RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advmat.de
A Nanozyme-Based Electrode for High-Performance Neural
Recording
Shuangjie Liu, Yang Wang, Yue Zhao, Ling Liu, Si Sun, Shaofang Zhang, Haile Liu,
Shuhu Liu, Yonghui Li, Fan Yang, Menglu Jiao, Xinyu Sun, Yuqin Zhang, Renpeng Liu,
Xiaoyu Mu, Hao Wang, Shu Zhang, Jiang Yang, Xi Xie, Xiaojie Duan, Jianning Zhang,
Guosong Hong, Xiao-Dong Zhang,* and Dong Ming*
Implanted neural electrodes have been widely used to treat brain diseases
that require high sensitivity and biocompatibility at the tissue–electrode
interface. However, currently used clinical electrodes cannot meet both these
requirements simultaneously, which hinders the eﬀective recording of
electronic signals. Herein, nanozyme-based neural electrodes incorporating
bioinspired atomically precise clusters are developed as a general strategy
with a heterogeneous design for multiscale and ultrasensitive neural
recording via quantum transport and biocatalytic processes. Owing to the
dual high-speed electronic and ionic currents at the electrode–tissue interface,
the impedance of nanozyme electrodes is 26 times lower than that of
state-of-the-art metal electrodes, and the acquisition sensitivity for the local
ﬁeld potential is ≈10 times higher than that of clinical PtIr electrodes,
enabling a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of up to 14.7 dB for single-neuron
recordings in rats. The electrodes provide more than 100-fold higher
antioxidant and multi-enzyme-like activities, which eﬀectively decrease 67%
of the neuronal injury area by inhibiting glial proliferation and allowing
sensitive and stable neural recording. Moreover, nanozyme electrodes can
considerably improve the SNR of seizures in acute epileptic rats and are
expected to achieve precise localization of seizure foci in clinical settings.
S. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Liu, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Mu, H. Wang,
X.-D. Zhang, D. Ming
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Brain Science and Neural Engineering
Academy of Medical Engineering and Translational Medicine
Tianjin University
Tianjin 300072, China
E-mail: xiaodongzhang@tju.edu.cn;richardming@tju.edu.cn
S.Sun, S.Zhang, H.Liu, Y.Li,M.Jiao,X.-D.Zhang
Department of Physics andTianjin Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional
Materials Physics andPreparing Technology
School of Science
Tianjin University
Tianjin 300354,China
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202304297
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202304297
1. Introduction
Neural electrodes are the core device unit
at the brain–computer interface and func-
tion as a diagnostic tool for neurological dis-
orders, thus, they have been widely used
in neuroscience to record neural electrical
activities.[1] Most central nervous system
(CNS) disorders, such as stroke, Parkin-
son’s disease, and epilepsy, are closely asso-
ciated with abnormal circulatory brain ac-
tivities and demand sensitive and biocom-
patible neural electrodes for timely diagno-
sis and therapy. Epilepsy, a clinically recur-
rent disease with a long course and high dis-
ability rate, is a common neurological dis-
order characterized by abnormal brain neu-
ronal discharges causing recurrent epilep-
tic seizures. The diagnosis and detection of
epilepsy have been of great interest during
surgery and postoperative monitoring and
are closely related to the resection size and
functional recovery of the lesion. Therefore,
the development of implantable electrodes
S. Liu
Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF)
Institute of High Energy Physics (IHEP)
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
Beijing 100049, China
F. Yang, G. Hong
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305, USA
S. Zhang, J. Zhang
Tianjin Neurological Institute
Department of Neurosurgery
General Hospital
Tianjin Medical University
Tianjin 300041, China
J. Yang, X. Xie
School of Electronics and Information Technology and Medicine
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510060, China
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (1 of 14)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
to accurately delineate seizure foci and capture weak neural sig-
nals during the incubation period or focal-onset seizures is neces-
sary to guide intraoperative resection of epileptogenic foci while
simultaneously protecting vital functional areas and avoiding
the occurrence of postoperative neurological deﬁcits.[2] However,
clinically available metal electrodes are limited by their low sen-
sitivity and chronic neuroinﬂammation owing to the slow elec-
tronic transfer and interface compatibility.[3]
Many eﬀorts have been made to apply state-of-the-art nan-
otechnologies to improve the sensitivity and biocompatibility.[4]
For example, carbon nanotube coating successfully enhanced
neural recording and electrical stimulation by decreasing the
electrode impedance (≈20 μm diameter) to 38 kΩ at 1 kHz
and increasing charge transfers.[5] Graphene-based electrodes
with high carrier mobility of 350 000 cm2 V–1 s–1 and
a low electrochemical impedance achieved a high signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) in vivo.[6] However, graphene and car-
bon nanotubes can potentially induce behavioral deﬁcits and
neural damage and pose long-term biological risks.[7] Elec-
trode arrays based on ﬂexible polymers and semiconduc-
tor nanowires can comprehensively record normal physio-
logical and epileptiform activities under acute and chronic
conditions.[8] However, the lack of rigidity of such electrode
arrays makes accurate implantation into the target brain re-
gion diﬃcult, resulting in surgical failure and enormous trans-
lational challenges in clinical settings.[9] To reconcile the con-
ﬂicting requirements of size, robustness, biocompatibility, and
electrical properties of conventional electrodes, the develop-
ment of functional and chronically implantable electrodes
that simultaneously have improved electrical properties and
bioactive surfaces to control intrinsic biological processes is
necessary.
Herein, we propose a nanozyme neural electrode based on
atomically precise metal clusters[10] that simultaneously achieves
high sensitivity and biocompatibility for long-term signal record-
ings. Furthermore, compared with the traditional Ag and W,
and clinical PtIr electrodes, the electrochemical performance
of the nanozyme electrodes was signiﬁcantly improved by en-
hancing quantum electronic transfers at the atomic layer in-
terface. The antioxidative properties and biocatalytic activities
of the nanozyme electrodes circumvented chronic neuroin-
ﬂammation and deterioration of neural signals during long-
term acquisition. We successfully recorded single-neuron ac-
tivity with an SNR of 14.7 dB, with increased the detec-
tion sensitivity of the local ﬁeld potential (LFP) signal in the
whole frequency band of 1–100 Hz by one order of mag-
nitude, and achieved stable neural signal acquisition for at
least 2 months without decay. In addition, a high detec-
tion sensitivity of epileptic signals was achieved, which is ex-
pected to enable the precise localization of seizure foci in the
clinic.
X. Duan
Department of Biomedical Engineering
College of Engineering
Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Structural Properties of Nanozyme Electrode
The general scheme and concept of the nanozyme neural elec-
trodes are shown in Figure 1a. The metal electrodes with a di-
ameter of 100 μm aﬀord suﬃcient mechanical strength for self-
support implantation into the brain. Nanozyme electrodes were
constructed by depositing metal clusters (Au, Ag, Pt, and Mn) on
the surface of Ag electrodes to form a functional layer of nan-
oclusters via multi-potential step methods. The deposition cur-
rent was controlled at ≈0.4 mA by setting the electrodeposition
parameters such that the nanozyme layer on the surface of the
bare electrode was dense with a strong binding force. Finally,
the electrodes were encapsulated by brushing with an insulating
layer of polyimide (PI), while the nanozyme recording sites were
left exposed (Figure S1, Supporting Information and Experimen-
tal Section). The electrochemical performance of the constructed
electrodes by analyzed (Figure 1b and Figures S2–S4, Support-
ing Information), and the results revealed that Au clusters de-
posited on the bare electrode exhibited the lowest impedance
and the highest cathode charge-storage-capacity (CSCc). Further-
more, the Au24Cd1 clusters-modiﬁed electrodes exhibited the op-
timal impedance and CSCc among a series of metal atom (Zn,
Ag, Er, Cu, and Cd)-doped Au clusters (Figures S5–S11, Sup-
porting Information). Thus, the nanozyme electrode based on
Au24Cd1 was chosen for the biocatalytic and electrophysiologi-
cal experiments in the remainder of the study. Scanning elec-
tron microscopy (SEM) images of the bare electrodes showed a
ﬂat surface (Figure 1c), whereas the nanozyme electrodes pre-
sented excellent uniformity and a homogeneous spatial distribu-
tion of atomic clusters, facilitating a high surface area and prefer-
ring satisfactory catalytic activity (Figure 1d and Figure S12, Sup-
porting Information). The root-mean-square surface roughness
of the nanozyme electrodes was calculated using atomic force mi-
croscopy (AFM) and found to be 124.5 nm, which was 9 times
higher than that of the Ag electrodes (13.8 nm) (Figure 1e and
Figure S13, Supporting Information). The high surface area and
high roughness of the nanozyme electrodes resulted in an exten-
sive exposure of the active catalytic sites, which was beneﬁcial
for achieving a high CSCc and low impedance.[6e,11] Only the Ag
crystal phase was detected in the X-ray diﬀraction proﬁle of the
nanozyme electrodes (Figure S14, Supporting Information), in-
dicating the formation absence of Au nanoparticles. X-ray pho-
toelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra further conﬁrmed that Au
(0) and Au (I) were the primary states in the nanozyme electrodes
(Figure S15, Supporting Information), which is consistent with
the reported Au clusters.[10]
The interface morphology, atomic arrangement and coordi-
nation bond of the atomically layered electrodes were charac-
terized using aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-ﬁeld
scanning transmission electron microscope (AC HAADF-STEM)
(Figure 1f–h). The Ag atomic layer at the interface exhibited
a lattice stripe of 0.235 nm (Figure 1g), corresponding to the
(111) plane of the Ag crystal. The atomic-level distribution of
the Au clusters on the surface of the Ag electrodes was random
(Figure 1g and Figure S16, Supporting Information).[12] To an-
alyze the ﬁne structure of the interface, the detailed atomic ar-
rangement was enlarged as shown in Figure 1h. The Au clusters
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (2 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 1. Characterization of the nanozyme electrode. a) A schematic diagram of the interface between the nanozyme electrodes and biological tissues.
b) Screen of neural electrodes based on modiﬁcation of diﬀerent metal clusters. c) A representative SEM image of the Ag electrodes. Inset, a magniﬁed
image of the region in the dashed box. d) A typical SEM image of the exposed active site of the nanozyme electrodes. Inset, a magniﬁed image of the
region in the dashed box. e) The surface roughness of electrodes by AFM. Inset, the surface morphology of nanozyme electrodes. The cross-sectional
AC HAADF-STEM image of the atomic-level catalytic layer–electrode interface at f) 100 nm, g) 2 nm, and h) 0.5 nm scaled magniﬁcations. The blue and
yellow spheres represent Ag and Au atoms, respectively. i) The corresponding EDX element mapping images (Ag red and Au blue) of the entire interface
area. j) Au L3-edge FT-EXAFS spectra in R space of the nanozyme electrodes. k) Au L3-edge XANES of the Au foil and the nanozyme electrodes.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (3 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
serving as nanozymes were preferentially located near the stack-
ing fault of the Ag electrode substrate, which was attributed to
the strong Ag─Au bonds.[13] In addition, the presence of Ag dis-
locations at the Au–Ag junction interface exposes the energetic
catalytic sites. Furthermore, elemental mapping using energy-
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) revealed a uniform distribu-
tion of both Ag and Au over the entire interfacial area (Figure 1i
and Figure S17, Supporting Information). To determine whether
a bond was formed at the nanozyme–Ag electrode interfaces, we
applied extended X-ray absorption ﬁne structure (EXAFS) spec-
tra at the Au L3-edge (Figure 1j,k and Figure S18, Supporting In-
formation). The X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES)
spectrum of the nanozyme electrodes exhibited a higher white-
line absorption than that of the Au foil reference, indicating lower
electron density and higher vacancy density (Figure 1j). It could
be ascribed to the formation of Au (I) in nanozyme electrodes,
which is consistent with XPS results. The Fourier-transformed
EXAFS (FT-EXAFS) curve of the nanozyme electrodes displayed
a pronounced peak at ≈2.83 Å, corresponding to the Au–Ag scat-
tering paths (Figure 1k).[14] Moreover, the Au─O and Au─Au
bonds were observed at ≈1.7 Å at ≈2.1 Å, respectively, which
might be ascribed to the oxidation and linkage of the RS-Au-S(R)-
Au-SR “staple” units within Au clusters in the aqueous phase dur-
ing the preparation process of nanozyme electrodes.[15] HAADF-
STEM and XANES spectra suggested that Au clusters were at-
tached to the surface of the neural electrodes via Au─Ag bonds,
forming new catalytically active sites and faster electron transfer
pathways at the neural interface,[16] which were beneﬁcial for en-
hancing the catalytic activity and reducing the impedance of the
electrodes.
2.2. Detection Sensitivity and Interface Transport of Nanozyme
Electrode
The quality of the recorded electrophysiological signals depends
on the electrochemical properties of the neural electrodes.[17]
The impedance of the nanozyme electrodes was signiﬁcantly
lower than that of the Ag electrodes in the frequency range of
1 Hz–100 kHz (Figure 2a). Speciﬁcally, the impedance of the
nanozyme electrodes was ≈12 times lower than that of the Ag
electrodes at a biologically relevant frequency of 1 kHz. Remov-
ing the eﬀect of increased eﬀective surface area of nanozyme,
the speciﬁc impedance of nanozyme electrodes (187.9 MΩ μm2)
was still reduced by a factor of 6.4, which is entirely attributed to
the interfacing electron transport eﬀect of nanozyme electrodes
(Figure 2c). The impedance of nanozyme electrodes is signiﬁ-
cantly lower than widely used PtIr electrode of 451.9 MΩ μm2,[18]
MorphE of 900 MΩ μm2,[19] Au electrode of 188 MΩ μm2.[20]
The phase diagram also shows a decreasing phase delay with
nanozyme deposition, tending toward Faradaic charge transport
(Figure 2b). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements also showed
an increase in CSCc with nanozyme deposition, which was ≈26.0
and 10.3 times greater than those of the Ag and clinical PtIr
electrodes, respectively (Figure 2d,e and Table S1, Supporting
Information). We further evaluated the long-term electrochem-
ical and mechanical stability of the nanozyme electrodes, which
are crucial for long-term recordings.[19,21] As shown in Figure 2f
and Figures S19–S21 (Supporting Information), the impedance
of the nanozyme electrodes maintained high stability with <9%
decay during the entire soaking period in PBS for up to 1 month
(n = 4). The mechanical properties of implantable neural elec-
trodes are equally important for chronic recording. As shown in
Figure S22 (Supporting Information), the nanozyme electrodes
were bent to varying degrees and maintained their functions un-
der signiﬁcant deformations. Furthermore, the bending stiﬀness
seems to be more relevant than the elastic modulus in the case
of tissue micromotion because the electrodes were ﬁxed to the
skull after implantation into the brain tissue and were not antic-
ipated to experience compressive or tensile stress.[22] We used a
dynamic mechanical analyzer to measure the bending stiﬀness
of the nanozyme electrodes in the frequency range of animal res-
piratory and heartbeat (0.1–10 Hz). We found that the nanozyme
electrodes exhibited bending stiﬀness value of 5–8 N m−1, which
was an order of magnitude lower than those of steel electrodes
of comparable dimensions commonly used in electrophysiolog-
ical recordings (Figure S23, Supporting Information). Taken to-
gether, these results indicated that the nanozyme electrode de-
scribed in this study is an outstanding candidate for use at bio-
electronic interfaces.
To further explore the underlying mechanism responsible for
the low resistance of the nanozyme electrodes, transport prop-
erties were modeled using the extended Boltzmann transport
theory based on the electron structures simulated by the den-
sity functional theory (DFT).[23] The Au24Cd1/Ag (111) system
with a cluster–crystal interface was constructed, and the opti-
mized structure predicted the Au─Ag bond lengths ranging from
2.8–3.0 Å (Figure 2g), which is in good agreement with the above
XANES results. The predicted adsorption energy was calculated
to be −7.473 eV, implying the high binding stiﬀness at the inter-
face. The predicted Bader charge of the Au24Cd1/Ag (111) model
indicates that the attached Au cluster supplied hole carriers to
the Ag crystal, suggesting p-type doping in general. Using the
electron structure predicted by DFT, the group velocities and
mass tensors of the carriers were obtained and substituted into
the Boltzmann transport theory to simulate the electrical con-
ductivity of the models. The benchmark Ag crystal set a base
pattern for the predicted electrical conductivity over the relax-
ation time (𝜎/𝜏) as a function of the carrier concentration (n)
at T = 300 K (Figure 2h). Accordingly, in the Au24Cd1/Ag (111)
model, the carrier concentration increased in the Ag crystal by
3.32 × 1018 m−2, which elevated 𝜎/𝜏from 1.31 × 1019 (Ω ms)−1
to 1.54 × 1019 (Ω ms)−1. The doping of hole carriers at a low con-
centration to an electron carrier system reduces the conductivity
owing to the neutralization of diﬀerent charges. However, when
the number of doped hole carriers surpasses the threshold, the
band structure and mass tensor of the system shift. We calculated
the critical concentration (n = 2.15 × 1018 m−2) for this transition
(Figure 2h). Compared with the benchmark (Figure 2i), the band
structure of the Au24Cd1/Ag (111) system exhibited more eigen-
states contributed by the Au and S atoms (Figure 2j and Figure
S24, Supporting Information), potentially providing a more com-
prehensive range of states in the conduction band for free elec-
trons. The Au clusters on the other side of the interface beneﬁt
from the conductivity of the donor levels provided by the Ag crys-
tals. Such synergistic eﬀects near the interface are vital for en-
hancing the conductivity. Due to the diﬀerent electronegativity,
Au and S are partially positive and negatively charged, which will
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (4 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 2. Electrochemical characterization and quantum interface transport of the nanozyme and Ag electrodes. a) Magnitude and b) phase angle of
electrodes impedance as a function of the frequency. c) The speciﬁc impedance at 1 kHz. d) CV of electrodes. e) Comparison of CSCc for electrodes.
f) CSCc and the speciﬁc impedance (at 1 kHz) for the nanozyme electrode soaked in PBS for 4 weeks. g) Side view of the geometrically optimized
structure of Au24Cd1/Ag (111) system. Gray, orange, yellow, and red balls represent Ag, Au, S, and Cd atoms. h) The ratio of electrical conductivity to
relaxation time (𝜎/𝜏) as a function of the carrier concentration for the p-type nanozyme electrode at 300 K using extended Boltzmann transport theory
based on DFT. i) The band structure (left) and total density of states (right) for Ag (111) surface. j) The band structure (left) and atom-projected density
of states (right) for Au24Cd1/Ag (111).
improve electrostatic adsorption of the opposite ions. Meanwhile,
the carrier concentration of nanozyme electrodes increases was
proven in Figure 2h, and the nano-structure exposes suﬃcient
sites for ions transmission and transfer, resulting in the enhance-
ment of signal transduction.[1a,24] The nanozyme electrodes with
dual conduction coupled with a large eﬀective surface area and
interfacing electron quantum transport can decrease the electro-
chemical impedance mismatch between the electrode and the
brain tissue.
2.3. Bioactivity and Biocompatibility of Nanozyme Electrode
Biocatalytic properties can eﬀectively alleviate neuroinﬂam-
mation by reducing dangerously activated molecules at the
tissue–electrode interface.[25] Therefore, the antioxidant and
multienzyme-mimicking properties of the nanozyme electrodes
were evaluated under physiological conditions. As shown in
Figure 3a, the nanozyme electrodes accelerated the catalytic re-
action with ABTS•+ substrate in seconds at a rapid reaction
rate of 4.76 μm s−1, which was 110.6 and 12.6 times higher
than that of the Ag and clinical PtIr electrodes, respectively. Al-
though the nanozyme electrode demonstrated superior antiox-
idant activity, the benchmark Ag electrode exhibited negligible
activity (Figure 3a,b). Next, we studied the CAT-like activity of
the nanozyme electrodes (Figure 3c,d and Video S1, Support-
ing Information). The Michaelis–Menten constant (Km) and the
maximum reaction velocity (Vmax) of the nanozyme electrodes
were determined to be 197.99 mm and 2.11 mm min−1, suggest-
ing its high CAT-like activity. In contrast, the Ag and PtIr elec-
trodes exhibited almost no CAT-like activity. Similarly, the high-
est superoxide dismutase (SOD)-like activity was observed for
the nanozyme electrode using the classical nitro-blue tetrazolium
(NBT) chromogenic method (Figure 3e). Quantiﬁcation showed
a high substrate inhibition rate of 94.6% for the nanozyme
electrode, whereas those of the Ag and clinical PtIr electrodes
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (5 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 3. In vitro total antioxidant and enzyme-like activities, and ex vivo histological studies of inﬂammation in brain tissues to chronically implanted
8-week nanozyme electrodes. a) The time dependence of ABTS·+ catalysis for electrodes. b) The corresponding reaction rates of electrodes. c) Time-
dependent CAT-like activities of the nanozyme electrodes at diﬀerent concentrations of H2O2. d) The reaction kinetics of CAT-like activities for electrodes.
e) Time-dependent analysis of SOD-like activities for electrodes. f) Inhibition rates of SOD for electrodes by the NBT method. g) Immunoﬂuorescence
images of tissue responses following 2-month implantation of Ag electrodes (left) and nanozyme electrodes (right). The tissue was labeled for astrocytes
(green), microglia (purple), and neurons (red). Scale bar, 100 μm. Normalized ﬂuorescence intensities of h) astrocytes and i) microglia, and j) neuron
lost zone diameters for nanozyme and Ag electrodes (n = 3). k–m) Quantitative analysis of ELISA for IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF𝛼in brain tissues 1, 3, and 7
days after implantation of nanozyme and Ag electrodes (n = 3). n–q) Indicators for oxidative stress, including SOD, GSH, H2O2, and MDA in groups
of the Sham, Ag, and nanozyme electrodes. The data were presented as mean ± SEM, n = 3, one-way analysis of variance was used to determine the
signiﬁcance level between multiple groups, and the signiﬁcance level was considered as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
were only 5.6% and 3.1%, respectively (Figure 3f). In addition,
the nanozyme electrode achieved a much higher negative cur-
rent density than the Ag electrode, indicating its excellent cat-
alytic activity owing to the relatively higher number of active
sites on its surface (Figure S25, Supporting Information). Over-
all, the unmodiﬁed Ag and clinical PtIr electrodes barely had
any enzyme-mimetic activities, as opposed to the robust antioxi-
dant and biocatalytic activities of the nanozyme electrode, which
serve as a feasible solution to minimize neuroinﬂammation from
implantation.[26]
To evaluate the brain tissue reaction to the long-term biocom-
patibility of the implanted nanozyme electrodes, post-mortem
histology 2 months after implantation was performed. Implanted
electrodes may contribute to local neuroinﬂammation due to
the invasion of brain tissue, further inducing a redox imbal-
ance and leading to excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS).[24a,27]
Glial encapsulation and neuronal death in the vicinity of elec-
trodes have been implicated as main factors negatively impacting
the stability and longevity of chronic neural recordings. Three
types of neural cells—neurons (NeuN), microglia (Iba1), and
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (6 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
astrocytes (GFAP)—were investigated by staining for speciﬁc
markers.[3a,10] Immunoﬂuorescence-stained images of brain tis-
sues showed the presence of activated microglia and accumulated
astrocytes, as well as many dying neurons after electrode implan-
tation (Figure 3g). The ﬁbrotic scar surrounding the nanozyme
electrodes was signiﬁcantly smaller than that surrounding the
Ag electrode by ≈1.5-fold due to the decreased accumulation of
astrocytes (Figure 3h). Similarly, the marker expression of mi-
croglia around the nanozyme electrodes was 1.6-fold lower than
that around the Ag electrodes (Figure 3i), owing to suppressed
immune responses. In addition, the loss of neurons was found
to be conﬁned within a region of ≈160 μm in diameter for the
nanozyme electrodes, compared to 448 μm for the Ag electrodes.
The neuron loss zone for the nanozyme electrodes was only
slightly larger than the implantation footprint (≈100 μm diameter
nanozyme electrode insulated with ≈10 μm thick PI), indicating
that there was no obvious further neuronal degeneration within 8
weeks after implantation (Figure 3j and Figure S26, Supporting
Information). Certainly, we also conducted studies on acute in-
ﬂammation post-implanted 7 days, and the immunoﬂuorescence
images showed that the nanozyme electrodes were more biocom-
patible than Ag electrodes in acute phase (Figure S27 , Support-
ing Information). These histological data demonstrate the abil-
ity of the nanozyme electrodes to create an improved and more
stable microenvironment at neural interfaces than stiﬀmetal
electrodes. Furthermore, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) conﬁrmed the expected gradual restoration of IL-1𝛽, IL-
6, and TNF𝛼from the nanozyme electrode implantation to nor-
mal levels in the sham group (Figure 3k–m), On the contrary, in-
ﬂammatory cytokines produced from the Ag electrode were not
recovered, consistent with the immunoﬂuorescence analysis.
Intracranial implantation of electrodes disrupts the blood-
brain barrier, triggers foreign body responses, and exposes
brain tissue to an environment rich in pro-oxidants and pro-
inﬂammatory factors, generating a large number of harmful
molecules from oxidative stress reactions.[3a,25g,28] The signiﬁcant
decrease in SOD and glutathione (GSH) levels for the Ag elec-
trode denoted the presence of excessive oxidants and consump-
tion of rescuing antioxidants (Figure 3n,o). Comparatively, the
nanozyme electrodes, owing to the high catalytic SOD-like activ-
ity, promoted the conversion of O2
•−into H2O2, eﬀectively re-
ducing the level of reactive oxygen and promoting the recovery of
the initial SOD and GSH levels in vitro (Figure 3e). Furthermore,
cells became vulnerable to assaults from oxygen free radicals, ini-
tiating lipid peroxidation processes and causing severe oxidative
damage. Notably, the MDA, as the end product of lipid peroxida-
tion, showed higher accumulation in the brain post Ag electrode
implantation. In contrast, the nanozyme electrodes steadily re-
duced the accumulation of lipid peroxides and approached the
level of the blank control group due to its high catalytic selec-
tivity for O2
•−(Figure 3p). Simultaneously, the nanozyme elec-
trodes demonstrate outstanding CAT-like activity, facilitating the
conversion of H2O2 into H2O and O2 in vitro (Figure 3q). These
ex vivo results revealed that the nanozyme electrodes could sal-
vage imbalanced redox reactions owing to their multi-enzyme
mimetic activities. According to the reported works,[10] it is ra-
tional to suppose that the nanozyme electrodes can alleviate the
acute inﬂammation and modulate redox reactions via inhibiting
NF-𝜅B pathway, which is a key factor in regulating inﬂamma-
tion, NO, ROS, and peroxynitrite.[29] Moreover, the biodistribu-
tion showed the absence of Au and Cd in the brain (Figure S28,
Supporting Information), suggesting a low risk of long-term ac-
cumulation.
2.4. In Vivo Sensitivity and Long-Term Monitoring of Nanozyme
Electrode
Eﬀective, accurate, and minimally invasive monitoring of biolog-
ical signals can provide a meaningful way to understand brain
function and diagnose neurological diseases.[18] The nanozyme
and Ag electrodes were implanted into the symmetrical hip-
pocampus CA3 of adult rats for in vivo neural signals record-
ing (Figure 4a). The electrodes were immersed in artiﬁcial cere-
brospinal ﬂuid to simulate the tissue ﬂuid microenvironment,
and the noise level was measured without any neural signal in-
put. The noise of the nanozyme electrode was 40.9 μV, which
was ≈3.4 times lower than that of the Ag electrodes (140.8 μV).
In addition, the nanozyme electrode detected LFP activity with
greater oscillation amplitudes in CA3, showing increased sensi-
tivity and a 6.2 times higher SNR (Figure 4b). The diﬀerence be-
tween the two traces is determined by calculating the power spec-
tra. As shown in Figure 4c, the power of the nanozyme electrode
was higher than that of the Ag electrode with a band-pass ﬁlter
at 1–100 Hz, indicating a more sensitive detection of LFP with
amplitude augmentation. We further demonstrated the power
spectra in diﬀerent frequency bands and time-frequency within
a 60 s time window. The signal ampliﬁcation of the nanozyme
electrodes was signiﬁcantly higher than that of the bare elec-
trodes and the degree of signal augmentation diﬀered across var-
ious frequency ranges, particularly in the lower frequency, i.e., 𝛿
rhythm, at a 14-fold increase (Figure 4d–f). The lower-frequency
component may be enhanced owing to the greater contact sur-
face with the nanozyme electrode, which allows better reception
of the signal from neighboring dendritic synaptic currents. The
two traces oscillated in parallel, reﬂecting a common source of
recorded neural activity. Similar results were observed in the nor-
mal rats (Figures S29 and S30, Supporting Information). In addi-
tion, we compared the recording performance of clinical PtIr and
nanozyme electrodes. The latter showed a sensitivity 9.8 times
higher than the former in 𝛿rhythm (Figure S31, Supporting In-
formation). Overall, the nanozyme electrode had a higher oscil-
lation amplitude and power with increased sensitivity and SNR
for LFPs. The abundant proteins present in the brain may non-
speciﬁcally adsorb on the electrode surface, potentially impact-
ing the sensitivity and long-term stability of the electrode. The
electrochemical methods and protein quantiﬁcation kits were
used to explore the anti-nonspeciﬁc adsorption capacity in vitro
(Figures S32 and S33, Supporting Information). In addition, the
non-speciﬁc adsorption of protein in vivo was studied by compar-
ing SEM images pre- and post-implantation of nanozyme elec-
trodes (Figure S34, Supporting Information). The results showed
that the nanozyme electrodes performed better resistance to non-
speciﬁc protein adsorption and no signiﬁcant changes in detec-
tion sensitivity.
To validate the continuous recording ability of the nanozyme
electrode, we implanted it into the hippocampal CA3 and moni-
tored the electrophysiological signals in rats for two months. The
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (7 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 4. Detection sensitivity and long-term stability of electrophysiological signal monitoring in normal rats. a) A schematic drawing of the implanted
nanozyme electrodes in the hippocampus CA3. b) The noise level, the LFP signal time-domain diagram, and SNR analysis for the control and nanozyme
electrodes. c) The power spectra analysis through FFT for the Ag and nanozyme electrodes. Inset, magniﬁed image of the region in the dashed box.
d,e) The comparison of power spectra and time-domain signal in various rhythms, including 𝛿, 𝜃, 𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾. f) Time-frequency diagrams of the Ag and
nanozyme electrodes. g) LFP of the Ag and nanozyme electrodes at representative time nodes (1, 4, 8 weeks) in the long-term stability study. h) The
correlation of the LFP power with the implantation time within 8 weeks. i) The sensitivity and stability of the nanozyme electrode. The detection sensitivity
was deﬁned as the ratio of the power of nanozyme electrodes and Ag electrodes. j) SNR after 8 weeks of implanted nanozyme electrodes. The data were
presented as mean ± SEM, n = 3, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
time-domain waveforms of the representative nodes at 1, 4, and
8 weeks are shown in Figure 4g. The signal power of the Ag
electrode quantitatively decreased by 57.9% after 8 weeks of im-
plantation, possibly because of the additional impedance intro-
duced by the glial scar, whereas the nanozyme electrode main-
tained stable recording signals without decay. Owing to the min-
imized chronic inﬂammation, the corresponding sensitivity of
the nanozyme electrode was at least 9.3 times higher than that
of the Ag electrode in the second month (Figure 4h). In addition,
the inﬂammatory responses caused by the Ag electrode formed
a thick and dense glial encapsulation, which gradually prevented
the recording electrode from coming into close contact with the
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (8 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
target neurons (Figure 3g), leading to a decrease in the num-
ber of detectable neurons. The power of the nanozyme electrode
remained stable over time with satisfactory biocompatibility. To
further characterize the long-term recordings, we investigated
the ratio of the signal power of the LFPs as collected by the two
electrodes. As shown in Figure 4i, the ratio gradually increased
over time and reached 10 in 𝛿rhythm after 2–8 weeks of implan-
tation without decay, as did the SNR (Figure 4j). Similar long-
term stability was observed in other normal rats (Figures S35 and
S36, Supporting Information). We compared the nanozyme elec-
trode with the clinical PtIr electrode, whose power was attenu-
ated by 41.4% at 4 weeks post-implantation. The nanozyme elec-
trode maintained excellent long-term stability, with a sensitivity
9.7-fold higher than that of the clinical PtIr electrode at the 4th
week after implantation (Figure S37, Supporting Information).
2.5. Seizure Recording Capability of Nanozyme Electrode
We assessed the potential capability to monitor seizures in
vivo, we concurrently implanted the nanozyme and refer-
ence electrodes intracranially into the hippocampal CA3 region
(Figure 5a), which is known to be hyperexcitable during
seizures.[2c] We employed kainic acid (KA)-induced epileptic rat
models with neuropathological and electroencephalographic fea-
tures similar to the human temporal lobe epilepsy, the most com-
mon type of refractory epilepsy in adults.[30] Once the epilepsy
was successfully induced (Video S2, Supporting Information),[31]
real-time epileptic activity was immediately recorded (Figure 5b).
The two-channel representative real-time recording signals and
the corresponding normalized time-frequency spectrum analy-
sis of the nanozyme and Ag electrodes are shown in Figure 5c,d
and Figure S38 (Supporting Information). Three distinct periods,
namely the basal activity, latency, and epilepsy periods, were iden-
tiﬁed. In the basal stage, the nanozyme electrode presented stead-
ier signal acquisition than the Ag electrode, indicating a more sta-
ble tissue–electrode interface. After a 2-min latency period, it en-
tered the epilepsy stage with representative seizure characteristic
waveforms and a sharp increase in amplitude. Moreover, the re-
sponse magnitudes of the nanozyme electrode at all three stages
were higher than those of the Ag electrode. The three-stage power
spectra (Figure 5e–g) were analyzed (Figure 5h), conﬁrming the
high neural activity of the nanozyme electrode, which was 6.0,
1.7, and 2.1 times higher than that of the Ag electrodes in the
basal, latency, and epilepsy periods, respectively. Furthermore,
the nanozyme electrode detected pathological signals that failed
to be captured by traditional electrodes during epileptic seizures
(Figure 5i), which is promising for the sensitive and accurate di-
agnosis of epilepsy sensitively and accurately. Further analysis of
the characteristic epileptic waves determined that the epileptic
detection SNR[32] of the nanozyme electrode was 3.2 times higher
than that of the Ag electrode. In addition, we successfully de-
tected sharp epileptic waves of seizures 7 days after KA induc-
tion (Figure S39, Supporting Information), and the sensitivity
of the nanozyme electrode was at least twofold higher than that
of the Ag electrode within 70 days of epilepsy recording (Figure
S40, Supporting Information). The nanozyme electrode also ca-
pably detected intense seizures of up to 1252.8 μV, and the corre-
sponding power value was more than 5 times higher in the 𝜃to
𝛾rhythm range than the clinical PtIr electrode, showing its high
sensitivity during the seizure occurrence (Figure S41, Supporting
Information).
2.6. In Vivo Single-Neuron Recording Sensitivity of Nanozyme
Electrode
In vivo single-neuron-recording capabilities of the nanozyme
electrodes were further validated, as shown in Figure 6. The tung-
sten (W) electrodes with a diameter of 2 μm was coated with
biocatalytic Au24Cd1 clusters through galvanostatic deposition to
prepare nanozyme electrodes. After the introduction of the clus-
ters, a uniform nanozyme-layer was formed on the surface of
the electrodes, and the eﬀective reaction area increased by 3.1
times (Figures S42 and S43, Supporting Information). As shown
in Figure 6a–c, the average impedance of the neural electrodes
measured at 1 kHz decreased from 2.1 MΩ to 80 kΩ, and the
speciﬁc impedance of nanozyme electrodes was still reduced by
a factor of 8.5 after removing the eﬀect of the increased surface
area. In addition, the ﬁtted parameters for the equivalent circuit
model (Figure 6a and Figure S44, Supporting Information) are
listed in Table S2 (Supporting Information), showing a 4.3-fold
reduction in the charge transfer resistance (Rct) for the nanozyme
electrodes, which greatly enhanced the charge transfer ability.
Similarly, CSCc increased by a factor of 1.7 times excluding the
eﬀect of the surface area, which was entirely due to the intrin-
sic electroactivity of the nanozyme (Figure 6d–e). In vivo single-
neuron recording capabilities of the nanozyme electrodes were
measured in the hippocampal CA3 region of the anesthetized
rats (Figure 6f), and a representative acute electrophysiological
recording in the high-frequency range (0.5–5 kHz) is shown in
Figure 6g. The nanozyme electrodes were able to detect and iso-
late single-neuron spikes with a high SNR, whereas the bare elec-
trode could not record any single unit with an SNR greater than
3 s.d. Figure 6h,i shows the sorted single-unit activity mean wave-
form and pile plot, respectively. The SNR of single-unit record-
ings from nanozyme electrodes was 14.7 dB, which was sig-
niﬁcantly higher than that reported for PEDOT-based electrode
(≈8 dB),[4e] Neuropixels (9.0 dB),[33] and graphene ﬁber electrode
(9.2 dB),[6d] indicating a close proximity between the ﬁring neu-
rons and the nanozyme electrodes. In addition, simultaneous
LFP recordings showed no phase diﬀerences between the W and
nanozyme electrodes, and similar activities were detected by both
channels (Figure 6j). However, the LFP detected by the nanozyme
electrodes had higher amplitudes, as evidenced by the power
spectral density plots of the neural recordings (Figure 6k). Over-
all, the single-unit recordings demonstrated that the nanozyme
electrodes created eﬀective interfaces capable of recording high-
quality neural activity.
Table S3 and Figure S45 (Supporting Information) demon-
strate the performance of nanozyme electrodes in comparison
with the most promising current electrodes. To overcome the lim-
itations of metallic electrodes, research on nanostructured mate-
rials has received much attention for developing next-generation
neural interfaces. Nanomaterials with excellent electronic con-
ductivity and biocompatibility, such as PEDOT,[4e] Pt black,[34]
graphene,[6d,e] and carbon nanotube,[28b] have been the most pop-
ular choices of electrodes in the past decade and have been well
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (9 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 5. In vivo monitoring of neural activities in acute seizure rat models with nanozyme electrodes. a) A schematic diagram of neural activities
recorded in KA-induced epileptic rats. b) The study timeline showing procedures for epileptic rats. c) Real-time recording of epileptiform activities,
including three distinct stages: the basal activity, the latent period, and the epileptiform activity. The black arrowheads indicate the time point of KA injec-
tion. d) Normalized time-frequency spectral analysis of the time serial data in (c). The power spectra during e) the basal, f) latency, and g) epileptiform
periods. h) Enlarged view during the basal, latency, and epileptiform periods. i) The minor physiological signals (epileptic sharp waves) collected by the
nanozyme electrode during the seizure onset. j) SNR analysis between Ag and nanozyme electrodes during seizures in (i). The data were presented as
mean ± SEM, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
characterized in terms of the electrical performance and signal
quality of the neural electrodes. However, the nano-coatings are
prone to peeling oﬀduring long-term implantation due to the
weak adhesion, which restricts long-term application in vivo.
Atomic engineering can realize the precise construction of neu-
ral electrodes at the atomic level through various heterojunc-
tions, avoiding the shortcomings of insuﬃcient rigidity and easy
shedding of other organic molecules. The greatest advantage of
nanozyme electrodes is that it is well-balanced and can satisfy
all aspects of performance required for neural electrodes, such
as high SNR for neural recordings, excellent long-term record-
ing stability, and chronic biocompatibility, by virtue of the bio-
catalytic activity and enhanced interface transport, which is cru-
cial for future clinical applications.
In addition, the nanozyme at the atomic level can not only
endow the neural electrodes with eﬃcient catalytic biological
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (10 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 6. In vivo single-unit recording capabilities of 2 μm diameter nanozyme electrodes/W. a) Equivalent circuit model of electrode–electrolyte interface
for nanozyme electrodes/W. b) Impedance magnitude and phase of 2 μm diameter W and nanozyme electrodes/W. c) The comparison of impedance
(left) and speciﬁc impedance after removing the eﬀect of the increased surface area (right) at 1 kHz. d) CV measurement for electrodes. e) The comparison
of CSC (left) and CSCc after removing the eﬀect of the increased surface area (right) for electrodes. f) Schematic of nanozyme electrodes/W implanted
into the CA3 region of the rat hippocampus. g) Representative acute recording of high-frequency (0.5–5 kHz) electrophysiological signal. h) Mean
waveform for each unit spike (right) using W and nanozyme electrodes/W. i) Piled single-unit neural recordings. Colors serve to distinguish the two
distinct single units. The SNR for the nanozyme electrodes/W is 14.7 dB. j) LFP and recorded acutely from W and nanozyme electrodes/W. k) Power
spectra analysis across the LFP range. The data were presented as mean ± SEM, n = 3.
activity and protect the neural tissues surrounding the implan-
tation from gliosis and neuroinﬂammation, but can also freely
edit the electrode surface, greatly improve the electron transmis-
sion eﬃciencies, and enhance the electrode recording sensitiv-
ity and long-term stability. Nanozyme-based neural electrodes
can also be extended to deep brain stimulation (DBS) appli-
cations for more precise electrical stimulation in neurological
disorders such as Parkinson’s disease. The low impedance and
high capacitance caused by the improved electron transmission
eﬃciencies can reduce the energy consumption, increase the
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (11 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
polarization voltage of the electrical stimulation, and extend the
lifespan of the stimulation electrodes. In addition, biocompatibil-
ity facilitates long-term stability of DBS, avoiding the hazards of
secondary surgery due to electrode failure.
This research brings together a new set of materials and a
novel approach to make fundamental advances in the electrical
performance, recording sensitivity, biocompatibility, and long-
term stability of microelectrode technology. Although the current
results are encouraging, especially for improving basic neuro-
science research, the clinical relevance of nanozyme-based elec-
trodes remains lacking at this stage and needs to be further
demonstrated through long-term high-sensitivity studies in pri-
mates. Therefore, we anticipate that the next step will be to tran-
sition to primate studies, which may lead to a shift in neuro-
science research and clinical neurotechnology. Second, emerging
single-atom nanozymes and more advanced bio-nanomaterials
can be used to develop eﬃcient and biocompatible neural elec-
trodes and provide more biomimetic interfaces to further blur
the electrode-biological tissue boundary.[35] Strong quantum ef-
fects on the atomic scale result in interesting electronic trans-
port phenomena at the interface. With the rapid development of
Moiré materials and related van der Waals heterostructures,[36]
the electron transport eﬃciency in neural electrodes is expected
to substantially increase. In addition, state-of-the-art CMOS fab-
rication techniques can be used to fabricate such nanozyme-
based needle electrodes into high-density arrays and ECoG elec-
trode arrays to probe globally coordinated brain regions for
sensitive brain–machine interfaces and high-throughput record-
ings. Finally, the nanozyme electrodes designed herein are not
only limited to epilepsy and can be extended for use as deep
brain stimulation electrodes for more precise long-term sta-
ble recording and modulation of neural activity at the single-
neuron level by electrical or optical stimulation to treat Parkin-
son’s disease, stroke, and other CNS diseases. The highly ver-
satile nanozyme-based electrodes demonstrate broad prospects
in neuroscience and translational medicine and hold promise
as closed-loop, bidirectional, and high-density implantable
devices.
3. Conclusion
We developed a high-performance implantable nanozyme neu-
ral electrode by integrating atomic-level catalytic clusters onto an
electrode surface to facilitate a heterogeneous Au–Ag interface.
As a result, the nanozyme electrode was endowed with ultra-low
intrinsic impedance and improved CSCc, 12 and 26 times better
than those of the commercial Ag electrode, respectively. More-
over, the nanozyme electrode exhibited multi-enzyme mimetic
activity with minimal neuroinﬂammation and stably recorded
electrical signals. The nanozyme electrode displayed high de-
tection sensitivity and enabled single-neuron recordings with
an SNR of 14.7 dB in vivo. Furthermore, the nanozyme elec-
trode can capture weak pathological signals that are missed by
traditional electrodes during real-time monitoring of epilepsy,
which is expected to achieve precise localization of seizure
foci in the clinic. Therefore, these highly versatile nanozyme-
based electrodes have broad prospects in neuroscience and
translational medicine as a new technology with therapeutic
potential.
4. Experimental Section
A detailed description of experimental procedures can be found in the Sup-
porting Information.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
S.L., Y.W., and Y.Z. contributed equally to this work. This work was ﬁ-
nancially supported by the National Key Research and Development Pro-
gram of China (2021YFF1200700), the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (Grant nos. 91859101, 81971744, U1932107, 82001952,
11804248, 82302361, and 82302381), the Outstanding Youth Funds of
Tianjin (2021FJ-0009), the National Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin
(Nos. 19JCZDJC34000, 20JCYBJC00940, 21JCYBJC00550, 21JCZDJC00620,
and 21JCYBJC00490), the Innovation Foundation of Tianjin University, and
the CAS Interdisciplinary Innovation Team (JCTD-2020-08). All animal ex-
periments were approved by the Animal Ethical and Welfare of Tianjin Uni-
versity (TJUE-2023-126).
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available in the sup-
plementary material of this article.
Keywords
acquisition sensitivity, biocatalytic, nanozymes, neural recording
Received: May 8, 2023
Revised: October 19, 2023
Published online: December 7, 2023
[1] a) D. Khodagholy, J. N. Gelinas, T. Thesen, W. Doyle, O. Devinsky, G.
G. Malliaras, G. Buzsáki, Nat. Neurosci. 2015, 18, 310; b) G. Hong,
C. M. Lieber, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2019, 20, 330; c) X. Yang, T. Zhou,
T. J. Zwang, G. Hong, Y. Zhao, R. D. Viveros, T.-M. Fu, T. Gao, C. M.
Lieber, Nat. Mater. 2019, 18, 510; d) T.-M. Fu, G. Hong, T. Zhou, T. G.
Schuhmann, R. D. Viveros, C. M. Lieber, Nat. Methods 2016, 13, 875.
[2] a) E. Beghi, Neuroepidemiology 2020, 54, 185; b) A. Chari, R. C.
Thornton, M. M. Tisdall, R. C. Scott, Brain Commun 2020, 2, 082; c)
J. Liu, F. Li, Y. Wang, L. Pan, P. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Y. Xu, H. Liao,
G. Ko, F. Fei, C. Xu, Y. Du, K. Shin, D. Kim, S.-S. Jang, H. J. Chung, H.
Tian, Q. Wang, W. Guo, J.-M. Nam, Z. Chen, T. Hyeon, D. Ling, Nat.
Nanotechnol. 2020, 15, 321.
[3] a) J. W. Salatino, K. A. Ludwig, T. D. Y. Kozai, E. K. Purcell, Nat. Biomed.
Eng. 2017, 1, 862; b) R. Chen, A. Canales, P. Anikeeva, Nat. Rev. Mater.
2016, 2, 16093.
[4] a) R. Garcia-Cortadella, G. Schwesig, C. Jeschke, X. Illa, A. L. Gray, S.
Savage, E. Stamatidou, I. Schiessl, E. Masvidal-Codina, K. Kostarelos,
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (12 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
A. Guimerà-Brunet, A. Sirota, J. A. Garrido, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12,
211; b) R. Parameswaran, J. L. Carvalho-De-Souza, Y. Jiang, M. J.
Burke, J. F. Zimmerman, K. Koehler, A. W. Phillips, J. Yi, E. J. Adams,
F. Bezanilla, B. Tian, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018, 13, 260; c) W. Yan,
I. Richard, G. Kurtuldu, N. D. James, G. Schiavone, J. W. Squair,
T. Nguyen-Dang, T. Das Gupta, Y. Qu, J. D. Cao, R. Ignatans, S. P.
Lacour, V. Tileli, G. Courtine, J. F. Löﬄer, F. Sorin, Nat. Nanotechnol.
2020, 15, 875; d) C. M. Tringides, N. Vachicouras, I. De Lázaro, H.
Wang, A. Trouillet, B. R. Seo, A. Elosegui-Artola, F. Fallegger, Y. Shin,
C. Casiraghi, K. Kostarelos, S. P. Lacour, D. J. Mooney, Nat. Nanotech-
nol. 2021, 16, 1019; e) T. D. Y. Kozai, N. B. Langhals, P. R. Patel, X.
Deng, H. Zhang, K. L. Smith, J. Lahann, N. A. Kotov, D. R. Kipke,
Nat. Mater. 2012, 11, 1065; f) J. Chen, Y. Huang, N. Zhang, H. Zou,
R. Liu, C. Tao, X. Fan, Z. L. Wang, Nat. Energy 2016, 1, 16138; g) J. Liu,
T.-M. Fu, Z. Cheng, G. Hong, T. Zhou, L. Jin, M. Duvvuri, Z. Jiang, P.
Kruskal, C. Xie, Z. Suo, Y. Fang, C. M. Lieber, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015,
10, 629; h) F. Yang, X. Wu, H. Cui, S. Jiang, Z. Ou, S. Cai, G. Hong, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 18406.
[5] E. W. Keefer, B. R. Botterman, M. I. Romero, A. F. Rossi, G. W. Gross,
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2008, 3, 434.
[6] a) L. Banszerus, M. Schmitz, S. Engels, J. Dauber, M. Oellers, F.
Haupt, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, B. Beschoten, C. Stampfer, Sci.
Adv. 2015, 1, e1500222; b) S. Garaj, W. Hubbard, A. Reina, J. Kong,
D. Branton, J. A. Golovchenko, Nature 2010, 467, 190; c) N. Liu,
A. Chortos, T. Lei, L. Jin, T. R. Kim, W.-G. Bae, C. Zhu, S. Wang, R.
Pfattner, X. Chen, R. Sinclair, Z. Bao, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1700159; d) K.
Wang, C. L. Frewin, D. Esraﬁlzadeh, C. Yu, C. Wang, J. J. Pancrazio, M.
Romero-Ortega, R. Jalili, G. Wallace, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1805867;
e) S. Zhao, G. Li, C. Tong, W. Chen, P. Wang, J. Dai, X. Fu, Z. Xu,
X. Liu, L. Lu, Z. Liang, X. Duan, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 1788; f) E.
Masvidal-Codina, X. Illa, M. Dasilva, A. B. Calia, T. Dragojevic, E. E.
Vidal-Rosas, E. Prats-Alfonso, J. Martínez-Aguilar, J. M. De La Cruz,
R. Garcia-Cortadella, P. Godignon, G. Rius, A. Camassa, E. Del Corro,
J. Bousquet, C. Hébert, T. Durduran, R. Villa, M. V. Sanchez-Vives, J.
A. Garrido, A. Guimerà-Brunet, Nat. Mater. 2019, 18, 280.
[7] a) M. Kim, H.-J. Eom, I. Choi, J. Hong, J. Choi, Neurotoxicology 2020,
77, 30; b) P. Li, T. Xu, S. Wu, L. Lei, D. He, J. Appl. Toxicol. 2017, 37,
1140.
[8] a) K. J. Yu, D. Kuzum, S.-W. Hwang, B. H. Kim, H. Juul, N. H. Kim,
S. M. Won, K. Chiang, M. Trumpis, A. G. Richardson, H. Cheng, H.
Fang, M. Thompson, H. Bink, D. Talos, K. J. Seo, H. N. Lee, S.-K.
Kang, J.-H. Kim, J. Y. Lee, Y. Huang, F. E. Jensen, M. A. Dichter, T.
H. Lucas, J. Viventi, B. Litt, J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 782;
b) D. Khodagholy, T. Doublet, P. Quilichini, M. Gurﬁnkel, P. Leleux,
A. Ghestem, E. Ismailova, T. Hervé, S. Sanaur, C. Bernard, G. G.
Malliaras, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 1575; c) Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Chen, T. Lei,
Y. Kim, S. Niu, H. Wang, X. Wang, A. M. Foudeh, J. B.-H. Tok, Z. Bao,
Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2019, 3, 58; d) J. Viventi, D.-H. Kim, L. Vigeland, E.
S. Frechette, J. A. Blanco, Y.-S. Kim, A. E. Avrin, V. R. Tiruvadi, S.-W.
Hwang, A. C. Vanleer, D. F. Wulsin, K. Davis, C. E. Gelber, L. Palmer,
J. Van Der Spiegel, J. Wu, J. Xiao, Y. Huang, D. Contreras, J. A. Rogers,
B. Litt, Nat. Neurosci. 2011, 14, 1599.
[9] a) J. T. Robinson, M. Jorgolli, A. K. Shalek, M.-H. Yoon, R. S. Gertner,
H. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 180; b) T. J. Oxley, N. L. Opie,
S. E. John, G. S. Rind, S. M. Ronayne, T. L. Wheeler, J. W. Judy, A. J.
Mcdonald, A. Dornom, T. J. H. Lovell, C. Steward, D. J. Garrett, B. A.
Moﬀat, E. H. Lui, N. Yassi, B. C. V. Campbell, Y. T. Wong, K. E. Fox,
E. S. Nurse, I. E. Bennett, S. H. Bauquier, K. A. Liyanage, N. R. Van
Der Nagel, P. Perucca, A. Ahnood, K. P. Gill, B. Yan, L. Churilov, C. R.
French, P. M. Desmond, et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2016, 34, 320.
[10] H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Sun, Q. Xin, S. Liu, X. Mu, X. Yuan, K. Chen, H. Wang,
K. Varga, W. Mi, J. Yang, X.-D. Zhang, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 114.
[11] T. Chung, J. Q. Wang, J. Wang, B. Cao, Y. Li, S. W. Pang, J. Neural Eng.
2015, 12, 056018.
[12] Y. Lei, F. Yang, H. Xie, Y. Lei, X. Liu, Y. Si, H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A
2020, 8, 20629.
[13] M. Van Der Linden, A. J. Van Bunningen, L. Amidani, M. Bransen, H.
Elnaggar, P. Glatzel, A. Meijerink, F. M. F. De Groot, ACS Nano 2018,
12, 12751.
[14] Y. Huang, W. Liu, L. Yang, T. Huang, Y. Jiang, T. Yao, S. Wei, J. Phys.
Conf. Ser. 2016, 712, 012066.
[15] a) M. A. Macdonald, D. M. Chevrier, P. Zhang, H. Qian, R. Jin, J. Phys.
Chem. C 2011, 115, 15282; b) X.-P. Fu, L.-W. Guo, W.-W. Wang, C. Ma,
C.-J. Jia, K. Wu, R. Si, L.-D. Sun, C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019,
141, 4613.
[16] N. T. Alvarez, E. Buschbeck, S. Miller, A. D. Le, V. K. Gupta, C.
Ruhunage, I. Vilinsky, Y. Ma, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 2020, 3, 6478.
[17] M.-H. Wang, B.-W. Ji, X.-W. Gu, H.-C. Tian, X.-Y. Kang, B. Yang, X.-L.
Wang, X. Chen, C.-Y. Li, J.-Q. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2017, 99, 99.
[18] F. Vitale, S. R. Summerson, B. Aazhang, C. Kemere, M. Pasquali, ACS
Nano 2015, 9, 4465.
[19] Y. Liu, J. Li, S. Song, J. Kang, Y. Tsao, S. Chen, V. Mottini, K. Mcconnell,
W. Xu, Y.-Q. Zheng, J. B.-H. Tok, P. M. George, Z. Bao, Nat. Biotechnol.
2020, 38, 1031.
[20] V. Saunier, E. Flahaut, M.-C. Blatché, C. Bergaud, A. Maziz, Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2020, 165, 112413.
[21] Y. Fang, A. Prominski, M. Y. Rotenberg, L. Meng, H. Acarón Ledesma,
Y. Lv, J. Yue, E. Schaumann, J. Jeong, N. Yamamoto, Y. Jiang, B. Elbaz,
W. Wei, B. Tian, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2021, 16, 206.
[22] A. Canales, X. Jia, U. P. Froriep, R. A. Koppes, C. M. Tringides, J.
Selvidge, C. Lu, C. Hou, L. Wei, Y. Fink, P. Anikeeva, Nat. Biotechnol.
2015, 33, 277.
[23] A. Togo, L. Chaput, I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. B 2015, 91, 094306.
[24] a) J. Rivnay, H. Wang, L. Fenno, K. Deisseroth, G. G. Malliaras, Sci.
Adv. 2017, 3, e1601649; b) X. Guo, J. Zhang, L. Yuan, B. Xi, F. Gao,
X. Zheng, R. Pan, L. Guo, X. An, T. Fan, S. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater.
2023, 13, 2204376.
[25] a) X. Wang, X. J. Gao, L. Qin, C. Wang, L. Song, Y.-N. Zhou, G. Zhu,
W. Cao, S. Lin, L. Zhou, K. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Jin, P. Wang, X. Gao, H.
Wei, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 704; b) S. Mitchell, R. Qin, N. Zheng, J.
Pérez-Ramírez, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2021, 16, 129; c) J. Xie, Y. Zheng, J.
Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 888; d) H. Tang, Y. Su, B. Zhang,
A. F. Lee, M. A. Isaacs, K. Wilson, L. Li, Y. Ren, J. Huang, M. Haruta,
B. Qiao, X. Liu, C. Jin, D. Su, J. Wang, T. Zhang, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3,
e1700231; e) F. Cao, L. Zhang, Y. You, L. Zheng, J. Ren, X. Qu, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 2020, 59, 5108; f) B. Xu, H. Wang, W. Wang, L.
Gao, S. Li, X. Pan, H. Wang, H. Yang, X. Meng, Q. Wu, L. Zheng, S.
Chen, X. Shi, K. Fan, X. Yan, H. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 2019,
58, 4911; g) K. Fan, J. Xi, L. Fan, P. Wang, C. Zhu, Y. Tang, X. Xu, M.
Liang, B. Jiang, X. Yan, L. Gao, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 1440.
[26] W. Feng, X. Han, H. Hu, M. Chang, L. Ding, H. Xiang, Y. Chen, Y. Li,
Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 2203.
[27] S. Liu, Y. Zhao, W. Hao, X.-D. Zhang, D. Ming, Biosens. Bioelectron.
2020, 170, 112645.
[28] a) A. Vezzani, J. French, T. Bartfai, T. Z. Baram, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2011,
7, 31; b) L. Lu, X. Fu, Y. Liew, Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, Z. Xu, J. Zhao, D. Li,
Q. Li, G. B. Stanley, X. Duan, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 1577.
[29] a) B. Hoesel, J. A. Schmid, Mol. Cancer 2013, 12, 86; b) Z. Ji, L. He, A.
Regev, K. Struhl, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2019, 116, 9453.
[30] N. Gouder, J.-M. Fritschy, D. Boison, Epilepsia 2010, 44, 877.
[31] C. Wang, W. Sun, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, Q. Guo, X. Zhou, D. Fan, H. Liu,
M. Qi, X. Gao, H. Xu, Z. Gao, M. Tian, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Wei, N.
J. Long, Y. Mao, C. Li, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2021, 5, 278.
[32] A. Suarez-Perez, G. Gabriel, B. Rebollo, X. Illa, A. Guimerà-Brunet,
J. Hernández-Ferrer, M. T. Martínez, R. Villa, M. V. Sanchez-Vives,
Front. Neurosci. 2018, 12, 862.
[33] J. J. Jun, N. A. Steinmetz, J. H. Siegle, D. J. Denman, M. Bauza, B.
Barbarits, A. K. Lee, C. A. Anastassiou, A. Andrei, Ç. Aydin, M. Barbic,
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (13 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
T. J. Blanche, V. Bonin, J. Couto, B. Dutta, S. L. Gratiy, D. A. Gutnisky,
M. Häusser, B. Karsh, P. Ledochowitsch, C. M. Lopez, C. Mitelut, S.
Musa, M. Okun, M. Pachitariu, J. Putzeys, P. D. Rich, C. Rossant, W.-
L. Sun, K. Svoboda, et al., Nature 2017, 551, 232.
[34] L.-C. Wang, M.-H. Wang, C.-F. Ge, B.-W. Ji, Z.-J. Guo, X.-L. Wang, B.
Yang, C.-Y. Li, J.-Q. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2019, 145, 111661.
[35] A. Wang, J. Li, T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem. 2018, 2, 65.
[36] E. Y. Andrei, D. K. Efetov, P. Jarillo-Herrero, A. H. Macdonald, K. F.
Mak, T. Senthil, E. Tutuc, A. Yazdani, A. F. Young, Nat. Rev. Mater.
2021, 6, 201.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2304297
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304297 (14 of 14)
 15214095, 2024, 6, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304297 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License