Academic Editor: Evandro Leite de
Souza
Received: 24 February 2025
Revised: 20 April 2025
Accepted: 24 April 2025
Published: 27 April 2025
Citation: Dong, Y.; Wu, X.; Zhang, Y.;
Hu, A.; Zhou, Q.; Yue, X.; Liu, Z.; Li, M.
The Role of Probiotics in Modulating
the Gut Microbiome in Alzheimer’s
Disease: A Review. Foods 2025, 14,
1531. https://doi.org/10.3390/
foods14091531
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Review
The Role of Probiotics in Modulating the Gut Microbiome in
Alzheimer’s Disease: A Review
Yushi Dong 2, Xilin Wu 2, Yumeng Zhang 2, Adi Hu 4, Qian Zhou 2
, Xiqing Yue 2
, Zhenmin Liu 1,*
and
Mohan Li 1,2,3,*
1
State Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology, Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Dairy Biotechnology,
Shanghai 200436, China
2
College of Food Science, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, China
3
School of Life Sciences & Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
4
Liaoning Industrial and Information Technology Development Research Institute, Shenyang 110180, China
*
Correspondence: liuzhenmin@brightdairy.com (Z.L.); fslimohan@126.com (M.L.)
Abstract: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) has emerged as a global public health priority charac-
terized by escalating prevalence and the limited efficacy of current therapeutic approaches.
Although the pathological complexity of AD is well-recognized, its underlying etiology
remains incompletely elucidated. Current research highlights a bidirectional gut–brain axis
(GBA) interaction, wherein gut microbiome perturbations may impair intestinal barrier
stability, influence immune responses, and blood–brain barrier permeability through micro-
bial metabolite-mediated pathways, thereby contributing to AD pathophysiology. Notably,
probiotics demonstrate therapeutic potential by restoring gut microbiome homeostasis,
reinforcing intestinal barrier integrity, and mitigating neuroinflammatory responses via
GBA. This review focuses on investigating the gut microbiome alterations in AD pathogen-
esis, the interaction of probiotics with GBA, and its significance in AD pathogenesis. By
synthesizing current clinical evidence, this review aims to establish a scientific foundation
for probiotic-based interventions as a novel therapeutic strategy in AD management.
Keywords: probiotics; Alzheimer’s disease; gut microbiome
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized
by the gradual deterioration of cognitive, memory, and motor functions, with primary
incidence in adults over 65 years [1]. Approximately 50 million people worldwide have
dementia and AD accounts for approximately 70% of cases worldwide. According to World
Health Organization statistics [2], a new dementia diagnosis occurs every three seconds
worldwide. Projections indicate that the dementia population will rise to 139 million
by 2050 due to aging demographics. Economically, dementia-related costs reached USD
1.3 trillion in 2019, with estimates suggesting this figure will climb to USD 2.8 trillion by
2030. These escalating trends pose significant challenges to global healthcare systems,
public health, and socioeconomic structures.
Amyloid-β plaques and Tau protein neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) are two typical
pathological features of AD [3], which might lead to neuroinflammation, calcium home-
ostasis disturbance, excess iron accumulation, and oxidative stress, eventually contributing
to neuronal cell death and then cognitive dysfunction [4,5]. Despite these established
associations, the conclusive mechanism of these pathological hallmarks of AD remains un-
defined. Current therapeutic approaches primarily address symptom management rather
Foods 2025, 14, 1531
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods14091531

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
2 of 27
than targeting disease progression, highlighting the critical need for multidimensional
re-evaluation of AD pathogenesis.
Cognitive dysfunction represents the primary symptom of AD. Recent scientific atten-
tion has focused on the potential connection between the gut microbiome and cognitive
function. Probiotics can directly interact with the host and gut microbiome, thus produc-
ing intestinal effects, such as enhancing the epithelial barrier function, modulating the
systemic metabolic responses, and signaling with the central nervous system (CNS) [6].
The prebiotic effect is achieved by providing substrates for specific intestinal microbial
groups. Prebiotics can promote their growth and metabolism, thus indirectly affecting
intestinal function, the immune system, and nervous signals [7]. Several reports have illus-
trated that probiotics may delay neurodegenerative processes through cognitive function
preservation and neuroinflammation suppression [8–10]. Specifically, probiotics regulate
complex metabolic and biochemical processes of the gut microbiome to enhance central
nervous system (CNS) function, facilitating gut–brain communication. This interaction
between the enteric nervous system (ENS) and CNS occurs via the bidirectional gut–brain
axis (GBA) [11]. Probiotics deliver various gut secretions through the GBA to inhibit inflam-
matory reactions, strengthen the immune system, and protect neuronal integrity. These
discoveries reinforce the gut–brain interconnection while proposing novel therapeutic
strategies for AD.
This review comprehensively analyzes gut microbiome–brain interactions, focusing
on probiotic modulation of GBA-mediated AD pathology to facilitate the establishment of
probiotic-based approaches for AD prevention and treatment.
2. Overview of AD
2.1. Pathogenesis of AD
AD is the most common type of dementia; however, its specific cause has not yet
been identified. Moreover, effective care and treatment cannot be provided, even if AD
is diagnosed. Currently, the pathogenesis of AD includes abnormal amyloid proteins,
Tau protein phosphorylation-induced NFTs, neuroinflammation, neuroactive substance
disorder, mitochondrial dysfunction, iron accumulation-induced ferroptosis, and oxidative
stress [12]. Among them, amyloid-beta peptide (Aβ) aggregates and NFTs are the most
widely studied. The essential precursor of Aβ plaque is Aβ precursor protein (APP), which
is a type 1 transmembrane glycoprotein. Their functions are associated with neuronal
synaptogenesis and plasticity. Two pathways are involved in the proteolytic metabolism of
APP. The α-secretase cleavage pathway will not produce Aβ deposits, while the β-secretase
enzyme sunders APP to neurotoxin formation and β-40 to 42 amino acid proteins [13].
Moreover, beta-amyloid is cleaved by β-secretase to induce APP accumulation. Aggrega-
tion of Aβ plaques in the brain stimulates mitogen-activated protein kinase and glycogen
synthase kinase-3β signaling to induce hyperphosphorylation and polymerization of the
Tau protein into insoluble NFTs [14].
2.2. AD, a Metabolic Syndrome?
The metabolic axis of Alzheimer’s disease pathophysiology involves dysregulated
Aβ/Tau proteostasis, glia-driven neuroinflammatory cascades, mitochondrial dysfunction,
ferroptosis, and oxidative stress pathways, which synergistically propagate a self-sustaining
cycle of neurodegenerative progression [3–5].
Excessive accumulation of the Aβ peptide promotes microglia activation, which leads
to neuroinflammation [15]. Microglia and astrocytes participate in the innate immune
function of the CNS and play a major role in the neuroinflammatory reactions in AD [16].
Microglia can clear up excess Aβ peptide through LDL receptor-related protein-1 [17].

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
3 of 27
However, excessive Aβ deposition activates microglia. Lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) can
induce activated cells (M1-type microglia) to secrete inflammatory factors, eventually lead-
ing to an inflammatory reaction [18]. In addition, astrocytes can strengthen the stability of
the blood–brain barrier (BBB). However, activated astrocytes will increase the permeability
of the BBB, and more Aβ plaques will pass through the BBB to increase the production
of pro-inflammatory factors [19]. This enhances the development of neuroinflammation,
leading to a vicious cycle (Figure 1). However, the causal relationship between neuroin-
flammation and AD pathogenesis remains unclear. In a randomized double-blind study
by Aisen et al. [20], patients with AD were treated with anti-inflammatory agents. The
results showed that these two anti-inflammatory drugs did not reduce the cognitive ability
of patients with AD. Although the Aβ abnormality in the brain is one of the important
symptoms of AD, the underlying cause and molecular mechanism behind this process are
not completely known. Clinical drug therapy for Aβ has not significantly reversed the
cognitive decline related to AD [21]. These results suggest that a single element, such as
the Aβ plaque or inflammatory factors alone, may not be enough to cause AD and other
comprehensive factors may be involved.
Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that regulates axonal transport, elongation,
and maturation and the maintenance of DNA and RNA integrity of neurons [22]. The
aggregation of the Aβ peptide and Tau protein in the cortex and brain stem is the first
pathological feature observed in the development of AD [23]. Aβ plaque in neurons will
activate glycogen synthase kinase 3-β (GSK-3β), which can phosphorylate Tau protein.
This wild-type protein breaks away from neural microtubules and spreads among neurons
via a trans-synaptic mechanism, after which NFTs are deposited in the brain, leading to
neuronal death [24]. An imbalance of calcium ions in the mitochondria is a key catalytic
factor in this process. Overloading of calcium ions aggravates the hyperphosphorylation
of the Tau protein, causing an imbalance in mitochondrial transport function and leading
to oxidative stress [16]. The brain requires more dynamic energy than other tissues and is
vulnerable to oxidative stress because of the defenseless antioxidant status of neurons [25].
Excessive iron accumulation has also been observed in the brains of patients with AD [5,26].
Iron overload can lead to hydroxyl radicals, ROS generation, and oxidative stress through
the Fenton reaction, thereby destroying lipids, DNA, RNA, and proteins [27]. In turn,
oxidative stress can enhance the acceleration of Aβ plaque and NFT formation. The process
described above is illustrated in Figure 1.
2.3. Risk Factors in AD
Age is a significant risk factor for AD, apart from lifestyle (e.g., smoking and unhealthy
diet), genetic inheritance, health status (e.g., diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and weakened
immunity), and environmental factors (e.g., pollution and lack of education). [28] (Figure 1).
Overall, the pathological mechanism of AD is not caused by a single element but may be
the result of the interaction of various complex mechanisms. AD is a complex metabolic
syndrome, and different genetic and environmental risk factors have comprehensive effects
on the treatment of AD. Therefore, it is necessary to comprehensively explore new treatment
strategies for AD from a new perspective. A complex relationship exists between the
intestinal microbiome and human health, which influences health benefits by manipulating
metabolism, the host immune system, and neurobehavioral traits [29]. Thus, the intestine
regulates and participates in various metabolic mechanisms in different ways, playing a
comprehensive role in human health.

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
4 of 27
Figure 1. AD risk factors and the correlation between various pathologies of AD. AD, Alzheimer’s
disease; APP, Aβ precursor protein; NFT, neurofibrillary tangle; ROS, reactive oxygen species; PUFAs,
polyunsaturated fatty acids.
3. The Gut Microbiome
3.1. Gut Microbiome Composition
The types and numbers of the intestinal microbiome are distributed across different
areas of the human GI tract. The colon is the habitat of most microorganisms, while a
relatively small number of microorganisms live in the stomach and small intestine [30–32].

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
5 of 27
Bacteria were the most abundant microbial species, accounting for 60%, and a few species
included viruses, fungi, and archaea [29,33]. The GI tract in humans contains approxi-
mately 100 trillion microorganisms known as the gut microbiome, which are categorized
into over 1500 species. The most dominant phyla were Bacteroidetes, followed by Firmicutes,
Proteobacteria, Fusobacteria, Tenericutes, Actinobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia [34]. They pro-
duce thousands of metabolites that participate in host metabolic processes and defense
mechanisms, thus influencing human health and function. In addition to helping the GI
tract digest and absorb various substances and nutrients, protecting human beings from
viruses, many diseases are related to intestinal microbiome dysfunction (such as inflam-
matory bowel disease [IBD], type 2 diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular diseases, AD, and
depression) [35–38].
3.2. Role and Funciton
3.2.1. Immunomodulatory and Metabolic Properties
The homeostasis of intestinal microorganisms is essential for the gut mucosal barrier
and host immunity. The integrity of the gut mucosal barrier provides a favorable environ-
ment for metabolic processes. Bifidobacterium breve and Lactobacillus salivarius are the two
main bacteria associated with stable immune system stability [39,40]. They can prevent
auto-immune diseases (such as GI infection, diarrhea, and IBD) and allergic reactions by
enhancing the secretion of some anti-bacterial substances (such as bacteriocins, H2O2, and
organic acids) and host immune cells (such as macrophages and lymphocytes) [41,42].
Microorganisms facilitate nutrient digestion and absorption in the gut and can metabolize
bioactive components, such as vitamins, to promote health [43,44]. Most vitamins can-
not be synthesized in the human body and must be obtained externally. Some intestinal
microorganisms are capable of de novo vitamin synthesis and supplementation [45]. Bifi-
dobacteria promote the synthesis of fat-soluble vitamin K and most water-soluble vitamin
B groups [46], including thiamine, riboflavin, pantothenic acids, folic acid, nicotinic acid,
biotin, pyridoxine, and cobalamin.
3.2.2. Protective Role in Various Diseases
Some intestinal microbes participate in the fermentation of indigestible carbohydrates
(such as cellulose, hemicellulose, resistant starch, and lignin), which are the main metabolic
functions of colon microorganisms [29,43,47,48]. This process produces short-chain fatty
acids (SCFA), including acetate, propionate, and butyrate from Bacteroidetes and Firmi-
cutes. These SCFA metabolites participate in the production and metabolism of bile acids,
cholesterol, and fat by secreting glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY) [49].
They suppress appetite and ameliorate diet-induced obesity and hyperglycemia [50,51].
GLP-1 and PYY can be used as neuroprotective agents to inhibit the formation of Aβ plaque,
exert anti-inflammatory effects, and mitigate oxidative stress [52,53]. SCFAs induce the
secretion of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) during cellulose fermentation [54]. IGF-1
promotes the secretion of calcium ions and mediates the osteoclast–osteoblast pathway to
facilitate the growth, formation, and even remodeling of bones, ultimately diminishing the
risk of osteoporosis and fracture [55]. Similar results were reported by Parvaneh et al. [56],
where microorganisms, such as Lactobacillus acidophilus and Lactobacillus plantarum in the
gut microbiome, increased bone density and remodeled bones by upregulating the ex-
pression of runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and bone morphometric protein 2
(Bmp2). L. acidophilus has been widely used as a probiotic supplement in commercial and
medical fields, such as dairy processing [57], soybean milk fermentation [39,58,59], and the
inhibition of acute gastroenteritis [60]. Therefore, the above evidence suggests that SCFAs
play an important role in regulating the GI microbiome and human health.

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
6 of 27
The gut microbiome synthesizes neurochemical substances, thereby affecting the CNS.
Dysfunction of the microbiome–gut–brain axis has a crucial impact on neurodevelopmental
diseases, such as depression, autism, and AD [61]. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
is a neuroactive substance involved in neurodegenerative diseases [62]. It can affect the
neuropathology of the brain through the microbiome–gut–brain. Fujii et al. [63] established
the germ-free C57BL/6N mice with fecal samples from a healthy participant and from an
AD patient. Recent evidence suggested that alterations in gut microbiome composition
contribute to cognitive decline in AD patients and experimental mouse models [63]. In Fujii
et al.’s study, oral transplantation of gut microbiota from an AD patient induced cognitive
impairment in recipient mice [63]. The result further demonstrates that compositional
variations in intestinal microbiomes lead to alterations in gut microbiome metabolites,
which in turn induce distinct behavioral outcomes, thereby supporting the concept of GBA.
Additionally, through the comparative analysis of 30 significant differential metabolites, it
was observed that levels of GABA, taurine, tryptophan, tyrosine, and valine were elevated
in the group transplanted with microbiomes from healthy donors. In contrast, propionic
acid was found to be present at lower concentrations [63]. This indicates that the intestinal
microbiome can determine the metabolism of specific products, thus affecting the progres-
sion of related diseases. The trimethylamine content produced by the uptake of meat and
dairy products depends on the gut microbiome situation [29]. However, trimethylamine is
oxidized to the harmful trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) in the liver. TMAO concentration
is positively correlated with the risk of cardiovascular disease [64]. Notably, Vogt et al.
detected the level of TMAO in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of individuals with AD clinical
symptoms [65]. The results showed that CSF TMAO in subjects with MCI and AD dementia
was significantly higher than that of healthy participants, and the enhancement of CSF
TMAO level was related to the Tau protein phosphorylation. High dietary fiber intake
produces indole propionic acid in the intestine, which can reduce the risk of type 2 dia-
betes [66] and has potential neuroprotective effects in the treatment of neurodegenerative
diseases [67].
3.3. Dietary and Aging Factors Affecting Both the Gut Microbiome and AD
Healthy or unhealthy dietary habits are important factors in gut microbiome alteration.
Changes in diet increase or decrease some species of microorganisms and thus regulate a
series of metabolic processes [41]. Dietary fiber intake has many benefits for maintaining
the functionality of the intestinal mucosal barrier [68], regulating bile acid and cholesterol
metabolism [49], and helping patients with type 2 diabetes control blood sugar [51]. These
advantages are because the gut microbiome can produce SCFAs through the fermentation
of dietary fiber, which plays an important role in subsequent metabolism. Notably, SF-
CAs can cross the BBB to elicit an anti-inflammatory response, consequently preventing
neuronal cell death [69]. The composition of the intestinal microbiome between patients
with AD and healthy individuals was previously compared. The microbial diversity of
patients with AD is significantly lower than that of the control group, and the difference in
abundance levels was related to biomarkers of AD [70–72]. In contrast, the excessive intake
of a diet rich in protein and fat leads to an increase in Bilophila, Alistipes, and Bacteroides
in the intestine because they belong to the bile-tolerant categories [73]. This labile gut
microbiome composition increases the TMAO concentration in the liver and blood [29],
triggers inflammatory reactions and oxidative stress, and eventually develops into various
metabolic diseases [35]. Importantly, TMAO can also activate microglia, destroying the
integrity of the gut barrier and BBB, leading to neuroinflammation [67]. Wang et al. [74]
found that L. plantarum significantly reduced the TMAO level in APP/PS1 mice by reshap-

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
7 of 27
ing the gut microbiome composition and improved pathological features related to AD
(cognitive impairment and Aβ plaque).
The number of species of gut microbiome is relatively small at birth but gradually
increases over time. The intestine of healthy adults is dominated by Bacteroidetes and Firmi-
cutes, followed by a small number of Actinobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, and Proteobacteria [75].
However, in the elderly (>65 years old), taxonomic diversity significantly decreases, show-
ing a lower abundance of Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides than in healthy adults [30]. Most
importantly, these two strains have many benefits for normal metabolism and the health of
the human body. Moreover, the aging gut microbiome weakens its ability to ferment and
decompose substances, thereby producing fewer SCFA and other intestinal metabolites [76].
These changes may be related to a decrease in food intake diversity, changes in living habits,
and frailty of the physiological state. The elderly population shows poor dental function
and saliva secretion; decreased efficiency of digestion, absorption, and metabolism; lack
of exercise; and frequent drug use [43]. Notably, AD prevalence rates also significantly
increase with age, doubling approximately every 5 years after the age of 65. Approximately
10% of individuals over the age of 65 years and 30–50% of those over the age of 85 years
may develop AD [77]. However, normal aging involves slight cognitive decline; therefore,
it is usually difficult to distinguish cognitive decline caused by AD from that related to
normal aging [78]. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is the earliest transitional stage before
the onset of AD. According to Tahami’s summary of PubMed literature in North America,
Europe, and Asia from 2014 to 2021, the probability of patients with MCI developing
AD ranges from 40% to 75% [1]. It is difficult to prevent or intervene in time during the
stage of MCI. Under these circumstances, AD appears to be an inevitable physiological
phenomenon of aging. However, the treatment strategy for AD should be reappraised and
explored from a more promising perspective to avoid misfortune.
Regardless of the pathogenesis or risk factors, AD may be more like a complex
metabolic syndrome than a traditional disease. The occurrence and progression of AD are
caused by diverse metabolic mechanisms and environmental risk factors, accompanied by
different clinical manifestations [4,79]. This suggests that the ultimate clinical manifestation
of AD may involve an assembly of pathogenic pathways. Notably, as key factors related to
both AD and gut microbiome, aging and diet not only alter the gut microbial population,
leading to GI disturbance and attack on the immune system, but also cause CNS disorders.
4. Gut Microbiome in AD
4.1. The Gut–Brain Axis
The gut microbiome plays an important role in nervous system-related diseases, in-
cluding neurodegenerative diseases, anxiety, depression, and autism [61]. Dietary habits,
lifestyle, xenobiotics, autoimmune conditions, biochemical metabolism, inflammatory re-
actions, and diseases can influence the composition of the intestinal microbiome [3,80].
Disturbances in the gut microbiome change the ratio of intestinal derivatives, inappropriate
neurochemicals, and neuroactive substances produced to act on the CNS in the brain. These
intestinal products trigger neuroinflammatory reactions and oxidative stress, leading to an
increase in intestinal and BBB permeability, consequently promoting neuronal injury and
death. This pathway relies on multiple communication networks [61] in the GBA. Multidi-
rectional contact between the gut and the brain occurs in various ways. Intestinal products,
such as microbiome-derived metabolites, hormones, and neuroactive molecules, can regu-
late the ENS, CNS, neuroendocrine system, and immune system [81,82]. The intestine has
an independent neural network; it can function normally even if it is disconnected from the
CNS. However, the bottom-up connection between the gut and CNS mainly depends on
the vagus nerve in the parasympathetic nervous system, which is composed of afferent and

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
8 of 27
efferent limbs [62]. Metabolites of gut microorganisms reach the brain through the vagus
nerve and the circulatory system [81]. This process is of great significance in improving
the imbalance between neuroactive substances and other metabolic substances in neurode-
generative diseases. The relationship between the gut and brain is shown in Figure 2. In
Bercik’s experiment [83], an anxious BALB/c mouse model (a more timid mouse strain)
and an NIH Swiss mouse model were constructed. When the gut microbiome of NIH Swiss
mice colonized the gut of BALB/c mice, the levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) in the hippocampus significantly increased. In contrast, NIH Swiss mice colonized
with the BALB/c mouse microbiome no longer showed active exploratory behavior. BDNF
is a neuroactive substance regulator that promotes the growth, maturation, and survival of
neurons and is related to changing anxiety states [84]. Many gut metabolites affect nervous
system diseases via the GBA (Figure 3).
Figure 2. Microbiome–gut–brain axis mediates the translocation of gut secretions into the central
nervous system, influencing AD pathogenesis. AD, Alzheimer’s disease; BBB, blood–brain barrier.

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
9 of 27
 
Figure 3. The therapeutic pathways of probiotics in AD pathogenesis. BBB, blood–brain barrier;
ENS, enteric nervous system; LPS, liposaccharide; SCFA, short-chain fatty acid; ROS, reactive oxygen
species; TMAO, trimethylamine N-oxide; GABA, gamma-aminobutyric acid; BDNF, brain-derived
neurotrophic factor; PYY, peptide YY; GPL-1, glucagon-like peptide-1.
4.2. AD Pathogenesis: The Gut Microbiome Effect
4.2.1. Neuroactive Substances
Low BDNF levels in the brain and serum are biomarkers of cognitive dysfunction
in AD [85]. BDNF regulates the Ras/MAPK/ERK and IRS-1/PI3K/AKT pathways by
binding to tyrosine kinase (TrKB) receptors, thus controlling neuronal survival and death of
neurons [86]. BDNF not only participates in the survival of neurons but also activates other
intracellular pathways. The ligand (BDNF), activated by tyrosine residues, can regulate
the cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) and CREB-binding protein (CBP),
thus affecting neuroplasticity and neuronal resistance [87]. Therefore, BDNF can improve
cognitive impairment, learning ability, and memory loss related to the pathophysiology of
AD. In a previous study [88], BDNF was injected into adult rat retinal ganglion cells, and the
TrkB, MAPK, and PI3K-PKB pathways were activated, thus inhibiting apoptosis induced by
caspase-3. After continuous injection of BDNF for 12 days, the percentage of surviving neu-
rons significantly increased. Recently, an increasing number of studies have pointed out the
therapeutic potential of BDNF in cognitive dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases, such
as AD [89]. In addition, intestinal bacteria can produce a variety of neuroactive substances
such as GABA, histamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. These neuronal stimulation
inducers control synaptic signaling and neuronal function through GBA, thereby influenc-
ing cognitive, memory, and learning abilities. The experimental results of Bai et. al. [90]
showed that the level of GABA significantly decreased in the parietal lobe of patients with
AD, compared with that in healthy participants. Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium are the two
main intestinal microbiomes that produce GABA [91], and the absence of these two strains
in the GI tract may be the reason for lower GABA levels in patients with AD. In contrast,
high histamine levels have been associated with ferroptosis and neuroinflammation in

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
10 of 27
AD [12]. Lactococcus and Lactobacillus in the intestine convert L-histidine into histamine
through histidine decarboxylase, thereby increasing the NO level [92], which eventually
leads to neuroinflammation and oxidative stress. Tryptophan (Trp) is an essential amino
acid involved in three metabolic pathways (kynurenine, serotonin, and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor [AhR] pathways) during the decomposition of gut bacteria, which are associated
with cognitive ability in AD [93]. In the serotonin biosynthesis pathway, the intermediate
products, circulating Trp or 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), can directly reach the brain
and produce serotonin in the CNS [94]. Serum can improve the clinical symptoms and
pathogenesis of AD [95–97]. Indole derivatives exerted similar neuroprotective effects.
They are ligands of AhR and can inhibit neuroinflammatory reactions by activating the
AhR signaling pathway [67].
4.2.2. Microbiome-Derived Metabolites
In addition to neurotrophic factors and neuroactive substances, microbiome-derived
metabolites such as SCFAs, LPS, and TMAO are key factors associated with the pathological
manifestations of AD. SCFAs are the most common metabolites derived from the gut
microorganisms. Presently, most studies have shown that SCFA mainly antagonizes AD in
three ways: through the anti-inflammatory reaction, reducing Tau protein phosphorylation
caused by Aβ plaque, and increasing neuroactive substances to improve memory and
cognition [79,93]. SCFA can promote the secretion of anti-inflammatory factors through
the immune system, thus inhibiting neuroinflammation. SCFA can enhance the ability of
microglia to clear Aβ of microglia and prevent excessive phosphorylation of Tau protein.
However, LPS and TMAO will promote amyloids to pass through the BBB, leading to the
Aβ aggregation in the brain and activation of microglia, triggering the neuroinflammatory
reaction. However, butyric acid can decrease the levels of LPS and inhibit the activation
of microglia and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines through the anti-inflammatory
pathway [72].
4.2.3. Ghrelin Hormone
Ghrelin is a hormone released from the stomach during hunger and enters the brain
through the BBB, thus stimulating appetite. It regulates food intake by binding to the
growth hormone secretariat-receptor (GHS-R) [98]. Moreover, this functional hormone can
regulate a variety of metabolic activities, such as muscle homeostasis and insulin sensitivity
neuromodulation [99]. Deacylated ghrelin, the most abundant form in the circulatory
system, is converted into acylated ghrelin (AG) by ghrelin O-acyltransferase (GOAT) [100].
Only AG is a corresponding ligand of the GHS-R1a receptor. The combination of AG and
GHS-R1a receptors in the nucleus of the hypothalamus initiates the synaptic transmission
of neurons, thus helping to improve cognitive function and memory ability [101]. An AD
clinical report by Gahete et al. [102] found that the expression level of GHS-R1a in the
temporal lobe was significantly lower than that in the healthy control group. In Moon
et al.’s report [103], high-dose ghrelin supplementation significantly improved hippocampal
function and neuroinflammation. However, Cao et al. [104] showed that the level of AG
in the brains of patients with AD was higher than that in the control group. This result
seems to conflict with the neuroprotective effect of ghrelin, which may be interpreted as
a compensatory response due to a severe deficiency of the ghrelin receptor. High-dose
ghrelin plays a key role in improving AD-related pathogenesis.

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
11 of 27
5. The Interaction of Probiotics with GBA and Its Significance in AD
5.1. Functional Properties of Probiotics
Probiotics are non-pathogenic live microorganisms consisting of yeast and diverse
beneficial bacteria. Appropriate intake of probiotics can maintain the balance of the gut
microbiome and regulate the metabolic cycle. This is because of several characteristics of
probiotics. They must tolerate the decomposition of acids, bile, and pancreatic juice to
survive, colonize, and reproduce in the GI tract [105]. Probiotics have a strong competitive
ability to limit the quantity of nutrients by pH adjustment in the intestine, thus invoking
antagonism against harmful bacteria [106]. These nutrients are energy sources for the
intestinal epithelial cells and various bacteria. Probiotics can repair intestinal epithelial
cells, maintain the integrity of the gut mucosa, and establish a gut barrier to protect the
host immune system [107]. Probiotics also play a crucial role in regulating bile metabolism
and increasing bone density and have anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory properties [106].
Regarding bile acid metabolism modulation, Bifidobacterium species can secrete bile salt
hydrolase (BSH), which deconjugates primary bile acids into secondary forms, activating
the farnesoid X receptor (FXR) to enhance enterohepatic circulation [108]. This has also been
proven in Hu et al.’s study: Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG-administered mice exhibited a signif-
icant reduction in unconjugated bile acid excretion and an increase in BSH levels [109]. In
addition, probiotics can prevent and improve many diseases, such as GI diseases (IBD), liver
disease, genitourinary infections, metabolic diseases (obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular
disease), immune-related diseases, cancer, oncologic diseases, and neurological diseases
(anxiety, depression, autistic spectrum disorder, and neurodegenerative disease) [43,105].
For example, Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) (such as Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli strains) can
modulate gut microbiome composition to indirectly influence SCFA levels, with butyrate,
produced by Firmicutes phylum families, demonstrating pro-apoptotic and anti-proliferative
effects on colorectal cancer cells [110]. Furthermore, LAB exhibits anti-carcinogenic poten-
tial via immune regulation (such as cytokine modulation and phagocyte activation) and
demonstrates therapeutic efficacy against human papillomavirus (HPV)-related cervical
neoplasia [111]. Importantly, probiotics regulate intestinal movement and metabolism
through the ENS and access the CNS via a bidirectional contact pathway [11]. Probiotics
affect AD via the gut–brain interaction network. They control the release of neuroactive
substances by modifying the composition of the gut microbes, thereby facilitating the
survival and differentiation [86]. In addition, they can directly adjust brain biochemical
components, such as serotonin [83] and BDNF [84], in the brains of AD mouse models
to treat cognitive and memory deficits. For instance, comparative analysis by Bai et al.
revealed that parietal lobe GABA levels in AD patients were attenuated by approximately
40% compared to neurologically intact participants [90]. This neuroregulatory capacity orig-
inates from microbial metabolites, particularly SCFAs, where butyrate enhances tryptophan
hydroxylase activity in enterochromaffin cells to promote 5-HT precursor synthesis [94].
5.2. Commonly Used Probiotics
Currently, the most widely used probiotics are Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, which
have been declared safe and beneficial to the human body [112]. Lactobacillus is a genus of
gram-positive facultative anaerobic rods or microaerophilic rod-shaped non-spore-forming
bacteria, including Lactobacillus plantaru, Lactobacillus brevis, L. casei, L. acidophilus, and
L. fermentum [113]. They produce acidic environments by converting hexose sugars into
lactic acid, thus inhibiting the growth of various harmful bacteria [114]. The Bifidobacterium
genus consists of gram-positive non-motile anaerobic bacteria, including Bifidobacterium
breve, Bifidobacterium longum, B. infantis, and B. animalis subsp lactis [113]. They not only
survive in gastric acid, bile salts, and other biological body fluids but also play a beneficial

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
12 of 27
role in human health. Nimgampalle et al. [115] pointed out that a 60-day treatment
with L. plantarum significantly improved cognitive impairment and restored the level of
acetylcholine in AD rats (a D-galactose-induced AD model). Amyloid aggregation increases
acetylcholinesterase expression, leading to a decrease in acetylcholine levels and cognitive
and memory abilities. Probiotics can increase acetylcholine levels, thus improving the
symptoms of cognitive impairment and spatial memory loss. Lee et al. [116] isolated
B. longum from human intestines. It can inhibit the activation of inflammatory factors,
relieve the imbalance of gut microbiome in AD model (5xFAD transgenic mice) and aged
mice, and improve AD-related symptoms, such as cognitive dysfunction. Athari Nik Azm
et al. [117] treated the AD group (Aβ1-42 injection rats) with Lactobacillus (L. acidophilus
and L. fermentum) and Bifidobacterium (B. lactis, B and longum) for 8 weeks. The results
of the water maze test showed that the spatial memory ability of the probiotic group
significantly improved compared with that of the AD group. Therefore, both single and
mixed probiotics are of great significance in improving AD. Additionally, probiotics can
enhance the therapeutic effects of AD drugs. Wang et al. [74] showed that the combination
of memantine (a medicine for dementia) and L. plantarum for 12 weeks reduced the levels
of Aβ1-42 and Aβ1-40 in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice to a greater extent, compared
to that with the memantine treatment alone. Combining probiotics with other interventions
may play a substantial role in the treatment of AD.
5.3. Prebiotics and Symbiotics
The scope of research on AD probiotics is expanding gradually. Symbiotics combine
the synergistic effects of probiotics and prebiotics. Prebiotics are fiber-based compounds
that tolerate gastric acid and are not decomposed by digestive enzymes [118]. Prebiotics
include cellulose, lignin, oligosaccharides, raw oats, and soybeans [68]. Probiotics ferment
and decompose prebiotics into nutrients, thereby promoting SCFA secretion and enhanc-
ing host immunity [119]. Both probiotics and prebiotics are beneficial for AD treatment,
and symbiotics combine their respective beneficial characteristics to achieve a compelling
therapeutic effect. Fruits and vegetables are rich in prebiotics, such as inulin, fructooligosac-
charides (FOS), and xylooligosaccharides (XOS), which are the main forms of fructan [120].
These dietary fibers can promote the colonization and growth of probiotics, such as Bifidobac-
terium, in the intestine. In addition, they reduced neuroinflammation and downregulated
AD biomarker levels. Chen et al. [121] found that FOS effectively improved the cognitive
function of AD mice and downregulated the overexpression of Aβ1-42 and Tau protein.
FOS also showed potential as a prebiotic by increasing the abundance of Bifidobacterium and
Lactobacillus. In the results of anti-inflammatory effect, all anti-inflammatory indexes have
recovered to the baseline after the treatment of FOS and Bifidobacterium, and the treatment
effect of the symbiotic group (FOS + Bifidobacterium) is the most significant.
5.4. How Probiotics Interact with AD Pathogenesis
5.4.1. Probiotics and Aβ Plaque
The gut microbiome is involved in the pathogenesis of AD through various biochem-
ical metabolic pathways. Bacterial amyloid has a similar molecular metabolism pattern
to β-amyloid, evoking Aβ misfolding and aggregation [122]. The disordered intestinal
environment gives improper proteins the chance to easily pass through the BBB via the
GBA [123], resulting in excessive deposition of amyloid in the brain. This occurs in the
early stages of MCI in AD and is one of the most important pathogeneses of AD. Moreover,
the destruction of the intestinal barrier and changes in BBB permeability stimulate the
inflammatory signaling pathway, accelerate the injury of neural cells by inflammatory
factors, and ultimately kill neurons [124].

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
13 of 27
Various species of microorganisms in the human gut can produce a marked number of
LPS, amyloids, and decomposition products. These secreted substances are usually quite
soluble; thus, tissues and systems have a certain tolerance [125]. However, under long-term
exposure to the burden of metabolism, they gradually develop into highly insoluble fibrous
protein aggregates, leading to the occurrence of neurodegenerative diseases characterized
by amyloid accumulation [126]. This phenomenon has been observed in brain samples
of patients with AD by proteomic analysis of amyloidogenic fungal proteins [127]. Asti
and Gioglio [128] pointed out that after long-term injection of bacterial LPS into the brain
of rats, several pathological characteristics, similar to those in the brain of patients with
AD, occurred. Insoluble fibrous protein aggregates cause damage to lipid membranes
and neurotoxicity [129] and have been found on the surface of fungi and bacteria (such as
Escherichia coli, Bacillus, Staphylococcus, and other gram-negative bacteria that usually trigger
human diseases) [122,125,128,130]. Bacteria utilize amyloid proteins as structural materials
of bacterial amyloid fibers to promote adhesion and the recruitment of pathological protein
assemblies, eventually destroying the intestinal barrier and attacking the host immune
system [129]. Curli is the first bacterial amyloid fiber discovered by Chapman et al. [131],
which has a similar structure and function to the Aβ protein [132] because they aggregate
in the same way as Aβ peptides. Bacterial amyloid has the same pathogen-associated
molecular patterns as Aβ 42, which can be recognized by toll-like receptors (TLRs) and
then trigger an immune response and neuroinflammation [125]. Enteroendocrine and other
epidermal cells can allow the misfolded α-synuclein deposit to enter the brain through the
direct neural connection of alpha-synuclein, leading to the Aβ aggregation in the CNS [131].
Probiotics resist the deposition of Aβ plaque in two ways: the modulation of gut
metabolites and the regulation of gut microbiome composition. Probiotics can increase
the level of SCFAs to interfere with protein–protein aggregation, thus eliminating the
formation of Aβ plaque (Figure 3). Kobayashi et al. [133] found that the administration
of Bifidobacterium brevis A1 not only downregulated the gene expression of hippocampal
immune response induced by Aβ but also increased the level of acetate in the plasma of
mice. However, Kobayashi et al. did not analyze the inhibitory effect of B. brevistrain A1
on clearing Aβ accumulation. The Aβ clearance effect of probiotics was verified in the
in vitro study by Yeon et al. [134]. They found that Lactobacillus helveticus IDCC 3801 (in
fermented milk) has the potential to reduce the level of Aβ and improve APP metabolism.
In addition to micro-biota-derived metabolites, such as SCFAs, neuroactive substances,
such as serotonin, have a similar effect on alleviating AD intensity by participating in Aβ
plaque clearance. Cirrito et al. [96] showed that after long-term administration of selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), the plaque load in the brains of mice decreased
by 50%. They also analyzed the brain amyloid load of healthy elderly participants and
those who had used SSRIs in the past five years. The results showed that serotonin
signaling was related to the reduction in amyloid plaques. Serotonin is involved in the
α-secretase and β-secretase cleavage pathways of APP proteolytic metabolism [97]. The
serotonin receptor is activated to initiate the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
pathway. Phosphorylated ERK will increase the cleavage effect of α-secretase on APP
while inhibiting the activity of β-secretase [96]. Probiotics can inhibit the accumulation
of Aβ plaque by participating in the metabolism of 5-HT and play a positive role in
mitigating the pathological intensity of AD [94,95]. In addition, probiotics can maintain
the balance of the gut microbiome and improve AD-related symptoms, such as amyloid
plaque deposition, by increasing the beneficial microbiome and suppressing antagonistic
pathogens (Figure 3). Cattaneo et al. [135] explored the relationship between amyloid
content and the composition of the gut microbiome. Compared with the control group, the
abundance of the anti-infectious EU bacteria rectum was lower, while that of pro-infectious

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
14 of 27
Escherichia or Shigella was higher in the feces of the Aβ deposition and cognitive impairment
groups. Proinflammatory bacteria can cause α-synuclein misfolding, thus allowing more
bacterial amyloids to enter the brain through the BBB. Bacterial endotoxins may play an
important role in the formation of amyloid plaques and other pathological processes related
to AD. Wang et al. [136] found that the administration of L. plantarum MA2 reshaped the gut
microbiome composition of AD rats (D-Galactose/AlCl3 induced AD model) and inhibited
the aggregation of Aβ42 and the amyloid-induced cytotoxicity. Probiotics maintain the
intestinal immune system by competing for limited nutrition and releasing anti-bacterial
substances, consequently playing an antagonistic role in the pathological processes related
to AD. Hence, metabolites released by a healthy intestinal microbiome can regulate immune
function, reduce Aβ accumulation, and mediate the inflammatory reaction against AD. In
contrast, the disorder of the gut microbiome will aggravate the inflammatory reaction and
oxidative stress of the CNS, leading to the deposition of Aβ.
5.4.2. Probiotics and Neuroinflammation
Several bacterial strains can be involved in the formation of Aβ fibrils and Tau phos-
phorylation, such as E. coli, Salmonella enterica, and Staphylococcus aureus [137]. Excessive
accumulation of Aβ plaque in the brain will accelerate the phosphorylation of Tau protein,
leading to an inflammatory reaction. Intestinal epithelial cells recognize different antigens
carried by or around the surface of the gut microorganisms [138]. LPS is connected to
the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, which mediates the association between
the imbalance of the intestinal microbiome and the pathological process of Tau protein in
AD [139]. From the perspective of the neuronal pathway, LPS causes abnormal activation
of microglia, which decreases their clearance capacity for Tau protein and Aβ plaque,
thus causing neuroinflammation (Figure 3). The hyper-ramified (a type of activated mi-
croglia) [140] and dystrophic microglia [141] have been found in the postmortem brains
of patients with AD. These modified microglia no longer exert protective effects against
neuroinflammation. The combination probiotic treatment with B. lactis, L. brevis, and L.
fermentum decreases the number and modification of microglia in the hippocampus and
cerebral cortex of mice (5xFAD model) [142]. The therapeutic effect of probiotics signifi-
cantly reduced the levels of tau protein aggregation and phosphorylation in the 5xFAD
group, which was comparable to the therapeutic effect of phosphatidylserine (a protective
component of the nerve cell membrane). Probiotics may alleviate pathological processes
related to AD by inhibiting microglial activation (Figure 3). In addition, from the per-
spective of immunological signaling pathways, LPS is allowed to cross the BBB through
interaction and recognition with the constitutively expressed CNS receptors, CD14 and
TLR4, triggering the corresponding immune response. TLR4 phosphorylates the MyD88
pathway to activate the pro-inflammatory transcription factor, NF-κB [139,143]. The activa-
tion of this pathway promotes macrophage activation and the release of pro-inflammatory
cytokines [144]. Probiotics can also regulate immune functions to maintain intestinal home-
ostasis and fight this invasion (Figure 3). Probiotics can inhibit the signaling pathways
of pro-inflammatory cytokines by affecting the distribution and function of immune cells
(macrophages, granulocytes, and T-cells) [145]. Jeong et al. [146] showed that 8 weeks of
Lactobacillus pentosus var. plantarum C29 treatment inhibited the expression of the NF-κB
signaling pathway of aging rats (Fischer 344 model) and aging-induced pro-inflammatory
factors, TNF-α and IL-6.
5.4.3. Probiotics and Mitochondrial Function
Mitochondrial dysfunction occurs in the early pathological stage of AD and is as-
sociated with the accumulation of NFT induced by amyloid plaques and tau protein

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
15 of 27
phosphorylation [147]. Excessive accumulation of these toxic proteins and fibers produces
ROS, which will lead to the aggravation of oxidative stress. Importantly, brain neurons are
high-energy demanders in human tissues and organs, accounting for 20% of the oxygen con-
sumption in the entire body, even under resting conditions [148]. Therefore, a continuous
energy supply is the basis for neurons to maintain a steady state and function. Oxidative
stress can cause serious damage to neurons and mitochondria, leading to neuronal death.
Mitochondria are mediators in iron metabolism and Ca2+ homeostasis, including heme
protein synthesis, redox signaling, energy metabolism, and neuroactive substance transmis-
sion [28,147,149]. However, excessive ROS formation leads to the uncontrolled regulation
of iron. This interrupts the regulation and control of related proteins and cofactors in iron
metabolism, leading to iron imbalance, mitochondrial energy deadlock, and even iron
death [148]. Ferroptosis is an iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell death [12] that
is induced by lipid peroxidation when ROS are overloaded [26]. The severity of the iron
load in the hippocampus and thalamus of patients with AD was directly proportional
to a decline in cognitive ability [150]. In addition, Van Bergen et al. [151] scanned and
evaluated the iron load and Aβ plaque level of 116 elderly participants with quantitative
susceptibility mapping and 18F-Flutemetamol-PET, respectively. There was a significant
correlation between the increase in iron and Aβ accumulation (p < 0.05). However, amyloid
deposition and tau protein phosphorylation may also lead to calcium ion disorders and
mitochondrial dysfunction by disrupting the calcium ion circuitry signaling pathway in
neurons [152]. Pérez et al. [153] found mitochondrial damage, decreased ATP levels, and
Ca2+ overload in the peripheral tissues of patients with AD.
Notably, mitochondria and the ancient intestinal micromicrobiome (both anaerobic and
aerobic bacteria) have a common development history [154]. This interaction may explain
why an intestinal microbiome imbalance affects mitochondrial function [155]. Probiotic
interventions can mitigate mitochondrial oxidative stress by reducing ROS levels, thereby
improving the pathology of AD (Figure 3). Acidophilus improved mitochondrial dysfunction
by reducing the levels of oxidative stress biomarkers, thus alleviating cognitive dysfunction
in AD rats (D-gal- and ALCL3-induced models) [156]. A similar result was found in
the report of Ton et al. [157]. Kefir-fermented milk treatment for 90 days significantly
reduced the magnitude of serum protein oxidation in patients with AD and improved
mitochondrial dysfunction and cognitive defects. Probiotics, including Lactobacillus [158,
159] and B. lactis [160], not only have a natural antioxidant defense system but can also
activate antioxidant enzymes (superoxide dismutase, catalase, ascorbate peroxidase) in
the host. Probiotics are also of great importance in the inhibition of iron and calcium ion
disorders. Probiotics inhibit the Fenton reaction during ferroptosis by producing catalase,
thus establishing an antioxidative defense mechanism in neural cells [161]. Lactobacillus
casei can chelate Fe2+ to inhibit lipid peroxidation [162]. Lactococcus lactis MG1363-pMG36e-
GLP-1, a probiotic strain constructed by Yue et al. [163], reduces oxidative stress indices,
such as ROS and malondialdehyde, and effectively suppresses ferroptosis by activating the
Keap1/Nrf2/GPX4 signaling pathway. They also found that synthetic probiotics corrected
the intestinal microbiome composition in mice: the levels of Akkermansia, Oscillospira, and
Sutterella increased. Although this study focused on the neuroprotective effect against
Parkinson’s disease, the evaluation results (iron death caused by mitochondrial damage,
oxidative stress, and alteration of intestinal microbiome) are also related to the pathological
mechanism of AD, which provides a theoretical basis and database for future treatment
strategies for AD. Additionally, the experimental results of Sobol et al. [164] have shown
that products fermented by Lactobacillus regulate nerve signal conduction by adjusting
calcium homeostasis in nerve cells.

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
16 of 27
5.4.4. Probiotics and Other AD Pathological Hypotheses
The etiology of AD remains unclear. Apart from the main AD pathology mentioned
above, multiple pathogenesis hypotheses have been proposed to understand the specific
causes or mechanisms of AD. The cholinergic hypothesis proposed that the decrease in
acetylcholine level (the main neuroactive substance of cholinergic neurons) induces Aβ
accumulation and Tau protein abnormality, eventually leading to oxidation stress and
neuronal cell apoptosis [28]. Cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain (BFCN) regulate
advanced behaviors, such as cognition, learning, and memory. Therefore, the degeneration
of the BFCN in patients with AD leads to the loss of synapses between the basal forebrain
and the corresponding tissues of the cortex and hippocampus, leading to a reduction
in cognition, memory, and learning abilities [165]. This has been found in early clinical
evidence [166], and the brain tissue evaluation results of patients with dementia exhibited
low acetylcholine levels and a lack of cholinergic neurons. Probiotics have the potential to
act as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in cognitive impairment by increasing acetylcholine
levels [115,167,168].
From the perspective of epidemiological research, risk factors, such as vascular patholo-
gies, hypertension, and diabetes, are related to cognitive dysfunction and an increased
risk of AD [169]. The oxygen consumption of the brain accounts for approximately 20% of
the total oxygen supply in the whole body and receives 15% of the cardiac blood output.
Thus, damage to cerebral perfusion can easily induce heart failure and vascular patho-
logical changes [170]. According to the vascular hypothesis of AD, these cardiovascular
risk factors cause destruction of the BBB and changes in vascular structure and cerebral
hemodynamics, which contribute to insufficient cerebral blood flow and oxygen supply,
eventually leading to the development of AD-related pathology [28]. Mitochondria and
cholinergic neurons are vulnerable to damage under long-term hypoxia [171]. Clinical evi-
dence has shown that probiotics can reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Probiotics
reduce total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, thus alleviating and
preventing cardiovascular diseases, such as hypertension [172]. Notably, higher cholesterol
levels were found in patients with AD with AD harboring the ApoE4 gene (which regulates
lipid transport and metabolism) [170], which is also the strongest genetic risk factor for
AD. Abnormal cholesterol metabolism may induce the formation and accumulation of
Aβ plaque [173]. In addition, a meta-analysis by Tao et al. [174] concluded that probiotics
can reduce three important indices of patients with type 2 diabetes (fasting blood glucose,
glycosylated hemoglobin A1c, and insulin resistance). Tenorio-Jiménez et al. [175] reported
that probiotics can significantly reduce the inflammatory index of the obese population,
thus reducing the risk of related diseases, such as CVD and diabetes. The pathological
mechanism of AD is complicated because it interacts and synergizes with one diseases.
Probiotics, by virtue of their various regulatory pathways, participate in every pathology
of AD, thus playing a comprehensive and covering improvement role in AD therapy. The
probiotic effect associated with AD pathogenesis has been summarized in Figure 3.
6. Applications, Prospects, and Limitations of Probiotics
Currently, Lactobacillus is the most frequently used genus in probiotic therapy and
most studies summarized in this review have shown a positive effect on the pathological
process of AD. Generally, probiotics indirectly affect various products secreted by intestinal
bacteria by correcting the composition of the intestinal microbiome, thus playing a positive
role in many AD pathologies. Recently, combination therapies with probiotics have also
been widely studied, including the combination of probiotics with AD drugs [74] and
the administration of symbiotics [121]. However, there are several limitations to these
positive effects.

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
17 of 27
6.1. Different Intervention Conditions of Probiotcs
Probiotic administration varies and some variables need to be explored through nu-
merous longitudinal experiments. In the existing clinical trials, the treatment schemes for
probiotics include single-strain probiotics, mixed probiotics, and combined interventions;
the intervention duration is also neglected. The majority of existing clinical investigations
on probiotic interventions have adopted relatively short observation periods, typically
spanning 2–3 months. As comprehensively reviewed in the report by Naomi et al., even a
two-week probiotic intake for animals or four-week probiotic treatment for humans are
sufficient to improve the pathology related to AD [176]. Nevertheless, probiotics with ther-
apeutic potential, such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, may require extended follow-up
periods to fully elucidate the critical assessment of potential microbiome adaptation and
metabolic homeostasis maintenance. Current research gaps highlight the imperative for
longitudinal studies incorporating repeated outcome assessments, standardized dosing
protocols, and comprehensive evaluation of microbial viability during prolonged admin-
istration. Additionally, probiotics are strain specific and exhibit significant individual
variance. This may explain why the same effective probiotics did not achieve the expected
improvement after intervention in another study. In a randomized double-blind placebo-
controlled trial by Akbari et al. [177], patients with AD were treated with probiotics for
12 weeks. The results showed that although the cognitive function of patients with AD
was obviously improved, the biomarkers related to oxidative stress and inflammation did
not significantly change. Hsu et al. [178] also treated patients with AD with Bifidobacterium
and Lactobacillus for 12 weeks. The results showed that cognitive impairment, oxidative
stress, and inflammatory responses significantly improved. This positive improvement
is similar to the results of Hsu et al. [178] but may be attributed to the combined effect
of selenium supplementation and probiotics. Kobayashi et al. [179] investigated the ef-
fect of a 12 week-treatment with B. brevis A1 on the prevention of cognitive and memory
improvement in subjects with MCI. The results showed that not all cognitive ability test
scores were significantly different, which implies that the therapeutic effect of single-strain
probiotics requires further research to be verified. Moreover, the participants reported by
Tini et al. [170] were all patients with MCI. This indicated that the severity and progression
of AD may also affect the efficiency of probiotic interventions. The various intervention
conditions for probiotics are compared in Table 1.
Table 1. Summarizing the experiments and clinical traits revealing probiotics’ effect on AD pathogenesis.
Probiotics
Model or Subjects
Duration
Significant Effect on AD
Source
200 mL/d of fermentum
milk contained
Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. casei,
L. fermentum and
Bifidobacterium bifidum
(2 × 109 CFU/g for each)
AD patients
12 weeks
Cognitive function
Akbari,
2016 [177]
Bifidobacterium longum subsp.
Infantis, B. breve, B. animalis subsp.
Lactis, B. bifidum and
Lactobacillus plantarum
(1 capsule contained
1 × 1010 CFU/d)
AD patients
12 weeks
↑BDNF
Inhibiting oxidative stress
and inflammation
Hsu, 2023 [178]

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
18 of 27
Table 1. Cont.
Probiotics
Model or Subjects
Duration
Significant Effect on AD
Source
Combination treatment of
selenium (200 mg/day) and
Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. casei,
L. fermentum and
Bifidobacterium bifidum
(2 × 109 CFU/g for each)
AD patients
12 weeks
Ameliorating the cognitive
function, oxidative stress
and inflammation
Akbari,
2016 [177]
Bifidobacterium brevis A1
(2 capsules contained >
2.0 × 1010 CFU/d)
MCI patients
12 weeks
Improving the
immediate memory
Kobayashi,
2019 [179]
2 mL/kg/d fermented
milk contained
Acetobacter aceti, A. sp., Lactobacillus
delbrueckii, L. fermentum, L.
fructivorans, L. kefiranofaciens,
Enterococcus faecium, Leuconostoc
spp., Candida famata and C. krusei
(probiotics dosage is not mentioned)
AD patients
3 months
Inhibiting the mitochondrial
dysfunction, DNA damage
and apoptosis
Mitigating the oxidative stress
and inflammation
Improving cognitive deficits
Ton, 2020 [157]
Bifidobacterium brevis A1
(probiotics dosage is not mentioned)
Aβ25–35-injected
mice
10 days
Ameliorating
Cognitive function
Increasing the expression of
the immune response gene
↑plasma acetate levels
Kobayashi,
2017 [133]
Lactobacillus plantarum
(1 × 108 CFU/kg/d)
D-galactose/AlCl3
induced AD rats
12 weeks
Reshaping the gut microbiome
composition
Ameliorating
Cognitive function
↓Aβ accumulation
Wang,
2022 [136]
8 mL sterilized water of
Bifidobacterium lactis,
Limosilactobacillus fermentum and
Levilactobacillus brevis
(8 × 107 CFU/d)
5xFAD mice model
3 months
Attenuating the
microglial activation
↓Aβ accumulation
↓Tau phosphorylation
Modifying the gut
microbiome composition
Improving the spatial and
recognition memories
Kim, 2024 [142]
Lactobacillus pentosus var.
plantarum C29
(2 × 109 CFU/d)
Aged Fischer
344 rats
8 weeks
Inhibiting NF-κB
signalling pathway
↓the expression of BDNF
Enhancing the
aging-impaired memory
Jeong,
2015 [146]
2 g (1 × 1010 CFU/g) of
Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. fermentum,
Bifidobacterium lactis and B. longum
Aβ1-42-injected
mice
8 weeks
Ameliorating memory deficit
and oxidative stress
Modifying the
microbiome composition
Athari Nik
Azm, 2018 [117]
Combination treatment of
Memantine (1 mg/mL) and
Lactobacillus plantarum
(1 × 109 CFU/mL)
APP/PS1 mice
12 weeks
Potentiating the drug therapy:
Inhibiting amyloid plaque and
neuroinflammation
Protecting neurons and the
hippocampal plasticity
↓TMAO
Wang, 2020 [74]
↑, up-regulate; ↓, down-regulate.
6.2. The Complexity in Designing an Effective Probiotic-Based Intervention for AD
Currently, most studies are based on in vitro culture and animal models. Moreover,
there are many ways to induce an experimental mouse model; therefore, the composition

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
19 of 27
of the intestinal microbiome will be affected differently after induction. Although the
induction occurred in a specific direction, it also led to deviations in the experiment. These
deviations were amplified after shifting from animal experiments to clinical treatments. In
addition to the complexity of the pathological mechanism of AD, genetic factors, dietary
habits, emotional changes after intervention, sex of the subjects, and different cognitive
evaluation tools in the experiment lead to deviations in the experimental results [180].
Most pathological studies related to AD can only be conducted after death; therefore, there
is little pathological evidence related to AD. Additionally, the severity of AD may affect
the intestinal response to probiotic interventions. Agahi et al. [181] treated patients with
AD with probiotics for 12 weeks and evaluated the severity of AD in patients using Test
Your Memory (a cognitive assessment tool). The results showed that 83.5% of the subjects
developed serious AD, and no significant changes were found in cognitive scores or other
inflammatory and oxidative indices after intervention with probiotics. The development of
AD may affect the sensitivity of patients to probiotic therapy. This may be because the loss
of neurons and TNFs is an irreversible pathological change in AD [182]. Probiotics may no
longer reverse the pathological process in the late stages of AD, based on Agahi et al. [181].
Moreover, it is difficult to distinguish MCI from the normal physiological phenomena
of aging. Therefore, it is necessary to apply interventional therapy in the early stage of
AD. Hwang et al. [183] reported that a 12-week probiotic supplement of L. plantarum C29-
fermented soybean significantly improved comprehensive cognitive functions (attention,
memory, and language ability) in patients with MCI by stimulating the secretion of BDNF.
Previous reports have found that other functional component therapies have a positive
impact on the cognitive ability of patients with MCI in short-term interventions (2 weeks
or even less). Lin et al. [182] emphasized the importance of early intervention in AD. They
found that a four-week treatment of solanezumab (a monoclonal antibody against Aβ
plaque) reduced the Aβ accumulation level in the brains of patients with AD, but there was
no pronounced change in cognitive ability. Although the complex pathological mechanisms
of AD, such as the aggregation of amyloid plaques, are still unclear, all the pathological
mechanisms of AD are related. The origin of all these progressions of AD is the deposition
of Aβ in the brain of patients with AD. Therefore, an extensive process to explore these
complex processes and a comprehensive treatment method are necessary to intervene in
AD. The clinical traits revealing the role of probiotics in AD pathogenesis are summarized
in Table 1.
7. Conclusions
Evidence based on studies in this review illustrates that probiotics can regulate the
stability of the intestinal microbiome and secrete intestinal metabolites and neuroactive
substances, thus suppressing AD-related pathogenesis, including the increase in BBB
permeability, Aβ accumulation, cognition dysfunction, neuroinflammation, and oxidative
stress. To date, no drugs have been developed to prevent AD symptoms. In addition, the
multifactorial nature of AD pathogenesis, characterized by diverse etiological hypotheses
and modifiable risk factors, presents significant challenges for therapeutic development.
However, probiotic-based interventions may modulate multiple AD-associated pathways
through GBA, demonstrating potential for attenuating neurodegenerative processes. This
therapeutic paradigm aligns with evolutionary biology principles—as symbiotic partners
in human evolution, gut microbiota exerts systemic influences on human health, mood,
and even behavior via bidirectional microbiota–gut–brain communication. More clinical
studies on the mechanisms of probiotic effects are necessary to position microbiota-targeted
strategies as multimodal interventions in AD management protocols.

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
20 of 27
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.D., M.L. and Z.L.; writing—original draft preparation,
Y.D., X.W., Y.Z., A.H., M.L. and Z.L.; writing—review and editing, Q.Z., X.Y., M.L. and Z.L.; supervi-
sion, M.L. and Z.L.; project administration, M.L. and Z.L. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Tahami Monfared, A.A.; Byrnes, M.J.; White, L.A.; Zhang, Q. Alzheimer’s disease: Epidemiology and clinical progression. Neurol.
Ther. 2022, 11, 553–569. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Ageing and Health. World Health Organization. Available online: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ageing-
and-health (accessed on 1 October 2024).
3.
Kesika, P.; Suganthy, N.; Sivamaruthi, B.S.; Chaiyasut, C. Role of gut-brain axis, gut microbial composition, and probiotic
intervention in Alzheimer’s disease. Life Sci. 2021, 264, 118627. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Korczyn, A.D.; Grinberg, L.T. Is Alzheimer disease a disease? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2024, 20, 245–251. [CrossRef]
5.
Bao, W.-D.; Pang, P.; Zhou, X.-T.; Hu, F.; Xiong, W.; Chen, K.; Wang, J.; Wang, F.; Xie, D.; Hu, Y.-Z. Loss of ferroportin induces
memory impairment by promoting ferroptosis in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Death Differ. 2021, 28, 1548–1562. [CrossRef]
6.
Lebeer, S.; Bron, P.A.; Marco, M.L.; Van Pijkeren, J.-P.; Motherway, M.O.C.; Hill, C.; Pot, B.; Roos, S.; Klaenhammer, T. Identification
of probiotic effector molecules: Present state and future perspectives. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2018, 49, 217–223. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
7.
Cunningham, M.; Azcarate-Peril, M.A.; Barnard, A.; Benoit, V.; Grimaldi, R.; Guyonnet, D.; Holscher, H.D.; Hunter, K.; Manurung,
S.; Obis, D. Shaping the future of probiotics and prebiotics. Trends Microbiol. 2021, 29, 667–685. [CrossRef]
8.
Siciliano, R.A.; Reale, A.; Mazzeo, M.F.; Morandi, S.; Silvetti, T.; Brasca, M. Paraprobiotics: A new perspective for functional foods
and nutraceuticals. Nutrients 2021, 13, 1225. [CrossRef]
9.
A˘gagündüz, D.; Kocaadam-Bozkurt, B.; Bozkurt, O.; Sharma, H.; Esposito, R.; Özo˘gul, F.; Capasso, R. Microbiota alteration and
modulation in Alzheimer’s disease by gerobiotics: The gut-health axis for a good mind. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2022, 153, 113430.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Ojha, S.; Patil, N.; Jain, M.; Kole, C.; Kaushik, P. Probiotics for neurodegenerative diseases: A systemic review. Microorganisms
2023, 11, 1083. [CrossRef]
11.
Foster, J.A.; Neufeld, K.-A.M. Gut–brain axis: How the microbiome influences anxiety and depression. Trends Neurosci. 2013, 36,
305–312. [CrossRef]
12.
Lane, C.A.; Hardy, J.; Schott, J.M. Alzheimer’s disease. Eur. J. Neurol. 2018, 25, 59–70. [CrossRef]
13.
Yan, N.; Zhang, J. Iron metabolism, ferroptosis, and the links with Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Neurosci. 2020, 13, 1443. [CrossRef]
14.
Zheng, W.-H.; Bastianetto, S.; Mennicken, F.; Ma, W.; Kar, S. Amyloid β peptide induces tau phosphorylation and loss of
cholinergic neurons in rat primary septal cultures. Neuroscience 2002, 115, 201–211. [CrossRef]
15.
Zotova, E.; Holmes, C.; Johnston, D.; Neal, J.W.; Nicoll, J.A.; Boche, D. Microglial alterations in human Alzheimer’s disease
following Aβ42 immunization. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 2011, 37, 513–524. [CrossRef]
16.
Brawek, B.; Garaschuk, O. Network-wide dysregulation of calcium homeostasis in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Tissue Res. 2014, 357,
427–438. [CrossRef]
17.
Lee, C.D.; Landreth, G.E. The role of microglia in amyloid clearance from the AD brain. J. Neural Transm. 2010, 117, 949–960.
[CrossRef]
18.
Tang, Y.; Le, W. Differential roles of M1 and M2 microglia in neurodegenerative diseases. Mol. Neurobiol. 2016, 53, 1181–1194.
[CrossRef]
19.
Di Benedetto, G.; Burgaletto, C.; Bellanca, C.M.; Munafò, A.; Bernardini, R.; Cantarella, G. Role of microglia and astrocytes in
Alzheimer’s disease: From neuroinflammation to Ca2+ homeostasis dysregulation. Cells 2022, 11, 2728. [CrossRef]
20.
Aisen, P.S.; Schafer, K.A.; Grundman, M.; Pfeiffer, E.; Sano, M.; Davis, K.L.; Farlow, M.R.; Jin, S.; Thomas, R.G.; Thal, L.J. Effects of
rofecoxib or naproxen vs placebo on Alzheimer disease progression: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2003, 289, 2819–2826.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
21 of 27
21.
Long, J.M.; Holtzman, D.M. Alzheimer disease: An update on pathobiology and treatment strategies. Cell 2019, 179, 312–339.
[PubMed]
22.
Wang, Y.; Mandelkow, E. Tau in physiology and pathology. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2016, 17, 22–35.
23.
Ingelsson, M.; Fukumoto, H.; Newell, K.; Growdon, J.; Hedley–Whyte, E.; Frosch, M.; Albert, M.; Hyman, B.; Irizarry, M. Early
Aβ accumulation and progressive synaptic loss, gliosis, and tangle formation in AD brain. Neurology 2004, 62, 925–931. [CrossRef]
24.
Dujardin, S.; Lécolle, K.; Caillierez, R.; Bégard, S.; Zommer, N.; Lachaud, C.; Carrier, S.; Dufour, N.; Aurégan, G.; Winderickx, J.
Neuron-to-neuron wild-type Tau protein transfer through a trans-synaptic mechanism: Relevance to sporadic tauopathies. Acta
Neuropathol. Commun. 2014, 2, 14. [CrossRef]
25.
Dringen, R. Metabolism and functions of glutathione in brain. Prog. Neurobiol. 2000, 62, 649–671. [CrossRef]
26.
Dixon, S.J.; Lemberg, K.M.; Lamprecht, M.R.; Skouta, R.; Zaitsev, E.M.; Gleason, C.E.; Patel, D.N.; Bauer, A.J.; Cantley, A.M.; Yang,
W.S. Ferroptosis: An iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell death. Cell 2012, 149, 1060–1072. [CrossRef]
27.
Porras, C.A.; Rouault, T.A. Iron homeostasis in the CNS: An overview of the pathological consequences of iron metabolism
disruption. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 4490. [CrossRef]
28.
Nasb, M.; Tao, W.; Chen, N. Alzheimer’s disease puzzle: Delving into pathogenesis hypotheses. Aging Dis. 2024, 15, 43.
29.
Valdes, A.M.; Walter, J.; Segal, E.; Spector, T.D. Role of the gut microbiota in nutrition and health. BMJ 2018, 361, k2179. [CrossRef]
30.
Guarner, F.; Malagelada, J.-R. Gut flora in health and disease. Lancet 2003, 361, 512–519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Xie, A.; Zhao, S.; Liu, Z.; Yue, X.; Shao, J.; Li, M.; Li, Z. Polysaccharides, proteins, and their complex as microencapsulation
carriers for delivery of probiotics: A review on carrier types and encapsulation techniques. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2023, 242, 124784.
[CrossRef]
32.
Zhao, S.; Yue, J.; Wang, Y.; Shao, J.; Li, Z.; Li, M. The regulation of volatile flavor compounds in fermented meat products mediated
by microorganisms: A review. Food Biosci. 2024, 62, 105180. [CrossRef]
33.
Yue, X.; Li, M.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zheng, Y. Microbial diversity and function of soybean paste in East Asia: What we know and
what we don’t. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 2021, 37, 145–152. [CrossRef]
34.
Shapira, M. Gut microbiotas and host evolution: Scaling up symbiosis. Trends Ecol. Evol. 2016, 31, 539–549. [CrossRef]
35.
Jovel, J.; Dieleman, L.A.; Kao, D.; Mason, A.L.; Wine, E. The human gut microbiome in health and disease. Metagenomics 2018, 92,
197–213.
36.
Shen, X.; Xie, A.; Li, Z.; Jiang, C.; Wu, J.; Li, M.; Yue, X. Research Progress for probiotics regulating intestinal Flora to improve
functional dyspepsia: A review. Foods 2024, 13, 151. [CrossRef]
37.
Hong, R.; Xie, A.; Jiang, C.; Guo, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Chen, J.; Shen, X.; Li, M.; Yue, X. A review of the biological activities of lactoferrin:
Mechanisms and potential applications. Food Funct. 2024, 15, 8182–8199. [CrossRef]
38.
Zhang, Y.; Guo, Y.; Jiang, C.; Xie, A.; Yue, X.; Li, M. A review of casein phosphopeptides: From enrichment identification to
biological properties. Food Biosci. 2024, 59, 104217. [CrossRef]
39.
Ashraf, R.; Shah, N.P. Immune system stimulation by probiotic microorganisms. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2014, 54, 938–956.
[CrossRef]
40.
Li, Z.; Kanwal, R.; Yue, X.; Li, M.; Xie, A. Polyphenols and intestinal microorganisms: A review of their interactions and effects on
human health. Food Biosci. 2024, 62, 105220. [CrossRef]
41.
Clemente, J.C.; Ursell, L.K.; Parfrey, L.W.; Knight, R.J. The impact of the gut microbiota on human health: An integrative view.
Cell 2012, 148, 1258–1270. [CrossRef]
42.
Sun, P.; Su, L.; Zhu, H.; Li, X.; Guo, Y.; Du, X.; Zhang, L.; Qin, C. Gut microbiota regulation and their implication in the
development of neurodegenerative disease. Microorganisms 2021, 9, 2281. [CrossRef]
43.
Gomaa, E.Z. Human gut microbiota/microbiome in health and diseases: A review. Antonie Leeuwenhoek 2020, 113, 2019–2040.
[CrossRef]
44.
Zhang, Y.; Xie, Y.; Shao, J.; Yue, X.; Li, M. Maillard reaction-based conjugates as carrier strategies for delivery of bioactive
compounds: A review. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 2024, 61, 101260. [CrossRef]
45.
LeBlanc, J.G.; Milani, C.; De Giori, G.S.; Sesma, F.; Van Sinderen, D.; Ventura, M. Bacteria as vitamin suppliers to their host: A gut
microbiota perspective. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2013, 24, 160–168. [CrossRef]
46.
Hill, M. Intestinal flora and endogenous vitamin synthesis. Eur. J. Cancer Prev. 1997, 6, S43–S45. [CrossRef]
47.
Hong, R.; Yang, H.; Guo, Y.; Liu, Q.; Xu, N.; Xie, Y.; Li, M.; Yue, X. The application and mechanism of polysaccharides, proteins
and their complexes on enhancing yogurt gel stability: A review. Food Sci. Anim. Prod. 2024, 2, 9240066. [CrossRef]
48.
Li, M.; Li, Q.; Abdlla, R.; Chen, J.; Yue, X.; Quek, S.Y. Donkey whey proteins ameliorate dextran sulfate sodium-induced ulcerative
colitis in mice by downregulating the S100A8-TRAF6-NF-κB axis-mediated inflammatory response. Food Sci. Hum. Wellness 2023,
12, 1809–1819. [CrossRef]
49.
Psichas, A.; Sleeth, M.; Murphy, K.; Brooks, L.; Bewick, G.; Hanyaloglu, A.; Ghatei, M.; Bloom, S.; Frost, G. The short chain fatty
acid propionate stimulates GLP-1 and PYY secretion via free fatty acid receptor 2 in rodents. Int. J. Obes. 2015, 39, 424–429.
[CrossRef]

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
22 of 27
50.
Lin, H.V.; Frassetto, A.; Kowalik Jr, E.J.; Nawrocki, A.R.; Lu, M.M.; Kosinski, J.R.; Hubert, J.A.; Szeto, D.; Yao, X.; Forrest, G.
Butyrate and propionate protect against diet-induced obesity and regulate gut hormones via free fatty acid receptor 3-independent
mechanisms. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e35240. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Zhao, L.; Zhang, F.; Ding, X.; Wu, G.; Lam, Y.Y.; Wang, X.; Fu, H.; Xue, X.; Lu, C.; Ma, J. Gut bacteria selectively promoted by
dietary fibers alleviate type 2 diabetes. Science 2018, 359, 1151–1156. [CrossRef]
52.
Sharma, M.K.; Jalewa, J.; Hölscher, C. Neuroprotective and anti-apoptotic effects of liraglutide on SH-SY 5Y cells exposed to
methylglyoxal stress. J. Neurochem. 2014, 128, 459–471. [CrossRef]
53.
Chen, X.-Y.; Du, Y.-F.; Chen, L. Neuropeptides exert neuroprotective effects in Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 2019, 11,
493. [CrossRef]
54.
Yan, J.; Herzog, J.W.; Tsang, K.; Brennan, C.A.; Bower, M.A.; Garrett, W.S.; Sartor, B.R.; Aliprantis, A.O.; Charles, J.F. Gut
microbiota induce IGF-1 and promote bone formation and growth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, E7554–E7563. [CrossRef]
55.
Weaver, C.M. Diet, gut microbiome, and bone health. Curr. Osteoporos. Rep. 2015, 13, 125–130. [CrossRef]
56.
Parvaneh, M.; Karimi, G.; Jamaluddin, R.; Ng, M.H.; Zuriati, I.; Muhammad, S.I. Lactobacillus helveticus (ATCC 27558)
upregulates Runx2 and Bmp2 and modulates bone mineral density in ovariectomy-induced bone loss rats. Clin. Interv. Aging
2018, 13, 1555–1564. [CrossRef]
57.
Masoumi, S.J.; Mehrabani, D.; Saberifiroozi, M.; Fattahi, M.R.; Moradi, F.; Najafi, M. The effect of yogurt fortified with Lactobacillus
acidophilus and Bifidobacterium sp. probiotic in patients with lactose intolerance. Food Sci. Nutr. 2021, 9, 1704–1711. [CrossRef]
58.
Xie, A.; Dong, Y.; Liu, Z.; Li, Z.; Shao, J.; Li, M.; Yue, X. A Review of Plant-Based Drinks Addressing Nutrients, Flavor, and
Processing Technologies. Foods 2023, 12, 3952. [CrossRef]
59.
Xie, A.; Shen, X.; Hong, R.; Xie, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Chen, J.; Li, Z.; Li, M.; Yue, X.; Quek, S.Y. Unlocking the potential of donkey Milk:
Nutritional composition, bioactive properties and future prospects. Food Res. Int. 2025, 209, 116307. [CrossRef]
60.
Cheng, H.; Ma, Y.; Liu, X.; Tian, C.; Zhong, X.; Zhao, L. A systematic review and meta-analysis: Lactobacillus acidophilus for
treating acute gastroenteritis in children. Nutrients 2022, 14, 682. [CrossRef]
61.
Sherwin, E.; Rea, K.; Dinan, T.G.; Cryan, J.F. A gut (microbiome) feeling about the brain. Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 2016, 32, 96–102.
[CrossRef]
62.
Farmer, A.D.; Randall, H.A.; Aziz, Q. It’s a gut feeling: How the gut microbiota affects the state of mind. J. Physiol. 2014, 592,
2981–2988. [CrossRef]
63.
Fujii, Y.; Nguyen, T.T.T.; Fujimura, Y.; Kameya, N.; Nakamura, S.; Arakawa, K.; Morita, H. Fecal metabolite of a gnotobiotic
mouse transplanted with gut microbiota from a patient with Alzheimer’s disease. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2019, 83, 2144–2152.
[CrossRef]
64.
Tang, W.W.; Wang, Z.; Levison, B.S.; Koeth, R.A.; Britt, E.B.; Fu, X.; Wu, Y.; Hazen, S.L. Intestinal microbial metabolism of
phosphatidylcholine and cardiovascular risk. N. Engl. J. Med. 2013, 368, 1575–1584. [CrossRef]
65.
Vogt, N.M.; Romano, K.A.; Darst, B.F.; Engelman, C.D.; Johnson, S.C.; Carlsson, C.M.; Asthana, S.; Blennow, K.; Zetterberg, H.;
Bendlin, B.B. The gut microbiota-derived metabolite trimethylamine N-oxide is elevated in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Res.
Ther. 2018, 10, 124. [CrossRef]
66.
de Mello, V.D.; Paananen, J.; Lindström, J.; Lankinen, M.A.; Shi, L.; Kuusisto, J.; Pihlajamäki, J.; Auriola, S.; Lehtonen, M.;
Rolandsson, O. Indolepropionic acid and novel lipid metabolites are associated with a lower risk of type 2 diabetes in the Finnish
Diabetes Prevention Study. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 46337. [CrossRef]
67.
Anastassova, N.; Stefanova, D.; Hristova-Avakumova, N.; Georgieva, I.; Kondeva-Burdina, M.; Rangelov, M.; Todorova, N.;
Tzoneva, R.; Yancheva, D. New Indole-3-Propionic Acid and 5-Methoxy-Indole Carboxylic Acid Derived Hydrazone Hybrids as
Multifunctional Neuroprotectors. Antioxidants 2023, 12, 977. [CrossRef]
68.
Fu, J.; Zheng, Y.; Gao, Y.; Xu, W. Dietary fiber intake and gut microbiota in human health. Microorganisms 2022, 10, 2507. [CrossRef]
69.
Chen, H.; Meng, L.; Shen, L. Multiple roles of short-chain fatty acids in Alzheimer disease. Nutrition 2022, 93, 111499. [CrossRef]
70.
Liu, P.; Wu, L.; Peng, G.; Han, Y.; Tang, R.; Ge, J.; Zhang, L.; Jia, L.; Yue, S.; Zhou, K. Altered microbiomes distinguish Alzheimer’s
disease from amnestic mild cognitive impairment and health in a Chinese cohort. Brain Behav. Immun. 2019, 80, 633–643.
[CrossRef]
71.
Hung, C.-C.; Chang, C.-C.; Huang, C.-W.; Nouchi, R.; Cheng, C.-H. Gut microbiota in patients with Alzheimer’s disease spectrum:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Aging 2022, 14, 477. [CrossRef]
72.
Verhaar, B.J.; Hendriksen, H.M.; de Leeuw, F.A.; Doorduijn, A.S.; van Leeuwenstijn, M.; Teunissen, C.E.; Barkhof, F.; Scheltens, P.;
Kraaij, R.; van Duijn, C.M. Gut microbiota composition is related to AD pathology. Front. Immunol. 2022, 12, 794519. [CrossRef]
73.
Forouhi, N.G.; Krauss, R.M.; Taubes, G.; Willett, W. Dietary fat and cardiometabolic health: Evidence, controversies, and
consensus for guidance. BMJ 2018, 361, k2139. [CrossRef]
74.
Wang, Q.-J.; Shen, Y.-E.; Wang, X.; Fu, S.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, Y.-N.; Wang, R.-T. Concomitant memantine and Lactobacillus plantarum
treatment attenuates cognitive impairments in APP/PS1 mice. Aging 2020, 12, 628. [CrossRef]

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
23 of 27
75.
Mariat, D.; Firmesse, O.; Levenez, F.; Guimarăes, V.; Sokol, H.; Doré, J.; Corthier, G.; Furet, J. The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio
of the human microbiota changes with age. BMC Microbiol. 2009, 9, 123. [CrossRef]
76.
Biagi, E.; Rampelli, S.; Turroni, S.; Quercia, S.; Candela, M.; Brigidi, P. The gut microbiota of centenarians: Signatures of longevity
in the gut microbiota profile. Mech. Ageing Dev. 2017, 165, 180–184. [CrossRef]
77.
Corrada, M.M.; Brookmeyer, R.; Paganini-Hill, A.; Berlau, D.; Kawas, C.H. Dementia incidence continues to increase with age in
the oldest old: The 90+ study. Ann. Neurol. 2010, 67, 114–121. [CrossRef]
78.
Harada, C.N.; Love, M.C.N.; Triebel, K. Normal cognitive aging. Clin. Geriatr. Med. 2013, 29, 737. [CrossRef]
79.
Mishra, V.; Yadav, D.; Solanki, K.S.; Koul, B.; Song, M. A Review on the Protective Effects of Probiotics against Alzheimer’s
Disease. Biology 2023, 13, 8. [CrossRef]
80.
Thursby, E.; Juge, N. Introduction to the human gut microbiota. Biochem. J. 2017, 474, 1823–1836. [CrossRef]
81.
Liu, L.; Huh, J.R.; Shah, K. Microbiota and the gut-brain-axis: Implications for new therapeutic design in the CNS. EBioMedicine
2022, 77, 103908. [CrossRef]
82.
Rhee, S.H.; Pothoulakis, C.; Mayer, E.A. Principles and clinical implications of the brain–gut–enteric microbiota axis. Nat. Rev.
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2009, 6, 306–314. [CrossRef]
83.
Bercik, P.; Park, A.; Sinclair, D.; Khoshdel, A.; Lu, J.; Huang, X.; Deng, Y.; Blennerhassett, P.; Fahnestock, M.; Moine, D. The
anxiolytic effect of Bifidobacterium longum NCC3001 involves vagal pathways for gut–brain communication. Neurogastroenterol.
Motil. 2011, 23, 1132–1139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
O’Sullivan, E.; Barrett, E.; Grenham, S.; Fitzgerald, P.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R.; Quigley, E.; Cryan, J.; Dinan, T. BDNF expression
in the hippocampus of maternally separated rats: Does Bifidobacterium breve 6330 alter BDNF levels? Benef. Microbes 2011, 2,
199–207. [CrossRef]
85.
Amidfar, M.; de Oliveira, J.; Kucharska, E.; Budni, J.; Kim, Y.-K. The role of CREB and BDNF in neurobiology and treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease. Life Sci. 2020, 257, 118020. [CrossRef]
86.
Bathina, S.; Das, U.N. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and its clinical implications. Arch. Med. Sci. 2015, 11, 1164–1178.
[CrossRef]
87.
Mattson, M.P.; Maudsley, S.; Martin, B. BDNF and 5-HT: A dynamic duo in age-related neuronal plasticity and neurodegenerative
disorders. Trends Neurosci. 2004, 27, 589–594. [CrossRef]
88.
Klöcker, N.; Kermer, P.; Weishaupt, J.H.; Labes, M.; Ankerhold, R.; Bähr, M. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor-mediated
neuroprotection of adult rat retinal ganglion cells in vivo does not exclusively depend on phosphatidyl-inositol-3′-kinase/protein
kinase B signaling. J. Neurosci. 2000, 20, 6962–6967. [CrossRef]
89.
Azman, K.F.; Zakaria, R. Recent advances on the role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in neurodegenerative diseases.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 6827. [CrossRef]
90.
Bai, X.; Edden, R.A.; Gao, F.; Wang, G.; Wu, L.; Zhao, B.; Wang, M.; Chan, Q.; Chen, W.; Barker, P.B. Decreased γ-aminobutyric
acid levels in the parietal region of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 2015, 41, 1326–1331. [CrossRef]
91.
Strandwitz, P. Neurotransmitter modulation by the gut microbiota. Brain Res. 2018, 1693, 128–133. [CrossRef]
92.
Alvarez, X.A.; Franco, A.; Fernández-Novoa, L.; Cacabelos, R. Blood levels of histamine, IL-1β, and TNF-α in patients with mild
to moderate Alzheimer disease. Mol. Chem. Neuropathol. 1996, 29, 237–252. [CrossRef]
93.
Choi, H.; Mook-Jung, I. Functional effects of gut microbiota-derived metabolites in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
2023, 81, 102730. [CrossRef]
94.
Aaldijk, E.; Vermeiren, Y. The role of serotonin within the microbiota-gut-brain axis in the development of Alzheimer’s disease: A
narrative review. Ageing Res. Rev. 2022, 75, 101556. [CrossRef]
95.
Akram, N.; Faisal, Z.; Irfan, R.; Shah, Y.A.; Batool, S.A.; Zahid, T.; Zulfiqar, A.; Fatima, A.; Jahan, Q.; Tariq, H. Exploring the
serotonin-probiotics-gut health axis: A review of current evidence and potential mechanisms. Food Sci. Nutr. 2024, 12, 694–706.
[CrossRef]
96.
Cirrito, J.R.; Disabato, B.M.; Restivo, J.L.; Verges, D.K.; Goebel, W.D.; Sathyan, A.; Hayreh, D.; D’Angelo, G.; Benzinger, T.; Yoon,
H. Serotonin signaling is associated with lower amyloid-β levels and plaques in transgenic mice and humans. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2011, 108, 14968–14973. [CrossRef]
97.
Claeysen, S.; Bockaert, J.; Giannoni, P. Serotonin: A new hope in Alzheimer’s disease? ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2015, 6, 940–943.
[CrossRef]
98.
Jeon, S.G.; Hong, S.B.; Nam, Y.; Tae, J.; Yoo, A.; Song, E.J.; Kim, K.I.; Lee, D.; Park, J.; Lee, S.M. Ghrelin in Alzheimer’s disease:
Pathologic roles and therapeutic implications. Ageing Res. Rev. 2019, 55, 100945. [PubMed]
99.
Gahete, M.D.; Córdoba-Chacón, J.; Kineman, R.D.; Luque, R.M.; Castaño, J.P. Role of ghrelin system in neuroprotection and
cognitive functions: Implications in Alzheimer’s disease. Peptides 2011, 32, 2225–2228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Delporte, C. Structure and physiological actions of ghrelin. Scientifica 2013, 2013, 518909. [CrossRef]
101. Tóth, K.; László, K.; Lénárd, L. Role of intraamygdaloid acylated-ghrelin in spatial learning. Brain Res. Bull. 2010, 81, 33–37.
[CrossRef]

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
24 of 27
102. Gahete, M.D.; Rubio, A.; Cordoba-Chacon, J.; Gracia-Navarro, F.; Kineman, R.D.; Avila, J.; Luque, R.M.; Castano, J.P. Expression
of the ghrelin and neurotensin systems is altered in the temporal lobe of Alzheimer’s disease patients. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2010, 22,
819–828. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Moon, M.; Cha, M.-Y.; Mook-Jung, I. Impaired hippocampal neurogenesis and its enhancement with ghrelin in 5XFAD mice. J.
Alzheimer’s Dis. 2014, 41, 233–241. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Cao, X.; Zhu, M.; He, Y.; Chu, W.; Du, Y.; Du, H. Increased serum acylated ghrelin levels in patients with mild cognitive
impairment. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2017, 61, 545–552. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Williams, N.T. Probiotics. Am. J. Health-Syst. Pharm. 2010, 67, 449–458. [CrossRef]
106. Stavropoulou, E.; Bezirtzoglou, E. Probiotics in medicine: A long debate. Front. Immunol. 2020, 11, 2192. [CrossRef]
107. Liu, Y.; Alookaran, J.J.; Rhoads, J.M. Probiotics in autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1537. [CrossRef]
108. Joyce, S.A.; MacSharry, J.; Casey, P.G.; Kinsella, M.; Murphy, E.F.; Shanahan, F.; Hill, C.; Gahan, C.G. Regulation of host weight
gain and lipid metabolism by bacterial bile acid modification in the gut. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, 7421–7426.
[CrossRef]
109. Hu, S.; Tang, B.; Lu, C.; Wang, S.; Wu, L.; Lei, Y.; Tang, L.; Zhu, H.; Wang, D.; Yang, S. Lactobacillus rhamnosus gg ameliorates
triptolide-induced liver injury through modulation of the bile acid-fxr axis. Pharmacol. Res. 2024, 206, 107275. [CrossRef]
110. Fotiadis, C.I.; Stoidis, C.N.; Spyropoulos, B.G.; Zografos, E.D. Role of probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics in chemoprevention for
colorectal cancer. World J. Gastroenterol. WJG 2008, 14, 6453. [CrossRef]
111. Górska, A.; Przystupski, D.; Niemczura, M.J.; Kulbacka, J. Probiotic bacteria: A promising tool in cancer prevention and therapy.
Curr. Microbiol. 2019, 76, 939–949. [CrossRef]
112. Didari, T.; Solki, S.; Mozaffari, S.; Nikfar, S.; Abdollahi, M. A systematic review of the safety of probiotics. Expert Opin. Drug Saf.
2014, 13, 227–239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Fijan, S. Microorganisms with claimed probiotic properties: An overview of recent literature. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
2014, 11, 4745–4767. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Makarova, K.; Slesarev, A.; Wolf, Y.; Sorokin, A.; Mirkin, B.; Koonin, E.; Pavlov, A.; Pavlova, N.; Karamychev, V.; Polouchine, N.
Comparative genomics of the lactic acid bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2006, 103, 15611–15616. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Nimgampalle, M.; Kuna, Y. Anti-Alzheimer properties of probiotic, Lactobacillus plantarum MTCC 1325 in Alzheimer’s disease
induced albino rats. J. Clin. Diagn. Res. JCDR 2017, 11, KC01. [CrossRef]
116. Lee, H.-J.; Lee, K.-E.; Kim, J.-K.; Kim, D.-H. Suppression of gut dysbiosis by Bifidobacterium longum alleviates cognitive decline in
5XFAD transgenic and aged mice. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 11814. [CrossRef]
117. Athari Nik Azm, S.; Djazayeri, A.; Safa, M.; Azami, K.; Ahmadvand, B.; Sabbaghziarani, F.; Sharifzadeh, M.; Vafa, M. Lactobacilli
and bifidobacteria ameliorate memory and learning deficits and oxidative stress in β-amyloid (1–42) injected rats. Appl. Physiol.
Nutr. Metab. 2018, 43, 718–726. [CrossRef]
118. Flint, H.J.; Duncan, S.H.; Louis, P. The impact of nutrition on intestinal bacterial communities. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2017, 38,
59–65. [CrossRef]
119. Kang, J.W.; Zivkovic, A.M. The potential utility of prebiotics to modulate Alzheimer’s disease: A review of the evidence.
Microorganisms 2021, 9, 2310. [CrossRef]
120. Biedrzycka, E.; Bielecka, M. Prebiotic effectiveness of fructans of different degrees of polymerization. Trends Food Sci. Technol.
2004, 15, 170–175. [CrossRef]
121. Chen, D.; Yang, X.; Yang, J.; Lai, G.; Yong, T.; Tang, X.; Shuai, O.; Zhou, G.; Xie, Y.; Wu, Q. Prebiotic effect of fructooligosaccharides
from Morinda officinalis on Alzheimer’s disease in rodent models by targeting the microbiota-gut-brain axis. Front. Aging
Neurosci. 2017, 9, 403. [CrossRef]
122. Friedland, R.P.; Chapman, M.R. The role of microbial amyloid in neurodegeneration. PLoS Pathog. 2017, 13, e1006654. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
123. Rutsch, A.; Kantsjö, J.B.; Ronchi, F. The gut-brain axis: How microbiota and host inflammasome influence brain physiology and
pathology. Front. Immunol. 2020, 11, 604179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Minter, M.R.; Zhang, C.; Leone, V.; Ringus, D.L.; Zhang, X.; Oyler-Castrillo, P.; Musch, M.W.; Liao, F.; Ward, J.F.; Holtzman, D.M.
Antibiotic-induced perturbations in gut microbial diversity influences neuro-inflammation and amyloidosis in a murine model of
Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 30028. [CrossRef]
125. Zhao, Y.; Dua, P.; Lukiw, W. Microbial sources of amyloid and relevance to amyloidogenesis and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). J.
Alzheimer’s Dis. Park. 2015, 5, 177.
126. Bhattacharjee, S.; Lukiw, W.J. Alzheimer’s disease and the microbiome. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2013, 7, 153. [CrossRef]
127. Alonso, R.; Pisa, D.; Marina, A.I.; Morato, E.; Rábano, A.; Carrasco, L. Fungal infection in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J.
Alzheimer’s Dis. 2014, 41, 301–311. [CrossRef]
128. Asti, A.; Gioglio, L. Can a bacterial endotoxin be a key factor in the kinetics of amyloid fibril formation? J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2014,
39, 169–179. [CrossRef]

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
25 of 27
129. Schwartz, K.; Boles, B.R. Microbial amyloids–functions and interactions within the host. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2013, 16, 93–99.
[CrossRef]
130. Friedland, R.P. Mechanisms of molecular mimicry involving the microbiota in neurodegeneration. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2015, 45,
349–362. [CrossRef]
131. Chapman, M.R.; Robinson, L.S.; Pinkner, J.S.; Roth, R.; Heuser, J.; Hammar, M.; Normark, S.; Hultgren, S.J. Role of Escherichia
coli curli operons in directing amyloid fiber formation. Science 2002, 295, 851–855. [CrossRef]
132. Sampson, T.R.; Debelius, J.W.; Thron, T.; Janssen, S.; Shastri, G.G.; Ilhan, Z.E.; Challis, C.; Schretter, C.E.; Rocha, S.; Gradinaru, V.
Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and neuroinflammation in a model of Parkinson’s disease. Cell 2016, 167, 1469–1480.e12.
[CrossRef]
133. Kobayashi, Y.; Sugahara, H.; Shimada, K.; Mitsuyama, E.; Kuhara, T.; Yasuoka, A.; Kondo, T.; Abe, K.; Xiao, J.-z. Therapeutic
potential of Bifidobacterium breve strain A1 for preventing cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 13510.
[CrossRef]
134. Yeon, S.-W.; You, Y.S.; Kwon, H.-S.; Yang, E.H.; Ryu, J.-S.; Kang, B.H.; Kang, J.-H. Fermented milk of Lactobacillus helveticus
IDCC3801 reduces beta-amyloid and attenuates memory deficit. J. Funct. Foods 2010, 2, 143–152. [CrossRef]
135. Cattaneo, A.; Cattane, N.; Galluzzi, S.; Provasi, S.; Lopizzo, N.; Festari, C.; Ferrari, C.; Guerra, U.P.; Paghera, B.; Muscio, C.
Association of brain amyloidosis with pro-inflammatory gut bacterial taxa and peripheral inflammation markers in cognitively
impaired elderly. Neurobiol. Aging 2017, 49, 60–68. [CrossRef]
136. Wang, Y.; Wang, D.; Lv, H.; Dong, Q.; Li, J.; Geng, W.; Wang, J.; Liu, F.; Jia, L.; Wang, Y. Modulation of the gut microbiota and
glycometabolism by a probiotic to alleviate amyloid accumulation and cognitive impairments in AD rats. Mol. Nutr. Food Res.
2022, 66, 2200265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Pistollato, F.; Sumalla Cano, S.; Elio, I.; Masias Vergara, M.; Giampieri, F.; Battino, M. Role of gut microbiota and nutrients in
amyloid formation and pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. Nutr. Rev. 2016, 74, 624–634. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
138. Arora, K.; Green, M.; Prakash, S. The microbiome and Alzheimer’s disease: Potential and limitations of prebiotic, synbiotic, and
probiotic formulations. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 8, 537847. [CrossRef]
139. Guo, L.; Xu, J.; Du, Y.; Wu, W.; Nie, W.; Zhang, D.; Luo, Y.; Lu, H.; Lei, M.; Xiao, S. Effects of gut microbiota and probiotics on
Alzheimer’s disease. Transl. Neurosci. 2021, 12, 573–580. [CrossRef]
140. Bachstetter, A.D.; Van Eldik, L.J.; Schmitt, F.A.; Neltner, J.H.; Ighodaro, E.T.; Webster, S.J.; Patel, E.; Abner, E.L.; Kryscio, R.J.;
Nelson, P.T. Disease-related microglia heterogeneity in the hippocampus of Alzheimer’s disease, dementia with Lewy bodies,
and hippocampal sclerosis of aging. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2015, 3, 32.
141. Streit, W.J.; Sammons, N.W.; Kuhns, A.J.; Sparks, D.L. Dystrophic microglia in the aging human brain. Glia 2004, 45, 208–212.
[CrossRef]
142. Kim, Y.J.; Mun, B.-R.; Choi, K.Y.; Choi, W.-S. Oral Administration of Probiotic Bacteria Alleviates Tau Phosphorylation, Aβ
Accumulation, Microglia Activation, and Memory Loss in 5xFAD Mice. Brain Sci. 2024, 14, 208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Vargas-Caraveo, A.; Sayd, A.; Maus, S.R.; Caso, J.R.; Madrigal, J.L.; García-Bueno, B.; Leza, J.C. Lipopolysaccharide enters the rat
brain by a lipoprotein-mediated transport mechanism in physiological conditions. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 13113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Singh, S.; Sahu, K.; Singh, C.; Singh, A. Lipopolysaccharide induced altered signaling pathways in various neurological disorders.
Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Arch. Pharmacol. 2022, 395, 285–294. [CrossRef]
145. Lekchand Dasriya, V.; Samtiya, M.; Dhewa, T.; Puniya, M.; Kumar, S.; Ranveer, S.; Chaudhary, V.; Vij, S.; Behare, P.; Singh, N.
Etiology and management of Alzheimer’s disease: Potential role of gut microbiota modulation with probiotics supplementation.
J. Food Biochem. 2022, 46, e14043. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. Jeong, J.J.; Woo, J.Y.; Kim, K.A.; Han, M.; Kim, D.H. Lactobacillus pentosus var. plantarum C29 ameliorates age-dependent memory
impairment in Fischer 344 rats. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2015, 60, 307–314.
147. Fang, E.F.; Hou, Y.; Palikaras, K.; Adriaanse, B.A.; Kerr, J.S.; Yang, B.; Lautrup, S.; Hasan-Olive, M.M.; Caponio, D.; Dan, X.
Mitophagy inhibits amyloid-β and tau pathology and reverses cognitive deficits in models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci.
2019, 22, 401–412. [CrossRef]
148. Onukwufor, J.O.; Dirksen, R.T.; Wojtovich, A.P. Iron dysregulation in mitochondrial dysfunction and Alzheimer’s disease.
Antioxidants 2022, 11, 692. [CrossRef]
149. Belaidi, A.A.; Bush, A.I. Iron neurochemistry in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease: Targets for therapeutics. J.
Neurochem. 2016, 139, 179–197. [CrossRef]
150. Sun, Y.; Ge, X.; Han, X.; Cao, W.; Wang, Y.; Ding, W.; Cao, M.; Zhang, Y.; Xu, Q.; Zhou, Y. Characterizing brain iron deposition in
patients with subcortical vascular mild cognitive impairment using quantitative susceptibility mapping: A potential biomarker.
Front. Aging Neurosci. 2017, 9, 81. [CrossRef]
151. Van Bergen, J.M.; Li, X.; Quevenco, F.-C.; Gietl, A.; Treyer, V.; Meyer, R.; Buck, A.; Kaufmann, P.A.; Nitsch, R.M.; van Zijl, P.C.
Simultaneous quantitative susceptibility mapping and Flutemetamol-PET suggests local correlation of iron and β-amyloid as an
indicator of cognitive performance at high age. Neuroimage 2018, 174, 308–316. [CrossRef]

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
26 of 27
152. Manczak, M.; Calkins, M.J.; Reddy, P.H. Impaired mitochondrial dynamics and abnormal interaction of amyloid beta with
mitochondrial protein Drp1 in neurons from patients with Alzheimer’s disease: Implications for neuronal damage. Hum. Mol.
Genet. 2011, 20, 2495–2509. [CrossRef]
153. Pérez, M.J.; Ponce, D.P.; Aranguiz, A.; Behrens, M.I.; Quintanilla, R.A. Mitochondrial permeability transition pore contributes to
mitochondrial dysfunction in fibroblasts of patients with sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Redox Biol. 2018, 19, 290–300. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
154. Margulis, L. Symbiosis and evolution. Sci. Am. 1971, 225, 48–61. [CrossRef]
155. Franco-Obregón, A.; Gilbert, J.A. The microbiome-mitochondrion connection: Common ancestries, common mechanisms,
common goals. Msystems 2017, 2, e00018-17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Beltagy, D.M.; Nawar, N.F.; Mohamed, T.M.; Tousson, E.; El-Keey, M.M. Beneficial consequences of probiotic on mitochondrial
hippocampus in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Complement. Integr. Med. 2021, 18, 761–767. [CrossRef]
157. Ton, A.M.M.; Campagnaro, B.P.; Alves, G.A.; Aires, R.; Côco, L.Z.; Arpini, C.M.; Guerra e Oliveira, T.; Campos-Toimil, M.;
Meyrelles, S.S.; Pereira, T.M.C. Oxidative stress and dementia in Alzheimer’s patients: Effects of synbiotic supplementation.
Oxidative Med. Cell. Longev. 2020, 2020, 2638703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Kullisaar, T.; Zilmer, M.; Mikelsaar, M.; Vihalemm, T.; Annuk, H.; Kairane, C.; Kilk, A. Two antioxidative lactobacilli strains as
promising probiotics. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2002, 72, 215–224. [CrossRef]
159. Musa, N.H.; Mani, V.; Lim, S.M.; Vidyadaran, S.; Majeed, A.B.A.; Ramasamy, K. Lactobacilli-fermented cow’s milk attenuated
lipopolysaccharide-induced neuroinflammation and memory impairment in vitro and in vivo. J. Dairy Res. 2017, 84, 488–495.
[CrossRef]
160. Ejtahed, H.S.; Mohtadi-Nia, J.; Homayouni-Rad, A.; Niafar, M.; Asghari-Jafarabadi, M.; Mofid, V. Probiotic yogurt improves
antioxidant status in type 2 diabetic patients. Nutrition 2012, 28, 539–543. [CrossRef]
161. de Moreno de Leblanc, A.; LeBlanc, J.G.; Perdigon, G.; Miyoshi, A.; Langella, P.; Azevedo, V.; Sesma, F. Oral administration of a
catalase-producing Lactococcus lactis can prevent a chemically induced colon cancer in mice. J. Med. Microbiol. 2008, 57, 100–105.
[CrossRef]
162. Lee, J.; Hwang, K.T.; Chung, M.Y.; Cho, D.H.; Park, C.S. Resistance of Lactobacillus casei KCTC 3260 to reactive oxygen species
(ROS): Role for a metal ion chelating effect. J. Food Sci. 2005, 70, m388–m391. [CrossRef]
163. Yue, M.; Wei, J.; Chen, W.; Hong, D.; Chen, T.; Fang, X. Neurotrophic role of the next-generation probiotic strain L. lactis
MG1363-pMG36e-GLP-1 on Parkinson’s disease via inhibiting ferroptosis. Nutrients 2022, 14, 4886. [CrossRef]
164. Sobol, C.; Belostotskaya, G. Product fermented by Lactobacilli induces changes in intracellular calcium dynamics in rat brain
neurons. Biochem. Suppl. Ser. A Membr. Cell Biol. 2016, 10, 37–45. [CrossRef]
165. Chen, Z.-R.; Huang, J.-B.; Yang, S.-L.; Hong, F.-F. Role of cholinergic signaling in Alzheimer’s disease. Molecules 2022, 27, 1816.
[CrossRef]
166. Bowen, D.M.; Smith, C.B.; White, P.; Davison, A.N. Neurotransmitter-related enzymes and indices of hypoxia in senile dementia
and other abiotrophies. Brain J. Neurol. 1976, 99, 459–496. [CrossRef]
167. Shamsipour, S.; Sharifi, G.; Taghian, F. An 8-week administration of Bifidobacterium bifidum and Lactobacillus plantarum combined
with exercise training alleviates neurotoxicity of Aβ and spatial learning via acetylcholine in Alzheimer rat model. J. Mol. Neurosci.
2021, 71, 1495–1505. [CrossRef]
168. Qadah, A.M.; Amr, A.; Yehia, H. Novel use of probiotic as acetylcholine esterase inhibitor and a new strategy for activity
optimization as a biotherapeutic agent. J. App. Biol. Biotechnol. 2023, 11, 202–215. [CrossRef]
169. Kapasi, A.; Schneider, J.A. Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment, clinical Alzheimer’s disease, and dementia in older
persons. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (BBA)-Mol. Basis Dis. 2016, 1862, 878–886. [CrossRef]
170. Tini, G.; Scagliola, R.; Monacelli, F.; La Malfa, G.; Porto, I.; Brunelli, C.; Rosa, G.M. Alzheimer’s disease and cardiovascular
disease: A particular association. Cardiol. Res. Pract. 2020, 2020, 2617970. [CrossRef]
171. Zhu, X.; Smith, M.A.; Honda, K.; Aliev, G.; Moreira, P.I.; Nunomura, A.; Casadesus, G.; Harris, P.L.; Siedlak, S.L.; Perry, G.
Vascular oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease. J. Neurol. Sci. 2007, 257, 240–246. [CrossRef]
172. Mo, R.; Zhang, X.; Yang, Y. Effect of probiotics on lipid profiles in hypercholesterolaemic adults: A meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Med. Clín. (Engl. Ed.) 2019, 152, 473–481.
173. Sjögren, M.; Mielke, M.; Gustafson, D.; Zandi, P.; Skoog, I. Cholesterol and Alzheimer’s disease—Is there a relation? Mech. Ageing
Dev. 2006, 127, 138–147. [CrossRef]
174. Tao, Y.-W.; Gu, Y.-L.; Mao, X.-Q.; Zhang, L.; Pei, Y.-F. Effects of probiotics on type II diabetes mellitus: A meta-analysis. J. Transl.
Med. 2020, 18, 30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Tenorio-Jiménez, C.; Martínez-Ramírez, M.; Tercero-Lozano, M.; Arraiza-Irigoyen, C.; Del Castillo-Codes, I.; Olza, J.; Plaza-Díaz,
J.; Olivares, M.; Gil, Á.; Gómez-Llorente, C. Evaluation of the effect of Lactobacillus reuteri V3401 on biomarkers of inflammation
and cardiovascular risk in obese adults with metabolic syndrome: A randomized clinical trial (PROSIR). Clin. Nutr. 2018, 37, S15.
[CrossRef]

Foods 2025, 14, 1531
27 of 27
176. Naomi, R.; Embong, H.; Othman, F.; Ghazi, H.F.; Maruthey, N.; Bahari, H. Probiotics for Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review.
Nutrients 2021, 14, 20. [CrossRef]
177. Akbari, E.; Asemi, Z.; Daneshvar Kakhaki, R.; Bahmani, F.; Kouchaki, E.; Tamtaji, O.R.; Hamidi, G.A.; Salami, M. Effect of
probiotic supplementation on cognitive function and metabolic status in Alzheimer’s disease: A randomized, double-blind and
controlled trial. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2016, 8, 256. [CrossRef]
178. Hsu, Y.-C.; Huang, Y.-Y.; Tsai, S.-Y.; Kuo, Y.-W.; Lin, J.-H.; Ho, H.-H.; Chen, J.-F.; Hsia, K.-C.; Sun, Y. Efficacy of probiotic
supplements on brain-derived neurotrophic factor, inflammatory biomarkers, oxidative stress and cognitive function in patients
with Alzheimer’s dementia: A 12-week randomized, double-blind active-controlled study. Nutrients 2023, 16, 16. [CrossRef]
179. Kobayashi, Y.; Kuhara, T.; Oki, M.; Xiao, J.-Z. Effects of Bifidobacterium breve A1 on the cognitive function of older adults with
memory complaints: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Benef. Microbes 2019, 10, 511–520. [CrossRef]
180. de Rijke, T.J.; Doting, M.E.; van Hemert, S.; De Deyn, P.P.; van Munster, B.C.; Harmsen, H.J.; Sommer, I.E. A systematic review on
the effects of different types of probiotics in animal Alzheimer’s disease studies. Front. Psychiatry 2022, 13, 879491. [CrossRef]
181. Agahi, A.; Hamidi, G.A.; Daneshvar, R.; Hamdieh, M.; Soheili, M.; Alinaghipour, A.; Esmaeili Taba, S.M.; Salami, M. Does severity
of Alzheimer’s disease contribute to its responsiveness to modifying gut microbiota? A double blind clinical trial. Front. Neurol.
2018, 9, 662. [CrossRef]
182. Lin, L.; Zheng, L.J.; Zhang, L.J. Neuroinflammation, gut microbiome, and Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 2018, 55, 8243–8250.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
183. Hwang, Y.-H.; Park, S.; Paik, J.-W.; Chae, S.-W.; Kim, D.-H.; Jeong, D.-G.; Ha, E.; Kim, M.; Hong, G.; Park, S.-H. Efficacy and
safety of Lactobacillus plantarum C29-fermented soybean (DW2009) in individuals with mild cognitive impairment: A 12-week,
multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Nutrients 2019, 11, 305. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.