Beta-cyclodextrin inclusion complexes of citral and linalool inhibit 
Escherichia coli on cooked chicken: Focus on their synergistic 
antibacterial effects
Wanying Zhu a, Yuhe Dong b, Tong Wu a, Haohan Jing b, Zikai Li b, Xi Yu b, Ying Xiao b,  
Tian Zhong b,*
a Faculty of Chinese Medicine, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macao SAR, China
b Faculty of Medicine, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macao SAR, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Essential oil
Plant-derived compounds
Antibacterial
Food preservation
A B S T R A C T
Citral and linalool are two well-studied antibacterial essential oil compounds. However, their synergistic anti­
bacterial effects have not been fully elucidated. This study explored their synergistic mechanism against 
Escherichia coli and the potential of their β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) inclusion complexes in food preservation. The 
combination of citral and linalool demonstrated enhanced efficiency in damaging bacterial cell membranes, 
inducing protein leakage, causing structural collapse, and inhibiting biofilm formation, reducing extracellular 
polymeric substance (EPS), and impairing bacterial motility compared to the individual use of either compound. 
Furthermore, the β-CD inclusion complexes of these two compounds exhibited synergistic effects in cooked 
chicken by inhibiting total viable counts (TVC) to 3.31 Log CFU/g after 3 days of storage, which is lower than the 
single-use groups (4.07 and 3.78 Log CFU/g for citral and linalool, respectively). These complexes also decreased 
total volatile basic nitrogen (TVB-N) accumulation and prevented pH increase, thereby enhancing food safety 
and quality.
1. Introduction
Food contamination by bacteria is becoming a growing global 
concern that will cause a series of health problems and great economic 
loss. Escherichia coli is frequently detected as the most prevalent Gram- 
negative bacteria in contaminated water and soil. Cooked meat prod­
ucts are commonly contaminated with E. coli during the production 
process (Keeratipibul et al., 2009). Because E. coli contamination cannot 
be easily identified through visual inspection, it frequently leads to 
foodborne illnesses and acute infections, posing a significant public 
health concern (Rani et al., 2021; Singha et al., 2023) Nowadays, 
chemical medicine and synthetic antibiotic are widely used on bacterial 
control. However, due to the rise and dissemination of muti-drug 
resistant bacteria, controlling bacterial infection has become increas­
ingly challenging. Furthermore, synthetic antibiotic also contribute to 
environmental pollution (Calo et al., 2015). Therefore, an increasing 
number of studies have started to focus on investigating the antibacterial 
effects of natural products, especially essential oils. Essential oils may 
provide a natural and safe alternative for the treatment of bacterial 
infections with fewer side effects, non-toxic, and environmentally 
friendly compared to conventional antibacterial drugs (Li et al., 2022).
Essential oils typically consist of a blend of volatile compounds 
(Bakkali et al., 2008), and their overall antibacterial effect represents 
the collective activity of various chemical components within them (Ju 
et al., 2022). Varieties of combinations of individual essential oil com­
pounds have shown synergistic antibacterial effects. A study conducted 
on fresh-cut cucumber reported that the mixture of cineole and carvacrol 
significantly reduced the E. coli population by increasing drug 
bioavailability, inhibiting the normal functions of nucleic acids and 
proteins, and regulating the transcription levels of virulence genes 
(Addo et al., 2023). Huang et al. (2021) reported that cinnamaldehyde 
and cinnamic acid exhibited a synergistic antibacterial effect against 
Serovar pullorum by interfering with membrane biosynthesis and sup­
pressing bacterial cell proliferation. Additionally, the combination of 
citral and carvacrol has been proved to reduce infections caused by 
Cronobacter sakazakii in reconstituted infant formula through synergistic 
disruption of bacterial cell morphology and strong antibiofilm activity 
(Cao, Zhou, et al., 2021). In the essential oil industry, synthetic 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: tzhong@must.edu.mo (T. Zhong). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Food Chemistry: X
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/food-chemistry-x
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fochx.2025.103248
Received 29 June 2025; Received in revised form 24 October 2025; Accepted 3 November 2025  
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
Available online 4 November 2025 
2590-1575/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

technology has gradually replaced traditional plant source extraction 
due to purity defects and process costs (Ghasemy-Piranloo et al., 2022). 
Therefore, understanding the composition of key antibacterial com­
pounds in essential oils and their optimal proportions in practice is 
essential to guide and develop the synthetic essential oil industry.
However, compounds from essential oils generally not applied 
directly to food due to their low water solubility, active volatility and 
potential impact on flavor (Ju et al., 2019). Encapsulation is a technique 
that protects essential oils by the presence of one or more wall materials, 
which might minimize their direct contact with food components and 
boost antibacterial efficacy (Nair et al., 2022). Cyclodextrins (CDs) are 
cyclic carbohydrates derived from starch. Among the natural CDs, the 
most suitable CD has been β-CD, owning to its suitable size to encap­
sulate most of the essential oil compounds (Paiva-Santos et al., 2022). Its 
lipophilic chamber that allows the system to include lipophilic elements 
and their hydrophilic outer surface ensures effective complex dissolu­
tion in an aqueous environment (Ravindran Maniam et al., 2022). When 
forming an inclusion complex with essential oils, the guest molecule 
with a suitable size and shape is enclosed into the cavity within a solid 
structure formed by host molecules. Encapsulating essential oils with 
β-CD showed following advantages: 1) suppress volatility and increase 
stability of essential oil; 2) transform liquid compounds into crystalline 
form; 3) mask the unpleasant smell and taste; 4) avoid unexpected in­
compatibilities; 5) increase bioavailability (Marques, 2010) What is 
more, a substantial body of research has demonstrated that β-CD serves 
as an excellent packaging material for the encapsulation of essential oils 
used in food product preservation to antimicrobial (Ji et al., 2023).
Linalool, an acyclic monoterpene tertiary alcohol (monoterpenol), 
can be found in the essential oils of various plants that widely spread all 
around the world (Pereira et al., 2018). Citral, a monoterpene aldehyde 
and contains two isomers (geranial and neral), can mainly be found in 
citrus fruits and lemongrass (Saddiq & Khayyat, 2010). Studies have 
shown that both citral and linalool have antibacterial effects when 
applied individually. Linalool treatment can effectively inhibit the 
growth of Shewanella putrefaciens (Guo et al., 2021) and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa (Liu et al., 2020) by destroying the structure and function of 
their cell walls and membranes. It can also restrain the growth of Shigella 
sonnei by increasing intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, 
inducing oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation, and damaging cell 
membrane integrity (Su et al., 2022). Citral has a similar antibacterial 
mechanism as linalool. It is effective against Yersinia enterocolitica by 
changing the cellular morphology and intracellular soluble proteins, 
decreasing cell membrane integrity, and causing oxidative stress (Kang 
et al., 2022). Citral has also been demonstrated to suppress Staphylo­
coccus aureus growth by damaging cell membrane and inhibiting meta­
bolic activity and bacteria cell growth (Dai et al., 2023). Linalool has 
been reported to has the potential to significantly improve the overall 
antibacterial effectiveness of essential oils as an adjunct ingredient 
(Pereira et al., 2018). Moreover, a synergistic antifungal effect has been 
observed with the combination of citral and eugenol (Ju et al., 2020). 
Nevertheless, research on the combined antimicrobial effects of citral 
and linalool remains limited. To date, the only relevant study is that of 
Prakash and Vadivel (2020), who prepared emulsions containing citral 
and linalool to determine their minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) 
against Listeria monocytogenes. However, no synergistic effect was 
observed in all the seven prepared nanoemulsions with different 
proportions.
Therefore, this study represents the first investigation into the syn­
ergistic mechanism of citral and linalool against E. coli, and verifies the 
antibacterial efficacy of their combined sustained-release formulation in 
a real food model. The potential mechanism of their synergistic anti­
bacterial effect will be analyzed via extracellular protein leakage assays, 
cell morphological imaging, and malondialdehyde (MDA) measure­
ments (Fig. 1A). Additionally, the synergistic inhibitory effects of this 
combination on E. coli biofilm formation will be evaluated through 
crystal violet (CV) staining, extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) 
production analysis, and swimming/swarming motility tests. Further­
more, β-CD inclusion complexes of these two compounds were prepared 
(Fig. 1B) and applied to cooked chicken meat. Changes in pH, total 
viable bacterial count (TVC), total volatile basic nitrogen (TVB-N), and 
color parameters during storage were assessed to validate their syner­
gistic efficacy in extending the shelf-life of real food models (Fig. 1C).
2. Material and methods
2.1. Reagents and strains
Citral (mixture of α-citral and β-citral, 97 %, w/v), linalool (99 %, w/ 
v), carvacrol (99 %, w/v), citronellal (96 %, w/v), cinnamaldehyde (98 
%, w/v), thymol (98 %, w/v), vanillin (99 %, w/v), and eugenol (99 %, 
w/v), were purchased from Macklin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. 
Lysogeny broth (LB), Mueller-Hinton broth (MHB), nutrient broth (NB), 
nutrient agar (NA), potato dextrose agar (PDA), and potato dextrose 
water (PDW) were obtained from Qingdao Haibo Biological Technology 
Co., Ltd. All other reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. 
Before each experiment, E. coli strain (ATCC25922), S. aureus strain 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of synergistic antibacterial mechanism of citral and linalool against Escherichia coli (A) and their β-cyclodextrin inclusion complexes (B) 
for extending the shelf-life of cooked chicken products (C).
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
2 

(CICC 21600), and L. monocytogenes strain (CICC 25021) was activated 
at 37 ◦C for 12 h with shaking. After activation, 200 μL of bacterial 
suspension was transferred into 20 mL fresh LB medium for 18 h culture 
(37 ◦C, 180 rpm) to achieve a bacterial population of ~109 CFU/mL. 
Prepared bacterial suspension was temporarily storage 4 ◦C for later use. 
For fungi, Penicillium spp. (isolated from naturally infected oranges) and 
Aspergillus niger (ATCC 16404) were inoculated onto PDA petri dishes 
and incubated at 28 ◦C for 3 days to ensure sufficient spores production. 
Spore suspensions were obtained by washing spores from the PDA plates 
with sterile PBS containing 1 % Tween-80.
2.2. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
The MIC of linalool, carvacrol, citronellal, cinnamaldehyde, citral, 
thymol, vanillin, and eugenol were determined using a double broth 
dilution method as described in previous studies but with some modi­
fications (Addo et al., 2023; Ferreira et al., 2018). This test was carried 
out in Mueller-Hinton broth (MHB) with an initial population of around 
106 CFU/mL. Firstly, all the essential oil components were dissolved in 
50 % ethanol, and 100 μL of MHB was pipetted into all wells of 96-well 
plate. Secondly, 100 μL of antibacterial solution was added to the first 
well of the rows. Thirdly, removed 100 μL mixture from the first well of 
each row, added it to the second well, mix it well and then repeat 
backwards. Next, 100 μL of the E. coli suspension (106 CFU/mL) and 10 
μL of 0.5 % 2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) solution were 
then pipetted into each well, resulting in three replicates of the same 
concentration of each essential oil compounds. Finally, the plate was 
cultured in an incubator at a constant temperature (37 ◦C) for 24 h, and 
the endpoint was determined visually by observing the presence of a red 
deposit, as described by de Souza et al. (2024). The samples containing 
equal amounts of ethanol without essential oil compounds were set as 
control group. The lowest concentration at which a well showed no 
bacterial growth was considered the MIC for that essential oil 
compounds.
The MIC values of citral and linalool against fungi were determined 
as described by Ju et al. (2020). In brief, the test was conducted in PDW, 
and the spore suspension was adjusted to a concentration of 105 CFU/ 
mL. The procedures performed on the 96-well microplate followed the 
same protocol as the previously described bacterial MIC determination 
method. After incubation at a constant temperature of 28 ◦C for 24 h, the 
results were visually assessed.
2.3. Fractional inhibitory concentration (FIC)
To determine the FIC index between linalool and seven other 
essential oil compounds, the checkerboard method was employed 
(Bassol´e et al., 2010). The experiment dosage were set based on the 
study by (Cao, Zhou, et al., 2021). Bacterial cultures (1 × 106 CFU/mL) 
and fungal spore suspensions (1 × 105 CFU/mL) were added to each well 
of a 96-well microplate, respectively. The cell culture was treated with 
these two substances, which are combined in dual-axes (x and y) format 
and added to each well of the microplate to obtain final concentrations 
of 4 ×, 2 ×, 1 ×, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, and 1/32 MIC. A 0.5 % TTC so­
lution was added to each well of the bacteria test plate as an indicator. 
Finally, the plates were incubated for 24 h at 37 ◦C. FICs were calculated 
as follows: 
FIC = MICA in combination
MICA alone
+ MICB in combination
MICB alone
(1) 
2.4. Viable bacterial counts
The bacterial inhibition affect was carried out in MHB. The prepared 
E. coli suspensions was diluted to a population of ~106 CFU/mL. The 
suspension was added in a 1.5 mL tube and mix with 95 % ethanol 
diluent of two essential oils to obtain the required final concentrations 
1/2 MIC of individual citral (marked as 1/2C) and linalool (marked as 1/ 
2L) and in combination (1/4C + 1/4L). The tubes were constant tem­
perature incubated in 37 ◦C without shaking, then all samples were 
diluted and spread on LB agar plate after 24 h. The number of viable cells 
was determined by colony forming units (CFU) from each sample.
2.5. Extracellular protein leakage
The leakage of intracellular protein was quantitatively analyzed by 
BCA Protein Quantitation Kit (Nanjing Jiancheng, China). Briefly, after 
incubation at 37 ◦C for 24 h, the bacterial culture medium was centri­
fuged at 5000 rpm for 10 min to remove supernatant, washed by PBS 
thrice. Bacterial pellet was resuspended with sterile PBS to ~106 CFU/ 
mL and incubated with individual citral and linalool (1/2C and 1/2L) 
and in combination (1/4C + 1/4L) at 37 ◦C. Following a 2-h incubation 
period, the samples were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 min and collect 
the supernatant. The working solution was co-incubated with sample 
supernates at a ratio step by step according to the instructions of the BCA 
Protein Quantitation Kit. Setting blank tube by adding same amount of 
H2O into working solution. Finally, the content of released intracellular 
protein was analyzed by measuring the absorbance value of each sample 
at 562 nm by a microplate reader (Dai et al., 2023).
2.6. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
E. coli was adjusted to 108 CFU/mL then co-incubate for 2 h with (1/ 
2C, 1/2 L, 1/4C + 1/4L and 1/2C + 1/2L) and without (Control) anti­
microbials. After washed with PBS twice, bacterial cell samples were 
eluded and fixed with 2.5 % v/v glutaraldehyde solution overnight and 
following with dehydrating in gradient ethanol solution (50–100 % v/v) 
for 10 min each as post-fixation. Finally, all fixed cells were air-dried and 
mounted on a SEM sample holder and coated with gold before 
visualization.
2.7. Malondialdehyde (MDA) content assay
E. coli was treated according to the description from Su et al. (2022)
with proper modification. The overnight bacterial culture was first 
adjusted to the population of ~108 CFU/mL with LB broth and trans­
ferred into 1.5 mL tubes, mixed with citral and linalool to achieve preset 
experimental concentration (1C, 1L, 1/2C + 1/2L). All experiment tubes 
were vortex well mixed and placed in a 37 ◦C thermostatic incubator for 
1 h. Then removed the incubate broth after centrifuge at 5000 rpm for 
10 min. The change in MDA in E. coli was evaluated using the lipid 
peroxidation MDA test kit (Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology, 
Beijing, China). E. coli precipitates were re-suspended with MDA 
extraction solution then the mixtures were subsequently treated by 
ultrasonication in ice bath to help disrupting bacterial cell and release 
MDA. Following centrifugation (8000 ×g, 10 min, 4 ◦C), the supernatant 
was combined with the MDA working solution and then heated in boiled 
water bath for 1 h. Cell mass was removed by centrifuging at 1000 ×g for 
10 min after ice bath cooled. MDA content was calculated by detecting 
the absorption of each supernatant sample at the wavelengths of 600 nm 
and 536 nm with microplate reader (FLUO star Omega, BMG Labtech, 
Germany).
2.8. Anti-biofilm formation activity
The experiment procedure was according to previous method with 
slight modification (Lim et al., 2022). An overnight grown culture was 
adjusted to ~108 CFU/mL in MH broth containing 1/2C, 1/2L and in 
combination 1/4C + 1/4L. The wells containing inoculum without 
essential oils served as growth controls. About 0.8 mL of culture was 
incubated for 48 h on a 24-well plate at 37 ◦C without shaking. Mature 
biofilm formed was washed twice with PBS to remove the loosely 
attached cells then stained with 0.1 % crystal violet (CV) for 15 min. 
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
3 

Next, the microplates were washed three times with sterile distilled 
water to remove excess CV. The attached biofilm formed was quantified 
by solubilizing with 95 % ethanol and absorbance at 595 nm was read. 
All experiments were performed in triplicate, and the biofilm inhibitory 
efficacy was calculated using the following formula: 
Biofilm inhibition (%) = OD595(control) −OD595(sample)
OD595(control)
× 100%
(2) 
2.9. EPS production
EPS production affected by essential oils was quantified by the 
phenol‑sulfuric acid method (Cao, Liu, et al., 2021). The overnight 
bacterial culture was inoculated into LB broth (1 × 108 CFU/mL) sup­
plemented with citral and linalool at different concentrations (1/2C, 1/ 
2L, 1/4C + 1/4L) and incubated in a 24-well microplate for 48 h to form 
biofilms. The biofilm of all wells was resuspended to the culture medium 
and then were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 15 min to remove bacterial 
cells. The supernatants were collected and mixed with 95 % (v/v) 
ethanol of 3-fold volume, respectively, followed by precipitated at 4 ◦C 
for 24 h. Afterwards, the precipitations, were gathered after centrifu­
gation at 5000 rpm for 15 min. The total polysaccharide was subse­
quently mixed with water, phenol (5 %, v/v), and the concentrated 
sulfuric acid in the ratio of 1:1:5 (v:v:v) to carry out the reaction for 20 
min. A 490 nm wavelength absorbance measurement was used to 
calculate the contents of EPS.
2.10. Swimming and swarming test
The motility tests were performed by using a slightly modified 
version of the prior procedure (Addo et al., 2023). The swarming 
motility was assessed on LB agar plates containing 1.5 % (w/v) agar and 
swimming motility was determined on LB plate with 0.3 % (w/v) agar. 
In brief, all testing plates were added essential oil ethanol solutions 
before agar solid to obtain various concentrations of 1/2C, 1/2L, 1/4C 
+ 1/4L. Plate without essential oils was regarded as the control. Over­
night culture of E. coli was adjusted to the concentration of ~108 CFU/ 
mL and 2 μL of bacterial suspension was spotted at the center of both 
swimming and swarming test disks then incubated at 37 ◦C for 24 h. 
Finally, the motility inhibiting effect of each experiment groups were 
recorded by photograph.
2.11. Preparation of β-CD inclusion complexes
All inclusion complexes were produced utilizing the coprecipitation 
method, with slight modifications. β-CD (4 g) was dissolved in 100 mL of 
distilled water at 75 ◦C to obtain supersaturation aqueous solution. After 
β-CD solution were cooled to room temperature, 0.64 g of linalool or 
citral were added in severally, then the mixture was kept stirring for 4 h 
to acquire Citral@β-CD or Linalool@β-CD suspension. To obtain Cit­
ral@β-CD + Linalool@β-CD (CL@β-CD), equal volumes of Citral@β-CD 
and Linalool@β-CD suspensions were evenly mixed. All cyclodextrin 
inclusion suspensions were suction-filtrated, and the precipitate was 
collected then dried at 30 ◦C.
2.12. Entrapment efficiency (EE) and loading capacity (LC)
The essential oil content of β-CD inclusion compounds was deter­
mined with the method that mentioned by Lin et.al with minor revision. 
To put in a nutshell, 0.1 g of each Citral@β-CD and Linalool@β-CD was 
dissolved in centrifuge tube with 20 mL of ethanol. The centrifuge tubes 
were tight lidded and the mixtures were sonicated for 30 min then 
subsequently placed at 4 ◦C overnight. Centrifuged the suspension at 
5000 rpm for 20 min to remove the undissolved β-CD. Transferred the 
supernatant and to a volumetric flask and diluted to 100 mL. After an 
appropriate dilution, the absorbance of Citral@β-CD at 238 nm and 
Linalool@β-CD at 204 nm were measured using UV spectrophotometer 
(UV-2600 Shimadzu Co., Kyoto, Japan). The following equations 
calculated EE and LC of the inclusion complexes. 
EE = Amount of encapsulated active compound
Initial amount of active compound
× 100%
(3) 
LC = Amount of encapsulated active compound
Amount of particles produced
× 100%
(4) 
2.13. Scanning electron micrograph (SEM)
The dehydrated recrystallized β-CD, Citral@β-CD, Linalool@β-CD 
and CL@β-CD were gold coated and their micromorphology was 
observed by scanning electron microscopy (S-3400 N, Hitachi Ltd., 
Japan.) at an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. The captured magnification of 
all samples ranged from 1000× to 20000 × .
2.14. Particle size
Dynamic light scattering (DLS, Zetasizer Lab, Malvern) was used to 
determine particle size distribution. Both Citral@β-CD and Linalool@β- 
CD were prepared and a re-crystallized β-CD sample was also involved. 
The 10 mg of each particle sample were suspended in 1 mL of distilled 
water a and then transferred in 1 cm path length plastic cuvettes for 
particle size and polydispersity index (PDI) measurement (Song et al., 
2024).
2.15. Application in cooked chicken
2.15.1. Treatments
Fresh chicken breast was provided by a local supermarket. Whole 
fresh chicken breast was boiled in Milli-Q water for 10 min and was 
rinsed to remove the impurities. After that, cut the samples into 3 g 
cubes with disinfectant knife and randomly divided into 4 groups: (1) 
PBS; (2) Citral@β-CD; (3) Linalool@β-CD; (4) CL@β-CD. PBS-treated 
samples were used as controls. All chicken cubes were immersed in 
different prepared solutions and placed on sterile dishes. Adjusting 
E. coli suspension to ~106 CFU/mL and adding 50 μL on each the coated 
and control samples. All groups were stored at 4 ◦C and analyzed at day 
0 and 3.
2.15.2. Determination of total viable counts (TVC)
The bacterial count of chicken meats under different treatment was 
determined with the method introduced by Yang et al. (2023) that had 
minor modifications. Each sample (3 g) was mixed with 27 mL pre- 
sterile PBS in a centrifuge tube and homogenized for 1 min using an 
aseptic homogenizer (Shanghai HuXi Analysis Instrument Factory Co., 
Ltd., China). To figure out the bacterial amount of all treatment group, 
the homogeneous liquid sample were firstly subjected to a ten-fold 
gradient dilution. Next, 100 μL of diluted sample was spread evenly 
on NA plate and incubated at 37 ◦C for 24 h. TVC was finally measured 
by the tilting plate method.
2.15.3. Total volatile basic nitrogen (TVB-N)
The TVB-N content of boiled chicken breast was analyzed by semi­
micro Kjeldahl method as described by Zhou et al. (2024). Specifically, 
3 g of chicken meat sample were homogenized with 27 mL of PBS so­
lution. Subsequently, 10 mL prepared liquid sample was mixed with 10 
g/L magnesium oxide solution at the ratio of 2:1 and added to a Kjeldahl 
flask for distillation for 10 min. The distillate was absorbed by 10 mL of a 
mixture of 20 g/mL boric acid and methyl blue-methyl red and titrated 
with 0.01 mol/L HCl solution. The titration volume was then calculated 
according to the following equation and the results are expressed as mg/ 
100 g meat. 
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
4 

X = (V1 −V2) × C × 14 × 30
m × 10
× 100
(5) 
where X represents the TVB-N content in chicken breast (mg/100g); V1 
and V2 represent the volume of HCl standard solution consumed by the 
experimental sample and the blank, C is the actual concentration (mol/ 
L) of HCl used; and m represents the sample weight (g). Each sample was 
analyzed in triplicate, and the average was taken as the final TVB-N 
value.
2.15.4. pH value
Chicken breast samples (3 g) were homogenized with 27 mL of PBS at 
8000 rpm for 60 s. Tissue homogenate pH values were quantified with a 
calibrated digital pH analyzer (PHBJ-206, Leici, Shanghai, China). The 
pH meter was calibrated with pH standard buffers of 6.86 and 9.18 
before each sampling days.
2.15.5. Color parameters
The color value L* (lightness), a* (redness), and b* (yellowness) of 
chicken breast on the surface was measured using a spectrophotometer 
(CR-10 Plus, Konica Minolta, Optics, Inc.) during 4 ◦C storage. The 
spectrophotometer was calibrated using standardized whiteboards and 
chalkboards before the measurements.
2.16. Statistical analysis
To ensure reproducibility and robustness, all experiments were 
performed in triplicate. Data are expressed as mean values ± standard 
deviation (SD). Statistical significances among groups were analyzed 
using one-way ANOVA (GraphPad Prism 9.0), with statistical signifi­
cance defined as p < 0.05. Intergroup comparisons are denoted as fol­
lows: * (p < 0.05), ** (p < 0.01), *** (p < 0.001), and **** (p < 0.0001).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. MIC and FIC
The MIC values of all tested essential oil compounds and their FIC 
values combined with linalool for E. coli are presented in Table 1. All 
compounds analyzed in this study exhibit antibacterial activity. Spe­
cifically, when used individually, the MIC values of eugenol, citral and 
linalool were determined to be 0.63 mg/mL, 0.75 mg/mL and 1.5 mg/ 
mL, respectively. Notably, the checkerboard test results demonstrated 
that when the concentrations of eugenol, citral and linalool were 1/4 
MIC, the FIC values of eugenol/linalool and citral/linalool combinations 
were both 0.5, indicating a significant synergistic antibacterial effect of 
these compound pairs against E. coli. In previous studies, the FIC index 
for the combination of citral and carvacrol against C. sakazakii CICC 
21544 was 0.5 (Cao, Zhou, et al., 2021). For the combination of 
carvacrol and 1,8-cineole, the FIC index was determined to be 0.5 when 
tested against S. aureus (Hon´orio et al., 2015). Similarly, the FIC indices 
for cinnamaldehyde combined with citronellal or nonanal vapors 
against Aspergillus flavus were reported as 0.5 and 0.25, respectively 
(Zhang et al., 2023). These findings are consistent with and provide 
support for the synergy results observed in our study. The combined 
antimicrobial effect of eugenol and linalool has been verified in previous 
studies on L. monocytogenes, E. aerogenes, E. coli and P. aeruginosa (Rehab 
& Zeinab, 2016). However, the synergistic effect of citral and linalool 
was first identified in the present study. Thus, citral/linalool combina­
tion was selected for subsequent analyses.
To provide the evidence of the broad-spectrum synergistic antimi­
crobial activity of the citral and linalool combination, additional ex­
periments were performed to evaluate its efficacy against S. aureus, 
L. monocytogenes, Penicillium spp., and A. niger. The MIC and FIC analyses 
revealed that citral-linalol combination exhibited a synergistic effect 
against L. monocytogenes and A. niger, with FIC indices of 0.375 for both 
strains (Table S1). In contrast, the effect against S. aureus and Penicillium 
spp. was additive (FIC = 1) (Table S1). These findings confirm that 
citral-linalool combination exhibits selective synergistic antimicrobial 
activity, the underlying mechanisms of which warrant further 
exploration.
3.2. Synergistic antibacterial effects in vitro
3.2.1. Bacteria count
The bacterial count results (Fig. 2A) demonstrate that after 24 h of 
incubation, the bacterial counts in the control group increased from an 
initial value of 5 Log CFU/mL to 10.63 Log CFU/mL. In contrast, 
treatment with citral (1/2 MIC) or linalool (1/2 MIC) individually 
resulted in final bacteria counts of 8.94 Log CFU/mL and 8.02 Log CFU/ 
mL, showing inhibit rates of 15.90 % and 24.65 %, respectively, indi­
cating their significant antibacterial effects. Notably, the combination of 
the two compounds of 1/4 MIC each resulted in a final bacterial count of 
6.24 Log CFU/mL, which was significantly lower than that of all other 
groups. Meanwhile, the bacterial inhibition rate in the combined group 
reached 41.30 %, which was 2.60 and 1.68 times higher than those in 
the individual citral and linalool groups, respectively. Accordingly, 
Fig. 2B displays bacterial suspensions diluted at a ratio of 1:103 and 
incubated on NA media for 24 h. Among all groups, the groups treated 
with a combination of 1/4 MIC of citral and 1/4 MIC of linalool 
exhibited significantly lower bacterial counts. These findings suggest 
that the combined treatment of citral and linalool achieves superior 
antibacterial efficiency compared to individual treatments. The inhibi­
tion of bacterial growth may be attributed to the biological effects of 
citral and linalool. Kang et al. (2022) demonstrated that citral could 
alter cellular morphology and intracellular soluble proteins, reduce cell 
membrane integrity and intracellular ATP concentration, induce cell 
membrane hyperpolarization, and elevate ROS levels of Yersinia enter­
ocolitica. Gao et al. (2023) found that linalool treatment down-regulated 
biological processes related to ribosome assembly, biosynthetic and 
metabolic, protein-containing complexes, and peptides, as revealed by 
transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. These findings indicated that 
linalool strongly inhibits ribosomal assembly and protein synthesis in 
E. coli, leading to significant cell death.
Table 1 
MIC and FIC of citral and linalool against E. coli.
Antibacterial agents
Single MIC (mg/mL)
Combined MIC (mg/mL)
FIC
Combined effect
A
B
A
B
A
B
Linalool
Carvacrol
1.5
0.16
0.38
0.08
0.75
additive
​
Citronellal
​
2.50
0.75
0.63
0.75
additive
​
Cinnamaldehyde
​
0.16
0.75
0.08
1
additive
​
Citral
​
0.75
0.38
0.19
0.5
synergistic
​
Thymol
​
0.16
0.75
0.04
0.75
additive
​
Vanillin
​
1.25
0.38
1.25
1.25
indifferent
​
Eugenol
​
0.63
0.38
0.16
0.5
synergistic
Synergistic (FIC index ≤0.5), additive (0.5 < FIC index ≤1), indifferent (1 < FIC index ≤4) or antagonism (FIC index >4).
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
5 

Fig. 2. Inhibition effect of different treatments on E. coli growth after 24 h incubation at 37 ◦C: (B) photographs of nutrient broth (NB) media after a 1:103 dilutions. 
(C) Extracellular protein content after 2 h incubation, (D) MDA content. (E) SEM image of E. coli treated with 1/2C, 1/2L, 1/4C + 1/4 L and control. Values are 
expressed as means (n = 3) ± SD (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001). Abbreviations: 1/2C or 1/2 L means the treatments with 1/2 MIC of citral or 1/2 MIC of 
linalool, respectively. 1/4C + 1/4L means the combination treatment with 1/4 MIC of citral and 1/4 MIC of linalool.
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
6 

3.2.2. Intracellular protein leakage
Considering that citral has a strong absorption at the wavelength of 
280 nm, the BCA protein assay was applied to avoid interference from 
essential oil components. After a co-incubation for 2 h, extracellular 
protein was detected in all samples. However, compare to control group 
(15.49 μg/mL), both individual treatment groups (1/2C and 1/2L) 
showed a minor increase of extracellular protein levels, with the con­
centrations of 20.89 μg/mL and 21.73 μg/mL, respectively (Fig. 2C). In 
addition, a rapid protein leakage reaching 47.64 μg/mL was found in the 
combined treatment group, which was significantly higher than that in 
the control group (p ≤0.01) and the individual groups (p ≤0.05). 
Proteins are indispensable biomacromolecules for bacterial growth, 
reproduction, and environmental adaptation, performing diverse vital 
functions within bacterial cells. During the growth of bacteria, a limited 
amount of specific proteins may be secreted out of the cell to play a role 
of intercellular signaling molecules or participate in metabolic pro­
cesses. However, abnormal release of intracellular proteins is commonly 
linked to bacterial death and suggests cell membrane damage caused by 
antibacterial agents. The BCA test result demonstrated that both citral 
and linalool could induce intracellular protein leakage. Nevertheless, 
their single use had no difference in membrane breaking. By contrast, 
their combination resulted in a twofold increase in protein leakage 
concentration, proving that citral and linalool exerted a significant 
impact on the integrity of the bacterial cell membrane.
3.2.3. MDA content
MDA is one of the end products of lipid peroxidation in living or­
ganisms, which is often used as the indicator of measuring the extent of 
oxidative damage to cells. As exhibited in Fig. 2D, only a trace amount of 
MDA was detected in the control group (0.03 nmol/mL). Compare with 
the control group, the MDA content in the group treated with citral at 
MIC for 1 h was 0.20 nmol/mL, indicating a significant induction of lipid 
peroxidation. In addition, the linalool MIC group showed a slight in­
crease in MDA content to 0.12 nmol/mL. Meanwhile, the combined 
group (1/2C + 1/2L) presented the highest MDA level among all 
experiment groups, reaching 0.27 nmol/mL—approximately 1.35 and 
2.25 times higher than that in the citral and linalool single-treatment 
groups, respectively, and even 9.00 times higher than that in the con­
trol group. The intense peroxidation effect induced by citral may be 
attribute to its unique chemical structure. Citral is an aldehyde mono­
terpene with strong oxidizing property due to the presence of an α, 
β-unsaturated aldehyde group, which brings it high chemical reactivity. 
Citral molecules can bind with the phospholipid bilayer closely and 
induce lipid oxidation in the cell membrane. Cao, Liu, et al. (2021) re­
ported that ctiral upregulate the MDA content in Vibrio parahaemolyticus 
cultures with the increase of the concentration and the exposure time. 
Furthermore, He et al. (2023) proved that MDA contents, along with 
other ROS-related factors such as H2O2 and O2•−, increased after Shigella 
sonnei cultures were exposure to linalool. However, linalool, a mono­
terpene alcohol with a hydroxyl group, lacks the ability to readily accept 
electrons. Resulting in relatively weaker lipid peroxidation induction 
than citral due to differences in structure and properties.
3.2.4. Morphology of E. coli cells
The morphological changes of E. coli exposed to various concentra­
tions of citral, linalool and their combinations were analyzed using SEM. 
As shown in Fig. 2E, E. coli cells from the control group exhibited a rod- 
like shape, plump and the surface were smooth. Treatment with 1/2 MIC 
citral resulted in mild shrinkage of bacterial cell wall while the overall 
shape remained clear (Fig. 2E). In contrast, E. coli cells treated with 
linalool displayed wrinkling and slight collapse of their structure, yet the 
boundaries of their cell walls remained distinct (Fig. 2E). The image of 
the 1/4C + 1/4L group revealed severe cellular disruption, with more 
shriveled cells and adhesion between them (red arrow). However, the 
extent of cellular damage varied within this group. Some cells were less 
affected and retained their structural integrity. With the increasing 
concentrations of combined treatments, exposure to the citral/linalool 
mixture at 1/2 MIC+1/2 MIC induced serious cell deformations, making 
the shapes of the cells difficult to identify (Fig. 2E). Irregular surface 
textures and apparent disintegration of cell morphology was observed in 
this sample, with most of cells becoming shorter and cracked. It is 
obviously that the rupture of cell morphology is related to the concen­
tration of the citral/linalool group. Similar to the protein leakage assay 
described above, when cells were exposed to citral or linalool at the 
same MIC ratio, the permeability of the cell wall and membrane was up- 
regulated, leading to the loss of cytosolic materials. Several studies have 
indicated that both citral and linalool have the ability to cause cell 
surface damage, thereby inducing bacterial inactivation and even death 
(Dai et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020). Meanwhile, direct 
contact with the citral/linalool mixture also resulted in a concentration- 
dependent synergistic effect on the structural breakdown of E. coli cells. 
At the same absolute MIC, cell fracture was more significant: cells 
exhibited malformation and even developed holes. Gao et al. (2023) also 
demonstrated that linalool can affect the synthesis and modification of 
lipopolysaccharides, thereby damaging the outer membrane of E. coli 
cells and triggering cell envelope stress responses. Once the first line of 
bacteria self-defense broke down, the lipophilic citral was allowed to 
penetrate the cytoplasmic membrane, allowing a greater amount of the 
antibacterial agent to enter the cell interior. Consequently, further cell 
disruption occurred, followed by the rapid outflow of organelles and 
functional components.
3.2.5. Biofilm formation
The ability to control biofilm formation was observed in all groups 
studied (Fig. 3A). Specifically, the individual use of citral (1/2 MIC) or 
linalool (1/2 MIC) resulted in biofilm inhibition rates of 65.43 % and 
70.95 % after 48 h of incubation, respectively, which corroborated 
previous findings (Cao, Zhou, et al., 2021; Pereira et al., 2018). When 
citral and linalool were applied in combination (1/4 MIC each), the 
biofilm inhibition rate reached 83.67 % after 48 h, representing an in­
crease of 18.24 % and 12.12 % compared to the single use of cital and 
linalool, respectively. This finding verified their synergistic effect on 
inhibiting biofilm formation. There was previous research demon­
strating that borneol and citral act synergistically to inhibit biofilms of 
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative foodborne bacteria, including 
P. aeruginosa, E. coli, S. aureus, and L. monocytogenes (Wang et al., 2025). 
According to the bacteria count result presented above (Fig. 2A), the 
combination of citral and linalool led to a significant reduction in E. coli 
growth. Since biofilm formation relies on a self-produced polymeric 
matrix secreted by bacteria, a reduced bacterial population correlates 
with decreased secretion of metabolites, which in turn may lead to a 
reduction in biofilm formation.
3.2.6. EPS content
In order to further explore the synergistic biofilm control mechanism 
of citral and linalool, EPS content after incubating for 48 h was analyzed. 
More precisely, co-incubation with individual citral and linalool (1/2 
MIC) resulted in decreased EPS contents by 2.62 % and 6.00 %, 
respectively, compare to the control group (Fig. 3B). By contrast, a great 
reduction in EPS excretion during biofilm formation was recorded in the 
combined group (1/4C + 1/4L) at 20.33 % (p ≤0.001). The formation of 
the biofilm matrix by E. coli is significantly attributed to the production 
of EPS, which are crucial for biofilm structure and function. In turn, EPS 
provides a diffusion barrier against antibacterial agents and shields cells 
from unfavorable environmental conditions (Harimawan & Ting, 2016). 
Connecting with the biofilm formation assay earlier in this discussion, 
the synergistic group of citral and linalool effectively suppressed the 
growth of E. coli, along with a greater reduction in EPS. Correspond­
ingly, the lower EPS content in the biofilm environment, the looser its 
structure becomes. Thus, its adhesive properties will be impaired, the 
elasticity of the biofilm will deteriorate, and the defense system for the 
bacteria will break down. Thereby, system imbalance is created, and 
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
7 

Fig. 3. (A) Biofilm inhibition ratios after incubation for 48 h at 37 ◦C under different treatments. (B) Effect on EPS of E. coli. (C) Effects on the motility of E. coli.
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
8 

bacteria in that environment undergoes escalating assaults from anti­
bacterial agents.
3.2.7. Swimming and swarming test
Likewise, flagella-mediated motility enables bacteria to possess a 
robust capability for colonizing host cells and adhering to surfaces, 
which is essential for the initial formation of biofilms. Additionally, 
motility also contributes to the escape of bacteria from mature biofilms 
to induce further infection and play a vital role in the virulence level of 
pathogenic bacteria (Chaban et al., 2015; Verstraeten et al., 2008). 
Swimming and swarming abilities were tested to investigate the 
combine effect of citral and linalool on bacterial motility in this study. It 
can be observed from Fig. 3C that, during the first 24 h, neither semi­
solid plates nor solid agar plates exhibited apparent bacterial colony 
spreading. Additionally, there was only a minor difference in colony 
diameter between the control and treatment groups in the swarming 
test. However, after 48 h of incubation, clear and well-developed bac­
terial halos were observed in the swimming test groups, whereas no 
significant differences were noted in the swarming test groups. Notably, 
when E. coli was exposed to 1/4C + 1/4L, a maximum decline in 
Fig. 4. Characterization of β-CD inclusion complexes: (A) Entrapment efficiency (EE) and loading capacity (LC) of Citral@β-CD and Linalool@β-CD inclusion; (B) 
Particle size distribution curves of re-crystallized β-CD, Citral@β-CD and Linalool@β-CD; (C) Appearance photos and SEM images of β-CD inclusion complexes. 
Abbreviations: C@β-CD: Citral@β-CD, L@β-CD: Linalool@β-CD, CL@β-CD: Citral@β-CD + Linalool@β-CD.
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
9 

swimming motility with a faint and limited halo spread was observed 
compared to the control group. Individual administration of citral (1/2 
MIC) had a less impact on swimming motility, while linalool (1/2 MIC) 
exhibited minimal effect on motility.
3.3. Physical properties of the prepared inclusion complexes
The dried Citral@β-CD and Linalool@β-CD appeared as white fine 
powders with a dstinct aroma characteristic of the essential oils. The EE 
and LC of the Citral@β-CD inclusion complexes were 62.60 % and 11.95 
%, respectively, while those for Linalool@β-CD were 40.47 % and 10.62 
%, respectively (Fig. 4A). The preparation and applications of β-CD in­
clusion of essential oil components has been extensively studied over the 
past few decades. For example, Maswal and Dar (2014) reported that 
β-CD can be used as a good carrier of citral. L´opez and Pascual-Villalobos 
(2010) synthesized a series of β-CD-monoterpenoids microcapsules, 
achieving maximum EE of 52 % with camphor, 34 % with geraniol, and 
31 % with linalool. The EE and LC values can be affected by multiple 
factors such as the chemical properties of essential oil components, 
preparation methods, preparing temperature, mixing time and speed, 
the use of co-solvent or other additives, etc. (Kfoury et al., 2018), the 
results obtained in this study are considered reliable and valid.
SEM results of the β-CD complexes are presented in Fig. 4C. Re- 
crystallized β-CD preformed the large aggregations of irregular long 
prismatic crystals, whereas both Citral@β-CD and Linalool@β-CD 
composites demonstrated rhombic crystals. The surface of the inclusions 
was smooth, with no cracks, pores or fractures observed, suggesting that 
the compounds were well encapsulated in the inclusion complexes. The 
formation of such distinct morphologies indicates differences in the 
crystallization behavior and the interaction between the compounds and 
the β-CD.
The particle size distribution curves for different formulations are 
displayed in Fig. 4B. The particle diameters of pure β-CD, Citral@β-CD 
and Linalool@β-CD was 164.4 nm, 568.3 nm and 330.6 nm, respec­
tively. The characteristic of the substance that package inside the β-CD 
shall may change its self-aggregation property and affect their crystal 
size. Besides, re-crystallized β-CD curve showed a polydispersity index 
(PDI) value of 1.00 while PDI of Citral@β-CD and Linalool@β-CD in­
clusion was 0.32 and 0.43, respectively. The PDI value is a key indicator 
of the uniformity of particle sizes in a suspension. A lower PDI value 
indicates a relatively more uniform particle size distribution, or a 
monodisperse system (Tao et al., 2014). Thus, the addition of essential 
oil compounds improved the dispersity of the complexes and facilitated 
a more even particle distribute within the system, suggesting a prom­
ising potential for practical applications. The interaction between β-CD 
cavities and essential oil molecules forms a stable complex through 
various non-covalent forces, including van der Waals forces, hydrogen 
bonds, dipole–dipole interactions, and London dispersion forces 
(Ravindran Maniam et al., 2022). These weak interactions enable 
controlled release of essential oil in response to specific condition 
Fig. 5. TVC (A), TVB-N (B), pH (C), photographs (D), and changes in color parameters: (E: L*, F: a*, and G: b*) of chicken samples during storage at 4 ◦C.
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
10 

changes, such as fluctuations in humidity, temperature, or mechanical 
stress, thereby facilitating a slow and sustained release profile.
3.4. Effects of extending the shelf life of cooked chicken
3.4.1. TVC
As shown in Fig. 5A, following the artificially inoculate of E. coli, the 
initial TVC of the chicken samples on day 0 was recorded as 4.10 Log 
CFU/g. By day 3, the TVC for the control group, Citral@β-CD, and 
Linalool@β-CD were maintained at 3.79, 4.07, and 3.78 Log CFU/g, 
respectively. In contrast, the CL@β-CD group exhibited a TVC of 3.31 
Log CFU/g, which not only decreased from the initial value but also 
remarkably lower than those of all other groups. This finding is 
reasonable, as bacteria are inactive and their growth would be very slow 
or even suspend under 4 ◦C refrigerator conditions. Previous assess­
ments have demonstrated that the combination of citral and linalool 
exhibits positive synergy when directly interacting with bacteria cells. 
Encapsulating essential oils within cyclodextrins reduces their volatility, 
thereby enabling long-term, low-concentration application on food 
surfaces (Kfoury et al., 2018). This approach extends the preservation 
period while preventing direct contact between the oils and food matrix, 
minimizing potential flavor alterations (Marques, 2010). When CL@β- 
CD was applied to cooked chicken meat, citral and linalool were slowly 
released, generating a synergistic antibacterial environment. Upon 
encountering E. coli on the chicken surface, linalool disrupts bacterial 
cell walls, thereby facilitating the entry of citral. This enables citral to 
more effectively induce lipid peroxidation and ROS generation, leading 
to MDA accumulation and membrane damage. As a result, essential oils 
can penetrate bacterial cells and cause further intracellular damage. The 
complementary mechanisms of these compounds enhance both bacterial 
inactivation and the inhibition of microbial growth. The decrease in TVC 
in CL@β-CD can be attributed to their strong synergistic antibacterial 
effects, demonstrating that the combined effect remains effective when 
applied in the form of β-CD complexes. In this study, citral and linalool 
were individually encapsulated and then physically blended. Although 
they do not contact with each other immediately, during storage, the 
gradual release process allows these volatile compounds to be delivered 
to the food surface and, perform synergistic antibacterial effects. 
Furthermore, the incorporation of these antibacterial compounds into 
β-CD enables sustained and long-term release, which helps inhibiting the 
development of TVC in boiled chicken meat.
3.4.2. TVB-N
TVB-N compounds consist of primary, secondary, and tertiary 
amines in the form of volatile amines and toxic nitrogen compounds. 
Their contents are closely associated to the degradation of proteins and 
other nitrogenous substances produced by bacterial proliferation and 
often serve as a crucial biomarker for evaluating meat freshness (Bekhit 
et al., 2021). In this study, the initial TVB-N content of boiled chicken 
meat was 11.58 mg/100 g. After a three-day storage, the TVB-N contents 
increased in all groups except the CL@β-CD group. Specifically, the 
Citral@β-CD and Linalool@β-CD groups exhibited values of 17.50 and 
18.67 mg/100 g, respectively, which were lower than that of the control 
group (21.00 mg/100 g) (Fig. 5B). Notably, the TVB-N content in the 
CL@β-CD treated group remained stable at 10.03 mg/100 g, showing no 
significant difference compared to the initial value. These findings 
indicated that the CL@β-CD treatment effectively inhibited the protein 
degradation in cooked chicken meat, which is consistent with the TVC 
results described above.
3.4.3. pH value
The pH value also serves as a critical indicator of meat freshness. In 
this study, the initial pH value of the chicken meat was 6.40 (Fig. 5C). 
However, within day 3, the pH values of the control, Citral@β-CD, 
Linalool@β-CD and CL@β-CD groups were 6.57, 6.44, 6.40 and 6.34, 
respectively. Among them, only the CL@β-CD group presented a 
significant lower pH than the control (p ≤0.05). A low temperature and 
moisture environment can suppress the bacterial growth. However, the 
pH value of the control group started to raise on day 3, revealing that the 
proliferating E. coli degraded the protein and produced alkaline sub­
stances in the meat tissue. These results evidenced that the CL@β-CD 
coating have a superior ability in slowing down the spoilage of chicken 
breast and extending its shelf life.
3.4.4. Colors
As shown in Fig. 5C, after a 3-day storage period, no significant 
differences were observed visually. However, the group coated with 
Linalool@β-CD showed a significant increase (p < 0.05) in L* values 
compare to the initial value (Fig. 5E). Furthermore, a* and b* value of 
the boiled chicken breast displayed in Fig. 5F-G did not find any sig­
nificant deviation during the cold storage period (p > 0.05) in all groups. 
a* and b* stand for redness and yellowness, which closely connect with 
the content of myoglobin and metmyoglobin in meat (Ruiz-Hern´andez 
et al., 2023). During the process of high-temperature cooking, 
myoglobin in raw meat will be oxidized into metmyoglobin tend to 
stabilize (Ragucci et al., 2024). What is more, with low content of fat, 
the lipid oxidation products were correspondingly less, and the impact 
on the color of chicken was also limited. Base on the L*, a*, b* results 
above, the color varies between Linalool@β-CD and control was mainly 
attracted by lightness value. Combining with the TVC and TVB-N 
analyze result above, it can be seen that covering with CL@β-CD 
instead of Citral@β-CD or Linalool@β-CD was beneficial as it can not 
only maintain the appearance of boiled chicken breast but also 
providing remarkable antibacterial and preservation properties owning 
to the synergistic effect of citral and linalool.
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, this study firstly investigated the synergistic inhibitory 
effect of citral and linalool on E. coli. The combination significantly 
enhanced the efficacy of disrupting bacterial cell membranes, inducing 
protein leakage, promoting MDA accumulation, causing structural 
collapse, inhibiting biofilm formation, reducing EPS production, and 
impairing bacterial motility. Furthermore, the study also validated the 
effectiveness of combining their β-CD inclusion complexes in extending 
the shelf life of cooked chicken meat. The application of this composite 
agent as a coating effectively suppressed microbial growth, reduced 
TVB-N accumulation, and mitigated pH increase in the chicken meat. To 
extend the application of CL@β-CD, the inclusion can not only be 
applied to cooked meats but also to foods prone to E. coli contamination, 
such as raw diet vegetables, ready-to-eat dairy products, and fresh-cut 
fruits. Consequently, the findings of this study provide the food in­
dustry with an effective sustained-release antibacterial strategy based on 
the synergistic effects of natural plant-derived compounds.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Wanying Zhu: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation, 
Data curation. Yuhe Dong: Investigation. Tong Wu: Investigation. 
Haohan Jing: Investigation. Zikai Li: Investigation. Xi Yu: Resources. 
Ying Xiao: Resources. Tian Zhong: Writing – review & editing, Su­
pervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
This study was supported by the Macao FDCT Grants 0005/2024/ 
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
11 

AGJ and 0009/2023/AFJ.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fochx.2025.103248.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Addo, K. A., Li, H., Yu, Y., & Xiao, X. (2023). Unraveling the mechanism of the synergistic 
antimicrobial effect of cineole and carvacrol on Escherichia coli O157:H7 inhibition 
and its application on fresh-cut cucumbers. Food Control, 144, Article 109339. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2022.109339
Bakkali, F., Averbeck, S., Averbeck, D., & Idaomar, M. (2008). Biological effects of 
essential oils – A review. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 46(2), 446–475. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fct.2007.09.106
Bassol´e, I. H. N., Lamien-Meda, A., Bayala, B., Tirogo, S., Franz, C., Novak, J., … 
Dicko, M. H. (2010). Composition and antimicrobial activities of Lippia multiflora 
Moldenke, Mentha x piperita L. and Ocimum basilicum L. essential oils and their 
major monoterpene alcohols alone and in combination. Molecules, 15(11), Article 11. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules15117825
Bekhit, A. E.-D. A., Holman, B. W. B., Giteru, S. G., & Hopkins, D. L. (2021). Total volatile 
basic nitrogen (TVB-N) and its role in meat spoilage: A review. Trends in Food Science 
& Technology, 109, 280–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2021.01.006
Calo, J. R., Crandall, P. G., O’Bryan, C. A., & Ricke, S. C. (2015). Essential oils as 
antimicrobials in food systems – A review. Food Control, 54, 111–119. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2014.12.040
Cao, J., Liu, H., Wang, Y., He, X., Jiang, H., Yao, J., Xia, F., Zhao, Y., & Chen, X. (2021). 
Antimicrobial and antivirulence efficacies of citral against foodborne pathogen 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus RIMD2210633. Food Control, 120, Article 107507. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2020.107507
Cao, Y., Zhou, D., Zhang, X., Xiao, X., Yu, Y., & Li, X. (2021). Synergistic effect of citral 
and carvacrol and their combination with mild heat against Cronobacter sakazakii 
CICC 21544 in reconstituted infant formula. LWT, 138, Article 110617. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.lwt.2020.110617
Chaban, B., Hughes, H. V., & Beeby, M. (2015). The flagellum in bacterial pathogens: For 
motility and a whole lot more. Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology, 46, 91–103. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2015.10.032
Dai, J., Bai, M., Li, C., San Cheang, W., Cui, H., & Lin, L. (2023). Antibacterial properties 
of citral against Staphylococcus aureus: From membrane damage to metabolic 
inhibition. Food Bioscience, 53, Article 102770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fbio.2023.102770
Ferreira, G. L. S., Bezerra, L. M. D., Ribeiro, I. L. A., Morais Júnior, R. C. D., & 
Castro, R. D. (2018). Susceptibility of cariogenic microorganisms to 
phytoconstituents. Brazilian Journal of Biology, 78(4), 691–696. https://doi.org/ 
10.1590/1519-6984.174147
Gao, Z., Jiang, S., Zhong, W., Liu, T., & Guo, J. (2023). Linalool controls the viability of 
Escherichia coli by regulating the synthesis and modification of lipopolysaccharide, 
the assembly of ribosome, and the expression of substrate transporting proteins. Food 
Research International, 164, Article 112337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodres.2022.112337
Ghasemy-Piranloo, F., Kavousi, F., & Kazemi-Abharian, M. (2022). Comparison for the 
production of essential oil by conventional, novel and biotechnology methods. 
Journal of Essential Oil Research, 34(5), 455–478. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10412905.2022.2120557
Guo, F., Liang, Q., Zhang, M., Chen, W., Chen, H., Yun, Y., Zhong, Q., & Chen, W. (2021). 
Antibacterial activity and mechanism of linalool against Shewanella putrefaciens. 
Molecules, 26(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules26010245
Harimawan, A., & Ting, Y.-P. (2016). Investigation of extracellular polymeric substances 
(EPS) properties of P. Aeruginosa and B. Subtilis and their role in bacterial adhesion. 
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 146, 459–467. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2016.06.039
He, R., Wu, H., Liu, J., Chen, W., Chen, W., Chen, H., Zhong, Q., Zhang, M., & Gu, F. 
(2023). Mechanism of membrane damage to Shigella sonnei by linalool from plant 
essential oils: A driver of oxidative stress. Industrial Crops and Products, 193, Article 
116255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2023.116255
Hon´orio, V. G., Bezerra, J., Souza, G. T., Carvalho, R. J., Gomes-Neto, N. J., 
Figueiredo, R. C. B. Q., … Magnani, M. (2015). Inhibition of Staphylococcus aureus 
cocktail using the synergies of oregano and rosemary essential oils or carvacrol and 
1,8-cineole. Frontiers in Microbiology, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2015.01223
Huang, Z., Pang, D., Liao, S., Zou, Y., Zhou, P., Li, E., & Wang, W. (2021). Synergistic 
effects of cinnamaldehyde and cinnamic acid in cinnamon essential oil against S. 
Pullorum. Industrial Crops and Products, 162, Article 113296. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.indcrop.2021.113296
Ji, J., Shankar, S., Royon, F., Salmieri, S., & Lacroix, M. (2023). Essential oils as natural 
antimicrobials applied in meat and meat products—A review. Critical Reviews in Food 
Science and Nutrition, 63(8), 993–1009. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10408398.2021.1957766
Ju, J., Chen, X., Xie, Y., Yu, H., Guo, Y., Cheng, Y., Qian, H., & Yao, W. (2019). 
Application of essential oil as a sustained release preparation in food packaging. 
Trends in Food Science & Technology, 92, 22–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tifs.2019.08.005
Ju, J., Xie, Y., Yu, H., Guo, Y., Cheng, Y., Chen, Y., Ji, L., & Yao, W. (2020). Synergistic 
properties of citral and eugenol for the inactivation of foodborne molds in vitro and 
on bread. LWT, 122, Article 109063. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2020.109063
Ju, J., Xie, Y., Yu, H., Guo, Y., Cheng, Y., Qian, H., & Yao, W. (2022). Synergistic 
interactions of plant essential oils with antimicrobial agents: A new antimicrobial 
therapy. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 62(7), 1740–1751. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/10408398.2020.1846494
Kang, S., Li, X., Xing, Z., Liu, X., Bai, X., Yang, Y., Guo, D., Xia, X., Zhang, C., & Shi, C. 
(2022). Antibacterial effect of citral on yersinia enterocolitica and its mechanism. 
Food Control, 135, Article 108775. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2021.108775
Keeratipibul, S., Oupaichit, T., & Techaruwichit, P. (2009). Contamination profiles of 
Escherichia coli and enterococci in steamed chicken meat products. Journal of Food 
Protection, 72(9), 1821–1829. https://doi.org/10.4315/0362-028X-72.9.1821
Kfoury, M., Auezova, L., Greige-Gerges, H., & Fourmentin, S. (2018). Cyclodextrins for 
essential oils applications. In S. Fourmentin, G. Crini, & E. Lichtfouse (Eds.), Vol. 17. 
Cyclodextrin applications in medicine, food, environment and liquid crystals (pp. 
81–123). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- 
76162-6_4. 
Li, Y., Erhunmwunsee, F., Liu, M., Yang, K., Zheng, W., & Tian, J. (2022). Antimicrobial 
mechanisms of spice essential oils and application in food industry. Food Chemistry, 
382, Article 132312. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2022.132312
Lim, A. C., Tang, S. G. H., Zin, N. M., Maisarah, A. M., Ariffin, I. A., Ker, P. J., & 
Mahlia, T. M. I. (2022). Chemical composition, antioxidant, antibacterial, and 
Antibiofilm activities of Backhousia citriodora essential oil. Molecules, 27(15), Article 
15. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules27154895
Liu, X., Cai, J., Chen, H., Zhong, Q., Hou, Y., Chen, W., & Chen, W. (2020). Antibacterial 
activity and mechanism of linalool against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Microbial 
Pathogenesis, 141, Article 103980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2020.103980
L´opez, M. D., & Pascual-Villalobos, M. J. (2010). Analysis of monoterpenoids in inclusion 
complexes with β-cyclodextrin and study on ratio effect in these microcapsules 
[application/pdf]. Julius-Kühn-Archiv, 425(705–709), 705–709. https://doi.org/ 
10.5073/JKA.2010.425.220
Marques, H. M. C. (2010). A review on cyclodextrin encapsulation of essential oils and 
volatiles. Flavour and Fragrance Journal, 25(5), 313–326. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
ffj.2019
Maswal, M., & Dar, A. A. (2014). Formulation challenges in encapsulation and delivery of 
citral for improved food quality. Food Hydrocolloids, 37, 182–195. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.foodhyd.2013.10.035
Nair, A., Mallya, R., Suvarna, V., Khan, T. A., Momin, M., & Omri, A. (2022). 
Nanoparticles—Attractive carriers of antimicrobial essential oils. Antibiotics, 11(1), 
Article 1. https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics11010108
Paiva-Santos, A. C., Ferreira, L., Peixoto, D., Silva, F., Soares, M. J., Zeinali, M., … 
Veiga, F. (2022). Cyclodextrins as an encapsulation molecular strategy for volatile 
organic compounds—Pharmaceutical applications. Colloids and Surfaces B: 
Biointerfaces, 218, Article 112758. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2022.112758
Pereira, I., Severino, P., Santos, A. C., Silva, A. M., & Souto, E. B. (2018). Linalool 
bioactive properties and potential applicability in drug delivery systems. Colloids and 
Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 171, 566–578. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2018.08.001
Prakash, A., & Vadivel, V. (2020). Citral and linalool nanoemulsions: Impact of 
synergism and ripening inhibitors on the stability and antibacterial activity against 
listeria monocytogenes. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 57(4), 1495–1504. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-019-04185-8
Ragucci, S., Landi, N., & Di Maro, A. (2024). Myoglobin as a molecular biomarker for 
meat authentication and traceability. Food Chemistry, 458, Article 140326. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2024.140326
Rani, A., Ravindran, V. B., Surapaneni, A., Mantri, N., & Ball, A. S. (2021). Review: 
Trends in point-of-care diagnosis for Escherichia coli O157:H7 in food and water. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 349, Article 109233. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2021.109233
Ravindran Maniam, M. M., Loong, Y. H., & Samsudin, H. (2022). Understanding the 
formation of β-Cyclodextrin inclusion complexes and their use in active packaging 
systems. Starch - St¨arke, 74(7–8), Article 2100304. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
star.202100304
Rehab, M. A. E.-B., & Zeinab, S. H. (2016). Eugenol and linalool: Comparison of their 
antibacterial and antifungal activities. African Journal of Microbiology Research, 10 
(44), 1860–1872. https://doi.org/10.5897/AJMR2016.8283
Ruiz-Hern´andez, K., Sosa-Morales, M. E., Cer´on-García, A., & G´omez-Salazar, J. A. 
(2023). Physical, chemical and sensory changes in meat and meat products induced 
by the addition of essential oils: A concise review. Food Reviews International, 39(4), 
2027–2056. https://doi.org/10.1080/87559129.2021.1939369
Saddiq, A. A., & Khayyat, S. A. (2010). Chemical and antimicrobial studies of 
monoterpene: Citral. Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology, 98(1), 89–93. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pestbp.2010.05.004
Singha, S., Thomas, R., Viswakarma, J. N., & Gupta, V. K. (2023). Foodborne illnesses of 
Escherichia coli O157origin and its control measures. Journal of Food Science and 
Technology, 60(4), 1274–1283. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-022-05381-9
Song, Q., Lu, Q., Zhang, S., Zhang, Z., Huang, J., Li, X., Song, D., Pu, J., Yang, Z., Fang, Z., 
Liu, Y., & Hu, B. (2024). Preparation and characterization of fennel (Foeniculum 
vulgare miller) essential oil/hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin inclusion complex and its 
application for chilled pork preservation. Food Chemistry, 456, Article 139887. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2024.139887
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
12 

de Souza, M. Q., Bierhals, D. V., Reis, A. J., Chimara, E., Vianna, J. S., von Groll, A., … 
Ramis, I. B. (2024). 2,3,5-triphenyl tetrazolium chloride as colorimetric indicator for 
drug susceptibility testing against nontuberculous mycobacteria. Diagnostic 
Microbiology and Infectious Disease, 108(1), Article 116096. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.diagmicrobio.2023.116096
Su, R., Guo, P., Zhang, Z., Wang, J., Guo, X., Guo, D., Wang, Y., Lü, X., & Shi, C. (2022). 
Antibacterial activity and mechanism of linalool against Shigella sonnei and its application 
in lettuce. Foods, 11(20), article 20. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods11203160
Verstraeten, N., Braeken, K., Debkumari, B., Fauvart, M., Fransaer, J., Vermant, J., & 
Michiels, J. (2008). Living on a surface: Swarming and biofilm formation. Trends in 
Microbiology, 16(10), 496–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2008.07.004
Wang, W., Coenye, T., Su, J., & Qiu, S.-X. (2025). Biofilm inhibition and eradication 
activity of citral and borneol against foodborne bacteria. Industrial Crops and 
Products, 223, Article 120199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2024.120199
Yang, X., Zhao, D., Ge, S., Bian, P., Xue, H., & Lang, Y. (2023). Alginate-based edible 
coating with oregano essential oil/β-cyclodextrin inclusion complex for chicken 
breast preservation. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 251, Article 
126126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.126126
Zhang, W., Li, B., Lv, Y., Wei, S., Zhang, S., & Hu, Y. (2023). Synergistic effects of 
combined cinnamaldehyde and nonanal vapors against aspergillus flavus. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 402, Article 110277. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2023.110277
Zhou, X., Guo, X., Chai, Y., Li, X., Chen, L., & Feng, X. (2024). Superabsorbent whey 
protein isolates/chitosan-based antibacterial aerogels: Preparation, characterization 
and application in chicken meat preservation. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules, 259, Article 128961. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijbiomac.2023.128961
W. Zhu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Food Chemistry: X 32 (2025) 103248 
13