Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
Available online 17 August 2023
0010-8545/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Review 
Current strategies of detecting Aβ species and inhibiting Aβ aggregation: 
Status and prospects 
Jun Li a,b,1, Wang Liao d,1, Dongqing Huang a,b,1, Meitong Ou c, Tongkai Chen f, Xinlu Wang g, 
Ruiyue Zhao g, Lingyan Zhang e, Lin Mei c,*, Jun Liu d,*, Ping Luan a,b,1,* 
a Department of Alzheimer’s Disease Clinical Research Center, Guangdong Second Provincial General Hospital, Guangzhou 510317, China 
b School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China 
c Tianjin Key Laboratory of Biomedical Materials, Key Laboratory of Biomaterials and Nanotechnology for Cancer Immunotherapy, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300192, China 
d Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510260, China 
e Department of Medical Imaging, Longgang Central Hospital of Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518116, China 
f Science and Technology Innovation Center, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou 510405, China 
g Department of Nuclear Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510120, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Alzheimer’s disease 
Nanomaterials 
Amyloid beta aggregation 
Therapy 
Diagnosis 
A B S T R A C T   
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a central neurodegenerative disorder characterized by behavioral disturbance and 
progressive cognitive impairment, and it is common in pre-senile and old-age people. The accumulation of 
soluble oligomers and amyloid plaques outside the nerve cells in the brain act the crucial part in the cause of the 
disease. Therefore, it is necessary to develop diagnosis and treatment methods for amyloid beta (Aβ) aggregation. 
Large-scale apparatus MRI/PET/MS and novel devices biosensors can accurately detect Aβ. Furthermore, precise 
diagnosis and early initiation of appropriate treatment in the early stages can minimize the impact of AD. Some 
therapeutic agents for AD include monoclonal antibodies, related peptides, and natural products. These thera­
peutic agents work by retarding and disassembling Aβ aggregation. In addition, the metal chelators can scavenge 
and chelate metal ions accumulating in lesions and affecting Aβ aggregation. Nanomaterials can also be used for 
precise diagnosis of different types of Aβ and multifunctional nanoplatform treatment. This review summarizes 
current advanced strategies for detecting and modulating Aβ for AD diagnosis and treatment.   
1. Introduction 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the major cause of dementia (60%-80%) 
and the most common neurodegenerative disease, affecting several 
elderly individuals worldwide [1]. About 44 million people have de­
mentia worldwide, which may triple by 2050 with the population aging 
[2], resulting in a severe economic burden on individuals and society 
[3]. AD was discovered in 1907 by Alois Alzheimer, when a 51-year-old 
woman showed rapid memory deterioration and symptoms of mental 
disorders [4]. However, Emil Kraepelin was the first to introduce the 
term Alzheimer’s disease in his psychiatry book, and distinguished the 
newly named disease from traditional dementia [5]. Although many 
scientists have researched AD pathogenic mechanism, its explicit cause 
is unclear. AD is a multifactorial and complex disease, whose related 
pathogenic factors include Amyloid beta (Aβ) cascade hypothesis [6–8], 
Tau hypothesis [9,10], neurological damage to cholinergic function 
[11], oxidative stress [12], transition metal accumulation [13], in­
flammatory response [14], etc. Studies have proved that Aβ may be a 
pathogenic factor of AD, an upstream element of other etiologies. Aβ is 
also essential in neurotoxicity and oxidative stress in disease evolution 
[15,16]. Aβ was first identified in 1992 by Higgins and Hardy, who 
showed Aβ accumulation in the brain parenchyma promoted AD path­
ogenesis, neurofibrillary tangles, vascular damage, cell damage, and 
dementia [17]. Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is the previous form of 
Aβ and has various isoforms in the human body, including APP 751 and 
770 (in glial cells) and APP695 (in neurons). APP processing mainly 
* Corresponding authors at: Department of Alzheimer’s Disease Clinical Research Center, Guangdong Second Provincial General Hospital, Guangzhou 510317, 
China (P. Luan). 
E-mail addresses: meilin@bme.pumc.edu.cn (L. Mei), liujun@gzhmu.edu.cn (J. Liu), luanping@szu.edu.cn (P. Luan).   
1 J. Li, W. Liao and D. Huang contributed equally to this work. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Coordination Chemistry Reviews 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ccr 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2023.215375 
Received 13 June 2023; Accepted 27 July 2023   

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
2
depends on secretase enzymes and commonly separates into two path­
ways: α-secretase mediated non-amyloidogenic pathway and β-secretase 
mediated amyloidogenic pathway (Aβ is produced here) [18]. Aggre­
gation forms of Aβ in vitro include oligomers, monomers and protofibrils. 
Aβ oligomers are the most toxic substances that can harm neuron syn­
apses and cause progressive cognitive decline (oligomer amyloid 
cascade hypothesis) [19]. The formation of Aβ plaques causes neuronal 
ion homeostasis imbalance and oxidative stress due to the activation of 
astrocytes and microglia after inflammatory response. Eventually, 
altered kinase or phosphatase activities cause broad neuronal or selec­
tive neuronal loss and synaptic dysfunction with concomitant neuro­
transmitter defects, causing tangles [8]. 
This review systematically summarizes various techniques for 
detecting Aβ, including MRI, PET, MS, biosensors and nanomaterials, 
and different approaches for inhibiting Aβ aggregation, such as relative 
nanoparticles, metal chelators, monoclonal antibodies, natural com­
pounds, and sequence-peptides. In addition, the generation and func­
tional characteristics of Aβ in the developing progress of AD have been 
discussed. The route of designing, progress of researching, and corre­
sponding ascendancies and drawbacks of nanomaterials are also 
highlighted. 
2. The production, structure, and function of Aβ 
Aβ is a critical pathological marker in AD progression. Therefore, it is 
crucial to understand the production process, structural traits, and 
functions of Aβ to provide a more suitable targeted therapy. 
2.1. Aβ generation 
Aβ is the major protein in amyloid plaques and plays a central role in 
the pathogenesis of AD, in which amyloid precursor protein (APP) is its 
precursors. Kang et al. were the first to isolate and sequence a full-length 
complementary DNA clone encoding Aβ and predicted that the precur­
sor protein, containing glycosylated cell-surface receptors properties, is 
composed of 695 residues. APP gene belongs to the multi-gene super- 
family, including amyloid precursor-like proteins (APLPs) consisting of 
APLP1 and APLP2 in humans [20]. APLP2 is the closest APP-relative and 
shares up to 70% similarity in amino acid with APP containing the KPI 
domain. However, the ectodomain with 125 amino acids adjacent to the 
transmembrane domain are highly different from APP, indicating that 
the Aβ-like protein sequence does not exist in APLP2. Experimental data 
have proved that some AD cases are caused by APP gene mutations [21]. 
APP is produced as different isoforms (size; 695–770 amino acids) 
through splicing of exons 7, 8, and 15. Exon 7 and 8 are homologous to 
the Kunitz of protease inhibitors (KPI) and the MR COX-2 antigen in 
thymocytes (OX-2). There are three major subtypes of APP, which 
contain 695, 751, and 770 amino acid residues. [22]. APP 695 is the 
most abundant in neurons which differs from other long types of APP 
because it lacks a 56 amino acid KPI domain within extracellular re­
gions. APP751 and APP770 with the KPI domain are predominantly 
secreted in glial cells [23]. APP has been researched for nearly 35 years. 
APP is essential in the development of neuromuscular synapses and the 
formation and plasticity of synapses within the CNS [24]. APP also 
regulates neuronal excitability [25]. However, its specific physiological 
function in the molecular level is unclear. 
APP, a type I transmembrane protein, consists of a short cytoplasmic 
C-terminus, a single transmembrane domain and a larger extracellular 
glycosylated N-terminus.[23,26]. The newly synthesized APP is trans­
ported from Golgi to the axon or cell endosome compartment. Some APP 
is inserted into the cell surface, then hydrolyzed by α-secretase to 
generate sAPPα fragments that diffuse out of the cell while some re- 
internalize into endosomes. The endosomes circulate to the cell sur­
face and release Aβ and sAPPβ after hydrolyzing APP [27]. Subse­
quently, Aβ degradation produces small glial cell lysosomes. Different 
expressions of V-ATPase between Tg2576 and wild-type mice exert 
various effects of autophagy [28]. The human body possesses APP in two 
different patterns (non-amyloidogenic and amyloidogenic) (Fig. 1). APP 
is first cleaved at amino acid 687 (in the APP 770 isoform) by α-secretase 
in the non-amyloidogenic pattern, resulting the release of ectodomain 
APPα (sAPPα) into the extracellular space. Meanwhile, the other part of 
APP containing 83 amino acids, known as C-terminal fragment 83 
(CTF83), is still embedded in the cell membrane. Next procedure, the 
disintegration of CTF83 by γ-secretase produces a short fragment p3 and 
the APP intracellular domain (AICD) into the extracellular space and the 
cytoplasm. The amyloidogenic pathway produces Aβ, the substance at 
the center of the protein cascade hypothesis and the predominant 
pathogenic element causing AD. Amyloidogenic processing begins with 
APP cleavage mediated by β-secretase at amino acid 671 (in the APP 770 
isoform), releasing a soluble APPβ (sAPPβ) outside the cell while CTF99 
remains in the plasma membrane. The processing of CTF99 is similar to 
CTF83 processing, which is cleaved by γ-secretase to produce Aβ 
released outside the cell while the AICD is released into the cytoplasm 
[18]. 
2.2. The structural features of Aβ 
Aβ is a 4 kDa polypeptide fragment produced by specific enzymatic 
cleavage of APP [29]. Aβ was first isolated, purified, and sequenced in 
the tangles of cerebral vascular amyloid associated with AD in 1984 
[30]. Aβ was reported as the main component of polymorphism of 
meningeal vascular deposits in Down syndrome, and it was found to be 
the same as the core sequence of amyloid plaque in AD. Aβ peptides are 
composed of 38–53 amino acids [31]. Aβ42 is the most toxic, inducing 
behavioral deficits, aged-dependent learning defects, and extensive 
neurodegeneration. The commonly structural composition of Aβ42 
consists of four parts: a C-terminal hydrophobic core, a central hydro­
philic region, a central hydrophobic core (CHC), and an N-terminal 
hydrophilic region (Fig. 2) [32]. 
2.2.1. Aβ monomers 
Aβ monomers self-assemble into different morphologies, including 
oligomers, pre-fibrils and fibrils. Additionally, oligomers are soluble so 
as to spread throughout the brain while fibrils are insoluble which may 
further aggregate into amyloid plaques [26]. The results from solid-state 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurement showed that the 
mature fibrils have a highly ordered and more rigid structure than 
monomers and oligomeric forms of Aβ [33,34]. Furthermore, the 
inhibitory effect of oligomers on neuronal viability is 10 folds of pre- 
fibrils and 40 folds of monomers. Notably, the toxicity-inducing effect 
of oligomer Aβ42 is more severe than that of other types [35]. Infrared 
spectroscopy has demonstrated that the secondary structure of Aβ con­
sists of a β-turn and two anti-parallel β-sheets. In addition, hydrophobic 
effects are necessary for the formation of aggregates, which results in 
intermolecular and intramolecular interactions between the hydropho­
bic portions of the Aβ region [36]. The hydrophobic center of amyloid 
peptides is known as Aβ16-35. Under specific conditions, Aβ changes its 
conformation from α-helical monomeric or random coil form to haz­
ardous beta-sheet oligomers and highly aggregated fibrils. Aβ25-35 is an 
11-mer peptide fragment, the shortest Aβ fragment that retains relevant 
physiological properties [37,38]. Furthermore, this peptide represents 
the distinct functional domains of full-length Aβ, including those 
responsible for amyloid protein production and corresponding cyto­
toxicity [39]. 
2.2.2. Aβ oligomers 
Oligomeric Aβ aggregated by monomers are soluble and in­
termediates in the generation of fibrils. Unlike monomers and proto­
fibrils, about the oligomeric form of Aβ, little is known because the 
assembly process of amyloid is an equilibrium reaction, and the oligo­
mers are intermediates during the reaction. Thus, it is difficult to retain 
the reaction intermediate in a relatively stable state. Aβ monomers form 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
3
various types of oligomers (dimers, tetramers, hexamers, dodecamers) 
from low to high molecular weight through a highly ordered assembly 
process. Depending on the quantity of aggregated monomers, oligomers 
can be classified, where 2–4 mers represent low-n oligomers; 12–48 
mers represents high-n oligomers; and infinite large bodies represents 
megamers. Oligomers can also be classified according to their shape: 
spherical, prefibrillar, and annular [40]. Aβ42 synthesis at physiological 
concentration (1–20 nM) readily forms oligomeric structures and the 
rate of oligomer formation is linearly related to temperature. The for­
mation of Aβ42 oligomers at physiological concentration is a reproduc­
ible process that can be kinetically analyzed and inhibited. The structure 
of oligomers and dimers were detected by Scanning tunneling micro­
scopy (STM) during this process (width of oligomers; 3–4 mm). It is 
believed that oligomer formation occurs as a result of the linear asso­
ciation of monomers since the oligomers are created by the end-to-end 
binding of polypeptide chains with the oligomer and monomer axes at 
a 90◦angle. [41]. 
2.2.3. Aβ fibrils 
Two or more monomers can assemble Aβ fibrils via a primary 
nucleation named fibril-independent pathway or secondary nucleation 
called fibril-dependent mechanism. The aggregation process is typically 
broken down into three steps: lag, growth, and stationary (Fig. 3) [42]. 
Amyloid fibrils have a layered structure, where protofilaments 
measuring approximately one micrometer in length and several nano­
meters in breadth are laterally bound together. The beta strands in each 
protofilament are stacked perpendicular to the fibrils’ long axis using a 
web of hydrogen bonds to form a cross-beta structure. [43]. The study of 
the filamentous protein component of amyloid tissue using X-ray 
diffraction led to the initial proposal of this structure. Using solid-state 
NMR spectroscopy to determine the conformation and intermolecular 
arrangement of Aβ fibrils has many advantages [44]. Besides, it has 
achieved many excellent results. The full-length Aβ contains the shortest 
fibril-forming component, Aβ16-22 which is an important model for 
studying amyloid fibril formation. The Aβ16-22 fibrils’ β-sheet structure 
was discovered through solid-state NMR measurement, indicating that 
the structure of fibrils at the molecular level is similar to that of the 
peptide [45]. 
2.3. The physiological function of Aβ 
Aβ is an essential pathological marker of AD, researchers have 
mainly paid attention on the toxic effects of Aβ, while ignoring its 
functional role as a physiologically present peptide. Aβ is a physiological 
peptide produced via APP hydrolysis. Aβ is considered as pathological 
product only when the Aβ concentration reaches a high level. Aβ at 
Fig. 1. Schematic of APP processing in the non-amyloidogenic and amyloidogenic pattern for Aβ production. Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [26]. 
Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 
Fig. 2. The primary structure of Aβ42. Red, blue, black, and green represent acidic, basic, hydrophobic, and polar residues, respectively. Figure adapted with 
permission from Ref. [32]. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
4
physiological concentration is crucial for normal neurophysiological 
activity [46]. Aβ at physiological concentration enhances the survival 
and plasticity of neurons and synapses and improves overall neural 
network function [47]. APP knocked-out (KO) mice have deficits in 
cognitive function and synaptic plasticity, indicating that Aβ can 
maintain synaptic and neuronal function. This defect may also be related 
to synaptic function and abnormal neuronal morphology in the hippo­
campus [48]. Aβ42 (synthetic monomer of Aβ) promotes neuronal sur­
vival under nutrient deprivation and protects mature neurons from 
excitotoxic death. Therefore, the pathological aggregation of Aβ42 may 
induce neurodegeneration by depriving the monomers of their protec­
tive activity [49]. Notably, Aβ also acts as an excellent antioxidant. 
Nakamura et al. found that three residues of Aβ42 (his6, his13, and his14) 
be able to regulate the redox activity of transition metals detected in 
amyloid plaques [50]. 
2.4. The role of Aβ in AD 
Aβ in a normal physiological state has a positive situational effect. 
However, Aβ can gradually cause diseases once it aggregates and mu­
tates. Earlier studies showed that synthetic Aβ fragments are lethal to 
mature neurons at greater concentrations but nutritious to hippocampus 
undifferentiated neurons at lower ones, exhibiting a bidirectional dos­
e–response [51]. However, experimental results of human cerebral 
cortex cell culture have shown that Aβ can disrupt the stability of 
neuronal calcium regulation and make neurons more susceptible to the 
influence of external calcium level environment changes. Therefore, Aβ 
can destroy the calcium homeostasis of neurons and make neurons more 
vulnerable to environment damage [52]. Amyloid protofibrils induce 
inflammatory processes by activating microglia [53]. Meanwhile, 
compared with other forms of Aβ, amyloid protofibrils can effectively 
induce tumor necrosis factor production in vitro. In addition, SH-SY5Y 
cells exposed to amyloid protofibrils induce more severe oxidative 
stress and produce a higher level of ROS and membrane lipid 
peroxidation [54]. Abnormal oxidative stress affects the normal physi­
ological activities of cell membrane, produces abnormal immune re­
sponses via microglia activation, reduces the number of synapses, and 
leads to synaptic dysfunction and neuronal death [26,55]. Furthermore, 
Aβ acts a pivotal part in autophagic system. Fan et al. evaluated the cell 
ability of HT22 cells and confirmed that autophagy in the PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR/p70S6K pathway was induced by Aβ25-35.[56]. Several recent 
researches have shown that Aβ oligomers, the most toxic aggregates, 
may cause the occurrence and progression of diseases [42,57,58]. 
Furthermore, the use of oligomeric monoclonal antibodies (soluble 
oligomers) to block binding to epitopes prevent hyperphosphorylation, 
indicating 
that 
soluble 
oligomers 
induce 
neuronal 
hyper­
phosphorylation [59]. In memory-related brain regions, soluble oligo­
mers isolated from AD patients’ brains can reduce the number of 
synaptic, enhance long-term synaptic depression and inhibit long-term 
potentiation [60]. 
3. Various techniques for monitoring Aβ 
Several clinical studies have suggested that AD has a long incubation 
period. Abnormal cognitive and behavioral activities indicate the 
accumulation of pathological markers in the brain. A study showed that 
plaque deposits occurred at least 15 years before dementia symptoms 
appeared [61] and the disease has developed to the middle or late stage. 
Therefore, early diagnosis and timely analysis of the condition are 
crucial for assessing the severity of the disease and providing appro­
priate treatment [62]. The detection and symptomatic treatment based 
on the corresponding biomarkers at the very beginning of the disease 
enable to greatly reduce the number of severely ill patients. This also 
prevents irreversible functional damage and decreases the burden on the 
family and society. Several detection methods for diagnosing Aβ, such as 
PET [63], MS [64], MRI [65] with high diagnostic accuracy and reso­
lution, have been developed and continuously improved. Multimodal 
imaging technologies [66] and biosensors based on electrochemistry 
and fluorescence [67] have also been developed due to new techno­
logical changes. The existing tools and technologies for Aβ detection are 
summarized below. In addition, their advantages and challenges in their 
utilization and some aspects that can be improved have been mentioned 
as well. 
3.1. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
MRI is achieved by applying radio frequency pulses to stimulate 
hydrogen protons in the human body in a static magnetic field. MRI has 
been widely used to diagnose various systems in the whole body, where 
the brain exhibits perfect effects. MRI can effectively detect relevant 
pathological changes in the AD patients’ brain. MRI has higher spatial 
resolution and is non-invasive, and thus it is accepted by most elderly 
people. MRI is widely recommended for structural imaging to reveal 
brain atrophy and abnormalities of other tissues (Fig. 4a) [68]. 
Compared with controls, the entorhinal cortex and the volumes of hip­
pocampus are decreased by 26%–27% and 38%–40%, under MRI 
structural imaging [69]. However, structural imaging alone cannot meet 
the needs of clinical diagnosis. As a result, more advanced technologies 
have been developed. For instance, the density and distribution of Aβ 
plaques at the lesion site can be observed using MRI to determine the 
disease stage and accurately assess the course of the disease [70]. The 
development of the intracerebral plaque in a transgenic mice (Tg2576) 
model was proved using in vivo magnetic resonance microscopy 
(microMRI) and showed that T (2)-weighted imaging clearly detect Aβ 
plaques in the regions of cortical and hippocampus in transgenic mice 
(the area, number, size of the plaques significantly increased with age) 
[65]. Intralesional Aβ accumulation and concomitant iron deposition 
can be observed using quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) mag­
netic resonance imaging after validating that Aβ protein is diamagnetic 
in AD model mice [71]. However, the application of MRI imaging has 
Fig. 3. Schematic of the aggregation process of Aβ. Figure adapted with 
permission from Ref. [42]. Copyright 2020 Multidisciplinary Digital Publish­
ing Institute. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
5
some challenges. First, the current imaging technology is time- 
consuming, and the safety of contrast agents in the body is also un­
known [70]. Second, it is expensive for some patients. Third, it is not 
sensitive enough to detect the early stage of AD depending on brain 
parenchymal change. Therefore, further research is needed to improve 
the sensitivity of MRI imaging to Aβ and its impact on the human body. 
3.2. Positron emission computed tomography (PET) 
Unlike MRI, PET can accurately diagnose early AD lesions. PET 
locate the lesion when the structural morphology of lesion area has not 
displayed abnormalities. For PET, certain substances crucial for meta­
bolic activities of life are injected into the human body, such as protein, 
nucleic acid, glucose, etc., marked with short-live radionuclides (such as 
11C,18F). As a result, the life metabolism can be explained by the 
congregation of the substance metabolism, thus achieving the diagnosis. 
Over the past 20 years, there has been a tremendous increase in the 
development of synaptic markers in neuroinflammation, specialized 
tracers for pathogenic proteins, and neurodegenerative disorders [72]. A 
PET ligand 124I-RmAb158-scFv8D3 which was antibody-based and 
targeting nonfibrillar Aβ, capable of treating the AD mouse model, 
significantly changed the intracerebral Aβ levels. Therefore, this ligand 
is permitted to treat soluble aggregates and likely to be a potential 
candidate for AD therapy (Fig. 4b) [73]. F18-Labeled PET is allowed to 
determine the risk that patients with amnestic moderate cognitive 
impairment will experience during clinical progression, and PET results 
were consistent with other biomarkers [74]. A novel selective PET tracer 
F18-FIBT under clinical researches especially bind to Aβ with excellent 
affinity for specific imaging [75]. PET imaging in Aβ detection enhances 
early and differential diagnosis of AD, providing a personalized and 
timely diagnosis. However, PET has some challenges. First, there is no 
consensus on quantifying the PET scan data. Second, the most widely 
used radiotracers only target typical AD, with only a few targeting 
atypical AD, thus resulting in an incomplete understanding of the whole 
disease. Third, although studies have shown that radionuclides are less 
abundant and stay in the body for a short period, extensive study should 
confirm the long-term impact of radionuclides on other aspects of bodily 
functions to avoid irreversible consequences. 
Fig. 4. a T2-weighted MRI imaging of an AD patient 
compared with healthy control and patient with MCI 
(mild cognitive impairment). Figure adapted with 
permission from Ref. [68]. Copyright 2019 Springer 
Nature. b Ex vivo 11C-PiB retention in postmortem 
brain tissue. Aβ42-stained brain tissue of 18 months 
old ArcSwe mouse and 10 months old AppNL-G-F 
mouse and corresponding 11C-PiB autoradiography 
images after radioligand injection at 40 min. Overlay 
represents the overlap of areas with plentiful Aβ pla­
que 
pathology 
and 
radioligand 
binding. 
Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [73]. 
Copyright 2022 Society of Nuclear Medicine. c 
Multivariate image analysis of MALDI-IMS data 
revealed accumulations of sphingolipids within the 
cortex and hippocampus of transgenic mouse brain. 
The bright field image depicts the dorsolateral part of 
a coronal section used for IMS analysis. The middle 
image represents the segmentation map obtained 
from the multivariate image analysis. The corre­
sponding single ion image is displayed on the right. 
scale bar = 0.5 mm. Figure adapted with permission 
from Ref. [78]. Copyright 2017 American Chemical 
Society.   
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
6
3.3. Mass spectrometry (MS) 
Compared with MRI and PET, MS is more refined and facilitates to 
develop new AD biomarkers. It is the preferred technology for protein 
and peptide identification, quantification, and characterization [76]. 
For detection utilizing electric and magnetic fields, MS separates moving 
ions based on the ratios of their mass-to-charge. The scope of research 
has expanded, encompassing new metabolomic and lipidomic in­
vestigations and early blood and cerebrospinal fluid biomarker identi­
fication of AD pathogenesis. MS treat AD by identifying and removing 
the molecules that form non-covalent complexes with Aβ peptides from 
the affected parts. MS was developed to assess the mechanism under­
lying the molecules and Aβ peptides and evaluate whether they enhance 
or block the fibrosis process. MS can be applied to assess the ability to 
reduce Aβ toxicity in vivo or in vitro and their anti-aggregation properties 
of small molecules and evaluate low molecular weight compounds that 
may reduce Aβ peptide oligomerization and toxicity [77]. Sphingolipids 
derived from neuronal membrane play a key role in physiological pro­
cesses, including signal transduction, aging. and cell recognition. Aβ 
fibrillation and impaired synaptic function may cause the dysregulation 
of sphingolipid metabolism. MS-based matrix-assisted laser desorption/ 
ionization (MALDI) imaging of the transgenic AD mice ’s brain tissue is 
an excellent tool to explore and elucidate the variations in the sphin­
golipid and its microenvironment of individual Aβ deposits (Fig. 4c) 
[78]. In addition, some researchers have shown that MS can be used to 
accurately analyze the diversity of Aβ, thus crucial for discovering new 
early biomarkers and laying a solid foundation for the early diagnosis of 
diseases [79]. MS also serves as a huge information platform. The LC- 
MS/MS platform screen several biomarkers to elucidate alternations in 
AD metabolic pathways, thus providing possible novel diagnosis tools 
[64]. MS requires invasive access to ex vivo samples, especially cere­
brospinal fluid obtained through a lumbar puncture. However, the 
lumbar puncture is a minimally invasive procedure that most patients 
reject. Moreover, the unnormalized optimal conditions for samples 
collection, processing, purification, and analysis should be further 
assessed. 
In summary, 1) MRI has the advantages of structured imaging, high 
resolution, and non-invasiveness. However, MRI requires a long scan­
ning time, and for this reason, most patients reject it. Besides, MRI un­
able to diagnose the initial stage of the disease. 2) PET provides a better 
prognosis for AD treatment and identifies the early stage of AD. 
Nevertheless, the negative effects of the radioactive tracer on the human 
body are still unknown. 3) MS can accurately identify AD pathological 
markers and provide a colossal data information platform to improve the 
diagnosis accuracy further. Nonetheless, the clinical application of MS is 
restricted by the invasive collection of in vitro samples, the high oper­
ating requirements of professionals, and expensive equipment. 
3.4. Novel biosensors 
Biosensors can also be used for detecting Aβ. Novel biosensors, 
including electrochemical sensors, surface plasmon resonance sensors 
(SPRs), and fluorescent sensors, due to the high sensitivity, rapid- 
response, simplicity and convenient, and low cost, have been exten­
sively used as the pathodiagnostic tools for AD [67]. A novel ratiometric 
electrochemical biosensor based on 2,2′-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazo­
line-6-sulphonate) (ABTS) simultaneously enhance the sensitivity, 
detection accuracy and measure the concentrations of Cu2+ and Aβ42 in 
hippocampus and plasma of AD rats [80], which are critical in the AD 
pathogenesis. Elbassal et al. found that the intensity of SPR absorption 
band of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) was sensitive to the amount of Aβ40 
and Aβ40 oligomers. Therefore, SPR can be used to detect and semi- 
quantify Aβ40, and also for the mechanism study of fibril formation 
[81]. BODIPY dyes are one of the most adaptable small-molecule fluo­
rophores which can be used as sensors or monitor the structural changes 
of different Aβ aggregates. BODIPY dyes non-covalently bond to Aβ 
protofibrils and oligomers. The aggregation and conformational changes 
of Aβ can be investigated through the specific enhancement of fluores­
cence intensity after binding (Fig. 5) [82]. However, these biosensors 
have some drawbacks, including low resolution, inadequate accuracy, 
and more sample size requirements. Therefore, practical and easy-to-use 
testing instruments are still needed. 
3.5. Nanomaterial relative detective methods 
Nanotechnology has significantly promoted medical development. 
Therefore, nanotechnology has been used for disease diagnosis, pre­
vention, and treatment via more advanced drug delivery systems and 
early detection and diagnosis technologies. Nanomaterials have been 
employed extensively in the medical field for several years. Nano­
materials are materials with at least one dimension in the 3D space at the 
nanometer scale (1–100 nm), including inorganic nanoparticles, organic 
nanoparticles, polymeric nanoparticles, liposome particles, nanofibers, 
etc. Many studies have focused on nanomaterials because of their 
excellent stability, biocompatibility, biodegradability, and low toxicity 
[83]. Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPION) combined 
with MRI were the first nanomaterials to diagnose AD. This type of 
material exhibits higher targeting properties because it can recognize 
relevant biomarkers by modifying the surface of nanomaterial with 
highly specific antibodies [84]. 
3.5.1. Carbon-based nanomaterials for Aβ detection 
Carbon nanomaterials are widely used for the detection function. For 
example, carbon-based nanomaterials have been extensively applied in 
biomedical fields, such as tumor therapy, biosensors, contrast agent and 
cell imaging because of their excellent physicochemical properties. 1D 
carbon nanotubes, zero-dimensional fullerenes (C60), and 2D graphene 
are of the most common carbon nanomaterials [85]. Furthermore, most 
commonly used among these categories are the graphene quantum dots 
(GQDs). Aβ monomer concentration can be detected using the fluores­
cence properties of GQDs. [86]. Carbon nanomaterials can also be 
combined with sensors to produce excellent effects. Recent studies have 
developed sensors that applied to detect the concentration of oligomers. 
This sensor is based on thionine (Th)-functionalized 3D nanomaterial of 
DNA aptamer immobilized by multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) 
and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) (Fig. 6). The added Th forms a π-π 
conjugated structure with the other two substances, thus enhances the 
electron transfer and stability. This sensor monitor the fluctuation of 
oligomer concentration based on different pulse voltammetry current 
responses, presenting a wide linear detection range. This sensor also 
exhibits remarkable stability and selectivity and thus has great potential 
in diagnostics [87]. However, products with a single function cannot 
meet the current needs. As a result, several materials with multiple 
functions have been produced due to the development of science and 
technology. For instance, Gao et al. developed a multifunctional 
nitrogen-doped carbonized polymer dot (CPD) targeting Aβ that could 
label Aβ fibrils through their interaction and emit enhanced red fluo­
rescence after binding for detection purposes. They also showed that 
CPD could image amyloid beta peptide in AD model transgenic C. elegans 
CL2006 in vivo. Therefore, CPD can be used for Aβ targeting therapy and 
diagnosis [88]. Furthermore, the combination of nanomaterials and 
sensors may provide excellent results. 
3.5.2. Metal-based nanomaterials for Aβ detection 
Metal-based nanomaterials are also commonly used for Aβ detection. 
Metal nanomaterials are used in developing diagnostic Aβ technology 
because of their excellent physicochemical properties and specific sur­
face area. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) are promising detection platforms 
due to their specific interaction with Aβ [89]. Antibodies and aptamers 
are widely used to design and develop probes on biosensors because of 
their high selectivity and specific to target protein. For example, Qiu et 
al. used antibodies and aptamers to design detection system of a dual- 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
7
probe sensor to target and recognize Aβ (Fig. 7). Briefly, the gold urchin 
attached the antibodies and aptamers. Nanohorn was connected to the 
electrode surface with amine linkers. Finally, the gold (Au) urchin with 
double probes was connected to the nanohorn to complete the assembly 
process. This dual-probe detection system could greatly reduce detec­
tion limits due to the superimposed dual detection effect, thus detecting 
lower levels of Aβ oligomers. Non-specific antibodies or other interfering 
proteins have also been used to assess the specificity of detecting Aβ 
oligomers (AβO)[90]. Pappalardo et al. innovatively utilized magnetic 
nanoparticles (MNP) as the core and amphiphilic cyclodextrin (CD) as 
the shell, with the surface adsorption of the Aβ recognition sequence 
KLVFF to synthesize a composite nanomagnet (MNP@SC16OH/Ada- 
scPep). The research results demonstrated that MNP@SC16OH/Ada- 
scPep with the addition of targeting recognition sequence, exhibited a 
higher capability for the specific recognition of Aβ1-42 compared to the 
nanomagnets without it.[91] Besides metal ion nanoparticles, a metal 
organic framework (MOFs) can also be used to detect Aβ. When metal 
ions or clusters and organic ligands self-assemble into these inorga­
nic–organic hybrid materials, intramolecular gaps are created, have 
been used in different fields, such as drug delivery and biosensing, due to 
their multifunctionality, pore size, and crystal morphology [92]. 
Multifunctional MOFs based on ceria nanoparticles (CeONPs) serve as a 
fluorescence-sensing multifunctional nanoplatform for intracellular 
imaging of AβO [93]. Ren et al. recently described a homogeneous turn- 
on fluorometric aptamer-sensor based on luminescent MOFs with 
aptamer-modified AuNPs (L-MOF/Apt-Au) as a tracking agent and 
target recycling enzyme-aided signal amplification. Because acceptor 
Apt-Au quenched the donor L-MOFs fluorescence properties, the 
tracking agent was unable to emit fluorescence when excited by fluo­
rescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). However, the “off” signal of 
the tracer could “turn on” after tracking agent solution was added to the 
AβOs, where Apt-Au was released after it preferentially bound to AβOs. 
Importantly, adding the supernatant with the enzyme (Rec Jf exonu­
clease) improve sensitivity in target recycling enzyme-acid signal 
amplification. This synthetic material can be applied in clinical 
diagnosis effectively [94]. 
3.6. Other methods (colorimetry /STM/ CE) 
Other diagnostic techniques, including colorimetry, Scanning 
tunneling microscopy (STM), and capillary electrophoresis (CE) are 
discussed in this subsection. Colorimetry involves evaluating the reac­
tion progress via visual observation of the color change in the solution. It 
is a relatively simple and low-cost technique. The colorimetric sensing 
system used to detect the Aβ40 aggregation is based on AuNPs with Cu2+
and changes the color from red to blue when the aggregation occurs 
[95]. STM can be used in multiplexed detection systems in protein chips 
because the separation between the sample and the scanning tip affects 
how sensitive it is. The pulses demonstrate a peak-like periodogram 
between the STM tip and the complex, and thus Aβ40 concentration can 
be analyzed in the periodogram of the peak frequency [96]. CE separates 
proteins based on their conformation and size through a uniform electric 
field (mainly molecular weight). The protein aggregation process of 
amyloid peptide is frequently studied using CE [97]. SEC purification 
and fresh dissolution via dilution are the two common methods of CE 
used to prepare oligomers. A study compared the effects of these 
methods on early aggregate formation via UV-CE, and found that initial 
sample preparation can significantly impact the early aggregation stage. 
The SEC-separated samples formed oligomers about 23 h earlier than the 
freshly-lysed samples [98]. However, further research is needed to 
support the application of the above techniques. 
4. Approaches for inhibiting Aβ aggregation 
Aβ is a crucial pathological marker of AD and a hot target therapy 
substance, and the aggregated form of Aβ is more toxic may damage cells 
and brain tissues in human body. Therefore, methods for inhibiting Aβ 
aggregation are needed. The current therapeutic methods for inhibiting 
Aβ aggregation are highlighted below. 
Fig. 5. a Synthesis route of BODIPY 18, b ThT and BODIPY 18-emission intensities in the presence of different types of Aβ42 selectivity (left) and emission 
enhancement (right) towards certain Aβ formation. Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [82]. Copyright 2020 Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
8
4.1. Nanomaterials for inhibiting Aβ aggregation 
As a hot emerging technology in pharmacy and medicine, Nano­
technology is crucial for AD treatment. Nanotechnology enhances in­
teractions at the molecular level by employing material with minimal 
functional organization at the nanoscale (1–100 nm) [99], thus 
achieving therapeutic purposes by processing nanoparticles and inte­
grating some corresponding therapeutic molecules. There are various 
types of nanoparticles (NPs), including natural polymers (poly­
saccharides and proteins), synthetic polymers (PEG and PLGA), metal 
ions (gold (Au), cerium (Ce), gadolinium (Ga)), carbon derivatives 
(fullerenes, graphene, carbon fiber), liposomes etc. [100]. NPs can 
inhibit Aβ aggregation [101], target relative AD biomarkers [102], 
reduce the death of neurons [103], and elevate the penetration effi­
ciency of drugs [100,104] due to their diverse chemical properties and 
the ease of chemical modification to obtain desired characteristics. 
Various types of NPs can be used to inhibit Aβ aggregation (Table 1). 
4.1.1. Carbon-derived nanomaterials 
Fullerenes (C60), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon nanospheres, 
graphene, carbon dots and other carbon-derived nanomaterials, are 
extensively used in the biomedical field due to their excellent physico­
chemical characteristics [92]. Carbon nanomaterials can interfere with 
the aggregation of the amyloidogenic process, thus mitigating the ag­
gregation of toxic substances. However, various carbon nanomaterials 
have different interference effects depending on the interaction between 
the materials and the peptides [105,106]. 
4.1.1.1. Fullerenes. Fullerenes are hollow molecules containing carbon, 
with spherical, ellipsoid, cylindrical or tubular shapes. They are struc­
turally convex polyhedral with pentagonal and hexagonal faces. C60 
and its derivatives are the most studied since C60 is the relatively most 
readily available fullerene, easiest to purify and cheapest. Fullerenes 
(C60) and its derivatives can inhibit the fibrillation of Aβ peptides 
[107–109], mainly due to the aromatic-stacking and hydrophobic in­
teractions [110]. Although C60 can inhibit Aβ aggregation, its applica­
tion is limited by its low solubility in water. Liu et al. examined the 
water-soluble C60(OH)6/C60(OH)12 (C60 with 6/12 hydroxyl groups) 
and C60 with Aβ42 pre-fibrils using multiple molecular dynamics 
simulation and demonstrated that C60(OH)6/C60(OH)12 exhibited a 
significant inhibiting effect. This could be explained by the weakening of 
the π-stacking interaction when C60 contains more hydroxyls, thus 
forming hydrogen bonds with protein backbones [111]. Besides, studies 
have shown that multiple water-soluble fullerene derivatives signifi­
cantly inhibit fibrillation. Notably, the water-soluble fullerene de­
rivatives have extremely low cytotoxicity and thus using for AD 
Fig. 6. The frame diagram of the application of Th-rGO-MWCNTs. a The synthesis procedure of Th-rGO-MWCNTs nanomaterials. b Schematic of an aptasensor-based 
AβO detection. (1) Th-rGO-MWCNTs nanocomposite-modified GCE (glassy carbon electrode); (2) carboxyl groups of MWCNTs activated by EDC/NHS; (3) Immo­
bilized aptamers-inhibited non-specific sites and Bovine serum albumin (BSA); (4) AβO detection. Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [87]. Copyright 
2021 Elsevier. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
9
treatment [112]. 
C60 has a unique dual function. First, under visible light or UV, it 
powerfully generates reactive oxygen species (ROS), while in the dark it 
scavenges ROS. In one study, a multi-therapy of AD’s near-infrared 
switchable nanoplatform was designed through conjugation of UCNP 
(upconversion nanoparticles) and KLVFF which is Aβ-target peptide 
(UCNP@C60-pep) (Fig. 8). Aβ photooxygenation is caused by ROS 
production by UCNP@C60-pep, thus hindering Aβ aggregation and 
alleviating consecutive cytotoxicity under near-infrared (NIR) light. 
Second, C60 has protective effects against excessive oxidative stress in 
the dark [113]. 
4.1.1.2. Carbon nanotubes. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were first foun­
ded in 1991. CNTs are cylindrical macromolecules made of hybridized 
carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal pattern. CNTs are classified into 
multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) which has multiple concen­
tric tubes and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) with seamless 
hollow nanoscale tube [114]. The diameter and length of SWCNTs is 
0.4–2 nm and 0.2–5 μm, respectively. The diameter of MWCNTs is 
2–100 nm determined by the number of layers (each layer is separated 
by approximately 0.34 nm) [115]. CNTs are widely used in biosensing, 
bioimaging, drug delivery, and other scientific fields because of their 
special properties, such as high flexibility, high performance, low cost 
and ease of being functionalized via various chemical groups through 
non-covalent and covalent binding [116,117]. Zhang et al. used mo­
lecular dynamics (MD) to assess the effect of monomeric Aβ42 peptide 
conformational evolution with CNTs and found that the absorption of 
peptides on the surface of CNTs increased with increasing curvature of 
CNTs. The absorption reduced the ratio of β-sheet and content of α-helix, 
thus affecting the amyloid peptides self-assembly [118]. Although 
SWCNTs inhibit amyloid fibrils formation, its application is limited by 
the low dispersibility in solution [119]. Thioflavin (ThT) staining and 
atomic force microscopy (AFM) results have also shown that hydroxyl­
ated SWCNTs (SWCNT-OH) inhibit Aβ42 fibrosis and decompose fibrils 
in a manner dose-dependently. Additionally, the effect of SWCNT-OH 
against Aβ42 aggregation mainly depends on the ratio of hydroxyl 
groups. Notably, hydroxylated SWCNTs has a cytoprotective effect 
against Aβ42 fibrillation-induced cytotoxicity [120]. 
4.1.1.3. Graphene oxide. Graphene oxide (GO) exhibits more active 
properties after increasing functional groups that contain oxygen. GO is 
a hydrophilic substance frequently used for Aβ treatment due to its su­
perior dispersibility in water. GO restricts Aβ aggregation by decreasing 
the propensity β-strand in Aβ [121]. However, GO has some drawbacks. 
First, GO leads to the loss of a significant amount of surface area due to 
the contact between adjacent flakes, thus greatly reducing adsorption 
capacity. However, a nanocomposite with iron oxide and graphene 
oxide (GOIO) significantly inhibits Aβ aggregation. Transmission elec­
tron microscopy (TEM) and ThT fluorescence assay have shown that 
GOIO effectively inhibited Aβ aggregation compared with GO. In addi­
tion, the cell viability assay has also demonstrated that GOIO effectively 
reduced Aβ42-induced cytotoxicity [122]. Some scientists have also 
investigated GO from functional aspect. For example, Fang et al. 
analyzed the data from the test of the novel object recognition and 
Morris water navigation task. They found that 5xFAD mouse model’s 
learning and memory impairment were ameliorated. Furthermore, GO 
regulated the secretion of autophagy-related proteins, reduced abnor­
mally aggregated proteins and improved the aberrant accumulation of 
amyloid [123]. 
4.1.1.4. Carbon dots. Carbon dots (CDs) are generally as known as 
carbon quantum dots (CQDs). In 2004, Xu et al. accidentally discovered 
CQDs emitting bright fluorescence by arc discharge in the preparation of 
SWCNTs [124]. CQDs are a new sort of fluorescent nanocarbon material 
because they are made of distributed, tiny, spherical carbon particles 
that are below 10 nm in size. CQDs possess several advantages, including 
excellent water solubility, optical characteristics, environmental 
friendliness, low toxicity, and raw material sources; therefore, they have 
great application prospects in medical imaging and biosensing. Chung et 
al. reported on carbon dots that target Aβ and respond to red light could 
be used as a nanomodulator powered on light to spatiotemporally 
decrease harmful Aβ aggregation both in vitro and in vivo (Fig. 9). In their 
study, they first combined red-light-absorbable CDs (RCDs) with Aβ- 
binding DNA through an EDC/NHS coupling reaction, then confirmed 
the imperceptible change after chemical modification using FTIR spec­
troscopy. Subsequently, they again assessed the targeting ability of the 
aptamer-functionalized carbon dots (Apta@CDs) via dot-blot assay. 
Furthermore, they examined the attenuated ability and Aβ aggregation 
inhibition based on MTT assay and Thioflavin S (ThS) dye. According to 
their results, Apta@CDs exhibited an extensive targeting ability toward 
Fig. 7. Schematic of AβO detection on a dielectrode modified by nanohorn. Three different approaches of AβO determination were comparative with the probes of 
(a) Au-urchin antibody; (b) Au-urchin antibody-aptamer; and (c) dual probe of antibody and aptamer on Au urchin. Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [90]. 
Copyright 2021 Dove Medical Press. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
10
Aβ42 and irreversibly denatured Aβ42 by red LED irradiation to hinder 
the formation of amyloid peptides, thereby extenuating Aβ-associated 
cytotoxicity [125]. Experiments on cell viability demonstrated that 
CQDs might considerably mitigate the neuro toxicity induced by Aβ 
species[126]. Several studies have shown that CDs as a kind of multi­
functional nanoparticles, display unprecedented advantages in the drug 
delivery process of central nervous system diseases, especially AD 
[127–129]. Combining CQDs with other important molecules or chem­
ical groups may yield unexpected surprises. Yan et al. proposed the dual- 
targeted nanomaterial named gCDs-E against two potential pathogenic 
agents in AD, infection from Candida albicans and Aβ aggregation. Ac­
cording to the results, gCDs-E suppressed the misfolding and dis­
aggregated fibrillation of Aβ, besides it inhibited the inflammation 
caused by Candida albicans to rescue memory loss [130]. 
Carbon derived nanomaterials possess excellent thermal, mechani­
cal, optical properties; thus, are crucial in the treatment of Aβ. However, 
the potential toxicity of carbon-based nanomaterials and the clearance 
pathways in vivo are still unknown. The toxicity depends on the type of 
Table 1 
Information of some nanomaterials for inhibiting Aβ aggregation.  
Categories 
Materials 
Experimental animal models 
Target 
Function 
Reference 
Carbon derived 
nanomaterials 
UCNP@C60-pep 
Caenorhabditis elegans 
CL2006 
Aβ 
The abilities of ROS-generating and ROS- 
quenching; 
Beneficial for decreasing Aβ-induced 
neurotoxicity. 
[113] 
graphene oxide and iron oxide 
(GOIO) 
SH-SY5Y neuroblast-like cells 
Aβ42 fibrils 
Reduced cytotoxicity of Aβ42 on neuroblastoma 
cells; 
Efficiently interacts and bind with the Aβ42 
peptides to inhibit their aggregation. 
[122] 
CUR-Fe3O4@CDs 
rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) 
cell line 
Aβ42 fibrils 
Protection of PC12 Cells from the toxicity of Aβ42 
fibrils; 
Reduce the generation of ROS induced by Aβ42 
fibrils; 
Strong affinity toward Aβ and effectively inhibit 
extracellular Aβ fibrillation. 
[175] 
Polymer 
nanoparticles 
Danggui-Shaoyao-San (DSS) 
APP/PS1 
Aβ42 
Ameliorates the cognitive disorders; 
Alleviates the neuronal degeneration; 
Mitigates the amyloidosis in the brain of APP/PS1 
mice. 
[138] 
Phytol-PLGA NPs 
Caenorhabditis elegans models 
(CL2006, CL4176) 
Aβ 
Increase the lifespan, chemotaxis behavior and 
decrease Aβ deposition and ROS production; 
Downregulated the expression of AD associated 
genes viz Aβ. 
[142] 
PLGA-PEG-Fuc 
Aβ oligomers-treated AD mice; 
Institute of Cancer 
Research (ICR) mice 
Aβ fibrils and 
oligomers 
Inhibition of Aβ aggregation; 
Prevention of Aβ oligomers-induced neurotoxicity, 
oxidative stress and neuroinflammation; 
Improvement of cognitive performance. 
[141] 
Metallic 
nanoparticles 
βCas AuNPs 
zebrafish larvae; 
SHSY-5Ycells 
Aβ 42 
Reduction of Aβ42-induced cytotoxicity. 
[144] 
PtII-PW11 
APP/PS1 
Aβ 42 
Significant protection ability on neurons against 
cytotoxicity induced by Aβ42 aggregation; 
Markable inhibitory effect toward amyloid 
fibrillation. 
Rescues the memory function and learning ability 
efficiently. 
[153] 
POMD-TZ 
Caenorhabditis elegans 
CL2006 worms; 
PC12 
Aβ42 
Inhibit Aβ aggregation, and shut down the 
cytotoxic effects caused by Aβ peptides; 
Cross the BBB and extend the longevity of AD 
transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans CL2006 worms; 
Further developed into an “Aβ-targeting and 
aggregate-sensitive” agent for monitoring the Aβ. 
[154] 
rPOMs@MSNs@copolymer 
PC12 
Aβ fibrils 
High photothermal effect and antioxidant activity; 
Disaggregate Aβ fibrils. 
[155] 
W20/XD4-SPIONs 
APP/PS1 mice; 
SH-SY5Y cells 
Aβ oligomers 
Inhibits Aβ aggregation and cytotoxicity and 
reduced the inflammatory cytokine production in 
vitro; 
Rescues cognitive deficits in AD mice; 
Reduces neuroinflammation in the brains of AD 
mice; 
Rescues synapse loss in the brains of AD mice. 
[157] 
Lipid nanoparticles  
α-bisabolol loaded SLNs (ABS) 
Neuro-2a 
Aβ 25-35 
Protects the Neuro-2a cells from Aβ induced 
neurotoxicity and inhibited Aβ aggregation. 
[162] 
Curcumin-loaded liposomes 
zebrafish embryos 
SH-SY5Y cells 
Aβ 
Internalizes Curcumin by neuroblastoma cells; 
Neuroprotective effect against oxidative stress; 
Exhibits little toxicity to zebrafish embryos. 
[171] 
Multifunctional LUV liposomes 
(mf-LIPs) 
hCMEC/D3 cells 
FVB mice 
Aβ42 peptide 
Inhibit amyloid peptide aggregation; 
Efficiently translocate across the BBB. 
[172] 
AP-BTH-lipid 
hCMEC/D3 cells 
Аβ42 
Inhibiting almost completely the fibrillation of 
Aβ42 and demonstrating a strong BBB penetration 
potential. 
[174] 
RVG29-Functionalized Lipid 
Nanoparticles 
hCMEC/D3 Cell 
Аβ42 
Increase the permeability across the BBB; 
Inhibit amyloid-beta fibrillation. 
[176] 
nanostructured lipid carriers 
loaded Salvia 
hCMEC/D3 Cell 
Aβ 
Significant higher antioxidant capacity. 
[166]  
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
11
material chosen, the route of synthesizing and the drug administration. 
4.1.2. Polymer nanoparticles 
Other NPs that are used to inhibit Aβ aggregation are polymer 
nanoparticles (PNPs), which range between 10 and 1000 nm in size. 
Based on the source of raw materials, the PNPs can be grouped into 
natural or synthetic, while according to packaging form, they can be 
grouped into nanocapsules or nanospheres [131]. Natural polymers 
include polysaccharides, proteins, chitosan and alginates, which have 
essential properties of natural substances. The commonly used synthetic 
polymers are poly D, L-Lactic-co-Glycolic acid (PLGA), poly glycolic acid 
(PGA), poly lactic acid (PLA), which are biodegradable with low 
immunogenicity [132]. Nanocapsules have a bubble-like structure in 
which the drug dissolves in an aqueous core encircled by a polymer 
capsule. Nanospheres are made of polymer matrices where drugs are 
disseminated in matrix pores or adhered on sphere surfaces [133]. PNPs 
has been used to diagnose and treat AD widely attributed to their safety, 
biodegradability, high loading capacity, biocompatibility, and mallea­
bility for surface modification properties [134]. 
Chitosan, a natural linear amino-polysaccharide, easily forms 
nanoparticles by cross-linking or taking advantage of its tendency to 
self-assemble through free amine groups [135]. Jiang et al. reported 
composite NPs formed by chitosan-hyaluronic acid (CH) self-assembly 
with various zeta potentials from −35 to + 38 mV. They found that 
not only negative but also positive CH NPs prevented Aβ from aggre­
gating and the effects grew stronger as surface charge density rose[136]. 
Moreover, chitosan could be applied to prevent and improve various 
symptoms, such as memory loss and cognitive defects [137]. Danggui- 
Shaoyao-San (DSS), whose main components are polysaccharides, has 
been employed as a treatment medication for AD, although the under­
lying mechanisms are still up for debate. Yang et al. investigated how 
DSS affected neuronal degeneration and amyloid aggregation in AD 
models (APP/PS1 mouse model). They randomized the APP/PS1 mice 
into three groups: model group, DSS group, and donepezil group (pos­
itive treatment group). Wild mice were used to be controls. They found 
that DSS alleviated the cognition deficits, ameliorated neuronal damage 
and inhibited amyloidosis as well as Aβ42 deposition. They postulated 
that the related neuronal degeneration was probably due to down- 
regulated receptor for advanced glycation end products and up- 
regulated lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 [138]. 
Apart from natural polymers, synthetic polymers also play a promi­
nent role in AD treatment. A new nanomaterial (PLGA-PEG-B6/Cur), 
which embodies B6 peptide to improve the BBB permeability and PLGA- 
PEG to promote the bioavailability of Cur has been designed. Various in 
vitro assays, including red blood cell lysis, dynamic light scattering 
(DLS), thromboelastography (TEG) analysis and flow cytometry (FCM), 
showed that PLGA-PEG-B6/Cur improved Cur uptake and permeability 
through the BBB. Additionally, according to the Morris water maze test, 
amelioration of spatial memory and learning capability with PLGA-PEG- 
B6/Cur was much better compared to bare Cur. The nanocomposite 
decreased amyloid deposits in the hippocampus, which was indicated by 
Ex vivo assays including western blotting, Bielschowsky silver staining 
and immunostaining [139]. Apart from Cur, fucoxanthin exhibits 
various beneficial biological activities, such as anticancer, anti- 
inflammatory, neuroprotective and antioxidant properties [140]. Yang 
et al. developed negatively charged PLGA-PEG nanoparticles carried 
Fig. 8. UCNP@C60-pep produces ROS under NIR, thus destroying Aβ aggre­
gation and scavenging excessive ROS in the dark, prolonging the lifespan and 
ameliorating Aβ-triggered paralysis of CL2006 worms. Figure adapted with 
permission from Ref. [113]. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. 
Fig. 9. Schematic illustration of Apta@CDs application. a Apta@CDs produce 1O2 to denature Aβ peptides irreversibly and chemically by inhibiting neurotoxic Aβ 
self-assembly effectively under red LED irradiation. b Image of 5xFAD mouse brain treated by Apta@CDs without or with illuminations in exemplary ThS-stained 
coronal sections. The expected Apta@CDs distribution area and a light path through the brain are shown by dashed lines. scale bar: 0.5 mm. Figure adapted 
with permission from Ref. [125]. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
12
fucoxanthin (PLGA-PEG-Fuc) with diameters of about 200 nm exhibiting 
the ability to penetrate the BBB. This nanoparticle increased the uptake 
of neurons as well as microglia and inhibited the amyloid beta fibrils and 
oligomers aggregation, thereby suppressing the oligomer-induced 
neurotoxicity (Fig. 10). Moreover, cognitive impairments were 
improved via injecting PLGA-PEG-Fuc intravenously [141]. The Phytol- 
PLGA NPs have also been found to be effective at suppressing amyloid 
beta peptides aggregation, ROS production and prolonging the survival 
time of transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans-associated AD models (CL2006, 
CL4176). Therefore, these nanoparticles are promising therapeutic op­
tions with neuroprotective efficacies and abilities to ameliorate fibril­
lation. The animal models that had been treated with Phytol-PLGA NPs 
exhibited downregulated protein expressions of Aβ peptides [142]. 
Because of their multifunctional features, such as good biocompati­
bility, biodegradability and low toxicity, polymer nanoparticles are 
attractive options for remission and treatment of AD. However, their 
intrinsic instability and lack of accurate targeting limit their applications 
in AD. Fortunately, the structural amphiphilic designs of block co­
polymers are expected to overcome some of these challenges to enhance 
the applications of polymer nanoparticles. 
4.1.3. Metallic nanoparticles 
Given their similarities in physical and chemical characteristics with 
carbon materials, metallic NPs have the ability to inhibit Aβ aggregation. 
They have an average diameter from 10 to 100 nm and generally be 
made of iron, gold, copper, silver and zinc. Owing to their large surface 
area and beneficial characteristics such as anticancer, antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory properties, among others, metallic NPs are the most 
widely used inorganic nanoparticles [133]. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) 
exhibit superior surface functionalization, biocompatibilities, and opti­
cal properties and are easily fabricated, making them ideal for various 
applications. 
4.1.3.1. Modified AuNPs. It has been indicated that surface-modified 
AuNPs inhibit the aggregation of Aβ and extenuate Aβ species-induced 
cytotoxicity. For instance, Anand et al. constructed an assembly 
(Mimo-AuNPs) with AuNPs core functionalized with a plant-based and 
non-protein amino acid mimosine, exhibiting a variety of biological 
properties, such as antiviral, anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrosis quali­
ties. In Fig. 11, as revealed by the ThT fluorescence and TEM images 
results, Mimo-AuNPs inhibited Aβ42 aggregation. Moreover, Mimo- 
AuNPs disaggregated the mature Aβ42 fibers and rescued neuronal via­
bilities by suppressing ROS production [143]. Apart from mimosine, 
AuNPs can be modified with other agents. In a zebrafish larvae model, 
injecting Aβ into interventricular space to assess the efficacies of AuNPs 
coated with casein (βCas AuNPs). They administrated the βCas AuNPs 
systemically by intracardial injection. It was realized that the nano­
particles inhibited Aβ42-induced cytotoxicity, which shows the BBB 
permeability and the critical effect of AuNPs to transport the protein 
[144]. Under 3D scaffold conditions, these findings provide the first 
evidence with regards to molecular mechanisms by which AuNPs 
reverse inflammation and oxidative damage caused by Aβ in human 
neural stem cells (hNSCs). Furthermore, AuNPs suppressed amyloid 
peptide assembly and improved proteasome activities as well as HSP70 
and HSP27 expressions in Aβ-treated hNSCs [145]. 
4.1.3.2. Magnetic nanoparticles. Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) have 
good biocompatibility and unique magnetic properties. To determine 
their efficacy at disaggregating Aβ deposits into fragments, recently a 
study validated that the mild MNPs to target Aβ aggregates when 
exposed to high frequency alternating magnetic fields (AMFs) is feasible. 
AMF hyperthermia/Mild MNP enhanced phagocytic clearance of Aβ and 
mitigated the human microglial cells-induced pro-inflammatory re­
sponses [146]. Quercetin (QC) is a flavonoid agent that exerts important 
Fig. 10. Illustration of the synthetic pathway of PLGA-PEG-Fuc nanoparticles and the mechanism for anti-AD neuroprotection. Figure adapted with permission from 
Ref. [141]. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
13
neuroprotective effects against amyloid beta peptides via its antioxidant 
abilities and prevention of aggregation [147]. Based on this background, 
core–shell magnetic mesoporous silica NPs (MMSNPs) carrying QC were 
fabricated. The abilities of the synthetic composites to inhibit amyloid 
fibrillation and their antioxidant activities were confirmed via thioflavin 
T fluorescence assay, TEM images and various assays in primary 
neuronal cell cultures. Thus, the developed nanocomposites are effective 
carriers of therapeutic natural materials for AD treatment [148]. In 
addition, a novel magnetic-plasma nanoplatform combined with GOIO 
magnetic core and gold plasmonic shell nanoparticle, detected at less 
98% of AD biomarkers in the whole blood sample. Its detection limit is 
several folds of magnitude higher than that of current Aβ kits on the 
market [149]. 
4.1.3.3. Polyoxometalates. Polyoxometalates (POMs), a class of unique 
inorganic nanomaterials with redox reaction, are formed by linking pre- 
transition metal ions via oxygen. They have been shown to exhibit 
various therapeutic potentials against Aβ, a pathological factor of AD 
[150–152]. Zhao et al. [153] showed that a negatively charged organic 
platinum-substituted POM (PtII-PW11) combines with HHQK to recog­
nize the positively charged motif of Aβ via electrostatic interactions. 
Moreover, it bound other residues via Van der Waals forces and bond 
made of hydrogen. These multiple contacts endow PtII-PW11 with sig­
nificant protective effects against Aβ42 aggregates-induced cytotoxicity 
in neurons and remarkable inhibitory effects on amyloid fibrillation. 
Moreover, PtII-PW11 efficiently rescued memory functions and learning 
abilities in transgenic AD mice models-APP/PS1 via suppressing Aβ 
deposition, with negligible toxicity. The conformation and functions of 
protein significantly alter by post-translational modifications (PTM), 
which generates modifications after DNA has been translated into pro­
teins at several sites covalently. Based on PTM, a Wells-Dawson poly­
oxometalate (POMD) derivative (POMD-TZ) with the thiazolidinethione 
(TZ) modification was fabricated [154]. Among all types of POMs, the 
Wells-Dawson polyoxometalate effectively inhibits Aβ aggregation 
while thiazolidinethione (TZ) specifically bind the Lys side chain 
(Fig. 12). Situated between central hydrophobic region (KLVFFA) and 
the cationic cluster (HHQK), the POMD-TZ bound Lys16 and inhibited 
Aβ aggregation. Furthermore, the BBB was penetrated by POMD-TZ, 
which prolonged the life span of AD transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans 
CL2006 worms. Apart from inhibiting Aβ aggregation, POMs perform 
great ability in ROS clearance. Ma et al. designed a POMs-based nano­
platform 
(rPOMs@MSNs@copolymer) 
with 
near-infrared 
(NIR) 
responsiveness and redox-activated. This platform generated local hy­
perthermia that caused the dissociation of Aβ fibrils by irradiating NIR 
laser, which was attributed to strong absorption of POMs and scavenging 
for Aβ amyloidogenic-secreted ROS [155]. 
4.1.3.4. Superparamagnetic 
iron-oxide 
nanoparticles. Super­
paramagnetic iron-oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) are iron oxide-based 
nanoparticles with a magnetic core and biocompatible coating func­
tionalized with antibodies, drugs, luminescent and biological vectors. 
They are potential multifunctional agents for AD diagnosis and treat­
ment [156]. A novel multifunctional SPIONs coupled with class A 
scavenger receptor activator XD4 and Aβ oligomer-specific scFv anti­
body W20(XD4/W20-SPIONs) has been reported. The XD4/W20- 
SPIONs maintain the characteristics of XD4 and W20 to enhance Aβ 
phagocytosis by microglia, mitigate neurotoxicity induced by AβO and 
Aβ aggregation and. In addition, Iba-1 positive microglia were quanti­
fied to verify whether the composite enhanced microglia phagocytosis of 
Aβ. Moreover, administration of XD4/W20-SPIONs in APP/PS1 mice 
models significantly ameliorated defective cognition and alleviated 
neuropathology [157]. The effects of SPIONs on Aβ fibrosis were found 
to be dose-dependent, with low doses of SPIONs inhibiting Aβ aggre­
gation and rescuing memory as well as learning deficits in AD models 
while the high one exhibited opposite effect [158]. Mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSCs) have potential applications in AD treatment. They exhibit 
various properties, including neuroprotective effects, inhibition of 
oxidative stress and apoptosis, suppressing anti-inflammatory cytokines 
[159]. In a related study, Wharton’s jelly-derived MSCs (WJ-MSCs) from 
human were magnetically delivered to the hippocampal area and their 
Fig. 11. Illustration of mimosine-functionalized gold nanoparticles (Mimo-AuNPs) inhibit Aβ aggregation and protect neurons from aggregate-induced neurotoxicity. 
Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [143]. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
14
effects were evaluated [160]. The WJ-MSCs were tagged with SPIONs 
that coated with dextran via a bio-mimicry technique to assemble 
SPIONs-labeled MSCs, which were strongly Prussian blue positive. Then, 
the SPIONs-labeled MSCs were transferred via a magnetic targeted cell 
delivery (MTCD) method using a Halbach magnet array into the hip­
pocampus of AD animals. The ability of WJ-MSCs improving the 
cognitive and memory performance of AD mice models was proved by 
behavioral assessments. 
Compared to other materials, metallic nanoparticles have excellent 
optical properties, chemical stability and size-dependent electro­
chemical effects. However, during their applications, attention should 
be paid to accumulation and metabolism of metals in the body. Excess 
metal accumulation results in severe, unexpected symptoms such as 
excessive oxidative stress, cell damage, synapse injury. 
4.1.4. Lipid nanoparticles 
Lipid nanoparticles have been widely used to transport medications 
to target pathogenic biomarkers of AD throughout the BBB. These 
nanoparticles can be classified into solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs), lipid 
nanoparticles, microemulsions, nanoemulsions, liposomes and nano­
structured lipid carries (NLCs). With the biocompatibility and biode­
gradability, they exhibit slight toxicity as well as the possibility to 
control and modify drug release. Moreover, they possibly incorporate 
hydrophilic and lipophilic drug. These characteristics make these ma­
terials potential choices for drug carriers, especially via the intranasal 
route [161]. 
4.1.4.1. Solid lipid nanoparticles. Sathya et al. assessed the effects of 
α-bisabolol loaded SLNs (ABS) in Neuro-2a cells and found that SLNs 
enhanced the biocompatibility and bioavailability of α-bisabolol to 
inhibit the cells neurotoxicity induced by Aβ25-35 and Aβ aggregation 
[162]. Then, they investigated the mechanisms underlying ABS’s ability 
to protect Neuro-2a cells from the harm caused by Aβ25-35. Compared 
with the control group, the ROS production by treatment group with 
ABS significantly reduced. Moreover, caspase-3, β-secretase, and 
cholinesterase levels were established to be reduced, which clearly 
validated the neuroprotective abilities of ABS. Western blot analysis and 
confocal microscopy showed reduced Bax expressions and enhanced Bcl- 
2 protein expressions, implying that ABS inhibited the neural cells 
apoptosis caused by Aβ [163]. 
4.1.4.2. Nanostructured lipid carriers. The NLCs are an upgrade form of 
SLNs that were created by substituting some of solid lipids with liquid 
lipids to increase the loading efficiency of drugs [164]. Pinheiro et al. 
proposed a nanosystem that was based on lipid nanoparticles (SLN and 
NLC) functionalized with the RVG29 peptide wrapping quercetin. 
RVG29, a peptide that is expressed in the BBB and in neuronal cells, 
specifically combines with nACh receptors. It has been confirmed that 
these nanosystems prevent Aβ aggregation and enhance BBB perme­
ability, indicating their potential use in AD treatment [165]. Apart from 
inhibiting Aβ aggregation, functionalized NLCs promote antioxidant 
capacities against reactive oxygen species generated during Aβ fibrosis 
[166]. 
4.1.4.3. Liposomes. With an impermeable outer lipophilic phospholipid 
layer, liposomes are consist of a lipid bilayer surrounding an aqueous 
core that enfolds water-soluble drugs and transports them across the 
lipid soluble layer of the cell membrane to target areas [167]. By func­
tionalizing the liposomal surfaces with biomolecules of different prop­
erties, BBB transport and targeting of AD-related molecules can be 
achieved [168–170]. Fernandes et al. synthesized a new type of nano­
carrier, an exosome-like liposome encapsulating the hydrophobic Cur. 
Liposomes and exosomes are difficult to escape from host immunity and 
clearance in vivo. The developed nanocarrier was able to overcome the 
limitations while preserving the potential of both liposomes and exo­
somes. These curcumin-loaded liposomes exhibited high encapsulation 
efficiencies, were non-toxic and could mitigate SH-SY5Y cell-secreted 
oxidative stress, implying their efficacy for neuroprotection. Moreover, 
they were internalized in zebrafish embryos and became centralized in 
the brain, yolk and lipid-enriched areas, indicating that they were 
Fig. 12. aSchematic presentation of the synthesis of pomd-tz (pomd is α-k6p2w18o62⋅14 H2O). bPOMD-TZ prevented Aβ from aggregating and enabled the 
modification of Aβ at the Lys16 site. Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [154]. Copyright 2022 John Wiley and Sons. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
15
permeable through the BBB. These innovative materials can potentially 
transport drugs to the brain, achieving a therapeutic purpose [171]. 
Papadia et al. developed a multifunctional LUV liposome (mf-LIP) in 
which the liposomes were surrounded by the Cur-lipid ligan (TREG) 
with affinity towards Aβ peptides and ligands to target LDL and trans­
ferrin receptors (ApoE and TfR-Mab) on the BBB. They investigated its 
ability for inhibition of Aβ peptide aggregation and to target on hCMEC/ 
D3 monolayers. Furthermore, they established that the co-presence of 
ApoE and TfR-Mab with TRGE on mf-LIPs surfaces would not influence 
their interaction abilities. In their study, mf-LIPs suppressed Aβ aggre­
gation and were efficiently translocated across the BBB [172]. In addi­
tion, there are other functionally modified liposomes with good 
inhibitory effects on aggregation [173,174]. 
Lipid nanoparticles have excellently flexibility, biocompatibility as 
well as the ability to delivery various types of drug compounds across 
the BBB. However, their poor in vivo stability might increase the appli­
cation costs. Moreover, the quality and sterility of the lipid-based 
product should be investigated further. 
4.2. Metal chelators 
Metal ion homeostasis, including Fe2+, Cu2+, and Zn2+, is critical for 
normal brain functions. Imbalances in metal ions facilitate the produc­
tion of Aβ via suppressing α-secretase and activating β- or γ-secretases 
[177]. Metal ions bind Aβ, which form toxic Aβ oligomers and over­
production of ROS [178]. Thus, metal chelation therapy has been come 
up to destroy the interactions between Aβ and metal ions, thereby 
attenuating neurotoxicity of metal-amyloid assemblies [179]. Lermyte et 
al. used native Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spec­
trometry to analyze the binding sites of Aβ monomers and metal ions. 
They discovered that metal ions (Cu2+, Co2+, Ni2+) with the most tough 
binding abilities to the amyloid peptide exhibited highly comparable 
binding regions with two histidine residues (His13, His6) besides the N- 
terminus. Furthermore, Fe3+ was bound between Gly25 and Ser8 while 
the binding regions for other metals (K+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Ca2+ and Na+) 
were centered on Leu34 and Gly38 [180]. This study elucidates on in­
teractions between metal ions and Aβ. 
4.2.1. Iron ion chelators 
Jiang et al. investigated the ability of a multifunctional hybrid (3- 
hydroxypyridin-4-one)-coumarin, referred to as 18d, to achieve iron- 
chelating effects. The pFe3+ value (an equilibrium constant evaluating 
the ability of an acid to dissociate hydrogen ions) of the hybrid was 
determined to range from 16.9 to 20.16, which was more effective than 
that of the reference drug (deferiprone), indicating that 18d is a better 
iron chelator [181]. Then, they validated the iron-chelating abilities of 
another hybrid (11 g), which also exhibited excellent iron-chelating 
abilities [182]. Zhao et al. studied how epigallocatechin gallate 
(EGCG) affected fibrillation caused by Fe (III). They established that 
EGCG inhibited fibrillation by chelating Fe3+ and protected PC12 cells 
from ROS and abnormal aggregation mediated toxicity [183]. The 
neuroprotectant 
biphenyl neolignan (honokiol) which inhibits 
Aβ aggregation and chelates metal irons, has been investigated in a 
transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans model prepared with Aβ42. Honokiol 
exhibits good abilities to chelate iron and suppress Aβ42 fibrillation, 
effects that are comparable to those of EGCG and resveratrol [184]. 
Carvalho et al. confirmed the changes in effect of conjugating different 
aromatic amines with the iron chelator desferrioxamine (DFO). 
Compared to bare DFO, the modified DFO exhibited good chelating 
activities [185]. In future, drugs with a single target may no longer meet 
clinical application requirements. Therefore, development of candidate 
drugs with multifunctional targets is particularly important. On this 
basis, the multifunctional adamantane-based semicarbazone and 
hydrazone chelators exhibited extensive abilities, including high iron 
chelation and alleviation of Aβ42-mediated oxidative stress as well as 
physicochemical properties for BBB permeation [186]. Iron is important 
for pathological development of AD, however, studies on iron chelators 
are limited. 
4.2.2. Copper ion chelators 
Yu et al. researched the outcome of different PMOFs in chelating 
Cu2+ and photooxidation to inhibit Aβ aggregation. They found that 
PMOFs have a high ability for Cu2+ chelation, which was attributed to 
binding affinities of carboxyl group and porphyrin with Cu2+ as well as 
the adsorption ability of its porosity structure to metal ions (Fig. 13) 
[187]. Mahl et al. investigated the ability of chitosan to bind Cu2+ in the 
presence of Aβ and His. Chitosan exhibited effective chelating abilities 
on Cu2+ by competing with Aβ and His [188]. A Cu2+ chelator 
(TDMQ20) has been applied in different stages of AD to assess its effects 
on regulating Cu2+ homeostasis and inhibiting ROS overproduction. 
Treatment of AD models with TDMQ20 significantly improved cognitive 
functions and memory impairment [189]. Recently, Elena et al. inves­
tigated the effects of two Keggin polyoxometalates (POMs) (K8−
and 
K4−) on interactions between Cu2+ and Aβ. The UV–Vis spectra with 
complete disappearance of the Cu (Aβ) signature implied that the K8−
and K4−removed Cu2+ from the peptide, indicating a novel approach for 
chelating Cu2+ using POMs [190]. Kaur et al. developed, synthesized, 
and assessed multitarget ligands based on triazole. The triazole deriva­
tive (4v) exhibited good metal chelation abilities and maintained the 
redox-dormant state of Cu2+ to inhibit ROS generation. Furthermore, 4v 
suppressed Aβ42 aggregates-mediated toxicity and inhibited protofibrils 
aggregation [191]. In addition, different types of copper chelators have 
been reported [192–194]. 
4.2.3. Zinc ion chelators 
Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and Fourier transform infrared 
(FTIR) assays revealed that brazilin is a potential Zn2+ chelator. Brazilin 
has a higher affinity for Zn2+ than Aβ42; therefore, it separates Zn2+ from 
the Aβ42 aggregate to reduce cytotoxic effects [195]. Currently, studies 
are aimed at modifying the surfaces of materials to confer them with 
multiple functions. For instance, modification of the human lysozyme 
(hLys) with iminodiacetic acid (IDA) resulted in strong binding affinities 
for Zn2+, when compared with native hLys [196]. Moreover, iminodi­
acetic acid-conjugated nanoparticles (IDA-NP) have been designed and 
synthesized. The nanoparticles exhibited a high capacity for Zn2+-che­
lation to inhibit Aβ42 fibrillation [197]. The effects of metal chelators on 
Zn2+ and Cu2+ concurrently have been reported [198–200]. 
Metal ions binding to Aβ aggravate toxic aggregate formation, 
resulting in severe damage to neurons. Thus, studies on metal chelators 
are indispensable for establishment of appropriate strategies to inhibit 
AD progression. The majority of current chelators are based on small- 
molecular substances, most of which are relatively toxic with various 
side effects including easy to clearance and lack of efficacy. As a metal 
chelator with less toxic side effects, neuropeptide may be an ideal 
candidate for Aβ aggregation inhibition [179]; thus, its efficacy should 
be investigated further. 
4.3. Natural compounds 
Compared with the above-mentioned materials, natural products are 
more attractive because of their wide range of sources, easy isolation, 
extraction, and intrinsic biocompatibility. It has been indicated that the 
green tea extract, EGCG, prevent Aβ aggregation and attenuate neuro­
toxicity caused by Aβ fibrillation [201,202]. Findings from molecular 
dynamics simulations and immune-infrared sensor measurements 
showed that EGCG interactions include hydrophilic interactions with 
the Aβ main chain and hydrophobic π–π interactions with side chain 
aromatic rings [203]. It has been reported that EGCG disrupts Aβ42 
protofibrils by breaking the hydrogen bonds from H6 to E11 via π-π 
interactions with Y10 or H14 residues and hydrogen-bonding in­
teractions with E11 to alter the L-shape, which was confirmed by MD 
simulations about microsecond all-atom (Fig. 14) [204]. Resveratrol, a 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
16
Fig. 13. Schematic presentation of the possible mechanism of Cu2+ chelation and inhibitory effects on amyloid fibrillation with porphyrinic metal–organic 
frameworks (PMOFs). Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [187]. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
Fig. 14. Schematic presentation of the mechanism via which EGCG disrupts Aβ protofibrils. Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [204]. Copyright 2020 
American Chemical Society. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
17
natural plant polyphenol extracted from red grape skins, has excellent 
neuroprotective effects [205]. Al-Edresi et al. found that the Aβ42 pep­
tide was easily split into small fragments after the addition of resveratrol 
in the MALDI of flight mass spectrometry assay [206]. Additionally, 
formation of Aβ plaques and Aβ42 levels in 5XFAD mice were reduced 
after oral administration of 0.5% resveratrol solution (60 mg/kg) [207]. 
Li et al. evaluated the differences between resveratrol and EGCG with 
regard to interactions with Aβ42 monomers. They found that EGCG binds 
Aβ42 majorly via hydrophobic, π-π stacking, and hydrogen-bonding in­
teractions, while resveratrol majorly binds via π-π stacking [208]. Cur­
cumin, a major component of Asian spices, has been studied to be a 
natural therapy for the treatment of AD, especially via targeting Aβ 
[209]. Doytchinova et al. showed that curcumin tightly bound with Aβ 
through hydrophobic, hydrogen bonds, cation-π and π-π interactions to 
disintegrate Aβ fibrils [210]. However, instability in physiological 
environment, poor solubility and low biocompatibility inhibit curcumin 
clinical transformation. To overcome these challenges, various func­
tional curcumin derivatives have been proposed. A solid lipid curcumin 
particle (SLCP) exhibited superior inhibitory effects on Aβ aggregation, 
amyloid fibrillation, and inflammatory responses in cell and in animal 
AD models [211]. The applicability of a novel method to synthesize 
selenium nanoparticles encapsulating curcumin-loaded PLGA nano­
spheres has been evaluated. Loading this nanocomposite with curcumin 
resulted in excellent abilities to diminish the amounts of Aβ deposits and 
rescued memory deficits in AD mice models [212]. A phenolic com­
pound, ferulic acid which is abundant and ubiquitous in various plants, 
has several properties, including neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory 
effects [213,214]. Ferulic acid-O-alkylamines derivatives are multi­
target ligands with impressive inhibitory effects on Aβ aggregation 
[215]. Investigations have also studied the effects of this acid and its 
derivatives on reducing Aβ aggregation-induced neurotoxicity and 
decreasing ROS-mediated oxidative stress damage [216]. Majid et al. 
showed that cholic acid suppresses fibrillation by targeting the elonga­
tion of fibrils and maintained the native state to prevent their aggrega­
tion. Therefore, cholic acid is a potential therapeutic agent against AD 
[217]. 
Various active molecules with inhibitory effects have been investi­
gated. However, the inherent instability of natural compounds reduces 
their half-life in the body, resulting in deficiencies of the residual drug in 
the body for treatment. Thus, efforts have been aimed at modifying the 
active molecules to increase their duration time to carry more of drug to 
the lesion site. 
4.4. Anti-Aβ monoclonal antibodies 
Immunotherapy first caught the attention of researchers in 1999 
when it was reported that trans-gene animals had active immunity 
against Aβ pathology [218]. The designs and development of active and 
passive immune-therapeutics against Aβ have been put forward. In a 
previous study, active immunization significantly reduced Aβ plaque 
deposits while lack of benefits in clinical symptoms like cognitive 
function [219]. Furthermore, studies have focused on applications of 
passive immunization, particularly monoclonal antibodies, which are 
considered to be a specific and safe therapeutic strategy for AD [220]. 
The monoclonal antibodies for ameliorating cognitive and memory 
functions resulting from Aβ aggregation are described below. 
Aducanumab is a humanized recombinant IgG1 immunoglobulin 
that has >10,000-fold selectivity for soluble Aβ aggregation compared 
to monomers [221]. It is obtained from the blood lymphocyte pools from 
healthy senior donors without the cognitive of loss signals or abnormal 
slow decline. The binding site of aducanumab was linear epitopes made 
from residues 3 to 7 of Aβ peptides [221]. It is effective at suppressing Aβ 
plaque formation and ameliorating AD symptoms in patients [222,223]. 
Preclinical studies involving 10 months old tgAPP/PS1-21 mice models 
indicated that the closely associated tissue and proteome of amyloid 
plaques were regulated after continuous treatment with aducanumab for 
4 months weekly (10 mg/kg). In this study, APP stress response 
pathway- and trafficking/processing-associated proteins were estab­
lished to be downregulated, suggesting the potential of aducanumab to 
improve the proteomic profile around senile plaques [224]. 
Lecanemab, also named BAN2401, is the mouse monoclonal anti­
body IgG1(mAb158) to be humanized, which specifically targets Aβ fi­
brils with at least a 1000-fold higher selectivity compared to monomers 
[225]. After long-term therapy of tg-ArcSwe mice with BAN2401(10 
mg/kg), oligomers or protofibrils in cerebrospinal fluid reduced 53% 
corresponding with the decrease of brain protofibril levels, while there 
were no changes in native monomeric Aβ42, suggesting that lecanemab 
selectively binds protofibrils [226]. In a randomized double-blind clin­
ical trial, 854 randomly selected volunteers (with mild cognitive 
impairment) were given treatment with lecanemab (609 patients) and 
placebo (245 patients). Lecanemab had a significant therapeutic effect 
on reducing brain amyloid, but negligible effects in ameliorating 
cognitive functions [227]. 
Solanezumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody, predominantly 
binds the middle regions of Aβ soluble forms and increases their clear­
ance from the brain [228]. In a phase 2, placebo-controlled, double- 
blind, randomized clinical trial, 52 AD patients were treated with sol­
anezumab or placebo for 12 weeks (100 mg weekly, 400 mg weekly, 
100 mg/4 weeks or 400 mg/4 weeks). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests 
and magnetic resonance imaging examinations revealed a dose- 
dependent rise in free CSF Aβ42, indicating that solanezumab modu­
lates the equilibria of Aβ [229]. 
Crenezumab is a human mAbs anti-Aβ IgG4 that has been found to 
bind different kinds of Aβ, especially monomers in vitro, to inhibit Aβ 
plaque accumulation [230]. Crenezumab exhibits multiple binding 
modes, both of which occur via recognition of N-terminal regions and 
cross-sections of fibrils [231]. Mechanistically, crenezumab inhibits Aβ 
aggregation by sequestering the Aβ’s hydrophobic core and breaking the 
basic salt bridge with structure of the β-hairpin [232]. Yang et al. 
designed a high-sensitivity immunoassay to detect Aβ oligomer con­
centrations in the CSF of AD patients after intravenous and subcutaneous 
administrations of crenezumab or placebo. They found that crenezumab 
reduced CSF oligomer levels in most treated patients [233]. 
Donanemab is the latest and most promising monoclonal antibody 
against Aβ, which can target an N-terminal pyroglutamate Aβ epitope 
[Aβ (p3-42)] to reduce amyloid plaques in AD [220]. In a randomized 
trial, early AD patients were administered donanemab or placebo. 
Compared with the placebo, donanemab had higher composite scores on 
cognition and daily life activities [234]. 
Gantenerumab is a humanized anti-Aβ mAb which binds Aβ ag­
gregations and eliminates Aβ plaques via phagocytosis mediated by Fc 
receptor [235]. In a randomized controlled trial of patients with domi­
nantly inherited AD, gantenerumab reduced amyloid plaques more 
significantly than placebo, but did not show symptomatic cognitive 
decline [236]. Various novel types of antibodies are being produced, 
with good application prospects [237–239]. 
Monoclonal antibodies have significant efficacy and acceptable long- 
term safety. Several antibodies have entered phase 3 clinical trials and 
are expected to become the first wave of approved and marketed 
disease-modifying therapies in the next 3–5 years. More studies should 
be performed to elucidate the pharmacokinetics, targeting, dosage 
regime and appropriate route for drug administration. 
4.5. Aβ sequence and non-Aβ sequence-derived peptides 
Apart from nanoparticles, chelators, natural products and antibodies, 
peptides are also suitable candidates for Aβ therapy. Because of their 
distinctive qualities, including practicability, feasibility, low toxicity, 
and high selectivity among others, peptides have become widely used 
and promising Aβ aggregation inhibitors. The potential of peptides to 
become high-quality candidate inhibitory drugs is mainly derived from 
their ability to prevent Aβ self-aggregation and toxicity, as well as inhibit 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
18
conformational transition [240]. Different Aβ regions are responsible for 
different Aβ fibrosis processes; thus, the two types of peptide-based in­
hibitors are Aβ and non-Aβ sequence-derived peptides [240]. 
4.5.1. Aβ sequence-derived peptides 
Peptide inhibitors deriving from C-terminal fragments (CTFs), the 
hinge or turn region, hydrophobic core (self-recognition sequence) and 
the N-terminus of Aβ sequence, is responsible for Aβ fibrosis. KLVFF, the 
central hydrophobic core (CHC) region of Aβ, is the critical amyloido­
genic sequence, and is also the nucleation site or self-recognition 
sequence[241]. Moreover, as an essential domain, CTFs have strong 
affinity to target Aβ oligomers and regulate oligomeric formation by 
adjusting intermolecular interactions [240]. Even though peptidyl- 
based inhibitors effectively inhibit Aβ, they are easily degraded during 
transportation, resulting in low utilization rates. To increase their af­
finity for binding Aβ, various modified peptides have been developed via 
N-methylation, conformational restriction through cyclization, fluori­
nated molecules, polymeric nanoparticles, and via incorporation of 
unnatural amino acids among others [242,243]. Pappalardo and co­
workers designed a novel carlix[4] arene-peptide conjugate, based on 
the KLVFF motif embedded with GPG to reduce self-aggregation and 
conjugated with p-amino carlix[4] arene to enhance peptide stability. 
High-resolution mass spectrometry confirmed the interaction between 
this new conjugate and Aβ monomers. Additionally, it was demonstrated 
that this compound can inhibit the toxic effects exerted by Aβ oligomers 
on SH-SY5Y neuronal cells.[244] They further investigated the Aβ8-20 
fragment and proposed that this fragment does not undergo folding and 
self-aggregation. This fragment was proved to be able to interact with 
the 4–11 sequence of Aβ1-42, thereby inhibiting the formation of Aβ 
protofibrils and reducing the neuronal toxicity.[245] Diomede et al. 
synthesized a new peptide derived from Aβ (Aβ1-6A2V-TAT (D)) and 
evaluated its function in transgenic C. elegans. The Aβ1-6A2V-TAT (D) 
interfered with AβOs and protected AD models by reducing the con­
centration of toxic Aβ[246]. Abedin et al. comprehensively analyzed the 
full length of Aβ sequences to establish peptide fragments with the best 
inhibitory potencies. Data from thioflavin-T fluorescence and light 
scattering showed that P3 (Aβ11-20) and P6 (Aβ26-36) had the strongest 
inhibitory effects on Aβ42 aggregation [247]. In addition, a C-terminal 
fragment tetrapeptide (the scanned fragment of Aβ39-42) with the best 
inhibitory activities was identified by spectroscopic and morphological 
Aβ aggregation was confirmed by electron microscopy. It was validated 
to effectively limit the conformation transition of Aβ42 peptides to 
β-sheet structures and alleviate amyloid aggregation-induced toxicity 
[248]. A β-sheet breaker proline pentamer and the self-recognition 
sequence (KLVFF) are the two portions of the peptide (KLVFFP5) 
created by Kanchi et al. Compared to KLVFF, KLVFFP5 shown a greater 
propensity for binding to protofibrils and causing their disintegration 
through the formation of hydrophobic contacts and hydrogen bonding 
[249]. A synthetic disrupting peptide based on the original Aβ sequence 
replaces Val-18 (Aβ) with a glutamic acid modified by side-chain to 
produce enough turns by in situ peptide cyclization to disassemble the 
folded structure of Aβ. This modified peptide inhibited and destroyed Aβ 
peptides as well as aggregation-related peptides (Fig. 15) [250]. 
4.5.2. Non Aβ sequence-derived peptides 
As mentioned earlier, the pentapeptide KLVFF derived from the Aβ 
Fig. 15. Schematic presentation of disrupting fibril with the synthesized peptide inhibitors. Figure adapted with permission from Ref. [250]. Copyright 
2021 Elsevier. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
19
sequence has attracted considerable attention for its unique ability to 
inhibit Aβ aggregation. However, as research has progressed, its ten­
dency to undergo self-aggregation has also emerger as a limitation. In 
order to overcome this drawback, researchers have developed various 
homologues, among which LPFFD, stands out as one of the most 
representative substances [251]. A C-terminally trehalose-conjugated 
derivative (Ac-LPFFD-Th) has been demonstrated to possess the ability 
to slow down Aβ aggregation and protect neurons from the toxic effects 
of Aβ oligomers. [252] In further investigations, it was found that the 
Ac-LPFFD-Th derivative can prevent neurons from excitotoxic damage 
mediated by NMDA and provide additional cell protection by inducing 
pro-survival signal pathways [253]. In addition, several other peptides 
have also demonstrated good inhibitory effects. Kawasaki et al. reported 
that arginine-rich tri-peptides significantly inhibits Aβ fibrils and ag­
gregates formation [254]. A small tri-peptide Arg-Arg-Tyr (RRY) was 
applied in APP/PS1 mice. It was found that RRY reduced the Aβ42 load 
and ameliorated Aβ42–induced cognitive deficits [255]. Kr´ol et al. con­
structed a novel peptide, NCAM-PrP, which consists of a positively 
charged hexapeptide linked to a hydrophobic signal sequence. The 
NCAM-PrP inhibited Aβ aggregations by forming specific hetero­
oligomeric complexes with lower aggregation states [256]. The ability 
of a heptapeptide (Semax) in anti-aggregating was investigated in an 
artificial membrane model with Aβ aggregation and amyloid formation. 
Semax inhibited Aβ aggregation and protected against its associated 
toxicity, implying that it has the potential for amelioration of Aβ fibrosis 
[257]. Derived from the receptor binding region of apoE, the trideca- 
peptide (CWG-LRKLRKRLLR), has the ability of restraining the aggre­
gation of Aβ and accelerating fibril disintegration [258]. 
Due to excellent properties and various synthetic routes, peptides 
have also attracted extensive attention as promising drugs. Candidate 
peptides are evaluated by inhibition of fibrillation and self-assembly, 
preventing conformational transitions. An important challenge in 
designing peptide-related therapeutic drugs is addition of rational li­
gands to overcome peptide limitations, such as easy digestion during 
transportation. 
5. Conclusions and perspectives 
Insidious onset, progressive development and unknown etiologies 
endow AD with the inevitability of becoming a disease that requires a lot 
of effort to be controlled. Moreover, it is associated with a heavy social 
pressure and economic burden. This review elucidates on Aβ formation 
and its functions. Then, the diagnostic instruments and technologies 
targeting Aβ are introduced, including large-scale instruments like MRI/ 
PET/MS, as well as new devices such as biosensors, colorimetry, and 
nanomaterial-related technologies. Finally, the methods used to inhibit 
Aβ aggregation, including nanomaterials, monoclonal antibodies, metal 
chelators, Aβ sequence-derived, non-derived peptides and natural 
compounds are summarized. 
Achieving the clinical applications of technologies in a cost-effective 
way is vital. While all the mentioned techniques have specific advan­
tages, they are also associated with various limitations. In terms of large- 
scale applications of instruments, reducing the associated costs and 
popularizing the training of professionals is important. As for the 
miniature monitoring equipment, there is a need to improve detection 
precision and accuracy. In therapy, the toxic properties of metal chela­
tors on the body should be addressed. Combining non-toxic small mol­
ecules with the same therapeutic effects and minimizing toxicity to 
achieve synergy should be taken into consideration. The instability of 
natural compounds and sequence peptides in the body is a major chal­
lenge. By chemically modifying the surfaces of compounds and peptides, 
their destruction in the physiological environment in the body can be 
inhibited, thereby promoting their circulation period. Regarding 
monoclonal antibodies, there is a need to elucidate their pharmacoki­
netics, side effects, and efficacy in the human body. 
Owing to nanomaterial’s excellent chemical and physical properties, 
biocompatibility, environment friendliness and easy modifications, they 
are essential in targeting Aβ to inhibit further aggregation or promote its 
depolymerization. Although significant effects have been achieved in 
nanomaterial applications, very few drugs can actually be put into 
clinical use, implying that some challenges should be overcome. Failures 
in clinical trials are mainly attributed to the fact that AD is a multifac­
torial and complicated disease, which inhibits the efficacies of single 
targeted therapy. Many drugs with good in vitro and in vivo outcomes 
have not undergone clinical trials yet, because the internal environment 
is dynamic and complex. After drug entry, it undergoes a reaction pro­
cess that is thousands of times more complicated than that in vitro. 
Therefore, it is not easy to establish the content and properties of the 
drug when it finally reaches the target site. Additionally, the toxicity of 
the applied materials to the human body should be carefully evaluated. 
The process of synthesizing materials is complicated and difficult to 
control. To enhance the applications of nanomaterials as therapeutic 
media for AD patients, the following points should be taken into 
consideration: i. It is necessary to fully screen and identify the most 
suitable ligands to maximize the therapeutic effects of modifying 
nanomaterials; ii. During synthesis or preparation, the toxic effects of 
intermediate products and final products to the human body should be 
assessed; iii. Assess the pharmacokinetics of materials to meet the pre­
scribed standards and iv. Reduce the cost of synthesis for large scale 
applications. By achieving the above considerations, the drug may meet 
the prescribed standards and be applied sooner or later, thereby 
relieving the pain of patients and reducing the burden on families and 
society. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge the support of the key Project of Basic Research of 
Shenzhen, China (JCYJ20200109113603854) and Natural Science 
Foundation of Guangdong Province, China (2023A1515011047). 
References 
[1] 2021 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures, Alzheimers Dement. 17 (2021) 
327–406, https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.12328. 
[2] C.A. Lane, J. Hardy, J.M. Schott, Alzheimer’s disease, Eur. J. Neurol. 25 (2018) 
59–70, https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.13439. 
[3] Z. Breijyeh, R. Karaman, Comprehensive review on Alzheimer’s disease: Causes 
and treatment, Molecules 25 (2020) 5789, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
molecules25245789. 
[4] R.J. Castellani, R.K. Rolston, M.A. Smith, Alzheimer disease, Dis. Mon. 56 (2010) 
484–546, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.disamonth.2010.06.001. 
[5] G. Cipriani, C. Dolciotti, L. Picchi, U. Bonuccelli, Alzheimer and his disease: a 
brief history, Neurol. Sci 32 (2011) 275–279, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072- 
010-0454-7. 
[6] X. Du, X. Wang, M. Geng, Alzheimer’s disease hypothesis and related therapies, 
Transl. Neurodegener 7 (2018) 2, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-018-0107-y. 
[7] M.S. Uddin, M.T. Kabir, M.S. Rahman, T. Behl, P. Jeandet, G.M. Ashraf, A. Najda, 
M.N. Bin-Jumah, H.R. El-Seedi, M.M. Abdel-Daim, Revisiting the amyloid cascade 
hypothesis: From anti-abeta therapeutics to auspicious new ways for Alzheimer’s 
disease, Int. J. Mol. Sci 21 (2020) 5858, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21165858. 
[8] D.J. Selkoe, J. Hardy, The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years, 
EMBO Mol. Med 8 (2016) 595–608, https://doi.org/10.15252/ 
emmm.201606210. 
[9] A.F.T. Arnsten, D. Datta, K. Del Tredici, H. Braak, Hypothesis: Tau pathology is an 
initiating factor in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimers Dement. 17 (2021) 
115–124, https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.12192. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
20
[10] N.N. Naseri, H. Wang, J. Guo, M. Sharma, W. Luo, The complexity of tau in 
Alzheimer’s disease, Neurosci. Lett 705 (2019) 183–194, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neulet.2019.04.022. 
[11] K. Winek, H. Soreq, A. Meisel, Regulators of cholinergic signaling in disorders of 
the central nervous system, J. Neurochem. 158 (2021) 1425–1438, https://doi. 
org/10.1111/jnc.15332. 
[12] C. Cheignon, M. Tomas, D. Bonnefont-Rousselot, P. Faller, C. Hureau, F. Collin, 
Oxidative stress and the amyloid beta peptide in Alzheimer’s disease, Redox Biol. 
14 (2018) 450–464, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2017.10.014. 
[13] P. Lei, S. Ayton, A.I. Bush, The essential elements of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Biol. 
Chem 296 (2021), 100105, https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.REV120.008207. 
[14] E.E. Spangenberg, K.N. Green, Inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: Lessons 
learned from microglia-depletion models, Brain Behav. Immun. 61 (2017) 1–11, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2016.07.003. 
[15] C.A. Findley, A. Bartke, K.N. Hascup, E.R. Hascup, Amyloid beta-related 
alterations to glutamate signaling dynamics during Alzheimer’s disease 
progression, ASN Neuro 11 (2019), 1759091419855541, https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/1759091419855541. 
[16] V. D’Ezio, M. Colasanti, T. Persichini, Amyloid-β 25–35 induces neurotoxicity 
through the up-regulation of astrocytic system X(c), Antioxidants (Basel, 
Switzerland) 10 (2021) 1685, https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox10111685. 
[17] J.A. Hardy, G.A. Higgins, Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis, 
Science 256 (1992) 184–185, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1566067. 
[18] H.M. Wilkins, R.H. Swerdlow, Amyloid precursor protein processing and 
bioenergetics, Brain Res. Bull 133 (2017) 71–79, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
brainresbull.2016.08.009. 
[19] E.N. Cline, M.A. Bicca, K.L. Viola, W.L. Klein, The amyloid-beta oligomer 
hypothesis: Beginning of the third decade, J. Alzheimers Dis. 64 (2018) 
S567–S610, https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-179941. 
[20] E.J. Coulson, K. Paliga, K. Beyreuther, C.L. Masters, What the evolution of the 
amyloid protein precursor supergene family tells us about its function, 
Neurochem. Int. 36 (2000) 175–184, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0197-0186(99) 
00125-4. 
[21] G. Pfundstein, A.G. Nikonenko, V. Sytnyk, Amyloid precursor protein (APP) and 
amyloid β (Aβ) interact with cell adhesion molecules: Implications in Alzheimer’s 
disease and normal physiology, Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 10 (2022), 969547, https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2022.969547. 
[22] E. Dawkins, D.H. Small, Insights into the physiological function of the beta- 
amyloid precursor protein: beyond Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neurochem. 129 
(2014) 756–769, https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.12675. 
[23] Y.W. Zhang, R. Thompson, H. Zhang, H. Xu, APP processing in Alzheimer’s 
disease, Mol. Brain 4 (2011) 3, https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-6606-4-3. 
[24] M. Klevanski, U. Herrmann, S.W. Weyer, R. Fol, N. Cartier, D.P. Wolfer, J. 
H. Caldwell, M. Korte, U.C. Müller, The APP intracellular domain is required for 
normal synaptic morphology, synaptic plasticity, and hippocampus-dependent 
behavior, J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 35 (2015) 16018–16033, https://doi. 
org/10.1523/jneurosci.2009-15.2015. 
[25] S.H. Lee, J. Kang, A. Ho, H. Watanabe, V.Y. Bolshakov, J. Shen, APP family 
regulates neuronal excitability and synaptic plasticity but not neuronal survival, 
Neuron 108 (2020) 676–690.e678, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuron.2020.08.011. 
[26] G.F. Chen, T.H. Xu, Y. Yan, Y.R. Zhou, Y. Jiang, K. Melcher, H.E. Xu, Amyloid 
beta: structure, biology and structure-based therapeutic development, Acta 
Pharmacol Sin 38 (2017) 1205–1235, https://doi.org/10.1038/aps.2017.28. 
[27] R.J. O’Brien, P.C. Wong, Amyloid precursor protein processing and Alzheimer’s 
disease, Annu. Rev. Neurosci 34 (2011) 185–204, https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
annurev-neuro-061010-113613. 
[28] Z.W. Zhao, Z. Yuan, D.Q. Zhao, Z.W. Wang, F.Q. Zhu, P. Luan, The effect of V- 
ATPase function defects in pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease, CNS Neurosci. 
Ther. 24 (2018) 837–840, https://doi.org/10.1111/cns.12861. 
[29] H. Hampel, J. Hardy, K. Blennow, C. Chen, G. Perry, S.H. Kim, V.L. Villemagne, 
P. Aisen, M. Vendruscolo, T. Iwatsubo, C.L. Masters, M. Cho, L. Lannfelt, J. 
L. Cummings, A. Vergallo, The Amyloid-beta Pathway in Alzheimer’s disease, 
Mol. Psychiatry 26 (2021) 5481–5503, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-021- 
01249-0. 
[30] G.G. Glenner, C.W. Wong, Alzheimer’s disease: initial report of the purification 
and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein, Biochem. 
Biophys. Res. Commun 425 (2012) (1984) 534–539, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbrc.2012.08.020. 
[31] A.S. Urban, K.V. Pavlov, A.V. Kamynina, I.S. Okhrimenko, A.S. Arseniev, E. 
V. Bocharov, Structural studies providing insights into production and 
conformational behavior of amyloid-beta peptide associated with Alzheimer’s 
disease development, Molecules 26 (2021) 2897, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
molecules26102897. 
[32] M.C. Owen, W. Kulig, C. Poojari, T. Rog, B. Strodel, Physiologically-relevant 
levels of sphingomyelin, but not GM1, induces a beta-sheet-rich structure in the 
amyloid-beta(1–42) monomer, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. Biomembr 2018 (1860) 
1709–1720, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamem.2018.03.026. 
[33] G. Comellas, C.M. Rienstra, Protein structure determination by magic-angle 
spinning solid-state NMR, and insights into the formation, structure, and stability 
of amyloid fibrils, Annu. Rev. Biophys. 42 (2013) 515–536, https://doi.org/ 
10.1146/annurev-biophys-083012-130356. 
[34] L. Nagel-Steger, M.C. Owen, B. Strodel, An account of amyloid oligomers: Facts 
and figures obtained from experiments and simulations, Chembiochem 17 (2016) 
657–676, https://doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201500623. 
[35] J. St Jean, R. Slavcev, P.N. Rao, The effects of amyloid beta aggregation on 
neuronal transcription, IBRO neuroscience reports 14 (2023) 375–379, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ibneur.2023.03.009. 
[36] H. Okumura, S.G. Itoh, Molecular dynamics simulation studies on the aggregation 
of amyloid-β peptides and their disaggregation by ultrasonic wave and infrared 
laser irradiation, Molecules 27 (2022) 2483, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
molecules27082483. 
[37] L. Millucci, L. Ghezzi, G. Bernardini, A. Santucci, Conformations and biological 
activities of amyloid beta peptide 25–35, Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 11 (2010) 
54–67, https://doi.org/10.2174/138920310790274626. 
[38] H.H. Tsai, J.B. Lee, Y.C. Shih, L. Wan, F.K. Shieh, C.Y. Chen, Location and 
conformation of amyloid β(25–35) peptide and its sequence-shuffled peptides 
within membranes: implications for aggregation and toxicity in PC12 cells, 
ChemMedChem 9 (2014) 1002–1011, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
cmdc.201400062. 
[39] A.K. Smith, D.K. Klimov, De novo aggregation of Alzheimer’s Aβ25-35 peptides in 
a lipid bilayer, Sci. Rep. 9 (2019) 7161, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019- 
43685-7. 
[40] K.L. Viola, W.L. Klein, Amyloid beta oligomers in Alzheimer’s disease 
pathogenesis, treatment, and diagnosis, Acta. Neuropathol 129 (2015) 183–206, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-015-1386-3. 
[41] D. Losic, L.L. Martin, A. Mechler, M.I. Aguilar, D.H. Small, High resolution 
scanning tunnelling microscopy of the beta-amyloid protein (Abeta1-40) of 
Alzheimer’s disease suggests a novel mechanism of oligomer assembly, J. Struct. 
Biol. 155 (2006) 104–110, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2006.02.013. 
[42] Y.R. Huang, R.T. Liu, The toxicity and polymorphism of β-amyloid oligomers, Int. 
J. Mol. Sci 21 (2020) 4477, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21124477. 
[43] E. Chatani, K. Yuzu, Y. Ohhashi, Y. Goto, Current understanding of the structure, 
stability and dynamic properties of amyloid fibrils, Int. J. Mol. Sci 22 (2021) 
4349, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22094349. 
[44] A. Naito, I. Kawamura, Solid-state NMR as a method to reveal structure and 
membrane-interaction of amyloidogenic proteins and peptides, Biochimica et 
Biophysica Acta (BBA) -, Biomembranes 1768 (2007) 1900–1912, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.03.025. 
[45] J.J. Balbach, Y. Ishii, O.N. Antzutkin, R.D. Leapman, N.W. Rizzo, F. Dyda, J. Reed, 
R. Tycko, Amyloid fibril formation by Aβ 16–22, a seven-residue fragment of the 
Alzheimer’s ˆa -amyloid peptide, and structural characterization by solid state 
NMR, Biochemistry 39 (2000) 13748–13759, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
bi0011330. 
[46] U. Sehar, P. Rawat, A.P. Reddy, J. Kopel, P.H. Reddy, Amyloid beta in aging and 
Alzheimer’s disease, Int J Mol Sci 23 (2022), https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms232112924. 
[47] M.S. Parihar, G.J. Brewer, Amyloid-β as a modulator of synaptic plasticity, 
J. Alzheimers Dis 22 (2010) 741–763, https://doi.org/10.3233/jad-2010- 
101020. 
[48] W. Cai, L. Li, S. Sang, X. Pan, C. Zhong, Physiological roles of β-amyloid in 
regulating synaptic function: Implications for AD pathophysiology, Neurosci. 
Bull. (2022) 1289–1308, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12264-022-00985-9. 
[49] M.L. Giuffrida, F. Caraci, B. Pignataro, S. Cataldo, P. De Bona, V. Bruno, 
G. Molinaro, G. Pappalardo, A. Messina, A. Palmigiano, D. Garozzo, F. Nicoletti, 
E. Rizzarelli, A. Copani, Beta-amyloid monomers are neuroprotective, 
J. Neurosci.: Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 29 (2009) 10582–10587, https://doi.org/ 
10.1523/jneurosci.1736-09.2009. 
[50] M. Nakamura, N. Shishido, A. Nunomura, M.A. Smith, G. Perry, Y. Hayashi, 
K. Nakayama, T. Hayashi, Three histidine residues of amyloid-beta peptide 
control the redox activity of copper and iron, Biochemistry 46 (2007) 
12737–12743, https://doi.org/10.1021/bi701079z. 
[51] E.J. Calabrese, Amyloid beta-peptide: biphasic dose responses, Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 
31 (2001) 605–606, https://doi.org/10.1080/20014091111857. 
[52] E.J. Fernandez-Perez, B. Mu˜noz, D.A. Bascu˜nan, C. Peters, N.O. Riffo-Lepe, M. 
P. Espinoza, P.J. Morgan, C. Filippi, R. Bourboulou, U. Sengupta, R. Kayed, 
J. Epsztein, L.G. Aguayo, Synaptic dysregulation and hyperexcitability induced by 
intracellular amyloid beta oligomers, Aging Cell 20 (2021) e13455, https://doi. 
org/10.1111/acel.13455. 
[53] G.S. Paranjape, L.K. Gouwens, D.C. Osborn, M.R. Nichols, Isolated amyloid- 
β(1–42) protofibrils, but not isolated fibrils, are robust stimulators of microglia, 
ACS Chem. Nerosci. 3 (2012) 302–311, https://doi.org/10.1021/cn2001238. 
[54] K. Ono, M. Tsuji, Protofibrils of amyloid-β are important targets of a disease- 
modifying approach for Alzheimer’s disease, Int. J. Mol. Sci 21 (3) (2020) 952, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21030952. 
[55] L. Mucke, D.J. Selkoe, Neurotoxicity of amyloid β-protein: synaptic and network 
dysfunction, Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 (2012), a006338, https://doi.org/ 
10.1101/cshperspect.a006338. 
[56] S. Fan, B. Zhang, P. Luan, B. Gu, Q. Wan, X. Huang, W. Liao, J. Liu, PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR/p70S6K pathway is involved in Aβ25-35-induced autophagy, Biomed Res. 
Int. 2015 (2015), 161020, https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/161020. 
[57] K.L. Viola, W.L. Klein, Amyloid β oligomers in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis, 
treatment, and diagnosis, Acta. Neuropathol 129 (2015) 183–206, https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00401-015-1386-3. 
[58] E.N. Cline, M.A. Bicca, K.L. Viola, W.L. Klein, The amyloid-β oligomer hypothesis: 
Beginning of the third decade, J. Alzheimers Dis 64 (2018) S567–S610, https:// 
doi.org/10.3233/jad-179941. 
[59] F.G. De Felice, D. Wu, M.P. Lambert, S.J. Fernandez, P.T. Velasco, P.N. Lacor, E. 
H. Bigio, J. Jerecic, P.J. Acton, P.J. Shughrue, E. Chen-Dodson, G.G. Kinney, W. 
L. Klein, Alzheimer’s disease-type neuronal tau hyperphosphorylation induced by 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
21
A beta oligomers, Neurobiol. Aging 29 (2008) 1334–1347, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.02.029. 
[60] B. Mroczko, M. Groblewska, A. Litman-Zawadzka, J. Kornhuber, P. Lewczuk, 
Amyloid β oligomers (AβOs) in Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neural Trans. (Vienna 
Austria) 125 (2018) (1996) 177–191, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00702-017- 
1820-x. 
[61] R.J. Bateman, C. Xiong, T.L. Benzinger, A.M. Fagan, A. Goate, N.C. Fox, D. 
S. Marcus, N.J. Cairns, X. Xie, T.M. Blazey, D.M. Holtzman, A. Santacruz, 
V. Buckles, A. Oliver, K. Moulder, P.S. Aisen, B. Ghetti, W.E. Klunk, E. McDade, R. 
N. Martins, C.L. Masters, R. Mayeux, J.M. Ringman, M.N. Rossor, P.R. Schofield, 
R.A. Sperling, S. Salloway, J.C. Morris, Clinical and biomarker changes in 
dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease, N. Engl. J. Med. 367 (2012) 795–804, 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1202753. 
[62] T. Varghese, R. Sheelakumari, J.S. James, P. Mathuranath, A review of 
neuroimaging biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease, Neurology Asia 18 (2013) 
239–248. 
[63] O. Sabri, M.N. Sabbagh, J. Seibyl, H. Barthel, H. Akatsu, Y. Ouchi, K. Senda, 
S. Murayama, K. Ishii, M. Takao, T.G. Beach, C.C. Rowe, J.B. Leverenz, B. Ghetti, 
J.W. Ironside, A.M. Catafau, A.W. Stephens, A. Mueller, N. Koglin, A. Hoffmann, 
K. Roth, C. Reininger, W.J. Schulz-Schaeffer, Florbetaben PET imaging to detect 
amyloid beta plaques in Alzheimer’s disease: phase 3 study, Alzheimers Dement. 
11 (8) (2015) 964–974, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2015.02.004. 
[64] P. Reveglia, C. Paolillo, G. Ferretti, A. De Carlo, A. Angiolillo, R. Nasso, 
M. Caputo, C. Matrone, A. Di Costanzo, G. Corso, Challenges in LC-MS-based 
metabolomics for Alzheimer’s disease early detection: targeted approaches versus 
untargeted approaches, Metabol.: Off. J. Metabol. Soc. 17 (2021) 78, https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11306-021-01828-w. 
[65] R. Ni, Magnetic resonance imaging in animal models of Alzheimer’s disease 
amyloidosis, Int. J. Mol. Sci 22 (2021) 12768, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms222312768. 
[66] X. Liu, K. Chen, T. Wu, D. Weidman, F. Lure, J. Li, Use of multimodality imaging 
and artificial intelligence for diagnosis and prognosis of early stages of 
Alzheimer’s disease, Transl. Res 194 (2018) 56–67, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trsl.2018.01.001. 
[67] Y. Zhou, L. Liu, Y. Hao, M. Xu, Detection of abeta monomers and oligomers: early 
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, Chem Asian J 11 (2016) 805–817, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/asia.201501355. 
[68] A. Chandra, G. Dervenoulas, M. Politis, Magnetic resonance imaging in 
Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment, J. Neurol. 266 (2019) 
1293–1302, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-018-9016-3. 
[69] A.T. Du, N. Schuff, J.H. Kramer, S. Ganzer, X.P. Zhu, W.J. Jagust, B.L. Miller, B. 
R. Reed, D. Mungas, K. Yaffe, H.C. Chui, M.W. Weiner, Higher atrophy rate of 
entorhinal cortex than hippocampus in AD, Neurology 62 (2004) 422–427, 
https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000106462.72282.90. 
[70] B. Yu, Y. Shan, J. Ding, A literature review of MRI techniques used to detect 
amyloid-beta plaques in Alzheimer’s disease patients, Ann. Palliat. Med. 10 
(2021) 10062–10074, https://doi.org/10.21037/apm-21-825. 
[71] N.J. Gong, R. Dibb, M. Bulk, L. van der Weerd, C. Liu, Imaging beta amyloid 
aggregation and iron accumulation in Alzheimer’s disease using quantitative 
susceptibility mapping MRI, Neuroimage 191 (2019) 176–185, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.019. 
[72] R. Ni, R.M. Nitsch, Recent developments in positron emission tomography tracers 
for proteinopathies imaging in dementia, Front. Aging Neurosci. 13 (2021), 
751897, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.751897. 
[73] S.R. Meier, D. Sehlin, S. Roshanbin, V.L. Falk, T. Saito, T.C. Saido, U. Neumann, 
J. Rokka, J. Eriksson, S. Syv¨anen, (11)C-PiB and (124)I-antibody PET provide 
differing estimates of brain amyloid-β after therapeutic intervention, J. Nucl. 
Med.: Off. Publicat. Soc. Nucl. Med. 63 (2022) 302–309, https://doi.org/ 
10.2967/jnumed.121.262083. 
[74] D.A. Wolk, C. Sadowsky, B. Safirstein, J.O. Rinne, R. Duara, R. Perry, M. Agronin, 
J. Gamez, J. Shi, A. Ivanoiu, L. Minthon, Z. Walker, S. Hasselbalch, C. Holmes, 
M. Sabbagh, M. Albert, A. Fleisher, P. Loughlin, E. Triau, K. Frey, P. Høgh, 
A. Bozoki, R. Bullock, E. Salmon, G. Farrar, C.J. Buckley, M. Zanette, P. 
F. Sherwin, A. Cherubini, F. Inglis, Use of flutemetamol F 18-labeled positron 
emission tomography and other biomarkers to assess risk of clinical progression 
in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment, JAMA Neurol. 75 (2018) 
1114–1123, https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0894. 
[75] T. Grimmer, K. Shi, J. Diehl-Schmid, B. Natale, A. Drzezga, S. F¨orster, H. F¨orstl, 
M. Schwaiger, I. Yakushev, H.J. Wester, A. Kurz, B.H. Yousefi, (18)F-FIBT may 
expand PET for β-amyloid imaging in neurodegenerative diseases, Mol. 
Psychiatry 25 (2020) 2608–2619, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-018-0203-5. 
[76] J. Hanrieder, Preface: Mass spectrometry in Alzheimer disease: This is the Preface 
for the special issue “Mass Spectrometry in Alzheimer Disease”, J. Neurochem. 
159 (2021) 207–210, https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.15512. 
[77] R. S¸tef˘anescu, G.D. Stanciu, A. Luca, I.C. Caba, B.I. Tamba, C.T. Mihai, 
Contributions of mass spectrometry to the identification of low molecular weight 
molecules able to reduce the toxicity of Amyloid-β peptide to cell cultures and 
transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease, Molecules 24 (6) (2019) 1167, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules24061167. 
[78] I. Kaya, D. Brinet, W. Michno, S. Syv¨anen, D. Sehlin, H. Zetterberg, K. Blennow, 
J. Hanrieder, Delineating amyloid plaque associated neuronal sphingolipids in 
transgenic Alzheimer’s disease mice (tgArcSwe) using MALDI imaging mass 
spectrometry, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 8 (2017) 347–355, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acschemneuro.6b00391. 
[79] N.V. Zakharova, A.E. Bugrova, A.S. Kononikhin, M.I. Indeykina, I.A. Popov, E. 
N. Nikolaev, Mass spectrometry analysis of the diversity of Aβ peptides: 
difficulties and future perspectives for AD biomarker discovery, Expert Rev. 
Proteomics 15 (2018) 773–775, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
14789450.2018.1525296. 
[80] Y. Yu, P. Wang, X. Zhu, Q. Peng, Y. Zhou, T. Yin, Y. Liang, X. Yin, Combined 
determination of copper ions and β-amyloid peptide by a single ratiometric 
electrochemical biosensor, Analyst 143 (2017) 323–331, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/c7an01683b. 
[81] E.A. Elbassal, C. Morris, T.W. Kent, R. Lantz, B. Ojha, E.P. Wojcikiewicz, D. Du, 
Gold nanoparticles as a probe for amyloid-β oligomer and amyloid formation, 
J. Phys. Chem. C Nanomater. Interf. 121 (2017) 20007–20015, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b05169. 
[82] S.V. Dzyuba, BODIPY dyes as probes and sensors to study amyloid-β-related 
processes, Biosensors 10 (2020) 192, https://doi.org/10.3390/bios10120192. 
[83] J. Xie, Z. Shen, Y. Anraku, K. Kataoka, X. Chen, Nanomaterial-based blood-brain- 
barrier (BBB) crossing strategies, Biomaterials 224 (2019), 119491, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2019.119491. 
[84] A. Cano, P. Turowski, M. Ettcheto, J.T. Duskey, G. Tosi, E. S´anchez-L´opez, M. 
L. García, A. Camins, E.B. Souto, A. Ruiz, M. Marqui´e, M. Boada, Nanomedicine- 
based technologies and novel biomarkers for the diagnosis and treatment of 
Alzheimer’s disease: from current to future challenges, J. Nanobiotechnol. 19 
(2021) 122, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-021-00864-x. 
[85] M. Mohajeri, B. Behnam, G.E. Barreto, A. Sahebkar, Carbon nanomaterials and 
amyloid-beta interactions: potentials for the detection and treatment of 
Alzheimer’s disease? Pharmacol. Res. 143 (2019) 186–203, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.phrs.2019.03.023. 
[86] H. Huang, P. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Yu, Y. Huang, H. Gu, C. Wang, Y. Yang, Graphene 
quantum dots for detecting monomeric amyloid peptides, Nanoscale 9 (2017) 
5044–5048, https://doi.org/10.1039/c6nr10017a. 
[87] D. Tao, C. Xie, S. Fu, S. Rong, S. Song, H. Ye, N. Jaffrezic-Renault, Z. Guo, 
Thionine-functionalized three-dimensional carbon nanomaterial-based 
aptasensor for analysis of Aβ oligomers in serum, Anal. Chim. Acta 1183 (2021), 
338990, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2021.338990. 
[88] W. Gao, W. Wang, X. Dong, Y. Sun, Nitrogen-doped carbonized polymer dots: A 
potent scavenger and detector targeting Alzheimer’s β-amyloid plaques, Small 16 
(43) (2020) 2002804, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202002804. 
[89] S. Martano, V. De Matteis, M. Cascione, R. Rinaldi, Inorganic nanomaterials 
versus polymer-based nanoparticles for overcoming neurodegeneration, 
Nanomaterials (Basel, Switzerland) 12 (2022) 2337, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
nano12142337. 
[90] Z. Qiu, Q. Shen, C. Jiang, L. Yao, X. Sun, J. Li, C. Duan, R. Li, X. Li, S.C. 
B. Gopinath, P. Anbu, T. Lakshmipriya, X. Li, Alzheimer’s disease determination 
by a dual probe on gold nanourchins and nanohorn hybrids, Int. J. Nanomed. 16 
(2021) 2311–2322, https://doi.org/10.2147/ijn.S302396. 
[91] A. Mazzaglia, G. Di Natale, R. Tosto, A. Scala, G. Sortino, A. Piperno, M. 
P. Casaletto, A. Riminucci, M.L. Giuffrida, P.G. Mineo, V. Villari, N. Micali, 
G. Pappalardo, KLVFF oligopeptide-decorated amphiphilic cyclodextrin 
nanomagnets for selective amyloid beta recognition and fishing, J. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 613 (2022) 814–826, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2022.01.051. 
[92] Y. Huang, Y. Chang, L. Liu, J. Wang, Nanomaterials for modulating the 
aggregation of beta-amyloid peptides, Molecules 26 (2021) 4301, https://doi. 
org/10.3390/molecules26144301. 
[93] X. Yan, Y. Pan, L. Ji, J. Gu, Y. Hu, Y. Xia, C. Li, X. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Yu, 
Multifunctional metal-organic framework as a versatile nanoplatform for Aβ 
oligomer imaging and chemo-photothermal treatment in living cells, Anal. Chem 
93 (2021) 13823–13834, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.1c02459. 
[94] H.X. Ren, Y.B. Miao, Y. Zhang, An aptamer based fluorometric assay for amyloid- 
β oligomers using a metal-organic framework of type Ru@MIL-101(Al) and 
enzyme-assisted recycling, Mikrochim. Acta 187 (2020) 114, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00604-019-4092-3. 
[95] Y. Zhou, H. Dong, L. Liu, M. Xu, Simple colorimetric detection of amyloid 
β-peptide (1–40) based on aggregation of gold nanoparticles in the presence of 
copper ions, Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany) 11 (2015) 
2144–2149, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201402593. 
[96] J.H. Lee, D.Y. Kang, S.U. Kim, C.H. Yea, B.K. Oh, J.W. Choi, Electrical detection of 
beta-amyloid (1–40) using scanning tunneling microscopy, Ultramicroscopy 109 
(2009) 923–928, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultramic.2009.03.009. 
[97] S. Paracha, C. Hestekin, Field amplified sample stacking of amyloid beta (1–42) 
oligomers using capillary electrophoresis, Biomicrofluidics 10 (2016), 033105, 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4954051. 
[98] N.E. Pryor, M.A. Moss, C.N. Hestekin, Capillary electrophoresis for the analysis of 
the effect of sample preparation on early stages of Aβ1-40 aggregation, 
Electrophoresis 35 (2014) 1814–1820, https://doi.org/10.1002/elps.201400012. 
[99] C. Spuch, O. Saida, C. Navarro, Advances in the treatment of neurodegenerative 
disorders employing nanoparticles, Recent Pat. Drug Deliv. Formul. 6 (2012) 
2–18, https://doi.org/10.2174/187221112799219125. 
[100] R.N.L. Lamptey, B. Chaulagain, R. Trivedi, A. Gothwal, B. Layek, J. Singh, 
A review of the common neurodegenerative disorders: current therapeutic 
approaches and the potential role of nanotherapeutics, Int. J. Mol. Sci 23 (3) 
(2022) 1851, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23031851. 
[101] Y. Huang, Y. Chang, L. Liu, J. Wang, Nanomaterials for modulating the 
aggregation of β-amyloid peptides, Molecules 26 (14) (2021) 4301, https://doi. 
org/10.3390/molecules26144301. 
[102] X. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Li, M. Zhong, P. Zhao, C. Guo, H. Xu, T. Wang, H. Gao, 
Brain targeting and Aβ binding bifunctional nanoparticles inhibit amyloid protein 
aggregation in APP/PS1 transgenic mice, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 12 (2021) 
2110–2121, https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.1c00035. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
22
[103] K. Debnath, S. Shekhar, V. Kumar, N.R. Jana, N.R. Jana, efficient inhibition of 
protein aggregation disintegration of aggregates, and lowering of cytotoxicity by 
green tea polyphenol-based self-assembled polymer nanoparticles, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interf. 8 (2016) 20309–20318, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b06853. 
[104] C. Riccardi, F. Napolitano, D. Montesarchio, S. Sampaolo, M.A.B. Melone, 
Nanoparticle-guided brain drug delivery: expanding the therapeutic approach to 
neurodegenerative diseases, Pharmaceutics 13 (11) (2021) 1897, https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/pharmaceutics13111897. 
[105] M. Mahmoudi, O. Akhavan, M. Ghavami, F. Rezaee, S.M. Ghiasi, Graphene oxide 
strongly inhibits amyloid beta fibrillation, Nanoscale 4 (2012) 7322–7325, 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c2nr31657a. 
[106] S. Song, J. Wu, Y. Cheng, L. Ma, T. Liu, J. Liu, J. Liu, J. Sotor, P. Luan, Emerging 
two-dimensional materials-enabled diagnosis and treatments of Alzheimer’s 
disease: Status and future challenges, Appl. Mater. Today 23 (2021) 101028, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2021.101028. 
[107] S. Xiao, D. Zhou, P. Luan, B. Gu, L. Feng, S. Fan, W. Liao, W. Fang, L. Yang, E. Tao, 
R. Guo, J. Liu, Graphene quantum dots conjugated neuroprotective peptide 
improve learning and memory capability, Biomaterials 106 (2016) 98–110, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.08.021. 
[108] Z. Bednarikova, P.D. Huy, M.M. Mocanu, D. Fedunova, M.S. Li, Z. Gazova, 
Fullerenol C60(OH)16 prevents amyloid fibrillization of Aβ40-in vitro and in 
silico approach, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18 (2016) 18855–18867, https://doi. 
org/10.1039/c6cp00901h. 
[109] Y. Sun, Z. Qian, G. Wei, The inhibitory mechanism of a fullerene derivative 
against amyloid-β peptide aggregation: an atomistic simulation study, Phys. 
Chem. Chem. Phys. 18 (2016) 12582–12591, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
c6cp01014h. 
[110] L. Xie, Y. Luo, D. Lin, W. Xi, X. Yang, G. Wei, The molecular mechanism of 
fullerene-inhibited aggregation of Alzheimer’s β-amyloid peptide fragment, 
Nanoscale 6 (2014) 9752–9762, https://doi.org/10.1039/c4nr01005a. 
[111] Z. Liu, Y.u. Zou, Q. Zhang, P. Chen, Y.u. Liu, Z. Qian, Distinct binding dynamics, 
sites and interactions of fullerene and fullerenols with amyloid-β peptides 
revealed by molecular dynamics simulations, Int. J. Mol. Sci 20 (8) (2019) 2048, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20082048. 
[112] A.G. Bobylev, O.A. Kraevaya, L.G. Bobyleva, E.A. Khakina, R.S. Fadeev, A. 
V. Zhilenkov, D.V. Mishchenko, N.V. Penkov, I.Y. Teplov, E.I. Yakupova, I. 
M. Vikhlyantsev, P.A. Troshin, Anti-amyloid activities of three different types of 
water-soluble fullerene derivatives, Colloids Surfaces B, Biointerf. 183 (2019), 
110426, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2019.110426. 
[113] Z. Du, N. Gao, X. Wang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Near-infrared switchable fullerene-based 
synergy therapy for Alzheimer’s disease, Small (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse 
Germany) 14 (33) (2018) 1801852, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201801852. 
[114] C. Xiang, Y. Zhang, W. Guo, X.J. Liang, Biomimetic carbon nanotubes for 
neurological disease therapeutics as inherent medication, Acta. Pharm. Sin. B 10 
(2020) 239–248, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2019.11.003. 
[115] P. Carneiro, S. Morais, M.C. Pereira, Nanomaterials towards biosensing of 
Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers, Nanomaterials (Basel, Switzerland) 9 (2019) 
1663, https://doi.org/10.3390/nano9121663. 
[116] K.S. Siddiqi, A. Husen, S.S. Sohrab, M.O. Yassin, Recent status of nanomaterial 
fabrication and their potential applications in neurological disease management, 
Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13 (2018) 231, https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-018-2638- 
7. 
[117] D.M. Teleanu, C. Chircov, A.M. Grumezescu, A. Volceanov, R.I. Teleanu, Blood- 
brain delivery methods using nanotechnology, Pharmaceutics 10 (2018) 269, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics10040269. 
[118] Z. Nan, Y. Jingjie, L. Yongxiang, G. Ping, Z. Kaiyang, H. Xiaoling, C. Yuan, Tuning 
the structure of monomeric amyloid beta peptide by curvature of carbon 
nanotubes, Carbon (2019), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2019.07.068. 
[119] D. Lin, R. Qi, S. Li, R. He, P. Li, G. Wei, X. Yang, Interaction dynamics in inhibiting 
the aggregation of Aβ peptides by SWCNTs: A combined experimental and coarse- 
grained molecular dynamic simulation study, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 7 (2016) 
1232–1240, https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.6b00101. 
[120] F. Liu, W. Wang, J. Sang, L. Jia, F. Lu, Hydroxylated single-walled carbon 
nanotubes inhibit Aβ(42) fibrillogenesis, disaggregate mature fibrils, and protect 
against Aβ(42)-induced cytotoxicity, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 10 (2019) 588–598, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.8b00441. 
[121] L. Baweja, K. Balamurugan, V. Subramanian, A. Dhawan, Effect of graphene oxide 
on the conformational transitions of amyloid beta peptide: A molecular dynamics 
simulation study, J. Mol. Graph. Model. 61 (2015) 175–185, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jmgm.2015.07.007. 
[122] I. Ahmad, A. Mozhi, L. Yang, Q. Han, X. Liang, C. Li, R. Yang, C. Wang, Graphene 
oxide-iron oxide nanocomposite as an inhibitor of Aβ 42 amyloid peptide 
aggregation, Colloids Surf. B Biointer. 159 (2017) 540–545, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.08.020. 
[123] F. Chu, K. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, J. Huang, Z. Yang, Graphene oxide ameliorates the 
cognitive impairment through inhibiting PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway to induce 
autophagy in AD mouse model, Neurochem. Res. 46 (2021) 309–325, https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11064-020-03167-z. 
[124] X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H.J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker, W.A. Scrivens, 
Electrophoretic analysis and purification of fluorescent single-walled carbon 
nanotube fragments, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126 (2004) 12736–12737, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ja040082h. 
[125] Y.J. Chung, C.H. Lee, J. Lim, J. Jang, H. Kang, C.B. Park, Photomodulating carbon 
dots for spatiotemporal suppression of alzheimer’s β-amyloid aggregation, ACS 
Nano 14 (2020) 16973–16983, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.0c06078. 
[126] H. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Ding, T. Wu, S. Cai, W. Zhang, R. Cai, C. Chen, R. Yang, 
Synthesis of carbon quantum dots for application of alleviating amyloid-β 
mediated neurotoxicity, Colloids Surf. B Biointerf. 212 (2022), 112373, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2022.112373. 
[127] W. Zhang, G. Sigdel, K.J. Mintz, E.S. Seven, Y. Zhou, C. Wang, R.M. Leblanc, 
Carbon dots: A future blood-brain barrier penetrating nanomedicine and drug 
nanocarrier, Int. J. Nanomed. 16 (2021) 5003–5016, https://doi.org/10.2147/ 
ijn.S318732. 
[128] M. Ashrafizadeh, R. Mohammadinejad, S.K. Kailasa, Z. Ahmadi, E.G. Afshar, 
A. Pardakhty, Carbon dots as versatile nanoarchitectures for the treatment of 
neurological disorders and their theranostic applications: A review, Adv. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 278 (2020), 102123, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2020.102123. 
[129] A. Nair, J.T. Haponiuk, S. Thomas, S. Gopi, Natural carbon-based quantum dots 
and their applications in drug delivery: A review, Biomed. & Pharmacother. =
Biomed. & Pharmacother. 132 (2020), 110834, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biopha.2020.110834. 
[130] C. Yan, C. Wang, X. Shao, Q. Shu, X. Hu, P. Guan, Y. Teng, Y. Cheng, Dual- 
targeted carbon-dot-drugs nanoassemblies for modulating Alzheimer’s related 
amyloid-β aggregation and inhibiting fungal infection, Materials today. Bio 12 
(2021), 100167, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2021.100167. 
[131] K.M. El-Say, H.S. El-Sawy, Polymeric nanoparticles: Promising platform for drug 
delivery, Int. J. Pharm 528 (2017) 675–691, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijpharm.2017.06.052. 
[132] J. Gupta, M.T. Fatima, Z. Islam, R.H. Khan, V.N. Uversky, P. Salahuddin, 
Nanoparticle formulations in the diagnosis and therapy of Alzheimer’s disease, 
Int. J. Biol. Macromol 130 (2019) 515–526, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijbiomac.2019.02.156. 
[133] A. Cano, P. Turowski, M. Ettcheto, J.T. Duskey, G. Tosi, E. Sanchez-Lopez, M. 
L. Garcia, A. Camins, E.B. Souto, A. Ruiz, M. Marquie, M. Boada, Nanomedicine- 
based technologies and novel biomarkers for the diagnosis and treatment of 
Alzheimer’s disease: from current to future challenges, J. Nanobiotechnol. 19 
(2021) 122, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-021-00864-x. 
[134] A. Kumari, S.K. Yadav, S.C. Yadav, Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles based 
drug delivery systems, Colloids Surf. B Biointerf. 75 (2010) 1–18, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2009.09.001. 
[135] D. Zhao, S. Yu, B. Sun, S. Gao, S. Guo, K. Zhao, Biomedical applications of 
chitosan and its derivative nanoparticles, Polymers (Basel) 10 (2018) 462, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym10040462. 
[136] Z. Jiang, X. Dong, Y. Sun, Charge effects of self-assembled chitosan-hyaluronic 
acid nanoparticles on inhibiting amyloid β-protein aggregation, Carbohydr. Res. 
461 (2018) 11–18, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carres.2018.03.001. 
[137] E. Manek, F. Darvas, G.A. Petroianu, Use of biodegradable, chitosan-based 
nanoparticles in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, Molecules 25 (2020) 4866, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules25204866. 
[138] C. Yang, Y.S. Mo, H.F. Chen, Y.H. Huang, S.L. Li, H. Wang, S.Q. Huang, X. Chang, 
Q. Du, Q. Wang, The effects of Danggui-Shaoyao-San on neuronal degeneration 
and amyloidosis in mouse and its molecular mechanism for the treatment of 
Alzheimer’s disease, J. Integr. Neurosci. 20 (2021) 255–264, https://doi.org/ 
10.31083/j.jin2002025. 
[139] S. Fan, Y. Zheng, X. Liu, W. Fang, X. Chen, W. Liao, X. Jing, M. Lei, E. Tao, Q. Ma, 
X. Zhang, R. Guo, J. Liu, Curcumin-loaded PLGA-PEG nanoparticles conjugated 
with B6 peptide for potential use in Alzheimer’s disease, Drug Deliv 25 (2018) 
1091–1102, https://doi.org/10.1080/10717544.2018.1461955. 
[140] S.K. Kim, R. Pangestuti, Biological activities and potential health benefits of 
fucoxanthin derived from marine brown algae, Adv. Food Nutr. Res. 64 (2011) 
111–128, https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-387669-0.00009-0. 
[141] M. Yang, L. Jin, Z. Wu, Y. Xie, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, S. Yan, B. Chen, H. Liang, C. 
B. Naman, J. Zhang, S. He, X. Yan, L. Zhao, W. Cui, PLGA-PEG nanoparticles 
facilitate in vivo anti-Alzheimer’s effects of fucoxanthin, a marine carotenoid 
derived from edible brown algae, J. Agric. Food Chem. 69 (2021) 9764–9777, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.1c00569. 
[142] S. Sathya, B. Shanmuganathan, B. Balasubramaniam, K. Balamurugan, K.P. Devi, 
Phytol loaded PLGA nanoparticles regulate the expression of Alzheimer’s related 
genes and neuronal apoptosis against amyloid-β induced toxicity in Neuro-2a cells 
and transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans, Food Chem. Toxicol. 136 (2020), 110962, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2019.110962. 
[143] B.G. Anand, Q. Wu, G. Karthivashan, K.P. Shejale, S. Amidian, H. Wille, S. Kar, 
Mimosine functionalized gold nanoparticles (Mimo-AuNPs) suppress β-amyloid 
aggregation and neuronal toxicity, Bioact. Mater. 6 (2021) 4491–4505, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2021.04.029. 
[144] I. Javed, G. Peng, Y. Xing, T. Yu, M. Zhao, A. Kakinen, A. Faridi, C.L. Parish, 
F. Ding, T.P. Davis, P.C. Ke, S. Lin, Inhibition of amyloid beta toxicity in zebrafish 
with a chaperone-gold nanoparticle dual strategy, Nat. Commun 10 (2019) 3780, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11762-0. 
[145] M.C. Chiang, C.J.B. Nicol, C.H. Lin, S.J. Chen, C. Yen, R.N. Huang, Nanogold 
induces anti-inflammation against oxidative stress induced in human neural stem 
cells exposed to amyloid-beta peptide, Neurochem. Int 145 (2021), 104992, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2021.104992. 
[146] E. Dyne, P.S. Prakash, J. Li, B. Yu, T.-L. Schmidt, S. Huang, M.-H. Kim, Mild 
magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia promotes the disaggregation and microglia- 
mediated clearance of beta-amyloid plaques, Nanomed.: Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 
34 (2021), 102397, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2021.102397. 
[147] M. Stefani, S. Rigacci, Protein folding and aggregation into amyloid: the 
interference by natural phenolic compounds, Int. J. Mol. Sci 14 (2013) 
12411–12457, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms140612411. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
23
[148] E. Halevas, B. Mavroidi, C.M. Nday, J. Tang, G.C. Smith, N. Boukos, 
G. Litsardakis, M. Pelecanou, A. Salifoglou, Modified magnetic core-shell 
mesoporous silica nano-formulations with encapsulated quercetin exhibit anti- 
amyloid and antioxidant activity, J. Inorg. Biochem. 213 (2020), 111271, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2020.111271. 
[149] J. Wu, W. Dong, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, M. Akioma, J. Liu, Y. Liu, A. Pliss, X. Zhang, 
P. Luan, Emerging two-dimensional materials-based diagnosis of 
neurodegenerative diseases: Status and challenges, Nano Today 40 (2021) 
101284, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.na ntod.2021.101284. 
[150] Q. Chen, L. Yang, C. Zheng, W. Zheng, J. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Liu, Mo 
polyoxometalate nanoclusters capable of inhibiting the aggregation of Aβ-peptide 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease, Nanoscale 6 (2014) 6886–6897, https://doi. 
org/10.1039/c3nr05906e. 
[151] M. Li, C. Xu, L. Wu, J. Ren, E. Wang, X. Qu, Self-assembled peptide- 
polyoxometalate hybrid nanospheres: two in one enhances targeted inhibition of 
amyloid β-peptide aggregation associated with Alzheimer’s disease, Small 9 
(2013) 3455–3461, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201202612. 
[152] J. Geng, M. Li, J. Ren, E. Wang, X. Qu, Polyoxometalates as inhibitors of the 
aggregation of amyloid β peptides associated with Alzheimer’s disease, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 50 (2011) 4184–4188, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
anie.201007067. 
[153] J. Zhao, K. Li, K. Wan, T. Sun, N. Zheng, F. Zhu, J. Ma, J. Jiao, T. Li, J. Ni, X. Shi, 
H. Wang, Q. Peng, J. Ai, W. Xu, S. Liu, Organoplatinum-substituted 
polyoxometalate inhibits β-amyloid aggregation for Alzheimer’s therapy, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 58 (2019) 18032–18039, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
anie.201910521. 
[154] N. Gao, Z. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Liu, D. Yu, J. Ren, X. Qu, Site-Directed Chemical 
Modification of Amyloid by Polyoxometalates for Inhibition of Protein Misfolding 
and Aggregation, Angew. Chem. (International ed. in English), 61 (2022) 
e202115336, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202115336. 
[155] M. Ma, N. Gao, Y. Sun, X. Du, J. Ren, X. Qu, Redox-activated near-infrared- 
responsive polyoxometalates used for photothermal treatment of Alzheimer’s 
disease, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 7 (2018) 1800320, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adhm.201800320. 
[156] A.C. Kaushik, A. Kumar, V.D. Dwivedi, S. Bharadwaj, S. Kumar, K. Bharti, 
P. Kumar, R.K. Chaudhary, S.K. Mishra, Deciphering the biochemical pathway 
and pharmacokinetic study of amyloid βeta-42 with superparamagnetic iron 
oxide nanoparticles (spions) using systems biology approach, Mol. Neurobiol. 55 
(2018) 3224–3236, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-017-0546-y. 
[157] X.G. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Lu, D.Q. Liu, Y.R. Huang, J. Zhu, W.W. Zhou, X.L. Yu, R. 
T. Liu, Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles conjugated with Aβ oligomer- 
specific scFv antibody and class A scavenger receptor activator show therapeutic 
potentials for Alzheimer’s Disease, J Nanobiotechnol. 18 (2020) 160, https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s12951-020-00723-1. 
[158] M. Sanati, S. Aminyavari, F. Khodagholi, M.J. Hajipour, P. Sadeghi, M. Noruzi, 
A. Moshtagh, H. Behmadi, M. Sharifzadeh, PEGylated superparamagnetic iron 
oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) ameliorate learning and memory deficit in a rat 
model of Alzheimer’s disease: Potential participation of STIMs, Neurotoxicology 
85 (2021) 145–159, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2021.05.013. 
[159] D. Lo Furno, G. Mannino, R. Giuffrida, Functional role of mesenchymal stem cells 
in the treatment of chronic neurodegenerative diseases, J. Cell. Physiol. (2018) 
3982–3999, https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.26192. 
[160] F.Q. Hour, A.J. Moghadam, A. Shakeri-Zadeh, M. Bakhtiyari, R. Shabani, 
M. Mehdizadeh, Magnetic targeted delivery of the SPIONs-labeled mesenchymal 
stem cells derived from human Wharton’s jelly in Alzheimer’s rat models, 
J. Control. Release 321 (2020) 430–441, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jconrel.2020.02.035. 
[161] T.T. Nguyen, T.T.D. Nguyen, N.M. Tran, G. Van Vo, Lipid-based nanocarriers via 
nose-to-brain pathway for central nervous system disorders, Neurochem. Res. 47 
(2022) 552–573, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-021-03488-7. 
[162] S. Sethuraman, S. Balakrishnan, M. Ganeshan, R. Kandasamy, D., Kasi Pandima, 
α-bisabolol loaded solid lipid nanoparticles attenuates Aβ aggregation and 
protects Neuro-2a cells from Aβ induced neurotoxicity, J. Mol. Liq. (2018), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2018.05.075. 
[163] S. Sathya, B. Shanmuganathan, K.P. Devi, Deciphering the anti-apoptotic 
potential of α-bisabolol loaded solid lipid nanoparticles against Aβ induced 
neurotoxicity in Neuro-2a cells, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 190 (2020), 
110948, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2020.110948. 
[164] F. Fernandes, M. Dias-Teixeira, C. Delerue-Matos, C. Grosso, Critical review of 
lipid-based nanoparticles as carriers of neuroprotective drugs and extracts, 
Nanomaterials (Basel, Switzerland) 11 (2021) 563, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
nano11030563. 
[165] R.G.R. Pinheiro, A. Granja, J.A. Loureiro, M.C. Pereira, M. Pinheiro, A.R. Neves, 
S. Reis, RVG29-functionalized lipid nanoparticles for quercetin brain delivery and 
Alzheimer’s disease, Pharm. Res 37 (2020) 139, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11095-020-02865-1. 
[166] E. Markova, L. Taneska, M. Kostovska, D. Shalabalija, L. Mihailova, M. Glavas 
Dodov, P. Makreski, N. Geskovski, M. Petrushevska, N.T. A, M. Simonoska 
Crcarevska, Design and evaluation of nanostructured lipid carriers loaded with 
Salvia officinalis extract for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 
B Appl. Biomater. 110 (2022) 1368–1390, https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.b.35006. 
[167] C. Hernandez, S. Shukla, Liposome based drug delivery as a potential treatment 
option for Alzheimer’s disease, Neural Regen. Res. 17 (2022) 1190–1198, https:// 
doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.327328. 
[168] N. Naziris, C. Demetzos, Liposomes: Production Methods and Application in 
Alzheimer’s Disease, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.1399 (2021) 385–394, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-030-78787-5_48. 
[169] L. Ord´o˜nez-Guti´errez, F. Wandosell, Nanoliposomes as a therapeutic tool for 
Alzheimer’s disease, Front. Synaptic Neurosci. 12 (2020) 20, https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fnsyn.2020.00020. 
[170] C. Ross, M. Taylor, N. Fullwood, D. Allsop, Liposome delivery systems for the 
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, Int. J. Nanomed. 13 (2018) 8507–8522, 
https://doi.org/10.2147/ijn.S183117. 
[171] M. Fernandes, I. Lopes, L. Magalh˜aes, M.P. S´arria, R. Machado, J.C. Sousa, 
C. Botelho, J. Teixeira, A.C. Gomes, Novel concept of exosome-like liposomes for 
the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Control. Release 336 (2021) 130–143, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.06.018. 
[172] K. Papadia, E. Markoutsa, S. Mourtas, A.D. Giannou, B. La Ferla, F. Nicotra, 
M. Salmona, P. Klepetsanis, G.T. Stathopoulos, S.G. Antimisiaris, Multifunctional 
LUV liposomes decorated for BBB and amyloid targeting. A. In vitro proof-of- 
concept, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 101 (2017) 140–148, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ejps.2017.02.019. 
[173] A. Binda, A. Panariti, A. Barbuti, C. Murano, R. Dal Magro, M. Masserini, F. Re, 
I. Rivolta, Modulation of the intrinsic neuronal excitability by multifunctional 
liposomes tailored for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, Int. J. Nanomed. 13 
(2018) 4059–4071, https://doi.org/10.2147/ijn.S161563. 
[174] S. Mourtas, B. Mavroidi, A. Marazioti, M. Kannavou, M. Sagnou, M. Pelecanou, S. 
G. Antimisiaris, Liposomes decorated with 2-(4′-Aminophenyl)benzothiazole 
effectively Inhibit Aβ1–42 fibril formation and exhibit in vitro brain-targeting 
potential, Biomacromolecules 21 (2020) 4685–4698, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.biomac.0c00811. 
[175] Y. Kuang, J. Zhang, M. Xiong, W. Zeng, X. Lin, X. Yi, Y. Luo, M. Yang, F. Li, 
Q. Huang, A novel nanosystem realizing curcumin delivery based on Fe(3)O(4) 
@carbon dots nanocomposite for Alzheimer’s disease therapy, Front Bioeng 
Biotechnol 8 (2020), 614906, https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.614906. 
[176] R.G.R. Pinheiro, A. Granja, J.A. Loureiro, M.C. Pereira, M. Pinheiro, A.R. Neves, 
S. Reis, RVG29-functionalized lipid nanoparticles for quercetin brain delivery and 
Alzheimer’s disease, Pharm. Res. 37 (2020) 139, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11095-020-02865-1. 
[177] L. Wang, Y.L. Yin, X.Z. Liu, P. Shen, Y.G. Zheng, X.R. Lan, C.B. Lu, J.Z. Wang, 
Current understanding of metal ions in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease, 
Transl. Neurodegener 9 (2020) 10, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-020-00189- 
z. 
[178] N. Kim, H.J. Lee, Redox-active metal ions and amyloid-degrading enzymes in 
Alzheimer’s disease, Int. J. Mol. Sci 22 (2021) 7697, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms22147697. 
[179] S. Ben-Shushan, Y. Miller, Neuropeptides: Roles and activities as metal chelators 
in neurodegenerative diseases, J. Phys. Chem. B 125 (2021) 2796–2811, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.0c11151. 
[180] F. Lermyte, J. Everett, Y.P.Y. Lam, C.A. Wootton, J. Brooks, M.P. Barrow, N. 
D. Telling, P.J. Sadler, P.B. O’Connor, J.F. Collingwood, Metal ion binding to the 
amyloid β monomer studied by native top-down FTICR mass spectrometry, J. Am. 
Soc. Mass Spectrom. 30 (2019) 2123–2134, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13361- 
019-02283-7. 
[181] X. Jiang, J. Guo, Y. Lv, C. Yao, C. Zhang, Z. Mi, Y. Shi, J. Gu, T. Zhou, R. Bai, 
Y. Xie, Rational design, synthesis and biological evaluation of novel 
multitargeting anti-AD iron chelators with potent MAO-B inhibitory and 
antioxidant activity, Bioorg. Med. Chem. 28 (2020), 115550, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bmc.2020.115550. 
[182] J. Guo, Z. Mi, X. Jiang, C. Zhang, Z. Guo, L. Li, J. Gu, T. Zhou, R. Bai, Y. Xie, 
Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of potential anti-AD hybrids with 
monoamine oxidase B inhibitory and iron-chelating effects, Bioorg. Chem. 108 
(2021), 104564, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioorg.2020.104564. 
[183] J. Zhao, L. Xu, Q. Liang, Q. Sun, C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Ding, P. Zhou, Metal 
chelator EGCG attenuates Fe(III)-induced conformational transition of 
α-synuclein and protects AS-PC12 cells against Fe(III)-induced death, 
J. Neurochem. 143 (2017) 136–146, https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.14142. 
[184] S. Kantham, S. Chan, G. McColl, J.A. Miles, S.K. Veliyath, G.S. Deora, S.N. Dighe, 
S. Khabbazi, M.O. Parat, B.P. Ross, Effect of the biphenyl neolignan honokiol on 
Aβ(42)-induced toxicity in caenorhabditis elegans, Aβ(42) fibrillation, 
cholinesterase activity, DPPH radicals, and iron(II) chelation, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 
8 (2017) 1901–1912, https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.7b00071. 
[185] R.R.V. Carvalho, T.V. Peres, C.W. Liria, M.T. Machini, M. Aschner, B.P. Esp´osito, 
Conjugates of desferrioxamine and aromatic amines improve markers of iron- 
dependent neurotoxicity, Biometals: Int. J. Role Metal Ions Biology Biochem. 
Med. 34 (2021) 259–275, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10534-020-00277-7. 
[186] D. Palanimuthu, Z. Wu, P.J. Jansson, N. Braidy, P.V. Bernhardt, D.R. Richardson, 
D.S. Kalinowski, Novel chelators based on adamantane-derived semicarbazones 
and hydrazones that target multiple hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease, Dalton 
Transact. (Cambridge England) 47 (2018) (2003) 7190–7205, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/c8dt01099d. 
[187] D. Yu, Y. Guan, F. Bai, Z. Du, N. Gao, J. Ren, X. Qu, Metal-organic frameworks 
harness cu chelating and photooxidation against amyloid β aggregation in Vivo, 
Chem. (Weinheim an der Bergstrasse, Germany) 25 (2019) 3489–3495, https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/chem.201805835. 
[188] C.R.A. Mahl, T.B. Taketa, J.B.M. Rocha-Neto, W.P. Almeida, M.M. Beppu, copper 
ion uptake by chitosan in the presence of amyloid-β and histidine, Appl. Biochem. 
Biotechnol. 190 (2020) 949–965, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12010-019-03120-z. 
[189] J. Zhao, Q. Shi, H. Tian, Y. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Xu, A. Robert, Q. Liu, B. Meunier, 
TDMQ20, a specific copper chelator reduces memory impairments in Alzheimer’s 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
24
disease mouse models, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 12 (2021) 140–149, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acschemneuro.0c00621. 
[190] E. Atri´an-Blasco, L. de Cremoux, X. Lin, R. Mitchell-Heggs, L. Sabater, 
S. Blanchard, C. Hureau, Keggin-type polyoxometalates as Cu(ii) chelators in the 
context of Alzheimer’s disease, Chem. Commun. 58 (2022) 2367–2370, https:// 
doi.org/10.1039/D1CC05792H. 
[191] A. Kaur, S.S. Narang, A. Kaur, S. Mann, N. Priyadarshi, B. Goyal, N.K. Singhal, 
D. Goyal, multifunctional mono-triazole derivatives inhibit Aβ(42) aggregation 
and Cu(2+)-mediated Aβ(42) aggregation and protect against Aβ(42)-induced 
cytotoxicity, Chem. Res. Toxicol. 32 (2019) 1824–1839, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.9b00168. 
[192] S. Mitra, K. Talukdar, P. Prasad, S.K. Misra, S. Khan, J.S. Sharp, J.W. Jurss, 
S. Chakraborty, Rational design of a Cu chelator that mitigates Cu-induced ROS 
production by amyloid beta, Chembiochem 23 (2022) e202100485, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/cbic.202100485. 
[193] Y.B. Peng, C. Tao, C.P. Tan, P. Zhao, Inhibition of Aβ peptide aggregation by 
ruthenium(II) polypyridyl complexes through copper chelation, J. Inorg. Biochem 
224 (2021), 111591, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2021.111591. 
[194] A.E. Behar, L. Sabater, M. Baskin, C. Hureau, G. Maayan, A Water-soluble peptoid 
chelator that can remove Cu(2+) from amyloid-β peptides and stop the formation 
of reactive oxygen species associated with Alzheimer’s disease, Angew Chem. Int. 
Ed. Engl 60 (2021) 24588–24597, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202109758. 
[195] J. Guo, W. Sun, F. Liu, Brazilin inhibits the Zn(2+)-mediated aggregation of 
amyloid β-protein and alleviates cytotoxicity, J. Inorg. Biochem 177 (2017) 
183–189, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2017.09.015. 
[196] X. Li, B. Xie, X. Dong, Y. Sun, Bifunctionality of Iminodiacetic acid-modified 
lysozyme on inhibiting Zn(2+)-mediated amyloid β-protein aggregation, 
Langmuir: ACS J. Surf Colloids 34 (2018) 5106–5115, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.langmuir.8b00254. 
[197] H. Liu, X. Dong, F. Liu, J. Zheng, Y. Sun, Iminodiacetic acid-conjugated 
nanoparticles as a bifunctional modulator against Zn(2+)-mediated amyloid 
β-protein aggregation and cytotoxicity, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 505 (2017) 
973–982, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2017.06.093. 
[198] R. Kumar, P.F. Pavlov, B. Winblad, Metal binding by GMP-1 and Its Pyrimido [1, 
2]benzimidazole analogs confirms protection against amyloid-β associated 
neurotoxicity, J. Alzheimers Dis 73 (2020) 695–705, https://doi.org/10.3233/ 
jad-190695. 
[199] V. Romanucci, M. Giordano, G. De Tommaso, M. Iuliano, R. Bernini, M. Clemente, 
S. Garcia-Vi˜nuales, D. Milardi, A. Zarrelli, G. Di Fabio, Synthesis of new tyrosol- 
based phosphodiester derivatives: Effect on amyloid β aggregation and metal 
chelation ability, ChemMedChem 16 (2021) 1172–1183, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/cmdc.202000807. 
[200] R. Chang, X. Chen, H. Yu, G. Tan, H. Wen, J. Huang, Z. Hao, Modified EDTA 
selectively recognized Cu(2+) and its application in the disaggregation of 
β-amyloid-Cu (II)/Zn (II) aggregates, J. Inorg. Biochem 203 (2020), 110929, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2019.110929. 
[201] J. Cheng-Chung Wei, H.C. Huang, W.J. Chen, C.N. Huang, C.H. Peng, C.L. Lin, 
Epigallocatechin gallate attenuates amyloid β-induced inflammation and 
neurotoxicity in EOC 13.31 microglia, Eur. J. Pharmacol. 770 (2016) 16–24, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.11.048. 
[202] N.A. Singh, V. Bhardwaj, C. Ravi, N. Ramesh, A.K.A. Mandal, Z.A. Khan, EGCG 
nanoparticles attenuate aluminum chloride induced neurobehavioral deficits beta 
amyloid and tau pathology in a rat model of Alzheimer’s disease, Front. Aging 
Neurosci. 10 (2018) 244, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2018.00244. 
[203] A. Acharya, J. Stockmann, L. Beyer, T. Rudack, A. Nabers, J.C. Gumbart, 
K. Gerwert, V.S. Batista, The effect of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate on the 
amyloid-β secondary structure, Biophys. J . 119 (2020) 349–359, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bpj.2020.05.033. 
[204] C. Zhan, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, G. Wei, Green tea extracts EGCG and EGC display 
distinct mechanisms in disrupting Aβ(42) protofibril, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 11 
(2020) 1841–1851, https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.0c00277. 
[205] Y. Qi, L. Shang, Z. Liao, H. Su, H. Jing, B. Wu, K. Bi, Y. Jia, 
Intracerebroventricular injection of resveratrol ameliorated Aβ-induced learning 
and cognitive decline in mice, Metab. Brain Dis. 34 (2019) 257–266, https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11011-018-0348-6. 
[206] S. Al-Edresi, I. Alsalahat, S. Freeman, H. Aojula, J. Penny, Resveratrol-mediated 
cleavage of amyloid β(1–42) peptide: potential relevance to Alzheimer’s disease, 
Neurobiol. Aging 94 (2020) 24–33, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neurobiolaging.2020.04.012. 
[207] Y. Chen, G.W. Shi, Z.M. Liang, S.Y. Sheng, Y.S. Shi, L. Peng, Y.P. Wang, F. Wang, 
X.M. Zhang, Resveratrol improves cognition and decreases amyloid plaque 
formation in Tg6799 mice, Mol. Med. Rep. 19 (2019) 3783–3790, https://doi. 
org/10.3892/mmr.2019.10010. 
[208] F. Li, C. Zhan, X. Dong, G. Wei, Molecular mechanisms of resveratrol and EGCG in 
the inhibition of Aβ(42) aggregation and disruption of Aβ(42) protofibril: 
similarities and differences, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 23 (2021) 18843–18854, 
https://doi.org/10.1039/d1cp01913a. 
[209] P.H. Reddy, M. Manczak, X. Yin, M.C. Grady, A. Mitchell, S. Tonk, C.S. Kuruva, J. 
S. Bhatti, R. Kandimalla, M. Vijayan, S. Kumar, R. Wang, J.A. Pradeepkiran, 
G. Ogunmokun, K. Thamarai, K. Quesada, A. Boles, A.P. Reddy, Protective effects 
of indian spice curcumin against amyloid-β in Alzheimer’s disease, J. Alzheimers 
Dis 61 (2018) 843–866, https://doi.org/10.3233/jad-170512. 
[210] I. Doytchinova, M. Atanasova, E. Salamanova, S. Ivanov, I. Dimitrov, Curcumin 
inhibits the primary nucleation of amyloid-beta peptide: A molecular dynamics 
study, Biomolecules 10 (2020), https://doi.org/10.3390/biom10091323. 
[211] P. Maiti, L. Paladugu, G.L. Dunbar, Solid lipid curcumin particles provide greater 
anti-amyloid, anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects than curcumin in the 
5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, BMC Neurosci. 19 (2018) 7, https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s12868-018-0406-3. 
[212] X. Huo, Y. Zhang, X. Jin, Y. Li, L. Zhang, A novel synthesis of selenium 
nanoparticles encapsulated PLGA nanospheres with curcumin molecules for the 
inhibition of amyloid β aggregation in Alzheimer’s disease, J. Photochem. 
Photobiol. B Biol. 190 (2019) 98–102, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jphotobiol.2018.11.008. 
[213] H. Wang, X. Sun, N. Zhang, Z. Ji, Z. Ma, Q. Fu, R. Qu, S. Ma, Ferulic acid 
attenuates diabetes-induced cognitive impairment in rats via regulation of PTP1B 
and insulin signaling pathway, Physiol. Behav. 182 (2017) 93–100, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2017.10.001. 
[214] N. Wang, Y. Zhou, L. Zhao, C. Wang, W. Ma, G. Ge, Y. Wang, I. Ullah, 
F. Muhammad, D. Alwayli, D. Zhi, H. Li, Ferulic acid delayed amyloid β-induced 
pathological symptoms by autophagy pathway via a fasting-like effect in 
Caenorhabditis elegans, Food Chem. Toxicol. 146 (2020), 111808, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fct.2020.111808. 
[215] Z. Sang, W. Pan, K. Wang, Q. Ma, L. Yu, Y. Yang, P. Bai, C. Leng, Q. Xu, X. Li, 
Z. Tan, W. Liu, Design, synthesis and evaluation of novel ferulic acid-O- 
alkylamine derivatives as potential multifunctional agents for the treatment of 
Alzheimer’s disease, Eur. J. Med. Chem. 130 (2017) 379–392, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ejmech.2017.02.039. 
[216] H. Turkez, M.E. Arslan, J.N. Barboza, C.Y. Kahraman, D.P. de Sousa, 
A. Mardino˘glu, Therapeutic potential of ferulic acid in Alzheimer’s disease, Curr. 
Drug Deliv. 19 (2021) 860–873, https://doi.org/10.2174/ 
1567201819666211228153801. 
[217] N. Majid, M.K. Siddiqi, A.N. Khan, S. Shabnam, S. Malik, A. Alam, V.N. Uversky, 
R.H. Khan, Biophysical elucidation of amyloid fibrillation inhibition and 
prevention of secondary nucleation by cholic acid: An unexplored function of 
cholic acid, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 10 (2019) 4704–4715, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acschemneuro.9b00482. 
[218] D. Schenk, R. Barbour, W. Dunn, G. Gordon, H. Grajeda, T. Guido, K. Hu, 
J. Huang, K. Johnson-Wood, K. Khan, D. Kholodenko, M. Lee, Z. Liao, 
I. Lieberburg, R. Motter, L. Mutter, F. Soriano, G. Shopp, N. Vasquez, 
C. Vandevert, S. Walker, M. Wogulis, T. Yednock, D. Games, P. Seubert, 
Immunization with amyloid-beta attenuates Alzheimer-disease-like pathology in 
the PDAPP mouse, Nature 400 (1999) 173–177, https://doi.org/10.1038/22124. 
[219] C. Holmes, D. Boche, D. Wilkinson, G. Yadegarfar, V. Hopkins, A. Bayer, R. 
W. Jones, R. Bullock, S. Love, J.W. Neal, E. Zotova, J.A. Nicoll, Long-term effects 
of Abeta42 immunisation in Alzheimer’s disease: follow-up of a randomised, 
placebo-controlled phase I trial, Lancet (London, England) 372 (2008) 216–223, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(08)61075-2. 
[220] B. Decourt, F. Boumelhem, E.D. Pope 3rd, J. Shi, Z. Mari, M.N. Sabbagh, Critical 
Appraisal of Amyloid Lowering Agents in AD, Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep 21 
(2021) 39, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11910-021-01125-y. 
[221] J.W. Arndt, F. Qian, B.A. Smith, C. Quan, K.P. Kilambi, M.W. Bush, T. Walz, R. 
B. Pepinsky, T. Bussi`ere, S. Hamann, T.O. Cameron, P.H. Weinreb, Structural and 
kinetic basis for the selectivity of aducanumab for aggregated forms of amyloid-β, 
Sci. Rep. 8 (2018) 6412, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-24501-0. 
[222] J. Sevigny, P. Chiao, T. Bussi`ere, P.H. Weinreb, L. Williams, M. Maier, R. Dunstan, 
S. Salloway, T. Chen, Y. Ling, J. O’Gorman, F. Qian, M. Arastu, M. Li, S. Chollate, 
M.S. Brennan, O. Quintero-Monzon, R.H. Scannevin, H.M. Arnold, T. Engber, 
K. Rhodes, J. Ferrero, Y. Hang, A. Mikulskis, J. Grimm, C. Hock, R.M. Nitsch, 
A. Sandrock, The antibody aducanumab reduces Aβ plaques in Alzheimer’s 
disease, Nature 537 (2016) 50–56, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature19323. 
[223] J. Ferrero, L. Williams, H. Stella, K. Leitermann, A. Mikulskis, J. O’Gorman, 
J. Sevigny, First-in-human, double-blind, placebo-controlled, single-dose 
escalation study of aducanumab (BIIB037) in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s 
disease, Alzheimer’s & dementia (New York N. Y.), 2 (2016) 169–176, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.trci.2016.06.002. 
[224] J. Bastrup, K.H. Hansen, T.B.G. Poulsen, K. Kastaniegaard, A.A. Asuni, 
S. Christensen, D. Belling, L. Helboe, A. Stensballe, C. Volbracht, Anti-Aβ antibody 
aducanumab regulates the proteome of senile plaques and closely surrounding 
tissue in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Alzheimers Dis 79 
(2021) 249–265, https://doi.org/10.3233/jad-200715. 
[225] V. Logovinsky, A. Satlin, R. Lai, C. Swanson, J. Kaplow, G. Osswald, H. Basun, 
L. Lannfelt, Safety and tolerability of BAN2401–a clinical study in Alzheimer’s 
disease with a protofibril selective Aβ antibody, Alzheimers Res. Ther. 8 (2016) 
14, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13195-016-0181-2. 
[226] S. Tucker, C. M¨oller, K. Tegerstedt, A. Lord, H. Laudon, J. Sj¨odahl, L. S¨oderberg, 
E. Spens, C. Sahlin, E.R. Waara, A. Satlin, P. Gellerfors, G. Osswald, L. Lannfelt, 
The murine version of BAN2401 (mAb158) selectively reduces amyloid-β 
protofibrils in brain and cerebrospinal fluid of tg-ArcSwe mice, J. Alzheimers Dis 
43 (2015) 575–588, https://doi.org/10.3233/jad-140741. 
[227] C.J. Swanson, Y. Zhang, S. Dhadda, J. Wang, J. Kaplow, R.Y.K. Lai, L. Lannfelt, 
H. Bradley, M. Rabe, A. Koyama, L. Reyderman, D.A. Berry, S. Berry, R. Gordon, 
L.D. Kramer, J.L. Cummings, A randomized, double-blind, phase 2b proof-of- 
concept clinical trial in early Alzheimer’s disease with lecanemab, an anti-Aβ 
protofibril antibody, Alzheimers Res. Ther. 13 (2021) 80, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s13195-021-00813-8. 
[228] R.S. Doody, R.G. Thomas, M. Farlow, T. Iwatsubo, B. Vellas, S. Joffe, K. Kieburtz, 
R. Raman, X. Sun, P.S. Aisen, E. Siemers, H. Liu-Seifert, R. Mohs, Phase 3 trials of 
solanezumab for mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease, N. Engl. J. Med. 370 
(2014) 311–321, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1312889. 
J. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

Coordination Chemistry Reviews 495 (2023) 215375
25
[229] M. Farlow, S.E. Arnold, C.H. van Dyck, P.S. Aisen, B.J. Snider, A.P. Porsteinsson, 
S. Friedrich, R.A. Dean, C. Gonzales, G. Sethuraman, R.B. DeMattos, R. Mohs, S. 
M. Paul, E.R. Siemers, Safety and biomarker effects of solanezumab in patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimers Dement. 8 (2012) 261–271, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jalz.2011.09.224. 
[230] W.J. Meilandt, J.A. Maloney, J. Imperio, G. Lalehzadeh, T. Earr, S. Crowell, T. 
W. Bainbridge, Y. Lu, J.A. Ernst, R.N. Fuji, J.K. Atwal, Characterization of the 
selective in vitro and in vivo binding properties of crenezumab to oligomeric Aβ, 
Alzheimers Res. Ther. 11 (2019) 97, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13195-019-0553- 
5. 
[231] Y. Chen, G. Wei, J. Zhao, R. Nussinov, B. Ma, Computational investigation of 
gantenerumab and crenezumab recognition of Aβ fibrils in Alzheimer’s disease 
brain tissue, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 11 (2020) 3233–3244, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acschemneuro.0c00364. 
[232] M. Ultsch, B. Li, T. Maurer, M. Mathieu, O. Adolfsson, A. Muhs, A. Pfeifer, 
M. Pihlgren, T.W. Bainbridge, M. Reichelt, J.A. Ernst, C. Eigenbrot, G. Fuh, J. 
K. Atwal, R.J. Watts, W. Wang, Structure of crenezumab complex with Aβ shows 
loss of β-hairpin, Sci. Rep. 6 (2016) 39374, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep39374. 
[233] T. Yang, Y. Dang, B. Ostaszewski, D. Mengel, V. Steffen, C. Rabe, T. Bittner, D. 
M. Walsh, D.J. Selkoe, Target engagement in an alzheimer trial: Crenezumab 
lowers amyloid β oligomers in cerebrospinal fluid, Ann. Neurol. 86 (2019) 
215–224, https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25513. 
[234] M.A. Mintun, A.C. Lo, C. Duggan Evans, A.M. Wessels, P.A. Ardayfio, S. 
W. Andersen, S. Shcherbinin, J. Sparks, J.R. Sims, M. Brys, L.G. Apostolova, S. 
P. Salloway, D.M. Skovronsky, Donanemab in early Alzheimer’s disease, N. Engl. 
J. Med. 384 (2021) 1691–1704, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2100708. 
[235] S. Ostrowitzki, R.A. Lasser, E. Dorflinger, P. Scheltens, F. Barkhof, T. Nikolcheva, 
E. Ashford, S. Retout, C. Hofmann, P. Delmar, G. Klein, M. Andjelkovic, B. Dubois, 
M. Boada, K. Blennow, L. Santarelli, P. Fontoura, A phase III randomized trial of 
gantenerumab in prodromal Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimers Res Ther 9 (2017) 
95, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13195-017-0318-y. 
[236] S. Salloway, M. Farlow, E. McDade, D.B. Clifford, G. Wang, J.J. Llibre-Guerra, J. 
M. Hitchcock, S.L. Mills, A.M. Santacruz, A.J. Aschenbrenner, J. Hassenstab, T.L. 
S. Benzinger, B.A. Gordon, A.M. Fagan, K.A. Coalier, C. Cruchaga, A.A. Goate, R. 
J. Perrin, C. Xiong, Y. Li, J.C. Morris, B.J. Snider, C. Mummery, G.M. Surti, 
D. Hannequin, D. Wallon, S.B. Berman, J.J. Lah, I.Z. Jimenez-Velazquez, E. 
D. Roberson, C.H. van Dyck, L.S. Honig, R. S´anchez-Valle, W.S. Brooks, 
S. Gauthier, D.R. Galasko, C.L. Masters, J.R. Brosch, G.R. Hsiung, S. Jayadev, 
M. Formaglio, M. Masellis, R. Clarnette, J. Pariente, B. Dubois, F. Pasquier, C. 
R. Jack Jr., R. Koeppe, P.J. Snyder, P.S. Aisen, R.G. Thomas, S.M. Berry, B. 
A. Wendelberger, S.W. Andersen, K.C. Holdridge, M.A. Mintun, R. Yaari, J. 
R. Sims, M. Baudler, P. Delmar, R.S. Doody, P. Fontoura, C. Giacobino, G. 
A. Kerchner, R.J. Bateman, A trial of gantenerumab or solanezumab in 
dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Med. 27 (2021) 1187–1196, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01369-8. 
[237] X. Zhang, Y. Huai, J. Cai, C. Song, Y. Zhang, Novel antibody against oligomeric 
amyloid-β: Insight into factors for effectively reducing the aggregation and 
cytotoxicity of amyloid-β aggregates, Int. Immunopharmacol. 67 (2019) 176–185, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2018.12.014. 
[238] J. Janssens, B. Hermans, M. Vandermeeren, E. Barale-Thomas, M. Borgers, 
R. Willems, G. Meulders, C. Wintmolders, D. Van den Bulck, A. Bottelbergs, L. Ver 
Donck, P. Larsen, D. Moechars, W. Edwards, M. Mercken, B. Van Broeck, Passive 
immunotherapy with a novel antibody against 3pE-modified Aβ demonstrates 
potential for enhanced efficacy and favorable safety in combination with BACE 
inhibitor treatment in plaque-depositing mice, Neurobiology of Disease 154 
(2021) 105365, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105365. 
[239] E. Gibbs, J.M. Silverman, B. Zhao, X. Peng, J. Wang, C.L. Wellington, I. 
R. Mackenzie, S.S. Plotkin, J.M. Kaplan, N.R. Cashman, A rationally designed 
humanized antibody selective for amyloid beta oligomers in Alzheimer’s disease, 
Sci. Rep 9 (2019) 9870, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-46306-5. 
[240] S. Jokar, S. Khazaei, H. Behnammanesh, A. Shamloo, M. Erfani, D. Beiki, O. Bavi, 
Recent advances in the design and applications of amyloid-beta peptide 
aggregation inhibitors for Alzheimer’s disease therapy, Biophys Rev. (2019), 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12551-019-00606-2. 
[241] D. Goyal, S. Shuaib, S. Mann, B. Goyal, Rationally designed peptides and 
peptidomimetics as inhibitors of amyloid-β (Aβ) aggregation: Potential 
therapeutics of Alzheimer’s disease, ACS Comb. Sci. 19 (2017) 55–80, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acscombsci.6b00116. 
[242] N. Ghosh, L.M. Kundu, Breaker peptides against amyloid-β aggregation: a 
potential therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer’s disease, Future Med. Chem. 13 
(2021) 1767–1794, https://doi.org/10.4155/fmc-2021-0184. 
[243] P. Ryan, B. Patel, V. Makwana, H.R. Jadhav, M. Kiefel, A. Davey, T.A. Reekie, 
S. Rudrawar, M. Kassiou, Peptides Peptidomimetics, and Carbohydrate-Peptide 
Conjugates as Amyloidogenic Aggregation Inhibitors for Alzheimer’s Disease, ACS 
Chem. Neurosci. 9 (2018) 1530–1551, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acschemneuro.8b00185. 
[244] G.M.L. Consoli, R. Tosto, A. Baglieri, S. Petralia, T. Campagna, G. Di Natale, 
S. Zimbone, M.L. Giuffrida, G. Pappalardo, Novel peptide-calix[4]arene conjugate 
inhibits abeta aggregation and rescues neurons from abeta’s oligomers 
cytotoxicity in vitro, ACS Chem. Nerosci. 12 (2021) 1449–1462, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acschemneuro.1c00117. 
[245] S. Zimbone, M.L. Giuffrida, G. Sabatino, G. Di Natale, R. Tosto, G.M.L. Consoli, 
D. Milardi, G. Pappalardo, M.F.M. Sciacca, Abeta(8–20) fragment as an anti- 
fibrillogenic and neuroprotective agent: advancing toward efficient Alzheimer’s 
disease treatment, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 14 (2023) 1126–1136, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acschemneuro.2c00720. 
[246] L. Diomede, M. Romeo, A. Cagnotto, A. Rossi, M. Beeg, M. Stravalaci, 
F. Tagliavini, G. Di Fede, M. Gobbi, M. Salmona, The new β amyloid-derived 
peptide Aβ1-6A2V-TAT(D) prevents Aβ oligomer formation and protects 
transgenic C. elegans from Aβ toxicity, Neurobiol. Dis. 88 (2016) 75–84, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2016.01.006. 
[247] F. Abedin, N. Kandel, S.A. Tatulian, Effects of Aβ-derived peptide fragments on 
fibrillogenesis of Aβ, Sci. Rep. 11 (2021) 19262, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41598-021-98644-y. 
[248] S. Bansal, I.K. Maurya, N. Yadav, C.K. Thota, V. Kumar, K. Tikoo, V.S. Chauhan, 
R. Jain, C-Terminal fragment, Aβ(39–42)-based tetrapeptides mitigates amyloid-β 
aggregation-induced toxicity, ACS Omega 3 (2018) 10019–10032, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsomega.8b01522. 
[249] P.K. Kanchi, A.K. Dasmahapatra, Destabilization of the Alzheimer’s amyloid-β 
peptide by a proline-rich β-sheet breaker peptide: a molecular dynamics 
simulation study, J. Mol. Model. 27 (2021) 356, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00894-021-04968-x. 
[250] N. Ghosh, L.M. Kundu, In-situ side-chain peptide cyclization as a breaker strategy 
against the amyloid aggregating peptide, Bioorg. Med. Chem. 33 (2021), 116017, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmc.2021.116017. 
[251] P. De Bona, M.L. Giuffrida, F. Caraci, A. Copani, B. Pignataro, F. Attanasio, 
S. Cataldo, G. Pappalardo, E. Rizzarelli, Design and synthesis of new trehalose- 
conjugated pentapeptides as inhibitors of Abeta(1–42) fibrillogenesis and 
toxicity, J. Pept. Sci. 15 (2009) 220–228, https://doi.org/10.1002/psc.1109. 
[252] A. Sinopoli, A. Giuffrida, M.F. Tomasello, M.L. Giuffrida, M. Leone, F. Attanasio, 
F. Caraci, P. De Bona, I. Naletova, M. Saviano, A. Copani, G. Pappalardo, 
E. Rizzarelli, Ac-LPFFD-Th: A trehalose-conjugated peptidomimetic as a strong 
suppressor of amyloid-beta oligomer formation and cytotoxicity, Chembiochem 
17 (2016) 1541–1549, https://doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201600243. 
[253] G. Di Natale, S. Zimbone, F. Bellia, M.F. Tomasello, M.L. Giuffrida, G. Pappalardo, 
E. Rizzarelli, Potential therapeutics of Alzheimer’s diseases: New insights into the 
neuroprotective role of trehalose-conjugated beta sheet breaker peptides, Pept. 
Sci. (2018), https://doi.org/10.1002/pep2.24083. 
[254] T. Kawasaki, S. Kamijo, Inhibition of aggregation of amyloid β42 by arginine- 
containing small compounds, Biosci. Biotech. Bioch. 76 (2012) 762–766, https:// 
doi.org/10.1271/bbb.110879. 
[255] X. Sun, S. Duan, A. Cao, B. Villagomez, R. Lin, H. Chen, L. Pi, B. Ren, R. Chen, 
M. Chen, Z. Ying, S. Fang, Q. Cao, RRY inhibits amyloid-β(1–42) peptide 
aggregation and neurotoxicity, J. Alzheimer’s Disease Rep. 5 (2021) 479–495, 
https://doi.org/10.3233/adr-210012. 
[256] S. Kr´ol, N. ¨Osterlund, F. Vosough, J. Jarvet, S. W¨arml¨ander, A. Barth, L.L. Ilag, 
M. Magzoub, A. Gr¨aslund, C. M¨orman, The amyloid-inhibiting NCAM-PrP peptide 
targets Aβ peptide aggregation in membrane-mimetic environments, iScience 24 
(2021) 102852, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102852. 
[257] M.F.M. Sciacca, I. Naletova, M.L. Giuffrida, F. Attanasio, Semax, a synthetic 
regulatory peptide affects copper-induced abeta aggregation and amyloid 
formation in artificial membrane models, ACS Chem. Neurosci. 13 (2022) 
486–496, https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.1c00707. 
[258] R. Corti, A. Cox, V. Cassina, L. Nardo, D. Salerno, C.A. Marrano, N. Missana, 
P. Andreozzi, P.J. Silva, F. Stellacci, R. Dal Magro, F. Re, F. Mantegazza, The 
clustering of mApoE anti-amyloidogenic peptide on nanoparticle surface does not 
alter its performance in controlling beta-amyloid aggregation, Int. J. Mol. Sci 21 
(2020) 1066, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21031066. 
J. Li et al.