Article
Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in 
Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2
Graphical abstract
Highlights
• Fight Alzheimer’s disease with peripheral cancers via Cyst-C 
secretion
• Tumor-derived Cyst-C attenuates amyloid pathology of 
Alzheimer’s disease
• Human Cyst-C binds amyloid oligomers and activates 
TREM2
• Tumor-derived Cyst-C degrades pre-existing amyloid 
plaques via TREM2
Authors
Xinyan Li, Xiaomei Tang, Jinyu Zeng, ...,
Yue Wang, Aodi He, Youming Lu
Correspondence
lym@hust.edu.cn
In brief
Peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid 
pathology and rescues cognition of 
Alzheimer’s disease through secretion of
cystatin-c (Cyst-C), which binds amyloid 
oligomers and activates TREM2 in 
microglia and enables microglia to 
degrade pre-existing plaques.
Li et al., 2026, Cell 189, 1–19
February 5, 2026 © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for 
text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
ll

Article
Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology 
in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c
activation of TREM2
Xinyan Li, 1,4 Xiaomei Tang, 1,4 Jinyu Zeng, 1,4 Limin Duan, 2 Zhenye Hou, 1 Lanfang Li, 1 Yiqing Guo, 1 Changdong Chai, 1 
Jiahao Liu, 3 Ya Wang, 3 Ling-Qiang Zhu, 1 Hao Li, 1 Tongmei Zhang, 1 Yue Wang, 1 Aodi He, 1 and Youming Lu 1,5, *
1 Innovation Center for Brain Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 
430030, China
2 Intensive Care Unit, Union Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China
3 Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China
4 These authors contributed equally
5 Lead contact
*Correspondence: lym@hust.edu.cn
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
SUMMARY
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and cancer are among the most devastating diseases worldwide. Epidemiolog-
ical data indicate that the incidence of AD significantly decreases in patients with a history of cancer. How-
ever, whether and how peripheral cancer may affect AD progression is yet to be studied. Here, we find that 
peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid pathology and rescues cognition via secretion of cystatin-c (Cyst-C), 
which binds amyloid oligomers and activates triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) 
in microglia, enabling microglia to degrade the pre-existing amyloid plaques in AD mice. These effects 
of Cyst-C are abolished by a cell-type-specific deletion (Cx3cr1 TREM2− /− ) or mutation of TREM2 
(TREM2 R47H ) or Cyst-C (Cyst-C L68Q ) in microglia. Together, these findings provide significant conceptual 
advances into cancer neuroscience and establish therapeutic avenues that are distinct from the present 
amyloid-lowering strategies, aiming at degrading the existing amyloid plaques for precision-targeted AD 
therapy.
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and cancer are two common dis-
eases in aging populations and are the leading causes of 
death worldwide. 1–4 As a major neurodegenerative disorder, 
AD is characterized by age-related cognitive declines. β-Amy-
loid (Aβ), such as Aβ 1–42 deposits, is the main component of 
senile plaques and is commonly described as a pathological 
fingerprint of AD. 5–8 Hence, various strategies developed for 
the treatment of AD have been directed at Aβ 1–42 peptide 
accumulation and deposition. Although some of these ap-
proaches have been shown to attenuate learning and memory 
declines in various mouse models, 9–12 no disease-modifying 
therapies are currently available in clinics. Recently, some 
anti-Aβ antibodies approved by the US Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) have been shown to slow cognitive decline in 
mild AD patients, while their long-term clinical benefits and 
the potential risks remain under debate. 13,14
Cancer is also an age-related disease and shares many risk 
factors with AD, including smoking and several molecular hall-
marks such as inappropriate activation and deregulation of the 
cell cycle. 15–18 Epidemiological studies indicate that the inci-
dence of AD significantly decreases in patients with a history 
of cancer. 19–23 However, deciphering the complex interplay be-
tween these two devastating diseases remains a conceptual and 
practical challenge; patients with one disease may not live to 
develop the other, and a diagnosis of one disease may limit 
the likelihood of a diagnosis of the other. Hence, whether, and 
if so how, peripheral cancer can affect the pathological progres-
sion of AD are yet to be studied.
Here, we report a discovery that peripheral cancer attenuates 
amyloid pathology in preclinical cancer-bearing mouse models 
of AD. We show that cystatin-C (Cyst-C) secreted from periph-
eral tumor cells effectively reduces amyloid plaque burden and 
rescues cognition in mouse models of AD. Human Cyst-C, which 
acts as a ligand of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells
2 (TREM2), directly binds Aβ 1–42 oligomers and activates TREM2 
and hence catabolizes Aβ 1–42 aggregates in microglia. These ef-
fects of Cyst-C are completely abolished by either a cell-type-
specific deletion (Cx3cr1 TREM2− /− ) or a disease mutation 
(TREM2 R47H ) of TREM2 or Cyst-C (Cyst-C L68Q ). Together, this 
study demonstrates that peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid 
pathology and promotes cognition of AD via Cyst-C secretion 
and TREM2 activation.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 © 2025 Elsevier Inc. 
1
All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020

RESULTS
Peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid pathology
To determine the causal role of peripheral cancer in the patho-
logical progression of AD, we generated allograft mouse models, 
including LLC (Lewis lung carcinoma cells) lung cancer, RM1 
(RM-1 mouse prostate carcinoma cells) prostate cancer, and 
MC38 (MC-38 mouse colon adenocarcinoma cells) colon can-
cer-bearing preclinical AD mouse models (Figure S1A), via intra-
venous injection (tail vein) of LLC, RM1, or MC38 cells (2.5 × 10 5 
cells/0.1 mL) into 5×FAD mice at 3 months of age 24 and rTg4510 
mice at 5 months of age, in which the mutant Tau P301L was ex-
pressed 25 (Figures S2A–S2D). 30 days after the injection, the 
number and size of tumors in the peripheral tissues and Aβ pep-
tide accumulation and plaque burden in the brain of each mouse 
were quantified. We found no significant difference in either the 
size or the number of tumors in the peripheral tissues among 
these models (Figures S1B–S1D), while all these types of tumors 
inhibited amyloid accumulation and aggregation on the basis of 
the measurements of soluble versus insoluble Aβ 1–42 (Figure 1A), 
Aβ 1–40 peptides (Figure 1B), Aβ 1–16 -labeled plaques (Figures 1C, 
1D, and S3A–S3D), and thioflavin-S-labeled pathological amy-
loid aggregates (Figures 1C, 1E, and S3A–S3D). Although amy-
loid inhibition was observed in the 5×FAD mice, peripheral can-
cer did not affect tau protein misfolding in the rTg4510 mice 
(Figures S2E–S2H), showing that peripheral cancer selectively 
inhibits amyloid pathology in AD mouse models.
Peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid pathology via CSPs 
To determine whether the physical burden of peripheral tumors 
underlies amyloid inhibition, we next applied cancer cell secre-
tory proteins (CSPs) released from each of these three types of 
cancer cells to 5×FAD mice at 3 months of age once per day 
(5 mg protein/100 μL per injection) for 30 consecutive days. All 
these applications failed to generate peripheral tumors in the 
5×FAD mice (Figures S4A and S4B), whereas each of these ap-
plications robustly reduced amyloid plaque burden, similar to the 
effects produced by the injection of LLC, RM1, or MC38 cell lines 
(Figures 2A–2C, S4C, and S4D).
We then tested these mice in a Morris water maze, with four 
trials per day. In the spatial training tests, no significant differ-
ences in path length, latency, or time spent floating were 
observed among the groups (Figure 2D). These results are 
consistent with previous reports that 5×FAD mice at 4 months 
of age have normal hippocampus-dependent and hippocam-
pus-independent learning. 26,27 In the hidden platform test, 
when probe trials were performed the day after the training ses-
sions, the 5×FAD mice that were administered CSPs spent a 
much higher amount of time in the quadrant that harbored the 
platform than did the controls (Figure 2E). CSPs from all these 
cancer cell lines did not affect the performance of the mice in 
the open field test (Figure S4E) or the elevated plus maze 
(Figure S4F). Notably, protective effects were observed even 
when CSPs were applied to 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age, 
and behaviors and amyloid pathology were examined at
5 months of age (Figures 2F, 2G, and S5A–S5C).
In the novel arm Y-maze test, 28 CSPs normalized the spatial 
working memory of 5×FAD mice without affecting mobility
(numbers of novel arm visits), as shown by a selective increase 
in the time spent in a novel arm (Figures 2H and 2I). Moreover, 
similar protection, such as a reduction in amyloid plaques 
(Figures S5D–S5F), were observed in amyloid precursor protein 
(APP)/presenilin 1 (PS1) mice at 8 months of age. APP/PS1 mice 
constitute another well-known preclinical model for studies of 
amyloid pathology in AD. 29 In this study, APP/PS1 mice were in-
jected with CSPs at 6 months of age once per day for 60 consec-
utive days. Together, these findings indicate that CSPs released 
from multiple cancer cell types, but not the physical burden of 
peripheral tumors, inhibit amyloid pathology and rescue cogni-
tion in preclinical mouse models of AD.
Profiling amyloid inhibitors from CSPs
We then hypothesized that multiple types of cancer cells may 
release the same CSPs to inhibit amyloid pathology in AD 
mice. To directly test this hypothesis, we first profiled the tran-
scriptomes of the LLC, RM1, and MC38 cell lines, as well as 
the tumor tissues from cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice, via RNA 
sequencing (RNA-seq). We identified over 1,500 candidate 
genes that exhibited a shared expression pattern among these 
different cancer types (Table S1). In parallel, CSPs in cancer 
cell culture media were examined via proteomic analysis. We 
found that 94 proteins were commonly present in all these can-
cer cell lines (Table S1), 33 of which were included in the list of 
candidate genes identified by RNA-seq profiling (Figures 3A 
and 3B). Among them, candidate proteins were then filtered for 
being amyloid pathological regulators. Four proteins, namely, 
calsyntenin-1 (CLS1), 30 carboxypeptidase-E (CPE), 31 cystatin-c 
(Cyst-C), 32 and gelsolin (GSN), 33 were identified as potential am-
yloid inhibitors (Figure 3B).
We then used an unbiased enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) to examine the blood plasma levels of these 
four proteins in LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer-bearing 5×FAD 
mice and human patients with multiple cancer types, including 
non-small cell lung cancer, prostate cancer, colon cancer, 
breast cancer, bladder cancer, and gallbladder cancer. Nota-
bly, the levels of all four proteins were robustly elevated in all 
these cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice and human patients 
(Figures 3C–3F). We also analyzed apolipoprotein E (APOE), 
which is known as a genetic risk factor for early- and late-onset 
AD and exacerbates amyloid pathology through several mech-
anisms, including plaque aggregation and clearance 34,35 in 
both the plasma and the CSF (cerebrospinal fluid), while there 
were no significant differences between 5×FAD mice with or 
without peripheral tumors (Figures 3H and 3I). These data are 
consistent with the earlier reports that the levels of APOE do 
not significantly differ between cognitively normal individuals 
and AD patients. 36,37
Peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid pathology via Cyst-C 
secretion
To determine which of these four proteins inhibits amyloid pa-
thology in mouse models of AD, we established a CRISPR-
Cas9 knockout strategy 38 to knock out the CLS1, CPE, Cst3, 
or GSN genes in LLC cancer cells (Figures S6A–S6D). To test 
the potential effects of gene deletion on tumor growth, a mutant 
LLC cell line with a deletion of CLS1, CPE, Cst3, or GSN was
ll
2 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

injected into 5×FAD mice at 3 months of age. 30 days after the 
injection, tumor size was measured. Our data revealed that dele-
tion of any of these four genes did not affect the tumor growth 
(Figures S6E and S6F). CSPs were then prepared from each of 
these mutant cell lines and injected via the tail vein once per 
day (5 mg protein/100 μL per day) for 30 consecutive days into 
5×FAD mice. All these injections did not generate tumors, while 
a deletion of the Cst3 gene, which encodes Cyst-C, but not any 
of the other three genes, completely eliminated tumor-derived 
Cyst-C expression in the brain (Figure S6G) and significantly 
attenuated amyloid plaque deposition in the brain of 5×FAD
mice at either 4 months (Figures 4A–4D and 4F) or 5 months of 
age (Figures 4E, 4G, S6H, and S6I). We also performed the 
open field tests and observed that Cyst-C deletion did not alter 
locomotor activity, as total distance traveled remained un-
changed across groups (Figure S6J), supporting the specific ef-
fects of tumor-derived Cyst-C on cognition.
Cyst-C is one of the cysteine proteinase inhibitors, which 
include Cyst-A, Cyst-B, Cyst-C, Cyst-D, and Cyst-F. 39 Among 
these proteins, Cyst-B and Cyst-F are also related to amyloid 
fibril aggregation. 40,41 We then generated stable mutant LLC 
cell lines with a deletion of Cst6, which encodes Cyst-B, or
Figure 1. Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology
(A and B) Soluble and insoluble Aβ 1–42 (A) and Aβ 1–40 (B) in the brains of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice. n = 9 mice per group.
(C–E) Representative images (C) and plots showing the areas of anti-Aβ 1–16 (red)-labeled (D) and thioflavin-S (green)-labeled (E) amyloid plaques in the cortex, 
thalamus, dentate gyrus (DG), and basal lateral amygdala (BLA) of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice. n = 16 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (A, B, D, and E).
See also Figures S1–S3.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
3
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
4 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Cst7, which encodes Cyst-F. CSPs from these mutant cancer 
cell lines were then purified and applied to 5×FAD mice. None 
of these deletions altered amyloid plaque burden in AD-model 
mice (Figures S6K and S6L).
We then determined the essential roles of Cyst-C secreted 
from cancer cells in amyloid inhibition by engineering Cst3-defi-
cient LLC cancer cells (LLC Cst3− ) expressing the His-tagged hu-
man Cst3 gene (LLC Cst3− hCst3+ ). CSPs from LLC Cst3− hCst3+ cul-
tures were then prepared and injected into 5×FAD mice at
4 months of age once per day for 30 consecutive days (Figure 
5A). This injection robustly increased the expression levels of hu-
man Cyst-C (Figure 5B), but not endogenous Cyst-C (Figure 5C), 
in the CSF of 5×FAD mice. Of note, we found that human Cyst-C, 
as labeled by an anti-His antibody, was incorporated into and 
colocalized with the existing amyloid plaques in the brains of 
5×FAD mice (Figures 5D–5F). The specificity of anti-His antibody 
to His-tagged human Cyst-C was validated by the absence of 
anti-His signaling in the brain of 5×FAD mice without His-tagged 
human Cyst-C (Figure 5D). We then assessed whether the coloc-
alization of human Cyst-C with amyloid plaques affects the pla-
que burden. In this study, a mutant Cyst-C with a Leu-68 → Gln 
substitution (Cyst-C L68Q ), which was found to be present in pa-
tients with hereditary cerebral amyloidosis, 42,43 was used as a 
control. We found that human Cyst-C, but not a mutant Cyst-
C L68Q , robustly reduced amyloid plaque burden (Figure 5G) 
and promoted cognition in 5×FAD mice (Figures 5H and 5I), indi-
cating that human Cyst-C counteracts the effects of Cst3 dele-
tion in LLC cancer cells. Notably, a significant reduction of amy-
loid plaque burden by human Cyst-C, but not by Cyst-C L68Q , was 
observed in 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age, showing that 
Cyst-C secreted from cancer cells is essential for degradation 
of the pre-existing amyloid plaques.
Tumor-derived Cyst-C penetrates the BBB for entry into 
the brain
Subsequently, we determined the route and the amount of 
Cyst-C secreted from peripheral cancer cells on amyloid inhibi-
tion. Previous reports indicate that the blood-brain barrier (BBB) 
was dysfunctional in the preclinical mouse models, including 
5×FAD and APP/PS1 mice, 44,45 as well as human patients at 
their early stage. 46,47 We then hypothesized that tumor-derived 
Cyst-C can penetrate across this impaired BBB and reach ther-
apeutically relevant levels in the brain. To test this hypothesis, we 
produced high-sensitivity isotope-labeled 125 I-Cyst-C and quan-
titatively measured the brain vascular permeability of 5×FAD 
mice (Figures S7A–S7G). In this study, 10-kDa 125 I-dextran and
67-kDa 125 I-albumin were used as controls. Our data revealed 
that 67-kDa 125 I-albumin, as a negative control, was unable to 
penetrate the BBB in 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age, with a 
permeability of 1.17 ± 0.19 only (mean ± SEM, n = 5 mice per 
group; Figure S7F). In contrast, both 10-kDa 125 I-dextran, as a 
positive control, and 13-kDa 125 I-Cyst-C displayed a marked de-
gree of penetrance across the BBB in 5×FAD mice at 4 months 
of age, with vascular permeabilities of 23.57 ± 1.04 for 125 I-
dextran and 20.16 ± 1.39 for 125 I-Cyst-C (mean ± SEM, n = 5 
mice per group; Figure S7F). Together with the data in Figures 
5A–5C showing that human Cyst-C, but not endogenous 
Cyst-C expression levels, was robustly elevated in the brain after 
the injections of CSPs from LLC Cst3− hCst3+ cell cultures, we 
concluded that Cyst-C secreted from peripheral tumor cells 
readily penetrates the BBB and efficiently reaches the therapeu-
tically relevant levels in the brain of 5×FAD mice.
Cyst-C is also enriched in cortical neurons and microglia. 48 We 
therefore next investigated the inhibitory effects of CSPs through 
neuronal Cyst-C. We generated a mutant strain of mice via selec-
tive deletion of the Cst3 gene in cortical neurons (nCst3 − /− mice) 
or microglia/macrophages (mCst3 − /− 
mice) (Figure S7H). 
Crossing these mutant mice with 5×FAD mice resulted in the 
complete deletion of Cyst-C in cortical neurons or microglia/ 
macrophages, while this deletion had no effect on tumor-derived 
Cyst-C expression levels (Figures S7H–S7J) and amyloid inhibi-
tion (Figures S7K–S7N).
In addition to microglia, peripheral immune cells may also 
react to proteins secreted from peripheral tumor cells in 5×FAD 
mice. We then hypothesized that these peripheral immune cell 
reactions may play a role in amyloid inhibition. To test these pos-
sibilities, we first measured peripheral immune cell subpopula-
tions using flow cytometry in 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age af-
ter the injection of CSPs from Cst3-deficient LLC cancer cell 
cultures expressing His-tagged human Cyst-C (once per day 
for 30 consecutive days). This injection did not alter either 
Ly6C + monocytes or CD45 + T cells, including CD4 + and CD8 + 
cells (Figures S8A–S8C). We then applied a low dose of X-ray 
whole-body irradiation (IR) with head shielding in 5×FAD mice. 
This irradiation reliably depleted ∼80% of CD45 + T cells, 
including CD3 + CD4 + and CD3 + CD8 + T cells, as well as CD11b + 
Ly6C + monocytes (Figures S8D–S8F). Of note, peripheral im-
mune cell depletion produced no effects on either human 
Cyst-C expression levels (Figure S8G), peripheral tumor growth 
(Figure S8H), or amyloid inhibition in the brain of LLC Cst3+ and 
LLC Cst3− cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice (Figures S8I and S8J). 
These data demonstrate that Cyst-C secretion from peripheral
Figure 2. Peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid pathology via CSPs
(A–C) Representative images (A) and plots showing Aβ 1–16 -labeled (B) and thioflavin-S-labeled (C) amyloid plaques in the brains of 5×FAD mice after injection (tail 
vein) of CSPs from LLC, RM1, and MC38 culture media. n = 11 mice per group.
(D–G) The latency and length of the swimming path to reach the hidden platform during the training sessions (D and F), and the percentage of time spent searching 
for a hidden platform in the target quadrant (quadrant 4) during the probe trials (E and G) in the Morris water maze of 5×FAD mice at 4 months (D and E) or
5 months (F and G) of age. n = 11 mice per group.
(H and I) Heatmaps and plots showing the number and time of visits to the novel arm in the Y-maze of 5×FAD mice at 4 months (H) or 5 months (I) of age. n = 11 
mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s. (no significant difference), *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (B, C, E, and 
G–I) or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (D and F).
See also Figures S4 and S5.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
5
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
6 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

cancer cells, but not immune cell reactions, inhibits amyloid pa-
thology in AD mice.
Human Cyst-C inhibits amyloid pathology
Next, we investigated whether the application of human Cyst-C 
has therapeutic effects against amyloid pathology in preclinical 
mouse models of AD. Human Cyst-C was purified and injected 
(tail vein, 50 μg/100 μL) into 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age 
once per day for 30 consecutive days (Figure 6A). A Cyst-C L68Q 
mutant and a vehicle solution were used as controls. Immediately 
after the last injections, the level of human Cyst-C in the CSF was 
robustly elevated to 6.25 ± 0.29 μg/mL (mean ± SEM, n = 9 mice 
per group; Figure 6A), which was comparable to that seen in can-
cer-bearing AD mice. Strikingly, human Cyst-C, as labeled with 
anti-His antibody, was largely colocalized with microglia-associ-
ated amyloid aggregates in the brain, including the cortex, thal-
amus, dentate gyrus, and basal lateral amygdala (Figure S9A). 
Significantly, we found that treatment with human Cyst-C caused 
activation of plaque-associated microglia; an increase of plaque-
associated CD68 + microglia (activated) was closely associated 
with a decrease of TMEM119 + (transmembrane protein 119) mi-
croglia (inactivated) in the brain of 5×FAD mice treated with hu-
man Cyst-C (Figure 6B). Further, the treatment with human 
Cyst-C enlarged plaque-associated microglial soma and 
reduced their branching complexity (Figure S9B), while cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy (CAA) pathology did not differ between 
groups treated with tumor-derived or recombinant Cyst-C and 
their respective controls (Figure S9C).
We then assessed the plaque burden by labeling with anti-
Aβ 1–16 and thioflavin-S. 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age were 
injected with human Cyst-C, Cyst-C L68Q , or a vehicle control. 
We found that human Cyst-C, but not Cyst-C L68Q or the vehicle 
control, effectively attenuated extracellular amyloid accumula-
tion and plaque burden in the brains of the 5×FAD mice at
5 months of age (Figure 6C). Together, these findings support 
the hypothesis that human Cyst-C promotes microglial phago-
cytosis and triggers the clearance of pre-existing amyloid pla-
ques. We next analyzed the effects of human Cyst-C on disease 
progression in 5×FAD mice. We first recorded LTP of synaptic 
transmission at the CA3 to CA1 Schaffer collateral pathway, 
which represents a cellular substrate of learning and mem-
ory. 49,50 Consistent with the findings of amyloid inhibition, hu-
man Cyst-C completely reversed LTP deficits (Figure 6D) and 
rescued learning and memory in 5×FAD mice at 5 months of 
age (Figures 6E and 6F).
To further test whether human Cyst-C can trigger amyloid pla-
que clearance, we applied human Cyst-C with tail-vein injections 
into 5×FAD mice at 8 months of age and APP/PS1 mice at
6 months of age, respectively. Amyloid plaques in these mice 
(5×FAD mice at 9 months of age and APP/PS1 mice at 8 months 
of age) were then examined immediately after the last injection. 
Human Cyst-C treatment significantly reduced the amyloid pla-
que burdens in these aged AD mice (Figures S9D–S9I), similar 
to that observed in these young AD mice (5×FAD mice at
5 months of age). Significantly, we found that this treatment 
was achieved in a dose-dependent manner (Figures S9J and 
S9K). These findings indicate that recognition and clearance of 
amyloid plaques are important components of human Cyst-C ef-
ficacy and represent more importance than a mechanism 
involving the prevention of plaque deposition by recognition of 
soluble amyloid peptides.
Immunoblotting of cortical homogenates revealed that human 
Cyst-C did not affect the levels of full-length APP, cleaved C-ter-
minal fragments (APP-CTFs), or APP-processing/Aβ-degrading 
enzymes, including PS1, 51 beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 
(BACE1), 52 ADAM17, 53 secreted APP alpha (sAPPα), 54 and insu-
lin-degrading enzyme (IDE) 55 (Figures S10A and S10B), indi-
cating that human Cyst-C is not involved in APP processing in 
AD-model mice. Of note, human and mouse Cyst-C share 
∼70% sequence identity. Mouse Cyst-C may not bind to human 
Aβ simply because of species differences. Furthermore, the ef-
fect of human Cyst-C and potential other effects of human 
Cyst-C in AD may be limited because human Cyst-C may not 
be able to bind and signal with mouse proteins. To exclude these 
possibilities, we applied recombinant mouse Cyst-C in AD mice 
and found that this application produced the protective effects 
on amyloid pathology, similar to that induced by human Cyst-C 
(Figures S10C–S10F).
Human Cyst-C binds Aβ 1–42 oligomers and activates 
TREM2
To determine the mechanisms underlying how Cyst-C released 
from cancer cells is therapeutically effective against amyloid pa-
thology, we searched for signaling targets of human Cyst-C with 
an unbiased proteomic screen of the Cyst-C protein complex in 
lysates from the hippocampus of 5×FAD mice. A top hit from this 
screen was TREM2 (Table S1), as validated by western blots 
(Figure 7A). To determine whether the therapeutic effects of tu-
mor-derived Cyst-C are mediated through TREM2, we per-
formed single-cell RNA-seq in CD11b + -enriched microglia
Figure 3. An unbiased proteomic screen of amyloid inhibitors from CSPs
(A and B) Venn (A) and bubble (B) diagrams of 33 genes and proteins that are commonly expressed in cancer cells or culture media and tumor tissues of LLC, RM1, 
and MC38 cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice.
(C–F) Bar graphs showing the levels of CLS1 (C), CPE (D), GSN (E), and Cyst-C (F) in the blood plasma of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice and 
patients. n = 9 mice per group (left); n = 38 healthy controls, 35 non-small cell lung cancer patients, 21 prostate cancer patients, 33 colon cancer patients, 46 
breast cancer patients, 33 bladder cancer patients, and 35 gall bladder cancer patients (right).
(G) A bar graph showing Cyst-C levels in the CSF of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice. n = 9 mice per group.
(H) Bar graphs showing APOE levels in the plasma of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice and cancer patients. n = 5 mice per group (left); n = 38 
healthy controls, 35 non-small cell lung cancer patients, 21 prostate cancer patients, 33 colon cancer patients, 46 breast cancer patients, 33 bladder cancer 
patients, and 35 gall bladder cancer patients (right).
(I) A bar graph showing APOE levels in the CSF of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice. n = 5 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (C–I).
See also Table S1.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
7
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
8 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

isolated from 5×FAD mice treated with (human Cyst-C) or 
without (control) human Cyst-C. Uniform manifold approxima-
tion and projection (UMAP) visualization and neighborhood clus-
tering revealed 7 distinct microglial subtypes, each defined by 
unique gene expression profiles and functional annotations 
(Figure S11A). Notably, treatment with human Cyst-C increased 
activated microglial subtypes such as microglia subtype-5 
with expression of CD68, while this treatment decreased the pro-
portion of TMEM119-positive microglia such as microglia 
subtype-1, demonstrating Cyst-C activates microglia in the brain 
of 5×FAD mice (Figures S11A and S11B). Transcriptomic anal-
ysis identified 91 differentially expressed genes (Table S1). Upre-
gulated genes showed enrichment in Trem2, CD68, and Tyrobp 
genes, while downregulated genes were enriched in Tmem119, 
Fcrls, and csf1r. These findings suggest that Cyst-C activates 
microglia and induces the expression of anti-inflammatory fac-
tors in 5×FAD mice. Pathway enrichment further indicated acti-
vation of phagocytic and lysosomal pathways, supporting that 
the effects of human Cyst-C were achieved by TREM2-depen-
dent reprogramming of microglia (Figures S11C and S11D). 
Together with our proteomic binding data and functional binding 
assays (Figures 3B and 7A–7C), it is plausible that tumor-derived 
Cyst-C exerts its therapeutic effects against amyloid pathology 
via TREM2-mediated modulation of microglial function. 
Previous studies have indicated that TREM2 modulates micro-
glial responses to amyloid plaque burden. While TREM2 activa-
tion has been reported to promote microglial phagocytosis and 
attenuate amyloid deposition, 56,57 other studies have shown, 
however, that TREM2 deficiency primarily reduces microglial 
clustering around plaques without consistently affecting overall 
amyloid burden. 58,59 We then examined whether TREM2 
functions as a receptor for human Cyst-C. We employed the 
extracellular domain of human TREM2 (hTREM2, amino acids 
[aa] 19–174) fused at the C terminus to the Fc portion of human 
immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) (TREM2-Fc) and investigated whether 
TREM2-Fc could directly bind to human Cyst-C. As expected, 
TREM2-Fc was physically associated with human Cyst-C in the 
presence of Aβ 1–42 oligomers (Aβ 1–42o ), and little binding was 
observed with TREM1-Fc or Fc controls (Figures 7B and 7C). 
The immobilized TREM2-Fc bound to human Cyst-C with an af-
finity comparable to that of previously described Aβ 1–42o , 57 with 
TREM2-Fc exhibiting little binding with the human Cyst-C mutant 
Cyst-C L68Q (Figures 7B and 7C). Similarly, human Cyst-C bound 
to TREM2-Fc with a comparable affinity to Aβ 1–42o , with few inter-
actions detected in Aβ 1–42 monomers (Aβ 1–42m ) (Figure S11E). We 
also generated TREM2 R47H by replacing the TREM2 arginine res-
idue at position 47 with a histidine. TREM2 R47H is an hTREM2 mu-
tation associated with late-onset AD. 60 We found that human 
Cyst-C was not bound with TREM2 R47H (Figure S11F). This 
finding is consistent with the previous studies that the 
TREM2 R47H mutation disrupts a direct binding between TREM2 
and its ligand and impairs downstream responses of TREM2 acti-
vation in microglia, particularly in the context of AD. 61
Next, we investigated whether an interaction between human 
Cyst-C and TREM2 functionally activates TREM2 in microglia. 
We crossed TREM2 flox mice with Cx3cr1-Cre ERT2 knockin mice 
and 5×FAD mice, which enabled the inducible deletion of 
TREM2 in microglia of 5×FAD mice via tamoxifen (TAM) adminis-
tration. We refer to these mice as Cx3cr1 TREM2− /− 5×FAD mice, 
whereas Cx3cr1 TREM2+/+ 5×FAD mice served as controls 
(Figures S11G and S11H). We first investigated the downstream 
events of TREM2 activation by human Cyst-C. Using a fluores-
cence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assay, we detected a 
significant increase in the interaction between TREM2 and its obli-
gate adapter DAP12 after the application of human Cyst-C 
(Figure 7D). In addition, we validated the FRET assay by including 
Aβ 1–42m and Aβ 1–42o as negative and positive controls, respec-
tively. Our data confirmed the previous studies that Aβ 1–42o , but 
not Aβ 1–42m , can activate TREM2 in microglia (Figure S12A), while 
this activation was robustly enhanced by human Cyst-C 
(Figure 7D). Consistent with this finding, human Cyst-C in the 
presence of Aβ 1–42o effectively induced the phosphorylation of 
the spleen protein tyrosine kinase (SYK), a key component of 
the TREM2-DAP12 downstream signaling pathway, 62 in microglia 
from TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD mice but not in those from TREM2 − /− 
5×FAD mice (Figures S12B and S12C). The effects of human 
Cyst-C were specific, as the application of Cyst-C L68Q , an inactive 
human Cyst-C mutant that did not bind TREM2 (Figure 7C), pro-
duced no effects (Figures S12D and S12E). Taken together, these 
results indicate that human Cyst-C, as a ligand of TREM2, directly 
binds Aβ oligomers and activates TREM2 in microglia.
To explore whether other TREM2 ligands contribute to the ef-
fects of human Cyst-C, we analyzed high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) and APOE in the CSF from 5×FAD mice injected with or 
without CSPs derived from LLC cultures and found no significant 
differences between groups (Figures S12F and S12G). Notably, 
a previous study using cultured endothelial cells in vitro sug-
gested a role of Cyst-C in the α-secretase pathway. 54 In contrast, 
our findings using in vivo analysis indicate that Cyst-C activates 
TREM2 signaling rather than α-secretase cleavage. The discrep-
ancy between the studies could be due to the differences of the 
experimental systems (cell types) used.
Figure 4. Peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid pathology via Cyst-C secretion
(A–C) Representative images (A) and plots showing Aβ 1–16 -labeled (B) and thioflavin-S-labeled (C) amyloid plaques in the brains of 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age 
after intravenous injections (tail vein) of CSPs from LLC cancer cells without (blank) or with deletion of CLS1, CPE, Cyst-C, or GSN. n = 11 mice per group.
(D and E) The latency and length of the swimming path to reach a hidden platform during the training sessions (left), and the percentage (right) of time spent 
searching for a hidden platform in the target quadrant (quadrant 4) during the probe trials in the Morris water maze of 5×FAD mice at 4 months (D) or 5 months 
(E) of age after the injections (tail vein) of CSPs from LLC cancer cells without (blank) or with deletion of CLS1, CPE, Cyst-C, or GSN. n = 9 mice per group.
(F and G) Heatmaps and plots showing the number and time of visits to novel arms in the Y-maze of 5×FAD mice at 4 months (F) or 5 months (G) of age after the 
injections (tail vein) of CSPs from LLC cancer cells without (blank) or with deletion of CLS1, CPE, Cyst-C, or GSN. n = 9 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (B, C, probe trials in D–F, and G) or 
two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (training sessions in D and E).
See also Figure S6.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
9
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
10 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Human Cyst-C degrades existing amyloid plaques via 
TREM2
Based on the data described above, we propose a working 
model for inhibition of amyloid pathology by Cyst-C activation 
of TREM2. In this model, human Cyst-C acts as a carrier of 
Aβ 1–42o for targeted degradation of Aβ plaques via activation of 
TREM2 in microglia. Indeed, we observed that Cyst-C was phys-
ically associated with Aβ 1–42o (Figure 7E) and phagocytosed 
Aβ 1–42o but not Aβ 1–42m in microglia (Figure 7F). When incubated 
with pHrodo-Aβ 1–42o or pHrodo-Aβ 1–42m in the presence of hu-
man Cyst-C (15 μg/mL), microglia from TREM2 +/+ (wild-type 
[WT]) mice showed substantially greater uptake of Aβ 1–42o than 
Aβ 1–42m (Figure 7F). In contrast, in the absence of Cyst-C, uptake 
of Aβ 1–42o in microglia was undetectable. Notably, uptake of 
Aβ 1–42o induced by Cyst-C was abolished in microglia from 
TREM2 − /− mice (the unconditional TREM2 knockout mice), indi-
cating that Cyst-C induces phagocytosis of Aβ 1–42o in microglia 
in a TREM2-dependent manner (Figure 7F). Notably, microglial 
uptake of Aβ 1–42o occurred in a dose-dependent manner with hu-
man Cyst-C; Aβ 1–42o in microglia from TREM2 +/+ mice was stably 
detected in the presence of a relatively high level of human 
Cyst-C (15 μg/mL) and was occasionally observed in the pres-
ence of 7.5 μg/mL human Cyst-C. When a relatively low level 
of human Cyst-C (1 μg/mL) was added, the uptake of Aβ 1–42o 
in microglia from either TREM2 +/+ or TREM2 − /− mice was not 
detectable (Figure 7G). This finding suggests that a minimal con-
centration of human Cyst-C is required to effectively activate 
TREM2-mediated phagocytosis in microglia, supporting the pre-
vious studies that at the basal condition TREM2 is in an inactive 
state. 57 Taken together, our findings indicate that human Cyst-C, 
as a carrier of Aβ oligomers, binds Aβ oligomers and activates 
TREM2 in microglia to phagocytose extracellular Aβ aggregates. 
We subsequently investigated whether human Cyst-C activa-
tion of TREM2 could indeed affect catabolism of Aβ plaques by 
measuring the rate of degradation of Aβ 1–42o following its uptake 
by microglia from TREM2 +/+ mice compared with those from 
TREM2 − /− mice. After incubation with free carboxy fluorescein 
(FAM)-labeled Aβ 1–42o , there was no difference in the time course
of the degradation of internalized Aβ 1–42o between these two ge-
notypes (Figures S12H and S12J). After internalization of Aβ 1–42o 
in the presence of human Cyst-C, however, Aβ 1–42o degradation 
was faster in microglia from TREM2 +/+ mice than in those from 
TREM2 − /− mice (Figures S12I and S12J). Moreover, the rate of 
Aβ 1–42o degradation in microglia from TREM2 +/− heterozygous 
mice was intermediate between that in microglia from 
TREM2 +/+ and TREM2 − /− mice (Figure S12J), indicating that 
the degradation and/or clearance of Aβ 1–42o by microglia not 
only requires TREM2 but also depends on the gene dosage. 
Next, we investigated whether human Cyst-C triggers the am-
yloid plaque clearance in vivo via TREM2. We injected TREM2 − /− 
5×FAD and TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age with hu-
man Cyst-C (once per day for 30 consecutive days). Immediately 
after the last injection, the mice were sacrificed, and the brains 
were prepared for immunohistochemistry and protein analysis. 
Very few amyloid plaques, as detected immunopositively by 
Aβ 1–16 antibody and thioflavin-S staining, were observed in the 
brains of the TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD mice (Figures 7H and 7I). In 
contrast, intense plaques were observed in both TREM2 − /− 
5×FAD mice and TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD mice injected with Cyst-
C L68Q (Figures 7H and 7I).
To further determine whether human Cyst-C promotes micro-
glial engulfment of amyloid aggregates and whether this effect 
depends on TREM2 in microglia, we performed MeX04 phago-
cytosis assays in both TREM2 − /− 5×FAD mice and TREM2 +/+ 
5×FAD mice. In TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD mice, application of human 
Cyst-C significantly increased the MeX04 signal in Iba1 + micro-
glia in the cortex, indicating enhanced microglial uptake of Aβ 
aggregates. However, this increase was not observed in 
TREM2 − /− 5×FAD mice, showing TREM2-dependent phagocy-
tosis of Aβ aggregates in AD mice in vivo (Figures S13A–S13C). 
We also used TREM2 R47H 5×FAD mice to investigate the ef-
fects of human Cyst-C on plaque aggregation and clearance in 
a second independent loss-of-function control model. Consis-
tent with the findings in the TREM2 − /− 5×FAD mice, quantitative 
image analysis (Figures 7H and 7I) demonstrated that the 
TREM2 R47H mutation completely blocked the ability of human
Figure 5. Cancer cell-secreted Cyst-C inhibits amyloid pathology
(A) Experimental schedule (top) and western blots (bottom) showing the expression of His-tagged human Cyst-C or Cyst-C L68Q in Cst3-deficient LLC cells.
(B and C) Bar graphs showing the expression levels of human Cyst-C (B) and mouse Cyst-C (mCyst-C) (C) in both the plasma and the CSF of 5×FAD mice after the 
injections of CSPs from the Cst3-deficient LLC cultures without (control) or with expression of human Cyst-C or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 9 mice per group.
(D) Representative images of the brain sections from 5×FAD mice after the injections of CSPs from the Cst3-deficient LLC cultures without (control) or with the 
expression of human Cyst-C. The cortical sections were stained with anti-His (green) and anti-Cyst-C (red) antibodies, as indicated. Selected areas (boxed) are 
shown with high magnification (right). The similar results were seen in each of the five experiments.
(E and F) Representative images (E) and blots of anti-His or non-specific IgG (IgG) precipitates (F) showing the physical association of human Cyst-C with amyloid 
aggregates in the cortex of 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age after the first five injections of CSPs from Cst3-deficient LLC culture media expressing human Cyst-C
or Cyst-C L68Q .
(G) Representative images (top) and plots (bottom) showing Aβ 1–16 -labeled and thioflavin-S-labeled amyloid plaques in the brains of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of 
age after 30 consecutive injections (tail vein) of CSPs from Cst3-deficient LLC cells expressing human Cyst-C, Cyst-C L68Q , or an empty vector (control). n = 9 mice 
per group.
(H) Heatmaps and plots showing the number and time of visits to novel arms in the Y-maze of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after 30 consecutive injections of 
culture media from Cst3-deficient LLC cells expressing human Cyst-C or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 11 mice per group.
(I) The latency and length of the swimming path to reach the hidden platform during the training sessions and the percentage of time spent searching for a hidden 
platform in the target quadrant (quadrant 4) during the probe trials in the Morris water maze of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after 30 consecutive injections (tail 
vein) of CSPs from Cst3-deficient LLC cells expressing human Cyst-C or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 11 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (B, C, G, H, and probe trials in I) or two-
way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (training sessions in I).
See also Figures S7 and S8.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
11
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
12 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Cyst-C to inhibit amyloid pathology (Figures S13D and S13E). 
Specifically, we found that the effects of Cyst-C L68Q on plaque 
burden in AD mice did not significantly differ from that produced 
by the TREM2 R47H mutation.
Finally, we injected human Cyst-C into TREM2 +/+ WT and 
TREM2 − /− WT mice at 4 months of age. The behavioral tests 
were performed immediately after the last injection (5 months 
of age). We found that in the memory recall session without a 
submerged platform, the TREM2 − /− 5×FAD mice spent signifi-
cantly less time in the target quadrant than did the TREM2 +/+ 
5×FAD mice, whereas no difference was found between the 
TREM2 +/+ WT and TREM2 − /− WT groups (Figure S13F). Consis-
tent with the observations in the Morris water maze test, the 
deletion of TREM2 in microglia completely abolished the thera-
peutic effects of human Cyst-C in the novel arm Y-maze test 
(Figure S13G).
DISCUSSION
Cancer neuroscience has focused on reciprocal interactions of 
the central and peripheral nervous systems with cancers, high-
lighting opportunities for cancer therapies. 63–65 While much is 
known about how the nervous system regulates cancer 
growth, 66–69 whether peripheral cancer affects the pathological 
progression of AD is yet to be examined. In this study, we have 
shown that peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology 
and rescues cognition in AD mouse models via Cyst-C secretion. 
We have also demonstrated that Cyst-C binds amyloid aggre-
gates and activates TREM2 in microglia, enabling microglia to 
phagocytose and degrade the pre-existing amyloid plaques. 
This study has provided significant conceptual advances into 
cancer neuroscience and established precision-targeted thera-
peutic strategies by removing the pre-existing amyloid plaques 
for AD therapies.
Consistent with the previous studies that vascular perme-
ability in the brain increases in both the preclinical mouse 
models 44,45 and human patients, 46,47 Cyst-C secreted from pe-
ripheral cancer cells can readily penetrate the BBB and reach
the therapeutically relevant levels in the brain of 5×FAD mice. 
Our data also revealed that albumin after tail-vein injection 
did not increase in the brains of AD mice, suggesting that 
changes in the BBB in AD are likely quite focal and not wide-
spread, as is seen in other neurological disorders such as brain 
tumors and infectious diseases. Of note, tumor-derived Cyst-C 
concentrations in the plasma vary across the different cancer-
bearing mice, while the reduction of amyloid pathology 
following the injections of CSPs from these different tumor 
types does not differ, raising the possibility that the effect of 
CSPs may not be specific to tumor-derived Cyst-C. To exclude 
this possibility, we have analyzed tumor-derived Cyst-C levels 
in both the plasma and the CSF (Figures 3F and 3G) and 
demonstrated that although concentrations of Cyst-C secreted 
from cancer cells in the plasma vary among different types of 
peripheral tumors, Cyst-C released from each of these different 
tumor types in the plasma can reach the therapeutic levels in 
the brain that are required for amyloid inhibition. More impor-
tantly, even if a concentration of Cyst-C in the plasma further 
increases, the inhibitory effects on amyloid pathology do not 
intensify.
Amyloid aggregates are the main components of senile pla-
ques in the brain and are commonly described as a constant 
neuropathological feature of early and late AD. 5–8 The long-
term search for AD therapies involving the inhibition of amyloid 
plaques has focused mainly on amyloid accumulation and pla-
que formation. 70–73 A reduction of Aβ deposition can be caused 
by BACE1 deletion, indicating that pharmacological inhibition of 
BACE1 could be a promising strategy for slowing the develop-
ment of AD-related amyloid pathology. 74 However, treatments 
by targeting BACE1 should be initiated before the formation of 
amyloid plaques. 75 The generation of Aβ 1–42m is, in and of itself, 
a physiologically relevant event, whereas its aggregation into 
oligomers and fibrils is pathogenic. 76 Thus, the strategy of 
removing the existing amyloid plaques has emerged as a valid 
disease-modifying therapy. 77 Our findings have demonstrated 
that Cyst-C binds to both Aβ fibrillary aggregates and TREM2 
in microglia and that this binding activates TREM2 in microglia,
Figure 6. Human Cyst-C inhibits amyloid pathology
(A) Experimental schedule, representative images, and western blots showing human Cyst-C or Cyst-C L68Q in the cortex of 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age after 
the first five injections. A plot showing the level of human Cyst-C and Cyst-C L68Q in the CSF of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after His-tagged human Cyst-C 
injection once per day for 30 consecutive days. The injections of Cyst-C L68Q mutant and a vehicle solution were used as controls. n = 9 mice per group.
(B) Representative images show that a decrease of plaque-associated TMEM119 + microglia was closely associated with an increase of plaque-associated 
CD68 + microglia in the cortex of 5×FAD mice after the injections of human Cyst-C. Bar graphs show the percent of TMEM119 + (top) and CD68 + (bottom) voxels 
within 15 μm around Aβ 1–16 
+ plaques. n = 7 mice per group.
(C) Representative images and plots showing Aβ 1–16 -labeled and thioflavin-S-labeled amyloid plaques in the brains of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after 30 
consecutive injections with human Cyst-C, Cyst-C L68Q , or a vehicle control. n = 9 mice per group.
(D) Illustration showing extracellular recordings of excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) from the CA1 hippocampus with stimulation of Schaffer collateral 
fibers. Representative traces of EPSPs and a plot of the EPSP slope normalized with respect to a 10 min baseline (defined as 100) immediately preceding the 
tetanus (arrow) in slices from wild-type (WT) or 5×FAD male mice at 5 months of age after the injection of human Cyst-C or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 12 recordings from 4 
mice per group.
(E) The latency and length of the swimming path to reach the hidden platform during the training sessions and the percentage of time spent searching for a hidden 
platform in the target quadrant (quadrant 4) during the probe trials in the Morris water maze of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after the injection of human Cyst-C 
or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 11 mice per group.
(F) Heatmaps and plots showing the number and time of visits to novel arms in the Y-maze of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after the injection of human Cyst-C 
or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 11 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (A, C, D, probe trials in E, and F), two-
way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (training sessions in E), or t test (B).
See also Figures S9 and S10.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
13
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
14 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

enabling microglia to phagocytose and degrade the pre-existing 
amyloid plaques.
Cyst-C is also expressed in neurons and microglia, 78 while 
deletion of Cyst-C in all these cell types does not alter amy-
loid plaque burden in AD mice, raising a question of how a tu-
mor-derived Cyst-C can override the function of brain-derived 
endogenous Cyst-C. To address this question, we have further 
dissociated a cancer cell-secreted human Cyst-C from an 
endogenous mouse Cyst-C by injecting CSPs from LLC Cst3− 
cell cultures expressing His-tagged human Cyst-C into 5×FAD 
mice. This injection significantly increases the expression levels 
of human Cyst-C, but not endogenous mouse Cyst-C, in the 
brain, showing that tumor-derived Cyst-C inhibits amyloid pa-
thology in 5×FAD mice. Significantly, tumor-derived Cyst-C 
can be readily incorporated into microglia-associated amyloid 
aggregates. Thus, Cyst-C released from cancer cells can be 
considered ‘‘a molecular glue’’ for targeted protein degradation 
of amyloid aggregates. Thus, degradation of pre-existing amy-
loid plaques by tumor-derived Cyst-C secretion and TREM2 
activation may represent an alternative therapeutic modality 
that is distinct from present amyloid-lowering strategies for the 
treatment of AD. Our findings are consistent with the previous re-
ports that Cyst-C plays a protective role in amyloid pathology of 
AD, 79 while a recent population-based case report indicates that 
an elevation of circulating Cyst-C correlates with increased de-
mentia risk. 80 This recent report, however, lacks basic informa-
tion about patients used for their assays, such as diagnostic 
criteria for dementia, sampling methods, and sample size. 
Sequence variants in a gene encoding TREM2 are associated 
with an increased risk for late-onset AD. 81 TREM2 is required for 
a wide variety of cellular functions, including chemotaxis, 82 
maintenance of energy metabolism, 83 and phagocytic clearance 
of apoptotic cell debris. 84 Despite recent identification of several 
lipids, APOE, and Aβ oligomers, 57 functional ligands (agonists) 
for the activation of TREM2 in microglia have yet to be identified. 
TREM2 is associated with tumor-derived Cyst-C, whereas a dis-
ease-related mutation in TREM2 (TREM2 R47H ) or human Cyst-C 
(Cyst-C L68Q ) disrupts this association. These findings indicate 
that tumor-derived Cyst-C can be considered as an agonist of 
TREM2 in microglia for targeted inhibition of amyloid pathology 
in AD.
Limitations of the study
Epidemiological studies have generally agreed on a negative as-
sociation between cancer and AD incidence, 19–23 while an earlier 
report by Freedman et al. 85 indicated a lower incidence of AD 
among breast cancer patients compared with those with lung 
cancer. However, patients in this study neither had their blood 
protein (Cyst-C) levels tested nor received a pathological diag-
nosis. A correlation between human plasma Cyst-C levels and 
AD severity has remained undefined. Furthermore, in our present 
study, we have demonstrated that Cyst-C secreted from cancer 
cells inhibits amyloid pathology without affecting neurofibrillary 
tau tangles in AD mice. Thus, the different incidence of AD be-
tween breast cancer versus lung cancer survivors reported in 
an early study 85 could be due to the different neuropathological 
severities, such as neurofibrillary tau tangles and amyloid pla-
ques in the cancer survivors.
Thus, one limitation of our study is that we have not found the 
effects of peripheral cancer and/or CSPs in tau protein misfold-
ing, which is a well-known specific pathological biomarker in AD 
patients. 86,87 The tau protein has numerous phosphorylation 
sites across its N-terminal and C-terminal regions, which are 
modulated by a balance of various kinases and phosphatases 
to maintain normal neuronal physiological functions. 86,88,89 A 
loss of the balance between phosphatases and kinases may 
lead to the hyperphosphorylation of tau. 86,88,89 This process re-
sults in the detachment of the tau protein from microtubules, fol-
lowed by conformational changes and the misfolding and accu-
mulation of tau oligomers. The lack of effects of peripheral 
cancer on tau pathology suggests that amyloid inhibitors 
released from peripheral cancer cells may not influence the ac-
tivity of protein kinases and phosphatases that modify the tau 
phosphorylation state.
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be 
directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Youming Lu (lym@hust. 
edu.cn).
Materials availability
This paper did not generate new, unique reagents.
Figure 7. Human Cyst-C degrades existing amyloid plaques via TREM2
(A) Representative blots showing the physical association of human Cyst-C with TREM2. Similar results were observed in each of the three experiments.
(B and C) Representative images (B) and a bar graph (C) showing direct binding of His-tagged human Cyst-C (human Cyst-C) but not its mutants human Cyst-
C L68Q and TREM2-Fc, nor Fc or TREM1-Fc. n = 5 independent experiments.
(D) Representative images and a bar graph showing interactions between TREM2-GFP and DAP12-mCherry, as determined by FRET. The white rectangles 
indicate the regions before (prebleaching) and after (postbleaching) bleaching. In this study, cultured primary microglia expressing TREM2-GFP and DAP12-
mCherry were treated with or without human Cyst-C for 30 min. n = 9 cells per group.
(E) Solid-phase binding assay showing the levels of human Cyst-C bound to Aβ 1–42o or Aβ 1–42m with different concentrations. The values were normalized to the 
bound level of Aβ 1–42o at the concentration of 200 nM. n = 3 independent experiments.
(F and G) Representative images and plots showing the uptake of pHrodo-Aβ 1–42o or Aβ 1–42m in cultured primary microglia from TREM2 +/+ and TREM2 − /− mice 
induced by human Cyst-C or vehicle at a single dose of 15 μg/mL (F) or three different doses of 1, 7.5, or 15 μg/mL (G), as determined by fluorescence intensity of 
pHrodo in microglia. n = 5 independent experiments in (F), n = 3 independent experiments in (G).
(H and I) Representative images showing Aβ 1–16 -labeled and thioflavin-S-labeled amyloid plaques in the brains of TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD, TREM2 − /− 5×FAD, and 
TREM2 R47H 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age. n = 9 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (C, F, and I), two-way ANOVA with 
Bonferroni’s test (E and G), or t test (D).
See also Figures S11–S13 and Table S1.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
15
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Data and code availability
• Single-cell RNA-seq data of microglia have been deposited at the China 
National Center for Bioinformation (CNCB) under accession number 
CRA033979. Original western blot images have been deposited at Men-
deley Data: https://doi.org/10.17632/rzypfghszv.1.
• This paper did not report original code.
• Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this 
paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
(grants 82430044 and 32421003 to Y.L. and 82271486 to X.L.); the Key Labo-
ratory of Anesthesiology and Resuscitation, Ministry of Education, China; the 
Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College; and the Huazhong University of Sci-
ence and Technology. We thank Drs. Cong Ma and Jianfeng Liu at the Center 
for Biological Cryo-EM, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, for 
technical support, suggestions, and comments on this study.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
X.L. and Y.L. initiated, designed, and supervised the study; X.L., X.T., and J.Z. 
generated cancer-bearing mouse models of AD and analyzed amyloid pathol-
ogy. L.D. analyzed the peripheral tumors in peripheral tissues. Z.H. and L.L. 
performed behavioral studies and immunohistochemistry studies. Y.G. per-
formed electrophysiological studies. J.L. collected and analyzed serum sam-
ples from human patients. C.C., A.H., and Yue Wang purified human Cyst-C 
and performed western blot studies. J.L. and Ya Wang performed immunohis-
tochemistry studies. X.L., T.Z., X.T., and J.Z. analyzed Cyst-C and TREM2 and 
TREM2-dependent activation of microglial phagocytosis and clearance of am-
yloid aggregates. All authors analyzed the data. X.L. and Y.L. wrote the 
manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
STAR★METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include 
the following:
• KEY RESOURCES TABLE
• EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
○ Animals
○ Cell lines
○ Human subjects
• METHOD DETAILS
○ Cancer-bearing mouse models
○ Screen cancer cell secretory proteins
○ Immunofluorescence
○ RNA-sequencing analysis
○ Protein extraction
○ Measurements of 125 I-Cyst-C penetrance the blood-brain barrier 
and entry to the brain
○ Flow cytometry
○ Whole-body irradiation
○ Microglia isolation from adult mouse brain
○ Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis
○ ELISA assays
○ Cyst-C expression and purification
○ Aβ uptake and degradation assay
○ Microglial phagocytosis of Aβ in AD mice
○ Co-IP and Western blots
○ Solid phase binding assay
○ FRET assay
○ Morris water maze
○ Novel arm Y-maze test
○ Electrophysiology
• QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 
2025.12.020.
Received: December 4, 2024 
Revised: September 5, 2025 
Accepted: December 10, 2025
REFERENCES
1. Holtzman, D.M., Morris, J.C., and Goate, A.M. (2011). Alzheimer’s dis-
ease: the challenge of the second century. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 77sr71. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3002369.
2. Lo´ pez-Otı´n, C., Pietrocola, F., Roiz-Valle, D., Galluzzi, L., and Kroemer, G. 
(2023). Meta-hallmarks of aging and cancer. Cell Metab. 35, 12–35. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2022.11.001.
3. Navarrete-Reyes, A.P., Soto-Pe´ rez-de-Celis, E., and Hurria, A. (2016). 
Cancer and Aging: A Complex Biological Association. Rev. Invest. Clin. 
68, 17–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0034-8376(25)00203-7.
4. Scheltens, P., De Strooper, B., Kivipelto, M., Holstege, H., Che´ telat, G., 
Teunissen, C.E., Cummings, J., and van der Flier, W.M. (2021). Alz-
heimer’s disease. Lancet 397, 1577–1590. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
s0140-6736(20)32205-4.
5. Small, D.H., Mok, S.S., and Bornstein, J.C. (2001). Alzheimer’s disease 
and Abeta toxicity: from top to bottom. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 595–598. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/35086072.
6. Frisoni, G.B., Altomare, D., Thal, D.R., Ribaldi, F., van der Kant, R., Ossen-
koppele, R., Blennow, K., Cummings, J., van Duijn, C., Nilsson, P.M., et al. 
(2022). The probabilistic model of Alzheimer disease: the amyloid hypoth-
esis revised. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 23, 53–66. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41583-021-00533-w.
7. Weaver, D.F. (2023). Amyloid-β is a cytokine. Alzheimers Dement. 19, 
4237–4247. https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.13165.
8. Thal, D.R., Walter, J., Saido, T.C., and Fa¨ ndrich, M. (2015). Neuropathology 
and biochemistry of Aβ and its aggregates in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta 
Neuropathol. 129, 167–182. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-014-1375-y.
9. Iaccarino, H.F., Singer, A.C., Martorell, A.J., Rudenko, A., Gao, F., Gilling-
ham, T.Z., Mathys, H., Seo, J., Kritskiy, O., Abdurrob, F., et al. (2016). 
Gamma frequency entrainment attenuates amyloid load and modifies mi-
croglia. Nature 540, 230–235. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature20587.
10. Zhao, Y., Zheng, Q., Hong, Y., Gao, Y., Hu, J., Lang, M., Zhang, H., Zhou, 
Y., Luo, H., Zhang, X., et al. (2023). β 2 -Microglobulin coaggregates with Aβ 
and contributes to amyloid pathology and cognitive deficits in Alzheimer’s 
disease model mice. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 1170–1184. https://doi.org/10. 
1038/s41593-023-01352-1.
11. Bai, N., Li, N., Cheng, R., Guan, Y., Zhao, X., Song, Z., Xu, H., Yi, F., Jiang, 
B., Li, X., et al. (2022). Inhibition of SIRT2 promotes APP acetylation and 
ameliorates cognitive impairment in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Cell Rep. 
40, 111062. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111062.
12. Heckmann, B.L., Teubner, B.J.W., Tummers, B., Boada-Romero, E., Har-
ris, L., Yang, M., Guy, C.S., Zakharenko, S.S., and Green, D.R. (2019). 
LC3-Associated Endocytosis Facilitates β-Amyloid Clearance and Miti-
gates Neurodegeneration in Murine Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 178, 536– 
551.e14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.056.
13. van Dyck, C.H., Swanson, C.J., Aisen, P., Bateman, R.J., Chen, C., Gee, 
M., Kanekiyo, M., Li, D., Reyderman, L., Cohen, S., et al. (2023). Lecane-
mab in Early Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 388, 9–21. https://doi. 
org/10.1056/NEJMoa2212948.
ll
16 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

14. Mintun, M.A., Lo, A.C., Duggan Evans, C., Wessels, A.M., Ardayfio, P.A., 
Andersen, S.W., Shcherbinin, S., Sparks, J., Sims, J.R., Brys, M., et al. 
(2021). Donanemab in Early Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 
1691–1704. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2100708.
15. Zabłocka, A., Kazana, W., Sochocka, M., Sta 
nczykiewicz, B., Janusz, M., 
Leszek, J., and Orzechowska, B. (2021). Inverse Correlation Between Alz-
heimer’s Disease and Cancer: Short Overview. Mol. Neurobiol. 58, 6335– 
6349. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-021-02544-1.
16. Lanni, C., Masi, M., Racchi, M., and Govoni, S. (2021). Cancer and Alz-
heimer’s disease inverse relationship: an age-associated diverging derail-
ment of shared pathways. Mol. Psychiatry 26, 280–295. https://doi.org/10. 
1038/s41380-020-0760-2.
17. Galva˜ o, F., Jr., Grokoski, K.C., da Silva, B.B., Lamers, M.L., and Siqueira, 
I.R. (2019). The amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing as a biological 
link between Alzheimer’s disease and cancer. Ageing Res. Rev. 49, 83–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2018.11.007.
18. de Bari, L., Atlante, A., Armeni, T., and Kalapos, M.P. (2019). Synthesis and 
metabolism of methylglyoxal, S-D-lactoylglutathione and D-lactate in can-
cer and Alzheimer’s disease. Exploring the crossroad of eternal youth and 
premature aging. Ageing Res. Rev. 53, 100915. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
arr.2019.100915.
19. Frain, L., Swanson, D., Cho, K., Gagnon, D., Lu, K.P., Betensky, R.A., and 
Driver, J. (2017). Association of cancer and Alzheimer’s disease risk in a 
national cohort of veterans. Alzheimers Dement. 13, 1364–1370. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2017.04.012.
20. Karanth, S.D., Katsumata, Y., Nelson, P.T., Fardo, D.W., McDowell, J.K., 
Schmitt, F.A., Kryscio, R.J., Browning, S.R., Braithwaite, D., Arnold, S. 
M., et al. (2022). Cancer diagnosis is associated with a lower burden of de-
mentia and less Alzheimer’s-type neuropathology. Brain 145, 2518–2527. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac035.
21. Ospina-Romero, M., Glymour, M.M., Hayes-Larson, E., Mayeda, E.R., 
Graff, R.E., Brenowitz, W.D., Ackley, S.F., Witte, J.S., and Kobayashi, L. 
C. (2020). Association Between Alzheimer Disease and Cancer With Eval-
uation of Study Biases: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA 
Netw. Open 3, e2025515. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen. 
2020.25515.
22. Schmidt, S.A.J., Ording, A.G., Horva´ th-Puho´ , E., Sørensen, H.T., and Hen-
derson, V.W. (2017). Non-melanoma skin cancer and risk of Alzheimer’s 
disease and all-cause dementia. PLoS One 12, e0171527. https://doi. 
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0171527.
23. Zhang, D.D., Ou, Y.N., Yang, L., Ma, Y.H., Tan, L., Feng, J.F., Cheng, W., 
and Yu, J.T. (2022). Investigating the association between cancer and de-
mentia risk: a longitudinal cohort study. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 14, 146. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13195-022-01090-9.
24. Oakley, H., Cole, S.L., Logan, S., Maus, E., Shao, P., Craft, J., Guillozet-
Bongaarts, A., Ohno, M., Disterhoft, J., Van Eldik, L., et al. (2006). Intra-
neuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss 
in transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations: poten-
tial factors in amyloid plaque formation. J. Neurosci. 26, 10129–10140. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.1202-06.2006.
25. Ramsden, M., Kotilinek, L., Forster, C., Paulson, J., McGowan, E., Santa-
Cruz, K., Guimaraes, A., Yue, M., Lewis, J., Carlson, G., et al. (2005). Age-
dependent neurofibrillary tangle formation, neuron loss, and memory 
impairment in a mouse model of human tauopathy (P301L). J. Neurosci. 
25, 10637–10647. https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.3279-05.2005.
26. Wu, D., Tang, X., Gu, L.H., Li, X.L., Qi, X.Y., Bai, F., Chen, X.C., Wang, J.Z., 
Ren, Q.G., and Zhang, Z.J. (2018). LINGO-1 antibody ameliorates myelin 
impairment and spatial memory deficits in the early stage of 5XFAD 
mice. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 24, 381–393. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
cns.12809.
27. Gu, L., Wu, D., Tang, X., Qi, X., Li, X., Bai, F., Chen, X., Ren, Q., and Zhang, 
Z. (2018). Myelin changes at the early stage of 5XFAD mice. Brain Res. 
Bull. 137, 285–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2017.12.013.
28. Zhang, J., Chen, Y., Zhao, Y., Wang, P., Ding, H., Liu, C., Lyu, J., and Le, 
W. (2024). Terahertz Irradiation Improves Cognitive Impairments and At-
tenuates Alzheimer’s Neuropathology in the APP SWE /PS1 DE9 Mouse: A 
Novel Therapeutic Intervention for Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurosci. Bull. 
40, 857–871. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12264-023-01145-3.
29. Garcia-Alloza, M., Robbins, E.M., Zhang-Nunes, S.X., Purcell, S.M., Be-
tensky, R.A., Raju, S., Prada, C., Greenberg, S.M., Bacskai, B.J., and 
Frosch, M.P. (2006). Characterization of amyloid deposition in the 
APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 24, 
516–524. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2006.08.017.
30. Vagnoni, A., Perkinton, M.S., Gray, E.H., Francis, P.T., Noble, W., and 
Miller, C.C.J. (2012). Calsyntenin-1 mediates axonal transport of the amy-
loid precursor protein and regulates Aβ production. Hum. Mol. Genet. 21, 
2845–2854. https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds109.
31. Pla´ , V., Paco, S., Ghezali, G., Ciria, V., Pozas, E., Ferrer, I., and Aguado, F. 
(2013). Secretory sorting receptors carboxypeptidase E and secretogranin 
III in amyloid β-associated neural degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Brain Pathol. 23, 274–284. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3639.2012. 
00644.x.
32. Mathews, P.M., and Levy, E. (2016). Cystatin C in aging and in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Ageing Res. Rev. 32, 38–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2016. 
06.003.
33. Ji, L., Zhao, X., and Hua, Z. (2015). Potential therapeutic implications of 
gelsolin in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 44, 13–25. https://doi. 
org/10.3233/jad-141548.
34. Corder, E.H., Saunders, A.M., Strittmatter, W.J., Schmechel, D.E., Gas-
kell, P.C., Small, G.W., Roses, A.D., Haines, J.L., and Pericak-Vance, M. 
A. (1993). Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alz-
heimer’s disease in late onset families. Science 261, 921–923. https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/science.8346443.
35. Kim, J., Jiang, H., Park, S., Eltorai, A.E.M., Stewart, F.R., Yoon, H., Basak, 
J.M., Finn, M.B., and Holtzman, D.M. (2011). Haploinsufficiency of human 
APOE reduces amyloid deposition in a mouse model of amyloid-β 
amyloidosis. J. Neurosci. 31, 18007–18012. https://doi.org/10.1523/ 
jneurosci.3773-11.2011.
36. Bekris, L.M., Millard, S.P., Galloway, N.M., Vuletic, S., Albers, J.J., Li, G., 
Galasko, D.R., DeCarli, C., Farlow, M.R., Clark, C.M., et al. (2008). Multiple 
SNPs within and surrounding the apolipoprotein E gene influence cerebro-
spinal fluid apolipoprotein E protein levels. J. Alzheimers Dis. 13, 255–266. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/jad-2008-13303.
37. Sunderland, T., Mirza, N., Putnam, K.T., Linker, G., Bhupali, D., Durham, 
R., Soares, H., Kimmel, L., Friedman, D., Bergeson, J., et al. (2004). Cere-
brospinal fluid beta-amyloid1-42 and tau in control subjects at risk for Alz-
heimer’s disease: the effect of APOE epsilon4 allele. Biol. Psychiatry 56, 
670–676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.07.021.
38. Akbaba, H., Erel-Akbaba, G., and Senturk, S. (2021). Special Focus Issue 
Part II: Recruitment of solid lipid nanoparticles for the delivery of CRISPR/ 
Cas9: primary evaluation of anticancer gene editing. Nanomedicine 
(Lond.) 16, 963–978. https://doi.org/10.2217/nnm-2020-0412.
39. Ochieng, J., and Chaudhuri, G. (2010). Cystatin superfamily. J. Health 
Care Poor Underserved 21, 51–70. https://doi.org/10.1353/hpu.0.0257.
40. Skerget, K., Taler-Vercic, A., Bavdek, A., Hodnik, V., Ceru, S., Tusek-Zni-
daric, M., Kumm, T., Pitsi, D., Pompe-Novak, M., Palumaa, P., et al. (2010). 
Interaction between oligomers of stefin B and amyloid-beta in vitro and in 
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 3201–3210. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109. 
024620.
41. Li, Q., Li, B., Liu, L., Wang, K.J., Liu, M.Y., Deng, Y., Li, Z., Zhao, W.D., Wu, 
L.Y., Chen, Y.H., et al. (2024). Monocytes release cystatin F dimer to asso-
ciate with Aβ and aggravate amyloid pathology and cognitive deficits in 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflamm. 21, 125. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12974-024-03119-2.
42. Perlenfein, T.J., Mehlhoff, J.D., and Murphy, R.M. (2017). Insights into the 
mechanism of cystatin C oligomer and amyloid formation and its
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
17
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

interaction with β-amyloid. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 11485–11498. https://doi. 
org/10.1074/jbc.M117.786558.
43. Hyytia¨ , H., Ristiniemi, N., Airas, L., Pettersson, K., and Hellman, J. (2010). 
Development of an immunoassay for the detection of cystatin C dimers. 
J. Immunol. Methods 355, 14–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jim.2010. 
02.014.
44. Giannoni, P., Arango-Lievano, M., Neves, I.D., Rousset, M.C., Baranger, 
K., Rivera, S., Jeanneteau, F., Claeysen, S., and Marchi, N. (2016). Cere-
brovascular pathology during the progression of experimental Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 88, 107–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2016. 
01.001.
45. Wang, Q., Huang, X., Su, Y., Yin, G., Wang, S., Yu, B., Li, H., Qi, J., Chen, 
H., Zeng, W., et al. (2022). Activation of Wnt/β-catenin pathway mitigates 
blood-brain barrier dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 145, 4474– 
4488. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac236.
46. Montagne, A., Nation, D.A., Sagare, A.P., Barisano, G., Sweeney, M.D., 
Chakhoyan, A., Pachicano, M., Joe, E., Nelson, A.R., D’Orazio, L.M., 
et al. (2020). APOE4 leads to blood-brain barrier dysfunction predicting 
cognitive decline. Nature 581, 71–76. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
020-2247-3.
47. Nation, D.A., Sweeney, M.D., Montagne, A., Sagare, A.P., D’Orazio, L.M., 
Pachicano, M., Sepehrband, F., Nelson, A.R., Buennagel, D.P., Harring-
ton, M.G., et al. (2019). Blood-brain barrier breakdown is an early 
biomarker of human cognitive dysfunction. Nat. Med. 25, 270–276. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0297-y.
48. Mussap, M., and Plebani, M. (2004). Biochemistry and clinical role of hu-
man cystatin C. Crit. Rev. Clin. Lab. Sci. 41, 467–550. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/10408360490504934.
49. Wheal, H.V., Chen, Y., Mitchell, J., Schachner, M., Maerz, W., Wieland, H., 
Van Rossum, D., and Kirsch, J. (1998). Molecular mechanisms that under-
lie structural and functional changes at the postsynaptic membrane during 
synaptic plasticity. Prog. Neurobiol. 55, 611–640. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
s0301-0082(98)00026-4.
50. Tang, Y.P., Shimizu, E., Dube, G.R., Rampon, C., Kerchner, G.A., Zhuo, 
M., Liu, G., and Tsien, J.Z. (1999). Genetic enhancement of learning and 
memory in mice. Nature 401, 63–69. https://doi.org/10.1038/43432.
51. Yang, Y., Bagyinszky, E., and An, S.S.A. (2023). Presenilin-1 (PSEN1) Mu-
tations: Clinical Phenotypes beyond Alzheimer’s Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
24, 8417. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24098417.
52. Monteiro, K.L.C., Dos Santos Alcaˆ ntara, M.G., Freire, N.M.L., Branda˜ o, E. 
M., do Nascimento, V.L., Dos Santos Viana, L.M., de Aquino, T.M., and da 
Silva-Ju´ nior, E.F. (2023). BACE-1 Inhibitors Targeting Alzheimer’s Dis-
ease. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 20, 131–148. https://doi.org/10.2174/ 
1567205020666230612155953.
53. Edwards, D.R., Handsley, M.M., and Pennington, C.J. (2008). The ADAM 
metalloproteinases. Mol. Aspects Med. 29, 258–289. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.mam.2008.08.001.
54. Wang, X.F., Liu, D.X., Liang, Y., Xing, L.L., Zhao, W.H., Qin, X.X., Shang, D. 
S., Li, B., Fang, W.G., Cao, L., et al. (2016). Cystatin C Shifts APP Process-
ing from Amyloid-beta Production towards Non-Amyloidgenic Pathway in 
Brain Endothelial Cells. PLoS One 11, e0161093. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0161093.
55. Pivovarova, O., Ho¨ hn, A., Grune, T., Pfeiffer, A.F.H., and Rudovich, N. 
(2016). Insulin-degrading enzyme: new therapeutic target for diabetes 
and Alzheimer’s disease? Ann. Med. 48, 614–624. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/07853890.2016.1197416.
56. Yeh, F.L., Wang, Y., Tom, I., Gonzalez, L.C., and Sheng, M. (2016). TREM2 
Binds to Apolipoproteins, Including APOE and CLU/APOJ, and Thereby 
Facilitates Uptake of Amyloid-Beta by Microglia. Neuron 91, 328–340. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.06.015.
57. Zhao, Y., Wu, X., Li, X., Jiang, L.L., Gui, X., Liu, Y., Sun, Y., Zhu, B., Pin˜ a-
Crespo, J.C., Zhang, M., et al. (2018). TREM2 Is a Receptor for β-Amyloid
that Mediates Microglial Function. Neuron 97, 1023–1031.e7. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.01.031.
58. Jay, T.R., Miller, C.M., Cheng, P.J., Graham, L.C., Bemiller, S., Broihier, M. 
L., Xu, G., Margevicius, D., Karlo, J.C., Sousa, G.L., et al. (2015). TREM2 
deficiency eliminates TREM2+ inflammatory macrophages and amelio-
rates pathology in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. J. Exp. Med. 
212, 287–295. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20142322.
59. Ulrich, J.D., Finn, M.B., Wang, Y., Shen, A., Mahan, T.E., Jiang, H., Stew-
art, F.R., Piccio, L., Colonna, M., and Holtzman, D.M. (2014). Altered mi-
croglial response to Aβ plaques in APPPS1-21 mice heterozygous for 
TREM2. Mol. Neurodegener. 9, 20. https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1326-
9-20.
60. Guerreiro, R., Wojtas, A., Bras, J., Carrasquillo, M., Rogaeva, E., Majounie, 
E., Cruchaga, C., Sassi, C., Kauwe, J.S.K., Younkin, S., et al. (2013). 
TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 117–127. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1211851.
61. Ellwanger, D.C., Wang, S., Brioschi, S., Shao, Z., Green, L., Case, R., Yoo, 
D., Weishuhn, D., Rathanaswami, P., Bradley, J., et al. (2021). Prior activa-
tion state shapes the microglia response to antihuman TREM2 in a 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118, 
e2017742118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2017742118.
62. Wang, S., Sudan, R., Peng, V., Zhou, Y., Du, S., Yuede, C.M., Lei, T., Hou, 
J., Cai, Z., Cella, M., et al. (2022). TREM2 drives microglia response to am-
yloid-β via SYK-dependent and -independent pathways. Cell 185, 4153– 
4169.e19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.033.
63. Mancusi, R., and Monje, M. (2023). The neuroscience of cancer. Nature 
618, 467–479. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-05968-y.
64. Winkler, F., Venkatesh, H.S., Amit, M., Batchelor, T., Demir, I.E., Deneen, 
B., Gutmann, D.H., Hervey-Jumper, S., Kuner, T., Mabbott, D., et al. 
(2023). Cancer neuroscience: State of the field, emerging directions. Cell 
186, 1689–1707. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.02.002.
65. Hanahan, D., and Monje, M. (2023). Cancer hallmarks intersect with neuro-
science in the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Cell 41, 573–580. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2023.02.012.
66. Park, M.H., Yun, H.M., Hwang, C.J., Park, S.I., Han, S.B., Hwang, D.Y., 
Yoon, D.Y., Kim, S., and Hong, J.T. (2017). Presenilin Mutation Sup-
presses Lung Tumorigenesis via Inhibition of Peroxiredoxin 6 Activity 
and Expression. Theranostics 7, 3624–3637. https://doi.org/10.7150/ 
thno.21408.
67. Xu, Q., Cao, Y., Kong, F., Liu, J., Chen, X., Zhao, Y., Lai, C.H., Zhou, X., Hu, 
H., Fu, W., et al. (2024). Multiple cancer cell types release LIF and Gal3 to 
hijack neural signals. Cell Res. 34, 345–354. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41422-024-00946-z.
68. Mauffrey, P., Tchitchek, N., Barroca, V., Bemelmans, A.P., Firlej, V., Allory, 
Y., Rome´ o, P.H., and Magnon, C. (2019). Progenitors from the central ner-
vous system drive neurogenesis in cancer. Nature 569, 672–678. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1219-y.
69. Renz, B.W., Takahashi, R., Tanaka, T., Macchini, M., Hayakawa, Y., 
Dantes, Z., Maurer, H.C., Chen, X., Jiang, Z., Westphalen, C.B., et al. 
(2018). β2 Adrenergic-Neurotrophin Feedforward Loop Promotes Pancre-
atic Cancer. Cancer Cell 33, 75–90.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell. 
2017.11.007.
70. Gouras, G.K., Almeida, C.G., and Takahashi, R.H. (2005). Intraneuronal 
Abeta accumulation and origin of plaques in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuro-
biol. Aging 26, 1235–1244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005. 
05.022.
71. Wirths, O., and Bayer, T.A. (2012). Intraneuronal Aβ accumulation and neu-
rodegeneration: lessons from transgenic models. Life Sci. 91, 1148–1152. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2012.02.001.
72. Takahashi, R.H., Nagao, T., and Gouras, G.K. (2017). Plaque formation 
and the intraneuronal accumulation of β-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Pathol. Int. 67, 185–193. https://doi.org/10.1111/pin.12520.
ll
18 
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

73. O’Brien, R.J., and Wong, P.C. (2011). Amyloid precursor protein process-
ing and Alzheimer’s disease. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34, 185–204. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613.
74. Ohno, M., Cole, S.L., Yasvoina, M., Zhao, J., Citron, M., Berry, R., Dister-
hoft, J.F., and Vassar, R. (2007). BACE1 gene deletion prevents neuron
loss and memory deficits in 5XFAD APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Neurobiol. 
Dis. 26, 134–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2006.12.008.
75. Neumann, U., Rueeger, H., Machauer, R., Veenstra, S.J., Lueoend, R.M., 
Tintelnot-Blomley, M., Laue, G., Beltz, K., Vogg, B., Schmid, P., et al.
(2015). A novel BACE inhibitor NB-360 shows a superior pharmacological 
profile and robust reduction of amyloid-β and neuroinflammation in APP 
transgenic mice. Mol. Neurodegener. 10, 44. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s13024-015-0033-8.
76. So¨ derberg, L., Johannesson, M., Nygren, P., Laudon, H., Eriksson, F., 
Osswald, G., Mo¨ ller, C., and Lannfelt, L. (2023). Lecanemab, Aducanu-
mab, and Gantenerumab - Binding Profiles to Different Forms of 
Amyloid-Beta Might Explain Efficacy and Side Effects in Clinical Trials 
for Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurotherapeutics 20, 195–206. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s13311-022-01308-6.
77. Zhang, Y., Chen, H., Li, R., Sterling, K., and Song, W. (2023). Amyloid 
β-based therapy for Alzheimer’s disease: challenges, successes and
future. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 8, 248. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41392-023-01484-7.
78. Hasegawa, A., Naruse, M., Hitoshi, S., Iwasaki, Y., Takebayashi, H., and 
Ikenaka, K. (2007). Regulation of glial development by cystatin C.
J. Neurochem. 100, 12–22. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006. 
04169.x.
79. Kaeser, S.A., Herzig, M.C., Coomaraswamy, J., Kilger, E., Selenica, M.L., 
Winkler, D.T., Staufenbiel, M., Levy, E., Grubb, A., and Jucker, M. (2007).
Cystatin C modulates cerebral beta-amyloidosis. Nat. Genet. 39, 1437– 
1439. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2007.23.
80. Higgins, C., Ware, E.B., Hicken, M., Zawistowski, M., and Bakulski, K.M. 
(2021). Circulating cystatin-C is associated with dementia in a racial and
ethnically diverse cohort: An interaction decomposition analysis. Alz-
heimers Dement. 17, e053278. https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.053278.
81. Jain, N., Lewis, C.A., Ulrich, J.D., and Holtzman, D.M. (2023). Chronic 
TREM2 activation exacerbates Aβ-associated tau seeding and spreading.
J. Exp. Med. 220, e20220654. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20220654.
82. Mazaheri, F., Snaidero, N., Kleinberger, G., Madore, C., Daria, A., Werner, 
G., Krasemann, S., Capell, A., Tru¨ mbach, D., Wurst, W., et al. (2017).
TREM2 deficiency impairs chemotaxis and microglial responses to 
neuronal injury. EMBO Rep. 18, 1186–1198. https://doi.org/10.15252/ 
embr.201743922.
83. Schlepckow, K., Morenas-Rodrı´guez, E., Hong, S., and Haass, C. (2023). 
Stimulation of TREM2 with agonistic antibodies-an emerging therapeutic
option for Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 22, 1048–1060. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/s1474-4422(23)00247-8.
84. Biundo, F., Chitu, V., Go¨ khan, S 
‚ ., Chen, E., Oppong-Asare, J., and Stan-
ley, E.R. (2023). Trem2 Enhances Demyelination in the Csf1r +/- Mouse
Model of Leukoencephalopathy. Biomedicines 11, 2094. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/biomedicines11082094.
85. Freedman, D.M., Wu, J., Chen, H., Kuncl, R.W., Enewold, L.R., Engels, E. 
A., Freedman, N.D., and Pfeiffer, R.M. (2016). Associations between can-
cer and Alzheimer’s disease in a U.S. Medicare population. Cancer Med. 
5, 2965–2976. https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.850.
86. Wang, Y., and Mandelkow, E. (2016). Tau in physiology and pathology. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 5–21. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2015.1.
87. Ballatore, C., Lee, V.M.Y., and Trojanowski, J.Q. (2007). Tau-mediated 
neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders. Nat. 
Rev. Neurosci. 8, 663–672. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2194.
88. Avila, J., Lucas, J.J., Perez, M., and Hernandez, F. (2004). Role of tau pro-
tein in both physiological and pathological conditions. Physiol. Rev. 84, 
361–384. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00024.2003.
89. Guo, T., Noble, W., and Hanger, D.P. (2017). Roles of tau protein in health 
and disease. Acta Neuropathol. 133, 665–704. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00401-017-1707-9.
90. Liu, P., Paulson, J.B., Forster, C.L., Shapiro, S.L., Ashe, K.H., and Zahs, K. 
R. (2015). Characterization of a Novel Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s 
Disease–Amyloid Pathology and Unique β-Amyloid Oligomer Profile. 
PLoS One 10, e0126317. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0126317.
91. Wang, Y., Shang, Y., Li, J., Chen, W., Li, G., Wan, J., Liu, W., and Zhang, M. 
(2018). Specific Eph receptor-cytoplasmic effector signaling mediated by 
SAM-SAM domain interactions. eLife 7, e35677. https://doi.org/10.7554/ 
eLife.35677.
92. Lau, S.F., Wu, W., Seo, H., Fu, A.K.Y., and Ip, N.Y. (2021). Quantitative 
in vivo assessment of amyloid-beta phagocytic capacity in an Alzheimer’s 
disease mouse model. Star Protoc. 2, 100265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
xpro.2020.100265.
93. Li, X., Yu, H., Zhang, B., Li, L., Chen, W., Yu, Q., Huang, X., Ke, X., Wang, 
Y., Jing, W., et al. (2022). Molecularly defined and functionally distinct 
cholinergic subnetworks. Neuron 110, 3774–3788.e7. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.neuron.2022.08.025.
94. Li, X., Chen, W., Pan, K., Li, H., Pang, P., Guo, Y., Shu, S., Cai, Y., Pei, L., 
Liu, D., et al. (2018). Serotonin receptor 2c-expressing cells in the ventral 
CA1 control attention via innervation of the Edinger-Westphal nucleus. 
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1239–1250. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-
0207-0.
95. Li, X., Chen, W., Huang, X., Jing, W., Zhang, T., Yu, Q., Yu, H., Li, H., Tian, 
Q., Ding, Y., et al. (2021). Synaptic dysfunction of Aldh1a1 neurons in the 
ventral tegmental area causes impulsive behaviors. Mol. Neurodegener. 
16, 73. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-021-00494-9.
96. Li, X., Chen, W., Yu, Q., Zhang, Q., Zhang, T., Huang, X., Li, H., He, A., Yu, 
H., Jing, W., et al. (2021). A circuit of mossy cells controls the efficacy of 
memory retrieval by Gria2I inhibition of Gria2. Cell Rep. 34, 108741. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108741.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19, February 5, 2026 
19
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

STAR★METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
mouse anti-Aβ 1-16
Biolegend
Cat# 803003; RRID: AB_2564653
mouse anti-HT7
Invitrogen
Cat# MN1000; RRID: AB_223453
mouse anti-AT8
Invitrogen
Cat# MN1020; RRID: AB_223648
rabbit anti-Gelsolin
Proteintech
Cat# 11644-2-AP; RRID: AB_2295090
rabbit anti-Carboxypeptidase
Proteintech
Cat# 13710-1-AP; RRID: AB_2083913
rabbit anti-Calsyntenin-1
Proteintech
Cat# 12788-1-AP; RRID: AB_2229723
rabbit anti-Cyst-C
Proteintech
Cat# 12245-1-AP; RRID: AB_2088058
rabbit anti-His
Proteintech
Cat# 10001-0-AP; RRID: AB_11232228
rabbit anti-Insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE)
ABclonal
Cat# A11190; RRID: AB_2861515
rabbit anti-ADAM17
ABclonal
Cat# A0821; RRID: AB_2757412
rabbit anti-GAPDH
Proteintech
Cat# 10494-1-AP; RRID: AB_2263076
rabbit anti-beta actin
Proteintech
Cat# 20536-1-AP; RRID: AB_10700003
rabbit anti-TREM2
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 89956; RRID: AB_2687924
rabbit anti-SYK
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 13198; RRID: AB_2687924
rabbit anti-phospho-SYK
Themo Fisher Scientific
Cat# MA5-14918; RRID: AB_10989513
rabbit anti-PS1
ABclonal
Cat# A2187; RRID: AB_2764205
rabbit anti-BACE1
ABclonal
Cat# A5266; RRID: AB_2766088
rabbit anti-Iba1
Wako
Cat# A5266; RRID: AB_839504
mouse anti-TMEM119
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 98778; RRID: AB_3676700
guinea pig anti-CD68
Synaptic Systems
Cat# 234308; RRID: AB_2924932
rabbit anti-CD31
Proteintech
Cat# 28083-1-AP; RRID: AB_2881055
mouse anti-CD16/32
BioLegend
Cat# 156603; RRID: AB_2783137
donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488
Invitrogen
Cat# A32790; RRID: AB_2762833
donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 555
Invitrogen
Cat# A31570; RRID: AB_ 2536180
goat anti- guinea pig Alexa Fluor 647
Invitrogen
Cat# A-21450; RRID: AB_2535867
donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 555
Invitrogen
Cat# A31572; RRID: AB_162543
donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 647
Invitrogen
Cat# A32787; RRID: AB_2762830
Dylight 800, Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG
Abbkine
Cat# A23920
Dylight 800, Goat Anti-Mouse IgG
Abbkine
Cat# A23910
FITC anti-mouse CD45
BioLegend
Cat# 103108; RRID: AB_312973
APC anti-mouse CD3
BioLegend
Cat# 100235; RRID: AB_2561455
PerCP/Cyanine5.5 anti-mouse CD4
BioLegend
Cat# 100433; RRID: AB_893330
PerCP/Cyanine5.5 
anti-mouse/human CD11b
BioLegend
Cat# 101227; RRID: AB_893233
PE anti-mouse Ly-6C
BioLegend
Cat# 128007; RRID: AB_1186133
PE anti-mouse CD8a
BioLegend
Cat# 100707; RRID: AB_312746
Bacterial and virus strains
Lenti-CMV-hCst3-GFP virus
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd.
N/A
Biological samples
Human plasma
This paper
N/A
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins
Aβ 1-42 peptides
Anaspec
Cat# AS-20276
Biotin- Aβ 1-42 peptides
Anaspec
Cat# AS-23523
(Continued on next page)
ll
e1 
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
FAM- Aβ 1-42 peptides
Anaspec
Cat# AS-23525
Recombinant human IgG1 Fc
R&D Systems
Cat# 110-HG
Recombinant human TREM2-Fc protein
R&D Systems
Cat# 1828-T2
Recombinant human TREM1-Fc protein
R&D Systems
Cat# 1278-TR
Recombinant human 
TREM2 R47H -Fc protein
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience
N/A
4’6’-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
Sigma
Cat# D9542; CAS: 28718-90-3
Thioflavin S
MedChemExpress
Cat# HY-D0972; CAS: 1326-12-1
pHrodo™ Red
Invitrogen
Cat# P36600
heat-inactivated fetal 
bovine serum (HI-FBS)
Sigma
Cat# 12106C
bovine serum albumin (BSA)
Sigma
Cat# B2064-100G; RRID: 9048-46-8
protease inhibitor cocktail
Sigma
Cat# P8340
phosphatase inhibitor cocktails
Sigma
Cat# P2850
Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2
Sigma
Cat# P5726
PMSF
MedChemExpress
Cat# HY-B0496; CAS: 329-98-6
formic acid
aladdin
Cat# G648434; CAS: 2804039-78-7
EGTA
Sigma
Cat# E3889; CAS: 67-42-5
sarkosyl
Sigma
Cat# L5000; CAS: 97-78-9
LB medium
BIOFOUNT
Cat# HC1007
IPTG
MedChemExpress
Cat# HY-15921; CAS: 367-93-1
Ni–NTA Sepharose column
QIAGEN
Cat# 31014
Superdex-200 Increase 10/300 GL column
CYTIVA
Cat# 28990944
5 × SDS-PAGE loading buffer
affinibody
Cat# AIWB-0025
Protein G-Sepharose
Sigma
Cat# P3296
streptavidin-HRP
Beyotime Biotech
Cat# A0305
mouse serum albumin
Themo Fisher Scientific
Cat# 23209
amine-functionalized dextran
Themo Fisher Scientific
Cat# D1860
Radiolabeled sodium iodide 125 I
Hubei JUSHENG Technology Co.
Cat# 24359-64-6
TMB solution
Thermo Fisher
Cat# N301
Critical commercial assays
human Cyst-C ELISA kit
Mlbio
Cat# ml027229
human calsyntenin-1 ELISA kit
Mlbio
Cat# ml851547
human gelsolin ELISA kit
Fine Test
Cat# EH0875
human carboxypeptidase-E ELISA kit
Mlbio
Cat# ml060744
human Aβ 1-40 ELISA kit
Thermo Fisher
Cat# KHB3482
human Aβ 1-42 ELISA kit
Thermo Fisher
Cat# KHB3442
human APOE ELISA kit
Elabscience
Cat# E-EL-H0470
mouse APOE ELISA kit
Elabscience
Cat# E-EL-M0135
mouse Cyst-C ELISA kit
Mlbio
Cat# ml063171
mouse calsyntenin-1 ELISA kit
Mlbio
Cat# ml844100
mouse gelsolin ELISA kit
Fine Test
Cat# EM1094
mouse carboxypeptidase-E ELISA kit
Mlbio
Cat# ml844101
Deposited data
RNA-seq of cancer cell and tumor tissue
This paper
Table S1
Proteomic analysis of cancer 
cell culture media
This paper
Table S1
Proteomic screen of 
Cyst-C protein complex
This paper
Table S1
(Continued on next page)
ll
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026 
e2
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
Animals
Mice were bred and reared under specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions. All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, and were performed in accor-
dance with the institutional guidelines. Male mice were used to avoid the potential differences between sexes. Mice were housed in 
groups of three to five mice/cage under a 12-h light-dark cycle, with lights on at 8:00 am, at a consistent ambient temperature (21 ± 
1 ◦ C) and humidity (50 ± 5%). All behavioral tests were conducted during the light phase of the cycle. APP/PS1 (Stock No: 034832), 
5×FAD mice (Stock No: 006554), rTg4510 mice (Stock No: 015815), CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 mice (Stock No: 012362), Cx3cr1- Cre ERT2 
mice (Stock No: 020940), TREM2 flox (two loxP sites flanking exon 2-3; Stock No: 029853), TREM2 R47H mice (Stock No: 037497), 
and Ai9 mice (Stock No: 007909) were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory.
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Single-cell RNA-seq of microglia
This paper
Table S1; CNCB: CRA033979; 
https://www.cncb.ac.cn/
Original images of Western blots
This paper
Mendeley Data: doi: 10.17632/rzypfghszv.1
Experimental models: Cell lines
Luciferase-expressing lung 
cancer cells (LLC)
ORiCells Biotechnology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd
N/A
Luciferase-expressing prostate 
cancer cells (RM1)
ORiCells Biotechnology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd
N/A
Luciferase-expressing colon 
cancer cells (MC38)
ORiCells Biotechnology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd
N/A
mutant LLC cancer cells (CLS1-KO)
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd.
N/A
mutant LLC cancer cells (CPE-KO)
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd.
N/A
mutant LLC cancer cells (GSN-KO)
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd.
N/A
mutant LLC cancer cells (Cst3-KO)
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd.
N/A
mutant LLC cancer cells (Cst6-KO)
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd.
N/A
mutant LLC cancer cells (Cst7-KO)
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd.
N/A
BL21-DE3 E. coli cells
MERCK
CAS: 41106202
Experimental models: Organisms/strains
Mouse: APP/PS1
Jackson Laboratory
RRID: IMSR_JAX: 034832
Mouse: 5×FAD
Jackson Laboratory
RRID: IMSR_JAX: 006554
Mouse: rTg4510
Jackson Laboratory
RRID: IMSR_JAX: 015815
Mouse: CaMK2α-Cre ERT2
Jackson Laboratory
RRID: IMSR_JAX: 012362
Mouse: Cx3cr1- Cre ERT2
Jackson Laboratory
RRID: IMSR_JAX: 020940
Mouse: TREM2 flox
Jackson Laboratory
RRID: IMSR_JAX: 029853
Mouse: TREM2 R47H
Jackson Laboratory
RRID: IMSR_JAX: 037497
Mouse: Ai9
Jackson Laboratory
RRID: IMSR_JAX: 007909
Mouse: Cst3 flox
Shanghai Model Organisms Center
Cat# NM-CKO-232632
Mouse: TREM2 KO
GemPharmatech
Cat# T003346
Software and algorithms
GraphPad Prism v9.0.
GraphPad Software
https://www.graphpad.com
Image-Pro Plus software
Media Cybernetics
https://www.totalsmart.com.
cn/cn/image-pro-plus
Synergy H1 microplate reader
BioTek
N/A
In Vivo FX PRO Imager
Bruker
N/A
Olympus FV3000
Olympus
N/A
Olympus SLIDEVIEW VS200
Olympus
N/A
Image J
National Inst. of Health
RRID:SCR_003070
ll
e3 
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Cst3 flox mice (two loxP sites flanking exon 1-2) and TREM2 KO (knockout exon 2-3) mice were generated and provided by Shanghai 
Model Organisms Center and GemPharmatech, respectively. Cst3 flox mice were crossed with CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 mice, and 5×FAD 
mice, to obtain Cst3 -/- 5×FAD mice, in which the Cst3 gene that encodes Cyst-C was deleted in the cortical neurons following tamox-
ifen administration. TREM2 flox mice were crossed with Cx3cr1- Cre ERT2 mice, and 5×FAD mice, to obtain TREM2 -/- 5×FAD mice, in 
which the TREM2 was deleted in microglia following tamoxifen administration. Mice at 2 months of age received daily intraperitoneal 
injection of 100 mg/kg tamoxifen dissolved in corn oil for five consecutive days.
The transgenic mice were genotyped by PCR using genomic DNA isolated from the tail samples with the following primer se-
quences: APP/PS1 (5’-ATGGTAGAGTAAGCGAGAACACG-3’, 5’-GGATCTCTGAGGGGTCCAGT-3’), 5×FAD (5’-ACCCCCATGTC 
AGAGTTCCT-3’, 5’-CGGGCCTCTTCGCTATTAC-3’), rTg4510 (Tau: 5’-TATTATGATGATATTTGGAGGCTGA-3’, 5’-GGTAACCGGC 
CTCTTCATC-3’; CaMK2α: 5’-GACCTGGATGCTGACGAAGG-3’, 5’-GCAGCTCTAATGCGCTGT-3’), CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 (5’-ATACCG 
GAGATCATGCAAGC-3’, 5’-GGCCAGGCTGTTCTTCTTAG-3’), Cx3cr1- Cre ERT2 (5’-ACGCCCAGACTAATGGTGAC-3’, 5’-GTTAATG 
ACCTGCAGCCAAG-3’), Ai9 (5’-CTGTTCCTGTACGGCATGG-3’, 5’-GGCATTAAAGCAGCGTATCC-3’), Cst3 flox mice (5’-ACCCAGC 
CTCATACCGTAGT-3’, 5’-TTTTCCTGAAGGCCCTGTCC-3’; Wild-type: 282 bp; Mutant: 341 bp), TREM2 flox mice (5’- CAAAGGAAGG 
GTCCATTTTG-3’, 5’- CCTGACCTATGGGCAGTAACA-3’; Wild-type: 196 bp; Mutant: 350 bp), TREM2 KO (5’-ACACGCAGCCTCTG 
GGTTCTCT-3’, 5’-GAGTGCAGGGAGCATAGCGTGT-3’, Wild-type: 335 bp; 5’-GCTTGTAGCGTCGGGGATAC’ -3’, 5’-AGGTGGTA 
GGCTAGAGGTGAC-3’, Mutant: 410 bp) and TREM2 R47H (5’-ACCCTAGTCCTGACTGTTGCT-3’, 5’-CCATCTGCTCAAGGAAG 
GTG-3’, Wild-type: 225 bp; 5’-ACCCTAGTCCTGACTGTTGCT’ -3’, 5’-AGGGAAGGAGGGTGTGAAGA-3’, Mutant: 360 bp).
Cell lines
Luciferase-expressing lung cancer (LLC), prostate cancer (RM1), and colon cancer (MC38) cells were purchased from ORiCells 
Biotechnology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd and verified with STR (Short Tandem Repeat) test. Cells were cultured in 5% CO 2 at 37 ◦ C using 
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (HI-FBS; Sigma), 100 U/mL peni-
cillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin.
Mutant cancer cell lines with deletion of targeting genes including CLS1, CPE, GSN, Cst3, Cst6, and Cst7 were engineered by 
Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd. LLC cancer cells were transiently transfected with PX458-pSpCas9 (BB)-2A-GFP containing 
gRNA of CLS1 (5’-CTGCTGGCGGGGCTGCTGTG-3’), CPE (5’-GCTGGCGCTGTGTGCCGCGC-3’), Cst3 (5’-GACGGCCAGCAGG 
AACAGCA-3’), GSN (5’-ACAGTGCGCACAGCGCCAGG-3’), Cst6 (5’-TCTGGCGTTCTCCGGTCCTG-3’), or Cst7 (5’-CCTAACTTCT 
GACACCCATG-3’). 24 h after transfection, GFP-positive cells were sorted (FacsAriaIII Cell Sorter, BD) for single-cell clonal selection. 
Genetic deletion cell lines were identified by DNA sequencing.
To express human Cst3 (hCst3) gene in Cst3-deficient LLC cells, the high infectious virus particles (5.6 × 10 8 genomic particles/mL) 
lentivirus Lenti-CMV-hCst3-GFP virus (Shanghai Taitool Bioscience Co., Ltd.) was applied (2 μL/well) to the cultured cancer cell lines. 
48 h after incubation, cancer cell secretory proteins in the culture media were prepared and stored at 4 ◦ C.
Human subjects
Blood plasma samples from cancer patients and health donors was obtained from Union Hospital, affiliated with Tongji Medical col-
lege, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Huazhong Uni-
versity of Science and Technology (Approval No: 2024-S189) and performed in accordance with the principle of the Helsinki Decla-
ration II. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.
This study cohort included 38 healthy controls and 203 cancer patients. The patients were stratified by cancer type into the 
following cohorts: non-small cell lung cancer (n=35), prostate cancer (n=21), colon cancer (n=33), breast cancer (n=46), bladder can-
cer (n=33), and gallbladder cancer (n=35). Each group included at least 20 samples.
METHOD DETAILS
Cancer-bearing mouse models
LLC, RM1 and MC38 cancer cells were harvested and passed through a 40-μm cell strainer, washed three times in PBS, re-sus-
pended in PBS, and inoculated (tail vein, 2.5 × 10 5 cells in 100 μL media per injection per day for two consecutive injections) into 
5×FAD mice at 3 months old of age or the rTg4510 mice at 5 months old of age. 0, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days after the last injection, 
in vivo imaging was performed with a Bruker In Vivo FX PRO Imager to examine the tumor growth. At day 30, mice were sacrificed, 
the tumors, brains, and blood were collected, and the size and number of tumors in the peripheral tissues were calculated.
Screen cancer cell secretory proteins
LLC, RM1 and MC38 cancer cell lines were cultured in a culture dish with a diameter of 10 cm. When the cell density reached 80% 
area, the cultures were washed three times with serum-free DMEM culture media and cultured in 10 mL serum-free DMEM media. 
After 24 h, the cultures were harvested and centrifuged for 10 minutes (1,500 g, 4 ◦ C). The supernatants were then centrifuged for 
10 minutes (12,000 g, 4 ◦ C). The final supernatants were collected and subjected to proteomic analyses by PTM Biolabs. Data-inde-
pendent Acquisition (DIA) was processed using Spectronaut (version 18) software. The false discovery rate (FDR) of protein, peptide, 
and the propensity score matching (PSM) were adjusted to < 1%.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026 
e4
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

To prepare CSPs, cancer cell culture media were concentrated from 10 to 1 (UFC9003; Millipore), and CSPs in the supernatants 
were quantified (50 mg proteins/mL supernatants) and injected (tail vein, 100 μL supernatants per injection per day) into 5×FAD mice 
at 3 or 4 months old of age once per day for 30 consecutive days, or APP/PS1 mice at 6 months old of age once per day for 60 consec-
utive days.
Immunofluorescence
Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection with tribromoethanol and transcardially perfused with chilled phosphate-buffered 
saline (PBS) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains were removed quickly after death, fixed in 4% PFA overnight at 4 ◦ C, 
and transferred to 30% sucrose solution for at least 48 h. Serial coronal sections (30 μm) were sliced using a cryostat (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific CryoStar NX50). Sections for immunofluorescence were stored at 4 ◦ C in PBS until staining. Sections were washed three 
times with PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100, blocked in PBS with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) at room temperature for 1 h, and 
incubated for 36-48 h at 4 ◦ C in primary antibody containing PBS with 3% BSA. The primary antibodies used for immunofluorescence 
were mouse anti-Aβ 1-16 (1:300, Bio-legend, 803003), mouse anti-HT7 (1:500, Invitrogen, MN1000), and mouse anti-AT8 (1:500, In-
vitrogen, MN1020), rabbit anti-Iba1 (1:300, Wako, A5266), mouse anti-TMEM119 (1:300, Cell Signaling Technology, 98778), guinea 
pig anti-CD68 (1:500, Synaptic Systems, 234308), and rabbit anti-CD31 (1:500, proteintech, 28083-1-AP). Afterward, sections were 
washed and reacted with conjugate-adsorbed Alexa Fluor secondary antibodies (1:300, Invitrogen) against the appropriate species 
diluted in PBS with 3% BSA at room temperature for 2 h, washed and counterstained with DAPI (1:1,000, Sigma, D9542). For Thi-
oflavin S staining, sections were washed with PBS and stained in 500 μM thioflavin S solution (MedChemExpress, HY-D0972) in 
50% ethanol for 8 min at room temperature. Fluorescence images were captured using a confocal laser-scanning microscope 
(Olympus FV3000) and a slide scanner (Olympus SLIDEVIEW VS200). The average plaque size and Aβ fractional area were generated 
and normalized, with an automated thresholding based on entropy of the histogram. The number of Aβ deposits was measured for 
each slice using six slices per mouse. At least 3 independent replicates were analyzed per group. Aβ plaque size, which is the total 
area stained for Aβ counted in a defined region relative to the total area of that region, was calculated by Image J (version 1.8.0). 
To validate gene knockout, the cancer cells cultured in the confocal dishes were fixed in 4% PFA for 30 minutes at 4 ◦ C, blocked in 
PBS with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) at room temperature for 1 h, and incubated for 24 h at 4 ◦ C in primary antibody containing 
PBS with 3% BSA. The primary antibodies used for immunofluorescence were rabbit anti-Gelsolin (11644-2-AP, Proteintech,1:500), 
rabbit anti-Carboxypeptidase (13710-1-AP, Protein tech, 1:500), rabbit anti-Calsyntenin-1 (12788-1-AP, Protein tech, 1:200), and 
rabbit anti-Cyst-C (12245-1-AP, Protein tech, 1:500). Afterward, cells were washed and reacted with conjugate-adsorbed Alexa Fluor 
secondary antibodies (1:300, Invitrogen) against the appropriate species diluted in PBS with 3% BSA at room temperature for 2 h, 
washed and counterstained with DAPI (1:1,000, Sigma, D9542). Fluorescence images were captured using a confocal laser-scanning 
microscope (Olympus FV3000).
RNA-sequencing analysis
All the samples (cancer cells and cancer tissues) were subjected to RNA-seq by CapitalBio Technology. The raw gene counts were 
processed with the DESeq2 package (version 1.42.1) in R (version 4.3.2) to analyze differentially expressed genes, a p-adjust value 
cutoff of 0.05 and fold-change cutoff of 2 were used to judge the statistical significance of gene expression differences. Heatmap and 
volcano plot were performed in R (version 4.3.2) using the pheatmap package (version 1.0.12) and ggplot2 package (version 3.5.1).
Protein extraction
To extract water-soluble, detergent-soluble, and insoluble fractions of the brain, a three-step protocol was used as described 
before. 90 The brains of 5×FAD mice were weighed, transferred to 4 volumes of ice-cold buffer A (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 
140 mM NaCl; 3 mM KCl; 0.1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride; 0.2 mM 1,10-phenanthroline monohydrate; protease inhibitor cock-
tail (P8340, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO); and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (P2850 and P5726, Sigma-Aldrich)) and homoge-
nized. The homogenate was centrifuged for 90 min (16,100 g; 4 ◦ C); the supernatant was harvested as the water-soluble fraction. 
The pellets were transferred to 4 volumes of ice-cold buffer B (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 140 mM NaCl; 3 mM KCl; 1% (v/v) Triton-
X-100; 0.1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride; 0.2 mM 1,10-phenanthroline monohydrate; protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, 
Sigma-Aldrich); and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (P2850 and P5726, Sigma-Aldrich)) and homogenized. The homogenate was 
centrifuged for 90 min (16,100 g; 4 ◦ C); the supernatant was harvested as the detergent-soluble fraction. The pellets were transferred 
to 40 μL of 70% formic acid and homogenized by repeatedly pipetting and vigorously shaking at room temperature for 30 min. The 
acidic pH of the homogenate was neutralized using 800 μL of 1 M Tris-base solution (no pH adjustment, pH ∼10.6) and centrifuged for 
90 min (16,100 g; 4 ◦ C). The supernatant was harvested as the insoluble fraction.
The brains of rTg4510 mice were weighed, transferred to 10 volumes of ice-cold extraction buffer (10 mM Tris HCl, PH 7.5; 0.8 M 
NaCl, 10% (w/v) sucrose; 1 mM EGTA, 2% (w/v) sarkosyl (Sigma, 97-78-9); and protease inhibitor cocktails (P8340, Sigma-Aldrich, 
St. Louis, MO)) and homogenized. The homogenate with an additional 5 volumes of extraction buffer was incubated at 37 ◦ C for 
30 min statically and subsequently centrifuged for 10 min (20,000 g, 25 ◦ C). The supernatants were collected and centrifuged for 
20 min (100,000g; 25 ◦ C). The resulting supernatants were soluble fractions and the precipitates were insoluble fractions.
Cortex of Cst3 -/- 5×FAD (5×FAD::CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 ::Cst3 flox/flox ::Ai9), Cst3 +/+ 5×FAD (5×FAD::CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 ::Ai9), 
TREM2 -/- 5×FAD (5×FAD::Cx3cr1-Cre ERT2 ::TREM2 flox/flox ::Ai9), and TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD (5×FAD::Cx3cr1-Cre ERT2 ::Ai9) mice with
ll
e5 
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

tamoxifen treatment were prepared and digested in buffer containing 10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.6), 50 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM 
edetic acid, 1 mM benzamidine, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mg/10 mL papain, and a mixture of aprotinin, leupeptin, and pepstatin A (10 μg/mL 
each) for 30 min. Suspended tdTomato-expressing cortical neurons or microglia were automatically isolated using an FacsAriaIII Cell 
Sorter (BD), homogenized, and diluted with a buffer containing 200 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.6), 8% SDS, and 40% glycerol.
Measurements of 125 I-Cyst-C penetrance the blood-brain barrier and entry to the brain
Human Cyst-C was synthesized and purified, as described below. 67-kDa mouse serum albumin (CAS#: 23209) and 10-kDa amine-
functionalized dextran (CAS#: D1860) were purchased from Themo Fisher Scientific. Radiolabeled sodium iodide 125 I (CAS#: 24359-
64-6) was purchased from Hubei JUSHENG Technology Co. Briefly, sodium hydroxide 125 I was diluted in phosphate-buffered saline 
(pH 7.3) and oxidized for 5 minutes with intermittent agitation and then transferred to a tube containing human Cyst-C, mouse albu-
min or amine-functionalized dextran solution and incubated for 5 minutes with constant agitation. 125 I-Cyst-C, 125 I-dextran and 
125 I-albumin were then purified using NAP™-5 20 ST columns (GE17-0853-01, Sigma-Aldrich) pre equilibrated in phosphate-buff-
ered saline (pH 7.3). The purified proteins were assessed by size-exclusion HPLC. Radioactivity was measured in the brain and blood 
using a Wizard 2480 automatic gamma counter (PerkinElmer Instruments Inc) 3 or 12 h after the intravenous injections (tail vein) of 
125 I-Cyst-C, 125 I-dextran or 125 I-albumin. To visualize the spatial distribution of 125 I-Cyst-C, 125 I-dextran and 125 I-albumin in the brain, 
Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection with tribromoethanol and perfused with chilled phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 
followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Sagittal cryosections (20 μm) were sectioned and placed in an X-ray cassette along with 
standards of known 125 I-radioactivity and exposed to GE storage phosphor screens (GE28-9564-74, MERCK). The radioactive sam-
ples were exposed for 6 days and were scanned in a Cyclone Plus Imager system (Perkin – Elmer). Digital images were converted to a 
false color scale with ImageJ and normalized to the standards. To measure the concentrations of 125 I-Cyst-C, 125 I-dextran and 
125 I-albumin, we precipitated these proteins from the plasma and the brain lysates using antibodies against human Cyst-C, dextran 
and albumin, respectively. The radioactivity (cpm) in the precipitates was then calculated using a γ-counter (WIZARD 2 2480, 
PerkinElmer Instruments Inc).
Flow cytometry
Immunophenotyping was performed using a FACS CALIBUR flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). For surface marker staining, cells 
were incubated with specific antibodies against CD45 (0.5 μL/10 6 cells, BioLegend, 103108), CD3 (0.5 μL/10 6 cells, BioLegend, 
100235), CD4 (0.5 μL/10 6 cells, BioLegend, 100433), CD8 (0.5 μL/10 6 cells, BioLegend, 100707), CD11b (0.5 μL/10 6 cells, 
BioLegend, 101227), and Ly6C + (0.5 μL/10 6 cells, BioLegend, 128007) for 30 min at 4 ◦ C. To ensure data accuracy, each sample 
included an unstained control and a fluorescence-matched isotype control (BD Biosciences) Data were acquired on the FACS Cal-
ibur cytometer using CellQuest software (BD Biosciences), collecting 50,000 events per sample. Analysis was performed with Flow-
Jo 10.0.6 (Tree-Star, USA), applying gating strategies based on forward scatter (FSC), side scatter (SSC).
Whole-body irradiation
We placed 5×FAD mice at 3 months of age into an irradiation chamber of an RS2000 Supper X-ray irradiator ( JUNSENG, Shanghai, 
China), ensuring whole-body uniform exposure to irradiator with lead shielding over the head. X-ray irradiator was calibrated to 
160 kVp and a low-dose of X-ray whole-body irradiation was applied for 3.5 minutes (dose rate = 0.86 Gy/min). After irradiation, 
mice were returned to their home cages under strict aseptic conditions. 24 h post-irradiation, blood samples were collected from 
tail vein and peripheral immune cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. Data confirmed the depletion of over 80% of immune cells, 
including CD11b⁺Ly6C⁺ monocytes and CD45⁺ T cells. Subsequently, mice received injections of LLC cells (2.5 × 10 5 cells in 100 μL 
media per injection per day for two consecutive injections) via the tail vein. 10 days after the injections, a second round of irradiation 
was administered to sustain immune cell depletion during tumor growth. The mice were sacrificed 20 days later, the blood samples, 
brain and tumor tissues were collected. Tumor size and number in the peripheral tissues, amyloid plague burden and Cyst-C expres-
sion levels were analyzed.
Microglia isolation from adult mouse brain
Following transcardial perfusion with ice-cold PBS, brains were rapidly dissected and mechanically minced in Dulbecco’s PBS 
(dPBS). Tissue dissociation was conducted using the Adult Brain Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-107-677) on a gentleMACS™ 
Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec, 10A0-093-235). The homogenate was filtered through a 70μm MACS SmartStrainer and centrifuged for 
10 min (300g, 4 ◦ C). Cellular debris was removed by density gradient centrifugation with Debris Removal Solution (Miltenyi Biotec) for 
10 min (3000g, 4 ◦ C). Erythrocyte contamination was eliminated by incubation with 1×Red Blood Cell Removal Solution for 10 min at
4 ◦ C, neutralized with PBS with 0.5% BSA. Following centrifugation, the cell pellet was resuspended in PBS with 5% BSA. For micro-
glia enrichment, single-cell suspensions were incubated with CD11b MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-093-634) for 15 min at 4 ◦ C. 
Labeled cells were isolated on LS columns mounted in a QuadroMACS™ separator (Miltenyi Biotec). The purified CD11b⁺ microglia 
were washed, resuspended in appropriate assay buffers, and used for subsequent applications.
ll
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026 
e6
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis
The freshly prepared single-cell suspension was adjusted to an optimal concentration of 700–1,200 cells/μL. Library preparation and 
sample loading were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol using the 10x Genomics Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 
3’ Reagent Kits v3.1 (cat. no.1000268). The resulting libraries were subsequently sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeg 6000 platform 
with paired-end 150bp (PE150) chemistry to achieve appropriate sequencing depth and coverage.
ELISA assays
The human plasma, the fractions of the brain, and cell culture media were obtained as described above. Mouse blood was centri-
fuged in the anticoagulant tube for 10 min (1,000 g; 4 ◦ C), and the supernatant was harvested as mouse plasma. Assays using the 
ELISA kits for human Cyst-C (ml027229, Mlbio), human calsyntenin-1 (ml851547, Mlbio), human gelsolin (EH0875, Fine Test), human 
carboxypeptidase-E (ml060744, Mlbio), human Aβ 1-40 (KHB3482,Thermo Fisher), human Aβ 1-42 (KHB3442, Thermo Fisher), human 
APOE (Elabscience, E-EL-H0470), mouse APOE (Elabscience, E-EL-M0135), mouse Cyst-C (ml063171, Mlbio), calsyntenin-1 
(ml844100, Mlbio), gelsolin (EM1094, Fine Test), and carboxypeptidase-E (ml844101, Mlbio) were performed according to the manu-
facturer instructions. At least 3 independent replicates were analyzed per group.
Cyst-C expression and purification
Human or mouse Cyst-C (wild-type and L68Q mutant) was expressed and purified as previously described, 91 with minor modifica-
tions. Constructs encoding human Cystatin C and the L68Q variant were obtained from BGI Genomics Co. Ltd (Shenzhen, China) and 
cloned into the pCold-TF2.0 plasmid (Takara) under the CSPA promoter. Proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) cells (CAS No: 
41106202, MERCK). Cultures were initially grown in 50 mL of LB medium (HC1007, BIOFOUNT) supplemented with ampicillin 
(50 mg/L) and then scaled up to 1 L. Cells were incubated at 37 ◦ C until OD₆₀₀ reached ∼0.6, followed by induction with 1 mM 
IPTG (CAS No: 367-93-1, MCE). Expression continued at 16 ◦ C for 18 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 × g for 
15 min, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 5% glycerol), and lysed by sonication. 
The lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 40 min, and the supernatant containing soluble protein was applied to a Ni– 
NTA agarose column (Vazyme, HP202-01) for affinity purification. The column was washed with five column volumes of binding buffer 
(20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole), followed by an additional wash containing 100 mM imidazole. The bound 
protein was eluted with buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, and 500 mM imidazole. Eluted fractions were 
concentrated using Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filters (3 kDa MWCO, Millipore). The His–TF tag was removed by overnight digestion 
at 4 ◦ C with HRV 3C protease (1:100, w/w). The digest was further purified by size-exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 In-
crease 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl.
Homogeneous fractions, as confirmed by SDS–PAGE, were pooled and concentrated. Protein concentrations were determined 
using the BCA assay. All purification steps were performed using endotoxin-free ultrapure reagents and water. The final preparations 
(both human and mouse Cyst-C) were highly pure and free of detectable endotoxin (<0.01 EU/μg, based on absorbance at 405 nm), 
ensuring suitability for downstream cellular and structural analyses.
Aβ uptake and degradation assay
Aβ 1-42 monomers (Aβ 1-42m ) and Aβ 1-42 oligomers (Aβ 1-42o ) were prepared as described before. Unlabeled, FAM-labeled, and biotin-
labeled synthetic human Aβ 1-42 peptides (Anaspec) were diluted in 1 × PBS as Aβ 1-42m . Aβ 1-42m were then oligomerized by incubation 
at 22 ◦ C for 48 h, centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16,000g at 25 ◦ C, and the supernatant was harvested as Aβ 1-42o . pHrodo-Aβ 1-42m was 
obtained by labeled Aβ 1-42m with pHrodo™ Red (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer instructions and oligomerized as pHrodo-
Aβ 1-42o .
For primary microglial cell culture, brains were removed from TREM2 +/+ and TREM2 -/- mice at postnatal day 2-3 and then disso-
ciated by enzymatic digestion using a Neural Tissue Dissociation Kit P (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer instructions. 
Microglia were labeled with magnetical CD11b MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec), loaded onto a MACS column (Miltenyi Biotec), and sub-
jected to magnetic separation. Isolated microglia were cultured in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS 
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin and maintained in a humidified 5% CO 2 incubator at 37 ◦ C. After 24 h, cultured medium was replaced 
with fresh medium for 3 days until use for uptake and degradation assays.
For Aβ uptake assay, 5 × 10 4 cultured primary microglia were seeded overnight into a 12-well plate before adding with hCyst-C 
(1, 7.5, or 15 μg/mL) and pHrodo-Aβ 1-42m (200 nM) or pHrodo-Aβ 1-42o (200 nM). After 2 h of treatment, cells were fixed with 4% para-
formaldehyde (PFA) and Aβ uptake was determined by quantifying pHrodo fluorescence, which colocalized with the anti-Iba1 by 
immunofluorescence. For Aβ degradation assay, primary microglia were incubated with FAM-Aβ 1-42o (200 nM) for 0.5, 1, or 2 hours 
in the presence or the absence of human Cyst-C (15 μg/mL). After the removal of FAM-Aβ 1-42o , cells were fixed with 4% PFA and the 
uptake and degradation of Aβ was determined by quantifying FAM fluorescence. Images in at least three randomized fields per treat-
ment were taken by confocal microscopy, and Image-Pro Plus software was used for data analysis.
Microglial phagocytosis of Aβ in AD mice
Quantitative in vivo assessment of Aβ phagocytic capacity was performed as previous report with minor modification. 92 
TREM2 -/- 5×FAD mice and TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD mice (4 months old) were injected vehicle, His-tagged hCyst-C or His-tagged
ll
e7 
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Cyst-C L68Q once per day for 30 consecutive days. The mice were intraperitoneally injected with Methoxy-X04 (10 mg/kg). 3 h later, 
mice were euthanized, perfused with ice-cold PBS, and the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex were dissected. Tissues were 
enzymatically dissociated using a papain-based solution at 37 ◦ C for 40 minutes with gentle trituration. After centrifugation, myelin 
debris was removed via a 30% Percoll gradient. The resulting cell pellet was resuspended in DMEM/F12 with 10% FBS. A portion 
of the cell suspension was stained with anti-CD11b-APC antibody for 45 minutes at 4 ◦ C with rotation. After washing, cells were 
analyzed by flow cytometry. Microglia were identified as CD11b⁺ populations, and MeX04 fluorescence was used to quantify the up-
take of Aβ aggregates. Unstained controls were used to establish gating. The percentage of MeX04⁺ microglia represented 
Aβ-phagocytic microglia, while MeX04 fluorescence intensity reflected phagocytic capacity. The confocal imaging was employed 
to visualize the intracellular localization of MeX04 in Aβ phagocytic microglia.
Co-IP and Western blots
Cerebral cortex from cancer-bearing 5×FAD mice treated with human Cyst-C was homogenized in ice-cold lysis buffer containing 
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM Na-orthovanadate and proteinase inhibitor mixture (Sigma,
5 μL/100 mg tissue). After clearing debris by centrifuging at 14,000 g at 4 ◦ C, protein concentration in the extracts was determined by 
Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). The extracts (∼500 μg protein) were incubated with nonspecific polyclonal rabbit anti-His 
(2 μg; 10001-0-AP, Protein tech) overnight at 4 ◦ C, followed by the addition of 40 μL of Protein G-Sepharose (Sigma) for 3 h at 4 ◦ C. The 
precipitates were washed four times with lysis buffer and subjected to proteomic analyses (PTM Biolabs) or denatured with SDS sam-
ple buffer and separated by 12% SDS-PAGE.
For cell-free binding assay, 0.5 μg His-tagged hCyst-C or hCyst-C L68Q was incubated with 0.5 μg Aβ 1-42m or Aβ 1-42o and nonspe-
cific polyclonal rabbit anti-His (2 μg; 10001-0-AP, Protein tech) in TBST buffer overnight at 4 ◦ C, followed by the addition of 40 μL of 
Protein G-Sepharose (Sigma) for 3 h at 4 ◦ C. The precipitates were washed four times with lysis buffer and denatured with SDS sam-
ple buffer and separated by 8% or 15% SDS-PAGE respectively for Aβ 1-42m or Aβ 1-42o blots. 0.5 μg human IgG1 Fc, TREM2-Fc, 
TREM1-Fc or TREM2 R47H -Fc was incubated with 0.5 μg His-tagged hCyst-C or hCyst-C L68Q in TBST buffer overnight at 4 ◦ C, followed 
by the addition of 40 μL of Protein G-Sepharose (Sigma) for 3 h at 4 ◦ C. The precipitates were washed four times with lysis buffer and 
denatured with SDS sample buffer and separated by 12% SDS-PAGE. Human IgG1 Fc, TREM2-Fc and TREM1-Fc were obtained 
from R&D Systems and TREM2 R47H -Fc was purified by Shanghai Taitool Bioscience.
Proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes using a Bio-Rad mini-protein-III wet transfer unit overnight at 4 ◦ C. Trans-
fer membranes were then incubated with blocking solution (5% no-fat milk in TBST) for 1 h at room temperature, washed three times, 
and incubated with rabbit anti-Cyst-C (12245-1-AP, Protein tech, 1:500), rabbit anti-His (10001-0-AP, Protein tech, 1:1000), rabbit 
anti-TREM2 (89956, Cell Signaling Technology, 1:1000) and mouse anti-Aβ 1-16 (803003, Bio-legend, 1:500) for 1 h at room temper-
ature. Membranes were washed three times with TBST buffer and incubated with the secondary antibody at room temperature for 1 h 
(Dylight 800, Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG, A23920, Abbkine, 1:10000; Dylight 800, Goat Anti-Mouse IgG, A23910, Abbkine, 1:10000). After 
incubation with secondary antibody, the membrane was washed in TBST as after incubation with primary antibody.
In Western blots with protein extracted from brain tissues or cells, 5 × SDS-PAGE loading buffer (AIWB-0025, affinity body) was 
added to each protein sample (1:4, v/v, buffer: sample), and the samples were heated at 95 ◦ C for 5 min. The denatured sample was 
loaded onto a 8–15% SDS-polyacrylamide Tris-Tricine gel and electrophoresis separation was performed at a constant current 
(20 mA) at room temperature. The separated proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (10600002, Cytiva) under 
low temperature conditions (transfer performed at 4 ◦ C, 275mA constant current, 1 h). Membranes are incubated in 5% BSA blocking 
buffer for 1-2 h to block non-specific binding sites (5% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA) (B2064-100G, Sigma-Aldrich)). Primary 
antibodies were then added directly to the universal antibody diluent as follows: mouse anti-HT7 (MN1000, Invitrogen, 1:500), mouse 
anti-AT8 (MN1020, Invitrogen, 1:500), rabbit anti-β-actin (20536-1-AP, Protein tech, 1:10000), rabbit anti-Insulin-degrading enzyme 
(IDE) (A11190, ABclonal, 1:500), rabbit anti-ADAM17(A0821, Abclonal,1:500), rabbit anti-Cyst-C (12245-1-AP, Protein tech, 1:500), 
rabbit anti-His (10001-0-AP, Protein tech, 1:1000), mouse anti-Aβ 1-16 (803003, Bio-legend, 1:500), rabbit anti-PS1 (A2187, ABclonal, 
1:500), rabbit anti-BACE1 (A5266, AB clonal, 1:300), rabbit anti-TREM2 (89956, Cell Signaling Technology, 1:1000), rabbit anti-SYK 
(13198, Cell Signaling Technology, 1:1000), rabbit anti-phospho-SYK (MA5-14918, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 1:1000) and rabbit 
anti-GAPDH (10494-1-AP, Protein tech, 1:10000). Membranes were incubated overnight at 4 ◦ C on an orbital shaker. After incubation 
with primary antibody, the membrane was washed three times with TBST washing buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 200 mM NaCl; 0.1
% (v/v) Tween-20) at room temperature for 10 min each time. The membranes were then incubated with the secondary antibody at 
room temperature for 1 h (Dylight 800, Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG, A23920, Abbkine, 1:10000; Dylight 800, Goat Anti-Mouse IgG, A23910, 
Abbkine, 1:10000). After incubation with secondary antibody, the membrane was washed in TBST as after incubation with primary 
antibody. We used the Odyssey® Imager-Image Studio Ver 2.0 for visualization and the ImageJ software Ver. 2.3.0 for quantitative 
analysis of protein bands. The original blots in this study were deposited at Mendeley Data: doi: 10.17632/rzypfghszv.1.
Solid phase binding assay
Nunc MaxiSorp 96-well plate was coated with 0.2 mg His-tagged hCyst-C per well, followed with blocking in 5% no-fat milk in TBS for
2 h at room temperature. Biotin-labeled Aβ 1-42m or Aβ 1-42o were added with the concentration of 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50, 100, or 200 nM
ll
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026 
e8
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

overnight at 4 ◦ C. After washing with TBST, streptavidin-HRP (Beyotime Biotech) was added for 0.5 h at room temperature. The plate 
was washed with TBST for three times, developed in TMB solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and absorbance at 450 nm was 
measured with a Synergy H1 microplate reader (Bio-Tek).
FRET assay
24 h after the transfection of TREM2-GFP and DAP12-mCherry, BV2 cells were incubated with or without hCyst-C at the concentra-
tion of 15 μg/mL for 1 h. The fluorescence intensity of the donor before and after bleaching was quantified, and each group contains 9 
cells from three independent experiments. FRET efficiency was calculated by E fret = 1-(Ia/Ib), where Ia and Ib represents the steady-
state donor fluorescence with or without the acceptor, respectively.
Morris water maze
We filled a 1.5 m-diameter swimming pool with white and non-toxic ink water. Pool temperature was maintained at 25 ◦ C. We placed 
a mouse to the behavior room where it was housed for 1-2 days before training session, as described before. The training session 
lasted for 6 days. In the first day of training, a mouse was allowed resting on the platform for 30 s and to have 60 s for finding the 
hidden platform. In case that a mouse did not find the platform within 60 s, we guided this mouse to find and stay the platform for 
30 s. Throughout the period of training session, the animal was required for perform a total of 4 trials, in which a mouse was released 
at four different randomized release points of the pool. Immediately, after the training session, this mouse was required to perform 
probe trials at day 2 after the training session. In both training and probe trials, the behavioral tests were performed by an experi-
menter who was unaware of the genotypes and treatments.
Novel arm Y-maze test
Novel arm Y-maze test was adapted from previous studies. 28 The maze consisted of three arms (35 × 35 × 35 cm) with 120-degree 
angles between arms. Each of the arms was cleaned with 70% ethanol solution between trials. We randomly arranged three arms: 
start arm, in which the mouse started to explore (always open), novel arm, which was blocked at the first trial but opened at the sec-
ond trial, and the other arm (always open). The start arm and the other arm were designed randomly to avoid the spatial memory error. 
We placed visual cues on the walls of the maze to discriminate different arms. We performed two trials separated by an inter-trial 
interval of 60 min in the test. In the first trial, the mouse was placed in the start arm and explored the maze for 8 min with the novel 
arm closed. In the second trial, we placed the mouse back in the maze in the same starting arm, with free access to all three arms for
5 min. We recorded the number of entries and the time spent in each arm by using a ceiling-mounted camera and used the amount of 
time in the novel arm relative to the total time during the second trial as an index of spatial work memory. The total number of arm visits 
was considered as an index of locomotor activity.
Electrophysiology
Hippocampal slices (350 μm) were cut from the mice and were placed in a holding chamber for at least 1 h. A single slice was then 
transferred to the recording chamber and submerged and superfused with artificial CSF (ACSF, 2 mL/min) that had been saturated 
with 95% O2–5% CO2. The composition of the ACSF was (in mm): 124 NaCl, 3 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2 MgCl2, 2 CaCl2, 26 NaHCO3, 
10 dextrose. Field EPSPs were recorded with micropipettes at 30 ± 2 ◦ C filled with ACSF and evoked by stimulation of the Schaffer-
collateral fibers at a frequency of 0.1 Hz. LTP was induced by three trains of 100 Hz stimulation lasting 500 msec, at an intertrain in-
terval of 10 sec.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All values in the text and figures are represented as the mean ± SEM, where the n value represents the number of independent bio-
logical replicates or animals. Unpaired two-tailed Student’s t tests and Bonferroni’s post hoc test following the one-way or two-way 
analyses of variance (BF ANOVA) were used when assumptions of normality and equal variance (F test) were met. Significance was 
accepted for p < 0.05. Statistical significance in figures and supplemental figures is indicated as follows: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and 
***p < 0.001. The exact sample numbers (n) and statistical analysis are indicated in each figure legend. Power calculations were per-
formed using GraphPad Prism v9.0. Group sizes were estimated based on our previous studies. 93–96
ll
e9 
Cell 189, 1–19.e1–e9, February 5, 2026
Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease via cystatin-c activation of 
TREM2, Cell (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.12.020
Article

Supplemental figures
Figure S1. Preclinical cancer-bearing AD mouse models, related to Figure 1
(A) Illustration showing the generation of cancer-bearing AD mouse models by injection (tail vein) of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer cell lines (2.5 × 10 5 cells/0.1 mL) 
into 5×FAD male mice at 3 months of age or rTg4510 male mice at 5 months of age.
(B–D) Representative in vivo images (B), tumor tissues, HE staining of tumor tissue sections (C), and a bar graph (D) showing the number and the size of tumor 
nodules. n = 7 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s. by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (D).
ll
Article

Figure S2. Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid plaque burden but not tau tangle aggregation, related to Figure 1
(A and B) Representative images (A) and bar graphs (B) showing anti-Aβ 1–16 -labeled (red) and thioflavin-S-labeled (green) plaques in the cortex, the thalamus, the 
DG, and the BLA of 5×FAD mice at 3 or 4 months of age. n = 7 mice per group.
(C and D) Phosphorylated tau (AT8) is detectable in rTg4510 mice at 6 months of age. Representative images (C) and western blots (D) and bar graphs showing 
anti-HT7 that labels total tau proteins and AT8 that labels phosphorylated tau in the cortex and the hippocampus of rTg4510 mice at 5 or 6 months of age. n = 7 
mice per group.
(E and F) Peripheral tumor does not affect tau aggregation. Representative images (E) and plots (F) showing brain sections stained with HT7 for human tau protein 
and AT8 for tau phosphorylated at 202/205 in the cortex and hippocampus of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer rTg4510 mice. n = 7 mice per group.
(G and H) Western blots (G) and plots (H) showing anti-HT7 and anti-AT8 antibodies in the cortex and hippocampus of LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer rTg4510 mice. 
n = 7 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s. and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (F and H) or t test (B–D).
ll
Article

Figure S3. Peripheral cancer attenuates amyloid plaque deposition in AD mice, related to Figure 1
Representative images and plots showing the number of anti-Aβ 1–16 (red) and thioflavin-S (ThS, green)-labeled plaques in the cortex (A), the DG (B), the thalamus 
(C), and the BLA (D) of 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age after the injection (tail vein) of LLC, RM1, or MC38 cancer cell lines. In this study, cancer cell lines were 
injected once per day for 30 consecutive days. Brain sections were then prepared and stained with anti-Aβ 1–16 and ThS. The plaque sizes were classified as 0–50, 
50–500, or >500 μm 2 , as indicated. n = 16 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (A–D).
ll
Article

Figure S4. Peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid pathology via cancer cell-secreted proteins, related to Figure 2
(A) Illustration showing the experiments for injection (tail vein) of cancer cell secretory proteins (CSPs) into 5×FAD mice at 3 months of age and the concentration 
of Cyst-C protein in the CSPs used for injection.
(B) Representative images showing that injections of CSPs do not generate tumor nodules.
(C and D) Injection of CSPs inhibits amyloid accumulation and plaque deposition. Soluble and insoluble Aβ 1–42 (C) and Aβ 1–40 peptides (D) in the brains of LLC, 
RM1, and MC38 cancer AD mice. n = 9 mice per group.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article

(E) Heatmaps and bar graphs showing the time spent in the center and the travel distance of 5×FAD mice after the injection of control, CSPs from LLC, RM1, or 
MC38 cell cultures in the open field. n = 11 mice per group.
(F) Heatmaps and bar graphs showing the time spent in the open arm and the number of open arm entries of 5×FAD mice after the injection of control, CSPs from 
LLC, RM1, or MC38 cell cultures in the elevated plus maze. n = 11 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (C–F).
ll
Article

Figure S5. Peripheral cancer inhibits amyloid pathology via secretion of cancer cell proteins, related to Figure 2
(A–C) CSPs inhibit amyloid pathology. Representative images (A) and plots showing Aβ 1–16 -labeled (B) and ThS-labeled (C) amyloid plaques in the brain of 5×FAD 
mice at 5 months of age after the injections (tail vein) of CSPs from LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer cells. n = 11 mice per group.
(D–F) Representative images (D) and plots showing Aβ 1–16 -labeled (E) and ThS-labeled (F) amyloid plaques in the cortex, the thalamus, the DG, and the BLA of 
APP/PS1 mice at 8 months of age after injections (tail vein) of CSPs from LLC, RM1, and MC38 cancer cell lines. In this study, APP/PS1 mice at 6 months of age 
were injected with CSPs once per day for 60 consecutive days. Immediately after the last injection, brain sections were prepared and stained with anti-Aβ 1–16 and 
ThS. n = 9 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (B, C, E, and F).
ll
Article

Figure S6. Tumor-derived Cyst-C attenuates plaque burden without affecting general motor activity, related to Figure 4
(A–D) Representative images (left) showing proteins of CLS1 (A), CPE (B), Cyst-C (C), and GSN (D) in the mutant LLC cancer cells. Plots (right) showing protein 
levels of CLS1, CPE, Cyst-C, and GSN in the mutant LLC cancer cell culture media by ELISA. n = 5 assays. Scale bar, 15 μm.
(E and F) The number and the size of tumor nodules measurements for LLC cancer cells with CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout of CLS1, CPE, Cst3, or GSN. n = 7 
mice per group.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article

(G) A plot showing the levels of Cyst-C in the CSF of 5×FAD mice after tail vein injections of CSPs from the cultures of a mutant LLC cell line with deletion of CLS1, 
CPE, Cst3, or GSN genes. n = 9 mice per group.
(H and I) Representative images (H) and plots (I) showing that Aβ 1–16 - and ThS-labeled amyloid plaques in the cortex, the thalamus, the DG, and the BLA of 5×FAD 
mice. In this study, the mice at 4 months of age were injected (tail vein) with CSPs from LLC cancer cells without (blank) or with deletion of CLS1, CPE, Cst3, or 
GSN once per day for 30 consecutive days. n = 11 mice per group.
(J) Open field test showing no significant differences in total distance traveled among 5×FAD mice injected with CSPs from LLC cells with or without deletion of 
Cst3. n = 9 mice per group.
(K and L) Representative images (K) and plots (L) showing that Aβ 1–16 - and ThS-labeled amyloid plaques in the brain of 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age after 
injection (tail vein) of CSPs from LLC cancer cells without (blank) or with deletion of Cst6 or Cst7. n = 9 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (F, G, I, J, and L) or t test (A–D).
ll
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
Article

Figure S7. Deletion of endogenous Cyst-C in microglia does not affect amyloid pathology, related to Figure 5
(A–D) Representative nuclear track emulsion autoradiographic images from low (top) to high (bottom) magnifications show the radioactivity (white) in the sagittal 
brain sections from non-AD control (A and B) and 5×FAD mice (C and D) at 3 h (A and C) or 12 h (B and D) after intravenously (tail vein) administering a single dose 
(50 μg protein/100 μL) of 125 I-dextran, 125 I-Cyst-C, or 125 I-albumin. The sections were stained with an antibody against vascular marker CD31 (red).
(E–G) Bar graphs show the percentages of 125 I-dextran, 125 I-Cyst-C, or 125 I-albumin concentrations (E and G) and the brain-to-blood ratios (F) from non-AD 
control (WT) and 5×FAD mice at 3 h (E and F) or 12 h (G) after intravenously injecting a single dose of 125 I-dextran, 125 I-Cyst-C, or 125 I-albumin. In this study, the 
concentrations are defined as 125 I-cpm per gram brain tissue or per mL blood divided by a single injection dose ( 125 I-cpm). The permeability is calculated as the 
percentage of the blood-to-brain ratios 3 h after a single-dose injection in (F). Of note, 125 I-dextran was undetectable 12 h after a single-dose injection in (G), while 
125 I-Cyst-C remained in the brain. The different detectable times of these two molecules in the brain could be primarily due to their distinct clearance and 
metabolic mechanisms. Cyst-C can be incorporated into the existing amyloid plaques and hence has a longer clearance time and slower metabolic process. n = 5 
mice per group.
(H and I) A vector design (H) and representative western blots (I) showing genetic deletion of neuronal Cyst-C in 5×FAD mice. In this study, Cst3 flox mice were 
generated and crossed with CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 mice, 5×FAD mice, and Ai9 mice, resulting in the production of nCst3 − /− 5×FAD mice (5×FAD::CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 :: 
Cst3 flox/flox ::Ai9), in which Cst3 was selectively deleted in tdTomato-expressing cortical neurons after treatment with TAM. tdTomato-expressing cortical neurons 
were then isolated from the cortex of the mice and purified for western blots. The nCst3 +/+ 5×FAD (5×FAD::CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 ::Ai9) mice were used as the control. 
A bar graph (I) showing the relative protein levels. n = 5 mice per group.
(J) A plot showing the levels of Cyst-C in the CSF in neuronal (nCst3 − /− 5×FAD mice) and microglial (mCst3 − /− 5×FAD mice) Cst3 knockout 5×FAD mice after the 
injections of CSPs from LLC cell cultures. n = 9 mice per group.
(K and L) Representative images (K) and bar graphs (L) showing anti-Aβ 1–16 - and ThS-labeled plaques in the cortex of nCst3 − /− 5×FAD (5×FAD::CaMK2α- 
Cre ERT2 ::Cst3 flox/flox ) and nCst3 +/+ 5×FAD (5×FAD::CaMK2α-Cre ERT2 ) mice after TAM and injections of CSPs from LLC, RM1, or MC38 cell cultures. n = 11 mice 
per group.
(M and N) Representative images (M) and bar graphs (N) showing anti-Aβ 1–16 - and ThS-labeled plaques in the cortex of mCst3 − /− 5×FAD (5×FAD::Cx3Cr1-
Cre ERT2 ::Cst3 flox/flox ) and mCst3 +/+ 5×FAD (5×FAD::Cx3Cr1-Cre ERT2 ) mice after TAM and injections of CSPs from LLC, RM1, or MC38 cell cultures. In this study, 
mCst3 − /− 5×FAD mice were generated and crossed with Cx3Cr1-Cre ERT2 mice and 5×FAD mice, resulting in the production of mCst3 − /− 5×FAD mice, in which 
Cst3 was selectively deleted in Cx3Cr1-expressing microglia and macrophages after treatment with TAM. n = 11 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (E–G, J, L, and N), or t test (I).
ll
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
Article

Figure S8. A low dose of X-ray irradiation depletes peripheral immune cells, related to Figure 5
(A and B) Flow cytometry of peripheral immune cell subpopulations in 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after the injections (once per day for 30 consecutive days) of 
CSPs from Cst3-deficient LLC cancer cell cultures expressing His-tagged human Cyst-C. Representative images show the populations of CD3 + CD4 + T cells and 
CD3 + CD8 + T cells of CD45 + cells (A) and CD11b + Ly6C + monocytes of CD11b + F4/80 + cells (B).
(C) Bar graphs show the ratio of CD3 + CD4 + T cells, CD3 + CD8 + T cells, and CD11b + Ly6C + monocytes in 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after the injections (once 
per day for 30 consecutive days) of CSPs from Cst3-deficient LLC cancer cell cultures expressing His-tagged human Cyst-C. n = 9 mice per group.
(D and E) Flow cytometry of peripheral immune cell subpopulations in 5×FAD mice at 3 months of age 24 h after treatment with (IR) or without (control) a low dose 
of X-ray whole-body irradiation with head shielding. Representative images showing the populations of CD3 + CD4 + T cells and CD3 + CD8 + T cells of CD45 + cells
(D) and CD11b + Ly6C + monocytes of CD11b + cells (E).
(F) Bar graphs show the ratio of CD45 + cells and CD11b + peripheral immune cells in 5×FAD mice 24 h after a low dose of X-ray whole-body irradiation with head 
shielding. n = 9 mice per group.
(G) Bar graphs show the Cyst-C expression levels in blood and CSF of peripheral immune cell-depleted 5×FAD mice 30 days after the injections of LLC Cst3+ or 
LLC Cst3− cells. In this study, LLC Cst3+ or LLC Cst3− cells were intravenously injected (tail vein) into 5×FAD mice at 3 months of age 24 h after the treatment with (IR) 
or without a low dose of X-ray whole-body irradiation with head shielding. n = 9 mice per group.
(H) Representative peripheral tumors (top) and bar graphs (bottom) show the numbers of tumor nodules in T cell-depleted 5×FAD mice 30 days after the injections 
of LLC Cst3+ or LLC Cst3− cells. In this study, LLC Cst3+ or LLC Cst3− cells were intravenously injected (tail vein) into 5×FAD mice at 3 months of age 24 h after the 
treatment with (IR) or without a low dose of X-ray whole-body irradiation with head shielding. The numbers of tumor nodules were analyzed 30 days after LLC cell 
injections. n = 9 mice per group.
(I and J) Representative images (I) and bar graphs (J) show Aβ 1–16 -labeled and ThS-labeled amyloid plaques in the brains of 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age after 
intravenous injections (tail vein) of LLC Cst3+ or LLC Cst3− cancer cells. In this study, LLC Cst3+ or LLC Cst3− cells were intravenously injected (tail vein) into 5×FAD 
mice at 3 months of age 24 h after the treatment with (IR) or without a low dose of X-ray whole-body irradiation with head shielding. n = 9 mice per group. 
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (G, H, and J), or t test (C and F).
ll
Article

Figure S9. Human Cyst-C treatment triggers the pre-existing plaque clearance, related to Figure 6
(A) Representative images and a bar graph show colocalization of His-tagged Cyst-C with plaque (Aβ 1–16 )-associated microglia (Iba1 + ) in the cortex, the thalamus, 
the DG, and the BLA of 5×FAD mice. In this study, brain sections from 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age after peripheral injection of His-tagged Cyst-C or vehicle
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article

(control) were prepared and stained with Aβ 1–16 and Iba1, as indicated. A bar graph shows the percentage of His-associated plaques in the cortex, the thalamus, 
the DG, and the BLA from the mice injected with control (red) or His-tagged Cyst-C. n = 7 mice per group.
(B) Representative images and bar graphs show microglial cell body diameters and the number of branches in these cells in the cortex of 5×FAD mice at 5 months 
of age after the injection of human Cyst-C or control vehicle, showing that application of Cyst-C increases soma size and reduces process complexity of microglia 
in AD mice. n = 9 cells per group from 3 mice.
(C) Application of Cyst-C produces no effects on cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). Representative images with low and high magnifications and a bar graph 
show the cerebral vascular amyloid plaques in 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after the injection of human Cyst-C or vehicle control. In this study, brain sections 
from the mice were prepared and stained with ThS and anti-CD31. n = 9 mice per group.
(D and E) Representative images (D) and plots (E) showing Aβ 1–16 - and ThS-labeled amyloid plaques in the cortex, the thalamus, the DG, and the BLA of 5×FAD 
mice after the 30 consecutive injections (tail vein once per day) of vehicle control or human Cyst-C. n = 10 mice per group.
(F) A plot shows the time of visit to the novel arm in the Y maze of 5×FAD mice at 9 months of age after the injection of vehicle control, human Cyst-C. n = 10 mice 
per group.
(G and H) Representative images (G) and plots (H) showing Aβ 1–16 - and ThS-labeled amyloid plaques in the cortex, the thalamus, the DG, and the BLA of APP/PS1 
mice after the 60 consecutive injections (tail vein once per day) of vehicle control, human Cyst-C, or hCyst-C L68Q . n = 9 mice per group.
(I) A plot shows the time of visit to the novel arm in the Y maze of APP/PS1 mice at 8 months of age after the injection of vehicle control, human Cyst-C, or Cyst-
C L68Q . n = 11 mice per group.
(J and K) Dose-dependent inhibition of amyloid pathology by human Cyst-C in AD mice. Bar graphs show the levels (J) of His-tagged human Cyst-C (Cyst-C) in 
both the plasma and the CSF of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after the injections (tail vein) of His-tagged human Cyst-C at the doses of 10, 30, 50, or 70 μg/ 
100 μL or vehicle control (once per injection for 30 consecutive days). n = 9 mice per group. The percentage of amyloid plaques labeled by ThS (K) in the cortex of 
5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after the injections (tail vein). In this study, the plaques in the cortex of the mice after injection of vehicle control were defined as 
100%. The behaviors performed were examined immediately after the last injection. Plots showing the time in the target zone in the Morris water maze tests, as 
well as the time in the novel arm in the Y maze tests (K). n = 9 mice per group in amyloid analysis, n = 11 mice per group in behavioral test.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by t test (B–E) or one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (A and H–K).
ll
Article

Figure S10. mCyst-C treatment inhibits amyloid pathology and rescues cognition in AD mice, related to Figure 6
(A and B) Western blots (A) and bar graphs (B) showing the expression level of APP, APP-CTFs, PS1, BACE1, ADAM17, sAPPα, and IDE in the brain of 5×FAD 
mice at 5 months of age after 30 consecutive injections (tail vein once per day) of vehicle control, human Cyst-C, or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 5 mice per group.
(C and D) Representative images (C) and plots (D) showing Aβ 1–16 -labeled (red) and ThS-labeled (green) plaques in the cortex, the thalamus, the DG, and the BLA 
of 5×FAD mice at 5 months of age after the injections of mCyst-C or vehicle control (once per day for 30 consecutive injections). n = 9 mice per group.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article

(E) Representative heatmaps and graphs show the latency and path length to reach the hidden platform during the training sessions (left) and the percentage of 
time spent in the target quadrant during probe trials (right) in the Morris water maze tests of 5×FAD mice immediately after the last injection of vehicle control or 
mCyst-C. n = 9 mice per group.
(F) Representative heatmaps and graphs show the number and time of visits to novel arms in Y-maze tests of 5×FAD mice immediately after the last injection of 
vehicle control or mCyst-C. n = 9 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (B), two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s 
test (training sessions in E), or t test (D, probe trials in E and F).
ll
Article

Figure S11. Proteomic and transcriptomic identification of Cyst-C activation of TREM2 in microglia, related to Figure 7
(A) UMAP representation of all cells from scRNA-seq, colored by annotated cell type. Data are presented after stringent quality control and comprehensive batch 
correction.
(B) Bar plot shows the relative abundance of 7 distinct cell types in 5×FAD mice treated with (hCyst-C) or without (control) human Cyst-C, expressed as a 
percentage of total cells.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article

(C) Volcano plot show that application of human Cyst-C upregulates some key TREM2-related genes, including Trem2, Tyrobp, and CD68, in 5×FAD mice at
4 months of age.
(D) Gene ontology enrichment analysis shows that application of human Cyst-C activates TREM2 signaling, apoptosis, and lysosomal pathways in microglia.
(E) Representative blots and a bar graph show the physical association of human Cyst-C, but not Cyst-C L68Q , with Aβ 1–42o , but not Aβ 1–42m . In this study, His-
tagged human Cyst-C (Cyst-C) or its mutant Cyst-C L68Q were incubated with Aβ 1–42m (top) or Aβ 1–42o (bottom) and precipitated with anti-His or non-specific IgG 
(IgG) and blotted with anti-Aβ 1–16 , as indicated. n = 5 independent experiments.
(F) Representative blots and a bar graph show a direct binding of His-tagged human Cyst-C (anti-His) with TREM2-Fc, but not with TREM2 R47H . n = 5 independent 
experiments.
(G and H) A representative image (G) and western blots (H) show genetic deletion of TREM2 in microglia of 5×FAD mice. In this study, TREM2 flox mice were 
generated and crossed with Cx3cr1-Cre ERT2 mice, 5×FAD mice, and Ai9 mice, resulting in the production of mTREM2 − /− 5×FAD mice (5×FAD::Cx3cr1-Cre ERT2 :: 
TREM2 flox/flox ::Ai9), in which TREM2 was selectively deleted in tdTomato-expressing microglia after treatment with TAM. tdTomato-expressing microglia were 
then isolated from the cortex of the mice and purified for western blots. mTREM2 +/+ 5×FAD (5×FAD::Cx3cr1-Cre ERT2 ::TREM2 flox/flox ::Ai9) mice, in which vehicle 
control, but not TAM, was applied and was used as the control. n = 5 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (E and F) or t test (H).
ll
Article

Figure S12. Microglia phagocytosis and clearance of Aβ 1–42o by Cyst-C activation of TREM2, related to Figure 7
(A) Representative images and a bar graph show that oligomeric (Aβ 1–42o ), but not monomeric (Aβ 1–42m ) forms of Aβ 1–42 enhanced TREM2-DAP12 interaction 
based on the FRET assay. n = 9 assays. Scale bar, 10 μm.
(B and C) Representative blots (B) and a bar graph (C) showing the levels of tyrosine-phosphorylated (Y525/526, anti-pSYK) and total SYK (anti-SYK) in cultured 
primary microglia were treated without (control) or with Cyst-C at different concentrations as indicated. n = 5 independent experiments.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article

(D and E) TREM2-dependent activation of SYK by human Cyst-C. Representative blots (D) and a bar graph (E) show activation of SYK by human Cyst-C, but not 
hCyst-C L68Q , in microglia in a TREM2-dependent manner. In this study, the levels of tyrosine-phosphorylated (Y525/526, anti-p-SYK) and total SYK (anti-SYK) 
were examined in microglia from the cortex of TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD and TREM2 − /− 5×FAD mice. Cultured primary microglia were treated without (control) or with 
Cyst-C or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 5 mice per group.
(F and G) Bar graphs show the levels of HDL (F) and APOE (G) in cortical lysates from 5×FAD mice at 4 months of age after the injection of CSPs from LLC cell 
cultures (LLC-CSPs) or vehicle control. ELISA was used to measure the levels of HDL, whereas immunoblot was used to detect the levels of APOE. n = 5 mice per 
group.
(H and I) Representative images showing FAM-Aβ 1–42o phagocytosis and clearance in cultured primary microglia. In this study, microglia were isolated from 
TREM2 +/+ , TREM2 +/− , and TREM2 − /− mice, cultured, and incubated with FAM-Aβ 1–42o (200 μM) for 2 h in the absence (H) or the presence (I) of human Cyst-C 
(15 μg/mL). Fluorescence images were taken 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 6 h after 2-h incubation with FAM-Aβ 1–42o .
(J) Plots showing the rate of FAM-Aβ 1–42o uptake and degradation in cultured microglia from TREM2 +/+ , TREM2 +/− , and TREM2 − /− mice in the absence or the 
presence of 15 μg/mL human Cyst-C. In the uptake plot (from 0 to 2 h), the fluorescence intensities of FAM-Aβ 1–42o are normalized to that in microglia from 
TREM2 +/+ mice in the presence of human Cyst-C immediately after 2-h incubation with FAM-Aβ 1–42o (defined as 100%). In the degradation plot (from 2 to 6 h), the 
fluorescence intensities of FAM-Aβ 1–42o are normalized to those in microglia immediately after 2-h incubation of FAM-Aβ 1–42o (defined as 100%). n = 3 inde-
pendent experiments.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (C and E), two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s 
test (J), or t test (A, F, and G).
ll
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
Article

Figure S13. Cyst-C activation of TREM2 inhibits amyloid pathology and rescues cognition, related to Figure 7
(A and B) Gating strategy to identify the CD11b+ microglia (upper and middle) and contour plots (lower) showing the proportion of Aβ phagocytic microglia from
TREM2 +/+ and TREM2 − /− mice treated with vehicle, human Cyst-C, or Cyst-C L68Q .
(C) Representative confocal images (left) and quantification (right) for the intracellular MeX04 (white color) in fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-isolated 
MeX04+ microglia from TREM2 +/+ and TREM2 − /− mice treated with vehicle, human Cyst-C, or Cyst-C L68Q . n = 6 mice per group.
(D and E) Soluble and insoluble Aβ 1–42 (D) and Aβ 1–40 peptides (E) in the brains of TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD mice, TREM2 − /− 5×FAD, and TREM2 R47H 5×FAD treated with 
human Cyst-C or hCyst-C L68Q . n = 7 mice per group.
(F and G) The percentage of time spent searching for a hidden platform in the target quadrant (quadrant 4) during the probe trials in the Morris water maze (F), and 
the heatmaps and plots showing the number and time of visits to the novel arm in the Y-maze test (G) of TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD, TREM2 − /− 5×FAD, TREM2 +/+ WT, and 
TREM2 − /− WT mice. In the behavior tests (F and G), TREM2 +/+ 5×FAD, TREM2 − /− 5×FAD, TREM2 +/+ WT, and TREM2 − /− WT mice at 4 months of age were 
injected (tail vein) with human Cyst-C once per day for 30 consecutive days. n = 11 mice per group.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. n.s., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test (C–G).
ll
Article