Enhanced Antibacterial Efficacy of Copper
Single-Atom Catalysts on a Two-Dimensional
Boron Nitride Platform
Wenbo Li,◆Daniel Maldonado-Lopez,◆Yingcan Zhao,* Cong Wang, Jianxiang Gao, Bowen Sun,
Yichao Bai, Linxuan Sun, Mingchuang Zhao, Haoqi He, Jiatao Lou, Qiangmin Yu, Xi Zhang,
Vijay Kumar Pandey, Feiyu Kang, Mauricio Terrones, Jose L. Mendoza-Cortes,* and Yu Lei*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Copper-based antibacterial systems leverage reactive
oxygen species (ROS) for effective pathogen control but are
limited by issues such as cytotoxicity and resistance due to Cu ion
release. By anchoring copper single-atom catalysts (Cu SACs) on
biocompatible boron nitride (BN) nanosheets, we create a stable,
high-efficiency antibacterial platform that minimizes Cu-ion-
induced cytotoxicity and bacterial resistance. This configuration
maximizes metal utilization and enhances photocatalytic efficiency
for ROS generation, including hydroxyl radicals and superoxide
anions. The defect-assisted covalent bonding between Cu and BN
ensures stable coordination, preventing metal ion dissolution.
First-principles quantum calculations at the level of density
functional theory (DFT) provided critical insights into the
structures and mechanisms of ROS generation, showing how atomic-level interactions between Cu and BN surfaces boost
catalytic activity and clarified electron transfer processes and adsorption energies essential for ROS formation. These insights
explain the observed catalytic behaviors and provide valuable design principles for developing efficient, low-toxicity SAC-based
antibacterial systems. Additionally, we studied other elements in the same row (Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Zn) experimentally
and theoretically. The d-BN-Cu system rapidly inactivated E. coli (106 CFU mL−1), achieving significant results with d-BN-Cu1
(Cu, 0.26 at. % with Cu nanoclusters) within 15 min, and d-BN-Cu3 (Cu, 0.024 at. % with Cu SAC) within 30 min when
exposed to sunlight. Although higher copper content can achieve better antibacterial effects, it also brings other potential risks,
such as metal ion leaching and higher cytotoxicity. This risk can be effectively avoided by utilizing SACs, as all of the Cu SACs
are securely anchored at the defect sites in h-BN through covalent bonds. Cell toxicity testing and in vivo testing emphasize the
unique advantages of d-BN-Cu3 (SAC) in balancing safety and efficiency. This SAC two-dimensional platform can not only
effectively combat Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria but also effectively avoid the toxicity caused by the metal itself.
KEYWORDS: 2D materials, boron nitride, Cu single-atom catalysts, photocatalysis, reactive oxygen species, antibacterial
INTRODUCTION
The discovery of antibiotics has greatly improved public health
conditions and is widely used in humans and animals.1
However, the overuse of antibiotics has led to the emergence
of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in bacteria, posing a serious
global threat to public health and presenting one of the most
pressing challenges of our time.2−4 Reactive oxygen species
(ROS), a primary antibacterial mechanism, can destroy
bacterial cell membranes, proteins, DNA, etc., thereby killing
bacteria without introducing AMR.5−8 Therefore, copper
(Cu)-based antimicrobial systems with high ROS catalytic
activity have received considerable attention in recent
years.9−12 However, the tendency of metal nanoparticles to
agglomerate during catalytic processes significantly reduces
their efficiency, while the release of Cu ions poses additional
environmental concerns.13−16 Single-atom catalysts (SACs)
show promise for antibacterial systems by enhancing atomic
Received:
August 3, 2025
Revised:
November 24, 2025
Accepted:
November 24, 2025
Published: December 10, 2025
Article
www.acsnano.org
© 2025 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society
42198
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 25, 2026 at 01:49:12 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

utilization and minimizing toxic ion release, which is crucial for
sustainable pathogen control. SACs can enhance the density of
active sites, improve atomic utilization, and maximize the
catalytic properties of metals.17−19 Moreover, the aggregation
of metallic elements can be physically hindered by anchoring
the metal atoms to the substrates.20−22 Meanwhile, the local
coordination environment of the metal single atoms is also a
key parameter to regulate the catalytic performance,23 making
the selection and coordination of SAC substrates particularly
important.
Two-dimensional (2D) materials exhibit two main anti-
bacterial mechanisms: physical puncturing of bacterial cell
membranes enabled by their layered structure,24 and bacterial
inactivation through oxidative stress generated by electron
transfer reactions.25 These mechanisms have established 2D
materials as emerging antibacterial agents. At the same time,
their flat structure provides a larger specific surface area and
active sites, making them a good carrier for antibacterial
materials.26,27 Among the 2D materials family, boron nitride
(BN) has excellent physical and chemical properties, such as
high-temperature resistance, high strength, and corrosion
Figure 1. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis method of d-BN-Cu, (b) HAADF-STEM images of d-BN and d-BN-Cu3, and (c) EDS
mapping showing the uniform distribution of Cu on d-BN-Cu3 nanosheets. (d) XPS spectra of d-BN, d-BN-Cu1, d-BN-Cu2, and d-BN-Cu3.
(e) XPS spectra of Cu 2p of d-BN, d-BN-Cu1, d-BN-Cu2, and d-BN-Cu3 (due to the low Cu content, we smoothed the signal and increased
the signal intensityof d-BN-Cu2 by three times, and increased the signal intensity of d-BN-Cu3 by five times). (f) The normalized Cu K-edge
XANES spectra of d-BN-Cu3, (g) corresponding FT-EXAFS fitting curves of d-BN-Cu3. (h) FTIR of BN and d-BN. (i) zeta potential of BN
loaded with different Cu concentrations.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42199

resistance,28 and also exhibits excellent performance and
biocompatibility in the antibacterial field.29 It has been widely
used in antibacterial, antitumor, and drug delivery fields.16,30,31
Despite these promising applications, the antimicrobial
performance of BN still has much room for improvement
compared with conventional organic and metallic antimicrobial
materials.
Herein, we prepared BN nanosheets loaded with Cu SACs
(d-BN-Cu3) and used density functional theory (DFT) to
identify the optimal coordination form of Cu SACs (B−O−
Cu) for ROS catalysis. First, defective BN (d-BN) was
obtained by cryomilling, which reduced the BN’s lateral size
and thickness, increased its specific surface area, and
introduced more surface defects.32 The smaller BN size after
cryomilling enhances its ability to physically disrupt bacterial
cells, thereby improving its antibacterial performance.33
Additionally, the increased specific surface area and abundance
of functional groups (−OH) introduced as surface defects
provide more sites for oxidative stress activation and optimal
loading of SACs. This approach enables the Cu-loaded BN
nanosheets to function as a synergistic bactericidal agent, with
Cu SACs on the surface enhancing antibacterial activity. The
structure of Cu SACs was verified by aberration-corrected
scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and
extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis.
The ROS catalytic ability of the materials was verified by
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) testing, demonstrating
that d-BN-Cu3 can catalyze the production of hydroxyl radicals
(•OH) and superoxide anions (•O2
−), destroying the
phospholipid bilayer and proteins on the bacterial surface.
This catalytic effect was significantly enhanced with light
irradiation. We further tested the antibacterial efficacy of d-BN-
Cu under sunlight by using the colony-forming unit (CFU)
counting method with a solar simulator. The results showed
that d-BN-Cu1, with just 0.26 at. % Cu content, could
inactivate E. coli at 106 CFU mL−1 within 15 min. This
synergistic antibacterial platform was also effective against
Gram-positive bacteria, highlighting its broad-spectrum
potential. The findings in this work suggest that d-BN-Cu
could serve as a promising framework for the prevention,
control, and treatment of drug-resistant bacterial infections.
Finally, for comparison, we studied other common transition
metal elements in BN besides Cu: Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Zn,
which cover most first-row transition metals.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Synthesis and Characterization. BN was pretreated by
cryomilling for 120 min to produce defective BN (d-BN).
Cryomilling takes advantage of conventional milling and a
cryogenic N2 environment so that the milling time can be
significantly reduced and oxidation can be substantially
suppressed.33 This process introduced more defects and
anionic functional groups, enhancing its reducibility, as seen
in Figure 1a. To prepare Cu-loaded d-BN, 500 mg of d-BN was
added to 10 mL of CuSO4 solution at varying concentrations
(0.01, 0.005, 0.001, and 0.0005 M) and shaken for 3 h to
ensure thorough mixing. The mixture was then centrifuged at
8000 rpm, the supernatant discarded, and the pellet rinsed with
10 mL of deionized water. The washing and centrifugation
process was repeated three times, and the sediment was
retained after the third centrifugation. The resulting samples
were dried in a constant-temperature oven at 60 °C for 2 days.
The d-BN samples were labeled d-BN-Cu1 to d-BN-Cu4, in
descending order, based on the CuSO4 solution concentration.
Similar to the above method, d-BN samples were loaded with
other metals using salt solutions at 0.01 M; the salt solutions
included CrCl3, MnCl2, FeCl3, CoCl2, NiCl2, and ZnCl2.
As shown in Table S1, the Cu content in d-BN-Cu1 through
d-BN-Cu4 was determined by using inductively coupled plasma
(ICP) analysis. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images
in Figure S1 reveal that in BN samples without cryomilling,
large BN flakes (≥400 nm) are prevalent. However, in d-BN
and d-BN-Cu3 samples (which underwent cryomilling), these
large flakes are rarely observed, with most particles measuring
around 100−300 nm. This size reduction is attributed to the
mechanical forces of cryomilling, which cause larger BN flakes
to break apart more easily. The atomic force microscopy
(AFM) images shown in Figure S2 further corroborate these
findings, showing significant interlayer stacking in BN and d-
BN. Occasionally, large BN nanosheets appear in the BN
samples, with sizes consistently between 100 and 300 nm,
consistent with SEM observations. By contrast, in the AFM
images, d-BN-Cu3 appears more evenly dispersed and with
minimal interlayer stacking, likely due to the spatial forces
exerted by the Cu atoms on the surface, which inhibit stacking
in solution. Spherical aberration-corrected high-angle annular
dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy
(HAADF-STEM) images (Figure 1b) show a clean and clearly
layered d-BN surface. After loading with Cu atoms, distinct
isolated bright spots appear on d-BN-Cu3 (Cu, 0.024 at. %),
corresponding to Cu SACs. These images indicate that the Cu
atoms are attached to the BN nanosheets as single atoms with
a tendency to accumulate near the edges of the layers (Figure
S3a), possibly due to a higher concentration of defects in these
regions. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) elemental
mapping (Figure 1c) confirms the presence of Cu and its
uniform distribution across the BN nanosheets. However, for
sample d-BN-Cu1 (with higher Cu concentration, 0.26 at. %)
there are numerous Cu nanoclusters with a 2 nm diameter on
the BN surface (Figure S3b).
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was employed to
investigate the surface properties and chemical structures of
the samples, as shown in Figure 1d,e. The characteristic Cu
peaks reveal that at low Cu concentrations, Cu predominantly
exists as low-valence Cu+ (932.7 eV). When the Cu content is
higher, it appears primarily as high-valence Cu2+ (934 eV). In
d-BN-Cu3, which has a lower Cu content, the Cu atoms exist
in a mixed valence state with both Cu+ and Cu2+ forms, though
Cu+ is predominant. In contrast, in d-BN-Cu2 and d-BN-Cu1,
where the Cu content is higher, Cu2+ dominates. This indicates
that d-BN preferentially reduces divalent Cu ions, but when
the Cu content exceeds the reduction capacity of d-BN, excess
Cu is loaded onto its surface in its original valence state. The
XPS peaks for B, N, and O show minimal variation across the
samples (Figure S4). Additionally, the elemental composition
of the samples was analyzed via XPS (Table S2). Since XPS
provides surface-level information, the measured Cu content is
slightly higher than expected.
Based on the detection results of HAADF-STEM images
(Figures 1b and S3a), we conclude that sample d-BN-Cu3 is
highly likely to be loaded onto d-BN in a single-atom form. To
further verify our hypothesis and analyze the valence bond and
coordination information on d-BN-Cu3, X-ray absorption near-
edge structure (XANES) and EXAFS measurements were
performed, using metallic Cu, Cu2O, and CuO as references.
As shown in the Cu K-edge absorption spectrum (Figure 1f),
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42200

the rising edge position of d-BN-Cu3 lies between those of
Cu2O and CuO, indicating that the Cu in d-BN-Cu3 exists in a
mixed valence state between +1 and +2.34,35 This unsaturated
coordination structure of metal atoms is known to enhance
catalytic activity.36 In Figure 1g, the Fourier transform EXAFS
(FT-EXAFS) spectrum provides insights into the coordination
environment of Cu in d-BN-Cu3. The absence of a Cu−Cu
scattering path (around 2.24 Å) confirms that Cu does not
form Cu−Cu metallic bonds in d-BN-Cu3. Additionally, the
lack of any significant peaks beyond the first near-neighbor
main peak suggests that the Cu atoms are not crystallized,
further supporting the conclusion that Cu is dispersed as SACs.
Based on the information on bond length and valence state
(XPS), it can be concluded that after reduction by d-BN, the
presence of the Cu element is mainly dominated by
monovalent Cu−O bonds (B−O−Cu in d-BN-Cu3), while
the possibility of a small amount of Cu−N bonds cannot be
ruled out.35,36
To further confirm the bonding of Cu atoms on the BN
surface, we analyzed functional groups and surface potentials
using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Figure
1h)33,37 and zeta potential measurements, respectively. A
significant enhancement in the hydroxyl group (−OH) signal
at 3400 cm−1 was observed with increasing cryomilling time
(Figure 1h). The transmittance at 3400 cm−1 across samples
with different cryomilling durations was statistically analyzed
Figure 2. (a) Antibacterial activity of d-BN loaded with various metal ions (Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, Ni, Zn, Cu) againstE. coli, assessed via colony
counting. Cu-loaded d-BN (d-BN-Cu) shows the strongest bactericidal effect. The concentration of the bacterial solution was 106 CFU
mL−1, and it was incubated in a constant temperature shaker (37 °C/120 rpm) for 3 h. The mixed solution after incubation was diluted 100
times and inoculated for culture and counting. The antibacterial rate of d-BN, d-BN-Cu1, d-BN-Cu2, d-BN-Cu3, and d-BN-Cu4 againstE.
coli(b) andS. aureus(c). (d) Test of the antibacterial effect of d-BN, d-BN-Cu3, and d-BN-Cu1 onE. coliunder simulated lighting conditions
(400−1076 nm, AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). The dark group was treated at room temperature and kept away from light. The controls for the
above inhibition experiments were a mixture of saline and bacterial solution, and the working concentration of the antibacterial material is
100 ppm. (e) Photothermal effects of the control, d-BN-Cu1, and d-BN-Cu3 at a concentration of 100 ppm under a solar simulator. (f)
Photothermograms of d-BN-Cu3.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42201

(Figure 1h). The results indicate that as ball milling time
increases, the −OH content does not increase indefinitely but
rather fluctuates within a certain range (Figure S5).
Concurrently, a decrease in the zeta potential (Figure 1i)
indicates an increase in surface anionic functional groups. This
indicates that cryomilling promotes the formation of more B−
OH groups at the edges of d-BN, which are negatively charged
in solution and facilitate the adsorption of positively charged
Cu ions. With the continuous increase of Cu element, the
increase in zeta potential also confirms the consumption of B−
OH anionic functional groups by Cu. These pieces of
information further confirm that B−O−Cu is the main atomic
configuration of Cu in d-BN-Cu3. The distribution of Cu
atoms observed under HAADF-STEM further supports this
finding (Figure S3a). Consequently, most of the Cu ions in d-
BN-Cu3 will combine with B−OH-rich areas to form
B−O−Cu defect structures, and a small amount of Cu ions
are reduced to form Cu−N at B vacancies.
Antibacterial Activity. To assess the impact of metal atom
loading on the antibacterial properties of BN, we evaluated the
antibacterial rates againstE. coli(ATCC 25922) andS. aureus-
(ATCC 6538) using the CFU counting method. As shown in
Figure 2a, seven different transition metals (Co, Cr, Fe, Mn,
Ni, Zn, and Cu) were loaded onto d-BN, but only Cu exhibited
rapid and near-complete bacterial inactivation, underscoring its
superior catalytic properties on BN nanosheets. The results for
different transition metals were confirmed via DFT calculations
(Figure S6). Refer to the computational results below for a
detailed analysis of the Cu defect structures. After 3 h of
cocultivation, the samples were inoculated onto Luria−Bertani
(LB) medium. We then used the same method to test the
antibacterial rates of d-BN with varying Cu loading amounts
againstE. coli(Figure 2b) andS. aureus(Figures 2c and S7). The
results showed that the d-BN-Cu series samples had significant
antibacterial effects on both Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria, and their antibacterial effects were positively
Figure 3. (a) Schematic diagram of the antibacterial mechanism of d-BN-Cu. (b) Morphology of E. coli before and after treatment with
antibacterial materials under SEM. (c,d) EPR analysis of ROS generation by d-BN-Cu3 under illuminated and nonilluminated conditions,
showing enhanced •OH production under light exposure. (e,f) Using EPR to test the catalytic effect of d-BN-Cu3 on •O2
−under light and
no-light conditions.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42202

correlated with the Cu loading concentration. Meanwhile, the
inhibitory effect of the sample on E. coli was slightly stronger
than that onS. aureus, which is likely due to the thicker cell wall
and richer peptidoglycan layer of S. aureus, typical of Gram-
positive bacteria, providing better protection compared to
Gram-negative bacteria. To further investigate, we centrifuged
the mixture of the d-BN-Cu3 group in Figure 2b, observed
atomic-level changes on the sample surface using STEM, and
confirmed the absence of Cu residues in the supernatant using
ICP. EDS mapping and HAADF-STEM images (Figure S8)
revealed that Cu was still present in the sample and maintained
its monatomic form. Additionally, in the ICP test results
(Table S3), there was no detectable signal of Cu. The presence
of potassium ions in the solution was attributed to the lysis of
bacterial cell membranes, providing further evidence of
bacterial inactivation.
Photocatalytic Disinfection Performance. We further
investigated the antibacterial activity of samples againstE.
coliunder sunlight using a solar simulator (Figure 2d). In the
absence of light, d-BN-Cu3 exhibits no significant antibacterial
effect; however, under illuminated conditions, it can
completely inactivate 106 CFU mL−1 ofE. coliwithin 30 min.
Meanwhile, the higher Cu content in d-BN-Cu1 enables
bacterial elimination within 15 min, highlighting the beneficial
role of Cu in the photocatalytic process and showcasing its
potential for rapid, broad-spectrum antibacterial applications.
Interestingly, we observed that even physiological saline,
without the addition of antibacterial materials, demonstrated
some antibacterial activity after 20 min of light exposure. To
understand the system’s energy dynamics under illumination,
we monitored temperature changes in situ using an infrared
camera (Figure 2e, f). The temperature of the system quickly
rises to 39 °C within the first 15 min of light exposure, after
which the temperature increase slows down, reaching a
maximum of approximately 41 °C. The increase in temperature
leads to an accelerated microbial respiration rate,38 producing
reactive oxygen species (ROS) that are harmful to cells.39−41
Consequently, even the control group, devoid of antibacterial
materials, exhibits some bactericidal effects after prolonged
light exposure. At the same time, there was not much
difference in temperature between the groups, which also
ruled out the influence of excessive temperature differences on
the experimental control.
Mechanistic Analysis. As illustrated in Figure 3a, the
sterilization mechanism of d-BN-Cu can be categorized into
two primary processes: (i) physical disruption of the cell
membrane due to the sharp, atomic edges of the 2D material;
and (ii) the generation of ROS by d-BN through the
photocatalytic reaction of Cu, which disrupts the surface
proteins and phospholipid bilayer of the cell. These actions,
comprising physical cleavage and inactivation of active
substances on the bacterial surface, interfere with the metabolic
and proliferative activities of the cells, thus exerting a
disinfecting effect. To analyze the mechanism of bacterial
damage, we first observed the morphology of E. coli before and
after treatment with d-BN-Cu3 using SEM (Figure 3b). The
SEM images reveal membrane disruption after treatment with
d-BN-Cu3. The extent of damage to the bacterial cell
membrane often correlates with the size of the 2D material.
The cryomilling process used in our work reduced the BN
thickness to 6 nm (Figure S2), enhancing its ability to
physically disrupt the bacterial cell membrane (Figures S9 and
S10).
The ROS formation catalyzed by the samples was evaluated
using EPR, with the solvent alone serving as a blank control. In
the absence of light (Figure 3c), no •OH peaks were detected
in d-BN. However, a •OH peak was present in d-BN-Cu3,
although not very strong. Interestingly, the d-BN-Cu3 sample
also exhibited a strong peak of alkyl radicals (•R).42 This is
because the capturing agent 5,5-Dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide
(DMPO) degrades under the influence of Cu2+ after capturing
•OH, and the amount of •R generated is correlated with the
pH.43 In illuminated conditions, the •OH peak intensity in d-
BN-Cu3 significantly increased, while the peaks of •R notably
decreased. It is worth noting that under illumination
conditions, the •OH signal was also observed in the control
group with only deionized water, and the signal was
significantly enhanced in the presence of d-BN (Figure
S11a). This indicates that under light conditions, d-BN has a
catalytic effect on •OH. The intensity comparison of •OH is
summarized in Table S4, and the peak intensity of the control
group under light conditions is defined as 100% for
quantitative comparison. In addition, the effects of d-BN
loaded with six other transition group metals (Co, Cr, Fe, Mn,
Ni, and Zn) on hydroxyl radical catalysis were evaluated and
compared with d-BN-Cu1 (Figure S12). The EPR signal
indicates that in the absence of light, aside from d-BN-Cu1,
only d-BN-Mn exhibits a partial DMPO oxidation peak
(DMPOO)42 and a special reactive oxygen peak (•SRO).
The G value of •SRO is consistent with that of hydroxyl
radicals (G ≈15); however, hydroxyl radicals have four peaks
(peak ratio of 1:2:2:1), and •SRO has six peaks (peak ratio of
1:1:1:1:1:1). This could be due to unique metal-ion-DMPO
interactions or a different ROS pathway, and it merits future
investigation. After light exposure, it can be observed that the
peak intensity of d-BN-Mn does not increase, indicating that it
cannot continuously and stably produce •SRO. The catalytic
effect of samples loaded with other transition group metals on
hydroxyl radicals did not significantly improve under light
irradiation; only the signal of d-BN-Zn was slightly enhanced
under light irradiation (Table S5), indicating that Cu-loaded d-
BN has the best catalytic effect on ROS.
The EPR signal of •O2
−is shown in Figure 3e,f. Without
light, only d-BN-Cu3 exhibited a typical •O2
−peak along with
weak •R peaks. After illumination, the signal intensity of d-BN-
Cu3 markedly increased. Concurrently, the control and d-BN
produced four peaks at similar positions (Figure S11b) and
with similar intensities. This may be due to the overlap of
•OOH peaks generated by the system under illumination.
Previous EPR tests on the H2O2/UV system in methanol
solvent exhibited peak positions similar to those in this
experiment.42 Notably, we did not detect any singlet oxygen
signals, even under light conditions (Figure S13). In summary,
under light conditions, a certain amount of ROS will be
produced in water, and d-BN can play a catalytic role in the
production of •OH. Furthermore, BN doped with Cu catalyzes
the generation of •OH and •O2
−more efficiently, achieving
significant bactericidal effects and enhancing the catalytic
reaction under light conditions.
Biosafety Testing. Cell culture and cytotoxicity assays
were used to evaluate the biocompatibility of d-BN-Cu (Figure
S14), including MCF10A (normal human epithelial breast cell
line), BEAS-2B (normal human bronchial epithelial cell line),
and HPDE6-C7 (normal human pancreatic ductal epithelial
cells). The IC50 values of d-BN-Cu for all three types of cells
are higher than 100 ppm, indicating minimal toxicity overall.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42203

Notably, an increase in Cu loading is associated with increased
toxicity. Based on the atomic distribution of Cu atoms, stability
testing of Cu atom loading, and human cell toxicity testing, it
has been shown that higher concentrations of Cu pose a
greater risk of leakage and elevated biological toxicity, whereas
single-atom Cu effectively mitigates these concerns. In the
samples tested, the Cu atoms in d-BN-Cu3 exist in a single-
atom form, exhibiting greater stability and reduced toxicity.
Furthermore, they preserve excellent antibacterial properties.
Consequently, further in vivo experiments are mainly focused
on evaluating the single-atom configuration.
The effect of d-BN-Cu samples on inflammation rehabil-
itation in vivo was evaluated by using a mouse wound infection
model (Figure 4). Ten μL ofE. colisolution orS. aureussolution
(106 CFU mL−1) were dripped into mouse wounds to establish
an infected wound model, and the mice were randomly divided
into four groups to receive diverse treatments, including the
control group, d-BN, d-BN-Cu3, and d-BN-Cu1. Figure 4a,b
shows daily changes in the wound area of mice and reflects the
impact of the sample on inflammation recovery. In theE.
coliinfection experiment (Figure 4a), due to the mild
inflammation caused, the mice’s own immune system can
quickly recover. Nevertheless, the wound recovery rate after
treatment with d-BN-Cu3 and d-BN-Cu1 was still significantly
faster than that of other groups. In theS. aureusinfection
experiment (Figure 4b,c), mice were more severely infected
and required a longer recovery time. After 4 days of infection,
it was found that the wound recovery rate of the mice treated
with our sample was significantly better than that of the control
group, and this recovery rate was positively correlated with the
Cu content. Moreover, the healed skin was collected for
histological analysis via hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
to evaluate the inflammation conditions (Figure 4d). In the
control group, extensive necrosis was observed in the skin
tissue, with a large number of inflammatory cells, such as
granulocytes and lymphocytes, present. However, the number
of inflammatory cells in the skin tissue of other experimental
groups was relatively small, and the overall recovery level was
higher than that of the control group. In summary, the d-BN-
Cu3 sample we developed has good biocompatibility, minimal
harm to human cells, and a positive effect on the recovery of
bacterial infections and inflammation in the body.
Theoretical Calculations. DFT calculations were per-
formed to investigate the electronic properties of Cu SACs on
Figure 4. Statistical chart of the recovery rate of inflammatory wounds in mice infected with bacteria, including (a)E. coliand (b)S. aureus. On
day 1 after the mice were infected with bacteria, they were grouped and inoculated with d-BN, d-BN-Cu3, d-BN-Cu1, and physiological saline
(control). (c) The wound images of mice in the control group and d-BN group during theS. aureusinfection experiment. (d) On day 3
postinfection, one mouse slice was taken from each group and stained with H&E.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42204

Figure 5. Progression of the structural and electronic features of BN as defects of interest are added to a supercell, calculated using hybrid
density functional theory. (a) Optimized geometries (perspective, side, and top views) and (b) spin-polarized atom-projected density of
states (DOS) aligned with respect to vacuum for the following structures: pristine, nitrogen vacancy (vN), nitrogen vacancy with oxygen
attached to boron (vN{3B}−Ob1‑B), nitrogen vacancy with Cu bonded to boron (vN{3B}−Cub1‑B), and nitrogen vacancy with oxygen and Cu
bonded to boron (vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B). These defects are calculated in a 4 × 4 lattice. (c) Optimized geometries and (d) spin-polarized
atom-projected DOS for “multidefects” of interest, taking the vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B defect as a starting point and adding CuN, NB, and OB
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42205

BN. The optimized Cu coordination environment (B−O−Cu)
enhances electron transfer and lowers the energy gap for ROS
generation. Band structure analysis confirms that d-BN-Cu
exhibits a reduced band gap (∼2.9 eV), facilitating visible-light-
driven photocatalysis. Defect engineering simulations further
revealed that BN vacancies contribute to Cu stabilization while
modulating the electronic states for optimal redox reactions.
These insights offer a design framework for next-generation
antimicrobial SACs.
DFT results are plotted in Figure 5, showing the progression
of the structural and electronic properties upon the addition of
defects to the lattice. Figure 5a,c corresponds to the optimized
geometries of different defect structures in a BN supercell. As
defects are introduced, buckling occurs due to charge
compensation and steric repulsions; this effect is more
prevalent in the near vicinity of the defects. The defects in
Figure 5a are calculated in a 4 × 4 supercell, and the structures
in Figure 5c are calculated in a 5 × 5 supercell to avoid
interactions between defective sites.
To study the structural effect of these defects, bond
distances of interest for the following structures were measured
and are shown in Table 1: nitrogen vacancy with O bonded to
B (vN{3B}−Ob1‑B); nitrogen vacancy with Cu bonded to B
(vN{3B}−Cub1‑B); nitrogen vacancy with O and Cu bonded to
B (vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B); defect including Cu substitution
at an N site and nitrogen vacancy with O and Cu bonded to B
(CuN,vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B); defect including N substitu-
tion at a B site and nitrogen vacancy with O and Cu bonded to
B (NB,vN{2B,N}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B); and defect including O
substitution at a B site and nitrogen vacancy with O and Cu
bonded to B (OB,vN{2B,O}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B). The defect
notation used in this paper is described in the Methods section.
From the values in Table 1, the B−O and B−Cu distances
are smaller in the vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B defect compared to
the individual vN{3B}−Ob1‑B and vN{3B}−Cub1‑B structures,
indicating stronger defect interactions with the lattice in the
vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B structure. This result predicts that the
simultaneous addition of O and Cu to the structure (B−O−Cu
coordination) has a synergistic effect, with more stable bonds
than those of O or Cu by themselves. This is verified in Figure
S15, which confirms that B−O−Cu defects are more stable
than adsorbed Cu−Cu clusters by 0.012 eV/atom. Taking the
structure with B−O−Cu coordination as a base, the addition
of more defects to the lattice (CuN, NB, and OB) results in even
smaller B−Cu and O−Cu bond distances, showing a similar
synergistic effect. Based on the chemical intuition gained from
experiments and the exhaustive approach taken to calculate
these multidefect structures (see Methods), we believe that
these models present high stability and correctly capture the
complexity found in our experimental samples.
Figure 5b,d shows the density of states (DOS) aligned with
respect to vacuum (w.r.t. vac.) for the pristine and defective
structures. This alignment serves as a guide to analyze how
suitable these structures are for performing reactions of
interest. The red and green lines in the DOS plots correspond
to the redox potentials for O2 reduction (−2.12 eV w.r.t. vac.)
and H2O oxidation (−4.60 eV w.r.t. vac.) for the production of
•O2−and •OH, respectively. In general, materials with a
conduction band minimum (CBM) above the O2 reduction
potential and a valence band maximum (VBM) below the H2O
oxidation potential can generate electrons/holes with favorable
energies to catalyze these reactions. Furthermore, their band
gap determines the photon energy required to excite an
electron from the valence to the conduction band and also
serves as a design principle. Based on our experimental design
for the antibacterial tests (see Methods), photon wavelengths
fall between 400 and 1100 nm (3.1 to 1.13 eV). Thus, we are
particularly interested in materials with band gaps ≤3.1 eV.
Starting our analysis with the pristine BN lattice, we observe
that its band alignment is appropriate for carrying out both
redox reactions. However, the pristine monolayer is an
insulator with a band gap of ≈6.3 eV, impeding photo-
excitation and discarding it for ROS production. Introducing
nitrogen vacancies (vN) drastically changes the DOS profile,
resulting in the appearance of intermediate states, which arise
mainly from boron contributions. These intermediate states fall
directly above the O2 reduction potential (red dashed line) in
the spin-up channel and directly below the Fermi level in the
spin-down channel. The DOS profile now has two spin-
polarized band gaps of 4.5 eV (spin-up) and 3.4 eV (spin-
down). The spin-up channel has an appropriate alignment for
carrying out both ROS reactions (•O2−and •OH production),
although its band gap of 4.52 eV limits electronic excitation.
The spin-down channel has a smaller band gap, but its
alignment only allows for the production of •O2−, since its
valence band is now mediated by the intermediate defect
levels. Moreover, the large gaps below the valence band might
prevent the conduction of electrons within the structure,
slowing the catalytic process. We note that the concentration
of vacancies in a 4 × 4 supercell is 3.22 at%. Nonetheless,
similar results are found when using 5 × 5 and 6 × 6 supercells
with vacancy concentrations of 2.04 and 1.41 at. % (see Figure
S16).
The addition of oxygen to the vacancy structure (vN{3B}−
Ob1‑B) again changes the DOS profile, where it now exhibits
intermediate spin-polarized defect states from oxygen con-
tributions in the spin-down channel. This structure has an
Figure 5. continued
to the lattice. These are hosted in 5 × 5 supercells. (e) Effect of layer number on the band gap for the pristine lattice (monolayer to bulk
transition). (f) Effect of layer number on the vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B defect (one to three layers).
Table 1. Bond Distances of Interest in the vN{3B}−Ob1‑B,
vN{3B}−Cub1‑B, vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B, CuN,vN{3B}−
Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B, NB,vN{2B,N}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B, and the
OB,vN{2B,O}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B Defect Structuresa
Defect structure
B−O distance
(Å)
B−Cu distance
(Å)
O−Cu distance
(Å)
vN{3B}−Ob1‑B
1.37
-
-
vN{3B}−Cub1‑B
-
1.98
-
vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B
1.34
1.97
1.84
CuN,vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−
Cub2‑B,B
1.34
1.94
1.83
NB,vN{2B,N}−Ob1‑B−
Cub2‑B,N
1.34
1.94
1.83
OB,vN{2B,O}−Ob1‑B−
Cub2‑B,O
1.34
1.94
1.83, 1.94
aStructures were fully optimized in terms of atomic positions and
lattice parameters.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42206

appropriate band alignment for the production of ROS in the
spin-up channel but presents a large band gap of ≈5.1 eV,
hindering electronic photoexcitation. The spin-down channel
has a smaller band gap of ≈1.8 eV but does not present
appropriate band alignment for the generation of ROS, since
the CBM now corresponds to the intermediate energy levels,
which fall below the oxidation potential for •OH production.
On the other hand, Mulliken Population Analysis reveals that
the exposed oxygen has one unpaired electron, likely
presenting high reactivity. Based on the experimental FT-
EXAFS resultswhich show that the coordination of Cu in d-
BN-Cu3 is with oxygen or nitrogenwe conclude that this
exposed oxygen likely serves as a binding site for Cu, rather
than as a catalytically active site. On the other hand, Cu
addition to the vacancy structure (vN{3B}−Cub1‑B) has
appropriate band alignments for both ROS, but the DOS
shows a band gap of ≈3.7 eV, which falls outside of our range
of interest, preventing the excitation of electrons and hindering
its ability for photocatalysis.
The next defect of interest has both oxygen and Cu bonded
to boron at the vacancy site (vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B). This
structure results in appropriate band alignment for both ROS
(•OH and •O2
−) and reduced gaps below the VBM, resulting
in enhanced available electronic states within the material.
These electronic properties predict that the vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−
Cub2‑B,B structure, with B−O−Cu coordination, presents
enhanced catalytic activity for hydroxyl and superoxide ROS.
Further, we calculated 5 × 5 (1.96 at. % Cu content) and 6 ×
6 (1.36 at. % Cu content) supercells hosting the vN{3B}−
Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B defect, yielding similar results (see Figure S17).
However, similar to the previous structure, its band gap of 4.2
eV prevents photoexcitation within our range of interest.
Taking the aforementioned structure with B−O−Cu
coordination as a base, we generated multidefect structures
of interest by adding CuN, NB, and OB to the lattice (Figure
5c). The DOS values for these structures are shown in Figure
5d. These defects were hosted in a 5 × 5 supercell, and they
capture more of the complexity expected in cryomilled
samples. The structures that incorporate Cu substituting
nitrogen (CuN,vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B) and nitrogen sub-
stituting boron (NB,vN{2B,N}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,N) have an equal
distribution of spin-up and spin-down electrons. They both
present correct band alignment for the production of ROS and
reduced band gaps (2.9 and 3.2 eV for CuN,vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−
Cub2‑B,B and NB,vN{2B,O}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,O, respectively). The
final defect of interest is OB,vN{2B,O}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,O, which
presents an uneven distribution of electrons along the spin-up
and spin-down channels. The spin-up band gap value is outside
of our range of interest at 4.1 eV; however, the spin-down band
gap has both a correct band gap value (2.9 eV) and alignment
to produce ROS. These three multidefect calculations show
viable electronic structures for ROS formation in our energy
range of interest. In summary, based on the comprehensive
computational analysis of various defect structures, multidefect
systems incorporating B−O−Cu coordination complexes in
conjunction with additional CuN, NB, and OB lattice defects
emerge as the most probable candidates for ROS generation.
This conclusion is supported by the favorable alignment of
redox potentials and band gap energies within the target range
for photocatalytic ROS activity.
The calculations shown thus far explore defect formation in
a single layer of BN. However, additional calculations were
performed for multilayer structures to elucidate the effect of
layer number on electronic properties. Figure 5e shows the
monolayer-to-bulk transition for pristine BN, showing a band
gap difference of 0.44 eV between the monolayer and bulk,
with several intermediate values. A similar band gap reduction
is observed in Figure 5f, which shows the effect of adding
layers to the vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B defect, showing a
reduction of ≈0.2 eV between monolayer and three-layer
slabs. These results indicate that the band gap can be
engineered through the layer number. Since cryomilling likely
yields slabs of different thicknesses, we believe that this band
gap modulation via layer addition/subtraction can also be an
important contributor to the photocatalytic activity observed
experimentally.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we successfully developed Cu single-atom
catalysts (d-BN-Cu3) with enhanced photocatalytic properties.
Boron nitride (BN), known for its exceptional chemical
stability, was employed as a substrate to anchor Cu atoms in a
single-atom form, ensuring high catalytic efficiency while
preventing Cu dissolution and reducing its biological toxicity.
The d-BN-Cu system effectively catalyzes the production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as hydroxyl radicals
(•OH) and superoxide anions (•O2
−), which can damage
bacterial cell membranes and genetic material, leading to rapid
bacterial inactivation. Meanwhile, under illumination, the
efficiency of the d-BN-Cu catalytic generation of ROS will
be significantly improved. In vivo experiments have shown that
d-BN-Cu can effectively promote the recovery of inflammation
caused by bacteria. Density functional theory (DFT)
simulations played a pivotal role in understanding the
structural characteristics and catalytic mechanisms of d-BN-
Cu. The simulations not only identified the optimal
coordination environment (B−O−Cu with additional CuN,
NB, and OB defects) for maximizing ROS catalytic activity but
also provided insights into the atomic-level interactions
between Cu atoms and the BN substrate. Computational
modeling allowed us to identify structures that yield the target
band gap and redox alignments for ROS generation, validating
the experimental results by elucidating the electronic
mechanisms and adsorption processes through which d-BN
can provide antibacterial activity. Moreover, the DFT results
guided the development of future design principles for ROS
catalysis in single-atom catalysts (SACs), highlighting how the
strategic manipulation of coordination structures can enhance
catalytic performance. Under light irradiation, the photo-
catalytic efficiency of d-BN-Cu3 is significantly enhanced,
achieving rapid inactivation ofE. coliat a concentration of 106
CFU mL−1 within just 30 min, ensuring a high antibacterial
effect while also considering safety during use. Our findings
underscore the importance of optimizing interactions between
active catalytic sites and their substrates to fully exploit the
catalytic potential of the material. The unique planar structure
of two-dimensional materials, such as BN, presents vast
opportunities for advancing SAC technologies. This study
provides not only a deeper understanding of the structural and
mechanistic aspects of ROS catalysis but also a promising
pathway for the design of efficient and sustainable antibacterial
systems. Furthermore, the insights gained from this work offer
a new strategy for addressing the environmental challenges
posed by drug-resistant bacteria.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42207

METHODS
Cryomilling. 3.5 g boron nitride was cryomilled in a
polycarbonate-encapsulated cell (SPEX 6775 Freezer/Mill) at −196
°C. The polycarbonate-encapsulated compactor (SPEX 6775) hits the
two ends of the cell with a frequency of 10 Hz (cps). Four samples
were prepared with different cryomilling times: 45, 90, 120, and 150
min.
Metal Reduction. d-BN-Cu: 500 mg of d-BN was added to 10
mL of CuSO4 solution at varying concentrations (0.01, 0.005, 0.001,
and 0.0005 M) and shaken for 3 h to ensure thorough mixing. The
mixture was then centrifuged at 8000 rpm, the supernatant discarded,
and the pellet rinsed with 10 mL of deionized water. The flushing and
centrifugation process was repeated three times, and the sediment was
retained after the third centrifugation. The resulting samples were
dried in a constant-temperature oven at 60 °C for 2 days. The d-BN
samples were labeled d-BN-Cu1 to d-BN-Cu4 in descending order
based on the CuSO4 solution concentration. Similar to the above
method, d-BN samples were loaded with other metals using salt
solutions at 0.01 M. The salt solutions included CrCl3, MnCl2, FeCl3,
CoCl2, NiCl2, and ZnCl2).
Antibacterial Experiment. CultivateE. coliin LB medium for 3−4
h to obtain a mixed bacterial solution of 109 CFU mL−1. Afterward,
centrifuge at 12000 rpm and wash with physiological saline to remove
excess residue, repeating the above operation 3 times. Dilute the
cleaned bacterial solution with physiological saline to OD600 ≈0.14,
at which point the bacterial concentration is approximately 108 CFU
mL−1. Weigh and prepare 5 mL of 100 ppm d-BN-Cu3 solution and
sonicate for 10 min. Then, 0.1 mL of the diluted bacterial solution was
added to obtain a final bacterial concentration of approximately 106
CFU mL−1. The control group added the bacterial solution directly to
physiological saline without adding any materials. Incubate in a
constant temperature shaker (120 rpm, 37 °C) for 3 h. Finally, the
bacterial concentration of the samples was measured using standard
spread plating techniques.
Photocatalytic Antibacterial Experiment. The photocatalytic
antibacterial experiment used a solar simulator to simulate sunlight
exposure. A solar monocrystalline silicon solenoid valve was used to
calibrate the light intensity to one solar light (Zolix, Sirius-SS300A-L,
400−1076 nm, AM 1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2). Then, the material was
dispersed in 1 mL of bacterial solution, with the same concentration
(100 ppm) of material and bacterial solution (106 CFU mL−1) as in
the antibacterial experiment described above. After a period of light
exposure, immediately inoculate on LB medium, incubate, and count
using the above method. The bacterial concentration of the sample
was measured using standard coating techniques after experiencing
specific lighting conditions. The infrared camera recorded the
temperature changes of the system during the light antibacterial
experiment. This experiment is an independent experiment, and the
relevant parameters of the experiment are the same as those of the
light antibacterial experiment. Temperature recording is divided into
two stages: (i) temperature rise stage (recorded every 5 min), and (ii)
temperature drop stage (recorded every 2 min).
SEM Observation of Bacterial Morphology. Take 4 mL ofE.
colisuspension with OD600 ≈1 and add 1 mL of 500 ppm d-BN-Cu3
to it. Incubate in a constant temperature shaker (120 rpm, 37 °C) for
3 h. Take a 1 mL portion of the mixed solution, centrifuge it (12000
rpm), and and remove the supernatant. The cells were then fixed with
1 mL of 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 12 h. The cells were dehydrated with
30%, 50%, 70%, 90%, and 100% ethanol solutions. After that, it was
diluted 10-fold with anhydrous ethanol and dripped onto the silicon
wafers to dry naturally. A 1500 nm Au film was coated on the sample
surface, and the bacterial morphology was observed under SEM.
Detection of ROS. The signals of the three ROS and their
changes under light conditions were detected using EPR. A 200−2000
nm xenon lamp was used as a light source during the detection. The
samples to be tested were 500 ppm of 120 BN and d-BN-Cu3,
respectively, and the control was a solvent without any added
material. For the detection of •OH, 5,5-Dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide
(DMPO, 100 mM) was chosen as the trapping agent, and deionized
water was chosen as the solvent. The signals were determined before
and after 1 min of light exposure, respectively. For the determination
of the superoxide anion, DMPO (100 mM) was also used as the
capture agent, and methanol as the solvent. The signals were
determined before and after 1 min of light exposure, respectively. For
the determination of monoclinic states, 2,2,6,6-Tetramethyl-4-
piperidone hydrochloride (TEMP, 20 mM) was selected as the
capture agent, and deionized water was used as the solvent. The
signals were determined before and after 1 min of light exposure,
respectively. If there are parameter changes in individual experiments,
additional explanations will be provided in the caption.
Cell Culture and Cytotoxicity Assay. MCF10A (normal human
epithelial breast cell line) was purchased from Pricella Biotechnology
Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China). HPDE6-C7 (normal human pancreatic
ductal epithelial cells) was purchased from Jennio Biotech Co., Ltd.
(Guangzhou, China). BEAS-2B (normal human bronchial epithelial
cell line) was obtained from Peter Lobie’s lab. MCF10A cells were
grown in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 5% horse serum, 20 ng/mL
EGF, 0.5 μg/mL hydrocortisone, 10 pg/mL insulin, 1% NEAA, and
1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37 °C in a humidified incubator
containing 5% CO2; BEAS-2B cells were grown in DMEM medium
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37 °C
in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2; HPDE6-C7 cells were
grown in MEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1%
penicillin-streptomycin at 37 °C in a humidified incubator containing
5% CO2. A cytotoxicity assay was performed on HPDE6-C7,
MCF10A and BEAS-2B cells. In brief, 5 × 103 cells were plated in
a 96-well plate overnight, and the cell viability was measured
according to the alamarBlue (Invitrogen, DAL1025) instructions after
72 h of exposure to diluted compounds (0, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100 μg/
mL dissolved in saline) in the medium. The control groups were
cultured in medium with equal volumes of saline, and no less than
four replicate wells were set up for each group. Ten μL of alamarBlue
was added to each well, and the fluorescence was measured using an
excitation at 535 nm and an emission at 590 nm using a microplate
reader (Tecan SPARK 10M, Switzerland). All experiments were
performed in medium with 2% serum.
In Vivo Experiments. Anesthetize mice with isoflurane gas, and
shave the hair on the back area above the tail. After disinfecting the
skin, except for the control group, all other groups of mice were cut
into circular wounds with a diameter of 5 mm on their back skin. Take
a suspension ofE. coliorS. aureus(107 CFU mL−1, 10 μL) and drop it
onto a mouse wound to simulate inflammation. After 24 h of bacterial
infection in mice, a control experiment was conducted by adding
antibacterial solution (100 ppm, 100 μL) or an equal amount of
physiological saline to the wound site. At the same time, photographs
were taken every day and the wound area of each group of mice.
ImageJ image analysis software quantifies the wound area and
calculates the wound healing rate. Healing rate = (Day 0 wound area
−Day n wound area)/Day 0 wound area × 100%. On the second day
after treatment, one specimen was taken from each group for
separation of the back wound tissue and fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde solution for H&E staining.
Defect Notation. The defect notation shown in this article is
described by the following rules, which allow for an explicit and
descriptive nomenclature.
vX: vacancy of atom X
{}: denotes exposed atoms with dangling bonds on the surface
X−Y: bonding between atoms X and Y
b1-X (used as subscript): monodentate binding with surface atom
X
b2-X,Y (used as subscript): bidentate binding with surface atoms X
and Y
For example, the vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B defect denotes a
nitrogen vacancy, which results in three exposed boron atoms.
Additionally, oxygen binds to one exposed boron atom in a
monodentate fashion, Cu binds to this oxygen, and also has a
bidentate bond with two surface boron atoms. Multiple defects are
appended to the notation with a comma. For example, adding a
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42208

nitrogen substitution at a boron site to the above example would
yield: NB, vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B.
Theoretical Quantum Simulations. Calculations were carried
out using unrestricted hybrid Density Functional Theory within the
CRYSTAL23 code,44 which employs Gaussian-type orbitals (GTOs),
allowing an efficient implementation of hybrid DFT. The exchange-
correlation functional was defined using the formulation para-
meterized by Heyd, Scuseria, and Ernzerhof45 (HSE06), which was
used for all geometry optimization and single-point energy
calculations. Long-range interactions were taken into consideration
via Grimme’s third-order (−D3) dispersion corrections.46 BSSE-
corrected double-ζ with polarization (DZVP) quality basis sets were
employed for structural optimizations, and triple-ζ with polarization
(TZVP) quality basis sets were used to compute total energies and
electronic properties.47 The boron nitride layers were separated by a
distance of ≈500 Å (the default parameter for slabs in CRYSTAL23),
resulting in virtually no periodicity in the z-direction. This separation
is possible due to the use of localized Gaussian orbitals. Defect
calculations were performed in 4 × 4 and 5 × 5 supercells (defect
concentration of ≈2−4 at. %), ensuring approximately 10 Å between
defects. Extra selected calculations, shown in the Supporting
Information, were carried out in larger 6 × 6 supercells (defect
concentration of ≈1−2 at. %). All structures were fully optimized in
their atomic positions and lattice parameters. The thresholds used for
evaluating the self-consistent field energy convergence, root mean
squared (RMS) forces, maximum forces, root mean squared atomic
displacements, maximum atomic displacements, and between-
geometry convergence energies were set to 2.72 × 10−6 eV, 1.54 ×
10−2 eV/Å, 2.31 × 10−2 eV/Å, 6.35 × 10−4 Å, 9.53 × 10−4 Å, and 2.72
× 10−6 eV, respectively. Electronic spin states were allowed to relax in
the unrestricted wave function calculations. The k-points used to
compute the Hamiltonian matrix were sampled using a Pack−
Monkhorst grid with a resolution approximately between b
1 2
40
i
and
b
1 2
60
i
, where bi are reciprocal lattice vectors. On the other hand, the
density matrix and Fermi energy were computed on a denser Gilat k-
point grid, with a resolution between b
1 2
80
i
and b
1 2
120
i
. Band edges were
aligned with respect to vacuum by shifting the Fermi level relative to
the vacuum level, which is defined as the asymptotic value of the
plane-averaged electrostatic potential sufficiently far away from the
slab (approximately 50 Å). The description of the electrostatic
potential was improved by adding ghost atoms in the near vicinity of
the slabs’ outermost layers. We note that band edge positions may
shift in an experimental setting, namely, due to different pH
conditions, or charge accumulation, depletion, and inversion. In this
regard, the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levelswhich depend upon
the concentration of defects, temperature, and sample sizemight
serve as more accurate descriptors of photocatalytic activity.48
However, the calculations shown in this work serve as a guide for
understanding the underlying electronic structure that gives rise to the
experimentally observed formation of ROS.
Computational Defect Structure Generation. Defects have
the potential to form in almost any lattice position. Therefore, to
correctly describe the phenomena that occur in nature, defect
generation must be carried out in a way that spans a majority of the
defect space. To generate defective supercells computationally, we
rely on chemical information obtained by experiments and leverage
that information by taking an exhaustive approach that utilizes
symmetry to explore defect space in a computationally efficient way.
The methodology used in this work was developed by Davidsson et al.
as a module in the Atomic Simulation Environment,49 called
DefectBuilder.50 This tool allows quick generation of defective
supercells, hosting defects at different positions in the structure and
avoiding the repetition of symmetrically equivalent structures. This is
particularly useful when dealing with double defects.
Defect Stability Screening. After the structures were generated
with DefectBuilder (on the order of hundreds for this work), single-
point calculations were carried out. DFT energies for stoichiometric
structures with defects incorporated in different sites were directly
compared. The three most stable structures for each stoichiometry
were selected and their geometries were fully optimized. After these
optimizations, only the lowest-energy structure was selected and is
shown in this work.
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145.
Information about the instruments used in the experi-
ment, the reagents used in the experiment, determi-
nation of Cu content using ICP (Table S1), XPS
analysis of material element content (Table S2),
determination of Cu and K ions in the supernatant of
the mixture after sterilization by BN using ICP (Table
S3), statistical summary of EPR signals of hydroxyl
radicals in Figure 3d (Table S4), statistical summary of
EPR signals of hydroxyl radicals in Figure S12 (Table
S5), SEM images of BN, d-BN, and d-BN-Cu3 (Figure
S1), AFM images of BN, d-BN, and d-BN-Cu3 (Figure
S2), HAADF-STEM images of d-BN-Cu3 and d-BN-Cu1
(Figure S3), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
spectra of d-BN, d-BN-Cu1, d-BN-Cu2, and d-BN-Cu3
(Figure S4), FTIR signals of BN with different
cryomilling times were detected, and the transmittance
at 3400 cm−1 was statistically analyzed (Figure S5),
computational optimized geometries and DOS for defect
structures with different transition metals (Figure S6),
evaluation of the antibacterial performance of d-BN-Cu
(100 ppm) against S. aureus using the plate colony
counting method (Figure S7), HAADF-TEM image of
d-BN-Cu3 (used) and EDS mapping of d-BN-Cu3
(used) (Figure S8), effect of different cryomilling
times on the antibacterial rate of BN on E. coli and S.
aureus (Figure S9), morphology of E. coli before and
after treatment with d-BN and d-BN-Cu3 under SEM
(Figure S10), EPR analysis of the catalytic effect of
control and d-BN on •OH and •O2
−(Figure S11), the
influence of d-BN loaded with seven different transition
group metals (Cu, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Cr) on the EPR
signal of hydroxyl radicals (Figure S12), EPR analysis of
the catalytic effect of d-BN and d-BN-Cu3 on singlet
oxygen under light and no-light conditions (Figure
S13), cytotoxicity assay of d-BN-Cu for MCF10A,
BEAS-2B, and HPDE6-C7 (Figure S14), energy
comparison of defect structures: (i) vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−
Cub2‑B,B with one adsorbed Cu atom vs (ii) vN{3B}−
Ob1‑B with an absorbed Cu−Cu cluster (Figure S15),
density of states for the nitrogen vacancy defect hosted
in 5 × 5 and 6 × 6 BN supercells (Figure S16), density
of states for the vN{3B}−Ob1‑B−Cub2‑B,B defect hosted in
5 × 5 and 6 × 6 BN supercells (Figure S17), optimized
defect structures in CIF format (PDF)
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Yu Lei −Institute of Materials Research, Center of Double
Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42209

University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
orcid.org/
0000-0003-4693-7408; Email: leiy07@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Jose L. Mendoza-Cortes −Department of Chemical
Engineering & Materials Science, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States; Department of
Physics & Astronomy, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States;
orcid.org/0000-
0001-5184-1406; Email: jmendoza@msu.edu
Yingcan Zhao −Environmental Science Program, Department
of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University-Hong Kong
Baptist University United International College, Guangdong
519087, P. R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0003-3722-1248;
Email: yingcanzhao@uic.edu.cn
Authors
Wenbo Li −Institute of Materials Research, Center of Double
Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China
Daniel Maldonado-Lopez −Department of Chemical
Engineering & Materials Science, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States
Cong Wang −Institute of Materials Research, Center of
Double Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China
Jianxiang Gao −Institute of Materials Research, Center of
Double Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
orcid.org/
0009-0004-1184-1523
Bowen Sun −Institute of Biopharmaceutical and Health
Engineering, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China
Yichao Bai −Institute of Materials Research, Center of Double
Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China
Linxuan Sun −Institute of Materials Research, Center of
Double Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China
Mingchuang Zhao −Institute of Materials Research, Center of
Double Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China
Haoqi He −Institute of Materials Research, Center of Double
Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China
Jiatao Lou −Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered
Materials for Value-Added Applications, Institute of
Materials Research, Tsinghua Shenzhen International
Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P.
R. China
Qiangmin Yu −Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced
Layered Materials for Value-Added Applications, Institute of
Materials Research, Tsinghua Shenzhen International
Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P.
R. China; Shenzhen Geim Graphene Center, Tsinghua-
Berkeley Shenzhen Institute & Shenzhen International
Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P.
R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0001-8970-487X
Xi Zhang −Institute of Biopharmaceutical and Health
Engineering, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0003-4093-0897
Vijay Kumar Pandey −Institute of Biopharmaceutical and
Health Engineering, Tsinghua Shenzhen International
Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P.
R. China
Feiyu Kang −Institute of Materials Research, Center of Double
Helix, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China;
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Layered Materials for
Value-Added Applications, Institute of Materials Research,
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China; Shenzhen Geim
Graphene Center, Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute &
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, Shenzhen 518055, P. R. China
Mauricio Terrones −Department of Physics, Department of
Chemistry, Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Center for Two-Dimensional and Layered Materials, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
16802, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-0010-2851
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
Author Contributions
◆W.L. and D.M.-L. have made equal contributions. The
manuscript was written through contributions of all authors.
All authors have given approval to the final version of the
manuscript.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was financially supported by the Shenzhen Science
and Technology Program (ZDSYS20230626091100001,
JCYJ20220530142816037, RCYX20231211090318017,
KQTD20240729102211015), the Guangdong Provincial Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (2022A1515110936), the
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42210

Cross-disciplinary
Research
and
Innovation
Fund
(JC2022005) at Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate
School, the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No.52403378), the Hong Kong HKSTP & HKBU Joint
Innovation Fund (IRF24-115), the Guangdong University Key
Research Platform and Project (2024ZDZX2095),the Zhuhai
Basic
and
Applied
Basic
Research
Foundation
(2320004002479), and the UIC Start-up Research Fund
(UICR0700084-24). JLM-C acknowledges startup funds from
Michigan State University. D. M.-L. was supported by the
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
under Grant No. 2235783. This work was supported in part
through computational resources and services provided by the
Institute for Cyber-Enabled Research at Michigan State
University. All the animal experiments were conducted in
accordance with the Guide for the Care, the ethical code was
IHM-AP-2025-006-R4.
REFERENCES
(1) Zhang, Q.-Q.; Ying, G.-G.; Pan, C.-G.; Liu, Y.-S.; Zhao, J.-L.
Comprehensive Evaluation of Antibiotics Emission and Fate in the
River Basins of China: Source Analysis, Multimedia Modeling, and
Linkage to Bacterial Resistance. Environ. Sci. Technol 2015, 49 (11),
6772−6782.
(2) Ying, C.; Zhu, X.; Xiang, S.; Wang, M.; Jiang, X.; Shen, J. Metal−
Organic Framework (MOF)-Based Single-Atom Iron Catalysts for
NIR-II Enhanced Catalytic-Photothermal Synergistic Antibacterial
Therapy. ACS Appl. Nano Mater 2023, 6 (21), 19622−19631.
(3) Yu, W.; Xu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Sui, Q.; Xin, Y.; Wang, H.; Zhang, J.;
Zhong, H.; Wei, Y. An Extensive Assessment of Seasonal Rainfall on
Intracellular and Extracellular Antibiotic Resistance Genes in Urban
River Systems. J. Hazard. Mater 2023, 455, 131561.
(4) Argimón, S.; Masim, M. A. L.; Gayeta, J. M.; Lagrada, M. L.;
Macaranas, P. K. V.; Cohen, V.; Limas, M. T.; Espiritu, H. O.; Palarca,
J. C.; Chilam, J.; et al. Integrating Whole-Genome Sequencing within
the National Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Program in the
Philippines. Nat. Commun 2020, 11 (1), 2719.
(5) Deng, F.; Fan, G.; Yuan, P.; Liu, Y.; Huang, C.; Zhao, L.; Wang,
X.; Yu, X.; Cheng, H.; Li, S. A Self-Accelerated Biocatalyst for
Glucose-Initiated Tumor Starvation and Chemodynamic Therapy.
Chem. Commun 2020, 56 (93), 14633−14636.
(6) He, W.; Kim, H.-K.; Wamer, W. G.; Melka, D.; Callahan, J. H.;
Yin, J.-J. Photogenerated Charge Carriers and Reactive Oxygen
Species in ZnO/Au Hybrid Nanostructures with Enhanced Photo-
catalytic and Antibacterial Activity. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2014, 136 (2),
750−757.
(7) Zhang, E.; Zhao, X.; Hu, J.; Wang, R.; Fu, S.; Qin, G.
Antibacterial Metals and Alloys for Potential Biomedical Implants.
Bioact. Mater 2021, 6 (8), 2569−2612.
(8) Li, H.; Zhou, X.; Huang, Y.; Liao, B.; Cheng, L.; Ren, B. Reactive
Oxygen Species in Pathogen Clearance: The Killing Mechanisms, the
Adaption Response, and the Side Effects. Front. Microbiol 2021, 11,
622534.
(9) Guo, W.; Wu, C.; Li, G.; Wang, Y.; He, S.; Huang, J.; Gao, X.;
Yue, X. Mechanism Insight into the High-Efficiency Catalytic Killing
of E. Coli by Metal−Phenolic Network as a Nanozyme. RSC Adv
2024, 14 (21), 15106−15111.
(10) Xi, J.; Wei, G.; An, L.; Xu, Z.; Xu, Z.; Fan, L.; Gao, L. Copper/
Carbon Hybrid Nanozyme: Tuning Catalytic Activity by the Copper
State for Antibacterial Therapy. Nano Lett 2019, 19 (11), 7645−7654.
(11) Wang, X.; Wang, H.; Cheng, J.; Li, H.; Wu, X.; Zhang, D.; Shi,
X.; Zhang, J.; Han, N.; Chen, Y. Initiative ROS Generation of Cu-
Doped ZIF-8 for Excellent Antibacterial Performance. Chem. Eng. J.
2023, 466, 143201.
(12) Syal, B.; Kumar, P.; Gupta, P. Recent Advancements in the
Preparation and Application of Copper Single-Atom Catalysts. ACS
Appl. Nano Mater 2023, 6 (7), 4987−5041.
(13) Cao, F.; Ju, E.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, Z.; Liu, C.; Li, W.; Huang, Y.;
Dong, K.; Ren, J.; Qu, X. An Efficient and Benign Antimicrobial
Depot Based on Silver-Infused MoS2. ACS Nano 2017, 11 (5), 4651−
4659.
(14) Wei, F.; Cui, X.; Wang, Z.; Dong, C.; Li, J.; Han, X.
Recoverable Peroxidase-Like Fe3o4@Mos2-Ag Nanozyme with
Enhanced Antibacterial Ability. Chem. Eng. J. 2021, 408, 127240.
(15) Stankic, S.; Suman, S.; Haque, F.; Vidic, J. Pure and Multi
Metal Oxide Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Antibacterial and Cytotoxic
Properties. J. Nanobiotechnol 2016, 14 (1), 73.
(16) Gudz, K. Y.; Permyakova, E. S.; Matveev, A. T.; Bondarev, A.
V.; Manakhov, A. M.; Sidorenko, D. A.; Filippovich, S. Y.; Brouchkov,
A. V.; Golberg, D. V.; Ignatov, S. G.; Shtansky, D. V. Pristine and
Antibiotic-Loaded Nanosheets/Nanoneedles-Based Boron Nitride
Films as a Promising Platform to Suppress Bacterial and Fungal
Infections. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12 (38), 42485−42498.
(17) Huang, L.; Chen, J.; Gan, L.; Wang, J.; Dong, S. Single-Atom
Nanozymes. Sci. Adv 2019, 5 (5), No. eaav5490.
(18) Wu, W.; Huang, L.; Wang, E.; Dong, S. Atomic Engineering of
Single-Atom Nanozymes for Enzyme-Like Catalysis. Chem. Sci 2020,
11 (36), 9741−9756.
(19) Syal, B.; Gupta, P. Cobalt Single-Atom Catalyst: Synthesis,
Characterization and Catalytic Activity. Appl. Organomet. Chem 2024,
38 (12), No. e7734.
(20) Zhu, W.; Liu, X.; Tan, L.; Cui, Z.; Yang, X.; Liang, Y.; Li, Z.;
Zhu, S.; Yeung, K. W. K.; Wu, S. AgBr Nanoparticles in Situ Growth
on 2D MoS2 Nanosheets for Rapid Bacteria-Killing and Photo-
disinfection. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11 (37), 34364−
34375.
(21) Wu, T.; Liu, B.; Liu, C.; Wan, J.; Yang, A.; Liu, K.; Shi, F.;
Zhao, J.; Lu, Z.; Chen, G.; Pei, A.; Hwang, H. Y.; Cui, Y. Solar-Driven
Efficient Heterogeneous Subminute Water Disinfection Nanosystem
Assembled with Fingerprint MoS2. Nat. Water 2023, 1 (5), 462−470.
(22) Jung, W. S. High-Performance Bimetallic Alloy Catalyst Using
Ni and N Co-Doped Composite Carbon for the Oxygen Electro-
Reduction. J. Colloid Interface Sci 2018, 514, 30−39.
(23) Jin, Z.; Li, P.; Meng, Y.; Fang, Z.; Xiao, D.; Yu, G.
Understanding the Inter-Site Distance Effect in Single-Atom Catalysts
for Oxygen Electroreduction. Nat. Catal 2021, 4 (7), 615−622.
(24) Pandey, R. P.; Rasheed, P. A.; Gomez, T.; Rasool, K.; Ponraj, J.;
Prenger, K.; Naguib, M.; Mahmoud, K. A. Effect of Sheet Size and
Atomic Structure on the Antibacterial Activity of Nb-MXene
Nanosheets. ACS Appl. Nano Mater 2020, 3 (11), 11372−11382.
(25) Mangadlao, J. D.; Santos, C. M.; Felipe, M. J. L.; de Leon, A. C.
C.; Rodrigues, D. F.; Advincula, R. C. On the antibacterial mechanism
of graphene oxide (GO) Langmuir−Blodgett films. Chem. Commun
2015, 51 (14), 2886−2889.
(26) Fujie, T.; Saito, A.; Kinoshita, M.; Miyazaki, H.; Ohtsubo, S.;
Saitoh, D.; Takeoka, S. Dual Therapeutic Action of Antibiotic-Loaded
Nanosheets for the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Tissue Defects.
Biomaterials 2010, 31 (24), 6269−6278.
(27) Zhang, W.; Mou, Z.; Wang, Y.; Chen, Y.; Yang, E.; Guo, F.;
Sun, D.; Wang, W. Molybdenum Disulfide Nanosheets Loaded with
Chitosan and Silver Nanoparticles Effective Antifungal Activities: in
Vitro and in Vivo. Mater. Sci. Eng., C 2019, 97, 486−497.
(28) Khan, M. H.; Liu, H. K.; Sun, X.; Yamauchi, Y.; Bando, Y.;
Golberg, D.; Huang, Z. Few-Atomic-Layered Hexagonal Boron
Nitride: Cvd Growth, Characterization, and Applications. Mater.
Today 2017, 20 (10), 611−628.
(29) Pan, Y.; Zheng, H.; Li, G.; Li, Y.; Jiang, J.; Chen, J.; Xie, Q.;
Wu, D.; Ma, R.; Liu, X.; Xu, S.; Jiang, J.; Cai, X.; Gao, M.; Wang, W.;
Zuilhof, H.; Ye, M.; Li, R. Antibiotic-Like Activity of Atomic Layer
Boron Nitride for Combating Resistant Bacteria. ACS Nano 2022, 16
(5), 7674−7688.
(30) Sukhorukova, I. V.; Zhitnyak, I. Y.; Kovalskii, A. M.; Matveev,
A. T.; Lebedev, O. I.; Li, X.; Gloushankova, N. A.; Golberg, D.;
Shtansky, D. V. Boron Nitride Nanoparticles with a Petal-Like Surface
as Anticancer Drug-Delivery Systems. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2015, 7 (31), 17217−17225.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42211

(31) Zhitnyak, I. Y.; Bychkov, I. N.; Sukhorukova, I. V.; Kovalskii, A.
M.; Firestein, K. L.; Golberg, D.; Gloushankova, N. A.; Shtansky, D.
V. Effect of BN Nanoparticles Loaded with Doxorubicin on Tumor
Cells with Multiple Drug Resistance. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2017, 9 (38), 32498−32508.
(32) Lei, Y.; Pakhira, S.; Fujisawa, K.; Liu, H.; Guerrero-Bermea, C.;
Zhang, T.; Dasgupta, A.; Martinez, L. M.; Rao Singamaneni, S.; Wang,
K.; et al. Low Temperature Activation of Inert Hexagonal Boron
Nitride for Metal Deposition and Single Atom Catalysis. Mater. Today
2021, 51, 108−116.
(33) Hassan, J.; Naz, S.; Haider, A.; Raza, A.; Ul-Hamid, A.; Qumar,
U.; Haider, J.; Goumri-Said, S.; Kanoun, M. B.; Ikram, M. h-BN
Nanosheets Doped with Transition Metals for Environmental
Remediation; A DFT Approach and Molecular Docking Analysis.
Mater. Sci. Eng., B 2021, 272, 115365.
(34) Wang, J.; Ge, X.; Yin, W.; Wang, X.; Wu, Y. Precise Modulation
of the Coordination Environment of Single Cu Site Catalysts to
Regulate the Peroxymonosulfate Activation Pathway for Water
Remediation. Inorg. Chem 2024, 63 (20), 9307−9314.
(35) Jin, H.; Cui, P.; Cao, C.; Yu, X.; Zhao, R.; Ma, D.; Song, W.
Understanding the Density-Dependent Activity of Cu Single-Atom
Catalyst in the Benzene Hydroxylation Reaction. ACS Catal 2023, 13
(2), 1316−1325.
(36) Wang, Y.; Zhang, W.; Wen, W.; Yu, X.; Du, Y.; Ni, K.; Zhu, Y.;
Zhu, M. Atomically Dispersed Unsaturated Cu-N3 Sites on High-
Curvature Hierarchically Porous Carbon Nanotube for Synergetic
Enhanced Nitrate Electroreduction to Ammonia. Adv. Funct. Mater
2023, 33 (46), 2302651.
(37) Huang, W.; Mei, D.; Qin, H.; Li, J.; Wang, L.; Ma, X.; Zhu, S.;
Guan, S. Electrophoretic Deposited Boron Nitride Nanosheets-
Containing Chitosan-Based Coating on Mg Alloy for Better
Corrosion Resistance, Biocompatibility and Antibacterial Properties.
Colloids Surf., A 2022, 638, 128303.
(38) Jofré, I.; Matus, F.; Mendoza, D.; Nájera, F.; Merino, C.
Manganese-Oxidizing Antarctic Bacteria (Mn-Oxb) Release Reactive
Oxygen Species (ROS) as Secondary Mn(II) Oxidation Mechanisms
to Avoid Toxicity. Biology 2021, 10, 1004.
(39) Van Der Poel, C.; Edwards, J. N.; Macdonald, W. A.;
Stephenson, D. G. Effect of Temperature-induced Reactive Oxygen
Species Production on Excitation−Contraction Coupling in Mamma-
lian Skeletal Muscle. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol 2008, 35 (12),
1482−1487.
(40) Ali, M. F.; Muday, G. K. Reactive Oxygen Species are Signaling
Molecules that Modulate Plant Reproduction. Plant, Cell Environ
2024, 47 (5), 1592−1605.
(41) Han, C.; Li, J.; Jin, P.; Li, X.; Wang, L.; Zheng, Y. The Effect of
Temperature on Phenolic Content in Wounded Carrots. Food Chem
2017, 215, 116−123.
(42) Chen, L.; Duan, J.; Du, P.; Sun, W.; Lai, B.; Liu, W. Accurate
Identification of Radicals by In-Situ Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
in Ultraviolet-Based Homogenous Advanced Oxidation Processes.
Water Res 2022, 221, 118747.
(43) Wang, L.; Fu, Y.; Li, Q.; Wang, Z. EPR Evidence for
Mechanistic Diversity of Cu(II)/Peroxygen Oxidation Systems by
Tracing the Origin of DMPO Spin Adducts. Environ. Sci. Technol
2022, 56 (12), 8796−8806.
(44) Erba, A.; Desmarais, J. K.; Casassa, S.; Civalleri, B.; Donà, L.;
Bush, I. J.; Searle, B.; Maschio, L.; Edith-Daga, L.; Cossard, A.;
Ribaldone, C.; Ascrizzi, E.; Marana, N. L.; Flament, J.-P.; Kirtman, B.
CRYSTAL23: A Program for Computational Solid State Physics and
Chemistry. J. Chem. Theory Comput 2023, 19 (20), 6891−6932.
(45) Heyd, J.; Scuseria, G. E.; Ernzerhof, M. Hybrid functionals
based on a screened Coulomb potential. J. Chem. Phys 2003, 118
(18), 8207−8215.
(46) Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.; Krieg, H. A consistent and
accurate ab initio parametrization of density functional dispersion
correction (DFT-D) for the 94 elements H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys 2010,
132 (15), 154104.
(47) Peintinger, M. F.; Oliveira, D. V.; Bredow, T. Consistent
Gaussian Basis sets of Triple-Zeta Valence with Polarization Quality
for Solid-State Calculations. J. Comput. Chem 2013, 34 (6), 451−459.
(48) Kaufman, A. J.; Nielander, A. C.; Meyer, G. J.; Maldonado, S.;
Ardo, S.; Boettcher, S. W. Absolute band-edge energies are over-
emphasized in the design of photoelectrochemical materials. Nat.
Catal 2024, 7 (6), 615−623.
(49) Larsen, A. H.; Mortensen, J. J.; Blomqvist, J.; Castelli, I. E.;
Christensen, R.; Dulak, M.; Jacobsen, K. W. The atomic simulation
environmenta Python library for working with atoms. Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter 2017, 29 (27), 273002.
(50) Davidsson, J.; Bertoldo, F.; Thygesen, K. S.; Armiento, R.
Absorption versus adsorption: high-throughput computation of
impurities in 2D materials. npj 2D Materials and Applications 2023,
7 (1), 26.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c13145
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 42198−42212
42212