Oral delivery of Clostridium butyricum using selective antibacterial lipids for 
enhanced treatment of Fusobacterium nucleatum-associated 
intestinal diseases
Shengke Zhao a,1, Yunjian Yu a,1, Youtao Xin a, Hegang Lu a, Xiaohui Li a, Shuyu Wang b,*,  
Feihe Ma c, Hui Gao a,*
a State Key Laboratory of Separation Membranes and Membrane Processes & Key Laboratory of Hollow Fiber Membrane Materials and Membrane Processes (MOE) & 
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Hollow Fiber Membrane Materials and Processes, School of Material Science and Engineering, Tiangong University, Tiajin 300387, China 
b Cancer Molecular Diagnostics Core, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin’s Clinical Research 
Center for Cancer, Tianjin 300060, PR China
c Key Laboratory of Functional Polymer Materials of Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Institute of Polymer Chemistry and 
College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, PR China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Clostridium butyricum
Fusobacterium nucleatum
Selective antibacterial lipid
Inflammatory bowel disease
Colorectal cancer
A B S T R A C T
The gut microbiota plays a crucial role in host immune modulation and maintaining homeostasis. An abnormal 
increase in certain pathogens such as Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fn) can break homeostasis and drive the pro­
gression of various intestinal diseases. Supplementing probiotics can partially counteract these effects without 
flora disturbance. However, broad-spectrum antibacterial treatments are not compatible with probiotic therapy 
in a therapeutic system due to their non-selective damage on both probiotics and the overall gut microbiota. 
Herein, we screen and identify lauric acid (LA)-derived lipid, S12, from a combinatorial library of 12 chemically 
diverse lipids for its selective antibacterial activity against Fn over probiotic Clostridium butyricum (Cb). This lipid 
is then utilized as a single-cell carrier to orally deliver Cb (Cb@S12) for enhanced treatment of Fn-associated 
intestinal diseases. The surface arming of S12 effectively protects Cb from simulated gastric and intestinal fluids, 
thus significantly prolonging its intestinal retention in mice. Oral administration of Cb@S12 has demonstrated 
impressive therapeutic outcomes against Fn-aggravated inflammatory bowel disease and orthotopic colorectal 
cancer by selectively eliminating Fn while preserving the probiotic activity of Cb. This study introduces a robust 
approach using selectively antibacterial lipids for probiotic encapsulation, offering an antibiotic-free “probiotic- 
antagonistic” combination therapeutic strategy for intestinal diseases.
1. Introduction
The gut microbiota is a vast community of microorganisms that plays 
a pivotal role in regulating host immune responses and maintaining 
homeostasis [1,2]. Alterations in the composition of the gut microbiota, 
commonly referred to as dysbiosis, have been associated with various 
intestinal diseases [3–6]. For instance, an abnormal increase of Fuso­
bacterium nucleatum (Fn), a filamentous Gram-negative anaerobic path­
ogen of oral origin, can disrupt homeostasis and contribute to the 
progression of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and colorectal cancer 
(CRC) [7–12]. Diseased tissue-enriched Fn further drives the prosperity 
of inflammatory and immunosuppressive microenvironment, which 
drastically impedes the effectiveness of chemotherapy and immuno­
therapy [10,13]. By contrast, supplementing with beneficial microbes 
termed as “probiotics”, which possess biological therapeutic activity and 
intestinal colonization ability, can neutralize the negative effects of 
pathogens and offer valid protection against immune dysfunction 
[14–16]. Therefore, precise modulation of the gut microbiota to reduce 
specific pathogens and increase probiotics can be a potentially effective 
strategy for treating intestinal diseases. However, integrating antibac­
terial treatments with probiotic therapy into a cohesive therapeutic 
system remains challenging.
On one hand, antibiotics, which are commonly used and clinically 
recommended approaches for combating pathogens, can non-selectively 
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: wangshuyu@tiangong.edu.cn (S. Wang), huigao@tiangong.edu.cn (H. Gao). 
1 These authors contributed equally: Shengke Zhao, Yunjian Yu.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nano Today
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nanotoday
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2025.102742
Received 8 November 2024; Received in revised form 14 March 2025; Accepted 24 March 2025  
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
Available online 28 March 2025 
1748-0132/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

kill intestinal or exogenous probiotics and reduce the resilience of the 
gut microbiome, making it more susceptible to colonization by other 
pathogens [17,18]. This leads to an imbalance in the normal micro­
biome, further interfering with probiotic therapy and potentially 
causing fresh disorders such as antibiotic associated diarrhea [19–22]. 
Despite advancements in physically encapsulating probiotics with arti­
ficial coatings to protect them from broad-spectrum antibiotics, the 
undesired killing of proliferative or symbiotic probiotics may still be 
unavoidable when antibiotics are released [22]. This has led to a shift 
towards non-antibiotic antimicrobial treatments to support probiotic 
therapy. However, apart from bacteriophages, there are currently no 
highly specific antibacterial materials available to eliminate certain 
enteric pathogens, such as Fn [10,23,24]. On the other hand, achieving 
therapeutic effects with probiotics is also challenging due to their low 
bioavailability, caused by insufficient colonization in the gastrointes­
tinal tract [25,26]. To address these challenges, surface encapsulation of 
individual probiotics using functional coatings such as lipids, poly­
saccharides and polyphenol has emerged as a superior strategy to 
enhance both bioavailability and therapeutic efficacy of probiotics 
against ulcerative colitis [27,28], and CRC [29,30]. However, these 
conventional coating materials without selective bactericidal activity 
cannot put the integration of antibacterial treatments and probiotic 
therapy into practice. All above, a novel coating material that can effi­
ciently deliver probiotics while selectively kill pathogens is urgently 
needed for implementing the precise gut microbiota modulation.
To achieve this, we herein introduce a series of natural fatty acids to 
construct amphiphilic lipids with inherent antimicrobial behaviors 
against Fn. From a combinatorial library of 12 chemically lipids with 
diverse alkyl chain lengths, we screen and identify lauric acid (LA)- 
derived lipid, S12, for its selective antibacterial activity toward Fn while 
preserving the viability of Clostridium butyricum (Cb). Cb represents a 
well-established probiotic that degrades undigested dietary fiber to 
generate short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), particularly butyrate, which is 
known to promote inflammatory resolution in IBD and suppress CRC 
tumor growth by provoking anticancer immune responses [30–32]. The 
selected lipid further serves as a single-cell coating material to arm and 
orally deliver probiotic Cb for enhanced treatment of Fn-associated in­
testinal diseases (Fig. 1). We demonstrate the robust antibacterial per­
formance of S12 against Fn over Cb, and execute detailed investigations 
into the selective antibacterial mechanisms. Furthermore, S12 coating 
effectively protects Cb from the influence of gastric acid and intestinal 
fluid, thus enabling improved survivability and colonization in intestinal 
tissues. In two kinds of mouse models of Fn-associated intestinal dis­
eases, dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced IBD and orthotopic CRC, 
lipid S12-coated Cb (Cb@S12) significantly decreases the contents of 
intratumoral Fn while increasing butyric acid levels. This dual action 
effectively remodels the immune microenvironment, impeding the 
progression of colitis and suppressing the growth of CRC tumors. 
Notably, Fn-specific S12 does not adversely affect the observed species 
(OTUs) of gut microbiota, while Cb@S12 treatment significantly opti­
mizes OTUs by manipulating bacterial behaviours, thereby decreasing 
the risk of new gastrointestinal disorders. This study develops an 
“all-in-one” probiotic encapsulation approach to integrate selective 
antibacterial treatments and probiotic therapy, providing a robust 
therapeutic strategy against intestinal diseases.
2. Experimental section
2.1. General
Aladdin (Shanghai, China) supplied 1,2-dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phos­
phate (DLPA), 1,2-dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DLPC), 1,2- 
dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol) (DLPG), 1,2-dilauroyl- 
sn-glycero-3-phospho-L-serine (DLPS), methoxy polyethylene glycol 
distearoyl phosphatidylacetamide (DSPE-mPEG2000), cholesterol, and 
DSS. Energy Chemical (Shanghai, China) supplied spermine, tris-(2- 
aminoethyl)-amine, and 1,4-bis-(3-aminopropyl)-piperazine. Nile-Red 
(NR), 3,3′-dipropylthiadicarbocyanine iodide (DiSC3-5), and propi­
dium iodide (PI) was supplied by Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology 
Co., Ltd. All additional chemicals were obtained from local vendors and 
utilized without further modification. Strains of Fusobacterium nucleatum 
(Fn, ATCC 25586) and Clostridium butyricum (Cb, ATCC 19398) were 
sourced from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Bacterial 
cultures were grown using Brian heart infusion (BHI) broth (AN67L438) 
from Shanghai Life-iLab Biotech Co., Ltd and Fluid Thioglycollate me­
dium (FTB) broth from Qingdao Hope Biotechnology. CT26 cells were 
sourced from the China Type Culture Collection Center. CT26 cells were 
grown in RPMI 1640 medium (Serena) containing 10% fetal bovine 
serum (Cellmax), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (cat#60703, Yeasen; 
Shanghai, China), and maintained at 37 ◦C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. The 
lipid 1H NMR spectra were obtained with a Bruker Avance III 400 MHz 
spectrometer. LC-MS spectra of the lipids were recorded using a SCIEX 
TRIPLE QUAD 6500 + . The sample, with a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL, 
was analyzed using an electrospray ionization (ESI) source in positive 
ion mode, employing multi-reaction monitoring for scanning. Experi­
ments involving dynamic light scattering were conducted using a Zeta­
sizer Pro device from Malvern Instruments.
2.2. The general synthetic methods of lipids S8-S16 (N4, N9-diacyl 
spermines)
The general synthetic methods of S8-S16 are rely on the earlier re­
ports (Fig. S1) [33]. Take lipid S12 (N4, N9-dilauroyl spermine) as an 
example. The primary amine groups of spermine were shielded using 
ethyl trifluoroacetate (2.2 equivalents) in methanol, and the mixture 
was stirred for 18 h at ambient temperature. The solvent was completely 
evaporated under vacuum. 2.2 equivalents of lauroyl chloride with 2.5 
equivalents of triethylamine were then added to the protected spermine 
solution in dichloromethane (DCM). Deprotection was achieved by 
treatment with 1 mol/L NaOH in aqueous methanol, followed by flash 
column chromatography, yielding S12 (N4, N9-dilauroyl spermine), 
which was homogenous on silica gel thin-layer chromatography (Rf =
0.40 in CH2Cl2: MeOH: conc. aq. NH3 25:10:1 v/v/v). Before use, the 
purified S12 was mixed with 1 mol/L HCl in methanol and precipitated 
in 0 ℃. The precipitation was separated by centrifugation at 
4000 rpm/min. These target N4, N9-lipospermines were prepared in 
chloroform-d and measured on a 400 MHz spectrometer at 25 ◦C, and 
their structures were further confirmed by electrospray ionization mass 
spectrometry (ESI-MS) (Fig. S2, S8-S11).
2.3. The synthetic method of lipid N12
2.3.1. Mono-Boc-tren
The synthesis of Mono-Boc-tren followed a previous report (Fig. S1) 
[34]. A stirred solution of tris-(2-aminoethyl) amine (5.1 mL, 35 mmol) 
in 
DCM 
(30 mL), 
received 
a 
dropwise 
addition 
of 
di-tert-butyl-dicarbonate (1.2 mL, 5.5 mmol) in 30 mL DCM over the 
course of 1 h at ambient temperature. After stirring the reaction mixture 
for 17 h, the solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure, and the 
residue was dissolved in water (10 mL). The aqueous solution was 
extracted with DCM (6 × 15 mL), and the combined organic phases were 
evaporated to give the product as a viscous oil (1.25 g, 92%). The target 
Mono-Boc-tren was prepared in chloroform-d and measured on a 
400 MHz spectrometer at 25 ◦C (Fig. S3).
2.3.2. N12-Boc (tert-butyl (2-(bis(3-oxotetradecyl) amino) ethyl) 
carbamate)
A solution of 10 mmol lauric acid in 20 mL of DCM was combined 
with 
10 mmol 
of 
1-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide 
(EDC) and 10 mmol of N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS). After stirring the 
blend at ambient temperature for 30 min, Mono-Boc-tren (4.5 mmol) 
was introduced. The mixture was stirred at ambient temperature for 
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
2 

Fig. 1. Illustration of this study approach. A) Screening of LA and its derivative lipids for selective antibacterial against Fn over Cb. B) Oral delivery of the screened 
S12-coated Cb (Cb@S12) for treatment of Fn-associated intestinal diseases in mice. Cb@S12 exhibited enhanced gastrointestinal stability and intestinal retention, 
effectively delivering Cb to the sites of intestinal inflammation while selectively killing pathogenic Fn without harming Cb viability. Following the treatment, the mice 
with Fn-aggravated DSS-induced acute colitis showed recovery through decreased inflammatory factors, restoration of colonic epithelial barrier, and maintaining 
intestinal microbial homeostasis. Additionally, the mice with orthotopic CRC tumors infected with Fn exhibited tumor growth inhibition by precise modulation of the 
gut microbiota and provoking antitumor immune responses, evidenced by increased CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, and M1 macrophages.
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
3 

16 h and then quenched by the addition of saturated NaHCO3 solution 
(20 mL). The aqueous phase was extracted with DCM (3 × 20 mL) and 
concentrated in vacuo. The crude product was purified by column 
chromatography using a DCM/MeOH (20:1) eluent. The target product 
N12 was prepared in chloroform-d and measured on a 400 MHz spec­
trometer at 25 ◦C (Fig. S3).
2.3.3. N12 (1,1′-((2-aminoethyl) azanediyl) bis (tetradecan-3-one))
The intermediate N12-Boc (0.1 mmol) was treated with 3 mL 4 M 
HCl in dioxane at 0 ◦C, followed by stirring at ambient temperature for 
3 h. Afterward, the solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure, and 
the product was isolated using column chromatography with a DCM/ 
MeOH (10:1) eluent. The target product N12 was prepared in 
chloroform-d and measured on 400 MHz spectrometer at 25 ◦C, and the 
structure was further confirmed by ESI-MS (Fig. S3).
2.4. The synthetic method of lipid P12
A solution of 10 mmol LA in 20 mL of DCM was combined with 
10 mmol each of EDC and NHS. After stirring the blend at ambient 
temperature for 10 minutes, 4.5 mmol of 1,4-bis(3-aminopropyl) 
piperazine was introduced. The resulting mixture was stirred at 
ambient temperature for 16 h and then quenched by the addition of 
saturated 20 mL of NaHCO3 solution. The aqueous phase was then 
extracted with DCM (3 × 20 mL) and concentrated in vacuo. The crude 
product was purified by column chromatography using a DCM/MeOH 
(10:1) eluent. The target product P12 was prepared in chloroform-d and 
measured on a 400 MHz, and the structure was further confirmed by 
ESI-MS (Fig. S4).
2.5. Preparation of nano-lipids and Cb@S12
The nano-lipid formulation of LA was prepared as the following 
method. A 10 mg of LA was dissolved in 5 mL of 0.1 M NaOH aqueous 
solution. Subsequently, 0.1 M HCl was added to set the pH to 7.4, and 
water was added to achieve a final volume of 10 mL. 1 mg/mLof LA 
solution was subjected to sonication to form nano-lipids, and then dia­
lyzed inPBS (pH 7.4, 0.01 M) before use.
The other lipids were dissolved in 2 mL of methanol and chloroform 
(1:3 ratio). The resultant solution was dried at room temperature using a 
rotary evaporator, resulting in a lipid film. The film was then diluted in 
PBS to form nano-lipids. The solution was pressed once using a sequence 
of filters (1.2, 0.8, 0.45, and 0.22 μm). For Nile Red-labeled coating, Nile 
Red was pre-dissolved in the chloroform solution.
The preparation of Cb@S12 followed a previously reported method 
[27]. The purified lipid S12, cholesterol, and mPEG2000-DSPE were 
dissolved in 2 mL of chloroform at a 16:4:1 molar ratio. The obtained 
film containing 50 μg of S12 was hydrated in 1 mL of bacterial solution, 
vortexed for 15 min, and then stored at 4 ◦C for further characterization. 
FITC-labeled coating was prepared by co-assembling with FITC-m­
PEG2000-DSPE instead of mPEG2000-DSPE. The FITC-labeled lipid 
coating was examined using flow cytometry (BD Accuri® C6 Plus, USA).
2.6. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum bactericidal 
concentration (MBC) assays
MIC and MBC assays were conducted following a reported method 
with minor modifications [35]. To prepare the working suspension (1 ×
108 CFU, OD600 ≈0.107), bacteria in the logarithmic growth phase were 
diluted in BHI broth to achieve a concentration of 1 × 107 CFU/mL. The 
S8-S16 nano-lipid aqueous solution was serially diluted two-fold in BHI 
broth to achieve a concentration of 5–100 μg/mL in a 96-well plate 
(Bioland). A 100 μL aliquot of bacterial suspension was dispensed into 
each well, followed by an 18 h incubation at 37 ◦C. The optical density 
at 600 nm was then measured with a microplate reader. BHI broth 
without bacteria served as the blank control, while BHI broth with 
bacterial suspension served as the positive control. The percentage of 
bacterial cell survival was calculated according to the equation: 
%Cell Growth = ODsample −ODblank
ODpositive −ODblank
×
100% 
Following the MIC assay, 5 μL of the bacterial suspension from wells 
without visible growth was spread onto blood agar plates (AN62L716, 
Life-iLab, China). These plates were subsequently kept at 37 ◦C for 18 h. 
The ultimate MBC value was established by visually evaluating the 
viability on bacteria survival.
2.7. Disc-diffusion test
Antibacterial efficacy of the S12 was investigated against Fn and Cb. 
The bacteria were cultured on BHI agar in an anaerobic chamber at 
37◦C. The grown colonies following the incubation period were har­
vested and dispensed in 5 mL of brucella broth. Turbidity of the sus­
pension was adjusted to an equivalent bacterial concentration of 
1 × 108 CFU/mL. The sterilized membrane discs, with and without the 
impregnation of S12, were then firmly placed on BHI agar which had 
been smeared with 100 µL of 1 × 108 CFU/mL bacteria. The agar plates 
were incubated anaerobically at 37◦C. And the diameter of the inhibi­
tion zones was measured using a ruler.
2.8. Bacterial morphology observation
Bacteria in the logarithmic phase of growth were rinsed with PBS 
three times, and then diluted to a concentration of 1 × 108 CFU/mL. The 
nano-lipids (S8-S16) solution was added to achieve a final concentration 
at 100 μg/mL and then incubated at 37 ◦C for 12 h. Post-incubation, the 
bacteria were centrifuged and washed with PBS three times. The bac­
teria were subsequently preserved in 4% glutaraldehyde in PBS at 4 ℃ 
for overnight. Following three PBS rinses, the bacteria underwent 
dehydration using a serious of ethanol concentrations (30%, 50%, 70%, 
80%, 90%, 95% and 100%). The dried specimens were air-dried and 
then coated with gold for analysis using scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM, JSM-6700F).
2.9. Confocal microscopy imaging of bacteria
Bacteria in the logarithmic phase of growth were washed with PBS 
three times, and diluted to a concentration of 1 × 108 CFU/mL with PBS. 
Nano-lipids in PBS and 10 μL of Nile Red (5 mg/mL) were added into 
1 mL of the bacterial suspension, achieving a final concentration of 
lipids S8-S16 at 100 μg/mL. The suspension was incubated at 37 ◦C in 
the dark for 2 h, and then 20 μL of DAPI (1 mg/mL) was added and the 
mixture was incubated for an hour at 37 ◦C in the dark. The bacteria 
were then imaged using confocal microscopy (Olympus-FV3000).
2.10. Cytoplasmic membrane depolarization assay
Bacteria in the logarithmic phase of growth were washed three times 
with HEPES buffer (B115V0, BasalMedia Co., Ltd), and diluted in HEPES 
buffer (5 mM HEPES, 20 mM glucose) containing 0.1 M KCl to 2 × 108 
CFU/mL. Then, DiSC3-5 was added to the suspension with a final con­
centration of 1.5 μM and the suspension was incubated for 1 h. Then, 
1.8 mL of the suspension was transferred to a cuvette and the fluores­
cence intensity was detected by fluorescence spectroscopy (Perkin FL 
6500, excitation wavelength = 622 nm, emission wavelength =
670 nm), ensuring it remained nearly constant. Next, 0.2 mL of nano- 
lipid aqueous solution was added to achieve the desired concentra­
tion, and fluorescence signals were recorded immediately.
2.11. Cytoplasmic membrane permeabilization assay
Bacteria in the logarithmic phase of growth were washed three times 
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
4 

with HEPES buffer (5 mM HEPES, 20 mM glucose), and diluted in the 
same buffer to achieve a concentration of 2 × 108 CFU/mL. The bacte­
rial suspension was treated with propidium iodide (PI) to reach a final 
concentration of 10 μM, followed by a 5-minute incubation period. 
Subsequently, 1.8 mL of the mixture was placed into a cuvette, and the 
fluorescence intensity was measured using fluorescence spectroscopy 
(excitation wavelength = 535 nm; emission wavelength = 617 nm), 
confirming that it remained nearly constant. Then, 0.2 mL of nano-lipid 
aqueous solution was introduced to reach the target concentration, and 
fluorescence signals measurements were taken immediately.
2.12. Outer membrane permeabilization assay
1-N-phenyl-naphthylamine (NPN) was used as a fluorescent probe 
(excitation wavelength = 350 nm, emission wavelength = 420 nm). The 
procedure was the same as the cytoplasmic membrane permeabilization 
assay.
2.13. Stability of Cb@S12 in simulated gastrointestinal fluids
Simulated gastric fluid (SGF) and simulated intestinal fluid (SIF) 
were prepared following the method described in the reference [28]. To 
prepare SGF, pepsin (3.2 g), NaCl (2.0 g), and concentrated HCl 
(7.0 mL) were mixed into 1.0 L of ddH2O, then the pH was adjusted to 
2.0 using 0.1 M HCl solution. To prepare SIF, KH2PO4 (6.8 g), NaOH 
(0.2 mol/L, 77.0 mL), and trypsin (10.0 g) were mixed into 450.0 mL of 
dd H2O and the pH was adjusted to 6.8 using 0.1 M HCl solution. SGF 
and SIF were ultimately filtered by 0.22 μm membrane filters. To eval­
uate the protective properties of the S12 coating, identical quantities of 
Cb and Cb@S12 (1 × 108 CFU) were incubated in SGF or SIF (1.0 mL). 
After incubation at 37 ◦C with shaking at 220 rpm for predetermined 
periods, the gradient-diluted Cb and Cb@S12 were spread onto blood 
agar plates. After incubating at 37 ◦C for 12 h, the colony counts were 
recorded.
2.14. Intestinal retention of Cb@S12
In order to evaluate the in vivo distribution of Cb@S12, BLAB/c mice 
were randomly assigned to two groups each group consisting 9. 
Following a 12 h fast, the mice in the Cb group were received an oral 
gavage of DiR-labeled Cb (1 × 108 CFU), while those in the Cb@S12 
group were fed with DiR-labeled Cb coated with S12 (1 × 108 CFU) by 
oral gavage. The gastrointestinal tracts of the mice in each group were 
collected for in vivo imaging (PerkinElmer IVIS spectrum) at 3, 6, and 
12 h post-administration.
2.15. Therapeutic efficacy against DSS-induced acute colitis aggravated 
by Fn
The acute colitis model was established based on the previously re­
ported method [9]. Briefly, male BLAB/c aged 6–8 weeks, were treated 
by oral gavage with 0.2 mL Fn (1 × 108 CFU/mouse) or with 0.2 mL PBS 
per day for a week, and were treated with 3% DSS or sterile drinking 
water for another week. Subsequently, the mice were divided into 
various treatment groups at random, with each group containing 5 mice, 
and given PBS, S12, Cb, or Cb@S12 (1 × 108 CFU/mouse/day) orally for 
a duration of 7 days. The colon and cecum were collected and preserved 
in 4% formalin for histological examination. On the last day of the 
treatment experiment, the feces of the mice were collected for analysis, 
and the colon length was recorded. The samples were rapidly frozen 
using dry ice, allowing for the analysis of the bacterial abundance 
through 16S rDNA sequencing and the measurement of short-chain fatty 
acid (SCFA) via gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS, Agi­
lent GC-MS/MS 7000 C).
The evaluation methods followed previously reported protocols [28, 
36,37]. Each mouse’s colon was preserved in 4% paraformaldehyde for 
two days. Following paraffin embedding, the tissues were sliced into 5 
μm sections and stained with hematein and eosin (H&E, H&E dye so­
lution, Keygen BioTECH) according to standard protocols. The colon 
histology was assessed using the scoring criteria detailed in table S1. The 
histological score was calculated by adding the inflammation, lesion 
depth, and crypt damage scores, then multiplying the sum by the lesion 
area score.
Standard protocols were followed for conducting immunohisto­
chemistry and immune-fluorescence staining. Colon samples were 
treated with pepsin (0.2 mg/mL) at 37 ◦C for 10 min to expose antigens 
and then blocked with a blocking solution at room temperature for 1 h. 
Subsequently, the samples were incubated with primary antibodies 
overnight at 4 ◦C, including anti-MPO (diluted 1:200, 58495–1, Sig­
nalway Antibody), anti-ZO-1 (diluted 1:200, zen-bioscience), and anti- 
Occludin (diluted 1:200, Abinscience). After three 5-minute PBS 
washes, immunohistochemical staining was performed using a horse­
radish peroxidase-streptavidin detection system. In immunofluores­
cence tests, the samples were treated with secondary antibodies labeled 
with either FITC (AN62L716, Life-iLab, China) or Cy3. Following three 
rinses with PBS, the samples were treated with DAPI (5 μg/mL) at 
ambient temperature for 1 h in darkness. The samples were visualized 
with a fluorescence microscope, and the fluorescence intensities were 
measured using ImageJ software.
2.16. Therapeutic efficacy against Fn-associated orthotopic CRC tumor
In the orthotopic implantation model, BALB/c mice received in­
jections of luciferase-labeled CT26 cells (2.0 × 106 in 50 μL of a PBS and 
GelNest™ Matrix glue (NEST Biotechnology) at a 1:1 ratio) into their 
cecum walls. Mice were orally administrated with 1 × 108 CFU Fn daily 
for 4 days prior to the start of various treatments and randomly divided 
into four groups with five mice in each group. Subsequently, PBS, S12, 
Cb, or Cb@S12 (1 × 108 CFU/mouse/day) were administered by oral 
gavage every two days. The tumor burden was monitored by biolumi­
nescent analysis using an IVIS imager (PerkinElmer) with intraperito­
neal (i.p.) injection with 100 μL of D-luciferin potassium salt (CI0002, 
CYTOCH, 10 mg/mL). Upon the concluding of the treatment, the mice 
were euthanized and specimens were gathered for histological analysis. 
To assess the biocompatibility of S12, Cb, and Cb@S12, H&E staining 
outcomes of the heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney were analyzed. 
Mouse feces were gathered for examination. Samples were rapidly 
frozen using dry ice for later transport to analyze bacterial abundance 
through 16S rDNA sequencing and measure SCFA levels via GC-MS.
2.17. Cytokine assay
The treated mice were euthanized, and one microliter of blood was 
collected from each mouse via the eye socket. The samples were placed 
in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes (BaiDi Biotechnology Co., Ltd.(BDBIO)) 
without EDTA and incubated at 37 ◦C for 30 min. Serum was separated 
by centrifuging at 3000 × g for 5 min, and levels of IL-6, TNF-α and IFN- 
γ were measured using commercial ELISA kits from Neobioscience 
Technology Co, Ltd. Using an electric homogenizer, the tumor tissue was 
blended in chilled PBS. The mixtures were spun at 5000 g for 10 minutes 
at 4 ◦C, and the resulting supernatants were diluted to half their original 
concentration. The level of IFN-γ was also detected by the ELISA kits.
2.18. Blood routine and blood chemistry analysis
BALB/c male mice were orally administrated with PBS, Cb@S12 (1 ×
108 CFU/mouse/day) by every two days for a week. The blood of the 
mice was collected and stored in anti-coagulation tubes. The blood 
routine indexes including the populations/concentrations of red blood 
cells (RBC), white blood cells (WBC), hemoglobin (HGB), and platelets 
(PLT), and the blood chemistry tests including the levels of alanine 
transaminase 
(ALT), 
aspartate 
transaminase 
(AST), 
alkaline 
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
5 

phosphatase (ALP), urea (UREA), and creatinine (CREA), were analyzed 
by Wuhan Servicebio Technology Co., Ltd.
2.19. Statistical analysis
The data were indicated as the mean ±SD. Sample size (n ≥3) for 
each statistical analysis. A statistical analysis was performed using 
GraphPad Prism 9.5 software. The differences between unpaired two- 
tailed Students’ t-test are used for comparison of two groups, and the 
differences among the treatment groups were analyzed using an analysis 
of variance (ANOVA) followed by the post-Turkey comparison tests. The 
differences with * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001 were 
considered to be statistically significant, and ns means no significance.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Screening of selective antibacterial lipids against Fn over Cb
To identify a lipid-based selective antibacterial coating material for 
probiotic delivery, we initially tested the antibacterial properties of LA 
and seven LA-derived lipids against Fn and Cb, these included four 
commercially available lipids 1,2-dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphate 
(DLPA), 1,2-dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol) (DLPG), 
1,2-dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-L-serine (DLPS), and 1,2-dilauroyl- 
sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DLPC) and three synthesized N-dilauroyl 
lipids (S12, N12, and P12, Fig. S1). The selection of these synthetic lipids 
is based on the consideration that N-substituted amide formation 
generally increases the bactericidal activity of fatty acid [38]. The 1H 
NMR and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) results 
confirmed the successful synthesis of S12, N12 and P12 (Fig. S2-S4). 
Amphiphilic LA is prepared as a nano-lipid aqueous solution at pH 7.4, 
where LA-derived lipids self-assemble into nanostructures using the thin 
film hydration method in aqueous solution at the same pH. The results 
from dynamic light scattering (DLS) and the zeta potential analyzer 
confirmed that their size and zeta potential are consistent with a stable 
nano-lipid solution (Fig. S5). The antibacterial activities of these lipids 
against Fn and Cb were evaluated by determining their MIC and MBC. As 
shown in Fig. S6 and S7, LA exhibited significant antibacterial properties 
against both Fn and Cb, with MICs of 25 μg/mL and 15 μg/mL, and MBCs 
of 50 μg/mL and 25 μg/mL, respectively. However, no obvious anti­
bacterial performance was observed in the commercial LA-derived 
lipids, including DLPA, DLPG, DLPS, and DLPC. Interestingly, the syn­
thesized N-acyl LA-derived lipids S12, N12 and P12 demonstrated se­
lective antibacterial activity against Fn over Cb, highlighting their 
potential for single-cell coating and delivery of Cb. Among them, S12 
exhibited the best antibacterial properties against Fn, with a MIC of 
10 μg/mL and with a MBC of 25 μg/mL. Therefore, S12 was chosen as 
the ideal lipid for further investigations.
3.2. The selective antibacterial mechanism of S12
The above results encourage us to further investigate the potential 
selective antibacterial mechanism of S12. Numerous studies have sug­
gested that antibacterial free fatty acids (FFA) target the bacterial cell 
membrane and disrupt various essential processes occurring within and 
at the membrane [39]. Some of the detrimental effects on bacterial cells 
are attributed to the detergent properties of FFAs. Due to their amphi­
pathic structure (e.g., the head groups and the length of the aliphatic 
chains), FFAs can interact with the cell membrane and create transient 
or permanent pores of variable sizes [39]. We hypothesized that the 
antibacterial mechanism of S12 is similar to that of FFAs. To gain further 
insight into this mechanism, we synthesized four additional N4, 
N9-diacyl spermines (Fig. 2A, Fig. S1) with varying lengths of saturated 
fatty acids (S8, S10, S14, and S16) for comparison to S12. The results 
from 1H NMR and ESI-MS confirmed the successful synthesis of S8-S16 
(Fig. S8-S11).
The antibacterial effects of S8-S16 against Fn and Cb was assessed by 
determining the MIC and MBC (Fig. 2B and C, Fig. S12 and S13). 
Interestingly, S8 and S10 demonstrated strong antibacterial abilities, 
while S16 showed poor antibacterial properties against both Fn and Cb. 
In contrast, S12 and S14 exhibited notable antibacterial performance 
against Fn but had poor effects against Cb. Notably, S12 possessed the 
best inhibitory and bactericidal efficiency against Fn, with MIC and MBC 
values two-fold lower than those of S14. We then observed changes in 
bacteria membrane morphology after treatment with S8-S16 using 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). As shown in Fig. 2D, more lipids 
attached to Fn membranes after S8-S14 treatments compared to S16, 
which caused the membranes to shrink and become destroyed, indi­
cating strong antibacterial performance. In contrast, the membranes of 
Fn remained intact following S16 treatment, suggesting minimal dam­
age. For Cb, as shown in Fig. 2E, S8-S10 treatments destroyed cell 
membranes, while relatively complete membrane structures were 
observed after S12-S16 treatments, implying no significant damage. 
These results suggest that, despite having similar spermine structures, 
S8-S16 exhibited different interactions with the bacteria membrane of 
Fn and Cb. It appears that S8-S14 acted like detergents on Fn membranes 
due to the appropriate lengths of fatty acids, while Cb membranes 
resisted interactions with S12-S16.
Subsequently, we used confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) to 
investigate the effect of S8-S16 on the bacterial membrane. Nano-lipids 
formulated from S8-S16 were labelled with Nile-Red (NR), a lipophilic 
dye that stains cytoplasmic lipids with red fluorescence [40], and the 
bacteria were labelled with DAPI. As shown in Fig. 2F and Fig. S14A, 
when NR-labeled S8-S14 were incubated with Fn, clear red signals were 
observed in the bacteria core merging with DAPI. This indicates that 
S8-S14 affected the permeability of the Fn membrane, allowing NR to 
enter. In comparison, S12-S16 had little effect on the membrane 
permeability of Cb, as indicated by the weak red signals in the core 
(Fig. 2G and Fig. S14B). These results demonstrate that S12 nano-lipids 
exhibit optimal inhibitory and bactericidal efficacy against Fn, while 
having no effects on Cb. Therefore, S12 was chosen as a model molecule 
for further study.
To further understand the selective antibacterial mechanism of S12 
against Fn over Cb, we measured the cytoplasmic membrane depolari­
zation and bacterial membrane permeabilization at their MIC. The 
membrane-potential-sensitive dye (3,3′-dipropylthiadicarbocyanine io­
dide) (DiSC3-5) was used to determine with the cytoplasmic membrane 
depolarization ability of S12 [41]. The DiSC3-5 potentiometric probe 
functions by accumulating in the cytoplasmic membrane and aggre­
gating at high concentrations, which subsequently causes fluorescence 
quenching [42]. The depolarization of the cytoplasmic membrane cau­
ses DiSC3-5 to migrate to the cytoplasm, resulting in an increase in 
fluorescence emission intensity. As shown in Fig. 2H, a significant in­
crease in fluorescence intensity was observed after incubating Fn with 
S12 at its MIC (10 μg/mL) for 3 h, indicating membrane depolarization. 
In contrast, the fluorescence intensity remained stable when Cb was 
incubated with S12 at 100 μg/mL for 3 h, suggesting no membrane 
depolarization for Cb, likely due to resistance to S12 nano-lipids.
Propidium iodide (PI) was then used as a fluorescent probe to assess 
cytoplasmic membrane permeabilization [43]. As shown in Fig. 2I, a 
significant increase in PI fluorescence was observed in Fn when exposed 
to S12 nano-lipids, indicating substantial cytoplasmic membrane dam­
age. Conversely, S12 nano-lipids had little effect on the cytoplasmic 
membrane of Cb. Since Fn is Gram-negative, it possesses an outer 
membrane structure different from the Gram-positive Cb. The fluores­
cent probe [1-(N-phenylamino) naphthalene] (NPN) was utilized to 
evaluate the permeabilization ability of the outer membrane. An intact 
outer membrane blocks NPN from binding to the hydrophobic tail of 
phospholipids unless the outer membrane is damaged [44]. The results 
showed that S12 could permeabilize the outer membrane of Fn (Fig. 2J). 
In summary, S12 significantly increased the membrane permeability of 
Fn in both the outer membrane and cytoplasmic membrane (inner 
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
6 

Fig. 2. Screening of selective antibacterial lipid against Fn over Cb with mechanism exploration. A) The molecular formulars of lipids S8-S16. B, C) The list of lipids 
S8-S16 with MIC and MBC when incubated with Fn or Cb. D-G) SEM D, E) and CLSM F, G) images of Fn D, F) and Cb E, G) treated with S8-S16 nano-lipids. H-J) 
Assessment of bacterial membrane integrity with S12 (n = 3). H) Cytoplasmic membrane depolarization of Fn and Cb treated with S12 nano lipids. I) Cytoplasmic 
membrane permeability of Fn and Cb following treatment with S12 nano-lipids. J) Outer membrane permeability of Fn following treatment with S12 nano-lipids at 
MIC. K) Schematic illustration showing the potential selective antibacterial mechanism of S12 against Fn over Cb. * *P < 0.01, * **P < 0.001.
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
7 

membrane), whereas the membrane integrity of Cb remained intact even 
in the presence of S12 at 100 μg/mL (Fig. 2K). These results were further 
confirmed by the disc-diffusion method (Fig. S15) and acridine orange 
(AO)/ethidium bromide (EB) staining (Fig. S16)
As demonstrated by the experimental data presented above, Cb 
possessed a more robust bacterial membrane in comparison to Fn, which 
protects it from the antibacterial effects of S12. This resistance may be 
attributed to the thick peptidoglycan layer characteristic of Cb, a Gram- 
positive bacterium belonging to the phylum Firmicutes/Bacillota [45]. 
The experimental results indicated that S12 had no effect on the bac­
terial membrane integrity of Cb and does not inhibit its growth (Fig. 3G). 
In addition, the proper alkane chain length of spermine contributed to 
the stability of the Cb membrane, as S12-S16 did not inhibit its growth 
even at concentrations up to 500 μg/mL. In contrast, Fn, a 
Gram-negative bacterium classified within the phylum Fusobacteriota, 
possessed a thinner bacterial membrane compared to Gram-positive 
Fig. 3. Formulation of Cb@S12 for protection against gastrointestinal fluids and enhanced retention in intestinal tract. A) Schematic illustration of the formulation of 
S12-coated Cb via biointerfacial self-assembly. B) The presence of the S12 coating grants Cb robust resistance to various harsh gastrointestinal conditions and imparts 
selective antibacterial activity against Fn. C) Size distribution and Zeta potential of Cb and Cb@S12 measured by DLS. Data are presented as the means ± SD (n = 3). 
D) Flow cytometric analysis of Cb with FITC-labeled S12 coating. Unlabeled Cb were used as controls. e TEM images of Cb and Cb@S12 (scale bar: 1 μm). F) SEM 
images of Cb and Cb@S12 (scale bar: 2 μm). G) Growth curves of Cb and Cb@S12 cultured in BHI medium at 37 ◦C and the OD600 was recorded. H) SEM images of Cb 
and Cb@S12 following 0.5 h incubation period in SGF (scale bar: 2 μm). I) Total amounts of Cb and Cb@S12 after incubation in SGF at different time points (n = 5, 
***P < 0.001). J) SEM images of Cb@S12 incubated in SIF for 1 and 4 h (scale bar: 2 μm). K) Total amounts of Cb and Cb@S12 after incubation in SIF at different 
time points (n = 5). L) Spread plates of Cb and Cb@S12 after incubation in SGF for 2 h and incubation in SIF for 4 h. M) Representative images of the digestive tract at 
different time points after oral gavage of an identical number (1 × 108 CFU) of Cb and Cb@S12 (n = 3).
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
8 

bacteria [46], which facilitated the penetration of S12 lipids. The 
experimental findings further demonstrate that both the bacterial outer 
and plasma membranes of Fn are susceptible to S12 lipids, which can 
interfere with or disrupt membrane function. Since cell wall integrity is 
essential for bacterial viability, its compromise leads to catastrophic 
osmotic rupture and loss of cellular contents [47].
3.3. Formulation of S12-coated Cb for protection against harsh conditions
Encouraged by the selective antibacterial performance of S12, we 
further utilized it as a single-cell coating to protect Cb from the harsh 
gastrointestinal environment (Figs. 3A and 3B). S12-coated Cb 
(Cb@S12) was formulated by vortex mixing Cb with S12, cholesterol, 
and DSPE-mPEG2000 in PBS buffer at a ratio of 16:4:1. The positively 
charged S12 was expected to self-assemble on the negatively charged 
surface of Cb. To confirm the success of the S12 coating, the sizes and 
zeta potential of Cb and Cb@S12 were measured. As shown in Fig. 3C, 
the zeta potential increased from −22.26 ± 1.21 mV to −11.81 
± 0.85 mV after S12 coating, attributed to the introduction of positively 
charged amino groups. The coatings were then labeled with fluorescein 
isothiocyanate (FITC) through the co-assembly of S12 with FITC- 
modified lipid (FITC-DSPE-mPEG2000, 10% molar ratio). Flow cytom­
etry analysis (Fig. 3D) and images of CLSM (Fig. S17) showed a dramatic 
increase in fluorescence intensity in Cb@S12 compared to uncoated Cb, 
also confirming the presence of the coating membranes. Further verifi­
cation of the successful S12 coating was performed by assessing the 
morphologies of Cb and Cb@S12 using transmission electron micro­
scopy (TEM) and SEM. TEM and SEM images revealed a clear extra outer 
shell on the coated bacteria (Fig. 3E and F). Additionally, Cb@S12 
retained their ability to grow and divide when incubated in culture 
media. As shown in Fig. 3G, Cb@S12 exhibited a significant delay in 
growth in BHI media (pH = 7.4) at 37◦C compared to uncoated Cb, likely 
due to the release of the S12 coating layer. These results collectively 
demonstrate that S12 can effectively coat and protect Cb, allowing it to 
maintain its viability and function under adverse conditions. This pro­
tective coating with selective antibacterial properties against Fn shows 
promise for enhancing the delivery and efficacy of probiotic Cb in 
treating intestinal diseases.
Then we assessed the survival and growth of Cb@S12 in the harsh 
gastrointestinal tract environment, which is crucial prior to their suc­
cessful colonization in the intestine [27,28]. Solutions of SGF (pH 2.0) 
and SIF (pH 6.8) were prepared to culture Cb and Cb@S12. After 0.5 h of 
incubation in SGF, the SEM images in Fig. 3H exhibited significant 
damage to the Cb membrane, whereas Cb@S12 remained relatively 
undamaged. These results suggested that the coating of S12 was able to 
ensure the survive of Cb in SGF condition, which was also confirmed by 
the plate counting method. As shown in Fig. 3I and L, Cb@S12 almost 
survived after 2 h, whereas the uncoated Cb failed to survive after 2 h 
incubation in SGF. These results demonstrate the protective efficacy of 
Cb@S12 in SGF conditions, matching the time probiotics need to pass 
through the stomach and reach the intestine. Then both Cb and Cb@S12 
showed good retention and growth in the SIF conditions, as demon­
strated in Fig. 3K and L. The SEM images exhibited that Cb@S12 had a 
coarse texture at 1 h but after 4 h incubation in SIF, it returned to a 
smooth surface (Fig. 3J), likely due to the release of the S12 coating 
layer. The overall levels of Cb@S12 in the 1–4 h period were slightly less 
than those of Cb, attributed to the shielding effect of S12, though no 
notable difference was observed (Fig. 3K). The findings suggest that the 
S12 coating layer successfully preserves the bioavailability of the pro­
biotics in a simulated gastrointestinal environment.
To assess the biosafety profile of Cb@S12, male BALB/c mice were 
subjected to blood biochemistry and routine hematological analyses. As 
shown in Fig. S19A, the populations/concentrations of RBC, WBC, HGB 
and PLT in Cb@S12-treated mice exhibited negligible changes compared 
to those treated with PBS. Similarly, as shown in Fig. S19B, the levels of 
ALT, AST, ALP, UREA, and CREA in Cb@S12-treated mice also exhibited 
negligible changes compared with the PBS-treated group. These results 
suggest that Cb@S12 did not induce acute inflammation or significant 
systemic toxicity.
Next, the intestinal retention capacity of Cb@S12 was studied to 
assess the protective effect of S12 in vivo. Cb were pre-labeled with DiR 
and then Cb and Cb@S12 were administered by oral gavage (i.g.). 
Fluorescence imaging was used to observe the distribution of bacteria in 
the intestine after sacrificing mice at various time points. As shown in 
Fig. 3M and Fig. S18, more Cb were present in the small intestine after 
Cb@S12 administration compared to free Cb at 3 h. Within 6 h of oral 
gavage, most of the free Cb had been cleared by the digestive system, 
while the fluorescence intensity of Cb@S12 in the intestine remained 
higher. Even after 12 h, most of the Cb@S12 remained in the cecum and 
the large intestine with strong fluorescence intensity. These experi­
mental results demonstrate that Cb@S12 significantly extends the in­
testinal retention of Cb. The in vivo survival of Cb@S12 strongly supports 
their potential as enhanced therapeutics for intestinal disease treatment.
3.4. Therapeutic efficacy of Cb@S12 on Fn-aggravated DSS-induced 
acute colitis
To verify the feasibility and superiority of probiotic therapy inte­
grated with selective antibacterial treatment, we first assessed the 
therapeutic efficacy of Cb@S12 in alleviating intestinal inflammation 
associated with IBD. IBD, which includes ulcerative colitis (UC) and 
Crohn’s disease (CD), is a severe condition linked to an aberrant immune 
response and gut microbiota disturbance [48]. Research has shown that 
Fn is enriched in IBD patients and exacerbates DSS-induced experi­
mental colitis by impairing the intestinal epithelial barrier and trig­
gering abnormal inflammation [7–9,11]. Because of the similarity in 
pathological features between mouse acute colitis and human ulcerative 
colitis, DSS-induced acute colitis is one of the most commonly used 
models for the simulation of intestinal diseases in vivo. In our study, Fn 
was administered to mice using the DSS-induced acute colitis model 
(Fig. 4A). The mice received a daily gavage of Fn (1 × 108 CFU) for 7 
days before the oral administration of 3% DSS. This caused damage to 
the intestinal epithelial cells, leading to the invasion of Fn and subse­
quent intestinal inflammation and diarrhea. The Fn-DSS treated mice 
were then randomly divided into four groups and orally gavaged with 
PBS, S12, Cb, and Cb@S12. Additionally, a group of DSS-treated mice 
without Fn was included to demonstrate the specific effect of Fn.
As shown in Fig. 4B, the greatest decrease in body weight was 
observed in the Fn-DSS-treated group, which experienced more weight 
loss than the DSS-treated group. Treatment with S12 resulted in a slight 
change of body weight, suggesting a limited therapeutic effect of the 
coating materials, indicating that antibacterial treatment alone is 
insufficient to control intestinal inflammation. Probiotic treatments, 
including Cb and Cb@S12, effectively inhibited body weight loss by 
promoting recovery of the gastrointestinal microenvironment. These 
results demonstrate the efficacy and superiority of the probiotic treat­
ment in promoting recovery and preventing weight loss. Notably, the 
mice in the Cb@S12 group demonstrated more significant increase in 
body weight compared to those in the Cb group, suggesting that the 
selective antibacterial S12 against Fn further contributed to the thera­
peutic efficacy of Cb against colitis. Additionally, the DSS-treated mice 
exhibited a significant reduction in colon length due to inflammatory 
injury of intestinal epithelial cells. The Cb@S12 group had the longest 
colon among all the groups, significantly different from the Cb group 
(Fig. 4C and D). To validate the combined therapeutic benefits, levels of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines, including mouse interleukin 6 (IL-6), 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and interferon gamma (IFN-γ), 
were assessed using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). As 
shown in Fig. 4E-G, mice treated with Cb@S12 exhibited significantly 
decrease in inflammation, as indicated by reduced concentrations of IL- 
6, IFN-γ, and TNF-α in colon tissue, compared to the uncoated Cb and 
control groups. According to the earlier reports [27,28], histological 
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
9 

Fig. 4. Therapeutic effects of Cb@S12 in mice with DSS-induced acute colitis aggravated by Fn. A) Schematic illustration of the experimental design. B) Normalized 
body weight of mice in the period of treatment. C) Digital images of colon tissues in different treatment groups. D) The length of colon tissue in different treatment 
groups. E-G) TNF-α E), IFN-γ F) and IL-6 G) levels in colon tissues (n = 5). H) H&E staining of colon tissues in different treatment groups (black arrow: lymphocyte 
infiltration, red arrow: crypt damage, scale bar: 200 μm). I) Immunohistochemical staining in colons in different treatment groups. J) Histological scores of colon 
tissues in various groups. K) Quantification of MPO positive cells in different treatment groups. Three biological replicates are shown. *P < 0.05, 
* *P < 0.01, * **P < 0.001.
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
10 

scores, such as inflammation, lesion depth, crypt damage, and lesion 
area (Table S1), were recorded using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) 
staining. As shown in Fig. 4H and J, mice treated with Fn-DSS showed 
the highest injury including lymphocyte infiltration and crypt destruc­
tion in the colon. Compared to other groups, mice treated with Cb@S12 
showed minimal histological damage. These results confirm the effec­
tiveness of Cb@S12 in preventing colon tissue damage. Additionally, the 
colon tissues treated with Cb@S12 exhibited the lowest percentage of 
myeloperoxidase (MPO)-positive cells, as compared to the S12 and Cb 
groups (Fig. 4I and K). The Cb treatment group also exhibited recovery 
of colon tissue, but there was still significant lymphocyte infiltration, 
likely due to the presence of Fn and the lower survival rate of uncoated 
Cb.
IBD often involves a compromised gut intestinal barrier and 
heightened intestinal permeability [36,37]. The impact of different 
treatments on the colonic epithelial barrier was demonstrated through 
Fig. 5. Therapeutic mechanism of Cb@S12 associated with intestinal inflammation mitigation. A) Immunofluorescence images of ZO-1 and Occludin in colon tissues 
(scale bar: 100 μm). B, C) The relative fluorescence intensity of ZO-1 B) and Occludin C) (n = 5). D-F) 16S rRNA sequencing analysis of gut microbiota in mice. D) 
Observed OTUs (n = 3). E) The identified reads of Fusobacterium and Clostridium. F) Shannon diversity index of gut microbiota (n = 3). G) Fecal SCFA levels in mice 
after different treatments determined by GC-MS at day 8 (n = 3). H) Schematic illustration of the therapeutic mechanism of Cb@S12 associated with intestinal 
inflammation mitigation. *P < 0.05, * *P < 0.01, * **P < 0.001.
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
11 

immunofluorescence staining of Zonula Occludens-1 (ZO-1) and 
Occludin. As shown in Fig. 5A-C, the treatments with DSS and Fn-DSS 
significantly decreased the levels of ZO-1 and Occludin proteins in colon 
tissue. Conversely, the Cb@S12 group notably countered this pattern 
when compared to the S12 and Cb groups. The diversity and quantity of 
the gut microbiota after different treatments were assessed through 16S 
rDNA gene sequencing, focusing on the fecal microbiota. As shown in 
Fig. 5D and F, the groups of S12, Cb, and Cb@S12 all showed a notable 
increase in both observed operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and the 
Shannon diversity index when compared to the Fn-DSS group, strongly 
indicating the restoration of gut microbiota homeostasis [49]. The mice 
treated with Cb@S12 exhibited the highest number of Clostridium. 
Furthermore, the mice administered with S12 and Cb@S12 exhibited a 
notable reduction in Fusobacterium counts (Fig. 5E). Interestingly, the Cb 
group also demonstrated a decrease in Fusobacterium numbers, probably 
due to microbial competition. It has been reported that Cb can prevent 
the spread of harmful bacteria and support gut health [50]. Gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis was conducted to 
measure colonic short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) levels after treatment 
(Fig. 5G). Analysis of fecal metabolomics exhibited notably higher levels 
of butyrate in mice administered with both Cb and Cb@S12. These 
findings suggest that more S12-coated Cb retained in colon tissue 
enhanced the production of butyrate and inhibited the survival of Fn, 
leading to the recovery of DSS-induced acute colitis aggravated by Fn in 
mice (Fig. 5H). Collectively, the above results highlight the potential of 
Cb@S12 as an effective therapeutic approach for treating Fn-associated 
IBD, combining the benefits of probiotic administration with selective 
antibacterial action against Fn.
3.5. Therapeutic efficacy of Cb@S12 on Fn-associated orthotopic CRC
Studies has shown that Fn accumulates unusually in the cancerous 
colon of individuals with CRC, and significantly the progression of the 
disease 
[51,52]. 
Growing 
evidences 
have 
demonstrated 
that 
CRC-colonizing Fn can promote the occurrence, progression, and 
metastasis of CRC [12,14], and contribute to resistance to CRC chemo­
therapy and immunotherapy by fostering an inflammatory and immu­
nosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME) [53]. Conversely, the 
well-established probiotic Cb has been demonstrated potential anti­
cancer effects in CRC [32]. Previous report has shown that the chemi­
cally modified Cb spores exhibit excellent treatment efficiency in mice 
bearing CT26 by producing anti-cancer SCFAs and regulating the gut 
microbiota [30]. Therefore, we hypothesize that Cb@S12 integrating 
both probiotic therapy and selective Fn elimination could be an effective 
treatment for Fn-associated CRC tumors. To verify this speculation, 
CT26luc cells were then implanted into the BALB/c mice to create a 
clinically relevant colon cancer model (Fig. 6A). The mice received a 
daily oral dose of 1 × 108 CFU of Fn for 4 consecutive days before the 
initiation of different treatments with PBS (control), S12, Cb and 
Cb@S12. The tumor growth was monitored by measuring its biolumi­
nescence intensity. Pathological analysis showed that the treatments did 
not cause obvious damage to the major organs including heart, liver, 
spleen, lung, and kidneys (Fig. 6B). As shown in Fig. 6C and Fig. S20, the 
group treated with Cb@S12 exhibited weaker bioluminescence intensity 
and a smaller area of bioluminescence signal compared to the other 
groups, indicating significant inhibition of tumor growth by Cb@S12. 
Although the mice treated with Cb showed a smaller area of biolumi­
nescence signal than the PBS group before day 14 and experienced 
longer survival than the S12 and PBS groups, there was significant dif­
ference when compared to the Cb@S12 group. This indicates the supe­
riority of Cb therapy integrated with selective Fn killing in suppressing 
CRC tumor growth. Results from the fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) and TUNEL staining confirmed that Cb@S12 reduced the Fn 
burden in tumors and increases apoptotic cells after treatment (Fig. 6D). 
Moreover, mice treated with Cb@S12 maintained stable body weight 
and survived longer than the other groups (Fig. 6E and F). These results 
strongly support the therapeutic potential of Cb@S12 in treating CRC 
tumors infected with Fn.
Improvement of intestinal diseases may be linked to the recovery of 
the gut microbiota diversity, which can interact with the host immune 
system [54]. Cb produced butyrate, which regulates important biolog­
ical functions in cancers and may affect immunotherapy [55]. Besides, 
selective Fn elimination can further provoke antitumor immune re­
sponses by reversing the immunosuppressive TME [24]. Therefore, the 
treatment might induce anti-tumor immunity in mice. This hypothesis is 
supported by the significant increase in the infiltration of CD3+, CD4+, 
and CD8+ T cells in the Cb@S12-treated Fn-infected tumors (Fig. 6G, 
Fig. S21A, Fig. S22A and B). Furthermore, the treatment resulted in a 
reduction of CD206+ M2 macrophage polarization and an increase in 
CD86+ M1 macrophage (Fig. 6H, Fig. S21B, Fig. S22C and D). 
Furthermore, the levels of IFN-γ in tumor tissue were detected by ELISA 
(Fig. 6I), showing an increased level of IFN-γ after treatment with 
Cb@S12. It has been previously reported that CD8+ T cells predomi­
nantly modulate the behavior of the tumor mass through IFN-γ release 
[56], and IFN-γ is also the main cytokine associated with M1 macro­
phage activation [57]. These findings suggest that the Cb@S12 treat­
ment increased the release of IFN-γ, leading to more CD8+ T cell 
infiltration and M1 macrophage polarization. This, in turn, resulted in 
more tumor cells being cleared by the immune system. These results 
indicate that Cb@S12 exhibited synergy between Cb supplementation 
and immunotherapy, enhancing efficacy in CRC mice.
Moreover, the fecal samples were studied through 16S rDNA gene 
sequencing. As shown in Figs. 6J and K, the groups treated with S12, Cb, 
and Cb@S12 showed a significant increase in OTUs, with Cb and 
Cb@S12 increasing the level of Clostridium and decreasing the burden of 
Fusobacterium. Combined with tumor inhibition, the results demonstrate 
that Cb effectively restored microbiota homeostasis, and S12 decreased 
the amount of Fn, further inhibiting the progression of Fn-infected CRC. 
Additionally, the content of fecal SCFA was measured. As shown in 
Fig. 6L, the butyrate content in the Cb@S12-treated group significantly 
increased, reaching levels three times higher than those in the group 
treated with Cb alone. This indicate that the S12 coating significantly 
boosted the efficacy of Cb by improving its oral bioavailability while 
selectively inhibiting Fn. Consequently, Cb regulates the balance of gut 
microbiota and increases SCFA generation, thereby enhancing the 
overall therapeutic efficacy. In general, the above results confirm that 
S12-enabled probiotic therapy integrated with selective antibacterial 
treatment can be an efficient therapeutic strategy against Fn-associated 
CRC.
4. Conclusion
In summary, we have identified S12, a LA-derived lipid with selec­
tive antibacterial activity against Fn over Cb, from a combinatorial li­
brary of 12 diverse lipids. Its selective antimicrobial mechanism 
involved Fn-specific membrane depolarization and permeability 
changes, attributed to the unique structures of bacterial membranes. 
This lipid has been further employed as a protective single-cell carrier to 
improve the oral delivery of Cb for the treatment of Fn-associated in­
testinal diseases. Cb with S12 encapsulation (Cb@S12) demonstrated 
significantly improved viability and bioactivity in simulated gastric and 
intestinal fluids, and exhibited superior intestinal colonization 
compared to Cb alone in vivo. Ultimately, the oral administration of 
Cb@S12 has shown remarkable treatment effects against Fn-aggravated 
IBD and orthotopic CRC by selectively eliminating Fn while preserving 
the probiotic activity of Cb, which concerned efficient restoration of the 
intestinal barrier and mobilization of antitumor immune responses, 
respectively. Overall, Cb@S12 presents a potent, antibiotic-free thera­
peutic strategy that leverages the synergy between probiotics and se­
lective antibacterial treatment using “all-in-one” LA-derived lipids. We 
anticipate that this universal approach will generate a multitude of 
reinforced gut probiotics with selective pathogen inhibition, capable of 
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
12 

Fig. 6. Anticancer effects of Cb@S12 in Fn-associated orthotopic CT26 tumor-bearing mice. A) Schematic illustration of the experimental design. B) H&E staining of 
heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and tumor from tumor-bearing mice in different treatment groups. C) In vivo bioluminescence imaging of the orthotopic CT26luc 
tumor-bearing mice after treatment with S12, Cb, and Cb@S12, setting PBS as the control group (n = 5). D) Fn-specific FISH and Tunnel staining in tumor tissues. E) 
Body weight of mice during the course of the treatment period. F) Survival curve of the tumor-bearing mice following different treatments (n = 5). G, H) Analyses of 
the immune cell population in the TME after treatment (n = 3). I) Levels of IFN-γ in tumor tissues (n = 3). J, K) Differences in gut microbiota in various groups. 
Observed OTUs and the identified reads of Fusobacterium and Clostridium were compared (n = 3). L) SCFA levels in the fecal of mice after different treatments 
determined by GC-MS at day 8 (n = 3). *P < 0.05, * *P < 0.01, * ** P < 0.001.
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
13 

effectively treating a wide range of Fn-related intestinal diseases.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Wang Shuyu: Formal analysis, Data curation. Gao Hui: Writing – 
review & editing, Project administration, Data curation. Ma Feihe: 
Investigation. Xin Youtao: Formal analysis, Data curation. Yu Yunjian: 
Writing – review & editing, Data curation. Zhao Shengke: Writing – 
original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Li Xiaohui: 
Investigation. Lu Hegang: Methodology, Formal analysis.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support for this work from 
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U20A20260, 
22075209, 52303155, 22201207), National Key R&D Program of China 
(2024YFE0104000), the Key Program of Tianjin Municipal Natural 
Science Foundation (No. 22JCZDJC00570), a distinguished professor of 
Tianjin, the Tianjin Enterprise Key Laboratory for Application Research 
of Hyaluronic Acid (KTRDHA-Z201901). We would like to thank the 
Analytical & Testing Center of Tiangong University for Scanning Elec­
tron Microscope work. Shengke Zhao and Yunjian Yu contributed 
equally to this work.
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.nantod.2025.102742.
Data availability
The authors do not have permission to share data.
References
[1] V. Tremaroli, F. B¨ackhed, Functional interactions between the gut microbiota and 
host metabolism, Nature 489 (2012) 242–249.
[2] M.L. Richard, H. Sokol, The gut mycobiota: insights into analysis, environmental 
interactions and role in gastrointestinal diseases, Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 
16 (2019) 331–345.
[3] R.E. Ley, D.A. Peterson, J.I. Gordon, Ecological and evolutionary forces shaping 
microbial diversity in the human intestine, Cell 124 (2006) 837–848.
[4] R. Zhu, T. Lang, W. Yan, X. Zhu, X. Huang, Q. Yin, Y. Li, Gut microbiota: influence 
on carcinogenesis and modulation strategies by drug delivery systems to improve 
cancer therapy, Adv. Sci. 8 (2021) 2003542.
[5] L.H.S. Lau, S.H. Wong, Microbiota, obesity and NAFLD, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 1061 
(2018) 111–125.
[6] M. Valles-Colomer, G. Falony, Y. Darzi, E.F. Tigchelaar, J. Wang, R.Y. Tito, 
C. Schiweck, A. Kurilshikov, M. Joossens, C. Wijmenga, S. Claes, L. Van 
Oudenhove, A. Zhernakova, S. Vieira-Silva, J. Raes, The neuroactive potential of 
the human gut microbiota in quality of life and depression, Nat. Microbiol 4 (2019) 
623–632.
[7] S. Wei, X. Wu, M. Chen, Z. Xiang, X. Li, J. Zhang, W. Dong, Exosomal-miR-129-2-3p 
derived from Fusobacterium nucleatum-infected intestinal epithelial cells promotes 
experimental colitis through regulating TIMELESS-mediated cellular senescence 
pathway, Gut Microbes 15 (2023) 2240035.
[8] Y. Chen, Y. Chen, P. Cao, W. Su, N. Zhan, W. Dong, Fusobacterium nucleatum 
facilitates ulcerative colitis through activating IL-17F signaling to NF-κB via the 
upregulation of CARD3 expression, J. Pathol. 250 (2020) 170–182.
[9] C. Duan, X. Tang, W. Wang, W. Qian, X. Fu, X. Deng, S. Zhou, C. Han, X. Hou, 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus attenuates intestinal inflammation induced by 
Fusobacterium nucleatum infection by restoring the autophagic flux, Int. J. Mol. 
Med. 47 (2021) 125–136.
[10] M. Zepeda-Rivera, S.S. Minot, H. Bouzek, H. Wu, A. Blanco-Míguez, P. Manghi, D. 
S. Jones, K.D. LaCourse, Y. Wu, E.F. McMahon, S.-N. Park, Y.K. Lim, A. 
G. Kempchinsky, A.D. Willis, S.L. Cotton, S.C. Yost, E. Sicinska, J.-K. Kook, F. 
E. Dewhirst, N. Segata, S. Bullman, C.D. Johnston, A distinct Fusobacterium 
nucleatum clade dominates the colorectal cancer niche, Nature 628 (2024) 
424–432.
[11] H. Liu, X.L. Hong, T.T. Sun, X.W. Huang, J.L. Wang, H. Xiong, Fusobacterium 
nucleatum exacerbates colitis by damaging epithelial barriers and inducing 
aberrant inflammation, J. Dig. Dis. 21 (2020) 385–398.
[12] M.R. Yu, H.J. Kim, H.R. Park, Fusobacterium nucleatum accelerates the progression 
of colitis-associated colorectal cancer by promoting EMT, Cancers 12 (2020) 2728.
[13] A. Janney, F. Powrie, E.H. Mann, Host–microbiota maladaptation in colorectal 
cancer, Nature 585 (2020) 509–517.
[14] X. Yang, J. Yang, Z. Ye, G. Zhang, W. Nie, H. Cheng, M. Peng, K. Zhang, J. Liu, 
Z. Zhang, J. Shi, Physiologically inspired mucin coated Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 
enhances biotherapy by regulating the pathological microenvironment to improve 
intestinal colonization, ACS Nano 16 (2022) 4041–4058.
[15] T. Jiang, H.S. Li, G.G. Han, B. Singh, S.K. Kang, J.D. Bok, D.D. Kim, Z.S. Hong, Y. 
J. Choi, C.S. Cho, Oral delivery of probiotics in poultry using pH-sensitive tablets, 
J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 27 (2017) 739–746.
[16] Y. Gao, X. Wang, C. Xue, Z. Wei, Latest developments in food-grade delivery 
systems for probiotics: a systematic review, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 63 (2023) 
4371–4388.
[17] T.D. Lawley, A.W. Walker, Intestinal colonization resistance, Immunology 138 
(2013) 1–11.
[18] J. Libertucci, V.B. Young, The role of the microbiota in infectious diseases, Nat. 
Microbiol 4 (2019) 35–45.
[19] N. Kamada, G.Y. Chen, N. Inohara, G. Nú˜nez, Control of pathogens and pathobionts 
by the gut microbiota, Nat. Immunol. 14 (2013) 685–690.
[20] S. Hempel, S.J. Newberry, A.R. Maher, Z. Wang, J.N.V. Miles, R. Shanman, 
B. Johnsen, P.G. Shekelle, Probiotics for the prevention and treatment of antibiotic- 
associated diarrhea: A systematic review and meta-analysis, JAMA 307 (2012) 
1959–1969.
[21] J. Suez, N. Zmora, G. Zilberman-Schapira, U. Mor, M. Dori-Bachash, S. Bashiardes, 
M. Zur, D. Regev-Lehavi, R. Ben-Zeev Brik, S. Federici, M. Horn, Y. Cohen, A. 
E. Moor, D. Zeevi, T. Korem, E. Kotler, A. Harmelin, S. Itzkovitz, N. Maharshak, 
O. Shibolet, M. Pevsner-Fischer, H. Shapiro, I. Sharon, Z. Halpern, E. Segal, 
E. Elinav, Post-antibiotic gut mucosal microbiome reconstitution is impaired by 
probiotics and improved by autologous FMT, Cell 174 (2018) 1406–1423.
[22] J. Pan, G. Gong, Q. Wang, J. Shang, Y. He, C. Catania, D. Birnbaum, Y. Li, Z. Jia, 
Y. Zhang, N.S. Joshi, J. Guo, A single-cell nanocoating of probiotics for enhanced 
amelioration of antibiotic-associated diarrhea, Nat. Commun. 13 (2022) 2117.
[23] D.-W. Zheng, X. Dong, P. Pan, K.-W. Chen, J.-X. Fan, S.-X. Cheng, X.-Z. Zhang, 
Phage-guided modulation of the gut microbiota of mouse models of colorectal 
cancer augments their responses to chemotherapy, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3 (2019) 
717–728.
[24] M. Wang, B. Rousseau, K. Qiu, G. Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Su, C. Le Bihan-Benjamin, 
I. Khati, O. Artz, M.B. Foote, Y.-Y. Cheng, K.-H. Lee, M.Z. Miao, Y. Sun, P.- 
J. Bousquet, M. Hilmi, E. Dumas, A.-S. Hamy, F. Reyal, L. Lin, P.M. Armistead, 
W. Song, A. Vargason, J.C. Arthur, Y. Liu, J. Guo, X. Zhou, J. Nguyen, Y. He, J.P. 
Y. Ting, A.C. Anselmo, L. Huang, Killing tumor-associated bacteria with a 
liposomal antibiotic generates neoantigens that induce anti-tumor immune 
responses, Nat. Biotechnol. 42 (2024) 1263–1274.
[25] Z. Li, A.M. Behrens, N. Ginat, S.Y. Tzeng, X. Lu, S. Sivan, R. Langer, A. Jaklenec, 
Biofilm-inspired ecapsulation of probiotics for the treatment of complex infections, 
Adv. Mater. 30 (2018) e1803925.
[26] Y. Lu, A.A. Aimetti, R. Langer, Z. Gu, Bioresponsive materials, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2 
(2016) 16075.
[27] Z. Cao, X. Wang, Y. Pang, S. Cheng, J. Liu, Biointerfacial self-assembly generates 
lipid membrane coated bacteria for enhanced oral delivery and treatment, Nat. 
Commun. 10 (2019) 5783.
[28] P. Peng, T. Feng, X. Yang, C. Nie, L. Yu, R. Ding, Q. Zhou, X. Jiang, P. Li, 
Gastrointestinal microenvironment responsive nanoencapsulation of probiotics 
and drugs for synergistic therapy of intestinal diseases, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 
14718–14730.
[29] O.Y. Kim, H.T. Park, N.T.H. Dinh, S.J. Choi, J. Lee, J.H. Kim, S.-W. Lee, Y.S. Gho, 
Bacterial outer membrane vesicles suppress tumor by interferon-γ-mediated 
antitumor response, Nat. Commun. 8 (2017) 626.
[30] D.-W. Zheng, R.-Q. Li, J.-X. An, T.-Q. Xie, Z.-Y. Han, R. Xu, Y. Fang, X.-Z. Zhang, 
Prebiotics-encapsulated probiotic spores regulate gut microbiota and suppress 
colon cancer, Adv. Mater. 32 (2020) 2004529.
[31] P. Markowiak-Kope´c, K. ´Sli˙zewska, The effect of probiotics on the production of 
short-chain fatty acids by human intestinal microbiome, Nutrients 12 (2020) 1107.
[32] L. Ma, Q. Shen, W. Lyu, L. lv, W. Wang, M. Yu, H. Yang, S. Tao, Y. Xiao, Clostridium 
butyricum and its derived extracellular vesicles modulate gut homeostasis and 
ameliorate acute experimental colitis, Microbiol. Spectr. 10 (2022) e01368-22.
[33] O.A.A. Ahmed, N. Adjimatera, C. Pourzand, I.S. Blagbrough, N4,N9-dioleoyl 
spermine is a novel nonviral lipopolyamine vector for plasmid DNA formulation, 
Pharm. Res. 22 (2005) 972–980.
[34] S.S.R. Namashivaya, A.S. Oshchepkov, H. Ding, S. F¨orster, V.N. Khrustalev, E. 
A. Kataev, Anthracene-based receptors with a turn-on fluorescence response for 
nitrate, Org. Lett. 21 (2019) 8746–8750.
[35] J. Sun, M. Li, M. Lin, B. Zhang, X. Chen, High antibacterial activity and selectivity 
of the versatile polysulfoniums that combat drug resistance, Adv. Mater. 33 (2021) 
2104402.
[36] B. Hu, S. Yu, C. Shi, J. Gu, Y. Shao, Q. Chen, Y. Li, R. Mezzenga, 
Amyloid–polyphenol hybrid nanofilaments mitigate colitis and regulate gut 
microbial dysbiosis, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 2760–2776.
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
14 

[37] R. Li, Y. Fan, L. Liu, H. Ma, D. Gong, Z. Miao, H. Wang, Z. Zha, Ultrathin hafnium 
disulfide atomic crystals with ROS-scavenging and colon-targeting capabilities for 
inflammatory bowel disease treatment, ACS Nano 16 (2022) 15026–15041.
[38] J.J. Kabara, D.M. Swieczkowski, A.J. Conley, J.P. Truant, Fatty acids and 
derivatives as antimicrobial agents, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2 (1972) 
23–28.
[39] A.P. Desbois, V.J. Smith, Antibacterial free fatty acids: activities, mechanisms of 
action and biotechnological potential, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 85 (2010) 
1629–1642.
[40] P. Greenspan, E.P. Mayer, S.D. Fowler, Nile red: a selective fluorescent stain for 
intracellular lipid droplets, J. Cell Biol. 100 (1985) 965–973.
[41] L. Zhang, P. Dhillon, H. Yan, S. Farmer, R.E.W. Hancock, Interactions of bacterial 
cationic peptide antibiotics with outer and cytoplasmic membranes of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44 (2000) 3317–3321.
[42] X. Arqu´e, M.D.T. Torres, T. Pati˜no, A. Boaro, S. S´anchez, C. de la Fuente-Nunez, 
Autonomous treatment of bacterial infections in vivo using antimicrobial micro- 
and nanomotors, ACS Nano 16 (2022) 7547–7558.
[43] K. Zhang, Y. Du, Z. Si, Y. Liu, M.E. Turvey, C. Raju, D. Keogh, L. Ruan, S.L. Jothy, 
S. Reghu, K. Marimuthu, P.P. De, O.T. Ng, J.R. Mediavilla, B.N. Kreiswirth, Y. 
R. Chi, J. Ren, K.C. Tam, X.-W. Liu, H. Duan, Y. Zhu, Y. Mu, P.T. Hammond, G. 
C. Bazan, K. Pethe, M.B. Chan-Park, Enantiomeric glycosylated cationic block co- 
beta-peptides eradicate Staphylococcus aureus biofilms and antibiotic-tolerant 
persisters, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 4792.
[44] B. Ma, C. Fang, J. Zhang, M. Wang, X. Luo, Z. Hou, Contemporaneous measurement 
of outer and inner membrane permeability in Gram-negative bacteria, Bio-Protoc. 
10 (2020) e3548.
[45] F.A. RaineyGenus I. Clostridium prazmowski 1880, 23, Bergey’s manual of 
systematic bacteriology 3 (2009) 738-828.
[46] K. Stokowa-Sołtys, K. Wojtkowiak, K. Jagiełło, Fusobacterium nucleatum–friend or 
foe? J. Inorg. Biochem 224 (2021) 111586.
[47] H. Strahl, J. Errington, Bacterial membranes: structure, domains, and function, 
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 71 (2017) 519–538.
[48] L. Antoni, S. Nuding, J. Wehkamp, E.F. Stange, Intestinal barrier in inflammatory 
bowel disease, World J. Gastroenterol. 20 (2014) 1165, 79.
[49] J. Ni, G.D. Wu, L. Albenberg, V.T. Tomov, Gut microbiota and IBD: causation or 
correlation? Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 14 (2017) 573–584.
[50] D. Paredes-Sabja, A. Shen, J.A. Sorg, Clostridium difficile spore biology: sporulation, 
germination, and spore structural proteins, Trends Microbiol 22 (2014) 406–416.
[51] S. Bullman, C.S. Pedamallu, E. Sicinska, T.E. Clancy, X. Zhang, D. Cai, D. Neuberg, 
K. Huang, F. Guevara, T. Nelson, O. Chipashvili, T. Hagan, M. Walker, 
A. Ramachandran, B. Diosdado, G. Serna, N. Mulet, S. Landolfi, S. Ramon y Cajal, 
R. Fasani, A.J. Aguirre, K. Ng, E. ´Elez, S. Ogino, J. Tabernero, C.S. Fuchs, W. 
C. Hahn, P. Nuciforo, M. Meyerson, Analysis of Fusobacterium persistence and 
antibiotic response in colorectal cancer, Science 358 (2017) 1443–1448.
[52] Q. Meng, Q. Gao, S. Mehrazarin, K. Tangwanichgapong, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, 
Y. Pan, S. Robinson, Z. Liu, A. Zangiabadi, R. Lux, P.N. Papapanou, X.E. Guo, 
H. Wang, L.E. Berchowitz, Y.W. Han, Fusobacterium nucleatum secretes amyloid-like 
FadA to enhance pathogenicity, EMBO Rep. 22 (2021) e52891.
[53] K. Mima, R. Nishihara, Z.R. Qian, Y. Cao, Y. Sukawa, J.A. Nowak, J. Yang, R. Dou, 
Y. Masugi, M. Song, A.D. Kostic, M. Giannakis, S. Bullman, D.A. Milner, H. Baba, E. 
L. Giovannucci, L.A. Garraway, G.J. Freeman, G. Dranoff, W.S. Garrett, 
C. Huttenhower, M. Meyerson, J.A. Meyerhardt, A.T. Chan, C.S. Fuchs, S. Ogino, 
Fusobacterium nucleatum in colorectal carcinoma tissue and patient prognosis, Gut 
65 (2016) 1973–1980.
[54] Y. Lee, K. Sugihara, M.G. Gillilland, S. Jon, N. Kamada, J.J. Moon, Hyaluronic 
acid–bilirubin nanomedicine for targeted modulation of dysregulated intestinal 
barrier, microbiome and immune responses in colitis, Nat. Mater. 19 (2020) 
118–126.
[55] H. Xu, H. Luo, J. Zhang, K. Li, M.-H. Lee, Therapeutic potential of Clostridium 
butyricum anticancer effects in colorectal cancer, Gut Microbes 15 (2023) 2186114.
[56] M.E. Hoekstra, M. Slagter, J. Urbanus, M. Toebes, N. Slingerland, I. de Rink, R.J. 
C. Kluin, M. Nieuwland, R. Kerkhoven, L.F.A. Wessels, T.N. Schumacher, Distinct 
spatiotemporal dynamics of CD8+ T cell-derived cytokines in the tumor 
microenvironment, Cancer Cell 42 (2024) 157–167.
[57] F.O. Martinez, S. Gordon, The M1 and M2 paradigm of macrophage activation: 
time for reassessment, F1000Prime Rep. 6 (2014) 13.
S. Zhao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Nano Today 62 (2025) 102742 
15