In Situ Self-Assembled Phytopolyphenol-
Coordinated Intelligent Nanotherapeutics for
Multipronged Management of Ferroptosis-
Driven Alzheimer’s Disease
Yining Liu, Dongju Zhao, Fan Yang, Caihua Ye, Ziyao Chen, Yihan Chen, Xiaomeng Yu, Jiyao Xie,
Yan Dou,* and Jin Chang*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Ferroptosis is a vital driver of pathophysiological consequences of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). High-efficiency pharmacological inhibition of ferroptosis
requires comprehensive coordination of diverse abnormal intracellular events, which
is an urgent problem and great challenge for its application in AD treatment. Herein, a
triphenylphosphonium-modified quercetin-derived smart nanomedicine (TQCN) is
developed for multipronged anti-ferroptosis therapy in AD. Taking advantage of the
favorable brain-targeting and mitochondria-locating properties, TQCN can efficiently
chelate iron through phytopolyphenol-mediated spontaneous coordination and self-
assemble into metal-phenolic nanocomplexes in situ, exerting escalating exogenous
offensive effects to attenuate iron overload and its induced free radical burst.
Meanwhile, the Nrf2 signaling-mediated endogenous defensive system is reconstituted
to restore iron metabolism homeostasis represented by iron export and storage and
enhance cytoprotective antioxidant cascades represented by lipid peroxidation
detoxification. Benefiting from the multifaceted regulation of pathogenic processes triggering ferroptosis, TQCN treatment
can ameliorate various neurodegenerative manifestations associated with brain iron deposition and rescue severe cognitive
decline in AD mice. This work displays great promise of in situ self-assembled phytopolyphenol-coordinated intelligent
nanotherapeutics as advanced candidates against ferroptosis-driven AD progression.
KEYWORDS: ferroptosis, Alzheimer’s disease, iron dyshomeostasis, phytopolyphenol nanochelator, metal-phenolic self-assembly
1. INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a refractory and fatal neuro-
degenerative disease prevalent in the elderly population with
complex and diverse etiologies.1,2 As iron is the most abundant
essential mineral involved in normal biochemical and physio-
logical processes of the brain, metabolic dysregulation of iron
plays a crucial role in triggering the onset and progression of
AD.3 In the healthy brain, tightly regulated iron transport,
storage, and recycling maintain iron homeostasis, which can be
disturbed by aging and inflammation, leading to iron
deposition.4 Excess redox-active iron ions transferred to the
mitochondria would catalyze the Fenton reaction and activate
the electron transport chain to produce large amounts of reactive
oxygen species (ROS), which attack polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs) enriched in plasma or organelle membranes
throughout neurons and cause their rupture.5 The resulting
lethal lipid peroxidation (LPO) initiates a distinct and pervasive
programmed cell death modality known as ferroptosis, which
spawns vicious interactions with other pathological anomalies
such as amyloid-β (Aβ) aggregation and neuronal loss,
ultimately exacerbating neurodegeneration and cognitive
decline.6 Therefore, alleviating iron overload and its induced
ROS burst is a top priority and potentially feasible therapeutic
avenue for halting ferroptosis-driven AD development.
Ferroptosis reflects the overwhelming destruction of the
brain’s endogenous defenses by iron dyshomeostasis-dependent
pathogenic processes. On the one hand, aberrant changes of iron
regulatory proteins are indispensable for the occurrence of
intracellular iron overload. Membrane protein ferroportin
Received:
September 25, 2023
Revised:
February 21, 2024
Accepted:
February 29, 2024
Published: March 6, 2024
Article
www.acsnano.org
© 2024 American Chemical Society
7890
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on November 29, 2025 at 08:04:38 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

(FPN) mediates normal iron efflux from neurons, and ferritin
heavy isoform (FTH) in the cytoplasm converts free iron into a
nontoxic oxidized state for storage, but their levels have been
found negatively correlated with AD progression, responsible for
iron retention to catalyze ROS toxicity.7,8 On the other hand,
attenuated antioxidant responses in neurons increase their
susceptibility to ferroptosis. Glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4),
that can directly reduce PUFA-OOH to nontoxic PUFA-OH, is
considered as the primary antioxidant enzyme to antagonize
ferroptosis.9 However, GPX4-mediated LPO elimination is also
severely impaired in AD, promoting iron overload induced
oxidative damage.10 At the transcriptional level, these defense
mechanisms converge on nuclear factor E2-related factor 2
(Nrf2), the central executor of various cytoprotective effects
such as broad-spectrum detoxification and multiple antioxidant
pathways.11,12 Therefore, remodeling iron metabolism homeo-
stasis and antioxidant defense status by activating neuronal Nrf2
signaling is essential to developing comprehensive therapeutic
strategies against ferroptosis.
Currently developed ferroptosis inhibitors mainly include
iron chelators and antioxidants, which has been shown to slow
down AD progression more or less.13 However, these drugs
control only a single pathogenic factor rather than the entire
ferroptosis process, and their application defects such as high
administration frequency and long infusion time caused by short
plasma half-life as well as many side effects are not conducive to
the long-term treatment of AD.14 Quercetin (QC) is a plant-
derived polyphenolic compound with natural chelating activity
due to three potential metal-binding sites mediated by the
catechol moieties in its structure.15,16 Previous studies have
shown that QC can act as an iron chelator to inhibit ferroptosis
or activate the Nrf2 pathway for effective treatment of
cardiovascular disease and acute renal injury, but whether it
plays a similar role in the AD brain remains unclear. In recent
years, metal-phenolic networks based on spontaneous coordi-
nation between polyphenols and metal ions have attracted great
attention, which can integrate enzymatic and nonenzymatic
effects to exert superior free radical scavenging properties.17,18 It
is well-known that QC itself is a natural antioxidant, but whether
it can in situ self-assemble into metal-phenolic structure by
chelating iron in the AD brain to upgrade the antioxidant
cascade has not been explored and is worth investigating.
Herein, we developed a mitochondria-targeted QC-derived
intelligent nanomedicine (TQCN) for the multipronged
management of ferroptosis-driven AD progression (Scheme
1). Benefiting from intranasal delivery and triphenylphospho-
nium (TPP) modification, TQCN could efficiently enter AD
characteristic brain regions and localize to mitochondria to
chelate free iron, thereby inhibiting the Fenton reaction
catalyzed by iron overload and its induced oxidative stress and
Scheme 1. Schematic of mitochondria-targeted QC-derived intelligent nanochelator (TQCN) capable of self-assembling into
metal−phenolic nanocomplexes in situ for multipronged “offensive and defensive” effects to overcome ferroptosis-driven AD
progression.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7891

mitochondrial dysfunction. By virtue of spontaneous coordina-
tion between phytopolyphenol structures of QC and iron ions,
iron-chelated TQCN could in situ self-assemble into metal-
phenolic nanocomplexes to maximize antioxidant effects for
ROS scavenging. Accompanied by escalating exogenous
offensive effects, Nrf2-mediated endogenous defense pathways
were also activated, represented by ameliorating barriers to iron
export and iron storage as well as enhancing GPX4-mediated
LPO detoxification. Thanks to the restoration of iron homeo-
stasis and redox balance, TQCN treatment achieved the
multiscale and comprehensive regulation of brain iron
deposition, ultimately rescuing Aβ pathology, neuronal loss,
and cognitive impairment in AD mice. This work extends the
application prospect of natural product-derived smart nano-
therapeutics for targeting ferroptosis to suppress AD patho-
genesis and provides potential therapeutic options for
ferroptosis-related neurodegenerative diseases.
2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
2.1. Preparation and Characterization of TQCN. As
illustrated in the synthetic route (Figure 1a), TPP-modified poly
(ethylene glycol) (PEG) was constructed through amino-
carboxyl cross-coupling reaction, which acted as the stabilizer
component and the main effector component QC to
spontaneously form the stable nanoassemblies TQCN through
solvent change, molecular aggregation, and precipitation.19,20
1H NMR spectra showed a clear discrimination between TPP
and PEG, and the characteristic peaks of both were found in the
synthesized PEG−TPP (Figure 1b). The positive surface charge
of TPP increased zeta potentials from −26.4 mV of PEG to −8.3
mV of PEG−TPP (Figure 1c), confirming the successful
conjugation of TPP to PEG.21 Transmission electron micros-
copy (TEM) images showed that the morphology of both QCN
and TQCN was approximately spherical, while the hydro-
dynamic diameter of TQCN was 146.7 nm (PDI = 0.303), larger
than that of QCN without TPP modification (132.1 nm; PDI =
0.355; Figure 1d and Figure S1). The zeta potential of TQCN
modified by TPP (−10.8 mV) also tended to be more positive
than that of QCN (−17.6 mV) (Figure 1e), further confirming
the successful TPP modification on TQCN. The UV−vis
absorption profiles of both QCN and TQCN exhibited a slight
redshift compared to free QC molecules (Figure 1f), due to the
change in solvent polarity, supporting the improved solubility of
these nanoassemblies.22,23 The loading capacity and encapsu-
lation efficiency of QC in TQCN were calculated to be 63.7%
and 88.0%, respectively (Figure S2), indicating efficient
encapsulation of QC.
Figure 1. Preparation and characterization of TQCN. (a) Schematic representation of the synthetic route. (b) 1H NMR spectra of TPP, PEG,
and PEG-TPP solubilized in DMSO-d6. (c) Zeta potentials of PEG, TPP, and PEG-TPP. (d) Dynamic light scattering (DLS) size distribution of
TQCN. Inset: TEM images. Scale bar, 100 μm. (e) Zeta potentials and (f) UV−vis absorbance spectra of free QC, QCN, and TQCN. (g)
Representative confocal fluorescence images of the distribution of Cy5.5-labeled QCN and TQCN in HT22 cells. Green, MitoTracker
mitochondrial staining; red, Cy5.5-labled NPs. Scale bars, 10 μm. (h) Pearson’s colocalization coefficient analysis in (g). Data are presented as
mean ± SD (n = 3). ***p < 0.001.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7892

The involvement of PEG in nanoassemblies ensured their
colloidal stability, providing support for subsequent biological
applications in vitro and in vivo. No obvious size increase or
particle aggregation of TQCN was observed during incubation
at 4 °C in various biological media, including water, PBS,
DMEM, and DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum for 7
days (Figure S3).The modification of TPP in nanoassemblies
has been reported to mediate the escape of nanoparticles (NPs)
from lysosomes and their translocation into mitochondria,
attributed to natural physisorption between negatively charged
membranes and positively charged TPP.24 The subcellular
colocalization analysis was performed in well-recognized clonal
mouse hippocampal cells (HT22) by labeling QCN and TQCN
with the near-infrared fluorescent dye Cy5.5 and staining the
mitochondria with the green fluorescent probe MitoTracker.
Confocal fluorescence images showed that the intensities of
both red fluorescence representing NPs and bright yellow
fluorescence colocalized with mitochondria were significantly
higher in TQCN-incubated cells than in QCN-incubated cells
(Figure 1g), accompanied by a larger Pearson’s colocalization
coefficient (TQCN: R2 = 0.844; QCN: R2 = 0.640) (Figure
1h).25 These results demonstrated that TQCN acquired the
ability conferred by TPP to internalize into neurons and target
mitochondria, the execution center of ferroptosis, which
contributed to the precise implementation of its therapeutic
effects.
2.2. Chelation-Induced in Situ Self-Assembly of Metal-
Phenolic Nanocomplexes. Dependent on the main effector
component, QC, TQCN possessed iron-chelating activity and
could thus self-assemble to form metal-phenolic nanocomplexes
for sustained free radical scavenging (Figure 2a). First, iron-
chelating capacity of QC was systematically evaluated by the
titration of QC with divalent iron (Fe2+) and trivalent iron
(Fe3+) in neutral buffer for UV−vis spectrophotometry.16 With
increasing iron ion concentrations, the characteristic absorbance
of free QC at 372 nm decreased gradually, while the absorption
band centered at 430 nm appeared (Figure 2b,c). Titration
kinetic curves revealed that the chelation of Fe2+/Fe3+ by QC
gradually stabilized to form metal-phenolic complexes with a
molar ratio of approximately 1:1 (Figure 2b,c inset), whose
solution color changed from pale yellow of QC to yellow-green
(Figure S4). To verify that QC-derived QCN or TQCN
retained the above properties, both formed stable nano-
complexes with Fe2+/Fe3+, and their absorption spectra showed
Figure 2. Iron-chelating capacity of TQCN and its induced in situ self-assembly of metal-phenolic nanocomplexes. (a) Illustration of escalating
exogenous antioxidant performance. (b, c) UV−vis absorbance spectra of the titration of QC with (b) Fe2+ and (c) Fe3+. Top to bottom: 500
μmol L−1 QC in the presence of increasing concentrations of Fe2+/Fe3+. Inset: titration kinetic curves of complex absorbance at 430 nm versus
Fe2+/Fe3+ concentrations. (d, e) UV−vis absorbance spectra of (d) QCN (400 μmol L−1) and (e) TQCN (400 μmol L−1) chelating with Fe3+
(1000 μmol L−1). Inset: digital photos of the corresponding solutions. (f, g) XPS analysis of (f) QCN/Fe3+ and (g) TQCN/Fe3+ nanocomplexes.
Inset, high-resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p regions. (h) ABTS and (i) DPPH radical scavenging activity of QCN, TQCN, QCN/Fe3+, and
TQCN/Fe3+ nanocomplexes. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7893

Figure 3. Neuroprotective effects of TQCN via inhibition of iron overload-induced oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction. (a)
Schematic representation of mitochondria as the site of ROS initiation by iron ions. (b) Iron content detection in HT22 cells after various
treatments. (c) Representative confocal fluorescence images of DCFH-DA staining and (d) quantitative analysis. Scale bars, 20 μm. (e)
Representative confocal fluorescence images of Mito-SOX staining and (f) quantitative analysis. Scale bars, 20 μm. (g) Schematic
representation of iron overload-induced mitochondrial and neuronal damage rescued by TQCN. (h) Representative confocal fluorescence
images of JC-10 staining and (i) quantitative analysis. Red, JC-10 aggregates; green, JC-10 monomers. Scale bars, 100 μm. (j) Representative
TEM images of mitochondrial morphology in HT22 cells after various treatments. Red arrows indicate mitochondria. Scale bars, 500 nm. (k)
Flow cytometry analysis of neuronal apoptosis after various treatments and (l) quantitative statistics of apoptosis rate. FAC: 600 μmol L−1,
QCN/TQCN: 25 μmol L−1. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; ns, not significant.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7894

a decrease in characteristic absorbance of QC at 372 nm and the
appearance of a characteristic peak of iron ions at 300 nm,
accompanied by similar solution color changes (Figure 2d,e and
Figure S5). Subsequently, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) was detected to further clarify the electronic states of
nanocomplexes formed by QCN and TQCN chelating free
iron.26,27 The high-resolution XPS spectra showed that the main
peaks around 711.7 and 725 eV in the QCN/Fe3+ nanocomplex
and 712.5 and 725.3 eV in the TQCN/Fe3+ nanocomplex were
all assigned to Fe 2p3/2 and Fe 2p1/2 (Figure 2f,g and Figure S6),
confirming the successful coordination of iron ions with QC
molecules, not affected by TPP modification.
Given that the chelated iron in the coordination structure can
stabilize the semiquinone radical intermediate to promote
Figure 4. Intrinsic defense mechanisms activated by TQCN against ferroptosis-driven AD pathogenesis. (a) Venn diagram showing intersection
target genes of QC, ferroptosis, and AD. (b) The “drug−target−disease” network and (c) PPI network diagram of 48 intersection target genes
obtained in (a). (d) GO functional annotation and (e) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. (f−h) Representative immunoblots and
quantitative analysis for (g) Nrf2 and (h) GPX4. (i) SOD and (j) CAT activity detection. (k) Representative immunoblots and (l) quantitative
analysis for 15-LOX and 4-HNE. (m) MDA content analysis. (n) Representative immunoblots and (o) quantitative analysis for Bax and Bcl-2.
FAC: 600 μmol L−1, QCN/TQCN: 25 μmol L−1. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7895

electron transfer,28,29 TQCN chelation-induced metal-phenolic
nanocomplexes were speculated to possess excellent free radical
scavenging properties. The 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazo-
line-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) and 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydra-
zide (DPPH) assays showed that QCN and TQCN exhibited
efficient removal of ABTS•+ and DPPH• in a dose-dependent
manner, and their scavenging rates reached about 90% at 500
μmol L−1 and 3 mmol L−1, respectively (Figure 2h,i). Consistent
with the discoloration of pure NPs, QCN/Fe3+ and TQCN/Fe3+
nanocomplexes still maintained a strong antioxidant capacity
(Figure 2h,i). Then, TQCN-mediated exogenous oxidative
removal performance on neuronal survival under iron overload
was assessed by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assays. It was
found that HT22 cells survived nearly 100% after incubation
with QCN or TQCN, indicating negligible neurotoxicity of the
synthesized NPs (Figure S7). Next, HT22 cells were incubated
with ferric ammonium citrate (FAC) to establish an in vitro
model of iron overload-induced neuronal injury, in which cell
viability rapidly dropped to about 60% (Figure S8). Both QCN
and TQCN treatments significantly increased cell viability close
to the control and slightly better than free QC and the traditional
iron chelator deferoxamine (DFO) (Figure S8). Collectively,
TQCN triggered the escalating exogenous offensive effects
against ferroptosis including iron chelation to reduce excess iron
ions and in situ metal-phenolic self-assembly to scavenge free
radicals.
2.3. Iron-Dependent Mitochondrial Oxidative Dam-
age Attenuated by TQCN for Neuroprotection. Since
excess intracellular iron ions tends to transfer to mitochondria
and activate the Fenton reaction, leading to oxidative stress burst
(Figure 3a),30−32 TQCN, with mitochondria-targeting ability
and iron-chelating activity, was expected to effectively reduce
iron retention. The results of iron content measurements
showed that FAC stimulation dramatically increased intra-
cellular iron levels in HT22 cells, which proved the successful
establishment of an iron-overload neuronal model (Figure 3b
and Figure S9a). Both QCN and TQCN treatments could
significantly reduce this abnormally elevated iron level in a
concentration-dependent manner (Figure S9b), whereas the
stronger effect of the latter was attributed to TPP-facilitated
entry of TQCN into mitochondria for more targeted iron
chelation (Figure 3b). Confocal fluorescence images of DCFH-
DA staining showed that substantially elevated ROS levels in
HT22 cells upon FAC stimulation were counteracted more
significantly by TQCN treatment than QCN treatment (Figure
3c,d). Furthermore, Mito-SOX staining for specific recognition
of mitochondrial ROS also showed that TQCN treatment
displayed the most prominent performance in inhibiting
mitochondrial ROS production (Figure 3e,f).33 These results
strongly supported the idea that TQCN targeting mitochondria
maximized resistance to oxidative stress caused by iron
deposition.
Extensive studies have shown that oxidative stress can induce
mitochondrial membrane potential depolarization and phos-
pholipid oxidation-dependent membrane disruption, leading to
mitochondrial dysfunction and further neuronal apoptosis
(Figure 3g).34−36 JC-10 staining showed that JC-10 aggregates
with red fluorescence were greatly inhibited by FAC stimulation
but significantly recovered after both QCN and TQCN
treatments, which simultaneously prevented the FAC-induced
production of JC-10 monomers with green fluorescence (Figure
3h). TQCN treatment was more effective than QCN treatment
in rescuing the FAC-induced decline in mitochondrial
membrane potential, as indicated by a higher ratio of aggregates
to monomers that was closer to the control (Figure 3i). Bio-
TEM images showed that mitochondrial membrane density
increased and mitochondrial cristae decreased or even vanished
upon FAC stimulation, which were significantly restored after
TQCN treatment, superior to QCN treatment (Figure 3j).37
Furthermore, as ATP is the functional product of mitochondria,
ATP deficiency has been reported to reflect mitochondrial
dysfunction.38 Substantially reduced ATP levels upon FAC
stimulation were also increased to nearly normal levels after
TQCN treatment compared to QCN treatment (Figure S10),
suggesting a great recovery of mitochondrial function.
Subsequently, FAC-induced neuronal apoptosis was detected
using flow cytometry analysis based on Annexin V-FITC/PI
staining. The results showed that TQCN treatment reduced the
apoptotic rate of HT22 cells from 37.14% under FAC
stimulation to 15.77%, more efficient than 21.28% by QCN
treatment (Figure 3k,l). In addition, PEG−TPP treatment alone
did not show any therapeutic effect in any of the above
experiments (Figures S11 and S12). These results suggested that
TQCN ameliorated iron overload-induced oxidative stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction, bringing about multiple neuro-
protective effects against ferroptosis.
2.4. TQCN-Activated Intrinsic Defenses against Fer-
roptosis-Driven AD Pathogenesis. To further estimate the
role of TQCN in initiating endogenous anti-ferroptosis
pathways against AD progression, network pharmacology
analysis was performed to identify potential targets and
molecular regulatory mechanisms. A total of 918 genes
associated with ferroptosis were obtained from the FerrDb
and GeneCards databases, and 3942 genes related to AD were
collected from the GeneCards, OMIM, and TTD databases. A
total of 334 target genes of QC were screened using TCMSP,
Swiss Target Prediction, and PharmMapper databases. The
overlap analysis of different gene sets showed that there were 55
intersection genes between QC and ferroptosis, of which 48
genes were associated with AD (Figure 4a), accounting for
87.3%, which could be regarded as the main targets of QC
regulating ferroptosis against AD. Subsequently, these 48 target
genes were introduced into the STRING database to construct
the visual “drug−target−disease” triangle (Figure 4b) and the
protein−protein interaction (PPI) network (Figure 4c). It was
found that these target genes mainly revolved around the
regulation of LPO and oxidative stress, such as lipoxygenase
(LOX) and Nrf2, which could mediate PUFA oxidation and
antioxidant responses, respectively.11,39 The Gene Ontology
(GO) functional enrichment analysis further suggested that
these target genes were involved in biological processes such as
the ROS metabolic process, lipid oxidation, and lipoxygenase
pathway as well as molecular functions and cellular components
such as mitochondrion, iron ion binding, and arachidonate 15-
LOX activity (Figure 4d). Finally, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis showed that
these target genes were enriched in the pathways regulating cell
senescence, neurodegeneration, ferroptosis, AD, ROS, and
apoptosis (Figure 4e).
Based on the bioinformatic findings, the detailed intrinsic
defense mechanisms of TQCN were verified by Western
blotting in HT22 cells undergoing ferroptosis. As anticipated,
the largely downregulated expressions of Nrf2 and its down-
stream GPX4 under FAC stimulation were significantly
increased by both QCN and TQCN treatments (Figure 4f),
with the latter being more pronounced than the former (Figure
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7896

4g,h). Given that Nrf2 is an upstream activator of various
antioxidant enzymes, we examined the activities of superoxide
dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT), which catalyze the
removal of O2
•−and H2O2, respectively, showing the extra-
ordinary ability of TQCN to rescue the extremely inhibited
antioxidant properties under iron deposition (Figure 4i,j). In
addition to the increased levels of GPX4 for LPO detoxification,
the FAC-induced surge in 15-LOX levels for LPO promotion
was also effectively attenuated by TQCN treatment, accom-
panied by the largely decreased contents of 4-HNE and
malondialdehyde (MDA), common byproducts of LPO (Figure
4k−m).40 Moreover, the increased levels of pro-apoptotic Bax
and the decreased levels of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 under FAC
stimulation were also observed to be reversed by TQCN
Figure 5. Brain-targeted, biodistribution- and mitochondria-targeted evaluation of TQCN. (a) Representative in vivo fluorescence images of
C57BL/6J mice administered with Cy5.5-labeled QCN or TQCN (2.5 mg kg−1) and (b) quantitative analysis of brain fluorescence intensities at
indicated time points. (c, e) Representative ex vivo fluorescence images of major organs and (d, f) quantitative fluorescence analysis of the brain
and liver at 2 and 32 h after administration. (g) Confocal immunofluorescence images of NeuN staining and (h) quantitative analysis of Cy5.5-
labled fluorescence intensities. Scale bars, 50 μm for original images and 25 μm for magnified images. (i) Confocal immunofluorescence images
of MitoTracker staining and (j) quantitative colocalization analysis with Cy5.5-labled NPs. Scale bars, 25 μm for original images and 10 μm for
magnified images. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7897

treatment (Figure 4n,o). Taken together, TQCN enhanced
Nrf2-mediated LPO elimination and antioxidant networks,
thereby rewiring endogenous defense systems against ferropto-
sis and its induced neuronal damage.
2.5. Brain-Targeted and Mitochondria-Located Eval-
uation of TQCN. Pharmacological inhibition of ferroptosis in
AD lesions depends on the permeability of the medications to
the blood−brain barrier (BBB).41 Intranasal administration
permits drug delivery directly into the brain, circumventing the
BBB through the olfactory and trigeminal pathways, which has
been widely employed for recent AD nanotherapeutics.42 In this
work, Cy5.5-labeled QCN and TQCN were administered
intranasally into C57BL/6J mice, and in vivo fluorescence
imaging was performed to evaluate their brain-targeting
efficiency. Brain fluorescence signals of both Cy5.5-labeled
QCN and TQCN were rapidly observed in living mice 10 min
after administration and gradually strengthened, reaching the
strongest at 2 h after administration, which then slowly subsided
Figure 6. TQCN treatment rescued cognitive impairment in AD mice. (a) Schematic of in vivo treatment and subsequent evaluation. (b)
Representative movement trajectories, the percentage of (c) time and (d) distance in inner squares, and (e) zone crossing number in the OFT.
(f) Experimental procedure, (g) preference index, and (h) discrimination index for novel object in the NOR test. (i) Representative moving
traces, the percentage of (j) distance, and (k) time spent in novel arm in the Y-maze test. (m) Escape latency in the navigation orientation phase,
(l) representative swimming paths, and (n) number of platform crossings in the spatial probe phase in the MWM test. TQCN: 2.5 mg kg−1. Data
are presented as the mean ± SEM (n = 8). *p < 0.05, **,##p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7898

Figure 7. Multipronged anti-AD efficacy of TQCN against ferroptosis. (a) Representative SWI images and (b) phase signal value analysis in the
hippocampus (n = 5). (c) Iron content detection in mouse brain after various treatments. (d) Representative images of Perl’s Prussian blue
staining on brain slices. Red arrows indicate iron-positive plaques. Scale bars, 200 μm for original images and 50 μm for magnified images. (e)
Representative confocal fluorescence images and (f, g) quantitative analysis of (f) DHE and (g) Aβ staining. Scale bars, 200 μm for DHE-stained
images and 50 μm for Aβ-stained images. (h−j) Representative immunoblots and quantitative analysis for (i) Nrf2, GPX4 and (j) FPN1, FTH1.
(k) SOD and CAT activity detection. (l) Schematic of Nrf2-mediated defense pathways activated by TQCN. (m) Representative immunoblots
and (n) quantitative analysis for 15-LOX and 4-HNE. (o) MDA content analysis. (p) Representative immunoblots and (q) quantitative analysis
for Bax and Bcl-2. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7899

but remained to some extent at 32 h after administration (Figure
5a,b). Throughout the whole process, brain fluorescence
intensities of TQCN administration were all significantly higher
than those of QCN administration at indicated time points
(Figure 5a,b), suggesting that lipophilic TPP modification
improved the brain-targeting ability of TQCN.
Ex vivo fluorescence imaging was then performed based on
isolated major organs, and the individual fluorescence differ-
ences in brain tissues were found to be consistent with in vivo
imaging results (Figure 5c−f). Large amounts of QCN and very
little TQCN also accumulated in the liver at 2 h after
administration (Figure 5c,d), and both were significantly
reduced and almost disappeared at 32 h after administration
(Figure 5e,f), implying an efficient hepatic clearance route.
Thereafter, the frozen brain sections were processed for
immunofluorescence imaging for cellular and subcellular
observations. Confocal images of neuronal nucleus-indicated
NeuN staining and mitochondria-indicated MitoTracker
staining showed that TQCN was transported to the hippo-
campus and cortex more than QCN (Figure 5g,h) and exhibited
stronger colocalization with mitochondria (Figure 5i,j).43 These
results demonstrated that intranasal delivery of TQCN could
reach the characteristic brain regions of AD such as the
hippocampus and cortex and locate in mitochondria, providing a
powerful guarantee for the specific treatment of ferroptosis-
driven AD in vivo.
2.6. TQCN Treatment Rescued Cognitive Impairments
in AD Mice. Inspired by the favorable cellular therapeutic
effects enhanced by mitochondrial-targeted capability, anti-
ferroptosis efficacy of TQCN was further investigated in APP/
PS1 transgenic mice, the recognized AD animal model, whose
brains showed massive iron deposition at 36 weeks of age,
accompanied by obvious AD pathological features.44,45 For
effective treatment, TQCN was administered intranasally every
other day for 24 days (Figure 6a), during which no significant
changes were monitored in the body weights of mice in each
group (Figure S13), indicating the safety and compliance of this
treatment modality. In the subsequent behavioral assessment of
cognitive function, the open field test (OFT) was performed first
to evaluate the autonomous exploration performance of mice. As
intuitively visualized from the movement trajectories, the AD
mice spent substantially increased time and distance at the edge
of the open field, while TQCN treatment restored a desire to
explore the internal space similar to that of the age-matched WT
mice (Figure 6b−d and Figure S14). In addition, the markedly
reduced zone crossing number in the AD mice was significantly
increased after TQCN treatment (Figure 6e), indicating
improved exploration motivation in the novel environment.
Next, the novelty recognition memory based on innate
curiosity in mice was assessed by the novel object recognition
(NOR) test and the Y-maze test, respectively.46 For the NOR
test, one of the familiar objects in the training phase was replaced
with a novel object in the testing phase to examine the mice’s
exploration preference for the novel object (Figure 6f). It was
found that the preference index and the discrimination index for
the novel object were much lower in the AD mice than in the
WT mice, which were greatly increased by TQCN treatment to
almost the same level as that of the WT mice (Figure 6g,h). For
the Y-maze test, the closed arm in the training phase was opened
in the testing phase to examine if the mice gravitated toward the
novel arm. The AD mice preferred to stay in the familiar arms
compared to the WT mice, as shown by fewer trajectories in the
novel arm in AD mice (Figure 6i). There was no significant
differences in the percentage of entries in the novel arm between
the WT and AD groups (Figure S15), which was due to the fact
that the WT mice preferred to stay in the novel arm for repetitive
movement and exploration, while the AD mice exhibited the
opposite behavior, resulting in greatly reduced distance and time
spent in the novel arm (Figure 6j,k). TQCN-treated AD mice
regained a stronger desire to explore the novel arm, even better
than the WT mice, as indicated by a significant increase in the
distance, time, and percentage of entries in the novel arm
(Figure 6i−k and Figure S16). Finally, the Morris water maze
(MWM) test was used to detect the spatial learning and memory
ability of mice. In the navigation orientation phase with the
hidden platform, escape latency of the AD mice was significantly
increased in the AD mice but was dramatically shortened after
TQCN treatment, comparable to that of the WT mice (Figure
6m), indicating an ameliorated learning disability. During the
spatial probe phase by removing the platform, the AD mice
showed severe border-searching stereotypical behavior, while
TQCN-treated AD mice exhibited similar exploration of the
original platform-located region as the WT mice, as indicated by
greatly increased distance and time spent in the target quadrant
and platform crossing number (Figure 6l,n and Figure S17).
Overall, these behavioral results validated that TQCN treatment
rescued the severely impaired cognitive function in AD mice.
2.7. Multipronged Anti-AD Efficacy of TQCN Admin-
istration against Ferroptosis. Susceptibility-weighted imag-
ing (SWI) is a classical and commonly used imaging technique
for noninvasive characterizing brain iron deposition.47 The
contrast in SWI images results from local magnetic field
inhomogeneities caused by highly paramagnetic iron, such as
low signal shadow and negative phase shift relative to
surrounding parenchyma.47,48 Thus, we used SWI imaging to
dynamically evaluate the inhibition of brain iron deposition
achieved by TQCN treatment. The obtained SWI images
showed that a large number of low-signal dark areas appeared in
the whole brain of AD mice, especially in the hippocampus and
cortex, compared with WT mice (Figure 7a). Quantitative
analysis showed that TQCN treatment prevented the sharp
decline of phase values in the hippocampus of AD mice,
restoring them to almost the same level as that of WT mice
(Figure 7b), further confirmed by iron content detection based
on brain tissue homogenates (Figure 7c). The distribution of
iron deposition in the mouse brain was further detected by Perl’s
Prussian blue staining. Numerous iron-positive plaques were
observed in both the hippocampus, especially dentate gyrus
(DG), CA1, and CA3 subregions, and the cortex of AD mice,
which were all significantly eliminated by TQCN treatment
(Figure 7d). These results demonstrated that TQCN treatment
effectively reduced brain iron deposition in AD lesions.
Furthermore, Bio-TEM images showed that TQCN retained
an approximately spherical NP morphology after long-term
treatment (Figure S17), suggesting the structural stability of
TQCN. Then, dihydroethidium (DHE) staining based on
freshly isolated mouse brain tissues was performed to detect
ROS levels and distribution in the mouse brain after various
treatments. Representative fluorescence images showed that
DHE-stained red fluorescence was densely distributed in the
hippocampus and cortex of AD brain but significantly weakened
after TQCN treatment (Figure 7e,f), indicating largely relieved
oxidative stress. Then, immunofluorescence staining of Aβ
aggregates in frozen brain sections and corresponding
quantitative analysis presented the potent inhibitory effect of
TQCN on Aβ deposition in the AD mouse brain (Figure 7e,g).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7900

To further elucidate the underlying regulatory mechanisms of
TQCN treatment on multiple factors affecting ferroptosis, the
expressions of related proteins in Nrf2-mediated iron metabo-
lism and endogenous antioxidant pathways were determined by
Western blotting. Along with the upregulation of Nrf2, the levels
of its downstream LPO detoxification enzyme GPX4, iron
storage protein FTH1, and iron export protein FPN1 were all
significantly increased in the AD mouse brain after TQCN
treatment (Figure 7h−j). Meanwhile, the restricted activities of
antioxidant enzymes SOD and CAT in AD mouse brain were
also effectively enhanced by TQCN treatment (Figure 7k),
demonstrating that TQCN treatment reversed the impaired
Nrf2 signaling cascade in the AD brain to promote iron
homeostasis and strengthen antioxidant defenses against
ferroptosis (Figure 7l). As a result, LPO, a major marker of
ferroptosis, was significantly inhibited in AD brain after TQCN
treatment, as evidenced by a large decrease in the levels of LPO
catalytic enzyme 15-LOX and LPO byproducts 4-HNE and
MDA (Figure 7m−o). Moreover, the decreased Bax levels and
the increased Bcl-2 levels in TQCN-treated AD brain proved
that TQCN prevented apoptosis from exerting a neuro-
protective effect (Figure 7p,q). On the whole, TQCN could
simultaneously trigger multiple anti-ferroptosis pathways to
combat AD.
Biosafety is a key concern in AD drug development and
clinical application. Among the components of TQCN, QC is a
plant-derived natural molecule with inherent biocompatibility,
PEG is an FDA-approved drug adjuvant, and TPP is a nontoxic
chemical moiety widely used in disease research.49 The
aforementioned cytotoxicity test proved in vitro biological safety
of TQCN (Figure S7), and its administration safety was
supported by the quality of life unaffected by the treatment
process (Figure S10). There were no obvious changes in serum
biochemistry analysis after TQCN treatment compared with the
WT mice, including liver function indicators (AST, ALT, T-Bil,
and ALB) and kidney function indicators (CR and BUN) (Table
S1), suggesting the negligible toxicity of TQCN on the liver and
kidney. Routine blood tests showed slightly decreased and
increased lymphocyte levels (Lymphs) and neutrophil ratio
(Gran%), respectively, but still within normal ranges as the other
parameters (Table S2). As shown by hematoxylin−eosin
(H&E) staining, there were no obvious pathological changes
in major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) after
various treatments (Figure S18). These results preliminarily
supported the biosafety of TQCN as a biosafe pleiotropic
ferroptosis-specific inhibitor for AD treatment. For possible
clinical translation, the design of AD lesion or neuron targeting,
the effect of doses on efficacy, and the analysis of TQCN
metabolites need to be further considered and investigated in
the future.
3. CONCLUSION
In summary, this work provided a comprehensive anti-
ferroptosis smart nanomedicine (TQCN) to suppress AD
pathogenesis. By virtue of efficient mitochondrial delivery
mediated by TPP modification, TQCN could chelate iron at
the center where ferroptosis occurred through spontaneous
coordination between phytopolyphenol structures of QC and
iron ions and self-assemble in situ to form metal-phenolic
nanocomplexes. This escalating exogenous offensive therapeutic
response allowed TQCN treatment to attenuate iron overload
and eliminate the ROS produced by the Fenton reaction.
Meanwhile, Nrf2 signaling pathways were activated to re-
establish endogenous defense systems by normalizing iron efflux
and storage and enhancing GPX4-mediated LPO detoxification.
As a result, TQCN treatment exhibited excellent efficacy in AD
mice, including reducing brain iron deposition, restoring iron
metabolism homeostasis, and alleviating oxidative stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction, ultimately ameliorating Aβ accumu-
lation, neuronal apoptosis, and cognitive decline. This work
reveals the great potential of natural phytopolyphenol-
coordinated intelligent nanotherapeutics for multipronged
management of ferroptosis-driven neurodegenerative diseases
such as AD.
4. METHODS
4.1. Materials. QC was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA).
FeCl3·6H2O and FeSO4 were purchased from the Guangfu Fine
Chemical Research Institute (Tianjin, China). mPEG-CH2-COOH
(MW = 5000, PEG-COOH) and mPEG-NH2 (MW = 2000, PEG-
NH2) were respectively purchased from Biomatrik Inc. (Zhejiang,
China) and Huateng Pharma (Hunan, China). TPP, FAC, 1-ethyl-3-(3-
(dimethylamino)propyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC), N-
hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), and tetrahydrofuran (THF) were
purchased from Aladdin (Shanghai, China). Phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS), physiological saline solution (PSS), Hank’s balanced salt
solution (HBSS), DAPI, Hoechst 33342, DCFH-DA, CCK-8 assay kit,
SOD and CAT activity assay kit, MDA content assay kit, ABTS and
DPPH free radical scavenging capacity assay kit, mitochondrial
membrane potential kit (JC-10 assay), and Annexin V-FITC/PI assay
kit were all purchased from Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd.
(Beijing, China). MitoTracker and Mito-SOX indicators were
respectively purchased from Beijing BioRab Technology Co., Ltd.
(China) and Yeasen (Shanghai, China). Iron assay kit and DHE were
purchased from Applygen (Beijing, China). Enhanced BCA protein
assay kit and ATP assay kit were purchased from Beyotime
Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). Deionized (DI) water was prepared
with a Milli-Q ultrapure water distiller (MINGCHE-D24UV, USA).
4.2. Preparation of QCN and TQCN. TPP, EDC, NHS, PEG-
NH2, and TPP were dissolved in DMSO. TPP (11 mg mL−1), EDC (9.5
mg mL−1), and NHS (5.75 mg mL−1) were mixed together and stirred
for 15 min. Then, 10 mg of PEG-NH2 (10 mg mL−1) was added to the
above solution and stirred for 24 h at room temperature. Next, the
reacted solution was dialyzed using a dialysis bag (MWCO: 1000 Da)
to remove unreacted reagents. The resulting PEG−TPP was further
freeze-dried for further use. PEG-COOH (100 μL, 2 mg mL−1) and QC
(100 μL, 10 mg mL−1) were dissolved in THF and then dropped into 5
mL of DI water swiftly under sonication (300 W). The final solution
containing QCN was centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 20 min to harvest
the NPs, and then the QCN was rinsed twice and resuspended in DI
water. To obtain TQCN, PEG−TPP (75 μL, 2 mg mL−1), PEG-
COOH (25 μL, 2 mg mL−1), and QC (100 μL, 10 mg mL−1) were
dissolved in THF, and then subsequent steps were carried out as
described above. To obtain Cy5.5-labeled QCN or TQCN, near-
infrared fluorescent probe Cy5.5 (2 μL, 50 mg mL−1) was added to the
THF solution of NPs, and then subsequent steps were performed as
described above.
4.3. Characterization. 1H NMR spectra of dry samples (TPP,
PEG, and PEG−TPP) solubilized in DMSO-d6 were characterized by a
Bruker Ascend 400 NMR spectrometer (Bruker, Germany). Surface
morphology of NPs was characterized by transmission electron
microscopy (TEM, HT7700, Hitachi, Japan). Hydrodynamic diameter
and zeta potential of NPs were analyzed by a dynamic light scattering
(DLS) instrument (Zetasizer Nano ZS90, Malvern, UK). UV−vis
spectra of QC (freshly made in 5% DMSO) and QCN and TQCN
(freshly made in DI water) were measured on the UV-3600 Plus
systems (Shimadzu, Japan). The standard curve of QC at different
concentrations was plotted according to the UV−vis characteristic
absorption of QC at 372 nm. To assess QC loading in TQCN, the
supernatant after TQCN synthesis was collected by centrifugation to
determine the characteristic absorbance of QC at 372 nm to calculate
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7901

the amount of unloaded free QC, and then the amount of unloaded free
QC was removed from the initial input QC to calculate EE% and LE%
of QC.
4.4. Metal-Phenolic Nanocomplex Identification. The kinetics
of the formation of the complexes between QC and iron ions were
determined by UV−vis spectra. A 500 μmol L−1 QC solution (freshly
made in 5% DMSO) was mixed with an Fe3+/Fe2+ solution (freshly
made in DI water) at different concentrations in accordance with the
volume ratio of 1:1. UV−vis absorbance spectra of the mixture were
recorded at 300−600 nm to analyze the difference in the absorbance at
430 nm. To detect the QC-derived QCN or TQCN to chelate iron, 400
μmol L−1 QCN or TQCN (made in DI water) was mixed with a 1000
μmol L−1 Fe3+/Fe2+ solution according to the volume ratio of 1:1, and
UV−vis absorbance spectra of the mixture were recorded at 300−600
nm. XPS was carried out by a Thermo ESCALAB 250Xi instrument
with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV). The data
had been corrected and the binding energy of the main peak of sample
C 1s was determined at 284.8 eV. To examine the free radical
scavenging ability of the metal-phenolic nanocomplex, ABTS and
DPPH free radical scavenging assays were performed to detect the total
antioxidant capacity of these nanocomplexes according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The absorbances at 405 and 515 nm
were respectively measured by a UV−vis spectrophotometer to
calculate the eliminated ABTS•+ and DPPH• ratio.
4.5. Cell Viability Assays. HT22 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (v/v) at 37 °C in an
incubator (Thermo Scientific, USA) containing 5% CO2. Cell viability
was determined with the CCK-8 method. Briefly, HT22 cells were
seeded at 5 × 103 cells/well in 96-well plates and cultured overnight for
subsequent experiments. To detect cytotoxicity, HT22 cells were
incubated respectively with TQCN and QCN (0, 16.5, 33.1, 165, 248,
331, and 662 μmol L−1) for 48 h. To assess the therapeutic effects on the
FAC-induced neuron model, HT22 cells were respectively treated with
DFO, QC, QCN, and TQCN (3, 10, and 25 μmol L−1) and co-
incubated with FAC (600 μmol L−1) for 36 h. Then, the incubation
solution was removed and a CCK-8 working solution was added for 30
min, and the absorbance was detected at 450 nm with a multimode
microplate reader (EnSpire, PerkinElmer, USA).
4.6. Mitochondrial Colocalization Analysis. HT22 cells were
seeded into a confocal dish, cultured for 12 h, and then incubated with
Cy5.5-labeled QCN or TQCN (25 μmol L−1) for 4 h. After being
washed three times with HBSS, the cells were stained with MitoTracker
(0.5 μmol L−1) for 15 min at 37 °C, followed by washing and keeping in
prewarmed HBSS. Finally, fluorescence images were obtained by a
confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM; A1 HD25, Nikon, Japan).
The Pearson’s colocalization coefficient was calculated using ImageJ
software. Frozen brain slices were incubated with MitoTracker and
DAPI at room temperature overnight for 30 min for CLSM observation.
The Manders’ overlap coefficient was calculated using ImageJ software.
4.7. Iron Content Detection. An iron assay kit was used to detect
iron content according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For in vitro
studies, HT22 cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 106 cells/well in a
six-well plate and cultured overnight. The cells were respectively treated
with QCN and TQCN (containing QC concentration of 25 μmol L−1)
and co-incubated with FAC (600 μmol L−1) for 36 h. After all of the
treatments, the cells were washed with cold PBS twice and then placed
in a shaking incubator with lysis buffer for 2 h. For in vivo studies, fresh
brain tissues was extracted and ground in lysis buffer with protease
inhibitor by a Precellys Evolution super homogenizer (Bertin, France)
and placed in a shaking incubator for 2 h. The samples were incubated
at 60 °C for 1 h with 4.5% potassium permanganate and incubation
buffer and treated with 30 μL of iron detection reagent for 30 min. The
absorbances were detected at 550 nm with a multimode microplate
reader (EnSpire, PerkinElmer, USA). The protein content was
evaluated using the BCA assay, and iron ion concentration correction
was performed.
4.8. ROS Fluorescence Imaging. For in vitro studies, HT22 cells
were seeded at a density of 4 × 105 cells/well in a confocal dish and
cultured overnight. After all the treatments, DCFH-DA or Mito-SOX
staining working solutions were added to HT22 cells for 10 min at 37
°C and then stained with Hoechst 33342 for CLSM observation. For in
vivo studies, fresh brain tissues were obtained, and frozen slices (10 μm
thick) were prepared within 1 h without fixation and dehydration. The
slices were incubated with DHE (10 μmol L−1) at 37 °C under dark
conditions for 30 min. After being washed with PSS, fluorescence
images were scanned by CLSM immediately, and the fluorescence
intensities were quantified by ImageJ software.
4.9. Detection of Morphology and Function of Mitochon-
dria. HT22 cells were seeded at a density of 4 × 105 cells/well in a
confocal dish and cultured overnight. After all of the treatments, HT22
cells were divided for the following tests. For observing the morphology
of mitochondria, Bio-TEM was performed according to the following
procedure. Cells were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 2 h. After
being dehydrated and dried, cells were cut into ultrathin sections (60−
80 nm). Sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate for 15
min and collected onto the copper grid for observation using a TEM
microscope (Hitachi, HT7700). For JC-10 staining, the cells were
stained with working solution prepared by diluting JC-10 mother
solution (200×) with PBS for 20 min at 37 °C. After rinsing,
monomeric JC-10 green fluorescence images and aggregate JC-10 red
fluorescence images were scanned by CLSM, and the fluorescence
intensities were quantified by ImageJ software. The membrane
potential was evaluated by the fluorescence intensity ratio of JC-10
aggregates (red fluorescence) to monomers (green fluorescence). For
the cellular ATP test, the supernatant of cellular lysis was collected, and
then 100 μL of ATP detection solution was added at room temperature
for 5 min. After mixing, the sample was measured with a luminometer
(EnSpire, PerkinElmer, USA).
4.10. Determination of SOD, CAT Activities, and MDA Level.
The activities of SOD and CAT as well as the MDA content were
measured using commercial kits according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Briefly, for in vitro studies, HT22 cells were seeded at a
density of 1 × 106 cells/well in a six-well plate and cultured overnight.
After various treatments, the supernatant of cellular lysis was collected
and measured with spectrophotometry. For in vivo studies, fresh brain
tissues were extracted and ground in lysis buffer with protease inhibitor
by a Precellys Evolution super homogenizer (Bertin, France). And then,
the follow-up detections were carried out according to the kit
instructions. The protein content was evaluated using the BCA assay
as the standard.
4.11. Network Pharmacology Analysis. The target genes of QC
were accessed from the Swiss Target Prediction database, the
Traditional Chinese Medicine Systems Pharmacology (TCMSP), and
the PharmMapper database. The genes associated with Alzheimer’s
disease were collected from the Therapeutic Targets database (TTD),
the GeneCards database, and the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
(OMIM). The genes associated with ferroptosis were collected from
the FerrDb database and the GeneCards database. The overlap of
identified genes was performed using the OmicStudio tools. The target
genes were integrated into the PPI network using the String database.
The analyzed PPI network was then imported into Cytoscape3.8.2
software (National Institute of General Medical Sciences, Boston, MA,
USA) for visualization processing, followed by building the protein−
protein interaction network and drug−disease−target network
diagram. The GO functional annotation and the KEGG pathway
analyses were performed through the online analysis function of the
Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery
(DAVID).
4.12. Animals and Administration. C57BL/6J mice (male, 8
months old) and APP/PS1 mice (male, 8 months old) were purchased
from Beijing Viewsolid Biotech Co., Ltd. All animal experiments were
performed according to the guidelines approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee at Tianjin Medical University
(SYXK2020-0010). All the mice were randomly divided into the
following three groups (n = 8 per group): the wild-type (WT) group
(C57BL/6J + saline), the AD group (APP/PS1 + saline), and the AD +
TQCN group (APP/PS1 + TQCN). The mice of the WT and AD
groups were administered intranasally with saline (20 μL) every other
day for 24 days. For in vivo treatment, the mice of the AD + TQCN
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7902

group were administered intranasally by TQCN (20 μL, 2.5 mg kg−1)
every other day for 24 days. After completion of the TQCN treatment,
behavioral tests were performed for 10 days. Finally, three mice were
randomly selected from each group for a follow-up molecular
mechanism study. The morphology of TQCN in mouse hippocampal
tissues was observed by Bio-TEM as described above.
4.13. In Vivo Fluorescence Imaging and Biodistribution.
C57BL/6J mice (male, 8 weeks old) were intranasally administrated
with Cy5.5-labeled QCN or TQCN (2.5 mg kg−1) and observed under
an in vivo imaging system (IVIS Lumina III, PerkinElmer) at indicated
time points (10 min, 1 h, 2 h, 6 h, 24 h, 32 h) after administration. Brain,
heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney were collected for in vitro
fluorescence imaging at 2 and 32 h after administration. At 2 h
postadministration, brain tissues were collected to prepare frozen brain
slices, which were stained with NeuN antibody at 4 °C overnight and
stained with DAPI for CLSM observation. The fluorescence intensities
were quantified with ImageJ software.
4.14. Behavioral Tests. All behavioral tests were sequentially
assayed and recorded using the Smart V3.0 video tracking system
(RWD Life Science Co., Ltd., China). In the OFT, the open field size
was 40 × 40 × 40 cm, and each mouse was placed in the center of the
bottom to move freely for 5 min. The percentages of time and distance
in inner and outer squares were recorded. The NOR test consisted of
three phases: habituation, training, and testing. The OFT was used for
the habituation phase. After 2 h, two identical objects were placed in
two corners on the same side of the instrument, and the mice were
placed in the center of the bottom and allowed to explore the objects for
5 min during the training phase. After 2 h, one of the objects was
replaced with a novel object and the mice were placed again to explore
the objects for 5 min during the testing phase. Time spent exploring
familiar and novel objects was further analyzed.
In the Y-maze test, three arms were labeled as a start arm, an other
arm, and a novel arm. The process included training and test trials.
During the training trial, the novel arm was blocked by the baffle and the
mice were placed in the start arm and allowed to freely explore the maze
for 5 min. After a 1 h interval, the novel arm was opened for the test trial.
The mice were placed in the start arm again and allowed to freely
explore the maze for 5 min. The distance, time, and number of entries in
the novel arm were recorded. In the MWM test, a circular tank with a
diameter of 120 cm was filled with water and kept at 21−24 °C. A
platform 12 cm in diameter was hidden more than 1.5 cm below the
water surface. The quadrant where the platform was located was defined
as the target quadrant. In the navigation orientation experiment, each
mouse was trained from four quadrants placed in water facing the tank
for 5 days. If the mouse did not reach the platform within 60 s, it would
be guided to the platform and stay on the platform for 30 s. On the sixth
day, the fixed platform was removed from the maze and the mice were
placed in the position farthest from the platform and allowed to swim
freely for 60 s. Escape latency, distance, and time spent in the target
quadrant, and platform crossing number were recorded.
4.15. SWI Imaging. In vivo magnetic resonance imaging was
performed on a 9.4 T MRI scanner (Bruker BioSpec 94/30 USR,
Germany). During the scanning, the mice were anesthetized by inhaling
isoflurane, and the mice’s heart rate and respiration were monitored in
real time. Using the T1-FLASH-2D sequence, the scanning parameters
were as follows: TR = 441 ms, TE = 16 ms, field of view (FOV) = 20
mm × 20 mm, flip angle = 30°, number of slices = 5, slice thickness = 0.5
mm. For analysis, the hippocampus was manually defined as a region of
interest (ROI) in imaging slices of each mouse. The phase value was
measured on the phase diagram, and the average phase value of the
hippocampus in the same sections of different mice was taken as the
final measurement value.
4.16. Perl’s Prussian Blue Staining. After all treatments, the brain
was collected, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 24 h, and
dehydrated in 30% sucrose solution for 48 h, and the solution was
changed once in between. Then, paraffin embedding and sectioning
were performed. The Perl’s staining liquid drops were added to the
sections and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. After rinsing with distilled
water three times, the incubation drops were added to the slices and
incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. After the slices were rinsed with distilled
water three times, the enhanced working liquid drops were added to the
slices and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min. After the slices were rinsed
with PBS three times, the compound dye was added for 5 min of
staining, and then the slices were washed, dehydrated, and sealed. The
sections were scanned with a Pannoramic 250 Flash Series digital
scanner (3D HISTECH, Hungary).
4.17. Aβ Immunofluorescence Staining. After all treatments,
brain tissues were collected, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution for
24 h, and dehydrated in 30% sucrose solution for 48 h, and the solution
was changed once in between. Frozen brain sections (20 μm thick)
were prepared on a Leica CM1950 cryostat (Germany). The sections
were incubated with anti-amyloid D54d2 (1:800, Cell Signaling), at 4
°C overnight. After being washed with Tris-buffered saline with Tween
(TBST), brain sections were incubated with the fluorescently
conjugated secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h. After
TBST washing, the sections were stained with DAPI for CLSM, and the
fluorescence intensities were quantified by ImageJ software.
4.18. Western Blotting Analysis. Proteins were extracted from
HT22 cells and hippocampal tissues. The expression levels of GPX4,
Nrf2, 15-LOX, 4-HNE, Bax, Bcl-2, FPN1, and FTH1 were detected.
The protein concentration was measured by the BCA method. SDS-
PAGE electrophoresis was used to isolate the protein and transfer it to a
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane. PVDF membranes were
enclosed in 5% BSA solution for 1 h and then incubated at 4 °C
overnight by primary antibodies, as shown in Table S3. After being
washed with TBST, PVDF membranes were incubated with HRP-
conjugated secondary antibody (1:3000, Cell Signaling Technology) at
room temperature for 1 h. After TBST washing, a ChemiDoc XRS +
System (Bio-Rad, USA) was used to display protein bands by the ECL
method, and protein expression levels were quantified by ImageJ
software.
4.19. In Vivo Biosafety. After all the treatments, blood samples of
mice were collected to analyze routine blood parameters, including
aspartate transaminase (AST), aminotransferase (ALT), total bilirubin
(T-Bil), creatinine (CR), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and albumin
(ALB), and serum enzyme levels, including white blood cells (WBCs),
lymphocytes (Lymph), monocytes (Mons), granulocytes (Grans), red
blood cells (RBCs), hemoglobin (HGB), hematocrit (HCT), mean
corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH),
mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), red blood cell
distribution width (RDW), platelets (PLTs), and mean platelet volume
(MPV). Then, major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys)
were collected and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde to prepare paraffin-
embedded tissue sections. After staining with H&E, the images were
observed under a Pannoramic digital scanner (3D HISTECH,
Hungary).
4.20. Statistical Analysis. All data were analyzed using GraphPad
Prism 9 Software and expressed as mean ± SEM or mean ± SD.
Significant differences were assessed using Student’s t test or one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s multiple
comparisons tests. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p <
0.0001 were determined as statistically significant.
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286.
Hydrodynamic diameter of QCN, standard curve of UV−
vis absorbance of QC with relative concentrations, DLS
size stability of TQCN, digital photographs of QC/Fe2+
and QC/Fe3+ complex solutions, UV−vis absorption
spectra of QCN and TQCN chelated with Fe2+, high-
resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p in QCN/Fe3+ and
TQCN/Fe3+ nanocomplexes, cytotoxicity assay of QCN
and TQCN, cell viability incubated with QC, DFO, QCN,
and TQCN under FAC stimulation, standard curve of the
absorbance of iron with relative concentrations, mouse
body weight monitoring, percentage of time and distance
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7903

spent in outer squares in the OFT, percentage of entries in
the novel arm in the Y-maze test, percentage of distance
and time in target quadrant in the MWM test, H&E tissue
staining, hematology and serum biochemistry analysis,
antibody information (PDF)
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Yan Dou −Department of Radiology and Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Functional Imaging, Tianjin Medical University
General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, People’s Republic of
China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-6905-2787;
Email: douyan@tmu.edu.cn
Jin Chang −School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin
300072, People’s Republic of China;
orcid.org/0000-
0002-6752-8526; Email: jinchang@tju.edu.cn
Authors
Yining Liu −School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin
300072, People’s Republic of China
Dongju Zhao −Department of Radiology and Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Functional Imaging, Tianjin Medical University
General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, People’s Republic of
China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-0589-5670
Fan Yang −School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin
300072, People’s Republic of China
Caihua Ye −Department of Radiology and Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Functional Imaging, Tianjin Medical University
General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, People’s Republic of China
Ziyao Chen −School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University,
Tianjin 300072, People’s Republic of China
Yihan Chen −Department of Radiology and Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Functional Imaging, Tianjin Medical University
General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, People’s Republic of China
Xiaomeng Yu −School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University,
Tianjin 300072, People’s Republic of China
Jiyao Xie −School of Life Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin
300072, People’s Republic of China
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
Author Contributions
Y.L. and D.Z. contributed equally to this work. Y.D. and Y.L.
designed the project. Y.L. and D.Z. conducted the investigation,
performed most experiments, and analyzed the data. Y.L. wrote
the draft. F.Y., C.Y., and Z.C. contributed to characterization,
behavioral tests, and discussions. Y.C., X.Y., and J.X. conducted
the investigation and assisted in Bio-TEM. J.C. provided
resources and financial support. Y.D. provided most resources
and financial support, supervised the entire project, and revised
the final manuscript. All authors approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This work was funded by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (32271440) and the Tianjin Natural
Science Foundation (21JCQNJC01570) and was supported by
the Tianjin Key Medical Discipline (Specialty) Construction
Project (TJYXZDXK-001A).
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
ABBREVIATIONS
AD, Alzheimer’s disease; ROS, reactive oxygen species; PUFAs,
polyunsaturated fatty acids; LPO, lipid peroxidation; Aβ,
amyloid-β; FPN, ferroportin; FTH, ferritin heavy isoform;
GPX4, glutathione peroxidase 4; Nrf2, nuclear factor E2-related
factor 2; QC, quercetin; TPP, triphenylphosphonium; PEG,
poly(ethylene glycol); TEM, transmission electron microscope;
CLSM, confocal laser scanning microscopy; XPS, X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy; ABTS, 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenz-
thiazoline-6-sulfonic acid); DPPH, 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydra-
zide; CCK-8, Cell Counting Kit-8; FAC, ferric ammonium
citrate; GO, Gene Ontology; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes; SOD, superoxide dismutase; CAT,
catalase; MDA, malondialdehyde; 4-HNE, 4-hydroxynonenal;
OFT, open field test; NOR, novel object recognition test;
MWM, Morris water maze test; SWI, susceptibility weighted
imaging; DHE, dihydroethidium
REFERENCES
(1) Wolters, F. J.; Chibnik, L. B.; Waziry, R.; Anderson, R.; Berr, C.;
Beiser, A.; Bis, J. C.; Blacker, D.; Bos, D.; Brayne, C.; Dartigues, J. F.;
Darweesh, S. K. L.; Davis-Plourde, K. L.; de Wolf, F.; Debette, S.;
Dufouil, C.; Fornage, M.; Goudsmit, J.; Grasset, L.; Gudnason, V.; et al.
Twenty-Seven-Year Time Trends in Dementia Incidence in Europe and
the United States: the Alzheimer Cohorts Consortium. Neurology 2020,
95, e519−e531.
(2) Scheltens, P.; De Strooper, B.; Kivipelto, M.; Holstege, H.;
Chételat, G.; Teunissen, C. E.; Cummings, J.; Van Der Flier, W. M.
Alzheimer’s Disease. Lancet 2021, 397, 1577−1590.
(3) Santos, M. A.; Chand, K.; Chaves, S. Recent Progress in
Multifunctional Metal Chelators as Potential Drugs for Alzheimer’s
Disease. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2016, 327−328, 287−303.
(4) Wu, Y.; Torabi, S. F.; Lake, R. J.; Hong, S.; Yu, Z.; Wu, P.; Yang, Z.;
Nelson, K.; Guo, W.; Pawel, G. T.; Van Stappen, J.; Shao, X.; Mirica, L.
M.; Lu, Y. Simultaneous Fe2+/Fe3+ Imaging Shows Fe3+ Over Fe2+
Enrichment in Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Brain. Sci. Adv. 2023, 9,
No. eade7622.
(5) Yan, N.; Zhang, J. Iron Metabolism, Ferroptosis, and the Links
with Alzheimer’s Disease. Front. Neurosci. 2020, 13, 1443.
(6) Dixon, S. J.; Lemberg, K. M.; Lamprecht, M. R.; Skouta, R.;
Zaitsev, E. M.; Gleason, C. E.; Patel, D. N.; Bauer, A. J.; Cantley, A. M.;
Yang, W. S.; Morrison, B.; Stockwell, B. R. Ferroptosis: an Iron-
Dependent Form of Nonapoptotic Cell Death. Cell 2012, 149, 1060−
1072.
(7) Dang, Y.; He, Q.; Yang, S.; Sun, H.; Liu, Y.; Li, W.; Tang, Y.;
Zheng, Y.; Wu, T. FTH1- and SAT1-Induced Astrocytic Ferroptosis Is
Involved in Alzheimer’s Disease: Evidence from Single-Cell Tran-
scriptomic Analysis. Pharmaceuticals 2022, 15, 1177.
(8) Yang, Y.; Wang, X.; Xiao, A.; Han, J.; Wang, Z.; Wen, M. Ketogenic
Diet Prevents Chronic Sleep Deprivation-Induced Alzheimer’s Disease
by Inhibiting Iron Dyshomeostasis and Promoting Repair via Sirt1/
Nrf2 Pathway. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2022, 14, No. 998292.
(9) Chen, L.; Dar, N. J.; Na, R.; McLane, K. D.; Yoo, K.; Han, X.; Ran,
Q. Enhanced Defense Against Ferroptosis Ameliorates Cognitive
Impairment and Reduces Neurodegeneration in 5xFAD Mice. Free
Radic. Biol. Med. 2022, 180, 1−12.
(10) Wang, C.; Chen, S.; Guo, H.; Jiang, H.; Liu, H.; Fu, H.; Wang, D.
Forsythoside A Mitigates Alzheimer’s-like Pathology by Inhibiting
Ferroptosis-Mediated Neuroinflammation via Nrf2/GPX4 Axis
Activation. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2022, 18, 2075−2090.
(11) Xu, S.; Chen, W.; Xie, Q.; Xu, Y. Obacunone Activates the Nrf2-
Dependent Antioxidant Responses. Protein Cell 2016, 7, 684−688.
(12) Cai, X.; Hua, S.; Deng, J.; Du, Z.; Zhang, D.; Liu, Z.; Khan, N. U.;
Zhou, M.; Chen, Z. Astaxanthin Activated the Nrf2/HO-1 Pathway to
Enhance Autophagy and Inhibit Ferroptosis, Ameliorating Acetami-
nophen-Induced Liver Injury. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2022, 14,
42887−42903.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7904

(13) Mobarra, N.; Shanaki, M.; Ehteram, H.; Nasiri, H.; Sahmani, M.;
Saeidi, M.; Goudarzi, M.; Pourkarim, H.; Azad, M. A Review on Iron
Chelators in Treatment of Iron Overload Syndromes. Int. J. Hematol.
Oncol. Ste. Cell Res. 2016, 10, 239−247.
(14) Fisher, S. A.; Brunskill, S. J.; Doree, C.; Gooding, S.; Chowdhury,
O.; Roberts, D. J. Desferrioxamine Mesylate for Managing Transfu-
sional Iron Overload in People with Transfusion-dependent
Thalassaemia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2013, 8, No. CD004450.
(15) Bardestani, A.; Ebrahimpour, S.; Esmaeili, A.; Esmaeili, A.
Quercetin Attenuates Neurotoxicity Induced by Iron Oxide Nano-
particles. J. Nanobiotechnology 2021, 19, 327.
(16) Guo, M.; Perez, C.; Wei, Y.; Rapoza, E.; Su, G.; Bou-Abdallah, F.;
Chasteen, N. D. Iron-Binding Properties of Plant Phenolics and
Cranberry’s Bio-Effects. Dalton Trans. 2007, 4951−4961.
(17) Liu, X.; Ma, Y.; Luo, L.; Zong, D.; Li, H.; Zeng, Z.; Cui, Y.; Meng,
W.; Chen, Y. Dihydroquercetin Suppresses Cigarette Smoke Induced
Ferroptosis in the Pathogenesis of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease by Activating Nrf2-Mediated Pathway. Phytomedicine 2022, 96,
No. 153894.
(18) Chen, X.; Li, H.; Wang, Z.; Zhou, Q.; Chen, S.; Yang, B.; Yin, D.;
He, H.; He, M. Quercetin Protects the Vascular Endothelium Against
Iron Overload Damages via ROS/ADMA/DDAHII/eNOS/NO Path-
way. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2020, 868, No. 172885.
(19) Liu, J.; Liu, C.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, K.; Song, J.-X.;
Sreenivasmurthy, S. G.; Wang, Z.; Shi, Y.; Chu, C.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, C.;
Deng, X.; Liu, X.; Song, J.; Zhuang, R.; Huang, S.; Zhang, P.; Li, M.;
Wen, L.; Zhang, Y. w.; Liu, G. A Self-Assembled α-Synuclein
Nanoscavenger for Parkinson’s Disease. ACS Nano 2020, 14, 1533−
1549.
(20) Zhao, D.; Tian, C.; Cheng, M.; Yang, F.; Tian, C.; Liu, Y.; Chen,
Z.; Pang, G.; Shen, H.; Chang, J.; Dou, Y. Carrier-Free Quercetin
Nanomedicine Blocks NLRP3 Deubiquitination and TXNIP Recruit-
ment for Parkinson’s Disease Therapy. Chem. Eng. J. 2023, 464,
No. 142697.
(21) Modica-Napolitano, J. S.; Aprille, J. R. Delocalized Lipophilic
Cations Selectively Target the Mitochondria of Carcinoma Cells. Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev. 2001, 49, 63−70.
(22) Coggeshall, N. D.; Lang, E. M. Influence of Solvent, Hydrogen
Bonding, Temperature and Conjugation on the Ultraviolet Spectra of
Phenols and Aromatic Hydrocarbons. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1948, 70 (10),
3283−92.
(23) Gritsenko, E. N. Study of Solvato Complexes of Polyphenols by
UV Spectroscopy. Chem. Nat. Compd. 1990, 26 (3), 341−342.
(24) Yang, P.; Sheng, D.; Guo, Q.; Wang, P.; Xu, S.; Qian, K.; Li, Y.;
Cheng, Y.; Wang, L.; Lu, W.; Zhang, Q. Neuronal Mitochondria-
Targeted Micelles Relieving Oxidative Stress for Delayed Progression
of Alzheimer’s Disease. Biomaterials 2020, 238, No. 119844.
(25) Han, Y.; Gao, C.; Wang, H.; Sun, J.; Liang, M.; Feng, Y.; Liu, Q.;
Fu, S.; Cui, L.; Gao, C.; Li, Y.; Yang, Y.; Sun, B. Macrophage
Membrane-Coated Nanocarriers Co-Modified by RVG29 and TPP
Improve Brain Neuronal Mitochondria-Targeting and Therapeutic
Efficacy in Alzheimer’s Disease Mice. Bioact. Mater. 2021, 6, 529−542.
(26) Yamashita, T.; Hayes, P. Analysis of XPS Spectra of Fe2+ and Fe3+
Ions in Oxide Materials. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2008, 254, 2441−2449.
(27) Guo, Z.; Liu, T.; Gao, W.; Iffelsberger, C.; Kong, B.; Pumera, M.
Multi-Wavelength Light-Responsive Metal-Phenolic Network-Based
Microrobots for Reactive Species Scavenging. Adv. Mater. 2023, 35,
No. e2210994.
(28) Ezzati Nazhad Dolatabadi, J.; Mokhtarzadeh, A.; Ghareghoran, S.
M.; Dehghan, G. Synthesis, Characterization and Antioxidant Property
of Quercetin-Tb(III) Complex. Adv. Pharm. Bull. 2014, 4, 101−104.
(29) Bertleff-Zieschang, N.; Rahim, M. A.; Ju, Y.; Braunger, J. A.;
Suma, T.; Dai, Y.; Pan, S.; Cavalieri, F.; Caruso, F. Biofunctional Metal-
Phenolic Films From Dietary Flavonoids. ChemComm 2017, 53, 1068−
1071.
(30) Gao, M.; Yi, J.; Zhu, J.; Minikes, A. M.; Monian, P.; Thompson,
C. B.; Jiang, X. Role of Mitochondria in Ferroptosis. Mol. Cell 2019, 73,
354−363.
(31) Richardson, D. R.; Huang, M. L. H.; Whitnall, M.; Becker, E. M.;
Ponka, P.; Suryo Rahmanto, Y. The Ins and Outs of Mitochondrial
Iron-Loading: the Metabolic Defect in Friedreich’s Ataxia. J. Mol. Med.
2010, 88, 323−329.
(32) Flannagan, K.; Stopperan, J. A.; Troutwine, B. M.; Lysaker, C. R.;
Strope, T.; Draper, J.; Shaddy-Gouvion, C.; Vivian, J.; Haeri, M.;
Wilkins, H. M. Mitochondrial Phenotypes in IPSC AD Models.
Alzheimers. Dement. 2021, 17, No. e058489.
(33) Zhang, W.; Chen, H.; Ding, L.; Gong, J.; Zhang, M.; Guo, W.; Xu,
P.; Li, S.; Zhang, Y. Trojan Horse Delivery of 4,4′-Dimethoxychalcone
for Parkinsonian Neuroprotection. Adv. Sci. 2021, 8, No. 2004555.
(34) Bao, L.; Cui, X.; Wang, X.; Wu, J.; Guo, M.; Yan, N.; Chen, C.
Carbon Nanotubes Promote the Development of Intestinal Organoids
through Regulating Extracellular Matrix Viscoelasticity and Intra-
cellular Energy Metabolism. ACS Nano 2021, 15, 15858−15873.
(35) Yang, F.; Yang, L.; Li, Y.; Yan, G.; Feng, C.; Liu, T.; Gong, R.;
Yuan, Y.; Wang, N.; Idiiatullina, E.; Bikkuzin, T.; Pavlov, V.; Li, Y.;
Dong, C.; Wang, D.; Cao, Y.; Han, Z.; Zhang, L.; Huang, Q.; Ding, F.;
Bi, Z.; Cai, B. Melatonin Protects Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem
Cells Against Iron Overload-Induced Aberrant Differentiation and
Senescence. J. Pineal Res. 2017, 63, No. e12422.
(36) Xu, F.; Wu, Y.; Yang, Q.; Cheng, Y.; Xu, J.; Zhang, Y.; Dai, H.;
Wang, B.; Ma, Q.; Chen, Y.; Lin, F.; Wang, C. Engineered Extracellular
Vesicles with SHP2 High Expression Promote Mitophagy for
Alzheimer’s Disease Treatment. Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, No. 2207107.
(37) Stockwell, B. R.; Friedmann Angeli, J. P.; Bayir, H.; Bush, A. I.;
Conrad, M.; Dixon, S. J.; Fulda, S.; Gascón, S.; Hatzios, S. K.; Kagan, V.
E.; Noel, K.; Jiang, X.; Linkermann, A.; Murphy, M. E.; Overholtzer, M.;
Oyagi, A.; Pagnussat, G. C.; Park, J.; Ran, Q.; Rosenfeld, C. S.;
Salnikow, K.; Tang, D.; Torti, F. M.; Torti, S. V.; Toyokuni, S.;
Woerpel, K. A.; Zhang, D. D. Ferroptosis: A Regulated Cell Death
Nexus Linking Metabolism, Redox Biology, and Disease. Cell 2017, 171
(2), 273−285.
(38) Ye, T.; Yang, W.; Gao, T.; Yu, X.; Chen, T.; Yang, Y.; Guo, J.; Li,
Q.; Li, H.; Yang, L. Trastuzumab-Induced Cardiomyopathy via
Ferroptosis-Mediated Mitochondrial Dysfunction. Free Radic Biol.
Med. 2023, 206, 143−161.
(39) Gao, S.; Zhou, L.; Lu, J.; Fang, Y.; Wu, H.; Xu, W.; Pan, Y.; Wang,
J.; Wang, X.; Zhang, J.; Shao, A.; Tang, H. Cepharanthine Attenuates
Early Brain Injury after Subarachnoid Hemorrhage in Mice via
Inhibiting 15-Lipoxygenase-1-Mediated Microglia and Endothelial
Cell Ferroptosis. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2022, 2022, No. 4295208.
(40) Koh, Y. H.; Park, Y. S.; Takahashi, M.; Suzuki, K.; Taniguchi, N.
Aldehyde Reductase Gene Expression by Lipid Peroxidation End
Products, MDA and HNE. Free Radic. Res. 2000, 33, 739−746.
(41) Han, L.; Jiang, C. Evolution of Blood−Brain Barrier in Brain
Diseases and Related Systemic Nanoscale Brain-Targeting Drug
Delivery Strategies. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 2021, 11, 2306−2325.
(42) Fonseca, L. C.; Lopes, J. A.; Vieira, J.; Viegas, C.; Oliveira, C. S.;
Hartmann, R. P.; Fonte, P. Intranasal Drug Delivery for Treatment of
Alzheimer’s Disease. Drug Delivery Transl. Res. 2021, 11, 411−425.
(43) Ren, L.; Xu, P.; Yao, J.; Wang, Z.; Shi, K.; Han, W.; Wang, H.
Targeting the Mitochondria with Pseudo-Stealthy Nanotaxanes to
Impair Mitochondrial Biogenesis for Effective Cancer Treatment. ACS
Nano 2022, 16, 10242−10259.
(44) Bao, W. D.; Pang, P.; Zhou, X. T.; Hu, F.; Xiong, W.; Chen, K.;
Wang, J.; Wang, F.; Xie, D.; Hu, Y. Z.; Han, Z. T.; Zhang, H. H.; Wang,
W. X.; Nelson, P. T.; Chen, J. G.; Lu, Y.; Man, H. Y.; Liu, D.; Zhu, L. Q.
Loss of Ferroportin Induces Memory Impairment by Promoting
Ferroptosis in Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell Death Differ. 2021, 28, 1548−
1562.
(45) Xu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, J. H.; Han, K.; Zhang, X.; Bai, X.; You,
L. H.; Yu, P.; Shi, Z.; Chang, Y. Z.; Gao, G. Astrocyte Hepcidin
Ameliorates Neuronal Loss Through Attenuating Brain Iron Deposi-
tion and Oxidative Stress in APP/PS1Mice. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2020,
158, 84−95.
(46) Zhang, Q.; Song, Q.; Yu, R.; Wang, A.; Jiang, G.; Huang, Y.;
Chen, J.; Xu, J.; Wang, D.; Chen, H.; Gao, X. Nano-Brake Halts
Mitochondrial Dysfunction Cascade to Alleviate Neuropathology and
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7905

Rescue Alzheimer’s Cognitive Deficits. Adv. Sci. 2023, 10,
No. e2204596.
(47) Haller, S.; Haacke, E. M.; Thurnher, M. M.; Barkhof, F.
Susceptibility-Weighted Imaging: Technical Essentials and Clinical
Neurologic Applications. Radiology 2021, 299, 3−26.
(48) Pfefferbaum, A.; Adalsteinsson, E.; Rohlfing, T.; Sullivan, E. V.
MRI Estimates of Brain Iron concentration in Normal Aging:
Comparison of Field-Dependent (FDRI) And Phase (SWI) Methods.
NeuroImage 2009, 47, 493−500.
(49) Ozsvari, B.; Sotgia, F.; Lisanti, M. P. Exploiting Mitochondrial
Targeting Signal(s), TPP and Bis-TPP, for Eradicating Cancer Stem
Cells (CSCs). Aging 2018, 10, 229−240.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09286
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 7890−7906
7906