Mannose-Integrated Nanoparticle Hitchhike
Glucose Transporter 1 Recycling to Overcome
Various Barriers of Oral Delivery for
Alzheimer’s Disease Therapy
Ting Lei, Zixiao Yang, Chaoqing Jiang, Xiaorong Wang, Wenqin Yang, Xiaotong Yang, Rou Xie,
Fan Tong, Xue Xia, Qianqian Huang, Yufan Du, Yuan Huang, and Huile Gao*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: A brain-targeting nanodelivery system has been a hot
topic and has undergone rapid progression. However, due to various
obstacles such as the intestinal epithelial barrier (IEB) and the blood-
brain barrier (BBB), few nanocarriers can achieve brain-targeting
through oral administration. Herein, an intelligent oral brain-
targeting nanoparticle (FTY@Man NP) constructed from a PLGA−
PEG skeleton loaded with fingolimod (FTY) and externally modified
with mannose was designed in combination with a glucose control
strategy for the multitarget treatment of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
The hydrophilic and electronegative properties of the nanoparticle
facilitated its facile penetration through the mucus barrier, while the
mannose ligand conferred IEB targeting abilities to the nanoparticle.
Subsequently, glycemic control allowed the mannose-integrated
nanoparticle to hitchhike the glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1)
circulation across the BBB. Finally, the released FTY modulated the polarity of microglia from pro-inflammatory M1 to
anti-inflammatory M2 and normalized the activated astrocyte, enhancing the clearance of toxic protein Amyloid-β (Aβ) while
alleviating oxidative stress and neuroinflammation. Notably, both in vitro and in vivo results have consistently demonstrated
that the oral administration of FTY@Man NP could effectively traverse the multiple barriers, thereby exerting significant
therapeutic effects. This breakthrough holds the promise of realizing a highly effective orally administered treatment for AD.
KEYWORDS: Alzheimer’s disease, Oral brain-targeting, Oral drug delivery system, Blood-brain barrier, Microglia polarization
INTRODUCTION
Over the past few decades, the explosive advancement of
nanotechnology has led to progress in nano-targeting drug
delivery systems for brain diseases.1−3 At present, for achieving
high bioavailability, intravenous administration is employed for
almost all brain-targeting nano-drug delivery systems.4−6
However, brain diseases, particularly neurodegenerative con-
ditions like Alzheimer’s disease (AD), exhibit a prolonged
course lasting up to 2−9 years.7 Long-term intravenous injection
would inevitably lead to poor patient compliance and pose a
significant risk of infection. Consequently, the vast majority of
drugs currently utilized in clinical practice for AD are
administered orally.8 The discrepancy between cutting-edge
research and clinical applications prompts us to ponder why
noninvasive oral administration, which boasts the merits of
simplicity, safety, and cost-effectiveness, has been overlooked in
brain-targeting drug delivery.
The scarcity of studies in oral brain-targeting drug delivery
can mainly be ascribed to the multitude of biochemical and
physiological obstacles encountered by drugs upon oral
administration, encompassing both the intestinal epithelial
barrier (IEB) and the blood-brain barrier (BBB).9,10 The five
steps are briefly outlined as “BMIBB”: (1) Crossing of the
biochemical barrier: Nanoparticles must maintain stability in the
Received:
October 7, 2023
Revised:
December 29, 2023
Accepted:
January 3, 2024
Published: January 12, 2024
Article
www.acsnano.org
© 2024 American Chemical Society
3234
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on November 27, 2025 at 06:38:57 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

presence of abundant enzymes and withstand extreme pH
fluctuations.11,12 (2) Crossing the mucus barrier: Nanoparticles
must rapidly navigate a continuously replenished hydrogel
network with robust viscoelastic properties.12,13 (3) Crossing
the IEB: Nanoparticles need to effectively penetrate the physical
transport barrier located between the intestinal tract and
bloodstream.14 (4) Crossing the blood barrier: Nanoparticles
must evade protein adsorption and phagocytosis by the
mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) in the bloodstream.15,16
(5) Crossing the BBB: Nanoparticles must first undergo BBB
recognition and subsequently overcome this formidable
obstacle.17−19 Previous studies have harnessed the hydrophilic
and negatively charged properties of PEG to facilitate PEGylated
nanoparticles crossing the mucus barrier and prolong systemic
long circulation.20,21 However, these characteristics are in
conflict with the requirement for lipophilicity and positive
electronegativity necessary to traverse the cellular barrier, and
coupled with the lack of active targeting, there is still ample
opportunity for enhancing the capacity of PEGylated nano-
particles to traverse the barrier. Meanwhile, the predominant
focus of current nanodelivery system designs lies in targeting a
singular barrier type when traversing cellular barriers.22 For
instance, folate has been utilized to target IEB, while transferrin
has been employed to target the BBB.23,24 Unfortunately, little
attention has been given to developing strategies that can
effectively target both types of barriers simultaneously.25
Moreover, intricate nanostructures have been employed in
certain studies to surmount multiple barriers, thereby
significantly compromising their potential for clinical trans-
lation.21,26 Therefore, the development of a simple and efficient
oral brain-targeting delivery system with enhanced multiple-
barrier-crossing efficiency holds significant value for innovative
scientific exploration.
Scheme 1. Schematic Diagram of Nanoparticle Achieving Brain-Targeting via Oral Administration
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3235

AD, a devastating neurodegenerative disorder, currently
remains the only fatal factor among the world’s top 10 that
lacks preventive measures, curative treatments, or even means of
delaying its progression.27−29 In addition to the delivery
challenges encountered in treating AD, the singularity and
obsolescence of clinical drug targets, as well as their focus on
symptom management rather than addressing underlying
causes, are significant factors contributing to therapeutic
dilemmas.30 Currently, the primary clinical application involves
cholinesterase inhibitors, such as donepezil, which enhance
neuronal activity by elevating acetylcholine levels in the brain to
manage mild and moderate AD.31 However, their effectiveness is
contingent upon the integrity of the synaptic structure, and
extensive damage to synapses during the middle and late stages
Figure 1. Optimization of nanoparticles for crossing mucus and cellular barriers in vitro. (A) Effective particle size and zeta potential of different
nanoparticles with different PEG contents. (B) The Papp of nanoparticles crossing porcine small intestinal mucus in 3D transwell chambers at 5
h. (C) The relative proportion of nanoparticles to mucin adsorption. (D) Effective particle size and zeta potential of different nanoparticles with
different mannose contents. (E) Cytotoxicity of nanoparticles at different concentrations in bEnd.3 cells. (F) Fluorescence intensity of
nanoparticles post internalization by Caco-2 cells. 28% PEG NP group was set as the control. (G) Fluorescence intensity of nanoparticles taken
up by Caco-2 with and without free mannose. (H) Schematic representation of the in vitro construction process for IEB. (I) The proportion of
different nanoparticles penetrating from the upper chamber to the lower chamber in 3D chambers. (J) The Papp of nanoparticles crossing the
3D transwell Caco-2 cells model at 8 h. 28% PEG NP group was set as the control. (K) Fluorescence intensity of nanoparticles post
internalization by bEnd.3 cells. 28% PEG NP group was set as the control. (L) Schematic representation of the in vitro construction process for
BBB. (M) Fluorescence intensity of nanoparticles taken up by BV-2 in the lower compartment. 28% PEG NP group was set as the control. (N)
3D confocal images of bEnd.3 cells in the transwell model donor chamber after the introduction of different nanoparticles for 8 h. Scale bar
represents 100 μm. All data are presented as the mean ± SD, n = 3.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3236

of the disease significantly diminishes their efficacy. Equally
frustrating is the fact that clinical trials targeting Amyloid-β (Aβ)
and Tau proteins, which are the two most prominent
pathological features of AD and have received significant
attention from researchers over the past two decades, have
yielded almost no progress.32 The relaunched researchers have
discovered mounting evidence indicating that aberrant
activation of microglia and astrocytes played a pivotal role
throughout the whole progression of AD.33 During the course of
AD, microglia and astrocytes would activate into pro-
inflammatory M1-type disease-associated microglia and hyper-
activated astrocytes, respectively. This process not only
diminished their inherent capacity to scavenge toxic proteins
but also triggered the release of substantial quantities of
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and inflammatory
factors, inducing oxidative stress and neuroinflammation.
Consequently, this perpetuated the widespread dissemination
of Aβ and Tau proteins, establishing a detrimental cycle.
Conversely, M2-type microglia and normalized astrocytes have
demonstrated the ability to effectively clear Aβ while
simultaneously releasing anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective
factors.34,35 Therefore, reversing the activation of microglia and
astrocytes can effectively ameliorate multiple pathological
characteristics of AD, thereby disrupting its detrimental
progression cycle and treating the root cause.
In this paper, a sophisticated oral nanoparticle capable of
overcoming the “BMIBB” process based on the natural
physiological barrier absorption properties was developed for
multitarget treatment for AD (Scheme 1). First, we chose
PLGA−PEG with good stability and safety as the nanocarrier
backbone. The hydrophilic and negatively charged nature of this
material facilitated rapid penetration of the mucus barrier while
also preventing protein adsorption and phagocytosis by MPS.
Then, we tapped into the common properties of intestinal
epithelial cells and brain endothelial cells to identify the glucose
transporter 1 (GLUT1), which is highly expressed in both, and
grafted α-mannopyranoside onto the end of PEG to achieve co-
targeting of IEB and BBB. To further improve the ability of
nanoparticles to traverse the BBB, a glycemic control strategy
was used to translocate the GLUT1 from the luminal to the
abluminal plasma membrane, thereby boosting mannose-
modified nanoparticles to penetrate the BBB and accumulate
within the brain. Finally, the loaded fingolimod (FTY) released
from the nanoparticle regulated the abnormally activated
microglia and astrocytes: (1) Converting microglia from the
proinflammatory M1 phenotype to the anti-inflammatory M2
phenotype not only restored their phagocytic ability toward
toxic proteins such as Aβ and Tau but also attenuated the release
of inflammatory mediators. (2) Normalizing the activated
astrocytes leads to a reduction in the release of pro-inflammatory
factors and an increase in the release of anti-inflammatory factors
and neuroprotective factors. Thus, by synergistically reducing
elevated levels of inflammation and alleviating oxidative stress,
the abnormal lesion microenvironment can be effectively
remodeled. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no
reports on oral brain-targeting nanodelivery systems for the
combination therapy of AD. Our nanoparticle with high clinical
translational value filled a critical gap in this field, promising to
usher in a magnificent chapter of oral brain-targeting drug
delivery.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Optimization of Nanoparticles for Crossing Mucus
and Cellular Barriers in Vitro. We utilized PLGA−PEG with
exceptional biocompatibility to produce hydrophilic negatively
charged nanoparticles that could exhibit repulsion toward the
negatively charged mucins in the mucus barrier, aiming to
overcome this physical obstacle.36 Various types of nano-
particles were synthesized by adjusting their PEG content. With
an increase in PEG content from 3% to 28%, there was a gradual
decrease in the effective particle size of the nanoparticles, from
156.7 ± 4.1 nm to 99.5 ± 2.7 nm, accompanied by a
corresponding change in zeta potential from −28.7 ± 1.2 mV
to −24.4 ± 0.2 mV (Figure 1A). After introducing different
nanoparticles with varying PEG contents into the mucus barrier
constructed by the 3D transwell model of the porcine small
intestine, we quantified nanoparticle penetration in the lower
compartment and calculated the apparent permeability
coefficient (Papp). The results showed that 28% PEG NP
exhibited the highest efficiency in penetrating the mucus barrier
(Figure 1B), as confirmed by mucin adsorption experiments,
which demonstrated their minimal protein adsorption (Figure
1C). Therefore, we selected 28% PEG NP for subsequent
optimization of cell barrier penetration and varied the levels of
mannose grafted onto the end of PEG to investigate the
nanoparticle penetration into intestinal epithelial cells. Our
results demonstrated that there were no significant differences in
particle size and zeta potential among all groups except for 100%
Man NP, which ranged from approximately 80 nm in size and
−20 mV in zeta potential (Figure 1D). The stability of
nanoparticles in PBS (pH = 7.2), simulated gastric fluid (SGF,
pH = 1.2), and simulated intestinal fluid (SIF, pH = 6.8) was
subsequently evaluated, revealing that all nanoparticles demon-
strated excellent stability across all three media (Figure S1).
Caco-2 cells and bEnd.3 cells are commonly utilized as
models for simulating the functions of intestinal epithelial cells
and brain endothelial cells, respectively.37,38 We initially
assessed their cytotoxicity on both cell types. The results
indicated that the nanoparticle demonstrated cell survival rates
comparable to those of the control group, implying a favorable
safety profile (Figures 1E, S2A). Caco-2 cellular uptake
experiments revealed that 50% Man NP exhibited superior
cellular targeting ability with a 1.66-fold increase compared to
28% PEG NP (Figure 1F). However, this advantage was nullified
upon the addition of free mannose (Figure 1G), indicating that
GLUT1 was responsible for the mechanism of uptake. Then, we
constructed a 3D transwell Caco-2 cell model to further mimic
the IEB (Figure 1H). By collecting nanoparticles from the lower
chamber at different time points, it was determined that 50%
Man NP had the best cell penetration efficiency (Figure 1I), with
a Papp 2.67-fold greater than that of 28% PEG NP (Figure 1J).
Confocal imaging results were consistent with these findings
(Figure S2B). The transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER)
values were assessed at pre/postadministration, indicating that
the cellular barrier remained intact even after 8 h of treatment
(Figure S2C). We further investigated whether mannose
modification would affect nanoparticle mucus penetration
efficiency. Mucin adsorption experiments indicated that there
was no significant difference between 50% Man NP and 28%
PEG NP (Figure S2D). We conducted similar experiments on
bEnd.3 cells, and the results showed that 50% Man NP exhibited
the highest targeting capacity toward bEnd.3 cells, which was
1.93-fold higher than that of 28% PEG NP (Figure 1K). This
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3237

phenomenon was abolished upon the addition of free mannose
(Figure S3A), indicating that the increased uptake was
attributed to intracellular entry through the GLUT1. We
improved the realism of BBB simulation by coculturing bEnd.3
cells with BV-2 cells in a 3D transwell chamber (Figure 1L). 4 h
after administration, the fluorescence intensity of nanoparticles
was evaluated in both the lower compartment solution and BV-2
cells, revealing that 50% Man NP exhibited maximal content
(Figures 1M, S3B), while confocal imaging showed that the
highest nanoparticle penetration in bEnd.3 cells was observed
with 50% Man NP (Figure 1N). The TEER values remained
unchanged even after an 8 h treatment, indicating the
preservation of cellular barrier integrity (Figure S3C). Thus
far, we have successfully identified that PLGA−PEG nano-
particles containing 28% PEG exhibited optimal mucus
penetration frequency. Additionally, grafting 50% of mannose
molecules at the end of PEG resulted in the highest IEB and BBB
penetration efficiency.
Evaluation of Brain-Targeting Ability of Nanoparticles
in Vivo. To evaluate the oral brain-targeting potential of the
nanoparticles in vivo, we administered various formulations
loading the fluorescent probe DiD via gavage to mice and
monitored their fluorescence distribution within the mice. First,
we assessed the fluorescence intensity of nanoparticles in major
tissues at 2, 4, and 6 h following oral administration in AD model
mice (with Aβ-injection). Semiquantitative fluorescence anal-
ysis of the brain demonstrated that mannose-integrated
nanoparticles exhibited approximately 2.9-fold stronger fluo-
rescence signals compared to PEG nanoparticles (Figure
S4A,B). The confocal imaging of brain slices yielded consistent
results (Figure S4C), collectively demonstrating that 50% Man
NP exhibited superior oral brain-targeting ability compared with
28% PEG NP. Moreover, there was no significant difference in
tissue fluorescence signals between the two groups of nano-
particles (Figure S4D). Studies have reported that the GLUT1,
which is highly expressed in brain capillary endothelial cells,
Figure 2. Evaluation of the oral brain-targeting ability of different nanoparticles in AD transgenic mice (FAD4T). (A) Living imaging of FAD4T
transgenic mice after oral administration of different DiD-loaded nanoparticles at 2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 h. Bar represents radiant efficiency from 3.0
× 106 to 1.4 × 107 [p/s]/[mW/cm2]. (B−D) Ex vivo fluorescent imaging of major organs (B), gastrointestinal tract (C), and brain (D) in FAD4T
transgenic mice 6 h after oral administration of different fluorescent nanoparticles. Bar represents radiant efficiency from 8.0 × 106 to 7.0 × 107,
6.0 × 107 to 9.0 × 109, and 9.0 × 106 to 5.5 × 107 [p/s]/[mW/cm2]. (E) Semiquantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity from B and D. Data
are presented as mean ± SD, n = 4. (F) Confocal microscopy imaging of the distribution of different DiD-loaded nanoparticles in the brain after
oral administration for 6 h. Scale bar = 500 μm. (G) Confocal microscopy imaging of the nanoparticles in the intestine after oral administration
for 6 h. Scale bar represents 100 μm. (a) 28% PEG NP; (b) 50% Man NP; (c) 50% Man NP with Glu control.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3238

would undergo translocation from the luminal to the abluminal
plasma membrane in response to rapid glycemic elevation.39 We
employed a glucose control strategy that could allow the
nanoparticles to hitchhike on receptor circulation from the
vasculature to the brain parenchyma. To determine the optimal
glucose control protocol, we subjected mice to a 12 h fast and
administered a 20% glucose solution via oral gavage 1 h before or
after DiD-loaded nanoparticle administration. The results
showed that the fluorescence signal in the brains of mice treated
with 20% glucose solution orally 1 h after administration of
nanoparticles was higher than those without glucose control and
with 20% glucose solution orally 1 h before administration of
nanoparticles (Figure S5A−D), while there was no significant
difference in tissue fluorescence (Figure S5C,E). Notably, the
fluorescence signal of the intestines exhibited a trend similar to
that observed in the brain results (Figure S5B,F), suggesting that
glucose modulation may enhance intestinal absorption of
mannose-modified nanoparticles. The aforementioned experi-
ments have demonstrated that the administration of glucose
solution 1 h after 50% Man NP administration resulted in
increased penetration and accumulation of 50% Man NP in the
brain. Subsequent experiments utilized a glucose control
strategy by administering glucose 1 h after nanoparticle
administration (50% Man NP with Glu control).
To further confirm the oral brain-targeting ability of 50% Man
NP combined with a glucose control strategy, we conducted
homeostatic experiments on FAD4T transgenic mice to eliminate
any potential impact from BBB disruption caused by the Aβ-
injection mice model. Living images demonstrated that the 50%
Man NP with Glu control exhibited the highest brain
accumulation at all time points and displayed the strongest
fluorescence signal in the brain after 6 h of administration
(Figures 2A, S6). Then major tissues were collected for ex vivo
fluorescence imaging and semiquantification after 6 h of
different formulations administered. It was observed that 50%
Man NP with Glu control exhibited higher tissue accumulation
compared to other groups (Figure 2B−E), and similar findings
were noted in confocal imaging of tissue sections (Figure S7).
To investigate the primary distribution regions of nanoparticles
within the brain, we conducted frozen section staining, and a
significant overlap was observed between nanoparticle distribu-
tion in the 50% Man NP with Glu control group and Aβ plaque
distribution areas, particularly in the cerebral cortex, hippo-
campus, and striatum (Figure 2F). This suggested that the
nanoparticles were capable of targeting AD lesion sites within
Figure 3. Preparation and characterization of nanoparticles loaded with FTY. (A) Effective particle size and zeta potential of nanoparticles. (B)
TEM images of nanoparticles. Scale bar represents 100 nm. (C) Cumulative release of FTY from nanoparticles in SGF and SIF. (D,E)
Expression of CD86 (D) and CD206 (E) in BV-2 cells after treatment with different formulations. (F) Confocal imaging of CD86 and CD206
expression in BV-2 cells after treatment with different formulations. Scale bar represents 50 μm. (G,H) The levels of TNF-α (G) and IL-10 (H)
in the supernatants of BV-2 cells after treatment with different formulations. (I,J) The levels of FTY in the brain (I) and intestine (J) of mice
after oral administration of Free FTY and Man NP with Glu control at 2, 6, and 12 h. (K) The levels of FTY in the major organs of mice after oral
administration of different formulations at 12 h. All data are presented as mean ± SD, n = 3.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3239

the brain. Confocal imaging revealed a greater distribution of
nanoparticles within the intestine of the 50% Man NP with the
Glu control group compared with both the 28% PEG NP and
50% Man NP groups, which was consistent with tissue imaging
findings (Figure 2G). Through investigation of the brain-
targeting ability of nanoparticles in two AD model mice, we have
collectively confirmed that 50% Man NP exhibited higher
accumulation in the brain compared to 28% PEG NP.
Furthermore, by implementing a glucose control strategy, we
further enhanced their accumulation at AD lesions, resulting in
highly efficient oral brain-targeting.
Preparation and Characterization of Nanoparticles
Loaded with FTY. FTY, a drug with the potential to
synergistically ameliorate multiple pathological features of AD,
was loaded into nanoparticles. The results demonstrated that
FTY@28% PEG NP exhibited a particle size of 76.2 ± 1.0 nm, a
PDI of 0.15 ± 0.02, a zeta potential of −18.8 ± 0.5 mV, a drug
loading efficiency of 2.33 ± 0.10%, and an encapsulation
efficiency of 93.4 ± 4.3%. Meanwhile, FTY@50% Man NP had a
particle size of 88.6 ± 6.0 nm with a PDI value of 0.17 ± 0.03 and
zeta potential value of −19.8 ± 0.8 mV along with the drug
loading efficiency and encapsulation efficiency values being
recorded as 2.02 ± 0.14% and 80.9 ± 5.7%, respectively (Figure
3A, Table S1). Transmission electron microscopy revealed that
both types of nanoparticles exhibited a uniform spherical
morphology with an average particle size of approximately 30
nm (Figure 3B). We subjected the nanoparticles to SGF and SIF
to monitor the drug release. The release of FTY from FTY@28%
PEG NP and FTY@50% Man NP in SGF was approximately
20% and 10%, respectively, after a 2 h period. Following an 8 h
exposure to SIF, their respective releases increased to about 40%
and 30%. Moreover, the release rate of FTY@50% Man NP was
Figure 4. Behavioral evaluation of nanoparticles in three AD model mice. (A) Schematic of the experiment timeline of the three AD model mice.
(B) Body weight change curve of FAD4T transgenic mice during the administration period. n = 10. (C−E) The latency to reach the platform area
and frequency of crossing the plateform area in 5-month-old FAD4T transgenic mice (C, n = 10), 8-month-old APP/PS1 transgenic mice (D, n =
6), and Aβ-injection mice (E, n = 10) after treatment with different preparations. Data are presented as mean ± SD; the WT and Sham-operation
group were set as the control. (F) Representative trajectory maps and thermograms of Aβ-injection mice after treatment with different
preparations in MWM. All data are presented as mean ± SD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3240

lower than that of FTY@28% PEG NP, indicating that both
types of nanoparticles exhibited excellent stability within the
gastrointestinal tract (Figure 3C). In subsequent experiments,
we referenced drug-loaded nanoparticles to FTY@28% PEG NP
and FTY@50% Man NP as PEG NP and Man NP, respectively.
We assessed the drug’s therapeutic effect at the cellular level.
Initially, the MTT assay demonstrated that the drug-loaded
nanoparticles exhibited negligible toxicity toward BV-2 cells
(Figure S8). Next, these nanoparticles were introduced to LPS-
induced BV-2 cells, and flow cytometry analysis revealed a
significant reduction in CD86 expression (a marker of M1-type
microglia) and an increase in CD206 expression (a marker of
M2-type microglia) on BV-2 cells treated with both FTY-
containing nanoparticles (Figure 3D,E). The conclusions were
further validated through confocal imaging experiments (Figure
3F). In the meantime, we observed a significant reduction in
pro-inflammatory factor TNF-α and a notable increase in anti-
inflammatory factor IL-10 levels in the cell supernatant following
nanoparticle treatment (Figure 3G,H). The above results
suggested that nanoparticles containing FTY could effectively
Figure 5. Evaluation of the ability of nanoparticles to modulate activated microglia and astrocytes in AD model mice. (A) Immunofluorescence
staining of CD86 and CD206 in the brain of APP/PS1 transgenic mice after treatment with different preparations. The white arrows indicate the
colocalization of IBA1 on CD86 and CD206, representing M1 phenotypic microglia and M2 phenotypic microglia, respectively. The first to
third line: Scale bar represents 500 μm. The last line: Scale bar represents 200 μm. (B) Immunofluorescence staining of Aβ and GFAP in the
brain of APP/PS1 transgenic mice after treatment with different preparations. The first to third line: Scale bar represents 500 μm. The last line:
Scale bar represents 200 μm. (C) Expression of p-STAT3, STAT3, APP, Tau, and BDNF proteins in the brain of FAD4T transgenic mice treated
with different preparations. (D) Expression of p-STAT3, STAT3, APP, Tau, and BDNF proteins in the brain of APP/PS1 transgenic mice
treated with different preparations. (E) Expression of inflammation-related factors TGF-β in plasma (n = 4) and IL-10 in the brain (n = 3) of
FAD4T transgenic mice after treatment with different preparations. Data are presented as the mean ± SD. (F) Expression of inflammation-
related factors TNF-α and IL-6 in the brain of APP/PS1 transgenic mice after treatment with different preparations. Data are presented as mean
± SD, n = 3. The significant differences of each group were compared to group AD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3241

convert pro-inflammatory microglial into anti-inflammatory
microglial and reduce the release of inflammatory factors while
increasing the release of anti-inflammatory factors, thus
exhibiting therapeutic potential.
We investigated the drug distribution of nanoparticles by
administering Free FTY and Man NP via oral gavage to mice. A
significantly higher drug accumulation of Man NP with Glu
control in the brain was observed compared with the Free FTY
group. Specifically, at 6 h postadministration, the Man NP with
Glu control group exhibited a 13.2-fold increase in drug
accumulation relative to the Free FTY (Figure 3I). The drug
accumulation in the intestine did not exhibit significant
differences within the initial 2 h. However, at both 6 and 12 h
time points, Man NP with Glu control demonstrated a stronger
capacity for intestinal retention compared to Free FTY (Figure
3J). Additionally, examination of drug distribution in major
tissues at the 12 h revealed no notable distinctions between Free
FTY and Man NP with Glu control (Figure 3K). Our findings
suggested that Man NP with Glu control offered a significant
advantage in intracerebral drug delivery compared to Free FTY,
resulting in a substantial increase in drug accumulation within
the brain and providing a prerequisite for optimal therapeutic
efficacy at the lesion sites.
Behavioral Evaluation of Nanoparticles’ Therapeutic
Effects in FAD4T Transgenic Mice, APP/PS1 Transgenic
Mice, and Aβ-Injection Mice. The Morris water maze
(MWM) is the most commonly employed behavioral experi-
ment for assessing memory levels in mice, and we utilized three
AD animal models, including FAD4T transgenic mice, APP/PS1
transgenic mice, and Aβ-injection model mice to evaluate the
impact of nanoparticles on memory rescue in AD model mice
(Figure 4A). First, we administered various treatments to the
AD mice for a duration of 7 days and monitored their weight
changes throughout this period, which showed that the weight of
the mice did not fluctuate more than 10%, indicating that none
of the treatment regimens had any discernible impact on their
normal growth patterns (Figures 4B, S9A,B). After treatment,
we performed an MWM test on AD mice. The results
demonstrated that following Man NP with Glu control
treatment, the latency of all three AD model mice was
significantly reduced in comparison to the AD group and
approached that of the healthy mice group (Figure 4C−E).
Taking the south quadrant results of the FAD4T mouse as an
example, it was observed that the mean latency to reach the
platform area in WT, AD, and Man NP with Glu control were
27.0 s, 46.9 s, and 22.8 s, respectively, indicating a significant
improvement in memory levels of AD mice after treat with Man
NP with Glu control. Meanwhile, other statistical data, such as
the frequency across platform area and cumulative time at
platform area, also demonstrated a significant improvement in
memory recovery for mice treated with Man NP with Glu
control compared to those in the AD group (Figure S9C−E).
Figure 6. Evaluation of the neuroprotective effects and the safety profile of nanoparticles in AD model mice. (A) The representative HE staining
of FAD4T transgenic mice after treatment with different preparations. The first line: Scale bar represents 200 μm. The second to third line: Scale
bar represents 100 μm. (B) The representative Nissl staining of APP/PS1 transgenic mice after treatment with different preparations. The first
line: Scale bar represents 200 μm. The second to third line: Scale bar represents 20 μm. (C,D) The levels of AST (C) and ALT (D) in the serum
of APP/PS1 transgenic mice after treatment with different preparations. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n = 3. (E) The levels of TBIL in the
serum of Aβ-injection model mice after treatment with different preparations. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n = 5. (F) The levels of Lymph,
WBC, and Gran in the blood of APP/PS1 transgenic mice after treatment with different preparations. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n = 3.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3242

Additionally, a trajectory map and thermogram further revealed
a significant inclination of Man NP with Glu control group
toward the original platform area (Figure 4F). The behavioral
experiments conducted on the three AD models provided strong
evidence that Man NP with Glu control possessed a significantly
potent memory rescue effect and held a great potential for AD
treatment.
Evaluation of the Ability of Nanoparticles to Modulate
Activated Microglia and Astrocytes in AD Model Mice.
To investigate the specific treatment mechanism, we conducted
euthanasia on mice and collected major tissues, particularly
brain, for further biological analysis. As the disease progresses,
microglia and astrocytes undergo activation into M1-type
microglia and activated astrocytes, resulting in a loss of their
original ability to scavenge toxic proteins. Additionally, these
disease-associated cells increase oxidative stress levels and
secrete inflammatory factors, leading to the formation of a pro-
inflammatory microenvironment. Facilitating the polarization of
microglia toward the M2 phenotype and normalizing astrocyte
can enhance the secretion of anti-inflammatory factors, mitigate
inflammatory response, and ultimately inhibit neuronal damage.
Studies have shown that FTY not only induces phenotypic
Figure 7. Transcriptomics analysis of FAD4T transgenic mice treated with different preparations. (A) Heat map analysis of differentially
expressed genes between all treatment groups, q < 0.01, fold change (FC) ≥2. (B) Venn graph of the number of differentially expressed genes
between treatment groups. (C) Heat map analysis of differentially expressed genes between AD and Man-NP-with-Glu-control, p < 0.05, FC ≥
2. (D) Volcano plot analysis of differential genes between AD and Man-NP-with-Glu-control, p < 0.05, FC ≥2. (E) The pathways analysis of
KEGG enrichment between all treatments. (F) Heat map of genes associated with AD disease between treatment groups. (G) The pathways
analysis of GO enrichment between all treatments. p < 0.05, FC ≥2. (H) Heat map of trending gene expression between groups WT, AD, Free
FTY and Man-NP-with-Glu-control. All data are presented as mean ± SD, n = 3.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3243

transition from M1-type microglia to M2-type through
upregulation of phosphorylated-STAT3 (p-STAT3) but also
exerts neuroprotective effects by normalizing astrocyte.
Immunofluorescence staining revealed that nanoparticle treat-
ment significantly reduced the expression of CD86 protein and
increased the expression of CD206 in AD mouse brain (Figures
5A, S10A). This suggested that nanoparticle treatment
effectively reversed the phenotypic conversion from M1-type
to M2-type microglial cells in AD lesions. Meanwhile, treatment
of Man NP with Glu control significantly reduced the
distribution of Aβ plaques in the brains of AD mice, particularly
in the hippocampus, which is crucial for memory. Moreover,
there was a notable decrease in activated astrocytes (GFAP-
labeled) within the brain (Figure 5B, S10B), indicating
promising outcomes.
Western blot experiments further confirmed a significant
upregulation of p-STAT3 protein expression and neuro-
protective factor BDNF in brain of the Man NP with Glu
control group as well as a significant downregulation of toxic
proteins APP and phosphorylated Tau protein (Figures 5C,D,
S11). Compared to the AD group, the Man NP with Glu control
group exhibited a significant reduction in pro-inflammatory
factors TNF-α and IL-6 and a distinct increase in anti-
inflammatory factors TGF-β and IL-10 in both blood and
brain tissues, almost reaching the level observed in healthy mice
(Figures 5E,F, S12A−C). These experiments collectively
demonstrate that the Man NP with Glu control effectively
reversed pro-inflammatory microglia to anti-inflammatory
microglia and normalized activated astrocytes, resulting in
significant degradation of toxic proteins Aβ and Tau as well as
reduction of oxidative stress and inflammation. Therefore, the
Man NP with the Glu control treatment exhibited a potent anti-
AD efficacy.
Evaluation of Neuroprotective Effects and Safety. The
state of neurons within the brain is directly correlated with the
level of memory in mice, with hippocampal CA1 and CA3
regions frequently utilized for memory research.40 Building
upon promising results in AD pathology improvement, we
further investigated the neuronal viability within the brain. HE
staining indicated that untreated AD model mice exhibited
significant nucleoplasmic crumpling and deepening, suggesting
extensive neuronal damage. However, the condition gradually
improved with drug treatment, and the Man NP with Glu
control group exhibited excellent neuronal viability comparable
to that of the healthy control group (Figures 6A, S13A,B). The
results of Nissl staining were consistent with those of HE
staining, collectively indicating that treatment with Man NP
with Glu control could rescue damaged neurons in the AD brain
(Figures 6B, S14A,B).
FTY has been reported to induce liver injury through
elevation of AST and ALT, while its immunosuppressive effect
may lead to adverse events such as lymphocyte homing and
leukopenia reduction.41,42 We evaluated the post-treatment
indices of mice through blood biochemistry and routine blood
tests, revealing that Free FTY treatment resulted in a slight
elevation of AST and ALT levels, but this phenomenon was not
observed in the preparation groups PEG NP, Man NP, and Man
NP with the Glu control (Figures 6C−E, S15). Furthermore,
blood analysis indicated that the Free FTY group resulted in a
reduction of lymphocytes and leukocytes, although this trend
was not statistically significant in the formulation group (Figure
6F). The results demonstrate that nanoparticle encapsulation
could ameliorate the adverse effects of FTY and contribute to
mitigating toxicity while enhancing efficacy. HE staining of the
tissue revealed no significant pathological alterations across all
treatment regimens, thereby confirming the favorable safety
profile of nanoparticles (Figures S16−S18).
Transcriptomic Analysis of FAD4T Transgenic Mice
after Reciving Treatment. We conducted a brain tran-
scriptome analysis in FAD4T transgenic mice treated with
different formulations to further elucidate the underlying
mechanisms of the drug’s efficacy. Excitingly, a total of 256
genes were significantly changed between the treatment groups,
and the expression of these genes in the Free FTY, PEG NP,
Man NP, and Man NP with Glu control groups gradually
differentiated from the AD group toward the healthy WT group
(Figure 7A). The Venn diagram illustrated the differential and
shared gene expression among treatment groups, revealing that
the WT group exhibited the most significant difference in gene
expression compared to the AD group, indicating a substantial
distinction between diseased and healthy mice. Additionally,
among all treatment groups, the Man NP with Glu control
displayed the most prominent difference, with 164 significantly
different genes (Figure 7B), suggesting that significant genetic
changes occurred in AD mice after treatment by the Man NP
with Glu control. As shown in the heatmap, we further analyzed
the specific expression of genes with significant changes between
the Man NP with Glu control and AD groups (Figure 7C), and
screened the genes with p ≤0.05 and FC ≥2 by volcano plot,
which showed that there were 60 genes with significant
upregulation and 104 genes with significant downregulation
(Figure 7D). Subsequently, we conducted a thorough analysis of
the distinct pathways associated with differential gene enrich-
ment, as mentioned earlier. Through Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis, it was determined that
the MAPK signaling pathway, P13K-Akt signaling pathway, Ras
signaling pathway, and phagosome signaling pathway exhibited
the most significant and abundant differential gene enrichment
across in the different groups (Figure 7E). We conducted further
analysis on genes closely associated with AD, inflammatory
response, and microglia status. The gene heatmap revealed that
the expression levels of these genes gradually normalized to
those of healthy mice following Free FTY, PEG NP, Man NP,
and Man NP with Glu control treatments (Figure 7F). In
addition, we found that most of the differential genes were
enriched in categories such as inflammatory response and
neurological development by Gene Ontology (GO) analysis
(Figure 7G). We compared the Man NP with the Glu control
group, which exhibited superior therapeutic efficacy, to the AD
group alone and identified the cytokine-cytokine receptor
interaction, P13K-Akt signaling pathway, and phagosome as
the pathways with highest and most significant differential gene
enrichment (Figure S19A). Furthermore, GO enrichment
analysis revealed specific biological processes involved in brain
changes between the two groups of mice (Figure S19B). In
addition, the heatmap analysis of AD disease-associated genes
revealed that Man NP with Glu control treatment significantly
downregulated the expression of risk genes such as CD33 and
M1 microglial-related gene CD68 as well as pro-inflammatory/
immunity-related gene Acod1. Conversely, Man NP with Glu
control treatment upregulated the expression of M2 microglial-
related gene II13ra2 and anti-inflammatory gene BDNF (Figure
S19C). Moreover, we performed a trend analysis on potential
therapeutic target genes and identified 50 genes, including
Cebpa, that exhibited significant changes after treatment (Figure
7H). The data presented above suggested that the therapeutic
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3244

effects of the Man NP with the Glu control group might involve
the regulation of multiple signaling pathways, while alterations
in these genes also provided potential avenues for future
investigations.
Effect of Nanoparticles on Intestinal Flora of AD
Transgenic Mice. Upon oral administration, nanoparticles
exhibited a prolonged residence time in the gastrointestinal tract
of at least 6 h. Our ex vivo imaging data revealed that Man NP
with Glu control demonstrated superior gut-targeting ability
compared to other dosage forms, prompting us to investigate
whether nanoparticle retention has any impact on gut
microbiota. In recent years, there have been numerous reports
on the impact of gut bacteria on AD. Therefore, 16s rRNA gene
sequencing was employed to analyze the gut contents. The Venn
graph showed significant specific OTUs between the treatment
groups (Figure 8A), indicating that the intestinal flora did
change significantly between the different groups. The PCoA
analysis revealed significant distributional variability between
the treatments and AD groups (Figure 8B). The α-diversity
analysis showed some enhancement of Man NP with Glu
Figure 8. The 16s analysis of intestinal flora of FAD4T transgenic mice treated with different preparations. (A) Venn graph of the number of
amplicon sequence variants (ASV) between treatment groups. (B) PCoA illustrating the discrepancy of OTUs among the different treatment
groups. (C) Analysis of the alpha diversity of gut microbia in each treatment group. (D) The taxa composition analysis of gut microbial at the
genus level between all treatment groups. (E) The content of proteobacteria bacteria of gut microbial at the phylum level between all treatment
groups. (F) Heat map of gut microbial at the genus level between all treatment groups. (G) Microbes with significant changes at the genus level
in each treatment group. Statistical significance was determined by ANOVA. All data are presented as mean ± SD, n = 4.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3245

control for the diversity and abundance degrees of gut bacteria
(Figure 8C). LefSe was employed to discern distinctive
classifiers ranging from the phylum to the genus level, and
these taxa exhibited significant heterogeneity among groups
(Figure S20A,B). We proceeded to conduct a more detailed
analysis of the changes in the composition of intestinal flora at
the level of the genus (Figure 8D). The Proteobacteria, which
were highly abundant at the phylum level in the AD, Free FTY,
and PEG NP groups, exhibited a significant reduction in the
WT, Man NP, and Man NP with Glu control groups (Figure
8E). As proteobacteria are the largest phylum of bacteria that
encompasses a wide range of pathogenic bacteria, we speculated
that this reduction may have a favorable impact on disease
treatment. To visualize the differences between groups, we
utilized heatmaps and histograms to display relative abundance
data for intestinal flora (Figure 8F,G). The results indicated a
significant reduction in the expression of Odoribacter,
Lachnospiaceae_NK4A136, and Colidextribacter in the Man
NP with the Glu control group compared to the AD group, with
levels almost similar to those observed in the healthy WT group.
These three microbial species were found to be negatively
associated with antioxidant activity and positively correlated
with inflammation. Meanwhile, some beneficial bacteria such as
Rikenellaceae_RC9_gut_group, Ruminococcaceae, and Para-
bacteroides, which produce butyrate and thus exert an anti-
inflammatory effect, were significantly upregulated after treated
with Man NP with Glu control.43 However, the internal
regulatory mechanism of Man NP with Glu treatment is still
under exploration and consideration. Generally, this treatment
can improve the environment of intestinal flora, promoting the
expression of beneficial and anti-inflammatory bacteria and
reducing the expression of conditionally pathogenic and pro-
inflammatory bacteria, which has a positive impact on disease
management.
Study Limitations. However, due to the challenges
associated with real-time tracking of CLUT1 cycling, we have
not been able to capture direct evidence of nanoparticle
hitchhiking on GLUT1. In the future, we will continue to
elucidate the specific cellular pathways of how glycosylated
nanoparticles exploit GLUT1 recycling across the BBB.
Furthermore, GLUT1, an important transporter for glucose
uptake in the brain and is extremely highly expressed in
endothelial cells, but it has also been reported that GLUT1 is
differentially reduced in AD, which might fail to maximize the
penetration of our mannose nanoparticles into focal brain areas.
Therefore, GLUT1-based targeting strategies may require
further thinking on how to increase the receptor levels on
brain endothelial cells. Meanwhile, GLUT1 is highly expressed
in the liver, and this progress has not been able to find a suitable
means to minimize the distribution of mannose nanoparticles in
the liver. Finally, the sample size of behavioral experiments in
this study is not large enough, particularly concerning the APP/
PS1 mouse model, leading to substantial intergroup differences.
To mitigate such issues, future studies should consider
optimizing the experimental design by increasing the sample
size.
CONCLUSIONS
AD, a complex neurodegenerative disorder with a protracted
course, is confronted by two major challenges: the intricacy and
variability of its pathological features and multiple obstacles to
drug delivery. Based on this, we developed an oral brain-
targeting delivery system for the treatment of AD by targeting
multiple pathological features of AD. The mannose-integrated
nanoparticles, in combination with the glucose control strategy,
achieved various barrier crossings of “BMIBB” by utilizing
GLUT1 cycling. Additionally, these exhibited a significant and
specific distribution to the AD lesions. FTY released in the brain
not only reversed pro-inflammatory microglia to anti-inflam-
matory microglia, restoring their ability to phagocytose toxic Aβ
and Tau proteins, but also normalized activated astrocytes,
synergistically reducing oxidative stress and neuroinflammation.
Ultimately, Man NP with Glu control exhibited great
therapeutic effects by restoring homeostasis of microglia and
astrocytes, reducing the burden of Aβ and Tau, remodeling the
microenvironment of AD lesions, and ameliorating memory
deficits in AD mice.
In addition to the formidable BBB, targeted drug delivery for
brain diseases needs to overcome various other barriers
depending on the different routes of administration.44,45
Previous studies on brain delivery have predominantly utilized
intravenous injection to circumvent other barriers.4,5 However,
due to the prolonged duration of AD, all current clinical
therapies except for Leqembi monoclonal antibody require oral
administration.46 Additionally, given the growing emphasis on
the clinical translational value of state-of-the-art research, it is
imperative to consider oral formulations that are more user-
friendly and simpler to prepare.47 In the past few decades, oral
targeted delivery systems have been primarliy focused on
intestinal targeting for the treatment of colonic-like diseases or
delivering large molecules such as insulin into the blood-
stream.48−50 Few studies have reported on oral brain-targeting
delivery systems due to the presence of multiple barriers. In this
study, we employed mannose-modified nanoparticles in
conjunction with a glucose modulation strategy to achieve
simultaneous traversal of the IEB and BBB, thereby successfully
accomplishing oral brain-targeting delivery by adhering to the
absorption properties of these physiological barriers. The
present study represents a promising initial endeavor in the
realm of oral brain-targeting.
Neuroglia, serving as carriers of the brain’s intrinsic immunity,
play a crucial role in the entire process of AD onset and
progression.51,52 Hyperactivated microglia and astrocytes not
only impair the clearance of toxic Aβ and Tau proteins but also
secrete excessive amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
reactive oxygen species, leading to oxidative stress and
neuroinflammation.53,54 Therefore, we have opted for FTY as
a multitarget approach to tackle AD at its source. By modulating
microglia from a pro-inflammatory phenotype to an anti-
inflammatory phenotype as well as normalizing the astrocytes,
we successfully alleviated the burden of toxic proteins while
concurrently reversing the AD leison microenvironment. This
therapeutic approach departed from the clinically outdated and
single-targeted methods and instead optimizes existing
techniques for eliminating toxic proteins, resulting in a more
comprehensive and promising anti-AD therapeutic strategy.
Overall, taking into account multiple factors critical to the
clinical translation of nanomedicines, including the preferred
route of administration, physicochemical stability, and safety, we
developed a facile and efficient nanodelivery system for oral
brain-targeting through one-step synthesis. The nanoparticles
can achieve multitarget therapy for AD by adapting to the
changes of physiological barriers and thereby overcoming
multiple obstacles. The nanoparticles partially addressed the
gap in the field of oral brain-targeting nanodelivery systems for
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3246

AD and offered pioneering inspiration for the further develop-
ment of AD.
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
Materials. PLGA (Mw = 5000) was purchased from Trueturn-
Biological technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). PLGA5000-PEG2000
and PLGA5000-PEG3400-Man were gained from Ruixi Biological
Technology Co., Ltd. (Xi'an, China). Mucin from porcine stomach
was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC (USA). Aβ1−42 was
purchased from GL Biochem Ltd. (Shanghai, China). FTY was
obtained from Dalian Meilun Biotech (Dalian, China). 4-Chloroben-
zenesulfonate salt (DiD) was gained from Biotium (Hayward,
California, USA). The anti-p-STAT3 was purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology Ltd. (Boston, USA). The antibeta Amyloid1−42,
anti-Iba1, and anti-GFAP were purchased from Abcam Ltd. (Cam-
bridge, UK). The anti-STAT3, anti-BDNF, APP polyclonal antibody,
and phosphorylated Tau antibody (p-Tau (Ser 404)) were purchased
from ABclonal Technology Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China). The anti-CD206
and anti-CD86 were gained from Proteintech Group, Inc. (Wuhan,
China). ELISA kits (IL-10, TGF-β, TNF-α, and IL-6,) were obtained
from BD Pharmingen (USA). All chemicals utilized in this investigation
were of analytical or reagent grade quality.
Cell Lines and Animals. The Caco-2, bEnd.3, and BV-2 cell lines
were obtained from the Chinese Academy of Sciences Cell Bank
(Shanghai, China). Male C57 BL/6 mice were derived from Dashuo
Biotechnology Co., Ltd. The APP/PS1 (APPswePSEN1DE9) trans-
genic mice were derived from the Nanjing Biomedical Research
Institute of Nanjing University (Nanjing, China). The FAD4T (B6/
JGpt-Tg(Thy-APP/Thy-PSEN1)5/Gpt) transgenic mice were pro-
vided by Gempharmatech Co., Ltd. (Jiangsu, China). The animals were
reared under standardized living conditions, and all animal experiments
were conducted in compliance with the guidelines approved by the
Experimental Animal Management Committee of Sichuan University.
Preparation and Characterization of the PEG NP and Man NP
Loaded with FTY. PEG NP: First, a 5 mg/mL solution of FTY was
prepared by dissolving it in DMSO. Similarly, a 5 mg/mL solution of
PLGA5000-PEG2000 was prepared by dissolving it in acetonitrile.
Subsequently, 400 μL of PLGA5000-PEG2000 and 10 μL of FTY
solutions were added to 3600 μL of ultrapure water and mixed
thoroughly using vortex. The supersonic probe (SCIENTZ JY92-IIN,
Ningbo, China) operating at a frequency of 42 kHz and power output of
100 W was utilized for the preparation of nanoparticles. Following a 5
min ultrasound treatment, then the organic solvent was eliminated
using a rotary evaporator and subsequently purified by triple washing
with ultrapure water via Millipore (Amicon Ultra) centrifuge filter (Mw
= 10 kDa).
Man NP: PLGA5000-PEG3400-Man was dissolved in acetonitrile to
prepare solution with a concentration of 5 mg/mL. Next, 200 μL of
PLGA5000-PEG2000, 200 μL of PLGA5000-PEG3400-Man, and 10 μL of
FTY solutions were added to 3600 μL of ultrapure water and then
vortexed to mix them. The subsequent steps were in line with the
protocol for synthesizing PEG NP.
The particle size and zeta potential of the nanoparticles were
determined through dynamic light scattering (Brookhaven, USA),
while their uniformity in terms of size and morphology was assessed
using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, H-600, Hitachi, Japan).
Mucin Adsorption and Mucus Penetration. FITC-labeled
nanoparticles were dispersed in a mucin solution (4 mg/mL) and
incubated on a shaker at 60 rpm and 37 °C. Samples were taken at 1, 2,
and 5 h, respectively. The supernatant of nanoparticles with no
adsorbed proteins was collected by centrifugation at low speed (5000
rpm for 10 min). Fluorescence values (excitation wavelength: 495 nm;
emission wavelength: 520 nm) of the supernatant were determined
using an enzyme labeling instrument, and the relative amount of mucin
adsorbed NP was calculated.
A 3D transwell chamber model was utilized to investigate the in vitro
mucus penetration rate of nanoparticles. Fresh porcine intestinal mucus
(100 μL) was uniformly spread on a polycarbonate membrane (pore
size: 3 μm) in the upper chamber, and PBS was added to the lower
chamber and equilibrated at 37 °C for 15 min with agitation.
Subsequently, FITC-labeled nanoparticles were cautiously introduced
into the upper chamber. Samples were collected from the lower
chamber at specific time intervals and subsequently replenished with an
equal volume of fresh PBS. The fluorescence intensity of nanoparticles
in the collected samples was quantified using an enzyme marker, and
the Papp was determined using the following formula:
Q
T
A
C
Papp
d
/d
1/(
)
0
=
×
×
where dQ/dt is the diffusion rate of nanoparticles from the upper
chamber to the lower chamber, C0 is the initial concentration of
nanoparticles, and A is the area of the polycarbonate membrane.
Experiment of a Simulated IEB and BBB. Caco-2 cells or bEnd.3
were seeded in six-well plates at a density of 3 × 105 cells per well. After
incubation for 24 h, FITC-loaded nanoparticles were added to the wells
and incubated for an additional 3 h. The culture medium was then
removed, and the cells were washed three times with PBS before being
harvested and analyzed by flow cytometry (Becton, Dickinson and
Company, USA).
In the IEB mimetic model: The insets were seeded with 5 × 104 cells
in the upper chambers (24 well, pore size: 3 μm, Corning, USA), and
the culture medium was refreshed every 1 to 2 days. After the TEER
(Millicell-ERS, Millipore, USA) of the model reached 600 Ω, 100 μg/
mL aliquots of different nanoparticles labeled with FITC were added
into the inset of transwells. At a specified time point, a specific volume
of liquid from the lower chamber was collected as a sample and
supplemented with an equal amount of PBS into the chambers. The
fluorescence intensity of nanoparticle in the sample was quantified,
followed by imaging using confocal microscopy 8 h later.
In the BBB mimetic model: bEnd.3 cells were seeded with 1 × 105
cells in the upper chambers (12 wells, pore size: 3 μm, Corning, USA).
The culture medium was replenished daily, and TEER values were
measured every 2 days until reaching a value of 200 Ω/cm2.
Subsequently, BV-2 cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 105 cells per
well in the lower chamber, and different nanoparticles labeled with
FITC at a concentration of 100 μg/mL were added to the upper inserts.
After a 4 h incubation period, the fluorescence intensity of each lower
chamber supernatant was measured using a microplate reader. The
mean fluorescence intensity in BV-2 cells was determined by flow
cytometry, while 3D confocal microscopic imaging was utilized to
observe the penetration of nanoparticles in bEnd.3 layer.
In Vivo Imaging in Mice. Both Aβ-injection AD model mice and
FAD4T mice were randomly assigned to different groups. They were
then orally administered with DiD-labeled nanoparticles (DiD 1 mg/
kg) and imaged using the Lumina III Imaging System (PerkinElmer,
USA) at specific time points of 2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 h after administration.
The mice were euthanized at designated time points for tissue
collection. Subsequently, the brain and tissues were dissected for ex vivo
imaging. Following fixation and dehydration, the specimens were
sectioned using a freezing microtome (Leica CM1950, Germany)
before being stained with DAPI (1 μg/mL). Finally, confocal
microscopy was employed to visualize the images.
Behavioral Experiment of Morris Water Maze. The behavioral
experiments were conducted in all three AD animal models, namely,
FAD4T transgenic mice, APP/PS1 transgenic mice, and Aβ-injection
model mice. The mice were randomly allocated into different groups,
with wild-type mice from the same litter and sham-operated mice
serving as healthy control groups. Oral administration of free FTY (1
mg/kg), PEG NP, Man NP, and Man NP with Glu control was
conducted daily. The body weights of mice were recorded every day.
Following 7 rounds of treatment, the mice underwent the MWM test,
preceded by a 4 day behavioral training period. The mice were placed in
a circular pool with a diameter of 100 cm, featuring a circular platform
positioned approximately 1 cm above the water surface. If the mice
successfully located and remained on the platform for at least 10 s
within a 60 s time frame, it would be deemed as having completed the
training task. Otherwise, artificial guidance would be provided to direct
the mice toward the platform for 10 s. On the fifth day, following
removal of the platform, a spatial probe test was conducted whereby
mice were allowed to swim freely for 60 s. The latency to reach the
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3247

platform area, average frequencies across original platform area, and
cumulative time at original platform area were recorded for statistical
analysis.
Pharmacodynamic Mechanisms of Nanoparticles in Vivo.
After behavioral treatment, blood was collected from the mice prior to
euthanasia for routine analysis of hematological and biochemical
parameters. Subsequently, brain and major tissues were harvested for
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical staining, while some
brain tissues were utilized for protein extraction for Western blotting
and ELISA assays. Additionally, RNA was extracted from some mouse
brains for transcriptomic analysis. The intestinal contents of certain
mice were utilized for the analysis of their intestinal microbiota.
Statistical Analysis. The statistical analysis was performed using
GraphPad Prism (version 8, CA). Data were presented as mean ± SD
and analyzed by a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test with significance
defined as *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001
compared to the control group.
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715.
Additional details on preparation of the nanoparticles;
Cytotoxicity assay; In vitro release of rapamycin; Stability
of nanoparticles; Uptake of nanoparticles; Ex vivo
fluorescent imaging of organs; Confocal microscopy
imaging of organs; Behavior experiments; Immunofluor-
escence staining; Western blot assay; ELISA assay;
Biosafety evaluation; Nissl staining; Transcriptomics
analysis; The 16s analysis of intestinal flora (PDF)
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Huile Gao −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China;
orcid.org/
0000-0002-5355-7238; Email: gaohuile@scu.edu.cn
Authors
Ting Lei −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Zixiao Yang −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Chaoqing Jiang −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Xiaorong Wang −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Wenqin Yang −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Xiaotong Yang −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Rou Xie −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug Delivery
System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan Province,
Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced Drug and
Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision Industrial
Technology, West China School of Pharmacy, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China
Fan Tong −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Xue Xia −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug Delivery
System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan Province,
Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced Drug and
Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision Industrial
Technology, West China School of Pharmacy, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China
Qianqian Huang −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and
Drug Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Yufan Du −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Yuan Huang −Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug
Delivery System of the Education Ministry and Sichuan
Province, Sichuan Engineering Laboratory for Plant-Sourced
Drug and Sichuan Research Center for Drug Precision
Industrial Technology, West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
Author Contributions
H.G., T.L., and Y.H. designed the research. T.L., Z.Y., C.J., X.W.,
W.Y., X.Y., R.X., F.T., and Y.D. performed the research. T.L.,
X.X., and Q.H. analyzed the data. T.L. and Z.Y. wrote the
original draft. H.G. and X.X. conducted the review and edit. All
authors have given approval to the final version of the
manuscript.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3248

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work was supported by the Research and Development
Program of Science and Technology Department of Sichuan
Province (2022JDJQ0050) and the Fundamental of Research
Funds for the Central Universities.
REFERENCES
(1) Wilczewska, A. Z.; Niemirowicz, K.; Markiewicz, K. H.; Car, H.
Nanoparticles as drug delivery systems. Pharmacol Rep 2012, 64 (5),
1020−1037.
(2) Singh, R.; Lillard, J. W. Nanoparticle-based targeted drug delivery.
Exp Mol. Pathol 2009, 86 (3), 215−223.
(3) Ruan, S.; Zhou, Y.; Jiang, X.; Gao, H. Rethinking CRITID
Procedure of Brain Targeting Drug Delivery: Circulation, Blood Brain
Barrier Recognition, Intracellular Transport, Diseased Cell Targeting,
Internalization, and Drug Release. Adv. Sci. (Weinh) 2021, 8 (9),
2004025.
(4) He, X.; Xie, J.; Zhang, J.; Wang, X.; Jia, X.; Yin, H.; Qiu, Z.; Yang,
Z.; Chen, J.; Ji, Z.; Yu, W.; Chen, M.; Xu, W.; Gao, H. Acid-Responsive
Dual-Targeted Nanoparticles Encapsulated Aspirin Rescue the
Immune Activation and Phenotype in Autism Spectrum Disorder.
Adv. Sci. (Weinh) 2022, 9 (14), No. e2104286.
(5) Lei, T.; Yang, Z.; Xia, X.; Chen, Y.; Yang, X.; Xie, R.; Tong, F.;
Wang, X.; Gao, H. A nanocleaner specifically penetrates the bloodbrain
barrier at lesions to clean toxic proteins and regulate inflammation in
Alzheimer’s disease. Acta pharmaceutica Sinica. B 2021, 11 (12), 4032−
4044.
(6) Huang, D.; Wang, Q.; Cao, Y.; Yang, H.; Li, M.; Wu, F.; Zhang, Y.;
Chen, G.; Wang, Q. Multiscale NIR-II Imaging-Guided Brain-Targeted
Drug Delivery Using Engineered Cell Membrane Nanoformulation for
Alzheimer’s Disease Therapy. ACS Nano 2023, 17 (5), 5033−5046.
(7) Acostabaena, N. Tracking the insidious course of Alzheimer’s
disease. Nature Medicine 2012, 18 (9), 1342−1343.
(8) Aggarwal, N.; Qamar, Z.; Rehman, S.; Baboota, S.; Ali, J. Orally
Administered Nanotherapeutics For Parkinson’s Disease: An Old
Delivery System Yet More Acceptable. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2020, 26 (19),
2280.
(9) Wang, P.; Wang, Y.; Li, P.; Chen, C.; Ma, S.; Zhao, L.; He, H.; Yin,
T.; Zhang, Y.; Tang, X.; Gou, J. Oral delivery of polyester nanoparticles
for brain-targeting: Challenges and opportunities. Chin. Chem. Lett.
2023, 34 (4), 107691.
(10) Wen, M. M.; El-Salamouni, N. S.; El-Refaie, W. M.; Hazzah, H.
A.; Ali, M. M.; Tosi, G.; Farid, R. M.; Blanco-Prieto, M. J.; Billa, N.;
Hanafy, A. S. Nanotechnology-based drug delivery systems for
Alzheimer’s disease management: Technical, industrial, and clinical
challenges. J. Controlled Release 2017, 245, 95−107.
(11) Brown, T. D.; Whitehead, K. A.; Mitragotri, S. Materials for oral
delivery of proteins and peptides. Nature Reviews Materials 2020, 5 (2),
127.
(12) Fábián, T.; Hermann, P.; Beck, A.; Fejérdy, P.; Fábián, G. Salivary
Defense Proteins: Their Network and Role in Innate and Acquired Oral
Immunity. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2012, 13 (4),
4295.
(13) Perez-Vilar, J.; Hill, R. L. The Structure and Assembly of Secreted
Mucins. J. Biol. Chem. 1999, 274 (45), 31751−31754.
(14) Bakhru, S. H.; Furtado, S.; Morello, A. P.; Mathiowitz, E. Oral
delivery of proteins by biodegradable nanoparticles. Adv. Drug Deliv
Rev. 2013, 65 (6), 811−821.
(15) Oh, J. Y.; Kim, H. S.; Palanikumar, L.; Go, E. M.; Jana, B.; Park, S.
A.; Kim, H. Y.; Kim, K.; Seo, J. K.; Kwak, S. K. Cloaking nanoparticles
with protein corona shield for targeted drug delivery. Nature
Communications 2018, 9 (1), 4548.
(16) Hoshyar, N.; Gray, S.; Han, H.; Bao, G. The effect of nanoparticle
size on in vivo pharmacokinetics and cellular interaction. Nanomedicine
2016, 11 (6), 673−692.
(17) Abbott, N. J.; Patabendige, A.; Dolman, D.; Yusof, S. R.; Begley,
D. J. Structure and function of the blood-brain barrier. Neurobiology of
Disease 2010, 37 (1), 13−25.
(18) Ohtsuki, S.; Terasaki, T. Contribution of Carrier-Mediated
Transport Systems to the Blood−Brain Barrier as a Supporting and
Protecting Interface for the Brain; Importance for CNS Drug Discovery
and Development. Pharm. Res. 2007, 24 (9), 1745−1758.
(19) Chen, Y.; Liu, L. Modern methods for delivery of drugs across the
blood-brain barrier. Adv. Drug Deliv Rev. 2012, 64 (7), 640−665.
(20) Kim, J.; Um, H.; Kim, N. H.; Kim, D. Potential Alzheimer’s
disease therapeutic nano-platform: Discovery of amyloid-beta plaque
disaggregating agent and brain-targeted delivery system using porous
silicon nanoparticles. Bioact Mater. 2023, 24, 497−506.
(21) Frizzell, H.; Woodrow, K. A. Biomaterial Approaches for
Understanding and Overcoming Immunological Barriers to Effective
Oral Vaccinations. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30 (37), 1907170.
(22) Hu, S.; Yang, Z.; Wang, S.; Wang, L.; He, Q.; Tang, H.; Ji, P.;
Chen, T. Zwitterionic polydopamine modified nanoparticles as an
efficient nanoplatform to overcome both the mucus and epithelial
barriers. Chemical Engineering Journal 2022, 428, 132107.
(23) Xiao, W.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Liu, Y.; Xie, R.; He, X.; Zhou, Y.;
Liang, L.; Gao, H. The protein corona hampers the transcytosis of
transferrin-modified nanoparticles through blood-brain barrier and
attenuates their targeting ability to brain tumor. Biomaterials 2021, 274,
120888.
(24) Xi, Z.; Ahmad, E.; Zhang, W.; Li, J.; Wang, A.; Faridoon; Wang,
N.; Zhu, C.; Huang, W.; Xu, L.; et al. Dual-modified nanoparticles
overcome sequential absorption barriers for oral insulin delivery. J.
Controlled Release 2022, 342, 1−13.
(25) Shan, W.; Zhu, X.; Liu, M.; Li, L.; Zhong, J.; Sun, W.; Zhang, Z.;
Huang, Y. Overcoming the Diffusion Barrier of Mucus and Absorption
Barrier of Epithelium by Self-Assembled Nanoparticles for Oral
Delivery of Insulin. ACS Nano 2015, 9 (3), 2345−2356.
(26) Shan, W.; Zhu, X.; Liu, M.; Li, L.; Zhong, J.; Sun, W.; Zhang, Z.;
Huang, Y. Overcoming the Diffusion Barrier of Mucus and Absorption
Barrier of Epithelium by Self-Assembled Nanoparticles for Oral
Delivery of Insulin. ACS Nano 2015, 9 (3), 2345−2356.
(27) Hampel, H.; Au, R.; Mattke, S.; van der Flier, W. M.; Aisen, P.;
Apostolova, L.; Chen, C.; Cho, M.; De Santi, S.; Gao, P.; et al.
Designing the next-generation clinical care pathway for Alzheimer’s
disease. Nature Aging 2022, 2 (8), 692−703.
(28) Scheltens, P.; De Strooper, B.; Kivipelto, M.; Holstege, H.;
Chételat, G.; Teunissen, C. E.; Cummings, J.; van der Flier, W. M.
Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 2021, 397 (10284), 1577−1590.
(29) Ren, R.; Qi, J.; Lin, S.; Liu, X.; Yin, P.; Wang, Z.; Tang, R.; Wang,
J.; Huang, Q.; Li, J.; Xie, X.; Hu, Y.; Cui, S.; Zhu, Y.; Yu, X.; Wang, P.;
Zhu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Huang, Y.; Hu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Li, C.; Zhou, M.; Wang,
G. The China Alzheimer Report 2022. Gen Psychiatr 2022, 35 (1),
No. e100751.
(30) Liu, P. P.; Xie, Y.; Meng, X. Y.; Kang, J. S. History and progress of
hypotheses and clinical trials for Alzheimer’s disease. Signal Transduct
Target Ther 2019, 4, 29.
(31) Long, J. M.; Holtzman, D. M. Alzheimer Disease: An Update on
Pathobiology and Treatment Strategies. Cell 2019, 179 (2), 312−339.
(32) Dolgin, E. How to defeat dementia. Nature 2016, 539 (7628),
156−158.
(33) Mullard, A. Microglia-targeted candidates push the Alzheimer
drug envelope. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 2018, 17 (5), 303−305.
(34) Hu, X.; Leak, R. K.; Shi, Y.; Suenaga, J.; Gao, Y.; Zheng, P.; Chen,
J. Microglial and macrophage polarization - New prospects for brain
repair. Nature Reviews Neurology 2015, 11 (1), 56.
(35) Leng, F.; Edison, P. Neuroinflammation and microglial activation
in Alzheimer disease: where do we go from here? Nat. Rev. Neurol 2021,
17 (3), 157−172.
(36) Avgoustakis, K. Pegylated Poly(Lactide) and Poly(Lactide-Co-
Glycolide) Nanoparticles: Preparation, Properties and Possible
Applications in Drug Delivery. Curr. Drug Delivery 2004, 1 (4), 321−
333.
(37) Akiyama, H.; Kondoh, T.; Kokunai, T.; Nagashima, T.; Saito, N.;
Tamaki, N. Blood-brain barrier formation of grafted human umbilical
vein endothelial cells in athymic mouse brain. Brain Res. 2000, 858 (1),
172−176.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3249

(38) Hidalgo, I. J.; Raub, T. J.; Borchardt, R. T. Characterization of the
Human Colon Carcinoma Cell Line (Caco-2) as a Model System for
Intestinal Epithelial Permeability. Gastroenterology 1989, 96 (3), 736−
749.
(39) Anraku, Y.; Kuwahara, H.; Fukusato, Y.; Mizoguchi, A.; Ishii, T.;
Nitta, K.; Matsumoto, Y.; Toh, K.; Miyata, K.; Uchida, S.; et al.
Glycaemic control boosts glucosylated nanocarrier crossing the BBB
into the brain. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 1001.
(40) Dong, C.; Madar, A. D.; Sheffield, M. E. J. Distinct place cell
dynamics in CA1 and CA3 encode experience in new environments.
Nat. Commun. 2021, 12 (1), 2977.
(41) Cohen, J. A.; Chun, J. Mechanisms of fingolimod’s efficacy and
adverse effects in multiple sclerosis. Ann. Neurol. 2011, 69 (5), 759−
777.
(42) Joni, S. S.; Cheshmavar, M.; Shoureshi, P.; Zamani, Z.; Taoosi,
N.; Akbari, M.; Afzali, M. Effects of fingolimod treatments on alanine
transaminase and aspartate transaminase levels in patients with multiple
sclerosis. International journal of physiology, pathophysiology and
pharmacology 2020, 12 (3), 88−94.
(43) Li, C.; Wang, N.; Zheng, G.; Yang, L. Oral Administration of
Resveratrol-Selenium-Peptide Nanocomposites Alleviates Alzheimer’s
Disease-like Pathogenesis by Inhibiting Aβ Aggregation and Regulating
Gut Microbiota. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13 (39), 46406−
46420.
(44) Knopman, D. S.; Amieva, H.; Petersen, R. C.; Chételat, G.;
Holtzman, D. M.; Hyman, B. T.; Nixon, R. A.; Jones, D. T. Alzheimer
disease. Nature Reviews Disease Primers 2021, 7 (1), 33.
(45) Castellani, R. J.; Rolston, R. K.; Smith, M. A. Alzheimer Disease.
Disease-a-Month 2010, 56 (9), 484−546.
(46) Bachurin, S. O.; Bovina, E. V.; Ustyugov, A. A. Drugs in Clinical
Trials for Alzheimer’s Disease: The Major Trends. Med. Res. Rev. 2017,
37 (5), 1186−1225.
(47) Duran-Lobato, M.; Niu, Z.; Alonso, M. J. Oral Delivery of
Biologics for Precision Medicine. Adv. Mater. 2020, 32 (13),
No. e1901935.
(48) Hou, Y.; Jin, J.; Duan, H.; Liu, C.; Chen, L.; Huang, W.; Gao, Z.;
Jin, M. Targeted therapeutic effects of oral inulin-modified double-
layered nanoparticles containing chemotherapeutics on orthotopic
colon cancer. Biomaterials 2022, 283, 121440.
(49) Zhang, M.; Xu, C.; Wen, L.; Han, M. K.; Xiao, B.; Zhou, J.;
Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Viennois, E.; Merlin, D. A Hyaluronidase-
Responsive Nanoparticle-Based Drug Delivery System for Targeting
Colon Cancer Cells. Cancer Res. 2016, 76 (24), 7208−7218.
(50) Lopes, M.; Shrestha, N.; Correia, A.; Shahbazi, M. A.; Sarmento,
B.; Hirvonen, J.; Veiga, F.; Seica, R.; Ribeiro, A.; Santos, H. A. Dual
chitosan/albumin-coated alginate/dextran sulfate nanoparticles for
enhanced oral delivery of insulin. J. Controlled Release 2016, 232, 29−
41.
(51) Sjöbeck, M.; Englund, E. Glial levels determine severity of white
matter disease in Alzheimer’s disease: a neuropathological study of glial
changes. Neuropathology & Applied Neurobiology 2003, 29 (2), 159−
169.
(52) Zhao, M.; Jiang, X. F.; Zhang, H. Q.; Sun, J. H.; Pei, H.; Ma, L. N.;
Cao, Y.; Li, H. Interactions between glial cells and the blood-brain
barrier and their role in Alzheimer’s disease. Ageing Res. Rev. 2021, 72,
101483.
(53) Li, Y.; Tan, M. S.; Jiang, T.; Tan, L. Microglia in Alzheimer’s
Disease. Biomed Research International 2014, 2014 (16), 437483.
(54) Verkhratsky, A.; Olabarria, M.; Noristani, H. N.; Yeh, C. Y.;
Rodriguez, J. J. Astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurotherapeutics
2010, 7 (4), 399−412.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3234−3250
3250