Gut Microbes
ISSN: 1949-0976 (Print) 1949-0984 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/kgmi20
Gut microbiome-targeted therapies for
Alzheimer’s disease
Tao Zhang, Guangqi Gao, Lai-Yu Kwok & Zhihong Sun
To cite this article: Tao Zhang, Guangqi Gao, Lai-Yu Kwok & Zhihong Sun (2023) Gut
microbiome-targeted therapies for Alzheimer’s disease, Gut Microbes, 15:2, 2271613, DOI:
10.1080/19490976.2023.2271613
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2023.2271613
© 2023 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Published online: 07 Nov 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 21683
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 129 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=kgmi20

REVIEW
Gut microbiome-targeted therapies for Alzheimer’s disease
Tao Zhanga,b,c, Guangqi Gaoa,b,c, Lai-Yu Kwoka,b,c, and Zhihong Sun
a,b,c
aKey Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Hohhot, China; bKey 
Laboratory of Dairy Products Processing, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Hohhot, China; cInner 
Mongolia Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Hohhot, China
ABSTRACT
The advent of high‐throughput ‘omics’ technologies has improved our knowledge of gut microbiome 
in human health and disease, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), a neurodegenerative disorder. 
Frequent bidirectional communications and mutual regulation exist between the gastrointestinal 
tract and the central nervous system through the gut-brain axis. A large body of research has reported 
a close association between the gut microbiota and AD development, and restoring a healthy gut 
microbiota may curb or even improve AD symptoms and progression. Thus, modulation of the gut 
microbiota has become a novel paradigm for clinical management of AD, and emerging effort has 
focused on developing potential novel strategies for preventing and/or treating the disease. In this 
review, we provide an overview of the connection and causal relationship between gut dysbiosis 
and AD, the mechanisms of gut microbiota in driving AD progression, and the successes and challenges 
of implementing available gut microbiome-targeted therapies (including probiotics, prebiotics, synbio­
tics, postbiotics, and fecal microbiota transplantation) in preventive and/or therapeutic preclinical and 
clinical intervention studies of AD. Finally, we discuss the future directions in this field.
Box 1 Glossary
Gut microbiota: The collection of microbes that inhabit the gut13.
Gut microbiome: The collection of all genomes of microbes that reside in the gut14.
Probiotic: “Live microorganisms which when administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit
on the host”15.
Prebiotic: “A substrate that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health benefit”16.
Synbiotic: “A mixture comprising live microorganisms and substrate(s) selectively utilized by host
microorganisms that confers a health benefit on the host”17.
Postbiotic: “Preparation of inanimate microorganisms and/or their components that confers a health
benefit on the host”18.
Fecal microbiota transplantation: Transfer of feces from a healthy donor to a recipient patient to
attempt to treat a specific disease associated with the gut microbiota19.
ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 25 May 2023  
Revised 28 September 2023  
Accepted 12 October 2023 
KEYWORDS 
Gut microbiome; probiotics; 
prebiotics; synbiotics; 
postbiotics; fecal microbiota 
transplantation; Alzheimer’s 
disease
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is one of the most common 
forms of dementia that can range in severity from 
cognitive impairment to incapacitation. It is 
a neurological disorder characterized by the accumu­
lation of β-amyloid-containing extracellular plaques 
and tau-containing intracellular neurofibrillary 
tangles.1 Around 6.07 million people aged 65 and 
older in the United States experienced AD in 2020, 
which is predicted to climb to 13.85 million in 2060.2 
The mortality of AD is 121,499 individuals in 2019, 
making it the sixth-leading cause of death in the 
United States.3 The short life expectancy, low quality 
of life, and high health-care costs incurred by the AD 
have triggered a heavy social burden.3 Although the 
pathogenesis of AD remains incompletely under­
stood, multiple confounding factors that contribute 
to disease progression have been determined.4 Age, 
CONTACT Zhihong Sun 
sunzhihong78@163.com 
Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, Inner Mongolia 
Agricultural University, Hohhot, China
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2023.2271613
GUT MICROBES                                              
2023, VOL. 15, NO. 2, 2271613 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2023.2271613
© 2023 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been 
published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.

genetics, and family history are the well-established 
risk factors for AD. Individuals of 65 y of age and 
older exhibit greater susceptibility to AD than 
younger people.5 A recent genome-wide association 
study 
has 
identified 
38 
susceptibility 
loci 
regulating AD risk, acting via immune dysregulation 
and protein catabolism,6 of which the apolipoprotein 
E (APOE) alleles have the strongest association with 
the disease, especially APOE4 allele.7 Parental history 
of dementia has also been linked to an increased risk 
of dementia.8 Modifiable risk factors (air pollution, 
lack of education, hearing loss, smoking, etc.) for AD 
in addition to the aforementioned events also deserve 
emphasis.9 Although the major strides in the patho­
physiology of AD have been made, no ‘magic bullet’ 
therapies are available. Of note, aducanumab, 
a monoclonal antibody targeting amyloid β (Aβ), 
has been granted accelerated approval by the United 
Food and Drug Administration for treating AD in 
2021.10 The divergence related to real-world effective­
ness and safety over this first-in-class drug, however, 
causes anxiety for clinicians and patients.11 Thus, 
concerted effort to expand the limited treatment 
options would tremendously aid clinical management 
of AD.
Although the clinical manifestations of gastroin­
testinal dysfunction associated with the pathogenesis 
of Parkinson’s disease,12 another clinicopathological 
entity of neurodegenerative diseases, are not estab­
lished in patients with AD, accumulating evidence 
suggests that the gut microbiota (see Box 1 for 
definitions)13–19 plays an important role in the 
onset and progression of AD.20 Alterations in the 
gut microbiome composition and functionality have 
been observed both in animal and human studies,21 
and the results of fecal microbiota transplantation 
(FMT) intervention studies conducted in both 
germ-free (GF) mice and antibiotic-treated pseudo- 
GF mice further suggested that the gut microbiome 
is a key driver of AD development.22 The establish­
ment of a causality relationship between alterations 
in gut microbiota and the progress of AD forms the 
basis for designing novel therapeutic strategies tar­
geting the gut microbiome, such as probiotics, pre­
biotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, and FMT.
This review summarizes the current knowledge 
of the mechanistic role of the gut microbiome in 
the development of AD and potential gut micro­
biome-targeting therapies in managing the disease. 
Finally, we discuss future directions of translating 
the gut microbiome research into clinical practice.
The gut microbiome and AD
Aberrant gut microbiota in AD patients
Nineteen next-generation sequencing technology- 
based observational studies have reported the 
observation of an altered gut microbiota in patients 
diagnosed with AD compared with healthy con­
trols (Supplementary Table S1). At least 11 phyla, 
15 classes, 14 orders, 38 families, 137 genera, and 
51 species were regarded as significantly differen­
tial bacterial taxa between healthy and diseased 
individuals, though only a low proportion (26/ 
266, 9.77%) of them altered in one study showed 
consistent 
changes 
in 
another 
study 
(Supplementary Table S2). The most frequently 
reported differentially abundant families and gen­
era are: the families Enterococcaceae (four studies), 
Lachnospiraceae 
(four 
studies), 
and 
Ruminococcaceae (four studies); the genera 
Bifidobacterium (seven studies), Bacteroides (six 
studies), Blautia (six studies), Dorea (four studies), 
Eubacterium (four studies), and Parabacteroides 
(four studies). However, for most reported differ­
entially abundant taxa, contradictory results are 
seen between studies. For example, five studies 
detected more gene sequences representing 
Bifidobacterium in the gut microbiota of patients 
with AD, while two studies found an opposite 
trend of difference. Only few families and genera 
exhibit a consistent trend of difference between 
patients 
with 
AD 
and 
healthy 
subjects 
(Supplementary Table S2), including: an increase 
representation in the families Enterobacteriaceae 
(two studies), Erysipelotrichaceae (two studies), 
and Gemellaceae (two studies), but a decrease 
representation in the family Lachnospiraceae (four 
studies) and Clostridiaceae (two studies) in the gut 
microbiota of patients with AD; an increase repre­
sentation in the genera Akkermansia (three stu­
dies), Anaerotruncus (three studies), Collinsella 
(three studies), Bilophila (two studies), Escherichia- 
Shigella (two studies), Flavobacterium (two stu­
dies), Gemella (two studies), Lactobacillus (two 
studies), and Solobacterium (two studies), but 
a decrease representation in the genera Roseburia 
2
T. ZHANG ET AL.

(three studies), Anaerostipes (two studies), 
Butyricicoccus (two studies), Coprococcus (two stu­
dies), Lachnoclostridium (two studies), Lachnospira 
(two 
studies), 
Megamonas 
(two 
studies), 
Parasutterella (two studies), and Ruminococcus 
(two studies) in the gut microbiota of patients 
with AD.
Although the gut microbiota profile in patients 
with AD represents substantial heterogeneity, 
patients with AD seem to have a distinct intestinal 
microbial landscape from healthy individuals, and 
the role of the differential abundant taxa in the 
development and pathogenesis in AD are still 
obscure, which warrants further confirmation and 
investigation.
Dysregulated gut microbiota in animal models 
of AD
Similarly, alterations in the gut microbiota compo­
sition have been reported in animal models of AD 
(Supplementary Table S3). One hundred and forty- 
three bacterial taxa were reported to show statisti­
cal significance between the gut microbiota of 
healthy and AD model mice in 11 observational 
studies, including seven phyla, four classes, eight 
orders, 35 families, 69 genera, and 20 species 
(Supplementary Table S4). At least 14 of these 
143 bacterial taxa showed consistent results 
between at least two independent studies, particu­
larly, the genus Ruminococcus was concordantly 
reported to be decreased in AD model mice in 
four unrelated studies. In addition, the genera 
Desulfovibrio and Lactobacillus were concordantly 
reported to be increased in AD model mice in three 
unrelated 
studies. 
Notably, 
the 
phyla 
Proteobacteria (five studies) and Verrucomicrobia 
(four studies), the family Erysipelotrichaceae (four 
studies), the genus Allobaculum (five studies) and 
Ruminococcus (four studies) were most frequently 
reported differentially abundant bacterial taxa in 
the selected studies. Altogether, these data sug­
gested that the gut microbiota in AD model mice 
is distinct from those of the healthy controls, and 
some common differential bacterial taxa have been 
captured across studies.
It is worth mentioning that the AD differential 
microbial taxa identified in clinical and preclinical 
studies are largely non-overlapping (Figure 1). 
Such finding represents an enormous challenge of 
translational gut microbiome research, which is 
likely due to the substantial intrinsic difference 
between the mouse and human gut microbiome 
configurations.23 In addition, 77.8% (21/27) and 
75% (9/12) of the most frequently reported differ­
entially abundant bacterial taxa (reported in at least 
Decreased in AD patients
Increased in AD patients
f_Lachnospiraceae
g_Roseburia
p_Firmicutes
f_Ruminococcaceae
g_Eubacterium
f_Bacteroidaceae
g_Dialister
g_Enterococcus
g_Erysipelotr
g_Faecalibacterium
f_Enterococcaceae
g_Bacteroides
g_Blautia
g_Dorea
g_Parabacteroides
c_Actinobacteria
f_Bifidobacteriaceae
f_Lactobacillaceae
g_Alistipes
g_Odoribacter
g_Paraprevotella
p_Actinomycetota
p_Proteobacteria
g_Bifidobacterium
g_Akkermansia
g_Anaerotruncus
g_Collinsella
  2
2
5
The number of studies
The most frequently reported differentially abundant bacterial taxa
1
  4
1
4
Decreased in AD mice
Increased in AD mice
g_Ruminococcus
f_Rikenellaceae
g_Akkermansia
g_Allobaculum
p_Verrucomicrobia
c_Gammaproteobacteria
f_Prevotellaceae
o_Erysipelotrichales
p_Proteobacteria
f_Erysipelotrichaceae
g_Desulfovibrio
g_Lactobacillus
4
2
0
2
4
The number of studies
The most frequently reported differentially abundant bacterial taxa
b
a
Figure 1. An overview of the most frequently reported differentially abundant gut taxa (reported in at least three studies) of 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in (a) humans and (b) animals. Red represents a stronger enrichment in the gut microbiota of subjects 
with AD, while blue represents a stronger enrichment in the gut microbiota of healthy controls. The prefix code in the taxon name 
represents taxonomic level; p = phylum; c = class; o = order; f = family; g = genus.
GUT MICROBES
3

three studies) showed inconsistent results in 
human and animal observational studies, respec­
tively, suggesting that there are intrinsic differences 
both among humans and among animals, not just 
the differences between humans and animals. The 
variability of the human and animal microbiota 
results may be attributed to differences in metho­
dology applied (such as fecal sample preservation, 
sequencing methods and bioinformatic analyses). 
Furthermore, factors that influence the gut micro­
biome should not be ignored, especially diet and 
lifestyle, as they are crucial determinants of overall 
gut microbial composition and function.24 
Together, these various confounders affecting the 
heterogeneity between studies should be taken into 
account in future studies, which will greatly facil­
itate the repeatability and reproducibility of data 
between laboratories.
Relationship between the gut microbiome and AD
An overwhelming amount of observational data 
from animal and human studies have consistently 
pointed to a close association between the gut 
microbiota and AD development, and, in recent 
years, the field of gut microbiome research in AD 
has started to move rapidly from correlation to 
causation.
The first generation of studies that disentangle 
the causality of gut microbiome in AD is mainly 
achieved by depleting the indigenous gut micro­
biota in transgenic (Tg) mouse models with AD 
phenotypes via implementing broad-spectrum 
combination antibiotics. For example, both short- 
and long-term antibiotic treatment-induced per­
turbations in the gut microbiota could lead to 
decreased Aβ plaque deposition and attenuated 
plaque-localized glial reactivity in male APP/PS1 
mice.25,26 However, the latter effect was not 
obvious in female APP/PS1 mice,26 suggesting 
that the gut microbiome played a sex-specific role 
in 
brain 
Aβ 
amyloidosis 
and 
microglial 
homeostasis.27 Yet it is worth noting that disrupt­
ing the gut microbiota by individual antibiotics 
(rather than a wide-spectrum antibiotic cocktail) 
was insufficient to reproduce these desired 
outcomes.28
The second generation of studies dissecting the 
causal relationship of the gut microbiota in AD 
development and AD pathology are conducted 
mainly through FMT experiments, which will be 
discussed later in the FMT section. Results 
obtained from the emerging explanatory research 
have started to present compelling and converging 
evidence supporting that the gut microbiome is 
a major determinant driving AD pathology.
Mechanisms of action of gut microbiota in 
driving AD progression
There is growing evidence that close connections 
and bidirectional communications exist between 
the brain and the gut through the gut-brain axis 
via the immune, endocrine/systemic, and neuronal 
pathways.29 The following sections discuss new 
insights into the mechanisms by which the gut 
microbiota contributes to AD (Figure 2).
Gut microbiota-microglia connections
Microglia are the resident macrophages of the cen­
tral nervous system (CNS)30. They are of para­
mount importance to ensure a healthy brain 
development and homeostasis under normal con­
ditions. In AD, dynamic changes in microglial acti­
vation can affect disease progression31,32, playing 
a central role for promoting disease pathogenesis.
It is known that microglia can be orchestrated by 
gut microbiota. This notion is supported by 
a groundbreaking animal study, which reported 
the observations of global defects in microglia in 
GF mice and severely changed microglia properties 
in antibiotic-treated specific pathogen-free (SPF) 
mice and the defective phenotype could be, at 
least 
in 
part, 
reversed 
by 
a 
co-housing 
experiment.33 Intriguingly, two other studies 
further substantiated that the impact of gut micro­
biota on microglia,34,35 meanwhile reporting that 
such effect was temporal- and sex-specific.35 
Furthermore, the increased gut barrier permeabil­
ity driven by the gut microbiota during aging 
results in increased translocation of gut-derived 
N6-carboxymethyllysine into the brain, conse­
quently triggering oxidative stress and mitochon­
drial dysfunction in the microglia.36 In fact, it has 
also been shown that microglia were required in 
the process of gut microbiota-driven brain Aβ pla­
que deposition in a mouse model of AD.37,38 
4
T. ZHANG ET AL.

Additionally, single-nucleus RNA-sequencing of 
brain cells of GF, SPF, and colonized-GF mice 
revealed that the absence of gut microbiota could 
lead to cell-specific transcriptomic changes, prefer­
entially in microglia; and such cellular alterations 
were associated with AD and could be effectively 
reversed by microbial colonization.39 Another 
study conducted by Seo et al. (2023) found that 
GF or antibiotic-treated genetically engineered 
mice of tauopathy expressing human APOE iso­
forms exhibited reduced gliosis, tau pathology, 
and neurodegeneration in a sex- and APOE 
isoform-dependent manner, providing direct evi­
dence of the role of the gut microbiota in interac­
tive regulation of neuroinflammation and tau- 
mediated neurodegeneration.40
Gut microbiota-astrocytes connections
Astrocytes are the predominant type of glial cells in 
the CNS, which is known to play a part in the 
cellular phase of AD.41 Although several recent 
studies have further reinforced the essential role 
of astrocytes in AD pathogenesis,42–44 the 
Gut microbiota
Gut microbiota
Gut microbiota
Firmicutes
Bacteroidetes
Gram-negative bacteria
SCFAs
LPS
Amino acids
T cells
Activated microglia
Amyloid plaques
Tau aggregation
Vagus nerve
Activated astrocytes
Figure 2. Mechanistic insights of gut microbiota in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) development. In AD, the intestinal barrier is compromised, 
which allows gut microbes and molecules to cross the intestinal epithelium.202 Gut microbiota can directly impact microglia.33–36 
Importantly, microglia are required in the process of gut microbiota-driven brain amyloid β (Aβ) plaque deposition.37 Short-chain fatty 
acids (SCFAs) produced by gut Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes can cross the intestinal barrier into the circulation, leading to Aβ plaque 
deposition through modulating plaque-associated microglial functions.60,61 Lipopolysaccharides (LPS), pro-inflammatory compounds 
produced by Gram-negative bacterial membranes, can also enter the circulation, leading to amyloid and tau pathology.66,67 Likewise, 
astrocyte activation can be regulated by gut microbiota, leading to Aβ deposition.45 T cells also play an important role in AD.203 The 
peripheral accumulation of phenylalanine and isoleucine caused by gut microbiota can stimulate the differentiation and proliferation 
of pro-inflammatory T helper 1 cells which crosstalk with M1 microglial cells in the brain, resulting in AD-associated neuroinflamma­
tion and cognitive impairment.53 The role of T cells and other immune cells in the development of AD through the control of the gut 
microbiota requires further investigation. Whether these mechanisms occur individually or in combination to promote AD requires 
further investigation.
GUT MICROBES
5

connections between astrocytes and intestinal 
microbiota are less explored compared with 
microglia.
One previous work found that transferring the 
feces from 16-month-old APP/PS1 mice to antibio­
tic-pretreated 3-month-old APP/PS1 mice for 7 
d could lead to increased Aβ deposition, presumably 
through inhibiting the activation of astrocytes 
around Aβ plaques.45 In a mouse model of multiple 
sclerosis, another nervous system disease, the com­
bined application of microbial metabolites of tryp­
tophan and type I interferons could activate aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor signaling in astrocytes and 
suppress CNS inflammation.46 In an experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis model, it was found 
that gut microbiome-driven production of inter­
feron-γ by meningeal natural killer cells could upre­
gulate the expression of the tumor necrosis factor- 
related apoptosis inducing ligand in astrocytes, 
thereby limiting CNS inflammation through indu­
cing T cell apoptosis.47 Together, these limited data 
suggest that the gut microbiota has the capacity to 
modulate astrocyte function, and whether and how 
these astrocyte-based anti-inflammatory mechan­
isms affect AD remains to be further investigated.
Gut microbiota-T cell connections
The gut microbiota can manipulate immune cells 
to influence disease manifestation, such as stroke48 
and multiple sclerosis.47 Thus, apart from the CNS 
immune cells, such as microglia and astrocytes, 
brain-infiltrated peripheral immune cells may also 
play a part in AD neuropathogenesis.49–52
A previous study found that, the shift in the gut 
microbiota during AD progression led to the per­
ipheral accumulation of phenylalanine and isoleu­
cine, 
stimulating 
the 
differentiation 
and 
proliferation of pro-inflammatory T helper 1 
(Th1) cells. Pro-inflammatory Th1 cells were asso­
ciated with the M1 microglia activation, contribut­
ing to AD-associated neuroinflammation and 
cognitive impairment. Moreover, healthy control 
mice exhibited an increase in Th1 cell infiltration 
and M1 microglia activation when exposed to fecal 
bacteria of AD mice by co-housing or FMT, and 
FMT of WT mice feces into AD mice could reduce 
Th1 cells of the recipient mice.53 The study sup­
ported that gut dysbiosis is a driver for AD 
progression. Given the interconnectedness of the 
gut microbiota and immune system in neurode­
generative diseases, continual efforts should be 
made to decipher the precise role of T cells and 
other immune cells in the development of AD 
through the control of the gut microbiota.54
In addition, it is noteworthy that gut-derived 
metabolites are integral to AD development.55 
Although changes in metabolite profile with 
respect to AD have been identified with the help 
of metabolomics, including but not limited to 
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs),56 lipopolysacchar­
ides (LPS),56 
bile acids,57 
trimethylamine- 
N-oxide58 and amino acids,59 few studies have 
investigated the causative links between these 
bioactive compounds and AD progression. Two 
distinct mouse models of AD have provided ele­
gant examples of cause- and- effect relationships 
between the SCFAs and the disease progress. In 
these studies, it was shown that supplementing 
SCFAs to either GF APP/PS1 or 5×FAD mice 
could lead to increased Aβ plaque deposition 
through modulating plaque-associated microglial 
functions, compared to their SPF.60,61 Akin to the 
notion that SCFA supplementation could modulate 
microglia and worsen disease progression in 
a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease.62 These 
converging studies suggest a detrimental effect of 
SCFAs on neurodegenerative diseases. Conversely, 
SCFAs have also been shown to be beneficial 
for AD in vitro and in vivo.63–65 In addition, LPS, 
pro-inflammatory compounds produced by Gram- 
negative bacterial membranes, could also lead to 
amyloid and tau pathology in animal models.66,67 
The role of other metabolites in AD needs to be 
further validated and tested in mechanistic models.
Collectively, studies dissecting the potential 
mechanisms by which the gut microbiota and 
their metabolites influence AD remain in its 
infancy, and additional research is needed to 
explore whether other action pipelines exist.
Gut microbiome-targeted therapies
Given that the tight connection between the gut 
microbiota and AD, and the mounting evidence 
supporting that microbial dysbiosis is a driver of 
the onset and progression of AD, attempts to 
circumvent AD through microbiome modification 
6
T. ZHANG ET AL.

that restores gut homeostasis hold great promise. 
In the following sections, we summarize available 
strategies that target the gut microbiota, including 
probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, and 
FMT (Figure 3), and current challenges.
Probiotics
The excellent ability of probiotics to modulate the 
gut microbiota has motivated their widespread use 
in various disease management, ranging from 
intestinal diseases to extraintestinal diseases, 
including AD.
Preclinical evidence
While experimental animal models of AD might 
not accurately recapitulate clinical scenarios, they 
are essential for us to understand AD pathophy­
siology and related drug development. Animal 
models of AD include Tg and non-Tg models, of 
which Tg mouse models are most commonly 
used.68 Probiotic intervention studies in AD Tg 
rodent models are summarized in Table 1.69–95
The pioneering work of Bonfili et al. (2017) 
provided evidence supporting the improvement 
effect of SLAB51 probiotic formulation in reducing 
cognitive decline, Aβ plaque and brain damages 
through restoring the gut microbial homeostasis 
in 3×Tg AD mice, providing a paradigm for 
managing 
AD 
with 
probiotic-based 
therapeutics.69 Over the ensuing years, the neuro­
protective effects of a multitude of probiotics 
on AD were investigated, including not only well- 
known probiotic species belonging to the genera 
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, such as 
Lactobacillus plantarum, 71,80,85 Bifidobacterium 
longum, 72,81 Lactobacillus lactis subsp. cremoris, 
74 Bifidobacterium lactis, 82 and Bifidobacterium 
breve, 89,91,95 but also less conventional probiotic 
species including Akkermansia muciniphila, 77 
Clostridium butyricum, 78 Agathobaculum butyrici­
producens, 83 and Saccharomyces boulardii. 93 
Besides single-strain probiotics, some intervention 
trials evaluated the beneficial effects of multi-strain 
probiotics in AD.69,70,73,75,76,79,84,87,88,90,92,94
Most of these animal-based probiotic interven­
tion trials have observed some extent of beneficial 
or even therapeutic effects on AD after the inter­
vention with only few exceptions, although differ­
ent study parameters were used, including 
probiotic strain used, probiotic dose, treatment 
duration, and the animal model. For example, 
Probiotics
Prebiotics
Synbiotics
Postbiotics
FMT
• Pros: generally considered safe, widely researched, proven to have multiple health benefits
• Pros: mainly derived from food, safe, easily available, inexpensive
• Pros: provide synergistic effects, enhance the survival of probiotics
• Pros: high stability and safety
• Pros: quickly restore the balance of the gut microbiota, approved by U.S. Food and Drug 
            Administration for the treatment of recurrent Clostridium difficile infection
• Cons: may be strain-specific, may not survive well in the gut, may cause an infection
• Cons: difficulty in distinguishing whether the beneficial effects are due to prebiotics or other 
             components in the food
• Cons: effectiveness varies depending on the combination of probiotics and prebiotics
• Cons: little studied and more evidence is needed to support its effects
• Cons: complex operating procedures, expensive, potential risks exist such as an infection, 
             long-term safety and efficacy need to be further validated
Gut microbiome-
based therapeutics
Figure 3. Microbiome-based therapeutics in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Microbiome-based therapeutics for AD including probiotics, 
prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT). The beneficial effects of these intervention approaches 
on AD remain to be tested, and the exact mechanism of AD improvement through regulating the intestinal microbiota needs to be 
also explored.
GUT MICROBES
7

Table 1. Comprehensive summary of probiotic intervention studies of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) using transgenic rodent models.
Study
Probiotic product or strain
Probiotic dose
Duration of 
probiotic 
intervention
Information of 
transgenic rodent 
model
Main observations
Bonfili et al. (2017)69
SLAB51 probiotic formulation
2 × 1011 bacteria/kg/day
4 months
8-week-old male 3×Tg- 
AD mice
●Reduced cognitive decline, amyloid load and brain damage
●Increased gut hormone concentration
●Changed the gut microbiota composition
Bonfili et al. (2018)70
SLAB51 probiotic formulation
2 × 1011 bacteria/kg/day
4 months
8-week-old male 3×Tg- 
AD mice
●Reduced oxidative stress in the brain of AD mice by activating sirtuin 1-dependent 
mechanisms
Lee et al. (2018)71
Lactobacillus plantarum C29
1 × 109 CFU
2 months
6-month-old male 
5×FAD mice
●Slowed down the progression of memory impairment
●Suppressed amyloid β (Aβ) plaque formation and expression of β-/γ-secretases and 
caspase-3
●Suppressed blood and fecal lipopolysaccharide levels
●Increased brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression and inhibited nuclear 
factor kappa-B activation
●Restored the disturbed gut microbial community
●Improved gut membrane permeability
Lee et al. (2019)72
Bifidobacterium longum NK46
1 × 1011 CFU
2 months
6-month-old male 
5×FAD mice
●Attenuated cognitive decline
●Shifted the gut microbiota composition
●Suppressed gut inflammatory markers, such as myeloperoxidase, interleukin (IL)-6, 
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α)
Bonfili et al. (2020)73
SLAB51 probiotic formulation
2 × 1011 bacteria/kg
14 months
8-week-old male 3×Tg- 
AD mice
●Influenced glucose uptake
●Decreased phosphorylated tau level
●Attenuated the increase in glycated hemoglobin
Cecarini et al. (2020)74 Lactobacillus lactis subsp. 
cremoris MG1363
1 × 109 CFU
2 months
8-week-old male 3×Tg- 
AD mice
●No difference in cognitive function
●Reduced brain amyloid load
●Modulated the ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy
●Diminished neuronal oxidative and inflammatory processes
Kaur et al. (2020)75
VSL#3
.32 × 109 CFU/25 g mice
2 months
6–8-month-old female 
APPNL-G-F mice
●Altered the gut microbiota composition
●Increased short-chain fatty acid concentrations, including serum acetate, butyrate, 
isobutyrate, lactate, and propionate levels; brain acetate and lactate levels
●No effect on Aβ accumulation and gliosis
Kaur et al. (2020)76
VSL#3
.32 × 109 CFU/25 g mice
2 months
6–8-month-old female 
APPNL-G-F mice
●Regulated the gut microbiota composition
●Attenuated gut permeability and intestinal inflammation
●Regulated the level of some eicosanoids, such as prostaglandin E2, F2α, and 
6-keto-prostaglandin F1α in serum; arachidonic acid in brain
●No effect on most bile acids in serum and brain
●No effect on Aβ accumulation, cytokines, gliosis, and memory function
Ou et al. (2020)77
Akkermansia muciniphila GP01
5 × 109 CFU
6 months
3-month-old male APP/ 
PS1 mice
●Ameliorated glucose homeostasis and restored intestinal barrier function
●Reduced Aβ plaque deposits and Aβ levels
●Ameliorated lipid metabolism disorder
●Relieved cognitive impairment and anxiety-related behaviors
Sun et al. (2020)78
Clostridium butyricum CGMCC 
9831
2 × 108 CFU
1 month
6-month-old APP/PS1 
mice
●Ameliorated cognitive deficits
●Reduced Aβ deposition
●Suppressed microglial activation and proinflammatory cytokine levels, such as IL- 
1β and TNF-α
●Regulated abnormal gut microbiota and metabolites, such as butyrate
Wang et al. (2020)79
Bifidobacterium bifidum 
TMC3115 and Lactobacillus 
plantarum 45
1 × 109 CFU
3.5 months
8-week-old male APP/ 
PS1 mice
●Significant improvement only seen in Morris water maze test but not open field 
test and novel object recognition test
●Elevated alpha and beta microbial diversity
●Reversed gut dysbiosis by suppressing Bacteroides and enhancing Acetatifactor and 
Millionella
(Continued)
8
T. ZHANG ET AL.

Table 1. (Continued).
Study
Probiotic product or strain
Probiotic dose
Duration of 
probiotic 
intervention
Information of 
transgenic rodent 
model
Main observations
Wang et al. (2020)80
Lactobacillus plantarum ATCC 
8014
1 × 109 CFU/mL
3 months
6-month-old male APP/ 
PS1 mice
●No differences in cognitive impairment
●Reduced Aβ plaques
●Slightly effected hippocampal neuron and plasticity
●Reduced plasma trimethylamine and trimethylamine-N-oxide levels
●Reduced proinflammatory cytokines (IL-2, IL-17 and TNF-α) in the hippocampus
Wu et al. (2020)81
Bifidobacterium longum 1714
1 × 109 CFU/mL
6 months
4-month-old APP/PS1 
mice
●Reduced Aβ deposition
●Inhibited microglia activation
●Decreased neural pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, and 
interferon-γ
Cao et al. (2021)82
Bifidobacterium lactis Probio-M8
1 × 109 CFU/mL
1.5 months
4-month-old APP/PS1 
mice
●Reduced Aβ plaques
●Protected against gut microbiota dysbiosis
●Attenuated cognitive impairment
Go et al. 
(2021)83
Agathobaculum 
butyriciproducens SR79
2 × 108 CFU
2 to 2.25  
months
APP/PS1 mice
●Improved cognitive impairment
●Reduced Aβ plaque deposition and microglial activation in the parietal cortex and 
hippocampus
●Decreased expression of IL-1β and C1QB; increased expression of insulin-like 
growth factor-1
Guilherme et al. 
(2021)84
OptiBac for those on antibiotics
1 × 109 CFU/mL
3.5 months
4-week-old male 
5×FAD mice
●No differences in Nesting score, Aβ deposition, body weight, and blood glucose
Huang et al. (2021)85
Lactobacillus plantarum PS128
1 × 109 CFU
33 d
6-month-old male 
3×Tg-AD mice
●No differences in cognitive dysfunction
●No differences in Aβ deposition- and tau protein-related protein levels
●No differences in fecal short-chain fatty acid levels, such as propionic acid, acetic 
acid, and butyric acid
●Reduced the activation of microglia but not astrocytes
●No differences in the synaptic plasticity and cognition-related neuronal loss
Kaur et al. (2021)86
VSL#3
4 × 109 CFU/25 g mice
2 months
2–3-month-old male 
and female APPNL-G-F 
mice
●Decreased Aβ plaques, microgliosis, and brain TNF-α level
●Memory improvement observed only in female APPNL-G-F mice
Kim et al. (2021)87
Bifidobacterium bifidum BGN4 
and Bifidobacterium longum 
BORI
1 × 109 CFU
1 month
3-month-old 5×FAD 
mice
●Attenuated cognitive impairment
●Reduced hippocampal neuronal death
●Suppressed amyloidosis and apoptotic processes
●Improved synaptic plasticity
●Altered the gut microbiome
Sun et al. (2021)88
BIOCG
1 × 109 CFU/kg
3 months
6-month-old male 
3×Tg-AD mice
●Alleviated learning and memory impairment
●Reduced Aβ burden
●Alleviated brain inflammation
●Reduced intracellular Aβ accumulation
Abdelhamid et al. 
(2022)89
Bifidobacterium breve A1
1 × 109 CFU
4 months
3-month-old APPNL-G-F 
mice
●Prevented memory impairment
●Reduced Aβ production, deposition, and fibril formation in the hippocampus
●Enhanced the hippocampal levels of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 10
●Attenuated microglial activation
●No change in tau phosphorylation
●Increased hippocampal synaptic protein levels
●No difference in genus-level gut microbiota composition
Bonfili et al. (2022)90
SLAB51 probiotic formulation
2 × 1011 bacteria/kg/day
14 months
8-week-old male 3×Tg- 
AD mice
●Ameliorated blood lipid profile and modified plasma fatty acid composition
●Influenced cholesterol biosynthesis and metabolism
●Reduced 27-hydroxycholesterol in plasma and brain
(Continued)
GUT MICROBES
9

Table 1. (Continued).
Study
Probiotic product or strain
Probiotic dose
Duration of 
probiotic 
intervention
Information of 
transgenic rodent 
model
Main observations
Ohno et al. (2022)91
Bifidobacterium breve A1
1 × 109 CFU
4 months
3-month-old APPNL-G-F 
mice
●Increased genistein, 2-oxoglutaric acid, succinic acid, and glutathione divalent
Webberley et al. 
(2022)92
Lab4b
5 × 108 CFU
3 months
3-month-old male 
3×Tg-AD mice
●Slowed down cognitive decline
●Minimized the loss of thin neuronal spines in the hippocampus
●Altered plasma levels of IL-10, keratinocyte chemoattractant/growth regulated 
oncogene, and TNF-α
●Influenced the liver metabolic profile
●Altered the gut microbiota composition
Ye et al. 
(2022)93
Saccharomyces boulardii 
HANSEN CBS 5926
1 × 108 CFU
1 month
6-month-old male APP/ 
PS1 mice
●Attenuated cognitive impairment
●Reduced Aβ deposition and tau hyperphosphorylation
●Improved the synaptic plasticity
●Attenuated microglia-induced neuroinflammation
●Regulated toll-like receptor signaling pathway
●Improved intestinal barrier integrity
●Regulated fungal microbiota homeostasis
Webberley et al. 
(2023)94
Lab4P
5 × 108 CFU
6 months
6-month-old male 
3×Tg-AD mice
●Prevented disease-associated deteriorations in novel object recognition, hippo­
campal neuron spine density, and hippocampal mRNA expression of inflamma­
tion-associated genes
Zhu et al. (2023)95
Bifidobacterium breve 
HNXY26M4
1 × 109 CFU
3 months
4-month-old male APP/ 
PS1 mice
●Alleviated amyloid deposition and cognitive impairment
●Ameliorated brain inflammation, oxidative damage, and synaptic impairment
●Upregulated claudin-5 expression and promotes intestinal barrier function
●Restored gut microbiota composition and short-chain fatty acid levels.
SLAB51 probiotic formulation comprises Streptococcus thermophilus DSM 32,245, Bifidobacterium lactis DSM 32,246, Bifidobacterium lactis DSM 32,247, Lactobacillus acidophilus DSM 32,241, Lactobacillus helveticus DSM 
32,242, Lactobacillus paracasei DSM 32,243, Lactobacillus plantarum DSM 32,244, and Lactobacillus brevis DSM 27,961. 
VSL#3 comprises Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. Bulgaricus, Lactobacillus paracasei, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium breve, Bifidobacterium longum, Bifidobacterium infantis, and 
Streptococcus salivarius subsp. thermophilus. 
OptiBac for those on antibiotics is composed of Lactobacillus rhamnosus Rosell-11 and Lactobacillus acidophilus/helveticus Rosell-52. 
BIOCG contains Lactobacillus plantarum Lp3a, Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis Bla019, and Bifidobacterium longum BL5b. 
The Lab4P probiotic consortium is composed of Lactobacillus acidophilus CUL21 (NCIMB 30,156), Lactobacillus acidophilus CUL60 (NCIMB 30,157), Lactobacillus plantarum CUL66 (NCIMB 30,280), Bifidobacterium bifidum 
CUL20 (NCIMB 30,153) and Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis CUL34 (NCIMB 30,172). 
The Lab4b probiotic comprises Lactobacillus salivarius CUL61 (NCIMB 30,211), Lactobacillus paracasei CUL08 (NCIMB 30,154), Bifidobacterium bifidum CUL20 (NCIMB 30,153), and Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis CUL34 
(NCIMB 30,172).
10
T. ZHANG ET AL.

orally administered Saccharomyces boulardii 
HANSEN CBS 5926 had the potential to attenuate 
cognitive impairment of APP/PS1 mice by regula­
tion of the fungal microbiota-gut-brain axis.93 
Conversely, administering Lactobacillus plantarum 
PS128 did not significantly change the cognitive 
dysfunction, levels of Aβ- and tau-related proteins, 
astrocyte activation state, synaptic plasticity, and 
cognition-related neuronal loss in 3×Tg AD 
mice.85
Strain specificity is one of the most influential 
factors contributing to the observed heterogeneity 
in therapeutic effects across studies. A previous 
study investigated how the physiological charac­
teristics of different Lactobacillus plantarum were 
related to their ulcerative colitis-alleviating func­
tion, and, after extensive experimentation, it was 
discovered that conjugated linoleic acid synthe­
sizing capacity could be a determining factor 
associating with ulcerative colitis alleviation.96 
Beck et al. (2022) reported that probiotic strain- 
specificity is an important driver of gut micro­
biome development in preterm infants, influen­
cing the host-microbe interaction in human gut 
in the very early stage of life.97 The implementa­
tion of genetically engineered probiotics that 
express 
a 
specific 
functional 
molecule 
against AD, such as p62 protein, a multi- 
functional signaling protein involved in regulat­
ing protein turnover via the ubiquitin-proteasome 
system and autophagy, cell proliferation and 
death, 
oxidative 
stress, 
inflammation 
and 
immune response has been demonstrated to be 
a safe, non-pathogenic, and noninvasive approach 
to deliver therapeutics to mice with AD.74 
Genetically designed AD-targeting therapeutic 
probiotics may represent a novel paradigm for 
realistic therapeutic management in AD com­
pared to traditional natural probiotics.
Furthermore, animal models also seem to be 
a vital determinant of discordant results, as there 
were minimal to no preclinical benefits from 
Lactobacillus plantarum PS128 consumption in 
3×Tg mice, whereas these preclinical benefits 
were reversed when mice were injected intracereb­
roventricularly with streptozotocin, a chemical that 
is extensively applied in constructing diabetic ani­
mal models.85
Sexual dimorphism appears to be a characteristic 
in AD, contributing to a divergent therapeutic 
effect between male and female subjects. For 
instance, VSL#3 supplementation was correlated 
with reduced Aβ plaque load, improved memory, 
and decreased microgliosis in female AppNL-G-F 
but not male mice, pointing to a sex-dependent 
probiotic effect.86 This interesting finding not 
only explains part of the discrepant probiotic ther­
apeutic effects observed between studies but also 
provides an important insight into setting specific 
guidelines in designing clinical studies addressing 
the therapeutic efficacy of treatments in a sex- 
dependent manner.
Finally, whether other study design parameters, 
such as probiotic dose and treatment duration, 
would influence the clinical outcomes of probiotic 
application should be systematically investigated.
Clinical evidence
Akbari et al. (2016) conducted a randomized, 
double-blind, and controlled clinical trial 
(n = 60) to evaluate the effects of a multispecies 
probiotic milk (containing Lactobacillus acido­
philus, Lactobacillus casei, Bifidobacterium bifi­
dum, and Lactobacillus fermentum) and found 
that a 12-week probiotic consumption could 
improve the cognitive function (measured by 
mini-mental state examination score) and affect 
the metabolic statuses of patients with AD.98 
This early study has provided a rationale for 
the clinical practice of probiotic-assisted therapy 
in AD management, and, shortly thereafter, 
a number of other probiotic intervention studies 
were published, in which the beneficial effects of 
administering a variety of probiotic strains 
in AD were tested (Table 2), including 
Lactobacillus 
plantarum 
(n 
= 100),101 
Bifidobacterium breve (n = 27, 121, 80, 80, 
130),102,103,105,106,108 Bifidobacterium longum 
(n = 90),107 Lactobacillus rhamnosus (n = 90),107 
and some probiotic consortia (n = 60, 60, 20, 
90).98–100,104 As in the probiotic intervention 
trials conducted in animals, the therapeutic 
effects of probiotics in AD seen in human sub­
jects are promising. Although these studies 
applied a considerably wide range of probiotic 
doses (from as low as 3 × 109 to as much as 
GUT MICROBES
11

Table 2. Comprehensive summary of human probiotic intervention studies of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Study
Country/ 
Region of 
trial
Study design
Disease stage
Sample 
size
Probiotic strain(s)
Probiotic dose
Duration of 
probiotic 
intervention 
(months)
Key findings
Akbari et al. (2016)98
Iran
Randomized, double- 
blind, and controlled 
clinical trial
AD
60
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 
Lactobacillus casei, 
Bifidobacterium bifidum, and 
Lactobacillus fermentum
8 × 109 CFU/g
3
●Improved MMSE score
●Increased triglyceride, VLDL, and 
QUICKI levels
●Reduced MDA, hs-CRP, HOMA-IR 
and HOMA-B levels
Agahi et al. (2018)99
Iran
Randomized, double- 
blind, and placebo- 
controlled clinical trial
AD
60
Lactobacillus fermentum, 
Lactobacillus plantarum, and 
Bifidobacterium lactis; or 
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 
Bifidobacterium bifidum, and 
Bifidobacterium longum
3 × 109 CFU
3
●No difference in cognitive tests
●No difference in serum TNF-α, IL-10, 
TAC, GSH, NO, MDA, and 8-OHdG 
levels
Leblhuber et al. 
(2018)100
Austria
Explorative  
intervention study
AD
20
Lactobacillus casei W56, 
Lactococcus lactis W19, 
Lactobacillus acidophilus 
W22, Bifidobacterium lactis 
W52, Lactobacillus paracasei 
W20, Lactobacillus 
plantarum W62, 
Bifidobacterium lactis W51, 
Bifidobacterium bifidum 
W23, and Lactobacillus 
salivarius W24
7.5 × 109 CFU
1
●Increased serum kynurenine level
●Increased 
RNA 
representing 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
●Reduced zonulin concentration
Hwang et al. 
(2019)101
Korea
Multi-center, 
randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled clinical trial
MCI
100
Lactobacillus plantarum C29
>1.25 × 1010 CFU/g
3
●Enhanced cognitive function
●Increased serum BDNF level
Kobayashi et al. 
(2019)102
Japan
Open-label, single-arm 
study
MCI
27
Bifidobacterium breve A1
2 × 1010 CFU
6
●Increased MMSE, POMS2, and GSRS 
scores
Kobayashi et al. 
(2019)103
Japan
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Subjective memory 
complains
121
Bifidobacterium breve A1
2 × 1010 CFU
3
●Improved cognitive function
●No significant differences in blood 
parameters
(Continued)
12
T. ZHANG ET AL.

Table 2. (Continued).
Study
Country/ 
Region of 
trial
Study design
Disease stage
Sample 
size
Probiotic strain(s)
Probiotic dose
Duration of 
probiotic 
intervention 
(months)
Key findings
Tamtaji et al. 
(2019)104
Iran
Randomized, double- 
blind, controlled 
clinical trial
AD
90
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 
Bifidobacterium bifidum, and 
Bifidobacterium longum
6 × 109 CFU
3
●Increased MMSE score
●Increased TAC, GSH, and QUICKI 
levels
●Reduced hs-CRP, insulin, HOMA-IR, 
triglycerides, VLDL-cholesterol, LDL- 
cholesterol, and total-/HDL- 
cholesterol levels
Xiao et al. (2020)105
Japan
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Suspected MCI
80
Bifidobacterium breve A1
2 × 1010 CFU
4
●Improved the total score of RBANS
●Improved domain scores of immedi­
ate memory, visuospatial/construc­
tional and delayed memory∙  
Bernier et al. 
(2021)106
Japan
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Suspected MCI
80
Bifidobacterium breve A1
2 × 1010 CFU
4
●Inverse correlation between HbA1c 
serum concentration and RBANS 
total score
Akhgarjand et al. 
(2022)107
Iran
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild and moderate AD
90
Lactobacillus rhamnosus HA- 
114 or Bifidobacterium 
longum R0175
1 × 1015 CFU
3
●Improved MMSE score
●No effects on activities of daily living
Asaoka et al. 
(2022)108
Japan
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Suspected MCI
130
Bifidobacterium breve A1
2 × 1010 CFU
6
●Improved 
ADAS-Jcog 
subscale 
“orientation”; and MMSE subscales 
“orientation in time” and “writing”
●No changes in the overall gut micro­
biota composition
Abbreviations: 8-OHdG = 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine; AD = Alzheimer’s disease; ADAS-Jcog = Japanese version of Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale; BDNF = brain-derived neurotrophic factor; CFU = colony-forming 
units; GSH = glutathione; GSRS = Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale; HbA1c = hemoglobin A1c; HDL = high density lipoprotein; HOMA-B = homeostasis model of assessment-estimated B cell function; HOMA-IR =  
homeostasis model of assessment-estimated insulin resistance; hs-CRP = high-sensitivity C-reactive protein; IL-10 = interleukin-10; LDL = low density lipoprotein; MCI = mild cognitive impairment; MDA = malondialde­
hyde; MMSE = Mini-Mental State Examination; NO = nitric oxide; POMS2 = Profile of Mood States 2nd Edition; QUICKI = quantitative insulin sensitivity check index; RBANS = Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of 
Neuropsychological Status; RNA = ribonucleic acid; TAC = total antioxidant capacity; TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor-alpha; VLDL = very low density lipoprotein.
GUT MICROBES
13

1 × 1015 colony-forming units) and treatment 
durations (lasting between 1 and 6 months), 
most studies (nine out of 10) consistently 
reported significant clinical effects on improving 
cognitive impairment after probiotic administra­
tion. However, it is worth noting that the rando­
mized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled 
clinical trial (n = 60) conducted by Agahi et al. 
(2018) found that the cognitive (Test Your 
Memory score) and biochemical (oxidant/antiox­
idant and inflammatory/anti-inflammatory bio­
markers) functions in patients with severe AD 
were 
insensitive 
to 
the 
probiotic 
supplementation.99 Thus, the disease stage 
of AD should be taken in consideration when 
designing treatment regimen.
Despite the excitement around health benefits 
from probiotics in AD clinical trials, these studies 
have several bottlenecks. First, the sample size of 
some studies was small, decreasing the statistical 
power and effect size.100,102 Second, the design of 
some of the clinical trials did not adhere to the 
general principles of control, randomization, or 
blinding.98,100,102 Third, it would be more conclu­
sive to include key clinical indicators of diagnostic 
and therapeutic implication, fulling the primary 
neuropathologic criteria for AD, such as the pre­
sence/level of extracellular Aβ deposition and 
intracellular accumulation of hyperphosphorylated 
tau in the brain.109 However, only a paucity of 
studies have focused on these definitive pathologi­
cal parameters.
In short, in both human and animal intervention 
trials, probiotic administration has shown consis­
tent and promising symptom alleviation effects 
in AD, opening a new paradigm for probiotic- 
assisted therapy in managing AD. Yet, a lot more 
well-planned and large-scale intervention studies 
would be needed to layout guidelines for testing 
the therapeutic effects and optimal clinical use of 
probiotics in AD.
Prebiotics
Prebiotics are “substrates that are selectively 
utilized by host microorganisms conferring 
a health benefit”.16 Initially, the concept of pre­
biotics mainly refers to carbohydrate substances 
such as oligosaccharides and human milk 
oligosaccharides, which is later extended to non- 
carbohydrate substances, mainly including poly­
unsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), phenolics, and 
phytochemicals. Among these prebiotics, PUFAs 
are of particular relevance to AD. The study of 
Kalmijn et al. (1997) found an inversely rela­
tionship between PUFA-rich fish consumption 
and risk of AD,110 and such finding has cata­
lyzed investigations into the effects of prebiotics 
on AD in both animals (Table 3) and humans 
(Table 4).
Preclinical evidence
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is a PUFA that 
has been explored extensively as a potential 
therapeutic option for AD in preclinical 
studies,111–127,132,134,136–138 but its clinical effi­
cacy varied largely between studies. The AD 
alleviation effect of carbohydrate-based prebio­
tics, including but not limited to inulin,128,130 
fructooligosaccharide,129,133 
xylooligosaccharide,131 
and 
mannanoligosaccharide,135 
have also been 
tested, showing satisfactory results.
A closer examination of many of the studies 
has revealed pitfalls in the experimental design, 
rendering their conclusions ineffective. For 
example, a common experimental design is to 
compare the therapeutic effects of the control 
and intervention groups, in which a standard 
diet and a so-called prebiotic-enriched diet are 
provided, respectively.114–116,121 Such experimen­
tal design assumes that prebiotics are only given 
to the intervention but not the control group; 
however, in many studies, the diet of both 
groups contain carbohydrate- and/or lipid-based 
prebiotics 
as 
part 
of 
the 
basic 
feed 
components.114–116,121 Thus, the observed clini­
cal outcome differences between groups do not 
really reflect the effects of prebiotic intake 
on AD development or improvement of the sub­
jects. To obviate such limitation, additional sup­
plement with and without prebiotics between 
treatment and control groups on the basis of 
a normal equivalent diet would be a more effec­
tive approach. Finally, phenolics and phytochem­
icals have been shown to reduce the risk of AD 
in both animal and human studies, reviewed by 
EI Gaamouch et al. (2022).167
14
T. ZHANG ET AL.

Table 3. Summary of common prebiotic intervention studies of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) using transgenic rodent models.
Study
Prebiotic used
Prebiotic dose
Duration of 
prebiotic 
intervention
Information of transgenic rodent 
model
Main observations
Calon et al. 
(2004)111
Docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA)
.6% (w/w) in the diet
98–108 d
17-month-old male and female 
Tg2576 mice
●Protected against cognitive deficits and massive loss of postsynaptic proteins, develop­
mentally regulated brain proteins, and postsynaptic density-95
Calon et al. 
(2005)112
DHA
.6% (w/w) in the diet
3–5 months
17-month-old male and female 
Tg2576 mice
●Protected against N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor subunit loss
●Decreased fodrin and gelsolin fragment accumulation
Lim et al. 
(2005)113
DHA
.6% (w/w) in the diet
98–108 d
17–19 months old male and female 
Tg2576 mice
●Protected against amyloid β (Aβ) production, accumulation, and potential downstream 
toxicity
Oksman et al. 
(2006)114
DHA
.5% (w/w) in the diet
4 months
6-month-old male APP/PS1 mice
●Lowered Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels
●No difference in the average plaque load
Arendash 
et al. 
(2007)115
DHA and 
eicosapentaenoic 
acid
13% (w/w) in the 
diet
7 months
2-month-old APP/PS1 mice
●No effects on cognitive function, brain fatty acid levels, or hippocampal Aβ levels
Green et al. 
(2007)116
DHA
1.3% (w/w) in the 
diet
3, 6 or 9 months
3-month-old male and female 3×Tg 
mice
●Reduced the levels of soluble Aβ and somatodendritic accumulation of tau
●No effects on amyloid precursor protein processing and Aβ degradation
●Reduced presenilin 1 steady-state levels
Hooijmans 
et al. 
(2007)117
DHA
.5% (w/w) in the diet
12 months
6-month-old male APP/PS1 mice
●Decreased Aβ deposition in the vasculature of the cingulate gyrus
Ma et al. 
(2007)118
DHA
.6% (w/w) in the diet
98–108 d
17-month-old male and female 
Tg2576
●Increased the neuronal sorting protein LR11
Hooijmans 
et al. 
(2009)119
DHA
.4% (w/w) in the diet
6 or 13 months
2-month-old male APP/PS1 mice
●Improved spatial memory, decreased Aβ deposition, and slightly increased relative 
cerebral blood volume
Perez et al. 
(2010)120
DHA
.6% (w/w) in the diet
3 months
3-month-old male and female APP/ 
PS1 mice
●Reduced Aβ load in the cortex, ventral hippocampus, and striatum of female APP/PS1 
mice
●No differences in LR11 protein levels in the cortex, hippocampus or striatum
●Increased drebrin levels in the hippocampus
Arsenault 
et al. 
(2011)121
DHA
9.5 μmole/g
8–10 months
4-month-old 3×Tg mice
●Increased DHA and decreased arachidonic acid concentrations in the cortex
●No effects on Aβ
●Improved mnesic performance deficit
●Prevented dysfunction of entorhinal cortex neurons
Fiol-deRoque 
et al. 
(2013)122
2-hydroxy DHA
15 mg/kg
4 months
3-month-old male 5×FAD mice
●Improved performance in the radial arm maze test
●Restored cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus
●No changes in Aβ
Ma et al. 
(2014)123
DHA
.6% (w/w) in the diet
5 months
14–15-month-old tau knock-out 
mice
●Protected against hyperphosphorylation
●Improved Morris water maze deficits
Torres et al. 
(2014)124
2-hydroxy DHA
15 mg/kg
4 months
3-month-old male 5×FAD mice
●Induced some of membrane lipid composition in the brain
●Diminished the Aβ brain pathology and tau hyperphosphorylation
Hosono et al. 
(2015)125
Arachidonic acid (ARA) 
or DHA
4% ARA or 4% DHA 
(w/w) in the diet
4 months
9-month-old female Tg2576 mice
●Reduced Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio
Teng et al. 
(2015)126
DHA
.6% (w/w) in the diet
4 months
13–14-month-old male APP/PS1 rat
●Reduced Aβ plaque density
●Improved behavioral testing
Raefsky et al. 
(2018)127
Isotope-reinforced 
polyunsaturated 
fatty acid
1% (w/w) in the diet
5 months
4–7-month-old male APP/PS1 mice
●No effects on behavior defect
●Reduced brain lipid peroxidation and hippocampal amyloid β-peptide levels
Hoffman et al. 
(2019)128
Inulin
8% (w/w) in the diet
4 months
3-month-old E4FAD mice
●No differences in cognitive dysfunction and Aβ load
●Altered gut microbiome diversity
●Enhanced systemic metabolism in cecum, blood, and hippocampus
●Decreased brain inflammation
(Continued)
GUT MICROBES
15

Table 3. (Continued).
Study
Prebiotic used
Prebiotic dose
Duration of 
prebiotic 
intervention
Information of transgenic rodent 
model
Main observations
Sun et al. 
(2019)129
Fructooligosaccharide
2% (w/w) in the diet
1.5 months
6-month-old male APP/PS1 mice
●Improved cognitive impairment
●Decreased Aβ deposition
●Increased levels of synaptic plasticity related proteins of postsynaptic density-95 and 
synapsin I
●Reversed the altered intestinal microbial composition
●Increased the levels of glucagon-like peptide-1 in the gut and glucagon-like peptide-1 
receptor in the brain
Chang et al. 
(2020)130
Inulin
Information not 
provided
4 months
3-month-old asymptomatic APOE3 
(E3FAD) and APOE4 (E4FAD) mice
●Inulin-induced systemic metabolism and gut microbiome changes were APOE genotype- 
dependent
Han et al. 
(2020)131
Xylooligosaccharide
10% (w/v) in 
phosphate 
buffered saline
5 weeks
6-month-old male APP/PS1 mice
●No effects on spatial memory dysfunction
●No differences in the intestinal microbiota composition, intestinal inflammation, gut 
barrier integrity
●No differences in the neuroinflammatory response
Park et al. 
(2020)132
DHA
200 mg/kg
2 weeks
3-month-old male 5×FAD mice
●Attenuated AD-associated pathologies, such as mitochondrial impairment, Aβ accumula­
tion, neuroinflammation, neuronal loss, and impairment of adult hippocampal 
neurogenesis
Wu et al. 
(2020)133
Fructooligosaccharide
5% (w/w) in the diet
6 months
5-month-old male or female APP/ 
PS1 mice
●Ameliorated cognitive dysfunction
●Alleviated the increase of Aβ plaques in the cerebral cortex
●Protected against the decrease in neprilysin expression
●Inhibited the increase in histone deacetylase 2 expression
Bie et al. 
(2021)134
DHA
400 mg/kg
2 months
5-month-old female APP/PS1 mice
●Reduced neuronal damage and improved cognitive dysfunction
●Inhibited Aβ plaques and tau protein neurofibrillary tangles probably by β-site APP 
cleavage enzyme 2 expression
Liu et al. 
(2021)135
Mannanoligosaccharide .12% (w/v) in the 
drinking water
2 months
6-month-old male 5×FAD mice
●Improved the cognitive and spatial memory loss, but not the working memory 
impairment
●Attenuated anxiety-like behavioral disorders
●Improved neuronal morphology and reduced Aβ accumulation
●Alleviated neuroinflammation and oxidative damage
●Increased short-chain fatty acids generation and related-microbes
●Protected the gut barrier integrity
Badesso et al. 
(2022)136
DHA
450 mg/kg
5 weeks
18–20-month-old female Tg2576 
mice
●Ameliorated freezing memory deficits, but was not sufficient to restore spatial memory 
and retention deficits
●Increased synapse formation
●No effect on Aβ deposition
Xiao et al. 
(2022)137
DHA
50 or 300 mg/kg
4 months
3-month-old APP/PS1 mice
●Improved cognitive decline and depression/anxiety behaviors
●No effect on Aβ deposition
●No effect on liver functions, kidney functions, and blood lipid levels
●Had little effects on brain inositol, glycine, and taurine levels
Zussy et al. 
(2022)138
Nanovectorized DHA
.2181 mg
1 month
3-month-old female J20 mice
●Counteracted tau hyperphosphorylation and cognitive loss
Abbreviations: Aβ = amyloid β; AD = Alzheimer’s disease; ARA = arachidonic acid; DHA = docosahexaenoic acid.
16
T. ZHANG ET AL.

Table 4. Comprehensive summary of human prebiotic intervention studies of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Study
Country/ 
Region of 
study
Study design
Disease stage
Number of enrolled 
subjects (subjects 
completed the trial)
Prebiotic(s) and placebo materials
Prebiotic 
dose (g/d)
Duration of 
prebiotic 
intervention 
(months)
Key findings
Freund-Levi 
et al. 
(2006)139
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
204 (174)
Omega-3 fatty acids 
(docosahexaenoic acid, DHA and 
eicosapentaenoic acid, EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
12
●Improved cognitive decline only in very mild 
but not mild to moderate AD patients
Kotani et al. 
(2006)140
Japan
Information not 
provided
MCI and AD
29 (29)
Arachidonic acid and DHA 
Placebo group (240 mg/d of 
olive oil)
0.48
3
●Improved the immediate memory and atten­
tion score in MCI but not AD patients
Chiu et al. 
(2008)141
China
Randomized, double- 
blind placebo- 
controlled study
Mild or moderate AD 
and MCI
46 (29)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1.8 g/d of olive 
oil)
1.8
6
●Improved general clinical but not cognitive 
function
Freund-Levi 
et al. 
(2008)142
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
204 (174)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●No influences on psychiatric, behavior or 
functional ability
Vedin et al. 
(2008)143
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
25 (23)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●Increased plasma DHA and EPA levels
●Lowered interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, and granu­
locyte colony-stimulating factor
Freund-Levi 
et al. 
(2009)144
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
35 (35)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●No effects on inflammatory and AD biomar­
kers in cerebrospinal fluid or on inflammatory 
markers in plasma
Irving et al. 
(2009)145
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
204 (174)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
12
●Affected weight and appetite
Quinn et al. 
(2010)146
USA
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
402 (295)
DHA 
Placebo group: corn or soy oil 
capsules
2
18
●No effect on slowing cognitive and functional 
decline
Vedin et al. 
(2010)147
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
25 (23)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●Reduced prostaglandin F2alpha release from 
blood mononuclear leukocytes
Sinn et al. 
(2012)148
Australia
Randomized, double- 
blind, controlled 
trial
MCI
50 (39)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (safflower oil, 2.2  
g linoleic acid)
1.83–1.95
6
●Improved geriatric depression scale scores 
both in EPA and DHA groups, and verbal 
fluency in DHA group
●No treatment effects on other cognitive or 
quality of life parameters
Vedin et al. 
(2012)149
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
20 (19)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●Affected gene expression in blood mononuc­
lear leukocytes
Faxén-Irving 
et al. 
(2013)150
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
204 (174)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
12
●Increased plasma but not cerebrospinal fluid 
transthyretin level
Lee et al. 
(2013)151
Malaysia
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
MCI
36 (35)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (.6 g linoleic acid)
1.74
12
●Improved short-term and working memory, 
immediate verbal memory, and delayed 
recall capability
Freund-Levi 
et al. 
(2014)152
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
40 (39)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●Increased DHA and EPA levels in the cere­
brospinal fluid
(Continued)
GUT MICROBES
17

Table 4. (Continued).
Study
Country/ 
Region of 
study
Study design
Disease stage
Number of enrolled 
subjects (subjects 
completed the trial)
Prebiotic(s) and placebo materials
Prebiotic 
dose (g/d)
Duration of 
prebiotic 
intervention 
(months)
Key findings
Freund-Levi 
et al. 
(2014)153
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Moderate AD
41 (40)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●No 
effects 
on 
oxidative 
stress 
and 
inflammation
Mahmoudi 
et al. 
(2014)154
Iran
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Normal or 
mild to MCI
199 (186)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (medium chain 
triglycerides)
.3
6
●No beneficial effects on improving cognition 
or prevention of cognitive decline
Shinto et al. 
(2014)155
USA
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
AD
39 (34)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (soybean oil)
1.65
12
●No differences in peripheral F2-isoprostane 
levels, ADAS-cog and ADL
●Decreased IADL
Eriksdotter 
et al. 
(2015)156
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
174 (165)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
12
●Had dose-response relationships between 
plasma omega-3 fatty acid levels and cogni­
tion preservation
Fiala et al. 
(2015)157
USA
Open study
MCI and AD
29 (29)
DHA + EPA 
No placebo group
2
17
●Increased amyloid β (Aβ) phagocytosis and 
resolvin D1 in MCI patients
Phillips et al. 
(2015)158
UK
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
AD
76 (76)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo (olive oil)
1.225
4
●No effects on cognition and mood
Wang et al. 
(2015)159
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
17 (15)
Omega-3 fatty acids 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●Prevented the reduction in specialized pro- 
resolving mediators released from peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells
Karimi et al. 
(2017)160
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
63 (63)
Omega-3 fatty acids 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●Decreased DNA methylation in blood 
leukocytes
Zhang et al. 
(2017)161
China
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
MCI
240 (219)
DHA 
Placebo group (corn oil)
2
12
●Increased the scores of full-scale intelligence 
quotient (FSIQ), information, and digit span
●Increased the volumes of left hippocampus, 
right hippocampus, total hippocampus, and 
global cerebrum
Schwarz 
et al. 
(2018)162
Germany
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
MCI
49 (13)
Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA) 
Placebo group (sunflower oil)
2.2
6.5
●Elevated cerebral blood flow and cerebral 
blood volume
Zhang et al. 
(2018)163
China
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
MCI
240 (217)
DHA 
Placebo group (corn oil without 
DHA)
2
24
●Increased the scores of FSIQ, verbal intelli­
gence quotient and subdomains of informa­
tion and digit span
●Decreased the blood Aβ42 level and mRNA 
expression of Aβ protein precursor
●Increased Beclin-1 and LC3-II levels and LC3-II 
mRNA expression
Jernerén 
et al. 
(2019)164
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
171 (171)
Omega-3 fatty acids 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●Plasma total homocysteine modified the 
effects of omega-3 fatty acids 
supplementation
Tofiq et al. 
(2021)165
Sweden
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
Mild to moderate AD
33 (33)
Omega-3 fatty acids 
Placebo group (1 g of corn oil, 
including .6 g of linoleic acid)
2.32
6
●Increased neurofilament light and chitinase- 
3-like protein 1 in the cerebrospinal fluid
Lin et al. 
(2022)166
China
Randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trial
MCI or AD
163 (131)
DHA or EPA or DHA and EPA 
Placebo group (soybean oil)
.7 or 1.6 or 
1.15
24
●No differences in cognitive, functional, mood 
status scores, biochemical profiles, and 
inflammatory cytokines levels
Abbreviations: Aβ = amyloid β; AD = Alzheimer’s disease; ADAS-cog = Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale; ADL = Activities of Daily Living; DHA = docosahexaenoic acid; EPA = eicosapentaenoic acid; FSIQ = full- 
scale intelligence quotient; IADL = Instrumental Activities of Daily Living; IL = interleukin; MCI = mild cognitive impairment.
18
T. ZHANG ET AL.

Clinical evidence
A number of clinical studies have evaluated the 
effects of prebiotics on mitigating AD, particularly 
the functional effect of PUFAs.
The first effort to interrogate the function of 
prebiotics in AD patients came from the 
OmegAD trial conducted in 2006, which is 
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial (n = 204). The study preliminarily observed 
that dietary consumption of omega-3 fatty acids 
was linked to improved cognitive functions in 
very mild but not mild to moderate AD 
patients.139 Subsequently, the OmegAD trial data 
were reassessed based on patient stratification, 
focusing on neuropsychiatric symptoms (n =  
204),142 release of cytokines (n = 25),143 inflamma­
tory markers (n = 35),144 weight and appetite (n =  
204),145 release of prostaglandin F2alpha (n =  
25),147 expression of genes (n = 20),149 transthyre­
tin levels (n = 204),150 PUFA levels (n = 40),152 oxi­
dative stress and inflammation (n = 41),153 plasma 
fatty acid profiles in relation to cognition and gen­
der (n = 174),156 release of specialized pro- 
resolving mediators (n = 17),159 DNA methylation 
(n = 63),160 plasma total homocysteine level 
(n = 171),164 and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers 
(n = 33).165 Aside from the well-known OmegAD 
study conducted in Sweden, other interventional 
studies involving prebiotics were conducted in 
eight countries, including Japan (n = 29),140 China 
(n = 46, 240, 240, 163),141,161,163,166 USA (n = 402, 
39, 29),146,155,157 Australia (n = 50),148 Malaysia 
(n = 36),151 Iran (n = 199),154 UK (n = 76),158 and 
Germany (n = 49).162 While most of these studies 
found significant improvement in patient clinical 
outcomes after prebiotic use, a few studies reported 
no apparent beneficial effects on AD, in the aspects 
of neuropsychiatric symptoms,142 inflammatory 
markers,144 cognitive dysfunction,146,154,158,166 and 
oxidative stress and inflammation.153
An interesting Cardiovascular Health Cognition 
Study compared the effects of lean fish versus fatty 
fish (tuna or other fish) intake on patients with AD, 
vascular dementia, and other types of dementia 
(Parkinson’s disease and Lewy body dementia), and 
in relation to APOE4 status, they found that con­
sumption of fatty fish reduced the risk of AD, 
Parkinson’s disease and Lewy body dementia, espe­
cially in patients without APOE4 allele.168 Transgenic 
mice expressing the human APOE4 isoform had 
a lower brain uptake of DHA than those expressing 
the APOE2 isoform due to limited biodistribution 
and transport of DHA in cerebral tissues.169 The 
inter-individual distribution of the APOE4 allele is 
thus a possible factor contributing the heterogeneous 
response of PUFA intervention in AD, and such 
genetic risk factor should be considered when imple­
menting prebiotic therapy, especially PUFAs, in 
future studies and in patients with AD.
Finally, while most prebiotic intervention stu­
dies investigated the beneficial effects of PUFAs 
on AD, few of them explored the functions of 
carbohydrate-based prebiotics, such as inulin, fruc­
tooligosaccharide, xylooligosaccharide, and man­
nanoligosaccharide. Given the gut microbiota 
modulation capacity of carbohydrate-based prebio­
tics, particularly enriching the SCFA-producers 
and gut microbes synthesizing beneficial bioactive 
molecules, it merits further attention.
Synbiotics
While an enormous amount of knowledge has been 
generated from experimental and clinical studies of 
probiotic and prebiotic intervention in AD, fewer 
studies have looked into the beneficial effects of 
synbiotics. By definition, synbiotics are classified 
into two subsets: a complementary synbiotic that is 
a mixture of a probiotic plus a prebiotic, and 
a synergistic synbiotic that is a synbiotic in which 
the substrate is designed to be selectively utilized by 
the co-administered microorganism(s).17
Data on the use of synbiotics in Tg AD rodent 
models are limited to few preclinical studies. Deng 
et al. (2022) found that the application of 
a complementary synbiotic, comprising inulin 
and a multispecies probiotic preparation (contain­
ing Bacillus natto, Bacillus coagulans, Lactobacillus 
casei, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium 
longum, and Bifidobacterium breve), but not inulin 
alone, could ameliorate cognitive impairment, 
decrease Aβ42 and induce neurogenesis, and 
reduce the inflammatory response, suggesting that 
synbiotic but not prebiotic supplementation could 
delay AD progression via regulating the gut-brain 
axis.170 Another interesting study conducted in 
transgenic humanized Drosophila melanogaster 
of AD demonstrated that administering the 
GUT MICROBES
19

synbiotic formulation (containing three metaboli­
cally active probiotics, including Lactobacillus 
plantarum NCIMB 8826, Lactobacillus fermentum 
NCIMB 5221, and Bifidobacteria longum spp. 
infantis, and a novel polyphenol-rich prebiotic, 
namely triphala powder) could increase the survi­
vability, motility, and rescued Aβ deposition and 
acetylcholinesterase activity of the fruit flies. The 
observed beneficial effects were likely achieved 
through gut-brain-axis signaling and regulation of 
metabolic stability, immune signaling, oxidative, 
and mitochondrial stress.171
Collectively, limited available evidence is available 
to demonstrate the beneficial effects of synbiotics in 
curbing AD progression. It merits more effort to 
uncover the beneficial synergistic AD remission 
effect unleashed by synbiotics than administering 
probiotics or prebiotics alone, particularly by animal 
and human intervention trials focusing on elucidat­
ing the specific synergistic mechanisms of action.
Postbiotics
Albeit extremely rare, probiotic therapy has some 
safety concerns, such as the spread of antibiotic 
resistance genes, the presence of potential virulence 
factors, and the development of bacteremia or fun­
gemia. Thus, functional research of postbiotics has 
emerged.172 Some of the biggest advantages of 
postbiotics are their good stability and ease of 
storage.18 Moreover, increasing evidence shows 
that postbiotics offer comparable health effects to 
probiotics, although the available studies are 
mostly limited to the health-promoting effects of 
postbiotics in gastrointestinal disorders.172,173 The 
safety-stability-health claims triangle from postbio­
tic intervention has unsurprisingly attracted con­
siderable attention.174 Thus, high-quality, well- 
designed animal models and human studies are 
still needed to fill the gaps in the realm of AD.
FMT
Historical accounts linking FMT and disease date 
back to the 4th century BC in China when human 
fecal suspension was used to treat patients with 
food poisoning, diarrhea, and those with fever 
and imminent dying.175 In 1958, the application 
of FMT in treating Clostridioides difficile infection 
(CDI)-associated pseudomembranous enterocolitis 
has opened a new era of modern medical research 
of FMT.176 The resurgence of FMT in the past 
decade was due to the efficacy of up to 90% in 
treating recurrent CDI in a landmark clinical 
study published in 2013.177 Contemporaneously, 
a plethora of FMT-related studies have been con­
ducted to explore other potential therapeutic indi­
cations associated with an altered gut microbiome, 
such as inflammatory bowel disease, with the goals 
of restoring of the gut microbiota to a premorbid 
state.178 In 2022, the first fecal microbiota product, 
Rebyota, was approved by the United States Food 
and Drug Administration for the prevention of 
recurrence of CDI in individuals 18 y of age and 
older who have completed antibiotic treatment for 
recurrent CDI.179 This optimism heralds the emer­
gence of FMT therapy as part of clinical practice. 
The great progress of FMT in managing gastroin­
testinal diseases has invigorated its application 
extending beyond the intestine, including AD 
(Table 5).22,27,45,180–193 However, as seen in 
Table 5, most current FMT-related studies pertain­
ing to AD are animal trials with only very few 
human clinical studies, and most of these studies 
demonstrated promising results of FMT therapy 
in AD, which warrants further evaluation of FMT 
in both preclinical and clinical research.
A few problems have been identified in some of 
the current FMT intervention trials, and, in future 
interventional research, robust experimental 
designs are of paramount importance for conduct­
ing reliable, valid, and safe studies. For instance, 
the eradication of indigenous microbial commu­
nities of recipient animals via broad-spectrum anti­
biotics prior to FMT appears to be incomplete, and 
it is not easy to assess the effect of residual micro­
biota in the experimental process; thus, it would be 
vital to use GF animals to conduct studies aiming 
to elucidate the clinical efficacy of FMT. 
Furthermore, there is a lack of consensual protocol 
for FMT implementation in the preclinical research 
included in this review, ranging from 1 time to 24 
times of application. Experimental parameters like 
the method and frequency of FMT application is 
particularly important for transitioning from pre­
clinical to clinical translation research, ensure 
reproducibility between and validity of studies. 
Finally, despite patients’ safety is the prime concern 
20
T. ZHANG ET AL.

Table 5. Comprehensive summary of studies of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) transgenic rodent models and patients with AD.
Study
FMT donor
FMT recipient
FMT treatment
Main observations
Animal studies
Harach 
et al. 
(2017)180
12-month-old APP/PS1 mice
4-month-old germ-free APP/PS1 mice
Oral gavage of 200 μL of cecal 
solution once daily for 2 times 
(3-day intervals)
●Increased cerebral amyloid-β (Aβ) pathology
Dodiya 
et al. 
(2019)27
APPPS1–21 male mice
Antibiotic-pretreated APP/PS1–21 male 
mice
Oral gavage of 200 μL of fresh fecal 
slurry supernatant once daily for 
24 d
●Restored fecal microbiome profile
●Restored Aβ amyloidosis and microglia morphology
Sun et al. 
(2019)181
6-month-old C57BL/6 male mice
6-month-old antibiotic-pretreated APP/PS1 
male mice
Oral administration of 200 μL of 
fresh fecal solution once daily 
for 4 weeks
●Improved cognitive deficits
●Reduced the brain deposition of Aβ, phosphorylation of tau protein, 
the levels of Aβ40 and Aβ42, cyclooxygenase-2, and CD11b levels
●Increased 
postsynaptic 
density 
protein 
95 
and 
synapsin 
I expressionIncreased postsynaptic density protein 95 and synapsin 
I expression
●Reversed the changes of gut microbiota and short-chain fatty acids
Kim et al. 
(2020)22
C57BL/6 mice
AD-like pathology with amyloid and 
neurofibrillary tangles (ADLPAPT) mice 
or antibiotic-pretreated ADLPAPT mice
4 or 16 weeks
●Ameliorated the formation of Aβ plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, 
glial reactivity and cognitive impairment
●Reversed abnormalities in colonic expression of genes related to 
intestinal macrophage activity and circulating blood inflammatory 
monocytes
Shen et al. 
(2020)182
AD patients
APP/PS1 mice
Information not provided
●Promoted intestinal NLRP3 inflammasome activation
●Up-regulated the expression of inflammatory factors, such as IL-1β, IL- 
18 and TNF-α both in peripheral blood and hippocampus
●Increased cognitive impairment and activated microglia in the central 
hippocampus
Kim et al. 
(2021)183
9-month-old male 5×FAD mice
Antibiotic-pretreated 9-month-old male 
C57BL/6 mice
Oral administration of 200 μL of 
fecal supernatant once daily for 
5 d
●Led to memory dysfunction, decreased neurogenesis and increased 
neuroinflammation in the brain, and colonic inflammation
Valeri et al. 
(2021)184
4-week-old or 12-month-old C57BL/6 mice Antibiotic-pretreated 5×FAD mice
A single oral gavage of cecum 
suspension
●Elevated cultivatable fecal Enterobacteriaceae and Lactobacillaceae 
representative bacteria and decreased Firmicutes amount
●Increased serum lipopolysaccharide binding protein levels
●Increased plaque load
Wang et al. 
(2021)45
16 months old male APP/PS1 mice
Antibiotic-pretreated male APP/PS1 mice
Oral gavage of 108 cells once daily 
for 7 d
●Increased Aβ deposition
●Altered the morphology of astrocytes but did not impact microglia
Bi et al. 
(2022)185
8-week-old female APP/PS1 mice
8-week-old tumor-bearing female APP/PS1 
mice
Oral gavage of 150 μL of fecal 
supernatant three times a week 
for 5 weeks
●Increased tumor size
Elangovan 
et al. 
(2022)186
4–6, 10–12, or 30–32-week-old B6.SJL 
mice
8–10, or 30–32-week-old 5×FAD mice
Oral gavage of 200 μL of fecal 
supernatant daily for 7 d
●Improved cognitive function, such as novel object recognition and 
forced alternation y-maze, and Aβ plaques burden in 32-week-old 
5×FAD mice receiving FMT from 10–12-week-old wildtype donors
Hang et al. 
(2022)187
6-month-old female tumor-bearing 
C57BL/6 mice
6-month-old female APP/PS1 mice
Oral gavage of 200 μL of fresh fecal 
solution three times a week for 
one month
●Improved short-term memory and cognitive ability
●Decreased Aβ plaque burden in the hippocampus and cortex
●Reversed the increased Firmicutes and Prevotella; and the decreased 
Bacteroidetes, Bacteroides, and Sutterella
Kim et al. 
(2022)188
9–10 months old Tg2576 mice
Antibiotic-pretreated 8-week-old ICR mice
Oral gavage of 200 μL of fecal 
suspension daily for 3 d, 
following once every two d for 
10 d
●Decreased stool parameters, including weight, water content, and 
morphology
●Lowered the distribution of myenteric neurons and the interstitial cells 
of Cajal, as well as the enteric nervous system function
Soriano 
et al. 
(2022)189
18 to 24 months old 3×Tg female mice
9 to 12 weeks old C57BL/6 mice with 
traumatic brain injury
Oral gavage of a single 200 μL of 
fecal supernatant
●Aggravated the lesion size and impaired motor ability
●Increased activated microglia/macrophages
●Increased Muribaculum and decreased Lactobacillus johnsonii
(Continued)
GUT MICROBES
21

Table 5. (Continued).
Study
FMT donor
FMT recipient
FMT treatment
Main observations
Wang et al. 
(2022)190
APP/PS1 mice or AD patients
Antibiotic-pretreated 6-week-old male 
C57BL/6J mice
Oral gavage of 200 μL of bacterial 
supernatant three times a week 
for 2 weeks
●Induced endoplasmic reticulum stress in the cerebral cortex of wild- 
type recipient mice
●Elevated the serum trimethylamine-N-oxide level
Human studies
Fujii et al. 
(2019)191
An 82-year-old male with AD
4-week-old germ-free C57BL/6N male mice Oral gavage of 150 μL of non- 
settling material
●Colonized and reproduced the bacterial diversity
●Triggered cognitive decline
Hazan et al. 
(2020)192
An 85-year-old woman (the patient’s wife) An 82-year-old man with AD and recurrent 
Clostridioides difficile infection
A single 300 mL fecal infusion
●Improved cognitive function
Park et al. 
(2021)193
A 27-year-old man with no gastrointestinal 
or other health problems, not using 
drugs and antibiotics
A 90-year-old woman with AD and severe 
Clostridioides difficile infection
Stool suspension (60 g) was 
applied during a colonoscopy 
for 2 times (3-month intervals)
●Improved cognitive function
●Changed the microbiota composition and short-chain fatty acid level
Abbreviations: Aβ = amyloid β; AD = Alzheimer’s disease; FMT = fecal microbiota transplantation; IL-18 = interleukin-18; IL-1β = interleukin-1β; TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor-alpha.
22
T. ZHANG ET AL.

for implementing any medical treatment, particu­
larly novel therapies like FMT, this is often 
omitted. Short-term and long-term safety assess­
ment of FMT should be carefully conducted, 
recorded, and reported.
Future directions
Despite in its infancy, there is a remarkable leap in 
our understanding of the gut microbiome in AD in 
the past 5 y. Mounting information has been gen­
erated from both descriptive studies that detail the 
gut microbiome in AD and explanatory studies 
aiming to interrogate the causal relationship 
between the gut microbiome and AD. While 
increasing evidence supports that gut dysbiosis is 
a driver for AD, it merits more effort to further 
verify the causal relationship between the two and 
to dissect the definitive mechanisms for driving the 
progress of AD. Future development of the field 
will require more well-designed, large-scale, and 
precise observational and mechanistic studies. 
Multi-omics, such as metagenomics, metabolo­
mics, metaproteomics, and metatranscriptomics, 
are powerful tools that can help answer some fun­
damental questions regarding the role of gut 
microbiome in the initiation, maintenance, and 
progression of AD.
Successful implementation of the described gut 
microbiota-targeting strategies in AD improve­
ment remains a formidable challenge. One impor­
tant reason is that the beneficial effects on AD do 
not solely depend on the regimen but also on the 
native host gut microbiota. Our previous study 
found that the inter-individual endogenous gut 
microbiota composition was an important factor 
relating to the heterogenous beneficial effects seen 
across study subjects.194 Similarly, the success of 
FMT in treating recurrent CDI was principally 
associated with the gut microbiota composition 
in the recipients.195 Thus, to maximize treatment 
benefits, both the specificity of the gut micro­
biota-modifying products and the host indigenous 
intestinal microbiome should be taken into 
account in future studies. Another obvious chal­
lenge in applying preclinical data in translational 
research is the tremendous variability between the 
rodent and human gut microbiome. Thus, 
attempts to establish animal models that mimic 
the characteristics of human intestinal micro­
biome, e.g., by developing humanized gnotobiotic 
animal models, will greatly facilitate cross- 
validation between animal and human studies 
and, ultimately, promote clinical practice.
Considering that diet and lifestyle are closely 
related to us and that they are the most influential 
in shaping gut microbial communities,24,196 they 
play a pivotal role in AD management.197 For exam­
ple, the Mediterranean, Dietary Approaches to Stop 
Hypertension (DASH), and Mediterranean-DASH 
Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) 
diets were linked to a reduced risk of AD,198 while 
the Western diet showed an opposite trend.199 
A prospective cohort study conducted in USA and 
published in 2022 analyzed the impact of lifestyle 
factors on life expectancy lived with and without 
Alzheimer’s dementia; it was found that they lived 
a larger proportion of their remaining years without 
Alzheimer’s dementia.200 However, a very recent 
study suggested that the MIND diet could not 
improve brain health, cognitive function, and brain 
imaging outcomes compared with those who fol­
lowed 
a 
control 
diet 
with 
mild 
caloric 
restriction.201 Despite some unexpected research 
results, optimism is growing that multidimensional 
interventions, including dietary patterns and life­
style, might prevent, or even halt AD development.
Conclusions
A raft of recent observational and mechanistic 
studies consistently demonstrated that the gut 
microbiome is a key player in modulating the 
disease state of AD, opening a new paradigm for 
intervening or even curbing the progress of AD. 
Gut microbiome-targeting strategies, such as 
probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, 
and FMT, hold great promise in the treatment 
and prophylaxis of AD in the years to come. 
Yet, concerted effort is still needed to provide 
answers to unresolved fundamental questions in 
regards to the role and mechanism of gut micro­
biota in AD, establish standard protocols for gut 
microbiome research, and generate high-quality 
data from preclinical and clinical studies, ulti­
mately translating gut microbiome research into 
clinical practice.
GUT MICROBES
23

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program 
of China (2022YFD21007002), the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (32325040, U22A20540), the Inner 
Mongolia 
Science 
& 
Technology 
planning 
project 
(2022YFSJ0017), the Yunnan Workstation of Academicians 
and Experts (202105AF150055), and the earmarked fund for 
CARS36.
ORCID
Zhihong Sun 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7605-2048
Authors’ contributions
T.Z. and G.G. designed the outline of the review. T.Z. wrote 
the manuscript. L.K. and Z.S. critically revised the manuscript 
and provided advice. All authors read and approved the final 
manuscript.
References
1. Knopman DS, Amieva H, Petersen RC, Chételat G, 
Holtzman DM, Hyman BT, Nixon RA, Jones DT. 
Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2021;7(1):7. 
doi:10.1038/s41572-021-00269-y.
2. Rajan KB, Weuve J, Barnes LL, McAninch EA, 
Wilson RS, Evans DA. Population estimate of people 
with clinical Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive 
impairment in the United States (2020-2060). 
Alzheimers Dement. 2021;17:1966–1975. PMID: 
34043283. doi:10.1002/alz.12362.
3. 2021 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers 
Dement. 2021;17(3):327–406. PMID: 33756057. doi:10. 
1002/alz.12328.
4. Khan S, Barve KH, Kumar MS. Recent advancements 
in pathogenesis, diagnostics and treatment of 
Alzheimer’s 
disease. 
Curr 
Neuropharmacol. 
2020;18:1106–1125. PMID: 32484110. doi:10.2174/ 
1570159x18666200528142429.
5. Scheltens P, De Strooper B, Kivipelto M, Holstege H, 
Chételat G, Teunissen CE, Cummings J, van der 
Flier 
WM. 
Alzheimer’s 
disease. 
Lancet. 
2021;397:1577–1590. 
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(20) 
32205-4.
6. Wightman DP, Jansen IE, Savage JE, Shadrin AA, 
Bahrami S, Holland D, Rongve A, Børte S, 
Winsvold BS, Drange OK, et al. A genome-wide asso­
ciation study with 1,126,563 individuals identifies new 
risk loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet. 2021;53 
(9):1276–1282. PMID: 34493870. doi:10.1038/s41588- 
021-00921-z.
7. Yamazaki Y, Zhao N, Caulfield TR, Liu CC, Bu G. 
Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: pathobiology 
and targeting strategies. Nat Rev Neurol. 2019;15 
(9):501–518. PMID: 31367008. doi: 10.1038/s41582- 
019-0228-7.
8. Wolters FJ, van der Lee S J, Koudstaal PJ, van 
Duijn CM, Hofman A, Ikram MK, Vernooij MW, 
Ikram MA. Parental family history of dementia in rela­
tion to subclinical brain disease and dementia risk. 
Neurology. 2017;88(17):1642–1649. PMID: 28356461. 
doi: 10.1212/wnl.0000000000003871.
9. Livingston G, Huntley J, Sommerlad A, Ames D, 
Ballard C, Banerjee S, Brayne C, Burns A, Cohen- 
Mansfield J, Cooper C, et al. Dementia prevention, 
intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet 
commission. Lancet. 2020;396(10248):413–446. PMID: 
32738937. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30367-6.
10. FDA. Drugs@FDA: FDA-approved drugs. Aduhelm. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index. 
cfm?event=overview.process&ApplNo=761178 .
11. Lythgoe MP, Jenei K, Prasad V. Regulatory decisions 
diverge over aducanumab for Alzheimer’s disease. Bmj. 
2022;e069780. doi:10.1136/bmj-2021-069780.
12. Travagli RA, Browning KN, Camilleri M. Parkinson 
disease and the gut: new insights into pathogenesis 
and clinical relevance. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2020;17(11):673–685. PMID: 32737460. doi: 10.1038/ 
s41575-020-0339-z.
13. Thursby E, Juge N. Introduction to the human gut 
microbiota. Biochem J. 2017;474:1823–1836. PMID: 
28512250. doi:10.1042/bcj20160510.
14. Berg G, Rybakova D, Fischer D, Cernava T, Vergès MC, 
Charles T, Chen X, Cocolin L, Eversole K, Corral GH, 
et al. Microbiome definition re-visited: old concepts 
and new challenges. Microbiome. 2020;8(1):103. 
PMID: 32605663. doi:10.1186/s40168-020-00875-0.
15. Hill C, Guarner F, Reid G, Gibson GR, Merenstein DJ, 
Pot B, Morelli L, Canani RB, Flint HJ, Salminen S, et al. 
Expert consensus document. The international scienti­
fic association for probiotics and prebiotics consensus 
statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term 
probiotic. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;11 
(8):506–514. PMID: 24912386. doi:10.1038/nrgastro. 
2014.66.
16. Gibson GR, Hutkins R, Sanders ME, Prescott SL, 
Reimer RA, Salminen SJ, Scott K, Stanton C, 
Swanson KS, Cani PD, et al. Expert consensus docu­
ment: The international scientific association for pro­
biotics and prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on 
the definition and scope of prebiotics. Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;14(8):491–502. PMID: 
28611480. doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2017.75.
17. Swanson KS, Gibson GR, Hutkins R, Reimer RA, 
Reid G, Verbeke K, Scott KP, Holscher HD, Azad MB, 
24
T. ZHANG ET AL.

Delzenne NM, et al. The International Scientific asso­
ciation for probiotics and prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus 
statement on the definition and scope of synbiotics. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;17(11):687–701. 
PMID: 32826966. doi:10.1038/s41575-020-0344-2.
18. Salminen S, Collado MC, Endo A, Hill C, Lebeer S, 
Quigley EMM, Sanders ME, Shamir R, Swann JR, 
Szajewska H, et al. The International Scientific associa­
tion of probiotics and prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus 
statement on the definition and scope of postbiotics. 
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021;18(9):649–667. 
PMID: 33948025. doi:10.1038/s41575-021-00440-6.
19. Cammarota G, Ianiro G, Tilg H, Rajilić-Stojanović M, 
Kump P, Satokari R, Sokol H, Arkkila P, Pintus C, 
Hart A, et al. European consensus conference on faecal 
microbiota transplantation in clinical practice. Gut. 
2017;66(4):569–580. PMID: 28087657. doi:10.1136/ 
gutjnl-2016-313017.
20. Cryan JF, O’Riordan KJ, Sandhu K, Peterson V, 
Dinan TG. The gut microbiome in neurological 
disorders. Lancet Neurol. 2020;19:179–194. PMID: 
31753762. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30356-4.
21. Chandra S, Sisodia SS, Vassar RJ. The gut microbiome 
in Alzheimer’s disease: what we know and what 
remains to be explored. Mol Neurodegener. 2023;18:9. 
PMID: 36721148. doi:10.1186/s13024-023-00595-7.
22. Kim MS, Kim Y, Choi H, Kim W, Park S, Lee D, 
Kim DK, Kim HJ, Choi H, Hyun DW, et al. Transfer 
of a healthy microbiota reduces amyloid and tau 
pathology in an Alzheimer’s disease animal model. 
Gut. 2020;69(2):283–294. PMID: 31471351. doi:10. 
1136/gutjnl-2018-317431.
23. Xiao L, Feng Q, Liang S, Sonne SB, Xia Z, Qiu X, Li X, 
Long H, Zhang J, Zhang D, et al. A catalog of the mouse 
gut 
metagenome. 
Nat 
Biotechnol. 
2015;33 
(10):1103–1108. PMID: 26414350. doi:10.1038/nbt.3353.
24. Parizadeh M, Arrieta MC. The global human gut 
microbiome: genes, lifestyles, and diet. Trends Mol 
Med. 2023;29:789–801. PMID: 37516570. doi:10.1016/ 
j.molmed.2023.07.002.
25. Minter MR, Hinterleitner R, Meisel M, Zhang C, 
Leone V, Zhang X, Oyler-Castrillo P, Zhang X, 
Musch MW, Shen X, et al. Antibiotic-induced pertur­
bations in microbial diversity during post-natal devel­
opment alters amyloid pathology in an aged APPSWE/ 
PS1ΔE9 murine model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Rep. 
2017;7(1):10411. PMID: 28874832. doi:10.1038/s41598- 
017-11047-w.
26. Minter MR, Zhang C, Leone V, Ringus DL, Zhang X, 
Oyler-Castrillo P, Musch MW, Liao F, Ward JF, 
Holtzman DM, et al. Antibiotic-induced perturbations 
in 
gut 
microbial 
diversity 
influences 
neuro- 
inflammation and amyloidosis in a murine model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Rep. 2016;6(1):30028. PMID: 
27443609. doi:10.1038/srep30028.
27. Dodiya HB, Kuntz T, Shaik SM, Baufeld C, Leibowitz J, 
Zhang X, Gottel N, Zhang X, Butovsky O, Gilbert JA, 
et al. Sex-specific effects of microbiome perturbations 
on cerebral Aβ amyloidosis and microglia phenotypes. 
J Exp Med. 2019;216:1542–1560. PMID: 31097468. 
doi:10.1084/jem.20182386.
28. Dodiya HB, Frith M, Sidebottom A, Cao Y, Koval J, 
Chang E, Sisodia SS. Synergistic depletion of gut micro­
bial consortia, but not individual antibiotics, reduces 
amyloidosis in APPPS1-21 Alzheimer’s transgenic 
mice. Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):8183. PMID: 32424118. doi:  
10.1038/s41598-020-64797-5.
29. Agirman G, Hsiao EY. SnapShot: The microbiota-gut- 
brain axis. Cell. 2021;184(9):2524–2524.e2521. PMID: 
33930299. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.03.022.
30. Perry VH, Nicoll JA, Holmes C. Microglia in neurode­
generative disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 2010;6(4):193–201. 
PMID: 20234358. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2010.17.
31. Hansen DV, Hanson JE, Sheng M. Microglia in 
Alzheimer’s disease. J Cell Biol. 2018;217:459–472. 
PMID: 29196460. doi:10.1083/jcb.201709069.
32. Leng F, Edison P. Neuroinflammation and microglial 
activation in Alzheimer disease: where do we go from 
here? Nat Rev Neurol. 2021;17(3):157–172. PMID: 
33318676. doi: 10.1038/s41582-020-00435-y.
33. Erny D, Hrabe de Angelis AL, Jaitin D, Wieghofer P, 
Staszewski O, David E, Keren-Shaul H, Mahlakoiv T, 
Jakobshagen K, Buch T, et al. Host microbiota con­
stantly control maturation and function of microglia 
in the CNS. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18(7):965–977. PMID: 
26030851. doi:10.1038/nn.4030.
34. Matcovitch-Natan O, Winter DR, Giladi A, Vargas 
Aguilar S, Spinrad A, Sarrazin S, Ben-Yehuda H, 
David E, Zelada Gonzalez F, Perrin P, et al. Microglia 
development follows a stepwise program to regulate 
brain homeostasis. Sci. 2016;353(6301):aad8670. 
PMID: 27338705. doi:10.1126/science.aad8670.
35. Thion MS, Low D, Silvin A, Chen J, Grisel P, 
Schulte-Schrepping 
J, 
Blecher 
R, 
Ulas 
T, 
Squarzoni P, Hoeffel G, et al. Microbiome influences 
prenatal and adult microglia in a sex-specific 
manner. Cell. 2018;172(3):500–516 e516. PMID: 
29275859. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.11.042.
36. Mossad O, Batut B, Yilmaz B, Dokalis N, Mezo C, 
Nent E, Nabavi LS, Mayer M, Maron FJM, 
Buescher JM, et al. Gut microbiota drives age-related 
oxidative stress and mitochondrial damage in microglia 
via the metabolite N(6)-carboxymethyllysine. Nat 
Neurosci. 2022;25(3):295–305. PMID: 35241804. 
doi:10.1038/s41593-022-01027-3.
37. Dodiya 
HB, 
Lutz 
HL, 
Weigle 
IQ, 
Patel 
P, 
Michalkiewicz J, Roman-Santiago CJ, Zhang CM, 
Liang Y, Srinath A, Zhang X, et al. Gut microbiota– 
driven brain Aβ amyloidosis in mice requires microglia. 
J Exp Med. 2022;219(1). PMID: 34854884. doi: 10.1084/ 
jem.20200895.
38. Mezo C, Dokalis N, Mossad O, Staszewski O, Neuber J, 
Yilmaz B, Schnepf D, de Aguero MG, Ganal- 
Vonarburg SC, Macpherson AJ, et al. Different effects 
GUT MICROBES
25

of constitutive and induced microbiota modulation on 
microglia in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2020;8(1):119. PMID: 
32727612. doi:10.1186/s40478-020-00988-5.
39. Huang Y, Wu J, Zhang H, Li Y, Wen L, Tan X, 
Cheng K, Liu Y, Pu J, Liu L, et al. The gut microbiome 
modulates the transformation of microglial subtypes. 
Mol 
Psychiatry. 
2023;28(4):1611–1621. 
PMID: 
36914812. doi:10.1038/s41380-023-02017-y.
40. Seo DO, O’Donnell D, Jain N, Ulrich JD, Herz J, Li Y, 
Lemieux M, Cheng J, Hu H, Serrano JR, et al. ApoE 
isoform– and microbiota-dependent progression of 
neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. 
Sci. 2023;379(6628):eadd1236. PMID: 36634180. 
doi:10.1126/science.add1236.
41. De Strooper B, Karran E. The cellular phase of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Cell. 2016;164(4):603–615. PMID: 
26871627. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.056.
42. Endo F, Kasai A, Soto JS, Yu X, Qu Z, Hashimoto H, 
Gradinaru V, Kawaguchi R, Khakh BS. Molecular basis 
of astrocyte diversity and morphology across the CNS 
in health and disease. Sci. 2022;378(6619):eadc9020. 
PMID: 36378959. doi: 10.1126/science.adc9020.
43. Ferrari-Souza JP, Ferreira PCL, Bellaver B, Tissot C, 
Wang YT, Leffa DT, Brum WS, Benedet AL, 
Ashton NJ, De Bastiani MA, et al. Astrocyte biomarker 
signatures of amyloid-β and tau pathologies in 
Alzheimer’s 
disease. 
Mol 
Psychiatry. 
2022;27 
(11):4781–4789. PMID: 35948658. doi:10.1038/s41380- 
022-01716-2.
44. Mann CN, Devi SS, Kersting CT, Bleem AV, Karch CM, 
Holtzman DM, Gallardo G. Astrocytic α2-Na + /K + 
ATPase inhibition suppresses astrocyte reactivity and 
reduces neurodegeneration in a tauopathy mouse 
model. Sci Transl Med. 2022;14(632):eabm4107. 
PMID: 35171651. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abm4107.
45. Wang M, Cao J, Gong C, Amakye WK, Yao M, Ren J. 
Exploring the microbiota-Alzheimer’s disease linkage 
using short-term antibiotic treatment followed by fecal 
microbiota transplantation. Brain Behav Immun. 
2021;96:227–238. PMID: 34111528. doi:10.1016/j.bbi. 
2021.06.003.
46. Rothhammer 
V, 
Mascanfroni 
ID, 
Bunse 
L, 
Takenaka MC, Kenison JE, Mayo L, Chao CC, Patel B, 
Yan R, Blain M, et al. Type I interferons and microbial 
metabolites of tryptophan modulate astrocyte activity 
and central nervous system inflammation via the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor. Nat Med. 2016;22(6):586–597. 
PMID: 27158906. doi:10.1038/nm.4106.
47. Sanmarco LM, Wheeler MA, Gutierrez-Vazquez C, 
Polonio CM, Linnerbauer M, Pinho-Ribeiro FA, Li Z, 
Giovannoni F, Batterman KV, Scalisi G, et al. Gut- 
licensed IFNγ+ NK cells drive LAMP1+TRAIL+ anti- 
inflammatory 
astrocytes. 
Nature. 
2021;590 
(7846):473–479. PMID: 33408417. doi:10.1038/s41586- 
020-03116-4.
48. Benakis C, Brea D, Caballero S, Faraco G, Moore J, 
Murphy M, Sita G, Racchumi G, Ling L, Pamer EG, 
et al. Commensal microbiota affects ischemic stroke 
outcome by regulating intestinal γδ T cells. Nat Med. 
2016;22(5):516–523. PMID: 27019327. doi:10.1038/nm. 
4068.
49. Baruch K, Rosenzweig N, Kertser A, Deczkowska A, 
Sharif AM, Spinrad A, Tsitsou-Kampeli A, Sarel A, 
Cahalon L, Schwartz M. Breaking immune tolerance 
by targeting Foxp3+ regulatory T cells mitigates 
Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Nat Commun. 2015;6 
(1):7967. PMID: 26284939. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8967.
50. Keren-Shaul H, Spinrad A, Weiner A, Matcovitch- 
Natan O, Dvir-Szternfeld R, Ulland TK, David E, 
Baruch K, Lara-Astaiso D, Toth B, et al. A unique 
microglia type associated with restricting development 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell. 2017;169(7):1276–1290. 
e1217. PMID: 28602351. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.018.
51. Kim K, Wang X, Ragonnaud E, Bodogai M, Illouz T, 
DeLuca M, McDevitt RA, Gusev F, Okun E, Rogaev E, 
et al. Therapeutic B-cell depletion reverses progression 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun. 2021;12(1):2185. 
PMID: 33846335. doi:10.1038/s41467-021-22479-4.
52. Chen X, Firulyova M, Manis M, Herz J, Smirnov I, 
Aladyeva E, Wang C, Bao X, Finn MB, Hu H, et al. 
Microglia-mediated T cell infiltration drives neurode­
generation 
in 
tauopathy. 
Nature. 
2023;615 
(7953):668–677. PMID: 36890231. doi:10.1038/s41586- 
023-05788-0.
53. Wang X, Sun G, Feng T, Zhang J, Huang X, Wang T, 
Xie Z, Chu X, Yang J, Wang H, et al. Sodium oligo­
mannate therapeutically remodels gut microbiota and 
suppresses gut bacterial amino acids-shaped neuroin­
flammation to inhibit Alzheimer’s disease progression. 
Cell Res. 2019;29(10):787–803. PMID: 31488882. 
doi:10.1038/s41422-019-0216-x.
54. Fung TC, Olson CA, Hsiao EY. Interactions between 
the microbiota, immune and nervous systems in health 
and disease. Nat Neurosci. 2017;20(2):145–155. PMID: 
28092661. doi: 10.1038/nn.4476.
55. Ahmed H, Leyrolle Q, Koistinen V, Karkkainen O, 
Laye S, Delzenne N, Hanhineva K. Microbiota-derived 
metabolites as drivers of gut–brain communication. 
Gut Microbes. 2022;14(1):2102878. PMID: 35903003. 
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2102878.
56. Marizzoni M, Cattaneo A, Mirabelli P, Festari C, 
Lopizzo N, Nicolosi V, Mombelli E, Mazzelli M, 
Luongo D, Naviglio D, et al. Short-chain fatty acids 
and lipopolysaccharide as mediators between gut dys­
biosis and amyloid pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. 
J 
Alzheimers 
Dis. 
2020;78(2):683–697. 
PMID: 
33074224. doi:10.3233/JAD-200306.
57. MahmoudianDehkordi S, Arnold M, Nho K, Ahmad S, 
Jia W, Xie G, Louie G, Kueider-Paisley A, Moseley MA, 
Thompson JW, et al. Altered bile acid profile associates 
with cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease—an 
emerging role for gut microbiome. Alzheimers Dement. 
26
T. ZHANG ET AL.

2019;15(1):76–92. PMID: 30337151. doi:10.1016/j.jalz. 
2018.07.217.
58. Vogt NM, Romano KA, Darst BF, Engelman CD, 
Johnson SC, Carlsson CM, Asthana S, Blennow K, 
Zetterberg H, Bendlin BB, et al. The gut microbiota- 
derived metabolite trimethylamine N-oxide is elevated 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther. 
2018;10:124. PMID: 30579367. doi:10.1186/s13195- 
018-0451-2.
59. Madeira C, Vargas-Lopes C, Brandao CO, Reis T, 
Laks J, Panizzutti R, Ferreira ST. Elevated glutamate 
and glutamine levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of 
patients with probable Alzheimer’s disease and depres­
sion. Front Psychiatry. 2018;9:561. PMID: 30459657. 
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00561.
60. Colombo AV, Sadler RK, Llovera G, Singh V, Roth S, 
Heindl S, Sebastian Monasor L, Verhoeven A, Peters F, 
Parhizkar S, et al. Microbiota-derived short chain fatty 
acids modulate microglia and promote Abeta plaque 
deposition. Elife. 2021;10. PMID: 33845942. doi:10. 
7554/eLife.59826.
61. Erny D, Dokalis N, Mezo C, Castoldi A, Mossad O, 
Staszewski O, Frosch M, Villa M, Fuchs V, Mayer A, 
et al. Microbiota-derived acetate enables the metabolic 
fitness of the brain innate immune system during health 
and disease. Cell Metab. 2021;33(11):2260–2276 e2267. 
PMID: 34731656. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2021.10.010.
62. Sampson TR, Debelius JW, Thron T, Janssen S, 
Shastri GG, Ilhan ZE, Challis C, Schretter CE, 
Rocha S, Gradinaru V, et al. Gut microbiota regulate 
motor deficits and neuroinflammation in a model of 
Parkinson’s disease. Cell. 2016;167(6):1469–1480 
e1412. PMID: 27912057. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.018.
63. Ho L, Ono K, Tsuji M, Mazzola P, Singh R, 
Pasinetti GM. Protective roles of intestinal microbiota 
derived short chain fatty acids in Alzheimer’s disease- 
type beta-amyloid neuropathological mechanisms. 
Expert 
Rev 
Neurother. 
2018;18:83–90. 
PMID: 
29095058. doi:10.1080/14737175.2018.1400909.
64. Fernando W, Martins IJ, Morici M, Bharadwaj P, 
Rainey-Smith SR, Lim WLF, Martins RN. Sodium buty­
rate reduces brain amyloid-β levels and improves cog­
nitive memory performance in an Alzheimer’s disease 
transgenic mouse model at an early disease stage. 
J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;74(1):91–99. PMID: 31958090. 
doi: 10.3233/JAD-190120.
65. Jiang Y, Li K, Li X, Xu L, Yang Z. Sodium butyrate 
ameliorates the impairment of synaptic plasticity by 
inhibiting the neuroinflammation in 5XFAD mice. 
Chem 
Biol 
Interact. 
2021;341:109452. 
PMID: 
33785315. doi:10.1016/j.cbi.2021.109452.
66. Sheng JG, Bora SH, Xu G, Borchelt DR, Price DL, 
Koliatsos 
VE. 
Lipopolysaccharide-induced- 
neuroinflammation increases intracellular accumula­
tion of amyloid precursor protein and amyloid β pep­
tide in APPswe transgenic mice. Neurobiol Dis. 2003;14 
(1):133–145. PMID: 13678674. doi: 10.1016/s0969- 
9961(03)00069-x.
67. Kitazawa M, Oddo S, Yamasaki TR, Green KN, 
LaFerla FM. Lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation 
exacerbates tau pathology by a cyclin-dependent kinase 
5-mediated pathway in a transgenic model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci. 2005;25:8843–8853. 
PMID: 16192374. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2868-05. 
2005.
68. Drummond E, Wisniewski T. Alzheimer’s disease: 
experimental models and reality. Acta Neuropathol. 
2017;133(2):155–175. PMID: 28025715. doi: 10.1007/ 
s00401-016-1662-x.
69. Bonfili L, Cecarini V, Berardi S, Scarpona S, 
Suchodolski JS, Nasuti C, Fiorini D, Boarelli MC, 
Rossi G, Eleuteri AM. Microbiota modulation counter­
acts Alzheimer’s disease progression influencing neu­
ronal proteolysis and gut hormones plasma levels. Sci 
Rep. 2017;7(1):2426. PMID: 28546539. doi: 10.1038/ 
s41598-017-02587-2.
70. Bonfili L, Cecarini V, Cuccioloni M, Angeletti M, 
Berardi S, Scarpona S, Rossi G, Eleuteri AM. SLAB51 
probiotic formulation activates SIRT1 pathway pro­
moting antioxidant and neuroprotective effects in 
an AD mouse model. Mol Neurobiol. 2018;55 
(10):7987–8000. PMID: 29492848. doi: 10.1007/ 
s12035-018-0973-4.
71. Lee HJ, Hwang YH, Kim DH. Lactobacillus plantarum 
C29-Fermented soybean (DW2009) alleviates memory 
impairment in 5XFAD transgenic mice by regulating 
microglia activation and gut microbiota composition. 
Mol Nutr Food Res. 2018;62(20):e1800359. PMID: 
30152045. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201800359.
72. Lee HJ, Lee KE, Kim JK, Kim DH. Suppression of gut 
dysbiosis by Bifidobacterium longum alleviates cogni­
tive decline in 5XFAD transgenic and aged mice. Sci 
Rep. 2019;9(1):11814. PMID: 31413350. doi: 10.1038/ 
s41598-019-48342-7.
73. Bonfili L, Cecarini V, Gogoi O, Berardi S, Scarpona S, 
Angeletti M, Rossi G, Eleuteri AM. Gut microbiota 
manipulation through probiotics oral administration 
restores glucose homeostasis in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2020;87:35–43. 
PMID: 31813629. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019. 
11.004.
74. Cecarini V, Bonfili L, Gogoi O, Lawrence S, 
Venanzi FM, Azevedo V, Mancha-Agresti P, 
Drumond 
MM, 
Rossi 
G, 
Berardi 
S, 
et 
al. 
Neuroprotective effects of p62(SQSTM1)-engineered 
lactic acid bacteria in Alzheimer’s disease: a pre- 
clinical 
study. 
Aging 
(Albany 
NY). 
2020;12 
(16):15995–16020. PMID: 32855357. doi:10.18632/ 
aging.103900.
75. Kaur H, Golovko S, Golovko MY, Singh S, Darland DC, 
Combs CK. Effects of probiotic supplementation on 
short chain fatty acids in the AppNL-G-F mouse 
model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 
GUT MICROBES
27

2020;76:1083–1102. PMID: 32623399. doi:10.3233/jad- 
200436.
76. Kaur H, Nagamoto-Combs K, Golovko S, Golovko MY, 
Klug MG, Combs CK. Probiotics ameliorate intestinal 
pathophysiology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s dis­
ease. Neurobiol Aging. 2020;92:114–134. PMID: 
32417748. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.04.009.
77. Ou Z, Deng L, Lu Z, Wu F, Liu W, Huang D, Peng Y. 
Protective effects of Akkermansia muciniphila on cog­
nitive deficits and amyloid pathology in a mouse model 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Nutr Diabetes. 2020;10(1):12. 
PMID: 32321934. doi: 10.1038/s41387-020-0115-8.
78. Sun J, Xu J, Yang B, Chen K, Kong Y, Fang N, Gong T, 
Wang F, Ling Z, Liu J. Effect of Clostridium butyricum 
against microglia-mediated neuroinflammation in 
Alzheimer’s disease via regulating gut microbiota and 
metabolites butyrate. Molecular Nutrition Food Res. 
2020;64(2):e1900636. PMID: 31835282. doi: 10.1002/ 
mnfr.201900636.
79. Wang F, Xu T, Zhang Y, Zheng T, He Y, He F, Jiang Y. 
Long-term 
combined 
administration 
of 
Bifidobacterium bifidum TMC3115 and Lactobacillus 
plantarum 45 alleviates spatial memory impairment 
and gut dysbiosis in APP/PS1 mice. FEMS Microbiol 
Lett. 2020;367. PMID: 32239209. doi:10.1093/femsle/ 
fnaa048.
80. Wang QJ, Shen YE, Wang X, Fu S, Zhang X, Zhang YN, 
Wang RT. Concomitant memantine and Lactobacillus 
plantarum treatment attenuates cognitive impairments 
in APP/PS1 mice. Aging (Albany NY). 2020;12 
(1):628–649. PMID: 31907339. doi: 10.18632/aging. 
102645.
81. Wu Q, Li Q, Zhang X, Ntim M, Wu X, Li M, Wang L, 
Zhao J, Li S. Treatment with Bifidobacteria can sup­
press Aβ accumulation and neuroinflammation in 
APP/PS1 
mice. 
PeerJ. 
2020;8:e10262. 
PMID: 
33194428. doi:10.7717/peerj.10262.
82. Cao J, Amakye WK, Qi C, Liu X, Ma J, Ren J. 
Bifidobacterium lactis Probio-M8 regulates gut micro­
biota to alleviate Alzheimer’s disease in the APP/PS1 
mouse model. Eur J Nutr. 2021;60(7):3757–3769. 
PMID: 33796919. doi: 10.1007/s00394-021-02543-x.
83. Go J, Chang DH, Ryu YK, Park HY, Lee IB, Noh JR, 
Hwang DY, Kim BC, Kim KS, Lee CH. Human gut 
microbiota 
Agathobaculum 
butyriciproducens 
improves cognitive impairment in LPS-induced and 
APP/PS1 mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nutr 
Res. 2021;86:96–108. PMID: 33551257. doi:10.1016/j. 
nutres.2020.12.010.
84. Guilherme MDS, Nguyen VTT, Reinhardt C, Endres K. 
Impact of gut microbiome manipulation in 5xFAD 
mice 
on 
Alzheimer’s 
disease-like 
pathology. 
Microorganisms. 2021;9(4):815. PMID: 33924322. doi:  
10.3390/microorganisms9040815.
85. Huang HJ, Chen JL, Liao JF, Chen YH, Chieu MW, 
Ke YY, Hsu CC, Tsai YC, Hsieh-Li HM. Lactobacillus 
plantarum PS128 prevents cognitive dysfunction in 
Alzheimer’s disease mice by modulating propionic 
acid levels, glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta activity, 
and gliosis. BMC Complement Med Ther. 2021;21 
(1):259. PMID: 34627204. doi: 10.1186/s12906-021- 
03426-8.
86. Kaur H, Nookala S, Singh S, Mukundan S, Nagamoto- 
Combs K, Combs CK. Sex-dependent effects of intest­
inal microbiome Manipulation in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Cells. 2021;10(9):2370. PMID: 
34572019. doi: 10.3390/cells10092370.
87. Kim H, Kim S, Park SJ, Park G, Shin H, Park MS, Kim J. 
Administration of Bifidobacterium bifidum BGN4 and 
Bifidobacterium longum BORI improves cognitive and 
memory function in the mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021;13:709091. PMID: 
34421576. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2021.709091.
88. Sun M, Bao W, Huang C, Xia Z, Zhang C, Wang G, 
Wang R, Li J, Roux S, Li Q, et al. A novel probiotic 
Formula, 
BIOCG, 
Protects 
against 
Alzheimer’s-related cognitive deficits via regulation 
of dendritic spine dynamics. Curr Alzheimer Res. 
2021;18:558–572. PMID: 34674621. doi:10.2174/ 
1567205018666211022091110.
89. Abdelhamid M, Zhou C, Ohno K, Kuhara T, Taslima F, 
Abdullah M, Jung CG, Michikawa M. Probiotic 
Bifidobacterium breve prevents memory impairment 
through the Reduction of both amyloid-β production 
and microglia activation in APP Knock-in mouse. 
J 
Alzheimers 
Dis. 
2022;85:1555–1571. 
PMID: 
34958017. doi:10.3233/jad-215025.
90. Bonfili L, Cuccioloni M, Gong C, Cecarini V, Spina M, 
Zheng Y, Angeletti M, Eleuteri AM. Gut microbiota 
modulation in Alzheimer’s disease: Focus on lipid 
metabolism. Clin Nutr. 2022;41:698–708. PMID: 
35158177. doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2022.01.025.
91. Ohno K, Abdelhamid M, Zhou C, Jung CG, 
Michikawa M. Bifidobacterium breve MCC1274 sup­
plementation Increased the plasma levels of metabolites 
with potential anti-oxidative activity in APP Knock-in 
mice. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;89(4):1413–1425. PMID: 
36057824. doi: 10.3233/jad-220479.
92. Webberley TS, Masetti G, Bevan RJ, Kerry-Smith J, 
Jack AA, Michael DR, Thomas S, Glymenaki M, Li J, 
McDonald JAK, et al. The impact of probiotic supple­
mentation on cognitive, Pathological and metabolic 
markers in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Front Neurosci. 2022;16:843105. PMID: 
35685773. doi:10.3389/fnins.2022.843105.
93. Ye T, Yuan S, Kong Y, Yang H, Wei H, Zhang Y, Jin H, 
Yu Q, Liu J, Chen S, et al. Effect of probiotic fungi 
against cognitive impairment in mice via regulation of 
the fungal microbiota–gut–brain axis. J Agric Food 
Chem. 2022;70(29):9026–9038. PMID: 35833673. 
doi:10.1021/acs.jafc.2c03142.
94. Webberley TS, Bevan RJ, Kerry-Smith J, Dally J, 
Michael DR, Thomas S, Rees M, Morgan JE, 
Marchesi JR, Good MA, et al. Assessment of Lab4P 
28
T. ZHANG ET AL.

probiotic effects on cognition in 3xTg-AD Alzheimer’s 
disease model mice and the SH-SY5Y neuronal cell line. 
Int J Mol Sci. 2023;24(5):4683. PMID: 36902113. doi:10. 
3390/ijms24054683.
95. Zhu G, Zhao J, Wang G, Chen W. Bifidobacterium 
breve HNXY26M4 attenuates cognitive deficits and 
neuroinflammation by regulating the gut–brain axis in 
APP/PS1 mice. J Agric Food Chem. 2023;71 
(11):4646–4655. PMID: 36888896. doi: 10.1021/acs. 
jafc.3c00652.
96. Liu Y, Sheng Y, Pan Q, Xue Y, Yu L, Tian F, Zhao J, 
Zhang H, Zhai Q, Chen W. Identification of the key 
physiological characteristics of Lactobacillus plantarum 
strains for ulcerative colitis alleviation. Food Funct. 
2020;11(2):1279–1291. PMID: 31984399. doi: 10.1039/ 
c9fo02935d.
97. Beck LC, Masi AC, Young GR, Vatanen T, Lamb CA, 
Smith R, Coxhead J, Butler A, Marsland BJ, 
Embleton ND, et al. Strain-specific impacts of probio­
tics are a significant driver of gut microbiome develop­
ment in very preterm infants. Nature Microbiology. 
2022;7(10):1525–1535. PMID: 36163498. doi:10.1038/ 
s41564-022-01213-w.
98. Akbari E, Asemi Z, Daneshvar Kakhaki R, Bahmani F, 
Kouchaki E, Tamtaji OR, Hamidi GA, Salami M. Effect 
of probiotic supplementation on cognitive function and 
metabolic status in Alzheimer’s disease: A randomized, 
double-blind and controlled trial. Front Aging 
Neurosci. 2016;8:256. PMID: 27891089. doi:10.3389/ 
fnagi.2016.00256.
99. Agahi A, Hamidi GA, Daneshvar R, Hamdieh M, 
Soheili M, Alinaghipour A, Esmaeili Taba SM, 
Salami M. Does severity of Alzheimer’s disease contri­
bute to its responsiveness to modifying gut microbiota? 
A double blind clinical trial. Front Neurol. 2018;9:662. 
PMID: 30158897. doi:10.3389/fneur.2018.00662.
100. Leblhuber F, Steiner K, Schuetz B, Fuchs D, 
Gostner JM. Probiotic supplementation in patients 
with Alzheimer’s dementia - an Explorative inter­
vention 
study. 
Curr 
Alzheimer 
Res. 
2018;15:1106–1113. PMID: 30101706. doi:10.2174/ 
1389200219666180813144834.
101. Hwang YH, Park S, Paik JW, Chae SW, Kim DH, 
Jeong DG, Ha E, Kim M, Hong G, Park SH, et al. 
Efficacy and safety of Lactobacillus plantarum 
C29-Fermented soybean (DW2009) in individuals 
with Mild cognitive impairment: A 12-week, 
multi-center, 
randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Nutrients. 2019;11 
(2):305. PMID: 30717153. doi:10.3390/nu11020305.
102. Kobayashi Y, Kinoshita T, Matsumoto A, Yoshino K, 
Saito I, Xiao JZ. Bifidobacterium Breve A1 supplemen­
tation Improved cognitive decline in older adults with 
Mild cognitive impairment: An Open-label, single-arm 
study. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2019;6:70–75. PMID: 
30569089. doi:10.14283/jpad.2018.32.
103. Kobayashi Y, Kuhara T, Oki M, Xiao JZ. Effects of 
Bifidobacterium breve A1 on the cognitive function of 
older adults with memory complaints: a randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Benef Microbes. 
2019;10(5):511–520. PMID: 31090457. doi: 10.3920/ 
bm2018.0170.
104. Tamtaji OR, Heidari-Soureshjani R, Mirhosseini N, 
Kouchaki E, Bahmani F, Aghadavod E, Tajabadi- 
Ebrahimi M, Asemi Z. Probiotic and selenium co- 
supplementation, and the effects on clinical, metabolic 
and 
genetic 
status 
in 
Alzheimer’s 
disease: 
A randomized, double-blind, controlled trial. Clin 
Nutr. 2019;38:2569–2575. PMID: 30642737. doi:10. 
1016/j.clnu.2018.11.034.
105. Xiao J, Katsumata N, Bernier F, Ohno K, Yamauchi Y, 
Odamaki T, Yoshikawa K, Ito K, Kaneko T. Probiotic 
Bifidobacterium breve in improving cognitive func­
tions of older adults with Suspected Mild cognitive 
impairment: 
A 
randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 
trial. 
J 
Alzheimers 
Dis. 
2020;77:139–147. PMID: 32623402. doi:10.3233/jad- 
200488.
106. Bernier F, Ohno K, Katsumata N, Shimizu T, Xiao J. 
Association of plasma hemoglobin A1c with improve­
ment 
of 
cognitive 
functions 
by 
probiotic 
Bifidobacterium breve supplementation in healthy 
adults with Mild cognitive impairment. J Alzheimers 
Dis. 2021;81:493–497. PMID: 33814441. doi:10.3233/ 
jad-201488.
107. Akhgarjand C, Vahabi Z, Shab-Bidar S, Etesam F, 
Djafarian K. Effects of probiotic supplements on cogni­
tion, anxiety, and physical activity in subjects with mild 
and moderate Alzheimer’s disease: A randomized, dou­
ble-blind, and placebo-controlled study. Front Aging 
Neurosci. 2022;14:1032494. PMID: 36389063. doi:10. 
3389/fnagi.2022.1032494.
108. Asaoka D, Xiao J, Takeda T, Yanagisawa N, 
Yamazaki T, Matsubara Y, Sugiyama H, Endo N, 
Higa M, Kasanuki K, et al. Effect of probiotic 
Bifidobacterium breve in improving cognitive func­
tion and preventing brain atrophy in older patients 
with Suspected Mild cognitive impairment: Results 
of 
a 
24-week 
randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 
trial. 
J 
Alzheimers 
Dis. 
2022;88:75–95. PMID: 35570493. doi:10.3233/jad- 
220148.
109. Long JM, Holtzman DM. Alzheimer disease: An update 
on pathobiology and treatment strategies. Cell. 
2019;179(2):312–339. PMID: 31564456. doi: 10.1016/j. 
cell.2019.09.001.
110. Kalmijn S, Launer LJ, Ott A, Witteman JC, Hofman A, 
Breteler MM. Dietary fat intake and the risk of incident 
dementia in the Rotterdam study. Ann Neurol. 1997;42 
(5):776–782. PMID: 9392577. doi: 10.1002/ana. 
410420514.
111. Calon F, Lim GP, Yang F, Morihara T, Teter B, 
Ubeda O, Rostaing P, Triller A, Salem N Jr., Ashe KH, 
GUT MICROBES
29

et al. Docosahexaenoic acid protects from dendritic 
pathology in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. 
Neuron. 2004;43:633–645. PMID: 15339646. doi:10. 
1016/j.neuron.2004.08.013.
112. Calon F, Lim GP, Morihara T, Yang F, Ubeda O, 
Salem N Jr., Frautschy SA, Cole GM. Dietary n-3 poly­
unsaturated fatty acid depletion activates caspases and 
decreases NMDA receptors in the brain of a transgenic 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Of 
Neuroscience. 2005;22(3):617–626. PMID: 16101743. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04253.x.
113. Lim GP, Calon F, Morihara T, Yang F, Teter B, 
Ubeda O, Salem N Jr., Frautschy SA, Cole GM. A diet 
enriched with the omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic 
acid reduces amyloid burden in an aged Alzheimer 
mouse model. J Neurosci. 2005;25(12):3032–3040. 
PMID: 15788759. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.4225-04.2005.
114. Oksman M, Iivonen H, Hogyes E, Amtul Z, Penke B, 
Leenders I, Broersen L, Lütjohann D, Hartmann T, 
Tanila H. Impact of different saturated fatty acid, poly­
unsaturated fatty acid and cholesterol containing diets 
on beta-amyloid accumulation in APP/PS1 transgenic 
mice. Neurobiol Dis. 2006;23:563–572. PMID: 
16765602. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2006.04.013.
115. Arendash GW, Jensen MT, Salem N Jr., Hussein N, 
Cracchiolo J, Dickson A, Leighty R, Potter H. A diet 
high in omega-3 fatty acids does not improve or protect 
cognitive performance in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. 
Neuroscience. 2007;149(2):286–302. PMID: 17904756. 
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.08.018.
116. Green KN, Martinez-Coria H, Khashwji H, Hall EB, 
Yurko-Mauro KA, Ellis L, LaFerla FM. Dietary docosa­
hexaenoic acid and docosapentaenoic acid ameliorate 
amyloid-β and tau pathology via a mechanism invol­
ving presenilin 1 levels. J Neurosci. 2007;27 
(16):4385–4395. PMID: 17442823. doi: 10.1523/jneur 
osci.0055-07.2007.
117. Hooijmans CR, Rutters F, Dederen PJ, Gambarota G, 
Veltien A, van Groen T, Broersen LM, Lütjohann D, 
Heerschap A, Tanila H, et al. Changes in cerebral blood 
volume and amyloid pathology in aged Alzheimer APP/ 
PS1 mice on a docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) diet or 
cholesterol enriched Typical Western diet (TWD). 
Neurobiol Dis. 2007;28:16–29. PMID: 17720508. 
doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2007.06.007.
118. Ma QL, Teter B, Ubeda OJ, Morihara T, Dhoot D, 
Nyby MD, Tuck ML, Frautschy SA, Cole GM. 
Omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid increases 
SorLA/LR11, a sorting protein with reduced expression 
in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease (AD): relevance to AD 
prevention. J Neurosci. 2007;27(52):14299–14307. 
PMID: 18160637. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3593-07.2007.
119. Hooijmans CR, der Zee CE V, Dederen PJ, 
Brouwer 
KM, 
Reijmer 
YD, 
van 
Groen 
T, 
Broersen LM, Lütjohann D, Heerschap A, Kiliaan AJ. 
DHA and cholesterol containing diets influence 
Alzheimer-like pathology, cognition and cerebral 
vasculature in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. Neurobiol Dis. 
2009;33(3):482–498. PMID: 19130883. doi: 10.1016/j. 
nbd.2008.12.002.
120. Perez SE, Berg BM, Moore KA, He B, Counts SE, 
Fritz JJ, Hu YS, Lazarov O, Lah JJ, Mufson EJ. DHA 
diet reduces AD pathology in young APPswe/PS1 Delta 
E9 transgenic mice: possible gender effects. J Neurosci 
Res. 2010;88:1026–1040. PMID: 19859965. doi:10.1002/ 
jnr.22266.
121. Arsenault D, Julien C, Tremblay C, Calon F. DHA 
improves cognition and prevents dysfunction of 
entorhinal cortex neurons in 3xTg-AD mice. PloS 
One. 2011;6(2):e17397. PMID: 21383850. doi: 10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0017397.
122. Fiol-DeRoque MA, Gutierrez-Lanza R, Terés S, 
Torres M, Barceló P, Rial RV, Verkhratsky A, 
Escribá PV, Busquets X, Rodríguez JJ. Cognitive recov­
ery and restoration of cell proliferation in the dentate 
gyrus in the 5XFAD transgenic mice model of 
Alzheimer’s disease following 2-hydroxy-DHA treat­
ment. Biogerontology. 2013;14(6):763–775. PMID: 
24114505. doi: 10.1007/s10522-013-9461-4.
123. Ma QL, Zuo X, Yang F, Ubeda OJ, Gant DJ, 
Alaverdyan M, Kiosea NC, Nazari S, Chen PP, 
Nothias F, et al. Loss of MAP function leads to hippo­
campal synapse loss and deficits in the Morris water 
maze with aging. J Neurosci. 2014;34(21):7124–7136. 
PMID: 24849348. doi:10.1523/jneurosci.3439-13.2014.
124. Torres M, Price SL, Fiol-Deroque MA, Marcilla- 
Etxenike A, Ahyayauch H, Barceló-Coblijn G, Terés S, 
Katsouri L, Ordinas M, López DJ, et al. Membrane lipid 
modifications and therapeutic effects mediated by 
hydroxydocosahexaenoic acid on Alzheimer’s disease. 
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Biomembranes. 
2014;1838(6):1680–1692. PMID: 24374316. doi:10. 
1016/j.bbamem.2013.12.016.
125. Hosono T, Mouri A, Nishitsuji K, Jung CG, Kontani M, 
Tokuda H, Kawashima H, Shibata H, Suzuki T, 
Nabehsima T, et al. Arachidonic or docosahexaenoic 
acid diet prevents memory impairment in Tg2576 mice. 
J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;48:149–162. PMID: 26401936. 
doi:10.3233/jad-150341.
126. Teng E, Taylor K, Bilousova T, Weiland D, Pham T, 
Zuo X, Yang F, Chen PP, Glabe CG, Takacs A, et al. 
Dietary DHA supplementation in an APP/PS1 trans­
genic rat model of AD reduces behavioral and Aβ 
pathology 
and 
modulates 
Aβ 
oligomerization. 
Neurobiol Dis. 2015;82:552–560. PMID: 26369878. 
doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.002.
127. Raefsky SM, Furman R, Milne G, Pollock E, Axelsen P, 
Mattson MP, Shchepinov MS. Deuterated polyunsatu­
rated fatty acids reduce brain lipid peroxidation and 
hippocampal amyloid beta-peptide levels, without dis­
cernable behavioral effects in an APP/PS1 mutant 
transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neurobiol Aging. 2018;66:165–176. PMID: 29579687. 
doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.02.024.
30
T. ZHANG ET AL.

128. Hoffman 
JD, 
Yanckello 
LM, 
Chlipala 
G, 
Hammond TC, McCulloch SD, Parikh I, Sun S, 
Morganti JM, Green SJ, Lin AL. Dietary inulin alters 
the gut microbiome, enhances systemic metabolism 
and reduces neuroinflammation in an APOE4 mouse 
model. PloS One. 2019;14(8):e0221828. PMID: 
31461505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0221828.
129. Sun J, Liu S, Ling Z, Wang F, Ling Y, Gong T, Fang N, 
Ye S, Si J, Liu J. Fructooligosaccharides Ameliorating 
cognitive deficits and neurodegeneration in APP/PS1 
transgenic mice through modulating gut microbiota. 
J Agric Food Chem. 2019;67(10):3006–3017. PMID: 
30816709. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.8b07313.
130. Chang Y-H, Hoffman J, Yanckello L, McCulloch S, Lin P, 
Lane A, Chlipala G, Green S, Lin A-L. Apolipoprotein 
E Genotype-dependent nutrigenetic effects to prebiotic 
inulin for reducing risk for Alzheimer’s disease in 
a mouse model. Curr Dev Nutr. 2020;4:1197–1197. 
doi:10.1093/cdn/nzaa057_013.
131. Han D, Li Z, Liu T, Yang N, Li Y, He J, Qian M, 
Kuang Z, Zhang W, Ni C, et al. Prebiotics regulation 
of intestinal microbiota attenuates cognitive dysfunc­
tion induced by surgery stimulation in APP/PS1 mice. 
Aging Dis. 2020;11:1029–1045. PMID: 33014520. 
doi:10.14336/ad.2020.0106.
132. Park YH, Shin SJ, Kim HS, Hong SB, Kim S, Nam Y, 
Kim JJ, Lim K, Kim JS, Kim JI, et al. Omega-3 fatty acid- 
type docosahexaenoic acid protects against Aβ- 
mediated mitochondrial deficits and pathomechanisms 
in Alzheimer’s disease-related animal model. Int J Mol 
Sci. 2020;21(11):3879. PMID: 32486013. doi:10.3390/ 
ijms21113879.
133. Wu S, Zhang J, Jiang C, Wang S, Que R, An L. Up- 
regulation of neprilysin mediates the protection of 
fructo-oligosaccharides against Alzheimer’s disease. 
Food Funct. 2020;11(7):6565–6572. PMID: 32644062. 
doi: 10.1039/d0fo00161a.
134. Bie N, Li J, Li C, Lian R, Qin L, Wang C. Protective 
effect and mechanism of docosahexaenoic acid on the 
cognitive function in female APP/PS1 mice. Food 
Funct. 2021;12(22):11435–11448. PMID: 34676845. 
doi: 10.1039/d1fo01922h.
135. Liu Q, Xi Y, Wang Q, Liu J, Li P, Meng X, Liu K, 
Chen W, Liu X, Liu Z. Mannan oligosaccharide attenu­
ates cognitive and behavioral disorders in the 5xFAD 
Alzheimer’s disease mouse model via regulating the gut 
microbiota-brain 
axis. 
Brain 
Behav 
Immun. 
2021;95:330–343. PMID: 33839232. doi:10.1016/j.bbi. 
2021.04.005.
136. Badesso 
S, 
Cartas-Cejudo 
P, 
Espelosin 
M, 
Santamaria E, Cuadrado-Tejedor M, Garcia-Osta A. 
Docosahexaenoic acid ameliorates contextual fear 
memory deficits in the Tg2576 Alzheimer’s disease 
mouse model: Cellular and molecular correlates. 
Pharmaceutics. 2022;15(1):82. PMID: 36678710. doi:  
10.3390/pharmaceutics15010082.
137. Xiao M, Xiang W, Chen Y, Peng N, Du X, Lu S, Zuo Y, 
Li B, Hu Y, Li X. DHA ameliorates cognitive ability, 
reduces amyloid deposition, and nerve fiber production 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Front Nutr. 2022;9:852433. 
PMID: 35782939. doi:10.3389/fnut.2022.852433.
138. Zussy C, John R, Urgin T, Otaegui L, Vigor C, Acar N, 
Canet G, Vitalis M, Morin F, Planel E, et al. Intranasal 
administration of Nanovectorized docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA) improves cognitive function in two com­
plementary mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Antioxid (Basel). 2022;11(5):838. PMID: 35624701. 
doi:10.3390/antiox11050838.
139. Freund-Levi Y, Eriksdotter-Jönhagen M, Cederholm T, 
Basun H, Faxén-Irving G, Garlind A, Vedin I, Vessby B, 
Wahlund LO, Palmblad J. ω-3 fatty acid treatment in 
174 patients with Mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: 
OmegAD study. Arch Neurol. 2006;63(10):1402–1408. 
PMID: 17030655. doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.10.1402.
140. Kotani S, Sakaguchi E, Warashina S, Matsukawa N, 
Ishikura Y, Kiso Y, Sakakibara M, Yoshimoto T, 
Guo J, Yamashima T. Dietary supplementation of ara­
chidonic and docosahexaenoic acids improves cogni­
tive dysfunction. Neurosci Res (N Y). 2006;56:159–164. 
PMID: 16905216. doi:10.1016/j.neures.2006.06.010.
141. Chiu CC, Su KP, Cheng TC, Liu HC, Chang CJ, 
Dewey ME, Stewart R, Huang SY. The effects of 
omega-3 fatty acids monotherapy in Alzheimer’s dis­
ease and mild cognitive impairment: a preliminary ran­
domized double-blind placebo-controlled study. 
Progress 
In 
Neuro-Psychopharmacology 
And 
Biological Psychiatry. 2008;32(6):1538–1544. PMID: 
18573585. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2008.05.015.
142. Freund-Levi 
Y, 
Basun 
H, 
Cederholm 
T, 
Faxén-Irving G, Garlind A, Grut M, Vedin I, 
Palmblad J, Wahlund LO, Eriksdotter-Jönhagen M. 
Omega-3 supplementation in mild to moderate 
Alzheimer’s disease: effects on neuropsychiatric symp­
toms. Int J Geriat Psychiatry. 2008;23(2):161–169. 
PMID: 17582225. doi: 10.1002/gps.1857.
143. Vedin I, Cederholm T, Freund Levi Y, Basun H, 
Garlind A, Faxén Irving G, Jönhagen ME, Vessby B, 
Wahlund LO, Palmblad J. Effects of docosahexaenoic 
acid–rich n−3 fatty acid supplementation on cytokine 
release from blood mononuclear leukocytes: the 
OmegAD 
study. 
Am 
J 
Clin 
Nutr. 
2008;87 
(6):1616–1622. PMID: 18541548. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/87. 
6.1616.
144. Freund-Levi Y, Hjorth E, Lindberg C, Cederholm T, 
Faxen-Irving G, Vedin I, Palmblad J, Wahlund LO, 
Schultzberg M, Basun H, et al. Effects of omega-3 
fatty acids on inflammatory markers in cerebrospinal 
fluid and plasma in Alzheimer’s disease: the OmegAD 
study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;27 
(5):481–490. PMID: 19439966. doi:10.1159/000218081.
145. Irving GF, Freund-Levi Y, Eriksdotter-Jönhagen M, 
Basun H, Brismar K, Hjorth E, Palmblad J, Vessby B, 
Vedin I, Wahlund LO, et al. Omega-3 fatty acid 
GUT MICROBES
31

supplementation effects on weight and appetite in 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease: the omega-3 
Alzheimer’s disease study. J American Geriatrics 
Society. 2009;57(1):11–17. PMID: 19054188. doi:10. 
1111/j.1532-5415.2008.02055.x.
146. Quinn JF, Raman R, Thomas RG, Yurko-Mauro K, 
Nelson EB, Van Dyck C, Galvin JE, Emond J, Jack CR 
Jr., Weiner M, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid supplemen­
tation and cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease: 
a randomized trial. Jama. 2010;304(17):1903–1911. 
PMID: 21045096. doi:10.1001/jama.2010.1510.
147. Vedin I, Cederholm T, Freund-Levi Y, Basun H, 
Hjorth E, Irving GF, Eriksdotter-Jönhagen M, 
Schultzberg M, Wahlund LO, Palmblad J. Reduced 
prostaglandin F2α release from blood mononuclear 
leukocytes after oral supplementation of ω3 fatty 
acids: the OmegAD study. J Lipid Res. 2010;51 
(5):1179–1185. PMID: 19965584. doi: 10.1194/jlr. 
M002667.
148. Sinn N, Milte CM, Street SJ, Buckley JD, Coates AM, 
Petkov J, Howe PR. Effects of n-3 fatty acids, EPA 
v. DHA, on depressive symptoms, quality of life, mem­
ory and executive function in older adults with mild 
cognitive impairment: a 6-month randomised con­
trolled trial. Br J Nutr. 2012;107(11):1682–1693. 
PMID: 21929835. doi: 10.1017/s0007114511004788.
149. Vedin I, Cederholm T, Freund-Levi Y, Basun H, 
Garlind A, Irving GF, Eriksdotter-Jönhagen M, 
Wahlund LO, Dahlman I, Palmblad J, et al. Effects of 
DHA-rich n-3 fatty acid supplementation on gene 
expression in blood mononuclear leukocytes: the 
OmegAD study. PloS One. 2012;7(4):e35425. PMID: 
22545106. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035425.
150. Faxén-Irving G, Freund-Levi Y, Eriksdotter-Jönhagen 
M, Basun H, Hjorth E, Palmblad J, Vedin I, 
Cederholm T, Wahlund LO. Effects on transthyretin 
in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid by DHA-Rich n – 3 
fatty acid supplementation in patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease: The OmegAD study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;36 
(1):1–6. PMID: 23563245. doi: 10.3233/jad-121828.
151. Lee 
LK, 
Shahar 
S, 
Chin 
AV, 
Yusoff 
NA. 
Docosahexaenoic acid-concentrated fish oil supple­
mentation in subjects with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI): a 12-month randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Psychopharmacol (Berl). 
2013;225(3):605–612. PMID: 22932777. doi: 10.1007/ 
s00213-012-2848-0.
152. Freund Levi Y, Vedin I, Cederholm T, Basun H, Faxén 
Irving G, Eriksdotter M, Hjorth E, Schultzberg M, 
Vessby B, Wahlund LO, et al. Transfer of omega-3 
fatty acids across the blood–brain barrier after dietary 
supplementation with a docosahexaenoic acid-rich 
omega-3 fatty acid preparation in patients with 
a lzheimer’s disease: the O meg AD study. J Intern 
Med. 2014;275(4):428–436. PMID: 24410954. doi:10. 
1111/joim.12166.
153. Freund-Levi Y, Vedin I, Hjorth E, Basun H, Faxén 
Irving G, Schultzberg M, Eriksdotter M, Palmblad J, 
Vessby B, Wahlund LO, et al. Effects of supplementa­
tion with omega-3 fatty acids on oxidative stress and 
inflammation in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: the 
OmegAD study. JAD. 2014;42(3):823–831. PMID: 
24934544. doi:10.3233/jad-132042.
154. Mahmoudi MJ, Hedayat M, Sharifi F, Mirarefin M, 
Nazari 
N, 
Mehrdad 
N, 
Ghaderpanahi 
M, 
Tajalizadekhoob Y, Badamchizade Z, Larijani B, et al. 
Effect of low dose ω-3 poly unsaturated fatty acids on 
cognitive status among older people: a double-blind 
randomized placebo-controlled study. J Diabetes 
Metab Disord. 2014;13(1):34. PMID: 24507770. doi:10. 
1186/2251-6581-13-34.
155. Shinto L, Quinn J, Montine T, Dodge HH, 
Woodward W, Baldauf-Wagner S, Waichunas D, 
Bumgarner L, Bourdette D, Silbert L, et al. 
A randomized placebo-controlled pilot trial of omega- 
3 fatty acids and alpha lipoic acid in Alzheimer’s dis­
ease. JAD. 2014;38(1):111–120. PMID: 24077434. 
doi:10.3233/jad-130722.
156. Eriksdotter M, Vedin I, Falahati F, Freund-Levi Y, 
Hjorth 
E, 
Faxen-Irving 
G, 
Wahlund 
LO, 
Schultzberg M, Basun H, Cederholm T, et al. Plasma 
fatty acid profiles in relation to cognition and gender in 
Alzheimer’s disease patients during Oral Omega-3 fatty 
acid 
supplementation: 
The 
OmegAD 
study. 
J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;48:805–812. PMID: 26402079. 
doi:10.3233/jad-150102.
157. Fiala M, Halder RC, Sagong B, Ross O, Sayre J, 
Porter V, Bredesen DE. ω-3 supplementation increases 
amyloid-β phagocytosis and resolvin D1 in patients 
with minor cognitive impairment. FASEB J. 2015;29 
(7):2681–2689. PMID: 25805829. doi: 10.1096/fj.14- 
264218.
158. Phillips MA, Childs CE, Calder PC, Rogers PJ. No effect 
of Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation on cognition 
and mood in individuals with cognitive impairment 
and probable Alzheimer’s disease: A Randomised con­
trolled trial. Int J Mol Sci. 2015;16:24600–24613. PMID: 
26501267. doi:10.3390/ijms161024600.
159. Wang X, Hjorth E, Vedin I, Eriksdotter M, Freund- 
Levi Y, Wahlund LO, Cederholm T, Palmblad J, 
Schultzberg M. Effects of n-3 FA supplementation on 
the release of proresolving lipid mediators by blood 
mononuclear cells: the OmegAD study. J Lipid Res. 
2015;56:674–681. PMID: 25616438. doi:10.1194/jlr. 
P055418.
160. Karimi M, Vedin I, Freund Levi Y, Basun H, Faxén 
Irving G, Eriksdotter M, Wahlund LO, Schultzberg M, 
Hjorth E, Cederholm T, et al. DHA-rich n–3 fatty acid 
supplementation decreases DNA methylation in blood 
leukocytes: the OmegAD study. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2017;106(4):1157–1165. PMID: 28855224. doi:10.3945/ 
ajcn.117.155648.
32
T. ZHANG ET AL.

161. Zhang YP, Miao R, Li Q, Wu T, Ma F. Effects of DHA 
supplementation on hippocampal volume and cogni­
tive function in older adults with Mild cognitive 
impairment: A 12-month randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;55 
(2):497–507. PMID: 27716665. doi: 10.3233/jad- 
160439.
162. Schwarz C, Wirth M, Gerischer L, Grittner U, 
Witte AV, Köbe T, Flöel A. Effects of Omega-3 fatty 
acids on resting cerebral perfusion in patients with Mild 
cognitive impairment: A randomized controlled trial. 
J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2018;5:26–30. PMID: 29405229. 
doi:10.14283/jpad.2017.23.
163. Zhang YP, Lou Y, Hu J, Miao R, Ma F. DHA supple­
mentation improves cognitive function via enhancing 
Aβ-mediated autophagy in Chinese elderly with mild 
cognitive 
impairment: 
a 
randomised 
placebo- 
controlled trial. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2018;89(4):382–388. PMID: 29142143. doi: 10.1136/ 
jnnp-2017-316176.
164. Jernerén F, Cederholm T, Refsum H, Smith AD, 
Turner C, Palmblad J, Eriksdotter M, Hjorth E, Faxen- 
Irving G, Wahlund LO, et al. Homocysteine status 
modifies the treatment effect of Omega-3 fatty acids 
on cognition in a randomized clinical trial in Mild to 
moderate Alzheimer’s disease: The OmegAD study. 
J 
Alzheimers 
Dis. 
2019;69(1):189–197. 
PMID: 
30958356. doi:10.3233/jad-181148.
165. Tofiq A, Zetterberg H, Blennow K, Basun H, 
Cederholm T, Eriksdotter M, Faxén-Irving G, 
Hjorth E, Jernerén F, Schultzberg M, et al. Effects of 
peroral Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation on cere­
brospinal fluid biomarkers in patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease: A randomized controlled trial—the OmegAD 
study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;83(3):1291–1301. PMID: 
34420949. doi:10.3233/jad-210007.
166. Lin PY, Cheng C, Satyanarayanan SK, Chiu LT, 
Chien YC, Chuu CP, Lan TH, Su KP. Omega-3 fatty 
acids and blood-based biomarkers in Alzheimer’s dis­
ease and mild cognitive impairment: A randomized 
placebo-controlled 
trial. 
Brain 
Behav 
Immun. 
2022;99:289–298. PMID: 34755655. doi:10.1016/j.bbi. 
2021.10.014.
167. El Gaamouch F, Chen F, Ho L, Lin HY, Yuan C, 
Wong J, Wang J. Benefits of dietary polyphenols in 
Alzheimer’s 
disease. 
Front 
Aging 
Neurosci. 
2022;14:1019942. PMID: 36583187. doi:10.3389/fnagi. 
2022.1019942.
168. Huang TL, Zandi PP, Tucker KL, Fitzpatrick AL, 
Kuller LH, Fried LP, Burke GL, Carlson MC. Benefits 
of fatty fish on dementia risk are stronger for those 
without APOE ε4. Neurology. 2005;65(9):1409–1414. 
PMID: 16275829. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000183148. 
34197.2e.
169. Vandal M, Alata W, Tremblay C, Rioux-Perreault C, 
Salem N Jr., Calon F, Plourde M. Reduction in DHA 
transport to the brain of mice expressing human APOE4 
compared to APOE2. J Neurochem. 2014;129:516–526. 
PMID: 24345162. doi:10.1111/jnc.12640.
170. Deng SM, Chen CJ, Lin HL, Cheng IH. The beneficial 
effect of synbiotics consumption on Alzheimer’s disease 
mouse model via reducing local and systemic inflam­
mation. 
Iubmb 
Life. 
2022;74:748–753. 
PMID: 
34962691. doi:10.1002/iub.2589.
171. Westfall S, Lomis N, Prakash S. A novel synbiotic delays 
Alzheimer’s disease onset via combinatorial gut-brain- 
axis signaling in Drosophila melanogaster. PloS One. 
2019;14:e0214985. PMID: 31009489. doi:10.1371/jour 
nal.pone.0214985.
172. Abbasi A, Rad AH, Ghasempour Z, Sabahi S, Kafil HS, 
Hasannezhad P, Rahbar Saadat Y, Shahbazi N. The 
biological activities of postbiotics in gastrointestinal 
disorders. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 2022;62(22):1–22. 
PMID: 33715539. doi: 10.1080/10408398.2021.1895061.
173. Zhang T, Zhang W, Feng C, Kwok LY, He Q, Sun Z. 
Stronger gut microbiome modulatory effects by post­
biotics than probiotics in a mouse colitis model. NPJ Sci 
Food. 2022;6(1):53. PMID: 36379940. doi: 10.1038/ 
s41538-022-00169-9.
174. Sabahi S, Homayouni Rad A, Aghebati-Maleki L, 
Sangtarash N, Ozma MA, Karimi A, Hosseini H, 
Abbasi A. Postbiotics as the new frontier in food and 
pharmaceutical research. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 
2022;1–28. PMID: 35348016. doi:10.1080/10408398. 
2022.2056727.
175. Zhang F, Luo W, Shi Y, Fan Z, Ji G. Should we stan­
dardize 
the 
1,700-year-old 
fecal 
microbiota 
transplantation? Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107:1755. 
author reply 1755-1756PMID: 23160295. doi:10.1038/ 
ajg.2012.251.
176. Eiseman B, Silen W, Bascom GS, Kauvar AJ. Fecal 
enema as an adjunct in the treatment of pseudomem­
branous enterocolitis. Surgery. 1958;44(5):854–859. 
PMID: 13592638.
177. van Nood E, Vrieze A, Nieuwdorp M, Fuentes S, 
Zoetendal EG, de Vos WM, Visser CE, Kuijper EJ, 
Bartelsman JF, Tijssen JG, et al. Duodenal infusion of 
donor feces for recurrent Clostridium difficile. N Engl 
J Med. 2013;368:407–415. PMID: 23323867. doi:10. 
1056/NEJMoa1205037.
178. Allegretti JR, Mullish BH, Kelly C, Fischer M. The 
evolution of the use of faecal microbiota transplanta­
tion and emerging therapeutic indications. Lancet. 
2019;394(10196):420–431. PMID: 31379333. doi: 10. 
1016/s0140-6736(19)31266-8.
179. WHO. https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press- 
announcements/fda-approves-first-fecal-microbiota- 
product. 2022.
180. Harach T, Marungruang N, Duthilleul N, Cheatham V, 
Mc Coy KD, Frisoni G, Neher JJ, Fåk F, Jucker M, 
Lasser T, et al. Reduction of Abeta amyloid pathology 
in APPPS1 transgenic mice in the absence of gut 
microbiota. 
Sci 
Rep. 
2017;7(1):41802. 
PMID: 
28176819. doi:10.1038/srep41802.
GUT MICROBES
33

181. Sun J, Xu J, Ling Y, Wang F, Gong T, Yang C, Ye S, 
Ye K, Wei D, Song Z, et al. Fecal microbiota transplan­
tation alleviated Alzheimer’s disease-like pathogenesis 
in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Transl Psychiatry. 2019;9 
(1):189. PMID: 31383855. doi:10.1038/s41398-019- 
0525-3.
182. Shen H, Guan Q, Zhang X, Yuan C, Tan Z, Zhai L, 
Hao Y, Gu Y, Han C. New mechanism of neuroinflam­
mation in Alzheimer’s disease: The activation of NLRP3 
inflammasome mediated by gut microbiota. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol 
Biol 
Psychiatry. 
2020;100:109884. PMID: 32032696. doi:10.1016/j. 
pnpbp.2020.109884.
183. Kim N, Jeon SH, Ju IG, Gee MS, Do J, Oh MS, Lee JK. 
Transplantation of gut microbiota derived from 
Alzheimer’s disease mouse model impairs memory 
function and neurogenesis in C57BL/6 mice. Brain 
Behav Immun. 2021;98:357–365. PMID: 34500036. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2021.09.002.
184. Valeri F, Dos Santos Guilherme M, He F, Stoye NM, 
Schwiertz A, Endres K. Impact of the age of cecal mate­
rial transfer donors on Alzheimer’s disease pathology in 
5xFAD mice. Microorganisms. 2021;9(12):2548. PMID: 
34946148. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9122548.
185. Bi W, Cai S, Hang Z, Lei T, Wang D, Wang L, Du H. 
Transplantation of feces from mice with Alzheimer’s 
disease promoted lung cancer growth. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 2022;600:67–74. PMID: 
35196629. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.01.078.
186. Elangovan S, Borody TJ, Holsinger RMD. Fecal micro­
biota transplantation reduces pathology and improves 
cognition in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Cells. 2022;12(1):119. PMID: 36611911. doi: 10.3390/ 
cells12010119.
187. Hang Z, Cai S, Lei T, Zhang X, Xiao Z, Wang D, Li Y, 
Bi W, Yang Y, Deng S, et al. Transfer of tumor-bearing 
mice intestinal flora can ameliorate cognition in 
Alzheimer’s disease mice. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;86 
(3):1287–1300. PMID: 35180124. doi:10.3233/jad- 
215495.
188. Kim JE, Roh YJ, Choi YJ, Lee SJ, Jin YJ, Song HJ, 
Seol AY, Son HJ, Hong JT, Hwang DY. Dysbiosis of 
fecal microbiota in Tg2576 mice for Alzheimer’s disease 
during pathological constipation. Int J Mol Sci. 2022;23 
(23):14928. 
PMID: 
36499254. 
doi: 
10.3390/ 
ijms232314928.
189. Soriano S, Curry K, Wang Q, Chow E, Treangen TJ, 
Villapol S. Fecal microbiota transplantation derived 
from Alzheimer’s disease mice worsens brain trauma 
outcomes in wild-type controls. Int J Mol Sci. 2022;23 
(9):4476. PMID: 35562867. doi: 10.3390/ijms23094476.
190. Wang F, Gu Y, Xu C, Du K, Zhao C, Zhao Y, Liu X. 
Transplantation of fecal microbiota from APP/PS1 
mice and Alzheimer’s disease patients enhanced endo­
plasmic reticulum stress in the cerebral cortex of wild- 
type mice. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022;14:858130. 
PMID: 35966768. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2022.858130.
191. Fujii Y, Nguyen TTT, Fujimura Y, Kameya N, 
Nakamura S, Arakawa K, Morita H. Fecal metabolite 
of a gnotobiotic mouse transplanted with gut micro­
biota from a patient with Alzheimer’s disease. Biosci 
Biotechnol Biochem. 2019;83:2144–2152. PMID: 
31327302. doi:10.1080/09168451.2019.1644149.
192. Hazan S. Rapid improvement in Alzheimer’s disease 
symptoms following fecal microbiota transplantation: 
a 
case 
report. 
J 
Int 
Med 
Res. 
2020;48 
(6):300060520925930. PMID: 32600151. doi: 10.1177/ 
0300060520925930.
193. Park SH, Lee JH, Shin J, Kim JS, Cha B, Lee S, Kwon KS, 
Shin YW, Choi SH. Cognitive function improvement 
after fecal microbiota transplantation in Alzheimer’s 
dementia patient: a case report. Curr Med Res Opin. 
2021;37:1739–1744. PMID: 34289768. doi:10.1080/ 
03007995.2021.1957807.
194. Hou Q, Zhao F, Liu W, Lv R, Khine WWT, Han J, 
Sun Z, Lee YK, Zhang H. Probiotic-directed modula­
tion of gut microbiota is basal microbiome dependent. 
Gut Microbes. 2020;12(1):1736974. PMID: 32200683. 
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2020.1736974.
195. Smillie CS, Sauk J, Gevers D, Friedman J, Sung J, 
Youngster I, Hohmann EL, Staley C, Khoruts A, 
Sadowsky MJ, et al. Strain tracking reveals the determi­
nants of bacterial engraftment in the human gut follow­
ing fecal microbiota transplantation. Cell Host & 
Microbe. 2018;23(2):229–240 e225. PMID: 29447696. 
doi:10.1016/j.chom.2018.01.003.
196. Zmora N, Suez J, Elinav E. You are what you eat: diet, 
health and the gut microbiota. Nat Rev Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2019;16(1):35–56. PMID: 30262901. doi: 10. 
1038/s41575-018-0061-2.
197. Arora S, Santiago JA, Bernstein M, Potashkin JA. Diet 
and lifestyle impact the development and progression 
of Alzheimer’s dementia. Front Nutr. 2023;10:1213223. 
PMID: 37457976. doi:10.3389/fnut.2023.1213223.
198. van 
den 
Brink 
AC, 
Brouwer-Brolsma 
EM, 
Berendsen AAM, van de Rest O. The Mediterranean, 
Dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH), and 
Mediterranean-DASH intervention for neurodegenera­
tive delay (MIND) diets are associated with less cogni­
tive decline and a lower risk of Alzheimer’s disease—A 
review. Adv Nutr. 2019;10(6):1040–1065. PMID: 
31209456. doi: 10.1093/advances/nmz054.
199. Wieckowska-Gacek 
A, 
Mietelska-Porowska 
A, 
Wydrych M, Wojda U. Western diet as a trigger of 
Alzheimer’s disease: From metabolic syndrome and 
systemic inflammation to neuroinflammation and neu­
rodegeneration. Ageing Res Rev. 2021;70:101397. 
PMID: 34214643. doi:10.1016/j.arr.2021.101397.
200. Dhana K, Franco OH, Ritz EM, Ford CN, Desai P, 
Krueger KR, Holland TM, Dhana A, Liu X, 
Aggarwal NT, et al. Healthy lifestyle and life expectancy 
with and without Alzheimer’s dementia: population 
based cohort study. BMJ. 2022;377:e068390. PMID: 
35418416. doi:10.1136/bmj-2021-068390.
34
T. ZHANG ET AL.

201. Barnes LL, Dhana K, Liu X, Carey VJ, Ventrelle J, 
Johnson K, Hollings CS, Bishop L, Laranjo N, 
Stubbs BJ, et al. Trial of the MIND diet for prevention 
of cognitive decline in older persons. N Engl J Med. 
2023;389(7):602–611. PMID: 37466280. doi:10.1056/ 
NEJMoa2302368.
202. Pellegrini 
C, 
Fornai 
M, 
D’Antongiovanni 
V, 
Antonioli L, Bernardini N, Derkinderen P. The 
intestinal barrier in disorders of the central nervous 
system. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2023;8:66–80. 
PMID: 36334596. doi:10.1016/S2468-1253(22)00241-2.
203. Carrasco E, de Las Heras MM G, Gabande-Rodriguez 
E, Desdin-Mico G, Aranda JF, Mittelbrunn M. The role 
of T cells in age-related diseases. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2022;22(2):97–111. PMID: 34099898. doi: 10.1038/ 
s41577-021-00557-4.
GUT MICROBES
35