Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
Available online 18 January 2024
0168-3659/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Microneedle-mediated nose-to-brain drug delivery for improved 
Alzheimer's disease treatment 
Shuyao Ruan 1, Jiaqi Li 1, Hang Ruan 1, Qing Xia 1, Xiaolin Hou , Zhi Wang , Teng Guo , 
Chunyun Zhu , Nianping Feng *, Yongtai Zhang * 
School of pharmacy, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No.1200 Cailun Road, Pudong New Area, Shanghai 201203, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Metal-organic frameworks 
COF 
Dissolving microneedles 
Brain-targeted drug delivery 
Intranasal drug delivery 
Alzheimer's disease 
A B S T R A C T   
Conventional transnasal brain-targeted drug delivery strategies are limited by nasal cilia clearance and the nasal 
mucosal barrier. To address this challenge, we designed dissolving microneedles combined with nanocarriers for 
enhanced nose-to-brain drug delivery. To facilitate transnasal administration, a toothbrush-like microneedle 
patch was fabricated with hyaluronic acid-formed microneedles and tannic acid-crosslinked gelatin as the base, 
which completely dissolved in the nasal mucosa within seconds leaving only the base, thereby releasing the 
loaded cyclodextrin-based metal-organic frameworks (CD-MOFs) without affecting the nasal cilia and nasal 
microbial communities. As nanocarriers for high loading of huperzine A, these potassium-structured CD-MOFs, 
reinforced with stigmasterol and functionalized with lactoferrin, possessed improved physical stability and 
excellent biocompatibility, enabling efficient brain-targeted drug delivery. This delivery system substantially 
attenuated H2O2- and scopolamine-induced neurocyte damage. The efficacy of huperzine A on scopolamine- and 
D-galactose & AlCl3-induced memory deficits in rats was significantly improved, as evidenced by inhibiting 
acetylcholinesterase activity, alleviating oxidative stress damage in the brain, and improving learning function, 
meanwhile activating extracellular regulated protein kinases-cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein- 
brain derived neurotrophic factor pathway. Moreover, postsynaptic density protein PSD-95, which interacts 
with two important therapeutic targets Tau and β-amyloid in Alzheimer's disease, was upregulated. This fruitful 
treatment was further shown to significantly ameliorate Tau hyperphosphorylation and decrease β-amyloid by 
ways including modulating beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 and a disintegrin and met­
alloproteinase 10. Collectively, such a newly developed strategy breaks the impasse for efficient drug delivery to 
the brain, and the potential therapeutic role of huperzine A for Alzheimer's disease is further illustrated.   
1. Introduction 
Nose-to-brain delivery is a proven strategy to improve drug distri­
bution in the brain and enhance the treatment of brain diseases. By 
intranasal administration, the drug is absorbed into the brain by two 
routes, one is through respiratory epithelial cells into the systemic cir­
culation, and then crosses the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to the brain; the 
other is to bypass the BBB through the trigeminal nerve pathway or the 
olfactory epithelium and directly to the central nervous system [1]. 
Intranasal administration has fast drug absorption and avoids the first- 
pass effect of oral administration. Compared with the injection route, 
patients have better compliance and can be administered autonomously. 
In particular, the brain-targeted delivery properties via the second route 
reduce the drug's systemic exposure and potential peripheral side effects 
[2,3]. Novel drug delivery systems such as liposomes, microemulsions, 
nanoparticles, and in situ gels, have been reported to increase the 
intranasal delivery of drugs [4,5]. Additionally, specific ligand-modified 
nanoparticles as well as neutrophil-derived nanocarriers have been 
shown to enhance drug delivery to the brain [6,7]. However, these 
passive modes of administration are challenged by the rapid clearance of 
nasal cilia and the barrier function of the nasal mucosa during nose-to- 
brain drug delivery. 
Microneedles are an active drug delivery device that achieves precise 
drug delivery by minimally invasively destroying physiological barriers 
[8]. Microneedles were initially used for transdermal drug delivery, and 
in recent years, they have been expanded to include mucosal 
* Corresponding authors. 
E-mail addresses: npfeng@shutcm.edu.cn (N. Feng), analysisdrug@126.com (Y. Zhang).   
1 Authors contributed equally to this work. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Controlled Release 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jconrel 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2024.01.013 
Received 7 October 2023; Received in revised form 18 December 2023; Accepted 9 January 2024   

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
713
applications such as eye and oral cavity, as well as drug delivery on 
organs and tissues including the heart and solid tumors [9,10]. Similar 
to the stratum corneum barrier for transdermal permeation, the nasal 
mucosa is the main barrier for drug absorption through the nose, so we 
envisage the use of microneedles for active intranasal administration to 
overcome nasal ciliary clearance and nasal mucosal barriers to improve 
brain delivery of drugs. In the current work, we designed dissolving 
microneedle patch with hyaluronic acid (HA) as the microneedle matrix 
and tannic acid-modified gelatin (GT) as the base for nose-to-brain de­
livery of huperzine A (Hup A) and to improve the efficacy in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). 
AD patients have cholinergic system defects such as decreased 
acetylcholinesterase and acetylcholine transferase activities, impaired 
acetylcholine synthesis and release [11]. Hup A is a high selectivity 
acetylcholinease inhibitor, which shows great potential in improving 
memory and learning ability [12]. In addition to providing neuro­
protection on the cholinergic system, Hup A exhibits multiple thera­
peutic effects on various AD pathogenesis, including increasing nerve 
growth factor and brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). It can also 
increase the expression of soluble amyloid precursor protein alpha (s- 
APPα) and reduces β-amyloid (Aβ) deposition, maintain mitochondrial 
homeostasis, reduce neuroinflammation and oxidative stress damage 
[13,14]. The commercially available dosage forms of Hup A include 
tablets, capsules and injections, but due to its insolubility and the limit 
of BBB, the drug delivery to the brain is limited. It has been reported that 
the intranasal delivery of Hup A by in situ gel combined with micro­
emulsion, and the transdermal delivery of Hup A by microneedles 
improved the distribution of the drug in the brain, but it was difficult to 
get rid of the restriction of BBB [15–17]. In addition, lipid nanocarriers, 
including nanoemulsions and poly(lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles, 
usually face the problem of extensive surfactant use and organic solvent 
residues that may pose biosafety concerns [18,19]. 
Cyclodextrin-based metal organic framework (CD-MOF) is a porous 
organic nanocarrier formed by the self-organization of cyclodextrins and 
metal ions [20]. CD-MOF has an ultra-high specific surface area, 
adjustable pore sizes capable of loading drug molecules, significant 
solubilization of insoluble drugs, and is composed of no surfactants with 
potential irritating effects on nasal mucosal cilia. Our current findings 
confirmed that by using CD-MOF as a carrier significantly increased the 
solubility of Hup A in water. and that the preparation process is simple 
and was cost effective. Further, CD-MOF containing Hup A was modified 
with lactoferrin, a receptor highly expressed on the respiratory epithe­
lial cells, brain endothelial cells and apical surface of neurons, and 
significantly increased in neurons in some neurocentrically impaired 
diseases. However, in vivo lactoferrin levels are low and in a normal 
physiological environment, brain cell membrane lactoferrin receptors 
are not saturated with endogenous lactoferrin and are thus able to 
specifically bind exogenous ligands to enhance brain uptake of drugs 
KOH
-CD-MOF
-CD
Hup A
Stigmasterol
One-pot method
Hup A@Lf-st-MOF
Lactoferrin
Electrostatic adsorption
Hup A@st-MOF
st
-CD-MOF
st-MOF
Hup A@st-MOF
st-MOF
-CD-MOF
st-MOF
st-MOF in water for 12 h
st-MOF in water for 6 h
Intensity (a.u.)
)
%
(
e
c
n
a
tti
m
s
n
a
r
T
Hup A
Physical mixture (Hup A and st-MOF)
Hup A@st-MOF
st-MOF
)
%
(
e
c
n
a
tti
m
s
n
a
r
T
Intensity (a.u.)
1
m
1
m
200 nm
500 nm
200 nm
200 nm
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
FTIR
FT-IR
XRD
XRD
-CD-MOF
st-MOF
st-MOF in water for12 h
-CD-MOF at 99% RH for 12 h
Hup A@st-MOF
Hup A@Lf-st-MOF
3000
2000
1000
Wavenumbers (cm )
10
20
30
40
2
(degree)
2
(degree)
3000
2000
1000
Wavenumbers (cm )
10
20
30
40
Fig. 1. Characteristics of Hup A@Lf-st-MOF. (A) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of Hup A@Lf-st-MOF. (B to E) FT-IR spectra and XRD patterns of 
each sample, which confirmed the successful synthesis of CD-MOF and the encapsulation of Hup A in an amorphous form. (F and G) SEM and TEM micrographs of the 
samples, respectively, showing CD-MOFs were uniformly distributed, and st-coating enhanced their physical stability in water, while drug loading and Lf modifi­
cation did not disrupt their structure. Abbreviations: γ-CD, γ-cyclodextrin; MOF, metal organic framework; γ-CD-MOF, γ-CD-based MOF; st, stigmasterol; st-MOF, 
stigmasterol-reinforced γ-CD-MOF; Hup A, huperzine A; Hup A@st-MOF, Hup A-loaded st-MOF; Lf, lactoferrin; Hup A@Lf-st-MOF, Lf-functionalized Hup A@st- 
MOF; FT-IR, Fourier transform infrared; XRD, X-ray diffraction; SEM, scanning electron microscope; TEM, transmission electron microscope. 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
714
[21,22]. 
In this work, a new transnasal intracerebral delivery system was 
constructed using phytosterol-reinforced CD-MOF as the carrier of Hup 
A. The nanocarrier was further modified with lactoferrin (Fig. 1A), then 
was dispersed in HA-fabricated dissolving microneedle patch with GT as 
the base. This newly designed delivery system achieved rapid separation 
of the microneedles from the base, shortened administration time, and 
enhanced drug delivery to the brain. Moreover, tannic acid contained in 
GT maintained nasal microbial ecological balance that underwent 
frequent administration. The effect of this drug delivery system on 
enhancing drug delivery for treating AD was evaluated using in vitro 
neural cell injury models and in vivo pathological models of memory 
impairment in rats, providing a new strategy for improving treatment of 
intracerebral disorders, including AD, via more efficient transnasal 
brain-targeted drug delivery than traditional nasal drip modalities. 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Animals and cell lines 
Male Sprague Dawley rats, weighing 180 ± 20 g, were provided by 
the Animal Experiment Center of Shanghai University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine (SUTCM) with the ethical approval number 
PZSHUTCM210416002. 
Human bronchial epithelial (16HBE) cells were provided by Prof. 
Kaili Hu from School of Chinese Medicine, SUTCM. Rat adrenal pheo­
chromocytoma (PC12) cells were purchased from Shanghai Baiyi 
Biotechnology Center (Shanghai, China). E. coli and Staphylococcus 
aureus were supplied by Qingdao Future Testing Co. (Qingdao, Shan­
dong, China). 
2.2. Materials 
Experimental materials were shown in Table S1, S2, and S3, in 
Supplementary Materials. 
2.3. HPLC analysis of Hup A 
Hup A was detected by an Agilent 1260 HPLC instrument (Agilent, 
USA) with a C18 reversed-phase column (250 × 4.6 mm, 5 μm) main­
tained at 35 ◦C, with 0.2% potassium dihydrogen phosphate-acetonitrile 
(16:84, v/v) as the eluent at a flow of 1 mL/min, recording the ab­
sorption peak at 310 nm. 
2.4. Preparation and characterisation of MOFs 
γ-cyclodextrin (γ-CD)-based MOF (γ-CD-MOF): γ-CD 1.62 g and po­
tassium hydroxide 0.56 g were dissolved in ultrapure water 50 mL, 
methanol 30 mL was added to form a white suspension, which was 
heated at 50 ◦C until it was clarified, and then mixed with methanol 
solution 40 mL containing poly(ethylene glycol) 20,000,650 mg, which 
was placed at 0 ◦C for 12 h, centrifuged at 3500 ×g for 5 min, and the 
resulting precipitates were cleaned with isopropanol and dichloro­
methane, and dried in a vacuum at 40 ◦C for 24 h to obtain γ-CD-MOF 
powder. 
Stigmasterol-reinforced CD-MOF (st-MOF): γ-CD-MOF 60 mg and 
stigmasterol 15 mg were dispersed in trichloromethane 1 mL, heated at 
50 ◦C and stirred for 6 h to obtain st-MOF. 
Hup A-encapsulated st-MOF (Hup A@st-MOF): The γ-CD-MOF, 
stigmasterol and Hup A were dispersed in trichloromethane 1 mL by 
one-pot cooking method, heated and stirred, and centrifuged and dried 
to obtain Hup A@st-MOF. 
Lactoferrin-modified MOFs: The prepared st-MOF and Hup A@st- 
MOF powders were respectively dispersed in lactoferrin aqueous solu­
tion were mixed respectively, and incubated at 4 ◦C for 30 min to make 
lactoferrin and st-MOF electrostatically adsorbed, and centrifuged by 
ultrafiltration (molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa) for 10 min to isolate 
the free lactoferrin in water that was not adsorbed, which led to 
lactoferrin-modified st-MOFs (Lf-st-MOFs) and lactoferrin-modified Hup 
A@st-MOF (Hup A@Lf-st-MOF), respectively. The concentration of 
lactoferrin was determined using a bicinchoninic acid kit, and the per­
centage of the adsorbed lactoferrin concentration over the total lacto­
ferrin concentration was named as the adsorption rate. In addition, Hup 
A was replaced with coumarin 6 (C6), and C6-encapsulated st-MOF 
(C6@st-MOF) and Lf-st-MOF (C6@Lf-st-MOF) were obtained by the 
same method. 
γ-CD inclusion complex of Hup A (Hup A@γ-CD): 1,4-dioxane solu­
tion of Hup A (50 mg/mL) was slowly dripped into 10 mL of γ-CD 
saturated aqueous solution, stirred at 50 ◦C for 6 h, and stored at 4 ◦C 
until precipitation was precipitated. The precipitate was separated by 
centrifugation, washed with anhydrous ethanol and dried in vacuum at 
40 ◦C for 24 h to form Hup A@γ-CD. 
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) analysis: Samples were mixed 
with potassium bromide according to 1:10 (w/w) and pressed into tab­
lets, and the infrared absorption spectra of 400 cm−1–4000 cm−1 was 
measured by Spectrum 200 infrared spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, USA). 
X-ray diffraction (XRD) assay: Samples were subjected to CuKα target 
diffraction with a Smatlab 9 X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Corporation, 
Tokyo, Japan) under the following conditions: voltage 40 kV, current 40 
mA, scanning step 0.1 step/s, and scanning angle range 3◦–40◦. 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) photographing: Samples were 
dried at the critical point, treated with metal spraying, and observed by 
Quanta 250 FEG SEM instrument (FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA). 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) photographing: Samples 
were placed on 400 mesh copper mesh, dried at room temperature, then 
were observed by JEM-1400 Flash TEM instrument (JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, 
Japan). 
Contact angle measurement: Samples were pressed into a flat sheet, 
then a vertical drop of ultrapure water was added on the top, and the 
angle between the water droplet and the flat sheet of the sample was 
measured by OCA20 contact angle meter (DataPhysics Instruments 
GmbH, Filderstadt, Germany) in order to evaluate the hydrophilicity of 
the samples. 
Drug loading determination: Hup A in MOF of known weight (M0) 
was extracted by methanol ultrasonication, and the supernatant was 
centrifuged at 12000 ×g for 10 min, the mass of Hup A was measured as 
M1, and the percentage value of M1 to M0 was recorded as the drug 
loading. 
In vitro release test: Samples of the test groups containing the same 
mass of Hup A were respectively loaded into dialysis bags with a mo­
lecular weight cut-off of 14 kDa, immersed in PBS (pH 7.4) (meeting sink 
conditions), stirred at 37 ◦C, and then sampled at the pre-set time points 
for detecting Hup A. Experiments were performed in triplicate. 
2.5. 16HBE cell uptake 
C6@Lf-st-MOF was prepared by dispersing C6@st-MOF 15 mg in 
different concentrations of lactoferrin aqueous solution, respectively, 
and incubating for 30 min at 4 ◦C. 16HBE cells were inoculated in 6-well 
plates at 4 × 105 per well and incubated at 37 ◦C with 5% CO2 for 24 h, 
washed with PBS, and then cultured in 2 mL of incomplete culture 
medium consisting of C6@Lf-st-MOF (C6 concentration 2 μg/mL) for 2 
h, washed twice with PBS, trypsin digested, cells were collected and 
washed twice with PBS, and finally cells were resuspended with PBS 0.5 
mL and detected by FACSCanto flow cytometer (Becton, Dickinson and 
Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) to examine the effect of lactoferrin 
concentration on cellular uptake. The uptake of 16HBE cells for free C6 
(Free C6), C6@Lf-st-MOF and C6@st-MOF were also evaluated by the 
same method (C6 concentration 3 μg/mL). 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
715
2.6. Preparation of isolated skin and nasal mucosa 
Rats were anaesthetised with 5% chloral hydrate intraperitoneally, 
the abdominal hair was shaved with an electric razor, and then the rats 
were sacrificed humanely, the abdominal skin was peeled off, and sub­
cutaneous tissues were removed; in addition, the nasal mucosa was 
peeled off from a freshly slaughtered pig in slaughterhouse. All the 
above tissues were washed with saline, stored at 4 ◦C and used within a 
week. 
2.7. Synthesis of GT 
Gelatin 1.5 g was dissolved in water 9 mL at 50 ◦C, tannic acid so­
lution 1 mL (120 mg/mL) was added slowly dropwise, adjusted to pH 
8.5 with 1 mmol/L sodium hydroxide solution, and continued to keep 
50 ◦C for 24 h, and then adjusted to pH 6.5 with 1 mmol/L hydrochloric 
acid solution, and then dried at 60 ◦C to obtain GT. Indanedione 1 mL 
was respectively added to 2 mL of glycine solution, GT solution and 
gelatin solution, and incubated at 100 ◦C for 15 min, cooled to room 
temperature, added 40% ethanol solution and stirred for 15 min, and 
then determining the absorbance at 570 nm. The degree of GT cross- 
linking was calculated according to eq. 1. 
Crosslinking rate (%) =
(
1 −m1
m0
)
× 100%
(1)  
where m0 is the amino acid content in gelatin without crosslinking 
treatment and m1 is the amino acid content in GT. 
Hemolysis: 2% (erythrocyte/saline, v/v) rat erythrocyte suspension 
0.5 mL was mixed with 0.5 mL of GT saline solution of different con­
centrations, respectively. In addition, saline and ultrapure water were 
mixed with equal amounts of 2% erythrocyte suspensions set as blank 
control and negative control groups, respectively. Then incubated at 
37 ◦C for 2 h, centrifuged at 2465 ×g for 5 min, supernatant 200 μL and 
GT solution were added into 96-well plates, measured at 541 nm by an 
Spark 10 M microplate reader (Tecan Trading AG, M¨annedorf, 
Switzerland), and the hemolysis rate was calculated according to eq. 2. 
Hemolysis rate (%) = (As −A1) −(Ab −A0)
Ac −A0
× 100%
(2) 
Where As is the absorbance of the erythrocyte suspension after in­
cubation in the sample, A1 is the absorbance of the sample itself, Ab is 
the absorbance of the blank control group, A0 is the absorbance of the 
blank solution, and Ac is the negative control group. 
Evaluation of bacteriostatic properties: 15% gelatin solution and 
15% GT solution were respectively cast into square flat-bottomed molds, 
dried and demolded, which were trimmed into small discs (diameter: 6 
mm). In addition, the filter paper sheets were soaked in 10 mg/mL 
tannic acid solution for 24 h and sterilized by ultraviolet irradiation for 
20 min before use. Six solid culture media were prepared by mixing 
nutrient broth and agar and autoclaved. Subsequently, 2 groups were set 
up, each with 3 culture plates, one group was added with E. coli bacterial 
solution 100 μL, the other group was added with Staphylococcus aureus 
bacterial solution 100 μL, and the coated plates were put into Oxford 
cups, and the middle part was pressed gently to make a close contact 
with the surface of the culture medium. In each group, gelatin discs, GT 
discs and tannic acid infiltrated filter paper were added respectively, 
sealed and incubated at 37 ◦C for 18 h, and the size of the inhibition 
circle was measured. 
2.8. Fabrication and characterisation of microneedles 
The microneedles were prepared by injection molding method, in 
which a 20% aqueous solution of HA dispersed with Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
(Hup A@Lf-st-MOF:HA = 1:4, w/w) was injected into the microneedle 
molds, which were placed in the environment of −0.1 mPa for 15 min, 
scraped off the uninstalled material, and then dried at 30 ◦C for 2 h. Then 
a 15% (w/v) GT solution containing 300 mg/g glycerol was injected into 
the mold as the base of the microneedle patch and dried at 30 ◦C for 12 
h, which gave the microneedles loaded with Hup A@Lf-st-MOF (MN- 
Hup A@Lf-st-MOF), and the microneedle patches with GT as the base 
and HA as microneedles (HA-GT MNs) were prepared by the same 
method but with no Hup A@Lf-st-MOF added. 
Appearance: The appearance of the microneedles was photographed 
by SEM. In addition, the microneedle patch base was formed by 15% GT 
solution containing 1% (w/v) rhodamine B, and C6@Lf-st-MOF was 
dispersed in the microneedles, and then was observed by Cytation5 
System (BioTek Instruments, Inc., Burlington, Vermont, USA). 
Drug loading: To determine Hup A in the microneedles, they were 
dissolved in a mixed solvent of ultrapure water and methanol (1:2, v/v), 
and Hup A was extracted by ultrasound, centrifuged at 12,000 ×g for 10 
min, and the supernatant was detected by HPLC. 
Mechanical strength: The microneedle patch was placed on the 
sample disc of the TMS pro mass spectrometer (Food Technology Cor­
poration, Sterling, Virginia, USA), and the probe (5 mm in diameter) was 
vertically contacted to the microneedles (with a trigger force of 0.05 N) 
and then squeezed downward at 30 mm/min until the deformation of 
the microneedles reached 40% and then returned. The force- 
displacement profiles were recorded and the mechanical strength of 
each microneedle was calculated. 
Hygroscopicity: The microneedle patches were stored at 25 ◦C and 
relative humidity 80 ± 5%, weighed at a predetermined time point, and 
the percentage of the weight gained by the microneedle patch over its 
initial weight was recorded as the hygroscopicity. 
Solubility: The microneedle patches were pressed vertically on the 
stratum corneum side of isolated rat skin and on the nasal cilia side of 
porcine nasal mucosa, respectively, then were taken back at the pre­
defined time points for drying, and the shape changes were observed 
microscopically. In addition, methylene blue-labelled MN-Hup A@Lf-st- 
MOF patch was prepared with HA solution containing 1% (w/v) meth­
ylene blue, which was vertically penetrated the microneedles 
completely into the composite hydrogel membrane (made as follows: 
1% [w/v] agar and 7% [w/v] konjaku flour were added to water and 
stirred at room temperature until fully dissolved, then heated to boiling 
and cooled at room temperature to form a solid elastic hydrogel mem­
brane with the thickness of approximately 1.5 mm), and the course of 
dissolution of the microneedles in this hydrogel was then videotaped. 
Tissue puncture performance: Rhodamine B-labelled MN-Hup A@Lf- 
st-MOF patch was prepared with HA solution containing 5% (w/v) 
rhodamine B and applied to isolated rat skin and porcine nasal mucosa, 
respectively, placed on a Franz diffusion cell, and waited for the 
microneedles to be fully dissolved in the tissues, then the tissues were 
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min, optimal cutting tempera­
ture compound-embedded, and sliced (30 μm in thickness) after liquid 
nitrogen cryopreservation. The fluorescence distribution was observed 
by Cytation5 System. 
Preparation of toothbrush-like microneedle patch for intranasal 
administration: The microneedle patch fabricated by injection molding 
method was cut into strips along the microneedles array, and each strip 
was fixed with Pattex contact adhesive to one disposable sterile syringe 
needle (tip removed) as the stick. The microneedles array of the fabri­
cated toothbrush-like microneedle patch was 2 × 5, with the micro­
needles facing outward, and the microneedle shape, tip distance, and 
spacing of the conical bottom were the same as those of the original 
microneedle patches. The length and width of the toothbrush head were 
3.72 mm and 1.14 mm, respectively, and the length of the support stick 
including the toothbrush head was 13 mm with a diameter of 0.3 mm. 
2.9. Ex vivo permeation test 
The isolated porcine nasal mucosa were fixed on the Franz diffusion 
cell of a SYSTEM 918–12 automated transdermal diffusion cell sampling 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
716
system (Logan Instruments Corp., Somerset, NJ, USA) with the nasal 
cilia side facing upwards, and the receiving cell with a volume of 6.5 mL 
was filled with PBS (pH 7.4, meeting the sink conditions) at 37 ◦C, with 
magnetic stirring at 300 rpm; the supplying cell was given different 
preparations of Hup A at the same dosage (Hup A: 1.5 mg), respectively. 
A sample of 1 mL was taken at a preset time point and promptly 
replenished with the same volume of fresh receiving solution preheated 
to 37 ◦C. The resulting samples were assayed by HPLC and the cumu­
lative penetration (Qn) was calculated according to eq. 3. 
Qn = Cn × V +
∑n−1
i=1 × Ci × Vi
(3) 
In where n and i denote the drug concentration sampled at the nth 
and ith time point, respectively; V is the volume of the receiving cell and 
Vi is the sampling volume. 
In addition, ultrapure water was used as the receiving solution, and 
C6-labelled preparations were used instead of Hup A-carrying prepara­
tions for the permeation test, and the administered dose was 1.5 mg of 
C6, and 1 mL of the sample was taken after 0.5 h. It was diluted 20-fold 
with ultrapure water, and the C6@st-MOF that had permeated through 
the nasal mucosa was analysed with a Nanosight NS300 nanoparticle 
tracking analyser (Malvern Panalytical, Malvern, UK). 
2.10. In vitro interaction of Hup A preparation on PC12 cells 
Cytotoxicity: PC12 cells were inoculated into 96-well plates at 3 ×
104 cells/well and incubated at 37 ◦C in 5% CO2 for 24 h. The culture 
medium was discarded, and 100 μL of incomplete medium containing 
empty (expressed as the mass concentration of the vector) and Hup A- 
loaded (expressed as the molar concentration of Hup A) CD-MOFs were 
added respectively, and the normal control group (equal volume of fresh 
incomplete medium was added as that of test preparation) and cell-free 
control group were set up, respectively. The cell culture medium was 
discarded after being incubated for 24 h, 100 μL of 7% Cell Counting Kit- 
8 (CCK-8) reagent diluted with incomplete medium was added, and 
incubated for 2 h. Absorbance was measured at 450 nm with a Spark 10 
M microplate reader, and cell viability was calculated according to eq. 4. 
Cell viability (%) = ODsample −ODblank
ODcontrast −ODblank
× 100%
(4) 
Where, ODsample, ODblank and ODcontrast are the absorbance of the test 
preparation administered group, control group without cells and normal 
control group respectively. 
Cell uptake: PC12 cells were inoculated with 4 × 105 cells per well in 
6-well plates, cultured for 24 h, washed twice with PBS, and then 2 mL of 
C6@Lf-st-MOF and C6@st-MOF solutions diluted with incomplete me­
dium at a final concentration of C6 of 2 μg/mL were added to each well, 
respectively, and incubated for 2 h. The cells were washed twice with 
PBS, digested by trypsin, and washed twice with PBS, resuspended in 
0.5 mL PBS for analysis by flow cytometry. 
Protective effect against H2O2-induced oxidative damage in PC12 
cells: PC12 cell suspension (3 × 105 cells /mL) was added to 96-well 
plates at 100 μL per well and incubated for 24 h. The medium was 
discarded, 100 μL of incomplete medium was added to the normal 
control and model control groups, and the drug administration groups 
were given 100 μL of incomplete medium containing Hup A@st-MOF 
and Hup A@Lf-st-MOF in each well, respectively., and incubated for 
4 h. Except for the normal control group, the same volume of fresh 
medium was added, the other groups were added with equal concen­
tration of H2O2 in the medium, then incubated for 24 h. The medium 
was discarded, 100 μL of 7% CCK-8 solution diluted with incomplete 
medium was added, and incubated for 2 h. The absorbance was 
measured at 450 nm with an microplate reader to calculate the cell 
viability. 
Protective effect on scopolamine-induced injury in PC12 cells: The 
protective effects of Hup A@st-MOF and Hup A@Lf-st-MOF on 
scopolamine-injured PC12 cells were evaluated by measuring cell 
viability using the CCK-8 assay, and the procedure was performed as 
described above. In addition, PC12 cell suspension was inoculated in 6- 
well plates at 3 × 105 cells/well, cultured routinely for 24 h, washed 
once with PBS, added 2 mL of incomplete medium containing Hup 
A@st-MOF and Hup A@Lf-st-MOF (final concentration of Hup A was 
0.1 μM), respectively, and equal volume of fresh incomplete medium 
was added to the normal control group and the model control group, 
incubated for 4 h, and added scopolamine at a concentration of 8 mM, 
incubated for 24 h, washed with cold PBS, trypsin digested, and cells 
were washed once with Bingding Buffer, 100 μL of 7% fluorescein iso­
thiocyanate solution was added, incubated at 4 ◦C for 30 min, 100 μL of 
10% propidium iodide solution was added for staining for 5 min, washed 
with PBS containing 2% fetal bovine serum, and finally cells were 
resuspended with 500 μL of PBS containing 2% fetal bovine serum, and 
assayed by flow cytometry. 
2.11. Brain tissue imaging 
Sodium carbonate‑sodium bicarbonate buffer 1 mL (0.1 M sodium 
carbonate buffer, pH 9.3) with a concentration of 0.5 mg/mL of lacto­
ferrin and human serum albumin (HSA) were respectively mixed with 
100 μL of 50 mg/mL of Cy5.5-NHS in dimethyl sulfoxide solution, 
respectively, and the mixture was stirred at 25 ◦C and protected from 
light for 1 h. The samples were centrifuged at 3000 ×g for 10 min in 
ultrafiltration tubes with a molecular weight cut-off of 3 kD to remove 
the ungrafted cy5.5 to obtain cy5.5-modified lactoferrin and HSA, which 
were used to replace Hup A in the preparation of cy5.5-labelled nano­
particles (cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF and cy5.5@HSA-st-MOF), and additionally 
prepared HA-GT MNs containing these nanoparticles (MN-cy5.5@Lf-st- 
MOF and MN-cy5.5@HSA-st-MOF). 
Thirty rats were randomly divided into 6 groups of 5 rats each, and 
administered as follows: (1) Control: an equal volume of saline was 
injected nasally; (2) TMN-cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF: MN-cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF was 
pricked into the pre-depilated skin of the abdomen of the rats until 
dissolution, and the area where it was administered was covered with a 
sterile dressing; (3) i.v. cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF: cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF saline so­
lution was injected intravenously; (4) cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF: cy5.5@Lf-st- 
MOF saline solution was dripped into the nasal cavity of rats; (5) MN- 
cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF and (6) MN-cy5.5@HSA-st-MOF: rats were supine 
and the toothbrush-like microneedle patch was carefully inserted into 
the nasal cavity with the microneedles pointing downward for 5–10 mm 
to reach the olfactory region (Fig. S1), and the microneedles were 
pricked into the nasal mucosa by applying a downward pressure for 10 s 
until all the microneedles were dissolved, then the support stick was 
taken out. 
The rats were anaesthetised with 5% chloral hydrate before admin­
istration, and the dose of cy5.5 was 80 μg per rat. After administration, 
the rats were executed at different time points, and the brain tissues 
were exfoliated and formalin-fixed for 30 min. Fluorescence images of 
the brain tissues of each group were captured (Ex/Em of Cy5.5-NHS: 
676 nm/707 nm) by IVIS Lumina XR Small Animal Imager (Perkin 
Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA). 
2.12. Establishment and administration of scopolamine and D-galactose 
& AlCl3-induced memory impairment model in rats 
Eighty rats were randomly grouped of 5 rats each, and Hup A 
preparations were administered respectively at a dose (Hup A) of 0.15 
mg/kg/day as follows: (1) Nasal drip: an equal volume of saline (Normal 
and Model groups), saline solution with a Hup A concentration of 0.6 
mg/mL (Free Hup A group), and Hup A@ Lf-st-MOF saline solution (Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF group) were respectively slowly dripped 5–10 mm into 
the nasal cavity; (2) Microneedle administration: Hup A-free micro­
needles (Blank MNs), MN-Hup A@st-MOF, and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
groups were given at 5–10 mm nasal cavity, and the TMN-Hup A@Lf-st- 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
717
MOF group placed the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF penetrated into the pre- 
depilated skin of rat abdomen. Isoflurane inhalation anaesthesia was 
given with a MATRX small animal gas inhalation anaesthesia machine 
(Midmark Corporation, Versailles, OH, USA) during administration. 
The scopolamine modelling group was administered once a day for 
21 consecutive days, and on days 15–21, rats in the Normal group were 
injected intraperitoneally with an equal amount of saline, and rats in the 
other groups were injected intraperitoneally with 4.5 mg/kg of scopol­
amine per day. Half an hour after each injection of scopolamine, the rats 
were subjected to a Morris water maze test. 
In the D-galactose & AlCl3 modelling group, 150 mg/kg of D-galac­
tose was injected intraperitoneally every day, and 24 mg/kg of AlCl3 was 
given by gavage for 90 consecutive days to establish the memory 
impairment model in rats. The Normal group was injected intraperito­
neally with the same volume of saline by gavage. On the 46th day of the 
experiment, Hup A preparations at a dose (Hup A) of 0.15 mg/kg/day 
were respectively administered at the same time of modelling for 45 
consecutive days. And on the 84th day of the experiment, the rats in 
each group were subjected to a Morris water maze test. 
2.13. Morris water maze test 
The platform of XR-XM101 Intelligent Morris water maze (Shanghai 
XinSoft Information Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) was set 
above the water surface, and the rats were put into the swimming pool to 
observe whether they could climb up to the platform, and to judge the 
swimming ability and eyesight of the rats. 
The platform was hidden below the water surface, and the time taken 
by the rats to climb onto the platform was recorded (latency period). If 
the rats could not climb onto the platform for >60 s, the time was 
recorded as 60 s, and the rats were guided to climb onto the platform and 
stand for 15 s to help them remember the position of the platform. The 
experiment lasted for 5 days, and the rats were trained 3 times a day at 
fixed time periods (from 3 different quadrants other than the quadrant 
where the platform was located), and the average time of the latency 
period of the 3 training sessions was taken as the training performance of 
the rat on that day. On the second day after the localisation navigation 
experiment, the platform was removed, and the rats were placed into the 
water from the quadrant opposite to the platform, and the swimming 
trajectories, the number of times the rats crossed the platform, and the 
time they stayed in the periphery of the platform within 60 s were 
recorded to evaluate the spatial localisation ability of the rats. 
2.14. In vivo pharmacodynamic test 
After the Morris water maze test, the rats were anaesthetized, blood 
was taken from the abdominal aorta and serum was separated, saline 
was used for perfusion, and the rats were executed, the brain tissue was 
quickly peeled off and weighed, the hippocampal tissue and cortex were 
separated on ice and weighed, and the following tests were carried out 
respectively: (1) Brain index: the ratio of brain weight to body weight 
was recorded as the brain index. (2) Elisa assay: hippocampal and 
cortical tissues were added with saline and homogenised with a Tis­
sueLyser II tissue homogeniser (QIAGEN, Dusseldorf, Germany), then 
the tissue homogenate and serum were tested for malondialdehyde 
(MDA), Glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px), serum superoxide dismutase 
(SOD), acetylcholinesterase, Tau and p-Tau, according to the in­
structions of the Elisa kit manufacturer, respectively. (3) Hematoxylin 
and eosin (H&E) staining analysis: brain tissues were fixed with 4% 
paraformaldehyde, embedded in paraffin wax, sliced (thickness: 4 μm) 
along the coronal profile, routinely performed H&E staining, and the 
pathological changes were observed by optical microscope. (4) Western 
blot analysis: brain tissue was fully lysed with cell tissue lysate, and 10 
μL of lysate was mixed with sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) loading buffer, heated at 100 ◦C for 5 min, 
cooled on ice, centrifuged at 12,000 ×g, and 20 μL of supernatant was 
loaded into 10% SDS-PAGE for separation by using the PowerPacTMHC 
electrophoresis instrument (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) at 
140 V. Subsequently, the membrane was transferred by Semi-Dry cell 
using Trans-Blot® semi-dry transfer cell (Bio-Rad), the membrane was 
blocked at 4 ◦C overnight, washed with TBST for 15 min (3 times), then 
incubated with primary antibody at 37 ◦C for 2 h, washed with TBST for 
10 min (4 times), followed by incubation with the secondary antibody 
according to the same procedure as that of treating by the primary 
antibody. The membrane was then treated with Super-GL enhanced 
chemiluminescence detection reagent for colour development, and the 
photos were analysed by Gel-Pro Analyser software (Media Cybernetics, 
Inc., Rockville, MD, USA). (5) Immunohistochemical analysis: paraffin 
sections of brain tissue were deparaffinised, repaired with sodium citrate 
buffer and treated with 10% H2O2, then blocked with 2.5% goat serum 
for 1 h. The sections were incubated with primary antibody at 4 ◦C for 
12 h and with secondary antibody at room temperature for 30 min, then 
developed the colour with diaminobenzidine for 2 min, and then added 
with deionised water to terminate the reaction, photographed by optical 
microscope, and the photographs were analysed with the software of 
Image Pro plus 6.0 software (Media Cybernetics, Inc.). 
2.15. Biocompatibility 
Rats were randomly grouped of 5 rats each. The normal and model 
groups were given 50 μL/each time of saline and 1% aqueous sodium 
deoxycholate solution nasally, respectively, and administered once a 
day; the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group and the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF- 
recovery group were both intranasal administration of toothbrush-like 
MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF patches. The Hup A was administered at a dose 
of 0.15 mg/kg/day, and it was consecutively administered for 6 days. 
The MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF, normal and model groups were anaes­
thetised with 5% chloral hydrate by intraperitoneal injection on day 7 
and then humanely executed and sampled, whereas the MN-Hup A@Lf- 
st-MOF-recovery group was sampled after 3 days of recovery from the 
last administration of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF. In the normal group and 
MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group, the nasal cavity was irrigated with saline 
and the nasal lavage fluid was collected before execution, and then 
blood was collected from the abdominal aorta and centrifuged at 3000 
×g for 10 min to obtain the serum; the nasal lavage fluid was centrifuged 
at 4 ◦C for 10 min at 12,000 ×g, the precipitate was collected, and the 
microbial community diversity was examined by conventional DNA 
extraction, PCR amplification, fluorescent quantification of PCR prod­
ucts, Miseq library construction, and Miseq sequencing. Additionally, 
serum was analysed by TBA-40FR automatic biochemical analyser 
(Toshiba Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) for alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total bilirubin (TBIL), creati­
nine (CR), urea (UR), and serum total protein concentration (TP). 
Nasal tissues were separated from each group of rats, and the viscera 
of normal group and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group were taken simul­
taneously and washed with saline. Nasal tissue samples of normal group 
and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group were divided into two parts, one of 
which was fixed with 4% glutaraldehyde, and then nasal cilia 
morphology was observed by SEM. The other one, together with viscera 
tissues as well as nasal samples of the other groups, was fixed with 10% 
formalin, paraffin embedded by Histostar Tissue Embedder (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), sliced, dehydrated with 
Excelsior AS automatic tissue dehydrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific 
Inc.), stained with H&E by a VaristainTM Gemini ES automatic staining 
machine (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.), and observed the pathological 
changes under a microscope. 
2.16. Statistical analysis 
Data were expressed as mean ± SD, t-test was used for comparison 
between two groups, and the homogeneity of variance between multiple 
groups was analysed by one-way ANOVA. p < 0.05 was considered to be 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
718
statistically different. 
3. Results 
3.1. Phytosterol modification enhanced the physical stability of γ-CD- 
MOF in water 
We first synthesized potassium-based MOF and then modified with 
γ-CD to improve the drug-loading performance of the nanocarrier. The 
physical stability of γ-CD-MOF in water was enhanced by coating with 
stigmasterol. The main characteristic absorptions of stigmasterol in the 
FT-IR spectra are as follows: hydroxyl stretching vibration peak at 3350 
cm−1, saturated hydrocarbon stretching vibration peak at 2934 cm−1 
and trans-disubstituted olefin at 970 cm−1 (Fig. 1B). γ-CD-MOF has a 
free hydroxyl stretching vibration peak at 3391 cm−1. st-MOF is similar 
to γ-CD-MOF in terms of characteristic FT-IR peak positions. No new 
functional group characteristic absorption peak was observed in st-MOF 
at 3395 cm−1, suggesting that no new groups were generated or cova­
lently cross-linked by the stigmasterol modification of γ-CD-MOF. The 
hydroxyl absorption peak of st-MOF is slightly red-shifted by hydrogen 
bonding of the hydroxyl group of stigmasterol to the carrier hydroxyl 
group compared to that of γ-CD-MOF. 
The XRD characteristic peaks of γ-CD-MOF are consistent with those 
reported (Fig. 1C) [23], suggesting the successful preparation of γ-CD- 
MOF. st-MOF has a characteristic diffraction peak similar to that of 
γ-CD-MOF, with both characteristic peaks at 16◦(2θ) and no significant 
difference in peak shape, indicating that st-MOF and γ-CD-MOF have a 
consistent cubic crystal structure and that the modification of stigmas­
terol did not damage the integrity of the crystal structure. The XRD 
patterns of st-MOF after 6 h and 12 h in water were also examined, and 
the characteristic diffraction peaks appeared at 16.56◦and 16.52◦
respectively, which were consistent with the positions of the charac­
teristic peaks of st-MOF, suggesting that the surface modification of 
stigmasterol improved the physical stability of γ-CD-MOF in water. In 
addition, the st-MOF may be partially disintegrated by prolonged 
exposure to water, thus affecting the peak patterns of the characteristic 
peaks. 
The contact angle of st-MOF is 40.4◦± 1◦, which is double that of the 
no stigmasterol-modified γ-CD-MOF (19.5◦± 3◦) (Fig. S2), indicating 
that the modification of stigmasterol provided hydrophobic properties 
to γ-CD-MOF, which inhibited water permeating into γ-CD-MOF struc­
tures and thus improved the physical stability in water. The SEM mi­
crographs showed γ-CD-MOF are cubic in shape, with a uniform 
distribution and a particle size of approximately 300 nm (Fig. 1D). The 
st-MOF has the same cubic crystal structure as the γ-CD-MOF. The st- 
MOF structure remained cubic after 12 h in water, while the γ-CD- 
MOF structure collapsed after 12 h in 99% relative humidity, further 
confirming that the stigmasterol modification enhanced the physical 
stability of the γ-CD-MOF structure in water. 
The carriers were immersed in Hup A chloroform solutions for drug 
loading, and the drug loading increased with increasing Hup A con­
centration, loading time and solvent temperature, but began to decrease 
after 6 h due to desorption of the drug from the carrier or disintegration 
of the carrier structure. In addition, the mass ratio of γ-CD-MOF to drug 
did not change significantly on the drug loading. Therefore, for drug 
loading process, with the Hup A concentration 30 mg/mL (Hup A:γ-CD- 
MOF = 1:2, w/w) in 50 ◦C chloroform and loading for 6 h were 
preferred, and the resulting Hup A@st-MOF had a loading of 15.04 ±
0.44% (Fig. S3). 
The FT-IR spectra of Hup A@st-MOF and st-MOF showed a broad 
hydroxyl stretching vibration peak at 3384 cm−1 and 3383 cm−1 
(Fig. 1E), and the FT-IR spectra of st-MOF before and after loading 
remained consistent without the characteristic absorption peak of Hup 
A, suggesting that Hup A dispersed in the pores and cavities of st-MOF 
rather than being adsorbed on the carrier surface. The distribution of 
Hup A in st-MOF was further confirmed by XRD, with a crystalline peak 
at 2θ = 10.6◦for Hup A and a characteristic peak at 2θ = 10.66◦for the 
physical mixture of Hup A and st-MOF (Fig. 1F), suggesting that a simple 
physical mixture did not change the crystalline structure of Hup A. In 
contrast, the crystalline characteristic peak of Hup A disappeared 
completely in Hup A@st-MOF, suggesting a transformation of Hup A 
from the crystalline to the amorphous or molecular state. In addition, 
the positions and peak shapes of the characteristic peaks of st-MOF and 
Hup A@st-MOF did not change significantly, indicating that the loading 
process of Hup A did not affect the lattice structure of the carriers. 
3.2. Lactoferrin modification provided active targeting of st-MOF to 
16HBE cells 
C6@st-MOF was used to evaluate cellular uptake. C6 concentrations 
(X) of 0.2–6.25 μg/mL showed a linear relationship with absorbance (Y) 
with a regression equation of Y = 3096.1× + 879.68 (r = 0.999). 
With increasing lactoferrin concentration, the prepared C6@Lf-st- 
MOF showed an increase in C6 fluorescence intensity in the 16HBE 
cells after co-incubation, demonstrating lactoferrin-mediated specific 
adhesion (Fig. S4). When the lactoferrin concentration reached 4 mg/ 
mL, the fluorescence intensity of cellular uptake of the prepared C6@Lf- 
st-MOF was the highest, but when the lactoferrin concentration 
continued to increase, free lactoferrin competed with the lactoferrin- 
modified carrier for adhesion, and the fluorescence intensity in the 
cells decreased. Lf-st-MOF was therefore preferably prepared at 4 mg/ 
mL of lactoferrin (lactoferrin:st-MOF = 4/15, w/w) and the adsorption 
of lactoferrin by st-MOF was 84.26 ± 1.91%. 
Lactoferrin modification did not affect carrier loading, the drug 
loading of Hup A@Lf-st-MOF was 14.85 ± 0.39%, which was close to 
Hup A@st-MOF (p > 0.05). 
Both Hup A@st-MOF and Hup A@Lf-st-MOF showed a cubic crystal 
structure with a homogeneous distribution and a particle size of about 
250 nm in TEM micrographs (Fig. 1G). Compared to st-MOF, a modified 
layer was visible on the surface of Lf-st-MOF nanoparticles. 
3.3. Dissolving microneedles containing Hup A@Lf-st-MOF had excellent 
physical properties 
GT was synthesized and used as a microneedle patch base. FT-IR 
spectra showed a broad and strong absorption polyhydroxy stretching 
vibration peak at 3389 cm−1 for tannic acid, and at 1714 cm−1 for the 
C––O stretching vibration peak in carboxylic acid (Fig. S5A) [24]. The 
gelatine has absorption peaks at 3300 cm−1, 1630 cm−1, 1533 cm−1 and 
1230 cm−1, corresponding to the N–H stretching vibration (amide A), 
the C––O stretching vibration (amide I band), the N–H in-plane bending 
vibration (amide II band) and the C–N stretching vibration (amide III 
band) peaks, respectively [25]. In GT, the O–H in the tannic acid and 
the N–H in the gelatine combine in a multi-point hydrogen bond to 
form a stable structure with a distinct absorption peak at 3275 cm−1. 
Compared to the characteristic absorption peak of gelatine, there is no 
significant change in the peak shape, confirming that no covalent cross- 
linking or new groups are produced in GT, but rather a weak bonding 
interaction such as hydrogen bonding. Due to the hydrogen bonding 
interaction, the electron cloud density changed and a slight redshift 
occurred in some bands, with the positions of the amide III and amide II 
bands changing to 1200 cm−1 and 1527 cm−1, respectively, which 
should be attributed to the shortening of the distance between the 
modified gelatine molecules and the enhanced interaction due to the 
hydrogen bonding of the N–H in gelatine with the hydroxyl groups in 
tannic acid. In the ultraviolet absorption spectrum, both tannic acid and 
GT have absorption peaks at 288 nm (Fig. S5B). Further identification by 
ultraviolet spectroscopy, the tannic acid molecule is a polyphenolic 
structure with a p-Π conjugation of the benzene ring to the hydroxyl 
group, which results in a characteristic benzene ring band around 270 
nm, whereas the gelatin molecule without a benzene ring structure does 
not have a corresponding ultraviolet absorption peak at that 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
719
wavelength. The presence of a benzene ring structure introduced by 
tannic acid in GT shows a ultraviolet absorption peak consistent with 
that of tannic acid, further confirming the successful cross-linking of 
tannic acid with gelatine with the cross-linking degree of 10.19 ± 1.3%. 
The dissolving microneedles were prepared by injection molding 
method (Fig. 2A). The microneedle patch base formed by GT is flat, free 
of wrinkles and breakage, and flexible and bendable. The HA structured 
microneedles array is distributed 15 × 15 and has a 100% demolding 
rate, with microneedles fitting closely to the base without warping and 
separation, while the dissolving microneedle-based transnasal drug de­
livery system was constructed with a microneedle patch tightly attached 
to a support stick, forming a toothbrush-like microneedle patch with the 
microneedles pointing outwards (Fig. 2B). The microneedles were intact 
without bending or fracture. The microneedles are conical in shape with 
a length of 430 μm, a conical bottom diameter of 280 μm, a microneedle 
tip diameter of 10 μm and a microneedle spacing of 580 μm. The 
appearance of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF is indistinguishable from that of 
microneedles without drug (Fig. 2C). The Hup A@Lf-st-MOF retained 
their cubic crystal structure after loading into microneedles (Fig. 2D), 
ensuring that their drug delivery properties were maintained during 
microneedle administration. 
The C6@Lf-st-MOF was dispersed into HA microneedles and the 
rhodamine B-labelled GT base was used to prepare microneedle patches, 
showing uniform distribution of C6 fluorescence in the needles (Fig. 2E), 
indicating uniform distribution of Lf-st-MOF; the GT layer only showed 
red fluorescence (rhodamine B), indicating that the base and the 
microneedles were distinct and there was no miscibility between HA and 
GT, ensuring accurate needles delivery of drug dose. 
The Hup A in MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF was 2.33 ± 0.16 μg/mg, with 
no significant change (p > 0.05) for 1 month by storage in airtight 
storage at room temperature. In addition, at a relative humidity of 80 ±
5% at room temperature, the moisture absorption of HA-GT MNs was 
between that of microneedle patches respectively prepared with HA (HA 
MNs) and gelatin (Gelatin MNs) alone (Fig. S6). Compared to the HA 
MNs, which were softened and deformed by moisture absorption after 3 
h, the moisture absorption of the HA-GT MNs decreased slightly, sug­
gesting that the GT base is less susceptible to moisture absorption. The 
moisture absorption of HA-GT MNs increased compared to Gelatin MNs 
Fig. 2. Characteristics of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF. (A) Schematic diagram of the process of preparing toothbrush-like MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF patch by injection 
molding method. (B) Appearance of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF patch (microneedles array: 15 × 15), which was flexible and fabricated into toothbrush-shaped 
microneedle patch (3.72 mm × 1.14 mm, microneedles array: 2 × 5, adhesive to a disposable sterile syringe needle [diameter 0.3 mm, length 13 mm; tip 
removed]). (C) SEM micrographs of microneedles without Hup A@Lf-st-MOF (HA-GT MNs) and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF. (D) SEM micrographs shows Hup A@Lf-st- 
MOFs held their original forms after MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF was dissolved in water. (E) Fluorescence micrographs of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF made by labelling Lf-st- 
MOF with the green fluorescent probe coumarin 6 and GT with the red fluorescent probe rhodamine B, respectively. (F) Force-displacement curves shows the 
mechanical strength of the microneedles was enhanced by loading CD-MOFs. Abbreviations: GT, tannic acid cross-linked gelatin; HA, hyaluronic acid; MN, 
microneedles; HA-GT MNs, MN patches with GT as the base and HA as MNs; MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF, HA-GT MNs loaded with Hup A@Lf-st-MOF. (For interpretation 
of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
720
due to the introduction of HA in MNs, indicating that GT as a base re­
duces the hygroscopicity of microneedles, but HA microneedles are 
highly hygroscopic and therefore need to be stored in a dry 
environment. 
The mechanical strength of microneedles generally needs to be 
0.098 N/needle to penetrate the stratum corneum [26]. Our unloaded 
HA-GT MNs were 0.254 N/needle, while the loading of Lf-st-MOF, which 
is mechanically stiffer than HA, increased the mechanical strength of 
MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF to 0.301 N/needle (Fig. 2F), both of which were 
able to penetrate the stratum corneum and were more likely to penetrate 
mucosal tissue with less mechanical strength than the stratum corneum 
[27,28]. 
The microneedles were further labelled with rhodamine B and the 
depth of fluorescence penetration into the pig nasal mucosa was traced 
using confocal laser scanning microscopy tomography. We found that 
the diameter of the micropores formed in the nasal mucosa gradually 
decreased with increasing depth (Fig. 3A), which was consistent with 
the shape of the microneedles. Due to the elastic deformation of the 
nasal mucosal tissue under pressure, the area where the microneedles 
were penetrated was depressed, so the penetration depth is less than the 
microneedles length. The fluorescence was almost invisible at a depth of 
270 μm in the tissue, indicating a penetration depth of approximately 
270 μm. Moreover, the longitudinal section of mucosal tissue showed an 
orderly arrangement of holes formed by microneedles penetration until 
the holes disappeared in a 250 μm thick section (Fig. 3B), which closed 
to the longitudinal section determination, demonstrating the strong 
mucosal penetration ability of microneedles to deliver drugs across the 
nasal mucosal barrier. In contrast, the microneedles penetrated the skin 
to a depth of approximately 240 μm and longitudinal sections showed a 
depth of approximately 200 μm (Fig. S7), confirming the higher me­
chanical strength of the stratum corneum compared to the nasal mucosa. 
In addition, microneedles penetrated into the nasal mucosa dissolved 
completely within 10 s (Fig. 3C), compared to 5 min in the less watery 
skin (Fig. S8), indicating a faster process of transnasal drug delivery. 
Nasal mucosa is mainly composed of loose connective tissue rich in 
water, in order to visualize and dynamically observe the dissolution 
process of microneedles in an aqueous environment, we made a 
hydrogel membrane constructed by mixing agar and konjaku flour with 
>90% (w/v) water. The membrane was solid, colorless and transparent 
jelly-like at room temperature, which facilitated the penetration and 
observation of the dynamic dissolution process of microneedles. We 
further observed that the microneedles labelled with methylene blue 
rapidly dissolved completely within 5 s after penetrating the composite 
hydrogel membrane and the blue dye spread rapidly around (Movie S1, 
Fig. S9). These findings illustrated that the prepared microneedles were 
able to dissolve rapidly in water-rich tissues along with drug release and 
away from the insoluble GT base. 
3.4. MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF effectively increased nose-to-brain drug 
delivery 
Hup A@Lf-st-MOF and Hup A@st-MOF significantly increased the 
solubility of Hup A in water, raising the difference in drug concentration 
between the two sides of the isolated porcine nasal mucosa in the 
improved Franz diffusing cells, thereby accelerating drug diffusion and 
enhancing transnasal permeation ex vivo. Compared to Hup A@st-MOF 
without lactoferrin modification, the Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group showed a 
decrease in cumulative drug penetration due to the adsorption of lac­
toferrin onto the surface of the nasal mucosa to form an aqueous protein 
film, which slowed the penetration of liposoluble Hup A molecules (p <
0.05) (Fig. 4A). Microneedles assistance significantly increased the 
amount of drug penetration, with the transnasal flux of Hup A in the MN- 
Hup A@st-MOF and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF groups being 1.76 and 1.73 
times higher than those in the free drug group, respectively, but there 
was no statistical difference in drug fluxes between the MN-Hup A@st- 
MOF and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF groups (p > 0.05) (Fig. 4B), suggesting 
a predominance of the enhanced permeation of microneedles in the 
transnasal delivery of drugs, and indicating the advantage of 
microneedle-assisted drug delivery over passive administration of 
lactoferrin-mediated nanocarriers alone for transnasal drug delivery 
into the brain. 
We further analysed the behaviour of C6-labelled nanocarriers 
penetrating through the nasal mucosa by nanoparticle tracking analysis 
technique. No fluorescent nanoparticles were detected in the Franz 
diffusing cells' receiving pools of both MN-Lf-st-MOF and the micro­
needles without nanoparticles (Fig. 4C, Movie S2), indicating that the 
composition of the nanoparticles and microneedles without fluorescent 
labelling did not interfere with the detection results; whereas the fluo­
rescent nanoparticles were detected in both C6@Lf-st-MOF and MN- 
C6@Lf-st-MOF groups, especially in the MN-C6@Lf-st-MOF group, 
where the number of fluorescent nanoparticles was the highest in the 
receiving solution, which illustrated that some of the nanocarriers 
Fig. 3. Microneedles penetration depth into porcine nasal mucosa ex vivo and their dissolution properties. (A) and (B) The fluorescence micrographs of 
transverse and longitudinal sections of porcine nasal mucosa vertically punctured by MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF labelled with the red fluorescent probe rhodamine B, 
respectively, showing the depth of penetration up to 270 μm. (C) Dissolution process of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF punctured porcine nasal mucosa. (For interpretation of 
the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
721
remained intact across the nasal mucosa, while microneedle assistance 
substantially increased the number of nanoparticles across the nasal 
mucosa. 
The in vitro cellular uptake and in vivo distribution results confirmed 
the successful in vivo nose-to-brain delivery of these nanocarriers via 
intranasal administration. Each Hup A-free vector (CD-MOF, st-MOF 
and Lf-st-MOF) was biosafe for PC12 cells, which is a commonly used 
neural cell line, with cell viability above 99% at concentrations ranging 
from 0 to 1500 μg/mL (Fig. S10). Compared with the st-MOF group, cell 
viability in the Lf-st-MOF group was slightly increased, probably due to 
the binding of lactoferrin to PC12 cell membranes through membrane- 
associated proteoglycans, causing PC12 cells to undergo anchorage- 
independent growth and promoting cell growth [29]. In the Hup A 
formulation treatment groups, when the Hup A concentration was in the 
range of 0–50 μM, Hup A@Lf-st MOF and Hup A@st-MOF groups both 
had cell viability above 90% (Fig. S11). For the clinical application of 
Hup A injection administered intramuscularly at a dose of 0.2 mg/day 
for the treatment of benign memory impairment, which resulted in in 
vivo drug concentrations well below 50 μM that examined above and 
therefore presumably good cytocompatibility of Hup A. However, when 
the Hup A concentration ≥200 μM, the cell viability and IC50 values of 
the Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group (213.45 ± 11.05 μM) were significantly 
lower than those of the Hup A@st-MOF group (298.10 ± 16.00 μM) (p <
0.01), which was attributed to the specific adhesion of lactoferrin to 
PC12 cells, resulting in the uptake of more Hup A that producing greater 
cytotoxicity. As shown in Fig. 4D-E, the lactoferrin-mediated ligand- 
receptor binding strategy successfully harvested more nanoparticles 
uptake by PC12 cells, as evidenced by the observably higher 
fluorescence intensity of cells in the C6@Lf-st-MOF group than in the 
C6@st-MOF group (p < 0.01). 
The cy5.5 fluorescence distribution in the brain was traced to assess 
the performance of drug delivery to brain. Transnasal drug delivery is 
mainly via the trigeminal and olfactory nerve pathways, directly into the 
brain via the nose, bypassing the BBB, and therefore has a faster dis­
tribution and higher uptake in the brain than the trans-BBB pathway of 
the systemic circulation (Fig. 4F). Fluorescence was detected in the brain 
within 1.5 h after administration in all cy5.5-labelled groups, except for 
the non-fluorescent dye-labelled carrier group (Fig. 4G). Fluorescence in 
the intranasal administration group was first concentrated in the olfac­
tory bulb region and later spread to the whole brain. After 1 h, the 
fluorescence in the brain of each group was ranked from strong to weak: 
MN-cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF > cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF > MN-cy5.5@st-MOF > i.v. 
cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF > TMN-cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF. The MN-cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF 
group had the fastest intranasal brain transit rate, the highest fluores­
cence intensity and the widest distribution in the brain, indicating that 
the microneedles intranasal administration significantly promoted nasal 
mucosal penetration and increased brain uptake of nanoparticles, while 
the lactoferrin modification further increased nanoparticles entry into 
the brain through specific adhesion to mucosal epithelial cells and nerve 
cells. In addition, the cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF group, which was administered 
by nasal drip, had the second fastest nasal-brain transit rate, showing a 
dual effect of entering the cerebrospinal fluid mainly via the trigeminal 
pathway or olfactory pathway and combined with lactoferrin-mediated 
brain-targeted delivery, so that fluorescence was detected mainly in the 
cerebral cortex 0.5 h after administration, but due to the rapid clearance 
of nasal cilia, the amount of nanoparticles entering the brain was limited 
Fig. 4. Evaluation of transnasal delivery of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF into the healthy rat's brain. (A) and (B) Ex vivo cumulative transnasal mucosal permeation 
profiles and permeation fluxes of Hup A in different carriers measured by modified Franz diffusion cell method, respectively; n = 3. (C) Scatter plot fitted to the 
detection of C6@Lf-st-MOF by Nanosight NS300 with fluorescence sorting assisted by microneedles for massive crossing of porcine nasal mucosa ex vivo; n = 3. (D) 
and (E) Flow cytometric histogram and statistical analysis of cell fluorescence intensity of C6-labelled nanocarriers after 2 h of co-incubation with PC12 cells in vitro 
measured by flow cytometry fluorescence sorting, respectively; n = 3. (F) Schematic diagram of the transit routes of nanoparticles through different parts of the nasal 
cavity. (G) In vivo fluorescence imaging of rat brain tissue captured by in vivo imaging system with NIR fluorescent probe cy5.5-labelled nanocarriers after different 
durations of administration by different modes; n = 5. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. Abbreviations: C6, coumarin 6; C6@st-MOF, C6-labelled st-MOF; C6@Lf-st-MOF, C6- 
labelled Lf-st-MOF; TMN-Lf-cy5.5-st-MOF, transdermal administration of MN-Lf-cy5.5-st-MOF. 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
722
and eventually intracerebral fluorescence intensity was significantly 
weaker than in the MN-cy5.5@Lf-st-MOF group. 
3.5. Hup A@Lf-st-MOF enhanced the ameliorative effect of Hup A on 
damaged neuronal cells in vitro 
We evaluated the protective effect of Hup A@Lf-st-MOF on PC12 
cells damaged by oxidative stress of H2O2. PC12 cell viability decreased 
with increasing H2O2 concentration in the medium, and cell viability 
was about 46.5% when the H2O2 concentration was 120 μM (Fig. S12). 
When the Hup A concentration was 0.01 μM in the Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
group and the Hup A concentration was 0.1 μM in the Hup A@st-MOF 
group, the 120 μM H2O2 treated P12 cell viability was significantly 
increased compared with the untreated group, and the cell viability in 
the Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group was significantly higher than that in the 
Hup A@st-MOF group due to the lactoferrin-mediated targeting effect 
(p < 0.05) (Fig. 5A). 
We additionally examined the protective effects of Hup A prepara­
tions on the scopolamine-induced PC12 cell injury model. The cell 
viability gradually decreased with increasing scopolamine concentra­
tion, and the cell viability was 46.84 ± 4.99% at the scopolamine con­
centration of 8 mM (Fig. S13). The 8 mM scopolamine damaged PC12 
cell viability increased with increasing Hup A concentration in the range 
of 0.01–10 μM in both Hup A@st-MOF and Hup A@Lf-st-MOF groups 
(Fig. 5B). In the Hup A@st-MOF group, the highest cell viability of 73.41 
± 11.24% was observed at a Hup A concentration of 10 μM. In the Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF group, the cell viability was 75.98 ± 5.12% at a Hup A 
concentration of 0.1 μM, and the cell viability no longer increased 
significantly with increasing drug concentration. Thus, the Hup A@Lf- 
st-MOF exhibited stronger neuroprotective effects compared to the 
Hup A@st-MOF, further confirming the potentiating effect of 
lactoferrin-mediated targeted drug delivery. Subsequently, the protec­
tive effects of Hup A preparations on the scopolamine-induced injury 
model of PC12 cells was confirmed by apoptosis assay. The apoptosis of 
PC12 cells induced by scopolamine was mainly distributed in the late 
and dead cell quadrants, accounting for 15.41% and 23.39% of the total 
number of cells, respectively, in the flow cytometry pattern (Fig. 5C). 
When pretreatment with Hup A@st-MOF and Hup A@Lf-st-MOF, 
respectively, the number of apoptotic cells decreased and the number 
of viable cells increased to 64.74% and 77.76%, respectively. The neu­
roprotective effect of Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group was significantly better 
than that of Hup A@st-MOF group at a concentration of 0.1 μM of Hup A 
(p < 0.01) (Fig. 5D), and this finding was mutually verified with the 
results of cytotoxicity assay, suggesting that lactoferrin modification 
increased the uptake of Hup A by PC12 cells, resulting in stronger 
efficacy. 
3.6. MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF enhanced the amelioration of scopolamine- 
induced memory impairment in rats with neurological damage 
The administration and sampling of experimental animals are shown 
in Fig. 6A. In the place navigation training experiment, rats were trained 
for 5 consecutive days to remember the location of the platform. As the 
number of training days increased, the latency of the rats in each test 
group appeared to be shortened to different degrees, and the rats took 
less time to find the platform, learned to find it and remembered its 
location (Movie S3). Compared with the treatment group, the latency 
periods of the model control and microneedles without Hup A (Blank 
MNs) groups did not change significantly with increasing training time 
(Fig. 6B), suggesting that scopolamine caused memory impairment and 
restricted memory behaviour in rats, reducing their ability to identify 
and remember the location of the target platform. The time consumed to 
Fig. 5. Protection of Hup A-loaded nanocarriers on in vitro cultured PC12 cell injury model. (A) and (B) The effects of lactoferrin modification on drug-loaded 
nanoparticles to improve the viability of in vitro cultured PC12 cells damaged by H2O2 (12 μM) and scopolamine (8 mM), respectively, as determined by Cell 
Counting Kit-8 assay; n = 5. (C) and (D) Scatter plots and statistical analysis of the effect of Hup A-loaded nanoparticles in reducing scopolamine (8 mM)-induced 
apoptosis in in vitro cultured PC12 cells as determined by flow cytometry, respectively; n = 3. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
723
find the platform was significantly reduced in all Hup A preparations 
administration groups, indicating a protective effect of reversing mem­
ory deficits and anti-scopolamine neurological damage, with the best 
treatment effect in the Hup A@Lf-st-MOF and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
groups. 
The rats were then examined in a spatial probe test for the number of 
times they traversed the platform and the time consumed in the area 
around the platform within a fixed period of time, and their movement 
trajectories were mapped to further assess their learning and memory 
abilities. The rats in the model control and MN-Lf-st-MOF groups tra­
versed the platform less frequently and were unable to remember the 
location of the platform (Fig. 6C-D). Treatment with the Hup A prepa­
rations improved the memory and learning functions of the rats, with a 
significant increase in the number of platform traversals and prolonged 
Fig. 6. In vivo improvement effects of different administration modes of Hup A on scopolamine-induced memory impairment model in rats. (A) Schematic 
diagram of experimental animal grouping with drug administration and sampling. (B to E) Escape latency in the Morris water maze training, time consumed around 
the perimeter of the platform and number of times traversing the platform, and action trajectories, respectively, in the pathological model rats. (F) and (G) Brain 
indices and weights of tissues in the hippocampal region of rats in each group at the end of treatment, respectively. (H) Cholinergic index AchE, and oxidative stress 
indexes GSH-Px, MDA, and SOD in rat serum measured by Elisa. (I) and (J) AchE, GSH-Px, and MDA in homogenates of rat hippocampal area and cerebral cortex 
tissues measured by Elisa, respectively. (K) Micrographs of H&E-stained sections of rat cerebral cortex and hippocampal CA1, CA3, and DG regions, bars = 50 μm. (L) 
Western blot analysis of p-ERK1/2, ERK1/2, p-CREB, CREB, TrkB, and BDNF expression in rat brain tissues. (M) and (N) Tissue section micrographs and positive 
expression rate of PSD-95 distribution in rat brain tissues analysed by immunohistochemistry, bars = 50 μm, respectively. Compared with the model group, *p <
0.05, **p < 0.01; compared with the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group, #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01. n = 5. Abbreviations: AchE, acetylcholinesterase; BDNF, brain derived 
neurotrophic factor; CREB, cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein; ERK, extracellular regulated protein kinases; GSH-Px, glutathione peroxidase; H&E, 
hematoxylin & eosin; MDA, malondialdehyde; p-ERK, phosphorylated-ERK; p-CREB, phosphorylated-CREB; PSD-95, postsynaptic density protein PSD-95; SOD, 
superoxide dismutase; TrkB, tyrosine kinase receptor B. 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
724
exploration time around the platform, with the mean number of plat­
form traversals increasing to 2.6 and 2.2 in the Hup A@Lf-st-MOF and 
MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF groups, respectively, showing significant pre­
vention and improvement of scopolamine-induced memory impairment 
(p < 0.01). The spatial probe trails of the rats are shown in Fig. 6E. the 
rats' swimming trajectory was predominantly limbic, with no awareness 
of finding the platform and a significant lack of memory function, while 
the rats in the Hup A preparations treatment groups showed a significant 
improvement in memory and learning function, and their movements 
were convergent, moving in search of the location of the target platform 
and exploring the area around the platform several times, with the Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF groups having similar move­
ment trajectories, and the rats passing through the area where the 
platform was located and the surrounding area several times, showing 
that their spatial exploration process was purposeful. 
The cerebral indices of each group were next compared. The AD 
process was accompanied by hippocampal and cortical atrophy [30]. 
Compared with the normal control group, the model control group of 
rats had atrophy of the brain and a slight decrease in cerebral index, 
which was slightly improved by the administration of the Hup A prep­
aration, with the MN-Hup A@st-MOF, MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF and TMN- 
Hup A@Lf-st-MOF groups showing a significant increase in cerebral 
index compared to the model control group, but there was no significant 
difference between the treatment groups (Fig. 6F), suggesting that the 
improvement in cerebral index may be mainly produced by the physi­
cochemical stimulation at the time of administration. Hippocampal 
weight differed significantly between groups, and although hippocam­
pal weight increased in each treatment group compared to the model 
control group, there was no significant difference among the treatment 
groups (p > 0.05) (Fig. 6G), possibly because the scopolamine-induced 
model of memory impairment in rats had a limited effect on brain 
weight and failed to express AD disease characteristics on cerebral 
weight indices [31]. 
Acetylcholine is an important neurotransmitter, and compared to the 
normal control group, acetylcholinesterase activity in serum and hip­
pocampus was significantly increased in rats after intraperitoneal in­
jection of scopolamine (p < 0.01) (Fig. 6H-I), resulting in impaired 
neurotransmitter transmission and damage to the cholinergic system, 
which is one of the important pathogenic factors of AD. Hup A is a 
typical acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, and the Hup A preparations 
inhibited acetylcholinesterase activity in the following order: MN-Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF > Hup A@Lf-st-MOF > MN-Hup A@st-MOF ≈TMN- 
Hup A@Lf-st-MOF > Free Hup A. The MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group 
inhibited acetylcholinesterase activity more strongly than the Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF group; acetylcholinesterase activity in hippocampus and 
serum after treatment with MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF was not significantly 
different from the normal control group (p > 0.05) and returned to 
normal levels. The stronger inhibiting acetylcholinesterase activity in 
the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group compared to the TMN-Hup A@Lf-st- 
MOF group suggests that the intranasal administration of microneedle 
has a significant advantage. There was a slight decrease of acetylcho­
linesterase activity in cortical in the normal control group compared to 
the model control group, but no significant difference (p > 0.05), 
probably due to the more significant effect of scopolamine on cholin­
ergic damage in the hippocampal region of the brain; cortical acetyl­
cholinesterase activity was significantly decreased in both the Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF groups compared to the 
normal control group (p < 0.01) (Fig. 6I), suggesting that Hup A is 
widely distributed within the brain and enhances acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitory activity in the cerebral cortex. These results suggest that 
intranasal administration of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF effectively 
enhanced the inhibiting acetylcholinesterase activity and reduced 
cholinergic damage. 
The scopolamine-induced memory impairment model in rats not 
only affects the cholinergic system in the brain, but also exacerbates 
oxidative stress damage in the brain. GSH-Px, MDA and SOD are 
common indicators to evaluate the level of oxidative stress in the body. 
GSH-Px is an important peroxidolytic enzyme that can effectively 
scavenge free radicals and reduce peroxide damage, and its expression 
level reflects the body's ability to resist oxidative stress [32]. Compared 
with the normal control group, GSH-Px was significantly lower in the 
model control group (Fig. 6H-J), suggesting severe oxidative stress 
damage in the organism. Compared with the model control group, GSH- 
Px activity was increased in each treatment group, which significantly 
alleviated oxidative stress injury and contributed to the improvement of 
memory impairment in rats. The trend of GSH-Px level in hippocampus 
and serum was similar in all groups, and the elevated GSH-Px in each 
administration group was from largest to smallest: MN-Hup A@Lf-st- 
MOF > Hup A@Lf-st-MOF ≈TMN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF > MN-Hup A@st- 
MOF > Free Hup A, which was basically consistent with the trend of 
anti-acetylcholinesterase activity, further demonstrating the advantages 
of nose-to-brain delivery in treating neurological diseases, and 
microneedle-mediated intranasal administration significantly increased 
drug delivery to the brain, while lactoferrin-functionalized CD-MOFs 
further enhanced drug efficacy. SOD is another antioxidant enzyme 
widely found in living organisms that scavenges oxygen free radicals and 
blocks free radical damage. SOD acts as a repair enzyme in vivo and 
exerts the potential to prevent, delay and ameliorate many neurological 
disorders. The results of SOD assay in serum of rats in all groups were 
consistent with the results of GSH-Px (Fig. 6H), verifying that Hup A 
could improve oxidative stress damage in vivo caused by scopolamine 
and increase the antioxidant level, thus providing protection to neural 
cells. MDA is the end product of lipid peroxidation in organisms and 
directly reflects the degree of peroxidation in the organism. Compared 
with the normal control group, the MDA content in the serum (Fig. 6H), 
hippocampus (Fig. 6I) and cerebral cortex (Fig. 6J) of the model control 
group was significantly increased (p < 0.01), indicating that the 
oxidative damage in rats was serious, while the drug advance inter­
vention groups effectively inhibited the lipid peroxidation reaction in 
rats and significantly reduced the MDA content in serum and brain. 
Taken together, the results of the above tests showed that all the Hup A 
preparations administration groups effectively alleviated the peroxida­
tion response of the organism and reduced the oxidative stress damage 
in brain, thus improving the neurological disorders in rats. Notably, the 
MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group showed the strongest anti-oxidative stress 
effect, demonstrating that the microneedle-mediated nose-to-brain de­
livery strategy combined with lactoferrin-functionalized nanocarriers 
significantly enhanced the therapeutic effect of the drug in the brain. 
The pathological changes in the cerebral cortex, CA1, CA3 and DG 
areas of the hippocampus in each group are shown in Fig. 6K. In the 
hippocampal area of the normal control group, the pyramidal cells were 
regular in morphology, neatly and densely arranged, with large and 
round nuclei, light blue or blue in colour, clear nucleoli, abundant 
cytoplasm and clear hierarchy; the cortical neurons were abundant, 
evenly distributed, regular in morphology, and without glial cell hy­
perplasia. Compared with the normal control group, the hippocampal 
CA3 and DG areas of the model control group showed more wrinkled 
pyramidal cells, degeneration and necrosis, with deepened cell staining 
and indistinct nucleus-cytoplasm demarcation; the cortical layer showed 
more wrinkled neurons, with deepened cell staining and indistinct 
nucleus-cytoplasm demarcation. In the free Hup A group, pyramidal 
cells wrinkling was found in the CA3 and DG regions of the hippocam­
pus; more neuronal wrinkling and deepening of cell staining were found 
in the cortex. Some cells in the hippocampal CA1 area and cortex of the 
TMN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group were partially wrinkled with deepened 
staining, while wrinkled neurons were rare in the cortex of both the Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF groups. No significant ab­
normalities were seen in the hippocampal region of the MN-Hup A@Lf- 
st-MOF group compared with the normal control group, suggesting a 
significant protective effect of reversing neuronal cell injury. 
The neurological basis of brain learning and memory is the plasticity 
of the central nervous system, i.e. the morphological and functional 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
725
changes that occur in the nervous system to adapt or respond to envi­
ronmental changes, which is manifested by the brain's ability to perform 
functions and behaviours that it could not perform through learning and 
training. Synaptic plasticity is an important manifestation of brain 
plasticity, where continuous dynamic changes in synaptic morphology 
and function occur during neurotransmitter transmission [33]. The 
extracellular regulated protein kinases (ERK)-cyclic AMP responsive 
element binding protein (CREB)-BDNF (ERK-CREB-BDNF) signaling 
pathway has been reported to be involved in regulating synaptic plas­
ticity, helping to improve learning memory by activating this channel 
[34,35]. The ERK, which includes ERK1 and ERK2, transmit signals from 
the cell surface to the nucleus to promote neuronal survival, differen­
tiation and improved learning memory function. ERK is activated by 
phosphorylation and then acts on the downstream cytokine CREB, 
which contributes to the formation and consolidation of long-term 
memory. BDNF also promotes neuronal survival and neurogenesis, 
and BDNF further increases synaptic plasticity by binding to the Tyro­
sine Kinase receptor B (TrkB) and activating CREB. We found signifi­
cantly lower expression of p-ERK1/2/ERK1/2, p-CREB/CREB, TrkB and 
BDNF in the model control group compared to the normal control group 
(p < 0.01), and no significant difference between the MN-Lf-st-MOF 
group and the model control group (p > 0.05) (Fig. 6L). Compared to 
the model control group, the relative expression of p-ERK1/2 and ERK1/ 
2 increased in each Hup A preparation administration group, with the 
highest in the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group, followed by the Hup A@Lf- 
st-MOF group and the lowest in the Free Hup A group. Thanks to the 
special structure of nose-to-brain channel, the intranasal administration 
of nanocarriers promoted ERK phosphorylation more significantly than 
their transdermal administration. In addition, BDNF protein expression 
was upregulated and TrkB expression was slightly increased in each Hup 
A preparation administration group, which increased the binding of 
BDNF and TrkB and effectively promoted CREB activation and increased 
phosphorylated CREB expression, and the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group 
upregulated the expression of ERK-CREB-BDNF pathway most strongly. 
In conclusion, Hup A reversed scopolamine-induced memory impair­
ment and improved memory and learning via activating mediating ERK- 
CREB-BDNF pathway, while the combined delivery strategy of micro­
needles intranasal administration and lactoferrin-modified CD-MOFs 
exerted the best modulatory effect. 
We have continued to focus on changes in postsynaptic density 
protein PSD-95 (PSD-95) in the brain, which is an important component 
of PSD and an important scaffolding protein in excitatory synapses that 
organizes signal transduction and is involved in regulating synaptic 
plasticity and improving learning memory [36]. PSD-95 has been re­
ported to protect synapses from Aβ damage, and its down-regulated 
expression is a potential biomarker of synapses affected by Aβ in AD 
[37]. The positive expression of PSD-95 in the brain was significantly 
decreased in the model control group compared to the normal control 
group (p < 0.01), but increased by drug administration, and both 
microneedles and nanocarriers enhanced the effect of drug-regulated 
PSD-95, especially the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group had the most sig­
nificant effect (Fig. 6M-N). 
3.7. MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF enhanced the amelioration of D-galactose & 
AlCl3-induced senile memory impairment in rats 
The administration and sampling of experimental animals are shown 
in Fig. 7A. In the place navigation training experiment, as the number of 
training days increased, the time to reach the platform decreased in each 
group, suggesting that the rats gradually recognized and memorized the 
target position (Fig. 7B, Movie S4). The mean escape latency of the 
model control and microneedles without Hup A groups was higher than 
Fig. 7. In vivo improvement effects of different administration modes of Hup A on D-galactose & AlCl3-induced memory impairment model in rats. (A) 
Schematic diagram of experimental animal grouping with drug administration and sampling. (B to E) Escape latency in the Morris water maze training, time 
consumed around the perimeter of the platform and number of times traversing the platform, and action trajectories, respectively, in the pathological model rats. (F 
to H) Tau and p-Tau in serum, hippocampal area, and cerebral cortex tissues of rats in each group at the end of the treatment as determined by Elisa assay, 
respectively. (I) Western blot analysis of BACE1 and Aβ in rat brain tissues. Comparison with the model group, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; compared with MN-Hup A@Lf- 
st-MOF group, #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01. n = 5. Abbreviations: Aβ, β-amyloid; BACE1, beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1. 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
726
that of the normal control group, suggesting that the intraperitoneal 
injection of D-galactose combined with gavage of AlCl3 successfully 
mimicked the symptoms of memory impairment in rats during rapid 
aging, as evidenced by the reduced ability to recognize platforms and 
the longer time taken to find them. After Hup A preparations treatment, 
the memory-related behaviours of the rats improved, with MN-Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF and TMN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF showing increased levels of 
target recognition and shorter escape latency than the model control 
group. In the spatial probe test, compared to the normal control group, 
the model control group had a significantly shorter retention time in the 
target quadrant (p < 0.01), a reduced number of target locations tra­
versed and impaired memory capacity (Fig. 7C-D). However, memory 
capacity improved in all Hup A preparations treatment groups, with the 
MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group having the best treatment effect, in which 
the target quadrant consumption time and the number of target location 
traversals were not statistically different from the normal control group 
(p > 0.05), suggesting that the memory ability of the rats returned to 
normal levels. In addition, the model control group and the Blank MNs 
group showed random trajectory diagrams, unfocused positions in 
various areas of the Morris water maze and weak ability to identify 
platform positions; after treatment with Hup A preparations, the rats had 
complex trajectories in the Morris water maze, where the rats in the 
normal control and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF treatment groups had 
convergent movements in the Morris water maze and consciously 
explored the area around the target several times (Fig. 7E), which was 
consistent with the results of spatial probe test. 
We further analysed the effects of Hup A preparation on Tau proteins 
and Aβ pathway. Tau is widely present in neuronal cells of the central 
nervous system and are mainly used to maintain microtubule stability in 
axons. Abnormal Tau in the brain is an important pathological feature of 
AD patients, which is manifested by an increase in the total amount of 
Tau in the brain and an increase in abnormally hyperphosphorylated 
Tau [38]. Phosphorylated Tau (p-Tau) accumulates and polymerizes to 
form neural fibrillary tangles (NFTs), which result in the destruction of 
neuronal microtubule structure in the brain, the impairment of axonal 
transport, and the emergence of cerebral neurodegeneration. In addi­
tion, it was recently reported that Tau disrupts the phase-separated 
condensate formed by PSD-95 and N-Methyl-D-aspartic acid through 
multivalent interactions, which may be associated with synaptic 
dysfunction and neurological disorders triggered by N-Methyl-D- 
aspartic acid receptor overactivation [39]. There was no statistically 
significant difference (p > 0.05) between groups of the rat serum Tau 
and p-Tau (Fig. 7F), and the abnormal p-Tau mainly occurred in the rat 
brain. Compared with the normal group, p-Tau was significantly 
increased in the hippocampal region and cerebral cortex of rats in the 
model group (p < 0.01) (Fig. 7G-H), suggesting that the model of rapid 
aging in rats caused by D-galactose & AlCl3 mimicked the characteristics 
of the accumulation of abnormally hyperphosphorylated Tau in the 
brain of AD patients. After the administration of Hup A, the p-Tau 
content decreased, and the order of the ability to reverse the polymer­
ization of p-Tau overaccumulation in the hippocampal region in each 
administration group from strongest to weakest was as follows: MN-Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF > Hup A@Lf-st-MOF > MN-Hup A@st-MOF ≈TMN-Hup 
A@Lf-st-MOF > Free Hup A, and the results were consistent with the 
Morris water maze test. Compared with the normal group, the Tau 
content in the hippocampus of rats in the model group was increased (p 
< 0.05), while the Tau content decreased and returned to the level of the 
normal group after the administration of Hup A (Fig. 7G). In the cerebral 
cortex, however, there was no significant change in the Tau content of 
the groups (Fig. 7H), and it was hypothesized that the abnormal phos­
phorylation process of Tau was mainly concentrated in the hippocampal 
region of the brain. The experimental results suggested that Hup A had a 
therapeutic effect to improve the p-Tau abnormality in the brain, with 
the best therapeutic effect in the lactoferrin-mediated transnasal brain- 
targeted drug delivery groups (MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group and the 
Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group). 
It was once thought that Aβ deposited in large quantities in the ce­
rebral cortex to form senile plaques, which induced hyper­
phosphorylation of Tau and caused apoptosis of neuronal cells in the 
brain, was an important causative factor of AD. However, recent reports 
have suggested that Tau and Aβ are only the results of AD, and that the 
potential causative factor of AD is a decrease in the acidity of the lyso­
somes of the neuronal cells, which are unable to efficiently remove the 
waste, and are stuffed with the precursor of Aβ, amyloid precursor 
protein (APP), and its fragments, which lead to the rupture of the ly­
sosomes and consequent neuronal cell damage or death [40]. APP can be 
catabolized by α-, β-, and γ-secretase, where β-secretase and γ-secretase 
cleave APP to produce deleterious Aβ, but APP is cleaved by α-secretase 
(A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase, ADAM) family members 
(including ADAM10) processing the resulting product is not amyloid 
and appears to be harmless and even protective [41]. β-secretase 1 
(Beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1, BACE1) is an aspartic protease that 
cleaves APP to produce 40 and 42 amino acids Aβ peptides. The majority 
of AD patients have increased levels of BACE1 expression, which leads to 
the production of more Aβ, and inhibition of BACE1 activity effectively 
reduces the production of Aβ peptides. BACE1 has been recognized as a 
promising therapeutic target in the early stages of AD, and therefore 
different BACE1 inhibitors have been investigated. In our current find­
ings, D-galactose & AlCl3 modelling resulted in significant elevation of 
BACE1 and Aβ in brain tissue (p < 0.01), but they were significantly 
down-regulated (p < 0.05) in all Hup A preparation administration 
groups, with the best performance in the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group 
(Fig. 7I, Fig. 8). In addition, ADAM10 decreased in the model group (p <
0.01), but increased significantly in all microneedle administration 
groups (p < 0.05), with the best effect in the microneedle intranasal 
administration group (Fig. 8). However, the recent clinical dilemma of 
BACE1 inhibitors failing to improve cognitive function in AD patients 
suggests that specific inhibition of BACE1 expression in certain cells is 
required to produce an ameliorative effect on AD, e.g., inhibition of 
microglial BACE1 function enhances microglial activity, which increases 
microglial phagocytosis of Aβ and improves cognitive function in AD 
model mice [42]. Hup A has been shown to attenuate central nervous 
system inflammation by acting on microglia [43]. 
3.8. The newly developed drug delivery systems showed excellent 
biocompatibility 
The HA of the microneedles that needs to be penetrated into the 
tissue has been recognized for its excellent biosafety, and GT has good 
haemocompatibility as the haemolysis rate is <5% at a concentration of 
10 mg/mL (Fig. S14), which is consistent with the previous report [44]. 
MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF showed good biocompatibility for both 
transdermal and intranasal administration. MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
transdermal administration transiently and reversibly created skin 
micropore channels, with visible traces of micropore channels appearing 
within 30 min after administration, then gradually diminishing until 
almost gone by 4 h (Fig. S15A). No rash, bruising or bleeding was 
observed when microneedles were administered daily for 7 consecutive 
days in the same locations on the skin (Fig. S15B). 
Next, we focused on assessing the biosafety of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
administration on the nasal mucosa. The SEM micrographs showed that 
the cilia on the nasal mucosa of the untreated normal control group were 
long, dense, neatly arranged and evenly distributed, whereas those in 
the 1% sodium deoxycholate treated group were short, sparse and 
disorganized, exposing the basal layer of the mucosa (Fig. 9A). The 
morphology of nasal cilia in the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF administration 
and 3 days after administration groups were both not significantly 
different from that of the normal control group, demonstrating that 
microneedling did not significantly damage nasal cilia. Further analysis 
of the H&E-stained nasal mucosa sections showed that the pseudos­
tratified ciliated columnar epithelium of the superior nasal concha on 
the normal nasal mucosa was arranged in an orderly and compact 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
727
manner, and the cilia on the free surface of the columnar cells were 
evenly distributed without inflammatory cell infiltration or edema 
(Fig. 9B). After treatment with 1% sodium deoxycholate, the pseudos­
tratified ciliated columnar epithelium was partially mutilated, the 
epithelial cells were damaged, some cilia were lost, inflammatory cell 
infiltration, and congestion appeared. In the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
intranasal administration group, the nasal mucosal cilia were evenly and 
neatly distributed and the epithelial cells were not fragmented, but there 
was slight edema and inflammatory cell infiltration. However, after 3 
days of stopping microneedle administration, the nasal mucosa was 
repaired and the above situation was significantly improved. These re­
sults suggest that the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF has a slight irritating effect 
on the nasal mucosa, but it can recover quickly after stopping 
microneedling. 
We went on to examine the inhibition of pathogenic bacteria by GT 
and the effect of intranasal administration of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF on 
the nasal microorganisms. Tannic acid had a significant inhibitory effect 
on S. aureus with an inhibition zone diameter of 14.54 ± 0.2 mm at a 
concentration of 10 mg/mL, while it was not significantly effective 
against Escherichia coli, for which no significant inhibition zone was 
formed (Fig. S16). It has been reported that the inhibitory effect of 
tannic acid on Gram-positive bacteria is stronger than that on Gram- 
negative bacteria, probably because Gram-positive bacteria have no 
outer membrane on the cell wall surface, and tannic acid can more easily 
penetrate and destroy the cytoplasmic membrane [45]. The gelatine did 
not have inhibitory properties, with obvious white colonies on its sur­
face and no inhibition zone, and no inhibition zone around the GT due to 
the low tannic acid content, but compared to the gelatine group, there 
were no white colonies formed by S. aureus on the surface of the GT 
samples, indicating weak inhibition of S. aureus. Next, the effect of MN- 
Hup A@Lf-st-MOF administration on nasal microorganisms was evalu­
ated using principal component analysis. The majority of sample points 
were clustered between the normal control and MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
administration groups, with high community similarity and no signifi­
cant differences (p > 0.05) (Fig. 10A). The similarity of abundance be­
tween samples at the phylum classification level was analysed by 
clustering, and samples with different abundances were clustered in 
blocks, and the results were presented as a heat map of the community, 
with staggered distribution and low variability between the two groups 
(Fig. 10B). Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Bacteriodota 
were the dominant genera in the samples, with high abundance at the 
phylum level, demonstrating that continuous intranasal administration 
of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF had no significant effect on microbial species 
and community structure, and no bacterial infections were observed. 
**
*
*
*
**
**
Fig. 8. In vivo improvement effects of different administration modes of Hup A on D-galactose & AlCl3-induced memory impairment model in rats. (A) and 
(B) Micrographs of tissue sections and positive expression rate of ADAM10, BACE1, APP, and Aβ distribution in rat brain tissues analysed by immunohistochemistry, 
respectively, bars = 100 μm. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. n = 5. Abbreviations: Aβ, β-amyloid; ADAM10, A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase 10; APP, amyloid precursor 
protein; BACE1, beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1. 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
728
Finally, we evaluated the visceral toxicity of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF 
intranasal administration. Among the serum biochemical indicators, 
TBIL and TP levels reflect bilirubin metabolism and hepatic synthesis 
function, and when TBIL and TP are elevated, it suggests possible liver 
injury. ALT and AST are mainly present in hepatocytes and are sensitive 
indicators for evaluating liver function, and CR and UR are important 
indicators for assessing renal function. Compared with rats in the normal 
control group, rats in the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group showed no sig­
nificant pathological changes in all organ tissues (Fig. S17), only an 
increase in AST and ALT (p < 0.05) (Fig. 10C), but the range of changes 
was small, so it is not yet possible to determine whether they are 
hepatotoxic. 
4. Discussion 
We achieved drug administration deep in the nasal cavity (olfactory 
region) by using dissolving microneedles combined with functionalized 
CD-MOFs, and the microneedles traversed the nasal mucosal barrier to 
enhance drug penetration through the nasal mucosa, thereby increasing 
CD-MOF-mediated drug delivery to the brain via the nose. 
Since Hup A is a poorly water-soluble component, γ-CD-MOF, a 
nanocarrier with high drug loading and excellent biosafety, was 
employed. γ-CD-MOF is an infinitely extended network of crystals 
formed by self-assembly of potassium ions and naturally regenerated 
γ-cyclodextrins (γ-CD) with ligand bonds, which have a high porosity 
and a large specific surface area, and thus enable efficient loading of 
drugs both on the surface and in the pore channels [46]. However, the 
structure of γ-CD-MOF collapses in water, while its physical stability is 
generally improved by surface modification. One route is to chemically 
cross-link γ-CD in the MOF, but the reaction process is complicated and 
may cause problems with organic solvent residues. Another route is to 
coat cholesterol on its surface [47], however, the relationship between 
Fig. 9. Preliminary evaluation of the biosafety of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF in healthy rats in vivo. (A) and (B) SEM micrographs of the nasal mucosa surface and 
micrographs of the H&E-stained sections of the nasal mucosa tissues of rats treated in different ways, respectively. 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
729
cholesterol and neurological function has not been fully clarified, and 
there are unpredictable consequences of incidental delivery of choles­
terol to the brain [48]. Therefore, we discarded the above two ap­
proaches and prepared γ-CD-MOF coated with stigmasterol, which is 
structurally similar to cholesterol, and then modified with lactoferrin, 
which further enhances the physical stability of the nanocarrier and 
provides an active brain-targeting function. Subsequently, 16HBE cells, 
which are similar to nasal mucosal cells, were selected as an in vitro 
cellular model to mimic nasal mucosal transport [49], and the uptake of 
Lf-st-MOF by 16HBE cells was measured, which elucidated the possible 
mechanism of nose-to-brain drug delivery by using this nanocarrier at 
the cellular level. 
In order to deliver drugs into the brain more efficiently than con­
ventional passive transnasal delivery, we developed a microneedle- 
assisted drug delivery device. HA was chosen to mold the micro­
needles, which combines the advantages of biosafety and bioadhesion, 
prolonging drug retention time in the nasal mucosa and then increasing 
drug absorption. The base of the microneedle patch was formed by GT. 
Gelatin is a macromolecular material derived from the partial hydrolysis 
of animal collagen, which has biodegradability, histocompatibility, and 
low antigenicity, and is widely used in food and pharmaceutical in­
dustries. However, gelatin suffers from defects such as poor thermal 
stability and insufficient mechanical properties, and it is often necessary 
to change its reticular structure by cross-linking to improve its func­
tional properties [50]. Tannic acid is a natural protein cross-linker with 
antibacterial and antiviral activities [51]. We found that the thermal 
stability and mechanical strength of GT were significantly improved 
compared with gelatin, and this complex had no observable effect on the 
nasal microbial environment. 
It has been reported that a 2% agar hydrogel membrane was formed 
for evaluating the in vitro dissolution behaviour of microneedles [52]. In 
the current work, we reduced the amount of agar and prepared a com­
posite hydrogel membrane by combining agar with konjaku flour to 
improve the membrane transparency. Due to the lower toughness of the 
hydrogel, the pressing force was less than that of penetrating into the 
porcine nasal mucosa and rat skin. Since the nasal mucosa of rats is too 
small to make ex vivo microneedle nasal mucosal puncture studies 
difficult, we used the porcine nasal mucosa, which has been reported to 
be used for ex vivo evaluation of microneedle-related characteristics 
[53]. The current design of HA-fabricated dissolving microneedles 
realized rapid dissolution and separation from the GT base, which 
shortened the administration time and improved compliance. Markedly, 
this newly designed microneedling device carried well-designed func­
tionalized CD-MOFs provided the most efficient transnasal mucosal 
delivery of drug into the brain among the tested delivery modes. We 
subsequently validated the developed microneedle-mediated drug de­
livery system for intranasal administration with Cy5.5-labelled Lf-st- 
MOF in animals in vivo with faster transit rate through the nose into the 
brain, effective reduction of nasal cilia clearance, and increased drug 
brain uptake. 
Neurodegenerative diseases, including AD, are closely related to 
oxidative stress injury. Excessive reactive oxygen radicals imbalance the 
oxidative and antioxidant levels of the body, destroying nucleic acid and 
protein structures, leading to apoptosis of neuronal cells and affecting 
mitochondrial dysfunction. The H2O2-induced oxidative stress injury 
cells in vitro is one of the well-established models of oxidative injury in 
vitro that is currently used [54]. In addition, scopolamine, a muscarinic 
receptor antagonist, has been reported to be used to construct an in vitro 
model of injured neuronal cells [55]. Scopolamine not only decreases 
acetylcholine levels in the brain leading to central cholinergic blockade, 
but also exacerbates oxidative stress injury [56]. PC12 cells have general 
characteristics of neuroendocrine cells and are widely used in 
ALT
AST
TBIL
CR
UR
TP
0
5
10
15
50
100
150
200
Concentration
Normal
MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF
*
*
*
IU/L
IU/L
mo/L
mo/L
mo/L
g/L
C
Community heatmap analysis on Phylum level
B
Normal
A
mol/L
mol/L
mol/L
Fig. 10. Preliminary evaluation of the biosafety of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF in healthy rats in vivo. (A) and (B) The analyses of microbial diversity in nasal lavage 
fluid after administration of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF nasally, where (A) is the principal component analysis (Con refers to the normal control group, and drug refers to 
the MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF group), and (B) is the heatmap of relative abundance in different samples. (C) The effects of MN-Hup A@Lf-st-MOF on the rat's serum 
indices of liver and kidney function; *p < 0.05. n = 5. Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CR, creatinine; TBIL, total 
bilirubin; TP, serum total protein concentration; UR, urea. 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
730
neurophysiology and neuropharmacology [57,58]. Here we constructed 
H2O2- and scopolamine-induced PC12 cell injury models, respectively, 
and elucidated that lactoferrin modification increased the internaliza­
tion of nanocarriers by PC12 cells, which dramatically enhanced the 
protective effect of Hup A on the neuronal cell injury models. 
The scopolamine-induced memory impairment model in rats was 
established based on the cholinergic damage hypothesis. The mecha­
nism of this pathological model is that scopolamine increases the ac­
tivity of acetylcholinesterase and blocks the binding of central 
acetylcholine to the corresponding receptors on the postsynaptic mem­
brane, resulting in impaired neural signaling. In addition, the effect of 
scopolamine on the brain is extensive, which not only damages the 
cholinergic system, but also exacerbates the oxidative stress damage in 
the body, causing brain tissue or nerve cell damage. The therapeutic 
approach for this pathological model is mainly to restore the cholinergic 
neurological function by increasing the level of acetylcholine in the 
brain. While Hup A is a typical acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, compared 
with the Free drug group, the microneedle-mediated nasal drug delivery 
system remarkably alleviated the scopolamine-induced memory 
impairment in rats, which was demonstrated by the increase of the 
number of traversing platforms and the peri-platform consuming time in 
the water maze spatial exploration experiments, suggesting the 
improvement of the memory and learning ability, which was attributed 
to the fact that the delivery system significantly increased the intrace­
rebral drug delivery, thereby enhancing the inhibition of acetylcholin­
esterase activity by Hup A, alleviating oxidative stress damage in the 
brain, reversing the effects of scopolamine on neuronal cell damage and 
memory impairment, involving potential mechanisms including acti­
vating the ERK-CREB-BDNF pathway, alleviating the inhibitory effects 
of scopolamine on PSD-95 expression, regulating neuronal cell survival, 
differentiation, and modulating synaptic plasticity. In addition, using D- 
galactose combined with AlCl3 induced rapid aging model in rats, Hup A 
preparation treatment also showed the admirable effect of improving 
the symptoms of memory impairment in rats, and had the therapeutic 
effect of improving the abnormal phosphorylation of Tau and decreasing 
the Aβ by modulating pathways including BACE1 and ADAM 10. 
However, due to the limitations of the laboratory, our current hand- 
made primary product only has microneedles array of 2 × 5, and the 
coverage on the support stick is very low. The ideal microneedle patch 
we envisioned is a dense array of microneedles covering the support 
stick, similar to a thick toothbrush, and the support stick should be a 
thin, flexible and elastic material, which can increase the amount of 
drug delivery and improve convenience, while ensuring the safety of 
drug administration, and this ideal product is not difficult to achieve for 
the production level of modern industrial technology, for example, can 
be realized by 3D printing technology. 
In conclusion, the newly constructed transnasal delivery system by 
dissolving microneedles combined with functionalized CD-MOFs ach­
ieved highly efficient nasal-intracerebral delivery of Hup A, which 
significantly improved the memory impairment in rat, additionally 
provided a new approach for transnasal therapy of neurodegenerative 
diseases. Although there are potential concerns about patient compli­
ance with the intranasal administration of microneedles, it is believed 
that the design of more sophisticated devices will be the countermeasure 
in the future. In addition, AD involves multiple pathogenic mechanisms, 
including oxidative stress damage, imbalance of the cholinergic system, 
Aβ deposition, and abnormal p-Tau, leading to limitations of current 
animal models of AD in mimicking human AD, and thus the mechanism 
of action of Hup A for AD remains to be further elucidated [59]. 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2024.01.013. 
Funding 
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (Grant number 82074031), the Program for Professor of Special 
Appointment (Eastern Scholar) at Shanghai Institutions of Higher 
Learning (Grant number TP2020054), Shanghai Sailing Program 
(21YF1447400), and the Program for Shanghai High-Level Local Uni­
versity Innovation Team (SZY20220315). 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Shuyao Ruan: Writing – original draft, Software, Project adminis­
tration, Methodology. Jiaqi Li: Writing – original draft, Validation, 
Project administration, Methodology. Hang Ruan: Software, Method­
ology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Qing Xia: Software, Resources, 
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Xiaolin Hou: Validation, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis. Zhi 
Wang: Visualization, Supervision, Resources, Investigation. Teng Guo: 
Visualization, Supervision, Data curation. Chunyun Zhu: Supervision, 
Resources. Nianping Feng: Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Re­
sources, Conceptualization. Yongtai Zhang: Writing – review & editing, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Inves­
tigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. 
Declaration of competing interest 
Authors declare that they have no competing interests. They have no 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could in­
fluence the work. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Prof. Changhong Wang from the Institute of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chi­
nese Medicine (SUTCM) for providing the water maze device; Prof. Xin 
Luan and Prof. Xuan Liu from the Institute of Cross-Science, SUTCM, for 
providing the Nanosight device and Cytation 5 imaging instrument, 
respectively; Prof. Kaili Hu from School of Chinese Medicine, SUTCM, 
for the gift of 16HBE cells. 
References 
[1] W.A. Banks, From blood-brain barrier to blood-brain interface: new opportunities 
for CNS drug delivery, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 15 (2016) 275–292. 
[2] M. Agrawal, S. Saraf, S. Saraf, S.G. Antimisiaris, M.B. Chougule, S.A. Shoyele, 
A. Alexander, Nose-to-brain drug delivery: an update on clinical challenges and 
progress towards approval of anti-Alzheimer drugs, J. Control. Release 281 (2018) 
139–177. 
[3] R.A. Yokel, Direct nose to the brain nanomedicine delivery presents a formidable 
challenge, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 14 (2022) e1767. 
[4] R. Awad, A. Avital, A. Sosnik, Polymeric nanocarriers for nose-to-brain drug 
delivery in neurodegenerative diseases and neurodevelopmental disorders, Acta 
Pharm. Sin. B 13 (2023) 1866–1886. 
[5] P. Saha, H. Kathuria, M.M. Pandey, Intranasal nanotherapeutics for brain targeting 
and clinical studies in Parkinson’s disease, J. Control. Release 358 (2023) 293–318. 
[6] Z. Zhang, J. Guan, Z. Jiang, Y. Yang, J. Liu, W. Hua, Y. Mao, C. Li, W. Lu, J. Qian, 
C. Zhan, Brain-targeted drug delivery by manipulating protein corona functions, 
Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 3561. 
[7] J.W. Xue, Z.K. Zhao, L. Zhang, L.J. Xue, S.Y. Shen, Y.J. Wen, Z.Y. Wei, L. Wang, L. 
Y. Kong, H.B. Sun, Q.N. Ping, R. Mo, C. Zhang, Neutrophil-mediated anticancer 
drug delivery for suppression of postoperative malignant glioma recurrence, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 12 (2017) 692–700. 
[8] Z. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Pei, J. Chen, X. Wei, Y. Liu, P. Xia, Q. Wan, Z. Gu, Y. He, Blue- 
ringed octopus-inspired microneedle patch for robust tissue surface adhesion and 
active injection drug delivery, Sci. Adv. 9 (2023) eadh2213. 
[9] J. Wang, Z. Lu, R. Cai, H. Zheng, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, Z. Gu, Microneedle-based 
transdermal detection and sensing devices, Lab Chip 23 (2023) 869–887. 
[10] J. Zhang, H. Li, L. Albakr, Y. Zhang, A. Lu, W. Chen, T. Shao, L. Zhu, H. Yuan, 
G. Yang, N.J. Wheate, L. Kang, C. Wu, Microneedle-enabled therapeutics delivery 
and biosensing in clinical trials, J. Control. Release 360 (2023) 687–704. 
[11] M. El-Hussieny, M.A. Abd-El-Maksoud, F.M. Soliman, M.A. Fouad, M.K. El-Ashrey, 
Dual-target ligand discovery for Alzheimer’s disease: triphenylphosphoranylidene 
S. Ruan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Controlled Release 366 (2024) 712–731
731
derivatives as inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase and β-amyloid aggregation, 
J. Enzyme Inhib. Med. Chem. 38 (2023) 2166040. 
[12] M. Alrouji, D. DasGupta, G.M. Ashraf, A.L. Bilgrami, F.A. Alhumaydhi, W. Al 
Abdulmonem, M. Shahwan, A. Alsayari, A. Atiya, A. Shamsi, Inhibition of 
microtubule affinity regulating kinase 4 by an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, 
huperzine A: computational and experimental approaches, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
235 (2023) 123831. 
[13] Y.P. Yan, J.Y. Chen, J.H. Lu, Disease-modifying activity of huperzine a on 
Alzheimer’s disease: evidence from preclinical studies on rodent models, Int. J. 
Mol. Sci. 23 (2022) 15238. 
[14] A. Atiya, F.A. Alhumaydhi, A. Shamsi, A. Olatunde, S.A. Alsagaby, W. Al 
Abdulmonem, S.E. Sharaf, M. Shahwan, Mechanistic insight into the binding of 
huperzine a with human transferrin: computational, spectroscopic and calorimetric 
approaches, ACS Omega 7 (2022) 38361–38370. 
[15] Y. Chen, G. Cheng, R. Hu, S. Chen, W. Lu, S. Gao, H. Xia, B. Wang, C. Sun, X. Nie, 
Q. Shen, W. Fang, A nasal temperature and pH dual-responsive in situ gel delivery 
system based on microemulsion of huperzine A: formulation, evaluation, and in 
vivo pharmacokinetic study, AAPS PharmSciTech 20 (2019) 301. 
[16] Y. Zhao, P. Yue, T. Tao, Q.H. Chen, Drug brain distribution following intranasal 
administration of Huperzine A in situ gel in rats, Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 28 (2007) 
273–278. 
[17] Q. Yan, W. Wang, J. Weng, Z. Zhang, L. Yin, Q. Yang, F. Guo, X. Wang, F. Chen, 
G. Yang, Dissolving microneedles for transdermal delivery of huperzine a for the 
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, Drug Deliv. 27 (2020) 1147–1155. 
[18] Y. Jiang, Y. Jiang, Z. Ding, Q. Yu, Investigation of the "nose-to-brain" pathways in 
intranasal Hup A nanoemulsions and evaluation of their in vivo pharmacokinetics 
and brain-targeting ability, Int. J. Nanomedicine 17 (2022) 3443–3456. 
[19] Q. Meng, A. Wang, H. Hua, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang, H. Mu, Z. Wu, K. Sun, Intranasal 
delivery of Huperzine a to the brain using lactoferrin-conjugated N-trimethylated 
chitosan surface-modified PLGA nanoparticles for treatment of Alzheimer’s 
disease, Int. J. Nanomedicine 13 (2018) 705–718. 
[20] Y. He, W. Zhang, T. Guo, G. Zhang, W. Qin, L. Zhang, C. Wang, W. Zhu, M. Yang, 
X. Hu, V. Singh, L. Wu, R. Gref, J. Zhang, Drug nanoclusters formed in confined 
nano-cages of CD-MOF: dramatic enhancement of solubility and bioavailability of 
azilsartan, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 9 (2019) 97–106. 
[21] J. Liang, L. Li, H. Tian, Z. Wang, G. Liu, X. Duan, M. Guo, J. Liu, W. Zhang, E. 
C. Nice, C. Huang, W. He, H. Zhang, Q. Li, Drug repurposing-based brain-targeting 
self-assembly nanoplatform using enhanced ferroptosis against glioblastoma, Small 
17 (2023) e2303073. 
[22] J. Zhang, R. Fang, Y. Li, J. Jin, F. Yang, J. Chen, Encapsulation of Au (III) complex 
using lactoferrin nanoparticles to combat glioma, Mol. Pharm. 20 (2023) 
3632–3644. 
[23] B. Liu, H. Li, X. Xu, X. Li, N. Lv, V. Singh, J.F. Stoddart, P. York, X. Xu, R. Gref, 
J. Zhang, Optimized synthesis and crystalline stability of γ-cyclodextrin metal- 
organic frameworks for drug adsorption, Int. J. Pharm. 514 (2016) 212–219. 
[24] A. Bhattacharyya, V.N.K. Priya, J.H. Kim, M.R. Khatun, R. Nagarajan, I. Noh, 
Nanodiamond enhanced mechanical and biological properties of extrudable gelatin 
hydrogel cross-linked with tannic acid and ferrous sulphate, Biomater. Res. 26 
(2022) 37. 
[25] A. Akturk, F.N. Kasikci, D.N. Dikmetas, F. Karbancioglu-Guler, M. Erol-Taygun, 
Hypericum perforatum oil and vitamin A palmitate-loaded gelatin nanofibers 
cross-linked by tannic acid as wound dressings, ACS Omega 8 (2023) 
24023–24031. 
[26] W. Yu, G. Jiang, Y. Zhang, D. Liu, B. Xu, J. Zhou, Polymer microneedles fabricated 
from alginate and hyaluronate for transdermal delivery of insulin, Mater. Sci. Eng. 
C Mater. Biol. Appl. 80 (2017) 187–196. 
[27] Y. Kim, I.H. Park, J. Shin, J. Choi, C. Jeon, S. Jeon, J.S. Shin, H. Jung, Sublingual 
dissolving microneedle (SLDMN)-based vaccine for inducing mucosal immunity 
against SARS-CoV-2, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 19 (2023) e2300889. 
[28] Y. Gong, S. Tong, X. Li, X. Chen, Y. Liu, N. Li, J. Xu, R. Xu, Y. Guo, F. Xiao, X. Chen, 
W. Chen, Intestinal villi-inspired mathematically base-layer engineered 
microneedles (IMBEMs) for effective molecular exchange during biomarker 
enrichment and drug deposition in diversified mucosa, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 
15696–15712. 
[29] Q. Guo, H. You, X. Yang, B. Lin, Z. Zhu, Z. Lu, X. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Mao, S. Shen, 
H. Cheng, J. Zhang, L. Deng, J. Fan, Z. Xi, R. Li, C.M. Li, Functional single-walled 
carbon nanotubes ‘CAR’ for targeting dopamine delivery into the brain of 
parkinsonian mice, Nanoscale 9 (2017) 10832–10845. 
[30] L. Pini, M. Pievani, M. Bocchetta, D. Altomare, P. Bosco, E. Cavedo, S. Galluzzi, 
M. Marizzoni, G.B. Frisoni, Brain atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease and aging, Ageing 
Res. Rev. 30 (2016) 25–48. 
[31] K.S. Tang, The cellular and molecular processes associated with scopolamine- 
induced memory deficit: a model of Alzheimer’s biomarkers, Life Sci. 233 (2019) 
116695. 
[32] Y. Guo, M. Mao, Q. Li, X. Yu, L. Zhou, Extracts of Ginkgo flavonoids and 
ginkgolides improve cerebral ischaemia-reperfusion injury through the PI3K/Akt/ 
Nrf2 signalling pathway and multicomponent in vivo processes, Phytomedicine 99 
(2022) 154028. 
[33] R.K. Sindhu, P. Kaur, P. Kaur, H. Singh, G.E. Batiha, I. Verma, Exploring 
multifunctional antioxidants as potential agents for management of neurological 
disorders, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 29 (2022) 24458–24477. 
[34] Q.Y. Yan, J.L. Lv, X.Y. Shen, X.N. Ou-Yang, J.Z. Yang, R.F. Nie, J. Lu, Y.J. Huang, J. 
Y. Wang, X. Shen, Patchouli alcohol as a selective estrogen receptor β agonist 
ameliorates AD-like pathology of APP/PS1 model mice, Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 43 
(2022) 2226–2241. 
[35] J. Keifer, Regulation of AMPAR trafficking in synaptic plasticity by BDNF and the 
impact of neurodegenerative disease, J. Neurosci. Res. 100 (2022) 979–991. 
[36] S. Ayuso-Dolado, G.M. Esteban-Ortega, ´O.G. Vidaurre, M. Díaz-Guerra, A novel 
cell-penetrating peptide targeting calpain-cleavage of PSD-95 induced by 
excitotoxicity improves neurological outcome after stroke, Theranostics 11 (2021) 
6746–6765. 
[37] K. Dore, Z. Carrico, S. Alfonso, M. Marino, K. Koymans, H.W. Kessels, R. Malinow, 
PSD-95 protects synapses from β-amyloid, Cell Rep. 35 (2021) 109194. 
[38] S. Liu, S.E. Heumüller, A. Hossinger, S.A. Müller, O. Buravlova, S.F. Lichtenthaler, 
P. Denner, I.M. Vorberg, Reactivated endogenous retroviruses promote protein 
aggregate spreading, Nat. Commun. 14 (2023) 5034. 
[39] Z. Shen, D. Sun, A. Savastano, S.J. Varga, M.S. Cima-Omori, S. Becker, 
A. Honigmann, M. Zweckstetter, Multivalent Tau/PSD-95 interactions arrest in 
vitro condensates and clusters mimicking the postsynaptic density, Nat. Commun. 
14 (2023) 6839. 
[40] J.H. Lee, D.S. Yang, C.N. Goulbourne, E. Im, P. Stavrides, A. Pensalfini, H. Chan, 
C. Bouchet-Marquis, C. Bleiwas, M.J. Berg, C. Huo, J. Peddy, M. Pawlik, E. Levy, 
M. Rao, M. Staufenbiel, R.A. Nixon, Faulty autolysosome acidification in 
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models induces autophagic build-up of Aβ in neurons, 
yielding senile plaques, Nat. Neurosci. 25 (2022) 688–701. 
[41] C.H. Lipper, E.D. Egan, K.H. Gabriel, S.C. Blacklow, Structural basis for membrane- 
proximal proteolysis of substrates by ADAM10, Cell 186 (2023) 3632–3641.e10. 
[42] N. Singh, B. Das, J. Zhou, X. Hu, R. Yan, Targeted BACE-1 inhibition in microglia 
enhances amyloid clearance and improved cognitive performance, Sci. Adv. 8 
(2022) eabo3610. 
[43] H. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Sun, Y. Wang, S. Wu, J. Wang, Huperzine-A improved 
animal behavior in cuprizone-induced mouse model by alleviating demyelination 
and neuroinflammation, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (2022) 16182. 
[44] Y.H. Peng, S.K. Hsiao, K. Gupta, A. Ruland, G.K. Auernhammer, M.F. Maitz, 
S. Boye, J. Lattner, C. Gerri, A. Honigmann, C. Werner, E. Krieg, Dynamic matrices 
with DNA-encoded viscoelasticity for cell and organoid culture, Nat. Nanotechnol. 
(2023), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-023-01483-3. 
[45] F. Tian, B. Li, B. Ji, J. Yang, G. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Luo, Antioxidant and 
antimicrobial activities of consecutive extracts from Galla chinensis: the polarity 
affects the bioactivities, Food Chem. 113 (2009) 173–179. 
[46] W. Zhang, Z. Zheng, L. Lin, X. Zhang, M. Bae, J. Lee, J. Xie, G. Diao, H.J. Im, 
Y. Piao, H. Pang, Ultrafast synthesis of graphene-embedded cyclodextrin-metal- 
organic framework for supramolecular selective absorbency and supercapacitor 
performance, Adv. Sci. (Weinh). 27, e2304062 (2023). 
[47] V. Singh, T. Guo, H. Xu, L. Wu, J. Gu, C. Wu, R. Gref, J. Zhang, Moisture resistant 
and biofriendly CD-MOF nanoparticles obtained via cholesterol shielding, Chem. 
Commun. (Camb.) 53 (2017) 9246–9249. 
[48] H. Wang, J.A. Kulas, C. Wang, D.M. Holtzman, H.A. Ferris, S.B. Hansen, Regulation 
of beta-amyloid production in neurons by astrocyte-derived cholesterol, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118 (2021) e2102191118. 
[49] L. Wang, L. Xu, J. Du, X. Zhao, M. Liu, J. Feng, K. Hu, Nose-to-brain delivery of 
borneol modified tanshinone IIA nanoparticles in prevention of cerebral ischemia/ 
reperfusion injury, Drug Deliv. 28 (2021) 1363–1375. 
[50] G. Strauss, S.M. Gibson, Plant phenolics as cross-linkers of gelatin gels and gelatin- 
based coacervates for use as food ingredients, Food Hydrocoll. 18 (2004) 81–89. 
[51] X. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Miao, X. Chen, X. Zhang, J. Shi, F. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Yang, 
X. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Duan, A 0D-2D heterojunction bismuth molybdate-anchored 
multifunctional hydrogel for highly efficient eradication of drug-resistant bacteria, 
ACS Nano 17 (2023) 15568–15589. 
[52] M.A. Lopez-Ramirez, F. Soto, C. Wang, R. Rueda, S. Shukla, C. Silva-Lopez, 
D. Kupor, D.A. McBride, J.K. Pokorski, A. Nourhani, N.F. Steinmetz, N.J. Shah, 
J. Wang, Built-in active microneedle patch with enhanced autonomous drug 
delivery, Adv. Mater. 32 (2020) e1905740. 
[53] F.N.S. Fachel, B. Medeiros-Neves, M. Dal Pr´a, R.S. Schuh, K.S. Veras, V.L. Bassani, 
L.S. Koester, A.T. Henriques, E. Braganhol, H.F. Teixeira, Box-Behnken design 
optimization of mucoadhesive chitosan-coated nanoemulsions for rosmarinic acid 
nasal delivery-in vitro studies, Carbohydr. Polym. 199 (2018) 572–582. 
[54] W.C. Chen, S.R. Hsieh, C.H. Chiu, B.D. Hsu, Y.M. Liou, Molecular identification for 
epigallocatechin-3-gallate-mediated antioxidant intervention on the H2O2-induced 
oxidative stress in H9c2 rat cardiomyoblasts, J. Biomed. Sci. 21 (2014) 56. 
[55] F. Zhang, F. Qiu, J. Zeng, Z. Xu, Y. Tang, T. Zhao, Y. Gou, F. Su, S. Wang, X. Sun, 
Z. Xue, W. Wang, C. Yang, L. Zeng, X. Lan, M. Chen, J. Zhou, Z. Liao, Revealing 
evolution of tropane alkaloid biosynthesis by analyzing two genomes in the 
Solanaceae family, Nat. Commun. 14 (2023) 1446. 
[56] U.C. Dash, S.K. Swain, S. Kanhar, P. Banjare, P.P. Roy, J. Dandapat, A.K. Sahoo, 
The modulatory role of prime identified compounds in Geophila repens in 
mitigating scopolamine-induced neurotoxicity in experimental rats of Alzheimer’s 
disease via attenuation of cholinesterase, β-secretase, MAPt levels and inhibition of 
oxidative stress imparts inflammation, J. Ethnopharmacol. 282 (2022) 114637. 
[57] B. Yin, X. Li, Z.X. Li, X.X. Zhu, L. Zhang, X.L. Zhou, J.B. Xu, F.Z. Chen, P. Tang, 
F. Gao, Adenophorone, an unprecedented sesquiterpene from eupatorium 
adenophorum: structural elucidation, bioinspired total synthesis and 
neuroprotective activity evaluation, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng. 62 (2023) 
e202306326. 
[58] L. Xing, B. Wang, J. Li, X. Guo, X. Lu, X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Sun, X. Luo, S. Qi, X. Qian, 
Y. Yang, A Fluorogenic ONOO–triggered carbon monoxide donor for mitigating 
brain ischemic damage, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144 (2022) 2114–2119. 
[59] I.M. Balmus, A. Ciobica, Main plant extracts’ active properties effective on 
scopolamine-induced memory loss, Am. J. Alzheimers Dis. Other Dement. 32 
(2017) 418–428. 
S. Ruan et al.