DOI: 10.1002/alz.041175
P U B L I C H E A LT H
POSTER PRESENTATIONS
Prevention (nonpharmacological) / Nutrition
Apolipoprotein E genotype-dependent nutrigenetic effects to
prebiotic inulin for reducing risk for Alzheimer’s disease in a
mouse model
Ya-Hsuan Chang1
Jared D Hoffman1
Lucille M Yanckello1
Scott D McCulloch2
Penghui Lin1
Andrew N Lane1
George Chlipala3
Stefan J Green3
Ai-Ling Lin1
1 University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA
2 Metabolon Inc., Durham, NC, USA
3 University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
USA
Correspondence
Ya-HsuanChang,UniversityofKentucky,
Lexington,KY,USA.
Email:ych334@uky.edu
Abstract
Background: Apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE4) allele is the strongest genetic risk factor for
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Cognitively normal APOE4 carriers show an early decline in
brain metabolic functions and gut microbiome dysbiosis before the onset of AD com-
pared to APOE3 carriers. Our laboratory previously found that inulin, a prebiotic, is
effective to restore metabolic functions and gut microbiome balance, and thus reduce
risk for AD in an ApoE4 mouse model (Hoffman et al., 2019). However, whether the
responses to the inulin diet are APOE allele-dependent remains unknown. Therefore,
our objective was to identify whether inulin would differently contribute to metabolic
and gut microbiome changes due to APOE genotype.
Method: We fed 3-month-old asymptomatic ApoE3 (E3FAD) and ApoE4 (E4FAD) mice
a prebiotic inulin diet or a control diet containing cellulose for 4 months (N=15/group;
Male:Female=1:1). After 4 months, we used magnetic resonance spectroscopy to mea-
sure in vivo brain scyllo-inositol level, a compound that has been demonstrated to
inhibit amyloid β aggregation (Fenili, Brown, Rappaport, & McLaurin, 2007). We col-
lected the fecal samples for gut microbiome sequencing, and cecal and blood samples
for metabolomic profiling.
Result: Inulin induced scyllo-inositol in hippocampus of the brain with a higher level in
E4FAD mice. Inulin increased blood metabolites in tryptophan and tyrosine metabolic
pathways that enhance nervous system in E3FAD mice. It increased blood metabo-
lites in pentose phosphate pathway and citric acid cycle that support nucleotides and
nucleic acids biosynthesis and energy production in E4FAD mice. These alterations in
hippocampus and blood showed inulin’s impacts on systemic metabolism depending on
mouse ApoE genotypes. Inulin enhanced short chain fatty acids in cecum with a greater
increase in E3FAD mice. E3FAD mice showed more distinct gut microbiome patterns
between inulin and control groups compared to E4FAD mice.
Conclusion: Inulin-induced systemic metabolism and gut microbiome changes are
APOE genotype-dependent. Our study contributes to the gut-brain axis research and
potential AD prevention. Future studies can design human interventions that facilitate
the guide of personalized nutrition in APOE3 and APOE4 population to prevent AD.
Alzheimer’s Dement. 2020;16(Suppl. 10):e041175.
© 2020 the Alzheimer’s Association
1 of 1
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/alz
https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.041175