Sequential targeting nanochaperone disrupts positive feedback loop of 
mitochondrial dysfunction for Alzheimer's disease therapy
Haodong Hu a, Shuyue Zhao a, Linlin Xu a, Zixuan Ma a, Rujiang Ma a, Fan Huang b,*,  
Linqi Shi a,c,**
a Key Laboratory of Functional Polymer Materials of Ministry of Education, Institute of Polymer Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, 
Frontiers Science Center for New Organic Matter, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, PR China
b State Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materials and Devices, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Radiation Medicine and Molecular Nuclear Medicine, Key Laboratory of 
Radiopharmacokinetics for Innovative Drugs, Tianjin Institutes of Health Science, Institute of Radiation Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union 
Medical College, Tianjin, 300192, PR China
c Haihe Laboratory of Sustainable Chemical Transformations, Tianjin, 300192, PR China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Alzheimer's disease
Mitochondrial dysfunction
Nanochaperone
Positive feedback loop
Sequential targeting
A B S T R A C T
Mitochondrial dysfunction is recognized as a key pathogenic mechanism of Alzheimer's disease (AD), involving a 
self-perpetuating feedback loop with three aspects: upstream β-amyloid protein (Aβ), downstream calcium ion 
(Ca2+) and reactive oxygen species (ROS). However, current therapeutic strategies only focus on one aspect and 
fail to address multiple factors within this cycle. Moreover, the lack of targeted approaches to the mitochondria 
within damaged neurons further limits their application. Herein, we developed a sequential targeting nano­
chaperone to selectively target damaged neuronal mitochondria and disrupt this vicious cycle for AD treatment. 
In this strategy, with the sequence mediation of damaged neuron-targeting and mitochondria-targeting peptides 
decorated on surface, the nanochaperone can first localize to the damaged neurons in AD brain and then 
translocate to mitochondria within them. Subsequently, this nanochaperone can effectively bind upstream Aβ 
proteins and inhibit their aggregation toxicity to mitochondria through the synergic effect of chaperone- 
mimicking microdomains and Aβ-targeting peptide on surface, thereby halting downstream mitochondrial 
Ca2+ dyshomeostasis and ROS overload in the damaged neuron. Furthermore, the modified mitochondria- 
targeting peptide with antioxidant property can further scavenge overproduced ROS and regulate Ca2+ ho­
meostasis, which in turn contributes to reducing the Aβ-induced mitochondrial damage. Consequently, the 
nanochaperone efficiently restores the mitochondrial dysfunction by disrupting the self-amplifying feedback loop 
of “Aβ-Ca2+-ROS” in the AD mitochondrial microenvironment, resulting in the significant alleviation of neuronal 
damage and cognitive deficits in 5xFAD transgenic mice. Taken together, our work presents a novel therapeutic 
strategy against mitochondrial dysfunction for AD treatment.
1. Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD), a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, 
is characterized by the gradual impairment of memory, cognition, and 
behavioural functions in patients. Given the global demographic shift 
towards aging populations, the incidence of AD continues to rise, which 
will become one of the most important healthcare challenges in the 21st 
century [1–3]. During the pathological progression of AD, mitochon­
drial dysfunction has been regarded as a key inducement [4–8]. 
Emerging evidence has shown that there is an important positive feed­
back loop in AD mitochondrial damage [9]. Specifically, the upstream 
pathological Aβ aggregates induce damage to mitochondrial membrane, 
leading to a large influx of calcium ions (Ca2+) into the mitochondria 
and Ca2+ dyshomeostasis [10,11]. Subsequently, the increased levels of 
Ca2+ further induce reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and 
mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction [12,13]. Conversely, down­
stream mitochondrial Ca2+ imbalance and elevated ROS levels will 
promote 
upstream 
Aβ 
pathological 
aggregation, 
establishing 
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author. Key Laboratory of Functional Polymer Materials of Ministry of Education, Institute of Polymer Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of 
Medicinal Chemical Biology, Frontiers Science Center for New Organic Matter, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, PR China.
E-mail addresses: huangfan@irm-cams.ac.cn (F. Huang), shilinqi@nankai.edu.cn (L. Shi). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biomaterials
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biomaterials
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2026.124408
Received 7 July 2025; Received in revised form 29 May 2026; Accepted 24 June 2026  
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
Available online 26 June 2026 
0142-9612/© 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

“Aβ-Ca2+-ROS” vicious circle of mitochondrial dysfunction. This feed­
back loop will further precipitate cellular energy supply insufficiency 
and ultimately drive neuronal cell death. Hence, extensive efforts have 
been dedicated to developing mitochondrion-targeting therapies for AD 
treatment, such as small molecules, peptides and various nanoparticles, 
which display certain beneficial effects on repairing mitochondrial 
damage [14–21]. However, current mitochondria-regulation ap­
proaches only focus on the downstream Ca2+ dysregulation and ROS 
overproduction, and cannot entirely halt the pathogenic mitochondrial 
damage process, especially the upstream Aβ toxicity, severely restricting 
their therapeutic effect. Furthermore, most mitochondrial drugs for AD 
fail to distinguish between normal and damaged neuronal mitochondria, 
which may cause severe side effects of treatment. Therefore, an ideal AD 
mitochondrial-targeting therapeutic strategy should be capable of 
selectively reaching the mitochondria in damaged neurons and 
addressing all components of the “Aβ-Ca2+-ROS” mitochondrial 
dysfunction cycle in AD brain.
Molecular chaperones, as important cellular machines, play pivotal 
roles in defending against neurodegenerative diseases, including AD 
[22–26]. In recent years, mounting evidence substantiates that the 
molecular chaperone is an important factor in maintaining mitochon­
drial function in AD [27–29]. Typically, molecular chaperones with 
unique surface microdomains can specifically bind upstream Aβ proteins 
and inhibit their aggregation toxicity to mitochondria, thereby reducing 
excessive Ca2+ influx into the mitochondria and restoring normal 
mitochondrial Ca2+ levels [30–33]. Meanwhile, they can reverse 
Aβ-induced over-opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pore 
(mPTP) and preserve electron transport chain efficiency, thereby 
attenuating the downstream ROS-mediated neuronal damage [34]. 
Furthermore, molecular chaperones can also alleviate Ca2+ imbalance 
and excessive ROS production by assisting the metal ion trafficking and 
their antioxidant properties, which in turn contribute to reducing the 
Aβ-induced mitochondrial damage [35]. Thus, under normal physio­
logical conditions, molecular chaperones can maintain mitochondrial 
physiological functions through preventing the occurrence of a positive 
feedback loop of mitochondrial dysfunction. However, the activity of 
molecular chaperones is significantly suppressed in AD pathological 
environment [36]. Consequently, developing a chaperone-mimicking 
strategy through reversing neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction is ur­
gently needed for AD treatment and remains a significant challenge.
Herein, we report a sequential targeting nanochaperone that can 
achieve AD treatment by breaking the positive feedback loop of mito­
chondrial dysfunction in brain damaged neurons (Scheme 1). To obtain 
the nanochaperone (nChap), brain damaged neuron-targeting peptide 
Scheme 1. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation and sequential targeting processes of nanochaperone KAS-nChap to damaged neuronal mitochondria: 1) 
After stereotaxic injection into the AD mice brain, 2) KAS-nChap first targets damaged neurons and then 3) targets intracellular mitochondria. (b) The improvement 
of the therapeutic outcome between “Aβ-Ca2+-ROS” positive feedback loop of mitochondrial dysfunction before and after KAS-nChap treatment.
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
2 

AAN modified poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(ε-caprolactone) (AAN- 
PEG-b-PCL), mitochondria-targeting peptide Szeto-Schiller 31 (SS-31) 
modified poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(ε-caprolactone) (SS-31-PEG- 
b-PCL) and Aβ-binding peptide KLVFF modified poly(β-amino ester)- 
block-poly(ε-caprolactone) (KLVFF-PAE-b-PCL) are self-assembled in a 
weak acidic aqueous solution. Upon transitioning to physiological pH 
(7.4), chaperone-mimicking hydrophobic microdomains form on the 
micelle surface due to the PAE segment transitioning from a hydrophilic 
extended state to a hydrophobic collapsed conformation [37,38]. This 
nanochaperone named KAS-nChap works via a sequential targeting 
mechanism: It first targets and enters damaged neurons in the brain 
through the recognition between the AAN peptide and excessive 
asparagine endopeptidase (AEP) secreted by damaged neurons [39,40]. 
Subsequently, this damaged neurons-entered KAS-nChap secondly tar­
gets mitochondria through the SS-31 peptide [41,42]. Once localized, 
KAS-nChap captures Aβ aggregates surrounding mitochondria via syn­
ergistic interactions between its chaperone-mimicking hydrophobic 
microdomains and Aβ-targeting peptide KLVFF [43,44], thus reducing 
the toxic effect of upstream Aβ aggregates on mitochondrial membranes 
and alleviating excessive mitochondrial Ca2+ influx and ROS overload in 
the damaged neuron [45–47]. Moreover, due to the additional ROS 
scavenging property of SS-31 peptide, KAS-nChap can scavenge the 
excessive production of ROS and regulate Ca2+ levels, which in turn 
contribute to reducing the Aβ-induced mitochondrial dysfunction [48,
Fig. 1. Construction and characterization of the nanochaperones. (a) Schematic illustration of nChap, K-nChap, KA-nChap and KAS-nChap nanochaperone. (b) 
TEM images of different nanochaperones. Scale bar = 200 nm. (c) Hydrodynamic diameters of nanochaperones measured by DLS. (d) Zeta potential of nano­
chaperones at different pH values. (e) Schematic illustration of the separation of free and bound Aβ oligomer to investigate the Aβ-binding ability of KAS-nChap. (f) 
Dot blot image and (g) quantitative results showing the binding affinities between Aβ oligomer and KAS-nChap (C, control; T, treated). (h) Damaged neurons 
targeting ability of nanochaperones measured by CLSM. Green: cytoskeleton stained with Actin-stain 488 phalloidin green. Red: Cy5-labeled nanochaperones. Blue: 
nuclei stained with DAPI. Scale bar = 20 μm (i) The flow cytometric quantification of damaged neurons targeting ability of nanochaperones. (j) Mitochondrial 
targeting ability of KAS-nChap. Green: mitochondria stained with Mito-tracker green. Red: Cy5-labeled nanochaperones. Blue: nuclei stained with Hoechst 33342. 
Scale bar = 20 μm. (k) Schematic illustration of sequential targeting nanochaperones KAS-nChap to mitochondria within damaged neurons. Data were presented as 
mean ± SD, n = 3, **p < 0.01. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
3 

49]. Therefore, this nanochaperone disrupts the positive feedback loop 
of mitochondrial dysfunction and further alleviates the pathological 
process of AD. This innovative therapeutic strategy is expected to 
become a potential AD treatment.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Preparation and characterization of KAS-nChap
The amphiphilic copolymers SS-31-PEG-b-PCL, AAN-PEG-b-PCL, and 
KLVFF-PAE-b-PCL were synthesized through ring-opening polymeriza­
tion, click reaction, Michael addition, and amidation reaction (Fig. S1) 
[50,51]. The chemical structure of the above polymers was confirmed by 
the 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectra (Fig. S2). Next, the 
above three amphiphilic copolymers with the same hydrophobic PCL 
block (as a core) and different hydrophilic blocks (as a mixed shell) were 
self-assembled into complex micelles in a weakly acidic aqueous solu­
tion and named KAS-nChap. Meanwhile, the nanochaperone without 
peptide modification (denoted as nChap), only KLVFF-modified nano­
chaperone (denoted as K-nChap), AAN/SS-31 dual peptide-modified 
nanochaperone (denoted as AS-nChap) and KLVFF/AAN dual 
peptide-modified nanochaperone (denoted as KA-nChap) were prepared 
using the same method as controls (Fig. 1a). Transmission electron mi­
croscopy (TEM) images showed that all nanochaperones exhibited uni­
formly spherical structures (Fig. 1b). Dynamic light scattering (DLS) 
results indicated that the average hydrodynamic diameter of all nano­
chaperones was approximately 110 nm (Fig. 1c). At the same time, we 
measured the zeta potential of nanochaperones at different pH. As 
shown in Fig. 1d, the charges of nChap, K-nChap and KA-nChap dis­
played charge conversion when the pH changed from 7.4 to 5.0 and back 
to 7.4, confirming that these nanochaperones containing PAE could 
rapidly and reversibly form hydrophobic microdomains on the surface 
through the deprotonation/protonation of the PAE segments. Moreover, 
although KAS-nChap did not undergo the charge conversion, the zeta 
potential of KAS-nChap still showed a significant change when the pH 
changed from 7.4 to 5.0 and back to 7.4, which was also attributed to the 
deprotonation/protonation of the PAE segments. Furthermore, to vali­
date the self-assembly behavior and structural integrity of nano­
chaperones, it is essential to measure the Critical Micelle Concentration 
(CMC). The results showed the CMC of various nanochaperones were 
around 1.8-4.1 μg/mL. These low CMC may facilitate the nano­
chaperones to maintain assembly stability even under the continuous 
dilution effect in circulating blood (Fig. S3). Moreover, after incubation 
in PBS or fetal bovine serum (FBS) for 10 days, no significant changes in 
particle size were observed among the nanochaperones (Fig. S4), indi­
cating their excellent structural integrity. We then performed dot blot 
assay to evaluate whether nanochaperones could capture and bind the 
free Aβ oligomer. For dot blot experiment, Aβ oligomer were 
co-incubated with PBS or nanochaperones, respectively. Then the so­
lutions were dialyzed and concentrated by Millipore ultrafiltration 
centrifuge tubes to remove any unbound Aβ oligomer. The free levels of 
Aβ oligomer in the filtrate were measured via dot blot tests (Fig. 1e) 
[52]. As shown in Fig. 1f, g and S5, the remaining level of free Aβ 
oligomer in K-nChap, KA-nChap, and KAS-nChap groups (~50%) were 
lower than those of nChap and AS-nChap groups (~95%), indicating a 
specific recognition and binding effect of the KLVFF-moiety to Aβ olig­
omer. Because SS-31 possesses antioxidant properties, cell-free free 
radical (DPPH and OH−) scavenging assays were tested. As shown in 
Fig. S6, free SS-31 peptide and KAS-nChap could notably scavenge DPPH 
and OH−
relative to those for nChap, K-nChap and KA-nChap (non­
–SS–31-containing control nanochaperones). These data underscored 
the antioxidant activity of the SS-31 peptide within the system, and 
SS-31 peptide modification could endow the nanochaperones with 
robust free radical scavenging ability. Before different nanochaperones 
were used in cell-based experiments, the cell toxicity of them should be 
further detected by CCK-8. The nanochaperone exhibited good 
biocompatibility with SH-SY5Y cells at concentrations ranging from 25 
to 500 μg/mL (Fig. S7), demonstrating their suitability for cell-based 
experiments.
2.2. Sequential targeting ability of KAS-nChap to damaged neurons and 
mitochondria
To validate the targeted ability of KAS-nChap to damaged neurons, 
confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was used to examine the 
localization of nanochaperones in SH-SY5Y cells. The nanochaperones 
were labeled with Cy5 and the cell membrane was labeled with phal­
loidin. As shown in Fig. 1h, the little red fluorescence was displayed in 
SH-SY5Y cells not pre-incubated with Aβ oligomer. Nevertheless, the red 
fluorescence intensity of KA-nChap and KAS-nChap groups markedly 
increased in SH-SY5Y cells when pre-incubated with Aβ oligomer, 
indicating that AAN modification enabled the nanochaperone targets to 
damage neurons and be endocytosed into cells. The flow cytometry data 
also supported these results (Fig. 1i and Fig. S8). After the nano­
chaperone enters the cell, successful lysosomal escape is a critical step 
for the intracellular performance of nanochaperones. To identify 
whether our nanochaperones could escape from lysosomes, they were 
incubated with SH-SY5Y cells for different periods, and their intracel­
lular distribution was tracked by CLSM (Fig. S9). At the early time point 
of 2 h, most nanochaperones were co-localized with lysosomes (orange 
color) in the cytoplasm compared to the 1 h time point, indicating that 
most nanochaperones might move into lysosomes. Next, after 4 h post- 
incubation, most nanochaperones were found in the cytoplasm (red 
color), which are not localized in lysosomes (green colour). It confirmed 
that in the acidic environment of lysosomes (pH = 5.0), complete pro­
tonation of the PAE chain segments of the nanochaperone could escape 
lysosomes through the proton sponge effect and thereby enter the 
cytoplasm. To verify the mitochondrial targeting capability of SS-31 
peptide-modified nanochaperones, confocal images of mitochondria- 
indicated Mito-tracker Green staining were acquired. It showed that 
KAS-nChap exhibited stronger colocalization with mitochondria in 
damaged neurons compared to nChap, K-nChap and KA-nChap (Fig. 1j 
and Fig. S10). This proved that KAS-nChap could target intracellular 
mitochondria via surface SS-31 peptide. These results demonstrated that 
KAS-nChap could be endocytosed into the damaged neurons and locate 
in mitochondria, providing a sequential targeting ability to damaged 
neuronal mitochondria (Fig. 1k).
2.3. Damaged mitochondrial calcium homeostasis repair and oxidative 
stress reduction by KAS-nChap
Then, we evaluated whether sequential targeting nanochaperone 
KAS-nChap could break the positive feedback loop of mitochondrial 
dysfunction by building a neuronal cell mitochondrial damage model 
(Fig. 2b). Mitochondrial proteins are primarily synthesized in the cyto­
plasm. Research indicated that Aβ protein can induce abnormalities in 
the protein import receptors on mitochondria. Consequently, immuno­
fluorescence experiments were conducted to evaluate whether KAS- 
nChap could reduce the Aβ oligomer damage to mitochondrial mem­
brane receptors by the binding ability of KLVFF peptide and Aβ (Fig. 2a). 
The findings revealed that the co-localization coefficient between FITC- 
labeled Aβ and the mitochondrial outer membrane receptor (Tom-20) 
diminished following incubation of KAS-nChap and cells, implying that 
KAS-nChap could alleviate the Aβ oligomer's toxic effects on mito­
chondria. The calculated Pearson's correlation coefficients also proved 
these findings (Fig. S11). To further verify the clearance mechanism of 
Aβ protein, we measured colocalization of FITC-labeled Aβ and the ly­
sosomes after treated with PBS or KAS-nChap for 8 h. As shown in 
Fig. S12, more intense orange fluorescence (merged by green FITC-Aβ 
signal and red Lyso-tracker signal) was observed in cells incubated with 
KAS-nChap, whereas PBS group showed almost no orange fluorescence 
signal. This indicated that KAS-nChap could bind and bring Aβ to 
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
4 

lysosomes, suggesting a potential role in Aβ degradation. The calculated 
Pearson's correlation coefficients also proved these findings. The “pro­
ton sponge effect” of our PAE-based nanochaperone may not be a static 
property but rather a dynamically regulated process that could diminish 
after its interaction with Aβ oligomer. To verify the lysosomal degra­
dation of Aβ could occur effectively, the zeta potential of Aβ-nano­
chaperone 
complexes, 
which 
were 
formed 
by 
co-incubating 
nanochaperones with Aβ oligomer, were further measured. As shown in 
Fig. S13, the zeta potential of KLVFF-modified nanochaperone were 
decreased after binding with negatively charged Aβ oligomer. The 
reduction in the potential of these Aβ-nanochaperone complexes could 
slow down the proton sponge effect of nanochaperones in lysosomes. 
Furthermore, to directly verify the lysosomal integrity, we further per­
formed the Acridine Orange (AO) staining assay. AO is a metachromatic 
dye that fluoresces red in intact acidic lysosomes and turns green in the 
cytosol when lysosomal integrity is reduced. As shown in Fig. S14, after 
incubating with the nanochaperones for 4 h, the cell cytoplasm exhibi­
ted significant green fluorescence, indicating that lysosomal escape 
occurred. Then, KLVFF-modified nanochaperones bound the Aβ olig­
omer in the cytoplasm to form the Aβ-nanochaperone complexes and 
returned to the lysosome after 8 h. After incubating for 10 h, the lyso­
somes mainly maintained a red spot morphology, especially in the 
KLVFF-modified nanochaperone group, indicating that lysosomal 
integrity could maintain. The above results tend to indicate that Aβ 
binding might delay the lysosomal escape process of nanochaperones, 
potentially creating a time window for lysosomal degradation of Aβ 
oligomer. Therefore, these findings imply that KLVFF-modified nano­
chaperones (especially KAS-nChap) may facilitate Aβ oligomer degra­
dation through the lysosomal network.
Aβ oligomer can cause the imbalance of mitochondrial Ca2+ ho­
meostasis. Studies have shown that direct exposure of neurons to Aβ 
oligomer can increase mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake and subsequent 
mitochondrial Ca2+ overload [9,10]. Specifically, pathological Aβ olig­
omer causes Ca2+ accumulation in mitochondria and subsequent Ca2+
homeostasis dysfunction. Therefore, the mitochondrial Ca2+ concen­
tration was measured using the mitochondrial calcium ion probe 
(Rhod-2). CLSM images showed significant red fluorescence in the Aβ 
oligomer-treated cells, indicating that Aβ oligomer could cause mito­
chondrial Ca2+ overload (Fig. 2e and g). Meanwhile, nChap treatment 
could not decrease the red fluorescence, due to the weak binding ability 
Fig. 2. Mitochondrial Ca2þ homeostasis recovery by KAS-nChap. (a) Immunofluorescence images of FITC-Aβ and Tom-20 colocalization in SH-SY5Y cells. Scale 
bar = 20 μm. (b) Schematic illustration of neuronal cell damaged model and neuronal dysfunction recovery. The flow cytometry of (c) mitochondrial Ca2+ and (d) 
mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) (Rhod-2 stained mitochondrial Ca2+: red; Calcein stained mPTP: green) content in SH-SY5Y cells after various 
treatments. (e) CLSM images of mitochondrial Ca2+ and (g) quantitative analysis. Scale bar = 20 μm. (f) CLSM images of mPTP and (h) quantitative analysis. Scale 
bar = 20 μm. (i) Schematic illustration of mitochondrial Ca2+ homeostasis repair. Data were presented as mean ± SD, n = 3, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (For 
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
5 

to Aβ. In contrast, K-nChap, KA-nChap and KAS-nChap decreased the red 
fluorescence, indicating that they could alleviate the mitochondrial 
Ca2+ uptake increase, with the KAS-nChap group showing the most 
significant therapeutic effect. Furthermore, the mitochondrial perme­
ability transition pore (mPTP), as a non-selective channel between the 
inner and outer mitochondrial membranes, maintains mitochondrial ion 
homeostasis [53,54]. Mechanistically, the interaction of Aβ oligomers 
with the mPTP regulator (CypD) and increased mitochondrial Ca2+ leads 
to excessive mPTP opening and reduced mitochondrial membrane po­
tential. These further cause mitochondrial calcium ion homeostasis 
imbalance, increased ROS production, and ultimately neuronal cell 
damage [55]. The opening degree of mPTP was investigated by Calcein 
staining. Similar results were observed that nearly no green fluorescence 
in the Aβ oligomer treated cells, while the KAS-nChap group exhibited 
increased green fluorescence, demonstrating that KAS-nChap treatment 
could significantly alleviate the over-opening of mPTP (Fig. 2f and h). 
Because KAS-nChap inhibited the excessive opening of mPTP by binding 
to Aβ oligomer. Meanwhile, KAS-nChap could prevent the mitochondrial 
cardiolipin oxidation, stabilize the structure of the mitochondrial 
membrane through the SS-31 peptide on the surface, thus maintaining 
the stability of mPTP. The flow cytometry data also supported the above 
results (Fig. 2c and d). Consequently, KAS-nChap markedly recovered 
Ca2+ homeostasis and diminished the over-opening of mPTP by the ef­
fects of KLVFF and SS-31 peptide (Fig. 2i).
Mitochondria are the main organelles that produce ROS and super­
oxide in cells. More and more experiments have shown that excess Ca2+
in mitochondria will increase the generation of ROS, damage the 
mitochondrial membrane potential and mitochondrial structure, 
resulting in excessive oxidative stress and neuronal cell death [56]. 
Therefore, 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) and 
MitoSox were used as probes to detect the levels of ROS in cells and 
mitochondria. As shown in Fig. 3a–d, obvious fluorescence was gener­
ated in both DCFH-DA or MitoSox after adding Aβ oligomer, indicating a 
substantial increase in ROS production. K-nChap and KA-nChap treat­
ments were more effective in scavenging ROS than the nChap group, 
which was because the KLVFF peptide had toxic Aβ oligomer binding 
ability [57], thereby reducing Aβ-induced ROS elevation. Besides, SS-31 
alone treatment also decreased fluorescence due to its antioxidant 
Fig. 3. Cellular oxidative stress and mitochondrial damage repair. CLSM images to show the intracellular and mitochondrial ROS generation after different 
treatments, staining with (a) DCFH-DA or (b) MitoSOX probe and (c-d) quantitative analysis, respectively. (e-f) They were detected by flow cytometry, respectively. 
(g) The quantitative analysis of intracellular mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) by flow cytometry. Red/Green ratio represents the fluorescent intensity of red 
J-aggregate divided by that of green J-monomer. (h) CLSM images of MMP staining with JC-1 dye. (i) Representative Bio-TEM images of mitochondrial morphology 
in SH-SY5Y cells after various treatments. Orange arrows indicate damaged mitochondria. Scale bar = 500 nm. (j) Statistical analysis of the mitochondria length/ 
width ratio in the different treatment groups. (k) Statistical analysis of the number of mitochondria in the different treatment groups. Data were presented as mean ±
SD, **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
6 

properties (Fig. S15). More impressively, there was almost no fluores­
cence after incubation with KAS-nChap. Therefore, KAS-nChap effec­
tively decreased ROS levels through the synergic effect of KLVFF 
peptide, chaperone-mimicking microdomains on the surface and anti­
oxidant SS-31. These results were further supported by flow cytometry 
data (Fig. 3e and f).
Mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) can reflect whether 
mitochondria are healthy in cells, and the decrease of MMP indicates 
mitochondrial damage. We examined changes in MMP using JC-1 as an 
indicator, which is a cationic cyanine dye that accumulates in mito­
chondria in a potential-dependent manner. When the mitochondrial 
potential is high, JC-1 can enter the matrix of the mitochondria to form 
aggregates with red fluorescence. Whereas, JC-1 can only exist as 
monomers with green fluorescence when the potential is lowered. Thus, 
mitochondrial depolarization can be measured by the relative ratio of 
red and green fluorescence [58,59]. The intensity of red and green 
fluorescence in SH-SY5Y cells was detected by CLSM and flow cytom­
etry. As shown in Fig. 3g and h and Fig. S16, the red-to-green fluores­
cence ratio was significantly decreased in the Aβ oligomer group, 
suggesting that Aβ oligomer induced mitochondrial damage. Besides, 
the intensity of red fluorescence increased and green fluorescence 
decreased in KLVFF-modified nanochaperones and SS-31 groups 
compared to the nChap group. Among them, KAS-nChap exhibited a 
substantial recovery of mitochondrial membrane potential, as evidenced 
by an increased red-to-green fluorescence ratio to about 0.9, suggesting 
that KAS-nChap effectively repaired mitochondrial damage in SH-SY5Y 
cells. Taken together, KAS-nChap exhibited better therapeutic effects 
because of the synergic effect of KLVFF peptide, chaperone-mimicking 
microdomains on surface and functional antioxidant properties of 
SS-31. To verify the mitochondrial protection and apoptosis inhibition 
effects at the protein level, Western Blot (WB) analysis of the SH-SY5Y 
cell lysates was performed to quantify the expression changes of key 
proteins in the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway (Fig. S17). The 
expression of antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2, proapoptotic protein Bax and 
main apoptosis effector Cleaved caspase-3 were analyzed. The 
KAS-nChap group showed the strongest effect on reduction in Bax and 
Cleaved caspase-3 expression and enhancement in Bcl-2 levels in com­
parison with other groups. From the quantitative analysis, the ratios of 
Bax/Bcl-2 and levels of Cleaved caspase-3 in the KAS-nChap group were 
also much lower than those of other groups. These results suggested that 
KAS-nChap could effectively inhibit mitochondrial damage and 
apoptosis. Subsequently, Bio-TEM images were used to detect the 
morphology of mitochondria. The mitochondrial membrane in cells 
treated with Aβ oligomer was destroyed and a large portion of swollen, 
vacuolated mitochondria with completely disrupted mitochondrial 
cristae were observed. In contrast, most mitochondria treated by 
KAS-nChap had healthy morphology with normal cristae structures, 
indicating that KAS-nChap treatment efficiently restored the ultra­
structure of mitochondria (Fig. 3i–k). Therefore, the above results 
indicated that KAS-nChap could effectively inhibit neuronal apoptosis 
by preserving mitochondrial integrity.
Next, to investigate whether nanochaperones can repair Aβ-induced 
cytotoxicity, cell viability was evaluated using the CCK-8 assay. Following 
treated with Aβ oligomer for 4 h, cell viability of SH-SY5Y cells decreased 
to approximately 60% (Fig. S18). In the presence of KAS-nChap, the cell 
survival rate increased to about 95%, higher than that of n-Chap, K-nChap 
and KA-nChap, suggesting that KAS-nChap effectively reduced Aβ 
oligomer-induced cytotoxicity. The above data demonstrate that KAS- 
nChap can break the self-perpetuating feedback loop of mitochondrial 
dysfunction by binding Aβ oligomer, restoring mitochondrial calcium 
homeostasis and scavenging ROS at the cellular level.
2.4. Amelioration effect of KAS-nChap on the behavior and cognition of 
5xFAD mice
We next selected 5xFAD mice as AD pathological model to 
investigate the therapeutic efficacy of nanochaperones in vivo [16,17]. 
Cy5-labeled nanochaperones were injected into the mouse bilateral 
hippocampus, and their metabolism was monitored using fluorescence 
imaging technology. As shown in Fig. S19, obvious fluorescence signals 
were observed throughout the entire mouse brain during the therapeutic 
window and persisted for nearly 20 days, indicating that nano­
chaperones could spread within the brain and remain effective for 
approximately three weeks. Furthermore, the nanochaperones were 
injected into 5xFAD mice by the brain stereotactic injection, while saline 
into C57BL/6J mice served as wild-type control (WT) (Fig. 4a). Then 
behaviour tests such as nest building, new object recognition (NOR), and 
Morris water maze (MWM) test were carried out to evaluate the spatial 
learning and memory abilities of AD model mice [60]. The nesting score 
and novel objects discrimination index showed that 5xFAD mice failed 
to build the complete nest due to cognitive impairment (Fig. 4b and c). 
In contrast, nChap, K-nChap, KA-nChap, and KAS-nChap treated mice 
obtained higher nesting scores, respectively. Of note, the KAS-nChap 
treated mice possessed excellent nesting skills similar to the WT 
group. Moreover, the hippocampal function of 5xFAD mice was also 
examined using NOR test (Fig. 4d and e). 5xFAD mice showed decreased 
interest in novel objects based on the results of motion paths and 
discrimination index (DI), while KAS-nChap treated mice demonstrated 
a higher DI, which was comparable to WT mice, reflecting good interest 
in exploring novel objects. After that, in MWM test, mice treated with 
KAS-nChap demonstrated a significantly shorter latency period 
compared to the AD group during 4-days training (Fig. 4f and g), 
approaching that of the WT group. Following the removal of the escape 
platform on day 7, KAS-nChap treated group spent less time searching 
for the hidden platform, more time swimming in the target quadrant, 
and showed increased platform crossing numbers compared to nChap, 
K-nChap and KA-nChap treated groups (Fig. 4h–j), confirming that 
KAS-nChap significantly enhanced the spatial memory capabilities of 
5xAD mice. The above findings suggested that KAS-nChap effectively 
mitigated the cognitive and behavioural impairments in AD transgenic 
mice to the normal level.
2.5. Improvement of mitochondrial dysfunction and alleviation of 
neuronal damage in 5xFAD mice by KAS-nChap
After the behavioural evaluation, we subsequently investigated the 
brain microenvironment changes in 5xFAD mice. First, to visualize the 
in vivo targeting ability of nanochaperones to damaged neurons, we 
conducted immunofluorescence assays on brain slices (Fig. 5a and b). 
KA-nChap and KAS-nChap (red, Cy5 labeled) were more numerous in 
the damaged neuronal regions (green, TUNEL stained) of the AD mice 
brain compared to the nChap and K-nChap groups, confirming that 
AAN-modified nanochaperones could effectively target damaged neu­
rons for better therapeutic effects. During the “Aβ-Ca2+-ROS” positive 
feedback loop of mitochondrial dysfunction, Aβ can cause mitochondrial 
Ca2+ imbalance, which damages mitochondrial respiration, increases 
ROS production, decreases ATP synthesis, and ultimately leads to neu­
roinflammation and cell death. Therefore, immunofluorescence was 
used to detect Aβ in 5xFAD mice brains [61]. CLSM images revealed lots 
of Aβ plaques in AD mice brain compared to the WT group. Nevertheless, 
the Aβ plaques of the KAS-nChap group were significantly reduced 
compared to other groups, indicating that KAS-nChap effectively alle­
viated Aβ deposition in 5xFAD mice (Fig. 5c and h). These results were 
further supported by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) data 
(Fig. S20). Subsequently, we detected the levels of mitochondrial 
oxidative stress in the brains of AD mice by various oxidation indicators. 
After treatment, compared with the AD mice, the oxidative stress in­
dicators in the brains of nChap, K-nChap and KA-nChap treated mice, 
including total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC), superoxide dismutase 
(SOD) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) were improved, while the 
level of malondialdehyde (MDA), a major aldehyde product of lipid 
peroxidation, was decreased (Fig. S21). Especially in the KAS-nChap 
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
7 

group, its antioxidant capacity was greatly enhanced by the introduction 
of the SS-31 peptide. Specifically, the T-AOC, SOD and GSH-Px activity 
of the KAS-nChap treated group increased by 2.0-fold, 2.6-fold and 
2.4-fold, respectively, compared with the AD mice, while the level of 
MDA was reduced to 47.4% of the AD group. This indicated that 
KAS-nChap could effectively reduce mitochondrial oxidative stress. 
Besides, KAS-nChap restored ATP production, indicating that it en­
hances bioenergetic generation in mitochondria (Fig. S22). Then, 
8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OHG), an oxidative damage product, was used 
to detect the level of ROS in the brain [62]. A significant increase in the 
green fluorescence signal of 8-OHG was observed in the hippocampus of 
AD mice compared to the WT group, while the green fluorescence signal 
in the KAS-nChap group was remarkably reduced, suggesting that 
KAS-nChap could alleviate oxidative stress levels in the brain hippo­
campus (Fig. 5d and i).
Because the vicious cycle of mitochondrial dysfunction ultimately 
leads to neuroinflammation and neuronal damage, we further detected 
the levels of inflammatory factors in the brains of mice after treatment. 
In comparison to the AD group, the KAS-nChap-treated group exhibited 
a notably reduced fluorescence of TNF-α in the brain hippocampus 
(Fig. S23), verifying that KAS-nChap effectively mitigated neuro­
inflammation in the AD brain. These results were further supported by 
ELISA data of inflammatory factors (TNF-α and IL-6) (Fig. S24). We next 
explored the neuroprotection ability of KAS-nChap by Hematoxylin-and- 
eosin (H&E), NeuN and Niss staining. The images showed severe neuron 
damage in the brain of AD mice with apparent cell atrophy and nucleus 
pyknosis. In contrast, KAS-nChap treatment could significantly lighten 
the nerve cell damage, revealing that KAS-nChap was able to alleviate 
neuronal damage in AD mice and effectively protect neurons (Fig. 5e–g 
and Fig. 5j). Furthermore, the immunofluorescence assays were also 
verified in the AD mice brain cortex (Fig. S25 and Fig. S26). Besides, the 
assessment of protein oxidation was measured via a comparative anal­
ysis of the levels of oxidative and nitrosative stress markers in the AD 
mice brain after treatments. As shown in Fig. S27, the protein carbonyl 
(PC) and 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT) levels in the nChap, K-nChap and KA- 
nChap groups were slightly lower compared to the AD group, while 
the KAS-nChap group reduced PC and 3-NT levels by 25% and 30%, 
respectively, compared to the AD control group. These results indicated 
that KAS-nChap treatment could effectively alleviate protein oxidation. 
Biosafety is a key concern in drug development and clinical application. 
As shown in H&E staining, there were no obvious pathological changes 
in the major organs of mice (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) after 
various treatments (Fig. S28). Besides, the blood biochemistry and 
routine blood parameters data were within normal ranges after different 
treatments compared with the WT group. These results indicate that the 
negligible toxicity of nanochaperones on the liver and kidney (Fig. S29 
and Fig. S30). Taken together, the above results preliminarily supported 
the biosafety of KAS-nChap as a potential AD treatment.
Fig. 4. Behavioural evaluation of KAS-nChap therapy in 5xFAD mice. (a) Time course of nanochaperone administration and therapeutic evaluation. (b) 
Representative images of the nest-building experiment. (c) Nest-building scores for each group. (d) Representative searching paths of mice in novel object recognition 
(NOR) after different treatments. (e) Discrimination index (DI) of different groups in NOR test. (f) Representative swimming paths of mice in MWM after different 
treatments. (g) Escape latency at different time points. (h) Escape latency after 6-day training. (i) Swimming time spent in the targeted quadrant. (j) Number of 
crossing the escape platform location. Data were presented as mean ± SD, n = 6, ns represents no significance, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
8 

3. Conclusion
In summary, we have developed a customized sequential targeting 
nanochaperone (KAS-nChap) to serve as a novel damaged neuronal 
mitochondria repair therapy for AD. Benefiting from the combined dual 
functional modules-damaged neuronal targeting peptide and mito­
chondrial targeting peptide, this nanochaperone can selectively target 
dysfunctional mitochondrial regions. Furthermore, Aβ-recognition 
peptide KLVFF and the chaperone-mimicking hydrophobic micro­
domains of the polymer shell endow the nanochaperone with the ability 
to recognize and bind Aβ aggregates that are damaged to mitochondria, 
thereby reducing excessive Ca2+ influx into mitochondria and ROS 
overload in the damaged neuron. Meanwhile, due to the decorated 
antioxidant capacity of SS-31 peptide, nanochaperone further down­
regulates the excessive production of ROS in mitochondria and restores 
Ca2+ dyshomeostasis. In turn, the ROS reduction and Ca2+ homeostasis 
recovery alleviate the toxicity of Aβ aggregates to mitochondria. As a 
result, the nanochaperone disrupts the positive feedback loop of mito­
chondrial dysfunction of AD. Consequently, it repaired damaged neu­
rons, thus restoring cognitive impairments in the 5xFAD transgenic 
mice. Admittedly, we acknowledge that brain stereotaxic injections 
have limitations in clinical applications. Therefore, in our future work, 
we will attempt to introduce blood-brain barrier (BBB) penetrating 
peptides to overcome BBB or use intranasal administration to bypass 
BBB for further facilitating the in vivo application of nanochaperones. 
Overall, this groundbreaking approach offered a novel therapeutic 
strategy for mitigating or reversing the pathological mechanisms of AD 
against mitochondrial dysfunction.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Haodong Hu: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, 
Writing – original draft. Shuyue Zhao: Data curation, Investigation, 
Methodology, Visualization. Linlin Xu: Methodology, Validation, 
Visualization. Zixuan Ma: Data curation. Rujiang Ma: Funding acqui­
sition, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Fan Huang: Funding 
acquisition, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Linqi Shi: Funding 
acquisition, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Grant Numbers: 52293380, 52293383, 52473162 
and 52073306), the National Key R&D Program of China 
(501100012166) (Project number: 2022YFA1205700), the Natural 
Science Foundation of Tianjin, China (23JCZDJC00160), and the State 
Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materials and Devices Research 
Grant (JYY25QZZZ0002).
Fig. 5. Mechanisms of nanochaperones therapy modulating AD microenvironment and neuroprotection in vivo. (a) Immunofluorescence images and (b) 
quantitative analysis of tunel and Cy5-labeled nanochaperones in the hippocampus. Scale bar = 50 μm. Immunofluorescence images for expression of c) Aβ, d) 8- 
OHG, and g) NeuN in 5xFAD mice brain hippocampus. Scale bar = 100 μm. (e) H&E and (f) Niss staining analysis of mice hippocampus with different treatment 
groups. Scale bar = 100 μm. Quantitative analysis of immunofluorescence images of h) Aβ, i) 8-OHG, and j) NeuN in 5xFAD mice brain hippocampus. Data were 
presented as mean ± SD, n = 5, ns represents no significance, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
9 

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10 
.1016/j.biomaterials.2026.124408.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] H. Hampel, R. Au, S. Mattke, W.M. van der Flier, P. Aisen, L. Apostolova, C. Chen, 
M. Cho, S. De Santi, P. Gao, Designing the next-generation clinical care pathway for 
Alzheimer's disease, Nat. Aging 2 (2022) 692–703.
[2] W.K. Self, D.M. Holtzman, Emerging diagnostics and therapeutics for Alzheimer 
disease, Nat. Med. 29 (2023) 2187–2199.
[3] J.F. Dartigues, Alzheimer's disease: a global challenge for the 21st century, Lancet 
Neurol. 8 (2009) 1082–1083.
[4] J. Liao, W. He, L. Li, J. Wang, L. Gong, Q. Zhang, Z. Lin, Mitochondria in brain 
diseases: bridging structural-mechanistic insights into precision-targeted therapies, 
Cell Biomaterials 1 (2025) 100016.
[5] T. Ashleigh, R.H. Swerdlow, M.F. Beal, The role of mitochondrial dysfunction in 
Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis, Alzheimer's Dementia 19 (2023) 333–342.
[6] T. Calì, D. Ottolini, M. Brini, Mitochondrial Ca2+ and neurodegeneration, Cell 
Calcium 52 (2012) 73–85.
[7] S.C. Cunnane, E. Trushina, C. Morland, A. Prigione, G. Casadesus, Z.B. Andrews, M. 
F. Beal, L.H. Bergersen, R.D. Brinton, S. de la Monte, Brain energy rescue: an 
emerging therapeutic concept for neurodegenerative disorders of ageing, Nat. Rev. 
Drug Discov. 19 (2020) 609–633.
[8] E. Motori, I. Atanassov, S. Kochan, K. Folz-Donahue, V. Sakthivelu, P. Giavalisco, 
N. Toni, J. Puyal, N.-G. Larsson, Neuronal metabolic rewiring promotes resilience 
to neurodegeneration caused by mitochondrial dysfunction, Sci. Adv. 6 (2020) 
eaba8271.
[9] M. Calvo-Rodriguez, B.J. Bacskai, Mitochondria and calcium in Alzheimer's 
disease: from cell signaling to neuronal cell death, Trends Neurosci. 44 (2021) 
136–151.
[10] M. Calvo-Rodriguez, S.S. Hou, A.C. Snyder, E.K. Kharitonova, A.N. Russ, S. Das, 
Z. Fan, A. Muzikansky, M. Garcia-Alloza, A. Serrano-Pozo, Increased mitochondrial 
calcium levels associated with neuronal death in a mouse model of Alzheimer's 
disease, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 2146.
[11] M. Calvo-Rodriguez, E.K. Kharitonova, A.C. Snyder, S.S. Hou, M.V. Sanchez-Mico, 
S. Das, Z. Fan, H. Shirani, K.P.R. Nilsson, A. Serrano-Pozo, Real-time imaging of 
mitochondrial redox reveals increased mitochondrial oxidative stress associated 
with amyloid β aggregates in vivo in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease, Mol. 
Neurodegener. 19 (2024) 6.
[12] W. Wang, F. Zhao, X. Ma, G. Perry, X. Zhu, Mitochondria dysfunction in the 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease: recent advances, Mol. Neurodegener. 15 
(2020) 1–22.
[13] K. Jia, H. Du, Mitochondrial permeability transition: a pore intertwines brain aging 
and Alzheimer's disease, Cells 10 (2021) 649.
[14] G. Battogtokh, Y.S. Choi, D.S. Kang, S.J. Park, M.S. Shim, K.M. Huh, Y.-Y. Cho, J. 
Y. Lee, H.S. Lee, H.C. Kang, Mitochondria-targeting drug conjugates for cytotoxic, 
anti-oxidizing and sensing purposes: current strategies and future perspectives, 
Acta Pharm. Sin. B 8 (2018) 862–880.
[15] Y. Han, X. Chu, L. Cui, S. Fu, C. Gao, Y. Li, B. Sun, Neuronal mitochondria-targeted 
therapy for Alzheimer's disease by systemic delivery of resveratrol using dual- 
modified novel biomimetic nanosystems, Drug Deliv. 27 (2020) 502–518.
[16] Q. Zhang, Q. Song, R. Yu, A. Wang, G. Jiang, Y. Huang, J. Chen, J. Xu, D. Wang, 
H. Chen, Nano-brake halts mitochondrial dysfunction cascade to alleviate 
neuropathology and rescue Alzheimer's cognitive deficits, Adv. Sci. 10 (2023) 
2204596.
[17] W. Qian, D. Liu, J. Liu, M. Liu, Q. Ji, B. Zhang, Z. Yang, Y. Cheng, S. Zhou, The 
mitochondria-targeted micelle inhibits Alzheimer's disease progression by 
alleviating neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction and neuroinflammation, Small 1 
(2025) 2408581.
[18] R. Liu, J. Yang, L. Liu, Z. Lu, Z. Shi, W. Ji, J. Shen, X. Zhang, An “Amyloid-β 
Cleaner” for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease by normalizing microglial 
dysfunction, Adv. Sci. 7 (2020) 1901555.
[19] G. Han, Y. Jin, K. Bai, Q. Du, X. Gu, L. Tao, J. Zhou, H. Zhang, Y. Ding, Biomimetic 
elasticity compressed assembly controls rapid intracerebral drug release to reverse 
microglial dysfunction, Sci. Adv. 11 (2025) eadr0656.
[20] C. Li, Y. Wu, Q. Chen, Y. Luo, P. Liu, Z. Zhou, Z. Zhao, T. Zhang, B. Su, T. Sun, 
C. Jiang, Pleiotropic microenvironment remodeling micelles for cerebral ischemia- 
reperfusion injury therapy by inhibiting neuronal ferroptosis and glial 
overactivation, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 18164–18177.
[21] Y. Liu, D. Zhao, F. Yang, C. Ye, Z. Chen, Y. Chen, X. Yu, J. Xie, Y. Dou, J. Chang, In 
situ self-assembled phytopolyphenol-coordinated intelligent nanotherapeutics for 
multipronged management of ferroptosis-driven Alzheimer's disease, ACS Nano 18 
(2024) 7890–7906.
[22] H. Malkki, Chaperone protein clusterin is involved in amyloid-β-associated 
entorhinal atrophy in early ad, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 10 (2014), 60-60.
[23] P.J. Muchowski, J.L. Wacker, Modulation of neurodegeneration by molecular 
chaperones, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6 (2005) 11–22.
[24] W. Ahmad, T. Zhao, K. He, S. Luo, Exploring the role of British dementia protein-2 
(Bri2) and its BRICHOS domain in neurodegenerative disorders, Supramol, Mater 3 
(2024) 100050.
[25] R. Freer, P. Sormanni, G. Vecchi, P. Ciryam, C.M. Dobson, M. Vendruscolo, 
A protein homeostasis signature in healthy brains recapitulates tissue vulnerability 
to Alzheimer's disease, Sci. Adv. 2 (2016) e1600947.
[26] S. Zhao, B. Li, Y. Song, S. Wu, H. Hu, J. Wang, L. Shi, F. Huang, Temperature- 
responsive self-assembly nanochaperone protects green fluorescent proteins from 
thermal denaturation, Supramol. Mater. 3 (2024) 100067.
[27] S. Escusa-Toret, W.I. Vonk, J. Frydman, Spatial sequestration of misfolded proteins 
by a dynamic chaperone pathway enhances cellular fitness during stress, Nat. Cell 
Biol. 15 (2013) 1231–1243.
[28] R. Rosenzweig, N.B. Nillegoda, M.P. Mayer, B. Bukau, The Hsp70 chaperone 
network, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20 (2019) 665–680.
[29] K.P. Kepp, Bioinorganic chemistry of Alzheimer's disease, Chem. Rev. 112 (2012) 
5193–5239.
[30] A.B. Caballero, P. Gamez, Nanochaperone-based strategies to control protein 
aggregation linked to conformational diseases, Angew. Chem. 133 (2021) 41–52.
[31] D. Balchin, M. Hayer-Hartl, F.U. Hartl, In vivo aspects of protein folding and 
quality control, Science 353 (2016) aac4354.
[32] H. Saibil, Chaperone machines for protein folding, unfolding and disaggregation, 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 14 (2013) 630–642.
[33] S. Zhao, S. Quan, W. He, L. Xu, H. Hu, Z. Ma, R. Ma, F. Huang, L. Shi, Natural spy 
chaperone mimic: tailored nanochaperone with electrostatic–hydrophobic synergy 
to enhance protein folding regulation, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 147 (2025) 
15357–15368.
[34] Q.Y. Zhao, J.Y. Liu, H. Deng, R.Y. Ma, J.Y. Liao, H.X. Liang, J.X. Hu, J.Q. Li, Z. 
Y. Guo, J.C. Cai, X.D. Xu, Z.L. Gao, S.C. Su, Targeting mitochondria-located circrna 
scar alleviates nash via reducing mros output, Cell 183 (2020) 76–93.
[35] B. Kalmar, L. Greensmith, Induction of heat shock proteins for protection against 
oxidative stress, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 61 (2009) 310–318.
[36] J. Labbadia, R.I. Morimoto, The biology of proteostasis in aging and disease, Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 84 (2015) 435–464.
[37] L. Xu, X. Wu, S. Zhao, H. Hu, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, R. Ma, 
Harnessing nanochaperone-mediated autophagy for selective clearance of 
pathogenic tau protein in Alzheimer's disease, Adv. Mater. 36 (2024) 2313869.
[38] J. Chen, F. Ma, Y. Zhang, M. Xu, L. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Ma, L. Shi, Synergizing CXCL9 
with BRD4-PROTAC using nanochaperone boosts robust T cell-dependent 
antitumor immune responses for cancer immunotherapy, Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 
(2024) 2314203.
[39] X. Mi, H. Du, X. Guo, Y. Wu, L. Shen, Y. Luo, D. Wang, Q. Su, R. Xiang, S. Yue, 
Asparagine endopeptidase-targeted ultrasound-responsive nanobubbles alleviate 
tau cleavage and amyloid-β deposition in an Alzheimer's disease model, Acta 
Biomater. 141 (2022) 388–397.
[40] X. Song, Z. Wan, T. Chen, Y. Fu, K. Jiang, X. Yi, H. Ke, J. Dong, L. Yang, L. Li, 
Development of a multi-target peptide for potentiating chemotherapy by 
modulating tumor microenvironment, Biomaterials 108 (2016) 44–56.
[41] Y. Wang, M. Deng, Y. Wu, C. Zheng, F. Zhang, C. Guo, B. Zhang, C. Hu, Q. Kong, 
Y. Wang, A multifunctional mitochondria-protective gene delivery platform 
promote intervertebral disc regeneration, Biomaterials 317 (2025) 123067.
[42] Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, F. Zhao, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, M. Ou, L. Mei, Q. Wang, 
Mitochondrial-targeted and ros-responsive nanocarrier via nose-to-brain pathway 
for ischemic stroke treatment, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 13 (2023) 5107–5120.
[43] H. Zhang, D. Yu, S. Liu, C. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Ren, X. Qu, Nir-ii hydrogen-bonded 
organic frameworks (Hofs) used for target-specific amyloid-β photooxygenation in 
an Alzheimer's disease model, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 61 (2021) e202109068.
[44] M. Ma, Z. Liu, N. Gao, K. Dong, Z. Pi, L. Kang, X. Du, J. Ren, X. Qu, Near-infrared 
target enhanced peripheral clearance of amyloid-β in Alzheimer's disease model, 
Biomaterials 276 (2021) 121065.
[45] Q. Huang, C. Jiang, X. Xia, Y. Wang, C. Yan, X. Wang, T. Lei, X. Yang, W. Yang, 
G. Cheng, Pathological bbb crossing melanin-like nanoparticles as metal-ion 
chelators and neuroinflammation regulators against Alzheimer's disease, Research 
6 (2023) 180.
[46] X. Zhang, H. Hu, Q. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang, S. Zhao, L. Xu, R. Ma, F. Huang, L. Shi, 
Cascade-targeting multifunctional nanochaperone remodels brain 
microenvironment for synergistic therapy of Alzheimer's disease, Nano Today 55 
(2024) 102168.
[47] Y. Lu, Z. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Guo, Q. Chen, X. Chen, X. He, L. Liu, 
Microenvironment remodeling micelles for Alzheimer's disease therapy by early 
modulation of activated microglia, Adv. Sci. 6 (2019) 1801586.
[48] H. Xu, P. She, Z. Zhao, B. Ma, G. Li, Y. Wang, Duplex responsive nanoplatform with 
cascade targeting for atherosclerosis photoacoustic diagnosis and multichannel 
combination therapy, Adv. Mater. 35 (2023) 2300439.
[49] X.P. Zhang, Y.G. Sun, R. Yang, B. Liu, Y. Liu, J.H. Yang, W.G. Liu, An injectable 
mitochondria-targeted nanodrug loaded-hydrogel for restoring mitochondrial 
function and hierarchically attenuating oxidative stress to reduce myocardial 
ischemia-reperfusion injury, Biomaterials 287 (2022) 13.
[50] L. Xu, Y. Ding, F. Ma, Y. Chen, G. Chen, L. Zhu, J. Long, R. Ma, Y. Liu, J. Liu, 
Engineering a pathological tau-targeted nanochaperone for selective and 
synergetic inhibition of tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease, Nano Today 43 
(2022) 101388.
[51] Y. Liu, Y. Li, D. Keskin, L. Shi, Poly (β-Amino Esters): Synthesis, formulations, and 
their biomedical applications, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 8 (2019) 1801359.
[52] H.R. Yang, X.Y. Li, L. Zhu, X.H. Wu, S.Z. Zhang, F. Huang, X.Z. Feng, L.Q. Shi, Heat 
shock protein inspired nanochaperones restore amyloid-β homeostasis for 
preventative therapy of Alzheimer's disease, Adv. Sci. 6 (2019) 1901844.
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
10 

[53] M. Bonora, P. Pinton, A new current for the mitochondrial permeability transition, 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 44 (2019) 559–561.
[54] X. Xia, H. Li, X. Xu, G. Zhao, M. Du, Facilitating pro-survival mitophagy for 
alleviating Parkinson's disease via sequence-targeted lycopene nanodots, ACS Nano 
17 (2023) 17979–17995.
[55] H. Du, L. Guo, F. Fang, D. Chen, A.A. Sosunov, G. M McKhann, Y. Yan, C. Wang, 
H. Zhang, J.D. Molkentin, Cyclophilin d deficiency attenuates mitochondrial and 
neuronal perturbation and ameliorates learning and memory in Alzheimer's 
disease, Nat. Med. 14 (2008) 1097–1105.
[56] L.Y. Zhao, F.L. Meng, Y.J. Li, S.J. Liu, M.M. Xu, F. Chu, C.Z. Li, X.L. Yang, L. Luo, 
Multivalent nanobody conjugate with rigid, reactive oxygen species scavenging 
scaffold for multi-target therapy of Alzheimer's disease, Adv. Mater. 35 (2023) 
2210879.
[57] Q. Luo, Y.X. Lin, P.P. Yang, Y. Wang, G.B. Qi, Z.Y. Qiao, B.N. Li, K. Zhang, J. 
P. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Wang, A self-destructive nanosweeper that captures and 
clears amyloid β-peptides, Nat. Commun. 9 (2018) 1802.
[58] K. Qian, X.Y. Bao, Y.X. Li, P.Z. Wang, Q. Guo, P. Yang, S.T. Xu, F.Z. Yu, R. Meng, Y. 
L. Cheng, D.Y. Sheng, J.X. Cao, M.J. Xu, J. Wu, T.Y. Wang, Y.H. Wang, Q. Xie, 
W. Lu, Q.Z. Zhang, Cholinergic neuron targeting nanosystem delivering hybrid 
peptide for combinatorial mitochondrial therapy in Alzheimer's disease, ACS Nano 
16 (2022) 11455–11472.
[59] A. Xie, G. Cheng, J. Wu, Z. Li, G. Yu, X. Zhu, T. Chen, Highly bbb-permeable 
nanomedicine reverses neuroapoptosis and neuroinflammation to treat Alzheimer's 
disease, Biomaterials 312 (2025) 122749.
[60] H. Zhou, Y. Gong, Y. Liu, A. Huang, X. Zhu, J. Liu, G. Yuan, L. Zhang, J.-a. Wei, 
J. Liu, Intelligently thermoresponsive flower-like hollow nano-ruthenium system 
for sustained release of nerve growth factor to inhibit hyperphosphorylation of tau 
and neuronal damage for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, Biomaterials 237 
(2020) 119822.
[61] T. Lei, Z. Yang, C. Jiang, X. Wang, W. Yang, X. Yang, R. Xie, F. Tong, X. Xia, 
Q. Huang, Y. Du, Y. Huang, H. Gao, Mannose-integrated nanoparticle hitchhike 
glucose transporter 1 recycling to overcome various barriers of oral delivery for 
Alzheimer's disease therapy, ACS Nano 18 (2024) 3234–3250.
[62] P.X. Liu, T.Y. Zhang, Q.J. Chen, C. Li, Y.C. Chu, Q. Guo, Y.W. Zhang, W.X. Zhou, H. 
Y. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Wang, Z.H. Zhao, Y.F. Luo, X.W. Li, H.L. Song, B.Y. Su, C.F. Li, 
T. Sun, C. Jiang, Biomimetic dendrimer-peptide conjugates for early multi-target 
therapy of Alzheimer's disease by inflammatory microenvironment modulation, 
Adv. Mater. 33 (2021) 2100746.
H. Hu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 335 (2026) 124408 
11