RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.afm-journal.de
Selective Adsorption to Pathogenic Bacteria Augments
Antibacterial Activity via Adjusting the Physicochemical
Property of Nanoparticles
Zhi-Hao Wang, Chaoran Zhu, Fengqin Zhao, Xiufang Shi,* Junjie Liu,* and Jinjin Shi*
Oral antibiotics are the primary method used to treat bacterial infections in
clinical practice. However, the non-selectivity of antibiotics reduces the
eﬃcacy of treatment while also tending to damage normal ﬂora and cause
dysbiosis. Obviously, it is crucial to enhance the selectivity of antibiotics
against bacteria. It is possible to modulate the physicochemical properties of
orally administered nanosystems to achieve selective adsorption to bacteria,
thereby achieving improving bactericidal eﬀects. A series of nanoparticles are
examined bacterial adhesion characteristics focusing on ﬁve aspects: particle
size, shape, charge, surface hydrophilicity, and surface modiﬁcation. Selective
adsorption of nanoparticles is investigated pathogenic bacteria (S. aureus as
an example), normal bacteria (E. coli as an example), and probiotic bacteria
(E. faecium as an example). The results show that ≈50 nm chitosan-modiﬁed
spherical Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) nanoparticles exhibit a stronger
adsorption capacity for pathogenic bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus). After
loading with amoxicillin, the antibacterial nanoparticles are able to destroy
pathogenic bacteria without disrupting the normal intestinal bacterial ﬂora
and reducing the typical side eﬀects of ecological disruption caused by
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Thus, this work presents a convenient and
versatile strategy for targeting bacteria to enhance the antibacterial eﬃcacy of
current antibiotics.
1. Introduction
Oral antibiotics are the most common and eﬀective treatment
for bacterial infections.[1] The vast majority of antibiotic targets
Z.-H. Wang, C. Zhu, F. Zhao, X. Shi, J. Liu, J. Shi
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou 450001, China
E-mail: xfshi@zzu.edu.cn;liujunjie@zzu.edu.cn;shijinyxy@zzu.edu.cn
Z.-H.Wang,C.Zhu,F.Zhao,X.Shi,J.Liu,J.Shi
Henan Key Laboratory of NanomedicineforTargeting Diagnosis
andTreatment
Zhengzhou 450001,China
Z.-H.Wang,C.Zhu,F.Zhao,X.Shi,J.Liu,J.Shi
Key Laboratory of AdvancedDrug Preparation Technologies
Ministry of Education
Zhengzhou 450001,China
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202416594
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202416594
are shared between Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria.[2] Non-selectivity
of antibiotics results in high-dose usage
and the emergence of drug resistance.[3]
Moreover, the non-selectivity of antibiotics
leads to the elimination of pathogenic bac-
teria along with normal bacteria, which
may result in diseases associated with
intestinal ﬂora dysbiosis.[4] Studies have
shown that oral antibiotics can alter the
composition and quantity of the intesti-
nal ﬂora, which in turn can impact the
immune defenses of the intestinal tract
and increase the risk of various dis-
eases, including bacterial enteritis and
metabolic disorders.[5] Therefore, it is cru-
cial to enhance the selectivity of antibiotics
against bacteria to minimize the adverse ef-
fects of antibiotics on the gut microbiota.
Nanoparticles have been extensively in-
vestigated as eﬃcient drug delivery carri-
ers for antibiotics.[6] The selective bind-
ing of nanoparticles to pathogenic bacte-
ria is crucial for enhancing antibacterial ef-
ﬁcacy. The human gut is a complex mi-
crobial ecosystem, with the largest number
of bacteria in the colon, about 1014, and
orally ingested nanoparticles inevitably interact with various
microorganisms.[7] It is well known that the physicochemical
properties of nanoparticles eﬀectively control the interaction be-
tween nanoparticles and the external environment. Therefore, it
is possible to modulate the physicochemical properties of orally
administered nanosystems to achieve selective adsorption to bac-
teria and thereby enhancing sterilization.
In this study, a series of model nanoparticles were prepared
based on the prevailing design of oral nanoparticles, grouped
according to diﬀerent particle size, shape, zeta potential, sur-
face hydrophilicity and surface modiﬁcation. The adsorption se-
lectivity of nanoparticles with diﬀerent physicochemical proper-
ties was veriﬁed in vitro and in vivo against pathogenic bacteria
(Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) as an example), normal bacteria
(Escherichia coli (E. coli) as an example), and probiotic bacteria
(Enterococcuz faecium (E. faecium) as an example), using a bac-
terial infection of S. aureus as a model. Accordingly, a model
nanoparticle with a stronger adsorption capacity for bacteria was
prepared based on the above investigations. The selective killing
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (1 of 16)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of selective adsorption to pathogenic bacteria augments antibacterial activity via adjusting the physicochemical property
of nanoparticles.
eﬀect of this antibacterial nanoparticle formulation on S. aureus
was investigated by loading it with amoxicillin.
The results show that the interaction between nanoparticles
and bacteria is inﬂuenced by nanoparticle size, shape, surface
hydrophilicity, charge, and surface modiﬁcation (Figure 1). Re-
garding nanoparticle size, small-sized nanoparticles exhibited
stronger binding to S. aureus compared to E. coli and E. fae-
cium. As for shape, spherical nanoparticles tended to bind more
eﬀectively to S. aureus than rod-shaped nanoparticles. Regard-
ing surface hydrophilicity, a hydrophilic PEG layer reduced S.
aureus attachment. As for surface charge, the negative charge
of the bacterial cell wall facilitates binding to Poly(lactide-co-
glycolide) (PLGA) nanoparticles with a positive surface charge.
In addition, surface modiﬁcation can alter nanoparticle aﬃnity
to bacteria, with hyaluronic acid and chitosan modiﬁcations en-
hancing binding to S. aureus. Taken together, small particle size
(≈50 nm) chitosan-modiﬁed PLGA nanoparticles (named as CS-
PLGA@S) exhibit the highest adsorption eﬃciency for S. aureus.
Using amoxicillin (AMX) as a model antibiotic, in vitro selective
bactericidal assays show that AMX loading CS-PLGA@S (CS-
PLGA@S/AMX) nanoparticles selectively target S. aureus while
reducing damage to normal bacteria. In vivo bacterial therapy ex-
periments, CS-PLGA@S/AMX nanoparticles reduced bacterial
damage to intestinal tissues and improved the abundance and di-
versity of intestinal ﬂora compared to free amoxicillin treatment.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Binding Ability of Model Nanoparticles of Diﬀerent Particle
Sizes to Bacteria
With reference to the current common oral nanomedicine par-
ticle sizes,[8] the study used commercially available polystyrene
nanoparticles (PS NPs) as a model to investigate the diﬀerences
in adsorption eﬃciency of nanoparticles with three diﬀerent par-
ticle sizes: 50, 100, and 200 nm, on various intestinal bacteria.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis (Figure 2a;
Figure S1, Supporting Information) showed that all groups of
polystyrene nanoparticles were spherical with a relatively uni-
form particle size and zeta potential distributions.
To assess whether the size of model nanoparticle aﬀects their
binding to intestinal bacteria (Figure 2b). The study selected the
Gram-negative bacterium E. coli, the Gram-positive bacterium
S. aureus, and the intestinal commensal E. faecium as bacterial
model organisms. As shown in Figure 2c, the adsorption capac-
ity of bacteria with PS NPs was size-dependent, particularly with
S. aureus, which was overall higher than the other two bacteria.
The adsorption capacity for S. aureus decreased signiﬁcantly from
32.0 to 9.8% as the particle size increased. On the contrary, the
increase in particle size had little eﬀect on the adsorption per-
centage of the other two bacteria. To visually analyze the binding
of model nanoparticles to bacteria, the study investigated the bac-
terial precipitates using ﬂow cytometry and confocal microscopy.
The results of ﬂow analysis (Figure 2d,f,h) further veriﬁed that
decreasing particle size increased the adsorption of nanoparti-
cles to the three bacteria. When the particle size was increased
from 50 to 200 nm, the reductions in E. coli, S. aureus, and E. fae-
cium were 11.2, 51.2, and 15.3%, respectively. This suggests that
nanoparticles with smaller particle sizes were more eﬀective at
binding to S. aureus. Confocal images (Figure 2e,g,i) showed the
co-localization of PS NPs with bacteria. Semi-quantitative analy-
sis of the ﬂuorescence signals showed that PS50 NPs exhibited
the highest ﬂuorescence intensity in all three bacteria. In partic-
ular, only 100 and 200 nm nanoparticles in S. aureus showed a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence, suggesting that S. aureus is more sensitive
to changes in particle size, and that small-sized nanoparticles are
better able to bind to bacteria. Further observation of the surface
of S. aureus by scanning electron microscopy (Figure 2j) revealed
that PS50 NPs were tightly wrapped around S. aureus, while only
sporadic nanoparticles were found on the bacterial surface in the
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (2 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 2. Binding ability of model nanoparticles of diﬀerent particle sizes to bacteria. a) TEM image of PS nanoparticles. The scale bar is 200 nm. b) A
schematic of bacterial adhesion experiment of nanoparticles. NP means nanoparticles. c) Binding rate of PS nanoparticles adhered on bacterial surface
(n = 3). Rhodamine B (RhB) labeled PS nanoparticles were incubated with d) E. coli, f) S. aureus, or h) E. faecium in PBS for 2 h. Adhesion eﬃciency
assessed by ﬂow cytometry and expressed as histograms. Unmodiﬁed bacteria were used as controls. Representative confocal images and MFI values
of DAPI labeled (e) E. coli, (g) S. aureus, or i) E. faecium incubated with RhB labeled PS nanoparticles (n = 3). The scale bar is 5 μm. j) Representative
pseudo-color SEM images of diﬀerent nanoparticles on S. aureus. The scale bar is 1 μm. Values are represented as means ± SD. Signiﬁcance was assessed
using one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Fisher’s LSD multiple comparisons, giving p-values, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, **** p < 0.0001. ns means
not signiﬁcant.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (3 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
PS200 NPs group. In conclusion, the study found that the bind-
ing of nanoparticles to bacteria was correlated with particle size.
Modulation of particle size signiﬁcantly altered the binding abil-
ity of nanoparticles to bacteria. Speciﬁcally, reducing the particle
size improved the attachment to S. aureus.
2.2. Binding Ability of Diﬀerent Shape Model Nanoparticles with
Bacteria
Diﬀerences in intestinal mucus permeation, retention, and in-
testinal epithelial cell uptake between spherical and rod-shaped
nanoparticles have been extensively studied.[9] Therefore, the
study utilized mesoporous silica,[10] a commonly employed ma-
terial in oral delivery, as a model to examine the variations in ad-
sorption eﬃciency among three shapes of nanoparticles: spher-
ical, 3:1 aspect ratio, and 5:1 aspect ratio, for various intestinal
bacteria. Diﬀerent shapes of mesoporous silica can be obtained
by adjusting the amounts of sodium hydroxide and ammonia
used during synthesis, as well as the aging time.[11] Figures 3a
and S2 (Supporting Information) show the successful prepara-
tion of spherical and rod-shaped model nanoparticles with a rela-
tively uniform particle size and zeta potential distribution for all
groups.
The binding capacity of nanoparticles with diﬀerent shapes
was examined after co-incubation with bacteria. As shown in
Figure 3b, the spherical MSNs were more eﬀective at binding
to bacteria than the rod-shaped MSNs, and MSN@1:1 demon-
strated the highest binding aﬃnity with S. aureus. The results of
the ﬂow-through analysis (Figure 3c,e,g) also accurately reﬂected
the binding ability of various shapes of MSNs to the three types
of enteric bacteria. The morphology of the MSNs changed from
spherical to rod-shaped MSNs with an aspect ratio of 5:1. This
change resulted in a decrease in the rates of 9.9, 24.8, and 8.9%
against the three types of bacteria, respectively. This indicates that
S. aureus is more sensitive to the change in nanoparticle shape.
Semi-quantitative analysis of the confocal images (Figure 3d,f,h)
revealed that spherical nanoparticles had the highest adsorption
capacity for common intestinal bacteria. In addition, the study
observed through scanning electron microscopy (Figure 3i) that
MSN@1:1 NPs were uniformly dispersed on the surface of S.
aureus. In contrast, only a small number of nanoparticles were
found on the surface of the other groups of bacteria. In summary,
the study conﬁrmed that the ability of nanoparticles to bind to
bacteria was correlated with the shape, with spherical nanoparti-
cles exhibiting stronger binding ability to S. aureus.
2.3. Binding Ability of Model Nanoparticles with Diﬀerent
Hydrophilicity and Hydrophobicity to Bacteria
Hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity play an important role in
determining nanoparticle-biological interactions.[12] The study
used poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles, which are
used in various drug delivery systems,[13] as a model. The study
adjusted the ratio of using PLGA and PEG-PLGA polymers to
prepare three model nanoparticles with varying degrees of hy-
drophilicity and hydrophobicity. This was done to investigate the
impact of hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity on the adsorption
eﬃciency of diﬀerent intestinal bacteria. Transmission electron
microscopy analysis (Figure 4a) revealed that the particle sizes
of the three model nanoparticles, each varying in hydrophilicity
and hydrophobicity, were similar, approximately 86 nm. Figure
S3 (Supporting Information) showed the nanoparticles with a rel-
atively uniform particle size distribution. The oil–water partition
coeﬃcient reﬂects the distribution of substances in the oil and
water phases, which can detect the hydrophilicity and hydropho-
bicity of the nanoparticle surface.[14] From the results (Figure 4b),
it can be observed that the PLGA nanoparticles exhibit hydropho-
bicity, while the PEG-PLGA nanoparticles exhibit hydrophilicity.
From the contact angle of the nanoparticles (Figure 4c), it can also
be observed that the contact angle of the nanoparticles with water
decreases as the hydrophilicity of the nanoparticles increases.[15]
This observation further conﬁrms the successful construction of
model nanoparticles with varying degrees of hydrophilicity and
hydrophobicity.
Model nanoparticles with varying degrees of hydrophilicity
and hydrophobicity were co-incubated with bacteria and sub-
sequently assessed for their binding capacity. As shown in
Figure 4d, PLGA NPs presenting hydrophobicity on the surface
exhibited the highest adsorption capacity and attached more to
S. aureus (≈23%) than to E. coli and E. faecium (≈8% and ≈11%).
The adsorption capacity tended to decrease with the increase of
the PEG content on the surface, i.e., the increase of hydrophilic-
ity. The ﬂow cytometry results (Figure 4e,g,i) similarly indicated
that the binding capacity of nanoparticles with varying degrees of
hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity on the surface to the three bac-
teria increased with the enhancement of hydrophobicity. In par-
ticular, in S. aureus, the percentage of PEG-PLGA NPs increased
from 39.6 to 84.8% when combined with PLGA NPs. Subsequent
semi-quantitative analysis of the confocal images (Figure 4f,h,j)
revealed that S. aureus exhibited the strongest ﬂuorescence sig-
nals, which were signiﬁcantly intensiﬁed by the increase in hy-
drophobicity. Furthermore, by the scanning electron microscopy
images of S. aureus (Figure 4k) revealed numerous nanoparti-
cles on the bacterial surface in the PEG-PLGA group. Hydropho-
bic nanoparticles exhibited a stronger ability to bind to bacte-
ria, which may be attributed to the modiﬁcation of PEG on the
nanoparticles’ surface. PEG is commonly utilized as a surface
modiﬁer to minimize adsorption.[16] The study conﬁrmed that
the binding ability of nanoparticles to bacteria was correlated with
the surface hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity.
2.4. Binding Capacity of Nanoparticles with Diﬀerent Charge
Models to Bacteria
The zeta potential reﬂects the change in the surface charge of
nanoparticles, and the absolute value of the zeta potential can
also serve as a crucial parameter for assessing the stability of
nanoparticles.[17] Since PLGA itself is negatively charged, the
study envisioned modifying the PLGA surface with positively
charged substances to alter its charge. Upon reviewing the lit-
erature, the study selected CTAB, a quaternary ammonium salt
that falls under cationic surfactants.[18] According to the princi-
ple of PLGA preparation, the study added varying amounts of
CTAB during the formation of the O/W emulsion, anticipating
the development of PLGA nanoparticles with distinct surface
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (4 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 3. Binding ability of diﬀerent shape model nanoparticles with bacteria. a) TEM image of mesoporous silica nanoparticles. The scale bar is
150 nm. b) Binding rate of mesoporous silica nanoparticles adhered on bacterial surface (n = 3). Coumarin-6 (C6) labeled mesoporous silica nanopar-
ticles were incubated with c) E. coli, e) S. aureus, or g) E. faecium in PBS for 2 h. Adhesion eﬃciency assessed by ﬂow cytometry and expressed as
histograms. Unmodiﬁed bacteria were used as controls. Representative confocal images and MFI values of DAPI labeled d) E. coli, f) S. aureus, or h) E.
faecium incubated with coumarin-6 labeled mesoporous silica nanoparticles (n = 3). The scale bar is 5 μm. i) Representative pseudo-color SEM images
of diﬀerent nanoparticles on S. aureus. The scale bar is 1 μm. Values are represented as means ± SD. Signiﬁcance was assessed using one-way ANOVA
analysis followed by Fisher’s LSD multiple comparisons, giving p-values, ** p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. ns means not signiﬁcant.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (5 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 4. Binding ability of model nanoparticles with diﬀerent hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity to bacteria. a) TEM image of PLGA nanoparticles. The
scale bar is 500 nm. b) The log Pow values of PLGA nanoparticles. c) Contact angle of three nanoparticle surfaces with water. d) Binding rate of PLGA
nanoparticles adhered on bacterial surface. Coumarin-6 labeled PLGA nanoparticles were incubated with e) E. coli, g) S. aureus, or i) E. faecium in PBS for
2 h. Adhesion eﬃciency assessed by ﬂow cytometry and expressed as histograms. Unmodiﬁed bacteria were used as controls. Representative confocal
images and MFI values of DAPI labeled f) E. coli, h) S. aureus, or j) E. faecium incubated with coumarin-6 labeled PLGA or PEG-PLGA nanoparticles.
The scale bar is 5 μm. k) Representative pseudo-color SEM images of diﬀerent nanoparticles on S. aureus. The scale bar is 1 μm. Values are represented
as means ± SD. Signiﬁcance was assessed using one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Fisher’s LSD multiple comparisons, giving p-values, *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ****p <0.0001.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (6 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
charges following solvent evaporation. The strongly positively
charged nanoparticles were named PLGA@+ and the nearly elec-
trically neutral nanoparticles were named PLGA@0. Figures 5a
and S4 (Supporting Information) show that the nanoparticles
were successfully prepared after the addition of CTAB, and there
was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the particle sizes between the
groups. Measurement of zeta potential by particle size poten-
tiostat (Figure 5b) showed -21.0 ± 3.6 mV for PLGA, 5.1 ± 1.9
mV for PLGA@0 close to electroneutrality, and 30.7 ± 2.1 mV
for PLGA@+, indicating successful preparation of nanoparticles
with diﬀerent charges.
Subsequently, this study evaluated the eﬀect of diﬀerent sur-
face charges of nanoparticles on the bacterial binding ability.
Figure 5c shows that among the three diﬀerently charged PLGAs,
the positively charged PLGA exhibited a stronger binding ability
with bacteria, and the adsorption percentage decreased rapidly
with decreasing surface potential. Notably, the binding percent-
ages of PLGA@+ NPs with S. aureus and E. faecium were 33.0 and
33.7%, respectively. As the surface potential decreased, the bind-
ing capacity to both bacteria decreased to 9.0 and 14.9%, respec-
tively. The results of ﬂow cytometry analysis (Figure 5d,f,h) also
showed a higher percentage of S. aureus with positively charged
nanoparticles. The same results could also be observed in the
confocal images (Figure 5e,g,i), where the average ﬂuorescence
intensity decreased more drastically in the S. aureus group as the
surface potential decreased. A signiﬁcant increase in the adsorp-
tion of positively charged nanoparticles on the surface of S. aureus
was observed through scanning electron microscopy (Figure 5j).
Therefore, the binding ability of nanoparticles to bacteria is cor-
related with the zeta potential of the nanoparticle surface. Specif-
ically, positively charged nanoparticles exhibited a stronger bind-
ing ability to S. aureus. This may be due to the presence of the
bacterial cell wall, resulting in a negatively charged surface. This
leads to more electrostatic interactions with positively charged
nanoparticles.[19]
2.5. Binding Ability of Model Nanoparticles with Diﬀerent
Surface Modiﬁcations to Bacteria
Nanoparticles that enhance intestinal epithelial uptake through
receptor-mediated mechanisms have also been extensively uti-
lized in oral drug delivery systems.[20] Examples include the folate
receptor and CD44 receptor, which are ligands modiﬁed to in-
crease the process of transcytosis in intestinal epithelial cells.[21]
In addition, chitosan-modiﬁed oral nanomedicines have the abil-
ity to temporarily open intestinal epithelial tight junctions, which
contributes to the oral bioavailability of oral nanomedicines.[22]
This prompted us to focus on the eﬀect of nanoparticle surface
modiﬁcation on the binding ability to intestinal bacteria. There-
fore, we also utilized PLGA as the core nanoparticles and devel-
oped nanoparticles with various ligand modiﬁcations by attach-
ing them to their surface. Hyaluronic acid (HA) is a common lig-
and for the CD44 receptor, and HA-PLGA NPs were prepared by
incubating PLGA NPs with a speciﬁc concentration of hyaluronic
acid solution. FTIR spectroscopy (Figure S5, Supporting Infor-
mation) was used to analyze the surface chemistry of the interac-
tion between PLGA NPs and HA or chitosan (CS). The presence
of characteristic peaks indicates the successful binding of CS or
HA to the nanoparticle surface. Folic acid (FA)-modiﬁed PLGA
nanoparticles were prepared by coupling folic acid with PLGA.[23]
To verify the structure, 1HNMR analysis was conducted (Figure
S6, Supporting Information). Hydrogen from the folate double
bond was observed at 6.5–9.0 ppm, along with the correspond-
ing characteristic peaks of PLGA at high ﬁeld, conﬁrming the
successful preparation of FA-PLGA polymers. Subsequently, FA-
PLGA NPs were prepared with reference to the preparation of
PLGA nanoparticles. Transmission electron microscopy analysis
(Figure 6a) showed that the three nanoparticles were of compa-
rable particle sizes and met the requirements for subsequent ex-
periments.
After loading with Coumarin-6, PLGA NPs, HA-PLGA NPs,
CS-PLGA NPs and FA-PLGA NPs had stable ﬂuorescence (Figure
S7, Supporting Information), and then were incubated with E.
coli, S. aureus, and E. faecium, respectively. After that, the ﬂuo-
rescence intensity of the supernatant was measured (Figure 6b),
while bacterial precipitation was detected using ﬂow cytome-
try and confocal microscopy. Compared to FA-PLGA and PLGA
(Figure 6c,e,g), both HA-PLGA and CS-PLGA showed an in-
creased binding capacity. Among them, CS-PLGA increased by
≈70% compared with PLGA, and it is evident that chitosan mod-
iﬁcation signiﬁcantly enhanced the binding capacity to bacte-
ria, particularly to S. aureus. The signiﬁcantly enhanced ﬂuo-
rescence signal of the chitosan-modiﬁed nanoparticles was also
observed from the confocal images (Figure 6d,f,h). Scanning
electron microscopy photography (Figure 6i) after incubating
the nanoparticles with S. aureus also revealed increased attach-
ment of CS-PLGA NPs to the bacterial surface. Chitosan has
been widely used in the development of oral drug delivery sys-
tems due to its excellent mucosal adhesion properties.[24] The
results suggest that modifying chitosan enhances the binding
of nanoparticles to bacteria, particularly S. aureus. Addition-
ally, this study suggests that the improved binding ability of
hyaluronic acid may be because of bacteria’s uptake of carbohy-
drates. Hyaluronic acid is a polysaccharide, and intestinal bac-
teria can break down dietary polysaccharides in the gastrointesti-
nal tract into monosaccharides or oligosaccharides for further fer-
mentation and utilization.[25] Moreover, multiple polysaccharide
utilization sites have been identiﬁed on the bacterial surface to
degrade various substrates.[26] Taken together, surface modiﬁca-
tion can eﬀectively alter the aﬃnity of nanoparticles for bacteria.
The modiﬁcations such as hyaluronic acid and chitosan can sig-
niﬁcantly enhance the binding of nanoparticles to bacteria. The
speciﬁc change in aﬃnity largely depends on the type of surface
modiﬁcation.
2.6. Bacterial Selective Adsorption and Antibacterial Evaluation of
Amoxicillin-Loaded Model Nanoparticles
In the ﬁeld of antibacterial research, the strong binding of
nanomedicine to bacteria is crucial for enhancing the antibac-
terial eﬀect,[27] as supported by our investigation into the in-
teraction between nanoparticles and bacteria. Based on the
above results, small-sized chitosan PLGA nanoparticles, referred
to as CS-PLGA@S showed improved adsorption selectivity on
S. aureus. Therefore, the study selected three representative
nanoparticles CS-PLGA@S, large-sized PLGA nanoparticles
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (7 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 5. Binding capacity of nanoparticles with diﬀerent charge models to bacteria. a) TEM image of PLGA@+ and PLGA@0 nanoparticles. The scale
bar is 500 nm. b) The hydrodynamic zeta potentials of PLGA@+ or PLGA@0 nanoparticles in water (n = 3). c) Binding rate of PLGA@+ or PLGA@0
nanoparticles adhered on bacterial surface (n = 3). Coumarin-6 labeled PLGA@+ or PLGA@0 nanoparticles were incubated with d) E. coli, e) S. aureus,
or f) E. faecium in PBS for 2 h. Adhesion eﬃciency assessed by ﬂow cytometry and expressed as histograms. Unmodiﬁed bacteria were used as controls.
Representative confocal images and MFI values of DAPI labeled e) E. coli, g) S. aureus, or i) E. faecium incubated with coumarin-6 labeled PLGA@+ or
PLGA@0 nanoparticles (n = 3). The scale bar is 5 μm. j) Representative pseudo-color SEM images of diﬀerent nanoparticles on S. aureus. The scale bar is
1 μm. Values are represented as means ± SD. Signiﬁcance was assessed using one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Fisher’s LSD multiple comparisons,
giving p-values, *p < 0.05, ****p < 0.0001.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (8 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 6. Binding ability of model nanoparticles with diﬀerent surface modiﬁcations to bacteria. a) TEM image of nanoparticles. The scale bar is
500 nm. b) Binding rate of nanoparticles adhered on bacterial surface (n = 3). Coumarin-6 labeled CS-PLGA, HA-PLGA, FA-PLGA, and PLGA nanopar-
ticles were incubated with c) E. coli, e) S. aureus, or g) E. faecium in PBS for 2 h. Adhesion eﬃciency assessed by ﬂow cytometry and expressed as
histograms. Unmodiﬁed bacteria were used as controls. Representative confocal images and MFI values of DAPI labeled d) E. coli, f) S. aureus, or h)
E. faecium incubated with coumarin-6 labeled CS-PLGA, HA-PLGA, FA-PLGA, and PLGA nanoparticles (n = 3). The scale bar is 5 μm. i) Representative
pseudo-color SEM images of diﬀerent nanoparticles on S. aureus. The scale bar is 1 μm. Values are represented as means ± SD. Signiﬁcance was assessed
using one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Fisher’s LSD multiple comparisons, giving p-values, *p < 0.05, ****p < 0.0001. ns means not signiﬁcant.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (9 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
(referred to as PLGA) and large-sized chitosan PLGA nanoparti-
cles (referred as CS-PLGA) to examine the eﬀect of physicochem-
ical properties on the antibacterial eﬀect of nanoparticles (Figure
S8, Supporting Information).
The three antibiotic carriers were examined for selective ad-
sorption after being incubated with a mixture of E. coli and S.
aureus (Figure 7a). As shown in Figure S9 (Supporting Informa-
tion), among the Nile Red staining of S. aureus, CS-PLGA@S ex-
hibited the highest percentage of 33.3% in the Q2 region, indi-
cating that CS-PLGA@S enhances the selectivity for S. aureus.
Also, more nanoparticles attached to the surface of spherical
S. aureus can be observed in the SEM images (Figure 7b,c) of the
CS-PLGA@S group. Confocal microscopy analysis (Figure 7d;
Figure S10, Supporting Information) of the mixed bacteria re-
vealed that the binding ability of the three antibiotic carriers to
E. coli did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly. However, the ﬂuorescence in-
tensity on S. aureus in the CS-PLGA@S group increased gradu-
ally, indicating the selective adsorption of CS-PLGA@S NPs to
S. aureus. Although S. aureus and E. Faecium are both Gram-
positive bacteria, S. aureus has more and high cross-linked net-
work structure of peptidoglycan, which may have stronger ad-
sorption capability to the nanoparticles.[28]
Subsequently, the designed nanoparticles were loaded with
amoxicillin for antibacterial evaluation. Amoxicillin is a 𝛽-
lactam antibiotic that holds a signiﬁcant position among oral
antibiotics.[29] Amoxicillin was encapsulated in nanoparticles,
with three antibacterial formulations loaded at 3.9–4.4% (Table
S1, Supporting Information). The minimum bactericidal con-
centration of antibacterial agents and free amoxicillin was de-
termined using the microtiter plate dilution method. For the
antibacterial formulation, the concentration refers to the ﬁnal
concentration of amoxicillin in the nanoparticles at the begin-
ning of treatment. Amoxicillin is released at a steady rate over a
24-h period (Figure S11, Supporting Information), which aligns
with ﬁndings from various studies on release from NPs.[30] Af-
ter loading with Amoxicillin, Amoxicillin loading CS-PLGA@S
nanoparticles (CS-PLGA@S/AMX) had a twofold higher antibac-
terial activity than Amoxicillin loading PLGA (PLGA/AMX) and
a 1.5-fold higher antibacterial activity than Amoxicillin loading
CS-PLGA (CS-PLGA/AMX) against E. coli, with a minimum
bactericidal concentration (MBC) of 100 μg mL−1 (Figure 7e;
Figure S12, Supporting Information). For S. aureus, the MBC
of CS-PLGA@S/AMX was 3.13 μg mL−1, which was sixfold
lower than PLGA/AMX and fourfold lower than CS-PLGA/AMX
(Figure S13, Supporting Information). For E. faecium, the MBC
of CS-PLGA@S/AMX was 375 μg mL−1, which was 1.3-fold
higher than that of PLGA/AMX and CS-PLGA/AMX. While CS-
PLGA@S/AMX had insigniﬁcant diﬀerent antibacterial activ-
ity on E. faecium compared with the other two nanoparticles
(Figure S14, Supporting Information). From the antibacterial ac-
tivity assessment, it was observed that CS-PLGA@S/AMX NPs,
which exhibited stronger adhesion on S. aureus, demonstrated
a more potent antibacterial eﬀect against S. aureus compared to
PLGA/AMX and CS-PLGA/AMX.
The study examined the antibacterial eﬀect of the nanoparti-
cles on mixed bacteria and quantiﬁed the concentration of each
bacterium in the mixture using a bacterial selection medium. Be-
fore loading with Amoxicillin, the three drug-free nanoparticles
had no signiﬁcant eﬀect on bacterial growth (Figure S15, Sup-
porting Information). In the mixed bacteria culture of E. coli and
S. aureus, the population of S. aureus in the CS-PLGA@S/AMX
decreased signiﬁcantly with the increasing binding capacity of
the antibacterial nanoparticles, while there was no signiﬁcant
bactericidal eﬀect observed against E. coli (Figure 7f). From the
quantitative analysis, it was observed that the number of E.
coli decreased by 28.7%, while S. aureus decreased by 42.8% in
the CS-PLGA@S/AMX compared to the PLGA/AMX. This indi-
cates the selective bactericidal ability of CS-PLGA@S/AMX on
S. aureus. Similar results (Figure 7g) were observed in a mix-
ture of E. faecium and S. aureus. The number of E. faecium re-
mained essentially unchanged in the CS-PLGA@S/AMX group
compared to the PLGA/AMX group, while S. aureus decreased
by 25.7%. This suggests selective sterilization of S. aureus by CS-
PLGA@S/AMX at certain concentrations without causing signif-
icant harm to intestinal commensal bacteria in vitro.
2.7. In Vivo Antibacterial Activity of Antibacterial Nanoparticles
To examine the bactericidal eﬀect of antibacterial agents against
S. aureus in vivo, the study established an intestinal coloniza-
tion model of S. aureus in mice. As shown in Figure 8a, female
C57BL/6J mice were given antibiotic-enriched drinking water
for 7 consecutive days to eliminate intestinal ﬂora. After 24 h
of regular feeding, the mice were administered 5 × 108 CFU of
S. aureus via gavage. The appropriate antibacterial nanoparticles
were administered the next day. The body weights of the mice
were recorded throughout the treatment period, and the fecal
counts of S. aureus in each group were monitored using the plate
smear method.[31]
After S. aureus gavage (Figure 8b), the study observed a signif-
icant decrease in body weight of the mice, which gradually recov-
ered after treatment. The body weight recovery was faster in the
nano-formulation and free drug groups compared to the model
group. This suggested that the antibacterial nanoparticles eﬀec-
tively killed S. aureus in the intestinal tract, thereby minimizing
the damage to the mice. This change (Figure 8c) was also ob-
served in the fecal count of S. aureus in mice, which decreased to
zero after drug administration. The intestinal damage (Figure 8d)
was further characterized by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain-
ing. Some areas of the apical cells of the villi were ruptured, and
nuclei were lost in the Model group. In the treatment group, the
morphology of the small intestine was similar to that of the con-
trol group, with all parts of the intestine structurally intact. This
suggests that the drug treatment reduced the damage caused by
S. aureus to the small intestine. No signiﬁcant damage was ob-
served in the large intestine of mice in either the model and treat-
ment groups.
Although antibiotics have saved millions of lives, they aﬀect
the balance of the gut microbiota. Therefore, the study next eval-
uated the eﬀects of post-treatment drugs on the gut ﬂora of mice.
The study performed 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequenc-
ing on fecal samples from healthy mice and treated groups on
day 4. The results (Figure 8e) indicate that S. aureus coloniza-
tion resulted in a decrease in microbiome diversity and com-
munity abundance in mice, as evidenced by 𝛼-diversity (Chao1,
Observed_OTUs, Shannon, and Simpson) analysis. However,
treatment with CS-PLGA@S NPs signiﬁcantly enhanced the
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (10 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 7. Bacterial selective adsorption and antibacterial evaluation of amoxicillin-loaded model nanoparticles. a) A schematic of bacterial selective
adhesion experiment of nanoparticles. b) Representative SEM false color images and c) quantitative chart of a mixture of E. coli and S. aureus incubated
with nanoparticles (n = 3). Yellow marks the nanoparticles on S. aureus, and green marks the nanoparticles on E. coli. The scale bar is 1 μm. d) MFI values
of representative confocal images of DAPI-labeled mixture of E. coli and S. aureus incubated with coumarin-6-labeled nanoparticles (n = 3). Fluorescence
values were quantiﬁed separately after identifying the two bacteria by shape. e) MBC values of drug-loaded nanoparticles (n = 3). Selective bactericidal
plate and quantiﬁcation f) of mixed of E. coli and S. aureus and g) mixed of E. faecium and S. aureus by drug-loaded nanoparticles (n = 3). Values are
represented as means ± SD. Signiﬁcance was assessed using one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Fisher’s LSD multiple comparisons, giving p-values,
*p < 0.05.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (11 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 8. In vivo antibacterial activity of antibacterial nanoparticles. a) Schematic diagram of the S. aureus colonization model. b) Mice body weight
changes in diﬀerent treatment groups (n = 5). c) S. aureus was counted by coating collected fecal pellets on egg-yolk mannitol salt agar plates in
diﬀerent time (n = 5). d) Representative photographs of H&E staining of small and large intestine. The scale bar is 100 μm. The collected fecal was
analyzed for gut microbiome by 16S rRNA sequencing at the end of treatment. e) Alpha diversity was displayed by chao1, Observed_OTUs, Shannon,
and Simpson. f) Beta diversity was displayed by PCoA, And relative abundance of gut microbiome at the class level. g) Relative abundance of selected
taxa in groups of faecal samples. Values are represented as means ± SD. *p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001 determined by a student’s t-test.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (12 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
abundance and diversity of the mouse gut microbiota compared
to other controls.
Subsequently, the study assessed the microbial community
composition among diﬀerent samples based on 𝛽-diversity
(Figure 8f). Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) was performed
based on weighted UniFrac distance. The CS-PLGA@S NPs
treatment group exhibited unique gut microbiota characteristics
compared to the other treatment groups. The CS-PLGA@S sam-
ple group was closer to the control group and had a more similar
species composition structure. In contrast, the model group was
more distant from the control group, and the community was
more diverse. Histograms illustrating species abundance at the
class level indicated that the CS-PLGA@S group had the poten-
tial to eﬀectively restore a healthy microbiota.
The study then counted the diﬀerences in the relative abun-
dance of speciﬁc groups of bacteria. The results (Figure 8g) vi-
sually indicated an increase in Enterobacteriaceae in the model
group. Particularly, colonization by S. aureus was still observed.
The relative abundance of Lactobacillaceae increased after CS-
PLGA@S treatment, which contributes to the utilization of
polysaccharides in the intestinal tract, thereby promoting the spe-
ciﬁc proliferation of beneﬁcial probiotics. Signiﬁcant increases
in Prevotellaceae, which are known as cornerstone bacteria in
the intestine, were observed compared to the model group. In
conclusion, these ﬁndings provide ample evidence that treatment
with CS-PLGA@S contributes to the restoration of intestinal pro-
biotics, ameliorates the dysbiosis often caused by conventional
drugs in the treatment of bacterial infections, and facilitates the
restoration of normal intestinal homeostasis.
3. Conclusion
Oral administration of non-selective antibiotics leads to alter-
ations in the species and number of intestinal ﬂora, causing
the development of diseases associated with intestinal dysbio-
sis. Clearly, it is critical to enhance the selectivity of antibiotics
for bacteria. In this study, the eﬀect of physicochemical prop-
erties of nanoparticles on the adsorption of common intestinal
microorganisms was investigated. The results of the study were
speciﬁcally utilized to develop nano-antibacterial formulations
with improved adsorption capacity against S. aureus. Small parti-
cle size chitosan-modiﬁed CS-PLGA@S nanoparticles exhibited
the highest adsorption eﬃciency for S. aureus. After loading with
AMX as model antibiotics, the nanoparticles showed selective
killing eﬀect against S. aureus in vitro and in an animal model.
Furthermore, the designed nanoparticles not only had selective
antibacterial activity, and reduced the amelioration of intestinal
dysbiosis induced by classical antibiotics. In conclusion, by in-
vestigating the adsorption of orally administered nanoparticles
with intestinal pathogenic bacteria, this paper provides a con-
venient and versatile strategy for selective antibacterial therapy
while maintaining intestinal homeostasis.
4. Experimental Section
Construction of Model Nanoparticles with Diﬀerent Shapes:
Meso-
porous silica was widely used in drug delivery, and in this study, the well-
established CTAB templating and base-catalyzed method was used to pre-
pare spherical mesoporous silica (MSN@1:1). 0.1 g of CTAB was dis-
solved in 48 mL of deionized water, and 0.5 mL of Poroxam F-127 so-
lution (20 mg mL−1) and 0.35 mL of sodium hydroxide solution (2 mol
L−1) were added under vigorous stirring. The reaction solution was then
heated and stirred at 80 °C for 0.5 h to form a stable CTAB micelle sys-
tem. After the solution was stabilized, 0.5 mL of TEOS solution was added
dropwise with stirring, and the reaction was continued for 2 h. At the end
of the reaction, high-speed centrifugation (12 000 rpm, 10 min) was per-
formed to remove the supernatant, and the MSN@1:1 was collected, and
the subsequent precipitation was added with 45 mL of ethanol and 2.5 mL
of concentrated hydrochloric acid to continue the heated reﬂux at 80 °C
for 12 h, and the procedure was repeated three times to remove the CTAB
in the nanoparticles. Finally, the nanoparticles were centrifuged methanol-
washed, lyophilized, and dry preservation.
Rod-shaped mesoporous silica (MSN@3:1) with an aspect ratio of 3:1
was prepared similarly to the spherical form. In summary, 0.35 g of CTAB
was dissolved in 100 mL of deionized water, and 1.25 mL of ammonia
was added under vigorous stirring. The reaction solution was continued
to be stirred at room temperature for 0.5 h to form a rod-shaped CTAB
micelle system. Subsequently, 1.2 mL of TEOS solution was added slowly
dropwise under stirring, and stirring was continued for 5 h. At the end of
the reaction, the supernatant was centrifuged at high speed to remove the
supernatant, the MSN@3:1 was collected, and the ethanol hydrochloric
acid mixture (v/v, 18:1) was used to heat and reﬂux the solution three times
to remove the CTAB. Finally, the nanoparticles were centrifuged, washed
with methanol, and dried for preservation.
Rod-shaped mesoporous silica (MSN@5:1) with an aspect ratio of 5:1
was prepared as follows: 0.11 g of CTAB was dissolved in 27 mL of deion-
ized water and 0.425 mL of ammonia was added under vigorous stirring.
The reaction solution was continued to be stirred at room temperature for
1 h to form a rod-shaped CTAB micelle system. Subsequently, 0.235 mL
of TEOS solution was added slowly dropwise under stirring, and stirring
was continued for 3 h. After the reaction, centrifugation was performed
at high speed, the supernatant was removed, and the MSN@5:1 was col-
lected, followed by heating and reﬂuxing using a mixture of ethanol hy-
drochloric acid (v/v, 18:1) for 12 h. This was repeated three times to re-
move CTAB from the nanoparticles. Finally, the nanoparticles were cen-
trifuged, washed with methanol, and dried for storage.
Preparation of PLGA Nanoparticles with Diﬀerent Hydrophilicity and Hy-
drophobicity:
20 mg of PLGA polymer material was dissolved in 2 mL of a
solvent mixture of dichloromethane and ethyl acetate (1:3) to form an or-
ganic phase. The organic phase was subsequently added to 5 mL of 0.5%
(w/v) Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution. The nanoscale emulsion (O/W)
was formed by sonication using a cell breaker (70%, 8 min, 2 s of opera-
tion, 3 s of interval) under ice bath conditions. The liquid was then slowly
poured into 20 mL of 0.1% (w/v) PVA solution and the organic solvent
was evaporated at room temperature to form PLGA nanoparticles. Finally,
the nanoparticles were centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 15 min, washed three
times with distilled water, and stored after freeze-drying. The PEG-PLGA
polymer forms a certain hydrophilic layer on the surface during the for-
mation of nanoparticles. Therefore, diﬀerent hydrophilic and hydrophobic
model nanoparticles were constructed by adding a certain percentage of
PEG-PLGA during the preparation process. The mass ratios of the polymer
materials used were PLGA, PLGA:PEG-PLGA (3:1), and PLGA:PEG-PLGA
(1:3), respectively. Finally, the nanoparticles formed in each group were
named PLGA, PLGA/PEG, PEG-PLGA in that order, by adding 0.04 mg of
coumarin-6 to the organic phase in order to form corresponding ﬂuores-
cent nanoparticles.
Nanoparticle Contact Angle Measurement:
A certain amount of PLGA,
PLGA/PEG, and PEG-PLGA nanoparticles were freeze-dried and pressed
into tablets, respectively, and then the static contact angle was measured
using a contact angle meter, with the medium required to be water.
Measurement of Oil–Water Partition Coeﬃcient of Nanoparticles:
n-
Octanol (50 mL) and 150 mL of distilled water were ﬁlled into a reservoir
bottle and placed in a thermostatic oscillator at 30 °C for 24 h. Then the two
phases were separated using a separatory funnel to obtain water-saturated
n-octanol and n-octanol-saturated water, respectively. Each group of ﬂuo-
rescent nanoparticles was dispersed in 1 mL of the water phase, followed
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (13 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
by the addition of 4 mL of pre-saturated n-octanol, and oscillated at 30 °C
for 2 h. Three volumes of each group of samples were measured in paral-
lel. Separate the two phases and measure the ﬂuorescence signal values in
water and octanol respectively, and calculate the log Pow value according
to the following equation:[32 ]
log Pow = log FO
Fw
(1)
where Fo is the ﬂuorescence intensity in the oil phase and Fw is the ﬂuo-
rescence intensity in the water phase.
Preparation of Nanoparticles with Diﬀerent Charge Models:
The organic
phase was formed by dissolving 20 mg of PLGA and 8 mg of Poroxam F-
127 polymeric material in 2 mL of a solvent mixture of dichloromethane
and ethyl acetate (3:2). The organic phase was then added to 5 mL of 0.6
mg mL−1 CTAB solution. The nanoscale emulsion was formed by sonica-
tion under ice bath conditions using a cell crusher (40%, 2 min, 2 s of
operation with 3 s of interval). Subsequently, 10 mL of deionized water
was slowly added to the emulsion to disperse the emulsion, and the or-
ganic solvent was evaporated by magnetic stirring at room temperature
to produce PLGA nanoparticles showing a positive charge on the surface,
which were named PLGA@+. Finally, the nanoparticles were centrifuged
at 12 000 rpm for 15 min, washed with distilled water for three times,
and stored after freeze-drying. On the basis of the above, by reducing
the concentration of CTAB solution in the aqueous phase (0.1 mg mL−1),
PLGA nanoparticles with electrically neutral surfaces were successfully
prepared, named PLGA@0. The corresponding ﬂuorescent nanoparticles
were formed by adding 0.04 mg of coumarin-6 in the organic phase to form
the corresponding ﬂuorescent nanoparticles.
Preparation of Chitosan-Modiﬁed Nanoparticles:
PLGA polymer mate-
rial (20 mg) was dissolved in 2 mL of a solvent mixture of dichloromethane
and ethyl acetate (1:3) to form an organic phase. The organic phase was
subsequently added to 5 mL of 0.5% (w/v) PVA solution. The nanoscale
emulsion was formed by sonication using a cell crusher (65%, 6 min, 2 s
of operation, 3 s of interval) under ice bath conditions. The liquid was then
slowly poured into 20 mL of 0.1% (w/v) PVA solution with stirring at room
temperature to evaporate the organic solvent to form PLGA nanoparti-
cles. The nanoparticles were washed by centrifugation and resuspended,
and the resuspension solution was added to 30 mL of 1% (v/v) acetic acid-
prepared chitosan solution (1 mg mL−1) and incubated with stirring for 1 h
to produce CS-PLGA. Finally, the nanoparticles were centrifuged at 12 000
rpm for 15 min, washed with distilled water for three times, and stored af-
ter freeze-drying. 0.04 mg of coumarin-6 was added to the organic phase
to form corresponding CS-PLGA ﬂuorescent nanoparticles.
Preparation of Hyaluronic Acid Modiﬁed Nanoparticles:
The organic
phase was formed by dissolving 50 mg of PLGA and 8 mg of Poroxam
F-127 polymeric material in 2 mL of a solvent mixture of dichloromethane
and ethyl acetate (3:2). The organic phase was then added to 5 mL of 0.6
mg mL−1 CTAB solution. The nanoscale emulsion was formed by sonica-
tion under ice bath conditions using a cell breaker (30%, 2 min, 2 s of oper-
ation, 3 s of interval). Subsequently, 10 mL of deionized water was added to
the emulsion to disperse the emulsion, and the organic solvent was evap-
orated by magnetic stirring at room temperature. Subsequently, 3 mL of
2% (w/v) sodium hyaluronate (HA) solution was added to the nanoparti-
cle suspension, and magnetic stirring was continued at room temperature
for 12 h to form HA-PLGA. The nanoparticles were centrifuged at 12000
rpm for 15 min, washed with distilled water for three times, and stored
after freeze-drying. 0.1 mg of coumarin-6 was added to the organic phase
to form corresponding HA-PLGA ﬂuorescent nanoparticles.
Bacterial Adhesion Experiment of Nanoparticles:
E. coli (ATCC 11 229),
S. aureus (ATCC 25 923), and E. faecium (ATCC 19 434) in logarithmic
growth phase (OD600 = 0.6) were centrifuged (5000 rpm, 5 min) and re-
suspended in 1 mL of PBS solution, respectively, and then added with ﬂuo-
rescent nanoparticles (1 mg mL−1, 50 μL) and incubated at 37 °C and 200
rpm for 2 h. After that, bacteria were collected by centrifugation, and the
supernatant was examined for ﬂuorescence intensity. At the same time,
the bacterial precipitate was resuspended with PBS and divided into two
parts, one part was used to detect the adsorption of nanoparticles on the
bacterial surface by ﬂow cytometry, and the other part was added with
paraformaldehyde ﬁxative and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min, then cen-
trifuged and added with DAPI staining solution to continue the incubation
for 10 min, and then centrifuged and washed for three times to remove the
excess staining solution, which was then dripped onto the slide for laser
confocal observation.
Scanning Electron Microscope Observation of S. Aureus Surface Adhesion:
Logarithmic growth stage S. aureus (3 mL; OD600 = 0.6) was centrifuged
and resuspended in 1 mL of PBS solution, and nanoparticles (1 mg mL−1,
150 μL) were added and incubated at 37 °C and 200 rpm for 2 h. The bac-
teria were then collected by centrifugation and incubated overnight with
1 mL of 2.5% glutaraldehyde electron microscope ﬁxative. Gradient dehy-
dration with ethanol was then performed followed by critical point drying,
and ﬁnally scanning electron microscopy was performed to observe the
surface adsorption.
Selective Binding Experiment of Nanoparticles to S. Aureus:
The sample
was mixed with 0.5 mL of logarithmic growth stage E. coli and S. aureus
(OD600 = 0.6) and resuspended in 1 mL of PBS, and then added with the
corresponding nanoparticles (1 mg mL−1, 50 μL), and then incubated for
2 h at 37 °C and 200 rpm, and then centrifuged to collect the bacteria. The
bacterial precipitates were added with paraformaldehyde ﬁxative and incu-
bated at 37 °C for 20 min, centrifuged, added with DAPI staining solution
and continued to incubate for 10 min, and ﬁnally centrifuged and washed
for three times to remove the excess staining solution, and then dropped
on slides for laser confocal observation. In the same case, the samples
without paraformaldehyde ﬁxation before were subjected to scanning elec-
tron microscopy for observation of the bacterial surface. In addition, S.
aureus was pre-incubated with Nile Red (0.5 μg mL−1, 0.5 mL) for 5 min
at 37 °C away from light, and the bacteria were washed by centrifugation
with PBS to remove the excess staining solution, and then the subsequent
adsorption experiments were carried out, and the bacteria were subjected
to ﬂow cytometry after incubation for detection.
Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) Assay:
The bacteriostatic
capacity of diﬀerent amoxicillin nanoparticles against E. coli, S. aureus
and E. faecium was determined using the microtiter plate broth di-
lution method. Amoxicillin-loaded PLGA/AMX, CS-PLGA/AMX and CS-
PLGA@S/AMX nanoparticles were prepared, where the drug concentra-
tion was the total drug concentration present within the nanoparticles,
determined by measuring the drug loading and encapsulation rate.
Each of the three bacteria was cultured to the logarithmic growth phase
and diluted into a bacterial suspension of 106 CFU mL−1. 100 μL of culture
medium was added to each well in a 96-well plate, followed by 100 μL
of the corresponding concentration of AMX, PLGA/AMX, CS-PLGA/AMX,
and CS-PLGA@S/AMX nanoparticles in the ﬁrst well, which was mixed
well and then 100 μL was pipetted and added to the next well, and the
gradient dilution was carried out in turn. After dilution, 100 μL of bacterial
suspension was added to each well, followed by placing the plates into an
incubator at 37 °C for 24 h. Finally, the bacterial solution of each well was
aspirated and inoculated into the plates for coating, and the incubation
was continued at 37 °C for 24 h. The growth of the colonies on the plates
was observed.
Selective Sterilization by Antibacterial Agents:
E. coli, S. aureus, and E.
faecium were cultured to logarithmic growth stage, respectively, and then
the bacterial solution was diluted into a bacterial suspension of 5 × 104
CFU mL−1. A 96-well plate was taken as a petri dish, and 120 μL of broth
medium and 50 μL of antibacterial preparation were added to each well
at a concentration recorded as 2.5 μg mL−1 in terms of drug content, and
the same volume of PBS solution was added to the control group. Subse-
quently, 10 μL of E. coli suspension and 20 μL of S. aureus suspension were
added to each group, which were placed in the incubator at 37 °C for 24 h.
Plate colonies were counted using selective agar medium to calculate the
number of E. coli and S. aureus. Under the same experimental conditions,
S. aureus and E. faecium were co-cultured and the numbers of S. aureus
and E. faecium were counted.
Animals:
Male Balb/c mice (6–8 weeks, 18–20 g) were purchased
from the experimental animal center of Henan province (Zhengzhou,
China). The mice were allowed 10 days to adapt the environment before
experiment. All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (14 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
the Guidelines for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of Zhengzhou
University and approved by Life Sciences Ethical Review Committee of
Zhengzhou University (yxy11sc20230124, Zhengzhou, China).
Modeling of S. Aureus Intestinal Colonization and Antibacterial Experi-
ments:
Mice were pretreated with ampicillin (1 mg mL−1), metronida-
zole (1 mg mL−1), neomycin trisulfate (1 mg mL−1), and vancomycin
(1 mg mL−1) in the drinking water prior to administration of S. aureus
by oral gavage to eradicate the preexisting intestinal microbiota. Nor-
mal drinking water was replaced one day before gavage. For the control
group in which the antibiotic pretreatment was omitted for normal feed-
ing. Prior to S. aureus gavage, the bacteria were cultured to the logarith-
mic growth phase, washed and resuspended in sterile phosphate buﬀer,
and the mice were gavaged orally with 200 μL of 5×108 CFU mL−1 bac-
terial suspension. Subsequently, the modeled mice were randomly di-
vided into: Model group, Amoxicillin group, PLGA/AMX group, and CS-
PLGA@S/AMX group. At 24 h after bacterial gavage, each group was
treated with 40 mg k−1g of Amoxicillin or Amoxicillin loading nanoparti-
cles (In terms of the amount of Amoxicillin), while the Control group was
given the same volume of saline.
The body weights of the mice were recorded. Mouse feces were col-
lected daily and then resuspended into 100 mg mL−1 fecal suspension in
PBS, and a series of dilutions were inoculated on mannitol salt agar plates
and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h to count the number of S. aureus in the
feces of mice. Thereafter, the feces were collected for plate counts every
24 h until the mice were executed. On the fourth day after S. aureus gav-
age, the mice in each group were decapitated and killed, and the small and
large intestines were removed after dissecting. They were cleaned with PBS
and placed in tissue ﬁxative containing 4% paraformaldehyde for ﬁxation,
and then sent for H&E staining and scanning. After deconstruction, two
to three fecal pellets were removed from each mouse and placed in a cen-
trifuge tube, followed by rapid placement on ice. For long-term storage,
the feces were quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at −80 °C.
Finally, the samples were sent to the laboratory for fecal ﬂora analysis.
Statistical Analysis:
All statistical analysis was evaluated using Graph-
Pad Prism 9. The statistical signiﬁcance was determined using Student’s
t test (two-tailed) or one-way ANOVA analysis followed by Fisher’s LSD
multiple comparisons. The diﬀerences between experimental groups and
control groups were considered statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. *p <
0.05, ** p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. ns, no signiﬁcance.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (nos.
82222067, 82102936, and 82473863), Outstanding Youth Foundation of
Henan Province Henan (no. 222300420020), Postdoctoral Fellowship Pro-
gram of CPSF under Grant (no. GZB20230676), China Postdoctoral Sci-
ence Foundation (no. 2023M743232, and 2021M702959), and the Scien-
tiﬁc and Technological Project of Henan Province (no. 242102310450).
They thank the members of Center of Advanced Analysis & Gene Sequenc-
ing, Zhengzhou University for technical assistance.
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available in the
supplementary material of this article.
Keywords
antibacterial
therapy,
bacteria-nanoparticle
interactions,
oral
nanoparticles, physicochemical property
Received: September 6, 2024
Revised: January 23, 2025
Published online: February 5, 2025
[1] a) Z. L. Wu, J. Zhao, R. Xu, Int. J. Nanomed. 2020, 15, 9587; b) G. Li, C.
Jackson, J. Bielicki, S. Ellis, Y. F. Hsia, M. Sharland, Bull WHO 2020,
98, 458.
[2] J. Periago, C. Mason, M. A. Griep, ACS Omega 2022, 7, 8420.
[3] a) R. Laxminarayan, I. Impalli, R. Rangarajan, J. Cohn, K. Ramjeet, B.
W. Trainor, S. Strathdee, N. Sumpradit, D. Berman, H. Wertheim, K.
Outterson, P. Srikantiah, U. Theuretzbacher, Lancet 2024, 403, 2534;
b) I. N. Okeke, M. E. A. de Kraker, T. P. Van Boeckel, C. K. Kumar, H.
Schmitt, A. C. Gales, S. Bertagnolio, M. Sharland, R. Laxminarayan,
Lancet 2024, 403, 2426; c) E. M. Darby, E. Trampari, P. Siasat, M. S.
Gaya, I. Alav, M. A. Webber, J. M. A. Blair, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2022,
21, 280.
[4] a) S. E. Lee, J. Y. Lim, D. B. Ryu, T. W. Kim, S. S. Park, Y. W. Jeon, J. H.
Yoon, B. S. Cho, K. S. Eom, Y. J. Kim, H. J. Kim, S. Lee, S. G. Cho, D.
W. Kim, J. W. Lee, C. S. Kim, D. M. Shin, C. K. Min, Biol. Blood Marrow
Transplant. 2019, 25, 1933; b) H. Duan, L. Yu, F. Tian, Q. Zhai, L. Fan,
W. Chen, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 62, 1427.
[5] a) D. A. Leﬄer, D. L. Longo, J. T. Lamont, N. Engl. J. Med. 2015,
372, 1539; b) K. A. Brown, N. Khanafer, N. Daneman, D. N. Fisman,
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2013, 57, 2326; c) A. J. Bäumler, V.
Sperandio, Nature 2016, 535, 85.
[6] a) S. Modi, G. K. Inwati, A. Gacem, S. S. Abullais, R. Prajapati, V. K.
Yadav, R. Syed, M. S. Alqahtani, K. K. Yadav, S. Islam, Y. Ahn, B. H.
Jeon, Antibiotics-Basel 2022, 11, 708; b) W. Gao, L. Zhang, Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 2020, 19, 5.
[7] a) R. Sender, S. Fuchs, R. Milo, PLoS Biol. 2016, 14, e1002533; b)
A. Weiner, S. Turjeman, O. Koren, Neuropharmacology 2023, 227,
109453.
[8] a) X. Zhou, Y. Liu, X. F. Wang, X. M. Li, B. Xiao, Colloids Surf. B-
Biointerfaces 2020, 187, 110880; b) F. Ran, W. Lei, Y. Cui, J. Jiao, Y.
L. Mao, S. Y. Wang, S. L. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2018, 511, 57;
c) G. Ru, L. M. Han, J. Qing, J. Y. Sheng, R. X. Li, M. F. Qiu, J. X. Wang,
Drug Deliv. 2016, 23, 3417.
[9] a) I. Takeuchi, H. Onaka, K. Makino, Bio-Med. Mater. Eng. 2018, 29,
205; b) X. Li, E. C. Montague, A. Pollinzi, A. Lofts, T. Hoare, Small
2021, 18, 2104632.
[10] a) Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. T. Zhao, Q. F. Zhao, B. He, Q. Zhang, S. L. Wang,
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2018, 513, 736; b) D. Hu, Y. Li, W. Teng, F. Li, L.
Li, M. Li, L. Tan, Z. Wu, J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 2024, 91, 105256.
[11] W. J. Liu, L. Y. Zhang, Z. R. Dong, K. H. Liu, H. S. He, Y. Lu, W. Wu, J.
P. Qi, Nano Res. 2022, 15, 9243.
[12] a) G. L. Li, Z. L. Cao, K. K. H. Y. Ho, Y. Y. Zuo, Anal. Chem. 2022, 94,
2078; b) J. T. Huckaby, S. K. Lai, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2018, 124,
125.
[13] C. Martins, F. Sousa, F. Araújo, B. Sarmento, Adv. Healthcare Mater.
2018, 7, 1701035.
[14] Q. Y. Bao, A. Y. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Chen, J. Hong, W. B. Shen, C. Zhang, Y.
Ding, Colloids Surf. B-Biointerfaces 2016, 146, 475.
[15] A. Kujawska, R. Mulka, S. Hamze, G. Zyla, B. Zajaczkowski, M. H.
Buschmann, P. Estellé, Colloid Surface A 2021, 627, 127082.
[16] a) X. J. Dong, Z. L. Zhang, L. L. Wu, X. Y. Ma, C. M. Xu, D. W. Pang,
ACS Omega 2019, 4, 7391; b) A. Al-Ani, A. Boden, M. Al Kobaisi, H.
Pingle, P. Y. Wang, P. Kingshott, Appl. Surf. Sci. 2018, 462, 980.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (15 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
[17] a) P. Hu, X. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015,
17, 9873; b) J. Li, Z.-Z. Sun, Y.-P. Chen, J. Wang, J. Environ. Chem. Eng.
2024, 12, 111673.
[18] A. Khatua, A. Prasad, E. Priyadarshini, I. Virmani, l. Ghosh, B. Paul, R.
Meena, H. Barabadi, A. K. Patel, M. Saravanan, ChemistrySelect 2020,
5, 10574.
[19] a) M. F. Al-Kobaisi, Sultan Qaboos Univ. Med. J. 2007, 7, 273; b) F. Lu,
Y. X. Song, H. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. J. Fu, J. Huang, H. Li, H. H. Qu, Z. H.
Kang, Carbon 2017, 120, 95.
[20] K. Wang, R. Shen, T. Meng, F. Hu, H. Yuan, Molecules 2022, 27, 2981.
[21] a) J. B. Huang, H. Zhang, Y. Yu, Y. Chen, D. Wang, G. Q. Zhang, G. C.
Zhou, J. J. Liu, Z. G. Sun, D. X. Sun, Y. Lu, Y. Q. Zhong, Biomaterials
2014, 35, 550; b) Y. Z. Hu, Y. H. He, J. R. Ji, S. P. Zheng, Y. Z. Cheng,
Int. J. Nanomed. 2020, 15, 1239.
[22] a) H. A. Asal, K. R. Shoueir, M. A. El-Hagrasy, E. A. Toson, Int. J.
Biol. Macromol. 2022, 209, 2188; b) I. A. d. Lima, N. M. Khalil, T. T.
Tominaga, A. Lechanteur, B. Sarmento, R. M. Mainardes, Artif. Cells,
Nanomed., Biotechnol. 2018, 46, 993; c) M. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Zhu, W.
Shan, L. Li, J. J. Zhong, Z. R. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Controlled Release
2016, 222, 67.
[23] a) J. Pan, D. Wan, Y. X. Bian, H. F. Sun, C. Zhang, F. M. Jin, Z.
Q. Huang, J. L. Gong, AIChE J. 2013, 59, 4494; b) M. Naserifar,
H. Hosseinzadeh, K. Abnous, M. Mohammadi, S. M. Taghdisi, M.
Ramezani, M. Alibolandi, Life Sci. 2020, 262, 118555.
[24] a) S. A. Sreenivas, K. V. Pai, Trop. J. Pharm. Res. 2008, 7, 1077; b)
T. Sangnim, D. Dheer, N. Jangra, K. Huanbutta, V. Puri, A. Sharma,
Pharmaceutics 2023, 15, 2361.
[25] a) J. F. Wardman, R. K. Bains, P. Rahfeld, S. G. Withers, Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 2022, 20, 542; b) F. M. Cerqueira, A. L. Photenhauer, R. M.
Pollet, H. A. Brown, N. M. Koropatkin, Trends Microbiol. 2020, 28, 95;
c) H. Akazawa, I. Fukuda, H. Kaneda, S. Yoda, M. Kimura, R. Nomoto,
S. Ueda, Y. Shirai, R. Osawa, PLoS One 2023, 18, e0284517.
[26] J. M. Grondin, K. Tamura, G. Déjean, D. W. Abbott, H. Brumer, J.
Bacteriol. 2017, 199, 00860.
[27] a) K. Punjabi, R. R. Adhikary, A. Patnaik, P. Bendale, S. Saxena, R.
Banerjee, Bioconjugate Chem. 2022, 33, 1552; b) L. Yu, Z. Shang, Q.
Jin, S. Y. Chan, W. Hong, N. Li, P. Li, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2022, 12,
2202207.
[28] a) L. S. Gonzalez-Delgado, H. Walters-Morgan, B. Salamaga, A. J.
Robertson, A. M. Hounslow, E. Jagielska, I. Sabała, M. P. Williamson,
A. L. Lovering, S. Mesnage, Nat. Chem. Biol. 2019, 16, 24; b) H. Yang,
M. Singh, S. J. Kim, J. Schaefer, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2017, 1859,
2171.
[29] D. Khalil, M. Hultin, M. U. Rashid, B. Lund, Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
2016, 22, 949e1.
[30] S. Alimohammadi, R. Salehi, N. Amini, S. Davaran, Bull. Korean
Chem. Soc. 2012, 33, 3225.
[31] a) P. Piewngam, Y. Zheng, T. H. Nguyen, S. W. Dickey, H. S. Joo, A.
E. Villaruz, K. A. Glose, E. L. Fisher, R. L. Hunt, B. Li, J. Chiou, S.
Pharkjaksu, S. Khongthong, G. Y. C. Cheung, P. Kiratisin, M. Otto,
Nature 2018, 562, 532; b) S. Larcombe, J. H. Jiang, M. L. Hutton, H.
E. Abud, A. Y. Peleg, D. Lyras, J. Med. Microbiol. 2020, 69, 290.
[32] S. Q. Guo, Y. Z. Liang, L. Z. Liu, M. M. Yin, A. P. Wang, K. X. Sun, Y.
X. Li, Y. A. Shi, J. Nanobiotechnol. 2021, 19, 32.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2416594
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2416594 (16 of 16)
 16163028, 2025, 12, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202416594 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License