DOI: 10.1002/alz.046288
D R U G D E V E L O P M E N T
PODIUM PRESENTATIONS
Nonhuman: Preclinical studies on APOE and neuroinflammation
Synbiotic-derived metabolites reduce neuroinflammatory
symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease
Chad Smith
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, USA
Correspondence
ChadSmith,IcahnSchoolofMedicineatMount
Sinai,New York,NY,USA.
Email:chad.smith@mssm.edu
Abstract
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a multifaceted disorder and recent advance-
ments suggest that the gut microbiota and its metabolites play a critical role in the
progression and potential treatment of AD. Synbiotics, the combination of probiotics
and prebiotics, can be designed to produce specific bioavailable metabolites that pen-
etrate the blood-brain-barrier and actively reduce the neuropathologies associated
with AD. Recently, we designed an in vitro model of the human gastrointestinal tract
that can be used to optimize the production of metabolites from synbiotic formula-
tions using machine learning algorithms that can then be tested in animal models of
AD. The objective of this study is to optimize and characterize a synbiotic’s metabolite
production using an in vitro bioreactor that could be used as a therapeutic tool against
AD. We hypothesize that a synbiotic designed towards the production of specific brain-
bioactive metabolites will synergistically mitigate the neuro- and systemic-pathologies
associated with AD.
Method: Using the in vitro model of the human gastrointestinal tract, we have used this
optimized combination of polyphenols and tested 15 combinations of 6 probiotic bac-
teria as a synbiotic to optimize metabolite production using a multivariate regression
algorithm (MARS) and found that three probiotic bacteria, Lactobacillus plantarum, Bifi-
dobacterium infantis and L. salivarius together synergistically improve the production of
brain bioavailable metabolites including quercetin, kamferin, 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic
acid and 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid.
Result: We have found that two polyphenolic metabolites 3-hydroxybenzoic acid and
3-(3’-hydroxyphenyl) propionic acid derived from a grapeseed polyphenolic extract
(GSPE) can penetrate the blood-brain-barrier and in vitro,inhibit the aggregation of
amyloid plaques and tau fibrils. By increasing the diversity of the polyphenolic pool by
adding a concord grape extract and resveratrol to the GSPE, we provided greater pro-
tection against cognitive impairment and amyloid aggregation in an AD mouse model
than the components alone.
Conclusion: While bioavailability studies have shown that these metabolites cross
the blood-brain-barrier, in vitro studies have confirmed that these metabolites have
potent anti-inflammatory activity. This synbiotic combining potent grape-derived
Alzheimer’s Dement. 2020;16(Suppl. 9):e046288.
© 2020 the Alzheimer’s Association
1 of 2
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/alz
https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.046288

2 of 2
DRUG DEVELOPMENT
polyphenolic precursors with bioactive probiotic bacteria has the potential to slow the
progression and treat AD by synergistically targeting multiple of its neuropathologies
including inflammation, amyloid aggregation and tau fibril formation.
 15525279, 2020, S9, Downloaded from https://alz-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/alz.046288 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License