RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advmat.de
Antibacterial Fusobacterium nucleatum-Mimicking
Nanomedicine to Selectively Eliminate Tumor-Colonized
Bacteria and Enhance Immunotherapy Against Colorectal
Cancer
Linfu Chen, Rui Zhao, Jingjing Shen, Nanhui Liu, Zixuan Zheng, Yu Miao, Jiafei Zhu,
Lin Zhang, Yingyao Wang, Huapan Fang, Jun Zhou, Maoyi Li, Yang Yang, Zhuang Liu,
and Qian Chen*
Clinical evidence indicates that tumor-colonizing bacteria can be closely
related to the tumor development and therapeutic responses. Selectively
eliminating bacteria within tumors may be an attractive approach to enhance
cancer treatment without additional side eﬀects. Herein, it is found that,
owing to the high aﬃnity between the membrane protein Fap-2 on
Fusobacterium nucleatum and d-galactose-𝜷(1-3)-N-acetyl-d-galactosamine
(Gal-GalNAc) overexpressed on colorectal tumor cells, F. nucleatum can
colonize in colorectal tumors, as evidenced by both clinical samples and
animal tumor models. Notably, F. nucleatum colonized in colorectal tumors
can lead to an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment, greatly
reducing their responses to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy.
Inspired by this ﬁnding, an F. nucleatum-mimetic nanomedicine is designed
by fusing F. nucleatum cytoplasmic membrane (FM) with Colistin-loaded
liposomes to achieve selective killing of tumor-colonizing F. nucleatum
without aﬀecting gut microbes. As a result, the therapeutic responses of F.
nucleatum-colonized tumors to ICB therapies can be successfully restored, as
demonstrated in an F. nucleatum-infected subcutaneous CT-26 tumor model,
chemically induced spontaneous colorectal cancer models, and MC-38 tumor
model. In summary, this work presents an F. nucleatum-mimicking
nanomedicine that can selectively eliminate tumor-colonized bacteria, which
is promising for enhancing the responses of cancer immunotherapy against F.
nucleatum-colonized colorectal cancer.
L. Chen, R. Zhao, J. Shen, N. Liu, Y. Miao, J. Zhu, H. Fang, J. Zhou, M. Li,
Z. Liu, Q. Chen
Institute of Functional Nano and Soft Materials (FUNSOM)
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials and
Devices
Soochow University
Suzhou 215123, P.R. China
E-mail: chenqian@suda.edu.cn
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202306281
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202306281
1. Introduction
As an essential body component, the host
microbiota would aﬀect the initiation, pro-
gression, and spread of cancer, and play
crucial roles in immunomodulation in var-
ious types of cancers.[1–5] There are ≈1014
bacteria colonized in the gut, and these
gut microbiota have been found to be
closely associated with the eﬃcacy of cancer
immunotherapy, such as immune check-
point blockade (ICB).[6–9] Apart from gut
microbiota, intratumor microbes also play
crucial roles in modulating the tumor
responses to cancer immunotherapy.[10,11]
For example, the mouse pancreatic can-
cer with abundant tumor-colonizing bac-
teria such as Actinobacteria, Deferribacteres,
and Biﬁdobacterium exhibited obviously re-
duced responsive rate to antibodies against
programmed cell death protein 1 (anti-
PD-1).[12] Among various tumor-colonizing
bacteria, Fusobacterium nucleatum is one of
the gram-negative anaerobic bacteria and
has been reported to accumulate in col-
orectal tumors and adenomas around colon
tissues.[5,10,13,14] Recently, some studies have
Z. Zheng, Y. Yang
Department of Thoracic Surgery
Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital
Tongji University School of Medicine
Shanghai 200433, P.R. China
L. Zhang
Department of Gynecologic Oncology
The International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital
School of Medicine
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai 200030, P.R. China
Y. Wang
Department of Gynecology
Kunshan Maternity and Children’s Health Care Hospital
Suzhou, Jiangsu 215300, P.R. China
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (1 of 15)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
demonstrated that the enrichment of F. nucleatum in colorec-
tal cancer could drive the formation of immunosuppressive tu-
mor microenvironment (TME),[2] such as increasing the inﬁltra-
tion of immune suppressive cells,[15] decreasing the inﬁltration of
tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes,[2,10] and inhibiting the killing ef-
ﬁciency of NK cells and T cells[16] through direct or indirect inter-
ference with metabolic pathways.[17,18] Therefore, the abundance
of F. nucleatum in CRC may play an important role in determin-
ing how tumors would respond to clinically used immunothera-
pies.
Considering the important role of tumor-colonizing bacteria
in inducing immunosuppressive TME, it would be interesting to
investigate whether eliminating those tumor-colonizing bacteria
would be beneﬁcial to tumor immunotherapy. Recently, Zhang
et al. successfully obtained a phage strain that could selectivity
kill F. nucleatum in intestinal tract after oral administration; so
as to enhance chemotherapy or immunotherapy against colon
tumors.[19,20] However, direct killing of bacteria colonizing in-
side tumors remains to be a challenge with phages. Leverag-
ing antibiotics to kill pathogenic bacteria is still the most eﬀec-
tive and widely used strategy.[13] However, systemic or oral ad-
ministration of antibiotics usually would have limited eﬀect in
killing bacteria localizing in tumors and may non-selectively kill
the gut microbiota.[21,22] Moreover, the overuse of antibiotics can
also lead to the occurrence of multidrug resistant strains.[23–25] As
the gut microbe has intricate connection with tumor immunity,
are veriﬁed to have critical functions in host-immune system reg-
ulation, and are closely associated with the patients’ response to
immunotherapy including immune checkpoint inhibitors,[26–31]
damaging gut microbes may have risks in compromising antitu-
mor immunity. Therefore, a delivery system that can speciﬁcally
deliver antibiotics to bacteria-colonizing tumors to selectively kill
microbes within the tumor without aﬀecting gut microbiota is
therefore highly desirable. There are various tumor targeted de-
livery nanocarriers that can selectively bind to cancer cells. How-
ever, these approaches are limited to speciﬁc types of cancers with
high expression of the targeted receptor.[32] Delivery system tar-
geted speciﬁc bacteria colonized tumor has not yet been reported
to the best of our knowledge.
In this work, we found a high percentage of F. nucleatum
in colorectal tumors from diﬀerent CRC patients’ samples and
demonstrated in preclinical mouse tumor models that F. nuclea-
tum colonized tumors would be highly resistant to ICB therapy.
According to the previous work, membrane protein Fap-2 ex-
pressed on F. nucleatum mediated the accumulation of F. nu-
cleatum in colorectal tumors by binding to d-galactose-𝛽(1-3)-N-
acetyl-d-galactosamine (Gal-GalNAc) overexpressed in colorectal
tumors.[3] Thus, an F. nucleatum-mimicking nanomedicine was
prepared here by fusing liposomes with F. nucleatum cytoplas-
mic membrane (FM), which with Fap-2 on the surface, could en-
able speciﬁc targeting of colorectal tumors overexpressing Gal-
GalNAc. Colistin, a kind of eﬀective antibiotic, was then loaded
into liposomes (Colistin-Lipo), which was further fused with FM
to obtain Colistin-loaded FM-fused liposomes (Colistin-LipoFM).
Interestingly, we found that such Colistin-LipoFM exhibited bet-
ter antibacterial ability than free Colistin and Colisitn-Lipo due
to their tumor targeting and retention ability. Excitingly, com-
pared to oral delivery of antibiotics, our F. nucleatum-mimicking
nanomedicine induced negligible side eﬀects to gut microbiota,
as indicated by the operation taxonomic units (OTUs) richness,
diversity Shannon, and inverse Simpson indices. In F. nucleatum-
infected subcutaneous CT-26 tumor model and a more aggres-
sive chemically induced spontaneous colorectal cancer model,
Colistin-LipoFM could successfully relieve F. nucleatum-derived
peritumoral microenvironment and restore the therapeutic ef-
ﬁcacy of antibodies against cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
antigen 4 (anti-CTLA4). In addition, we also demonstrated
that the Colistin-LipoFM could restore the therapeutic eﬃcacy
of anti-PD-1 in F. nucleatum-infected MC-38 tumor models
(Figure 1). Therefore, our work proposes an F. nucleatum-
mimicking nanomedicine to selectively kill bacteria colonized in
tumors, thereby overcoming immunotherapeutic resistances in-
duced by tumor colonized bacteria.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Gal-GalNAc Would Mediate Colonization of F. nucleatum in
CRC Tumors
According to the clinical sample chips containing proximal colon
tissues, distal colon tissues, and normal skin tissues, we found
that the majority of F. nucleatum was colonized in the colorec-
tal tumors and intestinal mucosa rather than normal skin tis-
sues by ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (Figure 2a;
Figure S1, Supporting Information). In addition to the clinical
samples, we also observed that F. nucleatum would preferentially
adhere to colorectal cancer cell lines including Caco-2, MC-38,
CT-26, and HT-29 with higher expression of Gal-GalNAc, but to
a much less extent, in binding melanoma cell line B16F10 or
cervical cancer cell line ID8 with lower Gal-GalNAc expressions
(Figure 2b,c; Figure S2, Supporting Information). According to
a recent published work, surface adhesin Fap-2 of F. nucleatum
could mediate the migration of F. nucleatum to colorectal tumors
by binding to Gal-GalNAc overexpressed in colorectal tumors.[14]
To identify the Gal-GalNAc mediated infection of F. nucleatum
in CRC, colorectal cancer cells including CT-26, HT-29, MC-38,
and Caco-2 were incubated with F. nucleatum and Gal-GalNAc
pretreated F. nucleatum (Figure 2d). As show in Figure 2e, pre-
incubation with Gal-GalNAc would suppress the adhesion ability
of F. nucleatum to the cell membrane of those cells. In addition,
we investigated the migration of F. nucleatum in mice bearing
colorectal CT-26 tumors with high content of Gal-GalNAc and
melanoma B16F10 tumors with low content of Gal-GalNAc after
intravenous (i.v.) injection of F. nucleatum (Figure S3, Support-
ing Information; Figure 2f). The abundance of F. nucleatum was
obviously higher in CT-26 tumors compared to that in melanoma
B16F10 tumors. Interestingly, the abundance of F. nucleatum in
B16F10 melanoma was increased after intratumor injection of
Gal-GalNAc (Figure 2g). All those results evidenced that Gal-
GalNAc on the colorectal tumor cells should be responsible for
the binding of F. nucleatum with those cells.
We further analyzed the levels of Gal-GalNAc in adenoma and
paracancerous tissue samples obtained from patients with CRC.
As shown in Figure 2h,i, most colorectal adenoma samples (26
out of 48) exhibited high expression of Gal-GalNAc, while high
expression of Gal-GalNAc was observed in only ﬁve cases of
para-carcinoma tissue. To explore whether the membrane protein
Fap-2 is uniquely expressed in F. nucleatum, we measured the
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (2 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 1. A schematic showing F. nucleatum mimicking nanomedicine to selectively eliminate tumor-colonized bacteria and enhance immunotherapy
against CRC. F. nucleatum that are speciﬁcally enriching in colorectal tumor tissues were screened, and the F. nucleatum cytoplasmic membrane (FM) was
then fused with antibiotics Colistin-loaded liposomes to prepare Colistin-LipoFM. The obtained Colistin-LipoFM could selectively kill tumor-colonizing
F. nucleatum in colorectal tumors owing to the high aﬃnity between the membrane protein Fap-2 on Colistin-LipoFM and Gal-GalNAc overexpressed
on the colorectal tumor cells. In addition, the selective depletion of tumor-colonizing F. nucleatum would successfully relieve the F. nucleatum-derived
pro-tumoral immunosuppressive microenvironment and improve the therapeutic eﬃcacy of immunotherapy.
expression of proteins in diﬀerent bacteria including Biﬁdobac-
terium longum, Bacteroides fragilis, Clostridium butyricum, Akker-
mansia muciniphila, Lactococcus lactis, Enterococcus faecalis, and
Escherichia coli using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Notably, compared to other tested
bacteria, Fap-2 was only expressed in F. nucleatum (Figure 2j),
consistent to the literature report that F. nucleatum preferentially
colonized in colorectal tumors through the speciﬁc interactions
between Fap-2 and Gal-GalNAc highly expressed in colorectal
tumors.[3,14]
2.2. Tumor-Colonizing F. nucleatum Would Drive
Immunosuppressive Tumor Microenvironment
It has been reported that colonization of F. nucleatum may
be able to drive the formation of an immunosuppressive mi-
croenvironment and accelerate the progression of CRC.[13,15,33]
Thus, we used the mouse colorectal CT-26 tumor model to ver-
ify F. nucleatum-induced immunosuppression in those tumors.
To simulate the physiological conditions of CRC patients with
high abundance of F. nucleatum, F. nucleatum was intratumorally
(i.t.) injected into CT-26 tumors on mice (1 × 107 CFU per tu-
mor) on day 0.[4,5,34] 1, 5, or 9 days after bacteria injection, the
mice were sacriﬁced, and their tumors were excised for bacte-
ria counting (Figure S4a, Supporting Information). As shown
in Figure S4b,c, Supporting Information, successful coloniza-
tion of F. nucleatum in CT-26 tumors was veriﬁed. Meanwhile,
9 days after bacterial injection, the tumors of mice were har-
vested for diﬀerent analyses. It was found that the percentages of
many immunosuppressive cells including myeloid derived cells
(CD45+CD11b+), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (CD11b+ Gr-
1+), and tumor-associated macrophage (CD11b+F4/80+) were ob-
viously increased (Figure S5a–c, Supporting Information). How-
ever, the percentages of CD8+ T lymphocyte (CD3+CD8+) and
CD4+ T lymphocyte (CD3+CD4+) were nearly unchanged after
F. nucleatum infection (Figure S5d–f, Supporting Information).
Meanwhile, various cytokines including tumor necrosis factor-𝛼
(TNF-𝛼), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-1𝛽(IL-1𝛽), interleukin-
10 (IL-10), and transforming growth factor-𝛽(TGF-𝛽), which are
key components in modulating the tumor immune microenvi-
ronment, were obviously increased in tumors with F. nucleatum
infection (Figure 3a; Figure S6, Supporting Information), fur-
ther indicating that F. nucleatum promoted the formation of an
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (3 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 2. Gal-GalNAc mediated infection of F. nucleatum in CRC tumors. a) Fluorescence images (left) of FISH assays measuring the level of F. nucleatum
in adenoma (n = 20), distal colon tissue (n = 20), proximal colon tissue (n = 20), and normal skin tissue (n = 18). Green ﬂuorescence represents
F. nucleatum. Scale bars: 1000 μm. Representative enlarged images (right) of FISH assays. Scale bars: 100 μm. b,c) Representative photographs of
Columbia blood plate (b) and quantiﬁcation (c) of F. nucleatum adhesion to tumors cells including colon cancer cell lines Caco-2, MC-38, CT-26, HT-29,
melanoma cell line B16F10, and cervical cancer cell line ID8. Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (S.E.M.). (n = 3). d) Schematic
illustrating the design of experiments on cells. e) Quantiﬁcation of F. nucleatum adhesion to colon cancer cell lines after pre-incubation with Gal-GalNAc
(10 mm). Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 3). f) Schematic illustrating the design of animal experiments on B16F10-tumor-bearing mice.
g) Relative F. nucleatum gDNA abundance (2 −ΔCt) in CT-26, B16F10 without or with intertumoral Gal-GalNAc injection, after i.v. injection with 1 ×
107 F. nucleatum. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 7 for the CT-26, B16F10, and B16F10 + Gal-GalNAc groups). h) Fluorescence images of
immunoﬂuorescent staining of Gal-GalNAc in adenoma (n = 48) and paracarcinoma tissue sections (n = 48) collected from patients with CRC (left).
Scale bars: 1000 μm. Representative enlarged images (right) of immunoﬂuorescent staining assay. Scale bars: 100 μm. Green ﬂuorescence represents
Gal-GalNAc. The statistical analysis of mean intensity of Gal-GalNAc (high, mean intensity > 10.297; media, mean intensity > 5.516; low, mean intensity
< 5.516). j) SDS–PAGE pattern of proteins from F. nucleatum, B. longum, B. fragilis, C. butyricum, A. muciniphila, L. lactis, E. faecalis, and E. coli. Statistical
signiﬁcance was calculated via a two-tailed Student’s t-test (e) or a Mann–Whitney test (g) in GraphPad Prism. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; and ***P < 0.001.
immunosuppressive TME. Interestingly, intragastrical (i.g.) ad-
ministration of antibiotic cocktail including metronidazole, van-
comycin hydrochloride, and ampicillin could inhibit the prolif-
eration of F. nucleatum in tumor and the intratumor inﬁltration
of immune cells, while the levels of cytokines were returned to
normal (Figure 3a; Figures S5 and S6, Supporting Information),
indirectly demonstrating that F. nucleatum in colorectal cancer
could drive the formation of immunosuppressive TME.
The ability of F. nucleatum to induce the immunosuppres-
sive TME prompted us to examine whether F. nucleatum could
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (4 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 3. Immunosuppressive microenvironment driven by tumor-colonizing F. nucleatum. a) Heatmap showing trends of cytokine levels of TNF-𝛼,
IL-6, IL-1𝛽, IL-10, and TGF-𝛽in tumors after various treatments as indicated (n = 8). All individuals are shown in Figure S7, Supporting Information.
b) Schematic illustrating the design of animal experiments on mice bearing CT-26 tumors. c) Survival corresponding to the tumor size of mice after
diﬀerent treatments as indicated (n = 6 for the untreated and F. nucleatum treated group, n = 16 for the anti-CTLA4 treated group, and n = 13 for the
anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum treated groups). d) Images of tumors collected from the mice on day 10 post diﬀerent treatments. e–j) Representative ﬂow
cytometric analysis images of CD3 + CD8 + T cells gating on CD45+ cells (e) and percentages of CD3+CD8+ T cells in CD45+ cells (f) or Ki67+ cells
in CD8+ cells (g), IFN-𝛾+ cells in CD8+ cells (h), Foxp3+ cells in CD4+ cells (i), and CD11b+ Gr-1+ cells inﬁltrated in tumors (j) analyzed by ﬂow
cytometry. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 6 for the untreated and F. nucleatum-treated group, n = 8 for the anti-CTLA4 treated group and
anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum-treated groups). k) Identiﬁcation of diﬀerentially expressed genes in CT-26 tumors collected from the mice after treating with
anti-CTLA4 or anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum (n = 4). l) GO enrichment analysis of the diﬀerential pathways treated with anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum versus
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (5 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
aﬀect the therapeutic eﬀect of immunotherapy such as ICB. In
our experiments, mice bearing subcutaneous CT-26 tumors with
or without F. nucleatum infection were administrated with anti-
CTLA4. As illustrated in Figure 3b, F. nucleatum was i.t. injected
into tumor at a dose of 1 × 107 CFU on day 0 and anti-CTLA4
was i.v. injected at a dose of 1 mg kg−1 on days 1, 3, and 5. As
shown in Figure 3c; Figure S7, Supporting Information, intra-
tumoral injection of F. nucleatum exhibited nearly no inﬂuence
on tumor progress, and anti-CTLA4 treatment could eﬀectively
delay the growth of tumors without F. nucleatum infection. In
contrast, the therapeutic outcome of anti-CTLA4 treatment was
obviously abrogated for tumors with F. nucleatum infection. Sim-
ilar results were also observed in a MC-38 colorectal tumor model
(Figure S8, Supporting Information).
To investigate the underlying mechanism, tumors in diﬀer-
ent groups were collected on day 10 for various analyses. The
sizes and weights of tumors further indicated that F. nuclea-
tum aﬀected the therapeutic eﬀect of anti-CTLA4 (Figure 3d;
Figure S9, Supporting Information). Then, the tumors were pro-
cessed into single cells suspensions and analyzed by ﬂow cytom-
etry. We discovered that the colonization of F. nucleatum in tu-
mors signiﬁcantly aﬀected the inﬁltration and function of CD8+
T cells, especially IFN-𝛾+ or Ki67+ CD8+ cells after anti-CTLA4
treatment (Figure 3e–h; Figure S10, Supporting Information).
Moreover, the frequency of immunosuppressive cells such as
Tregs and MDSCs in the tumors of mice after F. nucleatum infec-
tion was obviously increased (Figure 3i,j; Figure S11, Supporting
Information).
Meanwhile, the transcriptomic analysis was carried out to ex-
plore the changes of related genes after F. nucleatum infection.
As exhibited in Figure 3k, a total of 688 diﬀerential genes was
identiﬁed, including 208 upregulated genes and 482 downreg-
ulated ones. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed that most of
the downregulated diﬀerential genes after F. nucleatum invasion
were found to enrich in immune related pathways such as anti-
gen binding as well as innate and adaptive immune responses
(Figure 3i,m). According to the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis, it was found that most
of the downregulated diﬀerential genes post F. nucleatum inva-
sion enriched in Th1 and Th2 cell diﬀerentiation, natural killer
cell activation, and antigen processing and presenting pathways
(Figure S12a,b, Supporting Information). We found that the
genes associated with MDSCs (CD33) were signiﬁcantly up-
regulated after F. nucleatum colonization (Figure 3n). Notably,
we found that after blockade of MDSCs using anti-Gr-1, F.
nucleatum-induced CRC immune resistance was largely res-
cued (Figure S13, Supporting Information), indicating that
MDSCs may play an important role in F. nucleatum me-
diated immune evasion during anti-CTLA4 treatment. Thus,
the intratumor invasion of F. nucleatum may recruit the in-
ﬁltration of MDSCs, which exhibits potent immunosuppres-
sive activity and would lead to the failure of T cell mediated
immunotherapy.
2.3. Tumor-Targeting Ability of F. nucleatum-Membrane-Fused
Liposomes
Eliminating F. nucleatum in CRC tissue should be an eﬀective
strategy to relieve F. nucleatum-derived pro-tumoral microen-
vironment. Although i.g. administration of antibiotic cocktail
such as metronidazole, vancomycin hydrochloride, and ampi-
cillin could successfully eliminate F. nucleatum, they would non-
selectively kill the gut microbiota containing many probiotics that
perform critical functions in regulating the patients’ response
to immunotherapy (Figure S14, Supporting Information). Thus,
it would be critical to develop a delivery system that can eﬀec-
tively deliver antibiotics speciﬁcally into bacteria colonized tu-
mors without causing side eﬀects to gut microbiota. Biologi-
cal membrane-based nanoplatforms have become the focus of
biomedicine in recent years due to their unique properties, in-
cluding remarkable drug loading eﬃciency, minimal toxicity, and
the ability to incorporate extra functionalities.[35] Various estab-
lished techniques, such as encapsulating nanoparticles within
red blood cell membranes and fabricating nanoparticles using
cancer cell membranes, have been used to construct member
coating nanoparticles.[36–39] The high expression of Gal-GalNAc
in colorectal adenoma indicated the feasibility of utilizing cyto-
plasmic membrane of F. nucleatum as a new type of targeted drug
delivery carriers. At ﬁrst, cytoplasmic membrane of F. nucleatum
containing Fap-2 was isolated from the lysate of F. nucleatum af-
ter density gradient centrifugation.[22,40] Meanwhile, SDS–PAGE
was carried out to verify the presence of diﬀerent cytoplasmic pro-
teins in FM. As shown in Figure 4a, it was observed that while the
majority of cytoplasmic proteins was at low contents, the Fap-2
protein was enriched in FM.[41,42]
Then, we fabricated FM vesicles through repeated physical
extrusions. However, the hydrodynamic size and polydispersity
index (PDI) of FM vesicles increased signiﬁcantly over time
(Figure S15a,b, Supporting Information), potentially owing to
the aggregation of natural membrane. To stabilize the obtained
FM, we fused FM with liposomes. Speciﬁcally, liposomes syn-
thesized by reverse-phase evaporation were mixed with FM; and
then, repeatedly extruded through the extruder to generate FM
containing liposomes (LipoFM)[3,22] (Figure 4b). To conﬁrm the
successful fusion of FM and liposomes, FM labeled with Tetram-
ethylrhodamine B (TRITC) and liposomes labeled with ﬂuores-
cein isothiocyanate (FITC) were mixed and treated by repeated
physical extrusions. With increasing the number of extrusions,
the ﬂuorescence from FITC was decreased; while, the ﬂuores-
cence from TRITC was increased due to the Förster resonance
energy transfer (FRET),[43] indicating the successful fusion of FM
and liposomes (Figure 4c). Meanwhile, the confocal images of
LipoFM exhibited nearly complete co-localization of FITC and
TRITC channels, further indicating the successful preparation of
fused LipoFM (Figure S16, Supporting Information).
Next, we characterized the obtained LipoFM. As shown
in Figure 4d, the hydrodynamic diameters of liposomes and
anti-CTLA4. m) The number of diﬀerential genes enriched in GO term of mice treated with anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum versus anti-CTLA4. n) Volcano
plot for the transcriptome sequencing of CT-26 tumors treated with anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum versus anti-CTLA4. Statistical signiﬁcance was calculated
via one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (f–j) or the log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test (c) in GraphPad Prism. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; **** and
P < 0.0001.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (6 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 4. LipoFM to target F. nucleatum-colonizing tumors. a) SDS–PAGE pattern of proteins from marker (a-1), whole F. nucleatum lysate (a-2), and F.
nucleatum membrane (a-3). b) Schematic illustrating the preparation of Colistin-LipoFM. c) Fluorescence spectra of fused liposomes labeled with FITC
and FM labeled with TRITC with increasing the number of extrusions. d,e) The hydrodynamic sizes (d) and zeta potentials (e) of liposomes, FM, and
LipoFM. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 3). f) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of LipoFM (scale bar: 100 nm). g) CT-26 cells
were incubated with diﬀerent FITC labeled formulations for 1 h for ﬂow cytometry measurement. h) Statistical analysis of the FITC intensity of HT-29, CT-
26, MC-38, and Caco-2 cells after incubation with diﬀerent nanoparticles. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 5). i) Confocal microscopy images
of CT-26 cells incubated with diﬀerent formations for 1 h, in which Liposome, LipoFM, and LipoEM were labeled with FITC (green), cell membranes were
labeled with Texas Red-WGA (red), and cell nuclei were labeled with DAPI (blue). Scale bars: 20 μm. j) In vivo time-lapse ﬂuorescence imaging of mice
bearing CT-26 tumors after intravenous injection with DiR-labeled Liposome or LipoFM. k) Ex vivo DiR ﬂuorescence imaging of the main organs and
tumors collected from the mice with diﬀerent treatments as indicated at 72 h post injection (n = 4). l) Statistical analysis of the average DiR ﬂuorescence
signals in the main organs and tumors based on the images in (h). Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 4). m,n) Representative ﬂow cytometric
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (7 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
LipoFM were determined to be ≈190 and 200 nm, respectively.
In addition, the surface zeta potential of LipoFM was ≈−11 mv,
which was intermediate between liposomes and FM, further con-
ﬁrming the successful fusion of FM and liposomes (Figure 4e).
Meanwhile, the morphology of LipoFM was characterized by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging. As shown in
the Figure 4f, LipoFM exhibited uniform distribution in particle
sizes with spherical morphology. In the long-term stability study,
the hydrodynamic sizes and PDI of both LipoFM and liposomes
remained nearly unchanged in 72 h, indicating the improved sta-
bility of FM after infusion with liposomes (Figure S15a,b, Sup-
porting Information).
Inspired by the speciﬁc binding of F. nucleatum to Gal-GalNAc,
we then investigated whether the LipoFM would have the ability
to target and bind to colorectal tumors. Colorectal cancer cells in-
cluding CT-26, HT-29, MC-38, and Caco-2 with high Gal-GalNAc
expression were incubated with FITC labeled LipoFM (FITC-
LipoFM), Gal-GalNAc pretreated FITC-LipoFM, FITC-LipoEM
(fused from liposomes and E. coli cytoplasmic membrane), as
well as free Liposome. 60 min later, the cells were washed for
ﬂow cytometry analysis. As shown in the Figure 4g,h, the mean
ﬂuorescence intensity of cells incubated with LipoFM was signif-
icantly higher than that in LipoEM or Liposome treated group,
as well as that of FITC-LipoFM incubated cells pre-treated with
Gal-GalNAc (to block the binding site). In contrast, the addition
of Gal-GalNAc induced negligible eﬀect to the binding of LipoFM
to melanoma B16F10 cells with low Gal-GalNAc expression
(Figure S17, Supporting Information). We further analyzed the
targeting and binding ability of FITC-LipoFM to colorectal can-
cer cells by confocal imaging. As shown in Figure 4i, more signals
from FITC-LipoFM were observed on the cellular membranes.
These results collectively indicated that LipoFM could target col-
orectal cancer cells via the speciﬁc binding with Gal-GalNAc on
the membrane of those cells.
Encouraged by eﬀective targeting and binding ability of
LipoFM to colorectal cancer cells, we then investigated the tar-
geting ability of LipoFM in vivo. Mice bearing subcutaneous
CT-26 tumors were i.v. injected with 1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-
tetramethylindotricarbocyanine iodide (DiR) labeled LipoFM
(DiR-LipoFM) and DiR-Liposome, both of which exhibited sim-
ilar blood circulation proﬁles (Figure S18, Supporting Informa-
tion). Compared to DiR-Liposome, DiR-LipoFM exhibited signif-
icantly higher tumor accumulation (Figure 4j; Figure S19, Sup-
porting Information). After 72 h, the mice were sacriﬁced and
their tumors and other main organs were collected for ﬂuores-
cence imaging. It was observed that the ﬂuorescence intensity
from DiR in tumors collected from mice treated with LipoFM
was ≈1.5 times higher than that in tumors treated with liposomes
(Figure 4k,l). Slightly increased liver accumulation of LipoFM
was also observed, which might be due to the high expression
of Gal-GalNAc in liver (Figure S20, Supporting Information).
We further analyzed the retention of LipoFM in tumors at
various time points after i.v. injection of Cyanine 5.5 (Cy5.5) la-
beled LipoFM (Cy5.5-LipoFM) and Cy5.5-Liposome by ﬂow cy-
tometry. Interestingly, the population of Cy5.5+ cells in Cy5.5-
LipoFM treated group remained at high levels at diﬀerent time
points, while the proportions of Cy5.5+ cells in Cy5.5-Liposome
treated group decreased quickly within 72 h (Figure 4m,n). The
enhanced retention of LipoFM in tumors may contribute to the
speciﬁc binding between Fap-2 on LipoFM and Gal-GalNAc on
tumor cells. 72 h after i.v. injection of Cy5.5-LipoFM and Cy5.5-
Liposome, tumors were collected, sliced, and imaged by confocal
imaging. As show in the Figure 4o, the tumor slides collected
from mice injected with Cy5.5-LipoFM exhibited obviously high
ﬂuorescence signals.
2.4. Tumor-Targeted Delivery of Antibiotics Using F.
nucleatum-Membrane-Fused Liposomes
Encouraged by the eﬃcient targeting and binding ability of
LipoFM to colorectal tumors, we then explored the tumor tar-
geted delivery ability of antibiotics using LipoFM. First, we
screened the antibiotics that could eﬀectively kill F. nucleatum
including erythromycin, ampicillin, vancomycin hydrochloride,
kanamycin sulfate, metronidazole, and Colistin. As shown in
Figure S21a, Supporting Information, both metronidazole and
Colistin exhibited eﬀective inhibition eﬀect to F. nucleatum. Con-
sidering that the frequently used metronidazole is easy to in-
duce bacterial antimicrobial resistance,[44] Colistin, as one of
the few used antibiotics against drug-resistant Gram-negative
bacteria,[45] was chosen to be encapsulated into LipoFM. Speciﬁ-
cally, the Colistin was ﬁrst encapsulated into liposomes via the
emulsion solvent evaporation method; and then, the Colistin-
loaded liposomes were fused with FM as described above. The
loading eﬃciencies of Colistin in liposomes and LipoFM were
determined to be ≈15% and ≈13%, respectively, and the Colistin
loading capacities in liposomes and LipoFM were ≈9% and ≈7%,
respectively (Figure S21b, Supporting Information). Moreover,
the Colistin-LipoFM exhibited sustained release proﬁle of Col-
istin in phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) and cell culture media
(Figure S21c, Supporting Information). Compared to free Col-
istin, Colistin-LipoFM exhibited slightly increased half maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) (Figure S21d, Supporting Infor-
mation).
Then, the targeted drug delivery of Colistin-LipoFM was quan-
titatively measured by high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). Mice bearing subcutaneous CT-26 tumors were i.v. in-
jected with free Colistin, Colistin-Liposome (Colistin-Lipo), or
Colistin-LipoFM. After 24 h, tumors and major organs were
homogenized and extracted for HPLC analysis. As shown in
Figure 5a, tumors collected from mice injected with Colistin-
LipoFM showed the highest Colistin concentration. Then, we in-
vestigated the F. nucleatum killing eﬃciency using Colistin in dif-
ferent formulations. As shown in Figure 5b, 7 days after inoculat-
ing the CT-26 tumors, 1 × 107 CFU F. nucleatum was i.t. injected;
analysis plots (m) and percentages (n) of Cy5.5+ cells inﬁltrated in tumors at 24, 48, and 72 h post injection of LipoFM or Liposome. Data are presented
as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 4). o) Confocal microscopy images of CT-26 tumors collected from mice 72 h post injection of LipoFM or Liposome. The LipoFM
and Liposomes were labeled with Cy5.5 (red), blood vessels were labeled with anti-CD31 (yellow), and nuclei were labeled with DAPI (blue). Scale bars:
100 μm. Statistical signiﬁcance was calculated via two-way ANOVA (h,l,n) in GraphPad Prism. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; *** P < 0.001; and **** P < 0.0001.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (8 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 5. Colistin-LipoFM for selective depletion of tumor-colonizing F. nucleatum. a) Biodistribution of Colistin-LipoFM, Colistin-Lipo, and free Colistin
in mice bearing CT-26 tumors at 24 h post injection by recording the concentration of Colistin using HPLC. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M.
(n = 3). b) Scheme showing the experimental schedule on mice bearing CT-26 tumors. c) Colony plate images (left) and the colony-forming units
(CFUs) (right) showing the F. nucleatum abundance in homogenized tumors of mice with diﬀerent treatments as indicated. The black number in each
picture indicates the number of CFU in each plate. The dilution fold of these homogenized solutions is 20 000. All individuals are showing in Figure S23,
Supporting Information. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 8). d) Scheme showing the experimental schedule on mice bearing CT-26 tumors.
Feces collected on day 6 were analyzed for gut microbiome by 16S rDNA sequencing. e–g) The estimation of mouse gut microbial community based on
observed OTU richness (e), Chao1 diversity index (f), and Shannon diversity index after diﬀerent treatments (g). Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M.
(n = 5). h) Principal component analysis (PCA) illustrating the gut microbiome 𝛽-diversity after diﬀerent treatments. Each point represents each mouse
(n = 5). i) Relative abundance of gut microbiome in diﬀerent groups. Genus-level taxonomy is presented as a percentage of total sequences. Statistical
signiﬁcance was calculated via one-way ANOVA (a,c,e–g) in GraphPad Prism. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; and **** P < 0.0001.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (9 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
and then, free Colistin, Colistin-Lipo, and Colistin-LipoFM were
i.v. administered with same Colistin dosage of 15 mg kg−1 on
days 1, 3, and 5. Then, the mice were sacriﬁced, and their tu-
mors were collected for CFU determination. Excitingly, Colistin-
LipoFM treatment showed the most eﬀective inhibition of F. nu-
cleatum proliferation in tumors (Figure 5c; Figure S22, Support-
ing Information). Although better than free Colistin, the tumor
homing ability and F. nucleatum killing eﬃcacy of Colistin-Lipo
were much lower compared to Colistin-LipoFM, demonstrating
that fusing F. nucleatum with antibiotic-loaded liposomes could
indeed allow targeted elimination of tumor-colonizing bacteria.
Considering that continuous use of antibiotics could in-
duce dysbiosis, which is associated with the diarrhea, obe-
sity, inﬂammation, and even the failure of chemotherapy and
immunotherapy,[31,46] we then investigated whether Colistin-
LipoFM treatment would aﬀect the composition of gut micro-
biota (Figure 5d). According to the 16S ribosomal DNA gene se-
quencing, we observed that both Colistin-LipoFM and Colistin-
Lipo treatment induced negligible eﬀect to bacterial richness, in-
dicated by the operation taxonomic units (OTUs) richness, di-
versity Shannon, and inverse Simpson indices. However, i.g. ad-
ministration of Colistin obviously aﬀected the gut microbiota
(Figure 5e–g). Principal coordinates analysis further revealed that
the mice treated with Colistin-LipoFM and Colistin-Lipo exhib-
ited similar gut microbiota proﬁles to untreated mice, while the
gut microbiota of mice treated with oral administration of Col-
istin showed obvious changes (Figure 5h). Further analysis at
the gene level indicated that compared to oral administration of
Colistin, Colistin-LipoFM, and Colistin-Lipo after i.v. treatment
induced nearly no change to gut microbiota at the genetic level
(Figure 5i). The above results indicated that our Colistin-LipoFM
could selectively kill F. nucleatum colonized in those tumors with-
out disturbing gut microbiota. Although frequent systemic ad-
ministration of free antibiotics such as imipenem, neomycin, and
doxycycline at high doses can also eliminate intratumor micro-
biota, it would cause toxic eﬀects and have the risk to induce drug-
resistant bacteria.[34,47–49] Together, we have successfully synthe-
sized the F. nucleatum-mimicking nanoparticles with the attrac-
tive features of eﬃcient tumor accumulation, long-term stability,
and desired biocompatibility.
2.5. Colistin-LipoFM Overcoming F. nucleatum-Induced Immune
Resistance
Encouraged by the successful elimination of tumor-colonizing
F. nucleatum by Colistin-LipoFM, we then explored whether such
treatment could relieve F. nucleatum induced immune resistance
in colorectal tumors. Mice bearing CT-26 tumors were randomly
divided into six groups: 1) Untreated, 2) anti-CTLA4 (i.v.), 3) anti-
CTLA4 (i.v.) + F. nucleatum (i.t.), 4) anti-CTLA4 (i.v.) + F. nuclea-
tum (i.t.) + Free Colistin (i.v.), 5) anti-CTLA4 (i.v.) + F. nucleatum
(i.t.) + Colistin-Lipo (i.v.), and 6) anti-CTLA4 (i.v.) + F. nuclea-
tum (i.t.) + Colistin-LipoFM (i.v.). F. nucleatum was i.t. injected
with the dose of 1 × 107 CFU on day 0, anti-CTLA4 was i.v. in-
jected with the dose of 1 mg kg−1 on days 1, 3, 5; while, free Col-
istin, Colistin-Lipo, and Colistin-LipoFM were i.v. injected with
the Colistin dose at 15 mg kg−1 on days 1, 3, 5 (Figure 6a). Then,
the tumor sizes were recorded every 2 days. As shown in the
Figure 6b–d, the administration of Colistin-LipoFM could suc-
cessfully relieve the F. nucleatum induced failure of anti-CTLA4
therapy, achieving similar therapeutic results in mice without
F. nucleatum infection; while, the treatment of free Colistin and
Colistin-Lipo only showed moderate eﬀect in restoring the ef-
ﬁcacy of anti-CTLA4 therapy. In addition to the tumor growth
curves, 14 days after diﬀerent treatments, mice were euthanized
and their tumors were collected for diﬀerent analysis. The tumor
weights in diﬀerent groups further indicated the therapeutic re-
sults of anti-CTLA4 could be successful recovered with the help
of Colistin-LipoFM in F. nucleatum-infected tumors (Figure 6e,f).
Then, the tumors collected from diﬀerent groups were dissoci-
ated into single cells for ﬂow cytometry analysis. Consistent with
our above results, the intratumor injection of F. nucleatum led to
a reduced percentage of CD8+CD3+ T cells in tumor, but the i.v.
injection of Colistin-LipoFM could successfully increase the tu-
mor percentages of CD8+ T cells, especially IFN-𝛾+ CD8+ T cells
(Figure 6g–i). In addition, the percentage of MDSCs in the tu-
mors of mice treated by Colistin-LipoFM was obviously reduced
in F. nucleatum-infected tumors, indicating that Colistin-LipoFM
could successfully alleviate F. nucleatum-induced immunosup-
pressive microenvironment (Figure 6j,k).
In addition to the subcutaneous CT-26 tumor model, we then
investigated the therapeutic eﬀect of Colistin-LipoFM in a spon-
taneous colorectal tumor model, whose pathogenesis is similar
to humans’ CRC. According to previous works, azoxymethane
(AOM) and dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) were used to induce
the spontaneous colorectal tumors.[8] Speciﬁcally, the C57BL/6J
mice were intra-peritonelly (i.p.) injected with the AOM with
the dose of 10 mg kg−1 on days 0 and 20. Meanwhile, the
mice were fed with drinking water containing 3% DSS for 5
days; and then, replaced with regular water for 14 days for
three times. After 52 days, the mice were i.g. administrated
with streptomycin and penicillin to eliminate gut bacteria; and
then, i.g. administrated with F. nucleatum every day to estab-
lish F. nucleatum-infected spontaneous colorectal tumor model
(Figure 7a).
Mice bearing spontaneous colorectal tumors were divided into
ﬁve groups: 1) Untreated, 2) F. nucleatum (i.g.), 3) anti-CTLA4
(i.v.), 4) anti-CTLA4 (i.v.) + F. nucleatum (i.g.), and 5) anti-CTLA4
(i.v.) + F. nucleatum (i.g.) + Colistin-LipoFM (i.v.). F. nuclea-
tum was i.g. administrated every day with a dose of 2 × 109
CFU until the end of experiment; anti-CTLA4 was i.v. injected
with the dose of 1 mg kg−1 on days 60, 67, 74, 81, and 88;
and Colistin-LipoFM was i.v. injected with the Colistin dose of
15 mg kg−1 on the days 60, 67, 74, 81, and 88. Eight weeks later,
mice were euthanized and their intestinal tracts were collected.
It was found that anti-CTLA4 was able to inhibit the growth of
spontaneous colorectal tumors; while, its therapeutic eﬃciency
was obviously reduced with F. nucleatum infection. Interestingly,
the administration of Colistin-LipoFM could successfully rescue
the therapeutic eﬃcacy of anti-CTLA4 in F. nucleatum-infected
mice (Figure 7b,c; Figure S23, Supporting Information). In ad-
dition, the intestinal tracts containing tumors were sliced for
immunoﬂuorescence staining. As shown in Figure 7d,e; Figure
S24, Supporting Information, obviously increased inﬁltration
of CD8+ T cells was observed in the tumors collected from
mice in anti-CTLA4 (i.v.) and anti-CTLA4 (i.v.) + F. nucleatum
(i.g.) + Colistin-LipoFM groups, further indicating the eﬀective
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (10 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 6. Colistin-LipoFM overcoming F. nucleatum-induced immune-resistance in mice bearing CT-26 tumors. a) Scheme showing the experimental
schedule on mice bearing CT-26 tumors. b) Average tumor growth curves of the CT-26 tumors in mice with various treatments as indicated. Growth
curves were stopped when the mice had tumor volumes larger than 1000 mm3 of the corresponding group. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M.
(n = 6 for Untreated, anti-CTLA4, anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum, anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum + Colistin groups; n = 8 for the anti-CTLA4 +
F. nucleatum + Colistin-Liposome, anti-CTLA4 + F. nucleatum + Colistin-LipoFM groups). c) Survival corresponding to the tumor sizes of
mice after diﬀerent treatments as indicated. d) Individual tumor growth curves of the CT-26 tumors in mice with various treatments as indi-
cated. e–f) Images (e) and weight (f) of CT-26 tumors harvested from mice after diﬀerent treatments. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M.
(n = 6). g) The percentages of CD3+CD8+ T cells gating on CD45+ cells. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 6). h,i) Representative ﬂow
cytometric analysis images (h) and percentages (i) of IFN-𝛾+ cells in CD8+ T cells after diﬀerent treatments. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M.
(n = 6). j,k) Representative ﬂow cytometric analysis plots (j) and percentages (k) of MDSCs (CD11b+ Gr-1+) inﬁltrated in tumors of mice with diﬀerent
treatments. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 6). Statistical signiﬁcance was calculated via one-way ANOVA (f,g,i,k), the log-rank (Mantel–Cox)
test (c), or two-tailed Student’s t-test (b) in GraphPad Prism. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; and **** P < 0.0001.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (11 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 7. Colistin-LipoFM overcoming F. nucleatum-induced immune-resistance in mice bearing spontaneous colonic tumors and MC-38 tumors.
a) Scheme showing the experimental schedule of AOM/DSS induced spontaneous orthotopic colorectal cancer on C57BL/6J. b,c) Images (b) and
statistical analysis (c) of spontaneous colorectal tumors after diﬀerent treatments. All individuals are shown in Figure S24, Supporting Information.
Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 6). d) Representative immunoﬂuorescence images of spontaneous colorectal tumors showing the inﬁltration
of CD8+ T cells (red) after diﬀerent treatments. Scale bars: 100 μm. e) Statistical analysis of CD8+ T cells inﬁltrated in spontaneous colorectal tumors
after diﬀerent treatments. f) Scheme showing the experimental schedule of anti-PD1 treatment on mice bearing MC 38 tumors. g) Average tumor growth
curves of MC38 tumors in the mice with various treatments as indicated. G1: Untreated, G2: anti-PD-1, G3: anti-PD-1 + F. nucleatum, and G4: anti-PD-1
+ F. nucleatum + Colistin-LipoFM. Growth curves were stopped when at least one mouse was with its tumor volume larger than 1000 mm3 in the
corresponding group. Data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. (n = 6). h) Images of mice bearing MC 38 tumors with various treatments as indicated
on day 8. i) Individual tumor growth curves of the MC38 tumors in the mice with various treatments as indicated (n = 6). j) Survival curves of mice
after diﬀerent treatments as indicated. Statistical signiﬁcance was calculated via the log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test (j) or two-tailed Student’s t test (c,g) in
GraphPad Prism. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; and **** P < 0.0001.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (12 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
immunotherapeutic results achieved with the help of Colistin-
LipoFM to treat F. nucleatum-infected tumors.
In clinic, PD-1/PDL1 blockade therapy has also been ap-
proved for treatment of patients with microsatellite-instability-
high (MSI-high) colorectal cancer or those with a high overall
mutational burden.[50] To investigate whether Colistin-LipoFM
could rescue the therapeutic eﬃcacy of anti-PD-1 therapy in F.
nucleatum-infected tumors, mice bearing MC-38 tumors were
randomly divided into four groups: 1) Untreated, 2) anti-PD-1
(i.v.), 3) anti-PD-1 (i.v.) + F. nucleatum (i.t.), and 4) anti-PD-1 (i.v.)
+ F. nucleatum (i.t.) + Colistin-LipoFM (i.v.). F. nucleatum was
i.t. injected with the dose of 1 × 107 CFU on day 0; anti-PD-1
was i.v. injected with the dose of 1 mg kg−1 on days 1, 3, and 5;
and Colistin-LipoFM was i.v. injected with the Colistin dose at
15 mg k−1g on days 1, 3, and 5 (Figure 7f). Similar to the results
in anti-CTLA4 treatment, the administration of Colistin-LipoFM
successfully relieved the F. nucleatum-induced failure of anti-PD-
1 therapy, achieving similar therapeutic eﬀect results in anti-PD-1
treated mice without F. nucleatum infection (Figure 7g–j). Taken
together, Colistin-LipoFM could enable targeted delivery of an-
tibiotics into tumors and successfully overcome F. nucleatum-
induced immune resistance in CRC.
3. Conclusion
Tumor-associated microbes especially F. nucleatum have been re-
ported to accumulate in colorectal tumors and adenomas around
colon tissues. Recently, some studies reported that the enrich-
ment of F. nucleatum in colorectal cancer could recruit im-
munosuppressive cells such as MDSC and tumor-associated
macrophages into tumors, leading to the formation of immuno-
suppressive tumor microenvironment; and thus, the failure of
cancer immunotherapy. In our work, we found that the pres-
ence of F. nucleatum in tumors obviously reduces the therapeu-
tic eﬀect of anti-CTLA4 therapy. Mechanistic studies illustrated
that the genes related to immune-related functions and pathways
such as Th1 and Th2 cell diﬀerentiation, B cells and T cells ac-
tivation, and so on were signiﬁcantly downregulated after F. nu-
cleatum invasion. Of note, the myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) related gene CD33 was signiﬁcantly upregulated after
F. nucleatum invasion. Further, F. nucleatum induced immune
evasion was rescued by anti-Gr-1, supporting that F. nucleatum-
induced upregulation of MDSCs may play an important role in
impairing the therapeutic eﬀect of ICB therapy. Thus, eliminat-
ing tumor-colonizing F. nucleatum may be an eﬀective strategy to
improve the eﬃcacy of cancer immunotherapy.
Although antibiotics are universally used for the treatment of
bacterial infection and indeed could eﬀectively inhibit the prolif-
eration of bacteria, antibiotics still will non-selectively kill the gut
microbiota, some of which would perform critical functions in
regulating the anticancer immune responses. An ideal delivery
system that can selectively deliver antibiotics to bacteria-infected
tumors without harming the gut microbiota is thus required. Al-
though various tumor targeted nanocarriers have been developed
by modifying with ligands that could bind to cancer-speciﬁc re-
ceptors, these approaches are only limited to tumors overexpress-
ing the targeted receptor. Up to now, speciﬁc tumor bacteria tar-
geted delivery system has not been reported. This promoted us
to develop a tumor bacteria-targeted antibiotics delivery system
that can selectively eliminate bacteria in tumors and induce neg-
ligible eﬀect on the gut microbiota. Inspired by the resident of
F. nucleatum in colorectal tumors due to the interaction between
Fap-2 and Gal-GalNAc overexpressed in colorectal tumors, we de-
veloped an F. nucleatum-mimetic nanomedicine by fusing FM
with liposomes for targeted delivery of antibiotics to Gal-GalNAc
overexpressed tumors. Interestingly, the F. nucleatum-mimetic
nanomedicine could successfully kill intratumor F. nucleatum
without inducing substantial perturbations to the gut microbiota.
In F. nucleatum-infected subcutaneous colorectal tumor models
and chemically induced spontaneous colorectal cancer model,
such F. nucleatum-mimetic nanomedicine could eﬀectively re-
lieve F. nucleatum-derived pro-tumoral microenvironment and
improve the therapeutic eﬃcacy of anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD-1 im-
munotherapies.
Our work presents a unique strategy to enable speciﬁc target-
ing of bacteria-colonized tumors. As tumor colonizing F. nuclea-
tum is known to be related to the tumor metastasis and failure
of various cancer therapies,[5,21] removing intertumoral F. nu-
cleatum using our LipoFM delivery platform may be an eﬀective
strategy to beneﬁt current cancer treatments.[19] Apart from the
delivery of antibiotics demonstrated in this work, LipoFM may
be used in delivering other cargos, such as chemotherapeutics
and immune stimulating molecules, as well as other therapeutic
molecules to allow combinational therapies and enhance tumor
treatment. In addition to colorectal tumor, it has been reported
that breast cancer and pancreatic cancer also exhibited high ex-
pression of Gal-GalNAc, underlining the potential clinical trans-
lation of our ﬁndings to treat various types of cancers.[3,10] In con-
clusion, our work proposes a promising biomimicking nanoplat-
form for targeted drug delivery of tumors colonized with bacteria
and highlights the beneﬁt of selective killing of tumor-colonizing
bacteria in enhancing cancer immunotherapy.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
This article was partially supported by the National Research Programs
of China (2020YFA0211100, 2021YFF0701800, 2022YFA1206500), the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (52032008, 21927803,
52250002, 52273013), the Suzhou Key Laboratory of Nanotechnology and
Biomedicine, the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science
and Technology, and the 111 Program from the Ministry of Education of
China. All animal experiments were performed in compliance with the rele-
vant laws and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Commit-
tee of Soochow University (No. ECSU-2019000198). Clinical data analysis
was performed with the analysis of already published results in a database.
No human clinical sample collection was included in this work.
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the cor-
responding author upon reasonable request.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (13 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Keywords
biomimetic nanomedicine, colorectal cancer, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
immunoresistence, targeted drug delivery
Received: June 28, 2023
Revised: August 28, 2023
Published online: October 2, 2023
[1] A. D. Kostic, E. Chun, L. Robertson, J. N. Glickman, C. A. Gallini, M.
Michaud, T. E. Clancy, D. C. Chung, P. Lochhead, G. L. Hold, E. M.
El-Omar, D. Brenner, C. S. Fuchs, M. Meyerson, W. S. Garrett, Cell
Host Microbe 2013, 14, 207.
[2] J. L. Galeano Niño, H. Wu, K. D. Lacourse, A. G. Kempchinsky, A.
Baryiames, B. Barber, N. Futran, J. Houlton, C. Sather, E. Sicinska,
A. Taylor, S. S. Minot, C. D. Johnston, S. Bullman, Nature 2022, 611,
810.
[3] M. A. Casasanta, C. C. Yoo, B. Udayasuryan, B. E. Sanders, A. Umaña,
Y. Zhang, H. Peng, A. J. Duncan, Y. Wang, L. Li, S. S. Verbridge, D. J.
Slade, Sci. Signaling 2020, 13, eaba9157.
[4] L. T. Geller, M. Barzily-Rokni, T. Danino, O. H. Jonas, N. Shental, D.
Nejman, N. Gavert, Y. Zwang, Z. A. Cooper, K. Shee, C. A. Thaiss, A.
Reuben, J. Livny, R. Avraham, D. T. Frederick, M. Ligorio, K. Chatman,
S. E. Johnston, C. M. Mosher, A. Brandis, G. Fuks, C. Gurbatri, V.
Gopalakrishnan, M. Kim, M. W. Hurd, M. Katz, J. Fleming, A. Maitra,
D. A. Smith, M. Skalak, et al., Science 2017, 357, 1156.
[5] Y. Yang, W. Weng, J. Peng, L. Hong, L. Yang, Y. Toiyama, R. Gao, M.
Liu, M. Yin, C. Pan, H. Li, B. Guo, Q. Zhu, Q. Wei, M.-P. Moyer, P.
Wang, S. Cai, A. Goel, H. Qin, Y. Ma, Gastroenterology 2017, 152, 851.
[6] M. Vétizou, J. M. Pitt, R. Daillère, P. Lepage, N. Waldschmitt, C.
Flament, S. Rusakiewicz, B. Routy, M. P. Roberti, C. P. M. Duong,
V. Poirier-Colame, A. Roux, S. Becharef, S. Formenti, E. Golden, S.
Cording, G. Eberl, A. Schlitzer, F. Ginhoux, S. Mani, T. Yamazaki, N.
Jacquelot, D. P. Enot, M. Bérard, J. Nigou, P. Opolon, A. Eggermont,
P.-L. Woerther, E. Chachaty, N. Chaput, et al., Science 2015, 350, 1079.
[7] N. Iida, A. Dzutsev, C. A. Stewart, L. Smith, N. Bouladoux, R. A.
Weingarten, D. A. Molina, R. Salcedo, T. Back, S. Cramer, R.-M. Dai,
H. Kiu, M. Cardone, S. Naik, A. K. Patri, E. Wang, F. M. Marincola,
K. M. Frank, Y. Belkaid, G. Trinchieri, R. S. Goldszmid, Science 2013,
342, 967.
[8] L. F. Mager, R. Burkhard, N. Pett, N. C. A. Cooke, K. Brown, H. Ramay,
S. Paik, J. Stagg, R. A. Groves, M. Gallo, I. A. Lewis, M. B. Geuking,
K. D. Mccoy, Science 2020, 369, 1481.
[9] A. Sivan, L. Corrales, N. Hubert, J. B. Williams, K. Aquino-Michaels,
Z. M. Earley, F. W. Benyamin, Y. Man Lei, B. Jabri, M.-L. Alegre, E. B.
Chang, T. F. Gajewski, Science 2015, 350, 1084.
[10] L. Parhi, T. Alon-Maimon, A. Sol, D. Nejman, A. Shhadeh, T.
Fainsod-Levi, O. Yajuk, B. Isaacson, J. Abed, N. Maalouf, A.
Nissan, J. Sandbank, E. Yehuda-Shnaidman, F. Ponath, J. Vogel, O.
Mandelboim, Z. Granot, R. Straussman, G. Bachrach, Nat. Commun.
2020, 11, 3259.
[11] K. Mima, Y. Sukawa, R. Nishihara, Z. R. Qian, M. Yamauchi, K.
Inamura, S. A. Kim, A. Masuda, J. A. Nowak, K. Nosho, A. D. Kostic,
M. Giannakis, H. Watanabe, S. Bullman, D. A. Milner, C. C. Harris, E.
Giovannucci, L. A. Garraway, G. J. Freeman, G. Dranoﬀ, A. T. Chan,
W. S. Garrett, C. Huttenhower, C. S. Fuchs, S. Ogino, JAMA Oncol.
2015, 1, 653.
[12] S. Pushalkar, M. Hundeyin, D. Daley, C. P. Zambirinis, E. Kurz, A.
Mishra, N. Mohan, B. Aykut, M. Usyk, L. E. Torres, G. Werba, K.
Zhang, Y. Guo, Q. Li, N. Akkad, S. Lall, B. Wadowski, J. Gutierrez,
J. A. Kochen Rossi, J. W. Herzog, B. Diskin, A. Torres-Hernandez, J.
Leinwand, W. Wang, P. S. Taunk, S. Savadkar, M. Janal, A. Saxena, X.
Li, D. Cohen, et al., Cancer Discovery 2018, 8, 403.
[13] S. Bullman, C. S. Pedamallu, E. Sicinska, T. E. Clancy, X. Zhang, D.
Cai, D. Neuberg, K. Huang, F. Guevara, T. Nelson, O. Chipashvili,
T. Hagan, M. Walker, A. Ramachandran, B. Diosdado, G. Serna, N.
Mulet, S. Landolﬁ, S. Ramon Y Cajal, R. Fasani, A. J. Aguirre, K. Ng,
E. Élez, S. Ogino, J. Tabernero, C. S. Fuchs, W. C. Hahn, P. Nuciforo,
M. Meyerson, Science 2017, 358, 1443.
[14] J. Abed, J. E. M. Emgård, G. Zamir, M. Faroja, G. Almogy, A. Grenov,
A. Sol, R. Naor, E. Pikarsky, K. A. Atlan, A. Mellul, S. Chaushu, A. L.
Manson, A. M. Earl, N. Ou, C. A. Brennan, W. S. Garrett, G. Bachrach,
Cell Host Microbe 2016, 20, 215.
[15] A. D. Kostic, E. Chun, L. Robertson, J. N. Glickman, C. A. Gallini, M.
Michaud, T. E. Clancy, D. C. Chung, P. Lochhead, G. L. Hold, E. M.
El-Omar, D. Brenner, C. S. Fuchs, M. Meyerson, W. S. Garrett, Cell
Host Microbe 2013, 14, 207.
[16] C. Gur, Y. Ibrahim, B. Isaacson, R. Yamin, J. Abed, M. Gamliel, J.
Enk, Y. Bar-On, N. Stanietsky-Kaynan, S. Coppenhagen-Glazer, N.
Shussman, G. Almogy, A. Cuapio, E. Hofer, D. Mevorach, A. Tabib, R.
Ortenberg, G. Markel, K. Miklic, S. Jonjic, C. A. Brennan, W. S. Garrett,
G. Bachrach, O. Mandelboim, Immunity 2015, 42, 344.
[17] S.-S. Jiang, Y.-L. Xie, X.-Y. Xiao, Z.-R. Kang, X.-L. Lin, L. Zhang, C.-S. Li,
Y. Qian, P.-P. Xu, X.-X. Leng, L.-W. Wang, S.-P. Tu, M. Zhong, G. Zhao,
J.-X. Chen, Z. Wang, Q. Liu, J. Hong, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-X. Chen, J.-Y. Fang,
Cell Host Microbe 2023, 31, 781.
[18] D. Ternes, M. Tsenkova, V. I. Pozdeev, M. Meyers, E. Koncina, S.
Atatri, M. Schmitz, J. Karta, M. Schmoetten, A. Heinken, F. Rodriguez,
C. Delbrouck, A. Gaigneaux, A. Ginolhac, T. T. D. Nguyen, L.
Grandmougin, A. Frachet-Bour, C. Martin-Gallausiaux, M. Pacheco,
L. Neuberger-Castillo, P. Miranda, N. Zuegel, J.-Y. Ferrand, M.
Gantenbein, T. Sauter, D. J. Slade, I. Thiele, J. Meiser, S. Haan, P.
Wilmes, et al., Nat Metab 2022, 4, 458.
[19] D.-W. Zheng, X. Dong, P. Pan, K.-W. Chen, J.-X. Fan, S.-X. Cheng, X.-Z.
Zhang, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2019, 3, 717.
[20] X. Dong, P. Pan, D.-W. Zheng, P. Bao, X. Zeng, X.-Z. Zhang, Sci. Adv.
2020, 6, eaba1590.
[21] S. Chen, L. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Zhang, M. Sun, L. Wang, J. Lin, Y. Cui, Q.
Chen, C. Jin, X. Li, B. Wang, H. Chen, T. Zhou, L. Wang, C.-H. Hsu,
W. Zhuo, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 1248.
[22] L. Chen, H. Qin, R. Zhao, X. Zhao, L. Lin, Y. Chen, Y. Lin, Y. Li, Y. Qin,
Y. Li, S. Liu, K. Cheng, H. Chen, J. Shi, G. J. Anderson, Y. Wu, Y. Zhao,
G. Nie, Sci. Transl. Med. 2021, 13, eabc2816.
[23] M. O. A. Sommer, G. Dantas, G. M. Church, Science 2009, 325, 1128.
[24] A. Salyers, A. Gupta, Y. Wang, Trends Microbiol. 2004, 12, 412.
[25] S. A. Yuk, H. Kim, N. S. Abutaleb, A. M. Dieterly, M. S. Taha, M.
D. Tsifansky, L. T. Lyle, M. N. Seleem, Y. Yeo, Sci. Adv. 2021, 7,
eabj1577.
[26] K. A. Brown, N. Khanafer, N. Daneman, D. N. Fisman, Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 2013, 57, 2326.
[27] A. J. Bäumler, V. Sperandio, Nature 2016, 535, 85.
[28] L. M. Cox, S. Yamanishi, J. Sohn, A. V. Alekseyenko, J. M. Leung, I.
Cho, S. G. Kim, H. Li, Z. Gao, D. Mahana, J. G. Zárate Rodriguez, A.
B. Rogers, N. Robine, P. Loke, M. J. Blaser, Cell 2014, 158, 705.
[29] I. Cho, S. Yamanishi, L. Cox, B. A. Methé, J. Zavadil, K. Li, Z. Gao,
D. Mahana, K. Raju, I. Teitler, H. Li, A. V. Alekseyenko, M. J. Blaser,
Nature 2012, 488, 621.
[30] B. Routy, E. Le Chatelier, L. Derosa, C. P. M. Duong, M. T. Alou, R.
Daillère, A. Fluckiger, M. Messaoudene, C. Rauber, M. P. Roberti,
M. Fidelle, C. Flament, V. Poirier-Colame, P. Opolon, C. Klein,
K. Iribarren, L. Mondragón, N. Jacquelot, B. Qu, G. Ferrere, C.
Clémenson, L. Mezquita, J. R. Masip, C. Naltet, S. Brosseau, C.
Kaderbhai, C. Richard, H. Rizvi, F. Levenez, N. Galleron, Science 2018,
359, 91.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (14 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[31] V. Gopalakrishnan, B. A. Helmink, C. N. Spencer, A. Reuben, J. A.
Wargo, Cancer Cell 2018, 33, 570.
[32] D. Rosenblum, N. Joshi, W. Tao, J. M. Karp, D. Peer, Nat. Commun.
2018, 9, 1410.
[33] C. Kong, X. Yan, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, Y. Luo, P. Liu, S. Ferrandon, M. F.
Kalady, R. Gao, J. He, F. Yin, X. Qu, J. Zheng, Y. Gao, Q. Wei, Y. Ma,
J.-Y. Liu, H. Qin, Cancer Res. 2021, 81, 4485.
[34] A. Fu, B. Yao, T. Dong, Y. Chen, J. Yao, Y. Liu, H. Li, H. Bai, X. Liu, Y.
Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Guo, N. Li, S. Cai, Cell 2022, 185, 1356.
[35] Y. Wang, X. Xu, X. Chen, J. Li, Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2107406.
[36] Q. Feng, X. Ma, K. Cheng, G. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Yue, J. Liang, L. Zhang,
T. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Gao, G. Nie, X. Zhao, Adv. Mater. 2022, 34,
2206200.
[37] B. Yu, S. Goel, D. Ni, P. A. Ellison, C. M. Siamof, D. Jiang, L. Cheng,
L. Kang, F. Yu, Z. Liu, T. E. Barnhart, Q. He, H. Zhang, W. Cai, Adv.
Mater. 2018, 30, 1704934.
[38] G. Liu, X. Zhao, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Xu, Y. Li, H. Min, J. Shi, Y. Zhao, J.
Wei, J. Wang, G. Nie, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1900795.
[39] Z. Liu, F. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Sang, L. Zhang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 2021, 118, e2022769118.
[40] J. E. Guzmán-Flores, A. F. Alvarez, S. Poggio, M. Gavilanes-Ruiz, D.
Georgellis, Anal. Biochem. 2017, 518, 1.
[41] C. Gur, Y. Ibrahim, B. Isaacson, R. Yamin, J. Abed, M. Gamliel, J.
Enk, Y. Bar-On, N. Stanietsky-Kaynan, S. Coppenhagen-Glazer, N.
Shussman, G. Almogy, A. Cuapio, E. Hofer, D. Mevorach, A. Tabib, R.
Ortenberg, G. Markel, K. Miklic, S. Jonjic, C. A. Brennan, W. S. Garrett,
G. Bachrach, O. Mandelboim, Immunity 2015, 42, 344.
[42] C. W. Kaplan, X. Ma, A. Paranjpe, A. Jewett, R. Lux, S. Kinder-Haake,
W. Shi, Infect. Immun. 2010, 78, 4773.
[43] Z.-X. Chen, J.-L. Li, P. Pan, P. Bao, X. Zeng, X.-Z. Zhang, Nano Today
2021, 41, 101329.
[44] A. Smith, Br. Dent. J. 2018, 224, 403.
[45] R. L. Nation, J. Li, Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. 2009, 22, 535.
[46] A. Lavelle, H. Sokol, Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2020, 17,
223.
[47] S. Wade, M. Williams, Prescriber 2019, 30, 16.
[48] G. Griﬃths, B. Nyström, S. B. Sable, G. K. Khuller, Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
2010, 8, 827.
[49] M. O. Sommer, G. Dantas, Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2011, 14, 556.
[50] A. F. Oliveira, L. Bretes, I. Furtado, Front. Oncol. 2019, 9, 26.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2306281
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2306281 (15 of 15)
 15214095, 2023, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202306281 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License