RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advancedscience.com
Surface Engineering-Induced d-Band Center
Down-Regulation in High-Entropy Alloy Nanowires for
Enhanced Nanozyme Catalysis
Kunyang Feng, Hanting Wang, Song Zhou, Wei Zhang, Chonghai Gong, Yuxin He,
Yusen Wang, Wenchong Dai, Jianbo Li,* Zhengwei Zhang,* and Siqiao Li*
High-entropy alloys (HEAs) have garnered extensive attention owing to their
broad compositional tunability and high catalytic activity. However, precisely
modulating the enzyme-like activity of HEAs and enhancing their
biocompatibility for biological applications remain severely challenging.
Herein, PtRuFeCoNi HEA nanowires (NWs) are synthesized by adjusting the
metal composition and surface-engineered with polydopamine (PDA) to form
HEA NWs@PDA nanozymes (HEzymes@PDA) with superior catalytic activity
and photothermal properties. Density functional theory calculations and the
Sabatier principle reveal that self-polymerized PDA surface engineering
moderately lowers the d-band center of the HEAs, optimizes the surface
charge distribution, and enhances the adsorption–desorption eﬃciency of the
substrates. As a proof-of-concept, the HEzymes@PDA are synergistically
integrated with hydrogels for biosensing analysis. This study presents an
innovative paradigm for designing highly active HEA nanozymes via surface
engineering and demonstrates their immense potential in catalytic sensing
applications.
K. Feng, H. Wang, S. Zhou, W. Zhang, C. Gong, Y. Wang, J. Li, S. Li
School of Basic Medical Sciences
Chongqing Medical University
Chongqing 400016, China
E-mail: lijianbo@cqmu.edu.cn;lsqzzw@cqmu.edu.cn
K.Feng,H.Wang, S.Zhou,W.Zhang,C.Gong,Y.Wang,J.Li,S.Li
Chongqing Key Laboratory of ForensicMedicine
Chongqing Medical University
Chongqing 400016,China
Y.He,Z.Zhang
Collegeof Pharmacy
Chongqing Medical University
Chongqing 400016,China
E-mail: zzwcpu@cqmu.edu.cn
W.Dai
School of Management
Shanxi Medical University
Shanxi 030001, China
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202502354
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH
GmbH. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
DOI: 10.1002/advs.202502354
1. Introduction
Nanozymes are a class of enzyme mimetics
that integrate the distinctive characteris-
tics of nanomaterials with their catalytic
functionalities.[1] They can emulate the
functions of natural enzymes, including
peroxidase (POD) and oxidase (OXD), and
oﬀer exclusive advantages such as low
cost, high stability, ease of modiﬁcation,
adjustable catalytic activity, and scalability
for large-scale production.[2] The distinct
physicochemical properties of nanoma-
terials, including their size, morphology,
and active sites, provide exceptional op-
portunities
to
ﬁne-tune
their
catalytic
performance,
applying
in
biochemical
sensing, disease diagnosis and treatment,
and
environmental
protection.[3,4]
Var-
ious
nanocatalyst
materials,
including
metal-based,
carbon-based,
and
metal
oxide/sulﬁde
nanozymes,
have
been
developed.[5] However, challenges such as
limited catalytic activity, complex catalytic mechanisms, and poor
biocompatibility persist, necessitating the development of inno-
vative nanozymes, advanced activity modulation strategies, and
deeper investigations into their catalytic mechanisms.[6]
High-entropy alloys (HEAs) are single-phase solid-solution al-
loys with a simple crystal structure that are formed from ﬁve
or more metals in equal or approximately equal proportions,
each contributing 5–35% of the atomic ratio.[7] Compared with
conventional alloy materials, HEAs exhibit excellent hardness,
wear resistance, and thermal stability, making them appealing
in numerous ﬁelds such as chemical engineering, energy, and
thermoelectricity.[8,9] Moreover, their intrinsically high entropy
eliminates immiscibility boundaries between elements, thereby
facilitating robust control of their composition and optimiz-
ing catalytic performance.[10] Entropy-mediated strategies enable
the precise design of HEAs by controlling the lattice distortion
and elemental composition through tailored preparation con-
dition. This approach allows the creation of active sites with
speciﬁc geometric structures and electronic characteristics, of-
fering signiﬁcant potential for enhanced catalytic performance
and diverse applications.[11,12] The catalytic activity and disper-
sion of HEAs depend on the types and proportions of their con-
stituent metals.[13] Variations in atomic sizes of the elements in
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (1 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
the HEAs introduce substantial lattice distortions, thereby in-
creasing the energy barrier for atomic diﬀusion and enhancing
their stability and formation.[14] In addition, the cocktail eﬀect
in the HEAs modulates the adsorption of reactants and interme-
diates at active sites through synergistic interactions among the
elements.[15] Density functional theory (DFT) calculations have
been extensively employed to elucidate the mechanisms under-
lying the catalytic activity of HEAs, focusing on their geometric
and electronic structures, as well as substrate adsorption and re-
action processes.[16] Although HEAs show promise for various
catalytic reactions, their complex structures hinder precise regu-
lation, potentially resulting in a suboptimal enzyme-like activity.
Moreover, their low biocompatibility and potential toxicity limit
their biomedical applications. Notably, the introduction of sur-
face modiﬁcation engineering to HEAs oﬀers a promising solu-
tion to these problems.[17] By functionalizing small molecules,
macromolecules, and polymers, HEAs can optimize their cat-
alytic potential and biocompatibility, advancing the development
of high-entropy nanozymes (HEzymes) and the ﬁeld of nanozy-
mology.
The catalytic performance of nanozymes is closely linked to
their surface structural properties and electronic distributions.[18]
Surface modiﬁcation engineering and ligand alterations are ef-
fective strategies for optimizing catalytic eﬃciency by expos-
ing or increasing the number of active sites, modifying surface
properties, and enhancing stability and biocompatibility.[19] Poly-
dopamine (PDA) coating, inspired by the adhesive properties
of mussel foot proteins, has emerged as a multifunctional sur-
face modiﬁcation approach.[20] PDA surfaces are rich in catechol,
imine, and amine groups, which enable strong metal-ion chela-
tion, hydrophilicity, biocompatibility, and adhesion.[21] PDA coat-
ings alter the surface electronic and chemical properties of mate-
rials, and their strong near-infrared (NIR) absorption can impart
photothermal conversion eﬃciency under 808 nm irradiation.[22]
When applied to noble metals, PDA coatings generally exhibit
enhanced nanozyme activity through induced accumulation and
electron transfer eﬀects.[23] The dual ampliﬁcation of the cat-
alytic performance of HEzymes can be accomplished through a
combined strategy of structural design and surface modiﬁcation.
Integrating PDA with HEzymes for dual-function regulation of
the enzymatic activity and photothermal eﬀects remains an un-
explored avenue. According to the Sabatier principle, optimal
catalytic performance requires appropriate interactions between
catalysts and reactants. In addition, the position of the d-band
center in HEzymes plays a critical role in determining adsorp-
tion strength, thereby inﬂuencing the catalytic performance.[24]
Therefore, the Sabatier principle and d-band center theory can
provide theoretical guidance for evaluating surface modiﬁcation
strategies and designing functionalized HEzymes.
In this study, we synthesized PtRuFeCoNi HEA nanowires
(NWs) by adjusting the metal composition and subsequently
surface-engineered them with PDA to obtain HEA NWs@PDA
nanozymes (HEzymes@PDA) with high POD-like activities.
HEzymes@PDA exhibited superior catalytic activity and dis-
persibility compared with HEA NWs. The photothermal eﬀect
stimulated by the PDA coating signiﬁcantly increased the local
microenvironment temperature of HEzymes@PDA under NIR
irradiation, thereby enhancing the catalytic eﬃciency. DFT cal-
culations were employed to explore the electronic structure and
catalytic mechanisms of the HEA NWs, revealing the impact of
the d-orbital hybridization between Pt, Ru, and transition met-
als on electron transfer and substrate adsorption. According to
the Sabatier principle, the enhanced catalytic performance of
HEzymes@PDA resulted from the moderate adjustment of the
surface charge distribution and a slight reduction in the d-band
center, which optimized the adsorption–desorption eﬃciency of
the substrates. To validate the theoretical ﬁndings, a colorimetric
sensing platform based on HEzymes@PDA was developed for
practical applications in detecting acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
activity and methomyl in fruits. This study demonstrates that
surface modiﬁcation engineering enhances the catalytic perfor-
mance of HEzymes and provides insights into the relationship
between the Sabatier principle and d-band center for improving
nanozyme catalysis, oﬀering new perspectives for HEzyme de-
sign and biosensing applications.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Characterization of PtRuFeCoNi HEzymes@PDA
PtRuFeCoNi HEA NWs were synthesized using a simple low-
temperature oil-phase method, and HEA NWs@PDA were pre-
pared using a self-polymerized dopamine strategy applied to
the HEA NWs (Figure 1A).[12,15,25] First, platinum (II) acetylace-
tonate (Pt(acac)2), ruthenium (III) acetylacetonate (Ru(acac)3),
iron (III) acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3), cobalt (III) acetylaceto-
nate (Co(acac)3), and nickel (II) acetylacetonate (Ni(acac)2) were
used as metal precursors. Oleylamine (OAm) acted as the
solvent, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) served as
the structure-directing agent, and molybdenum hexacarbonyl
(Mo(CO)6) and glucose were used as reducing agents. After ob-
taining the PtRuFeCoNi HEA NWs, they were dispersed in anhy-
drous ethanol and reacted with dopamine in a Tris-HCl solution.
Oxidized dopamine aggregated to form PDA on the surfaces of
the HEA NWs, primarily due to the rich presence of catechol,
imine, and amine groups in PDA, which conferred an excellent
metal-chelating ability.
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image showed
that the HEA NWs possessed a uniform wire morphology, with
an average length of 14.41 ± 1.43 nm and width of 1.85 ± 0.34 nm
(Figure 1B). The self-polymerized PDA successfully coated the
surface of the HEA NWs, with the HEA NWs@PDA retaining its
original ﬁlamentary structure (Figure 1C). The high-resolution
TEM (HRTEM) image of the HEA NWs displayed an ordered
fringe pattern, with an average interplanar spacing of ≈0.223 nm,
which corresponded to the (1 1 1) crystal face (Figure 1D). Mean-
while, the integrated intensity of the (1 1 1) lattice in the cho-
sen area revealed that the average spacing between lattices, de-
termined through fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis, ranged
from 0.223 (zone 1) to 0.224 nm (zone 2), and then to 0.225 nm
(zone 3), demonstrating lattice distortion in the synthesized HEA
NWs (Figure S1, Supporting Information).[17c,26] In addition, the
selected area electron diﬀraction (SAED) image clearly showed
that the HEA NWs had ﬁve crystal planes, namely (1 1 1), (2 0 0),
(2 2 0), (3 1 1), and (3 3 1), verifying the face-centered cubic (FCC)
structure of the synthesized HEA NWs (Figure 1E).[27] The three
characteristic peaks in the X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) pattern of the
HEA NWs corresponded to the FCC structure of FePt (PDF#02-
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (2 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 1. Synthesis and characterizations of PtRuFeCoNi HEA NWs@PDA. A) Schematic illustration showing the formation process of HEA NWs@PDA.
B) TEM image of HEA NWs. C) TEM image of HEA NWs@PDA. D) HRTEM image of HEA NWs. The inset diagram shows the atomic arrangement. E)
SAED image of HEA NWs. F) XRD pattern of HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA. G) EDS spectrum of HEA NWs and metallic element contents obtained
by ICP-OES. H) HAADF-STEM and corresponding elemental mapping images of HEA NWs@PDA. I) FT-IR spectra of HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (3 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
1167), whereas the diﬀraction peak intensity of HEA NWs@PDA
exhibited a notable increase compared with that of the HEA NWs,
which was likely due to the PDA coating (Figure 1F).[28] The po-
sitions of the broad diﬀraction peaks were signiﬁcantly shifted
compared with those of pure Pt, Ru, Fe, Co, and Ni, proving the
incorporation of these metals into the HEA NWs structure to
form an FCC structure (Figure S2, Supporting Information).[16b]
This data provided initial evidence that the synthesis of HEA
NWs and surface modiﬁcation with PDA were successful.
High-angle annular dark-ﬁeld scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM)
and the corresponding elemental mapping images showed that
the ﬁve elements (Pt, Ru, Fe, Co, and Ni) were uniformly dis-
tributed throughout the entire NW (Figure S3, Supporting In-
formation). In addition, the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDS) spectrum of the HEA NWs further conﬁrmed the coexis-
tence of Pt, Ru, Fe, Co, and Ni (Figure 1G), demonstrating the
successful fabrication of PtRuFeCoNi HEA NWs. The inductively
coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) results
showed that the relative atomic ratios of Pt, Ru, Fe, Co, and Ni
were 29:7:19:11:34 (inset of Figure 1G). Based on this calcula-
tion, the conﬁgurational entropy of the HEA NWs was deter-
mined to be 1.83 R, which aligned with the high-entropy level
of the HEA NWs, classifying the material as an HEA.[8a] The
EDS mapping images of HEA NWs@PDA clearly showed that,
in addition to the distribution of the ﬁve metals, the NW coat-
ing also contained abundant C, N, and O, thereby verifying the
encapsulation of PDA (Figure 1H). Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy (FT-IR) was employed to analyze the changes in the
functional groups on the surface of the HEA NWs after PDA en-
capsulation. The diﬀraction peak intensity of HEA NWs@PDA
was higher than that of the HEA NWs, and out-of-plane distor-
tion of the C–H bond of the aromatic ring emerged, conﬁrming
the successful modiﬁcation with PDA (Figure 1I).[29] X-ray pho-
toelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to evaluate the detailed
surface elemental composition of the as-prepared HEA NWs and
HEA NWs@PDA. The Pt 4f, Ru 3p, Fe 2p, Co 2p, and Ni 2p bind-
ing energy peaks conﬁrmed the successful formation of HEA
NWs (Figure S4A, Supporting Information). The peaks of Pt
4f7/2 and Pt 4f5/2 were located at 71.12 and 74.46 eV, respectively,
while those of Ru 3p3/2 and Ru 3p1/2 corresponded to 463.15 and
485.02 eV (Figure S4B,C, Supporting Information).[12] The peaks
of Fe 2p3/2 and Fe 2p1/2 were located at 712.09 and 724.45 eV, re-
spectively, whereas those of Co 2p3/2 and Co 2p1/2 corresponded
to 780.91 and 796.79 eV (Figure S4D,E, Supporting Informa-
tion). The two peaks at 855.75 and 873.45 eV originated from
Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2 electrons, respectively (Figure S4F, Sup-
porting Information).[15,30] These results indicated that the HEA
NWs contained ﬁve metals, namely Pt, Ru, Fe, Co, and Ni, and
presented diverse valence states. However, the XPS results of the
HEA NWs@PDA displayed a substantial reduction in the peak
signals of each metal element, while the signal of C increased,
indicating that PDA successfully coated the surface of the HEA
NWs (Figures S4 and S5, Supporting Information). HEA NWs ex-
hibited a positive charge of 7.94 mV, whereas HEA NWs@PDA
had a negative charge of ≈−16.52 mV, further conﬁrming the
successful modiﬁcation with PDA (Figure S6, Supporting In-
formation). Using the same method, we successfully synthe-
sized FeCoNi and RuFeCoNi alloy nanoparticles (NPs) with fewer
metal precursors. The TEM images of FeCoNi NPs and RuFe-
CoNi NPs showed monodisperse spherical morphologies with
average diameters of 1.51 ± 0.30 and 2.89 ± 0.29 nm, respec-
tively (Figures S7A,B and S8A,B, Supporting Information). The
elemental ratios of the FeCoNi and RuFeCoNi NPs were also de-
termined by ICP-OES (Figures S7C and S8C, Supporting Infor-
mation).
2.2. Catalytic Activity of POD-Like Enzymes in HEzymes@PDA
We
initially
validated
the
enzymatic
catalytic
perfor-
mance
of
HEA
NWs
and
HEA
NWs@PDA
by
using
3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine
(TMB),
2,2′-azino-bis
(3-
ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium salt (ABTS),
and o-phenylenediamine (OPD) as chromogenic substrates. In
the presence of H2O2, the classical peaks of the colored products
(oxTMB: 652 nm, oxABTS: 415 nm, and oxOPD: 431 nm) were
monitored using UV–vis spectroscopy (Figure 2A,B; Figure
S9, Supporting Information). The results conﬁrmed that the
HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA possessed good substrate
universality. Compared with the POD-like activities of FeCoNi
NPs and RuFeCoNi NPs, the HEA NWs exhibited more potent
enzymatic activity (Figure 2C; Figure S10, Supporting Infor-
mation). The improvement in the enzymatic activity of the
RuFeCoNi NPs over that of the FeCoNi NPs was attributed to
doping with precious metals. The exceptional activity of the
HEA NWs was likely due to the shift in the d-band center
caused by lattice distortion, which enhanced the adsorption
capacity of the HEzymes. In addition, the synergy between
double precious and transition metals improved the catalytic
activity.[13a,31] To validate the universality of PDA modiﬁcation,
PDA coatings were successfully deposited on the surfaces of
FeCoNi NPs, RuFeCoNi NPs, and HEA NWs. Compared with
alloy materials without surface modiﬁcation, the catalytic per-
formance of PDA-coated materials was signiﬁcantly enhanced,
with HEA NWs@PDA displaying the highest enzymatic activity
(Figure 2D; Figures S11‒S13, Supporting Information). PDA
modiﬁcation enhanced the dispersibility of alloy materials,
enabling their active sites to more readily bind with substrate,
thereby improving the catalytic performance.[32] Furthermore,
due to the exceptional hydrophilicity and biocompatibility of
PDA, the solubility and dispersion of HEA NWs@PDA were
markedly improved in comparison with those of HEA NWs
(Figure S14, Supporting Information), further elevating their
enzymatic activity and making them more suitable for biological
applications.
To exclude the inﬂuence of PDA, we synthesized pure PDA
without HEA NWs and investigated its POD-like activity. The
results indicated that pure PDA lacked catalytic capability, and
HEA NWs@PDA achieved a “1 + 1 > 2” eﬀect in the catalytic
activity compared with HEA NWs and PDA alone (Figure 2E).
By varying the dopamine concentration during the formation of
HEA NWs@PDA, the obtained samples exhibited diverse POD-
like activities. When a higher dopamine concentration was used,
the enzyme-like activity decreased (Figure 2F), likely due to the
formation of overly thick PDA coatings that masked the ac-
tive sites of the HEA NWs, thereby inﬂuencing their catalytic
performance.[33] Thus, the optimal concentration of the PDA
coating was selected to be 0.03 mg mL−1. To further enhance
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (4 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 2. POD-like activity and optimization of HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA. A) Schematic diagram of the POD-like activity evaluations of HEA
NWs@PDA with TMB, OPD, and ABTS. B) UV–vis absorption spectra and visual colors of diﬀerent chromogenic reactions of HEA NWs@PDA. C)
UV–vis absorption spectra and visual colors of TMB chromogenic systems in the presence of FeCoNi NPs, RuFeCoNi NPs, and HEA NWs. D) UV–vis
absorption spectra and visual colors of TMB chromogenic systems in the presence of FeCoNi NPs@PDA, RuFeCoNi NPs@PDA, and HEA NWs@PDA.
E) UV–vis absorption spectra of TMB chromogenic systems in the presence of PDA, HEA NWs, and HEA NWs@PDA. F) Time-dependent POD-like
activities of HEA NWs@PDA obtained by diﬀerent dopamine concentrations. G) Time-dependent POD-like activities of diﬀerent concentrations of HEA
NWs@PDA. H) OXD-like and POD-like activities and visual colors of HEA NWs@PDA at diﬀerent pH values. Data are presented as the mean ± SD
(standard deviation) (n = 6 independent samples).
the enzyme-like activity of HEA NWs@PDA, catalytic param-
eters such as concentration and pH were optimized. The ab-
sorbance of the reaction system was highly sensitive to the HEA
NWs@PDA concentration and gradually increased with increas-
ing material concentration (Figure 2G). Based on the equilib-
rium of the colorimetric reaction, the appropriate concentration
of HEA NWs@PDA was selected as 5 μg mL−1. In diﬀerent
pH systems, HEA NWs@PDA exhibited the strongest enzyme-
like activity at pH 4.5 (Figure 2H). Furthermore, the POD- and
OXD-like activities of HEzymes@PDA were systematically ex-
amined, revealing that the expression of the OXD-like activity
was extremely limited compared with that of the POD-like activ-
ity (Figure 2H). Therefore, the inﬂuence of the OXD-like activity
was considered negligible.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (5 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 3. The photothermal eﬀect on the POD-like activity and mechanism of HEA NWs@PDA. A) UV–vis absorption spectra of TMB chromogenic
systems in the presence of HEA NWs, HEA NWs@PDA, and NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA. B) Time-dependent POD-like activities of HEA NWs, HEA
NWs@PDA, and NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA. C) Photothermal performance at diﬀerent concentrations of HEA NWs@PDA. D) Temperature-time
thermograms of infrared thermal images of PDA, HEA NWs, and HEA NWs@PDA under NIR light for 0‒5 min. E) UV–vis absorption spectra of TMB
chromogenic systems in the presence of HEA NWs@PDA at 50 °C and room temperature under dark ﬁeld. F) The eﬀect of diﬀerent temperatures on the
POD-like activity of HEA NWs@PDA. Data are presented as the mean ± SD (standard deviation) (n = 6 independent samples). G) UV–vis absorption
spectra of TMB chromogenic systems in the absence and presence of PDA, HEA NWs, and HEA NWs@PDA under dark ﬁeld. The inset shows the above
systems infrared thermal images (control: 27.6 °C, PDA: 28.2 °C, HEA NWs: 27.8 °C, HEA NWs@PDA: 27.2 °C). H) UV–vis absorption spectra of TMB
chromogenic systems in the absence and presence of NIR-treated PDA, NIR-treated HEA NWs, and NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA. The inset shows the
above systems infrared thermal images (control: 27.8 °C, PDA: 28.2 °C, HEA NWs: 31.9 °C, HEA NWs@PDA: 39.2 °C).
2.3. Impact of the Photothermal Eﬀect on the POD-Like Activity
of HEzymes@PDA
Owing to its molecular structure and physical properties, PDA as
a coating not only enhanced the POD-like activity of HEA NWs
but also modulates their photothermal properties.[34] Inspired
by the temperature-dependent mechanism of H2O2 decomposi-
tion, we investigated the eﬀect of the photothermal mechanism
on the POD-like activity of HEA NWs@PDA. Figure 3A shows
that after PDA modiﬁcation and NIR treatment, the catalytic ac-
tivity of the HEA NWs steadily increased. As the colorimetric
reaction time extended, the absorbance of HEA NWs and HEA
NWs@PDA continuously increased, with HEA NWs@PDA
showing the most signiﬁcant enhancement under NIR irradia-
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (6 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
tion (Figure 3B), indicating that NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA
possessed a superior POD-like activity. Figure 3C shows the tem-
perature variation curves for HEA NWs@PDA at various concen-
trations over time, indicating a distinct concentration-dependent
temperature elevation. The irradiation power of the laser was
carefully optimized to achieve the best photothermal perfor-
mance, with 1.2 W cm−1 chosen as the optimal power (Figure
S15, Supporting Information). In addition, HEA NWs@PDA ex-
hibited exceptional photothermal stability, with no apparent tem-
perature change after four on/oﬀlaser irradiation cycles (Figure
S16, Supporting Information).
To clarify the underlying mechanism by which NIR irradi-
ation enhances the catalytic activity, the photothermal eﬀects
of PDA, HEA NWs, and HEA NWs@PDA were compared,
and temperature variations were recorded using a thermal im-
ager. The results indicated that both PDA and HEA NWs pos-
sessed certain photothermal conversion capabilities, while HEA
NWs@PDA displayed the optimal photothermal conversion per-
formance (Figure 3D). This conﬁrmed that PDA modiﬁcation
enhanced the photothermal properties of HEA NWs, enabling
a synergistic eﬀect. To further validate this, a water bath heating
method was applied as an alternative to NIR processing. When
treated at 50 °C in the water bath, the absorbance increase ob-
served was similar to that from the NIR treatment, aligning with
the temperature optimization results (Figure 3A,E). The temper-
ature optimization results also demonstrated that the optimal
temperature for HEA NWs@PDA to exert catalytic activity was
50 °C (Figure 3F). These ﬁndings suggested that the enhance-
ment of the POD-like activity of HEA NWs@PDA following
NIR irradiation was primarily due to the elevation of the system
temperature.[35] To analyze the impact of PDA on the photother-
mal performance, the catalytic activities of HEA NWs modiﬁed
with diﬀerent amounts of PDA were tested under both dark-ﬁeld
and NIR light conditions. The PDA modiﬁcation of HEA NWs
signiﬁcantly enhanced the POD activity, and NIR light irradia-
tion could further improve the catalytic performance (Figure S17,
Supporting Information). Furthermore, absorbance and temper-
ature changes in the chromogenic systems of PDA, HEA NWs,
and HEA NWs@PDA were compared under dark-ﬁeld and NIR
irradiation (Figure 3G,H). The results showed that the tempera-
ture change trends for each system were consistent under dark-
ﬁeld conditions, whereas the catalytic system containing HEA
NWs@PDA exhibited a signiﬁcant temperature change and rela-
tive increase in absorbance under NIR irradiation.[36] Under NIR
irradiation, the localized temperature of the HEA NWs@PDA
microenvironment increased, promoting the decomposition of
H2O2 and increasing the diﬀusion rate of free radicals, thereby
further enhancing the catalytic activity. Consequently, we initially
designed HEA NWs with POD-like activity, which was subse-
quently improved through PDA coating to enhance their enzyme-
like activity and biocompatibility. The catalytic activity was fur-
ther augmented by leveraging the synergistic photothermal eﬀect
of PDA under NIR irradiation (Figure S18, Supporting Informa-
tion). Finally, the stabilities of HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA
were investigated (Figure S19, Supporting Information). After
being exposed to various environmental conditions for 7 d, as
well as stored at room temperature for 30 d, no signiﬁcant al-
terations were observed in the catalytic or photothermal perfor-
mance of HEA NWs@PDA. These results demonstrated that
HEzymes have excellent enzyme activity stability.
2.4. Kinetic Determination of HEzymes@PDA and Free-Radical
Analysis
To evaluate the eﬀect of PDA-wrapped HEzymes and NIR irradi-
ation on the POD-like activity, enzymatic kinetics were assessed
by varying the concentrations of TMB (Figure 4A‒C) and H2O2
(Figure 4D‒F). Curves of the substrate concentration versus the
initial reaction rate were obtained, which conformed to the clas-
sic Michaelis–Menten model, demonstrating that the POD-like
catalysis process complied with Michaelis kinetics.[37]
v = Vmax [S]
Km + [S]
(1)
1
v =
Km
Vmax [S] +
1
Vmax
(2)
Using the equations above, a Lineweaver–Burk double recip-
rocal plot was constructed, enabling the determination of the
Michaelis constant (Km) and maximum reaction rate (Vmax) for
the respective substrates. In addition, the catalytic constant (Kcat)
and catalytic eﬃciency (Kcat/Km) were derived (Figures S20 and
S21, Supporting Information). It is widely acknowledged that the
ﬁrst critical step in the catalytic mechanism of nanomaterials
mimicking POD-like activity involves the reactive adsorption of
H2O2 onto the nanozyme surface, followed by its catalytic decom-
position to release free radicals, which subsequently drive the cat-
alytic reaction of the chromogenic substrate.[38] Thus, designing
nanozymes with enhanced aﬃnities for H2O2 is crucial.
Compared with HEA NWs, HEA NWs@PDA had a lower Km
and higher Vmax for H2O2, which robustly indicated that the PDA
coating enhanced the aﬃnity of HEzymes for H2O2 and im-
proved the catalytic rate (Table S1, Supporting Information).[39]
More crucially, HEA NWs@PDA subjected to NIR irradiation
displayed a superior aﬃnity and catalytic eﬃciency compared
with those of HEA NWs@PDA alone. In addition, Kcat reﬂected
the ability of a single enzyme molecule to catalyze the transfor-
mation of substrates into products per unit of time, with higher
Kcat values indicating greater intrinsic catalytic activities. On the
other hand, Kcat/Km quantiﬁed the eﬃciency of substrate conver-
sion per second by each enzyme molecule under substrate sat-
uration conditions.[40] Compared with HEA NWs, the Kcat and
Kcat/Km of HEA NWs@PDA for H2O2 increased by 5.88 and 6.87
times, respectively. In particular, the Kcat and Kcat/Km of HEA
NWs@PDA were further enhanced by 1.87 and 2.06 times un-
der NIR irradiation (Table S1, Supporting Information). These
results indicated that the catalytic ability and POD-like activity of
HEzymes could be signiﬁcantly enhanced by PDA modiﬁcation
and NIR irradiation. In addition, a comparison of the kinetic pa-
rameters for TMB (Table S2, Supporting Information) revealed
that the Vmax, Kcat, and Kcat/Km of NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA
were the highest, followed by those of HEA NWs@PDA, with the
HEA NWs exhibiting the lowest values. These results indicated
that both PDA modiﬁcation and NIR irradiation promoted the
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (7 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 4. Michaelis‒Menten curves and POD mechanism of HEA NWs, HEA NWs@PDA, and NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA. A‒C) Michaelis‒Menten
curves of HEA NWs, HEA NWs@PDA, and NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA with diﬀerent concentrations of TMB. The data are presented as the mean
± SD (n = 6 independent samples). D‒F) Michaelis‒Menten curves of HEA NWs, HEA NWs@PDA, and NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA with diﬀerent
concentrations of H2O2. The data are presented as the mean ± SD (n = 6 independent samples). G) Speciﬁc activity of HEA NWs, HEA NWs@PDA, and
NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA. The data are presented as the mean ± SD (n = 6 independent samples). H) Relative activity of the HEzymes@PDA+TMB
system containing diﬀerent scavengers. For SOD (a−e: 0, 5, 10, 15, and 20 U/L), tryptophan (a−e: 0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mm), and isopropanol (a−e:
0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 mm). The data are presented as the mean ± SD (n = 6 independent samples). I) ESR spectra showing •OH formed from H2O2.
catalytic reaction of TMB. Furthermore, HEA NWs@PDA exhib-
ited superior catalytic eﬃciency compared to previously reported
nanozymes (Table S3, Supporting Information). The speciﬁc ac-
tivities of the HEzymes were also evaluated, with values of 13.87
U mg−1 for NIR-treated HEA NWs@PDA, 7.33 U mg−1 for HEA
NWs@PDA, and 1.75 U mg−1 for HEA NWs. The enhanced per-
formance of HEzymes@PDA under NIR irradiation highlighted
the eﬀectiveness of this approach (Figure 4G). Collectively, these
results validated the feasibility of the stepwise enhancement of
enzyme-like activity through PDA modiﬁcation and NIR-assisted
catalysis.
To
better
elucidate
the
catalytic
mechanism
of
HEzymes@PDA, the reactive oxygen species (ROS) gener-
ated during the decomposition of H2O2 were investigated.[41]
Isopropanol, tryptophan, and superoxide dismutase (SOD)
were used as scavengers for •OH, 1O2, and •O2
−, respectively
(Figure 4H). The relative catalytic activity of HEzymes@PDA
gradually decreased with increasing concentrations of these
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (8 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
scavengers, indicating the presence of •OH, 1O2, and •O2
−in
the catalytic process. For a detailed investigation of the free radi-
cals, electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy was employed
to identify the speciﬁc free radicals produced during the catalytic
reaction. The results proved that •OH, 1O2, and •O2
−were gen-
erated, with signal intensities gradually strengthening over time,
which mutually veriﬁed the results of the free-radical scavenger
experiments (Figure 4I; Figure S22, Supporting Information). In
addition, in the absence of H2O2, the signals of the three free rad-
icals were nearly undetectable, indicating that HEzymes@PDA
exhibited a negligible OXD-like activity. This observation aligned
with the earlier results from pH optimization experiments.
2.5. DFT Calculations of HEzymes and HEzymes@PDA
The previous experiments demonstrated that PDA modiﬁca-
tion signiﬁcantly enhanced the catalytic performance of HEA
NWs. Notably, the catalytic activity of nanozymes is closely as-
sociated with their surface properties and the electronic struc-
tures of their active sites. To elucidate the mechanism un-
derlying the enhanced POD-like activity of HEA NWs@PDA,
DFT calculations were conducted on both HEA NWs and HEA
NWs@PDA.[42] Leveraging on the relevant characterization re-
sults, such as ICP-OES and XRD, the most stable and energet-
ically favorable structure of HEA NWs, along with the corre-
sponding reaction sites, was selected as the theoretical model
for the study (Figures S23‒S26A, Supporting Information). Us-
ing this as a foundation, a model for HEA NWs@PDA was de-
signed (Figure 5A; Figure S26B, Supporting Information). The
total density of states (TDOS) analysis revealed that both HEA
NWs and HEA NWs@PDA exhibited signiﬁcant electron distri-
butions near the Fermi level (Ef) (Figure S27, Supporting Infor-
mation). The electronic states around the Ef inﬂuenced the ad-
sorption and catalytic capabilities of the HEA NWs toward the
reactants. After modiﬁcation with PDA, the electronic structure
of the HEA NWs underwent a discernible change, featuring a
higher electron abundance at the Ef. This indicated that there
were more active electrons on the surface of HEA NWs@PDA,
which facilitated a higher catalytic reaction rate.
The partially projected density of states (PDOS) of the HEA
NWs and HEA NWs@PDA were utilized to analyze the cat-
alytically active sites within their overall structures and disclose
the synergistic interactions among the diﬀerent metals (Figure
S28A,B, Supporting Information). A distinct overlap was ob-
served among the d-orbitals of the various metals, indicating
strong bonding interactions. The three transition metals (Fe, Co,
and Ni) displayed a broad frequency band in the middle region of
the spectrum, with notable orbital overlaps, verifying the strong
coupling among the 3-d orbitals of these transition metals. More-
over, the Pt-5d orbital was located at ≈−5 eV, which was the far-
thest from the Ef, indicating that Pt on the surface acted as an
electron reservoir.[15] This role helped to maintain the balance
of valence states within the HEA NWs during the catalytic pro-
cess. However, the highest peak of Ru appeared at −2.2 eV, which
was the closest to the Ef. Pt also exhibited a sharp peak near the
Ef. The electronic structure of the Pt–Ru bimetallic sites signif-
icantly improved the electron density at the Ef, enhancing the
adsorption and transfer eﬃciency of the substrate.[43] Thus, the
synergistic complementarity between the Fe and Co–Ni transi-
tion metals and the Pt–Ru noble metals induced lattice distortion
and created uneven bonding orbitals in the HEA NWs. Through
electron transfer and orbital hybridization, the HEA NWs pro-
vided numerous active sites for catalytic activity.[44] Moreover,
HEA NWs@PDA exhibited a similar trend in the distribution of
metal elements, conﬁrming that the internal element bonding
and synergistic interaction of the HEA NWs were not inﬂuenced
by the PDA modiﬁcation (Figure S28B, Supporting Information).
The d-band centers of the overall structures of the HEA NWs,
HEA NWs@PDA, and ﬁve internal metal elements are clearly
depicted in Figure 5B,C. According to the d-band center theory,
for HEA NWs, Ru (spin up: 0.39 eV, spin down: 0.98 eV) with
a higher d-band center position has stronger adsorption of re-
actants. This is because the electron cloud was farther from the
electron nucleus, making it more “diﬀused” and, therefore, more
likely to react with molecules. Crucially, the d-band center of Pt
was located at a lower energy level (spin up: −0.656 eV, spin
down: −0.446 eV), indicating a higher electron cloud density.
This signiﬁed that Pt was more likely to provide electrons during
the catalytic reaction, facilitating electron transfer. This behav-
ior aligned with its role as an electron reservoir. Adhering to the
Hammer–Nørskov d-band model, the d-band center of a metal
determines the position of electron donor–acceptor interactions.
The d-band centers of the Pt–Ru dual-site diﬀered signiﬁcantly,
with the Ru center having the highest energy and Pt center hav-
ing the lowest. This energy diﬀerence provided the driving force
for electron transfer from Pt to Ru, and the self-complementary
induction between these two metals allowed the substrate and
its intermediates to adsorb more stably.[13b] The three transition
metals (Fe, Co, and Ni) had higher energies in the spin-down
state and lower energies in the spin-up state. These transition
metals worked synergistically with Pt–Ru to promote electron
transfer, thereby enhancing catalytic eﬀects. After PDA modiﬁ-
cation, although the trend of the d-band centers of the metals in
the overall catalyst remained unchanged, the d-band centers of
both the overall structure and ﬁve metals of HEA NWs@PDA
became more negative than those of the unmodiﬁed HEA NWs.
This downward shift of the d-band center reduced the number
of antibonding states generated by coupling, causing more anti-
bonding states to fall below the Fermi level and become electron-
ﬁlled. This destabilized the bonding states, reducing the adsorp-
tion energy and making it easier to dissociate and transform the
substrate through stable adsorption compared with HEA NWs.
In addition, the more negative d-band center of HEA NWs@PDA
altered the donor–acceptor properties of the substrate, enabling it
to provide/accept more electrons and enhance electron transfer,
which facilitated catalytic reactions. In summary, PDA modiﬁca-
tion did not inﬂuence the internal structure of the HEA NWs.
Conversely, it ﬁne-tuned the d-band center of the HEA NWs and
optimized the surface electron cloud density, substantially im-
proving their catalytic capability.[45]
The mechanisms underlying the POD-like activities of the
HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA were further explored. Ac-
cording to previous studies, there are two splitting mecha-
nisms for the catalytic decomposition of H2O2: homolytic and
heterolytic.[46] Figure 5D and Figures S29‒S33 (Supporting In-
formation) show the homolytic and heterolytic decomposition
of H2O2 catalyzed by the HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA,
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (9 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 5. DFT calculations of the electron distribution and structural conﬁguration, and theoretical calculations of the POD-like mechanism of HEA
NWs and HEA NWs@PDA. A) 3D atomic model showing the crystal structure of HEA NWs@PDA. B) The d-band center comparisons for the individual
elements and the bulk HEA NWs. C) The d-band center comparisons for the individual elements and the bulk HEA NWs@PDA. D) Diﬀerent reaction
pathways for the decomposition of H2O2 to generate •OH on the HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA. E,F) PDOS and partial enlargement for H2O2
adsorption on the HEA NWs. G,H) PDOS and partial enlargement for H2O2 adsorption on the HEA NWs@PDA. I) Schematic illustration of Sabatier
principle for HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA. J) Optimized free energy proﬁles for H2O2 decomposition along homolytic pathways on HEA NWs and
HEA NWs@PDA.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (10 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
which ultimately generate •OH to catalyze the oxidation of TMB.
We ﬁrst analyzed the TDOS proﬁles of the HEA NWs and
HEA NWs@PDA after the adsorption of H2O2 (Figures S34
and S35, Supporting Information). The electron density of HEA
NWs@PDA at the Ef was higher than that of the HEA NWs. Sim-
ilar results were observed in the TDOS data of HEA NWs@PDA
and the HEA NWs after the decomposition and adsorption of
•OH. These ﬁndings proved that HEA NWs@PDA had more
electronic states available for electron occupation and transition
than the HEA NWs. To assess the adsorption capacity of the HEA
NWs and HEA NWs@PDA for H2O2 in more detail, the PDOS
diagrams clearly indicated that, when H2O2 was adsorbed on the
surfaces of the HEA NWs and HEA NWs@PDA, the s- and p-
orbitals of the adsorbed H2O2 exhibited signiﬁcant overlap with
the d-orbitals of the adjacent metals, suggesting that both cata-
lysts could stably adsorb H2O2 (Figure 5E‒H). In addition, the
adsorption of the intermediate •OH on the HEA NWs and HEA
NWs@PDA displayed similar results (Figure S36, Supporting In-
formation).
Based on the dissociation mechanism of H2O2, we calculated
the Gibbs free energy changes at each step of the catalytic pro-
cess, providing a more intuitive comparison of the activities of
the two catalysts. As shown in Figure 5J, both the HEA NWs and
HEA NWs@PDA exhibited negative adsorption energies (HEA
NWs: −0.754 eV, HEA NWs@PDA: −0.279 eV), further prov-
ing that both catalysts could stably adsorb H2O2. According to
Sabatier principle, the adsorption of reactants onto the surface of
an ideal catalyst should not be too strong or too weak. Excessive
adsorption could cause the reactants to adsorb too tightly, hin-
dering product desorption, while weak adsorption would under-
mine the catalyst’s ability to adsorb reactants. The PDA modiﬁca-
tion shifted the d-band center to a more negative value, thereby
optimizing the adsorption of reactants and intermediates. This
adjustment ensured that the adsorption was neither too strong
to prevent decomposition and dissociation, nor too weak to im-
pede eﬀective catalysis, thereby achieving the optimal catalytic
state (Figure 5I).[24] Subsequently, the peroxide bond in H2O2 was
uniformly broken, generating two •OH radicals (Figure 5J). The
rate-determining step (RDS) for the catalytic decomposition of
H2O2, which represented the slowest step of the reaction, was
crucial for guaranteeing the catalytic reaction rate. The superi-
ority of the catalysts was reﬂected in the reduction in their RDS
activation energies, speciﬁcally the step with the highest energy
barrier for generating •OH from the OH* intermediate. The en-
ergy barrier for the RDS in the homogeneous cleavage of H2O2
catalyzed by HEA NWs@PDA to generate •OH was signiﬁcantly
lower than that of the HEA NWs (HEA NWs@PDA, ∆E = 0.741;
HEA NWs, ∆E = 2.207), which accounted for the faster catalytic
rate of HEA NWs@PDA. We also investigated the free-energy
alterations at each step of the heterogeneous decomposition of
H2O2 catalyzed by the two catalysts (Figure S37, Supporting In-
formation). Similarly, the energy barrier for generating the ﬁrst
•OH by HEA NWs@PDA was higher than those of other reac-
tion steps (∆E = 1.062), serving as the RDS for catalyzing the
heterogeneous decomposition of H2O2. For HEA NWs, the en-
ergy required for the RDS in the heterogeneous decomposition
of H2O2 was higher compared with that of HEA NWs@PDA (∆E
= 1.785). This further demonstrated that HEA NWs@PDA pos-
sessed a superior catalytic performance compared with that of
the HEA NWs in catalyzing the heterogeneous decomposition of
H2O2.[47]
Overall, the RDS of the HEA NWs undergoing heterolytic
cleavage was relatively lower than that of the HEA NWs undergo-
ing homolytic cleavage, indicating that the HEA NWs may exert
a catalytic eﬀect by catalyzing the heterolytic cleavage of H2O2
to generate •OH. However, for HEA NWs@PDA, the RDS of
homolytic cleavage was lower than that of heterolytic cleavage,
suggesting that the catalysis of H2O2 homolytic cleavage played
a dominant role. Regardless of whether homolytic or heterolytic
cleavage occurred, the energy barrier required for the RDS of
H2O2 decomposition catalyzed by HEA NWs@PDA was smaller
than that of HEA NWs. The DFT results comprehensively clari-
ﬁed the relationship between the improved catalytic performance
by PDA modiﬁcation and Sabatier principle. Speciﬁcally, by op-
timizing the charge distribution on the surface of the HEA NWs
and appropriately reducing the energy of the d-band center to bal-
ance product coverage, PDA modiﬁcation signiﬁcantly elevated
the adsorption–dissociation eﬃciency and POD-like activity of
HEA NWs@PDA.
2.6. Application of HEzymes@PDA in Biosensing
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) plays a crucial role in terminating
the signal transmission of neurotransmitters in the synaptic
cleft and is widely used as a biomarker for disease diagnosis.[48]
Acetylthiocholine (ATCh), an AChE substrate, decomposes to
generate thiocholine (TCh). Since TCh is a potent reducing agent,
it can reduce blue oxTMB to colorless TMB, leading to a de-
crease in color intensity and absorbance.[49] Building on this prin-
ciple, we explored the potential applications of HEzymes@PDA
by constructing a biosensor for the visual detection of AChE
(Figure 6A). As shown in Figure 6B, in the presence of both
ATCh and AChE, the absorbance of the chromogenic system at
652 nm decreased signiﬁcantly, whereas ATCh or AChE alone
had little inﬂuence on the catalytic activity of HEzymes@PDA.
As the AChE concentration increased, the absorbance of oxTMB
gradually decreased (Figure 6C). In addition, within the range
of 0.1‒1.1 mU mL−1 AChE, a favorable linear relationship was
observed with an absorbance change (∆A652) (∆A652 = 0.4605
× CAChE + 0.0255, R2 = 0.9924), and the limit of detection
(LOD) was 0.064 mU mL−1 (Figure 6D). Compared with previ-
ously reported sensors for AChE detection, the HEzymes@PDA
biosensor displayed an ultra-low LOD and high sensitivity (Table
S4, Supporting Information). In addition, the speciﬁcity of the
proposed biosensor for detecting AChE was investigated. Com-
mon proteins, including horseradish peroxidase, glucose oxi-
dase, neprilysin, acid phosphatase, papain, and bovine serum al-
bumin, were selected as potential interfering substances. In the
presence or absence of AChE, the inﬂuence of these proteins on
the absorbance of the colorimetric system was negligible (Figure
S38, Supporting Information), suggesting that this sensing plat-
form had excellent speciﬁcity for AChE detection.
Carbamate pesticides are widely used to prevent and control
plant diseases, pests, and weeds.[50] However, these compounds
accumulate in the environment and damage the human body
by inhibiting AChE.[51] Thus, rapid and sensitive detection of
carbamate pesticide residues is important for ensuring human
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (11 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 6. The colorimetric detection platform for AChE and methomyl. A) Illustration of the detection mechanism for AChE and methomyl based
on AChE-controlled chromogenic reaction of the HEzymes@PDA/TMB/H2O2 system. B) UV–vis absorption spectra of HEzymes@PDA/TMB/H2O2
systems with diﬀerent compounds to investigate the feasibility of detecting AChE. C) UV–vis absorption spectra of colorimetric solution inﬂuenced by
AChE concentrations. D) The relationship of absorbance change at 652 nm with AChE concentration and corresponding linear relationship. E) UV–vis
absorption spectra of HEzymes@PDA/TMB/H2O2 systems with diﬀerent compounds to investigate the feasibility of detecting methomyl. F) UV–vis
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (12 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
health and food safety.[52] Based on the inhibitory action of car-
bamate pesticides on AChE, we chose methomyl as a typical
model and combined it with the HEzymes@PDA/AChE biosen-
sor. As shown in Figure 6E, adding only methomyl had minimal
eﬀect on the absorbance, excluding its interference with the re-
action system. As the concentration of methomyl increased, the
activity of AChE was inhibited, and the decreased absorbance
was subsequently restored (Figure 6F). This biosensing platform
showed two favorable linear relationships within the concentra-
tion ranges of 1‒40 and 200‒1000 ng mL−1 for methomyl, with
linear equations of ∆A652 = 0.0112 × Cmethomyl – 0.0187 (R2 =
0.9945) and ∆A652 = 1.8187×10−4 × Cmethomyl + 0.5161, (R2 =
0.9786), as well as an LOD of 0.329 ng mL−1 (Figure 6G). This
probe exhibited a superior sensing performance compared with
those of other methods for detecting methomyl (Table S5, Sup-
porting Information). Considering the complexity of the actual
sample, other pesticides and various ions were selected as in-
terfering substances to evaluate the speciﬁcity of the sensor for
methomyl assays (Figure 6J). Similarly, this sensor demonstrated
considerably high selectivity in the presence or absence of these
interfering substances.
In addition, to explore the latent role of the photothermal
eﬀect in methomyl monitoring, the same process was con-
ducted under NIR-assisted conditions. The sensing platform
based on NIR-treated HEzymes@PDA showed strong linear re-
lationships in the range of 0.1‒5 and 100‒2000 ng mL−1 af-
ter NIR irradiation, with linear equations of ∆A652 = 0.0815 ×
Cmethomyl + 0.3302 (R2 = 0.9934) and ∆A652 = 1.3758×10−4 ×
Cmethomyl + 0.8759 (R2 = 0.9842). The LOD was only 0.0628 ng
mL−1, which was 5 times lower than that without NIR irradi-
ation (Figure 6H,I). These results demonstrated that the pho-
tothermal eﬀect could signiﬁcantly improve the sensitivity of
methomyl detection by enhancing the catalytic performance of
HEzymes@PDA.[53]
2.7. A Portable Sensing Platform Based on Smartphone-Assisted
Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA
Sodium alginate (SA) is a natural, seaweed-derived polysaccha-
ride that contains numerous carboxyl groups, oﬀering low irrita-
tion and toxicity. SA can cross-link with Ca2+ to form a 3D hy-
drogel structure, which can eﬀectively immobilize nanozymes
and chromogenic reagents while aiding in size sieving and color-
producing stability.[54] Moreover, the high hydrophilicity and hy-
dration capacity of SA enhance the sensitivity and speed of
nanozyme responses to target analytes. Leveraging these advan-
tages, we constructed a portable, high-throughput visual sens-
ing platform using SA hydrogels to encapsulate HEzymes@PDA
(Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA) within 96-well plates. This plat-
form was combined with smartphone-based color recognition
to ensure more accurate visual detection (Figure 7A). Figure 7B
shows the construction and injectability of the SA hydrogel and
Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA. A discernible color change was ob-
served upon adding TMB and H2O2, conﬁrming the POD-like ac-
tivity and colorimetric capability of Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA
and validating its feasibility for colorimetric detection. The inter-
nal morphology of the SA hydrogel was revealed through scan-
ning electron microscopy (SEM), showing a well-deﬁned porous
structure (Figure S39, Supporting Information). Similarly, the
SEM images of Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA displayed a com-
parable porous reticular structure (Figure 7C). Upon magniﬁ-
cation, the HEA NWs@PDA loading was clearly visible within
the cavities. Beneﬁting from the ultrasmall nanostructure and
PDA modiﬁcation, HEzymes@PDA could be loaded relatively
quickly without disrupting the original organizational structure
of the SA hydrogel. This structural compatibility served as a
foundation for improving the catalytic performance of Hydro-
gel@HEzymes@PDA.
The SA hydrogel loaded with HEzymes@PDA was incor-
porated into 96-well plates, where speciﬁc reactions were ini-
tiated by adding substrates, resulting in progressively atten-
uating colorimetric signals. These signals were captured us-
ing a smartphone camera, and the color information of the
images was processed through RGB analysis. As depicted in
Figure 7D, the B/R value exhibited an excellent linear relation-
ship with AChE concentrations ranging from 1.8 to 11 mU
mL−1 (B/R = −0.08126 × CAChE + 1.9574, R2 = 0.9912). Sim-
ilarly, as the methomyl concentration increased, the color de-
velopment of Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA gradually recovered
(Figure 7E). The B/G value demonstrated a favorable linear
range with methomyl concentrations in the range of 2.0‒14 ng
mL−1 (B/G = 0.03136 × Cmethomyl + 0.8746, R2 = 0.9929).
These results conﬁrmed that the visualized biosensing plat-
form based on Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA possessed consid-
erable feasibility for detecting AChE and methomyl. Interest-
ingly, the 3D network structure of the SA hydrogel, combined
with the ﬂexibility of its molecular chains, allowed Hydro-
gel@HEzymes@PDA to be cross-linked and solidiﬁed into vari-
ous molds, producing hydrogel products shaped according to the
mold design.[55] Given methomyl’s predominant use in agricul-
ture, Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA was fabricated into shapes re-
sembling strawberries, pears, and apples, employing TMB, OPD,
and ABTS as chromogenic substrates. These hydrogels were suc-
cessfully applied for methomyl detection (Figure 7F).[56] Conse-
quently, the constructed Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA sensor ful-
ﬁlled the requirements for the on-site visual detection of AChE
and methomyl in diverse scenarios.
To
evaluate
the
practical
applicability
of
Hydro-
gel@HEzymes@PDA, three types of fruits were selected as
real samples to assess the performance of this sensor in detect-
ing residual methomyl. Diﬀerent concentrations of methomyl
were added to the pretreated samples, and the recovery rates were
determined (Table S6, Supporting Information). For strawber-
ries, pears, and apples, the recovery rates ranged from 95.6% to
102.0%, with a relative standard deviation (RSD) value of <3.16%.
These results proved that the Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA sens-
absorption spectra of colorimetric solution inﬂuenced by methomyl concentrations. G) The relationship of absorbance change at 652 nm with methomyl
concentration and corresponding linear relationship. H) UV–vis absorption spectra of colorimetric solution inﬂuenced by methomyl concentrations
under NIR light. I) The relationship of absorbance change at 652 nm with methomyl concentration and corresponding linear relationship under NIR
light. J) Interference experiment of methomyl colorimetric detection platform.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (13 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 7. Synthesis of Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA and construction of portable sensing platform. A) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of
Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA and constructing a visual methomyl detection platform. B) Digital photos of hydrogels (a, SA hydrogel; b, Hydro-
gel@HEzymes@PDA; c, Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA/TMB) under white light. C) SEM images of Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA. The red circles indicate
that HEzymes@PDA are located inside the hydrogel. D) The relationship of B/R with AChE concentration and the corresponding linear relationship. The
inner shows the digital photos of diﬀerent concentrations of AChE detected by Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA. E) The relationship of B/G with methomyl
concentration and the corresponding linear relationship. The inner shows the digital photos of diﬀerent concentrations of methomyl detected by Hy-
drogel@HEzymes@PDA. F) Digital photos of Hydrogel@HEzymes@PDA with TMB, OPD, and ABTS in diﬀerent interesting shapes (strawberry, pear,
and apple) under white light.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (14 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
ing platform was suitable for the on-site detection of methomyl
in actual samples and demonstrated great potential for biological
applications.
3. Conclusion
We developed a novel HEzymes@PDA catalyst with eﬃcient
POD-like catalytic activity and remarkable photothermal prop-
erties by employing surface-engineering techniques to modu-
late PtRuFeCoNi HEA NWs. The self-polymerized PDA coating
signiﬁcantly enhanced the catalytic performance of the HEAs.
Under NIR irradiation, HEzymes@PDA accelerated the forma-
tion and diﬀusion of free radicals, greatly improving the cat-
alytic rate. DFT analysis showed that the Pt–Ru bimetal had
strong substrate adsorption owing to site-to-site electron trans-
fer between the bimetal and transition metal. The Sabatier prin-
ciple comprehensively explained the high catalytic eﬃciency of
HEzymes@PDA: PDA-induced downward shifting of the d-band
center of the HEAs decreased the adsorption energy while in-
creasing the surface electron density, thereby enhancing the elec-
tron mobility and optimizing substrate adsorption and prod-
uct desorption. A HEzymes@PDA biosensor was successfully
constructed, enabling the rapid visual detection of AChE and
methomyl in fruits when combined with hydrogel technology.
In summary, this study integrates surface-engineering strategies
into the HEzyme ﬁeld, using the Sabatier principle to establish
the relationship between the d-band center location and substrate
adsorption and desorption abilities of the catalysts. This approach
oﬀers a new perspective for the design and biological applications
of HEzyme complexes.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
K.F. and H.W. contributed equally to this work. This work was funded
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82003713 and
82372350), the Youth Project of Science and Technology Research Pro-
gram of Chongqing Education Commission of China (KJQN202200464,
KJQN202300457, and KJQN202400478), and CQMU Program for Youth
Innovation in Future Medicine (W0095 and W0152).
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the cor-
responding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
DFT calculations, high-entropy alloy, nanozyme, photothermal eﬀect, sur-
face modiﬁcation
Received: February 7, 2025
Revised: March 19, 2025
Published online: April 7, 2025
[1] a) J. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Wang, Z. Lou, S. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Qin, H. Wei, Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2019, 48, 1004; b) M. Zandieh, J. Liu, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36,
2211041.
[2] a) Y. Huang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 4357; b) M. Liang,
X. Yan, Acc. Chem. Res. 2019, 52, 2190.
[3] a) J. Sheng, Y. Wu, H. Ding, K. Feng, Y. Shen, Y. Zhang, N. Gu, Adv.
Mater. 2024, 36, 2211210; b) Y. Xiao, M. Zhang, N. Lu, Anal. Chem.
2025, 97, 4978.
[4] a) Y. Zhang, G. Wei, W. Liu, T. Li, Y. Wang, M. Zhou, Y. Liu, X. Wang,
H. Wei, Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 2024, 4, 36; b) M. Broto, M.
M. Kaminski, C. Adrianus, N. Kim, R. Greensmith, S. Dissanayake-
Perera, A. J. Schubert, X. Tan, H. Kim, A. S. Dighe, Nat. Nanotechnol.
2022, 17, 1120; c) S. Fedeli, J. Im, S. Gopalakrishnan, J. L. Elia, A.
Gupta, D. Kim, V. M. Rotello, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2021, 50, 13467; d) L.
Su, S. Qin, Z. Xie, L. Wang, K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, D. Li, H. Zhang,
Coord. Chem. Rev. 2022, 473, 214784.
[5] a) Y. Sun, B. Xu, X. Pan, H. Wang, Q. Wu, S. Li, B. Jiang, H. Liu, Coord.
Chem. Rev. 2023, 475, 214896; b) X. Yuan, X. Wu, J. Xiong, B. Yan, R.
Gao, S. Liu, M. Zong, J. Ge, W. Lou, Nat. Commun. 2023, 14, 5974; c)
Q. Liu, A. Zhang, R. Wang, Q. Zhang, D. Cui, Nano-Micro Lett. 2021,
13, 1; d) Y. Li, H. Chai, Z. Yuan, C. Huang, S. Wang, Y. Sun, X. Zhang,
G. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J. 2024, 496, 153884; e) H. Li, Z. Jin, N. Lu, J.
Pan, J. Xu, X. B. Yin, M. Zhang, Dalton Trans. 2024, 53, 6974.
[6] Z. Wang, R. Zhang, X. Yan, K. Fan, Mater. Today 2020, 41, 81.
[7] a) Z. Li, K. G. Pradeep, Y. Deng, D. Raabe, C. C. Tasan, Nature 2016,
534, 227; b) Q. Pan, L. Zhang, R. Feng, Q. Lu, K. An, A. C. Chuang, J.
D. Poplawsky, P. K. Liaw, L. Lu, Science 2021, 374, 984.
[8] a) C.-Y. Cheng, Y.-C. Yang, Y.-Z. Zhong, Y.-Y. Chen, T. Hsu, J.-W. Yeh,
Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 2017, 21, 299; b) P. Sathiyamoorthi,
H. S. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci. 2022, 123, 100709.
[9] a) H. Cheng, H. Luo, Z. Pan, X. Wang, Q. Zhao, Y. Fu, X. Li, J. Mater.
Sci. Technol. 2023, 155, 211; b) D. Lu, X. Fu, D. Guo, W. Ma, S. Sun, G.
Shao, Z. Zhou, SusMat 2023, 3, 730; c) S. Ghosh, A. Nozariasbmarz,
H. Lee, L. Raman, S. Sharma, R. B. Smriti, D. Mandal, Y. Zhang, S. K.
Karan, N. Liu, Joule 2024, 8, 3303; d) K. Li, L. Sun, W. Bai, N. Ma, C.
Zhao, J. Zhao, C. Xiao, Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2024,146, 14318.
[10] W.-L. Hsu, C.-W. Tsai, A.-C. Yeh, J.-W. Yeh, Nat. Rev. Chem. 2024, 8,
471.
[11] a) Y. Xin, S. Li, Y. Qian, W. Zhu, H. Yuan, P. Jiang, R. Guo, L. Wang, ACS
Catal. 2020, 10, 11280; b) Y. Sun, S. Dai, Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, abg1600.
[12] Y. Sun, W. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Gu, S. Guo, Matter 2023, 6, 193.
[13] a) X. Huang, G. Yang, S. Li, H. Wang, Y. Cao, F. Peng, H. Yu, J. Energy
Chem. 2022, 68, 721; b) Y. Lv, L. Lin, R. Xue, P. Zhang, F. Ma, T. Gan,
J. Zhang, D. Gao, X. Zheng, L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater. 2024, 14,
2304515.
[14] T. Yang, J. Huang, S. Hu, Z. Zhang, Z. Ma, S. Liu, Y. Liu, B. Ge, P. K.
Shen, S. Gao, Chem. Eng. J. 2024, 500, 157426.
[15] C. Zhan, Y. Xu, L. Bu, H. Zhu, Y. Feng, T. Yang, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, B.
Huang, Q. Shao, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 6261.
[16] a) T. A. Batchelor, J. K. Pedersen, S. H. Winther, I. E. Castelli, K. W.
Jacobsen, J. Rossmeisl, Joule 2019, 3, 834; b) H. Li, Y. Han, H. Zhao,
W. Qi, D. Zhang, Y. Yu, W. Cai, S. Li, J. Lai, B. Huang, Nat. Commun.
2020, 11, 5437; c) H. Li, M. Sun, Y. Pan, J. Xiong, H. Du, Y. Yu, S. Feng,
Z. Li, J. Lai, B. Huang, Appl. Catal., B 2022, 312, 121431.
[17] a) Y. Ai, M. Q. He, H. Sun, X. Jia, L. Wu, X. Zhang, H. b. Sun, Q. Liang,
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2302335; b) J. Feng, X. Yang, T. Du, L. Zhang,
P. Zhang, J. Zhuo, L. Luo, H. Sun, Y. Han, L. Liu, Adv. Sci. 2023, 10,
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (15 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
2303078; c) X. Yang, J. Feng, Y. Li, W. Zhu, Y. Pan, Y. Han, Z. Li, H.
Xie, J. Wang, J. Ping, Adv. Sci. 2024, 11, 2406149.
[18] a) S. Ji, B. Jiang, H. Hao, Y. Chen, J. Dong, Y. Mao, Z. Zhang, R. Gao,
W. Chen, R. Zhang, Nat. Catal. 2021, 4, 407; b) F. Gao, T. Shao, Y. Yu,
Y. Xiong, L. Yang, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 745; c) J. Deng, D. Xian, X.
Cai, S. Liao, S. Lei, F. Han, Y. An, Q. He, G. Quan, C. Wu, Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2023, 33, 2211846.
[19] a) X. Li, W. Tan, J. Fan, K. Li, ACS Nano 2024, 18, 24162; b) H. Fan, J.
Zheng, J. Xie, J. Liu, X. Gao, X. Yan, K. Fan, L. Gao, Adv. Mater. 2024,
36, 2300387; c) G. Xu, X. Du, W. Wang, Y. Qu, X. Liu, M. Zhao, W. Li,
Y. Q. Li, Small 2022, 18, 2204131.
[20] S. Gao, D. Zhang, M. Pedrero, Z. Guo, J. M. Pingarrón, S.
Campuzano, X. Zou, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2024, 501, 215564.
[21] H. A. Lee, Y. Ma, F. Zhou, S. Hong, H. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res. 2019, 52,
704.
[22] G. Ma, X. Zhang, K. Zhao, S. Zhang, K. Ren, M. Mu, C. Wang, X. Wang,
H. Liu, J. Dong, ACS Nano 2024, 18, 3369.
[23] a) C. Zhang, W. Liu, Z. Li, B. Yan, J. Lin, C. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Lu, ACS
Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2022, 10, 1653; b) Y. Tang, X. Liu, P. Qi, W. Xu,
Y. Wu, Y. Cai, W. Gu, H. Sun, C. Wang, C. Zhu, Nano Lett. 2024, 24,
9974.
[24] J. Tian, Y. Rao, W. Shi, J. Yang, W. Ning, H. Li, Y. Yao, H. Zhou, S. Guo,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023, 62, 202310894.
[25] Y. Shao, W. Xu, Y. Zheng, Z. Zhu, J. Xie, X. Wei, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, Q.
Wu, J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J. 2023, 455, 140586.
[26] L. Tao, M. Sun, Y. Zhou, M. Luo, F. Lv, M. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, B.
Huang, S. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 10582.
[27] X. Ma, S. Zhang, Y. Zhou, W. Lei, Y. Zhai, Y. Zhao, C. Shan, J. Mater.
Chem. A 2024, 12, 8862.
[28] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Cai, K. Li, H. Huang, F. Song, M. Gao, Y.
Yang, L. Zheng, Mater. Today Nano 2022, 19, 100240.
[29] Y. Deng, W. Liu, R. Xu, R. Gao, N. Huang, Y. Zheng, Y. Huang, H. Li,
X. Y. Kong, L. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2024, 63, 202319216.
[30] Z. Hu, K. Chen, Y. Zhu, B. Liu, J. Shen, Small 2024, 20, 2309819.
[31] D. Wang, J. Wang, X. J. Gao, H. Ding, M. Yang, Z. He, J. Xie, Z. Zhang,
H. Huang, G. Nie, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310033.
[32] a) P. Gong, C. Li, D. Wang, S. Song, W. Wu, B. Liu, J. Shen, J. Liu,
Z. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2023, 642, 612; b) N. Liang, X. Ge, Y.
Zhao, L. Xia, Z.-L. Song, R.-M. Kong, F. Qu, J. Hazard. Mater. 2023,
454, 131455.
[33] G. Li, N. Marinkovic, B. Wang, M. R. Komarneni, D. E. Resasco, ACS
Catal. 2022, 12, 13930.
[34] M. Yin, D. Lei, Y. Liu, T. Qin, H. Gao, W. Lv, Q. Liu, L. Qin, W. Jin, Y.
Chen, J. Nanobiotechnol. 2024, 22, 321.
[35] Y. Zhu, Z. Wang, R. Zhao, Y. Zhou, L. Feng, S. Gai, P. Yang, ACS Nano
2022, 16, 3105.
[36] J. Wu, Q. Liu, D. Jiao, B. Tian, Q. Wu, X. Chang, H. Chu,
S. Jiang, Q. Yang, T. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2024, 63,
202403203.
[37] J.-J. Zheng, F. Zhu, N. Song, F. Deng, Q. Chen, C. Chen, J. He, X. Gao,
M. Liang, Nat. Protoc. 2024, 19, 3470.
[38] L. Gao, J. Zhuang, L. Nie, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, N. Gu, T. Wang, J. Feng,
D. Yang, S. Perrett, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2007, 2, 577.
[39] M. Zhang, G. Li, X. Sun, Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A 2017,
5, 20789.
[40] S. Wei, W. Ma, M. Sun, P. Xiang, Z. Tian, L. Mao, L. Gao, Y. Li, Nat.
Commun. 2024, 15, 6888.
[41] X. Wang, Q. Shi, Z. Zha, D. Zhu, L. Zheng, L. Shi, X. Wei, L. Lian, K.
Wu, L. Cheng, Bioact. Mater. 2021, 6, 4389.
[42] a) B. Wang, Y. Yao, X. Yu, C. Wang, C. Wu, Z. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A
2021, 9, 19410; b) X. Shen, Z. Wang, X. J. Gao, X. Gao, Adv. Mater.
2024, 36, 2211151.
[43] Y. Wei, X. Wu, Y. Zhao, L. Wang, Z. Zhao, X. Huang, J. Liu, J. Li, Appl.
Catal., B 2018, 236, 445.
[44] Y. Wan, W. Wei, S. Ding, L. Wu, H. Qin, X. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater.
2024, 34, 2414554.
[45] L. Hao, X. J. Liang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Han, Y. Jin, L. Li, A. Magrini,
M. Bottini, S. Gao, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2412368.
[46] Z. Yu, Z. Xu, R. Zeng, M. Xu, M. Zou, D. Huang, Z. Weng, D. Tang,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2024, 64, 202420200.
[47] K. S. Exner, I. Sohrabnejad-Eskan, H. Over, ACS Catal. 2018, 8, 1864.
[48] D.-M. Liu, B. Xu, C. Dong, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 2021, 142,
116320.
[49] W. Xiao, S. Cai, T. Wu, Z. Fu, X. Liu, C. Wang, W. Zhang, R. Yang, J.
Colloid Interface Sci. 2023, 635, 481.
[50] F. C. Martins, A. D. Batista, W. R. Melchert, Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food
Saf. 2021, 20, 6116.
[51] a) M. Shahid, S. Manoharadas, H. Chakdar, A. F. Alrefaei, M. F.
Albeshr, M. H. Almutairi, Chemosphere 2021, 278, 130372; b) Z. Wu,
Z. Hao, Y. Chai, A. Li, C. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Chen, C. Lu, Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2023, 233, 115341.
[52] F. Zhao, L. Wang, M. Li, M. Wang, G. Liu, J. Ping, TrAC, Trends Anal.
Chem. 2023, 165, 117152.
[53] Y. Wang, M. Li, Z. Wang, J. Xu, J. Zhao, Z.-D. Gao, Y.-Y. Song, Chem.
Eng. J. 2023, 476, 146329.
[54] L. Zhang, B. Shen, C. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Liang, P. Fei, J. Chen, W.
Lai, Food Hydrocolloids 2024, 156, 110368.
[55] L. T. Gao, Y. M. Chen, Y. Aziz, W. Wei, X. Y. Zhao, Y. He,
J. Li, H. Li, H. Miyatake, Y. Ito, Carbohydr. Polym. 2024, 330,
121812.
[56] W. Jia, R. Fan, J. Zhang, K. Zhu, S. Gai, Y. Yin, Y. Yang, Small 2022, 18,
2201510.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2502354
2502354 (16 of 16)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 25, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202502354 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License