Regular Article
Conjugating gold nanoclusters and antimicrobial peptides: From
aggregation-induced emission to antibacterial synergy
Youkun Zheng, Weiwei Liu, Yun Chen, Chunmei Li, Hui Jiang ⇑, Xuemei Wang ⇑
State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, National Demonstration Center for Experimental Biomedical Engineering Education, School of Biological Science and Medical
Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
g r a p h i c a l a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 10 December 2018
Revised 13 March 2019
Accepted 15 March 2019
Available online 16 March 2019
Keywords:
Gold nanoclusters
Antimicrobial peptides
Aggregation-induced emission
Synergistic effect
Multidrug-resistant bacteria
a b s t r a c t
Antimicrobial peptides and antibacterial nanostructures are two emerging classes of antimicrobial agents
that differ from conventional small-molecule antibiotics. Combining these two types of antimicrobial
agents into one entity may be an effective strategy to improve their antimicrobial efﬁciency. In this study,
we demonstrated an effective antibacterial hybrid formed by covalently conjugating antibacterial gold
nanoclusters (Au NCs, a novel antimicrobial nanostructure) and daptomycin (Dap, a cyclic lipopeptide
antimicrobial peptide). The as-synthesized hybrid structure (DapAu NCs) not only inherits the intrinsic
properties from both agents but also renders an enhanced synergistic effect. Compared with the physi-
cally mixed Au NCs and daptomycin (Dap+Au NCs), the DapAu NCs hybrid structure has a stronger bac-
tericidal effect toward methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, a representative of multidrug-resistant
bacteria. DapAu NCs could effectively disrupt bacterial membranes by creating more and/or larger holes
in the membranes due to the localized daptomycin within the conjugated structure. These larger (and
possibly more) holes motivate the entry of DapAu NCs into bacterial cells and lead to more serious dam-
age of the bacteria at subcellular levels. Moreover, bacterial genomic DNA fragmentation was further
quantiﬁed to show that DapAu NCs may induce severe DNA breaks. The strong DNA destruction bene-
ﬁted from localized high concentrations of reactive oxygen species (ROS) induced by the localization of
Au NCs in the antimicrobial conjugation. The conjugated Au NCs could serve as a critical free radical gen-
erator to continuously produce ROS within the bacteria. The continuous ROS bombings also limit the
capacity of the bacteria to develop drug resistance. In addition, a signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence enhancement
of the hybrid structure was observed due to a novel aggregation-induced emission (AIE) pattern caused
by the Au NCs and daptomycin conjugation. This conjugation strategy provides a new perspective for the
synthesis of new antimicrobial agents as well as AIE-type ﬂuorescence materials.
 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2019.03.052
0021-9797/ 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
⇑Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: sungi@seu.edu.cn (H. Jiang), xuewang@seu.edu.cn (X. Wang).
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jcis

1. Introduction
Since the discovery of penicillin, a series of small-molecule
antibiotics have been developed and applied to the treatment of
bacterial infections, making a signiﬁcant contribution to human
health [1–4]. Unfortunately, unreasonable antibiotic treatments
and the indiscriminate use of antibiotics have resulted in the emer-
gence of serious multidrug-resistant (MDR) infections. For exam-
ple,
worldwide
drug-resistant
bacteria,
such
as
ESKAPE
epidemics, have rendered previously effective antibacterial treat-
ments ineffective, which consequently impose serious public
health challenges [5–7]. In addition, the pace of conventional
antibiotic development lags far behind the development of bacte-
rial resistance [1].
Antibacterial nanostructures, including metals, metal oxides,
and carbon-based nanomaterials have been applied as potential
antibacterial alternatives to combat superbug infections and over-
come the drug resistance of conventional small-molecule antibi-
otics [8–12]. The excellent antibacterial capability of engineered
nanomaterials, with ultrasmall sizes and high surface-to-volume
ratios, is mainly attributed to their large contact surface with bac-
terial cells that results in the disruption of the cell permeability
and physiological functions of bacterial membranes [13,14]. More-
over, the internalized nanoparticles (NPs) further interact with
intracellular components such as proteins and DNA, which disrupts
normal cellular functions [6,15]. In addition, the induction of reac-
tive oxygen species (ROS) generation by nanomaterials may also
cause bacterial damage [14]. The multiple antibacterial mecha-
nisms also greatly reduce the probability that bacteria will develop
a
resistance
to
nanomaterials
[1,15,16].
However,
although
antibacterial nanomaterials possess a high potential for the treat-
ment of MDR bacteria, they also present a serious threat due to
their toxicity to human cells [9,17]. To reduce cytotoxicity, nano-
materials functionalized with antibiotics, antimicrobial peptides
(AMPs), and lysozymes have been fabricated [13,18,19]. In addi-
tion, signiﬁcant efforts have been committed to the development
of less toxic noble metal-based nanomaterials including gold nan-
oclusters (NCs) [6,20–22], platinum NPs [23], and palladium
nanocrystals [9,24] for antibacterial applications.
Combination therapy of bactericides, which can synergistically
improve the performance and reduce the adverse effects of indi-
vidual agent, is one of the most commonly used strategies for the
treatment of serious MDR bacterial infections [25–28]. This effec-
tive strategy can attack bacteria from two distinct fronts, and bac-
teria need to overcome more difﬁcult evolutionary hurdle in
order to develop resistance. Gold nanomaterials have been known
to possess excellent biocompatibility and have attracted great
attention in the biomedical ﬁeld [29–31]. It is worth noting that
when
the
size
of
gold
nanomaterials
decreases
to
sub-
nanometer dimensions (i.e., NCs), these ultrasmall Au NCs begin
to have distinctive physicochemical and biological properties.
For example, Xie’s group showed that 6-mercaptohexanoic acid-
stabilized Au NCs (2 nm) can kill test pathogenic bacteria
through inducing ROS oxidative damage, while larger Au NPs
(6 nm) cannot show a homogeneous effect [14]. Our previous
results also demonstrated that thiolated Au NCs with good bio-
compatibility show strong antibacterial properties against super-
bugs [6]. In other words, ultrasmall Au NCs can possess superior
biocompatibility and good antibacterial activity at the same time.
Such properties make Au NCs an excellent candidate for the
intended combination therapy with other antimicrobial agents,
such as AMPs. As a successful practice, Chen and coworkers
demonstrated
that
nanocomplexes
obtained
by
the
self-
assembly of surfactin and Au nanodots possess a lower (>80-
fold) minimal inhibitory concentration and a better biocompati-
bility than those of surfactin [13].
On
the
other
hand,
aggregation-induced
emission
(AIE)
enhancement, developed by Tang’s group in 2001, has opened
new doors for producing highly ﬂuorescent materials [32–35]. Thi-
olated metal NCs have been demonstrated to exhibit the AIE phe-
nomenon, and several investigations have obtained strongly
ﬂuorescent composite materials, employing their AIE properties
[36–42]. Previous studies have shown that the AIE enhancement
of metal NCs is mainly induced by solvents and ions [36–40]. In
this work, we have reported an AIE enhancement caused by the
conjugation of Au NCs and AMPs (Scheme 1). We have shown that
4,6-diamino-2-mercaptopyrimidine
(DAMP)-mediated
Au
NCs
(AuDAMP) have a weak ﬂuorescence and that the NCs can strongly
eliminate MDR bacteria via a combined bactericidal mechanism
(i.e., ROS production, membrane damage, and DNA destruction)
[6]. DAMP is an analogue of 2-mercaptopyrimidine in Escherichia
coli tRNA. Although DAMP presents almost no direct pharmacolog-
ical action, it can disturb bacterial tRNA synthesis and is commonly
used as a pharmaceutical intermediate for the synthesis of antimi-
crobial agents, including Au NPs [15,43–45]. AMPs are a class of
well-known natural antimicrobial agents with a potent antibacte-
rial ability since their unusual amino acid sequences can be easily
inserted into bacterial cell membranes to cause cell membrane
rupture [7,46–48]. Daptomycin (Dap), a cyclic lipopeptide antimi-
crobial peptide, is composed of a cyclic 13-member peptide linked
to a lipophilic decylic acid side chain and has a strong antibacterial
activity against most Gram-positive bacteria including MDR and
drug-susceptible strains (e.g., vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus
faecalis, Streptococcus pyogenes, and methicillin-resistant S. aureus
(MRSA)) [49]. It exerts an antibacterial efﬁcacy via a proposed
mechanism, where the lipophilic tail of Dap can easily insert into
the bacterial cell membrane with the assistance of calcium to
induce rapid cell membrane damage and potassium ion efﬂux
[49,50]. The hybrid DapAuDAMP NCs were prepared through
the covalent conjugation of Dap on DAMP-anchored Au NCs by
the strong covalent bond (amide) between the carboxyl of Dap
and the amino of DAMP molecules (Scheme 1). The conjugated par-
ticles could provide a maximum of 4-fold enhanced ﬂuorescence
due to the AIE effect. The conjugation of AuDAMP and Dap into one
entity allows the NCs to possess a high speciﬁc area for intracellu-
lar ROS production and helps Dap, with its lipophilic tail insertion
for optimal membrane damage, to be highly localized on the sur-
face of NCs. Therefore, relative to physically mixed Dap and Au
NCs (Dap+AuDAMP), DapAuDAMP possessed a superior antibac-
terial activity toward MRSA, a representative of MDR Gram-
positive bacteria. This conjugation strategy may also signiﬁcantly
reduce the bacterial exposure to Dap, which will curtail the likeli-
hood of the development of bacterial resistance to Dap in the long
run.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Reagents and instruments
DAMP
(98%)
and
N-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-N0-
ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC, 97%) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). The LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Via-
bility Kit was obtained from Invitrogen (USA). The TIANamp Bacte-
ria DNA Kit was purchased from Tiangen Biotech Co. Ltd. (China).
Lipid Peroxidation (LPD) MDA Assay Kit, ROS Assay Kit, Hoechst
33342, and Colorimetric TUNEL Apoptosis Assay Kit were obtained
from
Beyotime
Biotech
(China).
Chloroauric
acid
(HAuCl4),
daptomycin (98%), agarose, agar, N-acetyl-L cysteine (NAC,
98%), glutaraldehyde (25%), Triton X-100, dimethylsulfoxide, N-
hydroxysuccinimide (NHS, 98%), and other common reagents were
purchased from Sinopharm Ltd. (China). Ultra-pure water (18.2
2
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10

MX cm, Millipore) was employed throughout the solutions
preparation.
UV–vis and ﬂuorescence spectra were obtained using a Biomate
3S spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher, USA) and a RF-5301PC ﬂuo-
rimeter (Shimadzu, Japan), respectively. The ﬂuorescent lifetime
measurement and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were
performed on a FLS920 ﬂuorescent spectrometer (Edinburgh, UK)
and a ULVAC-PHI 5000 VersaProbe XPS (Japan), respectively. The
ultimate analysis was performed using a Spectroblue inductively
coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) (Speicher,
Germany).
The
hydrodynamic
size
and
zeta
potential
were
obtained by a Malvern Nano ZS Zetasizer 90 (UK). Fourier trans-
form infrared spectra (FTIR) were recorded by a Nicolet iS5 spec-
troscopy
(Thermo
Fisher,
USA),
and
the
thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA) utilized a TG209F3 analyzer (Netzsch, Germany)
under a N2 atmosphere. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were obtained
with a Zeiss Ultra Plus SEM (Zeiss, Germany) and a JEM-2100
TEM (JEOL, Japan), respectively. Confocal microscopic images were
acquired with a Nikon Ti-E confocal microscope (Japan).
2.2. Synthesis and characterization of gold nanoclusters
The synthesis of AuDAMP was based on our previous descrip-
tion [6,51]. For a typical synthesis procedure, 100 lL of HAuCl4
(0.1 M) and 200 lL of DAMP (0.1 M) were added to 9700 lL of
H2O. The solution underwent a hydrothermal reaction (70 C)
under gentle stirring (300 rpm) for half day, and the red-emitting
AuDAMP was formed. The synthesized AuDAMP was puriﬁed using
an ultraﬁltration tube (molecular weight cut-off, 3 KDa) to remove
free DAMP. The puriﬁed AuDAMP solution was stored in a refriger-
ator for further use and characterization.
For the preparation of DapAuDAMP, the as-synthesized
AuDAMP (10 mL) were ﬁrst mixed with N-(3-(dimethylamino)
propyl)-N0-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC, 0.1 mL, 0.8 M)
and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS, 0.1 mL, 0.4 M) and followed by
the addition of Dap (0.1 mL, 5 mM) to the solution, which was stir-
red continually for 30 min (300 rpm). The DapAuDAMP product
was collected after centrifugation (10,000 rpm) and air drying.
2.3. Bacteria culture
MRSA were cultured in Luria-Bertani (LB) agar at 35 C. A bacte-
rial suspension was obtained by inoculating a MRSA single colony
into LB medium that was then cultured for 8 h at 35 C and
180 rpm.
Freshly
harvested
cells
were
used
during
each
experiment.
2.4. Agar plates assay
Phosphate buffer saline (PBS, negative control), Dap, AuDAMP,
Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP were mixed with fresh MRSA
suspensions (1.0  108 CFU/mL). After incubation for 1 h at
35 C, 0.1 mL of the diluted bacterial suspension was plated onto
the LB agar. The colony counts were performed after 24 h
incubation.
2.5. Zone of inhibition measurements
The inhibitory effect of Au NCs was tested using the double-
layer agar method [52]. An aliquot of 0.2 mL of Au NCs solution
was pipetted into each hole. The culture dishes were cultured at
35 C, and the diameters of the inhibition zone were measured
after 24 h. The same volumes of PBS and Dap were used as controls.
2.6. Bactericidal dynamics
Bacterial suspensions (1.0  108 CFU/mL) were subjected to
different ﬁnal concentrations of Au NCs at 35 C for 1 h on a shak-
ing incubator (180 rpm). The colony counts were performed at dif-
ferent times during the incubation process.
Scheme 1. Schematic illustrations of the conjugation strategy for antibacterial Au NCs and Dap, conjugation-induced AIE enhancement, and antibacterial synergistic effect.
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10
3

2.7. Membrane integrity assay
The LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit (Invitrogen) was
employed for the determination of bacterial membrane integrity.
The MRSA were dealt Au NCs in LB at 35 C for 1 h. The working
samples were stained with SYTO 9 and propidium iodide (PI) and
treated for 30 min before observation using confocal laser scanning
microscopy (CLSM, Nikon).
2.8. Measurement of internalized gold
MRSA were treated with Au NCs for 1 h and then washed sev-
eral times until all uninternalized NCs were removed. The cleaned
bacterial cells were air dried and digested with aqua regia. The
internalized gold content was measured by an ICP-OES (Speicher,
Germany).
2.9. Reactive oxygen species assay
MRSA were treated with Dap and Au NCs for 1 h at 35 C and
then were collected by centrifugation. Then, the intracellular ROS
were measured using an ROS Assay Kit (Beyotime, China). The bac-
terial samples were treated with 20,70-dichloroﬂuorescein diacetate
(DCF-DA) for 1 h in the dark. The ﬂuorescence intensity of bacterial
suspensions was registered with a Shimadzu RF-5301 PC ﬂuo-
rospectrophotometer. A similar procedure was also used for the
measurement of ROS in a cell-free system.
2.10. Lipid peroxidation test
The MRSA incubated with Dap and Au NCs for 1 h were cen-
trifuged down. The lipid peroxidation (LPD) test was conducted
by an LPD MDA Assay Kit (Beyotime, China) according to the man-
ufacturer’s protocol.
2.11. Bacterial genomic DNA damage
The bacteria were incubated with Dap and Au NCs for 1 h and
then were collected by centrifugation, respectively. The DNA was
extracted by a TIANamp Bacteria DNA Kit (Tiangen, China). After
the genomic DNA was extracted, 10 lL DNA of each sample was
separated on a 1% agarose gel by electrophoresis.
2.12. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
assay
The MRSA incubated with Dap and Au NCs for 1 h were ﬁxed on
slides with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in water for 1.5 h and permeabi-
lized with Triton X-100 (1%) in PBS for 20 min. The positive control
was prepared by using a 10 U/mL DNaseI solution to incubate for
30 min at room temperature. The terminal deoxynucleotidyl trans-
ferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay was conducted by a
colorimetric TUNEL Apoptosis Assay Kit (Beyotime, China) per
the manufacturer’s instructions.
3. Results and discussion
Ultrasmall AuDAMP can be facilely prepared by the hydrother-
mal reduction of an Au precursor and by the reducibility of DAMP
itself. The as-synthesized AuDAMP was dark yellow in solution
with weak a red ﬂuorescence under UV light (inset in Fig. 1a).
We noted that the as-synthesized AuDAMP exhibit no characteris-
tic UV absorption peaks, which is consistent with our previously
reported mercaptopyrimidine-directed Au NCs that possess an
excellent antibacterial capacity [6,51]. Since DAMP and Dap are
rich in amino and carboxyl groups (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary
data), respectively, the ultrasmall AuDAMP and Dap can form a
stable hybrid structure by a simple amidation reaction in the pres-
ence of EDC and NHS (Scheme 1). The color of the solution became
pale yellow after the conjugation reaction (inset in Fig. 1a), sug-
gesting that particle aggregation may occur. Further, we found that
the formed hybrid structure (DapAuDAMP) exhibits a strongly
ﬂuorescence enhancement accompanied by a slight blueshift
(15 nm) in the ﬂuorescence emission peak (Fig. 1a). Using differ-
ent Dap concentrations results in a maximum 4-fold boost in the
ﬂuorescent intensity for the conjugated DapAuDAMP prepared
with 100 lM Dap (Fig. S2). The ﬂuorescent intensity decreases at
higher concentrations of Dap, maybe due to the precipitation of
aggregates.
In
addition,
the
ﬂuorescence
enhancement
of
DapAuDAMP excited by different excitation wavelengths is
almost unchanged (Fig. S3), demonstrating that light scattering
by the conjugated system is not responsible for the ﬂuorescence
enhancement [53]. Combining these results, we hypothesized that
the AuDAMP and Dap conjugates undergo AIE enhancement.
The TEM image visually shows the occurrence of aggregation,
and the conjugated DapAuDAMP, with an agminated network
shape, is observed (Fig. 1b). Moreover, the sizes of AuDAMP parti-
cles are same in both AuDAMP and Dap-conjugated samples. This
result is in line with the AIE of metal NCs, indicating that the
conjugation-induced AIE enhancement does occur [42,53–55]. Fur-
thermore, the dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis also demon-
strates the size increase following the conjugation of AuDAMP and
Dap. As illustrated in Fig. 1c, the mean hydrodynamic size of the
conjugated DapAuDAMP has a size of approximately 190 nm,
while the unconjugated AuDAMP was approximately 6 nm.
The XPS analysis was applied to obtain the valence states of the
gold species of AuDAMP before and after Dap conjugation. It is
worth noting that the oxidation states of metal NCs are dictated
by their structure and size [56]. However, the Au 4f7/2 binding
energies are identical at 83.8 eV, regardless of whether the ﬂuores-
cent AuDAMP was conjugated to Dap or not (Fig. 1d), implying that
the conjugation of Dap to the NC surface cannot affect the oxida-
tion states of the gold species in AuDAMP [51,57]. These data is
also in good agreement with our TEM results in Fig. 1b.
The ﬂuorescence properties of the conjugated DapAuDAMP
and AuDAMP were further examined by ﬂuorescence lifetime mea-
surements. As illustrated in Fig. 1e, the ﬂuorescence lifetime decay
proﬁle
implies
the
existence
of
long
ﬂuorescence
lifetime
(microsecond level) components in the conjugated DapAuDAMP,
namely, 4.659 ls (99.97%) and 26 ns (0.03%) (Detailed ﬁtting data
see
Supplementary
data).
The
microsecond-scale
lifetime
in
DapAuDAMP was similar to the ﬂuorescence lifetime of the
recently reported AIE-type ﬂuorescence Au NCs [36]. These results
further
demonstrate
that
the
ﬂuorescence
emission
of
DapAuDAMP is derived from the AIE effect induced by AuDAMP
and Dap.
To demonstrate the successful conjugation of AuDAMP and Dap,
the FTIR analysis was performed. As shown in Fig. 1f, we detected a
prominent peak at 1280 cm1 for DapAuDAMP, which is charac-
teristic of the amido bond (arylamine) within the hybrid structure.
This result is incontrovertible in conﬁrming the successful conjuga-
tion of AuDAMP and Dap (DapAuDAMP). In addition, to measure
the content of daptomycin within the DapAuDAMP conjugated
structure, we performed the TGA analysis. As shown in Fig. S4,
the TGA analysis showed that daptomycin accounted for 10%
(w/w) of DapAuDAMP, giving a mass ratio close to 1:9 for dapto-
mycin and AuDAMP within the DapAuDAMP hybrid structure.
To examine the antibacterial efﬁcacy of our conjugated struc-
ture, a series of antibacterial experiments were performed using
MRSA as a model. DapAuDAMP was used at a concentration of
10 lg/mL. Since the TGA analysis revealed that the mass ratio of
4
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10

Dap to AuDAMP was 1:9 (Figure S4), we introduced 1 lg/mL Dap
and 9 lg/mL AuDAMP individually or physically mixed with MRSA
as
control
groups.
Compared
to
the
other
treatments,
DapAuDAMP showed the best bactericidal effect, and the system
was able to effectively eliminate 100% of the bacterial cells after an
incubation of 1 h (Fig. 2a). The treatments with Dap alone and
Fig. 1. (a) UV–vis absorption (black line and red line) and photoemission spectra (blue line and green line, kex = 420 nm) of AuDAMP (black line and blue line) and
DapAuDAMP (red line and green line) in water. The inset shows photographs of AuDAMP and DapAuDAMP in water under visible (item 1 and 3) and UV light (item 2 and
4) in turn. (b) TEM images, (c) DLS measurements, (d) XPS spectra (Au4f zone), and (e) ﬂuorescence lifetime decays of AuDAMP and DapAuDAMP. (f) FTIR spectra of
AuDAMP (red line), Dap (dark-green line), and DapAuDAMP (orange line). (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10
5

AuDAMP alone showed similar antibacterial activities, and the rel-
ative viable bacteria that remained after treatment for 1 h were
37.5%
and
41.7%,
respectively
(Fig.
2a).
Interestingly,
the
DapAuDAMP
treatment
indicated
a
signiﬁcantly
enhanced
antibacterial property compared to that of the unconjugated coun-
terpart (physical mixture of Dap+AuDAMP) with the same concen-
trations of Dap and AuDAMP (Fig. 2a). Similar results were also
demonstrated by inhibition zone measurements. The group treated
with DapAuDAMP showed a signiﬁcantly enhanced and clear
transparent inhibition zone compared to that of the Dap+AuDAMP
group and other groups (Fig. S5), demonstrating its superior
antibacterial activity. In addition, DapAuDAMP presents rapid
bactericidal kinetics and can eliminate all bacteria in half an hour
(Fig. 2b). In contrast, the viable bacteria that remained in the other
groups were higher than 50% after the same treatment time
(Fig. 2b). All these results indicate the conjugated structure includ-
ing localized Dap and AuDAMP could induce a synergy that led to
the enhanced antibacterial activity.
In a previous study, we found that AuDAMP possesses an intrin-
sic mimic enzyme activity and can destroy bacterial membranes by
inducing intracellular ROS production [6]. Here, we also examined
the membrane integrity through a SYTO9/PI bacterial viability kit.
PI is a DNA-binding ﬂuorescent dye that enters cells and binds to
DNA only when the cell membrane is damaged (red ﬂuorescence),
whereas SYTO9 can label all bacteria regardless of being intact or
damaged (green ﬂuorescence). As such, these two stains could help
us evaluate the degree of damage to the bacterial membrane after
treatment. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, the MRSA cells in the PBS-
treated group showed almost only green ﬂuorescence, while in
other treatment groups the cells showed different degrees of red
ﬂuorescence emission. In particular, the group treated with
DapAuDAMP barely shows the green ﬂuorescence emission, indi-
cating the strong cell damage. Indeed, by calculating the propor-
tion of bacteria stained with PI, we obtained the degrees of
damage to the bacterial membrane after treatments with PBS,
Dap, AuDAMP, Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP for 1 h as 2.6%,
38.4%, 48.7%, 72.5% and 97.3%, respectively (Fig. 3b).
To further conﬁrm the membrane damage, the SEM observation
was carried out. As illustrated in Fig. 3c, we observed that
DapAuDAMP induces dramatic cell damage and results in the
leakage of abundant cellular contents when compared to that of
the control group. Consistent with the SYTO9/PI stain results in
Fig. 3a, Dap, AuDAMP and Dap+AuDAMP also result in various
degrees of cell destruction. Likewise, DapAuDAMP exhibited
stronger capabilities to cause bacterial cell destruction than did
Dap+AuDAMP
(Fig.
3c).
These
data
verify
again
that
the
DapAuDAMP conjugated structure may strongly interact with
bacterial membranes, which apace kills such superbugs by cell
destruction. The enhanced bacterial membrane destruction of
DapAuDAMP
also
explicitly
supports
our
hypothesis
that
the homogeneous conjugation of two active species into one
entity can provide the synergy for a highly potent antibacterial
property.
Following the destruction of the bacterial membrane, the
DapAuDAMP hybrid could enter the cells more easily and then
interact with genomic DNA to induce DNA destruction. To examine
this regard, the agarose gel electrophoresis analysis of bacterial
genomic DNA after treatment with DapAuDAMP was performed.
As presented in Fig. 3d, PBS- and Dap-treated groups of MRSA
showed an intact DNA band, suggesting that no DNA fragmentation
occurred. This result is consistent with expectations because the
main mechanism of Dap bactericidal action is to destroy the bacte-
rial cell membrane, rather than cause damage to the genomic DNA.
In
contrast,
the
AuDAMP-treated,
Dap+AuDAMP-treated
and
DapAuDAMP-treated groups all showed various degrees of
smearing in their electrophoresis patterns, suggesting the presence
of fractured DNA fragments and
genomic DNA destruction.
Although these treatments showed a certain degree of DNA frag-
mentation, the longest smear exhibited in the electrophoretic
bands also suggested the most severe DNA damage occurred in
the DapAuDAMP-treated group. Moreover, bacterial DNA damage
was further quantiﬁed by TUNEL assays, and the results also
showed that DapAuDAMP induced severe DNA scission (Fig. 3e
and f). The bacterial cells with fractured DNA were stained green
after the TUNEL analysis, while the cells without DNA damage
were stained blue by Hoechst 33342 (Fig. 3e). We determined
the bacterial DNA damage index by calculating the ﬂuorescent
ratio of bacterial cells stained with TUNEL to bacterial cells stained
with Hoechst 33342 (Fig. 3f). To compare the relative DNA damage
efﬁciencies, DNase I was employed as a positive control, and the
DNA damage index was approximately 0.42. In good agreement
with the electrophoresis patterns (Fig. 3d), the DNA damage index
was close to 0 in the PBS- and Dap-treated groups. The DNA dam-
age index was approximately 0.14 for the AuDAMP-treated group,
indicating that AuDAMP did cause minimal damage to the MRSA
genomic DNA. In contrast, the treated bacterial DNA damage index
reached 0.23 for the Dap+AuDAMP-treated group and may be
related to the destruction of the bacterial cell membrane by Dap
to allow more AuDAMP to enter the cell and induce DNA damage.
Correspondingly, stronger DNA damage is presented for the
DapAuDAMP-treated group, and the DNA damage index is as
high as 0.31 (Fig. 3f).
Fig. 2. (a) Percentages of viable MRSA remaining after treatment with PBS, Dap, AuDAMP, Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP for 1 h. Data are means ± S.D., n = 3. (b) MRSA
Killing kinetics by PBS, Dap, AuDAMP, Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP. Data are means ± S.D., n = 3.
6
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10

Fig. 3. (a) CLSM images of MRSA treated with PBS, Dap, AuDAMP, Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP at 35 C for 1 h. The dead cells were visualized by PI staining (red), while
SYTO 9 (green) was used to identify all cells. The scale bar is 20 lm. (b) The percentage of PI-stained bacteria that show damaged bacterial membrane. NAC is N-acetyl-L-
cysteine, an antioxidant that can scavenge ROS production. Data are means ± S.D., n = 3, t test. Compared to the PBS-treated group, * is signiﬁcant against the PBS-treated
group, p < 0.05. (c) SEM micrographs of bacteria treated with PBS, Dap, AuDAMP, Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP. The arrows point to leakages and holes. The scale bar is
2 lm. (d) The agarose gel electrophoresis results of the extracted genomic DNA from MRSA treated with PBS, Dap, AuDAMP, Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP (from left to
right). (e) Fluorescence images of MRSA after 1 h treatment. The cells were visualized by staining the DNA with Hoechst 33342 (blue), while the DNA damage status of the
bacterial cells was ascertained with a TUNEL assay (green). The scale bar is 20 lm. (f) DNA damage index, i.e., the ratio of DNA-damaged bacteria to normal bacteria, shows
the degree of DNA damage. Data are means ± S.D., n = 3, t test. Compared to the PBS-treated group, * is signiﬁcant against the PBS-treated group, p < 0.05. (For interpretation of
the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10
7

According to the antibacterial mechanism of inducing oxidative
damage through ROS generation (by AuDAMP) and creating holes
in the bacterial cell membrane (by Dap) [6,49], we hypothesize
that the enhanced antibacterial activity shown by DapAuDAMP
is a beneﬁt of the localized high concentration of drug and ROS
due to the hybrid conjugate. To verify that intracellular ROS pro-
duction is involved in the enhanced bactericidal performance of
DapAuDAMP, we ﬁrst determined the intracellular ROS produc-
tion in bacteria from each treatment group (Fig. 4a). Compared
with the PBS-treated group, the ROS production level shows no
changes after treatment with Dap. This is reasonable because the
mechanism by which Dap destroys bacterial cell membranes is
achieved by the insertion and interaction of its lipophilic tail into
the lipid layer of the cell membrane. In contrast, a signiﬁcantly
enhanced ROS generation can be observed for the AuDAMP, Dap
+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP treatment groups (Fig. 4a). When
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC, an antioxidant that can scavenge ROS
production) is incorporated, the AuDAMP-induced ROS enhance-
ment is erased, reducing the ROS level close to the initial value
(Fig. 4a). The CLSM observations also conﬁrm that the bacterial
membrane
damage
is
associated
with
the
ROS
production
(Fig. 3b and Fig. S6). The incorporation of NAC in the treatment
groups (i.e., AuDAMP, Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP) could
signiﬁcantly
ameliorate
the
bacterial
membrane
destruction
induced by ROS. These results irrefutably support our prior view
that the AuDAMP-induced ROS were involved in destroying the
bacterial membrane (Fig. 3a–c). These intracellular ROS were
derived from the catalytic oxidation process mediated by AuDAMP,
as a catalyst. Fig. S7 also conﬁrms that the catalytic process only
occurs in the presence of bacteria. The intrinsic oxidase- and
peroxidase-like activities enable AuDAMP to catalyze the production
of intracellular ROS, and subsequently, to induce cell damage [6].
It should be noted that the ROS produced after the conjugation
of AuDAMP and Dap did not increase signiﬁcantly when compared
to that of the unconjugated counterpart (Fig. 4a), while the overall
bacterial membrane destruction in the DapAuDAMP group was
markedly higher than that in the Dap+AuDAMP group (Fig. 3a–c).
This paradox indicates that ROS might not be the only contributor
to the antibacterial properties of the hybrid structure. Therefore,
we further investigated the role of Dap in DapAuDAMP. We ﬁrst
investigated the activity of Dap in our hybrid structure by measur-
ing the diameter of the inhibition zone after the introduction of
calcium. Since Dap is a calcium-dependent antimicrobial peptide,
an increase in the concentration of calcium can enhance its bacte-
ricidal ability [50]. As shown in Fig. 4b, DapAuDAMP exhibited a
stronger antibacterial activity against MRSA on the LB agar con-
taining calcium than that on the agar without calcium. This result
demonstrates that the activity of Dap in the hybrid structure is
maintained. Next, the LPD analysis was used to decouple the role
of Dap by separating the ROS inﬂuence from the overall inﬂuence
of DapAuDAMP on the destruction of the bacterial cell mem-
brane. LPD can oxidize and degrade the lipids, and the degradation
products are mainly reactive aldehyde species, such as malondi-
aldehyde, which can be further reacted with thiobarbituric acid
to produce ﬂuorescent complexes. It should be noted that ROS
are generated by AuDAMP, rather than by Dap, in the conjugated
structure. Consequently, LPD could be employed to recognize the
role of AuDAMP in ROS production. This would also allow us to
Fig. 4. (a) Normalized intracellular ROS levels after the incubation of different treatment groups for 1 h, where the ROS values of the PBS-treated group without (magenta)
and with (green) NAC were set as 1. Data are means ± S.D., n = 3, t test. Compared to the PBS-treated group, * is signiﬁcant against the PBS-treated group, p < 0.05. (b) The
effect of the calcium addition on the inhibition zone of DapAuDAMP against MRSA. (c) The relative LPD levels after incubation for 1 h, where the LPD of the PBS-treated
group was set as 1. Data are means ± S.D., n = 3, t test. Compared to the PBS-treated group, * is signiﬁcant against the PBS-treated group, p < 0.05. (d) The uptake of Au in
bacteria after treatment with AuDAMP, Dap+AuDAMP, and DapAuDAMP for 1 h. Data are means ± S.D., n = 3, t test. Compared to the AuDAMP-treated group, * is signiﬁcant
against the AuDAMP-treated group, p < 0.05. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
8
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10

clarify the contributions of Dap and AuDAMP and to further under-
stand the interaction mechanism of the bactericide hybrid. As illus-
trated in Fig. 4c, Dap+AuDAMP showed a high LPD level compared
to that of DapAuDAMP, indicating more ROS were produced by
Dap+AuDAMP, which is in good agreement with our ROS assay
results (Fig. 4a). This observation is in line with our expectations.
Because the AuDAMP within the Dap+AuDAMP group maintains
its original size, it induces a higher ROS production due to its con-
tact surface being larger than that of AuDAMP wrapped in the
DapAuDAMP hybrid. Combined with the results of membrane
damage, we can determine that the localized Dap within the
DapAuDAMP hybrid could promote the destruction of bacterial
membranes and form more and larger holes. This conclusion can
also be conﬁrmed by SEM revealing that the DapAuDAMP group
induces a greater leakage of cellular contents (Fig. 3c). Moreover,
the ICP-OES analysis also showed that the Au content in bacterial
cells treated with DapAuDAMP was higher than that of the con-
trol groups of Dap+AuDAMP and AuDAMP (Fig. 4d), suggesting that
more DapAuDAMP was internalized into bacterial cells. This result
implies that DapAuDAMP promoted the production of larger or
possibly more holes in the bacterial cell membranes, which in turn
facilitate the internalization of DapAuDAMP into the bacteria.
The internalized DapAuDAMP could further induce damage to bac-
terial subcellular components by catalyzing the generation and
release of a locally high concentration of ROS, subsequently leading
to bacterial cell death. In contrast, the unconjugated AuDAMP within
the Dap+AuDAMP group cannot possess the advantage of localizing
their ROS production site. In summary, the above evaluation of the
results highlights the beneﬁts of the conjugation of Dap and
AuDAMP into one entity, both in enhancing their optical properties
and in generating synergistic antibacterial properties.
4. Conclusion
On the basis of our previously reported antibacterial Au NCs [6],
this work has presented a highly potent antibacterial hybrid
obtained by covalent conjugation of Au NCs and the antimicrobial
peptide daptomycin. The as-synthesized conjugated structure not
only inherits the intrinsic properties from both agents but also ren-
ders an enhanced synergistic effect. The conjugated structure could
effectively destroy the bacterial membrane by creating holes in the
membranes via the action of the localized daptomycin. The mem-
brane damage motivates the entry of the antibacterial hybrid into
the bacteria and leads to more serious bacterial damage at the sub-
cellular level. In addition, bacterial genomic DNA fragmentation
showed that the antibacterial hybrid may induce severe DNA
breakage. The strong DNA destruction beneﬁted from localized
high concentrations of ROS induced by the localization of Au NCs
in the antibacterial hybrid. The conjugated Au NCs could continu-
ously generate ROS within the bacteria, and continuous ROS bomb-
ings could also limit the capacity of bacteria to develop drug
resistance. In addition, a signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence enhancement of
the hybrid structure was observed due to a novel AIE pattern
caused by Au NCs and daptomycin conjugation, which differs from
the previously reported solvent-induced and ion-induced AIE
patterns [36–40]. Our current strategy provides a new perspective
for the synthesis of new antibacterial agents as well as AIE-type
ﬂuorescence materials. Further study is underway to clarify the
speciﬁc mechanisms behind the conjugation-induce AIE effect.
Simultaneously, we will also develop more effective antibacterial
compositions to cope with severe multidrug-resistant infections.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Key Research and
Development
Program
of
China,
China
(2017YFA0205300),
National Natural Science Foundation of China, China (21675023,
91753106, and 81325011), and the Scientiﬁc Research Foundation
of Graduate School of Southeast University, China (YBJJ1829).
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Additional spectral features, molecular structure, TGA, inhibi-
tion zone, CLSM, and ROS results associated with this article can
be found in the Supplementary data. Supplementary data to this
article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2019.
03.052.
References
[1] A.J. Huh, Y.J. Kwon, ‘‘Nanoantibiotics”: a new paradigm for treating infectious
diseases using nanomaterials in the antibiotics resistant era, J. Control. Release
156 (2011) 128–145.
[2] R.F. Landis, C.H. Li, A. Gupta, Y.W. Lee, M. Yazdani, N. Ngernyuang, I. Altinbasak,
S.
Mansoor,
M.A.S.
Khichi,
A.
Sanyal,
V.M.
Rotello,
Biodegradable
nanocomposite antimicrobials for the eradication of multidrug-resistant
bacterial bioﬁlms without accumulated resistance, J. Am. Chem. Soc 140
(2018) 6176–6182.
[3] A. Gupta, R.F. Landis, C.H. Li, M. Schnurr, R. Das, Y.W. Lee, M. Yazdani, Y. Liu, A.
Kozlova, V.M. Rotello, Engineered polymer nanoparticles with unprecedented
antimicrobial efﬁcacy and therapeutic indices against multidrug-resistant
bacteria and bioﬁlms, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140 (2018) 12137–12143.
[4] S. Chen, Q. Chen, Q. Li, J. An, P. Sun, J. Ma, H. Gao, Biodegradable synthetic
antimicrobial with aggregation-induced emissive luminogens for temporal
antibacterial activity and facile bacteria detection, Chem. Mater. 30 (2018)
1782–1790.
[5] H.W. Boucher, G.H. Talbot, J.S. Bradley, J.E. Edwards, D. Gilbert, L.B. Rice, M.
Scheld, B. Spellberg, J. Bartlett, Bad Bugs, no Drugs: no ESKAPE! an update from
the infectious diseases society of america, Clin. Infect. Dis. 48 (2009) 1–12.
[6] Y. Zheng, W. Liu, Z. Qin, Y. Chen, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Mercaptopyrimidine-
conjugated gold nanoclusters as nanoantibiotics for combating multidrug-
resistant superbugs, Bioconjugate Chem. 29 (2018) 3094–3103.
[7] S.J. Lam, N.M. O’Brien-Simpson, N. Pantarat, A. Sulistio, E.H. Wong, Y.Y. Chen, J.
C. Lenzo, J.A. Holden, A. Blencowe, E.C. Reynolds, G.G. Qiao, Combating
multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacteria with structurally nanoengineered
antimicrobial peptide polymers, Nat. Microbiol. 1 (2016) 16162.
[8] Z. Yang, X. Hao, S. Chen, Z. Ma, W. Wang, C. Wang, L. Yue, H. Sun, Q. Shao, V.
Murugadoss, Z. Guo, Long-term antibacterial stable reduced graphene oxide
nanocomposites loaded with cuprous oxide nanoparticles, J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 533 (2019) 13–23.
[9] G. Fang, W. Li, X. Shen, J.M. Perez-Aguilar, Y. Chong, X. Gao, Z. Chai, C. Chen, C.
Ge,
R.
Zhou,
Differential
Pd-nanocrystal
facets
demonstrate
distinct
antibacterial activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, Nat.
Commun. 9 (2018) 129.
[10] V.K. Gupta, A. Fakhri, S. Tahami, S. Agarwal, Zn doped CdO nanoparticles:
structural, morphological, optical, photocatalytic and anti-bacterial properties,
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 504 (2017) 164–170.
[11] S.
Szunerits,
R.
Boukherroub,
Antibacterial
activity
of
graphene-based
materials, J. Mater. Chem. B 4 (2016) 6892–6912.
[12] X. Zou, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Luo, Mechanisms of the antimicrobial activities of
graphene materials, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (2016) 2064–2077.
[13] W.Y. Chen, H.Y. Chang, J.K. Lu, Y.C. Huang, S.G. Harroun, Y.T. Tseng, Y.J. Li, C.C.
Huang, H.T. Chang, Self-assembly of antimicrobial peptides on gold nanodots:
against multidrug-resistant bacteria and wound-healing application, Adv.
Funct. Mater. 25 (2015) 7189–7199.
[14] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Antimicrobial gold nanoclusters,
ACS Nano 11 (2017) 6904–6910.
[15] Y. Zhao, Y. Tian, Y. Cui, W. Liu, W. Ma, X. Jiang, Small molecule-capped gold
nanoparticles
as
potent antibacterial
agents
that
target
gram-negative
bacteria, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 (2010) 12349–12356.
[16] X. Li, S.M. Robinson, A. Gupta, K. Saha, Z. Jiang, D.F. Moyano, A. Sahar, M.A.
Riley, V.M. Rotello, Functional gold nanoparticles as potent antimicrobial
agents against multi-drug-resistant bacteria, ACS Nano 8 (2014) 10682–
10686.
[17] K.B. Holt, A.J. Bard, Interaction of Silver(I) ions with the respiratory chain of
Escherichia coli: an electrochemical and scanning electrochemical microscopy
study of the antimicrobial mechanism of micromolar Ag+, Biochemistry 44
(2005) 13214–13223.
[18] N. Tran, M. Hocquet, B. Eon, P. Sangwan, J. Ratcliffe, T.M. Hinton, J. White, B.
Ozcelik, N.P. Reynolds, B.W. Muir, Non-lamellar lyotropic liquid crystalline
nanoparticles
enhance
the
antibacterial
effects
of
Rifampicin
against
Staphylococcus aureus, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 519 (2018) 107–118.
[19] J. Wang, L. Tang, P. Somasundaran, W. Fan, G. Zeng, Y. Deng, Y. Zhou, J. Wang, Y.
Shen, Highly effective antibacterial activity by the synergistic effect of three
dimensional ordered mesoporous carbon-lysozyme composite, J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 503 (2017) 131–141.
[20] G. Mendoza, A. Regiel-Futyra, V. Andreu, V. Sebastián, A. Kyzioł, G. Stochel, M.
Arruebo, Bactericidal effect of gold-chitosan nanocomposites in coculture
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10
9

models of pathogenic bacteria and human macrophages, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 9 (2017) 17693–17701.
[21] Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Yang, Y. Liu, F. Hu, K. Zhu, X. Jiang, Gold nanoclusters for
targeting methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in vivo, Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 57 (2018) 3958–3962.
[22] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Surface ligand chemistry of gold
nanoclusters determines their antimicrobial ability, Chem. Mater. 30 (2018)
2800–2808.
[23] K.B.A. Ahmed, T. Raman, V. Anbazhagan, Platinum nanoparticles inhibit
bacteria proliferation and rescue zebraﬁsh from bacterial infection, RSC Adv.
6 (2016) 44415–44424.
[24] C.P.
Adams,
K.A.
Walker,
S.O.
Obare,
K.M.
Docherty,
Size-dependent
antimicrobial effects of novel palladium nanoparticles, PLoS One 9 (2014)
e85981.
[25] Y.W. Wang, H. Tang, D. Wu, D. Liu, Y. Liu, A. Cao, H. Wang, Enhanced
bactericidal toxicity of silver nanoparticles by the antibiotic gentamicin,
Environ. Sci.: Nano 3 (2016) 788–798.
[26] R.J. Worthington, C. Melander, Combination approaches to combat multidrug-
resistant bacteria, Trends Biotechnol. 31 (2013) 177–184.
[27] J. Zhang, Y.P. Chen, K.P. Miller, M.S. Ganewatta, M. Bam, Y. Yan, M. Nagarkatti,
A.W. Decho, C. Tang, Antimicrobial metallopolymers and their bioconjugates
with conventional antibiotics against multidrug-resistant bacteria, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 136 (2014) 4873–4876.
[28] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, T.P. Lim, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Antimicrobial cluster
bombs: silver nanoclusters packed with daptomycin, ACS Nano 10 (2016)
7934–7942.
[29] Y. Zheng, L. Lai, W. Liu, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Recent advances in biomedical
applications of ﬂuorescent gold nanoclusters, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 242
(2017) 1–16.
[30] X. Yang, M. Yang, B. Pang, M. Vara, Y. Xia, Gold nanomaterials at work in
biomedicine, Chem. Rev. 115 (2015) 10410–10488.
[31] R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou, Y. Chen, Atomically precise colloidal metal
nanoclusters and nanoparticles: fundamentals and opportunities, Chem. Rev.
116 (2016) 10346–10413.
[32] J. Mei, N.L. Leung, R.T. Kwok, J.W. Lam, B.Z. Tang, Aggregation-induced
emission: together we shine united we soar, Chem. Rev. 115 (2015) 11718–
11940.
[33] J. Guo, X.L. Li, H. Nie, W. Luo, S. Gan, S. Hu, R. Hu, A. Qin, Z. Zhao, S.J. Su, B.Z.
Tang, Achieving high-performance nondoped OLEDs with extremely small
efﬁciency roll-off by combining aggregation-induced emission and thermally
activated delayed ﬂuorescence, Adv. Funct. Mater. 27 (2017) 1606458.
[34] Z. Zhang, R.T. Kwok, Y. Yu, B.Z. Tang, K.M. Ng, Aggregation-induced emission
luminogen-based
ﬂuorescence
detection
of
hypoxanthine:
a
probe
for
biomedical diagnosis of energy metabolism-related conditions, J. Mater.
Chem. B 6 (2018) 4575–4578.
[35] Z. Wang, C. Gui, E. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Li, A. Qin, Z. Zhao, Z. Yu, B.Z. Tang, Speciﬁc
Fluorescence probes for lipid droplets based on simple AIEgens, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 8 (2016) 10193–10200.
[36] Z. Luo, X. Yuan, Y. Yu, Q. Zhang, D.T. Leong, J.Y. Lee, J. Xie, From aggregation-
induced emission of Au(I)-thiolate complexes to ultrabright Au(0)@Au(I)-
thiolate core-shell nanoclusters, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 (2012) 16662–16670.
[37] X. Jia, J. Li, E. Wang, Cu nanoclusters with aggregation induced emission
enhancement, Small 9 (2013) 3873–3879.
[38] N. Goswami, Q. Yao, Z. Luo, J. Li, T. Chen, J. Xie, Luminescent metal nanoclusters
with aggregation-induced emission, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7 (2016) 962–975.
[39] D. Li, Z. Chen, X. Mei, Fluorescence enhancement for noble metal nanoclusters,
Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 250 (2017) 25–39.
[40] W.X. Wang, Y. Wu, H.W. Li, Regulation on the aggregation-induced emission
(AIE) of DNA-templated silver nanoclusters by BSA and its hydrolysates, J.
Colloid Interface Sci. 505 (2017) 577–584.
[41] B. Li, X. Wang, X. Shen, W. Zhu, L. Xu, X. Zhou, Aggregation-induced emission
from gold nanoclusters for use as a luminescence-enhanced nanosensor to
detect trace amounts of silver ions, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 467 (2016) 90–96.
[42] N. Goswami, F. Lin, Y. Liu, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Highly luminescent thiolated gold
nanoclusters impregnated in nanogel, Chem. Mater. 28 (2016) 4009–4016.
[43] H.H. Sayed, A.H. Shamroukh, A.E. Rashad, Synthesis and biological evaluation
of
some
pyrimidine,
pyrimido[2,1-b][1,3]thiazine
and
thiazolo[3,
2-a]
pyrimidine derivatives, Acta Pharm. 56 (2006) 231–244.
[44] Y. Li, Y. Tian, W. Zheng, Y. Feng, R. Huang, J. Shao, R. Tang, P. Wang, Y. Jia, J.
Zhang, W. Zheng, G. Yang, X. Jiang, Composites of bacterial cellulose and small
molecule-decorated gold nanoparticles for treating gram-negative bacteria-
infected wounds, Small 13 (2017) 1700130.
[45] Y. Cui, Y. Zhao, Y. Tian, W. Zhang, X. Lü, X. Jiang, The molecular mechanism of
action of bactericidal gold nanoparticles on Escherichia coli, Biomaterials 33
(2012) 2327–2333.
[46] U. Rajchakit, V. Sarojini, Recent developments in antimicrobial-peptide-
conjugated gold nanoparticles, Bioconjugate Chem. 28 (2017) 2673–2686.
[47] P. Kumar, A. Takayesu, U. Abbasi, M.T. Kalathottukaren, S. Abbina, J.N.
Kizhakkedathu, S.K. Straus, Antimicrobial peptide-polymer conjugates with
high activity: inﬂuence of polymer molecular weight and peptide sequence on
antimicrobial activity, proteolysis, and biocompatibility, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 9 (2017) 37575–37586.
[48] H. Takahashi, G.A. Caputo, S. Vemparala, K. Kuroda, Synthetic random
copolymers as a molecular platform to mimic host-defense antimicrobial
peptides, Bioconjugate Chem. 28 (2017) 1340–1350.
[49] J.N. Steenbergen, J. Alder, G.M. Thorne, F.P. Tally, Daptomycin: a lipopeptide
antibiotic for the treatment of serious gram-positive infections, J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 55 (2005) 283–288.
[50] C.F. Carpenter, H.F. Chambers, Daptomycin: another novel agent for treating
infections due to drug-resistant gram-positive pathogens, Clin. Infect. Dis. 38
(2004) 994–1000.
[51] Y. Zheng, W. Liu, Y. Chen, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Mercaptopyrimidine-directed gold
nanoclusters: a suitable ﬂuorescent probe for intracellular glutathione imaging
and selective cancer cell identiﬁcation, J. Mater. Chem. B 6 (2018) 3650–3654.
[52] Y. Zheng, C. Miao, H. Chen, F. Huang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen, L. Zhao, Endophytic fungi
harbored in Panax notoginseng: diversity and potential as biological control
agents against host plant pathogens of root-rot disease, J. Ginseng Res. 41
(2017) 353–360.
[53] A. Yahia-Ammar, D. Sierra, F. Mérola, N. Hildebrandt, X. Le Guével, Self-
assembled gold nanoclusters for bright ﬂuorescence imaging and enhanced
drug delivery, ACS Nano 10 (2016) 2591–2599.
[54] L. Lin, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, S. Zhao, Photoluminescence light-up detection
of zinc ion and imaging in living cells based on the aggregation induced
emission enhancement of glutathione-capped copper nanoclusters, Biosens.
Bioelectron. 94 (2017) 523–529.
[55] X. Liu, C. Shao, T. Chen, Z. He, G. Du, Stable silver nanoclusters with
aggregation-induced emission enhancement for detection of aluminum ion,
Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 278 (2019) 181–189.
[56] X. Dou, X. Yuan, Y. Yu, Z. Luo, Q. Yao, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Lighting up thiolated
Au@Ag nanoclusters via aggregation-induced emission, Nanoscale 6 (2014)
157–161.
[57] Y. Negishi, K. Nobusada, T. Tsukuda, Glutathione-protected gold clusters
revisited: bridging the gap between gold(I)-thiolate complexes and thiolate-
protected gold nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127 (2005) 5261–5270.
10
Y. Zheng et al. / Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 546 (2019) 1–10