Hemoglobin-mediated synthesis of iron-hybridized gold nanoclusters for 
colorimetric biosensing and antibacterial wound therapy
Aisha Kanwal a,c,d,1, Juanhua Tian b,e,*,1, Qingyue Yang a,1, Yixiang Chen a, Arif Muhammad a,  
Khian-Hooi Chew d,f, Zihao Li b,e, Zhongli Lei a, Peng Yang a,**, Hao Ren a,**
a Key Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, Ministry of Education; Xi’an Key Laboratory of Polymeric Soft Matter; International Joint Research Center on 
Functional Fiber and Soft Smart Textile, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an, 710119, China
b Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University, West Five Road, No. 157, Xi’an, 710004, China
c Key Lab of Biomass Chemical Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310028, Zhejiang, 
China
d Zhejiang Expo New Materials Co., Ltd., Wenzhou, 325802, China
e Key Laboratory of Surgical Critical Care and Life Support (Xi’an Jiaotong University), Ministry of Education, China
f Key Laboratory of Optical Field Manipulation of Zhejiang Province, Department of Physics, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, 310018, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Iron-hybridized gold nanoclusters
Peroxidase-like activity
Biomolecules detection
Angiogenesis
Antibacterial effect
A B S T R A C T
The growing threat of antibiotic resistance calls for safe and multifunctional antimicrobial alternatives. Here, we 
report a green, one-pot synthesis of iron-doped gold nanoclusters (Hb–Au/FeNCs), using hemoglobin as a bio- 
reductant, stabilizer, and endogenous iron source. The resulting nanoclusters exhibit enhanced peroxidase-like 
catalytic activity and high stability. This facilitates ultrasensitive colorimetric detection of hydrogen peroxide 
and uric acid with detection limits of 0.91 × 10−6 M and 1.06 × 10−6 M, respectively. Hb–Au/FeNCs 
demonstrate broad-spectrum antibacterial efficacy against both Gram-negative (E. coli) and Gram-positive 
(S. aureus) bacteria by inducing membrane disruption. In a murine skin infection model, the nanoclusters not 
only achieve effective bacterial clearance but also accelerate wound healing and angiogenesis, as confirmed by 
H&E, Masson staining, and immunofluorescence labeling (CD31, CD45, CD68). Importantly, cytocompatibility 
assays reveal negligible toxicity toward mammalian cells, supporting their therapeutic safety. Furthermore, the 
Hb-coated Au/FeNCs surface partially resists nonspecific adsorption of other proteins (e.g., BSA, insulin, lyso­
zyme), ensuring colloidal stability in physiological environments. This biocompatible, enzyme-mimetic nano­
platform offers a sustainable and safe alternative to conventional antibiotics, with integrated diagnostic, 
antimicrobial, and regenerative functionalities.
1. Introduction
The accelerating emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria has 
become a pressing global health crisis, largely driven by the misuse and 
overuse of conventional antibiotics [1]. This challenge underscores the 
urgent need for alternative antibacterial strategies that are effective and 
less prone to resistance development [2]. In this context, metal nano­
clusters (MNCs), particularly those exhibiting enzyme-mimicking cata­
lytic activity (nanozymes), have attracted significant attention due to 
their broad-spectrum antibacterial properties, high surface area-to- 
volume ratios, and superior physicochemical stability under biological 
conditions [3]. Among them, gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) have emerged 
as a versatile platform owing to their chemical inertness, ultrasmall size, 
tunable surface chemistry, and excellent biocompatibility [4–6]. Pio­
neering studies from Xie’s group first demonstrated the antibacterial 
potential of ultrasmall gold and silver nanoclusters [7]. As these nano­
clusters approach sub-nanometer dimensions, their large surface area 
enhances reactivity and facilitates penetration into bacterial cells [8]. 
AuNCs also exhibit antibacterial properties against Gram-positive and 
Gram-negative bacteria, depending on the quality of the surface- 
stabilizing ligand/protein [9,10]. They can kill bacteria by damaging 
their cell membranes, making reactive oxygen species (ROS), and 
* Correspondence to: J. Tian, Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University, West Five Road, No. 157, Xi’an, 710004, China.
** Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: tianjuanhuaxj@163.com (J. Tian), pengyang@snnu.edu.cn (P. Yang), renhao@snnu.edu.cn (H. Ren). 
1 A.K., T.J. and Q.Y. contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Chemical Engineering Journal
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cej
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2025.170293
Received 11 June 2025; Received in revised form 9 October 2025; Accepted 27 October 2025  
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
Available online 3 November 2025 
1385-8947/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

stopping the replication of bacterial DNA, mechanisms that collectively 
lower the likelihood of resistance compared with traditional antibiotics 
[11].
Despite these benefits, the catalytic and antibacterial performance of 
NCs under physiological conditions remains challenging. Reducing 
cluster size alone is insufficient to maximize activity, and their high 
surface energy often leads to the undesired adsorption of bio­
macromolecules such as proteins and polysaccharides in vivo, forming a 
corona that hampers both catalytic efficiency and biological stability 
[12]. Moreover, toxicity is another concern for nanomaterials. For 
instance, although silver nanoparticles are well known for their anti­
bacterial activity, their medical use is limited by cytotoxicity. Similarly, 
copper and other metal-based nanoparticles may also present safety 
risks [13]. To address these limitations, recent studies have explored 
metal hybridization or organic/inorganic coatings to enhance antibac­
terial activity and minimize the toxicity. For example, thiol-protected Ag 
nanoclusters and glutathione-protected AgNCs have demonstrated 
improved antibacterial properties, including efficacy against multidrug- 
resistant bacteria [14]. Glutathione-conjugated silver nanoclusters 
(GSH@AgNCs) exert bactericidal effects by damaging cell membranes 
and disrupting biofilms in E. coli and S. aureus [15]. On the other hand, 
different types of biohybrids, including Apoferritin (Ft)-Au nanozymes 
[16,17], BSA-Au/graphene oxide [18], BSA-AuNCs [19,20], and other 
hybrid gold nanoclusters have shown enhanced antibacterial activity. 
More complex architectures, including silver‑gold nanohybrids [21], 
Janus nanoparticles [22], Au@CeO2@Pt nanozymes [23], MOF and 
MOF@Au-based nanozymes [24,25], MOF-MIL-125(Ti)@Au hybrid 
[26], MXene@hemin-Au [27], PtRu/C3N5 [28] PdFe/GDY [29] and 
ACPCAH nanozmyes [30], continue to expand the scope of nanozyme- 
enabled antibacterial strategies. Moreover, single-metal nanozymes 
demonstrate diminished catalytic activity owing to ineffective electron 
transport. Researchers have utilized approaches such as employing 
copper(II) ions to boost keratin-capped gold nanoclusters [31] or 
alloying gold with platinum to enhance catalytic performance in order 
to improve peroxidase-like activity [32]. Nevertheless, these approaches 
may pose issues like increased toxicity or synthetic intricacy.
Inspired by recent advances, we developed iron-hybridized gold 
nanoclusters (Hb–Au/FeNCs) through a green, one-pot method using 
hemoglobin as a natural reductant, stabilizer, and iron source. This 
biomimetic design yields ultrasmall AuNCs embedded with Fe centers 
that enhance peroxidase-like (POD-like) activity through Fenton-like 
reactions, generating ROS for stronger antibacterial effects [33]. This 
design improves stability and enhances peroxidase-like activity, while 
the intrinsic biocompatibility of both AuNCs and hemoglobin ensures 
low cytotoxicity, as confirmed by in vitro tests. Additionally, unlike some 
nanomaterials that act only on specific bacterial strains [34], Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs disrupt the membranes of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative 
bacteria, making them a promising candidate for treating polymicrobial 
infections and reducing the risk of resistance. In addition, the unfolded 
hemoglobin shell formed during synthesis partially prevents nonspecific 
adsorption of common proteins such as BSA, insulin, and lysozyme, 
thereby maintaining catalytic activity and colloidal stability under 
biological conditions.
Beyond antibacterial action, the strong POD-like activity of Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs enables highly sensitive colorimetric biosensing of oxidative 
biomarkers such as uric acid and hydrogen peroxide, with detection 
limits reaching as low as 1.06 × 10−6 M and 0.91 × 10−6 M, respec­
tively. Those values surpass many previously reported nanozyme sys­
tems. Moreover, their catalytic function may also promote angiogenesis, 
supporting wound healing. Such dual functionality, combining therapy 
and diagnosis, is particularly valuable in clinical scenarios involving 
infectious wound management, where real-time monitoring of inflam­
mation or oxidative stress may be required. Beyond antibacterial ac­
tivity, the peroxidase-like (POD-like) function of Hb–Au/FeNCs may 
also contribute to angiogenesis, making them promising candidates for 
multifunctional wound treatment. Altogether, Hb–Au/FeNCs represent 
a significant advancement in antibacterial nanomaterials by addressing 
the key deficiencies of current approaches. Their distinctive character­
istics, including an intrinsic iron supply, elevated peroxidase-like ac­
tivity, broad-spectrum antibacterial effectiveness, stability under 
physiological conditions, minimal cytotoxicity, and resistance to protein 
adsorption, render them an excellent option for addressing bacterial 
infections and facilitating wound healing. Moreover, this work in­
troduces a safe, efficient, and multifunctional nanozyme platform that 
integrates catalytic diagnostics, potent antimicrobial action, and wound 
healing potential into a single hybrid material (Scheme 1).
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Synthesis and characterization of Hb–Au/FeNCs
The fabrication of Hb–Au/FeNCs and their applications are illus­
trated in Scheme 1. The hemoglobin and Au precursors are combined 
directly to prepare the Hb–Au/FeNCs without any other reducing or 
stabilizing agent. Ultraviolet-visible (UV–vis) spectroscopy is utilized to 
detect resulting Hb–Au/FeNCs (Fig. S1), where the spectra of Hb show 
a prominent Soret band at 405 nm. Following the synthesis of Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs, the Soret band signal intensity dropped, and the position of its 
peak blue shifted from 405 to 395 nm, representing the change in the 
hydrophobicity of the heme groups in Hb [35]. There was no additional 
peak around 520 nm, proving that the as-synthesized HbAu/FeNCs were 
homogeneous without gold nanoparticles (AuNPs). Furthermore, in the 
synthesis of Hb–Au/Fe NCs, we systematically optimized key parame­
ters like pH, reaction duration, and temperature. The pH was adjusted 
between 5 and 9. The optimal nanoclusters were achieved at pH 8–9, 
while no detectable NCs were produced at pH 6–7. A reaction duration 
of 16 h and a temperature of 37 ◦C yielded well-dispersed and stable 
nanoclusters (Fig. S2). The pH adjustment was essential to facilitate the 
reduction of HAuCl4 and the formation of nanoclusters. NaOH creates an 
alkaline environment that reduces gold ions (Au3+) to gold (Au0). It 
enhances the reactivity of hemoglobin’s Trp and Tyr residues and in­
duces conformational changes in the protein [36]. These effects control 
the size, stability, and fluorescence of the resulting gold nanoclusters 
(Hb–AuNCs). The pH was maintained around 8–9 to ensure optimal 
conditions for this reaction. Additionally, to evaluate the reproducibility 
of the synthesis method, we independently prepared the Hb–Au/FeNCs 
three times. We measured the UV–vis spectra for each batch, achieving 
consistent results across all preparations (Fig. S3). This illustrates the 
reliability and reproducibility of the synthesis process, thereby rein­
forcing the credibility of the method for producing Hb–Au/FeNCs.
The shape and size distribution of the Hb–Au/FeNCs were examined 
using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), as depicted in Fig. 1A. 
The Hb–Au/FeNCs were evenly spread, having a quasi-spherical shape 
with a small average diameter of 1.8 ± 0.5 nm, according to the asso­
ciated size distribution histogram (Fig. 1A, inset). Also, the elemental 
composition of Hb–Au/FeNCs was assessed via elemental TEM mapping 
and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The findings demon­
strated the existence of C, O, Fe, S, and Au, signifying the homogeneous 
distribution of Au and corroborating the presence of Fe and protein 
chains within the Hb–Au/FeNCs (Figs. S4 and S5). Further, the newly 
synthesized Hb–Au/FeNCs expose bluish-green fluorescence under UV 
light (365 nm) with excitation and emission maxima at 453 nm and 510 
nm, respectively (Fig. 1B). We have also evaluated the fluorescence 
properties of the Hb–Au/FeNCs by examining their fluorescence 
spectra across various pH values (Fig. S6). The results showing that the 
basic pH has higher fluorescence emission intensity.
By evaluating X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) of the 
Hb–Au/FeNCs, the elements of C, N, O, Au, and Fe were the most 
abundant. Fig. 1C shows the Au 4f spectrum of metallic gold. The 
characteristic peaks at 84.46 eV and 88.15 eV can be attributed to the 
spin-orbit coupling state of Au4f7/2
0 
and Au 4f5/2
0 , respectively [37]. The 
binding energies at 284.8, 285.7 eV, and 289.05 eV in the C 1s spectra 
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
2 

were assigned to the C–C, C–O, and C––O groups of the protein 
component (Fig. S7A). The N 1s (amide) peaks (unprotonated and 
protonated amine/amide species) at 399.3 and 400.7 eV (Fig. S7B), and 
the O 1s peaks (C––O and O–C–O) groups at 531.03 and 535.3 eV (Fig. 
S7C), respectively, further supported this [38]. In addition to elements 
in the protein backbone, some additional peaks were seen at 49.7 and 
53.0 eV, respectively, corresponding to the Fe 3p orbitals (Fig. 1D) [39]. 
In addition, the concentration of Au and Fe of the newly prepared 
Hb–Au/FeNCs was determined as 61.3 ppm and 2.1 ppm by inductively 
coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) (Fig. 1E). Both 
high-resolution XPS and ICP-OES results confirmed the presence of Fe in 
Hb–Au/FeNCs, highlighting its crucial role in initiating the Fenton 
reaction.
In the FTIR spectroscopy of dry powder of native Hb and Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs (Fig. 1F & Fig. S8), the amide I band at 1655 cm−1 for native Hb 
is correlated with C––O stretching (70–85 %) and is closely linked to 
backbone conformation, showing that native Hb is in an α-helix-rich 
conformation (Fig. S8) [40]. To get further information on the sec­
ondary structure, peak-fitting of the amide I region of the FTIR spectra of 
Hb–Au/FeNCs was performed (Fig. 1F). The deconvoluted FTIR 
spectra of the amide I band revealed the presence of β-sheet stacking 
(1635 and 1619 cm−1) in the Hb–Au/FeNCs [41]. Therefore, it is 
conceivable that certain α-helix configurations changed into β-sheet 
structures during the formation of Hb–Au/FeNCs. Moreover, the 
structural changes of Hb in Hb–Au/FeNCs compared to the natural 
protein were evaluated using CD spectroscopy. The presence of two 
distinct negative peaks at 208 and 222 nm distinguishes the native he­
moglobin CD spectra (Fig. 1G). These bands are typical of proteins with 
high helical content. The first peak, with a wavelength of about 222 nm, 
is associated with α-helix n-π* transitions, whereas the peak at 208 nm is 
associated with π-π* transitions for both α-helix and random coil [42]. 
The intensity of peaks at 208 is reduced in the Hb–Au/FeNCs system 
compared to native Hb. There is also a slight shift toward a lower 
wavelength (205 nm) from the typical 208 nm band, while the peak at 
222 nm has almost disappeared in Hb–Au/FeNCs, revealing the loss of 
the α-helix shape and the emergence of protein unfolding [43]. This 
structural alteration in hemoglobin during the one-pot synthesis 
significantly influences the biomineralization of Hb–Au/FeNCs. The 
alkaline conditions employed in the synthesis likely induce the unfold­
ing of Hb [44,45]. This process exposes hydrophobic patches and spe­
cific reactive residues, such as tyrosine, which are crucial for interacting 
with gold ions (AuCl-). The exposed regions facilitate the conversion of 
gold ions into stable gold nanoclusters, which form the key core of the 
nanocatalysts. The unfolding may facilitate the interaction of iron ions 
with gold nanoclusters, thereby promoting Fe doping in the Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs structure [46].
Moreover, the secondary structural components of native Hb and 
Hb–Au/FeNCs systems were analyzed via convolutional deep neural 
network (CDNN) algorithms, and the results are shown in Fig. 1H. Hb 
has 97.1 % α-helix structures, 0.8 % β-sheets, 5.1 % β-turns, and 2 % 
random coils in their native shape. In the case of the Hb–Au/FeNCs 
system, the proportion of α-helix decreases to 20 %, and that of β-sheet 
and random coil increases to 38 % and 40 %, respectively, indicating a 
conformational change from α-helix to β-sheet and random coil structure 
during the reducing process. The β-sheets formed during the unfolding 
of Hb can enhance the stability of the resulting Hb–Au/FeNCs. β-sheet 
structures are recognized for imparting structural stability and pre­
venting the aggregation of nanoclusters [45].
More importantly, due to the presence of the Hb protein chain out of 
Hb −Au/FeNCs, the adsorption mass of Hb–Au/FeNCs of the biological 
solution is significantly lower than that of the blank gold interface. 
Through QCM-D testing (Figs. 1I, S9 and S10), we found that the 
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of (A) the synthesis procedure of Hb–Au/FeNCs and (B) their application for sensing and antibacterial activity.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
3 

Hb–Au/FeNCs-coated chip can reduce the adsorption mass of insulin, 
fibrinogen (FGA), bovine serum albumin (BSA), and sodium alginate 
(SA) by 25–70 % compared with the blank Au surface. This indirectly 
demonstrates that the nanozymes prepared by this method may have 
more stable catalytic conditions in vivo, for they partially resist protein 
adsorption and are less likely to form a protein corona.
2.2. Peroxidase-like catalytic activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs
The large surface area and the inert chemical property of Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs provide great potential for acting as nanozymes. First, in order to 
assess the peroxidase (POD)-like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs, typical 
colorimetric assays of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB), 2,2′-azino- 
bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid diammonium salt (ABTS), 
and o-phenylenediamine (OPD) were used in an H2O2-mediated reaction 
in PBS (Fig. 2A). The POD-like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs would 
generate •OH, which then catalyzes the oxidation of TMB to produce 
blue-colored oxidized TMB (oxTMB), having a characteristic absorbance 
at 370 and 652 nm, ABTS to produce green oxABTS with the 
characteristic peak at 415 nm, and OPD to produce yellow oxOPD with 
the characteristic peak at 450 nm, as demonstrated in Figs. 2A and S11. 
Control experiments showed that none of these substrates were oxidized 
when only TMB, H2O2, or Hb–Au/FeNCs were present. Factors such as 
the impact of pH, temperature, TMB, and H2O2 dependency on the POD- 
like activity of the Hb–Au/FeNCs were also examined to optimize the 
reaction conditions. The maximum catalytic activity was observed at pH 
5.0, 50 ◦C, 0.5 mM, and 3.0 mM, respectively (Figs. 2C, D, and S12). We 
also compared the catalytic activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs and the naturally 
occurring enzyme horseradish peroxidase (HRP) at different tempera­
tures and pHs. Fig. 2C and D show how the Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozyme 
can dramatically minimize the decline of enzyme activity due to varia­
tions in pH and temperature and exhibit greater tolerance over a wider 
pH and temperature range.
In contrast, the natural HRP enzyme starts to lose its catalytic activity 
when the temperature and pH fluctuate from their optimal values, 
demonstrating that the reported Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozymes maintain 
remarkable catalytic performance throughout crucial reaction circum­
stances. The effects of TMB and H2O2 concentrations on the peroxidase- 
Fig. 1. (A) TEM image of Hb–Au/FeNCs. Inset: particle size distribution based on TEM image; (B) Excitation and emission spectra of Hb–Au/FeNCs (0.5 mg/mL). 
Inset: photos of Hb–Au/FeNCs under daylight (left) and UV light (right); (C, D) XPS spectra of Au 4f, Fe 3p of Hb–Au/FeNCs, respectively; (E) (F) The deconvolution 
of the amide I band in the FTIR spectrum of the Hb–Au/FeNCs; (G) CD spectra of native Hb and Hb–Au/FeNCs (0.2 mg/mL); (H) Different conformations’ relative 
contents in native Hb and the Hb–Au/FeNCs system, as shown by the CDNN algorithm, derived from CD Spectra; (I) Summary of adsorption mass of different 
biomacromolecule solutions on blank Au and Hb −
Au/FeNCs coated chip.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
4 

Fig. 2. (A) Schematic illustration of the POD-like catalytic mechanism of Hb–Au/FeNC nanozymes. (B) UV–vis spectra of TMB oxidation catalyzed by Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs (inset: digital images of each group). (C) POD-like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs and HRP at different pH values, showing enhanced pH stability of Hb–Au/FeNCs 
due to the metal nanocluster core. (D) POD-like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs and HRP at different temperatures, indicating improved thermal stability from the 
protective effect of gold nanoclusters. (E) Steady-state kinetic analysis of Hb–Au/FeNCs at varying TMB concentrations (inset: enhanced substrate affinity compared 
to HRP). (F) Lineweaver–Burk plot for TMB oxidation. (G) Steady-state kinetic analysis at varying H2O2 concentrations. (H) Lineweaver–Burk plot for H2O2. (I) 
Comparison of Km values (TMB) between Hb–Au/FeNCs and reported nanozymes. Flower-like iron single-atomnanozymes (Fe/NC–F) [58]; Iron oxide/carbon 
nanozymes (FeOx/C) [59]; Aptamer-Modified Au/Fe3O4 (Apt-Au@Fe3O4 NPs) [56]; Gold Nanocluster-Based Nanozyme (AuNCs) [57] Nitrogen-doped amorphous 
carbon(SAF NCs) [60]; Fe–Mn bimetallic nanozyme (FeMnzyme) [61]; BSA‑gold nanozymes (BSA-Au-NZs) [62]; Hemoglobin–gold nanoparticle (Hb–AuNP) [54]; 
Fe–N4 single site embedded graphene (Fe–N-rGO) [63]; Formamide-converted transition metal–nitrogen–carbon (f-FeNC) [64]; (J) Demonstration of the catalase- 
like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozymes.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
5 

like activity are shown in Fig. S12. It has been found that the activity 
keeps rising as the H2O2 concentrations increase, hits a plateau at higher 
H2O2 substrate concentrations (up to 4.0 mM), and subsequently drops 
on further increases in H2O2 concentrations (>4.0 mM). Similarly, 
relative activity increases with TMB concentrations, finally plateauing at 
greater TMB concentrations. This can be attributed to the catalytic sites 
on the Hb–Au/FeNCs competing with each other when there are high 
concentrations of H2O2 and TMB around [47,48]. All the above studies 
demonstrated that the Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozymes had high POD-like 
catalytic activity to catalyze H2O2 and generate •OH.
Next, in order to further examine the catalytic activity of Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs nanozymes, the Michaelis-Menten equation was used to calculate 
steady-state catalytic kinetics under different substrates (TMB and 
H2O2). The maximum reaction rate (Vmax) and Michaelis constant (Km) 
for H2O2 and TMB substrates are determined using a Lineweaver-Burk 
plot [49]. The Km and Vmax values obtained for the H2O2 and TMB are 
3.783 and 0.0108 mM and 126 × 10−8 and 10 × 10−8 M s−1, respec­
tively, as illustrated in Fig. 2E-H. The reported Km value of the Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs nanozymes for H2O2 was found to be comparable to that of HRP 
(Km, 3.70 mM), whereas the Km value of the Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozymes 
for TMB was approximately 40 times lower than that of HRP (as shown 
in Fig. 2E, inset), demonstrating an excellent catalytic achievement 
compared to that of the natural enzyme (HRP) and most of the reported 
POD-like nanozymes to date, as shown in Fig. 2I. In addition, we esti­
mated the turnover number Kcat of Hb–Au/FeNCs by using the equa­
tion, Kcat = Vmax/[E], where Vmax is the maximum reaction velocity and 
[E] is the molar concentration of nanozymes [50]. The nanoparticle- 
tracking analysis (NTA) was used to determine the molar concentra­
tion of Hb–Au/FeNCs (1.9236 × 10−17 M).
The calculated turnover number (Kcat), known as substrate conver­
sions per second for a specific enzyme concentration, and Kcat/Km 
values, also often used to characterize the catalytic efficiency, of 
Hb–Au/FeNCs for TMB and H2O2 substrates were 5.20 × 109 s−1, 4.81 
× 1011 mM−1 s-1, and 6.55 × 1010 s−1, 1.73 × 1010 mM−1 s−1, respec­
tively. The greater the value of Kcat, the higher the enzymatic activity. 
The parameters exceed the values reported in the literature to date, 
indicating that the Hb–Au/FeNCs had better POD-like catalytic activity 
than most nanozymes (Table S1). Furthermore, we also determined the 
specific activity of our Hb–Au/FeNCs to facilitate standardized com­
parisons with other reported materials. The nanozyme activity unit (U) 
and specific activity (SA) were determined using the following formula 
[51]. 
Unanozyme = V/ε × l × ΔA/Δt 
where Unanozyme denotes the catalytic activity of the nanozymes 
(μmol⋅min−1), V represents the total volume of the reaction solution 
(μL), ε is the molar absorptivity of TMB at 652 nm (39,000 M−1. cm−1), l 
is the path length of light transmission (cm), and A is the absorbance 
value after subtracting the blank reference. ΔA/Δt is the initial rate of 
change of the OD value in relation to time at 652 nm for 1 min. 
SAnanozyme = Unanozyme/
[m]
SA denotes the unit of activity per milligram of nanozyme (U⋅mg−1), 
and [m] represents the weight of nanozymes utilized in the process 
(mg). Hb–Au/FeNCs exhibits a specific activity (SA) of 5.66 U mg−1, 
surpassing various reported nanozymes (Fig. S13 and Table S2), 
thereby indicating superior enzyme-like activities of Hb–Au/FeNCs. 
Based on the existence of Fe in Hb–Au/FeNCs (Fig. 1E), it can be 
inferred that the heme group that exists in Hb could serve as a beneficial 
catalyst for the Fenton reaction, enhancing the catalytic activity and 
creating sites for the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) into 
hydroxyl (•OH) radicals [52–54]. The lower Km value of Hb–Au/FeNCs 
signifies a greater substrate affinity compared to HRP, primarily due to 
iron doping. Iron improves catalytic activity by offering active sites for 
substrate binding and electron transport, and in combination with gold, 
establishes a synergistic effect that amplifies surface reactivity and fa­
cilitates chemical reactions. The size and structure of nanoclusters, 
surface characteristics including the presence of hemoglobin as a sta­
bilizing agent, and local micro environmental parameters such as pH, 
and temperature additionally affect performance. The variations in 
enzyme-substrate interactions between Hb–Au/FeNCs and HRP also 
play a role. Although iron doping is the key factor, these supplementary 
elements collectively influence catalytic efficiency, requiring future 
research to optimize performance. Numerous studies have provided the 
Km values of gold nanozymes with peroxidase-mimetic activity. For 
example, protamine‑gold nanoclusters (PRT-AuNCs) show an even 
higher affinity toward TMB than natural HRP, with an apparent Km of 
0.169 mM. Moreover, hybrid nanozymes integrating the characteristics 
of both iron and gold have been investigated [55]. Aptamer-modified 
Au@Fe3O4 nanoparticles show peroxidase-like activity for the detec­
tion of E. coli O157:H7, with Km values of 0.724 mM in the absence and 
0.978 mM in the presence of the target bacteria [56]. For instance, a 
study by Ma et al. showed that the Km value of only AuNCs nanozymes 
for TMB was roughly 1.9 times lower than that of HRP, while the Km 
value of our iron-hybridized gold nanocluster system (Hb–Au/FeNCs 
nanozymes) for TMB was nearly 40 times lower than that of HRP [57].
A possible hypothesis for the POD-like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs 
stems from the catalytic decomposition of H2O2 to generate •OH. As a 
result, fluorescent experiments were conducted to determine the pro­
duction of •OH. As illustrated in Fig. S14, in the presence of H2O2, the 
Hb–Au/FeNCs can convert the non-fluorescent molecule terephthalic 
acid (TA) to the highly fluorescent 2-hydroxy terephthalic acid (TAOH), 
which displays a distinctive fluorescence emission at 426 nm. The 
generation of •OH by the Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozymes in the presence of 
H2O2 was further demonstrated using a methylene blue (MB) dye 
degradation assay (Fig. S15). The absorbance of MB steadily decreased 
as the reaction time was extended, indicating that the Hb–Au/FeNCs 
nanozymes were catalyzing the generation of •OH (Fig. S15B). Addi­
tionally, a second methylene blue (MB) decolorization experiment was 
conducted utilizing various Hb–Au/FeNCs concentrations. Fig. S15C 
shows that the absorbance of MB decreased steadily as the concentration 
of Hb–Au/FeNCs increased, indicating that the Hb–Au/FeNCs nano­
zymes were catalyzing the production of •OH.
Next, UV–vis spectroscopy was used to measure catalase-like activity 
(CAT) since the absorbance of H2O2 at 240 nm decreases with decom­
position (Fig. S16). Moreover, the rate of H2O2 breakdown was found to 
increase with increasing pH for Hb–Au/FeNCs (Fig. 2J). When 
Hb–Au/FeNCs were introduced to the tubes containing H2O2, 
numerous gas bubbles were seen under the alkaline pH (i.e., pH 9 and 
10), as shown in the inset photos in Fig. S16, implying that Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs also exhibited intrinsic CAT-like activity, which catalyzes the 
dissociation of H2O2 to generate O2 and H2O in the basic conditions.
2.3. Colorimetric detection of H2O2 and uric acid
Numerous biological enzymatic processes produce hydrogen 
peroxide as a byproduct. It also contributes to cell signaling, oxidizes 
biomolecules, and denatures proteins, which can lead to diseases like 
cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, and oxidative stress. We represent 
hydrogen peroxide detection dependent upon the peroxidase activity of 
the nanozymes to illustrate the potential application of Hb–Au/FeNCs 
nanozymes. The TMB catalytic reaction was used as the initial basis for 
assessing the H2O2 bioassay. The presence of Hb–Au/FeNCs caused the 
color of the TMB solution to change from colorless to blue (Fig. 3A), 
demonstrating the catalytic activity. Various amounts of H2O2 (0.005 to 
5.0 mM) were introduced to the Hb–Au/FeNCs system to determine the 
sensitivity of H2O2 detection (Fig. 3B & C). The limit of detection (LOD) 
was determined to be 1.06 × 10−6 M (LOD = 3σ/slope, where σ is the 
standard deviation of the absorbance blank), and the linear range was 
computed to be between 5.0 × 10−6 and 3.0 × 10−4 M (Fig. 3C, inset). 
It’s worth mentioning that this LOD ranked at the top level among 
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
6 

reported colorimetric H2O2 nanozymes (Table S3).
As H2O2 is the primary product of the uricase-catalyzed reaction, a 
colorimetric approach for the detection of uric acid (UA) can be devel­
oped by combining the uricase (UOx) catalysis of UA with the Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs (Fig. 3D). UOx accelerated the oxidation of UA to allantoin and 
H2O2 in the presence of O2 in a buffer solution with a pH of 8.5. 
Following successful catalysis by Hb–Au/FeNCs, the enzymatically 
produced H2O2 successfully oxidized TMB, resulting in the creation of a 
blue color. The absorbance was significantly enhanced as the UA con­
centration was added, as illustrated in Fig. 3E & F. The LOD was 
determined to be 0.91 × 10−6 M (S/N = 3), and the linear range between 
1.0 × 10−6 and 5.50 × 10−4 M (Fig. 3F, inset), which is more effective 
than most of the previously reported colorimetric detections for uric acid 
[65,66] (Table S4). Moreover, in order to comprehend the improved 
sensing capabilities of Hb–Au/FeNCs in detecting H2O2 and uric acid, 
we addressed the role of the Fenton reaction, which is triggered by iron 
doping in gold nanoclusters. The inclusion of iron in Hb–Au/FeNCs aids 
in the decomposition of H2O2 into reactive hydroxyl radicals (•OH), 
thereby promoting a catalytic cycle that improves the colorimetric 
response. Iron doping enhances the catalytic activity and increases the 
electrical conductivity and reactivity of gold nanoclusters’ surfaces. This 
change speeds up the transfer of charges and improves interactions with 
analytes. This makes it easier to sense quickly and accurately, especially 
for H2O2 and uric acid, by making oxidative reactions stronger at the 
sensor surface. The catalytic and mechanistic enhancements account for 
the superior sensitivity and detection limits noted in the colorimetric 
assays for H2O2 and uric acid, with Hb–Au/FeNCs exhibiting markedly 
improved performance.
Further testing was done on the selectivity of Hb–Au/FeNCs 
nanozymes. Remarkably, the Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozymes have high 
specificity for uric acid compared to other substances that interfere, such 
as glycine, urea, glucose, NaCl, tryptophan, cysteine, glutathione, and 
tyrosine. Additionally, the combination of uric acid and a 5 times higher 
amount of other interfering substances was also evaluated. Fig. S17 
shows that even though the concentrations of other substances were five 
times higher than those of uric acid, they did not affect the detection of 
uric acid. The stability of Hb–Au/FeNCs is one of their key advantages 
over peroxidase enzymes. So, the stability of the Hb–Au/FeNCs during 
long-term storage conditions was investigated. The POD-like activity of 
Hb–Au/FeNCs was not observed to have decreased after storage for 8 
months at a lab bench; in fact, it was maintained at about the same level 
as before (Fig. S18).
Moreover, the sensing system successfully measured UA in spiked 
human serum samples. The effectiveness of this method was evaluated 
using the standard addition technique. To assess precision, the UA 
concentration in a human serum sample was determined with the 
Hb–Au/FeNCs-based nanozyme probe and compared to readings from a 
standard laboratory uric acid meter (SANNUO EA-11). The hospital’s 
instrument measured the UA concentration at 325 μM. Table S5 displays 
the UA concentrations in serum that had been 10 times diluted when 
discovered by the Hb–Au/FeNCs-based nanozymes probe. The assay 
results showed a strong correlation with the hospital’s standard instru­
ment, confirming the method’s accuracy for UA detection in serum 
samples. Additionally, with a relative standard deviation (RSD) of 
1.2–2.3 %, this approach yields an acceptable recovery ranging from 97 
% to 101.4 %.
Fig. 3. The reaction mechanisms and detection capacities of two distinct bioassays: (A) Mechanisms for the detection of H2O2. (B) The UV–vis absorbance spectra of 
a system including Hb–Au/FeNCs, TMB, and varying H2O2 concentrations. Inset: photos of color alterations for the relevant concentrations of H2O2; (C) A change in 
absorbance when H2O2 concentration increases. Inset: the linear absorbance curve at H2O2 concentrations ranging from 0.005 to 0.3 mM; (D) Mechanisms for the 
detection of uric acid. (E) The UV–vis absorbance spectra of a system including Hb–Au/FeNCs, TMB, and H2O2 at varying uric acid concentrations. Inset: photos of 
color alterations for the relevant uric acid concentrations; (F) A change in absorbance when uric acid concentration increases. Inset: the linear absorbance curve at 
uric acid concentrations ranging from 5.0 to 550 μM.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
7 

2.4. Assessment of antibacterial activity in vitro
Metal nanoparticles (MNPs) have been reported to potentially 
rupture bacterial cell membranes or induce structural changes in cellular 
organelles. Therefore, it is plausible that our Hb–Au/FeNCs also exhibit 
antibacterial properties, combining physical and chemical mechanisms 
such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, metabolic disruption, 
and membrane rupture [67–69]. These processes require close contact 
with bacteria, made possible by the trapping action of Hb–Au/FeNCs 
(Fig. 4A). Two representative bacterial strains, E. coli and S. aureus, 
were used to assess antibacterial activity. As shown in Fig. 4B-D, the 
viability of E. coli and S. aureus decreased with increasing concentrations 
of Hb–Au/FeNCs. A nearly complete antibacterial effect was achieved 
at concentrations of 100 μg/mL for E. coli and 80 μg/mL for S. aureus. All 
experiments were performed three times to ensure the accuracy of the 
results.
To further support the findings above, we conducted a morpholog­
ical assessment of bacteria using SEM and TEM to examine the 
interaction between bacteria and nanoclusters. The bacterial 
morphology across different groups is shown in Fig. 4E & F. E. coli, and 
S. aureus typically displayed rod-shaped and spherical structures, 
respectively, with smooth and intact cell walls. In the absence of 
nanoclusters, the bacteria appeared well-spaced (Fig. 4E,a, f). However, 
upon the application of varying concentrations of Hb–Au/FeNCs, the 
bacteria clustered, and their membranes became rough, damaged, and 
shriveled. In severe cases, the cells were deformed, shattered, and 
destroyed, as seen in Fig. 4E(b-e & g-j). Fig. 4F (a-f) illustrate TEM 
images of E. coli and S. aureus treated with Hb–Au/FeNCs at concen­
trations of 100 μg/mL and 80 μg/mL, respectively. The cellular integrity 
of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria was significantly 
compromised, likely due to the trapping effect of Hb–Au/FeNCs. 
Additionally, to evaluate the ROS-generating ability of Hb–Au/FeNCs, 
a DCFH-DA fluorescence assay was conducted. DCFH-DA, a nonfluo­
rescent probe, is oxidized by reactive oxygen species (ROS) to yield 
highly fluorescent DCF. In this experiment, 10 μM DCFH-DA was mixed 
with an equal volume of PBS or Hb–Au/FeNCs dispersions. The 
Fig. 4. (A) Schematic illustration of the antibacterial activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs via binding on the bacterial surface. (B, C) Antibacterial effect of Hb–Au/FeNCs 
against S. aureus (B) and E. coli (C). (D) Typical images of bacterial colonies on agar plates formed by E. coli (a-e) incubated with 0 μg/mL (control), 25 μg/mL, 50 μg/ 
mL, 75 μg/mL, and 100 μg/mL Hb–Au/FeNCs, respectively, and S. aureus (f-j) incubated with 0 μg/mL (control), 20 μg/mL, 40 μg/mL, 60 μg/mL, and 80 μg/mL 
Hb–Au/FeNCs, respectively; (E) Representative SEM images of E. coli (a-e) incubated with 0 μg/mL (control), 25 μg/mL, 50 μg/mL, 75 μg/mL, and 100 μg/mL 
Hb–Au/FeNCs, respectively, and S. aureus (f-j) incubated with 0 μg/mL (control), 20 μg/mL, 40 μg/mL, 60 μg/mL, and 80 μg/mL Hb–Au/FeNCs, respectively; (F) 
Representative TEM images of E. coli (a-c) incubated with 0 μg/mL (control) or with 100 μg/mL Hb–Au/FeNCs; and S. aureus (d-f) incubated with 0 μg/mL (control) 
and with 80 μg/mL Hb −
Au/FeNCs.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
8 

fluorescence spectra were recorded at an excitation wavelength of 485 
nm and an emission wavelength of 525 nm (slit width = 6 nm). As shown 
in Fig. S19, the fluorescence intensity increased significantly with the 
concentration of Hb–Au/FeNCs, indicating enhanced ROS generation. 
These results demonstrate that Hb–Au/FeNCs can effectively catalyze 
ROS production, which contributes to their antibacterial activity.
2.5. Evaluation of the potential to promote infected wound repair in vivo
Considering the outstanding in vitro antibacterial efficiency, an in 
vivo assessment was carried out to ascertain the possible applications of 
Hb–Au/FeNCs in wound healing. On the backside of each mouse, a 
circular, full-thickness, 5-mm-diameter cutaneous wound was made 
(Fig. S20). Six Sprague Dawley mice were divided into two groups: 
Control (PBS) and Hb–Au/FeNCs. Then, 109 CFU/mL of S. aureus cells 
were dropped to create bacterially infected wounds. Following one day 
of infection, different treatments (PBS and Hb–Au/FeNCs) were injec­
ted into the wound. The wounds were then bandaged with medical 
gauze, and daily photos were taken. The entire treatment period was 
determined to be 7 days (Fig. 5A). To investigate the bactericidal effect 
in vivo, S. aureus was harvested from the wound area on the 5th and 7th 
days and quantified using plate colony counting (Fig. 5B & C). The 
results showed that the wound bacterial load was significantly reduced 
in the Hb–Au/FeNCs-treated group compared with the control group. 
All mice were sacrificed after 7 days, and the wound tissues were 
collected for pathological histology analysis. The control groups (PBS) 
showed a comparatively slow rate of healing of the wounds. On the other 
hand, the wounds of the mice treated with Hb–Au/FeNCs gradually 
scabbed and nearly completely healed after 7 days, demonstrating that 
Hb–Au/FeNCs have a significant interaction with surviving bacteria in 
the wounds. Notably, the Hb–Au/FeNCs dramatically speed up the 
healing process in comparison to the control group (Fig. 5D-F).
Furthermore, to confirm the effect of the nanocluster in accelerating 
infectious wound healing and analyzing its underlying mechanism, 
hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) and Masson staining were applied. As shown 
by the red arrows in Fig. 6A (e), compared with the PBS group Fig. 6A 
(b), the new blood vessels in the Hb–Au/FeNCs group were signifi­
cantly enhanced, which would provide a favorable blood supply for 
tissue repair. Meanwhile, Masson staining was employed to visualize 
nascent granulation tissue between the wound healing boundaries (Fig. 
6A (e, f)). The width of the arrows (indicating the width of subepithelial 
granulation tissue) was narrower in the nanocluster group compared 
with the PBS group (Fig. 6A (e, f) & B). This could be due to the close 
relationship between pro-angiogenic effects and POD-like activity of 
Hb–Au/FeNCs. Peroxidase plays an important role in angiogenesis 
through multiple mechanisms, such as generating reactive oxygen spe­
cies to initiate vascular endothelial cell proliferation, activating vascular 
endothelial growth factor, and remodeling the extracellular matrix 
Fig. 5. (A) Schematic representation of an in vivo wound healing therapy strategy. (B) S. aureus bacterial colonies remained in infected wound tissues on days 5 and 
7. (C) Representative images of S. aureus colonies on agar plates collected from wound dressings on days 5 and 7. (D) Measurement of wound contraction in control 
and Hb–Au/FeNCs-treated mice, making use of pictures. (F) Image tracking of the healing process of S. aureus infected wounds with or without Hb −
Au/ 
FeNCs treatment.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
9 

(ECM) [70–73]. Furthermore, CD31, CD45, and CD68 were used to label 
vascular endothelial cells, leukocytes, and macrophages in the repaired 
tissue, respectively (Fig. 6C (a-f)). Compared with the control group, 
the expression of CD31 in the nanocluster group was stronger, accom­
panied by weaker expression of CD45 and CD68. The above results 
indicate that nanoclusters can effectively kill bacteria, thereby cooling 
the inflammatory response while enhancing tissue angiogenesis. The 
favorable factors in both aspects synergistically promote tissue repair, 
making it expected to serve a new generation of multifunctional 
dressings.
Next, to verify the biosafety of nanoclusters for biomedical applica­
tions in vitro and in vivo, we conducted additional evaluations of the 
biosafety of Hb–Au/FeNCs. Before performing the experiments, we 
initially measured the weight of the mice while administering the 
wound-healing treatment (Fig. 6D). Significantly, there is no discern­
ible alteration in the body weight of the mice, indicating the absence of 
biological toxicity associated with the designed nanoclusters. Cytotox­
icity is a critical factor in determining the applicability of nanomedicine 
for disease therapy. This study utilized mouse embryonic fibroblast cells 
(L929) to assess cell viability both in the short term and in the long-term 
using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay. A dose-response pattern 
was not observed in either cell line at concentrations below 80 μg/mL 
(Fig. 6E and S21), showing that the Hb–Au/FeNCs maintain high cell 
viability (>90 %) even after prolonged exposure. Furthermore, we 
evaluated cell viability of human immortalized keratinocyte cell line 
(HaCaT) as part of a comprehensive toxicity assessment across various 
cell types. No dose-response pattern was detected at concentrations 
under 80 μg/mL, with cell viability maintaining over 95 %, as illustrated 
in Fig. S22, indicating the substantial biocompatibility of Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs.
Furthermore, the haemolysis assay demonstrated that the Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs extract exhibited a haemolysis ratio of 8.565 %, indicating 
negligible haemolysis of red blood cells (Fig. S23). This was assessed by 
incubating human red blood cells with the Hb–Au/FeNCs extract, ul­
trapure water (positive control), and physiological saline (negative 
control). Absorbance at 545 nm revealed that the haemolysis induced by 
the Hb–Au/FeNCs was significantly lower than that induced by the 
positive control, which caused complete red blood cell lysis. The evi­
dence suggests that Hb–Au/FeNCs exhibit negligible toxicity within 
this concentration range.
Additionally, performing H&E staining on significant organs can 
further confirm the biocompatibility of Hb–Au/FeNCs in vivo. Fig. 7A 
demonstrates that the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen of the PBS or 
Hb–Au/FeNCs-treated mice did not exhibit any signs of impairment or 
lesions. Also, blood samples were collected from mice after treatment to 
assess the acute and chronic toxicities of Hb–Au/FeNCs through he­
matological analysis. The red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells 
(WBCs), hemoglobin (HGB), platelets (PLT), Lymphocytes, and neutro­
phil levels of the Hb–Au/FeNCs group were all within the normal range 
in comparison to the control group (Fig. 7B-G). This finding provides 
Fig. 6. (A) Hematoxylin, eosin (H&E), and Masson staining after treatment with PBS or Hb–Au/FeNCs. Red arrows indicate new blood vessels in the granulation 
tissue. The dotted line demarcates the boundary between fresh granulation tissue and normal subcutaneous tissue. (B) Quantitative comparison of subepithelial 
granulation width as indicated by the dashed arrow in Fig. 6A, e, f. (C) Immunohistochemical staining with CD31, CD45, and CD68 after treatment with PBS(a, b, 
and c) or Hb–Au/FeNCs (d, e, and f). (D) Body weight variations in mice during therapy. (E) The cell viability of L929 after treatment with varying concentrations of 
Hb-FeAuNCs (0, 20, 40, 60, and 80 μg/mL) using CCK-8 assays.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
10 

additional evidence that the Hb–Au/FeNCs exhibited no significant 
biological toxicity in vivo. In addition, blood biochemistry analysis 
showed no evidence of liver or kidney dysfunction, as evidenced by the 
levels of blood UREA (urea nitrogen), creatinine (CREA), aspartate 
transferase (AST), and alanine transferase (ALT) (Fig. 7H-K). Together, 
these findings indicate that Hb–Au/FeNCs exhibit low cytotoxicity and 
excellent biocompatibility, with minimal toxicity in both in vitro and in 
vivo environments, supporting their potential for safe application in 
wound healing and other biomedical fields.
A rat infection model was established using a similar method, and the 
animals were randomly allocated to receive treatment with either 
Hb–Au/FeNCs or PBS for the first 7 days (Fig. 8A). To better evaluate 
the in vivo safety of Hb–Au/FeNCs, half of the rats were sacrificed on 
day 9, while the remaining animals were maintained under standard 
conditions without further intervention until day 35. Following 7 days of 
treatment with Hb–Au/FeNCs, rat wound healing was significantly 
accelerated (Fig. 8B, C), accompanied by more organized tissue struc­
ture and increased collagen content (Fig. 8D, E), results which were 
consistent with the mouse experiments. In the short term, differential 
blood cell counts, biochemical parameters (including AST, ALT, UREA, 
and CREA), and histological analysis of major organs (heart, liver, 
spleen, lungs, and kidneys) revealed no significant systemic toxicity or 
hepatorenal damage (Fig. S24).
Furthermore, upon extending the observation period to 26 days post- 
treatment (Day 35), histological assessment of the major organs still 
showed no noticeable morphological abnormalities or pathological 
changes (Fig. 9A). Additionally, differential blood cell counts, blood 
biochemical parameters, and body weight monitoring further supported 
the long-term safety profile of Hb–Au/FeNCs (Fig. 9B-L). H&E and 
Masson’s trichrome staining demonstrated that the skin histo­
architecture in the Hb–Au/FeNCs-treated group closely resembled that 
of the control group, with no observed necrosis or structural abnor­
malities (Fig. 9M, N).
3. Conclusions
In summary, we have developed an environmentally friendly and 
facile one-pot strategy for synthesizing ultrasmall, monodisperse iron- 
hybridized gold nanoclusters (Hb–Au/FeNCs) using hemoglobin as a 
biotemplate, reducing agent, and intrinsic iron source. The resulting 
hybrid nanozymes exhibit exceptional catalytic robustness and colloidal 
stability under physiologically relevant stressors, including variations in 
temperature, pH, and long-term storage. Notably, the incorporation of 
iron significantly enhances the peroxidase-like activity of the nano­
clusters, achieving a catalytic efficiency approximately 40 times higher 
than that of natural HRP. This elevated activity enables highly sensitive 
and selective colorimetric detection of biomolecules such as uric acid 
and hydrogen peroxide, with excellent performance validated in human 
serum samples.
Beyond diagnostics, Hb–Au/FeNCs demonstrate potent broad- 
Fig. 7. (A) H&E staining of major organs slices including heart, kidney, liver, lung and spleen collected from both the PBS- and Hb–Au/FeNCs -treated mice at 7 
days after treatment. (B–G) Hematological evaluation of the changes in red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), hemoglobin (HGB), platelets (PLT), 
Lymphocytes, and Neutrophils in mice after treatment with PBS and Hb–Au/FeNCs. (H–K) Blood biochemistry evaluation of the changes in UREA (urea nitrogen), 
CREA (creatinine), AST (aspartate transferase), and ALT (alanine transferase) in mice after treatment with PBS and Hb–Au/FeNCs. The data is displayed as the mean 
± SD (n = 3).
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
11 

spectrum antibacterial activity against both Gram-positive and Gram- 
negative bacteria, primarily via membrane disruption and ROS- 
mediated oxidative stress. Importantly, they exhibit minimal cytotox­
icity and promote angiogenesis in infected wound models, contributing 
to accelerated tissue regeneration. Together, these features position 
Hb–Au/FeNCs as a promising class of non-antibiotic, multifunctional 
nanomaterials for integrated infection control, biosensing, and wound 
healing applications. Their biocompatibility, catalytic versatility, and 
therapeutic potential offer a compelling platform for next-generation 
antimicrobial and regenerative therapies.
Fig. 8. In vivo evaluation of antibacterial and wound healing effects of Hb–Au/FeNCs using a rat wound infection model. (A) Schematic illustration of the 
experimental procedure. The infected wound model was established on Day 0, followed by daily treatment with Hb–Au/FeNCs or PBS from Day 1 to Day 8. Rats 
were sacrificed on Days 9 and 32 for histological evaluation; (B) Quantitative analysis of wound contraction over 9 days; (C) Representative photographs of wound 
appearance during the healing process (Days 1–9) for PBS and Hb–Au/FeNCs groups; (D) Histological analysis of wound tissues collected on Day 9. Hematoxylin and 
eosin (H&E) staining (a, b, d, e) and Masson’s trichrome staining (c, f); (E) Comparison of subepithelial granulation width based on H&E staining for the first 9-days 
treatment period.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
12 

Fig. 9. Long-term biosafety and final wound healing quality assessment of Hb–Au/FeNCs in the rat wound infection model. (A) Histological analysis of major 
organs. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of the heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney harvested on day 35 to evaluate the systemic biocompatibility and 
potential toxicity of Hb–Au/FeNCs; (B-K) Results of long-term blood analysis, including hematological parameters (PLT, WBC, RBC, Lymphocytes, HGB, Neutro­
phils) and key serum biochemistry markers (CREA, UREA, AST, and ALT) collected on Day 35; (L) Body weight measurement of rats over the long-term experiment; 
(M) Comparison of subepithelial granulation width based on H&E staining; (N) Histological analysis of the regenerated wound tissues collected on day 35. The panel 
includes H&E staining (a, b, d, e) showing final epithelialization and Masson’s trichrome staining (c, f) demonstrating long-term collagen maturity and tissue 
regeneration quality.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
13 

4. Experimental section
4.1. Materials and characterization
4.1.1. Chemicals and materials
Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate trihydrate (HAuCl4⋅3H2O, ≥99.9 %) 
was acquired from Saitong (Beijing Jinming, China). Hemoglobin (95 
%), ascorbic acid (>99 %), uric acid (≥99 %), urea (≥99.5 %), glucose 
(99 %), glutathione (≥98 %), 3,3′,5,5′-Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB, 
≥99 %), 2,2′-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid dia­
mmonium salt) (ABTS, 98 %) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 30 %) were 
acquired from Aladdin Biochemical Technology (Shanghai, China). 
Terephthalic acid (TA, 99 %), horseradish peroxidase (HRP), and O- 
Phenylenediamine (OPD, 99.5 %). Uricase (UOx) was purchased from 
Yuanye Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). Serine (>98 %), cysteine 
(>98 %), Glutamic acid (>98 %), tyrosine (99 %), phenylalanine (99 %), 
and tryptophan (99 %) were obtained from Solarbio Life Science. Bovine 
serum albumin (BSA, ≥98 %) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 
Bovine fibrinogen (FGA) was purchased from Solebol. Bovine insulin 
was purchased from Source Leaf. Human serum albumin was purchased 
from Ruixi Bio. Nitric acid (65 % ~ 68 % HNO3) was purchased from 
Sinopharm Chemical. Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission 
Spectrometer (ICP-OES) standard solutions were purchased from 
Aladdin (100 ppm of Ag, Al, As, B, Ba, Bi, Ca, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, Li, 
K, Mg, Mn, Na, Ni, P, Pb, Se, Sr, V or Hg in 10 % HNO3) and Steel Yanac 
(1000 ppm of Au in 1.5 M HCl. The American Type Culture Collection 
(USA) provided Escherichia coli (ATCC® 8739™) and Staphylococcus 
aureus (ATCC® 29213™). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was purchased from 
EKO Biological Technology Co., Ltd. (China). Penicillin–streptomycin 
solution (100×) and the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) were obtained from 
Beyotime Biotechnology (China). High-glucose Dulbecco’s Modified 
Eagle Medium (DMEM) was supplied by Shanghai Yuanpei Biotech­
nology Co., Ltd. (China). All experiments utilized ultrapure water 
provided by Milli-Q Advantage A10 (Millipore, USA), which was used 
throughout. Before being used in the experiments, the glassware was 
thoroughly cleaned by being submerged in a freshly made solution of 
aqua regia (HCl: HNO3 volume ratio = 3:1). Subsequently, the glassware 
was thoroughly rinsed with water to ensure the total removal of any 
residual substances. All reagents employed in this work were of 
analytical quality and were used without further purification.
4.1.2. Apparatus and characterization
A TU-1901 double-beam UV–vis spectrophotometer was used to 
detect UV–vis absorption with a scanning range from 200 to 800 nm. 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to analyze the sam­
ples’ morphology. The same microscope was used to obtain high- 
resolution TEM (HRTEM) images at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. 
A SU8220 microscope was used for energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy 
(EDAX) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) ob­
servations. An AXIS ULTRA spectrometer was used to take X-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) observations. The far-UV Circular 
Dichroism (CD) spectrum was carried out using a Chirascan (Applied 
Photophysics) at a wavelength range of 175–260 nm. The percentages of 
secondary structural elements were calculated using inbuilted CDNN 
software. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were obtained using 
a Tensor 27 spectrometer with a wavelength range of 4000–400 cm−1. 
An F-7000 fluorescence spectrophotometer was used to measure fluo­
rescence with excitation wavelengths ranging from 240 to 450 nm and 
emission wavelengths ranging from 320 to 650 nm. The scan speed was 
set at 2400 nm/min, with 5.0 nm slits for both excitation and emission, 
and a PMT voltage of 500 V. A nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) 
system (Nanosight NS300) was used to determine the molar concen­
tration of nanoparticles. The NTA settings included a detect threshold of 
5, blur size set to auto, and a max jump distance of 14.2–14.7 pixels. The 
concentration of nanoparticles was found to be 5.79 × 108 ± 9.53 × 108 
particles/mL, with an average of 51.8 ± 1.1 particles per frame and 65.8 
± 1.2 centers per frame.
4.2. Preparation of Hb–Au/FeNCs
This work reported a fairly straightforward one-step method for 
synthesizing Hb–Au/FeNCs based on the direct reaction of HAuCl4 with 
hemoglobin solution. Typically, 10 mL of an aqueous HAuCl4 solution 
(10 mM) was combined with 10 mL of hemoglobin solution (25 mg/mL). 
The molar ratio of hemoglobin to HAuCl4 was approximately 1:25.8 
(~1:26). Then, 1 mL of NaOH (1 M) was added and the mixture was 
allowed to incubate at 37 ◦C (water bath) for 24 h. The solution was then 
centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 10 min, followed by dialysis with MilliQ 
water (with MWCO = 500 membrane for 48 h, and every 12 h to ex­
change the water) to thoroughly remove excess hemoglobin. The final 
product was freeze-dried and stored in the refrigerator at 4 ◦C for future 
use.
4.3. Determination of metal concentration
The gold standard solution and the iron standard solution were 
diluted to different initial concentrations (0.2 ppm, 0.4 ppm, 0.6 ppm, 
0.8 ppm, and 1 ppm) with 2 % HNO3 solution. The Hb–Au/FeNCs 
sample was diluted with 2 % HNO3 solution 100 times, and the content 
of iron and gold ions in the sample was determined by inductively 
coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, Avio550, Per­
kinElmer, Singapore).
4.4. Protein adsorption property of Hb–Au/FeNCs
A 100 μL Hb–Au/FeNCs nanocluster was dropped onto the pre­
cleaned QCM-D gold chip and dried in an artificial climate chamber at 
30 ◦C. The adsorption of different proteins (including Bovine serum al­
bumin, Bovine fibrinogen, Bovine insulin, and hemoglobin) with a 
concentration of 1 mg/mL was tested on a blank chip and nanoclusters 
coated chip with a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min at 25 ◦C. The adsorption 
amount was calculated by Q-sense Dfind from Biolin (Sweden).
4.5. Peroxidase-like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs
In this work, the catalytic abilities of Hb–Au/FeNCs in the presence 
of H2O2 were examined using TMB as a typical substrate. The experi­
ments were carried out in a 2 mL reaction system using Hb–Au/FeNCs 
(0.2 mg/mL), TMB (0.5 mM), and H2O2 (4 mM) in a PBS buffer at pH 
5.0. A blue solution was generated after 10 min of incubation in a water 
bath (50 ◦C). Following incubation, the mixture was centrifuged at 
10000 rpm for 10 min, and the upper clear blue solution was then used 
to measure the absorption. In a similar test, the temperature (10–90 ◦C) 
and pH (2.0–10.0) of the catalytic reaction system were changed to 
determine how pH and temperature affected the POD-like activity of 
Hb–Au/FeNCs. The maximum activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs was regarded 
as 100 %.
4.6. Detection of uric acid
UA solutions were synthesized in a phosphate buffer solution (pH 
8.5). The following procedures were then employed to determine the 
UA: uric acid (100 μL) of different concentrations was mixed with UOx 
(100 μL, 1 mg/mL) and 800 μL of PBS buffer (pH 8.5). After the mixture 
was incubated at 37 ◦C for 30 min, Hb–Au/FeNCs (100 μL, 0.2 mg/mL), 
TMB (100 μL, 0.5 mM), and phosphate buffer (1800 μL, pH 5.0) were 
added. The mixtures were incubated for another 30 min at 30 ◦C, and 
the supernatant was collected after centrifuging the mixture at 10,000 
rpm for 10 min and subjected to UV–vis analysis. Human serum samples 
were obtained with the approval of the Medical Ethics Committee of the 
Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University (No. 2023222).
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
14 

4.7. Detection of H2O2
The following procedures were employed to determine the H2O2: 
H2O2 (100 μL) of different concentrations was mixed with Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs (100 μL, 0.2 mg/mL) and TMB (100 μL, 0.5 mM) in a 2 mL re­
action system with a PBS buffer at pH 5.0. After incubating the mixture 
at 50 ◦C for 10 min, the supernatant was collected and subjected to 
UV–vis analysis after centrifuging it at 10,000 rpm for 10 min.
4.8. Catalase like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs
The following procedures were employed to determine the catalase- 
like activity of Hb–Au/FeNCs: In a cuvette, 100 μL of Hb–Au/FeNCs 
(0.2 mg/mL) and 200 μL of H2O2 (500 mM) were added successively to 
buffer solutions (1700 μL, pH 5–10). After mixing, the subsequent drop 
in absorption at 240 nm was promptly measured to assess the break­
down of H2O2.
4.9. Assessment of •OH generation via TA as a fluorescent probe
Terephthalic acid (TA) was used as a fluorescent probe to detect the 
production of hydroxyl radicals (•OH). In brief, 2.0 mL of phosphate 
buffer solution (pH 4.0) containing 5 mM H2O2, 0.5 mM TA, and 0.2 mg/ 
ml of Hb–Au/FeNCs were allowed to incubate for 3 h. The supernatant 
was then utilized to assess fluorescence spectra after being centrifuged at 
10,000 rpm for 10 min. After the reaction time, the FL spectra of the 
solution were observed at a wavelength of 315 nm.
4.10. Assessment of •OH generation via MB decoloration
A final concentration of 100 μg/mL of Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozymes 
was mixed with a 3 mL volume of MB solution (10 μg/mL −1) containing 
10 mM H2O2. The mixture was incubated for different intervals of time 
(0, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40 min) at 25 ◦C. The Hb–Au/FeNCs nanozymes 
were removed from the MB aqueous solution by centrifugation, and a 
UV–vis spectrophotometer was used to detect the absorbance at 664 nm.
4.11. Bacterial culture
The E. coli and S. aureus monoclonal strains were transferred to the 
Mueller-Hinton broth medium and grown there for 36 h (37 ◦C, 70 rpm). 
The bacterial solutions were diluted with PBS to a concentration of 106 
CFU/mL after the logarithmic phase was attained.
4.12. In vitro antibacterial activity
The antibacterial properties of Hb–Au/FeNCs (after dialysis) against 
each strain were assessed using the plate counting approach. Usually, 
the freeze-dried stock of the bacteria is initially revived by being 
cultured for 36 h in Mueller-Hinton broth media. Following a 36-h 
culture, bacterial suspensions were diluted with PBS to around 1 × 106 
CFU/mL. Briefly, 900 μL of 1 × PBS (pH 7.4) containing varying con­
centrations of Hb–Au/FeNCs were introduced to 100 μL of diluted 
bacterial cultures and incubated at 37 ◦C for 3 h at a speed of 180 rpm. 
To determine the minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC), 100 μL of 
the resulting solution was spread on an agar plate to develop viable 
colony units. The number of colonies was then counted after an over­
night incubation period at 37 ◦C.
4.13. SEM characterization for bacterial samples
Bacteria samples for SEM analysis were prepared according to the 
previous procedure [49]. Typically, Hb–Au/FeNCs were used in various 
concentrations to treat the bacteria. After 5 h of incubation, the bacteria 
in all groups were centrifuged for 5 min at 3500 rpm. The collected 
bacterial cells were fixed in 4 % formaldehyde at room temperature for 
12 h. Following a PBS wash, the bacteria were then repeatedly exposed 
to different ethanol solution concentrations (50 %, 60 %, 70 %, 80 %, 90 
%, and 100 %) to dehydrate them. Prior to SEM observation, the 
resulting bacteria were dried and sputter-coated with gold.
4.14. In vivo infected wound model with mice
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the 
guidelines of the Biomedical Ethics Committee of Health Science Center 
of Xi’an Jiaotong University (XJTUAE2023-942). Bacterial wound 
models were created on the dorsal region of female rats (Sprague 
Dawley rats, 6–8 weeks old and weighing 200–220 g). The rats were 
anesthetized, and wounds (55 mm in diameter) were created using a 
skin piercer and surgical scissors after removing the dorsal hair of the 
rats. The wounds were inoculated with a 20 μL solution of S. aureus (1 ×
109 CFU/mL). After 24 h, the rats with bacterial wounds were treated 
with Hb–Au/FeNCs (20 μL, 500 μg/mL) and PBS (20 μL) was used as the 
control. In the meantime, photographs recording the healing of the 
wounds were captured every day. After 7 days of treatment, the rats 
were sacrificed. Blood samples were collected from the eyes of rats pre- 
and post-treatment for blood biochemistry examinations. Furthermore, 
major organs were harvested from Hb–Au/FeNCs or PBS-treated rats 
following a 7-day treatment period for pathological examination. On 
day 7 of the treatment, the infected tissues were collected and fixed a 4 
% paraformaldehyde solution. The tissues were then embedded in 
paraffin, sectioned, and examined using an Olympus IX-71 microscope 
after staining with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
4.15. Long-term skin infection experimental with rats
All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the 
guidelines of the Biomedical Ethics Committee of Xi’an Jiaotong Uni­
versity. A bacterial wound infection model was established on the dorsal 
region of female Sprague–Dawley rats (5–6 weeks old, approximately 
150 g). The rats were anesthetized, and the dorsal hair was removed 
using depilatory cream. Circular wounds (6 mm in diameter) were 
created using a skin biopsy punch. Each wound was inoculated with 25 
μL of a S. aureus suspension (1 × 108 CFU/mL). After 24 h, the infected 
rats were treated with 20 μL of Hb–Au/FeNCs solution (500 μg/mL), 
while sterile 1 × PBS (20 μL) served as the control. Wound healing 
progress was monitored daily by photographing the wound sites. After 
nine days of treatment, one cohort of rats was euthanized. Blood samples 
were collected via cardiac puncture from rats treated with Hb–Au/ 
FeNCs or 1 × PBS for serum biochemical analysis. Major organs (heart, 
liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) were harvested for histopathological 
examination. Infected wound tissues after nine days of treatment were 
excised and fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde solution. The fixed tissues 
were embedded in paraffin, sectioned, and subjected to hematox­
ylin–eosin (H&E) and Masson’s trichrome staining, followed by micro­
scopic observation under a Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope.
The remaining rats, which were not euthanized after nine days, 
received no further treatment and were raised under standard condi­
tions for an additional 23 days before euthanasia. Blood samples were 
again collected by cardiac puncture for biochemical analysis. Major 
organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) were also collected for 
histopathological evaluation. Wound tissues were excised, fixed in 4 % 
paraformaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, and stained with H&E and 
Masson’s trichrome for microscopic observation using a Nikon Eclipse Ti 
microscope.
4.16. Cell viability
The cytotoxicity of the Hb–Au/FeNCs solution after five times 
centrifugal purification was evaluated using the Cell Counting Kit-8 
(CCK-8) assay. Mouse embryonic fibroblast cells (L929) were seeded 
in 96-well plates at a density of 5000 cells per well in 100 μL of complete 
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
15 

DMEM (high glucose) medium. For human immortalized keratinocyte 
cell line (HaCaT) were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 6000 cells 
per well in 100 μL of complete DMEM (high glucose) medium. After 
allowing the cells to adhere overnight, the culture medium was replaced 
with 100 μL of Hb–Au/FeNCs solution at various concentrations (0, 20, 
40, 60, and 80 μg/mL). For a continuous assessment over three 
consecutive days, one plate was collected every 24 h. At each time point, 
the drug-containing medium was carefully aspirated from each well, and 
a mixture of 10 μL of CCK-8 reagent and 90 μL of fresh high-glucose 
DMEM medium was added. The cells were incubated at 37 ◦C for 1.5 
h. Subsequently, the absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a 
microplate reader. The adsorption of different proteins on the relative 
absorbance values compared to the control.
4.17. ROS-generation
A DCFH-DA assay was used to assess ROS generation. Hb–Au/FeNCs 
stock solution (5 mg/mL) was diluted with 1 × PBS to 30 and 50 μg/mL. 
DCFH-DA (0.1 mM) was diluted with 1 × PBS to 10 μM. Equal volumes 
(1.5 mL) of 10 μM DCFH-DA and each Hb–Au/FeNCs dispersion were 
mixed, and fluorescence spectra were recorded at 485 nm excitation and 
525 nm emission with a 6 nm slit width.
Declarations ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the 
guidelines of the Biomedical Ethics Committee of Health Science Center 
of Xi’an Jiaotong University (XJTUAE2023-942).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Aisha Kanwal: Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, 
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization, 
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Juanhua Tian: 
Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisi­
tion, Data curation, Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. 
Qingyue Yang: Methodology, Investigation. Yixiang Chen: Method­
ology, Investigation. Arif Muhammad: Writing – review & editing. 
Khian-Hooi Chew: Writing – review & editing.Zihao Li: Writing – re­
view & editing.Zhongli Lei: Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing – 
review & editing. Peng Yang: Supervision, Project administration, 
Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. Hao Ren: Visualiza­
tion, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Funding
The funding for this work is provided by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Nos. 22375122, 82300776), the National Science 
Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (52225301), the National Key 
Research and Development Program of China (Nos. 2020YFA0710400, 
2020YFA0710402), the Key R&D Projects in Shaanxi Province (2023- 
YBGY-180), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Univer­
sities (Nos. GK201801003, GK202205013, GK202305001), P. Y. is 
grateful for funding from the Key Program of the National Natural Sci­
ence Foundation of China (No. 52533003), 111 Project (No. B14041), 
the Qinchuangyuan Scientists and Engineers Team Development 
(2023KXY-124), the Key Technology Breakthrough Project for Priority 
Agricultural Industrial Chains (23NYGG0004), the Shaanxi Innovative 
R&D Institution (2024ZG-XYJG-12), the Xi’an Association for Science 
and Technology-Young Talent Fostering Plan (959202413030), the Key 
Projects-Critical & Core Technology Breakthroughs-Agriculture and 
Rural Sector (2024NC-GJHX14), the Key Projects-Critical & Core 
Technology Breakthroughs-Social Development Sector (2024SF2-GJHX- 
44), and the Major Scientific and Technological Achievements 
Commercialization Project (230GZHCYH0003).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
None.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cej.2025.170293.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] F. Akram, M. Imtiaz, I. ul Haq, Emergent crisis of antibiotic resistance: a silent 
pandemic threat to 21st century, Microb. Pathog. 174 (2023) 105923, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.micpath.2022.105923.
[2] N. Morales-Dur´an, A. Le´on-Buitimea, J.R. Morones-Ramírez, Unraveling resistance 
mechanisms in combination therapy: a comprehensive review of recent advances 
and future directions, Heliyon 10 (6) (2024) e27984, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
heliyon.2024.e27984.
[3] N. Chakraborty, S. Gandhi, R. Verma, I. Roy, Emerging prospects of 
nanozymes for antibacterial and anticancer applications, 
Biomedicines 10 (6) (2022) 1378, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
biomedicines10061378.
[4] S. Mussa Farkhani, P. Dehghankelishadi, A. Refaat, D. Veerasikku Gopal, 
A. Cifuentes-Rius, N.H. Voelcker, Tailoring gold nanocluster properties for 
biomedical applications: from sensing to bioimaging and Theranostics, Prog. 
Mater. Sci. 142 (2024) 101229, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2023.101229.
[5] S.M. van de Looij, E.R. Hebels, M. Viola, M. Hembury, S. Oliveira, T. Vermonden, 
Gold nanoclusters: imaging, therapy, and theranostic roles in biomedical 
applications, Bioconjug. Chem. 33 (1) (2022) 4–23, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
bioconjchem.1c00475.
[6] S. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Song, S. He, H. Tan, The recent development of multifunctional 
gold nanoclusters in tumor theranostic and combination therapy, Pharmaceutics 
14 (11) (2022), https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14112451.
[7] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, T.-P. Lim, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Antimicrobial cluster 
bombs: silver nanoclusters packed with daptomycin, ACS Nano 10 (8) (2016) 
7934–7942, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b03862.
[8] W. Wang, Y. Zheng, Y. Sun, X. Jin, J. Niu, M. Cheng, H. Wang, H. Shao, T. Lin, 
High-temperature piezoelectric conversion using thermally stabilized 
electrospun polyacrylonitrile membranes, J. Mater. Chem. A 9 (36) (2021) 
20395–20404, https://doi.org/10.1039/D1TA04400A.
[9] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Surface ligand chemistry of gold 
nanoclusters determines their antimicrobial ability, Chem. Mater. 30 (8) (2018) 
2800–2808, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b00667.
[10] K. Zhao, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, B. Han, M. Lian, Progress in antibacterial 
applications of nanozymes, Front. Chem. 12 (2024) 1478273, https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fchem.2024.1478273.
[11] Mutalik, C.; Saukani, M.; Khafid, M.; Krisnawati, D. I.; Widodo; Darmayanti, R.; 
Puspitasari, B.; Cheng, T.-M.; Kuo, T.-R. Gold-based nanostructures for 
antibacterial application. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023. 24(12) 10006. doi:https 
://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241210006.
[12] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Observing antimicrobial process with 
traceable gold nanoclusters, Nano Res. 14 (4) (2021) 1026–1033, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s12274-020-3146-5.
[13] Z. Chen, Z. Chu, Y. Jiang, L. Xu, H. Qian, Y. Wang, W. Wang, Recent advances on 
nanomaterials for antibacterial treatment of oral diseases, Mater. Today Bio 20 
(2023) 100635, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100635.
[14] H. Yuan, M. Theresa, D. Bain, H. Fakhouri, K. Sreekanth, A. Ravi, S. Thomas, 
N. Kalarikkal, R. Antoine, E.K. Radhakrishnan, Singlet oxygen generation 
efficiency and antimicrobial ability in glutathione protected Ag31 nanoclusters, 
Inorg. Chem. Commun. 159 (2024) 111799, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
inoche.2023.111799.
[15] L. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Liu, F. Wang, X. Zhou, Antimicrobial performance of novel 
glutathione-conjugated silver nanoclusters (GSH@AgNCs) against Escherichia coli 
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
16 

and staphylococcus aureus by membrane-damage and biofilm-inhibition 
mechanisms, Food Res. Int. 160 (2022) 111680, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodres.2022.111680.
[16] X. Jiang, C. Sun, Y. Guo, G. Nie, L. Xu, Peroxidase-like activity of apoferritin paired 
gold clusters for glucose detection, Biosens. Bioelectron. 64 (2015) 165–170, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2014.08.078.
[17] F. Dashtestani, H. Ghourchian, A. Najafi, Silver-gold-apoferritin nanozyme for 
suppressing oxidative stress during cryopreservation, Mater. Sci. Eng. C 94 (2019) 
831–840, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2018.10.008.
[18] H. Zhang, X. Liang, L. Han, F. Li, “Non-naked” gold with glucose oxidase-like 
activity: a nanozyme for tandem catalysis, Small 14 (44) (2018) 1–8, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/smll.201803256.
[19] Jain, V.; Bhagat, S.; Singh, S. Bovine serum albumin decorated gold 
nanoclusters: a fluorescence-based nanoprobe for detection of 
intracellular hydrogen peroxide. Sensors Actuators B Chem. 2021, 327, 
128886. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2020.128886.
[20] Y.-S. Chen, Z.-W. Chen, Y.-W. Yuan, K.-C. Chen, C.-P. Liu, Fluorescence quenchers 
manipulate the peroxidase-like activity of gold-based nanomaterials, ACS Omega 5 
(38) (2020) 24487–24494, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c02956.
[21] P.-C. Kuo, C.-W. Lien, J.-Y. Mao, B. Unnikrishnan, H.-T. Chang, H.-J. Lin, C.- 
C. Huang, Detection of urinary spermine by using silver-gold/silver chloride 
nanozymes, Anal. Chim. Acta 1009 (2018) 89–97, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
aca.2018.01.018.
[22] B. Chen, K. Guo, H. Wang, F.-J. Xu, J. Wang, N. Zhao, NIR-II responsive janus 
nanoparticles amplify immunogenic cell death for enhanced cancer 
immunotherapy, Sci. China Technol. Sci. 67 (1) (2024) 321–329, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s11431-023-2477-9.
[23] A. Cao, Y. Sun, F. Pei, X. Mu, B. Du, Z. Tong, Q. Hao, M. Xia, W. Lei, B. Liu, 
A nanozyme-linked immunosorbent assay based on au@CeO2@Pt nanozymes for 
colorimetric and fluorescent detection of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein, 
Microchem. J. 194 (2023) 109263, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
microc.2023.109263.
[24] Z. Wang, W. Guo, K. Zhang, Y. Ye, Y. Wang, D. Sui, N. Zhao, F.-J. Xu, Two- 
dimensional copper metal-organic frameworks as antibacterial agents for biofilm 
treatment, Sci. China Technol. Sci. 65 (5) (2022) 1052–1058, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s11431-021-1963-3.
[25] P. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Tang, H. Shen, J. Li, Z. Yi, Q. Ke, H. Xu, Copper-based 
metal–organic framework as a controllable nitric oxide-releasing 
vehicle for enhanced diabetic wound healing, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 12 (16) (2020) 18319–18331, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsami.0c01792.
[26] Y. Zhang, J. Song, Q. Pan, X. Zhang, W. Shao, X. Zhang, C. Quan, J. Li, An au@ 
NH2-MIL-125(Ti)-based multifunctional platform for colorimetric detections of 
biomolecules and Hg2+, J. Mater. Chem. B 8 (1) (2020) 114–124, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C9TB02183C.
[27] Y. Chen, Y. Gu, X. Yi, H. Huang, Y. Li, B. Yang, S. Guo, L. Bai, Conductive nano- 
gold self-assembled MXene@hemin with high catalytic activity achieved by 
strong metal-support interactions: a powerful nanozyme for development of 
electrochemical aptasensor in tuberculosis diagnosis, Chem. Eng. J. 466 (2023) 
143112, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2023.143112.
[28] S. Shi, Y. Jiang, Y. Yu, M. Liang, Q. Bai, L. Wang, D. Yang, N. Sui, Z. Zhu, Piezo- 
augmented and photocatalytic nanozyme integrated microneedles for 
antibacterial and anti-inflammatory combination therapy, Adv. Funct. Mater. 33 
(10) (2023) 2210850, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202210850.
[29] T. Wang, Q. Bai, Z. Zhu, H. Xiao, F. Jiang, F. Du, W.W. Yu, M. Liu, N. Sui, 
Graphdiyne-supported palladium-iron nanosheets: a dual-functional peroxidase 
mimetic nanozyme for glutathione detection and antibacterial application, Chem. 
Eng. J. 413 (2021) 127537, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2020.127537.
[30] L. Shang, Y. Yu, Y. Jiang, X. Liu, N. Sui, D. Yang, Z. Zhu, Ultrasound-augmented 
multienzyme-like nanozyme hydrogel spray for promoting diabetic wound healing, 
ACS Nano 17 (16) (2023) 15962–15977, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.3c04134.
[31] S. Ma, J. Wang, G. Yang, J. Yang, D. Ding, M. Zhang, Copper(II) ions enhance the 
peroxidase-like activity and stability of keratin-capped gold nanoclusters for the 
colorimetric detection of glucose, Microchim. Acta 186 (5) (2019) 271, https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00604-019-3395-8.
[32] Y.-C. Gao, C. Wang, C.-X. Zhang, H.-W. Li, Y. Wu, Controlled preparation and 
application of glutathione capped gold and platinum alloy nanoclusters with high 
peroxidase-like activity, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 109 (2022) 140–146, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jmst.2021.08.074.
[33] X. Wang, L. Xiao, A. Dong, T. Wang, Q. Qian, X. Qi, F. Chen, J. Zuo, S. Yang, H. Gu, 
Z. Chen, L. Jiang, Y. Bai, H. Kong, K. Chong, Research advances in plant 
science in China in 2016 52 (4) (2017) 394, https://doi.org/10.11983/ 
CBB17147.
[34] P. Manivasagan, T. Thambi, A. Joe, H.-W. Han, S.-H. Seo, Y. Jun Jeon, J. Conde, E.- 
S. Jang, Progress in nanomaterial-based synergistic photothermal-enhanced 
chemodynamic therapy in combating bacterial infections, Prog. Mater. Sci. 144 
(2024) 101292, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2024.101292.
[35] S.-H. Tan, S. Yougbar´e, H.-L. Chu, T.-R. Kuo, T.-M. Cheng, Hemoglobin-conjugated 
gold nanoclusters for qualitative analysis of haptoglobin phenotypes, Polymers 12 
(10) (2020) 2242, https://doi.org/10.3390/polym12102242.
[36] X. Li, X. Wu, Y. Sun, Z. Song, L. Shi, Z. Dong, Comparative analysis of the 
interaction mechanism of γ-globulin and hemoglobin with spherical and rod- 
shaped gold nanoparticles, Chem. Biol. Interact. 403 (2024) 111257, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cbi.2024.111257.
[37] V. Sashuk, K. Rogaczewski, A halogen-free synthesis of gold nanoparticles using 
gold(III) oxide, J. Nanopart. Res. 18 (9) (2016) 1–8, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11051-016-3576-x.
[38] S.K. Das, C. Dickinson, F. Lafir, D.F. Brougham, E. Marsili, Synthesis, 
characterization and catalytic activity of gold nanoparticles biosynthesized with 
Rhizopus oryzae protein extract, Green Chem. 14 (5) (2012) 1322–1334, https:// 
doi.org/10.1039/C2GC16676C.
[39] D. Chakraborty, S. Sarkar, P.K. Das, Blood dots: hemoglobin-derived carbon dots 
as hydrogen peroxide sensors and pro-drug activators, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6 
(4) (2018) 4661–4670, https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b03691.
[40] M.A. Ríos-Corripio, L.S. Arcila-Lozano, B.E. Garcia-Perez, M.E. Jaramillo-Flores, A. 
D. Hern´andez-P´erez, A. Carlos-Martínez, M. Rosales-Perez, M. Rojas-L´opez, 
Fluorescent gold nanoparticle-based bioconjugate for the detection of Salmonella, 
Anal. Lett. 49 (12) (2016) 1862–1873, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00032719.2015.1128944.
[41] W.J. Goux, L. Kopplin, A.D. Nguyen, K. Leak, M. Rutkofsky, V. 
D. Shanmuganandam, D. Sharma, H. Inouye, D.A. Kirschner, The formation of 
straight and twisted filaments from short tau peptides, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (26) 
(2004) 26868–26875, https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M402379200.
[42] V.M. Bola˜nos-García, S. Ramos, R. Castillo, J. Xicohtencatl-Cortes, J. Mas-Oliva, 
Monolayers of apolipoproteins at the air/water interface, J. Phys. Chem. B 105 
(24) (2001) 5757–5765, https://doi.org/10.1021/jp010714b.
[43] N.J. Greenfield, Using circular dichroism spectra to estimate protein secondary 
structure, Nat. Protoc. 1 (6) (2006) 2876–2890, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nprot.2006.202.
[44] P.P. Samuel, W.C. Ou, G.N. Phillips, J.S. Olson, Mechanism of human 
apohemoglobin unfolding, Biochemistry 56 (10) (2017) 1444–1459, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acs.biochem.6b01235.
[45] Y.-B. Yan, Q. Wang, H.-W. He, H.-M. Zhou, Protein thermal aggregation involves 
distinct regions: sequential events in the heat-induced unfolding and aggregation 
of hemoglobin, Biophys. J. 86 (3) (2004) 1682–1690, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
s0006-3495(04)74237-x.
[46] F. Meng, H. Yin, Y. Li, S. Zheng, F. Gan, G. Ye, One-step synthesis of 
enzyme-stabilized gold nanoclusters for fluorescent ratiometric 
detection of hydrogen peroxide, glucose and uric acid, Microchem. J. 
141 (2018) 431–437, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2018.06.006.
[47] O. Adeniyi, S. Sicwetsha, P. Mashazi, Nanomagnet-silica nanoparticles decorated 
with Au@Pd for enhanced peroxidase-like activity and colorimetric glucose 
sensing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12 (2) (2020) 1973–1987, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsami.9b15123.
[48] Y. Pang, Z. Huang, Y. Yang, Y. Long, H. Zheng, Colorimetric detection of glucose 
based on ficin with peroxidase-like activity, Spectrochim. Acta - Part A Mol. 
Biomol. Spectrosc. 189 (2018) 510–515, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
saa.2017.08.056.
[49] X. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Meng, M. Wang, Y. Sun, L. Xia, Z. He, W. Hu, L. Ren, 
Z. Chen, X. Zhang, Antibacterial cascade catalytic glutathione-depleting MOF 
nanoreactors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14 (9) (2022) 11104–11115, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c24231.
[50] J.I. Garcia-Peiro, J. Bonet-Aleta, M.L. Tamayo-Fraile, J.L. Hueso, J. Santamaria, 
Platinum-based nanodendrites as glucose oxidase-mimicking surrogates, 
Nanoscale (2023) 14399–14408, https://doi.org/10.1039/d3nr02026f.
[51] B. Jiang, D. Duan, L. Gao, M. Zhou, K. Fan, Y. Tang, J. Xi, Y. Bi, Z. Tong, G.F. Gao, 
N. Xie, A. Tang, G. Nie, M. Liang, X. Yan, Standardized assays for determining the 
catalytic activity and kinetics of peroxidase-like nanozymes, Nat. Protoc. 13 (7) 
(2018) 1506–1520, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-018-0001-1.
[52] H. Burachaloo, A. Ranjieyhani, P.A. Gurr, D.E. Dunstan, G.G. Qiao, Combined 
fenton and starvation therapies using hemoglobin and glucose oxidase, Nanoscale 
11 (12) (2019) 5705–5716, https://doi.org/10.1039/c8nr09107b.
[53] J.M.C. Gutteridge, Iron promoters of the fenton reaction and lipid peroxidation 
can be released from haemoglobin by peroxides, FEBS Lett. 201 (2) (1986) 
291–295, https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-5793(86)80626-3.
[54] A. Kanwal, B. Saif, A. Muhammad, W. Liu, J. Liu, H. Ren, P. Yang, Z. Lei, 
Hemoglobin-promoted growth of polyhedral gold nanoparticles for the detection 
of glucose, H2O2, and ascorbic acid, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 6 (6) (2023) 
4734–4746, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.3c00062.
[55] Y.-Q. Huang, S. Fu, Y.-S. Wang, J.-H. Xue, X.-L. Xiao, S.-H. Chen, B. Zhou, 
Protamine-gold nanoclusters as peroxidase mimics and the selective enhancement 
of their activity by mercury ions for highly sensitive colorimetric assay of Hg(II), 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 410 (28) (2018) 7385–7394, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00216-018-1344-8.
[56] Ali, R.; Alattar, A.; Alshaman, R.; Ghabban, A.; Alanazi, S.; Al-Brahimi, H.; Alatwi, 
M.; Jlawi, A.; Albalawi, A.; Moutair Awad Alatawi, A.; Al balawi, B.; Al-Marwani, 
A.; El-Wekil, M. M. Sensing the Invisible: Ultrasensitive and selective 
colorimetric detection of E. coli O157:H7 based on masking the 
peroxidase-mimetic activity of aptamer-modified Au/Fe3O4. Food 
Chem. 2024, 443, 138564. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2024.138564.
[57] K. Ma, M. Yin, X.-X. Wang, C.-Y. Wang, K.-Z. Chen, S.-L. Qiao, Gold nanocluster- 
based nanozyme for high-throughput colorimetric detection of SARS-CoV-2, ACS 
Appl. Nano Mater. 7 (9) (2024) 10660–10669, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsanm.4c01049.
[58] L. Jiang, Y. Fan, Y. Li, X. Li, X. Yang, Q. Zhang, Design and application of flower- 
like Iron single-atom nanozymes for sensitive colorimetric detection of caffeic 
acid, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 8 (12) (2025) 6115–6124, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsanm.5c00315.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
17 

[59] X. Liu, T. Gao, H. Liu, Y. Fang, L. Wang, Fabrication of peroxidase-mimic iron 
oxide/carbon nanocomposite for highly sensitive colorimetric detection, J. Exp. 
Nanosci. 17 (1) (2022) 75–85, https://doi.org/10.1080/17458080.2022.2030470.
[60] M. Huo, L. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Shi, Construction of 
single-iron-atom nanocatalysts for highly efficient catalytic 
antibiotics, Small 15 (31) (2019) 1901834, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
smll.201901834.
[61] Y. Han, L. Luo, L. Zhang, Y. Kang, H. Sun, J. Dan, J. Sun, W. Zhang, T. Yue, 
J. Wang, Oxidase-like Fe–Mn bimetallic nanozymes for colorimetric detection of 
ascorbic acid in kiwi fruit, LWT 154 (2021) 112821, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
lwt.2021.112821.
[62] S.R.H. Jangi, Experimental evaluation of kinetic characteristics of 
SiO2@AuNPs nanocomposite and BSA-stabilized gold nanoparticles 
toward peroxidase-mediated reactions, Adv. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 7 (1) 
(2023) 1–11.
[63] M.S. Kim, J. Lee, H.S. Kim, A. Cho, K.H. Shim, T.N. Le, S.S.A. An, J.W. Han, M. Kim, 
Il; Lee, J., Heme cofactor-resembling Fe–N single site embedded graphene as 
nanozymes to selectively detect H2O2 with high sensitivity, Adv. Funct. Mater. 30 
(1) (2020) 1905410, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201905410.
[64] C. Zhang, C. Chen, D. Zhao, G. Kang, F. Liu, F. Yang, Y. Lu, J. Sun, Multienzyme 
cascades based on highly efficient metal-nitrogen-carbon nanozymes for 
construction of versatile bioassays, Anal. Chem. 94 (8) (2022) 3485–3493, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.1c04018.
[65] J. Lu, Y. Xiong, C. Liao, F. Ye, Colorimetric detection of uric acid in human urine 
and serum based on peroxidase mimetic activity of MIL-53(Fe), Anal. Methods 7 
(23) (2015) 9894–9899, https://doi.org/10.1039/c5ay02240a.
[66] Q. Lu, J. Deng, Y. Hou, H. Wang, H. Li, Y. Zhang, One-step electrochemical 
synthesis of ultrathin graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets and their application to 
the detection of uric acid, Chem. Commun. 51 (61) (2015) 12251–12253, https:// 
doi.org/10.1039/c5cc04231c.
[67] Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Yang, Y. Liu, F. Hu, K. Zhu, X. Jiang, Gold nanoclusters for 
targeting methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in vivo, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
57 (15) (2018) 3958–3962.
[68] J. Shan, X. Li, K. Yang, W. Xiu, Q. Wen, Y. Zhang, L. Yuwen, L. Weng, Z. Teng, 
L. Wang, Efficient bacteria killing by Cu2WS4 nanocrystals with enzyme-like 
properties and bacteria-binding ability, ACS Nano 13 (12) (2019) 13797–13808, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.9b03868.
[69] Y.N. Slavin, J. Asnis, U.O. H¨afeli, H. Bach, Metal nanoparticles: understanding the 
mechanisms behind antibacterial activity, J. Nanobiotechnol. 15 (1) (2017) 1–20, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-017-0308-z.
[70] P. Lu, K. Takai, V.M. Weaver, Z. Werb, Extracellular matrix degradation and 
remodeling in development and disease, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3 (12) 
(2011) a005058, https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a005058.
[71] H. Medfai, A. Khalil, A. Rousseau, V. Nuyens, M. Paumann-Page, B. Sevcnikar, P. 
G. Furtmüller, C. Obinger, N. Moguilevsky, O. Peulen, M. Herfs, V. Castronovo, 
M. Amri, P. Van Antwerpen, L. Vanhamme, K. Zouaoui Boudjeltia, Human 
peroxidasin 1 promotes angiogenesis through ERK1/2, Akt, and FAK pathways, 
Cardiovasc. Res. 115 (2) (2019) 463–475, https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvy179.
[72] V. Panagopoulos, I. Zinonos, D.A. Leach, S.J. Hay, V. Liapis, A. Zysk, W.V. Ingman, 
M.O. DeNichilo, A. Evdokiou, Uncovering a new role for peroxidase enzymes as 
drivers of angiogenesis, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 68 (2015) 128–138, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biocel.2015.09.006.
[73] X. Ren, L. Chang, Y. Hu, X. Zhao, S. Xu, Z. Liang, X. Mei, Z. Chen, Au@MOFs used 
as peroxidase-like catalytic nanozyme for bacterial infected wound healing 
through bacterial membranes disruption and protein leakage promotion, Mater. 
Des. 229 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2023.111890.
A. Kanwal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Chemical Engineering Journal 525 (2025) 170293 
18