Ultrasmall Coinage Metal Nanoclusters as Promising Theranostic
Probes for Biomedical Applications
Ge Yang, Ziping Wang, Fanglin Du, Fuyi Jiang, Xun Yuan,* and Jackie Y. Ying*
Cite This: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
ABSTRACT: Ultrasmall coinage metal nanoclusters (NCs, <3 nm) have emerged as a novel class of theranostic probes due to their
atomically precise size and engineered physicochemical properties. The rapid advances in the design and applications of metal NC-
based theranostic probes are made possible by the atomic-level engineering of metal NCs. This Perspective article examines (i) how
the functions of metal NCs are engineered for theranostic applications, (ii) how a metal NC-based theranostic probe is designed and
how its physicochemical properties affect the theranostic performance, and (iii) how metal NCs are used to diagnose and treat
various diseases. We first summarize the tailored properties of metal NCs for theranostic applications in terms of biocompatibility
and tumor targeting. We focus our discussion on the theranostic applications of metal NCs in bioimaging-directed disease diagnosis,
photoinduced disease therapy, nanomedicine, drug delivery, and optical urinalysis. Lastly, an outlook on the challenges and
opportunities in the future development of metal NCs for theranostic applications is provided.
1. INTRODUCTION
Ultrasmall nanoclusters (NCs) of coinage metals (e.g., Au, Ag,
and Cu) with a core size of ≤3 nm have emerged as a novel
class of functional nanomaterials.1,2 They are widely studied in
the areas of sensing,3−6 catalysis,7−16 environmental protec-
tion,17 energy conversion,18−20 and biomedicine.21 Metal NCs
are attractive in biomedicine,22,23 especially in disease
theranostics,24 due to their multi-functionalities in the
following aspects. (i) Due to the strong quantum confinement
effect in the sub-3-nm regime, metal NCs possess intriguing
molecule-like properties such as strong photoluminescence
(PL),25−30 chirality,31−33 and HOMO−LUMO transi-
tions,34−39 which can be engineered in biomedical applications
such as non-invasive PL imaging for disease diagnosis.21,22,24,40
(ii) The metal NC core and ligand shell structure (Figure 1)41
can both be precisely modulated at the atomic/molecular
level,42,43 allowing their physicochemical properties to be
tailored for desired functionalities.4,44 Specifically, the variation
of one atom or the ligand can trigger significant changes in the
NCs’ physicochemical properties.42,45−47 This provides
numerous opportunities in manipulating the functions of
NCs.48,49
Functional nanomaterials have been developed as theranos-
tic probes with potential for clinical translation. These include
inorganic nanoparticles (e.g., metal nanoparticles,50 quantum
dots,51 and carbon- or silica-based nanomaterials52,53) and
organic luminophores (e.g., small-molecule and macromolec-
ular luminophores).54 While the inorganic nanomaterials
provide for size/composition-tunable luminescence emissions,
large Stokes shifts, and high photostability, the organic
luminophores present flexibility in tailoring structures/surface
chemistry and tunable structure−property relationships.55
Atomically precise metal NCs can offer the key advantages
associated with both inorganic and organic nanomaterials. In
particular, metal NCs’ molecule-like properties, ultrasmall size,
rich and tailorable surface chemistry, tunable size/composition,
large Stokes shift, excellent biocompatibility, good photo-
stability, and good renal clearance present major opportunities
for applications in disease theranostics.5,21,23,24,56
The engineering of metal NCs has moved progressively from
the nanoscale toward the atomic level.43,57 This has led to
Published: May 18, 2023
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the “metal core−ligand shell”
structure of metal NCs, which can be engineered to achieve unique
physicochemical properties. Conventionally used hydrophilic ligands
and several representative structures of metal NCs are shown in the
figure.
Perspective
pubs.acs.org/JACS
© 2023 American Chemical Society
11879
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 24, 2026 at 02:08:35 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

increased efforts toward controlling NCs’ physicochemical
properties for specific functions, creating a variety of metal
NCs as theranostic probes for disease diagnosis and
therapy.21,23,24,58
To control NCs’ physicochemical properties, the engineer-
ing of metal NCs has been driven in three areas. The first
direction is focused on the size and structural tuning of metal
NCs,34,37,59−61 by which unique physicochemical properties of
metal NCs can be achieved through synthesis of atomically
precise metal NCs of different sizes and structures.62−67 For
example, the widely studied water-soluble Au25(SR)18,
Au38(SR)24, and Au44(SR)26 NCs have remarkable distinctions
in sizes and structures (Figure 1). Research efforts in this area
not only lead to metal NCs with interesting properties or
functions for theranostics64,68 but also contribute to the
understanding of the relationship between size/structure and
performance of metal NCs.69
Second, NC engineering has focused on tailoring the cluster
composition to offer new or improved physicochemical
properties.38,42,70−72 Heterometallic NCs with bi-, tri-, and
even tetra-metallic compositions have been derived to yield
composition-dependent properties42,71,73,74 (e.g., enzyme-
mimicking properties and stabilities),48,75 which make them
useful as theranostic probes.
In addition to engineering the metallic core, surface ligand
control of metal NCs is also of great interest.76−80 This third
area of NC engineering can be used to regulate biocompat-
ibility and biological interactions with NCs.81−83 Water-soluble
molecules such as γ-glutathione (GSH), cysteine (Cys), 6-
mercaptohexanoic acid (MHA), mercaptobenzoic acid (MBA),
dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA), and dimercaptosuccinic acid
(DMSA) have been used as the ligand shell of metal NCs
(Figure 1). Ligand engineering also imparts additional
functions, by which metal NCs may overcome the limitations
of conventional theranostic agents and achieve greater
efficacy.84−86 To date, hundreds of metal NCs with different
physicochemical properties and functions have been designed
as theranostic probes.5,21,23,24,56,58,87
In this Perspective, we present the engineering of NC
functions, such as biocompatibility and tumor targeting. The
major theranostic applications of these multi-functional metal
NCs in bioimaging, photoinduced disease therapy, nano-
medicine, drug delivery, and optical urinalysis are highlighted.
Outlooks on the challenges and opportunities in the future
development of metal NC-based theranostics for clinical
translations are discussed.
2. ENGINEERING FUNCTIONS OF METAL
NANOCLUSTERS AS THERANOSTIC PROBES
Metal NCs have to fulfill biocompatibility requirements for
medical applications,88 addressing cytotoxicity,89 tissue/organ
clearance (e.g., kidney, liver, sialaden, and muscle),84,90−92 and
neurotoxicity.93 They are also expected to have high specificity
or selectivity to lesion locations, which has implications on the
diagnostic and therapeutic efficacies, as well as side effects.94
For example, passive or active tumor-targeting ability is
required for tumor theranostics.95−97 For intracranial disease
Table 1. Properties and Applications of Metal NCs and Other Representative Renal-Clearable Theranostic Probesa
Theranostic Probes
λex/λem
Molecular Weight (Da)
Core/HD (nm)
Renal Clearance Efficiency (%ID)
Refs
Probing the Glomerular Filtration Rate
GSH-Au NCs
710/830
−
2.5/3.3
42 (24 h p.i.)
105, 106
LA-sulfobetaine-Au NCs
532/1000
−
1.6/4.5
70 (3 h p.i.)
107
Au25(GSH)18
800/1050
∼10 437
1.0/3.2−3.6
71 (24 h p.i.)
108, 109
86.6 (48 h p.i.)
Au18(GSH)14
−
∼7833
−
26.8 (24 h p.i.)
64
Au15(GSH)13
−
∼6936
−
22.9 (24 h p.i.)
64
Au10−11(GSH)10−11
−
5032−5536
−
19.1 (24 h p.i.)
64
Porphyrin-PEG
420/650
16 200
−
75 (24 h p.i.)
110
Imaging and Therapy
GSH-Au NCs
350/810
−
2.5/3.3
50 (24 h p.i.)
82
PEG-Au NCs
350/810
−
2.3/5.5
33 (24 h p.i.)
82
GSH/cysteamine-Au NCs
310/600
−
−
50 (24 h p.i.)
111
Au NCs
380/810
−
2.4/4.2
84 (3 d p.i.)
112
Ligand: 1-thio-β-D-glucose
GSH/folate-Au NCs
520/640
−
1.4/4
92 (24 h p.i.)
113
Au NCs
808/1050
−
1.85/2.5
75 (24 h p.i.)
94
Ligand: β-CD, anti-CD326
α-Lactalbumin-Au NCs
520/705
−
<2.5/<6
71.3 (48 h p.i.)
114
Polymeric renal reporter
−/710
−
−
78 (24 h p.i.)
115
SARS-CyCD
−/710
−
−
59 ± 5 (24 h p.i.)
116
Macromolecular CyP1
695/720
−
−
94 (24 h p.i.)
117
GSH-CuS dots
980/PA
−
4.8/5.8
52 (24 h p.i.)
118
Carbon dots
808/925
−
6/8
65 (6 h p.i.)
119
Porphyrinic-MOF dots
680/710
−
4/6
45 (24 h p.i.)
120
a−, unknown or unreported. λex, excitation wavelength. λem, emission wavelength. HD, hydrodynamic diameter. ID, injected dose. p.i., post-
injection. β-CD, β-cyclodextrin. Anti-CD326, anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecule antibody. SARS-CyCD, molecular probe for the detection of
SARS-CoV-2 protease. CyP1, macromolecular reporter with a biomarker-reactive moiety, a luminescent signaling moiety, and a renal clearance
moiety (2-hydroxypropyl)-β-CD. MOF, metal−organic framework.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11880

theranostics, metal NCs have to bypass the blood−brain
barrier (BBB) and reach the lesion locations.98
2.1. Biocompatibility of Metal NCs. Biocompatibility of
metal NCs is assessed at the in vitro and in vivo levels. The
latter includes renal clearance, liver clearance, saliva excretion,
muscle clearance, and/or neurotoxicity. Both in vitro and in
vivo biocompatibility can be affected by the size, structure,
surface chemistry, and composition of NCs.
2.1.1. Cytotoxicity. Metal NCs should be non-cytotoxic or
low in cytotoxicity for diagnostic applications.88 Both the
metallic core and the ligand shell of NCs can impact
cytotoxicity. Although some metals such as Au are bio-
inert,99 doping of toxic species (such as Hg and Cd) in the
metal core of NCs may present major cytotoxicity issues.
However, the cytotoxicity of metal NCs may be reduced by
engineering their ligand shell as follows. (i) Hydrophilic
surface ligands of metal NCs would be favorable for
biocompatibility. This can be further improved by using
functional ligands such as GSH, Cys, and DHLA, because
these anti-oxidative ligands may inhibit cell apoptosis and
promote cell proliferation or angiogenesis.85,88,89 (ii) Bio-
compatibility can also be achieved by modifying the NC’s
ligand shell by grafting biocompatible molecules on the surface.
(iii) Chirality of ligands affects biocompatibility.100 For
instance, dextral GSH-protected Au NCs (GSH-Au NCs)
showed neither cytotoxicity nor hemolysis as compared to the
levorotatory analogs.31
2.1.2. Renal Clearance. Renal clearance is the main
excretion pathway for ultrasmall metal NCs.87 Nanomaterials
with poor renal clearance can accumulate in the kidneys and
liver,87,96,101 which would not only lead to severe toxicity but
also influence the theranostic efficacy due to the accumulation-
induced, strong interference background. Metal NCs can be
manipulated in terms of hydrodynamic diameter (HD), surface
charge, stability, and metal core density to achieve good renal
clearance.23,101 Key information about the size, ligand,
luminescence, and renal clearance efficiencies of metal NCs
is summarized in Table 1, along with data for other key renal-
clearable theranostic probes.
The HD of nanomaterials critically impacts renal clearance,
as the kidney filtration threshold is ∼6 nm.64 The ultrasmall
HD (<6 nm) of NCs allows for good renal clearance.64,101 The
Au25 NCs stabilized by the bulky bovine serum albumin (BSA)
protein (with a molecular weight of 67K) have a HD of ∼6
nm.102 The metal NCs typically protected by short peptides or
small thiol molecules are much smaller in HD. Hence, NCs
often show excellent renal clearance.91 However, this does not
mean that smaller metal NCs have faster renal clearance
kinetics. For example, GSH-functionalized Au10−11, Au15, and
Au18 NCs showed slower renal clearance than Au25 NCs with
4× to 9× reduction in the early kidney elimination stage
(Figure 2a) due to the easier trapping of smaller Au NCs by
the glomerular glycocalyx.64
In addition to HD, the surface chemistry and stability of
metal NCs may also significantly influence their renal
clearance. For example, zwitterionic GSH-Au NCs (note:
GSH consists of both carboxylic and amino groups) displayed
faster renal clearance than polyethylene glycol (PEG)-modified
Au NCs with the same core size,82 which could not be
achieved by Cys-Au NCs (which are of the same size as GSH-
Au NCs) with poor stability.91
The density of a NC’s metal core also has a notable impact
on its renal clearance. The renal clearance efficiencies of metal
NCs in the early elimination stage exponentially decreased
with increased core density because metal NCs with lower
densities could distribute more easily inside the body and be
filtered through the kidneys.103
The above studies indicate that the NCs’ surface chemistry,
stability, and density all need to be considered in addition to
HD, so as to regulate the renal clearance behavior of NCs for
theranostic applications. Renal clearance is a complex process
that involves biological interactions with NCs inside the
kidneys. Decomposed substances from the metal NCs in a
physiological environment would also impact renal clear-
ance.104
2.1.3. Liver Clearance. Liver clearance of metal NCs is also
of great importance. While much attention has been devoted
toward renal clearance of metal NCs,23 very few studies have
Figure 2. (a) (Top) X-ray images of mice after being intravenously injected with Au10−11, Au18, or Au25 NCs. (Bottom) Renal clearance efficiencies
of Au10−11, Au15, Au18, and Au25 NCs in comparison with 1.7, 2.5, and 6 nm GSH-Au NPs 24 h post-injection vs. number of Au atoms. Adapted
with permission from ref 64. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (b) Liver GSH-mediated biotransformation impacting in vivo transport of ICG-
GSH-Au25 NCs. Adapted with permission from ref 84. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11881

focused on liver clearance of NCs.84 It is well-known that large-
sized nanomaterials could be degraded by macrophages in the
liver and spleen and then secreted into the duodenum via the
bile duct.55,121 Actually, metal NCs can also be cleared by the
liver through a detoxification process that is a natural defense
response to remove foreign materials to minimize their toxicity.
Currently, a GSH-mediated biotransformation has been
identified as one of major detoxification pathways to eliminate
heavy metals and lipophilic molecules. Jiang et al. recently
utilized indocyanine green (ICG)-modified GSH-Au25 NCs to
probe the GSH-mediated biotransformation by avoiding the
detoxification pathway of liver macrophage uptake (Figure
2b).84 The results revealed that the abundant GSH and Cys as-
produced by liver cells could replace the Au NCs’ ligands and
reduce the serum protein adsorption on the NCs surface,
which significantly changed the retention time in the blood and
the targeting and clearance of NCs. This GSH-mediated
biotransformation also applied to large-sized Au nanoparticles
(NPs) of 5−100 nm. Overall, the liver could regulate the
transport of metal NCs via the GSH-mediated biotransforma-
tion, which could maximize their disease-targeting capability
but minimize the non-specific accumulation and health hazards
of off-target metal NCs, facilitating the applicability of metal
NCs in disease theranostics.
2.1.4. Salivary Excretion. In addition to kidney and liver
excretion, salivary excretion is also an important excretion
pathway for those metal NCs with lower density and higher
vascular permeability. Sialaden can produce ∼1−2 L of saliva
per day containing abundant digestive enzymes accompanied
by the excretion of bacteria, viruses, and other species.90
Recently, GSH-Ag NCs were found to have higher vascular
permeability than the same-sized GSH-Au NCs due to their
lower density, allowing them to rapidly infiltrate into the
mandibular salivary gland with a longer retention (Figure
3a).90 Such Ag NCs could be effectively absorbed by transverse
striatal cells and excretory duct cells, and eventually secreted
into saliva by excretory ducts, which was not achieved by GSH-
Au NCs. This salivary excretion pathway of Ag NCs could be
utilized to treat some infectious diseases by integrating the
antibacterial functions of both saliva and Ag NCs. More
systematic studies are required to gain a deeper understanding
of the effects of size, composition, surface chemistry, and
stability on the salivary excretion of metal NCs.
2.1.5. Muscle Metabolism and Neurotoxicity. Due to the
complexity of biosystems, the biotoxicity assessment of metal
NCs should go beyond organs to cover muscles and the
nervous system, which requires a lengthy evaluation and
efficient regulation of bio-nano interactions. For example, an in
Figure 3. (a) Schematic illustration of the permeability, retention, and excretion of GSH-Ag NCs in a sub-mandibular salivary gland with GSH-Au
NCs as reference. Adapted with permission from ref 90. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the time-dependent clearance of
GSH-Au NCs injected in mice. Adapted with permission from ref 92. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.
Figure 4. (a) In vivo PL images of tumor-bearing mice 3 h after injection with (left) IRDye 800CW and (right) ultrasmall GSH-Au NCs. Adapted
with permission from ref 96. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Positron emission tomography (PET) images of lung-tumor-bearing
mice 1 h after injection with (left) 64Cu NC@BSA and (right) 64Cu NC@BSA-LHRH. Adapted with permission from ref 126. Copyright 2015
American Chemical Society.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11882

vivo toxicity survey of GSH-Au NCs over 90 days (Figure 3b)
revealed that, while most Au NCs were excreted by the kidneys
and liver within the first 30 days, the remaining Au NCs were
stored in muscles.92 The stored Au NCs could be eventually
released into the blood, resulting in anomalous elevation of Au
species in the major organs and re-initiation of organ toxicities
at 30−90 days. This muscle storage−release of metal NCs
suggests possible re-accumulation and toxicity of nanomaterials
in organisms over an extended period of time, which warrants
further evaluation of the long-term biotoxicity of metal NCs.
Leveraging the surface chemistry engineering of metal NCs
may minimize the muscle metabolism concerns through
optimizing the bio-nano interaction.
The core−shell engineering of metal NCs also provides
opportunities in modulating their influence on neural
systems.48,122,123 For instance, metal NCs with substitution
of a single metal atom could show distinctive enzyme-
mimicking activities and help in mitigating neuroinflammation
by eliminating oxidative stress.48,75 Moreover, anti-oxidative
surface ligands such as GSH and DHLA can be used to
stabilize metal NCs in order to achieve a neuroprotecting
function. Hao et al. found that GSH-Au25 NCs did not cause
permanent damage to the nervous system, even at ultrahigh
injection doses (200−500 mg/kg), and no obvious structural
changes were observed in neurons and glial cells in histology.93
These results may pave the way for theranostic application of
metal NC probes to neurological diseases.
2.2. Tumor Targeting. Malignant tumors have been a
major threat to human health. A variety of metal NC-based
theranostic probes have been developed for tumor diagnosis
and treatment.24 Such probes have to possess tumor-targeting
ability with high selectivity and efficacy, and present minimal
side effects. Metal NCs have been designed with passive or
active tumor-targeting capability.21 They intrinsically exhibit
passive tumor-targeting ability associated with the enhanced
permeation and retention (EPR) effect.82,102,124 For example,
GSH-Au NCs exhibited longer tumor retention time and faster
normal tissue clearance than conventional organic dyes (Figure
4a).96 This was due to the ability of NCs to escape rapid renal
clearance. Recent studies demonstrated that the passive tumor-
targeting ability of metal NCs was predominantly dependent
on their size,125 density, and surface chemistry82,103 and
modulated by the tumor microenvironment.111
Active tumor targeting of metal NCs has been mainly
achieved with the application of tumor-targeting ligands on the
NCs’ surface. For example, by grafting a tumor-targeting
peptide, luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH), on
the surface of 64Cu NC@BSA, 4× higher tumor uptake was
attained with the as-prepared 64Cu NC@BSA-LHRH (Figure
4b).126 Other tumor-targeting molecules (e.g., folic acid and
epidermal growth factor receptor antibody) have been
employed to modify metal NCs for active tumor target-
ing.127,128 Tumor-targeting molecules for ligand engineering
can be selected based on the targeting receptors in different
tumors. In addition, it would be important to take into
consideration the toxicity and in vivo clearance of the metal
NCs modified with tumor-targeting molecules since the
targeting moieties may significantly increase HD and lead to
unwanted side effects.
Figure 5. (a) PL of Au NCs from the visible to the NIR-I and NIR-II regions. Adapted with permission from refs 107, 143, and 145. Copyright
2011 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2021 Wiley-VCH, and 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) (Left) NIR-II-emitting CD-Au NCs for (middle)
protein labeling and (right) tumor-targeted imaging. Adapted with permission from ref 94. Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration
of a NIR-II-emitting Au NC-Pt probe with GSH-scavenging capability for imaging and treatment of hepatocellular cancer. Adapted with permission
from ref 135. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11883

Another consideration for metal NCs-based theranostic
probes involves the targeting of brain tumors and lesion
locations of other intracranial diseases. This is particularly
challenging because the delivery of these probes is generally
prevented by the BBB. The BBB is a semipermeable boundary
in the central nervous system (CNS), mainly composed of
endothelial tight junctions with pericyte and astrocyte foot-
process coverage, protecting the brain from direct exposure to
blood-borne pathogens and maintaining homeostasis of the
brain microenvironment.129 Bypassing the BBB is critical for
NCs-based theranostics for neurodegenerative or intracranial
diseases.31,98,122 Renal-clearable metal NCs can target brain
tumors through extravasation from the leaky blood−tumor
barrier into the tumor interstitium. For example, luminescent
GSH-Au NCs with a HD of 3 nm could bypass the BBB and
target the intracranial glioblastoma multiforme tissue with
higher efficiency (2.3×) and specificity (3×) than the
surrounding normal brain tissue.98 This could be due to
their longer retention time in the bloodstream as well as the
efficient excretion from the leaky brain tumor vessels into the
tumor interstitium.98 Such intracranial tumor-targeting capa-
bility of metal NCs would be very attractive. However, more
studies are needed to address the following questions. (i) How
do the surface chemistry, size, and composition of metal NCs
affect extravasation from the leaky blood−tumor barrier? (ii)
How are the infiltrated metal NCs in the brain tumors cleared
from the body?
3. THERANOSTIC APPLICATIONS OF METAL
NANOCLUSTERS
Engineering of metal NCs at the atomic and molecular levels
allows for the tuning of their physicochemical properties as
theranostic probes.21,23,24,130 For example, metal NCs have
been applied as optical probes for various imaging-directed
disease diagnoses.107,109,131,132 The unique physicochemical
properties enable metal NCs to be applied as therapeutics for
diseases such as cancer, neuroinflammation, and bacterial
infections.48,133−136 The rich surface chemistry, renal clearance,
and other attributes of metal NCs have been harnessed in drug
delivery and optical urinalysis applications.137−139 This section
discusses the applications of metal NCs in bioimaging,
photoinduced disease therapy, nanomedicine, drug delivery,
and optical urinalysis.
3.1. Bioimaging-Directed Disease Diagnosis. Ad-
vanced imaging technologies are indispensable to non-invasive
studies of the metabolism of different organs, bones, and
tissues, as well as disease diagnosis. Various metal NCs have
been designed as optical probes for PL imaging, X-ray imaging,
photoacoustic (PA) imaging, positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging, and laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
(LIBS) imaging.
3.1.1. PL Imaging. Metal NCs have demonstrated strong
PL, good photostability, large Stokes shift, rich surface
chemistry, and low or no toxicity, making them suitable
probes for PL imaging-guided disease diagnosis. PL imaging
with metal NCs from the visible (400−800 nm) to the first and
second near-infrared ranges (NIR-I: 800−1000 nm, NIR-II:
1000−1700 nm) could be achieved via engineering the ligands
or the metal core of NCs (Figure 5a).66,107,109,140−142
In 2011, Shang et al. reported orange-emitting D-penicill-
amine-Au NCs for HeLa cell imaging without much toxicity
(Figure 5a (left)).143 Subsequently, a series of luminescent
metal NCs with certain functions (e.g., pH sensitivity) was
developed based on ligand or metal core engineering and
applied to in vitro PL imaging of cells and in vivo imaging to
monitor their transport/interactions in kidneys, livers, muscles,
sialadens, etc.105,106,132,144 These early studies sparked
subsequent research on NIR-I/II-emitting metal NCs in non-
invasive theranostic applications.94,109,141,145
Compared with traditional PL imaging in the visible light
region, NIR PL imaging is more attractive due to the weak
biological background and low damages to tissues.4 Significant
efforts have been directed to the design of NIR-emitting metal
NCs for biolabeling and disease diagnosis in the past few
years.146 For example, NIR-I-emitting Au NCs were utilized to
label tissues147 and served as PL imaging contrast agents to
guide head and neck tumor surgeries.148 Recently, Zheng and
co-workers have developed a renal-clearable NIR-I-emitting Au
NCs probe for quick tumor detection96 and diagnosis of early
kidney dysfunction by monitoring kidney clearance kinetics
(KCK) of Au NCs in real time.105,106 The Au NCs with strong
NIR-I PL greatly enhanced the contrast and time window of
renal angiography by 50× and 1000×, respectively, making
them superior to the routine kidney function markers (which
were unable to probe the KCK). Zheng and co-workers have
also designed ICG-Au25 NCs as a NIR-I imaging probe for
early diagnosis of liver dysfunction caused by GSH
depletion.131 The NIR-I PL of ICG-Au25 NCs could be
recovered if the GSH concentration was well-balanced in liver
sinusoids, as GSH could replace the surface ICG on the Au25
NCs. This enabled early diagnosis of abnormal liver function,
such as acetaminophen-induced liver injury.
NIR-II PL imaging with deeper tissue penetration and
higher spatiotemporal resolution has become very promising
compared with visible and NIR-I PL imaging.146 Renal-
clearable NIR-II-emitting Au NCs with an emission peak of
1000 nm have been reported with lipoic acid-based
sulfobetaine as ligands. These NCs provided higher contrast
and resolution for in vivo imaging than NIR-I PL probes
(Figure 5a).107 Subsequently, researchers have found that
previously non-luminescent Au25 and Au24M1 (M = Ag, Cu,
and Zn) alloy NCs in visible and NIR-I regions could emit
NIR-II PL. These NCs were deployed for in vivo NIR-II PL
imaging of cerebral vessels, tumor metastasis,109 bone tissues,
and vascular disorders with high contrast and signal-to-
background ratio.140,141
Additional NIR-II-emitting Au NCs protected by other
ligands, such as ribonuclease and cyclodextrin (CD), have also
been developed for detecting tumors (e.g., early intestinal
tumor) and probing the protein blood circulation based on PL
imaging (Figure 5b).94,149 Interestingly, such Au NCs probes
were also capable for PL-imaging-guided tumor therapy. For
example, Yang et al. developed Pt(IV)-loaded Au NCs (Au
NC-Pt) with NIR-II PL and GSH consumption characteristics
for imaging lethal serous ovarian cancer deep in the abdominal
cavity and treating hepatocellular cancer (Figure 5c).135 Aside
from monitoring the in vivo Pt(IV) transport by NIR-II PL
imaging, Au NC-Pt also consumed intracellular GSH for Pt
detoxification, effectively maximizing the chemotherapy effect
of Pt(IV) for hepatocellular cancer.
Overall, PL imaging, especially NIR-II PL imaging that offers
non-invasiveness, no radiation hazard, high contrast, deep
tissue penetration, and high spatiotemporal resolution, is very
attractive for imaging-directed disease diagnosis. The large
family of luminescent metal NCs has supported the rapid
development of PL imaging technologies for biolabeling and
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11884

disease diagnosis. However, further advances toward clinical
translation would depend on the following. (i) A compre-
hensive, lengthy in vivo metabolism study and biosafety
assessment would be critical for metal NCs-based theranostic
probes. (ii) The PL mechanism of metal NCs needs to be well
understood, so that the NCs can be tailored to accommodate
the diverse requirements of PL imaging.
3.1.2. PA Imaging. PA imaging is a non-invasive and non-
ionizing bioimaging modality developed in recent years. The
working principle of PA imaging is that biological tissues can
absorb non-ionizing pulsed laser light to generate a thermo-
elastic expansion. The resulting ultrasound waves are detected
by ultrasonic transducers, producing images of tissues with
optical absorption contrast. PA imaging is a hybrid imaging
modality, offering deeper penetration than optical tissue
imaging and higher selectivity than ultrasound tissue imaging,
avoiding the influence of light scattering. With the strong
optical absorption at 670 nm, which can generate good PA
signals, renal-clearable Au25 NCs have been found to provide
high time-resolution PA imaging for visualizing NCs’ transport
in kidneys (Figure 6a).108 High temporal and spatial resolution
PA imaging of Au25 NCs has allowed for the quantitative
analysis of the glomerular filtration rate of individual kidneys
under normal and pathological conditions. The metal NCs
have potential to be broadly applicable for PA-imaging-
directed disease diagnosis.
3.1.3. X-ray Imaging. X-ray irradiation is widely used for
imaging and therapy in modern medicine. X-ray imaging relies
on the use of high-energy X-rays to penetrate the human body
to obtain distinct signals since human tissues with different
densities and thicknesses would absorb X-rays to different
degrees. However, the difference between pathological and
normal tissues sometimes is not detectable by X-ray imaging,
and radiosensitizers are required to enhance the contrast.
Metal NCs featuring high-Z, strong X-ray attenuation
coefficient, good biocompatibility, and rich surface chemistry
have been considered as novel radiosensitizers for X-ray-
imaging-directed disease diagnosis.124,150 For example, Xu et
al. employed GSH-Au NCs as a radiosensitizer for X-ray
imaging, achieving non-invasive diagnosis of kidney dysfunc-
tion by quantitatively analyzing the difference in transporting
Au NCs between the normal and injured kidneys (Figure
6b).150 In addition to the strong X-ray attenuation coefficient
of Au atoms, the high contrast of Au NCs in X-ray imaging also
benefited from their longer retention in kidneys, which was not
exhibited by commercial iodine-based radiosensitizers. This
Figure 6. (a) PA images at different time points showing the transport of Au25(GSH)18 from the abdominal aorta to the renal parenchyma and
renal pelvis in both kidneys. Adapted with permission from ref 108. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (b) X-ray images of the urinary system in mice
with unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) before and after intravenous injection of GSH-Au NCs. Adapted with permission from ref 150.
Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (c) PET images of 64Cu-doped Au NCs functionalized with active targeting ligand AMD3100 in a breast-tumor-
bearing mouse expressing CXCR4 receptors. Adapted with permission from ref 151. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) LIBS images
of (left) kidney slices, (middle) spleen slices, and (right) liver slices after injection of Au NCs. Adapted with permission from ref 152. Copyright
2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11885

impressive study demonstrated the high efficacy of Au NC-
based radiosensitizer in X-ray imaging.
3.1.4. PET Imaging. PET is a nuclear medicine imaging
modality that employs radioactive species to visualize and
measure changes in metabolic activities of the cells in body
tissues in vivo in a non-invasive, quantitative, and dynamic
manner. It is different from other nuclear medicine imaging
procedures because it monitors metabolic processes within
body tissues, while other techniques quantitatively detect the
radioactive species accumulated in a specific site of body
tissues to check the tissues’ function. With its high sensitivity,
excellent temporal resolution, and tissue penetration, PET is
routinely used for diagnosis of cancers, neurological disorders,
and cardiopathies.151 The 64Cu radioisotope showed attractive
half-life (12.7 h) and decay properties, making it suitable for
PET imaging and radiotherapy.126 To overcome the in vivo
instability and varying physicochemical properties associated
with conventional 64Cu-doped NP-based radioactive agents,
Gao et al. have developed radioactive 64Cu NC@BSA for PET
imaging-guided early yet sensitive diagnosis of primary
orthotopic lung tumors.126 The as-designed 64Cu NC@BSA
could also emit NIR PL, providing mutual signal verifications
with dual-mode PET concurrent to NIR PL imaging.
Subsequently, 64Cu-doped Au NCs were also developed for
PET imaging of breast cancer and metastasis (Figure 6c).151
The high cost associated with radioisotope metal species
compared to the non-radioactive species may limit the clinical
applications of radioactive metal NC-directed PET imaging.
3.1.5. LIBS Imaging and In-Line X-ray Synchrotron Phase
Contrast Tomography (XSPCT). LIBS is an atomic emission
spectroscopy that utilizes a high-energy pulsed laser to create a
microplasma on the surface of focused substances, thus
emitting light with a specific wavelength from the atomized
yet excited samples for the analysis of their composition and
concentration. LIBS can be used for multi-element imaging of
biological tissues to visualize the distribution and dynamics of
metal NCs in vivo.152 In addition, due to the high density of Au
atoms and strong PL characteristics, Au NCs can be non-
invasively tracked in living animals by X-ray tomography and
optical techniques.
Le Guével et al. have employed GSH-Au25 and sulfonated
DHLA-Au NCs as powerful imaging agents to monitor
metabolic process in malignant gliomas by LIBS (Figure 6d),
XSPCT, and PL imaging.152 XSPCT is an efficient 3D imaging
modality used to image samples with detailed anatomical
information based on a greater distinction between soft tissues.
It allows for the mapping of Au species within the organs with
a resolution of 3 μm. Metal NCs-sensitized LIBS imaging and
XSPCT are currently at an early developmental phase but have
substantial potential.
Various metal NCs have been designed as imaging agents for
diverse imaging modalities. This has led to a greater
understanding of in vivo metabolic activities and enabled the
accurate and sensitive diagnosis of many diseases. However,
most metal NCs-directed imaging applications have been
based on a mono-imaging mode. Dual- or multi-mode imaging
applications would be of great interest and await further
advancement with the design of multi-functional metal NCs-
based imaging probes.
3.2. Photoinduced Therapy. As mentioned earlier, many
metal NCs are photoresponsive, which enables them to be not
only effective contrast agents for imaging-directed disease
diagnosis but also photosensitizers for disease therapy. Metal
NCs-based photoinduced therapy can be generally divided into
three categories: cancer radiotherapy (RT), photothermal
therapy (PTT), and photodynamic therapy (PDT).
3.2.1. RT. RT is one of main clinical cancer treatment
strategies whereby high-energy radiation, such as X-rays, is
applied to shrink tumors and kill cancer cells.124 However,
such high-energy radiation can kill both tumor cells and
healthy ones and cause damage to normal tissues. Radio-
sensitizers with RT enhancement, high tumor-targeting ability,
good biocompatibility, and efficient renal clearance would be
of high interest to minimize the side effects of RT.
Renal-clearable Au NCs, such as Au10−12(GSH)10−12,
Au33−39(GSH)22−24, and Au25(GSH)18, have been developed
as radiosensitizers with excellent RT performance and good
biocompatibility (Figure 7).102,124,153 These Au NCs possess
high Z and good surface chemistry, allowing for direct
interaction with radiation and efficient energy release by
generating scattering photons, photoelectrons, positron pairs,
etc. This induced the formation of radioactive chemicals,
resulting in DNA damage and subsequent apoptosis of cancer
cells.154 The EPR effect led to greater accumulation of Au NCs
at the tumor site with better passive tumor targeting.102 GSH
on the surface facilitated escape of Au NCs from the reticulo-
endothelial system (RES) and activated the transport channels
of GSH on the cell surface.153 Au NCs have also been
functionalized with active tumor-targeting molecules, such as
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibody and RGD
peptide.128,155,156 These surface-modified Au NCs showed
higher tumor cell absorption, improving RT efficacy in tumor
ablation.
The ligand shell of metal NCs plays an important role in
determining the RT efficacy. For example, the zwitterionic
GSH surface was found to impart greater radiation enhance-
ment and tumor accumulation than BSA for the Au NCs.102
RT efficacy was also improved with smaller metal NCs. For
example, levonorgestrel-Au8 NCs showed enhanced RT
Figure 7. (a) Au10−12(GSH)10−12 NCs as radiosensitizers for
radiotherapy. (b) Time-course studies of the tumor volume and
weight of differently treated tumor-bearing mice. Adapted with
permission from ref 124. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11886

performance155 because the ultrasmall size of Au8 NCs
increased their accumulation in tumors and promoted the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) for irreversible
tumor cell apoptosis. Efficient tumor suppression (72.4%) was
achieved by Au8 NCs under X-ray irradiation.
To overcome the low efficacy of monomode RT for the
distant tumors or spontaneous metastatic tumors, Au NCs-
based theranostic probes have been designed with combina-
tional cancer therapy functions.154 Radionuclide technetium-
99m-labeled Au NCs (99mTc@Au NCs) and lutetium-177-
labeled Au NCs (177Lu@Au NCs) not only enhanced the RT
efficacy, but also induced anti-tumor immunotherapy by
activating dendritic cells. This radio-immunotherapy combina-
tional strategy was particularly effective for treating solid
tumors and distant tumors. The atomically precise Au NCs
provided opportunities to engineer their RT efficacy with size
and structure control. Metal NCs have the potential to be high-
efficiency radiosensitizers for RT through atomic-level design.
3.2.2. PDT. PDT is a clinically approved non-invasive
treatment procedure utilizing photosensitizers to convert O2 to
toxic ROS for cancer cell or bacteria killing under the
irradiation of low-energy light. Metal NCs with excellent
Figure 8. (a) Schematic illustration of the nucleus-targeting peptide-Au NCs for tumor PDT. Adapted with permission from ref 160. Copyright
2015 Wiley-VCH. (b) Synthesis and application of Cy7-Au NCs in NIR-II PL and PA imaging-guided PTT for tumors. Adapted with permission
from ref 161. Copyright 2023 Royal Society of Chemistry.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11887

optical properties and other unique features have been
demonstrated to be efficient photosensitizers for PDT.
Metal NCs have been hybridized with different nanomateri-
als such as TiO2 and carbon dots to improve PDT efficacy.
This was applied to not only PDT of tumors157 but also
photodynamic bacteria killing.158,159 However, the in vivo
metabolic behavior of such nanocomposites may be a concern
due to their larger size than the kidney filtration threshold of
∼6 nm. Subsequently, researchers have designed metal NCs
with biocompatibility, good tumor retention, and long PL
lifetime (e.g., in microseconds) as photosensitizers for PDT.
Currently there are two types of photosensitizers based on
photochemical mechanisms: (Type I) electron-transfer-direc-
ted production of superoxide anion (O2−•), hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (•OH), and (Type II) energy-
transfer-directed production of singlet oxygen (1O2). Most
reported metal NCs-based photosensitizers worked by the
latter ROS production mechanism.160,162 An example is the
peptide-coated Au NCs showing outstanding PDT efficacy for
tumors under NIR irradiation (Figure 8a).160 On the other
hand, efforts have been devoted to the design of Type I metal
NCs-based photosensitizers for PDT. For example, Han et al.
have developed DHLA-Au NCs with two-photon absorption
properties and excellent photodynamic activities,136 achieving
improved in vivo PDT efficacy under hypoxic conditions.
Similar PDT application was demonstrated with polyacryla-
mide gel-coated Au25 NCs, attaining improved cell uptake and
two-photon absorption.162 These results suggested that the
two-photon excitation properties of metal NCs improved the
PDT efficacy for the deep or large tumors by increasing tissue
penetration. In addition to cancer therapy, metal NCs-based
photosensitizers have also expanded the PDT applicability with
excellent performance for antibacterial therapy.163
To achieve more efficient PDT, the design of metal-NCs-
based photosensitizers should consider the following: (i) How
to tackle the low conversion of O2 to ROS in the hypoxic
microenvironment of solid tumors? (ii) How to deepen the
tissue penetration of light to attain efficient PDT for deep and
large tumors?
3.2.3. PTT. Unlike PDT, which involves photocatalytic ROS
production, PTT is a photoresponsive therapy whereby
photosensitizers convert light energy into heat to ablate
tumors. While metal NCs with strong PL present excellent
photodynamic activity, a different design of NCs is necessary
to acquire photothermal efficiency. For example, Yang et al.
conjugated photothermal heptamethine dye molecules (Cy7)
to NIR-II-emitting Au44 NCs using click-chemistry-mediated
surface engineering (Figure 8b).161 This improved the
photothermal efficiency of Au44 NCs from 34.95% to
65.12%. The renal-clearable Cy7-Au44 NCs possessed good
biocompatibility and pharmacokinetics, achieving NIR-II PL
and PA-imaging-guided cancer PTT with high sensitivity and
specificity. In this study, Au NCs served as theranostic probes,
offering simultaneous NIR-II PL/PA-imaging-based diagnosis
and PTT-based therapy. It illustrated the potential for
designing next-generation non-invasive theranostics for cancer.
To tackle the complexity, heterogeneity, and metastasis of
tumors, combinational therapy strategies have also been
adopted for cancer treatment. For example, Jiang et al.
developed a theranostic nanoplatform for cancer by combining
photothermal folic acid-modified polydopamine (PDA) with
temperature-sensitive Ag NCs loaded with an anti-cancer drug,
Figure 9. (a) Schematic illustration of DHLA-Au NCs in regulating neuroinflammation to neuronal regeneration. Adapted with permission from
ref 123. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of Au25 and Au24M1 NCs with GPx-like, CAT-like, and SOD-like
activities. Adapted with permission from ref 75. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons
license (CC-BY 4.0) from ref 48. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (c) Atomic force microscope (AFM) images of Aβ in the absence and presence
of levorotatory GSH-Au NCs, dextrorotary GSH-Au NCs, and non-chiral citrate-Au NCs (from left to right) after 48 h of co-incubation. Scale bars:
1 μm. Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons license (CC-BY 4.0) from ref 31. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (d) AFM images of
α-Syn peptide co-incubated for 168 h with Au NCs of different concentrations (0, 1, 5, and 10 mg/L (from left to right)). Adapted with permission
from ref 122. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Ltd.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11888

doxorubicin (Dox).130 Upon NIR light excitation, the PDA
accumulated in cancer cells generated heat that stimulated Ag
NCs to release Dox, achieving synergistic PL imaging, PDT,
and chemotherapy for tumor diagnosis and therapy.
3.3. Nanodrugs. Metal NCs are widely used as nanodrugs
for treating various diseases, such as neurological diseases,
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and wound infections. The success
of such application is determined by the physicochemical
properties of the NC-based nanodrugs, such as redox activity,
anti-oxidation, artificial enzyme activity, rich surface chemistry,
and intrinsic antibacterial attribute.
3.3.1. Metal NCs with Anti-oxidative or Enzyme-
Mimicking Activities for Treating Neuroinflammation.
Neuroinflammation is the major pathological feature of both
CNS and neurodegenerative diseases. In particular, microglia-
mediated neuroinflammation is one of the most prominent
traits of CNS diseases. Hence, regulating microglia polarization
from neuron-destructive to neuron-regenerative would aid in
CNS regeneration and disease treatment. Recently, Xiao et al.
chose neuroprotective and anti-oxidative DHLA molecules as
protecting ligand to derive Au NCs for neurogenesis alteration
(Figure 9a).123 With the neuroprotective and anti-oxidative
DHLA, Au NCs effectively inhibited the pro-inflammatory
process in microglial cells by inducing their polarization into
neuron-regenerative phenotypes, which was associated with
declined ROS and increased cell survival rate.123
Most types of brain damage involve enzyme catalysis and
persistent neuroinflammation. However, it is unclear which
specific catalytic pathway is accountable for restraining
neuroinflammatory responses because brain damage triggers
a variety of multi-enzyme reactions simultaneously. Hence,
several types of metal NCs have been designed with artificial
enzyme activities via single-atom substitution (Figure 9b), and
they exhibited excellent performance in modulating neuro-
inflammation.48,75 Specifically, Au24Ag1 displayed high catalase
(CAT)-like and GSH peroxidase (GPx)-like activities,75 which
enabled oxidative stress to be adjusted, further mitigating acute
inflammation in the brain. Au24Cu1 showed high CAT-like
activity and reduced peroxides in injured brain through
catalytic reaction, while Au24Cd1 possessed marked superoxide
dismutase (SOD)-like activity, efficiently diminishing inflam-
matory factors by preferentially treating superoxide and
nitrogen-related signaling molecules as substrates.48,75 Overall,
the biocatalytic properties of these NCs allowed for
modulation of neuroinflammation, raising substantial interest
for further studies.
3.3.2. Metal NCs with Rich Surface Chemistry for Treating
Neurodegenerative Diseases. The rich and tailorable surface
chemistry of NCs allows for the precise control of their
hydrophilicity and surface functional groups. Metal NCs can
interact with pathogenic species of some diseases, providing an
efficient means for treating diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD).164 AD and PD are the
two major neurodegenerative diseases worldwide. The patho-
genesis of AD is believed to be the amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide
misfolding-induced abnormal fibrillation and Aβ plaques. The
main pathological features of PD are the presence of misfolded
and accumulated α-synuclein in neurons of Lewy bodies and
the cell death of dopaminergic neurons in the brain. Hence,
metal NCs have been engineered with different surface
chemistry to disassemble Aβ plaques (Figure 9c) and α-
synuclein aggregates (Figure 9d) so as to treat AD and PD,
respectively. For example, Zhang et al. have employed cysteine-
arginine (CR) dipeptide as ligands to synthesize Au23(CR)14
NCs for dissolving exogenous Aβ plaques into monomers via
NC-Aβ interactions.165 This approach restored the misfolded
β-sheet state to its natural expanded state and led to good
efficacy for AD treatment. Hou et al. have effectively inhibited
the aggregation of Aβ peptide by using dextrorotary GSH-Au
NCs.31 This approach achieved better efficacy in AD therapy
than the levorotatory system (Figure 9c).31
Gao et al. have employed Au NCs protected by N-
isobutyryl-L-cysteine to provide excellent therapeutic effects
on PD by preventing α-synuclein fibrillation and reversing the
loss of dopamine neurons (Figure 9d).122 Wu et al. showed
that the cysteamine/4-aminothiophenol-Au NCs exhibited
Figure 10. (a) Optical spectra, digital photographs, and (b) simulated molecular structure of Au29(GSH)27 NCs. (c) Photographs of normal rats
(control) and rats with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) treated with vehicle (i.e., buffer), methotrexate (MTX), and Au29(GSH)27 NCs (GA) at
the (1) initial, (2) middle, and (3) end stages of drug administration. Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons license (CC-BY 4.0)
from ref 167. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11889

comparable PD therapy efficacy as the monoamine oxidase B
inhibitor (which is a common drug for PD treatment), but
without obvious side effects.166 The excellent efficacy of Au
NCs in PD treatment was probably due to the strong
interactions of their surface amino groups with the active
sites of α-synuclein aggregate.
3.3.3. Metal NCs for RA and Tumor Therapy. Metal NCs
can be comprised of curative ingredients for diseases such as
RA, a chronic autoimmune disease featuring irreversible
destruction of cartilage and bone along with joint inflamma-
tion. For RA treatment, Au(I)-containing compounds such as
aurothioglucose and sodium aurothiosulfate have been
clinically employed to retard the deterioration of RA. However,
such application has been constrained due to adverse side
effects. Gao et al. have reported that ultrasmall Au29(GSH)27
NCs with abundant Au(I) active species on the surface could
act as an anti-RA drug to regulate inflammatory cytokines and
recover the cartilage/bone destruction for RA in rats (Figure
10).167 This was because Au29 NCs could directly inhibit the
nuclear factor receptor-induced osteoclast differentiation and
downgrade the expression of osteoclast-specific gene markers.
Compared to Au(I)-containing drugs, Au NCs have a higher
LD50 and did not lead to undesired side effects, demonstrating
their benefits as potential therapeutics for RA treatment.
Inspired by the finding that micronutrient selenium would
poison cancer cells,168 researchers have designed selenolate-Au
NCs as an anti-cancer drug.169 Selenolate-Au NCs could
induce autophagy and decomposition of F-actin in cancer cells,
resulting in a distinct anti-cancer effect. More metal NCs with
customized therapeutic functions could be developed for
disease treatment by tuning the composition of metal NCs.
3.3.4. Metal NCs with Antibacterial Properties. Metal NCs,
including Ag, Au, and Cu NCs, have been shown to be highly
effective antibacterial agents with broad-spectrum antibacterial
activity and without drug resistance issues.99,170,171 Due to
their ultrasmall size, high surface-to-volume ratio, and high
biocompatibility, metal NCs-based antibacterial agents often
showed higher antibacterial activities and lower toxicity than
conventional antibiotics and metal NPs. Metal NCs have been
tailored in oxidation state, size, composition, surface chemistry,
and stability for antibacterial applications.70,81,99,134,170,172−177
The design of NC-based antibacterial agents has been
reviewed,24,58,178 and advances in this area have promoted
their therapeutic applications. For example, metal NCs-loaded
antibacterial hydrogels have been developed to treat bacterial
infections to accelerate wound healing.89,179,180 Injectable
antibacterial material has been designed with anti-oxidative
DHLA-Ag29 NCs loaded in a porous chitosan hydrogel.89 The
approach offered controlled release of Ag species, highly
localized concentration of Ag species, trapping of bacteria on
the hydrogel surface via electrostatic attraction, and anti-
oxidative DHLA ligands. Ag29 NC-loaded hydrogel not only
eradicated bacterial infections but also promoted hair follicle/
capillary regeneration, which facilitated the skin flap wound
healing without side effects.
Theanine peptide-Cu NCs have been designed with good
biocompatibility for fighting methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA)-induced skin infection and septicemia.171
They demonstrated comparable therapeutic effect to mupir-
ocin and vancomycin (Figure 11).
Many antibiotic-loaded hydrogels are clinically available for
antibacterial applications. Metal NCs-loaded antibacterial
hydrogels are promising for clinical use because they have
the advantages of broad-spectrum bactericidal activity, no drug
resistance, and flexibility in functionalization.
3.4. Metal NCs as Vehicles for Drug Delivery. Many
conventional drugs suffer from non-specificity, low solubility,
and short retention time, leading to significant side effects and
low therapeutic efficacy. High-performance drug delivery
systems (DDS) are often required to overcome such
limitations. Renal-clearable metal NCs have been shown to
be good vehicles for drug delivery.
In general, there are three types of metal NCs-based DDS,
depending on the drug loading modes: (I) surface loading of
drugs via physical interaction, (II) surface loading of drugs via
chemical conjugation, and (III) assembly of drug molecules
with metal NCs. For type I metal NCs-based DDS, drug
loading is based on surface engineering of metal NCs to
Figure 11. (a) Schematic illustration of Cu NCs (termed CuCs) for fighting MRSA-induced skin wound infection by destroying the cell membrane
structure and intracellular anti-oxidant defense system. (b) Images of wound healing in MRSA-infected mice treated with PBS, Cu NCs, and
mupirocin ointment (MO) over 9 days. The “Un-inf” group represents uninfected skin wounds. Adapted with permission from ref 171. Copyright
2021 Wiley-VCH.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11890

establish specific interactions with drug molecules.181 For
example, Peng et al. have successfully achieved the loading and
delivery of Dox by using renal-clearable PEG/MBA-Au NCs
based on π−π stacking interaction (note: MBA denotes
mercaptobenzoic acid).138 This DDS enhanced tumor
accumulation, efficacy, and therapeutic index of Dox by up
to 2−10 times, as compared to Au NPs. Moreover, the
transport of Dox could be adjusted in terms of renal clearance,
tumor targeting, and retention time by surface engineering of
Au NCs.139 The drug delivery efficiency of type I DDS is
critically dependent on the interaction strength between the
metal NCs and the drug molecules.
Type II metal NCs-based DDS leverage chemical con-
jugation for drug loading. Srinivasulu et al. have developed a
Au22 NC-chitosan DDS for delivering dual prodrugs (i.e.,
chemotherapeutic platinum and photodynamic aminolevulinic
acid) through a cross-linking strategy.183 This DDS provided
for pH-responsive drug delivery, releasing >50% of the drugs
loaded within 12 h at pH 5, and achieved synergistic
chemotherapy and PDT for lung cancer. Type II DDS
provides a facile way for drug delivery and can offer stimuli-
responsive drug delivery. However, possible alteration of the
drug’s therapeutic efficacy after chemical conjugation may be a
concern that needs to be addressed.
Metal NCs and drug molecules could also be assembled via
physical interaction to form a nanostructured DDS. For
example, Yahia-Ammar et al. have developed a type III DDS by
mixing GSH-Au NCs with cationic polymer allylamine
hydrochloride (PAH) (Figure 12).182 The assembled Au
NC-PAH nanostructures exhibited enhanced drug delivery and
cellular uptake of peptides (by 1.7 times) and antibodies (by
6.5 times). This type of DDS has also been developed with
stimuli-responsive or targeting functionalities, which are
attractive for theranostic applications.137 Type III DDS can
provide higher drug loading than type I DDS. It does not have
the risk of altering the drug’s therapeutic activity that is
associated with chemical conjugation of drugs in type II DDS.
3.5. Metal NCs for Optical Urinalysis. Urinalysis is a
non-invasive and simple method for disease diagnosis.
Currently, a number of colorimetric test strips have been
developed to identify urinary disease biomarkers such as
glucose, erythrocytes, bilirubin, ketones, and specific proteins.
However, many of such urinalyses are often constrained by
poor selectivity, low sensitivity, and expensive signal readout
devices. Colorimetric nanosensors based on precisely engineer-
able metal NCs offer solutions to overcome the aforemen-
tioned limitations of those urinalyses.
Recently, a colorimetric cancer nanosensor for simple and
sensitive urinalysis has been developed by conjugating renal-
clearable Au NCs with a protein carrier (i.e., neutravidin or
NAv) via a protease-cleavable peptide linker (Figure 13).184
Benefiting from the peroxidase-mimicking activity and renal-
clearable nature of Au NCs as well as the specific protease
cleavage of the peptide linker, the as-developed Au NCs-NAv
nanosensor after intravenous administration could be specif-
ically disassembled by proteases at the site of colorectal cancer.
This allowed the ultrasmall Au NCs to circulate in the
bloodstream and then be filtered into the urine through the
kidneys, triggering colorimetric changes in the urine of tumor-
bearing mice via catalytic oxidation of the peroxidase substrate
in the presence of H2O2 within 1 h. This seminal work is
interesting because it potentially opens a new window in
designing versatile colorimetric nanosensors for disease
Figure 12. (a) Schematic illustration of the construction of type III DDS by mixing GSH-Au NCs with cationic PAH. (b) PL micrographs of
human monocytic cells incubated with fluorescent peptide, antibody (Ab), GSH-Au NC-PAH, peptide-loaded GSH-Au NC-PAH, and Ab-loaded
GSH-Au NC-PAH for 24 h. Scale bar = 5 μm. Adapted with permission from ref 182. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.
Figure 13. Schematic illustration of the construction of a Au NCs-
based cancer nanosensor for colorimetric urinalysis by conjugating
renal-clearable and catalytic Au NCs with a NAv protein scaffold
through a protease-cleavable peptide linker. Adapted with permission
from ref 184. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11891

diagnosis associated with diversified proteases, which may
facilitate advanced, sensitive diagnostics through rational
surface engineering of renal-clearable metal NCs with
enzyme-mimicking activities as disease indicators.
4. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Ultrasmall coinage metal NCs have been demonstrated to be
promising theranostic probes, offering atomic/molecular-level
engineering of both the metal core and the ligand shell. The
NCs can be tailored with excellent biocompatibility in terms of
low cytotoxicity, renal clearance, liver clearance, saliva
excretion, muscle metabolism, and neurotoxicity. They are
developed with desired functionalities, such as passive or active
tumor targeting, making them suitable for theranostics for a
variety of diseases, including cancer, neurodegenerative, and
intracranial diseases.
The unique physicochemical properties of metal NCs enable
them to be employed as agents for PL imaging, X-ray imaging,
PA imaging, PET imaging, and LIBS imaging, with successful
applications in disease diagnosis and in vivo metabolism
studies. NCs have also been tailored with photoresponsive and
other properties for use as radio- or photosensitizers of RT,
PDT, and PTT for disease therapy.
In addition, metal NCs have been developed as efficient
nanodrugs for treating various diseases (e.g., neurological
diseases, RA, and bacterial infections), exploiting their artificial
enzyme activity, rich surface chemistry, and intrinsic
antibacterial characteristic. The rich surface chemistry of
renal-clearable metal NCs has been engineered for DDS
applications to minimize side effects of some drugs and
improve therapeutic efficacy. Moreover, the engineered surface
chemistry and enzyme-mimicking properties of metal NCs
make them well-suited for in vivo colorimetric urinalysis,
offering opportunities for early disease diagnosis.
Although substantial advances have been made in the design
and preclinical application of metal NCs-based theranostic
probes, there remain challenges that need to be addressed to
achieve successful clinical translation. For example, a system-
atic, long-term assessment of NCs’ toxicity should be
undertaken for animal models ranging from mice to non-
human primates. This would help to provide a better
understanding of the in vivo metabolic pathways and
comprehensive toxicological information pertaining to metal
NCs. Given the complexity of in vivo environments and the
rich surface chemistry of metal NCs, their biological
interactions (e.g., with protein corona) need to be studied in
depth,185 so as to optimize their performance as theranostic
probes.
Most atomically precise metal NCs are hydrophobic, which
constrains their biomedical applications. More research efforts
should be directed toward synthesizing water-soluble metal
NCs with atomic precision and high stability in the complex
physiological environment. Compared to the major advances
made in the synthesis and biomedical applications of Au and
Ag NCs, relatively little has been reported on the development
of water-soluble Cu NCs and Pt NCs with distinct
functionalities. This could be due to the lack of fundamental
understanding on the synthesis of the latter. It would be of
interest to examine such metal-containing compounds in future
research for their unique bio-nano interactions and interesting
physicochemical properties, especially (i) catalytic Cu(I) NCs
for click chemistry and (ii) cisplatin for anti-cancer activity.
Furthermore, considering that some functional molecules such
as biomarker-responsive peptides and active targeting mole-
cules are conjugated on the surface of metal NCs, it would be
important to control their quantity, surface distribution, and
conformation on the NCs’ surface. This would not only affect
their efficacy as biomedicine, but also determine their
reproducibility for clinical translation. Lastly, rational design
of metal NCs-based theranostic probes to tailor their
pharmacokinetics remains a significant challenge. This should
be addressed so as to achieve a delicate balance between blood
circulation half-life and renal clearance kinetics for specific
theranostic applications.
In the past few years, a variety of chiral metal NCs have been
reported, but relatively little has been applied toward
biomedical applications. Chiral metal NCs could have different
bio-nano interactions from the achiral NCs, and this would
have implications on their biomedical applications. Consider-
ing the different in vivo behavior of metal NCs from organic
theranostic probes, the construction of hybrid systems through
conjugating metal NCs with organic theranostic probes could
be very useful toward developing new, advanced theranostic
platforms or therapeutics. Currently, metal NCs-based
theranostic agents are primarily applied to cancer diagnosis
and treatment. Their biomedical applications in the future
could be broadened by deploying functional metal NCs (e.g.,
possessing anti-inflammation activity and ability to eliminate
oxidative stress) to tackle other problems such as inflammatory
dermatosis, RA, neurodegenerative disorders, diabetes, and
cardiovascular diseases. In addition, more research should
focus on the design of biomarker-responsive molecules or
linkers, which would lead to improved detection capabilities
for NCs in in vivo urinalysis.
In summary, we have reviewed the engineerable functions of
metal NCs for theranostic applications and discussed the
recent progress of metal NCs-based theranostic probes in
bioimaging-directed disease diagnosis, photoinduced disease
therapy, nanomedicine, drug delivery, and optical urinalysis.
The wealth of chemistry associated with metal NCs has led to
their sophisticated designs and applications as theranostic
probes. Further integration of metal NCs in complex systems
would pave the way for clinical successes.
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Xun Yuan −School of Materials Science and Engineering,
Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao
266042, P. R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-6539-3242;
Email: yuanxun@qust.edu.cn
Jackie Y. Ying −NanoBio Lab, Institute of Materials Research
and Engineering (IMRE) and NanoBio Lab, A*STAR
Infectious Diseases Laboratories, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 138669,
Singapore;
orcid.org/0000-0001-6938-2113;
Email: jyying@imre.a-star.edu.sg
Authors
Ge Yang −School of Materials Science and Engineering,
Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao
266042, P. R. China
Ziping Wang −Shandong Peninsula Engineering Research
Center of Comprehensive Brine Utilization, Weifang
University of Science and Technology, Weifang 262700, P. R.
China
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11892

Fanglin Du −School of Materials Science and Engineering,
Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao
266042, P. R. China
Fuyi Jiang −School of Environment and Material Engineering,
Yantai University, Yantai 264005, P. R. China
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (22071127), Taishan Scholar Founda-
tion (tsqn201812074), the Natural Science Foundation of
Shandong Province (ZR2019YQ07), and the NanoBio Lab
(IMRE, Science and Engineering Research Council, A*STAR,
Singapore).
■REFERENCES
(1) Chakraborty, I.; Pradeep, T. Atomically Precise Clusters of
Noble Metals: Emerging Link between Atoms and Nanoparticles.
Chem. Rev. 2017, 117 (12), 8208−8271.
(2) Jin, R.; Zeng, C.; Zhou, M.; Chen, Y. Atomically Precise
Colloidal Metal Nanoclusters and Nanoparticles: Fundamentals and
Opportunities. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116 (18), 10346−10413.
(3) Shang, L.; Xu, J.; Nienhaus, G. U. Recent Advances in
Synthesizing Metal Nanocluster-Based Nanocomposites for Applica-
tion in Sensing, Imaging and Catalysis. Nano Today 2019, 28, 100767.
(4) Qian, S.; Wang, Z.; Zuo, Z.; Wang, X.; Wang, Q.; Yuan, X.
Engineering Luminescent Metal Nanoclusters for Sensing Applica-
tions. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2022, 451, 214268.
(5) Xiao, Y.; Wu, Z.; Yao, Q.; Xie, J. Luminescent Metal
Nanoclusters: Biosensing Strategies and Bioimaging Applications.
Aggregate 2021, 2 (1), 114−132.
(6) Xie, J.; Zheng, Y.; Ying, J. Y. Highly Selective and Ultrasensitive
Detection of Hg2+ Based on Fluorescence Quenching of Au
Nanoclusters by Hg2+-Au+ Interactions. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46
(6), 961−963.
(7) Jin, R.; Li, G.; Sharma, S.; Li, Y.; Du, X. Toward Active-Site
Tailoring in Heterogeneous Catalysis by Atomically Precise Metal
Nanoclusters with Crystallographic Structures. Chem. Rev. 2021, 121
(2), 567−648.
(8) Du, Y.; Sheng, H.; Astruc, D.; Zhu, M. Atomically Precise Noble
Metal Nanoclusters as Efficient Catalysts: A Bridge between Structure
and Properties. Chem. Rev. 2020, 120 (2), 526−622.
(9) Cai, X.; Saranya, G.; Shen, K.; Chen, M.; Si, R.; Ding, W.; Zhu,
Y. Reversible Switching of Catalytic Activity by Shuttling an Atom
Into and Out of Gold Nanoclusters. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58
(29), 9964−9968.
(10) Wang, Y.; Wan, X.-K.; Ren, L.; Su, H.; Li, G.; Malola, S.; Lin,
S.; Tang, Z.; Häkkinen, H.; Teo, B. K.; Wang, Q.-M.; Zheng, N.
Atomically Precise Alkynyl-Protected Metal Nanoclusters as a Model
Catalyst: Observation of Promoting Effect of Surface Ligands on
Catalysis by Metal Nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138 (10),
3278−3281.
(11) Wang, J.; Xu, F.; Wang, Z.-Y.; Zang, S.-Q.; Mak, T. C. W.
Ligand-Shell Engineering of a Au28 Nanocluster Boosts Electro-
catalytic CO2 Reduction. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022, 61,
e202207492.
(12) Zhuang, S.; Chen, D.; Liao, L.; Zhao, Y.; Xia, N.; Zhang, W.;
Wang, C.; Yang, J.; Wu, Z. Hard-Sphere Random Close-Packed
Au47Cd2(TBBT)31 Nanoclusters with a Faradaic Efficiency of Up to
96% for Electrocatalytic CO2 Reduction to CO. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2020, 59 (8), 3073−3077.
(13) Liu, C.-Y.; Yuan, S.-F.; Wang, S.; Guan, Z.-J.; Jiang, D.-e.;
Wang, Q.-M. Structural Transformation and Catalytic Hydrogenation
Activity of Amidinate-Protected Copper Hydride Clusters. Nat.
Commun. 2022, 13 (1), 2082.
(14) Yao, C.; Guo, N.; Xi, S.; Xu, C.-Q.; Liu, W.; Zhao, X.; Li, J.;
Fang, H.; Su, J.; Chen, Z.; Yan, H.; Qiu, Z.; Lyu, P.; Chen, C.; Xu, H.;
Peng, X.; Li, X.; Liu, B.; Su, C.; Pennycook, S. J.; Sun, C.-J.; Li, J.;
Zhang, C.; Du, Y.; Lu, J. Atomically-Precise Dopant-Controlled Single
Cluster Catalysis for Electrochemical Nitrogen Reduction. Nat.
Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 4389.
(15) Kawawaki, T.; Kataoka, Y.; Hirata, M.; Akinaga, Y.; Takahata,
R.; Wakamatsu, K.; Fujiki, Y.; Kataoka, M.; Kikkawa, S.; Alotabi, A. S.;
Hossain, S.; Osborn, D. J.; Teranishi, T.; Andersson, G. G.; Metha, G.
F.; Yamazoe, S.; Negishi, Y. Creation of High-Performance
Heterogeneous Photocatalysts by Controlling Ligand Desorption
and Particle Size of Gold Nanocluster. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60
(39), 21340−21350.
(16) Duchesne, P. N.; Li, Z. Y.; Deming, C. P.; Fung, V.; Zhao, X.;
Yuan, J.; Regier, T.; Aldalbahi, A.; Almarhoon, Z.; Chen, S.; Jiang, D.-
e.; Zheng, N.; Zhang, P. Golden Single-Atomic-Site Platinum
Electrocatalysts. Nat. Mater. 2018, 17 (11), 1033−1039.
(17) Lin, Y.; Cao, Y.; Yao, Q.; Chai, O. J. H.; Xie, J. Engineering
Noble Metal Nanomaterials for Pollutant Decomposition. Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res. 2020, 59 (47), 20561−20581.
(18) Zhang, H.; Liu, H.; Tian, Z.; Lu, D.; Yu, Y.; Cestellos-Blanco,
S.; Sakimoto, K. K.; Yang, P. Bacteria Photosensitized by Intracellular
Gold Nanoclusters for Solar Fuel Production. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018,
13 (10), 900−905.
(19) Abbas, M. A.; Kamat, P. V.; Bang, J. H. Thiolated Gold
Nanoclusters for Light Energy Conversion. ACS Energy Lett. 2018, 3
(4), 840−854.
(20) Wang, X.; Zhao, L.; Li, X.; Liu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Yao, Q.; Xie, J.;
Xue, Q.; Yan, Z.; Yuan, X.; Xing, W. Atomic-Precision Pt6
Nanoclusters for Enhanced Hydrogen Electro-Oxidation. Nat.
Commun. 2022, 13 (1), 1596.
(21) Lin, Z.; Goswami, N.; Xue, T.; Chai, O. J. H.; Xu, H.; Liu, Y.;
Su, Y.; Xie, J. Engineering Metal Nanoclusters for Targeted
Therapeutics: From Targeting Strategies to Therapeutic Applications.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31 (51), 2105662.
(22) Jiang, X.; Du, B.; Huang, Y.; Zheng, J. Ultrasmall Noble Metal
Nanoparticles: Breakthroughs and Biomedical Implications. Nano
Today 2018, 21, 106−125.
(23) Yu, M.; Xu, J.; Zheng, J. Renal Clearable Luminescent Gold
Nanoparticles: From the Bench to the Clinic. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2019, 58 (13), 4112−4128.
(24) Zheng, K.; Xie, J. Engineering Ultrasmall Metal Nanoclusters as
Promising Theranostic Agents. Trends Chem. 2020, 2 (7), 665−679.
(25) Kang, X.; Zhu, M. Tailoring the Photoluminescence of
Atomically Precise Nanoclusters. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019, 48 (8),
2422−2457.
(26) Gan, Z.; Liu, Y.; Wang, L.; Jiang, S.; Xia, N.; Yan, Z.; Wu, X.;
Zhang, J.; Gu, W.; He, L.; Dong, J.; Ma, X.; Kim, J.; Wu, Z.; Xu, Y.; Li,
Y.; Wu, Z. Distance Makes a Difference in Crystalline Photo-
luminescence. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 5572.
(27) Zhou, M.; Higaki, T.; Hu, G.; Sfeir, M. Y.; Chen, Y.; Jiang, D.-
e.; Jin, R. Three-Orders-of-Magnitude Variation of Carrier Lifetimes
with Crystal Phase of Gold Nanoclusters. Science 2019, 364 (6437),
279−282.
(28) Wu, Z.; Liu, H.; Li, T.; Liu, J.; Yin, J.; Mohammed, O. F.; Bakr,
O. M.; Liu, Y.; Yang, B.; Zhang, H. Contribution of Metal Defects in
the Assembly Induced Emission of Cu Nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2017, 139 (12), 4318−4321.
(29) Sugiuchi, M.; Maeba, J.; Okubo, N.; Iwamura, M.; Nozaki, K.;
Konishi, K. Aggregation-Induced Fluorescence-to-Phosphorescence
Switching of Molecular Gold Clusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139
(49), 17731−17734.
(30) Xie, J.; Zheng, Y.; Ying, J. Y. Protein-Directed Synthesis of
Highly Fluorescent Gold Nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131
(3), 888−889.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11893

(31) Hou, K.; Zhao, J.; Wang, H.; Li, B.; Li, K.; Shi, X.; Wan, K.; Ai,
J.; Lv, J.; Wang, D.; Huang, Q.; Wang, H.; Cao, Q.; Liu, S.; Tang, Z.
Chiral Gold Nanoparticles Enantioselectively Rescue Memory
Deficits in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. Nat. Commun.
2020, 11 (1), 4790.
(32) Wang, J.-Q.; Guan, Z.-J.; Liu, W.-D.; Yang, Y.; Wang, Q.-M.
Chiroptical Activity Enhancement via Structural Control: The Chiral
Synthesis and Reversible Interconversion of Two Intrinsically Chiral
Gold Nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141 (6), 2384−2390.
(33) Krishnadas, K. R.; Sementa, L.; Medves, M.; Fortunelli, A.;
Stener, M.; Fürstenberg, A.; Longhi, G.; Bürgi, T. Chiral
Functionalization of an Atomically Precise Noble Metal Cluster:
Insights into the Origin of Chirality and Photoluminescence. ACS
Nano 2020, 14 (8), 9687−9700.
(34) Yuan, X.; Chng, L. L.; Yang, J.; Ying, J. Y. Miscible-Solvent-
Assisted Two-Phase Synthesis of Monolayer-Ligand-Protected Metal
Nanoclusters with Various Sizes. Adv. Mater. 2020, 32 (9), 1906063.
(35) Qin, L.; Sun, F.; Ma, X.; Ma, G.; Tang, Y.; Wang, L.; Tang, Q.;
Jin, R.; Tang, Z. Homoleptic Alkynyl-Protected Ag15 Nanocluster with
Atomic Precision: Structural Analysis and Electrocatalytic Perform-
ance Toward CO2 Reduction. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60 (50),
26136−26141.
(36) Kwak, K.; Lee, D. Electrochemistry of Atomically Precise Metal
Nanoclusters. Acc. Chem. Res. 2019, 52 (1), 12−22.
(37) Liu, J.-W.; Feng, L.; Su, H.-F.; Wang, Z.; Zhao, Q.-Q.; Wang,
X.-P.; Tung, C.-H.; Sun, D.; Zheng, L.-S. Anisotropic Assembly of
Ag52 and Ag76 Nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140 (5), 1600−
1603.
(38) Takano, S.; Tsukuda, T. Chemically Modified Gold/Silver
Superatoms as Artificial Elements at Nanoscale: Design Principles and
Synthesis Challenges. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143 (4), 1683−1698.
(39) Wang, T.; Wang, D.; Padelford, J. W.; Jiang, J.; Wang, G. Near-
Infrared Electrogenerated Chemiluminescence from Aqueous Soluble
Lipoic Acid Au Nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138 (20),
6380−6383.
(40) Cifuentes-Rius, A.; Deepagan, V. G.; Xie, J.; Voelcker, N. H.
Bright Future of Gold Nanoclusters in Theranostics. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2021, 13 (42), 49581−49588.
(41) Luo, Z.; Yuan, X.; Yu, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Leong, D. T.; Lee, J. Y.;
Xie, J. From Aggregation-Induced Emission of Au(I)-Thiolate
Complexes to Ultrabright Au(0)@Au(I)-Thiolate Core-Shell Nano-
clusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134 (40), 16662−16670.
(42) Hossain, S.; Niihori, Y.; Nair, L. V.; Kumar, B.; Kurashige, W.;
Negishi, Y. Alloy Clusters: Precise Synthesis and Mixing Effects. Acc.
Chem. Res. 2018, 51 (12), 3114−3124.
(43) Yao, Q.; Yuan, X.; Chen, T.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J. Engineering
Functional Metal Materials at the Atomic Level. Adv. Mater. 2018, 30
(47), 1802751.
(44) Yao, Q.; Wu, Z.; Liu, Z.; Lin, Y.; Yuan, X.; Xie, J. Molecular
Reactivity of Thiolate-Protected Noble Metal Nanoclusters: Syn-
thesis, Self-Assembly, and Applications. Chem. Sci. 2021, 12 (1), 99−
127.
(45) Zhou, Y.; Liao, L.; Zhuang, S.; Zhao, Y.; Gan, Z.; Gu, W.; Li, J.;
Deng, H.; Xia, N.; Wu, Z. Traceless Removal of Two Kernel Atoms in
a Gold Nanocluster and Its Impact on Photoluminescence. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60 (16), 8668−8672.
(46) Wang, S.; Meng, X.; Das, A.; Li, T.; Song, Y.; Cao, T.; Zhu, X.;
Zhu, M.; Jin, R. A 200-Fold Quantum Yield Boost in the
Photoluminescence of Silver-Doped AgxAu25‑x Nanoclusters: The
13th Silver Atom Matters. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (9), 2376−
2380.
(47) Yuan, X.; Goswami, N.; Mathews, I.; Yu, Y.; Xie, J. Enhancing
Stability Through Ligand-Shell Engineering: A Case Study with
Au25(SR)18 Nanoclusters. Nano Res. 2015, 8 (11), 3488−3495.
(48) Liu, H.; Li, Y.; Sun, S.; Xin, Q.; Liu, S.; Mu, X.; Yuan, X.; Chen,
K.; Wang, H.; Varga, K.; Mi, W.; Yang, J.; Zhang, X.-D. Catalytically
Potent and Selective Clusterzymes for Modulation of Neuro-
inflammation Through Single-Atom Substitutions. Nat. Commun.
2021, 12 (1), 114.
(49) Higaki, T.; Li, Q.; Zhou, M.; Zhao, S.; Li, Y.; Li, S.; Jin, R.
Toward the Tailoring Chemistry of Metal Nanoclusters for Enhancing
Functionalities. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51 (11), 2764−2773.
(50) Dadfar, S. M.; Roemhild, K.; Drude, N. I.; von Stillfried, S.;
Knüchel, R.; Kiessling, F.; Lammers, T. Iron Oxide Nanoparticles:
Diagnostic, Therapeutic and Theranostic Applications. Adv. Drug
Deliver. Rev. 2019, 138, 302−325.
(51) Gao, X.; Cui, Y.; Levenson, R. M.; Chung, L. W. K.; Nie, S. In
Vivo Cancer Targeting and Imaging with Semiconductor Quantum
Dots. Nat. Biotechnol. 2004, 22 (8), 969−976.
(52) Hong, G.; Diao, S.; Antaris, A. L.; Dai, H. Carbon
Nanomaterials for Biological Imaging and Nanomedicinal Therapy.
Chem. Rev. 2015, 115 (19), 10816−10906.
(53) Zhou, S.; Zhong, Q.; Wang, Y.; Hu, P.; Zhong, W.; Huang, C.-
B.; Yu, Z.-Q.; Ding, C.-D.; Liu, H.; Fu, J. Chemically Engineered
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles-Based Intelligent Delivery Systems
for Theranostic Applications in Multiple Cancerous/Non-Cancerous
Diseases. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2022, 452, 214309.
(54) Li, J.; Pu, K. Development of Organic Semiconducting
Materials for Deep-Tissue Optical Imaging, Phototherapy and
Photoactivation. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019, 48 (1), 38−71.
(55) Cheng, P.; Pu, K. Molecular Imaging and Disease Theranostics
with Renal-Clearable Optical Agents. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2021, 6 (12),
1095−1113.
(56) Xu, J.; Peng, C.; Yu, M.; Zheng, J. Renal Clearable Noble Metal
Nanoparticles: Photoluminescence, Elimination, and Biomedical
Applications. WIRES Nanomed. Nanobi. 2017, 9 (5), e1453.
(57) Yao, Q.; Chen, T.; Yuan, X.; Xie, J. Toward Total Synthesis of
Thiolate-Protected Metal Nanoclusters. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51 (6),
1338−1348.
(58) Zheng, K.; Xie, J. Cluster Materials as Traceable Antibacterial
Agents. Acc. Mater. Res. 2021, 2 (11), 1104−1116.
(59) Zhuang, S.; Liao, L.; Yuan, J.; Xia, N.; Zhao, Y.; Wang, C.; Gan,
Z.; Yan, N.; He, L.; Li, J.; Deng, H.; Guan, Z.; Yang, J.; Wu, Z. Fcc
versus Non-fcc Structural Isomerism of Gold Nanoparticles with
Kernel Atom Packing Dependent Photoluminescence. Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 2019, 58 (14), 4510−4514.
(60) Xia, N.; Yuan, J.; Liao, L.; Zhang, W.; Li, J.; Deng, H.; Yang, J.;
Wu, Z. Structural Oscillation Revealed in Gold Nanoparticles. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2020, 142 (28), 12140−12145.
(61) Wang, Z.; Pan, X.; Qian, S.; Yang, G.; Du, F.; Yuan, X. The
Beauty of Binary Phases: A Facile Strategy for Synthesis, Processing,
Functionalization, and Application of Ultrasmall Metal Nanoclusters.
Coord. Chem. Rev. 2021, 438, 213900.
(62) Kurashige, W.; Niihori, Y.; Sharma, S.; Negishi, Y. Precise
Synthesis, Functionalization and Application of Thiolate-Protected
Gold Clusters. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2016, 320−321, 238−250.
(63) Cai, X.; Hu, W.; Xu, S.; Yang, D.; Chen, M.; Shu, M.; Si, R.;
Ding, W.; Zhu, Y. Structural Relaxation Enabled by Internal Vacancy
Available in a 24-Atom Gold Cluster Reinforces Catalytic Reactivity. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142 (9), 4141−4153.
(64) Du, B.; Jiang, X.; Das, A.; Zhou, Q.; Yu, M.; Jin, R.; Zheng, J.
Glomerular Barrier Behaves as an Atomically Precise Bandpass Filter
in a Sub-Nanometre Regime. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 1096−1102.
(65) Zhang, B.; Chen, C.; Chuang, W.; Chen, S.; Yang, P. Size
Transformation of the Au22(SG)18 Nanocluster and Its Surface-
Sensitive Kinetics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142 (26), 11514−11520.
(66) Liu, J.; Duchesne, P. N.; Yu, M.; Jiang, X.; Ning, X.; Vinluan, R.
D.; Zhang, P.; Zheng, J. Luminescent Gold Nanoparticles with Size-
Independent Emission. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2016, 55 (31), 8894−
8898.
(67) Yao, Q.; Yuan, X.; Fung, V.; Yu, Y.; Leong, D. T.; Jiang, D.; Xie,
J. Understanding Seed-Mediated Growth of Gold Nanoclusters at
Molecular Level. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 927.
(68) Zheng, K.; Setyawati, M. I.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J. Overcoming
Bacterial Physical Defenses with Molecule-like Ultrasmall Antimicro-
bial Gold Nanoclusters. Bioact. Mater. 2021, 6 (4), 941−950.
(69) Xie, Y.; Yang, J.; Zhang, J.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X. Activating the
Antibacterial Effect of 4,6-Diamino-2-pyrimidinethiol-Modified Gold
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11894

Nanoparticles by Reducing Their Sizes. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020,
132 (52), 23677−23681.
(70) Zheng, K.; Xie, J. Composition-Dependent Antimicrobial
Ability of Full-Spectrum AuxAg25‑x Alloy Nanoclusters. ACS Nano
2020, 14 (9), 11533−11541.
(71) Wang, S.; Li, Q.; Kang, X.; Zhu, M. Customizing the Structure,
Composition, and Properties of Alloy Nanoclusters by Metal
Exchange. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51 (11), 2784−2792.
(72) Yao, Q.; Feng, Y.; Fung, V.; Yu, Y.; Jiang, D.; Yang, J.; Xie, J.
Precise Control of Alloying Sites of Bimetallic Nanoclusters via
Surface Motif Exchange Reaction. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 1555.
(73) Zhao, Y.; Zhuang, S.; Liao, L.; Wang, C.; Xia, N.; Gan, Z.; Gu,
W.; Li, J.; Deng, H.; Wu, Z. A Dual Purpose Strategy to Endow Gold
Nanoclusters with Both Catalysis Activity and Water Solubility. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2020, 142 (2), 973−977.
(74) Oh, E.; Delehanty, J. B.; Field, L. D.; Mäkinen, A. J.; Goswami,
R.; Huston, A. L.; Medintz, I. L. Synthesis and Characterization of
PEGylated Luminescent Gold Nanoclusters Doped with Silver and
Other Metals. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28 (23), 8676−8688.
(75) Sun, S.; Liu, H.; Xin, Q.; Chen, K.; Ma, H.; Liu, S.; Mu, X.;
Hao, W.; Liu, S.; Gao, Y.; Wang, Y.; Pei, J.; Zhao, R.; Zhang, S.;
Zhang, X.; Wang, H.; Li, Y.; Zhang, X.-D. Atomic Engineering of
Clusterzyme for Relieving Acute Neuroinflammation through Lattice
Expansion. Nano Lett. 2021, 21 (6), 2562−2571.
(76) Shen, H.; Xu, Z.; Hazer, M. S. A.; Wu, Q.; Peng, J.; Qin, R.;
Malola, S.; Teo, B. K.; Häkkinen, H.; Zheng, N. Surface Coordination
of Multiple Ligands Endows N-Heterocyclic Carbene-Stabilized Gold
Nanoclusters with High Robustness and Surface Reactivity. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60 (7), 3752−3758.
(77) Yan, J.; Teo, B. K.; Zheng, N. Surface Chemistry of Atomically
Precise Coinage-Metal Nanoclusters: From Structural Control to
Surface Reactivity and Catalysis. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51 (12),
3084−3093.
(78) Niihori, Y.; Matsuzaki, M.; Pradeep, T.; Negishi, Y. Separation
of Precise Compositions of Noble Metal Clusters Protected with
Mixed Ligands. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135 (13), 4946−4949.
(79) Narouz, M. R.; Osten, K. M.; Unsworth, P. J.; Man, R. W. Y.;
Salorinne, K.; Takano, S.; Tomihara, R.; Kaappa, S.; Malola, S.; Dinh,
C.-T.; Padmos, J. D.; Ayoo, K.; Garrett, P. J.; Nambo, M.; Horton, J.
H.; Sargent, E. H.; Häkkinen, H.; Tsukuda, T.; Crudden, C. M. N-
Heterocyclic Carbene-Functionalized Magic-Number Gold Nano-
clusters. Nat. Chem. 2019, 11 (5), 419−425.
(80) Yuan, X.; Zhang, B.; Luo, Z.; Yao, Q.; Leong, D. T.; Yan, N.;
Xie, J. Balancing the Rate of Cluster Growth and Etching for Gram-
Scale Synthesis of Thiolate-Protected Au25 Nanoclusters with Atomic
Precision. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (18), 4623−4627.
(81) Zheng, K.; Setyawati, M. I.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J. Surface Ligand
Chemistry of Gold Nanoclusters Determines Their Antimicrobial
Ability. Chem. Mater. 2018, 30 (8), 2800−2808.
(82) Liu, J.; Yu, M.; Ning, X.; Zhou, C.; Yang, S.; Zheng, J.
PEGylation and Zwitterionization: Pros and Cons in the Renal
Clearance and Tumor Targeting of Near-IR-Emitting Gold Nano-
particles. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2013, 52 (48), 12572−12576.
(83) Sun, S.; Huang, Y.; Zhou, C.; Chen, S.; Yu, M.; Liu, J.; Zheng, J.
Effect of Hydrophobicity on Nano-Bio Interactions of Zwitterionic
Luminescent Gold Nanoparticles at the Cellular Level. Bioconjugate
Chem. 2018, 29 (6), 1841−1846.
(84) Jiang, X.; Du, B.; Zheng, J. Glutathione-Mediated Bio-
transformation in the Liver Modulates Nanoparticle Transport. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 2019, 14 (9), 874−882.
(85) Genji Srinivasulu, Y.; Yao, Q.; Goswami, N.; Xie, J. Interfacial
Engineering of Gold Nanoclusters for Biomedical Applications. Mater.
Horiz. 2020, 7 (10), 2596−2618.
(86) Xie, Y.; Xianyu, Y.; Wang, N.; Yan, Z.; Liu, Y.; Zhu, K.;
Hatzakis, N. S.; Jiang, X. Functionalized Gold Nanoclusters Identify
Highly Reactive Oxygen Species in Living Organisms. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2018, 28 (14), 1702026.
(87) Liu, J.; Yu, M.; Zhou, C.; Zheng, J. Renal Clearable Inorganic
Nanoparticles: A New Frontier of Bionanotechnology. Mater. Today
2013, 16 (12), 477−486.
(88) Luo, Z.; Zheng, K.; Xie, J. Engineering Ultrasmall Water-
Soluble Gold and Silver Nanoclusters for Biomedical Applications.
Chem. Commun. 2014, 50 (40), 5143−5155.
(89) Wang, X.; Wang, Z.; Fang, S.; Hou, Y.; Du, X.; Xie, Y.; Xue, Q.;
Zhou, X.; Yuan, X. Injectable Ag Nanoclusters-Based Hydrogel for
Wound Healing via Eliminating Bacterial Infection and Promoting
Tissue Regeneration. Chem. Eng. J. 2021, 420 (2), 127589.
(90) Tang, S.; Huang, Y.; Zheng, J. Salivary Excretion of Renal-
Clearable Silver Nanoparticles. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59 (45),
19894−19898.
(91) Zhou, C.; Long, M.; Qin, Y.; Sun, X.; Zheng, J. Luminescent
Gold Nanoparticles with Efficient Renal Clearance. Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 2011, 50 (14), 3168−3172.
(92) Zhang, X.-D.; Luo, Z.; Chen, J.; Wang, H.; Song, S.-S.; Shen,
X.; Long, W.; Sun, Y.-M.; Fan, S.; Zheng, K.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J.
Storage of Gold Nanoclusters in Muscle Leads to their Biphasic In
Vivo Clearance. Small 2015, 11 (14), 1683−1690.
(93) Hao, W.; Liu, S.; Liu, H.; Mu, X.; Chen, K.; Xin, Q.; Zhang, X.-
D. In Vivo Neuroelectrophysiological Monitoring of Atomically
Precise Au25 Clusters at an Ultrahigh Injected Dose. ACS Omega
2020, 5 (38), 24537−24545.
(94) Song, X.; Zhu, W.; Ge, X.; Li, R.; Li, S.; Chen, X.; Song, J.; Xie,
J.; Chen, X.; Yang, H. A New Class of NIR-II Gold Nanoclusters
Based Protein Biolabels for In Vivo Tumor-Targeted Imaging. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60 (3), 1306−1312.
(95) Le Guével, X.; Perez Perrino, M.; Fernández, T. D.; Palomares,
F.; Torres, M.-J.; Blanca, M.; Rojo, J.; Mayorga, C. Multivalent
Glycosylation of Fluorescent Gold Nanoclusters Promotes Increased
Human Dendritic Cell Targeting via Multiple Endocytic Pathways.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7 (37), 20945−20956.
(96) Liu, J.; Yu, M.; Zhou, C.; Yang, S.; Ning, X.; Zheng, J. Passive
Tumor Targeting of Renal-Clearable Luminescent Gold Nano-
particles: Long Tumor Retention and Fast Normal Tissue Clearance.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135 (13), 4978−4981.
(97) Wang, X.; He, H.; Wang, Y.; Wang, J.; Sun, X.; Xu, H.; Nau, W.
M.; Zhang, X.; Huang, F. Active Tumor-Targeting Luminescent Gold
Clusters with Efficient Urinary Excretion. Chem. Commun. 2016, 52
(59), 9232−9235.
(98) Peng, C.; Gao, X.; Xu, J.; Du, B.; Ning, X.; Tang, S.; Bachoo, R.
M.; Yu, M.; Ge, W.-P.; Zheng, J. Targeting Orthotopic Gliomas with
Renal-Clearable Luminescent Gold Nanoparticles. Nano Res. 2017, 10
(4), 1366−1376.
(99) Zheng, K.; Setyawati, M. I.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J. Antimicrobial
Gold Nanoclusters. ACS Nano 2017, 11 (7), 6904−6910.
(100) Tang, H.; Li, Q.; Yan, W.; Jiang, X. Reversing the Chirality of
Surface Ligands Can Improve the Biosafety and Pharmacokinetics of
Cationic Gold Nanoclusters. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60 (25),
13829−13834.
(101) Du, B.; Yu, M.; Zheng, J. Transport and Interactions of
Nanoparticles in the Kidneys. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018, 3 (10), 358−
374.
(102) Zhang, X.-D.; Chen, J.; Luo, Z.; Wu, D.; Shen, X.; Song, S.-S.;
Sun, Y.-M.; Liu, P.-X.; Zhao, J.; Huo, S.; Fan, S.; Fan, F.; Liang, X.-J.;
Xie, J. Enhanced Tumor Accumulation of Sub-2 nm Gold
Nanoclusters for Cancer Radiation Therapy. Adv. Healthc. Mater.
2014, 3 (1), 133−141.
(103) Tang, S.; Peng, C.; Xu, J.; Du, B.; Wang, Q.; Vinluan, R. D.,
III; Yu, M.; Kim, M. J.; Zheng, J. Tailoring Renal Clearance and
Tumor Targeting of Ultrasmall Metal Nanoparticles with Particle
Density. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2016, 55 (52), 16039−16043.
(104) Yang, S.; Sun, S.; Zhou, C.; Hao, G.; Liu, J.; Ramezani, S.; Yu,
M.; Sun, X.; Zheng, J. Renal Clearance and Degradation of
Glutathione-Coated Copper Nanoparticles. Bioconjugate Chem.
2015, 26 (3), 511−519.
(105) Yu, M.; Liu, J.; Ning, X.; Zheng, J. High-Contrast Noninvasive
Imaging of Kidney Clearance Kinetics Enabled by Renal Clearable
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11895

Nanofluorophores. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2015, 54 (51), 15434−
15438.
(106) Yu, M.; Zhou, J.; Du, B.; Ning, X.; Authement, C.; Gandee, L.;
Kapur, P.; Hsieh, J.-T.; Zheng, J. Noninvasive Staging of Kidney
Dysfunction Enabled by Renal-Clearable Luminescent Gold Nano-
particles. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2016, 55 (8), 2787−2791.
(107) Chen, Y.; Montana, D. M.; Wei, H.; Cordero, J. M.;
Schneider, M.; Le Guével, X.; Chen, O.; Bruns, O. T.; Bawendi, M. G.
Shortwave Infrared In Vivo Imaging with Gold Nanoclusters. Nano
Lett. 2017, 17 (10), 6330−6334.
(108) Jiang, X.; Du, B.; Tang, S.; Hsieh, J.-T.; Zheng, J.
Photoacoustic Imaging of Nanoparticle Transport in the Kidneys at
High Temporal Resolution. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58 (18),
5994−6000.
(109) Liu, H.; Hong, G.; Luo, Z.; Chen, J.; Chang, J.; Gong, M.; He,
H.; Yang, J.; Yuan, X.; Li, L.; Mu, X.; Wang, J.; Mi, W.; Luo, J.; Xie, J.;
Zhang, X.-D. Atomic-Precision Gold Clusters for NIR-II Imaging.
Adv. Mater. 2019, 31 (46), 1901015.
(110) Huang, H.; Hernandez, R.; Geng, J.; Sun, H.; Song, W.; Chen,
F.; Graves, S. A.; Nickles, R. J.; Cheng, C.; Cai, W.; Lovell, J. F. A
Porphyrin-PEG Polymer with Rapid Renal Clearance. Biomaterials
2016, 76, 25−32.
(111) Yu, M.; Zhou, C.; Liu, L.; Zhang, S.; Sun, S.; Hankins, J. D.;
Sun, X.; Zheng, J. Interactions of Renal-Clearable Gold Nanoparticles
with Tumor Microenvironments: Vasculature and Acidity Effects.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017, 56 (15), 4314−4319.
(112) Wang, Y.; Ma, S.; Dai, Z.; Rong, Z.; Liu, J. Facile In Situ
Synthesis of Ultrasmall Near-Infrared-Emitting Gold Glyconanopar-
ticles with Enhanced Cellular Uptake and Tumor Targeting.
Nanoscale 2019, 11 (35), 16336−16341.
(113) Pyo, K.; Ly, N. H.; Yoon, S. Y.; Shen, Y.; Choi, S. Y.; Lee, S.
Y.; Joo, S.-W.; Lee, D. Highly Luminescent Folate-Functionalized
Au22 Nanoclusters for Bioimaging. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2017, 6 (16),
1700203.
(114) Yang, J.; Wang, T.; Zhao, L.; Rajasekhar, V. K.; Joshi, S.;
Andreou, C.; Pal, S.; Hsu, H.-t.; Zhang, H.; Cohen, I. J.; Huang, R.;
Hendrickson, R. C.; Miele, M. M.; Pei, W.; Brendel, M. B.; Healey, J.
H.; Chiosis, G.; Kircher, M. F. Gold/Alpha-Lactalbumin Nanoprobes
for the Imaging and Treatment of Breast Cancer. Nat. Biomed. Eng.
2020, 4 (7), 686−703.
(115) Cheng, P.; Chen, W.; Li, S.; He, S.; Miao, Q.; Pu, K. Fluoro-
Photoacoustic Polymeric Renal Reporter for Real-Time Dual Imaging
of Acute Kidney Injury. Adv. Mater. 2020, 32 (17), 1908530.
(116) Liew, S. S.; Zeng, Z.; Cheng, P.; He, S.; Zhang, C.; Pu, K.
Renal-Clearable Molecular Probe for Near-Infrared Fluorescence
Imaging and Urinalysis of SARS-CoV-2. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143
(45), 18827−18831.
(117) Huang, J.; Jiang, Y.; Li, J.; He, S.; Huang, J.; Pu, K. A Renal-
Clearable Macromolecular Reporter for Near-Infrared Fluorescence
Imaging of Bladder Cancer. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59 (11),
4415−4420.
(118) Liang, G.; Jin, X.; Qin, H.; Xing, D. Glutathione-Capped,
Renal-Clearable CuS Nanodots for Photoacoustic Imaging and
Photothermal Therapy. J. Mater. Chem. B 2017, 5 (31), 6366−6375.
(119) Siwawannapong, K.; Zhang, R.; Lei, H.; Jin, Q.; Tang, W.;
Dong, Z.; Lai, R.-Y.; Liu, Z.; Kamkaew, A.; Cheng, L. Ultra-Small
Pyropheophorbide-a Nanodots for Near-Infrared Fluorescence/
Photoacoustic Imaging-Guided Photodynamic Therapy. Theranostics
2020, 10 (1), 62−73.
(120) Wang, H.; Yu, D.; Fang, J.; Cao, C.; Liu, Z.; Ren, J.; Qu, X.
Renal-Clearable Porphyrinic Metal−Organic Framework Nanodots
for Enhanced Photodynamic Therapy. ACS Nano 2019, 13 (8),
9206−9217.
(121) Poon, W.; Kingston, B. R.; Ouyang, B.; Ngo, W.; Chan, W. C.
W. A Framework for Designing Delivery Systems. Nat. Nanotechnol.
2020, 15 (10), 819−829.
(122) Gao, G.; Chen, R.; He, M.; Li, J.; Li, J.; Wang, L.; Sun, T.
Gold Nanoclusters for Parkinson’s Disease Treatment. Biomaterials
2019, 194, 36−46.
(123) Xiao, L.; Wei, F.; Zhou, Y.; Anderson, G. J.; Frazer, D. M.;
Lim, Y. C.; Liu, T.; Xiao, Y. Dihydrolipoic Acid-Gold Nanoclusters
Regulate Microglial Polarization and Have the Potential to Alter
Neurogenesis. Nano Lett. 2020, 20 (1), 478−495.
(124) Zhang, X.-D.; Luo, Z.; Chen, J.; Shen, X.; Song, S.; Sun, Y.;
Fan, S.; Fan, F.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J. Ultrasmall Au10−12(SG)10−12
Nanomolecules for High Tumor Specificity and Cancer Radiotherapy.
Adv. Mater. 2014, 26 (26), 4565−4568.
(125) Yu, M.; Zheng, J. Clearance Pathways and Tumor Targeting
of Imaging Nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2015, 9 (7), 6655−6674.
(126) Gao, F.; Cai, P.; Yang, W.; Xue, J.; Gao, L.; Liu, R.; Wang, Y.;
Zhao, Y.; He, X.; Zhao, L.; Huang, G.; Wu, F.; Zhao, Y.; Chai, Z.;
Gao, X. Ultrasmall [64Cu] Cu Nanoclusters for Targeting Orthotopic
Lung Tumors Using Accurate Positron Emission Tomography
Imaging. ACS Nano 2015, 9 (5), 4976−4986.
(127) Yin, X.; Yang, B.; Chen, B.; He, M.; Hu, B. Multifunctional
Gold Nanocluster Decorated Metal-Organic Framework for Real-
Time Monitoring of Targeted Drug Delivery and Quantitative
Evaluation of Cellular Therapeutic Response. Anal. Chem. 2019, 91
(16), 10596−10603.
(128) Zhang, X.-D.; Chen, J.; Yang, J.; Wang, J.-Y.; Shen, X.; Song,
S.-S.; Wang, H.; He, H.; Wang, X.; Fan, S.; Sun, Y.-M.; Guo, M. Use
of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Antibody-Gold Cluster
Conjugates with Good Renal Excretion in Targeted Cancer Radiation
Treatment. J. Mater. Chem. B 2015, 3 (23), 4735−4741.
(129) Ding, S.; Khan, A. I.; Cai, X.; Song, Y.; Lyu, Z.; Du, D.; Dutta,
P.; Lin, Y. Overcoming Blood-Brain Barrier Transport: Advances in
Nanoparticle-Based Drug Delivery Strategies. Mater. Today 2020, 37,
112−125.
(130) Jiang, Y.; Sun, M.; Ouyang, N.; Tang, Y.; Miao, P. Synergistic
Chemo-Thermal Therapy of Cancer by DNA-Templated Silver
Nanoclusters and Polydopamine Nanoparticles. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2021, 13 (18), 21653−21660.
(131) Jiang, X.; Zhou, Q.; Du, B.; Li, S.; Huang, Y.; Chi, Z.; Lee, W.
M.; Yu, M.; Zheng, J. Noninvasive Monitoring of Hepatic Glutathione
Depletion Through Fluorescence Imaging and Blood Testing. Sci.
Adv. 2021, 7 (8), eabd9847.
(132) Yu, M.; Zhou, C.; Liu, J.; Hankins, J. D.; Zheng, J.
Luminescent Gold Nanoparticles with pH-Dependent Membrane
Adsorption. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133 (29), 11014−11017.
(133) Xie, Y.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, W.; Liu, X.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X.
Gold Nanoclusters-Coated Orthodontic Devices Can Inhibit the
Formation of Streptococcus mutans Biofilm. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng.
2020, 6 (2), 1239−1246.
(134) Zheng, K.; Setyawati, M. I.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J. Observing
Antimicrobial Process with Traceable Gold Nanoclusters. Nano Res.
2021, 14 (4), 1026−1033.
(135) Yang, Y.; Yu, Y.; Chen, H.; Meng, X.; Ma, W.; Yu, M.; Li, Z.;
Li, C.; Liu, H.; Zhang, X.; Xiao, H.; Yu, Z. Illuminating Platinum
Transportation while Maximizing Therapeutic Efficacy by Gold
Nanoclusters via Simultaneous Near-Infrared-I/II Imaging and
Glutathione Scavenging. ACS Nano 2020, 14 (10), 13536−13547.
(136) Han, R.; Zhao, M.; Wang, Z.; Liu, H.; Zhu, S.; Huang, L.;
Wang, Y.; Wang, L.; Hong, Y.; Sha, Y.; Jiang, Y. Super-efficient In Vivo
Two-Photon Photodynamic Therapy with a Gold Nanocluster as a
Type I Photosensitizer. ACS Nano 2020, 14 (8), 9532−9544.
(137) Goswami, U.; Dutta, A.; Raza, A.; Kandimalla, R.; Kalita, S.;
Ghosh, S. S.; Chattopadhyay, A. Transferrin-Copper Nanocluster-
Doxorubicin Nanoparticles as Targeted Theranostic Cancer Nano-
drug. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10 (4), 3282−3294.
(138) Peng, C.; Xu, J.; Yu, M.; Ning, X.; Huang, Y.; Du, B.;
Hernandez, E.; Kapur, P.; Hsieh, J.-T.; Zheng, J. Tuning the In Vivo
Transport of Anticancer Drugs Using Renal-Clearable Gold Nano-
particles. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58 (25), 8479−8483.
(139) Peng, C.; Yu, M.; Hsieh, J.-T.; Kapur, P.; Zheng, J. Correlating
Anticancer Drug Delivery Efficiency with Vascular Permeability of
Renal Clearable Versus Non-Renal Clearable Nanocarriers. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58 (35), 12076−12080.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11896

(140) Li, D.; Liu, Q.; Qi, Q.; Shi, H.; Hsu, E.-C.; Chen, W.; Yuan,
W.; Wu, Y.; Lin, S.; Zeng, Y.; Xiao, Z.; Xu, L.; Zhang, Y.; Stoyanova,
T.; Jia, W.; Cheng, Z. Gold Nanoclusters for NIR-II Fluorescence
Imaging of Bones. Small 2020, 16 (43), 2003851.
(141) Yu, Z.; Musnier, B.; Wegner, K. D.; Henry, M.; Chovelon, B.;
Desroches-Castan, A.; Fertin, A.; Resch-Genger, U.; Bailly, S.; Coll, J.-
L.; Usson, Y.; Josserand, V.; Le Guével, X. High-Resolution Shortwave
Infrared Imaging of Vascular Disorders Using Gold Nanoclusters.
ACS Nano 2020, 14 (4), 4973−4981.
(142) Wang, Z.; Zhu, Z.; Zhao, C.; Yao, Q.; Li, X.; Liu, H.; Du, F.;
Yuan, X.; Xie, J. Silver Doping-Induced Luminescence Enhancement
and Red-Shift of Gold Nanoclusters with Aggregation-Induced
Emission. Chem.Asian J. 2019, 14 (6), 765−769.
(143) Shang, L.; Dörlich, R. M.; Brandholt, S.; Schneider, R.;
Trouillet, V.; Bruns, M.; Gerthsen, D.; Nienhaus, G. U. Facile
Preparation of Water-Soluble Fluorescent Gold Nanoclusters for
Vellular Imaging Applications. Nanoscale 2011, 3 (5), 2009−2014.
(144) Le Guével, X.; Spies, C.; Daum, N.; Jung, G.; Schneider, M.
Highly Fluorescent Silver Nanoclusters Stabilized by Glutathione: A
Promising Fluorescent Label for Bioimaging. Nano Res. 2012, 5 (6),
379−387.
(145) Zhou, C.; Hao, G.; Thomas, P.; Liu, J.; Yu, M.; Sun, S.; Öz, O.
K.; Sun, X.; Zheng, J. Near-Infrared Emitting Radioactive Gold
Nanoparticles with Molecular Pharmacokinetics. Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 2012, 51 (40), 10118−10122.
(146) Ma, H.; Wang, J.; Zhang, X.-D. Near-Infrared II Emissive
Metal Clusters: From Atom Physics to Biomedicine. Coord. Chem.
Rev. 2021, 448, 214184.
(147) Peng, C.; Yu, M.; Zheng, J. In Situ Ligand-Directed Growth of
Gold Nanoparticles in Biological Tissues. Nano Lett. 2020, 20 (2),
1378−1382.
(148) Colombé, C.; Le Guével, X.; Martin-Serrano, A.; Henry, M.;
Porret, E.; Comby-Zerbino, C.; Antoine, R.; Atallah, I.; Busser, B.;
Coll, J.-L.; Righini, C. A.; Sancey, L. Gold Nanoclusters as a Contrast
Agent for Image-Guided Surgery of Head and Neck Tumors.
Nanomedicine 2019, 20, 102011.
(149) Wang, W.; Kong, Y.; Jiang, J.; Xie, Q.; Huang, Y.; Li, G.; Wu,
D.; Zheng, H.; Gao, M.; Xu, S.; Pan, Y.; Li, W.; Ma, R.; Wu, M. X.; Li,
X.; Zuilhof, H.; Cai, X.; Li, R. Engineering the Protein Corona
Structure on Gold Nanoclusters Enables Red-Shifted Emissions in the
Second Near-Infrared Window for Gastrointestinal Imaging. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59 (50), 22431−22435.
(150) Xu, J.; Yu, M.; Carter, P.; Hernandez, E.; Dang, A.; Kapur, P.;
Hsieh, J.-T.; Zheng, J. In Vivo X-Ray Imaging of Transport of Renal
Clearable Gold Nanoparticles in the Kidneys. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2017, 56 (43), 13356−13360.
(151) Zhao, Y.; Detering, L.; Sultan, D.; Cooper, M. L.; You, M.;
Cho, S.; Meier, S. L.; Luehmann, H.; Sun, G.; Rettig, M.; Dehdashti,
F.; Wooley, K. L.; DiPersio, J. F.; Liu, Y. Gold Nanoclusters Doped
with 64Cu for CXCR4 Positron Emission Tomography Imaging of
Breast Cancer and Metastasis. ACS Nano 2016, 10 (6), 5959−5970.
(152) Le Guével, X.; Henry, M.; Motto-Ros, V.; Longo, E.;
Montañez, M. I.; Pelascini, F.; de La Rochefoucauld, O.; Zeitoun, P.;
Coll, J.-L.; Josserand, V.; Sancey, L. Elemental and Optical Imaging
Evaluation of Zwitterionic Gold Nanoclusters in Glioblastoma Mouse
Models. Nanoscale 2018, 10 (39), 18657−18664.
(153) Zhang, X.-D.; Luo, Z.; Chen, J.; Song, S.; Yuan, X.; Shen, X.;
Wang, H.; Sun, Y.; Gao, K.; Zhang, L.; Fan, S.; Leong, D. T.; Guo, M.;
Xie, J. Ultrasmall Glutathione-Protected Gold Nanoclusters as Next
Generation Radiotherapy Sensitizers with High Tumor Uptake and
High Renal Clearance. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5 (1), 8669.
(154) Pei, P.; Shen, W.; Zhou, H.; Sun, Y.; Zhong, J.; Liu, T.; Yang,
K. Radionuclide Labeled Gold Nanoclusters Boost Effective Anti-
Tumor Immunity for Augmented Radio-Immunotherapy of Cancer.
Nano Today 2021, 38, 101144.
(155) Jia, T.-T.; Yang, G.; Mo, S.-J.; Wang, Z.-Y.; Li, B.-J.; Ma, W.;
Guo, Y.-X.; Chen, X.; Zhao, X.; Liu, J.-Q.; Zang, S.-Q. Atomically
Precise Gold-Levonorgestrel Nanocluster as a Radiosensitizer for
Enhanced Cancer Therapy. ACS Nano 2019, 13 (7), 8320−8328.
(156) Liang, G.; Jin, X.; Zhang, S.; Xing, D. RGD Peptide-Modified
Fluorescent Gold Nanoclusters as Highly Efficient Tumor-Targeted
Radiotherapy Sensitizers. Biomaterials 2017, 144, 95−104.
(157) Yang, D.; Gulzar, A.; Yang, G.; Gai, S.; He, F.; Dai, Y.; Zhong,
C.; Yang, P. Au Nanoclusters Sensitized Black TiO2‑x Nanotubes for
Enhanced Photodynamic Therapy Driven by Near-Infrared Light.
Small 2017, 13 (48), 1703007.
(158) Zhu, H.; Liu, N.; Wang, Z.; Xue, Q.; Wang, Q.; Wang, X.; Liu,
Y.; Yin, Z.; Yuan, X. Marrying Luminescent Au Nanoclusters to TiO2
for Visible-Light-Driven Antibacterial Application. Nanoscale 2021, 13
(45), 18996−19003.
(159) Liu, N.; Wang, Y.; Wang, Z.; He, Q.; Liu, Y.; Dou, X.; Yin, Z.;
Li, Y.; Zhu, H.; Yuan, X. Conjugating AIE-Featured AuAg
Nanoclusters with Highly Luminescent Carbon Dots for Improved
Visible-Light-Driven Antibacterial Activity. Nanoscale 2022, 14 (22),
8183−8191.
(160) Vankayala, R.; Kuo, C.-L.; Nuthalapati, K.; Chiang, C.-S.;
Hwang, K. C. Nucleus-Targeting Gold Nanoclusters for Simultaneous
In Vivo Fluorescence Imaging, Gene Delivery, and NIR-Light
Activated Photodynamic Therapy. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25 (37),
5934−5945.
(161) Yang, G.; Mu, X.; Pan, X.; Tang, Y.; Yao, Q.; Wang, Y.; Jiang,
F.; Du, F.; Xie, J.; Zhou, X.; Yuan, X. Ligand Engineering of Au44
Nanoclusters for NIR-II Luminescent and Photoacoustic Imaging-
Guided Cancer Photothermal Therapy. Chem. Sci. 2023, 14 (16),
4308−4318.
(162) McLean, A.; Wang, R.; Huo, Y.; Cooke, A.; Hopkins, T.;
Potter, N.; Li, Q.; Isaac, J.; Haidar, J.; Jin, R.; Kopelman, R. Synthesis
and Optical Properties of Two-Photon-Absorbing Au25(Captopril)18-
Embedded Polyacrylamide Nanoparticles for Cancer Therapy. ACS
Appl. Nano Mater. 2020, 3 (2), 1420−1430.
(163) Xie, Y.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X. Near-Infrared Light-Activated
Phototherapy by Gold Nanoclusters for Dispersing Biofilms. ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12 (8), 9041−9049.
(164) Gao, G.; Zhang, M.; Gong, D.; Chen, R.; Hu, X.; Sun, T. The
Size-Effect of Gold Nanoparticles and Nanoclusters in the Inhibition
of Amyloid-β Fibrillation. Nanoscale 2017, 9 (12), 4107−4113.
(165) Zhang, W.; Gao, G.; Ma, Z.; Luo, Z.; He, M.; Sun, T.
Au23(CR)14 Nanocluster Restores Fibril Aβ’s Unfolded State with
Abolished Cytotoxicity and Dissolves Endogenous Aβ Plaques. Natl.
Sci. Rev. 2020, 7 (4), 763−774.
(166) Wu, X.; Xu, H.; Luo, F.; Wang, J.; Zhao, L.; Zhou, X.; Yang,
Y.; Cai, H.; Sun, P.; Zhou, H. Sizes and Ligands Tuned Gold
Nanocluster Acting as a New Type of Monoamine Oxidase B
Inhibitor. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2021, 189, 113377.
(167) Gao, F.; Yuan, Q.; Cai, P.; Gao, L.; Zhao, L.; Liu, M.; Yao, Y.;
Chai, Z.; Gao, X. Au Clusters Treat Rheumatoid Arthritis with
Uniquely Reversing Cartilage/Bone Destruction. Adv. Sci. 2019, 6
(7), 1801671.
(168) Carlisle, A. E.; Lee, N.; Matthew-Onabanjo, A. N.; Spears, M.
E.; Park, S. J.; Youkana, D.; Doshi, M. B.; Peppers, A.; Li, R.; Joseph,
A. B.; Smith, M.; Simin, K.; Zhu, L. J.; Greer, P. L.; Shaw, L. M.; Kim,
D. Selenium Detoxification is Required for Cancer-Cell Survival. Nat.
Metab. 2020, 2 (7), 603−611.
(169) Wang, L.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X. Benzeneselenol-Modified Gold
Nanoclusters for Cancer Therapy. Chem. Commun. 2020, 56 (49),
6664−6667.
(170) Wang, Z.; Fang, Y.; Zhou, X.; Li, Z.; Zhu, H.; Du, F.; Yuan, X.;
Yao, Q.; Xie, J. Embedding Ultrasmall Ag Nanoclusters in Luria-
Bertani Extract via Light Irradiation for Enhanced Antibacterial
Activity. Nano Res. 2020, 13 (1), 203−208.
(171) Zhang, X.; Zhang, Z.; Shu, Q.; Xu, C.; Zheng, Q.; Guo, Z.;
Wang, C.; Hao, Z.; Liu, X.; Wang, G.; Yan, W.; Chen, H.; Lu, C.
Copper Clusters: An Effective Antibacterial for Eradicating Multi-
drug-Resistant Bacterial Infection In Vitro and In Vivo. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2021, 31 (14), 2008720.
(172) Li, Y.; Zhen, J.; Tian, Q.; Shen, C.; Zhang, L.; Yang, K.; Shang,
L. One Step Synthesis of Positively Charged Gold Nanoclusters as
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11897

Effective Antimicrobial Nanoagents Against Multidrug-Resistant
Bacteria and Biofilms. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2020, 569, 235−243.
(173) Xie, Y.; Liu, Y.; Yang, J.; Liu, Y.; Hu, F.; Zhu, K.; Jiang, X.
Gold Nanoclusters for Targeting Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus
aureus In Vivo. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57 (15), 3958−3962.
(174) Zheng, K.; Li, K.; Chang, T.-H.; Xie, J.; Chen, P.-Y.
Synergistic Antimicrobial Capability of Magnetically Oriented
Graphene Oxide Conjugated with Gold Nanoclusters. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2019, 29 (46), 1904603.
(175) Zheng, K.; Li, S.; Jing, L.; Chen, P.-Y.; Xie, J. Synergistic
Antimicrobial Titanium Carbide (MXene) Conjugated with Gold
Nanoclusters. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2020, 9 (19), 2001007.
(176) Zheng, K.; Setyawati, M. I.; Lim, T.-P.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J.
Antimicrobial Cluster Bombs: Silver Nanoclusters Packed with
Daptomycin. ACS Nano 2016, 10 (8), 7934−7942.
(177) Wang, L.; Li, S.; Yin, J.; Yang, J.; Li, Q.; Zheng, W.; Liu, S.;
Jiang, X. The Density of Surface Coating Can Contribute to Different
Antibacterial Activities of Gold Nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 2020, 20
(7), 5036−5042.
(178) Tang, S.; Zheng, J. Antibacterial Activity of Silver Nano-
particles: Structural Effects. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2018, 7 (13),
1701503.
(179) Mao, X.; Cheng, R.; Zhang, H.; Bae, J.; Cheng, L.; Zhang, L.;
Deng, L.; Cui, W.; Zhang, Y.; Santos, H. A.; Sun, X. Self-Healing and
Injectable Hydrogel for Matching Skin Flap Regeneration. Adv. Sci.
2019, 6 (3), 1801555.
(180) Liu, Y.; Wang, S.; Wang, Z.; Yao, Q.; Fang, S.; Zhou, X.; Yuan,
X.; Xie, J. The In Situ Synthesis of Silver Nanoclusters Inside a
Bacterial Cellulose Hydrogel for Antibacterial Applications. J. Mater.
Chem. B 2020, 8 (22), 4846−4850.
(181) Li, Q.; Pan, Y.; Chen, T.; Du, Y.; Ge, H.; Zhang, B.; Xie, J.;
Yu, H.; Zhu, M. Design and Mechanistic Study of a Novel Gold
Nanocluster-Based Drug Delivery System. Nanoscale 2018, 10 (21),
10166−10172.
(182) Yahia-Ammar, A.; Sierra, D.; Mérola, F.; Hildebrandt, N.; Le
Guével, X. Self-Assembled Gold Nanoclusters for Bright Fluorescence
Imaging and Enhanced Drug Delivery. ACS Nano 2016, 10 (2),
2591−2599.
(183) Srinivasulu, Y. G.; Mozhi, A.; Goswami, N.; Yao, Q.; Xie, J.
Traceable Nanocluster-Prodrug Conjugate for Chemo-Photodynamic
Combinatorial Therapy of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. ACS Appl.
Bio Mater. 2021, 4 (4), 3232−3245.
(184) Loynachan, C. N.; Soleimany, A. P.; Dudani, J. S.; Lin, Y.;
Najer, A.; Bekdemir, A.; Chen, Q.; Bhatia, S. N.; Stevens, M. M. Renal
Clearable Catalytic Gold Nanoclusters for In Vivo Disease
Monitoring. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14 (9), 883−890.
(185) Mahmoudi, M.; Lynch, I.; Ejtehadi, M. R.; Monopoli, M. P.;
Bombelli, F. B.; Laurent, S. Protein-Nanoparticle Interactions:
Opportunities and Challenges. Chem. Rev. 2011, 111 (9), 5610−5637.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02880
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 11879−11898
11898