Recent Progress in Nanomedicine for the
Diagnosis and Treatment of Alzheimer’s
Diseases
Han Yang,# Haozhe Tan,# Haifei Wen, Peikun Xin, Yanling Liu, Ziwei Deng, Yanning Xu, Feng Gao,
Liping Zhang, Ziyue Ye, Zicong Zhang, Yunhao Chen, Yueze Wang, Jianwei Sun, Jacky W. Y. Lam,
Zheng Zhao, Ryan T. K. Kwok,* Zijie Qiu,* and Ben Zhong Tang*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
ABSTRACT: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease that causes
memory loss and progressive and permanent deterioration of cognitive function. The most
challenging issue in combating AD is its complicated pathogenesis, which includes the
deposition of amyloid β (Aβ) plaques, intracellular hyperphosphorylated tau protein,
neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), etc. Despite rapid advancements in mechanistic research
and drug development for AD, the currently developed drugs only improve cognitive
ability and temporarily relieve symptoms but cannot prevent the development of AD.
Moreover, the blood−brain barrier (BBB) creates a huge barrier to drug delivery in the
brain. Therefore, effective diagnostic tools and treatments are urgently needed. In recent
years, nanomedicine has provided opportunities to overcome the challenges and
limitations associated with traditional diagnostics or treatments. Various types of
nanoparticles (NPs) play an essential role in nanomedicine for the diagnosis and
treatment of AD, acting as drug carriers to improve targeting and bioavailability across/
bypass the BBB or acting as drugs directly on AD lesions. This review categorizes different types of NPs and summarizes their
applications in nanomedicine for the diagnosis and treatment of AD. It also discusses the challenges associated with clinical
applications and explores the latest developments and prospects of nanomedicine for AD.
KEYWORDS: Alzheimer’s disease, nanomedicine, nanoparticles, blood-brain barrier, amyloid-β, diagnosis, treatment, clinical applications
1. INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is one of the most common
progressive neurodegenerative diseases, affecting about 32.6
million people globally.1 In the World Health Statistics 2024,
AD has been among the top ten leading causes of death for the
past 20 years.2 AD is considered the third leading cause of
disability and death in the elderly, bringing a huge economic
and mental burden on families and society.
On the one hand, due to the complexity of the brain, the
pathological mechanism of AD is still not fully understood,
which is the most serious problem faced in the diagnosis and
treatment of AD. The pathogenesis of AD is affected by many
factors, including age, genes, environment, behavior, and other
factors. The amyloid and tau hyperphosphorylation hypotheses
are the two most widely recognized theories among many
proposed pathogenic mechanisms (Scheme 1).3−5
The “Aβ hypothesis” proposes that the overproduction and
abnormal accumulation of Aβ in the brain is the first step that
initiates neurotoxicity and then accelerates the pathological
cascade changes of AD.6−9 The overproduction and accumu-
lation of Aβ are due to the abnormal increase of Aβ caused by
mutations in APP, PS1, or PS2 genes, or the obstruction of Aβ
clearance caused by mutations in APOE4 genes or abnormal
hydrolase.10 The excess Aβ gradually forms fibers and Aβ
deposition plaques, resulting in neurotoxicity, affecting the
neurotransmitter transmission, causing oxidative stress and
synaptic damage, inducing autophagy and glial cells hyper-
activation, and eventually leading to clinical manifestations of
dementia.11 Tau protein is a microtubule-associated protein in
the neurons, and it plays an important role in maintaining
microtubule stability, facilitating intracellular transport, and
Received:
August 29, 2024
Revised:
November 14, 2024
Accepted:
November 22, 2024
Published: December 3, 2024
Review
www.acsnano.org
© 2024 American Chemical Society
33792
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on July 22, 2026 at 09:04:55 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

promoting actin filament formation in healthy neurons.12,13
According to the “Tau hyperphosphorylation hypothesis”,
abnormally high levels of hyperphosphorylated and misfolded
Tau protein generate insoluble fibrils, which form neuro-
fibrillary tangles (NFTs).6,14 As a result, NFTs disrupt normal
microtubule function and break the cytoskeleton, resulting in
neuronal dysfunction and death.15 Factors such as Aβ,
oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and specific enzymes
influence the hyperphosphorylation of tau.16−18 More recent
research proposes that tau and Aβ work together to cause AD
and create a vicious cycle.19−21
Other mechanisms have also been proposed to explain the
pathophysiology of AD. In AD, neuroinflammation and
oxidative stress can be triggered by accumulating Aβ
plaques22,23 and neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyper-
phosphorylated tau protein.24,25 Activated microglia and
astrocytes release various inflammatory mediators, including
cytokines, chemokines, and reactive oxygen species
(ROS).26−29 This alteration facilitates the infiltration of
peripheral immune cells into the brain, further amplifying the
inflammatory response and oxidative stress, leading to
neuronal dysfunction and cognitive decline.30−33 Moreover,
an imbalance of neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine
(ACh),34,35 glutaminergic neurotransmission,36,37 and mono-
aminergic system,38,39 is well-documented in AD and
significantly contributes to the disease’s cognitive and
behavioral symptoms.40 Furthermore, metal ion homeostasis
imbalance (Zn2+, Cu2+),31,41−43 endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
dysfunction,44,45 glycosylation abnormalities,46−48 and mito-
chondrial autophagy dysfunction,31,49−51 etc. have been
discovered and provide strong support for further research
on the treatment of AD. However, so far, none of these
hypotheses can fully explain the exact cause of AD due to
various complicated factors simultaneously contributing to the
development of AD.16−18
Up until now, tacrine, donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine,
and memantine are the only five clinical drugs approved by the
FDA for AD treatment.52 However, these drugs can only
Scheme 1. Schematic Illustration of Proposed Pathogenesis
of AD; Created with BioRender.com
Figure 1. Strategies and materials for BBB regulation and brain-targeted drug delivery. (A) Schematic diagram of the BBB structure and
different mechanisms for BBB. (B) Various nanoparticles for brain-targeted drug delivery. (C) Noninvasive strategies for BBB crossing.
Created with BioRender.com.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33793

Table 1. Summary of the Applications, Advantages, and Disadvantages of Different Nanoparticles in the Diagnosis and Treatment of AD
Application
Class of nanoparticles
Diagnosis
Therapy
Advantage
Disadvantage
Au nanoparticle
In vitro diagnosis
1. L- and D-glutathione stabilized gold nanoparticles showed stronger
inhibition of Aβ 42 fibrillation and better rescue of behavioral
impairments in AD model mice.103
1. Small nanoparticle size;
1. Easy to agglomerate;
1. Detection of p53 peptides (66 nM).90
2. High specific surface area and
easy surface functionalization;
2. Suppress part of the
immune response;
2. Detection of tau-381 (0.5 to 100 pM).91
3. Detection of Aβ-peptide oligomers (430 fM).92
3. Good dispersion and stability;
3. Detect device de-
pendence.
4. Detection of MicroRNA-137 (1.7 fM).93
2. AuNP treatment prevented the neuroinflammation, modulation of
mitochondrial function, and impaired cognition induced by the AD
model.104
4. Admirable optical properties;
5. Detection of anti-Aβ 1−42 (1 pg/mL).94
5. High chemical stability and
morphological diversity.
6. Multidetection of Aβ1−40, Aβ 1−42, and τ protein.95
7. Detection of Aβ oligomers (1 to 600 nM).96
8. Detection of p-tau18 (1 pg/mL to 100 ng/mL).97
9. Detection of Aβ42 (1 × 10−5 to 200 ng/mL).98
10. Fluorescence detection of Aβ peptide aggregates.99
11. Fluorescence detection of amyloid plaques.100
12. STM Detection of Aβ (10 fg/m).101
In vivo diagnosis
Fluorescence imaging of the upstream regulator of Aβ plaque formation
CTGF (KD ∼21.9 nM).102
Ag nanoparticle
In vitro diagnosis
AgNPs could effectively prevent the effect of deficits in recognition and
spatial memory.106
1. Significantly enhanced Raman
signal;
Long-term enrichment
in vivo causes greater
biological toxicity.
Detection of Aβ40 and Aβ42.105
2. Small nanoparticle size.
Superparamagnetic
iron oxide nanopar-
ticle (magnetic bead)
In vitro diagnosis
1. Fe3O4-based nanoparticles which contain ferulic acid and
Simvastatin linked to its surface showed excellent neuroprotective
activity against the Aβ-induced cytotoxicity.111
1. Good biocompatibility and
biodegradability;
1. Complex preparation
process;
Detection of Aβ40 dimers peptides. Improved by 1000-fold compared to
SPE.107
In vivo diagnosis
2. Superparamagnetism;
2. Unclear metabolic
mechanisms in vivo.
1. MRI imaging of Aβ oligomers.108
3. Multifunction (drug delivery,
hyperthermia, etc.).
2. Fluorescence imaging of AD-related methylglyoxal (MGO).109
2. Superparamagnetic nanoparticles were uesd to label human
umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells and improved the memory
and cognitive ability of AD mice.110
3. Fe3O4@PDA injection showed the ability of hUC-MSCs to target damage
sites in AD model mice.110
Quantum dots
In vitro diagnosis
1. Protective effects on protein secondary structures in AD-affected
brain tissues.114
1. High sensitivity and selectiv-
ity;
1. Cytotoxic;
1. Detection of ApoE (0.29 to 5.86 nM).112
2. Multiple fluorescence detec-
tion;
2. Easy to agglomerate;
2. Neural stem cell membranes coated quantum dots were used to image
living cerebral blood vessels.113
2. MoS2 QDs neutralized ROS, prevented the deposition of Aβ1−42
and improved the exploration and learning abilities.115
3. High brightness, narrow
emission spectrum and large
Stokes shift.
3. High preparation
cost.
MnO2 nanoparticle
In vivo diagnosis
HSA-manganese dioxide nanocomposites were designed to suppressed
Aβ fibrillization and alleviates Aβ mediated SH-SY5Y neuro-
toxicity.117
1. Nanoscale;
Cytotoxic
MRI imaging of Aβ42 oligomers.116
2. High surface activity;
3. Reduce the detection limit
and improve the detection
sensitivity.
Gadolinium nanopar-
ticle
In vivo imaging
Metallofullerene Nanoparticles based on Gd prevent peptide
aggregation and break down existing oligomers.120
1. High NMR imaging signal;
1. Short half-life;
1. MRI imaging of Aβ plaques (0.20 and 0.15 mmol Gd/kg).118
2. Improve radiation sensitivity;
2. Low cell entry effi-
ciency.
2. PPA NPs high MRI signal, as evidenced by high signal presented in the
brain tissue of APP/PS1 mice.119
3. Good stability;
4. Avoid chronic toxicity from
residues.
Polymeric Nanopar-
ticle
In vivo imaging
1. PLA system for donepezil124 and magnesium oxide loaded.125
1. Good stability and long blood
circulation;
1. Poor stability;
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33794

Table 1. continued
Application
Class of nanoparticles
Diagnosis
Therapy
Advantage
Disadvantage
1. PLA
1. AIE DSPE-PEG nanocomposites for fluorescence imaging of Aβ fibril.121
2. PLGA nanoparticles for huperzine A,83 naringin,126 and curcumin
loading.127
2. Efficient drug delivery;
2. Heterogeneous par-
ticle size;
3. Surface modification;
2. PLGA
2. DiR-loaded TMC suggested that TMC modification increased nose-to-
brain drug delivery.83
3. PEG nanocomposites for AIE luminogens and astaxanthin load,
PEG-modified copper-cysteamine for PDT.121
3. Strong tissue penetration;
3. Distribution in bio-
logical samples.
3. PEG
3. PPA NPs show high MRI signal in the brain tissue of APP/PS1 mice.119
4. PAMAM dendrimers for the delivery of prussian blue,119 TPGS128
and tacrine hydrochloride.129
4. Low cytotoxicity and immu-
nogenicity.
4. Dendrimer
4. The biodistribution of LNT and PLNG was examined on WT mice using
Cy5.5-labeled LNT and PLNG.122
5. Nanogels carrier for the delivery of lentinan122 and insulin.130
5. Nanogels
5. In vivo imaging of Gal-NP@Cy5-siRNA evaluated by fluorescence
imaging.79
6. Glycosylated polymer nanocarrier for the delivery of siRNA to
reduce BACE1 expression.79
6. Accumulation of cy5.5-siRNAs complexed in the brain was determined by
strong fluorescence intensity.123
7. Poly(mannitol-co-PEI) nanoparticles were used for the delivery of
siBACE1 to reduced the accumulation of Aβ plaques.123
Mesoporous silica
nanoparticle
In vivo imaging
1. For the delivery of curcumin,132 AD therapeutic metal chelator133
and photosensitizer IR780.131
1. Good biocompatibility;
1. Cytotoxic;
The fluorescence of IR780 in mice brain was monitored by live fluorescent
imaging to indicate that the K peptide can greatly increases the BBB
permeability efficiency.131
2. Using Aβ-depleting nanostructures to alleviate Aβ plaque burden.134
2. Easy functionalization;
2. Complex preparation
process.
3. Good stability;
4. High drug loaded.
Carbon nanotube, gra-
phene oxide
In vitro diagnosis
1. Using graphene oxide to mitigate Aβ toxicity.135
1. Good chemical stability;
1. Insoluble in water;
Detection of MicroRNA-137 (1.7 fM).93
2. Using GO nanoparticles loaded with daunorubicin (Dau) to
improved cognitive function.136
2. Small size;
2. Cytotoxic;
3. Using carbon nanotubes and fullerenes (C60) coupling with
genistein to synergistic anti-AD activity by Aβ deaggregation.137
3. Easy functionalization;
3. Poor biological
stability.
4. Metallofullerene Nanoparticles based on Gd prevent peptide
aggregation and break down existing oligomers.120
4. Excellent optical performance;
5. Various morphologies are
used for drug loading.
Protein-based Nano-
particle
In vivo imaging
1. Using HSA nanosystem to coencapsulated clioquinol and donepezil,
which reduced Aβ deposition and rescued memory deficits.138
1. Good biocompatibility;
1. Low stability in vivo;
1. Cy5 was doped in HSA nanoparticles to image the Aβ-enriched regions of
the brain.138
2. Good Morphological stability;
2. Low load efficiency;
2. Using procyanidin C-1 (C1) encapsulated glucose-functionalized
BSA nanoparticles to pass BBB and significantly decreased the
expression of Tau, p-Tau(ser 396) and p-Tau (ser235).139
3. Easy functionalization;
3. Large differences be-
tween batches.
2. DIR-labeled C1-NPs verified the brain accumulation and biodistribution by
in vivo fluorescence imaging.139
4. Biodegradable;
5. High specificity;
3. Cas9 nanocomplexes targeting enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP)
were used to target Th and Bace1 in vivo.140
3. Amphiphilic R7L10 peptide was uesd to prepared Cas9 nano-
complexes and reduce symptoms of AD in mice.140
6. Simple preparation.
Lipid-based Nanopar-
ticle
In vivo imaging
1. Low-density lipoprotein nanoparticles were designed for the delivery
of a-mangostin to promoted the uptake and degradation of Ab.145
1. Improve the bioavailability of
drugs;
1. Low stability in vivo;
1. The fluorescence signal of DiR-loaded LfH-mNLC suggested LfH-mNLC
could cross the BBB and penetrate the brain.141
2. Cur drug-loaded nanolipid carriers were designed for the delivery of
trimethoprim to the brain and attenuation of oxidative stress-related
damag.141
2. Reduces side effects;
2. Poor targeting in vivo.
2. To observe the brain-targeting ability of the liposomes, Ost was replaced
with DiR dye. The fluorescence signa of Tf-modified DiR liposomes
explained its brain-targeting ability to a certain extent.142
3. ApoE3-bound polymer nanoparticles was investigated to improve
brain targeting of the donepezil.146
3. Improve the drug loading
capacity (both hydrophilic and
hydrophobic);
3. ICA/TSIIA in Ang2 modified liposomes was substituted for DiR
fluorescent dye to demonstrate the effective enrichment of liposomes in the
brain.143
4. Exosome-like liposomes were synthesized to improved the efficiency
of curcumin loading and achieved a neuroprotection effect.147
4. Good biocompatibility.
4. DiR was doped into the NT-LNPs and the fluorescent signal showed that
NT1-lipidoids, can effectively facilitate crossing of the BBB.144
5. Transferrin-modified Ost liposomes were constructed to alleviate of
AD-related pathology.142
6. Dual-modified liposomes were used for the delivery of the ApoE2
encoding plasmid DNA.148
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33795

Table 1. continued
Application
Class of nanoparticles
Diagnosis
Therapy
Advantage
Disadvantage
7. Dually functionalized liposomes were designed to decrease the
plaques in both the cortex and the hippocampus.149
8. Co-loading icariin (ICA) and tanshinone IIA (TSIIA) into Aniopep-
2-modified liposomes were developed to inhibit neuroinflammation
and oxidative stress.150
9. Solid lipid nanoparticles were designed for the delivery of RVG-9R
and BACE1 siRNA to treat AD.146
10. Chitosan-coated solid lipid nanoparticles were developed to
enhance the efficacy of ferulic acid in the treatment of AD.151
11. Solid lipid nanoparticles containing erythropoietin were developed
to improve memory impairment in a mouse model of AD.152
12. Solid lipid nanoparticles were designed for the delivery of curcumin
to decreased the expression of TG2-S in AD mode.153
13. Neurotransmitter-derived lipidoids were synthesized for the
delivery of amphotericin B (AmB), antisense oligonucleotides
(ASOs) against tau.144
Nucleic acid nanopar-
ticle
Nucleic acid nanoparticles are mainly used for therapy and have not been
used for AD diagnosis.
Tetrahedral DNA nanostructures were prepared to inhibit nerve cell
apoptosis and improve memory and learning in a rat model of AD.154
1. High specificity;
1. Low stability in vivo
and in vitro;
2. Long-lasting effect.
2. Fast clearance and
metabolism;
3. Poor ability to pene-
trate cell membranes.
Biomimetic nanoma-
terial
In vivo imaging
1. Plasma-derived exosomes loaded with Quercetin (Que) were used
to inhibit Tau phosphorylation.155
1. Good biocompatibility;
1. Unstable nanostruc-
ture;
1. Plasma-derived exosomes loaded with Quercetin (Que) were used to
improve the concentration of Que in the brain.155
2. Exosomes collected from curcumin stimulated RAW 264.7 cells to
inhibit the phosphorylation of Tau protein.156
2. Evade recognition by the
immune system and prolong
circulation time in the body;
2. Complex cell mem-
brane acquisition and
processing processes;
2. Neural stem cell membranes coated quantum dots were used to image
living cerebral blood vessels.113
3. Exosome were used to down-regulate the expression of b-secretase
and reduce the accumulation of Aβ,157
4. Mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) -derived exosomes were used to
reduce the expression of proinflammatory mediators in the brain.158
3. Targeted by specific cell
membrane proteins.
3. High preparation cost
and operation techni-
cal requirements.
5. MSCS-derived exosomes reduced Aβ expression and restored the
expression of genes involved in neuronal memory/synaptic plasticity
in cell models.159
6. Pluripotent stem cells-derived NSC-derived exosomes enhanced
hippocampal neurogenesis.160
7. Human Wharton’s jelly derived MSCs incorporated iron oxide
nanoparticles were used for AD treatment.
8. RBCs membranes modified metal−organic frameworks were used to
engulf Aβ.161
9. Neural stem cell membranes coated quantum dots were used to
decreased Aβ levels.113
10. A hybrid cell membrane was used for the delivery of rapamycin and
1-Trifluoromethoxyphenyl-3-(1-propionylpiperidin-4-yl) urea
(TPPU), which reducing amyloid plaque deposition.162
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33796

temporarily relieve patients’ cognitive symptoms. At the same
time, these drugs show serious side effects, instability, and
inadequate bioavailability.53 Yet, no drugs can stop or reverse
AD progression. In recent years, nanomedicine has developed
rapidly and has shown significant potential in neurodegener-
ative diseases like AD.54 Nanoparticles (NPs) play an
important role in nanomedicine. They have admirable
characteristics such as nanosize, charge, shape, surface
modifications, biocompatibility, stability, site-specific targeting,
controlled synthesis, and sustained release. Therefore, NPs
have been explored for nanomedicine applications in AD
biomarkers detection, AD medicine development, and brain
drug delivery.55 In one aspect, benefiting from the specific
physicochemical and electronic properties of NPs, researchers
can develop high-performance biosensors and achieve
observation of local protein accumulation, which is helpful
for the detection of AD-related markers.56−58 Furthermore,
after being modified by targeting ligands, NPs can also achieve
excellent and sensitive imaging effects in vivo,59 which also
provides the possibility for early diagnosis of AD in vivo.
The blood−brain barrier (BBB) plays a crucial role in
regulating the entry of AD therapeutic drugs into the CNS,
with almost 98% of small-molecule drugs failing to reach the
brain.60,61 The BBB is composed of microvascular endothelial
cells, pericytes, basement membranes, and astrocytes’ foot-
shaped extensions, which are tightly bound around capillaries
and have a complex structure (Figure 1A).62,63 At the same
time, BBB dysfunction induced by AD, including increased
BBB permeability, microbleeding, impaired glucose transport,
impaired P-glycoprotein-1 function, perivascular deposition of
blood-derived products, infiltration and degeneration of
pericytes and endothelial cells, can adversely affect intra-
cerebral drug delivery.64 Crossing the BBB to increase the
concentration of drugs in the brain is a serious problem that
must be solved in AD drug development.
Excitingly, NPs can resort to the nutrients and energy
transport routes (passive diffusion, carrier-mediated transport,
adsorptive-mediated transcytosis, receptor-mediated transport,
and efflux pumps) (Figure 1A)65,66 to enter the brain. Various
strategies for NPs to overcome the BBB have been exploited,
which include external stimulation (using light,67,68 focused
ultrasound,69−72 biochemical reagents,67,73 and radiation),
passive transcytosis,74−76 ligands conjugation,77−81 intranasal
administration,82−84 and membrane coating85,86 (Figure
1B).65,74,87 By adjusting their physicochemical and mechanical
properties, such as material, shape, and ligands, the efficiency
of various types of NPs transport across the BBB and
intracranial pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in the
brain can be greatly improved (Figure 1C).88,89 The design of
AD nanomedicine should also be optimized for the different
pathological mechanisms of AD and the changes of BBB in the
pathological state of AD. For example, nanomedicine can take
Aβ, tau, and other abnormally enriched proteins or
polypeptides, abnormally enriched metal ions, and inflamma-
tory factors in AD brain as targets. What’s more, utilizing
immune cells infiltrating after BBB dysfunction for drug
delivery, improving cerebrovascular integrity, re-establishing
diffusion, and repairing damaged glucose transport could be
one of the targets of AD nanomedicine. Although many NPs
are still in the early phases of translation, nanomedicine offers
the potential for diagnosing and treating AD.
Here, we review the progress of nanomedicine in diagnosing
and treating AD in vitro and in vivo in the last six years,
focusing on the role played by NPs (Table 1). In addition, this
article includes areas such as in vitro diagnosis methods based
on various signals, in vivo diagnosis with emphasis on the NIR-
II imaging system, and therapeutic NPs delivery. Besides, we
discuss the current challenges and limitations in its
applications, providing our insights for the future development
of nanomaterials to combat AD.
2. NANODIAGNOSIS FOR AD
Currently, diagnostic methods for AD are typically employed
only after clinical symptoms appear, relying on clinical
presentations, including patient history, cognitive tests, and
medical examinations. However, the underlying pathological
mechanisms of AD mentioned above, such as the formation of
Aβ extracellular plaques and NFTs, begin before clinical
symptoms manifest. Therefore, diagnosis and imaging of liquid
biomarkers related to AD, including Aβ40, Aβ42, tau protein,
nucleic acids, and exosomes, show promise for early diagnosis
of the disease. Nanotechnology has the potential to overcome
many limitations of traditional diagnostic techniques, such as
enabling robust signal transduction, low cost, and enhanced
functionality. Hence, the precise identification of AD
biomarkers and the development of functional nanomaterials
for biomarker handling and imaging are of paramount
importance.163
2.1. In Vitro AD Nanodiagnosis. Challenges still persist
in in vitro nanodiagnostics. Detecting the total amount of
either tau protein or Aβ could potentially lead to false positive
results due to overlap with these biological markers in ordinary
individuals and psychiatric patients. In addition, detecting
hypothesized pathogenic biomarkers, such as phosphorylated
tau protein, splitter tau protein, or Aβ-derived diffusible
ligands, remains challenging due to their scarcity in early AD
stages.57,164,165 Therefore, it is essential to select appropriate
diagnostic targets and suitable nanomaterials based on
diagnostic mechanisms (such as conductivity, colorimetric
properties, photoluminescence, and enhancement factors) for
use as sensitive elements and surface modification of
nanomaterials, thus improving the performance of the
transducer component for optimized biosensor functionality.
2.1.1. Nanodiagnosis Based on Electrical Signals.
Electrical signal biosensors utilize biological reactions to detect
specific molecules, which is crucial in biosensing. Biological
components bind with specific molecules (on electrical signal
biosensors such as antibodies, enzymes, nucleic acids, etc.).
Electrochemical reaction then converts the electrochemical
signal caused by this binding into an electrical signal. And
finally, it is possible to quantitatively detect analytes and the
biomolecule through changes in currentm, impedance, and
potential.166 The core part of the electrical signal biosensors is
the electrode, which typically captures the target through
covalent bonds (gold−sulfur bonds, etc.), nucleic acid chain
binding, or antibody receptor specific binding sandwich
complex. Various nanomaterials have been reported for AD
diagnosis based on electrical signals, including gold nanoma-
terials,167−169 silver nanomaterials,170 quantum dot nanoma-
terials,112 and composite nanomaterials.93 For instance, nucleic
acid aptamer-functionalized CNT FETs were used for the
detection of low-concentration Aβ proteins in serum with a
limit of detection (LoD) as low as 50 aM.171 Alba et al.
developed an Au@Pt/Au core−shell nanoparticle with
immobilized antibodies and electrocatalytic activity for the
analysis and detection of p53 peptides in complex sample
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33797

environments, achieving detection down to 66 nM (Figure
2A).90 Shui et al. reported a cysteamine-stabilized gold
nanoparticle, which utilized an aptamer-antibody sandwich
assay for detecting tau-381.169 Roy et al. utilized cyclic
voltammetry to develop a compact magnetic bead-based
microelectrode array (MEA) electrochemical biosensor. They
employed the sandwich assay to measure the cyclic voltammo-
gram (CV) of antibody complexes on Microwell sensors for
detecting Aβ40 dimers.107 Compared with commercial screen-
printed electrode (SPE) sensors, the limit of detection (LOD)
was improved by at least 1000-fold. Ag NPs diagnosis was also
reported. Liao et al. developed a diagnosis method for AD-
specific amyloid β-peptide oligomers (AβO) using a hybrid-
ization chain reaction (HCR)-triggered amplification of
electric signals through the combination of Aβ oligomers
with polyadenine and Ag NPs, achieving a sensor detection
limit of 430 fM for Aβ oligomers (Figure 2B).170
2.1.2. Nanodiagnosis Based on Localized Surface
Plasmon Resonance (LSPR). Localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR) sensing chips feature uniformly distributed
metallic nanostructures (such as silver NPs, gold NPs, and gold
nanorods). Any changes in the external environment of these
nanostructures lead to changes in the refractive index of the
surrounding medium. This subsequently alters the larger shifts
in resonance wavelength, which can be detected spectroscopi-
cally.94,172,173 Park et al. deposited Au NPs on polyethylene
terephthalate substrates, optimizing LSPR sensor performance
for the detection of Monoclonal antibodies (anti-Aβ1−42) at
an extremely low concentration of 1 pg/mL.94 Kim et al.
synthesized GNPs with three different sizes and shapes (such
as nanospheres and nanorods) on one platform through
distinct LSPR (Figure 3A−C), which can be used to selectively
detect three core AD biomarkers: Aβ1−40, Aβ1−42, and τ
protein (Figure 3D), demonstrating a promising platform for
multianalyte diagnostics.95
2.1.3. Nanodiagnosis Based on Colorimetric Biosensor.
Colorimetric biosensors detect biomarkers through physical
and chemical interactions, where results can be observed
directly with the naked eye or with a colorimeter. The
characteristic color change occurs due to significant increases
or shifts in the spectral wavelength peaks of nanosystems
exposed to target biomarkers.174,175 This method is cost-
effective and involves simple equipment. Zhu et al. developed a
label-free, naked-eye-observable gold nanoparticle system for
AβO diagnostics, contrasting with traditional homogeneous
colorimetric assays. The presence of AβO stabilizes the gold
nanoparticles in the detection system, preventing salt-induced
aggregation, which could lead to hypsochromic shifts in
absorption spectra. The sensor has a dynamic range for Aβ
oligomers from 1 to 600 nM, with a detection limit of 0.56
Figure 2. Schematic representations of various electrical signals based nanotechnology for AD diagnosis in vitro. (A) Method to detect p53
peptides through Au@Pt/Au core−shell nanoparticle. Adapted with permission from ref 90. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.
(B) Schematic representation of using a hybridization chain reaction (HCR)-triggered amplification of electric signals through the
combination of Aβ oligomers with polyadenine and Ag NPs. Adapted with permission from ref 170. Copyright 2022 Elsevier.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33798

nM.96 Liu et al. utilized gel-modified silver nanotriangles (Ag
NTs) and silver nanorods (Ag NRs) in a colorimetric sensor
array for the identification and detection of Aβ40 and Aβ42, as
well as the determination of their concentration ratio (Aβ
42%) (Figure 4A).105 Aggregation behaviors led to distinct
color and spectral changes, offering significant opportunities
for the early diagnosis and treatment of AD.
2.1.4.
Nanodiagnosis
Based
on
Luminescence.
2.1.4.1. Electrochemiluminescence (ECL). Electrochemilumi-
nescence (ECL) is a process where a substance generated at an
electrode undergoes an electron transfer reaction to form an
excited state that emits light. Applying voltage to an electrode
in the presence of organic or inorganic luminophores can lead
to ECL.176 By utilization of ECL-active substances as labels for
biomolecules, ECL has been implemented in commercial
instruments for the detection of clinically relevant analytes at
subpicomolar concentrations. ECL techniques enable the
sensitive detection of AD biomarkers.177 The excellent
electrochemical and ECL performance of porphyrins is
currently a research hotspot.178 Jiang et al. prepared PCN-
222@CeO2@AgNPs with a sensitive diagnosis of human
plasma p-tau18. The principle is that after obtaining electrons,
nanoparticles could further oxidize and reduce to generate
more SO4
2−and excited states, which subsequently generate an
ECL response. The detection range was 1 pg/mL to 100 ng/
mL, and the LOD was 0.147 pg/mL, facilitating early AD
detection.97 Ruthenium (Ru) complexes are important electro-
luminescent materials. Qin et al. developed a dual-wavelength-
ratio ECL sensor for detecting Aβ42. The sensor was based on
Au-g-C3N4NSs as donors and Ru@TiO2@Au composite
materials as acceptors. They proposed an efficient DWR-
ECL method, with a linear range for Aβ42 from 1 × 10−5 to
200 ng/mL and a LOD of 2.6 fg/mL (S/N = 3).98
2.1.4.2. Fluorescent Nanoprobes. Another important
luminescent nanomaterial is fluorescent nanoprobes. The
fluorescence spectra emitted by fluorescent dyes and markers
compensate for the limitations of traditional metallic or
inorganic nanomaterials in fluorescence detection.179,180
Pedro et al. improved the fluorescence detection of Aβ peptide
aggregates in vitro and ex vivo by conjugating gold nanorods
(GNRs) with the fluorescent molecule CRANAD-2.99 Xia et
al. developed dual-functional gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) by
coupling them with the dye Red Bengal (RB), thereby creating
tools for detecting and diagnosing amyloid plaques (Figure
4B).100
2.1.5. Nanodiagnosis Based on Scanning Tunneling
Microscopy (STM). The tunneling current intensity in scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) exhibits an exponential depend-
ence on the distance between the tip and the sample. By
monitoring changes in the tunneling current, we can obtain
information about subtle surface variations of the sample. Kang
et al. reported an AD nano diagnosis system using STM.
Specific antibody fragments were immobilized on gold (Au)
substrates and AuNPs. The introduction of antibody−nano-
Figure 3. Schematic representations of various nanotechnologies based on localized surface plasmon resonance for AD diagnosis in vitro.
(A) A shape-code nanoplasmonic biosensor for multiple Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers using LSPR. (B) HR-TEM images of plasmon-
optical properties of shape-code gold nanoparticles (50 nm AuNSs, aspect ratio of 1.6 AuNRs and aspect ratio of 3.6 AuNRs). (C)
Calibration linear regression curves of LSPR wavelength peak shifts with concentrations of Aβ1−40, Aβ1−42, and tau proteins. (D) The
LSPR wavelength peak shifts correspond to the detection of Aβ1−40, Aβ1−42, and tau proteins at different concentrations. Adapted with
permission from ref 95. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33799

particle conjugates led to immunobinding, causing changes in
the tip-to-biosurface distance. These distance variations
influenced the tunneling current, resulting in signal changes.
This technique achieves ultrahigh sensitivity detection of Aβ at
concentrations as low as 10 fg/mL.101
2.2. In Vivo AD Nanodiagnosis. For in vivo nano-
diagnostics, many issues have a great impact on the
nanodiagnosis, including the complex biological environment
in the body, the interference of a variety of proteins, the
obstruction of the BBB, and the occlusion of scalp, skull, and
brain tissue. Therefore, when designing nanodiagnostic probes,
the first consideration is their ability to cross the BBB. This
often involves surface modifications, either through non-
covalent modifications via coatings (such as polysorbate 80,
apolipoprotein E, or poloxamer 188) or through covalent
modifications via functionalization (such as apolipoprotein A-I,
transferrin, lactoferrin, or glycopeptide G7). Additionally,
surface charge and molecular size can also significantly
influence the ability to traverse the blood−brain barrier.181
Next, targeting the lesions associated with AD is crucial. This
typically involves selecting targeting groups based on different
pathological mechanisms, such as targeting Aβ (Aβ targeting
peptide LVFFA,182 GM1,138 etc.), tau (VQIINK,183 (D)-
TLKIVW,184 etc.), AChE (AChE-targeted miR-132,185 etc.),
oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and others. Finally, the
brightness of the imaging molecules, their tissue penetration
depth, and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of bioimaging
significantly impact the diagnostic effectiveness.
2.2.1. Nanodiagnosis with Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a critical diagnostic
tool for AD.186 Because MRI is capable of delineating the
morphological alterations within the cerebral cortex that occur
concomitant with the process of senescence, it provides a
valuable diagnostic tool for the longitudinal surveillance of AD
in the brain.187 Macrocyclic gadolinium is a commonly used
MRI contrast agent. Ketan B. Ghaghada et al. prepared ADx-
001 nanoparticles using an amyloid-plaque-targeting molecule
(ET3−73) and macrocyclic gadolinium imaging molecule
(Gd(III)-DSPE-DOTA sodium salt) (Figure 5A).118 ADx-001
is attractive because of its lack of radioactivity, ease of
distribution, long shelf life, and prevalence of MRI scanners.
ADx-001 demonstrated high sensitivity at 0.20 and 0.15 mmol
Gd/kg and excellent specificity at all dose levels for in vivo
imaging of Aβ plaques (Figure 5B).118 Rui-Tian Li et al.
developed multifunctional nanoparticles by using iron oxide,
designated as W20/XD4-SPIONs, through the conjugation of
the oligomer-specific scFv antibody W20 and the class A
scavenger receptor (SR-A) activator XD4 onto superparamag-
netic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs).108 The W20/XD4-
SPIONs, serving as a molecular MRI contrast agent specifically
targeting Aβ oligomers (AβOs), efficiently targeted the regions
of pathological AβOs deposition in the brain, thereby enabling
the differentiation of AD transgenic mice from wild-type (WT)
controls.108
Brain glucose is another important biomarker of AD and has
a high specificity, especially for early AD. Peng Zhao et al.
synthesized an activatable glucose-specific MRI contrast agent
(ZIF-8/GOx@MnO2@PEG, ZGMP) that consists of porous
zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) attached to glucose
oxidase (GOx) and modified by MnO2 and PEG (Figure
5C).116 ZIF-8 presented a typical polyhedron morphology with
an average size of 63.19 nm, and was uniformly coated by
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of fluorescent Nanoprobes for AD in vitro. (A) Schematic illustration of gel-modified silver nanotriangles
(Ag NTs) and silver nanorods (Ag NRs), and simultaneous identification and detection of Aβ40 and Aβ42 in rat cerebrospinal fluid exposed
to Cd2+ using a colorimetric sensor array, with each analyte generating a fingerprint. Adapted with permission from ref 105. Copyright 2020
American Chemical Society. (B) The RB-AuNPs probe achieves functional fluorescent amyloid plaques detection through the combination
of gold nanoparticles and rhodamine B. Adapted with permission from ref 100. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33800

MnO2 nanosheets to obtain ZIF-8/Gox NPs (Figure 5D−
G).116 The enzymatic cascade reaction involving brain glucose
and ZGMP can catalyze the generation of Mn(II) ions, thereby
augmenting the MRI signal intensity. An early stage AD mouse
model was established via the intracerebral administration of
Aβ42 oligomers, which was employed to validate the glucose-
activated MRI enhancement by ZGMP. The experimental
findings demonstrated an elevated glucose uptake in the early
AD mice relative to normal mice, correlating with a markedly
intensified T1WI signal at the region of interest (Figure
5H).116 This work eliminates the need for a specific scanning
sequence for glucose MRI, providing the possibility for MRI
diagnosis of early AD.
2.2.2. Nanodiagnosis with Optical Imaging. In contrast to
the reconstruction-dependent temporal constraints and the
intrinsic limitations in spatial resolution associated with MRI,
in vivo fluorescence imaging presents a spectrum of distinct
advantages, including the capability to capture wide-field
images, economic feasibility, operational simplicity, non-
invasive nature, exceptional sensitivity coupled with high
selectivity, superior spatiotemporal resolution, and innovative
visualization of biological processes.188
In the nascent stages of the field of bioimaging, inorganic
nanomaterials, including quantum dots, have been extensively
investigated for their distinctive optical properties. However,
these materials were beset by issues such as biocompatibility
and toxicity, poor biodegradability, and challenges in
functionalization, which led researchers to gravitate toward
the development of organic fluorescent materials.189 More
importantly, the tissue’s inherent autofluorescence background
in the visible light range (400−700 nm) is limited (1−2 mm),
which prevents the detection of the biological complexity in
deeper tissues. Traditional near-infrared wavelengths (NIR-I,
650−950 nm) are considered the first biological window,
because they reduce the absorption and scattering of near-
infrared light by blood and water in biological tissues. NIR
fluorescence imaging (FLI) offers greater tissue penetration
than visible light.190 NIR fluorescence bioimaging is endowed
with the capacity to surmount the inherent limitations of
traditional FLI concerning penetration depth and spatial
resolution. This capability is attributed to its salient attributes,
such as profound tissue penetration, minimal phototoxicity to
biological structures, attenuated scattering by tissues, and
reduced autofluorescence.191,192 However, NIR-I fluorescence
bioimaging is still affected by tissue autofluorescence (back-
ground noise), and the presence of photon scattering limits the
depth of tissue penetration. Recent experimental results
indicate that in the near-infrared II region (NIR-II, 1000−
1700 nm), also known as the second biological window, the
SNR for bioimaging can be significantly improved. NIR-II
bioimaging can detect information from deeper tissues at a
centimeter scale, achieving micron-level resolution at milli-
meter depths, thus surpassing the performance of NIR-I
fluorescence imaging.190
Recent studies have disclosed that the upregulated
expression of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in the
AD brain acts as an upstream regulator of Aβ plaque
formation. Consequently, CTGF may serve as an earlier
diagnostic biomarker for AD, preceding the detection of Aβ
plaques. Xueyun Gao et al. developed a peptide-coated gold
Figure 5. Nanodiagnosis with Magnetic Resonance Imaging. (A) Structure of the amyloid-plaque-targeting molecule (ET3−73) and
macrocyclic gadolinium imaging molecule (Gd(III)-DSPE-DOTA sodium salt). (B) Aβ plaques in vivo imaging of ADx-001 nanoparticles.
Adapted with permission from ref 118. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (C) Brain glucose activated MRI contrast agent for early diagnosis
of AD. (D) TEM image and (E) particle diameter distribution of ZIF-8. (F) TEM image of ZGMP and (G) elemental mapping of Zn, Mn,
and N. (H) AD mice, normal mice before and after ZGMP was injected. Adapted with permission from ref 116. Copyright 2022 American
Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33801

nanoparticle (DCG) that specifically targets CTGF with a high
affinity (KD ∼21.9 nM). The nanoparticle is adept at
permeating the BBB of APP/PS1 transgenic mice during the
precocious stages of the disease (prior to the age of 3 months)
in vivo. This capability enables noninvasive NIR-II imaging to
detect CTGF without overt Aβ plaque deposition.102
To mitigate the physiological toxicity caused by the poor
metabolizability of metal nanoparticles within biological
systems, researchers currently tend to develop organic-based
NIR luminescent materials. Clear elucidation of the changes in
AD-related methylglyoxal (MGO) levels in vivo is significant
yet highly challenging. Wen Zhang et al. reported a
biocompatible Fe3O4 nanoparticle (IONP)-conjugated
MGO-activatable NIR-II fluorescent probe (MAM) modified
with the peptide T7 (HAIYPRH) (named TM-IONP) for the
in situ detection of MGO in a transgenic AD mouse model.109
Following intravenous administration of TM-IONPs to
APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic (APP/PS1, AD) mice, the NIR-
II fluorescence emanating from the brain parenchymal regions,
excluding the vasculature, demonstrated a progressive enhance-
ment in signal intensity, spreading extensively across the
cerebral tissue within a 120 min time frame. In stark contrast,
Figure 6. Nanodiagnosis with Aggregation-Induced Emission Luminogens. (A) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of a dual-AIE
nanosystem. (B) QMT-CBT significantly enhanced the NIR signal in AD mice compared with that in WT mice. Adapted with permission
from ref 201. Copyright 2023 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33802

the brains of wild-type mice administered with TM-IONPs and
those of APP/PS1 mice treated with M-IONPs exhibited
significantly diminished NIR-II fluorescence intensities.109 The
developed NIR-II nanoprobe presents itself as a potent
instrument for the in vivo investigation of MGO-associated
neurodegenerative disorders, simultaneously propelling the
advancement of NIR-II luminescent nanoprobes designed to
transcend the constraints posed by the BBB.
2.2.2.1. Optical Imaging with Aggregation-Induced
Emission Luminogens. Diagnostic imaging offers definitive
visual evidence of pathological processes. In the context of
neurodegenerative diseases, structural modifications, partic-
ularly the aggregation of proteins, impede intramolecular
motion, thereby suffering from the notorious ACQ effect, while
concurrently amplifying the Aggregation-Induced Emission
(AIE) phenomena.193−195 Based on their excellent fluores-
cence properties, AIEgens are successfully implemented in
disease diagnostic imaging.81,196−200 Ben Zhong Tang et al.
designed and prepared near-infrared-II AIE nanotheranostic
Ang-AIE nanocomposites.121 Visual NIR-II images of Ang-AIE
NCs solution indicated a concentration-/wavelength-depend-
ent brightness. The NIR imaging at 1350 nm of Ang-AIE NCs
clearly outlines the frame of cerebrovascular with higher
sensitivity.121 Ang-AIE NCs have a longer half-life, facilitating
long-acting in vivo BBB penetration monitored at 1350 nm by
NIR-II imaging.121 As a result, the Ang-NCs group exhibited a
significantly higher fluorescence intensity than the NCs group
due to stronger BBB penetration and higher binding with Aβ
fibril in the brain.121 Moreover, the NIR images and
corresponding intensity quantification together indicated the
major accumulations were distributed in the liver and
spleen.121
AIE enables “turn-on” imaging generally through the
aggregation of the AIE molecule, while dual aggregations of
Figure 7. Schematic illustration of main applications of polylactic acid (PLA) NPs and poly lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) NPs in AD. (A)
The fabrication structure of nerve growth factor nanocapsules n(NGF) and the quantification of astrocytes (GFAP), microglia (Iba-1),
neurofilaments (NF200), neurons (NeuN), and vessels (Glut-1) in spinal cord sections after injury and repeated treatments with PBS, native
NGF, and n(NGF). Adapted with permission from ref 207. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (B) The fabrication structure of PLGA-GO-MB
scaffolds and their use for NPC culture and confocal images of NPCs grown on the different substrates after 7 days of culture, costained for
Tuj-1 (red) and GFAP (green), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref 209. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33803

the AIE molecule might further enhance the imaging intensity
and the consequent sensitivity.201 Gaolin Liang and colleagues
designed a NIR “dual-AIE” fluorophore, QMT-CBT, for the
enhanced visualization of AD.201 Cas1 is an important
biomarker related to neuroinflammation in AD, and it is
utilized to trigger dual aggregations of QMT-CBT, enabling
timely diagnosis of AD. Upon Cas1 cleavage, QMT-CBT is
converted to hydrophobic QMT-CBT-Cleaved, which is
subjected to a reduction-triggered CBT-Cys click reaction to
form the QMT Dimer (the first aggregation). Subsequently,
the QMT Dimer undergoes a self-assembly process to form
nanoparticles, designated as QMT-NPs, which constitutes the
second aggregation event. This assembly results in an amplified
“dual-AIE” fluorescence signal (Figure 6A). As shown in Figure
6B, the WT + QMT-CBT group showed a negligible
fluorescence signal, indicating the low Cas1 level in the brain
regions of the WT mice. Conversely, significantly enhanced
NIR fluorescence signals were detected in AD mice treated
with QMT-CBT.201
3. NANOTHERAPY FOR AD
The various properties of nanoparticles make them have
different applications in AD therapy. NPs can serve as
adjuvants and delivery carriers or as a nanodrug to cross the
BBB through different pathways, achieving targeted drug
delivery and controlled release by adjusting surface functional
groups to complete nanotherapy for AD. Its design principle is
consistent with that of in vivo nanodiagnostic probes. It is
particularly important to note that nanoparticles that can be
used as nanomedicines themselves, such as gold nanoparticles
and carbon nanoparticles, in addition to crossing the BBB and
targeting AD lesions are also required to have therapeutic
effects themselves. Here, we delineated the characteristics of
the following nanomaterials with a particular focus on their
application in the treatment of AD.
3.1. Polymer-based NPs. Polymeric NPs are colloidal
systems that have a nanoscale range from 10 to 1000 nm,
receiving widespread attention due to their stability and
biocompatibility.202−204 Biodegradable polymeric nanopar-
ticles, such as polylactic acid (PLA) NPs, poly lactic-co-glycolic
acid (PLGA) NPs, polyethylene glycol (PEG) NPs,
dendrimers, polydopamine (PDA),68 and nanogels have
frequently been regarded as superior for central nervous
system drug delivery due to their precise targeting and versatile
drug encapsulation capabilities and their potential to penetrate
the BBB, thereby enabling the controlled delivery of
pharmaceuticals to the CNS.205
3.1.1. Polylactic Acid NPs. PLA has garnered particular
attention in the field of materials science due to its exceptional
characteristics. These include low toxicity, biodegradability,
and high biocompatibility, making it an ideal material for
various applications, particularly in the biomedical sector.206
Lu et al. introduced a groundbreaking nanocapsule system,
n(NGF), which efficiently delivers nerve growth factor (NGF)
to the CNS in mice and primates (Figure 7A).207 The system
employs in situ polymerization with 2-methacryloyloxyethyl
phosphorylcholine (MPC), a monomer akin to natural
molecules, to enhance the BBB permeability. Cross-linking
with PLA diacrylate ensures sustained NGF release, which is
crucial for spinal cord injury treatment. The system notably
reduced inflammation, as seen by lower GFAP and Iba-1 levels,
and promoted neuronal recovery and vascular regeneration, as
indicated by increased levels of NeuN, NF200, and Glut-1.
This nanocapsule system is a major step forward in CNS drug
delivery, offering therapeutic possibilities for CNS injuries and
neurodegenerative diseases. Kim et al. developed an injectable
PLA microsphere system coated with Donepezil, enhancing
cognitive function in mild to moderate cases. The micro-
spheres were further wrapped with a polyethylene glycol-b-
polycaprolactone (PC) hydrogel to enable controlled, long-
lasting drug release, improving patient adherence to treatment
by reducing dosing frequency.124 Additionally, Kannan et al.
reported a chitosan-polylactic acid-loaded magnesium oxide
nanocomposite (CH/PLA/MgONCs), which was synthesized
and tested in an AD rat model.125 This green precipitation-
method-produced nanocomposite showed promising results,
improving both spatial and nonspatial memory while reducing
oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and amyloid-beta aggre-
gation. It also enhanced mitochondrial function, positioning
CH/PLA/MgONCs as a prospective therapeutic for AD. This
work exemplifies the powerful intersection of nanotechnology
and the advancement of neurodegenerative disease treatments.
3.1.2. Poly Lactic-co-glycolic Acid NPs. PLGA, a biocom-
patible and biodegradable polymer with a well-established
track record in nanomedicine, has garnered significant
attention for its role in targeted chemotherapy administration,
earning approvals from both the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency
(EMA).208 Meng et al. developed huperzine A-loaded PLGA
nanoparticles with surface modification by lactoferrin-con-
jugated N-trimethylated chitosan for AD treatment by
intranasal delivery.83 Zhang et al. introduced a groundbreaking
PLGA-based nanofibrous scaffold, revolutionizing the field of
neural tissue engineering and regenerative medicine (Figure
7B).209 This scaffold, coated with graphene oxide (GO) and
methylene blue (MB), offered a cellular matrix for neural
progenitor cell (NPC) transplantation, specifically targeting
tauopathies characterized by tau protein aggregation. This
multifaceted approach, combining targeted neuroprotective
delivery with a supportive cellular environment, marks a
significant advancement in innovative treatments for AD and
other neurodegenerative diseases. In 2022, Kar et al.
demonstrated that native PLGA nanoparticles can be
internalized by neurons and protect them against β-amyloid
toxicity in AD. The research reveals that these nanoparticles
modulate the expression of genes related to amyloid precursor
protein metabolism and reduce oxidative stress, suggesting
their potential as a therapeutic agent in AD pathology.210
Furthermore, J. Kshirsagar et al. investigated the potential
therapeutic effects of naringin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles for
AD. The research involved in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo
analyses and demonstrated that the nanoparticles could
enhance naringin’s bioavailability in the brain, showing
neuroprotective and antineuroinflammatory effects.126 In
2024, Cam et al. presented the design and evaluation of
curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles embedded in 3D-
printed sodium alginate/gelatin scaffolds for AD treatment.
The scaffolds, intended for sublingual delivery, demonstrated
controlled curcumin release over 18 days, enhanced cell
viability, and neuroprotective effects by modulating the Wnt/
β-catenin pathway.127
3.1.3. Polyethylene Glycol NPs. PEG is widely used in brain
drug delivery. Kanazawa et al. used Tat peptide-modified
nanomicelles composed of PEGyl-polycaprolactone polymers
to deliver siRNA to the brain.211 Tang et al. have recently
developed a sophisticated nanomaterial for AD therapy,
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33804

combining multiple treatments into a single NIR-II nano
theragnostic platform. This platform utilizes PEG derivatives
and AIE luminogens (AIEgens) for brain-targeting, Aβ fibril-
degrading, and ROS-regulating capabilities (Figure 8A). PEG
derivatives with a ROS-responsive thioketal (TK) template and
brain-targeted angiopep-2 (Ang-2) modification are coas-
sembled with AIEgens into nanocomposites.121 This design
enables efficient BBB penetration and controlled release of
AIEgens in response to ROS, enhancing the therapeutic impact
on AD pathology. Wang et al. explored the use of PEG-
modified copper-cysteamine (Cu-Cy-PEG) as a photosensi-
tizer for photodynamic therapy (PDT) in AD, demonstrated
improved biocompatibility and effectively produced ROS
under UV irradiation to degrade Aβ aggregates.212 In 2024,
Tong investigated PEGylated-liposomal astaxanthin (PEG-
ATX@NPs) as a potential AD treatment, demonstrating its
ability to scavenge FA, reduce oxidative stress, and inhibit Aβ
aggregation in AD model mice.213 Saeed et al. investigated the
protective effects of MoS2 quantum dots coated with DSPE-
PEG-TPP on protein secondary structures in AD-affected
brain tissues in mice. Using FTIR spectroscopy, it was found
that the treatment preserved protein structures similar to the
control group, suggesting potential therapeutic benefits in
protecting against AD-related pathologies.114
Figure 8. Schematic illustration of the main applications of polyethylene glycol (PEG) NPs and dendrimers in AD. (A) The fabrication
structure of nanodrug (Ang-AIE NCs, termed Ang-NCs) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of the morphology change of
Aβ species from monomer under different treatments. Adapted with permission from ref 121. Copyright 2024 Springer Nature. (B) The
fabrication structure of dendrimer PPA and plaques in brain tissue were detected by ThS staining. Adapted with permission from ref 119.
Copyright 2022 Elsevier.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33805

3.1.4. Dendrimers. With their monodisperse and precisely
controlled branched architecture, dendrimers have emerged as
pivotal agents in the realm of customized drug encapsulation
and targeted brain drug delivery. Among the various types of
dendrimers, poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers have
gained prominence due to their broad applicability in drug and
gene delivery systems to the brain, as well as in regenerative
medicine.214 It is reported that lactoferrin-conjugated
dendrimer nanoparticles could mediate BBB transport and
delivery of compounds to the desired region in the brain
tissue.132 Muniswamy et al. found that dendrimer-cationized-
albumin-coated NPs displayed superior permeation transport
across monolayer ECs.215
Shi et al. introduced a hybrid nanoparticle system to
improve BBB permeability and clear ROS in AD (Figure
8B).119 The system combines angiopoietin-2 (ANG-2)-
modified PAMAM dendrimers with Prussian blue, a
compound with strong antioxidant properties, enhancing
ROS clearance and offering therapeutic benefits. This nano-
composite has shown the ability to reduce neuroinflammation,
oxidative stress, and Aβ buildup. Shukla et al. presented the
development of a vitamin E-modified PAMAM dendrimer for
the delivery of piperine to alleviate Aβ1−42 induced neuro-
toxicity in an AD model. The dendrimer conjugate, TPGS-
PAMAM, was found to reduce Aβ1−42 fibril formation, increase
acetylcholine levels, and enhance cognitive function in affected
mice, suggesting its potential as a therapeutic strategy for
AD.128 In 2024, Jain et al. developed a delivery system using
vitamin E-modified poly(propyleneimine) (PPI) dendrimers to
enhance brain targeting and reduce peripheral side effects of
tacrine hydrochloride, a potent acetylcholinesterase inhibitor,
for the treatment of AD. The system demonstrated improved
drug loading, sustained release, and biocompatibility, suggest-
ing potential for enhanced therapeutic efficacy.129
3.1.5. Nanogels. Nanogels are recognized for their capacity
to encapsulate a variety of agents, including active molecules,
macromolecules, and therapeutic drugs.216−219 They are
regarded as promising vehicles for drug delivery and have
been extensively utilized to address numerous challenges
related to a spectrum of pathologies, especially for AD.220
A nanogel system, PLNG, is designed to effectively regulate
the AD microenvironment by inhibiting Aβ amyloidogenesis
and alleviating oxidative stress.122 PLNG is synthesized by
cross-linking lentinan (LNT), a polysaccharide derived from
Shiitake mushrooms known for its ability to prevent Aβ
amyloidogenesis, with a conjugated polymer, poly(deca-4,6-
diynedioic acid) (PDDA), which can neutralize harmful ROS.
In vivo studies using two AD mouse models have
demonstrated that the PLNG significantly enhances memory
and spatial recognition abilities.
Increasing research underscores the role of insulin in
AD.221−223 Extensive testing has confirmed the biocompati-
bility, hemocompatibility, and BBB crossing ability of the
nanogel carrier. The neuroprotective capabilities of NG-In are
Figure 9. Schematic illustration and applications of MSN NPs in AD. (A) Schematic illustration of the antiamyloidogenic capabilities of Aβ
nanodepletors’ antiamyloidogenic capabilities. Ultralarge porous silica nanostructures loaded with anti-Aβ scFvs (Aβ nanodepletors) target
and absorb Aβ peptides selectively. The reduction of Aβ by Aβ nanodepletors suppresses toxic Aβ self-assembly, resulting in less deposition
of Aβ plaques and alleviation of Aβ-derived neurotoxicity. (B) A representative coronal brain section image of the BSA-decorated
nanostructure and Aβ nanodepletor injected mouse, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref 134. Copyright 2020 WILEY-VCH. (C)
Synthesis of CICe@M-K and the dual role of CICe@M-K in inhibiting Aβ aggregation as well as scavenging ROS after crossing the BBB. (D)
Moving track in the open-field test. (E) Swimming path of the Morris water maze experiment. Adapted with permission from ref 131.
Copyright 2024 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33806

exemplified by its ability to counteract the neurotoxic effects
induced by the Aβ peptide. These findings suggest that the
NG-In nanogel system is not only a viable carrier for insulin in
biomedicine but also a highly promising tool in the
development of treatments for neurodegenerative diseases.
3.2. Inorganic Nanoparticles. Mesoporous silica nano-
particles (MSNs) with large surface area and pore volume are
suitable for high drug loading.224,225 Moreover, MSNs are a
promising drug carrier for many biomedical researches due to
their adequate biocompatibility.226,227 Chen et al. developed an
MSN-based approach for neurodegenerative therapy, which
involved multiple designs in the targeted codelivery of
curcumin, a natural antioxidant product to protect ROS
damage and plasmid RhoG-DsRed, beneficial to neurite
outgrowth.132
The early elimination of Aβ monomers in dementia is seen
as a potential strategy to slow the progression of AD. As
mentioned in Figure 9A, Lee’s team has introduced a approach
using Aβ-depleting nanostructures, termed “Aβ nanodeple-
tors,” designed to selectively capture and clear Aβ peptide
monomers from the brain.134 These nanodepletors utilize anti-
Aβ single-chain variable fragments and these fragments
maintain high affinity and selectivity for Aβ peptides.134,228−230
After the Aβ nanodepletors were injected into the hippo-
campus and cortex regions, the results revealed significant
alleviation of Aβ plaque burden in vivo compared with BSA-
decorated nanostructures injections (Figure 9B). Given the
potential of Aβ nanodepletors to significantly deplete the Aβ
peptide, they are considered as a promising therapeutic
candidate for future clinical treatments of the disease.
Addressing excessive accumulation of Aβ and elevated levels
of ROS, a multifunctional nanocarrier, CICe@M-K, were
studied by Wei group, which was designed to efficiently cross
the BBB and simultaneously inhibit Aβ aggregation and
scavenge ROS.131 This nanocarrier integrates antioxidant
curcumin (Cur) and photosensitizer IR780 within MSNs,
with surfaces modified by cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO2
NPs) and a targeting peptide K (CKLVFFAED) (Figure 9C).
In vivo imaging studies confirmed the efficient BBB
penetration and brain targeting effect of CICe@M-K. The in
vivo assays demonstrated that CICe@M-K not only reduces
Aβ depositions and oxidative stress but also enhances cognitive
function, positioning it as a promising therapeutic agent for AD
treatment (Figure 9D−E). Gao et al. fabricated HSA-
manganese dioxide nanocomposites which suppressed Aβ
fibrillization and alleviated Aβ-mediated SH-SY5Y neuro-
toxicity.117
Gadolinium (Gd) remains a prevalent component in MRI-
based diagnostics for AD due to its notable electronic spin and
minimal electronic relaxation rate, as documented in several
studies.231,232 For an effective antiaggregation therapy in AD,
nanoparticles based on Gd were developed by Zhou et al.,
which can either prevent peptide aggregation or break down
existing oligomers (Figure 10A).120 Endohedral metallofuller-
ene Gd@C82, known for its exceptional structural stability and
ease of modification, was modified with hydrogen-bonding
sites and charged groups on its surface for targeted design (f-
Gd@C82 NPs). f-Gd@C82 NPs are able to redirect Aβ
peptide self-assembly toward nontoxic, off-pathway species,
inhibiting the early growth of protofibrils and disaggregating
the preformed well-ordered protofibrils or even mature Aβ
fibrils (Figure 10B−C). This strategy presents a promising
avenue for developing anti-AD agents capable of inhibiting and
reversing Aβ aggregation.
Previous research found that molybdenum disulfide (MoS2)
with NIR photothermal absorption has important effects in
Figure 10. Schematic illustration and applications of Gd NPs and QDs in AD. (A) Dual-functionalized Gd@C82 nanoparticles to improve
neuronal cytotoxicity in AD via inhibition of Aβ aggregation. (B) Morphology of primary neurons treated with these conditions using SEM,
scale bar = 50 μm. (C) Enlarged image of (B), scale bar = 20 μm. Adapted with permission from ref 120. Copyright 2024 American Chemical
Society. (D) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of MoS2 QDs/MM System and its combined photochemotherapy against AD. (E) In the
MWM test, the swimming trajectories of different groups of APP/PS1 mice in the water maze within 1 min. (F) TUNEL staining. Adapted
with permission from ref 233. Copyright 2023 WILEY-VCH.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33807

antitumor photothermal therapy and could constrain Aβ1−42
aggregation by preventing the formation via hydrogen and
electrostatic interactions.115,233,234 Recently, molybdenum
disulfide quantum dots (MoS2 QDs) were developed by the
Xie group (Figure 10D), which not only possess the dual
capability of neutralizing ROS and preventing the deposition of
Aβ1−42, but also were designed to execute a multitarget
combined therapy, augmented by NIR irradiation. In vivo
behavioral studies further substantiate the efficacy of MoS2
QDs/MM, exhibiting exploration and learning abilities
comparable to those of wild-type mice (Figure 10E). The
results of TUNEL staining indicated that the mice have no
obvious brain injury, so MoS2 QDs/MM+NIR can effectively
prevent the brain injury process in APP/PS1 mice (Figure
10F).233
It is reported that the tight junctions between endothelial
cells have a gap of 4−6 nm, and the nanoparticles smaller than
4 nm can cross the BBB through passive diffusion, also known
as the paracellular route.74,75 Therefore, small NPs such as
AuNPs, AgNPs, and Fe3O4 nanoparticles may easily cross the
BBB via passive diffusion. Sokolova et al. found that ∼2 nm
core diameter AuNPs could accumulate increasingly over time
inside the spheroid, which is an in vitro BBB model.76 Feng et
al. prepared AT-CS@Au NPs and exhibited a significant ability
to delay the development of AD in vitro.235 Huo et al. designed
and prepared 3.3 nm L- and D-glutathione stabilized gold
nanoparticles (denoted as L3.3 and D3.3, respectively) and
found D3.3 possessed a larger binding affinity to Aβ 42 and
higher brain biodistribution than L3.3. Meanwhile, D3.3
showed stronger inhibition of Aβ 42 fibrillation, neuronal
protection and better rescue of behavioral impairments in AD
model mice.103 Natalia dos Santos Tramontin et al. evaluated
the AuNP treatment on an AD model and found that AuNP
treatment prevented the neuroinflammation, modulation of
mitochondrial function, and impaired cognition induced by the
AD model.104 Zhang et al. synthesized AgNPs and assessed
their therapeutic potential in sporadic AD model rats. The
results showed that AgNPs could effectively prevent the effect
of deficits in recognition and spatial memory.106 Fang et al.
designed multifunctional Fe3O4-based nanoparticles which
contain ferulic acid and Simvastatin linked to its surface
(FSSIO), showing excellent neuroprotective activity against
the Aβ-induced cytotoxicity, improving cognitive dysfunctions
and enhancing memory retention in AD model rats.111 Wang
et al. used superparamagnetic nanoparticles to label human
umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs) and
improved the memory and cognitive ability of AD mice by
excessive generation of neuroprotective factors.110
3.3. Carbon-Based Nanoparticles. Carbon-based nano-
particles were widely designed as an alternative to high-toxicity
traditional heavy-metal-based nanoparticles in AD through a
phototherapeutic pathway. With low biotoxicity, high bio-
compatibility, and diverse surface functionality, carbon-based
nanoparticles are the most prominent in AD studies. Carbon-
based nanoparticles, including graphene,236 graphene oxide,237
carbon nanotubes,238 carbon quantum dots,239 and full-
erenes,240 are able to be functionalized as drug nanocarriers241
or phototherapeutic agents242 in AD therapy.
Graphene oxide (GO) is the hydrophilic derivative of
graphenes with two-dimensional sp2-hybridized carbon-based
nanomaterial. Its high carrier mobility, significant thermal
conductibility, and excellent biocompatibility endow graphene
oxide with unparalleled attention in biomedical areas. Li et al.
explored GO’s ability to mitigate Aβ toxicity in yeast cells,
focusing on GO’s role in Aβ degradation and cellular stress
response enhancement.135 Yeast cells expressing Aβ were
Figure 11. Schematic illustration and applications of carbon NPs and protein-based NPs in AD. (A) The percentage of time spent in the
target quadrant and (B) swimming track at the last trail day of GO@Dau on anxiety and cognitive deficits in mice treated with aggregated
Aβ1−42. Adapted with permission from ref 136. Copyright 2021 Informa UK Limited. (C) The synthesis and beneficial effects of Glu-BSA/
C1 NPs in 5×FAD mice. (D) In vivo fluorescence imaging at different time points of DIR-labeled NPs and DIR-labeled C1-NPs. (E)
Western blot results of the expression of Tau, p-Tau (ser396), and p-Tau (ser235) in the brain tissue of mice in each group. (F)
Densitometry analysis of Tau, p-Tau (ser396), and p-Tau (ser235) proteins. Adapted with permission from ref 139. Copyright 2024 Elsevier.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33808

treated with varying GO concentrations, and Aβ toxicity was
assessed. These findings indicated that GO reduces Aβ toxicity
by promoting Aβ degradation and boosting cellular stress
responses, offering insights into potential therapeutic strategies
for AD. Moreover, drugs could be easily modified on GO
nanomaterial for a multitarget therapy for AD. Wang et al.
investigated the therapeutic efficacy of GO nanoparticles
loaded with daunorubicin (Dau) in AD mouse models.136 The
primary objective was to determine whether GO@Dau
nanoparticles could mitigate cognitive decline and anxiety-
like behaviors induced by aggregated Aβ1−42. The results
indicated that GO@Dau nanoparticle treatment significantly
improved cognitive function, reducing mice’s escape latency
(Figure 11A) and the swimming time in the target quadrant
was prolonged (Figure 11B). This study suggests that GO@
Dau nanoparticles could be a promising therapeutic approach
for AD, offering insights into the development of treatments
for the disease.
Nanosized-carbon nanotubes and fullerenes are allotropes
with the ability to translocate through the lipid membrane and
cross the BBB.243 In 2022, Dai et al. investigated the effects of
Nano C60 on the synaptic distribution of phosphorylated
CaMKIIα (a potential target for AD therapy) in cells and
cognitive function in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Their research
indicated that Nano C60 treatment could promote the
translocation of phosphorylated CaMKIIα from the cytoplasm
to the synapse in the target cell and mice. It addressed the
research question on the role of synaptic-activated CaMKII VS
total CaMKII in AD treatment, which provided insights into
the potential benefits of Nano C60 in AD therapy. In recent
studies, Mehta and Shende went further by comparing carbon
nanotubes and fullerenes (C60) coupling with genistein for
synergistic anti-AD activity by Aβ deaggregation.137 Both
formulations successfully controlled genistein release in rat’s
brain through intranasal administration in both ex-vivo and in
vivo experiments, providing insights for the effective design
and formulation of nanoparticles with enhanced properties for
anti-AD activity.
3.4. Protein-based Nanoparticles. Biogenic materials
were further investigated as nanocarriers other than manufac-
tured materials. HSA is one of the most attractive drug delivery
vehicles for drug delivery to the brain based on its
biocompatibility.244,245 Yang et al. constructed an HSA
nanosystem to coencapsulated clioquinol and donepezil,
which reduced Aβ deposition, ameliorated neuron morpho-
logical changes, rescued memory deficits, and greatly improved
acetylcholine regulation ability in vivo.138 In 2024, Duan et al.
designed and investigated a strategy to further improve the
efficiency and therapeutic effect of the drug across the BBB by
fabricating procyanidin C-1 (C1) encapsulated in glucose-
functionalized BSA nanoparticles (Glu-BSA/C1 NPs) (Figure
11C).139 Glu-BSA/C1 NPs could successfully pass the BBB
with a high ratio and accumulate in the brain by targeting
Glut1 (Figure 11D). Furthermore, Glu-BSA/C1 NPs alleviated
LPS-induced neuronal damage and significantly decreased the
expression of Tau, p-Tau (ser 396), and p-Tau (ser235)
(Figure 11E−F).
Figure 12. HDL-based therapies for AD. Adapted with permission from ref 251. Copyright 2021 Elsevier.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33809

3.5. Lipid-based Nanoparticles. Lipoprotein nanopar-
ticles (LPNPs), liposomes, and solid lipid nanoparticles
(SLNs) are emerging as promising drug delivery systems for
the treatment of AD because of their BBB-penetrating
ability.246−248 Recently, lipoprotein showed promise in the
field of AD therapy due to its physical compatibility and Aβ-
targeted delivery capabilities.
3.5.1. Lipoprotein Nanoparticles. Lipoprotein nanopar-
ticles are synthetic particles designed to mimic natural
lipoproteins to deliver therapeutic agents across the BBB and
target specific tissues or cells for drug delivery applications.206
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) nanoparticles cross the BBB
via the LDL receptor (LDLR)-related protein,247 enabling
their use as a diagnostic tool for brain-related disorders.249
Lipoprotein nanoparticles could be further engineered with
cellular drug-modified surfaces to reduce off-target effects and
enhance therapeutic outcomes. This method capitalized on the
natural affinity between LDLR and LDL nanoparticles’ surface
for enhanced brain delivery.250
In recent years, researchers have started to systematically
explore and discuss the potential of high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) and its derived nanocarriers in AD therapy (Figure
12).251 HDL is a naturally occurring nanoparticle that
functions as a lipid transporter and cell signaling agent.252
Many studies have emphasized the multifaceted role of HDL in
modulating AD pathophysiology, including its efficacy in Aβ
clearance and anti-inflammation,251 and have suggested the
great potential of HDL-based nanoplatforms in realizing
multitargeted therapeutic strategies.253 Dubey and co-workers
used ApoE3-bound polymer nanoparticles (mPEG−PCL) to
improve brain targeting of the drug.146 With surface
modification, mPEG−PCL showed better neuronal absorption
in vitro, and in vivo pharmacokinetic and biodistribution
studies confirmed their ability to improve the brain
bioavailability of donepezil. Surface modifications with
ApoE3 increase brain bioavailability and reduce dosage
requirements by evading the reticuloendothelial system and
prolonging the circulation time. This approach shows promise
in binding to Aβ with high affinity, potentially enhancing
donepezil’s therapeutic efficacy in AD treatment.
3.5.2. Liposome. Liposomes are composed of phospholipids
and cholesterol and are very similar to cell membranes.254 It
can be used as the carrier to overcome the BBB and deliver
molecules255 because of its good biocompatibility, long-term
efficacy, improved drug stability, high ratio of drug loading, and
easy operation.246 Mário Fernandes et al. Synthesized
exosome-like liposomes (exoliposomes) with a lipid composi-
tion similar to that of natural exosomes. Exoliposomes greatly
improved the efficiency of curcumin loading and delivery and
achieved a neuroprotection effect in SH-SY5Y neuronal cells,
indicating their potential for AD therapy.147 Kong et al.
constructed a kind of transferrin-modified Ost liposomes (Tf-
Ost-Lip). The in vivo studies reveal it can enhance the effect of
Ost on the alleviation of AD-related pathology.142 Sanjay Arora
et al. utilized dual-modified liposomes to deliver ApoE2
encoding plasmid DNA (pApoE2). After a single dose of
caudal vein administration, the transfected pApoE2 in C57BL/
6 mice was significantly increased without obvious signs of
toxicity, which illustrates the potential of dual-modified
liposomes for effective AD therapy.148 Wang et al. developed
an anti-AD brain-targeted nanodrug delivery system by
coloading icariin (ICA) and tanshinone IIA (TSIIA) into
Aniopep-2-modified liposomes. The results showed that Ang2-
ICA/TSIIA liposomes could inhibit neuroinflammation and
oxidative stress, reducing apoptosis and improve cognitive
function.150
3.5.3. Solid Lipid Nanoparticles. The emergence of solid
lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) stems from the realization of the
inherent shortcomings of other nanocarrier systems. Nio-
somes,256 transfersomes, liposomes, micelles, and polymeric
nanoparticles faced problems with stability, toxicity, and
limited drug loading, leading to the development of solid
lipid nanoparticles as a more robust alternative (see refs 151,
153, 248, 257−259). Unlike other lipid nanoparticles, SLN is
composed of solid lipids. These lipids remain solid at room
temperature or physiological temperatures. This solid structure
will help to stabilize the drug encapsulated within the
nanoparticles, inhibiting degradation of the drug during storage
and transportation. Giovanna Rassu et al. designed a nasal-to-
brain delivery system and chose the cell-permeable peptide
RVG-9R to increase the intracellular pathway of neurons.259
By determining the optimal molar ratio of RVG-9R and
BACE1 siRNA, the two were formulated and encapsulated in
SLNs to effectively deliver BACE1 siRNA, which could help
treat AD. In addition, the solid lipid core prevents premature
release of the drug in vivo, enabling controlled release.
Appropriate modification of the surface of SLNs (polymer
coating, attachment of targeting ligands, etc.) can further
enhance the stability and targeting, thereby inhibiting
aggregation and clearance during in vivo circulation. In 2021,
Sumant Saini et al. systematically developed chitosan-coated
solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) designed in a quality-by-
design paradigm to enhance the efficacy of ferulic acid (FA) in
the treatment of AD.151
Moreover, SLNs could encapsulate both hydrophilic and
lipophilic drugs, which was particularly beneficial for AD
treatment, as it allowed for the codelivery of multiple
therapeutic agents with different physicochemical proper-
ties.153,248,260 Solid lipid nanoparticles containing erythropoie-
tin (EPO) (EPO-SLN) have been developed by Tahereh Dara
et al. in 2019 to improve memory impairment in a mouse
model of AD.152 The controlled-release of these drugs from
SLNs could help patients maintain therapeutic concentration
in the brain for an extended period and further improve
treatment outcomes. Furthermore, SLN was able to protect
drugs from enzymatic degradation and improve their stability
in biological fluids. This is particularly important for AD drugs
with low biostability, which are often degraded in the
gastrointestinal tract and blood. Puglia et al. investigated the
effects of curcumin (CUR)-carrying SLNs on the expression
levels of tissue transglutaminase (TG2) isoforms in an
experimental AD model, finding that curcumin-carrying
SLNs decreased the expression of TG2-S, reduced the
activation of apoptotic pathways, and increased the expression
of TG2-L.153 SLNs enhance drug penetration across the BBB
through their nanoscale dimensions, BBB transport via RMT
and AMT facilitation, and targeting ligand conjugation261 or
PEGylation.142 SLNs-CUR may be a promising tool for the
treatment of AD. Continued research and development in this
field are expected to create more effective and safer lipid-based
therapies for AD.
3.6. Nucleic Acid Nanoparticles. With the deepening of
the research on AD and the continuous breakthrough of
genetic engineering technology, more and more nucleic acid
molecules (especially RNA) have been used to explore the
treatment of AD.262 In 2024, Nadjib Kihal et al. reported
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33810

several small DNA-based nanostructures that can fully inhibit
IAPP amyloid fibril formation and efficiently disassemble
fibrillar IAPP quaternary species, inspiring the design of nucleic
acid nanoparticles for AD.263 However, in the complex
environment of the body, nucleic acid molecules are very
easily degraded by enzymes or cause immune reactions.
Therefore, nucleic acid molecules are often loaded into
nanoparticles to prolong blood circulation time, efficiently
penetrate the BBB, and improve bioavailability. The commonly
used carriers mainly include liposomes, polymer nanoparticles,
inorganic nanoparticles, and protein nanocarriers, etc. Ma et al.
designed and synthesized neurotransmitter-derived lipidoids
for the delivery of amphotericin B (AmB), antisense
oligonucleotides (ASOs) against tau, and genome-editing
fusion protein (−27) GFP-Cre recombinase across the BBB
(Figure 13A). The particle diameter and PDI were controlled
by adjusting different NT-LNP/AmB formulations (Figure
13B). The optimal ratio was selected for in vivo experiments,
and the results showed about 50% of tau mRNA and about
30% of tau protein were reduced.144
Zhou et al. designed a glycosylated “triple interaction”
stabilized polymer nanocarrier for siRNA delivery. The
electrostatic and hydrogen bond interactions of Guanidi-
nium-phosphate (Gu+/PO3
4−), as well as fluorine-mediated
hydrophobic interactions, give the nanoparticles good stability
and long blood circulation time in the physiological environ-
ment.79 Gal-NP@siRNA nanoparticles exploit glycemic Glut1
recycling to enhance BBB penetration during glucose
administration, ensure siRNA reaches the appropriate site,
and reduce BACE1 expression. Park et al. prepared Cas9
nanocomplexes by adding amphiphilic R7L10 peptide to Cas9-
SgrNA (single-guide RNAs) to reduce symptoms of AD in
mice.140 Shao et al. directly prepared tetrahedral DNA
nanostructures (TDNs) using single strands of DNA, which
can effectively inhibit nerve cell apoptosis and improve
memory and learning in a rat model of AD.154
3.7. Biomimetic Nanomaterials. In the past few decades,
with the progress of biomimetic technology and the develop-
ment of nanotechnology, biomimetic nanoparticles have
attracted much attention. Biomimetic nanoparticles generally
have good biocompatibility and processability and have great
potential in the treatment of AD, such as direct nasal delivery,
multipath synergistic therapy strategies, the development of
multifunctional nanocomposites, and brain-targeted nano-
delivery strategies. At present, the biomimetic nanomaterials
commonly used in the treatment of AD mainly include
exosomes, stem cells, and cell membranes.
Exosomes are vesicle structures with a diameter of 30−150
nm secreted by cells into the surrounding environment. Similar
to liposomes, exosomes have a bilayer membrane structure and
are natural carriers of intercellular communication.245,264 The
composition and properties of exosomes are related to their
cell origin and environment. The surface of the exosome
membrane is rich in amine/carboxylate terminal phospholipids
and transmembrane proteins,265 which gives it the potential for
further functionalization, which is important for its wide
application. Currently, strategies focused on exosomes have
been applied to the treatment of AD.
Qi et al. used plasma-derived exosomes loaded with
Quercetin (Que) to prepare nanoparticles with BBB
penetration and enhanced targeting ability. Exo and Exo-Que
were successfully prepared, and their morphology and size
Figure 13. Nucleic Acid Nanoparticles for the treatment of AD. (A) Schematic illustration of fabricating NT-lipidoid-doped LNPs. (B)
Synthesis route and chemical structure of NTs used for lipidoid synthesis. (C) Hydrodynamic diameters and PDIs of different NT-LNP/
AmB formulations. (D) Representative ex vivo fluorescence images of the dissected brain. Adapted with permission from ref 144. Copyright
2020 American Association for the Advancement of Science.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33811

were characterized by AFM (Figure 14A). In vivo imaging
results showed that Exo-Que greatly improved the concen-
tration of Que in the brain by intravenous (I.V.) or
intrabitoneal (I.P.) injection (Figure 14B), reflecting the
BBB penetration and targeting effect. What’s more, these
exosomes can inhibit Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5)-
induced Tau phosphorylation and reduce the production of
insoluble neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), thereby interfering
with the progression of AD.155 Wang et al. stimulated mouse
macrophage RAW 264.7 cells with curcumin (cur) and
collected secreted exosomes. Thesse exosomes could activate
the AKT/GSK-3β pathway and inhibit the phosphorylation of
Tau protein, thereby preventing neuronal death and
attenuating OA-induced learning and memory deficits (Figure
14C−D).156 Yang et al. incubated human umbilical cord
mesenchymal stem cells (hUMSCs) with 3D graphene
scaffolds and 2D graphene films and extracted their exosomes.
Results showed that the 3D-Exo could downregulate the
expression of β-secretase, decrease the expression of BACE1,
and increase the expression of ADAM10, thereby reducing the
accumulation of Aβ. Modification with exosomes such as
peptides to enhance targeting and functionality is also a
common strategy.157 Cui et al. modified mesenchymal stem
cell (MSC)-derived exosomes with a central nervous system-
specific rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG) peptide to increase
the brain-targeting ability, significantly reduce the expression of
proinflammatory mediators TNF-α, IL-β, and IL-6, and
increase the levels of anti-inflammatory factors IL-10, IL-4,
and IL-13.158
In recent years, stem cell therapy has gained great attention
in the research on AD and shows great potential. Stem cells
used in AD research mainly include neuronal stem cells
(NSCs), mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Stem
cell-based therapies for AD are mainly divided into
endogenous and exogenous modalities.266,267 On the one
hand, direct transplantation of stem cells or their derived
neurons can participate in the integration of brain neural tissue
and replace the injured neurons.268 On the other hand, stem
cells can undergo paracrine to stimulate endogenous repair,
and neurotrophic factor (BDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF),
insulin growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) are paracrine mediators derived from
transplanted stem cells.266,269−271 However, the heterogeneity
of stem cells and their survival and mobility after trans-
plantation limit their application.272 Extracellular vesicles
derived from stem cells to be used as a biomimetic
nanomaterial are one of the important ideas to solve this
problem. As an important part of stem cell secretions,
exosomes have similar physiological functions as stem
Figure 14. Exosome nanoparticles for the treatment of AD. (A) Characterization size and morphology of Exo and Exo-Que by AFM. (B)
Representative fluorescence images of C57BL/6 mouse brains treated with Que and Exo-Que via intravenous injection and peritoneal
injection. Adapted with permission from ref 155. Copyright 2020 Informa UK Limited. (C) Hidden platform learning histograms. Data are
expressed as means ± SD (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ## indicating P < 0.01. (D) Swimming tracks of different groups of mice. Adapted
with permission from ref 156. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33812

cells.273 Chen et al. found that MSCS-derived exosomes
reduced Aβ expression and restored the expression of genes
involved in neuronal memory and synaptic plasticity in cell
models. At the same time, AD transgenic mouse cerebral
glucose metabolism and cognitive function improved signifi-
cantly.159 Upadhya et al. generated EVs from hiPSC-derived
NSCs using a combination of anion-exchange chromatography
(AEC) and size-exclusion chromatography (SEC).160 Results
showed that all cells in the passage 11 hNSCs derived from
human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) express NSC
markers nestin and Sox-2 (Figure 15A). Then, the EVs size was
measured with a mean value of 145.3 ± 49.0 nm (Figure 15B),
and the morphology was observed by TEM (Figure 15C).
Intranasal administration enhanced hippocampal neurogenesis
in the experimental mice. In addition to exosomes, the
researchers also engineered stem cells directly. Jung et al.
incorporated iron oxide nanoparticles into human Wharton’s
jelly derived MSCs (MSC-IONPs) (Figure 15D).274 Mean-
while, the immunofluorescence results showed that the
magnetic attraction of MSCS-IONPs could improve the
brain retention efficiency of MSCs after intraventricular
injection (Figure 16E).
Cell membranes are an excellent choice for the preparation
of nanoparticles due to their good biocompatibility and
nonimmunogenicity. Commonly used cell membrane types
include red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs),
platelets, macrophages, neural stem cells (NSCs), and
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Cell membranes can be
separated and prepared by ultrasound,275 freeze−thawing,276
extrusions,277 osmotic lysis,278 and Dounce homogenizer.279
The prepared cell membrane can be coated with nanoparticles,
RNA, proteins, and drugs by means of ultrasound, coextrusion,
and microfluidic electroporation.280 Su et al. used zinc ions
(Zn2+) and chlorogenic acid (CA) to prepare metal−organic
frameworks (MOF) in which CD22 shRNA (RNAi) and Aβ
aptamer (AAP) were loaded to form ZC/RNAi/AAP (ZRA)
nanocore (Figure 16A).161 RBCs membranes were modified
with a tachin receptor (TfR) aptamer to obtain TfR aptamer-
RBCM (TR) shell structures (Figure 16B). Then TR-ZC/
RNAi/AAP (TR-ZRA) nanoparticles were packaged by
ultrasonic method, and elemental analysis was performed
(Figure 16C). TR-ZRA can effectively penetrate the BBB to
target cells, enhance the ability of microglial cells to engulf Aβ
and lower levels of AD inflammation of the brain.
Figure 15. Stem cell therapy for the treatment of AD. (A) Fluorescence images of NSC markers nestin and Sox-2 expressed by human
induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). Scale bar: 100 μm. (B) Representative graph of EV particle size. (C) TEM pictures of EVs. Adapted
with permission from ref 160. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (D) Schematic illustration of the manufacturing of iron oxide
nanoparticle-incorporated mesenchymal stem cells (MSC-IONP) and treatment of AD. (E) MSCs or MSC-IONPs retained in the lateral
ventricle were stained with antibodies against human-specific proteins Ku80 (green) and STEM121 (red). Adapted with permission from ref
274. Copyright 2023 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33813

Huang et al. prepared neural stem cell (NSC) membranes
overexpressing rabies viral glycoprotein (RVG). They
encapsulated infrared II (NIR-II) AgAuSe quantum dots and
bexarotene (Bex), a hydrophobic retinoid X receptor (RXR)
agonist, in the cell membranes. Nanoparticles with long cycle
times and brain-targeting functions were prepared to be
imaged in real-time for in vivo detection.113 It was shown that
the fluorescence intensity of the mouse head and brains
injected with RVG-NV-NPs was significantly higher than those
of the NPs and NV-NPs groups at 24 h. Moreover, the results
of in vivo mesoscopic imaging of the cerebrovascular to the
perivascular space and the brain parenchyma show that RVG-
NV-NPs can clearly display the living cerebral blood vessels,
and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can reach 7.4. In vivo
animal experiments showed that Aβ levels rapidly decreased by
about 40% after a single dose. Hybrid membrane coatings of
multiple cell membranes have also been used in the treatment
of AD.281,282 Lin et al. mixed the cell membrane of HEK293T
cells overexpressing chemokine (C−C motif) receptor 2
(CCR2) with the platelet membrane to prepare a hybrid cell
membrane and then coated it with two small molecule drugs,
rapamycin and 1-trifluoromethoxyphenyl-3-(1-propionylpiper-
idin-4-yl) urea (TPPU). This hybrid nanoparticle enables
precise targeting and multidrug therapy of brain inflammatory
lesions, improving cognition in AD model mice, reducing
amyloid plaque deposition, and alleviating neuroinflamma-
tion.162
4. CLINICAL APPLICATIONS AND FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES
Nanomedicine presents significant opportunities for the
diagnosis and treatment of AD by overcoming the barriers
inherent in traditional therapies. Nevertheless, the clinical
applications of nanomedicine for AD remain in its infancy. To
date, no nanomedicine has been approved for clinical use in
the treatment of AD, but several innovative approaches are
being explored in potential clinical applications and ongoing
preclinical research. One promising area is the nanocarrier-
based drug delivery systems, which have exhibited efficacy in
other diseases and are now being explored for AD. For
example, liposomal formulations such as Doxil (doxorubicin
liposomes), widely used in cancer therapy, are under
investigation for their ability to enhance drug delivery to the
brain and increase bioavailability in AD treatments.283 In
addition, polymeric nanoparticles have entered clinical trials
for AD, aiming to improve therapeutic delivery across the
BBB.205 For targeted drug delivery, liposomal and polymeric
nanoparticles designed to load drugs (such as curcumin) have
demonstrated improved delivery across the BBB and targeted
amyloid-β plaques. These nanoparticles have exhibited
effectiveness in reducing amyloid-β levels and alleviating AD
symptoms in preclinical models.284 Advanced imaging
techniques employing superparamagnetic iron oxide nano-
particles (SPIONs) conjugated with antibodies specific to Aβ
or tau proteins have shown effectiveness in increasing MRI
contrast, facilitating the early detection of AD-related brain
abnormalities, including those associated with neurodegener-
ative diseases.285 Nanoparticle-mediated amplified fluorogenic
immunoassays (SNAFIA) provide a noninvasive and highly
Figure 16. Schematic illustration and applications of RBCs membrane-modified NPs in AD. (A) Schematic illustration of TR-ZC/RNAi/
AAPa preparation. (B) TEM image of ZC, ZRA, RBCm, and TR-ZRA. Scale bar: 100 and 200 nm. (C) The elemental mapping images of TR-
ZRA, scale bar: 100 nm. Adapted with permission from ref 161. Copyright 2023 Wiley-VCH.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33814

sensitive diagnostic approach to recognize biomarkers like
adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 1 (CAP1) in tear fluid,
displaying high sensitivity and specificity in preclinical
research.286 A few nanomedicines are currently undergoing
clinical trials for the treatment of AD. NanoLithium (NP03), a
nanoformulation of lithium citrate from a reverse micro-
emulsion, has completed the preclinical test and entered a
phase II clinical trial to evaluate the safety, tolerance, and
efficacy of the nanomedicine in patients with mild to severe
AD. Additionally, nanoparticles of APH-1105 are being
evaluated in a phase II clinical trial for their efficacy and
safety in treating mild to moderate AD. This nanomedicine
shows clinical promise because of its intranasal delivery
approach which can avoid crossing the BBB and target the
brain directly.287
Through these examples, it is not difficult to find that
nanomedicine has greater advantages in clinical applications
than traditional drugs. Compared to current clinical treatment
and diagnostic methods, the advantages of nanomedicine are
primarily demonstrated in the following aspects: (1) Sensitivity
and accuracy: The application of nanotechnology in medical
diagnostics significantly enhances the sensitivity of detection
and improves diagnostic accuracy. (2) Therapeutic efficacy and
side effects: Nanomedicines possess targeting and sustained-
release properties, which can reduce the toxic side effects of
drugs. They accumulate at the lesion sites through specific
targeting mechanisms, thereby enhancing the therapeutic
efficacy and minimizing damage to normal tissues. Addition-
ally, they can codeliver multiple drugs to achieve synergistic
treatment of various pathological mechanisms, improving
overall treatment outcomes. (3) Multiple administration routes
and preservation of bioactivity: Nanomedicines come in
diverse formulations and can be administered through various
routes, enhancing flexibility and convenience in treatment.
Furthermore, they can maintain the integrity and bioactivity of
active substances, preventing degradation by enzymes and thus
optimizing their effectiveness during the drug delivery process.
Different from the current clinical treatment focused on
symptom management and supplementation of brain nutrition,
these characteristics give nanomedicine the potential to
fundamentally treat AD.
As discussed in previous sections, nanoparticles have shown
considerable potential in targeting specific disease pathways,
enhancing drug delivery, and improving imaging techniques.
These nanoparticles are integral components of nanomedicine,
which encompasses a wide range of nanoscale materials and
technologies designed to address complex medical challenges.
However, despite these advances and the promising
potential of nanomedicine, its clinical application in AD
remains in its infancy. To date, no nanomaterials have been
approved for clinical use in treating AD due to the following
concerns: (1) Efficient delivery: Achieving effective delivery
and targeting of nanomaterials to the brain is challenging.
Approaches such as surface modification with targeting ligands
and employing receptor-mediated transcytosis have been
developed, yet the heterogeneous nature of the BBB and the
presence of efflux transporters can limit brain uptake. (2)
Stability and controllable release: Maintaining the stability and
controllable release of therapeutics from nanomaterials is
complex, as nanomaterials need to preserve their structural
integrity and functionality in the complex biological environ-
ment of the brain to prevent premature drug release, which
could reduce therapeutic efficacy and increase systemic side
effects. (3) Toxicity: The potential toxicity and biosafety of
nanomedicines need to be thoroughly assessed. The
interactions between nanomaterials and biological systems
can cause toxicological effects, such as oxidative stress,
inflammation, and disruption of cellular processes. Ensuring
biocompatibility and biosafety is critical for clinical translation.
(4) Scalability and reproducibility: The manufacturing process
needs to be standardized to ensure nanomaterials with
consistent size, shape, surface properties, and drug loading
capacity. Any variability in these variations may influence the
performance and biosafety of the nanomaterials. (5)
Regulatory and ethical considerations: The long-term effects
of nanomedicine exposure, potential environmental impact,
and ethical implications of nanomedicine require comprehen-
sive evaluation. Regulatory frameworks specific to nano-
medicine are evolving, necessitating thorough guidelines to
ensure safe and effective clinical use of these nanomaterials.
The future of nanomedicine in AD holds the potential to
bring about transformative changes in diagnosis, treatment,
and overall disease management. As the field advances, several
key areas are expected to drive innovation and clinical
translation, offering hope for more effective and personalized
therapeutic strategies.
(1) Develop methods of brain drug delivery or improve the
efficiency of brain drug delivery. Future research in nano-
medicine will likely focus on developing strategies to bypass or
transiently disrupt the BBB, ensuring that therapeutic agents
effectively reach their intended targets within the brain. In
recent years, adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors have been
extensively studied and are expected to replace traditional CNS
drug delivery methods. AAVs, which belong to the genus
Dependoparvovirus in the family Parvoviridae, become a
critical brain drug delivery vector because it is nontoxic and has
low immunogenicity.288−290 Some bacteria can cross the BBB
and promote acute meningitis, which gives inspiration for the
study of trans-BBB vectors.291,292 Bacterial membrane-
modified nanosystems have the potential to be effective
brain-targeted drug delivery systems for the preclinical and
clinical treatment of CNS diseases. Such innovative strategies
improve drug delivery efficiency and enhance patient
compliance by reducing the need for invasive procedures.
(2) Development of Biodegradable and Multi-Functional
Nanomaterials. Another critical area of future research is the
development of biodegradable and multifunctional nanoma-
terials. Biodegradable nanomaterials, which are designed to
break down into nontoxic byproducts after delivering their
therapeutic cargo, address one of the primary concerns
associated with nanomedicine: long-term toxicity and environ-
mental impact. Additionally, the development of multifunc-
tional nanomedicine platforms capable of diagnosing, monitor-
ing, and treating AD simultaneously represents a significant
advancement. These nanoplatforms could integrate multiple
therapeutic agents and diagnostic markers, enabling a
synergistic approach to disease management. Given the
complex and multifactorial nature of AD, this multifaceted
approach, which can monitor treatment efficacy in real-time
and adjust therapy dynamically, is particularly advantageous,
potentially leading to more effective and durable therapeutic
outcomes.
(3) Integration with advanced imaging technologies.
Integrating nanomedicine with advanced imaging technologies
is also a priority for future research. By combining nano-
medicine with imaging modalities, such as PET/MRI and NIR-
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33815

II fluorescence imaging, researchers can achieve real-time
monitoring of disease progression and treatment efficacy.
Multiplexed imaging platforms that detect multiple AD
biomarkers simultaneously could revolutionize the early
diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring of AD, providing a
more comprehensive understanding of the disease. For
instance, these integrated platforms could enable clinicians to
track the accumulation of amyloid plaques, tau tangles, and
other pathological hallmarks of AD in a single imaging session.
This would facilitate earlier interventions and more precise
adjustments to therapeutic regimens, significantly improving
patient outcomes.
(4) Personalized Nanomedicine. Personalized nanomedicine
represents another promising direction. Advances in genomics,
proteomics, and bioinformatics are important for treatments
that are tailored to the individual genetic and molecular
profiles of patients. Given the heterogeneous nature of AD,
personalized nanomedicine could optimize therapeutic efficacy
by targeting specific molecular pathways relevant to each
patient’s different disease state. For instance, nanomaterials can
be designed to release their therapeutic payload in response to
particular biomarkers or pathological conditions identified in
individual patients. Such precision targeting not only enhances
treatment effectiveness but also minimizes side effects,
representing a significant advancement in patient-specific
therapy.
(5) Integration with Burgeoning Technologies. The
integration of nanomaterials with burgeoning technologies,
such as artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML)
brings hope for this field.293 AI can analyze large data sets
generated from nanomaterials-based diagnostics and treat-
ments to identify patterns, optimize therapeutic strategies, and
predict outcomes. Machine learning, on the other hand, can
model the interactions and behaviors of nanomedicine within
biological environments, accelerating the development of
nanotherapies. These technologies not only enhance the
precision and efficiency of nanomedicine research but also
support the development of personalized treatment plans. By
integrating AI and ML, researchers can create adaptive
nanomedicine platforms that respond dynamically to changes
in the disease environment, further refining the delivery and
efficacy of treatments.
(6) Nanorobots. One innovative direction is the develop-
ment of nanorobots for precise and controllable drug delivery.
These nanorobots can be controlled and manipulated using
device modeling, fields, and feedback to navigate the
bloodstream, bypass the BBB, and precisely deliver therapeu-
tics to specific brain regions. By leveraging their multifunc-
tional design, nanorobots can also monitor the brain’s
microenvironment in real-time and effectively release drugs
in response to specific stimuli, providing a highly active
targeting and responsive approach to AD treatment.
In conclusion, nanomedicine holds immense potential to
revolutionize the management of AD, offering avenues for
earlier diagnosis, more effective treatment, and ultimately
improved patient outcomes. As research continues to evolve,
nanomedicine may lead to breakthroughs that could transform
AD from a largely untreatable condition to a manageable or
even curable disease, marking a significant leap forward in the
fight against this devastating disorder.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Ryan T. K. Kwok −Department of Chemistry, the Hong Kong
Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for
Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, Division of Life
Science, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, and
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon,
Hong Kong, China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-6866-3877;
Email: chryan@ust.hk
Zijie Qiu −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0003-
0728-1178; Email: zijieqiu@cuhk.edu.cn
Ben Zhong Tang −School of Science and Engineering,
Shenzhen Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-
Shenzhen), Guangdong 518172, P.R. China; Department of
Chemistry, the Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National
Engineering Research Center for Tissue Restoration and
Reconstruction, Division of Life Science, State Key Laboratory
of Molecular Neuroscience, and Department of Chemical and
Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China;
orcid.org/
0000-0002-0293-964X; Email: tangbenz@cuhk.edu.cn
Authors
Han Yang −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China; Department of Chemistry,
the Hong Kong Branch of Chinese National Engineering
Research Center for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction,
Division of Life Science, State Key Laboratory of Molecular
Neuroscience, and Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
Haozhe Tan −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Haifei Wen −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Peikun Xin −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Yanling Liu −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Ziwei Deng −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Yanning Xu −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33816

Feng Gao −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Liping Zhang −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Ziyue Ye −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Zicong Zhang −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Yunhao Chen −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Yueze Wang −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China
Jianwei Sun −Department of Chemistry, the Hong Kong
Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for
Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, Division of Life
Science, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, and
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon,
Hong Kong, China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-2470-1077
Jacky W. Y. Lam −Department of Chemistry, the Hong Kong
Branch of Chinese National Engineering Research Center for
Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, Division of Life
Science, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, and
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon,
Hong Kong, China
Zheng Zhao −School of Science and Engineering, Shenzhen
Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen),
Guangdong 518172, P.R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-
5536-0439
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
Author Contributions
#These authors contributed equally.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the financial support from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (52303382), Shenzhen Key
Laboratory
of
Functional
Aggregate
Materials
(ZDSYS20211021111400001), the Science, Technology, and
Innovation Commission
of
Shenzhen
Municipality
(KQTD20210811090142053, JCYJ20220530143805012), the
Innovation
and
Technology
Commission
(ITC−
CNERC14SC01 and ITCPD/17-9), the Research Grant
Council of Hong Kong (16303221 and C6014-20W), the
Innovation
and
Technology
Commission
(ITC-
CNERC14SC01 and ITCPD/17-9), Shenzhen Key Laboratory
o f
F u n c t i o n a l
A g g r e g a t e
M a t e r i a l s
(ZDSYS20211021111400001), and the Science Technology
Innovation
Commission
of
Shenzhen Municipality
(KQTD20210811090142053, JCYJ2022081810-3007014).
TOC was created with BioRender. Yang, H. (2024) https://
BioRender.com/g86l340.
VOCABULARY
Alzheimer’s diseaseThe definition of Alzheimer’s Disease
(AD) has been based on clinical manifestations, which
typically progress from mild cognitive impairment to more
severe, full-blown dementia. It is generally believed that the
pathological features, such as amyloid beta plaques and tau
tangles, are highly specific to AD, with a characteristic
distribution pattern. A key feature in the traditional
definition of AD is memory impairment, particularly in
episodic memory.
β-amyloid proteinA fragment of a larger protein called
amyloid precursor protein (APP). It is produced through
the cleavage of APP by enzymes. β-amyloid can aggregate to
form plaques in the brain. These plaques are one of the key
pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease. The accumu-
lation of β-amyloid plaques is believed to disrupt neuronal
function and contribute to the neurodegeneration observed
in Alzheimer’s and other neurodegenerative disorders.
Blood−brain barrierThe selective permeability of blood
vessels in the brain that protects it from harmful substances
in the bloodstream while allowing necessary nutrients to
pass through. The barrier is composed of tightly joined
endothelial cells that line the blood vessels of the brain,
preventing larger molecules and pathogens from crossing
into the brain tissue. However, it also presents a challenge
for delivering drugs or other therapeutic agents to the brain
in the treatment of neurological diseases.
NanomedicineThe application of nanotechnology for
medical purposes, including the diagnosis, treatment,
monitoring, and prevention of diseases. It involves the use
of nanomaterials, devices, and systems at the molecular or
nanoscale (typically between 1 and 100 nm) to manipulate
biological systems and improve healthcare outcomes.
Nanomedicine holds potential in areas such as targeted
drug delivery, imaging, and regenerative medicine, as well as
in the development of new therapeutic techniques.
Nanodiagnosis and nanotherapyThe use of nanotechnology
for both diagnosing and treating diseases. This involves the
application of nanomaterials, nanoparticles, or nanosystems
to identify diseases at an early stage, as well as to deliver
targeted treatments with precision. It combines diagnostic
tools such as imaging with therapeutic approaches, like drug
delivery or gene therapy, at the nanoscale level to enhance
treatment efficacy and minimize side effects.
Aggregation-induced emission (AIE)A phenomenon where
certain molecules or materials, which typically exhibit weak
fluorescence in their individual or dissolved state, become
highly fluorescent when they aggregate. This behavior is in
contrast to traditional fluorescence, where the emission
tends to decrease upon aggregation. AIE materials are of
significant interest in various applications, including sensors,
bioimaging, and optoelectronics, due to their enhanced
emission properties when they aggregate or form nano-
structures.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33817

REFERENCES
(1) Gustavsson, A.; Norton, N.; Fast, T.; Frölich, L.; Georges, J.;
Holzapfel, D.; Kirabali, T.; Krolak-Salmon, P.; Rossini, P. M.; Ferretti,
M. T.; et al. Global estimates on the number of persons across the
Alzheimer’s disease continuum. Alzheimer’s & Dementia 2023, 19 (2),
658−670.
(2) World Health Organization. World health statistics 2024:
monitoring health for the SDGs, Sustainable Development Goals.
2024, CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO.
(3) Fan, L.; Mao, C.; Hu, X.; Zhang, S.; Yang, Z.; Hu, Z.; Sun, H.;
Fan, Y.; Dong, Y.; Yang, J.; et al. New insights into the pathogenesis of
Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Neurol. 2020, 10, 1312.
(4) Ettcheto, M.; Cano, A.; Busquets, O.; Manzine, P. R.; Sanchez-
Lopez, E.; Castro-Torres, R. D.; Beas-Zarate, C.; Verdaguer, E.;
García, M. L.; Olloquequi, J.; et al. A metabolic perspective of late
onset Alzheimer’s disease. Pharmacol. Res. 2019, 145, No. 104255.
(5) Nation, D. A.; Sweeney, M. D.; Montagne, A.; Sagare, A. P.;
D’Orazio, L. M.; Pachicano, M.; Sepehrband, F.; Nelson, A. R.;
Buennagel, D. P.; Harrington, M. G.; et al. Blood−brain barrier
breakdown is an early biomarker of human cognitive dysfunction. Nat.
Med. 2019, 25 (2), 270−276.
(6) Busche, M. A.; Hyman, B. T. Synergy between amyloid-β and
tau in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 2020, 23 (10), 1183−1193.
(7) Jack, C. R.; Knopman, D. S.; Jagust, W. J.; Petersen, R. C.;
Weiner, M. W.; Aisen, P. S.; Shaw, L. M.; Vemuri, P.; Wiste, H. J.;
Weigand, S. D.; et al. Tracking pathophysiological processes in
Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic
biomarkers. lancet neurology 2013, 12 (2), 207−216.
(8) Li, G.; Li, Y.-M. Modulating the aggregation of amyloid proteins
by macrocycles. Aggregate 2022, 3 (2), No. e161.
(9) Xu, Q.; Ma, Y.; Sun, Y.; Li, D.; Zhang, X.; Liu, C. Protein
amyloid aggregate: Structure and function. Aggregate 2023, 4 (4),
No. e333.
(10) John, A.; Reddy, P. H. Synaptic basis of Alzheimer’s disease:
Focus on synaptic amyloid beta, P-tau and mitochondria. Ageing Res.
Rev. 2021, 65, No. 101208.
(11) Faustino, C.; Rijo, P.; Reis, C. P. Nanotechnological strategies
for nerve growth factor delivery: Therapeutic implications in
Alzheimer’s disease. Pharmacol. Res. 2017, 120, 68−87.
(12) Venkatramani, A.; Panda, D. Regulation of neuronal micro-
tubule dynamics by tau: Implications for tauopathies. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 2019, 133, 473−483.
(13) Hasegawa, M. Structure of NFT: Biochemical approach. Tau
Biology 2019, 1184, 23−34.
(14) Binder, L. I.; Guillozet-Bongaarts, A. L.; Garcia-Sierra, F.; Berry,
R. W. Tau, tangles, and Alzheimer’s disease. Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta (BBA)-Molecular Basis of Disease 2005, 1739 (2−3), 216−223.
(15) Gao, Y.; Tan, L.; Yu, J.-T.; Tan, L. Tau in Alzheimer’s disease:
mechanisms and therapeutic strategies. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 2018, 15
(3), 283−300.
(16) Avila, J.; Hernández, F. GSK-3 inhibitors for Alzheimer’s
disease. Expert Rev. Neurother. 2007, 7 (11), 1527−1533.
(17) Pei, J.-J.; Grundke-Iqbal, I.; Iqbal, K.; Bogdanovic, N.; Winblad,
B.; Cowburn, R. F. Accumulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5)
in neurons with early stages of Alzheimer’s disease neurofibrillary
degeneration. Brain Res. 1998, 797 (2), 267−277.
(18) Drewes, G. MARKing tau for tangles and toxicity. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 2004, 29 (10), 548−555.
(19) Yiannopoulou, K. G.; Papageorgiou, S. G. Current and future
treatments for Alzheimer’s disease. Therapeutic advances in neurological
disorders 2013, 6 (1), 19−33.
(20) Sadigh-Eteghad, S.; Sabermarouf, B.; Majdi, A.; Talebi, M.;
Farhoudi, M.; Mahmoudi, J. Amyloid-beta: a crucial factor in
Alzheimer’s disease. Med. Prin Pract 2015, 24 (1), 1−10.
(21) Mehta, P. D. Amyloid beta protein as a marker or risk factor of
Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 2007, 4 (4), 359−363.
(22) Tamagno, E.; Guglielmotto, M.; Monteleone, D.; Tabaton, M.
Amyloid-β production: major link between oxidative stress and
BACE1. Neurotoxic. Res. 2012, 22, 208−219.
(23) Murray, I. V.; Liu, L.; Komatsu, H.; Uryu, K.; Xiao, G.; Lawson,
J. A.; Axelsen, P. H. Membrane-mediated amyloidogenesis and the
promotion of oxidative lipid damage by amyloid β proteins. J. Biol.
Chem. 2007, 282 (13), 9335−9345.
(24) Rajmohan, R.; Reddy, P. H. Amyloid-beta and phosphorylated
tau accumulations cause abnormalities at synapses of Alzheimer’s
disease neurons. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2017, 57 (4), 975−999.
(25) Su, B.; Wang, X.; Lee, H.-g.; Tabaton, M.; Perry, G.; Smith, M.
A.; Zhu, X. Chronic oxidative stress causes increased tau
phosphorylation in M17 neuroblastoma cells. Neurosci. Lett. 2010,
468 (3), 267−271.
(26) Schubert, P.; Ferroni, S. Role of microglia and astrocytes in
Alzheimer’s disease. In The Role of Glia in Neurotoxicity; CRC Press,
2004; pp 319−332.
(27) Di Benedetto, G.; Burgaletto, C.; Bellanca, C. M.; Munafò, A.;
Bernardini, R.; Cantarella, G. Role of microglia and astrocytes in
Alzheimer’s disease: from neuroinflammation to Ca2+ homeostasis
dysregulation. Cells 2022, 11 (17), 2728.
(28) Wang, W. Y.; Tan, M. S.; Yu, J. T.; Tan, L. Role of pro-
inflammatory cytokines released from microglia in Alzheimer’s
disease. Ann. Transl Med. 2015, 3 (10), 136.
(29) Huang, X.; Hussain, B.; Chang, J. Peripheral inflammation and
blood−brain barrier disruption: effects and mechanisms. CNS
Neurosci. Ther. 2021, 27 (1), 36−47.
(30) Rossi, D. Astrocyte physiopathology: at the crossroads of
intercellular networking, inflammation and cell death. Prog. Neurobiol.
2015, 130, 86−120.
(31) Cheignon, C. m.; Tomas, M.; Bonnefont-Rousselot, D.; Faller,
P.; Hureau, C.; Collin, F. Oxidative stress and the amyloid beta
peptide in Alzheimer’s disease. Redox Biol. 2018, 14, 450−464.
(32) Sutherland, G. T.; Chami, B.; Youssef, P.; Witting, P. K.
Oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease: Primary villain or physio-
logical by-product? Redox Rep. 2013, 18 (4), 134−141.
(33) Dias-Santagata, D.; Fulga, T. A.; Duttaroy, A.; Feany, M. B.
Oxidative stress mediates tau-induced neurodegeneration in Droso-
phila. J. Clin. Invest. 2007, 117 (1), 236−245.
(34) Sapolsky, R. Biology and human behavior: The neurological
origins of individuality; The Teaching Company, 2005.
(35) Snyder, S. H.; Innis, R. B. Peptide neurotransmitters. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 1979, 48, 755−782.
(36) Zhou, Y.; Danbolt, N. C. Glutamate as a neurotransmitter in
the healthy brain. J. Neural Transm. 2014, 121, 799−817.
(37) Sehar, U.; Rawat, P.; Reddy, A. P.; Kopel, J.; Reddy, P. H.
Amyloid beta in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022,
23 (21), 12924.
(38) Nobili, A.; Latagliata, E. C.; Viscomi, M. T.; Cavallucci, V.;
Cutuli, D.; Giacovazzo, G.; Krashia, P.; Rizzo, F. R.; Marino, R.;
Federici, M.; et al. Dopamine neuronal loss contributes to memory
and reward dysfunction in a model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat.
Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 14727.
(39) Cai, Z. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: promising therapeutic
agents for Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Med. Rep. 2014, 9 (5), 1533−
1541.
(40) Walton, H. S.; Dodd, P. R. Glutamate−glutamine cycling in
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurochem. Int. 2007, 50 (7−8), 1052−1066.
(41) Nam, E.; Han, J.; Suh, J.-M.; Yi, Y.; Lim, M. H. Link of
impaired metal ion homeostasis to mitochondrial dysfunction in
neurons. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2018, 43, 8−14.
(42) Portbury, S. D.; Adlard, P. A. Zinc signal in brain diseases. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 2017, 18 (12), 2506.
(43) Huang, Y.; Wu, Z.; Cao, Y.; Lang, M.; Lu, B.; Zhou, B. Zinc
binding directly regulates tau toxicity independent of tau hyper-
phosphorylation. Cell Rep. 2014, 8 (3), 831−842.
(44) Nagar, P.; Sharma, P.; Dhapola, R.; Kumari, S.; Medhi, B.;
HariKrishnaReddy, D. Endoplasmic reticulum stress in Alzheimer’s
disease: Molecular mechanisms and therapeutic prospects. Life Sci.
2023, 330, No. 121983.
(45) Karvandi, M. S.; Sheikhzadeh Hesari, F.; Aref, A. R.; Mahdavi,
M. The neuroprotective effects of targeting key factors of neuronal
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33818

cell death in neurodegenerative diseases: The role of ER stress,
oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2023,
17, No. 1105247.
(46) Zhang, Q.; Ma, C.; Chin, L.-S.; Li, L. Integrative
glycoproteomics reveals protein N-glycosylation aberrations and
glycoproteomic network alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Adv.
2020, 6 (40), No. eabc5802.
(47) Espinosa, B.; Zenteno, R.; Mena, R.; Robitaille, Y.; Zenteno, E.;
Guevara, J. O-Glycosylation in sprouting neurons in Alzheimer
disease, indicating reactive plasticity. Journal of Neuropathology &
Experimental Neurology 2001, 60 (5), 441−448.
(48) Koike, S.; Ando, C.; Usui, Y.; Kibune, Y.; Nishimoto, S.; Suzuki,
T.; Ogasawara, Y. Age-related alteration in the distribution of
methylglyoxal and its metabolic enzymes in the mouse brain. Brain
Res. Bull. 2019, 144, 164−170.
(49) Keller, J.; Mark, R.; Bruce, A.; Blanc, E.; Rothstein, J.; Uchida,
K.; Waeg, G.; Mattson, M. 4-Hydroxynonenal, an aldehydic product
of membrane lipid peroxidation, impairs glutamate transport and
mitochondrial function in synaptosomes. Neuroscience 1997, 80 (3),
685−696.
(50) Tönnies, E.; Trushina, E. Oxidative stress, synaptic dysfunction,
and Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2017, 57 (4), 1105−1121.
(51) Nakamura, T.; Cieplak, P.; Cho, D.-H.; Godzik, A.; Lipton, S.
A. S-nitrosylation of Drp1 links excessive mitochondrial fission to
neuronal injury in neurodegeneration. Mitochondrion 2010, 10 (5),
573−578.
(52) Breijyeh, Z.; Karaman, R. Comprehensive review on
Alzheimer’s disease: causes and treatment. Molecules 2020, 25 (24),
5789.
(53) Yiannopoulou, K. G.; Papageorgiou, S. G. Current and future
treatments in Alzheimer disease: an update. J. Cent. Nerv. Syst. Dis.
2020, 12, No. 117957352090739.
(54) Srivastava, S.; Ahmad, R.; Khare, S. K. Alzheimer’s disease and
its treatment by different approaches: A review. Eur. J. Med. Chem.
2021, 216, No. 113320.
(55) Gowd, V.; Ahmad, A.; Tarique, M.; Suhail, M.; Zughaibi, T. A.;
Tabrez, S.; Khan, R. Advancement of cancer immunotherapy using
nanoparticles-based nanomedicine. Seminars in cancer biology 2022,
86, 624−644.
(56) Carneiro, P.; Morais, S.; Pereira, M. C. Nanomaterials towards
biosensing of Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers. Nanomaterials 2019, 9
(12), 1663.
(57) Bilal, M.; Barani, M.; Sabir, F.; Rahdar, A.; Kyzas, G. Z.
Nanomaterials for the treatment and diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease:
an overview. NanoImpact 2020, 20, No. 100251.
(58) Han, X.; Xu, K.; Taratula, O.; Farsad, K. Applications of
nanoparticles in biomedical imaging. Nanoscale 2019, 11 (3), 799−
819.
(59) Liu, X.; Duan, Y.; Liu, B. Nanoparticles as contrast agents for
photoacoustic brain imaging. Aggregate 2021, 2 (1), 4−19.
(60) Pardridge, W. M. The blood-brain barrier: bottleneck in brain
drug development. NeuroRx 2005, 2, 3−14.
(61) Pandit, R.; Chen, L.; Götz, J. The blood-brain barrier:
Physiology and strategies for drug delivery. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev.
2020, 165, 1−14.
(62) Banks, W. A. From blood−brain barrier to blood−brain
interface: new opportunities for CNS drug delivery. Nat. Rev. Drug
Discovery 2016, 15 (4), 275−292.
(63) Reddy, S.; Tatiparti, K.; Sau, S.; Iyer, A. K. Recent advances in
nano delivery systems for blood-brain barrier (BBB) penetration and
targeting of brain tumors. Drug Discovery Today 2021, 26 (8), 1944−
1952.
(64) Sweeney, M. D.; Sagare, A. P.; Zlokovic, B. V. Blood−brain
barrier breakdown in Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative
disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2018, 14 (3), 133−150.
(65) Zha, S.; Liu, H.; Li, H.; Li, H.; Wong, K.-L.; All, A. H.
Functionalized nanomaterials capable of crossing the blood−brain
barrier. ACS Nano 2024, 18 (3), 1820−1845.
(66) Herda, L. M.; Polo, E.; Kelly, P. M.; Rocks, L.; Hudecz, D.;
Dawson, K. A. Designing the future of nanomedicine: current barriers
to targeted brain therapeutics. Eur. J. Nanomed. 2014, 6 (3), 127−139.
(67) Chu, C.; Jablonska, A.; Lesniak, W. G.; Thomas, A. M.; Lan, X.;
Linville, R. M.; Li, S.; Searson, P. C.; Liu, G.; Pearl, M.; et al.
Optimization of osmotic blood-brain barrier opening to enable
intravital microscopy studies on drug delivery in mouse cortex. J.
Controlled Release 2020, 317, 312−321.
(68) Wu, D.; Fei, F.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, X.; Gong, Y.; Chen, X.;
Zheng, Y.; Tan, B.; Xu, C.; Xie, H.; et al. Nanoengineered on-demand
drug delivery system improves efficacy of pharmacotherapy for
epilepsy. Sci. Adv. 2022, 8 (2), No. eabm3381.
(69) Gorick, C. M.; Sheybani, N. D.; Curley, C. T.; Price, R. J.
Listening in on the microbubble crowd: advanced acoustic monitoring
for improved control of blood-brain barrier opening with focused
ultrasound. Theranostics 2018, 8 (11), 2988.
(70) Timbie, K. F.; Mead, B. P.; Price, R. J. Drug and gene delivery
across the blood−brain barrier with focused ultrasound. J. Controlled
Release 2015, 219, 61−75.
(71) Liu, Y.; Gong, Y.; Xie, W.; Huang, A.; Yuan, X.; Zhou, H.; Zhu,
X.; Chen, X.; Liu, J.; Liu, J.; et al. Microbubbles in combination with
focused ultrasound for the delivery of quercetin-modified sulfur
nanoparticles through the blood brain barrier into the brain
parenchyma and relief of endoplasmic reticulum stress to treat
Alzheimer’s disease. Nanoscale 2020, 12 (11), 6498−6511.
(72) Zhang, S.; Wang, Y.; Zhu, M.; Liu, B.; Zhao, W.; Zhang, S.; Xia,
J.; Shi, L.; Tang, P.; Wang, F.; et al. Ultrasound combined blood-brain
barrier targeting brain delivery of four-in-one molecular aggregates for
the enhancement of anesthetic efficacy and toxicity reduction via
propofol-etomidate synergistically inhibition GABA receptor. Aggre-
gate 2024, 5, No. e573.
(73) Lesniak, W. G.; Chu, C.; Jablonska, A.; Du, Y.; Pomper, M. G.;
Walczak, P.; Janowski, M. A distinct advantage to intraarterial delivery
of 89Zr-bevacizumab in PET imaging of mice with and without
osmotic opening of the blood−brain barrier. J. Nucl. Med. 2019, 60
(5), 617−622.
(74) Wu, D.; Chen, Q.; Chen, X.; Han, F.; Chen, Z.; Wang, Y. The
blood−brain barrier: structure, regulation, and drug delivery. Signal
Transduction Targeted Ther. 2023, 8 (1), 217.
(75) Zhang, W.; Sigdel, G.; Mintz, K. J.; Seven, E. S.; Zhou, Y.;
Wang, C.; Leblanc, R. M. Carbon dots: A future Blood−Brain Barrier
penetrating nanomedicine and drug nanocarrier. Int. J. Nanomed.
2021, 16, 5003−5016.
(76) Sokolova, V.; Mekky, G.; van der Meer, S. B.; Seeds, M. C.;
Atala, A. J.; Epple, M. Transport of ultrasmall gold nanoparticles (2
nm) across the blood−brain barrier in a six-cell brain spheroid model.
Sci. Rep. 2020, 10 (1), 18033.
(77) Allen, D. D.; Geldenhuys, W. J. Molecular modeling of blood−
brain barrier nutrient transporters: in silico basis for evaluation of
potential drug delivery to the central nervous system. Life Sci. 2006,
78 (10), 1029−1033.
(78) Tsuji, A. Small molecular drug transfer across the blood-brain
barrier via carrier-mediated transport systems. NeuroRx 2005, 2, 54−
62.
(79) Zhou, Y.; Zhu, F.; Liu, Y.; Zheng, M.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, D.;
Anraku, Y.; Zou, Y.; Li, J.; Wu, H.; et al. Blood-brain barrier−
penetrating siRNA nanomedicine for Alzheimer’s disease therapy. Sci.
Adv. 2020, 6 (41), No. eabc7031.
(80) Li, L.; Di, X.; Zhang, S.; Kan, Q.; Liu, H.; Lu, T.; Wang, Y.; Fu,
Q.; Sun, J.; He, Z. Large amino acid transporter 1 mediated glutamate
modified docetaxel-loaded liposomes for glioma targeting. Colloids
Surf., B 2016, 141, 260−267.
(81) He, X.; Luo, Y.; Li, Y.; Pan, Y.; Kwok, R. T.; He, L.; Duan, X.;
Zhang, P.; Wu, A.; Tang, B. Z.; et al. D-type neuropeptide decorated
AIEgen/RENP hybrid nanoprobes with light-driven ROS generation
ability for NIR-II fluorescence imaging-guided through-skull photo-
dynamic therapy of gliomas. Aggregate 2024, 5 (1), No. e396.
(82) Godfrey, L.; Iannitelli, A.; Garrett, N. L.; Moger, J.; Imbert, I.;
King, T.; Porreca, F.; Soundararajan, R.; Lalatsa, A.; Schätzlein, A. G.;
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33819

et al. Nanoparticulate peptide delivery exclusively to the brain
produces tolerance free analgesia. J. Controlled Release 2018, 270,
135−144.
(83) Meng, Q.; Wang, A.; Hua, H.; Jiang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Mu, H.; Wu,
Z.; Sun, K. Intranasal delivery of Huperzine A to the brain using
lactoferrin-conjugated N-trimethylated chitosan surface-modified
PLGA nanoparticles for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J.
Nanomed. 2018, 13, 705−718.
(84) Dhaliwal, H. K.; Fan, Y.; Kim, J.; Amiji, M. M. Intranasal
delivery and transfection of mRNA therapeutics in the brain using
cationic liposomes. Mol. Pharmaceutics 2020, 17 (6), 1996−2005.
(85) Sun, H.; Su, J.; Meng, Q.; Yin, Q.; Chen, L.; Gu, W.; Zhang, P.;
Zhang, Z.; Yu, H.; Wang, S.; et al. Cancer-Cell-Biomimetic
Nanoparticles for Targeted Therapy of Homotypic Tumors. Advanced
Materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.) 2016, 28 (43), 9581−9588.
(86) Drolez, A.; Vandenhaute, E.; Julien, S.; Gosselet, F.; Burchell, J.;
Cecchelli, R.; Delannoy, P.; Dehouck, M.-P.; Mysiorek, C. Selection
of a relevant in vitro blood-brain barrier model to investigate pro-
metastatic features of human breast cancer cell lines. PLoS One 2016,
11 (3), No. e0151155.
(87) Chen, Y.; Liu, L. Modern methods for delivery of drugs across
the blood−brain barrier. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2012, 64 (7), 640−
665.
(88) Alserihi, R. F.; Mohammed, M. R. S.; Kaleem, M.; Khan, M. I.;
Sechi, M.; Sanna, V.; Zughaibi, T. A.; Abuzenadah, A. M.; Tabrez, S.
Development of (−)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate-loaded folate receptor-
targeted nanoparticles for prostate cancer treatment. Nanotechnol. Rev.
2022, 11 (1), 298−311.
(89) Ashraf, G.; Tabrez, S.; Jabir, N.; Firoz, C.K.; Ahmad, S.; Hassan,
I.; Alexiou, A.; Kamal, M. An overview on global trends in
nanotechnological approaches for Alzheimer therapy. Curr. Drug
Metab. 2015, 16 (8), 719−727.
(90) Iglesias-Mayor, A.; Amor-Gutierrez, O.; Novelli, A.; Fernandez-
Sanchez, M.-T.; Costa-García, A.; de la Escosura-Muniz, A. Bifunc-
tional Au@ Pt/Au core@ shell nanoparticles as novel electrocatalytic
tags in immunosensing: application for Alzheimer’s disease biomarker
detection. Anal. Chem. 2020, 92 (10), 7209−7217.
(91) Shui, B.; Tao, D.; Cheng, J.; Mei, Y.; Jaffrezic-Renault, N.; Guo,
Z. A novel electrochemical aptamer-antibody sandwich assay for the
detection of tau-381 in human serum. Analyst 2018, 143 (15), 3549−
3554.
(92) Liao, X.; Ge, K.; Cai, Z.; Qiu, S.; Wu, S.; Li, Q.; Liu, Z.; Gao,
F.; Tang, Q. Hybridization chain reaction triggered poly adenine to
absorb silver nanoparticles for label-free electrochemical detection of
Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers amyloid beta-peptide oligomers. Anal.
Chim. Acta 2022, 1192, No. 339391.
(93) Azimzadeh, M.; Nasirizadeh, N.; Rahaie, M.; Naderi-Manesh,
H. Early detection of Alzheimer’s disease using a biosensor based on
electrochemically-reduced graphene oxide and gold nanowires for the
quantification of serum microRNA-137. RSC Adv. 2017, 7 (88),
55709−55719.
(94) Ly, T. N.; Park, S. High performance detection of Alzheimer’s
disease biomarkers based on localized surface plasmon resonance. J.
Ind. Eng. Chem. 2020, 91, 182−190.
(95) Kim, H.; Lee, J. U.; Song, S.; Kim, S.; Sim, S. J. A shape-code
nanoplasmonic biosensor for multiplex detection of Alzheimer’s
disease biomarkers. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2018, 101, 96−102.
(96) Zhu, X.; Zhang, N.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, B.; Chang, Z.; Zhou, Y.;
Hao, Y.; Ye, B.; Xu, M. A sensitive gold nanoparticle-based aptasensor
for colorimetric detection of Aβ 1−40 oligomers. Anal. Methods 2018,
10 (6), 641−645.
(97) Jiang, Y.-Q.; Wei, Y.-P.; Liu, X.-P.; Chen, J.-S.; Mao, C.-J.; Jin,
B.-K. Strong cathode electroluminescence biosensor based on CeO2
functionalized PCN-222@ Ag NPs for sensitive detection of p-Tau-
181 protein. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2024, 665, 144−151.
(98) Qin, D.; Meng, S.; Wu, Y.; Mo, G.; Jiang, X.; Deng, B. Design
of a dual-wavelength ratiometric electrochemiluminescence immuno-
sensor for sensitive detection of amyloid-β protein in human serum.
ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2021, 9 (22), 7541−7549.
(99) Jara-Guajardo, P.; Cabrera, P.; Celis, F.; Soler, M.; Berlanga, I.;
Parra-Muñoz, N.; Acosta, G.; Albericio, F.; Guzman, F.; Campos, M.;
et al. Gold nanoparticles mediate improved detection of β-amyloid
aggregates by fluorescence. Nanomaterials 2020, 10 (4), 690.
(100) Xia, Y.; Padmanabhan, P.; Sarangapani, S.; Gulyás, B.;
Vadakke Matham, M. Bifunctional fluorescent/Raman nanoprobe for
the early detection of amyloid. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9 (1), 8497.
(101) Choi, J.-W.; Oh, B.-K.; Jang, Y.-H.; Kang, D.-Y. Ultrasensitive
immunoassay for prostate specific antigen using scanning tunneling
microscopy-based electrical detection. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2008, 93 (3),
No. 033110.
(102) Lu, C.; Meng, C.; Li, Y.; Yuan, J.; Ren, X.; Gao, L.; Su, D.;
Cao, K.; Cui, M.; Yuan, Q.; et al. A probe for NIR-II imaging and
multimodal analysis of early Alzheimer’s disease by targeting CTGF.
Nat. Commun. 2024, 15 (1), 5000.
(103) Hou, K.; Zhao, J.; Wang, H.; Li, B.; Li, K.; Shi, X.; Wan, K.;
Ai, J.; Lv, J.; Wang, D.; et al. Chiral gold nanoparticles
enantioselectively rescue memory deficits in a mouse model of
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 4790.
(104) dos Santos Tramontin, N.; da Silva, S.; Arruda, R.; Ugioni, K.
S.; Canteiro, P. B.; de Bem Silveira, G.; Mendes, C.; Silveira, P. C. L.;
Muller, A. P. Gold nanoparticles treatment reverses brain damage in
Alzheimer’s disease model. Mol. Neurobiol. 2020, 57, 926−936.
(105) Liu, C.; You, X.; Lu, D.; Shi, G.; Deng, J.; Zhou, T. Gelsolin
encountering Ag nanorods/triangles: an aggregation-based colori-
metric sensor array for in vivo monitoring the cerebrospinal Aβ42% as
an indicator of Cd2+ exposure-related Alzheimer’s disease patho-
genesis. ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 2020, 3 (11), 7965−7973.
(106) Zhang, X.; Li, Y.; Hu, Y. Green synthesis of silver
nanoparticles and their preventive effect in deficits in recognition
and spatial memory in sporadic Alzheimer’s rat model. Colloids Surf.,
A 2020, 605, No. 125288.
(107) Roy, S.; Kang, S.; Choi, K. Y.; Lee, K. H.; Shin, K.-S.; Kang, J.
Y. Implementation of an ultra-sensitive microwell-based electro-
chemical sensor for the detection of Alzheimer’s disease. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2024, 247, No. 115898.
(108) Liu, X.-G.; Zhang, L.; Lu, S.; Liu, D.-Q.; Zhang, L.-X.; Yu, X.-
L.; Liu, R.-T. Multifunctional superparamagnetic iron oxide nano-
particles conjugated with Aβ oligomer-specific scFv antibody and class
a scavenger receptor activator show early diagnostic potentials for
Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Nanomed. 2020, 15, 4919−4932.
(109) Lai, Y.; Dang, Y.; Sun, Q.; Pan, J.; Yu, H.; Zhang, W.; Xu, Z.
Design of an activatable NIR-II nanoprobe for the in vivo elucidation
of Alzheimer’s disease-related variations in methylglyoxal concen-
trations. Chem. Sci. 2022, 13 (42), 12511−12518.
(110) Wang, Y.; Jiang, J.; Fu, X.; Zhang, J.; Song, J.; Wang, Y.; Duan,
L.; Shao, P.; Xu, X.; Zeng, L.; et al. Fe3O4@ polydopamine
nanoparticle-loaded human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells
improve the cognitive function in Alzheimer’s disease mice by
promoting hippocampal neurogenesis. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol.
Med. 2022, 40, No. 102507.
(111) Fang, L.; Song, Y.; Jin, H.; Liu, Y.; Gou, S. An Approach to
Apply BDNF Targeting Fe3O4-Based Nanoparticles as Multifunc-
tional Anti-Alzheimer Agents. Small 2024, No. 2403625.
(112) Medina-Sánchez, M.; Miserere, S.; Morales-Narvaez, E.;
Merkoçi, A. On-chip magneto-immunoassay for Alzheimer’s bio-
marker electrochemical detection by using quantum dots as labels.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2014, 54, 279−284.
(113) Huang, D.; Wang, Q.; Cao, Y.; Yang, H.; Li, M.; Wu, F.;
Zhang, Y.; Chen, G.; Wang, Q. Multiscale NIR-II imaging-guided
brain-targeted drug delivery using Engineered Cell membrane
Nanoformulation for Alzheimer’s Disease Therapy. ACS Nano
2023, 17 (5), 5033−5046.
(114) Alamri, O. A.; Qusti, S.; Balgoon, M.; Ageeli, A. A.; Al-
Marhaby, F.; Alosaimi, A. M.; Jowhari, M. A.; Saeed, A. The role of
MoS2 QDs coated with DSPE-PEG-TPP in the protection of protein
secondary structure of the brain tissues in an Alzheimer’s disease
model. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2024, 255, No. 128522.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33820

(115) Qi, X.; Ye, P.; Xie, M. MoS2 quantum dots based on lipid
drug delivery system for combined therapy against Alzheimer’s
disease. J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol. 2023, 82, No. 104324.
(116) Liu, J.; Chen, C.; Chen, H.; Huang, C.; Ren, Q.; Sun, M.; Tao,
J.; Lin, B.; Zhao, P. Brain glucose activated MRI contrast agent for
early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Anal. Chem. 2022, 94 (46),
16213−16221.
(117) Li, Y.; Qian, Z.; Shen, C.; Gao, Z.; Tang, K.; Liu, Z.; Chen, Z.
Colorimetric sensors for alkaloids based on the etching of Au@
MnO2 nanoparticles and MnO2 nanostars. ACS Appl. Nano Mater.
2021, 4 (8), 8465−8472.
(118) Badachhape, A. A.; Working, P. K.; Srivastava, M.; Bhandari,
P.; Stupin, I. V.; Devkota, L.; Tanifum, E. A.; Annapragada, A. V.;
Ghaghada, K. B. Pre-clinical dose-ranging efficacy, pharmacokinetics,
tissue biodistribution, and toxicity of a targeted contrast agent for
MRI of amyloid deposition in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10
(1), 16185.
(119) Zhong, G.; Long, H.; Zhou, T.; Liu, Y.; Zhao, J.; Han, J.; Yang,
X.; Yu, Y.; Chen, F.; Shi, S. Blood-brain barrier Permeable
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment by selective
mitophagy of microglia. Biomaterials 2022, 288, No. 121690.
(120) Yin, X.; Zhou, H.; Cao, T.; Yang, X.; Meng, F.; Dai, X.; Wang,
Y.; Li, S.; Zhai, W.; Yang, Z.; et al. Rational Design of Dual-
Functionalized Gd@ C82 Nanoparticles to Relieve Neuronal
Cytotoxicity in Alzheimer’s Disease via Inhibition of Aβ Aggregation.
ACS Nano 2024, 18 (24), 15416−15431.
(121) Wang, J.; Shangguan, P.; Chen, X.; Zhong, Y.; Lin, M.; He,
M.; Liu, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Pang, X.; Han, L.; et al. A one-two punch
targeting reactive oxygen species and fibril for rescuing Alzheimer’s
disease. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15 (1), 705.
(122) Xin, Y.; Fang, F.; Yue, Q.; Luo, Y.; Tian, S.; Cheng, L.; Wang,
X.; Yang, X.; Luo, L.; Meng, F. Microenvironment modulating
nanogels by Shiitake-derived lentinan and a reactive oxygen species
scavenging conjugated polymer for the treatment of Alzheimer’s
disease. Nano Today 2024, 55, No. 102178.
(123) Park, T.-E.; Singh, B.; Li, H.; Lee, J.-Y.; Kang, S.-K.; Choi, Y.-
J.; Cho, C.-S. Enhanced BBB permeability of osmotically active poly
(mannitol-co-PEI) modified with rabies virus glycoprotein via
selective stimulation of caveolar endocytosis for RNAi therapeutics
in Alzheimer’s disease. Biomaterials 2015, 38, 61−71.
(124) Ji, Y. B.; Lee, S.; Ju, H. J.; Kim, H. E.; Noh, J. H.; Choi, S.;
Park, K.; Lee, H. B.; Kim, M. S. Preparation and evaluation of
injectable microsphere formulation for longer sustained release of
donepezil. J. Controlled Release 2023, 356, 43−58.
(125) Rajkumar, M.; Govindaraj, P.; Vimala, K.; Thangaraj, R.;
Kannan, S. Chitosan/PLA-loaded Magnesium oxide nanocomposite
to attenuate oxidative stress, neuroinflammation and neurotoxicity in
rat models of Alzheimer’s disease. Metab. Brain Dis. 2024, 39 (4),
487−508.
(126) Dashputre, N. L.; Laddha, U. D.; Darekar, P. P.; Kadam, J. D.;
Patil, S. B.; Sable, R. R.; Udavant, P. B.; Tajanpure, A. B.; Kakad, S. P.;
Kshirsagar, S. J. Potential therapeutic effects of naringin loaded PLGA
nanoparticles for the management of Alzheimer’s disease: In vitro, ex
vivo and in vivo investigation. Heliyon 2023, 9 (9), No. e19374.
(127) Yekeler, H. B.; Guler, E.; Beato, P. S.; Priya, S.; Abobakr, F. K.
M.; Dogan, M.; Uner, B.; Kalaskar, D. M.; Cam, M. E. Design and in
vitro evaluation of curcumin-loaded PLGA nanoparticle-embedded
sodium alginate/gelatin 3D printed scaffolds for Alzheimer’s disease.
Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2024, 268, No. 131841.
(128) Singh, A.; Rakshit, D.; Kumar, A.; Mishra, A.; Shukla, R.
Vitamin E modified polyamidoamine dendrimer for piperine delivery
to alleviate Aβ1−42 induced neurotoxicity in Balb/c mice model.
Journal of Biomaterials Science, Polymer Edition 2023, 34 (16), 2232−
2254.
(129) Sahu, R. C.; Suthar, T.; Kumar, D.; Singh, P.; Datusalia, A. K.;
Jain, K. Novel ligand conjugated poly (propylene imine) dendrimers
for brain targeted delivery of tacrine hydrochloride. J. Drug Delivery
Sci. Technol. 2024, 92, No. 105336.
(130) Picone, P.; Ditta, L. A.; Sabatino, M. A.; Militello, V.; San
Biagio, P. L.; Di Giacinto, M. L.; Cristaldi, L.; Nuzzo, D.; Dispenza,
C.; Giacomazza, D.; et al. Ionizing radiation-engineered nanogels as
insulin nanocarriers for the development of a new strategy for the
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Biomaterials 2016, 80, 179−194.
(131) Wang, C.; Song, X.; Li, P.; Sun, S.; Su, J.; Liu, S.; Wei, W.
Multifunctional Nanocarrier for Synergistic Treatment of Alzheimer’s
Disease by Inhibiting β-Amyloid Aggregation and Scavenging
Reactive Oxygen Species. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2024, 16
(21), 27127−27138.
(132) Cheng, C.-S.; Liu, T.-P.; Chien, F.-C.; Mou, C.-Y.; Wu, S.-H.;
Chen, Y.-P. Codelivery of plasmid and curcumin with mesoporous
silica nanoparticles for promoting neurite outgrowth. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11 (17), 15322−15331.
(133) Geng, J.; Li, M.; Wu, L.; Chen, C.; Qu, X. Mesoporous silica
nanoparticle-based H2O2 responsive controlled-release system used
for Alzheimer’s disease treatment. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2012, 1 (3),
332−336.
(134) Jung, H.; Chung, Y. J.; Wilton, R.; Lee, C. H.; Lee, B. I.; Lim,
J.; Lee, H.; Choi, J. H.; Kang, H.; Lee, B.; et al. Silica nanodepletors:
Targeting and clearing Alzheimer’s β-amyloid plaques. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2020, 30 (15), No. 1910475.
(135) Chen, X.; Pandit, S.; Shi, L.; Ravikumar, V.; Køhler, J. B.;
Svetlicic, E.; Cao, Z.; Garg, A.; Petranovic, D.; Mijakovic, I. Graphene
Oxide Attenuates Toxicity of Amyloid-β Aggregates in Yeast by
Promoting Disassembly and Boosting Cellular Stress Response. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2023, 33 (45), No. 2304053.
(136) Wang, K.; Wang, L.; Chen, L.; Peng, C.; Luo, B.; Mo, J.;
Chen, W. Intranasal administration of dauricine loaded on graphene
oxide: multi-target therapy for Alzheimer’s disease. Drug Delivery
2021, 28 (1), 580−593.
(137) Mehta, P.; Shende, P. Collation of fullerenes and carbon
nanotubes with genistein for synergistic anti-Alzheimer’s activity by
amyloid-β deaggregation. J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol. 2024, 91,
No. 105205.
(138) Yang, H.; Mu, W.; Wei, D.; Zhang, Y.; Duan, Y.; Gao, J. x.;
Gong, X. q.; Wang, H. j.; Wu, X. l.; Tao, H.; et al. A novel targeted
and high-efficiency nanosystem for combinational therapy for
Alzheimer’s disease. Adv. Sci. 2020, 7 (19), No. 1902906.
(139) Duan, L.; Hao, Z.; Ji, R.; Li, X.; Wang, H.; Su, Y.; Guan, F.;
Ma, S. Glucose-modified BSA/procyanidin C1 NPs penetrate the
blood-brain barrier and alleviate neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s
disease models. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2024, 268, No. 131739.
(140) Park, H.; Oh, J.; Shim, G.; Cho, B.; Chang, Y.; Kim, S.; Baek,
S.; Kim, H.; Shin, J.; Choi, H.; et al. In vivo neuronal gene editing via
CRISPR−Cas9 amphiphilic nanocomplexes alleviates deficits in
mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 2019, 22 (4),
524−528.
(141) Meng, F.; Asghar, S.; Gao, S.; Su, Z.; Song, J.; Huo, M.; Meng,
W.; Ping, Q.; Xiao, Y. A novel LDL-mimic nanocarrier for the targeted
delivery of curcumin into the brain to treat Alzheimer’s disease.
Colloids Surf., B 2015, 134, 88−97.
(142) Kong, L.; Li, X.-t.; Ni, Y.-n.; Xiao, H.-h.; Yao, Y.-j.; Wang, Y.-
y.; Ju, R.-j.; Li, H.-y.; Liu, J.-j.; Fu, M.; et al. Transferrin-modified
osthole PEGylated liposomes travel the blood-brain barrier and
mitigate Alzheimer’s disease-related pathology in APP/PS-1 mice. Int.
J. Nanomed. 2020, 15, 2841−2858.
(143) Wang, J.; Kong, L.; Guo, R.-B.; He, S.-Y.; Liu, X.-Z.; Zhang,
L.; Liu, Y.; Yu, Y.; Li, X.-T.; Cheng, L. J. D. D. Multifunctional icariin
and tanshinone IIA co-delivery liposomes with potential application
for Alzheimer’s disease. Drug Delivery 2022, 29 (1), 1648−1662.
(144) Ma, F.; Yang, L.; Sun, Z.; Chen, J.; Rui, X.; Glass, Z.; Xu, Q.
Neurotransmitter-derived lipidoids (NT-lipidoids) for enhanced brain
delivery through intravenous injection. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6 (30),
No. eabb4429.
(145) Yao, L.; Gu, X.; Song, Q.; Wang, X.; Huang, M.; Hu, M.; Hou,
L.; Kang, T.; Chen, J.; Chen, H.; et al. Nanoformulated alpha-
mangostin ameliorates Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology by
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33821

elevating LDLR expression and accelerating amyloid-beta clearance. J.
Controlled Release 2016, 226, 1−14.
(146) Krishna, K. V.; Wadhwa, G.; Alexander, A.; Kanojia, N.; Saha,
R. N.; Kukreti, R.; Singhvi, G.; Dubey, S. K. Design and biological
evaluation of lipoprotein-based donepezil nanocarrier for enhanced
brain uptake through oral delivery. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2019, 10 (9),
4124−4135.
(147) Fernandes, M.; Lopes, I.; Magalhães, L.; Sárria, M. P.;
Machado, R.; Sousa, J. C.; Botelho, C.; Teixeira, J.; Gomes, A. C.
Novel concept of exosome-like liposomes for the treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Controlled Release 2021, 336, 130−143.
(148) Arora, S.; Layek, B.; Singh, J. Design and validation of
liposomal ApoE2 gene delivery system to evade blood−brain barrier
for effective treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Pharmaceutics
2021, 18 (2), 714−725.
(149) Mancini, S.; Balducci, C.; Micotti, E.; Tolomeo, D.; Forloni,
G.; Masserini, M.; Re, F. Multifunctional liposomes delay phenotype
progression and prevent memory impairment in a presymptomatic
stage mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J. Controlled Release 2017,
258, 121−129.
(150) Wang, J.; Kong, L.; Guo, R.-B.; He, S.-Y.; Liu, X.-Z.; Zhang,
L.; Liu, Y.; Yu, Y.; Li, X.-T.; Cheng, L. Multifunctional icariin and
tanshinone IIA co-delivery liposomes with potential application for
Alzheimer’s disease. Drug Delivery 2022, 29 (1), 1648−1662.
(151) Saini, S.; Sharma, T.; Jain, A.; Kaur, H.; Katare, O.; Singh, B.
Systematically designed chitosan-coated solid lipid nanoparticles of
ferulic acid for effective management of Alzheimer’s disease: A
preclinical evidence. Colloids Surf., B 2021, 205, No. 111838.
(152) Dara, T.; Vatanara, A.; Sharifzadeh, M.; Khani, S.;
Vakilinezhad, M. A.; Vakhshiteh, F.; Nabi Meybodi, M.; Sadegh
Malvajerd, S.; Hassani, S.; Mosaddegh, M. H. Improvement of
memory deficits in the rat model of Alzheimer’s disease by
erythropoietin-loaded solid lipid nanoparticles. Neurobiol. Learn.
Mem. 2019, 166, No. 107082.
(153) Campisi, A.; Sposito, G.; Pellitteri, R.; Santonocito, D.;
Bisicchia, J.; Raciti, G.; Russo, C.; Nardiello, P.; Pignatello, R.;
Casamenti, F.; et al. Effect of unloaded and curcumin-loaded solid
lipid nanoparticles on tissue transglutaminase isoforms expression
levels in an experimental model of Alzheimer’s disease. Antioxidants
2022, 11 (10), 1863.
(154) Shao, X.; Cui, W.; Xie, X.; Ma, W.; Zhan, Y.; Lin, Y.
Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease with framework nucleic acids. Cell
Proliferation 2020, 53 (4), No. e12787.
(155) Qi, Y.; Guo, L.; Jiang, Y.; Shi, Y.; Sui, H.; Zhao, L. Brain
delivery of quercetin-loaded exosomes improved cognitive function in
AD mice by inhibiting phosphorylated tau-mediated neurofibrillary
tangles. Drug Delivery 2020, 27 (1), 745−755.
(156) Wang, H.; Sui, H.; Zheng, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Shi, Y.; Liang, J.; Zhao,
L. Curcumin-primed exosomes potently ameliorate cognitive function
in AD mice by inhibiting hyperphosphorylation of the Tau protein
through the AKT/GSK-3β pathway. Nanoscale 2019, 11 (15), 7481−
7496.
(157) Yang, L.; Zhai, Y.; Hao, Y.; Zhu, Z.; Cheng, G. The regulatory
functionality of exosomes derived from hUMSCs in 3D culture for
Alzheimer’s disease therapy. Small 2020, 16 (3), No. 1906273.
(158) Cui, G.-h.; Guo, H.-d.; Li, H.; Zhai, Y.; Gong, Z.-b.; Wu, J.;
Liu, J.-s.; Dong, Y.-r.; Hou, S.-x.; Liu, J.-r. RVG-modified exosomes
derived from mesenchymal stem cells rescue memory deficits by
regulating inflammatory responses in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s
disease. Immunity & Ageing 2019, 16, 1−12.
(159) Chen, Y.-A.; Lu, C.-H.; Ke, C.-C.; Chiu, S.-J.; Jeng, F.-S.;
Chang, C.-W.; Yang, B.-H.; Liu, R.-S. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived
exosomes ameliorate Alzheimer’s disease pathology and improve
cognitive deficits. Biomedicines 2021, 9 (6), 594.
(160) Upadhya, R.; Madhu, L. N.; Attaluri, S.; Gitaí, D. L. G.;
Pinson, M. R.; Kodali, M.; Shetty, G.; Zanirati, G.; Kumar, S.; Shuai,
B.; et al. Extracellular vesicles from human iPSC-derived neural stem
cells: miRNA and protein signatures, and anti-inflammatory and
neurogenic properties. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2020, 9 (1), No. 1809064.
(161) Su, Y.; Huang, Y.; Kou, Q.; Lu, L.; Jiang, H.; Li, X.; Gui, R.;
Huang, R.; Huang, X.; Ma, J.; et al. Study on the Role of an
Erythrocyte Membrane-Coated Nanotheranostic System in Targeted
Immune Regulation of Alzheimer’s Disease. Adv. Sci. 2023, 10 (18),
No. 2301361.
(162) Lin, R. R.; Jin, L. L.; Xue, Y. Y.; Zhang, Z. S.; Huang, H. F.;
Chen, D. F.; Liu, Q.; Mao, Z. W.; Wu, Z. Y.; Tao, Q. Q. Hybrid
Membrane-Coated Nanoparticles for Precise Targeting and Syner-
gistic Therapy in Alzheimer’s Disease. Adv. Sci. 2024, 11,
No. 2306675.
(163) Nazem, A.; Mansoori, G. A. Nanotechnology for Alzheimer’s
disease detection and treatment. Insciences J. 2011, 1 (4), 169−193.
(164) Pange, S. S.; Patwekar, M.; Patwekar, F.; Alghamdi, S.;
Babalghith, A. O.; Abdulaziz, O.; Jawaid, T.; Kamal, M.; Tabassum, S.;
Mallick, J. A potential notion on alzheimer’s disease: nanotechnology
as an alternative solution. J. Nanomater. 2022, 2022 (1), No. 6910811.
(165) Qian, C.; Chen, J.; Wang, C.; Wang, Q.; Wang, X.; Wang, X.
Light-controlled molecular tweezers capture specific amyloid
oligomers. Aggregate 2024, 5 (2), No. e463.
(166) Brazaca, L. C.; Sampaio, I.; Zucolotto, V.; Janegitz, B. C.
Applications of biosensors in Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis. Talanta
2020, 210, No. 120644.
(167) Iglesias-Mayor, A.; Amor-Gutierrez, O.; Novelli, A.;
Fernandez-Sanchez, M. T.; Costa-Garcia, A.; de la Escosura-Muniz,
A. Bifunctional Au@Pt/Au core@shell Nanoparticles As Novel
Electrocatalytic Tags in Immunosensing: Application for Alzheimer’s
Disease Biomarker Detection. Anal. Chem. 2020, 92 (10), 7209−
7217.
(168) Negahdary, M.; Heli, H. An electrochemical peptide-based
biosensor for the Alzheimer biomarker amyloid-β (1−42) using a
microporous gold nanostructure. Microchim. Acta 2019, 186, 1−8.
(169) Shui, B.; Tao, D.; Cheng, J.; Mei, Y.; Jaffrezic-Renault, N.;
Guo, Z. A novel electrochemical aptamer−antibody sandwich assay
for the detection of tau-381 in human serum. Analyst 2018, 143 (15),
3549−3554.
(170) Liao, X.; Ge, K.; Cai, Z.; Qiu, S.; Wu, S.; Li, Q.; Liu, Z.; Gao,
F.; Tang, Q. Hybridization chain reaction triggered poly adenine to
absorb silver nanoparticles for label-free electrochemical detection of
Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers amyloid β-peptide oligomers. Anal.
Chim. Acta 2022, 1192, No. 339391.
(171) Chen, H.; Xiao, M.; He, J.; Zhang, Y.; Liang, Y.; Liu, H.;
Zhang, Z. Aptamer-functionalized carbon nanotube field-effect
transistor biosensors for Alzheimer’s disease serum biomarker
detection. ACS Sens. 2022, 7 (7), 2075−2083.
(172) Haes, A. J.; Chang, L.; Klein, W. L.; Van Duyne, R. P.
Detection of a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease from synthetic and
clinical samples using a nanoscale optical biosensor. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2005, 127 (7), 2264−2271.
(173) Rezabakhsh, A.; Rahbarghazi, R.; Fathi, F. Surface plasmon
resonance biosensors for detection of Alzheimer’s biomarkers; an
effective step in early and accurate diagnosis. Biosens. Bioelectron.
2020, 167, No. 112511.
(174) Ghasemi, F.; Hormozi-Nezhad, M. R.; Mahmoudi, M. Label-
free detection of β-amyloid peptides (Aβ40 and Aβ42): a colorimetric
sensor array for plasma monitoring of Alzheimer’s disease. Nanoscale
2018, 10 (14), 6361−6368.
(175) Liu, C.; Luo, Y.; Wen, H.; Qi, Y.; Shi, G.; Deng, J.; Zhou, T.
Red-to-blue paper-based colorimetric sensor integrated with smart-
phone for point-of-use analysis of cerebral AChE upon Cd 2+
exposure. Nanoscale 2021, 13 (2), 1283−1290.
(176) Pyati, R.; Richter, M. M. ECLElectrochemical lumines-
cence. Annual Reports Section″ C″(Physical Chemistry) 2007, 103, 12−
78.
(177) Liu, H.; Zhou, X.; Shen, Q.; Xing, D. based electro-
chemiluminescence sensor for highly sensitive detection of amyloid-
β oligomerization: Toward potential diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease.
Theranostics 2018, 8 (8), 2289.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33822

(178) Xu, Y.; Han, Z.; Du, P.; Lu, X. Signal enhancement in
electrochemiluminescence systems based on porphyrins. TrAC,
Trends Anal. Chem. 2023, 165, No. 117136.
(179) Fu, W.; Yan, C.; Guo, Z.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, H.; Tian, H.; Zhu,
W.-H. Rational design of near-infrared aggregation-induced-emission-
active probes: in situ mapping of amyloid-β plaques with ultra-
sensitivity and high-fidelity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141 (7), 3171−
3177.
(180) Zhang, T.; Chen, X.; Yuan, C.; Pang, X.; Shangguan, P.; Liu,
Y.; Han, L.; Sun, J.; Lam, J. W.; Liu, Y.; et al. Near-Infrared
Aggregation-Induced Emission Luminogens for In Vivo Theranostics
of Alzheimer’s Disease. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023, 62 (2),
No. e202211550.
(181) Lombardo, S. M.; Schneider, M.; Türeli, A. E.; Türeli, N. G.
Key for crossing the BBB with nanoparticles: The rational design.
Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 2020, 11 (1), 866−883.
(182) Zhang, Z.; Lv, M.; Liu, Y.; Qin, J.; Fan, Z.; Du, J. A Peptide-
Polyphenol Coated Polypyrrole Nanoparticle for Synergetic Attenu-
ation of Aggregation and Cytotoxicity of Amyloid-β Fibrils. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2024, 34, No. 2401208.
(183) Xu, L.; Ding, Y.; Ma, F.; Chen, Y.; Chen, G.; Zhu, L.; Long, J.;
Ma, R.; Liu, Y.; Liu, J.; et al. Engineering a pathological tau-targeted
nanochaperone for selective and synergetic inhibition of tau pathology
in Alzheimer’s Disease. Nano Today 2022, 43, No. 101388.
(184) Zhu, L.; Xu, L.; Wu, X.; Deng, F.; Ma, R.; Liu, Y.; Huang, F.;
Shi, L. Tau-targeted multifunctional nanoinhibitor for Alzheimer’s
disease. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13 (20), 23328−23338.
(185) Greenberg, D.; Soreq, H. MicroRNA therapeutics in
neurological disease. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2014, 20 (38), 6022−6027.
(186) Ulanova, M.; Gloag, L.; Bongers, A.; Kim, C.-K.; Duong, H. T.
K.; Kim, H. N.; Gooding, J. J.; Tilley, R. D.; Biazik, J.; Wen, W.; et al.
Evaluation of Dimercaptosuccinic Acid-Coated Iron Nanoparticles
Immunotargeted to Amyloid Beta as MRI Contrast Agents for the
Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cells 2023, 12 (18), 2279.
(187) Song, N.; Sun, S.; Chen, K.; Wang, Y.; Wang, H.; Meng, J.;
Guo, M.; Zhang, X.-D.; Zhang, R. Emerging nanotechnology for
Alzheimer’s disease: From detection to treatment. J. Controlled Release
2023, 360, 392−417.
(188) Tang, Y.; Pei, F.; Lu, X.; Fan, Q.; Huang, W. Recent advances
on activatable NIR-II fluorescence probes for biomedical imaging.
Adv. Opt. Mater. 2019, 7 (21), No. 1900917.
(189) Choi, G.; Rejinold, N. S.; Piao, H.; Choy, J.-H. Inorganic−
inorganic nanohybrids for drug delivery, imaging and photo-therapy:
recent developments and future scope. Chem. Sci. 2021, 12 (14),
5044−5063.
(190) Cao, J.; Zhu, B.; Zheng, K.; He, S.; Meng, L.; Song, J.; Yang,
H. Recent progress in NIR-II contrast agent for biological imaging.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 7, 487.
(191) Xu, W.; Wang, D.; Tang, B. Z. NIR-II AIEgens: a win−win
integration towards bioapplications. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60
(14), 7476−7487.
(192) Lu, S.; Ke, J.; Li, X.; Tu, D.; Chen, X. Luminescent nano-
bioprobes based on NIR dye/lanthanide nanoparticle composites.
Aggregate 2021, 2 (5), No. e59.
(193) Duo, Y.; Yang, Y.; Xu, T.; Zhou, R.; Wang, R.; Luo, G.; Tang,
B. Z. Aggregation-induced emission: An illuminator in the brain.
Coord. Chem. Rev. 2023, 482, No. 215070.
(194) He, Q.; Wang, M.; Zhao, L.; Xu, B.; Tian, W.; Zhang, L. Near-
infrared aggregation-induced emission materials: Bibliometric analysis
and their application in biomedical field. Aggregate 2024, 5, No. e505.
(195) Huang, L.; Zhou, Y.; Jiao, D.; Ren, J.; Qi, Y.; Wang, H.; Shi,
Y.; Ding, D.; Xue, X. Mitochondrial sensitive probe with aggregation-
induced emission characteristics for early brain diagnosis of
Parkinson’s disease. Aggregate 2024, 5 (1), No. e403.
(196) Kang, M.; Zhang, Z.; Song, N.; Li, M.; Sun, P.; Chen, X.;
Wang, D.; Tang, B. Z. Aggregation-enhanced theranostics: AIE
sparkles in biomedical field. Aggregate 2020, 1 (1), 80−106.
(197) Wang, H.; Li, Q.; Alam, P.; Bai, H.; Bhalla, V.; Bryce, M. R.;
Cao, M.; Chen, C.; Chen, S.; Chen, X.; et al. Aggregation-induced
emission (AIE), life and health. ACS Nano 2023, 17 (15), 14347−
14405.
(198) Naghibi, S.; Chen, T.; Jamshidi Ghahfarokhi, A.; Tang, Y.
AIEgen-enhanced protein imaging: Probe design and sensing
mechanisms. Aggregate 2021, 2 (3), No. e41.
(199) He, X.; Xie, H.; Hu, L.; Liu, P.; Xu, C.; He, W.; Du, W.;
Zhang, S.; Xing, H.; Liu, X.; et al. A versatile AIE fluorogen with
selective reactivity to primary amines for monitoring amination,
protein labeling, and mitochondrial staining. Aggregate 2023, 4 (1),
No. e239.
(200) Wang, F.; Ho, P.-Y.; Kam, C.; Yang, Q.; Liu, J.; Wang, W.;
Zhao, E.; Chen, S. An AIE-active probe for efficient detection and
high-throughput identification of outer membrane vesicles. Aggregate
2023, 4 (4), No. e312.
(201) Xu, L.; Gao, H.; Zhan, W.; Deng, Y.; Liu, X.; Jiang, Q.; Sun,
X.; Xu, J.-J.; Liang, G. Dual aggregations of a near-infrared
aggregation-induced emission luminogen for enhanced imaging of
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145 (50), 27748−27756.
(202) Shimoyama, D.; Jäkle, F. Controlling the aggregation and
assembly of boron-containing molecular and polymeric materials.
Aggregate 2022, 3 (2), No. e149.
(203) Xia, D.; Chen, J.; Zhang, Z.; Dong, M. Emerging polymeric
biomaterials and manufacturing techniques in regenerative medicine.
Aggregate 2022, 3 (5), No. e176.
(204) Tian, J.; Lin, F.; Yu, S.-B.; Yu, J.; Tang, Q.; Li, Z.-T. Water-
dispersible and soluble porous organic polymers for biomedical
applications. Aggregate 2022, 3 (5), No. e187.
(205) Rabiee, N.; Ahmadi, S.; Afshari, R.; Khalaji, S.; Rabiee, M.;
Bagherzadeh, M.; Fatahi, Y.; Dinarvand, R.; Tahriri, M.; Tayebi, L.;
et al. Polymeric nanoparticles for nasal drug delivery to the brain:
relevance to Alzheimer’s disease. Adv. Ther. 2021, 4 (3),
No. 2000076.
(206) Ansari, M. A.; Tripathi, T.; Venkidasamy, B.; Monziani, A.;
Rajakumar, G.; Alomary, M. N.; Alyahya, S. A.; Onimus, O.; D’souza,
N.; Barkat, M. A.; et al. Multifunctional nanocarriers for Alzheimer’s
disease: befriending the barriers. Mol. Neurobiol. 2024, 61 (5), 3042−
3089.
(207) Xu, D.; Wu, D.; Qin, M.; Nih, L. R.; Liu, C.; Cao, Z.; Ren, J.;
Chen, X.; He, Z.; Yu, W.; et al. Efficient delivery of nerve growth
factors to the central nervous system for neural regeneration. Adv.
Mater. 2019, 31 (33), No. 1900727.
(208) Arınmış, K. b. N.; Kıyan, H. T.; Ozturk, A. A. Preparation,
characterization, antioxidant activities, and determination of anti-
Alzheimer effects of PLGA-based DDSs containing ferulic acid. ACS
Omega 2024, 9 (10), 11321−11338.
(209) Wang, L.; Liu, X.; Fu, J.; Ning, X.; Zhang, M.; Jiang, Z.;
Cheng, G.; Zhu, Y.; Zhang, Z. Release of methylene blue from
graphene oxide-coated electrospun nanofibrous scaffolds to modulate
functions of neural progenitor cells. Acta Biomater. 2019, 88, 346−
356.
(210) Wu, Q.; Karthivashan, G.; Nakhaei-Nejad, M.; Anand, B. G.;
Giuliani, F.; Kar, S. Native PLGA nanoparticles regulate APP
metabolism and protect neurons against β-amyloid toxicity: Potential
significance in Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.
2022, 219, 1180−1196.
(211) Kanazawa, T.; Akiyama, F.; Kakizaki, S.; Takashima, Y.; Seta,
Y. Delivery of siRNA to the brain using a combination of nose-to-
brain delivery and cell-penetrating peptide-modified nano-micelles.
Biomaterials 2013, 34 (36), 9220−9226.
(212) Ma, Z.; Song, C.; Yang, K.; Zhu, Z.; Wang, J. Application of
PEG-modified Copper-cysteamine in photodynamic therapy for
Alzheimer’s disease. Mater. Lett. 2022, 328, No. 133018.
(213) Gu, Z.; Zhao, H.; Song, Y.; Kou, Y.; Yang, W.; Li, Y.; Li, X.;
Ding, L.; Sun, Z.; Lin, J.; et al. PEGylated-liposomal astaxanthin
ameliorates Aβ neurotoxicity and Alzheimer-related phenotypes by
scavenging formaldehyde. J. Controlled Release 2024, 366, 783−797.
(214) Xi, Y.; Chen, Y.; Jin, Y.; Han, G.; Song, M.; Song, T.; Shi, Y.;
Tao, L.; Huang, Z.; Zhou, J.; et al. Versatile nanomaterials for
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33823

Alzheimer’s disease: Pathogenesis inspired disease-modifying therapy.
J. Controlled Release 2022, 345, 38−61.
(215) Muniswamy, V. J.; Raval, N.; Gondaliya, P.; Tambe, V.; Kalia,
K.; Tekade, R. K. Dendrimer-Cationized-Albumin’encrusted poly-
meric nanoparticle improves BBB penetration and anticancer activity
of doxorubicin. Int. J. Pharm. 2019, 555, 77−99.
(216) Zhang, X.; Zhang, P.; Xiao, C.; Chen, X. ROS-responsive self-
degradable DNA nanogels for targeted anticancer drug delivery. ACS
Macro Lett. 2023, 12 (10), 1317−1323.
(217) Itzhakov, R.; Hak, H.; Sadhasivam, S.; Belausov, E.; Fallik, E.;
Spiegelman, Z.; Sionov, E.; Poverenov, E. Nanogel particles based on
modified nucleosides and oligosaccharides as advanced delivery
system. ACS Nano 2023, 17 (22), 23020−23031.
(218) Hu, C.; Severin, K. Nanogels with Metal-Organic Cages as
Functional Crosslinks. Angew. Chem. 2024, 63 (23), No. e202403834.
(219) Rajput, D.; Singh, M.; Sahu, P.; Jain, D.; Kashaw, S. K.; Patil,
U. K. Advances in Nanogel as Drug Delivery System for Cancer
Therapeutics: An Overview. Mini Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry
2023, 23 (21), 2053−2072.
(220) Ansari, M.; Eslami, H. Preparation and study of the inhibitory
effect of nano-niosomes containing essential oil from artemisia
absinthium on amyloid fibril formation. Nanomed. J. 2020, 7 (3),
243−250.
(221) Heyns, I. M.; Arora, M.; Ganugula, R.; Allamreddy, S. R.;
Tiwari, S.; Shah, D. K.; Basu, R.; Kumar, M. R. Polyester
Nanoparticles with Controlled Topography for Peroral Drug Delivery
Using Insulin as a Model Protein. ACS Nano 2024, 18 (18), 11863−
11875.
(222) Chen, W.; Huang, Q.; Lazdon, E. K.; Gomes, A.; Wong, M.;
Stephens, E.; Royal, T. G.; Frenkel, D.; Cai, W.; Kahn, C. R. Loss of
insulin signaling in astrocytes exacerbates Alzheimer-like phenotypes
in a 5xFAD mouse model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2023, 120
(21), No. e2220684120.
(223) Yoon, J. H.; Hwang, J.; Son, S. U.; Choi, J.; You, S.-W.; Park,
H.; Cha, S.-Y.; Maeng, S. How can insulin resistance cause
Alzheimer’s disease? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2023, 24 (4), 3506.
(224) Li, Z.; Barnes, J. C.; Bosoy, A.; Stoddart, J. F.; Zink, J. I.
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles in biomedical applications. Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2012, 41 (7), 2590−2605.
(225) Wu, S.-H.; Mou, C.-Y.; Lin, H.-P. Synthesis of mesoporous
silica nanoparticles. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013, 42 (9), 3862−3875.
(226) Tang, F.; Li, L.; Chen, D. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles:
synthesis, biocompatibility and drug delivery. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24
(12), 1504−1534.
(227) Rosenholm, J. M.; Sahlgren, C.; Lindén, M. Towards
multifunctional, targeted drug delivery systems using mesoporous
silica nanoparticles−opportunities & challenges. Nanoscale 2010, 2
(10), 1870−1883.
(228) Holliger, P.; Hudson, P. J. Engineered antibody fragments and
the rise of single domains. Nat. Biotechnol. 2005, 23 (9), 1126−1136.
(229) Liu, X.; Wu, F.; Ji, Y.; Yin, L. Recent advances in anti-cancer
protein/peptide delivery. Bioconjugate Chem. 2019, 30 (2), 305−324.
(230) Fukunaga, K.; Tsutsumi, H.; Mihara, H. Self-assembling
peptides as building blocks of functional materials for biomedical
applications. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 2019, 92 (2), 391−399.
(231) Santin, M. D.; Debeir, T.; Bridal, S. L.; Rooney, T.; Dhenain,
M. Fast in vivo imaging of amyloid plaques using μ-MRI Gd-staining
combined with ultrasound-induced blood−brain barrier opening.
NeuroImage 2013, 79, 288−294.
(232) Matharu, B.; Spencer, N.; Howe, F.; Austen, B. Gadolinium-
complexed Aβ-binding contrast agents for MRI diagnosis of
Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuropeptides 2015, 53, 63−70.
(233) Qi, X.; Li, L.; Ye, P.; Xie, M. Macrophage Membrane-
Modified MoS2 Quantum Dots as a Nanodrug for Combined Multi-
Targeting of Alzheimer’s Disease. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2024, 13
(6), No. 2303211.
(234) Li, K.; Xu, K.; Liu, S.; He, Y.; Tan, M.; Mao, Y.; Yang, Y.; Wu,
J.; Feng, Q.; Luo, Z.; et al. All-in-one engineering multifunctional
nanoplatforms for sensitizing tumor low-temperature photothermal
therapy in vivo. ACS Nano 2023, 17 (20), 20218−20236.
(235) Feng, Y.; Li, X.; Ji, D.; Tian, J.; Peng, Q.; Shen, Y.; Xiao, Y.
Functionalised penetrating peptide-chondroitin sulphate-gold nano-
particles: Synthesis, characterization, and applications as an anti-
Alzheimer’s disease drug. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2023, 230,
No. 123125.
(236) Yang, Z.; Ge, C.; Liu, J.; Chong, Y.; Gu, Z.; Jimenez-Cruz, C.
A.; Chai, Z.; Zhou, R. Destruction of amyloid fibrils by graphene
through penetration and extraction of peptides. Nanoscale 2015, 7
(44), 18725−18737.
(237) Vilela, P.; El-Sagheer, A.; Millar, T. M.; Brown, T.; Muskens,
O. L.; Kanaras, A. G. Graphene oxide-upconversion nanoparticle
based optical sensors for targeted detection of mRNA biomarkers
present in Alzheimer’s disease and prostate cancer. ACS Sens. 2017, 2
(1), 52−56.
(238) Robinson, J. T.; Hong, G.; Liang, Y.; Zhang, B.; Yaghi, O. K.;
Dai, H. In vivo fluorescence imaging in the second near-infrared
window with long circulating carbon nanotubes capable of ultrahigh
tumor uptake. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134 (25), 10664−10669.
(239) Zhou, X.; Hu, S.; Wang, S.; Pang, Y.; Lin, Y.; Li, M. Large
amino acid mimicking selenium-doped carbon quantum dots for
multi-target therapy of Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Pharmacol. 2021,
12, No. 778613.
(240) Rouse, J. G.; Yang, J.; Barron, A. R.; Monteiro-Riviere, N. A.
Fullerene-based amino acid nanoparticle interactions with human
epidermal keratinocytes. Toxicol. in Vitro 2006, 20 (8), 1313−1320.
(241) Augustine, S.; Singh, J.; Srivastava, M.; Sharma, M.; Das, A.;
Malhotra, B. D. Recent advances in carbon based nanosystems for
cancer theranostics. Biomater. Sci. 2017, 5 (5), 901−952.
(242) Wang, X.; Zhu, L.; Gu, Z.; Dai, L. Carbon nanomaterials for
phototherapy. Nanophotonics 2022, 11 (22), 4955−4976.
(243) Kubota, R.; Tahara, M.; Shimizu, K.; Sugimoto, N.; Hirose,
A.; Nishimura, T. Time-dependent variation in the biodistribution of
C60 in rats determined by liquid chromatography−tandem mass
spectrometry. Toxicol. Lett. 2011, 206 (2), 172−177.
(244) Shastri, D.; Raj, V.; Lee, S. Revolutionizing Alzheimer’s
Treatment: Harnessing Human Serum Albumin for Targeted Drug
Delivery and Therapy Advancements. Ageing Res. Rev. 2024, 99,
No. 102379.
(245) Jiang, X.; You, L.; Zhang, Z.; Cui, X.; Zhong, H.; Sun, X.; Ji,
C.; Chi, X. Biological properties of milk-derived extracellular vesicles
and their physiological functions in infant. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2021,
9, No. 693534.
(246) Ron-Doitch, S.; Sawodny, B.; Kühbacher, A.; David, M. M. N.;
Samanta, A.; Phopase, J.; Burger-Kentischer, A.; Griffith, M.; Golomb,
G.; Rupp, S. Reduced cytotoxicity and enhanced bioactivity of
cationic antimicrobial peptides liposomes in cell cultures and 3D
epidermis model against HSV. J. Controlled Release 2016, 229, 163−
171.
(247) Song, Q.; Huang, M.; Yao, L.; Wang, X.; Gu, X.; Chen, J.;
Chen, J.; Huang, J.; Hu, Q.; Kang, T.; et al. Lipoprotein-based
nanoparticles rescue the memory loss of mice with Alzheimer’s
disease by accelerating the clearance of amyloid-beta. ACS Nano
2014, 8 (3), 2345−2359.
(248) Shivananjegowda, M. G.; Hani, U.; Osmani, R. A. M.; Alamri,
A. H.; Ghazwani, M.; Alhamhoom, Y.; Rahamathulla, M.;
Paranthaman, S.; Gowda, D. V.; Siddiqua, A. Development and
evaluation of solid lipid nanoparticles for the clearance of Aβ in
Alzheimer’s disease. Pharmaceutics 2023, 15 (1), 221.
(249) Poudel, P.; Park, S. Recent advances in the treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease using nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems.
Pharmaceutics 2022, 14 (4), 835.
(250) Chernick, D.; Zhong, R.; Li, L. The role of HDL and HDL
mimetic peptides as potential therapeutics for Alzheimer’s disease.
Biomolecules 2020, 10 (9), 1276.
(251) Jin, Y.; Chifodya, K.; Han, G.; Jiang, W.; Chen, Y.; Shi, Y.; Xu,
Q.; Xi, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhou, J.; et al. High-density lipoprotein in
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33824

Alzheimer’s disease: From potential biomarkers to therapeutics. J.
Controlled Release 2021, 338, 56−70.
(252) Poliakova, T.; Wellington, C. L. Roles of peripheral
lipoproteins and cholesteryl ester transfer protein in the vascular
contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia. Mol. Neuro-
degener. 2023, 18 (1), 86.
(253) Keerthana, D.; Kavitha, R.; Damodharan, N. Niosome as a
promising carrier targeting Alzheimer’s disease across the Blood Brain
Barrier. NeuroQuantology 2022, 20 (9), 2453.
(254) Ross, C.; Taylor, M.; Fullwood, N.; Allsop, D. Liposome
delivery systems for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J.
Nanomed. 2018, 13, 8507−8522.
(255) Agrawal, M.; Ajazuddin; Tripathi, D. K.; Saraf, S.; Saraf, S.;
Antimisiaris, S. G.; Mourtas, S.; Hammarlund-Udenaes, M.;
Alexander, A. Recent advancements in liposomes targeting strategies
to cross blood-brain barrier (BBB) for the treatment of Alzheimer’s
disease. J. Controlled Release 2017, 260, 61−77.
(256) Rinaldi, F.; Hanieh, P. N.; Chan, L. K. N.; Angeloni, L.;
Passeri, D.; Rossi, M.; Wang, J. T.-W.; Imbriano, A.; Carafa, M.;
Marianecci, C. Chitosan glutamate-coated niosomes: A proposal for
nose-to-brain delivery. Pharmaceutics 2018, 10 (2), 38.
(257) Mohammed, H. A.; Khan, R. A.; Singh, V.; Yusuf, M.; Akhtar,
N.; Sulaiman, G. M.; Albukhaty, S.; Abdellatif, A. A.; Khan, M.;
Mohammed, S. A.; et al. Solid lipid nanoparticles for targeted natural
and synthetic drugs delivery in high-incidence cancers, and other
diseases: Roles of preparation methods, lipid composition, transitional
stability, and release profiles in nanocarriers’ development. Nano-
technol. Rev. 2023, 12 (1), No. 20220517.
(258) Liu, Y.; Shen, Y. Applications of Nanoparticles in Alzheimer’s
Disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2023, 96, 459−471.
(259) Rassu, G.; Soddu, E.; Posadino, A. M.; Pintus, G.; Sarmento,
B.; Giunchedi, P.; Gavini, E. Nose-to-brain delivery of BACE1 siRNA
loaded in solid lipid nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s therapy. Colloids
Surf., B 2017, 152, 296−301.
(260) Tsakiri, M.; Zivko, C.; Demetzos, C.; Mahairaki, V. Lipid-
based nanoparticles and RNA as innovative neuro-therapeutics. Front.
Pharmacol. 2022, 13, No. 900610.
(261) Ordóñez-Gutiérrez, L.; Wandosell, F. Nanoliposomes as a
therapeutic tool for Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Synaptic Neurosci.
2020, 12, 20.
(262) Lu, Z.-G.; Shen, J.; Yang, J.; Wang, J.-W.; Zhao, R.-C.; Zhang,
T.-L.; Guo, J.; Zhang, X. Nucleic acid drug vectors for diagnosis and
treatment of brain diseases. Signal Transduction Targeted Ther. 2023, 8
(1), 39.
(263) Kihal, N.; Nguyen, P. T.; Nazemi, A.; Greschner, A. A.;
Gauthier, M. A.; Bourgault, S. DNA nanostructures prevent the
formation of and convert toxic amyloid proteospecies into
cytocompatible and biodegradable spherical complexes. Aggregate
2024, 5, No. e502.
(264) Mathieu, M.; Martin-Jaular, L.; Lavieu, G.; Théry, C.
Specificities of secretion and uptake of exosomes and other
extracellular vesicles for cell-to-cell communication. Nat. Cell Biol.
2019, 21 (1), 9−17.
(265) Tian, T.; Zhang, H.-X.; He, C.-P.; Fan, S.; Zhu, Y.-L.; Qi, C.;
Huang, N.-P.; Xiao, Z.-D.; Lu, Z.-H.; Tannous, B. A.; et al. Surface
functionalized exosomes as targeted drug delivery vehicles for cerebral
ischemia therapy. Biomaterials 2018, 150, 137−149.
(266) Kwak, K.-A.; Lee, S.-P.; Yang, J.-Y.; Park, Y.-S. Current
Perspectives regarding Stem Cell-Based Therapy for Alzheimer’s
Disease. Stem Cells Int. 2018, 2018 (1), No. 6392986.
(267) Ahmad, F.; Sachdeva, P. A consolidated review on stem cell
therapy for treatment and management of Alzheimer’s disease. Aging
Medicine 2022, 5 (3), 182−190.
(268) Liu, Y.; Weick, J. P.; Liu, H.; Krencik, R.; Zhang, X.; Ma, L.;
Zhou, G.-m.; Ayala, M.; Zhang, S.-C. Medial ganglionic eminence−
like cells derived from human embryonic stem cells correct learning
and memory deficits. Nat. Biotechnol. 2013, 31 (5), 440−447.
(269) Park, D.; Yang, Y.-H.; Bae, D. K.; Lee, S. H.; Yang, G.; Kyung,
J.; Kim, D.; Choi, E.-K.; Lee, S. W.; Kim, G. H.; et al. Improvement of
cognitive function and physical activity of aging mice by human neural
stem cells over-expressing choline acetyltransferase. Neurobiol. Aging
2013, 34 (11), 2639−2646.
(270) Li, M.; Guo, K.; Ikehara, S. Stem cell treatment for
Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2014, 15 (10), 19226−19238.
(271) Jin, K.; Zhu, Y.; Sun, Y.; Mao, X. O.; Xie, L.; Greenberg, D. A.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) stimulates neurogenesis in
vitro and in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2002, 99 (18), 11946−
11950.
(272) Cao, Z.; Kong, F.; Ding, J.; Chen, C.; He, F.; Deng, W.
Promoting Alzheimer’s disease research and therapy with stem cell
technology. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2024, 15 (1), 136.
(273) Yu, B.; Zhang, X.; Li, X. Exosomes derived from mesenchymal
stem cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2014, 15 (3), 4142−4157.
(274) Jung, M.; Kim, H.; Hwang, J. W.; Choi, Y.; Kang, M.; Kim, C.;
Hong, J.; Lee, N. K.; Moon, S.; Chang, J. W.; et al. Iron oxide
nanoparticle-incorporated mesenchymal stem cells for Alzheimer’s
disease treatment. Nano Lett. 2023, 23 (2), 476−490.
(275) Hao, Q.; Liu, Q.; Wang, X.; Wang, P.; Li, T.; Tong, W. Y.
Membrane damage effect of therapeutic ultrasound on Ehrlich ascitic
tumor cells. Cancer biotherapy & radiopharmaceuticals 2009, 24 (1),
41−48.
(276) Amini, M.; Niemi, E.; Hisdal, J.; Kalvøy, H.; Tronstad, C.;
Scholz, H.; Rosales, A.; Martinsen, Ø. G. Monitoring the quality of
frozen-thawed venous segments using bioimpedance spectroscopy.
Physiol. Meas. 2020, 41 (4), No. 044008.
(277) Chai, Z.; Hu, X.; Wei, X.; Zhan, C.; Lu, L.; Jiang, K.; Su, B.;
Ruan, H.; Ran, D.; Fang, R. H.; et al. A facile approach to
functionalizing cell membrane-coated nanoparticles with neurotoxin-
derived peptide for brain-targeted drug delivery. J. Controlled Release
2017, 264, 102−111.
(278) Klenk, C.; Heim, D.; Ugele, M.; Hayden, O. Impact of sample
preparation on holographic imaging of leukocytes. Opt. Eng. 2020, 59
(10), 102403−102403.
(279) Barua, P.; Ahn, S. B.; Mohamedali, A.; Liu, F. Improved
sensitivity in cell surface protein detection by combining chemical
labeling with mechanical lysis in a colorectal cancer cell model.
Biotechnol. Lett. 2020, 42, 683−695.
(280) Zhong, X.; Na, Y.; Yin, S.; Yan, C.; Gu, J.; Zhang, N.; Geng, F.
Cell membrane biomimetic nanoparticles with potential in treatment
of Alzheimer’s disease. Molecules 2023, 28 (5), 2336.
(281) Liao, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Blum, N. T.; Lin, J.; Huang, P. Biomimetic
hybrid membrane-based nanoplatforms: synthesis, properties and
biomedical applications. Nanoscale Horiz. 2020, 5 (9), 1293−1302.
(282) Chen, H.-Y.; Deng, J.; Wang, Y.; Wu, C.-Q.; Li, X.; Dai, H.-W.
Hybrid cell membrane-coated nanoparticles: a multifunctional
biomimetic platform for cancer diagnosis and therapy. Acta Biomater.
2020, 112, 1−13.
(283) Wilson, B.; Geetha, K. M. Neurotherapeutic applications of
nanomedicine for treating Alzheimer’s disease. J. Controlled Release
2020, 325, 25−37.
(284) Li, Y.; Chen, M. Near-infrared Two-region AIE Nanoprobe
Study for AD Diagnosis and Treatment Integration. BIO Web of
Conferences 2022, 55, 01022.
(285) Tomitaka, A.; Kaushik, A.; Kevadiya, B. D.; Mukadam, I.;
Gendelman, H. E.; Khalili, K.; Liu, G.; Nair, M. Surface-engineered
multimodal magnetic nanoparticles to manage CNS diseases. Drug
Discovery Today 2019, 24 (3), 873−882.
(286) Lee, S.; Kim, E.; Moon, C.-E.; Park, C.; Lim, J.-W.; Baek, M.;
Shin, M.-K.; Ki, J.; Cho, H.; Ji, Y. W.; et al. Amplified fluorogenic
immunoassay for early diagnosis and monitoring of Alzheimer’s
disease from tear fluid. Nat. Commun. 2023, 14 (1), 8153.
(287) Zagórska, A.; Czopek, A.; Fryc, M.; Jaromin, A.; Boyd, B. J.
Drug discovery and development targeting dementia. Pharmaceuticals
2023, 16 (2), 151.
(288) Daya, S.; Berns, K. I. Gene therapy using adeno-associated
virus vectors. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2008, 21 (4), 583−593.
(289) Merkel, S. F.; Andrews, A. M.; Lutton, E. M.; Mu, D.; Hudry,
E.; Hyman, B. T.; Maguire, C. A.; Ramirez, S. H. Trafficking of adeno-
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33825

associated virus vectors across a model of the blood−brain barrier; a
comparative study of transcytosis and transduction using primary
human brain endothelial cells. J. Neurochem. 2017, 140 (2), 216−230.
(290) Tanguy, Y.; Biferi, M. G.; Besse, A.; Astord, S.; Cohen-
Tannoudji, M.; Marais, T.; Barkats, M. Systemic AAVrh10 provides
higher transgene expression than AAV9 in the brain and the spinal
cord of neonatal mice. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 2015, 8, 36.
(291) Sun, R.; Liu, M.; Lu, J.; Chu, B.; Yang, Y.; Song, B.; Wang, H.;
He, Y. Bacteria loaded with glucose polymer and photosensitive ICG
silicon-nanoparticles for glioblastoma photothermal immunotherapy.
Nat. Commun. 2022, 13 (1), 5127.
(292) Chen, H.; Zhou, M.; Zeng, Y.; Miao, T.; Luo, H.; Tong, Y.;
Zhao, M.; Mu, R.; Gu, J.; Yang, S.; et al. Biomimetic lip-
opolysaccharide-free bacterial outer membrane-functionalized nano-
particles for brain-targeted drug delivery. Adv. Sci. 2022, 9 (16),
No. 2105854.
(293) Zhu, X.; Li, Y.; Gu, N. Application of Artificial Intelligence in
the Exploration and Optimization of Biomedical Nanomaterials. Nano
Biomedicine & Engineering 2023, 15 (3), 342−353.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11966
ACS Nano 2024, 18, 33792−33826
33826