Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
Available online 2 May 2023
1385-8947/© 2023 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Ultra-small Au/Pt NCs@GOX clusterzyme for enhancing cascade catalytic 
antibiofilm effect against F. nucleatum-induced periodontitis 
Yuxian Wang a, Chuang Li b, Bowen Shen b, Liying Zhu c, Yangheng Zhang d, Ling Jiang e,* 
a College of Food Science and Light Industry, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, China 
b College of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, China 
c School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, China 
d Department of Periodontology, Nanjing Stomatological Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210008, China 
e College of Food Science and Light Industry, State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Bimetallic clusterzyme 
Cascade reaction 
Antibiofilm 
F. nucleatum 
Periodontitis 
A B S T R A C T   
Oral disease caused by pathogenic biofilm have a significant impact on human health, such as F. nucleatum- 
induced periodontitis. Clinical treatment for oral biofilm-induced diseases using scaling and antibiotics still 
encounters challenges of inevitable bleeding, drug resistance, and poor therapeutic effect. The development of 
nanozyme has provided a new strategy for inhibiting and removing oral biofilms recently. In this work, we had 
developed a bimetallic clusterzyme by Pt atom substitution in the structure of gold nanocluster (Au/Pt NCs) to 
enhance peroxidase-like (POD-like) activity, which exhibited high catalytic activity towards H2O2 due to the 
synergistic effect of Au and Pt atoms. Considering the insufficient catalytic activity in near-neutral conditions and 
requirement of high H2O2 level, clusterzyme with self-promoting antibacterial effect and excellent biocompat­
ibility had been designed by coupling glucose oxidase (GOX) on Au/Pt NCs (Au/Pt NCs@GOX), which could fully 
utilize the nutrient-rich oral environment to convert nontoxic glucose into highly toxic ⋅OH through cascade 
catalytic reaction, thereby inhibiting and eradicating F. nucleatum-induced biofilm in vitro. Furthermore, animal 
experiments in vivo proved that Au/Pt NCs@GOX clusterzyme with good safety could successfully treat peri­
odontitis in rats, reduce inflammation, and promote the regeneration of periodontal tissue. Overall, cascade 
clusterzyme in this work provides an insight to treat oral biofilm-induced periodontitis with a safe and efficient 
way for future clinical application.   
1. Introduction 
Bacterial infection has been one of the most important health safety 
hazards to humankind. Usually, pathogenic bacteria exist in the lesions 
in the form of biofilm with the protection of extracellular polymeric 
substances (EPS) [1,2]. The warm, moist and nutrient rich oral envi­
ronment is an ideal place for bacteria to form biofilm, which make them 
easy to colonize teeth and periodontal tissues [3]. Increasing evidence 
indicated that the presence of oral pathogenic biofilms is responsible for 
the development of chronic oral infections [4]. Among them, peri­
odontitis is a common disease caused by plaque biofilm that can lead to 
tooth loss and serious impact aesthetics, masticatory function and life 
quality [5]. In addition, it has been reported that these oral diseases also 
have a potential impact on the occurrence and development of many 
systemic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, gastrointestinal and 
colorectal cancer [6]. Therefore, it is of great clinical significance to 
realize the control of oral pathogenic biofilm. 
Several traditional methods are utilized to treat biofilm-induced oral 
diseases, such as mechanical scaling or root planing, but both of them 
require motivation and dexterity [7]. Supplemental use of local antibi­
otics can provide another way for the treatment of such oral infectious 
diseases. However, it is difficult to eliminate bacterial biofilm in vivo at 
minimal concentration of antibiotics [8]. Furthermore, high dosage of 
antibiotics may increase tolerance of biofilm against antibiotics and 
promote bacterial drug-resistance [8]. These limitations have led to the 
urgency of new alternative strategies [9–12]. 
Nanozyme with antibacterial action is a new strategy developed in 
recent years, which aims to use nanomaterials with enzyme-like prop­
erties for in situ catalytic generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) to 
kill bacteria [13,14]. Gao’s group has been focusing on the antibacterial 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: jiangling@njtech.edu.cn (L. Jiang).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Chemical Engineering Journal 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cej 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2023.143292 
Received 22 March 2023; Received in revised form 23 April 2023; Accepted 29 April 2023   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
2
application of iron-based nanozymes for a long time [14–17]. He had 
reported a dextran-coated iron oxide nanozyme that displayed strong 
peroxide-like (POD) activity, target biofilms with high specificity, and 
prevent severe caries without impacting surrounding oral tissues in vivo 
[16]. Besides, he had also presented a strategy for converting natural 
organosulfur compounds into nano-iron sulfides with superior enzyme- 
like activity, which not only exhibited enhanced antibacterial activity 
toward drug-resistance bacteria, but also had the ability to topically 
disrupt pathogenic biofilms and promote wound healing [17]. Similarly, 
many other nanomaterials with enzyme-like properties have also been 
reported to be used for the treatment of bacterial infection in vitro and in 
vivo, such as C3N4 [18], graphene [19], MOF [20], MOS2 [21] etc. 
Gold nanoclusters (Au NCs), typically consisting of several to hun­
dred Au atoms, has also been reported to exhibit intrinsic enzyme-like 
activities, namely peroxidase, oxidase and catalase activities [22], 
which has emerged as an outstanding new addition in the field of 
nanozymes due to their higher catalytic activity, more suitable size (<2 
nm) for in vivo application, and better biocompatibility. Zhang’s group 
had designed a structurally well-defined Au25 nanocluster with intrinsic 
high catalytic activity, named “clusterzyme” [23]. By single-atom sub­
stitutions with modulated bond lengths, the clusterzyme demonstrated 
preferential enzyme-mimicking catalytic activities, with Au25, Au24Cu1 
and Au24Cd1 
displaying compelling selectivity in glutathione 
peroxidase-like, catalase-like and superoxide dismutase-like activities, 
respectively [23]. Nevertheless, the application of clusterzyme at pre­
sent mainly focused on the biological analysis [24], diagnosis of bio­
markers [25], tumor treatment [26], etc. It is necessary to investigate 
the antibacterial application of clusterzyme with POD-like activity. 
In our previous work, a glutathione (GSH) protected ultra-small 
nanoclusters (Au NCs) was synthesized [27]. However, limited POD- 
like activity hindered its application in antibacterial therapy. Based on 
it, we constructed bimetallic nanoclusters with enhanced POD-like ac­
tivity by doping Au NCs with platinum (Pt) atoms to modulate the cat­
alytic activity sites of clusterzyme (Au/Pt NCs). Besides, cascade 
catalytic nanozyme was designed by chemical coupling of glucose oxi­
dase (GOX) on Au/Pt NCs (Au/Pt NCs@GOX), which could convert non- 
toxic glucose into gluconic acid and H2O2 to provide suitable environ­
ment and substrate in the subsequent peroxidase reaction. The enzy­
matic parameters of cascade catalytic reaction were mainly investigated 
to evaluate the catalytic performance of Au/Pt NCs@GOX. Furthermore, 
this cascade catalytic system was introduced to kill planktonic 
F. nucleatum and destroy F. nucleatum-induced biofilm. Finally, peri­
odontitis model was used to evaluate the therapeutic effect of Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX catalytic system against F. nucleatum-induced periodontitis. 
The excellent antibacterial and antibiofilm effect as well as biocom­
patibility endow the ultra-small clusterzyme a good application prospect 
in the treatment of oral diseases. 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Materials and characterization 
All chemical and biological reagents were obtained from commercial 
suppliers and used without any purification. Further information on the 
materials and instruments for characterization could be found in the 
Supplementary Materials. 
2.2. Synthesis of Au/Pt NCs@GOX clusterzyme 
The synthesis of Au NCs followed our previous work using gluta­
thione as both protecting ligand and reducing agent [27]. In detail, 
aqueous solution of HAuCl4 (10 mM, 1 mL) and GSH (15 mM, 1 mL) 
were mixed with ultrapure water (3 mL) at room temperature for 30 
min. Then the temperature of reaction mixture was raised to 70 ◦C at a 
shaking speed of 500 r/min for 24 h. The final yellow solution was added 
with acetonitrile (15 mL), and precipitates were obtained by 
centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 5 min. The pure Au NCs was obtained 
after washing with acetonitrile aqueous solution (3:1 v/v) for 3 times. 
The synthesis of Pt atom doped alloy Au NCs (Au/Pt NCs) were also 
based on the same method. The only difference was that 200 μL of 
H2PtCl6 (10 mM) solution was added into 800 μL of HAuCl4 solution at a 
molar ratio of 1:4. 
The cascade clusterzyme of Au/Pt NCs functionalized with GOX was 
synthesized according to the protocol in literature with some modifi­
cation [28]. 100 μL of GOX solution (0.5 mg/mL) was added into 5 mL of 
MES buffer (20 mM) containing 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) 
carbodiimide 
hydrochloride 
(EDC, 
1.93 
mM) 
and 
N-hydrox­
ysuccinimide (NHS, 27.8 mM). After stirring for 15 min at 60 ◦C, 5 mL of 
Au/Pt NCs dispersion (1 mg/mL) was added. The final mixture was 
stirred at 60 ◦C for 6 h. The resulting Au/Pt NCs@GOX were purified by 
dialysis with a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa for 24 h, and finally 
dispersed in NaAc-HAc buffer (pH 4.5, 0.1 M). 
2.3. Peroxidase (POD)-like activity of Au/Pt NCs clusterzyme and 
kinetics assay 
The POD-like activity and kinetics assay were determined by the 
method as previously described [29]. The chromogenic reaction of 
3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) in the presence of H2O2 was used 
to evaluate the POD-like activity of Au/Pt NCs. In a typical experiment, 
TMB solution (2 μL, 80 mM), H2O2 (2 μL, 10 M), and Au/Pt NCs (20 μL, 
1 mg/mL) were added into NaAc-HAc buffer solution (176 μL, pH 4.5, 
0.1 M) in turn. The absorbance of solutions at 652 nm was measured by a 
microplate reader (SpectraMax M3, Molecular Devices, USA) at a certain 
reaction time immediately. The steady-state kinetics assay was per­
formed at the same way, except changing the concentration of TMB and 
H2O2. Finally, the Michaelis-Menten constant (Km) was calculated ac­
cording to the equation: V0 = Vmax⋅[S]/(Km + [S]), where V0 represents 
the initial velocity (μM⋅s−1), Vmax represents the maximal reaction ve­
locity (μM⋅s−1), and [S] is the concentration of substrate (mM) [30]. 
2.4. Cascade catalytic reaction of Au/Pt NCs@GOX clusterzyme 
According to the fact that GOX can catalyze glucose to produce 
gluconic acid and H2O2, the consumption of glucose, the decrease of pH 
and the generation of H2O2 in the reaction systems were monitored to 
evaluate the cascade catalytic activity. For the consumption of glucose, 
glucose solution (20 μL, 50 mg/mL) and Au/Pt NCs@GOX (50 μL, 50 μg/ 
mL) were added into PBS (930 μL, pH 7.0, 10 mM). At different time 
internal, 50 μL of above solution was collected and mixed with 100 μL of 
DNS (1%), which was then boiled at 100 ◦C for 5 min and quickly cooled 
with ice water. The absorbance of solutions at 540 nm was measured by 
a microplate reader. For pH measurement, glucose solution (50 μL, 50 
mg/mL) and Au/Pt NCs@GOX (50 μL, 1 mg/mL) were added into PBS 
(900 μL, pH 7.0, 10 mM). And the changes of pH with time were 
recorded using pH meter (PHS-25). The H2O2 generation was measured 
by absorbance of chromogenic TMB at 652 nm according to the protocol 
of Hydrogen Peroxide Assay Kit (Solarbio Life Sciences Co., Ltd., Beijing, 
China). 
The kinetic of cascade catalytic reaction was analyzed by changing 
the concentration of glucose. In brief, 2 μL of TMB (80 mM) and 50 μL of 
Au/Pt NCs@GOX (1 mg/mL) were added into different volumes (0 ~ 20 
μL) of glucose solution (10 mg/mL) with a final volume of 200 μL. NaAc- 
HAc buffer solution (pH 4.3, 0.1 M) was prepared as the reaction buffer. 
The absorbance variation at 652 nm of the reaction buffer were recorded 
with a microplate reader. 
2.5. Antibacterial and antibiofilm tests of Au/Pt NCs and Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX clusterzyme against F. nucleatum 
F. nucleatum culture. F. nucleatum was selected as bacterial model for 
periodontal disease to evaluate the antibacterial and antibiofilm 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
3
properties of Au/Pt NCs and Au/Pt NCs@GOX. The liquid and solid 
culture medium of F. nucleatum were brain heart infusion (BHI) and 
Columbia blood agar medium, respectively, supplemented with yeast 
extract (5 g/L), L-cysteine (0.5 g/L), vitamin K1 (1 mg/L), and hemin (5 
mg/L). F. nucleatum was firstly streaking into Columbia blood agar 
plates and incubated at 37 ◦C under an anaerobic condition (80 % N2, 
10% CO2, and 10% H2). After two days of incubation, one colony was 
transferred to fresh liquid culture medium using a vaccination loop, and 
then cultured under the same anaerobic condition. The morphology was 
observed by microscope to identify F. nucleatum. Finally, the bacteria 
were transferred to a new liquid culture medium and cultured for 24 h. 
The number of bacterial colonies were determined by plate counting 
method before each antibacterial experiment. 
Antibacterial effect against planktonic F. nucleatum. The antibacterial 
activity of clusterzyme against planktonic F. nucleatum in the presence of 
glucose at different concentrations were studied by plate counting 
method. Briefly, 100 μL of diluted F. nucleatum (2 × 108 CFU/mL) were 
mixed with 800 μL of NaAc-HAc buffer solution (pH 4.5, 0.1 M) con­
taining 50 μL of Au/Pt NCs@GOX (1 mg/mL). Subsequently, different 
amounts of glucose (0, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 5 mM) were added to induce the 
catalytic reaction under anaerobic condition at 37 ◦C. After incubated 
for 30 min, 100 μL of diluted suspension was spread evenly on Columbia 
blood agar to determine CFUs. At the same time, the treatment of GOX 
and Au/Pt NCs were used as control group. For live/dead bacterial 
staining analysis, SYTO 9 and propidium iodide (PI) fluorescence im­
aging assay was utilized according to the protocol as previously 
described [27]. The morphology of bacteria was observed by scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM, S4800, Hitachi, Japan) and transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM, HT7800, Hitachi, Japan). 
Inhibition of F. nucleatum-induced biofilm. Aseptic glass coverslips with 
a diameter of 14 mm were firstly placed into 24-well plate. Then, 100 μL 
of F. nucleatum suspensions (2 × 108 CFU/mL) and 800 μL of BHI me­
dium containing vitamin K1 (1 mg/L), hemin (5 mg/L), and glucose (1% 
w/v) were added into each well. Afterwards, 100 μL of Au/Pt NCs@GOX 
(1 mg/mL) was mixed with above solutions and incubated at 37 ◦C for 
72 h to allow further bacterial biofilm growth under an anaerobic con­
dition. The treatment of GOX (10 μg/L) and Au/Pt NCs (1 mg/mL) with 
and without glucose were used as control group. 
Eradication of mature biofilm. 100 μL of F. nucleatum suspensions (2 ×
108 CFU/mL) were added into 24-well plate containing aseptic glass 
coverslips. Next, 900 μL of BHI medium with same nutrients as above 
were added into wells, and incubated at 37 ◦C for 72 h under an 
anaerobic condition. Every 24 h, the medium were discarded, and the 
residual biofilms were gently washed with PBS. After three times 
washing, fresh medium was supplied to form mature biofilm. To eradi­
cate biofilm, 100 μL of Au/Pt NCs@GOX (1 mg/mL), 100 μL of glucose 
(10% w/v), and 800 μL of NaAc-HAc (pH 4.5, 0.1 M) were mixed, and 
continued to cultivate at 37 ◦C for 24 h. As before, treatment of GOX (10 
μg/L) and Au/Pt NCs (1 mg/mL) were used as control group. 
The evaluation of antibiofilm effect. The ability of Au/Pt NCs@GOX 
against biofilms were evaluated by crystal violet staining. After the 
biofilms obtained in above experiments, they were washed by PBS to 
remove redundant medium and planktonic F. nucleatum. 500 μL of 
crystal violet dye solution (0.1%) was added to stain for 10 min. After 
three times washing with PBS, the photographs of residual biofilms were 
taken using digital camera. To quantitatively analysis, the biofilms were 
exposed to 500 μL of 95% ethanol to ensure complete dissolution of 
crystal violet. The absorbance of each solution at 570 nm was recorded 
by a microplate reader to calculate inhibition and eradication rate of 
biofilms. We further counted the colonies of viable bacteria and weighed 
the dry weight of the formed biofilms. The biofilms were repeatedly 
blown with 1 mL of sterile PBS, peeled from glass coverslips by ultra­
sonic oscillation. The obtained suspensions were diluted for plate 
counting, and simultaneously freeze-dried and weighted. For SEM 
observation, the coverslips washed by PBS were gradient dehydrated by 
30, 50, 70, 80, 90, and 100% ethanol after fixing with 2.5% (w/v) 
glutaraldehyde solution. Then, the coverslips were sputter-coated with 
gold and observed by SEM. 
2.6. Antibiofilm mechanism of Au/Pt NCs@GOX clusterzyme 
Visualization of biofilms. The visualization of biofilm disruption was 
performed by confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM, A1, Nikon, 
Japan). The treated biofilms on glass coverslips were washed with PBS 
for three times, and then stained with 200 μL of SYTO 9/PI (10 μM) 
solution for 30 min in the dark at 37 ◦C. After washing the free dyes, the 
obtained coverslips were examined, and 3D images were captured by 
CLSM. 
Bacterial membrane permeability assay. Intracellular β-D-galactosidase 
could catalyze o-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside (ONPG) to form o- 
nitrophenol [31], which could be conducted to characterize the mem­
brane permeability of F. nucleatum in biofilms. Briefly, ONPG with a 
concentration of 12.5 mM in PBS (10 mM, pH 7.4) and biofilm sus­
pensions with OD600 of 0.1 were freshly prepared, firstly. Then, 100 μL 
of biofilm suspensions, 15 μL of ONPG, and 35 μL of PBS were mixed in a 
96-well plate for incubation for 30 min. After that, the absorbance was 
measured at 420 nm by a microplate reader. 
Cascade catalytic reaction within biofilms. To verify the cascade cata­
lytic reaction of Au/Pt NCs@GOX within biofilms, the chromogenic 
reaction of TMB was used to evaluate the catalytic activity of clus­
terzymes. The obtained mature biofilms were washed with NaAc-HAc 
buffer (0.1 M, pH 4.5), and then 50 μL of clusterzymes (1 mg/mL) or 
GOX (10 μg/mL) and 950 μL of NaAc-HAc buffer were mixed with 
biofilms. After incubation for 30 min at 37 ◦C, 10 μL of TMB was added 
to induce chromogenic reaction. The absorbance was measured at 652 
nm by a microplate reader, and photos were acquired by digital camera. 
⋅OH detection. The generation of ⋅OH by clusterzyme catalytic system 
was measured by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR, A300, Bruker, 
German), which used 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide (DMPO) as 
radical scavenger [32]. Glucose solution (100 μL, 50 mM), clusterzymes 
(100 μL, 1 mg/mL), and NaAc-HAc (100 μL, 0.1 M, pH 4.5) were reacted 
at 37 ◦C for 30 min. Then, 100 μL of freshly prepared DMPO solution (50 
mM) were added. Above solution was transferred to glass capillary tubes 
for the detection of ⋅OH signals via EPR spectroscopy. 
Penetration of clusterzyme into biofilms. Transwell experiment was 
used to evaluate the penetration behavior of clusterzyme into 
F. nucleatum-induced biofilm [33]. BHI medium was added into the 
upper chamber of Transwell system with 0.4 μm polycarbonate mem­
brane. Then, 100 μL of F. nucleatum was cultured in the upper chamber 
to allow the biofilm formation on the surface of polycarbonate mem­
brane. Two days later, the culture medium and planktonic F. nucleatum 
were removed and biofilms were washed with PBS gently. After that, 
100 μL of Au/Pt NCs@GOX (1 mg/mL) was added into upper chamber, 
and F. nucleatum was placed in the lower chamber. After incubation for 
12 h, F. nucleatum in the lower chamber was diluted and spread on blood 
agar plates to observe the survival status. 
2.7. Treatment of periodontitis in vivo 
All animal experiments were carried out according to guidelines for 
the care and use of laboratory animals. 24 Wistar rats (100 ~ 120 g) 
were housed in specific pathogen-free conditions in a 12 h dark/light 
cycle. The rats in the experimental groups were ligatured with 4–0 silk 
suture around the maxillary bilateral second molars, followed by 
injecting F. nucleatum (~109 CFU/mL) suspensions (dispersed in 5% of 
CMC) on silk suture on the third day (Fig. S1). Meanwhile, they were fed 
with high-sugar water (100 g/L glucose) every day to accelerate the 
formation of periodontitis. The ligature was checked every day to avoid 
falling of them from molars. After one week infection, periodontitis was 
determined by the observation and PCR results. For the treatment of 
periodontitis, the infected rats were randomly divided into following 
groups: PBS-treated group (1), GOX-treated group (2), Au/Pt NCs- 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
4
treated group (3), and Au/Pt NCs@GOX-treated group (4). The maxil­
lary bilateral second molars of the rats in above groups were treated 
with different agents every other day, which were dispersed in 5% of 
CMC to form injectable ointment. After two weeks treatment, the rats 
were euthanasia, and the maxilla, teeth, and periodontium were 
collected to evaluate the alveolar bone loss by 3D Micro-CT (SkyScan 
1176, Bruker, German), and observe the dental plaque by basic fuchsin 
staining (2%). The hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemical 
(IHC) staining were performed to analyze the recovery of inflammation. 
The safety of clusterzyme in vivo was evaluated by the changes of body 
weight, blood routine index tests and serum biochemistry tests. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Structure characterization of Au/Pt NCs@GOX 
In our previous work, a stable fluorescent gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) 
using glutathione as both protecting and reducing agent was synthesized 
via one-pot hydrothermal method [27]. Based on it, bimetallic nano­
clusters (Au/Pt NCs) was further prepared by exquisite single-atom 
substitution of Pt atoms. The doping of Pt atoms increased the cata­
lytic active sites of metal nanoclusters, thus enhancing their peroxidase- 
like (POD) activity [23]. In order to design clusterzyme with cascade 
catalytic activity, glucose oxidase (GOX) was chemically modified on 
the surface of Au/Pt NCs, resulting in bimetallic nanocluster enzymes 
(Au/Pt NCs@GOX) with both POD and GOX activity (Fig. 1A). During 
the preparation, the solution of Au NCs, Au/Pt NCs and Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX exhibited light yellow and transparent, and under UV light 
Fig. 1. The design and characterization of clusterzymes. (A) Schematic illustration for the preparation of Au/Pt NCs@GOX with POD and GOX activity. (B-E) The 
characterization of (B) emission and UV–Vis absorption spectra, (C) Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra, (D) size distribution, (E) zeta potential of clusterzymes; 
(F) high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) of Au NCs (a), Au/Pt NCs (b), Au/Pt NCs@GOX (c), and scanning transmission electron microscope 
(STEM) of Au/Pt NCs@GOX (d); (e-f) correspond to the element mapping of (e) Au, (f) Pt, (g) S, and (h) P. 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
5
irradiation, they showed orange-yellow fluorescence (inset in Fig. 1B). 
From the fluorescence spectra (Fig. 1B), three types of clusterzymes had 
maximum fluorescence emission peaks at 610 nm under the excitation of 
400 nm. However, Au NCs without any doping and modification 
exhibited a stronger fluorescence intensity. The UV–Vis absorption 
spectrum of three clusterzymes showed a small shoulder peak around 
400 nm, and the absorbance decreased as the wavelength increase 
(Fig. 1B). These results indicated that the doping of Pt atoms and 
modification of GOX did not change the structure of ultra-small Au NCs, 
but had a significant impact on their fluorescence properties due to the 
distortions in the crystal structure and the formation of defects [34]. In 
addition, the successful modification of GOX on the surface of the 
clusterzymes could be verified by protein gel electrophoresis, with a 
molecular weight between 100 and 150 kDa (Fig. S2A). 
The chemical structure of Au/Pt NCs@GOX were determined by 
FTIR, shown in Fig. 1C. It could be observed that the stretching vibration 
of -SH at 2528 cm−1 in GSH was disappeared after the formation of 
nanocluster, indicating the bonding of Au-S and Pt-S [35]. The typical 
peak at 1710 cm−1 in Au NCs and Au/Pt NCs was assigned to the 
stretching vibration of –COOH, while it was disappeared in Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX, which is ascribe to the chemical crosslinking of amino group 
(GOX) and carboxyl group (Au NCs) to form an amide bond [36]. Next, 
thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) further showed the successful 
modification of GOX on the surface of Au/Pt NCs, with a loading ratio of 
~ 6% (Fig. S2B). The average particle size of Au NCs, Au/Pt NCs and Au/ 
Pt NCs@GOX were 2.01, 2.70 and 3.12 nm, respectively (Fig. 1D), 
indicating that the doping of Pt atoms and the modification of GOX 
could slightly increase the particles of Au NCs, but would not change 
their ultra-small size structure. The results of zeta potential showed that 
the modification of GOX could decrease the potential of nanocluster 
enzyme (Fig. 1E), causing the negatively charged Au/Pt NCs to shift 
towards positive charge, which would benefit the electrostatic interac­
tion between the clusterzyme and bacteria. Besides, three synthesized 
clusterzymes were observed under HRTEM, and presented spherical 
shapes with good dispersibility (Fig. 1F). The inner core sizes of them 
were found to be 1.69 nm (Au NCs), 1.98 (Au/Pt NCs), and 2.32 nm (Au/ 
Pt NCs/GOX). The d spacing of lattice fringes were measured to be 0.225 
and 0.232 nm, corresponding to the Pt (111) and Au (111) lattice 
spacing of the face centered cubic, respectively [37]. The STEM also 
clearly revealed the ultra-small size of Au/Pt NCs@GOX (Fig. 1F d). The 
corresponding mapping element distribution maps showed that Au, Pt, S 
and P elements were uniformly distributed on the surface of nanocluster 
enzyme (Fig. 1F e-f), thus confirming the successful modification of GOX 
on Au/Pt NCs. 
3.2. The enzyme-like activity of clusterzymes 
The catalytic activity of nanozyme was evaluated by oxidizing TMB 
with ⋅OH to produce a blue oxidized TMB (oxTMB), with a characteristic 
absorption peak at 652 nm (Fig. 2A). Without adding nanozyme, there 
was no peak for TMB between 350 and 750 nm, indicating that H2O2 did 
not have an oxidizing effect on TMB (Fig. 2B). However, after the 
addition of Au NCs and Au/Pt NCs, the peaks of oxTMB appeared at 652 
nm. Meanwhile, Au/Pt NCs exhibited three times catalytic activity that 
of Au NCs, indicating that Pt atoms doping could significantly enhance 
the POD-like activity of Au NCs. The optimal pH for catalytic system was 
at pH 3–5 (Fig. 2C), which was consistent with most reported nano­
zymes [21,38,39]. In addition, as the concentration of Au/Pt NCs 
gradually increased, the absorbance of reaction system at 652 nm also 
steadily increased over time (Fig. 2D), indicating its stable catalytic 
efficiency. 
To avoid direct use of H2O2, GOX was chemical modified on Au/Pt 
NCs to exert its cascade catalytic reaction through a two-step process 
(Fig. 2E). Firstly, in the presence of dissolved oxygen, glucose could be 
decomposed into gluconic acid and H2O2 by GOX. The generated glu­
conic acid could lower the pH of system to 3–4. Then, Au/Pt NCs@GOX 
exhibited the aforementioned POD-like activity in the acidic environ­
ment, immediately catalyzing H2O2 to produce ⋅OH and H2O in situ, 
which further oxidized TMB to produce chromogenic reaction. To vali­
date this cascade reaction, the consumption of substrate and formation 
of products were analyzed. As shown in Fig. 2F, the concentration of 
glucose gradually decreased as the catalytic reaction proceeded. 
Comparing with free GOX, more glucose was consumed by Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX, indicating that Au/Pt NCs@GOX had a higher catalytic ef­
ficiency. The pH of free GOX catalytic system remained at 4.5, while it 
maintained at 3.0 for Au/Pt NCs@GOX system, illustrating the genera­
tion of gluconic acid (Fig. 2G). Additionally, we detected the generation 
of H2O2 in the catalytic reaction. In Fig. 2H, the concentration of H2O2 in 
Au/Pt NCs@GOX catalytic system almost remained unchanged after 5 h 
of reaction, while it continuously increased for free GOX catalytic sys­
tem, and had been consistently lower than that in Au/Pt NCs@GOX 
catalytic system. These results reflected that the catalytic efficiency of 
nanocluster enzyme was higher than that of free GOX. 
Furthermore, the chromogenic reaction of TMB was used to 
Fig. 2. The enzyme-like activity of clusterzymes. (A) Schematic illustration of the POD-like catalytic process of Au/Pt NCs. (B) UV–Vis absorption spectra of the 
oxTMB. (C) The influence of pH and (D) different Au/Pt NCs concentrations on the POD-like catalytic process. (E) Schematic illustration of the cascade reaction of 
Au/Pt NCs@GOX. (F) Glucose consumption, (G) pH changes and (H) the formation of H2O2 during cascade catalytic reaction. 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
6
demonstrate that the modification of GOX did not affect the POD-like 
activity of clusterzyme. From Fig. S3A, it could be seen that the color 
of solution changed to blue accompanied by an absorption peak at 652 
nm only after the addition of glucose and Au/Pt NCs@GOX, indicating 
that Au/Pt NCs@GOX presented dual catalytic activity of GOX and POD. 
Meantime, the steady-state enzyme kinetic assay was conducted to 
evaluate the catalytic performance of clusterzyme (Fig. S3B). Obviously, 
the catalytic activity of Au/Pt NCs@GOX increased when the concen­
tration of glucose increased. The calculated initial reaction velocities 
(V0) and the concentration of glucose followed the typical Michaelis- 
Menten equation (Fig. S3C). The Michaelis-Menten constant (Km) and 
maximum velocity (Vmax) for Au/Pt NCs@GOX toward glucose were 
0.335 mM and 0.264 μM⋅S-1, respectively, indicating a relative high 
affinity to glucose. 
3.3. In vitro antibacterial effect of Au/Pt NCs@GOX against planktonic 
F. nucleatum 
Encouraged by the enhanced catalytic activity of Au/Pt NCs@GOX in 
the presence of glucose, the antibacterial effect against F. nucleatum was 
studied by using plate counting method. As shown in Fig. 3A, a large 
number of viable colonies grew well on the blood agar plate in control 
and Au/Pt NCs-treated group, indicating that no bactericidal substances 
were produced. However, both the treatment of free GOX and Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX exhibited enhanced antibacterial effect with the increase of 
glucose concentrations. When the concentration of glucose reached to 5 
mM, there were still visible bacteria on the plate in GOX-treat group, and 
the overall survival rate of F. nucleatum was about 20% (Fig. S4), indi­
cating that the concentration of H2O2 produced by the oxidation of 
glucose was not enough to effectively kill all bacteria. However, the 
cascade catalytic reaction of Au/Pt NCs@GOX given the highest anti­
bacterial activity. Almost 90% of F. nucleatum was killed after treated 
with 0.5 mM of glucose. No bacteria were grown on the plate at glucose 
concentration of 5 mM, indicating that the generation of ⋅OH via the 
cascade reaction played an important role in killing F. nucleatum. 
To visualize the antibacterial performance, the live/dead cell fluo­
rescence staining assay was employed to observe the treated bacterial 
cells by staining with SYTO 9 and propidium iodide (PI), in which 
SYTO9 with green fluorescence was to label all bacteria and PI with red 
fluorescence was to label only dead cells [27]. The fluorescence mi­
croscope images were shown in Fig. 3B. The rod-shaped F. nucleatum 
observed in bright-field exhibited the same green fluorescence after 
staining with SYTO 9, while the bacteria stained with PI showed 
different red fluorescence. Only a small amount of red fluorescence was 
observed in control and Au/Pt NCs-treated group, indicating the poor 
antibacterial effect. Almost all bacteria treated with Au/Pt NCs@GOX 
were stained with red fluorescence by PI, indicating that most bacteria 
were killed. The bacteria treated with GOX only showed weak red 
Fig. 3. In vitro antibacterial effect of clusterzymes against planktonic F. nucleatum. (A) Plate counting results and (B) SYTO 9/PI staining images of F. nucleatum 
treated with PBS, GOX, Au/Pt NCs and Au/Pt NCs@GOX. (D) SEM and TEM images of F. nucleatum treated without or with Au/Pt NCs@GOX. 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
7
fluorescence, indicating the limited antibacterial effect. These results are 
consistent with the plate counting, further demonstrating the excellent 
antibacterial effect of Au/Pt NCs@GOX via cascade catalytic reaction. 
SEM and TEM were further utilized to observe the morphological 
changes of F. nucleatum before and after treatment with Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX (Fig. 3C). The SEM results showed that untreated bacteria 
(control group) displayed intact cell membranes with bright and smooth 
surface, while the bacteria treated with Au/Pt NCs@GOX exhibited 
collapsed and fractured morphology, with a dark and rough surface. 
TEM provided clear evidence to reflect the damages of cell membrane. 
The edge of cell membrane of bacteria in control group was clearly 
visible, and the intact cell wall could be observed. However, F. nucleatum 
treated with Au/Pt NCs@GOX exhibited wrinkled and distorted cell 
membranes, and blurry cell walls. In addition, the cytoplasm of bacteria 
in control group was also intact, clear and visible, while it was seriously 
overflowed and ruptured after treated with Au/Pt NCs@GOX. It can be 
concluded that the antibacterial effect of Au/Pt NCs@GOX catalytic 
system on F. nucleatum is mainly caused by the destruction of bacterial 
cell membrane. 
3.4. In vitro inhibition effect of Au/Pt NCs@GOX against F. nucleatum 
biofilm 
Periodontosis is an oral disease caused by long-term consumption of 
high-sugar diets, which is often associated with biofilms formed by oral 
pathogens [40]. F. nucleatum is a typical pathogenic bacterium in oral 
environment, which can induce the development of periodontitis [41]. 
Therefore, the ability of Au/Pt NCs@GOX to inhibit the formation of 
F. nucleatum-induced biofilm was evaluated. In the experiment, 
F. nucleatum was incubated with clusterzymes in the medium with 
glucose (+) and without glucose (-), and then the formed biofilms were 
stained by crystal violet staining, which can bind to negatively charged 
molecules and polysaccharides in extracellular polymeric substances 
(EPS) to show dark purple [42]. The experiments were divided into four 
groups: control group (1), GOX-treated group (2), Au/Pt NCs-treated 
group (3), and Au/Pt NCs@GOX-treated group (4). As shown in 
Fig. 4A and 4B, group 4 exhibited apparent inhibition effect on biofilms 
in the presence of glucose and Au/Pt NCs@GOX, and the inhibition rate 
was as high as 82%. However, in other groups, the dark purple biofilms 
adhered completely to the surface of plate with a very low inhibition 
rate (<20%). The dry weight of biofilm for group (4) with glucose was 
only about 0.5 mg, which was far lower than that of control group (~1.5 
mg) (Fig. 4C). Subsequently, we tested the survival of F. nucleatum 
within the biofilm (Fig. 4D). The results of plate counting showed that 
only dozen single colonies were observed on the plate for group 4 with 
glucose, and the survival rate was 1.8% compared with control (Fig. S5). 
These results indicated that Au/Pt NCs@GOX could not only effectively 
inhibit the formation of biofilm through cascade catalytic reaction, but 
also greatly reduce the bacterial activity in biofilm by its antibacterial 
effect. 
Fig. 4. Inhibition of biofilm formation after treated with (1) PBS, (2) GOX, (3) Au/Pt NCs and (4) Au/Pt NCs@GOX. (A) Crystal violet staining, (B) inhibition rate of 
biofilm, (C) dry weight of biofilm and (D) bacterial plate counting. 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
8
3.5. In vitro eradication effect of Au/Pt NCs@GOX against F. nucleatum 
mature biofilm 
Apart from the ability to effectively inhibit the formation of biofilm, 
Au/Pt NCs@GOX was also able to efficiently eradicate mature biofilm. 
Same as the above experiments, it was divided into four groups: control 
group (1), GOX-treated group (2), Au/Pt NCs-treated group (3), and Au/ 
Pt NCs@GOX-treated group (4). The biofilms in group (1), (2) and (3) 
were dark purple after being stained by crystal violet, and firmly 
adhered to the surface of plate (Fig. 5A). However, only group (4) had an 
excellent ablation effect on mature biofilm with light purple. The 
quantitative analysis results showed that Au/Pt NCs@GOX could 
effectively eradicate about 60% of F. nucleatum mature biofilm (Fig. 5B). 
In addition, SEM was also used to observe the surface of biofilm. As 
shown in Fig. 5C, the spindle-shaped F. nucleatum in biofilms were 
gathered together for four groups (2000 × ), and embedded in the EPS 
(4000 × ). However, most of EPS on the surface of biofilm was destroyed 
for group (4), and it was obvious that the bacterial community structure 
became thin and scattered on the bottom of biofilm. To further visualize 
the anti-biofilm effect, the 3D CLSM was employed to investigate the 
average thickness of biofilm. Before observation, all bacterial cells were 
stained with SYTO 9 and PI, as done previously. As revealed in Fig. 5D, 
Fig. 5. Eradication of mature biofilm after treated with (1) PBS, (2) GOX, (3) Au/Pt NCs and (4) Au/Pt NCs@GOX. (A) Crystal violet staining of biofilm before (up) 
and after (down) dissolving in 95% ethanol, (B) eradication rate of biofilm, (C) SEM images and (D) live/dead staining by SYTO 9 and PI. 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
9
biofilms in group (1), (2) and (3) exhibited strong green fluorescence 
and weak red fluorescence. And the average thickness of them were 
around 20 μm, indicating that large amount of living bacteria existed in 
the biofilm. In group (4), a complete and thick biofilm was not observed, 
and the green fluorescence was significantly weaker than that of other 
groups, while the red fluorescence was enhanced. The remarkable 
reduction in thickness of biofilm was seen, demonstrating that the 
antibacterial system of Au/Pt NCs@GOX could disrupt dense structure 
of biofilm, resulting in a significant decrease in bacterial count and EPS, 
and thereby achieving antibiofilm effect. 
3.6. Antibiofilm mechanism of Au/Pt NCs@GOX 
It could be seen from above results that Au/Pt NCs@GOX exhibited 
excellent disruption effects against both planktonic F. nucleatum and 
F. nucleatum-induced biofilm, which was ascribe to the generation of 
⋅OH as well as acid pH by the catalytic effect of Au/Pt NCs@GOX in the 
presence of glucose. SEM, TEM and live/dead cell fluorescence staining 
proved that the antibacterial effect of clusterzyme was achieved by 
destroying the integrity of bacterial cell membranes. Meanwhile, an 
ONPG hydrolysis assay was then performed to characterize the degree of 
bacterial membrane damage, which could be catalyzed by intracellular 
β-D-galactosidase to form o-nitrophenol with a typical absorption at 420 
nm [31]. As shown in Fig. 6A, the absorbance did not change any more 
for control group (1), GOX-treated group (2), and Au/Pt NCs-treated 
group (3), but it increased 1.5 times for Au/Pt NCs@GOX-treated 
group (4), implying that the membrane permeability of bacteria could 
be induced by ⋅OH. In order to directly verify the production of ⋅OH, 
TMB was added on the surface of biofilm after treatment (Fig. 6B). Only 
light blue color was observed for group (2). However, group (4) 
exhibited relatively deep blue, with a 4-fold increase in absorption at 
652 nm. EPR spectroscopy was further used to identify the existence of 
⋅OH, which can react with DMPO. The results showed that the catalytic 
system of Au/Pt NCs@GOX produced obvious splitting peaks with the 
characteristic 1:2:2:1 signal (Fig. 6C), which can be ascribed to the 
presence of ⋅OH [32]. 
It has been reported that permeation and diffusion are the dominant 
factors affecting the transport of nanomaterial in biofilms [43]. 
Compared with bulk nanomaterials, metal nanoclusters with ultra-small 
structure could enhance the penetration and retention of nanoclusters 
inside the biofilms, thus improving its antibiofilm effect [33]. Therefore, 
the ability of Au/Pt NCs@GOX to get through the physical barrier of 
biofilm was evaluated. F. nucleatum biofilms were cultured in Transwell 
inserts, which was divided into upper and lower chamber by poly­
carbonate membrane (Fig. 6D). Firstly, F. nucleatum could form mature 
biofilm on polycarbonate membrane in upper chamber. After the addi­
tion of Au/Pt NCs@GOX, the clusterzyme gradually permeated the 
biofilm into lower chamber, leading to the antibacterial effect in the 
presence of glucose. The results of plate counting showed that there 
were a large number of viable bacteria in lower chamber without any 
treatment, while only extremely few viable bacteria were detected after 
treatment of Au/Pt NCs@GOX. It could be concluded that nanoclusters 
Fig. 6. Antibiofilm mechanism of clusterzyme. (A) Membrane permeability and (B) TMB chromogenic reaction of F. nucleatum-induced biofilm after treated with (1) 
PBS, (2) GOX, (3) Au/Pt NCs and (4) Au/Pt NCs@GOX. (C) The detection of ⋅OH by EPR and (D) Transwell assay. 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
10
with ultra-small size firstly penetrated into biofilm rapidly, then pro­
duced ⋅OH to disrupt EPS and even make it detach under cascade cat­
alytic reaction, and finally destroy the structure of cell membrane. 
3.7. Au/Pt NCs@GOX for the treatment of biofilm-induced periodontitis 
in vivo 
To estimate the therapeutic potential of Au/Pt NCs@GOX in local 
infection treatment, rat periodontitis was established via a ligature silk 
suture placement together with local inoculation of F. nucleatum. As 
shown in Figs. S1 and 7A, a ligature silk was wrapped around the 
maxillary second molar of rats to induce inflammation, followed by 
injecting with high concentration of F. nucleatum and feeding a sugar- 
rich diet. The periodontitis was determined by the observation and 
PCR results (Fig. 7B). Finally, the periodontitis was treated by injectable 
Au/Pt NCs@GOX ointment (Fig. 7C). Compared with healthy rats, local 
swelling, ulceration, and gingival recession could be easily seen around 
gingiva tissues for control group (1), GOX-treated group (2), and Au/Pt 
NCs-treated group (3) (Fig. 7D). However, for Au/Pt NCs@GOX-treated 
group (4), a healing effect of gingival margin was observed. Besides, the 
maxillary mucosa was clearly visible, and the teeth surface was clean 
without obvious plaque, indicating that clusterzyme could efficiently 
kill periodontal pathogens and relieve F. nucleatum-induced periodontal 
infection. Next, the dental plaque on the teeth was stained with basic 
fuchsin solution to visualize biofilm distribution (Fig. 7E). A large 
amount of red dye remained on the surface of teeth in group (1), (2), and 
(3), indicating that there were many plaque biofilms around the teeth. A 
light red color was observed for healthy group and group (4). In addi­
tion, as inflammation would gradually develop and cause alveolar bone 
loss, micro-CT was used to scan and reconstruct images of alveolar bone. 
The overall morphology as a reconstructed 3D model and the section 
images for the inner structure of the maxillary second molars were 
shown in Fig. 7F. It was found that rats in group (1), (2) and (3) 
exhibited increased bone loss comparing with rats without infection. 
The corresponding sagittal micro-CT slices revealed that the root 
furcation was exposed around the second molar, indicating the suc­
cessful establishment of periodontitis and poor therapeutic effect. 
However, alveolar bone loss of rats in group (4) was significantly 
improved. 
To further confirm the above results, H&E staining was performed to 
evaluate the inflammation and healing of gingival tissue. In Fig. 8A, the 
edge of gingival epithelial tissue of healthy rats was complete and 
clearly visible, without infiltration of inflammatory cell, and the peri­
odontal fibers were arranged in order. For group (1), (2) and (3), the 
gingival epithelial tissues were incomplete with a gap. Meanwhile, there 
was also a large infiltration of inflammation cells with deeply stained 
nuclei, indicating the obvious inflammation and pathological reaction. 
For group (4), the gingival epithelial tissue of rats gradually recovered, 
with significantly less inflammatory cells, revealing a reduction of 
inflammation of periodontal tissue. Next, IHC was used to observe the 
expression of pro-inflammatory factors (TNF-α and IL-6). In Fig. 8B, 
both TNF-α and IL-6 were positive expression in gingival tissue with or 
without treatment, but the expression level was related to the degree of 
inflammation. Higher density and darker brown color of inflammation 
cells were observed in group (1), (2) and (3). However, pro- 
inflammatory factors were less expressed in group (4), which was 
comparable to that of healthy rat. These results showed that Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX catalytic system could reduce inflammation and promote the 
Fig. 7. (A) Schematic illustration of modeling and treatment of periodontitis. (B) The infection of maxillary bilateral second molars and PCR results. (C) Photographs 
of the injectable Au/Pt NCs@GOX clusterzyme ointment. (D) The rats mouth images, (E) basic fuchsin staining of plaque and (F) 3D micro-CT reconstructed images 
after treatment with (1) PBS, (2) GOX, (3) Au/Pt NCs and (4) Au/Pt NCs@GOX. 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
11
regeneration of periodontal tissue during the treatment of periodontitis. 
3.8. Biosafety evaluation of Au/Pt NCs@GOX 
We next implemented a series of experiments to verify the biosafety 
of Au/Pt NCs@GOX. Firstly, human periodontal ligament cells were 
selected to test cytotoxicity of clusterzyme. As shown in Fig. 9A, peri­
odontal ligament cells stained with Calcein-AM/PI exhibited almost 
exclusively green fluorescence without any red fluorescence, and the 
cell morphology always presented fibrous shape. The quantitative 
analysis of CCK-8 assay showed that periodontal ligament cells 
remained high survival rate (>95%) even at the concentration of 500 
μg/mL (Fig. 9B). Besides, hemolysis results showed that Au/Pt 
NCs@GOX could cause negligible hemolysis (<5%) of red blood cells 
(RBCs) compared with Triton X-100-treated RBCs (>99%) (Fig. 9C). 
Furthermore, the body weight of rats in treatment group increased 
significantly (Fig. 9D), indicating that clusterzyme would not affect the 
growth of rats. 
Finally, the H&E staining of major organs (Fig. S6) and blood 
biochemical analysis (Fig. S7) were performed to verify the excellent 
biocompatibility of Au/Pt NCs@GOX in vivo. There was no significant 
difference and obvious inflammation or lesions in organ tissues between 
the treatment group and the healthy group. For hematological results, 
the levels of white blood cells (WBC), red blood cells (RBC), hemoglobin 
(HGB), hematocrit (HCT), platelet count (PLT), mean corpusular volume 
(MCV), mean corpusular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), platelet 
distribution width (RDW), mean corpusular hemoglobin (MCH) were 
within the normal range and showed the similar results compared with 
control. For biochemical analyses, no meaningful statistical differences 
in albumin (ALB), alanine amino-transferase (ALT), aspartate amino­
transferase (AST), and creatinine (CREA) were observed between 
control and treatment group, which are closely associated with the 
functions of liver and kidney of rats. In conclusion, all the evaluation 
results of toxicity in vivo suggest that Au/Pt NCs@GOX will not produce 
serious inflammation and immune reactions in vivo, and is relative safe 
as agent to treat periodontitis. 
4. Conclusion 
In this work, a bimetallic nanocluster enzyme, named clusterzyme, 
was firstly designed by Pt atom substitution in gold nanocluster (Au/Pt 
NCs). The investigation of enzyme-mimicking properties indicated that 
Au/Pt NCs clusterzyme with ultra-small size (~3 nm) showed enhanced 
POD-like activity compared with Au NCs. Then, a biological enzyme 
(GOX) was conjugated with Au/Pt NCs (Au/Pt NCs@GOX), endowing 
the clusterzyme with cascade catalytic activity in the presence of 
glucose. GOX in the clusterzyme could convert low concentration of 
glucose to gluconic acid and H2O2. The gluconic acid would adjust the 
pH to acidic condition (~3.0), which was benefit for the clusterzyme to 
exert POD-like activity and produce more ⋅OH as proved in the chro­
mogenic reaction of TMB. For this outstanding property, the clusterzyme 
was successfully utilized for efficient antibacterial and antibiofilm in 
vitro against F. nucleatum. More importance, the in vivo results confirmed 
that Au/Pt NCs@GOX clusterzyme as a self-promoting cascade catalyst 
had great cascade catalytic antibiofilm effect against F. nucleatum- 
induced periodontitis in nutrient-rich oral environment. Finally, the 
evaluation of biosafety demonstrated that Au/Pt NCs@GOX clusterzyme 
would provide a novel strategy to treat oral disease through glucose- 
triggered cascade catalytic reaction. 
Fig. 8. H&E and IHC staining of healthy, (1) PBS-, (2) GOX-, (3) Au/Pt NCs- and (4) Au/Pt NCs@GOX-treated rats.  
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
12
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (2021YFC2102700, U2106228), the Jiangsu Synergetic Inno­
vation Center for Advanced Bio-Manufacture (XTC2205). 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cej.2023.143292. 
References 
[1] H.-C. Flemming, J. Wingender, The biofilm matrix, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8 (9) 
(2010) 623–633. 
[2] Y.-K. Wu, N.-C. Cheng, C.-M. Cheng, Biofilms in chronic wounds: pathogenesis and 
diagnosis, Trends Biotechnol. 37 (5) (2019) 505–517. 
[3] Y. Jiao, F. Tay, L. Niu, J. Chen, Advancing antimicrobial strategies for managing 
oral biofilm infections, Int. J. Oral Sci. 11 (2019) 28. 
[4] R.J. Lamont, H. Koo, G. Hajishengallis, The oral microbiota: dynamic communities 
and host interactions, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 16 (2018) 745–759. 
[5] Y. Xi, Y. Wang, J. Gao, Y. Xiao, J. Du, Dual corona vesicles with intrinsic 
antibacterial and enhanced antibiotic delivery capabilities for effective treatment 
of biofilm-induced periodontitis, ACS Nano 13 (12) (2019) 13645–13657. 
[6] M.A. Nazir, Prevalence of periodontal disease, its association with systemic 
diseases and prevention, Int. J. Health Sci. 11 (2017) 72. 
[7] X. Tan, S. Liu, X. Hu, R. Zhang, X. Su, R. Qian, Y. Mai, Z. Xu, W. Jing, W. Tian, L. 
i. Xie, Near-infrared-enhanced dual enzyme-mimicking Ag-TiO2-x@ alginate 
microspheres with antibactericidal and oxygeneration abilities to treat 
periodontitis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15 (1) (2023) 391–406. 
[8] M. Xia, Y. Xie, C. Yu, G. Chen, Y. Li, T. Zhang, Q. Peng, Graphene-based 
nanomaterials: the promising active agents for antibiotics-independent 
antibacterial applications, J. Control. Release 307 (2019) 16–31. 
[9] J. Fang, H. Wang, X. Bao, Y. Ni, Y. Teng, J. Liu, X. Sun, Y. Sun, H. Li, Y. Zhou, 
Nanodiamond as efficient peroxidase mimic against periodontal bacterial infection, 
Carbon 169 (2020) 370–381. 
[10] T. Wu, J. Sun, J. Lei, Q. Fan, X. Tang, G. Zhu, Q. Yan, X. Feng, B. Shi, An efficient 
treatment of biofilm-induced periodontitis using Pt nanocluster catalysis, 
Nanoscale 13 (2021) 17912–17919. 
[11] H. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Li, X. Qi, J. Yang, H. Qi, Q. Li, Y.M. Ma, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, 
L. Zhang, A bifunctional zwitterion-modified porphyrin for photodynamic 
nondestructive tooth whitening and biofilm eradication, Adv. Funct. Mater. 31 
(2021) 2104799. 
[12] J. Li, S. Song, J. Meng, L. Tan, X. Liu, Y. Zheng, Z. Li, K.W.K. Yeung, Z. Cui, 
Y. Liang, S. Zhu, X. Zhang, S. Wu, 2D MOF periodontitis photodynamic ion therapy, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143 (37) (2021) 15427–15439. 
[13] Y. Su, M. Ding, H. Dong, Y. Hu, D. Yang, J. Shao, B. Huang, Recent advances in 
nanozyme for combating bacterial infection, Mater. Chem. Front. 6 (2022) 
2596–2609. 
[14] Y. Wang, X. Shen, S. Ma, Q. Guo, W. Zhang, L.u. Cheng, L. Ding, Z. Xu, J. Jiang, 
L. Gao, Oral biofilm elimination by combining iron-based nanozymes and 
hydrogen peroxide-producing bacteria, Biomater. Sci. 8 (9) (2020) 2447–2458. 
[15] L. Gao, K. Fan, X. Yan, Iron oxide nanozyme: a multifunctional enzyme mimetic for 
biomedical applications, Theranostics 7 (2017) 3207–3227. 
[16] P.C. Naha, Y. Liu, G. Hwang, Y. Huang, S. Gubara, V. Jonnakuti, A. Simon-Soro, 
D. Kim, L. Gao, H. Koo, D.P. Cormode, Dextran-coated iron oxide nanoparticles as 
biomimetic catalysts for localized and pH-activated biofilm disruption, ACS Nano 
13 (5) (2019) 4960–4971. 
[17] Z. Xu, Z. Qiu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, D. Li, X. Shen, K. Fan, J. Xi, Y. Gu, Y. Tang, J. Jiang, 
J. Xu, J. He, X. Gao, Y. Liu, H. Koo, X. Yan, L. Gao, Converting organosulfur 
Fig. 9. (A) Live/dead staining and (B) cell viability of human periodontal ligament cells after treated with different concentration of Au/Pt NCs@GOX. (C) Hemolysis 
of Au/Pt NCs@GOX. (D) Changes of body weight of rats during treatment of periodontitis. 
Y. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Chemical Engineering Journal 466 (2023) 143292
13
compounds to inorganic polysulfides against resistant bacterial infections, Nat. 
Commun. 9 (2018) 3713. 
[18] Z. Wang, K. Dong, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, H. Sun, J. Ren, X. Qu, Activation of 
biologically relevant levels of reactive oxygen species by Au/g-C3N4 hybrid 
nanozyme for bacteria killing and wound disinfection, Biomaterials 113 (2017) 
145–157. 
[19] W. Wang, B. Li, H. Yang, Z. Lin, L. Chen, Z. Li, J. Ge, T. Zhang, H. Xia, L. Li, Y. Lu, 
Efficient elimination of multidrug-resistant bacteria using copper sulfide 
nanozymes anchored to graphene oxide nanosheets, Nano Res. 13 (8) (2020) 
2156–2164. 
[20] Z. Liu, F. Wang, J. Ren, X. Qu, A series of MOF/Ce-based nanozymes with dual 
enzyme-like activity disrupting biofilms and hindering recolonization of bacteria, 
Biomaterials 208 (2019) 21–31. 
[21] W. Yin, J. Yu, F. Lv, L. Yan, L.R. Zheng, Z. Gu, Y. Zhao, Functionalized nano-MoS2 
with peroxidase catalytic and near-infrared photothermal activities for safe and 
synergetic wound antibacterial applications, ACS Nano 10 (12) (2016) 
11000–11011. 
[22] Y. Zhang, S. Li, H. Liu, W. Long, X. Zhang, Enzyme-like properties of gold clusters 
for biomedical application, Front. Chem. 8 (2020) 219. 
[23] H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Sun, Q. Xin, S. Liu, X. Mu, X. Yuan, K. Chen, H. Wang, K. Varga, 
W. Mi, J. Yang, X. Zhang, Catalytically potent and selective clusterzymes for 
modulation of neuroinflammation through single-atom substitutions, Nat. 
Commun. 12 (2021) 114. 
[24] Y. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Li, J. Huang, H. Yu, Z. Wang, Accelerating peroxidase-like 
activity of gold nanozymes using purine derivatives and its application for 
monitoring of occult blood in urine, Sens. Actuators B 270 (2018) 443–451. 
[25] H. Zhu, J. Deng, S. Mu, S. Xiao, Q. Li, W. Wang, Y. Gao, X. Luo, S. Gao, C. Cheng, 
Creating peroxidase-mimetic clusterzymes for efficient and selectively enzymatic 
diagnosis of biomarkers, Chem. Eng. J. 462 (2023), 142215. 
[26] Z. Yin, Q. Ji, D.i. Wu, Z. Li, M. Fan, H. Zhang, X. Zhao, A. Wu, L. Cheng, L. Zeng, 
H2O2-responsive gold nanoclusters@ mesoporous silica@ manganese dioxide 
nanozyme for “off/on” modulation and enhancement of magnetic resonance 
imaging and photodynamic therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13 (13) (2021) 
14928–14937. 
[27] Y. Wang, B. Shen, Z. Zhang, Y. Chan, L. Zhu, Y. Zhang, H. Huang, L. Jiang, 
Multifunctional fluorescent gold nanoclusters with enhanced aggregation-induced 
emissions (AIEs) and excellent antibacterial effect for bacterial imaging and wound 
healing, Biomater. Adv. 137 (2022), 212841. 
[28] X. Cui, J. Wang, B. Liu, S. Ling, R. Long, Y. Xiong, Turning Au nanoclusters 
catalytically active for visible-light-driven CO2 reduction through bridging ligands, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140 (48) (2018) 16514–16520. 
[29] J. Xi, G. Wei, L. An, Z. Xu, Z.L. Xu, L. Fan, L. Gao, Copper/carbon hybrid nanozyme: 
tuning catalytic activity by the copper state for antibacterial therapy, Nano Lett. 19 
(2019) 7645–7654. 
[30] X. Chen, X. Chen, L. Zhu, W. Liu, L. Jiang, Programming an orthogonal self- 
assembling protein cascade based on reactive peptide–protein pairs for in vitro 
enzymatic trehalose production, J. Agric. Food Chem. 70 (2022) 4690–4700. 
[31] Z. Yuan, C. Lin, Y.e. He, B. Tao, M. Chen, J. Zhang, P. Liu, K. Cai, Near-infrared 
light-triggered nitric-oxide-enhanced photodynamic therapy and low-temperature 
photothermal therapy for biofilm elimination, ACS Nano 14 (3) (2020) 3546–3562. 
[32] Y. Zhu, W. Wang, J. Cheng, Y. Qu, Y.i. Dai, M. Liu, J. Yu, C. Wang, H. Wang, 
S. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, Stimuli-responsive manganese single-atom 
nanozyme for tumor therapy via integrated cascade reactions, Angew. Chem. Int. 
Ed. 133 (17) (2021) 9566–9574. 
[33] Y. Zhang, R. Chen, Y. Wang, P. Wang, J. Pu, X. Xu, F. Chen, L. Jiang, Q. Jiang, 
F. Yan, Antibiofilm activity of ultra-small gold nanoclusters against Fusobacterium 
nucleatum in dental plaque biofilms, J. Nanobiotechnol. 20 (2020) 470. 
[34] A.R. Ziefuss, M. Willeke, M. Miertz, A. Heinemann, C. Rehbock, S. Barcikowski, 
Influence of Pt alloying on the fluorescence of fully inorganic, colloidal gold 
nanoclusters, ChemPhysChem 23 (2022) e202200033. 
[35] D. Bain, S. Maity, B. Paramanik, A. Patra, Core-size dependent fluorescent gold 
nanoclusters and ultrasensitive detection of Pb2+ ion, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6 
(2) (2018) 2334–2343. 
[36] A.A.P. Mansur, H.S. Mansur, S.M. Carvalho, Engineered hybrid nanozyme catalyst 
cascade based on polysaccharide-enzyme-magnetic iron oxide nanostructures for 
potential application in cancer therapy, Catal. Today 388 (2020) 187–198. 
[37] N. Xu, L. Meng, H. Li, D. Lu, Y. Wu, Polyethyleneimine capped bimetallic Au/Pt 
nanoclusters are a viable fluorescent probe for specific recognition of 
chlortetracycline among other tetracycline antibiotics, Microchim. Acta 185 
(2018) 294. 
[38] Y. Sang, W. Li, H. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Ren, X. Qu, Construction of 
nanozyme-hydrogel for enhanced capture and elimination of bacteria, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 29 (2019) 1900518. 
[39] L.u. Zhang, Z. Liu, Q. Deng, Y. Sang, K. Dong, J. Ren, X. Qu, Nature-inspired 
construction of MOF@ COF nanozyme with active sites in tailored 
microenvironment and pseudopodia-like surface for enhanced bacterial inhibition, 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60 (7) (2021) 3469–3474. 
[40] Y. Wang, J. Deng, T. Zhang, Y. Hua, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, T. Jiao, C. Li, X. Zhang, 
Study on the use of phase transition lysozyme-loaded minocycline hydrochloride in 
the local treatment of chronic periodontitis, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 5 (2022) 
3146–3157. 
[41] B. Signat, C. Roques, P. Poulet, D. Duffaut, Role of Fusobacterium nucleatum in 
periodontal health and disease, Curr. Issues Mol. Biol. 13 (2011) 25–36. 
[42] A. Awasthi, P. Sharma, L. Jangir, G. Kamakshi, K.K. Awasthi, K.A. Awasthi, Dose 
dependent enhanced antibacterial effects and reduced biofilm activity against 
Bacillus subtilis in presence of ZnO nanoparticles, Mater. Sci. Eng. C 113 (2020), 
111021. 
[43] Y. Gao, J. Wang, M. Chai, X.u. Li, Y. Deng, Q. Jin, J. Ji, Size and charge adaptive 
clustered nanoparticles targeting the biofilm microenvironment for chronic lung 
infection management, ACS Nano 14 (5) (2020) 5686–5699. 
Y. Wang et al.