RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.afm-journal.de
Bonyzymes: Eﬃcient Anti-Inﬂammatory, Antibacterial and
Osteogenic Agents for Peri-Implantitis Reconstruction
Treatment
Gufeng Liu, Xiaoyi Wu, Lei Tan, Tiange Cheng, Chengyu Yang, Xin Liu, Fengxiao He,
Ziqiao Tang, Qi Yan, Liangliang Fu, Min Wang, Haibin Xia, and Tao Wu*
Peri-implantitis is an inﬂammatory disease characterized by progressive
bone loss, challenging implant longevity and incurring signiﬁcant treatment
burden. Current reconstruction therapy involves mechanical scaling followed
by artiﬁcial bone grafting. However, residual bacteria and inﬂammation
memory often lead to recurrence, highlighting the critical need for the artiﬁcial
bone substitute with sustained anti-inﬂammatory and antibacterial properties.
By utilizing the phosphate groups of mesoporous hydroxyapatites for in situ
loading of CeO2, followed by a reduction method to fabricate a CeO2-Cu het-
erojunction interface, this study develops Bonyzymes with anti-inﬂammatory,
antibacterial, and osteogenic properties. The incorporation of Cu modulates
the electronic environment of the CeO2 surface, increasing superoxide
dismutase and catalase activities of Bonyzymes. In vitro, the Bonyzymes eﬀec-
tively regulated oxidative stress by scavenging excess reactive oxygen species,
exerting anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects. Additionally, it exhibits antibacterial activity
against Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli and Porphyromonas gingivalis,
and facilitates osteogenic diﬀerentiation in bone marrow stem cells. In vivo
experiments in rat peri-implantitis models conﬁrm its ability to promote bone
regeneration in the infected peri-implant area. Overall, this work develops
novel artiﬁcial bone substitutes, Bonyzymes, which not only promotes
bone regeneration but also exhibits anti-inﬂammatory and antibacterial
properties, oﬀering a promising strategy for peri-implantitis treatment.
G. Liu, X. Wu, C. Yang, X. Liu, F. He, Z. Tang, Q. Yan, L. Fu, M. Wang,
H. Xia, T. Wu
State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and
Regeneration
Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education
Hubei Key Laboratory of Stomatology
School & Hospital of Stomatology
Wuhan University
Wuhan 430079, P. R. China
E-mail: wutao_renee@whu.edu.cn
L.Tan
Department of Orthopaedics
Union Hospital
Tongji Medical College
Huazhong University of ScienceandTechnology
Wuhan, Hubei 430022,P.R.China
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202503585
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202503585
1. Introduction
As the global number of dental implants in-
creases, peri-implantitis is a growing and
troublesome problem.[1] It is reported that
the prevalence of peri-implantitis is 19.83%
at the patient level, with an incidence
rate as high as 43.9% within 5 years af-
ter ﬁnal restoration.[2] Following the on-
set of peri-implantitis, the peri-implant re-
gion develops into a complex microenvi-
ronment characterized by bacterial infec-
tion, inﬂammatory inﬁltration, and a cas-
cade of cellular and molecular event, lead-
ing to peri-implant tissue destruction.[3]
Reconstructive therapy is a crucial ap-
proach for peri-implantitis management,
enabling implant surface decontamination
and promoting osseointegration with arti-
ﬁcial bone grafting materials.[4] However,
current reconstructive therapy approaches
still face signiﬁcant challenges. First, the
current methods for implant surface de-
contamination demonstrate limited eﬃ-
cacy. Physical decontamination methods
fail to completely remove bacteria resid-
ing deep within implant threads, while
T. Cheng
HKU Faculty of Dentistry
Prince Philip Dental Hospital
34 Hospital Road, Sai Ying Pun 999077, Hong Kong
Z. Tang
Department of Stomatology
The People’s Hospital of Deyang City
Deyang, Sichuan 618000, P. R. China
Q. Yan, M. Wang, H. Xia
Department of Oral Implantology
Hospital and School of Stomatology
Wuhan University
Wuhan 430079, P. R. China
T. Wu
Center for Prosthodontics and Implant Dentistry
Optics Valley Branch
School and Hospital of Stomatology
Wuhan University
Wuhan 430000, P. R. China
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (1 of 18)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
chemical agents provide only transient antimicrobial eﬀects and
pose the risk of fostering bacterial resistance.[5] Additionally,
widely used artiﬁcial bone materials, such as inorganic bovine
bone, primarily function through osteoconduction and lack anti-
inﬂammatory and antibacterial properties, limiting their eﬀec-
tiveness in promoting bone regeneration within complex inﬂam-
matory microenvironment.[6]
In the progression of peri-implantitis, oxidative stress is closely
related to the development of inﬂammation as well as the de-
struction of bone tissue.[7] It is reported that oxidative stress
markers were highly expressed in salivary secretions of patients
with peri-implantitis, and oxidative stress-related genes showed
high transcript levels in peri-implantitis samples.[8] Most current
research on the treatment or prevention of peri-implantitis fo-
cused on surface modiﬁcations of implants, such as loading zinc
oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles,[9] silver nanoparticles,[10] or cerium
oxide (CeO2) nanoparticles[11] onto the implant surface. While
these surface modiﬁcations signiﬁcantly enhanced the antibac-
terial and anti-inﬂammatory capabilities of implants by utilizing
nanozymes, there may be certain risks to the osseointegration
and long-term stability of non-pure titanium surface implants.[12]
Moreover, this approach did not oﬀer a direct solution for treat-
ing peri-implantitis in patients with clinically used implants. To
treat infectious bone defects, composite bone grafting materi-
als have been developed, such as those using hydroxyapatite[13]
or demineralized bone matrix as carriers,[14] loaded with an-
tibiotics like vancomycin,[13b] curcumin,[14] and melatonin[13a]
to impart antimicrobial properties to the bone grafting materi-
als. However, these materials lack signiﬁcant anti-inﬂammatory
properties, raising concerns about their eﬀectiveness in treat-
ing complex inﬂammatory conditions such as periodontitis and
peri-implantitis.
Recent studies have shown that nanozymes hold promise
in treating bacterial infections and controlling inﬂammation.[15]
Nanozymes are a class of inorganic materials that can exhibit en-
zyme properties at the nanoscale (1–100 nm) and can eﬃciently
catalyze enzyme substrates under mild conditions.[16] The cat-
alytic activities of nanozymes mainly include superoxide dismu-
tase (SOD)-like activity and catalase (CAT)-like activity.[17] This
is attribute to the presence of empty d or f orbital in transi-
tion metal and lanthanide metal, which enable the formation of
coordinating bonds with substrate molecules.[18] Consequently,
these interactions facilitate the form of transition state with a
lower energy barrier.[18] As a result, nanozymes eﬀectively reduce
the activation energy of the overall reaction and accelerate the
chemical processes. The catalytic activity of nanozymes is closely
related to oxidative stress regulation, and scavenging excessive
reactive oxygen species (ROS) to maintain the oxidative stress
balance.[19] The surface modiﬁcations of implants mentioned
above utilized the properties of nanozymes to enhance the an-
tibacterial and anti-inﬂammatory capabilities of implants. Mean-
while, nanozymes have become a key focus in the treatment of
periodontitis, an inﬂammatory bone loss disease caused by bac-
terial infection, which is similar to peri-implantitis.[20] Currently,
nanozymes such as CeO2,[21] manganese dioxide (MnO2),[22]
copper-based nanozymes[23] have been developed for the treat-
ment of periodontitis. However, current materials for periodon-
titis as well as peri-implantitis failed to regulate the electronic en-
vironment of nanozymes, which plays a critical role in determin-
ing their catalytic eﬃciency and biological function. Additionally,
the tissue regeneration eﬀects of these materials primarily relied
on the regulation of osteoblasts by metal ions released, rather
than the osteoconductive, osteoinductive, and osteogenic prop-
erties typical of conventional bone substitutes.
In this study, we developed a novel class of biomaterials termed
“Bonyzymes,” mesoporous hydroxyapatite (MHA) scaﬀolds in-
tegrated with CeO2-Cu nanozymes, as a therapeutic strategy for
peri-implantitis reconstruction. The name “Bonyzyme” reﬂected
the material’s dual functionality in bone regeneration, enzyme-
like catalytic anti-inﬂammatory property. MHA, a widely recog-
nized bone substitute, was used as the carrier due to its high sur-
face area, excellent loading capacity, and superior biocompatibil-
ity, bioactivity, as well as its osteoconductive and osteoinductive
properties.[24] The Bonyzymes were fabricated by in situ loading
of CeO2 onto MHA via phosphate groups, followed by a reduction
process to create a CeO2-Cu heterojunction interface. As illus-
trated in Scheme 1, this novel artiﬁcial bone exhibited enhanced
antibacterial, anti-inﬂammatory, and osteogenic properties. It ad-
dressed the complex challenges of peri-implantitis by scavenging
excess ROS to restore oxidative stress balance, releasing metal
ions for antibacterial eﬀects, and promoting bone tissue regen-
eration through combined osteoconductive, osteoinductive, and
osteogenic eﬀects in the infected peri-implant area.
2. Results
2.1. Synthesis and Characterization of Bonyzymes
For the synthesis of Bonyzymes (MHA-CeO2-Cu), MHA was syn-
thesized via a hydrothermal reaction method, followed by the
sequential loading of CeO2 and Cu onto MHA through high-
temperature calcination and hydration hydrazine reduction, re-
spectively. The detailed synthesis procedure was illustrated in
Figure 1A. As illustrated by ﬁeld emission scanning electron mi-
croscopy (FESEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
images, MHA formed rod-shaped aggregates, where CeO2 and
Cu were dispersed on the surface of MHA and within its meso-
porous structure (Figure 1B,C). High resolution transmission
electron microscope (HRTEM) further identiﬁed three distinct
lattice spacings on MHA-CeO2-Cu: 0.28 nm (corresponding to
the (211) crystal plane of HA),[25] 0.31 nm (corresponding to
the (111) crystal plane of CeO2),[26] and 0.21 nm (corresponding
to the (111) crystal plane of Cu) (Figure 1D).[27] The successful
loading of Ce and Cu onto MHA was also veriﬁed by the corre-
sponding proﬁle of energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)
(Figure 1E and Figure S1, Supporting Information).
X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) analysis was employed to reveal the
crystal structure of the samples. As shown in Figure 1F, MHA
only displayed diﬀraction peaks for Ca5(PO4)3(OH).[28] As for
MHA-CeO2, diﬀraction peaks for both Ca5(PO4)3(OH) and CeO2
were present,[29] while in MHA-CeO2-Cu, additional peaks repre-
senting Cu were detected.[30] Meanwhile, Figure 1G showed the
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey spectra of the sur-
face across samples, conﬁrming the presence of Ca, P, O, Ce,
and Cu elements on MHA-CeO2-Cu. The high-resolution XPS
spectra qualitatively illustrated shifts in the Ce 3d XPS spec-
tra for MHA-CeO2 and MHA-CeO2-Cu, in which MHA-CeO2-
Cu showed higher characteristic peaks of Ce3+ (Figure 1H).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (2 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of the application and bioactive functions of bonyzymes for peri-implantitis treatment.
Quantitative analysis revealed that upon the incorporation of Cu,
the surface concentration of Ce4+ (CeO2) decreased from 65.44%
to 60.09%, while Ce3+ (CeO2) increased from 34.56% to 39.94%
(Figure 1I). High-resolution XPS analysis of the Cu 2p region re-
vealed the presence of two distinct chemical states of Cu: metallic
copper (Cu0) and copper oxide (Cu2+) (Figure S2, Supporting In-
formation). The detection of CuO was attributed to the formation
of Cu-O bonds at the CeO2-Cu heterojunction interface, where
Cu was coordinated to CeO2 via interfacial oxygen atoms.
To enhance the loading capacity of the Bonyzymes, MHA were
synthesized with ordered mesoporous structures. The Brunauer-
Emmett-Teller (BET) isotherms were conducted according to the
previous study,[31] suggesting that all three materials exhibited
type IV isotherms, which indicated all three samples as meso-
porous materials (Figure S3, Supporting Information). Further
results revealed that the loading of CeO2 and Cu onto MHA led
to a reduction in its BET surface area (Table S1, Supporting In-
formation). The alteration in the surface area reﬂected the incor-
poration of CeO2 and Cu within the framework of MHA.
Meanwhile, in vitro degradation experiment demonstrated
that MHA-CeO2-Cu exhibited considerable stability in a 37 °C
aqueous environment (Figure S4 and Table S2, Supporting Infor-
mation). After 14 days of immersion, SEM revealed no signiﬁcant
changes on surface morphology, and the nanozymes remained
ﬁrmly attached. Correspondingly, ion release analysis showed
that MHA-CeO2-Cu exhibited a certain degree of Ca release in
the in vitro aqueous environment, and the release of Ce and Cu
was negligible after 14 days. These ﬁndings suggested that MHA-
CeO2-Cu can provided sustained structural support and catalytic
activity in vivo.
2.2. Antioxidant Performance and Mechanism of Bonyzymes
Figure 2A–D illustrated the catalytic activities of the three kinds
of bone grafting materials. The results demonstrated that MHA-
CeO2-Cu exhibited markedly higher CAT-like activity (Figure 2A),
SOD-like activity (Figure 2B), superoxide scavenging ability
(Figure 2C), and overall antioxidant capacity (Figure 2D), com-
pared to MHA and MHA-CeO2 groups.
The experimental data demonstrated that MHA-CeO2-Cu ex-
hibited the most eﬃcient CAT-like and SOD-like ROS scaveng-
ing capabilities. To elucidate the catalytic mechanism underlying
ROS elimination, systematic density functional theory (DFT) cal-
culations were performed by constructing comparative models of
pristine CeO2 (111) surfaces and CeO2-Cu heterojunction inter-
faces (Figure 2E).
Following model construction, the SOD-like and CAT-like re-
action pathways were calculated on CeO2 surface sites and CeO2-
Cu heterojunction sites. The SOD-like reaction pathway revealed
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (3 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 1. Characterizations of MHA-CeO2-Cu. A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of MHA-CeO2-Cu. B) SEM images of samples. C) TEM
images of samples. D) HRTEM images of MHA-CeO2-Cu with lattice spacings characteristic of hydroxyapatite, CeO2, and Cu. E) TEM images of MHA-
CeO2-Cu with elemental distributions of Ca, P, O, Ce and Cu. F) XRD measurement. G) XPS survey spectra H) Fitted Ce 3d XPS spectra of MHA-CeO2
and MHA-CeO2-Cu. I) Analysis of the valence state concentrations of Ce (IV) and Ce (III).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (4 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 2. Antioxidant performance and mechanism of MHA-CeO2-Cu. A) Analysis of CAT-like activity (n = 5). B) Analysis of SOD-like activity (n = 5).
C) Analysis of superoxide anion clearance capacity (n = 5). D) Analysis of total antioxidant capacity (n = 5). E) The calculated models of pristine CeO2
surface (left1, left2) and CeO2-Cu heterojunction (right1, right2). F) The reaction mechanism of SOD-like (top) and CAT-like (bottom) reaction: M, metal
sites. G) The theoretical calculation for SOD-like path of CeO2 and CeO2-Cu. H) The theoretical calculation for CAT-like path of CeO2 and CeO2-Cu. I)
Diﬀerential charge density of CeO2-Cu: cyan, the charge depletion; yellow, the charge accumulation. J) Calculated DOS projected onto Ce, Cu, and O in
CeO2-Cu. K) Schematic representation of the antioxidant mechanism of MHA-CeO2-Cu. The p-values were determined using one-way ANOVA followed
by Dunnett test, ***p < 0.001 compared with the MHA-CeO2-Cu group.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (5 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
that H2O was initially adsorbed to form M-H2O, followed by pro-
ton from the M-H2O capture by OOH−to generate H2O2. Sub-
sequently, the remaining M-OH oxidized OOH−to O2, thereby
initiating the next catalytic cycle (Figure 2F, top). As shown
in Figure 2G and Table S3, Supporting Information, the rate-
determining step (RDS) energy of SOD-like process at CeO2 sur-
face sites was 0.9945 eV, whereas CeO2-Cu heterojunction sites
exhibited a signiﬁcantly lower RDS energy of SOD-like process of
0.654 eV. Moreover, the overall activation energy at CeO2-Cu het-
erojunction sites (−2.378 eV) is substantially lower than at CeO2
surface sites, indicating more prone SOD reactions at CeO2-Cu
heterojunction sites.
For the CAT-like reaction pathways at CeO2 surface sites and
CeO2-Cu heterojunction sites: H2O2 was ﬁrst adsorbed followed
by an H+ abstraction. After another H2O2 reacted with the
residual M-OOH at the active site, OOH-M-H2O2 intermediate
formed and ultimately converted to O2 (Figure 2F, bottom). In
the CAT pathway, the RDS energy at CeO2-Cu heterojunction
sites (1.24 513 eV) is markedly lower than at CeO2 surface sites
(2.49 172 eV) (Figure 2H and Table S4, Supporting Information).
To further clarify the mechanism of eﬃcient ROS scavenging
at CeO2-Cu heterojunction sites in MHA-CeO2-Cu, the diﬀeren-
tial charge density maps was simulated. The results revealed sig-
niﬁcant charge transfer at the CeO2-Cu heterojunction interface,
with noticeable electron depletion around Cu atoms in the Cu
cluster (Figure 2I). Bader charge calculation suggested 1.27 elec-
trons transferring from Cu cluster to CeO2 surface. Further den-
sity of states (DOS) analysis demonstrated strong participation
of Cu-3d orbital electronic states near the Fermi level, thereby in-
ﬂuencing the catalytic activity and electron transport capacity of
MHA-CeO2-Cu (Figure 2J). Furthermore, the DOS of Ce showed
exceptionally high values near the Fermi level, attributable to
Ce-4f electrons, suggesting oxygen vacancy formation around Ce
(Figure 2J). The simultaneous non-zero DOS values for both Cu
and Ce indicated electronic hybridization between them, further
conﬁrming charge transfer results and enhancing interface sta-
bility (Figure 2J).
Therefore, the CeO2-Cu heterojunction interface facilitated
substantial electron transfer, which signiﬁcantly reduced the
RDS energy of both SOD-like and CAT-like reactions, thereby
synergistically enhancing the SOD-like and CAT-like activities of
MHA-CeO2-Cu (Figure 2K).
2.3. Biocompatibility of Bonyzymes
To verify the biocompatibility of Bonyzymes, rat bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) were incubated for 5 days
with MHA, MHA-CeO2, and MHA-CeO2-Cu at varying concen-
trations (ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 mg mL−1). Cytoskeletal stain-
ing of BMSCs revealed that none of the materials induced no-
table changes in cell morphology at concentrations of 0.1 and
0.2 mg mL−1 (Figure 3A, Figures S5 and S6, Supporting Infor-
mation). However, at a concentration of 0.4 mg mL−1, some BM-
SCs in the MHA-CeO2 and MHA-CeO2-Cu groups exhibited ab-
normal cytoskeletal structures, deviating from the typical star-
shaped or spindle-shaped morphology (Figure S6, Supporting
Information). As demonstrated by the CCK-8 assay, there was
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in cell viability observed across groups
(Figure 3B and Figure S7, Supporting Information). However, the
0.2 mg mL−1 MHA-CeO2-Cu group demonstrated slightly higher
cell viability compared to the 0.1 and 0.4 mg mL−1 MHA-CeO2-
Cu group.
2.4. In Vitro Osteogenic Eﬀect of Bonyzymes
Prior to osteogenic diﬀerentiation induction of BMSCs, the os-
teogenic diﬀerentiation potential of BMSCs cultured at various
concentrations was initially evaluated by ALP activity assay. The
result demonstrated that BMSCs in the 0.2 mg mL−1 MHA-CeO2-
Cu group exhibited the strongest osteogenic diﬀerentiation po-
tential (Figure S8, Supporting Information). In conjunction with
the ﬁndings on the biocompatibility of Bonyzymes, the concen-
tration of 0.2 mg mL−1 was selected for subsequent in vitro cell
experiments. Following this, to assess the early-stage osteogenic
potential of Bonyzymes, ALP staining and ALP activity assay
were conducted on day 7 of osteogenic induction. As shown in
Figure 3C,D, MHA-CeO2-Cu signiﬁcantly enhanced ALP activity
in BMSCs compared with the other groups, suggesting a higher
osteogenic diﬀerentiation potential. Similarly, on day 21 of os-
teogenic induction, Alizarin Red staining and quantiﬁcation in-
dicated that BMSCs inﬂuenced by MHA-CeO2-Cu formed more
abundant and pronounced calcium nodules (Figure 3E,F).
On day 7 of osteogenic induction, quantitative real-time poly-
merase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis revealed that the ex-
pression of Alp, Bsp and Ocn was signiﬁcantly elevated in the
MHA-CeO2-Cu group (Figure 3G–I). Western blots result further
evidenced that MHA-CeO2-Cu enhanced the expression of ALPL,
BSP, and OCN in BMSCs (Figure 3J and Figure S9, Supporting
Information). On day 14 of osteogenic induction, both qRT-PCR
and western blots analysis demonstrated that MHA-CeO2-Cu sig-
niﬁcantly promoted the expression of osteogenic markers as well
(Figure 3K–N and Figure S9, Supporting Information).
2.5. In Vitro Antibacterial, and Immunomodulatory Function of
Bonyzymes
Plate count assays conﬁrmed MHA-CeO2-Cu showed inhibitory
eﬀect on Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and Escherichia coli (E.
coli) (Figure 4A–D). Remarkably, MHA-CeO2-Cu demonstrated
exceptionally antibacterial activity against Porphyromonas gingi-
valis (P. gingivalis), with nearly undetectable proliferation of P.
gingivalis observed in the MHA-CeO2-Cu group (Figure 4E,F).
To investigate the in vitro immunomodulatory function of
Bonyzymes, qRT-PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) were conducted to evaluate the eﬀect of MHA-CeO2-Cu
on the inﬂammatory response of mononuclear macrophages to
P. gingivalis lipopolysaccharide (LPS). As indicated by qRT-PCR
analysis, LPS-treated RAW 264.7 cells cocultured with MHA-
CeO2-Cu ((LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu) group) exhibited signiﬁcantly
lower expression of Il-1𝛽and Tnf-𝛼, even compared to untreated
RAW 264.7 cells (Figure 4G,H). Additionally, compared with LPS-
treated RAW 264.7 and the (LPS + MHA) group, the (LPS +
MHA-CeO2-Cu) group showed a signiﬁcant reduction in Il-6 ex-
pression (Figure 4I). For Il-10, the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu) group
demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase compared to LPS-treated
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (6 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 3. Biocompatibility assays and in vitro osteogenic function of MHA-CeO2-Cu. A) Fluorescent images of BMSCs cytoskeleton: green, phalloidin;
blue, DAPI. B) CCK-8 results for BMSCs at day 5 (n = 5). C) Representative ALP staining images of BMSCs. D) Quantitative analysis of ALP activity
in BMSCs (n = 3). E) Representative Alizarin red staining images of BMSCs. F) Semi-quantitative analysis of Alizarin red staining in BMSCs (n = 3).
G–I) At day 7, gene expression levels of Alp, Bsp and Ocn in BMSCs as detected by qRT-PCR (n = 3). J) At day 7, representative western blot images of
ALPL, BSP, and OCN in BMSCs. K–M) At day 14, gene expression levels of Alp, Bsp and Ocn in BMSCs as detected by qRT-PCR (n = 3). N) At day 14,
representative western blot images of ALPL, BSP, and OCN in BMSCs. The p-values were determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett test,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, compared with the MHA-CeO2-Cu group.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (7 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (8 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
RAW 264.7 cells (Figure 4J). Meanwhile, ELISA results conﬁrmed
a signiﬁcant elevation of IL-10 expression in the (LPS + MHA-
CeO2-Cu) group compared to all other groups, accompanied by
a marked decrease in TNF-𝛼expression among all LPS-treated
groups (Figure 4K,L).
To further elucidate the potential mechanisms by which
Bonyzymes regulated anti-inﬂammatory and antioxidant stress
responses in mononuclear macrophages, RNA-Seq was con-
ducted to assess changes of transcriptional proﬁles among un-
treated RAW 264.7 cells (none LPS group), LPS-treated RAW
264.7 cells (LPS group), and LPS-treated RAW 264.7 cells co-
cultured with MHA-CeO2-Cu ((LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu) group).
Principal component analysis (PCA) analysis (Figure 5A) and
heatmap of overall transcriptional proﬁles (Figure S10, Sup-
porting Information) indicated that the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu)
group exhibited distinct transcriptional proﬁles compared to the
other two groups, suggesting a speciﬁc polarization trend of
RAW 264.7 cells in response to MHA-CeO2-Cu. The volcano
plot revealed that, compared to LPS-treated RAW 264.7 cells,
there were 352 genes upregulated and 148 genes downregu-
lated in the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu) group (Figure 5B). Among
them, the expression of Mt1, Slc30a1, Hmox1, and Mt2 was no-
tably increased, while Slc39a10 expression was signiﬁcantly re-
duced. In the transcriptional proﬁle of the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-
Cu) group, the most signiﬁcantly altered genes predominantly
exhibited changes associated with anti-inﬂammatory and antiox-
idant responses (Figure 5C),[32] further highlighting the potential
role of the Bonyzymes in modulating inﬂammation and oxidative
stress.
Further enrichment analysis of the diﬀerentially expressed
genes was conducted. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analy-
sis revealed that, in comparison to LPS-treated RAW 264.7 cells,
the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu) group signiﬁcantly changed pro-
cesses related to cofactor metabolic processes, response to ox-
idative stress, and the positive regulation of cellular catabolic
process (Figure 5D). The chord diagram illustrated the clas-
siﬁcation of GO terms associated with signiﬁcantly altered
genes, along with the magnitude and direction of these changes
(Figure 5E). Meanwhile, the protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network highlighted the interconnections among signiﬁcantly
altered gene (Figure 5F). Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and
genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment results indicated that,
compared to LPS-treated RAW 264.7 cells, the (LPS + MHA-
CeO2-Cu) group exhibited signiﬁcant change of the MAPK,
AMPK and FoxO (Figures S11–S13, Supporting Information),
which was then validated by qRT-PCR (Figure 5G and Figure S14,
Supporting Information). These ﬁndings collectively demon-
strated that the Bonyzymes eﬀectively reprogramed the tran-
scriptional proﬁle of LPS-stimulated RAW 264.7 cells, promot-
ing anti-inﬂammatory and antioxidant responses through the
modulation of key genes, biological processes, and signaling
pathways.
2.6. In Vivo Therapeutic Eﬀects of Bonyzymes on Peri-implantitis
A rat model of peri-implantitis was ﬁrst established following a
strict clinical protocol. The construction of the model involved
several steps: tooth extraction, followed by the placement of an
implant in the ﬁrst stage surgery and the placement of a heal-
ing abutment in the second stage surgery. Next, peri-implantitis
was induced via silk ligature combined with S. aureus and P. gin-
givalis inoculation. The implant procedure, peri-implantitis in-
duction, and treatment protocol were illustrated in Figure 6A,B
and Figure S15, Supporting Information. In order to assess
the therapeutic eﬀects of Bonyzymes, maxillary bone samples
were scanned by micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) be-
fore and 8 weeks after the reconstructive surgery (Figure 6C,D
and Figure S16, Supporting Information). Bone loss around im-
plants was quantiﬁed by measuring the vertical distance between
the implant platform and the bone-implant interface. The CT
images showed marked vertical bone resorption around the im-
plants in peri-implantitis-induced rats (Figure S16, Supporting
Information, untreated group in Figure 6C,D). As illustrated in
the bucco-palatal (Figure 6C) and mesio-distal (Figure 6D) sec-
tion images, there was signiﬁcant bone loss at mesial, distal,
buccal, and palatal sites in the untreated, Scaling, and Bio-Oss
groups. Quantitative analysis further demonstrated the reduc-
tion in bone height around implants in these three groups com-
pared to baseline (8 weeks prior). In contrast, MHA-CeO2-Cu
exhibited a notable capacity for restoring bone height around
implants in peri-implantitis rats, especially at mesial and distal
sites (Figure 6E,F). At the buccal site, the MHA-CeO2-Cu group
showed signiﬁcant restorative capability compared to the scaling
and Bio-Oss groups, whereas at the palatal site, there was no sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence between MHA-CeO2-Cu and the scaling group
(Figure 6G,H). Compared to the untreated and Bio-Oss groups,
the MHA-CeO2-Cu group exhibited a signiﬁcantly higher BV/TV,
indicating an improved bone quality (Figure 6I).
Further histological evaluation was conducted to assess
the therapeutic impact of Bonyzymes on peri-implantitis.
Hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining revealed substantial bone loss
and extensive inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration, including inﬂamma-
tory cell clusters, in the untreated and Bio-Oss groups (Figure
7A). At the same time, a certain number of osteoclasts were ob-
served on the surface of the remaining bone in the Bio-Oss group,
indicating ongoing bone resorption (Figure 7A). Interestingly,
the Scaling group exhibited reduced inﬂammatory cells around
the implant (Figure 7A). In the MHA-CeO2-Cu group, partial
restoration of bone height and a certain amount of residual im-
planted material was observed (Figure 7A). Toluidine blue stain-
ing indicated ongoing bone destruction around the implant in
the untreated group, while remaining bone tissue around the im-
plants in the scaling and Bio-Oss group appeared relatively intact
(Figure 7B). In the MHA-CeO2-Cu group, a deeply stained area
along the bone edge suggested active bone formation (Figure 7B).
Figure 4. Antibacterial, and immunomodulatory abilities of MHA-CeO2-Cu. A) Representative agar plate images of S. aureus. B) Live bacterial count of
S. aureus based on CFU enumeration (n = 3). C) Representative agar plate images of E. coli. D) Live bacterial count of E. coli based on CFU enumeration
(n = 3). E) Representative agar plate images of P. gingivalis. F) Live bacterial count of P. gingivalis based on CFU enumeration (n = 3). G–J) Gene
expression levels of Il-1𝛽, Il-6, Il-10, and Tnf-𝛼in RAW264.7 cells as detected by qRT-PCR (n = 3). K,L) Protein expression levels of IL-10 and TNF-𝛼in
RAW264.7 cells as detected by ELISA (n = 3). The p-values were determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett test, *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001,
compared with the MHA-CeO2-Cu group (B, D, and F); *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, compared with the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu) group (G-L).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (9 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (10 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
To further monitor bone remodeling and mineralization dur-
ing the repair process, calcein was injected at the time of recon-
structive surgery, followed by xylenol orange injection at week 7
after surgery, enabling dynamic evaluation of the repair eﬀect of
Bonyzymes. The results of double ﬂuorescent labeling showed
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in mineral deposition rates among the
three groups at the start of treatment (Figure 7C,D). However, af-
ter 2 months of treatment, the MHA-CeO2-Cu group exhibited
a higher mineral deposition rate, which evidenced the ability of
MHA-CeO2-Cu to promote the regeneration of peri-implant bone
tissue (Figure 7C,E).
2.7. In Vivo Biocompatibility Assessment
To evaluate the in vivo biocompatibility of Bonyzymes, histolog-
ical analysis of major organs, including the heart, liver, spleen,
lungs, and kidneys, was performed using H&E staining. As
shown in Figure S17, Supporting Information, no pathological
necrosis or inﬂammatory lesions were observed in any of the
groups.
3. Discussion
Peri-implantitis leads to progressive loss of peri-implant bone,
with a reported prevalence of 19.83%.[2] Developing an eﬀective
treatment for peri-implantitis is therefore critical for the long-
term success of dental implants. In recent years, nanozymes
have shown signiﬁcant potential in treating bacterial infections
and controlling inﬂammation, with applications reported in con-
ditions such as hepatitis,[33] enteritis,[34] and periodontitis.[35]
Among these, CeO2 nanozymes have attracted extensive atten-
tion due to their superior catalytic activity.[36] The remarkable cat-
alytic performance of CeO2 nanozymes arises from surface catal-
ysis enabled by the reversible electron shuttle between Ce3+ and
Ce4+.[36,37] Recent studies have demonstrated that the free elec-
trons of Cu° can eﬀectively modulate the surface charge distribu-
tion of CeO2 nanozymes, thereby synergistically regulating their
catalytic activity.[38] Given its potential for application in bone
defect environments, and with MHA established as an eﬀective
carrier for drug release and bone defect repair,[39] we designed
novel MHA-based materials loaded with CeO2-Cu nanozymes,
named Bonyzymes. These composite materials were designed to
not only control inﬂammation and inhibit bacteria but also to pro-
mote bone defect repair in peri-implantitis.
Compared to pure CeO2 nanozymes, the MHA-CeO2-Cu syn-
thesized in this study exhibited enhanced nanozymes catalytic
activity. This result aligned with the ﬁnding that Cu acted as an
electron donor, thereby boosting the catalytic activity of CeO2.[40]
Meanwhile, the catalytic role of copper-based nanozymes should
also be considered. Xi et al. developed a Copper/Carbon Hybrid
Nanozyme based on copper-based nanozymes, which demon-
strated certain CAT-like and SOD-like activities.[41] The XPS anal-
ysis revealed that MHA-CeO2-Cu exhibited an ≈5% increase in
Ce3+ content compared to MHA-CeO2, partially explaining the
observed enhancement eﬀect.[42] However, this magnitude of in-
crease cannot fully account for the more than tenfold enhance-
ment in SOD-like and CAT-like activities or the nearly 100-fold
improvement in total antioxidant activity. Furthermore, Cheng
et al. calculated the catalytic rates and turnover number of various
nanozymes and found that cerium oxide nanozymes and copper-
based nanozymes exhibited similar catalytic performance.[43]
Therefore, the enhanced performance cannot be attributed solely
to the presence of individual CeO2 or Cu species. To further elu-
cidate the enhanced catalytic eﬃciency of Bonyzymes, we per-
formed DFT calculations. Based on HRTEM and XRD character-
ization results, we constructed an atomic model using the CeO2
(111) crystal plane as the substrate, upon which Cu nanoclus-
ter were computationally simulated. Cu was coordinated to CeO2
via interfacial oxygen atoms. DFT calculations revealed that the
incorporation of Cu nanocluster not only introduced new active
sites but also signiﬁcantly modiﬁed the surface charge distribu-
tion of CeO2. Due to diﬀerences in electronegativity, substantial
charge transfer from Cu nanocluster to the CeO2 surface was
calculated, which altered the interfacial charge environment of
the CeO2-Cu heterojunction. This electronic modulation dramat-
ically reduced the RDS energy for both CAT-like and SOD-like
reactions, and furthermore decreased the overall activation en-
ergy for the SOD-like reaction. SOD-like activity is able to con-
vert the toxic ·O2
−into H2O2,[44] while CAT-like activity further
decomposes H2O2, a typical inﬂammatory molecule, into water
and oxygen.[45] In this work, Bonyzymes integrated the enzymatic
functions of CAT-like and SOD-like activities, while the CeO2-Cu
heterojunction served to dramatically enhance these activities.
This synergistic conﬁguration enabled highly eﬃcient cascade
catalysis that completely converts toxic ·O2
−into O2 and H2O
through sequential disproportionation. The optimized catalytic
system eﬀectively eliminates ROS accumulation at target sites,
thereby preventing subsequent inﬂammatory damage.[46] Thus,
the inhibition of bone reconstruction by ROS accumulation was
avoided.[47]
Il-1𝛽, Il-6, and TNF-𝛼are typical pro-inﬂammatory cytokines,
while IL-10 is a typical anti-inﬂammatory cytokine.[48] In vitro
experiments showed downregulation of pro-inﬂammatory cy-
tokines and upregulation of anti-inﬂammatory cytokine, indi-
cating that MHA-CeO2-Cu was able to modulate macrophages
to shift toward the anti-inﬂammatory phenotype under LPS
stimulation.[49] RNA-Seq analysis further revealed the poten-
tial mechanisms by which MHA-CeO2-Cu regulated the anti-
inﬂammatory response in macrophages, showing a signiﬁcant
Figure 5. RNA-Seq analysis of LPS-treated RAW264.7 cells following MHA-CeO2-Cu treatment. A) PCA plot illustrating sample clusters of none LPS
group, LPS group, and (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu) group. B) Volcano plot illustrating signiﬁcant gene fold changes in the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu)/LPS
comparison, highlighting the top 10 most signiﬁcantly changed genes. C) The top 27 signiﬁcantly changed genes and representative inﬂammatory
genes in the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu)/LPS comparison: red, upregulated; blue, downregulated. D) GO enrichment analysis of diﬀerential genes in the
(LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu)/LPS comparison. E) Chord diagram of GO functions closely related to inﬂammation and oxidative stress. F) PPI network of
GO functions closely associated with inﬂammation and oxidative stress. G) Gene expression levels of Foxo1, Foxo3, Foxo4, Sirt1, Sirt6, Sod2 and Cat in
RAW264.7 cells as detected by qRT-PCR (n = 3). The p-values were determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett test, **p < 0.01, ***p <
0.001, compared with the (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu) group.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (11 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (12 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
upregulation of antioxidant-related genes. Among them, Hmox1
showed a signiﬁcant upregulation in (LPS + MHA-CeO2-Cu)
group, which encodes Heme Oxygenase-1 (HO-1), a well-known
stress protein and metabolic enzyme with anti-inﬂammatory,
cytoprotective, and immunoregulatory properties.[50] HO-1 can
reduce the bioavailability of free heme, thereby playing a crit-
ical role in antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory functions dur-
ing disease.[51] Additionally, the upregulation of the Metalloth-
ionein (MT) family, recognized as the guardians of metal and
redox homeostasis,[52] speciﬁcally Mt1 and Mt2, was highly
signiﬁcant. These proteins are reported to possess strong an-
tioxidant activity through their thiol groups, playing a cru-
cial role in antioxidant defense and the regulation of cellular
redox homeostasis.[53] Furthermore, the MT family has been
shown to be involved in inﬂammation and defense against
infection.[54] The upregulation of these genes enhances cel-
lular antioxidant capacity and reduces LPS-induced oxidative
stress. GO analysis revealed that MHA-CeO2-Cu enhanced the
cofactor metabolic process and response to oxidative stress in
LPS-stimulated macrophages, which was closely associated with
the upregulation of anti-inﬂammatory and antioxidant genes
such as Hmox1 according to the chord diagram. KEGG anal-
ysis further highlighted that several inﬂammation-related sig-
naling pathways, including MAPK, FoxO, and HIF-1 signaling
pathways, were involved in the regulation of LPS-stimulated
macrophages by MHA-CeO2-Cu. Notably, the activation of the
HIF-1 signaling pathway can neutralize ROS by modulating
the expression of endogenous SOD and CAT, thereby reduc-
ing oxidative stress and protecting cells from ROS-induced
damage.[55]
Meanwhile, the Bonyzymes also demonstrated antibacterial
activity in the in vitro experiments. Numerous studies have indi-
cated that nano-scale pure CeO2 lacked considerable antimicro-
bial activity,[56] which was consistent with the results observed in
the MHA-CeO2 group. However, the incorporation of copper sig-
niﬁcantly enhanced the antibacterial ability of Bonyzymes. This
improvement could be attributed to the fact that Cu2+ is an ef-
fective antibacterial agent, which is primarily achieved by dam-
aging the bacterial membrane, inducing lipid peroxidation, and
degrading DNA.[41] Meanwhile, the incorporation of Cu led to
the formation of ceria with more defects, which is believed to
make the surface more reactive and exhibit increased bacterial
toxicity.[57] Surprisingly, compared to its anti-S. aureus and anti-
E. coli eﬀects, Bonyzymes exhibited particularly pronounced an-
tibacterial eﬃcacy against P. gingivalis. This observation aligned
with the graphdiyne-iron nanozymes reported by Wu et al., which
similarly demonstrated dual CAT-like and SOD-like activities.[58]
The enhanced suppression of P. gingivalis may be attributed to
oxygen generation during the CAT-like and SOD-like reactions of
Bonyzymes, which disrupted the tricarboxylic acid cycle, a criti-
cal metabolic pathway for energy supply in P. gingivalis, thereby
inhibiting its proliferation.[59] Concurrently, the aerobic microen-
vironment could suppress anaerobic fermentation-derived bu-
tyrate production, a key short-chain fatty acid, further impairing
cytotoxic eﬀects of P. gingivalis and its capacity to induce tissue
inﬂammation.[60]
Peri-implantitis, being a complex pathological condition, de-
mands materials with not only anti-inﬂammatory and antibacte-
rial properties but also enhanced osteogenic capabilities. Li et al.
reported that an increased Ce4+/Ce3+ ratio promoted new bone
formation and mineralization around the material, which was
contrary to catalytic activity.[42] Therefore, achieving a balance be-
tween enhancing osteogenesis and maintaining catalytic activity
is crucial. In this study, Cu was incorporated into MHA-CeO2 at
an optimized ratio, which not only stabilized intermediate bind-
ing to enhance the material’s catalytic eﬃciency but also largely
preserved its osteogenic properties by avoiding an excessive in-
crease in the Ce4+/Ce3+ ratio. Additionally, MHA-CeO2-Cu re-
leased Cu2+ in a physiological environment, which had been re-
ported to promote cell proliferation, osteogenic diﬀerentiation,
and angiogenesis, thereby accelerating wound healing.[61] Mean-
while, microscale hydroxyapatite materials have been shown
to eﬃciently release calcium ions, signiﬁcantly reducing apop-
totic cell death and thereby promoting cell proliferation and
activity essential for bone growth.[62] While traditional hydrox-
yapatite materials are inherently brittle with limited loading
capacity,[63] we modiﬁed the hydroxyapatite by introducing meso-
pores, which further enhanced its surface area and nanozymes
loading eﬃciency. Moreover, Bonyzymes exhibited good stabil-
ity, which enabled them to exert long-lasting eﬀects in ROS scav-
enging, antibacterial activity, and osteogenesis promotion. Ulti-
mately, as demonstrated by the in vivo experiment, the integra-
tion of composite nanozymes with MHA endowed Bonyzymes
with eﬀective osteoconductive, osteoinductive, and osteogenic
properties, ﬁnally achieving robust tissue regeneration for
peri-implantitis.
4. Conclusion
This study demonstrated the promising therapeutic potential of
Bonyzymes, novel materials that integrates MHA with CeO2-
Cu nanozymes, serving as an artiﬁcial bone graft for peri-
implantitis treatment. By alleviating oxidative stress, Bonyzymes
eﬀectively regulate inﬂammatory pathways, which are pivotal
to the pathogenesis of peri-implantitis. In addition to its anti-
inﬂammatory eﬀects, Bonyzymes demonstrated antimicrobial
activity, further enhancing its clinical relevance. Furthermore,
Bonyzymes exhibited excellent osteogenic promotion eﬀects,
highlighting its potential in facilitating bone regeneration in
the peri-implant regions. These multifaceted properties posi-
tion Bonyzymes as promising candidates for peri-implantitis
treatment, oﬀering a comprehensive approach to the inﬂamma-
tory, infectious and bone repair challenges associated with this
condition.
Figure 6. In vivo therapeutic eﬀects of MHA-CeO2-Cu on Peri-implantitis. A) Schematic workﬂow of the animal experiment, including the establish-
ment and treatment of the peri-implantitis models. B) Photos illustrating the process of peri-implantitis model establishment and treatment in rats.
C) Mesiodistal view of Micro-CT images of peri-implant alveolar bone after 8 weeks of treatment. D) Buccolingual view of Micro-CT images of peri-
implant alveolar bone after 8 weeks of treatment. E–H) Quantitative analysis of peri-implant bone height recovery between pre-treatment and 8 weeks
post-treatment (n = 5). I) BV/TV analysis of peri-implant alveolar bone after 8 weeks of treatment (n = 5). The p-values were determined using one-way
ANOVA followed by Dunnett test, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, compared with the MHA-CeO2-Cu group.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (13 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (14 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
5. Experimental Section
Materials and Reagents:
Potassium hydrogen phosphate (K2HPO4,
Sinopharm,
China),
Cetyltrimethylammonium
Bromide
(CTAB,
Sinopharm, China), hydrogen peroxide (NaOH, Sinopharm, China),
calcium chloride (CaCl2, Sinopharm, China), ethanol (Sinopharm, China),
cerous nitrate (Ce(NO3)3, Aladdin, China), cupric nitrate (Cu(NO3)2,
Sinopharm, China), hydrazine hydrate (N2H4 · H2O, Sinopharm, China).
Preparation of MHA:
K2HPO4 (5.5 g) and CTAB (8.7 g) was dissolved
in ddH2O (100 mL) at 60 °C, with magnetic stirring for 0.5 h. Then,
1.1 M NaOH solution (40 mL) was added to adjust the pH to 12. Sub-
sequently, 0.4 M CaCl2 solution (60 mL) was gradually added to the above
solution, and the mixture was stirred at 120 °C for 24 h. After the re-
action, the white precipitate was ﬁltered and washed with ddH2O and
ethanol, then dried overnight at 60 °C under vacuum. Finally, the prod-
uct was sintered at 600 °C for 6 h to remove residual CTAB, resulting
in MHA.
Preparation of MHA-CeO2:
MHA (1 g) was added to 1 M Ce(NO3)3
solution (10 mL). The resulting suspension was sonicated for 15 min, fol-
lowed by magnetic stirring for 3 h. Then, the mixture was then centrifuged
at 12 000 rpm for 5 min, washed with ddH2O and ethanol, and then cen-
trifuged at 12 000 rpm for 15 min. After centrifugation, the sample was
vacuum-dried at 60 °C overnight. Finally, the product was calcined in a
tube furnace by heating at a rate of 2 °C min−1 to 650 °C for 5 h, resulting
in MHA-CeO2.
Preparation of MHA-CeO2-Cu:
MHA-CeO2 (0.15 g) and 0.1 M
Cu(NO3)2 (1 mL) were added to ddH2O (10 mL), and stirred for 3 h.
Subsequently, 85% N2H4·H2O (44 μL) was added to the suspension, and
stirred continuedly for an additional 3 min. The mixture was then cen-
trifuged at 12 000 rpm for 5 min, followed by washing with ddH2O and
ethanol. Afterward, the suspension was centrifuged again at 12 000 rpm
for 15 min. The sample was vacuum-dried at 60 °C overnight, resulting in
MHA-CeO2-Cu.
Characterization:
The surface morphology of the samples was ob-
served using SEM (Tescan, MIRA, Czech) combined with EDS. TEM (JEOL,
JEM-F200, Japan) with EDS was used to observed the morphology of the
samples, while HRTEM (JEOL, JEM-F200, Japan) was utilized to measure
the lattice spacings of the samples. XRD (Rigaku, SmartLab SE, Japan)
was performed to analyze the X-ray diﬀraction patterns of the samples.
XPS was conducted using an ESCALAB XI+ spectrometer (Thermo Scien-
tiﬁc, USA). A surface area and porosity analyzer (Micromeritics, TriStar II
3020, USA) was used for BET test.
In Vitro Degradation Study:
To evaluate the stability of materials under
physiological conditions, samples were immersed in phosphate-buﬀered
saline (PBS) at 37 °C for 14 days. After immersion, the supernatant was
collected and analyzed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrom-
etry (ICP-MS, Analytik Jena, PQ-MS, Germany) to quantify ion release.
The samples were then gently rinsed with ddH2O, vacuum-dried at 60 °C
overnight, and their surface morphology was examined using SEM (Tes-
can, MIRA).
Evaluation of ROS Clearance Abilities:
The CAT-like activity of the sam-
ples was measured using the catalase assay kit (Leagene, China) colored
by ammonium molybdate. The SOD-like activity was determined using the
superoxide dismutase assay kit (Solarbio, China) containing xanthine and
xanthine oxidase reaction system. The superoxide anion clearance ability
of the samples was evaluated using the superoxide anion clearance assay
kit (Solarbio, China) containing AP-TEMED system. The total antioxidant
intensity of the samples was measured using the total antioxidant activ-
ity assay kit (Beyotime, China) containing ferric-tripyridyltriazine. Above
assay kits were used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Above
experiments were performed in triplicates.
Theoretical Calculations:
All DFT calculations were carried out employ-
ing the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP),[64] based on the pro-
jector augmented wave (PAW) formalism.[65] The electron-ion interactions
were modeled using standard PAW pseudopotentials. Wavefunction ex-
pansions utilized a plane-wave basis set with an energy cutoﬀof 450 eV
for the smooth components. The Electron-electron exchange and correla-
tion interactions were treated with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE),[66]
a form of the general gradient approximation (GGA). The Van der Waals in-
teraction was simulated by Grimme’s DFT-D3 dispersion corrections.[67]
Brillouin zone sampling was performed using a 2 × 2 × 1 grid.[68] Elec-
tronic convergence was achieved when successive iterations reached an
energy diﬀerence below 10−5 eV. Structural optimizations proceeded un-
til all atomic forces were reduced below 0.05 eV Å−1. Post-processing of
charge density data was conducted using the VASPKIT toolkit.[69]
Cell Culture:
RAW264.7 cells were cultured in DMEM high-glucose
medium (Cytiva, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS,
Gibco, USA) in 5% CO2 at 37 °C. Rat BMSCs were obtained from femurs
and tibias of 8-week-old male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats. Brieﬂy, after the
gathering of femurs and tibias, their ends were removed to expose the
marrow cavity. The contents were ﬂushed out by culture medium. The cells
were then cultured in 𝛼-MEM medium (Cytiva, USA) supplemented with
10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (PS, Hyclone, USA) in 5% CO2
at 37 °C. BMSCs were isolated by selecting adherent cell colonies. BMSCs
at passages 2 to 4 (P2-P4) were used for subsequent experiments.
Cytoskeleton Staining:
BMSCs were seeded into 12-well plates at a den-
sity of 10 000 cells mL−1. After 12 h of incubation, the original culture
medium was replaced with the following medium: 𝛼-MEM containing 10%
FBS and 1% PS, or 0.2 mg mL−1 MHA, MHA-CeO2 or MHA-CeO2-Cu in 𝛼-
MEM (containing 10% FBS and 1% PS). After culturing for 1, 3, and 5 days,
cells were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Servicebio, China) for 15 min,
permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 (biosharp, China) for 15 min, and
blocked with 4% bovine serum albumin (Sigma, USA) for 1 h. Then, the
cytoskeletal staining was performed. Brieﬂy, cells were stained with FITC-
phalloidin (Servicebio, China) for 30 min to visualize F-actin, and DAPI
(Beyotime, China) was used for 5 min to stain the nuclei. Finally, cells
were sealed with an anti-ﬂuorescence-quenching agent (Beyotime, China),
and observed under a ﬂuorescence microscope (IX83, Olympus, Japan) for
imaging. Above experiment was performed in triplicates.
Cell Proliferation:
BMSCs were seeded into 96-well plates at a density
of 10 000 cells mL−1. After 12 h of incubation, the original culture medium
was replaced with the following medium: 𝛼-MEM containing 10% FBS and
1% PS, or 0.1–0.4 mg mL−1 MHA, MHA-CeO2 or MHA-CeO2-Cu in 𝛼-
MEM (containing 10% FBS and 1% PS). Cell viability was assessed on day
5 using a cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8, Biosharp, China). A microplate reader
(BioTek, PowerWave XS2, China) was used to detect cell viability with ab-
sorbance at 450 nm. Above experiment was performed in ﬁve times.
Osteogenic Diﬀerentiation of BMSCs:
BMSCs were seeded into 12-
well plates. Once the cell density reached over 80%, the original cul-
ture medium was replaced with the following medium: 𝛼-MEM con-
taining 10% FBS, 1% PS, 10 mM 𝛽-glycerophosphate (Sigma-Aldrich,
USA), 0.1 μM dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and 50 μg mL−1
ascorbic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), or 0.2 mg mL−1 MHA, MHA-CeO2,
or MHA-CeO2-Cu in 𝛼-MEM (containing 10% FBS, 1% PS, 10 mM 𝛽-
glycerophosphate, 0.1 μM dexamethasone, and 50 μg mL−1 ascorbic acid).
The mineralization-inducing medium was refreshed every 2 days. On day
7, cells were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde and rinsed three times with
ddH2O. An ALP staining kit (Beyotime, China) was then used to stain
the cells according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Macro images
were captured using a camera (Nikon, D7200, Japan), and micrographs
were taken using a microscope (Olympus, CKX53, Japan). In the mean-
time, total protein was harvested using radio immunoprecipitation assay
Figure 7. Histological analysis of the in vivo therapeutic eﬀects of MHA-CeO2-Cu on peri-implantitis. A) H&E staining images of peri-implant alveolar
bone: green arrows, inﬂammatory cells clusters; blue arrows, osteoclasts; yellow arrows, residual material. B) Toluidine blue staining images of peri-
implant alveolar bone: red arrows, regions with intense toluidine blue staining. C) Double ﬂuorescent labeling images of peri-implant alveolar bone:
green, calcein; red, xylenol orange. D) Quantiﬁcation of green ﬂuorescence intensity (n = 3). E) Quantiﬁcation of red ﬂuorescence intensity (n = 3).
The p-values were determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett test, *p < 0.05, compared with the MHA-CeO2-Cu group.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (15 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
(RIPA) buﬀer containing a protease inhibitor (Beyotime, China), and the
protein concentration was measured using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Be-
yotime, China). ALP activity was determined with an ALP activity kit (Be-
yotime, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Absorbance at
405 nm was measured using a microplate reader. The data were normal-
ized to the total protein concentration of each sample.
On Day 7 and 14, total RNA was harvested from BMSCs using the TM
Total RNA Kit I (OMEGA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
The RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA using HiScript II Q RT Su-
perMix for qPCR (Vazyme, China). The cDNA was ampliﬁed using ChamQ
SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme, China) on the QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-
Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, USA). Gene expression was ana-
lyzed according to the 2−ΔΔCt method, which was normalized to Gapdh.
The sequences of primers were listed in Table S5, Supporting Information.
Simultaneously, on Day 7 and 14, total protein was harvested from BM-
SCs using RIPA buﬀer with protease inhibitors. Protein concentration was
determined using a BCA protein assay kit. The protein samples were mixed
with SDS-PAGE sample loading buﬀer (Biosharp, China), denatured at
95 °C for 10 min, and separated by 10% SDS-PAGE. The proteins were
transferred onto PVDF membranes, blocked with blocking buﬀer for west-
ern blotting (Beyotime, China), and incubated overnight at 4 °C with pri-
mary antibodies. After incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary anti-
bodies (AS014, ABclonal, China), protein bands were visualized using the
Western Blot ECL HRP Substrate Kit (Advansta, USA). Quantitative anal-
ysis of protein bands was performed using ImageJ (NIH, USA). GAPDH
was used as a loading control. The primary antibodies included anti-ALPL
(A0514, ABclonal, China), anti-BSP (A16220, ABclonal, China), anti-OCN
(A20800, ABclonal, China), and anti-GAPDH (AC035, ABclonal, China).
On Day 21, cells were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde and rinsed three
times with ddH2O. Cells were then stained with Alizarin red solution (Ser-
vicebio, China) to assess mineralization. Macro images were captured
with a Nikon D7200 camera, and micrographs were taken with an Olym-
pus CKX53 microscope. After recoding, the Alizarin red dye was solubilized
by 10% hexadecylpyridinium chloride monohydrate (Servicebio, China) for
2 h. The absorption at 562 nm was measured using a PowerWave XS2 mi-
croplate reader. Above experiments were performed in triplicates.
Antibacterial Experiment:
The S. aureus and E. coli strains were cultured
in lysogeny broth (LB, BD, USA) liquid and solid medium at 37 °C. And,
the P. gingivalis strain was cultured in brain heart infusion (BHI, Hope-
bio, China) liquid medium and sheep blood agar solid medium at 37 °C,
which both were supplemented with vitamin K1 (1 mg L−1), and hemin
(5 mg L−1). P. gingivalis was cultured in an anaerobic atmosphere con-
taining 21% CO2 and 78.9% N2. The antibacterial ability of materials was
assessed using the colony-forming unit (CFU) method. Brieﬂy, 1 × 104
CFU mL−1 suspensions of S. aureus, E. coli and P. gingivalis were mixed
in a 1:1 ratio with liquid medium or suspensions of 0.4 mg mL−1 MHA,
MHA-CeO2, or MHA-CeO2-Cu (prepared in liquid medium). The tubes
were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. After incubation, 100 μL of the bacte-
rial suspension was plated on solid agar plates. Bacterial colonies were
recorded in detail. Above experiment was performed in triplicates.
Macrophage Polarization Assay:
RAW264.7 cells were seeded into 12-
well plates. After the adhesion of cells, the culture medium was replaced
with one of the following: DMEM high-glucose medium containing 10%
FBS, DMEM high-glucose medium containing 10% FBS and P. gingivalis
LPS (1 μg mL−1), or 0.2 mg mL−1 suspensions of MHA, MHA-CeO2,
or MHA-CeO2-Cu (prepared in DMEM high-glucose medium containing
10% FBS and P. gingivalis LPS (1 μg mL−1)). After 6 h of incubation, the
polarization state of the cells was assessed using RT-qPCR and ELISA.
RNA extraction, reverse transcription, and RT-qPCR were performed as
previously described, with the primers listed in Table S6, Supporting Infor-
mation.
The supernatants from each group were collected, and IL-10 and TNF-
𝛼secretion levels were measured using mouse IL-10 ELISA kit (EMC005,
NeoBioscience, China) and mouse TNF-𝛼ELISA kit (EMC102a, NeoBio-
science, China), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Above experi-
ments were performed in triplicates.
In Vitro Immunomodulatory Mechanism by Transcriptome Sequencing:
After 6 h of treatment, total RNA was isolated from RAW264.7 cells
using TRIzol and quantiﬁed with the RNA Nano 6000 assay kit on
the Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, USA). mRNA was
enriched using poly-T oligo-attached magnetic beads and transcribed
into cDNA with M-MuLV reverse transcriptase. The second strand of
cDNA was synthesized using DNA Polymerase I and RNase H, fol-
lowed by adaptor ligation. The cDNA library was puriﬁed using the
AMPure XP system (Beckman Coulter, USA) to obtain fragments of
370–420 bp. PCR ampliﬁcation was performed, and the products were
puriﬁed and veriﬁed using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system. Se-
quencing was conducted on an Illumina Novaseq platform (paired-end,
150 bp depth).
Clean RNA-seq data were processed using FastQC, and the reads were
aligned to the mouse reference genome (GRCm38) using Hisat2 v2.0.5.
Gene-level read counts were obtained with FeatureCounts v1.5.0-p. Diﬀer-
ential expression analysis between groups, based on fragments per FPKM,
was performed using the DESeq2 R package (1.42.1) with six biological
replicates per group. Visualization of the results, including volcano plots
and heatmaps, was carried out using R v4.3.2. Diﬀerentially expressed
genes were further analyzed using the DAVID platform for GO and KEGG
pathway enrichment. PPI networks were constructed using STRING.
Animal Model and Therapeutic Methods:
The animal experiments
in this study were approved by the Ethics Committee for Animal Re-
search, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University (No.
S07922080D). All in vivo experiments were conducted in compliance with
the Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) 2.0
guidelines. Male SD rats were purchased from the Hubei Research Center
of Laboratory Animals (China) and randomly divided into four groups. The
rats were housed in speciﬁc pathogen-free (SPF) conditions and under-
went a 1-week acclimatization period prior to the experiments. Anesthesia
was administered using pentobarbital for long procedures or isoﬂurane
for short procedures.
At 5 weeks of age, the maxillary ﬁrst molars of rats were extracted using
a dental probe. After 1 month of alveolar socket healing, an incision was
made along the alveolar ridge crest at the site of the maxillary ﬁrst molars,
and the mucoperiosteum was reﬂected. The implant site was gradually
prepared using a dental implant system (Nobel Biocare, OsseoSet 200,
Switzerland) with drills speed of 800 rpm, while saline irrigation was used
to prevent bone overheating. Once the socket reached the predetermined
depth, the implant was placed and sutured. After 1 month of osseointe-
gration, an incision was made at the coronal aspect of the implant, and
abutments were installed. 1 week after the restoration, 5-0 silk ligatures
were placed around the abutments, and 100 μL of bacterial suspension
containing P. gingivalis and S. aureus (each 5 × 108 CFU mL−1) was in-
jected into the peri-implant subgingival area every 2 days for 1 month to
induce experimental peri-implantitis.
1 month later, the baseline condition of the peri-implant alveolar bone
was assessed using micro-CT scanner (Bruker, Skyscan 1276, Germany).
Subsequently, diﬀerent treatments were applied to the peri-implant tis-
sues: untreatment, scaling alone, scaling followed by Bio-Oss placement,
or scaling followed by placement of a 1:1 mixture of Bio-Oss and MHA-
CeO2-Cu. Concurrently, 0.002 mL g−1 calcein (5 mg mL−1, Sigma, USA)
was administered via intraperitoneal injection. 7 weeks post-surgery, rats
received an intraperitoneal injection of 0.002 mL g−1 xylenol orange
(5 mg mL−1, Vokai, China). 8 weeks post-surgery, the rats were euthanized
by CO2, and peri-implant tissues were harvested for further analysis.
Micro-CT Analysis:
The collected peri-implant tissues were ﬁxed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for 48 h and subsequently scanned by a Micro-CT scan-
ner (Bruker, Skyscan 1276, Germany). 2D imaging of the samples was per-
formed by DataViewer software. The scan data were analyzed with CT Anal-
yser software for quantitative assessment.
Histological Assessment:
After washing the peri-implant tissues ﬁxed
in 4% paraformaldehyde, the samples were then dehydrated in graded
ethanol and embedded in methyl methacrylate. The embedded samples
were sectioned mesiodistally into slices 200 μm thick, which were sub-
sequently ground to a ﬁnal thickness of 20 μm. Fluorescence scanning
was performed to capture calcein/xylenol orange double labeling, followed
H&E and toluidine blue staining to evaluate peri-implantitis and tissue
repair.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (16 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Statistical Assessment:
All experiments were replicated at least three
times. Statistical analysis was conducted by GraphPad Prism version 8.0.2
(GraphPad Software), with One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) used
among groups, followed by Dunnett’s test. The results were presented as
the mean ± standard deviation (S.D) for each group. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001 were considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
G.L. and X.W. contributed equally to this work. This study was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 82201103,
82370964), and Research Project of School and Hospital of Stomatology
Wuhan University (No. ZW202403). The authors thank the Core Facility of
Wuhan University, Research Center for Medicine and Structural Biology of
Wuhan University for the technical support. The authers also would like to
thank AICA Sci-tech for their valuable support in performing the hard tis-
sue sectioning for this experiment. Schematic illustrations were created
with BioRender.com and Figdraw.com under appropriate publication li-
censes. [Correction added on November 3, 2025, after ﬁrst online publi-
cation: Figure 3A in the main text was inadvertently duplicated in Figure
S6 in the supporting information due to an unintentional typesetting er-
ror. The image in Figure S6 has been replaced with the correct image. This
change does not aﬀect the scientiﬁc conclusions, data interpretation, or
overall integrity of the study.] [Correction added on January 21, 2026, after
ﬁrst online publication: funding information has been updated.]
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
infection
control,
inﬂammation,
osteogenesis,
oxidative
stress,
peri-implantitis
Received: February 8, 2025
Revised: May 28, 2025
Published online: June 25, 2025
[1] F. Schwarz, J. Derks, A. Monje, H. L. Wang, J. Clin. Periodontol. 2018,
45, S246.
[2] C. T. Lee, Y. W. Huang, L. Zhu, R. Weltman, J. Dent. 2017, 62, 1.
[3] T. Berglundh, A. Mombelli, F. Schwarz, J. Derks, Periodontol. 2000
2024.
[4] N. Donos, E. Calciolari, M. Ghuman, M. Baccini, V. Sousa, L. Nibali,
J. Clin. Periodontol. 2023, 50, 285.
[5] a) A. Wilensky, L. Shapira, A. Limones, C. Martin, J. Clin. Peri-
odontol. 2023, 50, 336; b) F. Schwarz, S. Jepsen, K. Obreja, M. E.
Galarraga-Vinueza, A. Ramanauskaite, Periodontol. 2000 2022, 88,
145; c) A. Zipperer, M. C. Konnerth, C. Laux, A. Berscheid, D. Janek, C.
Weidenmaier, M. Burian, N. A. Schilling, C. Slavetinsky, M. Marschal,
M. Willmann, H. Kalbacher, B. Schittek, H. Brotz-Oesterhelt, S.
Grond, A. Peschel, B. Krismer, Nature 2016, 535, 511.
[6] A. Monje, R. Pons, J. Nart, R. J. Miron, F. Schwarz, A. Sculean, Peri-
odontol. 2000 2024, 94, 192.
[7] a) Z. Yin, Y. Liu, A. Anniwaer, Y. You, J. Guo, Y. Tang, L. Fu, L. Yi, C.
Huang, Adv. Mater. 2023, 2305633; b) W. Li, W. S. Jiang, Y. R. Su, K. W.
Tu, L. Zou, C. R. Liao, Q. Wu, Z. H. Wang, Z. M. Zhong, J. T. Chen, S. Y.
Zhu, Cell Death Dis. 2023, 14, 88; c) M. Puthia, M. Butrym, J. Petrlova,
A. C. Stromdahl, M. A. Andersson, S. Kjellstrom, A. Schmidtchen, Sci.
Transl. Med. 2020, 12, aax6601.
[8] A. Martin, P. Zhou, B. B. Singh, G. A. Kotsakis, JDR Clin. Trans. Res.
2022, 7, 415.
[9] Z. Wen, X. Shi, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Liu, R. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Su, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2023, 15, 15235.
[10] C. Yu, Y. Yu, Y. Lu, K. Quan, Z. Mao, Y. Zheng, L. Qin, D. Xia, J. Dent.
Res. 2024, 103, 516.
[11] X. Li, M. Qi, X. Sun, M. D. Weir, F. R. Tay, T. W. Oates, B.
Dong, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, H. H. K. Xu, Acta Biomater. 2019, 94,
627.
[12] K. Matvijenko, A. Pranckeviciene, R. Borusevicius, J. Oral Maxillofacial
Res. 2024, 15, 1.
[13] a) M. Shokri, M. Kharaziha, H. Ahmadi Tafti, F. Dalili, R. Mehdinavaz
Aghdam, S. R. Ghiassi, M. B. Eslaminejad, Biomater. Sci. 2024, 12,
4194; b) X. Lian, K. Mao, X. Liu, X. Wang, F. Cui, X. Li, J. Nanomater.
2015, 2015.
[14] R. Senthil, Ç. Sinem, S. B. Kavukcu, A. W. Aruni, Mater. Lett. 2022,
322, 132475.
[15] a) C. Peng, R. Pang, J. Li, E. Wang, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2211724;
b) L. Ma, J. J. Zheng, N. Zhou, R. Zhang, L. Fang, Y. Yang, X. Gao,
C. Chen, X. Yan, K. Fan, Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 233; c) X. Chen, H.
Xing, Z. Zhou, Y. Hao, X. Zhang, F. Qi, J. Zhao, L. Gao, X. Wang, J.
Mater. Chem. B 2021, 9, 1491.
[16] D. Jiang, D. Ni, Z. T. Rosenkrans, P. Huang, X. Yan, W. Cai, Chem. Soc.
Rev. 2019, 48, 3683.
[17] Y. Ai, Z. N. Hu, X. Liang, H. b. Sun, H. Xin, Q. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater.
2021, 32, 2110432.
[18] Y. Ai, M. He, F. Zhang, Y. Long, Y. Li, Q. Han, M. Ding, H.-b. Sun, Q.
Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A 2018, 6, 16680.
[19] C. Lennicke, H. M. Cocheme, Mol. Cell 2021, 81, 3691.
[20] L. Liu, Y. Zhang, T. Ju, X. Chen, X. Li, L. A. Wu, RSC Adv. 2024, 14,
36945.
[21] X. Bai, W. Peng, Y. Tang, Z. Wang, J. Guo, F. Song, H. Yang, C. Huang,
Bioact. Mater. 2024, 41, 271.
[22] S. Hu, L. Wang, J. Li, D. Li, H. Zeng, T. Chen, L. Li, X. Xiang, ACS
Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2023, 9, 5332.
[23] Y. Xu, Y. Luo, Z. Weng, H. Xu, W. Zhang, Q. Li, H. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Wang,
X. Liu, L. Liao, X. Wang, ACS Nano 2023, 17, 18732.
[24] R. M. Wang, K. Q. Sun, J. F. Wang, Y. F. He, P. F. Song, Y. B. Xiong,
Prog. Chem. 2016, 28, 885.
[25] Y. Li, M. A. Deguzman, J. E. Heise, G. P. Holland, J. Phys. Chem. C
2022, 126, 12790.
[26] B. Hu, K. Sun, Z. Zhuang, Z. Chen, S. Liu, W. C. Cheong, C. Chen, M.
Hu, X. Cao, J. Ma, R. Tu, X. Zheng, H. Xiao, X. Chen, Y. Cui, Q. Peng,
C. Chen, Y. Li, Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2107721.
[27] S. J. Kim, Y. I. Kim, B. Lamichhane, Y. H. Kim, Y. Lee, C. R. Cho, M.
Cheon, J. C. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, T. Ha, J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, S. G. Kim, Y. M.
Kim, S. Y. Jeong, Nature 2022, 603, 434.
[28] J. Roman-Lopez, V. Correcher, J. Garcia-Guinea, T. Rivera, I. B.
Lozano, Spectrochim. Acta Part A 2014, 120, 610.
[29] J. M. Soney, T. Dhannia, Inorg. Chem. Commun. 2024, 165, 112535.
[30] I. O. Mladenovi´c, N. D. Nikoli´c, Metals 2023, 13, 683.
[31] M. Thommes, K. Cychosz, Abstracts Of Papers Of The American Chem-
ical Society 2017, 254.
[32] a) E. Benarroch, Neurology 2023, 101, 714; b) Y. Fang, W. Li, C. Dong,
B. Gao, W. Guo, M. Li, Z. Jiao, Redox Rep. 2024, 29, 2428147; c) R.
Fischer, O. Maier, Oxid. Med. Cell. Longevity 2015, 2015, 610813; d)
M. Foller, I. S. Harris, A. Elia, R. John, F. Lang, T. J. Kavanagh, T. W.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (17 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Mak, Cell Death Diﬀer. 2013, 20, 1350; e) T. K. Furuya, C. E. Jacob,
M. T. P. Tomitao, L. C. C. Camacho, M. Ramos, J. Eluf-Neto, V. A. F.
Alves, B. Zilberstein, I. Cecconello, U. Ribeiro, Jr., R. Chammas, Genes
(Basel) 2018, 9, 631; f) M. V. Guillot-Sestier, K. R. Doty, D. Gate, J.
Rodriguez, Jr., B. P. Leung, K. Rezai-Zadeh, T. Town, Neuron 2015,
85, 534; g) M. Hemmat, L. Kohan, Gene Rep. 2021, 25, 101387; h)
K. Igarashi, J. Sun, Antioxid. Redox Signaling 2006, 8, 107; i) Y. Li, X.
He, X. Yang, K. Huang, Y. Luo, L. Zhu, Y. Li, W. Xu, Sci. Rep. 2015, 5,
14277; j) S. Liu, Z. Li, S. Lan, H. Hao, A. A. Baz, X. Yan, P. Gao, S.
Chen, Y. Chu, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 824; k) J. Lu, Z. Tang, M. Xu, J.
Lu, F. Wang, X. Ni, C. Wang, B. Yu, Redox Rep. 2024, 29, 2347139; l) I.
P. Nezis, H. Stenmark, Antioxid. Redox Signaling 2012, 17, 786; m) C.
Rebe, F. Ghiringhelli, Cancers (Basel) 2020, 12, 1791; n) T. Shimazu,
M. D. Hirschey, J. Newman, W. He, K. Shirakawa, N. Le Moan, C.
A. Grueter, H. Lim, L. R. Saunders, R. D. Stevens, C. B. Newgard, R.
V. Farese, Jr., R. de Cabo, S. Ulrich, K. Akassoglou, E. Verdin, Science
2013, 339, 211; o) Y. Yan, H. Teng, Q. Hang, L. Kondiparthi, G. Lei,
A. Horbath, X. Liu, C. Mao, S. Wu, L. Zhuang, M. James You, M. V.
Poyurovsky, L. Ma, K. Olszewski, B. Gan, Nat. Commun. 2023, 14,
3673; p) G. Yan, L. Yu, S. Jiang, J. Zhu, J. Toxicol. Sci. 2018, 43, 659.
[33] H. Cheng, Y. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Ding, S. Lin, W. Cao, Q. Wang, J. Wu, F.
Muhammad, X. Zhao, D. Zhao, Z. Li, H. Xing, H. Wei, Anal. Chem.
2017, 89, 11552.
[34] Y. Liu, Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, M. Zhou, Y. Yu, S. Lin, B. Jiang, X. Zhao,
L. Miao, C. W. Wei, Q. Liu, Y. W. Lin, Y. Du, C. J. Butch, H. Wei, Sci.
Adv. 2020, 6, abb2695.
[35] S. Ren, Y. Zhou, R. Fan, W. Peng, X. Xu, L. Li, Y. Xu, Chem. Eng. J. 2021,
423, 130207.
[36] Y. G. Kim, Y. Lee, N. Lee, M. Soh, D. Kim, T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater. 2024,
36, 2210819.
[37] a) Q. Huang, J. Li, G. A. Evmenenko, P. Dutta, T. J. Marks, Chem.
Mater. 2006, 18, 2431; b) M. Nolan, S. Grigoleit, D. C. Sayle, S. C.
Parker, G. W. Watson, Surf. Sci. 2005, 576, 217.
[38] P. Jiang, L. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Ye, P. Zhu, T. Tan, D. Wang, Y. Wang, Nat.
Commun. 2024, 15, 1010.
[39] T. Wu, L. Tan, N. Cheng, Q. Yan, Y. F. Zhang, C. J. Liu, B. Shi, Mater.
Sci. Eng., C 2016, 62, 888.
[40] L. Wang, Y. Chen, Mater. Today Chem. 2022, 24, 100784.
[41] J. Xi, G. Wei, L. An, Z. Xu, Z. Xu, L. Fan, L. Gao, Nano Lett. 2019, 19,
7645.
[42] J. Li, J. Wen, B. Li, W. Li, W. Qiao, J. Shen, W. Jin, X. Jiang, K. W. K.
Yeung, P. K. Chu, Adv. Sci. (Weinh) 2018, 5, 1700678.
[43] a) S. Cao, Y. Long, S. Xiao, Y. Deng, L. Ma, M. Adeli, L. Qiu, C. Cheng,
C. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2023, 52, 6838; b) T. Li, Y. Deng, Z. Xing, S.
Xiao, S. Mu, T. Wang, Y. Gao, L. Ma, C. Cheng, C. Zhao, Small Methods
2023, 7, 2300011; c) N. Lv, T. Wang, Z. Zhao, S. Mu, H. Zhu, M. Bai, Y.
Gao, L. Ma, X. Luo, C. Cheng, Adv. Mater. Technol. 2023, 8, 2300130.
[44] P. Hu, G. W. Wu, Q. Xia, Z. W. Mao, Prog. Chemistry 2009, 21, 873.
[45] S. Anwar, F. Alrumaihi, T. Sarwar, A. Y. Babiker, A. A. Khan, S. V.
Prabhu, A. H. Rahmani, Biomolecules 2024, 14, 697.
[46] T. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Zheng, J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol.
2022, 36, 22942.
[47] K. Kwon, J. Jung, A. Sahu, G. Tae, J. Controlled Release 2022, 344, 160.
[48] S. Kadomoto, K. Izumi, A. Mizokami, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 23, 144.
[49] C. Yunna, H. Mengru, W. Lei, C. Weidong, Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2020,
877, 173090.
[50] a) S. W. Ryter, Antioxidants (Basel) 2022, 11, 555; b) V. Consoli, V.
Sorrenti, S. Grosso, L. Vanella, Biomolecules 2021, 11, 589; c) X.
Zhang, Y. Yu, H. Lei, Y. Cai, J. Shen, P. Zhu, Q. He, M. Zhao, Cardiol.
Res. Pract. 2020, 2020, 5695723.
[51] a) O. T. Gbotosho, M. G. Kapetanaki, G. J. Kato, Front. Immunol 2020,
11, 561917; b) R. Larsen, R. Gozzelino, V. Jeney, L. Tokaji, F. A. Bozza,
A. M. Japiassu, D. Bonaparte, M. M. Cavalcante, A. Chora, A. Ferreira,
I. Marguti, S. Cardoso, N. Sepulveda, A. Smith, M. P. Soares, Sci.
Transl. Med. 2010, 2, 51ra71.
[52] M. Bensellam, D. R. Laybutt, J. C. Jonas, Biology (Basel) 2021, 10, 176.
[53] a) M. V. Kumari, M. Hiramatsu, M. Ebadi, Free Radic. Res. 1998, 29,
93; b) T. Miura, S. Muraoka, T. Ogiso, Life Sci. 60, PL301.
[54] K. S. Vignesh, G. S. Deepe, Jr., Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 2197.
[55] F. Ferreira, V. Raghunathan, G. Luxardi, K. Zhu, M. Zhao, Nat. Com-
mun. 2018, 9, 4296.
[56] a) S. A. Abid, A. A. Taha, R. A. Ismail, M. H. Mohsin, Environ Sci.
Pollut. Res. Int. 2020, 27, 30479; b) Y. A. Syed Khadar, A. Balamurugan,
V. P. Devarajan, R. Subramanian, S. D. Kumar, J. Mater. Res. Technol.
2019, 8, 267; c) K. Van Hoecke, J. T. Quik, J. Mankiewicz-Boczek, K.
A. De Schamphelaere, A. Elsaesser, P. Van der Meeren, C. Barnes, G.
McKerr, C. V. Howard, D. Van de Meent, K. Rydzynski, K. A. Dawson,
A. Salvati, A. Lesniak, I. Lynch, G. Silversmit, B. De Samber, L. Vincze,
C. R. Janssen, Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009, 43, 4537.
[57] a) A. Norbert, S. M. Alappatt, S. S. John, S. Shaji, S. K. Remillard, U.
P. Deshpande, R. R. Philip, Physica Status Solidi 2023, 220, 2200731;
b) Y. Kuang, X. He, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Ma, Z. Wu, Z. Chai,
J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2011, 11, 4103.
[58] X. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Lu, M. H. Li, S. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Song, S. Chen, J.
Kang, A. Dong, Y. W. Yang, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2024, 2403683.
[59] a) S. Li, Q. Ding, L. Zhang, F. Shi, C. Liu, T. Li, Y. Shi, M. Qi, L. Wang,
B. Dong, S. Song, J. Sun, J. S. Kim, C. Li, J. Controlled Release 2024,
370, 600; b) I. Martinez-Reyes, N. S. Chandel, Nat. Commun. 2020,
11, 102.
[60] a) A. Barbour, O. Elebyary, N. Fine, M. Oveisi, M. Glogauer, FEMS
Microbiol. Rev. 2022, 46, fuab039; b) V. Srinivasan, H. J. Morowitz,
Biol. Bull. 2006, 210, 1; c) M. A. Vinolo, H. G. Rodrigues, E. Hatanaka,
C. B. Hebeda, S. H. Farsky, R. Curi, Clin. Sci. (Lond) 2009, 117, 331.
[61] C. Wu, Y. Zhou, M. Xu, P. Han, L. Chen, J. Chang, Y. Xiao, Biomaterials
2013, 34, 422.
[62] Y. Cai, Y. Liu, W. Yan, Q. Hu, J. Tao, M. Zhang, Z. Shi, R. Tang, J. Mater.
Chem. 2007, 17, 3780.
[63] J. Qi, J. Xiao, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Xiong, Colloid Polym. Sci. 2020,
299, 623.
[64] J. Hafner, J. Comput. Chem. 2008, 29, 2044.
[65] P. E. Blochl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter 1994, 50, 17953.
[66] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 3865.
[67] S. Grimme, S. Ehrlich, L. Goerigk, J. Comput. Chem. 2011, 32, 1456.
[68] H. J. Monkhorst, J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B 1976, 13, 5188.
[69] V. Wang, N. Xu, J.-C. Liu, G. Tang, W.-T. Geng, Comput. Phys. Commun.
2021, 267, 108033.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, e03585
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
e03585 (18 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 50, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202503585 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License