Vincent Lebreton a,b, Samuel Legeay a, Patrick Saulnier a,b,
Frederic Lagarce a,b,⇑
a University of Angers, MINT Inserm 1066 CNRS 6021, Angers, France
b CHU Angers, 4 Rue Larrey, 49033 Angers, France
Nanomedicines have been developed for more than four decades to
optimize the pharmacokinetics (PK) of drugs, especially absorption,
distribution, and stability in vivo. Unfortunately, only a few drug
products have reached the market. One reason among others is the
lack of proper PK modeling and evaluation, which impedes the
optimization of these promising drug delivery systems. In this review,
we discuss the speciﬁcity of nanomedicines and propose key param-
eters to take into account for future accurate PK evaluation of
nanomedicine. We believe that this could help these innovative drug
products to reach to market and change the fate of many diseases.
Keywords: Nanomedicine; Pharmacokinetics; Drug evaluation; Modeling
Vincent Lebreton stud-
ied
pharmacy
at
the
University
of
Angers,
France, and was then a
hospital
pharmacist
at
the University of Tou-
louse, earning a MSc in
pharmacokinetics
from
the University of Paris XI,
France. He is currently a
hospital pharmacist and
a PhD at the University
of Angers. His main research interest is the pharma-
cokinetic evaluation of anticancer drug nanoparticles
to understand and improve their proﬁles.
Samuel
Legeay
received his PharmD in
2014 and his PhD in
2016 from the University
of Angers, France. After a
stint
at
the
Vascular
Biology Center (Augusta,
GA, USA), he joined the
MINT
laboratory
(UMR
INSERM
U1066
CNRS
6021, Angers, France) in
2017
as
an
assistant
professor, where he focuses his research on the phar-
macokinetics of nanomedicines and vascular targeting.
Speciﬁcity of pharmacokinetic modeling of
nanomedicines
⇑Corresponding author at: University of Angers, MINT Inserm 1066 CNRS 6021, Angers, France. Lagarce, F. (Frederic.lagarce@univ-angers.fr)
Introduction
The concept of nanomedicines was coined during the 1960s, and some medical applica-
tions have successfully made it to the clinic, especially in the domain of cancer therapy
and, recently, with two nanoparticle (NP)-based vaccines to combat Coronavirus 2019
(COVID-19).1–4 However, for some key opinion leaders in this ﬁeld, the pathway to the
market is narrow for these special drug delivery systems.5 This issue is linked to the difﬁ-
culty in characterizing nanosized drug delivery systems.6 Their clinical translation would
be faster if the products were better characterized and if their behavior in vivo was more
described.7
This is worth pursuing because nanotechnologies have signiﬁcant potential in medi-
cine beyond their application for vaccines. The concept of nanodrug delivery systems
was proposed initially to improve the efﬁcacy and safety of already commercialized anti-
cancer or anti-infectious drugs. The objective was to enhance the performance of those
nano-encapsulated drugs (i.e., absorption, body residence time, and selective distribution)
and to limit their toxicity.8 The ﬁeld has since received signiﬁcant funding and is projected
to continue to grow rapidly.9
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
REVIEWS
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
1359-6446/ 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2021.04.017
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com
2259

Frederic
Lagarce
received his PhD in 2004,
and has been a full pro-
fessor of pharmaceutical
technology
and
bio-
pharmaceutics
since
2012 at the University of
Angers,
France.
Being
also a hospital pharma-
cist,
his
research
is
translational
(from
bench to bedside) and
mainly focuses on cancer therapy, especially bioavail-
ability
enhancement
by
exploiting
interactions
between the drug products (mainly nanosystems) and
living tissues. In hospital he is in charge of the phar-
maceutical technology and quality control unit. Finding
new answers to medical needs using innovative drug
formulations is what drives his work.
Nanomedicines have been developed for more than
four decades to optimize the pharmacokinetics (PK) of
drugs, especially absorption, distribution, and stability
in vivo. Unfortunately, only a few drug products have
reached the market. One reason among others is the
lack of proper PK modeling and evaluation, which
impedes the optimization of these promising drug
delivery systems. In this review, we discuss the speci-
ﬁcity of nanomedicines and propose key parameters to
take into account for future accurate PK evaluation of
nanomedicine. We believe that this could help these
innovative drug products to reach to market and
change the fate of many diseases.
Unfortunately, the few therapeutics nanoformulations that have already reached the mar-
ket have not dramatically changed the outcome of their target disease, as seen, for example,
with liposomal doxorubicin, which displays a new toxicological proﬁle compared with free
doxorubicin (used for palmoplantar erythrodysesthesia)10,11 and for Nab paclitaxel (increases
sensory neuropathy), which has not changed the prognosis of patients with breast cancer.11,12
The enhanced permeation and retention (EPR) effect observed in rodents, which was for dec-
ades used to explain the potential of NPs to accumulate in tumors, is now widely recognized as
being minimal in humans.13 These examples show that the biodistribution of nanomedicines
remains to be precisely determined. Moreover, the interactions of nanomedicines with biolog-
ical media needs to be described in more details, in particular because of the high surface area:-
mass ratio of these nanosized drug delivery systems. Indeed, one major interaction raised to
explain the fate of NPs in vivo is protein corona formation at the surface of the NP, the diffusion
of the modiﬁed NP being impeded by its sterically hindered surface.
We think that the major problem impeding the access of nanomedicine to patients is
that previous pharmacokinetic (PK) and biodistribution studies, including PK modeling,
did not take into account the speciﬁcity of those drug delivery systems. In regular PK anal-
ysis, biodistribution is described by four phases: absorption (except for the intravenous
route), distribution, metabolism, and elimination (ADME). These are associated with differ-
ent PK parameters, such as volume of distribution, half-life, mean retention time (MRT),
area under the curve (AUC), and clearance. Those parameters are calculated based on the
concentration of the drug molecule in the blood (mainly) versus time. PK modeling can
be done by either a noncompartmental approach or by compartmental modeling. In this
review, we shed light on what makes nanomedicines so different and how those speciﬁcities
should be considered in models that are used to gain their approval by national and inter-
national health agencies.
Nanomedicines can globally be classiﬁed into two groups: organic and inorganic.
Organic NPs include nanocapsules, dendrimers, polymeric micelles, and liposomes,
whereas inorganic ones include NPs without any carbon atoms and generally comprise a
variety of materials, such as noble metals (golden, silver etc.), alkaline earth metals (cal-
cium, magnesium, etc.), semiconductors (cadmium and titan) or magnetic compounds
(iron, nickel, cobalt, etc.).15
In this review, we focus on organic lipidic or polymeric NPs because the issues and mod-
els associated with these differ from those of inorganic particles, especially in terms of their
diffusion and stability, which are central to understand the fate of these particles in the
body.
Absorption
Besides parenteral routes, all routes of administration (skin delivery, pulmonary deliv-
ery, and oral delivery) involve absorption to reach the blood circulation for systemic
action.16 We focus here on oral delivery because the challenges for PK evaluation are
the highest for this route, as explained below.
The oral route is the route of choice for many drugs because it is considered convenient
and safe. However, some drugs are not properly absorbed by the oral route because they are
not soluble and display low permeability across the intestinal barrier. Some drugs are also
destroyed by the biochemical stress induced by digestive liquids. Nanomedicines have been
proposed to protect the drug and enhance its permeability. This would allow the oral deliv-
ery of peptides, such as insulin, or other important drugs, such as anticancer drugs.17
After oral administration, the bioavailability of the drug is mainly impacted by the
absorption process. In fact, the stability of the drug after contact with biological media,
its solubility, and its permeability are key parameters to monitor. The encapsulation of
the drug molecules in NPs can help to control these parameters and many examples can
be found showing oral bioavailability enhancement after encapsulation in nanocarri-
ers;18–21 however, speciﬁc issues can also appear, as we discuss herein.
Gastrointestinal stability of NPs in relation to their PK proﬁle
Gastric or intestinal ﬂuids are a well-known stress for free molecules because of the pH of
the media and the presence of enzymes, such as lipases or peptidases. If encapsulation is
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
2260
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

proposed to protect active drugs, NPs should remain intact after
contact with gastric or intestinal ﬂuid with minimal encapsu-
lated drug leakage. To evaluate the gastrointestinal stability of
lipid nanocapsules (LNC), Roger et al. studied the size of LNCs
after 3 h of contact with a simulated gastric (FaSSIF-V2) and
intestinal media (FeSSIF-V2). The LNC size was not modiﬁed after
3 h in the gastric medium but was quickly destroyed in the
intestinal medium because of pancreatic lipase.22 In addition,
Singh et al. studied the stability of poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG)-
ylated liposomes versus conventional liposomes after 2 h of
exposure to the gastrointestinal environment. They compared
the release of the drug from these two formulations, ﬁnding that
if the drug remained in PEGylated liposomes after 2 h, it was
then completely released, compared with the conventional lipo-
somes XXXXX.23 For polymeric NPs, Tobio et al. demonstrated
that a PEG coating of poly (lactic acid) (PLA) NPs increased pro-
tection against digestive ﬂuids. Indeed, after 4 h of incubation in
simulated gastric media, PEG-PLA NPs were less degraded than
PLA NPs (only 3% PEG-PLA NPs were converted in lactate against
9% of PLA NPs).24
From these examples, it is easy to understand that, to
describe the PK proﬁle of nanomedicines after oral administra-
tion, the stability of the nanocarrier along all the gastro-
intestinal tract should be checked and included in the PK
model.
Mucus permeation of NPs as a crucial barrier to absorption
After its contact with gastric and intestinal ﬂuid, the nanocarrier
has to diffuse through mucus to be absorbed or at least to release
its cargo in the mucus in the vicinity of drug-absorption sites.
After the stability issue, diffusion within mucus is an important
barrier for nanocarrier absorption; the barrier properties of
mucus have been fully reviewed elsewhere.25–27
Using the Transwell system, Groo et al. studied the impact of
LNC surface modiﬁcations on their diffusion capability through
the intestinal mucus layer. The authors concluded that LNCs
with positive or neutral charge diffuse better through the mucus
compared with negative LNCs.28 However, mucus diffusion
might be a limiting step for drug absorption in the case of
nanomedicines, explaining why many authors have proposed
speciﬁc models26 and NP surface modiﬁcations to aid mucus
crossing.29 Regular cell models, such as Caco-2 cells, which are
widely used to assess the intestinal permeability of small mole-
cules, are not relevant in the case of nanomedicines if they do
not display a mucus barrier. This is why speciﬁc in vitro models,
including mucus-secreting cells in co-culture with Caco-2, have
been proposed.30–32 For example, to increase the correlation
between in vitro–in vivo results, Pereira et al. seeded Caco-2 and
HT29-MTX Matrigel, which contains myoﬁbroblasts (CCD18-
Co cells).33 The authors demonstrated that this new 3D in vitro
model was robust and could be used to predict drug and NP
permeability.33
NP mechanisms of diffusion in mucus are a complex and ill-
deﬁned phenomenon. Physicochemical interactions, such as
hydrophobic, electrostatic, and hydrogen interactions, limit NP
diffusion and can be controlled by the composition of the NP
surface properties.26 In addition, because both the size and
charge of nanomedicines impact their ability to diffuse through
mucus and there is interplay between those two features, they
have to be analyzed concomitantly.34,35
Contrary to what is used for free small molecules, mucus dif-
fusion is a key parameter that must be considered in the design of
absorption models for nanomedicines. Thus, as proposed for sta-
bility, relevant models of PK used for nanomedicines should take
into account their diffusion into mucus. In the case of small
molecules, in vitro–in vivo correlation does not consider mucus
diffusion; that is, the more the drug is released in vitro, the more
of it will be absorbed (if the transport process is not saturable).
This correlation is more complicated if the NPs are stuck in the
mucus. Similarly, current PK models do not differ even if the
drug remains in the NP during the absorption process.
Crossing intestinal barriers: The speciﬁcity of nanomedicines
and consequences for PK study
Crossing the intestinal barrier requires speciﬁc pathways in the
case of nanomedicines. As long as the drug remains encapsu-
lated, it cannot cross the enterocytes by passive diffusion,
whereas this is the main absorption process for small uncharged
molecules. Thus, the absorption will be different if the drug is
released before enterocyte crossing or if it is the NP carrying
the drug that is absorbed. These differences have to be taken into
account in relevant speciﬁc PK models. Indeed, NPs can only be
absorbed by active endocytosis using clathrin pits or caveolae or
by micropinocytosis.32 These processes are saturable and slower
than passive diffusion. These particular steps for NP absorption
should be included in relevant PK models of NP. Absorption
mechanisms can be studied using regular cellular models.18 For
example, one important question to address is the equilibrium
of the endocytosis mechanisms in the case of NPs. For some
NPs, a relay between the different endocytosis has been observed
if one of them is saturated or blocked, allowing rapid uptake of
the NPs in the cell, whereas, for others, it might not be the same
if their uptake is mediated by only one endocytosis process.
The integrity of NPs while crossing the intestinal barriers
should also be studied. For example, Roger et al. conducted an
in vitro study of LNCs to demonstrate their stability during ente-
rocyte crossing. By following NPs with Förster resonance energy
transfer (FRET) labeling, the authors observed the FRET signal in
the basolateral side of the Caco-2 cell monolayer after 2 h, allow-
ing them to demonstrate both LNC integrity and intestinal
absorption.36 This information is essential because the PK after
absorption will follow the PK proﬁle of the free drug if the carrier
is destroyed during the absorption process, whereas it will mostly
follow the PK proﬁle observed after intravenous injection of the
nanocarrier if this carrier remains intact after reaching the portal
vein at the end of the absorption process. One can also suggest
that the PK of the drug can also be a complex mix between the
PK of the free and encapsulated drug.
Other in vitro models have been developed to mimic accu-
rately the cell diversity of the intestinal barrier. Gulberg et al.
developed a co-culture with Caco-2 cells and the B cell lym-
phoma Raji cell line to mimic enterocytes and M cells, respec-
tively.37 This model was improved by des Rieux et al., and
enabled the authors to suggest micropinocytosis as a main mech-
anism of absorption for their 200-nm carboxylated polystyrene
NP.30 Beloqui et al. summarized different cell culture models used
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com
2261

for transport studies of NP. The authors stated that almost all NPs
cross the intestinal barriers via endocytosis except for lipophilic
NPs, which are mainly transported by transcellular pathways.32
The cellular models for studying intestinal absorption have
been improved to better describe their uptake mechanisms by
the cells. Knowledge of those mechanisms is needed to optimize
the NP formulation to enhance their oral bioavailability. In par-
allel, the integrity of NPs can be monitored (especially using
FRET) during the crossing of cells. This second feature appears
to be more crucial to include in the PK model to predict more
accurately the bioavailability of the drug. If the NP is not stable
while crossing the intestinal cell barrier, the fate of the encapsu-
lated drug can be critically modiﬁed, which is not the case if the
uptake pathway changes or is not fully described. The latter was
shown by Roger et al., who displayed alternative uptake mecha-
nisms because the main entrance pathway was blocked by inhi-
bitors. Indeed, the authors demonstrated a modiﬁcation of
transport pathways after cholesterol depletion or inhibition of
clathrin-mediated endocytosis.21
PK model relevancy for absorption
From what has already been discussed, we can afﬁrm that integ-
rity of the NP and its overall stability is an important parameter
to monitor to obtain a relevant PK model. In regular PK models,
the AUC after oral administration is accurate evidence of the rate
of absorption, which can be calculated by Weibull modeling
(Weibull’s law is a three-parameter probability law that is widely
used to model the lifetime of products because of its ﬂexibility).
In the case of nanomedicines, it is not relevant to only quantify
the concentration of the drug through time because it does not
consider the stability of the NP. For example, this was demon-
strated by Groo et al., whereby the most effective paclitaxel
nanoformulation in an in vivo subcutaneous tumor model after
oral delivery was not that with the highest AUC. Importantly,
the tumor was resistant to free paclitaxel but not to encapsulated
paclitaxel. Thus, the formulation that was not stable during
absorption gave the highest AUC, whereas free paclitaxel was
not effective enough against the tumor. Paclitaxel encapsulated
in stable LNCs was less absorbed but more effective. This is one
example that demonstrates that relationship between AUC and
drug effect is not obvious in the case of nanomedicines.38
Distribution
The main goal of drug nanoencapsulation is to modify the distri-
bution of the drug to enhance its activity and/or to reduce its
toxicity. Thus, this step of the PK process should be clearly
assessed. Once again, regular PK models fail to describe with
good accuracy the dynamics of NP distribution, which depends
on the interaction of particles with body ﬂuids and tissues
throughout the distribution process. Physicochemical parame-
ters of the NPs change after contact with body ﬂuids and are
responsible for the fate of the nanocarrier in vivo. To describe
and predict those interactions, it is mandatory to characterize
the NPs fully before administration and during their journey in
the bloodstream.
Characterization of NPs before administration
To follow the distribution dynamics and to establish relevant
models, it is important to characterize the formulation before
administration. Not only size, shape, and charge should be
assessed, but the homogeneity of the formulation should also
be well deﬁned. If more than one type of nanostructure exists
(e.g., nanocapsules mixed with micelles) in the same formulation
mixture, this will have impact the overall distribution. Regular
PK models used to describe distribution only consider the active
ingredient as a free drug. Some nanomedicine PK models have
been published but with the hypothesis that only one type of
NP was administered.23,39 However, it is now well known that
other species, such as micelles, can also be present in the formu-
lation in addition to NPs. This is also the case for liposomal for-
mulations, which can contain different types of liposome or
liposome remnants.40 This complexity of the NP population after
formulation has to be well characterized or puriﬁed to be
included for speciﬁc PK modeling of NPs.
To explain the complexity of NP characterization, we can look
at an apparently simple parameter, namely size determination. It
is well known that size impacts distribution.41,42 Thus, accurately
determining the size is mandatory. However, different tech-
niques adapted and validated in the nanosize range, such as
dynamic light scattering (DLS), NP tracking analysis (NTA), or
ﬁeld-ﬂow fractionation (FFF), coupled to multiple sizing detec-
tors or even electron microscopy (EM), will not give the same
results, especially for particles that are not solid, such as lipo-
somes or lipid nanocapsules. If the technique is different, the
measured parameter is also different as, thus, is the ﬁnal result.
In fact, the difﬁculty is in choosing the best adapted method of
analysis. In addition, size measurement is always performed
in vitro in standardized conditions and might not be the same
after contact with organic ﬂuids, as blood. The same reasoning
can be applied for zeta potential reﬂecting the surface charge of
the particles.
Therefore, determining the true size of a particle is difﬁcult
and impedes accurate modeling of distribution. A 10% error on
the radius of the particle will lead to a 21% error on the surface
and, for some techniques, this difference is much higher.43
Characterization of NPs after administration
If NP characterization is not easy before administration while
NPs are in their native form, it becomes even more difﬁcult in
the blood compartment after contact with plasma proteins,
which form a corona at the surfaces of the NPs and potentially
changes their diffusion properties.44,45 The proﬁle of coating pro-
tein depends on the physicochemical properties of NPs. This
physicochemical speciﬁcity leads to a ‘biological identity’, which
has been well described by Dawson and Linse et al., and more
recently by Caracciolo et al.14,46 This relatively modern concept
is misunderstood, and mastering it is probably one of the keys
to nanomedicine clinical success.47 Increasing knowledge of this
phenomenon is essential to obtain information relating to the
surface-associated proteins of NPs. Given that the environment
of the protein changes between different body compartments,
NP coatings change as they move through the body. Indeed, cor-
ona proteins comprise a ‘hard corona’ based on strong NP/pro-
tein links, and ‘soft corona’ resulting from weak binding,
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
2262
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

which allows dynamic protein exchanges at the surface of
NPs.48,49 Finally, protein corona formation can lead to opsoniza-
tion, which can enhance uptake by specialized cells of the retic-
uloendothelial
system
(RES),
leading
to
increased
NP
elimination. Therefore, by changing the size, shape properties,
and surface charge of NPs, a protein coating will inﬂuence their
biodistribution. To avoid or minimize corona protein and, thus,
increase the plasma half-life during biodistribution, it is possible
to design stealth NPs with a PEG coating.50,51 These NPs can be
considered second-generation NPs, for which steric stabilization
with PEG is one of the promising approaches used to improve
their PK proﬁle, increase circulation time and/or stability, and
reduce clearance of plasma nanocarrier by the RES.52
Other important information for establishing accurate PK
models is the equilibrium dynamic between the encapsulated
drug, free drug, and the free NP. Regular PK models only describe
the evolution of drug concentrations in compartments such as
blood, brain, or other speciﬁc tissues. For NPs, their performance
is linked to the distribution process of the drug within the carrier
(speciﬁc targeting or drug protection) and the kinetics of release
from the carrier to obtain drug action. Thus, monitoring the drug
alone presents some limitations for NP PK modeling. Thus, it is
important to use methods that enable the determination of not
only the encapsulated and released drugs, but also the emptied
NP. Combined with the PK process, this information is required
to establish an accurate PK model with a high prediction capabil-
ity of both the efﬁcacy and toxicity of nanomedicines.
Singh et al. performed an in vivo PK study on liposomes loaded
with exemestane (Fig. 1), in which they measured drug concen-
tration without evaluating the integrity of liposomes,23 while
Menzel et al. investigated exenatide loaded in a self-emulsifying
drug delivered system.39 Most of the published studies rely on
the monitoring of drug blood concentration over time, which
is relevant for non-encapsulated drugs but is not accurate for
nanomedicines. Considering the equilibrium between the free
and the encapsulated drug during PK modeling will be required
to remove barriers to the clinical translatability of nanomedicine
treatments.
Many studies use labeling of the drug or the nanocarrier (e.g.,
with a dye) to follow their distribution. In this case, the stability
of the dye and of its association with the nanocarrier has to be
checked. Many issues have been reported, such as instability of
ﬂuorescent labeling, structure modiﬁcation of the carrier after
labeling, or deterioration of NP stability.53,54 Moreover, labeling
can change the fate of the nanomedicines if it changes their sur-
face properties, as discussed earlier. Guo et al. discussed each
method of labeling and their associated ﬂaws for example, some
elements of whole blood (hemoglobin) can interfere with ﬂuo-
rescence. According to these authors, radiotracers are considered
as a suitable choice to keep the molecular structure of the
nanocarriers but, unfortunately, are not the most appropriate
form of control of NP structure integrity.54
Volume of distribution
The volume of distribution (Vd) is a theoretical volume at which
the drug should distribute at a homogenous concentration calcu-
lated from the initial blood concentration immediately after
intravenous injection. This parameter is calculated for every reg-
ular drug product. For nanomedicines, encapsulated and free
drugs are present at the same time from the initial time point
(T0) in the blood circulation because, in many cases, there is
an equilibrium between free and encapsulated drug even in the
containers. Given this duality, the regular determination of Vd
from the blood at T0 is neither accurate nor informative. If one
calculates the Vd from the total drug (encapsulated plus free
drug) the interpretation will be complex because the entities do
not display the same diffusion patterns. This inability to deter-
mine an accurate Vd has consequences for modeling because,
in standard models, Vd is used to calculate other parameters,
such as drug total clearance. This example shows again that reg-
ular
modeling
is
not
relevant
for
PK
determination
of
nanomedicines.
Biodistribution studies
A major way to evaluate the distribution of nanomedicines in the
body while assessing their stability is to use FRET, as already
described for absorption studies. Laine et al. used FRET to evalu-
ate the behavior of different lipid NPs [i.e., LNCs, pegylated
LNCs, and lipid nanoemulsions (LNEs)]. Results showed different
release kinetic proﬁles, with PEGylated LNCs and LNEs had an
extended blood-circulation time associated with good structure
stability over several hours after intravenous injection.55 Gravier
et al. used macroscopic and microscopic imaging to analyze the
FRET signal to determine the stability of LNE and LNC in a bio-
logical environment. Results showed that LNCs remained more
stable compared with LNEs in the presence of serum or cancer
cells.56 These studies, based only on imaging, give insight into
the fate of nanocarriers in vivo but are not quantitative and, thus,
do not enable determination of a PK proﬁle. Quantifying both
the free drug and the nanocarrier in parallel would be a good
strategy to this end.
Various studies have described the surface modiﬁcation of NPs
to optimize the biodistribution of the encapsulated drug in, for
example, active targeting on solid tumors. Some surface probes,
such as RGD peptides57 or speciﬁc antibodies, have been pro-
posed for this use.11,58 In recent years, the ability of blood pro-
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today
FIGURE 1
Plasma concentration of exemestane (EXE) with time for three different
formulations: suspension, conventional liposomes (EXE-CON-LIPO), and poly
(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-ylated liposomes (EXE-PEG-LIPO). Reproduced, with
permission, from 23.
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com
2263

teins to form a corona around NPs has also been taken into
account to develop efﬁcient active targeting.59,60 Before trying
to optimize the biodistribution, one should be able to character-
ize accurately the distribution of nanomedicines and to differen-
tiate encapsulated drug from free drug in every tissue. This would
help to solve the issue of active targeting. In fact, the percentage
of administrated drug that is considered to reach its target after
encapsulation in specialized drug delivery systems is low (0.3–
3% according to some studies).61,62 Although targeting has been
one of the potential key features highlighted for nanomedicines,
it is now obvious that this goal has not yet been achieved in
humans. This is also because animal models used (mainly
rodents) do not display the same physiological characteristics
as humans and, thus, are nonrelevant models.
Conclusions on PK model relevancy for distribution step
To characterize and model the distribution, it is important to
determine the dynamics of corona formation over the particles.
Regular PK parameters are not directly usable, such as, for exam-
ple, Vd, as discussed earlier. Moreover, modeling should include
the equilibrium between free and encapsulated drug. One way of
doing this would be to add a supplemental compartment related
to the encapsulated drug in the PK model. Thus, the minimum
number of compartments in a nanomedicine PK model would
be two (i.e., free drug in the blood and encapsulated drug in
the blood) (Fig. 2).
Degradation–elimination
The degradation–elimination phase is the last phase of the PK
process for drugs and NPs. One of the key advantages of NPs is
their prolonged circulation time. This has been seen as being par-
ticularly relevant for cancer therapy, and is why it is vital to char-
acterize this phase with the aim of optimizing it. This phase
contains both metabolization and excretion processes.
Phases of NP elimination and hepatic afﬁnity
For the active drug, the PK phase of metabolism is represented by
chemical reactions mainly found in the liver. Usually, these reac-
tions are divided into three phases. First, an activation phase
using enzymes of cytochrome P450, which include oxidation,
reduction, or hydrolysis reactions. Then, a conjugation phase is
necessary because metabolites obtained after the ﬁrst phase are
clearly unstable. During this second phase, the addition of a
hydrophilic group allows the best drug solubilization, thus facil-
itating its elimination. The ﬁnal phase is a transport phase to
eliminate xenobiotics (Fig. 3).63 All these phases refer to the
active drug and not to its carrier.
In the case of nanomedicines, PK parameters associated with
normal metabolism and followed by drug elimination are not
directly applicable. For the nanocarrier, it could be possible to
deﬁne a Phase IV of degradation (Fig. 3). Indeed, even if NPs
are not metabolized using classical hepatic pathways, there is a
speciﬁc process for NP degradation mainly linked to liver–NP
interactions, as described by Zhang et al.. After NP administra-
tion, proteins that are present in different biological media cover
NPs to form a protein corona. This is called opsonization and can
be considered as the ﬁrst step in elimination, during which the
NP is tagged by proteins to allow its recognition by speciﬁc cells.
Indeed, NPs covered with this protein corona generate different
cell interactions in the blood, such as complement activation,
or in different tissues, for example in the liver, with cellular
uptake by the resident macrophages, Kupffer cells. The second
step of NP elimination is the result of these interactions, which
lead to NP degradation NP by the immune system. Thus, the liver
has an essential role in the elimination of NPs, especially in the
Kupffer cells by micropinocytosis, clathrin-mediated endocyto-
sis, or caveolin-mediated endocytosis.64–66 Internalization is lar-
gely associated with surface charge, shape, or size and, thus,
also with the composition of protein corona because it impacts
all three characteristics. For example, PEG reduces cellular uptake
by decreasing the formation of the protein corona. By contrast,
NP size can affect endocytosis mechanisms. Indeed, endocytosis
is caveolin mediated for 20–100-nm NPs, whereas it is clathrin
mediated for 100–350-nm NPs, and uses micropinocytosis for lar-
ger NPs.65–68
NP–liver interactions: ABC phenomena
NP–liver interactions are a major step in elimination; unfortu-
nately, this step was generally only studied in vitro or in healthy
animals, as detailed by La-Beck et al.69 Using the right models in
this case can be particularly relevant. For example, cancers are
often associated with profound and heterogeneous immune dys-
function, which can lead to modiﬁcation of circulating proteins,
changing the nature of the corona covering the NPs and modify-
ing their PK proﬁles.68 Phagocytosis of NPs is more associated
with speciﬁc recognizable proteins present on their surface rather
than by the quantity of binding proteins. Indeed, Nguyen et al.
showed that uptake of NPs in mixtures of different protein con-
centrations by phagocytes was identical.60
These interactions with the mononuclear phagocyte system
(MPS) lead to NP clearance from blood and sequestration in
organs of the MPS: liver, spleen, and lymph nodes, and is one
of the most important barriers to the therapeutic efﬁciency of
NPs.70 PEG is added to the NP surface to reduce uptake by
MPS, but this can induce the production of anti-PEG antibodies
and activation of complement proteins. This immunogenicity
mechanism, which leads to an accelerated blood clearance
(ABC) phenomenon, is well established in preclinical studies
but is unclear in clinical situations.68,71–73 The lack of relevant
Drug Discovery Today
FIGURE 2
Drug release and exchange between nanoparticles and its elimination from
the central compartment. K1 and K–1 are the exchange constants of active
drug between the NP central compartment. Ke represents the elimination
constant from the compartment.
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
2264
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

PK studies, including repetition of NP injections, could explain
this situation. Thus, it will be interesting to study this ABC phe-
nomenon
more
precisely,
especially
PK
modiﬁcation
of
nanomedicines after multiple injections. The ABC phenomenon
is complex and depends on multiple factors: time interval effect
(more pronounced from 4 to 7 days), third dose effect (decrease
of effect after two injections), PEG-surface density, PEG chain-
length effect, NP size and charge effect (increased for larger and
positively charged NPs), administration effect (more important
for slow infusion in contrast to bolus), or also animal species
effect (maximum ABC is observed after 7 days for rats and
10 days for mice, but is unobserved for the rabbit).71
Renal excretion
As discussed for the distribution phase, another way to improve
the PK proﬁle during the elimination phase involves adding PEG
to the NP surface to reduce renal clearance.74
NP renal elimination is also associated with protein-corona
formation because it has a major role in increasing particle diam-
eter (hydrodynamic diameter), which becomes considerably lar-
ger compared with its in vitro measurement. Consequences for
blood clearance are important because NP diameter is associated
with cut-off glomerular ﬁltration linked to the elimination from
blood of the encapsulated drug; thus, this can affect its half-life
in blood.75
Glomerular tissue comprises three layers: fenestrated endothe-
lium, glomerular basement membrane (GBM), and podocytes,
with pores between 4 and 5 nm. Filtration cut-off is 65 kDa (al-
bumin
molecular
weight),
which
corresponds
to
6–8 nm.
NPs < 6 nm are subject to free glomerular ﬁltration, whereas
NPs > 8 nm are not ﬁltered. Moreover, renal elimination is also
inﬂuenced by NP charge because the GBM is negatively charged;
thus, positively charged NPs are more easily ﬁltered than nega-
tively charged NPs, which are repulsed. In addition, because fen-
estrated
endothelium
is
covered
by
a
negatively
charged
glycocalyx layer that is 200–300-nm thick, it allows negative
NPs to have a longer circulation time.54,75,76 In a recent review,
Peng et al. discussed the challenge of renal-clearable nanocarri-
ers.
This
is
an
interesting
topic
because
renal-clearable
nanomedicines have many advantages, such as minimizing
MPS uptake and avoiding long-term accumulation in vital
organs, which could induce hepatic or spleen toxicity.70
Calculating PK parameters for the elimination phase
for nanomedicines
In regular PK analysis, the elimination phase is described by dif-
ferent PK parameters: half-life, MRT, and clearance. These param-
eters are calculated (mainly) from the concentration of the free
drug in the blood versus time. This can be done by non-
compartmental analysis (NCA) or after using compartmental
modeling. In each case, the calculation should be related to the
drug concentration. When it comes to nanomedicines, the prob-
lem is more complex because the drug can be present in blood as
free or encapsulated drug (i.e., not bioavailable at the site of
action). This situation should be taken into account in studies
involving the PK analysis of nanomedicines. Indeed, the result
obtained is not the same if both the free drug and the encapsu-
Drug Discovery Today
FIGURE 3
Parallel elimination of organic nanoparticles (a) and its encapsulated drug after release (b). Blue arrow represents drug release into the environment from the
carrier; dashed blue arrow indicates drug exchange between the environment and the carrier. Blue circles indicate lipophilic drug molecules.
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com
2265

lated drug are separated after blood sampling before analysis.
Given that the fraction of drug that can be eliminated by the kid-
ney is only the free drug, the calculated renal clearance should
only refer to the free drug (with exception of renal-clearable
nanomedicines < 8 nm as discussed earlier). For terminal half-
life determination, the issue is the same and interpreting a
half-life that includes free and encapsulated drug can be difﬁcult,
especially if the parameter is compared with a standard injectable
or oral formulation without any encapsulation (i.e., sequestra-
tion of the drug from its elimination process). Thus, the MRT
might be more relevant because it allows a more accurate com-
parison between different formulations of the same drug after
NCA. MRT is a global value of the mean amount of time a mole-
cule will stay in the studied tissue or media; however, it is only
calculated from the blood AUC and its shape is described by area
under the ﬁrst moment curve (AUMC). Total clearance calcula-
tions for nanomedicine should also only be calculated as the
ratio of dose and AUC using NCA, again keeping in mind that,
in the case of nanomedicines, the result will be different if free
drug is considered or if the total of free and encapsulated drug
is considered. If modeling is involved to determine those elimi-
nation parameters, the carrier with its encapsulated drug should
be considered as a supplementary compartment, as discussed ear-
lier. In the model, the stability of the carrier should also be con-
sidered because it impacts the release of the free drug and, thus,
its elimination. In fact, the released drug can follow the elimina-
tion process, which might not be the same for the encapsulated
drug still protected from major elimination processes (metabo-
lization, kidney ﬁltration etc.).
Concluding remarks and perspectives
Classical PK parameters are not fully adapted and, thus, classical
PK modeling is not sufﬁcient to describe the PK of nanomedi-
cines. Indeed, the PK of NPs is a suite of complex phenomena
that combine free drug, encapsulated drug, and empty NPs. Clas-
sical PK models describe only the fate of the free drug. It is now
necessary to create new PK models taking into account the
dynamic equilibrium of free and encapsulated drug, the stability
of the nanocarrier in the organism, its interactions with speciﬁc
organs, such as the liver, spleen, and kidney, and any in vivo
modiﬁcations of the carrier.
Free drug 
Therapeuc target
Encapsulated drug 
Kidney compartment 
Eliminaon
Encapsulated drug 
Liver, MPS compartment 
Free drug
Free drug 
Encapsulated drug 
 Free drug 
Administraon 
NP 50–100 nm 
Blood compartment 
Free drug 
Other ssue 
Encapsulated drug 
Drug Discovery Today
FIGURE 4
Proposed theoretical compartment pharmacokinetics (PK) model adapted to the specific features of nanomedicines. Blue arrows indicate encapsulated drug
biodistribution; orange arrows indicate free drug biodistribution; black arrows indicate drug release from the nanoparticle; dashed black arrows indicate
hypothetical return of drug back its carrier. Abbreviation: MPS, mononuclear phagocyte system.
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
2266
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

Recently, Colino et al. proposed an interesting PK model of
NPs, which includes a speciﬁc compartment for macrophage
uptake and release.66 Two recent reviews by Byun et al. and Yuan
et al. provide details about PK behavior that can be used to design
PBPK models.77,78 Finally, Guo et al. suggested ways to improve
PK modeling using two methods of approaching data: compart-
mental and noncompartmental analysis. The second method is
more robust especially when the distribution is unknown.54
As these authors explain, it appears essential to take into
account all sequestration compartments in mathematical models
to better describe blood-circulation time and elimination of
nanomedicines. Fig. 4 summarizes a proposed approach to
describe the compartment to consider in modeling, which is
the ﬁrst step to future relevant PK models for nanomedicines.
Acknowledgment
This work was funded by the French League Against Cancer
(‘La Ligue contre le cancer’) Maine et Loire Comity.
References
1 S. Tran, P.J. DeGiovanni, B. Piel, P. Rai, Cancer nanomedicine: a review of recent
success in drug delivery, Clin Transl Med 6 (2017) 44–65.
2 L.R. Baden, H.M. El Sahly, B. Essink, K. Kotloff, S. Frey, R. Novak, et al., Efﬁcacy
and safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine, N Engl J Med 384 (2020) 403–
416.
3 J. Machhi, F. Shahjin, S. Das, M. Patel, M.M. Abdelmoaty, J.D. Cohen, et al.,
Nanocarrier vaccines for SARS-CoV-2, Adv Drug Deliv Rev 171 (2021) 215–
239.
4
Anon., Nanomedicine and the COVID-19 vaccines, Nat Nanotechnol 15 (2020)
963.
5 K. Park, Drug delivery of the future: chasing the invisible gorilla, J Control Release
240 (2016) 2–8.
6 A.T. Florence, Nanotechnologies for site speciﬁc drug delivery: changing the
narrative, Int J Pharm 551 (2018) 1–7.
7 H. Malhaire, F. Lagarce, Is the translational approach becoming a reality in
nanomedicine?, Eur J Nanomed 7 (2015) 79–83
8 T.M. Allen, P.R. Cullis, Drug delivery systems: entering the mainstream, Science
303 (2004) 1818–1822.
9 F. Farjadian, A. Ghasemi, O. Gohari, A. Roointan, M. Karimi, M.R. Hamblin,
Nanopharmaceuticals and nanomedicines currently on the market: challenges
and opportunities, Nanomedicine 14 (2019) 93–126.
10 A. Gabizon, H. Shmeeda, Y. Barenholz, Pharmacokinetics of pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin review of animal and human studies, Clin Pharmacokinet 42 (2003)
419–436.
11 R.K. Jain, T. Stylianopoulos, Delivering nanomedicine to solid tumors, Nat Rev
Clin Oncol 7 (2010) 653–664.
12 W.J. Gradishar, S. Tjulandin, N. Davidson, H. Shaw, N. Desai, P. Bhar, et al., Phase
III trial of nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel compared with polyethylated
castor oil-based paclitaxel in women with breast cancer, J Clin Oncol 23 (2005)
7794–7803.
13 F. Danhier, To exploit the tumor microenvironment: since the EPR effect fails in
the clinic, what is the future of nanomedicine?, J Control Release 244 (2016) 108–
121
14 G.
Caracciolo,
O.C.
Farokhzad,
M.
Mahmoudi,
Biological
identity
of
nanoparticles in vivo: clinical implications of the protein corona, Trends
Biotechnol 35 (2017) 257–264.
15 M. Auffan, J. Rose, J.-Y. Bottero, G.V. Lowry, J.-P. Jolivet, M.R. Wiesner, Towards a
deﬁnition of inorganic nanoparticles from an environmental, health and safety
perspective, Nat Nanotechnol 4 (2009) 634–641.
16 G. P, Kalarikkal N, Thomas S. Challenges in nonparenteral nanomedicine
therapy. In: Kesharwani P, Taurin S, Greish K, editors. Theory and applications
of nonparenteral nanomedicines. Amsterdam; Elsevier Inc; 2021. p. 27–54.
17 H. Malhaire, J.C. Gimel, E. Roger, J.P. Benoît, F. Lagarce, How to design the
surface of peptide-loaded nanoparticles for efﬁcient oral bioavailability?, Adv
Drug Deliv Rev 106 (2016) 320–336
18 E. Roger, F. Lagarce, E. Garcion, J.P. Benoit, Biopharmaceutical parameters to
consider
in
order
to
alter
the
fate
of
nanocarriers
after
oral
delivery,
Nanomedicine 5 (2010) 287–306.
19 A. Ramadan, F. Lagarce, A. Tessier-Marteau, O. Thomas, P. Legras, L. Macchi,
et al., Oral fondaparinux: use of lipid nanocapsules as nanocarriers and in vivo
pharmacokinetic study, Int J Nanomedicine 6 (2011) 2941–2951.
20 J. Varshosaz, S. Taymouri, A. Jahanian-Najafabadi, A. Alizadeh, Efavirenz oral
delivery via lipid nanocapsules: formulation, optimisation, and ex-vivo gut
permeation study, IET Nanobiotechnol 12 (2018) 795–806.
21 E. Roger, F. Lagarce, E. Garcion, J. Benoit, Lipid nanocarriers improve paclitaxel
transport throughout human intestinal, J Control Release 140 (2009) 174–181.
22 E.
Roger,
F.
Lagarce,
J.P.
Benoit,
The
gastrointestinal
stability
of
lipid
nanocapsules, Int J Pharm 379 (2009) 260–265.
23 A. Singh, Y.R. Neupane, S. Shaﬁ, B. Mangla, K. Kohli, PEGylated liposomes as an
emerging therapeutic platform for oral nanomedicine in cancer therapy: in vitro
and in vivo assessment, J Mol Liq 303 (2020) 9.
24 M. Tobío, A. Sánchez, A. Vila, I. Soriano, C. Evora, J.L. Vila-Jato, et al., The role of
PEG on the stability in digestive ﬂuids and in vivo fate of PEG-PLA nanoparticles
following oral administration, Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 18 (2000) 315–323.
25 R.A. Cone, Barrier properties of mucus, Adv Drug Deliv Rev 61 (2009) 75–85.
26 A.C. Groo, F. Lagarce, Mucus models to evaluate nanomedicines for diffusion,
Drug Discov Today 19 (2014) 1097–1108.
27 L. Sardelli, D.P. Pacheco, A. Ziccarelli, M. Tunesi, O. Caspani, et al., Towards
bioinspired: in vitro models of intestinal mucus, RSC Adv 9 (2019) 15887–15899.
28 A.C. Groo, K. Mircheva, J. Bejaud, I. Panaiotov, P. Saulnier, T. Ivanova, et al.,
Development of 2D and 3D mucus models and their interactions with mucus-
penetrating paclitaxel-loaded lipid nanocapsules, Pharm Res 31 (2014) 1753–
1765.
29 S. Dünnhaupt, O. Kammona, C. Waldner, C. Kiparissides, A. Bernkop-Schnürch,
Nano-carrier systems: strategies to overcome the mucus gel barrier, Eur J Pharm
Biopharm 96 (2015) 447–453.
30 A. des Rieux, V. Fievez, I. Théate, J. Mast, V. Préat, Y.J. Schneider, An improved
in vitro model of human intestinal follicle-associated epithelium to study
nanoparticle transport by M cells, Eur J Pharm Sci 30 (2007) 380–391.
31 Y. Xu, N. Shrestha, V. Préat, A. Beloqui, Overcoming the intestinal barrier: a look
into targeting approaches for improved oral drug delivery systems, J Control
Release 322 (2020) 486–508.
32 A. Beloqui, A. Des Rieux, V. Préat, Mechanisms of transport of polymeric and
lipidic nanoparticles across the intestinal barrier, Adv Drug Deliv Rev 106 (2016)
242–255.
33 C. Pereira, F. Araújo, C.C. Barrias, P.L. Granja, B. Sarmento, Dissecting stromal-
epithelial
interactions
in
a
3D
invitro
cellularized
intestinal
model
for
permeability studies, Biomaterials 56 (2015) 36–45.
34 C. He, L. Yin, C. Tang, C. Yin, Size-dependent absorption mechanism of
polymeric nanoparticles for oral delivery of protein drugs, Biomaterials 33 (2012)
8569–8578.
35 D.A. Norris, P.J. Sinko, Effect of size, surface charge, and hydrophobicity on the
translocation of -polystyrene microspheres through gastrointestinal mucin, J
Appl Polym Sci 63 (1997) 1481–1492.
36 E. Roger, J.C. Gimel, C. Bensley, A.S. Klymchenko, J.P. Benoit, Lipid nanocapsules
maintain full integrity after crossing a human intestinal epithelium model, J.
Control Release 253 (2017) 11–18.
37 E. Gullberg, M. Leonard, J. Karlsson, A.M. Hopkins, D. Brayden, A.W. Baird, et al.,
Expression of speciﬁc markers and particle transport in a new human intestinal
M-cell model, Biochem Biophys Res Commun 279 (2000) 808–813.
38 A.C. Groo, M. Bossiere, L. Trichard, P. Legras, J.P. Benoit, F. Lagarce, In vivo
evaluation of paclitaxel-loaded lipid nanocapsules after intravenous and oral
administration on resistant tumor, Nanomedicine 10 (2015) 589–601.
39 C. Menzel, T. Holzeisen, F. Lafﬂeur, S. Zaichik, M. Abdulkarim, M. Gumbleton,
et al., In vivo evaluation of an oral self-emulsifying drug delivery system (SEDDS)
for exenatide, J Control Release 277 (2018) 165–172.
40 H. He, Y. Lu, J. Qi, Q. Zhu, Z. Chen, W. Wu, Adapting liposomes for oral drug
delivery, Acta Pharm Sin B 9 (2019) 36–48.
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com
2267

41 K. Partikel, R. Korte, N.C. Stein, D. Mulac, F.C. Herrmann, H.U. Humpf, et al.,
Effect of nanoparticle size and PEGylation on the protein corona of PLGA
nanoparticles, Eur J Pharm Biopharm 141 (2019) 70–80.
42 W. Fan, Z. Yu, H. Peng, H. He, Y. Lu, J. Qi, et al., Effect of particle size on the
pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of parenteral nanoemulsions, Int J Pharm
586 (2020) 119551.
43 F. Caputo, J. Clogston, L. Calzolai, M. Rösslein, A. Prina-Mello, Measuring particle
size distribution of nanoparticle enabled medicinal products, the joint view of
EUNCL
and
NCI-NCL.
A
step
by
step
approach
combining
orthogonal
measurements with increasing complexity, J Control Release 299 (2019) 31–43.
44 A.L.
Capriotti,
C.
Cavaliere,
S.
Piovesana,
Liposome
protein
corona
characterization as a new approach in nanomedicine, Anal Bioanal Chem 411
(2019) 4313–4326.
45 P.C. Ke, S. Lin, W.J. Parak, T.P. Davis, F. Caruso, A decade of the protein corona,
ACS Nano 11 (2017) 11773–11776.
46 T. Cedervall, I. Lynch, S. Lindman, T. Berggård, E. Thulin, H. Nilsson, et al.,
Understanding the nanoparticle-protein corona using methods to quantify
exchange rates and afﬁnities of proteins for nanoparticles, Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 104 (2007) 2050–2055.
47 P. Jain, R.S. Pawar, R.S. Pandey, J. Madan, S. Pawar, P.K. Lakshmi, et al., In-vitro
in-vivo correlation (IVIVC) in nanomedicine: Is protein corona the missing link?,
Biotechnol Adv 35 (2017) 889–904
48 K. Kristensen, T.B. Engel, A. Stensballe, J.B. Simonsen, T.L. Andresen, The hard
protein corona of stealth liposomes is sparse, J Control Release 307 (2019) 1–15.
49 O. Vilanova, J.J. Mittag, P.M. Kelly, S. Milani, K.A. Dawson, J.O. Rädler, et al.,
Understanding the kinetics of protein-nanoparticle corona formation, ACS Nano
10 (2016) 10842–10850.
50 S. Palchetti, D. Pozzi, A.L. Capriotti, G. Barbera, R.Z. Chiozzi, L. Digiacomo, et al.,
Inﬂuence of dynamic ﬂow environment on nanoparticle-protein corona: from
protein patterns to uptake in cancer cells, Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 153 (2017)
263–271.
51 O.K. Kari, J. Ndika, P. Parkkila, A. Louna, T. Lajunen, A. Puustinen, et al., In situ
analysis of liposome hard and soft protein corona structure and composition in a
single label-free workﬂow, Nanoscale 12 (2020) 1728–1741.
52 G. Fang, Q. Zhang, Y. Pang, H.E. Thu, Z. Hussain, Nanomedicines for improved
targetability to inﬂamed synovium for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: Multi-
functionalization as an emerging strategy to optimize therapeutic efﬁcacy, J
Control Release 303 (2019) 181–208.
53 G. Bastiat, C.O. Pritz, C. Roider, F. Fouchet, E. Lignières, A. Jesacher, et al., A new
tool to ensure the ﬂuorescent dye labeling stability of nanocarriers: a real
challenge for ﬂuorescence imaging, J Control Release 170 (2013) 334–342.
54 Guo H, MacKay JA. A pharmacokinetics primer for preclinical nanomedicine
research. In Lorraine L, RInaldi C, editors. Nanoparticles for biomedical
applications. Amsterdam; Elsevier Inc; 2020. p. 109–28.
55 A.L. Lainé, J. Gravier, M. Henry, L. Sancey, J. Béjaud, E. Pancani, et al.,
Conventional versus stealth lipid nanoparticles: formulation and in vivo fate
prediction through FRET monitoring, J. Control Release 188 (2014) 1–8.
56 J. Gravier, L. Sancey, S. Hirsjärvi, E. Rustique, C. Passirani, J.P. Benoît, et al., FRET
imaging approaches for in vitro and in vivo characterization of synthetic lipid
nanoparticles, Mol Pharm 11 (2014) 3133–3144.
57 M. Goutayer, S. Dufort, V. Josserand, A. Royère, E. Heinrich, F. Vinet, et al.,
Tumor targeting of functionalized lipid nanoparticles: Assessment by in vivo
ﬂuorescence imaging, Eur J Pharm Biopharm 75 (2010) 137–147.
58 M. Hadjidemetriou, Z. Al-Ahmady, M. Mazza, R.F. Collins, K. Dawson, K.
Kostarelos, In vivo biomolecule corona around blood-circulating, clinically used
and antibody-targeted lipid bilayer nanoscale vesicles, ACS Nano 9 (2015) 8142–
8156.
59 C.K. Elechalawar, M.N. Hossen, L. McNally, R. Bhattacharya, P. Mukherjee,
Analysing
the
nanoparticle-protein
corona
for
potential
molecular
target
identiﬁcation, J. Control Release 322 (2020) 122–136.
60 V.H. Nguyen, B.J. Lee, Protein corona: a new approach for nanomedicine design,
Int J Nanomed 12 (2017) 3137–3151.
61 Q. Dai, S. Wilhelm, D. Ding, A.M. Syed, S. Sindhwani, Y. Zhang, et al.,
Quantifying the ligand-coated nanoparticle delivery to cancer cells in solid
tumors, ACS Nano 12 (2018) 8423–8435.
62 S. Wilhelm, A.J. Tavares, Q. Dai, S. Otha, J. Audet, H.J. Dvorak, et al., Analysis of
nanoparticle delivery to tumours, Nat Rev Mater 1 (2016) 16014.
63 C. Xu, C.Y.-T. Li, A.-N.T. Kong, Induction of phase I, II and III drug
metabolism/transport by xenobiotics, Arch Pharm Res 28 (2005) 249–268.
64 Y.-N. Zhang, W. Poon, A.J. Tavares, I.D. McGilvray, W.C.W. Chan, Nanoparticle–
liver interactions: cellular uptake and hepatobiliary elimination, J. Control
Release 240 (2016) 332–348.
65 K. Xiao, Y. Li, J. Luo, J.S. Lee, W. Xiao, A.M. Gonik, et al., The effect of surface
charge on in vivo biodistribution of PEG-oligocholic acid based micellar
nanoparticles, Biomaterials 32 (2011) 3435–3446.
66 C.I. Colino, J.M. Lanao, C. Gutierrez-Millan, Targeting of hepatic macrophages by
therapeutic nanoparticles, Front Immunol 11 (2020) 218.
67 C.D. Walkey, J.B. Olsen, H. Guo, A. Emili, W.C. Chan, Nanoparticle size and
surface chemistry determine serum protein adsorption and macrophage uptake, J
Am Chem Soc 134 (2012) 2139–2147.
68 N.M. La-Beck, L.M. Wood, X. Liu, Harnessing liposome interactions with the
immune system for the next breakthrough in cancer drug delivery, Front
Pharmacol 10 (2019) 220.
69 N.M. La-beck, A.A. Gabizon, Nanoparticle interactions with the immune system:
clinical implications for liposome-based cancer chemotherapy, Front Immunol 8
(2017) 6–11.
70 C. Peng, Y. Huang, J. Zheng, Renal clearable nanocarriers: overcoming the
physiological barriers for precise drug delivery and clearance, J. Control Release
322 (2020) 64–80.
71 T. Shimizu, A.S. Abu Lila, T. Ishida, Y. Hashimoto, H. Kiwada, Relationship
between the concentration of anti-polyethylene glycol (PEG) immunoglobulin
M
(IgM)
and
the
intensity
of
the
accelerated
blood
clearance
(ABC)
phenomenon against PEGylated liposomes in mice, Biol Pharm Bull 38 (2015)
417–424.
72 J.K. Armstrong, G. Hempel, S. Koling, L.S. Chan, T. Fisher, H.J. Meiselman, et al.,
Antibody
against
poly(ethylene
glycol)
adversely
affects
PEG-asparaginase
therapy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients, Cancer 110 (2007) 103–111.
73 Z. Zhang, Y. Chu, C. Li, W. Tang, J. Qian, X. Wei, et al., Anti-PEG scFv corona
ameliorates
accelerated
blood
clearance
phenomenon
of
PEGylated
nanomedicines, J. Control Release 330 (2020) 493–501.
74 F. Alexis, E. Pridgen, L.K. Molnar, O.C. Farokhzad, Factors affecting the clearance
and biodistribution of polymeric nanoparticles, Mol Pharm 5 (2008) 505–515.
75 M. Longmire, P.L. Choyke, H. Kobayashi, Clearance properties of nano-sized
particles
and
molecules
as
imaging
agents:
Considerations
and
caveats,
Nanomedicine 3 (2008) 703–717.
76 N. Bertrand, J.C. Leroux, The journey of a drug-carrier in the body: an anatomo-
physiological perspective, J Control Release 161 (2012) 152–163.
77 J.H. Byun, D.G. Han, H.J. Cho, I.S. Yoon, I.H. Jung, Recent advances in
physiologically
based
pharmacokinetic
and
pharmacodynamic
models
for
anticancer nanomedicines, Arch Pharm Res 43 (2020) 80–99.
78 D. Yuan, H. He, Y. Wu, J. Fan, Y. Cao, Physiologically based pharmacokinetic
modeling of nanoparticles, J Pharm Sci 108 (2019) 58–72.
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
KEYNOTE (GREEN)
Drug Discovery Today d Volume 26, Number 10 d October 2021
2268
www.drugdiscoverytoday.com