The human small and large intestines harbour a diverse 
community of commensal bacteria commonly referred 
to as the microbiota, which, at 1011−1012 microorganisms 
per cm3 in the colon, is unrivalled in its population den-
sity compared with bacterial abundance at other body 
sites1. The composition of the human colonic microbi-
ota is mainly defined by Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, 
along with members of a few other phyla, but it strongly 
varies between individuals2. The microbiota is shaped by 
environmental exposure, including to maternal micro-
organisms, starting at birth3–5. Once established in early 
childhood, the hundreds of coexisting species inhabiting 
the gut respond to environmental and lifestyle stimuli in 
timescales as short as hours to days6 and as long as repro-
ductive generations7. An important function of the gut 
microbiota is digestion of dietary fibre, which is a broad 
category of nutrients encompassing dozens of chemi-
cally diverse polysaccharides present in plant cell walls 
and other sources and functions as a prominent energy 
source for the microbiota. These dietary polysaccharides 
are largely indigestible by human digestive enzymes, 
which mostly target starch and a few simple sugars8. 
Bacterial fermentation of fibre-​derived sugars produces 
short-​chain fatty acids (SCFAs) that influence gut epithe-
lial cell and lymphocyte homeostasis9–11 as well as nutrient 
storage12. In recent years, the role of the gut microbiota 
in the causation and progression of intestinal diseases, 
such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and colorectal 
cancer, has become more relevant owing to changing 
dietary lifestyles, including reduced consumption of fibre 
polysaccharides in industrialized societies13.
The first line of host defence against both encroach-
ing commensal bacteria and invading enteric pathogens 
is the intestinal mucosal barrier14, which is a physical 
barrier that includes both biochemical and immuno-
logical components; the physical barrier is composed of 
epithelial cells that are connected by tight junctions and 
is protected by an overlying host-​secreted mucous layer 
that contains two layers in the colon (Fig. 1a). The immu-
nological aspects of both the physical and biochemical 
barriers are reviewed elsewhere in detail15,16, and we only 
briefly highlight the immunological components of the 
mucosal barrier here (Box 1).
The intestinal epithelium consists of six differen-
tiated cell types with defined functions: enterocytes, 
enteroendocrine cells, Paneth cells, tuft cells, goblet cells 
and microfold (M) cells, which have roles in absorp-
tion, hormone secretion, antimicrobial peptide (AMP) 
secretion, taste-​chemosensory responses, mucus pro-
duction and antigen sampling, respectively17. Not all 
cell types run the length of the intestine, and at least 
one additional type, cup cells, exists but has no known 
function17. Intestinal mucus is secreted by goblet cells to 
form a physical barrier in places such as the stomach and 
colon. Mucus also presents biochemical decoy receptors 
for potential pathogens, harbours components of the 
host immune response16 and may even retain memory 
of recent antimicrobial activity by binding and retaining 
bacteriophage populations18.
In addition to being composed of mostly mucin 
glycoproteins (Fig. 1b), mucus is a reservoir for other pro-
teins, including secretory IgA and AMPs19,20. Mucin 2 
(MUC2) is the predominant gel-​forming mucin 
expressed in the lower intestine, although other mucins 
are involved16. Mucin glycoproteins contain a bewildering 
repertoire of mostly O-​linked and some N-​linked glycan 
Commensal
Refers to symbiotic 
microorganisms that do not 
seem to harm (pathogens) or 
benefit (mutualists) their host. 
Commensal is arguably an 
imprecise term to apply to a 
microorganism, especially 
considering that any 
microorganism may display 
behaviours that are both 
beneficial and detrimental.
Interactions of commensal and 
pathogenic microorganisms with  
the intestinal mucosal barrier
Eric C. Martens1*, Mareike Neumann2 and Mahesh S. Desai2,3*
Abstract | The intestinal mucosal barrier is composed of epithelial cells that are protected by an 
overlying host-​secreted mucous layer and functions as the first line of defence against pathogenic 
and non-​pathogenic microorganisms. Some microorganisms have evolved strategies to either 
survive in the mucosal barrier or circumvent it to establish infection. In this Review , we discuss  
the current state of knowledge of the complex interactions of commensal microorganisms  
with the intestinal mucosal barrier, and we discuss strategies used by pathogenic microorganisms 
to establish infection by either exploiting different epithelial cell lineages or disrupting the 
mucous layer, as well as the role of defects in mucus production in chronic disease.
1University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
2Department of Infection and 
Immunity, Luxembourg 
Institute of Health,  
Esch-​sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
3Odense Research Center for 
Anaphylaxis, Department of 
Dermatology and Allergy 
Center, Odense University 
Hospital, University of 
Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
*e-​mail: emartens@ 
umich.edu; mahesh.desai@
lih.lu
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41579-018-0036-x
 MICROBIOME
REVIEWS
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATuRe RevIewS | MICrobIology
	
 volume 16 | AUGUST 2018 | 457

structures, which despite their complex structural vari-
ation can be targeted by several common species of gut 
bacteria as nutrient sources21. Moreover, several intestinal 
pathogens secrete enzymes or possess physical capa-
bilities that disrupt the mucous barrier or promote its 
invasion, facilitating pathogen colonization and success-
ful infection22. Other intestinal pathogens exploit signals 
and/or metabolic cues that are derived from mucosal 
nutrients but are liberated by the commensal microbiota23.
In this Review, we discuss the interaction of com-
mensal microorganisms with the intestinal mucosal bar-
rier and strategies used by pathogenic microorganisms 
to establish infection by either exploiting different epi-
thelial cell lineages or disrupting the mucous layer. The 
latter may be caused by either the commensal microbi-
ota or defects and variations in host mucus production. 
Although the mucosal immune system is integral to the 
intestinal mucosal barrier, the focus of this Review is 
on the main physical aspects of this system: mucus and 
epithelial cells. Recent reviews provide complementary 
summaries with deeper focus on aspects of the mucosal 
immune system16,24,25.
The gut mucosal barrier
To promote the continual health and resilience of the 
mucosal barrier, epithelial cells are constantly shed into 
the lumen and replaced by proliferation and differentiation 
of stem cells, which are located near the crypt bottom, with 
complete renewal every few days26. Likewise, the secretory 
activity of goblet cells (Fig. 1a) continuously replenishes the 
mucous layer that overlies the epithelium and lubricates 
the intestine. In the colon, gel-​forming mucins assemble 
into a firm inner layer that is adherent to the epithelium 
and resistant to dense microbial colonization27; however, 
a loose, outer mucous layer also forms, probably through 
the action of host and microbial enzymes. This layer is 
home to a dense population of commensal bacteria that 
can vary in both its identity and physiology relative to 
luminal populations28. For example, two well-​studied 
commensals, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Escherichia 
coli, exhibit different global transcriptional patterns dur-
ing existence in the colonic mucous layer compared 
with matched, nearby luminal contents28. In addition, 
bacterial colonization also influences mucus production 
and shapes the mucous barrier. B. thetaiotaomicron and 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii are two known examples of 
gut bacteria that modulate mucus production by augment-
ing goblet cell differentiation and inducing expression of 
genes involved in mucin glycosylation29. The activity 
of mucin-​secreting goblet cells has been linked to innate 
immune signalling through the discovery of specialized 
5VGOEGNN
'PVGTQE[VG
)QDNGVEGNN
6WHVEGNN
'PVGTQ
GPFQETKPG
EGNN
D
C
0
%
/7%OQPQOGT
/7%PGVYQTM
0
%
%
0
0
0
0
0
%
%
%
%
1NKPMGFIN[EQU[NCVKQP
265FQOCKP
%WREGNN
5GPVKPGN
IQDNGVEGNN
5%(#U
#/2U
5GETGVQT[+I#
&KGVCT[ȰDTG
/KETQDKQVC
(KTOOWEWU
.QQUGOWEWU
(TGUJOWEWU
Fig. 1 | Structure, function and production of the gut 
mucosal barrier. a | Model of large intestinal crypt 
architecture and metabolic connections with the 
microbiota in the gut lumen. The large intestine harbours 
commensal bacteria that ferment dietary fibre into 
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which are an important 
energy source for colonic enterocytes and goblet cells. 
Mucus secreted by goblet cells continually replenishes the 
mucous layer that overlies the gut epithelium as a first 
barrier against commensal bacteria and invading 
pathogens. Secretory immunoglobulin A (IgA) and 
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are secreted into the mucus 
as a defence against pathogens and potentially harmful 
commensal bacteria. The colonic epithelium consists of 
enteroendocrine cells, tuft cells, cup cells, goblet cells and 
sentinel goblet cells, which are located at the crypt 
entrance to reduce bacterial encroachment into the crypt. 
When challenged with bacterial Toll-​like receptor ligands, 
sentinel goblet cells expel mucus and are ejected into the 
intestinal lumen to be replaced. b | Host-​secreted mucin 2 
(MUC2) glycoproteins are a major constituent of small 
intestinal and colonic mucus. The monomer is organized 
into multiple domains, with the PTS core domain, which 
contains mainly proline (Pro), serine (Ser) and threonine 
(Thr), being the largest; the amino-​terminal and 
carboxy-terminal domains mediate disulfide crosslinking to 
build a very large mucin network comprising thousands of 
monomers (black arrows denote additional network 
connections). A series of glycosyl transferase enzymes 
(Box 2) add thousands of individual O-​linked glycans to  
the side chains of Ser and Thr residues that ultimately 
comprise up to 80% of the final MUC2 mass. These glycans 
are remarkably varied in their chemical structure, with up  
to 100 different variants in secreted MUC2 in humans  
and mice.
Microbiota
A community of 
microorganisms, such as the 
taxonomically diverse and 
densely populated assemblage 
of species that inhabits the 
human gut.
Inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD). A group of chronic 
diseases characterized by 
episodes of relapsing and 
remitting inflammation. Crohn’s 
disease and ulcerative colitis 
are the most common types  
of IBDs and are thought to 
develop from a combination  
of host genetic predisposition, 
including defects in the gut 
mucosal and immunological 
barriers, and environmental 
factors, such as diet and the 
microbiota.
Tight junctions
Multi-​protein complexes that 
form near the apical ends of 
intestinal epithelial cells, 
providing tight, water-​
impermeable and ion-​
impermeable seals between 
cells. Proteins that are included 
in tight junctions include 
claudins and occludins, which 
span the membrane and are 
anchored together outside the 
cell and are connected to  
the intracellular cytoskeleton.
Mucous layer
Mucus, composed mostly of 
secreted mucin glycoproteins 
and other substances, is 
secreted by goblet cells and 
overlies the intestinal 
epithelium, forming an 
adherent and insoluble inner 
layer and a looser outer layer 
in the colon.
Tuft cells
Taste-​chemosensory cells that 
are present in the intestinal 
epithelium and have an 
important role in initiating a 
type 2 immune response to 
clear parasitic infection. They 
have a unique appearance that 
includes a tubulovesicular 
system and an apical bundle of 
microfilaments that are 
attached to a tuft of long, 
lumen-​facing microvilli.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
458 | AUGUST 2018 | volume 16	

sentinel goblet cells, which are located at the entrance 
of colonic crypts and presumably impede luminal bac-
teria from entering the crypt30 (Fig. 1a). Bacterial SCFAs 
and metabolites are able to induce mucus biosynthesis in 
germ-​free mice29,31. Of the 17 currently known human or 
mouse mucins16, the importance of MUC2 is underscored 
by the fact that mice genetically deficient in the Muc2 gene 
develop inflammation and colon cancer owing to closer 
contact of bacteria with the epithelium32,33.
Human MUC2 is a notably large (5,289 amino acid) 
polypeptide that is organized into multiple domains, the 
largest being a PTS core containing mainly proline (Pro), 
serine (Ser) and threonine (Thr)34. The mostly O-​linked 
glycosylation of MUC2 occurs on Ser and Thr side 
chains and contributes essential biophysical properties 
to mucus, such as hydrophilicity, which holds secreted 
mucin glycoproteins in an extended form. Cysteine-​
containing regions in MUC2 promote crosslinking into 
much larger lattices via disulfide bonds at the amino and 
carboxyl termini (Box 2; Fig. 1b).
Commensal microorganisms
Although a major function of secreted mucus is to 
protect the host epithelium from both commensal 
microorganisms and pathogens, the glycoproteins in 
this barrier also create a beneficial nutrient environ-
ment for some colonic microorganisms. Dietary fibre 
provides a major energy source for gut microorganisms. 
Although the endogenous niche created by host glycans 
is always available and is therefore likely to be occupied 
by bacteria, the importance of this niche increases in 
the absence of dietary fibre polysaccharides because it 
pushes the microbiota to rely more heavily on endog-
enous nutrients, including mucins, to sustain their 
metabolism35,36.
Dietary fibre encompasses an array of distinct polysac-
charides, which are mostly from plant cell walls and plant 
storage polymers and are also present in other sources, 
such as animal tissue, fermented foods, fungi and food 
additives37. To depolymerize fibre polysaccharides, host-​
associated bacteria collectively produce thousands of 
carbohydrate-​active enzymes (CAZymes) that display dif-
ferent catalytic specificities for the linkages in these mol-
ecules before microorganisms can ferment the liberated 
sugars into SCFAs38. Similarly, members of the microbiota 
that have evolved to use host glycans, such as the abundant 
O-​linked glycans present in mucus, must produce 
substrate-​specific CAZymes and proteases (see below) 
to cleave the unique linkages that are present in these 
molecules and share little overlap with dietary fibre (Fig. 2a).
The plant cell wall harbours multiple polysaccha-
rides in a 3D matrix of varying solubility, which presents 
these nutrients to the microbiota in a complicated 
biophysical scaffold that transcends just the chemistry 
Glycoproteins
Class of proteins comprising 
oligosaccharide chains 
connected to a backbone 
polypeptide, sometimes 
thousands of amino acids long, 
which is modified with glycans 
in the endoplasmic reticulum. 
Mucins and other 
glycoproteins contain O-​linked 
and N-​linked glycans attached 
to serine or threonine and 
asparagine, respectively.
Secretory IgA
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is the 
most abundant antibody 
isotype in the human body and 
occurs in two subtypes: IgA1 
and IgA2, which are 
distinguished by their heavy 
chains. IgA1 is predominant in 
the serum, and IgA2 is most 
abundant in the intestinal tract 
to bind pathogens by reducing 
mobility and decreasing 
proliferation.
Carbohydrate-​active 
enzymes
(CAZymes). This term 
encompasses several different 
groups of enzymes: glycoside 
hydrolases, polysaccharide 
lyases, carbohydrate esterases 
and glycosyltransferases. 
These groups, and hundreds of 
more specific enzyme families 
that they collectively contain, 
are involved in building and 
degrading polysaccharides and 
glycans.
Box 1 | The immune system as a key part of the mucosal barrier
In addition to the physical and biochemical aspects of the mucosal barrier, the immune system has a crucial role in 
intestinal homeostasis, and many of its components are physically integrated into the epithelium and mucous layer. 
Pathogens and commensal microorganisms that reach close to or invade host tissue are sensed by a variety of pattern 
recognition receptors and antigen-​presenting cells. Colonic mucus is a reservoir for immunoglobulin A (IgA), which is 
secreted into the lumen of the intestinal tract126. Pathogen detection leads to T cell-​dependent production of IgA, which 
is released into the intestinal lumen, followed by coating and neutralization of the invading microorganism119 as recently 
shown for Salmonella enterica subsp. serovar enterica Typhimurium127. Another protein found in the mucous layer, the 
recently discovered protein Ly6/PLAUR domain containing 8 (LYPD8)128, binds to flagellated members of the microbiota, 
such as Proteus mirabilis, and inhibits their motility, preventing the invasion into the mucous layer128. Resistin-​like-β 
(RELMβ), another bactericidal protein present in the mucus, limits the access of Proteobacteria to the mucous layer129.
Microbial-​activated Toll-​like receptors (TLRs) trigger the myeloid differentiation primary response protein MYD88, 
which leads to the activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-​κB (NF-​κB)130. TLR deficiency can have severe 
effects on hosts. For example, TLR4-deficient mice exhibit a reduced number of inflammatory cells and are more 
susceptible to dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis131. The mouse commensal bacterium Helicobacter hepaticus 
interacts with TLR2 to induce IL-10 production in macrophages via an immunomodulatory polysaccharide, which triggers 
a nuclear mitogen- and stress-​activated protein kinase (MSK)-cAMP response element-​binding (CREB)-dependent 
anti-inflammatory response132. A toxin secreted by Bacteroides fragilis activates a pro-​carcinogenic signalling cascade in 
colonic epithelial cells involving the cytokine IL-17 and the transcription factors NF-​κB and signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)133. MYD88-deficient mice show a higher susceptibility to experimentally induced 
colitis134, and inhibition of MYD88 leads to increased colitis-​associated cancer135. Likewise, mice lacking TLR5 fail to 
control epithelial-​associated Proteobacteria populations and subsequently develop colitis136. Germ-​free 
MYD88-deficient and TIR-​domain-containing adaptor inducing IFNβ (TRIF)-deficient mice show a decreased 
susceptibility to azoxymethane-​associated and DSS-​associated cancer137.
Short-​chain fatty acids (SCFAs) regulate several aspects of barrier function, including immune components, through  
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) on epithelial and T cells. GPR43-dependent regulatory T cell (Treg cell) induction by 
SCFAs protects mice against colitis and requires expression of this receptor in T cells themselves138. Activation of 
GPR109a by the SCFA butyrate induces Treg cells as well as IL-10-producing T cells139. Additionally, butyrate inhibits IL-17 
by increasing the plasma levels of IL-10 and IL-12 (ref.140). Segmented filamentous bacteria induce T helper 17 (TH17) cell 
development in the intestine of mice141, and acetate produced by Bifidobacteria protects mice from death by 
enteropathogenic infections by suppressing inflammatory responses142.
The involvement of tuft cells in helminth elimination has become evident only recently143. A newly discovered role of 
tuft cells is the development of a type 2 immune response against the helminth Nippostrongylus brasiliensis144, which 
triggers the secretion of the cytokine IL-25 and leads to generation of innate lymphoid cells (ILCs)145. These ILCs generate 
IL-13, which leads to expansion of tuft cells and goblet cells, creating extra mucus to expel the parasite.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATuRe RevIewS | MICrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 16 | AUGUST 2018 | 459

of the carbohydrates it contains. The mucous layer 
also has properties that extend beyond its glycoprotein 
chemistry, owing to the firm and adherent inner layer, 
heavy disulfide crosslinking between secreted MUC2 
monomers and steric hindrance imposed by adjacent 
glycan chains attached to Ser and Thr residues in the 
MUC2 backbone (Fig. 2a). As a consequence of its resid-
ual structure even after milling, cooking, chewing and 
digestion, natural fibre polysaccharides from any given 
botanical source may be digested differently, and per-
haps by different microorganisms, relative to the same 
material if it were extracted from the plant cell wall and 
presented as purified polysaccharides, as is the case for 
most common prebiotics39. The effects of these fibre 
variations on the microbiome remain to be investi-
gated in controlled studies with humans and animals. 
Likewise, as layers of mucin glycoproteins are constantly 
replenished and change solubility as they emerge or are 
swept away from the epithelium, the accessibility of this 
nutrient source changes. For example, the tight, gel-​
like nature of the colonic inner mucous layer probably 
presents a physical barrier that cannot be surmounted 
by most microorganisms. The enzymes and other cel-
lular mechanisms that enable a few bacteria to invade 
the inner mucous layer remain unidentified; however, 
these enzymes will be important to define as they not 
only distinguish adaptations to this habitat but may also 
be important for disease because they equip bacteria 
with the ability to reach closer to host tissue than most 
microorganisms.
The gut microbial enzymes required for fibre deg-
radation have been intensively studied in recent years, 
especially among members of Bacteroidetes40–44. 
However, those required for mucus degradation have 
been investigated in far less detail, partly owing to the 
complexity of this substrate and difficulty in analyti-
cal methods. The known enzyme families required for 
removing specific glycosidic linkages in mucin O-​linked 
glycans have been recently reviewed21, and emerging 
work has begun to identify gut bacterial enzymes that 
degrade high mannose N-​linked glycans45. CAZymes are 
grouped into families, with the nomenclature including 
the enzyme type (for example, glycoside hydrolase (GH) 
or polysaccharide lyase) and a family number that rep-
resents shared homology via hidden Markov models8 and 
provides some indication of sugar and linkage specificity, 
which may be broad or narrow depending on the par-
ticular family. Although members of several CAZyme 
families have been associated with the degradation of 
host mucosal glycans, for example, GH2, which contains 
β-​galactosidase activity among others (Fig. 2a), there is 
still sufficient ambiguity in most families to impede pre-
dicting the ability of their constituent enzyme members 
to target mucin glycans based on annotation alone46. 
For example, other members of GH2 are also known 
to degrade β-​linked galactosides present in non-​mucin 
fibre polysaccharides.
Future work is needed to understand how various 
taxa of human gut bacteria have evolved to recognize 
and degrade mucosal glycans, as well as cope with the 
biophysical complexity of secreted mucin glycoproteins. 
A useful approach has been to first identify strains and/or 
species that grow on purified O-​linked or N-​linked 
glycans as sole carbon sources, identifying genes that 
are activated during those growth conditions and then 
perform detailed enzymatic characterizations with 
recombinant proteins36,41,47. This approach is facilitated 
in genera such as Bacteroides, which groups multiple 
genes together in individual polysaccharide utilization 
loci (PULs), which are gene clusters that often contain 
multiple CAZyme-​coding genes (Fig. 2b).
New activities are being actively discovered for gut 
microorganisms that use mucus as a nutrient or degrade it 
during pathogen invasion. A recently described protease 
family (M60-like proteases; also known as Pfam13402)48 
has provided evidence for enzymes that cleave the mucin 
glycoprotein backbone in a manner that is dependent 
on the presence of specific glycan sidechain struc-
tures49. Zinc metalloprotease ZmpB from Clostridium 
perfringens cuts adjacent to glycosylated Ser and/or Thr 
residues, with optimal cleavage mediated by recognition 
of α2,6-sialylated core 1 or core 3 structures (Fig. 2a). 
By contrast, another protease family member from 
B. thetaiotaomicron (BT4244) prefers a simpler struc-
ture with only Tn antigen49. Some common commen-
sals encode large repertoires of M60-like proteases. For 
example, the type strain of Bacteroides caccae, an organ-
ism recently implicated in low dietary fibre-​induced 
destruction of the colonic mucous layer36, possesses 16 
Box 2 | Synthesis of mucin glycans
Synthesis of ~100 different 
structures that simultaneously 
occur on human mucin 2 (MUC2) 
or its mouse homologue146 and 
other mucins is initiated in the 
Golgi apparatus by a series of  
glycosyltransferase enzymes147.  
An α-​linked N-​cetylgalactosamine 
(GalNAc) is first added by 1 of  
20 different polypeptide  
N-​acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 
(ppGALNACT) enzymes to the 
hydroxyl group of Ser or Thr 
residues to build a basal structure 
called Tn antigen. Tn antigen, in 
turn, functions as the substrate 
for additional glycosyltrans-
ferases that further elongate and 
diversify different core structures 
that are defined by one or two 
sugars that are directly attached 
to peptide-​linked GalNAc. In 
contrast to the many ppGALNACT 
enzymes in mice and humans, synthesis of these cores is initiated by a single glycosyl-
transferase. For example, to build core 1, the enzyme core 1 β1,3-galactosyltransferase  
(T synthase or C1GALT1) adds galactose to the Tn antigen, generating Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-Ser 
or Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-Thr (T antigen)148. Biosynthesis of core 3-derived O-​linked glycans is 
likewise initiated by a single core 3 β1,3 N-​acetylglucosaminyltransferase (C3GNT) 
transferring GlcNAc to GalNAcα1-Ser or GalNAcα1-Thr (Tn antigen)148. These structures 
may then be further elongated with additional sugars and linkages, for example, by 
β1,6-linked N-​acetylglucosamine attached either to core 1 (by C2GNT1 or C2GNT3, to 
produce core 2 from core 1; or, C2GNT2, to produce core 4 from core 3). These core 
structures can be further elongated into monoantennary or biantennary structures to 
make extended glycan chains. C1GALT1C1, glycoprotein-N-acetylgalactosamine 
3-β-galactosyltransferase 1 chaperone 1.
Prebiotics
Dietary supplements (most 
often oligosaccharide or 
polysaccharide fibres) that 
selectively increase certain 
taxonomic groups in the gut 
microbiota and also exert a 
positive impact on host health.
Hidden Markov models
A statistical approach that is 
often used in bioinformatics to 
identify hidden, but 
meaningful, amino acid 
sequence signals in proteins 
and can be used to group them 
into families with similar 
function.
)CNCEVQUG
0CEGV[NICNCEVQUCOKPG
0CEGV[NINWEQUCOKPG
α
β
5GT6JT
α
5GT6JT
α
β
5GT6JT
%QTG

6CPVKIGP
%QTG
%)06QT
%)06
%)06
%)06
%)#.6
%)#.6%
RR)#.0#%6
GP\[OGU
6PCPVKIGP
α
β
β
5GT6JT
α
β
β
5GT6JT
%QTG
%QTG
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
460 | AUGUST 2018 | volume 16	

of these enzymes, many of which are also grouped in 
co-​regulated PULs (Fig. 2b). Furthermore, a recently 
discovered intramolecular trans-​sialidase (RgNanH) 
from the commensal gut bacterium Ruminococcus 
gnavus enables the bacterium to bind to mouse and 
human mucus using an adhesive carbohydrate-​binding 
module and to cleave terminal sialic acid sugars from 
this substrate in a form (2,7-anhydro-​Neu5Ac) that 
can be metabolized only by R. gnavus50,51. Given that 
mucin-​degrading bacteria can cause damage that at 
least predisposes to disease, possibly in the absence of 
overt pathogens in genetically susceptible hosts, these 
enzymes may provide targets for inhibitory drugs to 
block intestinal diseases. Furthermore, increased mucin 
degradation by the gut microbiota may function as a 
marker for IBD.
α
α
αCPFα
αCPFα
α
α
β
α
α
α
α
α
β
β
β
β
β
β
α
β
β
β
β
C
$NQQFITQWR#
EQTG
$NQQFITQWR$
EQTG
5KCN[NEQTG
5WNHQUKCN[N
EQTG
51
5WNHCVCUG
)*
)*
6PCPVKIGPQPN[
)*CPF)*
)*
)*CPF)*
)*CPF)*
)*)*CPF)*
)*
GPFQCPF
DNQQFITQWRQPN[
6CPVKIGP
)*
GPFQCPFEQTGUQPN[
)*
GPFQCPFDNQQFITQWRQPN[
)*CPF)*
)*
)*
)*
)*CPF)*
D
$VJGVCKQVCQOKETQP$6
$VJGVCKQVCQOKETQP$6
$ECEECG$#%%#%A
)*
)*
)*
)*
*6%5
5WU%NKMG
5WU&NKMG
5WNHCVCUG
5WNHCVCUG
5WNHCVCUG
)*
)*
5WNHCVCUG
5WU&NKMG
5WU%NKMG
)*
*6%5
%'
/NKMG
/NKMG
5WU%NKMG
5WU&NKMG
5WU%NKMG
5WU&NKMG
/NKMG
/NKMG
5WU&NKMG
5WU%NKMG
#5 #5
#5
'%(
'%(
)CNCEVQUG
0CEGV[NICNCEVQUCOKPG
0CEGV[NINWEQUCOKPG
0CEGV[NPGWTCOKPKECEKF

UKCNKECEKF
(WEQUG
5GT
5GT
2TQ
6JT
2TQ
2TQ
5GT
/NKMGRTQVGCUG

HQTGZCORNG<OR$
)*
Fig. 2 | Microbial pathways involved in the metabolism of colonic mucus. a | A variety of different O-​linked glycan 
structures, with a mixture of glycosidic linkages, are attached to mucus and encountered by gut bacteria as potential 
nutrient sources. These glycans vary widely in their structure and also in ‘capping’ attachments, which include the host’s 
blood group (A , B, H or non-​secretor) and attached sulfate, fucose or sialic acids, some of which can be present on the 
same molecule (for example, the sulfo, sialyl (core 2) example illustrated). Some carbohydrate-​active enzymes 
(CAZymes) produced by the microbiota are able to degrade O-​linked glycans by cleaving specific linkages in these 
molecules. The target linkages of several different GH families, M60-like proteases and sulfatases are indicated, showing 
how bacteria degrade some of these structures. Note that some activities only work in an endo-​fashion (that is, cut 
internally within glycan chains) and in particular contexts, such as blood-​group-removing GH98 enzymes that liberate 
the terminal trisaccharide from either blood group A or B structures or GH101 enzymes that cleave peptide-​attached 
N-​acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) but only when it has an attached β1,3-linked galactose (T antigen, a historical term for 
the unsubstituted core 1 structure derived from its increased abundance on tumour cells). b | Schematics of 
polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs) for three gene clusters from Bacteroides that have been implicated in the 
degradation of O-​linked glycans (host mucin). Genes encoding degrading enzymes are shown in green, red or blue and 
distinguish sulfatases and carbohydrate esterase (CE) activities, M60-like proteases or GHs, respectively (with family 
numbers indicated to match to potential target linkages as shown in part a). A number of other binding, transport and 
sensory proteins are encoded in these loci, including hybrid two-component sensor regulator (HTCS), extra-​cytoplasmic 
function (ECF) sigma factor/anti-​sigma (AS) factor regulators and homologues of the prototypic Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron starch utilization system (Sus), TonB-​dependent receptor SusC and starch-​binding protein SusD. 
B. caccae, Bacteroides caccae.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATuRe RevIewS | MICrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 16 | AUGUST 2018 | 461

Finally, a few commensal bacterial lineages have 
evolved specialized strategies that enable them to inter-
act with or even live inside various niches within the 
mucosal barrier. Examples include segmented filamen-
tous bacteria, which make direct, intimate contacts with 
small intestinal epithelial cells52, and some Bacteroides 
species (Bacteroides fragilis and B. thetaiotaomicron)53,54, 
which colonize the lumen of some colonic crypts. 
Accordingly, B. fragilis has been shown to require special 
crypt colonization factor proteins for crypt colonization, 
of which B. thetaiotaomicron has several homologues. 
These are encoded by a PUL with homology to oth-
ers known to be involved in mucin utilization, and 
B. fragilis mutants missing these functions fail to occupy 
crypts53. These results imply that specific host-​derived 
glycan structures of crypt mucus are an important nutri-
ent source or adherence site for these Bacteroides spp. 
A separate study using laser capture microdissection 
identified Acinetobacter species as abundant bacteria 
in the colonic crypt of mice55, leading to the conclu-
sion that members of this genus possess an additional, 
unknown crypt colonization strategy. Even deeper into 
intestinal tissue, Alcaligenes species have been identified 
as lymphoid-​resident commensal bacteria, occupying 
an even more specialized niche inside of small intesti-
nal lymphoid tissue56. Alcaligenes species proliferate in 
the lymphoid tissue of Peyer’s patches when interleukin-22 
(IL-22)-producing innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are 
depleted and may cause systemic inflammation in 
mice56. Such examples of apparently non-​harmful 
commensals invading the mucosal barrier further 
blur the lines between commensal and pathogenic 
host−microorganism interactions. Mechanisms used 
by pathogens to subvert the gut mucosal barrier are 
discussed in the following sections.
Pathogens in the small intestine
The architecture of the mucosal barrier in the small 
intestine is fundamentally different to that in the 
large intestine. The small intestine is characterized by 
thinner mucus to promote nutrient absorption and anti-
gen sampling, which is, in part, offset by secretion of 
AMPs to exclude bacteria from the epithelial surface57. 
Enteric pathogens have evolved several different strat-
egies to gain entry into the small intestinal mucosal 
barrier by exploiting distinct cell lineages.
Enterocytes and microfold cells. Together with special-
ized secretory cells (goblet cells, enteroendocrine cell, 
Paneth cells and tuft cells), the small intestinal mucosal 
barrier contains specialized M cells, which cover under-
lying lymphoid aggregates called Peyer’s patches (Fig. 3a). 
Thus, the major role of M cells is the sampling and 
transcytosis of antigens through the epithelial barrier, 
but these cells and Peyer’s patches are also exploited by 
certain pathogens to gain entry through the mucosal 
barrier58. For example, although Salmonella enterica 
subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium can directly invade 
epithelial or dendritic cells, it primarily uses an M cell-​
dependent mechanism to traverse the mucosal barrier59. 
The pathogen can even gain access to the underlying 
tissue through ingestion by dendritic cells located in 
the Peyer’s patch, which may be followed by systemic 
spread60 (Fig. 3a).
Host cell surface proteins such as integrins are 
expressed on M cells and several other cell types and 
are frequent receptors for pathogen invasion. Compared 
with other intestinal enterocytes, M cells express a higher 
number of β1-integrin proteins that are receptors for 
Yersinia spp61. Yersinia pseudotuberculosis uses its outer 
membrane protein invasin to transit through M cells 
into the underlying Peyer’s patch by interacting with β1 
integrins expressed on the surface of the targeted cells62,63 
(Fig. 3b). A similar mechanism, which includes forma-
tion of a fibronectin bridge between β1 integrins and the 
invading bacterium64 (Fig. 3b), is used by Mycobacterium 
avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP).
E-​cadherin (a transmembrane glycoprotein) and the 
hepatocyte growth factor receptor (MET) are two other 
proteins presented on M cells. Listeria monocytogenes 
uses two of its main virulence factors, the surface proteins 
internalin A (InlA) and/or internalin B (InlB), to bind 
to E-​cadherin and MET and invade epithelial cells, 
including M cells65,66 (Fig. 3b). The docking of InlA to 
E-​cadherin induces local, intracellular actin recruit-
ment, activates the Arp2/3 complex67 and enables 
L. monocytogenes to invade cells, break out of its vacuole 
using listeriolysin O and then move within the cytoplasm 
and spread from cell to cell via actin assembly-​inducing 
protein (ActA)-dependent actin polymerization68 (Fig. 3b).
Mucus degradation and tight junction disruption. Some 
pathogens secrete enzymes that cleave mucus or disrupt 
tight junctions in the underlying epithelial cells to desta-
bilize host tissue (Fig. 3c). Vibrio cholerae secretes a soluble 
Zn2+-dependent metalloproteinase (haemagglutinin 
protease (Hap)) that possesses mucinolytic activity69. 
By contrast, another toxin produced by this bacterium, 
zonula occludens toxin (ZOT), interacts with the extra-
cellular domains of the tight junction proteins occludin 
and zonula occludens 1 protein (ZO1) to disrupt epithelial 
integrity70,71. Similar disruption of a different tight junction 
protein, claudin, is performed by the bacterial pathogen 
Clostridium perfringens through the activity of its entero-
toxin72. Such barrier disruption strategies are not limited 
to bacteria, as the protozoan Giardia lamblia (synonymous 
with Giardia duodenalis) possesses abilities to degrade or 
disrupt mucus73. Furthermore, the protozoan disrupts 
ZO1 to increase permeability of the epithelium74 and 
reorganizes cytoskeletal F-​actin filaments75 (Fig. 3c).
Pathogen invasion or evasion of secretory cell activity . 
Despite the mucus-​secreting and AMP-​secreting 
activities of goblet and Paneth cells, some pathogens 
have also evolved mechanisms to invade through 
these cells. Besides the routes described above for 
L. monocytogenes infection (Fig. 3b), goblet cells can be 
an alternative target site for entry76. The host receptor 
E-​cadherin is also expressed on goblet cells but is situated 
below the tight junctions and only accessible from the 
lumen if the cell has expelled mucus. L. monocytogenes 
recognizes E-​cadherin at the surface of villi located at 
the tip of mucus-​expelling goblet cells, is internalized 
and quickly transcytosed through the mucosal barrier and 
Interleukin-22
(IL-22). A cytokine that is part 
of the IL-10 cytokine family 
that is produced by activated 
natural killer and T cells and,  
in the gut, is responsible for 
activating epithelial cell 
regeneration, mucin 
production and antimicrobial 
peptide secretion.
Innate lymphoid cells
(ILCs). A group of innate 
immune cells that are 
characterized by the absence 
of antigen-​specific B or T cell 
receptors.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
462 | AUGUST 2018 | volume 16	

is then transferred in the lamina propria via exocytosis76 
(Fig. 3d). Moreover, S. Typhimurium has evolved to cir-
cumvent host defences during invasion of the epithelial 
barrier (Fig. 3e). This pathogen can evade the activity 
of Paneth cell-​secreted cationic antimicrobial peptides 
(CAMPs), including defensins, by altering the anionic 
character of the cell surface77,78. The pathogen uses 
phase variation to activate functions that incorporate 
positively charged aminoarabinose into lipid A, which 
decreases the net negative charge of the outer mem-
brane of the pathogen77,78. The ordinarily anionic lipid 
A is thought to attract cationic CAMPs, and reducing 
5VGOEGNN
2CPGVJEGNN
6WHVEGNN
)QDNGVEGNN
/EGNN
'PVGTQ
GPFQETKPG
EGNN
'PVGTQE[VG
.COKPCRTQRTKC
)WVNWOGP
D/EGNNUCPFGPVGTQE[VGU
E/WEWUCPFVKIJVLWPEVKQPFKUTWRVKQP
8EJQNGTCG
%RGTHTKPIGPU
8CEWQNG
+PXCUKQP
'UECRG
#EVKPVCKN
.OQPQE[VQIGPGU
.OQPQE[VQIGPGU
+PN#
+PN$
/'6
#EVKPȰNCOGPVU
(KDTQPGEVKP
DTKFIG
)NCODNKC
+PXCUKP
βKPVGITKP
;RUGWFQVWDGTEWNQUKU
F)QDNGVEGNNU
G2CPGVJEGNN
1EENWFKP
56[RJKOWTKWO
&GHGPUKP
%#/2U
/KETQDKQVC
.COKPCRTQRTKC
/#2
;RUGWFQVWDGTEWNQUKU
/#2
'ORVKGF
IQDNGVEGNN
6TCPUE[VQUKU
&% 6EGNN $EGNN
<16
%NCWFKP
'PVGTQVQZKP
%[VQRNCUO
*CR

#OKPQCTCDKPQUG
.KRKF#
4GCTTCPIGOGPV
5KCNKECEKF
/WEWU
C
5[UVGOKEURTGCF
'ECFJGTKP
2G[GToURCVEJ
/KETQDKQVC
%WREGNN
5GT
2TQ
6JT
2TQ
5GT
#EVKP
<1
.OQPQE[VQIGPGU
+PN#
'ECFJGTKP
%[VQRNCUO
%[VQRNCUO






s s s s s
s
s
s s

s

s

s
/EGNN
56[RJKOWTKWO
5[UVGOKE
URTGCF
&%
Fig. 3 | Interactions of pathogens with the mucosal barrier in the small 
intestine. a | Four secretory epithelial cell lineages are present in the small 
intestine, which include goblet cells, enteroendocrine cells, Paneth cells, 
and tuft cells. Microfold (M) cells are absorptive cells, which are part of the 
Peyer’s patch. Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium 
predominantly invades M cells (thick arrow , inset) before being engulfed by 
dendritic cells (DCs) located in the Peyer’s patch, although S. Typhimurium 
can directly invade trans-​epithelial DCs as well (thin arrow , inset) before 
systemic spread. b | Receptor-​mediated invasion strategies for Yersinia 
pseudotuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) and 
Listeria monocytogenes. Y. pseudotuberculosis uses its outer membrane 
protein invasin to transit through M cells into the Peyer’s patch by 
interacting with β1 integrins expressed on the cell surface, whereas MAP 
forms a fibronectin bridge to β1 integrins. L. monocytogenes uses its surface 
proteins internalin A (InlA) and/or internalin B (InlB) to bind to E-​cadherin 
and hepatocyte growth factor receptor (MET) and invade epithelial cells, 
including M cells. Docking of InlA to E-​cadherin induces local, intracellular 
actin recruitment, activates the Arp2/3 complex and enables the pathogen 
to invade cells, break out of its vacuole using listeriolysin O, then move within 
the cytoplasm and spread from cell to cell via actin assembly-​inducing 
protein (ActA)-dependent actin polymerization. c | Mechanisms through 
which Vibrio cholerae, Clostridium perfringens and the protozoan Giardia 
lamblia disrupt mucus and/or tight junctions between epithelial cells. 
V. cholerae secretes a haemagglutinin/protease (Hap), which possesses 
mucinolytic activity , and its zonula occludens toxin (ZOT) interacts with the 
extracellular domains of the tight junction proteins occludin and zonula 
occludens 1 protein (ZO1) to disrupt epithelial integrity. The protozoan 
G. lamblia reorganizes cytoskeletal F-​actin filaments and disrupts ZO1 to 
promote tight junction disruption and increase permeability of the 
epithelium. d | L. monocytogenes uses goblet cells that have expelled their 
mucus to traverse via transcytosis into the lamina propria as their E-​cadherin 
receptors are easier to access by the pathogen. e | Paneth cells secrete 
cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs), such as defensin, to inhibit 
pathogenic and non-​pathogenic microorganisms. S. Typhimurium can 
change the anionic charge of its surface molecule lipid A to reduce negative 
charge by adding positively charged amino groups via aminoarabinose.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATuRe RevIewS | MICrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 16 | AUGUST 2018 | 463

the negative charge inhibits this process79,80 (Fig. 3e). 
Along the same lines, some bacteria display anionic 
polysaccharide capsules above their outer membrane to 
neutralize AMPs before they reach lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS) at the cell surface81, although a potential role for 
this strategy in small intestinal pathogens is not clear. 
While S. Typhimurium is an invasive pathogen, different 
LPS modifications that also block killing by AMPs occur 
in some commensals82,83, underscoring the pressure to 
circumvent this arm of host defence by both pathogens 
and mutualists.
Pathogens in the large intestine
The dense commensal microbiota in the large intestine 
protects the host from invasion by several pathogens 
(a process termed colonization resistance). For example, 
colonization with Clostridiales was recently shown to be 
protective against lethal pathogens in mice84, and depletion 
of butyrate-​producing bacteria by antibiotic treatment 
promotes expansion of dysbiotic Enterobacteriaceae via 
microbiota-​activated peroxisome proliferator-​activated 
receptor-​γ (PPARγ) signalling85. Nevertheless, alterations 
in the colonic microbiota composition or physiology can 
also promote defects in the intestinal mucosal barrier. 
Enteric pathogens that colonize the large intestine use 
numerous mechanisms, including some dependent on 
the activities of co-​resident commensal microorganisms, 
to promote their colonization or persistence through 
invasion of the mucosal barrier.
Defects in colonic mucous barrier promote invasion 
of enteric pathogens. Studies in genetically modified 
mice have revealed the importance of mucus in the 
host defence against colonic pathogens. One study used 
MUC2-deficient (Muc2−/−) mice to understand the role 
of the colonic mucous barrier in slowing disease by 
the attaching and effacing (A/E) pathogen Citrobacter 
rodentium, revealing that mice lacking a normal mucous 
layer experience accelerated disease progression and even 
lethal colitis in response to this ordinarily self-​limiting 
pathogen86 (Fig. 4a). Another study investigated the 
amount of time required for expulsion of a parasitic nem-
atode, Trichuris muris, in the caecum of Muc2−/− mice87, 
which was significantly delayed compared with wild-​
type mice that instead exhibit goblet cell hyperplasia to 
probably increase mucus production and aid expulsion. 
A recent study using gnotobiotic mice provides a novel 
perspective on invasion of C. rodentium based on diet−
microbiota interactions that influence mucus thickness 
and, in turn, pathogen susceptibility36. When mice are 
deprived of fibre, the main exogenous nutrient source for 
colonic microorganisms, the composition of the micro-
biota changes in favour of increased mucus-​degrading 
bacteria (Fig. 4a). Consequently, mucus is increasingly 
used as an alternative nutrient and the thickness of the 
mucous layer, measured in Carnoy’s solution-fixed 
histo­logical sections, overlying the epithelium is eroded. 
C. rodentium can more rapidly traverse this eroded mucous 
layer and elicit similar disease kinetics and lethal colitis 
as in Muc2−/− mice (Fig. 4a).
The host mucosal barrier requires the cytokine IL-22, 
a cytokine involved in epithelial regeneration, AMP 
production and mucin synthesis, for an efficient defence 
against pathogens. Mice deficient in IL-22 clear T. muris 
infection more slowly, presumably owing in part to the 
lack of goblet cells and mucus88. IL-22-dependent induc-
tion of the AMPs regenerating islet-​derived protein 3β 
(REG3β) and REG3γ in colonic mouse epithelial cells 
provides increased survival after C. rodentium infec-
tion89. IL-22-deficient mice experience accelerated and 
lethal colitis similar to that observed in fibre-​deprived 
and Muc2−/− mice, further underscoring the importance 
of proper mucosal barrier and immunological responses 
in slowing disease progression caused by this pathogen89 
(Fig. 4a). S. Typhimurium has evolved strategies to use 
host-​dependent IL-22 production, which triggers metal 
sequestration by increased host lipocalin and calprotec-
tin production, to its advantage. This pathogen can use 
siderophores that are resistant to lipocalin neutralization 
and high-​affinity zinc transporters, promoting its own col-
onization while competing commensals are suppressed by 
this response90 (Fig. 4a).
Motility and adherence facilitate pathogen colonization. 
Expression of phase-​variable flagella and fimbriae helps 
adapt pathogen subpopulations to suitable infection sites 
by providing some pathogens with adherence properties 
and others with motility. Beyond promoting motility 
through the mucous layer, flagella confer another advan-
tage to some pathogens during infection at mucosal 
surfaces. Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and enterohe-
morrhagic E. coli (EHEC) strains possess flagella termed 
H6 and H7, which possess adhesive properties to bind to 
bovine mucins91 (Fig. 4b), suggesting that this additional 
property contributes to colonization by these pathogens 
on mucosal surfaces91. Similar flagellum-​related mucus 
adherence by Clostridium difficile, a nosocomial pathogen 
associated with antibiotic treatment92, is thought to pro-
mote colonization by this organism93, which can also form 
a biofilm near the epithelial surface94 (Fig. 4b). Emerging 
data further support a role for multi-​species bacte-
rial biofilms in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer95. 
Tumour-​associated biofilms, mainly composed of E. coli 
and B. fragilis, were recently discovered in humans, and 
tumour-​prone mice colonized with these species exhibit 
increased tumour formation96. As adherence to and 
movement through the mucous layer are requisite steps 
before epithelial colonization and biofilm formation for 
many commensals and pathogens, understanding the 
factors that mediate these events will uncover strategies 
to prevent some enteric infections and chronic diseases.
Disruption of colonic mucus and tight junctions by 
pathogens. Some colonic pathogens are adept at breaking 
peptide bonds and glycosidic linkages in colonic mucin 
structures and/or epithelial tight junctions, conferring 
competitive advantages during infection (Fig. 4c). StcE, 
a well-​studied E. coli metalloprotease, cleaves mucins97, 
which could help the pathogen to reach the epithelium and 
initiate disease. A recent study confirmed the proteolytic 
activity of StcE in human colonic mucosal biopsy samples 
and mucin-​producing LS174T colon carcinoma cells98. 
An in vitro study demonstrated that pathogenic E. coli 
secretes a zinc-​metalloproteinase SslE, another member 
Colonization resistance
A phenomenon by which the 
presence of a healthy 
microbiota inhibits invasion by 
external pathogens. In the gut, 
this state has been ascribed to 
the inhibition of many enteric 
pathogens, which are more 
adept at gaining an infection 
foothold after a major 
perturbation, such as antibiotic 
treatment.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
464 | AUGUST 2018 | volume 16	

of the M60-like protease family that cleaves mucin gly-
coproteins99. Similarly, the protozoan Entamoeba histol-
ytica secretes both cysteine proteases and an M60-like48 
protease that degrades mucus100,101 (Fig. 4c). E. histolytica 
also promotes colonization of the colonic mucous layer by 
adhering to mucins using a 170-kDa lectin102. The nem-
atode T. muris secretes serine proteases that act on the 
amino-​terminal disulfide crosslinking domain of MUC2, 
leading to depolymerization of the MUC2 network103 
(Fig. 4c). As judged by techniques such as trans-​epithelial 
electrical resistance, staining for tight junction proteins 
and increased passage rates of labelled molecules of var-
ious sizes in vivo and in vitro, some pathogens disrupt 
aspects of epithelial cell fitness, including the integrity of 
their tight junction proteins. For example, C. difficile toxin 
A and toxin B disrupt the cellular actin cytoskeleton, 
which affects its interactions with tight junction com-
ponents, such as claudin and occludin104. E. coli and 
Lectin
A broad family of plant, animal 
and bacterial proteins defined 
by their ability to bind to 
certain carbohydrates with 
moderate to high affinity.
5GT
2TQ
6JT
2TQ
5GT
5GT
2TQ
6JT
2TQ
5GT
/WEssOKEG
(KDTGHTGGFKGV
9KNFV[RGOKEG
%TQFGPVKWO
%TQFGPVKWO
+.OKEG
+.ssOKEG
2TQVGQDCEVGTKC
%TQFGPVKWO
56[RJKOWTKWO
E/WEWUCPFVKIJVLWPEVKQPFKUTWRVKQP
D/QVKNKV[CPFOWEWUCFJGUKP
.GEVKP
'JKUVQN[VKEC
%FKHƔEKNG
%FKHƔEKNG
$KQȰNO
F5KCNKECEKFCPFHWEQUG
'EQNK
1*
%NCWFKP
5VE'
OGVCNNQ
RTQVGCUG
1EENWFKP
)QDNGVEGNN
J[RGTRNCUKC
6OWTKU
'ZRWNUKQP
/WEWURTQVGKPDCEMDQPG
6QZKP#
6QZKP$

'EQNK
1*
5GTKPG
RTQVGCUG
'EQNK
1*
.COKPCRTQRTKC
%TQFGPVKWO
'HHGEVQT
RTQVGKPU
655
'EQNK
1/8U
2TQVGCUGU
%LGLWPK
+TQP
<KPE
+.
%CNRTQVGEVKP
.KRQECNKP
#EVKP
0QOWEWU
+PETGCUGF
OWEWU
RTQFWEVKQP
r.GUUOWEWU
r4')γ↓
'TQFGF
OWEWU
C
6OWTKU
%FKHƔEKNG
5KCNKECEKF
(WEQUG
56[RJKOWTKWO
$VJGVCKQVCQOKETQP
$VJGVCKQVCQOKETQP
'EQNK
'*'%
.COKPCRTQRTKC
↑/WEWU
FGITCFKPI
DCEVGTKC
Fig. 4 | Pathogen adaptations that promote colonization and invasion of 
the mucosal barrier in the large intestine. a | Mice genetically deficient 
in mucin 2 (Muc2−/− mice) lack a normal mucous layer, which results in 
accelerated disease progression following infection with Citrobacter 
rodentium. Wild-​type mice exhibit goblet cell hyperplasia, likely increasing 
mucus production and expelling the nematode Trichuris muris. However, 
Muc2−/− mice cannot clear T. muris owing to the lack of mucus production. 
Mice fed a fibre-​free diet exhibit an altered microbiota composition that 
reflects a higher abundance of mucus-​degrading bacteria. Increased foraging 
on the mucous layer leads to accelerated disease progression following 
infection with C. rodentium. Mice infected with C. rodentium and deficient in 
IL-22 show reduced mucus production and experience lethal colitis as the 
cytokine fails to induce the antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) regenerating islet-​
derived protein 3β (REG3β) and REG3γ in colonic mouse epithelial cells. 
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium uses host-dependent 
IL-22 production, which triggers metal sequestration (zinc and iron) 
by increased host lipocalin and calprotectin production, to its advantage by 
promoting its own colonization while suppressing competing commensals. 
b | In addition to promoting motility through the mucous layer, flagella confer 
another advantage to some pathogens during infection at mucosal surfaces. 
Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia 
coli (EHEC) strains express flagella (H6 and H7) with mucin adhesion 
properties, which might contribute to colonization on mucosal surfaces. 
Similar flagellum-​mediated adherence to mucus is thought to promote 
colonization by Clostridium difficile and biofilm formation near the epithelial 
surface. c | E. coli, Entamoeba histolytica and T. muris produce enzymes and 
lectins that either cleave or bind to mucins, whereas other pathogens, such 
as C. difficile and Clostridium perfringens, secrete toxins that disrupt colonic 
tight junctions. StcE, an E. coli metalloprotease, cleaves mucins, which helps 
the pathogen to reach epithelial cells. E. histolytica can adhere to mucins 
using a galactosamine–N-​acetylgalactosamine (Gal/GalNAc)-binding lectin. 
T. muris secretes serine proteases that act on the amino-​terminal disulfide 
crosslinking domain of MUC2, leading to depolymerization of the MUC2 
network. Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) filled with proteases are secreted 
by Campylobacter jejuni and cleave the tight junction proteins E-​cadherin and 
occludin. C. difficile toxin A and toxin B disrupt the cellular actin cytoskeleton, 
which affects its interactions with tight junction components claudin and 
occludin. E. coli and C. rodentium use their type III secretion systems (T3SS) 
to attach to epithelial cells, reorganize the cytoskeleton and alter tight 
junction protein integrity. d | Commensal organisms such as Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron can use mucin-​degrading enzymes to liberate sugars, such 
as sialic acid and fucose, which are either directly used by pathogens as 
nutrients (S. Typhimurium and C. difficile use free sialic acid) or modulate 
virulence activities of pathogens (fucose sensing by EHEC).
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATuRe RevIewS | MICrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 16 | AUGUST 2018 | 465

C. rodentium also use the type III secretion systems (T3SSs) 
to attach to the epithelial cells, to reorganize the cytoskel-
eton and consequently to alter the architecture and 
integrity of tight junction proteins105,106. Outer membrane 
vesicles, filled with proteases, are secreted by the patho­
gen Campylobacter jejuni to cleave the tight junction 
proteins E-​cadherin and occludin107 (Fig. 4c).
Exploitation of commensal-​liberated mucosal nutri-
ents by pathogens. In addition to roles for commensal-​
derived SCFAs for pathogens (Box 3), degradation of 
mucus by commensal bacteria and changes in the envi-
ronment following antibiotic treatment create new niches 
in the gut that facilitate colonization and persistence of 
pathogens, such as C. difficile and S. Typhimurium. 
Some of the direct connections between these events 
have been elucidated recently. Two studies108,109 revealed 
separate sugar-​liberation pathways in which the activity 
of commensal bacteria towards mucosal nutrients aug-
ments colonization by these pathogens (Fig. 4d). A first 
study showed that free sialic acid is released from colonic 
mucus glycans by some commensal bacteria, such as 
B. thetaiotaomicron, and that the availability of this 
sugar, which can be directly utilized but not cleaved by 
C. difficile and S. Typhimurium, is significantly increased 
after antibiotic treatment. The latter effect may be due to 
elimination of sialic acid-​liberating commensals, which 
could also compete for this sugar, but not the destruction 
of the sialic acid-​cleaving enzymes they produced before 
antibiotic treatment108. A second study revealed that a 
different host glycan-​derived sugar, fucose, which is also 
cleaved by B. thetaiotaomicron and other commensals, 
positively regulates the virulence of EHEC, presumably 
constituting a signal to the pathogen that it is within the 
mucous layer and close to its host epithelial niche109. This 
finding is interesting in light of seminal research into 
B. thetaiotaomicron–host interactions, which showed that 
introduction of this fucose-​consuming bacterium into 
germ-​free mice elicits fucosylation of host glycans110, a 
phenomenon that has been recreated in intestinal orga-
noids111. Thus, there is a complex interplay between the 
presence and activity of commensal bacteria, changes 
in the host mucosal barrier and the subsequent balance 
between commensal–pathogen relationships.
Mucosal barrier and chronic disease
A major role of the mucosal barrier is to keep bacterial 
pathogens and commensal bacteria at a physical distance 
from the epithelium. Disruption of this barrier contrib-
utes to inflammatory diseases such as IBD. Additionally, 
disruption of the small intestinal barrier is emerging as a 
factor in the development of coeliac disease112. If the large 
intestinal mucous layer is compromised owing to defects 
in mucus production or glycosylation113–115, which might 
potentially lead to it being broken down more quickly 
by bacteria35,36, commensals that normally occupy the 
lumen and outer mucous layer may move closer to host 
tissue and provoke increased immune responses. Although 
naturally occurring mucus defects in humans are not as 
severe as the effects observed in engineered mice (such 
as Muc2−/− mice) mentioned above, even seemingly small 
changes in the interaction between the host and the gut 
microbiota could tip the balance between health and dis-
eases such as IBD. This idea is supported by a study that 
showed infiltration of commensal bacteria into the inner 
mucous layer in multiple mouse IBD models and patients 
with ulcerative colitis, resulting in closer contact of the 
microbiota with the epithelium and in inflammation116. 
Along the same lines, it was shown that patients with 
ulcerative colitis lack a mucous layer on inflamed tissue 
in the gut mucosa, which is not the case in patients with 
Crohn’s disease117, which is consistent with the idea that 
inflammation in patients with ulcerative colitis is asso-
ciated with altered mucus production or glycosylation. 
However, it is not clear from these studies whether the 
inflammation-​associated changes in mucus presence or 
penetrability are the primary cause of the inflammation 
or a result. In light of the increased mucus foraging activ-
ity that occurs in the context of a low-​fibre diet discussed 
above36, a recent study found that mice fed a Western style 
(high-​fat and low-​fibre) diet also experience increased 
permeability of the inner mucous layer, as evaluated by 
ex vivo culture and bead-​penetration assay118. This study, 
which also found that certain prebiotics and probiotics 
reverse specific aspects of this barrier defect, under-
scores the complexity of microbial interactions with the 
mucosal barrier and the multiple sites and mechanisms 
Type III secretion systems
(T3SSs). Needle-​like complexes 
related to the bacterial 
flagellum that are an important 
virulence factor of Gram-​
negative bacteria. They enable 
pathogenic bacteria to inject 
effector proteins into the 
cytoplasm of the host target 
cell and modify a variety of 
cellular responses.
Box 3 | SCFAs and an organic acid can influence pathogens
Short-​chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and organic acids produced by fermenting gut bacteria 
are ubiquitous and abundant metabolites in the gut, so it is not surprising that pathogens 
have evolved many ways to sense and respond to these molecules. Changes in the 
concentrations of SCFAs (acetate, butyrate and propionate) and the organic acid 
succinate potentiate susceptibility to several pathogens. Bifidobacterium produces 
acetate, which promotes host defence mechanisms in epithelial cells and therefore 
protects mice from fatal Escherichia coli O157:H7 infection142. By contrast, acetate 
enhances Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium colonization by 
promoting expression of pathogenicity island 1 (SPI1)149, which encodes one of its type 3 
secretion systems (T3SSs) and enables it to inject effector proteins into host cell 
cytoplasm. Other studies have shown that butyrate and propionate reduce the 
expression of SPI1 in S. Typhimurium150,151, which indicates that the composition of the 
SCFAs in the ileum signals the pathogen that it is in a suitable infection site23. A study 
demonstrated that Clostridium difficile gains a fitness advantage by metabolizing the 
organic acid succinate, which is produced by some commensals (for example, 
Bacteroides) and consumed by others (for example, Firmicutes), including C. difficile152. 
This metabolite is not abundantly available to pathogens before antibiotic treatment 
owing to consumption by other bacteria but is transiently enhanced in the presence of 
some antibiotics, presumably owing to either lysis of bacterial cells or selective killing  
of succinate consumers152. Furthermore, in the presence of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, 
succinate enhances the expression of the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) in  
E. coli153, and the global virulence regulator leucine-​responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) 
and flagellar genes are induced by butyrate154. Production of E. coli flagella is also 
promoted by acetate and propionate154, underscoring the idea for this and other 
pathogens that motility and virulence functions are closely tied to SCFA levels.
'EQNK1*
56[RJKOWTKWO
'EQNK
'EQNK
'EQNK
56[RJKOWTKWO
52+
.''
52+
(NCIGNNC
.TR
(NCIGNNC
5WEEKPCVG
O
O–
O
–O
#EGVCVG
O
O–
2TQRKQPCVG
O
O–
$WV[TCVG
O
O–
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
466 | AUGUST 2018 | volume 16	

involved118. Finally, it has been shown that potentially 
inflammatory commensal bacteria in patients with IBD 
are highly coated with immunoglobulin A (IgA) and pen-
etrate the inner mucous layer in a mouse model to drive 
disease, suggesting that closer proximity of some of these 
deleterious organisms causes them to be increasingly 
detected by the immune system of the host119.
As the biosynthesis of O-​linked glycans is such a 
complex process, it is not surprising that many com-
ponents are required to maintain and support robust 
mucin production and that defects exist in this process120 
(Box 2). Mutations that reduce function of glycoprotein-​
N-acetylgalactosamine 3-β-​galactosyltransferase 1 
(C1GALT1), the enzyme that catalyses the synthesis 
of core 1-derived and core 2-derived O-​linked glycans, 
have been shown in patients with colorectal cancer and 
ulcerative colitis115,121. C1GALT1-deficient mice fail 
to produce core 1-derived O-​linked glycans and shift to 
higher production of core 3-derived O-​linked glycans115. 
Interestingly, spontaneous colitis occurs in C1galt1−/− 
mice in the distal colon, and the importance of these 
findings is corroborated by a known somatic missense 
mutation in the gene encoding the molecular chaperone 
C1GALT1-specific chaperone 1 (C1GALT1C1) in 
patients with ulcerative colitis. C1GALT1C1-deficient 
mice are characterized by abnormal mucus expression, 
altered mucin glycosylation and reduced thickness of the 
inner mucus115. Similar to core 1-deficient mice, mice 
with an engineered defect in synthesis of core 3-derived 
O-​linked glycans exhibit a reduction in MUC2 pro-
tein levels and increased permeability of the mucous 
layer122, which enhances the contact of intestinal bacteria 
with epithelial cells. Finally, results from a recent study 
demonstrated that mice lacking core 1 develop colitis 
only in the distal colon, whereas the absence of core 1 
and core 3 together leads to the development of colitis 
in the distal and proximal colon114. As in many mouse 
models of IBD, reducing or eliminating the microbiota 
by treating with antibiotics or re-​deriving mice as germ-​
free reduces colitis in C1galt1−/− and/or core 1 and core 
3 double-​knockout mice, highlighting a role for the 
microbiota in disease progression. Precise mechanisms 
connecting defects in mucin glycosylation with altered 
activities of gut microorganisms or changes in microbiota 
community structure and the onset of disease still remain 
to be determined. However, it is likely that reduced glyco-
sylation increases mucus susceptibility to bacterial degra-
dative enzymes, which decreases its barrier function and 
brings bacteria into closer proximity to the host and its 
immune system. Consistent with this, the mucus of core 
1-deficient and core 3-deficient mice is more susceptible 
to degradation by proteases114. An alternative explana-
tion, which is not exclusive of the previous mechanism, 
is that altered or simplified glycosylation selects for a 
different microbiota structure that in turn promotes or 
exacerbates inflammation. Consistent with this, core 
1-deficient mice show altered gut microbiota profiles 
that are shifted in favour of Bacteroidetes, a phylum with 
several known mucin degraders123. Finally, a third pos-
sibility is that altered mucin glycosylation increases the 
penetrability of the mucous layer to gut microorganisms 
or their antigens, leading to increased host exposure and 
activation of the immune system. Given the complex 
interactions described above, which interconnect diet, 
gut microorganisms and the immune system with the 
integrity of the mucosal barrier during health and disease, 
deciphering these mechanisms will lead not only to better 
understanding of why these spontaneous inflammatory 
diseases occur but also how to prevent and treat them.
Summary and outlook
The intestinal mucosal barrier is the first line of defence 
against encroachment by both commensal and pathogenic 
microorganisms. The status and integrity of this barrier 
are contingent upon a number of linked factors, including 
host diet, the community of commensal microorganisms 
that compose the microbiota, host genetics and expo-
sure to invading pathogens. Diet influences the extent to 
which commensal bacteria forage on mucus for nutrients, 
indirectly altering mucous layer status. Host defects in 
mucin glycosylation, cellular tight junctions and immune 
responses can damage the overall resilience of the mucosal 
barrier and are known to contribute to diseases such as 
IBD. A variety of bacterial pathogens have evolved strate-
gies to overcome the intact mucosal barrier and establish 
infection in the human host. It is clear that some of the 
mechanisms (for example, M60-like proteases, motility 
and adherence) deployed by classically defined pathogens 
are also used by organisms that are present as commen-
sals in many individuals. Given the complexity of these 
interactions and the ability to easily control variables, such 
as the amount and form of dietary nutrients in animal 
studies, a future goal is to understand the complex inter-
action between diet, the gut microbiota and the mucosal 
barrier during health and disease. Further research on 
diet−mucosal interactions that govern the effects of overt 
pathogens in healthy hosts or the pathogenic roles of com-
mensal microorganisms in hosts with defects that predis-
pose to diseases such as IBD should reveal new therapies 
or preventive strategies for these enteric diseases. Finally, 
future strategies may also involve precision editing of the 
gut microbiota with specific dietary components or drugs, 
as shown in a recent study in which Enterobacteriaceae-​
dependent microbial dysbiosis during gut inflammation 
was ameliorated by tungstate treatment124, as well as prebi-
otic modulation of the gut microbiome to specifically tar-
get enterocyte proliferation and cytokine production125 to 
improve health.
Published online 14 June 2018
Molecular chaperone
Type of protein that assists in 
the folding and unfolding of 
other proteins. They prevent 
aggregation by binding to non-​
native structures and therefore 
support the folding process.
1.	
Savage, D. C. Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal 
tract. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 31, 107–133 (1977).
2.	
Qin, J. et al. A human gut microbial gene catalogue 
established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 464, 
59–65 (2010).
3.	
Koenig, J. E. et al. Succession of microbial  
consortia in the developing infant gut microbiome. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 4578–4585  
(2011).
4.	
Palmer, C., Bik, E. M., DiGiulio, D. B., Relman, D. A.  
& Brown, P. O. Development of the human infant 
intestinal microbiota. PLoS Biol. 5, e177 (2007).
5.	
Yassour, M. et al. Natural history of the infant gut 
microbiome and impact of antibiotic treatment on 
bacterial strain diversity and stability. Sci. Transl. 
Med. 8, 343ra81–343ra81 (2016).
6.	
David, L. A. et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters 
the human gut microbiome. Nature 505, 559–563 
(2014).  
This study demonstrates that the gut microbiota 
reacts quickly to shifts in diet that alter the amount 
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATuRe RevIewS | MICrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 16 | AUGUST 2018 | 467

of plant material versus animal protein and that 
similar taxa are responsive to diet across individual 
humans.
7.	
Sonnenburg, E. D. et al. Diet-​induced extinctions in 
the gut microbiota compound over generations. 
Nature 529, 212–215 (2016).  
This proof-​of-principle study demonstrates that 
prolonged dietary fibre starvation in mice results in 
reduced diversity within a generation, and this loss 
of diversity becomes irreparable and more severe 
over multiple generations.
8.	
El Kaoutari, A., Armougom, F., Gordon, J. I., Raoult, D. 
& Henrissat, B. The abundance and variety of 
carbohydrate-​active enzymes in the human gut 
microbiota. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 11, 497–504  
(2013).
9.	
Furusawa, Y. et al. Commensal microbe-​derived 
butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic 
regulatory T cells. Nature 504, 446–450 (2013).  
This study demonstrates that the bacterial 
metabolite butyrate induces the differentiation of 
Treg cells and, furthermore, is able to ameliorate 
colitis in mice, providing novel insight into the 
interactions between the microbiota and host 
immune homeostasis.
10.	 Kim, M. H., Kang, S. G., Park, J. H., Yanagisawa, M. & 
Kim, C. H. Short-​chain fatty acids activate GPR41 and 
GPR43 on intestinal epithelial cells to promote 
inflammatory responses in mice. Gastroenterology 
145, 396–406 (2013).
11.	 Kaiko, G. E. et al. The colonic crypt protects stem cells 
from microbiota-​derived metabolites. Cell 165,  
1708–1720 (2016).
12.	 den Besten, G. et al. The role of short-​chain fatty acids 
in the interplay between diet, gut microbiota, and host 
energy metabolism. J. Lipid Res. 54, 2325–2340 
(2013).
13.	 Louis, P., Hold, G. L. & Flint, H. J. The gut microbiota, 
bacterial metabolites and colorectal cancer. Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 12, 661–672 (2014).
14.	 Turner, J. R. Intestinal mucosal barrier function in 
health and disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9, 799–809 
(2009).
15.	 Peterson, L. W. & Artis, D. Intestinal epithelial cells: 
regulators of barrier function and immune homeostasis. 
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 141–153 (2014).
16.	 Johansson, M. E. V. & Hansson, G. C. Immunological 
aspects of intestinal mucus and mucins. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 16, 639–649 (2016).
17.	 Gerbe, F., Legraverend, C. & Jay, P. The intestinal 
epithelium tuft cells: specification and function.  
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 69, 2907–2917 (2012).
18.	 Barr, J. J. et al. Bacteriophage adhering to mucus 
provide a non-​host-derived immunity. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 110, 10771–10776 (2013).
19.	 Pabst, O. New concepts in the generation and 
functions of IgA. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 821–832 
(2012).
20.	 Kommineni, S. et al. Bacteriocin production  
augments niche competition by enterococci in the 
mammalian gastrointestinal tract. Nature 526,  
719–722 (2015).
21.	 Tailford, L. E., Crost, E. H., Kavanaugh, D. & Juge, N. 
Mucin glycan foraging in the human gut microbiome. 
Front. Genet. 6, 81 (2015).
22.	 McGuckin, M. A., Lindén, S. K., Sutton, P. & Florin, T. H.  
Mucin dynamics and enteric pathogens. Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 9, 265–278 (2011).
23.	 Cameron, E. & Sperandio, V. Frenemies: signaling and 
nutritional integration in pathogen-​microbiota-host 
interactions. Cell Host Microbe 18, 275–284 (2015).
24.	 Tanoue, T., Atarashi, K. & Honda, K. Development and 
maintenance of intestinal regulatory T cells. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 16, 295–309 (2016).
25.	 Iliev, I. D. & Leonardi, I. Fungal dysbiosis: immunity 
and interactions at mucosal barriers. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 17, 635–646 (2017).
26.	 Darwich, A. S., Aslam, U., Ashcroft, D. M. &  
Rostami-​Hodjegan, A. Meta-​analysis of the turnover of 
intestinal epithelia in preclinical animal species and 
humans. Drug Metab. Dispos. 42, 2016–2022 
(2014).
27.	 Johansson, M. E. V., Larsson, J. M. H. & Hansson, G. C. 
The two mucus layers of colon are organized by the 
MUC2 mucin, whereas the outer layer is a legislator of 
host-​microbial interactions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
108, 4659–4665 (2011).
28.	 Li, H. et al. The outer mucus layer hosts a distinct 
intestinal microbial niche. Nat. Commun. 6, 8292 
(2015).  
This study separates the microbial populations and 
physiological responses of mucus-​associated and 
luminal bacteria, demonstrating distinct microbiota 
and behaviours in these niches.
29.	 Wrzosek, L. et al. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii influence the production 
of mucus glycans and the development of goblet cells 
in the colonic epithelium of a gnotobiotic model 
rodent. BMC Biol. 11, 61 (2013).
30.	 Birchenough, G. M. H., Nystrom, E. E. L.,  
Johansson, M. E. V. & Hansson, G. C. A sentinel 
goblet cell guards the colonic crypt by triggering 
Nlrp6-dependent Muc2 secretion. Science 352, 
1535–1542 (2016).  
This is a novel study that reveals differentiation of 
crypt goblet cells into distinct roles, including a 
TLR-​expressing sentinel goblet cell that senses 
microbial pathogen-​associated molecular patterns.
31.	 Johansson, M. E. V. et al. Normalization of host 
intestinal mucus layers requires long-​term microbial 
colonization. Cell Host Microbe 18, 582–592 (2015).
32.	 Velcich, A. et al. Colorectal cancer in mice genetically 
deficient in the mucin Muc2. Science 295,  
1726–1729 (2002).  
This is a foundational study in which MUC2 was 
eliminated in mice to demonstrate that deficiency 
of MUC2 leads to development of colorectal 
cancer.
33.	 Van der Sluis, M. et al. Muc2-deficient mice 
spontaneously develop colitis, indicating that MUC2 is 
critical for colonic protection. Gastroenterology 131, 
117–129 (2006).
34.	 Johansson, M. E. V., Sjövall, H. & Hansson, G. C. The 
gastrointestinal mucus system in health and disease. 
Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 10, 352–361 
(2013).
35.	 Earle, K. A. et al. Quantitative imaging of gut 
microbiota spatial organization. Cell Host Microbe 18, 
478–488 (2015).  
This is a seminal study that both innovates 
microscopic techniques for visualizing gut bacteria 
and shows low fibre-​induced thinning of the colonic 
mucous layer.
36.	 Desai, M. S. et al. A dietary fiber-​deprived gut 
microbiota degrades the colonic mucus barrier and 
enhances pathogen susceptibility. Cell 167,  
1339–1353 (2016).  
This study demonstrates that dietary fibre 
deprivation leads to mucus thinning and increased 
pathogen susceptibility in mice.
37.	 Porter, N. T. & Martens, E. C. The critical roles of 
polysaccharides in gut microbial ecology and 
physiology. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 71, 349–369  
(2017).
38.	 Koropatkin, N. M., Cameron, E.a & Martens, E. C. 
How glycan metabolism shapes the human gut 
microbiota. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 10, 323–335 (2012).
39.	 Hutkins, R. W. et al. Prebiotics: why definitions matter. 
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 37, 1–7 (2016).
40.	 Martens, E. C. et al. Recognition and degradation of 
plant cell wall polysaccharides by two human gut 
symbionts. PLoS Biol. 9, e1001221 (2011).
41.	 Cuskin, F. et al. Human gut bacteroidetes can utilize 
yeast mannan through a selfish mechanism. Nature 
517, 165–169 (2015).
42.	 Larsbrink, J. et al. A discrete genetic locus confers 
xyloglucan metabolism in select human gut 
bacteroidetes. Nature 506, 498–502 (2014).
43.	 Ndeh, D. et al. Complex pectin metabolism by gut 
bacteria reveals novel catalytic functions. Nature 544, 
65–70 (2017).
44.	 Sonnenburg, E. D. et al. Specificity of polysaccharide 
use in intestinal bacteroides species determines 
diet-induced microbiota alterations. Cell 141,  
1241–1252 (2010).
45.	 Nihira, T. et al. Discovery of β-1,4-d-​mannosyl-  
N-​acetyl-d-​glucosamine phosphorylase involved in the 
metabolism of N-​glycans. J. Biol. Chem. 288,  
27366–27374 (2013).
46.	 Martens, E. C., Kelly, A. G., Tauzin, A. S. & Brumer, H. 
The devil lies in the details: how variations in 
polysaccharide fine-​structure impact the physiology 
and evolution of gut microbes. J. Mol. Biol. 426, 
3851–3865 (2014).
47.	 Martens, E. C., Chiang, H. C. & Gordon, J. I. Mucosal 
glycan foraging enhances fitness and transmission of a 
saccharolytic human gut bacterial symbiont. Cell Host 
Microbe 4, 447–457 (2008).  
This is a study that initially probes the Bacteroides 
mechanisms of host O-​linked and N-​linked glycan 
degradation, linking these functions to colonization 
and transmission between generations.
48.	 Nakjang, S., Ndeh, D. A., Wipat, A., Bolam, D. N. & 
Hirt, R. P. A novel extracellular metallopeptidase 
domain shared by animal host-​associated mutualistic 
and pathogenic microbes. PLoS ONE 7, e30287 (2012).
49.	 Noach, I. et al. Recognition of protein-​linked glycans 
as a determinant of peptidase activity. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 114, 1–10 (2017).
50.	 Owen, C. D. et al. Unravelling the specificity and 
mechanism of sialic acid recognition by the gut 
symbiont Ruminococcus gnavus. Nat. Commun. 8, 
2196 (2017).
51.	 Crost, E. H. et al. The mucin-​degradation strategy of 
Ruminococcus gnavus: the importance of 
intramolecular trans-​sialidases. Gut Microbes 7,  
302–312 (2016).
52.	 Davis, C. P. & Savage, D. C. Habitat, succession, 
attachment, and morphology of segmented, 
filamentous microbes indigenous to the murine 
gastrointestinal tract. Infect. Immun. 10, 948–956 
(1974).
53.	 Lee, S. M. et al. Bacterial colonization factors control 
specificity and stability of the gut microbiota. Nature 
501, 426–429 (2013).  
This is a novel study showing that the order of gut 
colonization affects the ability to compete, even 
among isogenic strains of the same species, and 
that functions that govern crypt colonization 
contribute to colonization advantage.
54.	 Whitaker, W. R., Shepherd, E. S. & Sonnenburg, J. L. 
Tunable expression tools enable single-​cell strain 
distinction in the gut microbiome. Cell 169, 538–546.
e12 (2017).
55.	 Pedron, T. et al. A crypt-​specific core microbiota 
resides in the mouse colon. mBio 3, e00116–e00112 
(2012).
56.	 Sonnenberg, G. F. et al. Innate lymphoid cells promote 
anatomical containment of lymphoid-​resident 
commensal bacteria. Science 336, 1321–1325 
(2012).
57.	 Vaishnava, S. et al. The antibacterial lectin RegIIIγ 
promotes the spatial segregation of microbiota and 
host in the intestine. Science 334, 255–258 (2011).  
This paper demonstrates the importance of the 
antimicrobial protein REG3γ to avoid close 
bacterial contact with small intestinal epithelium.
58.	 Hase, K. et al. Uptake through glycoprotein 2 of FimH+ 
bacteria by M cells initiates mucosal immune 
response. Nature 462, 226–230 (2009).
59.	 Clark, M. A., Jepson, M. A., Simmons, N. L. &  
Hirts, B. H. Preferential interaction of Salmonella 
typhimurium with mouse Peyer's patch M cells.  
Res. Microbiol. 145, 543–552 (1994).
60.	 Rescigno, M. et al. Dendritic cells express tight 
junction proteins and penetrate gut epithelial 
monolayers to sample bacteria. Nat. Immunol. 2, 
361–367 (2001).
61.	 Marra, A. & Isberg, R. R. Invasin-​dependent and 
invasin-​independent pathways for translocation of 
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis across the Peyer’s patch 
intestinal epithelium. Infect. Immun. 65, 3412–3421 
(1997).
62.	 Rankin, S., Isberg, R. R. & Leong, J. M. The integrin-​
binding domain of invasin is sufficient to allow 
bacterial entry into mammalian cells. Infect. Immun. 
60, 3909–3912 (1992).
63.	 Clark, M. A., Hirst, B. H. & Jepson, M. A. M-​Cell 
surface β1 integrin expression and invasin-​mediated 
targeting of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis to mouse 
Peyer’s patch M cells. Infect. Immun. 66, 1237–1243 
(1998).
64.	 Secott, T. E., Lin, T. L. & Wu, C. C. Mycobacterium 
avium subsp. paratuberculosis fibronectin attachment 
protein facilitates M-​cell targeting and invasion 
through a fibronectin bridge with host integrins.  
Infect. Immun. 72, 3724–3732 (2004).
65.	 Shen, Y., Naujokas, M., Park, M. & Ireton, K. InIB-​
dependent internalization of Listeria is mediated by 
the Met receptor tyrosine kinase. Cell 103, 501–510 
(2000).
66.	 Mengaud, J., Ohayon, H., Gounon, P., Mege, R. M. & 
Cossart, P. E-​Cadherin is the receptor for internalin, a 
surface protein required for entry of L. monocytogenes 
into epithelial cells. Cell 84, 923–932 (1996).
67.	 Sousa, S. et al. Src, cortactin and Arp2/3 complex are 
required for E-​cadherin-mediated internalization of 
Listeria into cells. Cell. Microbiol. 9, 2629–2643 
(2007).
68.	 Kocks, C. et al. L. monocytogenes-​induced actin 
assembly requires the actA gene product, a surface 
protein. Cell 68, 521–531 (1992).
69.	 Silva, A. J., Pham, K. & Benitez, J. A. Haemagglutinin/
protease expression and mucin gel penetration in El 
Tor biotype Vibrio cholerae. Microbiology 149, 
1883–1891 (2003).
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
468 | AUGUST 2018 | volume 16	

70.	 Wu, Z., Nybom, P. & Magnusson, K.-E. Distinct effects 
of Vibrio cholerae haemagglutinin/protease on the 
structure and localization of the tight junction-​
associated proteins occludin and ZO-1. Cell. Microbiol. 
2, 11–17 (2000).
71.	 Fasano, A. et al. Vibrio cholerae produces a second 
enterotoxin, which affects intestinal tight junctions. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 88, 5242–5246 (1991).
72.	 Saitoh, Y. et al. Tight junctions. Structural insight into 
tight junction disassembly by Clostridium perfringens 
enterotoxin. Science 347, 775–778 (2015).
73.	 Amat, C. B., Motta, J.-P., Chadee, K. & Buret, A. G. 
Giardia duodenalis directly depletes mucins in 
intestinal goblet cells. FASEB J 30, 162.1–162.1 
(2016).
74.	 Maia-​Brigagão, C., Morgado-​Díaz, J. A. & De Souza, W.  
Giardia disrupts the arrangement of tight, adherens 
and desmosomal junction proteins of intestinal cells. 
Parasitol. Int. 61, 280–287 (2012).
75.	 Teoh, Da, Kamieniecki, D., Pang, G. & Buret, A. G. 
Giardia lamblia rearranges F-​actin and alpha-​actinin in 
human colonic and duodenal monolayers and reduces 
transepithelial electrical resistance. J. Parasitol. 86, 
800–806 (2000).
76.	 Nikitas, G. et al. Transcytosis of Listeria 
monocytogenes across the intestinal barrier upon 
specific targeting of goblet cell accessible E-​cadherin. 
J. Exp. Med. 208, 2263–2277 (2011).
77.	 Zhou, Z. et al. Lipid A modifications in polymyxin-​
resistant Salmonella typhimurium: PmrA-​dependent 
4-amino-4-deoxy- L-​arabinose, and 
phosphoethanolamine incorporation. J. Biol. Chem. 
276, 43111–43121 (2001).
78.	 Gunn, J. S. et al. PmrA-​PmrB-regulated genes 
necessary for 4-aminoarabinose lipid A modification 
and polymyxin resistance. Mol. Microbiol. 27,  
1171–1182 (1998).
79.	 Vaara, M. et al. Characterization of the 
lipopolysaccharide from the polymyxin-​resistant pmrA 
mutants of Salmonella typhimurium. FEBS Lett. 129, 
145–149 (1981).
80.	 Peschel, A. How do bacteria resist human 
antimicrobial peptides? Trends Microbiol. 10,  
179–186 (2002).
81.	 Llobet, E., Tomas, J. M. & Bengoechea, J. A. Capsule 
polysaccharide is a bacterial decoy for antimicrobial 
peptides. Microbiology 154, 3877–3886 (2008).
82.	 Tan, Y., Zanoni, I., Cullen, T. W., Goodman, A. L. & 
Kagan, J. C. Mechanisms of toll-​like receptor 4 
endocytosis reveal a common immune-​evasion 
strategy used by pathogenic and commensal bacteria. 
Immunity 43, 909–922 (2015).
83.	 Cullen, T. W. et al. Antimicrobial peptide resistance 
mediates resilience of prominent gut commensals 
during inflammation. Scince 347, 170–175 (2015).
84.	 Kim, Y. G. et al. Neonatal acquisition of Clostridia 
species protects against colonization by bacterial 
pathogens. Science 356, 315–319 (2017).
85.	 Byndloss, M. X. et al. Microbiota-​activated PPAR-​γ 
signaling inhibits dysbiotic Enterobacteriaceae 
expansion. Science 357, 570–575 (2017).
86.	 Bergstrom, K. S. B. et al. Muc2 protects against lethal 
infectious colitis by disassociating pathogenic and 
commensal bacteria from the colonic mucosa.  
PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000902 (2010).
87.	 Hasnain, S. Z. et al. Mucin gene deficiency in mice 
impairs host resistance to an enteric parasitic 
infection. Gastroenterology 138, 1763–1771 
(2010).
88.	 Turner, J. E., Stockinger, B. & Helmby, H. IL-22 
mediates goblet cell hyperplasia and worm expulsion 
in intestinal helminth infection. PLoS Pathog. 9, 1–7 
(2013).
89.	 Zheng, Y. et al. Interleukin-22 mediates early host 
defense against attaching and effacing bacterial 
pathogens. Nat. Med. 14, 282–289 (2008).
90.	 Behnsen, J. et al. The cytokine IL-22 promotes 
pathogen colonization by suppressing related 
commensal bacteria. Immunity 40, 262–273  
(2014).
91.	 Erdem, A. L., Avelino, F., Xicohtencatl-​Cortes, J. & 
Girón, J. A. Host protein binding and adhesive 
properties of H6 and H7 flagella of attaching and 
effacing Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 189,  
7426–7435 (2007).
92.	 Lawley, T. D. et al. Antibiotic treatment of Clostridium 
difficile carrier mice triggers a supershedder state, 
spore-​mediated transmission, and severe disease in 
immunocompromised hosts. Infect. Immun. 77, 
3661–3669 (2009).
93.	 Tasteyre, A., Barc, M. C., Collignon, A., Boureau, H. & 
Karjalainen, T. Role of FliC and FliD flagellar proteins 
of Clostridium difficile in adherence and gut 
colonization. Infect. Immun. 69, 7937–7940 (2001).
94.	 Purcell, E. B., McKee, R. W., McBride, S. M.,  
Waters, C. M. & Tamayo, R. Cyclic diguanylate inversely 
regulates motility and aggregation in Clostridium 
difficile. J. Bacteriol. 194, 3307–3316 (2012).
95.	 Li, S., Konstantinov, S. R., Smits, R. &  
Peppelenbosch, M. P. Bacterial biofilms in colorectal 
cancer initiation and progression. Trends Mol. Med. 
23, 18–30 (2017).
96.	 Dejea, C. M. et al. Patients with familial adenomatous 
polyposis harbor colonic biofilms containing 
tumorigenic bacteria. Science 359, 592–597  
(2018).
97.	 Grys, T. E., Siegel, M. B., Lathem, W. W. & Welch, R. A. 
The StcE protease contributes to intimate adherence 
of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 to 
host cells. Infect. Immun. 73, 1295–1303 (2005).
98.	 Hews, C. L. et al. The StcE metalloprotease of 
enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli reduces the inner 
mucus layer and promotes adherence to human 
colonic epithelium ex vivo. Cell. Microbiol. 19, 
e12717 (2017).
99.	 Valeri, M. et al. Pathogenic E. coli exploits SslE 
mucinase activity to translocate through the mucosal 
barrier and get access to host cells. PLoS One 10, 
1–14 (2015).
100.	Moncada, D., Keller, K. & Chadee, K. Entamoeba 
histolytica cysteine proteinases disrupt the polymeric 
structure of colonic mucin and alter its protective 
function. Infect. Immun. 71, 838–844 (2003).  
This is a study that reveals that pathogens can 
target critical sites in the MUC2 network to 
dissolve its important barrier function.
101.	Lidell, M. E., Moncada, D. M., Chadee, K. &  
Hansson, G. C. Entamoeba histolytica cysteine 
proteases cleave the MUC2 mucin in its C-​terminal 
domain and dissolve the protective colonic mucus gel. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 9298–9303 (2006).
102.	Chadee, K., Petri, W. A., Innes, D. J. & Ravdin, J. I. Rat 
and human colonic mucins bind to and inhibit 
adherence lectin of Entamoeba histolytica. J. Clin. 
Invest. 80, 1245–1254 (1987).
103.	Hasnain, S. Z., McGuckin, M. A., Grencis, R. K. & 
Thornton, D. J. Serine protease(s) secreted by the 
nematode Trichuris muris degrade the mucus barrier. 
PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 6, e1856 (2012).
104.	Nusrat, A. Turner, J. R., Verkade, P., Madara, L. & 
Parkos, C. A. Clostridium difficile toxins disrupt 
epithelial barrier function by altering membrane 
microdomain localization of tight junction proteins. 
Infect. Immun. 69, 1329–1336 (2001).
105.	Guttman, J. A. et al. Attaching and effacing pathogen-​
induced tight junction disruption in vivo. Cell Microbiol 
8, 634–645 (2006).
106.	Simonovic, I., Rosenberg, J., Koutsouris, A. & Hecht, G. 
Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli dephosphorylates 
and dissociates occludin from intestinal epithelial tight 
junctions. Cell. Microbiol. 2, 305–315 (2000).
107.	Elmi, A. et al. Campylobacter jejuni outer membrane 
vesicle-​associated proteolytic activity promotes 
bacterial invasion by mediating cleavage of intestinal 
epithelial cell E-​cadherin and occludin. Cell. Microbiol. 
18, 561–572 (2016).
108.	Ng, K. M. et al. Microbiota-​liberated host sugars 
facilitate post-​antibiotic expansion of enteric 
pathogens. Nature 502, 96–99 (2013).  
This study connects the mucin-​foraging activity of 
commensal B. thetaiotaomicron with the release of 
sialic acid, which benefits the pathogens C. difficile 
and S. Typhimurium.
109.	Pacheco, A. R. et al. Fucose sensing regulates 
bacterial intestinal colonization. Nature 492,  
113–117 (2012).
110.	 Bry, L., Falk, P. G., Midtvedt, T. & Gordon, J. I. A model 
of host-​microbial interactions in an open mammalian 
ecosystem. Science 273, 1380–1383 (1996).
111.	 Engevik, M. A. et al. Loss of NHE3 alters gut 
microbiota composition and influences bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron growth. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. 
Liver Physiol. 305, G697–G711 (2013).
112.	Schumann, M., Siegmund, B., Schulzke, J. D. & 
Fromm, M. Celiac disease: role of the epithelial 
barrier. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 3,  
150–162 (2017).
113.	Wang, Y. et al. Cosmc is an essential chaperone for 
correct protein O-​glycosylation. Proc. Natl Acad.  
Sci. USA 107, 9228–9233 (2010).
114.	Bergstrom, K. et al. Core 1– and 3–derived O-​glycans 
collectively maintain the colonic mucus barrier and 
protect against spontaneous colitis in mice. Mucosal 
Immunol. 10, 91–103 (2017).
115.	Fu, J. et al. Loss of intestinal core 1–derived O-​glycans 
causes spontaneous colitis in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 
1657–1666 (2011).  
This is a critical study that demonstrates that 
defects in MUC2 glycosylation in mice, which are 
similar to those observed in some humans, 
promote spontaneous inflammation.
116.	Johansson, M. E. V. et al. Bacteria penetrate the 
normally impenetrable inner colon mucus layer in both 
murine colitis models and patients with ulcerative 
colitis. Gut 63, 281–291 (2014).
117.	Pullan, R. D. et al. Thickness of adherent mucus gel on 
colonic mucosa in humans and its relevance to colitis. 
Gut 35, 353–359 (1994).
118.	Schroeder, B. O. et al. Bifidobacteria or fiber protects 
against diet-​induced microbiota-​mediated colonic 
mucus deterioration. Cell Host Microbe 23, 27–40.e7 
(2017).  
This study demonstrates that a low-​fibre, Western-​
style diet promotes increased permeability of the 
inner mucous layer that can be reversed by 
prebiotics and probiotics.
119.	Palm, N. W. et al. Immunoglobulin A coating identifies 
colitogenic bacteria in inflammatory bowel disease. 
Cell 158, 1000–1010 (2014).  
This is an important study establishing that a 
subset of microbiota species is coated with IgA and 
that these species elicit increased host 
inflammatory responses when separately 
introduced into germ-​free mice.
120.	Bergstrom, K. S. B. & Xia, L. Mucin-​type O-​glycans and 
their roles in intestinal homeostasis. Glycobiology 23, 
1026–1037 (2013).
121.	Ju, T. et al. Human tumor antigens Tn and sialyl Tn 
arise from mutations in Cosmc. Cancer Res. 68, 
1636–1646 (2008).
122.	An, G. et al. Increased susceptibility to colitis and 
colorectal tumors in mice lacking core 3–derived 
O-glycans. J. Exp. Med. 204, 1417–1429 (2007).
123.	Sommer, F. et al. Altered mucus glycosylation in core 1 
O-​glycan-deficient mice affects microbiota composition 
and intestinal architecture. PLoS One 9, e85254 
(2014).
124.	Zhu, W. et al. Precision editing of the gut microbiota 
ameliorates colitis. Nature 553, 208–211 (2018).
125.	Zou, J. et al. Fiber-​mediated nourishment of gut 
microbiota protects against diet-​induced obesity by 
restoring IL-22-mediated colonic health. Cell Host 
Microbe 23, 41–53 (2017).
126.	Macpherson, aJ., McCoy, K. D., Johansen, F.-E. & 
Brandtzaeg, P. The immune geography of IgA induction 
and function. Mucosal Immunol. 1, 11–22 (2008).
127.	Moor, K. et al. High-​avidity IgA protects the intestine 
by enchaining growing bacteria. Nature 544,  
498–502 (2017).
128.	Okumura, R. et al. Lypd8 promotes the segregation of 
flagellated microbiota and colonic epithelia. Nature 
532, 117–121 (2016).
129.	Propheter, D. C., Chara, A. L., Harris, T. A., Ruhn, K. A. 
& Hooper, L. V. Resistin-​like molecule β is a 
bactericidal protein that promotes spatial segregation 
of the microbiota and the colonic epithelium. Proc. 
Natl Acad. Sci. 114, 11027–11033 (2017).
130.	Akira, S. & Takeda, K. Toll-​like receptor signalling.  
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4, 499–511 (2004).
131.	Fukata, M. Toll-​like receptor-4 is required for intestinal 
response to epithelial injury and limiting bacterial 
translocation in a murine model of acute colitis.  
Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 288,  
G1055–G1065 (2005).
132.	Danne, C. et al. A large polysaccharide produced by 
helicobacter hepaticus induces an anti-​inflammatory 
gene signature in macrophages. Cell Host Microbe 22, 
733–745.e5 (2017).
133.	Chung, L. et al. Bacteroides fragilis toxin coordinates 
a pro-​carcinogenic inflammatory cascade via targeting 
of colonic epithelial cells. Cell Host Microbe 23,  
203–214.e5 (2018).
134.	Frantz, A. L. et al. Targeted deletion of MyD88 in 
intestinal epithelial cells results in compromised 
antibacterial immunity associated with 
downregulation of polymeric immunoglobulin 
receptor, mucin-2, and antibacterial peptides. 
Mucosal Immunol. 5, 501–512 (2012).
135.	Xie, L. et al. Targeting of MyD88 homodimerization by 
novel synthetic inhibitor TJ-​M2010-5 in preventing 
colitis-​associated colorectal cancer. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 
108, 1–12 (2016).
136.	Carvalho, F. A. et al. Transient inability to manage 
proteobacteria promotes chronic gut inflammation in 
TLR5-deficient mice. Cell Host Microbe 12, 139–152 
(2012).
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
NATuRe RevIewS | MICrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 16 | AUGUST 2018 | 469

137.	Zhan, Y. et al. Gut microbiota protects against 
gastrointestinal tumorigenesis caused by epithelial 
injury. Cancer Res. 73, 7199–7210 (2013).
138.	Smith, P. M. et al. The microbial metabolites, 
short-chain fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg cell 
homeostasis. Science 341, 569–573 (2013).
139.	Singh, N. et al. Activation of the receptor (Gpr109a) 
for niacin and the commensal metabolite butyrate 
suppresses colonic inflammation and carcinogenesis. 
Immunity 40, 128–139 (2014).
140.	Zhang, M. et al. Butyrate inhibits interleukin-17 and 
generates Tregs to ameliorate colorectal colitis in rats. 
BMC Gastroenterol. 16, 84 (2016).
141.	Ivanov, I. I. et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells  
by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell 139,  
485–498 (2009).
142.	Fukuda, S. et al. Bifidobacteria can protect from 
enteropathogenic infection through production of 
acetate. Nature 469, 543–547 (2011).
143.	Howitt, M. R. et al. Tuft cells, taste-​chemosensory cells, 
orchestrate parasite type 2 immunity in the gut. 
Science 351, 1329–1333 (2016).
144.	Gerbe, F. et al. Intestinal epithelial tuft cells initiate 
type 2 mucosal immunity to helminth parasites. 
Nature 529, 226–230 (2016).
145.	von Moltke, J., Ji, M., Liang, H.-E. & Locksley, R. M.  
Tuft-​cell-derived IL-25 regulates an intestinal ILC2-
epithelial response circuit. Nature 529, 221–225 
(2016).
146.	Holmén Larsson, J. M., Thomsson, K. A., Rodríguez-​
Piñeiro, A. M., Karlsson, H. & Hansson, G. C. Studies 
of mucus in mouse stomach, small intestine, and 
colon. III. Gastrointestinal Muc5ac and Muc2 mucin 
O-​glycan patterns reveal a regiospecific distribution. 
Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 305, 
G357–G363 (2013).
147.	Bennett, E. P. et al. Control of mucin-​type 
O-glycosylation: a classification of the polypeptide 
GalNAc-​transferase gene family. Glycobiology 22, 
736–756 (2012).
148.	Brockhausen, I., Schachter, H., S. P. Essentials of 
Glycobiology (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 
2009).
149.	Lawhon, S. D., Maurer, R., Suyemoto, M. & Altier, C. 
Intestinal short-​chain fatty acids alter Salmonella 
typhimurium invasion gene expression and virulence 
through BarA/SirA. Mol. Microbiol. 46, 1451–1464 
(2002).
150.	Gantois, I. et al. Butyrate specifically down-​regulates 
Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 gene expression. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 946–949  
(2006).
151.	Hung, C. C. et al. The intestinal fatty acid propionate 
inhibits Salmonella invasion through the post-​
translational control of HilD. Mol. Microbiol. 87, 
1045–1060 (2013).
152.	Ferreyra, J. A. et al. Gut microbiota-​produced 
succinate promotes C. difficile infection after antibiotic 
treatment or motility disturbance. Cell Host Microbe 
16, 770–777 (2014).
153.	Curtis, M. M. et al. The gut commensal Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron exacerbates enteric infection 
through modification of the metabolic landscape.  
Cell Host Microbe 16, 759–769 (2014).
154.	Tobe, T., Nakanishi, N. & Sugimoto, N. Activation of 
motility by sensing short-​chain fatty acids via two 
steps in a flagellar gene regulatory cascade in 
enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli. Infect. Immun. 
79, 1016–1024 (2011).
Acknowledgements
Work in the authors’ laboratories was supported by National 
Institutes of Health R01 and R21 (GM099513 and 
AI128120) awards (to E.C.M.) and an Innovator Award from 
the Kenneth Rainin Foundation. Work in their laboratories 
was also supported by the following grants (to M.S.D.): 
Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR) CORE (C15/
BM/10318186); FNR AFR Bilateral (11228353); 
Luxembourg Ministry of Higher Education and Research sup-
port (DM-​Muc); and Personalized Medicine Consortium of 
Luxembourg Pump Prime (Die-​IBD).
Author contributions
E.C.M., M.N. and M.S.D. researched data for the article, dis-
cussed the content, wrote the article, and reviewed and 
edited the manuscript before submission.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
470 | AUGUST 2018 | volume 16