Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 17
BI O PH YSICS
An oligomeric semiconducting nanozyme with ultrafast 
electron transfers alleviates acute brain injury
Xiaoyu Mu1†, Junying Wang1,2†, Hua He3†, Qifeng Li4, Bing Yang5, Junhui Wang6, Haile Liu2, 
Yalong Gao4, Lufei Ouyang2, Si Sun2, Qinjuan Ren2, Xinjian Shi3, Wenting Hao1, Qiaoman Fei5, 
Jiang Yang7, Lulin Li8, Ryan Vest9,10, Tony Wyss-Coray10, Jian Luo8,10, Xiao-Dong Zhang1*
Artificial enzymes have attracted wide interest in disease diagnosis and biotechnology due to high stability, easy 
synthesis, and cost effectiveness. Unfortunately, their catalytic rate is limited to surface electron transfer, affecting 
the catalytic and biological activity. Here, we report an oligomeric nanozyme (O-NZ) with ultrafast electron transfer, 
achieving ultrahigh catalytic activity. O-NZ shows electron transfer of 1.8 nanoseconds in internal cores and 
1.2 picoseconds between core and ligand molecule, leading to ultrahigh superoxidase dismutase–like and gluta-
thione peroxidase–like activity (comparable with natural enzyme, Michaelis constant = 0.87 millimolars). Excitingly, 
O-NZ can improve the 1-month survival rate of mice with acute brain trauma from 50 to 90% and promote the 
recovery of long-term neurocognition. Biochemical experiments show that O-NZ can decrease harmful peroxide and 
superoxide via in vivo catalytic chain reaction and reduce acute neuroinflammation via nuclear factor erythroid-2 
related factor 2–mediated up-regulation of heme oxygenase-1 expression.
INTRODUCTION
Artificial enzymes have attracted wide interest in biomedicine due to 
high stability, persistent catalytic activity, and versatile enzyme-like 
selectivity. In particular, during oxidoreductase, superoxide dismutase 
(SOD)– and glutathione peroxidase (GPx)–like activity is very im-
portant because it is closely related to oxidative stress of the biolog-
ical system. The antioxidative materials of Mn3O4 hold remarkable 
SOD-like activity with a clearance rate of >80%, higher than other 
metal oxide nanoparticles, such as Fe3O4, CeO2, Co3O4, and MnO2 
(1). However, the GPx-like activity of Mn3O4 nanozyme via surface 
electron transfer is relatively low with maximum reaction velocity 
of 0.056 mM min−1 for H2O2. The V2O5 with an active center of 
V═O and V─O─V exhibits prominent GPx-like activity and serves as 
an antioxidant nanozyme to achieve cytoprotection (2), which catalyzes 
the reaction at the maximal reaction velocity Vmax of ~0.43 mM min−1 
for H2O2 with kcat = 0.065 s−1. Nevertheless, V2O5 nanozyme could 
exhibit a weak SOD-like activity. It was recently reported that a single-­
atom enzyme Co/PMCS had multienzyme activities and could rapidly 
obliterate multiple reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (RONS) to 
alleviate sepsis (3). Co/PMCS single-atom nanozyme demonstrated 
comparable SOD-like activity to Mn3O4 nanozyme and GPx-like 
activity to V2O5 nanozyme with the kcat of ~0.116 and 0.086 s−1 for 
H2O2 and glutathione (GSH), respectively. In addition, although 
melanin nanoparticles (MeNPs) and Prussian blue nanoparticles 
(PBNPs) could eliminate the multiple RONS, they failed to mimic 
GPx (4, 5). Thus, it is interesting to develop nanozymes with ultra-
fast electron transfer to achieve redox reactions in an ultrashort time.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is frequently associated with post-
traumatic stress disorder, memory deficits, and chronic neuro­
inflammation leading to degenerative brain diseases (6, 7). The 
pathophysiology of TBI is multifaceted and can be divided roughly 
into primary and secondary damage phases. Primary brain damage 
triggers a cascade of molecular and biochemical events leading to 
long-lasting secondary neuronal and glial damage, including neuro­
inflammation, brain edema, and delayed neuronal death (8). One of 
the earliest forms of secondary damage in TBI is oxidative stress (9). 
The brain is particularly vulnerable to oxidative stress due to its high 
rate of oxygen consumption and high content of transition metals 
and polyunsaturated fatty acids (9). Mitochondrial damage can 
induce leakage of excessive reduced O2, which forms the primary 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), O2
•− (10). Meanwhile, excessive 
activation of N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors and Ca2+ influx can 
cause overproduction of reactive nitrogen species (RNS), •NO (11). 
•NO can then react with O2
•− to generate highly toxic ONOO−, 
which damages proteins, lipids, and DNA. Therefore, the balance of 
free radicals, such as O2
•− and •NO, in the first stage of TBI is crucial 
for limiting the impact of secondary injury and achieving successful 
treatment of TBI.
Artificial enzymes with enzyme-like characteristics (2, 12–18) have 
recently drawn significant research attention as potential biomedicine 
(19–25). Here, we report an oligomeric nanozyme (O-NZ), with a 
semiconductor core active center and surface-active unit, that achieves 
ultrafast electron transfer. The core of O-NZ has nitrogen-doped 
graphite-like structure as multienzyme character, and the surface-­
active groups include amide groups, hydroxy groups, and pyrrolic 
N as hydrogen donors to eliminate RONS (Fig. 1, A to C). The 
nanozyme exhibits an ultrafast core electron transfer of 1.8 ns, achieving 
1Tianjin Key Laboratory of Brain Science and Neural Engineering, Academy of Medical 
Engineering and Translational Medicine, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. 
2Department of Physics and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Materials 
Physics and Preparing Technology, School of Sciences, Tianjin University, Tianjin 
300350, China. 3State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing and Center for Bio-
engineering and Biotechnology, China University of Petroleum (East China), Qingdao 
266580, China. 4Department of Neurosurgery and Key Laboratory of Post-trauma 
Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central Nervous System, Tianjin Medical University 
General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China. 5Department of Cellular Biology, School of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China. 6State Key 
Laboratory of Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China. 7School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510060, China. 8Palo Alto Veterans Institute for Research, 
VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. 9Department of Chemical 
Engineering, School of Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 
10Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, School of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: xiaodongzhang@tju.edu.cn
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2021 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 17
the strong SOD/GPx-like activities. Meanwhile, O-NZ holds an ultra-
fast electron transfer of 1.2 ps between core and surface group, lead-
ing to high scavenging activity to O2
•-, •NO, and ONOO− free radicals 
in several milliseconds. The nanozyme treatment significantly increases 
the overall survival rate of mice with severe TBIs from 50 to 90% and 
also greatly improves neurocognition and memory by nuclear factor 
erythroid-2 related factor 2 (Nrf2)–mediated up-regulation of heme ox-
ygenase-1 (HO-1).
RESULTS
Structural characterization and ultrafast electron 
transfer dynamics
We prepared and screened a series of carbogenic nanozymes with 
different ligands and surface groups (fig. S1). Among them, generated 
by ethanol and o-phenylenediamine as precursors, O-NZ was se-
lected because of its high activities. As shown in Fig. 1D and fig. S2, 
O-NZ has an average core diameter of 2.8 nm and a cross-dimension 
height of 2.2 nm, as determined by transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images, respectively, 
indicating its ultrasmall size. Results from dynamic light scattering 
(DLS) reveal an average hydrodynamic size of 3.4 nm for O-NZ (fig. S3), 
which is notably smaller than the generally agreed-upon renal filtra-
tion threshold of 5.5 nm (26, 27). The molecular weight of O-NZ is 
experimentally measured to be ~1145 Da by matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF 
MS) and calculation of isotope patterns (Fig. 1, E and F, and fig. S4), 
indicating that the nanozyme is short oligomer. Compared with the 
other three nanozymes (L-NZ, C-NZ, and G-NZ), the ultraviolet-­
visible (UV-vis) absorption spectrum of O-NZ shows a specific 
absorption peak at ~432 nm (Fig. 1G and fig. S5), which can be 
categorized into the n-* transition of the surface states containing 
C═O/C═N and C─O/C─N structures. Similar to the previous re-
ported carbon dots (28), the absorption peaks at ~230 to 310 nm are 
Fig. 1. Structural characterization of O-NZ. (A to C) Schematic diagram of O-NZ with the nitrogen-doped graphite-like core as multienzyme character and the surface-­
active groups as hydrogen donors. (D) TEM image of O-NZ. (E) MALDI-TOF MS of O-NZ in a wide range with a regular interval of mass/charge ratio (m/z) of 24. a.u., arbitrary 
units. (F) Calculated isotope pattern using the molecular model of C91H36, corresponding to the measured pattern. (G) Absorption/emission spectra of O-NZ under 390-nm 
excitation. PL, photoluminescence. (H) Raman and (I) FTIR spectra of O-NZ. (J to L) XPS spectra of O-NZ for N 1s, C 1s, and O 1s.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 17
assigned to the -* transition of the aromatic C═C bond. A series 
of emission spectra of O-NZ under different excitation wavelengths 
reveal two emission bands (fig. S6A). The emission band at short 
wavelength of O-NZ shows strong excitation dependence, which is 
dominated by surface defects (29). Different from the L-NZ, C-NZ, 
and G-NZ, O-NZ also has an excitation-independent emission peak 
at 556 nm originating from direct exciton recombination (fig. S6). 
Therefore, the energy gap of O-NZ calculated from absorption and 
emission spectra is ~2.23 eV, which is consistent with the electro-
chemical result (fig. S7). Raman spectrum of O-NZ exhibits two 
peaks at around 1640 cm−1 (G band) and 1390 cm−1 (D band) 
(Fig. 1H) corresponding to the E2g vibration mode of sp2 carbon 
domains and structural defects or partially disordered structures of 
sp2 domains (30), respectively. The upshift of G band as compared 
with graphene (1580 cm−1) is associated with nitrogen doping (31). 
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic spectrum shows 
N─H or O─H stretching, C═C stretching, amide N─H bending, and 
C─NH─C stretching bands (Fig. 1I), suggesting the presence of 
hydroxy and amino groups in O-NZ. This is very different from FTIR 
spectra of L-NZ, C-NZ, and G-NZ (fig. S8). Moreover, x-ray photo-
electron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses of O-NZ indicate the presence 
of C═C, C═O, and C─O bonds, especially several coexisting nitrogen-­
related signals, such as C═N, pyridinic N, pyrrolic N, and graphitic 
N (400.9 eV) (Fig. 1, J to L), similar to reports on chemically modi-
fied graphite using nitric acid and other nitrates (32–34). In addi-
tion, N/C radio and O/C radio of O-NZ are enhanced than L-NZ, 
C-NZ, and G-NZ (table S1), revealing the high N-doping and abun-
dant hydroxy groups of O-NZ. Therefore, O-NZ has nitrogen-doping 
graphitic structure as its core and amide, hydroxy, and pyrrolic 
groups as surface functional groups.
To gain further insight into the electron transfer dynamics of 
O-NZ, we performed fluorescence lifetime and femtosecond transient 
absorption (TA) measurement. Figure 2A shows the fluorescence 
decay curve of the O-NZ, and the average decay time is estimated to 
be 1.8 ns, much smaller than the general carbon quantum dots (6.6 
to 8.3 ns) and Au clusters (13.3 ns) (29, 35). This indicates that the 
internal core of nanozyme has ultrafast electron transfer. From the 
femtosecond TA spectra with excitation at 340 nm (Fig. 2B), O-NZ 
exhibits two strong negative stimulated emission peaks at around 
410 and 560 to 620 nm, coinciding with its emission peaks (fig. S6). 
Moreover, the positive features correspond to excited-state absorption 
at around 460 nm. Figure 2C shows the kinetics of each featured 
wavelength in terms of delay time, indicating that one part of the 
coulomb-induced hot carriers at carbon core is trapped by surface 
states, including the carbon backbone and functional groups within 
1.2 ps. Therefore, O-NZ has ultrafast electron transfer characteristic. 
As shown in Fig. 2D, energy level diagram of O-NZ is assumed ac-
cording to the electrochemical method. The calculated highest occu-
pied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular 
orbital (LUMO) energy levels are −5.717 and −3.441 eV, respective-
ly (fig. S7). As a result, the electron transfer path of O-NZ was proposed 
in Fig. 2E. Given the nature of the carbon core, the -conjugated do-
mains of O-NZ are likely to facilitate charge transfer and electron 
storage (36, 37). Besides, the structural defects of O-NZ could promote 
the interfacial electron transfer (24), and surface functional groups of 
O-NZ can also serve as electron donors (29). Therefore, O-NZ ex-
hibits an ultrafast core electron transfer of 1.8 ns, which may deter-
mine the enzyme-like properties. Meanwhile, an ultrafast electron 
transfer of 1.2 ps occurs between core and surface ligand group, which 
may determine the radical scavenging activities of O-NZ.
Superior RONS scavenging activity and enzyme-like activity
Using the 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid (ABTS) 
assay, we find that O-NZ exhibits strong scavenging activity against 
ROS in a manner, which was superior to other carbogenic nanozyme 
analogs (L-NZ, C-NZ, and G-NZ) by approximately an order of 
magnitude (Fig. 3A), indicating a strong electron-donating ability to 
ROS (38, 39). In addition, the scavenging capability of O-NZ shows 
Fig. 2. Ultrafast electron transfer dynamics of O-NZ. (A) Time-resolved photoluminescence spectrum of O-NZ. (B) TA spectra of O-NZ at indicated delay times from 2 ps 
to 7.7 ns. Abs, absorbance; mOD, milli-optical density. (C) Kinetic traces at different probe wavelengths. (D and E) Schematic diagram of ultrafast electron transfer process of 
O-NZ. LUMO, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital; HOMO, highest occupied molecular orbital. ESA, excited-state absorption; SE, stimulated emission.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 17
concentration dependent (Fig. 3B and fig. S9A). Time-dependent 
absorbance curve reveals the fast reaction rate of O-NZ against ABTS+• 
(fig. S9B). Notably, fig. S10 shows that O-NZ could effectively and 
continuously scavenge 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), an 
ideal compound composed of several N radicals with unpaired elec-
trons, indicating strong overall scavenging capability against RNS. 
Furthermore, compared with L-NZ, C-NZ, and G-NZ, O-NZ ex-
hibited a strong enhancement in general RNS scavenging capability 
(fig. S11). Further, we evaluated whether O-NZ has the enzyme-like 
activities. The SOD-like activity of O-NZ was tested by the Total 
Superoxide Dismutase Assay Kit with WST-8 (S0101, Beyotime). As 
shown in Fig. 3C, the catalytic disproportionation of O2
•− to H2O2 
and O2 enhances with the increasing concentration of O-NZ. Com-
pared with the reported antioxidative materials such as V2O5, Mn3O4, 
CeO2, MeNPs, PBNPs, PCNSs (porous carbon nanosphere), and 
N-PCNSs (fig. S12), O-NZ exhibits the highest SOD-like activity 
(fig. S13). Besides, the GPx-like activity of O-NZ was measured by 
the glutathione reductase (GR)–coupled assay. Figure 3D shows that 
the concentration of reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate (NADPH) decreases with the presence of O-NZ. The de-
scending rate gets faster with the increase in O-NZ, H2O2, and GSH 
concentrations (Fig. 3D and fig. S14, A and B), indicating the GPx-­
mimicking activity of O-NZ. Moreover, as shown in fig. S14 (A and B) 
of the steady-state kinetic analyses, the GPx-like activity of O-NZ 
follows a Michaelis-­Menten kinetics. The Vmax for H2O2 and GSH 
obtained from the direct analysis using GraphPad Prism software is 
72.97 and 18.49 M min−1, respectively. The calculated Michaelis 
constant (KM) for H2O2 and GSH is 0.8204 and 0.8688 mM, respec-
tively. Compared with natural GPx enzyme (8.695 mM), the KM of 
O-NZ for GSH is much lower (fig. S14C), indicating the higher affinity 
of O-NZ. In addition, the GPx-like activity of O-NZ is much higher 
than the reported antioxidative materials except V2O5 (fig. S15). 
Overall, O-NZ has stronger SOD and GPx-mimicking activities and 
catalytic efficiency due to its ultrafast electron transfer property.
To investigate the scavenging capabilities of O-NZ in more de-
tails, we monitored multiple RONS species individually. For O2
•− and 
•OH scavenging, electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra were per-
formed (Fig. 3, E and F). The ESR signals from the spin adducts 
significantly decreased with increasing O-NZ concentrations. Notably, 
the scavenging efficiency of O-NZ for O2
•− was significantly superior 
to that for •OH. In addition, we investigated the •NO and ONOO− 
scavenging capability of O-NZ. To probe the •NO scavenging capa-
bility of O-NZ, S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) was used 
to serve as the source of •NO. Carboxy-PTIO (2-Phenyl-4,4,5,5-­
tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl-3-oxide) with five-line electron 
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signals was used to trap •NO and 
generate carboxy-PTI (2-Phenyl-4,4,5,5-tetramethylimidazoline-1-oxyl) 
with seven-line EPR signals (Fig. 3G). In the presence of O-NZ, the 
ESR signals showed five lines, indicating that the carboxy-PTIO was 
not reduced into carboxy-PTI by •NO, and, in other words, •NO was 
Fig. 3. Superior and wide-ranging RONS scavenging activity, SOD-like, and GPx-like properties of O-NZ. (A) Comparison of the total antioxidant capacities of L-NZ, 
G-NZ, C-NZ, and O-NZ against ROS. (B) Concentration-dependent investigation of ABTS•+ in the presence of O-NZ. (C) Inhibitor rate of SOD-like activity for O-NZ. (D) GPx-
like activity of O-NZ monitored as a function of time. (E to H) O2
•−, •OH, •NO, and ONOO− scavenging activities of O-NZ, respectively. (I) Illustration of RONS scavenging 
routes of O-NZ, schematic diagram of the SOD-like and GPx-like activities of O-NZ, and GSH recycling by GR. NAPD+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 17
completely cleared by O-NZ. This revealed the strong scavenging 
activity of O-NZ for the highly active •NO essential for TBI treatment. 
As ONOO− has a strong characteristic absorption peak at ~302 nm, 
UV-vis spectrophotometry was adopted to evaluate ONOO− scavenging. 
As shown in Fig. 3H, ONOO− could be completely eliminated by 
O-NZ even at a relatively low concentration of 11.8 M. As low as 3 M 
O-NZ could still gradually scavenge ONOO− over time (fig. S16). 
These facts revealed that O-NZ exhibited a profound scavenging 
ability for ONOO−, important in treating TBI. This is because ONOO− 
is produced as the intermediate product from •NO and O2
•− under 
oxidative stress and can cause extensive cellular damage following 
TBI. These results demonstrate that O-NZ reveals high scavenging 
activity for RONS, especially for more active O2
•− and RNS, which 
can be attributed to the synergistic effect of amide, hydroxy, and 
pyrrolic surface groups as hydrogen donors and more active centers.
Therefore, a mechanistic scheme of O-NZ is summarized to show 
the scavenging process against multiple RONS and enzyme-like activ-
ities (Fig. 3I). Gao and coworkers (31) reported that N doping and 
graphitic structure were critical for carbogenic nanozymes to per-
form enzyme-like activities and the enzymatic activities were en-
hanced when N-doping ratio were increased. Moreover, hydroxyl 
groups as the hydrogen donor or electron donor were important for 
phenolic antioxidants, such as -tocopherol and flavonoids, to ex-
hibit high radical scavenging activities (40). Besides, the structural 
defects of O-NZ could promote the interfacial electron transfer be-
tween O-NZ and RONS (24). In addition, the ESR spectrum indi-
cates that O-NZ in solutions has an intrinsic unpaired electron (fig. 
S17), which is capable of quenching the RONS. On the basis of the 
above analysis, we conclude that the synergistic effect of graphitic 
structure, high N doping, abundant hydroxy groups and defects, as 
well as ultrafast electron transfer, could account for the excellent 
RONS scavenging activity and enzyme-like activity.
Inhibition of cellular oxidative stress in vitro
We first tested the cytoxicity of O-NZ on N2a (mouse neuroblastoma 
N2a cells), MA-c (mouse astrocytes-cerebellar), and primary neuronal 
cells using the adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP) assay, which shows 
low cytotoxicity (fig. S18, A to C). Next, the O-NZ effect on viability 
of cells stimulated with H2O2 and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was 
investigated. After nanozyme treatment, the survival rate of H2O2-­
stimulated N2a cells increases from 76% to the level of the untreated 
control, while in LPS-stimulated N2a cells, it increases from 65 to 
89% (fig. S18, D and G). Similar phenomena are observed for MA-c 
and primary neuronal cells (fig. S18, E, F, H, and I). Moreover, the 
survival rate increases in a dose-dependent manner in both cases, 
demonstrating the protective effect of O-NZ on nerve cells.
Further, in vitro ROS scavenging was investigated using various 
probes of general ROS including O2
•−, •OH, peroxynitrite, and •NO 
(Fig. 4, A to H, and fig. S19). Figure 4 (A and B) and fig. S19 show 
that intracellular ROS increased 5.7 and 4.4 times in cells treated with 
H2O2 and LPS compared with normal cells, indicating increased 
cellular oxidative stress resulting from the stimulus. However, the 
total ROS level significantly decreases with O-NZ treatment, close 
to the control level, which is consistent with previous work (41, 42). 
Similarly, flow cytometry analyses show that O2
•−, •OH, ONOO−, 
and •NO free radicals could be appreciably reduced with O-NZ 
treatment (Fig. 4, C to H), suggesting enzyme-mimicking properties 
of O-NZ to scavenge multiple ROS and RNS under physiological 
conditions consistent with Fig. 3.
We next examined the effects of O-NZ on function and cell cycle in 
H2O2- and LPS-damaged neurons (Fig. 4, I to L, and fig. S20). It is 
found that apoptotic cells account for up to 51% of all cells in H2O2-­treated 
neurons and 59% in LPS-treated neurons (Fig. 4, I and J, fig. S20, A 
and C). Meanwhile, numerous cells are arrested in the S or G2-M 
phases based on cell cycle analysis after treatment with H2O2 and LPS 
(Fig. 4, K and L, and fig. S20 B and D), which indicates damage to 
DNA structures or key enzymes involved in mitosis, eventually 
leading to checkpoint failure. Nevertheless, O-NZ greatly relieves ROS- 
and RNS-induced cell damage. The percentage of apoptosis and ratio 
of cell cycle arrest are restored close to the normal levels. Oxidative 
stress induced by H2O2 and LPS at high concentrations can disrupt 
normal cell function and metabolism, lastly resulting in massive 
apoptosis, necrosis, and cell cycle arrest (43). Nanozymes with multiple 
scavenging properties are effective in controlling damage induced by 
RONS bursts and consequently against oxidative stress.
Improvement of survival rate and secondary spread of 
injury of TBI mice
To further investigate O-NZ as a potential TBI treatment, we ran-
domly divided and subjected C57/BL6 mice to brain injury followed 
with intravenous injection of O-NZ at 1 hour after injury. Meanwhile, 
edaravone, a clinically used ROS scavenger, was used as the positive 
control. To evaluate the spread of secondary damage following an 
initial TBI, time-dependent pathophysiologic and recovery progresses 
in vivo were monitored using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
(Fig. 5A). Hyperintense T2-weighted lesion (red arrow) can be ob-
served in mice 5 days after TBI, indicating edema or dilated ventricles 
resulting from accumulation of water. Minor hyperintensity is also 
observed anterior of the damage. However, 17 days after injury, the 
TBI mice show aggravated edema deep into the white matter with en-
larged and enhanced hyperintense lesions (Fig. 5B). In the edaravone-­
treated group, aggravated edema is still present in the brain at 17 days 
after injury. In contrast, there is no detectable damage at the injury 
site in the O-NZ treated group. Thirty days after injury, significant 
hyperintensity is still observed in the TBI mice (Fig. 5, A and B), 
while mice that received O-NZ treatment show negligible edema, 
suggesting the ability of O-NZ to effectively reduce the spread of 
secondary damage. The survival rate was recorded over 30 days of 
observation (Fig. 5C). Mice following TBI show high mortality with 
50% survival. In the edaravone-treated group, the animal survival 
rate is increased to 60%, possibly due to inhibition of ROS produc-
tion. The effect of O-NZ is far superior to edaravone, increasing the 
survival rate to 90%, which is a tremendous improvement in the 
high mortality of severe and acute TBI. Evans blue (EB) staining 
shows high influx of dye with visible hematoma 1 day after TBI 
(Fig. 5, D and E), suggesting increased blood-brain barrier (BBB) 
permeability caused by TBI (44). Thus, O-NZ can rapidly penetrate 
across the damaged BBB and be trapped in the injured region for a 
long time to play the therapeutic role (fig. S21). After 3 days, how-
ever, the O-NZ-treated group shows significant recovery of BBB 
integrity. Moreover, apoptosis staining reveals that mice with TBI 
have widespread apoptotic cells distributed along the damaged area 
of the cortex, but O-NZ significantly reduces these apoptosis signals 
(Fig. 5, F and G). These results indicate that O-NZ treatment could 
effectively inhibit the spread of secondary damage of TBI mice up to 
1 month via early recovery of BBB and vitality of neurocyte.
To further evaluate that O-NZ treatment could promote neu-
rological recovery after TBI, we subjected mice to a series of behavioral 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 17
tests. The Morris water maze (MWM) was used to investigate 
TBI-induced long-term cognitive deficits (45). During the acquisition 
phase of days 14 to 18, 30 to 34, and 60 to 64, all the mice apparent-
ly learned the task, while the distance traveled and latency to hidden 
platform with O-NZ treatment obviously decrease compared with 
TBI group (Fig. 6, A and D, and fig. S22, A to D). In particular, 
O-NZ treatment for 1 month is shown to normalize the performance 
of searching time for platform, suggesting enhanced spatial learning 
and acquisition ability (Fig. 6D). For the probe trial on days 19 and 
35 (Fig. 6, B, C, E, and F), the number of platform crossings and the 
percentage time in the missing platform quadrant are significantly re-
duced in the TBI group, while almost returning to the normal level 
after O-NZ treatment, revealing that O-NZ treatment could effi-
ciently improve the spatial memory of TBI mice. In addition, the 
O-NZ-treated TBI mice show comparable spatial learning and spatial 
memory with normal mice even on day 65 (fig. S22, D to F), suggesting 
Fig. 4. O-NZ markedly reduces intracellular ROS, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis induced by H2O2 in vitro after 24 hours. (A) Fluorescent images of general ROS 
detected in H2O2 treated N2a cells using 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA) probe and (B) corresponding general ROS level by the flow cytometer. (C) Fluores-
cent images of •OH level in cells using hydroxyphenyl fluorescein (HPF) probe and (D) corresponding quantitative results obtained from flow cytometer. (E) Fluorescent 
images of O2
•− level detected using dihydroethidium (DHE) probe and (F) corresponding quantification of O2
•− detected by the flow cytometer. (G) Fluorescent images of 
•NO level tested by the fluorescent probe 3-amino,4-aminomethyl-2‘,7‘-difluorescein diacetate (DAF-FM DA) and (H) the corresponding quantitative result using flow 
cytometer. (I) Cell apoptosis of H2O2-induced N2a cells with and without O-NZ treatment and (J) corresponding apoptosis cells analyzed by flow cytometer. (K) Cell cycle 
analyzed by counting the percentage of DNA after propidium iodide (PI) staining. (L) Cell cycle phase analysis based on the flow cytometer results. Data were presented 
as means ± SD (n ≥ 3). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for statistical analysis. *P < 0.05.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 17
the improvement of long-term cognitive capability. Other time-de-
pendent behavioral tests are investigated in Fig. 6 (G to I). In the ro-
tarod performance test for motor function, time spent on the rod 
increases significantly and reaches the normal level 100 days after 
TBI in the O-NZ-treated group, as compared to the untreated TBI 
mice, indicating recovery of motor coordination and physical con-
dition (Fig. 6G). Injured mice start to show neurological deficits with-
in hours after trauma, which aggravates with time and peaks after 
3 days, but O-NZ could be able to lower neurological severity score 
(NSS) to an extent (Fig. 6H), suggesting recovery of neurological 
functions. Moreover, in the corner test, O-NZ treatment shows a ten-
dency to normalize behavior in 1 month (Fig. 6I). In summary, 
O-NZ treatment contributes to distinct recovery in terms of NSS, 
motor function, spatial learning, and memory after 30 days, while 
untreated mice show persistent deficits.
Reduction of inflammatory factors in TBI mice
To probe the mechanisms for O-NZ–mediated improvement of out-
come in TBI, we assessed oxidative stress and neuroinflammation 
in brain tissues. As shown in Fig. 7A, large amounts of NO are pro-
duced in the brain 1 and 7 days after TBI, which is an inflammato-
ry product that is implicated in secondary damage. After the O-NZ 
treatment for 14 days, the NO level nearly returns to normal level. 
The H2O2 level increases significantly at day 1 in TBI mice (Fig. 7B). 
In contrast, O-NZ treatment markedly reduces H2O2 back to almost 
normal brain tissue levels after 14 days. Similarly, there is an in-
crease in the oxidized glutathione (GSSG) and lipid peroxide level 
in untreated TBI mice compared with the control at day 1, while 
O-NZ could rescue GSSG and lipid peroxide to the normal level 
after 14 days (fig. S23). On the basis of the GSH/GSSG ratio, ele-
vated oxidative stress could be significantly detected at day 1 in TBI 
Fig. 5. O-NZ reduces the spread of secondary damage after TBI in mice. (A) T2-weighted MRI was performed on TBI, TBI + edaravone, and TBI + O-NZ groups at the 
time points of 5, 17, and 30 days after injury. The spread of secondary damage was visualized by hyperintense regions surrounding the primary damage (red arrows). 
Slices from 1-mm anterior and 1-mm posterior to the impact site were also shown. (B) Quantification of volume of hyperintense secondary damage through all slices from 
T2-weighted MRI. (C) Survival rate of O-NZ–treated TBI mice within 30 days. Edaravone was set as positive control. (D) Brain images at 1 and 3 days after injury after intra-
venous injection of EB solution. (E) Quantification of BBB permeability from EB staining of O-NZ–treated and untreated TBI mice at 1 and 3 days (n = 3 per group). 
(F) Apoptotic population in brain tissue at 3 days after injury using terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) 
method and (G) corresponding apoptosis quantification (n = 3 per group). Data are presented as means ± SEM. ***P < 0.001 versus the control group and #P < 0.05 and 
##P < 0.01 versus the TBI group, analyzed by one-way ANOVA.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 17
mice, while it is recovered closed to normal level under O-NZ treat-
ment (Fig. 7C). Meanwhile, SOD activity in O-NZ-treated mice is 
restored to normal levels 7 days after injury (Fig. 7D), reflecting 
the significant antioxidative and RONS-scavenging ability of O-NZ.
As representative indicators for neuroinflammation induced by 
TBI (46, 47), reactive astrocytes and microglia were studied by markers 
of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and Iba-1 (Ionized calcium 
binding adapter molecule 1), respectively. As shown in Fig. 7E and 
fig. S25A, astrocytes undergo reactive astrogliosis characterized by 
morphological and functional adaptations including up-regulation of 
GFAP in the injured cortex on days 1 and 7 after injury. O-NZ treatment 
could significantly reduce the number of reactive astrocytes (Fig. 7H). 
Concurrently, microglia undergo a similar transformation in mor-
phology (Fig. 7F and fig. S24B), and the number of reactive microglia 
7 days after injury shows a little rise than that 1 day after injury (Fig. 7H 
and fig. S24D), which is consistent with the reported literatures 
(47, 48). Meanwhile, neurons marked with NeuN (neuronal nuclei) 
markedly reduce in injured cortex after TBI while it is significantly 
elevated via O-NZ treatment (Fig. 7G and fig. S24C), indicating the 
neuroprotective effect of O-NZ. Moreover, two important pro­
inflammatory factors, tumor necrosis factor– (TNF-) and inter-
leukin-1 (IL-1), show gradual restoration 14 days after treatment 
(Fig. 7, I and J), suggesting recovery of the neuroimmune system.
To further investigate the antioxidation and antineuroinflam-
matory mechanism of O-NZ, we performed real-time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), Western blot experiments, 
and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining (Fig. 8). It is well known 
that Nrf2 has considerable neuroprotective effects in central nervous 
system (CNS) diseases (49). Once stimulated by trauma, the total 
Nrf2 expression in the perilesional cortex is markedly elevated dis-
played by IHC staining (Fig. 8, B and C). O-NZ treatment could 
further increase the number of Nrf2 positive cells to enhance anti-
oxidant response and reduce inflammation. As the downstream 
proteins of Nrf2 signaling pathway via activating the antioxidant 
response element, HO-1 expression was evaluated by IHC stain-
ing. As shown in Fig. 8 (D and E), HO-1–positive cells increase with 
the up-regulated expression of Nrf2 in the O-NZ-treated group. Sim-
ilarly, the mRNA levels of Nrf2 and HO-1 in the cerebral cortex of 
the injured side by qPCR and Western blot analyses also demonstrate 
that O-NZ could ameliorate brain oxidative stress and neuroinflam-
matory by up-regulating Nrf2 and HO-1 expressions (Fig. 8, F to H). 
In addition, the induction of other antioxidant responsive element–
driven genes, NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase-1 (NQO-1), was 
assessed by qPCR method. The NQO-1 follows the same trend 
as HO-1 (fig. S25). These comprehensive results from oxidative 
stress and neuroinflammatory and protein/gene expression manifest 
the molecular mechanism of O-NZ for TBI repair, that is, O-NZ via 
multicatalytic processes can gradually balance in vivo RONS and re-
duce neuroinflammatory by activating the Nrf2/HO-1 signaling path-
way, similar to previous work (50).
Fig. 6. O-NZ treatment causes behavioral improvement in TBI mice. (A to F) MWM test (n = 10 per group). (A and D) Latency to locate and rest on the hidden platform 
recorded for spatial learning trials on days 14 to 18 and 30 to 34. (B and E) Number of platform location crossings and (C and F) the percentage of time during the probe 
trial spent in the quadrant of tank that previously housed the hidden platform recorded for the probe trial on days 19 and 35, evaluating the reference memory of each 
mouse. Data are presented as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 analyzed by one-way ANOVA. (G) Latency to fall from the rod in the rotarod test at dif-
ferent time points after injury (n = 7 per group). O-NZ treatment can improve the motor coordination and balance deficits induced by TBI. (H) NSS assessed at different 
time points after injury (n = 7 per group). The NSS obtained before injury was set as baseline. (I) Right turn number ratio quantified in the corner test when stimulating 
both sides of the vibrissae simultaneously (n = 7 per group). Data are presented as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 versus the control 
group; and #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001, and ####P < 0.0001 versus the TBI group, analyzed by one-way ANOVA.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 17
In addition, toxicological effects of O-NZ on TBI mice were tested 
by body weight, clinical hematologic, and biochemical indicators. 
It is found that the injection of O-NZ in healthy mice does not lead 
to weight loss compared with control group and the injection of 
O-NZ in TBI mice causes weight gain compared with TBI group 
(fig. S26). The biodistribution of O-NZ in the healthy mice and TBI 
mice shows the similar trend that kidney owns the high uptakes 
due to renal clearance, but there is a little difference in the brain 
owing to the BBB damage (fig. S27). Last, to evaluate the pharmaco-
kinetics, excretion, and long-term in vivo toxicity, we intravenously 
injected O-NZ into healthy mice. O-NZ also shows acceptable sta-
bility in both phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and fetal bovine se-
rum (FBS) (fig. S28). The nanozymes exhibit a short blood half-life 
(~26.3 min) and a rapid excretion, with renal clearance reaching 
80% 12 hours after injection (fig. S29). The long-term in vivo toxicity 
assessments (figs. S30 to S32), including hematology, biochemistry, 
and pathology studies, show that O-NZ does not cause obvious toxic 
reactions after 3 months, suggesting no long-term adverse effects.
DISCUSSION
TBI causes a series of secondary injuries that last from hours to 
months after the initial trauma and lead to irreversible neuron loss 
(51, 52). TBI-triggered oxidative stress contributes significantly to 
the pathological progression of brain injury. (53) Therefore, inhibi-
tion of RNS and ROS accumulation at early stages immediately after 
TBI is essential to mitigate secondary brain damage. Improvement 
of the survival rate of severe TBI has been proven to be challenging, 
with very few compounds showing survival benefits clinically (54, 55). 
O-NZ, however, was shown in our study to provide an extraordinary 
improvement in the survival rate, indicating a potentially feasible 
solution for the high mortality rate of TBI. In addition to the 
Fig. 7. O-NZ treatment reduces oxidative stress and restores healthy levels of inflammatory proteins in the brain of TBI mice. (A to D) Oxidative stress indicators 
including NO, H2O2, GSH/GSSG, and SOD in brain tissue of TBI mice with or without treatment of O-NZ at 1, 7, and 14 days after injury (n = 5 per group). (E to G) Immuno-
fluorescence images for astrocytes (GFAP), microglia (Iba-1), and neurons (NeuN) in the injured cortex at 7 days after injury with or without O-NZ treatment, respectively. 
Blue indicates the 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)  staining of cell nuclei. (H) Quantitative analysis of the pixel density of GFAP/Iba-1/NeuN cells in the injured cortex 
with or without O-NZ treatment (n = 3 per group). (I and J) Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) quantitative analysis of IL-1 and TNF- levels in brain tissues on 
days 1, 3, and 14 with or without O-NZ treatment (n = 5 per group), respectively. Healthy mice injected with PBS or O-NZ were named as control or O-NZ group, respec-
tively. Data are presented as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 versus the control group; and #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, and ###P < 0.001 versus 
the TBI group, analyzed by one-way ANOVA.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 17
survival benefits, O-NZ–treated TBI mice also presented functional 
improvements in behavior and normalization of brain inflammation 
levels. In contrast, untreated TBI mice suffered persistent neuronal 
damage and behavioral and cognitive difficulties. O-NZ treatment 
helps to maintain an appropriate balance of the highly active •NO 
molecule and acts as an enzyme-like molecule to supplement native 
SOD. Meanwhile, its catalytic activity further allows O-NZ to reduce 
excessive levels of H2O2 and prevents subsequent ROS reactions and 
glutathione oxide production. Likely as a result of this RONS-­
neutralizing activity, the levels of neuroimmune factors such as 
TNF- and IL-1 in TBI mice can be reduced to normal levels after 
receiving O-NZ treatment.
Nanozymes represent an important class of therapeutics for TBI 
treatment, but only nanozymes with high catalytic selectivity can be 
potentially useful for CNS diseases. O2
•− and •NO are primitive free 
radicals widely distributed in the brain, serving as key targets for 
brain-targeting antioxidants. However, most previous work on 
nanozymes has focused on improving the scavenging efficiency for 
•OH, while few reports targeted O2
•− (1, 2, 42) and •NO scavenging 
(41). O-NZ displays its unique advantages on scavenging RNS, such 
as •NO and ONOO−, thanks to its high catalytic selectivity. Note that 
•NO was restored to healthy levels 90 days after injury, indicative of 
in vivo catalytic balance after treatment. Nitric oxide is an important 
signaling molecule, and if it is not removed thoroughly and timely, 
then it may trigger new catalytic responses (56). Moreover, unlike 
inorganic nanozymes (57–59), organic nanozymes such as O-NZ 
show fast excretion and low toxicity. This preclinical study presented 
the therapeutic potential of nanozymes in treating TBI, but further 
Fig. 8. Molecular mechanism of O-NZ for brain injury treatment. (A) Schematic diagram of TBI repair molecular mechanism of O-NZ treatment via Nrf2-mediated 
up-regulation of HO-1 expression. (B and C) IHC images of Nrf2 and quantitative analysis of Nrf2-positive cells in the perilesional cortex. (D and E) IHC images of HO-1 and 
quantitative analysis of HO-1–positive cells in the perilesional cortex at 7 days after TBI after O-NZ treatment. (F) The mRNA levels of Nrf2 and HO-1 in the cerebral cortex 
of the injured side by qPCR analyses at 7 days after TBI after O-NZ treatment. (G and H) Western blot quantitative analysis and Western blot bands of total Nrf2 and HO-1 in 
the cerebral cortex of the injured side at 7 days after TBI after O-NZ treatment. Data are presented as means ± SEM. **P < 0.01, and ****P < 0.0001 versus the control group; 
and #P < 0.05 and ####P < 0.0001 versus the TBI group, analyzed by one-way ANOVA (n = 3 per group).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
11 of 17
investigational work is needed, such as probing the effects on specific 
cell types and determining intra- and intercellular mechanisms of 
O-NZ. In the future, enzyme-like molecules with rational design on 
functionalization may prove interesting for TBI treatment.
In summary, O-NZ, exhibited high RONS scavenging activity 
and SOD/GPx-like catalytic selectivity via ultrafast electron transfer. 
O-NZ showed excellent scavenging capacity for O2
•− and ONOO−, 
as well as the highly active •NO. O-NZ improved the survival rate of 
acute TBI mice to 90%, compared with only 50% of untreated TBI 
mice. Furthermore, O-NZ improved the long-term behavior of TBI 
mice, including spatial memory, cognition, and functional limb 
control, while irreparable injury and permanent cognitive impair-
ment were observed in TBI mice without treatment. Tissue level 
analyses found that TBI treatment with O-NZ could restore antioxi-
dant enzymes, active signaling molecules, inflammatory factors, and 
oxidative stress indicators to healthy levels. The molecular mechanism 
of O-NZ for TBI repair is that O-NZ via multicatalytic processes can 
gradually balance in vivo RONS and reduce neuroinflammatory by 
activating the Nrf2/HO-1 signaling pathway. This work clearly 
manifests that ultrafast nanozymes with both catalytic activity and 
selectivity are featured as an important therapeutic candidate for 
treatment of nervous system diseases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials preparation
Preparation of O-NZ
Two grams of o-phenylenediamine was dissolved in 200 ml of ethanol, 
and then the reaction solution was thermostated at 180°C for 1 hour 
under high pressure to obtain a brownish yellow solution. The 
ethanol was removed by rotary evaporation, and then the resulting 
product was redissolved in water. The aqueous solution was ultra-
filtered through a 3000-Da ultrafiltration tube to collect the lower 
filtrate. The lower filtrate was dialyzed by a 1000-Da dialysis bag for 
3 days. Last, the yellow solution in dialysis bag was collected and 
dried to powder as the final purified product for further testing and 
characterization. The concentration of O-NZ was quantified by 
weight and absorption spectrum.
Preparation of L-NZ
One gram of lysine was dissolved in 50 ml of ultrapure water, and 
the mixture was transferred to a beaker and carbonized at 90°C for 
30 min in a microwave oven. To remove the impurities, the ultra-
filtration process was performed as abovementioned. The final solu-
tion was dried to powder for further testing and characterization. 
The concentration of L-NZ used was quantified as abovementioned.
Preparation of C-NZ
One gram of lysine and 0.276 g of cysteine were dissolved in 50 ml 
of ultrapure water, and the final molar ratio of lysine and cysteine 
was 3:1. The mixture was transferred to a beaker and carbonized at 
90°C for 30 min in a microwave oven. After the abovementioned 
ultrafiltration process, the final solution was dried to powder for 
further testing. The concentration of C-NZ used was quantified as 
abovementioned.
Preparation of G-NZ
One gram of lysine and 0.701 g of GSH were dissolved in 50 ml 
of ultrapure water, and the final molar ratio of lysine and GSH was 
3:1. The mixture was transferred to a beaker and carbonized at 90°C 
for 30 min in a microwave oven. After the abovementioned ultra-
filtration process, the final solution was dried to powder for 
further testing. The concentration of G-NZ used was quantified 
as abovementioned.
Materials characterization
TEM imaging was conducted on a JEOL JEM-2100F instrument 
with an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. AFM image was performed 
on a MultiMode 8 microscope (Bruker) with tapping mode in air. 
The hydrodynamic size of O-NZ was measured by DLS method on a 
Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern, UK). Absorption spectra were recorded 
on Shimadzu 3600 UV-vis–near infrared (NIR) spectrophotometer. 
Emission spectra were measured on a Jobin Yvon Fluorolog-3-21 
fluorescence spectrophotometer under different excitation wave-
lengths. XPS was operated at 300 W on a 5400 PHI ESCA spectrometer 
with a monochromatic Al K x-ray source. FTIR spectroscopy was 
conducted on an IRAffinity-1S spectrometer. MALDI-TOF MS was 
performed on an AB SCIEX TOF MS 5800. The luminescence life-
time was measured by a Fluorolog-3 fluorometer (HORIBA Jobin 
Yvon Inc., France), using 375 nm as the excitation wavelength.
Transient absorption
Femtosecond pump-probe TA measurements were performed using 
a regenerative amplified Ti:sapphire laser system (Coherent; 70 fs, 
6 mJ per pulse, and 1-kHz repetition rate) as the laser source and a 
femto-TA100 spectrometer (Time-Tech Spectra). Briefly, the 800-nm 
output pulse from the regenerative amplifier was split in two parts 
with a 50% beam splitter. The transmitted part was used to pump an 
optical parametric amplifier that generated a wavelength-tunable 
laser pulse from 250 nm to 2.5 m as pump beam. The reflected 
800-nm beam was split again into two parts. One part was attenuated 
with a neutral-density filter and focused into a 2-mm-thick sapphire 
or CaF2 window to generate a white light continuum used for probe 
beam. The probe beam was focused with an Al parabolic reflector 
onto the sample. After the sample, the probe beam was collimated 
and then focused into a fiber-coupled spectrometer with comple-
mentary metal-oxide semiconductor sensors and detected at a fre-
quency of 1 kHz. The intensity of the pump pulse (340 nm) used in 
the experiment was controlled by a variable neutral-density filter 
wheel. The delay between the pump and probe pulses was con-
trolled by a motorized delay stage. The pump pulses were chopped 
by a synchronized chopper at 500 Hz, and the absorbance change 
was calculated with two adjacent probe pulses (pump-blocked 
and pump-unblocked). The samples were placed in 1-mm quartz 
cuvettes and were vigorously stirred in all the measurements.
Energy level of O-NZ
The conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) of O-NZ were 
tested by electrochemical method using a standard three-electrode 
system. The three electrodes included Ag/Ag+ electrode as the refer-
ence electrode, Pt wire as the counter electrode, and glassy carbon 
electrode as the working electrode. Ammonium hexafluorophos-
phonate (180 mg) and ferrocene (5 mg) were dissolved into an-
hydrous acetonitrile (5 ml) to prepare the electrolyte. After bubbling 
N2 through the electrolyte for 3 min, the cyclic voltammetry (CV) 
curve of ferrocene was obtained at a sweep rate of 50 mV s−1. The 
CV curve of O-NZ was obtained by the same experimental method. 
The redox potentials of ferrocene and O-NZ were acquired by the 
analyses of CV curves. According to the formula
	
​E​ HOMO​  =  − e(​E​ ox​ − ​E​Fc/Fc+​ 
ox 
​ + 4.8 V)​	
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
12 of 17
	
​E​ LUMO​  =  − e(​E​ red​ − ​E​Fc/Fc+​ 
red 
​ + 4.8 V)​	
	
​E​ g​  =  ​E​ LUMO​ − ​E​ HOMO​	
we can calculate the VB top (EHOMO), CB bottom (ELUMO), and 
bandgap (Eg) of O-NZ.
RONS scavenging capacities of O-NZ
For total antioxidant capacity against ROS for O-NZ, we measured 
strictly in accordance with the instructions of T-AOC Assay Kit 
(S0119, Beyotime) based on the ABTS agent. Briefly, each tube was 
added in sequence with 20 l of peroxidase, 10 l of O-NZ with dif-
ferent concentrations, and 170 l of ABTS working solution. After a 
6-min incubation, the resulting solution was measured by UV-vis spec-
trophotometer at 405 nm. The time-dependent absorbance at 734 nm 
was performed in dynamic mode. The L-NZ, C-NZ, and G-NZ with 
the same molar concentration were used as contrast samples.
For total antioxidant capacity against RNS of O-NZ, 50 M DPPH• 
dissolved in a mixture of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and water 
(1:40) was used as a highly stable nitrogen-centered radical. The 
scavenging reaction was initiated with the addition of 10 l of O-NZ 
to 190 l of DPPH, and the absorption spectrum was immediately 
measured by a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer. The time-dependent 
absorbance at 543 nm was performed in dynamic mode. The L-NZ, 
C-NZ, and G-NZ with the same molar concentration were used as 
contrast samples.
For O2
•− scavenging of O-NZ, an ESR spectrometer (Bruker EMX 
plus, Germany) was operated at 0.6-mW microwave power and 1-G 
modulation amplitude. KO2 and 5-tert-butoxycarbonyl-5-methyl-­
1-pyrroline N-oxide (BMPO) were used as the contributor and spin 
trapper of O2
•−, respectively. The resulting solution contained 2.5 mM 
KO2, 25 mM BMPO, and 3.5 mM 18-crown-6 in DMSO medium. 
ESR spectra were recorded with or without the presence of O-NZ at 
different concentrations.
For •OH scavenging of O-NZ, we used ESR spectroscopy under 
the same settings as mentioned above. •OH were originated from 
5 mM hydrogen peroxide in 10 mM buffer under UV irradiation for 
5 min and trapped by 50 mM BMPO. ESR spectra were recorded 
with or without the presence of O-NZ at different concentrations.
For ONOO− scavenging of O-NZ, UV-vis spectrophotometry was 
used in the range of 200 to 500 nm. The ONOO− solution should be 
freshly prepared. H2O2 (10 ml, 50 mM), HCl (5 ml, 1 M), and NaOH 
(5 ml, 1.5 mM) were quickly added in that order into NaNO2 (10 ml, 
50 mM) with quick stirring in an ice-water bath. The resulting ONOO− 
solution showed pale yellow. Absorption spectra were immediately 
measured after the addition of O-NZ at different concentrations. 
The time-dependent absorption spectra were recorded in real time.
For •NO scavenging of O-NZ, 250 M SNAP was used as the 
source of •NO, and ESR spectroscopy was used under the same 
settings as mentioned above. Carboxy-PTIO (10 M) with five-line 
EPR signals was used to trap •NO and generate carboxy-PTI with 
seven-line EPR signals. ESR spectra were recorded with or without 
the presence of 10 M O-NZ.
Enzyme-like activity of O-NZ
The SOD-like activity of O-NZ is determined by the Total Superoxide 
Dismutase Kit. The steps are as follows: For each reaction, 250 l 
of SOD detection buffer, 75 l of nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) 
coloring solution, and 0.75 l of enzyme solution were mixed to 
make 400 l of NBT/enzyme working solution. We added 50 l of 
O-NZ, 400 l of NBT/enzyme working solution, and 50 l of reac-
tion starter in order. The reaction was performed under light for 
20 min, and the absorption value at 560 nm was detected by a spectro-
photometer. The blank control group without O-NZ needed light. 
The light control group without O-NZ did not need light.
The GPx-like activity of O-NZ was studied by GR-coupled analysis 
method. The spectrophotometry was used to detect kinetics at 340 nm 
by following decrease in the concentration of NADPH (the molar 
extinction coefficient is 6.22 mM−1 cm−1). In experiments, the vol-
ume of the total reaction solution was fixed at 500 l, and the order 
of adding the reactants was O-NZ, GSH, NADPH, GR, and H2O2. 
The experiments were performed by varying the concentration of 
H2O2 (0.025 to 1.2 mM) and the concentration of GSH (0.25 to 
10 mM) at a time and fixed the concentration of GR (1.7 U) and 
NADPH (200 M) in PBS (100 mM) (pH 7.4) at 25°C. Michaelis-­
Menten curves were drawn by the direct analysis using GraphPad 
Prism software. Natural GPx enzyme was also measured the enzyme 
kinetic parameters under the same experimental condition.
Cell toxicity and viability
Mouse neuroblastoma (N2a) and MA-c cell lines were purchased 
from National Infrastructure of Cell Line Resource. Primary neuronal 
cells were extracted from the cerebral cortex of mouse embryos in 
pregnant C57BL/6 mice. Cells were cultured in an incubator con-
taining 5% CO2 at 37°C with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium 
(DMEM) (Gibco) containing 10% FBS (Gibco) for N2a and MA-c 
cells or B-27 Plus Neurobasal medium (Gibco) for primary neuronal 
cells, respectively.
At a concentration of 5 × 105 cells ml−1, cells were seeded into a 
12-well plate for N2a, MA-c, and primary neuronal cells, respectively, 
and cultured in an incubator until cells were completely adherent. 
Then, culture medium in each well was replaced by fresh DMEM or 
Neurobasal medium containing O-NZ at different doses. Cells from 
the control group were treated without O-NZ, and the wells without 
cells were regarded as blank. The cytotoxicity was assessed after 
24-hour incubation by the ATP assay. According to the manufac-
turer’s instructions of ATP assay kit (S0026, Beyotime), after cen-
trifugation, cell debris was removed, and the supernatant was added 
into the substrate solution. The luminescence of solution was recorded 
in an Illuminometer with an integration time of 1 s per well. The 
protein content was tested according to the BCA Protein Assay Kit 
(P0012S, Beyotime), and then the ATP concentration was converted 
to nanomoles per milligram of protein. ATP concentration was di-
rectly proportional to cell viability. For the tests of cell survival rate, 
cells were inoculated in a 12-well plate for N2a, MA-c, and primary 
neuronal cells, respectively, and incubated with 200 M H2O2 (88597, 
Sigma-Aldrich) or LPS (0.5 mg/ml; L8880, SolarBio) for 6 hours. 
Then, the culture medium was substituted by fresh medium con-
taining O-NZ at different doses. The plates were kept in the incuba-
tor for 24 hours, and cell viability was assessed by the ATP assay.
RONS scavenge ability in vitro
N2a cells (1 × 105 cells per well) were cultured in six-well plates for 
24 to 48 hours before treatment with 200 M H2O2 or LPS (0.5 mg/ml) 
for 6 hours. Then, the solution was replaced by fresh-culture medium 
with 10% FBS containing 40 M O-NZ. The intracellular oxidative 
stress was measured using various fluorescent probes that target 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
13 of 17
specific RONS, including 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA) 
[Ex (excitation) = 488 nm and Em (emission) = 525 nm] (D6883, 
Sigma-Aldrich) for general ROS, dihydroethidium (DHE) (Ex = 535 nm 
and Em = 610 nm) (D7008, Sigma-Aldrich) for superoxide, hydro­
xyphenyl fluorescein (HPF) solution (Ex = 490 nm and Em = 515 nm) 
(H4290, Sigma-­Aldrich) for •OH, and 3-amino,4-aminomethyl-­
2′,7′-difluorescein diacetate (DAF-FM DA) (Ex = 495 nm and 
Em = 515 nm) (S0019, Beyotime) for NO level. According to the proto-
cols from the manufacturer, cells were kept at 37°C for the appro-
priate period of time in the dark. Intracellular oxidative stress was 
captured using a fluorescence microscope (EVOS, AMG), and quanti-
tative analysis of free radicals was conducted by a fluorescence-­
activated cell sorting flow cytometer (BD Accuri C6). The quantification 
were presented with self-fluorescence of O-NZ deducted.
Apoptosis and cycle analysis
Cells that reached complete attachment in six-well plates were 
treated with 800 M H2O2 or LPS (2.5 mg/ml) for 6 hours, and then 
the solution was replaced by fresh culture medium with 10% FBS 
containing 40 M O-NZ for 24 hours. Next, cells were washed with 
PBS three times at 1500 rpm for 10 min. The cell concentration was 
adjusted to 106 cells ml−1 in PBS or binding buffer for cell cycle or 
apoptosis analysis, respectively. Apoptosis were detected by incu-
bating 100 l of cell suspension in sequence with 5 l of fluorescein 
isothiocyanate–annexin V for 5 min and 5 l of propidium iodide 
(PI) for 10 min under dark. The suspension was then diluted by 300 l 
of binding buffer for flow cytometry (BD Accuri C6). For cycle 
analysis, all cell samples were fixed with 70% cold ethanol drop wise 
and kept at 4°C for 12 hours. Cells were collected by centrifugation 
(1500 rpm for 15 min) and mixed with 100 l of ribonuclease at 
37°C for 30 min. Then, PI solution was added to each sample for 
another 30 min. Cell cycle was analyzed using the flow cytometer 
(BD Accuri C6).
Traumatic brain injury
Male C57BL/6J mice at 6 to 8 weeks were purchased and maintained 
under the guidelines approved by the Key Laboratory of Post-trauma 
Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central Nervous System, Tianjin 
Medical University General Hospital. Animals were raised under 
specific pathogen–free level environment in a regular 12-hour dark/
light cycle and supplied with food and water ad libitum. Surgery was 
performed after 1 week of transportation to adapt to the environ-
ment. Mice were anesthetized with 10% chloral hydrate (10 mg/kg) 
by intraperitoneal injection to conduct fluid percussion injury (FPI) 
models. The mouse was then placed in a stereotaxic frame, and the 
scalp was cut to expose the skull. The craniotomy was performed by 
drilling the skull above the right side of the parietal-temporal cortex 
in the circle of 4 mm in diameter. A plastic female Luer lock disc 
was cemented to the craniotomy site using cyanoacrylate adhesive 
followed by dental cement and was allowed to wait for 15 min for 
the disc to be firmly fixed over the site. Then, the mouse was 
positioned under the FPI device (Custom Design & Fabrication, 
Richmond, VA) such that the affixed disc was in the same plane as 
the end of the device connected to it. The head of the mouse was 
held firmly and subjected to a moderate or severe injury pressure 
(mortality experiments, 2.6 ± 0.1 atm; behavioral assessment exper-
iment, 1.9 ± 0.1 atm). After injury, the Luer lock fitting was gently 
removed, and the scalp was stitched up. All mice were placed on a 
warm pad to recover from anesthesia and then divided into control, 
O-NZ, TBI, TBI + O-NZ, and TBI + edaravone group. Mice were 
intravenously injected with O-NZ immediately after injury at the dose 
of 50 mg/kg with the injection volume of 200 l. Edaravone was used 
as positive control and injected intravenously at the dose of 4 mg/kg 
based on body surface area. As control, healthy mice injected with 
PBS or O-NZ at the dose of 50 mg/kg were named as control or 
O-NZ group, respectively. Animal survival was recorded during 
30 days of observation (n = 20 per group).
Magnetic resonance imaging
Brain tissue in vivo (n = 4 per group) was examined by MRI at 5, 17, 
30 days after TBI on a 3-T MR scanner (MR750, GE Healthcare, 
USA) to generate T2-weighted images. Images were acquired using 
a fast spin echo pulse sequence: TR (time of repetition)/effective TE 
(time of Echo) = 3093/77 ms, echo train length  =  22, matrix  = 
256 by 256, field of view = 80 mm by 80 mm, and 12 slices of 1 mm 
in thickness. Mice were injected with 10% chloralic hydras and put 
into the MR apparatus. T2-weighted MRI were performed for a 
group of four mice. Volume of secondary damage was estimated from 
hyperintense regions indicative of edema in T2-weighted images 
using ImageJ software.
BBB permeability
EB solution (2%) was intravenously injected into injured mice (n = 3 
per group) on days 1 and 3 after injury. Forty minutes later, mice were 
perfused with PBS three times (10 ml for each time). The brain tissue was 
taken out and separated into the ipsilateral and contralateral sections. 
All samples were then homogenized in N,N-dimethylformamide 
(Sigma-Aldrich) and centrifuged at 9000 rpm for 20 min. The super-
natant was then collected for permeability evaluation. EB was 
quantified by measuring optical absorption at 620 nm.
Apoptosis by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated 
deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling assay
Mice (n = 3 per group) were perfused with PBS (20 ml) and para-
formaldehyde (10 ml, 4%), respectively, on day 3 after injury, and 
the brain tissue was gathered and kept fixed for 48 hours. The brains 
were then dehydrated in gradient ethanol (100, 95, 80, and 70%) 
before being embedded into paraffin and sliced into 4-m coronal 
sections. Tissue apoptosis was tested using terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate (dUTP) nick end 
labeling (TUNEL) assay kit (C1090, Beyotime). Specifically, tissue 
sections were deparaffinized in dimethylbenzene and rinsed in 
gradient ethanol to water. The slides were incubated in proteinase K 
(20 g/ml) at 37°C for 20 min. After rinsing in PBS three times, the 
slides were incubated with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase 
enzyme and Cy3-labeled dUTP mixture and kept at 37°C, avoiding 
light for 1 hour. Tissue apoptosis was then examined using fluorescence 
microscope (BD Accuri C6) and quantified using ImageJ software.
Behavior tests
MWM test
To evaluate the spatial learning and spatial memory, MWM test was 
performed in a circular water pool on days 14 to 19, 30 to 35, and 60 
to 65 after TBI (n = 10 per group). A circular stainless steel tank 
with 122 cm in diameter and 51 cm in height on both sides with 
nonreflective interior surfaces was used. The water made opaque by 
milk was maintained at 24° to 26°C with an automatic heater to avoid 
hypothermia, and the platform was set in the center of quadrant 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
14 of 17
I. Before the spatial learning, visual discrimination learning was per-
formed to distinguish whether the vision of mice was normal. On 
the five consecutive days for spatial learning trials, each mouse was 
tested with four trials a day approximately at the same time each day 
with an intertrial interval of 15 s, and the start location was randomly 
selected in four different quadrants. Each mouse was put into the 
water facing toward the tank wall and allowed to swim for 60 s to 
find the hidden platform below water surface. Mice that failed the 
task would be placed onto the platform and left there for 15 s to 
remember the escape site. After finishing one trial, the mice were 
kept on dry towels until the next trial. Latency to locate and rest on 
the hidden platform and the distance traveled (path length) to the 
hidden platform were recorded to evaluate spatial learning activity. 
The probe test on the sixth day was performed with the platform re-
moved from the water pool to evaluate long-term spatial memory, 
where each mouse was released into the water at a position right oppo-
site the escape platform and allowed to swim freely for 60 s. Spatial 
memory was expressed as the percentage of time spent in the missing 
platform quadrant and the number of platform location crossings.
NSS test
The NSS test performed before injury was regarded as baseline 
(n = 7 per group). A 10-point task was used to analyze motor func-
tion, balance, alertness, and behaviors at different time points after 
TBI. One point was given when the task was failed. The total score 
reflected the severity of brain damage. Tasks used in NSS included 
the following: (i) ability and initiative to exit a circle of 30 cm in 
diameter within 3 min; (ii) paresis of upper and/or lower limb of the 
contralateral side; (iii) alertness, initiative, and motor ability to walk 
straight; (iv) innate reflex—the mouse will bounce in response to a 
loud hand clap; (v) physiological behavior as a sign of “interest” in 
the environment; (vi) ability to balance on a beam of 7 mm in width 
for at least 10 s; (vii) ability to balance on a round stick of 5 mm in 
diameter for at least 10 s; (viii) ability to cross a 30-cm-long beam of 
3 cm in width; (ix) same task but increased difficulty on a 2-cm-wide 
beam; and (x) same task but increased difficulty on a 1-cm-wide 
beam. NSS was evaluated at 1, 3, 7, 14, and 30 days after injury.
Corner test
Sensorimotor function was assessed by the corner test (n = 7 per 
group). Turning preference was tested before injury as baseline. 
Two pieces of hardboard (20 cm by 30 cm by 1 cm) were attached 
together with 30° angle. Each mouse was put between the two-angled 
hardboard and encouraged to enter the deep corner. Then, both sides 
of the vibrissae were stimulated simultaneously, and the mouse would 
turn upward and backward and then face to the open end. Each 
mouse was given 10 trials, and turning side for each time was re-
corded. Healthy mice usually turn to either side randomly, while 
brain unilateral damaged ones tend to turn around in the ipsilateral 
direction due to injury induced postural asymmetry. The right turn 
number ratio to a total of 10 turns was shown as a percentage (%).
Rotarod test
Accelerated rotation apparatus (rotarod) is a speed-adjustable rod 
that is used for assessing motor coordination deficits and balance 
alterations in rodents. All the mice were pretrained on the spinning 
rod for 5 days before TBI. The overall training time was 5 min with 
rod speed accelerating from 4 to 40 rpm. Each mouse was given 
three trials every day, and those that fell from the rod would be put 
back to the rotating rod. Most of the mice could stay on the device 
for 5 min by the last day, and those that failed in this training were 
excluded. Then, the rotarod test was performed at 1, 7, 30, 45, 60, 
and 80 days after TBI (n = 7 per group). The latency to fall from the rod 
(5 min, maximum) was measured and averaged over the three trials.
In vivo oxidative stress
Brains were collected at 1, 7, and 14 days after TBI (n = 5 per group). 
Mice were anesthetized and perfused with PBS (30 ml). Tissues were 
homogenized in cold PBS (4 ml) to make the concentration approxi-
mately 10% and centrifuged twice at 1000g for 10 min. The lipid 
peroxide assay was performed according to the instructions of 
malondialdehyde (MDA) assay kit (S0131, Beyotime). MDA content 
in tissue homogenate was quantified by standard curve. Tissue ho-
mogenate samples were mixed with thiobarbituric acid and antioxi-
dant reagent provided by the kit. After incubating the reaction system 
in boiling water for 15 min, the solution turned pink with accumu-
lation of precipitate. All samples then cooled down in water, and the 
MDA content was measured by optical absorption at 532 nm. The 
accurate calculation of MDA was based on the total amount of protein 
in each sample, which was tested using enhanced BCA protein assay 
kit (P0010, Beyotime) following the instructions of the manufacturer.
SOD activity was assessed using the Total Superoxide Dismutase 
Assay Kit with WST-8 (S0101, Beyotime). According to the protocol, 
tissue homogenate was mixed with WST-8 and xanthine oxidase in 
96-well plates, and then xanthine was added and incubated at 37°C 
for 20 min. The reaction solution turned yellow, and optical absorp-
tion was measured at 450 nm. SOD activity was indicated as the ability 
of inhibiting the production of superoxide per milligram of protein.
Hydrogen peroxide assay kit (S0038, Beyotime) was used for H2O2 
quantification in brain tissue at the same time points previously 
mentioned. Tissue homogenate was blended with the mixture of Fe2+ 
and xylenol orange and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. 
After that, absorbance at 560 nm was tested. The H2O2 level was 
calculated using standard curves based on the individual protein 
concentration.
The GSSG level was detected using the GSH and GSSG assay 
kit (S0053, Beyotime). Brain tissue was homogenized in protein-­
removing reagent M included in the kit at the ratio of 10 mg/100 l. 
Then, the homogenate was centrifuged at the speed of 10,000g at 
4°C for 10 min. Supernatant was collected and incubated with 
GSH-masking reagents at room temperature for 1 hour. GR and 
5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) were added in the reaction sys-
tem and kept at room temperature for 5 min, and then the chromo-
genic reaction was started by adding NADPH. Twenty minutes later, 
absorbance was analyzed using a microplate reader at 412 nm. 
GSSG level was quantified by the standard curve and divided by 
protein concentration.
•NO is unstable and difficult to test; therefore, it was analyzed by 
detecting the content of nitrate or nitrite in tissue. The first step was 
to convert nitrate to nitrite in the presence of nitrate reductase. The 
second step was adding the fluorescent probe 2,3-diaminonaphthalene 
to react with nitrite. Meanwhile, NaOH was added to enhance the 
fluorescent yield, and the fluorescence was measured. Nitrate oxide 
level was in proportion to the intensity of fluorescence/total protein 
(in milligrams per milliliter).
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits 
for inflammatory cytokine
At days 1, 3, and 14 after the TBI operation (n = 5 per group), mice 
were cleaned with 10 ml of PBS perfusion, and brain samples were 
rapidly harvested. Homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000g for 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
15 of 17
10 min, and supernatant were saved at −80°C for preparation. 
Supernatant protein concentration was measured and used for 
inflammation-related cytokine quantification. Enzyme-linked im-
munosorbent assay (ELISA) kits for IL-1 (ab197742, Abcam) and 
TNF- (ab208348, Abcam) were used to detect inflammation levels. 
These assays were carried out according to the instructions provided 
by the manufacturer. Each sample was detected twice at least and 
analyzed using Microsoft Excel 2010 software.
Immunostaining
Brain tissue (n = 3 per group) was made into paraffin sections at 1 
and 7 days after TBI. The slides were dewaxed in xylene and gradient 
ethanol and processed with 0.3% H2O2 and 0.1% Triton X-100 at 
37°C for 20 min. After that, all slides were put in antigen-retrieval 
buffer, kept at 95°C for 10 min, and then allowed to cool to room 
temperature naturally. Then, the samples were blocked with 10% goat 
serum at 37°C for 40 min. Anti-GFAP (1:400; ab90601, Abcam), 
anti–Iba-1 (1:300; ab48004, Abcam), and anti-NeuN (1:800; GTX00837, 
GeneTex) primary antibodies were added onto each sample and 
placed at 4°C overnight. The tissue was rinsed in tris-buffered saline 
with Tween 20 three times and incubated with secondary anti-
body at room temperature for 1 hour. After counterstaining with 
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), the slides were mounted 
with antifade reagent and photographed with fluorescence micro-
scope (EVOS, AMG).
Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
Total RNA from 100 mg of mouse hippocampus was isolated using 
RNAiso Plus (catalog no. 9109, Takara). Complementary DNA was 
made from 2 g of extracted total RNA with RevertAid Reverse 
Transcriptase (catalog no. EP0441, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 
RT-qPCR was performed with LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master 
(catalog no. 04707516001, Roche Diagnostics) on Applied Biosystems 
7500 Real-Time PCR Systems. The reaction was incubated at 95°C 
for 5 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 10 s and 60°C for 40 s. 
Gene-specific primers were as follows: Nrf2, 5′- TCCCATTTG-
TAGATGACCATGAG-3′ (forward) and 5′- CCATGTCCTGCTC-
TATGCTG-3′ (reverse); HO-1, 5′- ACAGAGGAACACAAAGACCAG-3′ 
(forward) and 5′- GTGTCTGGGATGAGCTAGTG-3′ (reverse); 
NQO-1, 5′-ACGACAACGGTCCTTTCCAGA-3′ (forward) and 
5′-CAGAAACGCAGGATGCCACT-3′ (reverse); -actin, 5′-GA-
CAGGATGCAGAAGGAGATTACT-3′ (forward) and 5′-TGATC-
CACATCTGCTGGAAGGT-3′ (reverse).
Western blot
Total protein lysate from mouse hippocampus was prepared by 
radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer containing protease inhibi-
tors (cOmplete, mini, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, 
Roche Diagnostics). The protein concentrations were determined 
using a BCA protein assay kit (Bio-Rad) and analyzed with SDS–
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and subsequently transferred to a 
polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. Anti-Nrf2 (1:1000, #ab62352), 
anti–HO-1 (1:1000; #10701-1-AP), and anti–-actin (1:2000; #sc-47778) 
were purchased from Abcam, ProteinTech, and Santa Cruz Bio-
technology, respectively. The horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–
conjugated secondary antibody was purchased from Abcam. The 
signal was detected with Pierce enhanced chemiluminescence 
Western blotting substrate (catalog no. 32209, Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific) and exposed using UVITEC alliance mini HD6.
IHC staining
The brain sections with antigen retrieval were treated with 3% H2O2 
for 15 min and QuickBlock Blocking Buffer (catalog no. P0260, 
Beyotime, China) for 30 min at room temperature. Then, the sec-
tions were incubated with primary antibodies against HO-1 (1:200; 
#10701-1-AP, ProteinTech) and Nrf2 (1:200; #ab62352, Abcam) 
overnight at 4°C. After washing twice with PBS, the sections were 
incubated with biotinylated secondary antibody (1:500; Vector, 
Burlingame, CA, USA) and HRP-streptavidin reagent (Vector, USA). 
The 3,3-diaminobenzidine was used as the chromogen. Then, the 
sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. Images were pictured 
by a microscope. The ImageJ software was used to quantify positively 
stained immunoreactive cells.
Biodistribution
O-NZ solution was administered intravenously into healthy or TBI 
mice at a dose of 100 mg kg−1 at 2 hours after injury. At different 
time points after injection, the brain and main organs were collected 
and homogenized to evaluate biodistribution by fluorescence under 
455-nm excitation on Maestro EX in vivo imaging system (n = 3). 
All results of biodistribution were presented by subtracting fluores-
cence background of the corresponding organs from healthy mice. 
The uptake of O-NZ in the injury site was observed by brain sections 
using fluorescence microscope.
Pharmacokinetics and pathology
O-NZ solution was mixed with PBS or FBS and placed at room tem-
perature for 44 hours. Fluorescence was examined using an in vivo 
imaging system (Maestro EX, Caliper) at the time points of 0, 3.5, 5, 
6.5, 20, and 44 hours. O-NZ solution was intravenously injected 
into C57 mice (n = 3), and blood samples were collected from inner 
canthus at 5, 15, and 30 min and 1, 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours, respec-
tively. Excretion (n = 3) was collected for 13 hours, and O-NZ in the 
urine was quantified by fluorescence.
All mice were euthanized by exsanguination at 3 months after 
injection. Blood was drawn and collected in Eppendorf tubes for 
hematology analysis on a blood cell counter. For biochemistry anal-
ysis, blood samples were centrifuged at 6000 rpm twice to separate 
the serum and analyzed by biochemistry analyzer (7170S, Hitachi). 
Main organs including the heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney 
were fixed in 10% formaldehyde for 48 hours. Pathology assessment 
was performed by hematoxylin and eosin staining.
Statistical methods
Data are presented as means ± SD or SEM. Comparison of means 
between two groups was accomplished by the Student’s t test. For 
multiple comparison, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was 
used to assess difference in means among groups. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, 
***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 versus the control group was analyzed 
by ANOVA. #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001, and ####P < 0.0001 
versus the TBI group was analyzed by ANOVA.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at https://science.org/doi/10.1126/
sciadv.abk1210
REFERENCES AND NOTES
	 1.	 N. Singh, M. A. Savanur, S. Srivastava, P. D'Silva, G. Mugesh, A redox modulatory Mn3O4 
nanozyme with multi-enzyme activity provides efficient cytoprotection to human cells 
in a Parkinson’s disease model. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 14267–14271 (2017).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
16 of 17
	 2.	 A. A. Vernekar, D. Sinha, S. Srivastava, P. U. Paramasivam, P. D'Silva, G. Mugesh, An 
antioxidant nanozyme that uncovers the cytoprotective potential of vanadia nanowires. 
Nat. Commun. 5, 5301 (2014).
	 3.	 F. Cao, L. Zhang, Y. You, L. Zheng, J. Ren, X. Qu, An enzyme-mimicking single-atom 
catalyst as an efficient multiple reactive oxygen and nitrogen species scavenger for sepsis 
management. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 59, 5108–5115 (2020).
	 4.	 Y. Liu, K. Ai, X. Ji, D. Askhatova, R. Du, L. Lu, J. Shi, Comprehensive insights into 
the multi-antioxidative mechanisms of melanin nanoparticles and their application 
to protect brain from injury in ischemic stroke. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 856–862 (2017).
	 5.	 W. Zhang, S. Hu, J. J. Yin, W. He, W. Lu, M. Ma, N. Gu, Y. Zhang, Prussian blue nanoparticles 
as multienzyme mimetics and reactive oxygen species scavengers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 
5860–5865 (2016).
	 6.	 K. Blennow, D. L. Brody, P. M. Kochanek, H. Levin, A. McKee, G. M. Ribbers, K. Yaffe, 
H. Zetterberg, Traumatic brain injuries. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers. 2, 16084 (2016).
	 7.	 V. E. Johnson, W. Stewart, Age at injury influences dementia risk after TBI. Nat. Rev. 
Neurol. 11, 128–130 (2015).
	 8.	 M. W. Greve, B. J. Zink, Pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury. Mt. Sinai J. Med. 76, 
97–104 (2009).
	 9.	 A. Rodriguez-Rodriguez, J. J. Egea-Guerrero, F. Murillo-Cabezas, A. Carrillo-Vico, Oxidative 
stress in traumatic brain injury. Curr. Med. Chem. 21, 1201–1211 (2014).
	10.	 S. Pou, W. S. Pou, D. S. Bredt, S. H. Snyder, G. M. Rosen, Generation of superoxide by 
purified brain nitric oxide synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 24173–24176 (1992).
	11.	 L. Cherian, R. Hlatky, C. S. Robertson, Nitric oxide in traumatic brain injury. Brain Pathol. 
14, 195–201 (2004).
	12.	 H. Wang, K. Wan, X. Shi, Recent advances in nanozyme research. Adv. Mater. 31, 1805368 
(2019).
	13.	 Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, B. Liu, J. Liu, Molecular imprinting on inorganic nanozymes 
for hundred-fold enzyme specificity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 5412–5419 (2017).
	14.	 D. L. Ni, D. W. Jiang, C. J. Kutyreff, J. H. Lai, Y. J. Yan, T. E. Barnhart, B. Yu, H. J. Im, L. Kang, 
S. Y. Cho, Z. F. Liu, P. Huang, J. W. Engle, W. B. Cai, Molybdenum-based nanoclusters act 
as antioxidants and ameliorate acute kidney injury in mice. Nat. Commun. 9, 5421 (2018).
	15.	 K. Chen, S. Sun, J. Wang, X.-D. Zhang, Catalytic nanozymes for central nervous system 
disease. Coord. Chem. Rev. 432, 213751 (2021).
	16.	 H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Sun, Q. Xin, S. Liu, X. Mu, X. Yuan, K. Chen, H. Wang, K. Varga, W. Mi, 
J. Yang, X.-D. Zhang, Catalytically potent and selective clusterzymes for modulation 
of neuroinflammation through single-atom substitutions. Nat. Commun. 12, 114 
(2021).
	17.	 S. Sun, H. L. Liu, Q. Xin, K. Chen, H. Z. Ma, S. H. Liu, X. Y. Mu, W. T. Hao, S. J. Liu, Y. L. Gao, 
Y. Wang, J. H. Pei, R. L. Zhao, S. F. Zhang, X. N. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. H. Li, X. D. Zhang, 
Atomic engineering of clusterzyme for relieving acute neuroinflammation through 
lattice expansion. Nano Lett. 21, 2562–2571 (2021).
	18.	 S. F. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Sun, J. Y. Wang, Q. F. Li, R. J. Yan, Y. L. Gao, H. L. Liu, S. J. Liu, W. T. Hao, 
H. T. Dai, C. L. Liu, Y. M. Sun, W. Long, X. Y. Mu, X. D. Zhang, Catalytic patch with redox Cr/
CeO2 nanozyme of noninvasive intervention for brain trauma. Theranostics 11, 
2806–2821 (2021).
	19.	 B. Jiang, D. Duan, L. Gao, M. Zhou, K. Fan, Y. Tang, J. Xi, Y. Bi, Z. Tong, G. F. Gao, N. Xie, 
A. Tang, G. Nie, M. Liang, X. Yan, Standardized assays for determining the catalytic activity 
and kinetics of peroxidase-like nanozymes. Nat. Protoc. 13, 1506–1520 (2018).
	20.	 Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, E. Ju, Z. Liu, F. Cao, Z. Chen, J. Ren, X. Qu, Biomimetic nanoflowers by 
self-assembly of nanozymes to induce intracellular oxidative damage against hypoxic 
tumors. Nat. Commun. 9, 3334 (2018).
	21.	 X. Mu, H. He, J. Wang, W. Long, Q. Li, H. Liu, Y. Gao, L. Ouyang, Q. Ren, S. Sun, J. Wang, 
J. Yang, Q. Liu, Y. Sun, C. Liu, X. Zhang, W. Hu, Carbogenic nanozyme with ultrahigh 
reactive nitrogen species selectivity for traumatic brain injury. Nano Lett. 19, 4527–4534 
(2019).
	22.	 X. Mu, J. Wang, Y. Li, F. Xu, W. Long, L. Ouyang, H. Liu, Y. Jing, J. Wang, H. Dai, Q. Liu, 
Y. Sun, C. Liu, X.-D. Zhang, Redox trimetallic nanozyme with neutral environment 
preference for brain injury. ACS Nano 13, 1870–1884 (2019).
	23.	 Y. Chong, X. Dai, G. Fang, R. Wu, L. Zhao, X. Ma, X. Tian, S. Lee, C. Zhang, C. Chen, Z. Chai, 
C. Ge, R. Zhou, Palladium concave nanocrystals with high-index facets accelerate 
ascorbate oxidation in cancer treatment. Nat. Commun. 9, 4861 (2018).
	24.	 B. Xu, H. Wang, W. Wang, L. Gao, S. Li, X. Pan, H. Wang, H. Yang, X. Meng, Q. Wu, L. Zheng, 
S. Chen, X. Shi, K. Fan, X. Yan, H. Liu, A single-atom nanozyme for wound disinfection 
applications. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 58, 4911–4916 (2019).
	25.	 L. Huang, J. Chen, L. Gan, J. Wang, S. Dong, Single-atom nanozymes. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav5490 
(2019).
	26.	 H. Soo Choi, W. Liu, P. Misra, E. Tanaka, J. P. Zimmer, B. Itty Ipe, M. G. Bawendi, 
J. V. Frangioni, Renal clearance of quantum dots. Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 1165–1170 (2007).
	27.	 X. D. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Chen, X. Shen, S. Song, Y. Sun, S. Fan, F. Fan, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, 
Ultrasmall Au10-12(SG)10-12 nanomolecules for high tumor specificity and cancer 
radiotherapy. Adv. Mater. 26, 4565–4568 (2014).
	28.	 H. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Guo, B. Lei, J. Zhuang, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, Hydrophobic carbon dots 
with blue dispersed emission and red aggregation-induced emission. Nat. Commun. 10, 
1789 (2019).
	29.	 F. Yuan, T. Yuan, L. Sui, Z. Wang, Z. Xi, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, Z. Tan, A. Chen, M. Jin, S. Yang, 
Engineering triangular carbon quantum dots with unprecedented narrow bandwidth 
emission for multicolored leds. Nat. Commun. 9, 2249 (2018).
	30.	 Z. H. Sheng, L. Shao, J. J. Chen, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang, X. H. Xia, Catalyst-free synthesis 
of nitrogen-doped graphene via thermal annealing graphite oxide with melamine and its 
excellent electrocatalysis. ACS Nano 5, 4350–4358 (2011).
	31.	 K. Fan, J. Xi, L. Fan, P. Wang, C. Zhu, Y. Tang, X. Xu, M. Liang, B. Jiang, X. Yan, L. Gao, In vivo 
guiding nitrogen-doped carbon nanozyme for tumor catalytic therapy. Nat. Commun. 9, 
1440 (2018).
	32.	 D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff, The chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 39, 228–240 (2010).
	33.	 S. Lu, G. Xiao, L. Sui, T. Feng, X. Yong, S. Zhu, B. Li, Z. Liu, B. Zou, M. Jin, J. S. Tse, H. Yan, 
B. Yang, Piezochromic carbon dots with two-photon fluorescence. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
56, 6187–6191 (2017).
	34.	 B. C. M. Martindale, G. A. M. Hutton, C. A. Caputo, S. Prantl, R. Godin, J. R. Durrant, 
E. Reisner, Enhancing light absorption and charge transfer efficiency in carbon dots 
through graphitization and core nitrogen doping. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 6459–6463 
(2017).
	35.	 B. Santiago-Gonzalez, A. Monguzzi, J. M. Azpiroz, M. Prato, S. Erratico, M. Campione, 
R. Lorenzi, J. Pedrini, C. Santambrogio, Y. Torrente, F. De Angelis, F. Meinardi, S. Brovelli, 
Permanent excimer superstructures by supramolecular networking of metal quantum 
clusters. Science 353, 571–575 (2016).
	36.	 Y. Chong, C. Ge, G. Fang, X. Tian, X. Ma, T. Wen, W. G. Wamer, C. Chen, Z. Chai, J. J. Yin, 
Crossover between anti- and pro-oxidant activities of graphene quantum dots 
in the absence or presence of light. ACS Nano 10, 8690–8699 (2016).
	37.	 E. L. Samuel, D. C. Marcano, V. Berka, B. R. Bitner, G. Wu, A. Potter, R. H. Fabian, 
R. G. Pautler, T. A. Kent, A. L. Tsai, J. M. Tour, Highly efficient conversion of superoxide 
to oxygen using hydrophilic carbon clusters. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 2343–2348 
(2015).
	38.	 X.-D. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Yang, J. Chen, X. Shen, J. Deng, D. Deng, W. Long, 
Y.-M. Sun, C. Liu, M. Li, Highly catalytic nanodots with renal clearance for radiation 
protection. ACS Nano 10, 4511–4519 (2016).
	39.	 J.-Y. Wang, X. Mu, Y. Li, F. Xu, W. Long, J. Yang, P. Bian, J. Chen, L. Ouyang, H. Liu, Y. Jing, 
J. Wang, L. Liu, H. Dai, Y. Sun, C. Liu, X.-D. Zhang, Hollow PtPdRh nanocubes 
with enhanced catalytic activities for in vivo clearance of radiation-induced ROS via 
surface-mediated bond breaking. Small 14, 1703736 (2018).
	40.	 J. S. Wright, E. R. Johnson, G. A. DiLabio, Predicting the activity of phenolic antioxidants: 
Theoretical method, analysis of substituent effects, and application to major families 
of antioxidants. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 1173–1183 (2001).
	41.	 K. Fan, H. Wang, J. Xi, Q. Liu, X. Meng, D. Duan, L. Gao, X. Yan, Optimization of Fe3O4 
nanozyme activity via single amino acid modification mimicking an enzyme active site. 
Chem. Commun. 53, 424–427 (2017).
	42.	 Y. Huang, Z. Liu, C. Liu, E. Ju, Y. Zhang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Self-assembly of multi-nanozymes 
to mimic an intracellular antioxidant defense system. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 128, 
6758–6762 (2016).
	43.	 S. Y. Kim, H.-Y. Jo, M. H. Kim, Y.-y. Cha, S. W. Choi, J.-H. Shim, T. J. Kim, K.-Y. Lee, 
H2O2-dependent hyperoxidation of peroxiredoxin 6 (Prdx6) plays a role in cellular toxicity 
via up-regulation of iPLA2 activity. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 33563–33568 (2008).
	44.	 W. Li, J. Qiu, X. L. Li, S. Aday, J. Zhang, G. Conley, J. Xu, J. Joseph, H. Lan, R. Langer, 
R. Mannix, J. M. Karp, N. Joshi, BBB pathophysiology-independent delivery of siRNA 
in traumatic brain injury. Sci. Adv. 7, eabd6889 (2021).
	45.	 L. B. Tucker, A. G. Velosky, J. T. McCabe, Applications of the morris water maze 
in translational traumatic brain injury research. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 88, 187–200 
(2018).
	46.	 I. P. Karve, J. M. Taylor, P. J. Crack, The contribution of astrocytes and microglia 
to traumatic brain injury. Br. J. Pharmacol. 173, 692–702 (2016).
	47.	 D. W. Simon, M. J. McGeachy, H. Bayır, R. S. Clark, D. J. Loane, P. M. Kochanek, The 
far-reaching scope of neuroinflammation after traumatic brain injury. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 13, 
171–191 (2017).
	48.	 L. C. Turtzo, J. Lescher, L. Janes, D. D. Dean, M. D. Budde, J. A. Frank, Macrophagic 
and microglial responses after focal traumatic brain injury in the female rat. 
J. Neuroinflammation 11, 82 (2014).
	49.	 L. Liu, L. M. Locascio, S. Dore, Critical role of Nrf2 in experimental ischemic stroke. Front. 
Pharmacol. 10, 153 (2019).
	50.	 J. Zhao, A. N. Moore, J. B. Redell, P. K. Dash, Enhancing expression of Nrf2-driven genes 
protects the blood–brain barrier after brain injury. J. Neurosci. 27, 10240–10248 (2007).
	51.	 M. L. Block, L. Zecca, J.-S. Hong, Microglia-mediated neurotoxicity: Uncovering 
the molecular mechanisms. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 57–69 (2007).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Mu et al., Sci. Adv. 7, eabk1210 (2021)     10 November 2021
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
17 of 17
	52.	 M. V. Russo, D. B. McGavern, Inflammatory neuroprotection following traumatic brain 
injury. Science 353, 783–785 (2016).
	53.	 B. Surnar, U. Basu, B. Banik, A. Ahmad, B. Marples, N. Kolishetti, S. Dhar, Nanotechnology-
mediated crossing of two impermeable membranes to modulate the stars 
of the neurovascular unit for neuroprotection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, E12333–E12342 
(2018).
	54.	 A. P. Mann, P. Scodeller, S. Hussain, J. Joo, E. Kwon, G. B. Braun, T. Mölder, Z.-G. She, 
V. R. Kotamraju, B. Ranscht, S. Krajewski, T. Teesalu, S. Bhatia, M. J. Sailor, E. Ruoslahti, 
A peptide for targeted, systemic delivery of imaging and therapeutic compounds into 
acute brain injuries. Nat. Commun. 7, 11980 (2016).
	55.	 D. Yoo, A. W. Magsam, A. M. Kelly, P. S. Stayton, F. M. Kievit, A. J. Convertine, Core-cross-
linked nanoparticles reduce neuroinflammation and improve outcome in a mouse model 
of traumatic brain injury. ACS Nano 11, 8600–8611 (2017).
	56.	 H. Kawagishi, T. Finkel, Unraveling the truth about antioxidants: ROS and disease: Finding 
the right balance. Nat. Med. 20, 711–713 (2014).
	57.	 Y. Zhang, F. Wang, C. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Kang, Y. Huang, K. Dong, J. Ren, X. Qu, Nanozyme 
decorated metal–organic frameworks for enhanced photodynamic therapy. ACS Nano 
12, 651–661 (2018).
	58.	 J. Kang, J. Joo, E. J. Kwon, M. Skalak, S. Hussain, Z. G. She, E. Ruoslahti, S. N. Bhatia, 
M. J. Sailor, Self-sealing porous silicon-calcium silicate core–shell nanoparticles 
for targeted siRNA delivery to the injured brain. Adv. Mater. 28, 7962–7969 (2016).
	59.	 M. Soh, D. W. Kang, H. G. Jeong, D. Kim, D. Y. Kim, W. Yang, C. Song, S. Baik, I. Y. Choi, 
S. K. Ki, H. J. Kwon, T. Kim, C. K. Kim, S. H. Lee, T. Hyeon, Ceria-zirconia nanoparticles 
as an enhanced multi-antioxidant for sepsis treatment. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 
11399–11403 (2017).
Acknowledgments 
Funding: This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (grant nos. 81971744, U1932107, 91859101, and 82001952), the National Natural 
Science Foundation of Tianjin (nos. 19JCZDJC34000 and 20JCYBJC00940), the Independent 
Innovation Foundation of Tianjin University, and the National Institutes of Health (grant nos. 
NS092868 and AG059694). Author contributions: X.-D.Z., X.M., J.Y.W., and H.H. conceived and 
designed the experiments. X.M., J.Y.W., H.H., H.L., Q.L., and Y.G. carried out the experiments. 
H.H., H.L., and X.S. contributed to materials synthesis. X.M., L.O., and J.H.W. contributed to 
physical and chemical measurement. J.Y.W., W.H., S.S., Q.R., B.Y., and Q.F. contributed to 
biological experiment. X.M., X.-D.Z., J.Y.W., and J.L. analyzed the data. X.M., X.-D.Z., J.Y.W., R.V., 
and J.L. prepared the manuscript. T.W.-C., R.V., L.L., J.L., and J.Y. provided advice on experiment 
design, animal model, and data analysis. All authors discussed the results and commented on 
the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the 
paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 23 June 2021
Accepted 22 September 2021
Published 10 November 2021
10.1126/sciadv.abk1210
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

An oligomeric semiconducting nanozyme with ultrafast electron transfers
alleviates acute brain injury
Xiaoyu Mu, Junying Wang, Hua He, Qifeng Li, Bing Yang, Junhui Wang, Haile Liu, Yalong Gao, Lufei Ouyang, Si Sun,
Qinjuan Ren, Xinjian Shi, Wenting Hao, Qiaoman Fei, Jiang Yang, Lulin Li, Ryan Vest, Tony Wyss-Coray, Jian Luo, and
Xiao-Dong Zhang
Sci. Adv. 7 (46), eabk1210.  DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abk1210
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.abk1210
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2021 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026