Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Bacteroides Fragilis in the gut microbiomes
of Alzheimer’s disease activates microglia
and triggers pathogenesis in neuronal
C/EBPβ transgenic mice
Yiyuan Xia
1,2,10, Yifan Xiao2,10, Zhi-Hao Wang1, Xia Liu1, Ashfaqul M. Alam3,
John P. Haran4,5,6, Beth A. McCormick5,6, Xiji Shu2
, Xiaochuan Wang
7,8
&
Keqiang Ye
1,9
Gut dysbiosis contributes to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathogenesis, and
Bacteroides strains are selectively elevated in AD gut microbiota. However, it
remains unknown which Bacteroides species and how their metabolites trigger
AD pathologies. Here we show that Bacteroides fragilis and their metabolites
12-hydroxy-heptadecatrienoic acid (12-HHTrE) and Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
activate microglia and induce AD pathogenesis in neuronal C/EBPβ transgenic
mice. Recolonization of antibiotics cocktail-pretreated Thy1-C/EBPβ trans-
genic mice with AD patient fecal samples elicits AD pathologies, associated
with C/EBPβ/Asparaginyl endopeptidase (AEP) pathway upregulation, micro-
glia activation, and cognitive disorders compared to mice receiving healthy
donors’ fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT). Microbial 16S rRNA sequen-
cing analysis shows higher abundance of proinﬂammatory Bacteroides fragilis
in AD-FMT mice. Active components characterization from the sera and brains
of the transplanted mice revealed that both 12-HHTrE and PGE2 activate pri-
mary microglia, ﬁtting with poly-unsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) metabolites
enrichment identiﬁed by metabolomics. Strikingly, recolonization with live but
not dead Bacteroides fragilis elicited AD pathologies in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic
mice, so did 12-HHTrE or PGE2 treatment alone. Collectively, our ﬁndings
support a causal role for Bacteroides fragilis and the PUFA metabolites in
activating microglia and inducing AD pathologies in Thy1- C/EBPβ trans-
genic mice.
The neuroinﬂammation, triggered by insoluble amyloid β (Aβ) peptide
deposits and phosphorylated Tau-enriched neuroﬁbrillary tangles
(NFT) that are two prominent hallmarks in Alzheimer’s disease (AD),
signiﬁcantly contributes to AD pathogenesis1. The innate immune cells
involved in this process are primarily microglia and astrocytes2. Acti-
vated microglia play a key role in the brain’s immune response to
neuronal degeneration, and microglial activation is an early event in
the pathogenesis of AD3. The gut microbiome is essential for microglial
functions in immune and neuronal responses throughout the host’s
life span. Host microbiota substantially contributes to microglia
homeostasis, and microglia in germ-free mice display global defects
including
altered
cell
proportions,
and
immature
phenotype
Received: 20 March 2022
Accepted: 24 August 2023
Check for updates
A full list of afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper.
e-mail: xijishu@jhun.edu.cn; wxch@mails.tjmu.edu.cn; kq.ye@siat.ac.cn
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

associated with impaired innate immune response. The absence of a
complex host microbiota leads to defects in microglia maturation,
differentiation, and function4. Gut microbiota imbalance leads to
increased permeability of the intestinal epithelial barrier with the
release of proinﬂammatory cytokines and promotion of a neuroin-
ﬂammatory response5. Aging-induced changes in gut microbiota
compositions modulate the morphology and functions of microglia
through the gut-brain axis. Gut microbiota communicates with
microglia by its secreted metabolites and neurotransmitters. This is
highly associated with age-related cognitive declines6. It is worth not-
ing that increased proinﬂammatory and reduced anti-inﬂammatory
bacteria in the intestine are associated with systemic inﬂammatory
states in patients with cognitive impairment and brain amyloidosis7.
Recent studies revealed signiﬁcant changes in the proportion of cer-
tain microbiome taxa in AD patients8,9. Notably, AD patient micro-
biomes are associated with dysregulation of the anti-inﬂammatory P-
glycoprotein pathway, revealing a lower proportion and prevalence of
bacteria with the potential to synthesize butyrate, as well as higher
abundances of taxa that cause inﬂammation10. Most recently, we
showed that AD-derived microbiota enhances the proinﬂammatory
pathway for poly-unsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) metabolism, and Bac-
teroides strains mediating PUFA metabolism are increased in AD
patient gut microbiomes, activating microglia in the brain, associated
with C/EBPβ/AEP signaling activation11.
Recently, we identiﬁed δ-secretase, an asparagine endopepti-
dase (AEP, gene name LGMN), which cleaves both APP and Tau in an
age-dependent manner in the brains, where its enzymatic activity and
expression level are temporally escalated. It cuts APP at both N373
and N585 residues and facilitates Aβ production by decreasing the
steric hindrance for BACE112. Additionally, δ-secretase cuts Tau at
N255 and N368 and abolishes its microtubule assembly activity,
resulting in its aggregation and NFT formation. Depletion of δ-
secretase signiﬁcantly reduces Aβ production and NFT formation in
AD mouse brains, leading to restoration of synaptic activity and
cognitive functions13. Hence, AEP is necessary for AD onset and
progression. C/EBPβ, an Aβ and IL-6-activated transcription factor14,
regulates genes critical for the activation of microglia, and it also
mediates
numerous
cytokines
and
pro-inﬂammatory
gene
expression15,16. Remarkably, C/EBPβ is highly upregulated and acti-
vated in AD brains17–19, modulating Tau pathology propagation in
microglia20. We show that C/EBPβ is highly expressed in human AD
brains, especially in neurons, inducing AD pathologies by upregu-
lating AEP19. Moreover, we report that spatiotemporal activation of
the C/EBPβ/AEP axis regulates the pathogenesis of AD21. In addition,
we disclose that C/EBPβ preferentially dictates ApoE4 mRNA tran-
scription in AD brains22, which feeds back and activates C/EBPβ in the
presence of 27-hydroxycholesterol, exacerbating AD pathologies23.
Most recently, we report that C/EBPβ is escalated in neurons in an
age-dependent manner and mediates APP, MAPT, and BACE1 mRNA
expression, and mice with double transgenic expression of ApoE4
and C/EBPβ in neurons exhibit sporadic AD pathologies in Thy1-
ApoE4/C/EBPβ mouse model24. Thus, C/EBPβ/AEP pathway plays a
critical role in driving AD pathogenesis. Further, we report that FSH
(follicle stimulatory hormone) selectively activates C/EBPβ/AEP sig-
naling after menopause, leading to women’s more susceptibility to
AD onset25.
In the central nervous system (CNS), cyclooxygenases (COXs) and
5-lipoxygenase (LOX-5), enzymes that metabolize arachidonic acid
(AA) into biologically active lipid molecules termed eicosanoids, are
associated with pathobiological mechanisms accompanying aging and
neurodegeneration26–28. However, both COXs and LOX-5 also inﬂuence
CNS functions via mechanisms unrelated to the roles in inﬂammation.
For example, COX-2, which is predominantly expressed in pyramidal
neurons in contrast to COX-1, which is mostly present in microglia,
regulates
neuroplasticity
via
its
conversion
of
AA
to
classic
prostaglandins but also by favoring oxidative metabolism of endo-
cannabinoids to novel prostaglandins29. Noticeably, AD patient brains
contain more AA than normal healthy controls30. A portion of intra-
cellular free AA is metabolized by COX-1, COX-2, and LOX-5 to biolo-
gically active prostaglandins and leukotrienes, respectively. COX-2 and
LOX-5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) study suggests that the
alleles of COX-2 and LOX-5 could be risk factors for AD31. Interestingly,
LOX-5 regulates Aβ levels in the brain by inﬂuencing γ-secretase32.
In the present study, we show that AD-FMT induced AD-like
pathologies and cognitive impairments in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic
mice mimic augmented C/EBPβ levels in neurons in aged animals.
Moreover, we identify Bacteroides fragilis is selectively enriched in the
gut microbiota, and these bacterial PUFA metabolites 12-HHTrE or
PGE2 trigger primary microglia activation. Remarkably, Bacteroides
fragilis or 12-HHTrE or PGE2 alone induces AD-like pathologies and
cognitive disorders by activating C/EBPβ and microglia in the brain of
Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice.
Results
AD patient fecal transplantation induces mouse Aβ and Tau
aggregations in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice
C/EBPβ expression is escalated in neurons in an age-dependent
manner33. Interestingly, neuronal C/EBPβ represses REST/FOXO
mRNA transcription, shortening the lifespan of Thy1-C/EBPβ trans-
genic mice34. AD gut microbiota stimulates C/EBPβ/AEP pathway and
enhances PUFA metabolism that activates microglia in the brain of
germ-free 3xTg mice11. To explore whether AD gut dysbiosis is cap-
able to trigger AD-like pathologies using mouse machinery, we
pretreated Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice with antibiotics cocktail
(Abx) for 1 month, and fecal pellets in vitro culture suggested that
Abx treatment substantially depleted the host gut microbiota
(Supplementary Fig. 1A, B). Mice were orally gavaged once a day
consecutively for 2 months with frozen fecal samples obtained from
4 donors (2 AD and 2 HC (healthy control), 7–8 mice per donor).
Then, mouse Aβ and Tau pathologies were analyzed via immuno-
ﬂuorescent (IF) staining. AD but not HC fecal samples triggered
robust Aβ IF signals, which were also Thioﬂavin S (Th-S) positive,
indicating that mouse Aβ is aggregated via β-sheet conformation,
resembling pathological Aβ inclusions in the senile plaques in
human AD brains. By contrast, there were no signals in wild-type
(WT) mice regardless of AD or HC fecal treatment (Fig. 1A). We made
a similar observation with aberrant Tau accumulation, which was
validated by T22, an aggregated Tau speciﬁc antibody (Fig. 1B).
Quantiﬁcation showed that Aβ and Tau aggregates were signiﬁcantly
higher in C/EBPβ transgenic mice than in WT mice (Fig. 1C, D). ELISA
assays indicated that mouse Aβ42 but not Aβ40 peptide concentra-
tions were increased by AD fecal inoculation with C/EBPβ transgenic
mice much stronger than WT mice (Fig. 1E). In alignment with Aβ42
levels escalation by AD-FMT, immunoblotting (IB) showed that
much stronger Aβ aggregates smear in the brain of C/EBPβ trans-
genic mice, similar to human AD brain lysates (Fig. 1F, left panel),
suggestive of demonstrable basal levels of Aβ40 peptides in WT
mice, which was not elevated in C/EBPβ transgenic mice by HC-FMT.
Remarkably, T22 positive p-Tau aggregates were only observed in
the brain from C/EBPβ transgenic mice, reminiscent of accumulated
Tau in human AD brains (Fig. 1F, right panel). To deﬁne that mouse
Aβ and Tau were indeed aggregated into the pathological inclusions
in the brain, we conducted the immuno-EM (electron microscopy)
analysis and found that AD fecal inoculation triggered both mouse
Aβ and Tau accumulation (arrow) in WT mouse brain, and the
immuno-activities were profoundly augmented in C/EBPβ trans-
genic mice (Fig. 1G), ﬁtting with the IB ﬁndings. Silver staining
demonstrated that prominent protein aggregates in the WT brain
after AD fecal inoculation, which was further exacerbated in C/EBPβ
transgenic mice (Supplementary Fig. 1C, D).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
2

AD patient fecal transplantation activates C/EBPβ/AEP pathway
and cognitive dysfunctions in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice
To assess whether AD gut microbiota incurred AD-like pathologies
implicated C/EBPβ/AEP signaling activation, we performed IB analysis
and found that both C/EBPβ and p-C/EBPβ, a biomarker for its
activation35, were elevated in WT mice upon AD fecal inoculation,
which
subsequently
elicited
AEP
upregulation
and
activation.
Consequently, APP N585 and Tau N368 fragmentation, the down-
stream targets of AEP, was evidently increased as compared to HC
control. Accordingly, p-Tau AT8 activities were elevated. These bio-
chemical events were pronouncedly intensiﬁed in C/EBPβ transgenic
mice after AD gut microbiota inoculation (Fig. 2A, B). As expected, the
dendritic spines revealed by Golgi staining were reduced in WT mice
by AD gut microbiota, which was further decreased in C/EBPβ
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
3

transgenic mice (Fig. 2C, D). EM analysis showed that the synapses in
WT mice were attenuated by AD fecal samples, which were sub-
stantially mitigated in C/EBPβ transgenic mice (Fig. 2E, F). MWM
(Morris Water Maze) behavioral tests demonstrated that the escape
latency for WT mice was signiﬁcantly increased by AD fecal trans-
plantation compared to HC, whereas it remained comparable among
C/EBPβ transgenic mice regardless of AD or HC gut microbiota
inoculation (Fig. 2G), suggesting that the learning capability for WT
mice was impaired by AD gut microbiota, and neuronal overexpression
of C/EBPβ exerts more prominent detrimental effect than AD gut
dysbiosis on the learning ability. By contrast, the time percentage
spent in the target quadrant, an index reﬂecting the memory functions,
was signiﬁcantly reduced in WT mice by AD microbiota as compared to
HC, which was further decreased in C/EBPβ transgenic mice, though
the swimming speeds remained similar among the groups (Fig. 2H).
Hence, AD microbiota activates C/EBPβ/AEP pathway and triggers
synaptic degeneration in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice, leading to
cognitive dysfunctions.
AD fecal transplantation activates microglia and increases PUFA
oxidative enzymes in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice
C/EBPβ regulates pro-inﬂammatory genes in microglia and is upregu-
lated in AD. Mounting evidence demonstrates that C/EBPβ orches-
trates microglial transcriptional programs that promote inﬂammation
and neuronal cell death18. Interestingly, it mediates Tau pathology
spreading in microglia in AD20. IF co-staining revealed that C/EBPβ was
upregulated in Iba-1 positive microglia cells in the hippocampus of WT
mice upon AD gut microbiota transplantation, and this effect was
further elevated in Thy1- C/EBPβ transgenic mice (Fig. 3A, B). Since
dysregulated microglia are intimately involved in AD pathogenesis, we
conducted IF to analyze microglia morphology on the brain sections.
IF co-staining with antibodies against both Iba-1 and CD86, a biomarker
for microglia activation36, exhibited an enlarged cell body and nucleus
in C/EBPβ transgenic mice versus WT mice. Further, highly ramiﬁed
microglia changed to an ameboid form upon AD gut microbiota. CD86
was strongly escalated in AD microglia by the AD fecal samples
(Fig. 3C). The diameter of the cell body, the number of branch points
and the total branch length in the microglia were quantiﬁed, as the
diameters increased, the branch points and length were signiﬁcantly
diminished (Fig. 3D). Correspondingly, the inﬂammatory cytokines
including IL-6 and IL-1β were strongly augmented by AD gut micro-
biota (Fig. 3E), in accordance with the microglia activation status. IF co-
staining using anti-CD86 with Iba-1 or IL-1β, or Iba-1 with IL-1β or IL-6
demonstrated that AD fecal transplantation strongly activated Iba-1
positive microglia from WT mice with CD86 signals signiﬁcant eleva-
tion than HC samples, and this effect was further augmented in
microglia from C/EBPβ Tg mice. IL-1β and IL-6 co-staining exhibited the
same patterns, and these events were quantiﬁed (Supplementary
Fig. 2A–D). In alignment with the robust microglia activation, human
Aβ42 aggregates were greatly engulfed into the active microglia,
resulting in a reduction of remnant Aβ42 in the media. As expected,
microglia from C/EBPβ Tg mice exhibited stronger activities than WT
mice (Supplementary Fig. 3).
Gut microbiota activates C/EBPβ/AEP pathway, elevating proin-
ﬂammatory enzymes implicated in PUFA metabolism, and PGE2 acti-
vates microglia in germ-free 3xTg mice in the presence of SCFA (short
chain fatty acid)11. IB analysis revealed that AD gut microbiota
increased PUFA enzymes including LOX-5; COX-1, COX-2, BLT-2, and
PTGES in the brain of WT mice, which were further escalated in Thy1-C/
EBPβ transgenic mice (Fig. 3F, G). Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
validated the ALOX5, PTGES1, and PTGES but not PTGS2, LTB4R1, or
LTB4R2 genes were selectively agitated upon AD fecal treatment
(Fig. 3H). These ﬁndings are consistent with previous reports that COXs
and LOX-5 and PTGES mRNA expression is mediated by C/EBPβ37–39.
Dysregulated microglia are intimately involved in neurode-
generation. Chronic neuro-inﬂammation mediated by microglia is
one of the pathological hallmarks of AD20, and microglial activation
is an early event in the pathogenesis of AD3. To search for the
pathogens that activated microglia in the brain in the AD fecal
inoculated mice, we conducted in vitro primary microglial activation
assay using the serum from the mice pretreated with Abx, followed
by transplant with HC or AD gut microbiota. Since the identiﬁcation
of the potential components driving microglial activation needs a
large number of microglia cultures, we utilized rat but not mouse
primary microglia cultures. We assessed microglial activation by
analyzing its cellular morphology including diameter, branch points,
and length. It was worth noting that the serum from the mice
inoculated with AD-FMT signiﬁcantly activated microglia with C/
EBPβ transgenic mice stronger than WT mice. In contrast, the serum
from Abx-treated WT or transgenic mice without any FMT treatment
exhibited no activity (Supplementary Fig. 4A, B). To explore whether
the microglial stimulatory activity was exerted by proteins or small
molecules in the serum, we denatured and precipitated proteins
with TCA, followed by high-speed centrifugation. Markedly, the
supernatant after protein removal displayed comparable activity as
the intact serum, suggesting that some small bioactive molecules
are presumably responsible for this effect (Supplementary Fig. 5A,
B). Next, we wondered whether the brain of the animals inoculated
with AD-FMT also possess the same stimulatory activity on micro-
glia, we employed the brain lysates and found the similar activity
pattern as the serum (Supplementary Fig. 6A, B). Again, depleting
proteins from the brain lysates prepared from the animals inocu-
lated with AD-FMT did not affect the stimulatory effect on microglia
activation, indicating that the bioactive small molecules might be
responsible for the activity (Supplementary Fig. 7A, B). We also
validated these effects with the brain lysates or serum from C/EBPβ
Tg mice, inoculated with AD or HC-FMT, on primary microglia cul-
tures from C/EBPβ Tg mice. As expected, mouse primary microglia
Fig. 1 | AD humanized Abx-treated mice display increased AD pathologies
compared with HC humanized Abx-treated mice in WT and C/EBPβ Tg mice.
A, B Immunoﬂuorescent staining of Aβ (red) and Th-S (green) in the frontal cortex
region of brains, Th-S (green) and T22 (red) in the hippocampus CA1 region of
brains from 6-month-old AD humanized Abx-treated mice and HC humanized Abx-
treated mice. Scale bar: 40 μm. C Quantitative analysis of Aβ and Th-S positive
plaques (left panel, n = 8 biologically independent samples in each group, data are
shown as mean ± SEM. one-wayANOVAand Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
A high magniﬁcation picture showed Aβ plaques (Arrow) were signiﬁcantly
increased in AD humanized Abx-treated mice brain (right panel, Scale bar: 10 μm).
D Quantitative analysis of T22 and Th-S positive PHFs (left panel, n = 8 biologically
independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM. one-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). A high magniﬁcation picture
showed PHF Tau (Arrowhead) were signiﬁcantly increased in AD humanized Abx-
treated mice brain (right panel, Scale bar:10 μm). E Aβ40 and Aβ42 concentrations in
the cortex of AD or HC humanized Abx-treated mice were measured using mouse
Aβ40 and Aβ42 ELISA kit. the concentration of Aβ42, not Aβ40 was signiﬁcantly
increased in AD humanized Abx-treated mice compared with HC humanized Abx-
treated mice cortex. (n = 5 biologically independent samples in each group, data are
shown asmean ± SEM, one-wayANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
F Enrichment of aggregated Tau and Aβ in the detergent-insoluble fractions of
mouse brains and AD human cortex. Sarkosyl-insoluble fractions were blotted with
antibodies against Aβ (4G8), or Tau T22 for Tau oligomers (representative of 3
mice). G immunogold EM showed the aggregated extracellular Aβ and intracellular
AT8 in the hippocampus neurons of AD or HC humanized Abx-treated mice. Fibrils
like structures (arrows) were highly increased in AD humanized Abx-treated mice
(left panels, Scale bar: 200 nm). Quantitative analysis of Aβ and AT8 positive dots.
(Right panel, n = 5 biologically independent samples in each group, data are shown
as mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
4

from C/EBPβ Tg mice were prominently activated by the brain
lysates or serum from AD-FMT-treated mice (Supplementary Fig. 8).
To identify the molecules accounting for the microglial activation,
we fractionated the supernatant from the cortex tissues from huma-
nized Abx-treated C/EBPβ transgenic mice using HPLC and analyzed
the microglia stimulatory activity using different fractions. Quantita-
tive analysis indicated that fractions #15-#24 exhibited prominent
activities from the brains inoculated with AD-FMT with the climaxed
effect in fractions #16-#17; in contrast, no demonstrable activity was
observed in the same fractions from the brains treated with HC-FMT.
Metabolomics analysis showed that PGE2 was mostly abundant in
these two fractions (Supplementary Fig. 9A, B), suggesting that this
PUFA metabolite might be accountable for the potent microglia sti-
mulatory activity. Next, we quantitatively analyzed the concentrations
of several major PUFA metabolites including AA, LTB4, 12-HHTrE, and
PGE2 in the different tissues from the cortex, serum to the feces.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
5

Interestingly, AA, 12-HHTrE, and PGE2 but not LTB4 were selectively
elevated in the cortex from both WT and C/EBPβ transgenic mice
treated by AD-FMT with the latter much higher than the former
(Supplementary Fig. 9C), and we observed similar but slightly different
distribution patterns between the serum and feces samples (Supple-
mentary Fig. 9D, E). To further conﬁrm the effects of 12-HHTrE and
PGE2 on the activation of microglia and Aβ42 deposition, we included
these two metabolites to in vitro cultured C/EBPβ Tg microglia and
neurons, and found that 12-HHTrE and PGE2 signiﬁcantly augmented
the activation of microglia and elevated neuronal Aβ42 deposition
(Supplementary Fig. 10). To interrogate the roles of C/EBPβ in med-
iating PGE2 metabolite’s effect, we knocked it down with shRNA from
primary neurons, microglia or their mixture and monitored Tau
phosphorylation or neuronal apoptosis upon PGE2 treatment. Deple-
tion of C/EBPβ substantially diminished AT8 and TUNEL activities in
neurons and CD86 signals in primary microglia. Hence, the deletion of
C/EBPβ from primary neuronal cultures or microglia alleviated the
detrimental effects of B. Fragilis metabolite (Supplementary Fig. 11).
Biochemical analysis showed that neuron/microglia mixture displayed
stronger AEP-mediated effects including APP N585, Tau N368 frag-
mentation, and Aβ and AT8 activities elevation by PGE2 than primary
neurons alone, correlated with inﬂammatory cytokines escalation
(Supplementary Fig. 12A, B). Neuronal apoptosis exhibited the similar
pattern, indicating that PGE2 triggered more robust AD pathological
effects in neurons in the presence of microglia (Supplementary
Fig. 12C, D).
Bacteroides fragilis is enriched in AD fecal transplanted
Abx-treated Thy1-C/EBPβ mice
Gut dysbiosis in AD patients stimulates C/EBPβ/AEP pathway, trigger-
ing microglia activation and AA-associated inﬂammation11. To compare
the human-derived gut microbiomes in Abx-treated C/EBPβ transgenic
mice and AD patient fecal samples, we collected the fecal pellets from
humanized C/EBPβ transgenic mice inoculated with two HC and two
AD-FMT. Bacterial DNA was extracted, and 16S rRNA sequence analysis
was performed. The microbiome analysis showed that human gut
microbiota by FMT was successfully established in Abx-treated mice.
At the phyla level, the taxonomic study revealed that the microbial
community of FMT-recipient mice was similar to the microbial phyla of
the human donor inoculum (Supplementary Fig. 13A). In agreement
with our recent study with germ-free 3xTg mice, the recipient mice
successfully harbored 83.3% of the genus-level taxa, which was found
in the donor inoculum. Moreover, the beta diversity analysis principal
coordinate plot (PCoA) indicated that the microbiota of the FMT-
recipient mice was clustered together with their human donor coun-
terparts (Supplementary Fig. 13B). Notably, our study conﬁrmed that
there were no signiﬁcant alterations in the alpha diversity between the
donor and FMT recipient mice. Therefore, these results support the
successful engraftment of human gut microbiota in the Abx-treated
mice. In addition, we found signiﬁcant augmentation in the mean
relative abundances of B. fragilis, B. uniformis, and C. innocuum, while a
signiﬁcant decrease in the mean relative abundances of B. ovatus
(Supplementary Fig. 13C). In our previous study, we found that three
strains of bacteria (B. intestinalis, B. fragilis, and B. xylanivsolvens) are
escalated AD humanized ex-germ-free mice11. B. fragilis was the only
strain that was increased in two independent studies, thus, we chose to
focus on this bacterial strain. Remarkably, quantitative analysis of the
concentrations of AA and its metabolites in the culture medium from
the B. fragilis demonstrated that these bacteria were indeed implicated
in AA metabolism and were responsible for AA metabolites-related
pathologies in Abx-treated mice (Supplementary Fig. 13D, E).
Thy-1 is a neuronal promoter that drives gene expression in the
brain and the gut (enteric neurons). To test whether inoculation of AD
patients’ feces affects the enteric neurons that express C/EBPβ in the
Thy-1-C/EBPβ mouse, we performed p-C/EBPβ/Aβ42 and p-C/EBPβ/AT8
co-IF on the enteric neurons in the gut sections and found that the
enteric neurons were also inﬂuenced by the AD patients’ feces as CNS
neurons in the brain (Supplementary Fig 14). Next, we conducted the
metabolomics and analyzed the lipid metabolism proﬁles for the feces
and brain samples with respect to AD compared to HC humanized Abx-
treated C/EBPβ transgenic mice. For the feces samples, the long-chain
saturated fatty acids including myristate, palmitate, stearate and ara-
chidate, long-chain monounsaturated fatty acid, and most of PUFA
(except docosatrienoate) are all signiﬁcantly increased from 1.5 to 3.5
folds (Supplementary Fig. 15A). For the brain tissues, we analyzed the
metabolomic proﬁles for both C/EBPβ transgenic mice versus WT lit-
termates on the baseline. For most of the fatty acids, the ratios were
around 1, except for a couple of PUFA including docosatrienoate and
dihimo-linoleate revealing 1.75 and 1.5, respectively, suggesting that
neuronal overexpression do not drastically alter the lipid metabolism
proﬁles in Thy1- C/EBPβ transgenic mice as compared to WT controls.
However, the metabolomic proﬁles for the brains appeared sig-
niﬁcantly different with respect to AD compared to HC in humanized
Abx-treated C/EBPβ transgenic mice. We found that the long-chain
saturated fatty acids, long-chain monounsaturated fatty acid, and most
of PUFA (except docosatrienoate and arachidonate) metabolites were
signiﬁcantly higher in the brain by FMT from AD compared to the HC-
FMT group (Supplementary Fig. 15B), supporting that AD gut micro-
biota indeed pronouncedly change the long chain fatty acid, espe-
cially, PUFA metabolism. Therefore, Bacteroides fragilis is selectively
augmented in humanized Abx-C/EBPβ transgenic mice upon AD-FMT,
and this bacteria-mediated PUFA metabolism is escalated in the
animals.
Live Bacteroides fragilis induces AD-like pathologies in Thy1-C/
EBPβ transgenic mice
Identiﬁcation of the molecules accounting for microglia activation
from the serum and brain of humanized Abx-C/EBPβ mice by AD-FMT,
combined with microbiome analysis and metabolomic assay, indicates
that Bacteroides fragilis might play an important role in mediating
microglia activation and AA-associated inﬂammation in the brain of
Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice (Fig. 3). To ascertain that Bacteroides
Fig. 2 | AD humanized Abx-treated mice display increased toxic proteins and
declining cognitive functions compared with HC humanized Abx-treated mice
in WT and C/EBPβ Tg mice. A Immunoblot showing p-C/EBPβ, C/EBPβ, AEP, APP
and tau expression and processing in 6-month-old mouse brains of AD or HC
humanized Abx-treated mice. B Quantitative analysis of immunoblot. The bands of
p-C/EBPβ, C/EBPβ, AEP, AT8, TauN368, and APPN585 were measured with image J
and normalized with β-actin. (n = 5 biologically independent samples in each group,
data are shown as mean ± SEM, two-tailed Student’s t test). C The dendritic spines
from the apical dendritic layer of the hippocampus CA1 region were analyzed by
Golgi staining. Scale bar: 10 μm. D Quantitative analysis of Golgi staining, (n = 5
biologically independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM,
one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). E Electron micro-
scopy analysis of synapses, the number of synapses in CA1 region of AD humanized
Abx-treated mice were decreased compared with HC humanized Abx-treated mice.
Arrows indicate the synapses. Scale bar, 1 μm. F Quantitative analysis of synapses in
CA1, (n = 5 biologically independent samples mice per group, mean ± SEM. one-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). (G & H) Morris Water Maze
analysis of cognitive functions. AD humanized Abx-treated mice exacerbated the
learning and memory dysfunctions, but does not affect motor function. (mean ±
SEM., one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). WT + HC1 (n = 8
biologically independent samples); WT + HC2 (n = 6 biologically independent
samples); WT + AD1 (n = 6 biologically independent samples); WT + AD2 (n = 6
biologically independent samples); Tg+HC1 (n = 6 biologically independent sam-
ples); Tg +HC2 (n = 8 biologically independent samples); Tg +AD1 (n = 8 biologically
independent samples); Tg +AD2 (n = 7 biologically independent samples).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
6

fragilis is indeed accountable for these pathological events, we
inoculated dead or live Bacteroides fragilis into the Abx-pretreated
Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice via oral gavage. In two months, we per-
formed IF co-staining and found that live but not dead Bacteroides
fragilis or control medium stimulated aggregated Aβ in the cortex,
which was ThS positive as well (Fig. 4A, C). Aggregated Tau T22 stain-
ing also validated that live but not dead Bacteroides fragilis elicited Th-
S-positive Tau accumulation in the hippocampal neurons (Fig. 4B, D).
Quantiﬁcation revealed that mouse Aβ42 levels in the brain were sig-
niﬁcantly elevated by live but not dead Bacteroides fragilis, while
mouse Aβ40 concentrations remained unchanged regardless of what
treatment (Fig. 4E). IB analysis showed that live Bacteroides fragilis
strongly induced Aβ production and aggregation as compared to
medium or dead bacteria-treated samples. Remarkably, T22 immu-
noblotting showed aggregated p-Tau was demonstrable in the mice
after live but not dead Bacteroides fragilis treatment (Fig. 4F). Silver
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
7

staining conﬁrmed that extensive protein inclusions were con-
spicuously increased in the cortex and the hippocampus from live but
not dead Bacteroides fragilis-treated mice, indicating widespread
pathological Aβ and Tau accumulations in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic
mice (Fig. 4G, H). Golgi staining disclosed robust dendritic spine
decrease after live but not dead Bacteroides fragilis treatment (Fig. 4I).
EM analysis also exhibited the similar synapse reduction pattern by live
Bacteroides fragilis (Fig. 4J, K). In alignment with the massive synaptic
degeneration, cognitive behavioral tests demonstrated that live Bac-
teroides fragilis treatment signiﬁcantly abrogated the learning and
memory functions of Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice (Fig. 4L, M). Hence,
Bacteroides fragilis alone is sufﬁcient to provoke AD-like pathologies
and cognitive defects in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice.
Bacteroides fragilis activates microglia and augments PUFA
metabolites
AD gut microbiota activates C/EBPβ/AEP signaling in germ-free 3xTg
mice11 and Abx-treated C/EBPβ transgenic mice (Figs. 2 and 3). As
expected, IF co-staining demonstrated that live Bacteroides fragilis
treatment prominently upregulated C/EBPβ expression in Iba-1-
positive microglia in the hippocampus as compared to dead bacteria
or medium control (Fig. 5A, B). Iba-1 and CD86 co-staining validated
that live Bacteroides fragilis strongly activated microglia as showed by
the augmented diameter of the nucleus, decreased branch points, and
lengths of the microglial processes when compared with medium and
dead bacteria (Fig. 5C, D). Consequently, pro-inﬂammatory cytokines
including IL-6 and IL-1β levels were signiﬁcantly escalated by live but
not dead Bacteroides fragilis, though TNFα concentrations were not
different among the groups (Fig. 5E). In vitro quantiﬁcation study
disclosed that Bacteroides fragilis swiftly metabolized AA into a variety
of PUFA derivatives (Supplementary Fig. 13D, E). Accordingly, in vivo
quantitative analysis with bacteria-inoculated mouse brains showed
that live but not dead Bacteroides fragilis potently augmented AA, 12-
HHTrE, and PGE2 concentrations, whereas LTB4 levels remained
unchanged (Fig. 5F). Thus, oral administration of Bacteroides fragilis
strongly escalates C/EBPβ and activates microglia in Thy1-C/EBPβ
transgenic mice, associated with augmented proinﬂammatory cyto-
kines and AA-derived 12-HHTrE and PGE2 metabolites.
12-HHTrE or PGE2 treatment induces AD-like pathologies and
cognitive defects in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice
The inﬂammatory cyclooxygenase-PGE2 pathway is implicated in the
pre-clinical development of AD, both in the epidemiology of normal
aging populations and in transgenic mouse models of Familial AD40.
Both 12-HHTrE and PGE2 are metabolized from PGH2, which is derived
from AA by COX-1/2. To explore whether these metabolites from PUFA
by Bacteroides fragilis induce AD-like pathologies, we treated Thy1-C/
EBPβ transgenic mice via i.p. (intraperitoneal) injection of the diluted
12-HHTrE, or PGE2 solution at the dose of 5 mg/kg twice a week for
4 weeks. IF co-staining showed that both compounds elicited appar-
ently Aβ aggregated signals in the cortex, which were ThS positive with
PGE2 much stronger than 12-HHTrE (Fig. 6A, C). T22 staining also
validated that both metabolites provoked p-Tau aggregates in the
hippocampus. Again, PGE2 displayed much more robust activity than
12-HHTrE (Fig. 6B, D). Consistent with Aβ IF staining activities, ELISA
quantiﬁcation revealed that PGE2 signiﬁcantly induced mouse Aβ42
production as compared to 12-HHTrE, which also displayed a much
stronger effect than vehicle control. By contrast, Aβ40 concentrations
remained constant, no matter whether the mice were treated with
which compound or vehicle (Fig. 6E). IB analysis with anti-Aβ 4G8
echoed mouse Aβ42 levels by ELISA with PGE2 exhibiting stronger
effect than 12-HHTrE. Anti-T22 displayed the similar pattern with PGE2
more robust than 12-HHTrE in triggering p-Tau aggregation (Fig. 6F). In
agreement with the IB results, silver staining showed that both PGE2
and 12-HHTrE triggered abundant protein inclusions in the cortex and
the hippocampus with the latter stronger than the former (Fig. 6G, H).
Golgi staining and EM studies supported that both metabolites sig-
niﬁcantly elicited synaptic degeneration with PGE2 stronger than 12-
HHTrE (Fig. 6I–K). Accordingly, MWM tests indicated that both
metabolites signiﬁcantly impaired cognitive functions with PGE2 more
potent than 12-HHTrE, ﬁtting with their pathological effects, although
none of them affected the swimming speed (Fig. 6L, M). Thus, PGE2
exhibits a stronger effect in provoking AD-like pathologies and cog-
nitive defects than 12-HHTrE in Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice.
12-HHTrE or PGE2 treatment elicits microglia activation and
elevates PUFA levels in the brain of Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice
To interrogate whether these metabolites mimic AD-FMT or Bacter-
oides fragilis in activating C/EBPβ in microglia and microglia activation,
we conducted IF co-staining and validated that Iba-1 positive microglia
cells in the hippocampus from Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice were
highly increased upon 12-HHTrE or PGE2 stimulation, accompanied
with escalation of C/EBPβ (Fig. 7A, B). Iba-1 and CD86 co-staining
revealed that both compounds strongly agitated microglia, which were
conﬁrmed by quantitative analysis of the diameters, branch points,
and branch length (Fig. 7C, D). As a result, these proinﬂammatory PUFA
metabolites
signiﬁcantly
increased
both
IL-6
and
IL-1β,
with
PGE2 stronger than 12-HHTrE, though TNFα levels remained constant
(Fig. 7E). Correspondingly, PGE2 levels in the brain were the highest in
mice treated with PGE2, 12-HHTrE concentrations were the highest in
mice treated with the same compounds. Noticeably, AA levels were
signiﬁcantly elevated by both metabolites, whereas LTB4 quantities
remained comparable among the groups (Fig. 7F). To explore whether
depletion of microglia confers protection in the AD inoculated mice,
we fed Thy1-C/EBPβ Tg mice with PLX3397 (CSF1R Inhibitor)41 to delete
microglia, followed by PGE2 treatment, and found that deletion of
microglia from Thy1-C/EBPβ Tg mice attenuated PGE2-induced AD
pathologies (Supplementary Fig. 16). Together, these ﬁndings support
that Bacteroides fragilis abundant in AD patient gut microbiomes may
activate C/EBPβ/AEP pathway and stimulate microglia activation via
PGE2 and 12-HHTrE, two major metabolites from PUFA by these
bacteria.
Fig. 3 | AD humanized Abx-treated mice display increased activated microglia
and inﬂammatory cytokines compared with HC humanized Abx-treated mice
in WT and C/EBPβ Tg mice. A Immunoﬂuorescent staining of Iba-1 (red) and C/
EBPβ (green) in the hippocampus CA1 region of the 6-month-old mice brains from
AD or HC humanized Abx-treated mice. Scale bar: 40 μm. B Quantitative analysis of
Iba-1 optical density (n = 8 biologically independent samples in each group, data are
shown asmean ± SEM, one-wayANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
C The high magniﬁcation of immunoﬂuorescent staining of Iba-1 (green) and CD86
(red) positive microglia in the hippocampus CA1 region of the brains from AD or HC
humanized Abx-treated mice. Scale bar: 40 μm. D Quantitative analysis of diameter,
number of branch points, and total branch length in Iba-1 (green) positive micro-
glia. (n = 8 biologically independent samples in each group, data are shown as
mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
E Proinﬂammatory cytokine IL-1β, IL-6 and TNFα concentrations in the brain lysates
from AD or HC humanized Abx-treated mice, respectively. (n = 5 biologically
independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). F Immunoblot showing ara-
chidonic acid metabolism products LOX-5, COX-1, COX-2, BLT-1, BLT-2, and PTGES
expression and processing in mouse brains of AD or HC humanized Abx-treated
mice. G Quantitative analysis of immunoblot. The bands of LOX-5, COX-1, COX-2,
BLT-1, BLT-2, and PTGES were measured with image J and normalized with β-actin.
(n = 5 biologically independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ±
SEM, two-tailed Student’s t test). H Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of the brain
samples from AD or HC humanized Abx-treated mice. Comparing C/EBPβ targeted
arachidonic acid pathway genes. (n = 3 in each group, data are shown as mean ±
SEM, two-tailed Student’s t test).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
8

Discussion
In the current work, we discover that Bacteroides fragilis bacteria is
enriched in AD gut microbiota, which might be accountable for trig-
gering AD-like pathologies associated with obvious microglia activa-
tion
in
Thy1-C/EBPβ
transgenic
mice,
leading
to
cognitive
dysfunctions. Depending on the analysis method, SPF mice usually
harbor between 400 and 1000 bacterial strains in their gut
microbiota42. Employing microbiome analysis from Abx-treated mice
inoculated with AD-FMT, we identify that Bacteroides fragilis and sev-
eral other strains were strongly augmented. Interestingly, the same
strain was also identiﬁed in our recent study with germ-free 3xTg AD
mice inoculated with the AD gut microbiota11. Moreover, Bacteroides in
the human subject’s cohort where the AD samples originated, not only
for this study but also in our prior report11, were identiﬁed in higher
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
9

abundance among AD patients with Bacteroides fragilis, in particular,
being a top strain of AD among the cohort examined10. These ﬁndings
therefore suggest that Bacteroides fragilis might implicate in triggering
C/EBPβ/AEP pathway and microglia activation, resulting in demon-
strable
aggregated
Aβ
and
Tau
pathologies
and
extensive
neuroinﬂammation.
Microglia play a crucial role in the clearance of these toxic protein
assemblies43. However, with the progression of disease, notably in AD
models, the healthy phagocytic responses of microglia to Aβ peptides
fade away, either because microglia become ineffective or because
they are overwhelmed by levels of accumulating Aβ peptides. In par-
allel with the progression of pathology in AD model mice, microglia
also develop a more toxic inﬂammatory phenotype44, leading to a
damaging feed-forward cycle, with increasing buildup of toxic Aβ
peptide assemblies along with escalated toxic cytokines. The pro-
nounced microglia activation in both germ-free 3xTg mice and Abx-
treated C/EBPβ transgenic mice upon AD-FMT called our attention in
searching for the bioactive metabolites responsible for microglia sti-
mulatory effect (Supplementary Figs. 4–8). Employing primary rat
microglia activation assay, we identiﬁed that AA-derived two meta-
bolites 12-HHTrE and PGE2 from the serum or brain samples from Abx-
treated mice inoculated with AD-FMT were tightly coupled with
microglia stimulatory activities (Supplementary Fig. 9). Interestingly,
Bacteroides fragilis swiftly metabolized AA into various PUFA meta-
bolites including 12-HHTrE and PGE2 (Supplementary Fig. 13D, E).
Metabolomic analysis, combined with the HPLC study, demonstrated
that PUFA metabolism was signiﬁcantly elevated in the brain and feces
from the mice after AD-FMT inoculation (Supplementary Fig. 16).
Administration of these bioactive compounds into Thy1-C/EBPβ
transgenic mice essentially recapitulated what we observed with AD-
FMT or Bacteroides fragilis alone, underscoring that AD gut microbiota
or Bacteroides fragilis-elicited AD-like pathologies and cognitive dys-
functions might be exerted via PGE2 or 12-HHTrE, which stimulated
microglia activation and extensive neuroinﬂammation (Figs. 6 and 7).
Activated microglia exhibit diverse phenotypes and have multi-
faceted interactions with Aβ and tau species as well as with neuronal
circuits. Active microglia exert various inﬂuences on the progression
of AD, depending on the stage of disease, individual susceptibility, and
state of microglial priming. Microglia could potentially be modulated
at various points in the AD trajectory to either prevent or modify dis-
ease progression45. Highly ramiﬁed microglia can change to an ame-
boid form on pathological stimulation46,47. Microglia in aging brains
have reduced branching that reduces their area of surveillance, which
might contribute to the impairment of homeostatic functions48–50.
Microglia in Braak stage V–VI brains display more profound morpho-
logical changes than do at earlier stages51. The temporal diversity of
microglial morphology could be attributed to the intensity and dura-
tion of the pathological environment52 but could also be related to the
differential responses of microglia to different stimuli such as Aβ or
Tau aggregation53. We show that the activated microglia, validated by
Iba-1 and CD86 co-staining, reveal short processes in the brain with
extensive aggregated Aβ and Tau pathologies in Thy1-C/EBPβ trans-
genic mice after AD-FMT, Bacteroides fragilis or PUFA metabolites
treatment (Figs. 3, 5 and 7).
In addition to promoting the production of inﬂammatory med-
iators, C/EBP family members are themselves induced by the classical
pro-inﬂammatory triad of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα54–56, all of which are
signiﬁcantly increased in pathologically impacted regions of the AD
brain1. It remains unclear why TNFα levels were stable in these animals
regardless of the stimulation. Under AD-FMT treatment, we observed
evident C/EBPβ/AEP signaling activation, accompanied by discernable
APP N585 and Tau N368 fragmentation (Fig. 2A, B), which were in
alignment with elevated mouse Aβ42 and aggregated Aβ and Tau
(Fig.
1).
C/EBPβ
regulates
numerous
gene
expression
in
neuroinﬂammation17,37.
Accordingly,
C/EBPβ
levels
are
highly
increased in Iba-1 positive microglia cells in the brains of mice inocu-
lated with AD-FMT, or treatment with live Bacteroides fragilis or 12-
HHTrE/PGE2 (Figs. 3A, 5A and 7A). The activated C/EBPβ is further
validated by IB with p-C/EBPβ and downstream target AEP (Fig. 2A, B).
Noticeably, the mRNA transcription of the major enzymes implicating
in AA metabolism including ALOX5, PTGS1, and PTGES (Fig. 3H). These
ﬁndings are consistent with previous reports that the expression of
COXs and LOX-5 and PTGES are mediated by C/EBPβ37–39,57. The aug-
mented enzymes upregulate various AA metabolites including PGE2
and 12-HHT etc., which feedback to stimulate microglia activation,
further escalating neuroinﬂammation. In alignment with 12-HHTrE
augmentation, its receptor BLT2 levels are evidently escalated in both
WT and C/EBPβ transgenic mice by AD-FMT.
The release of pro-inﬂammatory molecules can lead to synaptic
dysfunction, neuronal death, and inhibition of neurogenesis58. For
instance, IL-1β induces synaptic loss by increasing prostaglandin E2
(PGE2) production, which leads to presynaptic glutamate release and
postsynaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor activation59. In
addition, the complement system is activated, promoting the phago-
cytic function of microglia, which might result in inappropriate prun-
ing of synapses60. We observed that IL-1β was signiﬁcantly elevated in
the brain of Thy1-C/EBPβ transgenic mice, when they were treated with
AD-FMT, live Bacteroides fragilis, or 12-HHTrE/PGE2 (Figs. 3E, 5E and
7E). In consequence, the dendritic spines and synapses in these ani-
mals were severely degenerated, resulting in substantial cognitive
deﬁcits (Figs. 2F, G; 4L, M, 6L, M). On the other hand, IL-6, a major
downstream target of C/EBPβ, is also highly augmented, mirroring the
IL-1β oscillation.
COX-1 and COX-2, which are capable of converting AA to pros-
taglandin H2 (PGH2), show a differential cell type-speciﬁc expression
in the adult mammalian brain. COX-1 is constitutively expressed in
most tissues and in the brain predominantly in microglia26. On the
other hand, in the brain, COX-2 is constitutively expressed in
Fig. 4 | Live bacteria treated mice display increased AD pathologies and
impaired cognitive functions compared with control mice in C/EBPβ Tg mice.
A, B Immunoﬂuorescent staining of Aβ (red) in the frontal cortex region of brains,
and T22 (red) in the hippocampus CA1 region of brains from 6-month-old Abx-
treated C/EBPβ Tg mice after medium, dead bacteria, or live bacteria (Bacteroides
fragilis) gavage for 2 months. Scale bar: 40 μm. C, D Quantitative analysis of positive
plaques and PHFs (left panel, n = 8 biologically independent samples/group, data
are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison
test). E Mouse Aβ40 and Aβ42 ELISA. The concentration of Aβ42, not Aβ40 was
signiﬁcantly increased in Bacteroides fragilis gavage Abx-treated C/EBPβ Tg mice
compared with medium, or dead bacteria gavage Abx-treated C/EBPβ Tg mice
cortex. (n = 5 biologically independent samples/group, data are shown as mean ±
SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). F Sarkosyl-
insoluble fractions were blotted with antibodies against Aβ (4G8), or Tau T22 for
Tau oligomers (representative of 3 mice). G Silver staining in cortex and
hippocampus. Scale bar: 50 μm. H Quantitative analysis of G (n = 8 biologically
independent samples/group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA and
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). I The dendritic spines from the apical
dendritic layer of the hippocampus CA1 region were analyzed by Golgi staining.
(Upper panel, Scale bar: 10 μm). Quantitative analysis of Golgi staining (n = 8 bio-
logically independent samples/group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test) (lower panel). J Electron
microscopy analysis of synapses. Arrows indicate the synapses. Scale bar, 1 μm.
K Quantitative analysis of synapses in CA1, (n = 5 biologically independent samples/
group, mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
L, M Morris Water Maze analysis of cognitive functions. Abx-treated C/EBPβ Tg
mice after live bacteria (Bacteroides fragilis) gavage exacerbated the learning and
memory dysfunctions, but did not affect motor function. (mean ± SEM.; n = 7 bio-
logically independent samples/group, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple
comparison test).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
10

hippocampal neurons and their dendritic spines. Neuronal COX-2
expression is modiﬁed by synaptic activity61 as well as by pathological
conditions including the Aβ-triggered neurotoxicity62. Depending
upon the differential cellular localization of COX-1 and COX-2, the
subsequent conversion of PGH2 into other active molecules may lead
to dissimilar ultimate products of COX-1 vs. COX-2 activity. The
cyclooxygenase-PGE2 pathway modulates the inﬂammatory response
to accumulating Aß peptides through actions of speciﬁc E-prostanoid
G-protein coupled receptors. PGE2 binds four G-protein coupled
receptors (GPCRs) termed E-prostanoid receptors (EP1-4) that have
distinct downstream signaling cascades and cellular distributions in
the brain. In vivo, all four EP receptors are expressed in neurons;
microglial expression of EP2, EP3, and EP4 receptors is validated in
mouse
brain63–65.
Phenotypic
changes
in
microglia,
including
Fig. 5 | Live bacteria treated mice display increased activated microglia and
inﬂammatory cytokines compared with control mice in C/EBPβ Tg mice.
A Immunoﬂuorescent staining of Iba-1 (red) and C/EBPβ (green) in the hippo-
campus CA1 region of the brains from 6-month-old Abx-treated C/EBPβ Tg mice
after medium, dead bacteria, or live bacteria (Bacteroides fragilis) gavage for
2 months. Scale bar: 40 μm. B Quantitative analysis of Iba-1 optical density (n = 8
biologically independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM,
one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). C The high magniﬁ-
cation of immunoﬂuorescent staining of Iba-1 (green) and CD86 (red) positive
microglia in the hippocampus CA1 region of the brains from Abx-treated C/EBPβ Tg
mice after medium, dead bacteria, or live bacteria (Bacteroides fragilis) gavage for
2 months. Scale bar: 40 μm. D Quantitative analysis of diameter, number of branch
points, and total branch length in Iba-1 (green) positive microglia. (n = 8 biologically
independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). E proinﬂammatory cytokine IL-
1β, IL- 6 and TNFα concentrations in the brain lysates from Abx-treated C/EBPβ Tg
mice after medium, dead bacteria, or live bacteria (Bacteroides fragilis) gavage for
2 months, respectively. (n = 5 biologically independent samples in each group, data
are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison
test). F Concentrations of arachidonic acid (AA) and its metabolites in Abx-treated
C/EBPβ Tg mice after medium, dead bacteria, or live bacteria (Bacteroides fragilis)
gavage cortex. (n = 5 biologically independent samples in each group, data are
shown asmean ± SEM, one-wayANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
11

alterations in morphology, proteomic signatures, and behavior, are
associated with disease progression66. Employing rat primary micro-
glia morphology assay, we identiﬁed two COX-1/2 metabolites 12-
HHTrE and PGE2 from the serum or brain of Abx-treated mice inocu-
lated with AD-FMT (Supplementary Fig. 9), which exhibit robust
microglia activation in the brain (Fig. 3C, D). The receptors by which
microglia recognize Aβ species are mostly pattern recognition recep-
tors, including Toll-like receptors, CD14, CD47, α6β1 integrin, and
scavenger receptors (including CD36). In turn, these receptors activate
molecular pathways that induce microglial phenotypic changes67–69.
Conceivably, the EP receptors on microglia cells might mediate these
two metabolites’ pathological effects including microglia morphology
in vitro and in mouse brains.
Epidemiological
studies
support
the
possibility
that
anti-
inﬂammatory drugs delay the onset and possible progression of AD.
Anti-inﬂammatory treatment, including NSAIDs and steroids, might
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
12

decrease the risk of AD by as much as 50%70. Nevertheless, inhibition of
COX enzymatic activity by NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs) has different consequences depending on the timing of AD
development, and inhibition of COX-1/COX-2 by non-selective NSAIDs
is beneﬁcial in preventing disease in healthy aging individuals but
ineffectual once symptoms begin71,72. In epidemiologic studies of
cognitively normal aging populations, NSAIDs prevent and delay the
development of AD73–75. Together, our study supports that gut dys-
biosis in AD patients, especially B. fragilis enrichment and it’s PUFA
metabolites PGE2 and 12-HHTrE abundance, triggers C/EBPβ/AEP sig-
naling activation, leading to AD-like pathologies in Thy1-C/EBPβ
transgenic mice. Imaginably, pretreatment with NSAID on the pro-
dromal AD B. fragilis carriers may signiﬁcantly prevent or slow down
AD onset and progression.
Methods
Ethical approval
The mice experimental protocol was reviewed and approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Emory Uni-
versity (DAR3000226ELMNTS-N). For the human fecal samples, we have
received the written informed consent from the participants for the use
of samples and data for this present research. This study was approved
by the UMass Chan Medical School Institutional Review Board (IRB) at
the University of Massachusetts Medical School (docket H00010892).
Animals
For the generation of Thy1-human C/EBPβ transgenic mouse of C57BL/6J
background, mouse genomic fragments containing homology arms
(HAs) were ampliﬁed from bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome (BAC) clone
by using high ﬁdelity Taq, and were sequentially assembled into a tar-
geting vector together with recombination sites and selection markers.
After conﬁrming correctly targeted ES clones via Southern Blotting, we
selected some clones for blastocyst microinjection, followed by founder
production. Founders were conﬁrmed as germline-transmitted via
crossbreeding with wild-type. In the end, male and female F1 hetero-
zygous mutant mice were conﬁrmed as the ﬁnal deliverables for this
project. The C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Jax lab (Cat#: 000664).
These mice were free access to sterile water and food with 5 mice/ cage.
They were kept in a speciﬁc pathogen-free (SPF) condition with 20–25 °C
temperature and 45–55% humidity on a regular 12-h light/dark cycle.
Abx gavage
The antibiotic cocktail was comprised of four antibiotics and one
antifungal (ampicillin (100 mg/kg), vancomycin (50 mg/kg), metroni-
dazole (100 mg/kg), neomycin (100 mg/kg), amphotericin B (1 mg/
kg)). This protocol was maintained for 30 days. This cocktail was made
fresh every 36 h. Previous studies show that this method of antibiotic
administration is the most effective in depleting the microbiome with
minimal effects on the morbidity and mortality of the animal76.
Primary cultured neuron and microglia
All pregnant C/EBPβ Tg mice are self-bred, all pregnant rats were
purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. The protocol was reviewed
and approved by the Emory Institutional Animal Care and Use Com-
mittee. Primary mouse cortical neurons, were isolated from E18 mice.
Brain tissues were dissected, dissociated, and incubated with 5 ml of
D-Hanks containing 0.25% trypsin for 5 min, centrifuged at 1000 g for
5 min after the addition of 4 ml of the neuronal plating medium con-
taining Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium/F12 with 10% fetal bovine
serum. Then, the cells were resuspended, about 5 × 105 cells were
plated onto each well of 12-well plates for WB, and 1 × 105 cells
were plated onto each glass coverslip for cell imaging. The neurons
were then put into a humidiﬁed incubator with 5% CO2 at 37 °C. The
medium was changed to neurobasal medium supplemented with 2%
B27 (maintenance medium) after 2 to 4 h. Neurons at 11 to 13 DIV were
treated with drugs. For primary rat microglia, brieﬂy, coat two T-75
culture ﬂasks with 7 ml each of 10 μg/ml PDL for 2 h. Wash the ﬂask
bottom with distilled water 3 times before use. Tissues were dissected,
dissociated, and incubated with 5 ml of D-Hanks containing 0.25%
trypsin for 10 min, centrifuged at 1000 × g for 5 min after. Aspirate the
supernatant and resuspend the pellet. Then plate each tube of cells
into one coated T-75 ﬂask at the density of 50,000 cells/cm2. Add
culture media (10% FBS/DMEM + 1% Pen/Strep) to reach a volume of
15 ml in the ﬂasks. Put seeded ﬂasks into an incubator with 5% CO2,
100% humidity at 37 °C. Change culture media every 5 days. To collect
microglia, vigorously tap the ﬂasks on the bench top and collect the
ﬂoating cells in conditioned culture media. Use a hemocytometer to
count the ﬂoating cell density and seed the cells at 50,000 cells/cm2 in
PDL-coated culture vessels. The microglial is ready to use the next day.
Human donor and criteria
The Frozen fecal samples obtained from 4 donors (2 AD and 2 HC
(healthy control) were generously provided by Dr. John P. Haran and
Dr. Beth A. McCormick. The human feces samples were collected from
nursing home elders who are 65 years of age and lived in one of four
nursing home facilities located in central Massachusetts. All the elders
had been living at that facility for 1 month and did not have any diar-
rheal illness or antimicrobial exposure within the preceding 4 weeks.
No elders suffered from dysphagia or had a feeding tube. Any elders
with antimicrobial exposure or diarrheal illness during the conduct of
the study were excluded from this analysis. Human donor selection
criteria were as described previously10.
12-HHTrE and PGE2 treatment
12-HHTrE and PGE2 (Cayman chemicals, 10 mg/ml) were brought to
room temperature right before being used and diluted with sterilized
1xPBS to 1 mg/ml. Thy1-C/EBPβ Tg mice received IP injection of the
diluted 12-HHTrE or PGE2 solution immediately at the dose of 5 mg/kg
twice a week for 4 weeks.
Fig. 6 | 12-HHTrE and PGE2 treated mice display increased AD pathologies and
impaired cognitive functions in C/EBPβ Tg mice. A, B Immunoﬂuorescent
staining of Aβ (red) in the frontal cortex region of brains, and T22 (red) in the
hippocampus CA1 region of brains from 6-month-old vehicle, 12-HHTrE, or PGE2-
treated C/EBPβ Tg mice. Mice received IP injection of the diluted 12-HHTrE, or
PGE2 solution at the dose of 5 mg/kg twice a week for 4 weeks. Scale bar: 40 μm.
C, D Quantitative analysis of positive plaques and PHFs (left panel, n = 8 biologically
independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). E Mouse Aβ40 and Aβ42 ELISA.
(n = 5 biologically independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ±
SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). F Sarkosyl-
insoluble fractions were blotted with antibodies against Aβ (4G8), or Tau T22 for
Tau oligomers (representative of 3 mice). G Silver staining in cortex and hippo-
campus. Scale bar: 50 μm. H Quantitative analysis of (G). (n = 8 biologically inde-
pendent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA
and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). I The dendritic spines from the apical
dendritic layer of the hippocampus CA1 region were analyzed by Golgi staining.
(upper panel, Scale bar: 10 μm). Quantitative analysis of Golgi staining (n = 8 bio-
logically independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-
way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test) (lower panel). J Electron
microscopy analysis of synapses, the number of synapses in CA1 region of 12-
HHTrE, or PGE2-treated C/EBPβ Tg mice were decreased compared with vehicle-
treated mice. Arrows indicate the synapses. Scale bar, 1 μm. K Quantitative analysis
of synapses in CA1, (n = 5 biologically independent samples per group, mean ± SEM,
one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). L, M Morris Water
Maze analysis of cognitive functions. 12-HHTrE, or PGE2-treated C/EBPβ Tg mice
exacerbated the learning and memory dysfunctions, but does not affect motor
function. (mean ± SEM.; n = 7 biologically independent samples per group, one-way
ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
13

Immuno-staining
Treated microglia or cryo-sections of mouse brain were ﬁxed with 4%
PFA (Paraformaldehyde) for 10 min followed by 3 times wash in PBS,
10 min 0.5% Triton X-100 and 30 min blocking in 1% BSA, as well as
the overnight incubation with Iba-1 antibody (VWR, 1:200) and C/
EBPβ antibody (H-7, 1:200) at 4 °C. To detect the localization of Aβ,
the slides were incubated with Aβ antibody (1:200) at 4 °C. To detect
the localization of T22, the slides were incubated with T22 (1:500) at
4 °C. After overnight incubation, the slides were washed three times
in PBS and incubated with Texas Red Red-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG
or FITC-conjugated anti-mouse IgG for 1 h at room temperature or
0.0125% Thioﬂavin-S in 50% ethanol for 5 min. The slides were
Fig. 7 | 12-HHTrE and PGE2 treated mice display increased activated microglia
and inﬂammatory cytokines in C/EBPβ Tg mice. A Immunoﬂuorescent staining
of Iba-1 (red) and C/EBPβ (green) in the hippocampus CA1 region of the brains from
6-month-old vehicle, 12-HHTrE, or PGE2-treated C/EBPβ Tg mice. Scale bar: 40 μm.
B Quantitative analysis of Iba-1 optical density (n = 8 biologically independent
samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bon-
ferroni’s multiple comparison test). C The high magniﬁcation of immuno-
ﬂuorescent staining of Iba-1 (green) and CD86 (red) positive microglia in the
hippocampus CA1 region of the brains from vehicle, 12-HHTrE, or PGE2-treated C/
EBPβ Tg mice. Scale bar: 40 μm. D Quantitative analysis of diameter, number of
branch points, and total branch length in Iba-1 (green) positive microglia. (n = 8
biologically independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM,
one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). E Proinﬂammatory
cytokine IL-1β, IL-6 and TNFα concentrations in the brain lysates from vehicle, 12-
HHTrE, or PGE2-treated C/EBPβ Tg mice, respectively. (n = 5 biologically indepen-
dent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ± SEM, one-way ANOVA and
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test). F Concentrations of arachidonic acid (AA)
and its metabolites in vehicle, 12-HHTrE, or PGE2-treated C/EBPβ Tg mice cortex.
(n = 5 biologically independent samples in each group, data are shown as mean ±
SEM, one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
14

washed three times in PBS, then covered with a glass cover using a
mounting solution, and analyzed under a ﬂuorescence microscope
(Olympus).
Golgi staining
Mice brains were ﬁxed in 10% formalin for 24 h, and then immersed in
3% potassium bichromate for 3 days in the dark. The solution was
changed each day. Then the brains were transferred into 2% silver
nitrate solution and incubated for 24 h in the dark. Vibratome sections
were cut at 60 μm, air dried for 10 min, dehydrated through 95% and
100% ethanol, cleared in xylene and cover-slipped. For the measure-
ment of spine density, only spines that emerged perpendicular to the
dendritic shaft were counted.
Gallyas silver staining
Silver staining was performed using the Gallyas method. After de-
parafﬁnization, 5-µm sections were incubated in 5% periodic acid for
5 min, washed in water, and then placed in an alkaline silver iodide
solution (containing 1% silver nitrate) for 1 min. The sections were then
washed in 0.5% acetic acid for 10 min, and placed in developer solution
for 15 min, before washing with 0.5% acetic acid, then water. The sec-
tions were then treated with 0.1% gold chloride for 5 min before
washing in water, and incubated in 1% sodium thiosulphate (hypo) for
5 min, before a ﬁnal wash77.
Real-time PCR
RNAs from tissues were isolated with Trizol. After reverse transcription
with SuperScriptIII reverse transcriptase, Real-time PCR reactions were
performed using the ABI 7500-Fast Real-Time PCR System, Gene-
speciﬁc primers and TaqMan Universal Master Mix Kit were designed
and bought from Taqman (please ﬁnd the details in Table 1). All kits
and reagents were purchased from Life Technologies. 2−ΔΔCt method
was used for the relative quantiﬁcation of gene expression. For each
data point, at least 2 duplicated wells were used.
Detergent-insoluble protein aggregates preparation for
Western blots
The soluble and insoluble proteins were extracted following protocol78
and then were analyzed by Western blots.
Western Blotting
The tissues were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer
(20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 150 mM NaCl,
2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate,
1 mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate) with protease inhibitor
cocktail for 20 min on ice. The supernatant was collected by cen-
trifuging at 14,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C. Then the protein extract
was diluted to 5 mg/ml. After electrophoresis, the samples were
incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibody, followed by
immunoblotting. Please ﬁnd the primary antibodies in Table 1.
Uncropped and unprocessed scans of the blots were shown as
Source Data.
ELISA quantiﬁcation
The tissues were diluted with cold reaction buffer (PBS, 5% BSA,
0.03% Tween-20, protease inhibitor cocktail), and centrifuged at
16,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. Then analyzed with mouse Aβ40/42, IL-6,
TNFα, IL-1β, PGE2, and LTB4 ELISA kit according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions.
Proinﬂammatory cytokines ELISA
Themice braintissuewas lysedin lysis buffer(50 mMTris, pH 7.4,40 mM
NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1.5 mM Na3VO4, 50 mM NaF, 10 mM
sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate, supple-
mented with protease inhibitors cocktail), and centrifuged for 15 min at
16,000 g. Then the supernatants were analyzed by IL-6, TNFα, and IL-1β
ELISA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines concentrations were determined by compar-
ison with the standard curve.
Protocol for microbiota analysis
DNA was extracted from stool samples (n = 5 mice per group) using a
PowerSoil kit from MO BIO Laboratories (Carlsbad, CA). 16 S rRNA
genes were PCR-ampliﬁed from each sample using a composite for-
ward primer and a reverse primer containing a unique 12-base barcode,
designed using the Golay error-correcting scheme, which was used to
tag PCR products from respective samples. We used primers for
paired-end 16 S community sequencing on the Illumina platform using
bacteria/archaeal primer 515 F/806 R. Primers were speciﬁc for the V4
region of the 16 S rRNA gene. The forward PCR primer sequence
contained the sequence for the 5′ Illumina adapter, the forward primer
pad, the forward primer linker, and the forward primer sequence. Each
reverse PCR primer sequence contained the reverse complement of
the 3′ Illumina adapter, the Golay barcode (each sequence contained a
different barcode), the reverse primer pad, the reverse primer linker,
and the reverse primer. Three independent PCR reactions were per-
formed for each sample, combined, and puriﬁed with AMPure mag-
netic puriﬁcation beads (Agencourt). The products were quantiﬁed,
and a master DNA pool was generated from the puriﬁed products in
equimolar ratios. The pooled products were sequenced using an Illu-
mina MiSeq sequencing platform. Bioinformatics analysis was per-
formed using QIIME2 (Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology,
r2023.2). Sequences were assigned to OTUs with UPARSE using 97%
pairwise identity and were classiﬁed taxonomically using the RDP
classiﬁer retrained with Greengenes. After chimera removal, the aver-
age number of reads per sample was 21,511. A single representative
sequence for each OTU was aligned using PyNAST 1.0, and a phylo-
genetic tree was then built using FastTree. The phylogenetic tree was
used to compute the UniFrac distances. The PCoA analysis shown is
unweighted. The raw sequence data reported in this paper have been
deposited in the DDBJ (accession number: SSUB021355).
In vitro anaerobic bacteria culture experiment
Bacteroides fragilis (25285, ATCC) was cultured in the chopped meat
medium (AS-811, AnaerobeSystems) and incubated at 37 °C in Bio-bag
with the GasPak™EZ Gas Generating Container Systems (260001,
Gaspak EZ W/Indicator, BD). For the arachidonic acid metabolism
assay, the above bacteria were grown in a medium added with or
without 62.5 μM arachidonic acid. 72 h later, the medium from each
culture was collected for the HPLC analysis or ELISA assay.
HPLC quantitative analysis of arachidonic acid and its
metabolites
Solid phase extraction (SPE) sample preparation: Samples were cen-
trifuged for 15 min at 4000 rpm at 4 °C to remove bacteria and media
pellets. 10 ml of the supernatant was collected and 10 µl of formic acid
and 1 ml of methanol were added to bring the media to contain 10%
methanol and 1% formic acid. The samples were sat on ice for at least
15 mins to allow protein precipitation. The samples were centrifuged
for 15 min at 4000 rpm at 4 °C to remove any precipitations.
As for the control media without inoculating bacteria, the stock
standards were added to bring the standard concentration to x50,
X100 and X1000 of the stock concentration. The stock concentrations
of PGE2, Arachidonic acid, LTB4 and 12HHTrE were 200 µg/ml. 250 µg/
ml, 2 µg/ml and 2 µg/ml respectively. The compounds were extracted
using SPE columns (Thermo Scientiﬁc, CA). Columns were washed with
2 ml of MeOH followed by 2 ml of H2O, 10% methanol with 1% formic
acid. 8 ml of the samples or 2 ml of the control medium was added for
extraction. After applying the sample, the columns were washed with
4 ml of 10% MeOH, and the analytes were then eluted with 1 ml of
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
15

Table 1 | Key resources for the experiments, including the antibodies, chemicals, primers, kits, animals, software, etc
Reagent or Resource
Source
Identiﬁer
Antibodies
Anti-δ-secretase (AEP) (11B7)
Dr. Colin Watts
(University of Dundee)
N/A, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-TauN368
Home-made
N/A, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-APPN585
Home-made
N/A, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-C/EBPβ(H-7) HRP
Santa Cruze
Cat# sc-7962 HRP, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-phoshpo Thr235 C/EBPβ
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 3084 s, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-beta Amyloid 4G8
Covance
Cat# SIG-39220, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-Tau (T22) oligomeric
Millipore Sigma
Cat# ABN454, 1:1000 for WB, 1:500 for IF
Anti-phospho-Tau (Ser202, Thr205) (AT8)
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# MN1020, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-Iba1
VWR
Cat# 100369-764, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-CD86 (E2G8P)
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 91882 S, 1:1000 for WB, 1:200 for IF
Anti-Tau (TAU-5)
Invitrogen
Cat# AHB0042, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-PTGES
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# PA5-60916, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-APP A4 (22C11)
Millipore Sigma
Cat# MAB348, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-5 Lipoxygenase (LOX5)
Abcam
Cat# ab39347, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-Cyclooxygenase 1 (COX1)
Abcam
Cat# ab109025, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2)
Abcam
Cat# ab15191, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-LTB4-R1/BLTR
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# BS-2654R, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-LTB4-R2
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# BS-2655R, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-β actin (AC-15)
Invitrogen
Cat# AM4302, 1:1000 for WB
Anti-mouse IgG-HRP
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 7076 S, 1:2000 for WB
Anti-rabbit IgG-HRP
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 7074 S, 1:2000 for WB
Anti-mouse IgG-Alexaﬂuor 488
Invitrogen
Cat# A11001, 1:2000 for IF
Anti-mouse IgG-Alexaﬂuor 594
Invitrogen
Cat# A11005, 1:2000 for IF
Anti-rabbit IgG-Alexaﬂuor 488
Invitrogen
Cat# A11034, 1:2000 for IF
Anti-rabbit IgG-Alexaﬂuor 594
Invitrogen
Cat# A11037, 1:2000 for IF
Anti-rabbit IgG-Cy5
Invitrogen
Cat# A10523. 1:2000 for IF
Chemical and antibiotics
Thioﬂavin S
Millipore Sigma
Cat# T1892-25G
Arachidonic acid
Cayman Chemical
Item No. 90010
Prostaglandin E2
Cayman Chemical
Item No. 14010
Leukotriene B4
Cayman Chemical
Item No. 20110
12-HTTrE
Cayman Chemical
Item No. 34590
Vancomycin Hydrochloride
VWR
Cat# 97062-554
Gentamicin sulfate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# G1914-5G
Ampicillin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# A159325
Erythromycin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# PHR1039-1G
Neomycin
Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# 21810031
Critical Commercial Assay
Amyloid beta 42 mouse ELISA Kit
Invitrogen
Cat# KMB3441
Amyloid beta 40 mouse ELISA Kit
Invitrogen
Cat# KMB3481
Mouse IL-6 ELISA Kit
Abcam
Cat# ab100712
TNF alpha Mouse Uncoated ELISA Kit
Invitrogen
Cat# 88-7324-88
IL-1 beta Mouse Uncoated ELISA Kit
Invitrogen
Cat# 88-7013-22
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) ELISA Kit
caymanchemical
Cat# 514010
Leukotriene B4 (LTB4) ELISA Kit
caymanchemical
Cat# 10009292
Deposited Data
16 s RNA sequences
PPMS for EIGC https://fex.cores.emory.edu/
KYE22363-63838
RNAseq data
PPMS for EIGC https://fex.cores.emory.edu/
KYE22363-64287
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: C/EBPβ Tg
Ye lab
N/A
Bacteria: Bacteroides fragilis VPI 2553
ATCC
Cat# 25285
Sequence-Based Reagents
ALOX5 TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# Mm01182747_m1
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
16

MeOH. The eluent was diluted 1:1 with H2O to bring down the methanol
to 50% for the HPLC assay. The injection volume was 200 µl and 20 µl.
Arachidonic acid and its metabolites, LTB4, 12HHTrE, and PGE2
were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography with a
photodiode array autosampler, model 1525 binary pump, and model
2996 photodiode array detector was used. Analytes were separated
using reverse-phase chromatography on a Waters Xbridge BEH col-
umn (4.6 × 150 mm, 5 µM, Waters) with a guard cartridge (3.9 × 5 mm,
5 µM, Waters). The analytes were identiﬁed by comparing their reten-
tion times and spectral proﬁles to known standards. A stock solution in
100% methanol and the concentrations are 250 µg/ml for arachidonic
acid, 2 µg/ml of LTB4 and 12HHTrE, 200 µg/ml for PGE2, respectively.
The working standard solution was prepared in 50% methanol. A series
dilution of the standard was prepared in 50% methanol as the
standard curve.
Liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry analysis
of metabolites (LC-MS/MS)
Samples were dried and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 45% iso-
propanol followed by separation on Ascentis Express Capillary C18
column (2.7 μm beads, 15 cm × 300 µm; Supelco, Bellefonte, PA). The
analytes were eluted over a 35-min gradient at a rate of 2 μl/min with
buffer B ranging from 1% to 75% (buffer A: 10 mM ammonium acetate in
40% acetonitrile and 60% water; buffer B: 10 mM ammonium acetate in
90% isopropanol and 10% acetonitrile). The mass spectrometric ana-
lysis was performed on a Qexactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-
Fisher Scientiﬁc, San Jose, CA) in negative mode. MS settings included
MS1 scans (120,000 resolution, 100–1500 m/z, 3 × 106 AGC and 50 ms
maximal ion time) and 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (60,000 reso-
lution, 2 × 105 AGC, ~100 ms maximal ion time, HCD, Stepped NCE (20,
40, 60), and 20 s dynamic exclusion). PGE2 was identiﬁed in samples
and conﬁrmed by comparing with the PGE2 standard with matched m/
z, retention time and ms2 spectrum.
Electron Microscopy
After deep anesthesia, mice were perfused transcardially with 2% glu-
taraldehyde and 3% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Hippocampal slices
were post-ﬁxed in cold 1% OsO4 for 1 h, dehydrated, and ﬂat-embedded
in Araldite resin. Samples were prepared and examined using standard
procedures. Ultrathin sections (90 nm) were stained with uranyl
acetate and lead acetate and viewed at 100 kV in a JEOL 200CX elec-
tron microscope. Synapses were identiﬁed by the presence of synaptic
vesicles and postsynaptic densities. Ten images were taken from each
mouse to count synapses and the mean synapse count of each animal
(5 mice per group) was used for statistical analysis.
Immunocytochemistry in transmission electron microscopy
Following perfusion ﬁxation, the brains were removed from the skull and
blocks of tissue were cut from the stratum pyramidale of the CA1 sector
of the mice hippocampus, incubated overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde
in PBS, and rinsed three times (15 min each step) in PBS. Dehydrated in
the ethanol gradient, then inﬁltrated with 100% ethanol/LR White resin
(EMS, Hatﬁeld PA) (25% ethanol/LR White, 50%, 75%, three changes of
100%) at 1 hr each step. The sample was left in the last change of LR
White for 4 hrs and then placed in gelatin capsules for polymerization at
50 C for 12 h. The samples were sectioned on an RMC MTX ultra-
microtome approx. 60 nm thick and placed on 200 mesh nickel grids.
Each section incubated with antibodies was adjoining sections on each
grid. For each brain sample, sections on grids were blocked in 3% BSA in
PBS for 45 min at RT. They were then incubated in either Aβ mouse
antibody (1:100 ab/diluent; 1% BSA in PBS) or AT8 mouse (1:100 ab/
diluent) for 1 h at RT. Samples were washed in 1% BSA three times 10 min
each step, then incubated in 1:20 GAM 15 nm gold (EMS, Hatﬁeld PA) in
diluent gold secondary antibody for 1 hr at RT. They were rinsed in
ﬁltered DI water 10 min each step for three times. Negative controls were
exposed to secondaryantibodiesonly. The sections were then viewed on
a JEOL JEM1011 TEM at 100 kV JEOL USA, Peabody MA). Images were
captured on an AMT mid-mount camera (AMT, Woburn MA).
Statistical analysis
The sample size was determined by Power and Precision V2 (Biostat).
Image J 1.51J8, SPSS 12.0, Prism-GraphPad 7.04, QIIME2 r2023.2,
PyNAST 1.0, and Illumina’s bcl2fastq were used for analysis. All data are
expressed as Mean ± S.E.M. from three or more independent experi-
ments, and the level of signiﬁcance between the two groups was
assessed with Student’s t-test. For more than two groups, one-way
ANOVA followed by LSD post hoc test was applied. A value of p < 0.05
was considered to be statistically signiﬁcant.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Source data are provided with this paper.Source Data.xlsx includes the
relevant raw data from each graphic. Supplementary Data 1.zip con-
tains the metabolomic data of brain, serum, and fecal samples from the
Alzheimer’s disease mouse model, using proteomics only to quantify
certain speciﬁc metabolites. Raw RNA sequencing data used in this
study are available in the Bioproject database under accession codes
PRJNA1001130 Source data are provided with this paper.
Table 1 (continued) | Key resources for the experiments, including the antibodies, chemicals, primers, kits, animals,
software, etc
Reagent or Resource
Source
Identiﬁer
PTGS1 TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# Mm00477214_m1
PTGS2 TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# Mm00478374_m1
LTB4R TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# Mm00521839_m1
LTB4R2 TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# Mm00498491_s1
PTGES TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# Mm00452105_m1
GAPDH TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays
Thermo-ﬁsher
Cat# Mm99999915_g1
Software and Algorithms
ImageJ 1.51J8
National Institutes of Health
https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/
SPSS 12.0
IBM
https://www.ibm.com/analytics/spss-statistics-software
Prism-GraphPad 7.04
GraphPad
https://www.graphpad.com/scientiﬁc-software/prism/
QIIME 2 r2023.2
Dr.Alam Ashfaqul laboratory, University of Kentucky
https://qimme.org/
Illumina’s bcl2fastq
Dr.Alam Ashfaqul laboratory, University of Kentucky
https://www.illumina.com/
PyNAST 1.0
Dr.Alam Ashfaqul laboratory, University of Kentucky
http://biocore.github.io/pynast/
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
17

References
1.
Akiyama, H. et al. Inﬂammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol.
Aging 21, 383–421 (2000).
2.
Heneka, M. T., Kummer, M. P. & Latz, E. Innate immune activation in
neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 463–477 (2014).
3.
Cagnin, A. et al. In-vivo measurement of activated microglia in
dementia. Lancet 358, 461–467 (2001).
4.
Erny, D. et al. Host microbiota constantly control maturation and
function of microglia in the CNS. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 965–977
(2015).
5.
Medzhitov, R. Recognition of microorganisms and activation of the
immune response. Nature 449, 819–826 (2007).
6.
Zhou, R. et al. Microbiota-microglia connections in age-related
cognition decline. Aging Cell 21, e13599 (2022).
7.
Cattaneo, A. et al. Association of brain amyloidosis with pro-
inﬂammatory gut bacterial taxa and peripheral inﬂammation markers
in cognitively impaired elderly. Neurobiol. Aging 49, 60–68 (2017).
8.
Vogt, N. M. et al. Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease.
Sci. Rep. 7, 13537 (2017).
9.
Zhuang, Z. Q. et al. Gut microbiota is altered in patients with Alz-
heimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 63, 1337–1346 (2018).
10.
Haran, J. P. et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Microbiome Is Associated with
Dysregulation of the Anti-Inﬂammatory P-Glycoprotein Pathway.
mBio 10, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00632-19 (2019).
11.
Chen, C. et al. Gut microbiota regulate Alzheimer’s disease
pathologies and cognitive disorders via PUFA-associated neuroin-
ﬂammation. Gut, https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326269
(2022).
12.
Zhang, Z. et al. Delta-secretase cleaves amyloid precursor protein
and regulates the pathogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Com-
mun. 6, 8762 (2015).
13.
Zhang, Z. et al. Cleavage of tau by asparagine endopeptidase
mediates the neuroﬁbrillary pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat.
Med 20, 1254–1262 (2014).
14.
Strohmeyer, R., Shelton, J., Lougheed, C. & Breitkopf, T. CCAAT-
enhancer binding protein-beta expression and elevation in Alzhei-
mer’s disease and microglial cell cultures. PLoS One 9, e86617
(2014).
15.
Fonseca, G. J., Seidman, J. S. & Glass, C. K. Genome-Wide
Approaches to Deﬁning Macrophage Identity and Function. Micro-
biol Spectr. 4, https://doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec.MCHD-0039-
2016 (2016).
16.
Gosselin, D. et al. An environment-dependent transcriptional net-
work speciﬁes human microglia identity. Science 356, https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.aal3222 (2017).
17.
Ejarque-Ortiz, A. et al. Upregulation of CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein beta in activated astrocytes and micro. Glia. Glia 55,
178–188 (2007).
18.
Straccia, M. et al. Pro-inﬂammatory gene expression and neurotoxic
effects of activated microglia are attenuated by absence of CCAAT/
enhancer binding protein beta. J. Neuroinﬂammation 8, 156
(2011).
19.
Wang, Z. H. et al. C/EBPbeta regulates delta-secretase expression
and mediates pathogenesis in mouse models of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Nat. Commun. 9, 1784 (2018).
20. Ndoja, A. et al. Ubiquitin Ligase COP1 Suppresses Neuroinﬂamma-
tion by Degrading c/EBPbeta in Microglia. Cell 182, 1156–1169.e1112
(2020).
21.
Wang, H., Liu, X., Chen, S. & Ye, K. Spatiotemporal activation of the C/
EBPbeta/delta-secretase axis regulates the pathogenesis of Alzhei-
mer’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, E12427–E12434 (2018).
22. Xia, Y. et al. C/EBPbeta is a key transcription factor for APOE and
preferentially mediates ApoE4 expression in Alzheimer’s disease.
Mol. Psychiatry 26, 6002–6022 (2021).
23. Wang, Z. H. et al. ApoE4 activates C/EBPbeta/delta-secretase with
27-hydroxycholesterol, driving the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s
disease. Prog. Neurobiol. 202, 102032 (2021).
24. Wang, Z. H. et al. Neuronal ApoE4 stimulates C/EBPbeta activation,
promoting Alzheimer’s disease pathology in a mouse model. Prog.
Neurobiol. 209, 102212 (2022).
25. Xiong, J. et al. FSH blockade improves cognition in mice with Alz-
heimer’s disease. Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-
04463-0 (2022).
26. Choi, S. H., Aid, S. & Bosetti, F. The distinct roles of cyclooxygenase-
1 and -2 in neuroinﬂammation: implications for translational
research. Trends Pharm. Sci. 30, 174–181 (2009).
27.
Chu, J. & Pratico, D. The 5-lipoxygenase as a common pathway for
pathological brain and vascular aging. Cardiovasc Psychiatry Neu-
rol. 2009, 174657 (2009).
28. Phillis, J. W., Horrocks, L. A. & Farooqui, A. A. Cyclooxygenases,
lipoxygenases, and epoxygenases in CNS: their role and involve-
ment in neurological disorders. Brain Res Rev. 52, 201–243 (2006).
29. Yang, H. & Chen, C. Cyclooxygenase-2 in synaptic signaling. Curr.
Pharm. Des. 14, 1443–1451 (2008).
30. Rapoport, S. I. Brain arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acid cas-
cades are selectively altered by drugs, diet and disease. Pros-
taglandins Leukot. Ess. Fat. Acids 79, 153–156 (2008).
31.
Listi, F. et al. Role of cyclooxygenase-2 and 5-lipoxygenase poly-
morphisms in Alzheimer’s disease in a population from northern
Italy: implication for pharmacogenomics. J. Alzheimers Dis. 19,
551–557 (2010).
32. Firuzi, O., Zhuo, J., Chinnici, C. M., Wisniewski, T. & Pratico, D.
5-Lipoxygenase gene disruption reduces amyloid-betapathology in
a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J. 22, 1169–1178
(2008).
33. Cortes-Canteli, M. et al. Role of C/EBPbeta transcription factor in
adult hippocampal neurogenesis. PLoS One 6, e24842 (2011).
34. Xia, Y. et al. Neuronal C/EBPbeta/AEP pathway shortens life span via
selective GABAnergic neuronal degeneration by FOXO repression.
Sci. Adv. 8, eabj8658 (2022).
35. Kim, J. W., Tang, Q. Q., Li, X. & Lane, M. D. Effect of phosphorylation
and S-S bond-induced dimerization on DNA binding and tran-
scriptional activation by C/EBPbeta. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104,
1800–1804 (2007).
36. Kobayashi, K. et al. Minocycline selectively inhibits M1 polarization
of microglia. Cell Death Dis. 4, e525 (2013).
37. Straccia, M. et al. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta regulates
prostaglandin E synthase expression and prostaglandin E2 pro-
duction in activated microglial cells. Glia 61, 1607–1619 (2013).
38. Reddy, K. V., Serio, K. J., Hodulik, C. R. & Bigby, T. D. 5-lipoxygenase-
activating protein gene expression. Key role of CCAAT/enhancer-
binding proteins (C/EBP) in constitutive and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) alpha-induced expression in THP-1 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
13810–13818 (2003).
39. Healy, Z. R., Zhu, F., Stull, J. D. & Konstantopoulos, K. Elucidation of
the signaling network of COX-2 induction in sheared chondrocytes:
COX-2 is induced via a Rac/MEKK1/MKK7/JNK2/c-Jun-C/EBPbeta-
dependent pathway. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 294, C1146–C1157
(2008).
40. Johansson, J. U., Woodling, N. S., Shi, J. & Andreasson, K. I.
Inﬂammatory cyclooxygenase activity and PGE2 signaling in mod-
els of Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Immunol. Rev. 11, 125–131 (2015).
41.
Green, K. N., Crapser, J. D. & Hohsﬁeld, L. A. To Kill a Microglia: A
Case for CSF1R Inhibitors. Trends Immunol. 41, 771–784 (2020).
42. Stecher, B. et al. Like will to like: abundances of closely related
species can predict susceptibility to intestinal colonization by
pathogenic and commensal bacteria. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000711
(2010).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
18

43. Lee, C. Y. & Landreth, G. E. The role of microglia in amyloid clear-
ance from the AD brain. J. Neural Transm. (Vienna) 117, 949–960
(2010).
44. Hickman, S. E., Allison, E. K. & El Khoury, J. Microglial dysfunction
and defective beta-amyloid clearance pathways in aging Alzhei-
mer’s disease mice. J. Neurosci. 28, 8354–8360 (2008).
45. Leng, F. & Edison, P. Neuroinﬂammation and microglial activation in
Alzheimer disease: where do we go from here. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17,
157–172 (2021).
46. Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F. & Helmchen, F. Resting microglial
cells are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo.
Science 308, 1314–1318 (2005).
47. Stence, N., Waite, M. & Dailey, M. E. Dynamics of microglial acti-
vation: a confocal time-lapse analysis in hippocampal slices. Glia.
33, 256–266 (2001).
48. Spittau, B. Aging microglia-phenotypes, functions and implications
for age-related neurodegenerative diseases. Front Aging Neurosci.
9, 194 (2017).
49. Davies, D. S., Ma, J., Jegathees, T. & Goldsbury, C. Microglia show
altered morphology and reduced arborization in human brain dur-
ing aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Pathol. 27, 795–808
(2017).
50. Bisht, K. et al. Dark microglia: A new phenotype predominantly
associated with pathological states. Glia. 64, 826–839 (2016).
51.
Sanchez-Mejias, E. et al. Soluble phospho-tau from Alzheimer’s
disease hippocampus drives microglial degeneration. Acta Neuro-
pathol. 132, 897–916 (2016).
52. Navarro, V. et al. Microglia in Alzheimer’s disease: activated,
dysfunctional or degenerative. Front Aging Neurosci. 10, 140
(2018).
53. Doorn, K. J. et al. Increased amoeboid microglial density in the
olfactory bulb of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s patients. Brain Pathol.
24, 152–165 (2014).
54. Magalini, A. et al. Role of IL-1 beta and corticosteroids in the reg-
ulation of the C/EBP-alpha, beta and delta genes in vivo. Cytokine 7,
753–758 (1995).
55. Poli, V. The role of C/EBP isoforms in the control of inﬂammatory
and native immunity functions. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 29279–29282
(1998).
56. Wedel, A. & Ziegler-Heitbrock, H. W. The C/EBP family of tran-
scription factors. Immunobiology 193, 171–185 (1995).
57. Serio, K. J., Reddy, K. V. & Bigby, T. D. Lipopolysaccharide induces 5-
lipoxygenase-activating protein gene expression in THP-1 cells via a
NF-kappaB and C/EBP-mediated mechanism. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 288, C1125–C1133 (2005).
58. Lyman, M., Lloyd, D. G., Ji, X., Vizcaychipi, M. P. & Ma, D. Neuroin-
ﬂammation: the role and consequences. Neurosci. Res. 79, 1–12
(2014).
59. Mishra, A., Kim, H. J., Shin, A. H. & Thayer, S. A. Synapse loss
induced by interleukin-1beta requires pre- and post-synaptic
mechanisms. J. Neuroimmune Pharm. 7, 571–578 (2012).
60. Hong, S. et al. Complement and microglia mediate early synapse
loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352, 712–716 (2016).
61.
Kaufmann, W. E., Worley, P. F., Pegg, J., Bremer, M. & Isakson, P.
COX-2, a synaptically induced enzyme, is expressed by excitatory
neurons at postsynaptic sites in rat cerebral cortex. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 93, 2317–2321 (1996).
62. Ryu, J. K., Franciosi, S., Sattayaprasert, P., Kim, S. U. & McLarnon, J.
G. Minocycline inhibits neuronal death and glial activation induced
by beta-amyloid peptide in rat hippocampus. Glia. 48, 85–90
(2004).
63. Shi, J. et al. The prostaglandin E2 E-prostanoid 4 receptor exerts
anti-inﬂammatory effects in brain innate immunity. J. Immunol. 184,
7207–7218 (2010).
64. Johansson, J. U. et al. Suppression of inﬂammation with conditional
deletion of the prostaglandin E2 EP2 receptor in macrophages and
brain microglia. J. Neurosci. 33, 16016–16032 (2013).
65. Slawik, H., Volk, B., Fiebich, B. & Hull, M. Microglial expression of
prostaglandin EP3 receptor in excitotoxic lesions in the rat striatum.
Neurochem Int. 45, 653–660 (2004).
66. Yin, Z. et al. Immune hyperreactivity of Abeta plaque-associated
microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 55,
115–122 (2017).
67. Liu, S. et al. TLR2 is a primary receptor for Alzheimer’s amyloid beta
peptide to trigger neuroinﬂammatory activation. J. Immunol. 188,
1098–1107 (2012).
68. Murgas, P., Godoy, B. & von Bernhardi, R. Abeta potentiates
inﬂammatory activation of glial cells induced by scavenger recep-
tor ligands and inﬂammatory mediators in culture. Neurotox. Res.
22, 69–78 (2012).
69. Alawieyah Syed Mortadza, S., Sim, J. A., Neubrand, V. E. & Jiang, L.
H. A critical role of TRPM2 channel in Abeta42 -induced microglial
activation and generation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha. Glia. 66,
562–575 (2018).
70. Jones, R. W. Inﬂammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 358,
436–437 (2001).
71.
Breitner, J. C. et al. Extended results of the Alzheimer’s disease anti-
inﬂammatory prevention trial. Alzheimers Dement 7, 402–411 (2011).
72.
Leoutsakos, J. M., Muthen, B. O., Breitner, J. C., Lyketsos, C. G. &
Team, A. R. Effects of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug treat-
ments on cognitive decline vary by phase of pre-clinical Alzheimer
disease: ﬁndings from the randomized controlled Alzheimer’s Dis-
ease Anti-inﬂammatory Prevention Trial. Int J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 27,
364–374 (2012).
73. Stewart, W. F., Kawas, C., Corrada, M. & Metter, E. J. Risk of Alz-
heimer’s disease and duration of NSAID use. Neurology 48,
626–632 (1997).
74. Szekely, C. A. et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs for the
prevention of Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review. Neuroepi-
demiology 23, 159–169 (2004).
75. in t’ Veld, B. A. et al. Nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs and the
risk of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 345, 1515–1521 (2001).
76. Reikvam, D. H. et al. Depletion of murine intestinal microbiota:
effects on gut mucosa and epithelial gene expression. PLoS One 6,
e17996 (2011).
77.
Wang, Z.-H. et al. Delta-secretase (AEP) mediates tau-splicing
imbalance and accelerates cognitive decline in tauopathies. J. Exp.
Med. 215, 3038–3056 (2018).
78. Diner, I., Nguyen, T. & Seyfried, N. T. Enrichment of detergent-
insoluble protein aggregates from human postmortem brain. JoVE
(Journal of Visualized Experiments), e55835 (2017).
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by a grant from the National Institute of Health
(RO1, AG065177) to K. Ye. The Natural Science Foundation of Hubei
Province of China for Distinguished Young Scholars (Grant No.
2022CFA104) to Y Xia. Additional support was provided by the Georgia
Clinical & Translational Science Alliance of the National Institutes of
Health under Award Number UL1TR002378, and National Institute
Health (R01 AG067483) to J.P. Haran. This studywas supported in part by
the Emory Gnotobiotic Animal (EGAC), which is subsidized by the Emory
University School of Medicine and is one of the Emory Integrated Core
Facilities. Additional support was provided by the Rodent Behavioral
Core (RBC), which is subsidized by the Emory University School of
Medicine and is one of the Emory Integrated Core Facilities; the Emory
Integrated Genomics Core (EIGC), which is subsidized by the Emory
University School of Medicine and is one of the Emory Integrated Core
Facilities; as well as Emory HPLC Bioanalytical Core (EHBC), which was
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
19

supported by the Department of Pharmacology, Emory University
School of Medicine. The metabolomics analysis on the feces and brain
samples from the AD and HC humanized Abx-mice was performed by
Metabolon, Inc. Morrisville, NC. We are thankful for Dr. Haiyan Tan at St.
Jude Children’s Research Hospital for identifying the chemicals in the
HPLC fractions.
Author contributions
K.Y., Y.Y.X conceived the project, designed the experiments, analyzed
the data and wrote the manuscript. Y.Y.X., Y.F.X. designed and per-
formed most of the experiments and analyzed the data. Z.-H.W. X.L.
conducted genotype and breed the transgenic mice. J.P.H., B.A.M.
provided the AD and HC fecal samples. A.M.A., X.J.S, X.C.W assisted
with data analysis and interpretation and critically read the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interest.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Xiji
Shu, Xiaochuan Wang or Keqiang Ye.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Ping Fang and
Xin Qi for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review
ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. 2School of Medicine, Jianghan
University, Wuhan, HB 430056, China. 3University of Kentucky, Microbiology, Immunology & Molecular Genetics Ofﬁce - MN 376, Medical Science Building,
800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY, USA. 4Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
5Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA. 6Program in Microbiome Dynamics,
University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA. 7Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine, Key Laboratory of
Education Ministry of China/Hubei Province for Neurological Disorders, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, China. 8Co-innovation Center of Neurodegeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu, China. 9Faculty of Life and Health Sciences, Shenzhen
Institute of Advanced Technology, Shenzhen Guangdong 518055, China. 10These authors contributed equally: Yiyuan Xia, Yifan Xiao.
e-mail: xijishu@jhun.edu.cn; wxch@mails.tjmu.edu.cn; kq.ye@siat.ac.cn
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41283-w
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:5471 
20