Core-shell structured CeO2@ZIF-8 nanohybrids regulating the Ce(III)/Ce 
(IV) valence conversion to enhance ROS-scavenging capacity for 
periodontitis treatment
Yameng Yu a,b,1, Xiwen Zhao b,c,1, Yufeng Zheng d,*
, Dandan Xia a,b,**,  
Yunsong Liu b,c,***
a Department of Dental Materials, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, 100081, China
b National Center for Stomatology & National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Research Center of Oral Biomaterials and Digital 
Medical Devices & Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital Stomatology & NHC Key Laboratory of Digital Stomatology & NMPA Key Laboratory for Dental Materials, Beijing, 
100081, China
c Department of Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, 100081, China
d School of Materials Science and Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Core-shell nanohybrids
Cerium oxide
Metal organic frameworks
Reactive oxygen species scavenging
Periodontitis treatment
A B S T R A C T
Colonization of pathogenic microorganism is the initiating factor of periodontitis, inflammatory-induced 
imbalance of reductant-oxidant homeostasis is the leading cause of alveolar bone defects. Herein, core-shell 
structured nanohybrids with antibacterial, antioxidative and osteogenic properties were constructed by in situ 
growth of ZIF-8 nanocrystals onto cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO2@ZIF-8). The Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio can be 
manipulated via regulating the ZIF-8 shell thickness. The shell thickness increased with elevated concentration of 
Zn2+ that coordinated with organic linker in the synthesis process, leading to enhanced Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio in 
CeO2@ZIF-8, which further promoted its antioxidative enzyme mimetic activities as well as osteogenic property. 
In vitro, CeO2@ZIF-8 exhibited excellent antibacterial activities, provided cellular protective effect under 
oxidative stress state, and facilitated osteogenic differentiation. In vivo, CeO2@ZIF-8 could alleviated bacterial 
infection induced inflammation response and promoted alveolar bone regeneration. The underlying mechanism 
was explored via bioinformatic analysis, which indicated that CeO2@ZIF-8 promoted the expression of cop­
per–zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) via upregulating oxidoreductase activity, so that to relive the oxidative 
stress and upregulate the expression of osteogenesis related genes and proteins. The above findings indicated that 
CeO2@ZIF-8 could simultaneously achieve bacteriostasis, ROS scavenging and osteogenesis, so that to 
completely fulfill the therapeutic demand in the treatment of periodontitis.
1. Introduction
As a widespread chronic inflammation, periodontitis is injurious up 
to 90 % world population [1,2]. Increasing evidence has suggested that 
periodontitis is closely relevant to a range of extraoral diseases, 
including cardiovascular disease, colitis, diabetes, and cognitive decline 
[3,4]. Accumulation and colonization of pathogenic microorganism is 
the initiating factor of periodontitis, resulting in irreversible lesion to 
periodontal ligaments, alveolar bone and cementum, and eventually 
leading to tooth loss [5–7]. Although current clinical therapies including 
mechanical debridement and antibiotic therapy have achieved positive 
outcomes, such treatment strategies solely revolve around combating 
bacterial infection, but neglect to suppress free radicals and oxidative 
injury caused by inflammation [8–10]. In the chronic inflammatory 
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author. Department of Dental Materials, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, 100081, China.
*** Corresponding author. National Center for Stomatology & National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Research Center of Oral 
Biomaterials and Digital Medical Devices & Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital Stomatology & NHC Key Laboratory of Digital Stomatology & NMPA Key Laboratory for 
Dental Materials, Beijing, 100081, China.
E-mail addresses: yfzheng@pku.edu.cn (Y. Zheng), dandanxia@pku.edu.cn (D. Xia), liuyunsong@hsc.pku.edu.cn (Y. Liu). 
1 Equal contribution, Joint first authors.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biomaterials
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biomaterials
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2025.123588
Received 6 January 2025; Received in revised form 26 June 2025; Accepted 28 July 2025  
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
Available online 29 July 2025 
0142-9612/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

microenvironment, immune cell produced-reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) far outstrips cellular antioxidant clearance capacity, resulting in 
imbalance of reductant-oxidant (REDOX) homeostasis and oxidative 
stress response, which can promote the activation of osteoclasts, inhibit 
osteogenic differentiation, and affect the healing and regeneration of 
alveolar bone [11–13]. Therefore, it is urgent to develop a versatile 
therapeutic material with antibacterial, antioxidative and osteogenic 
capacities to completely fulfill the therapeutic demand in the treatment 
of periodontitis.
Cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO2 NPs) have attracted widespread 
attention due to the superior biocompatibility, satisfactory antibacterial 
activity, and recyclable ROS scavenging capacity [14–16]. Based on the 
reversible Ce3+/Ce4+ REDOX pairs and existence of oxygen vacancies, 
CeO2 NPs exhibit both superoxide dismutase (SOD)-like and catalase 
(CAT)-like activities [17–19]. As such, CeO2 NPs are capable of con­
verting superoxide (O2
•-) to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) via the Ce3+
correlated SOD-like activity, and H2O2 is further decomposed into H2O 
and O2 via Ce4+ correlated CAT-like activity, so that to form a ROS 
scavenging cycle of O2
•-→H2O2→H2O + O2 through the valence state 
conversion [20,21]. Numerous studies have proved the application po­
tency of CeO2 NPs as therapeutic nanozymes for periodontitis, whether 
as the form of injectable drug or functional component for guided bone 
regeneration membrane, with the aim of realizing cytoprotective effect 
against oxidative stress and promoting periodontal tissue regeneration 
[22–27]. The antioxidative activities of CeO2 NPs-based nanozymes, 
especially its SOD mimetic activity, is closely related to the concentra­
tion of trivalent cerium ion, increasing the proportion of trivalent to 
tetravalent cerium ion can promote the generation of oxygen vacancies, 
which in turn facilitates the Ce3+/Ce4+ valence conversion efficiency 
and benefits for ROS elimination as well as osteogenesis [28–30]. 
However, in the inflammatory state, CeO2 NPs suffer from the challenge 
of highly oxidative microenvironment, where the overaccumulation of 
ROS, especially H2O2, may oxidase the Ce3+ to Ce4+, so that to weaken 
the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio, and impair the self-circulating catalytic ability as 
well as the whole ROS scavenging cycle [30–32]. Therefore, it is of great 
significance to promote enzyme-like activities via optimizing the 
Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio of CeO2 NPs-based nanozymes, with the aim to relieve 
the cellular oxidative stress and facilitate bone defect regeneration.
In view of the flexible synthesis, unique structural feature and well- 
defined metal sites, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are recognized 
as ideal building blocks or carriers for nanozymes in biomedical appli­
cations [33–35]. Among them, zeolitic imidazole framework-8 (ZIF-8) 
have attracted widespread attentions, numerous studies have demon­
strated the efficacy of ZIF-8 as an ideal encapsulation platform for 
various nanozymes due to the confinement effect [36–40]. Besides, 
ZIF-8 nanocrystals possess abundant Zn sites being served as crucial 
metal prosthetic group for various enzymes, which endows ZIF-8 with 
intrinsic enzyme-like activities and universality of catalysis reactions 
[41–43]. Compared to single-component counterparts, ZIF-8 encapsu­
lated nanozymes exhibit superior catalytic and antioxidative activities 
[44]. Inspired by those merits, we hypothesized that constructing 
core-shell structured nanohybrids of CeO2 NPs and ZIF-8 would exhibit 
unique synergistic features in terms of facilitating ROS elimination. 
Moreover, based on the porous structure and desired biodegradability, 
ZIF-8 can be recognized as a reservoir of zinc ion to provide gradual 
release effect and exert bactericidal property against pathogens associ­
ated with periodontitis [45–47]. Therefore, ZIF-8 nanocrystals can be 
coated onto CeO2 NPs to simultaneously protect cellular oxidative stress 
injury while eliminate the bacterial infection.
Herein, core-shell structured nanohybrids were constructed by in- 
situ growth of ZIF-8 nanocrystals onto CeO2 NPs, for simultaneously 
eradicating bacterial infection, restoring the intracellular REDOX bal­
ance under inflammatory oral microenvironment, and promoting alve­
olar bone regeneration (Scheme 1). The biocompatibility and enzyme- 
like activities of the nanohybrids could be optimized by precisely con­
trolling the growth of ZIF-8 crystal structure. Benefiting from the core- 
shell structure, CeO2@ZIF-8 exhibited an increase in the Ce3+/Ce4+
ratio compared with pristine CeO2 NPs, so that possessed superior 
antioxidative enzyme-like activities as well as osteogenic ability. 
Meanwhile, ZIF-8 shell exerted extraordinary bactericidal effect due to 
Scheme 1. Construction of CeO2@ZIF-8 with antibacterial, ROS-scavenging and osteogenic properties in the treatment of periodontitis.
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
2 

the gradually released zinc ion. The in vitro experiments demonstrated 
that CeO2@ZIF-8 significantly inhibited the viabilities of Methicillin- 
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Escherichia coli (E. coli) and 
Streptococcus mutans (S. mutans), relieved cellular oxidative stress injury 
caused by H2O2 stimulation, meanwhile promoted alkaline phosphate 
(ALP) activities and upregulate the expression of osteogenesis-related 
genes. To improve the bioavailability in the treatment of periodontitis, 
CeO2@ZIF-8 was mixed with polyethylene glycol (PEG) 4000 and 400 to 
obtain an injectable platform. In vivo, the treatment platform alleviated 
the bacterial infection-induced inflammation response and promoted 
alveolar bone regeneration. The above findings indicated that the con­
struction of core-shell structured CeO2@ZIF-8 nanohybrids could 
simultaneously fulfill the therapeutic demand for periodontitis in terms 
of bacteriostasis, ROS scavenging and osteogenesis.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Preparation and characterization of CeO2@ZIF-8
The detailed materials and reagents were supplied in Supporting 
Information. The preparation of core-shell structured nanohybrid was 
demonstrated in Fig. 1a. CeO2 NPs was synthesized via solvothermal 
methods according to the literature [48]. The growth of ZIF-8 nano­
crystal was achieved via liquid-phase concentration-controlled nucle­
ation method [49]. 2-methylimidazole (2-MeIm) and Zn(NO3)2⋅6H2O 
were separately dissolved in absolute methanol (40 mL) at a certain 
amount to prepare solution A and B. The as-prepared CeO2 NPs (0.2 g) 
was suspended into solution A by ultrasonic concussion, then solution B 
was poured into the mixture and allow to reaction under room tem­
perature for 1 min, followed by centrifugal collection, ethanol washing 
and vacuum drying to obtain CeO2@ZIF-8. ZIF-8 shell thickness control 
was achieved by adjusting the concentration of solution B, the detailed 
synthetic formula was shown in Table S1. A series of samples with 
varying ZIF-8 shell thickness have been successfully synthesized under 
low, medium and high zinc ion concentrations that coordination with 
organic linker in the synthesis process, which respectively denoted as 
C@Z-L, C@Z-M and C@Z-H.
The structure and morphology of CeO2@ZIF-8 was observed by 
scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-4800) and transmission 
electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JEM-F200), the elemental distributions 
of C, Ce, N, O and Zn were evaluated by energy-dispersive X-ray spec­
troscopy (EDS) mapping. The synthesis of CeO2@ZIF-8 was verified by 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; MI-600), fourier-transform 
infrared spectra (FT-IR; nicolet is50), X-Ray Diffraction (XRD; Rigaku 
Fig. 1. Synthesis and characterization of core-shell structured nanohybrids: (a) The preparation procedure of CeO2@ZIF-8; (b–d) Representative SEM and TEM 
observations of CeO2 NPs and CeO2@ZIF-8; (f) size distribution of CeO2 NPs; (g) elemental composition of CeO2 NPs; (h) size distribution of CeO2@ZIF-8; (i) 
elemental composition of CeO2@ZIF-8; (j–k) EDS mapping images of C, N, O, Zn and Ce elements on different samples.
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
3 

DMAX 2400) and thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA; Q50TGA). The 
particle size, distribution and zeta-potential of different samples were 
measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS; BI-200SM). The specific 
surface area (SSA) and pore volume of CeO2@ZIF-8 were examined by 
Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET; BELSORP MAX X) analysis. The cerium 
and zinc ion release behaviors were investigated by Inductively Coupled 
Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-OES; Agilent Varian 700), the SOD and 
CAT mimetic activities of CeO2@ZIF-8 were measured by the total su­
peroxide dismutase assay kit with WST-8 (S0101, Beyotime) and cata­
lase activity assay kit (S0051, Beyotime) following the instructions of 
the manufacturer, the detailed procedures are described in the Sup­
porting Information.
2.2. In vitro investigation for bactericidal capacity and antibacterial 
action mechanism of CeO2@ZIF-8
MRSA ATCC 43300, E. coli ATCC 25922 and S. mutans ATCC 25175 
were chosen as model bacteria, the bactericidal efficacy of different 
samples with varying ZIF-8 shell thickness were examined via 
comparing the minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC), colony 
forming unit (CFU) enumeration, SEM morphological observation and 
live-dead staining, the antibacterial mechanism of CeO2@ZIF-8 was 
determined via examining the bacterial membrane permeability, con­
centration of leaked protein and production of ROS before and after 
being co-incubated with the samples, using pristine CeO2 NPs as the 
control group, the detailed experiment procedures were supplied in the 
Supporting Information.
2.3. In vitro evaluation the biocompatibility of CeO2@ZIF-8
Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs, obtained 
from Cell Bank of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China) 
were used for all cell tests. The cytotoxicity evaluation of CeO2@ZIF-8 
was carried out via cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) assay (HY–K0301, 
MedChemExpress, USA), the hemocompatibility of CeO2@ZIF-8 was 
carried out via hemolysis analysis, using pristine CeO2 NPs as the control 
group, the detailed experiment procedures were supplied in the Sup­
porting Information.
2.4. Verification the cellular protection effect of CeO2@ZIF-8 against 
oxidative stress
Firstly, the treatment concentration of particle suspension was 
determined via co-incubating hBMSCs with different concentrated 
sample suspensions, and cell survival percentage was measured by CCK- 
8 assay. Afterwards, H2O2 treatment concentration was determined 
using median inhibition concentration. The cellular protection effects of 
samples were determined by measurement of ROS production level, 
live/dead staining and cyto-skeleton visualization, using pristine CeO2 
NPs as the control group, the detailed experiment procedures were 
supplied in the Supporting Information.
2.5. In vitro osteogenic differentiation assessment of CeO2@ZIF-8
The osteogenic activities of core-shell structured nanohybrid was 
verified via measurement of the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and 
alizarin red staining (ARS), followed by using reverse transcription- 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) to examine the 
expression of osteogenic-related genes and proteins including ALP, 
osteocalcin (OCN), runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) and 
osterix (OSX), using pristine CeO2 NPs as the control group, the detailed 
experiment procedures were supplied in the Supporting Information.
2.6. Evaluation the treatment efficacy of CeO2@ZIF-8 for periodontitis
The in vivo antibacterial, anti-inflammatory and osteogenic 
properties of the samples were evaluated by periodontitis animal model. 
The animal experiments have been approved by the Animal Ethical and 
Welfare Committee of Peking University Health Science Center 
(Approved NO. PUIRB-LA2023093). A total of 40 SD rats (male, 4 weeks 
old, weight 200–300 g) were stocked in SPF laboratory for one week to 
acclimatize. Afterwards, the rats were anaesthetized by Tri­
bromoethanol through intraperitoneal injection at a dose of 125–250 
mg/kg, the maxillary first molars of rats were tightened with ortho­
dontic ligature wires at 1 mm below the gum. After surgery, the rats 
were all received with 10 % (w/v) sugar water and sticky feed every 2 
days for 8 weeks. After 8 weeks, 4 rats were randomly selected and 
sacrificed to verify the effect of the periodontitis model through probing 
depth (PD), serum inflammatory factors, alveolar bone height (micro- 
CT) and histological staining.
Once the periodontitis model was successfully established, the rats 
were randomly divided into 3 groups as follow: periodontitis model 
without treatment (blank control), periodontitis model with treatment 
of CeO2 NPs and periodontitis model with treatment of CeO2@ZIF-8 
(n=3). The treatment platform containing CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 was 
prepared according to the literature [50]. In brief, the samples were 
ultrasonic dispersed in PEG-400 at a concentration of 2 mg/mL, the 
suspension was mixed with PEG-4000 at a ratio of 5:2 (PEG-4000: 
PEG-400, v: m), the mixture was then fused in a water bath at 50 ◦C with 
gently stirring, the treatment platform was obtained after cooling to 
room temperature.
For the treatment of periodontitis, after anesthesia, the treatment 
platform containing PEG with either CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 was 
locally injected in periodontal pocket to cover the periodontitis lesion. 
After 8 weeks, all rats were euthanized, the collected periodontal tissues 
were collected for Hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining, Masson staining 
and Giemsa staining for histological analysis. The hard tissues contain­
ing maxillary and teeth were scanned by micro-CT (SkyScan 1276, 
Bruker, China). The levels of inflammatory cytokines in blood serum 
were measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits to 
access the anti-inflammatory properties. The major organs (heart, liver, 
spleen, lung, and kidney) were collected and stained with H&E staining, 
together with routine blood parameters to assess the biosafety, the 
healthy (untreated) rat was selected as the healthy control group.
2.7. Mechanism exploration of CeO2@ZIF-8 in promoting osteogenic 
activity
For bioinformatic analysis, hBMSCs were incubated with cell culture 
media or sample suspension of CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 after 7 days, 
and total RNA was respectively isolated using TRIzol reagent (Invi­
trogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The transcriptome 
RNA sequencing was performed by BMK (Beijing, China). Three repli­
cates of each group were sequenced, reads containing adapter or poly- 
Nb reads, as well as low-quality reads, were removed to ensure high- 
quality data for subsequent analysis. Differential gene expression anal­
ysis was performed using DEGSeq2 software (version 1.20.0). The 
threshold of significant differential expression was p-value <0.05, and 
the absolute fold change was 2. To understand the significantly enriched 
Gene Ontology Consortium (GO) entries compared to the entire genomic 
background, ClusterProfiler was used to perform enrichment analysis of 
biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components 
separately using a hypergeometric test method. Western blot analysis 
was performed to further verity the predicted signaling pathway, using 
cell culture media as the blank control, pristine CeO2 NPs as the control 
group, the detailed experiment procedures were supplied in the Sup­
porting Information.
2.8. Statistical analysis
All the experiments were carried out in triplicate. Hypothesis one 
sample t-test was used to measure the statistically significant difference 
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
4 

(P) among groups (Origin 2021). The data were expressed as the mean 
±standard deviation in relevant figures and tables. All the values were 
illustrated as the mean±SD. Statistical significance was determined as * 
0.01<P<0.05, ** 0.001<P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ns P>0.05.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Preparation and characterization of CeO2@ZIF-8
The core-shell structured nanohybrids were rationally designed to 
enhance its antibacterial activities as well as the enzyme-like activities 
while preserving desired biocompatibility (Fig. 1a). Firstly, the mono­
dispersed and uniform CeO2 NPs with spherical structure was synthe­
sized via solvothermal method and calcination (Fig. 1b and c). 
Afterwards, ZIF-8 shell was coated onto CeO2 NPs via liquid-phase 
concentration-controlled nucleation method, where CeO2 NPs was sus­
pended into highly concentrated 2-Melm methanol solution, after 
pouring Zn(NO3)2⋅6H2O, the nucleation process of ZIF-8 could be 
accelerated via the coordination between 2-Melm and Zn2+, leading to a 
continuous ZIF-8 shell that grew onto CeO2 NPs in a relatively short 
reaction period. The controllable thickness of ZIF-8 shell was achieved 
by adjusting the zinc concentration, the detailed synthetic formula was 
shown in Table S1. A series of samples with varying ZIF-8 shell thickness 
were successfully synthesized and denoted as C@Z-L, C@Z-M and C@Z- 
H, where L, M and H refer to low, medium and high concentrations of 
Zn2+ that coordination with organic linker. As illustrated in Fig. 1d–e, a 
well-defined core-shell structure was obtained in CeO2@ZIF-8, where 
the dark core and light shell respectively represented CeO2 NPs and ZIF- 
8. Comparing with pristine CeO2 NPs (137.66 nm), the mean particle 
diameter of CeO2@ZIF-8 was increased to 232.84 nm (Fig. 1f and h). It 
was also worth to mention that, the ZIF-8 shell thickness increased with 
the increasing zinc ion concentrations, this was further confirmed by the 
increased particle diameters obtained by TEM observation (Fig. S1). The 
elemental mapping in EDS and further demonstrated finely arranged C, 
N, O and Ce element on CeO2 NPs, and uniformly distributed Zn element 
was identified on CeO2@ZIF-8, elucidating CeO2 NPs was successfully 
encapsulated by ZIF-8 nanocrystals (Fig. 1g and i, 1j-1k).
The synthesis of CeO2@ZIF-8 was further characterized by XRD. As 
shown in Fig. 2a and Fig. S2, the diffraction peaks at 2θ of 28.43◦, 
33.20◦, 47.34◦and 56.10◦were corresponding to the cubic fluorite- 
phase of ceria, and no other impurities was found (JCPDS NO.34- 
0394). After coated with ZIF-8, new peaks at (011), (022), (122), 
(022), (013), (222), (114), (233), (134), (044), (334) and (244) were 
attributed to the crystal plane of ZIF-8 [51,52]. Fig. 2b showed the FT-IR 
spectrums of CeO2 NPs and CeO2@ZIF-8 ranging from 4000 cm−1 to 
400 cm−1 which identified the chemical bonds and functional groups in 
the two samples. For CeO2 NPs, the presence of a strong adsorption peak 
at 3421 cm−1 was ascribed to the vibration of hydroxyl groups on the 
surface of ceria, and the peak at 713 cm−1 was corresponding to 
Ce–O–Ce stretching vibration [53]. For CeO2@ZIF-8, the new peaks 
appeared at 2953 cm−1 and 2918 cm−1 were corresponding to the C–H 
stretching vibration of the imidazole ring and methyl groups that pre­
sent in the linker, the peak at 1572 cm−1 was attributed to the C––N 
stretching, the peaks at 1460 cm−1 and 1382 cm−1 represented the 
entire ring stretching, the peaks at 1141 cm−1, 990 cm−1, 759 cm−1 and 
690 cm−1 were corresponding to the in-plane bending and aromatic sp2 
C–H bending of the imidazole ring [54]. According to the TGA profile in 
Fig. S3, the weight loss occurred below 200 ◦C of all the samples could 
be attributed to the evaporation of water or solvent molecules occluded 
within and adsorbed by CeO2 NPs or ZIF-8 frameworks [55]. Between 
200 ◦C and 500 ◦C, significant weight loss occurred in CeO2@ZIF-8, 
which was corresponding to the decomposition of 2-MeIm while the 
crystal structure of ZIF-8 began to collapse under extreme thermal stress, 
upon the temperature exceeded to 600 ◦C, complete decomposition 
occurred and the mass loss curve reached equilibrium. On the contrary, 
the mass loss of CeO2 NPs was rather negligible after the temperature 
exceeded 200 ◦C. The content of ZIF-8 shell increased with the 
increasing concentration of Zn2+. Quantitatively, it could be calculated 
that the ZIF-8 shell was at about 11.56 %, 22.41 % and 42.97 % for the 
samples that prepared under low, medium and high Zn2+ concentration 
(Table S1).
The zeta-potential and particle size distribution for pristine and ZIF-8 
coated CeO2 NPs were demonstrated in Fig. 2c and d. The zeta potential 
value was at about −23.27 eV and 23.97 eV for CeO2 NPs and 
CeO2@ZIF-8, respectively. Since ZIF-8 exhibited positively charged na­
ture, coating CeO2 NPs with ZIF-8 nanocrystals caused increases in zeta 
potential for all the core-shell structured samples (Fig. S4) [56]. The 
specific surface area (SSA) and micropore-volume were measured by 
BET analysis. As shown in Fig. 2e–f and Fig. S5, CeO2 NPs possessed 
relatively low SSA and pore volume, which might be attributed to the 
self-aggregation effects. On the contrary, construction of core-shell 
structured nanohybrids could significantly enhance SSA and pore vol­
ume due to introduction of nanoporous structured ZIF-8 nanocrystals, 
and the increase degree for these two parameters were positively 
correlated with the shell thickness (Table S2).
The surface chemical compositions of pristine and ZIF-8 coated CeO2 
NPs were investigated by XPS. The XPS survey spectrum and elemental 
content analysis (Fig. 2g–i and Fig. S6) confirmed the existence of C, N, 
O, Ce and Zn elements on the core-shell structured nanohybrids, which 
indicated the successful growth of ZIF-8 coating over CeO2 NPs. 
Considering the important role of Ce valence state in affecting the 
enzyme-mimetic activities, the proportion of trivalent to tetravalent 
cerium ions for all samples was calculated based on accumulating the 
values of corresponding peak area, the peaks represented Ce4+ were 
assigned as U, U″, U‴, V, V″, V‴, and the peaks corresponding to Ce3+
were assigned as U′ and V’ [26,57]. All the samples exhibited 
mixed-valence state of both Ce3+ and Ce4+. The contents of Ce3+ and 
Ce4+ in pristine CeO2 NPs were calculated to be 16.88 % and 83.32 %, 
respectively. After being coated with ZIF-8, the Ce3+ percentage 
increased to 18.34 %. Interestingly, the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio was enhanced 
with increased thickness of ZIF-8 shell, the core-shell nanohybrids syn­
thesized under evaluated zinc ion concentrations exhibited higher Ce3+
content (Fig. S6).
The release of cerium and zinc ion from samples were examined by 
ICP-OES (Fig. 2j–k and Fig. S7). In the initial 3 days, the cerium ion 
releasing from CeO2 NPs was higher than that of core-shell structured 
samples, but with the progressive degradation of ZIF-8 shell, the cu­
mulative release of cerium ion gradually increased and even exceeded 
that of CeO2 NPs on the seventh days. The construction of core-shell 
structured nanohybrids enabled boosting release of cerium ion which 
might be ascribed to the change of CeO2 surface structure during ZIF-8 
growth. For all the core-shell structured samples, the zinc ion slowly 
released from the sample without burst-release effect, the amount of 
zinc ion generated from the degraded ZIF-8 shell remained nearly con­
stant after 5 days, and the zinc ion concentration was increased with 
shell thickness. The degradation of ZIF-8 coating either in acidic or basic 
environment was also examined by measuring the released zinc ions 
after immersion in PBS solution (pH = 5.0 or 8.5) for 1–7 days (Fig. S8). 
Though acidic condition could accelerate the degradation of ZIF-8 
coating, the release of zinc ions in acidic environment was also a 
gradual process. The amount of released zinc ions in acidic environment 
is higher than that in neutral (pH = 7) or basic environment (pH = 8.5), 
which is corresponding to the pH-sensitive nature of ZIF-8 [58,59], so 
that the accelerated release of zinc ions can better exert antibacterial 
properties in the slightly acidic condition caused by bacterial 
metabolism.
As shown in Fig. 2l and Fig. S9, all three samples exhibited both SOD 
and CAT mimetic activities due to the coexistence situation of both 
tetravalent and trivalent cerium ions. Compared with pristine CeO2 NPs, 
encapsulation by ZIF-8 nanocrystals could effectively promote the SOD 
mimetic activities due to the enhancement in Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio, which 
was corresponding to the published research [15,31,60]. The 
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
5 

Fig. 2. The characterizations of core-shell structured nanohybrids: (a) XRD patterns; (b) FT-IR spectra; (c) Zeta potential analysis; (d) Hydrothermal diameter 
distribution of different samples; (e) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms obtained by BET analysis; (f) Pore volume vs pore diameter measurement; (g) XPS full 
survey spectra; (h) High-resolution XPS spectra of Ce element; (i) High-resolution XPS spectra of Zn element; (j) Cerium ion release from samples measured by ICP- 
OES; (k) Zinc ion release from samples measured by ICP-OES; (l) The SOD and CAT mimetic activities of CeO2 NPs and CeO2@ZIF-8; (m) Schematic illustration of the 
enhancement of Ce3+/Ce4+ redox cycling and ROS scavenging property by ZIF-8 coating.
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
6 

enhancement of SOD mimetic activity was positively related to the ZIF-8 
shell thickness, so that C@Z-H exhibited much higher SOD mimetic 
activity than that of other samples. However, the CAT mimetic activity 
was only enhanced for samples with relatively thinner ZIF-8 thickness 
(C@Z-L and C@Z-M), which might be attributed to the much lower 
tetravalent cerium ion proportion in C@Z-H that affected its CAT-like 
catalytic performance (Fig. S6).
Interestingly, encapsulation of CeO2 NPs with optimized ZIF-8 shell 
thickness would facilitate both SOD and CAT mimetic activities. The 
underlying mechanism about enhancement of Ce3+/Ce4+ redox cycling 
and ROS scavenging property by ZIF-8 coating can be speculated as the 
follow aspects (Fig. 2m). Numerous researches have demonstrated that 
ZIF-8 nanocrystals exhibit outstanding oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) 
activity, the strong zinc-nitrogen-carbon coordination bonds can effec­
tively enhance the conductivity and electron transportation, so that to 
benefit the ORR performance [61–63]. In addition, ZIF-8 nanocrystals 
possess heterarchical porous structure, which not only facilitate the 
exposure of active sites for catalytic of ORR, the porous structure in 
ZIF-8 also guarantees an ideal mass transfer efficiency between the ox­
ygen, catalyst surface and electrolyte, which is more conductive to 
initiation of catalytic reactions [64]. Based on the abovementioned ad­
vantages, ZIF-8 nanocrystals have been widely employed as the catalytic 
Fig. 3. Evaluation the bactericidal capacity and exploration of antibacterial action mechanism of core-shell structured nanohybrids: (a) Photos of E. coli, MRSA and 
S. mutans colony after incubated with CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 (106 CFU/mL); (b) SEM images for bacterial morphology change after incubated with different 
samples; (c) Live/dead staining of bacteria incubated with different samples; (d) Bacterial colony counts (106 CFU/mL); (e) Bacterial cell membrane permeability; (f) 
Protein leakage. (* 0.01<P < 0.05, ** 0.001<P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ns P > 0.05).
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
7 

reagent for ORR in the application of fuel cells [65] or metal-air batteries 
[66], which inspired us to develop ZIF-8 nano-coating to facilitate the 
ORR performance of CeO2 NPs for the antioxidative treatment of peri­
odontitis. Furthermore, the aromatic methylimidazole ligand in ZIF-8 is 
recognized as an efficient charge reducing reagent due to its high proton 
affinity, so that coating with ZIF-8 can increase the proportion of 
trivalent cerium ion [67]. Since a thicker ZIF-8 coating possessed higher 
pore volume, specific surface area (Table S2) as well as the content of 
imidazole rings that coordinated with zinc ions (Fig. 2 k and Fig. S7), so 
that the reduction effect was more pronounced on samples with thicker 
ZIF-8 coating. But considering the synergistic effect of both tetravalent 
and trivalent cerium ions in terms of ROS scavenging cycle, C@Z-M with 
medium thickness (also denoted as CeO2@ZIF-8) exhibited superior 
SOD and CAT mimetic activities. As a result, the SOD and CAT mimetic 
activities could be simultaneously enhanced by optimizing the ZIF-8 
shell thickness.
3.2. In vitro investigation for bactericidal capacity and antibacterial 
action mechanism of CeO2@ZIF-8
The bactericidal activity of all core-shell structured nanohybrids was 
examined via minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC). As shown in 
Fig. S10, after co-incubation with sample suspension that equal to or 
greater than the concentration of 2 mg/mL, the bacterial colony number 
was almost to vanishing point for C@Z-H, only some dry powder-like 
particle traces remained on the agar plate, and few bacterial colonies 
(less than 10 CFU) was observed on C@Z-L and C@Z-M. On the contrary, 
very dense and thick colonies are observed for pristine CeO2 NPs, indi­
cating the significant contribution of ZIF-8 coating to the antibacterial 
function of the material. Although enhanced ZIF-8 coating thickness will 
promote its sterilization performance due to the increased positive 
surface charge of nanoparticles (Fig. S4) and zinc ion release (Fig. S7), 
but bacterial colony counting for all three core-shell structured samples 
was less than 10 CFU at 2 mg/mL, so that the minimal bactericidal 
concentration (MBC) values for all samples against three bacterial 
strains were at about 2 mg/mL, and MBC of pristine CeO2 NPs was more 
than 8 mg/mL.
Since all three core-shell structured nanohybrids exhibited almost 
similar antibacterial effects, CeO2@ZIF-8 prepared under medium Zn2+
concentration was chosen as the as the optimized formulation for further 
investigation on account of its superior antioxidative enzyme-like per­
formance (Fig. 3a and Fig. S11). The bacteria that incubated with CeO2 
NPs started to shrink and distortion, but the morphology of all bacteria 
remained largely intact with integrated membrane structure (Fig. 3b). 
On the contrary, after incubation with CeO2@ZIF-8, severe shrinkage 
and corrugation were observed in E. coli and S. mutans, and the integrity 
of bacterial membrane was completely disrupted in MRSA. Interestingly, 
a more clumping situation was observed in the CeO2@ZIF-8 group, 
which might be attributed to the interaction between electropositive 
CeO2@ZIF-8 with electronegative bacterial membrane (Fig. S12). Ac­
cording to the live/dead staining visualization in Fig. 3c, the CeO2@ZIF- 
8 group exhibited much more spreading of red fluorescence (dead) 
compared with pristine CeO2 NPs, while the control group showed 
almost green fluorescence (live) with little red fluorescence scattered 
over. According to the CFU colony counting results (Fig. 3d), the anti­
bacterial efficacy of CeO2@ZIF-8 against three bacterial strains all 
reached 100 %, while the representative antibacterial efficacy for pris­
tine CeO2 NPs was at about 97.20 % for E. coli, 95.45 % for MRSA, 95.04 
% for S. mutans.
The interaction mechanism between CeO2@ZIF-8 and bacterial was 
explored through quantification of protein leakage, bacterial cell 
membrane permeability and ROS levels before and after co-incubation. 
Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was used to monitor the bacterial mem­
brane permeability difficult to its superior penetrability of destabilized 
membrane rather than an intact one [68]. The OD570 values for all three 
bacterial strains that incubated with CeO2@ZIF-8 were much higher 
than that of control or CeO2 group, indicating a more serious damage 
caused by ZIF-8 shell (Fig. 3e). Meanwhile, significantly increased 
intracellular protein leakage appeared in all CeO2@ZIF-8 groups rather 
than others, which further confirmed the destroyed integrity of the 
bacterial membrane after being incubated with CeO2@ZIF-8 (Fig. 3f). 
Although pristine CeO2 NPs could inhibit the bacterial viability due to 
the physical damage caused by the rough surfaces, sharp edges and 
corners, but the bacteriostasis effect is far from enough. The negatively 
charged surface of CeO2 NPs might interfere the microbial adhesion, so 
that to weaken the antibacterial performance. On the contrary, posi­
tively charged CeO2@ZIF-8 could readily adsorbed onto the bacterial 
membrane through electrostatic interaction, thereby destroying the 
membrane integrity by the sharp and rigid ZIF-8 nanocrystals and 
leading to more pronounced protein leakage. It was worth to mention 
that the main antibacterial mechanism of ZIF-8 also involved inducing 
oxidative stress response by the released Zn2+ and imidazole groups [69,
70]. But both pristine CeO2 NPs and CeO2@ZIF-8 possessed 
ROS-scavenging properties, so that the ROS level was also examined 
(Fig. S13) to further understand the interaction between the samples and 
bacteria. Both of the two samples could significantly decrease the ROS 
levels within all three bacterial strains, and the reduction degrees by 
CeO2@ZIF-8 group were much greater than that of CeO2, this was in line 
with the results of antioxidant activity tests. Taking these results 
together, the superior antibacterial efficiency could be ascribed to the 
physical damage caused by CeO2@ZIF-8 adsorption onto bacterial cell 
membrane.
3.3. In vitro evaluation the biocompatibility of CeO2@ZIF-8
The effect of CeO2@ZIF-8 on cell viability was determined via cell 
counting kit-8 (CCK-8) assay, using human bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) as the model cell line (Fig. S14). 
The sterilized samples were suspended in extraction medium at a con­
centration of 2 mg/mL for 24 h to prepare conditioned media. After 1- 
day, 3-day or 5-day incubation, all the cell viability was remained 
more than 100 %, indicating the MBC value of all three core-shell 
structured samples will not induce any negative impact on the cells. 
Specifically, after 1-day incubation, the cell viabilities for CeO2 and 
CeO2@ZIF-8 groups were about 110.53 % and 101.56 %, cells incubated 
with CeO2 increased significantly compared with CeO2@ZIF-8. With 
prolonged incubation time, the cell viabilities were promoted by both of 
the two samples, which reached to 166.81 % for CeO2 and 160.38 % for 
CeO2@ZIF-8, and the increased tendency remains similar among the two 
samples. Besides, the hemocompatibility of the samples was evaluated 
via hemolysis analysis (Fig. S15). The hemolysis ratio for both CeO2 and 
CeO2@ZIF-8 were below 5 % (national standard). Overall, these data 
demonstrated that CeO2@ZIF-8 possessed favorable biocompatibility.
3.4. Verification the cellular protection effect of CeO2@ZIF-8 against 
oxidative stress
The ROS scavenging properties of the samples under inflammatory 
microenvironment were investigated via H2O2 stimulated cellular 
oxidative stress model. The treatment concentration of particle sus­
pension and H2O2 were determined by CCK-8 assay. Compared with 
CeO2 groups (cell viabilities were more than 80 % at all concentrations), 
the cell viabilities were suppressed when incubated with CeO2@ZIF-8 at 
higher concentration range, but being restored and promoted when the 
concentration was diluted below 0.25 mg/mL, due to the does- 
dependent cytotoxicity of Zn2+ in the outer shell of CeO2@ZIF-8 
(Fig. S16a). After treated with 5 μM H2O2 aqueous solution for 6 h, cell 
viability was significantly suppressed to the median inhibition concen­
tration (Fig. S16b). So that the cellular protective effect and anti- 
oxidative activity of the samples were determined under 5 μM H2O2 
treatment at suspension concentration of 0.03 mg/mL. Meanwhile, un­
treated hBMSCs was employed as control group to determine the basal 
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
8 

ROS level.
As shown in Fig. 4a, without H2O2 treatment, the viabilities of 
hBMSCs that incubated with pristine CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 almost 
remained the same, but with the H2O2 treatment, the viability of 
hBMSCs was significantly suppressed to 45.98 % due to the oxidative 
stress injury; the cell survival rate could be effectively enhanced to 
109.52 % by pre-treatment with CeO2@ZIF-8, the pre-treatment with 
CeO2 NPs could also relieve the oxidative stress injury and restore the 
cell viability to 91.91 %, which was closely to the viability of hBMSCs 
without H2O2 treatment, but slightly lower than that of CeO2@ZIF-8 
group. The elimination of ROS was quantitatively detected via 2′,7′- 
Dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) probe. As shown in 
Fig. 4b, both two samples could significantly decrease ROS levels 
whether the cells were with or without H2O2 treatment, the ROS scav­
enging property of CeO2@ZIF-8 was much stronger than that of pristine 
CeO2 NPs. This was further confirmed by the fluorescence images 
(Fig. 4c), the intensity of fluorescence was significantly increased by 
H2O2 treatment, the pre-treatment with CeO2 or CeO2@ZIF-8 could 
eliminate the overwhelming ROS with varying degrees of fluorescence 
quenching, and the fluorescence intensity of CeO2@ZIF-8 was less 
obvious than that of CeO2 NPs, manifesting superior ROS scavenging 
activity after coating with ZIF-8 shell. Besides, pre-treatment with 
CeO2@ZIF-8 extract alone could not effectively restore the cell viability, 
even at higher concentration about 2 mg/mL (Fig. S16c). The extraor­
dinary cellular protective effect of CeO2@ZIF-8 could be mainly ascribed 
to the construction of core-shell structured nanohybrids. It is worth to 
mention that, because of the appropriately increased Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio 
that simultaneously facilitated both SOD and CAT mimetic activities, the 
highest improvement was found in the sample with medium-thick ZIF-8 
coating (Fig. S17). On the contrary, the cell viability for C@Z-H was 
much lower than that of C@Z-M, which might be attributed to the much 
lower Ce4+ proportion and higher coating thickness that suppress its 
ROS scavenging performance (especially for Ce4+ mediated CAT-like 
activity). Similarly, the ROS level on C@Z-M was the lowest among all 
the samples, which was corresponding to the SOD and CAT activity tests. 
Therefore, encapsulation of CeO2 NPs with medium-thick ZIF-8 coating 
would simultaneously facilitate both SOD and CAT mimetic activities, so 
that provide superior cellular protective effect against oxidative stress.
The inhibiting effect against oxidative stress induced cellular injury 
was further confirmed by live/dead staining and immunofluorescence 
staining after pre-treated with the two samples. As shown in Fig. 4d, 
without H2O2 treatment, minimal cell death in hBMSCs was observed 
after pre-treatment with pristine CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 at suspension 
concentration of 0.03 mg/mL, which was well corresponding to the 
quantitative CCK-8 results. On the contrary, H2O2 treatment signifi­
cantly decreased cell viability. The pre-treatment with both CeO2 NPs 
and CeO2@ZIF-8 can suppress cell apoptosis, and stronger fluorescence 
intensity was observed on CeO2@ZIF-8 group (Fig. 4d). To validate the 
cell morphology changes caused by varying degrees of oxidative dam­
age, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) labeled phalloidin and 4’,6-dia­
midino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) were used to dye cell nucleus and 
cytoskeleton (Fig. 4e). The morphology of hBMSCs remained integrity 
and almost unchanged with the pre-treatment of CeO2 NPs or CeO2@­
ZIF-8. All those results indicated the superior ROS scavenging property 
and extraordinary biocompatibility of CeO2@ZIF-8, thereby reducing 
the oxidative stress injury and restoring the cell viability.
3.5. In vitro osteogenic differentiation assessment of CeO2@ZIF-8
To explore the osteogenic promotion effect of the samples, the dif­
ferentiation of hBMSCs cocultured with CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 was 
investigated by measuring the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and 
extracellular matrix mineralization using ALP staining and alizarin red 
staining (ARS). Coating with ZIF-8 shell could increase the ALP activities 
and degrees of mineralization due to the introduction of zinc ions. 
Although the increased degree was positively related to the ZIF-8 
coating thickness, but the ALP activities and OD intensity of ARS were 
remained almost the same for the samples prepared under medium and 
high concentrations of Zn2+ that coordination with organic linkers 
(Fig. S18). The ALP activities of hBMSCs significantly increased on day 7 
when incubating with CeO2@ZIF-8 in both proliferation medium (PM) 
and osteogenic medium (OM), which was characterized by the denser 
ALP staining for CeO2@ZIF-8 than that of control or CeO2 groups 
(Fig. 5a). Similarly, the hBMSCs incubated with CeO2@ZIF-8 indicated 
greater mineralized nodules and higher degrees of mineralization 
compared with pristine CeO2 NPs and control (Fig. 5b).
To further evaluate the osteogenic activities at the gene level, the 
expression of osteogenic genes and proteins including ALP, osteocalcin 
(OCN), runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) and osterix (OSX) 
were detected by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-qPCR) (Fig. 5c–f). Notably, the results exhibited the same 
growth tendency, in which the osteogenic markers of hBMSCs were all 
significantly up-regulated for CeO2 NPs and CeO2@ZIF-8 group in both 
PM and OM, and the increase trends were even more dramatic for 
CeO2@ZIF-8 group. Taken together, these results showed that coating 
with ZIF-8 shell could significantly promote hBMSCs proliferation and 
differentiation in both earlier and later stage.
3.6. Evaluation the treatment efficacy of CeO2@ZIF-8 for periodontitis
The antibacterial activity, cytotoxicity and osteogenic property for 
three core-shell structured samples possess similar efficiency, but the 
core-shell structured sample with medium-thick ZIF-8 coating possessed 
superior SOD and CAT mimetic activities and cellular protective effect, 
so that was selected as the optimized formulation and was used for in 
vivo evaluation. The therapeutic efficacy for ameliorating periodontitis 
was verified via periodontitis rat model. As shown in Fig. 6a, the rats 
were suffered with ligature placement and high-glucose-diet for 8 weeks 
to successfully establish the periodontitis model. Afterwards, the 
injectable platform containing PEG with either CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF- 
8 were locally injected in periodontal pocket to cover the periodontitis 
lesion, using the healthy rat as the control group. According to the 
micro-CT tomographic images of the sagittal planes and 3D recon­
struction images of the rat maxillary alveolar bone (Fig. 6b), compared 
with the control group, the vertical distance between the alveolar bone 
crest (ABC) and the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) was the longest in 
the periodontitis group, indicating the obvious bone loss caused by the 
inflammatory damage. In contrast, the injection of CeO2 NPs or 
CeO2@ZIF-8 treatment platform can significantly decrease the distance 
between ABC and CEJ (Fig. 6c), the decrease trend was even more 
dramatic for CeO2@ZIF-8 group, indicating the enhanced osteogenic 
property by construction of the core-shell structured nanohybrids.
The therapeutic effect of CeO2@ZIF-8 was further evaluated via Gi­
emsa staining, Hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining and Masson staining 
(Fig. 6d–f). According to histological staining results, severe and 
destructive inflammatory status of alveolar bone was observed in the 
periodontitis group, manifesting by significant infiltration of inflam­
matory cells, notable collagen loss and the presence of bacteria coloni­
zation (emphasized by red arrows), and the amounts of bacteria and 
bone loss is relieved in CeO2 group. On the contrary, the bacterial 
infection caused inflammatory response was significantly attenuated by 
treatment with CeO2@ZIF-8. Barely no bacteria colonization was 
observed in CeO2@ZIF-8 group. The inflammatory cells ratio in 
CeO2@ZIF-8 group calculated from H&E staining was at about 10.19 %, 
which was relatively lower than that of periodontitis (40.52 %) and 
CeO2 (11.09 %) groups (Fig. S19). In addition, new bone formation was 
observed in the two treatment groups, and the bone mass was much 
higher in CeO2@ZIF-8 than that in CeO2 or periodontitis groups.
The safety of CeO2@ZIF-8 was evaluated via H&E staining of major 
organs. As shown in Fig. S20, compared to the control group, there was 
no significant histopathological necrosis, hydropic degeneration or 
inflammation lesion observed in heart, liver, spleen, lung and kidney 
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
9 

Fig. 4. Verification the cellular protection effect of core-shell structured nanohybrids against oxidative stress: (a) Viability of CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 pre-treated 
hBMSCs with [denoted as H2O2(−)] or without H2O2 stimulation [denoted as H2O2(+)]; (b) Quantitatively measurement of ROS scavenging property of different 
samples via DCFH-DA staining; (c) Fluorescence images of DCFH-DA staining; (d) Live/dead staining of CeO2 or CeO2@ZIF-8 pre-treated hBMSCs with [denoted as 
H2O2(−)] or without H2O2 stimulation [denoted as H2O2(+)]; (e) FITC staining of CeO2 or CeO2@ZIF-8 pre-treated hBMSCs with [denoted as H2O2(−)] or without 
H2O2 stimulation [denoted as H2O2(+)]. (* 0.01<P < 0.05, ** 0.001<P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ns P > 0.05).
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
10 

after treatment with CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8. Blood routine analysis 
further verified that the levels of red blood cell, while blood cell, he­
moglobin and platelet were all within the normal range (Fig. S21). Since 
CeO2@ZIF-8 exhibited superior anti-infection performance, treatment 
with CeO2@ZIF-8 can significantly decrease the levels of white blood 
cell compared with CeO2 group. Besides, CeO2@ZIF-8 could also 
significantly decrease the levels of the serious inflammatory cytokines 
which participated in the pathogenesis of periodontitis (Fig. S22). These 
outcomes demonstrated that the construction of core-shell structured 
CeO2@ZIF-8 could simultaneously improve the antibacterial activity 
and antioxidative property, so that to restore the inflammatory micro­
environment and facilitate alveolar bone regeneration.
3.7. Mechanism exploration of CeO2@ZIF-8 in promoting osteogenic 
activity
According to the above results, construction of core-shell structured 
CeO2@ZIF-8 could relieve oxidative stress injury and facilitate osteo­
genesis. To explore the comprehensive understanding of the effect of 
cellular protecting and osteogenesis for CeO2@ZIF-8 at the molecular 
level, high-throughput RNA-Sequencing was employed to quantify 
transcriptional alterations of CeO2@ZIF-8 in hBMSCs, using OM treated 
hBMSCs as the control group, CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 pre-treated 
hBMSCs as the experimental groups. According to the result of differ­
entially expressed genes (DEGs) counting in Fig. S23a, there were 3424 
upregulated and 3803 downregulated genes in the comparison between 
Fig. 5. In vitro osteogenic differentiation assessment of core-shell structured nanohybrids: (a) ALP staining at day 7; (b) ARS staining at day 7; (c) Quantitatively 
measurement of ALP activity of hBMSCs after incubated with CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8; (d) Quantitatively measurement of ARS activity of hBMSCs after incubated 
with different samples; (e–h) The expression of osteogenic genes of hBMMSCs at days 7. (* 0.01<P < 0.05, ** 0.001<P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ns P > 0.05).
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
11 

Fig. 6. Evaluation the treatment efficacy of injectable platform containing PEG with either CeO2 NPs or CeO2@ZIF-8 for periodontitis: (a) Graphic illustration of the 
establishing of periodontitis animal model; (b) Sagittal and coronal tomographic images of micro-CT and 3D reconstruction images of rat maxillary alveolar bones in 
each group; (c) The semi-quantitative analysis of CEJ-ABC based on coronal tomographic images; (d) H&E staining of periodontal tissue; (e) Masson staining of 
periodontal tissue; (f) Giemsa staining of periodontal tissue; (* 0.01<P < 0.05, ** 0.001<P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ns P > 0.05).
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
12 

OM and CeO2@ZIF-8 (p < 0.05), 3552 upregulated and 3921 down­
regulated genes in the comparison between CeO2 NPs and CeO2@ZIF-8, 
while the difference between OM and CeO2 was relatively marginal. The 
Venn diagram was obtained by calculating the fragments per kilobase of 
exon model per million mapped fragments (FPKM) of differently 
expressed genes in OM, CeO2 and CeO2@ZIF-8 groups (Fig. S23b), CeO2 
NPs pre-treated hBMSCs exhibited the largest number of differentially 
expressed genes than that of CeO2@ZIF-8 pre-treated hBMSCs, so as we 
focused on the difference comparison between these two groups.
The volcano map of the transcriptome sequencing results elucidated 
the reliability of the differentially expressed genes in CeO2 NPs or 
CeO2@ZIF-8 pre-treated hBMSCs (Fig. 7a). Further analysis of these 
DEGs using Gene Ontology (GO) pathway enrichment showed that the 
catalytic-related genes and antioxidant-related genes in CeO2@ZIF-8 
group exhibited higher expression than that of CeO2 group (Fig. 7b). 
According to the enrichment bubble diagram in Fig. 7c and d, the 
upregulated genes were significantly enriched in oxidoreductase activ­
ity. Analysis of gene expression levels in the genes enriched in this 
pathway showed that antioxidant related cytoplasmic CuZn-SOD 
(SOD1) was highly expressed in CeO2@ZIF-8 pre-treated hBMSCs 
(Fig. 7e), which is recognized as the leading defense against O2
•- in the 
cellular antioxidative process [31]. According to the Western Blot 
verification, CeO2@ZIF-8 could significantly promote the production of 
SOD1 protein expression in hBMSCs compared to CeO2 or control groups 
(Fig. 7f and Fig. S24). This was further validated by SOD1 immunohis­
tochemical staining in periodontal tissue (Fig. 7g).
ROS have emerged as essential participants in regulating stem cell 
fate and function in maintaining the bone homeostasis as well as 
balancing osteoclastogenesis and osteoblastogenesis [71]. Normally, 
intracellular ROS exist at pico-to nano-molar levels to participate in 
infection defense, immune regulation and signal transduction of peri­
odontal tissue [20]. The SOD and CAT in enzymatic antioxidant system 
are of crucial significance in balancing the production and elimination of 
ROS [72]. O2
•- radical is a major culprit that associated with inflamma­
tion and primary precursor in the formation of various other harmful 
ROS, in the ROS scavenging cycle, SOD is capable of catalyzing the 
conversion of O2
•- into H2O2, while CAT can further decompose H2O2 
into O2 and H2O, so as to avoid the accumulation of ROS at a toxic level 
[73]. However, in inflammatory state, the production of ROS drastically 
exceeds the scavenging capacity by such antioxidant enzymes [74]. The 
excessive ROS can cause mitochondrial oxidative damage that further 
exacerbates mitochondrial dysfunction and evoke increased ROS pro­
duction, thereby causing a detrimental cycle in terms of oxidative injury 
[75]. Besides, the abnormalities in redox status facilitates the differen­
tiation of pre-osteoclast but inhibits the proliferation of osteoblast, the 
imbalance between osteogenic and osteoclastic activities ultimately 
impair the bone regeneration process [76]. Numerous studies have 
proven that CeO2 based nanozymes can relieve cellular oxidative dam­
age and repair mitochondrial function via upregulating the expression 
levels of SOD [77]. The upregulated SOD could protect DNA damage, 
inhibit osteoclastogenesis as well as favor new bone formation [30,60,
78,79]. The antioxidative enzyme-like activities of CeO2 NPs, especially 
the SOD mimetic activity, is positively related to the proportion of 
trivalent to tetravalent cerium ion. Nevertheless, in the inflammatory 
state, the SOD mimetic activity of CeO2 suffered from the challenge of 
highly oxidative microenvironment, where the excessive production of 
ROS, especially H2O2, may oxidase the cerium ion from trivalence to 
tetravalence, so that to weaken the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio and impair the 
whole ROS scavenging cycle. Since SOD is a pivotal cellular ROS scav­
enger that participate in the SOD-CAT double enzyme cascade to sup­
press inflammation and oxidative injury. In this study, the construction 
of core-shell structured CeO2@ZIF-8 could appropriately increase the 
proportion of trivalent to tetravalent cerium ion, so as to upregulate 
oxidoreductase activity and facilitate the potential activation of SOD1 
[80–82]. Therefore, the activity of SOD1 was significantly enhanced by 
pre-treatment of CeO2@ZIF-8, thus to enhance the cellular protective 
effect and facilitate osteogenic differentiation both in vitro and in vivo.
Consequently, the potential mechanisms of our study were described 
in Fig. 8. The treatment of periodontitis is a complex process which 
involved a sequence of therapeutic demands in terms of antibacterial, 
ROS-scavenging and osteogenesis. Colonization of dental plaque mi­
croorganisms is regarded as the initiating factor of periodontitis. The 
virulence factors secreted by periodontal pathogens can induce host 
immune response as well as accumulation of excessive ROS in the sur­
rounding microenvironment, which further cause cellular oxidative 
stress response, aggravation of inflammation and loss of alveolar bone 
[83]. Additionally, oxidative stress may also cause mitochondrial 
dysfunction, further inhibits the osteogenic differentiation through 
downregulating the osteogenesis related genes in terms of Runx2 and 
osteocalcin [84]. Compare with pristine CeO2 NPs, CeO2@ZIF-8 
exhibited enhanced antibacterial activity due to the electropositive na­
ture and nano-daggers effect. Moreover, CeO2@ZIF-8 could promote 
SOD and CAT mimetic activities, and directly scavenge extracellular 
ROS, through appropriately increase the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio, so that to 
alleviate the cellular oxidative stress injury and decrease the production 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Besides, CeO2@ZIF-8 could activate 
oxidoreductase activity and upregulate expression of SOD1, so that to 
relive the oxidative stress and upregulated the expression of osteo­
genesis related genes and proteins. Under such potential mechanisms, 
construction of core-shell structured CeO2@ZIF-8 could eventually 
improve the antioxidant activity and promote osteogenic differentia­
tion, leading to enhanced alveolar bone regeneration in periodontal 
animal models. Therefore, CeO2@ZIF-8 is expected to provide an 
effective treatment strategy for periodontitis.
4. Conclusion
In summary, we have constructed a core-shell structured nanohybrid 
CeO2@ZIF-8 with bacteriostasis, ROS scavenging and osteogenesis 
properties for the treatment of periodontitis. By virtue of regulating the 
proportion of trivalent to tetravalent cerium ion through manipulating 
the ZIF-8 shell thickness, the enzyme-mimetic activity, bactericidal ac­
tivity and biocompatibility of CeO2@ZIF-8 was optimized. Benefiting 
from the nanohybrid core-shell structure, CeO2@ZIF-8 exhibited an in­
crease in SOD and CAT mimetic activities compared with pristine CeO2 
NPs due to the enhanced Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio, thus to weaken the cellular 
oxidative stress injury caused by H2O2 stimulation and provide 
extraordinary cellular protective effect. Meanwhile, CeO2@ZIF-8 could 
significantly inhibit the viability of MRSA, E. coli and S. mutans, as well 
as facilitating osteogenic differentiation. In vivo, CeO2@ZIF-8 containing 
platform exhibited excellent antibacterial activities, alleviated the 
inflammation response and promoted alveolar bone regeneration. The 
underlying mechanism was explored via bioinformatic analysis, the 
result indicated that CeO2@ZIF-8 could activate oxidoreductase activity 
and upregulate expression of SOD1, so that to relive the oxidative stress 
and upregulated the expression of osteogenesis related genes and pro­
teins. The above findings indicated that the construction of core-shell 
structured CeO2@ZIF-8 could simultaneously fulfill the therapeutic de­
mand in the treatment of periodontitis.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yameng Yu: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Project admin­
istration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Xiwen Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Validation, 
Software, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. 
Yufeng Zheng: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding 
acquisition, Conceptualization. Dandan Xia: Writing – review & edit­
ing, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Yunsong Liu: Writing – review 
& editing, Supervision, Investigation, Funding acquisition.
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
13 

(caption on next page)
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
14 

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the National Key Research and Devel­
opment Program of China (2023YFC2412600); the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (82370924); the Beijing Nova Program 
(20230484459); the Young Beijing Scholars Program (2024–089); the 
Beijing Natural Science Foundation (7242173, L242157); the Clinical 
Medicine Plus X-Young Scholars Project of Peking University, the 
Fundamental 
Research 
Funds 
for 
the 
Central 
Universities 
(PKU2024LCXQ014); and the Research Foundation of Peking University 
School and Hospital of Stomatology (PKUSS20230104).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2025.123588.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] B.L. Pihlstrom, B.S. Michalowicz, N.W. Johnson, Periodontal diseases, Lancet 366 
(2005) 1809–1820.
[2] T. Vos, C. Allen, M. Arora, R.M. Barber, Z.A. Bhutta, A. Brown, et al., Global, 
regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 
Fig. 7. The mechanism of CeO2@ZIF-8 in promoting osteogenic activity in vitro and in vivo: (a) The volcano map of the transcriptome sequencing results of hBMSCs 
after pre-treated with different samples, in the volcano map, the differentially expressed genes were calculated as log 2 × fold change (FC) > 1.00 and p < 0.05 by the 
software DESeq2; (b) Gene Ontology enriched molecular function; (c) GO enrichment analysis of biological processes for top 20 upregulated pathways between CeO2 
NPs and CeO2@ZIF-8 treated hBMSCs, the x-axis represents the GeneRatio, the y-axis shows gene set names, the size of the triangle represents the number of genes in 
that gene set, and the color of the triangle represents the q value of hypergeometric test; (d) Chord plot shows the distribution of DEGs in different GO-enriched 
functions; (e) Gene clustering heat maps of hBMSCs after pre-treated with different samples; (f) Western blot verification showed the levels of SOD1 and GAPDH 
in hBMSCs pre-treated with different samples; (g) SOD1 immunohistochemical staining in periodontal tissue according to in vivo experiments. (For interpretation of 
the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Fig. 8. The overall mechanisms by which CeO2@ZIF-8 scavenge ROS and facilitate osteogenic differentiation.
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
15 

310 diseases and injuries, 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the global burden 
of disease study 2015, Lancet 388 (2016) 1545–1602.
[3] R.J. Genco, M. Sanz, Clinical and public health implications of periodontal and 
systemic diseases: an overview, Periodontol 2000 83 (2020) 7–13.
[4] Z. Shen, S. Kuang, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Wang, C. Xu, et al., Restoring periodontal 
tissue homoeostasis prevents cognitive decline by reducing the number of 
Serpina3nhigh astrocytes in the hippocampus, Innovation 5 (2024) 100547.
[5] T. Kwon, I.B. Lamster, L. Levin, Current concepts in the management of 
periodontitis, Int. Dent. J. 71 (2021) 462–476.
[6] Y. Xi, Y. Wang, J. Gao, Y. Xiao, J. Du, Dual corona vesicles with intrinsic 
antibacterial and enhanced antibiotic delivery capabilities for effective treatment 
of biofilm-induced periodontitis, ACS Nano 13 (2019) 13645–13657.
[7] X. Chen, N. Huang, D. Wang, M. Zhang, X. Deng, F. Guo, et al., Sulfated chitosan- 
modified CuS nanocluster: a versatile nanoformulation for simultaneous 
antibacterial and bone regenerative therapy in periodontitis, ACS Nano 18 (2024) 
14312–14326.
[8] M. Czesnikiewicz-Guzik, G. Osmenda, M. Siedlinski, R. Nosalski, P. Pelka, 
D. Nowakowski, et al., Causal association between periodontitis and hypertension: 
evidence from Mendelian randomization and a randomized controlled trial of non- 
surgical periodontal therapy, Eur. Heart J. 40 (2019) 3459–3470.
[9] D. Larsson, C.-F. Flach, Antibiotic resistance in the environment, Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 20 (2022) 257–269.
[10] F. Graziani, D. Karapetsa, B. Alonso, D. Herrera, Nonsurgical and surgical 
treatment of periodontitis: how many options for one disease? Periodontology 
2000 75 (2017) 152–188.
[11] C. Fang, L. Wu, M.-J. Zhao, T. Deng, J.-M. Gu, X.-P. Guo, et al., Periodontitis 
exacerbates benign prostatic hyperplasia through regulation of oxidative stress and 
inflammation, Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2021 (2021) 1–11.
[12] Y. Xu, Y. Luo, Z. Weng, H. Xu, W. Zhang, Q. Li, et al., Microenvironment-responsive 
metal-phenolic nanozyme release platform with antibacterial, ROS scavenging, and 
osteogenesis for periodontitis, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 18732–18746.
[13] N. Yan, J. Xu, G. Liu, C. Ma, L. Bao, Y. Cong, et al., Penetrating macrophage-based 
nanoformulation for periodontitis treatment, ACS Nano 16 (2022) 18253–18265.
[14] A. Dhall, W. Self, Cerium oxide nanoparticles: a brief review of their synthesis 
methods and biomedical applications, Antioxidants 7 (2018) 97.
[15] X. Li, M. Qi, X. Sun, M.D. Weir, F.R. Tay, T.W. Oates, et al., Surface treatments on 
titanium implants via nanostructured ceria for antibacterial and anti-inflammatory 
capabilities, Acta Biomater. 94 (2019) 627–643.
[16] S. Bao, D. Yu, Z. Tang, H. Wu, H. Zhang, N. Wang, et al., Conformationally 
regulated “nanozyme-like” cerium oxide with multiple free radical scavenging 
activities for osteoimmunology modulation and vascularized osseointegration, 
Bioact. Mater. 34 (2024) 64–79.
[17] Y. Huang, M. Zhang, M. Jin, T. Ma, J. Guo, X. Zhai, et al., Recent advances on 
cerium oxide-based biomaterials: toward the next generation of intelligent 
theranostics platforms, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 12 (2023) 2300748.
[18] F. Fragou, A. Zindrou, Y. Deligiannakis, M. Louloudi, Engineering of oxygen- 
deficient Nano-CeO2–x with tunable biocidal and antioxidant activity, ACS Appl. 
Nano Mater. 7 (2024) 10552–10564.
[19] B. Yuan, Z. Tan, Q. Guo, X. Shen, C. Zhao, J.L. Chen, et al., Regulating the H2O2 
activation pathway on a well-defined CeO2 nanozyme allows the entire steering of 
its specificity between associated enzymatic reactions, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 
17383–17393.
[20] E. Chen, T. Wang, Y. Tu, Z. Sun, Y. Ding, Z. Gu, et al., ROS-scavenging biomaterials 
for periodontitis, J. Mater. Chem. B 11 (2023) 482–499.
[21] Y.G. Kim, Y. Lee, N. Lee, M. Soh, D. Kim, T. Hyeon, Ceria-based therapeutic 
antioxidants for biomedical applications, Adv. Mater. 36 (2024) 2210819.
[22] Y. Yu, S. Zhao, D. Gu, B. Zhu, H. Liu, W. Wu, et al., Cerium oxide nanozyme 
attenuates periodontal bone destruction by inhibiting the ROS–NFκB pathway, 
Nanoscale 14 (2022) 2628–2637.
[23] S. Ren, Y. Zhou, R. Fan, W. Peng, X. Xu, L. Li, et al., Constructing biocompatible 
MSN@ Ce@ PEG nanoplatform for enhancing regenerative capability of stem cell 
via ROS-scavenging in periodontitis, Chem. Eng. J. 423 (2021) 130207.
[24] S. Ren, Y. Zhou, K. Zheng, X. Xu, J. Yang, X. Wang, et al., Cerium oxide 
nanoparticles loaded nanofibrous membranes promote bone regeneration for 
periodontal tissue engineering, Bioact. Mater. 7 (2022) 242–253.
[25] L. Zhang, Y. Gao, Z. Wang, Y. Qi, L. Li, T. Wang, et al., Erythrocyte-like mesoporous 
PDA@ CeO2 nanozyme with dual drugs for periodontitis treatment, ACS Appl. Bio 
Mater. 7 (2024) 2851–2861.
[26] Y. Wang, C. Li, Y. Wan, M. Qi, Q. Chen, Y. Sun, et al., Quercetin-loaded ceria 
nanocomposite potentiate dual-directional immunoregulation via macrophage 
polarization against periodontal inflammation, Small 17 (2021) 2101505.
[27] Y. Sun, X. Sun, X. Li, W. Li, C. Li, Y. Zhou, et al., A versatile nanocomposite based 
on nanoceria for antibacterial enhancement and protection from aPDT-aggravated 
inflammation via modulation of macrophage polarization, Biomaterials 268 (2021) 
120614.
[28] T. Naganuma, Tunable phosphate-mediated stability of Ce 3+ ions in cerium oxide 
nanoparticles for enhanced switching efficiency of their anti/pro-oxidant activities, 
Biomater. Sci. 9 (2021) 1345–1354.
[29] O.E. Medina, J. Gallego, L.G. Restrepo, F.B. Cort´es, C.A. Franco, Influence of the 
Ce4+/Ce3+ Redox-couple on the cyclic regeneration for adsorptive and catalytic 
performance of NiO-PdO/CeO2±δ nanoparticles for n-C7 asphaltene steam 
gasification, Nanomaterials 9 (2019) 734.
[30] W. Hu, K.H.R. Yie, C. Liu, J. Zhu, Z. Huang, B. Zhu, et al., Improving the valence 
self-reversible conversion of cerium nanoparticles on titanium implants by 
lanthanum doping to enhance ROS elimination and osteogenesis, Dent. Mater. 38 
(2022) 1362–1375.
[31] Y. Sun, X. Liu, L. Wang, L. Xu, K. Liu, L. Xu, et al., High-performance SOD mimetic 
enzyme Au@ Ce for arresting cell cycle and proliferation of acute myeloid 
leukemia, Bioact. Mater. 10 (2022) 117–130.
[32] M. Soh, D.W. Kang, H.G. Jeong, D. Kim, D.Y. Kim, W. Yang, et al., Ceria–Zirconia 
nanoparticles as an enhanced multi-antioxidant for sepsis treatment, Angew. 
Chem. 129 (2017) 11557–11561.
[33] S-s Ding, L. He, X-w Bian, G. Tian, Metal-organic frameworks-based nanozymes for 
combined cancer therapy, Nano Today 35 (2020) 100920.
[34] J. Guo, L. Yang, Z. Gao, C. Zhao, Y. Mei, Y.-Y. Song, Insight of MOF environment- 
dependent enzyme activity via MOFs-in-nanochannels configuration, ACS Catal. 10 
(2020) 5949–5958.
[35] Y. Yu, Y. Zhong, D. Xie, G. Luo, Y. Mao, M. Yuan, et al., Fe3O4 nanorods coated 
with ZIF-8 and decorated with Pt nanoparticles as magnetically actuated nanoscale 
stirring bars for catalytic dye degradation, H2 production, and hydrogenation of 
olefins, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 4 (2021) 10999–11006.
[36] Y. Pang, M. Zhao, Y. Xie, Y. Wang, Y. You, Y. Ke, et al., Multifunctional ac@ ZIF-8/ 
AgNPs nanoplatform with pH-responsive and ROS scavenging antibacterial 
properties promotes infected wound healing, Chem. Eng. J. 489 (2024) 151485.
[37] M.Z. Zou, W.L. Liu, C.X. Li, D.W. Zheng, J.Y. Zeng, F. Gao, et al., A multifunctional 
biomimetic nanoplatform for relieving hypoxia to enhance chemotherapy and 
inhibit the PD-1/PD-L1 axis, Small 14 (2018) 1801120.
[38] W. Zhang, S. Li, X. Liu, C. Yang, N. Hu, L. Dou, et al., Oxygen-generating MnO2 
nanodots-anchored versatile nanoplatform for combined chemo-photodynamic 
therapy in hypoxic cancer, Adv. Funct. Mater. 28 (2018) 1706375.
[39] C. Li, Y. Li, S. Wu, G. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhao, et al., Flexible scaffold modulation of spatial 
structure and function of hierarchically porous nanoparticle@ZIF-8 composites to 
enhance field deployable disease diagnostics, Small Methods (2024) 2400738.
[40] Z. Qi, Y. Pei, T.W. Goh, Z. Wang, X. Li, M. Lowe, et al., Conversion of confined 
metal@ ZIF-8 structures to intermetallic nanoparticles supported on nitrogen- 
doped carbon for electrocatalysis, Nano Res. 11 (2018) 3469–3479.
[41] J. Chen, L. Huang, Q. Wang, W. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Fang, et al., Bio-inspired 
nanozyme: a hydratase mimic in a zeolitic imidazolate framework, Nanoscale 11 
(2019) 5960–5966.
[42] Y. Zhong, Y. Yang, Y. Xu, B. Qian, S. Huang, Q. Long, et al., Design of a Zn-based 
nanozyme injectable multifunctional hydrogel with ROS scavenging activity for 
myocardial infarction therapy, Acta Biomater. 177 (2024) 62–76.
[43] Y. Li, C. Xu, J. Mao, L. Mao, W. Li, Z. Liu, et al., ZIF-8-based nanoparticles for 
inflammation treatment and oxidative stress reduction in periodontitis, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 16 (2024) 36077–36094.
[44] L. He, G. Huang, H. Liu, C. Sang, X. Liu, T. Chen, Highly bioactive zeolitic 
imidazolate framework-8–capped nanotherapeutics for efficient reversal of 
reperfusion-induced injury in ischemic stroke, Sci. Adv. 6 (2020) eaay9751.
[45] D. Han, X. Liu, S. Wu, Metal organic framework-based antibacterial agents and 
their underlying mechanisms, Chem. Soc. Rev. 51 (2022) 7138–7169.
[46] Y. Liu, T. Li, M. Sun, Z. Cheng, W. Jia, K. Jiao, et al., ZIF-8 modified multifunctional 
injectable photopolymerizable GelMA hydrogel for the treatment of periodontitis, 
Acta Biomater. 146 (2022) 37–48.
[47] X. Li, M. Qi, C. Li, B. Dong, J. Wang, M.D. Weir, et al., Novel nanoparticles of 
cerium-doped zeolitic imidazolate frameworks with dual benefits of antibacterial 
and anti-inflammatory functions against periodontitis, J. Mater. Chem. B 7 (2019) 
6955–6971.
[48] W. Liu, X. Liu, L. Feng, J. Guo, A. Xie, S. Wang, et al., The synthesis of CeO 2 
nanospheres with different hollowness and size induced by copper doping, 
Nanoscale 6 (2014) 10693–10700.
[49] X. Huang, S. Yan, D. Deng, L. Zhang, R. Liu, Y. Lv, Novel strategy for engineering 
the metal-oxide@ MOF core@ shell architecture and its applications in 
cataluminescence sensing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13 (2021) 3471–3480.
[50] J. Li, S. Song, J. Meng, L. Tan, X. Liu, Y. Zheng, et al., 2D MOF periodontitis 
photodynamic ion therapy, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143 (2021) 15427–15439.
[51] D.D. Kachhadiya, Z. Murthy, Preparation and characterization of ZIF-8 and ZIF-67 
incorporated poly (vinylidene fluoride) membranes for pervaporative separation of 
methanol/water mixtures, Mater. Today Chem. 22 (2021) 100591.
[52] Y.-R. Lee, M.-S. Jang, H.-Y. Cho, H.-J. Kwon, S. Kim, W.-S. Ahn, ZIF-8: a 
comparison of synthesis methods, Chem. Eng. J. 271 (2015) 276–280.
[53] T.N. Ravishankar, T. Ramakrishnappa, G. Nagaraju, H. Rajanaika, Synthesis and 
characterization of CeO2 nanoparticles via solution combustion method for 
photocatalytic and antibacterial activity studies, ChemistryOpen 4 (2015) 
146–154.
[54] H. Kaur, G.C. Mohanta, V. Gupta, D. Kukkar, S. Tyagi, Synthesis and 
characterization of ZIF-8 nanoparticles for controlled release of 6-mercaptopurine 
drug, J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 41 (2017) 106–112.
[55] H. Zhang, M. Zhao, Y. Yang, Y. Lin, Hydrolysis and condensation of ZIF-8 in water, 
Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 288 (2019) 109568.
[56] D. Yang, Y. Li, L. Zhao, F. Cheng, L. Chang, D. Wu, Constructing ZIF-8-decorated 
montmorillonite composite with charge neutralization effect and pore structure 
optimization for enhanced Pb2+ capture from water, Chem. Eng. J. 466 (2023) 
143014.
[57] Z. Shi, K. Li, J. Li, Y. Ding, X. Zheng, Morphological dependency of antioxidant 
enzyme-like activities of nanoceria in energy-band structure aspect, J. Nano Res. 
25 (2023) 200.
[58] K. Quan, Y. Lu, T. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Tang, C. Yu, et al., Magnetically-drivable, 
pH-responsive Fe3O4/ZIF-8 coating on implant for biofilm prevention and 
treatment, Nano Today 64 (2025) 102772.
[59] Q. Sun, H. Bi, Z. Wang, C. Li, X. Wang, J. Xu, et al., Hyaluronic acid-targeted and 
pH-responsive drug delivery system based on metal-organic frameworks for 
efficient antitumor therapy, Biomaterials 223 (2019) 119473.
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
16 

[60] F. Wei, C.J. Neal, T.S. Sakthivel, Y. Fu, M. Omer, A. Adhikary, et al., A novel 
approach for the prevention of ionizing radiation-induced bone loss using a 
designer multifunctional cerium oxide nanozyme, Bioact. Mater. 21 (2023) 
547–565.
[61] S. Shen, Y. Sun, H. Sun, Y. Pang, S. Xia, T. Chen, et al., Research progress in ZIF-8 
derived single atomic catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction, Catalysts 12 (2022) 
525.
[62] Z. Liang, C. Qu, D. Xia, R. Zou, Q. Xu, Atomically dispersed metal sites in MOF- 
based materials for electrocatalytic and photocatalytic energy conversion, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 57 (2018) 9604–9633.
[63] X.F. Lu, B.Y. Xia, S.Q. Zang, X.W. Lou, Metal–organic frameworks based 
electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction, Angew. Chem. 132 (2020) 
4662–4678.
[64] D. Roy, S. Sarkar, K. Bhattacharjee, K. Panigrahi, B.K. Das, K. Sardar, et al., Site 
specific nitrogen incorporation in reduced graphene oxide using imidazole as a 
novel reducing agent for efficient oxygen reduction reaction and improved 
supercapacitive performance, Carbon 166 (2020) 361–373.
[65] J. Xu, G. Liang, D. Chen, Z. Li, H. Zhang, J. Chen, et al., Iron and nitrogen doped 
carbon derived from ferrocene and ZIF-8 as proton exchange membrane fuel cell 
cathode catalyst, Appl. Surf. Sci. 573 (2022) 151607.
[66] W. Jin, Z. Lu, Q. Wang, Y. Zhu, H. Pan, S. Yao, et al., Atomic Cu dispersed ZIF-8 
derived N-doped carbon for high-performance oxygen electrocatalysis in Zn-air 
battery, J. Phys.: Materials 4 (2021) 024006.
[67] J.A. Townsend, J.E. Keener, Z.M. Miller, J.S. Prell, M.T. Marty, Imidazole 
derivatives improve charge reduction and stabilization for native mass 
spectrometry, Anal. Chem. 91 (2019) 14765–14772.
[68] J. Yan, W. Zhou, Z. Jia, P. Xiong, Y. Li, P. Wang, et al., Endowing 
polyetheretherketone with synergistic bactericidal effects and improved osteogenic 
ability, Acta Biomater. 79 (2018) 216–229.
[69] A. Abednejad, A. Ghaee, J. Nourmohammadi, A.A. Mehrizi, Hyaluronic acid/ 
carboxylated zeolitic imidazolate framework film with improved mechanical and 
antibacterial properties, Carbohydr. Polym. 222 (2019) 115033.
[70] X. Zheng, Y. Zhang, L. Zou, Y. Wang, X. Zhou, L. Yao, et al., Robust ZIF-8/alginate 
fibers for the durable and highly effective antibacterial textiles, Colloids Surf. B 
Biointerfaces 193 (2020) 111127.
[71] X. Li, B. Li, Y. Shi, C. Wang, L. Ye, Targeting reactive oxygen species in stem cells 
for bone therapy, Drug Discov. Today 26 (2021) 1226–1244.
[72] Y. Zhang, S. Ma, W. Chang, W. Yu, Nanozymes targeting mitochondrial repair in 
disease treatment, J. Biotechnol 394 (2024) 57–72.
[73] J.F. Turrens, Mitochondrial formation of reactive oxygen species, J. Physiol. 552 
(2003) 335–344.
[74] Y. Zhang, A. Khalique, X. Du, Z. Gao, J. Wu, X. Zhang, et al., Biomimetic design of 
mitochondria-targeted hybrid nanozymes as superoxide scavengers, Adv. Mater. 33 
(2021) 2006570.
[75] D.F. Stowe, A.K. Camara, Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production in 
excitable cells: modulators of mitochondrial and cell function, Antioxid Redox 
Signal 11 (6) (2009) 1373–1414.
[76] J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Tang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yin, L. Chen, Application of antioxidant 
compounds in bone defect repair, Antioxidants 13 (2024) 789.
[77] A.L. Popov, N.R. Popova, I.I. Selezneva, A.Y. Akkizov, V.K. Ivanov, Cerium oxide 
nanoparticles stimulate proliferation of primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts in 
vitro, Mater. Sci. Eng., C 68 (2016) 406–413.
[78] J. Colon, N. Hsieh, A. Ferguson, P. Kupelian, S. Seal, D.W. Jenkins, et al., Cerium 
oxide nanoparticles protect gastrointestinal epithelium from radiation-induced 
damage by reduction of reactive oxygen species and upregulation of superoxide 
dismutase 2, Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 6 (2010) 698–705.
[79] J. He, K. Chen, T. Deng, J. Xie, K. Zhong, J. Yuan, et al., Inhibitory effects of 
rhaponticin on osteoclast formation and resorption by targeting RANKL-Induced 
NFATc1 and ROS activity, Front. Pharmacol. 12 (2021) 645140.
[80] F. Guerrero, A. Carmona, V. Vidal, A. Franco, A. Martín-Malo, E.M. S´anchez- 
Fern´andez, et al., A selenoureido-iminoglycolipid transported by zeolitic- 
imidazolate framework nanoparticles: a novel antioxidant therapeutic approach, 
Nanoscale horizons 8 (2023) 1700–1710.
[81] Y. Song, S.W. Leonard, M.G. Traber, E. Ho, Zinc deficiency affects DNA damage, 
oxidative stress, antioxidant defenses, and DNA repair in rats, J. Nutr. 139 (2009) 
1626–1631.
[82] T. Hidalgo, R. Sim´on-V´azquez, A. Gonz´alez-Fern´andez, P. Horcajada, Cracking the 
immune fingerprint of metal–organic frameworks, Chem. Sci. 13 (2022) 934–944.
[83] W. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Cao, Y. Chen, C. Si, X. Sun, et al., The role of mitochondrial 
dysfunction in periodontitis: from mechanisms to therapeutic strategy, 
J. Periodontal. Res. 58 (2023) 853–863.
[84] X. Sun, X. Xu, X. Yue, T. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Zhang, et al., Nanozymes with 
osteochondral regenerative effects: an overview of mechanisms and recent 
applications, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 13 (2024) 2301924.
Y. Yu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Biomaterials 325 (2026) 123588 
17