Review Article
Antimicrobial strategies for urinary catheters
Zhiling Zhu
,1 Ziping Wang,2 Siheng Li,3 Xun Yuan
1
1School of Materials Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, Shandong 266042,
China
2Shandong Peninsula Engineering Research Center of Comprehensive Brine Utilization, Weifang University of Science and
Technology, Weifang, Shandong 262700, China
3Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204, USA
Received 18 July 2018; revised 3 September 2018; accepted 4 October 2018
Published online 23 November 2018 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.36561
Abstract: Over 75% of hospital-acquired or nosocomial urinary
tract infections are initiated by urinary catheters, which are used
during the treatment of 16% of hospitalized patients. Taking the
United States as an example, the costs of catheter-associated uri-
nary tract infections (CAUTI) are in excess of $451 million dollars/
year. The biofilm formation by pathogenic microbes that protects
pathogens from host immune defense and antimicrobial agents is
the leading cause for CAUTI. Thus, tremendous efforts have been
devoted to antimicrobial coating for urinary catheters in the past
few decades, and it has been demonstrated to be one of the most
direct and efficient strategies to reduce infections. In this article,
we briefly summarize the current methods for preparation of
antimicrobial coatings based on different stages in the biofilm for-
mation, highlight recent progress in the urinary catheter coating
material design and selection, discuss approaches to improving
their long-term antimicrobial efficacy, biocompatibility, multidrug
resistance and recurrent infections, and finally outline future
requirements and prospects in antimicrobial coating material
design. The scope of the works surveyed is confined to antimi-
crobial urinary catheters. © 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed
Mater Res Part A: 107A: 445–467, 2019.
Key Words: biofilm, catheter-associated urinary tract infection,
antimicrobial coatings
How to cite this article: Zhu Z, Wang Z, Li S, Yuan X. 2019. Antimicrobial strategies for urinary catheters. J Biomed Mater Res Part
A 2019:107A:445–467.
URINARY CATHETER AND CATHETER-ASSOCIATED URINARY
TRACT INFECTION (CAUTI)
Medical devices are essential for prevention, diagnosis, treat-
ment, or alleviation of illnesses and diseases. The application
of implantable medical devices has greatly improved the
healthcare quality for human beings. However, in the United
States, ~1.7 million cases of healthcare-associated infections
(HAIs) are reported annually and more than half are associ-
ated with medical implants.1 In the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention (CDC) report, the occurrence of HAIs
resulted in 99,000 deaths and an estimated $20 billion in
healthcare cost.2
As one of the most well-known medical devices, the uri-
nary catheter has been used for urine retention on indwell-
ing basis for centuries. Nowadays, the urinary catheter is
extensively used in inpatient hospitals and healthcare facili-
ties, with over 30 million urinary catheters inserted per year
in the United States, and 15%–25% of hospitalized patients
receive urinary catheters during their hospital stay.3 The uri-
nary catheter is usually a latex, polyurethane, or silicone
tube, inserted through the urethra to the patient’s bladder.
In the last decades, a series of new improvements had been
made to urinary catheters to reduce the pathogen coloniza-
tion. In the 1920s, Foley introduced an “open catheter sys-
tem” with an intrabladder balloon attached to a collecting
tube. However, bacteriuria occurs rapidly by the end of
4 days. In the 1960s, the intermittent “closed catheter sys-
tem” was developed, in which a plastic collection bag is
fused to the distal end of the tube, aiming to reduce patho-
gen contamination. Later on, several antimicrobial catheters
were commercialized. In Table I, we summarize the most
common commercial urinary catheters in the market.
Urinary tract infection (UTI) is one of the most common
HAIs reported to the CDC’s National Healthcare Safety
Correspondence to: X. Yuan; e-mail: yuanxun@qust.edu.cn
Contract grant sponsor: National Natural Science Foundation of China; contract grant number: 31800800
Contract grant sponsor: The Original Innovation Project of Qingdao City ; contract grant number: 18-2-2-58-jch
Contract grant sponsor: The Scientific Research Foundation of Qingdao University of Science and Technology; contract grant number:
210/0100229008 210/010022914
© 2018 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.
445

Network (NHSN), with >560,000 cases occurring and over
13,000 attributable deaths (mortality rate of 2.3%) each year.4
UTI is also the leading cause of secondary nosocomial blood-
stream infections with about 17% of hospital-acquired bacter-
emia from a urinary source, attributed up to a 10% mortality.4
Approximately 40%–50% of women and 5% of men will expe-
rience at least one UTI during their lifetime.5 In the United
States, the attributed financial implications of UTI are estimated
to be between $1.6 billion and $3.5 billion each year.5
Among UTIs acquired in hospitals, 75% cases are associated
with the urinary catheters, referred as catheter-associated uri-
nary tract infection (CAUTI). In the United States, the costs of
CAUTI are in excess of $451 million dollars/year. In short-term
catheterization (<3 days), most episodes of catheter-associated
bacteriuria are asymptomatic with a single organism isolated,
and <5% catheter-associated bacteriuric patients are identified
with bacteremia.2,3,6 However, in long-term catheterization
(>28 days), almost all patients become bacteriuria. Two phe-
nomena are observed during catheterization, the incidence of
new episodes of bacteriuria by a wide variety of uropathogenic
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial species and the
presence of persistent strains in the catheterized urinary
tract.2,3,6 As the prolonged use of urinary catheters leads to a
higher risk of acquiring UTIs, it is recommended to minimize
catheter use during hospitalization. Besides, it is well recog-
nized that the use of urinary catheters favors microorganism
adhesion and colonization, leading to infections, which is always
associated with the occurrence of microbial biofilms.
MICROBIAL BIOFILM AND BACTERIAL RESISTANCE
Microbial biofilm
The microbial biofilm is a complex aggregate of bacteria,
embedded within a self-produced matrix of extracellular
polymeric substances (EPS),7 which mainly consist of poly-
saccharides, with other biomolecules, for example, proteins,
lipids, and nucleic acids.8 The biofilm can shield the embed-
ded bacteria from the mechanical/physical stress, the antimi-
crobials therapeutics, and host-immune defenses.9,10 The
microorganisms responsible for biofilm formation on cathe-
ters are mostly Gram-negative bacterium, that is, Escherichia
coli, Bacillus coli, Bacillus proteus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
and Bacillus aerogenes.
Generally, biofilm develops through five consecutive
stages, involving initial reversible attachment, irreversible
attachment, maturation I, maturation II, and dispersion.11 A
schematic diagram of microbial biofilm development is
shown in Scheme 1.
In the first stage, planktonic microbes are transported
from bulk liquid to a catheter surface either by physical
forces or bacterial appendages, such as pili or flagella.12,13
While still not fully understood, it is thought that the first
biofilm colonist adheres to the surface through a weak,
reversible adhesion via van der Waals forces, hydrophobic
interactions, steric interactions, electrostatic interactions, or
specifically binding to the targets.14,15 Environmental factors
like surface treatment, temperature, pH, exposure time, and
bacterial concentration, also affect bacterial adhesion.16
In the irreversible attachment stage, the bacterial append-
ages overcome the physical repulsive forces,17 and subsequently,
the appendages anchored on the surface and consolidate the
bacterial-surface bond to immobilize reversible adsorbed
microbes.18 In the end, a number of reversible adsorbed
microbes become irreversibly adhered to the surface.
In the third stage, the biological processes begin to replace
the physical and chemical contribution as the dominant factor.
Microorganisms start to communicate with each other via quo-
rum sensing by the production of autoinducer signals, for exam-
ple, homoserine lactones,19 which stimulate the expression of
biofilm specific genes.20 In this stage, the excretion of polysac-
charide intercellular adhesin (PIA) is dominant that induces
intercellular aggregation as well as stabilizes the biofilm struc-
ture.21 Eventually, the biofilms become multi-layered and their
thickness is increased up to 10 μm.
In the fourth stage, often referred as the exponential
growth phase, a rapid increase in population is observed.
The maturation depends on the nature of environment,
where the rapid growth relies on surrounding nutrients from
the bulk fluid and the substrate. Herein, microcolonies func-
tion in a relatively complex and coordinated manner to
enhance substance exchange, distribute metabolic products,
and remove toxic byproducts.22 A thin layer of glycocalyx is
generated,23 and the size of the microcolony expands and its
thickness reaches ~100 μm.
In the fifth stage, bacterial biofilms begin to disperse, as
the breakdown of biofilms and release of motile planktonic
cells. Based on the current understanding, enzymes that
degrade EPS are produced by the community itself, such as
dispersin B and deoxyribonuclease.24 A seeding dispersal
progress is observed as the hollow, internal cavities in the
biofilm colonies become filled with nonaggregated plank-
tonic cells. A release of planktonic cells from the cavities into
the surrounding medium along with the collapse of colony
wall.25 The extracellular surfactants, for example, rhamnoli-
pids, are produced to decrease the adhesiveness of cell–cell,
cell–matrix, and cell–surface interactions,26 and induce cen-
tral hollowing and biofilm detachment. Genetically, the
microorganisms upregulate the operon coding for expression
of flagella proteins to increase their motility and downregu-
late the gene coding for a number of porins to complete a
genetic cycle for biofilm adhesion and cohesion.27
Bacterial resistance
The microbial biofilm provides a niche for the embedded patho-
gens to escape the host immune defense and fight against the
antimicrobial therapeutics. It can be attributed to three possible
reasons: (1) slow penetration of antimicrobials due to the
matrix formed by the EPS28; (2) formation of a resistant pheno-
type called persister cells that remain in a transient dormant
state and can cause recurrent infections29; (3) an altered envi-
ronment within the biofilm that is composed of different anaer-
obic niches, concentration gradients and local accumulation of
acids and inhibitive waste products. Hence, a lot of antimicro-
bials exhibit limited or even no efficacy against pathogens in the
biofilm environment. To this end, an alternative multifaceted
approach is required, combining broad-spectrum antimicrobials,
446
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

TABLE I. List of the Commercial Urinary Catheters in the Market
Brand
Material
Type
Feature
Antimicrobial
Strategies
American Australia
Medical Catheters
Latex-free
Closed system
Unique lubricated silicone
introducer tip;
side-loaded catheter
Antifouling
Astra Tech Catheters
Latex-free
Intermittent; closed
system
LoFric is the world’s first
hydrophilic intermittent
catheter
Antifouling
Bard Catheters
Latex-free; silicone
Foley catheters;
intermittent; closed
system
Bardex Lubricath; Bardia
all silicone; hydrogel
coating; smooth;
elastomer coating; X-ray
opaque; prelubricated;
better biocompatibility;
silver alloy coating; PTFE
coating
Antifouling;
bactericidal
Coloplast Catheters
Latex-free;
phthalate-free;
DEHP-free
Intermittent; closed
system
Prelubricated; hydrophilic
coating; sterile saline
included; fire-polished
eyelets; siliconized
surface
Antifouling
Covidien Catheters
Latex-free
Foley catheters;
intermittent
Unique, patented
hydrophilic coating;
silicone coated
Cure Catheters
Latex-free; DEHP-free,
BPA-free
Intermittent; closed
system
Cure is the first and only
company to
manufacture all of its
products without DEHP;
prelubricated;
fire-polished eyelets
Antifouling
GeeWhiz Catheters
Latex-free; silicone
External male catheter
“Leak proof” seal
GentleCath Catheters
Latex-free
Intermittent; closed
system
Hydrophilic coating;
silicone introducer tip;
polished eyelets
Antifouling
Hi-slip Catheters
Latex-free
Intermittent
Water already included for
enhanced hygiene and
convenience; hydrophilic
coating
Hollister Catheters
Latex-free
Closed system
Ultra-smooth; unique
introducer tip
Antifouling
MTG Catheters
Latex-free
Intermittent; closed
system
Fire-polished eyelets;
silicone introducer tip;
prelubricated
Rochester Medical
Catheters
Latex-free; PVC-free;
silicone
Intermittent; closed
system
Hydrophilic coating;
prelubricated introducer
tip; built-in adhesive
band (self-adhering,
integrated adhesive);
breathable silicone
material; Kink-resistant
Antifouling
Rusch Catheters
Latex-free
Foley catheters;
intermittent; closed
system
Silicone introducer tip;
prelubricated;
nonallergenic,
water-soluble lubricant
coating;
Antifouling
Teleflex Catheters
Latex-free; silicone
Foley catheters
Better biocompatibility;
hydrogel coating; PTFE
coating
Antifouling
Tyco Catheters
Latex; silicone
Foley catheters;
intermittent; closed
system
Hydrogel coating; silver
alloy coating
Antifouling
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
447
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

improved diagnostic and monitoring techniques, and impeded
bacterial adherence to the catheters. Bacterial resistance is a
major implication for urinary catheter practices and closely
related to CAUTI.4
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
Antimicrobials
Antimicrobials act across a wide range of microorganisms
including bacteria, fungal, virus protozoa, and helminthes,
which can be broadly classified by the primarily against, as
antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and anti-protozoa. They
can also be classified according to their function. For exam-
ple, agents that kill microbes are called microbicidal, while
those that merely inhibit their growth are biostatic. The anti-
microbial agents to treat infection are known as antimicro-
bial chemotherapy, while the medicines to prevent infection
are antimicrobial prophylaxis.
Disinfectants are antimicrobial agents, which destroy a
wide range of microorganisms on nonliving objects. They
SCHEME 1. Biofilm formation and strategies against pathogen colonization.
FIGURE 1. Common anti-biofilm formation strategies. (A) Bactericidal agents, including antibiotics, antimicrobial peptides, bacteriophages, carbon
nanotube, graphene oxide, metal, and metal oxide nanoparticles; (B) antifouling agents, including PEG, zwitterionic polymers, topographic surfaces,
and biosurfactants; (C) biofilm disruptors, including dissociation enzymes, quorum sensing inhibitors, nitrogen oxide, and NO donors; (D) benign
biofilms, including E. coli 83972, and E. coli Nissle 1917 biofilms.
448
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

work by destroying the cell wall of microbes or interfering
with the metabolism. Antiseptics are applied to living tissue
to reduce the possibility of infection, sepsis, or putrefaction.
Antibiotics, also called antibacterials, are a type of antimicro-
bial substance used in the treatment and prevention of bac-
terial infections within the body. They may either kill or
inhibit the growth of bacteria.
Antimicrobial strategies
The innovation of more effective antimicrobial urinary cathe-
ter coatings is the central endeavor to eliminate the patho-
gen biofilm on medical implant.30,31 Commonly, the solutions
are based on our current understanding of the biofilm-
formation mechanisms, and can be divided into five major
categories (Fig. 1): (1) release of bactericidal agents; (2) con-
tact-killing; (3) catheter surface modification for prevention
of initial adherence; (4) biofilm disruption; and (5) use of
benign bacterial biofilm to inhibit the pathogen colonization.
In this article, we focus on the urinary catheter coating mate-
rial design.
Bactericidal coatings
Silver coatings. Silver is one of the most popular antimicro-
bials for the medical device coating, and one of the few anti-
microbials approved by FDA for urinary catheter application.
The silver-coated urinary catheters were first introduced in
the United States approximately at 2008 and 2013 in the
UK. The Bardex® I.C. anti-infective Foley catheter is the first
commercialized
catheter
containing
a
silver-alloy
layer,
which has been documented extensively in the literature,
and has been studied in multiple clinical trials. Dover™sil-
ver Foley catheter is another popular catheter with a silver-
based hydrogel coating. The silver coatings are on both the
internal and external surfaces and slowly release ionic silver
particles during the first 5 days and provide consistent elu-
tion over time. The silver-coated urinary catheters reduce
pathogen colonization by releasing silver ions into the uri-
nary tract,32 which target bacteria by three mechanisms
(2)33: (1) impaired membrane function by loss of membrane
potential, (2) protein dysfunction by destruction of Fe–S
cluster, and (3) oxidative stress by antioxidant depletion.
To date, several clinical studies have been reported to
confirm the effectiveness of the silver-coated catheters on
CAUTI. Lederer et al. examined the silver alloy hydrogel
catheter (Bardex I.C.) on the symptomatic CAUTI.34 This sil-
ver alloy hydrogel urinary catheter reduced 47% symptom-
atic CAUTI occurrences as defined by both NHSN and clinical
criteria.
Stenzelius
et
al.
compared
the
incidence
of
catheter-associated bacteriuria with a silver-coated catheter
or a noncoated control catheter in patients undergoing elec-
tive orthopedic surgery with shorten catheterization.35 This
study indicated that the silver alloy coating can signifi-
cantly, up to 3.7-fold, reduce the risk of catheter-associated
bacteriuria in short-term catheterization (1–3 days). How-
ever, there are other studies contradicting the effectiveness
of silver coating. Desai et al. demonstrated the ineffective-
ness of silver impregnated catheters to prevent CAUTI.36
More recently, a nonrandomized crossover study showed
even no advantages of the silver-coated silicone catheter
(BIP™silicone catheter) in reduction of the incidence of
CAUTI, including cystitis, febrile UTI, and urosepsis, in this
cohort of critically ill patients.37 In general, silver-coated
catheters are effective against CAUTI; however, the effec-
tiveness is limited in certain uropathegon-catheter models,
as well as the severity of medical condition of the patients
in the clinical studies.
To improve the antimicrobial efficacy, an increasing
number of novel silver materials have been developed.38–48
Silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) are one of the most attractive
SCHEME 2. Mechanisms of bactericidal silver ion.
FIGURE 2. Transmission electron micrograph of E. coli cell treated with 50 μg cm−3 of silver nanoparticles in liquid LB medium for 1 h (A). The visual
characteristics of the p(HEMA-co-MPC)/Ag films as seen in the side view backscattered SEM image taken at a 15 angle (B). TEM analysis of E. coli
MTCC 739 treated with Kocuran-capped silver glyconanoparticles (C). Panels (A)–(C) are reprinted with permission from refs. 49–51, and 52, respec-
tively. Copyright 2004 Elsevier, 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2014 IOP Publishing.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
449
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

material for catheter coatings [Fig. 2(a)].49,50 They can effi-
ciently inhibit microorganism growth and apply to diverse type
of medical devices. The Ag NPs are primarily composed of Ag0
metal with a particle size of <100 nm and very large surface-
to-volume ratio. The microorganisms inhibition mechanism of
Ag NPs is related to (1) the release of antibacterial Ag+ ion
from particle surface38–48; (2) the incorporation of Ag NPs into
the bacterial membrane, leading to structural damages and
compromised membrane functions, including increase in per-
meability, disruption of regulated plasma membrane transport,
and eventually, causing cell death.49,50 In addition, silver can be
combined with other active materials, showing improved anti-
microbial
efficacy,
for
instance,
silver
coating
releasing
hydroxyapatite materials,53 phosphorylcholines
with silver
nanoparticles [Fig. 2(b)],51 Kocuran exopolysaccharide functio-
nalized silver glyconanoparticles [Fig. 2(c)].52
The silver-impregnated catheters will continue to play
an important role, owing to its broad-spectrum antimicro-
bial ability, simple preparation, and less side effects. How-
ever, this type of catheter easily loses antimicrobial
activity in long-term catheterization. Moreover, some clini-
cal trials have demonstrated the occurrence of bacterial
resistance in the intermittent catheterization. Compared to
other antimicrobial catheters, the cytotoxicity is still high
to the host cells. On the other hand, the exploration of
new composite materials is promising in improving the
antibacterial efficacy without compromising patient safety.
Further, Ag nanoclusters (Ag NCs) with ultra-small core
sizes <2 nm is attractive with improved antimicrobial effi-
ciency compared with the Ag NPs of the same Ag dose.
The Ag NCs’ intrinsic high antimicrobial efficiency and the
ability to accurately tune their properties could possibly
help to overcome the current evolving antimicrobial resis-
tance in many microbial pathogens.54–56
Antibiotic coatings. Antibiotics selectively inhibit biological
activities of microorganisms at low concentrations, which is
pivotal for prevention and control of infectious diseases.
Antibiotic coatings are perhaps the most direct method to pre-
vent CAUTI, designed to inhibit or delay the onset of biofilm
formation by a controlled release of high-local concentration of
antibiotics at the potential site of colonization. Compared to the
silver coatings, the antibiotic coatings have high activity to tar-
get the pathogen. To date, many antibiotics have been impreg-
nated into the urethral catheters, including nitrofurazone,36
gentamicin,57 norfloxacin,58 sparfloxacin,59 vancomycin, and
rifampin.60
The nitrofural-impregnated catheters are one of the most
studied antimicrobial catheter. Nitrofural kills the bacteria by
inhibiting DNA replication process, and resultantly the inhibition
of pathogen growth and biofilm formation. However, in short-
term (≤14 days) catheterization, the nitrofural-impregnated
catheters may cause greater participant-reported discomfort
during use and at removal than silver alloy catheters.61 Unlike
the silver-alloy catheter, the nitrofural-impregnated catheter sur-
face is not covered by a hydrogel layer. The rougher surface
potentially cause patients discomfort during catheterization.
Moreover, nitrofurazone may lead to mammary and ovarian
tumors in animal subjects and hence has been listed under pro-
hibited drugs for food animals under Group I by FDA. This side
effect of nitrofural has led to the slowdown of research in this
field.
Other antibiotics for CAUTI involve sparfloxacin, minocy-
cline, and rifampin. Kowalczuk et al. reported that the long-
term indwelling catheter modified with sparfloxacin has
excellent antibacterial and antibiofilm function, which inhib-
ited colonization and infection of E. coli and S. aureus.59
Fisher et al. modified the catheter with a mixture of rifam-
pin, sparfloxacin, and triclosan (Fig. 3), which exhibited
FIGURE 3. Impregnation of antimicrobials in the Foley catheter. Schematic depiction of the method used to produce antimicrobial catheters. During
use of the catheter, antimicrobials release by urine flow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.
450
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

broad-spectrum antibacterial properties and bacterial inhibi-
tion for more than 100 days.62
Noticeably, the delay of bacterial adherence is significant
for the first several days of catheterization. But no evidence
indicated a decrease of symptomatic infection or demon-
strated any clinical benefits in long-term catheterization. In
addition, the continued use of the antibiotics may cause bac-
terial resistance, which would greatly restrict the potential
clinic applications. The bacterial resistance induced by the
use of antibiotic is the key concern for the application of
antibiotic impregnated catheters.
Bactericidal enzyme coatings. Bactericidal enzymes inhibit
bacteria
through
production
of
antimicrobial
substances
(i.e., oxidative enzymes). Specifically, the hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) produced by peroxidases is used to attack bacterial cells,
or oxidize halides to more potent antimicrobials. Recently, bac-
tericidal enzymes have been used as highly active antibacterial
materials for catheter coating. An Austrian group developed
versatile methods to immobilize cellobiose dehydrogenase
(CDH) on the catheter surface (Fig. 4), which produced H2O2
and successfully inhibited all kinds of uropathogens.63–65 Halo-
peroxidases and lactoperoxidase are another type of antibacter-
ial enzymes that catalyze the oxidation of halide, pseudohalide
ions to the more potent hypohalous acids, pseudohypohalous
acids, and molecular halogens in the presence of H2O2. Grover
et al. developed a chloroperoxidases (CPO)-based paint that
showed >99% antimicrobial activity within 30 min against
E. coli and S. aureus, and prevented the growth of a broad spec-
trum of bacterial pathogens.66
The bactericidal enzymes have several advantages
over other conventional antimicrobials as the catheter
coatings. First, they are more specific toward selected
pathogens without disturbing the other benign microor-
ganisms in the host. Second, it is very difficult for the
pathogens to develop resistance to bactericidal enzymes.
Last, bactericidal enzymes are considered as natural, non-
reactive, and nontoxic to the host. However, bactericidal
enzymes do pose some disadvantages. The production and
purification of bactericidal enzymes is much more expen-
sive compared to the conventional antimicrobials, such as
silver and antibiotics. Moreover, bactericidal enzymes are
FIGURE 4. Stepwise immobilization of CDH onto PDMS surfaces: (1) plasma treatment, (2) grafting APTES, (3) grafting glutaraldehyde, and (4) graft-
ing the CDH enzyme. Reprinted with permission from refs. 63–65. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.
FIGURE 5. SEM micrograph of the surface of a section of a Lubri-sil hydrogel-coated all-silicone Foley catheter after biofilm formation by
S. epidermidis 414 for 24 h (A). Surface of a section of a Lubri-sil hydrogel-coated all-silicone Foley catheter pretreated with phage 456 after biofilm
formation by S. epidermidis 414 for 24 h with divalent cation-supplemented MHB (B). Panels (A) and (B) are reprinted with permission from ref. 67.
Copyright 2006 The American Society for Microbiology.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
451
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

prone
to
denaturation
in
extreme
conditions
during
device sterilization, storage, and transport.
Bacteriophage coatings. The bacteriophages are natural
predators of bacteria. They are essentially viruses that can
enter bacteria and replicate. Generally, bacteriophages can
be divided into two categories: lytic phage and lysogenic
phage. Lytic phage is frequently used as antibacterial sub-
stances with good bacterial selectivity and low toxicity
toward mammalian cells. The earliest bacteriophage mod-
ified urethral catheter was introduced in 2006.67 Curtin
et al. used coagulase-negative bacteriophage to modify
the catheter surface. After 24 h of Staphylococcus epider-
midis culture, the biofilm on the modified catheter surface
decreased significantly compared to the control catheters
(Fig. 5). However, the single component phage modified
urethral catheter has a narrow lysis spectrum and poor
tolerance. Recent studies reported a method by using bac-
teriophage cocktail to modify silicone catheter with broad
bactericidal efficacy.68 Moreover, Milo et al. prepared an
infection-responsive surface coating for urinary catheters,
which releases a therapeutic dose of bacteriophage in
response to elevated urinary pH and delay catheter block-
age.69 These coatings were stable both in the absence of
infection, and in the presence of urease negative bacteria.
Quantitative and visual analysis of crystalline biofilm
reduction show that bacteriophage constitute a promising
strategy for the prevention of catheter blockage (Fig. 6).
The high bactericidal efficacy of bacteriophages made
them a potential antimicrobial agent for CAUTI treatment.
Bacteriophages have distinct advantages over antibiotics of
not promoting bacterial resistance and nontoxicity toward
mammalian cells. As a bioactive substance, the use of bacte-
riophage is restricted because of the instability in extreme
environment. Despite the considerable progress in antimi-
crobial coatings fabricated with bacteriophages, it is mostly
in the early stage of development. More research toward the
development of multi-pathogenic resistant coatings by fabri-
cating phage cocktail containing coatings are anticipated in
the further studies.
Contact-killing coatings
Antimicrobial peptide (AMP) coatings. Antimicrobial pep-
tides (AMPs) or so-called host-defense peptides (HDPs) are
broad-spectrum antimicrobials that are effective to both
Gram-negative and Gram-positive strains, viruses, and fungi.
AMPs target the pathogens through multiple pathways:
(1) alternation of cytoplasmic membrane70; (2) membrane
permeabilization71; (3) activation of autolysin; (4) inhibition
of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis72; (5) inhibition of cer-
tain enzymes; (6) enhancement of immunomodulation.73
FIGURE 6. SEM visualization of catheter cross-sections comparing levels of encrustation and blockage by P. mirabilis. (A and C) Uncoated control.
(B and D) With dual-layered bacteriophage coating. All catheters were removed from in vitro bladder models 13 h after model start. (A and B) Show
cross-sections of catheter eyeholes. (C and D) Show cross-sections of catheter lumen 1 cm below retention balloon. Panels (A)–(D) are reprinted
with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.
FIGURE 7. AMPs are attached to the exposed catechol functionalities on the PDMS surface via Michael addition/Schiff base reaction of the CWR11’s
inherent thiol (left) and/or amine (middle) group, as well as via physical adsorption (right) (A). Antibiofilm assessment of CWR11-immobilized cathe-
ter surface via SEM images (B). Panels (A) and (B) are reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.
452
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

One representative example is the use of the AMP tachy-
plesin III-coated indwelling ureteral stents to prevent urinary
tract infections.74 Compared to the untreated stents, there
were an up to 1000 times inhibition of bacterial growth on
the AMP-coated stents, without any toxicity and clinical evi-
dence of drug related adverse effects. Lim et al. described a
simple, effective immobilization method to tether a potent
synthetic AMP CWR11 onto the catheter surface (Fig. 7).75
This CWR11-impregnated catheter exhibited excellent bacteri-
cidal activity against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative
strains, and remained effective for up to 21 days. The allyl
glycidyl ether (AGE) polymer brush immobilized AMP were
developed with faster bactericidal rate and enhanced biocom-
patibility, for example, cysteine-modified Lasioglossin peptide,
RK1 (RWKRWWRRKK), and RK2 (RKKRWWRRKK).76,77 These
AMP-coated catheters showed excellent antimicrobial and
antibiofilm activities against pathogens, and did not exhibit tox-
icity toward mammalian cells. Recently, Pinese et al. introduced
a site-specific silylated AMP, which can directly modify silicone
catheter and greatly simplify the conventional catheter modifi-
cation operations (Fig. 8).78
Overall, great progresses have been achieved in the devel-
opment of AMP-impregnated catheters. The implant coating of
AMPs is still challenged by a series of factors, including loss
FIGURE 8. One-step specific grafting of antibacterial hybrid peptide 2 on activated silicone catheters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copy-
right 2016 Wiley-VCH.
FIGURE 9. SEM images of E. coli cells incubated without SWNTs for 60 min. Cells were filtered and observed via SEM on the filter (A). Cells incu-
bated with SWNTs for 60 min (B). Representative SEM micrographs of E. coli cells deposited on a control filter (C). SEM micrographs of E. coli cells
deposited on 0.01 μm2 GO sheets showing compromised cell integrity (D). SEM micrographs of E. coli cells deposited on 0.65 μm2 GO sheets show-
ing compromised (E) and normal (F) cell integrity. Panels (A)–(F) are reprinted with permission from refs. 83 and 84. Copyright 2007 and 2015 Amer-
ican Chemical Society.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
453
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

of antimicrobial activities, nonspecific binding, altered peptide
orientations, inadequate surface AMP density, nonoptimal
coating, and high pH sensitivity.79–81 In addition, the use of
AMPs still induced pathogen resistance, even though the
AMP’s resistance is in a lesser extent compared to the conven-
tional antibiotics.82
Carbon
nanotube and
graphene
oxide coatings.
The
carbon-based nanomaterials have strong antimicrobial activity,
such as single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT)83 and graphene
oxide (GO)84 (Fig. 9). The principal cytotoxic mechanism of car-
bon nanotubes is physical piercing of the microorganism outer
membrane, causing irrecoverable membrane structural damage
and the efflux of intracellular content.85 Kang et al. reported the
first direct evidence of highly purified SWNT exhibiting strong
antimicrobial activity to induce severe membrane damage and
subsequent cell inactivation.83 Akhavan et al. discovered GO as
an excellent antimicrobial material for surface coatings.86 San-
tos et al. first reported the fabrication and application of a
nanocomposite containing GO that this antimicrobial film was
90% more effective in preventing bacterial colonization relative
to the unmodified surface.87 Li et al. demonstrated that coating
of catheter and glass surfaces with hydrate GO (hGO) is capable
of killing drug-resistant bacteria (Fig. 10).88 The carbon radical
(•C) is identified as the active species of the GO-based antibac-
terial coatings. In the recent in vitro and in vivo studies, these
carbon nanomaterial-coated catheters demonstrated satisfac-
tory short-term antibacterial activity. However, there is uncer-
tainty regarding the long-term antibacterial efficacy and safety
in the clinic applications, which calls for more preclinical trials
in the future studies.
Antifouling coatings
Attachment of bacteria on the surfaces is affected by many
factors, mainly the surface properties, for example, coating,
charge, roughness, and topography, as well as the microor-
ganism virulence factors and adhesin. An effective inhibition
of bacterial attachment by coating the surface with antifoul-
ing agents can greatly reduce the biofilm formation and the
associated infections. Therefore, the principal goal of the
antifouling strategy is to prevent the initial adhesion of bac-
teria, thus reducing the biofilm development.
As the bacterial attachment initiated through anchoring by
adhesion proteins, a protein-resistant surface effectively inhibit
bacterial adhesion and the subsequent biofilm formation.89 The
hydrophilic antifouling coatings, exemplified by zwitterionic
polymer, polyethylene glycol (PEG), poly(acrylic acid) (PAA),
poly(acrylamide) (PAAm), and ethylcellulose, are effective to
thwart bacterial adhesion on the surfaces.90,164
PEG coatings. PEG is a hydration layer with large energetic
barrier and steric repulsion to nonspecific protein adsorp-
tion. PEG coating on the substrates is designed to prevent
FIGURE 10. Schematic to prepare the hGO coated catheters and the images of hGO-coated catheters with different coating cycles. Reprinted with
permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.
FIGURE 11. Structure of zwitterions (A), zwitterionic monomer (B), and
zwitterionic polymer PZI (C).
454
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

bacterial adhesion.91,92 Two decades ago, Park et al. (1998)
reported that the PEG modified polyurethane surfaces could
effectively
prevent
bacterial
adhesion
and
infections.91
Recently, Yang et al. developed an antibacterial and antifoul-
ing surface via a simple one-step modification of a catheter
surface with brush-like polycarbonates containing pendent
adhesive dopamine, antifouling PEG, and antibacterial cat-
ions.93 This coating demonstrated excellent antibacterial and
antifouling activities against both Gram-positive (S. aureus)
and Gram-negative (E. coli) bacteria.
While
PEG-based
coating
has
been
historically
regarded as the gold standard of protein-resistant surface,
drawbacks still exist on the use of PEG. The potential
immunogenicity of PEG has raised the concern. A recent
study
indicated
PEG
provoking
immune
response
to
~25% of the population.94 In addition, the long-term sta-
bility of the PEG coating is compromised by the oxidative
degradation of the polyether backbone.95
Hydrogel coatings. The formation of a hydrogel layer is
another strategy to achieve protein resistance. Hydrogels are
lightly cross-linked polymer networks that have the capacity
to swell and retain large amounts of water. Similar to PEG
grafted surface, hydrogel forms a hydration layer, which
increases surface hydrophilicity and establishes a barrier to
inhibit nonspecific protein adsorption. Several hydrogel-
coated
catheters
are
already
available
in
the
market,
including CR Bard hydrogel catheter, Covidien Dover hydro-
gel catheter, BIOCATH® catheter.
The antifouling efficacy of the hydrogel-coated catheters
has been extensively studied. Lederer et al. launched a multi-
center cohort study to assess the impact of a silver-alloy and
hydrogel-coated urinary catheter on symptomatic CAUTI.34
As a result, the use of a silver alloy hydrogel urinary catheter
reduced symptomatic CAUTI occurrences according to both
NHSN and clinical criteria. Chung et al. examined the effect
of silver and hydrogel-coated catheter on the incidence of
CAUTI.96
Silver
alloy
and
hydrogel-coated
catheters
appeared to be effective in preventing CAUTI. Nevertheless,
Kazmiersak et al. discovered that the hydrogel layer can
increase aggregation of the planktonic cells and newly nucle-
ated crystals, leading to even faster catheter blockage than
in the case of uncoated silicone.97
Polyzwitterion coatings. Polyzwitterions bear both cationic
and anionic groups along the polymer backbone, which are
overall in a charge neutrality.98 Polyzwitterions is highly
hydrophilic to form a hydration layer on the surface. Poly-
zwitterions
also
repel
non-specific
protein
absorption
through electrostatic and steric repulsion. It has been dem-
onstrated that the polyzwitterionic surface is a potent alter-
native to the conventional antifouling PEGylated surface.99
The three most common zwitterionic polymers are phos-
phorylcholine (PC), sulfobetaine, and carboxybetaine [Fig. 11
SCHEME 3. A: Quorum sensing. QS initiates the activation of luxI leading to the production of signal molecules (filled arrow) (acylhomoserine lac-
tones, acyl-HSL), which are released into the extracellular environment. At high cell densities, these signal molecules are retrieved into the cell
resulting in the expression of target genes (virulence, etc.) through luxR. B: Quorum quenching. QQ is initiated by the inactivation of quorum sensing
signal (acyl-HSL) by enzymes-lactonase (hydrolysis of lactone ring) and acylase (cleavage of the acyl side chain) generally produced by Gram-positive
(Bacillus sp.) and Gram-negative bacteria (Ralstonia sp.) respectively. Panels (a) and (b) are reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2011
Taylor & Francis.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
455
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

(a)]. Many polyzwitterion modified catheters have been
reported, such as PC polymer-coated catheter,100 and sulfobe-
taine methacrylate [SBMA, Fig. 11(b)] coated silicone cathe-
ter.101 These catheters have a strong ability to resist bacterial
adhesion and inhibit biofilm formation. Blanco et al. developed
a strategy by covalent immobilization of zwitterionic polymer
SBMA on silicone catheters to prevent biofilm formation.101
As a result, the biocompatible SBMA-coated catheter exhibited
an enhanced hydrophilicity and reduced protein adsorption.
Moreover, the SBMA-coated catheters were challenged by
P. aeruginosa and S. aureus for 7 days, and the biofilm forma-
tion was reduced by 80%–90%, compared to the control
unmodified catheters. Another representative example is the
self-cleaning zwitterionic polymer coatings in the implantable
biomedical devices. Unlike the permanently charged polymers,
the zwitterionic polymers can switch between anionic and cat-
ionic forms by a controlled hydrolysis process, where the release
of dead bacteria and antifouling occur on the same substrate.102
More recently, Kurowska et al. reported a simultaneously anti-
microbial, protein-repellent, and cell-compatible surface-attached
polymer network, made from a poly(oxonorbornene)-based
zwitterion [PZI, Fig. 11(c)], which reduced the growth of bacte-
rial biofilms on surfaces through its multi-functionality.103
Besides, it was shown that the PZI was highly compatible with
immortalized mammalian cells.
However, the long-term stability of the zwitterionic sur-
face is still a concern. The surface hydration layer of poly-
zwitterion may
break down and lose its
antibacterial
activity, leading to the adhesion of bacteria on the surface of
the modified coating. It is urgent to develop super hydro-
philic amphoteric ion coating to improve the long-term
stability of the hydration layer. Otherwise, the super hydro-
philic zwitterionic polymers cross-linked to biocide releasing
polymers with long-term stability are a promising strategy
against CAUTIs.
Cationic polymer coatings. The cationic polymers, such as
quaternary ammonium salts, are another class of antifouling
coating agent. Conventionally, the nonfouling coating mini-
mizes protein or cell adsorption but does not directly
destroy any bacteria adsorbed to the surface, causing bacte-
ria slowly deposited on the surface after prolonged use. Anti-
bacterial contact-active cationic coatings adsorb proteins and
bacteria cells by the attraction with the negatively charged
bacteria membrane. The combination of these two classes of
material produce the coating with simultaneous antifouling
and antimicrobial activities. Recently, Zhou et al. developed a
method forming antibiofilm coatings on urinary catheter sur-
face.104 As a result, the in vivo antibacterial and antibiofilm
effect of these nonleachable covalently linked coatings can
be tuned to achieve >90% reduction of clinically relevant
pathogenic bacteria.
Disruption of biofilm architecture
The fourth type of strategy focuses on the disruption of bio-
film architecture during the maturation phase. The mature
biofilm provided a hospitable microenvironment for patho-
gen proliferation. The extracellular matrix shielded the
embedded pathogens from most external bactericidal agents
and host immune system.105 The antimicrobial coating and
antifouling coating are no longer effective against the mature
biofilm. But several innovative methodologies are emerging
to combat the mature biofilm.
Enzymes for EPS dissociation. EPS is a major component
of the biofilm network, which is consisted of poly-N-
acetylglucosamine (PNAG) and extracellular DNA.24 A
dissociation of EPS via hydrolytic enzymes would cause a
biofilm dispersion. Hydrolytic enzymes can be categorized
into proteases (e.g., subtilisin and lysostaphin), polysac-
charide hydrolases (e.g., alpha amylase, dispersin B, chiti-
nases,
beta-glucanases,
lysozyme,
and
alginate
lyase),
DNases, and bacteriophage lysins. A well-known example
is dispersin B, a glycoside hydrolase produced by Aggrega-
tibacter actionmycetemcomitans capable of hydrolyzing
PNAG of S. epidermidis, E. coli, and S. aureus strains.25
Extracellular DNA is another essential component in the
biofilm matrix. DNase I is an endonuclease that cleaves
extracellular DNA, which is able to disintegrate biofilms of
a
broad
range
of
bacteria,
including
P.
aeruginosa,
S.
aureus,
and
Gardnerella
vaginalis.24,106,107
Hogan
et al. evaluated the anti-biofilm activity of the hydrolytic
enzymes dispersin B, lysostaphin, alpha amylase, V8 prote-
ase, and serrapeptase, both individually and in combina-
tion with antibiotics vancomycin and rifampicin, against
biofilms formed by S. aureus.108 They observed the syner-
gistic effect by combining the use of both antibiotics with
hydrolytic enzymes, with the significant enhancement of
antibiotic efficacy. Thus, the combination of enzymatic
SCHEME 4. Illustration of surface release nitric oxide (NO) and bacteri-
cidal/biofilm dispersal effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127.
Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.
456
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

agents and certain antibiotics is potentially effective against
S. aureus biofilm associated infections, such as catheter and
other implant infections.
The hydrolytic enzyme is highly selective to destroy
pathogen biofilm, and not likely to induce bacterial resis-
tance. However, the dispersing enzymes encountered similar
problems to the bactericidal enzymes in terms of application
on the catheter coatings. The cost of large scale production
is high and the enzyme coating is unstable.
Signal interference. The signal interference is another strat-
egy to prevent biofilm formation by “hijacking” the quorum-
sensing (QS) system to hamper the bacterial corporation
within the biofilm architecture (3).109 QS is a stimuli origi-
nated from the biofilm communication system, which regu-
lates gene expression in response to fluctuations of the
population density. Autoinducers are the signaling molecules
produced intracellularly by QS bacteria and secreted extra-
cellularly for bacterial communication. The binding of auto-
inducers to receptors occurs at a threshold concentration
and the bound receptors are activated to regulate the gene
expression.110 A variety classes of autoinducers have been
discovered both in Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacte-
ria, for example, acylated homoserine lactones (AHL),111
oligopeptide,112 and furanosyl borate diester (Al-2).113
Quorum sensing inhibitor coatings. The suppression of QS
molecules production could disrupt the QS system and con-
tain the bacterial proliferation. For example, RNAIII-inhibiting
peptide (RIP) is a QS inhibitor that interferes with QS and
destroy the biofilm of S. aureus114 and S. epidermidis.115 Azi-
thromycin is an ineffective antibiotic against P. aeruginosa,
but an effective inhibitor to interfere with lasR and rhlR-
mediated QS circuity of P. aeruginosa.116 Recently, Saini
et al. demonstrated the long-term in vivo effectiveness of azi-
thromycin (AZM) and ciprofloxacin (CIP) impregnated cathe-
ters in a murine model, which may possibly be a key to
success in preventing CAUTIs.117 Thiazolidinedione-8 (TZD-8)
is another anti-QS molecule that has the potential to effec-
tively prevent CAUTI. Shenderovich et al. incorporated the
sustained-release delivery systems of TZD-8 on the cathe-
ters.118 The slow release of TZD-8 can effectively inhibit Can-
dida albicans biofilms for at least 8 days.
Quorum quenching coatings. Quorum quenching (QQ) is
another strategy to prevent the QS response by disrupting
the signaling pathways. The degradation of the signaling
molecule N-acyl-homoserine lactones (N-AHLs) is one of the
most representative examples of QQ. Bijtenhoorn et al. identi-
fied a metagenome-derived N-AHL hydrolase (BpiB05),119
which effectively hydrolyzed the N-AHLs during cell–cell com-
munication and strongly reduces the motility, pyocyanin
FIGURE 12. Histological micrographs from trichrome staining of (A) uninfected silicone elastomer, (B) uninfected NO-releasing, (C) S. aureus
infected silicone elastomer, and (D) S. aureus infected NO-releasing xerogels. Blood vessels denoted by *. Possible biofilm matrix denoted by #.
The implant is represented by the white space at the bottom of each image. The scale bar is 100 μm. Panels (A)–(D) are reprinted with permission
from ref. 128. Copyright 2005 Elsevier.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
457
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

synthesis, and biofilm formation of P. aeruginosa. Along with N-
AHL hydrolase, a synthetic halogenated furanone was reported
to interfere with AHL-mediated las QS in P. aeruginosa.120
Ivanova et al. fabricated the silicone urinary catheter coatings
by enzymes acylase and alpha-amylase using a layer-by-layer
deposition technique. The enzymatic catheter coatings are capa-
ble of degrading bacterial QS molecules and polysaccharides,
respectively.121,122 These hybrid coatings demonstrated 30%
enhancement of antibiofilm efficiency against clinically relevant
Gram-negative bacteria compared to conventional catheters.
These quorum quenching coating significantly reduced the
occurrence of single-species (P. aeruginosa) and mixed-species
(P. aeruginosa and E. coli) biofilms on silicone catheters under
both static and dynamic conditions. Moreover, the QQ and
matrix degrading enzyme assemblies delayed the biofilm
growth up to 7 days in an in vivo animal model.
Quorum sensing (biofilm dispersal) coatings. Apart from
interference with biofilm formation, some other QS signals
can trigger biofilm dispersal. For example, the AGR (acces-
sory gene regulator)-mediated QS system is extensively
expressed in S. aureus at the biofilm dispersion.123 Boles
et al. demonstrated that the artificial stimulation of the AGR-
mediated QS system with autoinducing peptide (AIP) could
promote P. aureus biofilm dispersal.124 Cis-2-dodecenoic acid
(BDSF) is a QS signal molecule produced by the opportunis-
tic pathogen Burkholderia cenocepacia and suppresses germ
tube formation of Candida albicans. Tian et al. showed that
BDSF (90 μM) can reduce the C. albicans cell adherence to
catheters by 25-fold.125
Overall, incorporation of QS inhibitors or QQ agents into
the catheter coatings is a novel and promising concept to com-
bat biofilm formation. This strategy expands our knowledge of
signal interference associated applications for effective treat-
ment method in the field of CAUTI. However, a major restric-
tion of the QS and QQ strategies is the narrow spectrum of
activity of QS molecules, which limit the applicability against
the broad spectrum of urinary tract pathogens in CAUTIs.
Nitric oxide release coatings. Nitric oxide (NO) is a chemi-
cally unstable, lipophilic gas, and one of the smallest endoge-
nously produced molecules against infection.126 NO exhibited
both local bactericidal/biofilm dispersal effects by amino and
sulfhydryl nitrosation, lipid peroxidation, tyrosine nitration,
DNA break down, and stimulation of motility and regulation
of dispersal (4).127 Once generated by the activated immune
cells, NO could diffuse through bacterial cellular membranes
to destroy the microorganism by exerting nitrosative and oxi-
dative stress.126 The common NO donors are S-nitrosothiols,
such as S-Nitroso-Nacetyl-DL-penicillamine (SNAP) and S-
nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), which can be blended into poly-
mer materials for slow release of NO.
NO-releasing
polymeric
coatings
have
been
widely
applied to prevent biofilm related infections on implant bio-
medical devices. But, very few studies have been conducted
with NO or NO donor impregnated urinary catheters.126
Nablo et al. reported in vivo antibacterial activity of NO-
releasing xerogel-coated catheter against an aggressive sub-
cutaneous S. aureus infection in a rat model (Fig. 12).128 The
FIGURE 13. Comparison of E. coli colonization on NOX (a NO-impreg-
nated), AG (BARDEX I.C. silver-coated), and NFC (Nitrofurazone-coated)
catheters vs control after immersion of catheters for 24 h in suspension
containing 103 cfu/mL of E. coli. In each LB Petri dish, a catheter was
rolled over the surface and then incubated at 37C overnight. Reprinted
with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.
SCHEME 5. Possible mechanisms of bacterial interference: The Bladder Inn. Abbreviations: G, good; B, bad.
458
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

results indicated an 82% reduction of biomaterial-associated
infections
with
NO-releasing
coatings.
Regev-Shoshani
et al. found that the NO modified catheter had the similar
antibacterial performance as nitrofural-impregnated catheter
(Fig. 13).129 Meyerhoff group reported an SNAP-modified
catheter. In the 14 day test, the biofilm formation on the
catheter
surface
was
significantly
reduced.127
Recently,
Cutruzzolà et al. reviewed the origin and impact of NO in
P. aeruginosa biofilms. They emphasized that NO is able to
induce the dispersal of P. aeruginosa and other bacterial bio-
films by lowering the level of an important signal transduction
molecule, cyclic-di-GMP. Noticeably, in the study of NO-releasing
coatings, the NO capacity of coating materials and releasing rate
are the key factors in clinical applications. While the NO-
releasing coatings are a viable antimicrobial catheter candidate,
the long-term storage stability, NO donor diffusion in the physi-
ological environment, and toxicity of the materials are still
major concerns required further investigation.
Bacterial interference
Bacterial interference is a use of benign bacteria to compete
with pathogenic bacteria on surface biofilm formation, thus
preventing pathogen infections. The two best-documented
benign bacteria for bacterial interference against UTIs are
Lactobacillus species (e.g., L. crispatus CTV05, L. casei var rham-
nosus GR1 and GG, and L. fermentum B54) and E. coli (E. coli
strains 83972 and HU2117).130 Although the exact mechanism
is still not clear, it probably includes competition for nutrients,
production of antibacterials, competition for attachment sites,
regulation of gene expression, immunomodulation, and biofilm
disruption (5).130 The preliminary clinical trials of bacterial
interference using benign E. coli were promising that most
patients’ urinary tracts were devoid of pathogen colonization,
along with a significant reduction in the incidence of UTIs.
There were no reports on symptomatic UTIs.
Benign bacterial inoculation. To enhance the benign bacte-
rial duration in the bladder for establishing colonization, a
direct incubation protocol was used in the clinic trials.131,132
Briefly, the bacteria in saline were injected through a cathe-
ter into the bladder, followed by clamping the catheter for
1 h before draining. The process was repeated twice daily
for up to three consecutive days to complete one inoculation
cycle. In a most recent study, only 24% and 36% of the
patients retained the bacteria after one and two inoculation
cycles, respectively.131 The relatively low practicality and
success rate of the intentional bladder colonization have con-
siderably compromised patient compliance.
SCHEME 6. (A) Preparation of mannose-presenting silicone (PDMS) surfaces by CO2 plasma treatment to provide the activated surfaces, followed
by immersion in a solution of G5 PAMAM dendrimers containing 128 NH2 groups, leading to the corresponding amino-terminated PAMAM sur-
faces, and then attachment of Mann-COOH to afford the corresponding mannose-modified silicone surfaces. (B) Preparation of benign biofilms of
fim+ E. coli 83972 and demonstration of bacterial interference, that is, the exclusion of pathogens from the benign biofilm, using E. faecalis as a
model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
459
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

The obstacle of installation of E. coli 83972 on the blad-
der against removal by the urine flow is associated with its
lack of a functional fim operon encoding type 1 fimbriae
serving as a major adhesion.133 To circumvent this limita-
tion, wild-type E. coli strain 83972 was genetically trans-
formed to express type 1 fimbriae, referred to as fim+ E. coli
83972, to increase the capability of adherence,134 particu-
larly for the specific binding of FimH at the tip of the fim-
briae with the mannosides on the surface of bladder
epithelial cells.135,136 As a result, improving urinary catheter
adherence can augment the bacterial interference capabili-
ties of E. coli 83972. Despite type 1 fimbriae are implicated
as a virulence factor,133 a clinical study showed that incorpo-
ration of type 1 fimbriae to E. coli 83972 did not contribute
to mucosal inflammatory response in human urinary tract,
nor cause any other side effect.137
Benign bacterial biofilm coatings. An alternative strategy
of bacterial interference uses pre-established biofilms of
benign bacteria to serve as live, protective catheter coating
against pathogen colonization. However, the application of
this strategy to silicone urinary catheters was hampered by
low adherence of benign bacteria onto silicone materials.
Lopez et al. developed a general method for biofunctionaliza-
tion of silicone (PDMS) with mannoside ligands to enhance
benign bacteria adherence (6).139 They used mild CO2 plasma
to activate PDMS surface followed by the immobilization of
generation 5-poly(amidoamine) (G5 PAMAM) dendrimers to
generate an amino-terminated surface, which subsequently
functionalized with carboxyl-terminated mannose derivative to
form mannoside-PDMS to promote the adherence of benign fim
+ E. coli 83,972. A dense, stable biofilm of fim+ E. coli 83972
could be established within 48 h on the mannose-coated PDMS
and this benign biofilm reduced the adherence of the uropatho-
genic E. faecalis by 104-fold after 72 h, a significant improve-
ment compared to the benign bacteria on the unmodified
substrate by only 5.5-fold reduction.
The
fim+
E.
coli
83972
biofilms
formed
on
the
oligo(ethylene glycol) (OEG) mannoside presenting PDMS
surfaces
blocked
the
colonization
of
uropathogenic
E. faecalis in a high-nutrient environment (lysogeny broth)
for 3 days, but the efficiency dropped rapidly after 5 days.
Significant
improvement
would
require
substantial
increase of the coverage and long-term stability of the
SCHEME 7. The possible mechanisms of ZnO NPs antibacterial activity, including: ROS formation, Zn2+ release, internalization of ZnO NPs into bac-
teria, and electrostatic interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2015 Springer.
FIGURE 14. STEM images of P. aeruginosa grown in LB either without metals (A), or with 75 mg/L total cadmium in the form of either cadmium ace-
tate (B) or CdSe QDs (C), where the latter treatment is associated with cells exhibiting damaged membranes. Scale bar is 1 μm. Panels (A)–(C) are
reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.
460
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

fim+ E. coli 83972 biofilms. Zhu et al. developed a high
FimH affinity biphenyl mannoside ligand to promote the
formation of a stable, densely packed benign E. coli biofilm
on silicon surface, which is capable to prevent the coloni-
zation of E. faecalis for 11 days at a high concentration
(108 CFU mL−1) in LB media.138 This approach has also
been demonstrated effective by using another probiotic
fim+ E.coli strain (E.coli Nissle 1917).140 More recently, a
preconjugated multidentate mannoside ligand functiona-
lized PAMAM dendrimer was developed. The use of
manoside-PAMAM dendrimer simplified the catheter sur-
face
modification.
The
resultant
benign
biofilm
has
enhanced benign E.coli coverage, and better (long-term)
stability for prevention of uropathogen infections.141
This benign bacterial biofilm system features as self-
renewable, live, and prophylactic, compared to the conven-
tional antimicrobial material coatings. This approach also
confers a sustainable antimicrobial pathway to prevent
CAUTI without inducing resistance. For potential applica-
tions in a clinical setting, further research will be necessary
to focus on the assessment of the safety of the benign bacte-
rial strain and its biofilm on the silicone catheters for long-
term application.
Futuristic antimicrobial strategies
Apart from the above-mentioned antimicrobial strategies
already in the exploration to fight against CAUTI, there are
many innovative antimicrobial materials potentially applica-
ble as antimicrobial catheter, ranging from inorganic mate-
rials, biomolecules, to synthetic polymers. To the best of our
knowledge, these materials have not been reported in
catheter-related applications; however, they may be the can-
didates of future catheter because of their exceptional
FIGURE 15. SEM images of E. faecalis on Au NS-modified PDMS surfaces before and after NIR exposure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152.
Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.
FIGURE 16. Comparison of P. aeruginosa adhesion on structured and unstructured regions of the growth substrates. (A) Fluorescence microscopy
shows the localized effect of substrate topography on bacterial adhesion as compared to flat surfaces. The image shows the interface between a
structured and unstructured region on the same substrate. The interface between the flat (upper) and structured (lower) areas is abrupt, as is the
transition from ordered packing to random microcolony aggregates, which lack long-range cell order. The cells were stained with SYTOX green
nucleic acid stain. (B,C) Cross-sectional SEM images of PA14 cultured on flat and periodically structured epoxy surfaces, respectively, showing the
stark difference in attachment morphology. The orientation of the aligned cells is highlight in (C). Scale bars are 10 μm in (A) and 1 μm in (B) and
(C). Panels (A)–(C) are reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
461
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

features, including high antimicrobial activity, low bacterial
resistance, and ease of surface fabrication.
Metal and metal oxide nanoparticle coatings. Although the
organic disinfectants or antibiotics have shown excellent
antimicrobial efficacy, they are typically designed to disrupt
a single biological active protein crucial to the pathogen sur-
vival, with resistance emerging from a single mutation to
overcome the susceptibility. Alternatively, the antibacterial
inorganic nanomaterials are the potent candidates in the
catheter coatings, especially metal and metal oxide nanopar-
ticles (NPs) (note that the silver nanoparticles have already
been discussed in the above section).142
Zinc oxide and quantum dot nanoparticle coatings. Zinc
oxide nanoparticle (ZnO NP) is a class of broad-spectrum
antimicrobial material.143 Due to the increased surface area
and reduced particle size, ZnO NPs show enhanced surface
reactivity.144 The possible bactericidal mechanisms include
the
generation
of
reactive
oxygen
species
(ROS),
the
enhanced uptake of toxic soluble Zn2+ ions, membrane dis-
ruption by electrostatic interaction with the particles, and
the direct internalization of particles (7).144
Zinc oxide quantum dots (ZnO QDs) are nanoparticles of
purified powdered ZnO. ZnO QDs have been shown to be effec-
tive in destroying certain pathogens, that is, L. monocytogenes
and Salmonella enterica serovar.145 Another quantum dots,
CdSe QDs, exhibited antimicrobial activity from the release of
dissolved heavy metals. As shown in Figure 14, the growth of
pathogen P. aeruginosa can be inhibited by CdSe QDs.146 CdTe
QDs are another bactericidal inorganic nanomaterial. Their
antimicrobial activities are related to the oxidative damage of
protein and lipid.147 Noticeably, the toxicity of QDs was depen-
dent upon their physicochemical properties and environmental
factors.148 QD size, charge, concentration, outer coating bioac-
tivity (capping material and functional groups), and oxidative,
photolytic, and mechanical stability have each been implicated
as determining factors in QD toxicity. Although ZnO and QD
nanoparticles are known to be toxic to host human cells at rel-
atively high concentrations, they are not expected to be toxic at
very low concentrations.149,150
Titanium oxide (TiO2) nanoparticle coatings. The TiO2 nano-
composite films have been applied for medical implant surface
coatings due to their excellent antibacterial activity, noncyto-
toxicity, high photocatalytic activity, and strong self-cleaning
ability. Since the discovery by Fujishima and Honda in 1972,151
there has been tremendous research regarding this special
material. Lin et al. developed an anatase TiO2 nanocomposite
for antimicrobial coatings, showing strong inhibition of E. coli
(DH 5R) and Bacillus megaterium (QM B1551).152 Later, Chung
et al. reported another antimicrobial TiO2 coating, which can
effectively prevent S. aureus and E. coli.153
Gold nanoparticle coatings. Gold nanoshells (Au NSs) are
biologically
inert
at
physiological
temperatures.
Once
exposed to near-infrared (NIR) radiation, Au NSs are capable
of the photothermal ablation of cells and tissue. Recently,
Khantamat et al. introduced a photoactive-based coating of
Au NSs-decorated silicone surfaces for the near-infrared
(NIR) photothermal destruction of the pathogenic bacterium
E. faecalis (Fig. 15).154
Copper nanoparticle coatings. Copper-based nanoparti-
cles, such as copper oxide (CuO) NPs, have been applied for
anti-fouling coating. For example, CuO nanoparticles are
effective to a board spectrum of uropathogens. This nanopar-
ticle can release Cu2+ ions to generate ROS for bacterial cell
membranes disruption and direct internalization for enzyme
function disruption.155
Although it is a booming field to use metals and metal
oxides as antimicrobial coatings, most of the research still
stay in the early stage of the in vitro model. More in vivo and
clinical studies are needed to evaluate the long-term antimi-
crobial efficacy, stability, biocompatibility, and cytotoxicity.
Biosurfactant. Biosurfactants are produced by bacteria to
compete for adhesion. These compounds serve to alter the sur-
face properties, such as charge and hydrophobicity, inherently
interfering the bacterial–surface and/or bacterial–bacterial
interactions.156 Common biosurfactants include lipopeptides
(surfactin), glycolipids, and phospholipids. Surfactin and rham-
nolipid are the representative biosurfactants with good anti-
adhesive activity to reduce the attachment of Staphylococcus
aureus, Listeria monocytogenes, and Micrococcus luteus.156 Sur-
factin was originally isolated from Bacillus subtilis LB5a.157
Rhamnolipid was extrapolated from Pseudomonas aeruginosa
LBI.158 Janek et al. reported the antiadhesive activity of the bio-
surfactant pseudofactin II secreted by the arctic bacterium
Pseudomonas fluorescens BD5.159 Pseudofactin II showed anti-
adhesive activity against several pathogenic microorganisms.
Up to 99% reduction in pathogen adhesion could be achieved
by 0.5 mg mL−1 pseudofactin II. In addition, pseudofactin II
can disperse preformed biofilms. Pradhan et al. reported that a
biosurfactant S9BS inhibited biofilm formation by pathogenic
bacteria, including Escherichia coli and Streptococcus mutans.160
It was interesting to note that S9BS fully inhibited the biofilm
formation without bactericidal activity at concentration of
40 μg mL−1. However, to the best of our knowledge, the biosur-
factants have not been directly applied on the catheter surface
coatings yet.
Modification of surface topography. Surface topographical
features influence the arrangement and the behavior of bac-
terial cells on surfaces, accordingly affecting the biofilm
development. As the chemical modification of catheter sur-
faces may induce microorganism resistance, alternative
approaches to inhibit the biofilm by altering the surface
topography receive increasing attention.
Hochbaum et al. demonstrated that bacterial ordering
and orientation on the single-cell level was affected by the
nanometer-scale periodic surface features. A tuning of the
periodicity of structures within the relevant cellular scale
can lead to a significant change in bacterial assembly
(Fig. 16).161 Dickson et al. used the nano-imprint lithography
to fabricate a library of biomimetic nano-pillars on the sur-
faces of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) films. After incu-
bation with a Gram-negative E. coli strain, the pillared
surfaces were found to have lower densities of adhered
462
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

bacteria compared to the flat surfaces. Their work showed
that the imprinted polymer nanostructures with precisely
defined geometries can prevent bacteria biofilm forma-
tion.162 More recently, Ducker’s group demonstrated that
“the nanometer barrier” significantly reduce the surface
motility of the bacterium and may therefore hinder surface
biofilm expansion.163,165 Despite a promising technique, the
long-term antifouling efficacy in the surface topographically
modified catheter model has not been reported.
CONCLUSION
CAUTI is one of the most prevalent hospital-acquired infec-
tions, attributed to an extensive application of catheters in
healthcare facilities and hospital stay. The significant impact
of CAUTI and the incapability of conventional catheters in
providing protection to patients from pathogen invasion
have motivated the design of “antimicrobial urinary cathe-
ters”. Several antimicrobial urinary catheters based on silver-
, hydrogel-, and antibiotic-impregnation strategies have been
approved by FDA for clinical application. However, the per-
formance of commercialized antimicrobial catheter is not
satisfactory in terms of long-term catheterization. Concomi-
tantly, the application of antibiotic catheters resulted in the
arisen
antibiotic
resistance
and
reduced
effectiveness
over time.
Many more effective antimicrobial strategies are emerg-
ing as the potential solutions against CAUTI. Based on the
current understanding of the bacterial biofilm structure and
formation mechanisms, the antimicrobial urinary catheter
design can be divided into five major categories: (1) bacteri-
cidal; (2) contact-killing; (3) antifouling; (4) biofilm disrup-
tion; and (5) bacterial interference. These antimicrobial
strategies are in different stages of development. Most of the
antimicrobial approaches are still premature for clinical
application. A more thorough clinical evaluation is needed to
demonstrate the effectiveness against CAUTI. The composite
materials consisted of multiple antimicrobial components,
such as AMPs, antimicrobial enzymes, biosurfactants, and
anti-QS molecules, have become a research hotspot. The
simultaneous employment of multiple antibacterial strate-
gies is another promising solution for synergistic improve-
ment of the antibacterial efficacy.
We foresee that in the post-antibioctic era, the bio-
derived or bio-inspired antimicrobial and antifouling strate-
gies will play more important roles in the escalating battle
against CAUTI as effective and noncytotoxic solutions. The
further investigation of the composition and formation
mechanism of biofilms will provide new insights on the bio-
markers and signaling molecules as new tool or target to
inhibit pathogen colonization. Other than the conventional
chemical-based antimicrobial method, the physical- and
biological-based antimicrobial methodologies are starting to
gain significance. The specific nano-/micro-pattern surface
enables the physical segregation of embedded pathogen and
thus exhibits excellent antifouling ability. The benign bacte-
rial biofilm coating serves as a live defender to sustainably
prevent the pathogen initial adherence.
In the end, the key challenge regarding these innovative
catheters is the bacterial resistance, cytotoxicity, and long-
term efficacy during catheterization, which needed to be
addressed in the future studies. Patient safety and antimicro-
bial effectiveness must remain as the center of new antimi-
crobial catheters development. We truly believe some of
these innovative catheters will be the final solution to eradi-
cate CAUTIs and other implant-associated infections.
REFERENCES
1. Dwivedi P, Narvi SS, Tewari RP. Application of polymer nanocom-
posites in the nanomedicine landscape: envisaging strategies to
combat implant associated infections. J Appl Biomater Funct
Mater 2013;11:129–142.
2. C. Gould, C. Umscheid, R. Agarwal, G. Kuntz, D. Pegues, the
Healthcare
Infection
Control
Practices
Advisory
Committee
(HICPAC), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Guildline
for Prevention of Catheter Associated Urinary Tract Infections
2009, 2016 (last updated), https://www.cdc.gov/infectioncontrol/
pdf/guidelines/cauti-guidelines.pdf
3. Warren JW. Catheter-associated urinary tract infections. Int J Anti-
microb Agents 2001;17:299–303.
4. Gould CV, Umscheid CA, Agarwal RK, Kuntz G, Pegues DA. Guide-
line for prevention of catheter-associated urinary tract infections
2009. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2015;31:319–326.
5. Foxman B. Epidemiology of urinary tract infections: Incidence,
morbidity, and economic costs. Am J Med 2002;113:5–13.
6. Weinstein
JW,
Mazon
D,
Pantelick
E,
Reagan-Cirincione
P,
Dembry LM, Hierholzer WJ. A decade of prevalence surveys in a
tertiary-care center: Trends in nosocomial infection rates, device
utilization, and patient acuity. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;
20:543–548.
7. Flemming HC, Wingender J. The biofilm matrix. Nat Rev Microbiol
2010;8:623–633.
8. Sheng GP, Yu HQ, Li XY. Extracellular polymeric substances (EPS)
of microbial aggregates in biological wastewater treatment sys-
tems: A review. Biotechnol Adv 2010;28:882–894.
9. Xu KD, McFeters GA, Stewart PS. Biofilm resistance to antimicro-
bial agents. Microbiology 2000;146:547–549.
10. Hanke ML, Kielian T. Deciphering mechanisms of staphylococcal
biofilm evasion of host immunity. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 2012;
2:62.
11. Stoodley P, Sauer K, Davies DG, Costerton JW. Biofilms as com-
plex differentiated communities. Annu Rev Microbiol 2002;56:
187–209.
12. Berkeley R, Lynch J, Melling J, Rutter P, Vincent B. Microbial adhe-
sion to surfaces. London: Soc Chem Ind; 1980. 47 p–66 p.
13. Jarrell K. Pili and Flagella: Current Research and Future Trends.
Norfolk: Caister Academic Press; 2009. 215 p–234 p.
14. Briandet R, Herry JM, Bellon-Fontaine MN. Determination of the
van der Waals, electron donor and electron acceptor surface ten-
sion components of static gram-positive microbial biofilms. Col-
loids Surf B Biointerfaces 2001;21:299–310.
15. Takahashi H, Suda T, Tanaka Y, Kimura B. Cellular hydrophobicity
of listeria monocytogenes involves initial attachment and biofilm
formation on the surface of polyvinyl chloride. Lett Appl Microbiol
2010;50:618–625.
16. An YH, Friedman RJ. Concise review of mechanisms of bacterial
adhesion to biomaterial surfaces. J Biomed Mater Res 1998;43:
338–348.
17. De Weger LA, Van der Vlugt C, Wijfjes A, Bakker P, Schippers B,
Lugtenberg B. Flagella of a plant-growth-stimulating Pseudomo-
nas fluorescens strain are required for colonization of potato roots.
J Bacteriol 1987;169:2769–2773.
18. Kumar CG, Anand S. Significance of microbial biofilms in food
industry: A review. Int J Food Microbiol 1998;42:9–27.
19. Davies DG, Parsek MR, Pearson JP, Iglewski BH, Costerton JW,
Greenberg EP. The involvement of cell-to-cell signals in the devel-
opment of a bacterial biofilm. Science 1998;280:295–298.
20. Hall-Stoodley L, Stoodley P. Developmental regulation of micro-
bial biofilms. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2002;13:228–233.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
463
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

21. Dunne WM. Bacterial adhesion: Seen any good biofilms lately?
Clin Microbiol Rev 2002;15:155–166.
22. Davey ME, O’toole GA. Microbial Biofilms: from Ecology to Molec-
ular Genetics. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2000;64:847–867.
23. Christensen
GD,
Barker
LP,
Mawhinney
TP,
Baddour
LM,
Simpson WA. Identification of an antigenic marker of slime pro-
duction for Staphylococcus epidermidis. Infect Immun 1990;58:
2906–2911.
24. Izano EA, Amarante MA, Kher WB, Kaplan JB. Differential roles of
poly-N-Acetylglucosamine surface polysaccharide and extracellu-
lar DNA in Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermi-
dis biofilms. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008;74:470–476.
25. Kaplan JB, Ragunath C, Ramasubbu N, Fine DH. Detachment of
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans biofilm cells by an endog-
enous -Hexosaminidase activity. J Bacteriol 2003;185:4693–4698.
26. Neu TR. Significance of bacterial surface-active compounds in
interaction of bacteria with interfaces. Microbiol Rev 1996;60:
151–166.
27. Garrett TR, Bhakoo M, Zhang Z. Bacterial adhesion and biofilms
on surfaces. Prog Nat Sci 2008;18:1049–1056.
28. Lynch AS, Robertson GT. Bacterial and fungal biofilm infections.
Annu Rev Med 2008;59:415–428.
29. Lewis K. Persister cells, dormancy and infectious disease. Nat Rev
Microbiol 2007;5:48–56.
30. Singha P, Locklin J, Handa H. A review of the recent advances in
antimicrobial coatings for urinary catheters. Acta Biomater 2017;
50:20–40.
31. Neoh KG, Li M, Kang E-T, Chiong E, Tambyah PA. Surface modifica-
tion strategies for combating catheter-related complications: Recent
advances and challenges. J Mater Chem B 2017;5:2045–2067.
32. Dervisevic E, Dervisevic M, Nyangwebah JN, Senel M. Develop-
ment of novel amperometric urea biosensor based on fc-PAMAM
and MWCNT bio-nanocomposite film. Sensors Actuators B Chem
2017;246:920–926.
33. Percival SL, Bowler PG, Russell D. Bacterial resistance to silver in
wound care. J Hosp Infect 2005;60:1–7.
34. Lederer JW, Jarvis WR, Thomas L, Ritter J, Wound Ostomy J. Mul-
ticenter cohort study to assess the impact of a silver-alloy and
hydrogel-coated urinary catheter on symptomatic catheter-associ-
ated urinary tract infections. Contemp Nurse 2014;41:473–480.
35. Stenzelius K, Persson S, Olsson UB, Stjärneblad M. Noble metal
alloy-coated latex versus silicone Foley catheter in short-term
catheterization: A randomized controlled study. Scand J Urol
Nephrol 2011;45:258–264.
36. Desai DG, Liao KS, Cevallos ME, Trautner BW. Silver or nitrofura-
zone impregnation of urinary catheters has a minimal effect on
uropathogen adherence. J Urol 2010;184:2565–2571.
37. Stenzelius
K,
Laszlo
L,
Madeja
M,
Pessah-Rasmusson
HLN,
Grabe M. Catheter-associated urinary tract infections and other
infections in patients hospitalized for acute stroke: A prospective
cohort study of two different silicone catheters. Scand J Urol
Nephrol 2016;50:483–488.
38. Gomez-Carretero S, Nybom R, Richter-Dahlfors A. Electroen-
hanced antimicrobial coating based on conjugated polymers with
covalently coupled silver nanoparticles prevents staphylococcus
aureus biofilm formation. Adv Healthc Mater 2017;6:1700435.
39. Qayyum S, Oves M, Khan AU. Obliteration of bacterial growth and
biofilm through ROS generation by facilely synthesized green sil-
ver nanoparticles. PLoS One 2017;12:e0181363.
40. Shivaram A, Bose S, Bandyopadhyay A. Understanding long-term
silver release from surface modified porous titanium implants.
Acta Biomater 2017;58:550–560.
41. Xu DQ, Su YL, Zhao LL, Meng FC, Liu C, Guan YY, Zhang JY,
Luo JB. Antibacterial and antifouling properties of a polyurethane
surface modified with perfluoroalkyl and silver nanoparticles.
J Biomed Mater Res A 2017;105:531–538.
42. Funao H, Nagai S, Sasaki A, Hoshikawa T, Tsuji T, Okada Y,
Koyasu S, Toyama Y, Nakamura M, Aizawa M, Matsumoto M,
Ishii K. A novel hydroxyapatite film coated with ionic silver via ino-
sitol hexaphosphate chelation prevents implant-associated infec-
tion. Sci Rep 2016;6:23238.
43. Rtimi S, Sanjines R, Pulgarin C, Kiwi J. Quasi-instantaneous bacte-
rial inactivation on cu–ag Nanoparticulate 3D catheters in the dark
and under light: Mechanism and dynamics. ACS Appl Mater Inter-
faces 2016;8:47–55.
44. Rtimi S, Sanjines R, Pulgarin C, Kiwi J. Microstructure of cu–ag
uniform Nanoparticulate films on polyurethane 3D catheters: Sur-
face properties. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8:56–63.
45. Taheri
S,
Cavallaro
A,
Christo
SN,
Majewski
P,
Barton
M,
Hayball JD, Vasilev K. Antibacterial plasma polymer films conju-
gated with phospholipid encapsulated silver nanoparticles. ACS
Biomater Sci Eng 2015;1:1278–1286.
46. Wang R, Neoh KG, Kang ET, Tambyah PA, Chiong E. Antifouling
coating with controllable and sustained silver release for long-
term inhibition of infection and encrustation in urinary catheters.
J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater 2015;103:519–528.
47. Agarwala
M,
Barman
T,
Gogoi
D,
Choudhury
B,
Pal
AR,
Yadav RNS. Highly effective antibiofilm coating of silver-polymer
nanocomposite on polymeric medical devices deposited by one
step plasma process. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater 2014;
102:1223–1235.
48. Taheri S, Cavallaro A, Christo SN, Smith LE, Majewski P, Barton M,
Hayball JD, Vasilev K. Substrate independent silver nanoparticle
based antibacterial coatings. Biomaterials 2014;35:4601–4609.
49. Sondi I, Salopek-Sondi B. Silver nanoparticles as antimicrobial
agent: A case study on E. coli as a model for gram-negative bacte-
ria. J Colloid Interface Sci 2004;275:177–182.
50. Kim JS, Kuk E, Yu KN, Kim JH, Park SJ, Lee HJ, Kim SH, Park YK,
Park YH, Hwang CY. Antimicrobial effects of silver nanoparticles.
Nanomedicine 2007;3:95–101.
51. Fuchs AV, Ritz S, Putz S, Mailander V, Landfester K, Ziener U.
Bioinspired phosphorylcholine containing polymer films with sil-
ver nanoparticles combining antifouling and antibacterial proper-
ties. Biomater Sci 2013;1:470–477.
52. Kumar CG, Sujitha P. Green synthesis of Kocuran-functionalized
silver glyconanoparticles for use as antibiofilm coatings on sili-
cone urethral catheters. Nanotechnology 2014;25:325101.
53. Honda
M,
Kawanobe
Y,
Ishii
K,
Konishi
T,
Mizumoto
M,
Kanzawa N, Matsumoto M, Aizawa M. In vitro and in vivo antimi-
crobial properties of silver-containing hydroxyapatite prepared via
ultrasonic spray pyrolysis route. Korean J Couns Psychother 2013;
33:5008–5018.
54. Zheng K, Setyawati MI, Leong DT, Xie J. Antimicrobial silver nano-
materials. Coord Chem Rev 2018;357:1–17.
55. Yuan X, Setyawati MI, Leong DT, Xie J. Ultrasmall ag+-rich
nanoclusters as highly efficient nanoreservoirs for bacterial killing.
Nano Res 2014;7:301–307.
56. Yuan X, Setyawati MI, Tan AS, Ong CN, Leong DT, Xie J. Highly
luminescent silver nanoclusters with tunable emissions: Cyclic
reduction–decomposition synthesis and antimicrobial properties.
NPG Asia Mater 2013;5:e39.
57. Cho YW, Park JH, Kim SH, Cho YH, Choi JM, Shin HJ, Bae YH,
Chung H, Jeong SY, Kwon IC. Gentamicin-releasing urethral cathe-
ter for short-term catheterization. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 2003;
14:963–972.
58. Park JH, Cho YW, Cho YH, Choi JM, Shin HJ, Bae YH, Chung H,
Jeong SY, Kwon IC. Norfloxacin-releasing urethral catheter for long-
term catheterization. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 2003;14:951–962.
59. Kowalczuk D, Ginalska G, Piersiak T, Miazga-Karska M. Prevention
of biofilm formation on urinary catheters: Comparison of the
sparfloxacin-treated long-term antimicrobial catheters with silver-
coated ones. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater 2012;100B:
1874–1882.
60. Raad I, Darouiche R, Hachem R, Sacilowski M, Bodey GP. Antibi-
otics and prevention of microbial colonization of catheters. Antimi-
crob Agents Chemother 1995;39:2397–2400.
61. Pickard R, Lam T, Maclennan G, Starr K, Kilonzo M, Mcpherson G,
Gillies K, Mcdonald A, Walton K, Buckley B. Antimicrobial cathe-
ters for reduction of symptomatic urinary tract infection in adults
requiring short-term catheterisation in hospital: A multicentre ran-
domised controlled trial. Lancet 2012;380:1927–1935.
62. Fisher LE, Hook AL, Ashraf W, Yousef A, Barrett DA, Scurr DJ,
Chen X, Smith EF, Fay M, Parmenter CDJ, Parkinson R, Bayston R.
Biomaterial modification of urinary catheters with antimicrobials
to give long-term broadspectrum antibiofilm activity. J Control
Release 2015;202:57–64.
464
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

63. Thallinger B, Argirova M, Lesseva M, Ludwig R, Sygmund C,
Schlick A, Nyanhongo GS, Guebitz GM. Preventing microbial colo-
nisation of catheters: Antimicrobial and antibiofilm activities of cel-
lobiose dehydrogenase. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2014;44:402–408.
64. Thallinger B, Brandauer M, Burger P, Sygmund C, Ludwig R,
Ivanova K, Kun J, Scaini D, Burnet M, Tzanov T, Nyanhongo GS,
Guebitz GM. Cellobiose dehydrogenase functionalized urinary
catheter as novel antibiofilm system. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl
Biomater 2016;104:1448–1456.
65. Lipovsky A, Thallinger B, Perelshtein I, Ludwig R, Sygmund C,
Nyanhongo GS, Guebitz GM, Gedanken A. Ultrasound coating of
polydimethylsiloxanes with antimicrobial enzymes. J Mater Chem
B 2015;3:7014–7019.
66. Grover N, Borkar IV, Dinu CZ, Kane RS, Dordick JS. Laccase- and
chloroperoxidase-nanotube paint composites with bactericidal and
sporicidal activity. Enzym Microb Technol 2012;50:271–279.
67. Curtin JJ, Donlan RM. Using bacteriophages to reduce formation
of catheter-associated biofilms by Staphylococcus epidermidis.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2006;50:1268–1275.
68. Lehman SM, Donlan RM. Bacteriophage-mediated control of a
two-species biofilm formed by microorganisms causing catheter-
associated urinary tract infections in anIn VitroUrinary catheter
model. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2015;59:1127–1137.
69. Milo S, Hathaway H, Nzakizwanayo J, Alves DR, Esteban PP,
Jones BV, Jenkins ATA. Prevention of encrustation and blockage
of urinary catheters by Proteus mirabilis via pH-triggered release
of bacteriophage. J Mater Chem B 2017;5:5403–5411.
70. Yu L, Guo L, Ding JL, Ho B, Feng SS, Popplewell J, Swann M,
Wohland T. Interaction of an artificial antimicrobial peptide with
lipid membranes. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr 2009;1788:
333–344.
71. Matsuzaki K, Sugishita K, Fujii N, Miyajima K. Molecular basis for
membrane selectivity of an antimicrobial peptide, Magainin 2. Bio-
chemistry 1995;34:3423–3429.
72. Nguyen LT, Haney EF, Vogel HJ. The expanding scope of antimi-
crobial peptide structures and their modes of action. Trends Bio-
technol 2011;29:464–472.
73. Habets MG, Brockhurst MA. Therapeutic antimicrobial peptides
may compromise natural immunity. Biol Lett 2012;8:416–418.
74. Minardi D, Ghiselli R, Cirioni O, Giacometti A, Kamysz
W,
Orlando F, Silvestri C, Parri G, Kamysz E, Scalise G, Saba V,
Giovanni M. The antimicrobial peptide tachyplesin III coated alone
and in combination with intraperitoneal piperacillin-tazobactam
prevents ureteral stent pseudomonas infection in a rat subcutane-
ous pouch model. Peptides 2007;28:2293–2298.
75. Lim K, Chua RRY, Ho B, Tambyah PA, Hadinoto K, Leong SSJ.
Development of a catheter functionalized by a polydopamine pep-
tide coating with antimicrobial and antibiofilm properties. Acta
Biomater 2015;15:127–138.
76. Mishra B, Basu A, Chua RRY, Saravanan R, Tambyah PA, Ho B,
Chang MW, Leong SSJ. Site specific immobilization of a potent
antimicrobial peptide onto silicone catheters: Evaluation against
urinary tract infection pathogens. J Mater Chem B 2014;2:1706–
1716.
77. Li X, Li P, Saravanan R, Basu A, Mishra B, Lim SH, Su X,
Tambyah PA, Leong SSJ. Antimicrobial functionalization of sili-
cone surfaces with engineered short peptides having broad spec-
trum antimicrobial and salt-resistant properties. Acta Biomater
2014;10:258–266.
78. Pinese C, Jebors S, Echalier C, Licznar-Fajardo P, Garric X,
Humblot V, Calers C, Martinez J, Mehdi A, Subra G. Simple and
specific grafting of antibacterial peptides on silicone catheters.
Adv Healthc Mater 2016;5:3067–3073.
79. Bagheri M, Beyermann M, Dathe M. Immobilization reduces the
activity of surface-bound cationic antimicrobial peptides with no
influence upon the activity Spectrum. Antimicrob Agents Che-
mother 2009;53:1132–1141.
80. Basu A, Mishra B, Jan Leong SS. Immobilization of polybia-MPI by
allyl glycidyl ether based brush chemistry to generate a novel anti-
microbial surface. J Mater Chem B 2013;1:4746–4755.
81. Izquierdo-Barba I, Vallet-Regí M, Kupferschmidt N, Terasaki O,
Schmidtchen A, Malmsten M. Incorporation of antimicrobial com-
pounds in mesoporous silica film monolith. Biomaterials 2009;30:
5729–5736.
82. Brogden KA. Antimicrobial peptides: Pore formers or metabolic
inhibitors in bacteria? Nat Rev Microbiol 2005;3:238–250.
83. Kang S, Pinault M, Pfefferle LD, Elimelech M. Single-walled carbon
nanotubes exhibit strong antimicrobial activity. Langmuir 2007;23:
8670–8673.
84. Perreault F, de Faria AF, Nejati S, Elimelech M. Antimicrobial prop-
erties of graphene oxide nanosheets: Why size matters. ACS Nano
2015;9:7226–7236.
85. Tang YJ, Ashcroft JM, Chen D, Min G, Kim C-H, Murkhejee B,
Larabell C, Keasling JD, Chen FF. Charge-associated effects of ful-
lerene derivatives on microbial structural integrity and central
metabolism. Nano Lett 2007;7:754–760.
86. Akhavan O, Ghaderi E. Toxicity of graphene and graphene oxide
nanowalls against bacteria. ACS Nano 2010;4:5731–5736.
87. Santos CM, Tria MCR, Vergara RAMV, Ahmed F, Advincula RC,
Rodrigues DF. Antimicrobial graphene polymer (PVK-GO) nano-
composite films. Chem Commun 2011;47:8892–8894.
88. Li R, Mansukhani ND, Guiney LM, Ji Z, Zhao Y, Chang CH,
French CT, Miller JF, Hersam MC, Nel AE. Identification and opti-
mization of carbon radicals on hydrated graphene oxide for ubiq-
uitous antibacterial coatings. ACS Nano 2016;10:10966–10980.
89. Ostuni E, Chapman RG, Liang MN, Meluleni G, Pier G, Ingber DE,
Whitesides GM. Self-assembled monolayers that resist the adsorp-
tion of proteins and the adhesion of bacterial and mammalian
cells. Langmuir 2001;17:6336–6343.
90. Cheng G, Zhang Z, Chen S, Bryers JD, Jiang S. Inhibition of bacte-
rial adhesion and biofilm formation on zwitterionic surfaces. Bio-
materials 2007;28:4192–4199.
91. Park KD, Kim YS, Han DK, Kim YH, Lee EHB, Suh H, Choi KS. Bac-
terial adhesion on PEG modified polyurethane surfaces. Biomate-
rials 1998;19:851–859.
92. Roosjen A, van der Mei HC, Busscher HJ, Norde W. Microbial
adhesion to poly(ethylene oxide) brushes:
Influence of polymer
chain length and temperature. Langmuir 2004;20:10949–10955.
93. Yang C, Ding X, Ono RJ, Lee H, Hsu LY, Tong YW, Hedrick J,
Yang YY. Brush-like polycarbonates containing dopamine, cations,
and PEG providing a broad-spectrum, antibacterial, and antifoul-
ing surface via one-step coating. Adv Mater 2014;26:7346–7351.
94. Garay RP, Elgewely R, Armstrong JK, Garratty G, Richette P. Anti-
bodies against polyethylene glycol in healthy subjects and in
patients treated with PEG-conjugated agents. Expert Opin Drug
Deliv 2012;9:1319–1323.
95. Hucknall A, Rangarajan S, Chilkoti A. In pursuit of zero: Polymer
brushes that resist the adsorption of proteins. Adv Mater 2009;21:
2441–2446.
96. Chung PHY, Wong CWY, Lai CKC, Siu HK, Tsang DNC, Yeung KY,
Ip DKM, Tam PKH. A prospective interventional study to examine
the effect of a silver alloy and hydrogel-coated catheter on the inci-
dence of catheter-associated urinary tract infection. Hong Kong
Med J 2017;23:239–245.
97. Kazmierska KA, Thompson R, Morris N, Long A, Ciach T. In vitro
multicompartmental bladder model for assessing blockage of uri-
nary catheters: effect of hydrogel coating on dynamics of proteus
mirabilis growth. Urology 2010;76:515.e15–515.e20.
98. Lowe AB, McCormick CL. Synthesis and solution properties of
Zwitterionic polymers†. Chem Rev 2002;102:4177–4190.
99. Ladd J, Zhang Z, Chen S, Hower JC, Jiang S. Zwitterionic poly-
mers exhibiting high resistance to nonspecific protein adsorption
from human serum and plasma. Biomacromolecules 2008;9:
1357–1361.
100. Russell JC. Bacteria, biofilms, and devices: The possible protective
role of Phosphorylcholine materials. J Endourol 2000;14:39–42.
101. Diaz BC, Ortner A, Dimitrov R, Navarro A, Mendoza E, Tzanov T.
Building an antifouling Zwitterionic coating on urinary catheters
using an enzymatically triggered bottom-up approach. ACS Appl
Mater Interfaces 2014;6:11385–11393.
102. Mi L, Jiang S. Integrated antimicrobial and nonfouling Zwitterionic
polymers. Angew Chem Int Ed 2014;53:1746–1754.
103. Kurowska M, Eickenscheidt A, Guevara-Solarte DL, Widyaya VT,
Marx F, Al-Ahmad A, Lienkamp K. A simultaneously antimicrobial,
protein-repellent, and cell-compatible polyzwitterion network. Bio-
macromolecules 2017;18:1373–1386.
104. Zhou C, Wu Y, Thappeta KRV, Subramanian JTL, Pranantyo D,
Kang ET, Duan HW, Kline K, Chan-Park MB. In vivo anti-biofilm and
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
465
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

anti-bacterial non-leachable coating thermally polymerized on cylin-
drical catheter. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9:36269–36280.
105. Lewis K. Riddle of biofilm resistance. Antimicrob Agents Che-
mother 2001;45:999–1007.
106. Hymes SR, Randis TM, Sun TY, Ratner AJ. DNase inhibits Gard-
nerella vaginalis biofilms in vitro and in vivo. J Infect Dis 2013;
207:1491–1497.
107. Whitchurch CB, Tolker-Nielsen T, Ragas PC, Mattick JS. Extracellu-
lar DNA required for bacterial biofilm formation. Science 2002;295:
1487.
108. Hogan S, Zapotoczna M, Stevens NT, Humphreys H, O’Gara JP,
O’Neill E. Potential use of targeted enzymatic agents in the treat-
ment of Staphylococcus aureus biofilm-related infections. J Hosp
Infect 2017;96:177–182.
109. Kalia VC, Purohit HJ. Quenching the quorum sensing system:
Potential antibacterial drug targets. Crit Rev Microbiol 2011;37:
121–140.
110. Miller MB, Bassler BL. Quorum sensing in bacteria. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2001;55:165–199.
111. Churchill MEA, Chen L. Structural
basis of acyl-homoserine
lactone-dependent signaling. Chem Rev 2011;111:68–85.
112. Grossman AD, Losick R. Extracellular control of spore formation in
Bacillus subtilis. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1988;85:4369–4373.
113. Cao JG, Meighen EA. Purification and structural identification of
an autoinducer for the luminescence system of Vibrio harveyi.
J Biol Chem 1989;264:21670–21676.
114. Cirioni O, Giacometti A, Ghiselli R, Dell’Acqua G, Orlando F,
Mocchegiani F, Silvestri C, Licci A, Saba V, Scalise G. RNAIII-
inhibiting peptide significantly reduces bacterial load and enhances
the effect of antibiotics in the treatment of central venous catheter–
Associated Staphylococcus aureus infections. J Infect Dis 2006;193:
180–186.
115. Balaban
N,
Giacometti
A,
Cirioni
O,
Gov
Y,
Ghiselli
R,
Mocchegiani F, Viticchi C, Del Prete MS, Saba V, Scalise G. Use of
the quorum-sensing inhibitor RNAIII-inhibiting peptide to prevent
biofilm formation in vivo by drug-resistant Staphylococcus epider-
midis. J Infect Dis 2003;187:625–630.
116. Tateda K, Comte R, Pechere JC, Köhler T, Yamaguchi K, Van
Delden C. Azithromycin inhibits quorum sensing in Pseudomo-
nas
aeruginosa.
Antimicrob
Agents
Chemother
2001;45:
1930–1933.
117. Saini H, Vadekeetil A, Chhibber S, Harjai K. Azithromycin-cipro-
floxacin-impregnated urinary catheters avert bacterial coloniza-
tion, biofilm formation, and inflammation in a murine model of
foreign-body-associated urinary tract infections caused by pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2017;61:
e01906–16.
118. Shenderovich
J,
Feldman
M,
Kirmayer
D,
Al-Quntar
A,
Steinberg D, Lavy E, Friedman M. Local sustained-release delivery
systems of the antibiofilm agent thiazolidinedione-8 for prevention
of catheter-associated urinary tract infections. Int J Pharm 2015;
485:164–170.
119. Bijtenhoorn P, Schipper C, Hornung C, Quitschau M, Grond S,
Weiland N, Streit WR. BpiB05, a novel metagenome-derived
hydrolase acting on N-acylhomoserine lactones. J Biotechnol
2011;155:86–94.
120. Hentzer M, Riedel K, Rasmussen TB, Heydorn A, Andersen JB,
Parsek MR, Rice SA, Eberl L, Molin S, Høiby N. Inhibition of
quorum sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm bacteria
by a halogenated furanone compound. Microbiology 2002;148:
87–102.
121. Ivanova K, Fernandes MM, Francesko A, Mendoza E, Guezguez J,
Burnet M, Tzanov T. Quorum-quenching and matrix-degrading
enzymes in multilayer coatings synergistically prevent bacterial
biofilm formation on urinary catheters. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
2015;7:27066–27077.
122. Ivanova K, Fernandes MM, Mendoza E, Tzanov T. Enzyme multi-
layer coatings inhibit Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm formation
on
urinary
catheters.
Appl
Microbiol
Biotechnol
2015;99:
4373–4385.
123. Abdelnour A, Arvidson S, Bremell T, Ryden C, Tarkowski A. The
accessory gene regulator (agr) controls Staphylococcus aureus
virulence in a murine arthritis model. Infect Immun 1993;61:3879–
3885.
124. Boles BR, Horswill AR. Agr-mediated dispersal of Staphylococcus
aureus biofilms. PLoS Pathog 2008;4:e1000052.
125. Tian J, Weng LX, Zhang YQ, Wang LH. BDSF inhibits Candida albi-
cans adherence to urinary catheters. Microb Pathog 2013;64:
33–38.
126. Fang FC. Perspectives series: Host/pathogen interactions. Mecha-
nisms of nitric oxide-related antimicrobial activity. J Clin Invest
1997;99:2818–2825.
127. Colletta A, Wu J, Wo Y, Kappler M, Chen H, Xi C, Meyerhoff M.
S-Nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) impregnated silicone foley
catheters: A potential biomaterial/device to prevent catheter-asso-
ciated urinary tract infections. ACS Biomater Sci Eng 2015;1:
416–424.
128. Nablo BJ, Prichard HL, Butler RD, Klitzman B, Schoenfisch MH.
Inhibition of implant-associated infections via nitric oxide release.
Biomaterials 2005;26:6984–6990.
129. Regev-Shoshani G, Ko M, Crowe A, Av-Gay Y. Comparative effi-
cacy of commercially available and emerging antimicrobial uri-
nary catheters against bacteriuria caused by E. coli in vitro.
Urology 2011;78:334–339.
130. Darouiche RO, Hull RA. Bacterial interference for prevention of uri-
nary tract infection. Clin Infect Dis 2012;55:1400–1407.
131. Darouiche RO, Green BG, Donovan WH, Chen D, Schwartz M,
Merritt J, Mendez M, Hull RA. Multicenter randomized controlled
trial of bacterial interference for prevention of urinary tract infec-
tion
in
patients
with
neurogenic
bladder.
Urology
2011;78:
341–346.
132. Horwitz
D,
McCue
T,
Mapes
AC,
Ajami
NJ,
Petrosino
JF,
Ramig RF, Trautner BW. Decreased microbiota diversity associ-
ated with urinary tract infection in a trial of bacterial interference.
J Infect 2015;71:358–367.
133. Connell I, Agace W, Klemm P, Schembri M, Marild S, Svanborg C.
Type 1 fimbrial expression enhances Escherichia coli virulence for
the urinary tract. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1996;93:9827–9832.
134. Trautner BW, Cevallos ME, Li HG, Riosa S, Hull RA, Hull SI,
Tweardy DJ, Darouiche RO. Increased expression of type-1 fim-
briae by nonpathogenic Escherichia coli 83972 results in an
increased capacity for catheter adherence and bacterial interfer-
ence. J Infect Dis 2008;198:899–906.
135. Ferrières L, Hancock V, Klemm P. Specific selection for virulent uri-
nary tract infectious Escherichia coli strains during catheter-associated
biofilm formation. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2007;51:
212–219.
136. Klemm P, Hancock V, Schembri MA. Mellowing out: Adaptation to
commensalism
by
Escherichia
coli
asymptomatic
bacteriuria
strain 83972. Infect Immun 2007;75:3688–3695.
137. Bergsten G, Wullt B, Schembri MA, Leijonhufvud I, Svanborg C.
Do type 1 fimbriae promote inflammation in the human urinary
tract? Cell Microbiol 2007;9:1766–1781.
138. Zhu Z, Wang J, Lopez AI, Yu F, Huang Y, Kumar A, Li S, Zhang L,
Cai C. Surfaces presenting α-phenyl mannoside derivatives enable
formation of stable, high coverage, non-pathogenic Escherichia
coli biofilms against pathogen colonization. Biomater Sci 2015;3:
842–851.
139. Lopez AI, Kumar A, Planas MR, Li Y, Nguyen TV, Cai C. Biofunctio-
nalization of silicone polymers using poly(amidoamine) dendri-
mers and a mannose derivative for prolonged interference against
pathogen colonization. Biomaterials 2011;32:4336–4346.
140. Chen Q, Zhu Z, Wang J, Lopez AI, Li S, Kumar A, Yu F, Chen H,
Cai C, Zhang L. Probiotic E. coli Nissle 1917 biofilms on silicone
substrates for bacterial interference against pathogen colonization.
Acta Biomater 2017;50:353–360.
141. Zhu Z, Yu F, Chen H, Wang J, Lopez AI, Chen Q, Li S, Long Y,
Darouiche RO, Hull RA. Coating of silicone with mannoside-
PAMAM dendrimers to enhance formation of non-pathogenic
Escherichia coli biofilms against colonization of uropathogens.
Acta Biomater 2017;64:200–210.
142. Hajipour
MJ,
Fromm
KM,
Akbar
Ashkarran
A,
Jimenez
de
Aberasturi D, Larramendi IRD, Rojo T, Serpooshan V, Parak WJ,
Mahmoudi M. Antibacterial properties of nanoparticles. Trends
Biotechnol 2012;30:499–511.
143. Jones N, Ray B, Ranjit KT, Manna AC. Antibacterial activity of ZnO
nanoparticle suspensions on a broad spectrum of microorgan-
isms. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2008;279:71–76.
466
ZHU ET AL.
ANTIMICROBIAL STRATEGIES FOR URINARY CATHETERS
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

144. Sirelkhatim
A,
Mahmud
S,
Seeni
A,
Kaus
NHM,
Ann
LC,
Bakhori SKM, Hasan H, Mohamad D. Review on zinc oxide nano-
particles: Antibacterial activity and toxicity mechanism. Nano
Micro Lett 2015;7:219–242.
145. Jin T, Sun D, Su J, Zhang H, Sue HJ. Antimicrobial efficacy of zinc
oxide quantum dots against Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella
Enteritidis, and Escherichia coli O157: H7. J Food Sci 2009;74:
M46–M52.
146. Priester JH, Stoimenov PK, Mielke RE, Webb SM, Ehrhardt C,
Zhang JP, Stucky GD, Holden PA. Effects of soluble cadmium salts
versus CdSe quantum dots on the growth of planktonic Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa. Environ Sci Technol 2009;43:2589–2594.
147. Lu Z, Li CM, Bao H, Qiao Y, Toh Y, Yang X. Mechanism of anti-
microbial activity of CdTe quantum dots. Langmuir 2008;24:
5445–5452.
148. Hardman R. A Toxicologic review of quantum dots: Toxicity
depends on physicochemical and environmental factors. Environ
Health Perspect 2006;114:165–172.
149. Pelley JL, Daar AS, Saner MA. Review state of academic knowl-
edge on toxicity and biological fate of quantum dots. Toxicol Sci
2009;112:276–296.
150. Tsoi KM, Dai Q, Alman BA, Chan WCW. Are quantum dots toxic?
Exploring the discrepancy between cell culture and animal stud-
ies. Acc Chem Res 2013;46:662–671.
151. Fujishima A. Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconduc-
tor electrode. Nature 1972;238:37–38.
152. Fu G, Vary PS, Lin CT. Anatase TiO2 nanocomposites for antimi-
crobial coatings. J Phys Chem B 2005;109:8889–8898.
153. Chung CJ, Lin HI, Tsou HK, Shi ZY, He JL. An antimicrobial TiO2
coating for reducing hospital-acquired infection. J Biomed Mater
Res B Appl Biomater 2008;85:220–224.
154. Khantamat O, Li CH, Yu F, Jamison AC, Shih WC, Cai C,
Lee TR. Gold nanoshell-decorated silicone surfaces for the
near-infrared (NIR) photothermal destruction of the patho-
genic bacterium E. faecalis. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2015;7:
3981–3993.
155. Ren G, Hu D, Cheng EWC, Vargas-Reus MA, Reip P, Allaker RP.
Characterisation of copper oxide nanoparticles for antimicrobial
applications. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2009;33:587–590.
156. Zeraik AE, Nitschke M. Biosurfactants as agents to reduce adhe-
sion of pathogenic bacteria to polystyrene surfaces: Effect of tem-
perature and hydrophobicity. Curr Microbiol 2010;61:554–559.
157. Nitschke M, Pastore GM. Biosurfactant production by Bacillus sub-
tilis using cassava-processing effluent. Appl Biochem Biotechnol
2004;112:163–172.
158. Nitschke
M,
Costa
SG,
Haddad
R,
Gonçalves
G,
Lireny
A,
Eberlin MN, Contiero J. Oil wastes as unconventional substrates
for rhamnolipid biosurfactant production by Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa LBI. Biotechnol Prog 2005;21:1562–1566.
159. Janek T, Lukaszewicz M, Krasowska A. Antiadhesive activity of the
biosurfactant pseudofactin II secreted by the Arctic bacterium
Pseudomonas fluorescens BD5. BMC Microbiol 2012;12:24.
160. Pradhan AK, Pradhan N, Sukla LB, Panda PK, Mishra BK. Inhibi-
tion of pathogenic bacterial biofilm by biosurfactant produced
by Lysinibacillus fusiformis S9. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 2014;
37:139–149.
161. Hochbaum AI, Aizenberg J. Bacteria pattern spontaneously on
periodic nanostructure arrays. Nano Lett 2010;10:3717–3721.
162. Dickson MN, Liang EI, Rodriguez LA, Vollereaux N, Yee AF. Nano-
patterned polymer surfaces with bactericidal properties. Biointer-
phases 2015;10:021010.
163. Chang YR, Weeks ER, Ducker WA. Surface topography hinders
bacterial surface motility. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018;10:
9225–9234.
164. Banerjee I, Pangule RC, Kane RS. Antifouling coatings: Recent
developments in the design of surfaces that prevent fouling by
proteins, bacteria, and marine organisms. Adv Mater 2011;23:
690–718.
165. Mon H, Chang YR, Ritter AL, Falkinham JO, Ducker WA. Effects of
colloidal crystals, antibiotics, and surface-bound antimicrobials on
pseudomonas aeruginosa surface density. ACS Biomater Sci Eng
2018;4:257–265.
JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL MATERIALS RESEARCH PART A | FEB 2019 VOL 107A, ISSUE 2
467
REVIEW ARTICLE
 15524965, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jbm.a.36561 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License