RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advancedscience.com
Brain-Wide Neuroregenerative Gene Therapy Improves
Cognition in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease
Zheng Wu,* Liang Xu, Yu Xie, Abhijeet Sambangi, Shreya Swaminathan, Zifei Pei,
Wenyu Ji, Zeru Li, Yaowei Guo, Zhifei Li, and Gong Chen*
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive and irreversible brain disorder with
extensive neuronal loss in the neocortex and hippocampus. Current
therapeutic interventions focus on the early stage of AD but lack eﬀective
treatment for the late stage of AD, largely due to the inability to replenish the
lost neurons and repair the broken neural circuits. In this study, by using
engineered adeno-associated virus vectors that eﬃciently cross the
blood–brain-barrier in the mouse brain, a brain-wide neuroregenerative gene
therapy is developed to directly convert endogenous astrocytes into functional
neurons in a mouse model of AD. It is found that ≈500 000 new neurons are
regenerated and widely distributed in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus.
Importantly, it is demonstrated that the converted neurons can integrate into
pre-existing neural networks and improve various cognitive performances in
AD mice. Chemogenetic inhibition of the converted neurons abolishes
memory enhancement in AD mice, suggesting a pivotal role for the newly
converted neurons in cognitive restoration. Together, brain-wide
neuroregenerative gene therapy may provide a viable strategy for the
treatment of AD and other brain disorders associated with massive neuronal
loss.
Z. Wu, L. Xu, Y. Xie, W. Ji, Z. Li, Y. Guo, Z. Li, G. Chen
State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Molecules and Druggability Assessment
Guangdong Basic Research Center of Excellence for Natural Bioactive
Molecules and Discovery of Innovative Drugs
Key Laboratory of CNS Regeneration (Ministry of Education)
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Non-Human Primate Research
GHM Institute of CNS Regeneration
Jinan University
Guangzhou 510632, China
E-mail: zhengwu@jnu.edu.cn;gongchen@jnu.edu.cn
Z.Wu, A.Sambangi, S.Swaminathan,Z.Pei,G.Chen
Department of Biology
Huck Institutes of LifeSciences
Pennsylvania StateUniversity
University Park,PA 16802,USA
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202410080
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH
GmbH. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
DOI: 10.1002/advs.202410080
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease is a devastating neu-
rodegenerative disorder that aﬀects mil-
lions of people globally. The pathologi-
cal hallmarks of AD include the depo-
sition of A𝛽plaques and tau-rich neu-
roﬁbrillary tangles, which lead to neu-
roinﬂammation, oxidative stress, and ul-
timately, the loss of neurons and synap-
tic connectivity.[1,2] While the exact mecha-
nisms underlying AD progression are still
unclear, it is widely accepted that the fail-
ure to clear toxic A𝛽and tau protein from
the brain contributes signiﬁcantly to dis-
ease onset and progression.[3] Recent clin-
ical trials aimed at reducing A𝛽achieved
some success in slowing the progression
of AD in early-stage patients but had lit-
tle eﬀect on cognitive functions in patients
with moderate to severe AD symptoms.[4,5]
This correlation may be attributed to the
substantial neuronal loss observed in the
brains of patients with mid-to-late AD. Ob-
viously, therapeutic strategies based on the
removal of harmful proteins lack the capacity to regenerate neu-
rons. Thus, it is pivotal to search for neuron replacement therapy
in order to reverse memory deﬁcits.
Regenerating neurons and repairing degenerated neural net-
works in AD animals, through either boosting endogenous neu-
rogenesis in the hippocampus[6] or transplanting external stem
cells,[7] bring new possibilities for the treatment of AD. How-
ever, exogenous cell transplantation may induce immune rejec-
tion and tumorigenesis, leading to potential medical risks. Mean-
while, adult neurogenesis occurs only in speciﬁc regions of the
mammalian brain, and this ability declines sharply with age
increase.[8] Furthermore, whether adult neurogenesis exists in
the human brain is still controversial.[9,10] Alternatively, recently
developed astrocyte-to-neuron (AtN) conversion has shown great
potential for regenerating new neurons in AD animal brains, but
whether it can produce any cognitive beneﬁts is still unknown.[11]
Unlike other neurodegenerative diseases, AD patients’ brains
show extensive neuronal loss across diﬀerent brain areas, espe-
cially in brain regions highly relevant to learning and memory
functions, such as the cortex and hippocampus.[12] Therefore,
how to achieve brain-wide neuron regeneration in AD brains
represents a signiﬁcant challenge in the regenerative medicine
ﬁeld.[13]
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (1 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
In this study, using engineered adeno-associated virus (AAV)
vectors that eﬃciently cross the blood–brain-barrier (BBB) in the
mouse brain, we developed a brain-wide neuroregenerative gene
therapy through the conversion of endogenous astrocytes into
functional neurons in a mouse model of AD. We show that about
half a million of new neurons are regenerated and widely dis-
tributed in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Importantly,
the converted neurons can integrate into pre-existing neural net-
works and improve various cognitive performances in AD mice.
Meanwhile, chemogenetic inhibition of the converted neurons
can eliminate memory improvement, suggesting that converted
new neurons contribute signiﬁcantly to cognitive improvement
in AD mice. To investigate the mechanism of AtN conversion,
we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) studies
following NeuroD1 initiation of AtN conversion in the hippocam-
pus and found that astrocytic transcriptome was changed toward
neuronal transcriptome during the AtN conversion process. Tak-
ing advantage of the abundance and wide distribution of resident
astrocytes in the brain, our brain-wide AtN conversion gene ther-
apy sheds new light on the restoration of cognitive functions after
AD and may be also applicable to the treatment of other neuro-
logical disorders previously considered untreatable.
2. Results
2.1. Local Neuroregeneration via NeuroD1-Mediated AtN
Conversion in the Hippocampus of 5xFAD Mice
The hippocampus is closely related to learning and memory
which undergoes signiﬁcant neuronal loss in AD brains.[12,14] We
previously reported that NeuroD1 can reprogram cortical reac-
tive astrocytes into functional neurons in mouse brains of 5xFAD
and stroke.[11,15] Since 5xFAD mice, at 6-6.5 months of age, show
signiﬁcant pathological phenotypes and cognitive impairment in
our previous studies,[16,17] we used mice at this age to explore
the potential of NeuroD1 mediated AtN conversion in the hip-
pocampus in vivo (Figure 1A). To express NeuroD1 speciﬁcally
in astrocytes, we employed astrocyte-speciﬁc promoter Gfap to
directly drive the expression of NeuroD1. AAV9-GFAP::NeuroD1-
P2A-GFP were directly injected into 5xFAD mouse hippocampus
(6–6.5 months of age), and AAV9-GFAP::GFP was selected as a
control. Then mice were sacriﬁced at 1 week post injection (wpi),
3 and 6 wpi for immunohistological study (Figure 1A). In the con-
trol group, almost all of the GFP+ cells were co-stained by GFAP
and lacked of NeuroD1 expression (Figure 1B top). Meanwhile,
we observed a strong NeuroD1 immunostaining signal in GFAP+
astrocytes at 1 week after AAV9-GFAP::NeuroD1-P2A-GFP injec-
tion (Figure 1B bottom). Then we tracked changes in the molecu-
lar identity of NeuroD1-expressing astrocytes. We found that the
majority of NeuroD1-infected astrocytes retained astrocyte mark-
ers (GFAP) at 1 wpi (Figure 1C), whereas an increasing num-
ber of NeuroD1-infected astrocytes acquired the neuronal marker
NeuN at 3 and 6 wpi (Figure 1D,E, quantiﬁed in F). Moreover, a
signiﬁcant number of GFP+ cells with both astrocytic and neu-
ronal markers (double-positive) were detected in the hippocam-
pus of AAV-NeuroD1 treated mice (Figure 1D,H, and quantiﬁed
in 1F green bar), whereas these cells were never detected in con-
trols (Figure 1G). At 6 wpi, 53.7% of AAV9-transduced astrocytes
were fully converted into neurons (GFAP−/NeuN+) by NeuroD1
(Figure 1E and quantiﬁed in 1F red bar). Interestingly, we also
found that when astrocytes acquired a neuronal marker (NeuN+),
their GFAP signal was signiﬁcantly reduced (Figure 1H,I). Of
note, the number of double-positive cells was smaller in the early
and late time points after AAV-NeuroD1 injection, and most in
the mid-stage (3 wpi, Figure 1F green bar), indicating transitional
stage cells were observed during AtN conversion (Figure 1H).
Together, these data reveal that local AtN conversion has been
achieved by ectopic expression of NeuroD1 in 5xFAD mouse hip-
pocampus.
2.2. Single Cell RNA-Sequencing Analysis of AtN Conversion in
5xFAD Mouse Hippocampus
To elucidate the molecular mechanism of NeuroD1-mediated
AtN conversion in 5xFAD mouse hippocampus, we next per-
formed unbiased single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) at
3 wpi (Figure 2A), when the greatest number of transition-
state cells (GFAP+/NeuN+) was detected (Figure 1F). Then, a
microwell-based ultra-high throughput scRNA-seq platform was
employed in this study. We analyzed scRNA-seq data of 22 752
cells from the control and NeuroD1-treated mice and identiﬁed
13 clustered cell populations by the marker genes (Figure 2B;
Figure S1A, Supporting Information). Astrocytes accounted for
≈24% of total cells, consistent with the expectation. However,
most of the neurons were lost because of tissue digestion and
dissociation (Figure S1B, Supporting Information left). Among
these astrocytes, 1241 and 221 GFP+ astrocytes were found in
the control and NeuroD1 group, respectively (Figure S1B, Sup-
porting Information right). Next, by analyzing diﬀerentially ex-
pressed genes (DEGs, fold change > 1.5, p < 0.05) in AAV-
infected astrocytes (GFP+), we found 85 down-regulated genes
and 151 up-regulated genes (Figure S1C, Supporting Informa-
tion). Of note, many neuronal genes (e.g., Abat, Syn2, Olfm2, and
Stmn1) were induced by NeuroD1 overexpression (Figure S1D,
Supporting Information), while mature astrocyte genes (e.g.,
Slca3, Aqp4, Aldoc, and Gja1) were down-regulated (Figure S1E,
Supporting Information). Moreover, four algorithms (StemID,
CytoTrace, SLICE, and CCAT) were employed for estimating
cell potency from scRNA-seq data,[18–21] and showed signiﬁcantly
higher diﬀerentiation capacity (entropy value) in NeuroD1 over-
expressed astrocytes (Figure S2A–D, Supporting Information).
Together, these data reveal that NeuroD1 initiates the AtN con-
version, as evidenced by the upregulation of neuronal genes and
repression of astrocyte genes.
To further elucidate the characterization of AtN conversion,
we separated astrocytes and neurons from the total cell popu-
lation for further analysis. Neurons were divided into two sub-
populations, of which subpopulation 2 neurons highly expressed
Igfbpl1, Marcksl1, and Tmsb10 genes (Figure S3A, Supporting
Information). These genes are mainly related to axon growth,
neuronal diﬀerentiation, and regeneration, and are mainly ex-
pressed in immature neurons.[22–24] Astrocytes were further di-
vided into 5 subpopulations based on their gene expression pro-
ﬁle (Figure 2C; Figure S3A, Supporting Information). Interest-
ingly, in both control and NeuroD1-treated mice, the majority of
astrocytes were clustered in populations 1, 2, and 3, but popula-
tion 4 astrocytes were primarily present in control mice, whereas
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (2 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 1. NeuroD1-mediated local AtN conversion in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice. A) Schematic diagram showing the experimental design to
investigate changes in cell morphology and markers at diﬀerent time points. The area in green indicates the hippocampus. B) Representative images
showing that the control virus transducing GFP+ cells (green) co-localized with the astrocytic markers GFAP (cyan) but not NeuroD1(red) at 1 week after
AAV9 injection (top, n = 3 mice), and the GFP+ cells co-localized with GFAP and speciﬁcally expressing NeuroD1 at 1 wpi of AAV9-GFAP::NeuroD1-GFP
injection (bottom, n = 3 mice). Scale bar, 20 μm. C–E) Representative images illustrating the gradual change from astrocytes to neurons over a 6-week
time window of NeuroD1-overexpression in hippocampal astrocytes. Note that most GFP+ cells co-labeled with GFAP at early time points after AAV-
NeuroD1 injection (C); 3 weeks after AAV injection, a neuronal marker (NeuN) was obtained while retaining an astrocyte marker (GFAP), these cells
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (3 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
subpopulation 5 astrocytes were mainly present in the NeuroD1
group (Figure 2C,D; Figure S3B, Supporting Information). No-
tably, compared with astrocyte subpopulations of 1–4, mature
astrocyte genes were downregulated, while immature astrocyte
and neuronal genes were upregulated in subpopulation 5 astro-
cytes (Figure S3E, Supporting Information). To determine the
composition of astrocyte subpopulation 5, we scattered GFP+
cells into U-MAP plots and found that few GFP+ cells in the
control group were distributed within subpopulation 5 (Figure
S3C, Supporting Information), while the majority of NeuroD1
overexpressed GFP+ cells are clustered in astrocyte subpopula-
tion 5 (Figure S3D, Supporting Information). Overall, ≈40% of
NeuroD1-overexpressing GFP+ cells belonged to subpopulation
5 astrocytes, compared with ≈1% in the control group (Figure 2D,
purple block). Next, the reprogramming trajectory of astrocytes
was constructed through pseudotime analysis (Figure S3F, Sup-
porting Information), more GFP+ astrocytes in the diﬀerentia-
tion path from astrocytes to neuronal fate (cell fate 2) were ob-
served in NeuroD1-treated mouse brain (Figure 2F; Figure S3G,
Supporting Information). In addition, cells distributed in the cell
fate 2 direction were mainly subpopulation 5 GFP+ astrocytes
(Figure S3F, Supporting Information), which were abundant in
the NeuroD1-treated hippocampus but very rare in the control
group (Figure 2E,F; Figure S3G, Supporting Information). Fur-
thermore, the gene expression proﬁle of group 5 GFP+ astro-
cytes (NeuroD1 vs Ctrl) distributed in the cell fate 2 direction
was fundamentally altered, exhibiting a downregulation of ma-
ture astrocyte genes (e.g., Aqp4, Gja1, and Hopx), upregulation
of immature (such as Olig1, Hes5, Vim, Hes6 and Sox4) and neu-
ronal genes (e.g., Abat, Syngr1, Olfm1 and Tubb4b; Figure 2G). In
addition, overexpression of NeuroD1 in astrocytes (subpopula-
tion 5) also upregulated many genes related to neurogenesis, de-
velopment, synaptic function, survival, and mitochondrial energy
production, while downregulated genes related to neurotransmit-
ter homeostasis, metabolism, vesicle transport, and other func-
tions more commonly observed in astrocytes (Figure 2H). Col-
lectively, our ﬁndings demonstrate that NeuroD1 signiﬁcantly al-
ters the transcriptomic landscape of astrocytes toward neuronal
landscape, suggesting a role for NeuroD1 in neuronal fate repro-
gramming.
Moreover, neurons and astrocytes have distinct energy
metabolic proﬁles. Astrocytes mainly rely on glycolysis (anaero-
bic) for their energy production, whereas neurons preferentially
use oxidative phosphorylation (aerobic) to generate energy from
glucose.[25,26] As expected, AtN conversion was also accompanied
by a change in energy metabolism preference, with a signiﬁcant
elevation of OXPHOS, pyruvate metabolism, and TCA cycle in
GFP+ cells (Figure 2I–K). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment anal-
ysis revealed that many DEGs were enriched in biological pro-
cesses including neurogenesis, axonogenesis, synapse organiza-
tion, and brain development (Figure 2L). Together, these data sug-
gest that transcriptional factor NeuroD1 drives the astrocyte tran-
scriptome in a neuronal direction.
To investigate the speciﬁc subtypes of astrocytes targeted for
conversion into neurons, we conducted RNA velocity analysis to
predict the direction and speed of individual cell transitions be-
tween clusters in scRNA-seq data.[27,28] All astrocytes and neu-
rons were included in the unbiased RNA velocity analysis. In-
terestingly, arrows in astrocyte subpopulation 5 point toward
the immature neurons of subpopulation 2 (Figure S4A, Sup-
porting Information), suggesting that cluster 5 astrocytes could
be the major source for AtN conversion in 5xFAD mouse hip-
pocampus after NeuroD1 treatment. Subsequently, we analyzed
DEGs in A1 (neurotoxic reactive astrocytes) and A2 reactive astro-
cytes (neuroprotective reactive astrocytes).[29] The heatmap anal-
ysis demonstrated that 3 A1-enriched DEGs were downregulated
(C3, S1Pr3, and Gbp2), while 1 DEG (Sperping1) was upregu-
lated in NeuroD1-treated astrocytes (Figure S4B, Supporting In-
formation). For A2-enriched DEGs, we observed 3 upregulated
(Emp1, CD109, and B3gnt5) and 1 downregulated (Cd14) DEGs
in NeuroD1-treated astrocytes (Figure S4B, Supporting Informa-
tion). These ﬁndings suggest that genes associated with neuro-
toxic phenotypes are downregulated, whereas those related to
neuroprotective phenotypes are upregulated in cluster 5 astro-
cytes in NeuroD1-treated mice. Notably, astrocyte-5 subpopula-
tions were predominantly observed in the brains of NeuroD1-
treated mice (Figure S4C, Supporting Information). Conversely,
we noticed that cluster 4 astrocytes were primarily found in the
control group (Figure S4C, Supporting Information). Heatmap
of the top 10 marker genes used to deﬁne cluster 4 astrocytes
(Figure S4D, Supporting Information), most of which are in-
volved in promoting inﬂammatory responses (such as Cxcl10,
Iﬁtm3, Serpina3n, and Isg15). Taken together, these data sug-
gest that more neuroprotective reactive astrocytes are generated,
whereas proinﬂammatory reactive astrocytes are suppressed, in
the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice treated with NeuroD1.
2.3. Brain-Wide Gene Therapy Targeting Astrocytes for Neuronal
Conversion
The Alzheimer’s disease brain is characterized by widespread
neurodegeneration, particularly in the hippocampus and cortex,
which are two brain regions intimately linked to learning and
memory.[12,14] To date, we have achieved local AtN conversion in
the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice in this study, and in the cor-
were deﬁned as transitional cells (D); but then lost GFAP signal and continued to express NeuN (cyan) signal (E). Dashed boxes represent the enlarged
images. Scale bar, 20 μm. F) Quantiﬁed data showing the type of the AAV9-NueroD1 infected cells at 1 week (n = 5 mice), 3 weeks (n = 6 mice), and
6 weeks (n = 5 mice) post injection. Note that the proportion of NeuroD1 overexpressed astrcoytes (GFAP+/NeuN−) were gradually decreased (blue
bar), converted neurons (GFAP−/NeuN+) were gradually increased (red bar), while the proportion of transitional stage cells (GFAP+/NeuN+) were ﬁrst
increased and then decreased (green bar). G) All of the GFP+ cells were co-labeled with astrocytic marker GFAP at 6 wpi, no transitional stage of cells
and converted neurons were detected in the control group (n = 3 mice). Scale bar, 20 μm. H) High-resolution confocal images showing the transitional
stage cells that were observed in the hippocampus during NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion. Compared with uninfected astrocytes (arrows, GFP−),
AAV-infected cells (GFP+) contained clear NeuN signals in the cell body and weaker GFAP (arrowheads). Scale bar, 10 μm. I) Quantiﬁed data showing
that the GFAP ﬂuorescence intensity in transitional stage cells (GFAP+/NeuN+, green bar) was signiﬁcantly decreased compared with their neighboring
AAV-uninfected astrocytes (GFAP+/NeuN−, blue bar, n = 7 mice) or the hippocampal astrocytes in control virus-treated group (GFAP+/NeuN−, gray
bar, n = 5 mice). Data are shown as mean ± SD. **p < 0.01, One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (4 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 2. sc-RNAseq analysis revealed the molecular mechanism of AtN. A) Experimental design. 5xFAD mouse Hippocampi were injected with AAV9
and extracted from control and NeuroD1 treated mice at 3 weeks post injection (n = 3 mice per group). Hippocampi were dissociated, and single-cell
suspensions were prepared and isolated using a microﬂuidic chip, followed by scRNA-seq processing. B) Clustering using the Seurat package revealed 13
distinct cellular populations. UMAP of 22,752 single-cell RNA proﬁles from 5xFAD mouse hippocampi of AAV9 injection. C) UMAP clustering, showing 2
subclusters of neurons, 5 subclusters of astrocytes. Pie chart showing the percentage of diﬀerent clustered cells in the control and NeuroD1 group. Note
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (5 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
tex in our previous study.[11] Next, we wondered whether a sin-
gle AAV-NeuroD1 treatment could achieve brain-wide AtN con-
version, rather than conﬁned to a localized region, and thus
improve cognitive performance in 5xFAD mice. Therefore, we
investigated the possibility of achieving brain-wide astrocyte-to-
neuron (AtN) conversion in AD mouse brains by using sys-
temic administration of the BBB-penetrating AAV-PhP.eB vec-
tors. To trace astrocyte-converted neurons in the long term, we
developed a Cre-FLEx (ﬂip-excision) expression system which in-
cludes a bigenic mouse line expressing Cre recombinase under
the control of the Gfap promoter (Cre77.6) to target astrocytes
in 5xFAD mouse brains. AAV-PhP.eB FLEx vectors with an in-
verted coding sequence of GFP (control) or NeuroD1-P2A-GFP
driven by a strong universal synthetic promoter CAG were em-
ployed to trace the cell fate of Cre-expressing astrocytes in 5xFAD
brains after overexpressing GFP or NeuroD1-GFP (Figure 3A–C).
As expected, we observed a wide distribution of GFP across
the whole brain including the cerebral cortex and hippocampus
(Figure 3D), suggesting that systemic delivery of AAV-PhP.eB-
CAG::FLEx-GFP in bigenic Cre-AD mice achieved brain-wide ex-
pression of the ectopic gene.
To identify the cell type of GFP-expressing cells, we immunos-
tained several brain residential cell markers and found that
GFP was rarely expressed in microglia (Iba1+), oligodendrocytes
(Olig2+), NG2 cells (NG2+), or neurons (NeuN+, Figure 3E–H).
On the other hand, over 80% GFP+ cells were co-expressed with
astrocytic marker GFAP in various brain regions (Figure 3I,L and
Figure S5, Supporting Information). Almost all GFP+ cells were
co-labeled with astrocyte pan marker S100𝛽across the diﬀerent
brain areas (Figure 3J, quantiﬁed in Figure 3L). Interestingly, in
most regions of the mouse brain, more than 90% of GFP+ cells
were labeled by glutamine synthetase (GS), another commonly
used astrocyte marker, but we also observed that more than half
of the GFP+ cells located in the thalamus, midbrain, and hind-
brain did not co-express GS (Figure 3K,L). These results might
be attributed to the fact that oligodendrocytes in those brain
regions also express GS.[30] Together, these data suggest that
systemic delivery of Cre-dependent AAV-PhP.eB-CAG::FLEx-
GFP in bigenic Cre-AD mice enables brain-wide targeting of
astrocytes.
2.4. NeuroD1-Mediated Neuronal Conversion among Diﬀerent
Brain Regions
Astrocytes are known to have region-speciﬁcity.[31,32] Whether
NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion can be achieved in diﬀer-
ent brain regions is largely unknown. To address this topic,
AAV-PhP.eB-CAG::FLEx-NeuroD1-P2A-GFP was injected retro-
orbitally (R.O.) into Cre-AD bigenic mice and analyzed at 10 days
post injection (dpi) and 60 dpi for immunohistochemistry study
(Figure 4A). At an early time-point (10 dpi), we observed a
strong NeuroD1 signal in S100𝛽+ astrocytes but not in con-
trol (Figure 4B), indicating that AAV-infected astrocytes be-
gan to express conversion factor NeuroD1. By 60 dpi, many
GFP-expressing cells in control mice still showed astrocytic
morphology and were labeled by pan astrocyte marker S100𝛽
(Figure 4C,D top). However, NeuroD1-overexpressed GFP+ cells
exhibited typical neuronal morphology with NeuN immunos-
taining signal throughout the cortex (Figure 4C right) and
hippocampus (Figure 4D bottom). Furthermore, NeuroD1 im-
munostaining signals were detected in GFP+ neurons at 60 dpi
(Figure 4E), whereas NeuroD1 was only observed in astrocytes
at 10 dpi (Figure 4B right). Therefore, these results indicate
that overexpression of NeuroD1 in astrocytes induces AtN con-
version in the cortex and hippocampus in Alzheimer’s mouse
brains.
To further study the diﬀerences in NeuroD1-mediated AtN
conversion eﬃciency in diﬀerent brain regions, we analyzed
11 regions on sagittal sections of mouse brains (Figure 4F).
At 60 dpi, we found many GFP+ neurons (NeuN+) located in
the cortex (Figure 4G top), hippocampus, and parts of the mid-
brain (Figure 4G middle row right), but GFP+ cells in the ol-
factory bulb, striatum, thalamus, and hindbrain were not co-
stained with NeuN (Figure 4G bottom). Quantitative analyses
showed that the majority of GFP+ cells at 10 dpi after AAV-
NeuroD1 treatment were still astrocytes (S100𝛽+), but after 60 dpi
of AAV-NeuroD1 treatment, more than 80% of GFP+ cells ex-
pressed neuronal marker (NeuN), and these cells were widely
distributed in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and the mid-
brain area (Figure 4H,I). However, in other brain regions, most
GFP+ cells were still co-labeled with astrocyte marker (S100𝛽) af-
ter 60 days of NeuroD1 treatment (Figure 4I). These data suggest
that region-speciﬁc astrocytes exhibit heterogeneous susceptibil-
ity to NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion.
Next, we wondered whether AtN conversion in the cortex
and hippocampus could aﬀect A𝛽pathology and reactive gliosis
in 5xFAD mice and therefore performed A𝛽42 and GFAP im-
munostaining. Then, we found there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in A𝛽42 between control and NeuroD1 groups, suggesting A𝛽42
pathology is not aﬀected by AtN conversion in 5xFAD mouse
brain (Figure S6A,B, Supporting Information). Interestingly, de-
spite there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in GFAP immunostaining
in the cortex between these two groups, more hypertrophic reac-
tive astrocytes were observed in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice
in the control group (Figure S6C,D, Supporting Information).
Thus, these results suggest that neurotoxic reactive astrocytes
in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice are decreased by NeuroD1-
mediated AtN conversion.
that the astrocyte 4 population was present in controls, but the astrocyte 5 population was more abundant in the hippocampus of NeuroD1-treated mice.
D) GFP+ astrocyte population in control and NeuroD1 group. Up to 38.2% of GFP+ astrocytes with NeuroD1 were clustered in the astrocyte 5 population,
but in control GFP+ astrocytes this proportion was less than 1.3%. E,F) Pseudotime analysis revealed the diﬀerence of GFP+ astrocytes in Control (E)
and NeuroD1-GFP group (F). Note that more NeuroD1 overexpressing astrocytes were distributed in the branch toward to neuronal population 2 (cell
fate 2, related to Figure S3g, Supporting Information). G) Relative gene expression level of GFP+ astrocyte population 5 (NeuroD1 vs Ctrl) in terms of
mature astrocyte genes, immature astrocyte genes, and neuronal genes. H) Heatmap showing some of the upregulated and downregulated genes of
NeuroD1-GFP+ astrocytes (subpopulation 5) in cell fate 2 direction. I–K) Metabolic pattern score of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS, I), pyruvate
metabolism (J), and TCA cycle (K) were increased in NeuroD1 overexpressing astrocytes. L) Gene Ontology terms of the DEGs in response to NeuroD1
overexpression in hippocampal astrocytes.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (6 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 3. Design and validation of brain-wide targeting astrocytes for transgene expression in 5xFAD mouse brain. A) Male 5xFAD mice were crossed
with Gfap::cre transgenic female mice (Cre 77.6) to generate bigenic mice. B) Schematic of the Cre-FLEx system used to activate GFP expressing and
the inverted transgene was packaged into the AAV-PhP.eB capsids C) Flowchart of study design to evaluate GFP expressing in bigenic mouse brain.
dpi, days post injection. D) Representative low-mag confocal images of GFP expression in the view of sagittal (top, scale bar = 0.5 mm) and coronal
(bottom, scale bar = 0.2 mm) sections from anterior to posterior. GFP-expressing cells were investigated in 11 brain regions as shown in sagittal view.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (7 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
2.5. Brain-Wide Gene Therapy Conversion Regenerated Half a
Million New Neurons in 5xFAD Mouse Brain
We next asked how many neurons that we can regenerate in the
5xFAD mouse brain by brain-wide AtN conversion. To achieve
this goal, the ﬂuorescence micro-optical sectioning tomography
(fMOST) technique was employed in this study (Figure 5A,B), a
technique developed to obtain high-resolution images of samples
labeled with ﬂuorescent dyes and recently were mainly used to
get the whole-brain image with single-neuron resolution. Whole-
brain GFP imaging was then achieved using fMOST on the
bigenic mice 60 days after NeuroD1 treatment (Figure 5C–F,
n = 4 mice). Since there are huge diﬀerences in morphology
between neurons and astrocytes, we can easily identify the con-
verted neurons (GFP+ and NeuN+) using the spot function of
Imaris software. As shown in the confocal images (Figure 5G),
converted neurons (GFP+ and NeuN+) were eﬃciently labeled by
the blue spots with high accuracy (≈90%, Figure 5H), which en-
abling us to count GFP+ converted neurons in the whole mouse
brain. Next, fMOST images were loaded into Imaris software
for quantiﬁcation of converted neurons, and the converted neu-
rons were automatically identiﬁed and labeled with the blue spots
(Figure 5I). We found that NeuroD1-mediated brain-wide gene
therapy conversion regenerated ≈366 000 new neurons in the
cortex and 149 000 new neurons in the hippocampus, respec-
tively (Figure 5J). These results indicate that whole-brain gene
therapy conversion regenerated a total of >500 000 new neurons
in a 5xFAD mouse brain.
We further assessed the electrophysiological functions of
astrocyte-converted neurons induced by NeuroD1 in the cortex
and hippocampus of 5xFAD bigenic mice. Whole-cell recordings
were performed on acute cortical and hippocampal brain slices
at 60–90 dpi following injection of NeuroD1 viral vectors. Repeti-
tive action potentials were induced upon injecting depolarization
currents in both cortical (Figure 5K top) and hippocampal con-
verted neurons (Figure 5K bottom). Furthermore, we recorded
signiﬁcant spontaneous synaptic currents, both excitatory and in-
hibitory, in all converted neurons (Figure 5L–O), indicating that
these neurons had formed synaptic connections with other neu-
rons and therefore integrated into functional neural circuits.
2.6. Converted Neurons Acquire Local Neuronal Identities
The brain is a highly structured organ, with speciﬁc types of neu-
rons in particular locations forming a complex neural network.
To examine the subtypes of the converted neurons and their
spatial distribution, we focused on laminar and molecular prop-
erties. In the cerebral cortex, there was a widespread presence
of converted neurons throughout the upper and lower layers
(Figure 6A). Most Cux1+ converted neurons were localized to the
upper layers (Figure 6B, GFP+), while Ctip2+ converted neurons
mainly resided in deeper layers (Figure 6C, GFP+), similar to
the spatial distribution of endogenous neurons (GFP−). The
converted neurons were mainly distributed in layers II-III and
V-VI, with a small portion in layer IV and a few in layer I
(Figure 6D). Of these converted neurons, the majority of Cux1+
superﬁcial layer neurons were located in the motor cortex,
while over 90% Ctip2+ deep layer neurons were regenerated in
the somatosensory and visual cortex (Figure 6E,F). In the hip-
pocampus, the presence of converted neurons can be detected in
diﬀerent regions including CA1, CA3, and dentate gyrus (DG).
Among them, ≈70% of the converted neurons were located in
the granule cell layer of DG (Pie chart in Figure 6G). Speciﬁcally,
we observed that converted neurons in the CA1 region only
expressed Ctip2, and the granular layer of the dentate gyrus
(DG) co-expressed Ctip2 and Prox1, whereas converted neurons
in the CA3 and hilus regions did not express Ctip2 or Prox1
(Figure 6G). Among them, NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion
regenerated a large proportion of Ctip2 and Prox1 double pos-
itive converted neurons in DG, but very few Prox1+ converted
neurons in the hippocampus (Figure 6H). Together, these data
indicate that astrocyte-converted neurons adopt the molecular
signatures characteristic of local neuronal subtypes with spatial
locations in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus.
Since all of the antibodies we used above labeled glutamatergic
neurons, we next asked whether NeuroD1-mediated astrocyte-to-
neuron conversion could regenerate GABAergic neurons in the
5xFAD mouse brain. Surprisingly, few of the converted neurons
were co-labeled with the GABAergic neuronal marker GAD67
throughout the entire cortex and hippocampus (n = 6 mice,
Figure S7, Supporting Information). These data suggest that
FLEx-CAG::NeuroD1 is unable to convert cortical and hippocam-
pal astrocytes into GABAergic neurons in the brains of Cre-
AD mice. Since most of the converted neurons are glutamater-
gic, it is unclear whether this would result in an imbalance
in excitatory–inhibitory (E–I) activity. Therefore, we conducted
patch-clamp recordings on hippocampal endogenous neurons
in 5XFAD brains with (NeuroD1) and without (Ctrl) AtN con-
version. No signiﬁcant diﬀerences in sEPSC and sIPSC were
found between groups (Figure S8, Supporting Information), in-
dicating that NeuroD1-regenerated glutamatergic neurons did
not disrupt the E–I balance in the hippocampus of 5xFAD
mice.
Having shown that NeuroD1-converted neurons acquired
proper neuronal subtypes and spatial location identities, we next
examined whether these newly generated neurons could project
their axons to the appropriate brain regions. The corticopontine
tract is a distinctly convergent descending motor pathway that
contributes more than 95% of aﬀerents to the basal pontine nu-
cleus (BPN).[33] Therefore, this pathway is particularly advan-
tageous for studying ipsilateral axonal projections of converted
neurons located in the deeper layer of the cortex. A retrograde
tracer cholera toxin subunit B (CTB) was injected into the BPN
at 60 days after injection of AAV-PhP.eB-NeuroD1 (R.O.). Mouse
brains were collected 10 days after CTB injection and sagittally
CB, cerebellum; HB, hindbrain; HIP, hippocampus; MB, midbrain; MO, motor cortex; OB, olfactory bulb; SS, somatosensory cortex; STR, striatum;
TH, thalamus; VIS, visual cortex; PIR, Piriform cortex. E–H) Typical images showing that GFP was not expressed in microglia (Iba1, E), NG2 cells or
oligodendrocytes (Olig2, F), NG2 cells (NG2, G), and Neurons (NeuN, H). Scale bar, 20 μm. I,J) Validation of GFP that was co-labeled with GFAP (I),
S100𝛽(J), and Glutamine synthetase (GS, K). Scale bar, 20 μm. L) Percentage of GFP-expressing (GFP+) cells with three diﬀerent astrocytic markers in
diﬀerent brain regions (n = 3 mice per group, mean ± SD).
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (8 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 4. Brain-wide AtN conversion study in 5xFAD mouse brain. A) Study design to examine NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion. B) Representative
confocal image showing that NeuroD1 was expressed in AAV-infected astrocytes (right, GFP+ and S100𝛽+, arrows), but not in non-infected astrocytes
(right, GFP−and S100𝛽+, arrowhead) and control AAV-infected astrocytes (left, GFP+ and S100𝛽+, arrows) at 10 dpi. Scale bar, 20 μm. C) Low-mag
confocal images of cortical areas at 60 dpi. GFP+ cells were co-labeled with astrocytic marker S100𝛽in the control mouse brain (left), but in the NeuroD1-
treated mouse brain, they were co-labeled with the neuronal marker NeuN (right). Scale bar, 100 μm (top), 20 μm (bottom). D) Typical images showing
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (9 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
sectioned for histological study (Figure 6I). Injection of CTB into
BPN labeled 40% of the deep layer converted neurons in the cor-
tex (Figure 6J,M). Next, we focused on the bilateral hippocam-
pus for examining contralateral axonal projections, given the
substantial number of neural ﬁbers connecting these structures
across both hemispheres. We performed a unilateral injection of
CTB into one side of the hippocampus at 60 dpi of AAV-PhP.eB-
NeuroD1 injection, followed by an analysis of CTB retrograde-
labeled neurons on the contralateral side of the hippocampus
10 days after CTB administration (Figure 6K). About 60% and
50% of the converted neurons were found in CA3 and hilus areas
contralaterally to the injection side, respectively (Figure 6L,M).
Therefore, these data demonstrate that astrocyte-converted neu-
rons can extend their axonal projections to the appropriate target
brain areas.
2.7. Brain-Wide AtN Conversion Improves Cognitive
Performance in 5xFAD Mice
We have shown that the systemic delivery of NeuroD1 globally
converts astrocytes into neurons, speciﬁcally in the cortex and
hippocampus, two brain regions closely associated with cognitive
function. Then, we assessed its potential eﬀects on the cognitive
performances of 5xFAD mice by using four diﬀerent behavioral
tests, including the Y-maze spontaneous alternation test, odor ha-
bituation test, contextual fear conditioning test, and Morris water
maze test (Figure 7A).
The Y-maze spontaneous alternation test is used to evaluate
short-term memory in mice. Compared to the wild-type (WT)
mice (gray bar), both female and male 5xFAD mice exhibited a
signiﬁcantly lower percentage of spontaneous alternation across
all entries (Figure 7B,C; blue bar), whereas no signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences were found in terms of total entries (Figure S9, Supporting
Information). Notably, male 5xFAD mice that received NeuroD1
brain-wide gene therapy exhibited a signiﬁcantly higher percent-
age of spontaneous alternation than those not treated with Neu-
roD1 (Figure 7B, green bar). However, this beneﬁcial result was
not observed in the female 5xFAD mice (Figure 7C). This data
suggests that the short-term memory of male 5xFAD mice is en-
hanced by NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion gene therapy.
Olfactory impairment has been recognized as a potential pre-
clinical marker for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), and this deﬁciency
has been replicated in animal models of AD.[16] The establish-
ment of mouse olfactory habituation tests relies on the basis of
spontaneous drinking or foraging, innate odor memory, and cu-
riosity about unfamiliar odors. Typically, WT mice would quickly
lose interest on the same odor, shown by decreased time investi-
gating the same odor (Figure 7D,E, gray line). In contrast, 5xFAD
mice spent much more time on exploring the familiar odors than
the WT mice (Figure 7D,E, blue line). On the other hand, both fe-
male and male 5xFAD mice treated with NeuroD1 spent signiﬁ-
cantly less time on the familiar odors compared to those without
NeuroD1 treatment (Figure 7D,E, green vs red line). These re-
sults indicate that the impairment of olfactory memory of 5xFAD
mice can be rescued by NeuroD1-mediated gene therapy.
The contextual fear conditioning memory test is a procedure
used to assess the strength of the fear memory in a speciﬁc con-
text, such as a particular chamber. Mice were placed into the con-
ditioning chamber 24 h after foot-shock, both female and male
5xFAD exhibited less freezing time in the conditioning chamber
compared to the WT mice, suggesting impaired memory. 5xFAD
mice in the control group continued to show reduced freezing
levels, as expected (Figure 7F,G). In contrast, the freezing time
of the NeuroD1-treated mice recovered to the levels of the WT
group, and was signiﬁcantly higher than the 5xFAD mice with-
out receiving the NeuroD1 (Figure 7F,G), suggesting a rescue of
the fear memory deﬁcit by brain-wide NeuroD1 gene therapy.
The Morris water maze task is one of the most classic behav-
ior assays for assessing spatial learning and memory abilities in
AD mice. As expected, 5xFAD mice showed severe deﬁcits in spa-
tial memory formation in comparison to WT mice (Figure 7H).
Interestingly, 5xFAD mice receiving NeuroD1 brain-wide gene
therapy were signiﬁcantly rescued from spatial memory impair-
ment compared with control 5xFAD mice (Figure 7H). In the
probe trial, WT mice showed more platform crossing frequency
and time in the goal quadrant than 5xFAD mice, as expected
(Figure 7I,J). Again, NeuroD1-treated 5xFAD mice returned to
the levels of the WT group, which exhibited higher crossing fre-
quency and more time in the goal quadrant than 5xFAD mice
in the control group (Figure 7I,J). These data collectively demon-
strate that NeuroD1-mediated brain-wide gene therapy leads to
a signiﬁcant enhancement of spatial learning and memory in
5xFAD mice.
2.8. Astrocyte-Converted Neurons are Necessary for
Improvement of Fear Memory in 5xFAD Mice
Because cognitive functions were remarkably improved by brain-
wide AtN conversion gene therapy, we next examined whether
the astrocyte-converted neurons made a signiﬁcant contribution
to cognition enhancement in 5xFAD mice. To achieve this, cre-
dependent expression of hM4Di, an inhibitory designer recep-
tor exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADD) technol-
ogy was employed. We ﬁrst mixed FLEx-hSyn::hM4Di-mCherry
and FLEx-CAG::NeuroD1-P2A-GFP/GFP (control) vectors, then
injected the AAV mixture into the bigenic mice. Therefore, the
FLEx vector is expected to be activated in astrocytes in mice with
the Gfap-cre background, which ensures that hM4Di is not ex-
pressed in native neurons. In addition, due to the presence of
the neuron-speciﬁc promoter hSyn, hSyn::hM4Di should not be
expressed in astrocytes, but can be expressed in neurons that are
converted from astrocytes (Figure 8A,B). As expected, immuno-
NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion in bigenic mouse hippocampus. Scale bar, 200 μm (left), 50 μm (right). E) NeuroD1 immunostaining signals were
detected within GFP+ neurons (arrows) but not in the endogenous neurons (arrowhead) at 60 dpi. Scale bar, 20 μm. F) A sagittal view of 5xFAD mouse
brain at 2 months after AAV-PhP.eB-NeuroD1-P2A-GFP injection (R.O.). Scale bar, 200 μm. G) Enlarged confocal images that were indicated by the white
dashed box in panel F, Scale bar, 20 μm. H,I) Percentage of GFP+ cells with S100𝛽and NeuN co-expression in mouse brains that were treated with
NeuroD1 at 10 dpi (n = 4 mice, H) and 60 dpi (n = 5 mice, I), respectively. Note that NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion eﬃciency diﬀers obviously in
diﬀerent brain regions. Data was shown as mean ± SD.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (10 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 5. AtN whole brain imaging and electrophysiologic study. A) Schematic diagram showing the collection and preparation of mouse brain tissue
for fMOST imaging. B) Workﬂow of fMOST whole brain imaging procedure, the resin-embedded brain tissues were cut by the diamond knife in an
anteroposterior direction, with 2 μm thickness step by step. C) Representative images of whole-brain GFP ﬂuorescent imaging by fMOST. Green, purple
and cyan represent the cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum, respectively. D) Imaris software was used to extract the cortical (green) and hippocampal
(purple) structures from the whole mouse brain for further independent analysis. E) A 3-D transparent view from the sagittal plane (100 μm thickness),
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (11 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
histochemical analysis conﬁrmed that hM4Di was expressed nei-
ther in astrocytes nor in native neurons in the control mouse
brain (Figure 8C). Consistently, we observed many converted
neurons that were labeled by GFP in NeuroD1-treated mouse
brains (Figure 8D). Moreover, we also detected many hM4Di-
immunoreactive signals that were exclusively expressed in con-
verted neurons but not in native neurons (Figure 8D). Quan-
tiﬁed data revealed that ≈80% of astrocyte-converted neurons
expressed hM4Di in the cortex and hippocampus (Figure 8E).
Electrophysiological analysis of acute brain slices conﬁrmed that
clozapine-N-oxide (CNO, 5 μm) inhibited spiking in hM4Di-
expressing converted neurons (Figure 8F), resulting in an el-
evated spiking threshold and reduced spiking number under
the current step injection in converted neurons from cortex
(Figure 8G), CA1 (Figure 8H) and DG (Figure 8I), respectively.
Taken together, these results indicate that the electrophysiologi-
cal activity of astrocyte-converted neurons can be selectively in-
hibited by DREADD.
We next investigated whether cognition enhancement in
5xFAD mice was due to the brain-wide AtN conversion gene ther-
apy. Male bigenic mice (6 months) were injected (R.O.) with AAV-
PhP.eB-NeuroD1, then contextual fear conditioning memory
tests were performed at 2 months after AAV-PhP.eB-NeuroD1 in-
jection. To inhibit the activity of astrocyte-converted neurons dur-
ing a stimulus association period, we injected CNO (5 mg kg−1,
i.p.) 15 min before the electric shock, the same volume of saline
was given as the vehicle control. After 24 h, mice were tested for
freezing behavior in the same contexture box (Figure 8J). In the
control group (GFP + hM4Di), mice exhibited no diﬀerence in
freezing behavior on the test day (day 3) between CNO and saline
injections, indicating that CNO itself did not have a signiﬁcant
eﬀect on contextual fear memory in 5xFAD mice (Figure 8K).
Interestingly, NeuroD1-treated mice displayed signiﬁcantly en-
hanced freezing behavior when they had received a saline injec-
tion, whereas this improvement in fear memory was inhibited by
CNO injection (Figure 8K). Notably, when NeuroD1-treated mice
were injected with CNO, they displayed similar levels of freez-
ing behavior as control mice (Figure 8K). Therefore, these results
indicate that astrocyte-converted neurons contribute to the im-
provement of contextual fear memory in 5xFAD mice.
3. Discussion
Neuron replacement therapy has long been a hope for patients
with Alzheimer’s disease. Here, we demonstrated for the ﬁrst
time that brain-wide AtN conversion gene therapy can signiﬁ-
cantly improve cognitive function in 5xFAD mice, a commonly
used Alzheimer’s disease mouse model with severe neuronal
loss.[34] By using a BBB-crossing AAV-PhP.eB viral vectors, sys-
temic administration of this NeuroD1-mediating AtN system in
transgenic mice achieves remarkable neuroregeneration in mul-
tiple brain regions, especially in cortex and hippocampus, which
are highly related to learning and memory. The converted neu-
rons could stay at the right position and form long-distance ax-
onal projection. Most importantly, behavior tests show a compre-
hensive cognitive promotion in 5xFAD mice after brain-wide AtN
gene therapy. Using hM4Di-DREADD-mediated chemogenetic
inhibition to speciﬁcally inhibit the ﬁring probability of converted
neurons, precludes cognitive enhancement by brain-wide AtN
gene therapy. Overall, systemic AAV injection targeting resident
astrocytes inside the brain for AtN resulted in eﬃcient brain-wide
neuroregeneration, consequently enhancing cognition in 5xFAD
mice, which may provide a brain-wide neuroregeneration gene
therapy for the treatment of AD.
Acquiring the ability of brain regeneration after injury like
a salamander is the ultimate goal in the ﬁeld of regenerative
medicine. Unfortunately, mammals have almost lost this mirac-
ulous ability to regenerate neurons after injury.[9,10] However,
glial cells in the brain still retain the basic “engram” of neurore-
generation. Such as reactive astrocytes surrounding A𝛽plaques
in the brains of 5xFAD mice exhibit some properties of neu-
ral stem cells,[35] suggesting that reactive astrocytes may be a
desired endogenous source cell for regenerating neurons. In-
deed, in vivo, reprogramming of astrocytes into functional neu-
rons, termed astrocyte-to-neuron conversion, has been achieved
by ectopic expression of neuronal pioneer factors in astrocytes
such as NeuroD1.[11,15] Recently, NeuroD1-mediated AtN was
challenged by some scientists who claim that astrocyte-converted
neurons do not originate from resident astrocytes but rather from
pre-existing neurons infected with AAV, a phenomenon called
“leakage” expression.[36] Therefore, to prove the real existence of
NeuroD1-mediated conversion in the 5xFAD mouse brain, we
provide several lines of evidence for the real conversion of res-
ident astrocytes. First, we observed many “intermediate” cells
that contained both astrocytic and neuronal markers in NeuroD1-
treated 5xFAD mouse brain but not found in the control group.
Second, unbiased single-cell RNA sequencing analysis revealed
that typical astrocytic genes were suppressed, whereas neuronal
genes were induced during AtN conversion. Notably, this cellu-
lar conversion was accompanied by a shift in metabolic prefer-
ence from glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation. It is consis-
tent with previous ﬁndings that metabolic state is particularly
relevant for the AtN conversion, because neurons are highly de-
pendent on oxidative metabolism, while astrocytes rather utilize
anaerobic glycolysis.[25,26] Third, pseudo-chronological analysis
further revealed that astrocytes with enforced NeuroD1 expres-
sion tend to diﬀerentiate into neurons. Finally, to exclude the pos-
the white box indicated some typical brain regions in the cortex (MO, SS, and VIS) and hippocampus (CA1). MO, motor cortex; SS, somatosensory cortex;
VIS, visual cortex; CA1, cornu ammonis 1. F) Representative high-magniﬁcation images from single-layer fMOST ﬂuorescence images (GFP). Scale bar,
20 μm. G) Use confocal images to test the accuracy of Imaris software in identifying converted neurons (GFP+ and NeuN+), the blue spots represent
converted neurons deﬁned by the Imaris software. Scale bar, 20 μm. H) The statistical data shows that the accuracy of converted neuron identiﬁcation by
Imaris software reaches ≈90%. I) Examples of Imaris software automatically identify astrocyte-converted neurons (GFP+ and indicated by blue spots)
in fMOST ﬂuorescence images. Scale bar, 20 μm. J) Quantitative results showed that NeuroD1 induced 36.6 and 14.9 k astrocyte-converted neurons in
the cortex and hippocampus, respectively (n = 4 mice). K–M) Representative traces of evoked repetitive action potentials (K), spontaneous excitatory
post-synaptic currents (sEPSCs, L), and inhibitory post-synaptic currents (sIPSC, M) in converted neurons located in the cortex (top) and hippocampus
(bottom). N) Summary graph of mean frequency and amplitude of sEPSCs. O) Bar graph of mean frequency and amplitude of sIPSCs. Data was shown
as mean ± SD.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (12 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 6. Brain-wide astrocyte-converted neurons acquire adequate position identity and axonal projection. A) Representative confocal images showing
the spatial distribution of the converted neurons (GFP+) in the mouse cortex at 60 dpi of AAV-PhP.eB-NeuroD1. White dashed lines indicate the laminar
boundaries within the bigenic mouse cortex. Scale bar, 100 μm. B) Example images show that CUX1-expressing converted neurons (CUX1+ and GFP+)
are predominantly located in superﬁcial layers (II-III), whereas converted neurons in deeper layers (V-VI) lack CUX1 expression. White dashed boxes
were enlarged in the right panels and the white arrow indicated a typical converted neuron that expressing CUX1. Left scale bar, 100 μm; right scale bar,
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (13 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
sibility of NeuroD1 broadly changing the speciﬁcity of the Gfap
promoter,[36,37] we employed the Cre-FLEx system, in which the
constitutive CAG promoter drives NeuroD1 and reporter gene ex-
pression in astrocytes with Cre recombinase. The CAG promoter
is a potent constitutive promoter commonly used to drive ro-
bust gene expression in mammalian expression vectors. In gen-
eral, the possibility of NeuroD1 changing promoter speciﬁcity
through cis-regulation can be entirely rejected. Together, these
results fully demonstrate that NeuroD1 initiates the conversion
of astrocytes into neurons, rather than simply leaking expression
of the reporter gene in the pre-existing neurons.
Astrocytes are proliferative and wide-distribution glial cells in
the adult mammalian brain, which share a common develop-
mental origin with neurons.[13] Additionally, astrocytes also ex-
hibit limited neurogenic potential in response to invasive in-
juries such as ischemic stroke, as well as noninvasive conditions
like chronic amyloidosis.[35,38] Thus, the bias intrinsic character-
istics of astrocytes render them optimal internal sources for in
vivo neuroregeneration following brain injury or disease. Fur-
thermore, astrocytes have been found to possess similar tran-
scriptional and epigenetic signatures as their neighboring neu-
rons, the fact that direct astrocytes are reprogrammed toward an
identity similar to their neighboring neurons.[31] In this study, we
investigated the NeuroD1-mediated conversion of astrocytes on
the scale of brain-wide. Speciﬁcally, cortical astrocytes were found
to be convertible into cortical neurons expressing layer-speciﬁc
markers, while hippocampal astrocytes displayed a propensity
for conversion into neurons bearing location-speciﬁc markers.
These results are in agreement with multiple recent reports
showing that astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in diﬀerent brain
regions can regenerate distinct neuronal identities despite be-
ing induced by the same conversion factors.[31,39,40] Most likely,
region-speciﬁc astrocytes have inherent properties that inﬂuence
the outcome of cellular reprogramming, enabling regeneration
of diverse neuronal subtypes in a spatially controlled manner,
thereby orchestrating the de novo regeneration of neural tissue
in situ.
In the scRNA-seq data, we noticed that the number of GFP+
astrocytes in the NeuroD1 group was signiﬁcantly less than that
in the control group. The underlying mechanism for this obser-
vation remains unclear, and we propose several potential explana-
tions. First, the process of AtN conversion is accompanied by sub-
stantial transcriptomic changes, including the downregulation
of genes associated with astrocyte identity.[41,42] As an astrocyte-
speciﬁc promoter, the GFAP promoter is likely to experience re-
duced activity during this transition, which may account for the
low proportion of GFP+ astrocytes observed in the scRNA-seq
data. Furthermore, epigenetic regulation plays a key role in cell
reprogramming, with a study suggesting that reprogramming ﬁ-
broblasts leads to decreased CAG promoter activity early in the
cell reprogramming process.[43] A similar promoter regulatory
mechanism may also exist in NeuroD1-mediated AtN conver-
sion. Finally, previous research has shown that reprogrammed
astrocytes exhibit increased fragility,[25] implying GFP+ astrocytes
reprogrammed by NeuroD1 may more susceptible to loss dur-
ing tissue digestion. Taken together, these potential mechanisms
may contribute to the reduced proportion of GFP+ astrocytes in
the NeuroD1 group observed in the scRNA-seq data.
We observed that region-speciﬁc astrocytes exhibit heterogene-
ity in NeuroD1-mediated neuronal reprogramming, with high
conversion eﬃciency in the cortex and hippocampus but less eﬃ-
cient in other brain regions such as the olfactory bulbs, thalamus,
and brainstem. The discrepancy may be attributed to the varying
intrinsic power toward inhibition or promotion of neuronal re-
programming among astrocytes in distinct brain regions. Notch
signaling is a well-known obstacle to neuronal reprogramming
in astrocytes,[38,44] whose level varies among distinct brain areas,
which in turn contributes to disparities in the eﬃciency of as-
trocyte conversion induced by the same conversion factor.[45] In
addition, studies have found that some cortical and hippocampal
astrocytes have higher levels of certain transcription factors, such
as Sox2 and Ascl1,[46,47] which are known to conduct neuronal
reprogramming from astrocytes.[48,49] Another special result we
observed is that NeuroD1-mediated brain-wide AtN regeneration
did not regenerate GABAergic neurons, but almost exclusively
excitatory neurons, which are preferentially vulnerable to dam-
age early in the course of AD.[50] NeuroD1 is highly expressed in
neural progenitor cells and contributes to the generation of most
of the excitatory neurons,[51] indicating that NeuroD1 preferen-
tially guides precursor cells to diﬀerentiate into glutamatergic
neurons. Furthermore, a recent study identiﬁed a subpopulation
of astrocytes in the hippocampus with a glutamatergic signature.
For example, some genes involved in glutamatergic vesicle exo-
cytosis are strongly expressed not only in glutamatergic neurons
but also in this subset of astrocytes.[52] Overall, these ﬁndings
suggest that astrocytes prefer to be converted into glutamatergic
neurons under NeuroD1-mediated AtN conversion.
In vivo, glia-to-neuron conversion has been shown to signiﬁ-
cantly relieve symptoms in a variety of CNS disease models, in-
cluding ischemic stroke, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s dis-
20 μm. C) Astrocyte-converted neurons were marked by Ctip2, a deep layer marker of cortex (V-VI). Note that converted neurons located in shallower
layers did not express Ctip2. The white dashed box indicates the magniﬁed area, and the white arrow indicates the Ctip2-expressing converted neurons.
Left scale bar, 100 μm; right scale bar, 20 μm. D) Pie chart illustrating the distribution of astrocyte-converted neurons in subregions of the cortex. The
number in the middle of the pie chart represents the total number of converted neurons (n = 6 mice). MO: motor cortex, SS: somatosensory cortex, VIS:
visual cortex. E,F) Quantiﬁcations of Cux1+ (E) and Ctip2+ (F) converted neurons in diﬀerent subregions. G) Distribution of astrocyte-converted neurons
in bigenic mouse hippocampus. Note that Ctip2 was highly expressed in CA1 and DG but not in CA3 and hilus, whereas prox1 was only expressed in
DG. Pie chart (top left) indicating the subregion distribution of converted neurons (n = 2220 neurons from 6 mice). Scale bar, 200 μm. H) Bar graph
showing the percentage of the converted neurons with diﬀerent identity markers. I) Study design of CTB retrograde tracing of converted neurons in
bigenic mouse cortex. ROI: region of interest. J) Confocal images showing CTB retrograde labeled converted neurons (arrows) and pre-existing neurons
(arrowhead) in cortical ROI. Scale bar, 20 μm. K) A typical image showing CTB was injected in one side of the hippocampus, and the contralateral
side of the hippocampus was investigated. Scale bar, 1 mm. L) Representative confocal images showing CTB-labeled converted neurons (arrows) and
pre-existing neurons (arrowheads) in CA3 and hilus, respectively. Scale bar, 20 μm. M) Quantiﬁcation data showing CTB labeled converted neurons in
the cortex (n = 3 mice), CA3 (n = 4 mice), and hilus (n = 4 mice).
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (14 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 7. Brain-wide AtN gene therapy rescues cognition in 5xFAD mice. A) Timeline of behavior experiments. Bigenic mice were received AAV-PhP.eB
(R.O.) at the age of 6–6.5 months. Behavior tests were performed at 2-months post injection (mpi) of AAV-PhP.eB. B,C) Y-maze testing showed that
spatial working memory in the spontaneous-alteration Y-maze test was signiﬁcantly impaired in both male (n = 11, B) and female (n = 18, C) 5xFAD mice
compared with WT mice (male, n = 10; female, n = 13). Systemic delivery of AAV-PhP.eB-mediated NeuroD1 improved spontaneous alternation behavior
in male (n = 13, B) but not in female (n = 13, C) 5xFAD mice compared with the GFP control group (male, n = 14; female, n = 12). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (15 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
ease, epilepsy, spinal cord injury, and retinal lesions.[53] However,
local regeneration of a limited number of neurons by intracranial
injection of conversion vectors may not be applicable in the treat-
ment of AD, as massive neurodegeneration occurs throughout
the brain, particularly in the neocortex and hippocampus. There-
fore, we developed a brain-wide AtN conversion gene therapy that
can not only regenerate ≈500 000 new neurons but also be widely
distributed in the neocortex and hippocampus, which is currently
diﬃcult to achieve with other strategies. Moreover, we found
strong evidence of functional network integration of converted
neurons in the brains of 5xFAD mice. Whole-cell patch clamp
recording revealed that the converted neurons received func-
tional synaptic innervation that contained both excitatory and in-
hibitory post-synaptic currents. Retrograde tracing revealed that
axons of converted neurons in the frontal cortex project to the
ipsilateral BPN nucleus, and axons of converted neurons in the
hippocampus project to the contralateral hippocampus. Similar
to previous studies, converted neurons can ﬁnd the correct tar-
gets for axonal projections.[15,39,54] Most importantly, cognitive
behavior tests were signiﬁcantly improved after treating 5xFAD
mice with brain-wide gene therapy conversion. Next, we used the
DREADD-based chemogenetic method to speciﬁcally silence the
activity of converted neurons, demonstrating that the activity of
converted neurons contributes to cognitive recovery. Together, be-
cause astrocytes are widely distributed throughout the brain and
possess intrinsic proliferative capacity, our brain-wide gene ther-
apy conversion may provide an alternative method to regenerate
large numbers of new neurons for the treatment of neurodegen-
erative diseases such as AD.
Moreover, the cognitive improvements in 5xFAD mice fol-
lowing NeuroD1-mediated AtN gene therapy, despite unchanged
excitatory–inhibitory (E–I) balance and A𝛽levels, may be at-
tributed to several mechanisms. Notably, the transition from pro-
inﬂammatory to neuroprotective astrocytes may play an impor-
tant contribution, as reactive astrocytes have a signiﬁcant impact
on the progression of Alzheimer’s disease.[55,56] Astrocytes are es-
sential for brain homeostasis, and a reduction in proinﬂamma-
tory astrocytes, along with an increase in protective ones, may en-
hance synaptic function, support neuronal survival, and reduce
neurotoxic A𝛽eﬀects, thus fostering a more favorable environ-
ment for cognitive recovery. Additionally, although new excitatory
neurons did not alter E–I balance, their integration into existing
circuits may enhance synaptic plasticity and network connectiv-
ity, which are vital for cognitive functions like learning and mem-
ory. These new neurons might compensate for deﬁcits in AD-
aﬀected circuits, improving network dynamics. Furthermore, the
AtN conversion could indirectly inﬂuence the glial population,
triggering protective responses and limiting neurodegeneration.
Together, these factors suggest that cognitive recovery results
from a combination of enhanced synaptic plasticity, glial modula-
tion, and indirect eﬀects of neurogenesis. Future studies should
further explore these mechanisms to better understand the ther-
apeutic potential of NeuroD1 in the mouse model of Alzheimer’s
disease.
The mouse brain contains ≈75 million neurons, which are
interconnected in a complex and ordered manner, establishing
functional neuronal circuits that enable the execution of diverse
functions. Although we have discovered that the converted neu-
rons in the frontal cortex can form ipsilateral projections, and the
neurons in the hippocampus can form contralateral projections,
the existence of other projections in the converted neurons re-
mains to be determined. Moreover, the molecular mechanisms
guiding the orientation of axonal growth of converted neurons
toward downstream target neurons remain unclear, which is the
ﬁrst limitation of this study. Using fMOST whole-brain imag-
ing combined with stereocytometry, we regenerated ≈500 000
new neurons in the cortex and hippocampus of 5xFAD mice, but
this technique was unable to quantify nonﬂuorescent endoge-
nous neurons. Therefore, it is still unknown whether NeuroD1-
mediated AtN can increase the overall number of neurons in the
brains of 5xFAD mice, and it is worth continuing to study in
the future. Despite we provide a valuable brain-wide gene ther-
apy conversion in AD mouse brain by single retro-orbital injec-
tion of AAV-PhP.eB vectors, this viral vector can only penetrate
the BBB of speciﬁc mouse strains, which poses a huge obstacle
to possible future clinical applications,[57] and this is the third
limitation. Therefore, new AAV serotypes that can penetrate the
BBB in large animals are worthy of further exploration.[58] In ad-
dition, AAV-PhP.eB is designed to preferentially infect cells in
the CNS,[59,60] but systemic injection may result in some degree
of oﬀ-target transduction in peripheral tissues, however, we did
not examine transduction of AAV-PhP.eB in peripheral organs in
this study. Further investigations into the potential peripheral ef-
fects of AAV-PhP.eB infection, particularly on GFAP+ cells out-
side the brain, would be valuable, and this is the fourth limita-
tion. The ﬁfth obvious limitation of this study is that AtN conver-
sion have no eﬀect on A𝛽deposition within the AD mouse brain,
which leaves newly generated neurons still exposed to the toxic
eﬀects of A𝛽aggregates. To achieve better eﬃcacy, combination
therapy may be a better choice in the future. For example, com-
bining brain-wide gene therapy conversion with immunotherapy
antibody that targets deposited A𝛽,[61] can both regenerate neu-
***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA with Fisher’s LSD test. D,E) Normalized investigation time of mice to repeated presentations of the
same odor. Olfactory memory was remarkably improved in both male (WT, n = 10; 5xFAD, n = 9; 5xFAD + GFP, n = 13; 5xFAD + ND1, n = 14, D) and
female (WT, n = 9; 5xFAD, n = 13; 5xFAD + GFP, n = 10; 5xFAD + ND1, n = 10, E) 5xFAD mice after NeuroD1 treatment. **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001,
one-way ANOVA with Tukey HSD test. F,G) Both male (n = 11, F) and female (n = 15, G) 5xFAD mice exhibit contexture fear conditioning memory
impairment, but NeuroD1-mediated brain-wide AtN gene therapy signiﬁcantly improved fear memory in both male (n = 13, F) and female (n = 15, G)
5xFAD mice. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA with Tukey HSD test for F and Fisher’s LSD test for G. H) Latency to
reach the hidden platform during spatial training in the Morris water maze. Compared to WT mice (n = 17), 5xFAD mice (n = 17) spent a longer time
to ﬁnd the hidden platform (p < 0.02, one-way ANOVA with Fisher’s LSD test). Note that 5xFAD mice treated with NeuroD1 (n = 21) took less time to
ﬁnd the hidden platform compared to the control group (n = 18). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA with Fisher’s LSD test. I) Number of platform
crossings during probe trial (WT, n = 17; 5xFAD, n = 17; 5xFAD + GFP, n = 18; 5xFAD + ND1, n = 21. **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA with Fisher’s LSD
test). J) Time spent in the goal quadrant during the probe trial (WT, n = 17; 5xFAD, n = 17; 5xFAD + GFP, n = 18; 5xFAD + ND1, n = 21. *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, one-way ANOVA with Fisher’s LSD test). Data as shown mean ± SD.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (16 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 8. Chemogenetic evidence that astrocyte-converted neurons contribute to memory improvement in 5xFAD mice. A) Work model of hM4Di-
mCherry AAV-PhP.eB employing the Cre-on strategy. The hSyn promoter was used to drive the expression of hM4Di speciﬁcally in neurons. B) Sys-
temic injection (R.O.) mixture of AAV-PhP.eB-FLEx-CAG::GFP and FLEx-hSyn::hM4Di-mCherry or AAV-PhP.eB-FLEx-CAG::NeuroD1-P2A-GFAP and FLEx-
hSyn::hM4Di-mCherry into the bigenic mice. Due to the dual control of the Cre-on and the hSyn promoter, only astrocyte-converted neurons could express
hM4Di. C) Typical confocal image showing that hM4Di was not expressed in astrocyte and pre-existing neurons in the control group at 2-months post
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (17 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
rons while also reducing the deposition of A𝛽in the Alzheimer’s
brain.
In conclusion, the brain-wide gene therapy approach for AtN
conversion oﬀers a promising avenue for addressing the com-
plex challenges posed by AD. By focusing on regenerating a large
number of neurons throughout the brain, rather than just local
regions, we expect to revitalize neural circuits and restore cog-
nitive functionality in patients with AD. Future research should
continue reﬁning this method, optimizing its delivery, and in-
creasing its eﬃciency to maximize therapeutic beneﬁts for those
aﬀected by this debilitating disorder.
4. Experimental Section
Mice:
The transgenic mouse strains used in this study include
GFAP::Cre [B6.Cg-Tg(Gfap-cre)77.6Mvs/2J, stock number: 024098] and
5xFAD transgenic mice(stock number: 006554), carrying mutations on
both human APP (Swedish (K670N/M671L), Florida (I716V) and London
(V717I) and human PS1 proteins (M146L and L286V) all purchased from
The Jackson Laboratory. The GFAP::Cre mice were crossed with the 5xFAD
transgenic mice for breeding. The oﬀspring at the age of 6–9 months
(5xFAD/GFAP::Cre and age-matched WT littermates) were used in the
present study. All mice were subjected to a standard 12 h light and dark cy-
cle with suﬃcient water and food. Experimental protocols were approved
by the Laboratory Animal Ethics Committee of Jinan University, China (ap-
proval No. IACUC-20200916-03) and the Pennsylvania State University
IACUC, USA (approval No. 46803).
AAV Production:
AAV used for AtN conversion include AAV9
GFAP::NeuroD1-P2A-GFP/GFAP::GFP
and
AAV
PhP.eB
CAG::FLEx-
NeuroD1-P2A-GFP/CAG::FLEx-GFP were produced by PackGene Biotech,
LLC (Guangzhou, China). GFAP1.6 (length 1677 bp) promoter was used
in this study. The production steps of AAV mentioned above entail the
following: Initially, a considerable amount of highly puriﬁed plasmid was
extracted and co-transfected into HEK293 cells. Subsequently, AAV was
concentrated and puriﬁed through Iodixanol gradient (Merck/Sigma-
Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) ultracentrifugation. Then the virus titer was
measured by FWD ITR and REV ITR primers for speciﬁc detection of the
AAV vector’s ITR sequence using SYBR green qPCR. The purity of AAV was
assessed through SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. An endotoxin test was con-
ducted via gel assay, yielding a result of less than 10 EU mL−1. The purity
of capsid protein was determined by SDS-PAGE, revealing the absence
of any noticeable impurities. For chemogenetic inhibition, AAV PhP.eB
DIO-hSyn::hM4Di-mCherry (Addgene #44362, 2.3 × 1013 GC mL−1)
was used in this study. AAV titer adjustment was performed using PBS
containing 0.001% F-68 (Poloxamer 188 Solution, Caisson Laboratories,
Smithﬁeld, UT, USA). All AAVs were stored in a −80 °C freezer and used
within 12 months of production.
AAV and CTB Injection:
Brain surgeries were conducted on 6–
6.5 months old mice. For AAV9 injection, the mice were anesthetized by
intraperitoneal injection of 20 mL kg−1, 1.25% Avertin (Sigma, T48402).
Shaving the hair and washing the scalp with iodine tincture and ethanol,
then the mice were placed into a stereotaxic setup. The operation began
with a midline scalp incision followed by the creation of a (≈1 mm) drill
hole on the skull and then AAV9 were injected into both sides of the mouse
cortex (AP + 0.6 mm, ML ± 2 mm, DV −0.7 mm) and hippocampus
(AP −2 mm, ML ± 1.5 mm, DV −1.3 mm) (1 μL, 1 × 1012 GC mL−1).
After the viral injection, the needle was kept in place for at least 10 min be-
fore being slowly withdrawn. The stereotaxic coordinates were measured
from bregma.
The mice were anesthetized by Isoﬂurane (3%) and then AAV PhP.eB
CAG::FLEx- NeuroD1-GFP/ CAG::FLEx-GFP were delivered into the vein
through retro-orbital injections (5 μL, 1 × 1013 GC mL−1). Mice were
put back in their original cage after awakening. For retrograde label-
ing of the converted neurons, CTB-555 (500 nL) was injected into BPN
(AP −4 mm, ML + 0.4 mm, DV −5.5 mm) and hippocampus (AP −2 mm,
ML −1.5 mm, DV −1.3 mm) two months after injection of the AAV PhP.eB-
NeuroD1 virus. After the CTB injection, the pipette was held for 10 min
before withdrawal. The slice staining was performed 1–2 weeks after CTB
injection.
Immunohistochemistry and Analysis:
Mice were deeply anesthetized
with 1.25% Avertin and then sequentially perfused with ice-cold artiﬁcial
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (aCSF) to wash away the blood. Then 4% paraformalde-
hyde (PFA) was used to ﬁx the brain overnight. After ﬁxation, the brain
was cut into 30 μm sections by a vibratome (Leica, VTS1200). For im-
munostaining, brain slices were washed with PBS and blocked for 2 h at
room temperature in the blocking solution (10% normal donkey serum,
5% bovine serum albumin, and 0.2% Triton X-100 prepared in PBS). Pri-
mary antibodies were diluted in the blocking buﬀer and incubated at 4 °C
for 24–48 h. After 3 washes with 0.2% PBST (0.2% tween-20 in PBS), the
brain slices were incubated with secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa
Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 555, or Alexa Fluor 647 (1:1000) and 0.5 mg ml−1
DAPI (F. Hoﬀmann-La Roche, Natley, NJ, USA) in blocking buﬀer for 2 h at
room temperature and washed with PBS (12 min × 3 times). Finally, sam-
ples were mounted with VECTASHIELD mounting medium (VECTOR Lab-
oratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) and sealed with nail polish. Representa-
tive images were taken with a Zeiss Axioplan ﬂuorescent microscope (Axio
Imager Z2, Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany) or confocal microscope (LSM880,
Zeiss, Jena, Germany).
Primary antibodies used were listed as follows: mouse anti-GFAP
(1:1000, Cat# G3893, Sigma), rabbit anti-GFAP (1:500, Cat# G9269,
Sigma), rabbit anti-NeuN (1:1000, Cat# ab177487, Abcam), guinea pig
anti-NeuN (1:2000, Cat# ABN90, Millipore), rabbit anti-S100𝛽(1:500,
Cat# ab52642, Abcam), rabbit anti-NeuroD1 (1:1000, Cat# ab205300, Ab-
cam), rat anti-Ctip2 (1:200, Cat# ab18465, Abcam), mouse anti-CUX1
(1:500, Cat# ab54583, Abcam), Chicken anti-GFP (1:1000, Cat# ab13970,
Abcam), mouse anti-A𝛽42 (1:1000, Cat# 800701, biolegend), rabbit anti-
Iba1 (1:1000, Cat# #019-19741, Wako), rabbit anti-Olig2 (1:1000, Cat#
AB9610, Millipore), rabbit anti-NG2 (1:500, Cat# AB5320, Millipore), rab-
bit anti-Prox1 (1:500, Cat# AB5475, MillipoDoure), mouse anti-GAD67
(1:1000, Cat# MAB5406, Millipore).
Electrophysiology:
Brain samples were prepared two months after the
virus injection. Mice were anesthetized with 1.25% Avertin and perfused
with ice-cold cutting solution (in mM: 93 NMDG, 2.5 KCl, 30 NaHCO3,
1.25 NaH2PO4, 15 glucose, 20 HEPES, 12 N-Acetyl-L-cysteine, 5 sodium
ascorbate, 2 thiourea, 3 sodium pyruvate, 7 MgSO4, 0.5 CaCl2, pH 7.35–
7.45, 300–310 mOsm, solution was bubbled with 95% O2/5% CO2). Af-
ter decapitation, the brains were rapidly transferred into an ice-cold oxy-
genated cutting solution and cut into 300 μm thick coronal sections with
a vibratome (Leica, VTS1200). Then, slices were transferred to holding so-
AAV injection. Scale bar, 20 μm. D) Representative image showing that hM4Di was speciﬁcally expressed in the converted neurons (GFP+, arrows) but
not in the pre-existing neurons at 2-months post AAV injection. Scale bar, 20 μm. E) Quantiﬁed data of astrocyte-converted neurons with hM4Di. F) Rep-
resentative evoked action potential traces of astrocyte-converted neurons before and during CNO perfusion (5 μm). G–I) Left, minimal injected current
to induce action potentials (APs) was increased by CNO (5 μm) application in cortical (G, n = 5), CA1 (H, n = 6), and DG-converted neurons (I, n = 6).
Right, a number of induced APs at diﬀerent injecting currents in cortical (G, n = 5), CA1 (H, n = 6), and DG-converted neurons (I, n = 6). *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, Two-sided paired t-test. J) Schematic (top) and mechanism (bottom) of chemogenetic experimental design demonstrating that
astrocyte-converted neurons directly contribute to the improvement of fear-conditioned memory in 5xFAD mice 2 months after AAV-PhP.eB injection.
K) Quantiﬁcation of percentage freezing time of control group mice and NeuroD1 treated mice that were injected (i.p.) with saline or CNO (5 mg kg−1).
***p < 0.001, one-way ANOVA with Tukey HSD test. Data as shown mean ± SD.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (18 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
lution with continuous 95% O2/5% CO2 bubbling (in mM: 92 NaCl, 2.5
KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 30 NaHCO3, 15 glucose, 20 HEPES, 12 N-Acetyl-L-
cysteine, 5 sodium ascorbate, 2 thiourea, 3 sodium pyruvate, 2 MgSO4,
2 CaCl2). After 1 h recovery, the slices were transferred to a recording
chamber that was ﬁlled with artiﬁcial cerebral spinal ﬂuid (in mM: 124
NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 26 NaHCO3, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2.5 CaCl2, 1.3 Mg SO4 and
10 glucose, and constantly bubbled with 95% O2/5% CO2). Whole-cell
recordings were performed using a pipette solution consisting of 125
mm K-Gluconate, 5 mm Na-phosphocreatine, 10 mm KCl, 2 mM EGTA,
10 mM HEPES, 4 mm MgATP, and 0.5 mm Na2GTP (pH 7.3, adjusted with
KOH, 280–290 mOsm L−1). To record the spontaneous synaptic events,
the potassium gluconate in the pipette solution was replaced with Cs-
methanesulfonate to block K+ channels and reduce noise. Pipette resis-
tance was typically 4–6 MΩ. The membrane potential was held at −70 mV
for sEPSC recording, and at 0 mV for sIPSC recording. Data were col-
lected using pClamp 10 and Clampex 10.4 software (Molecular Devices,
Palo Alto, CA), and sampled at 10 kHz and ﬁltered at 3 kHz, analyzed with
Clampﬁt 10.4.
fMOST Whole Brain Imaging and Quantiﬁcation:
Mice were anes-
thetized and perfused with ice-cold saline solution and 4% paraformalde-
hyde (PFA), sequentially. Brains were post-ﬁxed in 4% PFA for 24 h, and
transferred into 0.01 m PBS, and rinsed at 4 °C overnight. Then the ﬁxed
brains got dehydrated in graded ethanol solutions. Afterward, each brain
was impregnated with graded LR White (Ted Pella Inc, 18182 1KT) under
dark conditions in 4 °C. Finally, individual brains were placed into cap-
sules ﬁlled with LR White, and these capsules were set in a vacuum oven
for 24 h in 37.5 °C. After embedding, the brain-wide ﬂuorescence micro-
optical sectioning tomography (fMOST) via structured illumination is em-
ployed (Biomapping5000, OEBio Inc, Wuhan, China). The brain samples
were then sectioned coronally at an interval of 2 μm in an anteroposterior
(AP) direction to achieve the axial scan, counterstained in PI, and then
underwent ﬂuorescence image acquisition via mosaic scan. The images
had a voxel size of 0.32 × 0.32 × 2 μm, enabling 3D reconstruction. The
raw data acquired by the BPS necessitated mosaic stitching and illumina-
tion correction image pre-processing. Then, the pre-processed data were
visualized and converted to ﬁgures using Imaris software (v.9.8.0, Oxford
Instrument plc, Abingdon, UK).
To quantify the total number of converted neurons (GFP+) in the en-
tire cortex and hippocampus of mice, Imaris software was used. First, the
software with some confocal images of regenerating neurons stained with
NeuN was provided and continuously adjusted the software’s identiﬁca-
tion parameters until more than 90% of GFP+ cells in the confocal images
were co-labeled with NeuN. Then, these parameters were loaded into the
software to label the GFP cells in the confocal images, and it was veriﬁed
that more than 90% of GFP+ cells were NeuN-positive. Finally, the pa-
rameters of cortical neurons were set to 15 μm, and hippocampal neuron
parameters were set to 10 μm. The authors used the Surfaces-Mask func-
tion in Imaris to separate the hippocampus and cortex respectively, and
then applied the spots function to count the number of neurons in the
hippocampus and cortex respectively. Snapshot and Animation functions
in Imaris were applied to make photos.
Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Library Preparation:
To obtain fresh brain
tissue, the mice were anesthetized with 1.25% Avertin and then sequen-
tially perfused with ice-cold aCSF to wash away the blood. The fresh hip-
pocampus was removed with tweezers and then dissociated into single-
cell suspension using the papain kit (Worthington) according to the manu-
facturer’s protocol. The cell suspension was injected into the SCOPE-chip
microﬂuidic chip (Singleron) to complete the separation of single cells
based on the principle of “Poisson distribution”. Cells fell into specially
customized chip microwells under the inﬂuence of gravity, ensuring that
only one cell fell into each microwell. Millions of magnetic beads carrying
unique cell tags (Cell Barcode) were then added to the microwells of the
chip to ensure that only one magnetic bead fell into each microwell. After
the cells were lysed, magnetic beads with unique cell tags (Barcode) and
molecular tags (UMI) captured the mRNA by binding to the poly(A) tail
on the mRNA, and label the cells and mRNA. The magnetic beads in the
chip were collected, and the mRNA captured by the magnetic beads was
reverse transcribed into cDNA and ampliﬁed. After cDNA fragmentation,
adapter ligation, and other necessary steps, a sequencing library suitable
for the Illumina sequencing platform was constructed.
Primary Analysis of Raw Read Data:
Raw reads were processed with
fastQC and fastp to remove low-quality reads. Poly-A tails and adaptor
sequences were removed by Cutadapt. After quality control, reads were
mapped to the reference genome using STAR. Gene counts and UMI
counts were acquired by FeatureCounts software. Expression matrix ﬁles
for subsequent analyses were generated based on gene counts and UMI
counts.
Quality Control, Dimension-Reduction and Clustering (Scanpy):
Scanpy
v1.8.2 was used for quality control, dimensionality reduction, and clus-
tering under Python 3.7. For each sample dataset, the expression matrix
was ﬁltered by the following criteria: 1) cells with a gene count less than
200 or with a top 2% gene count were excluded; 2) cells with a top 2%
UMI count were excluded; 3) cells with mitochondrial content >20% were
excluded; 4) genes expressed in less than 5 cells were excluded. After ﬁl-
tering, cells were retained for the downstream analyses. The raw count
matrix was normalized by total counts per cell and logarithmically trans-
formed into a normalized data matrix. The top 2000 variable genes were
selected by setting ﬂavor = ‘seurat’. Principle Component Analysis (PCA)
was performed on the scaled variable gene matrix, and the top 20 prin-
ciples components were used for clustering and dimensional reduction.
Cells were separated into 13 clusters by using the Louvain algorithm. Cell
clusters were visualized by using Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection (UMAP). The cell type identity of each cluster was determined
with the expression of canonical markers found in the DEGs using the
SynEcoSys database. Heatmaps/dot plots/violin plots displaying the ex-
pression of markers used to identify each cell type were generated by Seu-
rat v3.1.2 DoHeatmap/DotPlot/Vlnplot.
Diﬀerentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) Analysis (scanpy):
To identify
diﬀerentially expressed genes (DEGs), the scanpy.tl.rank_genes_groups
function based on the Wilcoxon rank sum test with default parameters
was used, and selected the genes expressed in more than 10% of the cells
in either of the compared groups of cells and with an average log (Fold
Change) value greater than 0.25 as DEGs. Adjusted p-value was calculated
by benjamini-hochberg correction and the value 0.05 was used as the cri-
terion to evaluate the statistical signiﬁcance.
Pathway Enrichment Analysis:
To investigate the potential functions of
the changed gene, the Gene Ontology (GO) was used with the “cluster-
Proﬁler” R package 3.16.1. Pathways with a p-value less than 0.05 were
considered as signiﬁcantly enriched. Gene Ontology gene sets including
molecular function (MF), biological process (BP), and cellular component
(CC) categories were used as reference.
Single-Cell
Trajectory
and
Entropy
Analysis:
To
map
diﬀerentia-
tion/conversion of astrocyte to neuron, pseudotime trajectory analysis
was performed with Monocle2. For constructing the trajectory, highly
variable genes were selected from the cluster by Seurat v3.1.2 Find-
VairableFeatures, and dimension-reduction was performed by DDRTree.
The trajectory was visualized by plot_cell_trajectory.
Cell Pluripotency Analysis:
To study cell pluripotency, as shown in
previously published studies, four algorithms including StemID,[19]
CytoTrace,[21] SLICE,[20] and CCAT[18] were employed. StemID is an algo-
rithm based on the projection of cells and Shannon entropy for the in-
ference of diﬀerentiation trajectories and the prediction of the stem cell
identity. StemID assign every cell onto a speciﬁc link between its cluster
of origin and another cluster based on the longest projection of the vec-
tor connecting the cluster center with the cell position onto these links.
The signiﬁcance of each link was calculated by repeating the process of
randomly assigning cell positions 1000 times in the embedded space. The
ensemble of signiﬁcant links was used to construct lineage trees as poten-
tial diﬀerentiation trajectories. Meanwhile, the speciﬁc diﬀerentiation di-
rection was determined by calculating the transcriptome entropy of cells.
CytoTRACE v0.3.3 (a computational method that predicts the diﬀerentia-
tion state of cells from single-cell RNA-sequencing data using gene counts
and expression) was used to predict the diﬀerentiation potential of cell
subpopulations. SLICE (version 0.99.0) was used to evaluate the stem-
ness of cells by the entropy of gene expression based on single-cell ex-
pression proﬁles. After removing ribosomal genes, an SLICE object was
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (19 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
created to perform the bootstrap calculation of single-cell gene entropy
values by the getEntropy function. Correlation of Connectome and Tran-
scriptome (CCAT) could return accurate single-cell potency estimates of
a million cells. CCAT was an ultrafast method for estimating the diﬀeren-
tiation capacity of single cells from scRNA-Seq data that was scalable to
upcoming scRNA-Seq studies analyzing millions of cells. CCAT measure-
ments were directly driven by the previously proposed entropy rate (SR).
Since the dynamic range of the local entropy Si was smaller, this meant
that the SR could be further approximated in scale by the dot product of
transcriptome x and connectome k. Therefore, CCAT was deﬁned by the
Pearson correlation coeﬃcient (PCC) of connectome k and transcriptome
x.
RNA Velocity Analysis:
For RNA velocity analysis, a loom ﬁle containing
5719 cells and the GRCm38 (mm10) reference genome were utilized. The
analysis was conducted using the velocyto (ref) and scVelo (ref) tools in
Python, with default parameters applied.[28] To ensure visualization con-
sistency, the results were projected onto a UMAP plot derived from Seurat
clustering analysis.
Chemogenetical Manipulation:
To manipulate newly converted neural
activity, the virus AAV PhP.eB CAG::FLEx-NeuroD1-P2A-GFP /CAG::FLEx-
GFP (5 μL, 1 × 1013 GC mL−1) and AAV PhP.eB DIO-hSyn::hM4Di-mCherry
(5 μL, 1 × 1013 GC mL−1) were mixed to 10 μL in a 1:1 ratio. Then the
mixture was retro-orbitally injected into 5xFAD/GFAP-Cre mice. Following
tests were administered 2 months after virus injection to elucidate the in-
ﬂuence of AtN conversion. For electrophysiology, whole cell patch clamp
recordings were performed, and CNO (Cat#34233-69-7, Sigma-Aldrich)
was reconstituted in 5% DMSO and was used with a concentration of
5 μm in aCSF, which was perfused at 2–3 mL min−1 after a baseline record-
ing was obtained. For the contexture fear conditioning test, mice were in-
traperitoneally injected CNO (5 mg kg−1) 15 min before the electric shock,
and the same volume of saline was given as the vehicle control.
Behavioral Tests and Analysis:
Mice were moved to the behavioral test-
ing room one hour in advance to acclimate before starting the behavioral
test. All behavioral tests were conducted during the light phase of the
light/dark cycle, and all behaviors were performed and analyzed by two
investigators who were blinded to the treatment conditions of the animals.
Y Maze Test:
Spontaneous alternation performance was conducted
following the protocol described in the previous study.[17] Each mouse
was placed in the center of a symmetrical Y-maze and allowed to freely
explore the maze for an 8-minute session. The ﬁrst 2 min were excluded
from data analysis because the mice were still exploring the new environ-
ment. The total number and sequence of arm entries made during the last
6 min were recorded and analyzed. An arm entry was deﬁned as when the
hind paws of the mice had been completely placed in the arm. The spon-
taneous turn behavior score = total number of turns/maximum number
of turns × 100%.
Odor Habituation Test:
The odor habituation test was conducted to
evaluate the ability of mice to remember odors, as previously described.[16]
Four diﬀerent odors (heptanone, isoamyl acetate, limonene, and ethyl
valerate; Sigma) were diluted in mineral oil at a ratio of 1:1000 and applied
to a cotton-applicator stick, which was then enclosed in a plastic tube. The
odor stick was inserted into a port on the side of the animal’s home cage,
and the odors were presented for four successive trials (one block), each
lasting 20 s, with a 30-second inter-trial interval. The duration of time spent
investigating was deﬁned as snout-oriented sniﬃng within a proximity of
1 cm from the odor presentation port, and it was recorded across all tri-
als by a single observer who was blinded to the mouse groups. Mice were
tested in a counter-balanced order. A mouse with intact memory was ex-
pected to spend decreasing time investigating (sniﬃng) the odor stick,
which would indicate learning and memory ability. It is expected that mice
with intact learning ability would exhibit a progressive decrease in investi-
gation time, speciﬁcally in terms of sniﬃng behavior directed toward the
odor stick. Such behavior would serve as an indicator of successful learn-
ing and memory retention.
Contextual Fear Conditioning Test:
Mice were exposed to a novel con-
text, consisting of an observation chamber with deﬁned lightning, odor,
background noise, and geometry. The chamber was a box made of PVC
plastic that contained a removable foot shock grid and sensors for the an-
imal’s movements. Each mouse was allowed to habituate the new cham-
ber for 5 min on day 1. On day 2, the mouse was placed into the chamber
for 3 min to record the baseline movement of the mice, then mice were
received 3 repetitions of a mild electric foot shock (0.6 mA, lowest power
shock) for 2 s, at 58 s inter-trial intervals. On day 3, each mouse was placed
into the same chamber for 3 min and the freezing time was recorded to
evaluate the memory ability.
Morris Water Maze Test:
The Morris water maze apparatus consisted
of a large circular pool (120 cm in diameter) ﬁlled with opaque 21 ± 1 °C
water with nontoxic white pigment. Visual cues were adhered to the in-
ner walls of the pool. The whole procedure consisted of 5-day acquisition
training and a probe trial on the next day. Initially, acquisition training was
performed, with a platform of ﬁxed position submerged 1.5 cm below the
surface. The mouse was gently put into the water with its head facing the
wall of the pool, and the drop position was semi-random between trials.
Mice received two training sessions with a 3-hours intersession interval for
5 continuous days. Every session consisted of two trials with 10 min inter-
trial intervals. During each trial, the time spent by an individual mouse to
ﬁnd the platform was recorded, and it was allowed to stay on the platform
for 10 s once the mouse found it. The maximum time of each trial was 60 s.
If a mouse failed to ﬁnd the platform, it was guided to the platform and
then allowed to sit on it for another 10 s. For the probe trial, the platform
was removed and each mouse were allowed to swim for 60 s, with a drop
location 180° from the original platform. After each trial, mice were wiped
oﬀthe excess water and dried oﬀwith an electric hot-air blower before
being placed back into their home cage.
Statistical Analysis:
Data were shown as mean ± standard deviation
(SD) or box plot. Statistical signiﬁcance was tested with Student’s two-
tailed paired or unpaired t-tests and One Way ANOVA test followed with
Tukey post hoc test or Fisher’s LSD test. The signiﬁcance level was set to
P < 0.05. Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 7.0.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr. Xiaoying Fan’s Lab for their technical support on
RNAseq. The authors thank Ms. Bai Yuting for providing mouse weaning
and genotyping services. The authors would also like to extend gratitude
to all members of the Chen Lab for their invaluable scientiﬁc insights and
discussions throughout the project. This work was supported by the Jinan
University Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars to Z.W., Natural Science
Foundation of Guangdong Province of China (No. 2022A1515012294),
Guangzhou Key Projects of Brain Science and Brain-Like Intelligence Tech-
nology (202206060002), the Program for Guangdong Introducing Inno-
vative and Entrepreneurial Teams (2021ZT09Y552), the Charles H. Smith
Endowment Fund for Brain Repair from the Pennsylvania State University
to GC.
Conﬂict of Interest
Gong Chen is a co-founder of NeuExcell Therapeutics Inc.
Author Contributions
Z.W. and L.X. contributed equally to this work. Z.W. and G.C. supervised
and designed the research. Z.W., L.X., Y.X., A.S., S.S., W.-Y.J., Z.-R.L., and
Y.-W.G. completed most of the experiments. Z.W., L.X., and G.C. analyzed
the data and made the ﬁgures. L.X. performed bioinformatics analysis. X.L.
and Z.-F.L. performed fMOST study. Z.W., G.C., L.X., and Y.X. wrote the
manuscript with input from all authors.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (20 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available on request
from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to
privacy or ethical restrictions.
Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, gene therapy, neurodegeneration, NeuroD1
Received: August 22, 2024
Revised: January 9, 2025
Published online: February 14, 2025
[1] D. S. Knopman, H. Amieva, R. C. Petersen, G. Chételat, D. M.
Holtzman, B. T. Hyman, R. A. Nixon, D. T. Jones, Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers
2021, 7, 33.
[2] J. Park, J. Wang, W. Guan, L. A. Gjesteby, D. Pollack, L. Kamentsky, N.
B. Evans, J. Stirman, X. Gu, C. Zhao, S. Marx, M. E. Kim, S. W. Choi,
M. Snyder, D. Chavez, C. Su-Arcaro, Y. Tian, C. S. Park, Q. Zhang, D.
H. Yun, M. Moukheiber, G. Feng, X. W. Yang, C. D. Keene, P. R. Hof,
S. S. Ghosh, M. P. Frosch, L. J. Brattain, K. Chung, Science 2024, 384,
eadh9979.
[3] M. A. Busche, B. T. Hyman, Nat. Neurosci. 2020, 23, 1183.
[4] B. S. Zeng, P. T. Tseng, C. S. Liang, New Engl. J. Med. 2023, 388, 1630.
[5] J. R. Sims, J. A. Zimmer, C. D. Evans, M. Lu, P. Ardayﬁo, J. Sparks, A.
M. Wessels, S. Shcherbinin, H. Wang, E. S. Monkul Nery, E. C. Collins,
P. Solomon, S. Salloway, L. G. Apostolova, O. Hansson, C. Ritchie, D.
A. Brooks, M. Mintun, D. M. Skovronsky, T.-A. Investigators, JAMA,
J. Am. Med. Assoc. 2023, 330, 512.
[6] Y. D. Li, Y. J. Luo, L. Xie, D. S. Tart, R. N. Sheehy, L. Zhang, L. G.
Coleman, Jr., X. Chen, J. Song, Cell Stem Cell 2023, 30, 415.
[7] M. Martinez-Losa, T. E. Tracy, K. Ma, L. Verret, A. Clemente-Perez, A.
S. Khan, I. Cobos, K. Ho, L. Gan, L. Mucke, M. Alvarez-Dolado, J. J.
Palop, Neuron 2018, 98, 75.
[8] E. P. Moreno-Jiménez, M. Flor-García, J. Terreros-Roncal, A. Rábano,
F. Caﬁni, N. Pallas-Bazarra, J. Avila, M. Llorens-Martín, Nat. Med.
2019, 25, 554.
[9] S. F. Sorrells, M. F. Paredes, A. Cebrian-Silla, K. Sandoval, D. S. Qi, K.
W. Kelley, D. James, S. Mayer, J. Chang, K. I. Auguste, E. F. C. Hang,
A. J. Gutierrez, A. R. Kriegstein, G. W. Mathern, M. C. Oldham, E. J.
Huang, J. M. Garcia-Verdugo, Z. G. Yang, A. Alvarez-Buylla, Nature
2018, 555, 377.
[10] Y. Zhou, Y. J. Su, S. Y. Li, B. C. Kennedy, D. Y. Zhang, A. M. Bond, Y.
S. Sun, F. Jacob, L. Lu, P. Hu, A. N. Viaene, I. Helbig, S. K. Kessler, T.
Lucas, R. D. Salinas, X. S. Gu, H. I. Chen, H. Wu, J. E. Kleinman, T.
M. M. Hyde, D. W. Nauen, D. R. Weinberger, G. L. Ming, H. J. Song,
Nature 2022, 607, 527.
[11] Z. Guo, L. Zhang, Z. Wu, Y. Chen, F. Wang, G. Chen, Cell Stem Cell
2014, 14, 188.
[12] C. H. Andrade-Moraes, A. V. Oliveira-Pinto, E. Castro-Fonseca, C. G.
daSilva, D. M. Guimaraes, D. Szczupak, D. R. Parente-Bruno, L. R. B.
Carvalho, L. Polichiso, B. V. Gomes, L. M. Oliveira, R. D. Rodriguez,
R. E. P. Leite, R. E. L. Ferretti-Rebustini, W. Jacob, C. A. Pasqualucci,
L. T. Grinberg, R. Lent, Brain 2013, 136, 3738.
[13] H. G. Lee, M. A. Wheeler, F. J. Quintana, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery
2022, 21, 339.
[14] M. Kampmann, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2024, 25, 351.
[15] Y. C. Chen, N. X. Ma, Z. F. Pei, Z. Wu, F. H. Do-Monte, S. Keefe, E.
Yellin, M. S. Chen, J. C. Yin, G. Lee, A. Minier-Toribio, Y. Hu, Y. T. Bai,
K. Lee, G. J. Quirk, G. Chen, Mol. Ther. 2020, 28, 217.
[16] Y. Wang, Z. Wu, Y. T. Bai, G. Y. Wu, G. Chen, Mol. Neurodegener. 2017,
12, 73.
[17] Z. Wu, Z. Y. Guo, M. Gearing, G. Chen, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 4159.
[18] A. E. Teschendorﬀ, A. K. Maity, X. Hu, W. Y. Chen, M. Lechner, Bioin-
formatics 2021, 37, 1528.
[19] D. Grun, M. J. Muraro, J. C. Boisset, K. Wiebrands, A. Lyubimova, G.
Dharmadhikari, M. van den Born, J. van Es, E. Jansen, H. Clevers, E.
J. P. de Koning, A. van Oudenaarden, Cell Stem Cell 2016, 19, 266.
[20] M. Z. Guo, E. L. Bao, M. Wagner, J. A. Whitsett, Y. Xu, Nucleic Acids
Res. 2017, 45, e54.
[21] G. S. Gulati, S. S. Sikandar, D. J. Wesche, A. Manjunath, A. Bharadwaj,
M. J. Berger, F. Ilagan, A. H. Kuo, R. W. Hsieh, S. Cai, M. Zabala, F.
A. Scheeren, N. A. Lobo, D. L. Qian, F. Q. B. Yu, F. M. Dirbas, M. F.
Clarke, A. M. Newman, Science 2020, 367, 405.
[22] C. Y. Guo, K. S. Cho, Y. Q. Li, K. Tchedre, C. Antolik, J. Ma, J. Chew, T.
P. Utheim, X. Z. A. Huang, H. H. Yu, M. T. A. Malik, N. Anzak, D. F.
Chen, Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 2054.
[23] S. Chanda, C. E. Ang, Q. Y. Lee, M. Ghebrial, D. Haag, Y. Shibuya, M.
Wernig, T. C. Südhof, Cell Stem Cell 2019, 25, 103.
[24] W. Zhang, W. H. Chu, Q. X. Liu, D. Coates, Y. D. Shang, C. Y. Li, Stem
Cell Res. Ther. 2018, 9.
[25] S. Gascón, E. Murenu, G. Masserdotti, F. Ortega, G. L. Russo, D.
Petrik, A. Deshpande, C. Heinrich, M. Karow, S. P. Robertson, T.
Schroeder, J. Beckers, M. Irmler, C. Berndt, J. P. F. Angeli, M. Conrad,
B. Berninger, M. Götz, Cell Stem Cell 2016, 18, 396.
[26] G. L. Russo, G. Sonsalla, P. Natarajan, C. T. Breunig, G. Bulli, J.
Merl-Pham, S. Schmitt, J. Giehrl-Schwab, F. Giesert, M. Jastroch, H.
Zischka, W. Wurst, S. H. Stricker, S. M. Hauck, G. Masserdotti, M.
Gotz, Cell Stem Cell 2021, 28, 524.
[27] G. La Manno, R. Soldatov, A. Zeisel, E. Braun, H. Hochgerner, V.
Petukhov, K. Lidschreiber, M. E. Kastriti, P. Lonnerberg, A. Furlan,
J. Fan, L. E. Borm, Z. Liu, D. van Bruggen, J. Guo, X. He, R.
Barker, E. Sundstrom, G. Castelo-Branco, P. Cramer, I. Adameyko,
S. Linnarsson, P. V. Kharchenko, Nature 2018, 560, 494.
[28] V. Bergen, M. Lange, S. Peidli, F. A. Wolf, F. J. Theis, Nat. Biotechnol.
2020, 38, 1408.
[29] S. A. Liddelow, K. A. Guttenplan, L. E. Clarke, F. C. Bennett, C. J.
Bohlen, L. Schirmer, M. L. Bennett, A. E. Munch, W. S. Chung, T.
C. Peterson, D. K. Wilton, A. Frouin, B. A. Napier, N. Panicker, M.
Kumar, M. S. Buckwalter, D. H. Rowitch, V. L. Dawson, T. M. Dawson,
B. Stevens, B. A. Barres, Nature 2017, 541, 481.
[30] W. Xin, Y. A. Mironova, H. Shen, R. A. M. Marino, A. Waisman, W. H.
Lamers, D. E. Bergles, A. Bonci, Cell Rep. 2019, 27, 2262.
[31] A. Herrero-Navarro, L. Puche-Aroca, V. Moreno-Juan, A. Sempere-
Ferrandez, A. Espinosa, R. Susin, L. Torres-Masjoan, E. Leyva-Diaz,
M. Karow, M. Figueres-Onate, L. Lopez-Mascaraque, J. P. Lopez-
Atalaya, B. Berninger, G. Lopez-Bendito, Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, eabe8978.
[32] F. Endo, A. Kasai, J. S. Soto, X. Yu, Z. Qu, H. Hashimoto, V. Gradinaru,
R. Kawaguchi, B. S. Khakh, Science 2022, 378, eadc9020.
[33] D. G. R. Tervo, B. Y. Hwang, S. Viswanathan, T. Gaj, M. Lavzin, K. D.
Ritola, S. Lindo, S. Michael, E. Kuleshova, D. Ojala, C. C. Huang, C.
R. Gerfen, J. Schiller, J. T. Dudman, A. W. Hantman, L. L. Looger, D.
V. Schaﬀer, A. Y. Karpova, Neuron 2016, 92, 372.
[34] W. A. Eimer, R. Vassar, Mol. Neurodegener. 2013, 8, 2.
[35] S. Sirko, G. Behrendt, P. A. Johansson, P. Tripathi, M. R. Costa, S. Bek,
C. Heinrich, S. Tiedt, D. Colak, M. Dichgans, I. R. Fischer, N. Plesnila,
M. Staufenbiel, C. Haass, M. Snapyan, A. Saghatelyan, L. H. Tsai, A.
Fischer, K. Grobe, L. Dimou, M. Gotz, Cell Stem Cell 2013, 12, 426.
[36] L. L. Wang, C. Serrano, X. Zhong, S. Ma, Y. Zou, C. L. Zhang, Cell
2021, 184, 5465.
[37] Y. Xie, J. Zhou, L. L. Wang, C. L. Zhang, B. Chen, EBioMedicine 2023,
90, 104531.
[38] M. Zamboni, E. Llorens-Bobadilla, J. P. Magnusson, J. Frisen, Cell
Stem Cell 2020, 27, 605.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (21 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
[39] N. Mattugini, R. Bocchi, V. Scheuss, G. L. Russo, O. Torper, C. L. Lao,
M. Gotz, Neuron 2019, 103, 1086.
[40] H. Qian, X. Kang, J. Hu, D. Zhang, Z. Liang, F. Meng, X.
Zhang, Y. Xue, R. Maimon, S. F. Dowdy, N. K. Devaraj, Z. Zhou,
W. C. Mobley, D. W. Cleveland, X. D. Fu, Nature 2020, 582,
550.
[41] A. Pereira, J. Diwakar, G. Masserdotti, S. Beskardes, T. Simon, Y. J.
So, L. Martin-Loarte, F. Bergemann, L. Vasan, T. Schauer, A. Danese,
R. Bocchi, M. Colomé-Tatché, C. Schuurmans, A. Philpott, T. Straub,
B. Bonev, M. Götz, Nat. Neurosci. 2024, 27, 1260.
[42] Z. Su, W. Niu, M. L. Liu, Y. Zou, C. L. Zhang, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5,
3338.
[43] X. Hu, Q. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Kim, X. Chen, A. A. Hartman, A. E. Eastman,
I. H. Park, S. Guo, Stem Cells 2021, 39, 43.
[44] J. P. Magnusson, C. Goritz, J. Tatarishvili, D. O. Dias, E. M. Smith, O.
Lindvall, Z. Kokaia, J. Frisen, Science 2014, 346, 237.
[45] X. Hu, S. Qin, X. Huang, Y. Yuan, Z. Tan, Y. Gu, X. Cheng, D. Wang,
X. F. Lian, C. He, Z. Su, Stem Cell Rep. 2019, 12, 290.
[46] M. Y. Batiuk, A. Martirosyan, J. Wahis, F. de Vin, C. Marneﬀe,
C. Kusserow, J. Koeppen, J. F. Viana, J. F. Oliveira, T. Voet,
C. P. Ponting, T. G. Belgard, M. G. Holt, Nat. Commun. 2020,
11.
[47] Y. Liu, W. Hong, P. Gong, G. Qi, X. Wang, S. Kang, H. Tang, S. Qin,
Glia 2023, 71, 602.
[48] W. Niu, T. Zang, Y. Zou, S. Fang, D. K. Smith, R. Bachoo, C. L. Zhang,
Nat. Cell Biol. 2013, 15, 1164.
[49] Y. G. Liu, Q. L. Miao, J. C. Yuan, S. E. Han, P. P. Zhang, S. L. Li, Z.
P. Rao, W. L. Zhao, Q. Ye, J. L. Geng, X. H. Zhang, L. P. Cheng, J.
Neurosci. 2015, 35, 9336.
[50] H. J. Fu, A. Possenti, R. Freer, Y. Nakano, N. C. H. Villegas, M. P. Tang,
P. V. M. Cauhy, B. A. Lassus, S. Chen, S. L. Fowler, H. Y. Figueroa, E.
D. Huey, G. V. W. Johnson, M. Vendruscolo, K. E. Duﬀ, Nat. Neurosci.
2019, 22, 47.
[51] S. Tutukova, V. Tarabykin, L. R. Hernandez-Miranda, Front. Mol. Neu-
rosci. 2021, 14, 662774.
[52] R. de Ceglia, A. Ledonne, D. G. Litvin, B. L. Lind, G. Carriero, E. C.
Latagliata, E. Bindocci, M. A. Di Castro, I. Savtchouk, I. Vitali, A.
Ranjak, M. Congiu, T. Canonica, W. Wisden, K. Harris, M. Mameli,
N. Mercuri, L. Telley, A. Volterra, Nature 2023, 622, 120.
[53] H. Qian, X. D. Fu, Annu. Rev. Genet. 2021, 55, 45.
[54] Z. Wu, M. Parry, X. Y. Hou, M. H. Liu, H. Wang, R. Cain, Z. F. Pei, Y. C.
Chen, Z. Y. Guo, S. Abhijeet, G. Chen, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 1105.
[55] A. Serrano-Pozo, H. Li, Z. Li, C. Munoz-Castro, M. Jaisa-Aad, M. A.
Healey, L. A. Welikovitch, R. Jayakumar, A. G. Bryant, A. Noori, T.
R. Connors, M. Hu, K. Zhao, F. Liao, G. Lin, T. Pastika, J. Tamm, A.
Abdourahman, T. Kwon, R. E. Bennett, M. E. Woodbury, A. Wachter,
R. V. Talanian, K. Biber, E. H. Karran, B. T. Hyman, S. Das, Nat. Neu-
rosci. 2024, 27, 2384.
[56] J. Kim, I. D. Yoo, J. Lim, J. S. Moon, Exp. Mol. Med. 2024, 56, 95.
[57] J. H. Wang, D. J. Gessler, W. Zhan, T. L. Gallagher, G. P. Gao, Signal
Transduction Targeted Ther. 2024, 9, 78.
[58] M. R. Chuapoco, N. C. Flytzanis, N. Goeden, J. Christopher Octeau,
K. M. Roxas, K. Y. Chan, J. Scherrer, J. Winchester, R. J. Blackburn, L. J.
Campos, K. N. M. Man, J. Sun, X. Chen, A. Lefevre, V. P. Singh, C. M.
Arokiaraj, T. F. Shay, J. Vendemiatti, M. J. Jang, J. K. Mich, Y. Bishaw,
B. B. Gore, V. Omstead, N. Taskin, N. Weed, B. P. Levi, J. T. Ting, C.
T. Miller, B. E. Deverman, J. Pickel, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 2023, 18,
1241.
[59] K. Y. Chan, M. J. Jang, B. B. Yoo, A. Greenbaum, N. Ravi, W. L. Wu,
L. Sanchez-Guardado, C. Lois, S. K. Mazmanian, B. E. Deverman, V.
Gradinaru, Nat. Neurosci. 2017, 20, 1172.
[60] J. W. Seo, E. S. Ingham, L. Mahakian, S. Tumbale, B. Wu, S. Aghevlian,
S. Shams, M. Baikoghli, P. Jain, X. Ding, N. Goeden, T. Dobreva, N.
C. Flytzanis, M. Chavez, K. Singhal, R. Leib, M. L. James, D. J. Segal,
R. H. Cheng, E. A. Silva, V. Gradinaru, K. W. Ferrara, Nat. Commun.
2020, 11, 2102.
[61] C. H. van Dyck, C. J. Swanson, P. Aisen, R. J. Bateman, C. Chen,
M. Gee, M. Kanekiyo, D. Li, L. Reyderman, S. Cohen, L. Froelich, S.
Katayama, M. Sabbagh, B. Vellas, D. Watson, S. Dhadda, M. Irizarry,
L. D. Kramer, T. Iwatsubo, New Engl. J. Med. 2023, 388, 9.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2410080
2410080 (22 of 22)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202410080 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [20/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License