Precursor engineering and controlled conversion for the
synthesis of monodisperse thiolate-protected metal
nanoclusters
Yong Yu,† Qiaofeng Yao,† Zhentao Luo, Xun Yuan, Jim Yang Lee* and Jianping Xie*
In very recent years, thiolate-protected metal nanoclusters (or thiolated MNCs) with core sizes smaller than
2 nm have emerged as a new direction in nanoparticle research due to their discrete and size dependent
electronic structures and molecular-like properties, such as HOMO–LUMO transitions in optical absorptions,
quantized charging, and strong luminescence. Synthesis of monodisperse thiolated MNCs in suﬃciently
large quantities (up to several hundred micrograms) is necessary for establishing reliable size–property
relationships and exploring potential applications. This Feature Article reviews recent progress in the
development of synthetic strategies for the production of monodisperse thiolated MNCs. The
preparation of monodisperse thiolated MNCs is viewed as an engineerable process where both the
precursors (input) and their conversion chemistry (processing) may be rationally designed to achieve the
desired outcome – monodisperse thiolated MNCs (output). Several strategies for tailoring the precursor
and the conversion process are analyzed to arrive at a unifying understanding of the processes involved.
1
Introduction
Thiolate-protected metal nanoclusters (or thiolated MNCs) such
as thiolated Au or Ag NCs containing a few to several hundreds
of atoms are a subgenre of the metal nanoparticles (MNPs).1–3
They have cores typically smaller than 2 nm and their surface is
protected by thiolate ligands. Therefore, they can be denoted as
Mn(SR)m where M is the metal, SR is the thiolate ligand, and n
and m are specic integers. Due to strong quantum conne-
ment eﬀects1,4 in the sub-2 nm size regime and strong metal–
thiolate interaction,5 thiolated MNCs possess discrete elec-
tronic states6–9 and unique geometric structures10,11 distinctively
diﬀerent from their larger counterparts12–20 (MNPs with core
sizes >2 nm have a quasi-continuous electronic structure and
face centered cubic (fcc) atomic packing). As a result thiolated
MNCs exhibit intriguing molecular-like properties, such as
HOMO–LUMO transitions,7,21–23 quantized charging,21,24 and
strong luminescence,25–32 which can be useful for catalysis33–42
and optical devices.43,44
Yong Yu received his B.S. and
M.S. degrees from Harbin Insti-
tute
of
Technology
(HIT)
of
China. He is currently a Ph.D.
candidate at the Department of
Chemical
and
Biomolecular
Engineering, National Univer-
sity of Singapore (NUS), under
the supervision of Prof. Jianping
Xie. His current research inter-
ests are synthesis and catalytic
applications
of
thiolate-pro-
tected noble metal nanoclusters.
Qiaofeng
Yao
obtained
his
bachelor degree (in Chemistry)
from University of Science and
Technology of China (USTC) in
2010.
Aer
that,
he
started
pursuing his Ph.D. degree at the
Department of Chemical and
Biomolecular
Engineering,
National University of Singapore
(NUS), under co-supervision of
Prof. Jim Yang Lee and Prof.
Jianping
Xie.
His
current
research focus is on two-phase
synthesis and self-assembly of thiolate-protected noble metal
nanoclusters.
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of
Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore 119260. E-mail: chexiej@nus.edu.sg;
cheleejy@nus.edu.sg
† These two authors contributed equally to this article.
Cite this: Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606
Received 26th January 2013
Accepted 22nd March 2013
DOI: 10.1039/c3nr00464c
www.rsc.org/nanoscale
4606 | Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale
FEATURE ARTICLE
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

Due to the ultrasmall size of MNCs, the contribution of even
one additional atom to the MNCs is greatly amplied, resulting
in extreme size sensitivity of the physical and chemical prop-
erties of MNCs. For example thiolated Au NCs of diﬀerent sizes
display markedly diﬀerent optical absorption in the UV-vis-NIR
region.45,46 Recent studies also reported that the catalytic prop-
erties of MNCs are highly size dependent.33,35,39 The accessibility
of monodisperse well-dened thiolated MNCs (with specied
values of n and m in their formula) is crucial to both basic and
applied research in NC chemistry, for determining the total
structure of thiolated MNCs, for establishing size–property
relationships, and for exploring the size-dependent properties
for a diversity of applications. The availability of monodisperse
thiolated MNCs depends mainly on the design and imple-
mentation of solution-based synthetic chemistry, which is still
not fully understood at present despite extensive studies on
ultrasmall MNPs over the last two decades.
It is the purpose of this Feature Article to systematize the
synthetic approaches to monodisperse thiolated MNCs, particu-
larly thiolated Au and Ag NCs. It is helpful to start our discussion
with an account of the general methods of synthesis of thiolated
MNCs. It was rst demonstrated by Brust and Schiﬀrin in 1990s
that thiolated MNPs could be formed by reducing M(I)–SR
complexes in the presence of a strong reducing agent, sodium
borohydride NaBH4 (Scheme 1a).47 This is clearly a bottom-up
Scheme 1
Schematic illustration of (a) the Brust–Schiﬀrin method [Au(I)–SR
complexes are selected as model M(I)–SR complexes in this illustration] and (b) the
uniﬁed synthetic approach proposed in this Feature Article for the synthesis of
monodisperse MNCs.
Zhentao Luo earned his B.E.
from the Department of Chem-
ical
and
Biomolecular
Engi-
neering, National University of
Singapore (NUS) in 2010. He is
currently
undertaking
Ph.D.
studies at the same department
with
the
guidance
of
Prof.
Jianping
Xie.
His
research
focuses on understanding the
luminescence
properties
of
metal
nanoclusters
and
exploring
their
biomedical
applications.
Dr Jim Yang Lee received his B.S.
from the National University of
Singapore (NUS) and Ph.D. from
University of Michigan. He is
currently
the
Head
and
Professor of the Department of
Chemical & Biomolecular Engi-
neering at National University of
Singapore. He is also a Senior
Principal Fellow of the Energy
Studies Institute (ESI). His main
research interest is the design
and
synthesis
of
nanoscale
materials for energy-related applications such as batteries and fuel
cells. Website: http://www.chbe.nus.edu.sg/staﬀ/lee.html
Xun Yuan obtained both his B.E.
(2006) and M.E. (2009) degrees
from Shandong University of
Technology,
China.
He
is
currently a Ph.D. student at the
Department of Chemical and
Biomolecular
Engineering,
National University of Singapore
(NUS), under the supervision of
Prof. Jianping Xie. His research
interests are focused on the
synthesis and biological appli-
cations of luminescent metal
nanoclusters.
Dr Jianping Xie received his B.S.
and M.S. in Chemical Engi-
neering from Tsinghua Univer-
sity of China. He graduated with
Ph.D. from the Singapore-MIT
Alliance
(SMA)
program.
He
joined National University of
Singapore (NUS) as an Assistant
Professor in 2010. His current
research
interests
lie
in
the
interfacing
of
nanotechnology
and biotechnology with focus on
developing green chemistry for
the synthesis of ultrasmall metal nanoclusters and exploring their
biomedical
applications.
Website:
http://cheed.nus.edu.sg/
chexiej/index.html
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620 | 4607
Feature Article
Nanoscale
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

approach to the construction of thiolated MNCs. The fast
reduction kinetics caused by the use of a strong reducing agent
and thus lacking in control of the reaction kinetics usually
results in MNCs with a broad size distribution, which have to be
separated by very elaborate post-synthesis purication methods.
Several isolation methods, such as solubility-based fraction-
ation,48–51 liquid
chromatography,52–54 and gel electropho-
resis,46,55–58 are commonly used to produce monodisperse MNCs
in analytic (a few micrograms) to semi-preparative quantities
(several tens of micrograms). A series of atomically precise Au
NCs with diﬀerent core sizes (n ¼ 10, 15, 18, 22, 25, 29, 38,46
40,54,59 55,60 68,53 102,51 130,61 144,48,50 18761) has been prepared
with the help of these isolation methods.
The direct synthesis of thiolated MNCs with atomic preci-
sion where post-synthesis purication is eliminated62,63 is
clearly a preference over isolation-assisted syntheses. The
works of Whetten et al.,49,55,64,65 Murray et al.,66–71 and Tsukuda
et al.50–52,72,73 on narrowing the size distribution of thiolated
MNCs are pioneering in this regard. The development of NC
chemistry clearly beneted from the synthesis of several
atomically precise thiolated MNCs in bulk quantities. The
success of these synthesis methods was based on the “size
focusing” strategy,74 where the stability diﬀerence between the
MNCs drives the convergence of an initially polydisperse
distribution of MNCs into the most stable MNC form. The
stability of MNCs with certain sizes also makes it possible to
produce monodisperse MNCs via the core size reduction of
large MNPs (>2 nm) by thiol-etching. Hence the synthesis of
monodisperse thiolated MNCs can be broadly categorized into
the following three approaches: chemical reduction of M(I)–SR
complexes, thiol-etching-assisted size focusing of polydisperse
MNCs, and thiol-etching-directed core size reduction of
MNPs. They cover most of the variations in synthetic chem-
istry reported for the preparation of monodisperse thiolated
MNCs.
In this Feature Article, we view the production of mono-
disperse MNCs as an engineerable process, where the input is
the precursors, the output is the highly monodisperse thio-
lated MNCs with designed properties (e.g., high catalytic
activity or strong luminescence). The transition from input to
output is processed by chemical conversions (Scheme 1b). The
previously mentioned M(I)–SR complexes, polydisperse MNCs,
and MNPs are the precursors of monodisperse MNCs. The
conversion chemistry is dependent on the precursor used and
mainly
comprises
chemical
reduction
and
thiol-etching.
Consequently two tailorable modules, namely the precursors
(input) and their conversion chemistry (processing), may be
used to provide monodispersity of thiolated MNCs in the
product (output).
We will demonstrate in this Feature Article that the
tailoring of precursors and conversion chemistry could indeed
facilitate the synthesis of monodisperse MNCs by reviewing
the most recent progress in the synthetic chemistry for thio-
lated MNCs. This article is structured as follows. The discus-
sion of precursors will be presented rst, in Section 2, as they
are the starting materials for the production of monodisperse
thiolated MNCs. They are one of the most important factors in
the
control
of
the
quality
of
product
MNCs.
Several
approaches to tailor the size and/or structure of diﬀerent
types of precursors, and their inuence on the monodispersity
of nal MNCs will be discussed in detail. The control
measures for chemical reduction (one of the options for the
“processing” module) will be reviewed in Section 3, with the
emphasis on how a mild and controllable reduction envi-
ronment is indispensable to and versatile for the synthesis of
MNCs with the desired outcomes such as atomic precision
and strong luminescence. Section 4 discusses the other option
for
the
processing
module:
thiol-etching.
The
control
measures for thiol-etching such as etchant and etching
kinetics modications will be presented. We hope that the
synthesis principles demonstrated here can be used to stim-
ulate further developments of new and eﬀective synthetic
pathways for the production of monodisperse MNCs, and to
build a large library of monodisperse thiolated MNCs for
fundamental studies and application explorations.
2
Precursor size and structure tailoring
A rational design of the precursor (in terms of size and struc-
ture) is of great importance at least in the following two aspects:
(1) it could simplify the synthesis process and reduce the eﬀort
level in the synthesis (e.g., shorter reaction time and elimina-
tion of laborious post-synthesis purication); and (2) it oﬀers
more controllability in targeting the desired MNCs and their
property tuning (e.g., enhanced luminescence and kinetic
trapping of MNCs in metastable sizes). A large number of
approaches
have
been
demonstrated
for
the
synthesis
of monodisperse MNCs using precursor tailoring. Regardless of
the diﬀerence in implementation details, the uniformity of the
precursor (in terms of size and structure) is most critical to the
quality of the product MNCs.
The strategies for tailoring the size and structure of
precursors are dependent on the type of precursors which
include M(I)–SR complexes, MNPs, and raw MNCs. M(I)–SR
complexes are the conventional starting material for the
synthesis of thiolated MNCs by the bottom-up method.47 The
metal atoms in M(I)–SR complexes are in a higher oxidative
state (+1) and hence their conversion to NCs [typically with a
M(0) core] is decided by the reduction chemistry. In contrast,
MNPs are converted to MNCs by diminution in a top-down
manner. The large size and high content of M(0) in MNPs
indicate that core size reduction is achieved through an
oxidative process such as etching by thiols. In comparison with
the M(I)–SR complexes and MNPs, raw MNCs are closest in
terms of size and oxidative state to the nal MNC product, and
their conversion to the latter depends largely on core size
evolution and structural rearrangement, which could also be
powered by the strong metal–thiol interaction in a thiol-
etching process.
2.1
Tailoring the M(I)–SR complexes
M(I)–SR complexes is one of the most commonly used type of
precursors in the preparation of thiolated MNCs. They exist in
4608 | Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale
Feature Article
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

polymeric forms and can be produced by facile methods.75 For
example, Au(I)–SR could be readily prepared by mixing Au(III)
ions (e.g., HAuCl4) with a thiol ligand (H–SR), as described by
the reaction of xAu(III) + (3x + 1)H–SR / RS–[Au–SR]x + xRS–SR
+ (3x + 1)H+.47,49,55,70 Since the synthesis of monodisperse NCs
from M(I)–SR is dependent on the reductive decomposition of
M(I)–SR polymers, it is reasonable to expect that the size and
structure of polymeric M(I)–SR complexes could aﬀect the
accessibility of M(I) to the reductant, and consequently the local
concentration of freshly generated M(0) atoms and oligomeric
M(I)–SR protecting staples, and the formation of thiolated
MNCs by the “grow and passivate” model.58 The “grow and
passivate” model hypothesizes that the aggregation of M(0)
atoms leads to the formation and growth of the M(0) cores,
which are progressively passivated by the adsorption of oligo-
meric M(I)–SR staples (RS–[M–SR]x) until a full protecting shell
of RS–[M–SR]x staples is formed. It is worth noting that the
“grow and passivate” model is based on the “divide and protect”
scheme76 of MNC synthesis, where a highly symmetric M(0) core
is protected by RS–[M–SR]x staples. Recent progress in the total
structure determination of thiolated Au NCs has conrmed the
core [Au(0)]–shell [staples] structure of thiolated MNCs.23,77–80
For example, the crystallographic investigations of Murray
et al.23 and Jin et al.77 have independently determined the
structure of Au25(SR)18 NCs, which consists of an icosahedral
Au13 core capped with six dimeric Au(I)–SR staples RS–[Au–SR]2.
Since the formation and growth of the M(0) core is primarily
determined by the local concentration of M(0) atoms while the
passivation process is governed by the structure and local
availability of RS–[M–SR]x staples, uniformity of the size and
structure of M(I)–SR complexes is denitely helpful to the
synthesis of monodisperse thiolated MNCs with the desired size
and properties.
2.1.1
Tailoring the size of M(I)–SR complexes. Size tailoring
of the M(I)–SR complexes could be realized by controlling the
kinetics of formation of M(I)–SR complexes. Generally, a milder
kinetics oﬀers more controllability of the reaction and conse-
quently the nal product. For example, Zhu et al. applied a
lower reaction temperature (273 K) and slow stirring speed (30
rpm) to create a gentle reaction environment to form Au(I)–SR
complexes.81 These Au(I)–SR complexes were predominantly
100–400 nm in size (determined by dynamic light scattering,
Fig. 1a, top panel), which prompted the formation of Au25(SR)18
NCs (Fig. 1b, top panel). The yield of Au25(SR)18 NCs was about
40% based on the number of Au atoms in the reaction mixture
(the yield was improved in a subsequent study by changing the
solvent).62 In contrast, the Au(I)–SR complexes formed by a room
temperature protocol showed a multi-modal size distribution
(<2 nm, 100–400 nm, and >1 mm; Fig. 1a, bottom panel), which
led to a polydisperse Au NC product (all other conditions were
the same, Fig. 1b, bottom panel).
Besides kinetics, thermodynamic factors (e.g., robustness of
M(I)–SR) can also be used to tailor the size of M(I)–SR
complexes. Recently, our group reported a cyclic reduction–
decomposition procedure (Fig. 2a) for regulating the size of
Ag(I)–SR complexes. Specically, Ag(I)–SR complexes with a
broad size distribution (the type-I complexes, Ag1–11(SR)1–6,
Fig. 2b, top panel) were rst reduced to form Ag NCs with a
broad size distribution of 6 to 19 Ag atoms (the original Ag
NCs, Fig. 2c, top panel), which subsequently underwent a
thiol-promoted decomposition to form Ag(I)–SR complexes
with
a
narrow
size
distribution
(the
type-II
complexes,
Ag1–3(SR)1,2, Fig. 2b, bottom panel).82 We proposed that the
cyclic
reduction–decomposition
prompted
a
size-selection
process based on the thermodynamic stability of the Ag(I)–SR
complexes. The type-II Ag(I)–SR complexes not only had a
narrower size distribution than the initial type-I Ag(I)–SR
complexes (Fig. 2b), but also displayed increased resistance
towards further reduction (longer reduction time). The reduc-
tion of type-II Ag(I)–SR complexes gave rise to a family of new
Ag NCs (the modied Ag NCs, Ag18–20(SR)11–13, Fig. 2c, bottom
panel). As expected, the greater polydispersity of type-I Ag(I)–SR
complexes led to more polydisperse Ag NCs (the original Ag
NCs), whereas the greater monodispersity of type-II Ag(I)–SR
complexes led to more narrowly distributed Ag NCs (the
modied
Ag
NCs).
More
interestingly,
atomically
mono-
disperse Ag16(SR)9 NCs with bright emission at 647 nm could
be obtained aer further etching of the modied Ag NCs with
an excess thiol.
2.1.2
Tailoring the structure of M(I)–SR complexes. Ther-
modynamic eﬀects may also be used to modify the structure of
M(I)–SR complexes. In general there is a natural tendency for
M(I)–SR complexes to aggregate under the strong M(I)/M(I)
interaction and the van der Waals forces between the SR
ligands unless a suﬃciently strong repulsion (e.g., electrostatic
interaction and steric hindrance) is present to oppose the
aggregation. The extent of aggregation of M(I)–SR can be a
controllable parameter in the synthesis of monodisperse
thiolated MNCs. For instance, Yao et al. showed that the
aggregation of Au(I)–SG complexes (where GSH is glutathione,
a naturally occurring water soluble tripeptide, g-glu-cys-gly)
could be easily regulated by a pH-sensitive aggregation–
dissociation equilibrium.83 GSH has two carboxylic groups
(pKa1 ¼ 2.12 and pKa2 ¼ 3.53) and can show diﬀerent ioniza-
tion forms at diﬀerent pHs. Therefore tuning the pH of the
Fig. 1
(a) Dynamic light scattering (DLS) spectra of Au(I)–SR complexes formed
at 273 K (top panel) and room temperature (bottom panel). (b) UV-vis absorption
spectra of Au25(SR)18 NCs (top panel) and polydisperse Au NCs (bottom panel)
formed by the NaBH4 reduction of corresponding Au(I)–SR complexes. Repro-
duced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2008) American Chemical Society.
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620 | 4609
Feature Article
Nanoscale
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

reaction solution provides a simple way to modulate the
surface charge and the aggregation extent of the Au(I)–SG
complexes. The aggregation–dissociation equilibrium of Au(I)–
SG complexes was used by the authors to provide a low and
constant concentration of Au(I) for the control and sustainable
mild reduction environment throughout the reduction of
Au(I)–SG complexes. The mild and controllable reduction
kinetics made it possible to kinetically trap NCs into sizes less
tolerant to thiol-etching [Au15(SG)13, with optical absorption
spectrum shown in Fig. 3a (black line) and ESI-MS spectrum
shown in Fig. 3b], evading the formation of a more stable and
common Au25(SG)18. The pH dependence of the aggregation–
dissociation equilibrium of Au(I)–SG complexes was then used
to vary the cluster size. For example, Au18(SG)14 NCs [with
optical absorption spectrum shown in Fig. 3a (red line) and
ESI-MS spectrum shown in Fig. 3c] could be synthesized at a
diﬀerent reaction pH (pH 2.7).
The structure of Au(I)–SR complexes can also be modied
by familiar techniques in organic synthesis. Inspired by the
commonly used protection–deprotection strategy in multi-
step organic synthesis, Yuan et al. developed a protection–
deprotection method (Fig. 4a) to reversibly modify the
structure of Au(I)–SR complexes for a fast synthesis of
monodisperse Au25(SR)18 NCs.84 In this method a cetyl-
trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) protecting shell was
rst electrostatically [via the formation of (CTA)+(COO) ion
pairs] graed onto Au(I)–SR complexes to promote the
formation of inverse-micelles. The structure of encapsulated
Au(I)–SR complexes was altered by the steric hindrance of
CTAB, signicantly increasing their liability for the reduction
reaction, where atomically precise Au25(SR)18 NCs (the red
absorption spectrum in Fig. 4b) could be synthesized from
the inverse-micelles in <10 min. More impressively, the
protecting layer of CTAB could be easily removed aer
synthesis by counter-ion addition, forming surfactant-free
Au25(SR)18 NCs with optical absorption (black line) and ESI
spectra shown in the leand right panels of Fig. 4b,
respectively.
Fig. 2
(a) Schematic illustration of the cyclic reduction–decomposition approach to narrowing the size distribution of Ag(I)–SR complexes, and subsequent
synthesis of strongly emissive atomically precise Ag NCs from these size-tailored Ag(I)–SR complexes. (b) ESI mass spectra of type-I (top) and type-II (bottom) Ag(I)–SR
complexes. The inset shows the zoomed-in ESI mass spectra of the complexes in the m/z range 1050–2050. (c) Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-
of-ﬂight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectra of the original (top) and modiﬁed (bottom) Ag NCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2013) Nature
Publishing Group.
Fig. 3
(a) UV-vis spectra of Au15(SG)13 (black line) and Au18(SG)14 (red line) synthesized via the two-phase approach. The insets show digital photos of corresponding
products (no. 1 – Au15(SG)13 and no. 2 – Au18(SG)14). ESI spectra (in negative ion mode) of (b) Au15(SG)13 and (c) Au18(SG)14. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83.
Copyright (2013) Wiley-VCH.
4610 | Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale
Feature Article
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

2.2
Tailoring the MNP precursor
Monodisperse thiolated MNCs could also be formed by a top-
down approach through the thiol-etching of preformed MNPs
(>2 nm). For example, Huang et al. prepared thiolated Au NCs
with emission wavelengths in the region of 500 to 615 nm
by
reacting
tetrakis(hydroxymethyl)phosphonium
chloride
(THPC)-protected Au NPs with a series of arylthiols.85 A similar
method was also used in a follow-up study for the synthesis of
Au/Ag NCs.86 In addition to THPC-protected MNPs, other
surfactant-protected MNPs were also employed as precursors
for the preparation of luminescent MNCs. Didodecyldimethy-
lammonium bromide (DDAB)-stabilized Au and Ag NPs were
used for the synthesis of red-emissive Au NCs (emitting at 650
and 690 nm)87 and Ag NCs (emitting at 680 nm),88 where a
bidentate thiol, reduced lipoic acid (DHLA), was the etchant.
Thiolated MNPs are also suitable precursors for the fabrication
of monodisperse thiolated MNCs. Bakr et al. obtained thiolated
Ag NCs with intense and broad absorption starting from freshly
prepared Ag NPs stabilized by 4-uorothiophenol (4FTP).89
Recent sedimentation velocity-analytical ultracentrifugation
(SV-AUC) and ESI-MS analysis identied these Ag NCs as
Ag44(SR)30 NCs.90 Taking into account the 4 charge carried by
each NC, the 18 free electrons in a [Ag44(SR)30]4 NC form a
shell-closing electronic structure91 which can account for the
stability of the magic-number MNCs. In a separate study,
Muhammed et al. treated mercaptosuccinic acid (MSA)-pro-
tected Au NPs with GSH at 328 K and varied the solution pH.
Au25 NCs were formed at pH 3 and Au8 NCs at pH 7–8, reecting
the pH sensitivity of the thiol-etching process.92
The size and size distribution of the starting MNPs should
then be important factors in determining the monodispersity
of the product MNCs. In principle, a narrow distribution of
small MNPs benets the formation of monodisperse MNCs.
The size of MNPs can be changed by adjusting the synthesis
parameters
(e.g.,
ligand-to-metal
ratio,
temperature,
and
solvent) in the synthesis of the MNPs. For example, Huang
et al. increased the size of MNP precursors (THPC-protected Au
NPs) from 2.2 to 3.6 nm simply by changing the THPC-to-Au
ratio. The diﬀerent-sized Au NP precursors were then etched
by 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) to produce Au NCs with
sizes of 1.2–2.1 nm. These Au NCs also showed uorescence
Fig. 4
(a) Schematic illustration of fast (<10 min) synthesis of Au25(SR)18 NCs by the protection–deprotection approach; (b) UV-vis spectra (left panel) of the as-
synthesized Au25(Cys)18 NCs in toluene (red line) and in water (black line), and ESI mass spectra (right panel) of the as-synthesized Au25(Cys)18 NCs in water (in negative
ion mode). Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620 | 4611
Feature Article
Nanoscale
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

with an emission wavelength in the 500–640 nm range.86 Other
than controlling the synthesis conditions, the size and size
distribution of MNP precursors could also be modied by post-
synthesis treatment. Lin et al. developed a novel metal-salt-
induced-etching method for varying the size and size distri-
bution of MNP precursors.87 When Au(III) precursors (e.g.,
AuCl3 or HAuCl4 in DDAB–toluene solution) were introduced
dropwise into a solution of preformed DDAB-protected Au NPs
in toluene, a decrease in particle size and particle size distri-
bution was observed (Fig. 5). TEM measurements of particle
size before and aer Au(III) addition of 5.55  0.68 nm and
3.17  0.35 nm, respectively, conrmed that the addition of a
Au(III) salt precursor had caused a size reduction of DDAB-
protected Au NPs. The application of a subsequent thiol-
etching process converted these size-manipulated Au NPs into
fairly monodisperse Au NCs with strong luminescence and
good
stability.
This
metal-salt-induced-etching
process
could be easily extended to the MNP precursors of other
metals (e.g., Ag).88
The size of the nal MNCs is also aﬀected by the capping
agent on the precursor MNPs and their protection chemistry.
For example, a recent study showed that the THPC-protected Au
NPs (3.4  1.0 nm) can be etched by MUA and converted to 1.4 
0.4 nm Au NCs, whereas a similar MUA-etching process only
changed the citrate-protected Au NPs (3.3  0.4 nm) to 2.8 
0.4 nm Au NPs.86 The Au NCs converted from the THPC-pro-
tected Au NPs showed strong luminescence at 525 nm (excited
at 375 nm), whereas those converted from citrate-protected Au
NPs could not luminesce.
2.3
Tailoring raw MNC precursors
Raw MNC precursors can also form monodisperse MNCs via a
thiol-etching process. The MNC precursors are generally
divided into two major categories: thiolated MNCs and non-
thiolate-protected (e.g., phosphine and polymer) MNCs. A thiol-
etching process performed on thiolated MNCs is usually known
as “size-focusing”, whereas thiol-etching of non-thiolate-pro-
tected MNCs is known as “thiolation”.
In a typical size-focusing process, the size evolution of
thiolated MNCs is dependent on the size-sensitive stability of
the MNCs: less stable sizes are eliminated while stable sizes
persevere.74 Shichibu et al. showed that only Au25(SR)18 NCs
persisted when a series of Aun(SR)m NCs (n ¼ 10–39) were
etched by excess thiol at 328 K. The persistence could be
attributed to the excellent stability of Au25(SR)18 NCs93 which
has been conrmed by many groups.44,62,91,94,95 Aside from
Au25(SR)18 NCs, several other sizes [e.g., Au38(SR)24
64,96,97 and
Au144(SR)60
98,99] were also shown to be resistant to thiol-
etching. The multi-modal distribution of ultrastable sizes has
made size-focusing a popular approach in the synthesis of
monodisperse or atomically precise MNCs with variable sizes.
It also underlines the importance of controlling the size
distribution of the raw MNCs because a broad size distribution
of MNCs could lead to two or more stable sizes aer thiol-
etching. Thus, a narrow and properly manipulated size
distribution of MNC precursors is essential for delivering true
size monodispersity of the nal MNCs via the size-focusing
approach.
The size and size distribution of the raw thiolated MNC
precursors can be modied by a number of reaction param-
eters (e.g., reaction temperature,81,100,101 stirring speed,79,99,100
solvent,97,102 type and amount of reductant,103 and thiol-to-
metal ratio49,61) used in the preparation of the raw MNCs.
MNC precursors with tailored size and size distribution were
used to produce a number of thiol-etching tolerant atomically
precise
MNCs
(e.g.,
Au
NCs:
Au19,103
Au20,100
Au24,101
Au25,62,69,81 Au38,64,96,97,104 and Au144 NCs;98,99 and Ag NCs:
Ag7,102 Ag9 and Ag16
82). The several excellent review articles on
size-focusing should be a good resource for anyone interested
Fig. 5
(a) Schematic illustration of Au(III)-salt-induced-etching approach for tailoring the size and size distribution of Au NP precursors, and subsequent preparation of
luminescent Au NCs from these Au NP precursors. (b) TEM images, digital photos (c) under normal light and (d) UV light of corresponding Au NPs/NCs at each stage of
the synthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.
4612 | Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale
Feature Article
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

in applying this technique to the synthesis of monodisperse
MNCs.1,2,74
Non-thiolate-protected MNCs can also be used as raw MNC
precursors in thiolation. An early study by Balasubramanian
et
al.
reported
the
room
temperature
thiolation
of
Au55(PPh3)12Cl6 NCs with hexanethiol.71 The thiolated Au NCs
with a core mass of 14.5 kDa were found to be Au75 NCs based
on laser-desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (LDI-MS).
Shichibu et al. thiolated Au11(PPh3)8Cl3 NCs using a two-phase
system at an elevated temperature (328 K) and reported the
formation of atomically precise Au25(SG)18 NCs.105 Besides
phosphine-protected MNCs, polymer-stabilized MNCs could
also be thiolated into monodisperse MNCs. For example, in a
recent work of Nishigaki et al., Au41(SR)13 NCs were synthesized
by
the
thiolation
of
polyvinylpyrrolidone
(PVP)-stabilized
Au NCs.106
It is expected that diﬀerent protecting ligands impart
diﬀerent protecting chemistry to the MNCs. For example, the
phosphine ligands are terminal ligands with charge neutral
phosphorus atoms in the ligands. In contrast, thiol ligands are
electron-withdrawing and bridging ligands between neigh-
boring Au centers and the sulfur atoms in the thiol ligands.
The protecting chemistry of MNCs determines the behavior of
raw MNCs in a thiolation process and hence aﬀects the
properties of the nal product. It is interesting to note that the
thiolation of phosphine-protected MNCs oen results in an
increase of the core metal size (e.g., phosphine-protected
Au11—thiolated Au25
105 and phosphine-protected Au55—thio-
lated Au75
71). This is not the case for the thiolation (size-
focusing) of thiolated MNCs. It was theorized that rapid
agglomeration of Au cores occurs during the ligand exchange
process in the thiolation of phosphine-protected Au NCs,
forming polydisperse Au NCs with larger core sizes,93 which
were then “size focused” to the stable form of atomically
precise Au NCs. Monodispersity of the starting material could
signicantly narrow the size distribution in polydisperse Au
NC intermediates formed by ligand exchange, facilitating the
successful production of thiolated Au25 and Au75 from phos-
phine-protected Au11 and Au55, respectively. Interestingly the
stable sizes formed by thiolation of PVP-stabilized Au NCs are
diﬀerent from those formed by size-focusing of thiolated Au
NCs. In the work of Tsunoyama et al. on the thiolation of PVP-
stabilized Au NCs with octadecanethiol (C18-SH), the stable
C18–S-protected Au NCs were those with core sizes of 8, 11, 21,
and 26 kDa,73 which are diﬀerent from those obtained by the
thiol-etching of thiolated Au NCs (8, 14, 22, and 29 kDa).48
However, a fundamental understanding of the MNC precursor
protection chemistry on the thiol-etching process and the
properties of the nal products is still presently lacking. More
comprehensive and systematic investigations are needed to ll
the knowledge gap.
3
Creation of a mild reduction environment
In the “grow and passivate” model of Section 2, the aggrega-
tion of M(0) species formed by the chemical reduction of M(I)–
SR complexes into larger particles and the adsorption of M(I)–
SR complexes (in the form of SR–[M(I)–SR]x staples) on the
metal core (due to the strong M–thiolate interactions) which
inhibits further growth are simultaneous events. A mild and
controllable reduction environment is necessary for improving
the monodispersity of the MNCs. This is because size and
structure tuning of M(I)–SR complexes is easier under such
reaction conditions, as shown in Section 2. A mild and
controllable reduction environment also oﬀers better control
of the balance between NC growth and thiolate passivation,
which is the topic of discussion in this section. A fast reduc-
tion kinetics does not provide enough time for the SR–[M(I)–
SR]x staples to fully cover and stabilize the NCs in the early
stages of the reaction, predisposing the formation of large
NCs. NCs with a broad size distribution are formed because of
the reduction in the time for NCs ripening to a monosize. In
contrast, under a mild and slow reduction environment, the
formation of NCs could be terminated at early stages to yield
smaller NCs. The size distribution of the NC precursor could
also be rened and manipulated to an appropriate size range
for subsequent size focusing, providing the opportunity for the
less stable NCs to be selectively formed.
A
mild
reduction
environment
could
be
created
by
decreasing the concentration of the reducing agent in the
modied Brust–Schiﬀrin method. For example, Zhu et al. used a
low reductant-to-Au ratio to provide a mild reducing environ-
ment for the synthesis of Au20(SR)16 NCs.100 In their follow-up
work the preparative procedures were slightly modied (e.g.,
time for NaBH4 addition) and Au24(SR)20 NCs were formed.101
Ethanol could also be used as the reaction medium to throttle
down the reactivity of NaBH4, as shown by Wu et al.102 The
reduction in the local concentration of the reductant decreased
the reduction rate of Agx(DMSA)y complexes (DMSA denotes
meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid) and monodisperse Ag7(SR)4
NCs were produced.102 A strong reducing agent, NaBH4, was
used in all these examples and the regulation of its activity
required additional control measures that led to a more
complex experimental setup. A more preferable alternative
would be the use of a milder reducing agent to provide the mild
reduction environment. The discussion in this section will
focus on the use of three diﬀerent types of mild reducing
agents, namely borane-based selective reductant, gaseous
reductant (carbon monoxide CO), and reducing-cum-protecting
thiol ligands, to provide and sustain a controllable reduction
environment.
3.1
Borane-based selective reductant
Borane-based compounds, such as NaBH4,107–109 sodium cya-
noborohydride (NaBH3CN),110–114 and borane–amine/phosphine
complexes,115–117 are common reducing agents in organic
chemistry. They, however, diﬀer greatly in their reducing
powers. NaBH4 is a strong reducing agent while NaBH3CN and
borane–amine/phosphine
complexes
are
weaker
reducing
agents and are more selective in their action.110–117 Hence the
careful selection of a weak reducing agent can be the route to
controllable reduction kinetics for the synthesis of selective
NCs. For example, Wu et al. used borane–tert-butylamine
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620 | 4613
Feature Article
Nanoscale
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

complexes (Fig. 6b) to decelerate the reduction to form inter-
mediate NCs with a size distribution more appropriate for
processing to smaller NCs by size-focusing (Fig. 6a).103 These
small NCs were identied as Au19(SR)13 by ESI mass spectrom-
etry (Fig. 6c). In a separate eﬀort, borane–tert-butylamine
complexes were used by Park and Lee to synthesize biicosahe-
dral Au25 NCs protected by mixed ligands (phosphine and
various thiolate ligands) in a single-phase one step process.118
Recent work by Ghosh et al. also showed that NaBH3CN is a
good mild reducing agent which could slow the growth of Au
NCs, allowing small NCs with 18 Au atoms protected by 14 thiol
ligands to be formed.119
3.2
Reactive gaseous reductant (CO)
The principle of slow and controllable reduction kinetics for
the formation of monodisperse MNCs can also be imple-
mented with the use of a reactive gas, CO, as shown by a
recently developed one-pot synthesis method.120 CO is a mild
reducing agent known for the synthesis of noble metal
nanoparticles. Its aﬃnity for the noble metal surface was
assumed to stabilize the small NCs in the early stages of NC
growth. The CO molecules were subsequently consumed due
to the unique catalytic activities of small Au species for CO
oxidation, leaving behind a clean NC surface protected only
by the thiol ligands. Using cysteine (Cys) as a model thiol
ligand, Au25(SR)18 NCs were facilely synthesized in a one-pot
manner (typical UV-vis and ESI-MS spectra are shown in
Fig. 7a–d). The slow and controllable reaction kinetics was
also disclosed by the progressive change of the solution color
during synthesis from colorless–yellow–orange–brown–red-
brown (Fig. 7e–g, inset). The intermediates were identied by
spectroscopic and spectrometric techniques allowing the
growth
process
of
Au25(SR)18
NCs
to
be
reconstructed
(Fig. 7h).
Another feature of the CO reduction method is that the
reducing power of CO could be ne-tuned by the solution pH,
allowing very delicate adjustments to be made to the reaction
kinetics to “quench” NC formation at several intermediate
stages. Specically systematic variations of the solution pH
while keeping other reaction conditions the same enabled three
small Au NCs with 10–12, 15, and 18 Au atoms and in distinct
colors (colorless, yellow, and dark brown) to be trapped
kinetically.121
3.3
Thiol ligands as reducing-cum-protecting agents
Thiol ligands are normally used for surface protection. Very
recently some researchers have started exploring the native
reducing properties of thiol ligands for the synthesis of Au and
Ag NCs. There are several foreseeable advantages in using thiol
ligands as the reducing agent. First, replacement of NaBH4 by
thiol ligands could allay the concern of using NCs for biomed-
ical applications. The concern arises from the adverse health
eﬀects of NaBH4 and/or its decomposed products on biological
systems.122 Second, the elimination of an extraneous reducing
agent can reduce the complexity and the environmental foot-
print of the synthesis. Post-synthesis purication may be
simpler too. Third, the reducing capability of thiol ligands is
weaker and strongly dependent on the preparative conditions.
This provides a means to regulate the size of the nal product
through control of reaction conditions.
Thiol-containing natural peptides are particularly inter-
esting from the biocompatibility perspective. Luo et al. devel-
oped a facile one-pot procedure where thiolated Au NCs were
synthesized with GSH as the reducing-cum-protecting agent.32
As shown in Fig. 8a, two types of Au(I) complexes were formed
upon mixing HAuCl4 with GSH: one coordinated by thiolate
groups (major presence) and the other coordinated by non-
thiolate groups (minor presence). The non-thiolate coordinated
Au(I) complexes were unstable and were preferentially reduced
to Au(0) by the disulde byproduct in the GSH reaction with
Au(III) ions at an elevated temperature (343 K). The generated
Au(0) acted as the nuclei for the slow aggregation of thiolate–
Au(I) complexes into core–shell structured Au(0)@Au(I)–thiolate
NCs. Au(0)@Au(I)–thiolate NCs with ve diﬀerent sizes (from
29 to 43 Au atoms, Fig. 8b), high SR-to-Au ratios relative to
conventional Aun(SR)m NCs, and very strong orange emission
(lem ¼ 610 nm, QY  15%) (Fig. 8c) were obtained.
Custom-designed peptides have also been used as the
reducing-cum-protecting agent for the synthesis of Ag NCs. For
example, a custom-designed polypeptide CCYRGRKKRRQRRR
was used by Cui et al. to synthesize Ag NCs (Fig. 9a).123 The
amino acid sequence CCY in the polypeptide was the most
important for the synthesis of Ag NCs. The phenolic group of
tyrosine (Y) reduced Ag(I) to Ag(0) while surface protection was
provided through the thiol group of cysteine (C). This process
resembles the synthesis of MNCs via protein-assisted bio-
mineralization.30 The reducing capability of tyrosine was
modied by pH adjustments, leading to the production of small
NCs (Agn, n ¼ 5, 6, 7) at pH 9 and larger NCs (Ag25) at pH 12 (see
Fig. 9b for core mass determination). The small NCs showed
Fig. 6
(a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Au19(SR)13 NCs with a mild
reductant and (b) borane–tert-butylamine complex. (c) The ESI spectrum con-
ﬁrming the monodispersity of Au19(SR)13 NCs. The inset in (c) shows both
experimental and simulated isotope patterns of the Au19(SR)13 NCs. Reproduced
with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.
4614 | Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale
Feature Article
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

blue emission at 432 nm while the larger NCs showed red
emission at 661 nm. The advantage of custom-designed
peptides is the exibility to introduce added functionality to the
nal product. The remaining sequence (RGRKKRRQRRR) of the
custom-made peptide was designed for cell nucleus targeting in
biological systems. This versatile approach is also applicable to
Fig. 7
(a) UV-vis spectrum of Au25(Cys)18 NCs synthesized by a CO-reduction method. The inset is a digital photo of the ﬁnal product. (b–d) ESI spectra of the triply
charged ions of Au25(Cys)18 NCs in progressively zoomed m/z regions. Time resolved UV-vis spectra of the reaction solution as a function of reaction time: (e) 0–20 min;
(f) 25–90 min; and (g) 2–24 h. (h) Schematic illustration of a three-stage formation process reconstructed from the time resolved UV-vis spectra in (e–g). Stage 1 is the
reduction of thiolate–Au(I) complexes to Au10–15 NCs; stage 2 is the NC growth of Au10–15 to Au16–25 NCs; and stage 3 is the transformation or size-focusing of Au16–25
NCs to Au25 NCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.
Fig. 8
(a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of luminescent Au(0)@Au(I)–thiolate NCs. X in the Au(I)–X complexes can be any non-thiolate functional group in the
reaction mixture. (b) ESI-MS spectra of ﬁve Au NC species isolated from the as-synthesized product using PAGE. (c) UV-vis absorption (blue line), photoemission (solid red
line, lex ¼ 365 nm), and photoexcitation (dashed red line, lem ¼ 610 nm) spectra of the luminescent Au NCs. Insets in (c) are digital photos of luminescent Au NCs in
the solid state (top row) and in water (bottom row) under (1) visible and (2) UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2012) American
Chemical Society.
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620 | 4615
Feature Article
Nanoscale
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

the synthesis of Au NCs, as shown by a follow-up study by the
same group.124
4
Thiol-etching under elaborate control
The strong metal–thiol interaction is closely involved in the size
and structure evolution of MNC and MNP precursors. We
understand from previous discussion that thiol-etching is
driven by the relative stability of MNCs.1,64,74,105 In a harsh
etching environment, only the most stable MNC species could
survive as the nal product, while several metastable species
may be kinetically stabilized in a less harsh etching environ-
ment. Correspondingly, two strategies can be used in a thiol-
etching process to reduce the polydispersity and/or to tailor the
size of product MNCs: (1) tuning the thermodynamics of thiol-
etching to produce the most robust structure and (2) creating a
milder etching environment for the kinetic trapping of meta-
stable species.
4.1
Tuning the thermodynamics of thiol-etching
The stability of MNCs is determined by their M(0) core and the
SR–[M(I)–SR]x protecting staples on their surface. Recent studies
have revealed that the structures of SR–[M(I)–SR]x staples and
the M(0) core are strongly dependent on the thiol ligand. For
example, Nishigaki et al. synthesized hitherto unreported
Au41(S-Eind)12
NCs
(Eind-SH
is
a
bulky
arenethiol,
1,1,3,3,5,5,7,7-octaethyl-s-hydrindacane-4-thiol, Fig. 10b) via
the ligand exchange reaction between PVP-stabilized Au NPs
and Eind-SH (Fig. 10a).106 Structural characterizations by X-ray
absorption ne structure (EXAFS) analysis, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS), and mass spectrometry fragmentation
analysis suggested that strong steric hindrance from the bulky
arylthiol ligand prompted the formation of a new Au(I)–(S-Eind)
protecting motif, where twelve Eind-S ligands are directly bound
to a Au41 core as terminal ligands. This Au(I)–(S-Eind) protecting
motif is distinctively diﬀerent from the short oligomeric SR–
[Au(I)–SR]x (x ¼ 1, 2) staples typically found in conventional
Aun(SR)m NCs. The steric eﬀect of the Eind-SH ligand also
resulted in a signicantly lower SR-to-Au ratio in Au41(S-Eind)12
NCs (Fig. 10c). The steric eﬀect of thiol ligands was also inves-
tigated by Krommenhoek et al.125 using a series of thiol ligands
with diﬀerent steric hindrance [e.g., 1-hexanethiol (C6-SH),
cyclohexanethiol (Cy-SH), and 1-adamantanethiol (Ad-SH)]. The
authors concluded from TEM and MALDI-TOF analyses that an
increase in the steric hindrance of the thiol ligands would
decrease the core size of stabilized Au NCs. In strong contrast to
the pervasiveness of Au25 NCs as the most stable size in the
synthesis of conventional Aun(SR)m NCs, there were no Au25 NCs
found in that study. Instead several Au NCs with unprecedented
sizes
(e.g.,
Au30(SAd)18,
Au39(SAd)23,
Au65(SCy)30,
and
Au67(SCy)30) were found to be extraordinarily stable when pro-
tected by the bulky arylthiol ligands.125 These observations
underscore the possibility of using the steric hindrance of thiol
ligands to vary the thermodynamics of thiol-etching to arrive at
new and monodisperse MNCs.
Other than steric hindrance, the electronic eﬀect of thiol
ligands could also be used to shithe most stable form of NCs
as the nal product. For instance, an aromatic thiol ligand, 4-
tert-butylbenzenethiol (HSPh-tBu), was used by Zeng et al.78 to
etch preformed Au38(SC2Ph)24 NCs, giving rise to new ultra-
stable Au36(SPh-tBu)24 NCs. This suggests the higher stability of
Au36 species over Au38 species in the aromatic thiolate (e.g., tBu-
PhS)-protected Au NCs. It should be mentioned that Au38(SR)24,
instead of Au36(SR)24, is an ultrastable size in a non-aromatic
thiolate-protected Au NC system. The authors also successfully
prepared single crystals for the total structure determination.
Fig. 9
(a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ag NCs using the peptide
CCYRGRKKRRQRRR. This peptide biomineralized Ag in situ and formed Ag NCs in
aqueous solution. Ag NCs with blue and red emission were formed at pH 9 and
12, respectively. (b) MALDI-TOF mass spectra of large (left panel) and small Ag
NCs (right panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright (2011)
American Chemical Society.
Fig. 10
(a) Schematic illustration of the etching process of PVP-stabilized Au NPs
by a bulky thiol ligand. (b) Molecular structure of Eind-SH. (c) The SR-to-Au ratio in
Au NCs protected by diﬀerent bulky thiol ligands. Reproduced with permission
from ref. 106. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.
4616 | Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale
Feature Article
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

The Au36(SPh-tBu)24 NCs had a fcc Au28 core capped with four
dimeric motifs (SR–[Au–SR]2) and twelve terminal SPh-tBu
ligands. This structure is uniquely diﬀerent from previously
reported Au NC structures. For example, in the reported
Au25(SC2H4Ph)18, Au38(SC2H4Ph)24, and Au102(SPhCO2H)44, the
thiolate ligands were only present in the oligomeric motifs (SR–
[Au–SR]x, x ¼ 1, 2).23,77,79,80 An unprecedented new binding mode
(simple terminal) of thiolate ligands was discovered for the rst
time in this study. The authors attributed the structural diﬀer-
ence, as well as the good stability of Au36(SR)24 NCs, to the
electronic eﬀect of the aromatic thiolate ligands, where an
inductive eﬀect could be established by the direct conjugation
of the Au centers to the phenyl rings. This hypothesis was
supported by the theoretical study using density functional
theory (DFT). Similar ultrastable H-PhS-protected Au36 species
was also reported by Nimmala and Dass.126
4.2
Kinetic tuning of the thiol-etching reaction
Similar to the reduction of M(I)–SR complexes, a mild reaction
environment is also conducive to the thiol-etching of MNC or
MNP precursors for the preparation of monodisperse MNCs,
especially those with strong luminescence. For example, Rao
and Pradeep developed a two-phase method to establish the
mild etching environment needed for the synthesis of lumi-
nescent Ag NCs from H2MSA-protected Ag NPs (H2MSA denotes
mercaptosuccinic acid).127 The parent Ag NP precursors were in
the aqueous phase and mixed with an organic solution of
H2MSA (the etchant). Etching occurred at the water–organic
interface upon stirring, gradually converting Ag NPs to lumi-
nescent Ag7(H2MSA)7 (emission at 440 nm) and Ag8(H2MSA)8
(emission at 650 nm). The two-phase etching method was also
used to synthesize luminescent Au NCs by the same group. For
example, NIR-emitting Au23 NCs and red-emissive Au22 NCs
were
prepared
by
the
two-phase
etching
of
preformed
Au25(SG)18 with diﬀerent thiol ligands.128 Two-phase etching is
also used by other groups for the synthesis of monodisperse
MNCs. For example, Qian et al. obtained atomically precise
Au38(SC2Ph)24 via the thiol-etching of mix-sized Aun(SG)m NCs in
a water–toluene system.97,104
Conventional two-phase etching oen alters the surface
chemistry of the NCs as a side eﬀect.129 In an attempt to take
advantage of the gentle kinetics of two-phase etching and to
simultaneously preserve the surface chemistry of the NCs aer
synthesis, Yuan et al. developed an electrostatically induced
reversible phase transfer protocol for the synthesis of mono-
disperse and luminescent MNCs (Fig. 11).31 In their experimental
design (Fig. 11a), preformed negatively charged water-soluble
raw MNC precursors (formed by reducing M(I)–SG complexes
with NaBH4) were electrostatically bound to a cationic surfactant
(e.g., CTAB) to enable the transfer of the raw MNC precursors
from the aqueous phase to the organic phase (toluene). The
phase-transfer and subsequent etching of the NCs with excess
GSH under a mild reaction environment resulted in the forma-
tion of monodisperse and luminescent MNCs. At the completion
of thiol-etching, the luminescent MNCs were returned to the
aqueous phase by disrupting the ionic bonds between MNCs and
CTAB with an anionic surfactant. Monodisperse and lumines-
cent GS-protected Ag NCs were synthesized in this way. The good
match between the well-dened UV-vis absorption spectrum of
as-synthesized Ag NCs and the spectrum of Ag29(SG)22 reported
by Kumar et al.130 was used to show the monodispersity of the Ag
NCs. Another important feature of this reversible phase-transfer
method is its versatility (dependent only on the general electro-
static interaction between thiol ligands and surfactant). Besides
Ag NCs, a variety of similarly monodisperse and luminescent
MNCs (e.g., Au, Pt, and Cu NCs) were also synthesized by this
approach (Fig. 11b).
5
Concluding remarks
This Feature Article regards the preparation of monodisperse
MNCs (output) as an engineerable process with diﬀerent types of
precursors [input, e.g., M(I)–SR complexes, polydisperse raw
MNCs, and MNPs] that may be used. The chemistry for
Fig. 11
(a) Schematic illustration of the process to produce monodisperse and
luminescent MNCs by a phase transfer cycle (aqueous / organic (incubation) /
aqueous); (b) photoexcitation (dotted lines) and photoemission (solid lines)
spectra of as-synthesized (i) Ag, (ii) Au, (iii) Pt, and (iv) Cu NCs in toluene. The insets
show the digital photos of the MNCs in water (top items 1 and 2) and in toluene
(bottom items 1 and 2). Items 1 were viewed under visible light, whereas items 2
were viewed under UV light (365 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31.
Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620 | 4617
Feature Article
Nanoscale
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

processing the precursors to the nal product depends on the
type of precursor used. Since the oxidation state of metal is
higher in the M(I)–SR complexes, the conversion of M(I)–SR
complexes to MNCs has to involve chemical reduction. On the
other hand, the high metallic content of MNPs suggests that
core size reduction by thiol-etching would be the principal
process for MNC production. Polydisperse MNCs are some-
where in between these extremities where size evolution and/or
structure reorganization has to be carefully controlled, oen
with the assistance from thiol-etching.
Recent progress on the synthesis of MNCs suggests that
monodisperse MNCs can be formed more easily if the precursor
and/or the precursor conversion chemistry are developed
rationally. There are diﬀerent approaches to tailoring the MNC
precursors in the literature. Precursor size distribution is most
important in syntheses from MNP precursors. For M(I)–SR
complex precursors, the size and structure of the precursors,
and the reaction microenvironment are all important consid-
erations.
For
polydisperse
MNC
precursors,
the
original
protection chemistry is as important as the precursor size
distribution. The synthesis of monodisperse MNCs with the
desired attributes is also easier if the conversion chemistry is
tailored accordingly. Generally a mild and controllable chem-
ical reduction environment provides a better control of
precursor size and structure by regulating the rates of core
growth and thiolate passivation, which could lead to the
formation of less stable or smaller MNCs. The thiol-etching
process, on the other hand, can also be engineered by modi-
fying thermodynamics or kinetic factors.
The unied understanding presented in this article for the
synthesis of monodisperse MNCs can potentially lead to
simpler and more eﬀective methods of preparation. It is envi-
sioned that more monodisperse MNCs with the desired features
can be produced in high yields by following some simple
principles in precursor and precursor conversion chemistry
control. However, these are general guidance and a detailed
understanding of the precursor size and structure, the conver-
sion chemistry, and its relation to the properties of the nal
product, especially at the molecular level, is still unsatisfactory
at this time. More systematic and comprehensive studies on
MNC precursors and precursor conversion chemistry are still
needed, which will have to depend on the advances and
continuing improvements of theoretical and experimental
procedures.
Acknowledgements
This work is nancially supported by the Ministry of Education,
Singapore, under the grant R-279-000-327-112. Y. Yu and Q. Yao
acknowledge the National University of Singapore for their
research scholarship.
Notes and references
1 R. Jin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 343–362.
2 Q. Zhang, J. Xie, Y. Yu and J. Y. Lee, Nanoscale, 2010, 2,
1962–1975.
3 Y. Lu and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3594–3623.
4 O. Varnavski,
G. Ramakrishna, J. Kim, D.
Lee and
T. Goodson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 132, 16–17.
5 H. Hakkinen, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 443–455.
6 Y. Gao, N. Shao and X. C. Zeng, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1497–
1503.
7 Y. Li, G. Galli and F. o. Gygi, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1896–1902.
8 Y. B. Losovyj, S.-C. Li, N. Lozova, K. Katsiev, D. Stellwagen,
U. Diebold, L. Kong and C. S. S. R. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem.
C, 2012, 116, 5857–5861.
9 C. M. Aikens, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 2, 99–104.
10 Y. Pei and X. C. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4054–4072.
11 J. Akola, M. Walter, R. L. Whetten, H. H¨akkinen and
H. Gr¨onbeck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3756–3757.
12 J. Yang, E. Sargent, S. Kelley and J. Y. Ying, Nat. Mater.,
2009, 8, 683–689.
13 C. Gao, J. Vuong, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Yin, Nanoscale,
2012, 4, 2875–2878.
14 Y. Yin, C. Erdonmez, S. Aloni and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12671–12673.
15 O. Zaluzhna, Y. Li, T. C. Allison and Y. J. Tong, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2012, 134, 17991–17996.
16 Y. Li, O. Zaluzhna, C. D. Zangmeister, T. C. Allison and
Y. J. Tong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1990–1992.
17 Y. Yu, Q. Zhang, B. Liu and J. Y. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010,
132, 18258–18265.
18 Q. Zhang, Y. Tan, J. Xie and J. Lee, Plasmonics, 2009, 4, 9–22.
19 Q. Zhang, J. Xie, J. Yang and J. Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2008, 3,
139–148.
20 Q. Zhang, J. Xie, Y. Yu, J. Yang and J. Y. Lee, Small, 2010, 6,
523–527.
21 R. W. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2688–2720.
22 M. Walter, J. Akola, O. Lopez-Acevedo, P. D. Jadzinsky,
G. Calero, C. J. Ackerson, R. L. Whetten, H. Gronbeck and
H. Hakkinen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105,
9157–9162.
23 M. Zhu, C. M. Aikens, F. J. Hollander, G. C. Schatz and
R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5883–5885.
24 S. Chen, R. S. Ingram, M. J. Hostetler, J. J. Pietron,
R. W. Murray, T. G. Schaaﬀ, J. T. Khoury, M. M. Alvarez
and R. L. Whetten, Science, 1998, 280, 2098–2101.
25 L. Shang, S. J. Dong and G. U. Nienhaus, Nano Today, 2011,
6, 401–418.
26 S. Choi, R. M. Dickson and J. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41,
1867–1891.
27 J. Yu, S. A. Patel and R. M. Dickson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2007, 46, 2028–2030.
28 J. Zheng, C. Zhou, M. Yu and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4,
4073–4083.
29 C. Zhou, C. Sun, M. Yu, Y. Qin, J. Wang, M. Kim and
J. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7727–7732.
30 J. Xie, Y. Zheng and J. Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131,
888–889.
31 X. Yuan, Z. Luo, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Y. Lee and
J. Xie, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8800–8808.
32 Z. Luo, X. Yuan, Y. Yu, Q. Zhang, D. T. Leong, J. Y. Lee and
J. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16662–16670.
4618 | Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale
Feature Article
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

33 W. Chen and S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48,
4386–4389.
34 Y. Liu, H. Tsunoyama, T. Akita and T. Tsukuda, Chem.
Commun., 2010, 46, 550–552.
35 Y. Liu, H. Tsunoyama, T. Akita, S. Xie and T. Tsukuda, ACS
Catal., 2010, 1, 2–6.
36 T. Tsukuda, H. Tsunoyama and H. Sakurai, Chem.–Asian J.,
2011, 6, 736–748.
37 Y. Zhu, H. Qian and R. Jin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11455–
11462.
38 Y. Zhu, H. Qian, B. A. Drake and R. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2010, 49, 1295–1298.
39 Y. Zhu, H. Qian, M. Zhu and R. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22,
1915–1920.
40 Y. Zhu, H. Qian and R. Jin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6793–
6799.
41 Y. Zhu, Z. Wu, C. Gayathri, H. Qian, R. R. Gil and R. Jin,
J. Catal., 2010, 271, 155–160.
42 X. Nie, H. Qian, Q. Ge, H. Xu and R. Jin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6,
6014–6022.
43 G. Ramakrishna, O. Varnavski, J. Kim, D. Lee and
T. Goodson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5032–5033.
44 M. A. H. Muhammed, A. K. Shaw, S. K. Pal and T. Pradeep,
J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14324–14330.
45 M. M. Alvarez, J. T. Khoury, T. G. Schaaﬀ, M. N. Shagullin,
I. Vezmar and R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101,
3706–3712.
46 Y. Negishi, K. Nobusada and T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2005, 127, 5261–5270.
47 M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiﬀrin and
R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801–802.
48 T. G. Schaaﬀ, M. N. Shagullin, J. T. Khoury, I. Vezmar,
R. L. Whetten, W. G. Cullen, P. N. First, C. Guti´errez-
Wing, J. Ascensio and M. J. Jose-Yacam´an, J. Phys. Chem.
B, 1997, 101, 7885–7891.
49 M. M. Alvarez, J. T. Khoury, T. G. Schaaﬀ, M. Shagullin,
I. Vezmar and R. L. Whetten, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 266,
91–98.
50 N. K. Chaki, Y. Negishi, H. Tsunoyama, Y. Shichibu and
T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8608–8610.
51 Y.
Levi-Kalisman,
P.
D.
Jadzinsky,
N.
Kalisman,
H.
Tsunoyama,
T.
Tsukuda,
D.
A.
Bushnell
and
R. D. Kornberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2976–2982.
52 H. Tsunoyama, Y. Negishi and T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2006, 128, 6036–6037.
53 A. Dass, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11666–11667.
54 S. Knoppe, J. Boudon, I. Dolamic, A. Dass and T. B¨urgi,
Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5056–5061.
55 T. G. Schaaﬀ, G. Knight, M. N. Shagullin, R. F. Borkman
and R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10643–
10646.
56 T. G. Schaaﬀand R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104,
2630–2641.
57 Y. Negishi, Y. Takasugi, S. Sato, H. Yao, K. Kimura and
T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6518–6519.
58 Y. Negishi, Y. Takasugi, S. Sato, H. Yao, K. Kimura and
T. Tsukuda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12218–12221.
59 H. Qian, Y. Zhu and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132,
4583–4585.
60 H. Qian and R. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11462–11464.
61 Y. Negishi, C. Sakamoto, T. Ohyama and T. Tsukuda,
J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1624–1628.
62 Z. Wu, J. Suhan and R. Jin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 622–
626.
63 C. Lavenn, F. Albrieux, G. Bergeret, R. Chiriac, P. Delichere,
A. Tuel and A. Demessence, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7334–
7337.
64 T. G. Schaaﬀand R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103,
9394–9396.
65 S. Link, A. Beeby, S. FitzGerald, M. A. El-Sayed, T. G. Schaaﬀ
and R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3410–3415.
66 J. F. Parker, C. A. Fields-Zinna and R. W. Murray, Acc. Chem.
Res., 2010, 43, 1289–1296.
67 D. Lee, R. L. Donkers, G. Wang, A. S. Harper and
R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6193–6199.
68 R. L. Donkers, D. Lee and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 2004, 20,
1945–1952.
69 J. F. Parker, J. E. F. Weaver, F. McCallum, C. A. Fields-Zinna
and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13650–13654.
70 M. J. Hostetler, J. E. Wingate, C.-J. Zhong, J. E. Harris,
R. W. Vachet, M. R. Clark, J. D. Londono, S. J. Green,
J. J. Stokes, G. D. Wignall, G. L. Glish, M. D. Porter,
N. D. Evans and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 17–30.
71 R. Balasubramanian, R. Guo, A. J. Mills and R. W. Murray,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8126–8132.
72 R. Tsunoyama, H. Tsunoyama, P. Pannopard, J. Limtrakul
and T. Tsukuda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16004–16009.
73 H. Tsunoyama, P. Nickut, Y. Negishi, K. Al-Shamery,
Y. Matsumoto and T. Tsukuda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007,
111, 4153–4158.
74 R. Jin, H. Qian, Z. Wu, Y. Zhu, M. Zhu, A. Mohanty and
N. Garg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2903–2910.
75 C. F. Shaw, N. A. Schaeﬀer, R. C. Elder, M. K. Eidsness,
J. M. Trooster and G. H. M. Calis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984,
106, 3511–3521.
76 H. H¨akkinen, M. Walter and H. Gr¨onbeck, J. Phys. Chem. B,
2006, 110, 9927–9931.
77 M. W. Heaven, A. Dass, P. S. White, K. M. Holt and
R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3754–3755.
78 C. Zeng, H. Qian, T. Li, G. Li, N. L. Rosi, B. Yoon,
R. N. Barnett, R. L. Whetten, U. Landman and R. Jin,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 13114–13118.
79 H. Qian, W. T. Eckenhoﬀ, Y. Zhu, T. Pintauer and R. Jin,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8280–8281.
80 P. D. Jadzinsky, G. Calero, C. J. Ackerson, D. A. Bushnell and
R. D. Kornberg, Science, 2007, 318, 430–433.
81 M. Zhu, E. Lanni, N. Garg, M. E. Bier and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2008, 130, 1138–1139.
82 X. Yuan, M. I. S. Setyawati, A. S. Tan, C. N. Ong, D. T. Leong
and J. Xie, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e39.
83 Q. Yao, Y. Yu, X. Yuan, Y. Yu, J. Y. Lee and J. Xie, Small,
2013, DOI: 10.1002/smll.201203112.
84 X. Yuan, Y. Yu, Q. Yao, Q. Zhang and J. Xie, J. Phys. Chem.
Lett., 2012, 3, 2310–2314.
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620 | 4619
Feature Article
Nanoscale
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online

85 C.-C. Huang, Z. Yang, K.-H. Lee and H.-T. Chang, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6824–6828.
86 C.-C. Huang, H.-Y. Liao, Y.-C. Shiang, Z.-H. Lin, Z. Yang and
H.-T. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 755–759.
87 C.-A.
J.
Lin,
T.-Y.
Yang,
C.-H.
Lee,
S.
H.
Huang,
R. A. Sperling, M. Zanella, J. K. Li, J.-L. Shen, H.-H. Wang,
H.-I. Yeh, W. J. Parak and W. H. Chang, ACS Nano, 2009,
3, 395–401.
88 S. Huang, C. Pfeiﬀer, J. Hollmann, S. Friede, J. J.-C. Chen,
A.
Beyer,
B.
Haas,
K.
Volz,
W.
Heimbrodt,
J. M. Montenegro Martos, W. Chang and W. J. Parak,
Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8915–8919.
89 O. M. Bakr, V. Amendola, C. M. Aikens, W. Wenseleers,
R. Li, L. Dal Negro, G. C. Schatz and F. Stellacci, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5921–5926.
90 K. M. Harkness, Y. Tang, A. Dass, J. Pan, N. Kothalawala,
V. J. Reddy, D. E. Cliﬀel, B. Demeler, F. Stellacci,
O. M. Bakr and J. A. McLean, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4269–
4274.
91 M. Walter, J. Akola, O. Lopez-Acevedo, P. D. Jadzinsky,
G. Calero, C. J. Ackerson, R. L. Whetten, H. Gr¨onbeck and
H. H¨akkinen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105,
9157–9162.
92 M. Habeeb Muhammed, S. Ramesh, S. Sinha, S. Pal and
T. Pradeep, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 333–340.
93 Y. Shichibu, Y. Negishi, H. Tsunoyama, M. Kanehara,
T. Teranishi and T. Tsukuda, Small, 2007, 3, 835–839.
94 A. C. Dharmaratne, T. Krick and A. Dass, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2009, 131, 13604–13605.
95 M. A. Tofanelli and C. J. Ackerson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012,
134, 16937–16940.
96 O. Toikkanen, V. Ruiz, G. R¨onnholm, N. Kalkkinen,
P. Liljeroth and B. M. Quinn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130,
11049–11055.
97 H. Qian, Y. Zhu and R. Jin, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3795–
3803.
98 H. Qian and R. Jin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4083–4087.
99 H. Qian and R. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2209–
2217.
100 M. Zhu, H. Qian and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131,
7220–7221.
101 M. Zhu, H. Qian and R. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1,
1003–1007.
102 Z. Wu, E. Lanni, W. Chen, M. E. Bier, D. Ly and R. Jin, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16672–16674.
103 Z. Wu, M. A. MacDonald, J. Chen, P. Zhang and R. Jin, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9670–9673.
104 H. Qian, M. Zhu, U. N. Andersen and R. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. A,
2009, 113, 4281–4284.
105 Y. Shichibu, Y. Negishi, T. Tsukuda and T. Teranishi, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13464–13465.
106 J.-i. Nishigaki, R. Tsunoyama, H. Tsunoyama, N. Ichikuni,
S. Yamazoe, Y. Negishi, M. Ito, T. Matsuo, K. Tamao and
T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14295–14297.
107 C. A. Brown and V. K. Ahuja, J. Org. Chem., 1973, 38, 2226–
2230.
108 J. V. B. Kanth and M. Periasamy, J. Org. Chem., 1991, 56,
5964–5965.
109 A. Aramini, L. Brinchi, R. Germani and G. Savelli, Eur. J.
Org. Chem., 2000, 2000, 1793–1797.
110 C. F. Lane, Synthesis, 1975, 1975, 135–146.
111 N. Jentoand D. G. Dearborn, J. Biol. Chem., 1979, 254,
4359–4365.
112 R. F. Borch, M. D. Bernstein and H. D. Durst, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 1971, 93, 2897–2904.
113 R. O. Hutchins, C. A. Milewski and B. E. Maryanoﬀ, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 3662–3668.
114 R. J. Mattson, K. M. Pham, D. J. Leuck and K. A. Cowen,
J. Org. Chem., 1990, 55, 2552–2554.
115 G. C. Andrews and T. C. Crawford, Tetrahedron Lett., 1980,
21, 693–696.
116 B. Carboni and L. Monnier, Tetrahedron, 1999, 55, 1197–
1248.
117 R. O. Hutchins, K. Learn, B. Nazer, D. Pytlewski and
A. Pelter, Org. Prep. Proced. Int., 1984, 16, 335–372.
118 S. Park and D. Lee, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7049–7054.
119 A. Ghosh, T. Udayabhaskararao and T. Pradeep, J. Phys.
Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1997–2002.
120 Y. Yu, Z. Luo, Y. Yu, J. Y. Lee and J. Xie, ACS Nano, 2012, 6,
7920–7927.
121 Y. Yu, X. Chen, Q. Yao, Y. Yu, N. Yan and J. Xie, Chem.
Mater., 2013, 25, 946–952.
122 I. D´ıez and R. A. Ras, Advanced Fluorescence Reporters in
Chemistry and Biology II, Springer, 2010.
123 Y. Cui, Y. Wang, R. Liu, Z. Sun, Y. Wei, Y. Zhao and X. Gao,
ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8684–8689.
124 Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Zhao, R. Liu, Z. Sun, W. Li and X. Gao,
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 871–873.
125 P. J. Krommenhoek, J. Wang, N. Hentz, A. C. Johnston-
Peck, K. A. Kozek, G. Kalyuzhny and J. B. Tracy, ACS
Nano, 2012, 6, 4903–4911.
126 P. R. Nimmala and A. Dass, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133,
9175–9177.
127 T. Udaya Bhaskara Rao and T. Pradeep, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2010, 49, 3925–3929.
128 M. A. H. Muhammed, P. K. Verma, S. K. Pal, R. C. A. Kumar,
S. Paul, R. V. Omkumar and T. Pradeep, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009,
15, 10110–10120.
129 J. Yang, J. Y. Lee and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40,
1672–1696.
130 S. Kumar, M. D. Bolan and T. P. Bigioni, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2010, 132, 13141–13143.
4620 | Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4606–4620
This journal is ª The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Nanoscale
Feature Article
Published on 25 March 2013. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:29:22 AM. 
View Article Online