Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
1 of 18
H E A LT H  A N D  M E D I C I N E
Biomimetic elasticity compressed assembly controls 
rapid intracerebral drug release to reverse 
microglial dysfunction
Guochen Han1†, Yi Jin1†, Kaiwen Bai1, Qiaofei Du1, Xiaochen Gu2, Ling Tao3, Jianping Zhou1*, 
Huaqing Zhang1*, Yang Ding1,3*
The regulation of microglial dysfunction has become increasingly prominent in treatment of Alzheimer’s disease 
(AD). Herein, we develop a scalable polymer-­involved biomimetic assembly that responds to intracerebral reac-
tive oxygen species (ROS) for elastic spreading and concentration-­dependent drug therapy. Structurally, a poly-
mer of thermally sensitive deformation is selected for hydrophobic loading of curcumin (Cur) and coordinative 
grafting onto ultrasmall ceria (CeO2) by elastic compression at transition temperature, which is further sealed by 
self-­polymerized dopamine with apolipoprotein decoration to improve intracerebral shuttling. When triggered 
by ROS in the lesions, burst exposure of Cur and polymer-­linked CeO2 (PCeO2) is achieved. The concentrated Cur 
switches amyloid-­β (Aβ)–activated microglia into normal for mobilizing phagocytosis, and CeO2 has sustainable 
antioxidant capacity to prevent microglial mitochondrial damage after phagocytosis of PCeO2-­captured Aβ. After 
administration, our findings reveal microglia-­mediated Aβ clearance, neuroprotection, and ROS elimination in AD 
mice. Collectively, this biomimetic assembly provides a promising approach in AD treatments.
INTRODUCTION
Microglia are one of the critical resident macrophages located in the 
central nervous system, and their states are defined by their intrinsic 
determinants, having different functions in maintaining immune ho-
meostasis in the brain (1, 2). In Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology, 
microglia can be divided into amyloid-­β (Aβ)–activated microglia 
and normal microglia, thus having completely different functions in 
Aβ phagocytosis and degradation (3, 4). In patients with AD, the ac-
cumulation of Aβ and pathophysiological stresses persistently acti-
vate microglial differentiation into Aβ-­activated microglia, which 
would stimulate inflammatory responses in the brain by releasing 
degenerate pro-­inflammatory factors and reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) (5–7). Normal microglia on the contrary are capable of secret-
ing various protective mediators to mitigate inflammation, subse-
quently facilitating neuron repair and mobilizing phagocytosis to 
eliminate pathogenic proteins (8). As a result, selective tuning of mi-
croglial states from Aβ-­activated microglia toward normal microglia 
will ameliorate the inflammatory response and accelerate pathogenic 
Aβ clearance under AD physiological conditions. The purposeful 
drug intervention of microglial function does pose a substantial 
challenge in clinical therapy.
Blood-­brain barrier (BBB) impedes transport of a majority of 
drugs into the brain (9, 10). Even luckily overcoming BBB, the rapid 
dispersion of any permeated substance does subsequently occur in the 
cerebrospinal fluid, which would be difficult for conventional delivery 
mechanisms to achieve locus-­specific intracerebral drug access and 
release an effective concentration level to execute microglial function 
regulation (11, 12). Moreover, the recovery of microglial dysfunction 
involves intricate pathological mechanisms that require synergistic 
therapy by using multiple elements (13, 14). Natural medicines have 
been investigated as potential candidates in treating AD by managing 
microglial state conversion (15). Of note, curcumin (Cur) as a natural 
polyphenol extracted from turmeric has different pharmacological 
activities including antioxidative defense, Aβ aggregation inhibition, 
and microglial function regulation in a concentration-­dependent 
manner (16–18), wherein a high concentration of Cur is required for 
a reversal microglial state (17, 19). However, state regulation from Cur 
is inadequate for completely reversing microglial dysfunction. Clear-
ance of excessive ROS because of microglial activation in lesions is 
equally important for preserving mitochondria of microglia (20). A 
nanoenzyme, as the most effective enzyme mimicking nanomaterials 
for eliminating ROS, has attracted extensive attention in AD therapy. 
An ultrasmall ceria nanozyme (CeO2) with sustainable antioxidant 
activity makes it possible to reverse mitochondrial damage caused by 
excessive ROS accumulation, which is beneficial from the recyclable 
valence transition between Ce3+ and Ce4+ (21). Consequently, a viable 
delivery system capable of multidrug shielding, BBB traversing, and 
then burst releasing in response to the lesion microenvironment is 
needed to elevate drug concentration to a therapeutically relevant 
level in the brain.
Mechanisms of burst release used in drug delivery can enhance 
drug localization and accumulation and thus optimize therapeutic out-
comes (22). Majority of drug burst-­releasing design relies on hydro-
phobic repulsion, elastic liberation, charge reversal, and size expansion 
at nanoscale settings (23, 24). Poly(N-­isopropylacrylamide)-­co-­
(acrylamide) (pNIPAAm-­co-­pAAm) demonstrates thermosensitive 
elasticity and hydrophilic-­hydrophobic transition at low critical solu-
tion temperature (LCST). When the processing temperature is higher 
than LCST, the polymer is compressible for hydrophobic drug shield-
ing, together with storing elastic potential energy (25). On the contrary, 
the polymer would expand its structure and restore hydrophilicity 
below LCST, lending a burst release effect to packaged drugs without 
1State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, Department of Pharmaceutics, China 
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China. 2Faculty of Pharmacy, University 
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3E 0T5, Canada. 3State Key Laboratory of Functions 
and Applications of Medicinal Plants, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang 550014, 
China.
*Corresponding author. Email: dydszyzf@​163.​com (Y.D.); zhanghq@​163.​com (H.Z.); 
zhoujianping@​cpu.​edu.​cn (J.Z.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2025 The 
Authors, some rights 
reserved; exclusive 
licensee American 
Association for the 
Advancement of 
Science. No claim to 
original U.S. 
Government Works. 
Distributed under a 
Creative Commons 
Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-­NC). 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
2 of 18
assistance from additional energy (26). As such, this elastic polymer 
is suitably serving as a size-­altering nanoplatform to fulfill burst re-
lease of Cur at concentration-­dependent demands. Using an elastic 
polymer alone as a delivery carrier may lead to premature drug 
leakage during biological transport; modifying the surface mor-
phology and property of the polymer is thus imperative to manage 
elastic energy and restrict size expansion, thus minimizing prema-
ture drug loss. A polydopamine (PDA) framework with intense ri-
gidity and responsive degradability has demonstrated applicability 
to not only endow sufficient dosage stability but also create micro­
environment responsivity for numerous nanoplatforms (27). Therefore, 
a compressed elastic polymer within a PDA shell would perform 
controllable yet burst drug release to increase site-­specific drug 
accumulation for reversing microglial dysfunction.
In this study, we designed a combinative assembly of Cur and CeO2 
that was compressed by an elastic polymer and packaged with a ROS-­
responsive PDA shell, which could regulate the microglial state in a 
concentration-­dependent manner and remove pathogenic Aβ and cas-
cade product ROS (Fig. 1). For preparation, a thermosensitive polymer 
was first customized to acquire a desirable LCST and then conjugated 
to the CeO2 nanozyme (PCeO2) via a coordination effect between a Ce 
atom and thiol groups of polymers. By raising the processing tempera-
ture to LCST, the soluble polymer was compressed and transformed 
into a hydrophobic state to simultaneously encapsulate a high dose of 
Cur. Afterward, we introduced the dopamine autopolymerization 
method to conceal the dual drug–loaded assembly and ensured a ROS-­
triggered burst drug release mechanism. To enhance BBB crossing and 
intracerebral shuttling, natural apolipoprotein A-­I (apoA-­I) with high 
affinity to a high-­expressing level of scavenger receptor class B type I on 
BBB was conjugated to the assembly (APPCeO2/Cur). It was hypoth-
esized that once this delivery platform reached AD lesions, ROS would 
strip the thin shell of PDA, and then the inner polymer expands the 
structure and restores hydrophilicity, leading to Cur burst release and 
complete PCeO2 exposure. Consequently, the concentrated Cur would 
facilitate microglial state switching from Aβ-­activated microglia to-
ward normal microglia and promote secretion of numerous protective 
mediators to repair damaged neurons and mobilize phagocytosis for 
Aβ clearance. Meanwhile, the exposed PCeO2 could recognize and dis-
aggregate Aβ plaques to form a harmless nanocomplex and further 
facilitate microglia-­mediated uptake and degradation of Aβ deposi-
tion. The CeO2 with uptake into microglia would further eliminate 
ROS accumulation and protect mitochondria. Collectively, this biomi-
metic assembly will be capable of creating an effective and promising 
strategy in managing microglial phenotypic transition, eliminating 
pathogenic Aβ, and obliterating accumulated ROS in the AD model.
RESULTS
Preparation and characterization of elastic compression and 
spreading of the biomimetic assembly
To effect a burst release mechanism, it was imperative that polymers 
have compression and expansion capability with changes in tem-
perature. A thermosensitive polymer of pNIPAAm-­co-­pAAm was 
synthesized through bis[2-­(2′-­bromoisobutyryloxy) ethyl] disulfide 
Fig. 1. Illustration of APPCeO2/Cur preparation consisting of the thermosensitive polymer, dual drugs CeO2 and Cur, and apoA-­I–decorated PDA shell for revers-
ing microglial dysfunction. BBB permeation with the assistance of apoA-­I mimetic modification, ROS-­triggered PDA degradation for concentrated release of Cur to 
regulate the microglial state and secrete neuroprotective factors, and elastic release of the PCeO2 core continuously eliminating ROS and disaggregating Aβ deposits for 
microglia-­mediated phagocytosis and metabolism. iv, intravenously.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
3 of 18
to initiate atom-­transfer radical polymerization (fig. S1), which 
would be retractable into a hydrophobic state when the temperature 
was above LCST. On the contrary, this polymer became spreadable 
and hydrophilic below LCST (28, 29). The LCST suitable for in vivo 
application would range above body temperature (37°C). Hence, the 
LCST was tailored by adjusting N-­isopropyl acrylamide (NIPAAm) 
and acrylamide (AAm) monomer mass ratios, and 87.5 wt % 
NIPAAm was adopted because of the desirable LCST of 41°C, 
which was detected by ultraviolet-­visible absorption spectroscopy 
(fig. S2). The polymer structure was also confirmed by 1H nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) and 13C NMR (figs. S3 and S4). The 
average molecular weight of the polymer was calculated to be 
∼5000 g/mol (fig. S5). Thereafter, the disulfide section of the poly-
mer was reduced to thiol and anchored to the surface of a 6 nm–
sized CeO2 nanozyme to form PCeO2, which increased the stability 
of CeO2 for further application (fig. S6). Because of the thermal 
shrinkage of the polymer, the spreading chains were to be com-
pressed at LCST, and hydrophobic domains were to form a poly-
meric shell on the CeO2 core that provided a reservoir for shielding 
of hydrophobic drug molecules. To verify this hypothesis, we tested 
particle size variations of PCeO2 in response to temperature chang-
es (Fig. 2A). The particle size of PCeO2 shrank from ~63 to ~29 nm 
with the temperature rising from 37° to 41°C. The thermoshrinkage 
of the polymer demonstrated a transition to hydrophobicity, which 
provided a possibility for uploading hydrophobic molecules. More-
over, the process of thermal shrinkage was reversible with the tem-
perature alternating between 37° and 41°C (Fig. 2B). The switchable 
particle size and property were critical in the burst release mecha-
nism because the polymer provided an expanded structure for hy-
drophobic drug exposure at physiological temperature.
To upload a high dose of drugs, Cur was incubated with PCeO2 at 
41°C, leading to the polymeric structure contracting and compressed 
drug encapsulation by hydrophobic interaction. To minimize drug 
leakage during in vivo circulation, self-­polymerization of dopamine 
(PDA) was designed to heat-­seal Cur-­loaded PCeO2 for a stable core-­
shell structure (PPCeO2/Cur). The size of PPCeO2/Cur was increased 
from ∼28 to ∼51 nm (Fig. 2C and fig. S7), indicating the formation 
of a PDA shell. To promote circulation stability and BBB penetration, 
we applied Michael’s addition reaction to graft apoA-­I onto the sur-
face of PPCeO2/Cur via conjugation of amine groups (apoA-­I) with 
dihydroxyindole/indolequinone groups (PDA shell) for the biomi-
metic assembly of APPCeO2/Cur. Attributed to the surface modifica-
tion of apoA-­I, APPCeO2/Cur demonstrated an increased particle 
size of ~62 nm and improved stability in phosphate-­buffered saline 
Fig. 2. Characterization and site-­specific targeting of APPCeO2/Cur assembly. (A) Particle size distribution of CeO2 and PCeO2 at 37° and 41°C, respectively. (B) Size 
changes of CeO2 and PCeO2 in response to cyclic heating and cooling (n = 3). (C) Particle size distribution of PCeO2, PPCeO2/Cur, and APPCeO2/Cur. (D) Changes of particle 
size of PPCeO2/Cur and APPCeO2/Cur in 10% serum-­containing medium (n = 3). d, days. (E) Cur release profiles from APPCeO2/Cur with different thicknesses in H2O2 (0.1 mM) 
or PBS (pH 7.4, 0.01 M) (n = 3). h, hours. (F) Particle size distribution of APPCeO2/Cur incubated with H2O2 (0.1 mM) at 1, 2, and 8 hours. (G) TEM image of APPCeO2/
Cur. (H) TEM image of APPCeO2/Cur treated with 0.1 mM H2O2. (I) BBB transcytosis efficiency of APPCeO2/Cur (n = 3). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. 
(J) Representative imaging of AD mice treated with Cy5-­labeled APPCeO2/Cur and BPPCeO2/Cur. (K) Representative fluorescence imaging of brain slice treated with Cy5-­
labeled APPCeO2/Cur and BPPCeO2/Cur. Scale bar, 1 mm. Results are shown as the means ± SD. ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
4 of 18
(PBS; containing 10% serum) compared to PPCeO2/Cur because of 
steric hindrance of apoA-­I around neighboring PPCeO2/Cur (Fig. 2, 
C and D). ApoA-­I modification of APPCeO2/Cur not only provided 
high serum stability and increased peripheral circulation but also 
might contribute to BBB permeation.
Upon crossing BBB and accumulating in lesion, the PDA shell of 
APPCeO2/Cur would be specifically degraded by excessive ROS; 
consequently, the PCeO2 core would spread elastic polymer chains 
for rapid drug release. It was estimated that a suitable PDA thickness 
was crucial to a drug burst-­releasing mechanism. An excessively 
thick shell would impede the elastic release of the polymer because 
of incomplete degradation, while a thin shell cannot protect the 
PCeO2 structure, leading to premature drug leakage before reaching 
targeted cells. To optimize shell thickness, we prepared APPCeO2/
Cur nanoparticles at different thicknesses, including 6, 9, and 16 nm. 
As anticipated, nanoparticles with the 6-­nm shell were too fragile to 
maintain physical integrity, while those with 9-­ and 16-­nm shell 
thicknesses were stable (fig. S8). Furthermore, the shell with the 9-­nm 
thickness was easier to disintegrate in H2O2 compared with the 
16-­nm shell, which might facilitate drug release in oxidative stress 
lesions. As shown in Fig. 2E, Cur release from APPCeO2/Cur was 
hardly changed in PBS media (pH 7.4, 0.01 M) but accelerated after 
incubation in 0.1 mM H2O2. The results suggested that the ROS 
presence in the AD lesion (~0.1 mM H2O2) could degrade PDA 
shells and promote rapid drug release. In addition, Cur release from 
APPCeO2/Cur nanoparticles with the 9-­nm shell was faster than 
that of the 16-­nm counterpart, indicating that a thicker shell impris-
oned drug escape. Hence, nanoparticles with the 9-­nm shell were 
formulated for further exploration to assure drug stability during 
blood circulation and concentrated release within AD lesions. To in-
vestigate the progression of PDA disintegration, APPCeO2/Cur with 
the 9-­nm shell thickness was incubated in 0.1 mM H2O2 and the 
particle size change was monitored. As shown in Fig. 2F, particle size 
slightly decreased, while distribution remained uniform within the 
first 2 hours, indicating that the outer layer of the shell had gradual 
degradation and the nanostructure remained stable. However, size 
distribution was divided into three segments at 37°C after 8-­hour 
incubation, corresponding to PDA shell fragments, released PCeO2, 
and aggregates because of nanoparticle structural disintegration, 
which indicated that the structure of the PDA shell was disrupted by 
ROS. The morphological changes were further investigated using 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) before or 8 hours after in-
cubation with H2O2 (Fig. 2, G and H). The TEM image of APPCeO2/
Cur displayed a complete shell-­core structure. When incubated in 
H2O2 (0.1 mM) that mimics the AD lesions, the shell-­core structure 
depolymerized into piecemeal morphology, which was consistent 
with particle size distribution at 8 hours. These results demonstrated 
that the burst release of Cur resulted from degradation of the PDA 
shell and PCeO2 expansion in the presence of ROS, providing a pos-
sibility for rapid drug accumulation in AD lesions.
Bioinspired BBB crossing and intracerebral accumulation
ApoA-­I as a key functional component of high-­density lipoprotein 
(HDL) can mediate efficient HDL delivery into the brain because of 
high affinity to scavenger receptor class B type I at BBB (30). In-
spired by the high BBB permeability activity of HDL, a variety of 
apoA-­I biomimetic recombinant HDL brain target delivery systems 
had been developed for brain target drug delivery. However, apoA-­I 
biomimetic modification was mainly used for lipid-­related carriers 
by the amphiphilic α-­helical structure of apoA-­I. Therefore, to ex-
pand the application of apoA-­I in brain delivery, we developed the 
biomimetic delivery system that relied on covalent modification 
of apoA-­I.
The biosafety of preparations was evaluated by 3-­(4,5-­dimethyl-
2-­thiazolyl)-­2,5-­diphenyl-­2-­H-­tetrazolium (MTT) bromide at the 
cell level. MTT assay showed no obvious toxicity in BV-­2, SH-­SY5Y, 
and hCMEC/D3 cells (figs. S9 to S11). Subsequently, for establish-
ment of the transwell BBB model, hCMEC/D3 was seeded on the 
upper chamber, and transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) 
values were measured daily until TEER was reached and maintained 
at 140 ohms·cm2 (fig. S12). After incubation with carboxyfluorescein 
(FAM)–labeled APPCeO2/Cur (F-­APPCeO2/Cur), the medium in 
lower chambers was collected for fluorescence analysis. Meanwhile, 
the control group of FAM-­labeled bovine serum albumin (BSA)–
modified preparation (F-­BPPCeO2/Cur groups) was set, which pro-
vided the same biological stability while lacking active targeting BBB 
capability. As demonstrated in Fig. 2I, the transcytosis efficiency of 
F-­APPCeO2/Cur was ~20.9%, which was 4.4 times higher than that 
of F-­BPPCeO2/Cur groups (~4.7%). The results confirmed that cova-
lent modification of apoA-­I could mediate and promote BBB cross-
ing and penetration by the APPCeO2/Cur assembly.
To further investigate BBB transcytosis capacity and cerebrum 
accumulation in vivo, Cy5-­labeled apoA-­I and BSA were further 
conjugated onto PPCeO2/Cur to obtain Cy5-­APPCeO2/Cur and 
Cy5-­BPPCeO2/Cur. These preparations were administered to mice 
of the AD model, and living fluorescence imaging was meanwhile 
performed (Fig. 2J). As detected, Cy5-­APPCeO2/Cur exhibited a 
strong fluorescence signal in the brain area, while Cy5-­BPPCeO2/
Cur showed faint fluorescence and the signal in the brain area re-
mained nearly unchanged over time. Quantitative comparison of 
radiant efficiency in brain indicated 4.6-­fold stronger accumulation 
of Cy5-­APPCeO2/Cur than that of Cy5-­BPPCeO2/Cur at 24 hours 
(fig. S13), confirming the efficient BBB permeation and increased 
accumulation in lesion via apoA-­I mediation. Furthermore, to in-
vestigate the primary distribution regions of nanoparticles within 
the brain, we conducted fluorescence imaging of the brain slices. As 
shown in Fig. 2K, a notable overlap was observed between nanopar-
ticle (red) distribution and Aβ plaque (green) distribution areas in 
the Cy5-­APPCeO2/Cur group, particularly in the cerebral cortex 
and hippocampus. To evaluate drug distribution, we investigated 
the distribution of Cur in the brain and peripheral organs. As shown 
in fig. S14, the concentration of Cur in APPCeO2/Cur was much 
higher than that in the BPPCeO2/Cur group, further indicating that 
apoA-­I had better targeting efficacy. These findings indicated that 
apoA-­I–modified nanoparticles were capable of targeting AD le-
sions. This would be the foundation for the APPCeO2/Cur assembly 
to further accomplish microglial dysfunction reversion, Aβ clear-
ance, and ROS elimination.
Microglial state transition by burst drug release
In AD pathophysiology, Aβ-­activated microglia are activated by ex-
cessive Aβ deposition and express inflammatory properties (31). 
Reversing the microglial state from Aβ-­activated microglia toward 
normal microglia could potentiate AD treatment, because this pro-
cess facilitated secretion of anti-­inflammatory cytokines and phago-
cytosis for pathogenic proteins. Cur was reportedly capable of 
normalizing microglia in a concentration-­dependent manner, and it 
was essential to devise a burst drug-­releasing mechanism to achieve 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
5 of 18
localized Cur concentration (Fig. 3A). To investigate the effect of 
concentration dependence of Cur on reversion of Aβ-­activated mi-
croglia, we first established an Aβ-­activated microglial model to 
mimic AD pathology. In short, Aβ oligomers were introduced to 
incubate BV-­2 cells for hyperactive microglia. Subsequently, flow 
cytometry was used to detect CD80, a costimulatory molecule ex-
pressed on activated microglia and closely associated with neuroin-
flammation, to identify Aβ-­activated microglia. As shown in figs. 
S15 and S16, the CD80+ percentage of microglia was up-­regulated 
to ~80.5% and the ROS level was significantly increased after Aβ 
stimulation, indicating that microglial activation was successfully 
induced by Aβ to imitate AD pathophysiology. In addition, to mim-
ic ROS-­triggered burst release in the AD brain, APPCeO2/Cur with 
different Cur dosages was pretreated with 0.1 mM H2O2, followed 
by incubation with Aβ-­activated microglia. CD206 could improve 
brain repair and regeneration by increasing microglial phagocytosis 
and was used to label normalized microglia (Fig. 3B and fig. S17). In 
groups treated with PCeO2, PPCeO2, and APPCeO2, there was no 
notable effect on the expression of CD206 because of a lack of key 
therapeutic element of Cur. In APPCeO2/Cur–treated groups of low 
(1 μg/ml, L) or middle (5 μg/ml, M) dose of Cur, the CD80 level was 
slightly decreased in contrast to the expression increase of CD206. 
Moreover, Aβ-­activated microglia treated with a high Cur concen-
tration (10 μg/ml, H) of APPCeO2/Cur exhibited an obvious expres-
sion increase of CD206 and a decrease of CD80. Quantitative 
analysis demonstrated that the percentage of Aβ-­activated microglia 
(CD80+) decreased to 23.6% and that of normal microglia (CD206+) 
increased to 18.7% from 3.7%, representing a fivefold increase in the 
APPCeO2/Cur (H) (Pre-­H2O2) group. The results indicated that a 
high dose of Cur accomplished highly efficient regulation of Aβ-­
activated microglia to normal microglia in a concentration-­
dependent manner. Of note, there was no obvious marker change in 
the APPCeO2/Cur (H) group without H2O2 when compared with 
APPCeO2, further confirming the importance of rapid release in the 
ROS environment for microglial phenotypic transition.
Transforming from Aβ-­activated microglia to normal microglia, 
microglia would decrease the level of pro-­inflammatory factors and 
increase the expression of anti-­inflammatory factors. Hence, we 
Fig. 3. Microglial phenotypic transition further alleviated inflammatory reaction and promoted microglia-­mediated Aβ phagocytosis. (A) Schematic illustration 
of modulation of microglia by burst release of Cur. (B) Expression of the Aβ-­activated microglia biomarker CD80 and normal microglia biomarker CD206 of microglia in-
cubated with various concentrations of Cur nanoparticles for 48 hours. (C) Illustration for the experiment design, including the inflammatory cytokine analysis and SH-­
SY5Y conditioned culture. (D) Levels of pro-­inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-­α, IL-­1β, and IL-­6) and anti-­inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-­4, IL-­10, and TGF-­β) secreted by 
BV-­2 cells detected by ELISA (n = 3). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (E) Neuroprotective effects after inflammatory improvement (n = 6). One-­way 
ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (F) Aβ cellular uptake efficacy of Aβ-­activated microglia after treatment with different preparations (n = 3). One-­way ANOVA with 
Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. Results are shown as the means ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
6 of 18
used enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect repre-
sentative pro-­inflammatory factors including tumor necrosis factor–α 
(TNF-­α), interleukin-­6 (IL-­6), and IL-­1β and anti-­inflammatory 
factors including IL-­4, transforming growth factor–β (TGF-­β), and 
IL-­10 in culture supernatants. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 3C, condi-
tioned culture media in different groups were collected for further 
incubation with SH-­SY5Y cells. As illustrated in Fig. 3D, because 
of regulation of Aβ-­activated microglia to normal microglia in a 
concentration-­dependent manner, pro-­inflammatory cytokine lev-
els were increased in turn as the Cur concentration increased in 
APPCeO2/Cur (L)–, APPCeO2/Cur (M)–, and APPCeO2/Cur 
(H)–treated groups. The pro-­inflammatory cytokine level in the 
APPCeO2/Cur (H)–treated group was significantly decreased 
compared with those in other groups. On the contrary, the anti-­
inflammatory factor levels of IL-­4, TGF-­β, and IL-­10 were increased 
60.8, 80.2, and 98.2% than that of the PBS group. The tendency in 
cytokine secretion was consistent with the transformation of the 
microglial state, confirming that microglial phenotypic transition 
alleviated inflammatory reaction. We further assessed whether 
microglial state reversion could induce positive cytokine secretion 
to protect neuronal cells. As shown in Fig. 3E, cell viability of SH-­
SY5Y was severely decreased to 52.0% after cultivation with the con-
ditioned culture medium of the PBS group, indicating that Aβ 
toxicity and inflammatory factors secreted by Aβ-­activated microg-
lia aggravated neuronal damage. The survival rates of SH-­SY5Y cells 
incubated with conditioned culture media from PCeO2, PPCeO2, 
and APPCeO2 groups were higher than that from the PBS group 
because of the reduced secretion of inflammatory factors. As ex-
pected, the cell viability upon incubation with conditioned culture 
medium from the APPCeO2/Cur (H) group was significantly in-
creased to 79.6%, suggesting that expression of anti-­inflammatory 
factors because of normal microglial transformation could repair 
neuronal cell apoptosis. In short, state regulation of microglia could 
ameliorate the inflammatory microenvironment and recover neuro-
nal impairment. Moreover, function remodeling might promote mi-
croglial phagocytosis, which was the main route of intracerebral Aβ 
clearance. To investigate the Aβ phagocytic ability of microglia after 
phenotypic regulation, microglia were incubated with FAM-­Aβ 
after treatment with the different preparations. Consequently, 
APPCeO2/Cur (H) (Pre-­H2O2) demonstrated higher cellular inter-
nalization efficiency of Aβ, which confirmed that microglial regula-
tion from Aβ-­activated microglia toward normal microglia could 
facilitate phagocytosis for Aβ metabolism (Fig. 3F). Even though 
more Aβ has been phagocytosed into microglia, the undegraded Aβ 
detected by ELISA in the APPCeO2/Cur (L) (Pre-­H2O2) group was 
markedly decreased by 35.6% than that in the PBS group (fig. S18). 
With the increase in Cur dose, microglia reversed the state to nor-
mal in a concentration-­dependent manner, and the clearance capac-
ity was significantly enhanced in the APPCeO2/Cur (H) (Pre-­H2O2) 
group, and the undegraded Aβ was only 58.1% of APPCeO2/Cur (L) 
(Pre-­H2O2). These results illustrated that microglial transformation 
could promote Aβ uptake and clearance.
Disaggregating Aβ plaques for promoting 
microglia-­mediated Aβ clearance
The existence of excessive Aβ in AD pathology induces microglial 
activation, leading to phagocytosis impairment, which hinders Aβ 
phagocytosis and clearance by microglia, leading to continuous de-
posits (32). We herein demonstrated that burst drug release from 
APPCeO2/Cur could drive Aβ-­activated microglia toward normal 
microglia and enhance phagocytosis activity. However, the cross-­
linking structure of the Aβ plaque limited microglial phagocytosis 
and degradation. To facilitate the clearance of Aβ plaques by mi-
croglia, the important step was to depolymerize insoluble Aβ 
plaques into soluble forms. Nevertheless, more neurotoxic Aβ oligo-
mers were produced by disaggregation of Aβ plaques and conse-
quently caused severe neurotoxicity, known as the “dust-­raising” 
effect (33). Given that the hydrophobic segment in the polymer 
structure might had affinity to Aβ, PCeO2 that was exposed from 
APPCeO2/Cur after ROS trigger had the potential to disaggregate 
and form a polymer-­Aβ complex, which would weaken Aβ toxicity 
by impeding interaction to neuron cytomembranes and promote 
uptake by microglia.
The affinity to Aβ was the basis of Aβ capture and depolymeriza-
tion. To verify the affinity of polymers with Aβ, we applied molecu-
lar modeling assay for docking calculation and analyzing interaction 
between units of the polymer on the PCeO2 surface and amino acid 
residues of Aβ peptides. Docking analysis indicated that Aβ was 
bound by polymeric fragments in the helix structure of Aβ mono-
mers, oligomers, and β sheet structures of fibrils. The best docking 
score from 50 poses of the docked polymer chain was visualized in 
Fig. 4A and fig. S19. The interaction between fragments of polymer 
chains and residues (Phe20, Ala21, Val24, or Leu34) of the Aβ peptide 
would include van der Waals force and hydrogen bonds. Docking 
scores of best poses to Aβ1–42 oligomers and fibrils were −2.07 and 
−2.13 kcal/mol, respectively, which were similar to the monomer 
score (−2.28 kcal/mol). This finding indicated that the polymer had 
high affinity with Aβ monomers, oligomers, and fibrils.
To further investigate binding affinity, we used surface plasmon 
resonance (SPR) analysis to compare dynamic interaction of Aβ 
monomers/oligomers to the polymer, PCeO2, and released PCeO2. 
Tetramers of Aβ oligomers with a molecular weight about 18 kDa 
were prepared (fig. S20) and used in SPR analysis, wherein released 
PCeO2 represented APPCeO2/Cur pretreated with H2O2 and Cur 
removal by using ultrafiltration centrifugation. As expected, binding 
affinity values (KD) between the polymer and Aβ monomers, oligo-
mers, and fibrils are 5.50 × 10−6, 4.41 × 10−6, and 3.16 × 10−6 M (fig. 
S21), respectively, consistent with docking analysis, which further 
indicated high affinity between the polymer and pathological Aβ 
protein. Notably, the PCeO2 assembly showed a remarkable increase 
in binding affinity to both Aβ monomers and oligomers, as evi-
denced by higher affinity values of 5.12 × 10−7 and 3.03 × 10−7 M, 
respectively (Fig. 4B). Similar to dendrimers, we speculated that the 
multivalent binding effect from the extended structure of PCeO2 
could promote more Aβ assembly (34). Meanwhile, released PCeO2 
demonstrated similar affinity to Aβ monomers (KD = 5.67 × 10−7 M) 
and oligomers (KD = 4.06 × 10−7 M) compared with PCeO2, indicat-
ing that PCeO2 retained binding affinity to Aβ after liberation from 
APPCeO2/Cur. The lower affinity of PPCeO2/Cur to Aβ could not be 
simulated and calculated, which was attributed to PDA shell block-
ing. Moreover, we inspected disaggregation of Aβ fibrils by PCeO2 
using thioflavin-­T (ThT), which produced intense fluorescence upon 
binding to the β sheet of Aβ fibrils (35). Aβ fibrils were obtained by 
incubating the Aβ monomer for 7 days and subsequently treating 
with different preparations. As shown in Fig. 4C, the PBS group 
showed maximum ThT fluorescence because of the abundant β sheet 
structure in Aβ fibrils. By contrast, the fluorescence intensity of the 
PCeO2 group displayed a significant reduction (~33%), while those 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
7 of 18
treated with the polymer just decreased by 17%. These results not 
only verified the disaggregating ability of the polymer in Aβ plaques 
but further confirmed that multivalent binding of PCeO2 could ac-
celerate Aβ plaque decomposition. ThT fluorescence was almost un-
affected by the PPCeO2 assembly because of the shielding effect of 
the PDA shell. However, fluorescence intensity indicated a signifi-
cant decrease in released PCeO2, demonstrating that ROS could de-
stroy the PDA shell to liberate the PCeO2 core for remarkably 
accelerating disaggregation of Aβ plaques. To further prove that AP-
PCeO2/Cur could depolymerize Aβ plaques, we used TEM to inves-
tigate the morphological characteristics of Aβ fibrils. Typical amyloid 
fibrils could reach lengths of several micrometers and aggregate into 
plaques (fig. S22). When incubating Aβ1–42 fibrils with PCeO2 re-
leased from APPCeO2/Cur, the mature amyloid fibrils were seldom 
discerned, and numerous small and relatively amorphous aggregates 
were distinguished, demonstrating their excellent efficacy in depoly-
merizing Aβ1–42 fibrillization. Moreover, the Aβ affinity of PCeO2 
allowed it to capture Aβ and sequester Aβ intermolecular binding. 
Therefore, we speculated that PCeO2 could inhibit Aβ aggregation 
and evaluated the inhibitory effect using ThT fluorescence. As ex-
pected, the PCeO2 assembly gave high activity for inhibiting Aβ ag-
gregation (fig. S23). The fluorescence intensity was decreased in the 
presence of the polymer and PCeO2 nanoparticles. These results in-
dicated that the polymer together with CeO2 conjugation could not 
only disaggregate Aβ plaques but also inhibit Aβ aggregation. In ad-
dition, we further investigate the toxicity of the PCeO2/Aβ nano-
complex in neurons using the MTT assay. As shown in fig. S24, when 
Aβ oligomers were incubated with SH-­SY5Y, they exhibited signifi-
cant neurotoxicity with a cell survival rate of 33.27%. In contrast, 
when incubated with the PCeO2/Aβ nanocomplex, a significantly 
enhanced cell viability of 72.95% was observed. The reduced cyto-
toxicity might be attributed to the notion that the PCeO2/Aβ nano-
complex could prevent the Aβ oligomer from adhering to the cell 
membrane, thereby reducing neuronal damage.
To explore whether plaque disaggregation operated by PCeO2 
would weaken the “dust-­raising” effect, we here applied annexin 
Fig. 4. Disaggregating Aβ plaques and promoting Aβ clearance by microglia. (A) Scheme of APPCeO2/Cur to promote Aβ plaque disaggregation and clearance. Poly-
mer chain combined with both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues of the Aβ peptide. (B) SPR assay to measure the binding affinity of PCeO2 and released PCeO2 to Aβ 
monomers (or oligomers). (C) ThT fluorescence assay was adopted to monitor depolymerization of Aβ deposits (n = 6). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. 
(D) Apoptosis analysis of SH-­SY5Y cells after treatment with various preparations detected by flow cytometric analysis. (E) Aβ content in microglia after treatment with 
various preparations detected by ELISA (n = 3). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (F) Representative images of FAM-­Aβ distributed in BV-­2 cells after 
treatment with different preparations at 4 hours. Released PCeO2 represented H2O2 pretreatment and Cur removal by using ultrafiltration centrifugation. Results are 
shown as the means ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
8 of 18
V-­fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)/propidium iodide (PI) staining 
to detect nerve cell apoptosis (Fig. 4D and fig. S25). As a control, the 
Aβ oligomer group that referred to more toxic products from Aβ 
plaque disaggregation displayed more severe neurotoxicity (~49.98% 
of apoptosis) than Aβ fibrils (~37.01% of apoptosis). On the con-
trary, SH-­SY5Y cells treated with PCeO2 and released PCeO2 re-
duced the apoptosis percentage to 4.11 and 4.02%, respectively, 
demonstrating that PCeO2 could effectively prevent neuron apopto-
sis caused by the “dust-­raising” effect.
To further investigate the Aβ clearance effects of PCeO2 after pro-
moting Aβ disaggregation, we first detected the ability of Aβ uptake. 
As shown in fig. S26, after liberation from APPCeO2/Cur in the ROS 
microenvironment, PCeO2 enhanced the relative intracellular fluo-
rescence intensity in a concentration-­dependent manner and reached 
a maximum at 5 μg/ml, suggesting that PCeO2 facilitated Aβ endocy-
tosis by binding Aβ. The intracellular fate of Aβ in microglia was fur-
ther detected by ELISA analysis after another incubation for 4 hours. 
Even with a higher amount of Aβ1–42 internalized into microglia with 
the help of PCeO2, the minimum intracellular Aβ1–42 level (unde-
graded Aβ1–42) was detected in the presence of PCeO2 (Fig. 4E). To 
explain this phenomenon, the degradation process of Aβ was further 
explored by confocal laser scanning confocal microscopy (CLSM). 
The PBS group was visualized with apparent green fluorescence, es-
pecially on the surface of BV-­2 cells (Fig. 4F and fig. S27), implying 
that Aβ was easy to adhere onto microglial membranes rather than 
uptake into the cytoplasm. The PPCeO2 group showed a similar phe-
nomenon to the PBS group because of PDA shell shadowing. How-
ever, FAM-­Aβ incubated with PCeO2 or released PCeO2 shared 
slight green fluorescence on the cell membrane but intense fluores-
cence inside the cell, indicating that PCeO2 for assembly could en-
hance cellular translocation and mitigate cellular membrane adhesion 
of Aβ. Moreover, the strong yellow fluorescence indicated colocaliza-
tion of FAM-­Aβ (green) and lysosome (red), confirming that PCeO2 
promoted Aβ degradation via a lysosomal network of microglia. 
These results indicated that polymer chaperone could recognize and 
combine to surface-­exposed hydrophobic residues of the Aβ peptide, 
disaggregate Aβ plaques, and promote microglia-­mediated Aβ inter-
nalization as well as degradation in lysosomes.
Elimination of ROS and prevention of 
mitochondrial impairment
Activation of microglia induced by Aβ would generate excessive 
ROS, which subsequently aggravates mitochondrial dysfunction of 
microglia, resulting in attenuation of microglial phagocytosis and 
degradation (20). Therefore, eradicating overproduced ROS could 
prevent mitochondria from ROS stimulation and mitigate microg-
lial dysfunction. After administration, the APPCeO2/Cur assembly 
released the CeO2 nanoenzyme, which could eliminate ROS from 
continuous electron transfer between Ce3+ and Ce4+ atoms (Fig. 
5A). The Ce3+ content on the CeO2 surface played a key role in ROS 
scavenging, and we first investigated the percentage of Ce3+ to assess 
the antioxidant activity of PCeO2 by using x-­ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy (XPS). As shown in Fig. 5 (B and C), the Ce3+ fraction 
of PCeO2 showed a negligible change after coordinative modifica-
tion with the polymer, which would not diminish the antioxidant 
property of the CeO2 nanoenzyme. Although the Ce3+ fraction was 
reduced after incubation with 0.1 mM H2O2, PCeO2 would easily 
recover back into a reductive state after H2O2 depletion because of 
the easy formation of oxygen vacancies in the surface of the CeO2 
lattice structure, which further explained why CeO2 was able to 
continually scavenge ROS. Similar results were also observed in 
ROS elimination activity, which was measured by detecting the fluo-
rescence strength produced by interaction between H2O2 and 
2,7-­dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCFH). DCFH is a specific ROS 
probe that has no fluorescence and exhibits strong fluorescence 
when oxidized to 2,7-­dichlorofluorescein (DCF) by ROS. As shown 
in Fig. 5D, incubation with the PCeO2 group showed the weakest 
fluorescence intensity, which was the same as that with the CeO2 
group, indicating an advanced effect of ROS extirpation. These re-
sults further confirmed that surface modification of CeO2 would not 
affect the property of ROS elimination.
To assess the ROS-­obliterating effect of different preparations on 
the cell level, intracellular ROS were detected using the fluorescence 
strength of DCF. As shown in Fig. 5 (E and F), when stimulated by 
Aβ, BV-­2 cells presented intensive green fluorescence, indicating ex-
cessive Aβ-­triggered ROS accumulation. On the contrary, in the 
CeO2 group, green fluorescence in the cells rapidly reduced with 
intracellular ROS degradation. After quantification and calculation, 
the ROS level of the CeO2 group dropped by 55.6% compared to 
that of the PBS group. This result demonstrated that the CeO2 nano-
enzyme could effectively reduce microglial oxidative stress because 
of catalytic properties. In addition, PCeO2 and released PCeO2 
showed a similar decrease in intracellular ROS with a faint DCF 
fluorescence signal, indicating that CeO2 could maintain the ROS 
clearance ability while undergoing a complex release process. Be-
cause of PPCeO2, PPCeO2/Cur, and APPCeO2/Cur being wrapped 
in the PDA shell, a small amount of ROS could be cleared with PDA 
degradation, while the efficiency of ROS elimination was signifi-
cantly lower than that of CeO2.
Scavenging excessive ROS can minimize mitochondrial damage. 
Encouraged by the strong performance of PCeO2 in ROS oblitera-
tion, we further used double fluorescence 5,5′,6,6′-­tetrachloro-­1,1′,3, 
3′-­tetraethylimidacarbocyanine iodide (JC-­1) to examine the mito-
chondrial membrane potential of BV-­2 cells for confirming that 
ROS scavenging could restore mitochondrial function. JC-­1 was a 
mitochondrial potential indicator that enters in the matrix of the 
mitochondria to form aggregates with red fluorescence when the 
mitochondrial potential was high and only exists as a monomer 
with green fluorescence when the potential was lowered. As depict-
ed in Fig. 5G and fig. S28, the red-­green fluorescence ratio of the 
normal control group was 5.54, while this ratio decreased to 1.31 
after Aβ stimulation. Moreover, there was notable green fluores-
cence in cells treated with Aβ, indicating a notable reduction in 
mitochondrial membrane potential (fig. S29), confirming that ROS 
did lead to mitochondrial dysfunction. After treatment with prep-
arations that contained CeO2, BV-­2 cells showed a brighter red 
fluorescence, with a red-­green fluorescence ratio increasing to 2.7, 
suggesting that CeO2 could hinder depolarization of membrane 
potential by eliminating ROS. This tendency was consistent with 
ROS obliteration, further indicating positive correlation between 
ROS clearance and mitochondrial protection.
These results confirmed that APPCeO2/Cur could eliminate ROS 
induced by Aβ pathology and further facilitate the recovery of mito-
chondrial function, which not only described the protective effects 
of combined assembly therapy in the mitochondria through ROS 
elimination but also provided a promising therapeutic target in AD 
treatment by restoring mitochondrial function to switch off microg-
lial dysfunction.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
9 of 18
Restoration of memory impairment and cognitive deficit in 
the AD mouse model
To further evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of the APPCeO2/Cur as-
sembly in vivo, we first evaluated the in vivo safety of the formulation. 
Because of administration via intravenous injection, the hemolysis test 
was necessary before the pharmacodynamic investigation. As shown 
in fig. S30, the APPCeO2/Cur assembly displayed a negligible hemoly-
sis effect (<4%), indicating acceptable safety for intravenous adminis-
tration. We selected 8-­month-­old APPswe/PSEN1dE9 (C57BL/6) 
transgenic mice, which had a cognitive impairment and an early onset 
of the amyloid lesion. Subsequently, the animals were intravenously 
administered with APPCeO2/Cur (Cur at 5 mg/kg), PCeO2, and AP-
PCeO2 at the equivalent CeO2 concentration every 3 days for 4 weeks 
(Fig. 6A). C57BL/6 wild-­type (WT) mice injected with saline were set 
as the baseline group. Morris water maze (MWM) and nesting behav-
ioral experiments were adopted to assess amelioration effects of test 
groups on spatial learning and memory performance. As shown in 
Fig. 6B, saline-­treated AD mice revealed the longest escape latencies 
during learning periods of MWM, suggesting obvious deficits in 
learning and spatial memory. Although the PCeO2 assembly exhibited 
fine ROS clearance capability in vitro, the treated AD mice displayed 
similar therapeutic patterns to those treated with saline because of the 
absence of brain targeting. By contrast, APPCeO2-­treated AD mice 
exhibited a decreased escape latency time of 26.84 s, broadened per-
centage of time spent in the targeting quadrant, and more frequent 
times of platform crossings relative to PCeO2-­treated mice (Fig. 6C), 
demonstrating that the APPCeO2 assembly could improve animal 
memory and cognition because of highly efficient BBB permeation 
and ROS elimination of the test samples. Moreover, the intended ther-
apeutic efficacy could be further enhanced by APPCeO2-­mediated 
burst release delivery of Cur that could recover microglial dysfunction 
and subsequently ameliorate neurological damage. Afterward, we ob-
served the nesting behavior of AD mice to evaluate the hippocampal 
function of the animals after different treatments. As illustrated in Fig. 
6D, it was difficult for AD mice treated with saline to establish mass 
and complete nest because of cognitive deficiency. On contrary, AD 
mice in the APPCeO2/Cur treatment group revealed a positive nesting 
ability, showing examples of gathered nest with tissue scraps. In addi-
tion, AD mice administered with APPCeO2/Cur scored slightly lower 
points to WT mice, which were significantly higher than values 
Fig. 5. ROS elimination improved mitochondrial impairment. (A) Schematic illustration of ROS clearance of CeO2 in assembly and mitochondria protection. (B) XPS 
analysis of the Ce 3d orbital showing binding energy levels of Ce3+ (shaded) and Ce4+. A.U., arbitrary units. (C) Quantification of the Ce3+ percentage of the CeO2 surface. 
(D) Fluorescence intensity to demonstrate the enzyme activity of CeO2 in ROS elimination (n = 3). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (E) Analysis of the 
intracellular ROS level in Aβ-­stimulated BV-­2 cells after being incubated with different preparations (n = 3). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (F) Repre-
sentative images of the intracellular ROS level in Aβ-­stimulated BV-­2 cells after incubation with different preparations. (G) Mitochondrial membrane potential of BV-­2 cells 
in the presence of Aβ and after treatment with different preparations. PCeO2 (Pre-­H2O2) and PCeO2 (H2O2 depletion) referred to H2O2 pretreatment and 5 days after the 
depletion of H2O2, respectively. Released PCeO2 represented H2O2 pretreatment and Cur removal by using ultrafiltration centrifugation. Results are shown as the 
means ± SD. ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
10 of 18
obtained from saline-­treated mice (Fig. 6E). The findings in nesting 
behavior further verified that APPCeO2/Cur could attenuate cognitive 
and memory deficits in the AD mouse model.
Reverse microglial dysfunction and amelioration of the 
inflammation microenvironment
To further demonstrate roles of the APPCeO2/Cur assembly in the 
microglial state, we analyzed immunofluorescence images of the mi-
croglial state collected from APP/PS1 transgenic mice. As shown in 
Fig. 7A and fig. S31, obvious enhancement in the green fluorescence 
strength of CD80 was observed in the hippocampus of AD mice 
compared to WT mice, indicating that microglia were activated in 
the brain of AD mice. The treatment with APPCeO2 could slightly 
decrease the CD80 signal, and CD80-­positive microglia decreased to 
29.5%, which illustrated a decrease in Aβ-­activated microglial pro-
portion. This result might due to the notion that PCeO2 was released 
from APPCeO2 after crossing BBB, which played positive roles in 
Aβ and ROS clearance. Notably, the fluorescence intensity of CD80 
was obviously attenuated, and that of CD206 was markedly ele-
vated (CD206-­positive microglia increased to 45.4%) when treated 
with APPCeO2/Cur, suggesting that the APPCeO2/Cur assembly 
could efficiently reverse the microglial state by burst releasing the 
Fig. 6. Cognition and memory deficit rescue of APPCeO2/Cur in AD mice. (A) Time course of drug administration and therapeutic evaluation. (B) Escape latency, per-
cent time spent on the targeted quadrant, and times across the platform of WT mice and AD mice treated with saline, PCeO2, APPCeO2, and APPCeO2/Cur (n = 16). One-­
way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (C) Representative path tracings of mice in MWM. (D) Representative images of nest behavior. (E) Scores for nest behavior 
(n = 16). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. Results are shown as the means ± SD. *P < 0.05 and ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
11 of 18
Fig. 7. Reversion of microglia and clearance of Aβ deposition. (A) Immunostaining of CD80 and CD206 in the hippocampus after treatment with different formulations. Green 
represents Aβ-­activated or normal microglial marker stained with antibody CD80 or CD206, red represents microglia stained with Iba-­1, and blue represents nuclei stained with 
DAPI. Scale bars, 100 μm. (B) Levels of TNF-­α, IL-­1β, IL-­6, IL-­4, IL-­10, and TGF-­β in the brain treated with different preparations were determined by ELISA kits (n = 3). One-­way 
ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (C) Immunostaining of Aβ plaques in the hippocampus of mice treated with different formulations for 4 weeks. Green represents Aβ 
stained with antibody 6E10, and blue represents nuclei stained with DAPI. Scale bars, 100 μm. (D) Immunofluorescence staining quantitative analysis of Aβ levels in the brains of 
normal and AD mice treated with different formulations (n = 3). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (E) Representative images of Aβ phagocytosis in microglia after 
treatment with different preparations. Green represents the phagosome stained with antibody CD68, red represents microglia stained with Iba-­1, and purple represents Aβ 
stained with antibody 6E10. Scale bars, 20 μm. (F) Quantification of the phagosome (n = 3). One-­way ANOVA with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc test. (G) Representative images of HE 
and Nissl staining in the hippocampus after treatment with different formulations. Scale bars, 100 μm. Results are shown as the means ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
12 of 18
component of Cur. Furthermore, a reversion in the microglial state 
from Aβ-­activated microglia toward normal microglia could relieve 
the inflammation microenvironment. As shown in Fig. 7B, a higher 
expression of inflammatory factors including TNF-­α, IL-­1β, and IL-­
6 was observed in the saline group, which indicated that microglial 
activation induced the inflammatory response in the AD brain. On 
contrary, AD mice treated with APPCeO2 displayed a significant de-
crease in TNF-­α and IL-­1β levels, while anti-­inflammatory cytokines 
showed subtle changes, because APPCeO2 could inhibit microglial 
activation by eliminating Aβ. Moreover, inflammatory factors fell by 
61.4, 60.1, and 63.1% after treatment with APPCeO2/Cur, respec-
tively, indicating that the APPCeO2/Cur assembly could effectively 
inhibit the expression of inflammatory cytokines by regulating the 
microglial state. In addition, anti-­inflammatory cytokines including 
IL-­4, IL-­10, and TGF-­β remarkably increased in the APPCeO2/Cur 
group, which suggested that the inflammation environment in the 
brain was explicitly improved after the treatment.
Reduced amyloid pathology and oxidative 
stress modulation
Given that the PCeO2 core of APPCeO2/Cur has Aβ affinity and a 
clearance effect in vitro, we further explored Aβ levels in AD mice 
that received different treatments using immunofluorescence stain-
ing. The results demonstrated that the level of Aβ was similar in the 
AD group and PCeO2 group (Fig. 7, C and D, and fig. S32), while 
that of APPCeO2 groups was significantly decreased in study mice. 
This finding illustrated that PCeO2 alone would not effectively re-
duce the content of Aβ because of BBB restriction. The enhanced 
permeability of APPCeO2 across BBB allowed the PCeO2 core to be 
carried to AD lesions and Aβ to be captured for microglial phagocy-
tosis. Compared with the APPCeO2 mice, an obvious reduction of 
Aβ deposition was observed in the APPCeO2/Cur group. The en-
couraging result might be ascribed to the phenotypic reversal of mi-
croglia by concentrated Cur.
To clarify the process of microglial capture and Aβ degradation, 
we used immunofluorescence analysis by labeling microglial phago-
somes, Aβ, and microglia. As shown in Fig. 7 (E and F), Aβ plaques 
(6E10, purple) could be clearly observed in AD mice, which were 
surrounded by few microglia (Iba-­1, red) with negligible phago-
somes (CD68, green) released for Aβ phagocytosis. This result indi-
cated that Aβ accumulation would impair microglial function and 
reduce Aβ phagocytosis in the AD mouse model, and that of the 
PCeO2 group indicated less reversion of microglial dysfunction be-
cause of BBB restriction. When compared to a few microglia (red) 
that infiltrated near Aβ plaques and distribution of CD68 phago-
somes in APPCeO2-­treated mice, APPCeO2/Cur treatment mark-
edly disintegrated Aβ plaques by up-­regulating CD68 expression and 
improving microglial dysfunction. The results confirmed that apoA-­I 
biomimicking the APPCeO2/Cur assembly could release Cur and 
PCeO2 therapy elements simultaneously, which would readjust mi-
croglial dysfunction and promote Aβ clearance, respectively, and 
jointly contribute to ameliorating AD pathology in study mice.
In addition, oxidative stress equally played an important role in 
the pathogenesis and progression of AD. An excessive amount of 
ROS in the AD microenvironment would cause damage to neurons 
and activate microglia. Thus, to investigate the ROS scavenging abil-
ity of nanoassembly, the level of ROS was detected after treatment. A 
significant increase in the ROS level was observed in the brain of AD 
mice compared to WT mice, which indicated that oxidative stress 
was evident in the AD brain. Unexpectedly, alleviation of oxidative 
stress was observed in AD mice of APPCeO2 treatment (fig. S33), 
which illustrated that APPCeO2 could quickly respond to the high 
level of ROS in the AD lesions and eliminate excessive ROS via the 
catalysis of the CeO2 enzyme. Notably, the level of ROS showed a 
more significant decrease after treatment with APPCeO2/Cur for 
4 weeks. This phenomenon demonstrated that CeO2 was not enough 
to sweep completely the ROS in the microenvironment, and pheno-
typic reversal of microglia was also important for the improvement 
of the ROS microenvironment.
Ameliorating neuron damage
Although the level of Aβ deposit and oxidative stress were signifi-
cantly alleviated after treatment, the survival of neurons in the brain 
should be considered. To further evaluate the efficacy of various 
preparations in ameliorating neuron damage, we performed Nissl 
and hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining to monitor neuronal in-
jury cells in the brain. The Nissl body of normal nerve cells would 
display a strong color, which was used for assessing neuroprotec-
tion. As shown in Fig. 7G and figs. S34 and S35, AD mice treated 
with saline showed a lighter color and neuron hypocellularity in the 
hippocampus and cortex compared to the WT group, indicating se-
rious damage of neurons in AD mice of saline treatment. Neverthe-
less, the APPCeO2/Cur treatment group showed improvement in 
the damaged neurons, while the APPCeO2 treatment group could 
not present clear amelioration, demonstrating that Cur regulating 
microglial dysfunction was essential for the recovery of neural dis-
order and neural loss. Moreover, after treatment with APPCeO2/
Cur, neuronal shrinkage, nucleus pyknosis, and cytoplasmic con-
densation were all remarkably ameliorated in the hippocampus and 
cortex of AD mice.
Although the APPCeO2/Cur assembly shared an improved ther-
apeutic efficacy on AD, its biosafety still needed to be studied. After 
4 weeks of treatment with intravenous injections, major organs in-
cluding the heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney were collected for 
HE staining. There was no obvious histopathological lesion in any of 
the tissues from all study groups (fig. S36). Blood biochemical in-
dexes indicated that the concentration of alanine transaminase, al-
kaline phosphatase, urea nitrogen, and creatinine slightly changed 
compared to values of saline-­treated mice (fig. S37), suggesting that 
the assembly of CeO2 treatment for 4 weeks would cause negligible 
liver and kidney toxicity. The results demonstrated that the AP-
PCeO2/Cur assembly could not only significantly alleviate neuron 
damage but also have satisfactory biocompatibility and biosafety as 
well, which should exhibit a potential perspective for continuing 
clinical application in the future.
DISCUSSION
Aβ antibodies of aducanumab and lecanemab have been approved 
by the Food and Drug Administration for AD therapy (36,  37), 
which provides the right therapeutic target and research direction. 
However, clinical data of Aβ antibodies reveal limited efficiency and 
immune inflammation in AD treatment (38). The principal reasons 
are the attenuation of phagocytosis and the release of inflammatory 
factors because of the dysfunction of microglia (39), which suggest 
that the Aβ clearance strategy can be optimized for developing more 
effective and safe drugs. In patients with AD, the accumulation of 
Aβ and ROS persistently activates microglia, which will stimulate 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
13 of 18
inflammatory responses. As a result, selective tuning of the microg-
lial state from Aβ-­activated microglia toward normal microglia was 
urgently needed for inflammatory alleviation, Aβ clearance, and 
ROS elimination. In the present study, we designed a biomimetic 
elasticity compressed drug assembly, which could regulate the mi-
croglial state in a burst-­releasing manner to remove pathogenic Aβ 
and cascade product ROS.
The local concentration of drug at the lesions is a critical deter-
minant of therapeutic efficacy, particularly for natural polyphenol 
drugs that display concentration-­dependent pharmacological ef-
fects (40). For achieving burst drug release, it is usually necessary to 
provide external triggering conditions, such as light, heat, ultra-
sound, etc. (23, 24, 41). Therefore, we designed a drug assembly us-
ing a polymer of thermally sensitive deformation, which expressed 
rapid release behavior in the pathological microenvironment of AD 
with high levels of ROS (Fig. 2E). This strategy of thermal deforma-
tion–inspired drug loading and ROS-­triggered burst drug release 
could be expanded to the treatment of other diseases, such as cancer 
treatments that need burst drug release for effective tumor killing 
and avoid drug resistance. In addition, effective BBB penetration is 
another tremendous challenge for nanotechnology-­based drug de-
livery for the treatment of brain disease (42). In this study, the 
apoA-­I–decorated biomimetic drug assembly improved drug bio-
stability and intracerebral shuttling (Fig. 2, D and J). From this as-
pect, apoA-­I modification could be also expanded into another drug 
delivery system for the treatment of other brain diseases.
In AD pathology, Aβ overstimulation leads to microglial dys-
function with impaired phagocytosis and degradation function, 
which results in the Aβ accumulation and spreading in the brain 
(43). Moreover, the accumulation and spreading of Aβ further stim-
ulate microglial hyperactivation, triggering a vicious cycle of Aβ ac-
cumulation and microglial dysfunction (32). We observed that a 
burst drug release mechanism from APPCeO2/Cur accomplished a 
highly efficient state from Aβ-­activated microglia toward normal 
microglia in a concentration-­dependent manner (Fig. 3B). More-
over, transforming to normal microglia would decrease the level of 
pro-­inflammatory factors (including IL-­1β, IL-­6, and TNF-­α) and 
increase the expression of anti-­inflammatory factors (including IL-­
4, IL-­10, and TGF-­β) (Fig. 3D), which could recover neuronal dam-
age (Fig. 3E). Furthermore, phagocytosis and the clearance ability of 
microglia were significantly enhanced after the function reversal of 
microglia (Fig. 3F and fig. S18), which could effectively reduce the 
Aβ burden in the brain.
Nevertheless, restoration of microglial function was insufficient 
for the clearance of Aβ accumulation because of the fact that even 
normal microglia found it hard to clear insoluble Aβ plaques. There-
fore, we designed Aβ-­affinity polymers to disaggregate Aβ plaques 
(Fig. 4C) and form a low-­toxicity complex (fig. S24) for effective Aβ 
clearance by microglia (Fig. 4, E and F). In summary, reversing mi-
croglial dysfunction could restore phagocytosis and the degradation 
capability of microglia for effective Aβ clearance, which could re-
lieve the Aβ burden in the brain and disrupt the vicious cycle of Aβ 
accumulation and microglial dysfunction. This might provide a pio-
neering idea for AD drug development.
However, completely reversing microglial dysfunction needs not 
only state regulation from Cur but also clearance of excessive ROS in 
lesions to preserve the function of microglia (20). The CeO2 nanoen-
zyme exhibited a sustainable ROS clearance ability and prevented mi-
tochondrial damage of microglia (Fig. 5, E to G). To further evaluate 
the synergetic efficacy of Cur and CeO2 in vivo, we observed that the 
intravenous administration of APPCeO2/Cur significantly reduced in-
tracerebral inflammatory factors, Aβ burden, and ROS accumulation 
via synergy of Cur and PCeO2 (Fig. 7, A to E) and further reversed 
neurological damage, resulting in remarkable memory amelioration 
and cognition impairments in AD mice (Fig. 6, B to E). Besides, CeO2, 
as an inorganic nanomaterial with high biosafety, holds significant po-
tential for the therapy of central nervous system diseases (44). How-
ever, the long-­term safety of its administration requires careful 
consideration. By modifying the surface of inorganic nanomaterials, it 
is possible to optimize their metabolic behavior in the brain, thereby 
enhancing both therapeutic efficacy and safety (45).
Collectively, a biomimetic assembly with intracerebral elastic 
spreading for concentration-­dependent drug therapy could open a 
promising avenue for reversing Aβ-­induced microglial dysfunction 
and suppressing AD progression and related central nervous degen-
erative diseases. Our research had ameliorated principal pathologies 
triggered by Aβ-­activated microglia. However, phosphorylated tau 
aggregation, as another key pathology of AD, was not further inves-
tigated. Microglia activated by tau not only worsen the intracranial 
environment but also influence AD progression by recruiting pe-
ripheral immune cells (46, 47). The recovery of tau-­activated mi-
croglia will require additional studies, but our therapeutic strategy 
provides an important conceptual framework that will help guide 
future experiments.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
ApoA-­I was extracted from human plasma precipitate Cohn’s Fraction 
IV in our laboratory according to an established protocol. Cohn’s 
Fraction IV was a gift from Tonrol Biological Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd. (Anhui, China). Cur was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical 
Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Aβ1–42 (A9810) was obtained 
from Sigma-­Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, US), and FAM-­Aβ1–42 was ob-
tained from Anhui Guoping Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Anhui, 
China). MTT, TNF-­α (YFXEM00031), IL-­1β (YFXEM00028), IL-­6 
(YFXEM00045), IL-­4 (YFXEM00057), IL-­10 (YFXEM00065), TGF-­β 
(YFXEM00561), and Aβ1–42 (YFXEH00219) ELISA and bicinchoninic 
acid (YWB002) protein assay kits were purchased from YIFEIXUE BIO 
TECH (Jiangsu, China). Hoechst 33342 trihydrochloride (KGA1805-­10) 
and annexin V-­FITC/PI apoptosis detection kit (KGA1102-­100) were 
obtained from Jiangsu Keygen Biotech Co., Ltd. APC anti-­mouse 
CD206 (BioLegend,104713), PE anti-­mouse CD206 MMR Antibody 
(BioLegend, 141715), and Anti-­β-­Amyloid Antibody (BioLegend, 
803014) were purchased from BioLegend. The Reactive Oxygen 
Species Assay Kit (DCFH-­DA, S0033S) and mitochondrial mem-
brane potential assay kit (JC-­1, C2006) were obtained from Beyotime 
Biotechnology. Anti-­Iba1 antibody (Abcam, EPR16588) and Anti-­
CD68 antibody (Abcam, EPR20545) were purchased from Abcam. 
4′,6-­diamidino-­2-­phenylindole (DAPI, D3571) and Lyso Tracker-­
Red (L12492) were bought from Invitrogen Corporation. Dulbecco’s 
modified eagle’s medium (DMEM) and fetal bovine serum (FBS) 
were from Gibco.
Cell lines
The immortalized murine microglial cell line (BV-­2), human cerebral 
microvessel endothelial cell line (hCMEC/D3), and human neuro-
blastoma cell line (SH-­SY5Y) were obtained from Cell Bank of the 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
14 of 18
Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China). The cells were cultured 
in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 0.01% penicillin/streptomycin 
under 37°C and 5% CO2 condition, and the culture medium was 
replaced every 2 days before the experiment.
Animals
APPswe/PSEN1dE9 (C57BL/6) transgene mice and C57BL/6 WT 
mice (male, 8-­month-­old) were purchased from Jiangsu Aniphe 
Biolaboratory Inc. (Jiangsu, China, AM03012). APPswe/PSEN1dE9 
(C57BL/6) expressed a chimeric mouse/human amyloid precursor pro-
tein (Mo/HuAPP695swe) and a mutant human presenilin 1 (PS1-­dE9). 
The animal use protocol was approved by China Pharmaceutical 
University Ethics Committee and in compliance with guidelines of 
the National Institute of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Labo-
ratory Animals. The study animals were housed in a pathogen-­free 
facility with a 12-­hour light/dark cycle and given access to food and 
water ad libitum.
Preparation and characteristic of nanoparticles
To obtain the pNIPAAm-­co-­pAAm polymer, 3 g of NIPAAm, 0.62 g 
of AAm, 70 μl of N,N,N′,N″,N″-­pentamethyldiethylenetriamine, 
and 0.03 g of bis[2-­(2′-­bromoisobutyryloxy) ethyl] disulfide were 
dissolved in a mixed solvent of 36 ml of deionized water and 24 ml 
of methanol in a Schlenk flask, the mixture was stirred at room 
temperature for 15 min, and then the sample was degassed under 
vacuum. CuBr (0.02 g) was added to the above mixture, the flask 
was filled with nitrogen, and the mixture was thawed and stirred 
for 12 hours at room temperature. Afterward, the solvent was 
evaporated and the crude product was dissolved in water. The 
final pNIPAAm-­co-­pAAm polymer was purified by dialysis. For 
synthetic polymers with different LCSTs, similar procedures 
were used, except for addition of different mass ratios of the initial 
monomers (NIPAAm:AAm, 70:25, 87.5:12.5, and 90:10). The 
LCSTs were analyzed using ultraviolet-­visible absorption spec-
troscopy, and the composition was confirmed by 1H NMR and 
13C NMR. The molecular weight was detected by gel perme-
ation chromatography.
To bind the above polymer to the CeO2 surface (PCeO2), the di-
sulfide linkage of the polymer with tris(2-­carboxyethyl) phosphine 
hydrochloride was reduced for 30 min at 25°C. Then, the polymer 
was added to 8 ml of CeO2 in a 1:4 weight ratio (polymer:CeO2, 1:4), 
and the mixture was stirred for 48 hours to obtain PCeO2 nanopar-
ticles. The resultant PCeO2 nanoparticles (10 mg) and Cur [0.4 mg 
in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)] were mixed in 2 ml of trisphosphate-­
buffered saline (25 mM tris and 0.15 mM NaCl) buffer at 41°C and 
stirred for 10 min, dopamine (DA) solution was added to the above 
solution, and the concentration was kept at 0.1 mg/ml for 1 hour. 
Subsequently, the product with a 100-­kDa molecular weight cutoff 
was purified by centrifugation filtration to obtain PDA-­coated nano-
assembly (PPCeO2/Cur). To enhance BBB permeation, apoA-­I was 
added to PPCeO2/Cur (PPCeO2/Cur:apoA-­I, 1:0.1, w/w) solution 
and incubated overnight to obtain APPCeO2/Cur. Particle size dis-
tribution and the zeta potential of nanoparticles were measured at 
37° and 41°C, respectively, using dynamic light scattering (DLS; 
Zetasizer Nano ZS, Malvern Panalytical Ltd., UK). Entrapment effi-
ciency (EE%) and drug loading (DL%) were calculated as follows: 
EE% = (quantity of Cur in nanoparticles)/(quantity of Cur initially 
added) × 100%; DL% = (quantity of Cur in nanoparticles)/(quantity 
of drug-­loaded nanoparticles) × 100%.
Cur release from APPCeO2/Cur and nanoparticle stability
The ROS-­triggered burst release of Cur was performed in PBS or 
PBS containing 0.1 mM H2O2. Briefly, 2 ml of APPCeO2/Cur with 
variable shell thickness was placed in a dialysis bag (molecular 
weight cutoff, 3500) and then the sample was suspended in 100 ml 
of PBS medium at 37°C under horizontal agitation (150 rpm) for 
48 hours. At predetermined intervals, 1 ml of medium was collected 
and replenished with fresh PBS; the Cur concentration in PBS was 
quantified using a high-­performance liquid chromatography assay. 
Cumulative release percentage (%) = (cumulative weight of Cur in 
PBS)/(weight of total Cur in nanoparticles) × 100%.
To depict the relationship between drug release and shell disinte-
gration, the particle size change and morphology of APPCeO2/Cur 
in PBS containing 0.1 mM H2O2 at 1, 2, and 8 hours were monitored 
using DLS and TEM (H-­600, Hitachi Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). To assess 
the stability of PPCeO2/Cur and APPCeO2/Cur under physiological 
conditions, PPCeO2/Cur and APPCeO2/Cur were mixed in PBS 
(pH 7.4, 0.01 M) and the sample was incubated at room tempera-
ture; changes in particle size and polydispersity index using DLS 
were measured every day for 7 days.
BBB transwell model establishment and BBB 
penetration assay
We established a BBB transwell model to further investigate the BBB 
transcytosis ability of the nanoparticles. Briefly, hCMEC/D3 cells 
were seeded on the upper chamber of the transwell (0.4-­μm pore 
size and 12-­mm diameter) at a density of 5 × 103 and TEER values 
were recorded daily by the electrical resistance system (Millipore, 
US). When the TEER value exceeds 140 ohms·cm2 and remains 
above, it indicates cell confluence and the monolayer is achieved. 
We used the transwell model to assess BBB penetration of the for-
mulations. FAM-­labeled apoA-­I and BSA were synthesized by dis-
solved FAM and apoA-­I or BSA (mole ratio, 10:1) in PBS (pH 8.5), 
and the solution was stirred overnight. The product was purified by 
dialysis against PBS for 24 hours. Subsequently, fluorescence-­labeled 
preparations (FAM-­labeled apoA-­I or BSA) were added to the upper 
chamber at time 0 and incubated for 4 hours, followed by collection of 
medium from the lower chamber at 0, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 120 min 
and measurement of fluorescence intensity using a fluorescence 
spectrophotometer (Varioskan LUX, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, 
US) to quantify BBB permeation of the nanoparticles.
In vivo BBB crossing of nanoassemblies was investigated using 
an imaging system (VISQUE, Vieworks Co., Ltd., Gyeonggi-­do, 
South Korea). Briefly, apoA-­I was labeled with near-­infrared dye 
Cy5, and Cy5-­APPCeO2/Cur and Cy5-­labeled BSA-­modified Cy5-­
BPPCeO2/Cur (control) were intravenously administered to AD 
mice (n = 3). Fluorescence images of animals were taken at 1, 2, 4, 8, 
12, and 24 hours under anesthesia. To analyze biodistribution of 
Cy5-­APPCeO2/Cur ex vivo, mice were euthanized at 24 hours 
postinjection, and the brains were collected for fluorescence imag-
ing and analysis using Living Image Software. The brains were fur-
ther fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 hours, embedded into the 
paraffin, sectioned in a horizontal plane, and processed. The pri-
mary antibody (anti-­β-­Amyloid 6E10, 803004, BioLegend) prepared 
in blocking buffer was applied overnight at 4°C, followed by a sec-
ondary antibody (Goat anti-­mouse IgG Alexa Flour 488, GB25301, 
Servicebio) for 30-­min incubation at room temperature. The sec-
tions were stained with DAPI to show nuclei and were immediately 
observed under a fluorescence microscope.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
15 of 18
We further evaluated the in vivo distribution of the drug by mea-
suring the concentration of Cur in the brain and liver. ICR mice were 
divided into groups and intravenously administered with APPCeO2/
Cur and BPPCeO2/Cur [with Cur (12 mg/kg)]. Major organs including 
the brain and liver were harvested at 1, 2, 4, 8, and 12 hours. The con-
centrations of Cur were determined using high-­performance liquid 
chromatography–mass spectrometry (LCMS2020, Shimadzu, Japan).
Effects of microglial state transition on neuroprotection and 
uptake efficacy
We analyzed the specific microglial markers CD206 and CD80 us-
ing flow cytometry to explore microglial phenotypic transition po-
tentially induced by rapid Cur release. BV-­2 cells were cultured in a 
24-­well plate for 12 hours before experiment. Subsequently, cells 
were co-­incubated with Aβ oligomers (10 μM) to stimulate microg-
lial activation. These cells were collected to detect CD80 using flow 
cytometry, a specific marker of Aβ-­activated microglia, to evaluate 
the effect on microglia activation. The culture supernatant was col-
lected and centrifuged, followed by the determination of hydrogen 
peroxide concentration using the hydrogen peroxide assay kit (Bey-
otime Biotech Inc., S0038). To mimic ROS-­triggered burst release in 
the AD brain, APPCeO2/Cur with different Cur dosages was pre-
treated with H2O2 (0.1 mM). Thereafter, the medium was replaced 
by a fresh drug-­containing medium and incubated for 48 hours. 
Cells were collected and then labeled with PE-­CD206 and APC-­
CD80, followed by flow cytometry analysis (FACS Celesta, Becton, 
Dickinson and Company, NJ, US).
To measure the variation of cellular pro-­inflammatory and anti-­
inflammatory cytokines with phenotypic transition, BV-­2 cells were 
cultured in a 24-­well plate at a density of 1 × 105 cells per well. After 
incubation at 37°C for 24 hours, the medium was changed to serum-­
free DMEM and cells were stimulated with 10 μM Aβ1–42 and nano-
assemblies for 48 hours. Subsequently, the supernatant was collected 
to quantify levels of pro-­inflammatory cytokines (TNF-­α, IL-­1β, 
and IL-­6) and anti-­inflammatory cytokines (IL-­4, IL-­10, and TGF-­β) 
by using mouse TNF-­α, IL-­1β, IL-­6, IL-­4, IL-­10, and TGF-­β ELISA 
kits (YIFEIXUE BIO TECH, Jiangsu, China).
Pro-­inflammatory factors secreted by microglia may repair neu-
ron damage. To verify this hypothesis, SH-­SY5Y cells were seeded in 
a 96-­well plate (1 × 104 cells per well) and cells were cultured for 
12 hours. Then, the cultured medium was replaced with 10 μM Aβ1–42 
for 24 hours to induce neuronal injury. The medium containing 
cultured microglia was added for another 24 hours; cells incubated 
with FBS-­free medium were used as the control. Subsequently, 0.5% 
MTT solution was added to the plate. After 4 hours, the solution was 
replaced with DMSO and the absorbance was measured using a mi-
croplate reader (Varioskan LUX, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, US) 
at 490 nm.
BV-­2 cells (1 × 105 cells per well) were seeded in a 24-­well plate 
and cultured for 12 hours. Subsequently, cells were co-­incubated 
with Aβ oligomers (10 μM) to stimulate microglial activation. BV-­2 
cells were treated with different preparations for 48 hours, and cells 
were washed three times with PBS. FBS-­free medium containing 
FAM-­Aβ1–42 (2 μg/ml) was added for another 4 hours. The cells were 
rinsed and analyzed for uptake efficacy using flow cytometry assay.
Aβ adsorption and disaggregation
The affinity between the polymer and Aβ would influence adsorp-
tion and disaggregation of Aβ deposition. To detect binding affinity, 
the Aβ1–42 peptide was dissolved in hexafluoroisopropanol and the 
solvent was evaporated by nitrogen flow to prepare an Aβ1–42 film. 
Afterward, DMSO was added to redissolve Aβ1–42 (5 mM) and the 
peptide was depolymerized into a monomer using ultrasound for 
10 min in an ice water bath. Aβ1–42 oligomers were prepared by 
incubating 100 μM monomeric Aβ1–42 in PBS at 37°C for 24 hours.
To investigate the molecular weight of Aβ1–42 oligomers, native 
gel electrophoresis was used. Aβ1–42 oligomers were prepared and 
aggregated in PBS at 37°C for 24 hours. Thereafter, Aβ1–42 oligomers 
were separated on 10 to 20% gradient tris-­tricine gels (Thermo Fish-
er Scientific, LC2672). The gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant 
blue, and images were acquired through a digital camera.
The binding ability between the nanoassembly and Aβ1–42 monomer 
and oligomers was analyzed using Open SPR instrument (Nicoya Ltd., 
ON, Canada). N-­Hydroxysuccinimide and ethyl (dimethylaminopropyl)-­
carbodiimide (1/1, mol/mol) flow through the sensor chip for activa-
tion, followed by introduction of 200 μl of Aβ1–42 monomer or oligomers 
to reach an appropriate level of immobilization. Ethanolamine was 
used to block the residual carboxyl group on the sensor chip. The 
flow rate of running buffer (PBS, 0.01 M, pH 7.0) was set at 20 μl/
min. Before the next injection, the regeneration buffer SDS solution 
(0.01 M) was run at 150 μl/min and then the sensor chip was equili-
brated with PBS for 5 min. The binding ability between series con-
centrations of the polymer, PCeO2, released PCeO2, and Aβ1–42 was 
analyzed by Trace Drawer software.
To inspect the effect of the polymer on Aβ aggregation and disag-
gregation, Aβ plaques were obtained by storing PBS (0.01 M, pH 7.0) 
at 37°C for 7 days. The polymer, PCeO2, PPCeO2, released PCeO2 
with Aβ plaques (4 × 10−5 M), or Aβ monomer (4 × 10−5 M) with a 
volume ratio of 1:1 were mixed, and the sample was incubated at 
37°C for 48 hours. Twenty-­five microliters of the mixture was added 
into 180 μl of 20 μM ThT buffer solution in a 96-­well black micro-
plate, and fluorescence at 485 nm with an excitation wavelength of 
450 nm was recorded using a microplate reader (Varioskan LUX, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, US).
For TEM analysis, 10 μl of Aβ fibrils (500 μg/ml) in the absence 
and presence of APPCeO2/Cur (Pre-­H2O2) was applied to a carbon-­
coated copper grid for 15 min, followed by blotting with filter 
paper. The grid was stained with 10 μl of 1.5% phosphotungstic 
acid (pH 7.4) for 2 min, then rinsed three times with deionized 
water, and air-­dried. Imaging was conducted using H-­600 (Hitachi 
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).
For endocytosis, BV-­2 cells (1 × 105 cells per well) were seeded in 
a 24-­well plate and cultured for 12 hours. Thereafter, cells were co-­
incubated with FAM-­Aβ1–42 (2 μg/ml), together with medium or 
serum-­free medium containing different preparations, including 
the polymer, PCeO2, PPCeO2, and released PCeO2 (polymer con-
centration ranging from 0 to 50 μg/ml) for 4 hours. Then, cells were 
collected and washed three times with PBS and the cellular uptake 
of FITC-­Aβ1–42 was quantified by flow cytometry.
For Aβ degradation, BV-­2 cells were incubated with Aβ1–42 (2 μg/
ml) in the presence of the polymer, PCeO2, PPCeO2, and released 
PCeO2 (polymer concentration ranging from 0 to 50 μg/ml) in 
DMEM for 4 hours. Subsequently, the culture medium was replaced 
with serum-­free DMEM and incubated for an additional 4 hours. 
Thereafter, cells were washed with cold PBS (pH 7.4) and collected 
for lysing with 1% SDS. The lysate was collected, and the total pro-
tein in the cells was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay 
kit. The undegraded Aβ1–42 in the cells was quantified by Human 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
16 of 18
Aβ1–42-­ELISA assay (YIFEIXUE BIO TECH, Jiangsu, China) and ex-
pressed as Aβ1–42/total protein.
BV-­2 cells (1 × 105 cells per well) were planted in glass-­bottom 
culture dishes and cultured for 12 hours before experiment. Then, the 
medium was replaced with FBS-­free medium containing FAM-­Aβ1–42 
(2 μg/ml) together with the polymer, PCeO2, PPCeO2, and released 
PCeO2 and cultured for 4 hours. Cells were washed three times with 
PBS, stained with LysoTracker Red for 45 min, and dyed with Hoechst 
33258 for 15 min. After washing with PBS for another three times, 
FAM-­Aβ1–42 and lysosomes were observed by CLSM (LSM700, Carl 
Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany) for the monitoring process of Aβ 
degradation.
Disaggregation of Aβ plaques could result in more neurotoxic Aβ 
oligomers. To investigate this potential neurotoxicity, SH-­SY5Y cells 
were seeded onto a 24-­well plate at a density 1 × 105 cells per well 
and the sample was cultured for 12 hours. Subsequently, the medi-
um was replaced with that containing Aβ plaques (10 μM) and 
incubated together with the polymer, PCeO2, PPCeO2, and released 
PCeO2 for 24 hours. Afterward, cells were resuspended and incu-
bated with annexin V-­FITC/PI and PI for 10 min, followed by flow 
cytometry analysis of cell apoptosis (FACS Celesta, Becton, Dickinson 
and Company, NJ, US).
Cell toxicity assay
SH-­SY5Y cells were planted to assess the inhibition of Aβ1–42 oligo-
mers in cell toxicity by PCeO2. Specifically, the SH-­SY5Y cells with a 
seeding density of 1 × 104 cells per well were incubated in a 96-­well 
plate for 12 hours. Aβ1–42 oligomers (10 μM) was pre-­prepared 
through the aforementioned procedure and co-­incubated with PCeO2 
(10 μM Aβ1–42 oligomers) at 37°C for 24 hours. For evaluating toxicity, 
the cells were measured through MTT assay.
ROS scavenging capacity of the CeO2 nanoenzyme
Proportion of Ce3+ atoms on the surface of CeO2 nanoenzyme is a 
decisive parameter benefiting ROS scavenging capacity. To detect 
Ce3+ quantity, various samples were analyzed using XPS (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific K-­Alpha+ spectrometer, US) equipped with a mono-
chromatic Al Kα x-­ray source (1486.6 eV) operating at 100 W and 
under vacuum (P < 10−8 mbar) with a pass energy of 25 eV; experi-
mental peaks were fitted with software Peakfit version 4.12.
The clearance of ROS was inspected by a DCFH-­DA probe that 
could be rapidly turned into bright-­fluorescence DCF in the pres-
ence of ROS (48). Briefly, BV-­2 cells were seeded on a 24-­well plate 
with a density of 1 × 105 cells per well and cultured for 12 hours. 
Then, Aβ oligomers (10 μM) were added to simulate AD pathophys-
iological condition. Subsequently, different preparations were added 
into the medium and cultured for another 24 hours. Cells were 
stained with 10 μM DCFH-­DA for 30 min and then with DAPI (5 μg/
ml) for 10 min at 37°C. The fluorescence images were collected 
using a flow cytometer (FACS Celesta, Becton, Dickinson and Com-
pany, NJ, US) and inverted fluorescence microscope (Eclipse Ts2-­
FL, Nikon Precision Inc., CA, US).
ROS excess could lead to mitochondrial dysfunction. To investi-
gate the mitochondrial function of microglia, the mitochondrial 
membrane potential of microglial cells was detected by a JC-­1 fluo-
rescence probe. BV-­2 cells were seeded in a 24-­well plate at 1 × 105 
cells per well for 24 hours. After co-­incubation with Aβ oligomers 
(10 μM) and various CeO2 nanoparticles for 24 hours, cells were 
washed three times with PBS and then stained with JC-­1 (5 μg/ml) 
for 15 min. Fluorescence images were obtained using an inverted 
fluorescence microscope (Eclipse Ts2-­FL, Nikon Precision Inc., 
CA, US).
Ameliorating memory impairment and rescuing 
cognitive deficits
AD mice (APP/PS1 transgene mice) were randomly divided into 
four study groups (n = 16 in each group), and the following doses 
were administered by intravenous injection every 3 days for 4 weeks: 
(i) saline, (ii) PCeO2, (iii) APPCeO2, and (iv) APPCeO2/Cur (AP-
PCeO2/Cur equivalent dosage of Cur at 5 mg/kg; APPCeO2 and 
PCeO2 group equivalent CeO2 concentration with APPCeO2/Cur). 
In addition, WT mice (C57BL/6 WT mice, n = 16) were intrave-
nously injected with saline as the control group.
The learning ability and spatial memory of study animals were 
assessed using the MWM test protocol inside a quiet test room (19). 
Briefly, a round pool was divided into four quadrants with four dif-
ferent geometric configurations. A 10-­cm diameter platform was 
placed in the center of quadrant 1. Subsequently, water was added 
into the pool until the level was 1.5 cm higher than the platform, and 
the water temperature was set at 21°C. Study animals were trained in 
the pool for 5 days, and then a trial run was conducted on the sixth 
day. During training days, each animal started at a random position 
inside the pool. For the first 2 days, the animal was guided to reach 
the platform using a flag, followed by training without a guiding flag 
on days 3 to 5. Swimming tracks of each animal were recorded using 
a video-­tracking system (DigBehv-­MG, Shanghai Jiliang Software 
Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China), with the maximum time 
limit set at 60 s. If an animal failed to reach the platform within 60 s, 
the latency of the test was recorded as 60 s, and the animal was guid-
ed to the platform and allowed to stay on the platform for 10 s. On 
the trial run day, each animal will swim in the pool for 1 min with-
out the platform. The latency, swimming pathway, and time spent in 
the target quadrant were recorded, followed by data analysis using a 
computerized tracking system to evaluate learning and memory 
performance.
After treating study animals for 4 weeks, each animal was moved 
into a dwelling cage containing corncob padding of ~1 cm for nest 
behavior testing. Subsequently, pieces of square towel (5 cm by 
5 cm) were placed to the cage. The animals were allowed to move 
randomly without restriction, and their nesting behavior was re-
corded by taking photos and calculating scores. Scoring schemes 
were as follows: 0, the towel was still square and no obvious biting; 
1, the towel was torn into big pieces but no gathering; 2, the towel 
was torn into big pieces and concentrated in the cage; 3, the towel 
was torn into small pieces and located at one side of the cage; 4, the 
towel was torn into small pieces and gathered in a corner. The scores 
were graded blindly by more than three experimenters.
Upon conclusion of behavioral tests, study animals were eutha-
nized and perfused with paraformaldehyde. Subsequently, major or-
gans (brain, heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) were collected, 
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS, and embedded in paraffin. 
Organ sections (5 μm) were collected and stained with HE for 5 min. 
Coronal brain sections were stained with toluidine blue for 30 min to 
indicate Nissl body. For immunofluorescence analysis, antigen re-
trieval (10 μM citrate buffer, pH 6.0) was performed for an efficient 
epitope exposure, endogenous peroxidase was quenched by treating 
the paraffin sections with 0.3% H2O2, and nonspecific binding of an-
tibodies was eliminated using blocking buffer (1% BSA) for 1 hour at 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
17 of 18
room temperature. The prepared primary antibody (anti-­Aβ1–42 pri-
mary antibody 6E10, Iba-­1 antibody, CD206 antibody, CD80 anti-
body, and CD68 antibody) in blocking buffer was applied overnight 
at 4°C, followed by secondary antibody (Goat anti-­mouse IgG Alexa 
Flour 488, Goat anti-­rabbit IgG Alexa Flour 488, and Goat anti-­rat 
IgG Alexa Flour 549) for 30-­min incubation at room temperature.
To measure brain ROS levels and pro-­inflammatory and anti-­
inflammatory cytokines, brain tissues were harvested and homoge-
nized in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer, followed by collection 
of the supernatant through centrifugation at 20,000 rpm for 30 min at 
4°C. Then, levels of ROS, TNF-­α, IL-­1β, IL-­6, IL-­4, IL-­10, and TGF-­β 
were quantified using ELISA kits.
Safety evaluation
The safety of the preparations was assessed by in vitro hemolysis. 
Fresh rabbit red blood cells (RBCs) were collected through centrifu-
gation at 1500 rpm. First, PCeO2, APPCeO2, and APPCeO2/Cur 
were diluted with saline at various concentrations and then mixed 
with 2% RBC suspension. Saline and distilled water were mixed in 
2% RBCs to act as negative (A0%) and positive (A100%) controls. 
Samples were incubated at 37°C for 1 hour, followed by centrifuga-
tion at 3000 rpm for 10 min and measurement by spectrophotome-
try at 570 nm. The percentage of hemolysis was calculated as follows: 
Hemolysis (%) = (Asample − A0%)/(A100% − A0%) × 100%.
For in vivo biosafety assessment, study animals were euthanized 
after completing a 4-­week treatment with a Cur dose of 5 mg/kg in 
different preparations. Thereafter, blood samples and major organ 
specimens were collected. Liver and kidney functions as well as se-
rum biochemistry were checked using a detection kit from Service-
bio Co., Ltd. (Jiangsu, China); organ specimens were examined for 
possible tissue damages by optical microscopy observation.
Statistical analysis
Sample size, data presentation, and statistical significance were all 
detailed in figure captions. GraphPad Prism 9.0.0 software was used 
for data analysis. All images were analyzed using ImageJ software. 
Normality was assessed using the Shapiro-­Wilk test. For normally 
distributed data, homoscedasticity was assessed using the F test. 
When variances were homogeneous, an unpaired two-­tailed Stu-
dent’s t test was performed for two-­group comparison, while one-­
way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey-­Kramer post hoc 
test was used for multigroup comparison. For data with two inde-
pendent variables, a two-­way (repeated-­measures) ANOVA with 
Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons post hoc test was used. P > 0.05 
represents no significant difference (n.s.), and P < 0.05 represents a 
significant difference.
Supplementary Materials
This PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S37
Tables S1 and S2
REFERENCES AND NOTES
	 1.	 R. C. Paolicelli, A. Sierra, B. Stevens, M.-­E. Tremblay, A. Aguzzi, B. Ajami, I. Amit, E. Audinat, 
I. Bechmann, M. Bennett, F. Bennett, A. Bessis, K. Biber, S. Bilbo, M. Blurton-­Jones,  
E. Boddeke, D. Brites, B. Brône, G. C. Brown, O. Butovsky, M. J. Carson, B. Castellano,  
M. Colonna, S. A. Cowley, C. Cunningham, D. Davalos, P. L. De Jager, B. de Strooper,  
A. Denes, B. J. L. Eggen, U. Eyo, E. Galea, S. Garel, F. Ginhoux, C. K. Glass, O. Gokce,  
D. Gomez-­Nicola, B. González, S. Gordon, M. B. Graeber, A. D. Greenhalgh, P. Gressens,  
M. Greter, D. H. Gutmann, C. Haass, M. T. Heneka, F. L. Heppner, S. Hong, D. A. Hume,  
S. Jung, H. Kettenmann, J. Kipnis, R. Koyama, G. Lemke, M. Lynch, A. Majewska,  
M. Malcangio, T. Malm, R. Mancuso, T. Masuda, M. Matteoli, B. W. McColl, V. E. Miron,  
A. V. Molofsky, M. Monje, E. Mracsko, A. Nadjar, J. J. Neher, U. Neniskyte, H. Neumann,  
M. Noda, B. Peng, F. Peri, V. H. Perry, P. G. Popovich, C. Pridans, J. Priller, M. Prinz,  
D. Ragozzino, R. M. Ransohoff, M. W. Salter, A. Schaefer, D. P. Schafer, M. Schwartz,  
M. Simons, C. J. Smith, W. J. Streit, T. L. Tay, L.-­H. Tsai, A. Verkhratsky, R. von Bernhardi,  
H. Wake, V. Wittamer, S. A. Wolf, L.-­J. Wu, T. Wyss-­Coray, Microglia states and 
nomenclature: A field at its crossroads. Neuron 110, 3458–3483 (2022).
	 2.	 A. D. Greenhalgh, S. David, F. C. Bennett, Immune cell regulation of glia during CNS injury 
and disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 21, 139–152 (2020).
	 3.	 N. Rachmian, S. Medina, U. Cherqui, H. Akiva, D. Deitch, D. Edilbi, T. Croese, T. M. Salame,  
J. M. P. Ramos, L. Cahalon, V. Krizhanovsky, M. Schwartz, Identification of senescent, 
TREM2-­expressing microglia in aging and Alzheimer’s disease model mouse brain.  
Nat. Neurosci. 27, 1116–1124 (2024).
	 4.	 L. Zhao, F. Meng, Y. Li, S. Liu, M. Xu, F. Chu, C. Li, X. Yang, L. Luo, Multivalent nanobody 
conjugate with rigid, reactive oxygen species scavenging scaffold for multi-­target 
therapy of Alzheimer’s disease. Adv. Mater. 35, 2210879 (2023).
	 5.	 F. Leng, P. Edison, Neuroinflammation and microglial activation in Alzheimer disease: 
Where do we go from here? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17, 157–172 (2021).
	 6.	 T. Bartels, S. De Schepper, S. Hong, Microglia modulate neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s diseases. Science 370, 66–69 (2020).
	 7.	 A.-­C. Wendeln, K. Degenhardt, L. Kaurani, M. Gertig, T. Ulas, G. Jain, J. Wagner, L. M. Häsler, 
K. Wild, A. Skodras, T. Blank, O. Staszewski, M. Datta, T. P. Centeno, V. Capece, M. R. Islam,  
C. Kerimoglu, M. Staufenbiel, J. L. Schultze, M. Beyer, M. Prinz, M. Jucker, A. Fischer,  
J. J. Neher, Innate immune memory in the brain shapes neurological disease hallmarks. 
Nature 556, 332–338 (2018).
	 8.	 O. Butovsky, H. L. Weiner, Microglial signatures and their role in health and disease.  
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 622–635 (2018).
	 9.	 C. D. Arvanitis, G. B. Ferraro, R. K. Jain, The blood–brain barrier and blood–tumour barrier 
in brain tumours and metastases. Nat. Rev. Cancer 20, 26–41 (2020).
	10.	 W. Zhang, A. Mehta, Z. Tong, L. Esser, N. H. Voelcker, Development of polymeric 
nanoparticles for blood-­brain barrier transfer—Strategies and challenges. Adv. Sci. 8, 
2003937 (2021).
	11.	 E. Nance, S. H. Pun, R. Saigal, D. L. Sellers, Drug delivery to the central nervous system. 
Nat. Rev. Mater. 7, 314–331 (2022).
	12.	 L. Han, C. Jiang, Evolution of blood-­brain barrier in brain diseases and related systemic 
nanoscale brain-­targeting drug delivery strategies. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 11, 2306–2325 
(2021).
	13.	 H. Liu, Y. Han, T. Wang, H. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Yuan, Z. Li, Targeting microglia for therapy of 
Parkinson’s disease by using biomimetic ultrasmall nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 
21730–21742 (2020).
	14.	 H. Wang, X. Xu, Y. C. Pan, Y. Yan, X. Y. Hu, R. Chen, B. J. Ravoo, D. S. Guo, T. Zhang, 
Recognition and removal of amyloid-­β by a heteromultivalent macrocyclic coassembly:  
A potential strategy for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Adv. Mater. 33, e2006483 
(2021).
	15.	 X. Jin, M.-­Y. Liu, D.-­F. Zhang, X. Zhong, K. Du, P. Qian, H. Gao, M.-­J. Wei, Natural products as 
a potential modulator of microglial polarization in neurodegenerative diseases. 
Pharmacol. Res. 145, 104253 (2019).
	16.	 S. Kim, M. Kim, M.-­C. Kang, H. H. L. Lee, C. H. Cho, I. Choi, Y. Park, S.-­H. Lee, Antioxidant 
effects of turmeric leaf extract against hydrogen peroxide-­induced oxidative stress in 
vitro in Vero cells and in vivo in zebrafish. Antioxidants 10, 112 (2021).
	17.	 J. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Y. Luo, Y. Du, X. Zhang, J. Fu, Curcumin inhibits LPS-­induced 
neuroinflammation by promoting microglial M2 polarization via TREM2/ TLR4/ NF-­κB 
pathways in BV2 cells. Mol. Immunol. 116, 29–37 (2019).
	18.	 T. Chen, L. Wan, Y. Xiao, K. Wang, P. Wu, C. Li, C. Huang, X. Liu, W. Xue, G. Sun, X. Ji, H. Lin,  
Z. Ji, Curcumin/pEGCG-­encapsulated nanoparticles enhance spinal cord injury recovery 
by regulating CD74 to alleviate oxidative stress and inflammation. J. Nanobiotechnol. 22, 
653 (2024).
	19.	 P. Liu, T. Zhang, Q. Chen, C. Li, Y. Chu, Q. Guo, Y. Zhang, W. Zhou, H. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Wang, 
Z. Zhao, Y. Luo, X. Li, H. Song, B. Su, C. Li, T. Sun, C. Jiang, Biomimetic dendrimer-­peptide 
conjugates for early multi-­target therapy of Alzheimer’s disease by inflammatory 
microenvironment modulation. Adv. Mater. 33, e2100746 (2021).
	20.	 S. Bhatt, L. Puli, C. R. Patil, Role of reactive oxygen species in the progression of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Drug Discov. Today 26, 794–803 (2021).
	21.	 F. Muhammad, F. Huang, Y. Cheng, X. Chen, Q. Wang, C. Zhu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, P. Wang,  
H. Wei, Nanoceria as an electron reservoir: Spontaneous deposition of metal 
nanoparticles on oxides and their anti-­inflammatory activities. ACS Nano 16, 
20567–20576 (2022).
	22.	 L. Li, J. Zou, Y. Dai, W. Fan, G. Niu, Z. Yang, X. Chen, Burst release of encapsulated annexin 
A5 in tumours boosts cytotoxic T-­cell responses by blocking the phagocytosis of 
apoptotic cells. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 4, 1102–1116 (2020).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025

Han et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr0656 (2025)     30 April 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
18 of 18
	23.	 X. Mai, Y. Chang, Y. You, L. He, T. Chen, Designing intelligent nano-­bomb with on-­demand 
site-­specific drug burst release to synergize with high-­intensity focused ultrasound 
cancer ablation. J. Control. Release 331, 270–281 (2021).
	24.	 G. Ma, Z. Liu, C. Zhu, H. Chen, R. T. K. Kwok, P. Zhang, B. Z. Tang, L. Cai, P. Gong, 
H2O2-­responsive NIR-­II AIE nanobomb for carbon monoxide boosting low-­temperature 
photothermal therapy. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 61, e202207213 (2022).
	25.	 M. Bathfield, J. Reboul, T. Cacciaguerra, P. Lacroix-­Desmazes, C. Gérardin, 
Thermosensitive and drug-­loaded ordered mesoporous silica: A direct and effective 
synthesis using PEO-­b-­PNIPAM block copolymers. Chem. Mater. 28, 3374–3384 
(2016).
	26.	 J. Sun, S. Kleuskens, J. Luan, D. Wang, S. Zhang, W. Li, G. Uysal, D. A. Wilson, 
Morphogenesis of starfish polymersomes. Nat. Commun. 14, 3612 (2023).
	27.	 W. Cheng, X. Zeng, H. Chen, Z. Li, W. Zeng, L. Mei, Y. Zhao, Versatile polydopamine 
platforms: Synthesis and promising applications for surface modification and advanced 
nanomedicine. ACS Nano 13, 8537–8565 (2019).
	28.	 J. Nam, S. Son, L. J. Ochyl, R. Kuai, A. Schwendeman, J. J. Moon, Chemo-­photothermal 
therapy combination elicits anti-­tumor immunity against advanced metastatic cancer. 
Nat. Commun. 9, 1074 (2018).
	29.	 K. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Cao, H. Liu, Y. Geng, W. Yuan, J. Zhou, Z. L. Wu, G. Shan, Y. Bao, Q. Zhao, 
T. Xie, P. Pan, Programmable reversible shape transformation of hydrogels based on 
transient structural anisotropy. Adv. Mater. 32, e2001693 (2020).
	30.	 X. Wang, H. Wang, B. Xu, D. Huang, C. Nie, L. Pu, G. J. M. Zajac, H. Yan, J. Zhao, F. Shi,  
B. T. Emmer, J. Lu, R. Wang, X. Dong, J. Dai, W. Zhou, C. Wang, G. Gao, Y. Wang, C. Willer,  
X. Lu, Y. Zhu, X.-­W. Chen, Receptor-­mediated ER export of lipoproteins controls lipid 
homeostasis in mice and humans. Cell Metab. 33, 350–366.e7 (2021).
	31.	 S. Hickman, S. Izzy, P. Sen, L. Morsett, J. El Khoury, Microglia in neurodegeneration.  
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1359–1369 (2018).
	32.	 P. d’Errico, S. Ziegler-­Waldkirch, V. Aires, P. Hoffmann, C. Mezö, D. Erny, L. S. Monasor,  
S. Liebscher, V. M. Ravi, K. Joseph, O. Schnell, K. Kierdorf, O. Staszewski, S. Tahirovic,  
M. Prinz, M. Meyer-­Luehmann, Microglia contribute to the propagation of Aβ into 
unaffected brain tissue. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 20–25 (2022).
	33.	 Y.-­H. Liu, B. Giunta, H.-­D. Zhou, J. Tan, Y.-­J. Wang, Immunotherapy for Alzheimer 
disease—The challenge of adverse effects. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 8, 465–469 (2012).
	34.	 W.-­J. Jeong, J. Bu, R. Jafari, P. Rehak, L. J. Kubiatowicz, A. J. Drelich, R. H. Owen, A. Nair,  
P. A. Rawding, M. J. Poellmann, C. M. Hopkins, P. Král, S. Hong, Hierarchically multivalent 
peptide–nanoparticle architectures: A systematic approach to engineer surface 
adhesion. Adv. Sci. 9, e2103098 (2022).
	35.	 S. Lövestam, D. Li, J. L. Wagstaff, A. Kotecha, D. Kimanius, S. H. McLaughlin, A. G. Murzin,  
S. M. V. Freund, M. Goedert, S. H. W. Scheres, Disease-­specific tau filaments assemble via 
polymorphic intermediates. Nature 625, 119–125 (2024).
	36.	 H. Fillit, A. Green, Aducanumab and the FDA—Where are we now? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17, 
129–130 (2021).
	37.	 Y. Toderika, J. Najib, Lecanemab, a novel amyloid β-­directed antibody for early Alzheimer 
disease. J. Nurse Pract. 19, 104744 (2023).
	38.	 S. Salloway, R. Sperling, N. C. Fox, K. Blennow, W. Klunk, M. Raskind, M. Sabbagh,  
L. S. Honig, A. P. Porsteinsson, S. Ferris, M. Reichert, N. Ketter, B. Nejadnik, V. Guenzler,  
M. Miloslavsky, D. Wang, Y. Lu, J. Lull, I. C. Tudor, E. Liu, M. Grundman, E. Yuen, R. Black,  
H. R. Brashear, Bapineuzumab 301 and 302 Clinical Trial Investigators, Two phase 3 trials 
of bapineuzumab in mild-­to-­moderate Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 370, 322–333 
(2014).
	39.	 L. Söderberg, M. Johannesson, P. Nygren, H. Laudon, F. Eriksson, G. Osswald, C. Möller,  
L. Lannfelt, Lecanemab, aducanumab, and gantenerumab—Binding profiles to different 
forms of amyloid-­beta might explain efficacy and side effects in clinical trials for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurotherapeutics 20, 195–206 (2023).
	40.	 S. Fu, S. Liang, D. Jiang, R. Yang, Z. Zhang, L. Chang, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, 
Gas-­blasting nanocapsules to accelerate carboplatin lysosome release and nucleus 
delivery for prostate cancer treatment. Asian J. Pharm. Sci. 16, 192–202 (2021).
	41.	 L. Chen, R. Nixon, G. De Bo, Force-­controlled release of small molecules with a rotaxane 
actuator. Nature 628, 320–325 (2024).
	42.	 D. E. Tylawsky, H. Kiguchi, J. Vaynshteyn, J. Gerwin, J. Shah, T. Islam, J. A. Boyer, D. R. Boué, 
M. Snuderl, M. B. Greenblatt, Y. Shamay, G. P. Raju, D. A. Heller, P-­selectin-­targeted 
nanocarriers induce active crossing of the blood-­brain barrier via caveolin-­1-­dependent 
transcytosis. Nat. Mater. 22, 391–399 (2023).
	43.	 C. Gao, J. Jiang, Y. Tan, S. Chen, Microglia in neurodegenerative diseases: Mechanism and 
potential therapeutic targets. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 8, 359 (2023).
	44.	 X. Xu, Z. Han, D. Li, X. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Cao, J. Tao, J. Cheng, J. H. Zhang, L. Cheng, G. Chen, 
Minocycline-­loaded cerium oxide nanoparticles for the enhanced treatment of 
intracerebral hemorrhage. Adv. Funct. Mater. 34, 2313198 (2024).
	45.	 B. B. Mendes, Z. Zhang, J. Conniot, D. P. Sousa, J. M. J. M. Ravasco, L. A. Onweller, A. Lorenc, 
T. Rodrigues, D. Reker, J. Conde, A large-­scale machine learning analysis of inorganic 
nanoparticles in preclinical cancer research. Nat. Nanotechnol. 19, 867–878 (2024).
	46.	 J. C. Udeochu, S. Amin, Y. Huang, L. Fan, E. R. S. Torres, G. K. Carling, B. Liu, H. McGurran,  
G. Coronas-­Samano, G. Kauwe, G. A. Mousa, M. Y. Wong, P. Ye, R. K. Nagiri, I. Lo,  
J. Holtzman, C. Corona, A. Yarahmady, M. T. Gill, R. M. Raju, S.-­A. Mok, S. Gong, W. Luo,  
M. Zhao, T. E. Tracy, R. R. Ratan, L.-­H. Tsai, S. C. Sinha, L. Gan, Tau activation of microglial 
cGAS–IFN reduces MEF2C-­mediated cognitive resilience. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 737–750 
(2023).
	47.	 X. Chen, M. Firulyova, M. Manis, J. Herz, I. Smirnov, E. Aladyeva, C. Wang, X. Bao, M. B. Finn, 
H. Hu, I. Shchukina, M. W. Kim, C. M. Yuede, J. Kipnis, M. N. Artyomov, J. D. Ulrich,  
D. M. Holtzman, Microglia-­mediated T cell infiltration drives neurodegeneration in 
tauopathy. Nature 615, 668–677 (2023).
	48.	 B. Hu, F. Dai, Z. Fan, G. Ma, Q. Tang, X. Zhang, Nanotheranostics: Congo red/Rutin-­MNPs 
with enhanced magnetic resonance imaging and H2O2-­responsive therapy of Alzheimer’s 
disease in APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice. Adv. Mater. 27, 5499–5505 (2015).
Acknowledgments: We thank the Cellular and Molecular Biology Center of China 
Pharmaceutical University for assistance with CLSM. Funding: We acknowledge the National 
Natural Science Foundation of China (82372113, 82104097, 82373815, and 82073795), Natural 
Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars of Jiangsu Province (BK20240096). In 
addition, we thank the Young Talent Support Project of Jiangsu Association for Science and 
Technology (TJ-­2021-­002), Jiangsu 333 High-­level Talent Training Project, Double First-­Rate 
Construction Plan of China Pharmaceutical University (CPU2022QZ18), and Fundamental 
Research Funds for the Central Universities (2632023TD05). Author contributions: 
Conceptualization: G.H., Y.J., Y.D., and H.Z. Methodology: G.H., Y.J., K.B., L.T., and Q.D. 
Investigation: K.B. and Q.D. Visualization: G.H. and Y.J. Supervision: J.Z., Y.D., and H.Z. Writing—
original draft: G.H. and Y.J. Writing—review and editing: G.H., Y.J., X.G., Y.D., and H.Z. 
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and 
materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in 
the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 13 June 2024 
Accepted 26 March 2025 
Published 30 April 2025 
10.1126/sciadv.adr0656
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 26, 2025