C O G N I T I V E N E U R O S C I E N C E
Copyright © 2018
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
originalU.S.Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Memory enhancement by ferulic acid ester
across species
Birgit Michels1*†, Hanna Zwaka1,2†‡, Ruth Bartels2†, Oleh Lushchak3†, Katrin Franke4,
Thomas Endres5, Markus Fendt6,7, Inseon Song8, May Bakr8, Tuvshinjargal Budragchaa4,
Bernhard Westermann4, Dushyant Mishra9§, Claire Eschbach9‖, Stefanie Schreyer2,
Annika Lingnau2, Caroline Vahl2, Marike Hilker2, Randolf Menzel2, Thilo Kähne10,
Volkmar Leßmann5,7, Alexander Dityatev7,8,11, Ludger Wessjohann4*, Bertram Gerber1,7,12*
Cognitive impairments can be devastating for quality of life, and thus, preventing or counteracting them is of
great value. To this end, the present study exploits the potential of the plant Rhodiola rosea and identifies the
constituent ferulic acid eicosyl ester [icosyl-(2E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-prop-2-enoate (FAE-20)] as a
memory enhancer. We show that food supplementation with dried root material from R. rosea dose-dependently
improves odor-taste reward associative memory scores in larval Drosophila and prevents the age-related decline of
this appetitive memory in adult flies. Task-relevant sensorimotor faculties remain unaltered. From a parallel ap-
proach, a list of candidate compounds has been derived, including R. rosea–derived FAE-20. Here, we show that
both R. rosea–derived FAE-20 and synthetic FAE-20 are effective as memory enhancers in larval Drosophila. Synthetic
FAE-20 also partially compensates for age-related memory decline in adult flies, as well as genetically induced early-
onset loss of memory function in young flies. Furthermore, it increases excitability in mouse hippocampal CA1 neurons,
leads to more stable context-shock aversive associative memory in young adult (3-month-old) mice, and increases
memory scores in old (>2-year-old) mice. Given these effects, and given the utility of R. rosea—the plant from which
we discovered FAE-20—as a memory enhancer, these results may hold potential for clinical applications.
INTRODUCTION
Whenever cognitive function is pathologically impaired, there is an ob-
vious desire to remedy it. In this context, plants have the potential to pro-
vide us with therapeutic substances. Indeed, plant compounds that are
widely used and that exert powerful effects on nervous system function,
includingmorphineandcodeine(Papaversomniferum),pseudoephedrine/
ephedrine [genus Ephedra (e.g., E. sinica)], caffeine [genus Coffea (e.g.,
C. arabica and C. canephora)], and nicotine [genus Nicotiana (e.g.,
N. tabacum and N. rustica)], have been identified.
Preparations from the root of Rhodiola rosea L., a perennial plant of
the family Crassulaceae that growsnaturally in higher-altitude regions of
the Northern Hemisphere, are traditionally used by humans for various
alleged effects, including ones that arguably are related to nervous sys-
tem function (1–3) [but see (4–6)]. Linnaeus (2), for example, mentions
the use of R. rosea roots in cases including “cephalgia” and “hysteria.”
Contemporary studies in humans (3) and in rats (7) report that R. rosea
extract enhances memory and/or attention [reviewed in (8)] and coun-
teracts pharmacologically induced deficits in pre-pulse inhibition in rats
(9), as well as fatigue (3) and milder forms of depression in humans (3).
As yet lacking however, are comprehensive analyses of whether any one
or more of the compounds contained in R. rosea root material or its
extracts can individually bring about any one or more of these effects
or produce the increases in life span that have been observed in various
speciesfedwithR. rosea powderor extract (10, 11). This precludes prop-
er quality control and thus imposes hard limits on the medical and sci-
entific utility of R. rosea and of preparations derived from it. Further, the
specific memory processes affected by R. rosea or its preparations have
not been identified. In particular, it remains unknown whether memory
acquisition, memory consolidation, or memory retrieval is enhanced.
To allow accelerated analyses of these issues, the present study uses
three insect study cases [larval and adult Drosophila melanogaster, as
well as the honeybee Apis mellifera (12–15)] as effective and placebo-
free model systems to investigate the memory-enhancing effects of
R. rosea root material and crude extracts. After demonstrating their
dose-dependent effects in memory enhancement, we take advantage of
a parallel study that has provided a list of neurobehaviorally active can-
didate compounds, including ferulic acid eicosyl ester [icosyl-(2E)-3-(4-
hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-prop-2-enoate (FAE-20)], purified from
R. rosea root material. Here, we study the effects of R. rosea root
material, R. rosea–derived FAE-20, and, importantly, synthetic FAE-20
as an individual compound. We show that FAE-20 can indeed enhance
memory in larval Drosophila and can partially compensate for memory
impairments both in aged flies and in a case of genetically induced early-
onset memory impairment in young flies. In addition, it can increase the
excitability of hippocampal CA1 cells and enhance hippocampus-
dependent contextual fear memory in mice. Given the commonalities
1Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, Department Genetics of Learning and Memory,
Magdeburg, Germany. 2Free University Berlin, Institute of Neurobiology, Berlin,
Germany. 3Precarpathian National University, Department of Biochemistry, Ivano-
Frankivsk, Ukraine. 4Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry (IPB), Department of Bio-
organic Chemistry, Halle (Saale), Germany. 5Otto von Guericke University, Medical
Faculty, Magdeburg, Germany. 6Otto von Guericke University, Medical Faculty, Insti-
tute for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Magdeburg, Germany. 7Center for Behavioral
Brain Sciences (CBBS), Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany. 8German
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Molecular Neuroplasticity Group,
Magdeburg, Germany. 9University of Würzburg, Biocenter Am Hubland, Depart-
ment of Genetics and Neurobiology, Würzburg, Germany. 10Otto von Guericke Uni-
versity, Institute of Experimental Internal Medicine, Magdeburg, Germany. 11Otto von
Guericke University, Medical Faculty, Magdeburg, Germany. 12Otto von Guericke Univer-
sity, Institute of Biology, Magdeburg, Germany.
*Corresponding author. Email: birgit.michels@lin-magdeburg.de (B.M.); bertram.
gerber@lin-magdeburg.de (B.G.); wessjohann@ipb-halle.de (L.W.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡Present address: Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
§Presentaddress:DepartmentofPhysiologyandNeurobiology,UniversityofConnecticut,
Storrs, CT 06269, USA.
‖Present address: Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Research Campus,
19700 Helix Drive, Ashburn, VA 20147, USA.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
1 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

in the mechanisms of learning and memory across species (13, 16), we
discuss the potential of these findings for clinical use.
RESULTS
Supplementing food with Rhodiola1 improves memory
scores of larval Drosophila
We raised Drosophila larvae on either standard food medium (control)
or food medium supplemented with different concentrations of Rhodiola1
root powder to test for the effects of this food supplementation on memory
formed in an odor-sugar associative classical conditioning paradigm
(Fig. 1A). For the highest concentration of Rhodiola1, memory scores
were almost tripled relative to control. This effect was confirmed twice
by using a simplified, one-odor version of the paradigm (17) and by
introducing a broader range of concentrations (Fig. 1, B and C).
Together, these three independent datasets reveal a concentration-
dependent enhancement of memory by Rhodiola1 food supplementation
(Fig. 1, A to D, and fig. S1). In contrast, the behavior of experimentally
naïve larvae toward the sugar reward [fructose (FRU)] and toward the
odors [n-amyl acetate (AM) and 1-octanol (1OCT)] was unaffected
(Fig. 2, A to C). Further, supplementing the food with Rhodiola1 did
not affect the behavior of larvae toward the odors after training-like
reward-only exposure or after training-like odor-only exposure (Fig. 2,
D to G, and fig. S2). We conclude that food supplementation with
Rhodiola1 improves associative memory scores of larval Drosophila in
a dose-dependent manner and leaves task-relevant sensorimotor proces-
sing and the nonassociative effects of stimulus exposure unaffected.
A commercially available Rhodiola preparation does not
increase larval memory scores
A tablet preparation containing the SHR-5 extract from R. rosea is com-
mercially available (“Arctic root” tablets, SwedishHerbalInstitute). This
extract has been reported to counteract fatigue in humans (3), to be
effective in the treatment of mild-to-moderate depression (3, 18), and
to increase life span and physical stress resistance in Caenorhabditis
elegans and flies (10, 11) [also see (3) for a review]. We therefore tested
whether food supplementation with ground Arctic root tablets affects
memory scores. This was found not to be the case (fig. S3; for our choice
of concentrations, see Materials and Methods).
A subsequent experiment revealed a difference in memory per-
formance between control larvae and larvae raised on food containing
the abovementioned tablet or Rhodiola root accessions from different
sources, named Rhodiola1 (accession 1), Rhodiola2 (accession 2, a
separate batch of Rhodiola1), and Rhodiola3 (accession 3, a root sample
of different geographical origin) (fig. S4). Specifically, food supplemen-
tation with Rhodiola1, Rhodiola2, and Rhodiola3 increased memory
scores, as did root material from a further additional source (accession 4:
Rhodiola4; fig. S1), but the tablet did not. We performed a separate,
parallel chemical analysis and bioactivity correlation analysis aimed at
identifying behaviorally active candidate compounds in R. rosea roots;
this was based on the accession from which we had obtained the largest
sample (Rhodiola4). Within the present study, however, we first asked
whethertheseeffectscanalsobeobservedinyoungand/oragedadultflies.
Rhodiola4 improves memory scores in aged but not in young
adult Drosophila
Food supplementation with Rhodiola4 did not improve the memory
scores of young adult Drosophila in an odor-sugar associative learning
paradigm (Fig. 3, A and B). Strikingly, however, the low memory scores
in aged adult Drosophila can be remedied by food supplementation with
Rhodiola4 (Fig. 3C and fig. S5).
We conclude that food supplementation with Rhodiola4 can com-
pensate for age-related memory decline in adult Drosophila. To see
whether feeding on Rhodiola can also have acute effects on memory
function, and to disentangle the enhancing effect of Rhodiola on the ac-
quisition of memory, memory consolidation, and memory retrieval, we
decided to use the proboscis extension reflex conditioning paradigm of
the honeybee, in which these processes can be conveniently investigated
separately (14, 15).
Feeding on Rhodiola4E before training improves memory
acquisition in the honeybee
We first asked whether Rhodiola has an acute impact on memory ac-
quisition. To establish this, we fed the bees the day before training. One
group of bees was fed with sugar solution plus Rhodiola4E, whereas the
second group received the same amount of plain sugar solution. On the
next day, both groups were trained in five trials, pairing odor with plain
sugar as the reward (Fig. 4A). The group previously fed with Rhodiola4E
showed statistically higher response rates to the conditioned odor during
acquisition than the control group did. Since we could exclude effects of
Rhodiola4E on task-relevant sensorimotor processing such as sugar re-
sponsiveness and odor responsiveness (Fig. 4, B and C), the increase in
conditioned responses reflects an enhancement of memory acquisition.
Feeding on Rhodiola4E after training improves memory
consolidation in the honeybee
Next, we tested whether acute feeding on Rhodiola4E affects memory
consolidation (14, 15). In the current paradigm, consolidation to an ear-
ly form of long-term memory (eLTM) takes place until 9 hours after
training (19). Animals were fed with control or Rhodiola4E solution
5 hours after training (i.e., during the time window of memory con-
solidation) and were tested for their memory the next day, by which
time memory consolidation into eLTM was complete. Memory scores
in Rhodiola4E-treated bees were higher than those in the control group
(Fig. 4D and fig. S6), in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 4E).
Feeding on Rhodiola4E does not affect memory retrieval in
the honeybee
To see whether acute feeding on Rhodiola4E also affects memory retriev-
al, we shifted Rhodiola4E feeding to 29 hours after training and tested
memory on the next day. This timing of experimental events ensures
that memory consolidation processes had been completed when the
animals were treated 29 hours after training (19), whereas the time in-
terval between Rhodiola4E feeding and the test remained constant rela-
tive to the previous experiment (i.e., 19 hours). If Rhodiola4E feeding
timed in this manner were to facilitate memory retrieval, increased
scores should be observed. This, however, was not the case (Fig. 4F).
We conclude that acute feeding on Rhodiola4E accelerates memory ac-
quisition and its more effective consolidation into a stable form, whereas
memory retrieval and task-relevant sensorimotor faculties remain un-
altered. Together, the findings in Drosophila and the honeybee so far en-
couraged us to ask whether a specific memory-enhancing compound
could be identified from Rhodiola.
Identifying ferulic acid eicosyl ester (FAE-20) as a candidate
memory enhancer
Upon obtaining a large sample of dried Rhodiola4 root material, we first
tested a crude extract for its memory-enhancing effect to ascertain that
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
2 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

Fig. 1. Rhodiola1 enhances memory in larval Drosophila. (A to C) Larvae reared in food vials with either control food (gray, control) or food supplemented with the indicated
concentrations of Rhodiola1 root (brown, Rhodiola1). (A) Larvae underwent differential training such that one of two odors (AM, black cloud; 1OCT, yellow cloud) was presented on
a petri dish together with a sugar reward [green, fructose (FRU); in half of the cases, the training sequence was as indicated; in the other half, it was the reverse]. During testing, the
choice between the odors was measured. The performance index (PI) quantifies associative memory as the difference in test behavior between reciprocally trained groups of
larvae, revealing that Rhodiola1 dose-dependently increases memory scores. n = 15, 12, 12, and 11. (B) As in (A), showing that Rhodiola1 dose-dependently increases memory
scoresalso in anondifferentialversion of the paradigm. n = 11, 11, 11, and 11. (C)Asin (B), testing lower levels of Rhodiola1 concentration. n= 15, 15, 13, and11. (D)Summary based
on the median PIs using Rhodiola1 (A to C) and Rhodiola4 (fig. S1), normalized to the median of the respective control. Box plots represent the median as the middle line, with the
25th and 75th quantiles as box boundaries and the 10th and 90th quantiles as whiskers. “b” indicates a statistically significant difference from control (“a”) in Bonferroni-corrected
U tests (P < 0.05/3) preceded by a Kruskal-Wallis test (P < 0.05). Data are documented in data file S1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
3 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

Fig. 2. Rhodiola1 does not affect task-relevant sensorimotor faculties. Larvae reared in food vials with either control food or food supplemented with the indicated con-
centrations of Rhodiola1 root performed the tasks indicated. These tasks test for sensorimotor faculties relevant for the odor-reward learning experiments shown in Fig. 1. In no
case did Rhodiola1 have an effecton performance. (A toC)Preference ofexperimentally naïve larvae towardthe sugar reward[A: FRU, green (n=17, 17, 17, and17)]andtowardthe
odors [B; AM, black cloud (n = 12, 12, 12, and 12); C: 1OCT, yellow cloud (n = 12, 12, 28, and 12)]. (D to G) Odor preference after training-like stimulus exposure to the reward but
omitting the odors [D and E, testing for preferences for AM (n = 12, 12, 12, and 12) and 1OCT (n = 11, 12, 12, and 12), respectively] or to the odors but omitting the reward [F and G,
testing for preferences for AM (n = 12, 11, 12, and 12) and 1OCT (n = 12, 12, 12, and 12), respectively]. In half of the cases, the sequence of exposure trials was as indicated; in the
other half, it was the reverse. In fig. S2, odor preferences after exposure to only one of the odors are shown. n.s. indicates P > 0.05 (Kruskal-Wallis test). Further details as in Fig. 1.
Data are documented in data file S1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
4 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

functionalcomponentsof Rhodiolaare extractable. Supplementing food
with R. rosea crude extract (Rhodiola extractcrude) indeed improved
memory scores in larval Drosophila (Fig. 5A), showing that a soluble
component conferred such an effect. This encouraged us to adopt a
bioassay-guided isolation and reverse metabolomics approach using
activity correlation algorithms(20).However, the present foodsupple-
mentation paradigm requires, impractically, large amounts of extract
for such an approach. Although, in principle, the bee paradigm would
have been a suitable and resource-friendly alternative, we reasoned
that, in the longer run, it would be an advantage to work in a genet-
ically more accessible model system. In a parallel study, therefore, we
developed an alternative memory-related screen for larval Drosophila
that takes advantage of the rewarding effect of Rhodiola4 and requires
much less material. This screen suggested a list of candidate com-
pounds, including b-sitosterol-b-D-glucoside (BSSG) and ferulic acid
eicosyl ester (FAE-20). Consequently, both compounds were synthe-
sized to obtain sufficient and pure material for causal verification in
the present test for memory enhancement. Given that food supple-
mentation with synthetic BSSG and its derivatives had no impact
on larval memory scores (fig. S7), and given that we had ascertained
the presence of FAE-20 in Rhodiola4 (figs. S8 and S9), we focused on
synthetic FAE-20 in the following experiments.
FAE-20 as a memory enhancer in Drosophila
Drosophila larvae were raised on either control food medium or food
medium supplemented with different concentrations of synthetic FAE-
20. The latter improved memory scores in a dose-dependent manner.
Memory scores were doubled at a 0.71 mM concentration of FAE-20,
whereas 10-fold lower or 10-fold higher concentrations of FAE-20 were
of no statistically significant effect (Fig. 5B). A similar dose dependen-
cy had been observed earlier when using Rhodiola extractcrude and
Rhodiola4E (Figs. 4E and 5A). The effect of R. rosea food supplementa-
tionontheDrosophilalifespanfollowsanoptimumfunctionaswell(11).
The nextquestionwaswhethernot only FAE-20 but also structurally
related and naturally occurring derivatives would improve memory
scores in larval Drosophila (Fig. 5C). Larvae were raised either on
control food or on food supplemented with FAE-20, hexadecyl-
(2E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-prop-2-enoate (FAE-16), dodecyl-
(2E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-prop-2-enoate (FAE-12),
octyl-(2E)-3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-prop-2-enoate (FAE-8),
icosyl-(2E)-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-prop-2-enoate (4-OH-CAE-20), or
7,8-dihydro-ferulic acid eicosyl ester (DH-FAE-20). The results con-
firm that feeding on FAE-20 leads to higher memory scores than in
controls and suggest that substances with a shorter alkyl chain length
(FAE-16, FAE-12, and FAE-8) have no statistically significant effect. In
addition, food supplementation with substances similar to FAE-20 but
lacking the methoxy group of FAEs (4-OH-CAE-20) or substances with
a hydrogenated double bond (DH-FAE-20) exerted no measurable ef-
fect on memory scores. Food supplementation with FAE-20 leaves the
memory scores of young adult flies unchanged (Fig. 6, A and B) but
partially compensates for age-related memory decline (Fig. 6C). In con-
trast, the behavior of experimentally naïve aged flies toward the odors
BA and 3OCT (Fig. 6D) and toward the sugar reward (Fig. 6E) was un-
affected by FAE-20 food supplementation.
A preliminary proteomics approach suggested that food supplemen-
tation with Rhodiola4 decreases the levels of the active zone protein
Bruchpilot in aged adult Drosophila (BRP, coded by the brp gene).
We found this intriguing because, in Drosophila, BRP expression has
been reported to increase with age, and up-regulation of BRP protein
in young flies has been found to elicit a premature impairment of
memory function in an aversive learning paradigm (21). This raised
the question whether, relative to the baseline condition with two ge-
nomic copies of the brp gene (2×BRP, baseline), the establishment of
an early-onset condition of high BRP expression in young flies with four
genomic copiesof thebrp gene (4×BRP, “control”) (21) wouldlead to an
early-onset decrease in memory scores in our appetitive paradigm
as well. This was indeed found to be the case at the behavioral level
(Fig. 6F; 2×BRP, baseline versus 4×BRP, control). Food supplementa-
tion with FAE-20 in 4×BRP flies (4×BRP, FAE-20) was able to partial-
ly compensate for this genetically induced “pathological” condition.
Fig. 3. Rhodiola4 compensates for age-dependent memory decline. (A to C) Flies reared until 1 or 15 days after hatching in food vials with either control food or food
supplemented with Rhodiola4 root underwent differential training suchthat oneof two odors [black and yellow clouds;in half of the cases, benzaldehyde (BA); in the other half,
3-octanol (3OCT)] was presented with a sugar reward [green; sucrose (SUC)], and the other odor was presented without the reward (in half of the cases, the training sequence
was as indicated; in the other half, it was the reverse). During the test, choice between the odors was measured. The PI quantifies associative memory as the difference in test
behavior between reciprocally trained groups of flies. Rhodiola4 leaves memory scores in young flies unaffected (B; n = 24 and 46) yet compensates for the decline in memory
scores of aged flies (C; n = 23 and 22). n.s. indicates P > 0.05 (U test). b indicates statistically significant difference from control (a) in a U test (P < 0.05). Further details as in Fig. 1.
Data are documented in data file S1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
5 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

Fig. 4. Rhodiola4E improves acquisition and consolidation, but not retrieval, in bees. (A) Bees were fed with sugar solution plus Rhodiola4E extract (brown), or sugar solution
(gray, control). On the next day, the bees underwent classical conditioning of the proboscis extension response (PER) through paired odor-reward presentations. Acquisition rates
for PERs toward the odor are higher after feeding on Rhodiola4E [logistic regression:c2(1) = 13.33, P = 0.00026; n= 73 and 117]. (B andC) Feeding on Rhodiola4E affects neither sugar
responsiveness [B; one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), P > 0.05; n = 49, 51, 47, and 45] nor odor responsiveness [C; logistic regression: c2(1) = 0.01, P = 0.98; n = 157 and 114).
(D) When bees were fed with Rhodiola4E during memory consolidation, levels of PER during testing were higher than that in controls [logistic regression: c2(1) = 8.50, P = 0.0036; n =
129 and 130]. Data shown include data from experiments in (E) and fig. S6. (E) As in (D), showing that memory is improved in accordance with the Rhodiola4E concentration. The
memory of bees fed with 1% Rhodiola4E differs from the control [logistic regression: c2(1) = 16.08, P = 0.00006; n = 44, 46, 47, and 46]. (F) Rhodiola4E has no effect on memory retrieval
when fed at the same time before the test as in (D) and (E) but does at a time after training when memory consolidation is already over. Rates of PER were not different for bees fed
later on with Rhodiola4E versus control [logistic regression: c2(1) = 0.01, P = 0.92; n = 59 and 55]. *P < 0.05. Bars indicate confidence intervals. Data are documented in data file S1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
6 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

Fig. 5. Rhodiola extractcrude and FAE-20 improve memory in larval Drosophila. (A and B) As in Fig. 1B, food supplementation with Rhodiola extractcrude (A; brown) or with FA
eicosyl ester (B; FAE-20, blue) improves the memory of larval Drosophila in a dose-dependent manner. Similar to what was found for memory consolidation in bees (Fig. 4E), both
for Rhodiola extractcrude and for FAE-20, we observed memory enhancement at intermediate concentrations. b indicates statistically significant difference from control (a) in
Bonferroni-corrected U tests [A: P < 0.05/2 (n = 33, 34, and 27); B: P < 0.05/3 (n = 17, 16, 19, and 18)] preceded by Kruskal-Wallis tests (P < 0.05). (C) As above, for food supple-
mentation with FAE-20 or the FAE-20 derivatives indicated. Of the tested compounds, only FAE-20 leads to enhanced memory scores relative to control (P = 0.007), replicating the
results from (B). “b” indicates statistically significant difference from control (“a”) in Bonferroni-corrected U tests [P < 0.05/6 (n = 35, 35, 35, 35, 35, and 35)] preceded by a Kruskal-
Wallistest(P =0.055). Gray shading indicatesthe valuesbetween the 25thand75th quantiles of the controlPIscores. Furtherdetailsasin Fig. 1. Dataare documented in datafile S1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
7 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

Fig. 6. FAE-20 improves memory in aged fliesand modulates levels of the BRP protein. (A to C) As in Fig. 3, food supplementation with FAE-20 (blue) leaves memory scores
in young flies unaffected (B; n = 24 and 28) yet partially compensates for the memory impairment of aged flies (C; n = 29 and 28). n.s. and b, respectively, indicate P > 0.05 and P <
0.05 in U tests versus control (a). (D and E) Feeding on FAE-20 does not affect odor preference [D: BA (yellow cloud) and 3OCT (black cloud)] or SUC preference (E, green) in aged
flies. n.s. indicates P > 0.05 in U tests (n = 28 and 28; 28 and 28; and 40 and 40). (F) As in (B) and (C), showing that relative to baseline conditions of BRP (2×BRP, baseline), memory
scores in young flies are impaired upon BRP overexpression when raised oncontrol food (4×BRP, control), which is partially compensated for by raising the animals on FAE-20 food
(4×BRP, FAE-20). b indicates a difference from baseline (a), “c” indicates a difference from control in Bonferroni-corrected U tests [P < 0.05/2 (n = 20, 28, and 27)] preceded by a
Kruskal-Wallis test (P < 0.05). (G) Quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) shows that BRP overexpression can be partially compensated for by FAE-20 feeding. “b” indicates a
difference from baseline (“a”), “c” indicates a difference from control in Bonferroni-corrected U tests [P < 0.05/2 (n = 95, 96, and 102)] preceded by a Kruskal-Wallis test (P <
0.05). The inset illustrates the topology of BRP at the presynapse [© from (47); originally published in the Journal of Cell Biology. https://doi.org/10.1083/JCB.200812150]. Further
details as in Fig. 1. Data are documented in data file S1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
8 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

To see whether feeding FAE-20 to 4×BRP animals indeed reduces
levels of BRP protein, we used quantitative MS of adult fly heads
(Fig. 6G). This confirmed the increase in BRP levels in young
4×BRP control flies when compared with young 2×BRP baseline flies
(21). Critically, FAE-20 food supplementation reduced this increase in
BRP in 4×BRP flies.
We conclude that supplementing food with FAE-20 can improve
memory scores in larval Drosophila. Furthermore, FAE-20 can partially
compensate for both memory impairments in aged flies and early-onset
memory impairments caused by a genetically induced, premature in-
crease in BRP levels in young flies. Our next question was whether
FAE-20 has neurocognitive effects in mice as well.
FAE-20 increases excitability of CA1 neurons and improves
contextual fear memory
Given the role of hippocampal CA1 neurons in learning and memory in
rodents and humans (22, 23), we tested whether the physiological prop-
erties of these neurons are altered by acute application of Rhodiola
extractcrude. It turned out that cell excitability, measured as the number
of action potentials upon current injection, isincreased (Fig. 7, A and B).
Likewise, application of 4 mM FAE-20 increases the excitability of CA1
neurons (Fig. 7, C and D). This prompted us to test whether acute
application of FAE-20 modulates hippocampus-dependent memory
in the mouse. Because we were concerned that the acidic conditions
in parts of the mammalian digestive system might incapacitate FAE-20
by acidic hydrolysis, mice were intraperitoneally injected with FAE-20
solution (6 or 12 mg/kg) or solvent and trained in a contextual fear
conditioning paradigm 30 min later. On the next day, they were tested
for freezing behavior first in a novel context and then in the training
context (Fig. 7, E to G). After injection of FAE-20 in young adult mice
(3 months), the FAE-20–treated groups and the control groups
showed a similarly low level of freezing in the novel context, and ini-
tially, equally elevated freezing in the training context. Contextual fear
memory was more stable across the testing period in FAE-20–treated
animals (Fig. 7, E and F). Application of FAE-20 in aged mice (>2 years)
resulted in higher levels of contextual fear memory throughout the test,
as compared with controls (Fig. 7G). We conclude that acute FAE-20
treatment can improve hippocampus-dependent contextual fear
memory in the mouse, possibly related to increased excitability of the
neurons involved.
DISCUSSION
Translational potential
The starting point of the present study was that preparations from
R. rosea roots reportedly increase the life span in various animal species
(10, 11), are used in traditional human medicine (1–3), and have been
reported to have positive effects on memory function in rodents (7) and
humans (3) [but see (4–6)]. As regards the effects on memory function,
however, the specific memory processes affected by Rhodiola (acquisi-
tion, consolidation, and retrieval) and the bioactive compound(s) in the
root causing these effects remained unknown. We have systematically
investigated the effects of R. rosea, its extracts, and single compounds
present in these extracts on associative learning and memory. We con-
clude that R. rosea improves memory scores in a dose-dependent man-
ner in Drosophila larvae and that it compensates for age-related
memory decline in aged flies. In bees, feeding on R. rosea specifically
improves memory acquisition and memory consolidation but not its
retrieval. Task-related sensorimotor faculties remain unchanged in all
cases. We specifically attribute a memory enhancement effect in
Drosophila to the bioactive compound FAE-20, which we show to be
present in the R. rosea extract. We confirm these effects with synthetic
pure FAE-20, which also ameliorates age-related as well as genetically
caused early-onset memory impairments in adult flies.
Critically, from a translational medicine perspective, FAE-20 is also
effective in a rodent model: Mouse hippocampal CA1 neurons showed
increased excitability, and mice treated with FAE-20 showed improved
hippocampus-dependent memory. In the light of the abovementioned
reports of neurocognitive effects of R. rosea in traditional medicine, and
given that FAE-20 was identified from R. rosea as a memory-enhancing
compound, trials into the effects of FAE-20 in humans now seem war-
ranted. Once toxicity tests are passed and the pharmacokinetics of
FAE-20 are known, such tests might be particularly promising because
of the reported associations between neuronal excitability, synaptic
plasticity, and learning (24, 25). A possible mechanism by which an in-
crease in neuronal excitability might lead to improved synaptic plastic-
ity is that the higher number of action potentials generated during the
induction of synaptic plasticity by more excitable cells can cause an
increased Ca2+ influx via N-methyl-D-aspartate types of glutamate re-
ceptors. Pyramidal cells from area CA1 of the dorsal hippocampus, for
example, are less excitable in old than in young mice (26); thus, old mice
should benefit more from increases in excitability than young mice,
which is consistent with the apparently more pronounced behavioral
effects of FAE-20 we observe in old mice. Moreover, several compounds
that increase the intrinsic excitability of these neurons, such as the
cholinesteraseinhibitorgalantamineandtheL-typecalciumchannelblock-
er nimodipine, improve the performance of old mice in hippocampus-
dependent behavioral tasks (26).
FAE-20 as a memory enhancer
FAE-20 has so far not been reported as a constituent of R. rosea [regard-
ing other plants, see (27) and (28)], but in general, ferulic acid (FA) and
related phenolic compounds in free form or as conjugates are ubiqui-
tous antioxidants in plants. While FA is discussed as a therapeutic
agent against oxidative stress–related diseases, including neuro-
degenerative disorders (29), no neurocognitive effects have previously
been reported for alkyl esters of FA such as FAE-20. Synthetic alkyl
esters of FA (and caffeic acid) have been shown to inhibit in vitro tu-
morcellproliferation,theactivityofcyclooxygenaseenzymes(COX-1and
COX-2), and lipid peroxidation (30)—effects that are consistent with
the increase in life span and the reduction in body weight observed
uponR.roseafoodsupplementationinanumberofspecies(10,11,31,32).
These effects were enhanced by ester formation, probably because bio-
availability and membrane permeation are increased by this process. In
particular, long-chain esterification might increase the bioavailability or
even membrane accumulation of FA (because it increases lipophilicity
and thus facilitates localization to and crossing of membranes and of
the blood-brain barrier). Accordingly, we find memory enhancement
for FAE-20 rather than for shorter-chain alkyl esters of FA (see also the
“Could FAE-20 reach the brain?” section).
The identification of FAE-20 as a memory enhancer does not inval-
idate previous claims regarding the activity of other compounds from
R. rosea (4–6). In most previous studies, the so-called SHR-5 extract of
R. rosea root material was used, which is typically marketed in tablet
form (3–6, 10, 11). This extract is standardized to the content of sali-
droside [2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)ethyl b-D-glucopyranoside] (4–6). It is
also reported to contain other phenyl ethanoids and propanoids (e.g.,
tyrosol, rosavin, and tiandrin), and bioactivity has been attributed to
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
9 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

B
E
A
F
D
C
G
Training
Tests
c
hours
1 to 5 min
6 to 10 min
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
1 to 5 min
6 to 10 min
1 to 5 min
6 to 10 min
1 to 5 min
6 to 10 min
(6 mg/kg)
(12 mg/kg)
(6 mg/kg)
to
Fig. 7. FAE-20 increaseshippocampalexcitability and leads to more stable contextual fearmemory in mice. (A to D)Rhodiola extractcrude (A and B)or FAE-20 (C andD) was
applied to acute murine hippocampal slices at the concentrations indicated, and the excitability of CA1 neurons was determined as the number of action potentials (APs) upon
current injection. Excitability was increased by Rhodiola extractcrude [P < 0.05, two-way repeated-measures ANOVA (rmANOVA); n =10] and by FAE-20 [two-way rmANOVA with P >
0.05 for the two lower concentrations (n = 11 to 18) and P < 0.05 for the highest FAE-20 concentration (n = 13)], relative to the application of solvent as a control (n = 10 to 14).
(E) Mice (3 months old) were intraperitoneally injected with either FAE-20 (6 mg/kg; n = 14) or solvent as a control (n = 13) 30 min before contextual fear conditioning training.
On the next day, freezing behavior was tested in a novel context (to assess unspecific fear) and in the training context (to assess conditioned contextual fear). Animals from both
groups discriminated equally well between the neutral and the training context (rmANOVA, all P values < 0.05). In control animals, contextual fear decreased over time [P < 0.05,
Fisher’s least significant difference (LSD) post hoc test], yet memory remainedstable upon FAE-20 treatment (P >0.05)and was higher than that in controlanimals (P = 0.0007). (F) If
animals were treated with a higher concentration of FAE-20, they again discriminated between the two contextsas well as control animals did (rmANOVA,all P values < 0.05). They
showed a slight but statistically significant (P = 0.04) decline in freezing over time in the training context but, importantly, exhibited more freezing in the second half of the training
context exposure than the control group (P < 0.0001), again indicating a more stable fear memory in FAE-20–treated mice (Fisher’s LSD post hoc comparisons; control, n =
13; FAE-20, n = 9). (G) As in (E), for 2.4- to 2.8-year-old mice. Animals from both groups discriminated equally well between the neutral and the training context (rmANOVA,
all P values < 0.05). Animals treated with FAE-20 exhibited higher levels of fear memory in the training context (i.e., showed more freezing) than the control animals
throughout the testing phase (P < 0.05, Fisher’s LSD post hoc test; control, n = 15; FAE-20, n = 16). Data are documented in data file S1.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
10 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

these compound classes (3, 33) [but see (4–6)]. In the case of larval
Drosophila at least, and to the extent tested, our data provide no ev-
idence for a memory enhancement effect of SHR-5–containing tablet
material. Our attempts to determine whether this is because of insuf-
ficient amounts of FAE-20 in the SHR-5–containing tablets were un-
successful, however, because signal overlap and matrix effects
precluded proper quantitative analysis.
Can FAE-20 account for the effects of Rhodiola?
FAE-20 enhances memory in larval Drosophila at a concentration of
0.71 mM (Fig. 5B), indicating effectiveness in the low micromolar range.
This concentration corresponds to 0.34 mg of FAE-20 per milliliter of
food. According to our analytical investigations, the FAE-20 content in
the Rhodiola extractcrude is estimated to be less than 1%. Range-wise, this
is consistent with what we found for the memory-enhancing effect of
Rhodiola extractcrude at 0.3 mg of extract per milliliter of food (Fig. 5A),
as this would correspond to less than 3 mg of FAE-20 per milliliter of
food. Given that we obtained about 25 to 30% of the weight of the dried
R. rosea root material as extract, reaching roughly the same FAE-20
dose by adding Rhodiola1 root material would require about three to
four times as much Rhodiola1 root material as compared with the
Rhodiola extractcrude, which amounts to a few milligrams of Rhodiola1
per milliliter of food. This is about what we have found to be effective
(Fig. 1, B to D). Due caveats include the error margins of the above es-
timations, the combined effects of structurally related compounds that
individuallyhavesubthresholdeffects,thepossibilityofinvertedU-shaped
dose-effect relationships, and errors arising from quantitatively relating
behavioral experiments that were not performed in parallel. Bearing
these caveats in mind, we think it is likely that FAE-20 mediates a sub-
stantial part of the memory-enhancing effect of R. rosea and its extract,
and we emphatically refrain from making more quantitative claims.
Molecular effects of Rhodiola/FAE-20
A process previously proposed to mediate the enhancement of memory
by R. rosea is the inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity
(34, 35). However, in bees, AChE inhibitors either slightly impair
memory acquisition (36) or leave it unaltered (37). Furthermore,
memory retrieval in the bee was improved by inhibiting AChE (37).
Without further assumptions, these effects of AChE inhibition do not
readily match our findings in bees because Rhodiola4E, by contrast, en-
hances memory acquisition and leaves retrieval unaffected.
Polar R. rosea extracts and compounds isolated therefrom, such as
rosiridin, have been reported to influence the levels and/or to moderate
the effectsof biogenic amines (38) [see also (39, 40)]. Asbiogenic amines
are themselves evolutionarily conserved and powerful modulators of
memory processes [Drosophila, (13, 41, 42); bee, (14, 15); mammals,
(43)], the biogenic amine systems indeed appear to be promising can-
didates to mediate the memory-related effects of polar R. rosea extracts
across species. We should point out, however, that FAE-20 is rather
nonpolar, so a different or an additional mechanism may be expected
to bring about memory enhancement by FAE-20.
Our present results show that, upon an increase in the levels of the
synaptic protein BRP in aged adult flies and in young flies overexpres-
sing the BRP protein, FAE-20 can reduce BRP levels back toward
normal. In both cases, this effect on BRP levels is accompanied by a
partial compensation for memory decline. This is consistent with pre-
vious findings showing that maintaining adaptive levels of BRP expres-
sion is necessary for proper memory function in flies (21, 44) and
arguably in bees as well (45). Why might BRP levels matter for memory
function? BRP localizes to the presynaptic active zone (46). It is required
for concentrating synaptic vesicles close to Ca2+ channels and thus for
the fine-tuning of synaptic transmission (47, 48). As the N terminus of
Drosophila BRP has sequence homology to the vertebrate ELKS/CAST/
ERC protein (46), BRP appears to be a promising candidate to mediate
the memory-related effects of FAE-20 across species.
It did not escape our attention that the effects of FAE-20 on memory
as well as on BRP levels in adult flies resemble the effects of feeding flies
with the autophagy-promoting polyamine spermidine (49). However,
preliminary proteomic analyses remained inconclusive as to whether
there is a change in the abundance of proteins that are involved in sper-
midine synthesis or autophagy after feeding the flies with FAE-20. Fur-
ther, the two substances differ drastically in their physicochemical
properties and are therefore unlikely to have the same molecular tar-
get. Still, it remains possible that FAE-20 and spermidine affect
overlapping processes, such as autophagy. This is an attractive idea
given the common role of autophagy in plasticity and learning across
species (21, 49–51).
Together, the available evidence shows that FAE-20 is a potent
memory enhancer in different species and paradigms and prompts at
least four nonexclusive working hypotheses for a mechanism of its
action, namely, modulation of neuronal excitability, of the biogenic
amine systems, of BRP/ELKS/CAST/ERC function, and of homeostatic
autophagy. To identify the mode(s) of action of FAE-20, these working
hypotheses now need to be investigated in detail.
Could FAE-20 reach the brain?
Assuming the brain to be the site ultimately affected by FAE-20 treat-
ment, one wonders whether the FAE-20 would actually reach the brain.
With pharmacokinetic analyses pending, we note that, in Drosophila,
digestion and absorption are predominantly accomplished in the
mid-gut, which is much less acidic than in mammals (52), making
the acidic hydrolysis of esters unlikely. If FAE-20 is indeed taken up
into the hemolymph (“blood”), then lipoproteins such as lipophorin
(53) could transport it to close to anywhere in the body. Because of its
highly nonpolar lipophilic properties, the interaction of transported
FAE-20 with cell membranes could then allow it to pass through
the blood-brain barrier (54). In the case of mice, the latter interaction
might also allow FAE-20 to reach the brain upon FAE-20 intraperi-
toneal injection.
Are larvae young or old?
The effects of memory enhancers are often easier to detect when, for
whatever reason, memory function is compromised (49, 55, 56). Ac-
cordingly, in our study, the effects of FAE-20 were revealed by
compensating for genetically induced mnemonic impairments in adult
Drosophila and by enhancing memory function that is compromised by
age. But why, then, is memory enhancement through FAE-20 so readily
revealed in larval Drosophila? A possible reason for this is that the late,
stage 3 larvae used in the present experiments are, in a sense, “aged,” rep-
resenting a life stage at the end of a 5-day continuous feeding frenzy and
shortly before the“larvaldeath” followed by rebirthasa young adult (57).
Caveats
We note that, under healthy conditions, the use of memory enhancers
entails risks. (i) As argued above, memory-enhancing effects are easier
to obtain whenever memory function is compromised. This might
prompt healthy subjects to use higher concentrations in an attempt
nevertheless to achieve an increase in memory function, increasing the
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
11 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

likelihood of unintended side effects. The rewarding effects of Rhodiola
and FAE-20 that we observed in larval Drosophila in a parallel study
may indicate an addictive potential and caution against their non-
medical use. (ii) Under healthy conditions, memory enhancement
may induce excessively rapid acquisition and consolidation for only
spuriously associated events, leading to superstitious behavior not
adaptively grounded in experience. Last but not least, (iii) it may dis-
tort the adaptive balance between memory acquisition and forgetting/
extinction, or the adaptive balance between the discrimination and
generalization of memories. In other words, faster learning or more
robust or more specific memory does not necessarily equal better cog-
nition and may not always be adaptive. Bearing these caveats in mind,
memory enhancement may still be desirable, for example, to compensate
for age-dependent memory loss or when mnemonic abilities are path-
ologically impaired.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Drosophila experiments, R. rosea materials
D. melanogaster genotypes
Canton-S wild-type D. melanogaster larvae or adults were used for all
experiments, unless mentioned otherwise. Flies carrying P(acman)
brp83 have been described previously (58), and because they carry
two additional copies of the gene coding for BRP, these animals are re-
ferred to as “4×BRP” for simplicity. The “2×BRP, baseline” genotype,
having only the genomic copies of BRP-coding genes, corresponds to
the Canton-S strain mentioned above.
Food media and fly keeping
Procedures followed those of (59). To prepare standard food medium,
34 liters of water were mixed to 5.9 kg of cornmeal (Mühle Hofmann,
Röthlein, Germany), boiled for 5 min, and automatically stirred gently
for 4 hours. On the next day, 400 g of soya flour (Mühle Hofmann,
Röthlein, Germany), 750 g of dried yeast powder (Heirler Cenovis,
Radolfzell, Germany), and 250 g of agar-agar (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe,
Germany) were added to 6 liters of water; after stirring, 1.8 liters of
malt (Ulmer Spatz, Bingen am Rhein, Germany) and 1.8 liters of sug-
ar beet molasses (Grafschafter Krautfabrik, Meckenheim, Germany)
were added and boiled for 5 min with the cornmeal mixture while
being gently stirred. Upon cooling to 70° to 80°C, 100 g of antifungal
agent (methyl-4-hydroxybenzoate; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)
was added.
To prepare fly culture vials, this food medium was boiled in a
microwave oven, and, for control vials, aliquots (20 ml) were poured
into plastic vials and kept at 4°C for later use. For the experimental
groups, each of the following substances was added 5 min after boiling
to reach the specified concentrations of material per volume of food.
These vials were stored for later use at 4°C
(1) Rhodiola1: Dried R. rosea roots (collected by O.L. in 2009 in the
Carpathian Mountains near Mount Pip Ivan; 48°2′31″N, 24°37′32″E)
were ground for 60 s with a commercial coffee mill. The powder was
added to the vials 5 min after boiling to reach the specified concentra-
tions; then, vials were stored at 4°C.
(2) Tablet: Ground “Arctic root” tablets (Swedish Herbal Institute,
Gothenburg, Sweden; lot no. 60363, purchased via s.a.m. Pharma,
Vienna, Austria; expiration date: November 2011, implying harvest
of plant material before that date) were added to the food to reach
the indicated concentrations. According to the manufacturer’s specifi-
cations, 28% of the tablets’ weightconsistsof the patentedSHR-5 extract
of R. rosea. Assuming that this extract is enriched from the dried root
ingredients by at least a factor of 10, a concentration of 2.8 mg/ml of
tablet should thus correspond to ~10 mg/ml of Rhodiola1; a pilot exper-
iment had shown that higher concentrations of the hygroscopic ground
tablet powder compromised the viability of Drosophila.
(3) Rhodiola2 refers to a second crop of dried R. rosea roots, also
collected by O.L. in 2009 in the Carpathian Mountains near Mount
Pip Ivan (48°2′31″N, 24°37′32″E).
(4) Rhodiola3 refers to dried R. rosea roots of unspecified Russian
origin purchased by O.L. before 2011 and thus also harvested before
that date.
(5) Rhodiola4 root was purchased by B.M. in 2011 from the Eve-
line24.de online shop (Maardu, Estonia; Ch./lot no. 18621; expiration
date: 6 July 2014 and thus harvested before that date).
Voucher samples of all accessions or purchases are deposited
at the Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry and the Leibniz In-
stitute for Neurobiology: Arctic root tablets (QGB005), Rhodiola1
(QGB001), Rhodiola2 (QGB003), Rhodiola3 (QGB004), and Rhodiola4
(QGB011).
In all cases, vials were retrieved from the 4°C store at around noon,
and2 hours afterward, approximately 100 Canton-S wild-type flies were
added to the vial, which was then maintained at 25°C and 60 to 70%
relative humidity under a 14-hour light/10-hour dark cycle. On the next
day, these flies were removed; after an additional 4 days, the larvae were
harvested from the food slurry for experiments.
Preparation of Rhodiola extractcrude for food medium
Finely chopped Rhodiola4 root (1.565 kg) was exhaustively extracted
with 80% aqueous undenatured ethanol (3 × 6 liters) at room tempera-
ture. The extracts were combined and filtered, and the solvent was evap-
orated under reduced pressure. Food medium was then prepared as
described above, at the concentrations mentioned in Results.
Synthesis of ferulic acid esters and derivatives for food medium
The ferulic acid esters FAE-8, FAE-12, FAE-16, and FAE-20 were
synthesized by the Mitsunobu reaction from FA and long-chain alco-
hols as described by Maresca et al. (60). In the same fashion, 4-OH-
CAE-20wasobtainedstarting from trans-p-coumaricacid, andicosanol.
DH-FAE-20 was obtained by hydrogenation of the double bond of FA
eicosyl ester, affording the product in quantitative yield. Synthesis details
and compound data are summarized in Supplementary Materials and
Methods. Food medium was then prepared as described above, at the
concentrations mentioned in Results.
Synthesis of BSSG and derivatives for food medium
Thesynthesisofb-sitosterol-b-D-glucosideandb-sitosterol-b-D-galactoside
wasperformed following a procedure described by Kunz and Harreus (61),
starting from acetobromo-a-D-glucose or acetobromo-a-D-galactose and
sitosterol. The remaining compounds were purchased from com-
mercial sources: b-sitosterol (Honeywell-Fluka via Fisher Scientific,
Schwerte, Germany), stigmasterol (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium),
stigmasterol-b-D-glucoside (ChemFaces, Wuhan, Hubei, China), and
cholesterol-b-D-glucoside and stevioside (both from Sigma-Aldrich,
Taufkirchen, Germany). Food medium was then prepared as described
above, at the concentrations mentioned in Results.
Behavioral experiments in larval Drosophila
The procedures for behavioral experiments in larval Drosophila follow
those of (59) and are further specified below.
Two-odor learning paradigm in larval Drosophila
The learning experiments follow the procedures of (62) (see sketch in
Fig. 1A): Petri dishes (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) with an inner
diameter of 85 mm were filled with 1% agarose (electrophoresis grade;
Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), which was allowed to solidify. The
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
12 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

dishes were covered with their lids and then left untreated at room tem-
perature until the following day. As the sugar reward, 2 mol of FRU
(purity: 99%, Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) was used, which was
added to 1 liter of agarose 10 min after boiling.
Experiments were performed under natural light at 21° to 24°C.
Before the experiments, the regular lids of the petri dishes were re-
placed by lids perforated in the center by 15 holes (diameter, 1 mm)
to improve aeration.
Odor was applied by adding 10 ml of odor substance into custom-
made Teflon containers (inner diameter, 5 mm; these could be closed
by a perforated lid with seven holes, 0.5 mm in diameter each). As
odors, we used AM [Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) no. 628-63-7;
purity, 98.5%, diluted 1:50 in paraffin oil] and 1OCT [CAS no. 111-87-5;
purity, 99% (undiluted)], both from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany), un-
less stated otherwise.
A spoonful of food medium containing larvae was taken from the
food vial and transferred to a droplet of tap water on a petri dish. Thirty
animals were collected, briefly washed in tap water, and transferred
as a group to the assay plates for the start of training; in half of the
cases, we started with a FRU-containing petri dish, and in the other
half of the cases, we started with an agarose-only (PURE)–containing
petri dish.
Immediately before the first training trial, two containers both
loaded with the same odor were placed onto the assay plate on opposite
sides of the plate (7 mm from the edges). Within each reciprocal train-
ing condition, we started with AM in half of the cases and with 1OCT in
the other half, unless stated otherwise. Then, the petri dish was closed,
and the larvae were allowed to move freely for 5 min. The larvae were
then transferred to a petri dish with the alternative odor and the respec-
tive other substrate for 5 min (e.g., AM was presented on a FRU-
containingplateand1OCTonaPUREpetridish:AM+/1OCTtraining).
This cycle was repeated two more times. Fresh petri dishes were used for
each trial.
After this training, the animals were tested for their choice between
the odors. The larvae were placed in the middle of a PURE petri dish;
unless mentioned otherwise, a container with AM was placed on one
side and a container with 1OCT was placed on the other side to create a
choice situation. After 3 min, the number of animals on the “AM” or
“1OCT” side was counted. After this test was completed, the next group
of animals was run and trained reciprocally (e.g., AM/1OCT+).
For both groups, the odor preference ranging from −1 to 1 was
calculated. To this end, the number of animals observed on the AM side
(#AM) minus the number of animals observedon the 1OCT side (#1OCT)
was determined, divided by the total number (#TOTAL)
PREF ¼ ð#AM  #1OCTÞ=#TOTAL
ð1Þ
To determine whether these preferences vary according to the
training regimen (i.e.,whetherthey reflectassociative memory),the data
from alternately run, reciprocally trained groups were taken, and the PI
ranging from −1 to 1 was calculated as
PI ¼ ðPREFAMþ=1OCT  PREFAM=1OCTþÞ=2
ð2Þ
Data for control and experimental groups were gathered alternately.
One-odor learning paradigm in larval Drosophila
In two experimental series, we used a one-odor training regimen (17)
by omitting 1OCT from the experiment. That is, the animals in one
group received presentations of AM with the reward, alternating
with presentations of an empty odor container (EM) on a PURE
petri dish (AM+/ EM); the animals trained reciprocally received un-
paired presentations of odor and reward (AM/ EM+). During the
test, the animals were allowed to choose between AM and EM; the
data were then treated, with due adjustments, as described in the pre-
ceding section.
Behavior toward odors and sugar in experimentally naïve
larval Drosophila
To test for the behavioral specificity of Rhodiola1 treatment, we
determined the behavior of experimentally naïve larvae toward the
stimuli to be associated for each of the rearing conditions indicated.
To test behavior toward FRU, split petri dishes of 85 mm inner diam-
eter were prepared: One-half contained PURE, while in the other
half, FRU was present in addition (see sketch in Fig. 2A).
Regarding the odors, the larvae had the choice either between AM
and EM or between 1OCT and EM (see sketch in Fig. 2, B and C). In
both cases, the larvae were placed in the middle, and after 3 min, the
number of larvae on either side was counted; then, the preference
index (PREF) values were calculated, with due adjustments, according
to Eq. 1.
Olfactory behavior after training-like stimulus exposure in
larval Drosophila
As we have argued before (63), the mere exposure to the training
stimuli (i.e., odor exposure per se and reward exposure per se) can
have nonassociative effects on test behavior. Therefore, the behavior
of animals from the control and Rhodiola1 groups toward AM (diluted
1:50 in paraffin oil) and 1OCT, respectively, was assayed after either of
two exposure treatments. Either the larvae were exposed to the reward
but not to the odors in an otherwise training-like way (see sketches in
Fig. 2, D and E) or they were exposed to the odors but not to the
reward (Fig. 2, F and G). Then, the PREF scores for AM and 1OCT,
respectively, versus EMs were determined, with due adjustments,
according to Eq. 1.
Learning experiments in adult Drosophila
Flies were raised and kept on standard fly food (control) or on fly
food supplemented with either ground Rhodiola4 root (10 mg/ ml)
or FAE-20 (final concentration, 0.71 mM) at 25°C and 60 to 70% relative
humidity under a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle. For the learning
experiments, we used either freshly hatched flies (1 to 3 days after
hatching) or 15-day-old flies (after hatching). Every 3 to 5 days after
hatching, the “15-day-old” group was transferred to fresh food vials.
One day before the behavioral experiments, the flies were starved
overnight for 18 to 20 hours at 25°C and 60 to 70% relative humidity
in vials equipped with a moist tissue paper to prevent desiccation.
The experimental setup and protocol followed those of (64). As
odors, 90 ml of BA (CAS no. 100-52-7, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)
and 340 ml of 3OCT (CAS no. 589-98-0, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)
were applied in 1-cm-deep Teflon containers of 5- and 14-mm diam-
eters, respectively. Two training trials were applied. Each trial started by
loading a group of 50 to 100 flies into the setup (0:00 min). One minute
later, the flies were transferred to a tube lined with a filter paper that had
been soaked the previous day with 2 ml of 2 M SUC solution; then, BA,
for example, was shunted into the permanent air flow running through
this tube (in half of the cases, 3OCT was used). After 45 s, odor stimu-
lation was terminated, and after an additional 15 s, the flies were taken
out of the tube. At the end of a 1-min waiting period, the flies were
transferred into another tube lined with a filter paper that had been
soaked with pure water the previous day, and the respective other odor
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
13 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

was presented. After 45 s, stimulation with this odor was terminated,
and 15 s later, the flies were taken out of this second tube. The second
trial started immediately. In half of the cases, both training trials started
with an odor-sugar presentation; in the other half, both trials started
with an odor-alone presentation. After this BA+/ 3OCT training and
an additional waiting period of 3 min, the flies were transferred to a
T maze, where they could choose between the previously rewarded
and the previously unrewarded odor. After 2 min, the choice point of
the maze was closed, the flies on each side were counted, and the PREF
was calculated
PREF ¼ ð#BA  #3OCTÞ=#TOTAL
ð3Þ
A second group was trained reciprocally (BA/ 3OCT+), and the PI
was calculated as a measure of associative memory based on their
PREF values
PI ¼ ðPREFBAþ=3OCT  PREFBA=3OCTþÞ=2
ð4Þ
The experiments were performed at 22° to 25°C and 75 to 85% rel-
ative humidity. Training took place under light; the test was per-
formed in complete darkness, preventing the flies from seeing.
Behavior toward odors and SUC in experimentally naïve
adult Drosophila
To test for the behavioral specificity of FAE-20 effects, the preference of
control or FAE-20–reared aged flies toward the stimuli to be associated
was determined. Flies were tested for responsiveness to the odors BA
and 3OCT and to SUC in the same T maze setup used for the learning
experiments. To test the preference for olfactory cues, the flies were giv-
en 2 min to choose between the two arms of the T maze: one scented
with the respective odor used for conditioning and the other one un-
scented. For each experiment, the number of flies was counted in both
arms, and a PREF for each odor was calculated, with due adjustments,
according to Eq. 3. To test the preference for SUC, the flies were given
2 min to choose between one arm of the T maze lined with a SUC
solution–soaked filter paper and the other arm lined with a water-
soaked filter paper. The PREF was calculated, with due adjustments,
in the same way.
Statistical analyses of Drosophila behavioral experiments
All statistical analyses were performed with Statistica (version 11; StatSoft
Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA). In a conservative approach, nonparametric tests
at a statistical significance level of 5% were used throughout. For
multiple-group comparisons, Kruskal-Wallis (H) tests were used,
followed by pairwise comparisons with Mann-Whitney U tests.
For these follow-up pairwisecomparisons,thestatisticalsignificancelev-
elof5%wasmaintainedwithaBonferronicorrection(P<0.05dividedby
the respective number of pairwise tests). Data are displayed as box plots
representing the median as the middle line, with the 25th and 75th quan-
tiles as box boundaries and the 10th and 90th quantiles as whiskers.
Quantitative MS of adult Drosophila heads
Single heads of adult Drosophila were resolubilized in 20 ml of water
containing 8 M of freshly deionized urea. Tissue and cell destruction
was achieved by means of a microglass potter and pulsed sonification
on ice for 1 hour. After centrifugation at 21,000g for 15 min at 15°C, 15 ml
of the resulting supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and supple-
mented with 60 ml of 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (pH 8.0) and 2 mM
dithiothreitol. After incubation for 1 hour at 20°C, 10 mM methyl meth-
ane thiosulfonic acid was added for an additional 1 hour for thiomethyla-
tion of previously reduced cysteines. Limited proteolysis was started by
adding250ngoftrypsin(TrypsinGold,Promega,Mannheim,Germany),
followed by incubation at room temperature for 12 hours. Resulting
peptides were purified with reversed-phase C18 ZipTip nano-columns
(Millipore/Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA)/70% acetonitrile (ACN), and dried in a vacuum evaporator
centrifuge (Savant, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
Proteome analysis was performed on a hybrid dual-pressure linear
ion trap/orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo
Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-nLC ultrahigh-performance
liquid chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were resol-
ubilized in 12 ml of 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN and subjected to a 75-mm-
inner-diameter, 25-cm PepMap C18 column, packed with 2-mm resin
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation was achieved by applying a gra-
dient from 2 to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over a 120-min gradient
at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro MS used ex-
clusively collision-induced dissociation fragmentation. The spectra ac-
quisition consisted of an orbitrap full MS [Fourier transform MS
(FTMS)] scan, followed by up to 15 LTQ tandem MS/MS experiments
(TOP15) on the most abundant ions detected in the full MS scan. Es-
sential MS settings were as follows: FTMS (resolution, 60,000; mass/
charge ratio range, 400 to 2000) and MS/MS (linear trap; minimum sig-
nal threshold, 500; dynamic exclusion time setting, 30 s; singly charged
ions were excluded from selection). Normalized collision energy and
activation time were set to 35% and 10 ms, respectively.
Raw data processing and protein identification were performed by
PEAKS Studio 8.0 (Bioinformatics Solutions; Waterloo, Canada). False
discovery rate was set to <1%.
BRP quantification was performed on the basis of the six most abun-
dant tryptic BRP peptides within the MS datasets obtained. Relative
protein quantification was achieved using the Skyline analysis platform
(65) for MS peak integration on extracted ion chromatograms of the
following selected peptide masses:
(1) TQGTLQTVQER: 630.83082+ (precursor), 631.33222+ (precur-
sor[M+ 1]), 631.83352+(precursor[M+ 2]), and 632.33472+(precursor
[M + 3]).
(2) SLQTQGGGAAAAGELNK: 786.90252+ (precursor), 787.40392+
(precursor [M + 1]), 787.90522+ (precursor [M + 2]), and 788.40642+
(precursor [M + 3]).
(3) VTYELER: 455.23742+ (precursor) and 455.73892+ (precursor
[M + 1]).
(4) LQQSSVSPGDPVR: 685.35712+ (precursor), 685.85862+ (pre-
cursor [M + 1]), 686.35992+ (precursor [M + 2]), 686.86112+ (precursor
[M + 3]), and 687.36242+ (precursor [M + 4]).
(5) LLQLVQMSQEEQNAK: 879.95642+ (precursor), 880.45782+
(precursor [M + 1]), and 880.95872+ (precursor [M + 2]).
(6) IEMEVQNMESK: 669.30742+ (precursor) and 669.80882+ (pre-
cursor [M + 1]).
The monoisotopic precursor mass and one or more 13C-isotopic
variants ([M + 1], [M + 2] …) were chosen for more accurate and con-
fident quantification. The peak qualities of the quantified peptides were
controlled by the “isotope dot product” (idotp), set to >0.95. Idotp pro-
vides a measure for precursor isotope distribution and the correlation
between the expected and the observed pattern, with optimal matching
resulting in an idotp value of “1” (66).
To analyze the relative abundance of the BRP protein in 2×BRP
baseline, 4×BRP control, and 4×BRP flies fed with FAE-20, the six
BRP peptides showing the highest intensities of all BRP peptides in
the MS raw data were taken into consideration. Having separated by
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
14 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

gender each of these six peptide intensities, data from n = 7 to 9 repli-
cates were normalized to the median of the respective peptide inten-
sity of the female or male control. For each group of flies, normalized
data of the six peptides were pooled and analyzed with nonparametric
statistics.
In all cases, experimenters were blinded to the treatment con-
ditions (food supplementation, genotypes of the animals). These were
decoded only after the experiments.
Honeybee experiments
Animals
Forager honeybees (A. mellifera carnica) were collected at 2 p.m. at the
hive entrance or in an indoor flight room. The bees were immobilized
by cooling and mounted in plastic tubes. At 4 p.m., the bees were fed to
saturation, and at 4 p.m. on the following day, with 16 ml of SUC solu-
tion. All the SUC solutions mentioned in the context of the bee
experiments refer to a concentration of 30% (w/v), unless stated other-
wise. The animals were kept in a dark humidified chamber overnight at
20° to 24°C.
Learning experiments and Rhodiola feeding in bees
Odor-sugar associative learning experiments were conducted on har-
nessed bees, as previously described (67). All experiments were per-
formed in the morning (10 to 12 a.m.). The animals were placed next
to the training site 30 min before the experiment. Experiments consisted
of a five-trial (Fig. 4A) or a three-trial (Fig. 4, D to F, and fig. S6) classical
conditioning phase, followed by a single-trial (Fig. 4, D to F) or a three-
trial(fig. S6) odor-only presentation test phase. Atraining trialconsisted
of the bee being placed in front of an exhaust, followed after 10 s by the
presentation of the odor for 5 s and then 3 s later by the presentation of
SUC solution to the antennae and the proboscis lasting for 4 s (i.e., an
overlap of 2 s between odor and SUC). An extension of the proboscis to
the odor was considered to be a response (PER). The total duration of a
trial was 30 s; the time between two trials was 10 min. The odor was
presented manually with a 20-ml syringe containing a filter paper
(1 cm in diameter) with 4 ml of either 1-hexanol (CAS no. 111-27-3)
or 1-nonanol (CAS no. 143-08-8) (both 98%; Sigma-Aldrich, Munich,
Germany) for each bee.
Bees were fed 16 ml of SUC solution, of which 8 ml contained 0.1, 1, or
10% (w/v) Rhodiola4E root extract. The feeding took place 19 hours
before training (1% extract: Fig. 4A), 5 hours after training (i.e., 19 hours
before the test; Fig. 4, D and E, and fig. S6), or 29 hours after training
(i.e., 19 hours before the test; Fig. 4F). In the control group, the bees
were fed 16 ml of SUC solution at these respective time points.
Sugar response experiments in experimentally naïve bees
Bees were fed with 16 ml of SUC solution, of which 8 ml contained 0.1, 1,
or 10% (w/v) Rhodiola4E root extract; in the control group, the bees were
fed 16 ml of SUC solution. On the following day, the PERs of treated and
control bees were noted to concentrations of SUC solution presented to
the antenna in an ascending order [0, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, and 30% (w/v),
according to (68)]. The SUC response score was calculated for each bee
by summing the number of PERs it had shown.
Odor response experiments in experimentally naïve bees
Bees were fed 16 ml of SUC solution, of which 8 ml contained 1% (w/v)
Rhodiola4E root extract; in the control group, the bees were fed 16 ml of
SUC solution. On the following day, the bees were tested for their PER
in response to odor (4 ml of either 1-hexanol or 1-nonanol for each bee).
Preparation of Rhodiola4E
To produce Rhodiola4E, dried Rhodiola4 roots were ground in a com-
mercial coffee mill for 3 min and subsequently in a porcelain mortar.
Ground roots (100 mg) were stirred for 18 hours at room temperature
in 10 ml of ethanol (99%, undenatured) in a light-protected glass bottle.
After solvent evaporation, the remaining material was added to SUC
solution, vortexed, and heated to 90°C for 60 s.
Stock solutions were kept in darkness at 4°C for up to 7 days.
The SUC solution for the control groups was prepared and treated
in parallel.
Statistical analyses of behavioral experiments on bees
Included in the analysis were bees that fulfilled two criteria: (i) showing
a PER to the SUC solution throughout training and (ii) showing a PER
upon SUC stimulation at the very end of the respective experiments.
rmANOVA was used with Fisher’s LSD as a post hoc analysis (Statistica
version 8.0, StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA). We used R version 3.4.1
(69) and lme4 (70) to perform a logistic mixed-effects analysis of the
relationship between Rhodiola treatment and the number of PERs in
honeybees. To model several trials, we added as fixed effects the time
points of testing and the different treatment groups (without an inter-
action term) to the model. As random effects, we included an intercept
for subjects. To model only the test trials, we entered the different treat-
ment groups as fixed effects into the model. As random effects, we had
an intercept for subjects. To model the test trials in the concentration
dependency experiment, we entered the different treatment groups as
fixed effects into the model and added the last trial of the acquisition as a
fixed effect. As random effects, we had an intercept for subjects. As
optimizers for the model, we used BOBYQA, nloptwrap, and R’s
standard. No obvious deviations from homoscedasticity or normal-
ity were found by visual inspection of residual plots. We obtained all
P values by likelihood ratio tests of the full model with treatment
groups against the model without groups as a fixed effect. In Fig. 4
(B to F), bars and error bars represent means and confidence inter-
vals with confidence levels of 95%.
Mouse experiments
Mice and slice preparation for electrophysiology
Experiments were performed on 4- to 6-week-old male C57BL/6J mice
as described in (71). Mice were treated in accordance with the ethical
guidelines for the use of animals in experiments; experiments were
approved by the local animal care committee (Landesverwaltungsamt
Sachsen-Anhalt). The animals were decapitated after cervical dislo-
cation. The brain was rapidly removed and placed in ice-cold solu-
tion containing 230 mM SUC, 2.5 mM KCl, 7 mM MgCl2, 1.25 mM
NaH2PO4, 26.6 mM NaHCO3, 0.5 mM CaCl2, and 10 mM D-glucose
(all chemicals here and below were from Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim,
Germany). The frontal lobe was removed, and the brain was glued to
a vibratome stage. Horizontal or transverse hippocampal slices were cut
at 350 mm with a vibrating microtome (VT1200S, Leica). The slices were
then incubated at room temperature (23° to 25°C) for at least 1 hour in a
submerged chamber to recover in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF)
containing 113 mM NaCl, 2.38 mM KCl, 1.24 mM MgSO4, 0.95 mM
NaH2PO4, 24.9 mM NaHCO3, 1 mM CaCl2, 1.6 mM MgCl2, and
27.8 mM D-glucose. Subsequently, the slices were transferred to the re-
cording chamber and were continuously perfused (2 to 3 ml/min) with
carbogen-bubbledACSFcontaining119mMNaCl,2.5mMKCl,1.3mM
MgSO4, 1 mM NaH2PO4, 26.2 mM NaHCO3, 2.5 mM CaCl2, and
11 mM D-glucose. All solutions were saturated by 95% O2/5% CO2
and adjusted to a pH of 7.4 and an osmolarity of 295 ± 5 mosM. Before
whole-cell patch-clamp recording, Rhodiola extractcrude (0.28 mg/ml) or
FAE-20(0.1, 1.0, and4mM)wasbathapplied.The vehicle (80% ethanol)
was applied in the same way.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
15 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings and data analysis
Recordings were obtained using an EPC-10 amplifier (HEKA Elektronik,
Lambrecht, Germany). The data were digitized at 20 kHz and filtered at
2 to 3 kHz. All recordings were made at room temperature in whole-cell
configuration from CA1 pyramidal cells visually identified with an in-
frared differential interference contrast microscope (SliceScope, Scien-
tifica, Kings Grove, UK). Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were
performed with glass pipettes (4 to 5 megohms; Hilgenberg, Malsfeld,
Germany) filled withinternal solution containing 140 mM K-gluconate,
8 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM CaCl2, 10 mM Hepes, 2 mM EGTA, 0.5 mM
NaGTP, and 2 mM MgATP (pH 7.2 with KOH; 290 mosM). To evoke
action potentials, current pulses were applied using a patch amplifier in
current-clamp mode. A series of 14 current pulses (500-ms duration,
from −80 to 440 pA in 40-pA increments) were applied. Membrane
potential was held at −70 mV during interpulse intervals by injecting
direct current using the Patchmaster software (HEKA Elektronik).
The numbers of action potentials at each current step were counted.
Excel (Microsoft, USA) and SigmaPlot 12.3 (Systat Software Inc.,
Erkrath, Germany) were used for statistical analyses and graphical pre-
sentation of electrophysiological data, presented as the means ± SEM.
Statistical significance was determined using two-way rmANOVA.
Contextual fear conditioning in mice
For the contextual fear conditioning experiments, young adult (3 months
old) or aged (2.4 to 2.8 years old) C57BL/6J male mice (Charles River,
Sulzfeld,Germany)were usedasmentionedinResults.Theywerehoused
in groups of three to four animals and had free access to food and water.
All experiments took place during the light phase of the 12-hour light/
12-hour dark cycle. The experiments were carried out in accordance
with the European Committee Council Directive (86/609/EEC) and were
approved by the local animal care committee (Landesverwaltungsamt
Sachsen-Anhalt 42502-2-1191).
We used an automated system (TSE Systems, Bad Homburg,
Germany) for fear conditioning, located in a sound-attenuating cham-
ber. We used cubic test boxes (23 cm by 23 cm), which were surrounded
by an array of infrared light beams to detect the movements of the
animals. The floor consisted of a grid, by which the unconditioned stim-
ulus (1-s, 0.5-mA scrambled foot shock) could be delivered. To provide
distinct contexts, the color of the test boxes (black or transparent),
the floor (grid or plastic floor), the odor [70% alcohol or Deskosept
(Dr. Schumacher GmbH, Melsungen)], and the background noise
(provided by a fan) could be changed. To avoid any bias, these dif-
ferent contextual stimuli were randomly changed.
On the first day, the animals were placed into the conditioning
chamber for a total of 10 min. After a 2-min habituation period,
they received three scrambled foot shocks (1 s, 0.5 mA) at random
intervals (1.5 to 4 min). After the last foot shock, the animals remained
in the chamber for the last 2 min. Twenty-four hours after the
conditioning, the animals were first tested for unspecific fear by expos-
ing them for 5 min to a neutral novel context and scoring their freezing
behavior. One hour later, we exposed the animals for 10 min to the con-
text in which the training had been carried out (training context) and
scored their freezing behavior.
To apply FAE-20 to the animals, 3 ml of a 4.06 mM FAE-20 solution
[10% (v/v) ethanol in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)] per kilogram of
body weight (i.e., 6 mg of FAE-20 per kilogram of body weight) or, for
the control, 3 ml of an ethanol solution [10% (v/v) ethanol in PBS] per
kilogram of body weight was injected intraperitoneally 30 min before
the fear conditioning started. To test an FAE-20 concentration that
was twice as high, 6 ml of the abovementioned 4.06 mM FAE-20 solu-
tion per kilogram of body weight (i.e., 12 mg of FAE-20 per kilogram of
body weight) or of an ethanol solution [10% (v/v) ethanol in PBS] per
kilogram of body weight for the control was injected.
The behavioral data of the mice were analyzed by rmANOVA using
the intraperitoneally injected “drug” as the between-subject factor and
the “context” of testing as the within-subject factor. For the detailed
group comparisons, the ANOVA was followed by Fisher’s LSD post hoc
comparisons. P < 0.05 was considered a statistically significant difference.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/10/eaat6994/DC1
Supplementary Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Rhodiola4 produces memory enhancement in Drosophila larvae.
Fig. S2. Rhodiola1 does not affect olfactory behavior after one-odor exposure.
Fig. S3. A Rhodiola tablet preparation has no memory-enhancing effect in larval Drosophila.
Fig. S4. Different levels of memory enhancement by various Rhodiola materials.
Fig. S5. Confirming that Rhodiola4 improves memory in aged flies.
Fig. S6. Rhodiola4E leads to enhanced memory performance across extinction trials in bees.
Fig. S7. No memory-enhancing effects of synthetic BSSG or its derivatives in larvae.
Fig. S8. Analytical data on the ferulic acid ester fraction isolated from Rhodiola roots.
Fig. S9. NMR comparison of isolated and synthetic FAE-20.
Data file S1. Raw data of all experiments (Excel).
References (72–74)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. R. P. Brown, P. L. Gerbarg, Z. Ramazanov, Rhodiola rosea. A phytomedicinal overview.
HerbalGram 56, 40–52 (2002).
2. C. Linnaeus, Materia medica. Liber I, De plantis (Lars Salvius, 1749), p. 168.
3. A. Panossian, G. Wikman, J. Sarris, Rosenroot (Rhodiola rosea): Traditional use, chemical
composition, pharmacology and clinical efficacy. Phytomedicine 17, 481–493 (2010).
4. European Medicines Agency, Assessment report on Rhodiola rosea L., rhizoma et radix
(London, United Kingdom, 2012); www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/
Herbal_-_HMPC_assessment_report/2012/05/WC500127861.pdf.
5. National Institutes of Health, Rhodiola (National Center for Complementary and
Integrative Health, 2016); https://nccih.nih.gov/health/rhodiola.
6. S. Ishaque, L. Shamseer, C. Bukutu, S. Vohra, Rhodiola rosea for physical and mental
fatigue: A systematic review. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 12, 70 (2012).
7. V. D. Petkov, D. Yonkov, A. Mosharoff, T. Kambourova, L. Alova, V. V. Petkov, I. Todorov,
Effects of alcohol aqueous extract from Rhodiola rosea L. roots on learning and memory.
Acta Physiol. Pharmacol. Bulg. 12, 3–16 (1986).
8. S. K. Hung, R. Perry, E. Ernst, The effectiveness and efficacy of Rhodiola rosea L.:
A systematic review of randomized clinical trials. Phytomedicine 18, 235–244 (2011).
9. A. Coors, E. Kahl, R. Khalil, B. Michels, B. Gerber, M. Fendt, Rhodiola rosea root extract has
antipsychotic-like effects in rodent models of sensorimotor gating, poster at the 11th
FENS Forum of Neuroscience (July 2018).
10. F. A. C. Wiegant, S. Surinova, E. Ytsma, M. Langelaar-Makkinje, G. Wikman, J. A. Post, Plant
adaptogens increase lifespan and stress resistance in C. elegans. Biogerontology 10, 27–42 (2009).
11. S. E. Schriner, K. Lee, S. Truong, K. T. Salvadora, S. Maler, A. Nam, T. Lee, M. Jafari,
Extension of Drosophila lifespan by Rhodiola rosea through a mechanism independent
from dietary restriction. PLOS ONE 8, e63886 (2013).
12. S. Diegelmann, B. Klagges, B. Michels, M. Schleyer, B. Gerber, Maggot learning and
Synapsin function. J. Exp. Biol. 216, 939–951 (2013).
13. R. L. Davis, Olfactory memory formation in Drosophila: From molecular to systems
neuroscience. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 28, 275–302 (2005).
14. R. Menzel, U. Müller, Learning and memory in honeybees: From behavior to neural
substrates. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 379–404 (1996).
15. M. Schwärzel, U. Müller, Dynamic memory networks: Dissecting molecular mechanisms
underlying associative memory in the temporal domain. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 63,
989–998 (2006).
16. E. R. Kandel, Y. Dudai, M. R. Mayford, The molecular and systems biology of memory. Cell
157, 163–186 (2014).
17. T. Saumweber, J. Husse, B. Gerber, Innate attractiveness and associative learnability of
odors can be dissociated in larval Drosophila. Chem. Senses 36, 223–235 (2011).
18. S. M. Ross, Rhodiola rosea (SHR-5), Part 2: A standardized extract of Rhodiola rosea is
shown to be effective in the treatment of mild to moderate depression. Holist. Nurs. Pract.
28, 217–221 (2014).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
16 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

19. D. Wüstenberg, B. Gerber, R. Menzel, Long- but not medium-term retention of olfactory
memories in honeybees is impaired by actinomycin D and anisomycin. Eur. J. Neurosci. 10,
2742–2745 (1998).
20. S. Hielscher-Michael, C. Griehl, M. Buchholz, H.-U. Demuth, N. Arnold, L. A. Wessjohann,
Natural products from microalgae with potential against Alzheimer’s disease: Sulfolipids
are potent glutaminyl cyclase inhibitors. Mar. Drugs 14, E203 (2016).
21. V. K. Gupta, U. Pech, A. Bhukel, A. Fulterer, A. Ender, S. F. Mauermann, T. F. M. Andlauer,
E. Antwi-Adjei, C. Beuschel, K. Thriene, M. Maglione, C. Quentin, R. Bushow, M. Schwärzel,
T. Mielke, F. Madeo, J. Dengjel, A. Fiala, S. J. Sigrist, Spermidine suppresses age-associated
memory impairment by preventing adverse increase of presynaptic active zone size
and release. PLOS Biol. 14, e1002563 (2016).
22. O. J. Ahmed, M. R. Mehta, The hippocampal rate code: Anatomy, physiology and theory.
Trends Neurosci. 32, 329–338 (2009).
23. K. M. Igarashi, H. T. Ito, E. I. Moser, M.-B. Moser, Functional diversity along the transverse
axis of hippocampal area CA1. FEBS Lett. 588, 2470–2476 (2014).
24. H. K. Titley, N. Brunel, C. Hansel, Toward a neurocentric view of learning. Neuron 95,
19–32 (2017).
25. W. Zhang, D. J. Linden, The other side of the engram: Experience-driven changes in
neuronal intrinsic excitability. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4, 885–900 (2003).
26. X.-W. Yu, M. M. Oh, J. F. Disterhoft, CREB, cellular excitability, and cognition: Implications
for aging. Behav. Brain Res. 322, 206–211 (2017).
27. A. M. Baldé, M. Claeys, L. A. Pieters, V. Wray, A. J. Vlietninck, Ferulic acid esters form stem
bark of Pavetta owariensis. Phytochemistry 30, 1024–1026 (1991).
28. L. Hennig, G. M. Garcia, A. Giannis, R. W. Bussmann, New constituents of Baccharis
genistelloides (Lam.) Pers. ARKIVOC 2011, 74–81 (2011).
29. A. Sgarbossa, D. Giacomazza, M. di Carlo, Ferulic acid: A hope for Alzheimer’s disease
therapy from plants. Nutrients 7, 5764–5782 (2015).
30. B. Jayaprakasam, M. Vanisree, Y. Zhang, D. L. Dewitt, M. G. Nair, Impact of alkyl esters of
caffeic and ferulic acids on tumor cell proliferation, cyclooxygenase enzyme, and lipid
peroxidation. J. Agric. Food Chem. 54, 5375–5381 (2006).
31. C. Chen, J. Song, M. Chen, Z. Li, X. Tong, H. Hu, Z. Xiang, C. Lu, F. Dai, Rhodiola rosea
extends lifespan and improves stress tolerance in silkworm, Bombyx mori. Biogerontology
17, 373–381 (2016).
32. M. Wang, L. Luo, L. Yao, C. Wang, K. Jiang, X. Liu, M. Xu, N. Shen, S. Guo, C. Sun,
Y. Yang, Salidroside improves glucose homeostasis in obese mice by repressing
inflammation in white adipose tissues and improving leptin sensitivity in hypothalamus.
Sci. Rep. 6, 25399 (2016).
33. A. Panossian, R. Hamm, G. Wikman, T. Efferth, Mechanism of action of Rhodiola,
salidroside, tyrosol and triandrin in isolated neuroglial cells: An interactive pathway
analysis of the downstream effects using RNA microarray data. Phytomedicine 21,
1325–1348 (2014).
34. Y. Cao, L. Liang, X. Jian, J. Wu, Y. Yan, P. Lin, Q. Chen, F. Zheng, Q. Wang, Q. Ren,
Z. Gou, Y. Fan, Y. Du, Memory-enhancing effect of Rhodiola rosea L extract on aged mice.
Trop. J. Pharm. Res. 15, 1453–1457 (2016).
35. B. J. Hillhouse, D. S. Ming, C. J. French, G. H. N. Towers, Acetylcholine esterase inhibitors in
Rhodiola rosea. Pharm. Biol. 42, 68–72 (2004).
36. S. M. Williamson, C. Moffat, M. A. E. Gomersall, N. Saranzewa, C. N. Connolly, G. A. Wright,
Exposure to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors alters the physiology and motor function of
honeybees. Front. Physiol. 4, 13 (2013).
37. D. Guez, H. Zhu, S. W. Zhang, M. V. Srinivasan, Enhanced cholinergic transmission
promotes recall in honeybees. J. Insect Physiol. 56, 1341–1348 (2010).
38. D. van Diermen, A. Marston, J. Bravo, M. Reist, P.-A. Carrupt, K. Hostettmann,
Monoamine oxidase inhibition by Rhodiola rosea L. roots. J. Ethnopharmacol. 122,
397–401 (2009).
39. Q. G. Chen, Y. S. Zeng, Z. Q. Qu, J. Y. Tang, Y. J. Qin, P. Chung, R. Wong, U. Hägg,
The effects of Rhodiola rosea extract on 5-HT level, cell proliferation and quantity of
neurons at cerebral hippocampus of depressive rats. Phytomedicine 16, 830–838
(2009).
40. C. Mannucci, M. Navarra, E. Calzavara, A. P. Caputi, G. Calapai, Serotonin involvement in
Rhodiola rosea attenuation of nicotine withdrawal signs in rats. Phytomedicine 19,
1117–1124 (2012).
41. C. J. Burke, W. Huetteroth, D. Owald, E. Perisse, M. J. Krashes, G. Das, D. Gohl, M. Silies,
S. Certel, S. Waddell, Layered reward signalling through octopamine and dopamine
in Drosophila. Nature 492, 433–437 (2012).
42. C. Schroll, T. Riemensperger, D. Bucher, J. Ehmer, T. Völler, K. Erbguth, B. Gerber,
T. Hendel, G. Nagel, E. Buchner, A. Fiala, Light-induced activation of distinct modulatory
neurons triggers appetitive or aversive learning in Drosophila larvae. Curr. Biol. 16,
1741–1747 (2006).
43. W. Schultz, Neuronal reward and decision signals: From theories to data. Physiol. Rev. 95,
853–951 (2015).
44. S. Knapek, S. Sigrist, H. Tanimoto, Bruchpilot, a synaptic active zone protein for
anesthesia-resistant memory. J. Neurosci. 31, 3453–3458 (2011).
45. K. B. Gehring, K. Heufelder, H. Depner, I. Kersting, S. J. Sigrist, D. Eisenhardt,
Age-associated increase of the active zone protein Bruchpilot within the honeybee
mushroom body. PLOS ONE 12, e0175894 (2017).
46. D. A. Wagh, T. M. Rasse, E. Asan, A. Hofbauer, I. Schwenkert, H. Dürrbeck, S. Buchner,
M.-C. Dabauvalle, M. Schmidt, G. Qin, C. Wichmann, R. Kittel, S. J. Sigrist, E. Buchner,
Bruchpilot, a protein with homology to ELKS/CAST, is required for structural integrity and
function of synaptic active zones in Drosophila. Neuron 49, 833–844 (2006).
47. W. Fouquet, D. Owald, C. Wichmann, S. Mertel, H. Depner, M. Dyba, S. Hallermann,
R. J. Kittel, S. Eimer, S. J. Sigrist, Maturation of active zone assembly by Drosophila
Bruchpilot. J. Cell Biol. 186, 129–145 (2009).
48. R. J. Kittel, C. Wichmann, T. M. Rasse, W. Fouquet, M. Schmidt, A. Schmid, D. A. Wagh,
C. Pawlu, R. R. Kellner, K. I. Willig, S. W. Hell, E. Buchner, M. Heckmann, S. J. Sigrist,
Bruchpilot promotes active zone assembly, Ca2+ channel clustering, and vesicle release.
Science 312, 1051–1054 (2006).
49. V. K. Gupta, L. Scheunemann, T. Eisenberg, S. Mertel, A. Bhukel, T. S. Koemans, J. M. Kramer,
K. S. Y. Liu, S. Schroeder, H. G. Stunnenberg, F. Sinner, C. Magnes, T. R. Pieber, S. Dipt,
A. Fiala, A. Schenck, M. Schwaerzel, F. Madeo, S. J. Sigrist, Restoring polyamines protects
from age-induced memory impairment in an autophagy-dependent manner. Nat. Neurosci.
16, 1453–1460 (2013).
50. L. Álvarez-Arellano, M. Pedraza-Escalona, T. Blanco-Ayala, N. Camacho-Concha,
J. Cortés-Mendoza, L. Pérez-Martinez, G. Pedraza-Alva, Autophagy impairment by
caspase-1-dependent inflammation mediates memory loss in response to b-amyloid
peptide accumulation. J. Neurosci. Res. 96, 234–246 (2017).
51. Y. G. Zhao, L. Sun, G. Miao, C. Ji, H. Zhao, H. Sun, L. Miao, S. R. Yoshii, N. Mizushima,
X. Wang, H. Zhang, The autophagy gene Wdr45/Wipi4 regulates learning and memory
function and axonal homeostasis. Autophagy 11, 881–890 (2015).
52. M. J. Lehane, P. F. Billingsley, Biology of the Insect Midgut (Springer Netherlands, 1996).
53. W. Palm, J. L. Sampaio, M. Brankatschk, M. Carvalho, A. Mahmoud, A. Shevchenko,
S. Eaton, Lipoproteins in Drosophila melanogaster—Assembly, function, and influence on
tissue lipid composition. PLOS Genet. 8, e1002828 (2012).
54. T. Stork, D. Engelen, A. Krudewig, M. Silies, R. J. Bainton, C. Klämbt, Organization and
function of the blood–brain barrier in Drosophila. J. Neurosci. 28, 587–597 (2008).
55. L. Eleore, J. C. López-Ramos, P. J. Yi, J. M. Delgado-García, The cognitive enhancer T-588
partially compensates the motor associative learning impairments induced by
scopolamine injection in mice. Behav. Neurosci. 121, 1203–1214 (2007).
56. Y. Wang, L. Wang, J. Wu, J. Cai, The in vivo synaptic plasticity mechanism of EGb
761-induced enhancement of spatial learning and memory in aged rats. Br. J. Pharmacol.
148, 147–153 (2006).
57. M. Tissot, R. F. Stocker, Metamorphosis in Drosophila and other insects: The fate of
neurons throughout the stages. Prog. Neurobiol. 62, 89–111 (2000).
58. T. Matkovic, M. Siebert, E. Knoche, H. Depner, S. Mertel, D. Owald, M. Schmidt, U. Thomas,
A. Sickmann, D. Kamin, S. W. Hell, J. Bürger, C. Hollmann, T. Mielke, C. Wichmann,
S. J. Sigrist, The Bruchpilot cytomatrix determines the size of the readily releasable
pool of synaptic vesicles. J. Cell Biol. 202, 667–683 (2013).
59. D. Mishra, “The content of olfactory memory in larval Drosophila,” thesis, University of
Würzburg (2011).
60. A. Maresca, G. Akyuz, S. M. Osman, Z. AlOthman, C. T. Supuran, Inhibition of
mammalian carbonic anhydrase isoforms I–XIV with a series of phenolic acid esters.
Bioorg. Med. Chem. 23, 7181–7188 (2015).
61. H. Kunz, A. Harreus, Glycosidsynthese mit 2,3,4,6-tetra-O-pivaloyl-a-D-
glucopyranosylbromid. Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem. 1982, 41–48 (1982).
62. B. Michels, T. Saumweber, R. Biernacki, J. Thum, R. D. V. Glasgow, M. Schleyer,
Y.-c. Chen, C. Eschbach, R. F. Stocker, N. Toshima, T. Tanimura, M. Louis, G. Arias-Gil,
M. Marescotti, F. Benfenati, B. Gerber, Pavlovian conditioning of larval Drosophila: An
illustrated, multilingual, hands-on manual for odor-taste associative learning in maggots.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 11, 45 (2017).
63. B. Michels, S. Diegelmann, H. Tanimoto, I. Schwenkert, E. Buchner, B. Gerber, A role for
Synapsin in associative learning: The Drosophila larva as a study case. Learn. Mem. 12,
224–231 (2005).
64. A. Yarali, B. Gerber, A neurogenetic dissociation between punishment-, reward-, and
relief-learning in Drosophila. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 4, 189 (2010).
65. B. MacLean, D. M. Tomazela, N. Shulman, M. Chambers, G. L. Finney, B. Frewen, R. Kern,
D. L. Tabb, D. C. Liebler, M. J. MacCoss, Skyline: An open source document editor for creating
and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics 26, 966–968 (2010).
66. B. Schilling, M. J. Rardin, B. X. MacLean, A. M. Zawadzka, B. E. Frewen, M. P. Cusack,
D. J. Sorensen, M. S. Bereman, E. Jing, C. C. Wu, E. Verdin, C. R. Kahn, M. J. Maccoss,
B. W. Gibson, Platform-independent and label-free quantitation of proteomic data using
MS1 extracted ion chromatograms in skyline: Application to protein acetylation and
phosphorylation. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 11, 202–214 (2012).
67. N. Stollhoff, R. Menzel, D. Eisenhardt, Spontaneous recovery from extinction depends
on the reconsolidation of the acquisition memory in an appetitive learning paradigm in
the honeybee (Apis mellifera). J. Neurosci. 25, 4485–4492 (2005).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
17 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

68. R. Scheiner, Responsiveness to sucrose and habituation of the proboscis extension
response in honey bees. J. Comp. Physiol. A Neuroethol. Sens. Neural. Behav. Physiol. 190,
727–733 (2004).
69. R Core Team, R: A language and environment for statistical computing (R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, 2017); www.R-project.org/.
70. D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, S. Walker, Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4.
J. Stat. Softw. 67, 48 (2015).
71. I. Pavlov, L. P. Savtchenko, I. Song, J. Koo, A. Pimashkin, D. A. Rusakov, A. Semyanov, Tonic
GABAA conductance bidirectionally controls interneuron firing pattern and synchronization
in the CA3 hippocampal network. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 504–509 (2014).
72. N. Mamidi, D. Manna, Zn(OTf)2-promoted chemoselective esterification of hydroxyl group
bearing carboxylic acids. J. Org. Chem. 78, 2386–2396 (2013).
73. C. Anselmi, F. Bernardi, M. Centini, E. Gaggelli, N. Gaggelli, D. Valensin, G. Valensin, Interaction
of ferulic acid derivatives with human erythrocytes monitored by pulse field gradient
NMR diffusion and NMR relaxation studies. Chem. Phys. Lipids 134, 109–117 (2005).
74. K. Nishimura, Y. Takenaka, M. Kishi, T. Tanahashi, H. Yoshida, C. Okuda, Y. Mizushina,
Synthesis and DNA polymerase a and b inhibitory activity of alkyl p-coumarates and
related compounds. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 57, 476–480 (2009).
Acknowledgments: We thank S. Lenuweit, H. Reim, B. Kracht, K. Tschirner, K. Gerber,
H. Haberkern, N. P. Ruiz, and V. M. Saxon for experimental help; J. Lopez-Rojas for
discussions; R. Glasgow for proofreading; and M. Groß and E. Paisios for help with the
statistics. Furthermore, we are grateful to H. Sultani and A. Schaks for contributing to the
chemical synthesis and to J. Schmidt for MS experiments. Funding: We received
institutional support from the Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology Magdeburg, the
Wissenschaftsgemeinschaft Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (WGL), the German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), and the Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg.
Project support came from a Journal of Experimental Biology Travelling Fellowship of The
Company of Biologists (to O.L.), the German-Israel Foundation Young Scientists’ program, and
the Leibniz Research Alliance Bioactive Compounds and Biotechnology program–Seed
money (to B.M.). This study would not have been possible without the overhead money
received through our grants from the German Science Foundation (DFG) (CRC 554, CRC 779,
CRC-TR 58, SPP 1392, ME 365/41-1, Heisenberg program, and GE 1091/4-1), the German Federal
Ministry of Science and Technology (BMBF; Bernstein Focus Insect-inspired robotics), and
the European Commission (MINIMAL FP7–618045). T.E. and V.L. were supported by the
EU Joint Program–Neurodegenerative Disease Research (JPND) project CircProt (jointly funded
by BMBF and EU Horizon 2020 grant agreement no. 643417) and DFG-CRC779. C.E. was
funded via a University of Würzburg/ Excellence Initiative Graduate School Life Sciences PhD
fellowship. Author contributions: B.M., H.Z., R.B., and O.L. conceived the overall study and
experimental design; performed the acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data; drafted the
manuscript; and wrote and revised the article. T.E., M.F., T.K., T.B., L.W., B.W., I.S., A.D., C.E.,
V.L., R.M., D.M., M.B., S.S., A.L., C.V., and M.H. conceived the experimental design; acquired,
analyzed, and interpreted the data; and revised the article. B.G. conceived the overall study and
experimental design, coordinated the project, analyzed and interpreted the data, drafted the
manuscript, and wrote and revised the article. L.W. and K.F. conceived the overall study
and experimental design for all chemical (analytical and synthetic) experiments, analyzed and
interpreted the data, drafted the manuscript, and wrote and revised the article’s (phyto-)
chemical content. Competing interests: B.M., B.G., L.W., K.F., H.Z., R.B., A.D., I.S., V.L., T.E., M.F.,
T.K., and O.L. have filed a patent to the German Patent and Trade Mark Office covering
FAE-20 and its application for improving learning and memory (serial no. DE 10 2017 127 865.6;
date received: 24 November 2017). All other authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the
paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related
to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 27 March 2018
Accepted 12 September 2018
Published 24 October 2018
10.1126/sciadv.aat6994
Citation: B. Michels, H. Zwaka, R. Bartels, O. Lushchak, K. Franke, T. Endres, M. Fendt, I. Song,
M. Bakr, T. Budragchaa, B. Westermann, D. Mishra, C. Eschbach, S. Schreyer, A. Lingnau, C. Vahl,
M. Hilker, R. Menzel, T. Kähne, V. Leßmann, A. Dityatev, L. Wessjohann, B. Gerber, Memory
enhancement by ferulic acid ester across species. Sci. Adv. 4, eaat6994 (2018).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Michels et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaat6994
24 October 2018
18 of 18
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026

Memory enhancement by ferulic acid ester across species
Birgit Michels, Hanna Zwaka, Ruth Bartels, Oleh Lushchak, Katrin Franke, Thomas Endres, Markus Fendt, Inseon Song,
May Bakr, Tuvshinjargal Budragchaa, Bernhard Westermann, Dushyant Mishra, Claire Eschbach, Stefanie Schreyer,
Annika Lingnau, Caroline Vahl, Marike Hilker, Randolf Menzel, Thilo Kähne, Volkmar Leßmann, Alexander Dityatev,
Ludger Wessjohann, and Bertram Gerber
Sci. Adv. 4 (10), eaat6994.  DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aat6994
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aat6994
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on March 26, 2026