Nano Today (2011) 6, 401—418
available at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nanotoday
REVIEW
Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters:
Synthesis and biological applications
Li Shang a, Shaojun Dong b, G. Ulrich Nienhaus a,c,∗
a Institute of Applied Physics and Center for Functional Nanostructures (CFN), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Wolfgang-Gaede-Strasse 1, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
b State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Changchun 130022, China
c Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Received 24 March 2011; received in revised form 3 June 2011; accepted 19 June 2011
Available online 8 July 2011
KEYWORDS
Fluorescent probes;
Metal nanoclusters;
Bioanalysis;
Fluorescence
imaging;
Biolabels
Abstract
Recent advances in nanotechnology have given rise to a new class of ﬂuorescent
labels, ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters, e.g., Au and Ag. These nanoclusters are of signiﬁcant
interest because they provide the missing link between atomic and nanoparticle behavior in
metals. Composed of a few to a hundred atoms, their sizes are comparable to the Fermi wave-
length of electrons, resulting in molecule-like properties including discrete electronic states and
size-dependent ﬂuorescence. Fluorescent metal nanoclusters have an attractive set of features,
such as ultrasmall size, good biocompatibility and excellent photostability, making them ideal
ﬂuorescent labels for biological applications. In this review, we summarize synthesis strategies
of water-soluble ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters and their optical properties, highlight recent
advances in their application for ultrasensitive biological detection and ﬂuorescent biological
imaging, and ﬁnally discuss current challenges for their potential biomedical applications.
© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Introduction
Nanobiotechnology, the integration of nanotechnology with
biology, biochemistry and medicine, is an emerging and
very active research ﬁeld. Particularly, the utilization of
nanostructured materials in biology and biomedicine has
∗Corresponding author at: Institute of Applied Physics and Center
for Functional Nanostructures (CFN), Karlsruhe Institute of Tech-
nology (KIT), Wolfgang-Gaede-Strasse 1, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.
Tel.: +49 721 608 43401; fax: +49 721 608 48480.
E-mail address: uli@uiuc.edu (G.U. Nienhaus).
been extensively explored during the past decade [1,2].
The development of luminescent nanomaterials as ﬂuo-
rescent labels is an especially attractive research ﬁeld
due to the multitude of promising applications in the life
sciences [3,4]. To date, researchers have developed sev-
eral different types of luminescent nanomaterials, including
semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) [5], dye-doped nanopar-
ticles [6], up-converting lanthanide-doped nanoparticles
[7] and carbon nanodots [8]. Compared with existing
small-molecule dyes and ﬂuorescent proteins [9], these
luminescent nanoprobes exhibit much improved photophysi-
cal properties, huge surface-to-volume ratios, facile surface
tailorability and color tunability. Consequently, they are
1748-0132/$ — see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.nantod.2011.06.004

402
L. Shang et al.
expected to complement or possibly even replace con-
ventional ﬂuorescent probes and offer great opportunities
for advancing ﬁelds such as biosensors, molecular imaging,
optoelectronics and nanomedicine.
Metal nanoclusters (NCs), composed of a few to roughly
a hundred atoms, are a new type of luminescent nanomate-
rials that recently have attracted a great deal of interest
[10—12]. Metal NCs typically have diameters below 2 nm
and properties that place them between isolated atoms
and larger nanoparticles or even bulk noble metals. For NC
dimensions approaching the Fermi wavelength of electrons,
the continuous density of states breaks up into discrete
energy levels leading to the observation of dramatically
different optical, electrical and chemical properties as com-
pared to nanoparticles [10]. A distinct feature is their
strong photoluminescence, combined with good photosta-
bility, large Stokes shift and high emission rates. Moreover,
recent advances have enabled facile synthesis of water-
soluble ﬂuorescent metal NCs with different ligands and
tunable emission colors in various biocompatible scaffolds,
establishing them as a new class of ultrasmall, biocom-
patible ﬂuorophores for applications as biological labels or
optoelectronic emitters [13—15].
In this review, we will ﬁrst summarize the synthesis
strategies developed for these ﬂuorescent metal NCs and
describe their optical properties. While there are also a few
reports on ﬂuorescent metal NCs such as Cu [16] and Pt [17],
this review focuses mainly on Au and Ag NCs. We highlight
recent advances in the application of ﬂuorescent metal NCs
to the detection of various analytes including metal ions,
small biomolecules, proteins and nucleic acids, as well as
in biological imaging. In the ﬁnal section, we discuss some
of the challenges that researchers currently face in their
research on ﬂuorescent metal NCs.
Synthesis of ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters
Actually, the observation of photoluminescence from noble
metals dates back more than forty years but has not
attracted much attention due to the extremely low quantum
yield (QY) of 10−10 [18]. Recently, however, researchers have
developed various approaches to synthesize water-soluble
ﬂuorescent metal NCs with much enhanced QY in the range
of 10−3 to 10−1, thus sufﬁciently bright for ﬂuorescence
marker applications. In general, the reduction of metal ions
in aqueous solution results in large nanoparticles rather than
small NCs due to the tendency of NCs to aggregate. In addi-
tion, the nature of the ligands used for capping the particle
surface can markedly affect their emission properties [19].
Therefore, choosing suitable agents capable of stabilizing
clusters from aggregating and enhancing their ﬂuorescence
is of key importance for obtaining small, highly ﬂuorescent
metal NCs. Accordingly, we will discuss the various synthesis
strategies of ﬂuorescent metal NCs based on different types
of stabilizers.
Thiols
Thiol-containing small molecules are the most commonly
adopted stabilizers in metal nanoparticle synthesis owing
to the strong interaction between thiols and Au/Ag [20].
Glutathione was shown to be an excellent stabilizer for
synthesizing Au NCs with visible luminescence by reducing
Au3+ in the presence of glutathione with sodium borohy-
dride (NaBH4); the QY of these NCs was reported to be in
the order of 10−3 [21]. A series of glutathione-protected
Au NCs with deﬁned chemical compositions have been syn-
thesized [22,23]. In similar approaches, ﬂuorescent Au NCs
stabilized with various other thiols such as tiopronin [24],
phenylethylthiolate [25], thiolate -cyclodextrin [26] and 3-
mercaptopropionic acid [27] have also been reported. Using
bidentate dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) as the stabilizing agent,
Adhikari and Banerjee [28] recently reported the synthe-
sis of ﬂuorescent Ag NCs (QY: 2%) by reducing a mixture of
lipoic acid and Ag+ with NaBH4. Note that the particle size as
well as the luminescence efﬁciency of metal NCs prepared
by this approach depends sensitively on the thiol-to-metal
molar ratio. Increasing this ratio will result in smaller metal
NCs and, correspondingly, in a blue-shift of the emission
wavelength. While thiol-stabilized metal NCs were mostly
produced by using the strong reductant NaBH4, the Nien-
haus group [29] recently reported Au NC synthesis by using a
mild reductant, tetrakis(hydroxymethyl)phosphonium chlo-
ride (THPC). In this approach, a zwitterionic thiolate ligand,
D-penicillamine (DPA), was chosen as the stabilizer (Fig. 1).
The obtained DPA-capped Au NCs emitted bright ﬂuores-
cence at 610 nm (QY: 1.3%) and possessed excellent stability
in aqueous solvents over the physiologically relevant pH
range.
In addition to the above-mentioned one-pot strategy by
direct reduction of metal ions in the presence of thiols,
luminescent, monolayer-protected metal NCs can also be
Fig. 1
(A) Schematic depiction of the synthesis of DPA-stabilized ﬂuorescent Au NCs using THPC as the reductant. (B) Photographs
of an aqueous solution of DPA-Au NCs (left) in room light and (right) under a UV light source with excitation at 365 nm.

Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters: Synthesis and biological applications
403
produced by etching large Au nanoparticles with thiols.
Chang and coworkers [30] produced ﬂuorescent Au NCs by
adding various alkanethiol ligands to preformed Au nanopar-
ticles stabilized by THPC. TEM measurement revealed that
the size of the particles decreased with increasing size of
the thiol-capping agent. 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (11-
MUA) was found to yield the brightest Au NCs, with a QY of
3.1%. By controlling the molar ratios of THPC to Au/Ag ions,
they further showed that ﬂuorescent Au and Au/Ag NCs with
tunable size and emission wavelength could be obtained
by using this strategy with 11-MUA as capping agent [31].
Along a similar route, Chang and coworkers [32] also pre-
pared -D-mannose-conjugated Au NCs through the reaction
of Au nanoparticles with thiol-modiﬁed mannose. Interest-
ingly, irradiation with a light-emitting diode (LED) during
preparation was shown to enhance the QY, alter the emission
wavelength and shorten the reaction time. Under illumina-
tion by a green LED, luminescent, mannose-conjugated Au
NCs with QY of 11% were prepared within 8 h.
Fluorescent Au NCs by etching nanoparticles were also
prepared using other capping agents. Pradeep et al. [33]
synthesized ﬂuorescent Au NCs from mercaptosuccinic acid
(MSA)-protected Au nanoparticles by etching with excess
glutathione. The etching process was found to be pH-
dependent: etching at pH 3 and 7—8 yielded Au25 and
Au8, respectively. Two possible mechanisms were proposed
to explain this etching-based strategy (Fig. 2). Along the
ﬁrst route, gold atoms are removed from the nanopar-
ticle surfaces by excess ligands (such as glutathione) in
the form of Au(I)-thiolate complexes, which then undergo
strong aurophilic interactions and form luminescent Au clus-
ters. Alternatively, ligands may etch the surface gold atoms
of the nanoparticles, leading to the formation of lumi-
nescent particles with decreased size, and the removed
atoms will precipitate as Au(I)-thiolate complexes after
etching. The same group also developed an interfacial
route for the synthesis of brightly red-emitting Au23 clus-
ters by core etching of more stable, glutathione-protected
Au25 clusters [34]. In recent work, ﬂuorescent Au NCs
were synthesized based on precursor-induced etching in
the organic phase from didodecyldimethylammonium bro-
mide (DDAB)-stabilized Au nanoparticles [35]. The clusters
became highly red-luminescent upon ligand exchange with
DHLA for the transfer of the product to aqueous solution
(QY: 3.45%).
The etching-based strategy has also been used to syn-
thesize thiol-protected ﬂuorescent Ag NCs. Ag NCs were
produced through interfacial etching of MSA-protected Ag
nanoparticles with excess MSA at the water—organic inter-
face [36]. A crude mixture of luminescent Ag7 and Ag8
clusters was ﬁnally obtained by this approach. Unfortu-
nately, the approaches developed for the synthesis of Au NCs
are not always successful for the synthesis of their Ag ana-
logues. Therefore, researchers aim to develop other facile
routes to prepare monolayer-protected Ag NCs. Recently,
a new solid-state route was introduced to prepare lumi-
nescent Ag9 NCs protected with MSA (QY: 0.8%) [37].
Remarkably, these Ag NCs can be synthesized in gram quan-
tities by minimizing diffusion of the reactants in the growth
step by mixing them in the solid state. This new synthetic
approach is expected to be applicable to the synthesis of
other metal clusters as well.
Fig. 2
Schematic illustration of two possible routes for the formation of luminescent Au NCs via etching of preformed MSA-
protected Au nanoparticles.
(Reprinted with permission from Reference [33] ©2008 Springer.)

404
L. Shang et al.
Dendrimers
Based on their capability of sequestering metal ions from
solution, dendrimers have been utilized as templates to pre-
pare small metal NCs. In a remarkable paper, Dickson and
colleagues [38] reported the ﬁrst synthesis of photostable
luminescent Ag NCs in PAMAM dendrimers through direct
photoreduction. Subsequently, they described the synthesis
of ﬂuorescent, dendrimer-stabilized Au8 NCs with a high QY
of 42% [39]. Moreover, Au NCs with emission colors ranging
from the UV to the near-infrared (NIR) region were obtained
by varying the relative PAMAM/Au concentration and the
dendrimer generation [40]. This approach, however, has the
disadvantage of low synthesis yield of small NCs owing to
the simultaneous formation of large nanoparticles. Martinez
et al. [41] subsequently developed a new approach for syn-
thesizing ﬂuorescent PAMAM-templated Au NCs that avoids
the formation of large nanoparticles. They produced small
ﬂuorescent Au NCs at physiological temperature using a
mild biologically derived reductant, ascorbic acid. Recently,
Lin et al. [42] proposed a simple strategy for synthesiz-
ing dendrimer-encapsulated Au NCs (predominantly Au8).
By introducing a speciﬁc counterion (AuX4−, X = chloride or
bromide) into a dendritic microcavity with pH-dependent
polarity, dendrimer-encapsulated Au NCs with high QY
(20—62%) were obtained upon microwave irradiation.
Polymers
Polymers
with
abundant
carboxylic
acid
groups
were
identiﬁed as promising templates for synthesizing highly
ﬂuorescent, water-soluble Ag NCs. In an earlier report,
ﬂuorescent Ag NCs were prepared in polymer microgels
of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-acrylic acid-2-hydroxyethyl
acrylate) by UV irradiating the mixture of polymer microgel
and Ag+ [43]. Similarly, a molecular hydrogel composed of
multi-arm star polyglycerol-block-poly(acrylic acid) copoly-
mers was used for synthesizing ﬂuorescent Ag NCs via
photoreduction by Frey and coworkers [44]. With a com-
mercially available polyelectrolyte, poly(methacrylic acid)
(PMAA), as a template, Shang and Dong [45] presented a
simpler and cheaper approach to prepare water-soluble ﬂu-
orescent Ag NCs under photoreduction. Upon UV irradiation
(365 nm) of a silver salt aqueous solution in the presence of
PMAA, highly ﬂuorescent Ag NCs were obtained with a QY of
18.6%. Ras et al. [46] further showed that such PMAA-Ag NCs,
prepared by photoactivation using visible light, exhibited
electrochemiluminescent and solvatochromic properties.
While photoreduction has proved useful for synthesizing
Ag NCs, ﬂuorescent PMAA-Ag NCs have also been produced
via convenient sonochemical [47] and microwave-assisted
approaches [48].
There are also several recent reports on the synthesis
of polymer-stabilized ﬂuorescent Au NCs. For instance, Au
NCs capped with multivalent polymers, polyethylenimine
(PEI), were prepared by etching preformed dodecylamine-
capped Au nanoparticles [49]. These ﬂuorescent clusters
exhibited strong blue emission with a QY of 10—20%.
Cooper et al. [50] reported the synthesis of ﬂuorescent
multidentate, polymer-capped Au NCs by NaBH4 reduction.
Their polymer consisted of a linear chain of water-soluble
methacrylic acid units and a hydrophobic end group contain-
ing three unreacted thiols. Upon systematic variation of the
polymer-to-gold ratio, a transition from non-ﬂuorescent to
ﬂuorescent nanoparticles was observed for particle diame-
ters between 1.1 nm and 1.7 nm. Au NCs consisting of only
two or three atoms protected by poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone)
(PVP) have been synthesized via a simple electrochemical
technique by Santiago González et al. [51]. These PVP-Au
NCs showed not only stable photoluminescence but also
magnetic properties (Fig. 3). Compared with previous meth-
ods of producing small metal NCs, the electrochemical
synthesis is much simpler and quicker, providing a good
Fig. 3
Synthesis of Au NCs containing only two and three atoms in the presence of PVP via simple electrochemical technique.
These clusters show stable photoluminescent and magnetic properties.
(Reprinted with permission from Reference [51] ©2010 American Chemical Society.)

Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters: Synthesis and biological applications
405
control over the cluster size. Most recently, Yabu [52] syn-
thesized blue-emitting Au NCs via reﬂux of Au ions with
amino-terminated poly(1,2-butadiene) (PB-NH2) in toluene.
Photoluminescent composite ﬁlms of PB-NH2 and Au NCs
were patterned through photo-crosslinking of PB.
DNA oligonucleotides
The well known interactions of metal cations with DNA
have enabled the design and fabrication of various DNA-
templated metal nanostructures [53]. Especially silver ions
possess a high afﬁnity to cytosine bases on single-stranded
DNA, which makes DNA oligonucleotides good stabilizers
for preparing small Ag NCs [54,55]. In a pioneering study,
Dickson and coworkers [56] reported the synthesis of short
oligonucleotide-encapsulated Ag NCs by using NaBH4 as the
reductant. Mass spectroscopy demonstrated the formation
of small Ag NCs with 1—4 atoms bound to the 12-base
oligonucleotide, and distinct absorption and ﬂuorescence
spectral features were observed. NMR spectroscopy further
revealed that cytosine experienced the largest chemical
shifts with Ag NCs. Based on these ﬁndings, red- and
blue/green-emitting Ag NCs were then prepared with 12-
mer cytosine as template [57,58]. Several studies were
carried out that emphasize the key role of bases and base
sequences on the formation of oligonucleotide-stabilized
ﬂuorescent Ag NCs [59—62]. For instance, Petty et al. [59]
found that the bases have a dominant inﬂuence on cluster
formation, and both base complexation and inherent clus-
ter stability contribute to the type of DNA-encapsulated Ag
NCs. Gwinn et al. [60] demonstrated that both sequence
and secondary structure of the oligonucleotide strand can
affect the ﬂuorescence properties of these DNA-hosted
Ag NCs.
Using DNA microarrays for high-throughput analysis of 12-
mer oligonucleotide strands to identify optimal sequences
for Ag NC formation, well-deﬁned ﬂuorescent Ag NCs with
distinct emission ranging from blue to NIR were produced,
although the synthesis of each speciﬁc NCs did not follow a
general procedure (Fig. 4) [63]. These Ag NCs were reported
to possess high QYs in the range of 16—34%. Particularly, the
yellow, red and NIR emitting species showed greatly reduced
bleaching and blinking, suggesting signiﬁcant advantages
over existing dyes for single molecule spectroscopy and
imaging. O’Neill et al. [64] presented the loop-dependent
synthesis of ﬂuorescent Ag NCs on DNA hairpins with 3—12
cytosines in the loop. Their results showed that the number
of cytosines in the loop could tune the stability and ﬂuo-
rescence of Ag NCs. Moreover, mismatched double-stranded
DNA templates have recently been utilized for the site-
speciﬁc growth of ﬂuorescent Ag NCs [65]. Molecular-scale
Ag NCs were found to localize in the mismatched site while
the metalized DNA retains its integrity.
Contrary to many studies on DNA-encapsulated Ag NCs,
studies on the synthesis of luminescent Au NCs with DNA
as the capping agent are scarce, with the exception of a
recent study by Chen et al. [66]. They showed that atom-
ically monodisperse Au NCs could be obtained by etching
gold particles (either spheres or rods) with the assistance of
biomolecules including amino acids, proteins and DNA under
sonication in water. Speciﬁcally, Au nanorods were gradually
Fig. 4
Steady-state excitation and emission spectra for ﬁve distinct ss-DNA encapsulated Ag NCs. (A) Blue emitters created in
5′-CCCTTTAACCCC-3′, (B) green emitters created in 5′-CCCTCTTAACCC-3′, (C) yellow emitters created in 5′-CCCTTAATCCCC-3′, (D)
red emitters created in 5′-CCTCCTTCCTCC-3′, and (E) near-IR emitters created in 5′-CCCTAACTCCCC-3′. (F) Images of dissolved NCs,
the spectra of which are shown in panels A—D (from left to right).
(Reprinted with permission from Reference [63] ©2008 American Chemical Society.)

406
L. Shang et al.
etched by double-stranded DNA under sonication, leading
to the formation of ﬂuorescent Au8 NCs. The involvement
of violent sonication during synthesis, however, may lead to
the disruption of the DNA structures.
Peptides and proteins
Biological macromolecules such as peptides and proteins
have also been utilized as templates for synthesizing highly
ﬂuorescent metal NCs. Dickson and coworkers [67] reported
a signiﬁcant advance in producing ﬂuorescent Ag NCs in vivo
by ambient-temperature photoactivation. A protein, nucle-
olin, which is known to bind silver, was employed as the
major scaffold for the formation of ﬂuorescent Ag NCs.
Inspired by this observation, they further designed a short
peptide incorporating the speciﬁc amino acids most preva-
lent in nucleolin and several cysteine groups to form and
stabilize ﬂuorescent Ag NCs directly in phosphate buffered
solution. A short peptide-based hydrogel was also used to
produce ﬂuorescent Ag NCs by Adhikari and Banerjee [68].
Interestingly, Ag NCs containing only Ag2 formed simply in
the presence of sunlight at physiological pH. Apparently, Ag+
ions associate with the carboxylate group of the aspartic
acid residue in the gelator peptide and are spontaneously
reduced under sunlight.
Compared with short peptides, large and complicated
proteins possess abundant binding sites that can potentially
bind and further reduce metal ions, thus offering better
scaffolds for template-driven formation of small metal NCs.
The ﬁrst ﬂuorescent Au NCs synthesized with proteins as
templates were reported by Ying and coworkers in 2009
[69]. Based on the capability of bovine serum albumin (BSA)
to sequester and reduce Au precursors in situ, they devel-
oped a simple, green synthetic route for the preparation
of Au NCs with red emission (Fig. 5, QY: 6%). Notably, BSA
functions both as a stabilizing agent and a reductant in
this approach. As a matter of fact, the process is similar
to the biomineralization behavior of organisms in nature.
This work is remarkable not only for providing an alternative
approach of synthesizing highly ﬂuorescent Au NCs, but also
because the proposed strategy may be extended to other
proteins and metals. Inspired by this ﬁnding, researchers
recently reported that other proteins such as lysozyme [70]
and transferrin [71,72] could also act as efﬁcient bioscaf-
folds for producing ﬂuorescent Au NCs. Even denatured BSA
has been shown to function as an effective stabilizing agent
for ﬂuorescent Ag NCs when using NaBH4 as a reductant for
cluster formation [73]. Besides their known roles as reduc-
tants and capping agents, proteins such as BSA can also
function as etching agents for the synthesis of ﬂuorescent
Au NCs, according to a recent report by the Pradeep group
[74].
Enzymes are proteins capable of catalyzing speciﬁc
chemical reactions. The production of metal NCs directed
by enzymatic activity can integrate the catalysis function
of enzymes and the luminescence of metal NCs in a sin-
gle cluster, thus leading to the possibility of constructing
multi-functional nanoprobes. In a recent study, horseradish
peroxidase (HRP) was used for templating the synthesis
of ﬂuorescent Au NCs under physiological conditions to
form HRP—Au NC bioconjugates [75]. The ﬂuorescence of
HRP—Au NCs could be quenched quantitatively by adding
H2O2, indicating that the HRP enzyme remains active in the
luminescent conjugates. This study could be extended to
other functional proteins to generate bifunctional Au NCs.
Prior to this work, Narayanan and Pal [76] also reported a
synthesis of luminescent Ag NCs templated by an enzyme,
bovine pancreatic -chymotrypsin, via NaBH4 reduction. The
functional integrity of the enzyme conjugated to Ag NCs was
conﬁrmed by monitoring the enzyme activity by absorption
spectroscopy. The large excess of NaBH4, however, caused
adverse effects in the system, possibly affecting potential
bioapplications.
Fig. 5
Schematic representation of the formation of Au NCs in BSA solution. Upon adding Au(III) ions to the aqueous BSA solution,
the protein molecules sequestered Au ions and entrapped them. The reducing capability of BSA was subsequently activated by
adjusting the pH to about 12 with NaOH, so the entrapped ions underwent progressive reduction to form Au NCs in situ.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [69] ©2009 American Chemical Society.)

Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters: Synthesis and biological applications
407
Optical properties of ﬂuorescent metal
nanoclusters
Absorption and ﬂuorescence
Generally, the optical properties of metal nanoparticles are
dominated by the collective oscillation of electrons at their
surfaces, known as surface plasmon resonance, that are in
resonance with the incident electromagnetic radiation. As
the size reduces to the subnanometer scale, metal clusters
are too small to support plasmons, and a transition from
metal to molecule ensues. Instead of forming continuous
densities of states and behaving as conductors, these few-
atom metal NCs exhibit discrete energy levels. Well-deﬁned
metal NCs are expected to possess characteristic absorption
features and can be distinguished from each other by their
absorption proﬁles [34]. For instance, glutathione-protected
Au25 NCs exhibit several characteristic absorption features
in the range 400—1000 nm, which are believed to arise from
intraband (sp ←sp) or interband transitions (sp ←d) of the
bulk gold [77]. Tsukuda et al. [22] further showed that the
absorption peaks of glutathione-protected Au NCs due to
intraband transition tend to be blue-shifted with decreas-
ing core size. As the size decreases, the spacing between
the discrete states in each band increases, thus leading to
a blue shift in the absorption peaks with decreasing cluster
size. Absorption spectra of a few-atom Ag NCs also exhibit
discrete electronic transitions instead of collective plas-
mon excitations. For example, Dickson and coworkers [56]
reported ﬂuorescent Ag1—Ag4 clusters with absorption peaks
at 440 nm and 357 nm. In recent work, DHLA-protected Ag4
and Ag5 NCs were found to exhibit peaks at 435 nm and
335 nm, respectively, with another shoulder peak at 500 nm
[28]. Discrete electronic transitions clearly indicate that
these few atom metal NCs exhibit molecular behavior.
Luminescence of metals is normally extremely weak,
owing to the efﬁcient nonradiative decay and the absence
of an energy gap [18]. However, recent studies showed that
small metal NCs behave as ‘‘artiﬁcial atoms’’ and show pho-
toluminescence with much enhanced QY, which can be seven
to nine orders of magnitude higher than that of bulk gold
(10−10). With the rapid development of synthesis strategies,
the luminescence properties of metal NCs have fascinated
the scientiﬁc community. Compared with conventional ﬂu-
orophores such as organic dyes and ﬂuorescent proteins
[78—80], metal NCs show advantageous photophysical prop-
erties including good photostability, large Stokes shift (over
100 nm) and high emission rate.
Currently, several mechanisms have been proposed to
explain the emission properties of ultrasmall metal NCs.
Huang and Murray [24,81] suggested that the visible lumi-
nescence of monolayer-protected metal NCs is associated
with interband transitions between the ﬁlled d band and
the sp conduction band. Whetten et al. [21] attributed
the infrared luminescence from glutathione-protected Au25
clusters to the relaxed radiative recombination across the
HOMO—LUMO gap within the sp conduction band (intra-
band transition). Chang et al. [32] suggested that the
luminescence of their Au NCs, prepared via thiol-induced
etching, mainly originated from Au NCs/polynuclear Au(I)-
thiol (core/shell) complexes, based on the fact that these
Au NCs displayed a strongly Stokes-shifted luminescence
with long lifetimes (>100 ns), which is characteristic of
thiol-Au(I) complexes that display ligand—metal charge
transfer and metal—metal interactions. Zheng et al. [82]
recently proposed that luminescent nanoparticles synthe-
sized by dissociation of polymeric Au(I) thiolates can actually
be considered as intermediate between luminescent Au(I)
complexes/clusters and nonluminescent gold nanoparticles.
More recently, Wu and Jin [19] reported that the surface lig-
ands play a major role in the ﬂuorescence of thiol-protected
Au NCs. These studies suggest that there may be two major
sources for the ﬂuorescence of metal NCs: (1) the metal
core, with its intrinsic quantization effects and (2) the par-
ticle surface, the properties of which are governed by the
chemical interactions between the metal core and the sur-
face ligands. Unlike QDs, no general mechanism is currently
known that explains the emission from all metal NCs. Rather,
the luminescence mechanism may be different for metal NCs
with different sizes, coating ligands or even when they are
prepared by different synthesis routes.
Solvatochromic effect
The solvatochromic effect is well known for larger metal
nanoparticles and is mainly related to their surface plasmon
phenomenon [83]. Several recent studies showed that few-
atom metal NCs also display a similar dependence of their
optical behavior on the solvent. Ras et al. [46] observed
that both optical absorption and ﬂuorescence emission
properties of PMAA-stabilized Ag NCs could be tuned to a
great extent by selecting appropriate solvents (Fig. 6). For
instance, an about 70-nm red shift of the absorption peak of
Ag NCs was observed upon transfer from water to methanol.
Various DNA oligonucleotide-encapsulated Ag NCs were also
found to exhibit strong, discrete ﬂuorescence with sol-
vent polarity-dependent absorption and emission [84]. Chen
et al. [66] recently observed solvent-dependent photolumi-
nescence properties of Au8 NCs when exposed to different
organic solvents such as chloroform, tetrahydrofuran, or
N,N-dimethylformamide. In addition, they investigated the
solvatochromic effect of Au8 NCs protected by different
ligands including histidine, cysteine and glutathione. The
results were found to be independent of the type of coat-
ing on the cluster surface. The authors attributed the
solvatochromic effect of Au NCs to the rich surface prop-
erties of the clusters. The change in chemical environment
may induce electronic energy splitting and electron redis-
tribution on the cluster surface, leading to a variation
of the optical properties of the metal NCs [66]. While
environment-sensitive optical properties of plasmonic metal
nanoparticles have enabled the development of new tech-
niques for sensitive chemical and biological sensing [85], we
expect that the solvatochromic effect of ﬂuorescent metal
NCs may also be utilized in similar applications in the future.
Two-photon absorption
Compared with one-photon excitation, using two NIR pho-
tons of half the transition energy for the excitation of
ﬂuorophores can offer substantial advantages. In particular,
for in vivo imaging and photodynamic therapy, two-photon

408
L. Shang et al.
Fig. 6
Solvatochromic effects of PMAA-Ag NCs. (A) Absorption spectra in various solvents. Photograph of the NCs in water/methanol
mixtures under (B) visible and (C) UV light, ranging from pure water (left) to pure methanol (right). (D) Absorption and (E) emission
spectra of the samples shown in panel B.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [46] ©2009 Wiley—VCH.)
excitation (TPE) in the NIR region increases the penetra-
tion depth, spatial resolution due to lower scattering, and
minimizes autoﬂuorescence [86]. Goodson and coworkers
[87] investigated two-photon absorption (TPA) properties of
quantum sized Au25 NCs in hexane. Two-photon excited ﬂu-
orescence in the visible region with excitation at 800 nm
has been observed from these clusters, and the TPA cross-
section was measured to be 42,700 GM (Göppert-Mayer unit,
10−50 cm4 s), which is superior to the TPA cross-sections of
many organic chromophores. The TPA properties of water-
soluble 11-MUA-protected Au nanodots were studied by
Chou et al. [88], who reported a TPA cross-section of
about 8761 GM in water. Recently, strong two-photon emis-
sion from water-soluble glutathione-protected Au NCs was
also observed [89]. The TPA cross-section of these Au NCs
in water was determined to be 189,740 GM, much higher
than those of typical organic dyes and QDs [90]. DNA-
encapsulated Ag NCs were found to possess extremely high
TPA cross-sections by Dickson et al. [91]. They quoted cross-
sections of 35,000 GM for 660 nm Ag NCs, 34,000 GM for
680 nm emitters, and 50,000 GM for the 710 nm emitters.
Such large TPA cross-sections of metal NCs make them efﬁ-
cient absorbers for multiphoton biological imaging and other
nonlinear optical applications.
Electrochemiluminescence
Electrochemiluminescence (ECL) refers to the emission
of light due to a high-energy electron transfer reaction
between electrogenerated species, which possesses several
advantages over photoluminescence in analytical chemistry,
such as low cost and high sensitivity [92]. Ras et al. [46] ﬁrst
reported that PMAA-stabilized Ag NCs exhibited cathodic
hot electron-induced ECL. They ascribed the ECL behav-
ior of Ag NCs to the ox-red excitation pathway, where the
luminophore was oxidized by the cathodically produced oxi-
dizing radical, SO4•−. However, the use of a voltage pulse
of −30 V to obtain ECL of Ag NCs is unfavorable for real
applications because unpredictable reactions can occur and,
moreover, the surface structure of the electrode could
be disrupted during the strong cathodic polarization [93].
Recently, Chen and coworkers [94] reported ECL from BSA-
stabilized Au NCs using triethylamine as the co-reactant.
A strong ECL signal was observed at ∼1.45 V from Au NCs
immobilized on the Pt electrode surface. Interestingly, the
ECL spectrum in the presence of Au NCs showed a peak
at 680 nm, located near the shoulder peak of Au NCs at
690 nm in the ﬂuorescence emission spectrum, thus sug-
gesting that the ECL mechanism may be related to the
surface state of Au NCs. ECL from BSA-stabilized Au NCs
on a modiﬁed indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode surface was
observed by Zhu et al. [95], where K2S2O8 was used as
the co-reactant. In the cathodic ECL process, electrons
were injected into the conduction band of ITO and then
transferred to the LUMO of the Au NCs. A possible ECL
mechanism was proposed as depicted in Fig. 7. A simple
label-free method for dopamine detection was developed
based on ECL of Au NCs in aqueous media, suggesting that
water-soluble, biocompatible ﬂuorescent metal NCs can be
effective in the development of new types of ECL biosensors
[95].

Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters: Synthesis and biological applications
409
Fig. 7
Schematic illustration of (A) electron transfer between
ITO and Au NCs and (B) the proposed ECL mechanisms of BSA-Au
NCs.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [95] ©2011 American
Chemical Society.)
Application of ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters in
biodetection
Fluorescent metal NCs show great promise as optical
reporters for sensitive biological detection, owing to their
good water-solubility, large Stokes shifts, low toxicity and
high emission rates. We summarize recent advances in the
application of these emissive clusters for the detection of
various biologically important analytes in this section.
Detection of metal ions
Hg2+ is a highly toxic and widespread pollutant ion, and its
damaging effects to the brain, nervous system and the kid-
ney even at very low concentrations are well known [96].
Recently, metal NCs have been utilized as Hg2+ sensors based
on the quenching of their ﬂuorescence. Chang et al. [30]
showed that 11-MUA-capped Au NCs are capable of sens-
ing Hg2+ based on Hg2+-induced aggregation of Au NCs. The
limit of detection (LOD) was measured to be 5.0 nM and a
remarkable selectivity toward Hg2+ could be obtained when
conducting the assay in the presence of a chelating ligand,
2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic acid (PDCA). BSA-stabilized Au NCs
were demonstrated to be selective and sensitive for the
detection of Hg2+ by Ying et al. [97]. The sensing mechanism
was based on the high-afﬁnity metallophilic Hg2+—Au+ inter-
actions, which efﬁciently quenched the ﬂuorescence of Au
NCs (Fig. 8). By virtue of the high QY of BSA-Au NCs, the LOD
for Hg2+ was estimated to be 0.5 nM, which is much lower
than the maximum level of mercury in drinking water (10 nM)
permitted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA). Moreover, Lin and Tseng [98] showed that lysozyme
type VI-stabilized Au NCs were capable of sensing Hg2+ and
CH3Hg+ through the interaction between Hg2+/CH3Hg+ and
Au+ on the cluster surface. The LOD for Hg2+ and CH3Hg+
were as low as 3 pM and 4 nM, respectively. This probe was
successfully applied to the determination of both ions in sea-
water. Fluorescent oligonucleotide- and DHLA-stabilized Ag
NCs have also been demonstrated recently for the determi-
nation of Hg2+ [28,99].
Cu2+ is another signiﬁcant environmental pollutant and
an essential trace element in biological systems. Consider-
able efforts have recently been directed at the detection
of Cu2+ using ﬂuorescent metal NCs. Shang and Dong [100]
have developed a simple and sensitive ﬂuorescent sensor
for Cu2+ detection based on ﬂuorescent PMAA-Ag NCs. The
LOD of Cu2+ was measured to be 8 nM at a signal-to-noise
(S/N) ratio of 3, which is much lower than the U.S. EPA limit
for Cu2+ in drinking water (20 M). The detection mecha-
nism was based on the ﬂuorescence quenching by Cu2+ upon
interaction with the free carboxylic acid groups of poly-
mers surrounding the emissive Ag NCs. Glutathione-capped
Au NCs were also employed in a Cu2+ chemosensor applica-
tion based on aggregation-induced ﬂuorescence quenching
[101]. This assay possesses a good selectivity toward Cu2+
over other metal ions, with a LOD of 3.6 nM. Moreover, the
Cu2+-quenched ﬂuorescence could be efﬁciently recovered
upon addition of a metal ion chelator, ethylenediaminete-
traacetate (EDTA). Because these turn-off assays may
compromise speciﬁcity since other quenchers or environ-
mental stimulus might also lead to ﬂuorescence quenching
and report ‘‘false positive’’ results, Chang and coworkers
[102] recently demonstrated a novel, turn-on ﬂuorescent
assay for Cu2+ using DNA-templated Ag NCs. The introduc-
tion of Cu2+ resulted in the formation of DNA—Cu/Ag NCs
with more complete protection from DNA templates and
thus enhanced the ﬂuorescence. Furthermore, by using a
combination of DNA-Cu/Ag NCs and 3-mercaptopropionic
acid (MPA), they observed that MPA-induced ﬂuorescence
quenching of DNA-Cu/Ag NCs was suppressed in the presence
of Cu2+ ions, allowing turn-on detection of Cu2+ at concentra-
tions as low as 2.7 nM [103]. Fluorescence assays in the NIR
region possess many advantages over visible ﬂuorescence,
which is particularly attractive for sensitive in vivo determi-
nation of biological targets [104]. Guo et al. [105] recently
presented a NIR ﬂuorescent assay for Cu2+ based on the
quenching of luminescent Au NCs prepared via heat-assisted
reduction of a gold(I)-thiol complex. This NIR ﬂuorescence-
based method enabled the sensitive detection of Cu2+ with
a LOD down to 1.6 nM.
Detection of small biomolecules
Biothiols such as cysteine (Cys), homocysteine (Hcy) and
glutathione (GSH) play a critical role in reversible redox
reactions and important cellular functions including detox-
iﬁcation and metabolism. The analysis of their levels in
human body ﬂuids plays an important role in the early
diagnosis of many diseases [106]. A simple ﬂuorescence
method for Cys detection has been developed based on
PMAA-Ag NCs [107]. The ﬂuorescence of Ag NCs can be efﬁ-
ciently quenched by Cys rather than other -amino acids,
which allowed the selective determination of Cys with a
LOD of 20 nM. Based on the absorption and ﬂuorescence,
these researchers suggested that Cys quenched the ﬂuo-

410
L. Shang et al.
Fig. 8
(A) Schematic representation of Hg2+ sensing based on ﬂuorescence quenching of Au NCs resulting from high-afﬁnity
metallophilic Hg2+—Au+ bonds. (B) Photographs of aqueous BSA-Au NCs solutions (20 M) in the presence of 50 M of various metal
ions under UV light.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [97] ©2010 the Royal Society of Chemistry.)
rescence by thiol-adsorption-accelerated oxidation of the
ﬂuorescent Ag clusters. Oligonucleotide-stabilized Ag NCs
have also been demonstrated to be capable of detecting
biothiols [108]. The sensing mechanism was based on ﬂu-
orescence quenching due to formation of non-ﬂuorescent
complexes between DNA-Ag NCs and biothiols. The detec-
tion limits for Cys, Hcy and GSH were measured to be 4.0 nM,
4.0 nM and 200 nM, respectively. By virtue of the template-
dependent ﬂuorescence properties of DNA-Ag NCs and their
speciﬁc response to thiol compounds, Qu and coworkers
[109] recently introduced a novel ﬂuorescent turn-on assay
for biothiols with high speciﬁcity and sensitivity. Contrary to
previous work, which reported ﬂuorescence quenching of Ag
NCs by biothiols, they found that the emission of some DNA-
Ag NCs such as those with 12 cytosines could be enhanced in
the presence of thiol compounds (Fig. 9). This turn-on assay
enabled a sensitive determination of GSH with a LOD as low
as 6.2 nM, which was at least a magnitude lower than the
previous turn-off assay [108]. This study also showed that
Ag NCs formed in different DNA templates could have differ-
ent ﬂuorescence response patterns to analytes, suggesting
the opportunity to modulate the response patterns of DNA-
Ag NCs to a speciﬁc analyte simply by selecting appropriate
DNA templates in nanocluster synthesis.
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) represents another example
of an analyte attracting a great deal of attention due to its
involvement in many chemical, biological, pharmaceutical
and environmental processes. Particularly, H2O2 is one of the
products of enzymatic reactions by almost all oxidases, thus
enabling quantitative assays of the activity of the enzyme as
well as various enzyme substrates such as glucose [110,111].
Chang et al. [112] developed an assay system for the quan-
titative determination of H2O2 using ﬂuorescent 11-MUA-Au
NCs based on luminescence quenching. In the presence of
H2O2, 11-MUA units bound to the cluster surface through
Au—S bonds are readily oxidized to form an organic disulﬁde
product, resulting in reduced luminescence. This method
was reported to detect H2O2 over a wide dynamic range
(100 nM to 1.0 mM) with a LOD of 30 nM, comparable to other
optical H2O2 sensors. Further combination of luminescent
Fig. 9
(A) Schematic illustration of the template-dependent ﬂuorescence response patterns of different DNA-Ag NCs to thiol
compounds. (B) Representative ﬂuorescence spectra of dC12-Ag NCs in the presence of increasing glutathione concentrations
(0—2000 nM).
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [109] ©2011 the Royal Society of Chemistry.)

Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters: Synthesis and biological applications
411
Fig. 10
(Left) Schematic representation of the formation of HRP-Au NCs and the H2O2-induced quenching. (Right) Fluorescence
response of HRP-Au NCs after adding H2O2 (0—100 M). Inset: Plot of the ﬂuorescence ratio [I650/I450] of HRP-Au NCs versus the log
concentration of H2O2.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [75] ©2011 American Chemical Society.)
Au NCs with glucose oxidase enabled the sensitive determi-
nation of glucose. Dong and coworkers [113] demonstrated
that BSA-stabilized Au NCs could also be utilized for the
facile detection of glucose with a LOD of 5.0 M. The sens-
ing mechanism was based on the enzymatically generated
H2O2-induced degradation of Au NCs, which resulted in the
ﬂuorescence quenching. Zhang et al. [75] recently reported
a new strategy to construct enzyme-functionalized ﬂuores-
cent Au NCs for the detection of H2O2 (Fig. 10). Bifunctional
ﬂuorescent Au NCs could be formed in situ using horseradish
peroxidase (HRP) as a scaffold. The enzyme remains active
in the clusters and enables the catalytic reaction of HRP-
Au NCs and H2O2, resulting in the ﬂuorescence quenching
that can be applied to H2O2 detection with high sensitivity
(LOD: 30 nM).
Detection of proteins
Conjugation of selective receptor molecules (e.g. antibod-
ies and aptamers) to the surface of ﬂuorescent metal NCs
has been employed for the development of metal NC-based
ﬂuorescent protein sensors. The ﬁrst application of ﬂuo-
rescent metal NCs for protein detection was reported in
2006 by Leblanc et al. [114]. The polyclonal, goat-derived
anti-human IgG antibody was electrostatically conjugated
with PAMAM dendrimer-encapsulated Au NCs to construct
a human IgG immunoassay. The system was able to detect
IgG by linear ﬂuorescence quenching in response to changes
in the surface electrostatic properties of Au NCs by the
formation of antigen—antibody immunocomplexes. Using
ﬂuorescent Au NCs as ﬂuorophores and 13-nm Au nanopar-
ticles (Au NPs) as quenchers, Chang and coworkers [115]
developed a competitive ﬂuorescence quenching assay for
analyzing proteins (Fig. 11). Platelet-derived growth fac-
tor AA (PDGF AA) molecules were conjugated to 11-MUA-Au
nanodots through electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions
(denoted as PDGF AA-LAu ND), and thiol-derivatized aptamers
with high afﬁnity toward PDGFs were modiﬁed on the sur-
face of Au NPs (denoted as Apt-QAuNP). The ﬂuorescence
of PDGF AA-LAu ND decreased when ﬂuorescence quench-
ing occurred between Apt-QAuNP and PDGF AA-LAu ND. The
ﬂuorescence quenching was efﬁciently suppressed in the
presence of PDGF or PDGF -receptor due to competitive
reactions between them and Apt-QAuNP, which can be used
as a turn-on ﬂuorescence assay of PDGFs or PDGF receptors.
The system allowed the detection of PDGF at concentrations
as low as 0.5 nM in the presence of BSA at 10 M. The same
group also reported the utilization of biofunctional Au NCs as
ﬂuorescence sensors for the sensitive detection of other pro-
teins including concanavalin A [116] and immunoglobulin G
[117].
A straightforward method for the rapid detection of
glutathione S-transferase (GST)-tagged proteins from cell
lysates has been developed by Chen et al. [118] by using
glutathione-stabilized Au NCs. The presence of GST-tagged
proteins could be visualized under UV light illumination
upon centrifugation of their conjugates with luminescent
GSH-Au NCs. The LOD of this approach by simple obser-
vation with the naked eye was estimated to be 0.75 M,
which was slightly higher than the detection limit by
using ﬂuorescence spectroscopy (0.25 M). Martinez and
Fig. 11
Schematic representations of PDGF and PDGF recep-
tor nanosensors based on the modulation of the ﬂuorescence
quenching between PDGF AA-LAuND and Apt-QAuNP.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [115] ©2008 American
Chemical Society.)

412
L. Shang et al.
coworkers [119] recently developed a new strategy for
detecting speciﬁc proteins using an intrinsically ﬂuores-
cent recognition ligand that combines the high ﬂuorescence
QY (>50%) of oligonucleotide-templated Ag NCs with the
speciﬁcity and strong binding afﬁnity of DNA aptamers for
their target proteins. This simple method was characterized
by the simultaneous achievement of synthesizing ﬂuores-
cent Ag NCs and conjugating the recognition molecules
(aptamers) within one step. Further incorporating palettes
of nanocluster-templating sequences, each with different
ﬂuorescence features and different aptamer sequences,
would allow the development of multiplex protein detection
schemes.
Detection of nucleic acids
Formation of ﬂuorescent metal NCs can depend upon a
number of factors, including solvent chemistry, pH and the
scaffold. For instance, the emission properties of DNA-Ag
NCs may vary greatly depending on the local environ-
ment and nucleotide sequences, which have recently been
exploited as a new signal transduction mechanism for
nucleic acid detection. By virtue of the highly sequence-
dependent generation of ﬂuorescent Ag NCs in hybridized
DNA duplex scaffolds, Wang and coworkers [120] developed
a new Ag NCs-based ﬂuorescent assay capable of specif-
ically identifying single nucleotide modiﬁcations in DNA.
Their study showed that even a single-nucleotide mismatch
located two bases away from the nanocluster formation site
would prohibit the generation of ﬂuorescent Ag NCs. As an
example, they demonstrated the capability of this strategy
to identify the sickle cell anemia mutation in the hemoglobin
beta chain (HBB) gene.
On the basis of the ﬁnding that the red ﬂuorescence of
DNA-Ag NCs could be enhanced up to 500-fold when placed
in proximity to guanine-rich DNA sequences, Yeh et al. [121]
recently designed a DNA detection probe that ‘‘lights up’’
upon target binding. As shown in Fig. 12, dark DNA-Ag NCs
can be transformed into bright red-emitting clusters when
placed in proximity of guanine bases, which enabled the
speciﬁc detection of DNA targets in a separation-free for-
mat. Particularly, this new type of nanocluster probe was
able to detect the target with an extremely high signal-to-
background ratio of 175, which is a factor of 5 better than
by using a conventional molecular beacon probe.
Chang et al. [122] presented a one-pot synthesis of ﬂuo-
rescent and functional DNA-Ag NCs that act as selective and
sensitive probes for DNA detection. The speciﬁc DNA scaffold
combined a DNA sequence for the recognition of target DNA
and a scaffold for the preparation of ﬂuorescent Ag NCs.
The detection was based on the different stabilities (read
out by ﬂuorescence intensities) of formed Ag NCs in solu-
tions containing 0.15 M NaCl in the absence and presence of
perfectly matching DNA, which allowed the sensitive detec-
tion of a gene for fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) with
a LOD of 14 nM.
Fig. 12
(A) Schematic representation showing red ﬂuorescence enhancement of DNA-Ag NCs through proximity with a G-rich
overhang, 3′-G4(TG4)2TG3, caused by DNA hybridization and photographs of the resulting emission under UV (366 nm) irradiation.
(B) 3D- and 2D-contour plots of excitation/emission spectra of the Ag NCs before (left) and after (right) hybridizing NC-bearing
Strand 1 with Strand HC 15G. Inset: Integrated red ﬂuorescence emission with the buffer ﬂuorescence subtracted in arbitrary
units, which shows an enhancement of ∼500-fold after duplex formation.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [121] ©2010 American Chemical Society.)

Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters: Synthesis and biological applications
413
Application of ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters in
biological imaging
Fluorescence imaging offers unique advantages over other
imaging modalities in regard to sensitivity, multiplex detec-
tion capabilities and equipment cost. It relies heavily on
stable, biocompatible, highly speciﬁc and sensitive markers
[123]. Conventional ﬂuorophores for imaging applications
include organic dyes and engineered ﬂuorescent proteins,
which have limited photostability that can be a disadvantage
for long-term experiments in live cells with high sensitivity.
Semiconductor QDs have been considered as a promising
alternative owing to their excellent photophysical prop-
erties such as good photostability and high ﬂuorescence
brightness; therefore, they have been under intense inves-
tigation for in vitro and in vivo imaging [5]. However, these
QDs have prompted potential safety concerns for in vivo
use. In addition, their larger dimensions, typically compa-
rable to or larger than the size of proteins, could possibly
affect the function of attached ligand molecules [3]. In con-
trast, ﬂuorescent metal NCs are smaller and exhibit bright
emission and good biocompatibility, making them attractive
alternatives as ﬂuorescent probes for bioimaging.
A number of papers have reported biological imaging
applications based on ﬂuorescent metal NCs. In an early
report, Baskakov and coworkers [124] presented the ﬁrst
imaging application of Ag NCs in combination with a ﬂuo-
rophore, thioﬂavin T (ThT). Fluorescent NCs were generated
in situ by sensitized photoreduction of Ag+ in the pres-
ence of ThT. Notably, these hybrid NCs displayed ultrabright
ﬂuorescence in aqueous solution without any detectable
photobleaching, and could be easily detected using a ﬂu-
orescence microscope. The potential of these luminescent
NCs for bioimaging was demonstrated by staining amyloid
ﬁbrils (Fig. 13). After incubation for 5 min with preformed
ThT-Ag NCs, amyloid ﬁbrils were observed to be covered by
blinking ﬂuorescent clusters. Whereas amyloid ﬁbrils stained
with ThT-Ag NCs displayed a time-dependent increase of ﬂu-
orescence with no appreciable photobleaching even after
24 h of illumination at 475 nm (500 W/cm2), those stained
only with ThT showed a rapid decay of the ﬂuorescence and
were barely detectable even after 1 min of illumination.
Dickson and coworkers [67] reported the staining of living
cells by intracellularly generated, ﬂuorescent peptide-
encapsulated Ag NCs. These ultrasmall Ag NCs were found
to distribute evenly within the cells and some even passed
through the nuclear membrane, resulting in a weak nuclear
staining. Because these Ag NCs exhibited short lifetimes
(220 ps (33%) and 1760 ps (67%)), they could be monitored
with time-gated microscopy to minimize contributions from
autoﬂuorescence or other co-loaded dyes with slower emis-
sion. Later, the same group reported the application of
ﬂuorescent DNA-Ag NCs to biological imaging in a more spe-
ciﬁc way through surface labeling of live cells [125]. These
DNA-Ag NCs were readily conjugated with proteins such as
avidin without signiﬁcantly perturbing their biological func-
tion, owing to the ultrasmall size of Ag NCs. Employing
simple avidin—biotin interactions, avidin-conjugated Ag NCs
could stain the cell surface and be internalized. Moreover,
in recent studies, metal NCs were delivered into living cells
by microinjection [126], conjugation with a cell penetrating
peptide [126—128], using a transfection agent [129], or sim-
ple endocytosis [29,42], thereby opening strategies toward
intracellular labeling and imaging.
Two-photon imaging can be advantageous for the study
of biological samples because of the ability of deeper imag-
ing inside tissues and the reduced phototoxicity of NIR
light. The outstanding TPA cross sections of metal NCs make
them good candidates for application in two-photon cellu-
lar imaging. Using dextran-encapsulated 11-MUA-Au NCs as
the ﬂuorophore, Chou and coworkers [88] investigated their
potential for two-photon imaging of human mesenchymal
stem cells (hMSCs). Bright luminescence from Au NCs could
be observed in ﬁxed cell samples via two-photon excitation
in a confocal microscope using 800 nm laser pulses, thus
validating the applicability of ﬂuorescent Au NCs in two-
photon imaging. Xu et al. [89] also presented applications of
glutathione-protected Au NCs, which possess a much higher
TPA cross section than 11-MUA-Au NCs, for two-photon exci-
tation in live cell imaging. Recently, Nienhaus and coworkers
[29] investigated the internalization of ﬂuorescent DPA-Au
NCs by live HeLa cells via two-photon ﬂuorescence imag-
ing. After incubation with DPA-Au NCs for 2 h, cells were
imaged by using confocal microscopy with TPE at 810 nm. As
shown in Fig. 14, the bright luminescence from clusters of
ingested NCs could easily be observed inside the cells. Cells
were also imaged at different z-positions for 3D reconstruc-
tion, which revealed DPA-Au NCs inside the cells as well as
Fig. 13
Epiﬂuorescence microscopy images of amyloid ﬁbrils of PrP 90—231 stained with (A) preformed ThT-Ag NCs and (B) 10 M
ThT, respectively. Scale bars: 10 m. ThT-Ag NCs were generated by the irradiation of aqueous solutions containing ThT (10 M)
and AgNO3 (1 M) at 312 nm for 3 min. (C) Photobleaching kinetics of the ﬁbrils stained with ThT (black line) versus photoactivation
kinetics of the ﬁbrils stained with ThT-Ag NCs (red line). The kinetics were collected from a 5 m × 5 m area and normalized to
the intensity measured at zero time.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [124] ©2005 Elsevier.)

414
L. Shang et al.
Fig. 14
(A) Fluorescence image, taken with 810 nm two-photon excitation after incubation of HeLa cells with DPA-Au NCs
(100 g/ml) for 2 h. (B) Cross section of a 3D image reconstruction, showing internalized DPA-Au NCs. Membranes were stained
with the red dye DiD.
attached to the membrane. While elucidating the detailed
uptake mechanism of these ultrasmall Au NCs still requires
more investigation, the ﬁnding that most particles inside
the cells existed in the form of large aggregates suggests
they were taken up by speciﬁc endocytosis pathways that
package a large number of particles into endosomal vesicles
[130].
Wu et al. [131] recently presented the ﬁrst example
of in vivo ﬂuorescence imaging in animals with ultrasmall
BSA-stabilized Au NCs. The ﬂuorescence signal of Au NCs
in living organisms could be spectrally distinguished from
the background, and the high photostability as well as the
low toxicity of Au NCs indicated their potential for con-
tinuous imaging in vivo. As shown in Fig. 15, ﬂuorescence
images of the subcutaneously injected mice exhibited bright
emission from different locations depending on the injected
Au NC dose. The ﬂuorescence of Au NCs could also be
visualized upon injection into muscles by up to a few mil-
limeters, owing to the improved tissue penetration afforded
by NIR ﬂuorescence. Au NCs were intravenously injected into
athymic nude mice and subjected to whole body real-time
in vivo imaging. Immediately after tail vein injection, the
ﬂuorescence from Au NCs-injected mice was easily visual-
ized in the superﬁcial vasculature of the whole body. The
ﬂuorescence signals remained visible in the circulation even
at 5 h post injection, and decreased noticeably 24 h post
injection. Furthermore, using two different tumor models,
in vivo and ex vivo imaging studies showed that the ultra-
small Au NCs could be accumulated to a high level in tumor
sites owing to the enhanced permeability and retention
(EPR) effects. Recent work by Zheng et al. found that the
renal clearance of 2 nm glutathione-coated luminescent Au
NCs was more than 10—100 times better than that of sim-
ilarly sized nonluminescent Au NPs [132]. The small size
Fig. 15
In vivo ﬂuorescence image of 100 l Au NCs injected (A) subcutaneously (a: 0.235 mg ml−1, b: 2.35 mg ml−1) and (B)
intramuscularly (2.35 mg ml−1) into mice. (C) Real-time in vivo abdomen imaging upon intravenous injection with 200 l of Au NCs
(2.35 mg ml−1) at different time points post injection.
(Reprinted with permission from Ref. [131] ©2010 the Royal Society of Chemistry.)

Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters: Synthesis and biological applications
415
in combination with surface ligands not only enables the
majority of the luminescent Au NCs to be cleared from the
body through kidney ﬁltration, but also stabilizes the lumi-
nescent Au NCs during blood circulation. This variety of
studies has clearly demonstrated that ultrasmall NIR Au NCs
are promising contrast imaging agents for in vivo ﬂuores-
cence imaging.
Summary and perspective
Fluorescent metal NCs are a novel class of luminescent
nanomaterials. Their attractive properties including ultra-
small size, low toxicity, lack of intermittency and low
photobleaching make them attractive ﬂuorescent probes for
biological applications. Recent advances in the synthesis
of ﬂuorescent Au/Ag NCs by a variety of approaches have
contributed signiﬁcantly to progress toward a fundamen-
tal understanding of their fascinating optical properties as
well as the development of applications in bioanalysis and
biological imaging. Despite their great potential and promis-
ing future as novel labeling agents, further advancement of
ﬂuorescent metal NCs faces a variety of challenges.
First, there remains a good deal of room for develop-
ing better synthesis routes to produce high quality metal
NCs. Particularly, most of the currently reported metal NCs
possess a relatively low QY (less than 10%) in comparison
to semiconductor QDs and many organic dyes. In addition,
NCs often show size heterogeneity in the crude product.
Polydispersity deﬁnitely compromises their attractiveness
as ﬂuorophores and also makes detailed fundamental stud-
ies of their properties (such as structure determination and
quantiﬁcation) more difﬁcult. Thus, it is an important goal
to develop new synthesis strategies to efﬁciently produce
monodisperse, bright metal NCs. In this regard, Jin et al.
[133] recently demonstrated the possibility of synthesizing
atomically monodisperse thiol-functionalized Au25 NCs. They
also revealed that ligands with electron-rich atoms or groups
can markedly enhance the ﬂuorescence of Au NCs [19]. This
observation may spawn new strategies for future progress in
this direction.
Second, in addition to ﬂuorescence, it could be useful to
simultaneously endow metal NCs with other properties. Such
bi- or multifunctional probes bear a lot of promise for appli-
cations. Especially, magnetic nanomaterials exhibit a unique
magnetic resonance (MR) contrast enhancement effect that
enables noninvasive MR imaging of cell trafﬁcking, gene
expression and cancer [134]. For clinical applications requir-
ing in vivo imaging, probes comprising ﬂuorescence and
magnetism can be advantageous because of their ability
to be detected optically and magnetically. Another pos-
sibility could be to combine ﬂuorescent metal NCs with
plasmonic materials such as gold, which may yield unique
multifunctional nanoprobes for plasmon and ﬂuorescence-
based imaging and detection [135]. The rational design and
fabrication of such multifunctional metal NC-based probes
can be very challenging. The recent success in coating Au
NCs with silica may likely assist in this endeavor, owing to
the possibility of introducing different functionalities on the
silica surface [136,137].
Third, despite many reports on the biological application
of ﬂuorescent metal NCs, relatively little is known about
the interaction of these ultra-small clusters with the biolog-
ical environment. For instance, in a biological ﬂuid, proteins
can adsorb and associate with nanoparticles, which can have
signiﬁcant impact on the biological behavior of both pro-
teins and nanoparticles [138,139]. Correspondingly, a better
understanding of the interactions between metal NCs and
proteins and other biomolecules is important to understand
the mechanistic basis of the biological activity of these NCs
and to make safe use of nanotechnology. Moreover, it would
be also interesting to explore the fate of these tiny clusters
after entering live cells, i.e., where do they go, do they
change cell signaling or other cellular properties, or how
are they processed and degraded by the cells?
In conclusion, ﬂuorescent metal NCs have attractive
features for their application as ultrasmall biocompatible
labels. As the synthesis and biological applications of these
ﬂuorescent metal NCs are still at an early stage, much work
remains to be done before these clusters will be widely
employed as alternatives to conventional ﬂuorophores in
practical applications. With further advances in design and
synthesis of high quality, multifunctional metal NCs, we
expect their widespread application in advanced image-
guided therapy, intracellular drug delivery, ultrasensitive
molecular diagnostics, as well as novel light-emitting nan-
odevices over the years to come.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG) through the Center for Functional
Nanostructures (CFN) and the Priority Program SPP1313. L.S.
gratefully acknowledges support from the Alexander von
Humboldt (AvH) Foundation.
References
[1] M.C. Roco, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 14 (2003) 337—346.
[2] Y.C. Cao, Nanomedicine 3 (2008) 467—469.
[3] F. Wang, W.B. Tan, Y. Zhang, X. Fan, M. Wang, Nanotechnology
17 (2006) R1.
[4] M. Baker, Nat. Methods 7 (2010) 957—962.
[5] X. Michalet, F. Pinaud, L. Bentolila, J. Tsay, S. Doose, J. Li, G.
Sundaresan, A. Wu, S. Gambhir, S. Weiss, Science 307 (2005)
538—544.
[6] J. Yan, M.C. Estévez, J.E. Smith, K. Wang, X. He, L. Wang, W.
Tan, Nano Today 2 (2007) 44—50.
[7] D.K. Chatterjee, M.K. Gnanasammandhan, Y. Zhang, Small 6
(2010) 2781—2795.
[8] S.N. Baker, G.A. Baker, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 49 (2010)
6726—6744.
[9] G.U. Nienhaus, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 47 (2008) 8992—8994.
[10] J. Zheng, P.R. Nicovich, R.M. Dickson, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem.
58 (2007) 409—431.
[11] H. Xu, K.S. Suslick, Adv. Mater. 22 (2010) 1078—1082.
[12] I. Diez, R.H.A. Ras, Nanoscale 3 (2011) 1963—1970.
[13] M.A.H. Muhammed, T. Pradeep, in: A.P. Demchenko (Ed.),
Advanced Fluorescence Reporters in Chemistry and Biology
II, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 333—353.
[14] I. Díez, R. Ras, Advanced Fluorescence Reporters in Chemistry
and Biology II, Springer, 2010, pp. 307—332.
[15] C. Lin, C. Lee, J. Hsieh, H. Wang, J. Li, J. Shen, W. Chan, H.
Yeh, W. Chang, J. Med. Biol. Eng. 29 (2009) 276—283.

416
L. Shang et al.
[16] W. Wei, Y. Lu, W. Chen, S. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133 (2011)
2060—2063.
[17] S.-I. Tanaka, J. Miyazaki, D.K. Tiwari, T. Jin, Y. Inouye, Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 50 (2011) 431—435.
[18] A. Mooradian, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22 (1969) 185—187.
[19] Z. Wu, R. Jin, Nano Lett. 10 (2010) 2568—2573.
[20] R. Jin, Nanoscale 2 (2010) 343—362.
[21] S. Link, A. Beeby, S. FitzGerald, M. El-Sayed, T. Schaaff, R.
Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B 106 (2002) 3410—3415.
[22] Y. Negishi, K. Nobusada, T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127
(2005) 5261—5270.
[23] Y. Negishi, Y. Takasugi, S. Sato, H. Yao, K. Kimura, T. Tsukuda,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126 (2004) 6518—6519.
[24] T.
Huang,
R.
Murray,
J.
Phys.
Chem.
B
105
(2001)
12498—12502.
[25] D. Lee, R.L. Donkers, G. Wang, A.S. Harper, R.W. Murray, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 126 (2004) 6193—6199.
[26] M. Paau, C. Lo, X. Yang, M. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C 114 (2010)
15995—16003.
[27] Z. Wang, W. Cai, J. Sui, ChemPhysChem 10 (2009) 2012—
2015.
[28] B. Adhikari, A. Banerjee, Chem. Mater. 22 (2010) 4364—
4371.
[29] L. Shang, R.M. Dörlich, S. Brandholt, R. Schneider, V. Trouillet,
M. Bruns, D. Gerthsen, G.U. Nienhaus, Nanoscale 3 (2011)
2009—2014.
[30] C.-C. Huang, Z. Yang, K.-H. Lee, H.-T. Chang, Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 46 (2007) 6824—6828.
[31] C.-C. Huang, H.-Y. Liao, Y.-C. Shiang, Z.-H. Lin, Z. Yang, H.-T.
Chang, J. Mater. Chem. 19 (2009) 755—759.
[32] C.-C. Huang, Y.-L. Hung, Y.-C. Shiang, T.-Y. Lin, Y.-S. Lin, C.-T.
Chen, H.-T. Chang, Chem. Asian J. 5 (2010) 334—341.
[33] M. Habeeb Muhammed, S. Ramesh, S. Sinha, S. Pal, T.
Pradeep, Nano Res. 1 (2008) 333—340.
[34] M. Muhammed, P. Verma, S. Pal, R. Kumar, S. Paul, R. Omku-
mar, T. Pradeep, Chem. Eur. J. 15 (2009) 10110—10120.
[35] C.A. Lin, T.Y. Yang, C.H. Lee, S.H. Huang, R.A. Sperling, M.
Zanella, J.K. Li, J.L. Shen, H.H. Wang, H.I. Yeh, W.J. Parak,
W.H. Chang, ACS Nano 3 (2009) 395—401.
[36] T. Udaya Bhaskara Rao, T. Pradeep, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 49
(2010) 3925—3929.
[37] T.U.B. Rao, B. Nataraju, T. Pradeep, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132
(2010) 16304—16307.
[38] J. Zheng, R.M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124 (2002)
13982—13983.
[39] J. Zheng, J.T. Petty, R.M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125
(2003) 7780—7781.
[40] J. Zheng, C. Zhang, R.M. Dickson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004)
077402.
[41] Y.P. Bao, C. Zhong, D.M. Vu, J.P. Temirov, R.B. Dyer, J.S. Mar-
tinez, J. Phys. Chem. C 111 (2007) 12194—12198.
[42] Y.-C. Jao, M.-K. Chen, S.-Y. Lin, Chem. Commun. 46 (2010)
2626—2628.
[43] J.G. Zhang, S.Q. Xu, E. Kumacheva, Adv. Mater. 17 (2005)
2336—2340.
[44] Z.
Shen,
H.W.
Duan,
H.
Frey,
Adv.
Mater.
19
(2007)
349—352.
[45] L. Shang, S.J. Dong, Chem. Commun. (2008) 1088—1090.
[46] I. Díez, M. Pusa, S. Kulmala, H. Jiang, A. Walther, A.S. Gold-
mann, A.H.E. Muller, O. Ikkala, R.H.A. Ras, Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed. 48 (2009) 2122—2125.
[47] H. Xu, K.S. Suslick, ACS Nano 4 (2010) 3209—3214.
[48] S. Liu, F. Lu, J.-J. Zhu, Chem. Commun. 47 (2011) 2661—2663.
[49] H. Duan, S. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129 (2007) 2412—2413.
[50] N. Schaeffer, B. Tan, C. Dickinson, M.J. Rosseinsky, A. Laro-
maine, D.W. McComb, M.M. Stevens, Y. Wang, L. Petit, C.
Barentin, D.G. Spiller, A.I. Cooper, R. Levy, Chem. Commun.
(2008) 3986—3988.
[51] B. Santiago González, M.a.J. Rodríguez, C. Blanco, J. Rivas,
M.A. Lòpez-Quintela, J.M.G. Martinho, Nano Lett. 10 (2010)
4217—4221.
[52] H. Yabu, Chem. Commun. 47 (2011) 1196—1197.
[53] S.
Pitchiaya,
Y.
Krishnan,
Chem.
Soc.
Rev.
35
(2006)
1111—1121.
[54] N. Dattagupta, D.M. Crothers, Nucl. Acids Res. 9 (1981)
2971—2985.
[55] K.F.S. Luk, A.H. Maki, R.J. Hoover, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 97
(1975) 1241—1242.
[56] J.T. Petty, J. Zheng, N.V. Hud, R.M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 126 (2004) 5207—5212.
[57] T. Vosch, Y. Antoku, J.C. Hsiang, C.I. Richards, J.I. Gonza-
lez, R.M. Dickson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104 (2007)
12616—12621.
[58] C.M.
Ritchie,
K.R.
Johnsen,
J.R.
Kiser,
Y.
Antoku,
R.M. Dickson, J.T. Petty, J. Phys. Chem. C 111 (2007)
175—181.
[59] B. Sengupta, C.M. Ritchie, J.G. Buckman, K.R. Johnsen,
P.M. Goodwin, J.T. Petty, J. Phys. Chem. C 112 (2008)
18776—18782.
[60] E.G. Gwinn, P. O’Neill, A.J. Guerrero, D. Bouwmeester, D.K.
Fygenson, Adv. Mater. 20 (2008) 279—283.
[61] B. Sengupta, K. Springer, J.G. Buckman, S.P. Story, O.H. Abe,
Z.W. Hasan, Z.D. Prudowsky, S.E. Rudisill, N.N. Degtyareva,
J.T. Petty, J. Phys. Chem. C 113 (2009) 19518—19524.
[62] J. Sharma, H.-C. Yeh, H. Yoo, J.H. Werner, J.S. Martinez,
Chem. Commun. 46 (2010) 3280—3282.
[63] C.I. Richards, S. Choi, J.C. Hsiang, Y. Antoku, T. Vosch, A.
Bongiorno, Y.L. Tzeng, R.M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130
(2008) 5038—5039.
[64] P.R.
O’Neill,
L.R.
Velazquez,
D.G.
Dunn,
E.G.
Gwinn,
D.K.
Fygenson,
J.
Phys.
Chem.
C
113
(2009)
4229—
4233.
[65] Z. Huang, F. Pu, D. Hu, C. Wang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Chem. Eur. J.
17 (2011) 3774—3780.
[66] R. Zhou, M. Shi, X. Chen, M. Wang, H. Chen, Chem. Eur. J. 15
(2009) 4944—4951.
[67] J. Yu, S.A. Patel, R.M. Dickson, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 46
(2007) 2028—2030.
[68] B.
Adhikari,
A.
Banerjee,
Chem.
Eur.
J.
16
(2010)
13698—13705.
[69] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, J.Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131 (2009)
888—889.
[70] H. Wei, Z. Wang, L. Yang, S. Tian, C. Hou, Y. Lu, Analyst 135
(2010) 1406—1410.
[71] P.L. Xavier, K. Chaudhari, P.K. Verma, S.K. Pal, T. Pradeep,
Nanoscale 2 (2010) 2769—2776.
[72] X.L. Guével, N. Daum, M. Schneider, Nanotechnology 22
(2011) 275103.
[73] C. Guo, J. Irudayaraj, Anal. Chem. 83 (2011) 2883—2889.
[74] M.A. Habeeb Muhammed, P.K. Verma, S.K. Pal, A. Retnaku-
mari, M. Koyakutty, S. Nair, T. Pradeep, Chem. Eur. J. 16 (2010)
10103—10112.
[75] F. Wen, Y. Dong, L. Feng, S. Wang, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, Anal.
Chem. 83 (2011) 1193—1196.
[76] S.S. Narayanan, S.K. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C 112 (2008)
4874—4879.
[77] M. Zhu, C.M. Aikens, F.J. Hollander, G.C. Schatz, R. Jin, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 130 (2008) 5883—5885.
[78] B.N.G. Giepmans, S.R. Adams, M.H. Ellisman, R.Y. Tsien, Sci-
ence 312 (2006) 217—224.
[79] J. Wiedenmann, G.U. Nienhaus, Expert Rev. Proteom. 3 (2006)
361—374.
[80] G.U. Nienhaus, J. Wiedenmann, ChemPhysChem 10 (2009)
1369—1379.
[81] T. Huang, R.W. Murray, J. Phys. Chem. B 107 (2003)
7434—7440.

Ultra-small ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters: Synthesis and biological applications
417
[82] C. Zhou, C. Sun, M. Yu, Y. Qin, J. Wang, M. Kim, J. Zheng, J.
Phys. Chem. C 114 (2010) 7727—7732.
[83] H. Chen, X. Kou, Z. Yang, W. Ni, J. Wang, Langmuir 24 (2008)
5233—5237.
[84] S.A. Patel, M. Cozzuol, J.M. Hales, C.I. Richards, M. Sartin, J.-
C. Hsiang, T. Vosch, J.W. Perry, R.M. Dickson, J. Phys. Chem.
C 113 (2009) 20264—20270.
[85] K.A. Willets, R.P. Van Duyne, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 58 (2007)
267—297.
[86] P.T.C. So, C.Y. Dong, B.R. Masters, K.M. Berland, Annu. Rev.
Biomed. Eng. 2 (2000) 399—429.
[87] G. Ramakrishna, O. Varnavski, J. Kim, D. Lee, T. Goodson, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 130 (2008) 5032—5033.
[88] C. Liu, M. Ho, Y. Chen, C. Hsieh, Y. Lin, Y. Wang, M. Yang,
H. Duan, B. Chen, J. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C 113 (2009)
21082—21089.
[89] L. Polavarapu, M. Manna, Q.-H. Xu, Nanoscale 3 (2011)
429—434.
[90] D.R. Larson, W.R. Zipfel, R.M. Williams, S.W. Clark, M.P.
Bruchez,
F.W.
Wise,
W.W.
Webb,
Science
300
(2003)
1434—1436.
[91] S.A. Patel, C.I. Richards, J.-C. Hsiang, R.M. Dickson, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 130 (2008) 11602—11603.
[92] X.-B. Yin, S. Dong, E. Wang, Trends Anal. Chem. 23 (2004)
432—441.
[93] R.J. Forster, P. Bertoncello, T.E. Keyes, Annu. Rev. Anal.
Chem. 2 (2009) 359—385.
[94] Y.-M. Fang, J. Song, J. Li, Y.-W. Wang, H.-H. Yang, J.-J. Sun,
G.-N. Chen, Chem. Commun. 47 (2011) 2369—2371.
[95] L. Li, H. Liu, Y. Shen, J. Zhang, J.-J. Zhu, Anal. Chem. 83
(2011) 661—665.
[96] P. Holmes, K.A.F. James, L.S. Levy, Sci. Total Environ. 408
(2009) 171—182.
[97] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, J.Y. Ying, Chem. Commun. 46 (2010)
961—963.
[98] Y.-H. Lin, W.-L. Tseng, Anal. Chem. 82 (2010) 9194—9200.
[99] W. Guo, J. Yuan, E. Wang, Chem. Commun. (2009) 3395—
3397.
[100] L. Shang, S.J. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. 18 (2008) 4636—4640.
[101] W. Chen, X. Tu, X. Guo, Chem. Commun. (2009) 1736—1738.
[102] G.-Y. Lan, C.-C. Huang, H.-T. Chang, Chem. Commun. 46
(2010) 1257—1259.
[103] Y.-T. Su, G.-Y. Lan, W.-Y. Chen, H.-T. Chang, Anal. Chem. 82
(2010) 8566—8572.
[104] L. Shang, J. Yin, J. Li, L. Jin, S. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron.
25 (2009) 269—274.
[105] X. Tu, W. Chen, X. Guo, Nanotechnology 22 (2011) 095701.
[106] X. Chen, Y. Zhou, X. Peng, J. Yoon, Chem. Soc. Rev. 39 (2010)
2120—2135.
[107] L. Shang, S. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron. 24 (2009) 1569—1573.
[108] B. Han, E. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron. 26 (2011) 2585—2589.
[109] Z. Huang, F. Pu, Y. Lin, J. Ren, X. Qu, Chem. Commun. 47
(2011) 3487—3489.
[110] L. Shang, H. Chen, L. Deng, S. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron. 23
(2008) 1180—1184.
[111] L. Shang, S.J. Dong, Anal. Chem. 81 (2009) 1465—1470.
[112] Y.-C. Shiang, C.-C. Huang, H.-T. Chang, Chem. Commun.
(2009) 3437—3439.
[113] L. Jin, L. Shang, S. Guo, Y. Fang, D. Wen, L. Wang, J. Yin, S.
Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron. 26 (2011) 1965—1969.
[114] R.C. Triulzi, M. Micic, S. Giordani, M. Serry, W.-A. Chiou, R.M.
Leblanc, Chem. Commun. (2006) 5068—5070.
[115] C.-C. Huang, C.-K. Chiang, Z.-H. Lin, K.-H. Lee, H.-T. Chang,
Anal. Chem. 80 (2008) 1497—1504.
[116] C.-C. Huang, C.-T. Chen, Y.-C. Shiang, Z.-H. Lin, H.-T. Chang,
Anal. Chem. 81 (2009) 875—882.
[117] Y.-C. Shiang, C.-A. Lin, C.-C. Huang, H.-T. Chang, Analyst 136
(2011) 1177—1182.
[118] C.-T. Chen, W.-J. Chen, C.-Z. Liu, L.-Y. Chang, Y.-C. Chen,
Chem. Commun. (2009) 7515—7517.
[119] J. Sharma, H.-C. Yeh, H. Yoo, J.H. Werner, J.S. Martinez,
Chem. Commun. 47 (2011) 2294—2296.
[120] W. Guo, J. Yuan, Q. Dong, E. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132
(2010) 932—934.
[121] H.-C. Yeh, J. Sharma, J.J. Han, J.S. Martinez, J.H. Werner,
Nano Lett. 10 (2010) 3106—3110.
[122] G.-Y. Lan, W.-Y. Chen, H.-T. Chang, Biosens. Bioelectron. 26
(2011) 2431—2435.
[123] M. Fernandez-Suarez, A. Ting, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9
(2008) 929—943.
[124] N. Makarava, A. Parfenov, I.V. Baskakov, Biophys. J. 89 (2005)
572—580.
[125] J. Yu, S. Choi, C.I. Richards, Y. Antoku, R.M. Dickson, Pho-
tochem. Photobiol. 84 (2008) 1435—1439.
[126] S. Choi, J. Yu, S.A. Patel, Y.-L. Tzeng, R.M. Dickson, Pho-
tochem. Photobiol. Sci. 10 (2011) 109—115.
[127] S.-Y. Lin, N.-T. Chen, S.-P. Sum, L.-W. Lo, C.-S. Yang, Chem.
Commun. (2008) 4762—4764.
[128] S.-Y. Lin, N.-T. Chen, S.-P. Sun, J.C. Chang, Y.-C. Wang,
C.-S. Yang, L.-W. Lo, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 (2010)
8309—8315.
[129] Y. Antoku, J.-i. Hotta, H. Mizuno, R.M. Dickson, J. Hofkens,
T. Vosch, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 9 (2010) 716—721.
[130] X. Jiang, C. Röcker, M. Hafner, S. Brandholt, R.M. Dörlich,
G.U. Nienhaus, ACS Nano 4 (2010) 6787—6797.
[131] X. Wu, X. He, K. Wang, C. Xie, B. Zhou, Z. Qing, Nanoscale 2
(2010) 2244—2249.
[132] C. Zhou, M. Long, Y. Qin, X. Sun, J. Zheng, Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed. 50 (2011) 3168—3172.
[133] Z. Wu, J. Suhan, R. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. 19 (2009) 622—626.
[134] J.-H. Lee, Y.-w. Jun, S.-I. Yeon, J.-S. Shin, J. Cheon, Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 45 (2006) 8160—8162.
[135] Y. Jin, X. Gao, Nat. Nanotechnol. 4 (2009) 571—576.
[136] M.A. Habeeb Muhammed, T. Pradeep, Small 7 (2011) 204—208.
[137] X. Le Guevel, B. Hotzer, G. Jung, M. Schneider, J. Mater.
Chem. 21 (2011) 2974—2981.
[138] C. Röcker, M. Pötzl, F. Zhang, W.J. Parak, G.U. Nienhaus, Nat.
Nanotechnol. 4 (2009) 577—580.
[139] X. Jiang, S. Weise, M. Hafner, C. Röcker, F. Zhang, W.J. Parak,
G.U. Nienhaus, J. R. Soc. Interface 7 (2010) S5—S13.
Li Shang graduated with a B.S. degree in
chemistry from Wuhan University (P.R. China)
in 2004. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in ana-
lytical chemistry from Changchun Institute of
Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences, under the supervision of Prof. Shaojun
Dong in 2009. In 2010 he received a post-
doctoral fellowship from the Alexander von
Humboldt Foundation and joined the group of
Prof. G. Ulrich Nienhaus at the Karlsruhe Insti-
tute of Technology (KIT), Germany. He has
coauthored over 30 peer-reviewed publications. His scientiﬁc inter-
ests focus on the development of functional metal nanomaterials for
analytical and biomedical applications.
Shaojun Dong, professor of chemistry at
Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. She is the
member of the Academy of Sciences of the
Developing World since 1999. She is cur-
rently on the Editorial and Advisory Board
of six international journals. She has pub-
lished over 700 papers in peer-reviewed
international journals, the citation by oth-
ers exceeds 12,000, with an h-index of
55. Her research interests concentrate in

418
L. Shang et al.
electrochemistry with interdisciplinary ﬁelds, including chemically
modiﬁed electrodes, nanomaterials and nanotechnology, bioelec-
trochemistry, spectroelectrochemistry, and biofuel cells.
Gerd Ulrich Nienhaus is a chair professor and
head of the Institute of Applied Physics, Karl-
sruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany.
He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Physical
Chemistry from the University of Münster,
Germany, in 1988. In 1990, he moved to the
Department of Physics of the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA, where he
was an associate professor before accepting
an offer to become chair professor and head
of the Institute of Biophysics at the Univer-
sity of Ulm, Germany, in 1996. In 2009, he moved to the KIT. He is
a Fellow of the American Physical Society, the Institute of Physics
and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. His
research focuses on molecular and cellular biophysics studies using
a broad array of biophotonics methods.