Acetamiprid mediates cognitive dysfunction through the gut-brain axis: 
Synaptic damage and immune-mediated blood-brain barrier dysfunction
Bing Wu a,b, Xue-yan Tian a,b
, Wen-si Ni a,b, Hao-Xuan Gao a,b
, Yu-wen Wang a,b,  
Ling-he Zhang a,b, Yu-bin Li a,b, Yan-ling Lv a,b, Ya-nan Song a,b, Yu-cheng Yan a,b,  
Xiao-zhe Geng a,b, Yi-man Li a,b, Hui-fang Yang a,b,*, Ji Zhao a,b,c,*
a College of Public Health, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan 750004, PR China
b Key Laboratory of Environmental Factors and Chronic Disease Control, Yinchuan 750004, PR China
c Department of Toxicology, Shaanxi Provincial Key Lab of Free Radical Biology and Medicine, School of Public Health, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an 
710032, PR China
H I G H L I G H T S
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T
• Subchronic ACE exposure causes cogni­
tive dysfunction in mice, primarily 
spatial 
learning 
and 
memory 
impairment.
• ACE exposure induces neuronal degen­
eration and synaptic dysfunction in 
hippocampal CA1.
• ACE changes the composition of intes­
tinal flora in mice and affects the release 
of neurotransmitters and inflammatory 
factors.
• ACE can cause damage to the gut-brain 
barrier structure in mice and induce 
immune response on the gut-brain axis.
• FMT protects the intestinal barrier and 
synapses, alleviating the gut-brain im­
mune 
response 
activated 
by 
ACE 
exposure.
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Acetamiprid
Cognitive function
Gut–brain axis
Gut microbiota
Fecal microbiota transplantation
A B S T R A C T
Acetamiprid is a widely used neonicotinoid pesticide that can increase the risk of inducing nervous system 
diseases. Considering the increased exposure to acetamiprid and its impact on cognitive function, further clar­
ification is needed. Therefore, we used a mouse model of drinking water to evaluate the effects of acetamiprid on 
cognitive dysfunction and the possible underlying mechanisms. Our study revealed that acetamiprid can cause 
damage to hippocampal and synaptic structures, which in turn leads to a decline in spatial learning and memory 
abilities in mice. Importantly, acetamiprid exposure altered the composition and diversity of the intestinal flora 
and induced a systemic immune response in the gut–brain axis. Specifically, acetamiprid exposure damages the 
gut–brain axis, including structural disorders of the intestinal flora, related neurotransmitters and systemic 
immune factors. In addition, fecal microbiota transplantation restored the homeostasis of the gut microbiota and 
reduced the degree of damage to synaptic and spatial learning and memory. Moreover, intestinal barrier function 
* Correspondence to: 1160 Shengli Street, Xingqing District, Yinchuan 750004, PR China.
E-mail addresses: joyceyhf@163.com (H.-f. Yang), zhaosky2021@163.com (J. Zhao). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Hazardous Materials
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhazmat
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2025.139287
Received 21 February 2025; Received in revised form 18 June 2025; Accepted 15 July 2025  
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
Available online 17 July 2025 
0304-3894/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

is restored, effectively preventing the entry of harmful substances into intestinal tissue and thereby reducing 
damage to the blood–brain barrier and the immune response in the gut–brain. This study provides new insights 
into potential new mechanisms of acetamidine exposure related to cognitive function.
1. Introduction
Parkinson’s disease (PD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are major neuro­
developmental and neurodegenerative diseases affecting millions of 
people around the world [23]. These disorders are mainly characterized 
by motor dysfunction, attention regulation abnormalities and social 
communication disorders. The causes of these diseases are complex and 
involve interactions among multiple factors, such as genetics, the 
environment and lifestyle. Among the many potential environmental 
risk factors, pesticides have become pathogenic factors that cannot be 
ignored due to their extensive environmental residues and neurotoxic 
potential. Epidemiological studies suggest that exposure to certain 
pesticides may be associated with specific neurodevelopment or 
neurodegenerative processes, such as Parkinson’s disease, attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism [23]. Although some studies 
are short, there is no conclusive evidence that these diseases are caused 
entirely by pesticide exposure, but this does not mean that the effects of 
pesticide exposure can be ignored. In fact, pesticide exposure may 
contribute to or exacerbate the occurrence and development of neuro­
degenerative diseases and other neurological diseases.
As a typical neonicotinoid pesticide, acetamiprid is widely used in 
agricultural production. Owing to its significant share of the market, it 
also raises issues of food safety and ecological security. Acetamiprid and 
its metabolites have been detected in various environmental samples 
(water sources and food) and biological samples (brain, blood and urine) 
[39]. Moreover, according to global pesticide reports, acetamiprid 
exposure has been associated with an increased risk of autism spectrum 
disorders in children and an increase in autism spectrum behavioral 
manifestations in rodents [24]. Therefore, the health effects of long-term 
low-dose exposure to acetamiprid cannot be ignored. Although acet­
amiprid is clearly neurotoxic, the mechanism by which acetamiprid 
causes nervous system damage is still unclear. Therefore, in-depth 
research on the potential impact of acetamiprid exposure on nervous 
system health, especially the specific biological processes and damage 
mechanisms of its neurotoxicity, is highly important for obtaining a 
comprehensive understanding of the complex etiology of these diseases.
Changes in cognitive function are the main manifestation of nervous 
system dysfunction, and synaptic plasticity is the basic mechanism of 
cognitive function at the cellular level [18]. Synaptic dysfunction, such 
as synapse loss and deficits in synaptic plasticity, is thought to be closely 
related to cognitive decline [40]. However, the molecular mechanism of 
the synaptic dysfunction and cognitive damage caused by acetamiprid 
exposure remains unclear. In in vitro experiments, acetamiprid did not 
exhibit the expected cytotoxic effects and was unable to inhibit 
nicotine-induced intracellular fluorescence stimulation (nicotine 
cross-desensitization phenomenon) [12]. This finding indicates that the 
damaging effect of acetamiprid on the nervous system may not simply 
affect the function of the nervous system through direct action on neu­
rons but may also indirectly affect the function of the nervous system 
through other mediators or metabolites. For example, other factors, such 
as inflammation and intestinal flora disorders, may be involved [4]. 
There is growing evidence that dynamic changes in the gut microbiome 
can change brain physiology and behavior [45]. Therefore, these factors 
interact with each other, leading to a decrease in synaptic plasticity and 
ultimately damaging cognitive function.
The microbiota–gut–brain axis (MGBA) refers to the two-way 
regulatory and information exchange network system between intesti­
nal microorganisms and the central nervous system. Studies have shown 
that MGBA signaling affects neurotransmitters, neurogenesis, dendritic 
formation and blood–brain barrier development and regulates cogni­
tive function and behavioral patterns [22,37]. Studies have shown that 
98 % of the differences in the human intestinal microbiome are deter­
mined by environmental factors [27]. Therefore, the impact of envi­
ronmental exposure on the diversity of the intestinal flora is very 
important. Acetamiprid induces an imbalance in the abundance and 
homeostasis of the gut microbiota in mice, silkworms [17], and worker 
bees [30], leading to metabolic changes and intestinal immune dysre­
gulation, as well as pathological damage to intestinal tissues in mice 
[19]. These reports suggest that acetamiprid exposure can destroy the 
intestinal structure and alter the relative abundance of the intestinal 
flora and the content of metabolites in the flora. However, little is known 
about whether and how changes in the intestinal flora structure caused 
by acetamiprid exposure mediate cognitive impairment.
In this study, we investigated the role of the intestinal flora in syn­
aptic and cognitive dysfunction caused by acetamiprid exposure in mice. 
Our results provide new insights into the mechanism of nerve damage 
caused by acetamiprid exposure and provide reliable evidence for po­
tential harmful risks to human health and possible treatment 
approaches.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Animal model of gradient exposure to acetamiprid
The breeding and use procedures for all experimental animals were 
approved by the Animal Experiment Management Committee of Ningxia 
Medical University (No. IACUC-NYLAC-2023–204). The C57BL/6 J mice 
used in the experiment were provided by the Experimental Animal 
Center of Ningxia Medical University (male mice aged 3 weeks weighing 
10–15 g). C57BL/6 J mice were housed for one week under standard 
living conditions (12 h light/dark cycle, temperature range of 25 ◦C ± 2 
◦C, relative humidity of 50–60 %). Forty-eight male C57BL/6 J mice 
were randomly divided into 4 groups according to the experimental 
design: the acetamiprid low-dose group (n = 12), the acetamiprid 
medium-dose group (n = 12), the acetamiprid high-dose group (n = 12) 
and the control group (n = 12). We used ad libitum access to drinking 
water to expose the mice continuously for 12 weeks. The exposure doses 
used were as follows: control group (pure water), low-dose acetamiprid 
group (4.55 mg/kg, 1/40 of the LD50), medium-dose acetamiprid group 
(9.1 mg/kg, 1/20 of the LD50), and high-dose acetamiprid group 
(18.2 mg/kg, 1/10 of the LD50). Their urine and feces were collected at 
4, 8, and 12 weeks, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at 
−80 ◦C until processing. Behavioral testing began at the end of the tenth 
weekend. At the 12th week, the brain and colon tissues of the mice were 
collected and stored at −80 ◦C for subsequent experiments.
2.2. Animal model of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT)
FMT was performed as previously described [36]. The forty-eight 
male C57BL/6 J mice were randomly divided into four groups: the 
acetamiprid high-dose group (n = 12), FMT+High group (n = 12), 
FMT+Control group (n = 12), and control group (n = 12). Fresh feces 
were collected from control mice, and 600 mg of feces was placed in 
6 mL of sterile saline and soaked for 1 min. The dissolved feces were then 
centrifuged at 10000 × g/min for 3 min at 4 ◦C to collect the suspension. 
The mice in the high group and FMT-high group were continuously 
exposed to acetamiprid through their drinking water for 12 weeks at a 
concentration of 18.2 mg/kg. There was no exposure to acetamiprid in 
only the drinking water in the FMT+Control and Control groups. 
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
2 

Starting at week 5, 200 μL of the suspension was administered to the 
mice in the FMT-High group and FMT-Control group by oral gavage. 
Two gavage sessions were performed every Tuesday and Friday for 12 
weeks.
2.3. Targeted neurotransmitter metabolomics
The frozen fecal samples were ground with liquid nitrogen, 100 mg 
of the sample was mixed with 800 μL of a precooled mixture of methanol 
and acetonitrile (1:1), and the mixture was ultrasonically treated for 1 h. 
The mixture was then incubated for 1 h at −20 ◦C and centrifuged at 
14000 × g at 4 ◦C for 20 min. The internal standard L-DOPA-D3 was 
added to the supernatant, and LC–MS/MS analysis was performed after 
centrifugation. Technical support for targeted neurotransmitter metab­
olomics was provided by Bioprofile Technologies (Shanghai, China).
2.4. Microbiota sequencing
Microbiota sequencing was performed as previously described [38]. 
Sequencing of 16S rRNA amplicons was performed by GENESKY Tech­
nologies (Shanghai, China). In brief, total genomic DNA was extracted 
from collected fecal samples via the Fast DNA SPIN Kit (Santa Ana, CA, 
USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The concentration and 
purity of the DNA extracts were subsequently checked via agarose gel 
electrophoresis via NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massa­
chusetts, USA) and Qubit 3.0 fluorescence quantifiers (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, Massachusetts, USA), respectively. The concentration was 
uniformly normalized to 10 ng/μL, and the total amount was ≥500 ng. 
Afterward, an appropriate proportion of spike-ins (artificially generated 
from random sequences containing approximately 40 % GC content and 
tracked as an internal standard for absolute quantification) was added to 
sample DNA (10 ng/μL) with known gradient copy numbers. The V3-V4 
hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene and spike-ins were ampli­
fied on an ABI 2720 Thermal Cycler (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) via 
the primers 341 F (5′-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3′) and 805 R 
(5′-GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3′) and the TopTaq DNA Polymerase 
Kit (TransGen, Beijing, China). After library quantification, pooling, and 
quality checking, all samples were sequenced via the 2 × 250 bp 
double-ended method via an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencer (Illu­
mina, San Diego, CA, USA).
2.5. Water maze
The water maze test was performed as previously described [43]. 
One of the four starting positions, east, west, south and north, was 
randomly selected, the mouse’s head was placed toward the pool wall, 
and the time (s) for the mouse to search for the underwater platform was 
recorded. Each mouse was trained 4 times a day for 5 consecutive days 
with a training interval of 15 min. The day after the last training session, 
the platform was removed, and 60 s of exploratory behavior training 
began.
2.6. Open field experiment
The open field experiment was performed as previously described 
[43]. The mice were placed in a quiet environment in the center of the 
box bottom, and the total exercise distance and average speed over 
5 min were observed and recorded.
2.7. Novel object recognition
Novel object recognition was performed as previously described 
[13]. Two objects of the same size and shape were placed in the upper 
left and upper right corners, 5 cm away from the wall. The experimental 
rats were placed on the side of the field away from the objects and 
allowed to explore freely for 5 min. Two hours later, an old object was 
removed and replaced with a new shaped and odorless object, and the 
mice were again allowed to explore freely for 5 min.
2.8. Balance beam test
The balance beam test was performed as previously described [5]. 
The mice remained upright and passed through an elevated narrow 
beam to a safe platform. Exercise coordination was quantified by 
measuring the time it took the mice to cross the balance beam.
2.9. T-maze
The T-maze test was performed as previously described [6]. The 
mouse is placed into the trunk arm of the T-maze, the gate is opened, and 
within a fixed time until the mouse leaves the trunk and enters a target 
arm (four limbs enter the arm). A total of 10 exercises were conducted, 
and the number of times each exercise entered each arm was recorded.
2.10. Fecal water content
The fecal water content was determined as previously described 
[34]. The mice were placed in clean cages without food or water for 
30 min. Feces were recorded and collected immediately after excretion. 
All the feces were then weighed to obtain the wet weight and dried 
overnight in a 65 ◦C oven. Finally, the samples were weighed again to 
obtain the dry weight. Fecal moisture content (%)= (wet weight–dry 
weight)/wet weight × 100 %.
2.11. Intestinal permeability measurement
The mice were fasted for 4 h, and then 0.6 mg/g fluorescein 
isothiocyanate-dextran average mol wt 4000 (FD4) (Sigma, USA) was 
administered to the mice via gavage. Three hours later, blood was 
collected under the retina. The collected blood was then immediately 
tested through a fluorescence spectrophotometer, with a 0-h sample as 
the background (excitation wavelength: 490 nm; emission wavelength: 
520 nm).
2.12. Evans blue staining
The mice that had fasted for 24 h but were not allowed to drink were 
gavaged with Evans blue at a concentration of 200 µL/mouse. After 
30 min, the mice were anesthetized and sacrificed, the entire intestine 
was removed, and the length of the intestine from the pylorus to the dye- 
colored end was observed.
2.13. Alcian blue staining
The paraffin-embedded sections were dewaxed in xylene and hy­
drated with distilled water. The sections were then incubated with 
Alcian blue solution for 30 min. After being washed with running tap 
water for 2 min and then rinsed with distilled water, the slices were 
dehydrated twice and treated twice with absolute alcohol for 3 min 
each. Finally, the samples were treated with xylene 3 times for 3 min 
each, after which coverslips were installed.
2.14. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining
The brain and distal colon tissues were immersed in 4 % para­
formaldehyde and Carnot’s fixative solution, respectively. After 24 h, 
the fixed tissues were dehydrated with a series of ethanol solutions of 
50 %, 75 %, 80 %, 90 % and 100 %. After clearing treatment with 
xylene, the tissues were embedded in paraffin. Paraffin blocks of brain 
and distal colon tissue were cut into 3.5-micron-thick sections and 
stained with hematoxylin–eosin.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
3 

2.15. ELISA
The levels of LPS (JL20691–96T), IL-6 (JLW20268–96T) and TNF-α 
(JLW10484–96T) in the serum or tissue were determined via commer­
cial ELISA kits (Jonlnbio, China) according to the product instructions.
2.16. Nissl staining
Nissl staining was performed as previously described [43]. After the 
slices were dewaxed and dehydrated according to previously described 
methods, they were stained with salting-out blue in an incubator at 60 
◦C for 40 min and then washed with distilled water. The slices were then 
rapidly differentiated by soaking in 95 % ethanol. After the slices were 
dehydrated and made transparent, they were sealed with neutral gum. 
Finally, the sections were observed under a microscope.
2.17. Golgi staining
After the mice were sacrificed and perfused with normal saline, their 
brains were removed and immediately fixed in 30 % sucrose solution for 
48 h. The brains were then treated with a Golgi staining kit (Servicibio, 
China) for 5 days. After staining, the tissue blocks were cut into 50- 
micron-thick sections, dehydrated twice in absolute ethanol for 
20 min each time, and then washed in xylene for 30 min. Images were 
acquired via a slice scanner and pannoramicscanner scanning software 
and analyzed via ImageJ.
Fig. 1. Body weight metrics and model validation of mice during ACE gradient exposure. (A) Schematic representation of the experimental design for chronic 
exposure to ACE in animals. (B) Determination of ACE concentrations in mouse urine via high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). (C) Changes in the body 
weights of the mice throughout the exposure period. The data are shown as the means ± SDs. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, compared with the control group.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
4 

(caption on next page)
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
5 

2.18. Transmission electron microscopy
Approximately 1 mm thick hippocampal tissue blocks were fixed in 
2.5 % glutaraldehyde for 2 h, washed three times with PBS for 15 min 
each, fixed in 1 % osmium acid for 2 h, and washed three times with PBS 
for 15 min each. The tissues were dehydrated stepwise in 50 %, 70 %, 
80 % and 90 % ethanol for 8 min each time and then in 100 % ethanol 
for 12 min each time. The tissue was embedded in epoxy, trimmed and 
positioned. After being positioned, the samples were cut into ultrathin 
sections and stained with uranium acetate-citric acid, after which they 
were observed and photographed under a transmission electron 
microscope.
2.19. Western blot
Western blotting was performed as previously described [43]. The 
incubated secondary antibody was tested with chemiluminescent (Mil­
lipore, Germany) solution. The antibodies used in this study were 
anti-PSD95 (1:1000; Affinity), anti-SYP (1:1000; Affinity), anti-IL-6 
(1:1000; 
Affinity), 
anti-TNF-α 
(1:1000; 
Abacm), 
anti-Occludin 
(1:1000; Abcam), anti-GRIN2B (1:500; Sangon Biotech), anti-GRIA1 
(1:500; Sangon Biotech), and anti-β-actin (1:8000; Affinity).
2.20. Immunofluorescence
The removed brain tissue was fixed in 4 % PFA for 72 h and then 
dehydrated in 30 % sucrose for 72 h. Tissues on slides were treated with 
0.2 % Triton X-100 and blocked with 5 % goat serum. The slides were 
incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4 ◦C. After being washed 
with PBS, fluorescent secondary antibodies were added and incubated in 
the dark for 60 min. After rinsing again with PBS, DAPI solution was 
added, and the slides were incubated in the dark for 3–5 min. Finally, 
they were observed under a fluorescence microscope.
2.21. Statistical analysis
The analysis of the intestinal flora was performed via MOTHUR 
software. Community composition analysis was completed via 
MOTHUR and R software. Beta diversity analysis was performed via R 
and LEfSe software. The remaining statistical analyses were performed 
via GraphPad Prism 6 and SPSS 23 software. If the data corresponded to 
a normal distribution, which was expressed as the mean ± SEM (stan­
dard error of the mean), a bilateral unpaired Student’s t test was used for 
comparisons between two independent groups, and a bilateral paired 
Student’s t test was used for paired data. More than two groups were 
subjected to bilateral ordinary one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple 
comparison test. If the data did not follow a normal distribution, dif­
ferences in the diversity indices between groups were analyzed via the 
Wilcoxon rank-sum test or the Kruskal–Wallis rank-sum test. A P value 
less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
3. Results
3.1. Acetamiprid exposure causes pathological changes and damage to the 
integrity of synaptic structures in the hippocampal CA1 area of mice, 
which in turn leads to cognitive dysfunction dominated by impaired spatial 
learning and memory
First, we established an animal model of acetamiprid exposure via 
drinking water (Fig. 1A). We determined the content of acetamiprid in 
mouse urine via HPLC–MS/MS. The results revealed that the content of 
acetamiprid in the urine of the mice in the low-, medium- and high-dose 
groups exhibited a gradient change (Fig. 1B). The mice were also 
weighed. Compared with those in the control group, the weights of the 
mice in the exposed group did not significantly differ. However, 
beginning in the fourth week, the mice in the middle- and high-dose 
acetamiprid groups still experienced weight loss (Fig. 1C). We then 
tested the neural behavior of the mice. The learning and memory abil­
ities of the mice were comprehensively evaluated through three animal 
behavioral experiments: a water maze, novel object recognition, and a T- 
maze. Compared with those of the control group, the learning and 
spatial memory function impairments in the high-dose group increased 
with increasing exposure to acetamiprid, with the most obvious damage 
observed in the high-dose group (Fig. 2A, B, C, D, E, F). The open field 
test, balance beam test, and rotarod test were used to evaluate whether 
the exercise ability of the mice was affected. The results of the open field 
experiment revealed that, compared with those in the control group, the 
exercise ability of the mice gradually decreased with increasing acet­
amiprid exposure dose, and the middle- and high-dose groups presented 
decreased exercise ability (Fig. 2G, H). The results of the balance beam 
test revealed that, compared with that in the control group, the time for 
the mice to pass through the balance beam gradually increased with 
increasing acetamiprid exposure dose (Fig. 2I). However, considering 
that the open field experiment better reflects the voluntary movement of 
mice influenced by their emotional state, we further analyzed indicators 
such as movement speed and distance in the water maze, as well as the 
drop rotation speed in the rotarod test, to assess the passive movement 
capability of the mice. The results indicated that there were no differ­
ences among the groups (Fig S1A, B, C). The above results indicate that 
subchronic exposure to acetamiprid is due mainly to nonmotor neuro­
behavioral damage, resulting in decreased spatial learning and memory 
abilities in mice.
The hippocampus is crucial for memory formation and encoding 
emotional experiences, so we stained the hippocampus of the mice with 
HE. Compared with that in the control group, the hippocampal damage 
gradually worsened with increasing doses of acetamiprid. In the high- 
exposure group, there was significant neuronal degeneration in the 
CA1 area, which manifested as a decrease in neuron volume, shrinkage 
of cell nuclei, and condensation of nuclear chromatin (Fig. 2J). 
Compared with those in the control group, the number of Nissl bodies 
and neurons in the CA1 region gradually decreased with increasing 
acetamiprid exposure dose, with the most obvious decrease in the 
middle- and high-dose groups (Fig. 2K, L, M). These results suggest that 
acetamiprid can cause hippocampal damage in mice.
Synapses are the basic structure for information transmission, pro­
cessing and storage between neurons. Therefore, we observed the ul­
trastructures of synapses in the hippocampal CA1 area of the mice via 
transmission electron microscopy. Compared with those in the control 
Fig. 2. Chronic exposure to ACE can cause pathological damage to the hippocampus and alterations in neurobehavior in mice. (A) Spatial exploration trajectory map 
of the water maze test in mice exposed to ACE. (B) Number of platform crossings by the mice in each dose group. (C) Proportion of time spent in the target quadrant 
by the mice in each dose group. (D) Latency times during the learning phase of the water maze for each dose group. (E) Recognition index in the novel object 
recognition test for each dose group. (F) Accuracy rates of the mice in each dose group in the T-maze test. (G) Total distance traveled by the mice in each group during 
the open-field test. (H) Speed of the mice in each group during the open-field test. (I) Time taken by the mice in each group to traverse the balance beam in the beam- 
walking test. (J) HE staining of the CA1 region of the mouse hippocampus (40 ×). (K) Nissl staining of the mouse hippocampal CA1 region (40 ×). (L) Cell counts 
were conducted within an area of 2200 × 1000 μm2. (M) Nissl body counts were conducted within an area of 2200 × 1000 μm2. The data are shown as the means ±
SDs. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared with the control group.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
6 

Fig. 3. Effects of chronic exposure to ACE on synaptic structure and function. (A) Electron microscopy image of the hippocampal CA1 region in mice (5000 ×). (B) 
Golgi apparatuses of pyramidal cells in the hippocampal CA1 region of mice (scale bar=50 μm). (C) Representative dendritic spine morphology in the hippocampal 
region of mice from each experimental group (scale bar=10 μm). (D) Dendritic spine density in the mouse hippocampus (scale bar=10 μm). (E) Western blot bands 
for PSD-95, SPY, and BDNF proteins. (F) Statistical results of the Western blot analysis of PSD-95. (G) Statistical results of the Western blot analysis of SYP. (H) 
Statistical results of the Western blot analysis of BDNF. The data are shown as the means ± SDs. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared with the con­
trol group.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
7 

Fig. 4. Chronic exposure to ACE alters the fecal characteristics and gut microbiota composition of mice. (A) Representative photographs of fecal samples from each 
group. (B) Water content in feces across different dosage groups. (C) Fecal particle count in different dosage groups. (D) Alpha diversity analysis of mouse gut 
microbiota diversity (observed species index). (E) Alpha diversity analysis of mouse gut microbiota diversity (ACE index). (F) Alpha diversity analysis of mouse gut 
microbiota diversity (Chao1 index). (G) Alpha diversity analysis of mouse gut microbiota diversity (Shannon index). (H) Beta diversity analysis of the mouse gut 
microbiota via principal coordinate analysis (PCoA). (I) Linear discriminant analysis effect size cladogram showing the marker species and their taxonomic hierarchy 
distributions among different groups. (J) Bubble chart depicting the abundance distribution of the gut microbiota at the genus level (bubble size corresponds to 
abundance, and color represents different groups). The data are shown as the means ± SDs. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared with the control group.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
8 

(caption on next page)
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
9 

group, the synaptic structure in the hippocampal CA1 area of the mice in 
the exposed group was impaired, the pre- and postsynaptic membranes 
were blurred, the gaps were narrowed, and the synapses were turbid 
(Fig. 3A). The structure of synapses was further evaluated via Golgi 
staining. Compared with those of the control group, the synaptic 
complexity and dendritic spine density of hippocampal vertebral cells 
decreased significantly with increasing concentrations of acetamiprid 
(Fig. 3B, C, D). We then measured the expression of the synapse-related 
markers SYP, PSD-95 and BDNF. Compared with those in the control 
group, the expression of SYP, PSD-95 and BDNF gradually decreased 
with increasing exposure dose (Fig. 3E, F, G, H). These results suggest 
that acetamiprid can cause synaptic damage to the hippocampus of 
mice.
3.2. Acetamiprid exposure changes the composition of the intestinal flora 
and affects neurotransmitter release
During the animal feeding period, we observed that the appearance 
and number of particles in the feces of the mice in each group were 
significantly different. Compared with those in the control group, loose 
feces were easily visible in the medium- and high-dose groups, were soft 
in texture and were not easy to pick up with clips (Fig. 4A). Compared 
with those in the control group, the water content in the feces and the 
number of feces particles per unit time in the high-dose group were 
significantly greater (Fig. 4B, C). We then sequenced 16S rRNA from 
mouse feces. The results of the species abundance and species diversity 
of the intestinal microbiota revealed that, compared with those in the 
control group, the richness and community diversity of the intestinal 
microbiota gradually decreased with increasing exposure concentration, 
especially in the high-dose group (Fig. 4D, E, F, G). The similarity results 
of the ecological distances of the samples revealed that the discrimina­
tion effect between the exposed groups and the control groups was 
obvious, and the separation distance in the high-dose group was the 
farthest (Fig. 4H). The size of the effect of linear discriminant analysis 
revealed the species with significantly greater relative abundances in 
each group. The yellow nodes represent species with no significant 
differences in relative abundance between groups. The node distribution 
of the cladogram revealed that, compared with those in the control 
group, the abundance patterns of the bacterial communities in the 
exposed groups changed (Fig. 4I). The stacking bar graph shows that, 
compared with that in the control group, the proportion of dominant 
bacteria gradually changed with increasing exposure dose (Fig S2A, B, C, 
D, E, F). In addition, the bubble plot at the genus level shows the top 30 
bacterial communities in each group. Notably, 12 species of bacteria, 
including Akkermansia and Oscillibacter, are associated with intestinal 
inflammation (Fig. 4J). The above results generally indicate that acet­
amiprid exposure disturbs the intestinal flora.
Acetamiprid-disrupted gut microbiota may affect the central nervous 
system through certain mechanisms. Therefore, we conducted targeted 
metabolomics on mouse feces to assess the levels of neurotransmitters. 
The results showed that acetamiprid exposure significantly elevated the 
levels of various neurotransmitters, including the inhibitory neuro­
transmitter glycine and the serotonin precursor 5-hydroxytryptophan, 
while the level of serotonin itself did not increase. Additionally, tyra­
mine and L-DOPA, which are converted into dopamine in the body, are 
also affected. Studies have shown that tyramine may influence dopa­
minergic system function in neurodegenerative diseases. The levels of 
glutamate, a major excitatory neurotransmitter, and its precursor 
glutamine both significantly increased after exposure. In neurological 
disorders, excessive glutamine often mediates excitotoxicity and 
neuronal damage (Fig S3A). In summary, these findings suggest that 
acetamiprid exposure disrupts the structure of the gut microbiota and 
may impact the nervous system by altering neurotransmitter levels.
3.3. Acetamiprid exposure caused destruction of the gut–brain barrier 
structure in mice and induced an immune response in the gut–brain axis
The intestinal flora plays an extremely important role in maintaining 
the steady state of the intestinal barrier, and disturbances in the intes­
tinal flora are often accompanied by damage to the intestinal barrier. We 
first tested the intestinal transport ability of the mice. Compared with 
that in the control group, the intestinal transport distance gradually 
increased with increasing exposure dose, but the colon length gradually 
decreased (Fig. 5A, B). The shortening of the colon is often caused by 
damage to colon tissue in certain diseases or infections. We then 
measured the level of inflammation in colon tissue. Compared with 
those in the control group, inflammatory infiltration in colon tissue 
increased significantly with increasing exposure concentration, and the 
expression levels of inflammatory factors increased (Fig. 5C, D). Elec­
tron microscopy revealed that the colonic epithelium was a tight junc­
tion complex in the control group, whereas the colonic epithelium was 
significantly damaged in the exposed group, especially in the high-dose 
group (Fig. 5E). Compared with those in the control group, the expres­
sion of Occludin and ZO-1 in the colon tissue gradually decreased with 
increasing exposure concentration (Fig. 5F). The intestinal permeability 
test results revealed that, compared with those in the control group, the 
FD4 content in the serum of the mice in the middle- and high-dose 
groups significantly increased (Fig. 5G), indicating that the perme­
ability and permeability of the intestinal intestines increased after 
acetamiprid exposure.
The gut is one of the major sources of LPS in the human body [9]. We 
subsequently measured the LPS levels in the serum. Compared with that 
in the control group, the content of LPS gradually increased with 
increasing exposure dose (Fig. 5H). These findings suggest that intestinal 
barrier damage may cause some harmful substances to enter the circu­
lation. Moreover, compared with those in the control group, the 
expression of the blood–brain barrier tight junction protein OCCLUDIN 
and the occlusive microloop protein ZO-1 in the third ventricle of the 
mice gradually decreased with increasing exposure dose (Fig. 5I, J). 
These findings suggest that acetamiprid destroys the structural integrity 
of the blood–brain barrier in mice. Microorganisms and their metabo­
lites have immunoregulatory functions that stimulate immune cells to 
release signaling factors. To further confirm that acetamiprid exposure 
activates the immune response of the gut–brain axis, we tested the 
microglial marker IBA-1 via immunohistochemistry. Compared with 
those in the control group, the microglial cell bodies in the hippocampus 
of the exposed group were enlarged, and the branches were shortened 
(Fig. 5K). These findings suggest that acetamiprid can activate micro­
glia. Activated microglia can lead to inflammation. Then, we used ELISA 
to measure the levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in the serum, intestine, and brain 
tissues of the mice. The results revealed that the expression of TNF-α and 
IL-6 in serum, intestine and brain tissues gradually increased with 
increasing exposure dose (Fig. 5L, M, N). The above results confirm that 
acetamiprid exposure causes spatial learning and memory impairments 
Fig. 5. ACE exposure induces disruption of the gut–brain barrier structure and triggers an immune response in the gut–brain axis in mice. (A) Representative 
images of the gastrointestinal tract in mice stained with Evans blue. (B) Representative images of colon length in mice from different dosage groups. (C) HE staining 
of mouse colon cross-sections (scale bar=100 μm). (D) Western blot bands showing IL-6 and TNF-α protein expression in the colon. (E) Electron microscopy image of 
mouse colon tissue (scale bar=1 μm). (F) Western blot bands showing occludin and ZO-1 protein expression in the colon. (G) Intestinal permeability assay. (H) Serum 
levels of LPS in mice from different experimental groups. (I) Western blot bands showing occludin protein expression in the brain. (J) Immunofluorescence staining of 
brain ZO-1. (K) Immunohistochemical image of Iba1 in the mouse hippocampus. (L) Expression levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in the brains of mice after ACE exposure. (M) 
Expression levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in the guts of mice after ACE exposure. (N) Expression levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in the blood of mice after ACE exposure. The data 
are shown as the means ± SDs. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared with the control group.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
10 

(caption on next page)
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
11 

in mice, along with elevated LPS expression. To explore the link between 
these two findings, we scored cognitive-related neurobehavioral tests 
and correlated the scores with serum LPS levels, revealing a positive 
correlation (Fig. S4). These findings provide an experimental basis for 
further study of the role of the gut microbiota in acetamiprid-induced 
neurotoxicity.
3.4. FMT reduces the effect of acetamiprid on the intestinal flora
To verify whether the intestinal flora is involved in the process of 
cognitive dysfunction caused by acetamiprid. We used the intestinal 
flora of healthy mice to intervene in mice exposed to high doses of 
acetamiprid to verify the regulatory effect of the intestinal flora on the 
cognitive dysfunction caused by acetamiprid exposure (Fig. S5). First, 
we observed the fecal characteristics. The results revealed that the water 
content of the feces and the number of feces particles per unit time in the 
mice were close to those in the control group (Fig. 6A, B). The results of 
the structure and function of the intestinal tissue revealed that fecal 
bacteria transplantation slowed abnormally active intestinal transport 
(Fig. 6C). The 16S rRNA sequencing results of the bacterial flora 
revealed that, compared with those in the high group, the species di­
versity and richness of the intestinal flora in the FMT-H group were 
greater, and the ecological distance between the high group and the 
control group was shorter (Fig. 6D, E, F, G, H). In addition, in terms of 
the biological composition of the intestinal flora, the bacterial compo­
sition of the FMT-H group was closer to that of the control group at 
different taxonomic levels (Fig. 6I, Fig. S2). In the heatmap at the genus 
level, compared with the high group, FMT significantly increased po­
tential beneficial bacteria or probiotics, such as Lachnospiraceae_UCG- 
006, Butyricicoccus, Ruminococcaceae_genus and Blautia, and 
decreased potential biomarkers of inflammatory bowel disease, such as 
Adlercreutzia and inflammatory bowel disease IBD-associated bacteria 
Turicibacter and Dubosiella (Fig. 6J). The above results demonstrate 
that FMT reduces the structural disturbance of the intestinal flora caused 
by chronic exposure to acetamiprid.
3.5. FMT restores spatial learning and memory ability and synaptic 
structural integrity in mice
First, changes in neurobehavior in the mice were observed. 
Compared with those in the high group, the escape latency of the mice in 
the FMT-H group decreased significantly, but the number of platform 
crossings, target quadrant stay time, multiple selection accuracy in the T 
maze, and recognition index in the new object recognition experiment 
increased (Fig. 7A, B, C, D, E, F). Pathology revealed that, compared 
with that in the high group, neuronal damage in the CA1 area of the 
hippocampus was significantly lower in the FMT-H group (Fig. 7G). The 
Nissl results revealed that the number of neurons and Nissl bodies in the 
FMT-H group was greater than that in the high group (Fig. 7H, I, J). 
Golgi staining of hippocampal vertebral cells revealed that, compared 
with those in the high group, the synaptic complexity and dendritic 
spine density of the mice in the FMT-H group were restored (Fig. 7K, L, 
M, N). The detection of synapse-related proteins and neurotrophic fac­
tors revealed that, compared with those in the high group, the expres­
sion of BDNF, SYP, PSD95 and NMDAR2B was greater in the FMT-H 
group (Fig. 7O, P, Q, R). The above results show that FMT intervention 
effectively alleviates synaptic damage caused by acetamiprid exposure 
and plays a protective role in nerves.
3.6. FMT restores the intestinal and blood–brain barrier structure and 
alleviates the gut–brain immune response
First, we used targeted neurotransmitter metabolomics to analyze 
biological samples from FMT-H and highbred mice. Compared with 
those in the high-dose group, there were no significant differences in the 
levels of various neurotransmitters in the FMT-H group (Fig S3B). Next, 
we verified the immune pathway between the intestine and the brain. 
AB staining of the intestinal mucus revealed that the intestinal mucus 
content decreased in the high-dose group, whereas the intestinal mucus 
content in the FMT-H group increased significantly (Fig. 8A). Compared 
with those in the high group, inflammatory cell infiltration and 
epithelial cell disruption in the colon were alleviated in the FMT-H 
group (Fig. 8B). The results of transmission electron microscopy 
revealed that, compared with that in the high group, the structural 
damage to the epithelial tight junction complex, the main structure of 
the intestinal barrier, was reduced in the FMT-H group (Fig. 8C). 
Moreover, compared with those in the high group, the expression levels 
of Occludin and ZO-1 in intestinal tissue were greater in the FMT-H 
group (Fig. 8D). Then, we measured the serum LPS and FD-4 levels. 
Compared with those in the high-dose group, the contents of LPS and 
FD-4 in the FMT-H group were significantly lower (Fig. 8E, F). More­
over, compared with those in the high-dose group, the expression of 
tight junction proteins in midbrain tissue and the protein expression of 
ZO-1 in the third ventricle in the FMT-H group were significantly greater 
(Fig. 8G, H). Then, we tested the microglial marker IBA-1 via immu­
nohistochemistry. The results showed that FMT inhibited the activation 
of microglia in the hippocampus (Fig. 8I). We then measured the levels 
of TNF-α and IL-6 in the intestine, brain tissue and serum. The levels of 
TNF-α and IL-6 were lower in the FMT-H group than in the high group 
(Fig. 8J, K, L). The above results suggest that FMT has a protective effect 
on the intestinal barrier, effectively preventing harmful substances in 
intestinal tissue from entering the circulation, thereby alleviating 
damage to the blood–brain barrier; FMT can also reduce the immune 
response between the gut–brain.
4. Discussion
Acetamiprids are a class of pesticides widely used to control pests, 
and their impact on nontarget animals is increasing. Acetamiprids can 
pose a hazard to human health through soil, groundwater (in very low 
doses), and pesticides remaining on vegetables and fruits [35]. More­
over, acetamiprid and its metabolites accumulate and have long 
half-lives, suggesting that they may induce irreversible neuronal dam­
age. Therefore, this study focused on the neurotoxicity of subchronic 
exposure to acetamiprid by taking a small amount orally through 
drinking water rather than the toxicity of large doses of acetamiprid. 
Studies have shown that exposure to acetamiprids can lead to changes in 
brain functions related to learning and memory, as well as significant 
changes in brain histopathology [28]. Our research results also 
demonstrated that subchronic exposure to acetamiprids is due mainly to 
nonmotor neurobehavioral damage, which can lead to pathological 
damage in the hippocampus of mice and can lead to decreased spatial 
learning and memory abilities in mice. The ability of the brain to learn 
and remember is closely related to synaptic plasticity [20]. Synaptic 
Fig. 6. FMT restores the fecal characteristics, gut function and gut microbiota structure altered by ACE exposure. (A) Water content in feces after FMT. (B) Fecal 
particle count after FMT. (C) Representative images of the gastrointestinal tract in mice stained with Evans blue. (D) Alpha diversity analysis of mouse gut microbiota 
diversity (observed species index). (E) Alpha diversity analysis of mouse gut microbiota diversity (Shannon index). (F) Alpha diversity analysis of mouse gut 
microbiota diversity (ACE index). (G) Alpha diversity analysis of mouse gut microbiota diversity (Chao1 index). (H) Beta diversity analysis of the mouse gut 
microbiota via principal coordinate analysis (PCoA). (I) Changes in the gut microbial community composition-community bar plot analysis at the family level. (J) 
Heatmap of differential gut microbiota at the genus level between the high- and FMT-H groups. The y-axis taxon labels represent different species indicated by color, 
corresponding to the next highest taxonomic level. For the y-axis Fc labels, red indicates a fold change > 1 and P < 0.05, whereas yellow indicates a fold change ≤1 
and P < 0.05. The data are shown as the means ± SDs. *P < 0.05, compared with the control group.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
12 

(caption on next page)
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
13 

plasticity includes functional plasticity and structural plasticity. Studies 
have shown that the plasticity of synaptic structures is damaged and that 
the connections between neurons may not be effectively strengthened, 
which in turn affects the formation and consolidation of memories [3]. 
Changes in the density, size and shape of dendrites are the basis for 
structural synaptic plasticity in cognition and memory [20]. Our 
research revealed that subchronic exposure to acetamiprid can cause 
synaptic damage, which is manifested mainly by a significant reduction 
in the synaptic complexity and dendritic spine density of hippocampal 
vertebral cells. These findings suggest that subchronic exposure to 
acetamiprids induces synaptic damage in mice, which in turn leads to 
cognitive dysfunction in these mice.
How do acetamiprids cause synaptic damage in mice? Interestingly, 
we observed significant changes in the appearance and particle number 
of feces in mice after acetamiprid exposure during animal breeding. 
Recent studies have shown that pesticide exposure can indirectly cause 
neurobehavioral abnormalities and synaptic damage by disrupting the 
composition and function of the intestinal microbiota [21]. By 
sequencing 16S rRNA from mouse feces, we found that the richness, 
diversity and uniformity of the microbial communities in each group 
characterized by alpha diversity were significantly reduced, indicating 
the disruptive effect of ACE on the intestinal flora. These findings sug­
gest that acetamiprids can disturb the intestinal microbiota. This process 
may be mediated through the metabolic and immune pathways of the 
microbial-gut-brain axis. The role of the microbial-gut-brain axis in 
nerve injury repair and the regulation of synaptic plasticity has gradu­
ally become the focus of research in the field of neuroscience. The in­
testinal microbiota interacts in two ways with the central nervous 
system through metabolites, immune signals and neural pathways; its 
imbalance is closely related not only to neurodegenerative diseases, 
such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease but also to the direct 
regulation of synaptic structure and function, as well as dynamic balance 
[11,29,8]. Studies have shown that in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) models, 
dysregulation of the intestinal microbiota in mice leads to decreased 
expression of PSD-95 and SYP in the hippocampus [42]. Our results also 
demonstrated that the expression of PSD-95, SYP and BDNF in the 
hippocampus of mice decreased after subchronic exposure to acet­
amiprid, which may be related to disorders of the intestinal microbiota. 
Intestinal microorganisms can synthesize a variety of neuroactive sub­
stances (such as GABA and 5-HT), which directly or indirectly regulate 
presynaptic membrane transmitter release and postsynaptic receptor 
responses. Some studies have shown that probiotic treatment can 
improve neuroinflammation, GABAergic neurotransmission, and motor 
function in patients with hepatic encephalopathy. Studies have shown 
that probiotic intervention can increase the activity of GABAergic in­
terneurons in the hippocampus of chronically stressed mice, reverse the 
excitotoxicity of glutamate, and improve synaptic plasticity [1]. Our 
results demonstrated that the levels of multiple neurotransmitters, 
including the inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine, a precursor of sero­
tonin synthesis, and pentahydroxytryptamine, were significantly 
elevated after exposure to acetamiprid. However, the serotonin content 
did not increase, which suggested that acetamiprid exposure may affect 
the synthesis of serotonin. In addition, tyramine and levodopa are 
converted into dopamine in the body. Glutamate is the main excitatory 
neurotransmitter, and both its body and synthetic precursor glutamine 
increase significantly after exposure. These findings further suggest that 
acetamiprids induce disorders of the intestinal microbiota, affect the 
release of neurotransmitters, and, in turn, lead to synaptic damage.
Notably, dysregulation of the intestinal microbiota can also lead to 
destruction of the integrity of the intestinal barrier, promote the entry of 
bacterial metabolic products such as LPS into the blood circulation, and 
activate a systemic inflammatory response [16]. These inflammatory 
factors (such as IL-1β and TNF-α) are transmitted into the central ner­
vous system through the blood–brain barrier, triggering excessive 
activation of microglia and astrocytes and exacerbating neuro­
inflammation [16,2,25,33]. Studies have shown that intestinal flora 
disorders in mice with traumatic brain injury (TBI) are accompanied by 
increased IL-6 levels in the hippocampus, while FMT can significantly 
inhibit microglial activation and reduce neuron loss [7]. Similarly, 
supplementation with probiotics can restore gut barrier function, reduce 
proinflammatory factor levels in rats with spinal cord injury, and pro­
mote the recovery of motor function [15]. Our results demonstrated that 
after acetamiprid exposure, the level of LPS increased, destroying the 
structural integrity of the blood–brain barrier in mice and increasing 
the expression of inflammatory factors, activating the immune response 
of the gut–brain axis.
As a powerful means of regulating the MGBA, FMT has been shown 
in recent years to improve synaptic dysfunction after nerve injury by 
rebuilding the ecology of the intestinal flora. Studies have demonstrated 
that FMT treatment significantly restores the alpha diversity of the in­
testinal flora after injury and reverses the abnormal proliferation of 
Proteobacteria, a change that is directly related to a decrease in LPS 
levels [31]. Moreover, transplanting the fecal microbiota from patients 
with depression can induce depressive-like behaviors in rats, indicating 
that the gut microbiota has a significant effect on neurobehavior [14]. 
Probiotics alleviate inflammatory responses and improve neurological 
function by modulating communication between the peripheral immune 
system and the brain [10]. Our results revealed that FMT significantly 
increased both the alpha diversity and beta diversity of the intestinal 
flora, increased potential beneficial bacteria or probiotics, and reduced 
potential biomarkers of inflammatory bowel disease and IBD-related 
bacteria in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Moreover, FMT 
improved the cognitive dysfunction and synaptic damage caused by 
acetamiprid in mice. Notably, FMT can also restore the structure of the 
blood–brain barrier. Studies have shown that FMT significantly reduces 
the permeability of the blood–brain barrier and reduces the level of LPS 
in Alzheimer’s disease model mice [32,41]. FMT also regulates the 
gut–brain immune response. Studies have shown that FMT alleviates 
intestinal inflammation and disrupts the intestinal barrier in mouse 
models of Parkinson’s disease, thereby reducing systemic inflammation 
levels [26,44]. Our research results demonstrated that FMT protects the 
intestinal barrier by restoring flora diversity and reducing the trans­
mission of LPS and proinflammatory factors (such as IL-1β and TNF-α) 
into the brain, thereby alleviating blood–brain barrier damage and 
reducing the gut–brain immune response.
In summary, acetamiprids affect synaptic plasticity and cognitive 
dysfunction in mice through the MGBA. FMT alleviates the damage 
caused by acetamiprids on synaptic and cognitive function.
Fig. 7. FMT improves neurobehavioral outcomes and synaptic structural and functional damage induced by ACE exposure. (A) Spatial exploration trajectory map of 
the water maze test in mice after FMT. (B) Latency period of the water maze learning phase after FMT. (C) Number of platform crossings by the mice after FMT. (D) 
Proportion of time spent in the target quadrant by the mice after FMT. (E) Accuracy in each group in the t maze test after FMT. (F) Recognition index in the novel 
object recognition test after FMT. (G) HE staining of the CA1 region of the mouse hippocampus (40 ×). (H) Nissl staining of the mouse hippocampal CA1 region 
(40 ×). (I) Nissl body counts were conducted within an area of 2200 × 1000 μm2. (J) Cell counts were conducted within an area of 2200 × 1000 μm2. (K) Golgi 
apparatuses of pyramidal cells in the hippocampal CA1 region of mice (scale bar=50 μm). (L) Representative dendritic spine morphology in the hippocampal region 
of mice from each experimental group (scale bar=10 μm). (M) Sholl analysis of synapses in different experimental groups. (N) Dendritic spine density in the mouse 
hippocampus. (O) Western blot bands showing BDNF, SYP and PSD-95 protein expression. (P) Western blot bands for GRIAI and NMDAR2B protein expression. (Q) 
Statistical results of the Western blot analysis of NMDAR2B. (R) Statistical results of Western blot analysis of GRIAI. The data are shown as the means ± SDs. 
*P < 0.05, compared with the control group. #P < 0.05, compared with the high group.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
14 

Fig. 8. FMT improves gut–brain barrier structural integrity and reduces inflammatory responses between the gut and brain induced by ACE exposure. (A) Alcian blue 
staining of colonic tissue (scale bar=100 μm). (B) HE staining of mouse colon cross-sections (scale bar=100 μm). (C) Electron microscopy image of mouse colon tissue 
(scale bar=1 μm). (D) Western blot bands showing occludin and ZO-1 protein expression in the colon. (E) Serum levels of LPS in the mice. (F) Intestinal permeability 
assay. (G) Western blot bands showing occludin protein expression in the brain. (H) Immunofluorescence staining of brain ZO-1. (I) Immunohistochemical image of 
Iba1 in the mouse hippocampus. (J) Expression levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in the guts of the mice after FMT. (K) Expression levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in the blood of mice 
after FMT. (L) Expression levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in the barin of mice after FMT. The data are shown as the means ± SDs. *P < 0.05, compared with the control 
group. #P < 0.05, compared with the high group.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
15 

5. Conclusion
In summary, this study revealed that acetamiprids can cause damage 
to the intestines and brain. Importantly, disorders of the intestinal flora, 
abnormal release of neurotransmitters, and activation of the gut–brain 
immune response play important roles in this process. Moreover, the 
conclusion that FMT restores the intestinal flora strengthens the view 
that ACE activates the immune response by changing the intestinal flora 
to disturb neurotransmitters and destroy the intestinal and brain mi­
croenvironments. The results of this study suggest a new mechanism for 
the neurotoxic effects of acetamiprid and emphasize the potential 
harmful risks of low-dose chemicals to human health and the impor­
tance of ensuring risk assessment when assessing pesticide residues in 
the environment.
Environmental implication
Acetamiprid, a widely used neonicotinoid pesticide, poses environ­
mental risks due to its potential persistence and bioaccumulation. This 
study reveals that acetamiprid disrupts gut microbiota, triggers systemic 
immune activation via the gut-brain axis, and impairs cognitive function 
in mice. These findings indicate that environmental contamination by 
acetamiprid may threaten human health by altering microbial commu­
nities and activating neurotoxic pathways. The mitigation of gut-brain 
axis damage through fecal microbiota transplantation highlights the 
critical role of gut ecology in reducing pesticide-induced harm. 
Furthermore, these results advocate for stricter regulation of neon­
icotinoid pesticides to minimize ecological exposure and protect the 
neurological health of vulnerable species and humans.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ling-he Zhang: Validation. Hao-Xuan Gao: Validation. Ji Zhao: 
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project adminis­
tration, Data curation. Wen-si Ni: Validation. Xiao-zhe Geng: Valida­
tion. Yu-cheng Yan: Validation. Hui-fang Yang: Writing – review & 
editing, Resources, Project administration, Data curation. Xue-yan 
Tian: Validation, Methodology. Yi-man Li: Validation. Bing Wu: 
Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, Data curation. Yan- 
ling Lv: Validation. Yu-bin Li: Validation. Yu-wen Wang: Validation. 
Ya-nan Song: Validation.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (No. 82204005, 82460635), the Natural Science 
Foundation Project of Ningxia (2023AAC05034 and 2022BSB03085) 
and the key research and development plan project of Ningxia 
(2023BEG02028).
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2025.139287.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] Arenas, Y.M., P´erez-Martinez, G., Montoliu, C., Llansola, M., Felipo, V., 2025. 
Extracellular vesicles from L. paracasei improve neuroinflammation, GABA 
neurotransmission and motor incoordination in hyperammonemic rats. Brain 
Behav Immun 123, 556–570.
[2] Baizabal-Carvallo, J.F., Alonso-Juarez, M., 2020. The link between gut dysbiosis 
and neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease. Neuroscience 432, 160–173.
[3] Batool, S., Raza, H., Zaidi, J., Riaz, S., Hasan, S., Syed, N.I., 2019. Synapse 
formation: from cellular and molecular mechanisms to neurodevelopmental and 
neurodegenerative disorders. J Neurophysiol 121, 1381–1397.
[4] Beilharz, J.E., Kaakoush, N.O., Maniam, J., Morris, M.J., 2016. The effect of short- 
term exposure to energy-matched diets enriched in fat or sugar on memory, gut 
microbiota and markers of brain inflammation and plasticity. Brain Behav Immun 
57, 304–313.
[5] Bouchard, J., Truong, J., Bouchard, K., Dunkelberger, D., Desrayaud, S., 
Moussaoui, S., Tabrizi, S.J., Stella, N., Muchowski, P.J., 2012. Cannabinoid 
receptor 2 signaling in peripheral immune cells modulates disease onset and 
severity in mouse models of Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci 32, 18259–18268.
[6] Cao, L.H., He, H.J., Zhao, Y.Y., Wang, Z.Z., Jia, X.Y., Srivastava, K., Miao, M.S., 
Li, X.M., 2022. Food allergy-induced autism-like behavior is associated with gut 
microbiota and brain mtor signaling. J Asthma Allergy 15, 645–664.
[7] Celorrio, M., Abellanas, M.A., Rhodes, J., Goodwin, V., Moritz, J., Vadivelu, S., 
Wang, L., Rodgers, R., Xiao, S., Anabayan, I., Payne, C., Perry, A.M., Baldridge, M. 
T., Aymerich, M.S., Steed, A., Friess, S.H., 2021. Gut microbial dysbiosis after 
traumatic brain injury modulates the immune response and impairs neurogenesis. 
Acta Neuropathol Commun 9, 40.
[8] Cryan, J.F., O’Riordan, K.J., Cowan, C., Sandhu, K.V., Bastiaanssen, T., 
Boehme, M., Codagnone, M.G., Cussotto, S., Fulling, C., Golubeva, A.V., 
Guzzetta, K.E., Jaggar, M., Long-Smith, C.M., Lyte, J.M., Martin, J.A., Molinero- 
Perez, A., Moloney, G., Morelli, E., Morillas, E., O’Connor, R., Cruz-Pereira, J.S., 
Peterson, V.L., Rea, K., Ritz, N.L., Sherwin, E., Spichak, S., Teichman, E.M., van de 
Wouw, M., Ventura-Silva, A.P., Wallace-Fitzsimons, S.E., Hyland, N., Clarke, G., 
Dinan, T.G., 2019. The microbiota-gut-brain axis. Physiol Rev 99, 1877–2013.
[9] d’Hennezel, E., Abubucker, S., Murphy, L.O., Cullen, T.W., 2017. Total 
lipopolysaccharide from the human gut microbiome silences toll-like receptor 
signaling. mSystems 2, e00046–00017.
[10] D’Mello, C., Ronaghan, N., Zaheer, R., Dicay, M., Le, T., MacNaughton, W.K., 
Surrette, M.G., Swain, M.G., 2015. Probiotics improve inflammation-associated 
sickness behavior by altering communication between the peripheral immune 
system and the brain. J Neurosci 35, 10821–10830.
[11] Fung, T.C., Olson, C.A., Hsiao, E.Y., 2017. Interactions between the microbiota, 
immune and nervous systems in health and disease. Nat Neurosci 20, 145–155.
[12] Guzman-Vallejos, M.S., Ramirez-Cando, L.J., Aguayo, L., Ballaz, S.J., 2024. 
Molecular docking analysis at the human α7-nachr and proliferative and evoked- 
calcium changes in SH-SY5Y Cells by imidacloprid and acetamiprid insecticides. 
Neurotox Res 42, 16.
[13] Hu, Y., Huang, Y., Xing, S., Chen, C., Shen, D., Chen, J., 2022. Aβ promotes CD38 
expression in senescent microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. Biol Res 55, 10.
[14] Kelly, J.R., Borre, Y., Brien, O.’, Patterson, C., El Aidy, E., Deane, S., Kennedy, J., 
Beers, P.J., Scott, S., Moloney, K., Hoban, G., Scott, A.E., Fitzgerald, L., Ross, P., 
Stanton, P., Clarke, C., Cryan, G., Dinan, J.F., G, T., 2016. Transferring the blues: 
depression-associated gut microbiota induces neurobehavioural changes in the rat. 
J Psychiatr Res 82, 109–118.
[15] Kigerl, K.A., Hall, J.C., Wang, L., Mo, X., Yu, Z., Popovich, P.G., 2016. Gut dysbiosis 
impairs recovery after spinal cord injury. J Exp Med 213, 2603–2620.
[16] Kowalski, K., Mulak, A., 2019. Brain-gut-microbiota axis in Alzheimer’s disease. 
J Neurogastroenterol Motil 25, 48–60.
[17] Li, F., Li, M., Zhu, Q., Mao, T., Dai, M., Ye, W., Bian, D., Su, W., Feng, P., Ren, Y., 
Sun, H., Wei, J., Li, B., 2021. Imbalance of intestinal microbial homeostasis caused 
by acetamiprid is detrimental to resistance to pathogenic bacteria in Bombyx mori. 
Environ Pollut 289, 117866.
[18] Liu, F., Day, M., Mu˜niz, L.C., Bitran, D., Arias, R., Revilla-Sanchez, R., Grauer, S., 
Zhang, G., Kelley, C., Pulito, V., Sung, A., Mervis, R.F., Navarra, R., Hirst, W.D., 
Reinhart, P.H., Marquis, K.L., Moss, S.J., Pangalos, M.N., Brandon, N.J., 2008. 
Activation of estrogen receptor-beta regulates hippocampal synaptic plasticity and 
improves memory. Nat Neurosci 11, 334–343.
[19] Liu, J., Zhao, F., Xu, Y., Qiu, J., Qian, Y., 2021. Gut flora-mediated metabolic 
health, the risk produced by dietary exposure to acetamiprid and tebuconazole. 
Foods 10, 835.
[20] Ma, S., Zuo, Y., 2022. Synaptic modifications in learning and memory - a dendritic 
spine story. Semin Cell Dev Biol 125, 84–90.
[21] Matsuzaki, R., Gunnigle, E., Geissen, V., Clarke, G., Nagpal, J., Cryan, J.F., 2023. 
Pesticide exposure and the microbiota-gut-brain axis. ISME J 17, 1153–1166.
[22] Morais, L.H., Schreiber, H.L., 4th, Mazmanian, S.K., 2021. The gut microbiota- 
brain axis in behaviour and brain disorders. Nat Rev Microbiol 19, 241–255.
[23] Mostafalou, S., Abdollahi, M., 2017. Pesticides: an update of human exposure and 
toxicity. Arch Toxicol 91, 549–599.
[24] Ongono, J.S., B´eranger, R., Baghdadli, A., Mortamais, M., 2020. Pesticides used in 
Europe and autism spectrum disorder risk: can novel exposure hypotheses be 
formulated beyond organophosphates, organochlorines, pyrethroids and 
carbamates? - A systematic review. Environ Res 187, 109646.
[25] Pan, I., Issac, P.K., Rahman, M.M., Guru, A., Arockiaraj, J., 2024. Gut-brain axis a 
key player to control gut dysbiosis in neurological diseases. Mol Neurobiol 61, 
9873–9891.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
16 

[26] Rao, J., Xie, R., Lin, L., Jiang, J., Du, L., Zeng, X., Li, G., Wang, C., Qiao, Y., 2021. 
Fecal microbiota transplantation ameliorates gut microbiota imbalance and 
intestinal barrier damage in rats with stress-induced depressive-like behavior. Eur J 
Neurosci 53, 3598–3611.
[27] Rothschild, D., Weissbrod, O., Barkan, E., Kurilshikov, A., Korem, T., Zeevi, D., 
Costea, P.I., Godneva, A., Kalka, I.N., Bar, N., Shilo, S., Lador, D., Vila, A.V., 
Zmora, N., Pevsner-Fischer, M., Israeli, D., Kosower, N., Malka, G., Wolf, B.C., 
Avnit-Sagi, T., Lotan-Pompan, M., Weinberger, A., Halpern, Z., Carmi, S., Fu, J., 
Wijmenga, C., Zhernakova, A., Elinav, E., Segal, E., 2018. Environment dominates 
over host genetics in shaping human gut microbiota. Nature 555, 210–215.
[28] Saito, H., Furukawa, Y., Sasaki, T., Kitajima, S., Kanno, J., Tanemura, K., 2023. 
Behavioral effects of adult male mice induced by low-level acetamiprid, 
imidacloprid, and nicotine exposure in early-life. Front Neurosci 17, 1239808.
[29] Sampson, T.R., Debelius, J.W., Thron, T., Janssen, S., Shastri, G.G., Ilhan, Z.E., 
Challis, C., Schretter, C.E., Rocha, S., Gradinaru, V., Chesselet, M.F., 
Keshavarzian, A., Shannon, K.M., Krajmalnik-Brown, R., Wittung-Stafshede, P., 
Knight, R., Mazmanian, S.K., 2016. Gut microbiota regulate motor deficits and 
neuroinflammation in a model of Parkinson’s disease. Cell 167, 1469–1480.e12.
[30] Su, Y., Shi, J., Hu, Y., Liu, J., Wu, X., 2024. Acetamiprid exposure disrupts gut 
microbiota in adult and larval worker honeybees (Apis mellifera L.). Insects 15, 
927.
[31] Suez, J., Zmora, N., Zilberman-Schapira, G., Mor, U., Dori-Bachash, M., 
Bashiardes, S., Zur, M., Regev-Lehavi, D., Ben-Zeev Brik, R., Federici, S., Horn, M., 
Cohen, Y., Moor, A.E., Zeevi, D., Korem, T., Kotler, E., Harmelin, A., Itzkovitz, S., 
Maharshak, N., Shibolet, O., Pevsner-Fischer, M., Shapiro, H., Sharon, I., 
Halpern, Z., Segal, E., Elinav, E., 2018. Post-antibiotic gut mucosal microbiome 
reconstitution is impaired by probiotics and improved by autologous FMT. Cell 
174, 1406–1423 e16. 
[32] Sun, J., Xu, J., Ling, Y., Wang, F., Gong, T., Yang, C., Ye, S., Ye, K., Wei, D., 
Song, Z., Chen, D., Liu, J., 2019. Fecal microbiota transplantation alleviated 
Alzheimer’s disease-like pathogenesis in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Transl 
Psychiatry 9, 189.
[33] Tschoe, C., Bushnell, C.D., Duncan, P.W., Alexander-Miller, M.A., Wolfe, S.Q., 
2020. Neuroinflammation after intracerebral hemorrhage and potential 
therapeutic targets. J Stroke 22, 29–46.
[34] Wang, K., Zhang, C., Zhang, B., Li, G., Shi, G., Cai, Q., Huang, M., 2022. Gut 
dysfunction may be the source of pathological aggregation of alpha-synuclein in 
the central nervous system through Paraquat exposure in mice. Ecotoxicol Environ 
Saf 246, 114152.
[35] Yang, G., Li, J., Wang, Y., Chen, C., Zhao, H., Shao, K., 2018. Quantitative 
ecotoxicity analysis for pesticide mixtures using benchmark dose methodology. 
Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 159, 94–101.
[36] Yao, H., Zhang, D., Yu, H., Yuan, H., Shen, H., Lan, X., Liu, H., Chen, X., Meng, F., 
Wu, X., Zhang, G., Wang, X., 2023. Gut microbiota regulates chronic ethanol 
exposure-induced depressive-like behavior through hippocampal NLRP3-mediated 
neuroinflammation. Mol Psychiatry 28, 919–930.
[37] Yuan, X., Kang, Y., Zhuo, C., Huang, X.F., Song, X., 2019. The gut microbiota 
promotes the pathogenesis of schizophrenia via multiple pathways. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun 512, 373–380.
[38] Zeng, J., Li, Y., Zou, Y., Yang, Y., Yang, T., Zhou, Y., 2024. Intestinal toxicity 
alleviation and efficacy potentiation through therapeutic administration of 
Lactobacillus paracasei GY-1 in the treatment of gout flares with colchicine. Food 
Funct 15, 1671–1688.
[39] Zhang, D., Lu, S., 2022. Human exposure to neonicotinoids and the associated 
health risks: a review. Environ Int 163, 107201.
[40] Zhang, J., Zhang, Y., Wang, J., Xia, Y., Zhang, J., Chen, L., 2024. Recent advances 
in Alzheimer’s disease: mechanisms, clinical trials and new drug development 
strategies. Signal Transduct Target Ther 9, 211.
[41] Zhang, N., Zhang, R., Jiang, L., Gao, Z., Xia, W., Ma, X., Qin, Y., Zhang, D., Li, J., 
Tian, P., Zhang, Q., Wang, W., Zhang, K., Xu, S., Zhao, N., Xu, S., 2024. Inhibition 
of colorectal cancer in Alzheimer’s disease is mediated by gut microbiota via 
induction of inflammatory tolerance. Proc Natl Acad Sci 121, e2314337121.
[42] Zhang, P., Liu, Y., Jin, X., Hu, Z., Yang, J., Lu, H., Hang, T., Song, M., 2025. 
Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology induced by Porphyromonas gingivalis in 
middle-aged mice is mediated by NLRP3 inflammasome via the microbiota-gut- 
brain axis. J Alzheimer’S Dis JAD 103, 487–505.
[43] Zhao, J., Qiu, Y.K., Xie, Y.X., Li, X.Y., Li, Y.B., Wu, B., Wang, Y.W., Tian, X.Y., Lv, Y. 
L., Zhang, L.H., Li, W.L., Yang, H.F., 2024. Imbalance of mitochondrial quality 
control regulated by STING and PINK1 affects cyfluthrin-induced 
neuroinflammation. Sci Total Environ 946, 174313.
[44] Zhao, Z., Ning, J., Bao, X.Q., Shang, M., Ma, J., Li, G., Zhang, D., 2021. Fecal 
microbiota transplantation protects rotenone-induced Parkinson’s disease mice via 
suppressing inflammation mediated by the lipopolysaccharide-TLR4 signaling 
pathway through the microbiota-gut-brain axis. Microbiome 9, 226.
[45] Zhu, S., Jiang, Y., Xu, K., Cui, M., Ye, W., Zhao, G., Jin, L., Chen, X., 2020. The 
progress of gut microbiome research related to brain disorders. J Neuroinflamm 
17, 25.
B. Wu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Journal of Hazardous Materials 496 (2025) 139287 
17