Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
1 of 12
B I O P H YS I C S
Investigating gut alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: 
In-­depth analysis with micro-­ and nano-­3D X-­ray phase 
contrast tomography
Francesca Palermo1, Nicole Marrocco1, Letizia Dacomo2, Elena Grisafi2, Viviana Moresi1,  
Alessia Sanna1, Lorenzo Massimi1, Marianna Musella1, Laura Maugeri1, Inna Bukreeva1,  
Fabio Fiordaliso2, Alessandro Corbelli2, Olga Junemann1, Marina Eckermann3, Peter Cloetens3, 
Timm Weitkamp4, Giuseppe Gigli5,6, Nicole Kerlero de Rosbo1,  
Claudia Balducci2*†, Alessia Cedola1*†
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), a debilitating neurodegenerative disorder, remains one of the foremost public health 
challenges affecting more than 30 million people worldwide with the etiology still largely enigmatic. The intricate 
gut-­brain axis, serving as a vital communication network between the gut and the brain, appears to wield influ-
ence in the progression of AD. Our study showcases the remarkable precision of x-­ray phase-­contrast tomography 
(XPCT) in conducting an advanced three-­dimensional examination of gut cellular composition and structure. The 
exploitation of micro-­ and nano-­XPCT on various AD mouse models unveiled relevant alterations in villi and 
crypts, cellular transformations in Paneth and goblet cells, along with the detection of telocytes, neurons, eryth-
rocytes, and mucus secretion by goblet cells within the gut cavity. The observed gut structural variations may 
elucidate the transition from dysbiosis to neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. Leveraging XPCT could prove 
pivotal in early detection and prognosis of the disease.
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most common form of dementia, is a 
progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by synaptic 
dysfunction, cognitive decline, and multiple brain alterations in-
cluding synaptic loss, chronic neuroinflammation, and neuronal cell 
death (1). As the prevalence of this devastating condition continues 
to rise and attempted therapies to fail (2), unveiling the underlying 
mechanisms and identifying therapeutic targets are paramount.
In recent years, there has been growing evidence supporting a 
bidirectional communication between the gut and the brain (3–6), 
involving various neuroendocrine, immune, and neuronal intercon-
nected pathways. Dysfunction in this axis has been implicated in 
several psychiatric and neurological disorders including AD (7, 8).
The gut microbiota, which refers to the vast community of mi-
croorganisms residing in the intestinal tract, support human health 
and seems to have profound influences on brain function, cogni-
tion, and behavior (9).
Scientists have discovered that changes in the gut microbiota 
composition (namely, dysbiosis) can contribute to AD develop-
ment and progression (3–6). Gut bacterial communities differ in 
mild cognitively impaired and AD patients if compared to cogni-
tively normal individuals (10, 11), which suggests that microbiome 
composition and metabolism might influence disease onset and/or 
progression. Theoretically, dysbiosis is characterized by a loss of 
microbial diversity, the prevalence of dangerous bacteria produc-
ing toxic metabolites promoting inflammation, and, consequently, 
the breakage of the gut/brain barriers. In patients with AD, a 
reduction in the abundance of the bacterial phylum Firmicutes 
producing essential metabolites and of serotonin transporting 
bacterium Turicibacter was found (12), whereas the proinflamma-
tory taxa Bacteroidetes, Gammaproteobacteria, Enterobacteriales, 
and Enterobacteriaceae were augmented (6, 13–15). Of note, ani-
mal models mimicking AD display similar human gut microbiota 
changes (16–20). It is assumed that bad bacteria could contribute 
to the disease by entering the circulation, reaching the brain, and 
initiating the classical AD-­related cascade of neuropathological 
events, which includes production of various neurotransmitters 
and neuroactive substances that negatively influence brain func-
tion and behavior together with an up-­regulation of inflammatory 
markers in the central nervous system (21). These molecules could 
initiate the vicious cycle of AD also by eventually promoting β-­
amyloid (Aβ) accumulation (21). Experimental investigations have 
proved that fecal transplantation from AD subjects or AD mice to 
healthy mice or rats leads to the development of typical disease 
features such as cognitive impairment, amyloid deposition, and re-
duced hippocampal neurogenesis (6, 22–24).
Understanding the intricate cross-­talk between the gut and the 
brain in AD has opened possibilities for therapeutic interventions 
ideally at earlier stages of disease, also thanks to the fact that the gut 
is a more easily accessible organ compared to the brain. To be no-
ticed that risk factors for AD can be distinguished as nonmutable 
risk factors (i.e., age, sex, and gene mutations) and mutable risk fac-
tors (i.e., lifestyle, obesity, and environment) with gut dysbiosis be-
ing a mutable risk factor. On the basis of this, researchers are 
exploring the potential of modulating the gut microbiota through 
dietary interventions, probiotics, prebiotics, and fecal microbiota 
transplantation to restore a physiological microbiota, so to improve 
cognitive functions and alleviate the pathological processes associ-
ated with AD (25–27).
1Institute of Nanotechnology – CNR, Rome, Italy. 2Istituto di Ricerche Farmaco-
logiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Milan, Italy. 3Synchrotron ESRF, Grenoble France. 4Syn-
chrotron SOLEIL, Saint-­Aubin, France. 5Institute of Nanotechnology – CNR, Lecce, 
Italy. 6University of Salento, Lecce, Italy.
*Corresponding author. Email: alessia.​cedola@​cnr.​it (A.C.); claudia.​balducci@​
marionegri.​it (C.B.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2025 The 
Authors, some rights 
reserved; exclusive 
licensee American 
Association for the 
Advancement of 
Science. No claim to 
original U.S. 
Government Works. 
Distributed under a 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License 4.0 
(CC BY). 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
2 of 12
The main hypothesis behind the contribution of gut dysbiosis 
toward the development of AD or dementia is that upon dysbiosis, 
multiple gut changes occur also at structural/cellular/functional 
level: i.e., increased intestinal barrier permeability [namely, “leaky 
gut” (28)], tight junction loss (29), reduced mucus release in the gut 
lumen, and activation of immune cells (30). These changes might be 
responsible for bacteria escape from the gut lumen and initiation of 
the pathological cascade. At this regard, however, evidence is still 
poor and further investigation is needed to better describe and un-
veil these alterations.
The possibility to identify early gut changes through sophisticat-
ed imaging, combined with metagenomic data, might, indeed, alert 
on the ongoing pathological events predisposing to AD at clinical 
level, but will also allow to establish which biomolecular mecha-
nisms are behind those changes at preclinical level, thus allowing 
the identification of therapeutic targets.
This paper presents a groundbreaking application of nano– and 
micro–x-­ray phase-­contrast tomography (XPCT) (31–35) to unveil 
and investigate various structural and morphological gut alterations on 
the whole organ, without aggressive tissue manipulation such as sec-
tioning and staining. XPCT enables high-­resolution three-­dimensional 
(3D) imaging of soft biological tissues, traditionally considered “invis-
ible” to x-­rays, with minimal sample preparation and without the use of 
additional contrast agents. XPCT is particularly suited for preclinical 
research in neurological diseases, allowing simultaneous visualization 
of changes in cell abundance and organization, as well as structural al-
teration in the vascular network and other morphological features (36), 
enabling comparison of physiological and pathological states of key 
disease targets (37).
A single XPCT volume allows the extraction of information that 
would be contained in thousands of sequential histological sections. 
Furthermore, a single XPCT image captures all existing structures 
without the need for specific markers to highlight particular features.
We here report on nano-­ and micro-­XPCT analysis conducted 
on ileum fragments derived from two mouse model of familial AD 
(APP/PS1 and APP23) (38) and a mouse model of accelerated se-
nescence, widely used as a sporadic AD mouse model (SAMP8) 
(39). The ileum is part of the small intestine, which is affected in AD 
mice (40, 41).
High-­resolution 3D analysis has provided unprecedented gut de-
tails, also allowing to execute qualitative and quantitative reliable 
analysis of whole tissue slabs, providing evidence of alterations oc-
curring in different mouse models of dementia.
RESULTS
XPCT allows analysis of crypt and villus morphology in 
dementia mouse models
To deeply investigate the morphological changes in the gut of AD mice, 
through XPCT, we analyzed the ileum villi and crypts of various mouse 
models: healthy wild-­type (WT) mice aged matched (18 months) to 
APP/PS1dE9 and APP23 AD mice, senescence-­accelerated mouse 
resistant-­1 (SAMR1) mice, and littermate controls of senescence-­
accelerated mouse-­8 (SAMP8) frail mice of 11 months of age (38, 39).
The corresponding XPCT images of the ileal villi (Fig. 1A) clearly 
present impressive differences in shape and density in APP/PS1dE9 
or APP23 carrying AD-­related human mutations, when compared to 
the other mouse strains including control groups WT and SAMR1 
and SAMP8 mice. The villi of SAMP8, the sporadic AD model, show, 
instead, a gut conformation comparable to their relative SAMR1 con-
trols. With regard to the villus length, we observe that aged WT mice 
have longer villi when compared to younger control but, notably, in 
AD mice villus lengths are even longer than those measured in their 
age-­matched WT littermates, likely indicating that aging might be 
associated with an increase in villus length, and that the presence of 
an AD-­related pathology exacerbates this change. Small significant 
differences are detected in SAMP8 mice if compared with SAMR1. 
Both genotypes exhibit longer villus compared to age-­matched WT 
mice, likely indicating a typical villus conformation of SAM mice 
which is slightly modified by a frail condition, at least at the age in-
vestigated (Fig. 1B). The thickness of the epithelium barrier in APP/
PS1 and APP23 is also considerably reduced, while the villus region 
of lamina propria appears impressively larger.
Morphometric quantification of the crypt also reveals significant 
differences among mice (Fig. 1B). Both APP/PS1dE9 and APP3 
mice show significantly deeper crypts if compared to aged-­matched 
controls. Again, no differences are found at this level between 
SAMP8 and SAMR1 mice, and also between younger and older 
WT mice.
Notably, the lamina propria in APP/PS1dE9 and APP23 exhibits 
lower density, brighter shades of the grayscale, compared to the con-
trol groups and SAMP8 mice, while the epithelium displays a more 
corrugated shape. Our concomitant investigation on corresponding 
brains of mice whose gut were studied reveals the presence of Aβ 
deposited plaques only in APP/PS1dE9 and APP23, as expected 
(Fig. 1C), in the cortex, hippocampus, and thalamus. The two differ-
ent models are characterized by a different morphology of the 
plaques. No plaques were detectable in SAMP8 and in WT, SAMR1 
mouse brains. While our SAMP8 mice do develop cognitive and 
motor impairment, as well as brain atrophy and neuropathology 
(42), we found no plaque deposition despite testing multiple specific 
antibodies for their labeling.
The gut changes described so far, specifically observed only in 
AD mutated mice, suggest that they may be related to either the 
APP gene overexpression or the ongoing AD pathology, an issue 
that deserves further investigation in future studies and throughout 
longitudinal approaches.
The histological analysis performed by hematoxylin and eosin 
staining validates the features observed in XPCT images (Fig. 2). 
Ileum of control healthy WT mice shows well-­organized villi, char-
acterized by the surface of columnar epithelial enterocytes with a 
striated border, needed for optimal nutrient absorption, and the 
lamina propria, a highly cellular loose connective tissue that makes 
up the core of the villus, containing mostly lymphocytes (Fig. 2, A 
and B). The ileum of the APP23 mice (Fig. 2, C and D), instead, 
shows a flat luminal surface of the villi, with a cuboidal striated 
epithelium and a lamina propria completely disorganized and 
mostly devoid of cells compared to age-­matched control littermates. 
Round-­shape subcellular structures are also observable. Similar 
features were found for APP/PS1 (fig. S1). Of note, these histologi-
cal features of AD mouse ileum in part resemble those previously 
described for the colon of Tg2576 mice, another widely used mouse 
model of AD (43).
Nano-­XPCT allows a multilevel analysis of the mouse gut: 
Cellular and vascular components
To further improve the level of detail reachable in gut analysis by 
XPCT, we also conducted an experiment of nano-­XPCT of mouse 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
3 of 12
ileum, with a resolution at the nanometric scale to enable single-­
cell scale. The high resolution allows to visualize very fine details in 
the volume and to distinguish individual cells. A representative 
nano-­XPCT image, showing a longitudinal view of the ileum 
structure at the level of the crypts and the tunica muscularis, ob-
tained from an APP/PS1 sample is shown in Fig. 3A. The different 
tissues and cellular types are highlighted in circles and shown 
magnified in the insets of the same figure. The zoom in Fig. 3B 
shows the bottom of a crypt, where goblet cells are indicated by 
white arrows, the presence and location of Paneth cells by an 
asterisk and telocytes by blue arrows. The identification of cells and 
structures was based on morphological and anatomical considerations, 
18 months
WT
SAMP8
SAMR1
APP/PS1dE9
APP23
VL
CD
LP
EC
APP/PS1dE9
APP23
SAMR1
SAMP8
WT
  
  
A
B
C
Fig. 1. XPCT reveals intestinal villi and crypt changes in AD mutated mice. (A) XPCT images of the ileum morphology in different dementia models and their control groups. 
White pixels represent low-­density tissue, while dark pixels represent high-­density tissue. Scale bars, 50 μm. The XPCT image of WT helps to define the extension of villus length (VL) 
and crypt depth (CD) and to illustrate the location/extension of epithelial cells (ECs) and lamina propria (LP). (B) Quantification of villus length (left side) and crypt depth (right side) 
in the different mouse models. Results are shown as mean ± SD. One-­way ANOVA P < 0.0001; post hoc by Tukey’s post hoc test: *P < 0.0001. (C) XPCT of mouse model hemibrains. 
XPCT images of hemibrains are obtained as z projection of minimum intensity over 5 μm. Scale bars, 50 μm. Experiments carried out at the ANATOMIX beamline (SOLEIL) and at the 
ID19 beamline (ESRF).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
4 of 12
comparison with tabulated histological images (44) and with his-
tological sections obtained from the same samples imaged with 
XPCT (Fig. 2 and fig. S2), and reference to transmission electron 
microscopy images (45, 46), showing the same biological struc-
tures present in our tomograms. Features such as shape, size, and 
spatial location were used to classify the anatomical details in the 
XPCT images.
Enteric neurons of the myenteric plexus (or Auerbach’s plexus) 
are shown in Fig. 3C (transversal view) indicated by yellow arrow. 
The nanoscale resolution makes it possible to distinguish the inter-
nal structure of neurons: The nucleolus appears as a black spot in the 
center of each body, while the nuclear and cytoplasmic regions can 
be discriminated, thanks to the different shades of gray correspond-
ing to different material densities. The red arrow indicates a blood 
vessel containing blood cells (black spots). Figure 3D shows neurons 
(yellow arrows) belonging to the submucosal plexus (or Meissner’s 
plexus), which provides secretomotor innervation to the mucosa 
closest to the lumen of the gut. As for the neurons of Auerbach’s 
plexus, we can distinguish the internal structure of the cells. The 
myenteric plexus exists between the longitudinal and circular 
smooth muscle layers (the latter shown in Fig. 3E) of muscularis 
externa in the gastrointestinal tract and provides motor innervation 
to both muscle layers, having parasympathetic and sympathetic in-
put. Meissner’s plexus and Auerbach’s plexus build up the enteric 
nervous system (47). Figure 3F shows a blood vessel, the inside of 
which appears lighter because it is less dense than the surrounding 
tissue, filled with erythrocytes, which are individually visible as 
black crescent-­shaped structures.
3D reconstruction of Paneth and goblet cells upon 
XPCT analysis
Paneth and goblet cells belong to the secretory epithelial cell (EC) com-
partment of the innate immune system. Specifically, Paneth cells, which 
are highly specialized secretory ECs located at the bottom of the crypt in 
the small intestine, are nowadays considered as strictly related to the in-
testinal homeostasis. They release different molecules such as antimicro-
bials peptide and immunomodulating proteins, which control and 
modulate gut microbial communities and secrete factors forming a pro-
tective biochemical barrier. They increase in number in case of the estab-
lishment of an inflammatory condition (48).
Goblet cells are one of the cell types in the secretory lineage orig-
inating from stem cells, equipped with an efficient biological ma-
chinery for mucus secretion, and inhabiting the entire length of the 
intestine. These cells contribute to intestinal protection through the 
secretion of different types of mucus serving as a protective barrier. 
In the small intestine, goblet cells located in the crypts secrete a 
dense mucus functioning as a diffusion barrier for antimicrobial 
proteins and peptides keeping bacteria at a distance, whereas goblet 
cells placed in the villi rapidly secrete a type of mucus that can be 
easily removed to allow nutritional uptake. When goblet cell func-
tion is compromised, unprotected regions of the gut epithelium ap-
pear, allowing bacteria to escape from the gut lumen, enter the 
circulation and initiate inflammatory events (49). Protein misfolding–
related diseases, such as AD, could result in altered production 
and apoptosis of goblet cells, in turn affecting mucus properties. 
However, an increase in the number of both Paneth and goblet cells, 
as well as higher mucus release, has been also described in AD mice (50). 
This contrasting evidence encourages sophisticated analysis of Paneth 
and goblet cells in AD mice, as well as mucus release, which could be 
instrumental to more precisely unveil AD-­related gut alterations.
XPCT analysis revealed both Paneth and goblet cells in great de-
tail, allowing precise quantification of their abundance. Figure 4A 
shows a representative 3D rendering of the longitudinal view of one 
crypt of SAMR1 mouse. The epithelial layer of the crypt is rendered 
in green; the dark fissure in the center of the structure corresponds 
to the crypt lumen; Paneth cells are colored in yellow and goblet 
cells in blue. The same color code has been used in the 3D render-
ings in Fig. 4 (B and C), which show a goblet and a Paneth cell, 
respectively. In detail, the rendering in Fig. 4B shows a single goblet 
cell displaying its characteristic polarized morphology with the nu-
cleus (dark blue) located at the narrow base of the cell and a large 
oval apical portion (light blue) (expanded with mucin-­secreting 
granules) extending into the intestinal lumen. The Paneth cell in Fig. 
4C presents the typical pyramidal shape, with basally situated nucle-
us (colored in blue) and prominent apical granules (yellow) that oc-
cupy most of its cytoplasmatic region.
It is intriguing to also note how clearly XPCT allowed to visual-
ize, and thus analyze, goblet cell mucus or Paneth cell antimicrobial 
granule release in the gut lumen (Fig. 4, B and C, asterisks).
A
B
C
D
Fig. 2. Comparison of micro-­XPCT and nano-­XPCT with histological sections. 
(A) and (C) report micro-­XPCT and nano-­XPCT slices from a WT mouse as control 
and a Tg APP23 mouse, respectively. For the nano-­XPCT, two virtual sections across 
perpendicular directions are shown. Similarly, (B) and (D) report histological sec-
tions stained with hematoxylin and eosin at similar scale and across the same di-
rections for comparison with the x-­ray findings. XPCT experiment carried out at the 
ANATOMIX beamline (SOLEIL); nano-­XPCT experiment performed at ID16A (ESRF).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
5 of 12
Again, to prove the possibility to make quantitative analyses, we 
show in Fig. 4 (D and E) an example of data obtained by quantifying 
the cells of 30 crypt per mouse from 3D reconstructed gut slices of 
solely one mouse per genotype of the SAM groups versus an aged-­
matched WT mouse. Quantification allowed to unveil relevant 
changes in both goblet and Paneth cells in SAMP8 mice, which will 
be further investigated in larger experimental mouse groups.
XPCT allows identification and analysis of telocytes
Telocytes (51, 52), a distinctive type of interstitial cells, are unique 
mesenchymal cells featured by numerous long cytoplasmic exten-
sions, called telopodes, extending hundreds of micrometers away 
from the cell body. To prove the enormous potential of XPCT in pro-
viding structural, morphological, and cellular details, in Fig. 5A, we 
show two XPCT images of telocytes (upper panel) and two images of 
segmented and 3D reconstructed telocytes from different view sides 
(lower panels); in Fig. 5B a 3D reconstruction of telocytes clearly 
show their placement adjacent to the crypts. Telocytes are normally 
quiescent state cells and do not divide until environment perturba-
tions occur, which they react to rapidly expanding in the attempt to 
restore a physiological condition (51). Although these cells remain 
largely unknown in terms of role and mechanisms of actions, there is 
growing interest in better understanding their involvement in health 
and pathology (52). At the state of the art, it is known that different 
telocyte subtypes exist adapting to the different sites in which they 
reside by performing different functions (52). They are mainly in-
volved in the differentiation and proliferation of intestinal crypt stem 
cells and interact with other cell types (macrophages, smooth muscle 
cells, and other immune cells), either by establishing cell membrane 
contacts (52) or by producing exosomes, for various purposes, e.g., 
mediating chemotaxis of immune cells and organ repair. It has been 
reported that telocytes themselves can act as immune cells (53).
To date, telocytes are distinguishable only through transmission 
electron microscopy, whereas it is still debatable which markers are 
reliable for their identification through immunohistochemistry, and 
at the state of the art, at least three different antibodies must be used 
concomitantly (51). In contrast, XPCT successfully allowed to well 
distinguish telocytes on the basis of their distinctive cell morpholo-
gy and their placement. As observable in the XPCT Fig. 5A, telo-
cytes (indicated by orange arrows) present very long and very thin 
prolongations, namely, the telopodes (indicated by green arrows), 
which can be clearly seen with XPCT but are mostly below the re-
solving power of light microscopy. Figure 5A shows telocytes sur-
rounding the epithelium of the crypts (upper panels) and the 3D 
renderings of isolated telocytes (lower panels). Using the same color 
code as in the XPCT tomograms in the upper panels, two different 
colors are used in the 3D renderings to distinguish the soma and 
telopodes of the telocytes: The soma are rendered in orange and the 
telopodes in green. As displayed in the 3D rendering of Fig. 5B, telo-
cytes (colored in bright green) are aligned along the crypt-­villus 
axis, in close association with the intestinal epithelium and blood 
vessels, forming a continuous network along the basal side of the 
entire crypt-­villus epithelium (dark green) (51). Figure 5C displays 
XPCT close-­ups of the tips of the ileal villi, where the telocytes 
(indicated by green arrows) are in close contact with the intestinal 
epithelium (EC) and blood vessels (red arrows). 3D renderings of 
telocytes in the villus tip are shown in Fig. 5D, allowing a better vi-
sualization of the position of these cells (in green) in relation to 
blood capillaries (colored in red) and to other cells likely to be com-
patible with dendritic cells (in blue).
Lymphatic follicles
The ability of XPCT to allow 3D reconstruction of the entire organ 
allowed us to study the presence and the conformation of Peyer’s 
patches (PPs) and isolated lymphoid follicles (ILFs), throughout the 
ileum. PPs are recognized as a group of well-­organized lymphoid fol-
licles positioned inside the lamina propria and submucosa of the dis-
tal portion of the small intestine (ileum, jejunum, and sometimes in 
the duodenum). PPs and ILFs have been known as the gut defender 
of the intestinal wall responding to harmful bacteria and parasites; 
indeed, they are recognized as the immune sensors of the intestine 
due to their ability to translocate luminal antigens and bacteria across 
the follicle-­associated epithelium (FAE) to the underlying immune 
cells, contained in the germinal center (GC) and in the subepithelial 
dome (SD). The immune cells can inhibit or activate the immune 
response, resulting in either tolerance or systemic immune cell re-
sponse (54) within the mucosa. PPs are characterized by follicle cen-
ters and distinct cellular regions overlaid by a specialized epithelium 
that lacks crypts or villi. In 5XFAD AD mice, elevated levels of in-
flammatory cytokines and chemokines including interleukin-­12 and 
macrophage inflammatory protein-­1α in PPs have been reported 
(55). XPCT also allowed to well identify PPs and clearly distinguish 
their subcompartments. Figure 6A shows an XPCT image of the 
*
A
B
C
F
E
D
Fig. 3. Nanotomography of a mouse ileum. White pixels represent low-­density 
tissue, while dark pixels represent high-­density tissue. (A) Longitudinal view of the 
ileum structure at the level of the crypta and the tunica muscularis. The circles indi-
cate the approximate position of the morphological details shown in the figure. 
(B) Bottom of a crypt, where goblet cells are indicated by white arrows, the presence 
and location of Paneth cells by an asterisk and telocytes by blue arrows. (C) Neu-
rons of the myenteric plexus (Auerbach). (D) Neurons belonging to the submucosal 
plexus (Meissner). (E) Longitudinal layer of the tunica muscularis. (F) Blood vessel 
with enterocytes (red arrow) that appear as crescent-­shaped black structures. Scale 
bars, 10 μm. Experiment carried out at the beamline ID16A (ESRF).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
6 of 12
section of ileum, where two follicles of a PP are visible, pointed by the 
black arrows. To illustrate the difference in size between these struc-
tures, Fig. 6 (C and D) shows XPCT images of a PP and a ILF in the 
ileal villi. An increased numbers of PPs and ILFs well correlate with 
the development of prions disease, with the M cells up-­taking the 
invaded prions, and the PPs acting as replicating centers of the prions 
(56). ILF analysis in AD might thus be highly informative of gut en-
vironment alteration and of an ongoing inflammatory condition.
Also, at this level, XPCT allowed to identify PPs and well distin-
guish the inner structural features indicated by the arrows in Fig. 
6C: GC, SD, FAE, and parafollicular area (PF).
Quantification of the number of ILFs has been expressed as the 
mean density of ILFs for ileum length unit. The ILF density of each 
group analyzed is shown in Fig. 6B. Only ileal segments fully visible 
in the tomographic volume were considered to avoid underestima-
tion of ILF density. We did not include intestinal tract that were 
partially outside the tomographic field of views or damaged due 
to preparation.
DISCUSSION
AD has been mainly considered for decades as a “brain pathology,” 
with the overproduction of Aβ and aggregated species formation 
and deposition as the mostly recognized primary cause. The multi-
tude of Aβ-­centric clinical trials failing throughout years has, how-
ever, progressively indicated that diagnosis comes at stages when the 
central nervous system is so severely compromised at multiple levels 
that single target therapy most likely will not succeed (57, 58). This 
increasing awareness has encouraged the identification of earlier 
brain and plasma biomarkers with the main idea to recognize initial 
disease stages so to timely intervene. Recent evidence, however, has 
shed light on the involvement of peripheral organs in AD develop-
ment and neuropathology progression, such as the eyes and the 
gut (59, 60).
The gut-­brain axis receives particularly attracting attention, be-
cause of evidence highlighting an intimate, mutual influence be-
tween the gut and the brain through a bidirectional communication. 
The main accepted theory is that dysbiosis, meant as a pathological 
change in gut microbiota composition, would predispose to the 
development of AD, and that preservation/restoration of a more 
physiological gut microbiota with prebiotics, probiotics, or gut mi-
crobiota transplantation will prevent its development or slow down 
its progression, respectively (7, 61).
One of the mostly assumed mechanisms linking gut dysbiosis to 
an increased risk of AD is that pathological bacteria predominating 
during dysbiosis will produce gut structural alterations, likely driv-
en by inflammatory-­related events: augmented lipopolysaccharides, 
pro-­inflammatory cytokines, T helper cells and monocytes, and in-
creased gut barrier permeability. These events will then favor bacte-
ria escape from the gut lumen, which by entering the circulation, 
together with the overproduced inflammatory cytokines, will cause 
blood brain barrier breakage and eventually bacteria invasion inside 
the brain (62, 63). Bacteria invasion would promote the initiation of 
neuroinflammation leading to abnormal Aβ production. Data from 
AD brain subjects reported the presence of gut bacteria around Aβ 
deposited plaques in the brain parenchyma associated with an in-
crease of pro-­inflammatory cytokines in plasma and brain (13). Gut 
transplantation from AD subjects or mice into healthy mice 
A
B
D
C
E
Fig. 4. Nano-­XPCT analysis of the Paneth and goblet cells. (A) Representative 3D rendering of the longitudinal view of one crypt of SAMR1 mouse. The epithelial layer 
of the crypt has been rendered in green. The Paneth cells are colored in yellow and the goblet cells in blue. Scale bars, 5 μm. (B) and (C) show 3D renderings and nano-­XPCT 
close-­ups of goblet and Paneth cells, respectively. The same color code of (A) has been used for the 3D renderings shown in (B) and (C). In detail, the goblet cell nucleus is 
colored in dark blue and the apical portion, expanded with mucin-­secreting granules, which extends into the intestinal lumen, is rendered in light blue. The Paneth cell 
presents the typical pyramidal shape with basally situated nucleus (blue) and prominent apical granules (yellow) that occupy most of its cytoplasmatic region. Nano-­XPCT 
close-­ups in (B) show goblet cells (indicated by arrows) secreting mucus (asterisks) in the intestinal lumen. Scale bars, 2.5 μm. In (C), transversal view of a crypt in which 
the Paneth cells are arranged in a radial pattern (highlighted by the dashed-­line boxes). The release of the antimicrobial granules (black dots, asterisk) into the lumen is 
visible. Scale bars, 5 μm. (D and E) Quantification of goblet and Paneth cells in the crypts. Results are obtained on 30 crypt per mouse (n = 1) and are shown as 
mean ± SD. One-­way ANOVA P < 0.0001; post hoc by Tukey’s post hoc test: *P < 0.02, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
7 of 12
reproduces neuropathology signatures of AD such as cognitive im-
pairment, amyloid brain deposition, and neuroinflammation (6, 62). 
A possible association of the gut dysbiosis with Aβ pathway in AD 
has been hypothesized, providing a potential alternative approach to 
alter the brain Aβ load (64).
At the state of the art, however, most of the research is focused on 
dysbiosis, gut microbiota characterization, and bacteria composi-
tion. Omics analysis including 16 ribosome DNA (rDNA) amplicon 
and metagenomic sequencing look for association between micro-
bial composition changes and brain dysfunctional and neuropatho-
logical signatures (65).
No considerable efforts are, instead, devoted to the investigation 
of gut structural changes, which might possibly explain, or even pre-
dict, microbial gut escape from the lumen and the risk of disease 
initiation. To address this need, we here interrogated nano-­ and 
micro-­XPCT on their ability to deeply investigate in a 3D fashion 
the anatomy and cellular components of the mouse ileum in differ-
ent mouse models of AD-­dementia. Our results provide compelling 
evidence on the enormous power of XPCT to visualize the intestinal 
environment in 3D with an incredible level of detail and resolution, 
allowing even subtle intestinal changes to be detected. XPCT per-
mitted to distinguish specific structural changes of the crypts and 
the villi in the ileum of APP/PS1dE9 and APP23 transgenic (Tg) 
mice, which were not detectable in the spontaneous SAMP8 mouse 
model of accelerated aging, although featured by AD-­like cognitive 
symptoms and brain alterations (42). XPCT also allowed to con-
comitantly visualize and distinguish neurons of the myenteric plex-
us (Auerbach), from neurons belonging to the submucosal plexus 
(Meissner), together composing the enteric nervous system, as well 
as the longitudinal layer of the tunica muscularis. Blood vessels were 
also clearly visible together with the presence of circulating erythro-
cytes. It is to be emphasized also that through XPCT, we have been 
able to easily identify telocytes placed along the ileum villi and 
crypts. This cell subtype is still underinvestigated, but telocytes seem 
to represent a therapeutic resource which urgently calls for further 
investigation. Evidence, indeed, indicates that in a pathological 
A
B
C
D
Fig. 5. Nano-­XPCT analysis of telocytes. (A) Nano-­XPCT images of telocytes located around ileal crypts (indicated by the capital letter “C”) in transversal view and the 
corresponding 3D renderings. The figures help to illustrate the structure of telocytes: The cell body is indicated by orange arrows in the XPCT images and it was rendered 
in the 3D images with the same color; the cell processes (telopodes) are indicated and rendered in green. (B) 3D renderings of ileal crypts surrounded by telocytes (bright 
green) in longitudinal view. (C) Nano-­XPCT close-­ups of the tips of ileal villi in longitudinal and transversal view. Telocytes (green arrows) are located in the lamina propria 
(LM) close to the EC layer and blood capillaries (red arrows). Dendritic-­like cells are indicated by blue arrows. (D) 3D renderings of telocytes located in the villus tip. The 
telocytes are colored in green, the blood capillary in red, and cells compatible with dendritic cells are rendered in blue. Experiment carried out at ID16A (ESRF).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
8 of 12
context, telocytes decrease in their number, whereas their implanta-
tion in the injured tissue would stimulate the activity of regenerative 
stem cell niche (66). This hypothesis implies that their monitoring 
might be highly informative of an ongoing pathology, alerting on 
the need of a prompt intervention. The main difficulty, however, is 
that their identification through immunohistochemistry is extreme-
ly difficult, because of the lack of specific markers, requiring multi-
ple labeling to increase the certainty of their identity. So far, only 
electron microscopy allowed precise telocyte visualization. We here 
demonstrated that XPCT, by reproducing the entire gut environ-
ment in 3D, represents a breakthrough, allowing to analyze and 
quantify, in an enormous number of acquired images, the number 
of telocytes together with the length and number of their telopodes 
with 100% certainty. Furthermore, this technique permitted to 
clearly visualize and reconstruct in 3D, gut cells covering crucial gut 
functions, such as goblet cell involved in mucus secretion and gut 
protection, Paneth cells guaranteeing gut homeostasis preservation 
and defense, and Payer’s patches, immune sensors of the intes-
tine eliciting an immune response in case of pathogen or danger 
presentation. Also, at this cellular level, XPCT allows to collect and 
analyze thousands of acquired images and provides a large-­scale 
analysis of cell number and morphology in health and disease.
In conclusion, we have proved that XPCT represents a break-
through for a systematic and comprehensive analysis of the gut, in-
strumental to address and define which changes characterize AD 
subjects throughout pathology progression, and in association with 
cognitive dysfunction and brain neuropathological changes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Samples
The present study was performed on excised brains and intestines from 
three mouse models of dementia: (i) APPswe, PSEN1dE9 mice 
[B6C3-­Tg(APPswe,PSEN1dE9)85Dbo/Mmjax mice] expressing a chi-
meric mouse/human amyloid precursor protein with the Swedish muta-
tion (Mo/HuAPP695swe) and a mutant human presenilin 1 (PS1-­dE9): 
n = 3 mice, 18 months old (Jackson Lab, USA); (ii) APP23 containing 
the Swedish double mutation on APP (APP751*K670N/M671L): n = 3 
mice, 18 months old; (iii) SAMP8: n = 8 mice, 11 months old (Envigo, 
Italy); and (iv) SAMR1: n = 5 mice, 11 months old (Envigo, Italy).
A
B
D
C
Fig. 6. XPCT analysis of lymphoid follicles. (A) XPCT image of a section of ileum, where two follicles of a Peyer’s patch (PP) are visible (black arrows). Scale bar, 200 μm. 
(B) Mean density for ileum length unit of lymphoid follicles. Results are shown as mean ± SD. (C) XPCT image of a PP. The spatial and contrast resolutions provided by XPCT 
allow to distinguish the regions which compose the PP. The figure helps to illustrate the location/extension of germinal center (GC), follicular area (F), subepithelial dome 
(SED), follicle-­associated epithelium (FAE), and parafollicular area (PF). Note the densely packed lymphoid cells (asterisks) within the follicular area. (D) Isolated lymphatic 
follicle (ILF). (C) and (D) are on the same scale to allow the comparison of size. Scale bars, 50 μm. XPCT images were obtained as z projection of minimum intensity over 
3 μm. The experiment was carried out at the ANATOMIX beamline (SOLEIL).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
9 of 12
Additional samples from C57BL/6 WT mice were used as age-­
matched controls: n = 7 mice, 11 months old; and n = 3 mice, 18 months 
old. Table 1 summarizes the models and the number of samples ana-
lyzed in the present work.
Both APP/PS1 (67) and APP23 (68) mice are animal models 
widely used to study genetic AD. They carry typical human AD mu-
tations and develop an AD phenotype including cognitive impair-
ment and Aβ plaque deposition in the brain, neuronal damage, 
neuroinflammation, and brain atrophy. APP23 mice develop cogni-
tive impairment at 6 months of age, while APP/PS1 mice develop 
that at 11 to 12 months of age.
SAMP8 is a mouse model of accelerated senescence that was es-
tablished through phenotypic selection (69). SAMP8 mice specifi-
cally develop dementia, reflecting typical brain alterations of AD 
(immune alterations, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, 
neurodegeneration, and brain atrophy) (70), together with deficits 
in learning and memory (39). This model, often associated with spo-
radic AD, is usually compared with SAMR1 mice, which show nor-
mal aging process (71).
All animals were housed in a specific pathogen–free facility in 
groups of four in standard mouse cages containing sawdust with food 
(2018S Envigo diet) and water ad libitum, under conventional 
laboratory conditions (room temperature, 20° ± 2°C; humidity, 60%) 
and a 12/12-­hour light/dark cycle. The IRFMN adheres to the prin-
ciples set out in the following laws, regulation, and policies governing 
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals: Italian Governing Law 
(D.lgs 26/2014; Authorization n.19/2008-­A issued 6 March 2008 by 
Ministry of Health), Mario Negri Institutional Regulations and Poli-
cies providing internal authorization for persons conducting animal 
experiments (Quality Management System Certificate – UNI EN ISO 
9001:2015 – Reg. N° 6121), the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals (2011 edition), and EU directives and guidelines 
(EEC Council Directive 2010/63/UE). The statement of Compliance 
(Assurance) with the Public Health Service Policy on Human Care 
and Use of Laboratory Animals has been reviewed (9 September 
2014; Animal Welfare Assurance #A5023-­01). All animals were 
managed in accordance with European directive 2010/63/UE and 
with Italian law D.l. 26/2014. The procedures were approved by 
the local animal health and ethical committee and were authorized 
by the national authority (Istituto Superiore di Sanità; authorization 
numbers: 418/2021-­PR and 624/2023-­PR). All efforts were made to 
reduce the number of animals by following the 3R’s rule. Mice were 
euthanized under CO2 inhalation. Brains and intestine were excised. 
Intestine was cut to select the ileum (Fig. 7). Samples were dehy-
drated through a graded ethanol series (70/95/100%), put in 
propylene oxide, and subsequently included in paraffin wax. No 
contrast agent has been used in the preparation of samples prior 
x-­ray imaging.
For the micro-­XPCT experiments, the whole paraffin-­embedded 
samples were scanned to obtain the tomographic volumes of the en-
tire organs. The dimensions of the paraffin-­embedded brains were 
about 0.8 × 0.5 × 1 (width-­depth-­height) cm3, whereas the ileum 
measured about 0.2 × 0.2 × 0.8 cm3. For the nano-­XPCT experiment 
at the ID16A beamline, 500-­μm biopsies were punched out from 
identified regions of interest of the samples already measured at the 
microscale, guided by tomographic prescan acquired at the lower 
resolution. For tomographic imaging, the paraffin-­embedded tissue 
biopsies were then placed on metal pins.
Table 1. Analyzed samples. 
Model
Age
Description
Number of samples
 APP/PS1
18 months
Familial AD
3
 APP23
18 months
Familial AD
3
C 57BL/6
18 months
Aged NTg
3
 SAMP8
11 months
Sporadic AD
8
 SAMR1
11 months
Sporadic AD control
5
C 57BL/6
11 months
Age-­matched control
7
Fig. 7. Schematic illustrative picture showing the localization of the ileum in the mouse gastrointestinal tract. The last panel on the right displays the 3D rendering 
of a portion of intestinal villi obtained from XPCT images.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
10 of 12
Micro-­XPCT
The XPCT experiments were performed at (i) the ANATOMIX 
beamline of Synchrotron SOLEIL (Paris, France) (72) and at (ii) the 
beamline ID19 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility 
(ESRF, Grenoble, France), in free-­space propagation mode.
(i) The XPCT experiment at ANATOMIX beamline was per-
formed with a filtered white beam. The measurements were per-
formed at two different resolutions: scans with an effective pixel size 
of 3.07 μm were taken with an energy spectrum peaked around 
30 keV, at a propagation distance between sample and detector of 1 m, 
and an exposure time of 150 ms per projection radiograph. Higher-­
resolution data were taken at an effective pixel size of 0.65 μm, cen-
tral photon energy around 20 keV, a propagation distance of 20 mm, 
and an exposure time of 100 ms per projection angle. In both cases, 
the detector was an indirect system consisting of a lutetium alumi-
num garnet scintillator coupled via a lens system (magnifications 
2.1× and 10×, respectively, for the two resolutions) to a Hamamatsu 
Orca Flash 4.0 camera [sensor type, complementary metal-­oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS); sensor array size, 2048  ×  2048 pixels; 
physical pixel size, 6.5 μm; and 16-­bit nominal dynamic range]. The 
tomography was produced by means of 4000 projections in extend-
ed field-­of-­view (FOV) mode, an acquisition method, which allows 
to almost double the effective horizontal width of the FOV of the 
detector. The rotation axis is moved close to either left or right side 
of the FOV and a dataset of projections, having size equal to the 
detector FOV, is collected over 360°. After properly stitching the si-
nograms, the reconstruction procedure can be performed as usual. 
Data preprocessing, phase retrieval, and tomographic reconstruc-
tion were performed using the standard data processing pipeline at 
the beamline, based on a Python script as a user front end and for 
preprocessing and the PyHST2 software package (73) as the back-
end for the tomographic reconstruction.
(ii) Data acquisition at ID19 was carried out using pink beam 
with an energy peaked around 26.5 keV. The sample-­detector dis-
tance was set at 10 cm. The detector had an effective pixel size of 
0.65 μm. The experiment was carried out recording 3600 projections in 
extended FOV mode covering a total angle range of 360°. The acqui-
sition time for each angular position was 150 ms. Data preprocessing, 
phase retrieval, and tomographic reconstruction were performed 
with Tomwer software (74) provided by the ESRF.
In both the experiments, phase retrieval was performed by using 
Paganin’s algorithm (75), since we acquired a single image per 
angle—out of focus, on a plane placed at the Fresnel’s distance, where 
the phase signal is maximum (76)—in free-­space propagation mode, 
and the radiation wavelength and material density met the require-
ments. This method allows the simultaneous extraction of phase 
and amplitude of the wave as the ratio of the phase term over the 
absorption term. Tomographic reconstruction of the 3D volumes 
was performed from the phase-­retrieved angular projections using 
the Filtered Back Projection algorithm.
Nano-­XPCT
We imaged the samples of ileum at higher resolution exploiting 
nano-­XPCT. The experiment was carried out at the Nano-­Imaging 
ID16A beamline of the ESRF (Grenoble, France) with an effective 
pixel size of 80 nm. A pair of multilayer-­coated Kirkpatrick-­Baez 
optics was used to focus the x-­rays (∼30 nm) at 17 keV. The sample 
was put in the divergent beam downstream of the focus to produce 
magnified phase-­contrast images. The projection geometry also 
allows zooming into specific regions of a large sample by combining 
scans with different magnifications and FOV (77, 78). By measuring 
the Fresnel diffraction patterns at four different effective propaga-
tion distances, the phase maps of the sample can be retrieved via 
holographic reconstruction, this so-­called phase-­retrieval proce-
dure (79) being implemented using GNU Octave software. Magni-
fied radiographs were recorded onto an x-­ray detector using a 
scientific CMOS camera from XIMEA GmbH, with a GSENSE6060 
sensor from Gpixel, 6144 × 6144 pixels with each 10 μm edge length. 
For one tomography scan, 2000 projections were acquired with 0.2 s 
exposure time. Tomography scans at four different focus-­to-­sample 
distances, i.e., four different Fresnel numbers, were acquired to 
complete one holotomography scan. The tomographic reconstruc-
tion was obtained with ESRF PyHST software package (80).
XPCT image analysis
Image analysis and segmentation were performed using ImageJ. 3D 
rendering images were obtained using the high-­end software VG-
studio Max. Before extracting qualitative and quantitative informa-
tion, images were prepreprocessed to eliminate or mitigate artifacts 
due to experimental conditions or computational reconstruction.
In the XPCT and nano-­XPCT images, the shades of gray are pro-
portional to electron density, with black corresponding to the high-
est value of the density spectrum, whereas white corresponds to the 
lowest value, hence to features of lowest density.
To enhance the contrast and visualize structures developing in 
3D and therefore lying on different tomographic slices, we exploited 
the z projection of minimum intensities, which consists in project-
ing on the visualization plane the voxels of a set of continuous slices. 
Each pixel of the output image contains the minimum value found 
along the axis perpendicular to that pixel. Minimum intensity pro-
jection enlightens high-­density structures such as cell nuclei and 
amyloid plaques.
Morphometric villus parameters (crypt depth and villus length), 
density of goblet and Paneth cells, and density of ILFs were quantified 
twice independently by three observers (authors F.P. and N.M., F.P. and 
M.M., and F.P. and N.M., respectively) to improve the reliability of mea-
surements. To limit measurement errors, the length of the villi was mea-
sured at the point of maximum elongation, as it was possible to work on 
the virtual 3D volume. The same consideration is valid for the quantifi-
cation of crypt depth. About 300 villi per sample were analyzed.
Histological analyses
Ileum portions from WT and APP23, included in paraffin, were cut 
by using a Leica microtome (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) in 10-­μm-­thick 
sections. Hematoxylin and eosin (Sigma-­Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, 
USA) staining was performed according to the standard manufac-
turer’s instructions. In brief, after deparaffinization to water, slides 
were stained for 10 min with Mayer’s hematoxylin solution. Slides 
were then washed under tap water for 10 min and counterstained 
with eosin Y solution for few seconds. After removing the excess of 
eosin, sections were dehydrated, and cover slips were mounted with 
Eukitt mounting medium. Representative pictures were acquired by 
using an Axioplan microscope (Zeiss, Germany) with Axiocam 
503 color and ZEN 3.3 (blue edition) software.
Statistics
The differences between mouse models were analyzed by consider-
ing all objects measured in the same genotype as statistical sample. 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
11 of 12
“n” the total number of objects measured per group. After verifying 
the normal distribution of the data and their homoscedasticity by 
means of Levene’s test, data were analyzed with one-­way analysis of 
variance (ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s post hoc test or Student’s t 
test as post hoc test. All values were expressed as mean ± SD.
Supplementary Materials
The PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 and S2
Legends for tables S1 to S4
Legend for movie S1
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:
Tables S1 to S4
Movie S1
REFERENCES AND NOTES
	 1.	 C. A. Lane, J. Hardy, J. M. Schott, Alzheimer’s disease. Eur. J. Neurol. 25, 59–70 (2018).
	 2.	 A. E. Abdallah, Review on anti-­Alzheimer drug development: Approaches, challenges and 
perspectives. RSC Adv. 14, 11057–11088 (2024).
	 3.	 C. Jiang, G. Li, P. Huang, Z. Liu, B. Zhao, The gut microbiota and Alzheimer’s disease.  
J. Alzheimers Dis. 58, 1–15 (2017).
	 4.	 S. Chandra, S. S. Sisodia, R. J. Vassar, The gut microbiome in Alzheimer’s disease: What we 
know and what remains to be explored. Mol. Neurodegener. 18, 9 (2023).
	 5.	 D. Cammann, Y. Lu, M. J. Cummings, M. L. Zhang, J. M. Cue, J. Do, J. Ebersole, X. Chen,  
E. C. Oh, J. L. Cummings, J. Chen, Genetic correlations between Alzheimer’s disease and 
gut microbiome genera. Sci. Rep. 13, 5258 (2023).
	 6.	 S. Grabrucker, M. Marizzoni, E. Silajdžić, N. Lopizzo, E. Mombelli, S. Nicolas,  
S. Dohm-­Hansen, C. Scassellati, D. V. Moretti, M. Rosa, K. Hoffman, J. F. Cryan, O. F. O’Leary, 
J. A. English, A. Lavelle, C. O’Neill, S. Thuret, A. Cattaneo, Y. M. Nolan, Microbiota from 
Alzheimer’s patients induce deficits in cognition and hippocampal neurogenesis. Brain 
146, 4916–4934 (2023).
	 7.	 J. S. Loh, W. Q. Mak, L. K. S. Tan, C. X. Ng, H. H. Chan, S. H. Yeow, J. B. Foo, Y. S. Ong,  
C. W. How, K. Y. Khaw, Microbiota–gut–brain axis and its therapeutic applications in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 9, 37 (2024).
	 8.	 R. Khan, C. M. Di Gesù, J. Lee, L. D. McCullough, The contribution of age-­related changes 
in the gut-­brain axis to neurological disorders. Gut. Microbes 16, 2302801 (2024).
	 9.	 K. Hou, Z.-­X. Wu, X.-­Y. Chen, J.-­Q. Wang, D. Zhang, C. Xiao, D. Zhu, J. B. Koya, L. Wei, J. Li, 
Z.-­S. Chen, Microbiota in health and diseases. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 7, 135 (2022).
	10.	 C.-­C. Hung, C.-­C. Chang, C.-­W. Huang, R. Nouchi, C.-­H. Cheng, Gut microbiota in patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease spectrum: A systematic review and meta-­analysis. Aging (Albany 
NY) 14, 477–496 (2022).
	11.	 G. Chen, X. Zhou, Y. Zhu, W. Shi, L. Kong, Gut microbiome characteristics in subjective 
cognitive decline, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic 
review and meta-­analysis. Eur. J. Neurol. 30, 3568–3580 (2023).
	12.	 N. M. Vogt, R. L. Kerby, K. A. Dill-­McFarland, S. J. Harding, A. P. Merluzzi, S. C. Johnson,  
C. M. Carlsson, S. Asthana, H. Zetterberg, K. Blennow, B. B. Bendlin, F. E. Rey,  
Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 7, 13537 (2017).
	13.	 A. Cattaneo, N. Cattane, S. Galluzzi, S. Provasi, N. Lopizzo, C. Festari, C. Ferrari, U. P. Guerra, 
B. Paghera, C. Muscio, A. Bianchetti, G. D. Volta, M. Turla, M. S. Cotelli, M. Gennuso,  
A. Prelle, O. Zanetti, G. Lussignoli, D. Mirabile, D. Bellandi, S. Gentile, G. Belotti, D. Villani,  
T. Harach, T. Bolmont, A. Padovani, M. Boccardi, G. B. Frisoni, INDIA-­FBP Group, 
Association of brain amyloidosis with pro-­inflammatory gut bacterial taxa and 
peripheral inflammation markers in cognitively impaired elderly. Neurobiol. Aging 49, 
60–68 (2017).
	14.	 E. R. Murray, M. Kemp, T. T. Nguyen, The microbiota–gut–brain axis in Alzheimer’s disease: 
A review of taxonomic alterations and potential avenues for interventions. Arch. Clin. 
Neuropsychol. 37, 595–607 (2022).
	15.	 P. Liu, L. Wu, G. Peng, Y. Han, R. Tang, J. Ge, L. Zhang, L. Jia, S. Yue, K. Zhou, L. Li, B. Luo,  
B. Wang, Altered microbiomes distinguish Alzheimer’s disease from amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment and health in a Chinese cohort. Brain Behav. Immun. 80, 633–643 
(2019).
	16.	 S. J. Dunham, K. A. McNair, E. D. Adams, J. Avelar-­Barragan, S. Forner, M. Mapstone,  
K. L. Whiteson, Longitudinal analysis of the microbiome and metabolome in the 5xfAD 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. MBio 13, e0179422 (2022).
	17.	 P. M. Chilton, S. S. Ghare, B. T. Charpentier, S. A. Myers, A. V. Rao, J. F. Petrosino,  
K. L. Hoffman, J. C. Greenwell, N. Tyagi, J. Behera, Y. Wang, L. J. Sloan, J. Zhang,  
C. B. McClain, S. S. Barve, Age-­associated temporal decline in butyrate-­producing 
bacteria plays a key pathogenic role in the onset and progression of neuropathology and 
memory deficits in 3× Tg-­AD mice. Gut Microbes 16, 2389319 (2024).
	18.	 C. Qu, Q.-­Q. Xu, W. Yang, M. Zhong, Q. Yuan, Y.-­F. Xian, Z.-­X. Lin, Gut dysbiosis aggravates 
cognitive deficits, amyloid pathology and lipid metabolism dysregulation in a transgenic 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Pharm. Anal. 13, 1526–1547 (2023).
	19.	 J. A. López-­Villodres, A. Escamilla, S. Mercado-­Sáenz, C. Alba-­Tercedor,  
L. M. Rodriguez-­Perez, I. Arranz-­Salas, R. Sanchez-­Varo, D. Bermúdez, Microbiome 
alterations and Alzheimer’s disease: Modeling strategies with transgenic mice. 
Biomedicine 11, 1846 (2023).
	20.	 E. Ayan, H. DeMirci, M. A. Serdar, F. Palermo, A. T. Baykal, Bridging the gap between gut 
microbiota and Alzheimer’s disease: A metaproteomic approach for biomarker discovery 
in transgenic mice. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24, 12819 (2023).
	21.	 N. Hochuli, S. Kadyan, G. Park, C. Patoine, R. Nagpal, Pathways linking microbiota-­gut-­
brain axis with neuroinflammatory mechanisms in Alzheimer’s pathophysiology. 
Microbiome Res. Rep. 3, 9 (2023).
	22.	 N. Kim, S. H. Jeon, I. G. Ju, M. S. Gee, J. Do, M. S. Oh, J. K. Lee, Transplantation of gut 
microbiota derived from Alzheimer’s disease mouse model impairs memory function 
and neurogenesis in C57BL/6 mice. Brain Behav. Immun. 98, 357–365 (2021).
	23.	 M. Wang, J. Cao, C. Gong, W. K. Amakye, M. Yao, J. Ren, Exploring the microbiota-­
Alzheimer’s disease linkage using short-­term antibiotic treatment followed by fecal 
microbiota transplantation. Brain Behav. Immun. 96, 227–238 (2021).
	24.	 C. Di Salvo, V. D’Antongiovanni, L. Benvenuti, A. d’Amati, C. Ippolito, C. Segnani,  
C. Pierucci, G. Bellini, T. Annese, D. Virgintino, Lactiplantibacillus plantarum HEAL9 
attenuates cognitive impairment and progression of Alzheimer’s disease and related 
bowel symptoms in SAMP8 mice by modulating microbiota-­gut-­inflammasome-­brain 
axis. Food Funct. 15, 10323–10338 (2024).
	25.	 M. Liu, P. Zhong, Modulating the gut microbiota as a therapeutic intervention for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Indian J. Microbiol. 62, 494–504 (2022).
	26.	 J. K. Pasupalak, P. Rajput, G. L. Gupta, Gut microbiota and Alzheimer’s disease: Exploring 
natural product intervention and the gut–brain axis for therapeutic strategies.  
Eur. J. Pharmacol. 984, 177022 (2024).
	27.	 Ş. Ayten, S. Bilici, Modulation of gut microbiota through dietary intervention in 
neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Curr. Nutr. Rep. 13, 82–96 
(2024).
	28.	 M. Marizzoni, S. Provasi, A. Cattaneo, G. B. Frisoni, Microbiota and neurodegenerative 
diseases. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 30, 630–638 (2017).
	29.	 P. André, F. Laugerette, C. Féart, Metabolic endotoxemia: A potential underlying 
mechanism of the relationship between dietary fat intake and risk for cognitive 
impairments in humans? Nutrients 11, 1887 (2019).
	30.	 R. Tarawneh, E. Penhos, The gut microbiome and Alzheimer’s disease: Complex and 
bidirectional interactions. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 141, 104814 (2022).
	31.	 L. Massimi, I. Bukreeva, G. Santamaria, M. Fratini, A. Corbelli, F. Brun, S. Fumagalli,  
L. Maugeri, A. Pacureanu, P. Cloetens, N. Pieroni, F. Fiordaliso, G. Forloni, A. Uccelli,  
N. K. de Rosbo, C. Balducci, A. Cedola, Exploring Alzheimer’s disease mouse brain through 
X-­ray phase contrast tomography: From the cell to the organ. Neuroimage 184, 490–495 
(2019).
	32.	 S. Di Fonzo, W. Jark, G. Soullié, A. Cedola, S. Lagomarsino, P. Cloetens, C. Riekel, 
Submicrometre resolution phase-­contrast radiography with the beam from an X-­ray 
waveguide. J. Synchrotron Rad. 5, 376–378 (1998).
	33.	 A. Mittone, L. Fardin, F. Di Lillo, M. Fratini, H. Requardt, A. Mauro, R. A. Homs-­Regojo,  
P.-­A. Douissard, G. E. Barbone, J. Stroebel, M. Romano, L. Massimi, G. Begani-­Provinciali,  
F. Palermo, S. Bayat, A. Cedola, P. Coan, A. Bravin, Multiscale pink-­beam microCT 
imaging at the ESRF-­ID17 biomedical beamline. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 27, 1347–1357 
(2020).
	34.	 A. Cedola, G. Campi, D. Pelliccia, I. Bukreeva, M. Fratini, M. Burghammer, L. Rigon, F. Arfelli, 
R. C. Chen, D. Dreossi, N. Sodini, S. Mohammadi, G. Tromba, R. Cancedda,  
M. Mastrogiacomo, Three dimensional visualization of engineered bone and soft tissue 
by combined x-­ray micro-­diffraction and phase contrast tomography. Phys. Med. Biol.  
59, 189–201 (2014).
	35.	 M. Mastrogiacomo, G. Campi, R. Cancedda, A. Cedola, Synchrotron radiation techniques 
boost the research in bone tissue engineering. Acta Biomater. 89, 33–46 (2019).
	36.	 M. Fratini, I. Bukreeva, G. Campi, F. Brun, G. Tromba, P. Modregger, D. Bucci, G. Battaglia,  
R. Spanò, M. Mastrogiacomo, H. Requardt, F. Giove, A. Bravin, A. Cedola, Simultaneous 
submicrometric 3D imaging of the micro-­vascular network and the neuronal system in a 
mouse spinal cord. Sci. Rep. 5, 514 (2015).
	37.	 F. Palermo, N. Pieroni, A. Sanna, B. Parodi, C. Venturi, G. Begani Provinciali, L. Massimi,  
L. Maugeri, G. P. Marra, E. Longo, L. D’Amico, G. Saccomano, J. Perrin, G. Tromba,  
I. Bukreeva, M. Fratini, G. Gigli, N. K. de Rosbo, A. Cedola, Multilevel X-­ray imaging 
approach to assess the sequential evolution of multi-­organ damage in multiple sclerosis. 
Commun. Phys. 5, 290 (2022).
	38.	 T. M. Dawson, T. E. Golde, C. Lagier-­Tourenne, Animal models of neurodegenerative 
diseases. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1370–1379 (2018).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025

Palermo et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr8511 (2025)     31 January 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
12 of 12
39. B. Liu, J. Liu, J.-­S. Shi, SAMP8 mice as a model of age-­related cognition decline with 
underlying mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 75, 385–395 (2020).
40. S. Wu, L. Hu, Y. Fu, Y. Chen, Z. Hu, H. Li, Z. Liu, Effects of intestinal M cells on intestinal
barrier and neuropathological properties in an AD mouse model. Mol. Neurobiol.
61, 10006–10022 (2024).
41. X. Han, S. Tang, L. Dong, L. Song, Y. Dong, Y. Wang, Y. Du, Loss of nitrergic and cholinergic 
neurons in the enteric nervous system of APP/PS1 transgenic mouse model. 
Neurosci. Lett. 642, 59–65 (2017).
42.	 L. Dacomo, P. La Vitola, L. Brunelli, L. Messa, E. Micotti, L. Artioli, E. Sinopoli, G. Cecutti, 
S. Leva, S. Gagliardi, O. Pansarasa, S. Carelli, A. Guaita, R. Pastorelli, G. Forloni, C. Cereda, 
C. Balducci, Transcriptomic and metabolomic changes might predict frailty in SAMP8 
mice. Aging Cell 23, e14263 (2024).
43.	 J. E. Kim, J. J. Park, M. R. Lee, J. Y. Choi, B. R. Song, J. W. Park, M. J. Kang, H. J. Son, J. T. Hong, 
D. Y. Hwang, Constipation in Tg2576 mice model for Alzheimer’s disease associated with 
dysregulation of mechanism involving the mAChR signaling pathway and ER stress 
response. PLOS ONE 14, e0215205 (2019).
44.	 J. Ruberte, A. Carretero, M. Navarro, Morphological Mouse Phenotyping: Anatomy, 
Histology and Imaging (Elsevier, 2017).
45.	 Y. Shimizu, K. Nakamura, A. Yoshii, Y. Yokoi, M. Kikuchi, R. Shinozaki, S. Nakamura, S. Ohira, 
R. Sugimoto, T. Ayabe, Paneth cell α-­defensin misfolding correlates with dysbiosis and 
ileitis in Crohn’s disease model mice. Life Sci. Alliance 3, e201900592 (2020).
46.	 E. M. Garabedian, L. J. Roberts, M. S. McNevin, J. I. Gordon, Examining the role of Paneth 
cells in the small intestine by lineage ablation in transgenic mice. J. Biol. Chem.
272, 23729–23740 (1997).
47.	 M. A. Fleming, L. Ehsan, S. R. Moore, D. E. Levin, The enteric nervous system and its 
emerging role as a therapeutic target. Gastroenterol. Res. Pract. 2020, 1–13 (2020).
48.	 S. R. Lueschow, S. J. McElroy, The Paneth cell: The curator and defender of the immature 
small intestine. Front. Immunol. 11, 587 (2020).
49.	 G. Vivacqua, R. Mancinelli, S. Leone, R. Vaccaro, L. Garro, S. Carotti, L. Ceci, P. Onori, 
L. Pannarale, A. Franchitto, E. Gaudio, A. Casini, Endoplasmic reticulum stress: A possible 
connection between intestinal inflammation and neurodegenerative disorders. 
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 36, e14780 (2024).
50.	 J. He, Y. Liu, J. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Jiang, S. Luo, G. He, Intestinal changes in permeability, tight junction
and mucin synthesis in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Med. 52, 113 (2023).
51.	 M. Shoshkes-­Carmel, Telocytes in the luminal GI tract. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
17, 697–701 (2024).
52.	 M. G. Vannucchi, The telocytes: Ten years after their introduction in the scientific 
literature. An update on their morphology, distribution, and potential roles in the gut. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 4478 (2020).
53.	 M. G. Vannucchi, Telocytes and macrophages in the gut: From morphology to function, do the
two cell types interact with each other? Which helps which? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 8435 (2022).
54.	 C. Jung, J.-­P. Hugot, F. Barreau, Peyer′s patches: The immune sensors of the intestine. 
Int. J. Inflam. 2010, 823710 (2010).
55.	 Y. Ano, K. Ikado, K. Uchida, H. Nakayama, Amyloid β-­induced mesenteric inflammation in 
an Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mouse model. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 17, 52–59 (2020).
56.	 A. Marshall, B. M. Bradford, A. R. Clarke, J. C. Manson, N. A. Mabbott, Oral prion 
neuroinvasion occurs independently of PrPC expression in the gut epithelium. J. Virol.
92, e01010–18 (2018).
57. B. P. Imbimbo, M. Watling, What have we learned from past failures of 
investigational drugs for Alzheimer’s disease? Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs
30, 1175–1182 (2021).
58.	 B. P. Imbimbo, S. Ippati, M. Watling, C. Balducci, Accelerating Alzheimer’s disease drug 
discovery and development: What’s the way forward? Expert Opin. Drug Discovery
16, 727–735 (2021).
59.	 F. Casciano, E. Zauli, C. Celeghini, L. Caruso, A. Gonelli, G. Zauli, A. Pignatelli, Retinal 
alterations predict early prodromal signs of neurodegenerative disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
25, 1689 (2024).
60.	 A. Warren, Y. Nyavor, N. Zarabian, A. Mahoney, L. A. Frame, The microbiota-­gut-­brain-­
immune interface in the pathogenesis of neuroinflammatory diseases: A narrative review 
of the emerging literature. Front. Immunol. 15, 1365673 (2024).
61.	 T. Zhang, G. Gao, L.-­Y. Kwok, Z. Sun, Gut microbiome-­targeted therapies for Alzheimer’s 
disease. Gut Microbes 15, 2271613 (2023).
62.	 M. Cerovic, G. Forloni, C. Balducci, Neuroinflammation and the gut microbiota: Possible 
alternative therapeutic targets to counteract Alzheimer’s disease? Front. Aging Neurosci.
11, 284 (2019).
63.	 S. R. Sarkar, S. Banerjee, Gut microbiota in neurodegenerative disorders. J. Neuroimmunol.
328, 98–104 (2019).
64.	 J. S. Generoso, V. V. Giridharan, J. Lee, D. Macedo, T. Barichello, The role of the microbiota-­gut-­
brain axis in neuropsychiatric disorders. Braz. J. Psychiatry 43, 293–305 (2021).
65.	 C. Sheng, W. Du, Y. Liang, P. Xu, Q. Ding, X. Chen, S. Jia, X. Wang, An integrated 
neuroimaging-­omics approach for the gut-­brain communication pathways in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Aging Neurosci. 15, 1211979 (2023).
66.	 I. Rosa, M. Marini, M. Manetti, Telocytes: An emerging component of stem cell niche 
microenvironment. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 69, 795–818 (2021).
67.	 A.-­M. Waldron, J. Fissers, A. Van Eetveldt, B. Van Broeck, M. Mercken, D. J. Pemberton, 
P. Van Der Veken, K. Augustyns, J. Joossens, S. Stroobants, S. Dedeurwaerdere, L. Wyffels, 
S. Staelens, In vivo amyloid-­β imaging in the APPPS1–21 transgenic mouse model with a 
89Zr-­labeled monoclonal antibody. Front. Aging Neurosci. 8, 67 (2016).
68.	 D. Van Dam, E. Vloeberghs, D. Abramowski, M. Staufenbiel, P. P. De Deyn, APP23 mice as a 
model of Alzheimer’s disease: An example of a transgenic approach to modeling a CNS 
disorder. CNS Spectr. 10, 207–222 (2005).
69.	 T. Takeda, M. Hosokawa, S. Takeshita, M. Irino, K. Higuchi, T. Matsushita, Y. Tomita, 
K. Yasuhira, H. Hamamoto, K. Shimizu, A new murine model of accelerated senescence. 
Mech. Ageing Dev. 17, 183–194 (1981).
70.	 I. Akiguchi, M. Pallàs, H. Budka, H. Akiyama, M. Ueno, J. Han, H. Yagi, T. Nishikawa, Y. Chiba, 
H. Sugiyama, R. Takahashi, K. Unno, K. Higuchi, M. Hosokawa, SAMP8 mice as a 
neuropathological model of accelerated brain aging and dementia: Toshio Takeda’s 
legacy and future directions. Neuropathology 37, 293–305 (2017).
71.	 T. Takeda, Senescence-­accelerated mouse (SAM): A biogerontological resource in aging 
research. Neurobiol. Aging 20, 105–110 (1999).
72.	 T. Weitkamp, M. Scheel, J. Perrin, G. Daniel, A. King, V. Le Roux, J.-­L. Giorgetta, A. Carcy, 
F. Langlois, K. Desjardins, in Journal of Physics: Conference Series (IOP Publishing, 2022), 
vol. 2380, pp. 012122.
73.	 A. Mirone, E. Brun, E. Gouillart, P. Tafforeau, J. Kieffer, The PyHST2 hybrid distributed code 
for high speed tomographic reconstruction with iterative reconstruction and a priori 
knowledge capabilities. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B 324, 41–48 (2014).
74.	 H. Payno, P. Paleo, C. Nemoz, A. Mirone, P.-­J. Gouttenoire, J. Lesaint, W. De Nolf, T. Vincent, 
tomwer (1.1) Zenodo (2022). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8228891
75.	 D. Paganin, S. C. Mayo, T. E. Gureyev, P. R. Miller, S. W. Wilkins, Simultaneous phase and 
amplitude extraction from a single defocused image of a homogeneous object. 
J. Microsc. 206, 33–40 (2002).
76.	 A. Pogany, D. Gao, S. Wilkins, Contrast and resolution in imaging with a microfocus x-­ray 
source. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68, 2774–2782 (1997).
77.	 R. Mokso, P. Cloetens, E. Maire, W. Ludwig, J.-­Y. Buffière, Nanoscale zoom tomography with hard
x rays using Kirkpatrick-­Baez optics. Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 144104 (2007).
78. M. Bartels, M. Krenkel, P. Cloetens, W. Möbius, T. Salditt, Myelinated mouse nerves 
studied by X-­ray phase contrast zoom tomography. J. Struct. Biol. 192, 561–568 
(2015).
79.	 P. Cloetens, W. Ludwig, J. Baruchel, D. Van Dyck, J. Van Landuyt, J. Guigay, M. Schlenker, 
Holotomography: Quantitative phase tomography with micrometer resolution using 
hard synchrotron radiation x rays. Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 2912–2914 (1999).
80.	 P. Paleo, J. Lesaint, H. Payno, A. Mirone, N. Vigano, C. Nemoz, Nabu 2024.1. Zenodo (2024). 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11104029.
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the european Synchrotron Radiation Facility for 
provision of beamtime and we thank the staff for assistance in using beamlines id 16a and 
id19 (l. Broche) and for constructive discussion. We acknowledge Synchrotron SOleil 
(Saint- Aubin, France) for allocation of beamtime within the scope of proposals 20190809. 
AnAtOMiX is an equipment of excellence (eQUiPeX) funded by the investments for the Future 
program of the French national Research Agency (AnR), project nanoimagesX, grant no. 
AnR- 11- eQPX- 0031. this research was made possible also by the testamentary bequest of  
S. Stoppani. Special thanks to M. c. lavecchia for the drawing in Fig. 7. Funding: this work was 
supported by: R. Puglia and cnR for tecnopolo per la Medicina di Precisione. d. G. R. n. 2117 of 
21.11.2018; PiAnO nAZiOnAle di RiPReSA e ReSilienZA (PnRR) – missione 4 componente 2 
investimento1.5; progetto ecs 00000024 Rome technopole; Airalzh- Grants- for- Young- 
Reasearchers – AGYR 2022 ediMAF; and investments for the Future program of the French 
national Research Agency (AnR), project nanoimagesX, grant no. AnR- 11- eQPX- 003. Author 
contributions: conceptualization: F.P., A.ce., c.B., n.K.d.R., G.G., and i.B. data curation: F.P., n.M., 
M.e., P.c., M.M. A.ce., and t.W. Formal analysis: F.P., A.c., n.M., c.B., v.M., l.d., M.e., M.M., and t.W. 
Funding acquisition: c.B., G.G., A.ce., and lo.M. investigation: F.P., n.M., v.M., A.S., lo.M., la.M., 
i.B., M.e., P.c., t.W., c.B., A.co., F.F., A.ce., and e.G. Methodology: F.P., c.B., n.K.d.R., A.co., G.G., 
l.d., F.F., P.c., A.ce., e.G., i.B., and t.W. Project administration: A.ce., c.B., G.G., lo.M., and t.W. 
Software: P.c., A.ce., and i.B. Resources: c.B., F.F., A.co., M.e., O.J., P.c., A.ce., and t.W. 
Supervision: A.ce., c.B., n.K.d.R., and G.G. validation: F.P., c.B., O.J., P.c., M.M., A.ce., n.M., e.G., 
and i.B. visualization: F.P., n.M., O.J., c.B., l.d., M.M., A.ce., e.G., and i.B. Writing–original draft: 
F.P., A.ce., c.B., v.M., A.co., and G.G. Writing–review and editing: all the authors. 
Competing interests: the authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and 
materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in 
the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 19 July 2024 
Accepted 3 January 2025 
Published 31 January 2025 
10.1126/sciadv.adr8511
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on December 09, 2025