8636 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Cite this: Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015,
44, 8636
Metal nanoclusters: novel probes for diagnostic
and therapeutic applications
Yu Tao,ab Mingqiang Li,b Jinsong Rena and Xiaogang Qu*a
Metal nanoclusters, composed of several to a few hundred metal atoms, have received worldwide
attention due to their extraordinary physical and chemical characteristics. Recently, great eﬀorts have been
devoted to the exploration of the potential diagnostic and therapeutic applications of metal nanoclusters.
Here we focus on the recent advances and new horizons in this area, and introduce the rising progress on
the use of metal nanoclusters for biological analysis, biological imaging, therapeutic applications, DNA
assembly and logic gate construction, enzyme mimic catalysis, as well as thermometers and pH meters.
Furthermore, the future challenges in the construction of biofunctional metal nanoclusters for diagnostic
and therapeutic applications are also discussed. We expect that the rapidly growing interest in metal
nanocluster-based theranostic applications will certainly not only fuel the excitement and stimulate
research in this highly active field, but also inspire broader concerns across various disciplines.
1. Introduction
In the last 20 years, researchers investigating nanomaterials
have discovered a lot of new and fascinating characteristics not
found in bulk materials.1 Copious research has concentrated
on the development of metal nanoparticles (42 nm) because of
their promising applications, including optics, sensing, drug
delivery, and catalysis.2–4 Particularly, the discovery of metal
nanoclusters (o2 nm) (e.g., Pt, Au, Ag, Cu) has greatly extended
the horizon of nanomaterials science. Metal nanoclusters, as
defined, composed of several to a few hundred atoms, are a new
kind of luminescent nanomaterial that has attracted a great
deal of attention in recent years.5,6 These nanosystems exhibit
molecule-like characteristics as their size approaches the
Fermi-wavelength of electrons, which endow them an impor-
tant role – the missing link between isolated metal atoms and
plasmonic metal nanoparticles.7–9 Due to the discrete energy
levels, metal nanoclusters possess dramatically different elec-
trical, optical and chemical properties from those of larger
metal nanoparticles.10–14 A distinct feature is their strong photo-
luminescence, combined with facile synthesis, good quantum
yields, tunable fluorescence emission, large Stokes shift and
high photostability.15–18 Conventionally, metal nanoclusters can
be passivated by a monolayer of organic ligands, which result
in high fluorescence intensity.19–23 Recent advances have
a Laboratory of Chemical Biology and State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource
Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Changchun, Jilin 130022,
China. E-mail: xqu@ciac.ac.cn
b University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, China
Yu Tao
Yu Tao received her BS degree
(2009)
from
Nanjing
Normal
University,
China.
She
then
obtained her PhD degree under
the supervision of Prof. Jinsong
Ren from the Chinese Academy of
Sciences in 2015. She is currently
working
as
a
postdoctoral
researcher at the City College of
New York (USA). Her current
scientific interest is focused on
the fabrication of biofunctionalized
metal nanoclusters.
Mingqiang Li
Mingqiang Li received his BS degree
from the University of Science and
Technology of China in 2009. He
then obtained his PhD degree from
the Chinese Academy of Sciences in
2015. He is currently working
as a postdoctoral researcher at
Columbia University. His research
is focused on the development
of polymeric nanomaterials for
biomedical applications.
Received 4th August 2015
DOI: 10.1039/c5cs00607d
www.rsc.org/chemsocrev
Chem Soc Rev
REVIEW ARTICLE
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8637
enabled facile synthesis of hydrosoluble metal nanoclusters
with tunable fluorescence emission in diverse biofunctiona-
lized scaffolds, establishing them as a new kind of biocompa-
tible fluorophore for applications as biological labels. Although
several excellent review papers have been dedicated to metal
nanoclusters,24–31 most of them has mainly focused on the
synthesis of metal nanoclusters. And only a few comprehensive
reviews have been devoted to metal nanoclusters for theranostic
applications, which although are urgently needed.25 In this review,
we will focus on recently discovered theranostic applications
of metal nanoclusters (Scheme 1), including biosensing, bio-
imaging, therapeutic applications, DNA assembly and logic
gate construction, artificial enzymes, as well as metal nano-
cluster based thermometers and pH meters, etc. In addition, we give
a brief outlook on the current challenges and future development
of metal nanocluster-based theranostic agents. For clarity and
illustrating simplicity, the applications discussed in this review are
categorized based on the functions of metal nanoclusters: biological
analysis (Scheme 2), biological imaging, therapeutic applications
(Scheme 3), DNA assembly and logic gate construction, enzyme
mimic catalysis, as well as metal nanocluster based thermometers
and pH meters.
2. Biological analysis
2.1.
Nucleic acid detection
2.1.1.
DNA detection. The detection of nucleic acid is
crucial in disease diagnosis, harmful pathogen identification,
gene therapy and forensic applications.32,33 Silver nanoclusters
(AgNCs) are of great interest owing to their excellent physico-
chemical properties such as high biocompatibility, strong
luminescence and excellent photostability.34–36 DNA-templated
AgNCs display bright fluorescence in solution and have gener-
ated huge research interest in the past decade.6,25,28,37,38 Taking
advantage of the highly DNA sequence- and structure-dependent
spectroscopic features of the AgNCs, they have been widely
utilized for nucleic acid detection. In 2010, Martinez and Werner
found that the dark DNA–AgNCs could be converted into bright
red/green emitters when in close proximity to guanine-/thymine-
rich DNA; particularly the red fluorescence of AgNCs could be
enhanced 500-fold when placed close to guanine-rich (G-rich)
Scheme 1
Representation of recent theranostic applications of biofunc-
tional metal nanoclusters.
Scheme 2
Schematic showing the biological analysis applications of
metal nanoclusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137.
Jinsong Ren
Jinsong
Ren
received
her
BSc
degree
at
Nanjing
University
in
1990,
and
PhD
from
the
Changchun Institute of Applied
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of
Sciences in 1995. From 1996 to
2002, she worked in the School of
Medicine, UMMC and Department
of
Chemistry
and
Chemical
Engineering, California Institute
of Technology. In 2002, she took
a position as a principal investi-
gator at Changchun Institute of
Applied
Chemistry,
Chinese
Academy of Sciences. Her current research is mainly focused on
drug screening and DNA-based nanofunctional materials.
Xiaogang Qu
Xiaogang Qu received his PhD from
the Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS) in 1995 with the President’s
Award of CAS. He moved to USA
afterwards
and
worked
with
Professor J. B. Chaires at the
Mississippi Medical Center and
Nobel Laureate Professor Ahmed
H.
Zewail
at
the
California
Institute
of
Technology.
Since
2002, he has been a professor at
the Changchun Institute of Applied
Chemistry, CAS. From 12/2006 to
05/2007, he visited the group of
Nobel Laureate Professor Alan J. Heeger at UCSB. His current
research is focused on ligand–nucleic acids or related protein inter-
actions,
and
bio-functional
materials
for
advanced
medical
technology.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8638 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
DNA sequences. Due to this phenomenon, they designed a DNA
detection probe that ‘‘lights up’’ upon target binding (Fig. 1a).
This probe showed good sensitivity and high signal-to-background
ratios, which could be successfully applied to detect an influenza
target.39 On the basis of using DNA–AgNCs as the fluorescent
probe and the G-rich overhang as the enhancer, Wang and
colleagues also utilized the strand displacement reactions to detect
DNA (Fig. 1b), in which the detection sensitivity could be further
enhanced through additional Exo III based amplification.40
Besides, Liu et al. developed a novel hairpin DNA probe for
hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface-antigen gene detection, which
simply consisted of three DNA sequences: a nucleation sequence
as the template for AgNC formation, a recognition sequence for
specific targets and a short blocking sequence (Fig. 1c). The
probe was based on target-induced release of the AgNC template
and subsequent in situ generation of AgNCs.41 In addition, by
embedding different recognition sequences, the probes could
also be employed for multiplexed detection of different DNA
targets.42 For further enhancing the detection limits, Lei and
colleagues also proposed a label-free ratiometric fluorescence
strategy based on DNA-regulated AgNCs for sensitive detection of
DNA (Fig. 1d). By regulating the conformation of the probe, two
kinds of AgNCs were successfully one-pot prepared with different
fluorescence properties. Upon introducing target DNA, the tem-
plate of AgNC1 turned into a loop so that the fluorescence
intensity of AgNC1 was enhanced. Meanwhile, fluorescence
intensity of AgNC2 decreased due to the formation of a duplex.
The opposite change led to the large ratios of two fluorescence
intensities from AgNCs, and thus was used to sensitively quantify
target DNA in a ratiometric way. Interestingly, the mismatched
bases could be effectively positioned by comparing the fluores-
cence changes in AgNCs, and thus this phenomenon showed
potential for distinguishing single nucleotide polymorphism.43
In addition to utilization of AgNCs alone as the fluorescent
probes, hybrid systems could also be applied for the develop-
ment of fluorescent DNA sensors. The fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET) based sensing platforms for multiplexed
turn-on analysis of the genes through applying diﬀerent sized
luminescent AgNCs were demonstrated by Willner et al.
(Fig. 2a). The sensing module involved the assembly of three
components composed of a nucleic acid-stabilized AgNCs and
a quencher-modified nucleic acid hybridized with a nucleic
acid scaﬀold that was complementary to the target DNA. The
luminescence of the AgNCs was quenched in the sensing
module nanostructure. The strand displacement of the scaﬀold
by the target DNA separated the DNA–AgNCs and the quencher,
leading to the turned-on luminescence of the AgNCs. By
implementing two different-sized AgNC-modified sensing mod-
ules, the parallel multiplexed analysis of two genes (the Werner
syndrome gene and the HIV, human immunodeficiency, gene),
using 615 and 560 nm luminescent AgNCs, was implemented.
The second sensing module included the nucleic acid function-
alized AgNCs and the quencher-modified nucleic acid hybri-
dized with a hairpin DNA scaffold. Opening of the hairpin by
the target DNA could trigger the luminescence of the AgNCs
due to the spatial separation of the AgNCs/quencher units,
which could also be applied for the multiplexed analysis of two
genes.44 Besides, photoinduced electron transfer (PET) between
AgNCs and G-quadruplex/hemincomplexes, accompanied by a
decrease in the fluorescence of the DNA—AgNCs, was also
applied for DNA detection (Fig. 2b). In the PET process, a
parallel G-quadruplex and the sensing sequences were firstly
blocked by a duplex. The subsequent combination of target
DNA could trigger the release of the G-quadruplex and allow it
to fold properly and bind hemin to form a stable G-quadruplex/
hemin complex, which promoted the electron transfer from the
DNA–AgNCs to the hemin Fe(III) center, thus resulting in the
fluorescence intensity decrease of the AgNCs.45 Furthermore,
nanomaterials were also involved in the development of
AgNC-based DNA sensors (Fig. 2c). Because of the extraordinarily
high quenching efficiency of grapheme oxide (GO), the DNA–
AgNC probe exhibited minimal background fluorescence in the
presence of GO, while strong emission was observed when it
formed a double helix with the specific target DNA, leading to
a high signal-to-background ratio. Moreover, the large planar
surface of GO allowed adsorption of different DNA–AgNC
probes, each with a distinct color emission, leading to a multi-
color sensor for the multiplexed analysis of a series of genes of
infectious pathogens in the same solution.46,47
Besides AgNCs, gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) could also be
utilized for DNA detection. AuNCs comprised of a few tens of
gold atoms have attracted much attention in many areas such
as physics, chemistry, materials science, and biosciences
because of their unique physicochemical properties compared
to those of metallic nanoparticles.48,49 The AuNCs possessing
sizes comparable to the Fermi wavelength of electrons show
excellent molecule-like properties such as discrete electronic
states and size-dependent fluorescence.27,50 Several approaches
for AuNC synthesis in solutions have been developed: including
Scheme 3
Schematic illustration of the therapeutic applications of metal
nanoclusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86, 186, 192, 194, 215
and 217.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8639
(1) chemical reduction of Au(III) ions in the presence of stabiliz-
ing agents; (2) core etching of gold nanoparticles into smaller
NCs by etching molecules; and (3) template-assisted synthesis
inside the cavities of dendrimers or proteins.51 West and
colleagues presented the synthesis of the enzyme DNase 1
stabilized AuNCs (DNase 1–AuNCs) with core size consisting
of either 8 or 25 atoms in a concentration-dependent fashion.
The DNase 1–Au8NCs exhibited blue fluorescence whereas the
DNase 1–Au25NCs exhibited red fluorescence. In addition to the
intense fluorescence emission, the synthesized DNase 1–AuNC
hybrid retained the native functionality of the protein, allowing
simultaneous detection and digestion of DNA with a detection
limit of 2 mg mL1.52
2.1.2.
Single nucleotide polymorphism detection. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are stably inherited types of
sequence variations in the human genome, hence representing
promising disease markers.53 Therefore, sensitive SNP detection
is vital for the development and improvement of diagnostic
assays.54,55 Our group reported the site-specific growth of fluor-
escent AgNCs by using a mismatched double-stranded DNA
template (Fig. 3a). The highly stable and bright fluorescent
AgNCs were found to localize at the mismatched site and
the metalized DNA retained its integrity. As a consequence, the
DNA-encapsulated nanoclusters could be utilized as functional
biological probes to identify SNPs.56 In addition, Wang and
coworkers designed the DNA duplexes with an inserted cytosine
loop as capping scaﬀolds for the generation of fluorescent
AgNCs (Fig. 3b). The formation of fluorescent AgNCs in the
scaﬀolds was highly sequence-dependent and even capable of
identifying a typical single-nucleotide mutation located two
bases away from the nanocluster formation site, in particular
the mutation associated with sickle cell anemia.57 For further
applications of AgNCs in single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) detection, Werner et al. also reported a new type of
Fig. 1
(a) Schematic and data showing the red fluorescence enhancement of DNA-templated silver nanoclusters (DNA–AgNCs) caused by guanine
proximity and its application for specific DNA detection. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. (b) Schematic analysis of DNA and thrombin by the light-
up DNA–AgNC system through strand displacement reactions without/with the help of Exo III. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from the Royal
Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the structure of the hairpin DNA probe and the analysis of the HBV gene using the hairpin DNA probe.
Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of a label-free ratiometric fluorescence strategy
utilizing DNA-regulated AgNCs for DNA detection. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8640 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
fluorescent molecular probe, termed a chameleon nanocluster
beacon (NCB), that lighted up into diﬀerent colors upon binding
distinct SNP targets (Fig. 3c). Depending upon the alignment
between the AgNCs and the DNA enhancer sequence, the fluores-
cence emission color of a NCB could change substantially to
directly detect SNPs by the naked eye under UV excitation. This
SNP detection method was validated on all single-nucleotide
substitution scenarios in three synthetic DNA targets, in six
disease-related SNP targets, and in two clinical samples taken
from patients with ovarian serous borderline tumors.58
Apart from AgNCs, Wang and colleagues also reported that
the fluorescence of double-strand DNA-hosted copper nanoclusters
(CuNCs) could be utilized for the identification of SNPs (Fig. 3d).
Previous reports showed that CuNCs could be eﬃciently synthe-
sized by using poly(thymine) single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) or
random double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) as the template, and the
fluorescence intensity of the ssDNA–CuNCs was dependent on the
length of the DNA template. As for the dsDNA-templated CuNCs,
the fluorescence intensity of CuNCs was very sensitive to the base
type located in the major groove. This intriguing finding provided a
sensitive fluorimetric diagnostic of the mismatch type in a specific
DNA sequence.59
2.1.3.
MicroRNA detection. On the other hand, microRNAs
(miRNAs) are 19–25 nt non-coding RNAs that can bind to the
mRNAs to regulate a plethora of cellular processes, both in
normal physiology and in disease.60–63 Therefore, sensitive quan-
titative analysis of miRNA has become imperative for miRNA
discovery and study, early diagnosis of disease, and discovery of
new anticancer drugs.64–66 In 2012, Vosch and Yang investigated
the influence of the nucleic acid secondary structure on the fast
formation of bright red emissive AgNCs, designed for the detec-
tion of a miRNA sequence (RNA-miR160) (Fig. 4a). The findings
showed that especially the propensity for mismatch self-dimer
formation of the DNA probes could be a good indicator for the
creation and stabilization of red emissive AgNCs. Consequently,
the bright red emissive AgNC-based DNA probe could also be
extended for RNA-miR172 detection.67 After that, they also found
that the red fluorescence of the DNA–AgNC probe was dimin-
ished in the presence of target miRNA without pre- or post
modification, addition of extra enhancer molecules, or labeling.
In addition, the DNA–AgNC probe showed excellent selectivity in
the presence of four other control miRNA sequences, suggesting
Fig. 2
(a) General scheme of the optical detection of a target gene using a
sensing module consisting of a probe template, a nucleic acid protected
AgNCs, and a quencher functionalized nucleic acid. Reprinted with per-
mission from ref. 44. (b) Schematic illustration of the analysis of DNA and
ATP through the photoinduced electron transfer between DNA–AgNCs
and the G-quadruplex/hemin complex. Reprinted with permission from
ref. 45. (c) Schematic representation of the preparation of DNA–AgNCs
and the assay for label-free DNA detection using AgNC–GO nanohybrid
materials. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society
of Chemistry.
Fig. 3
(a) Schematic representation of the site-specific DNA-programmed growth of fluorescent AgNCs for DNA detection. Reprinted with permission
from ref. 56. (b) Schematic illustration of using two diﬀerent DNA duplexes with inserted cytosine loops working as synthetic scaﬀolds to generate
fluorescent silver clusters for the identification of the sickle cell anemia gene mutation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. (c) Chameleon
nanocluster beacon (cNCB, which consists of a NC probe and a G-rich probe) lights up into diﬀerent colors upon binding single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) targets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. (d) Schematic representation of the detection of SNP by using the mismatched
DNA-templated copper nanoclusters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8641
that this DNA–AgNC probe could be developed into a new,
simple, inexpensive, and instant technique for miRNA detec-
tion.68 Moreover, Ye et al. developed a novel method to quantify
miRNA expression levels as low as attomolar sensitivity by target
assisted isothermal exponential amplification coupled with
fluorescent DNA-scaffolded AgNCs and demonstrated its feasi-
bility in the application of detecting miRNA in real samples
(Fig. 4b). The target assisted isothermal exponential amplifica-
tion reaction using the unimolecular DNA template enabled the
effective conversion of miRNA to a great amount of the reporter
oligonucleotides (109-fold) within minutes. The resultant reporter
oligonucleotides could act as scaffolds for the synthesis of fluor-
escent AgNCs and function as signal indicators. This method
showed high selectivity for discriminating differences between
miRNA family members, thus providing a promising alternative
to standard approaches for quantitative detection of miRNA.69 In
addition, a simple miRNA detection system based on hybridization
chain reaction (HCR) was also developed using highly fluorescent
DNA-hosted AgNCs. In this assay, a new type of hairpin DNA probe
containing a poly-cytosine nucleotide loop was designed and used
as one of the HCR monomers. And another HCR monomer (MB2)
contained a poly-guanine nucleotide sticky end.
Initially, the two monomers were stable to coexist in
solution; therefore, the DNA probe containing a poly-cytosine
nucleotide loop could be an ideal template for in situ synthesis
of highly fluorescent AgNCs. After the introduction of the
initiator strand (target miRNA), it was capable of triggering a
cascade of hybridization events that yielded nicked double helix
analogs, which resulted in the decrease of the fluorescence
signal greatly. This method allowed the sensitive detection of
let-7a miRNA with high specificity towards single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the let-7miRNA family.70 Besides their
highly fluorescence properties, the DNA–AgNCs could also be
applied for the sensitive and label-free miRNA detection based
on their effective electrocatalytic activity (Fig. 4c). The functional
oligonucleotide probe integrated both the recognition sequence
for hybridization and the template sequence for in situ synthesis
of AgNCs, which appeared to possess exceptional metal mimic
Fig. 4
(a) Schematic representation of the microRNA detection by virtue of the propensity for mismatch self-dimer formation of the DNA probes, which
can be a good indicator for the creation and stabilization of red emissive AgNCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. (b) Detection of microRNA with
attomolar sensitivity based on target-assisted isothermal exponential amplification (TAIEA) coupled with fluorescent DNA-scaﬀolded AgNCs. Reprinted
with permission from ref. 69. (c) Illustration of electrochemical detection of microRNA using oligonucleotide encapsulated AgNCs. Reprinted with
permission from ref. 71. (d) Schematic showing microRNA detection based on the principle of the RCR-mediated concatemeric dsDNA–CuNC strategy.
Reprinted with permission from ref. 72.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8642 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
enzyme properties for catalyzing H2O2 reduction. The miRNA
assay employed gold electrodes to immobilize the molecular
beacon (MB) probe. After the MB probe subsequently hybridized
with the target and functional probe, the oligonucleotide encap-
sulated AgNCs were brought to the electrode surface and pro-
duced a detection signal, in response to H2O2 reduction. This
label-free electrochemical assay of miRNA exhibited an ultra-
sensitive detection limit of 67 fM with a linear range of 5 orders
of magnitude and high selectivity.71 In addition to AgNCs, a
novel concatemeric dsDNA-templated CuNC (dsDNA–CuNC)
strategy was also proposed for miRNA detection by introducing
the rolling circle replication (RCR) technique into CuNC synth-
esis (Fig. 4d). The target miRNA as the primer could trigger RCR
and be further converted to a long concatemeric dsDNA scaffold
through hybridization, which was capable of being used as the
template to synthesize CuNCs, with a high detection limit of
10 pM.72 Recently, our group also successfully obtained a novel
enzyme-free amplified platform for selective and quantitative
detection of cancer cells and miRNAs by rationally combining
hybridization chain reaction and CuNCs. The protocol relied on
the target triggered formation of dsDNA polymers and in situ
formation of CuNCs with strong fluorescence intensity, with a
detection limit of 0.25 nM for microRNA-21.73 Moreover, AuNCs
could also be utilized for miRNA detection by a maximal signal
amplification protocol of catalytic silver deposition. AuNCs were
successfully synthesized and in situ incorporated into the protein
matrix of alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The so-incorporated
AuNCs could dramatically enhance the catalysis activities of
ALP–AuNCs in catalytic dephosphorylation and silver deposition
reactions compared to native ALP. A sandwiched hybridization
protocol was then proposed using ALP–AuNCs as the catalytic
labels of the DNA detection probes for targeting miRNAs that
were magnetically caught from blood samples by DNA capture
probes, followed by the catalytic ligation of two DNA probes
complementary to the targets. Then the electroanalysis strategy
through the ALP–AuNC-catalyzed silver deposition was devel-
oped with the detection limit as low as 21.5 aM, including the
accurate identification of single-base mutant levels in miRNAs.
Such an electroanalysis detection method for miRNAs might
hold great potential for applications in the clinical laboratory for
the diagnosis of cancer and the warning of cancer metastasis.74
2.2.
Protein detection
The presence of certain biomarker proteins and/or irregular
protein concentrations is a sign of cancer and other disease
states.75,76 Therefore, sensitive, convenient and precise protein
detection is of utmost importance to the early diagnosis of
diseases and successful treatment of patients. However, protein
detection is a challenging problem owing to the structural
diversity and complexity of the target analytes.77 So far, aptamers
have been widely used for protein detection. Protein aptamers are
functional DNA or RNA structures that can recognize certain
proteins with high aﬃnity. Detection systems based on aptamers
for thrombin are introduced.78 Thrombin is one of the key path-
way proteins in the coagulation cascade and has been implicated
in many diseases.79,80 Martinez and coworkers synthesized an
intrinsically fluorescent recognition ligand that combined the
highly fluorescent DNA–AgNCs with thrombin aptamers for the
target protein recognition (Fig. 5a). Upon addition of target
thrombin, DNA–AgNCs showed significant quenching resulting
from the binding of native thrombin with its aptamer sequence,
which developed an efficient strategy for the detection of specific
thrombin proteins.81 Zhu and Le presented a binding-induced
fluorescence turn-on assay for thrombin detection. Key features of
this assay included aptamer binding-induced DNA hybridization
in the presence of target proteins and fluorescence enhancement
of AgNCs using guanine-rich DNA sequences. Using this approach,
a detection limit of 1 nM and a linear dynamic range of 5 nM–2 mM
were achieved for human a-thrombin.82 Moreover, the DNA–Ag/
PtNCs were also successfully prepared by using a C-rich DNA
template, which possessed highly efficient peroxidase-mimicking
activity. With this finding, an aptamer based sandwich-type strat-
egy was employed to design a label-free colorimetric aptasensor for
thrombin detection with high sensitivity and selectivity.83
Except AgNCs, AuNCs can also be eﬀectively applied for
protein
detection.
Protein-encapsulated
gold
nanoclusters
(protein–AuNCs) are gaining substantial interest because of
their bright photoluminescence and ease of synthesis.84 Wide
applications have been explored within a short period, espe-
cially in the field of biosensing.85–88 Zhang et al. found that
the fluorescence intensity of protein-directed synthesized
AuNCs could be enhanced significantly on plasmonic sub-
strates. Moreover, protein analytes could interact with AuNCs
and influence the enhanced fluorescence process differently
so that distinct fluorescence image patterns could be obtained.
Using the array-based sensing strategy, five AuNCs were used
as sensing elements and ten kinds of proteins at three
concentrations were successfully discriminated (Fig. 5b).89
Similarly, Chang and He designed and synthesized a series
of dual-ligand co functionalized fluorescent AuNCs with similar
fluorescence and diverse surface properties to build a protein
sensing array. Using the ‘‘chemical nose/tongue’’ strategy,
eight proteins have been well distinguished at low concen-
tration. The practicability of this sensor array was further
validated by high accuracy (100%) examination of 48 unknown
protein samples.90
Fig. 5
(a) Schematic of aptamer–nanocluster–DNA templated AgNCs for
detection of the thrombin protein. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permis-
sion from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic of the sensor
array. The presence of protein analytes changes the plasmon-enhanced
fluorescence profiles of five AuNCs distinctly, which can be used for
protein discrimination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. (c) A
schematic illustrating fluorescence detection of proteases using protein-
protected AuNCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8643
As one kind of special protein, protein enzymes play essential
roles in many biochemical processes, and often aberrations in
the enzyme expression level have been associated with many
diseases.91,92 Therefore, the development of highly sensitive,
simple, rapid, and real-time methods for detecting enzyme
activity is of critical importance in biomedical studies.93
Proteases are a major class of enzymes that catalyze the
hydrolysis of peptide bonds to break down proteins into
smaller pieces,94 which are present in all living cells and
organisms and play a pivotal role in the development and
control of many biological processes.95 Therefore, monitoring
the change of the concentrations of proteases attracts a great
deal of attention as alternations in the level of proteases
directly link to a number of diseases associated with cancer,
arthritis, as well as neurodegenerative and cardiovascular dis-
eases.96,97 Xia et al. demonstrated a nanoscale platform based
on protein-protected AuNCs for the fluorescence detection of
proteases with high sensitivity and selectivity (Fig. 5c). The
detection was based on the concept that the protein shell could
serve as a protective layer to prevent the fluorescent AuNCs
from being exposed to the O2 from ambient air. When the
protein shell was degraded by protease, the O2 molecules could
quickly access the AuNCs and thus quench the fluorescence,
providing a one-step and low cost approach for protease detec-
tion.98 Protein post-translational modifications (PTMs), which
are most often mediated by enzymes, play key roles in func-
tional proteomics.99 Identification and quantification of PTM
enzymes, thus, is critical in the study of cell functioning and
development of diagnostic and therapeutic tools.100 Jiang and
Tang developed a simple, rapid method for highly fluorescent
AuNC synthesis with diﬀerent peptide templates and discovered
that PTM enzymes were capable of exerting chemical modifica-
tions on the peptide-templated AuNCs and quench the AuNCs’
fluorescence, which furnished the development of a real-time
and label-free sensing strategy for PTM enzymes. Two PTM
enzymes, histone deacetylase 1 and protein kinase A, were
employed to demonstrate the feasibility of this fluorescent
nanocluster beacon, and subpicomolar detection limits were
readily achieved for both enzymes.101 Yu and Lin utilized
substrate hydrolysis to trigger a ‘‘top-down’’ etching process
for the generation of fluorescent gold nanoclusters, and the
turn-on changes in emission intensity of the assay solution
provide a facile way for sensing the hydrolytic enzyme (esterase
and alkaline phosphatase as examples) activity.102 In addition,
Wang and Li also built a sensitive and selective ratiometric
fluorescent sensing platform for the detection of tyrosinase
activity and dopamine (DA) using glutathione (GSH) protected
AuNCs as probes. Upon excitation at 350 nm, AuNCs displayed
an intense red emission, which could be eﬀectively quenched
by quinones. Tyrosinase, a typical polyphenol oxidase, can
catalyze the oxidization of DA to o-quinone and therefore
quenched the fluorescence of AuNCs. Moreover, the reaction
of tyrosinase and DA gave rise to an emission band at 400 nm,
which increased in a tyrosinase/DA-concentration-dependent
manner. The ratiometric signal variations were utilized for
facile, sensitive, and selective detection of tyrosinase activity
and DA. Additionally, it became a useful platform for tyrosinase
inhibitor screening in biomedical research.103
Due to the eﬀect of enzymes on the structures of the DNA
templates of AgNCs, AgNCs could also be utilized for enzyme
detection. Through introducing an aptamer region for adeno-
sine assembly, Zhu et al. developed a new strategy for the assay
of adenosine deaminase (ADA, an important enzyme in various
human tissues and played a crucial role in the diﬀerentiation
and maturation of the lymphoid system) by utilizing DNA-
templated AgNCs. At first, the adenosine aptamer region
formed a close-packed tight structure in the presence of adeno-
sine, therefore no AgNCs were observed. Upon addition of ADA,
adenosine was converted to inosine, which made the oligo-
nucleotide flexible. Consequently, the complementary part of
the oligonucleotide could hybridize with an adenosine aptamer.
The complementary part and the inserted six base cytosine-loop
could work as an eﬃcient template to generate red-emitting
stabilized fluorescent AgNCs. The intensity of the fluorescence
signal might thereby determine the concentration of the enzyme
and its inhibitor.104 By inducing the aptamer region as part of the
template, Ye and coworkers also demonstrated a simple and
reliable fluorescent molecular beacon for adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) and ADA detection through utilizing DNA-templated AgNCs
as a signal indicator. The ATP-induced conformational alteration
in the template facilitated the proximity of the G-rich overhang
region and the as-prepared AgNCs, resulting in the fluorescence
enhancement of AgNCs and enabling the detection of the analyte,
ATP. Meanwhile, ADA could transform ATP into inosine triphos-
phate (ITP), resulting in the conformational recovery of the aptamer
and fluorescence decrement of AgNCs. It was a green chemical
assay in a label-free format, avoiding the need for designing
complicated fluorescent sensors and the use of organic solvents.105
Similarly, a simple and sensitive fluorescence method for monitor-
ing the activity and inhibition of protein kinase (PKA) using
polycytosine oligonucleotide (dC12)-templated AgNCs was also
proposed by Wang and Yang. The detection was based on the
adenosine-5-triphosphate (ATP)-induced fluorescence enhance-
ment of AgNCs and then the hydrolysis of ATP by PKA. The
method exhibited high sensitivity, good selectivity, and a wide
linear range toward PKA detection. A selected PKA inhibitor,
H-89, was used as a model system for assaying PKA inhibition.
The sensing protocol was also applied for the assay of drug-
stimulated activation of PKA in HeLa cell lysates.106 In addition,
Zhang et al. developed a reliable and sensitive method for
nuclease activity assay by combining the high specificity of
DNA cleavage reactions with ultra high fluorescence turn-on
abilities of G-rich DNA sequences in close proximity to AgNCs.
When the AgNCs were exposed to the targeted endonucleases,
specific DNA cleavages occurred, and pieces of G-rich DNA
fragments separated from AgNCs, resulting in fluorescence
turn-oﬀ, with a detection limit of 3.5  104 U mL1.107
Similarly, they also developed a fluorescence turn-on assay
using DNA–AgNCs for rapid, ultra sensitive assay of acetylcho-
linesterase (AChE), which had pivotal functions in Alzheimer’s
disease, inflammatory processes, and nerve-agent poisoning.108
The detection mechanism was based on the concept that AChE
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8644 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
could hydrolyze acetylthiocholine (ATCh) chloride to produce
thiocholine (TCh). Subsequently, TCh sensitively and rapidly
reacted with AgNCs via Ag–S bond formation and enhanced the
fluorescence of AgNCs. AChE could be detected as low as 0.5 
104 U mL1 with a linear range from 0.1 to 1.25  103 U mL1.109
As a new type of luminescent bioprobe, CuNCs could also
be applied for enzyme detection. He et al. exploited the
dsDNA-specific fluorescent CuNCs as the ‘‘green’’ nano-dye
for polymerization-mediated biochemical analysis. The target
was capable of inducing the formation of a complementary
primer–template complex and subsequent primer-extension
reaction, generating dsDNA which could efficiently template
the formation of fluorescent CuNCs. The feasibility of the
proposed strategy was verified by polymerase detection.110 In
addition, on the basis of the inhibition of double strand DNA
(dsDNA)-templated fluorescent CuNC formation by pyrophos-
phate (PPi), Yu and Jiang developed a novel label-free turn-on
fluorescent strategy to detect alkaline phosphatase (ALP) under
physiological conditions. Initially, there were strong inter-
actions between PPi and Cu2+, which would hamper the effective
synthesis of fluorescent CuNCs. Subsequently, the ALP-catalyzed
PPi hydrolysis would disable the complexation between Cu2+
and PPi, facilitating the formation of fluorescent CuNCs. The
proposed method using a PPi substrate might hold potential
application in diagnosis of ALP-related diseases or evaluation of
ALP functions in biological systems.111 Apart from the dsDNA
template, the poly(thymine) (poly T) sequence could also be used
as a template for copper nanocluster formation. Wang et al.
reported for the first time the example of using poly T-templated
CuNCs to develop a novel ultrasensitive label-free method for the
nuclease (S1 nuclease as a model system) assay, and its inhibitor
screening using the poly T-templated fluorescent CuNCs. T30
kept the original long state in the absence of nuclease, which
could effectively template the formation of fluorescent CuNCs.
In the presence of nuclease, poly T was digested to mono- or
oligonucleotide fragments with decrease of fluorescence, which
could be recognized as a signal for the detection of nuclease
activity.112
2.3.
Detection of other small biomolecules
Metal nanoclusters could also be applied in label-free detection
of small biomolecules, such as urea, dopamine, glucose, bio-
logical thiols, theophylline, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
guanosine-30-diphosphate-50-diphosphate (ppGpp). Urea is a
byproduct of protein metabolism that is formed in the liver,
carried by the blood and excreted through the kidney in urine.
Therefore, urea is an important marker for evaluating uremic
toxin levels, as well as kidney and hepatocellular functions.113
Urea detection is also important in the estimation of non-protein
nitrogen in food products such as milk since it is known that
urea adulteration is utilized as an indicator of protein feeding
eﬃciency.114 Jayasree and Ajayaghosh developed urease function-
alized AuNCs as a new NIR emitting biosensor for the direct
detection of urea (Fig. 6a). The AuNCs could be physically
Fig. 6
(a) Schematic representations of the preparation of AuNCs, AuNC@urease and a representation of the mechanism of fluorescence quenching in
the presence of urea. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. (b) Schematic illustration of the fluorescence response and peroxidase-like catalytic color
reaction of the BSA–AuNCs to dopamine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. (c) Highly reactive oxygen species (hROS) detection using the dual-
emission fluorescent nanocomplex constructed by a crown nanoparticle assembly with a core dye-encapsulated silica particle and multiple satellite
AuNCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. (d) Schematic illustration of the construction of carbon dot and gold nanocluster binary heterogeneous
nanocomplexes (C-dot–AuNCs), as well as the working principle for the detection of hROS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8645
entrapped within the urease to form AuNC@urease. Sub-
sequently, in the presence of urea associated with an enzyme
specific conversion, NIR fluorescence emission of AuNCs was
reduced as a result of pH-induced aggregation of AuNCs. The
generality of the nanosensor was demonstrated by detecting urea
in whole blood and adulterated milk samples.114 Recently, Chen
et al. reported for the first time a facile synthetic process of
AuNCs by using N-acetyl-L-cysteine as both a reducing agent and
a protection ligand. Based on the pH stimuli-responsive proper-
ties of the as-prepared AuNCs and the pH changes upon the
biochemical reactions, a pH-sensing platform for the detection
of urea, urease, and urease inhibitors was also constructed.115
Dopamine (DA), an important catecholamine neurotransmitter,
plays a vital role in the function of the central nervous, renal,
hormonal, and cardiovascular systems.116,117 Abnormal DA con-
centrations in the brain may result in serious diseases such as
Parkinsonism, where DA levels are reduced, and schizophrenia,
which can be related to excess DA activity.118,119 Thus, given the
wide range of physiological and pathophysiological eﬀects of DA,
precise DA determination is of great clinical importance. For the
first time, our group described the use of bovine serum albumin
(BSA)-stabilized AuNCs as a novel platform for simple, reliable,
highly sensitive and selective fluorescence and colorimetric sen-
sing of DA (Fig. 6b). The as-prepared BSA–AuNCs exhibited strong
fluorescence and high peroxidase-like activity. In the presence of
dopamine, the fluorescence intensity of the AuNCs decreased
significantly through a photoinduced electron transfer process.
Meanwhile, as the catalytic activity of AuNCs was extremely
sensitive to surface properties, their enzyme-like activity could be
efficiently restrained after their interaction with dopamine. Both
methods exhibited high sensitivity and excellent selectivity
toward dopamine over other interfering substances. More impor-
tantly, we demonstrated the application of the present method
in hydrochloride injection samples, human serum samples and
PC12 cells.120
Glucose is one of the most significant brain components
in the biological systems.121 The level of brain glucose in vivo
can provide useful information on brain activity related to
brain energy metabolism and be an indicator of acute human
brain injuries, such as stroke.122 Li and Qi developed a
ratiometric fluorescent probe for sensing glucose. In their
approach, the AuNCs protected by ovalbumin acted as the
reference for the fluorophore and the Alizarin Red S–3-amino-
phenyl boronic acid immobilized on the poly(N-acryloxy-
succinimide) acted as both the response signal and the
specific recognition unit for sensing glucose. Once the ratio-
metric fluorescent probe reacted with glucose in the biological
system, the fluorescence of Alizarin Red S was quenched,
while the fluorescence of AuNCs was essentially unchanged.
As a result, the present ratiometric fluorescent probe was
successfully used for monitoring glucose in the rat brain
following the cerebral calm/ischemia.123
Biological thiols, such as cysteine (Cys), homocysteine (Hcy),
and glutathione (GSH), play vital roles in maintaining cellular
functions and human physiology. Abnormal levels of biological
thiols have been linked to a number of diseases, such as
leukocyte loss, psoriasis, hair depigmentation, liver damage,
cancer, and AIDS.124 Based on the fact that the fluorescence
response pattern of a silver nanocluster to a specific analyte was
highly dependent on the nature of the DNA template, our group
developed a novel fluorescence turn-on assay for thiol com-
pounds with high sensitivity by modulating DNA-templated
silver nanoclusters. Importantly, the protocol oﬀered high
specificity for the determination of biothiols among amino
acids found in proteins, as well as detection in serum samples.125
Cysteine (Cys), a sulfur containing amino acid, plays a role in a
variety of fundamental physiological processes in organisms.
Irregular amounts of Cys may be associated with many human
diseases, such as slow growth, edema, lethargy, loss of muscle and
fat, skin lesions, and weakness.126 Therefore, it is of considerable
significance to develop highly sensitive and selective probes for
Cys.127 Xie et al. developed a new and simple method to detect Cys
with high selectivity and sensitivity using highly fluorescent
AgNCs, where both physicochemical properties (Ag surface chemi-
stry and fluorescence) of the NC core and physical properties
(e.g., steric hindrance) of the organic shell of GSH–AgNCs were
fully utilized for Cys detection. AgNCs protected by GSH showed
superior selectivity for Cys over the other 19 natural amino acids
(nonthiol-containing) due to the specific thiol–Ag interaction.
Importantly, the GSH protecting layer on the NC surface made
possible the differentiation of Cys from GSH (or other large-sized
thiol molecules) simply by their size.128
Park et al. showed the application of the abasic site-
incorporated duplex DNA-templated AgNCs as a probe for theo-
phylline detection. The strategy relied on theophylline-controlled
formation of fluorescent AgNCs from abasic site-incorporated
duplex DNA. When theophylline was not present, silver ions
interacted with the cytosine groups opposite to the abasic site in
duplex DNA, which led to the eﬃcient formation of intensely red
fluorescent AgNCs. In contrast, when theophylline was bound at
the abasic site through pseudo base pairing with appropriately
positioned cytosines, silver ions binding to cytosine nucleobases
were prevented. Consequently, fluorescent AgNCs were not
formed causing a significant reduction of the fluorescence
signal. This new sensor exhibited excellent selectivity and high
sensitivity with a detection limit as low as 1.8 mM, and could be
used in detecting theophylline in human blood serum.129
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are related to a variety of
pathogenic processes, including inflammation, carcinogenesis,
ischemia-reperfusion injury, and signal transduction.130 While
a moderate level of ROS is involved in normal cell functions,
excessive amounts of ROS, especially highly reactive oxygen
species (hROS), can directly damage critical components of
cells at all levels including protein, DNA, and lipids by oxidation.
Therefore, probes for detecting ROS are crucially important for
both understanding the etiology of the disease and optimizing
therapeutic interventions. Based on the new finding that the
strong fluorescence of AuNCs could be sensitively and selec-
tively quenched by the highly reactive oxygen species (hROS),
Chu and coworkers developed a novel dual-emission fluores-
cent nanocomplex through the crown-like assembly of a core
dye-encapsulated silica particle with satellite AuNCs for live cell
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8646 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
imaging of hROS, including OH, ClO and ONOO (Fig. 6c).131
Recently, our group demonstrated a facile one-step synthesis
of binary heterogeneous C-dot–AuNCs assembled from C-dots
and AuNCs for ratiometric detection of hROS both in vitro and
in vivo (Fig. 6d). The assembly endowed C-dot–AuNCs with
improved performance such as the fluorescence enhancement
of AuNCs and stability of C-dots to ROS. And the dual-emission
property allowed sensitive imaging and monitoring of hROS
signaling in living cells with high contrast. Importantly, with
good photostability and excellent biocompatibility, this designed
nanoprobe allowed for the detection of ROS in the model of local
ear inflammation.132 In contrast, Tian et al. developed a ratio-
metric fluorescent biosensor for OH, in which AuNCs protected
by BSA were employed as a reference fluorophore and the
organic molecule 2-[6-(4-hydroxy)phenoxy-3H-xanthen-3-on-9-yl]
benzoic acid (HPF) acted as both the response signal and the
specific recognition element for OH. The nonfluorescent HPF
became highly fluorescent with the emission at 515 nm in the
presence of OH, while the emission of AuNCs at 637 nm
remained constant, resulting in a ratiometric determination of
OH. The developed fluorescent sensor exhibited high selectivity
for OH over other reactive oxygen species (ROS), and it could be
successfully used for bioimaging and monitoring of
OH
changes in live cells upon oxidative stress.133 Zhang’s group also
reported a new strategy to construct enzyme functionalized
fluorescent AuNCs via a biomineralization process for the detec-
tion of hydrogen peroxide. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was
used as a model functional template to direct the synthesis
of fluorescent AuNCs under physiological conditions to form
HRP–AuNCs. In addition, the fluorescence of HRP–AuNCs could
be quenched quantitatively by adding H2O2, with a detection
limit of 30 nM, indicating that the HRP enzyme remained active
and enabled catalytic reaction of HRP–AuNCs and H2O2.134
In addition, Huang and coworkers established a facile
strategy for highly selective and sensitive detection of bacterial
alarmone, guanosine-30-diphosphate-50-diphosphate (ppGpp),
which was generated when bacteria face stress circumstances
such as nutritional deprivation, by developing a Cu2+-mediated
oﬀ–on fluorescent probe of AgNCs.135
2.4.
Immunoassay
Apart from that, AuNCs could also serve as the probes for
immunoassay. In 2011, Zhu et al. firstly developed a portable,
low-cost optical immune sensor using environmentally friendly
AuNCs as signal amplification labels. Human IgG served as a
model to demonstrate the performance of the proposed sensor.
Through sandwiched immune reaction, IgG could be qualita-
tively and quantitatively determined by colorimetry, the fluores-
cence method, as well as eye observation according to the
clinical requirement. Based on the dual signal amplification
of AuNCs and silver enhancement, the sensitivity was improved
to 0.005 ng mL1.136 Porous CaCO3 spheres were also used for
loading of AuNCs to fabricate CaCO3/AuNC hybrids through
electrostatic interactions, which further assembled horseradish
peroxidase/antibody conjugates (HRPAb2). By using CaCO3/AuNC/
HRPAb2 bioconjugates as probes, a versatile immunosensor was
developed for fluorescent and electrochemical detection of the
cancer biomarker neuron-specific enolase (NSE), with the
detection limits of 2.0 and 0.1 pg mL1 for fluorescence and
electrochemical detection, respectively.137 Besides, Zhu et al.
also fabricated a multifunctional boron nitride/gold nano-
cluster composite, which could be used as a fluorescent or
electrochemical label for immunosensing in the sensitive
detection of interleukin-6.138
3. Biological imaging
3.1.
Cell imaging in vitro
Dickson et al. have carried out a lot of studies focusing on
the cell imaging based on the AgNCs. In 2007, Dickson et al.
developed the peptide-protected fluorescent AgNCs for eﬃcient
cellular imaging (Fig. 7a). In situ silver-stained cells strongly
supported the observation of fluorescent AgNCs in cells, indi-
cating that nucleolin as well as other argyrophilic proteins
could be very useful guides for biocompatible AgNC prepara-
tion.139 Afterwards, Dickson and co-workers reported a fluoro-
genic cluster shuttle through DNA-triggered AgNC transfer in
2009 (Fig. 7b). In this system, poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)-templated
AgNCs were readily transferred from a PAA template to
cytosine(C)-rich oligonucleotides, owing to their high aﬃnity
to C-rich single-stranded DNA, resulting in a 10-fold increase in
cluster brightness. This moderate selectivity allowed AgNC
transfer to ssDNA-tagged proteins with little interference from
other cellular components. And the brightness and photostability
advantages of AgNCs could be utilized for higher sensitivity
imaging.140 Subsequently, Dickson and Tzeng also synthesized
thermally and cell-culture medium stable AgNCs through tailored
oligonucleotide scaﬀolds, which could be used as the eﬃcient
probes for both fixed and live-cell imaging.141
Through introducing the DNA aptamers, the aptamer-
functionalized AgNCs were also successfully applied for cell
targeting and imaging. Zhu et al. presented a strategy to
synthesize AS1411-functionalized AgNCs with excellent fluores-
cence. AS1411 is an antiproliferative G-rich phosphodiester
oligonucleotide and currently an anticancer agent under phase
II clinical trials.142 Intriguingly, AS1411 shows high binding
aﬃnity to nucleolin when it forms a stable G-quadruplex
structure.143 As a result, AS1411-functionalized AgNCs were
eﬃciently internalized into MCF-7 human breast cancer cells
and were capable of specifically staining nuclei with red color.
In addition, 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazolz-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay demonstrated that the AgNCs were cyto-
compatible and showed better inhibition eﬀects than pure
AS1411 on MCF-7 human breast cancer cells.142 Apart from
AS1411, the Sgc8c aptamer could also be useful for cell recogni-
tion. Sgc8c is a cell-specific DNA aptamer which is selected
against CCRF-CEM cells (CCL-119 T-cells, human acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia) through the cell-SELEX process.144 It can
bind human protein tyrosine kinase-7 (PTK 7) on the surface of
the target lymphoblastic leukemia cell and be internalized
eﬃciently.145 Gao et al. synthesized the silver cluster–Sgc8c
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8647
aptamer hybrids, which were successfully used to target the
nucleus of live cells.146 Similarly, by using the Sgc8c aptamer,
Wang et al. also developed a strategy that allowed the genera-
tion of intrinsically fluorescent AgNC–aptamer assemblies for
cell recognition through a convenient one-step process. The
effect of linkers with different base types and base numbers on
the fluorescence of AgNCs was systematically investigated. The
optimal fluorescent Sgc8c–AgNCs exhibited specific binding to
target CCRF-CEM cells by using a six-base adenine linker.147
Inspired by the phenomenon that dark AgNCs could be con-
verted into bright red emitters when in close proximity to G-rich
DNA, Wang et al. also presented a label-free and turn-on
aptamer strategy for cancer cell detection based on the
recognition-induced conformation alteration of the aptamer
and the hybridization-induced fluorescence enhancement effect
of DNA–AgNCs in close proximity to G-rich DNA sequences. By
using the aptamer Sgc8c, the CCRF-CEM cancer cell detection
was performed with a detection limit of as low as 150 CCRF-CEM
cells in 200 mL binding buffer.148 Zhu and coworkers also designed a
novel multifunctional DNA scaffold composed of the Sgc8c aptamer,
a fluorescent AgNC nucleation sequence and a complementary
sequence against target mRNA, for the preparation of fluorescent
AgNCs. The obtained DNA–AgNCs presented a ‘‘light-up’’ and
‘‘spectrum-shift’’ response to target mRNA, providing an easy way
to image the tumor-related mRNA in living cells.149
Apart from DNA-templated AgNCs, blue-green, yellow and red
emitting AgNCs protected by GSH have been produced by
collecting them on a plastic surface during an interfacial etching
process. Cell studies confirmed the uptake of AgNCs in epithelial
lung cancer cells by an endocytotic process, indicating the high
potential of fluorescent AgNCs for biolabeling and imaging.35
As compared to AgNCs, AuNCs may be more suitable for cell
imaging because of their exceptional near-infrared lumines-
cence properties and excellent colloidal stabilities. Nienhaus
et al. reported a facile strategy to synthesize water-soluble
fluorescent gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) stabilized with the
bidentate ligand dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA). Their long fluores-
cence lifetime (4100 ns) makes them attractive labels in
fluorescence lifetime imaging applications (Fig. 7c).150 Wang
et al. reported a facile synthesis of AuNCs with diﬀerent optical
properties by using chiral penicillamines as capping agents. It
was the first time that the reversal of circular dichroism (CD)
signals after the scaﬀolds adsorbed onto the surface of AuNCs
could be observed. Due to the good biocompatibility and
photostability of AuNCs, such synthesized AuNCs were also
utilized for the optical imaging of live HeLa cells using confocal
microscopy.151 Chen et al. reported that GSH could significantly
and selectively enhance the fluorescence intensity of AuNCs
prepared by blending HAuCl4 and histidine in solution. The
GSH-capped Au NCs showed much less cytotoxicity to both
normal and cancer cells, as compared to those without GSH.
Most importantly, AuNCs without GSH could selectively image
the cancer cells, especially for the liver cancer cells whose GSH
content was much higher than other cell types, making the
AuNCs a powerful probe to distinguish cancer cells from
normal cells.49 In addition, Xu et al. also investigated the
one- and two-photon excitation emission properties of water-
soluble GSH monolayer protected AuNCs. Strong one and two-
photon emission was observed from the AuNCs, making them a
promising alternative for one- and two-photon bio-imaging
applications.152 Gao et al. also developed a facile method to
produce peptide–AuNCs using a bifunctional peptide (Fig. 7d).
Upon introducing the nucleus targeting peptide domain, the
AuNCs exhibited red emission, possessed a distinct molecular
Fig. 7
(a) Emission from formaldehyde-fixed NIH3T3 cells loaded with
100 mM silver nitrate for 20 h. (A) Fluorescence image; the inset is the
intensity profile along the line drawn across the cell. (B–D) Colocalization
of silver and SYTO RNASelect staining; (B) emission from RNASelect
fluorescence; (C) emission from silver clusters; (D) merge of (B) and (C).
Scale bar: 30 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. (b) Bovine
pulmonary artery endothelial cells (BPAECs) stained with anti-actin Ab/C12
(actinC12) and visualized by silver nanocluster (AgNC) transfer. Fluores-
cence images of BPAEC from (A) AgNCs and (B) FITC tagged to actinC12 to
indicate the location of actin, with colocalization in (C). Brightness com-
parison between Cy3-labeled (D) and AgNCs-labeled (E) cells under
identical staining and imaging conditions. The scale bar is 25 mm. Reprinted
with permission from ref. 140. (c) Intensity (A and C) and fluorescence
lifetime imaging (FLIM) (B and D) images of cells only (A and B) and cell
incubated with 100 mg mL1 dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA)-capped AuNCs for
1 h (C and D). Scale bar: 10 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. (d)
A schematic illustration of peptide–Au cluster formation. A confocal image
of HeLa cells stained with the CCYTAT–Au clusters. The CCYTAT–Au
clusters exhibit red emission; Hoechst 33342, which has blue emission,
was used as a reference for nucleus staining. Reproduced from ref. 153
with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Synthesis of BSA–
AuNCs and multimodal nanoparticles (MNPs). Fluorescence and overlaid
images of H1650 cells treated with (A–C) MNP–epidermal growth factor
(MNP–EGF) conjugates (red) and syto 21 (green), and (D–F) AuNC–EGF
conjugates (red) and syto 21 (green). (G–I) MTT assay histograms for (G)
Fe3O4, (H) AuNCs and (I) MNPs. (J) Bright-field image and (K) fluorescence
image of (a) cell pellets without and (b) with labeling using MNPs. (L) T1-
and (M) T2-weighted MRI of (i) PBS, (ii) AuNCs, and cells labeled (iii) without
and (iv) with MNPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8648 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
composition and specifically targeted the nucleus of three
kinds of cell lines without any further modification, providing
a new choice for specific cell nuclei staining.153
Aside from small biomolecule-protected AuNCs, nontoxic and
highly bright protein–AuNCs may also be considered suitable
candidates for cellular imaging. BSA–AuNCs could be synthesized
through the core etching of mercaptosuccinic acid protected gold
nanoparticles. Folic acid conjugated BSA–AuNCs were found to be
internalized to a significant extent by oral carcinoma KB cells
through folic acid mediated endocytosis, which could be used in
cell imaging.154 Gue´vel et al. loaded the fluorescent BSA–AuNCs
inside 100 nm silica nanoparticles using a modified-Sto¨ber
method. These nanoparticles showed a high monodispersity
and stability over more than 5 months. Steady state fluores-
cence and lifetime measurements indicated the role of silica
as a protective host to improve the photostability and the
chemical stability of the fluorescent compound. Cell experi-
ments performed on lung tumor cells confirmed the potential
of fluorescent AuNCs doped in silica nanoparticles for imaging
application.155 Biju et al. fabricated the multimodal nano-
particles by the conjugation of biotinylated NIR-fluorescent
BSA–AuNCs to streptavidin-functionalized Fe3O4 nanoparticles
(Fig. 7e). Upon the conjugation of the epidermal growth factor
(EGF) to the Fe3O4 nanoparticles, the Fe3O4 nanoparticles and
AuNCs could be efficiently delivered into the cells, combining
NIR fluorescence and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for
live cell imaging. Another interesting property of AuNCs was
the long-living excited state (4500 ns), which was sufficient to
sensitize dissolved oxygen and produce 1O2. Therefore, the
green fluorescence of the endoperoxide of the singlet oxygen
sensor green (SOSG) dye triggered by 1O2 provided the third
modality for live cell imaging.156 These nanoparticles were
applied as contrast agents in various noninvasive diagnostic
imaging techniques, representing highly promising platforms
for the development of imaging probes. The incorporation of
other proteins for the synthesis of AuNCs could expand the
applications of AuNCs in cell imaging. Mao and coworkers
developed a novel nano-conjugates containing ultrasmall
water-soluble AuNCs protected by ovalbumin as the fluorescent
part and folic acids as the targeting ligand. Specific staining of
HeLa cells by the nanoconjugates was demonstrated. The nano-
conjugates were nontoxic and furthermore could be specifically
endocytosed using folic acid as the targeting ligand, making
them as the promising candidates for optical-imaging-based
cancer detection, targeted drug delivery for cancer treatment or
imaging agents for early tumor diagnosis.157 Zhou et al. reported
a facile, one-pot aqueous synthesis of highly fluorescent AuNCs
using bovine pancreatic ribonuclease A (RNase-A) as the biotem-
plate. The as-prepared AuNCs not only fluoresced strongly in the
near-infrared (NIR) region, but also exhibited an elevated quan-
tum yields of B12%. Additionally, by coupling vitamin B12 to
the RNase-A–AuNCs, a multifunctional nanoplatform that was
suitable for simultaneous targeting and imaging of cancer at the
Caco-2 cellular levels was also developed.158
CuNCs, as one kind of newly emerging metal nanocluster, can
also be applied for cell imaging. A bifunctional peptide was
designed to in situ reduce Cu ions and anchor a CuNCs. The
peptide–CuNCs probe, mainly composed of Cu14, emitted blue two-
photon fluorescence under femtosecond laser excitation. The probe
was also suitable for one-photon and two-photon cell nuclei
imaging for both HeLa and A549 cell lines.159 BSA could also be
used as a template for the synthesis of CuNCs, using hydrazine
hydrate as the reducing agent. The as-prepared CuNCs showed red
fluorescence and could be used as probes for CAL-27 cellular
imaging.160 Huang and Zheng also described a one-step route for
the preparation of water-soluble fluorescent CuNCs stabilized by
tannic acid (TA). The fluorescence of the as-prepared TA capped
CuNCs (TA–CuNCs) could be strongly quenched by Fe3+ through an
electron transfer mechanism, but not by other metal ions. And it
could be successfully used for imaging ferric ions in living cells,
suggesting the potential application of CuNC fluorescent probes in
clinical analysis and cell imaging.161
3.2.
Bioimaging in vivo
In vivo imaging is a very powerful technique for localization and
dynamic monitoring of biomolecules in living systems.162–164
The development of new in vivo imaging sensors would provide
significant advances toward clinical and medical diagnostics.165–167
Gold nanoclusters with the near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence are
advantageous to be employed in in vivo imaging due to deep
tissue penetration, minimum photodamage to biological samples,
and minimum interference from background autofluorescence by
biomolecules in living systems.168–170 Zheng et al. have performed
a serious work in bioimaging in vivo by utilizing AuNCs. In 2011,
they found that the luminescent GSH–AuNCs exhibited the effi-
cient renal clearance (Fig. 8a). This new finding resulted from the
very small particle size and the GSH ligand, which not only
enabled the majority of the luminescent AuNCs to be cleared
out of the body through kidney filtration, but also stabilized the
luminescent AuNCs during blood circulation. Inspired by these
advances, it could be highly promising to be applied for in vivo
biomedical imaging.171 Zheng et al. also found that GSH–AuNCs
with diameters of B2.5 nm behaved like small dye molecules
(IRDye 800CW) with excellent physiological stability, efficient renal
clearance but a much longer tumor retention time and faster
normal tissue clearance. Their finding indicated that the well-
known enhanced permeability and retention effect, a unique
strength of conventional nanoparticles in tumor targeting, still
existed in such small AuNCs (Fig. 8b). These merits enabled the
AuNCs to be used in detecting tumor more rapidly than the dye
molecules without severe accumulation in reticuloendothelial
system organs.169 Afterwards, Zheng and colleagues further
synthesized the first renal-clearable NIR-emitting poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG)ylated AuNCs (PEG–AuNPs) through a facile one-
step method. These AuNCs exhibited excellent photophysical
properties and core size was almost identical to zwitterionic
GSH–AuNCs (Fig. 8c). Systematic studies of the renal clearance,
pharmacokinetics, and passive tumor targeting of PEG–AuNPs
and GSH–AuNPs in tumor-bearing mice showed that the
PEG–AuNCs could effectively target tumors with efficiency
three times higher than that of the GSH–AuNCs, whereas
PEG–AuNPs took much longer time to reach the desired
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8649
contrast index threshold than the zwitterionic GSH–AuNPs.
These differences in the tumor targeting of luminescent AuNCs
implied that PEGylated AuNCs were potentially more suitable
for cancer therapy owing to their high targeting efficiency and
long tumor retention, whereas zwitterionic GSH–AuNCs had
potential for use in cancer diagnosis owing to their short
detection time and rapid clearance from normal tissues.172
Zhang et al. systematically explored the in vivo renal clear-
ance, biodistribution, and toxicity responses of the BSA- and
GSH-protected AuNCs for 24 h and 28 days. The BSA–AuNCs
had low-efficient renal clearance and only 1% and 5% of gold
could be cleared, but the GSH–AuNCs had high-efficient renal
clearance and 36% and 94% of gold could be cleared after 24 h
and 28 days, respectively. Both GSH– and BSA–AuNCs caused
acute infection, inflammation, and kidney function damage
after 24 h, but these toxicity responses for the GSH–AuNCs were
capable of being eliminated after 28 days. The immune system
could also be affected by two kinds of AuNCs, but the immune
response for the GSH–AuNCs could also be recovered after
28 days. All these phenomena showed that the GSH–AuNCs with
small size could be metabolized by renal clearance and thus the
toxicity could be significantly decreased. The BSA–AuNCs, how-
ever, could form large compounds and further accumulate in
liver and spleen, which could cause irreparable toxicity response.
Therefore, the GSH–AuNCs had great potential for in vivo ima-
ging and therapy, and the BSA–AuNCs could be used as the agent
of liver cancer therapy.173 As an example of AuNC-based biologi-
cal imaging, Huang et al. also synthesized the BSA-templated Au20
Fig. 8
(a) X-ray computed tomography (CT) images of a live mouse before and 30 min after IV injection of glutathione-coated luminescent gold
nanoclusters (GSH–AuNCs). Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. (b) Scheme of passive tumor targeting of GSH–AuNCs and IR Dye 800CW.
Reprinted with permission from ref. 169. (c) Synthesis scheme (A) and TEM image (B) of the NIR-emitting PEGylated AuNCs (PEG–AuNCs). Kinetics for the
passive tumor targeting of the PEG–AuNPs in nude mice bearing MCF-7 tumors. (C) In vivo NIR fluorescence images of the mouse IV injected with PEG–
AuNCs at 5, 12, 18, 24, and 48 h p.i. (D) Time-dependent contrast index (CI) of the tumor area after IV injection of the PEG–AuNCs or GSH–AuNCs. (E)
Accumulation and retention kinetics of the PEG–AuNCs in tumor and normal tissues. (F) In vivo NIR fluorescence images of the nude mouse IV injected
with the PEG–AuNCs collected at 2, 3, and 4 h p.i. (G) Renal clearance kinetics of the PEG–AuNCs and GSH–AuNCs (inset: PEG–AuNCs found in the
urine measured by ICP-MS at 12 and 24 h p.i.). Reprinted with permission from ref. 172.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8650 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
nanoclusters for both cancer cells and tumor-bearing nude mice
imaging that could be improved by receptor-mediated inter-
nalization.174 By taking advantage of protein-directed nanoparticle
assembly, Nie and Zhao designed a strategy to assemble two
AuNCs at the ferroxidase active sites of ferritin heavy chain
(Fig. 9a). Studies showed that the resulting nanostructures
retained not only the intrinsic fluorescence properties of noble
metals, but gained enhanced intensity, showed a red-shift, and
exhibited tunable emissions due to the coupling interaction
between the paired Au clusters. Furthermore, the nanostructures
possessed the well-defined nanostructure of native ferritin,
showing organ-specific targeting ability, high biocompatibility,
and low cytotoxicity. Furthermore, both in vitro and in vivo,
ferritin receptor-mediated targeting and biomedical imaging
were achieved, indicating that such agents were ideal for
targeted in vitro and in vivo imaging. These results thus opened
up new opportunities for biomolecule-guided nanostructure
assembly with great potential in biomedical applications.175
As compared to using a single imaging mode, multimodality
imaging in vivo with two or more imaging modalities allows
integration of the strengths of individual modalities, while
overcoming their limitations, which may be more suitable for
medical imaging applications.176,177 Gao and colleagues fabri-
cated albumin protein-coated Au clusters with red fluorescence
and robust X-ray attenuation. In vivo 2D and 3D computed
tomography imaging studies showed visualization of the major
organs. The BSA–Au clusters were excreted in urine, resulting in
clear visualization of the calyces, pelvis, ureter, and bladder.
Therefore, label-free BSA–Au clusters might be suitable for kidney
visualization and disease diagnosis.178 Recently, Lin et al. strategi-
cally designed and developed Gd3+-aggregated AuNCs encapsulated
by silica shell nanoparticles (Gd3+–AuNC@SiO2NPs), which exhib-
ited aggregation-enhanced fluorescence, with an intensity that
was up to 3.8 times as intense as that of discrete AuNCs.
The as-prepared NPs had good cytocompatibility and could serve
as a multimodal computed tomography (CT) and magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) probe for in vitro and in vivo imaging.179 Yan
and coworkers also reported a simple and one-step mild strategy
to fabricate a multifunctional BSA–Gd2O3/Au hybrid nanoprobe for
in vivo imaging. The biocompatible nanoparticles showed excellent
chemical stability, intense NIR fluorescence emission, and good
magnetic resonance signal for multimodality imaging. Further
modification of BSA–Gd2O3/Au with arginine–glycine–aspartic acid
peptide c(RGDyK) (RGD) enabled the functional imaging nanoprobe
for targeted tumor imaging in vivo.180
Self-illuminating fluorescence imaging without autofluores-
cence background interference recently aroused great research
interest in molecular imaging. Chen et al. reported for the first
time a novel design of nontoxic self-illuminating gold nanoclusters
(64Cu-doped AuNCs) for dual-modality positron emission tomo-
graphy (PET) and near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging based
on Cerenkov resonance energy transfer (CRET) (Fig. 9b). PET
radionuclide
64Cu was introduced by a chelator-free doping
method, which played dual roles as the energy donor and the
PET imaging source. Meanwhile, AuNCs acted as the energy
acceptor for NIR fluorescence imaging. 64Cu-doped AuNCs exhib-
ited eﬃcient CRET–NIR and PET imaging both in vitro and in vivo.
In a U87MG glioblastoma xenograft model, 64Cu-doped AuNCs
showed high tumor uptake and produced satisfactory tumor self-
illuminating NIR images in the absence of external excitation,
which provided novel biomedical research tools, especially for
molecular imaging and cancer therapy.181
AgNCs, as a complement to gold nanoclusters and mole-
cular fluorophores, are also successfully used as a new class of
fluorescent probes for in vivo imaging. Wang and coworkers
reported a novel strategy for highly sensitive recognition and
in vivo imaging of cancer cells by taking advantage of their sponta-
neous ability to generate AgNCs with high near-infrared fluorescence
Fig. 9
(a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis and emission spectra of apoferritin-protected AuNCs and their application for in vivo imaging. Reprinted
with permission from ref. 175. (b) Self-illuminating 64Cu-doped gold nanoclusters (64Cu-doped AuNCs) for in vivo synergistic dual-modality positron
emission tomography (PET) and self-illuminating near infrared (NIR) imaging. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. (c) The [Ag(GSH)]+ complex
solution was administered into the solid tumor mouse model through local injection or intravenous injection through the tail. After incubation for 24 h,
fluorescent silver nanoclusters were observed inside the tumors by in vivo fluorescence imaging. After 7 days the corresponding tumor was reduced in
size and eventually disappeared. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8651
emission by intracellular reduction of innocuous silver salts (Fig. 9c).
Both ex vivo experiments comparing cancer cell models to normal
cells and in vivo imaging of subcutaneous xenografted tumor
(cervical carcinoma model) in nude mice established the validity
of this strategy for precise and selective imaging of cancer cells and
tumors. Furthermore, it was observed that the spontaneous self-
generation of AgNCs by tumors in their inside led to drastic
reduction of their sizes and often to complete remission, thus
providing important hope for new therapy strategies based on cheap
and readily available agents.182 Besides, Yan and colleagues reported
a one-pot fabrication of thiol polyethyleneimine (SH-PEI) stabilized
ultrasmall NIR fluorescent AgNCs. And the SH-PEI–AgNCs were
subsequently bioconjugated with folate for targeted in vitro and
in vivo bioimaging.183
Aside from biosensing and biological imaging, a lot of other
work has been conducted on the theranostic applications of
metal nanoclusters, such as therapeutic applications, metal
nanocluster based DNA assembly and logic gate construction,
artificial enzymes, as well as the metal nanocluster based
thermometers and pH meters.
4. Therapeutic applications of metal
nanoclusters
4.1.
Metal nanoclusters applied to imaging-guided cancer
therapy
Optical imaging-guided cancer therapy is a promising technol-
ogy for simultaneous tumor imaging and treatment.184,185 Due
to the excellent optical properties, metal nanoclusters may have
great potential for applications in imaging-guided cancer thera-
pies. In 2011, Irudayaraj and coworkers reported BSA-protected
AuNCs, which were conjugated with herceptin, for specific
targeting and nuclear localization in ErbB2 over-expressing
breast cancer cells and tumor tissue (Fig. 10a). More interest-
ingly, they also found that AuNC–herceptin could escape the
endolysosomal pathway and enter the nucleus of cancer cells to
enhance the therapeutic efficacy of herceptin.186 Gu et al. also
developed the BSA–AuNCs which were functionalized as a
fluorescent probe and a pro-drug intended for tumor diagnosis
and therapy. The AuNCs conjugated with methionine (Met) and
hydrophilic indocyanine green (ICG) derivative (MPA), a near-
infrared (NIR) fluorescent dye, could be used as efficient probes
(Au–Met–MPA) for in vitro and in vivo tumor targeting imaging.
Furthermore, doxorubicin (DOX), a widely used clinical anti-
cancer drug, could also be immobilized on the methionine
modified
AuNCs
to
form
a
pro-drug
(Au–Met–DOX)
for
enhanced tumor affinity and improved anti-tumor activity.170
In addition, Wang’s group developed the gold nanocluster–
reduced graphene oxide (AuNC–RGO) nanocomposites, which
could cause inhibition of HepG2 cells at high concentration
due to the interactions between AuNC–RGO and proteins and
DNA (Fig. 10b). More interestingly, they could carry DOX into
the cells while led to some synergy in inducing karyopyknosis
for oncotherapy. AuNC–RGO also showed interesting prospects
for cellular imaging due to their moderate fluorescence inten-
sity. All these results indicated that AuNC–RGO could become
a multimodal probe and drug carrier for targeting, detection,
and oncotherapy.187 Wan and colleagues also prepared AuNCs
and doxorubicin dual-loaded photosensitive liposome by using
a supercritical CO2 method to gain a liposome-based drug
carrier. Upon light irradiation, the carrier could release the
drug in a short time, exhibiting a light-triggered nanoswitch
for controlled drug release and tumor therapy. In addition,
experimental results implied that the photoluminescence (PL)
intensity of AuNC/Dox-loaded liposome was nearly linear to
the environmental temperature, indicating that the multi-
functional liposome displayed an application as PL sensors
of temperature, especially serving as potential intracellular
thermometry for spatially and temporally resolved tempera-
ture detection in living cells.188 Lu et al. also developed a
multifunctional theranostic nanocomposite that could simulta-
neously target and image the cancer cells. The nanocomposite
comprised photostable and biocompatible luminescent AuNCs
as the diagnostic probes and conjugated to a folic acid
(FA)-modified pH-responsive amphiphilic polymeric system
for controlled drug release. The nanocomposite used a core–
satellite structure to encapsulate hydrophobic drugs and released
the drug payload in mildly acidic endosomal/lysosomal compart-
ments by the action of the pH-labile linkages in the polymer. In vivo
studies showed the selective accumulation of the FA-conjugated
nanocomposite in tumor tissues by folate-receptor-mediated endo-
cytosis, demonstrating the potential of the nanocomposite as a
nontoxic, folate-targeting, pH-responsive drug carrier.189 Gao
et al. synthesized the novel tridecapeptide modified AuNC and
verified its molecular formula. Au25 clusters stabilized by tri-
decapeptides could well penetrate the cell membrane, exactly
located in the cytoplasm. Hence the AuNCs could specifically
complex with thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1) in the cytoplasm,
suppress its activity and further induce the up-regulation of the
activated PARP level, leading to the higher level of ROS and cell
apoptosis.190
Fig. 10
(a) Schematic of the synthesis of gold nanocluster-conjugated
with herceptin (AuNC–Her). And typical autocorrelation curve (solid
squares) of AuNC–Her diffusing inside the nucleus fitted with two com-
ponents (black solid line). The inset is the image of SK-BR3 cells incubated
with AuNC–Her–Alexa647 for 4 h. Reprinted with permission from
ref. 186. (b) TEM image of gold nanocluster–reduced grapheme oxide
(GNC–RGO) nanocomposites and laser confocal fluorescence micro-
graphs of HepG2 cells treated with DOX-loaded GNC–RGO. Reprinted
with permission from ref. 187.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8652 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Besides chemotherapy, radiotherapy is also an option to cancer
treatment. Xie et al. presented a new type of metabolizable and
eﬃcient radiosensitizers for cancer radiotherapy by combining
ultrasmall Au25NCs with the biocompatible coating ligand GSH. It
could preferentially accumulate in tumor via the improved
enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) eﬀect, and led to
strong enhancement for cancer radiotherapy. After the treatment,
the small-sized GSH–Au25NCs could be efficiently cleared by the
kidney, minimizing any potential side effects due to the accumu-
lation of Au25NCs in the body.191 After that, Xie and coworkers
also developed ultrasmall Au10–12(SG)10–12 nanomolecules for high
tumor specificity and cancer radiotherapy (Fig. 11a). The ultra-
small size of the Au10–12(SG)10–12 nanomolecules could increase
the tumor uptake and targeting specificity via the improved EPR
effect, while the highly exposed biocompatible GSH shell on the
nanomolecule surface could further contribute to their tumor
uptake by allowing the nanomolecules to escape the reticulo-
endothelial system (RES) absorption and activating the transpor-
ter on the cell surface. The ultrahigh tumor uptake, targeting
specificity, and efficient renal clearance of ultrasmall Au10–12(SG)10–12
nanomolecules with highly exposed GSH ligands allowed them to be
ideal radiotherapy sensitizers that could efficiently enhance the
safety and efficacy of radiotherapy.192
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is capable of destructing cancer
cells upon specific light irradiation. Only the tumor lesion
exposed to light would be killed by PDT, without significant
damage to normal organs in the dark. Therefore, as compared to
conventional cancer therapies, PDT exhibits remarkable advant-
ages in terms of enhancing cancer killing specificity and
reducing side eﬀects.193 Chen and coworkers strategically designed
and prepared a photo-theranostic agent based on chlorin e6
(Ce6) photosensitizer-conjugated silica-coated gold nanoclusters
(AuNC@SiO2–Ce6) for fluorescence imaging-guided photo-
dynamic therapy (PDT). The AuNC@SiO2–Ce6 showed excellent
features, such as high Ce6 photosensitizer loading, no non-
specific release of Ce6 during its circulation and significantly
enhanced cellular uptake efficiency of Ce6, offering a remark-
ably improved photodynamic therapeutic efficacy compared to
free Ce6. In addition, the fluorescence of Ce6 and plasmon
luminescence of AuNCs offered the opportunity for subcellular
characterization of the nanoformula. This photo-theranostics
owned good stability, high water dispersibility and solubility,
non-cytotoxicity, and good biocompatibility, thus facilitating its
biomedical applications, particularly for multi-modal optical,
CT and photoacoustic (PA) imaging-guided PDT or sonodynamic
therapy.194 Similarly, Jayasree and Ajayaghosh recently developed
a fluorescence imaging assisted photodynamic therapy strategy
by using photosensitizer-linked gold nanoclusters (Fig. 11b).
The synthesized near-infrared-emitting lipoic acid-capped gold
nanocluster based nanoplatform showed excellent tumor reduction
property by incorporating a tumor-targeting agent (folic acid)
and a photosensitizer (protoporphyrin IX). Moreover, the NIR
emission of AuNCs facilitated real-time tracking of the progress
in PDT.195
4.2.
Metal nanoclusters applied to gene delivery
Gene therapy also provides a promising paradigm for combating
many serious diseases, such as cancer and genetic disorders.196–198
Fig. 11
(a) (A) Schematic illustration of the structure of Au10(SG)10 nanomolecules. (B) Three- and (C) two-dimensional small animal X-ray CT imaging of
Au10–12(SG)10–12 at 6 h p.i. (D) Time-course studies of tumor volumes and (E) tumor weights (at 23 days p.i.) of untreated mice (control), mice treated with
Au10–12(SG)10–12 only, mice treated with radiation only, and mice treated with both Au10–12(SG)10–12 and radiation. Reprinted with permission from
ref. 192. (b) (A) Synthetic scheme for the preparation of the new imaging/PDT agent photosensitizer-linked gold cluster (PFL–AuC). (B) In vivo targeted
tumor imaging. (C) Autofluorescence spectra at 320 nm excitation as a measure of collagen variation. H&E stained sections: control animals showing
tumor infiltration with dividing cells (D), tumor treated with laser alone showing dividing cells (E), and tumor treated with PFL–AuC and laser showing
necrotic cells (F). Reprinted with permission from ref. 195.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8653
Metal nanocluster-based hybrid nanocomposites have been suc-
cessfully applied in gene therapy. Chen’s group prepared poly-
ethyleneimine (PEI)-modified AuNCs (PEI–AuNCs) as a novel gene
carrier by conjugating low molecular weight PEI-1.8K onto AuNCs.
The PEI–AuNCs exhibited 2–3 times higher transfection efficiency
in cells than that of PEI-25K. Moreover, PEI–AuNCs emitted strong
red fluorescence when excited by UV light, which could be used for
bioimaging in vitro and in vivo.199 Similarly, our group also
reported a ligand-induced etching process for preparing highly
fluorescent PEI-templated gold nanoclusters (PEI–AuNCs). By
taking advantage of both the high gene transfection efficiency of
PEI and the low cytotoxicity of AuNCs, the as-prepared PEI–AuNCs
could be utilized as the efficient gene delivery platform while
simultaneously acting as an imaging agent.200 Zhu and Min
developed a new multifunctional probe comprising a cell-specific
internalization aptamer, fluorescent AgNCs, and therapeutic
siRNA in one system for specific delivery of siRNA into target cells
and noninvasive imaging simultaneously (Fig. 12a). AgNCs
could be synthesized directly from the Sgc8c aptamer chimera,
which could behave as a cell-type specific siRNA delivery and
imaging probe. The excellent fluorescence stability of biotiny-
lated aptamer functionalized AgNCs in buffers of pH ranging
from 5.0 to 7.0, combined with the enhanced stability of siRNA
in the complex enabled their promising application in the
intracellular siRNA delivery and tracking.145
4.3.
Metal nanoclusters applied to vaccine development
In the past few decades, immunotherapy has been widely
investigated for the treatment of various diseases, such as viral
infections, cancer, and neurological disorders.201–204 While con-
ventional live vaccines provide an effective vaccination strategy
devised since the beginning of the vaccinology era,205,206 safety
concerns may impede their clinical utility, necessitating the devel-
opment of safer vaccines.207 In this regard, modern vaccines, such
as protein antigen-based subunit vaccines, are becoming increas-
ingly viable alternatives for immunotherapy.208 Our group has
conducted some work in this area based on metal nanoclusters.
We designed a one-pot synthesis that allows CpG-functionalized
AgNCs (CpG–AgNCs) to be prepared, combining attractive
features of enhanced immune response and intracellular imaging.
Fig. 12
(a) Schematic illustration of aptamer-functionalized AgNC-mediated cell type-specific siRNA delivery and tracking. And gene silencing eﬀect of
aptamer-functionalized AgNC-based siRNA delivery on VEGF mRNA expression and VEGF protein expression in HeLa cell lines. Reproduced from ref. 145
with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) General scheme for the synthesis of the OVA–AuNC–CpG conjugates to induce immune
response. ELISA results of anti-OVA IgG titers elicited by different stimuli. Histopathological studies of tissue organs from a mouse injected with the
OVA–AuNC–CpG conjugates (top panel) and a nonimmunized control animal (bottom panel). Reprinted with permission from ref. 215.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8654 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
The induction of AgNCs here provided several crucial advantages
such as high biocompatibility, increased CpG stability against
nuclease degradation and enhanced CpG uptake ability by TLR9-
positive cells, which were critically important for the enhanced
bioactivity of the CpG ODNs. Cytokine assays demonstrated the
remarkable immunostimulatory activity of CpG–AgNCs, providing
strong evidence that the CpG–AgNCs could be utilized as efficient
immunostimulatory agents.209 Recent studies showed that anti-
gens and CpG ODNs must be co-localized in the same antigen
presenting cells (APCs) to generate the most potent therapeutic
antigen-specific immune responses.210–214 Inspired by this finding,
we demonstrated, for the first time, that the antigen protein
ovalbumin (OVA) could be covalently linked to the adjuvant CpG
ODNs, which was capable of being used as a template to produce
highly fluorescent AuNCs (OVA–AuNC–CpG conjugates, OACs)
(Fig. 12b). Through dual-delivery of protein antigens and CpG
ODNs on AuNCs, the as-prepared OACs could act as smart self-
vaccines to assist in the generation of high immunostimulatory
activity while simultaneously acting as an imaging agent. Both
in vitro and in vivo experiments demonstrated that these engi-
neered vaccines possessed high immunogenicity. All these
findings suggested that the OACs might be utilized as safe
and efficient immunostimulatory agents that were capable of
preventing and/or treating a variety of ailments.215 More recently,
we also developed an effective vaccine that can increase strong
CD8+ T cell mediated immunity. We synthesized the peptide–
AuNC–CpG conjugates using the bifunctional peptide antigens
and thiolated adjuvant CpG ODNs. OVA peptide SIINFEKL, as one
part of the peptide template, could be used to induce strong CD8+
cytolytic T cell responses. And the AuNCs with fascinating optical
properties could also simultaneously serve as an imaging agent
without any further modification.216
4.4.
Metal nanoclusters applied as antibacterial agents
Infectious diseases caused by bacteria are one of the most
important health challenges worldwide, aﬄicting millions of
people annually. To date, metal nanoclusters have also been
extensively developed to inhibit and reduce the growth of
detrimental bacteria. Chen et al. reported that the microwave-
assisted synthesized lysozyme-templated gold nanoclusters
(Lys–AuNCs) retained the bioactivity of lysozyme. Therefore,
the as-prepared Lys–AuNCs with desirable fluorescence features
were successfully employed as broad-band labeling agents for
pathogenic bacteria, including both Gram-positive and Gram-
negative bacteria. Lys–AuNCs could also effectively inhibit the
cell growth of notorious antibiotic-resistant bacteria, including
pan-drug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii and vancomycin-
resistant Enterococcus faecalis, and have neglected toxicities
towards cells.85 Xie and colleagues studied the antimicrobial
activity of glutathione-protected Ag+-rich NCs (GSH–Ag+–R NCs)
towards both Gram-negative (i.e., P. aeruginosa, and E. coli)
and Gram-positive (i.e., B. subtilis, and S. aureus) bacteria with
GSH–Ag0–R NCs as reference. It was shown that GSH–Ag+–R NCs
had the same size and surface ligands as GSH–Ag0–R NCs, but
different oxidation states of silver. Antimicrobial studies showed
that GSH–Ag+–RNCs had much higher antimicrobial activity
than the reference GSH–Ag0–R NCs regardless of the bacteria
type. This interesting finding suggested that the undissociated
Ag+–R NCs armed with abundant Ag+ ions on the surface were
highly active in bacterial killing.217 In addition, Wang and Lu
synthesized silica nanospheres encapsulating silver nanoclusters
(Ag–SiO2) via a one-pot microemulsion method and their anti-
bacterial activities were investigated. The results showed that
Ag–SiO2 exhibited excellent and durable antimicrobial activities
against both Gram-negative Escherichia coli and Gram-positive
Staphylococcus aureus via the continual release of silver ions from
the silica spheres. Moreover, the tested silver nanoclusters
showed higher activity against bacteria than the silver nano-
particles. This newly designed Ag–SiO2 might offer a rapid and
constant antimicrobial solution for practical applications.218
4.5.
Metal nanoclusters applied as a diabetes medicine
Chou and Cheng reported for the first time the insulin-directed
synthesis of fluorescent AuNCs. The as-prepared insulin–AuNCs
showed excellent biocompatibility and retained the insulin bio-
activity. Versatility in applications such as fluorescence imaging,
X-ray computed tomography (CT), and in vivo blood-glucose
regulation was successfully demonstrated. The excellent property
of the insulin–AuNCs to retain bioactivity in reducing blood
glucose implied that insulin–AuNCs had the potential to be
applied as the diabetes medicine.86
4.6.
Metal nanoclusters applied for drug screening
By taking advantage of the stabilizing eﬀect of various serum
albumin-binding drugs against the protein unfolding event
that aﬀected the formation kinetics of fluorescent AuNCs,
Tan and Su developed a facile drug screening method based
on the synthesis of fluorescent AuNCs inside albumin proteins
loaded with small molecular drugs and compared the relative
fluorescence intensities of the resultant AuNCs. Several drugs
(e.g., ibuprofen, warfarin, phenytoin, and sulfanilamide) with a
wide range of binding aﬃnities towards HSA and BSA were
used to demonstrate the concepts and to confirm the generality
and the quantitative nature of our method.219
5. Metal nanocluster based DNA
assembly and logic gate construction
5.1.
Metal nanocluster based DNA assembly
DNA has emerged as one of the most remarkable materials
of choice for the creation of supramolecular assemblies in
nanotechnology.220,221 According to extremely precise base
pairing rules, DNA strands are capable of assembling with their
complements into DNA tiles with diﬀerent geometries and
topologies.222,223 Besides, other bases with special pairing cap-
ability have also attracted substantial interest in DNA-based
nanotechnology.224 Recently, DNA-mediated assembly of noble
metal nanomaterials has received much attention due to their
potential application in nanoelectronics, biosensing, clinical
diagnostic and dynamic materials.225–227 Using DNA as the
template, a lot of work has been conducted on the controlled
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8655
assembly of fluorescent AgNCs. Our group demonstrated a new
strategy to create site-specific, homogeneous, and bright AgNCs
with high-stability against salt using the triplex DNA template
(Fig. 13a). By using the reasonable design of the DNA sequence,
homogeneous Ag2 clusters were obtained in the predefined
position of CG.C+ site of triplex DNA. This strategy was also
explored for controlled assembly of AgNCs at the pre-defined
positions on the DNA nanoscaffold.228
Yan et al. demonstrated the site-specific synthesis and in situ
immobilization of AgNCs on a triangular DNA origami scaﬀold
through the use of the well-known Tollens reaction (Fig. 13b).
DNA of specific sequences was successfully used for the site-
specific incorporation of the sugar units on a triangular DNA
origami scaﬀold to enable the subsequent site-specific syn-
thesis and in situ immobilization of AgNCs at predefined positions
on the DNA nanoscaﬀold. The resulting high-density array of
emissive AgNCs might have potential for application in many
fields, such as the fabrication of semiconductor nanostructures.229
Fygenson’s group showed that the DNA hairpins could template
the site-specific assembly of fluorescent few-atom AgNCs on DNA
nanotubes (Fig. 13c). Fluorescent AgNCs were formed only at
hairpin sites and not on the double-stranded DNA scaﬀold,
allowing for spatially programmed self-assembly. AgNCs synthe-
sized on hairpins protruding from DNA nanotubes could have
nearly identical fluorescence spectra to those synthesized on free
hairpins of identical sequence. Analysis of the stepwise photo-
bleaching of individual clusters suggested a chemical yield of
B45%.230 Willner et al. introduced Y-shaped DNA units mod-
ified with AgNCs as functional components for the formation of
nucleic-acid-crosslinked hydrogels (Fig. 13d). The study demon-
strated that the AgNCs stabilized in the sequence-specific loops
of the Y-shaped units revealed suﬃcient thermal stabilities that
allowed the thermal switching of fluorescent systems between
gel/solution phases without the destruction of the fluorescent
DNA–AgNC complexes. The different fluorescence properties of
the hydrogels paved the way to pattern surfaces with distinct
fluorescent hydrogels.231 In addition, they also presented two
different methods to self-assemble red- or yellow-luminescent
nucleic acid-stabilized AgNC nanowires.232 Recently, we also demon-
strated a novel strategy to fabricate fluorescent single-wall carbon
nanotubes (SWNTs) with DNA-templated silver nanoclusters
(DNA–AgNCs). Through the DNA linkage, no covalent modifica-
tion of the SWNTs was needed, and the nanohybrids retained
both the high fluorescence of AgNCs and structural integrity of
SWNTs. Importantly, the present system could serve as a con-
venient and efficient platform for fluorescence visualization of
SWNTs.233
5.2.
Metal nanocluster based logic gate construction
Molecular logic gates, which are capable of performing Boolean
logic operation by receiving chemical, biological or optical
input signals, have oﬀered a new paradigm for future comput-
ing technology in light of the need for miniaturization and the
increase of function density.234 The fact that the fluorescence
properties of AgNCs are highly dependent on the DNA stabilizer
and on the DNA microenvironment opens up the opportunity
to modulate the AgNC fluorescence by using appropriate DNA
molecules or changing the microenvironment for AgNCs.
Therefore, the DNA-templated AgNCs have been widely used
for constructing simple molecular logic gates in recent years.
Wang et al. devised a novel kind of versatile logic device by
utilizing ion-tuned fluorescent DNA–AgNCs, with K+ and H+ as
two inputs (Fig. 14a). A well-chosen hairpin DNA with a poly-C
loop served as the template for synthesizing two species of
AgNCs. Several G-tracts and C-tracts on its two terminals
enabled the hairpin DNA to convert into the G-quadruplex
and/or i-motif structures upon the input of K+ and H+, which
remarkably influenced the spectral behaviors of AgNCs. In
particular, different species of AgNCs had distinct fluorescence
responses to the input of K+ and H+. These unique features of
DNA–AgNCs enabled multiple logic operations via a multichannel
fluorescence output, indicating the versatility as a molecular logic
device.235 After that, they described for the first time the stem-
directed growth of AgNCs with high brightness using the
well-chosen hairpin DNA structure. These DNA protected
AgNCs
exhibited
the
base
sequence,
strand
length
and
microenvironment-dependent fluorescence properties. Benefit-
ing from these properties, versatile logic gates (OR, NOT,
INHIBIT, XNOR, and IMPLICATION) were constructed using
different ions as inputs with AgNCs as signal transducers.236
Dong et al. also presented a unique, label-free and resettable
Fig. 13
(a) (A) Schematic representation of the triplex DNA-templated
preparation of fluorescent AgNCs. (B) Schematic representation and (C)
TEM image of the controlled alignment of AgNCs on the DNA template.
Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. (b) (A) Schematic representation
of the site-specific immobilization of fluorescent AgNCs on a triangular
DNA origami scaﬀold. (B and C) AFM images showing the in situ synthesis
and site-specific immobilization of AgNCs on a particular arm of the
triangular DNA origami scaﬀolds before (B) and after (C) treatment with
the Tollens reagent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. (c) Schematic
of DNA nanotubes with hairpin protrusions for AgNC synthesis. Reprinted
with permission from ref. 230. (d) Self-assembly of a AgNC-functionalized
DNA hydrogel by the crosslinking of AgNC modified Y-shaped nucleic acid
subunits. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8656 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
molecular keypad lock by exploring the combination of DNA–
AgNCs and enzymatic reaction. The ‘‘lock’’ was opened up only
when the input was adopted with an exact sequence, which
thus could defend against illegal invasion and present potential
applications on information protection at a molecular level.
This work demonstrated the first example that exonuclease-
catalyzed DNA hydrolysis reaction could be used to achieve the
RESET function of a molecular keypad without complicated
procedures.237 By virtue of the G-rich-DNA-induced fluores-
cence enhancement, our group designed a DNA-encoding strat-
egy for the programmable regulation of the fluorescence
properties of AgNCs (Fig. 14b). Aqueous AgNCs could be used
as signal transducers to convert DNA inputs into fluorescence
outputs for the construction of various DNA-based logic gates
(AND, OR, INHIBIT, XOR, NOR, XNOR, and NAND). Moreover, a
sequential DNA logic gate was also developed for the fabrica-
tion of a molecular keypad that was capable of constructing
crossword puzzles, which had great potential in the construc-
tion of molecular security devices.238 Taking advantage that
molecule-like silver nanoclusters (AgNCs) with few to tens of
atoms were highly sensitive to the sequence and structure of DNA
stabilizers, we therefore also developed a novel pH-triggered
reversible molecular fluorescence switch by virtue of the DNA-
dependent fluorescence pH response to AgNCs. Moreover, we
applied this DNA–AgNC system for the construction of a mole-
cular logic gate.239
AuNCs could also be employed to construct logic gates.
Chattopadhyay et al. proposed the use of biocompatible
chitosan-protected AuNCs, dispersed in water for multi-level
Boolean logic operations. This was based on the reversible
change in fluorescence of the AuNCs in response to changes
in pH, metal ion concentration and temperature. These respon-
sive AuNCs could be used for tri-state logic operation, an OR
logic gate, a decoder, a keypad lock and were also capable of
higher order functions.240 Yang et al. also developed a Boolean
NAND logic gate for the fluorescence detection of nitrite ions by
the use of BSA–AuNCs. The fluorescence of the probe was
completely quenched only in the presence of both nitrous acid
and hydrogen peroxide. Upon integrating the inherent features
of the sensor with the conceptually Boolean logic gate, the first
NAND logic gate composed of AuNCs has been built up and
been successfully applied to monitor nitrites in multiple sam-
ples. Furthermore, endowed with unique photoemission and
electrochemiluminescence qualities, the metal nanoclusters
were foreseen as promising candidates for signal reporters to
construct more complex logic operations for multiplexed detec-
tion of analytes.241
6. Metal nanocluster based artificial
enzymes
As highly stable and low-cost alternatives of enzymes, artificial
enzymes have been a very important and exciting branch of
biomimetic chemistry, and shown promising potential in bionics,
environmental detection and biomedical applications.242,243
Recent advances in noble metal nanoclusters opens up new
opportunities for the development of artificial enzymes with
high catalytic activity. In 2011, Wang et al. firstly demonstrated
that BSA–AuNCs exhibited highly intrinsic peroxidase-like activity.
As compared to other peroxidase mimetics, it was more com-
petent for bioanalysis due to the ultra-small size, good stability
and
high
biocompatibility.
The
BSA–AuNCs
as
peroxidase
mimetics provided a novel colorimetric assay for H2O2 with a
detection limit of 2.0  108 M. Furthermore, a sensitive and
selective method for efficient xanthine detection was developed
using xanthine oxidase (XOD) and the BSA–AuNCs, even in urine
and human serum samples.244 Chen and coworkers also demon-
strated that water-soluble BSA–AuNCs could act as a peroxidase
mimic and were capable of enhancing the chemiluminescence
emission from the luminol–hydrogen peroxide system, which
could be used as a sensitive detection tool for hydrogen peroxide
and glucose.245 Despite the favorable properties, one of the main
shortcomings that the AuNCs as enzyme mimics was that its
optimum reaction occurred in strongly acidic solution with a pH
value near 3, which greatly limited its applications in biological
systems where a near neutral pH value was required. For the first
time, our group reported that GO could serve as the enzyme
modulator to regulate the peroxidase-like activity of lysozyme-
stabilized gold nanoclusters (Lys–AuNCs) (Fig. 15). The most
exciting feature of the GO–AuNC hybrid (GA) was that it exhibited
high catalytic activity over a broad pH range, even at neutral pH.
On the basis of these unique and attractive properties, GA might
become a novel substitute for peroxidase with great potential in
bioanalytical chemistry. We applied the folic acid conjugated
GO–AuNC hybrid (GFA) composite as the robust nanoprobe for
Fig. 14
(a) (A) Schematic diagram of logic operations based on the hairpin
DNA template HP26-tuned fluorescent Ag nanoclusters. (B–G) HP26-
stabilized Ag nanoclusters for multiple logic operations. Reprinted with
permission from ref. 235. (b) (A) DNA-encoding strategy for the program-
mable regulation of the fluorescence properties of AgNCs; fluorescence
spectra of AgNCs before and after addition of G-rich (B) and T-rich (B)
DNA enhancers. (D) AgNC-transducer-based molecular keypad that is
capable of crossword puzzles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 238.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8657
selective, quantitative, and fast colorimetric detection of cancer
cells.246 Yang and He also developed a facile one-step approach
to synthesize DNA-templated Ag/Pt bimetallic nanoclusters
(DNA–Ag/Pt NCs), which possess highly efficient peroxidase-like
catalytic activity. With this finding, an aptamer based sandwich-
type strategy has been employed to design a label-free colorimetric
aptasensor for the thrombin detection with high sensitivity and
selectivity.83 Besides, Tseng and colleagues present a simple, one-
pot approach for synthesizing ultrafine platinum nanoclusters
(PtNCs) under alkaline conditions using lysozyme (Lys) as a
template. The as-prepared PtNCs exhibited an intrinsic oxidase-
like activity via catalyzing O2 oxidation of organic substrates
through the four-electron reduction process. And compared with
larger Pt nanoparticles, the PtNCs produced substantially greater
catalytic activity in the O2-mediated oxidation process.247
7. Metal nanocluster based
thermometers and pH meters
Nienhaus et al. reported the application of fluorescent lipoic
acid-protected AuNCs on intracellular temperature sensing
(Fig. 16a). These nanothermometers featured a high tempera-
ture sensitivity of both their fluorescence intensity and lifetime,
as well as an excellent stability over the physiological temperature
range. This enabled precise temperature measurements in bio-
logical systems in a spatially resolved fashion by using fluores-
cence imaging.248 Besides, Baker and coworkers also employed
BSA–AuNCs as a highly promising nanoscale thermometer.249
In addition, the AuNCs could also extend their applications
to fluorescent pH sensors (Fig. 16b). Chang and colleagues
developed a facile, one-pot synthetic approach for the prepara-
tion of the dual-emission BSA–Ce/AuNCs as ratiometric pH
probes inside HeLa cells. The fluorescence intensities of
BSA–Ce/AuNCs at 410 and 650 nm were pH dependent and
independent, respectively. The fluorescence intensity ratio
(I410/I650) was linear against pH values from 6.0 to 9.0, which
thus could be used as a ratiometric probe for monitoring local
pH values inside cells due to the stability and biocompatibility
of BSA–Ce/AuNCs.250
8. Other applications
Jin et al. demonstrated that 1O2 can be eﬃciently produced
through the direct photosensitization by Au25(SR)18
 clusters
(H–SR = phenylethanethiol or captopril) without using conven-
tional organic photosensitizers under visible/near-IR (532, 650,
and 808 nm) irradiation. Water-soluble Au25(captopril)18
 clusters
were explored for cytocompatibility and photodynamic activity
Fig. 15
(A) Schematic illustration and (B) time-dependent absorbance
changes of the high catalytic activity of the synergistic GO–AuNC hybrid
in a fairly broad range of operating pH values. (C) Schematic representation
of preparation of the FA–GO–AuNCs hybrid (GFA) and (D) cancer cell
detection by using target-directed GFA. (E) Time-dependent absorbance
changes upon analyzing different numbers of MCF-7 cells. (F) Typical
photographs for cancer cell detection by the colorimetric method devel-
oped using GFA (from left to right: buffer, NIH-3T3 cells, HeLa cells and
MCF-7 cells). Reprinted with permission from ref. 246.
Fig. 16
(a) (A) Typical (fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy) FLIM
images of HeLa cells with internalized AuNCs at four diﬀerent tempera-
tures. (B–E) AuNC-based fluorescence thermometry of temperature var-
iations inside HeLa cells. Typical fluorescence lifetime images of a HeLa
cell with incorporated AuNCs are shown taken (B) at constant temperature
and (C) in the presence of a temperature gradient across the cell; scale bar
10 mm. (D and E) Lifetime distributions of two selected clusters of AuNCs
inside the cells at constant temperature (a1 and b1) and in the presence of
a temperature gradient (a2 and b2). Reprinted with permission from
ref. 248. (b) (A and B) Effects of pH on the fluorescence of BSA–Ce/Au
NCs. (C) Confocal images of HeLa cells treated with TBS solutions at
different pH values. The scale bars are 10 mm. (D) Blue-to-red ratios of
HeLa cells at various pH values. Reproduced from ref. 250 with permission
from the Royal Society of Chemistry.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8658 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
toward HeLa cells, indicating the effective photodynamic cytotoxi-
city of Au25(SR)18
 clusters to cancer cells. It is suggested that the
optical gap of Au25(SR)18 clusters (B1.3 eV) being larger than the
energy of 1O2 (0.97 eV) allowed for the efficient energy transfer
to 3O2. In addition, the long lifetime of the electronic excited states
of Au25(SR)18 and the well-defined O2 adsorption sites were the key
factors that promoted energy transfer from Au25(SR)18
 to mole-
cular oxygen, thus facilitating the formation of 1O2. Besides,
neutral Au25(SR)0
18 could also produce 1O2 as efficiently as the
anionic Au25(SR)18
 does.251 Fielicke et al. showed that the
cationic gold clusters reacted with molecular oxygen without
the aid of a support effect or a co-adsorbate and that these
clusters were capable of activating the oxygen molecules towards
further reaction through the formation of superoxide (O2
)
moieties. These moieties were seen to form spontaneously in
systems, which upon electron transfer attained a closed shell
within the spherical jellium model (Au10
+ and Au22
+), whereas an
oxygen induced self-promotion in the activation was observed
for other systems (Au4
+, Au12
+, and Au21
+).252
Kamat et
al. found
that
glutathione-capped
gold
nano-
clusters (GSH–AuNCs) which exhibited molecule-like properties
could be employed as a photosensitizer for hydrogen generation.
When a mesoscopic TiO2 film sensitized by GSH–AuNCs was used
as the photoanode with a Pt counter electrode in aqueous buffer
solution (pH = 7), significant photocurrent activity under visible
light (400–500 nm) excitation was observed. Additionally, sensitizing
Pt/TiO2 nanoparticles with GSH–AuNCs in an aqueous slurry system
and irradiating with visible light could effectively produce H2.
Furthermore, the rate of H2 evolution could be significantly
enhanced (B5 times) with a sacrificial donor, such as EDTA.253
Klabunde and colleagues also showed that the surface atoms of
weakly solvated gold nanoclusters in the 2–8 nm size range could be
oxidized by thiols to yield hydrogen gas and thiolate-stabilized
nanostructures. Alternatively, the sulfur–hydrogen bond could also
be broken in a homolytic fashion to form a RS–Au bond and
hydrogen atoms to yield hydrogen gas.254
9. Conclusion and perspective
In this review, we attempt to give a comprehensive overview
of the recent progress in theranostic applications of metal
nanoclusters, including biosensing, bioimaging, therapeutic
applications, DNA assembly and logic gate construction, artifi-
cial enzymes, as well as metal nanocluster based thermometers
and pH meters, etc. Metal nanoclusters typically possess dia-
meters below 2 nm and properties that oﬀer the missing link
between metal atoms and nanoparticles, or even bulk noble
metals. As the sizes of metal nanoclusters approach the Fermi
wavelength of electrons, the continuous density of states breaks
up into discrete energy. As a result, metal nanoclusters exhibit
dramatically diﬀerent optical, electrical and chemical proper-
ties as compared to the nanoparticles, including strong photo-
luminescence, excellent photostability, good biocompatibility
and sub-nanometer size. Moreover, recent advances have enabled
facile synthesis of water-soluble fluorescent metal nanoclusters
with diﬀerent biocompatible ligands and tunable emission colors.
The unique properties of biofunctionalized scaﬀolds protected
metal nanoclusters in combination with their ultrasmall size and
good biocompatibility have enabled their use as emerging func-
tional materials for a variety of biomedical applications.
Despite exciting progress in the development of metal
nanoclusters in theranostic applications, a variety of challenges
still remain and need to be addressed. To this end, the follow-
ing aspects are awaiting to achieve:
(1) Although many metal nanoclusters have been developed,
the structures and fundamental understanding of fluorescent
metal nanoclusters are still in their early stage. The sensitivity
of metal nanoclusters to their environments oﬀers the opportu-
nity for the applications in biosensors. However, the coordina-
tion nature of the nanocluster-protection group complex implies
that the stability of metal nanoclusters is also aﬀected by the
presence of strong competing ligands. And the stability of metal
nanoclusters in cells and in vivo is still a challenging issue.
Therefore, full understanding of the structures and lumines-
cence mechanisms of metal nanoclusters is useful for in vitro/
in vivo imaging under one-photon or two-photon excitation.
(2) So far, many researchers have concentrated on metal
nanoclusters. Only in recent years, the studies on biomolecule-
functionalized metal nanoclusters emerged gradually, and
these metal nanoclusters show unique and excellent character-
istics. Furthermore, the biomolecule-templated metal nano-
clusters may retain the bioactivity of the biomolecule template,
which may oﬀer new additional functions. Those properties make
them potentially useful in a wide range of theranostic applications,
such as biological probes and antimicrobial agents. Therefore,
it is necessary to develop methods for the synthesis of other new
biomolecule-functionalized metal nanoclusters. The new metal
nanoclusters may exhibit surprising and excellent properties, which
will broaden the theranostic applications of metal nanoclusters.
(3) Up to now, a lot of reports has suggested that the fluorescent
metal nanoclusters are promising tools for sensing and intra-
cellular imaging. However, the development of multifunctional
theranostic metal nanoclusters is important, which may serve as
the versatile nanomedical platforms for simultaneous diagnosis
and therapy in the rapidly emerging area of theranostics. There-
fore, it is highly desired to simultaneously endow metal nano-
clusters with other properties, and such bi- or multifunctional
metal nanoclusters will have potential for applications.
Though many challenges have to be faced and resolved in
the future work, there is still much room for future scientific
research and application development of these metal nanoclusters
in theranostic applications such as biosensing, bioimaging and
biomedical science.
Acknowledgements
Financial support was provided by the National Basic Research
Program of China (2012CB720602 and 2011CB936004) and the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (grants 21210002,
91413111, 21431007, and 21533008).
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8659
Notes and references
1 S. H. Yau, O. Varnavski and T. Goodson, Acc. Chem. Res.,
2013, 46, 1506.
2 L. Dykman and N. Khlebtsov, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012,
41, 2256.
3 M. Stratakis and H. Garcia, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4469.
4 R. R. Arvizo, S. Bhattacharyya, R. A. Kudgus, K. Giri,
R. Bhattacharya and P. Mukherjee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012,
41, 2943.
5 J. Zheng, P. R. Nicovich and R. M. Dickson, Annu. Rev. Phys.
Chem., 2007, 58, 409.
6 H. Xu and K. S. Suslick, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1078.
7 Y. Negishi, K. Nobusada and T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2005, 127, 5261.
8 J. P. Wilcoxon and B. L. Abrams, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006,
35, 1162.
9 L. Cademartiri and V. Kitaev, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3435.
10 R. W. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2688.
11 S. W. Chen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 574, 153.
12 H. Xu and K. S. Suslick, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3209.
13 M. Turner, V. B. Golovko, O. P. H. Vaughan, P. Abdulkin,
A. Berenguer-Murcia, M. S. Tikhov, B. F. G. Johnson and
R. M. Lambert, Nature, 2008, 454, 981.
14 W. Chen and S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4386.
15 J. T. Petty, J. Zheng, N. V. Hud and R. M. Dickson, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5207.
16 C. M. Ritchie, K. R. Johnsen, J. R. Kiser, Y. Antoku, R. M.
Dickson and J. T. Petty, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 175.
17 E. G. Gwinn, P. O’Neill, A. J. Guerrero, D. Bouwmeester and
D. K. Fygenson, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 279.
18 J.
Sharma,
H.-C.
Yeh,
H.
Yoo,
J.
H.
Werner
and
J. S. Martinez, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3280.
19 H. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Lei, L. Shi, X. Wu, V. Ma¨kinen, S. Lin,
Z. Tang, J. He, H. Ha¨kkinen, L. Zheng and N. Zheng, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9568.
20 Y. Song, K. Liu and S. Chen, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 17143.
21 F. Aldeek, M. A. H. Muhammed, G. Palui, N. Zhan and
H. Mattoussi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2509.
22 M. De Nardi, S. Antonello, D.-e. Jiang, F. Pan, K. Rissanen,
M. Ruzzi, A. Venzo, A. Zoleo and F. Maran, ACS Nano, 2014,
8, 8505.
23 M. A. H. Muhammed, F. Aldeek, G. Palui, L. Trapiella-
Alfonso and H. Mattoussi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8950.
24 L. Shang, S. Dong and G. U. Nienhaus, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 401.
25 S. Choi, R. M. Dickson and J. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012,
41, 1867.
26 A. Latorre and A´. Somoza, ChemBioChem, 2012, 13, 951.
27 M. Cui, Y. Zhao and Q. Song, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem.,
2014, 57, 73.
28 Z. Yuan, Y.-C. Chen, H.-W. Li and H.-T. Chang, Chem.
Commun., 2014, 50, 9800.
29 L. Zhang and E. Wang, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 132.
30 Y. Lu and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3594.
31 J. M. Obliosca, C. Liu and H.-C. Yeh, Nanoscale, 2013,
5, 8443.
32 L. Peng, C. S. Wu, M. You, D. Han, Y. Chen, T. Fu, M. Ye
and W. Tan, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1928.
33 Y. Song, Y. Wang and L. Qin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013,
135, 16785.
34 D. Schultz, S. M. Copp, N. Markesˇevic´, K. Gardner,
S. S. R. Oemrawsingh, D. Bouwmeester and E. Gwinn,
ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9798.
35 X. Le Gue´vel, C. Spies, N. Daum, G. Jung and M. Schneider,
Nano Res., 2012, 5, 379.
36 J. Obliosca, C. Liu and H.-C. Yeh, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8443.
37 I. Diez and R. H. A. Ras, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1963.
38 A. Latorre and A´. Somoza, ChemBioChem, 2012, 13, 951.
39 H. C. Yeh, J. Sharma, J. J. Han, J. S. Martinez and
J. H. Werner, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3106.
40 L. Zhang, J. Zhu, Z. Zhou, S. Guo, J. Li, S. Dong and
E. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 4004.
41 Y. Xiao, Z. Wu, K.-y. Wong and Z.-h. Liu, Chem. Commun.,
2014, 50, 4849.
42 Y. Zhang, C. Zhu, L. Zhang, C. Tan, J. Yang, B. Chen,
L. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2015, 11, 1385.
43 L. Liu, Q. Yang, J. Lei, N. Xu and H. Ju, Chem. Commun.,
2014, 50, 13698.
44 N. Enkin, F. Wang, E. Sharon, H. B. Albada and I. Willner,
ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11666.
45 L. Zhang, J. Zhu, S. Guo, T. Li, J. Li and E. Wang, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2403.
46 Y. Tao, J. Ren, Y. Lin and X. Qu, Analyst, 2012, 137, 2588.
47 X. Liu, F. Wang, R. Aizen, O. Yehezkeli and I. Willner,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11832.
48 Z. Luo, K. Zheng and J. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5143.
49 X. Zhang, F.-G. Wu, P. Liu, N. Gu and Z. Chen, Small, 2014,
10, 5170.
50 H.-H. Wang, C.-A. J. Lin, C.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-M. Tseng,
C.-L. Hsieh, C.-H. Chen, C.-H. Tsai, C.-T. Hsieh, J.-L. Shen,
W.-H. Chan, W. H. Chang and H.-I. Yeh, ACS Nano, 2011,
5, 4337.
51 H. Kawasaki, K. Hamaguchi, I. Osaka and R. Arakawa, Adv.
Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3508.
52 A. L. West, M. H. Griep, D. P. Cole and S. P. Karna, Anal.
Chem., 2014, 86, 7377.
53 H. Pei, N. Lu, Y. Wen, S. Song, Y. Liu, H. Yan and C. Fan,
Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4754.
54 R. H. A. M. Vossen, E. Aten, A. Roos and J. T. den Dunnen,
Hum. Mutat., 2009, 30, 860.
55 U. Jakobsen and S. Vogel, Bioconjugate Chem., 2013, 24, 1485.
56 Z. Huang, F. Pu, D. Hu, C. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3774.
57 W. W. Guo, J. P. Yuan, Q. Z. Dong and E. K. Wang, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 932.
58 H.-C. Yeh, J. Sharma, I.-M. Shih, D. M. Vu, J. S. Martinez
and J. H. Werner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11550.
59 X. Jia, J. Li, L. Han, J. Ren, X. Yang and E. Wang, ACS Nano,
2012, 6, 3311.
60 K. K.-H. Farh, A. Grimson, C. Jan, B. P. Lewis, W. K.
Johnston, L. P. Lim, C. B. Burge and D. P. Bartel, Science,
2005, 310, 1817.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8660 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
61 L. Ma, J. Teruya-Feldstein and R. A. Weinberg, Nature,
2007, 449, 682.
62 G.-l. Wang and C.-Y. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 7037.
63 J. R. Buchan and R. Parker, Science, 2007, 318, 1877.
64 R. Duan, X. Zuo, S. Wang, X. Quan, D. Chen, Z. Chen, L. Jiang,
C. Fan and F. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4604.
65 D. P. Bartel, Cell, 2004, 116, 281.
66 G. Hutva´gner and P. D. Zamore, Science, 2002, 297, 2056.
67 P. Shah, A. Rørvig-Lund, S. B. Chaabane, P. W. Thulstrup,
H. G. Kjaergaard, E. Fron, J. Hofkens, S. W. Yang and
T. Vosch, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8803.
68 S. W. Yang and T. Vosch, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 6935.
69 Y.-Q. Liu, M. Zhang, B.-C. Yin and B.-C. Ye, Anal. Chem.,
2012, 84, 5165.
70 X. Qiu, P. Wang and Z. Cao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014,
60, 351.
71 H. Dong, S. Jin, H. Ju, K. Hao, L.-P. Xu, H. Lu and X. Zhang,
Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 8670.
72 F. Xu, H. Shi, X. He, K. Wang, D. He, Q. Guo, Z. Qing,
L. a. Yan, X. Ye, D. Li and J. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2014,
86, 6976.
73 Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Tao, Z. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu,
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11496.
74 Y. Si, Z. Sun, N. Zhang, W. Qi, S. Li, L. Chen and H. Wang,
Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 10406.
75 M. J. Daniels, Y. Wang, M. Lee and A. R. Venkitaraman,
Science, 2004, 306, 876.
76 J. S. Ross and J. A. Fletcher, Stem Cells, 1998, 16, 413.
77 C.-C. You, O. R. Miranda, B. Gider, P. S. Ghosh, I.-B. Kim,
B. Erdogan, S. A. Krovi, U. H. F. Bunz and V. M. Rotello,
Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 318.
78 H. Wei, B. Li, J. Li, E. Wang and S. Dong, Chem. Commun.,
2007, 3735.
79 Y. Zhang, Y. Guo, Y. Xianyu, W. Chen, Y. Zhao and X. Jiang,
Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3802.
80 J.-O. Lee, H.-M. So, E.-K. Jeon, H. Chang, K. Won and
Y. Kim, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390, 1023.
81 J.
Sharma,
H.-C.
Yeh,
H.
Yoo,
J.
H.
Werner
and
J. S. Martinez, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2294.
82 J. Li, X. Zhong, H. Zhang, X. C. Le and J.-J. Zhu, Anal.
Chem., 2012, 84, 5170.
83 C. Zheng, A.-X. Zheng, B. Liu, X.-L. Zhang, Y. He, J. Li,
H.-H. Yang and G. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13103.
84 J. P. Xie, Y. G. Zheng and J. Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009,
131, 888.
85 W. Y. Chen, J. Y. Lin, W. J. Chen, L. Y. Luo, E. W. G. Diau
and Y. C. Chen, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 755.
86 C.-L. Liu, H.-T. Wu, Y.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Lai, C.-W. Shih,
Y.-K. Peng, K.-C. Tang, H.-W. Chang, Y.-C. Chien, J.-K.
Hsiao, J.-T. Cheng and P.-T. Chou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2011, 50, 7056.
87 K. Chaudhari, P. L. Xavier and T. Pradeep, ACS Nano, 2011,
5, 8816.
88 P.-H. Chan and Y.-C. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 8952.
89 H. Kong, Y. Lu, H. Wang, F. Wen, S. Zhang and X. Zhang,
Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4258.
90 Z. Yuan, Y. Du, Y.-T. Tseng, M. Peng, N. Cai, Y. He, H.-T.
Chang and E. S. Yeung, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4253.
91 D.-S. Guo, K. Wang, Y.-X. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2012, 134, 10244.
92 S. Samantaray, R. Sharma, T. K. Chattopadhyaya, S. D. Gupta
and R. Ralhan, J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol., 2004, 130, 37.
93 Z. Zeng, S. Mizukami and K. Kikuchi, Anal. Chem., 2012,
84, 9089.
94 M. S. Wolfe, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1599.
95 R. C. Taylor, S. P. Cullen and S. J. Martin, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol., 2008, 9, 231.
96 M. Drag and G. S. Salvesen, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2010,
9, 690.
97 P. Friedl and K. Wolf, Cancer Res., 2008, 68, 7247.
98 Y. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Zhou, P. Kim and Y. Xia, Small, 2012,
8, 3769.
99 Y. L. Deribe, T. Pawson and I. Dikic, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.,
2010, 17, 666.
100 C. T. Walsh, S. Garneau-Tsodikova and G. J. Gatto, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7342.
101 Q. Wen, Y. Gu, L.-J. Tang, R.-Q. Yu and J.-H. Jiang, Anal.
Chem., 2013, 85, 11681.
102 C. Yu, Y. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Li, J. Chen and
Q. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9821.
103 Y. Teng, X. Jia, J. Li and E. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4897.
104 K. Zhang, K. Wang, M. Xie, X. Zhu, L. Xu, R. Yang,
B. Huang and X. Zhu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 124.
105 M. Zhang, S.-M. Guo, Y.-R. Li, P. Zuo and B.-C. Ye, Chem.
Commun., 2012, 48, 5488.
106 C. Shen, X. Xia, S. Hu, M. Yang and J. Wang, Anal. Chem.,
2015, 87, 693.
107 Y. Qian, Y. Zhang, L. Lu and Y. Cai, Biosens. Bioelectron.,
2014, 51, 408.
108 J. S. Coggan, T. M. Bartol, E. Esquenazi, J. R. Stiles,
S. Lamont, M. E. Martone, D. K. Berg, M. H. Ellisman
and T. J. Sejnowski, Science, 2005, 309, 446.
109 Y. Zhang, Y. Cai, Z. Qi, L. Lu and Y. Qian, Anal. Chem.,
2013, 85, 8455.
110 Z. Qing, T. Qing, Z. Mao, X. He, K. Wang, Z. Zou, H. Shi and
D. He, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12746.
111 L. Zhang, J. Zhao, M. Duan, H. Zhang, J. Jiang and R. Yu,
Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 3797.
112 Z. Qing, X. He, T. Qing, K. Wang, H. Shi, D. He, Z. Zou, L. Yan,
F. Xu, X. Ye and Z. Mao, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 12138.
113 K. S. Chua and I. K. Tan, J. Clin. Pathol., 1976, 29, 517.
114 L. V. Nair, D. S. Philips, R. S. Jayasree and A. Ajayaghosh,
Small, 2013, 9, 2673.
115 H.-H. Deng, G.-W. Wu, Z.-Q. Zou, H.-P. Peng, A.-L. Liu,
X.-H. Lin, X.-H. Xia and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2015,
51, 7847.
116 R. M. Wightman, L. J. May and A. C. Michael, Anal. Chem.,
1988, 60, 769A.
117 A. Zhang, J. L. Neumeyer and R. J. Baldessarini, Chem. Rev.,
2007, 107, 274.
118 P. Damier, E. C. Hirsch, Y. Agid and A. M. Graybiel, Brain,
1999, 122, 1437.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8661
119 T. M. Dawson and V. L. Dawson, Science, 2003, 302, 819.
120 Y. Tao, Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013,
42, 41.
121 J. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 814.
122 D.-Y. Yang, T.-H. Tsai, C.-H. Cheng, C.-W. Lee, S.-H. Chen
and F.-C. Cheng, J. Chromatogr. A, 2001, 913, 349.
123 L.-L. Wang, J. Qiao, H.-H. Liu, J. Hao, L. Qi, X.-P. Zhou,
D. Li, Z.-X. Nie and L.-Q. Mao, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 9758.
124 J. Zhu, X. Song, L. Gao, Z. Li, Z. Liu, S. Ding, S. Zou and
Y. He, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 53, 71.
125 Z. Huang, F. Pu, Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun.,
2011, 47, 3487.
126 S. Shahrokhian, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 5972.
127 H. S. Jung, J. H. Han, T. Pradhan, S. Kim, S. W. Lee,
J. L. Sessler, T. W. Kim, C. Kang and J. S. Kim, Biomaterials,
2012, 33, 945.
128 X. Yuan, Y. Tay, X. Dou, Z. Luo, D. T. Leong and J. Xie,
Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 1913.
129 K. S. Park, S. S. Oh, H. T. Soh and H. G. Park, Nanoscale,
2014, 6, 9977.
130 L. Gibellini, M. Pinti, M. Nasi, S. De Biasi, E. Roat,
L. Bertoncelli and A. Cossarizza, Cancers, 2010, 2, 1288.
131 T. Chen, Y. Hu, Y. Cen, X. Chu and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2013, 135, 11595.
132 E. Ju, Z. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Tao, J. Ren and X. Qu, ACS Nano,
2014, 8, 6014.
133 M. Zhuang, C. Ding, A. Zhu and Y. Tian, Anal. Chem., 2014,
86, 1829.
134 F. Wen, Y. Dong, L. Feng, S. Wang, S. Zhang and X. Zhang,
Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 1193.
135 P. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Chang, Z. H. Xiong and C. Z. Huang,
Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 49, 433.
136 H. Liu, X. Wu, X. Zhang, C. Burda and J.-J. Zhu, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2548.
137 J. Peng, L.-N. Feng, K. Zhang, X.-H. Li, L.-P. Jiang and
J.-J. Zhu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5261.
138 G.-H. Yang, J.-J. Shi, S. Wang, W.-W. Xiong, L.-P. Jiang,
C. Burda and J.-J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10757.
139 J. Yu, S. A. Patel and R. M. Dickson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2007, 46, 2028.
140 J. H. Yu, S. Choi and R. M. Dickson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2009, 48, 318.
141 S. Choi, J. Yu, S. A. Patel, Y.-L. Tzeng and R. M. Dickson,
Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 109.
142 J. Li, X. Zhong, F. Cheng, J.-R. Zhang, L.-P. Jiang and
J.-J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4140.
143 L. Feng, Y. Chen, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 2930.
144 D. Shangguan, Y. Li, Z. Tang, Z. C. Cao, H. W. Chen,
P. Mallikaratchy, K. Sefah, C. J. Yang and W. Tan, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11838.
145 J. Li, W. Wang, D. Sun, J. Chen, P. Zhang, J.-R. Zhang,
Q. Min and J.-J. Zhu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3514.
146 Z. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Wei, R. Liu, H. Zhu, Y. Cui, Y. Zhao and
X. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11960.
147 J. Yin, X. He, K. Wang, Z. Qing, X. Wu, H. Shi and X. Yang,
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 110.
148 J. Yin, X. He, K. Wang, F. Xu, J. Shangguan, D. He and
H. Shi, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 12011.
149 J. Li, J. You, Y. Zhuang, C. Han, J. Hu, A. Wang, K. Xu and
J.-J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7107.
150 L. Shang, N. Azadfar, F. Stockmar, W. Send, V. Trouillet,
M. Bruns, D. Gerthsen and G. U. Nienhaus, Small, 2011,
7, 2614.
151 X. Yang, L. Gan, L. Han, D. Li, J. Wang and E. Wang, Chem.
Commun., 2013, 49, 2302.
152 L. Polavarapu, M. Manna and Q.-H. Xu, Nanoscale, 2011,
3, 429.
153 Y. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Zhao, R. Liu, Z. Sun, W. Li and X. Gao,
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 871.
154 M. A. H. Muhammed, P. K. Verma, S. K. Pal, A. Retnakumari,
M. Koyakutty, S. Nair and T. Pradeep, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010,
16, 10103.
155 X. Le Gue´vel, B. Hotzer, G. Jung and M. Schneider, J. Mater.
Chem., 2011, 21, 2974.
156 E. S. Shibu, S. Sugino, K. Ono, H. Saito, A. Nishioka,
S. Yamamura, M. Sawada, Y. Nosaka and V. Biju, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10559.
157 J. Qiao, X. Mu, L. Qi, J. Deng and L. Mao, Chem. Commun.,
2013, 49, 8030.
158 Y. Kong, J. Chen, F. Gao, R. Brydson, B. Johnson, G. Heath,
Y. Zhang, L. Wu and D. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1009.
159 Y. Wang, Y. Cui, R. Liu, Y. Wei, X. Jiang, H. Zhu, L. Gao,
Y. Zhao, Z. Chai and X. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10724.
160 C. Wang, C. Wang, L. Xu, H. Cheng, Q. Lin and C. Zhang,
Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1775.
161 H. Cao, Z. Chen, H. Zheng and Y. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron.,
2014, 62, 189.
162 P. P. Ghoroghchian, M. J. Therien and D. A. Hammer, Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2009, 1, 156.
163 M. S. T. Gonçalves, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 190.
164 A. Loudet and K. Burgess, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4891.
165 T. Ueno and T. Nagano, Nat. Methods, 2011, 8, 642.
166 X. Chen, X. Tian, I. Shin and J. Yoon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011,
40, 4783.
167 D. T. Quang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6280.
168 J.-M. Liu, J.-T. Chen and X.-P. Yan, Anal. Chem., 2013,
85, 3238.
169 J. Liu, M. Yu, C. Zhou, S. Yang, X. Ning and J. Zheng, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4978.
170 H. Chen, B. Li, X. Ren, S. Li, Y. Ma, S. Cui and Y. Gu,
Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 8461.
171 C. Zhou, M. Long, Y. Qin, X. Sun and J. Zheng, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3168.
172 J. Liu, M. Yu, X. Ning, C. Zhou, S. Yang and J. Zheng,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12572.
173 X.-D. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Shen, P.-X. Liu, F.-Y. Fan and
S.-J. Fan, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 4628.
174 P. Zhang, X. X. Yang, Y. Wang, N. W. Zhao, Z. H. Xiong and
C. Z. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2261.
175 C. Sun, H. Yang, Y. Yuan, X. Tian, L. Wang, Y. Guo, L. Xu,
J. Lei, N. Gao, G. J. Anderson, X.-J. Liang, C. Chen, Y. Zhao
and G. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8617.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

8662 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
176 L. Jing, K. Ding, S. V. Kershaw, I. M. Kempson, A. L. Rogach
and M. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6367.
177 L. Martı´-Bonmatı´, R. Sopena, P. Bartumeus and P. Sopena,
Contrast Media Mol. Imaging, 2010, 5, 180.
178 Y. Wang, C. Xu, J. Zhai, F. Gao, R. Liu, L. Gao, Y. Zhao,
Z. Chai and X. Gao, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 343.
179 X. Wu, C. Li, S. Liao, L. Li, T. Wang, Z. Su, C. Wang, J. Zhao,
C. Sui and J. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 8876.
180 S.-K. Sun, L.-X. Dong, Y. Cao, H.-R. Sun and X.-P. Yan, Anal.
Chem., 2013, 85, 8436.
181 H. Hu, P. Huang, O. J. Weiss, X. Yan, X. Yue, M. G. Zhang,
Y. Tang, L. Nie, Y. Ma, G. Niu, K. Wu and X. Chen,
Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 9868.
182 S. Gao, D. Chen, Q. Li, J. Ye, H. Jiang, C. Amatore and
X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4384.
183 Y. Wang, C. Dai and X.-P. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2014,
50, 14341.
184 X. Ji, F. Peng, Y. Zhong, Y. Su, X. Jiang, C. Song, L. Yang,
B. Chu, S.-T. Lee and Y. He, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1029.
185 S. Jiang, M. K. Gnanasammandhan and Y. Zhang, J. R. Soc.,
Interface, 2010, 7, 3.
186 Y. Wang, J. Chen and J. Irudayaraj, ACS Nano, 2011,
5, 9718.
187 C. Wang, J. Li, C. Amatore, Y. Chen, H. Jiang and
X.-M. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11644.
188 R. Gui, A. Wan, X. Liu and H. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2014,
50, 1546.
189 D. Chen, Z. Luo, N. Li, J. Y. Lee, J. Xie and J. Lu, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2013, 23, 4324.
190 R. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Yuan, D. An, J. Li and X. Gao, Chem.
Commun., 2014, 50, 10687.
191 X.-D. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Luo, D. Wu, X. Shen, S.-S. Song,
Y.-M. Sun, P.-X. Liu, J. Zhao, S. Huo, S. Fan, F. Fan,
X.-J. Liang and J. Xie, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 133.
192 X.-D. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Chen, X. Shen, S. Song, Y. Sun,
S. Fan, F. Fan, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014,
26, 4565.
193 K. Yang, L. Feng, X. Shi and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013,
42, 530.
194 P. Huang, J. Lin, S. Wang, Z. Zhou, Z. Li, Z. Wang,
C. Zhang, X. Yue, G. Niu, M. Yang, D. Cui and X. Chen,
Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 4643.
195 L. V. Nair, S. S. Nazeer, R. S. Jayasree and A. Ajayaghosh,
ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5825.
196 L. Yin, Z. Song, K. H. Kim, N. Zheng, N. P. Gabrielson and
J. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3063.
197 M. Candolfi, W. Xiong, K. Yagiz, C. Liu, A. K. M. G.
Muhammad, M. Puntel, D. Foulad, A. Zadmehr, G. E.
Ahlzadeh,
K.
M.
Kroeger,
M.
Tesarfreund,
S.
Lee,
W. Debinski, D. Sareen, C. N. Svendsen, R. Rodriguez,
P. R. Lowenstein and M. G. Castro, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A., 2010, 107, 20021.
198 F. Yang, S.-W. Cho, S. M. Son, S. R. Bogatyrev, D. Singh,
J. J. Green, Y. Mei, S. Park, S. H. Bhang, B.-S. Kim, R. Langer
and D. G. Anderson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010,
107, 3317.
199 H. Tian, Z. Guo, J. Chen, L. Lin, J. Xia, X. Dong and
X. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2012, 1, 337.
200 Y. Tao, Z. Li, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6154.
201 C. C. Pritchard, H. H. Cheng and M. Tewari, Nat. Rev.
Genet., 2012, 13, 358.
202 J. I. Cutler, E. Auyeung and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2012, 134, 1376.
203 A. Kulkarni, K. DeFrees, S.-H. Hyun and D. H. Thompson,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7596.
204 Y. Tao, E. Ju, J. Ren and X. Qu, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 9963.
205 R. Rappuoli, H. I. Miller and S. Falkow, Science, 2002,
297, 937.
206 G. Wang, R.-Y. Cao, R. Chen, L. Mo, J.-F. Han, X. Wang,
X. Xu, T. Jiang, Y.-Q. Deng, K. Lyu, S.-Y. Zhu, E.-D. Qin,
R. Tang and C.-F. Qin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013,
110, 7619.
207 W. Byrd, A. de Lorimier, Z. R. Zheng and F. J. Cassels,
Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2005, 57, 1362.
208 B. Guy, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2007, 5, 505.
209 Y. Tao, Z. Li, E. Ju, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2013,
49, 6918.
210 Y. Krishnamachari and A. K. Salem, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev.,
2009, 61, 205.
211 M. Diwan, M. Tafaghodi and J. Samuel, J. Controlled
Release, 2002, 85, 247.
212 X. Liu, Y. Xu, T. Yu, C. Cliﬀord, Y. Liu, H. Yan and
Y. Chang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4254.
213 A.
D.
Sandler,
H.
Chihara,
G.
Kobayashi,
X.
Zhu,
M. A. Miller, D. L. Scott and A. M. Krieg, Cancer Res.,
2003, 63, 394.
214 H. J. Cho, K. Takabayashi, P. M. Cheng, M. D. Nguyen,
M. Corr, S. Tuck and E. Raz, Nat. Biotechnol., 2000, 18, 509.
215 Y. Tao, E. Ju, Z. Li, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater.,
2014, 24, 1004.
216 Y. Tao, Y. Zhang, E. Ju, H. Ren and J. Ren, Nanoscale, 2015,
7, 12419.
217 X. Yuan, M. Setyawati, D. Leong and J. Xie, Nano Res., 2014,
7, 301.
218 R. Lu, W. Zou, H. Du, J. Wang and S. Zhang, Ceram. Int.,
2014, 40, 3693.
219 Y. Yu, S. Y. New, J. Xie, X. Su and Y. N. Tan, Chem.
Commun., 2014, 50, 13805.
220 F. A. Aldaye and H. F. Sleiman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007,
129, 4130.
221 C. Zhang, M. Su, Y. He, X. Zhao, P.-a. Fang, A. E. Ribbe,
W. Jiang and C. Mao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008,
105, 10665.
222 U. Feldkamp, B. Sacca` and C. M. Niemeyer, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5996.
223 D. Liu, A. Bruckbauer, C. Abell, S. Balasubramanian,
D.-J. Kang, D. Klenerman and D. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2006, 128, 2067.
224 G. H. Clever, C. Kaul and T. Carell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2007, 46, 6226.
225 S. Pal, Z. Deng, B. Ding, H. Yan and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2700.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8636--8663 | 8663
226 H. A. Becerril and A. T. Woolley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009,
38, 329.
227 S. Beyer, P. Nickels and F. C. Simmel, Nano Lett., 2005,
5, 719.
228 L. Feng, Z. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nucleic Acids Res.,
2012, 40, e122.
229 S. Pal, R. Varghese, Z. Deng, Z. Zhao, A. Kumar, H. Yan and
Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4176.
230 P. R. O’Neill, K. Young, D. Schiﬀels and D. K. Fygenson,
Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5464.
231 W. Guo, R. Orbach, I. Mironi-Harpaz, D. Seliktar and
I. Willner, Small, 2013, 9, 3748.
232 R. Orbach, W. Guo, F. Wang, O. Lioubashevski and
I. Willner, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13066.
233 Z. Huang, Y. Tao, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2011, 17, 7745.
234 J. Andreasson and U. Pischel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010,
39, 174.
235 T. Li, L. Zhang, A. Jun, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano,
2011, 5, 6334.
236 J. Li, X. Jia, D. Li, J. Ren, Y. Han, Y. Xia and E. Wang,
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6131.
237 Z. Zhou, Y. Liu and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2013,
49, 3107.
238 Z. Huang, Y. Tao, F. Pu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2012, 18, 6663.
239 Z. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Mol. BioSyst., 2012, 8, 921.
240 S. K. Sailapu, A. K. Sahoo, S. S. Ghosh and A. Chattopadhyay,
Small, 2014, 10, 4067.
241 J. Zhang, C. Chen, X. Xu, X. Wang and X. Yang, Chem.
Commun., 2013, 49, 2691.
242 Z. Dong, Q. Luo and J. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7890.
243 Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4200.
244 X.-X. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Shan and Q.-M. Huang, Biosens.
Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3614.
245 M. Deng, F. Chen and J. S. Xu, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 3117.
246 Y. Tao, Y. Lin, Z. Huang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater.,
2013, 25, 2594.
247 C.-J. Yu, T.-H. Chen, J.-Y. Jiang and W.-L. Tseng, Nanoscale,
2014, 6, 9618.
248 L. Shang, F. Stockmar, N. Azadfar and G. U. Nienhaus,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11154.
249 X. Chen, J. Essner and G. A. Baker, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9594.
250 Y.-N. Chen, P.-C. Chen, C.-W. Wang, Y.-S. Lin, C.-M. Ou,
L.-C. Ho and H.-T. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8571.
251 H. Kawasaki, S. Kumar, G. Li, C. Zeng, D. R. Kauﬀman,
J. Yoshimoto, Y. Iwasaki and R. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2014,
26, 2777.
252 A. P. Woodham and A. Fielicke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2014, 53, 6554.
253 Y.-S. Chen and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014,
136, 6075.
254 J. E. Matthiesen, D. Jose, C. M. Sorensen and K. J. Klabunde,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9376.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Published on 24 September 2015. Downloaded on 2/18/2026 11:09:09 PM. 
View Article Online