This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831 | 817
Cite this: Mater. Horiz., 2017,
4, 817
Engineering gold-based radiosensitizers for
cancer radiotherapy
Nirmal Goswami,
a Zhentao Luo,b Xun Yuan,*c David Tai Leonga and
Jianping Xie
*a
Radiotherapy remains a major modality in cancer therapy. The main goal of radiotherapy is to shrink
tumors and kill cancer cells by using high-energy radiation, such as X-rays and g-rays. Despite the
eﬀectiveness of radiotherapy in treating cancer in many possible ways, harmful damage caused by such
radiation to the surrounding healthy/normal cells is often unavoidable. Therefore, it would be desirable to
strike the right balance between tumor eradication and minimizing the possible side eﬀects. To address
this challenge, a magic bullet is the ‘‘radiosensitizer’’, which can make cancer cells more sensitive to
radiation by increasing the local treatment eﬃciency using a relatively low and safe radiation dose. This
review article focuses on the recent progress in the area of radiosensitizers, especially gold-based
materials. It begins with the key factors associated with radio-biological interactions along with the
possible biological eﬀects upon irradiation and from which the idea of radiosensitizers is derived. The
prospect of gold-based materials as radiosensitizers is summarized through the mechanistic elucidation of
the interaction of radiation with gold. Following that, some of the key design strategies for generating
ideal gold-based radiosensitizers are highlighted. Examples of gold-based materials derived from these
strategies, such as gold nanoparticles and nanoclusters, and their applications in radiotherapy are
presented and discussed. The final part of this review article focuses on the avenues for future research
on engineering gold-based nanomaterials for cancer radiotherapy.
1. Introduction
Gold (Au)-based nanomaterials, which provide unique and highly
tunable physicochemical properties together with high photo-
stability and low cytotoxicity, remain a primary candidate to be
deployed to treat cancer in many possible ways.1–7 For instance, gold
nanoparticles (NPs), nanorods (NRs) as well as nanodendrites have
been the main subject of interest in photothermal therapy (PTT)
a Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of
Singapore, 4 Engineering Drive 4, 117585, Singapore. E-mail: chexiej@nus.edu.sg
b Duke-NUS Medical School, 8 College Road, 169857, Singapore
c College of Materials Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and
Technology, Qingdao 266042, P. R. China. E-mail: yuan916xun@gmail.com
Nirmal Goswami
Dr Nirmal Goswami is currently a
research fellow in Prof. Jianping
Xie’s group at the Department
of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, National University
of Singapore. He obtained his
PhD (2014) in Chemistry from
the S. N. Bose National Centre
for Basic Sciences, India. He is
interested in noble metal nano-
clusters
and
their
biomedical
applications.
Zhentao Luo
Dr Zhentao Luo earned his PhD
from the Department of Chemical
and
Biomolecular
Engineering,
National University of Singapore
(NUS) under the guidance of Prof.
Jianping Xie. Currently, he is in
Duke-NUS
Medical
School
for
Medical Doctor Training.
Received 20th June 2017,
Accepted 13th July 2017
DOI: 10.1039/c7mh00451f
rsc.li/materials-horizons
Materials
Horizons
REVIEW
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

818 | Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
and some of these nanomaterials have been studied in early
clinical trials.8–11 These Au NPs are distributed in the tumor
and they could function as an actuator to convert light to heat
when they are exposed to light at their resonance wavelength.
This effect could raise the temperature of the tissue and ablate
the tumor cells by disrupting the cell membrane. Au NPs-based
photodynamic therapy (PDT) is another promising cancer treat-
ment modality, and it relies on the combination of a photo-
sensitizer (PS), light and oxygen.12–14 Recently, it has been
demonstrated that ultrasmall Au NPs (with a particle size below
2 nm, or so-called Au nanoclusters (NCs)) can also efficiently
generate singlet oxygen (1O2) under visible/near-IR irradiation
without using any conventional organic photosensitizers.15
The other eﬀective way to treat cancer cells by using Au NPs
is radiotherapy (RT). Unlike light-based therapeutic treatments
(e.g., PTT and PDT), RT is a treatment involving the use of high-
energy radiation, such as X-rays and g-rays. Sometimes, alpha
(a) or beta (b) particles, electron (e), proton or neutron beams
are also used to target the cancer tissues. The advantage of
using such high-energy radiation for cancer treatment is that it
can be used to treat relatively large tumors as well as those
tumors deep inside the body, which could not be easily treated by
low-energy-light-based therapeutics due to their short penetration
depths. Gold-based materials have been used in radiotherapy due
to their interesting radiosensitizing eﬀects, which could enhance
the eﬃcacy of the treatment. The ability of gold to strongly adsorb,
scatter and re-emit the radiation can locally increase the radiation
dose in the targeted cells.16,17 In addition, it also provides good
chemical stability and high biocompatibility with low toxicity.18
Due to such unique characteristics of gold, there has been
growing research interest in the use of gold-based materials for
cancer radiotherapy in recent years.19–45
This review focuses on the aspects central to the rational
design of functional gold-based nanomaterials that are highly
eﬃcient in radiotherapy enhancement. Because targeting yield/
cellular uptake of the radiosensitizers is the key to radiotherapy
enhancement, this review focuses on the strategies to enhance
the cellular uptake by overcoming the biological barriers. The
impacts of particle size, shape, composition as well as surface
functionalization of gold-based nanomaterials are further
discussed. Finally, two types of most well-studied gold-based
nanomaterials, gold nanoparticles (NPs) and nanoclusters
(NCs), are highlighted with a detailed discussion on the engi-
neering principles to advance these promising radiosensitizers
for cancer radiotherapy.
2. Radiotherapy: principles and key
parameters
Radiotherapy remains one of the most eﬀective ways for cancer
treatment, as about half of the cancer patients receive radio-
therapy at some stage of their illness. Cancer radiotherapy
refers to the use of radiation to kill the cancer cells and shrink
tumors. Ionizing radiation (i.e., a particular type of radiation
that forms electrically charged particles while passing through
the cells of the tissues) is by far the most common form of
radiation used for cancer treatment. It can be classified into
David Tai Leong
Dr David Tai Leong is an Associate
Professor at the Department of
Chemical
and
Biomolecular
Engineering, National University of
Singapore (NUS). He obtained his
PhD in Biology and his Bachelors in
Chemical Engineering from NUS.
He
received
his
post-doctoral
training at the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute at the University
of Pennsylvania and was awarded
the Lee Kuan Yew Postdoctoral
Fellowship. His research interests
span across the fundamental under-
standing of biological eﬀects of nanomaterials to their applications in
nanomedicine, biosensing and nanotoxicology.
Jianping Xie
Dr Jianping Xie is currently an
Associate Professor at the Depart-
ment of Chemical & Biomolecular
Engineering at National Univer-
sity
of
Singapore
(NUS).
He
received
his
BS
and
MS
in
Chemical
Engineering
from
Tsinghua University, China, and
his PhD from the Singapore-MIT
Alliance (SMA) program. Dr Xie
joined
NUS
in
2010
and
established
the
BioNanoMetals
research
group.
His
research
interests
include
noble
metal
nanoclusters, nanomedicine, and applied environmental nano-
technology (http://cheed.nus.edu.sg/stf/chexiej/index.html).
Xun Yuan
Dr Xun Yuan received his BE (2006)
and
ME
(2009)
degrees
from
Shandong University of Technol-
ogy,
China,
and
PhD
degree
(2014) from National University of
Singapore (NUS) under the super-
vision of Prof. Jianping Xie. After
three years of postdoctoral work at
the Institute of Bioengineering and
Nanotechnology (IBN), he joined
Qingdao University of Science and
Technology (QUST) as a Professor
in 2017. His research focuses on the
synthesis and applications of metal
nanoclusters.
Review
Materials Horizons
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831 | 819
two types: (i) photon radiation in which high-energy photon
beams, such as high energy X-rays and gamma (g) rays, are
routinely used; and (ii) particle radiation, where particles such as
electrons, protons, carbon ions, alpha (a) and beta (b) particles
are commonly used. Ionizing radiation features with high energy
and it can penetrate into the cancer cells. However, the energy of
radiation depends on the type of source. Typically, the penetra-
tion depth increases if higher energy radiation is used. For
example, high energy X-rays or g-rays can easily pass through
the body while electron beams, which have a low energy level, are
not able to penetrate deeply into the body. As a result, electron
beam radiation is normally used to treat the tumors that are
close to the surface of the body (e.g., skin cancer).46
A key aspect for all the ionizing radiation based cancer
treatments is the interaction of radiation with the matter within
the tumor cell. As the photon encounters the matter, it has a
number of possibilities to interact with the atomic particles.
Photonic interaction with matter depends on the type of ioniz-
ing radiation, its incident energy, as well as the properties of
the matter of interest. In the following, we will highlight some
of the most common radiation–matter interactions (Scheme 1).
It should be noted that this review is not meant to cover these
particular topics in great technical detail. For this purpose,
readers are instead directed to related publications that survey
the different techniques in more detail.
3. Radiation–matter interactions
Photoelectric eﬀect
In the photoelectric eﬀect, the incident photon radiation transfers
all its energy to an electron located in one of the atomic shells. As a
result, the electron will be knocked out completely from the inner
shell of the atom, and then it starts to ionize surrounding
molecules. Such an event is more likely to take place when the
electron binding energy within the matter is slightly less than the
incident photon. Therefore, it is related to the atomic number of
the absorbing matter as well as to the energy of the incident
radiation. Typically, this eﬀect is proportional to the cube power of
the absorbing matter’s atomic number (Z3).47,48
Compton scattering
It is one of the most important interactions in radiotherapy
based cancer treatment. In this event, a portion of energy of the
incident radiation will be transferred to the loosely bound
electrons of an atom. The incident photon will then be scattered
in a diﬀerent direction, with a much lower energy. Sometimes,
the interaction also results in the scattering of the loosely bound
electrons from the outer shell of the atom. It is known that the
Compton eﬀect is directly proportional to the physical density
of the matter or irreversibly proportional to the incident energy
of the photons. However, it does not depend on the atomic
number of the absorbing matter.48
Coherent scattering
It occurs when the energy of the X-ray or g-photon is lower than
the binding energy of the electron it strikes. In principle, there
is no energy transfer involved in this case; rather the incident
photon scatters in a diﬀerent direction. This type of interaction
is possible at low photon energies. Coherent scattering varies
with the atomic number of the absorber (Z) and the incident
photon energy (E) by Z2/E.48
Pair production
Unlike the above events where the incident photons interact with
the electrons in the atomic shells, pair production is a photon–
matter interaction where a photon encounters the atomic nuclear
electromagnetic field. This interaction becomes significant at a
high energy and is proportional to the atomic number of the
absorbing matter.48
4. Biological eﬀects upon radiation
During the radiation treatment, any of the above mentioned
interactions may take place, leading to immediate biological
eﬀects. Even though the biological basis of radiotherapy is not
well understood, the most common interpretation is that the
ionizing radiation can directly or indirectly aﬀect the most crucial
part of the cell, i.e., deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (Scheme 1).
A direct action causes the disruption of DNA molecules by
breaking either single or double stranded DNA. As cells are
unable to divide and proliferate further, the end result of this
direct eﬀect is cell death. An indirect eﬀect arises while DNA
molecules are damaged by the reactive species produced by the
interaction of ionizing radiation with water molecules (radiolysis)
within the cell. A relevant event here is the generation of free
radicals. DNA damage induced by such radicals was indeed
corroborated by the fact that the presence of scavenger molecules
was able to reduce the radiosensitivity of the water molecules.49,50
In both cases, the damage induced in a tumor cell by the
ionizing radiation could be lethal or potentially lethal. While
the goal of radiotherapy is to maximize the radiation dose to
the abnormal cancer cells, the fatal damage to the normal cells
becomes unavoidable due to the small diﬀerence in the sensi-
tivity to the ionizing radiation of the normal and malignant
tissues (Fig. 1).51 Considering this fact, several improvements
have been made in recent years to achieve a maximum dose to
the tumor cells and to avoid their exposure to normal tissues.
For example, use of a low dose of radiation repetitively within a
Scheme 1
Interactions of X-rays with high-Z materials and the corres-
ponding direct and indirect eﬀects on cancer cells.
Materials Horizons
Review
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

820 | Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
course of treatment (known as fractionation) is found to increase
the diﬀerential cytotoxic eﬀects on tumor and normal cells.52,53
In addition, megavolt (6–25 MV) X-rays are now used to avoid
skin damage; tomotherapy and intensity-modulated radiation
therapy (IMRT) are applied to better concentrate the radiation
within the tumor volume;54–56 optimized dose fractionation
schedules are also developed to allow better cumulative damage
to the tumor and adequate repairing of normal tissues.57 Despite
such advances, it is still challenging to use radiotherapy alone to
eradicate tumor cells.
5. Radiosensitizers in cancer
radiotherapy
The above limitation, however, can be addressed by introdu-
cing a radiosensitizer that can locally increase the eﬃcacy of
radiotherapy treatment by enhancing the radiation damage to
the targeted cell.58 The rationale for the use of radiosensitizers
in radiotherapy is quite similar to the use of photosensitizers in
PDT. In general, radiosensitizers are the molecules/materials
with the ability to absorb/interact with radiation. An ideal
radiosensitizer should feature with (i) a high enhancement
factor for radiotherapy; (ii) good tumor-targeting capability
(at both tissue and cellular levels) so that it can be accumulated
in tumors rather than normal tissues; (iii) good biocompat-
ibility (or low toxicity); and (iv) eﬃcient renal clearance to avoid
potential short- and long-term detrimental eﬀects on the patient.
The activation pathways of radiosensitizers are analogous to
those of water molecules/biological tissues within the cells by
ionizing radiation; but the presence of radiosensitizers can first
increase the radiation absorption, and thus they are able to
deposit more energy which could result in a local dose increase
specifically to tumor cells.
The advantages of such radiosensitizers are highly attractive.
First, they are compatible with the current well-developed best
practice and state-of-the-art equipment of radiotherapy, and
they can be widely and readily applied in a practical set-up.
The enhancement moiety is just a net addition to the current
administration- and equipment-based solutions. Second, the
strong radiosensitizing eﬀects and the tumor-targeting capability
of good radiosensitizers can ensure much higher and more
specific damage to tumors relative to normal tissues at the same
dose of radiation, which allows the reduction of radiation dose,
prevents excessive damage to normal tissues, increases the
chance of treating the challenging infiltrative cancers, and even
eradicates the undetected tumor cells outside the tumor volume.
Third, due to their good biocompatibility, these radiosensitizers
can be applied to the same patient multiple times, and the dose
of the radiosensitizers can be varied over a relatively wide range
to achieve a desired enhancement to radiotherapy. However,
such ideal radiosensitizers have yet to be developed.
6. Radiosensitizer categories
In pursuit of all these attractive features, researchers from
various fields developed a wide range of agents that could
aﬀect the radiotherapy eﬃcacy.53,58 One particular type is
chemical radiosensitizers, which are basically conventional
chemotherapeutic drug molecules or complexes. Most of these
chemical
radiosensitizers
could
enhance
radiotherapy
by
modulating cell responses, such as reducing the radioresistance
of tumor cells, slowing down neo-angiogenesis or disrupting
the existing vessels (anti-angiogenic), inducing apoptosis and
suppressing mitosis.59 For example, early reports showed that
the activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
renders breast cancer cells radioresistant. Conversely, drugs
that inhibit EGFR autophosphorylation, such as cetuximab and
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, could oppose the radioresistance of
the cell.60,61 Gemcitabine, a chemotherapeutic agent that has been
approved for the treatment of a variety of solid tumors, can
radiosensitize cells that progress into the S-phase by depleting
dATP pools and causing mis-incorporation and mis-repair of bases
after radiation, leading to both apoptotic and non-apoptotic cell
death.59 Another interesting example of chemical radiosensitizers
is chemotherapeutic platinum analogs, including cisplatin, carbo-
platin, and oxaliplatin.62,63 They are used clinically in combination
with radiation, and their radiosensitizing eﬀects are believed to
be mediated through a variety of mechanisms, such as enhanced
formation of toxic platinum intermediates, improved cellular
uptake of platinum complexes, inhibition of DNA repair, and
cell-cycle arrest under radiation.64,65
Despite the many preclinical and clinical studies aﬃrming
the eﬃcacy of these radiosensitizers, major drawbacks of these
chemotherapeutics are their inherent cytotoxicity and side eﬀects.
For instance, gemcitabine is known to cause myelosuppression (its
most common side eﬀect), anemia, vomiting, and diarrhea.66,67
Similarly, cisplatin is known to have myelotoxicity, neurotoxicity,
and nephrotoxicity, and it can cause hemolytic anemia, hearing
loss, and vomiting.68,69 Because the radiosensitizing eﬀect is
concentration dependent, to achieve a desired enhancement
factor, the chemotherapeutics are often used above the cytotoxic
level, and an acute toxicity of combined radiotherapy and
chemotherapy is often observed.70
Fig. 1
Diﬀerential sensitivity of the normal and tumor tissues to ionizing
radiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51.
Review
Materials Horizons
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831 | 821
6.1.
High-Z-element-based radiosensitizers
As an alternative, high-Z-element-based agents have emerged as
next generation radiosensitizers in recent years. These high-Z-
element-based agents can strongly absorb, scatter, and emit
radiation energy, resulting in a local dose increase when they
are accumulated in tumors.16 The primary component of these
materials that diﬀers from the soft biological tissues is their
mass attenuation coeﬃcient, which is defined as m/r, where m is
the attenuation coeﬃcient and r is the mass density. A graphi-
cal representation of the mass attenuation coeﬃcient (m/r)
of the soft biological tissues has been presented in Fig. 2. It
should be mentioned that the probability of the Compton eﬀect
drops slightly with an increase in photon energy. Generally, a
high dose of radiation is used for normal radiotherapy and
therefore, the primary mechanism by which photons lose
energy in the soft biological tissues is through the Compton
eﬀect. The purpose of using radiosensitizers is to reduce the
eﬀective radiation dose. For a low radiation dose, the prob-
ability of photoelectric interactions or Rayleigh scattering
becomes significantly higher when a radiosensitizer is intro-
duced within the targeted cell. As the photoelectric eﬀect is
dependent on the atomic number of the material, researchers
in this field have brought out the idea of starting with high
atomic number (Z) materials as radiosensitizers. This concept
was first verified in 1980, where iodine was introduced
as a contrast agent in mammalian cells in culture.71 Their
results indicated that the presence of iodine indeed enhanced
the cell killing as well as the yield of DNA single-strand break-
ing when irradiated with X-rays. Following this report, several
attempts have been made to investigate a number of high Z
material based radiosensitizers;72 examples include nanomaterials
of gold (Au),16,73 silver (Ag),74,75 hafnium oxide,76 platinum
(Pt),77,78 gadolinium,79 iron oxide (Fe3O4),80 and quantum dots
(QDs).81
6.2.
Gold-based radiosensitizers
Gold, among all the materials used to date, has been particularly
proven to be attractive as a radiosensitizer.83 The basic rationale
for using gold as a radiosensitizer is based on the following
properties of gold: (i) one of the highest Z values (Au, Z = 79);
(ii) highly inert and biocompatible; and (iii) the ability to
increase the dose deposited in the target volume due to its
diﬀerence in the mass energy absorption coeﬃcient when
compared to the soft tissues (Fig. 2). A comparison of the mass
attenuation coeﬃcients between gold and some other frequently
used radiosensitizers such as gadolinium and iodine revealed
that the m/r value for gold dominates at energy values above
80 keV. For instance, at 100 keV, the m/r value for gold is
5.158 cm2 g1, and for iodine and gadolinium, these values are
1.942 cm2 g1 and 3.109 cm2 g1, respectively. A simple calcula-
tion based on the ratio of the m/r value of gold and gadolinium/
iodine suggests that gold could provide B2.7 times better
sensitivity per unit weight than iodine and B1.66 times better
sensitivity per unit weight than gadolinium. This calculation
indicates that the presence of gold within the tumors could
lead to an obvious enhancement of radiotherapy dose when
irradiated with keV X-rays (eﬀective energy).
The radiation dose enhancement eﬀect of gold was first
experimentally verified with a monolayer culture of C3H/10T1/2
mouse embryo fibroblasts, under an X-ray of 48 keV eﬀective
energy.84 The dose enhancement factor that could be achieved
was up to 4100 when the same cells were attached on a gold
foil. A similar dose enhancement was also reported in another
study.85 For instance, Au particles of size B1.5–3.0 mm suspended
in mammalian cells were able to increase the radiation dose
by B42–43% when irradiated with 200 kVp X-rays (note that the
expression of kVp is different from that of keV; kVp is the
maximum voltage in an X-ray tube, while the expression of keV
denotes the energy of an individual electron in the beam).85
Although the ability of gold in a realistic biological model could
not be envisaged from these in vitro studies, consistent results
from both studies confirm the enhancement of radiotherapy by
using gold as a sensitizer.
In an in vivo experiment, small sized Au NPs (B1.9 nm) were
chosen particularly to avoid the potential toxicity eﬀect in liver
as well as to induce deposition in tumor cells through the
enhanced permeation and retention (EPR) eﬀect. Indeed, a high
tumor uptake (B1.8 times that of liver) was observed when Au
NPs were intravenously injected into mice bearing subcutaneous
EMT-6 mammary carcinomas.73 The most exciting result was
obtained when the tumor region was irradiated with 250 kVp
X-rays. The introduction of 2.7 g-Au per kg-body-weight of mice
has improved the survival rate to B86% under 250 kVp X-rays,
while the radiation alone (without Au NPs) achieved only 20%
survival rate. Various forms of Au NPs have also been reported
in recent years as radiosensitizers.86,87 Monte Carlo simulations
suggest that 3% gold (30 mg Au per gram tumor) in the tissue
would give a tremendous dose enhancement (a factor of B6)
for a 140 kVp source, while the same has led to 5 to 7%
enhancement when using 6 and 4 MV photon beams without
Fig. 2
Comparison of the photon mass energy absorption coeﬃcients for
gold (Z = 79), gadolinium (Z = 64), iodine (Z = 56), bone and soft tissue.
Source: National Institute Standards and Technologies (NIST).82
Materials Horizons
Review
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

822 | Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
the flattening filter.87 A follow-up study also suggests that the
presence of Au NPs within tumors can influence the production
of photoelectrons and Auger electrons during low-energy
g-/X-ray irradiation, and subsequently enhance the dose in
tumors (e.g., 440%).86
7. Gold-based radiosensitizers: from
the design perspectives
The recognition that gold has the potential to be an ideal radio-
sensitizer has shifted the eﬀorts to laboratory and translational
studies, which aim to make gold-based radiosensitizers clinically
relevant.88 Like any other clinically approved drug molecules/
materials, several studies focused on their administration, bio-
distribution, metabolism, and elimination pathways. Usually, for
gold-based materials the most common/preferred administration
route is intravenous injection. However, a challenge issue arises
following the administration step. In particular, any material
following administration would face a series of complex biological
barriers which could limit their therapeutic outcomes. These
obstacles include protein corona formation (opsonisation), non-
specific distribution, inadequate accumulation of the NPs
inside the tumor (poor targeting ability), insuﬃcient blood
circulation time, and inadequate clearance of the NPs from the
body. A careful consideration of the physicochemical properties
of the material of interest is crucial to surmount all these
barriers. In the following section, we will discuss some impor-
tant strategies that could improve the therapeutic outcomes
of the gold-based materials, especially as promising radiosensi-
tizers for cancer radiotherapy (Scheme 2).
7.1.
Strategy #1: tailoring the physicochemical properties of
Au NPs
For any therapeutic materials, the primary requirement to
achieve high therapeutic eﬃciency is their precise accumula-
tion in the target site. An excitement generated by Au NPs for
therapeutic applications arises from their ability to preferen-
tially accumulate at the target site. The recognition that most
solid tumors have blood vessels with defective architecture,
which allows foreign particles to enter into the tumor from
surrounding tissues, has led to the generation of a phenomenon
called the enhanced permeation and retention (EPR) eﬀect.89
This phenomenon is highly pronounced in cancer. Therefore,
various materials attributes of Au NPs, such as size, shape, and
surface functionalization, have been taken into account for
developing Au NPs with a high EPR eﬀect. The size of the NPs
is probably one of the most important factors, as the EPR eﬀect
is considered to be a molecular weight dependent phenomenon.
In particular, NPs above the threshold size of renal clearance and
below the cutoﬀsize of the pores in tumor vessels are favorable
for the EPR eﬀect. The size of the Au NPs can be easily tuned
to this range, thanks to the recent advancement of synthetic
chemistry of Au NPs. Accordingly, Au NPs in the size range of
10–250 nm are particularly attractive and advantageous over the
small drug molecules, which generally suffer from rapid renal
clearance.90 However, size is not the sole factor for the EPR
effect; other factors, such as particle shape and surface charge,
are also considered to be important. For example, it has been
shown that Au nanorods with a relatively small volume and high
aspect ratio were good candidates for EPR-mediated tumor
delivery.91 While the EPR effect based drug delivery becomes
immensely popular in the NP community, it also suffers from
some limitations. Since the EPR effect is a passive targeting
approach, the major limitation is the insufficient loading of Au
NPs within the tumor sites through this effect, which sometimes
also generates certain adverse side effects.89
Such limitations can be mitigated by using an active targeting
strategy. By active targeting, it is possible to maximize the
targeting yield as well as to minimize the adverse eﬀects. Cancer
cells generally overexpress certain receptor molecules relative to
normal cells. Based on this fact, many targeting ligands have
been developed. Examples of such tumor-targeting agents
include proteins (mainly antibodies and their fragments),
nucleic acids (aptamers), or other receptor ligands (peptides,
vitamins, and carbohydrates). Targeting ligands will recognize
the receptor molecules through ligand–receptor interactions,
which are highly specific due to their high binding affinity.
Therefore, when a targeting agent is attached to the particle
surface, a high targeting efficacy is generally observed. However,
proper attention should also be paid during the functionaliza-
tion or conjugation of targeting ligands to NPs. In some recent
studies, a phage display approach has been employed to identify
target-specific peptides including cancer cell-targeting peptides.
Since various gold-based nanomaterials can be easily function-
alized with these cancer cell-targeting peptides, several studies
focused on their application in molecular targeting, cancer
diagnosis and treatment.92–95
In the case of Au NPs, there are some unique advantages
arising from their well-defined synthetic chemistry, which provides
eﬃcient protocols to prepare Au NPs with well-defined size, shape,
surface, and functionality. For example, the surface of Au NPs can
be easily modified through various bio-conjugation approaches.
Scheme 2
Schematic illustration of the various functionalization strate-
gies implemented to improve the therapeutic outcomes of Au NPs.
Review
Materials Horizons
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831 | 823
Several studies demonstrated that it is indeed possible to
improve the targeting yield by conjugating Au NPs with active
targeting ligands specific to cancer cells. For example, when the
anti-epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibody was
conjugated to Au NPs, it was found that much more Au NPs
were bound to HSC and HOC malignant cells relative to HaCaT
(human keratinocytes) benign cells through the molecular
targeting of overexpressed EGFR on the malignant cell surface.96
Anti-EGFR was also conjugated to Au nanorods to improve the
specificity in binding.2,97
Of recent interest is the fact that the NPs themselves can also
induce endothelial cell gaps (termed NanoEL i.e., nanomaterial
induced endothelial leakiness) even when there is no EPR
eﬀect.98,99 The EPR eﬀect alone is not highly dependable since
the EPR eﬀect arises due to the tumor’s own innate drive to
access nutrients from the main vasculature. The size and eﬀective
density of the NPs are important determinants of NanoEL.100,101
In particular, NPs in the size region of 10–30 nm could easily
induce NanoEL in human mammary and microvascular capillary
endothelial cells.100 Effective densities exceeding 1.7 g cm3
could induce cell gaps in microvascular capillary endothelial
cells.101 Besides NanoEL as being a non-EPR and nanotechnol-
ogically pliable way of accessing the tumors, there are also
other strategies like inducing oxidative stress in the endothelial
cells that have been shown to work with nanodiamonds and
high surface area mesoporous silica NPs.102,103 However, one
may need to modify the surface of Au NPs to have those
oxidative stress abilities. Nonetheless, all these new strategies
that do not depend on the EPR effect may present a new wave of
directly targeting NPs for radiotherapy.
7.2.
Strategy #2: reducing the opsonisation/protein corona
formation
When surface-engineered NPs are used in vitro, a high targeting
eﬃcacy was often observed. Such scenario however, may or
may not happen in the in vivo case. In general, following
administration through intravenous injection, these NPs start
to circulate in the blood stream and will be distributed to
various organs according to their physicochemical properties.
The possibility of accumulation of the NPs at the target site will
then depend on their ability to overcome the biological barriers
during circulation. Obstacles along the way first begin with the
adsorption of plasma proteins onto the surface of circulating
NPs. This process is called ‘‘opsonisation’’ or ‘‘protein corona
formation’’. Since the surface of the NPs will be dominated by
proteins, the targeting abilities of the NPs will be drastically
inhibited. In addition, the biological fate including their bio-
distribution, cellular uptake, and immune response of the
synthetic NPs will also be defined by the nature of the ‘‘protein
corona’’. To improve the therapeutic outcome, it is therefore
necessary to preserve the ‘‘synthetic identity’’ of the surface-
engineered NPs, by significantly reducing the protein adsorption.
Functionalization of Au NPs with materials that have a high
shielding eﬀect with proteins is recognized to be one of the
most eﬃcient ways to reduce the opsonisation. These materials
include hydrophilic polymers, such as polyvinyl alcohol,
poly(amino acid)s, polysaccharides, polyethylene glycol (PEG)
and various zwitterionic ligands. Among all these polymeric
materials, functionalization with PEG on the particle surface
(which is known as PEGylation) is demonstrated to be eﬃcient
in reducing the formation of the protein corona, which could
re-establish the as-designed specific binding.104 According to
theoretical predictions, PEG could suppress protein adsorption
by blocking protein-binding sites and by creating a thermo-
dynamic barrier to protein diﬀusion. Because of its unique
feature, PEGylation with various types of NPs including Au NPs
has been extensively examined. Au NPs have also been exploited
as a model system to investigate the eﬀect of size and PEG
grafting density on serum protein adsorption.105 The results
showed that both the size and PEG grafting density control the
composition of the adsorbed protein layer by selectively blocking
or permitting the adsorption of specific proteins from serum.
Functionalization with zwitterionic ligands has emerged as
another alternative strategy to provide corona-free NPs.106
Biological components, such as most of the cell membranes,
phospholipids, and their derivatives, have zwitterionic charac-
ter. A zwitterionic coating has been considered to be useful for
developing highly stable materials with good biocompatibility
and low cytotoxicity. Indeed, small Au NPs (B4 nm) function-
alized with a zwitterion disulfide ligand were stable in various
media including saline media with salt concentrations as
high as 3.0 M.107 Several other groups also reported zwitterionic
ligand functionalized highly stable Au NPs.108–110 For instance,
Au NPs coated with zwitterionic poly(carboxybetaine acrylamide)
(polyCBAA) ligands showed good stability in undiluted blood
serum.111 Under a similar condition, Au NPs with other conven-
tional coatings including PEG were found to be agglomerated.
These results were in accordance with the previous findings that
zwitterionic self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) could resist the
nonspecific adsorption of proteins in aqueous buffer solutions.112
This unique feature of zwitterionic ligands has been exploited to
achieve high targeting yield of NPs.
7.3.
Strategy #3: improving the blood circulation half-life
The therapeutic outcome of a NP is closely associated with its
ability to remain in circulation. This ability is generally defined
by their circulation half-lives (t1/2), which is the time a NP takes
to halve its concentration during circulation. A prolonged
circulation time is necessary for therapeutic applications as
the ability of NPs to accumulate at the target site is directly
related to their circulation half-life. A major limiting factor for
the relatively short half-life of the large NPs (especially for those
with similar size to bacteria and viruses) is opsonisation, which
generally leads to aggregation and rapid clearance from the
bloodstream through the reticuloendothelial system (RES)
(liver, spleen, and lymph nodes). Enhanced RES accumulation
would therefore result in lower targeting yields. Based on the
experimental data reported so far, it can be identified that
formation of the hard corona is favored with the increment in
NP size. The consequence is that a relatively longer circulation
time will be favored for small NPs. It was evident from previous
studies that among 80, 170, and 240 nm NPs, 80 nm NPs
Materials Horizons
Review
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

824 | Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
showed the longest elimination half-life. A recent study used
fluorescent-labeled Au NPs to investigate the eﬀect of particle
size on tumor accumulation dynamics over a 24 h period. At
24 h post-injection, the 15 nm Au NP achieved its maximal
signal in the tumor. Although smaller Au NPs showed longer
circulation half-lives, reducing the NP size below a certain
threshold may result in elimination of particles through other
channels such as renal excretion. In general, NPs with sizes
below 6 nm are generally cleared within minutes from the
systemic circulation by renal excretion (kidney barrier B5.8 nm).
This circumstance has been verified with two diﬀerently sized
NPs of 4 nm and 8 nm. Indeed, the circulation half-life of the
8 nm NP was longer than that of the 4 nm NP due to its lower
renal clearance eﬃcacy. For the design of Au NPs for radio-
therapy or other therapeutic applications, it is important to
choose a proper size window as the NP size is a determinant
factor for long circulation half-lives.
There are several other factors that could also dictate the
circulation half-life of NPs (Fig. 3a). Particularly, PEGylation,
known to work well for preventing opsonisation, is probably the
most widely used strategy to prolong NPs’ circulation time.
Several attempts have been made to find the optimal PEGylation
strategy for NPs. Studies on the eﬀect of chain length, density
of PEG molecules on the NP surface and finding the right
interaction with the NP surface are of particular interest. In fact,
a recent study demonstrated that a blood half-life as long as
B51 h could be achieved by combining the right balance
between the size of Au NPs and the chain length of PEG
molecules (Fig. 3b).113 In particular, small size of Au NPs and
large molecular weight/chain length of PEG favored long blood
circulation. Even though spherical NPs were generally used for
most therapeutic applications, the impact of NP shape on blood
circulation has also been investigated in some studies.114 The
shape of NPs aﬀects their local curvature, which could eventually
modify the interactions of NPs with biological components. A
comparison study between rod and spherical shaped PEGylated
Au NPs revealed that the Au nanorods were taken up to a lesser
extent by the liver, and they had a longer circulation time in the
blood and higher accumulation in the tumor, when compared
to their spherical counterparts.115 Other parameters, such as
softness/flexibility of the NPs,116 and surface charge,90 have also
been tailored to prolong the circulation lifetime as well as to
enhance the targeting yield. In general, NPs with a high degree of
deformability/softness as well as neutral/negative surface charge
exhibit long circulation time. Interested readers are referred to
recent review articles that highlight the critical factors influen-
cing the blood circulation time of engineered NPs.117–119
8. Au NP-based radiosensitizers
In light of the above unique features/strategies, as well as the
realization that Au NPs could be an ideal radiosensitizer,
various research groups started to investigate the performance
of diﬀerent types of Au NPs as radiosensitizers for cancer
radiotherapy.41,120–128 A general observation is that the presence
of Au NPs within the tumor cells, followed by irradiation with
X-rays, could enhance the local radiation dose. The ability of Au
NPs to damage the ‘‘reproductive integrity’’ of a cell was experi-
mentally confirmed by some research groups. For example,
when a plasmid DNA was bombarded with 60 keV electrons,
the production of low energy electrons in the presence of Au NPs
resulted in B2.5 fold enhancement of double stranded DNA
damage.129 Three key parameters governing such radiosensitiza-
tion in DNA were identified, namely, cellular concentration of
Au NPs, size of the Au NPs, and the incident X-ray energy. By
optimizing all these parameters, it was concluded that large-
sized Au NPs with high concentration and 50 keV photons could
Fig. 3
(a) Various strategies that could be combined to accomplish prolonged circulation of NPs in blood. (b) The circulatory half-lives of PEGylated Au
NPs with diﬀerent sizes and PEG molecular weights. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113.
Review
Materials Horizons
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831 | 825
potentially result in a radiation dose enhancement factor (DEF)
of 6.130 An in vitro study aiming to explore the size dependent
radiosensitization properties of Au NPs revealed that compared
to 14 and 74 nm Au NPs, 50 nm Au NPs demonstrated a better
DEF (1.20, 1.43 and 1.26, respectively for 14, 50 and 74 nm at
220 kVp) due to their higher cellular internalization.131 Another
study demonstrated that among 4.8, 12.1, 27.3, and 46.6 nm
PEG-coated Au NPs, 12.1 and 27.3 nm Au NPs were accumulated
in the tumor with high concentrations and had stronger sensi-
tization effects compared to 4.8 and 46.6 nm NPs. According to
their in vivo study, almost all sizes of the PEG-coated Au NPs
were able to reduce the tumor volume and weight after 5 Gy
radiation; however, 12.1 and 27.3 nm Au NPs resulted in
complete disappearance of the tumor due to a high degree of
radiosensitization (Fig. 4).19 Because of the unique advantages
of PEGylation (e.g., improved stability and increased circulation
time), several other PEG-coated Au NPs were used to study the
radiosensitization effect.132,133 These PEGylated Au NPs were
indeed internalized in the cell cytoplasm to a large extent, and
therefore the cell survival rates were decreased when exposed to
X-ray radiation. Another notable feature of these PEGylated
Au NPs is that they did not cause obvious toxicity.134 The
concentration dependent dose enhancement was also investi-
gated for relatively small Au NPs (B1.9 nm) by using bovine
aortic endothelial cells (BAECs) as a model of endothelial
tissue. The results indicated that when kiloV X-ray beams were
used, a dose enhancement of up to 25 times could be achieved
at a high concentration of Au NPs (1 mM).135 The dose enhance-
ment was much better than the 5–10 nm PEGylated Au NPs,
although the reason behind such an enhancement is unclear at
the moment.
Cellular internalization also depends on the nature of the
surface ligands on the NP surface. Therefore, the radiosensiti-
zation eﬀect of Au NPs functionalized with active targeting
ligands was also investigated. Some important examples will be
highlighted here. Some of the cancer cells tend to overexpress
the folate receptors (FRs) more than normal healthy cells, and
this eﬀect has been exploited to target folate-linked therapeutic
agents specifically to FR-expressing tumors.136 Folate ligands
can be easily functionalized with Au NPs through various bio-
conjugation methods.137 An in vitro study demonstrated that
folate-conjugated Au NPs were highly eﬀective towards HeLa
(with a high level of folate receptor expression) cells, while they
were marginally eﬀective towards MCF-7 (with a low level of
folate receptor expression) cells.137 Later, the uptake of folate-
and non-folate-conjugated PEGylated Au NPs with comparable
size on the HeLa cells was also investigated. As expected,
internalization of the folate-Au NPs into the HeLa cells was
higher than those of PEGylated Au NPs. Because of higher
cellular uptake of folate-Au NPs, a significantly higher radiation
dose enhancement eﬀect was observed upon exposure to
180 kVp X-rays with the folate-Au NPs (DEF = 1.64  0.05) as
compared to PEGylated Au NPs (REF = 1.35  0.05).138 Other
active targeting ligands, such as monoclonal antibodies, were
also conjugated to Au NPs, aiming to improve their cellular
internalization. Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is one such example
which has been used frequently for patients with breast cancer.
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is over-
expressed in 20–30% of early-stage breast cancer. Trastuzumab
binds specifically to the HER2 positive cancer cell lines and
works through slowing down the cell duplication. The combination
of targeting and therapeutic ability of trastuzumab with the radio-
sensitizing properties of Au NPs resulted in an improved therapeutic
performance. For example, it was demonstrated that trastuzumab-
PEG-Au NPs with 300 kVp X-rays were 5.1 times more effective in
terms of breaking DNA double strands in SK-BR-3 cells as compared
to treatment with X-ray radiation alone. Efficient transport of
trastuzumab-PEG-Au NPs into the HER2-overexpressing SK-BR3
cells was demonstrated by dark field microscopy.139 In contrast,
non-targeted PEG-Au NPs had little or no internalization in SK-BR3
cells, which in turn substantiated the key role of active targeting
ligands. In a follow-up study, the same group compared the
Fig. 4
(a) Tumor growth curves and (b) tumor weights of 4.8, 12.1,
27.3, and 46.6 nm PEG-coated Au NP treated mice at a concentration of
4 mg kg1. Bars represent mean  standard deviation. Data were analyzed
by Student’s t-test, and *, P o 0.05; **, P o 0.01; ***, P o 0.001. 12.1 nm
and 27.3 nm PEG-coated Au NPs have decreased the tumor size most
significantly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19.
Materials Horizons
Review
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

826 | Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
REF of trastuzumab-PEG-Au NPs with that of non-targeted
PEG-Au NPs under the exposure of 100 kVp X-ray radiation.
The trastuzumab-PEG-Au NPs were more effective (DEF = 1.6)
than PEG-Au NPs (DEF = 1.3). In addition, the trastuzumab-
PEG-Au NPs also led to a 46% reduction in tumor volume at
four months as compared to the treatment with X-ray radiation
alone (100 kVp).140
Providing the necessary fuel/food onto the NP surface for the
growth of tumor cells is another way of eﬀective cellular
internalization. These proliferating cancer cells can consume
a variety of fuel/food, such as glucose and amino acids. Such
unique metabolic characteristics of cancer cells were exploited
for targeted delivery of Au NPs. Using the human prostate
carcinoma cell line, DU-145, it has been shown that the cellular
uptake of glucose-functionalized Au NPs was more than those
Au NPs without glucose.141 When 200 kVp X-ray was applied,
glucose-functionalized Au NPs increased the radiosensitivity
by 50.37% (P o 0.001) at 24 h and by 38.68% (P o 0.005) at 48 h
when compared to those Au NPs without glucose. In a follow-up
study, the cellular uptake and radiosensitivity of glucose-
functionalized Au NPs were also tested using a breast-cancer
cell line (MCF-7) as a model.142 It was revealed that the glucose-
functionalized Au NPs were able to enter the cells and they were
distributed in the cytoplasm. Because of high cellular uptake,
a significantly increased radiation induced cytotoxicity was
observed under exposure of 200 kVp X-rays.142
9. Au NC-based radiosensitizers
In the previous section, we have underlined the fact that when
large Au NPs are used as radiosensitizers, there is a high chance
to have high in vivo toxicity due to the accumulation of these
NPs in the liver and spleen. For instance, these accumulations
can induce gene regulations and liver necrosis.143,144 To avoid
such toxic side eﬀects, it is desirable to find a NP with high
tumor specificity which can bypass the clearance by the RES
organs, such as the liver and spleen. A NP with eﬃcient urinary
excretion will meet these requirements.
Reducing the NP size to below the kidney filtration threshold
could benefit the escape of NPs from RES absorption. Ultrasmall
Au NPs (o2 nm), which are also known as Au nanoclusters
(NCs), have been introduced recently to this field.146–148 The
striking differences between these Au NCs and their larger
counterparts (i.e., NPs, 42 nm) are their ultrasmall size feature
and unique physicochemical properties.149–152 A typical Au NC
has a core–shell type structure with a gold core below 2 nm. The
Au core contains a few to hundreds of Au atoms, and this core is
protected by a ligand shell. The ligands could be small thiolate
ligands, biocompatible peptides, or even other biomolecules,
such as proteins and DNA.153–156 A recent study investigated the
bio-distribution and renal clearance of luminescent GSH-coated
Au NPs (B2 nm) and compared the results with other ligand
functionalized Au NPs of similar sizes (Fig. 5).145 It was found
that the renal clearance of 2 nm GSH-coated Au NPs was B10 to
100 times higher than those of the similar-sized Au NPs coated
with
bis(p-sulfonatophenyl)phenylphosphine
and
cysteine.
The presence of GSH ligands on the NP surface can reduce
the adsorption of serum proteins, minimize the nonspecific
accumulation, and thus improve the renal clearance efficiency.
GSH on a 2 nm NP might behave more similarly to free GSH
molecules during interaction with proteins, while GSH on large
NPs exhibits a different interaction pattern with serum proteins.
Based on this phenomenon, it was suggested that both the
ligand and the NP size play central roles in renal clearance.
Recently, the Au NC surface was functionalized with a penta-
peptide, Cys-Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (CRGDS).157 CRGDS has a small
hydrodynamic diameter (HD) and zwitterionic character and
for these reasons, it stabilizes the Au NCs during circulation
and enables them to be specifically taken up by the tumor cells.
Such unique properties not only resulted in a high tumor-to-
liver uptake ratio of 9.3, but also showed efficient urinary
excretion (82% within 24 h after injection).
We have recently introduced these ultrasmall Au NCs to the
field of cancer radiotherapy. To study the radiotherapy enhance-
ment by these NCs, we had chosen the most stable NCs, i.e., Au25
NC species as a proof-of-concept.158 In particular, two types of
Au25 NCs, namely, GSH-Au25 NCs and bovine serum albumin
(BSA)-Au25 NCs, were considered. Apart from studying the radio-
sensitizing eﬀect, the motivation was to assess the eﬀects of
surface ligands of NCs on their pharmacokinetics in the body.
The cellular responses as well as radiation enhancements of
both NCs were evaluated using the HeLa cells. The unique
luminescence characteristics of these NCs were taken into
consideration to further confirm the accumulation. Notably,
GSH-Au25 NCs showed higher tumor accumulation via the EPR
eﬀect and therefore had a stronger enhancement for cancer
radiotherapy. The same NCs also showed eﬃcient renal clearance
and therefore had no obvious toxicity in the body. In contrast,
BSA-Au25 NCs could not be eﬃciently removed by the kidney and
therefore eventually caused a certain liver damage. The relatively
large hydrodynamic size of the BSA-Au25 NCs (HD B6 nm)
Fig. 5
Bio-distribution of GSH-coated Au NPs in mice 24 h post injection.
The percentage of the injected dose was calculated based on the Au
concentration measured by ICP-MS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145.
Review
Materials Horizons
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831 | 827
compared to GSH-Au25 NCs (HD B2.4 nm) was considered
to be the reason for their poorer excretion through renal
clearance. When both NCs were intraperitoneally injected into
mice bearing the U14 tumor with a tumor weight of B10 mg-
tumor per kg body, a remarkable decrease in tumor volume was
observed in the mice treated with GSH- and BSA-Au25 NCs
relative to the control group. While both NCs showed strong
radiation enhancement, the performance of the GSH-Au25 NCs
(B55%) was better than that of BSA-Au25 NCs (B38%) due to
their higher cellular uptake. Driven by such interesting results,
we further explored the eﬃcacy of another GSH-protected Au
NC.159,160 A small-sized Au NC namely, Au10–12(SG)10–12 was
further investigated. Apart from the fact that GSH, being a
naturally occurring peptide, could provide good biocompatibility,
the ultrasmall size might also help the Au NCs to escape the RES
organs and improve their deposition in tumor cells.
The Au NCs containing a high concentration of GSH mole-
cules on their surface could possibly facilitate the uptake of
NCs by the tumor cells by activating the GSH transporters
inside the body. As a result, the accumulation of these NCs
inside the tumor is expected to improve. Our investigation on
the cellular uptake of the GSH-protected Au NCs by analyzing
the standardized uptake values (SUVs), which are defined as
(weight of Au/weight of tissue sample)/(weight of Au injected
into animal/total body weight), of gold in the tumor tissue at
diﬀerent time points post injection (p.i.) indeed proved ultra-
high uptake of these NCs in tumor tissues compared to normal
tissues (Fig. 6a).159 In fact, the tumor uptake of these ultrasmall
Au NCs was about an order of magnitude higher than those of
tiopronin-protected Au NPs (B2 nm) and PEG-coated Au nanorods
(B20 nm). In addition, further in vivo bio-distribution study
revealed that at 24 h p.i., the concentration of GSH-protected Au
NCs in tumors was also much higher than that of all other key
organs including the kidney and liver (Fig. 6b).
Because of their high cellular uptake, we further tested their
radiotherapy sensitization eﬃcacy by using U14 tumor bearing
Fig. 6
(a) Standard uptake values (SUV) of Au10–12(SG)10–12 NCs in tumors at different time points. (b) Bio-distribution of Au10–12(SG)10–12 NCs at 24 h and
23 days p.i. (c) Time-course studies of tumor volumes and (d) tumor weights (at 23 days p.i.) of untreated mice (control), mice treated with Au10–12(SG)10–12
NCs only, mice treated with radiation only, and mice treated with both Au10–12(SG)10–12 NCs and radiation. Data are analyzed by Student’s t-test, and the star
denotes significant difference from the control group (p o 0.05). Reprinted with permission from ref. 159.
Materials Horizons
Review
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

828 | Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
nude mice as the animal model. First, GSH-protected Au NCs
with a concentration of 20 mg-Au per kg-body were adminis-
tered, and when their uptake reached a maximum, i.e., 24 h p.i.,
the mice were irradiated under 137Cs g-radiation of 3600 Ci at a
5 Gy dose. As shown in Fig. 6c and d, after 23 days p.i., both the
tumor volume and tumor weight showed significant change for
the mice treated with both GSH-protected Au NCs and radia-
tion, which proved that indeed these Au NCs can enhance
the radiotherapy eﬃciency. Other notable Au NCs, including
GSH-coated Au29–43 NCs, also showed strong enhancement for
radiotherapy with negligible damage to the normal tissues.160
These NCs can also be efficiently cleared by the kidney.
10. Conclusion and future direction
The concept of damaging the ‘‘reproductive integrity’’ of a cell
by introducing high-Z value materials that are sensitive to
ionizing radiation is recognized as a potentially important
way to enhance the eﬃcacy of radiotherapy. In the past few
years, we have seen a rapid growth in the pace of discovery and
development of gold-based radiosensitizers. The well-developed
synthetic chemistry, low cytotoxicity, good biocompatibility,
and the ease of functionalization of Au NPs and NCs certainly
helped researchers to exploit the potential of various types of
Au NPs/NCs as promising radiosensitizers for cancer radio-
therapy. In view of all these unique characteristics, we have
highlighted here some of the important radio-biological
phenomena that should be taken into account when gold is
used as a radiosensitizer. We have also discussed the common
radiation–matter interactions with their possible outcomes.
Theoretical studies along with many in vitro and some in vivo
results demonstrated that Au NPs/NCs could indeed improve
the radiotherapeutic outcome if they were sufficiently interna-
lized into the target cells. We have discussed the obstacles
that can result in nonspecific distribution of the NPs as well as
the strategies to overcome such obstacles including PEGylation
and functionalization with certain cancer cell specific targeting
ligands.
In radiotherapy, there are still challenges such as tumor
radio-resistance and minimizing irradiation of healthy non-
target tissues while maximizing radiation doses delivered to
tumors. As the design of gold-based radiosensitizers continues
to mature, eﬀorts towards clinical translation should focus on
the need for (i) surmounting the biological obstacles faced
by Au NPs/NCs in vivo; (ii) optimization of physicochemical
properties of Au NPs/NCs for higher cellular internalization and
better radiotherapeutic performance; (iii) understanding the
mechanism of Au NP-based radiosensitization at clinically
relevant radiation energies; (iv) optimization of radiobiological
parameters, such as dose and concentration; and (v) in-depth
investigation on the in vivo toxicity of the targeted Au NPs.
An in-depth and systematic understanding of these subjects
through interdisciplinary research eﬀorts would definitely
accelerate the translation of the gold-based radiosensitizers to
clinical practice.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Ministry of Educa-
tion, Singapore, under the Grant R-279-000-481-112.
References
1 P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Today,
2007, 2, 18–29.
2 X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120.
3 B. Kang, M. A. Mackey and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2010, 132, 1517–1519.
4 A. M. Gobin, M. H. Lee, N. J. Halas, W. D. James,
R. A. Drezek and J. L. West, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1929–1934.
5 A. Z. Wang, R. Langer and O. C. Farokhzad, Annu. Rev.
Med., 2012, 63, 185–198.
6 J. Conde, G. Doria and P. Baptista, J. Drug Delivery, 2011,
2012, 1–12.
7 L. C. Kennedy, L. R. Bickford, N. A. Lewinski, A. J. Coughlin,
Y. Hu, E. S. Day, J. L. West and R. A. Drezek, Small, 2011, 7,
169–183.
8 X. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed,
Lasers Med. Sci., 2008, 23, 217.
9 E. B. Dickerson, E. C. Dreaden, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed,
H. Chu, S. Pushpanketh, J. F. McDonald and M. A. El-Sayed,
Cancer Lett., 2008, 269, 57–66.
10 S. Hwang, J. Nam, S. Jung, J. Song, H. Doh and S. Kim,
Nanomedicine, 2014, 9, 2003–2022.
11 P. Qiu, M. Yang, X. Qu, Y. Huai, Y. Zhu and C. Mao,
Biomaterials, 2016, 104, 138–144.
12 D. K. Chatterjee, L. S. Fong and Y. Zhang, Adv. Drug
Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1627–1637.
13 S. S. Lucky, K. C. Soo and Y. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115,
1990–2042.
14 Y. Cheng, A. C. Samia, J. D. Meyers, I. Panagopoulos, B. Fei
and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10643–10647.
15 H. Kawasaki, S. Kumar, G. Li, C. Zeng, D. R. Kauﬀman,
J. Yoshimoto, Y. Iwasaki and R. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26,
2777–2788.
16 J. F. Hainfeld, F. A. Dilmanian, D. N. Slatkin and
H. M. Smilowitz, J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 2008, 60, 977–985.
17 M. K. Leung, J. C. Chow, B. D. Chithrani, M. J. Lee, B. Oms
and D. A. Jaﬀray, Med. Phys., 2011, 38, 624–631.
18 C. J. Murphy, A. M. Gole, J. W. Stone, P. N. Sisco, A. M. Alkilany,
E. C. Goldsmith and S. C. Baxter, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41,
1721–1730.
19 X.-D. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Shen, J. Chen, Y.-M. Sun, P.-X. Liu
and X.-J. Liang, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 6408–6419.
20 J. F. Hainfeld, F. A. Dilmanian, Z. Zhong, D. N. Slatkin,
J. A. Kalef-Ezra and H. M. Smilowitz, Phys. Med. Biol., 2010,
55, 3045.
21 S. Jain, J. A. Coulter, A. R. Hounsell, K. T. Butterworth,
S. J. McMahon, W. B. Hyland, M. F. Muir, G. R. Dickson,
K. M. Prise and F. J. Currell, Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol.,
Phys., 2011, 79, 531–539.
Review
Materials Horizons
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831 | 829
22 D. Y. Joh, L. Sun, M. Stangl, A. Al Zaki, S. Murty,
P. P. Santoiemma, J. J. Davis, B. C. Baumann, M. Alonso-
Basanta and D. Bhang, PLoS One, 2013, 8, e62425.
23 K. T. Butterworth, S. J. McMahon, F. J. Currell and
K. M. Prise, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4830–4838.
24 E. Lechtman, N. Chattopadhyay, Z. Cai, S. Mashouf,
R. Reilly and J. Pignol, Phys. Med. Biol., 2011, 56, 4631.
25 T. Wolfe, D. Chatterjee, J. Lee, J. D. Grant, S. Bhattarai,
R. Tailor, G. Goodrich, P. Nicolucci and S. Krishnan,
Nanomedicine, 2015, 11, 1277–1283.
26 S. Her, D. A. Jaﬀray and C. Allen, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev.,
2015, 109, 84–101.
27 X. Zhang, Cell Biochem. Biophys., 2015, 72, 771–775.
28 Y. Yang, L. Zhang, J. Cai, X. Li, D. Cheng, H. Su, J. Zhang,
S. Liu, H. Shi, Y. Zhang and C. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1718–1732.
29 A. Al Zaki, D. Joh, Z. Cheng, A. L. B. De Barros, G. Kao,
J. Dorsey and A. Tsourkas, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 104–112.
30 N. Ma, Y.-W. Jiang, X. Zhang, H. Wu, J. N. Myers, P. Liu,
H. Jin, N. Gu, N. He, F.-G. Wu and Z. Chen, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28480–28494.
31 J. F. Hainfeld, H. M. Smilowitz, M. J. O’Connor, F. A.
Dilmanian and D. N. Slatkin, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8,
1601–1609.
32 D. K. Nagesha, D. B. Tada, C. K. K. Stambaugh, E. Gultepe,
E. Jost, C. O. Levy, R. Cormack, G. M. Makrigiorgos and
S. Sridhar, Phys. Med. Biol., 2010, 55, 6039–6052.
33 W. Roa, X. Zhang, L. Guo, A. Shaw, X. Hu, Y. Xiong,
S. Gulavita, S. Patel, X. Sun and J. Chen, Nanotechnology,
2009, 20, 375101.
34 S. J. McMahon, M. H. Mendenhall, S. Jain and F. Currell,
Phys. Med. Biol., 2008, 53, 5635–5651.
35 R. I. Berbeco, W. Ngwa and G. M. Makrigiorgos, Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys., 2011, 81, 270–276.
36 W. Ngwa, R. Kumar, S. Sridhar, H. Korideck, P. Zygmanski,
R. A. Cormack, R. Berbeco and G. M. Makrigiorgos, Nano-
medicine, 2014, 9, 1063–1082.
37 Y.-S. Yang, R. P. Carney, F. Stellacci and D. J. Irvine, ACS
Nano, 2014, 8, 8992–9002.
38 C. Alric, R. Serduc, C. Mandon, J. Taleb, G. Le Duc, A. Le
Meur-Herland,
C.
Billotey,
P.
Perriat,
S.
Roux
and
O. Tillement, Gold Bull., 2008, 41, 90–97.
39 D. Wu, X.-D. Zhang, P.-X. Liu, L.-A. Zhang, F.-Y. Fan and
M.-L. Guo, Curr. Nanosci., 2011, 7, 110–118.
40 Y. Lin, H. Paganetti, S. J. McMahon and J. Schuemann,
Med. Phys., 2015, 42, 5890–5902.
41 I. Miladi, C. Alric, S. Dufort, P. Mowat, A. Dutour,
C. Mandon, G. Laurent, E. Bra¨uer-Krisch, N. Herath and
J. L. Coll, Small, 2014, 10, 1116–1124.
42 H. Shirato, T. Harada, T. Harabayashi, K. Hida, H. Endo,
K. Kitamura, R. Onimaru, K. Yamazaki, N. Kurauchi,
T. Shimizu, N. Shinohara, M. Matsushita, H. Dosaka-
Akita and K. Miyasaka, Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys.,
2003, 56, 240–247.
43 J. C. Polf, L. F. Bronk, W. H. Driessen, W. Arap, R. Pasqualini
and M. Gillin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 193702.
44 K. Haume, S. Rosa, S. Grellet, M. A. S´miałek, K. T. Butterworth,
A. V. Solov’yov, K. M. Prise, J. Golding and N. J. Mason, Cancer
Nanotechnol., 2016, 7, 8.
45 T. N. Huan, T. Ganesh, K. S. Kim, S. Kim, S.-H. Han and
H. Chung, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 27, 183–186.
46 R. Baskar, K. A. Lee, R. Yeo and K.-W. Yeoh, Int. J. Med. Sci.,
2012, 9, 193–199.
47 G. J. van der Plaats, Medical X-ray Techniques in Diagnostic
Radiology: A Textbook for Radiographers and Radiological
Technicians, Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
48 A. G. Ghom, Textbook of oral radiology, Elsevier Health
Sciences, 2017.
49 M. A. Khan, J. Van Dyk, I. W. T. Yeung and R. P. Hill,
Radiother. Oncol., 2003, 66, 95–102.
50 C. L. Limoli, M. I. Kaplan, E. Giedzinski and W. F. Morgan,
Free Radical Biol. Med., 2001, 31, 10–19.
51 S. Falk, Surgery, 2009, 27, 169–172.
52 K. K. Fu, T. F. Pajak, A. Trotti, C. U. Jones, S. A. Spencer,
T. L. Phillips, A. S. Garden, J. A. Ridge, J. S. Cooper and
K. K. Ang, Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys., 2000, 48, 7–16.
53 S. H. Zaidi, R. A. Huddart and K. J. Harrington, Curr. Drug
Discovery Technol., 2009, 6, 103–134.
54 C. Nutting, D. Dearnaley and S. Webb, Br. J. Radiol., 2000,
73, 459–469.
55 L. A. Dawson and D. A. Jaﬀray, J. Clin. Oncol., 2007, 25, 938–946.
56 T. R. Mackie, T. Holmes, S. Swerdloﬀ, P. Reckwerdt,
J. O. Deasy, J. Yang, B. Paliwal and T. Kinsella, Med. Phys.,
1993, 20, 1709–1719.
57 S. Prewett and R. Venkitaraman, Clin. Oncol., 2010, 22,
222–230.
58 L. K. Kvols, J. Nucl. Med., 2005, 46, 187S–190S.
59 T. S. Lawrence, A. W. Blackstock and C. McGinn, Semin.
Radiat. Oncol., 2003, 13, 13–21.
60 S.-M. Huang and P. M. Harari, Clin. Cancer Res., 2000, 6,
2166–2174.
61 N.
Taira,
H.
Doihara,
T.
Oota,
F.
Hara,
T.
Shien,
H. Takahashi, S. Yoshitomi, Y. Ishibe and N. Shimizu, Acta
Med. Okayama, 2006, 60, 25–34.
62 L. Kelland, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2007, 7, 573–584.
63 P. G. Rose, B. N. Bundy, E. B. Watkins, J. T. Thigpen,
G. Deppe, M. A. Maiman, D. L. Clarke-Pearson and
S. Insalaco, N. Engl. J. Med., 1999, 340, 1144–1153.
64 E. B. Douple, R. C. Richmond, J. A. O’Hara and C. T. Coughlin,
Cancer Treat. Rev., 1985, 12, 111–124.
65 S. Setua, M. Ouberai, S. G. Piccirillo, C. Watts and
M. Welland, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10865–10873.
66 L. Toschi, G. Finocchiaro, S. Bartolini, V. Gioia and
F. Cappuzzo, Future Oncol., 2005, 1, 7–17.
67 C. Sun, D. Ansari, R. Andersson and D.-Q. Wu, World
J. Gastroenterol., 2012, 18, 4944–4958.
68 N. Milosavljevic, C. Duranton, N. Djerbi, P. H. Puech,
P. Gounon, D. Lagadic-Gossmann, M. T. Dimanche-Boitrel,
C. Rauch, M. Tauc and L. Counillon, Cancer Res., 2010, 70,
7514–7522.
69 J. Levi, R. Aroney and D. Dalley, Br. Med. J. (Clin. Res. Ed.),
1981, 282, 2003–2004.
Materials Horizons
Review
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

830 | Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
70 M. Verheij, C. Vens and B. van Triest, Drug Resist. Updates,
2010, 13, 29–43.
71 H. Matsudaira, A. M. Ueno and I. Furuno, Radiat. Res.,
1980, 84, 144–148.
72 D. Kwatra, A. Venugopal and S. Anant, Transl. Cancer Res.,
2013, 2, 330–342.
73 J. F. Hainfeld, D. N. Slatkin and H. M. Smilowitz, Phys.
Med. Biol., 2004, 49, N309.
74 P. Liu, Z. Huang, Z. Chen, R. Xu, H. Wu, F. Zang, C. Wang
and N. Gu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11829–11836.
75 R. Xu, J. Ma, X. Sun, Z. Chen, X. Jiang, Z. Guo, L. Huang,
Y. Li, M. Wang and C. Wang, Cell Res., 2009, 19, 1031.
76 L.
Maggiorella,
G.
Barouch,
C.
Devaux,
A.
Pottier,
E. Deutsch, J. Bourhis, E. Borghi and L. Levy, Future Oncol.,
2012, 8, 1167–1181.
77 M. Yamada, M. Foote and T. W. Prow, Wiley Interdiscip.
Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2015, 7, 428–445.
78 E. Porcel, S. Liehn, H. Remita, N. Usami, K. Kobayashi,
Y. Furusawa, C. Le Sech and S. Lacombe, Nanotechnology,
2010, 21, 085103.
79 L. Sancey, F. Lux, S. Kotb, S. Roux, S. Dufort, A. Bianchi,
Y. Cremillieux, P. Fries, J.-L. Coll and C. Rodriguez-
Lafrasse, Br. J. Radiol., 2014, 87, 20140134.
80 L.-F. Shen, J. Chen, S. Zeng, R.-R. Zhou, H. Zhu, M.-Z.
Zhong, R.-J. Yao and H. Shen, Mol. Cancer Ther., 2010, 9,
2123–2130.
81 P. Juzenas, W. Chen, Y.-P. Sun, M. A. N. Coelho,
R. Generalov, N. Generalova and I. L. Christensen, Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1600–1614.
82 J. H. Hubbell and S. M. Seltzer, Tables of X-ray mass
attenuation coeﬃcients and mass energy-absorption coeﬃ-
cients 1 keV to 20 MeV for elements Z = 1 to 92 and 48
additional substances of dosimetric interest, National Inst. of
Standards and Technology-PL, Gaithersburg, MD, USA,
Ionizing Radiation Div., 1995.
83 L. Song, N. Falzone and K. A. Vallis, Int. J. Radiat. Biol.,
2016, 92, 716–723.
84 D. Regulla, W. Friedland, L. Heiber, W. Panzer, M. Seidenbusch
and E. Schmid, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., 2000, 90, 159–163.
85 I. D. M. Herold, C. C. Stobbe, R. V. Iyer and J. D. Chapman,
Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 2000, 76, 1357–1364.
86 S. H. Cho, B. L. Jones and S. Krishnan, Phys. Med. Biol.,
2009, 54, 4889.
87 S. H. Cho, Phys. Med. Biol., 2005, 50, N163.
88 K. T. Butterworth, J. R. Nicol, M. Ghita, S. Rosa, P. Chaudhary,
C. K. McGarry, H. O. McCarthy, G. Jimenez-Sanchez, R. Bazzi
and S. Roux, Nanomedicine, 2016, 11, 2035–2047.
89 J. Fang, H. Nakamura and H. Maeda, Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev., 2011, 63, 136–151.
90 F. Alexis, E. Pridgen, L. K. Molnar and O. C. Farokhzad,
Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2008, 5, 505–515.
91 X. Tong, Z. Wang, X. Sun, J. Song, O. Jacobson, G. Niu,
D.
O.
Kiesewetter
and
X.
Chen,
Theranostics,
2016,
6, 2039.
92 G. Abbineni, S. Modali, B. Safiejko-Mroczka, V. A. Petrenko
and C. Mao, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2010, 7, 1629–1642.
93 K. Sakamoto, Y. Ishibashi, R. Adachi, S.-i. Matsumoto,
H. Oki, Y. Kamada, S. Sogabe, Y. Zama, J.-i. Sakamoto
and A. Tani, Peptides, 2017, 94, 56–63.
94 B. Cao, M. Yang and C. Mao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49,
1111–1120.
95 A. Kurabi, D. Schaerer, L. Chang, K. Pak and A. F. Ryan, J. Drug
Targeting, 2017, 1–28, DOI: 10.1080/1061186X.2017.1347791.
96 I. H. El-Sayed, X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Cancer Lett.,
2006, 239, 129–135.
97 X. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed,
Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 412–417.
98 M. Setyawati, C. Y. Tay, S. Chia, S. Goh, W. Fang, M. Neo,
H. C. Chong, S. Tan, S. C. J. Loo and K. Ng, Nat. Commun.,
2013, 4, 1673.
99 M. I. Setyawati, C. Y. Tay, D. Docter, R. H. Stauber and
D. T. Leong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8174–8199.
100 M. I. Setyawati, C. Y. Tay, B. H. Bay and D. T. Leong,
ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5020–5030.
101 C. Y. Tay, M. I. Setyawati and D. T. Leong, ACS Nano, 2017,
11, 2764–2772.
102 M. I. Setyawati, V. N. Mochalin and D. T. Leong, ACS Nano,
2015, 10, 1170–1181.
103 B. L. Li, M. I. Setyawati, L. Chen, J. Xie, K. Ariga, C.-T. Lim,
S. Garaj and D. T. Leong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017,
9, 15286–15296.
104 R. Gref, M. Lu¨ck, P. Quellec, M. Marchand, E. Dellacherie,
S. Harnisch, T. Blunk and R. H. Mu¨ller, Colloids Surf., B,
2000, 18, 301–313.
105 C. D. Walkey, J. B. Olsen, H. Guo, A. Emili and W. C. Chan,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2139–2147.
106 Z. G. Estephan, P. S. Schlenoﬀand J. B. Schlenoﬀ,
Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6794–6800.
107 L. L. Rouhana, J. A. Jaber and J. B. Schlenoﬀ, Langmuir,
2007, 23, 12799–12801.
108 T. Mizuhara, K. Saha, D. F. Moyano, C. S. Kim, B. Yan,
Y.-K. Kim and V. M. Rotello, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015,
54, 6567–6570.
109 X. Liu, H. Huang, Q. Jin and J. Ji, Langmuir, 2011, 27,
5242–5251.
110 K. Susumu, E. Oh, J. B. Delehanty, J. B. Blanco-Canosa,
B. J. Johnson, V. Jain, W. J. Hervey, W. R. Algar,
K. Boeneman, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9480–9496.
111 W. Yang, L. Zhang, S. Wang, A. D. White and S. Jiang,
Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5617–5621.
112 R. E. Holmlin, X. Chen, R. G. Chapman, S. Takayama and
G. M. Whitesides, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 2841–2850.
113 S. D. Perrault, C. Walkey, T. Jennings, H. C. Fischer and
W. C. W. Chan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1909–1915.
114 J. A. Champion, Y. K. Katare and S. Mitragotri, J. Controlled
Release, 2007, 121, 3–9.
115 Arnida, M. M. Jana´t-Amsbury, A. Ray, C. M. Peterson and
H. Ghandehari, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2011, 77,
417–423.
116 L. Zhang, Z. Cao, Y. Li, J.-R. Ella-Menye, T. Bai and S. Jiang,
ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6681–6686.
Review
Materials Horizons
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 817--831 | 831
117 J.-W. Yoo, E. Chambers and S. Mitragotri, Curr. Pharm.
Des., 2010, 16, 2298–2307.
118 E. Blanco, H. Shen and M. Ferrari, Nat. Biotechnol., 2015,
33, 941–951.
119 J. Schuemann, R. Berbeco, D. B. Chithrani, S. H. Cho,
R. Kumar, S. J. McMahon, S. Sridhar and S. Krishnan, Int.
J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys., 2016, 94, 189–205.
120 A. Popovtzer, A. Mizrachi, M. Motiei, D. Bragilovski,
L.
Lubimov,
M.
Levi,
O.
Hilly,
I.
Ben-Aharon
and
R. Popovtzer, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2678–2685.
121 Y. Dou, Y. Guo, X. Li, X. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, G. Lv,
X. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Gong and J. Chang, ACS Nano, 2016,
10, 2536–2548.
122 N. Ma, F.-G. Wu, X. Zhang, Y.-W. Jiang, H.-R. Jia,
H.-Y. Wang, Y.-H. Li, P. Liu, N. Gu and Z. Chen, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13037–13048.
123 F. Geng, J. Z. Xing, J. Chen, R. Yang, Y. Hao, K. Song and
B. Kong, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 1205–1216.
124 Z. Rezaee, A. Yadollahpour, V. Bayati and F. N. Dehbashi,
Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 1431.
125 X. Liu, Y. Liu, P. Zhang, X. Jin, X. Zheng, F. Ye, W. Chen
and Q. Li, Int. J. Nanomed., 2016, 11, 3517.
126 C.-d. Zhu, Q. Zheng, L.-x. Wang, H.-F. Xu, J.-l. Tong,
Q.-a. Zhang, Y. Wan and J.-q. Wu, J. Nanobiotechnol.,
2015, 13, 67.
127 P. Zhang, Y. Qiao, J. Xia, J. Guan, L. Ma and M. Su, ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4518–4524.
128 L. Cui, K. Tse, P. Zahedi, S. M. Harding, G. Zafarana,
D. A. Jaﬀray, R. G. Bristow and C. Allen, Radiat. Res.,
2014, 182, 475–488.
129 Y. Zheng, D. J. Hunting, P. Ayotte and L. Sanche, Radiat.
Res., 2008, 169, 19–27.
130 E. Brun, L. Sanche and C. Sicard-Roselli, Colloids Surf., B,
2009, 72, 128–134.
131 D. B. Chithrani, S. Jelveh, F. Jalali, M. van Prooijen,
C. Allen, R. G. Bristow, R. P. Hill and D. A. Jaﬀray, Radiat.
Res., 2010, 173, 719–728.
132 C.-J. Liu, C.-H. Wang, S.-T. Chen, H.-H. Chen, W.-H. Leng,
C.-C. Chien, C.-L. Wang, I. M. Kempson, Y. Hwu and
T.-C. Lai, Phys. Med. Biol., 2010, 55, 931.
133 C.-J. Liu, C.-H. Wang, C.-C. Chien, T.-Y. Yang, S.-T. Chen,
W.-H. Leng, C.-F. Lee, K.-H. Lee, Y. Hwu and Y.-C. Lee,
Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 295104.
134 X.-D. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Shen, P.-X. Liu, N. Yang, B. Zhao,
H. Zhang, Y.-M. Sun, L.-A. Zhang and F.-Y. Fan, Int.
J. Nanomed., 2011, 6, 2071–2081.
135 W. N. Rahman, N. Bishara, T. Ackerly, C. F. He, P. Jackson,
C. Wong, R. Davidson and M. Geso, Nanomedicine, 2009, 5,
136–142.
136 E. I. Sega and P. S. Low, Cancer Metastasis Rev., 2008,
27, 655.
137 G. A. Mansoori, K. S. Brandenburg and A. Shakeri-Zadeh,
Cancers, 2010, 2, 1911–1928.
138 K. Khoshgard, B. Hashemi, A. Arbabi, M. J. Rasaee and
M. Soleimani, Phys. Med. Biol., 2014, 59, 2249.
139 N.
Chattopadhyay,
Z.
Cai,
J.-P.
Pignol,
B.
Keller,
E. Lechtman, R. Bendayan and R. M. Reilly, Mol. Pharma-
ceutics, 2010, 7, 2194–2206.
140 N. Chattopadhyay, Z. Cai, Y. L. Kwon, E. Lechtman,
J.-P. Pignol and R. M. Reilly, Breast Cancer Res. Treat.,
2013, 137, 81–91.
141 X. Zhang, J. Z. Xing, J. Chen, L. Ko, J. Amanie, S. Gulavita,
N. Pervez, D. Yee, R. Moore and W. Roa, Clin. Invest. Med.,
2008, 31, 160–167.
142 T. Kong, J. Zeng, X. Wang, X. Yang, J. Yang, S. McQuarrie,
A. McEwan, W. Roa, J. Chen and J. Z. Xing, Small, 2008, 4,
1537–1543.
143 Y. Pan, A. Leifert, D. Ruau, S. Neuss, J. Bornemann,
G. Schmid, W. Brandau, U. Simon and W. Jahnen-
Dechent, Small, 2009, 5, 2067–2076.
144 N. L. Rosi, D. A. Giljohann, C. S. Thaxton, A. K. Lytton-Jean,
M. S. Han and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2006, 312, 1027–1030.
145 C. Zhou, M. Long, Y. Qin, X. Sun and J. Zheng, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3168–3172.
146 N. Goswami, Q. Yao, T. Chen and J. Xie, Coord. Chem. Rev.,
2016, 329, 1–15.
147 R. Jin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 343–362.
148 R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou and Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2016,
116, 10346–10413.
149 N. Goswami, Q. Yao, Z. Luo, J. Li, T. Chen and J. Xie,
J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 962–975.
150 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, ACS Nano,
2017, DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b02035.
151 J. Fang, B. Zhang, Q. Yao, Y. Yang, J. Xie and N. Yan, Coord.
Chem. Rev., 2016, 322, 1–29.
152 A. Yahia-Ammar, D. Sierra, F. Me´rola, N. Hildebrandt and
X. Le Gue´vel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2591–2599.
153 X.-R. Song, N. Goswami, H.-H. Yang and J. Xie, Analyst,
2016, 141, 3126–3140.
154 N. Goswami, K. Zheng and J. Xie, Nanoscale, 2014, 6,
13328–13347.
155 L. Shang, S. Dong and G. U. Nienhaus, Nano Today, 2011,
6, 401–418.
156 Y. Wang, J. Chen and J. Irudayaraj, ACS Nano, 2011, 5,
9718–9725.
157 X. Wang, H. He, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Sun, H. Xu, W. M. Nau,
X. Zhang and F. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9232–9235.
158 X. D. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Luo, D. Wu, X. Shen, S. S. Song,
Y. M. Sun, P. X. Liu, J. Zhao, S. Huo, S. Fan, F. Fan, X.-J.
Liang and J. Xie, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 133–141.
159 X. D. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Chen, X. Shen, S. Song, Y. Sun,
S. Fan, F. Fan, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26,
4565–4568.
160 X.-D. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Chen, S. Song, X. Yuan, X. Shen,
H. Wang, Y. Sun, K. Gao, L. Zhang, S. Fan, D. T. Leong,
M. Guo and J. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–7.
Materials Horizons
Review
Published on 13 July 2017. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 6/24/2026 3:23:43 AM. 
View Article Online