From Cu nanowires to bio-functional materials: Innovative progress in 
copper nanowires composites synthesis and
biotechnology-related applications
Xinhao Li a , Jiahui Chen b,c,* , Huangqing Ye d, **
a Northwestern Polytechnical University Queen Mary University of London Engineering School, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710072, China
b School of Materials and Energy, Foshan University, Foshan 528200, China
c Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Green Energy Materials and Devices, Yunfu Industrial Technology Research Institute of New Energy and New Materials, Yunfu 
527300, China
d College of Materials Science and Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Copper nanowires (Cu NWs) 
Synthesis methods 
Composites
Biotechnology
A B S T R A C T
Copper nanowires (Cu NWs) are newly synthesized one-dimensional nanomaterials exhibiting synergistic inte-
gration of high electrical/thermal conductivity, mechanical flexibility, and inherent antimicrobial behavior. This 
article reviews recent progress in synthesis of copper nanowires composites, including research of innovative 
synthetic routes (electrodeposition, wet chemical reduction, hydrothermal, and hydrazine methods) yielding 
high aspect ratio Cu NWs and composite fabrication strategies (physical mixing, coating/deposition, and 
impregnation into host matrices) integrating Cu NWs into functional materials are summarized. Furthermore, 
this review discusses the applications of biological field in copper nanowires composites from many aspects. In 
agricultural and food technologies, Cu NWs reinforced biodegradable films and sensors have promising appli-
cations in agricultural films and contaminant detection. In biomedicine, copper nanowires composites display 
strong broad spectrum antibacterial activity with weak cytotoxicity. In wearable electronics, copper nanowires 
composites have been reported for electrochemical biosensing and as flexible heating devices. Finally, this re-
view discusses the challenges and future development directions that remain for the applications of copper 
nanowires composites in the field of biotechnology-related applications.
1. Introduction
Copper nanowires (Cu NWs) are one-dimensional nanostructures 
with high aspect ratios and good electrical conductivity. The bulk 
electrical conductivity of copper is ~5.96 × 10 7 S m − 1 (16.78 nΩ m), 
which is comparable to that of silver but is over 100 times cheaper [1]. 
Cu NWs have better charge transport ability than conventional materials 
like indium tin oxide (ITO), carbon nanofibers (CNFs) and conducting 
polymers, and they also exhibit good mechanical flexibility and pro-
cessability in solution. Therefore, Cu NWs are a good alternative to 
fabricate low-cost and high-performance materials for many emerging 
technologies. Apart from the nanowires themselves, the process of 
fabrication of copper nanowire composites has also drawn significant 
interest. Methods such as physical mixing, vacuum deposition,
electroless plating, and direct impregnation have been reported for 
introducing Cu NWs into flexible or porous substrates [2–7]. The 
resulting composite materials display tunable conductivity, trans-
parency, stretchability, and antimicrobial behavior. Copper nanowire 
composites have been reported in a wide range of biological areas, 
including agriculture, food safety, biomedicine, antibacterial materials, 
etc. [8–13]. For example, Chen et al. [14] found that Cu NWs reinforced 
cellulose films could be used as biodegradable agricultural mulches with 
enhanced thermal insulation and water resistance. In the area of food 
safety, copper nanowire composites sensors could quickly and sensi-
tively detect antibiotics [15], pesticides [9] and sugar [16] based on 
electrochemical or ECL devices. Additionally, in the case of biomedical 
applications, copper nanowire composites could be used in non-invasive 
biosensing [17], photothermal tumor ablation [18] and antimicrobial
* Corresponding author. School of Materials and Energy, Foshan University, Foshan, 528200, China. 
** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: jhchen@fosu.edu.cn (J. Chen), beyondye88@gmail.com (H. Ye).
Peer review under the responsibility of Chongqing University
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nano Materials Science
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/cn/journals/nano-materials-science/
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoms.2025.11.021
Received 22 August 2025; Received in revised form 18 October 2025; Accepted 4 December 2025
Available online xxxx
2589-9651/© 2025 Chongqing University. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC 
BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: X. Li et al., From Cu nanowires to bio-functional materials: Innovative progress in copper nanowires composites synthesis 
and biotechnology-related applications, Nano Materials Science , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoms.2025.11.021

coating on biomedical dressings for wound healing [12]. These above 
applications not only take advantages of inherent bioactivity of Cu ions, 
but also the good structure stability and large surface area of nanowires. 
Nevertheless, several issues still impede the large-scale applications of 
copper nanowire composites in biology. First, copper nanowire com-
posites are prone to oxidize under ambient and aqueous conditions, 
which may severely impact their lifetime and functionality [19,20]. 
Second, copper nanowire composites possess certain antibacterial 
behavior; however, the cytotoxicity and biocompatibility of copper 
nanowire composites should also be thoroughly studied, especially for in 
vivo applications [21,22].
Therefore, to alleviate these issues, this paper reviews a few copper 
nanocomposites used in the biological field searching for new material 
engineering approaches to enhance their biocompatibility and func-
tionality. Fig. 1 shows that this review reports a detailed and current 
summary of the copper nanowires synthesis approaches, composite 
fabrication methods, and various biotechnology applications of copper 
nanowire composites. Highlighting the recent advances in low-cost and 
large-scale synthesis, composite fabrication approaches in which the 
property of nanowires are retained, and applications areas in which 
copper nanowire composites have exhibited potential advantages. 
Finally, the review addresses the current issues existing in stability and 
toxicity of materials and applications as well as the future perspectives 
for the development of copper nanowire composites with improved 
performance and enhanced reliability.
2. Copper nanowires synthesis
2.1. Electrodeposition
Template assisted electrochemical deposition is a frequently used 
and relatively general method to synthesize well-ordered copper nano-
wires (Cu NWs) due to the method's cost-effectiveness, scalability, and 
precise morphology control. The whole process relies on the porous 
templates which can confine the diameter and alignment of nanowires 
and the morphology of products. Recently, template optimization, 
control method of deposition and the addition of novel processes have 
been increasingly paid attention in template assisted electrochemical 
deposition. There are two main types of templates that are widely used
in Cu NW synthesis: Anodic aluminum oxide templates (AAO) and 
polycarbonate templates (PC). Fig. 2a shows that AAO templates consist 
of highly ordered hexagonally arranged pores with diameters of up to 
5 nm and densities of 10 12 cm − 2 with high uniformity in structure [27]. 
These templates are usually synthesized by multi-stage anodization. 
During the anodization process, controlled voltage applications is 
continuously applied and slowly decreased to prevent pore branching 
from occurring [28]. On the other hand, polycarbonate track-etched 
membranes are composed of randomly distributed pores with di-
ameters ranging from 40 nm to 400 nm and thickness of 6–100 μm, 
which can provide a wider range of dimensions for nanowires [29]. 
Polycarbonate templates can be prepared by ion track etching. In this 
method, irradiation with swift heavy ions generates tracks that are 
further chemically etched to form cylindrical pores [29].
Knowing the characteristics of these templates guiding the prepara-
tion of the templates and subsequent optimization of the nanowire array 
growth. For AAO templates (Fig. 2a), the important preparation steps 
are removal of the barrier layer with phosphoric acid (6 wt%) for the 
proper time (10 min), in order to avoid damage to the pore structure 
from over-etching [31]. These templates must have a conductive seed 
layer; conventional method is gold sputtering, however, recent advances 
in conductive carbon paint (electrical conductivity ~46.72 S cm − 1 ) as 
an alternative to gold for making seed layers has shown promise for 
low-cost nanowire template fabrication [32]. PC membranes require 
different preparation protocols (Fig. 2b) such as ultrasonic cleaning to 
ensure uniform depositing on both sides of the membrane and good 
wetting of the internal pore walls of the membrane by the depositing 
material. These templates must be chemically inert with respect to the 
depositing material and must provide electrical insulation [27]. The 
choice of template used for the growth plays a crucial role in deter-
mining the final nanowire properties. AAO templates have yielded 
nanowires with diameters <100 nm and lengths up to 10 μm with good 
uniformity and crystallinity. Preparation process is shown in Fig. 2c 
[31]. Polycarbonate templates have resulted in larger diameter nano-
wires (200 nm average) and the length can be controlled by varying the 
deposition time. Preparation process is shown in Fig. 2b [27]. After 
synthesis the templates are dissolved (DCM for polycarbonate and NaOH 
for AAO), and the NWs can be surface functionalized if required [27,33]. 
Current work is aimed at improving the performance of both template
Fig. 1. Overview of copper nanowires, 
including copper nanowires synthesis, 
copper nanowires composites synthesis 
and biotechnology applications of cop-
per nanowires composites. The applica-
tion images from left to right are 
hydrophobic Cu/LC composite film [8], 
MIP/BNQDs/NMC-Cu 
NWs/GCE 
in 
MIECLS [15], Cu NWs, rGO and 
AChE-modified screen-printed carbon 
electrode biosensors [9], Scheme of 
PEGylated Cu NWs as a photothermal 
agent 
for 
cancer 
therapy 
[11], 
Hypromellose-Cu NW film [21], Real 
image of the ECG sensor mounted on 
the target skin [23], Image of the TENG 
sensorized surgical glove with flexible 
interconnects [24], Schematic illustra-
tion of the electrical heaters based on 
Cu NWs and fabric substrate [25], 
Schematic illustration of a laminated 
fabric and the personal thermal man-
agement of the laminated fabric [26].
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
2

types. Current work on AAO templates includes eliminating Y-branch 
formations through stepwise anodization and improving electrical 
contact through modified processing sequences [34]. Polycarbonate 
template research is focused on improving pore uniformity and devel-
oping scalable production approaches.
2.2. Wet chemical reduction
2.2.1. Catalytic synthesis
Liquid-phase catalytic synthesis is an attractive alternative for syn-
thesizing Cu NWs owing to its process simplicity, scalability potential. In 
general, synthesis of Cu NWs can be conducted in solution environment 
to realize directional growth for obtaining high aspect ratio nano-
structures. In early reports, aqueous-based synthesis was simple, but the
obtained nanowires exhibited poor dispersibility and severe particle 
formation. For example, nanowires obtained by hydrazine reduction of 
Cu(NO 3 ) 2 were aggregated and limited to diameters ~90 nm and lengths 
~10 μm. However, electrode performances were restricted by generated 
copper particles [35]. Later, using glucose reduction with hexadecyl 
amine (HDA) could give rise to nanowires with reduced diameters 
around 24 nm and long lengths up to hundreds of micrometers. How-
ever, aggregation exists in the product [35]. Different from aqueous 
phase, non-aqueous liquid-crystalline media show better morphological 
control and dispersibility due to the superior morphological guidance of 
liquid-crystalline. Ultranested Cu NWs with diameters around 78 nm 
and good dispersibility can be obtained via glucose and cetyl-
trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) liquid-crystalline templates [35]. 
Liquid-crystalline media can provide morphology guidance, however,
Fig. 2. (a) The fabrication of AAO, involving anodization and oxide layer removal steps [28]. and SEM images of top anodic aluminum oxide, where Dp is the pore 
diameter and Dint is the interpore distance [30]. (b) Schematic steps for electrodeposition of synthesized Cu nanowires using PC template [27]. (c) Schematic of 
fabricating nanowire assemblies using AAO template [28].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
3

the following introduction of catalytic species is necessary to enhance 
the reduction kinetics and control the nucleation density.
A summary of the catalytic synthetic parameters, dimensions of the 
reported Cu NWs was provided in Table 1. Platinum catalysts in both 
sputtered thin film and nanoparticle form have been shown to drive 
large yield nanowire growth with ~80 nm diameter and hundreds of 
micrometers in length (Fig. 3a.) [36]. Gold nanoparticles are served as 
catalysts and diameter controllers due to their five-fold twinned struc-
ture, which funnels preferential growth due to lattice mismatch (11.4%) 
between Cu and Au. Recently, a great breakthrough has been made in 
the synthesis of ultrathin Cu NWs in aqueous solution with Au nano-
particle catalysis. As shown in Fig. 3b, the product exhibits an unprec-
edented diameter down to 7 nm and an aspect ratio up to 1 400 [37]. 
Moreover, transition metal cations such as Ni 2+ have been proposed as 
low-cost alternatives for large-scale synthesis with high chemical-purity 
(Fig. 3c) [38]. Though there has been good progress towards minimizing 
diameter (from ~90 nm to 7 nm) and improving aspect ratio (from 1 to 
30), there is still a challenge to tune synthesis scalability and product 
quality. In the future, cost-effective catalyst replacements and environ-
mentally friendly synthesis routes will be the focus to facilitate practical 
applications in transparent conductive electrodes.
2.2.2. Hydrothermal growth
Hydrothermal synthesis is a convenient, inexpensive method to 
produce copper nanowires with numerous benefits including simplicity, 
easy scalability, and good control of nanowire morphology [20]. In 
general, this approach consists of reducing copper salts in aqueous or 
mixed solvent systems at high temperature and pressure. Usually, 
glucose or ascorbic acid are used as mild reducing agents to control 
nanowire growth [20,40,41]. A summary of the hydrothermal growth 
synthetic parameters and dimensions of the reported Cu NWs was pro-
vided in Table 2. One of the advantages of the hydrothermal synthesis 
method is that the dimensions and structure of the Cu NWs can be 
controlled by varying the reaction parameters. For example, glucose 
concentration (4 mM to 16 mM) can be used to control the nanowire 
diameter ranging from about 39.6 nm to 72.1 nm, while the length can 
be controlled from 86 μm to even 250 μm with an aspect ratio of up to 5 
000 [19,20,40].
Additionally, the capping agents PVP and OLA can guide the aniso-
tropic growth of the nanowires by adsorbing on preferred crystal facets 
(e.g., {100} over {111}) and promoting the formation of five-fold 
twinned nanowires with increased structural stability (Fig. 4) [19,42]. 
Moreover, recent advancements have explored diverse copper pre-
cursors and additives to optimize synthesis outcomes. The use of copper 
oxalate as a precursor has been shown to yield high-purity Cu NWs with 
aspect ratios as high as 413, while the addition of NaCl as a mediating 
agent prevents aggregation and promotes uniform growth [19]. Solvent 
systems, for example, water/polyhydric alcohol mixture solvent system, 
have also been optimized to obtain ultralong nanowires [40]; formic 
acid etching should be performed after the growth process to remove 
oxide layers on the surface of Cu NWs to obtain better electrical and 
optical properties [20]. Special approaches like dodecyl amine reduc-
tion can synthesize ultra-high aspect ratio Cu NWs with diameter down 
to 18 nm and length up to 200 μm, while ascorbic acid method can 
synthesize unique rectangular cross-section nanorods in reduction [42].
In summary, hydrothermal method can synthesize high quality Cu NWs 
with controlled dimensions, intensive crystallinity and good perfor-
mance. However, oxidation resistance and largescale uniformity are still 
the present challenges for the further researches [42].
2.2.3. Hydrazine method
Hydrazine method is an effective approach to synthesize copper 
nanowires. It has been widely used for the fabrication of various nano-
wires with advantages of simplicity, large-scale and high yield. More-
over, this method has attracted considerable attentions for 
biotechnology applications due to its high-quality nanowires with mild 
conditions [1]. Copper ions are reduced to copper nanowires in an 
alkaline solution using hydrazine as a strong reducing agent. The hy-
drazine method has a unique advantage that ethylenediamine (EDA) is 
used as a directing agent for anisotropic growth [1]. Fig. 5 shows that 
EDA is preferentially adsorbed on the side facets of nanowires and 
copper atoms are deposited on the two ends of nanowires, where copper 
atoms diffuse into the EDA film and induce the aggregation of Cu(OH) 4
2−
to Cu(OH) 2 , and then Cu 2 O seeds and finally Cu nanowires. This growth 
process is controlled by the ratio of Cu(NO 3 ) 2 , NaOH and EDA. Due to 
the controlled growth process, the copper nanowires have a five-fold 
twinned feature and thus exhibit excellent structural stability.
Table 3 summarizes the key synthesis parameters of the hydrazine 
method and the corresponding dimensions of the Cu NWs reported for 
biological applications. The hydrazine method is a convenient approach 
with many advantages such as: Firstly, the synthesis process operates at 
atmospheric pressure and moderate temperature (60 ◦ C to 80 ◦ C), while 
other methods such as hydrothermal synthesis require high pressure and 
high temperature [8]. Secondly, the reaction time is very short (usually 
within 1 h) and can be used to produce nanomaterials quickly. Thirdly, 
the reaction medium is aqueous and reduces the amount of organic 
solvents that may be toxic to biological systems [12]. A significant 
benefit of the hydrazine-synthesized Cu NWs is their well-defined 
morphology. The nanowires possess uniform diameter (90–120 nm) 
and can be grown up to tens of micrometers in length, thus leading to a 
high aspect ratio and large surface area. Such characteristics enhance 
the electrical and thermal conductivity of the nanowires as well as the 
interaction with biological targets, e.g., bacterial cell membranes. 
Recently, it has reported that Cu NWs obtained by the hydrazine method 
exhibit significantly higher antibacterial activity than copper nano-
particles, i.e., up to 80–90 % reduction in bacterial growth for both 
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. This is due to the slow and 
sustained release of Cu ions from the surface of nanowires leading to 
prolonged antimicrobial action and decreased cytotoxicity [12,25]. 
Additionally, because the hydrazine method is based on water-based, 
low-temperature process, the resulting Cu NWs can be readily 
dispersed in biocompatible matrices, e.g., activated carbon fiber, chi-
tosan, and cellulose, to form composite materials with potential appli-
cations in wound dressings, antibacterial coatings, biosensors, etc [48, 
49]. These composites integrate both the mechanical support of the 
matrix and the bioactive properties of the Cu NWs into the applications 
and further extend the biomedical applications of the nanowires [12]. In 
summary, the hydrazine method's ability to produce structurally uni-
form, high aspect ratio Cu NWs in a biocompatible manner, directly 
supports investigations with the nanowires in a biological context. The
Table 1
Catalytic synthetic parameters and dimensions of the resulting Cu NWs.
Copper precursor
Catalyst
Reducing agent
Capping agent
Reaction temperature/ ◦ C
Reaction time/h
Nanowire size
Ref.
Diameter/nm
Length/μm
[Cu(acac) 2 ] 
Pt
HDA
HDA and CTAB 
–
–
78
10 to 100 
35
CuCl 2 
Au 
Glucose
HDA
–
–
7
9.6
37
CuCl 2 
Ni(acac) 2 
OLA
OLA
180
4
18
>40
39
CuCl 2
Ni(acac) 2
OLA
OLA
175
10
16.2 ± 2
40
38
Oleylamine (OLA), Hexadecylamine (HDA), Cetyltriamoninum bromide (CTAB).
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
4

resulting nanowires possess scalable and cost-effective synthesis, high 
antibacterial performance, and low toxicity, making this method 
particularly attractive for biomedical applications.
2.3. Oxidation prevention
Copper nanowires have silver-like conductivity and better flexibility 
at lower cost, but their large-scale utilization is limited by strong 
intrinsic oxidation sensitivity. Large surface area, high surface energy, 
and defective structure of Cu NWs result in the exothermic reaction of 
forming Cu 2 O and CuO layers even at mild ambient or humid conditions.
This process causes resistance increase and percolation path breaking in 
a steep manner. The reaction rate is further accelerated at heat, hu-
midity, or chemically aggressive environments like chloride- or sulfide-
containing biofluids where the porous oxide can not effectively 
passivate the underlying metal, causing continuous internal corrosion of 
the network and its breaking down. At body-temperature range, un-
protected Cu NW films already exhibit measurable resistance drift 
within weeks, which highlights the pressing demand of effective stabi-
lization of Cu NWs in bio-integrated and flexible electronic systems [50]. 
To counteract this instability, various anti-oxidation approaches 
have been explored to provide barriers or modify surface reactivity.
Fig. 3. (a) Formation of Cu nanowires directed by the liquid-crystalline structure catalyzed by platinum [35]. (b) Length and diameter evolutions of Cu NWs and 
schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of Cu NWs in Au catalyst [37]. (c) Schematic of the formation mechanism of Cu NWs. The Ni 2+ and Cl-ions play 
critical roles in promoting the growth of high aspect ratio Cu NW [38].
Table 2
Hydrothermal growth synthetic parameters and dimensions of the obtained Cu NWs.
Copper precursor
Reducing agent
Capping agent
Reaction temperature/ 
◦ C
Reaction time/ 
h
Nanowire size
Ref.
Diameter/
nm
Length/
μm
CuCl
OLA 
OLA
170
61
63
30
42
CuCl 2
Glycerol 
OLA and oleic acid 
120
4
50
250
40
CuCl 2
Glucose 
OLA and oleic acid 
120
8
39.6 to 72.1 
86 to 110 
20
CuCl 2
Glucose 
Dodecylamine 
120
4
31
100 to 200 
43
CuCl 2
Glucose 
HDA
100
6
25 to 35 
50 to 60 
44
CuCl 2
Ascorbic acid
CTAC
120
2
100
25
45
CuCl 2
Aqueous plant extract (Eucalyptus
globulus) 
OLA and oleic acid
121
2
44 to 145
5 to 90
46
Copper glycine 
Ascorbic acid 
CTAC
280
–
38
40
47
Cu(NO 3 ) 2
Ascorbic acid
PVP
120
4
50
>10
41
Copper oxalate [Cu
(C 2 O 4 )]
Ascorbic acid
PVP
160
4
189
78
19
Oleylamine (OLA), Hexadecylamine (HDA), Hexadecyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC), Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP).
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
5

Fig. 4. Schematic of hydrothermal synthesis of 1D Cu NWs [1].
Fig. 5. Synthesis of Cu NWs using EDA as a surfactant [1]. (a) A photograph of a Cu NW solution. (b) A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of Cu NWs. (c) 
The growth model of the Cu NWs.
Table 3
Synthesis parameters and dimensions of hydrazine-method Cu NWs for biological applications.
Copper precursor
Reducing agent
Capping agent
Reaction temperature/ ◦ C
Reaction time/h
Nanowire size
Ref.
Diameter/nm
Length/μm
CuSO 4 
N 2 H 4
EDA
80
1
3 to 10 
0.3 to 1 
8
CuCl 2 
N 2 H 4
EDA
30
0.25
10 to 15 
–
12
Cu(NO 3 ) 2 
N 2 H 4
EDA
80
2
–
–
48
Cu(NO 3 ) 2 
N 2 H 4
EDA
77
0.5
–
–
25
Cu(NO 3 ) 2
N 2 H 4
EDA
60
2
80 to 150
10
49
Hydrazine (N 2 H 4 ), Ethylenediamine (EDA).
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
6

These include relatively thick organic capping layers such as PVP, PEG, 
or PVA, which can retard oxidation by hindering O 2 /H 2 O ingress but 
result in incomplete/porous films and reduced conductivity [51–56]. A 
better approach is to use inorganic passivation with dense conformal 
metal-oxide shells comprising Al-doped ZnO, ZnO, Al 2 O 3 , TiO 2 , and 
SrSnO 3 , which can not only block O 2 /H 2 O ingress but also enhance the 
adhesion of the junction and interface as well as the figure of merit of the 
device. Cu NW networks coated with SrSnO 3 layers showed improved 
figures of merit due to better junction contact and retained their con-
ductivity after 180 days of air exposure and after undergoing 85 ◦ C/85% 
RH aging test and in oxidizing/sulfide media, where the bare networks 
were quickly destroyed [51]. In addition, Zhao et al. [57] also achieved 
similar protection using ultrathin In 2 O 3 nanoshells (~5 nm), which 
maintained ~20 Ω/sq sheet resistance and >84% transmittance, and 
resisted heat, humidity, and chemical attack in different media. The 
structures provide a scalable, room-temperature solution for transparent 
and flexible electrodes for various devices.
Noble-metal shells (Au, Pt, Ni, Ag) are chemically stable but are 
costly and make the device thicker (decreasing transparency); while 
graphene-based coatings are lightweight and conductive, they are 
defective and allow corrosive species to ingress [58]. In contrast, 
conformal metal-oxide encapsulation (e.g., ZnO, SnO 2 , NiO, Nb 2 O 5 , or 
Cr 2 O 3 ) offer chemical and mechanical protection with negligible impact 
on mechanics or optics. Some study demonstrate that oxide-capped 
nanowires can survive harsh environmental stressors (85 ◦ C/85% RH 
for 96 h, ultraviolet-ozone, immersion in NaCl or Na 2 S solution) without 
inducing <10% to 30% change in resistance, whereas untreated net-
works drop by several orders of magnitude [52–54]. In addition to 
chemical isolation, these shells also make networks mechanically robust. 
For example, Cr 2 O 3 resistance changed by only 10.9% after 10 000 
bending cycles, compared with 310% for uncoated films, and thus were 
stable under chronic flexing in the biomedical setting [54]. These oxide 
shells can be complemented by hybrid architectures–oxide/metal/oxide 
laminates or embedding Cu NWs in biocompatible polymers like color-
less polyimide–to further improve chemical isolation and mechanical 
compliance at the expense of some transparency, while ensuring stable 
performance through extended heat, humidity, and fatigue testing [55, 
59].
In addition to passive encapsulation, chemical and structural con-
trols can suppress oxidation kinetics intrinsically. Nanoscale barriers 
emerge at wire junctions during room-temperature oxalic-acid passiv-
ation, simultaneously protecting and welding contacts while lowering 
initial sheet resistance and maintaining low resistance for >70 d in air 
[60]. Low density of atomic-step under controlled engineered twin 
boundary in nanotwinned copper also suppresses exothermic Cu 2 O 
formation and maintains sample integrity for >1 year under ambient 
conditions via self-limiting growth [61]. In addition, scalable ligand 
carbonization by electron-beam-induced processes provides another 
solution to convert surface organics into dense nanometer-thick carbo-
naceous shells, which effectively prevent AgInSbTe nanostructures from 
oxidization and moisture absorption without affecting conductivity 
[62]. In-situ graphitic coatings via hydrothermal carbonization also 
delays the onset of oxidation to ~200 ◦ C and the growth of resistivity 
under 85 ◦ C/85 % RH aging compared with that of untreated films, 
confirming the potential of these green and low-cost barriers for large 
area manufacturing [63].
Taking together, these results demonstrate that the oxidation sta-
bility of Cu NWs can be systematically tuned by integrating structural 
control and barrier engineering. Among the strategies reported so far, 
conformal oxide encapsulation of NiO, Cr 2 O 3 , SrSnO 3 , and In 2 O 3 pro-
vide the best combination of environmental safety and electrical prop-
erties along with scalability, whereas hybrid and polymer-embedded 
systems improve the mechanical robustness of flexible biointerfaces [50, 
59,64,65]. Future efforts should be directed toward relating shell 
composition and thickness to oxygen-diffusion kinetics and optoelec-
tronic figures of merit under more realistic biofluid environments.
Understanding such structure–property relationships will facilitate the 
design of oxidation-resistant Cu NW composites with conductive, 
transparent, and flexible architectures for prolonged operation in 
biomedical and wearable electronics.
2.4. Comparative analysis of copper nanowires synthesis
Building upon the preceding subsections, synthesis of copper nano-
wires has evolved from well-controlled template assisted electrodepo-
sition to larger-scale chemical and hybrid “green” routes with their own 
set of benefits and limitations with respect to scalability, cost, envi-
ronmental impact, and potential biological applicability. Table 4 shows 
that template approaches such as anodic aluminum oxide or poly-
carbonate track-etched membranes allow for controlled diameter and 
length, as well as high structural uniformity and centimeter-scale arrays 
from a multi-step template preparation [27,29,30]. These approaches 
also include toxic chemicals (CrO 3 , Br 2 /methanol) and solvent-rich 
removal steps that limit the environmental impact and increase over-
all cost. Hydrothermal reduction with amines or sugars represent a 
simpler, low-equipment alternative with high aspect-ratio products and 
moderate environmental impact; this method achieved multi-gram 
yields (≈2.1 g for a 5 L batch at $4.20 g -1 ) while operating an open, 
high-temperature vessel (100 ◦ C to 160 ◦ C) [1,20]. In contrast, the hy-
drazine aqueous reduction process offers the best throughput with high 
purity to date at 1.2 g h − 1 in open vessels at 80 ◦ C [1,25]. However, this 
method is highly toxic, generates toxic ammonia, and poses significant 
safety concerns, precluding potential biotechnology applications. Cata-
lytic or seed-mediated growth in organic media (Pt, Ni, Pd) produce 
single-crystalline, ultralong nanowires with narrow size distribution and 
high conductivity, but require expensive noble metals and generate 
organic waste [38,36]. More recently, bio-extract and oxalate-polyol 
systems offer a compromise between performance and green chemis-
try, using plant phenolics or oxalate–ascorbate pairs as benign re-
ductants to synthesize oxidation-resistant, high aspect-ratio Cu NWs at 
low temperature [1,19,46,47]. The “green” protocols for these ap-
proaches remove the toxic reducer and permit conductive products 
without high-temperature annealing, but the current yield is not yet as 
high as that achieved with the hydrazine system and reproducibility 
between batches is less well-established. Overall, the comparison data 
supports that no one route simultaneously optimizes scalability, cost, 
environmental impact, and bio-compatibility: template assisted and 
catalytic approaches favor precision; hydrazine and hydrothermal 
routes favor throughput; and finally, the emerging bio-based chemistries 
hold the most promise for future large-scale, environmentally sustain-
able, biomedical-grade copper nanowire synthesis [1,8,19,20,25,47].
3. Copper nanowires composites synthesis
3.1. Physical mixing
Physical mixing is a common and large-scale method to prepare 
copper nanowires composites. It is a preferred strategy for preparing 
biomedical composites because flexibility, conductivity, and biocom-
patibility are required for biomedical composites. Physical mixing dis-
perses the pre-synthesized Cu NWs into a polymer matrix through 
mechanical blending. There are no in-situ chemical reactions or high-
temperature processes, which maintain the structure of nanowires and 
the functional properties of the matrix [2,66]. The process typically 
begins with the synthesis of high-aspect-ratio Cu NWs with diameters of 
24 nm to 45 nm and lengths of tens of micrometers [2,3,66]. Fig. 6a 
shows surface cleaning (with lactic acid or acetic acid) to remove oxide 
layers and organic impurities, which is an essential step to achieve high 
electrical conductivity as well as biocompatibility [2,66]. Figs. 6b and c 
show that after purification, the Cu NWs are dispersed in polymer so-
lutions (typically poly (styrene-block-butadiene-block-styrene) (SBS), 
poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), or in biocompatible elastomers
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
7

like Ecoflex and cellulose via a combination of planetary mixing and 
high-shear dispersion [2,66,67]. This physical mixing route to produce 
composites with tunable electrical and mechanical properties. For 
instance, copper nanowire composites/polymer composites can exhibit 
conductivities up to 1 858 S cm − 1 and elongation at break of more than 
900%, which are required for stretchable and wearable biomedical de-
vices [3,66]. The method also produces transparent electrodes with low 
sheet resistance and high optical transmittance, which are required for 
biosensors and implantable electronics [2]. Additionally, the composites 
exhibit robust mechanical stability, maintaining performance after 
repeated bending or stretching cycles, and demonstrate improved 
chemical stability when embedded in protective polymer matrices [2, 
66]. In summary, the physical mixing method provides a convenient, 
efficient, and biocompatible approach to prepare copper nanowire 
composites based composites. It is particularly attractive for a range of 
biomedical applications, which require both functional performance 
and gentle processing.
3.2. Deposition
Deposition methods are one of the simplest ways to prepare copper 
nanowires-based composites with well-controlled morphological con-
trol of nanostructure, composition and functional properties. Recently 
these methods have attracted much interest due to their potential to 
prepare materials with controlled properties relevant for biomedical 
applications such as large surface areas, controlled oxidation states and 
controlled electrical properties [4,5]. There are many methods of 
deposition, but vacuum thermal evaporation is the most popular method 
for the synthesis of high quality copper nanowires based composites.
Fig. 7a shows that this method employs specialized equipment under 
controlled conditions, typically maintaining substrate temperatures 
around 97 ◦ C and vacuum levels of approximately 2 × 10 − 4 Pa [5]. The 
process enables to obtain copper nanowires with diameters in the range 
of 20 nm to 80 nm, as well as at the same time to deposit silver nano-
particles with diameters of 5 nm to 15 nm and thus to obtain composite 
nanowires with an increase in roughness on the surface [5]. Moreover, 
laser surface treatment coupled with vacuum evaporation process adds 
another layer of precision to the nanowires production. The KrF excimer 
laser treatment process induces laser-induced periodic surface structures 
(LIPSS) on the polymer substrate, which act as masks for the following 
copper coating [4]. Coherent copper nanowires with nominal thick-
nesses around 40 nm are obtained by means of preferential nucleation 
on oxygen-rich ridge surfaces. The degree of oxidation in the composites 
increases gradually with time, being approximately 30 at.% oxygen 
content after 4 months of exposure, thus offering promising perspectives 
for biomedical applications.
Furthermore, electrochemical and electroless deposition have also 
shown great potential in synthesizing various copper nanowire com-
posites with multifunctional properties. So far, electrochemical deposi-
tion (ECD) from solution on laser-induced graphene (LIG) stands out as 
an innovative strategy (Fig. 7b) where laser patterning and spatially 
selective metal growth are coupled [68]. Through controlling the 
applied current density during ECD, well-defined Cu nanostructures 
could be obtained in the form of flower-like morphologies at <5 mA, 
nanoclusters at 10 mA to 25 mA and continuous metallic films at 
>25 mA [68]. In parallel, electroless deposition has gained attention for 
its ability to construct uniform, junctionless nanowire networks using 
polymeric nanofiber templates [69]. Typically, nanofibers are generated
Table 4
Comparison of copper nanowire synthesis methods.
Synthesis method
Typical conditions
Scalability
Cost
Environmental impact
Suitability for biotechnology 
applications
Ref.
Electrodeposition 
60 ◦ C, aqueous CuSO 4 /H 2 SO 4 , 
multi-step AAO prep
Moderate
High
Poor – acidic and toxic etchants 
(DCM, CrO 3 )
Low – residual solvents limit bio-use 
[27,29,
30]
Hydrothermal 
growth 
100 ◦ C to 160 ◦ C, 6h to 24 h sealed 
vessel
High
Moderate
Moderate – aqueous, washable 
residues
Potential – after surface passivation
[1,20]
Hydrazine method 
60 ◦ C to 80 ◦ C, ≤1 h, open vessel 
Very high
Low
Poor – toxic, carcinogenic reagent
Unsuitable – toxic residues
[1,25]
Catalytic synthesis
180 ◦ C, Pt/Ni/Pd seeds, organic
solvent
Moderate
High
Moderate – organic waste
Unsuitable – metal residues &
solvent toxicity
[38,36]
Bio-extract
≤160 ◦ C, aqueous plant or oxalate 
system
Moderate
Low
Good – benign solvents & low 
hazard
Promising – antioxidant capping 
reduces toxicity
[1,19,46,
47]
Fig. 6. (a) The schematic of the process of chemical treatment and wash of Cu NWs [3]. (b) (c) The schematic of the fabrication process of Cu NWs-based stretchable 
conductors [3,67].
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
8

via electrospinning and then activated catalytically to enable selective 
metal deposition as shown in Fig. 7c. After being immersed in a plating 
bath containing Cu 2+ and other auxiliary ions like Ni 2+ , nanofibers 
could be converted into self-fused Cu/Ni alloy nanowire network with 
improved electrical conductivity, superior mechanical robustness and 
extended oxidation life. Process parameters including plating time, bath 
pH, and temperature can be finely adjusted to control network 
morphology and properties [69]. Despite these advances, challenges 
remain in optimizing deposition processes for enhanced uniformity, 
long-term stability, and scalability. Future works should explore process 
parameters to better control oxidation states, biocompatibility, and 
large-scale manufacturing protocols.
3.3. Direct impregnation
Direct impregnation is a dominant and remarkably efficient fabri-
cation approach to synthesize various copper nanowire composites with 
wide ranging applications due to its mild processing conditions. This 
process entails immersing pre-formed polymer matrices into well-
collected Cu NWs dispersants and allows for nanowire infiltration 
through capillary forces and solvent diffusion without subjecting the 
process to high temperatures or mechanical deformation [6,70]. Due to 
its gentle nature, direct impregnation is particularly advantageous in 
polymer fabrication involving temperature-sensitive polymers and 
bioactive species for advanced biomedical composite fabrication. 
Building upon this foundation, the direct impregnation approach is 
provided by the successful applications of the method to a range of 
polymer systems. Fig. 8a shows that Cu NWs have been introduced into 
polymer nanofibers (PVDF) as well as into epoxy resins with good 
incorporation being obtained in each case. In both cases, detailed con-
trol of the loading (5 wt% to 20 wt%) was achieved through optimiza-
tion of the suspension concentration and immersion parameters [6,70]. 
The utility of this approach for surface modified nanowires is further 
demonstrated by the applications to polydopamine coated Cu NWs 
(Fig. 8b) which are prone to oxidation-induced degradation when used 
in biotechnology applications [70].
Moreover, the direct impregnation approach demonstrates excep-
tional adaptability to complex nanowire architectures and composite 
designs. In recent years, core-shell nanowires like Cu@Ni nanowires [7] 
(Fig. 8c) and multi-component composites such as copper nano-
wire/graphene oxide composites [71] (Fig. 8d) have been successfully 
processed, where the mild impregnation conditions preserve the delicate 
interfacial structures essential for enhanced performance. Additionally, 
the scalability and reproducibility inherent to direct impregnation have 
solidified its position as a mainstream industrial process. While 
complicated synthesis routes often demand the use of bespoke equip-
ment, this simple method can be easily adapted for use with any stan-
dard processing facility while maintaining quality of the material [72]. 
The ease of generating composites with tunable electrical, thermal, and 
mechanical properties through simple parameter variation has made 
this the go-to method for many researchers looking to develop new 
biomedical materials.
3.4. Comparative analysis of copper nanowires composites synthesis
A comparative examination of Cu NW composite synthesis routes 
reveals that the processing pathway largely determines network uni-
formity, interfacial bonding, scalability, and environmental adapt-
ability. The physical mixing approach—solution blending, melt mixing, 
or the mechanical dispersion of Cu NWs in polymers such as PDMS, 
Ecoflex, or SBS—typically offers the most straightforward and scalable 
processing pathway. It is low cost and compatible with roll-to-roll pro-
cessing and can yield tunable electrical and mechanical properties via 
filler content and polymer elasticity. For example, Cu NW/Ecoflex 
composites prepared by shear mixing or freeze-casting display thermal 
conductivities of up to 3.1 W m − 1 K − 1 at < 2 vol% filler content, while 
Cu NW/SBS films, prepared using lactic-acid cleaning to promote 
interfacial contact, exhibit excellent stretchability (>900%) and con-
ductivity (1 858 S cm − 1 ) under benign processing conditions [2,67]. 
However, physical mixing of the Cu NWs often leads to filler aggregation 
and poor wire alignment, which can reduce percolation efficiency and 
optical uniformity, especially for transparent or flexible device appli-
cations. The deposition method covering approaches such as vacuum
Fig. 7. (a) Process flow diagram for the preparation of the AgNPs/Cu NWs composites using the solid-state ionics method and vacuum thermal evaporation method: 
(a-1) clean quartz glass substrate; (a-2) the deposited copper electrodes on two ends of the substrate; (a-3) the Rb4Cu16Cl13I7 films deposited over the whole 
substrate; (a-4) applying a direct current electric field; (a-5) the silver materials deposited over the whole substrate; (a-6) obtaining AgNPs/copper nanowire 
composites [5]. (b) Schematic of the LIG-ECD process for forming Cu-LIG composites. (b-1) The first step is patterning LIG through laser engraving and (b-2) the 
second step is ECD on the patterned LIG [68]. (c) (c-1) The polymer nanofiber template is formed on a PET film by an electrospinning method. (c-2) The catalyst is 
deposited on the surface of the polymer nanofiber template. (c-3) The Cu/Ni nanonetwork is plated on the polymer nanofiber template by electroless deposition [69].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
9

filtration, spray coating, spin-coating, and photonic sintering—enables 
control over Cu NW network morphology and film thickness. These 
approaches enable the fabrication of transparent conductive films with 
low sheet resistance and high uniformity. Cu NW/PMMA and Cu 
NW/poly (acrylate) films exhibit transmittances of up to 91.3 % and 
sheet resistances of approximately 100 Ω sq − 1 , while Cu@Ni and Cu/Ni 
nanonetworks obtained using electroless deposition exhibit enhanced 
oxidation resistance and durability. However, these approaches suffer 
from higher cost and limited environmental friendliness owing to the 
use of hydrazine and metal waste [3,5,68,69]. Composites prepared by 
the deposition method usually exhibit better film smoothness and op-
tical control than those prepared by the physical mixing method, 
although the processing route is more complex and the stretchability is 
limited. Therefore, they are generally limited to use in highly deform-
able wearables. Among the various impregnation routes, the direct 
impregnation approaches such as dip-coating, in situ polymer infiltra-
tion, and electrospinning promote strong interfacial coupling with the 
Cu NWs and matrix materials. PDA-coated Cu NW/epoxy laminates 
exhibit enhanced oxidation resistance and ~2.87 W m − 1 K − 1 thermal 
conductivity at 3.1 vol%, whereas PVDF/Cu NW electrospun fibers
exhibit tunable dielectric properties via β-phase crystallinity control [6, 
7,70]. The direct impregnation methods are suitable for uniform coating 
and biocompatibility, but solvent emissions and process time are still 
issues. In summary, as depicted in Table 5, the physical mixing strategy 
is preferable for large-scale application and low cost, the deposition 
methods are beneficial for conductivity and transparency, and the direct 
impregnation is superior for strong interfacial coupling and biological 
suitability. A balanced combination of these routes, especially focusing 
on green solvents, low-temperature curing, and recyclable matrices, will 
be critical for the development of sustainable, high-performance Cu NW 
composite systems for next-generation flexible electronics.
4. Biotechnology applications
4.1. Agriculture and food
4.1.1. Agricultural film
Mulch films have been widely used in modern agriculture to increase 
soil temperature and maintain proper soil moisture to overcome low 
temperature and water deficiency during winter. However, the use of
Fig. 8. (a) Scheme of the preparation process of flexible mats of PVDF/Cu NWs nanofibers [6]. (b) Scheme illustrating the preparation process of PDA-coated-Cu NWs 
[70]. (c) Diagram for the preparation of NiNWs, Ni@Cu NWs, and composite foams [71]. (d) Schematic illustrations of the preparation process of Cu@Ni NWs/GO 
and Cu@Ni NWs/RGO composites [7].
Table 5
Comparison of copper nanowire composite synthesis strategies.
Composite
strategy
Representative system
Typical conditions
Scalability
Cost
Environmental
impact
Suitability for biotechnology 
applications
Ref.
Physical mixing
Cu NW/Ecoflex, Cu NW/SBS
Shear-mixing or freeze-casting
≤60 ◦ C
High
Low
Good – benign 
solvents
Limited
[2,
67]
Deposition
Cu NW/PMMA, Cu NW/poly 
(acrylate)
Vacuum filtration, spray 
coating ≤120 ◦ C
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate – solvent-
based
Low
[3,
69]
Cu@Ni, Cu/Ni, Cu–GO 
hybrids
Electroless or hydrothermal 
80 ◦ C
Moderate
High
Poor – hydrazine use 
Low
[5,
68]
Direct
impregnation
PDA–Cu NW/Epoxy
In situ dip-coating ≤60 ◦ C
Moderate
Low
Good – aqueous PDA
High
[7]
PVDF/Cu NW Electrospun
Fiber
Electrospinning 25 ◦ C to 70 ◦ C
Moderate
Moderate
Poor – solvent
emissions
Medium
[6,
70]
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
10

conventional plastic mulch films is associated with major environmental 
problems such as soil contamination and microplastic pollution [73]. 
Therefore, biodegradable mulch films have been developed as an 
alternative to decrease the environmental carbon footprint of agricul-
ture. Most of the raw materials used in the production of biodegradable 
films, however, have limitations such as unpredictable degradation, 
high cost of production, and poor flexibility. Among all these alterna-
tives, cellulose-based biodegradable films attracted our attention due to 
its clean, renewable, abundant and low cost characteristic [74]. 
Cellulose-based mulch films can maintain other important agricultural 
features, such as moisture retention and temperature control, with little 
plastic residues in soil. Nevertheless, the strong heat loss by radiative 
heat dissipation from cellulose-based mulch films cannot be ignored. It is 
reported that the inherent hydrophilic property of cellulose might be 
due to abundant existed free hydroxyl groups and the strong absorption 
and radiation property of the functional groups of cellulose, such as 
–OH, C–O–C and C–H, in mid-to far-IR atmospheric window. Thus, 
improving the thermal insulation and waterproof property of 
cellulose-based mulch films is an urgent issue for us to solve [8,14]. 
Therefore, to overcome these drawbacks, scientists have proposed the 
use of copper nanowire composites, which show low emissivity and high 
reflectivity in the mid-to far-IR region, which can significantly reduce 
radiative heat loss and improve the insulation property. Li et al. [8] 
shows that they obtained homogeneous Cu NWs blending with ligno-
cellulose nanofibers (LCNFs) to obtain Cu/LC composite films. Finally, 
the surface was coated with superhydrophobic material via chemical 
vapor deposition using methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMS) (Fig. 9a). In 
Chen et al. approach [14], the pre-synthesized Cu NWs were filtered on 
LCNF films to improve the thermal insulation. Next, the LCNF/Cu NWs 
films were peeled off and immersed in the hydrophobic PDMS/hexane 
solution (1 min) to obtain LCNF/Cu NWs/PDMS composite films as 
shown in Fig. 9b.
In thermal insulation characteristics analysis. Pure LCNF film 
showed low IR reflectance (~10%) in the 2.5 μm to 25 μm range 
(Fig. 9c–1), while Cu/LC film exhibited high IR reflectance (~33%). As 
shown in Fig. 9c–2. Thermal imaging analysis demonstrated that the 
surface temperature of Cu/LC film (40.6 ◦ C) was lower than that of LC 
film (46.3 ◦ C) under the same heating condition, which might be due to 
the high IR reflectivity of copper nanowire composites (Fig. 9c–3) [8]. 
On the other hand, surface temperature of Cu NWs-modified LCNF film 
was 6.3 ◦ C lower than that of the heating plate, whereas the temperature 
difference between the surface of LCNF/Cu NWs/PDMS film and the
heating plate was reduced to 5.2 ◦ C, possibly due to the suppression of IR 
reflectance by Cu NWs caused by the PDMS coating (Fig. 9d) [14]. 
Table 6 shows that the water contact angle (WCA) of the pristine 
LCNF film was 37 ◦ , indicating that it was highly hydrophilic. The WCA 
of Cu NWs, MTMS, and PDMS functionalized LCNF films dramatically 
increased to 154 ◦ and 118 ◦ , respectively. In addition, the water vapor
transmission rate (WVTR) of PDMS coated film was 0.0289 g cm − 2 d − 1 ,
which was significantly decreased compared with that of pristine LCNF 
film (0.0334 g cm − 2 d − 1 ). Furthermore, the mechanical properties of the 
PDMS modified film exhibited 113.34 MPa strength nearly twice that of 
the pristine LCNF film (53.56 MPa), and the elongation at break of the 
PDMS modified film increased from 4.05% to 6.54%, which was higher 
than those of the pristine and MTMS modified films. These results sug-
gested that the structure of the film was good flexibility [8,14]. In 
summary, Cu NWs/MTMS composite film exhibits remarkable hydro-
phobic performance and thermal insulation, whereas Cu NWs/PDMS 
composite film presents an excellent balance of water resistance, me-
chanical strength and thermal stability. Such results indicate that Cu 
NWs-containing cellulose films have great potential for use as sustain-
able agricultural mulch films with improved performances and envi-
ronmentally friendly.
4.1.2. Food detection
The safety of the global food supply is threatened by an increasingly 
complex cocktail of chemical hazards, from naturally occurring toxins to 
anthropogenic compounds such as antibiotics and pesticides [15,49]. 
Traditional analytical methods that are sensitive enough to discern these 
contaminants (high-performance liquid chromatography, mass spec-
trometry, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays) are often 
hampered by large instrumentation, laborious sample preparation, and 
high associated costs [9,15,49,75]. In recent years, copper nanowire 
composites have been reported to be a suitable functional material for 
advanced electrochemical sensors due to their good electrical conduc-
tivity, large specific surface area, preferential electrocatalytic activity, 
and low price. Copper nanowire composites sensing system (near-in-
frared electrochemiluminescence (NIR-ECL), microchip electrophoresis 
(ME) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE)-based biosensing) have been re-
ported to improve the detection sensitivity, selectivity and stability of 
the whole system making the copper nanowire composites have poten-
tial applications in food safety field [9,15,16,49,75].
Carbohydrates are difficult analytes because of their bulky nature 
and lack of chromophore or fluorophobic groups. A simple and effective
Fig. 9. (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of hydrophobic Cu/LC composite film [8]. (b) Fabrication of LCNF/Cu NWs/PDMS composite film [14]. (c) 
(c-1) Absorbance spectra in the wavelength range of 0.25 μm to 2.5 μm and infrared reflectance spectra in the wavelength range of 2.5 μm to 25 μm of the LC film and 
the Cu/LC film (the blue shaded area is the atmospheric window). Digital photo and IR image of (c-2) the LC film and (c-3) the Cu/LC film [8]. (d) Thermal images of 
LCNF film, LCNF/Cu NWs film, and LCNF/Cu NWs/PDMS film [14].
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
11

solution to the problem of carbohydrates as analytes is provided by the 
Cu NWs-modified ME system. Cu NWs were drop-cast onto the surface of 
the electrode to form a ME-Cu NWs system by Garcia et al. [16] for the 
rapid electrochemical detection of glucose and fructose in honey [16]. 
System design (Fig. 10a–1) and electropherograms (Fig. 10a–2). Glucose 
and fructose peaks appeared at about 159.3 s ± 3.2 s and 210.7 s ± 3.7 s, 
respectively. The signal to noise ratios were from 8 to 32 and the 
baseline noise was <0.6 nA. No signals were observed for the honey 
samples tested using the unmodified electrode. The presence of copper 
nanowire composites is crucial for both the target recognition and cat-
alytic performance [16].
With extensive applications in clinical medicine, livestock, and aqua-
culture, antibiotics are being recognized with great concern because of 
their residual accumulation in food and environment, which leads to the 
worldwide antibiotic resistance problem. In this context, NIR-ECL sensing
is garnering attention for its low background interference, deep tissue 
penetration, and biocompatibility. Copper nanowire composites are 
applied in these platforms to solve the toxicity and instability problems of 
conventional luminophores [15,75]. For ENR (enrofloxacin) sensing, Wu 
et al. [15] reported that Cu NWs aggregation was avoided and electron 
transport was improved by NMC-copper nanowire composite. Meanwhile, 
the introduction of boron nitride quantum dots (BNQDs) was more 
effective in improving performance, and the molecularly imprinted 
polymer-based sensor (MIP/BNQDs/NMC-Cu NWs/GCE) was further 
developed (Fig. 10b–3). The sensor presented good linearity between ENR 
concentration and quenching ratio, and the LOD could reach 
3.33 × 10 − 10 mol L − 1 (Figs. 10b–1 and b-2). Compared with other ENR 
sensors for antibiotics (Table 7.), this platform exhibited higher sensitivity 
and a wider range of detection. Similarly, to avoid aggregation and 
oxidative degradation of Cu NWs in dispersion, the polyvinylpyrrolidone
Table 6
Copper nanowires-based composite agricultural film performance table.
Agricultural films
WCA/ ◦ 
WVTR/g cm − 2 
d − 1 )
Temperature difference between film and 
heating plate/ ◦ C
Transmittance at 
700 nm/%
Breaking strength/ 
MPa
Elongation/
%
Ref.
LCNF
37 ± 5
0.033 4
0
94
53.56
4.05
8
LCNF/Cu NWs/
MTMS 
154 ± 1
–
5.7
57.1
54.3
4.24
14
LCNF/Cu NWs/ 
PDMS
118 ± 4
0.028 9
5.2
70
113.34
6.54
8
Lignocellulosic nanofibers (LCNF), Methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMS), Poly (dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS).
Fig. 10. (a) (a-1) Microchip and CSPE layouts and image of the detection reservoir. RB, running buffer reservoir; SR, sample reservoir; SW, sample waste reservoir; 
ED, ED cell. (a-2) microchip electropherograms on CSPE-Cu NWs for glucose and fructose detection in honey samples. Standards analysis is shown in red. No signal is 
observed when a bare electrode is used (bottom electrophoregram) [16]. (b) (b-1) ECL spectra of the prepared MIECLS with incremental ENR concentrations. (b-2) 
MIECLS standard curve for detecting ENR. (b-3) Construction mechanism diagram of MIP/BNQDs/NMC-Cu NWs/GCE in MIECLS [15]. (c) (c-1) ECL responses of 
MIP/Cu NWs@PVP/GCE under different CIP concentrations. (c-2) Standard curve for detecting CIP. (c-3) The design principle of MIP/Cu NWs@PVP/GCE and the 
specific detection mechanism for CIP [75]. (d) (d-1) Fabrication of AChE-Cs/rGO-TEPA-Cu NWs/GCE biosensor. (d-2) DPV responses of AChE biosensor after in-
cubation with different concentrations of malathion for 10 min. (d-3) The corresponding plot of the difference in ΔI against the concentration of malathion [49]. (e) 
(e− 1) The fabrication process of the screen-printed carbon electrodes. (e− 2) Cyclic voltammogram response of the Cu NWs/rGO/AChE/SPCE biosensor for indirect 
detection of chlorpyrifos. (e− 3) Calibration plot from 10 to 200 μg/L of chlorpyrifos [9].
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
12

(PVP) was used as anti-aggregation agent by Wu et al. [75]. Subsequently, 
the molecular imprinting-based sensor (MIP/Cu NWs@PVP/GCE) was 
prepared as shown in Fig. 10c–3. The amount of CIP could be determined 
by ECL signal changes. The sensor exhibited a low LOD of 
2.59 × 10 − 9 mol L − 1 as shown in Figs. 10c–1 and c-2, which is much 
higher sensitivity and wider linear range than those reported reports until 
now for CIP detection and good selectivity (Table 7).
Due to the potential hazards for human health and environment 
caused by organophosphorus pesticides (OPs), it is very urgent to 
develop rapid on-site detection technology. As the representative of 
electrochemical biosensor based on AChE, its fast response and portable 
feature make it widely used in various fields. Because of the excellent 
electrocatalytic properties, copper nanowire composites have been 
widely used in AChE electrochemical biosensors [9,49]. For the detec-
tion of malathion, a novel 3D conductive rGO-TEPA/Cu NWs hybrid 
interface was fabricated by Li et al. [49] to enhance the surface area and 
electron transfer property of the sensor. Then AChE and chitosan were 
sequentially deposited on this platform to prepare stable and bio-
recognizable biosensor (Fig. 10d–1). The sensor exhibited a linear 
detection range from 3.03 × 10 − 9 mol L − 1 to 6.05 × 10 − 5 mol L − 1 with a
LOD of 1.18 × 10 − 9 mol L − 1 (Figs. 10d–2 and d-3). Compared with the 
reported sensors (Table 7), the platform shows lower LODs and larger 
linear detection range. To detect chlorpyrifos (CPS), a Copper nano-
wire/rGO composite-modified SPCE (Figs. 10e–1) was fabricated by 
Suwannachat et al. [9]. Cu NWs could offer more thiol binding sites to 
recognize target and rGO could improve the conductivity of the com-
posite, thus the sensor's sensitivity was enhanced. The sensor presents a 
linear range from 2.85 × 10 − 8 mol L − 1 to 5.71 × 10 − 7 mol L − 1 and the 
LOD was 8.84 × 10 − 9 mol L − 1 (Figs. 10e–2 and e-3). Compared with 
other many conventional sensors (Table 7), the Cu NWs/rGO/A-
ChE/SPCE biosensor has a higher sensitivity due to the electrocatalytic 
behavior and high thiol adsorption ability of Cu NWs and excellent 
electron mobility of rGO. In summary, copper nanowire composites 
could be considered as a highly versatile component for the improve-
ment of the sensitivity, selectivity and stability of various advanced 
electrochemical sensors in ME systems, NIR-ECL sensing interface or 
AChE–based biosensor, and the highly sensitive, selective and reliable 
rapid detection of carbohydrates, antibiotics and pesticides in food and 
environmental matrices has been further extended to other complex 
matrices. All these results have demonstrated that copper nanowire 
composites are key materials for advanced sensors for food safety and 
environmental applications.
4.2. Biomedicine
4.2.1. Disease detection
Copper nanowire composites with high electrical conductivity, large 
specific surface area and good electrocatalytic activity have attracted 
extensive attention for fabricating various copper nanowire composites 
hybrid electrodes and sensors for detecting small-molecule biomarkers 
in electrochemical interfaces during the past few years. To date, several 
clinically relevant analytes including creatinine (CRT), glucose, galac-
tose metabolites (Gal, Gal-1-phosphate, UDP-Gal) and sialic acid (SA) 
have been successfully detected with enhanced sensitivity by employing 
copper nanowire composites hybrid electrodes which would be of great 
help for disease diagnosis without enzymatic labeling and invasive 
bleeding [10,17,18,88]. Creatinine (CRT) is an important biomarker for 
studying renal function and muscle metabolism. In Geethukrishnan et al. 
[10] study, a novel non-enzatic electrochemical sensor was fabricated 
and assembled by assembling copper nanowire/mesoporous silica 
quantum dots composite onto glass carbon electrode (Cu 
NWs/MSQD/GCE) (Figs. 11a–1). Cu NWs could improve conductivity 
and promote the formation of complex with CRT, and the MSQD could 
offer more catalytic sites and framework. The current density of the 
sensor (Figs. 11a–2) increases with the increase of CRT concentration. 
From the differential pulse voltammetr (DPV) results (Figs. 11a–3), the 
CRT presents linear range from 1.96 × 10 − 6 mol L − 1 to 
9.66 × 10 − 4 mol L − 1 (R 2 = 0.988), and the LOD, sensitivity was calcu-
lated as 9.2 × 10 − 7 mol L − 1 . Contrasted with other reported references 
(Table 8), this sensor offers a broader linear range and a lower LOD, 
providing an effective alternative to traditional enzyme-based assays, 
which often suffer from poor stability and complicated procedures. 
Galactosemia is a lethal congenital metabolic disorder caused by the 
accumulation of Gal, Gal-1-P, and UDP-Gal. Traditional methods for 
screening this disease are based on single-marker detection with low 
sensitivity and complicated procedures. A microfluidic electrochemical 
detection chip based on copper nanowire composite (MC-Cu NWs) is 
designed by García et al. [88] to simultaneously detect all three me-
tabolites (Figs. 11b–1). Microfluidics can guarantee low sample con-
sumption and high throughput, and copper nanowire composites can 
enhance the signal by electrocatalysis. The device showed 
signal-to-noise ratios from 7 to 65 with background noise below 0.15 nA 
(Figs. 11b–2) and successfully distinguished healthy samples from 
galactosemia samples. Compared with conventional blood-based inva-
sive methods (Table 8), the MC-Cu NWs platform presents high
Table 7
Comparison of copper nanowires-based composite sensors with other reported 
methods for food detection.
Analyte
Materials
LOD/mol L − 1
Linear range/ 
mol L − 1
Ref.
Glucose
CSPE-Cu NWs 
4 × 10 − 6
5 × 10 − 5 to
2 × 10 − 4
16
Fructose 
2.3 × 10 − 5
1 × 10 − 4 to
4 × 10 − 4
Enrofloxacin (ENR)
oPAD
4.73 × 10 − 7
2.78 × 10 − 6 to
2.78 × 10 − 3
76
CdSe 1-x S x /ZnS 
QDs
1.64 × 10 − 7
2.78 × 10 − 7 to
1.39 × 10 − 4
77
Ru (bpy)3
2+
9.74 × 10 − 9
1.97 × 10 − 7 to
1.67 × 10 1
78
MIP/BNQDs/ 
NMC-Cu NWs/ 
GCE 
3.33 × 10 − 10
1.00 × 10 − 9 to
5.00 × 10 − 5
15
Ciprofloxacin (CIP)
Ag@PEI/Ag
5.20 × 10 − 9
1.00 × 10 − 8 to
1.00 × 10 − 4
79
CeO2/NH2-
MIL-88 B(Fe)
2.90 × 10 − 8
5.00 × 10 − 5 to
2.00 × 10 − 4
80
Ru (bpy)3
2+/CP
5.00 × 10 − 7
5.00 × 10 − 7 to
2.00 × 10 − 4
81
MIP/Cu 
NWs@PVP/ 
GCE 
2.59 × 10 − 9
5.0 × 10 − 9 to
5.0 × 10 − 5
75
Malathion
AChE/Chit-PB-
MWNTs-
HGNs/Au 
0.05 × 10 − 9
5 × 10 − 11 to 
7.5 × 10 − 8
82
AChE&ChOx/ 
Pt-Au/ 
MWCNT/GCE 
0.16 × 10 − 9
1 × 10 − 10 to
5 × 10 − 8
83
AChE-CS/Pb-
Cu NWs/GCE 
4.5 × 10 − 12
1.5 × 10 − 6 to
9 × 10 − 6
84
AChE-CS/rGO-
TEPA-Cu NWs/ 
GCE
1.18 × 10 − 9
3.03 × 10 − 9 to
6.05 × 10 − 5
49
Organophosphate
chlorpyrifos
CQDs/Fe 3+ 
9.13 × 10 − 7
6.28 × 10 − 7 to
1.26 × 10 − 4
85
rGO/PCB 
1.97 × 10 − 5
2.85 × 10 − 5 to
5.71 × 10 − 4
86
SWNT
3.99 × 10 − 6
3.99 × 10 − 5 to
3.99 × 10 − 4
87
Cu NWs/rGO/ 
AChE/SPCE
8.84 × 10 − 9
2.85 × 10 − 8 to
5.71 × 10 − 7
9
Carbon screen printed electrode (CSPE), Nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbon 
(NMC), Boron nitride quantum dots (BNQDs), Glassy carbon electrode (GCE), 
Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), Reductive graphene oxide-tetraethylenepentamine 
(rGO-TEPA), Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), Screen-printed carbon electrode 
(SPCE).
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
13

sensitivity and specificity for detecting target metabolites in neonatal 
urine, which is promising for clinical screening and subtyping 
galactosemia.
Furthermore, to address the need for non-invasive glucose moni-
toring in diabetic patients, especially those unsuitable for frequent blood 
sampling, Na et al. [17] developed a copper nanowire composites 
conductive paste (Cu NWs_GSS) for a saliva glucose detection platform 
where screen printing was employed to co-deposit Cu NWs and carbon 
pastes onto the polyimide substrates to create low cost, highly conduc-
tive microelectrodes as illustrated in Figs. 11c–1. Figs. 11c–1 and c-2 
show that when immersed in human saliva, the sensor showed a broad 
linear range from 1 × 10 − 9 mol L − 1 to 0.1 mol L − 1 with an acceptable 
LOD below 1 × 10 − 9 mol L − 1 which is sufficiently low to detect glucose 
in human saliva (Table 8). These results are attributed to the high 
electron transport efficiency and surface area of copper nanowire com-
posites in non-enzymatic systems, demonstrating significant potential 
for practical development of non-invasive glucose monitoring devices.
SA is an early-stage biomarker for many diseases, such as cancer and 
inflammatory diseases. However, because of its poor structural stability 
and weak ECL activity, SA is difficult to detect. A heterostructured ECL 
sensor based on Cu NWs combined with two-dimensional Ti 3 C 2 MXene 
further modified with a molecularly imprinted polymer (GIP/Ti 3 C 2 /Cu 
NWs/GCE) was fabricated by Wang et al. [18] for improving the tar-
geting specificity (Fig. 11d–3). The sensor presented good linearity in 
the range of 5 × 10 − 12 mol L − 1 to 1 × 10 − 8 mol L − 1 (R 2 = 0.997) and the 
LOD reached 1.17 × 10 − 12 mol L − 1 (Figs. 11d–1 to d-2), which was 
much lower than that of traditional ECL sensors (Table 8). The good 
performance of the sensor could be ascribed to the fact that copper 
nanowire composites could improve ECL emission and enhance the 
electron transfer property, and Ti 3 C 2 MXene could improve the structure 
of the whole sensor and avoid the aggregation of the film, which could 
further improve the sensitivity and selectivity of ultrasensitive and 
specific SA detection. In summary, copper nanowire composites could 
be used as a multifunctional component in the electrochemical detection
Fig. 11. (a) (a-1) Schematic illustration of the electrochemical determination of CRT in urine samples. (a-2) DPV obtained for 1.96 μM to 966.0 μM concentration of 
CRT in 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.0) within a potential window of 0.2 V to 0.8 V. (a-3) Linear calibration graph showing the linear relationship of the 
current peak vs concentration of the analyte [10]. (b) (b-1) Scheme for simultaneous detection of galactosemia biomarkers on the microfluidic chip layout. (b-2) 
Rapid detection of galactosemia profiles in urines samples obtained from ill newborns. The red line indicates the analysis results of ill newborn urine samples, each 
one corresponding to a different galactosemia profile, whereas the black line indicates the analysis results of healthy urine samples for comparison and the gray line 
indicates the analysis results of ill newborn urine samples using a bare electrode [88]. (c) (c-1) Schematic illustration of the fabricated copper nanowires paste 
glucose sensor strip (Cu NWs_GSS). (c-2) CV curves of the Cu NWs_GSS in 0.1 M NaOH solution with glucose concentrations ranging from 1 nM to 100 mM. (c-3) 
Calibration plot of the amperometric current response as a function of different glucose concentration [17]. (d) (d-1) ECL images of GIP/Ti 3 C 2 /Cu NWs/GCE after 
exposure to increasing concentrations of SA spiked between 5 × 10 − 12 mol L − 1 and 1 × 10 − 8 mol L − 1 . (d-2) Linear relationship. (d-3) Schematic preparation of 
GIP/Ti 3 C 2 /Cu NWs/GCE and ECL detection of SA [18].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
14

of several important biomarkers of diseases. Coupling with different 
functional materials facilitates non-enzymatic, highly sensitive and 
possibly non-invasive sensing films for small molecules and paves the 
way for applications in point-of-care, disease screening and health 
monitoring.
4.2.2. Tumor therapy
Copper nanowire composites exhibit superior electrical conductivity, 
electrocatalytic activity and modifiable surface, and have been reported 
to exhibit high sensitivity and selectivity in the electrochemical bio-
sensing of tumor-related small-molecule biomarkers. However, the ap-
plications of copper nanowire composites are not limited to biosensing.
Table 8
Comparison of copper nanowires-based composite sensors with other reported methods for disease detection.
Detected disease
Materials
Sample
Analyte
LOD/mol L − 1
Linear range/mol L − 1
Ref.
Kidney disease 
CNT-ABTS/Nafion 
Urine
–
1.1 × 10 − 5
0–2.1,3 × 10 − 2
89
Calix [4]pyrrol 
6.3 × 10 − 7
10 − 6 – 10 − 2
90
Cu/Nafion
6.8 × 10 − 7
2.2 × 10 − 6 – 1.326 × 10 − 4 
91
Cu NWs/MSQD/GCE 
9.2 × 10 − 7
1.96 × 10 − 6 – 9.66 × 10 − 4
10
Galactosemia 
CSPE-Cu NWs 
Gal
1.5 × 10 − 5
5 × 10 − 5 to 4 × 10 − 4
88
Gal 1-P 
1.6 × 10 − 5
1 × 10 − 4 to 1 × 10 − 3
UDP-Gal 
1.2 × 10 − 4
1 × 10 − 4 to 1 × 10 − 3
HPLC/PAD
Blood
Gal 1-P 
1.15 × 10 − 6
–
92
Gal
1.4 × 10 − 7
–
93
Diabetes
Cu NWs/rGO
Glucose
–
2 × 10 − 7
–
94
Cu NWs/MWCNTs 
2.6 × 10 − 7
–
95
CuNPs/rGO
3.4 × 10 − 6
–
96
Cu NWs_GSS
1 × 10 − 9
1 × 10 − 9 to 0.1
17
Tumor
GO/TiO 2 -Ru (bpy)3
2+@PEI-CdS/GCE
Serum albumin
Sialic Acid
1.7 × 10 − 11
1 × 10 − 9 to 1 × 10 − 4
97
Carbon cloth (CC) electrode 
5 × 10 − 7
4 × 10 − 5 to 4.4 × 10 − 4
98
MOF/CdTe@SiO 2 @MIP 
2.5 × 10 − 8
1 × 10 − 7 to 3 × 10 − 4
99
GIP/Ti 3 C 2 /Cu NWs/GCE
1.17 × 10 − 12
5 × 10 − 12 to 1 × 10 − 8
18
Molybdenum disulfide quantum dots (MSQD), Glassy carbon electrode (GCE), Carbon screen-printed electrodes (CSPE), Glucose sensor strip (GSS).
Fig. 12. (a) In vivo photothermal therapy efficacy of PEGylated Cu NWs. (a-1) Scheme of PEGylated Cu NWs as a photothermal agent for cancer therapy. (a-2) 
Thermal imaging of tumor-bearing BALB/c mice. (a-3) Temperature profiles of tumor-bearing BALB/c mice. (a-4) Tumor volume of CT26-bearing BALB/c mice after 
PEGylated Cu NWs-mediated photothermal ablation. (a-5) Percentage of HMGB1 + cells in the tumor tissue [11]. (b) (b-1) Effects of treatment with 5 μg mL –1 CuNPs 
or Cu NWs on cell death. (b-2) Relative intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in CuNP- or Cu NWs treated A549 cells. (b-3) Western blot analysis of the 
expression of DLAT and LIAS proteins and the formation of DLAT oligomers. Next, Semiquantitative analysis of DLAT oligomer formation and LIAS expression 
determined by densitometry of protein bands compared with that of tubulin. (b-4) Schematic of cuproptosis effectively induced by Cu NWs. (b-5) Induction of cell 
death by CuNPs or Cu NWs in cancer and normal cells [100].
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
15

An increasing number of studies have reported that copper nanowire 
composites could be further applied in the therapy of diseases, especially 
in photothermal therapy (PTT) and cuprotosis [11,100]. Photothermal 
therapy is a minimally invasive treatment modality that uses photo-
thermal agents (PTA) to convert near-infrared (NIR) light into heat and 
selectively kill tumor tissues. Despite the extensive investigation of 
noble metal nanomaterials for photothermal conversion owing to their 
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect, their high cost and potential 
cytotoxicity hinder their clinical translation. Copper nanowire com-
posites have been proposed as an alternative due to their excellent 
photothermal properties and scalable synthesis [11]. To improve their 
biocompatibility and aqueous dispersibility, Li et al. [11] functionalized 
Cu NWs and obtained Cu NWs modified with polyethylene glycol 
(PEG-Cu NWs) (Fig. 12a–1). When exposed to 808 nm NIR irradiation, 
the photothermal conversion efficiency of PEG-Cu NWs was ~12.5% 
(Fig. 12a–2) and the temperature of tumor regions increased to ~56.3 ◦ 
within several minutes, and efficient local tumor ablation could be ob-
tained (Fig. 12a–3). In addition, significant tumor growth inhibition in 
mice after treatment was observed. The tumor volume was decreased to 
343.8 mm 3 ± 254.6 mm 3 at day 15 after treatment, which was signifi-
cantly lower than that in the control group (Fig. 12a–4). The further 
histological studies showed that the thermal stress induced immuno-
genic cell death, and the amount of released high mobility group box 1 
(HMGB1) protein was enhanced up to 64.1% (Fig. 12a–5). HMGB1 and 
other DAMPs act as endogenous adjuvants to enhance the antitumor 
immune response by recruiting immune cells and activating effector T 
lymphocytes. These results suggested that PEG-Cu NWs based PTT might 
be synergized with immunotherapy [11].
In addition to physical ablation, copper nanowire composites have 
also demonstrated therapeutic effects through biochemical mechanisms, 
especially by inducing cuprotosis. Cuprotosis is a newly discovered type 
of programmed cell death due to copper overload. While classical copper 
ion carriers (e.g., elesclomol, disulfiram) face limitations related to 
toxicity and poor delivery efficiency, copper nanowire composites serve 
as a more stable and controllable Cu 2+ reservoir, enabling intracellular 
copper release with high precision [100]. Chen et al. revealed that Cu 
NWs triggered much more cell death in human lung carcinoma 
A549 cells (26.8%) than copper nanoparticles (13.0%) at the same 
concentration (Fig. 12b–1). Cu NWs increased the intracellular reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) level by 2.3 times that of CuNPs, suggesting that 
Cu NWs induced cytotoxicity was associated with the generation of 
reactive oxygen species (Fig. 12b–2). Western blot results also demon-
strated that Cu NWs induced DLAT oligomerization and LIAS expression 
downregulation in a dose- and time-dependent manner, strongly sup-
porting Cu NWs could activate cuprotosis (Fig. 12b–3). Mechanistically, 
the intracellularly released Cu 2+ induced by Cu NWs disturbs mito-
chondrial function, triggers ROS amplification, and activates the 
cuprotosis signaling cascade finally inducing cell death (Fig. 12b–4). 
Importantly, Cu NWs demonstrated selective cytotoxicity toward cancer 
cells (e.g., A549, MCF-7) over normal cells (e.g., MCF10A), highlighting 
their tumor specificity (Fig. 12b–5). In summary, copper nanowire 
composites exhibit dual behaviors for photothermal ablation and in-
duction of cell death through cuprotosis in copper-based tumor therapy. 
The modular design and low cost of these nanowires suggest that they 
have great potential for clinical translation. Further investigation into 
the in vivo pharmacokinetics, organ-specific targeting, and synergistic 
effects with other therapies is warranted.
4.2.3. Antimicrobial
Disinfection technology is widely used in fields such as public health, 
medical protection, water treatment and food preservation. Traditional 
UV and high temperature methods must be carried out under certain 
equipment conditions and cannot be applied to portable devices or 
structurally complex objects. Furthermore, chemical disinfectants such 
as chlorine, hydrogen peroxide, ethanol are low cost and easy to use, but 
they can cause microbial resistance, secondary pollution and generally
do not have long-term antimicrobial efficiency [12,101]. This has led to 
an increased interest in the synthesis of new antimicrobial materials that 
are fast-acting, broadly applicable, safe, environmentally friendly and 
durable. These include many nanomaterials with promising antimicro-
bial properties, such as metal-based nanomaterials, which are easily 
processable and inherently possess antimicrobial characteristics. Among 
these, Cu NWs have drawn much attention because of their unique 
one-dimensional morphology, high surface area-to-volume ratio, good 
electrical and thermal conductivity. Compared with bulk copper and 
spherical copper nanoparticles, the bactericidal performance of Cu NWs 
was improved due to the larger surface contact and more effective 
electron transfer, which further enhanced the disruption of cell mem-
brane [101,102]. Importantly, Cu NWs can be easily synthesized and 
deposited onto different functional substrates such as chitosan, activated 
carbon fibers (ACF), and cellulose derivatives to fabricate composite 
antimicrobial structures in which mechanical, thermal, and antibacte-
rial properties can be tuned simultaneously. Such copper nanowire 
composites may find applications in wearable protective gear, wound 
dressings, water filtration membranes, and antimicrobial coatings [12, 
21,22,101–103].
A summary of the antibacterial effects of copper nanowires-based 
composites in recent years was provided in Table 9. In flexible 
biopolymer substrates, chitosan is a naturally occurring cationic poly-
saccharide with good biocompatibility and film-forming property, and it 
has been used as a soft substrate for Cu NWs by Anand et al. [12]. The 
inhibition zones of copper nanowire/chitosan composites against 
Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) were 
11.48 mm and 18.84 mm, and the inhibition rates were 45.8% and 
31.06% (Fig. 13a), while the cytotoxicity was as low as 2.9 %, which 
showed that the copper nanowire/chitosan composites had a good bal-
ance between antimicrobial property and cellular safety. Similarly, Cu 
NWs embedded in hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) films showed 
superior antibacterial efficacy, with inhibition rates reaching 96% for 
E. coli and 90 % for S. aureus (Figs. 13b–1 and b-2), while maintaining
Table 9
Comparison of the antibacterial effects of copper nanowires-based composites in 
recent years.
Target
bacteria
Materials
Inhibition
zone/mm
Bacterial
reduction/%
Cytotoxicity/
%
Ref.
E. coli
Cu NW/ 
chitosan 
11.48
45.8
2.9
12
Cu NW/ 
ACF 
20.2
83.8
1.5
12
PDA/Cu 
NW 
–
90
–
102
M-Cu/ 
Cu2O NWs 
–
90
–
101
CuC NW
230
90
2
22
Cu NW/
PMMA
–
90
–
103
Cu NW/ 
PDMS 
–
90
–
103
HPMC-Cu 
NW
–
96
20
21
S. aureus
Cu NW/ 
chitosan 
18.84
31.06
2.9
12
Cu NW/ 
ACF 
20.3
86.36
1.5
12
HPMC-Cu 
NW 
–
90
20
21
M-Cu/ 
Cu2O NWs 
–
90
–
101
CuC NW
230
90
2
22
PDA/Cu
NW
–
99
–
102
Activated carbon fiber (ACF), Hydrox-ypropyl methyl cellulose (HPMC), Cop-
per–carbon dot (CuC), Polymethylmeth acrylate (PMMA), Polydopamine (PDA), 
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). Escherichia coli (E. coli), Staphylococcus aureus 
(S. aureus).
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
16

Fig. 13. (a) Absorbance-based method against E. coli and S. aureus at the material dose of 1 mg L –1 or 1 cm 2 patch [12]. (b) (b-1) Schematic diagram showing the 
fabrication of HPMC-Cu NWs films. (b-2) Cell mortality of E. coli and S. aureus after 24 h of incubation with HPMC-Cu NWs film [21]. (c) Schematic illustration and 
photographs for the fabrication of the Cu NWs-on-PMMA film. And mortality of E. coli cells after settling and further culturing in PBS buffer for 1 h, 5 h, and 24 h on 
the Cu NWs-on-PMMA film and a PMMA slide used as a control [103]. (d) Schematic illustration and photographs for the fabrication of the Cu NWs-in-PDMS film. 
And mortality of E. coli cells after incubation in PBS buffer for 1 h, 5 h, and 24 h with the Cu NWs-in-PDMS film and a PDMS slide as a control [103]. (e) (e− 1) 
Schematic illustration showing the preparation of PDA/Cu NWs coating on SS substrate. (e− 2) Quantitative count of viable bacteria on pristine and PDA/Cu NWs 
coated SS surface after exposed to a droplet of E. coli and S. aureus suspension at a concentration of ≈10 4 in PBS for 120 min at 37 ◦ C [102]. (f) (f-1) Schematic 
synthesis process of the M-Cu/Cu 2 O NWs electrode. (f-2) The inactivated rates for M-Cu/Cu 2 O NWs electrode after 0− 96 h treatment time [101].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
17

low cytotoxicity (20%). It can be concluded that the natural polymer 
matrix can not only improve the bactericidal ability of Cu NWs, but also 
can well control the biocompatibility of copper nanowire composites 
[21]. In addition, porous adsorption materials such as activated carbon 
fibers have also been used to enhance the antibacterial applications of 
copper nanowire composites in the fields of filtration and purification. 
The copper nanowire/ACF composite material showed an inhibition 
zone of 20.2 mm and 20.3 mm against E. coli and S. aureus, respectively, 
with inhibition rates as high as 83.8% and 86.36 % (Fig. 13a), while 
maintaining extremely low toxicity (1.5%), indicating that it also has 
achieved a good balance between high antibacterial efficiency and low 
toxicity [12]. In terms of structural diversification, Cu NWs have also 
been embedded in hydrophobic polymers as matrices, namely PMMA 
(Fig. 13c) and PDMS (Fig. 13d). The former is used as an environmental 
protection layer to prevent influence of water vapor, and the latter is 
used as mechanical reinforcement to apply copper nanowire composites 
in extreme environment and wearable electronics, flexible displays, and 
antimicrobial food package [103]. In addition, structural functionali-
zation of Cu NWs, such as PDA (Fig. 13e–1), Cu 2 O shell (Fig. 13f–1) also 
exhibited obvious antibacterial performance. As shown in Figs. 13e–2 
and Figs. 13f–2, PDA/Cu NWs and M-Cu/Cu 2 O NWs could get inhibition 
rate more than 90 % on E. Coli and its cytotoxicity was less than 2% 
[101,102].
From the analysis of dual antibacterial efficiency in Table 9, Cu NW/ 
HPMC and stainless-steel surface coating PDA/Cu NW show excellent 
antibacterial effects in both types of bacteria. These systems function via 
a dual mechanism: (1) generation of oxidative stress through ion release, 
and (2) physical adsorption and local bacterial enrichment enabled by 
the supporting substrate. In some cases, electroporation-assisted Cu NWs 
systems have further amplified the permeability of bacterial mem-
branes, accelerated Cu ion penetration and enhanced bactericidal effi-
cacy against both E. coli and S. aureus [21,102]. Furthermore, the 
antibacterial performance of copper nanowire composites against E. coli 
is slightly higher than that against S. aureus. This difference can be un-
derstood from two aspects: its cell structure and bactericidal mecha-
nism. E. coli is a Gram-negative bacterium, and its cell wall is composed 
of a thin peptidoglycan layer and an external lipopolysaccharide double 
membrane, and its structure is relatively fragile [21]. The copper ions or 
surface reactive oxygen species released by copper nanowire composites 
have strong redox activity, which can penetrate the cell membrane, 
trigger a series of damage processes such as membrane lipid peroxida-
tion, DNA breakage, and protein denaturation, and ultimately lead to 
cell apoptosis or necrosis [12,21,22]. In contrast, S. aureus is a 
Gram-positive bacterium, and its cell wall is mainly composed of a thick 
peptidoglycan layer, which has a more stable structure and has a certain 
barrier effect on the diffusion or penetration of metal ions. Therefore, in 
general, the sensitivity to Cu NWs is slightly lower [102]. However, 
some composite systems with high structural stability and synergistic 
release ability (such as HPMC-Cu NWs and PDA/Cu NW) can still ach-
ieve a bactericidal effect of ≥99 %, which shows that material structure 
regulation plays a key role in antimicrobial spectrum regulation. For 
example, HPMC or PDA as a matrix material not only helps to stabilize 
the dispersion of Cu NWs and improve the accessibility of its active 
components, but also may participate in complexing metal ions and 
regulating the release rate, thereby achieving a sustained and more 
targeted bactericidal effect [12,22,102]. In summary, copper nanowire 
composites represent a next-generation strategy for high-performance 
disinfection materials, offering multifunctionality, durability, and 
broad-spectrum activity making them highly attractive for future 
development in public health and biomedical applications.
4.2.4. Cytotoxicity and biocompatibility
The biological application of copper nanowire composites mainly 
relies on a delicate balance between their high bioactivity and accept-
able cytocompatibility. As shown in the preceding section, the copper 
nanowire composites display remarkable antimicrobial ability with
negligible acute cytotoxicity. However, their long-term biocompatibility 
and dose-dependent cytocompatibility still need to be systematically 
investigated. The in vitro cytotoxicity and cell proliferation behavior of 
PCS–CSNW (poly (citrate-siloxane)–copper sulfide nanowire) nano-
composites were investigated by Li et al. using PCS–CSNWs with various 
contents. The results indicated that PCS–CSNWs have low cytotoxicity in 
vitro and promote cell proliferation for L929 fibroblasts and HepG2 
cells. The cell viability of PCS–CSNWs was still high at the content of
2 mg mL –1 . After mice were implanted with PCS–CSNWs in subcutane-
ous pocket for four weeks, only mild inflammatory response was 
observed, and no copper accumulation was detected in major organs. 
The results indicated that PCS–CSNWs have little toxic side effect and 
good biosafety at therapeutic dose [104]. In addition, Nehra et al. [105] 
investigated the in vitro cytotoxicity of Cu NWs, and the results indi-
cated that Cu NWs usually show weak acute cytotoxicity, and the cell 
viability of A-431 carcinoma cells decreased only gradually at the 
highest concentration (1 000 nM μg –1 range). A clear dose–response 
relationship was also observed, and the establishment of safe exposure 
limits for biomedical applications was highlighted.
Mechanistically, the toxicity of Cu NWs arises from their tendency to 
release Cu 2+ ions, which act as catalysts to produce ROS and RNS 
reactive species, resulting in oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation, mito-
chondrial dysfunction, and ultimately apoptotic or necrotic cell death. 
Since the liver is the main copper depot in the body, no significant 
copper overload-induced cell injury would be expected if the resulting 
tissue copper concentrations do not exceed the physiological range 
(18 μg g –1 to 55 μg g –1 dry weight) and do not approach the threshold for 
a pathophysiological state (190 μg g –1 to 3 360 μg g –1 ) [106]. However, 
surface modification and polymer encapsulation can greatly reduce the 
toxic effects. For example, poly (N-vinylimidazole)-based copper nano-
composites containing 1.0% Cu with particle size of 4 nm to 6 nm were 
able to preserve hepatocyte integrity and normal levels of enzyme (ALT, 
AST) while modulating the activities of cytochrome c oxidase and 
glutathione synthetase [106], which suggests that polymer-stabilized 
systems may retain the bio-functionality of copper while reducing 
cytotoxicity. Published IC 50 values for Cu-based nanomaterials vary 
greatly between 54.34 μg mL –1 and 1 000 μg mL –1 in different cell lines, 
which indicates a strong dependence of biological response of nano-
materials on particle size, surface chemistry and formulation.
Particle geometry has a significant influence on biocompatibility. 
Long Cu NWs (>~200 nm) are less easily internalized and cleared, 
enhancing the risk of chronic inflammation, whereas short nanowires 
(<50 nm) may pass through cells more easily but are removed more 
quickly. Persistent high copper loads can damage liver and kidney 
function. Therefore, controlled dissolution and excretion are crucial to 
ensuring biosafety. To date, superior surface engineering strategies, 
including polymer, mesoporous silica, or metal organic framework 
(MOF) coatings, have been demonstrated to inhibit Cu 2+ leaching, 
improve hemocompatibility, extend circulation time, and have no in-
fluence on photothermal or catalytic performance [106,107]. In addi-
tion, investigations of Cu NP-modified Ti6Al4V substrates showed that 
the related cell viability recovered with time over 1 d to 7 d, suggesting 
that cells can tolerate low-level Cu exposure and exhibit acceptable 
long-term biocompatibility when ion release is controlled and main-
tained at an acceptable level [108]. Importantly, the embedding of Cu 
NWs in biocompatible matrices such as hypromellose (HPMC) or chi-
tosan confers extra safety benefits: HPMC–Cu NW films showed >70% 
viability of human dermal fibroblasts at 400 μg mL –1 to 500 μg mL –1 but 
still possessed high antibacterial activity, in contrast to spherical Cu 
nanoparticles of similar concentration (<25% viability) [21]. The 
improvement is attributed to the slower ion release and reduced ROS 
generation for one-dimensional morphology of Cu NWs and the pro-
tective matrix effect. Nevertheless, the cytotoxicity rises dramatically 
above 500 μg mL –1 , so the therapeutic window is still narrow and needs 
to be carefully determined.
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
18

In summary, the currently published information suggests that cop-
per nanowire composites, if properly engineered, are likely to exhibit a 
reasonable compromise between antimicrobial/therapeutic activity and 
mammalian cell compatibility. At regulated concentrations, Cu NWs 
exhibit effective properties as antibacterial, photothermal, and regen-
erative agents; however, these properties may translate to oxidative and 
systemic toxicities with prolonged or unregulated exposure. Conse-
quently, a rational focus for the coming years should be the compre-
hensive assessment of long-term biosafety, including chronic exposure 
models, biodistribution, and metabolic clearance experiments. Under-
standing structure–toxicity correlations and rationalizing in vitro and in 
vivo protocols will be crucial for translating copper nanowire compos-
ites into safe and efficacious biomedical materials [109].
4.3. Wearable electronics
4.3.1. Physiological signal monitoring
Inspired by the remarkable electrical conductivity, flexible me-
chanical behavior, and low cost, the applications of copper nanowire 
composites in physiological signal monitoring sensors have attracted 
extensive attention. These copper nanowire composites show great po-
tential to replace the traditional noble metal (Ag and Au) in wearable 
electronics. However, the problems of easy oxidation and poor 
biocompatibility motivate the design of novel composites with improved 
properties to be applied in biological environment [110]. A foundational 
challenge for copper nanowire composites are their susceptibility to 
oxidation, which degrades electrical performance and largely limits 
long-term use. A summary of the performance of physiological signal 
sensors prepared from copper nanowires-based composite materials in 
recent years is presented in Table 10. Some findings suggest an effective 
strategy to mitigate this involved issue is creating core-shell structures. 
Wei et al. [110] supported this by coating Cu NWs with a thin, 20 nm 
silver layer as shown in Fig. 14a–1. This Cu-Ag core-shell structure not 
only provides excellent oxidation resistance but also forms the basis of a 
high-performance electronic skin (e-skin) as shown in Fig. 14a–2. By 
replicating the micropapillae structure of a rose petal onto a PDMS 
substrate, the resulting sensor generally indicates high sensitivity 
(1.35 kPa − 1 ), a very low detection limit (<2 Pa), and what appears to be 
a rapid response time of 36 ms. This indicates the ability to monitor 
physical signals such as voice vibrations from the neck and detailed 
wrist pulse waveforms as shown in Fig. 14a–3. Building on the success of 
the core-shell concept, subsequent research has focused on improving 
biocompatibility and stability for more direct and demanding electro-
physiological applications. Kim et al. [23] developed an oxidation-free 
Cu-Au core-shell nanowire using a novel wet chemical synthesis 
involving a ligand exchange process as shown in Fig. 14b–1. The Cu-Au 
nanowire electrodes shown in Fig. 14b–2 exhibited exceptional stabili-
tyeven after exposure to harsh environments (80 ◦ C and 80% relative 
humidity) and demonstrated excellent biocompatibility with over 95% 
cell viability in culture. These electrodes were fabricated into 
high-performance sensors for electromyogram (EMG) and electrocar-
diogram (ECG) monitoring, successfully capturing clear QRS complexes 
from the heart even after accelerated aging tests (Fig. 14b–3). While
core-shell structures addressed the oxidation problem, another problem 
lies in the research on how to improve the mechanical properties and 
sensitivity of the sensor itself. Zhang et al. [111] introduced a novel 
bifunctional sensor based on a porous copper nanowires@IonGel (PCI) 
composite film. This was achieved by using a polystyrene microsphere 
template to create a porous, micro-structured IonGel that encapsulated 
lactic acid-treated Cu NWs as shown in Fig. 14c–1. The resulting com-
posite has exhibited an unprecedented stretchable range of up to 8000 % 
and constitute an ultra-high-pressure sensitivity of approximately 
72.1 kPa − 1 in the low-pressure region (0Pa to 0.7 Pa), with a detection 
limit of just 0.14 Pa. This substantial sensitivity and rapid response 
(typically 18 ms) allow the sensor to monitor a wide range of human 
physiological signals with ostensibly high resolution, such as breathing 
rhythm and heart rate signals as shown in Fig. 14c–2.
Beyond monitoring physical and electrical signals, the field has 
expanded into the complex domain of electrochemical sensing for spe-
cific biomarkers in bodily fluids. Wang et al. [112] developed a flexible, 
non-enzymatic glucose sensor by depositing Cu NWs onto a reduced 
graphene oxide (RGO) coated cotton fabric (CF) as shown in Fig. 15a–1. 
This Cu NWs/RGO/CF composite electrode suggest what appears to be 
excellent catalytic performance for glucose oxidation, achieving a high 
sensitivity of approximately 1 020 μA mM − 1 cm − 2 with a rapid 5-s 
response time. Fig. 15a–2 shows that the sensor was used to analyze 
glucose concentrations in human sweat and serum with apparently high 
accuracy, which supports the path toward non-invasive diabetes moni-
toring. In addition, copper nanowires-based composites can also be used 
to detect other key biomarkers. Zeng et al. [113] fabricated a sensor for 
cysteine by modifying a glassy carbon electrode with copper nanowire 
composites stabilized by poly (dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride) as 
shown in Fig. 15b. The positively charged PDDA enhances the electro-
static adsorption of negatively charged cysteine, which makes high 
sensitivity of 1.430 μA μM − 1 cm − 2 and represents a low detection limit 
of around 0.19 μM at a relatively low operating potential of 0.2 V 
(Fig. 15b). The evidence suggests that this sensor appears to be effective 
for detecting cysteine in human plasma samples, demonstrating its po-
tential for clinical diagnostics. Similarly, Venkateswarlu et al. [13] 
developed a sensor for the drug etilefrine by coating a Cu NWs-modified 
carbon paste electrode with an electropolymerized ionic liquid as shown 
in Fig. 15c–1. This novel composite electrode can detect etilefrine in 
blood plasma with a detection limit of approximately 2.3 μM 
(Fig. 15c–2), which suggest the potential of copper nanowire composites 
in therapeutic drug monitoring and pharmacology. In summary, these 
studies indicate a substantial and promising progression. Future works 
can focus on integrating these disparate strategies, for instance, creating 
porous, biocompatible, core-shell nanowire composites to develop 
multi-modal sensors presumably capable of simultaneously monitoring 
physical, electrical, and chemical physiological signals.
4.3.2. Motion pressure sensor
Copper nanowire composites exhibit highly promising behavior for 
motion monitoring sensors in biomedical applications because of their 
superior electrical conductivity, flexibility, and low cost in comparison 
with noble metal nanowires. With the rapid development of wearable
Table 10
Performance of physiological signal sensors prepared from copper nanowires-based composite materials in recent years.
Signal category
Signal
Material System
Sensitivity
Detection Limit (LOD)
Response Time
Stability
Ref.
Physical
Voice, wrist pulses 
PDMS/Cu–Ag NWs
1.35 kPa − 1
2 Pa
30 ms to 50 ms
>5 000 cycles 
110
Breathing, heart rate 
Cu NWs/IonGel
72.1 kPa − 1
0.14 Pa
18 ms to 27 ms
>5000 cycles 
111
EMG, ECG
CuAuNW
–
–
–
–
23
Chemical
Glucose
Cu NWs/RGO/CF
236.46 mA mM − 1 cm − 2 
0.13 nM
5 s
>25 days
112
Cysteine
Cu NWs-PDDA/GCE 
1.43 mA mM − 1 cm − 2
190 nM
2 s 
>1 day
113
ET-HCl
CPE/Cu NWs/poly (EMIMS)
–
2300 nM
–
–
13
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), Electromyogram (EMG), Electrocardiogram (ECG), Etilefrine [2-ethylamino-1-(3-hydroxyphenyl) ethanol hydrochloride] (ET-HCl), 
Reduced graphene oxide (RGO), Cotton fabric (CF), Poly (dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA), Glassy carbon electrode (GCE), Carbon paste electrode (CPE), 
Electro-polymerization of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium methyl sulfate (EMIMS).
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
19

Fig. 14. (a) (a-1) Schematic of the preparation of Cu–Ag NWs. (a-2) Schematic of the fabrication process of flexible micro-structured e-skin. (a-3) Voice signal 
detection diagram and wrist pulses detection diagram [110]. (b) (b-1) Schematic of the gold deposition process. (b-2) Schematic of the EP sensor. (b-3) EMG signal 
detection diagram and ECG signal detection diagram [23]. (c) (c-1) Preparation process of PCI composite films. (c-2) Rhythmic breathing detection diagram and 
Monitoring heart rate detection diagram [111].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
20

electronics and increasing demand for real-time physiological signal 
monitoring, copper nanowire composites present an attractive oppor-
tunity for the next generation of motion sensors that can be integrated 
into the human body [114]. The performances of motion pressure sen-
sors prepared from copper nanowires-based composite materials in 
recent years are summarized in Table 11. A foundational strategy in-
volves creating 3D conductive networks within porous substrates. Xiong 
et al. [48] have demonstrated this by fabricating a flexible pressure 
sensor using a commercial melamine foam (MF) as a skeleton. They 
employed an in-situ growth method where reduced graphene oxide and 
Cu NWs were presumably co-deposited onto the foam's internal frame-
work, creating a CuRGOMF composite as shown in Fig. 16a–1. This 
porous structure has provided high compressibility, which results in a 
sensor with excellent sensitivity across a substantially wide working 
range (0.011 kPa to 1.5 kPa) and a fast response time of approximately 
0.3 s. The sensor demonstrated remarkable stability over 5000 loa-
ding/unloading cycles and was successfully used to detect real-time 
human motions such as grasping, picking up objects, and clicking a 
mouse as shown in Fig. 16a–2. Similarly, building on the use of 3D 
frameworks, Su et al. [114] advanced the concept by utilizing a
biocompatible matrix. They ostensibly developed a double-layer mem-
brane using bacterial cellulose (BC) and Cu NWs through a stratified 
vacuum filtration process. This architecture, featuring a protective BC 
layer over a conductive Cu NWs network as shown in Fig. 16b–1, has 
yielded a piezoresistive sensor with a very high sensitivity of 
49.95 kPa − 1 over a broad pressure range (8.02 kPa to 122.06 kPa) and a 
rapid response time of 2.8 s. The analysis supports that the sensor's 
mechanical robustness was confirmed by its ability to withstand over 
2000 loading-unloading cycles, while the BC layer provides excellent 
protection against Cu NWs oxidation for over five months. Fig. 16b–2 
demonstrated the ability to monitor a wide array of human activities, 
from subtle wrist pulses to large-scale leg movements, suggesting its 
suitability for advanced real-time health monitoring systems.
To further enhance both performance and stability, researchers have 
focused on creating synergistic hybrid films. Zhu et al. [117] developed 
a Cu NWs–graphene hybrid film by embedding Cu NWs into 
water-dispersible modified graphene (WGP) sheets via a simple vacuum 
filtration process. This process has created a 3D conductive network 
where graphene sheets bridged non-connected Cu NWs, boosting the 
electrical conductivity to 3.02 × 10 4 S m –1 —what appears to be an order
Fig. 15. (a) (a-1) Fabrication of Cu NWs/RGO/CF electrode. (a-2) The detection of glucose in human sweat samples and human serum samples [112]. (b) Fabrication 
of a sensor for cysteine and its performance [113]. (c) (c-1) Schematic representation of Cu NWs synthesis and fabrication of CPE/Cu NWs/poly (EMIMS). (c-2) DPV 
obtained for CPE/Cu NWs/poly (EMIMS) due to the addition of ET-HCl into PBS and calibration plot of oxidation peak current vs. ET-HCl concentration [13].
Table 11
Performance of motion pressure sensors prepared from copper nanowires-based composite materials in recent years.
Body part
Motion
Material System
Sensitivity/kPa − 1
Response Time/s
Stability/cycles
Ref.
Finger
Touching
Resin/Cu NWs 
–
–
1 500
115
Finger
Bending
Cu NW/PDMS 
0.162
0.24
2 500
116
Finger
Gripping, picking, clicking
Cu NW/RGO/MF
0.011
0.3
5 000
48
Finger
Throat
Bending Swallowing
PDMS/Cu NWs-WGP/PDMS
–
–
450
117
Finger
Muscle
Knee
Bending Movement Behavior
BC/Cu NWs
49.95
2.8
2 000
114
Hand
Bending, stretching
Ecoflex-Cu NWs
–
–
8 000
24
Foot
Bending, stretching
Cu NWs/GrMF/Cu NWs
–
–
10 000
44
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), Water-dispersible modified graphene (WGP), Coating reduced graphene oxide (RGO), Melamine foam (MF).
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
21

(caption on next page)
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
22

of magnitude higher than pure Cu NWs films. This hybrid structure also 
provided superior oxidation resistance, with the film's properties 
remaining largely stable after eight weeks of air exposure. A flexible 
strain sensor fabricated from this film exhibits excellent mechanical 
durability with less than 15 % conductivity loss over 450 bending cycles 
and capablility of monitoring both small-scale motions like swallowing 
and large-scale finger bending (Fig. 16c). Similarly, Jason et al. [44] 
introduced skin-inspired fractal strain sensors using a "paint-on" method 
to create a hybrid conductive network of Cu NWs and graphite micro-
flakes (GrMF). This technique is a direct and conformal application of 
sensors onto complex surfaces like skin. By combining the high 
stretchability of Cu NWs with the high sensitivity of GrMFs and incor-
porating fractal-shaped elastomeric substrates, they achieved an 
extraordinary stretchability of up to 600% and a maximum gauge factor 
of 3 000. This work demonstrates that sensor performance could pre-
sumably be tuned by adjusting both the material composition and the 
structural geometry, enabling wireless ankle motion sensors for sports 
analytics as shown in Fig. 16d.
While piezoresistive sensors are common, other sensing mechanisms 
offer unique advantages. Kim et al. [115] explored capacitive sensing by 
developing a flexible and transparent touch pad. They synthesized 
high-aspect-ratio Cu NWs and fabricated a robust electrode by over-
coating it with a UV-curable polyurethane acrylate (PUA) resin as shown 
in Fig. 17a–1. This PUA coating was apparently critical, providing su-
perior chemical stability against oxidation. The coated electrode's 
resistance increased by only about 15% after 24 h in ambient conditions 
and remained substantially stable, whereas an uncoated electrode 
degraded rapidly. The resulting capacitive touch pad suggests an ability 
to not only detect a finger touch but also constitutes the applied force, 
making it suitable for advanced human-machine interfaces and flexible 
displays (Fig. 17a–2). Going beyond capacitive architecture, recently, 
hybrid nanowire networks with conformal oxide shells have been 
demonstrated to exhibit excellent environmental stability as well as high 
signal fidelity. The patterned Ag NW@SnO 2 electrodes retained high 
transparency (≈86.7% at 550 nm) and low sheet resistance (≈9.6 Ω 
sq − 1 ), and the SnO 2 shell exhibited excellent chemical and thermal 
stability, maintaining the performance under UVO and 85 ◦ C/85% RH 
aging as well as up to 300 ◦ C. With reproducible capacitance response to 
graded pressures and small hysteresis, it is demonstrated how inorganic 
passivation can simultaneously enhance both sensitivity and long-term 
reliability in skin-conformal sensors [118]. Similarly, self-assembled 
SnO 2 nano shells grown directly on Cu NW meshes yield lightweight, 
transparent, and highly chemically/oxidation resistant Cu electrodes 
with sheet resistance of≈13.6 Ω sq − 1 and 83.5% transmittance that 
exhibit >1 000 bending cycles and long-term 85 ◦ C/85% RH at least for 
tens of days with negligible drift. The obtained devices exhibit superior 
adhesion and mechanical endurance, matching or even exceeding that of 
Ag-based electrodes. The scalable process and low life cycle cost make 
these electrodes attractive for various applications, especially for 
motion-pressure sensors in wearable health care and soft robotics [119]. 
Addressing the critical challenge of signal interference during move-
ment, Yu et al. [116] developed a stretch-insensitive capacitive pressure 
sensor. The investigation indicated was achieved by designing a highly 
stretchable electrode composed of Cu NWs networks on a pre-stretched, 
wrinkled PDMS film as shown in Fig. 17b–1. The final sensor exhibited a 
high-pressure sensitivity of 0.162 kPa − 1 and its performance was largely
unaffected by stretching within 80% strain range. Therefore, this sensor 
is essential for wearable applications on dynamic body parts like joints 
as shown in Fig. 17b–2, enabling reliable pressure monitoring during 
finger bent. Bagchi et al. [24] created a flexible triboelectric nano-
generator (TENG) using pure, ostensibly oxidation-resistant Cu NWs as 
the electrode. Their approach involved vacuum filtration followed by a 
lactic acid treatment to remove surface oxides before encapsulation in 
Ecoflex, which served as the triboelectric layer as shown in Fig. 17c–1. 
The TENG was robust, flexible, non-cytotoxicity through tests with 
human fibroblast cells. The data suggests that this device not only har-
vested mechanical energy efficiently, producing a remarkable 
open-circuit voltage of 200 V from finger tapping, but also functioned as 
a highly effective motion sensor as shown in Fig. 17c–2. In summary, the 
field of copper nanowire composites motion sensors are advancing 
rapidly through material innovation and engineering. The progression 
from simple porous composites to multi-layered, hybrid, and coated 
structures, along with the exploration of piezoresistive, capacitive, and 
triboelectric mechanisms, has addressed key challenges such as stability, 
sensitivity, and power dependency. The future lies in integrating these 
diverse strategies to create multifunctional, self-powered, and truly 
biocompatible sensors that can be typically integrated into our lives.
4.3.3. Wearable heater
With the rapid advancement of smart wearable devices, personal 
thermal management technology is widely used in people's daily life. As 
the conventional heating elements, indium tin oxide is brittle and rigid, 
and the price of indium is increasing, which cannot meet the demands of 
wearable electronics with flexibility, lightweight and low cost. In 
addition, the mechanical deformation of bending, twisting and stretch-
ing caused by daily human motion also put high requirements on the 
stability and reliability of wearable heaters [120]. In the past few years, 
copper nanowires have been reported as a low-cost alternative to Ag 
NWs, which exhibits similar electrical conductivity and better stability 
than Ag NWs under electrical current. Therefore, copper nanowire 
composites are expected to be an ideal flexible transparent conductor 
and wearable heater [121]. A summary of the performance of wearable 
heaters prepared from copper nanowires-based composite materials in 
recent years is shown in Table 12. The earliest fabric-centered prototype, 
Guo et al. [25] deposited Cu NWs networks onto a clean nylon woven 
fabric (Nylon 66) via vacuum-assisted filtration and mechanical press-
ing, followed by a PDMS overcoat which can improve antioxidant per-
formance and bonding fastness as shown in Fig. 18a–1. A five-layer 
heater could apparently reach 142.2 ◦ C within 45 s under a low 
driving voltage of 1.8 V. The heater protected by the PDMS layer also 
demonstrated good long-term heating stability and reliability, typically 
maintaining a steady temperature of about 52 ◦ C for 1 h at 1.0 V. These 
fabrics are suitable for personal thermal management and thermal 
therapy systems, with potential for energy saving based on Joule heating 
(Figs. 18a-2 to a-4). To push beyond flexibility into true stretchability, 
Cheng et al. [120] introduced a composite fiber with a unique hierar-
chical configuration. This involved coating Cu NWs onto a helical 
polyester yarn, treating it with H 2 plasma to enhance conductivity, and 
then dip-coating it in liquid silicone rubber as shown in Fig. 18b–1. The 
analysis supports that this fiber largely maintained its heating perfor-
mance after 1 000 cycles of stretching (50% strain), bending (1 mm 
radius), and twisting (50 turns/meter) and it apparently heated from
Fig. 16. (a) (a-1) The process of fabrication of CuRGOMF and schematic diagram of CuRGOMF sensor. (a-2) The response signals of the CuRGOMF sensor under 
gripping and releasing cycles; the response signals of the CuRGOMF sensor in picking up and putting down the plum cycles; the response signals of the CuRGOMF 
sensor in clicking the mouse [48]. (b) (b-1) The schematic diagram of the preparation mechanism of BC/Cu NWs composite membrane for piezoresistive sensor. (b-2) 
Sensing response of the sensor for finger bending, wrist pulse, wrist flexion, clapping, muscle movements, knee behavior [114]. (c) Relative resistance change for the 
sensor according to the throat muscle motions for swallowing and the bending motions of the index finger [117]. (d) (d-1) Schematic depicting the placement of the 
Cu NWs/GrMF/Cu NWs sensors on the ankle skin locations corresponding to the anterior tibiofibular ligament (ATL), calcaneofibular ligament (CL), and medial 
ligament (ML). The wireless device placed on the sensory sock can communicate with smart devices and deliver data in real time. Ankle motion sensors with the 
wireless platform demonstrating, (d-2) toes and (d-3) heel up-down movement, and side-to-side hinge movement on the (d-4) left and (d-5) right foot edge, and their 
corresponding resistance change readouts from the ankle sensor set [44].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
23

Fig. 17. (a) (a-1) Schematic of the fabri-
cation process for the RCC electrode. (a-2) 
Performance tests of the RCC-electrode-
based capacitive touch sensor. “ON” and 
“OFF” touch signal and a successive touch 
and corresponding signal output [115].
(b) (b-1) Schematic illustration of the 
preparation process for Cu NWs/PDMS 
electrodes and the 3-D schematic and side 
view of the SICPS based on the Cu 
NWs/PDMS electrodes. (b-2) Responses of 
the SICPS during a repeat test with 
different finger bent angles 45 ◦ and 90 ◦ 
[116]. (c) (c-1) Schematic for the fabri-
cation of the Cu NWs-Ecoflex based single 
electrode TENG. (c-2) Image of the TENG 
sensorized surgical glove with flexible in-
terconnects and Voc obtained from tap-
ping with the glove on skin [24].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
24

20 ◦ C to 57 ◦ C at a low DC voltage of 3 V within 20 s. These robust fibers 
were woven into a heating fabric and integrated with a microcontroller 
unit for smartphone-controlled personal heating, which suggests appli-
cations in heating kneepads for articular thermotherapy and coats for 
warmth (Figs. 18b–1and 18b-2). Furthermore, rapid, large-area 
patterning has been tackled by Ding et al. [121] through spraying Cu 
NWs ink onto a polyurethane substrate and then treating it with pho-
tonic sintering for stretchable Cu NWs conductors (Figs. 18c–1). The 
light energy instantaneously deoxidized, welded, and seemingly 
embedded the Cu NWs into the soft PU surface, ostensibly achieving 
high conductivity and strong adhesion. This fast and cost-effective 
technique provides evidence that supports integration of patterned 
heaters into various wearable electronic devices (Fig. 18c–2), including 
glove-shaped heaters for warming hands as shown in Fig. 18c–3.
For further advancing multifunctionality, Guo et al. [26] introduced 
a laminated fabric with enhanced photothermal conversion and Joule 
heating effects. This fabric combined a copper nanowire composites 
conductive network layer for Joule heating and mid-infrared reflection, 
with a CNT/cellulose aerogel layer for photothermal conversion and 
thermal insulation as shown in Fig. 19a. When exposed to a light in-
tensity of 1 000 W m –2 , the fabric's temperature reached about 74.0 ◦ C 
after 280 s. This dual-heating approach offers a new strategy for per-
sonal thermal management, enabling energy saving by utilizing both 
solar and electrical inputs. Addressing the critical issue of oxidation 
stability, Cetin et al. [123] supports the use of Ti 3 C 2 MXene as a pro-
tective layer on Cu NWs networks (Fig. 19b–1). Bare Cu NWs networks 
typically degraded within 10 days under ambient conditions, however, 
MXene/Cu NWs networks remained stable for up to 10 months. As 
transparent thin-film heaters (TTFHs), these networks demonstrated 
consistent performance for over a week at 3 V. The enhanced perfor-
mance is ascriboed to the sacrificial protective role of the MXene 
nanosheets, which helep to alleviate oxidation of the underlying Cu 
NWs. This result suggests a breakthrough in stability, making copper 
nanowire composites heaters viable for applications like human ther-
motherapy patches (Fig. 19b–2) and defrosting networks (Fig. 19b–3). 
Building on this oxidation-protection strategy, recent studies on 
Al 2 O 3 -coated copper nanowires (Al 2 O 3 @Cu NWs) report a conformal
5 nm nano shell that is able to retain both optical and electrical per-
formance (Rsh≈15.6 Ω sq − 1 , T ~ 84.7%) for over 120 h at 85 ◦ C/85% 
RH and up to 210 ◦ C without any resistance drift [125]. Compared with
vacuum deposited oxide or thick metal coatings, this Al 2 O 3 sheath 
provides a low-cost and flexible approach to long-term oxidation pro-
tection for nanowires without sacrificing transparency, which is of great 
importance for skin conformal heaters in thermotherapy, antifogging 
visors, and e-skin systems [125]. Likewise, ZnO–NiO@Cu NW flexible 
transparent conductive thin films present a remarkable balance between 
high transmittance (84.7%) and low sheet resistance (20 Ω sq − 1 ). A 
uniformly coated ZnO–NiO shell (~3 nm) not only prevents oxidation 
and sulfuration, but also retains the fast thermal response (<30 s) and 
stable behavior after humidity or heat exposure [126]. For further 
refining the fabrication of conductive textiles, Song et al. [122] devel-
oped a green, water-based Cu NWs ink inspired by the "brick-mortar" 
structure of pearls. Fig. 19c–1 shows that the ink used 
tannic-polyethylenimine (TA-PEI) modified Cu NWs as "bricks" and 
carboxymethyl cellulose as "mortar", creating a robust hydrogen 
bonding network for strong adhesion and stability. Then screen printing 
was used to apply the ink onto cotton fabric, resulting in a conductive 
textile with superb conductivity (sheet resistance of approximately 
3.33 Ω⋅sq − 1 ) and excellent bending resistance as shown in Fig. 19c–2. 
The printed fabric demonstrates exceptional Joule heating performance, 
reaching 112.8 ◦ C at 1.5 V. These findings point toward an environ-
mentally friendly and low-cost approach for mass manufacturing of 
multifunctional e-textiles. Looking ahead, Kim et al. [124] explores Cu 
NWs-polyurethane acrylate patterns for thermal haptic devices (THDs) 
in virtual environments (Fig. 19d–1). The Cu NWs-PUA pattern showed 
minimal resistance changes up to 50 % tensile strain and withstood over 
30,000 cycles without mechanical failure, substantially outperforming 
Cu foil patterns. Within this framework, the pattern functions simulta-
neously as a heater and thermometer, which allows for accurate tem-
perature control and feedback (Figs. 19d-1 to d-4). This innovation 
paves the way for realistic thermal feedback in virtual reality, ostensibly 
enhancing immersive experiences in various applications. Taken all 
together, these results illustrate the evolution from pressed Cu NWs 
sheets to hierarchically engineered fibers, flash-sintered elastomers, 
hybrid photothermal laminates, and advanced conductive inks. This 
progression maps a complete technical roadmap, encompassing key 
strategies to reduce the inter-wire contact resistance, embed the network 
inside of mechanically matched elastomers without compromising 
conductivity under strain, and couple Joule heating with complemen-
tary heat-management to lower operating current. Although Cu 
NW-based composites continue to dominate the landscape of low-cost, 
high-performance wearable heaters, the above developments in paral-
lel metallic nanowire systems offer several design principles. For 
example, hybrid structures comprising oxide-overcoated nanowire 
frameworks (e.g., BaSnO 3 -overcoated Ag NWs) have demonstrated that 
controlled oxide encapsulation can lead to more stable junctions with 
improved adhesion and anti-oxidation [127]—a set of guiding principles 
that can be applied to Cu-based nanowire networks to achieve long-term 
electrothermal reliability under high humidity or cyclic bending. In 
addition, the incorporation of UV-curable polymer matrices into nano-
wire heaters has been shown to greatly improve cycle 
deformation-induced mechanical durability as well as reduce tempera-
ture variations during cyclic deformation [128]—a design concept that 
could be extended to Cu NW composites to improve flexibility and avoid 
wire-bonding breakage under stretchable substrates. Finally, 
solution-processed oxide–metal bilayer thin films (e.g., MoO x /nanowire 
structures) have demonstrated scalable fabrication approaches and 
outstanding thermal resilience up to 300 ◦ C by balancing thin protective 
layers for transparency, conductivity, and environmental durability—- 
clear design principles that have emerged for Cu NW-based thermal 
management applications [129]. In summary, the comparative benefits 
made herein strongly justify the direction of future copper nanowire 
research: hybrid encapsulation, polymer incorporation, and scalable 
oxide-interface engineering to resolve transparency, flexibility, and 
thermal robustness, pushing Cu NW composite heaters toward more 
intelligent, durable, and bio-compatible wearable applications.
Table 12
Performance of wearable heaters prepared from copper nanowires-based com-
posite materials in recent years.
Applications
Materials
Maximum 
heating 
temperature/
◦ C
Driving
voltage/
V
Heating 
rate ◦ C
s –1
Ref.
Heated clothing
TA-PEI/Cu 
NWs/CMC 
112.8
1.5
–
122
Heated clothing
Cu NWs/ 
cotton 
fabric/ 
CNT/ 
cellulose 
aerogel 
70
1.8
0.56
26
Heated clothing
Cu NWs/ 
Nylon 66
142.2
1.8
2.6
25
Heating 
kneepad, 
infant heating 
coat
Cu NWs/PE
102
3
1.85
120
Heated gloves 
Cu NWs/ 
PU
46 to 102
3 to 7
–
121
Human
thermotherapyTi3C2 MXene/Cu NWs503–123Thermal haptic devicesCu
NWs/PUA1207–124Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), Polyester (PE), Polyurethane 
(PU), Tannic-polyethylenimine (TA-PEI), Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), 
Polyurethane acrylate (PUA).
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
25

5. Conclusions and outlook
This review has tracked the recent advances in Cu NWs science and 
surveyed their emerging biotechnology applications. Today, sophisti-
cated electrodeposition and solution-phase methods can produce Cu 
NWs with controlled wire diameter (tens of nm) and length (tens to 
hundreds of μm), high aspect ratio that is critical to their electrical 
properties. Composite assembly approaches (physical mixing, deposi-
tion, impregnation) have been used to transfer Cu NWs into flexible 
films, porous scaffolds and wearable devices. These copper nanowire 
composites have several applications in the biological field: high
thermal insulation agricultural film, biosensor platforms for glucose or 
pathogens, antibacterial coatings, and various wearable sensors. 
Importantly, many researchers have found that Cu NWs exhibit strong 
antimicrobial activity (due to Cu 2+ release and ROS generation) and low 
toxicity to human cells at relevant concentrations, rendering Cu NWs 
potentially useful in biomedical applications.
However, several limitations are hindering the widespread adoption 
of Cu NWs in biomaterials. First, bare Cu NWs are chemically unstable. 
They oxidize and lose conductivity rapidly under ambient and aqueous 
conditions. Thus, protective strategies (noble-metal shells, carbon/ 
MXene coatings, conductive polymers) are required to maintain
Fig. 18. (a) (a-1) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of electrical heaters based on Cu NWs and fabric substrate. (a-2) IR images of electrical heaters with ice. (a-
3) IR images of the electrical heaters on the back of hand. (a-4) Digital and IR images about the electrical heater under different bending angles [25]. (b) (b-1) The 
hierarchical description of the SHF structure and process schematic of the integration of WSPHS: weaving SHFs into heating fabric and then integrating the heating 
fabric with cloth/clothes and a microcontroller chip. (b-2) Photograph of WSPHS applications at the knee position of a human body and IR thermal images before and 
after switching on the device. (b-3) Photograph of WSPHS applications at the chest position of an infant model and IR thermal images before and after switching on 
the device and software interface on an Android phone which read the body temperature and controlled the heating temperature [120]. (c) (c-1) Schematic 
illustration of the fabrication process of Cu NWs/PU conductors. (c-2) Schematic illustration of the ginkgo leaf shaped heater (top left), the actual photo of the 
patterned Cu NWs/PU heater (bottom left), infrared images of the heater when the voltage was off (above right) and on (bottom right). (c-3) Photo of heater glove 
wearing on hands (left), infrared images of the glove when the voltage was off (above right) and on (bottom right) [121].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
26

functionality. In contrast, oxidative passivation and aggregation should 
be controlled for prolonged performance. Second, Cu NWs are less toxic 
than Cu nanoparticles, but copper ion toxicity still be a concern at high 
doses and in vivo studies are required to establish safe dosage limits. The 
oxidative passivation agents used in most Cu NWs preparations (e.g. 
hydrazine and other reducing agent methods) also have environmental 
and safety concerns, and thus greener and scalable synthesis remain to 
be developed. Finally, advancing lab-scale achievements toward in-
dustry presents challenges. For example, template-based methods are 
highly uniform but are not easily scaled-up due to the steps involved in 
fabricating and removing the templates. In contrast, solution processes 
may allow for scale-up. However, the limitations of current batch pro-
tocols hinder widespread adoption, as commercialization demands cost-
effective, large-scale production methods. Further works could be aimed 
at (1) systematic in vitro and in vivo toxicity and immunological 
response investigations of copper nanowire composites, (2) develop-
ment of scalable and green synthesis routes, and (3) development of 
standard protocols to obtain reliable characterization of Cu NWs 
degradation and dissolution in biological media. These opportunities 
and challenges will necessitate cross-disciplinary efforts involving ma-
terials scientists, chemists, and bioengineers.
In summary, copper nanowires are an attractive material for next-
generation biomaterials due to the combination of their electrical 
properties and their scalability, enhanced by their bioactivity. The sta-
bility and safety constraints of Cu NWs can be overcome by coating, 
hybridizing, or using new chemistries to enable these nanowires to reach 
their full potential in medicine and biotechnology, as well as in sus-
tainable agriculture. As their design and fabrication advance, copper
nanowire composites will find widespread use in flexible biosensors, 
antimicrobial films, and healing devices.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Xinhao Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Methodology, Investigation. Jiahui Chen: Writing – re-
view & editing. Huangqing Ye: Writing – review & editing, Method-
ology, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interests
All authors disclosed no relevant relationships.
References
[1] S. Ding, Y. Tian, Recent progress of solution-processed Cu nanowires transparent 
electrodes and their applications, RSC Adv. 9 (46) (2019) 26961–26980.
[2] C.R. Chu, C. Lee, J. Koo, H.M. Lee, Fabrication of sintering-free flexible copper 
nanowire/polymer composite transparent electrodes with enhanced chemical 
and mechanical stability, Nano Res. 9 (7) (2016) 2162–2173.
[3] W. Huang, J. Li, S. Zhao, F. Han, G. Zhang, R. Sun, C.-P. Wong, Highly electrically 
conductive and stretchable copper nanowires-based composite for flexible and 
printable electronics, Compos. Sci. Technol. 146 (2017) 169–176.
[4] J. Pryjmakova, M. Hryhoruk, M. Vesely, P. Slepicka, V. Svorcik, J. Siegel, 
Engineered Cu-PEN composites at the nanoscale: preparation and 
characterisation, Nanomaterials 12 (7) (2022).
[5] D. Xu, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, W. Yang, J. Chen, Solid-state ionics method fabricated 
centimeter level high surface roughness silver nanoparticles/copper nanowires 
composites: fractal theory study and SERS application, Opt. Mater. 90 (2019) 
194–199.
Fig. 19. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a laminated fabric and the personal thermal management of the laminated fabric [26]. (b) (b-1) Fabrication of 
the MXene/Cu NW electrodes and electrode materials. (b-2) Photo and for the stages of Joule heating under a constant bias voltage of 3 V. (b-3) Demonstration of 
defrosting of an ice cube by MXene/Cu NW network TTFHs under 3 V of a constant bias voltage [123]. (c) (c-1) Design principle and preparation process of Cu NWs 
conductive inks. (c-2) Schematic diagram of the screen-printed conductive pattern and demonstration of electric fabrics in different scenarios [122]. (d) (d-1) 
Schematic fabrication of the Cu NWs–PUA pattern using a UV laser. Description of the temperature change on the virtual environment using 12-THDs. (d-2) 
Temperature change in the simulation and the experimental results when touching wood, copper at 40 ◦ C; its IR and virtual image. (d-3) Temperature change in the 
simulation and the experimental results when touching a cup filled with water at 50 ◦ C, IR and virtual image. (d-4) Temperature change in the simulation and the 
experimental results when approaching a heat source and change in the angle of the hand [124].
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
27

[6] J.P.F. Santos, A.B. da Silva, M. Arjmand, U. Sundararaj, R.E.S. Bretas, Nanofibers 
of poly(vinylidene fluoride)/copper nanowire: microstructural analysis and 
dielectric behavior, Eur. Polym. J. 101 (2018) 46–55.
[7] X. Wang, B. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. Yu, L. Cui, X. Cao, J. Liu, Super-light Cu@Ni 
nanowires/graphene oxide composites for significantly enhanced microwave 
absorption performance, Sci. Rep. 7 (1) (2017) 1584.
[8] Z. Li, Q. Tian, Y. Chen, B. Zhao, F. Qiu, T. Zhang, Superhydrophobic degradable 
cellulose-based film with radiation insulation performance for agricultural 
application, Cellulose 30 (8) (2023) 5145–5156.
[9] J. Suwannachat, A. Saenchoopa, W.S.T. Tun, R. Patramanon, S. Daduang,
J. Daduang, S. Kulchat, An electrochemical AChE-based biosensor for 
organophosphate pesticides using a modified CuNWs/rGO nanocomposite on a 
screen-printed carbon electrode, Food Chem. 434 (2024) 137431.
[10] Geethukrishnan, P.P. Bagde, S. Kh, C. Adak, R.P. Shukla, K.K. Tadi, Smart sensing 
of creatinine in urine samples: leveraging Cu-nanowires/MoS2 quantum dots and 
machine learning, Sens. Biosens. Res. 47 (2025).
[11] K.-C. Li, H.-C. Chu, Y. Lin, H.-Y. Tuan, Y.-C. Hu, PEGylated copper nanowires as a 
novel photothermal therapy agent, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8 (19) (2016) 
12082–12090.
[12] R. Anand Omar, S.B. Ranavare, N. Verma, Cu nanowire – impregnated activated 
carbon fiber for antibacterial applications, Chem. Eng. Sci. 299 (2024).
[13] S. Venkateswarlu, M. Venu, Y.V.M. Reddy, B. Sravani, K. Mallikarjuna, M. Yoon,
G. Madhavi, Facile preparation of ionic liquid-coated copper nanowire-Modified 
carbon paste electrode for electrochemical detection of etilefrine drug, Bull. Kor. 
Chem. Soc. 40 (6) (2019) 560–565.
[14] Y. Chen, L. Gan, Y. Dai, H. Shi, T. Zhang, F. Qiu, D. Yang, Transparent cellulose-
based film with water resistance and thermal protective for agriculture 
application, Biomass Convers. Biorefinery 14 (20) (2023) 25973–25983.
[15] J. Wu, L. Wu, M. Guo, W. Hao, L. Cai, G. Fang, S. Wang, A molecularly imprinted 
near-infrared electrochemiluminescence sensor based on copper nanowires and 
signal dual-amplification strategy for the sensitive detection of enrofloxacin, Food 
Chem. 476 (2025) 143414.
[16] M. Garcia, A. Escarpa, Microchip electrophoresis-copper nanowires for fast and 
reliable determination of monossacharides in honey samples, Electrophoresis 35 
(2–3) (2014) 425–432.
[17] W. Na, J. Lee, J. Jun, W. Kim, Y.K. Kim, J. Jang, Highly sensitive copper nanowire 
conductive electrode for nonenzymatic glucose detection, J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 69 
(2019) 358–363.
[18] Y. Wang, A. Luo, M. Liu, S. Tang, W. Wang, A. Liang, Self-enhanced luminescence 
of copper nanowires combined with pH-sensitive glycosyl imprinted polymers: 
electrochemiluminescence for high-sensitivity detection of sialic acid, Sensor. 
Actuator. B Chem. 410 (2024).
[19] Y.-K. Kim, Y.-J. Yu, S.-H. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, Synthesis of high aspect ratio copper 
nanowire using copper oxalate precursor, J. Mater. Sci. 59 (26) (2024) 
11718–11731.
[20] K.S. Pilyushenko, A.G. Musaev, P.S. Mikhailova, M.A. Atlanov, O.V. Vershinina, 
M.A. Popov, D.N. Pevtsov, P.V. Arsenov, Versatile fabrication of SERS-active 
substrates with copper nanowires synthesized via hydrothermal method, Mater. 
Lett. 388 (2025).
[21] B. Bagchi, C. Salvadores Fernandez, M. Bhatti, L. Ciric, L. Lovat, M.K. Tiwari, 
Copper nanowire embedded hypromellose: an antibacterial nanocomposite film,
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 608 (2022) 30–39.
[22] B. Das, P. Dadhich, P. Pal, S. Thakur, S. Neogi, S. Dhara, Carbon nano dot 
decorated copper nanowires for SERS-Fluorescence dual-mode imaging/anti-
microbial activity and enhanced angiogenic activity, Spectrochim. Acta Mol. 
Biomol. Spectrosc. 227 (2020).
[23] D. Kim, J. Bang, P. Won, Y. Kim, J. Jung, J. Lee, J. Kwon, H. Lee, S. Hong, N.
L. Jeon, S. Han, S.H. Ko, Biocompatible cost-effective electrophysiological 
monitoring with oxidation-free Cu–Au core–shell nanowire, Adv. Mater. Technol.
5 (12) (2020).
[24] B. Bagchi, P. Datta, C.S. Fernandez, P. Gupta, S. Jaufuraully, A.L. David,
D. Siassakos, A. Desjardins, M.K. Tiwari, Flexible triboelectric nanogenerators 
using transparent copper nanowire electrodes: energy harvesting, sensing human 
activities and material recognition, Mater. Horiz. 10 (8) (2023) 3124–3134.
[25] Z. Guo, C. Sun, J. Zhao, Z. Cai, F. Ge, Low-voltage electrical heater based on one-
step fabrication of conductive Cu nanowire networks for application in wearable 
devices, Adv. Mater. Interfac. 8 (3) (2020).
[26] Z. Guo, C. Sun, J. Wang, Z. Cai, F. Ge, High-performance laminated fabric with 
enhanced photothermal conversion and joule heating effect for personal thermal 
management, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13 (7) (2021) 8851–8862.
[27] J. Gupta, S. Arya, A. Singh, S. Verma, A. Sharma, B. Singh, A. Tomar, Template 
based electrochemical synthesis of copper (Cu) nanowires as CH2Cl2 sensor, 
Integrated Ferroelectrics Int. J. 204 (1) (2020) 63–72.
[28] S. Yang, Q. Li, B. Du, Y. Ying, Y. Zeng, Y. Jin, X. Qin, S. Gao, S. Wang, Z. Wang,
R. Wen, X. Ma, Photothermal superhydrophobic copper nanowire assemblies: 
fabrication and deicing/defrosting applications, Int. J. Extrem. Manuf. 5 (4) 
(2023).
[29] F. Roustaie, S. Quednau, F. Dassinger, H.F. Schlaak, M. Lotz, S. Wilfert, In situ 
synthesis of metallic nanowire arrays for ionization gauge electron sources, 
Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and 
Microelectronics: Materials, Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 34 (2) 
(2016).
[30] I.A. Kalinin, A.D. Davydov, A.P. Leontiev, K.S. Napolskii, A. Sobolev, M. Shatalov,
M. Zinigrad, D. Bograchev, Influence of natural convection on the 
electrodeposition of copper nanowires in anodic aluminium oxide templates, 
Electrochim. Acta 441 (2023).
[31] C.F. Chen, H. Wang, Z.D. Ding, A.D. Wang, Fabrication of copper nanowire arrays 
by electrolytic deposition, J. Nano Res. 32 (2015) 25–31.
[32] D.M. Oliveira, S. Castro-Lopes, A.S. Carvalho, A. Galembeck, E. Padron-
Hernandez, Conductive carbon paint: an efficient way to electrodeposit metallic 
nanowires by using porous membranes, Heliyon 9 (3) (2023) e14642.
[33] H.-Y. Chen, Y.-S. Huang, C.-N. Liao, Electrodeposition and growth mechanism of 
nanotwinned copper in high aspect-ratio via structures, J. Electrochem. Soc. 168 
(10) (2021).
[34] Y.-S. Huang, H.-Y. Chen, C.-N. Liao, Growth of nanotwinned Cu nanowires in 
modified anodic aluminum oxide templates, Mater. Lett. 288 (2021).
[35] D. Zhang, R. Wang, M. Wen, D. Weng, X. Cui, J. Sun, H. Li, Y. Lu, Synthesis of 
ultralong copper nanowires for high-performance transparent electrodes, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 134 (35) (2012) 14283–14286.
[36] Y. Cheng, S. Wang, R. Wang, J. Sun, L. Gao, Copper nanowire based transparent 
conductive films with high stability and superior stretchability, J. Mater. Chem. C
2 (27) (2014) 5309–5316.
[37] J. Xu, X. Zhu, S. Xia, Y. Liu, C. Kan, D. Shi, Au-catalyzed ultrathin copper 
nanowires, J. Mater. Chem. A 10 (48) (2022) 25431–25436.
[38] H. Guo, N. Lin, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, Q. Xie, T. Zheng, N. Gao, S. Li, J. Kang, D. Cai, 
D.L. Peng, Copper nanowires as fully transparent conductive electrodes, Sci. Rep.
3 (2013) 2323.
[39] G. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ge, Y. Wang, S. Lu, Y. Zhao, Y. Tang, A.M. Soomro, Q. Hong,
X. Yang, F. Xu, S. Li, L.J. Chen, D. Cai, J. Kang, Cu nanowires passivated with 
hexagonal boron nitride: an ultrastable, selectively transparent conductor, ACS 
Nano 14 (6) (2020) 6761–6773.
[40] Y. Zhang, J. Guo, D. Xu, Y. Sun, F. Yan, Synthesis of ultralong copper nanowires 
for high-performance flexible transparent conductive electrodes: the effects of 
polyhydric alcohols, Langmuir 34 (13) (2018) 3884–3893.
[41] X. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Ni, H. Zheng, One-step preparation of copper nanorods 
with rectangular cross sections, Solid State Commun. 139 (8) (2006) 412–414.
[42] H.J. Yang, S.Y. He, H.Y. Tuan, Self-seeded growth of five-fold twinned copper 
nanowires: mechanistic study, characterization, and SERS applications, Langmuir 
30 (2) (2014) 602–610.
[43] Y. Li, Z. Fan, X. Yuan, H. Yang, Y. Li, C. Wang, Dodecylamine-mediated synthesis 
and growth mechanism of copper nanowires with an aspect ratio of over 10000, 
Mater. Lett. 274 (2020).
[44] N.N. Jason, S.J. Wang, S. Bhanushali, W. Cheng, Skin inspired fractal strain 
sensors using a copper nanowire and graphite microflake hybrid conductive 
network, Nanoscale 8 (37) (2016) 16596–16605.
[45] Y. Sun, F. Zhang, L. Xu, Z. Yin, X. Song, Roughness-controlled copper nanowires 
and Cu nanowires–Ag heterostructures: synthesis and their enhanced catalysis,
J. Mater. Chem. A 2 (43) (2014) 18583–18592.
[46] R.J.B. Pinto, J.M.F. Lucas, F.M. Silva, A.V. Gir~ 
ao, F.J. Oliveira, P.A.A.P. Marques, 
C.S.R. Freire, Bio-based synthesis of oxidation resistant copper nanowires using 
an aqueous plant extract, J. Clean. Prod. 221 (2019) 122–131.
[47] Q. Liu, Y. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Shi, Q. Pan, D. Yang, T. Wang, Novel facile synthesis and 
room-temperature sintering of copper nanowires for solution-processed 
transparent conductive films, Chem. Eng. J. 472 (2023).
[48] Y. Xiong, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, P. Zhu, Y. Hu, R. Sun, C.-P. Wong, A flexible pressure 
sensor based on melamine foam capped by copper nanowires and reduced 
graphene oxide, Mater. Today Commun. 24 (2020).
[49] S. Li, L.M. Qu, J.F. Wang, X.Q. Ran, X. Niu, Acetylcholinesterase based rGO-
TEPA-Copper nanowires biosensor for detecting malathion, Int. J. Electrochem. 
Sci. 15 (1) (2020) 505–514.
[50] I. Hong, S. Lee, D. Kim, H. Cho, Y. Roh, H. An, S. Hong, S.H. Ko, S. Han, Study on 
the oxidation of copper nanowire network electrodes for skin mountable flexible, 
stretchable and wearable electronics applications, Nanotechnology 30 (7) (2019) 
074001.
[51] K. Liu, X. Liu, Q. Dong, L. Song, X. Liang, D. Hu, S. Yu, Highly reliable strontium 
tin oxide/copper nanowire composite flexible transparent conductive thin films,
J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 36 (18) (2025).
[52] X. Jia, P. Yang, L. Zhao, D. Du, Z. Wang, W. An, S. Yu, Ultrathin Ag@ZnO 
core–shell nanowires for stable flexible transparent conductive films, ACS Appl. 
Electron. Mater. 5 (8) (2023) 4198–4208.
[53] H. Dong, S. Yu, L. Song, X. Wang, C. Wu, Fabrication of high-quality flexible 
transparent conductive thin films with a Nb2O5/AgNWs/Nb2O5 sandwich 
structure, Ceram. Int. 48 (11) (2022) 15348–15354.
[54] X. Jia, L. Zhao, P. Yang, W. An, Z. Wang, S. Yu, Flexible transparent conductive 
films of Ag/Cr2O3 core–shell nanowires as electrodes for electroluminescent 
devices and heaters, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 6 (17) (2023) 16024–16033.
[55] Y. Zhou, L. Zhao, N. Zhang, C. Chang, Z. Song, W. An, Q. Dong, S. Yu, Self-
assembled growing ultrathin Ag@NiO core-shell nanowires for stable 
freestanding transparent conductive colorless polyimide nanomembranes,
J. Alloys Compd. (2023) 935.
[56] B. Liu, S. Yu, K. Tan, L. Song, M. Liu, J. Li, X. Dong, Synthesis of ultrathin MgO@ 
Ag core–shell nanowires for highly reliable transparent electrode, Mater. Lett. 
398 (2025).
[57] L. Zhao, Y. Le, J. Li, P. Yang, S. Yu, Self-assembled In2O3 nanoshells on Cu 
nanowires by vacuum-free processing for highly stable transparent conductive 
films, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 8 (34) (2025) 16944–16954.
[58] K. Tan, Z. Yang, Y. Zhu, B. Liu, L. Zhao, L. Song, S. Yu, High-reliable ultrathin 
Ni@ Ag core− shell nanowires for flexible temperature sensors, J. Alloys Compd. 
1022 (2025).
[59] S. Yu, H. Dong, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, C. Wu, Highly transparent and low resistance 
BaSnO3/Ag nanowire composite thin films, Curr. Appl. Phys. 57 (2024) 86–92.
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
28

[60] W. Yuan, X. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cai, N. Peng, C. Kan, High initial 
conductivity and oxidation resistance of copper nanowire films via depositing 
oxalic acid, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 27 (14) (2025) 7177–7188.
[61] H.-Y. Chen, H.-Y.T. Chen, C.-N. Liao, Mechanistic understanding of self-limiting 
oxidation behavior of copper nanowires with dense twin boundaries, Appl. Surf. 
Sci. 692 (2025).
[62] B. Luo, Y. Fang, J. Li, Z. Huang, B. Hu, J. Zhou, Improved stability of metal 
nanowires via electron beam irradiation induced surface passivation, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 11 (13) (2019) 12195–12201.
[63] H. Ye, J. Chen, S. Wei, Y. Hu, Y. Wang, X.-Z. Fu, R. Sun, One-pot biosynthesis of 
two-dimensional dendrite-like Cu/C hybrids with excellent anti-oxidation 
property for flexible electronics, J. Alloys Compd. 957 (2023).
[64] B. Wang, S. Yu, L. Huang, Zinc oxide-encapsulated copper nanowires for stable 
transparent conductors, Nanomaterials 13 (19) (2023).
[65] M. Liu, S. Yu, L. Song, J. Li, J. Feng, Highly stable, flexible, transparent hybrid 
strontium titanate conductive thin films with embedded Cu nanowires, Materials 
18 (10) (2025).
[66] B. Rajesh Kumar, K.C. Etika, Facile one-pot hydrothermal synthesis of copper 
nanowires and their impact on the EMI shielding capability of epoxy composites, 
Chem. Eng. Technol. 45 (3) (2021) 410–416.
[67] S. Bhanushali, P.C. Ghosh, G.P. Simon, W. Cheng, Copper nanowire-filled soft 
elastomer composites for applications as thermal interface materials, Adv. Mater. 
Interfac. 4 (17) (2017).
[68] C. Liang, W. Zhang, Y. Fan, Z. Mei, L. Zhang, Z. Sun, R. You, Z. You, X. Zhao, On 
demand copper electrochemical deposition on laser induced graphene for flexible 
electronics, Small 21 (19) (2025) e2408943.
[69] R. Yoshikawa, M. Tenjimbayashi, T. Matsubayashi, K. Manabe, L. Magagnin,
Y. Monnai, S. Shiratori, Designing a flexible and transparent ultrarapid 
electrothermogenic film based on thermal loss suppression effect: a self-fused Cu/ 
Ni composite junctionless nanonetwork for effective deicing heater, ACS Appl. 
Nano Mater. 1 (2) (2018) 860–868.
[70] H. Yuan, Y. Wang, T. Li, P. Ma, S. Zhang, M. Du, M. Chen, W. Dong, W. Ming, 
Highly thermal conductive and electrically insulating polymer composites based 
on polydopamine-coated copper nanowire, Compos. Sci. Technol. 164 (2018) 
153–159.
[71] P. Ai, X. Mai, B. Xue, L. Xie, Core-shell nickel@copper nanowires associated with 
multilayered gradient architecture design towards excellent absorption-dominant 
electromagnetic interference shielding, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 230 (2025) 21–31.
[72] Y. Zhou, S. Wu, F. Liu, High-performance polyimide nanocomposites with 
polydopamine-coated copper nanoparticles and nanowires for electronic 
applications, Mater. Lett. 237 (2019) 19–21.
[73] Q.Q. Zhang, Z.R. Ma, Y.Y. Cai, H.R. Li, G.G. Ying, Agricultural plastic pollution in 
China: generation of plastic debris and emission of phthalic acid esters from 
agricultural films, Environ. Sci. Technol. 55 (18) (2021) 12459–12470.
[74] G. Asefi, A. Habibollahzade, T. Ma, E. Houshfar, R. Wang, Thermal management 
of building-integrated photovoltaic/thermal systems: a comprehensive review, 
Sol. Energy 216 (2021) 188–210.
[75] J. Wu, Y. Qin, X. Mei, L. Cai, W. Hao, G. Fang, Self-enhanced near-infrared copper 
nanoscale electrochemiluminescence probe for the sensitive detection of 
ciprofloxacin in foods, Foods 14 (3) (2025).
[76] K. Chomthong, K. Kunpatee, U. Pimpitak, S. Puthong, K. Komolpis, W. Wonsawat,
S. Nuanualsuwan, A. Yakoh, N. Khongchareonporn, N. Ruecha, S. Chaiyo, Label-
free simultaneous detection of quinolone antibiotic residues using an origami 
paper–based electrochemical immunosensor, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 410 
(2024).
[77] S. Feng, Y. Lin, J. Xu, X. Lu, Inertial microfluidic-assisted rapid detection of 
chemical contaminant in foods using quantum dots-based molecularly imprinted 
sensor, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 394 (2023).
[78] W. Zhang, F. Yang, H. Wan, C. Gu, K. Zhou, Determination of four residues of 
fluoroquinolones with similar structure in fish by modified QuEChERS protocol 
coupled toCapillary Electrophoresis(CE) with end-column 
electrochemiluminescence (ECL), Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 15 (7) (2020) 
6802–6814.
[79] J. He, J. Li, Core-satellite nanocomposites via PEI-Induced self-assembly for 
enhanced SERS sensing of thiram and ciprofloxacin, J. Saudi Chem. Soc. 28 (1) 
(2024).
[80] J. Li, X. Tang, X. Guo, W. Han, S. Wang, F. Zha, H. Tian, Y. Chang, CeO2/NH2-
MIL-88B(Fe) composites with peroxidase-like activity for colorimetric detection 
and photo-enzymatic synergetic degradation of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride,
J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 12 (6) (2024).
[81] D. Pav~ao e Pav~ao, C. Nascimento Botelho, R. Nunes Fernandes, C. Costa dos 
Santos, F. Santos Damos, R. de Cassia Silva Luz, A. Simple, Cost-effective, and 
environmentally friendly method for determination of ciprofloxacin in drugs and 
urine samples based on electrogenerated chemiluminescence, Electroanalysis 32 
(7) (2020) 1498–1506.
[82] C. Zhang, C. Lei, C. Cen, S. Tang, M. Deng, Y. Li, Y. Du, Interface polarization 
matters: enhancing supercapacitor performance of spinel NiCo2O4 nanowires by 
reduced graphene oxide coating, Electrochim. Acta 260 (2018) 814–822.
[83] C. Zhai, X. Sun, W. Zhao, Z. Gong, X. Wang, Acetylcholinesterase biosensor based 
on chitosan/prussian blue/multiwall carbon nanotubes/hollow gold nanospheres 
nanocomposite film by one-step electrodeposition, Biosens. Bioelectron. 42 
(2013) 124–130.
[84] D. Song, Y. Li, X. Lu, M. Sun, H. Liu, G. Yu, F. Gao, Palladium-copper nanowires-
based biosensor for the ultrasensitive detection of organophosphate pesticides, 
Anal. Chim. Acta 982 (2017) 168–175.
[85] H. Man, M. Chaima, X. Wang, L. Xiu, L. Yang, J. Huang, Fluorescent detection of 
organophosphorus pesticides using carbon dots derived from broccoli, Arabian J. 
Sci. Eng. 48 (7) (2022) 8315–8324.
[86] Y. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Qiu, Q. Zhang, W. Tang, H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Ma, X. Guo, Y. Liu, 
A flexible acetylcholinesterase-modified graphene for chiral pesticide sensor,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141 (37) (2019) 14643–14649.
[87] I. Kim, G.H. Kim, C.S. Kim, H.J. Cha, G. Lim, Optical detection of paraoxon using 
single-walled carbon nanotube films with attached organophosphorus hydrolase-
expressed Escherichia coli, Sensors 15 (6) (2015) 12513–12525.
[88] M. García, J.R. Alonso-Fernandez, A. Escarpa, Copper nanowires immobilized on 
the boards of microfluidic chips for the rapid and simultaneous diagnosis of 
galactosemia diseases in newborn urine samples, Anal. Chem. 85 (19) (2013) 
9116–9125.
[89] C.L. Gonzalez-Gallardo, N. Arjona, L. Alvarez-Contreras, M. Guerra-Balcazar,
Electrochemical creatinine detection for advanced point-of-care sensing devices: 
a review, RSC Adv. 12 (47) (2022) 30785–30802.
[90] T. Guinovart, D. Hern 
andez-Alonso, L. Adriaenssens, P. Blondeau, F.X. Rius,
P. Ballester, F.J. Andrade, Characterization of a new ionophore-based ion-
selective electrode for the potentiometric determination of creatinine in urine, 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 87 (2017) 587–592.
[91] C.-H. Chen, M.S. Lin, A novel structural specific creatinine sensing scheme for the 
determination of the urine creatinine, Biosens. Bioelectron. 31 (1) (2012) 90–94.
[92] J.-S. Jeong, H.-J. Kwon, H.-R. Yoon, Y.-M. Lee, T.-Y. Choi, S.-P. Hong, A pulsed 
amperometric detection method of galactose 1-phosphate for galactosemia 
diagnosis, Anal. Biochem. 376 (2) (2008) 200–205.
[93] J.-S. Jeong, H.-R. Yoon, S.-P. Hong, Development of a new diagnostic method for 
galactosemia by high-performance anion-exchange chromatography with pulsed 
amperometric detection, J. Chromatogr. A 1140 (1–2) (2007) 157–162.
[94] L. Ju, G. Wu, B. Lu, X. Li, H. Wu, A. Liu, Non-enzymatic amperometric glucose 
sensor based on copper nanowires decorated reduced graphene oxide, 
Electroanalysis 28 (10) (2016) 2543–2551.
[95] J. Huang, Z. Dong, Y. Li, J. Li, J. Wang, H. Yang, S. Li, S. Guo, J. Jin, R. Li, High 
performance non-enzymatic glucose biosensor based on copper 
nanowires–carbon nanotubes hybrid for intracellular glucose study, Sensor. 
Actuator. B Chem. 182 (2013) 618–624.
[96] Q. Wang, Q. Wang, M. Li, S. Szunerits, R. Boukherroub, Preparation of reduced 
graphene oxide/Cu nanoparticle composites through electrophoretic deposition: 
application for nonenzymatic glucose sensing, RSC Adv. 5 (21) (2015) 
15861–15869.
[97] N. Cao, F. Zhao, B. Zeng, A novel ratiometric molecularly imprinted 
electrochemiluminescence sensor for sensitive and selective detection of sialic 
acid based on PEI-CdS quantum dots as anodic coreactant and cathodic 
luminophore, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 313 (2020).
[98] Y. Zhou, H. Huangfu, J. Yang, H. Dong, L. liu, M. Xu, Potentiometric analysis of 
sialic acid with a flexible carbon cloth based on boronate affinity and molecularly 
imprinted polymers, The Analyst 144 (21) (2019) 6432–6437.
[99] P. Zhao, S. Tang, X. Wu, Y. Chen, K. Tang, J. Fu, H. Lei, Z. Yang, Z. Zhang, 
Imprinted ratiometric fluorescence capillary sensor based on UiO-66-NH2 for 
rapid determination of sialic acid, Talanta 253 (2023).
[100] Z. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Yin, M. Song, F. Wang, G. Jiang, Cu nanowires trigger efficient 
cuproptosis via special intracellular distribution and excessive Cu ion release, 
Nano Lett. 24 (37) (2024) 11446–11453.
[101] C. Wang, L. Wang, M. Liu, W. Bi, Y. Xu, High-efficiency and stable cathode 
disinfection in real water systems via convenient in situ prepared copper-cuprous 
oxide nanowires, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 17 (13) (2025) 19471–19481.
[102] M. Sahoo, A. Kalkivai, S. Kolluru, D. Mitra, Copper nanowire-immobilized 
coatings for antibacterial application, Part. Part. Syst. Char. 42 (7) (2025).
[103] S. Jiang, T. Sreethawong, S.S.C. Lee, M.B.J. Low, K.Y. Win, A.M. Brzozowska, S.L.
M. Teo, G.J. Vancso, D. Ja 
nczewski, M.Y. Han, Fabrication of copper nanowire 
films and their incorporation into polymer matrices for antibacterial and marine 
antifouling applications, Adv. Mater. Interfac. 2 (3) (2015).
[104] Y. Li, N. Li, J. Ge, Y. Xue, W. Niu, M. Chen, Y. Du, P.X. Ma, B. Lei, Biodegradable 
thermal imaging-tracked ultralong nanowire-reinforced conductive 
nanocomposites elastomers with intrinsical efficient antibacterial and anticancer 
activity for enhanced biomedical application potential, Biomaterials 201 (2019) 
68–76.
[105] M. Nehra, A.N. Dilbaghi, V. Singh, N.K. Singhal, S. Kumar, Highly ordered and 
crystalline Cu nanowires in anodic aluminum oxide membranes for biomedical 
applications, Phys. Status Solidi 217 (13) (2020).
[106] I.A. Shurygina, G.F. Prozorova, I.S. Trukhan, S.A. Korzhova, N.N. Dremina, A.
I. Emel'yanov, O.V. Say, N.P. Kuznetsova, A.S. Pozdnyakov, M.G. Shurygin, 
Evaluation of the safety and toxicity of the original copper nanocomposite based 
on Poly-N-vinylimidazole, Nanomaterials 12 (1) (2021).
[107] S¸ . Altınsoy, S. Erkan, N.B. Üllen, S.C. Ates¸, N. Evcil, Evaluation of surface 
properties of modified Ti6Al4V alloy with copper nanoparticles organic 
nanostructure for biomedical applications: dependency on anticorrosive, 
antibacterial, and biocompatibility, Corrosion Rev. 43 (3) (2025) 361–380.
[108] Y. Song, K.B. Tan, S.F. Zhou, G. Zhan, Biocompatible copper-based 
nanocomposites for combined cancer therapy, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 10 (6) 
(2024) 3673–3692.
[109] S. Zhang, S. Peng, Copper-based biomaterials for anti-tumor therapy: recent 
advances and perspectives, Acta Biomater. 193 (2025) 107–127.
[110] Y. Wei, S. Chen, Y. Lin, Z. Yang, L. Liu, Cu–Ag core–shell nanowires for electronic 
skin with a petal molded microstructure, J. Mater. Chem. C 3 (37) (2015) 
9594–9602.
X. Li et al. 
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
29

[111] S. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Ding, L. Zhang, J. Chen, H. Huang, D. Jiang, Z. Chen,
G. Pan, A flexible bifunctional sensor based on porous copper nanowire@IonGel 
composite films for high-resolution stress/deformation detection, J. Mater. Chem. 
C 8 (12) (2020) 4081–4092.
[112] Y. Wang, F. Chen, J. Ye, H. Liu, T. Zhang, Z. Li, Reduced graphene oxide cotton 
fabric based on copper nanowires for flexible non-enzyme glucose sensor, 
Cellulose 30 (8) (2023) 5131–5143.
[113] Z. Zeng, J. Qiao, C. Tang, S. Shao, An electrochemical sensor based on copper 
nanowires-PDDA modified glassy carbon electrode for amperometric detection of 
cysteine in alkaline medium, Results Chem. 4 (2022).
[114] W. Su, Z. Wang, Z. Chang, F. Geng, S. Yuan, J. Jiang, K. Wang, X. Peng, 
Mechanically robust and lightweight double-layer bacterial cellulose-CuNWs with 
photothermal conversion and piezoresistive sensing, Appl. Surf. Sci. 655 (2024).
[115] D. Kim, J. Kwon, J. Jung, K. Kim, H. Lee, J. Yeo, S. Hong, S. Han, S.H. Ko,
A transparent and flexible capacitive-force touch pad from high-aspect-ratio 
copper nanowires with enhanced oxidation resistance for applications in 
wearable electronics, Small Methods 2 (7) (2018).
[116] S. Yu, J. Li, L. Zhao, B. Wang, H. Zheng, Stretch-insensitive capacitive pressure 
sensor based on highly stretchable CuNWs electrode, Sensor Actuator Phys. 346 
(2022).
[117] Y. Zhu, Y. Hu, P. Zhu, T. Zhao, X. Liang, R. Sun, C.-p. Wong, Enhanced oxidation 
resistance and electrical conductivity copper nanowires–graphene hybrid films 
for flexible strain sensors, New J. Chem. 41 (12) (2017) 4950–4958.
[118] S. Yu, X. Liu, P. Yang, L. Zhao, H. Dong, C. Wu, X. Li, J. Xiong, Highly stable silver 
nanowire networks with tin oxide shells for freestanding transparent conductive 
nanomembranes through all-solution processes, Chem. Eng. J. 446 (2022).
[119] L. Zhao, J. Li, Z. Song, X. Wang, S. Yu, Self-assembled growth of SnO2 nanoshells 
on copper nanowires for stable and transparent conductors, ACS Appl. Nano 
Mater. 6 (12) (2023) 10658–10667.
[120] Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, R. Wang, X. Wang, H. Zhai, T. Wang, Q. Jin, J. Sun, Highly 
stretchable and conductive copper nanowire based fibers with hierarchical
structure for wearable heaters, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8 (48) (2016) 
32925–32933.
[121] S. Ding, J. Jiu, Y. Gao, Y. Tian, T. Araki, T. Sugahara, S. Nagao, M. Nogi, H. Koga,
K. Suganuma, H. Uchida, One-step fabrication of stretchable copper nanowire 
conductors by a fast photonic sintering technique and its application in wearable 
devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8 (9) (2016) 6190–6199.
[122] M. Song, Z. Luo, P. Du, J. Cao, Z. Cai, F. Ge, Copper conductive ink-based pearl 
biomimetic structure for personal thermal management fabrics, ACS Appl. Nano 
Mater. 8 (4) (2025) 1873–1881.
[123] O. Cetin, O. Cakir, S. Koylan, D. Doganay, Y. Khan, H.E. Unalan, All-solution 
processed, highly stable MXene/Cu nanowire networks for flexible transparent 
thin-film heaters, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 6 (23) (2023) 22446–22458.
[124] D. Kim, J. Bang, W. Lee, I. Ha, J. Lee, H. Eom, M. Kim, J. Park, J. Choi, J. Kwon, 
S. Han, H. Park, D. Lee, S.H. Ko, Highly stretchable and oxidation-resistive Cu 
nanowire heater for replication of the feeling of heat in a virtual world, J. Mater. 
Chem. A 8 (17) (2020) 8281–8291.
[125] L. Zhao, P. Yang, S. Shi, X. Wang, S. Yu, Enhanced the thermal/chemical stability 
of Cu NWs with solution-grown Al2O3 nanoshell for application in ultra-flexible 
temperature detection sensors, Chem. Eng. J. 473 (2023).
[126] B. Tang, H. Liu, B. Liu, Y. Yang, P. Yang, H. Dong, L. Zhao, S. Yu, Investigation on 
preparation and performance of high-reliable ZnO–NiO@Cu NW flexible 
transparent conductive thin films, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 35 (7) (2024).
[127] J. Bai, S. Yu, E. Zhang, L. Zhao, L. Song, J. Li, High-reliability flexible transparent 
heaters based on silver nanowires and barium stannate, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. 
Electron. 36 (21) (2025).
[128] S. Yu, X. Liu, P. Yang, C. Wu, L. Li, Flexible transparent Ag nanowire/UV-curable 
resin heaters with ultra-flexibility, high transparency, quick thermal response, 
and mechanical reliability, J. Alloys Compd. (2022) 908.
[129] L. Song, S. Qu, L. Ma, S. Yu, Highly reliable MoOx/Ag NW bilayer transparent 
conductive thin films fabricated by all solution process and transparent heater 
application, Opt. Mater. 138 (2023).
X. Li et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
30