Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
Available online 26 January 2025
1385-8947/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Review
Research progress of gold, silver, and copper nanoclusters in bacterial 
infection diagnosis and treatment
Wenjia Li a,1, Yaohan Tang c,1, Baiyang Liu a, Jinwen Zhou a, Bingbing Chen a, Jing Hou b,*,  
Zhijun Liu a,*
, Zengchao Guo a,*
a School of Basic Medicine Sciences, Shandong Second Medical University, Weifang 261053, China
b Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China
c Department of Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530007, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Gold nanoclusters
Silver nanoclusters
Copper nanoclusters
Antibacterial properties
Fluorescent labeling
A B S T R A C T
Infectious diseases caused by multi-drug resistant (MDR) bacteria have become one of the most severe global 
public health crises. Timely detection and effective treatment are essential to prevent the worsening and spread 
of bacterial infections. Therefore, the development and application of novel antibacterial materials to address 
MDR bacterial infections are crucial. Metal nanoparticles have been widely researched and show promise as 
antibacterial agents, gaining significant attention in the biomedical field. Recently, metal nanoclusters with 
smaller sizes and higher specific surface areas have attracted increasing interest, as they exhibit both antibac­
terial and fluorescent properties, offering the potential for “multi-purpose with one needle” in bacterial detection 
and infection treatment. Among these, gold, silver, and copper nanoclusters are notable examples. This paper 
reviews research advancements in the antibacterial mechanisms of gold, silver, and copper nanoclusters, along 
with their preparation and characterization methods. It also briefly discusses the challenges these metal nano­
clusters face in treating bacterial infections and explores future directions.
1. Introduction
Since ancient times, humans have combated bacterial infections, 
which pose a serious threat to health. Since Fleming’s discovery of 
penicillin in 1928, antibiotics have been widely used in clinical settings, 
achieving significant success in infection treatment. However, the 
misuse of antibiotics and bacteria’s capacity for mutation have led to the 
emergence of MDR bacteria [1]. By 2050, infections caused by MDR 
bacteria are projected to cause over 39 million deaths, surpassing the 
current mortality rate of cancer [2]. Although researchers continuously 
develop new antibiotics through chemical modifications of existing 
drugs or by exploring novel natural compounds [3–5], these efforts often 
cannot keep pace with the rapid emergence of resistant strains [6,7]. 
Moreover, high doses or multiple antibiotics are often required to 
eliminate MDR bacteria, leading to severe side effects and uncertain 
outcomes [8]. According to Huh et al., the FDA is expected to approve 
only 1–2 new antibiotics for clinical use per year in the 21st century [6]. 
Thus, there is an urgent need for new strategies to combat bacterial 
infections that are not only safe and effective but also have a lower 
likelihood of inducing resistance.
Researchers worldwide have extensively studied nanomaterials as 
promising antibacterial agents due to their unique properties and high 
specific surface area. Unlike traditional antibiotics, antibacterial nano­
materials offer a broad spectrum of action, and bacteria are less likely to 
develop resistance to them because of their multimodal antibacterial 
mechanisms. Metallic nanomaterials, a significant branch of nano­
materials, exhibit excellent physicochemical properties, including 
magnetic, electrical, and photothermal activities [9,10], making them 
popular candidates for potential antibacterial agents [11–14]. Ul­
trasmall aggregates of a few to several hundred metal atoms, known as 
metal nanoclusters (MNCs) [13], are typically <2 nm in size, with their 
sub-nanometer dimensions defining their properties [15]. This size 
range is comparable to the Fermi wavelength of conduction electrons, 
where free electrons are confined within the nanoclusters, resulting in 
unique, tunable electronic transitions that impart molecular-like fea­
tures, such as luminescence and distinctive charging behaviors [15,16]. 
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: jinghou@njfu.edu.cn (J. Hou), zhijun.liu@sdsmu.edu.cn (Z. Liu), guozc@sdsmu.edu.cn (Z. Guo). 
1 Wenjia Li and Yaohan Tang contribute equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Chemical Engineering Journal
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cej
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2025.159977
Received 8 December 2024; Received in revised form 19 January 2025; Accepted 25 January 2025  

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
2
MNCs have structural advantages, including large surface areas, precise 
sizing, controlled morphology, and ease of surface modification. Their 
physicochemical properties, such as distinctive optical, electromagnetic, 
and catalytic traits, enable them to demonstrate finely adjustable anti­
bacterial efficacy [7,17]. For example, traditional gold nanoparticles are 
generally inert towards bacteria, but they exhibit robust antibacterial 
activity when scaled down to the nanocluster (NC) range [18]. Addi­
tionally, the atomic-level manipulation and customization of metal 
nanoclusters allow them to function as versatile theranostic agents for 
photoluminescence-assisted therapies targeting bacterial infections 
[19,20]. This article reviews the recent advancements in research on 
MNCs as an emerging class of nanoantibiotics, covering the synthesis, 
characterization, antibacterial activity, and fluorescent labeling capa­
bilities of gold, silver, and copper nanoclusters (Fig. 1).
2. Synthesis of metal nanoclusters
The use of metal nanoclusters in biomedicine requires reliable syn­
thesis methods to produce materials of high quality. These methods 
must create MNCs with superior physicochemical attributes, while sur­
face functionalization imparts bioactivity to the clusters. Currently, 
various synthesis approaches for MNCs include “bottom-up” methods 
such as chemical reduction, bioreduction, photoreduction, electro- 
reduction, and “top-down” methods like chemical etching. This sec­
tion provides a brief overview of these methods.
2.1. Synthesis of gold nanoclusters
Research has demonstrated that the optical and catalytic properties 
of gold nanoclusters depend on their unique size, composition, and 
shape [21]. Therefore, the controllable synthesis of gold nanoclusters is 
a primary focus in nanomaterial preparation. Since the discovery of 
metal nanoclusters, numerous synthesis methods have been developed, 
mainly divided into “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches (Fig. 2) 
[22]. In the top-down method, metal nanoparticles are synthesized first, 
then large nanoparticles are etched with various etchants to produce 
smaller nanoclusters. For example, Nie et al. used hyperbranching and 
multivalent polymers to etch macromolecular gold nanoparticles, 
forming gold nanoclusters with fluorescence emission and high-water 
solubility [23]. Wang et al. also synthesized fluorescent gold nano­
clusters using small molecule etchants [24]. The “bottom-up” approach 
involves reducing agents to reduce metal precursors and adding specific 
template compounds, such as proteins and small molecules, as stabi­
lizers and protectors. These compounds promote the gradual aggrega­
tion of metal atoms to form nanoclusters.
2.1.1. Template method
The template method is one of the most common techniques for 
preparing functionalized Au NCs, enabling them to inherit the properties 
of template materials with specific structures or functions. This method 
is easy to operate, has a high yield, and produces metal nanoclusters 
with relatively stable fluorescence performance, allowing precise con­
trol over the nanocluster dimensions. Thomas et al. used DNA as a 
template by mixing DNA with chloroauric acid (HAuCl4) and adding a 
reducing agent, such as citric acid, to successfully reduce HAuCl4 to gold 
nanoparticles [25]. However, studies indicate that DNA templates are 
rarely used in gold nanocluster preparation due to DNA’s limited 
biocompatibility [26]. Nonetheless, Liu et al. synthesized red-emitting 
Au NCs using single-stranded DNA as a biological template, resulting 
in Au NCs with robust stability at physiological pH. These biocompatible 
fluorescent Au NCs hold potential for applications as nanoprobes in 
bioimaging and related fields (Fig. 3A) [27]. Xie et al. developed an 
environmentally friendly method for synthesizing red-emitting fluores­
cent Au NCs, achieving a quantum yield of 6 % by using bovine serum 
albumin as both a stabilizer and reductant (Fig. 3B,C) [16]. Martinez’s 
group synthesized Au13 and Au17 nanoclusters at room temperature, 
utilizing the fourth-generation PAMAM dendrimer (G4OH) as a tem­
plate and ascorbic acid as the reducing agent, resulting in stable 
dendrimer-encapsulated gold nanoclusters [28].
2.1.2. Monolayer protection method
Due to the smaller size of gold nanoclusters compared to gold 
Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of the synthesis, characterisation, and application of gold, silver, and copper nanoclusters in bacterial infection.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
3
nanoparticles, the need to control uniform particle size and morphology, 
and their high surface activity, many researchers use protective ligands 
to prepare gold nanoclusters through strong interactions with gold 
atoms. Small molecules containing thiols, amines, and hydroxyl groups 
are commonly used as ligands in synthesizing Au NCs due to their low 
cost, easy availability, and modifiability. Gold nanoclusters were 
initially prepared by reducing gold ions to gold atoms using sulfhydryl- 
containing molecules as ligands. This method offers the advantage of 
adjusting the optical properties of gold nanoclusters by selecting suit­
able ligands while controlling their low toxicity, making them suitable 
for biological applications. For instance, Au NCs protected by 6- 
mercaptohexanoic acid (MHA-Au NCs), prepared by Zheng et al., were 
used as antimicrobial agents. They demonstrated that antibacterial 
properties could be imparted to Au NPs by precisely controlling their 
size at the nanocluster scale, typically under 2 nm [18]. Link et al. 
synthesized nanoclusters containing 28 gold atoms using glutathione as 
a protective agent [29]. These nanoclusters exhibited a distinct ab­
sorption onset at 1.3 eV, corresponding to an electronic transition within 
the conduction band, specifically the HOMO-LUMO energy gap. The 
luminescence consisted of two bands, peaking around 1.5 eV and 1.15 
eV, indicating radiative recombination between the ground state and 
two different excited states, with an overall quantum yield of 
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the “bottom-up” and “top-down” synthesis routes of metal nanoclusters. Reproduced with permission [22]. Copyright 2019, Academic 
Press Inc.
Fig. 3. (A) Schematic representation of the formation of DNA templated Au NCs. Reproduced with permission [27]. Copyright 2012, Springer International Pub­
lishing. (B) Photographs of BSA (1) powder, (2) aqueous solution, (3) BSA-Au NCs solution and (4) powder under (top) visible and (bottom) UV light. (C) Green 
synthesis route using BSA as a protein template. Reproduced with permission [16]. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. (For interpretation of the references 
to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
4
approximately (3.5 ± 1.0) × 10−3. Wang’s group introduced a new 
category of Au NCs-mercaptopyrimidine-linked Au NCs-which displayed 
strong nanoantibiotic properties against persistent superbugs both in 
vitro and in vivo, without inducing bacterial resistance and with mini­
mal side effect towards mammalian cells [30].
2.1.3. Bioreduction method
In addition to the above methods for synthesizing gold nanoclusters, 
in-situ biosynthesis has recently attracted considerable attention due to 
its biocompatibility, cost-effectiveness, and low toxicity. Recent studies 
demonstrated the successful biosynthesis of Au NCs within bacterial/ 
cancer cells for imaging-guided therapy [31–37]. Leveraging the unique 
microenvironment of bacteria, Au precursors undergo spontaneous 
reduction, enabling the biosynthesis of Au NCs for both diagnostic and 
therapeutic of bacterial infections [33–35]. Zheng’s group also applied a 
similar approach, achieving the in-situ synthesis of fluorescent Au NCs 
within biological tissues for imaging purposes [38]. Thus, Au NCs syn­
thesized through in-situ self-assembly can be used for bioimaging at 
lesion sites and for therapeutic purposes, as they can kill cancer cells or 
bacteria.
2.2. Synthesis of silver nanoclusters
Silver nanocluster synthesis initially involved the use of charged 
particles and photons. Sputtered metal atoms (Ag or Au) were generated 
by colliding metal with noble gas ions or pulsed lasers, allowing 
nucleation into clusters after gas-phase aggregation. Inert gas collisions 
cooled the clusters through gas-phase cooling. Additionally, Ag NCs 
were synthesized in templates such as zeolite [39]. Over time, similar to 
the synthesis of other metal nanoclusters like gold and copper, template- 
based synthesis has become one of the most common methods. Reports 
indicate that polymers, peptides, proteins, and DNA are often chosen as 
ideal templates for preparing stable nanoclusters [40–43].
2.2.1. Polymers
Dickson and colleagues successfully fabricated Ag nanoclusters using 
poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendritic polymers as scaffolds. These 
multicolored, highly luminescent Ag nanoclusters exhibit exceptional 
photostability and can be visualized at the single-molecule level with 
mild mercury lamp excitation [44]. The synthesis of fluorescent Ag 
nanoclusters within polymer microgel hosts, employing a photo­
activated template-based approach, has been established. The photo­
luminescence intensity and emission wavelength vary based on the 
duration of photoactivation, and the acidity of the surrounding medium 
significantly influences the optical properties of these photogenerated 
Ag NCs [45]. Charged carboxyl groups have a strong affinity for Ag ions, 
a principle widely used to immobilize Ag ions on materials rich in 
carboxyl groups, serving as an Ag source for subsequent reduction re­
actions [46]. Shen et al. reported the successful production of fluores­
cent Ag NCs via photo-induced processes, using multi-armed star 
copolymers as scaffolds [47]. This method offers a convenient way to 
control cluster size, where two key factors—the “cage effect” from 
densely grafted PAA and the strong binding between protonated acrylic 
acid groups and Ag ions—aid in cluster formation. Yonesato et al. used 
polyoxymethylenate (POM) as a structural and functional unit, synthe­
sizing 
three-bladed 
propeller-shaped{Ag27}17+
nanoclusters 
by 
Fig. 4. (A) Schematic representation of POM-based building block assembly for synthesis of Ag nanoclusters. (B) Crystal structures of Ag27. (a) Overall anion 
structure and (b) {Ag27}17+ cluster. Spheres: Ag, orange, blue, black; O, red. Reproduced with permission [48]. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (C) 
Schematic illustration of the core–shell structure of protein- and peptide-protected Au/Ag NCs. Reproduced with permission [50]. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of 
Chemistry. (D) Schematic representation of (a) the synthesis of human ferritin template fluorescent silver NCs (Ft-Ag NCs) and (b) a Ft-Ag NC embedded hydrogel 
sensor. Reproduced with permission [55]. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
5
assembling reactive nanoclusters on open Dawson-type POM 
[Si2W18O66]16−
(Fig. 4A,B) [48]. The {Ag27} cluster consists of five 
octahedral {Ag6} units and three bridging silver atoms, with two octa­
hedral {Ag6} units forming a face-sharing dioctahedral {Ag9} structure 
at its core, where nine silver atoms are arranged in a hexagonal close- 
packed (hcp) configuration. Huma et al. produced blue-emitting 
cationic silver nanoclusters (bPEI-Ag NC) functionalized with 
branched polyethylene imine in a one-pot reaction, demonstrating 
notable antibacterial efficacy against twelve multidrug-resistant uro­
pathogens responsible for urinary tract infections [49].
2.2.2. Proteins
Protein-shielded Au/Ag NCs resemble natural metalloproteins or 
proteins with metal ion cofactors, and their inherent biocompatibility 
makes them promising modified natural proteins with significant 
biomedical potential (Fig. 4C) [50]. In a typical protein-directed syn­
thesis, the protein molecule initially chelates the Ag ion, interacting with 
it to provide a scaffold or template. The Ag ion then undergoes reduction 
either by a strong reducing agent, such as NaBH4, or through reducing 
groups within the protein itself, such as tyrosine and tryptophan side 
chains. However, the complexity of proteins poses challenges in devel­
oping effective protein templates for cluster formation. Several proteins, 
including serum albumin, lysozyme, and pancreatic rennet protease, 
have been used to direct the production of fluorescent Ag NCs [51–54]. 
These methods, however, often require the protein template to be in 
unnatural conditions, such as complete denaturation [51] or a highly 
alkaline environment [52–54]. To fully preserve the structural integrity 
and functionality of proteins as templates for Ag NC synthesis, cluster 
formation under natural conditions is desirable. Lee and colleagues 
synthesized fluorescent Ag NCs using human ferritin as a template in a 
neutral aqueous buffer, successfully retaining the ferritin structure and 
its ability to bind antibodies (Fig. 4D) [55].
2.2.3. Peptides
Similar to proteins, peptides can stabilize Ag NCs and confer 
enhanced biocompatibility and bioactivity. Advances in peptide syn­
thesis allow for the creation of peptides with specific amino acid se­
quences, enabling the rational design of peptide ligands with desirable 
characteristics (e.g., size, charge, reducing ability, targeting ability) for 
functional peptide-protected Ag NCs in biomedical applications. Thiol 
groups are crucial for producing stable peptide-protected Au/Ag NCs, as 
the strong sulfur-metal bond with Au/Ag stabilizes the NCs. Therefore, 
sulfhydryl-containing amino acids, such as cysteine and homocysteine, 
and peptides like the ubiquitous cysteine-containing tripeptide gluta­
thione, are frequently used as ligands for synthesizing peptide-protected 
Au/Ag NCs [56,57]. Thiols assist in the reduction and coordination with 
metal ions, forming complexes that often serve as intermediates in 
producing thiol salt-stabilized Au/Ag NCs, and they can also etch larger 
NPs to reduce their size [50].
Although template-based methods provide unique optical properties 
for Ag NCs, the process is time-consuming and can pose biohazards. 
Additionally, fabricating templates is challenging and relatively costly. 
Therefore, developing green preparation methods for Ag NCs is essen­
tial. Bioactive compounds from microorganisms and plants can reduce 
and cap silver nanoparticles without toxic chemicals or harsh reaction 
conditions [58–61]. Ebrahiminezhad et al. used Matricaria chamomilla 
for the green and straightforward preparation of Ag NCs [62]. Stable Ag 
NCs with an average size of 2.4 nm were successfully prepared without 
any additional template. The biomacromolecules in Matricaria chamo­
milla, rich in oxygen-containing functional groups, anchored Ag+ ions, 
resulting in Ag NCs capped by hydrophilic compounds, which rendered 
them stable in aqueous environments. This method provides a novel 
approach to producing Ag NCs.
2.3. Synthesis of copper nanoclusters
Compared to Au and Ag NCs, there are fewer studies on Cu NCs due 
to their tendency to oxidize and the difficulty in synthesizing extremely 
small particles. Like other NCs, Cu NCs are prepared using “top-down” 
and “bottom-up” methods. Current literature shows that Cu NC synthesis 
ways include template synthesis, electrochemical methods, water-in-oil 
(w/o) microemulsion technology, Brewer’s microemulsion technique, 
and microwave-assisted polyol synthesis [63].
Template-based synthesis techniques have proven effective for pro­
ducing metal nanoclusters, often using biomacromolecules like DNA, 
proteins, and peptides. The dimensions of both the core and metal 
nanoparticles can be controlled using templates with varying cavity 
sizes. One classic template synthesis method is the preparation of copper 
nanoclusters in a “nanoreactor” formed by a fourth-generation hydroxyl 
polyamide dendrimer (PAMAM(G4-OH)), developed by Crooks and 
colleagues [64]. The dendrimer acts as a template while providing a 
ligand field to prevent aggregation of the copper nanoclusters. The 
tertiary amines within the PAMAM dendrimer have a homogeneous 
structure, allowing ligand bonds with transition metal ions. Crooks and 
colleagues co-solubilized PAMAM with copper sulfate, localizing Cu2+
on the G4-OH dendrimer (G4-OH/Cu2+), which was then reduced to Cu 
NCs by sodium borohydride. Around the same time, Balogh’s group also 
synthesized stable copper nanoclusters using a PAMAM dendrimer as a 
template [65]. Wei et al. introduced a novel one-step chemical reduction 
method for synthesizing Cu(n ≤8) NCs using 2-mercapto-5-n-propylpyr­
imidine (MPP) as a protective ligand. They developed a procedure for 
preparing copper NCs soluble in non-polar solvents like toluene, hexane, 
and chloroform, using a straightforward one-phase approach. This 
involved dissolving cupric nitrate and tetra-n-octylammonium bromide 
in alcohol, stirring the solution for 30 min, and cooling it in ice water. 
MPP and NaBH4 in ethanol were then added to the mixture. The prod­
ucts were obtained through centrifugation and purification. This was the 
first reported instance of wet chemical preparation of copper clusters 
with fewer than 8 atoms, offering promising potential for future research 
and applications in nanotechnology.
3. Characterization of metal nanoclusters
To thoroughly characterize metal nanoclusters, various techniques 
are routinely employed. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) pro­
vides morphological insights, mass spectrometry (MS) offers composi­
tional accuracy, UV–visible and fluorescence spectroscopies analyze 
optical properties and electronic transitions, X-ray photoelectron spec­
troscopy (XPS) investigates elemental composition and chemical states, 
and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) analyzes surface 
chemistry. This comprehensive characterization approach enables a 
deep understanding of the nanoclusters’ physicochemical properties, 
elucidates their formation mechanisms, and facilitates targeted optimi­
zation of their properties.
3.1. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
XPS is a valuable analytical technique for examining the reactive 
properties of metal nanoclusters and assessing the oxidation state and 
stability of their metal cores by detecting changes in X-ray spectra 
(Fig. 5D) [67]. For instance, XPS analyses were used to investigate the 
oxidation state of Cu NCs prepared via wet chemical reduction (Fig. 5C) 
[66]. The XPS spectrum shown reveals two peaks at 932.3 and 952.0 eV, 
corresponding to the binding energies of Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2 elec­
trons for Cu(0), respectively. Notably, the absence of Cu (II) signals in 
the XPS spectrum indicates minimal oxidation within the Cu nano­
clusters. In contrast, the XPS spectra of Cu nanoclusters synthesized via 
electrochemical methods show both Cu(0) and Cu(II) binding energy 
peaks (Fig. 5A,B). Following Ar+ sputtering treatment, Cu(II) was 
completely removed, leaving only Cu(0) and a small amount of Cu(I) 
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
6
[68]. These findings demonstrate that Cu nanoclusters prepared using 
different approaches may exhibit distinct oxidation states, which can be 
accurately determined using XPS analysis.
3.2. UV–vis absorption spectra
The absorption value of gold nanoclusters typically decreases with 
increasing wavelength, leading to distinct absorption peaks character­
istic of gold nanoclusters [69]. The absorption peak of gold nanoclusters 
usually appears around 400 nm. Since UV–visible spectra of gold 
nanoclusters with various structures can differ significantly, they can be 
used to ascertain the electronic structure and particle size of gold 
nanoclusters, thereby enhancing the understanding of their optical 
properties. For example, Cys-Au NCs synthesized by Luo et al. display a 
UV absorption peak at 380 nm. This strong absorption band at 380 nm 
can be attributed to ligand-to-metal charge transfer and metal-to-metal 
ligand charge transfer, which are distinctive transitions for gold clusters 
and supramolecular gold compounds (Fig. 6A,C,D) [70].
3.3. Mass spectrometry technique
Mass spectrometry provides insights into the structure and compo­
sition of metal nanoclusters by transforming them into moving gaseous 
molecules, which are then characterized as ion peaks based on their 
mass-to-charge ratio. Whetten’s group first applied mass spectrometry 
to analyze gold nanoclusters in 1998 [56]. Since then, numerous ap­
proaches have been developed utilizing mass spectrometry alongside 
other techniques, such as inductively coupled plasma spectrometry- 
mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
(GC–MS), and high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spec­
trometry (HPLC-MS).
Fig. 5. (A) X-ay Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of copper (Cu) clusters, produced via electrochemical methods, is shown before (depicted by the black 
line) and after exposure to sputtering with argon ions (Ar+) (represented by the red line). The initial sample exhibits a peak at 934.72 eV, corresponding to Cu 2p3/2, 
accompanied by a secondary peak, or satellite, at 943.2 eV. Following sputtering, the satellite peak diminishes, and the primary peak of Cu 2p3/2 shifts towards 
lower binding energies, specifically to 933.19 eV. (B) XPS data repository. Reproduced with permission [68]. Copyright 2019, American Institute of Physics. (C) X-ray 
photoelectron spectrum of Cu 2p electrons within Cu nanoclusters synthesized through wet chemical reduction. The dotted line indicates the binding energy 
associated with Cu(II) 2p electrons. Reproduced with permission [66]. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (D) X-ay Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) 
analysis of as-prepared gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) (top) and those oxidized with 100 μM hydroxyl radicals (•OH) (bottom). The raw spectral data (depicted in red) 
show the decomposition of the 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 spectral components into those corresponding to metallic gold (Au(0)) (blue) and Au(I)(green). Reproduced with 
permission [67]. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web 
version of this article.)
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
7
3.4. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra
In NMR hydrogen spectra, the number of characteristic peaks reflects 
the chemical environment of hydrogen atoms in an organic molecule. 
NMR mapping, combined with IR mapping, can provide information 
about functional groups in metal nanoclusters, facilitating a better un­
derstanding of their chemical structure, synthesis process, and proper­
ties. This technique can also be used to assess the purity of the prepared 
metal nanoclusters [71].
3.5. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR)
FT-IR spectroscopy can investigate the formation mechanisms and 
surface chemical environments of metal NCs. As shown in Fig. 6E, the 
FT-IR spectra of monomeric 2-mercapto-5-n-propylpyrimidine (MPP) 
and MPP-stabilized Cu NCs are displayed [66]. The broad peak at 2525 
cm−1, corresponding to the S–H stretching vibration in MPP, is absent 
in the Cu-MPP spectrum, suggesting that MPP is attached to the Cu 
surface via Cu–S bonds.
Fig. 6. (A) The UV–visible absorption spectrum (blue line), excitation spectrum (olive line), and emission spectrum (red line) of Cys-Au NCs, along with UV–vis 
absorption spectral lines of Fe3+ (concentration of 500 μM, indicated by the orange line). Reproduced with permission [70]. Copyright 2023, Royal Society of 
Chemistry. (B) Bright field TEM images of (a) and (b) along with their corresponding high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images of an individual Au nanocluster (c) and 
(d) reveal a typical size approximately 1 nm. The insets of the HRTEM images display the fast Fourier transforms (FFTs) derived from the respective particle in the 
[011] zone, where the spots correspond to {111} and {200} lattice planes of Au. Reproduced with permission [71]. Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) 
UV–visible absorption spectrum of Cys-Au NCs/Fe3+ together with ascorbic acid. D) The UV absorption spectrum (blue solid line), emission spectrum (red solid line, 
λex = 365 nm) and excitation spectrum (red dotted line, λem = 570 nm) of Cys-Au NCs are presented. (Inset) Visual representations of Cys-Au NCs in (1) visible light 
and (2) UV illumination. Reproduced with permission [70]. Copyright 2023, Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) FTIR spectra were obtained for both MPP-protected Cu 
NCs and the monomeric compound MPP(2-mercapto-5-n-propylpyrimidine). The prominent peak at 2525 cm−1, associated with the S–H stretching vibration mode, 
is absent in the Cu-MPP clusters, suggesting that MPP molecules have been covalently attached to the copper surface through the formation of Cu–S bonds. 
Reproduced with permission [66]. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
8
3.6. Other methods
Additional methods for characterizing metal nanoclusters include 
electron microscopy, which can visualize the morphology and particle 
size of synthesized gold nanoclusters to confirm synthesis success and 
assess particle size uniformity (Fig. 6B) [71]. Moreover, X-ray energy 
dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and elemental mapping can determine 
the composition, valence state, and functional groups of metal nano­
clusters, providing a more scientific explanation of nanocluster forma­
tion mechanisms [22].
4. Antibacterial mechanism of metal nanoclusters
The primary mechanisms through which nanomaterials combat 
antimicrobial resistance include membrane disruption [41], generation 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [42], interference with DNA function 
and induction of metabolic disturbances [43], enzyme mimicry perfor­
mance [44], ion dissolution, and biofilm eradication [72].
4.1. Antibacterial mechanism of gold nanoclusters
The antibacterial mechanism of gold nanoclusters can be broadly 
divided into three components: Mechanism ① Bacteria are categorized 
into gram-negative and gram-positive based on their cell wall structure. 
Gram-positive bacteria have a thick peptidoglycan layer, while gram- 
negative bacteria possess significantly less peptidoglycan. This struc­
tural difference partially explains why certain antibiotics or gold 
nanoclusters exhibit different bactericidal effects against these species. 
Kuo et al. showed that gold nanoclusters initially attach to the bacterial 
membrane, disrupting its integrity, causing cytoplasmic components to 
leak from the cell, and thereby producing bacteriostatic and bactericidal 
effects (Fig. 7A) [73]. Mechanism ② Gold nanoclusters induce intra­
cellular ROS production upon cellular entry, leading to oxidative stress. 
DNA, lipids, and other molecules are severely damaged through ROS- 
dependent or non-ROS-dependent mechanisms (Fig. 7B) [73]. Wang 
et al. demonstrated that gold nanoclusters exert bactericidal effects 
through the combined action of bacterial membrane disruption, oxida­
tive stress induction, DNA damage, and interference with energy 
metabolism (Fig. 7C) [30]. Mechanism ③ According to literature, the 
antibacterial function of gold nanoclusters is likely influenced by the 
surface charge of the ligands used in their synthesis. Wang’s group 
synthesized a series of Au NCs with different charges and found that 
positively charged Au NCs exhibited strong inhibitory effects against 
MRSA (Fig. 7D) [30].
When combined with other antibacterial agents, gold nanoclusters 
exert a synergistic effect that significantly enhances bacterial cell 
Fig. 7. (A) Depiction of how glutathione-attached gold nanoclusters (GSH-Au NCs) cause the demise of A. aceti. (B) How reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced by 
gold nanoclusters function. Reproduced with permission [73]. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (C) (a) Confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) 
images showing MDR E. coli and MRSA cells, both untreated and treated with AuDAMP NCs. Dead cells are stained red with propidium iodide (PI), while SYTO 9 
(green) stains all cells. (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of MDR E. coli (top) and MRSA (bottom), both untreated and treated with AuDAMP. Scale bars 
indicate 2 μm. (c) Agarose gel electrophoresis results of genomic DNA extracted from MDR E. coli and MRSA, untreated and treated with DAMPAu(I), AuDAMP NCs, 
and AuDAMP NPs, respectively. (d) Normalized ROS production after 2 h of incubation, with the control group’s ROS levels set to 1. (D) Characterization of 
mercaptopyrimidine-linked Au NCs. (a) Chemical structures of the relevant mercaptopyrimidine molecules. (b) Size distribution and (c) Zeta potential of Au NCs. 
Reproduced with permission [30]. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
9
membrane disruption, leading to bacterial cell lysis and improved 
antibacterial outcomes. Chen et al. developed an antibacterial assembly 
(SFT/Au NCs) by conjugating a surfactant-SFT to Au NCs via non- 
covalent bonding, creating an effective antibacterial system. The SFT/ 
Au NC conjugate demonstrated a lower minimum inhibitory concen­
tration and higher antimicrobial activity [74]. Antibiotics remain 
essential in treating bacterial infections in humans; however, the need 
for higher concentrations and the emergence of bacterial resistance have 
decreased their bactericidal efficiency. Nanomaterials, characterized by 
high specific surface area and complex antibacterial mechanisms, 
exhibit exceptional antibacterial properties and pose significant chal­
lenges for bacteria to develop resistance against. Studies have shown 
that coupling antibiotics with gold nanoclusters enhances antibacterial 
efficacy beyond what either component achieves alone. For example, 
Zheng et al. demonstrated that combining Au NCs with doxycycline 
effectively disrupts bacterial membranes, causing extensive subcellular 
damage and reducing bacterial resistance development (Fig. 8) [69]. 
The hybrid Dap-AuDAMP was synthesized by linking Dap to DAMP- 
functionalized Au NCs via a robust amide bond between the carboxyl 
group of Dap and the amino group of DAMP molecules (Fig. 8A). 
Compared to other methods, Dap-AuDAMP exhibited superior antibac­
terial efficacy, achieving complete bacterial eradication after 1 h of in­
cubation. Individually, both Dap and AuDAMP showed comparable 
antibacterial effects, with approximately 37.5 % and 41.7 % of bacteria 
remaining viable after 1 h of treatment, respectively (Fig. 8B). 
Furthermore, Dap-AuDAMP demonstrated rapid bactericidal action, 
eliminating all bacteria within 30 min. In contrast, the percentage of 
viable bacteria in other groups exceeded 50 % after the same treatment 
duration (Fig. 8C). These findings indicate that the conjugated structure 
promotes a synergistic effect, resulting in superior antibacterial activity 
compared to an unconjugated mixture of Dap and AuDAMP. In a sepa­
rate study, Kalita et al. created an antibacterial hybrid by surface- 
functionalizing lysozyme-coated Au NCs with the β-lactam antibiotic 
ampicillin (Lys-Au NCs-Amp). This hybrid reverses MRSA’s resistance to 
ampicillin and shows enhanced antibacterial efficacy against non- 
resistant bacterial strains. Research into its antibacterial mechanism 
revealed that Lys-Au NCs-Amp’s effectiveness against MRSA and its 
persistent forms is attributed to an increased concentration of ampicillin 
at the target site, multivalent presentation, and improved ampicillin 
permeation facilitated by lysozyme-induced cell rupture. This antibac­
terial hybrid effectively eliminated MRSA infections in diabetic wounds 
in rats and expedited the healing process [75].
4.2. Antibacterial mechanism of silver nanoclusters
The antibacterial mechanisms of Ag NCs are largely consistent with 
those of Ag NPs. Compared to Ag NPs, extremely small Ag NCs have a 
higher surface-to-volume ratio and are more prone to oxidative disso­
lution, enabling the rapid release of Ag+ ions for enhanced antibacterial 
activity. Mechanism ① Ag NCs adhere to the cell wall and membrane 
surface, causing structural damage and dysfunction of the outer mem­
brane. This initiates a series of processes, including cell wall cratering, 
membrane perforation, increased cell membrane permeability, mem­
brane backbone disruption, free radical-induced membrane damage, 
lysis and dispersion of membrane components, leakage of cellular con­
tents, and respiratory failure with H+ leakage [76–79]. Mechanism ② 
Ag NCs penetrate the cell interior, disrupting subcellular structures and 
metabolic functions [7]. This includes damage to organelles (e.g., 
mitochondria, vesicles, ribosomes) and biomolecules (e.g., proteins, 
lipids, DNA), generation of reactive oxygen radicals to induce cytotox­
icity and oxidative stress, and interference with signal transduction 
pathways [76]. Unlike Ag NPs, Ag NCs consist of a few silver atoms and 
organic ligands with a well-defined molecular structure. Biomolecular 
ligands provide enhanced protection to the tiny metal cores, ensuring 
stability by preventing oxidation through higher molar ratios and 
improved surface coverage [80,81]. The core structure and surface li­
gands of Ag NCs are critical to their antibacterial activity. Amphiphilic 
ligands enable Ag NCs to bind to cell membranes, facilitating endocy­
tosis by target bacterial cells, a phenomenon confirmed by molecular 
dynamics simulations. Additionally, the nanocluster structure of Ag NCs 
exhibits strong peroxidase-like activity, associated with high ROS gen­
eration, which enhances bactericidal effectiveness. These properties 
allow Ag NCs to damage cell walls and membranes, promote oxidative 
stress, and impair essential cellular processes like ATP synthesis [72]. 
Fig. 8. (A) The strategy involves conjugating antibacterial Au NCs with Dap, which results in enhanced AIE and a synergistic antibacterial effect. (B) The percentages 
of viable MRSA remaining after being treated with PBS, Dap, AuDAMP, a combination of Dap and AuDAMP (Dap + AuDAMP), and the conjugated form (Dap- 
AuDAMP) are shown. (C) The MRSA killing kinetics for PBS, Dap, AuDAMP, Dap + AuDAMP, and Dap-AuDAMP are presented. Reproduced with permission [69]. 
Copyright 2019, Academic Press Inc.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
10
Yuan was the first to study the antimicrobial activity of ultrasmall 
glutathione-protected Ag NCs, demonstrating that Ag+-rich nano­
clusters could act as effective nanobanks in bacterial cultures [82].
However, Ag NCs are reactive and unstable under physiological 
conditions, with applications often limited by oxidation [83], which can 
lead to aggregation and a loss of bactericidal properties. To address this, 
silver nanoparticles can be engineered to be encapsulated or doped with 
carriers for prolonged antibacterial effects. Zheng et al. achieved effi­
cient synergistic antibacterial effects by encapsulating Ag NCs with 
daptomycin, a commercial antibiotic [84]. The resulting antimicrobial 
complex (D-Ag NC) retained the properties of both bactericides with 
enhanced synergistic performance. Specifically, D-Ag NC hybrids 
localized Ag NCs and daptomycin within a network. In this hybrid 
structure, daptomycin disrupts the bacterial membrane, while localized 
Ag NCs produce ROS to oxidize the bacterial lipid bilayer, exacerbating 
membrane damage and creating larger pores (Fig. 9A). This facilitates 
further entry of D-Ag NCs into the bacteria, generating locally high ROS 
concentrations within the cell, inducing severe DNA damage, and 
resulting in high bactericidal efficacy.
For the first time, Liu et al. synthesized highly dispersed Ag NC- 
modified mesoporous silica nanostructures (Ag NC-MSNs) using a one- 
pot method to anchor Ag NCs to MSNs (Fig. 9B) [22]. The antibacte­
rial effectiveness of these Ag NC-MSNs was evaluated against two 
common bacteria responsible for wound infections and biofilm forma­
tion: Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-negative Pseudo­
monas aeruginosa (Fig. 9C). The uniform dispersion of ultra-small silver 
nanoparticles throughout the micro-nanostructure effectively prevents 
nanoparticle clustering and promotes the sustained release of Ag+. Due 
to their structural characteristics, silver nanoparticles exhibit a 
controlled release rate of silver ions on the nanoparticle surface, 
providing potent antibacterial action. Meanwhile, silver nanoparticles 
embedded within the nanoparticle pores act as reservoirs, ensuring 
sustained antibacterial activity. Additionally, the mesoporous structure 
enhances bacterial adsorption and interaction with Ag NC-MSNs. The 
enhanced antibacterial performance of Ag NC-MSNs can be attributed to 
the following distinctive characteristics: ① The ultra-small size and high 
surface area-to-volume ratio of Ag NCs. ② The supporting MSN matrix 
prevents aggregation and facilitates the release of activated Ag nano­
particles from the porous network. ③ The affinity of Ag NC-MSNs for 
bacterial surfaces enhances their interaction, and ④ The even dispersion 
of Ag NCs within the MSN structure allows for continuous and gradual 
Ag+ release (Fig. 9D).
Wang et al. proposed a simple method for synthesizing bacitracin- 
directed silver, gold, and copper nanoclusters [85]. It was found that 
Ag NCs@Bacitracin exhibited stronger bactericidal potency than others 
due to significant membrane damage. Propidium iodide staining 
exhibited that membrane damage in the bacterial population was 72.3 % 
after treatment with Ag NCs@Bacitracin, and the introduction of Ag 
NCs@Bacitracin led to higher ROS production, enhancing its antibac­
terial effect. Bacitracin peptides served as templates for the nano­
clusters, cooperating with Ag atoms to form complexes that boosted 
antibacterial activity. Du et al. prepared ultrasmall silver nanoclusters 
using a green method involving direct reduction of silver ions by anti­
microbial peptides [86]. The positively charged peptide ligands pro­
moted Ag NCs binding to bacteria through electrostatic attraction. 
Additionally, strong hydrophobic interactions enabled the ultrasmall Ag 
Fig. 9. (A) D-Ag NCs create larger holes in the cell membrane. Reproduced with permission [84]. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (B) Illustration of the 
synthesis of Ag NC-MSNs. C) Bacterial inhibition of Ag NC-MSNs, MSNs, and Ag NCs agar plates after incubation with 1 × 105 CFU for 24 h. Petri dishes inoculated 
with S. aureus and P. aeruginosa, showing different numbers of bacterial colonies in the indicated agar plate. D) Schematic of possible antimicrobial mechanisms of 
Ag NC-MSNs. Reproduced with permission [22]. Copyright 2019, Academic Press Inc.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
11
NC@TP-I to rapidly enter bacteria, interfere with cell growth and 
metabolism, and significantly increase ROS generation, exposing bac­
teria to intense oxidative stress and cell death. In contrast, Ag Cube@TP- 
I could not penetrate the bacterial wall and primarily relied on Ag+
release to kill bacteria. The ability of Ag NC@TP-I to overcome cell wall 
defenses indicated its superior antibacterial activity. Furthermore, silver 
nanoclusters with antimicrobial peptide ligands demonstrated excellent 
stability, low cytotoxicity, and long-lasting antibacterial efficacy.
4.3. Antibacterial mechanism of copper nanoclusters
Current literature suggests that Cu NCs alone exhibit limited anti­
bacterial efficacy, and that functionalization and capping are effective 
ways to enhance their antibacterial activity. Therefore, this discussion 
on antibacterial mechanisms primarily focuses on the combined use of 
Cu NCs with other substances. Various methods have been identified to 
improve the bactericidal effect of Cu nanoclusters. For instance, Xia 
et al. used tannic acid (TA) to cap Cu NCs (TA-Cu NCs) to enhance 
bactericidal activity [87]. TA-Cu NCs demonstrated significant anti­
bacterial activity against Gram-positive bacteria, primarily by disrupt­
ing cell membranes. The proposed mechanisms for TA-Cu NCs’ 
antimicrobial action include the following: Mechanism ① The TA 
component of TA-Cu NCs interacts with the peptidoglycan layer of 
Gram-positive bacteria, disrupting cell membranes, as evidenced by 
experimental results. Mechanism ② Negatively charged TA-Cu NCs 
interact with Gram-positive bacteria that possess very weak negative 
charge through electrostatic interactions, enhancing the bactericidal 
selectivity of TA-Cu NCs. Mechanism ③ TA-Cu NCs attack and penetrate 
the bacterial interior. Atomic force microscopy observations exhibited 
that the cell membranes of E. coli and P. aeruginosa remained intact 
under the same treatment, whereas those of S. aureus and B. subtilis were 
cleaved, supporting the proposed antibacterial mechanisms (Fig. 10). In 
Table 1, we summarize several examples of the antibacterial mechanism 
of metal nanoclusters.
The multiple antibacterial mechanisms of metal nanoclusters render 
them a promising candidate for clinical infection control. However, its 
biological safety remains a crucial factor that demands thorough 
consideration. The observed metal nanoclusters selectivity towards 
bacteria and healthy cells could be explained by the fact that the cell 
structures are different. For instance, the phagocytosis of lysosomes and 
the mitochondrial barrier in healthy cells significantly mitigate the 
damage caused by antibacterial mechanisms to healthy cells [88]. 
Bacterial cell membranes are abundant in acidic phospholipids, 
including phosphatidylglycerol and cardiolipin. Conversely, in healthy 
cells, these acidic phospholipids are typically sequestered within the 
inner leaflets of plasma membranes [89–92]. This difference is signifi­
cant as the surface of bacterial membranes, with their high negative 
charge, contrasts sharply with the less negatively charged membranes of 
healthy cells, accounting for the enhanced affinity towards multivalent 
cations exhibited by bacteria [74,93–95]. Also, the presence of choles­
terol in healthy cell membranes helps to stabilize the membranes, 
making them less sensitive to destruction by antibacterial drugs [74,96].
5. Fluorescence properties of gold/silver/copper nanoclusters
5.1. Fluorescence properties of gold nanoclusters
Fluorescence is a photoluminescent phenomenon and a key property 
of gold nanomaterials. Gold nanoclusters typically consist of tens to 
hundreds of Au atoms, placing them near the Fermi wavelength of 
electrons (<2 nm) and imparting molecular-like properties. As a novel 
category of fluorescent nanomaterials, gold nanoclusters have found 
wide applications in bioimaging, detection, disease diagnosis, and 
treatment due to their good water solubility, biocompatibility, high 
quantum yield, photostability, and ease of synthesis. Niu et al. synthe­
sized BSA-stabilized Au NCs for fluorescence detection of cysteine and 
copper ions. This simple, stable, and efficient label-free fluorometry 
method could be practically applied for sequential detection of cysteine 
and Cu2+ in the brains of mice with Alzheimer’s disease (Fig. 11A,D) 
[97]. Sha et al. fabricated a fluorescent sensor for detecting 5-hydroxy­
tryptamine (5-HT) using transferrin-coated Au NCs (Tf-Au NCs). The 
fluorescence response of Tf-Au NCs to 5-HT was due to the high-affinity- 
induced aggregation of Au NCs with 5-HT and sialylated glycoproteins 
in transferrin. This aggregation-induced fluorescence enhancement 
method provided an efficient route for detecting 5-HT with excellent 
stability, as the pH of the buffer solution had minimal effect on fluo­
rescence enhancement (Fig. 11B, C) [98]. The fluorescence properties of 
gold nanoclusters are influenced by factors such as size, ligand, struc­
ture, charge, and environmental parameters like temperature, ionic 
strength, and pH. For example, Jiang et al. synthesized cytidine-gold 
nanoclusters that emitted colors ranging from blue to orange by 
adjusting the pH [99].
The unique fluorescence characteristics of gold nanoclusters also 
allow for convenient bacterial detection. Based on specific fluorescence 
Fig. 10. AFM images of S. aureus (A), B. subtilis (B), E. coli (C) and P. aeruginosa (D). Control cells were treated with phosphate (i) and bacterial cells were treated 
with 30 μg/mL TA-Cu NCs for 10 min (ii). The arrows represent the rupture of the external surface of B. subtilis. Reproduced with permission [87]. Copyright 
2019, Elsevier.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
12
changes, photoluminescent Au NCs can facilitate label-free bacterial 
identification. Chan et al. demonstrated that human serum albumin- 
protected Au NCs (HSA-Au NCs) could serve as selective fluorescent 
probes for S. aureus and MRSA, showing strong fluorescence enhance­
ment upon binding (Fig. 12A, B) [100]. In another study, pH-responsive 
Au NCs were developed to control bacterial labeling via pH adjustment. 
Liu et al. devised a novel approach to prepare cross-linked protein (BSA) 
with Au NCs (CP-GNC). Since BSA is an amphoteric electrolyte, the net 
surface charge of CP-GNC can be regulated by pH. The adhesion and 
release of E. coli to CP-GNC can be controlled by pH, allowing label-free 
bacterial detection. The probe effectively labeled bacteria and formed 
cell clusters at pH 5.2 (Fig. 12C–F) [101]. Pranantyo et al. also showed 
that stable Au NCs exhibit a pH-responsive bacterial binding effect, 
useful for fluorescence detection in bacterial infection [102].
To improve bacterial selectivity in detection using Au NC fluores­
cence, receptor-specific binding can be achieved by functionalizing Au 
NCs with various ligands. For example, Mukherji and his team suc­
cessfully identified Lux-R family regulators in E. coli by functionalizing 
Au NCs with acyl homoserine lactone quorum-sensing molecules, 
differentiating E. coli from S. aureus, which lacks this receptor (Fig. 12H, 
I) [103]. The type I fimbriae on E. coli surfaces bind specifically to 
mannose and mannosides. Huang [104] and Tseng [105] developed a 
fluorescence detection method using Au NCs that form fluorescent 
clusters upon binding to E. coli through multivalent interactions be­
tween E. coli and FimH on pili (Fig. 12G). Specific binding sites on 
bacterial surfaces also allow for enzyme recognition. Lysozyme- 
modified Au NCs, for example, can specifically detect bacteria. Liu 
et al. developed a point-of-care detection method to identify E. coli 
specifically, using lysozyme-modified Au NCs that selectively anchored 
to the bacterial surface, resulting in enhanced red photoluminescence 
(Fig. 12J) [106].
5.2. Fluorescence properties of silver nanoclusters
Silver nanoclusters (Ag NCs) are novel fluorescent nanomaterials 
characterized by high quantum yield, tunable emission wavelength, 
strong luminescence, and good biocompatibility. These properties make 
Ag NCs widely applicable in biocatalysis, analysis, detection, and bio­
imaging [107]. Currently, fluorescence-based bacterial detection using 
Ag NCs can be divided into two main types: ① “Turn-off” and “Turn-on” 
fluorescence detection and ② Ratiometric fluorescence detection.
Most Ag NC fluorescence-based bacterial detection falls into the 
fluorescence quenching category, referred to here as the “Turn-off” type. 
For instance, Yang et al. combined DNA-Ag NCs with bacterial aptamers 
to develop a novel visual detection method for effective bacterial 
elimination. The G-rich sequence attached to the S. aureus aptamer en­
hances the fluorescence of DNA-Ag NCs. When the aptamer binds to 
bacteria, the G-rich sequence detaches from the DNA-Ag NCs, causing 
significant fluorescence quenching and enabling visual monitoring of 
S. aureus through changes in fluorescence. Fluorescence images showed 
that N4-Ag NCs/Apt-G (fluorescent probe) was abundant at low S. aureus 
concentrations and emitted strong fluorescence. As S. aureus concen­
tration increased, N4-Ag NCs/Apt-G gradually degraded into isolated Ag 
NCs, with a corresponding decrease in fluorescence intensity. A favor­
able linear correlation was observed between fluorescence intensity and 
CFU/mL in the range of 1E7 to 1E11 CFU/mL (Fig. 13A–C) [108]. Dou 
et al. utilized polyethyleneimine (PEI) templated with Ag/Cu NCs for 
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). The aptamer-Ag/Cu NCs 
probe was synthesized using polydopamine nanospheres (PDANSs), 
which have excellent quenching capability, as the FRET acceptor. This 
probe was combined with cryoprobe-assisted target-cycling signal 
amplification and modified with an S. Typhimurium aptamer, resulting in 
fluorescence quenching of the probes. In the presence of bacteria, the 
aptamer binds to the target, detaches from the PDANSs, and the Ag/Cu 
NCs restore the fluorescence signal. The aptamer-target complex is then 
digested by cryonase (a non-selective enzyme that digests nucleic acids), 
releasing the target to bind with another aptamer, creating a cycle that 
continues until all adaptors are consumed. Once both Ag/Cu NCs are 
released, their fluorescence signal is significantly amplified, resulting in 
high sensitivity. This method has a detection limit as low as 3.8 CFU/mL, 
ten times lower than without enzyme aid, providing an early and rapid 
method for detecting S. typhimurium in food [109].
Table 1 
Typical examples of the antibacterial mechanism of metal nanoclusters.
Materials
Target pathogens
Antibacterial 
mechanism
Ref.
AuDAMP
MDR E. coli and MRSA
Cell membrane 
destruction, DNA 
damage, and reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) 
generation
[30]
Dap-Au NCs
MRSA
Disrupt bacterial 
membranes by creating 
more and/or larger 
holes, ROS-induced 
DNA damage
[69]
Amphiphilic Ag NCs
MDR P. aeruginosa
Impairing the cell wall/ 
membrane, promoting 
oxidative stress and 
attenuating pivotal 
cellular processes, e.g., 
ATP synthesis
[72]
Glutathione- 
conjugated (GSH)- 
AuNCs
A. aceti
The production of 
intracellular ROS 
caused destruction of 
the bacterial 
membranes
[73]
SFT/DT–Au NDs
S. aureus, S. enteritidis, 
MRSA, E. coli, and P. 
vulgaris
Disintegration of the 
bacterial membrane
[74]
AUNC-L-Amp
MRSA
Increased Amp 
concentration at the site 
of action, multivalent 
presentation and 
enhanced permeation of 
Amp through lysozyme- 
mediated cell wall lysis
[75]
DNA-stabilized Ag 
NCs
E. coli DH5 alpha 
(Gram-negative) and 
S. epidermidis (Gram- 
positive)
Reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) generation
[81]
GSH-Ag+-R NCs.
gram-negative bacteria 
P. aeruginosa and E. 
coli, as well as gram- 
positive bacteria B. 
subtilis and S. aureus
High local 
concentration of Ag+
ions can interact with 
biomolecules on the 
bacteria cell wall and 
consequently cause cell 
membrane damage; a 
large amount of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) 
can be generated
[82]
D-AgNCs
S. aureus
Generate localized high 
ROS concentration; 
effectively damage the 
bacterial membrane and 
led to more severe DNA 
damage
[84]
Ag NC-MSNs
Gram-positive 
S. aureus, as well as the 
Gram-negative 
P. aeruginosa
The enhanced ROS 
production by Ag+ ions 
and Ag NCs induces 
destructive oxidative 
stress to the bacterial 
cells.
[22]
AgNCs@Bacitracin
S. aureus
Higher reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) 
production and cell 
membrane destruction
[85]
AgNC@TP-I
E. coli and S. aureus
The generation of 
reactive oxygen species
[86]
TA-CuNCs
gram-positive bacteria 
S. aureus and B. subtilis
Bacterial membrane 
damage
[87]
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
13
The fluorescence methods described above are easy to use, highly 
sensitive, cost-effective, and suitable for field detection. However, they 
have inherent drawbacks, such as susceptibility to interference from 
concentration variations and background fluorescence, leading to false- 
positive or false-negative results. Ratiometric fluorescence biosensing, 
which detects changes by recording the ratio of fluorescence intensities 
at two different wavelengths, offers a solution to these limitations [110]. 
Ma et al. developed an ultrasensitive ratiometric fluorescence sensing 
platform for detecting S. Typhimurium (S. Typhi), named SCENT-Cas 
(Silver Nanocluster Enhanced Nucleic Acid Detection Applying 
CRISPR/Cas12a), by integrating Ag NC probes with CRISPR/Cas12a 
(Fig. 13D,E) [111]. Initially, loop-mediated isothermal amplification 
(LAMP) was used to amplify the species-specific gene of S. typhi, which 
then activated CRISPR/Cas12a to degrade the single-stranded DNA 
(ssDNA) in the system. Green-fluorescing Ag NCs could be effectively 
transformed into red-fluorescing Ag NCs when the Ag NC probe was 
placed near a pre-designed converter ssDNA. This method allowed the 
target nucleic acid to be visualized through a fluorescence shift from 
green to red. The biosensor demonstrated excellent performance, 
detecting S. typhimurium as low as 1 CFU/mL, with a dynamic range of 1 
to 108 CFU/mL.
5.3. Fluorescence properties of copper nanoclusters
Copper nanoclusters (Cu NCs) exhibit unique fluorescence properties 
compared to gold and silver nanoclusters, with significant potential for 
applications in biosensing and imaging. For example, Kawasaki et al. 
described a method for synthesizing Cu NCs using microwave-assisted 
polyol synthesis without additional protection or reducing agents 
[112]. The resulting Cu NCs displayed strong blue fluorescence and high 
stability. Chen et al. synthesized Cu NCs using 2-mercapto-5-n-propyl­
pyrimidine as a protective ligand, achieving photoluminescence at 
423 nm and 593 nm [66]. Additionally, DNA-templated Cu NCs showed 
strong fluorescence properties, though their fluorescence emission 
remained stable for only 20 min, which could limit their application in 
long-term monitoring studies [113]. To address this, Lian et al. syn­
thesized copper nanoclusters using histone-DNA templates, enhancing 
fluorescence and stability compared to the original method [114]. 
However, many of these methods involved organic solvents [115], 
resulting in low fluorescence and significant instability, which limited 
their practical application. Yang et al. improved this by synthesizing Cu 
NCs in an aqueous L-cysteine solution, achieving significant fluores­
cence stability over time and resistance to solvent changes, indicating 
good stability of the Cu NCs [116].
Exploring the fluorescence properties of Cu NCs for bacterial imaging 
could further enrich the bacterial detection platform. Qing et al. used 
Fig. 11. (A) Schematic illustration of fluorescence switch for cysteine and Cu2+ analysis. Reproduced with permission [97]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (B) Schematic 
diagram of the synthesis of a fluorescent transferrin-stabilized gold nanocluster (Tf-Au NCs) and for the detection of serotonin (5-HT). (C) The fluorescence emission 
spectra of Tf-Au NCs in the presence of different concentrations of 5-HT (0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 μM). Inset: the calibration curve between the 
percentage of fluorescence enhancement (F-F0)/F0 % and the concentration of 5-HT. Reproduced with permission [98]. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (D) Selectivity of 
fluorescence probe toward cysteine. F-F0 denotes fluorescence intensity change of BSA-Au NCs in the presence of interferences. Reproduced with permission [97]. 
Copyright 2021, Elsevier.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
14
DNA-templated Cu NCs (DNA-Cu NCs) to detect micrococcal nuclease 
(MNase), a nucleic acid-degrading enzyme essential for bacterial cell 
dispersion in infected hosts [117,118]. MNase content reflects the 
pathogenicity of S. aureus, making DNA-Cu NCs an MNase-based sensor 
for identifying S. aureus, thus enhancing bacterial detection efficiency 
[119]. Song et al. developed a dual-emission colorimetric fluorescence 
Cu NCs-SiO2@CDs probe for visual pH detection based on fluorescence 
color changes. The Cu NCs-SiO2@CDs probe can monitor bacterial 
metabolism with a high signal-to-noise ratio, providing information on 
pH variations and bacterial growth in metabolic systems (Fig. 14). 
Fig. 12. (A) The HSA-Au NC exhibits a distinctive binding preference for both S. aureus and MRSA. (B) Images captured following a 2-hour incubation period of 
various bacteria with HSA-Au NCs are presented in tube I. Tubes II and III of each panel held bacteria and HSA-Au NCs, respectively. These photographs were 
obtained under UV illumination at a wavelength of λmax = 365 nm. Reproduced with permission [100]. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic 
presentation of CP-GNCs as a pH-sensitive tool for bioimaging and drug delivery. (D) E. coli were mixed with CP-GNC at different pH. Fluorescent images were taken 
under UV exposure. (E) A streamlined diagram illustrates the pH-dependent binding of CP-GNC to E. coli. Specifically, complete attachment of CP-GNC to the cells 
was observed at a pH of 5.2. Conversely, at a pH of 7.4, all CP-GNC detached from the surface of E. coli. (F) Confocal fluorescent microscopy of Bl21-gold cells labeled 
with CP-GNC and aggregated into cell clusters. Reproduced with permission [101]. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (G) Visualization of Man-Au NCs in the (left) absence 
and (right) presence of E. coli upon excitation under a hand-held UV lamp (365 nm). Reproduced with permission [105]. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (H) Interaction of 
the fluorescent probe with bacterial cells. (I) Confocal microscopy images of E. coli (a) and S. aureus (b) incubated with Au@OA@C8-AHL. Scale bar is 5 μm. 
Reproduced with permission [103]. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (J) Fluorescence enhancement detection of E. coli by lysozyme-modified Au NCs. 
Reproduced with permission [106]. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
15
Additionally, this probe can be used to image bacterial metabolism. This 
dual-emission colorimetric fluorescence probe presents a new approach 
to bacteriological studies [120].
6. Conclusions and future perspectives
Metal nanoclusters have emerged as a promising strategy in 
combating severe bacterial infections, representing an innovative and 
versatile form of nanomedicine. This paper provides a comprehensive 
review of recent advancements in the antibacterial applications of ul­
trasmall metal nanoclusters, covering preparation methods, character­
ization, antibacterial mechanisms, and the fluorescence properties of 
gold, silver, and copper nanoclusters. These studies can help us identify 
effective and broadly applicable metal nanocluster strategies, estab­
lishing a foundation for efficient infectious disease management.
Metal nanoclusters are excellent materials for detecting and treating 
bacterial infections; however, several challenges must be addressed for 
clinical translation. Although extensive research has been conducted on 
the antibacterial mechanisms of atomically precise metal nanoclusters, a 
deeper understanding of dynamic nanobiological interactions is still 
required, as this remains an underexplored field [121]. Leveraging the 
precise physicochemical characterization of metal nanoclusters can help 
us investigate nano-bio interactions and facilitate the rational design of 
metal nanoclusters. Metal nanoclusters need to be engineered to remain 
bioactive in complex biological media while evading recognition by the 
cellular immune system. Structure-activity relationship studies based on 
metal nanoclusters will also aid in developing effective antibacterial 
agents [122,123]. Further exploration of metal nanoclusters as NIR-II 
imaging agents is needed to enhance imaging and therapeutic efficacy. 
NIR-II window imaging can overcome limitations such as limited tissue 
penetration depth and improve imaging resolution. Additionally, highly 
stable metal nanoclusters with excellent anti-interference, tunable 
emission, and high quantum yield should be developed.
Despite obstacles, including lysosomal escape, mitochondrial tar­
geting, and mitochondrial membrane penetration, which reduce the 
toxic effects of cationic nanostructures on mammalian cells [88], the 
biosafety of metal nanoclusters in vivo and in vitro must be thoroughly 
assessed to facilitate clinical translation. Studies have shown that inor­
ganic nanoparticles, such as Au nanoparticles, can induce the endothe­
lial leakiness (NanoEL) effect, disrupting endothelial cell connections 
and promoting cancer metastasis [124–128]. Therefore, the potential for 
the NanoEL effect should be considered in developing future metal 
nanoclusters. The antibacterial potential and safety of nanoparticles are 
influenced by their size, charge, dispersant, and environmental condi­
tions. For successful clinical translation, it is essential to comprehen­
sively understand the distribution, transport, and interactions between 
metal nanoclusters and biological systems. The size, composition, shape, 
and clustering of metal nanoclusters must be considered from the organ 
Fig. 13. (A) The PLA/N4 -Ag NC/Apt-G sensor, when incorporated into nanofilms and subjected to S. aureus treatment, exhibited particular fluorescence intensity 
patterns, as visualized through CLSM imaging. (B) Fluorescence images of the sensor with different concentrations of S. aureus under ultraviolet light excitation (left 
to right: 0, 1.25 × 108, 1.25 × 109, 1.25 × 1010, 6.25 × 1010, and 1.25 × 1011 CFU/mL). (C) An excellent linear relationship between fluorescence intensity and CFU/ 
mL in the range of 1E7 to 1E11 CFU/mL could also be observed. Reproduced with permission [108]. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (D) Schematic 
diagram of a ratiometric fluorescent biosensing platform for S. typhi detection termed SCENT-Cas. (E) Feasibility test of SCENT-Cas by confirming that trans-cleavage 
of CRISPR/Cas12a can only be activated in the presence of the correct target and crRNA. Reproduced with permission [111]. Copyright 2023, Elsevier.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
16
to cellular and molecular levels. Research indicates that ultrasmall metal 
nanoclusters have promising applications in biomedicine. Currently, 
metal nanoclusters are still in the early stages of development, with 
nonavailable for clinical application. Nevertheless, metal nanoclusters 
have shown significant potential in various biomedical fields. With 
collaborative efforts from scientists in nanobiotechnology, material 
chemistry, pharmacology, and clinical medicine, antibacterial metal 
nanoclusters as next generation nanoantibiotics have a bright future in 
addressing the critical challenge of bacterial infections.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Wenjia Li: Writing – original draft. Yaohan Tang: Conceptualiza­
tion, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Baiyang Liu: Writing – 
original draft. Jinwen Zhou: Writing – original draft. Bingbing Chen: 
Writing – original draft. Jing Hou: Writing – review & editing, Super­
vision, Conceptualization. Zhijun Liu: Writing – review & editing, Su­
pervision. Zengchao Guo: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, 
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Research Foundation of Shandong 
Second Medical University (2023BSQD012), and the Traditional Chi­
nese Medicine Science Project of Shandong Province (M-2023093).
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] M. Ferri, E. Ranucci, P. Romagnoli, V. Giaccone, Antimicrobial resistance: a 
global emerging threat to public health systems, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. 57 (2017) 
2857–2876.
[2] S. Kariuki, Global burden of antimicrobial resistance and forecasts to 2050, 
Lancet 404 (2024) 1172–1173.
[3] W. Kim, W. Zhu, G.L. Hendricks, D.V. Tyne, A.D. Steele, C.E. Keohane, N. Fricke, 
A.L. Conery, S. Shen, W. Pan, K. Lee, R. Rajamuthiah, B.B. Fuchs, P.M. Vlahovska, 
W.M. Wuest, M.S. Gilmore, H. Gao, F.M. Ausubel, E. Mylonakis, A new class of 
synthetic retinoid antibiotics efective against bacterial persisters, Nature 556 
(2018) 103–107.
Fig. 14. (A) The synthesis of a dual-emission ratiometric nanocomposite material, consisting of Cu NCs encapsulated in SiO2 @CDs, is detailed here. (B) Images 
captured under 365 nm UV light illumination depict Cu NCs-SiO2 @CDs dispersed in buffer solutions of varying pH levels. (C) CIE chromaticity diagram showing the 
(x,y) color coordinates of Cu NCs-SiO2 @CDs varying with pH value. (D) Detection of bacterial metabolism by Cu NCs-SiO2 @CDs at different times 0 h, pH = 7.2 (a); 
1 h pH = 6.7 (b); and 3 h pH = 5.4 (c); a1, b1, and c1 are fluorescent photos of the bacterial metabolic system; a2, b2, and c2 reflect the metabolic amount of bacteria; 
a3, b3, and c3 are laser confocal imaging of bacterial metabolic system. (E) The fluorescence intensity spectra (excitation at 380 nm) of Cu NCs-SiO2 @CDs in buffer 
solution with different pH value from 4.2 to 7.2. Reproduced with permission [120]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
17
[4] D. Guan, F. Chen, Y. Qiu, B. Jiang, L. Gong, L. Lan, Sulfonium, an underestimated 
moiety for structural modification, alters the antibacterial profile of vancomycin 
against multidrug- resistant bacteria, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 20 (2019) 
6750–6754.
[5] M.J. Mitcheltree, A. Pisipati, E.A. Syroegin, K.J. Silvestre, D. Klepacki, J. 
D. Mason, D.W. Terwilliger, G. Testolin, A.R. Pote, K.J.Y. Wu, R.P. Ladley, 
K. Chatman, A.S. Mankin, Y.S. Polikanov, A.G. Myers, A synthetic antibiotic class 
overcoming bacterial multidrug resistance, Nature 599 (2021) 507–512.
[6] A.J. Huh, Y.J. Kwon, Nanoantibiotics: a new paradigm for treating infectious 
diseases using nanomaterials in the antibiotics resistant era, J. Controlled Rel. 
156 (2011) 128–145.
[7] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Antimicrobial silver nanomaterials, 
Coordin. Chem. Rev. 1 (2018) 357.
[8] J.M.V. Makabenta, A. Nabawy, C.H. Li, S. Schmidt-Malan, R. Patel, V.M. Rotello, 
Nanomaterial-based therapeutics for antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections, Nat. 
Rev. Microbiol. 1 (2021) 23–36.
[9] M.S. Ahmed, T. Annamalai, X. Li, A. Seddek, P. Teng, Y.C. Tse-Dinh, H. Moon, 
Synthesis of antimicrobial poly (guanylurea)s, Bioconj. Chem. 4 (2018) 
1006–1009.
[10] K.P. Miller, L. Wang, B.C. Benicewicz, A.W. Decho, Inorganic nanoparticles 
engineered to attack bacteria, Chem. Soc. Rev. 21 (2015) 7787–7807.
[11] W. Zhang, J. Song, R. Liang, X. Zheng, J. Chen, G. Li, B. Zhang, X. Yan, R. Wang, 
A nanomaterial targeting the spike protein captures SARS-CoV-2 variants and 
promotes viral elimination, Bioconj. Chem. 9 (2022) 993–1003.
[12] J. Li, J.J. Zhu, K. Xu, Fluorescent metal nanoclusters: from synthesis to 
applications, Trends Anal. Chem. 58 (2014) 90–98.
[13] L.B. Zhang, E.K. Wang, Metal nanoclusters: new fluorescent probes for sensors 
and bioimaging, Nano Today 1 (2014) 132–157.
[14] Y. Zhao, Y. Tian, Y. Cui, W. Liu, W. Ma, X. Jiang, Small molecule-capped gold 
nanoparticles as potent antibacterial agents that target gram-negative bacteria, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 35 (2010) 12349–12356.
[15] J. Zheng, P.R. Nicovich, R.M. Dickson, In highly fluorescent noble-metal quantum 
dots, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 3 (2011) 1963–1970.
[16] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, J.Y. Ying, Protein-directed synthesis of highly fluorescent gold 
nanoclusters, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 3 (2009) 888–889.
[17] Y. Zheng, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Protein-directed synthesis of highly fluorescent gold 
nanoclusters, Chin. Chem. Lett. 31 (2020) 3183–3189.
[18] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Antimicrobial gold nanoclusters, ACS 
Nano 7 (2017) 6904–6910.
[19] R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou, Y. Chen, Atomically precise colloidal metal nanoclusters 
and nanoparticles: fundamentals and opportunities, Chem. Rev. 116 (2016) 
10346–10413.
[20] K. Zheng, J. Xie, Cluster materials as traceable antibacterial agents, Acc. Mater. 
Res. 2 (2021) 1104–1116.
[21] W. Chen, S. Chen, Oxygen electroreduction catalyzed by gold nanoclusters: strong 
core size effects, Angew. Chem. 24 (2009) 4450–4453.
[22] J. Liu, S. Li, Y. Fang, Z. Zhu, Boosting antibacterial activity with mesoporous 
silica nanoparticles supported silver nanoclusters, J. Colloid Interf Sci. 555 (2019) 
470–479.
[23] H. Duan, S. Nie, Etching colloidal gold nanocrystals with hyperbranched and 
multivalent polymers: a new route to fluorescent and water-soluble atomic 
clusters, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 9 (2007) 2412–2413.
[24] H.H. Wang, C.A.J. Lin, C.H. Lee, Y.C. Lin, Y.M. Tseng, C.L. Hsieh, C.H. Chen, C. 
H. Tsai, C.T. Hsieh, J.L. Shen, W.H. Chan, W.H. Chang, H.I. Yeh, Fluorescent gold 
nanoclusters as a biocompatible marker for in vitro and in vivo tracking of 
endothelial cells, ACS Nano 6 (2011) 4337–4344.
[25] A.C. Thomas, Blue emitting gold nanoclusters templated by poly-cytosine DNA at 
low pH and poly-adenine DNA at neutral pH, Chem. Commun. 54 (2012) 
6845–6847.
[26] G. Liu, Y. Shao, F. Wu, S.J. Xu, J. Peng, L.L. Liu, DNA-hosted fluorescent gold 
nanoclusters: sequence-dependent formation, Nanotechnology 1 (2012) 015503.
[27] G. Liu, Y. Shao, K. Ma, Q.H. Cui, F. Wu, S.J. Xu, Synthesis of DNA-templated 
fluorescent gold nanoclusters, Gold Bull. 45 (2012) 69–74.
[28] Y.P. Bao, C. Zhong, D.M. Vu, J.P. Temirov, D.R. Brian, J.S. Martinez, 
Nanoparticle-free synthesis of fluorescent gold nanoclusters at physiological 
temperature, J. Phys. Chem. C 33 (2007) 12194–12198.
[29] S. Link, A. Beeby, S. FitzGerald, M.A.E. Sayed, T.G. Schaaff, R.L. Whetten, Visible 
to infrared luminescence from a 28-atom gold cluster, J. Phys. Chem. B 13 (2002) 
3410–3415.
[30] Y. Zheng, W. Liu, Z. Qin, Y. Chen, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Mercaptopyrimidine- 
conjugated gold nanoclusters as nanoantibiotics for combating multidrug- 
resistant superbugs, Bioconj. Chem. 9 (2018) 3094–3103.
[31] J.G. Wang, S.S. Jiang, D.S.H. Wong, S.S. Shieh, C.W. Wu, Soft-sensor development 
with adaptive variable selection using nonnegative garrote, Control Eng. Pract. 9 
(2013) 1157–1164.
[32] M.N. Wang, Z.Q. Yu, H. Feng, J.L. Wang, L.H. Wang, Y. Zhang, L.H. Yin, Y. Du, 
H. Jiang, X.M. Wang, J.H. Zhou, In situ biosynthesized gold nanoclusters 
inhibiting cancer development via the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway, J. Mater. 
Chem. B 35 (2019) 5336–5344.
[33] Z. Guo, J. Zeng, W. Liu, Y. Chen, H. Jiang, Y. Weizmann, X. Wang, Formation of 
bio-responsive nanocomposites for targeted bacterial bioimaging and 
disinfection, Chem. Eng. J. 426 (2021) 130726.
[34] J. Zeng, Z. Guo, Y. Wang, Z.J. Qin, Y. Ma, H. Jiang, Y. Weizmann, X. Wang, 
Intelligent bio-assembly imaging-guided platform for real-time bacteria 
sterilizing and infectious therapy, Nano Res. 15 (2022) 4164.
[35] Z. Guo, J. Xiao, W. Liu, Y. Wang, T. Liu, H. Jiang, X.H. Liu, X.M. Wang, Cationic 
porphyrin-based nanoparticles assisted with bio-assembly imaging-guided 
strategy for efficient inactivation of bacteria and promote wound healing, Chem. 
Eng. J. 457 (2023) 141218.
[36] M.N. Wang, Y. Chen, W.J. Cai, H. Feng, T.Y. Du, W.W. Liu, H. Jiang, 
A. Pasquarelli, Y. Weizmann, X.M. Wang, In situ self-assembling Au-DNA 
complexes for targeted cancer bioimaging and inhibition, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 1 
(2020) 308–316.
[37] F. Semcheddine, E.I.G. Nida, W.W. Liu, L. Tayyaba, H. Gang, X.M. Jiang, Xie, 
Rapid and label-free cancer theranostics via in situ bio-self-assembled DNA-gold 
nanostructures loaded exosomes, Mater. Horiz. 10 (2021) 2771–2784.
[38] C.Q. Peng, M.X. Yu, J. Zheng, In situ ligand-directed growth of gold nanoparticles 
in biological tissues, Nano Lett. 2 (2019) 1378–1382.
[39] T. Sun, K. Seff, Silver clusters and chemistry in zeolites, Chem. Rev. Chem. Rev. 4 
(1994) 857–870.
[40] Y. Zheng, J.Y. Ying, Protein-directed synthesis of highly fluorescent gold 
nanoclusters, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 3 (2009) 888–889.
[41] Z. Wu, M.A. MacDonald, J. Chen, P. Zhang, R.C. Jin, Kinetic control and 
thermodynamic selection in the synthesis of atomically precise gold nanoclusters, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 25 (2011) 9670–9673.
[42] Z. Shen, H. Duan, H. Frey, Water-soluble fluorescent Ag nanoclusters obtained 
from multiarm star poly (acrylic acid) as “molecular hydrogel” templates, Adv. 
Mater. 19 (2007) 349–352.
[43] J. Zheng, J.T. Petty, R.M. Dickson, High quantum yield blue emission from water- 
soluble Au8 nanodots, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003) 7780–7781.
[44] J. Zheng, R.M. Dickson, Individual water-soluble dendrimer-encapsulated silver 
nanodot fluorescence, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124 (2002) 13982–13983.
[45] J.I. Zhang, S.H. Xu, E. Kumacheva, Photogeneration of fluorescent silver 
nanoclusters in polymer microgels, Adv. Mater. 17 (2005) 2336–2340.
[46] E. Hao, K.L. Kelly, J.T. Hupp, G.C. Schatz, Synthesis and optical properties of 
anisotropic metal nanoparticles, Chem. Soc. 51 (2002) 15182–15183.
[47] Z. Shen, H. Duan, H. Frey, Water-soluble fluorescent Ag nanoclusters obtained 
from multiarm star poly (acrylic acid) as “molecular hydrogel” templates, Adv. 
Mater. 3 (2007) 349–352.
[48] K. Yonesato, H. Ito, H. Itakura, D. Yokogawa, T. Kikuchi, N. Mizuno, 
K. Yamaguchi, K. Suzuki, Controlled assembly synthesis of atomically precise 
ultrastable silver nanoclusters with polyoxometalates, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 50 
(2019) 19550–19554.
[49] Z.E. Huma, A. Gupta, I. Javed, R. Das, S.Z. Hussain, S. Mumtaz, I. Hussain, V. 
M. Rotello, Cationic silver nanoclusters as potent antimicrobials against 
multidrug-resistant bacteria, ACS Omega 3 (2018) 16721–16727.
[50] Z. Luo, K. Zheng, J.P. Xie, Engineering ultrasmall water-soluble gold and silver 
nanoclusters for biomedical applications, Chem. Commun. 50 (2014) 5143–5155.
[51] C. Guo, J. Irudayaraj, Fluorescent Ag clusters via a protein-directed approach as a 
Hg (II) ion sensor, Anal. Chem. 83 (2011) 2883–2889.
[52] S. Ghosh, U. Anand, S. Mukherjee, Luminescent silver nanoclusters acting as a 
label-free photoswitch in metal ion sensing, Anal. Chem. 86 (2014) 3188–3194.
[53] B. Li, J. Li, J. Zhao, Silver nanoclusters emitting weak NIR fluorescence 
biomineralized by BSA, Spectrochimi. Acta A 134 (2015) 40–47.
[54] T.Y. Zhou, Y.H. Huang, W.B. Li, Z.M.C.F. Luo, C.J. Yang, X. Chen, Facile synthesis 
of red-emitting lysozyme-stabilized Ag nanoclusters, Nanoscale 4 (2012) 
5312–5315.
[55] I.H. Lee, B. Ahn, J.M. Lee, C.S. Lee, Y.W. Jung, A facile synthesis of fluorescent 
silver nanoclusters with human ferritin as a synthetic and interfacing ligand, 
Analyst 140 (2015) 3543–3550.
[56] T.G. Schaaff, G. Knight, M.N. Shafigullin, R.F. Borkman, R.L. Whetten, Isolation 
and selected properties of a 10.4 kDa gold: glutathione cluster compound, J. Phys. 
Chem. B 102 (1998) 10643–10646.
[57] Y. Yu, Z. Luo, Y. Yu, J.Y. Lee, J.P. Xie, Observation of cluster size growth in CO- 
directed synthesis of Au25 (SR) 18 nanoclusters, ACS Nano 6 (2012) 7920–7929.
[58] M. Sathishkumar, K. Sneha, S.W. Won, C.W. Cho, S. Kim, Y.S. Yun, Cinnamon 
zeylanicum bark extract and powder mediated green synthesis of nano-crystalline 
silver particles and its bactericidal activity, Colloid. Surf. B 73 (2009) 332–338.
[59] A. Ebrahiminezhad, Y. Ghasemi, S.R. Amini, J. Barar, S. Davaran, Impact of 
amino-acid coating on the synthesis and characteristics of iron-oxide 
nanoparticles (IONs), Korean Chem. Soc. 33 (2012) 3957–3962.
[60] A. Ebrahiminezhad, S.R. Amini, S. Davaran, J. Barar, Y. Ghasemi, Impacts of iron 
oxide nanoparticles on the invasion power of Listeria monocytogenes, Curr. 
Nanosci. 10 (2014) 382–388.
[61] A. Ebrahiminezhad, Y. Ghasemi, S.R. Amini, J. Barar, S. Davaran, Preparation of 
novel magnetic fluorescent nanoparticles using amino acids, Colloid. Surf. B 102 
(2013) 534–539.
[62] A. Ebrahiminezhad, A. Berenjian, Y. Ghasemi, Template free synthesis of natural 
carbohydrates functionalised fluorescent silver nanoclusters, IET Nanobiotechnol. 
2 (2016) 120–123.
[63] Y. Lu, W. Wei, W. Chen, Copper nanoclusters: synthesis, characterization and 
properties, Chin. Sci. Bull. 57 (2016) 41–47.
[64] M. Zhao, L. Sun, R.M. Crooks, Preparation of Cu nanoclusters within dendrimer 
templates, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 19 (1988) 4877–4878.
[65] L. Balogh, D.A. Tomalia, Poly (amidoamine) dendrimer-templated 
nanocomposites. 1. Synthesis of zerovalent copper nanoclusters, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 29 (1988) 7355–7356.
[66] W. Wei, Y. Lu, W. Chen, S.W. Chen, One-pot synthesis, photoluminescence, and 
electrocatalytic properties of subnanometer-sized copper clusters, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 7 (2011) 2060–2063.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
18
[67] T. Chen, Y. Hu, Y. Cen, X. Chu, Y. Lu, A dual-emission fluorescent nanocomplex of 
gold-cluster-decorated silica particles for live cell imaging of highly reactive 
oxygen species, J. Am. Chem. 31 (2013) 11595–11602.
[68] N.V. Vidal, M.C. Blanco, M.A.L. Quintela, Electrochemical synthesis of very stable 
photoluminescent copper clusters, Indian J. Chem. A 38 (2010) 15924–15930.
[69] Y. Zheng, W. Liu, Y. Chen, C.M. Li, H. Jiang, X.M. Wang, Conjugating gold 
nanoclusters and antimicrobial peptides: from aggregation-induced emission to 
antibacterial synergy, J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 546 (2019) 1–10.
[70] W. Luo, C. Wang, J. Min, H.Y. Luo, Gold nanoclusters Cys-Au NCs as selective 
fluorescent probes for “on-off-on” detection of Fe3+ and ascorbic acid, RSC Adv. 
11 (2023) 7425–7431.
[71] G. Pramanik, J. Humpolickova, J. Valenta, P. Kundu, S. Bals, P. Bour, 
M. Dracinsky, Gold nanoclusters with bright near-infrared photoluminescence, 
Nanoscale 8 (2018) 3792–3798.
[72] Y. Chen, L. Ren, L. Sun, X. Bai, G.Q. Zhuang, B. Cao, G.Q. Hui, N.F. Zheng, S. 
J. Liu, Amphiphilic silver nanoclusters show active nano-bio interaction with 
compelling antibacterial activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria, NPG Asia 
Mater. 12 (2020) 56.
[73] J.C. Kuo, S.H. Tan, Y.C. Hsiao, C. Mutalik, H.M. Chen, S. Yougbare, T.R. Kuo, 
Unveiling the antibacterial mechanism of gold nanoclusters via in situ 
transmission electron microscopy, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 1 (2021) 464–471.
[74] W.Y. Chen, H.Y. Chang, J.K. Lu, Y.C. Huang, S.G. Harroun, Y.T. Tseng, Y.J. Li, C. 
C. Huang, H.T. Chang, Self-assembly of antimicrobial peptides on gold nanodots: 
against multidrug-resistant bacteria and wound-healing application, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 46 (2015) 7189–7199.
[75] S. Kalita, R. Kandimalla, A.C. Bhowal, J. Kotoky, S. Kundu, Functionalization of 
β-lactam antibiotic on lysozyme capped gold nanoclusters retrogress MRSA and 
its persisters following awakening, Sci. Rep.-UK 8 (2018) 5778.
[76] I. Sondi, S.B. Salopek, Silver nanoparticles as antimicrobial agent: a case study on 
E. coli as a model for Gram-negative bacteria, J. Collold Interf. Sci. 1 (2004) 
177–182.
[77] W.R. Li, X.B. Xie, Q.S. Shi, H.Y. Zeng, Y.S. Ou-Yang, Y.B. Chen, Antibacterial 
activity and mechanism of silver nanoparticles on Escherichia coli, Appl. 
Microbiol. Biot. 85 (2010) 1115–1122.
[78] E.T. Hwang, J.H. Lee, Y.J. Chae, Y.S. Kim, B.C. Kim, B.I. Sang, M.B. Gu, Analysis 
of the toxic mode of action of silver nanoparticles using stress-specific 
bioluminescent bacteria, Small 6 (2008) 746–750.
[79] S. Kaviya, J. Santhanalakshmi, B. Viswanathan, J. Muthumary, K. Srinivasan, 
Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using Citrus sinensis peel extract and its 
antibacterial activity, Spectrochim. Acta A 3 (2011) 594–598.
[80] M.I. Setyawati, X. Yuan, J. Xie, D.T. Leong, The influence of lysosomal stability of 
silver nanomaterials on their toxicity to human cells, Biomaterials 25 (2014) 
6707–6715.
[81] S. Javani, R. Lorca, A. Latorre, C. Flors, A.L. Cortajarena, A. Somoza, Antibacterial 
activity of DNA-stabilized silver nanoclusters tuned by oligonucleotide sequence, 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 16 (2016) 10147–10154.
[82] X. Yuan, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Ultrasmall Ag+-rich nanoclusters as 
highly efficient nanoreservoirs for bacteria killing, Nano Res. 7 (2014) 301–307.
[83] C.M. Ritchie, K.M. Johnsen, J.R. Kiser, Y. Antoku, R.M. Dickson, J.T. Petty, Ag 
nanocluster formation using a cytosine oligonucleotide template, Indian J. Chem. 
1 (2007) 175–181.
[84] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, T.P. Lim, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Antimicrobial cluster 
bombs: silver nanoclusters packed with daptomycin, ACS Nano 8 (2016) 
7934–7942.
[85] S. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Peng, X.M. Yang, Exploring the antibacteria performance of 
multicolor Ag, Au, and Cu nanoclusters, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8 (2019) 
8461–8469.
[86] J. Du, Y. Cong, X. Wang, Y.T. Kang, P.B. Zhang, L.D. Li, Green synthesis of 
antimicrobial peptide-protected silver nanoclusters with regulated antibacterial 
behavior, ACS Appl. Mater. 9 (2023) 3919–3926.
[87] J. Xia, W. Wang, X. Hai, Y. Shu, J.H. Wang, Improvement of antibacterial activity 
of copper nanoclusters for selective inhibition on the growth of gram-positive 
bacteria, Chin. Chem. Lett. 2 (2019) 421–424.
[88] S. Marrache, S. Dhar, Engineering of blended nanoparticle platform for delivery 
of mitochondria-acting therapeutics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109 (2012) 
16288–16293.
[89] M.P. Ryder, X. Wu, G.R. McKelvey, J. McGuire, K.F. Schilke, Binding interactions 
of bacterial lipopolysaccharide and the cationic amphiphilic peptides polymyxin 
B and WLBU2, Colloids Surf. B 120 (2014) 81–87.
[90] M. Wenzel, A.I. Chiriac, A. Otto, D. Zweytick, C. May, C. Schumacher, R. Gust, H. 
B. Albada, M. Penkova, U. Kr¨amer, R. Erdmann, N. Metzler-Nolte, S.K. Straus, 
E. Bremer, D. Becher, H. Br¨otz-Oesterhelt, H.-G. Sahl, J.E. Bandow, Small cationic 
antimicrobial peptides delocalize peripheral membrane proteins, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 111 (2014) 1409–1418.
[91] C. Ratledge, S.G. Wilkinson, Microbial Lipids, vol. 1, Academic Press, London, 
1988.
[92] A.J. Verkleij, R.F.A. Zwaal, B. Roelofsen, P. Comfurius, D. Kastelijn, L.L.M. 
V. Deenen, The asymmetric distribution of phospholipids in the human red cell 
membrane. A combined study using phospholipases and freeze-etch electron 
microscopy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 323 (1973) 178–193.
[93] K. Matsuzaki, Control of cell selectivity of antimicrobial peptides, Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta 1788 (2009) 1687–1692.
[94] A. Som, G.N. Tew, Influence of lipid composition on membrane activity of 
antimicrobial phenylene ethynylene oligomers, J. Phys. Chem. B 112 (2008) 
3495–3502.
[95] C. Zhu, Q. Yang, L. Liu, F. Lv, S. Li, G. Yang, S. Wang, Multifunctional cationic 
poly(p-phenylene vinylene) polyelectrolytes for selective recognition, imaging, 
and killing of bacteria over mammalian cells, Adv. Mater. 23 (2011) 4805–4810.
[96] K. Matsuzaki, K. Sugishita, N. Fujii, K. Miyajima, Molecular basis for membrane 
selectivity of an antimicrobial peptide, magainin-2, Biochemistry 34 (1995) 
3423–3429.
[97] Y. Niu, T. Ding, J. Liu, J.L. Zhang, L.L. Tong, X.F. Cheng, Y.M. Yang, Z.Z. Chen, 
Fluorescence switch of gold nanoclusters stabilized with bovine serum albumin 
for efficient and sensitive detection of cysteine and copper ion in mice with 
Alzheimer’s disease, Talanta 223 (2021) 121745.
[98] Q. Sha, B. Sun, C. Yi, R.X. Guan, J. Fei, Z.Y. Hu, B.F. Liu, X. Liu, A fluorescence 
turn-on biosensor based on transferrin encapsulated gold nanoclusters for 5-hy­
droxytryptamine detection, Sensor. Actuat. B-Chem. 294 (2019) 177–184.
[99] H. Jiang, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, Single cytidine units-templated syntheses of multi- 
colored water-soluble Au nanoclusters, Nanoscale 17 (2014) 10355–10362.
[100] P.H. Chan, Y.C. Chen, Human serum albumin stabilized gold nanoclusters as 
selective luminescent probes for Staphylococcus aureus and methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus, Anal. Chem. 84 (2012) 8952–8956.
[101] P.C. Liu, Cross-linked proteins with gold nanoclusters: a dual-purpose pH- 
responsive material for controllable cell imaging and antibiotic delivery, Part. 
Part. Syst. Char. 32 (2015) 749–755.
[102] D. Pranantyo, P. Liu, W.B. Zhong, E.T. Kang, M.B.C. Park, Antimicrobial peptide- 
reduced gold nanoclusters with charge-reversal moieties for bacterial targeting 
and imaging, Biomacromolecules 20 (2019) 2922–2933.
[103] R. Mukherji, A. Samanta, R. Illathvalappil, S. Chowdury, A. Prabhune, R.N. Devi, 
Selective imaging of quorum sensing receptors in bacteria using fluorescent Au 
nanocluster probes surface functionalized with signal molecules, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Inter. 5 (2013) 13076–13081.
[104] C.C. Huang, C.T. Chen, Y.C. Shiang, Z.H. Lin, H.T. Chang, Synthesis of fluorescent 
carbohydrate-protected au nanodots for detection of concanavalin A and 
Escherichia coli, Anal. Chem. 81 (2009) 875–882.
[105] Y.T. Tseng, H.T. Chang, C.T. Chen, C.H. Chen, C.C. Huang, Preparation of highly 
luminescent mannose-gold nanodots for detection and inhibition of growth of 
Escherichia coli, Biosens. Bioelectron. 27 (2011) 95–100.
[106] J. Liu, L. Lu, S. Xu, L.Y. Wang, One-pot synthesis of gold nanoclusters with bright 
red fluorescence and good biorecognition abilities for visualization fluorescence 
enhancement detection of E. coli, Talanta 134 (2015) 54–59.
[107] J. Tang, H. Shi, G. Ma, L.P. Luo, Z.H. Tang, Ultrasmall Au and Ag nanoclusters for 
biomedical applications: a review, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8 (2020) 1019.
[108] M. Yang, X. Chen, L. Zhu, S.H. Lin, C.W. Li, X.Y. Li, K.L. Huang, W.T. Xu, 
Aptamer-functionalized DNA-Silver nanocluster nanofilm for visual detection and 
elimination of bacteria, ACS Appl. Mater. Interf. 13 (2021) 38647–38655.
[109] S. Dou, M. Liu, F. Zhang, B.X. Li, Y.H. Zhang, F.L. Li, Y.M. Guo, X. Sun, Silver/ 
copper bimetallic nanoclusters integrating with cryonase-assisted target recycling 
amplification detection of Salmonella typhimurium, Microchim. Acta 190 (2023) 
403.
[110] L. Chen, J. Lu, M. Luo, H. Yu, X.J. Chen, J.G. Deng, X.T. Hou, E. Hao, J.C. Wei, 
P. Li, A ratiometric fluorescent sensing system for the selective and ultrasensitive 
detection of pesticide residues via the synergetic effects of copper nanoclusters 
and carbon quantum dots, Food Chem. 379 (2022) 132139.
[111] L. Ma, J. Wang, Y. Li, D. Liao, W.L. Zhuang, X. Han, S.L. Man, A ratiometric 
fluorescent biosensing platform for ultrasensitive detection of Salmonella 
typhimurium via CRISPR/Cas12a and silver nanoclusters, J. Hazard. Mater. 443 
(2023) 130234.
[112] H. Kawasaki, Y. Kosaka, Y. Myoujin, K. Narushima, T. Yonezawa, R. Arakawa, 
Microwave-assisted polyol synthesis of copper nanocrystals without using 
additional protective agents, Chem. Commun. 47 (2011) 7740–7742.
[113] A. Rotaru, S. Dutta, E. Jentzsch, K. Gothelf, A. Mokhir, Selective dsDNA- 
templated formation of copper nanoparticles in solution, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
49 (2010) 5665–5667.
[114] J. Lian, Q. Liu, Y. Jian, B.X. Li, Histone–DNA interaction: an effective approach to 
improve the fluorescence intensity and stability of DNA-templated Cu 
nanoclusters, Chem. Commun. 53 (2017) 12568–12571.
[115] P. Maity, S. Yamazoe, T. Tsukuda, Dendrimer-encapsulated copper cluster as a 
chemoselective and regenerable hydrogenation catalyst, ACS Catal. 3 (2013) 
182–185.
[116] X. Yang, Y. Feng, S. Zhu, Y.W. Luo, Y. Zhuo, Y. Dou, One-step synthesis and 
applications of fluorescent Cu nanoclusters stabilized by L-cysteine in aqueous 
solution, Anal. Chim. Acta 847 (2014) 49–54.
[117] J.N. Heins, J.R. Suriano, H. Taniuchi, C.B. Anfinsen, Characterization of a 
nuclease produced by Staphylococcus aureus, J. Biol. Chem. 242 (1967) 
1016–1020.
[118] M.E. Olson, T.K. Nygaard, L. Ackermann, R.L. Watkins, O.W. Zurek, K.B. Pallister, 
S. Griffith, M.R. Kiedrowski, C.E. Flack, J.S. Kavanaugh, B.N. Kreiswirth, A. 
R. Horswill, J.M. Voyich, Staphylococcus aureus Nuclease is an SaeRS-dependent 
virulence factor, Infect. Immun. 81 (2013) 1316–1324.
[119] T. Qing, C. Long, X. Wang, K. Zhang, P. Zhang, B. Feng, Detection of micrococcal 
nuclease for identifying Staphylococcus aureus based on DNA templated 
fluorescent copper nanoclusters, Microchim. Acta 186 (2019) 248.
[120] S. Song, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, X.D. Yang, Z.Q. Wen, M.H. Yang, Q. Lin, pH-responsive 
copper-cluster-based dual-emission ratiometric fluorescent probe for imaging of 
bacterial metabolism, Talanta 221 (2021) 121621.
[121] Y. Wang, R. Cai, C. Chen, The nano-bio interactions of nanomedicines: 
understanding the biochemical driving forces and redox reactions, Acc. Chem. 
Res. 52 (2019) 1507–1518.
W. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

Chemical Engineering Journal 506 (2025) 159977
19
[122] X. Yang, M. Yang, B. Pang, M. Vara, Y. Xia, Gold nanomaterials at work in 
biomedicine, Chem. Rev. 115 (2015) 10410–10488.
[123] X.D. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Shen, P.X. Liu, F.Y. Fan, S.J. Fan, In vivo renal clearance, 
biodistribution, toxicity of gold nanoclusters, Biomaterials 33 (2012) 4628–4638.
[124] M.I. Setyawati, C.Y. Tay, S.L. Chia, S.L. Goh, W. Fang, M.J. Neo, H.C. Chong, S. 
M. Tan, S.C. Loo, K.W. Ng, J. Xie, C.N. Ong, N.S. Tan, D.T. Leong, Titanium 
dioxide nanomaterials cause endothelial cell leakiness by disrupting the 
homophilic interaction of VE-cadherin, Nat. Commun. 4 (2013) 1673.
[125] Z. Guo, H. Jiang, A. Song, X. Liu, X. Wang, Progress and challenges in bacterial 
infection theranostics based on functional metal nanoparticles, Adv. Colloid 
Interf. 332 (2024) 103265.
[126] M.I. Setyawati, C.Y. Tay, B.H. Bay, D.T. Leong, Gold nanoparticles induced 
endothelial leakiness depends on particle size and endothelial cell origin, ACS 
Nano 11 (2017) 5020–5030.
[127] J. Wang, L. Zhang, F. Peng, X. Shi, D.T. Leong, Targeting endothelial cell 
junctions with negatively charged gold nanoparticles, Chem. Mater. 30 (2018) 
3759–3767.
[128] F. Peng, M.I. Setyawati, J.K. Tee, X. Ding, J. Wang, M.E. Nga, H.K. Ho, D.T. Leong, 
Nanoparticles promote in vivo breast cancer cell intravasation and extravasation 
by inducing endothelial leakiness, Nat. Nanotechnol. 14 (2019) 279–286.
W. Li et al.