Carrier-free nanoassembly with dual antioxidant and anti-inflammatory 
activities camouflaged by melanoma cell membrane for tau-targeted 
therapy of Alzheimer's disease
Rui Xue a,1, Fengyu Wang a,1, Beibei Zhang c, Jin Wu b,*, Ningnannan Zhang a,**,  
Chunyang Sun a,***
a Department of Radiology & Tianjin Key Lab of Functional Imaging, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, 300052, PR China
b Military Medical Sciences Academy, Academy of Military Sciences, Tianjin, 300050, PR China
c Department of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450002, PR China
A B S T R A C T
Targeting phosphorylated tau (p-tau) across the blood–brain barrier (BBB) represents a critical prerequisite for attenuating tau pathology and disease progression in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) by alleviating oxidative stress and neuroinflammation. To address this challenge, we developed a novel carrier-free selenium-based 
nanoassembly stabilized by hydroxyl-rich fingolimod (FTY720), a sphingosine analogue. Following camouflaging with melanoma cell membranes and further 
functionalizing with T807, the resulting nanocomposite (FSMT) demonstrated robust capacity for BBB crossing and target p-tau both in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, 
FTY720 and nano-selenium exert remarkable antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects by modulating the GSK-3β and NF-κB signaling pathways, respectively, 
thereby attenuating tau hyperphosphorylation and preventing neuronal cell death. In an okadaic acid-induced AD mouse model, the FSMT treatment not only 
significantly ameliorated oxidative stress and neuroinflammation, but also improved spatial learning and memory impairments. The reduction in abnormal tau 
aggregation following treatment was confirmed by PET-CT imaging. Overall, this p-tau-targeted biomimetic nanocomposite demonstrated excellent biocompatibility 
and therapeutic efficacy, presenting a translatable strategy for treating AD and other neurological disorders through analogous mechanisms.
1. Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the progressive decline 
in cognitive function and is one of the most prevalent age-related 
neurodegenerative disorders [1]. It is estimated that over 55 million 
people worldwide are currently living with AD or other dementia, a 
number that is rapidly increasing [2]. This growth contributes to AD's 
substantial economic and social burden on a global scale. The hallmark 
pathological features of AD primarily include amyloid-beta (Aβ) depo­
sition and the formation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), which are 
composed of hyperphosphorylated tau (p-tau) protein [3,4]. Therapeu­
tic strategies for AD have generally focused on these two pathological 
features. However, nearly all promising drug candidates targeting 
Aβ-related pathological sites have failed to produce satisfactory out­
comes in clinical trials [5–7]. In the brains of AD patients, tau hyper­
phosphorylation leads to its detachment from microtubules and 
aggregation into NFTs, a central event in the pathological progression of 
AD that ultimately results in neuronal dysfunction [8]. Pioneering 
studies have demonstrated that tau-related pathology is closely linked to 
cognitive decline and memory impairment in patients [9]. Since 
oxidative stress damage associated with AD can be mitigated by 
reducing p-tau protein levels, tau-targeted therapies are anticipated to 
provide more direct and effective benefits than Aβ-targeted therapies 
[10,11]. Given these findings, targeting p-tau protein and inhibiting its 
phosphorylation process hold great potential as a more effective thera­
peutic approach for AD.
Tau hyperphosphorylation is closely linked to oxidative stress and 
neuroinflammation. Oxidative stress activates specific kinases that 
regulate tau phosphorylation, leading to its hyperphosphorylation [12,
13]. The free radicals generated by oxidative stress can further directly 
interact with tau, promoting the formation of tau oligomers that are 
more prone to aggregation, thereby facilitating NFT formation [14]. 
Neuroinflammation also plays a critical role in the progression of AD. 
Specifically, the nuclear factor kappa-light chain enhancer of activated B 
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.
*** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: wujinlch@163.com (J. Wu), znnn2010@sina.com (N. Zhang), chysun@tmu.edu.cn (C. Sun). 
1 These authors have contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biomaterials
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biomaterials
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2025.123970
Received 17 September 2025; Received in revised form 11 December 2025; Accepted 30 December 2025  
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
Available online 31 December 2025 
0142-9612/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

cells (NF-κB) signaling pathway acts as a key regulator, facilitating 
microglial polarization toward the pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype [15,
16]. This polarization leads to the release of inflammatory cytokines, 
which exacerbate neuronal damage by enhancing tau hyper­
phosphorylation [17]. Consequently, therapeutic strategies targeting 
p-tau may benefit from combining antioxidant and anti-inflammatory 
approaches.
Selenium, an essential trace element in the human body, plays a vital 
role in antioxidant defense by selenoproteins, such as glutathione 
peroxidase, which maintain redox homeostasis and protect cells from 
oxidative damage [18,19]. Selenium is also involved in regulating im­
mune responses and alleviating chronic inflammation by modulating the 
expression of inflammatory genes and signal transduction pathways in 
activated macrophages [20]. To date, selenium nanoparticles have 
emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy for treating neurological 
disorders (e.g., AD, Parkinson's disease, and spinal cord injury), owing to 
their enhanced bioactivity, improved bioavailability and low toxicity 
[21–23]. Unfortunately, conventional methods for synthesizing sele­
nium nanoparticles typically utilize hydroxyl-rich polysaccharides as 
stabilizers, which makes it difficult to encapsulate small-molecular 
cargoes and consequently limits their applicability in combination 
therapies [24,25]. Fingolimod (FTY720), a sphingosine analogue and 
S1P receptor modulator, has been shown to mitigate AD progression 
through neuroprotective effects, including the regulation of neuro­
genesis, inflammation, and apoptosis [26,27]. More importantly, the 
abundant hydroxyl groups of FTY720 suggests its potential as a stabi­
lizer for synthesizing a carrier-free selenium-containing nanoassembly 
to enhance AD therapy via synergistic mechanisms.
Realizing precise and effective drug delivery to neurons and glial 
cells presents another major challenge for AD therapy, as the blood- 
brain barrier (BBB) hinders the entry of commonly used therapeutic 
agents into the brain parenchyma [28,29]. Fortunately, the intrinsic BBB 
penetration of brain metastatic cancer cells has inspired the develop­
ment of biomimetic nanoparticles camouflaged with their membranes to 
promote drug delivery to intracranial AD lesions [30,31]. These nano­
carriers can efficiently bypass the BBB by disrupting tight junctions in 
cerebrovascular endothelial cells, interacting with endothelial adhesion 
molecules, or exploiting transport channels on endothelial cells [30–33]. 
The B16F10 melanoma cell line is a well-established model for studying 
brain metastasis in animal models [34,35]. Its commercial availability, 
standard culture requirements, and rapid proliferation enable efficient 
cell membrane preparation. Moreover, the AD model is commonly 
established in C57BL/6J mice, and the B16F10 cell line, derived from 
this strain, is well-suited for AD therapy.
In this study, we constructed a carrier-free nanoassembly camou­
flaged with B16F10 melanoma cell membranes and further functional­
ized with T807, an active targeting ligand for p-tau that is currently 
applied in clinical PET imaging (Scheme 1) [36,37]. The functional 
nanoscale 
FSMT, 
which 
demonstrates 
both 
antioxidant 
and 
anti-inflammatory properties, is synthesized via a mild, facile, one-step 
reduction reaction between SeO3
2−
and FTY720. Following i.v. in­
jections, the obtained FSMT successfully crossed the BBB and precisely 
targeted neuronal p-tau protein. Within neurons, the FTY720 and sele­
nium of FSMT alleviated oxidative stress and inflammatory damage by 
modulating the GSK-3β and NF-κB signaling pathways. This modulation 
showed remarkable therapeutic potential against AD by reducing tau 
hyperphosphorylation and prevents neuronal death. Moreover, FSMT 
facilitated microglial polarization toward the anti-inflammatory M2 
phenotype, thereby alleviating neuroinflammation. Both in vitro and in 
vivo experiments demonstrated that FSMT inhibited tau phosphorylation 
and considerably improved spatial learning and memory deficits in AD 
model mice. In contrast to reported nanomedicines for combinatorial 
strategies in AD therapy through anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and 
anti-tau phosphorylation pathways, our system features a carrier-free 
Scheme 1. Fabrication of the tau-targeted biomimetic FSMT and its anti-AD mechanisms.
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
2 

and facile-to-synthesize design (Table S1) [4,11,21,36,38–43]. Addi­
tionally, it demonstrates autonomous BBB penetration and specific tar­
geting of p-tau following intravenous administration. Such strategy 
offers new avenues for tau-targeting AD therapy through enabling active 
and precise drug delivery.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Synthesis of selenium nanoparticles functionalized with various 
stabilizing agents
FTY720-stabilized selenium nanoassembly (FS) was prepared by 
mixing Na2SeO3 solution (2 mg/mL, 2 mL) with FTY720 solution (16 
mg/mL, 1 mL), followed by dropwise adding to ascorbic acid solution 
(1.5 mg/mL, 27 mL) under stirring. The mixture was continuously 
stirred for 24 h and the resulting nanoparticles were obtained by 
centrifugation at 11,000 rpm for 10 min.
Chitosan-stabilized selenium nanoparticles (CS) were synthesized 
following a previously reported procedure [24]. Cy5.5-labeled FS 
(Cy5.5FS) was synthesized by adding 0.5 mL of sulfo-Cy5.5 amine 
aqueous solution (1 mg/mL) to the mixture of Na2SeO3 and FTY720 
before reacting with ascorbic acid.
2.2. Isolation of B16F10 cell membranes
B16F10 cells were digested using non-enzy cell detach solution 
(Applygen, China) and collected. After being washed with PBS twice, the 
cells were resuspended in membrane protein extraction buffer (Beyo­
time, China) and incubated on ice for 15 min. The cell suspension was 
then transferred to a pre-chilled glass homogenizer placed in an ice bath, 
followed by homogenization for approximately 20 cycles. Subsequently, 
the mixture was centrifuged at 700 g for 10 min at 4 ◦C and the resulting 
supernatant was further centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min at 4 ◦C. The 
precipitate was collected and stored at −80 ◦C.
To obtain fluorescently labeled B16F10 cell membranes, cells were 
incubated with medium containing 10 μM DiI or DiD for 30 min prior to 
cell collection. Subsequent procedures were carried out as described 
above.
2.3. Fabrication of biomimetic nanoparticles
For B16F10 cell membrane cloaking, the extracted cell membrane 
fragments were first extruded sequentially through 800 nm (10 passes) 
and 400 nm (10 passes) polycarbonate membranes using a lipid extruder 
(Avanti Polar Lipids 610017-1Ea, USA). The resulting membranes were 
then mixed with CS or FS at a weight ratio of 1:1 and subjected to further 
extrusion through a 400 nm polycarbonate membrane for eight passes to 
obtain CSM or FSM.
T807-modified nanoparticles (FSMT) were prepared by the lipid- 
insertion method. Briefly, DSPE-PEG2000-T807 (0.5 mg) dissolved in 
DMSO was added into the solution of FSM (equivalent [Se] = 0.05 mg/ 
mL, 5 mL) and stirred at rt for 12 h. The resulting solution was centri­
fuged at 11,000 rpm for 10 min to obtain FSMT.
2.4. Characterization of surface modification of FSMT
To verify the proteins retained on the surface of FSMT, we quantified 
the total protein content of B16F10 cell lysate, B16F10 cell membrane 
fragments, and FSMT using a BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime, China). 
Equal amounts of protein samples were heated at 95 ◦C for 15 min and 
then loaded onto a 10 % SDS-polyacrylamide gel. Proteins were visu­
alized using Coomassie blue fast staining solution, followed by 
destaining with ddH2O until the background was clear. For western 
blotting (WB) analysis, the separated proteins were transferred to pol­
yvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes and blocked for 10 min. The 
membranes were then treated with primary antibodies against gp100 or 
CD44. Afterward, the membranes were incubated with goat anti-rabbit 
IgG H&L secondary antibodies to enable specific binding to the corre­
sponding primary antibodies. Protein bands were visualized using an 
enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) detection reagent (Biosharp, 
China), and the images were captured using a BioImaging system (Bio- 
Rad ChemiDoc XRS+, USA) for analysis.
To evaluate the successful decoration of T807 on cell membranes in 
FSMT, FSMDiI/FITC was synthesized by mixing and stirring DSPE- 
PEG2000-FITC with DiI-labeled FSM in the same manner. The colocali­
zation of DiI-labeled FSM and DSPE-PEG2000-FITC was subsequently 
observed using a confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) (Zeiss 
LSM900, Germany).
2.5. Determination of antioxidant enzyme-like activity
For the superoxide dismutase (SOD)-like activity assay, an SOD assay 
kit (Beyotime, China) was used. Specifically, 160 μL of WST-8 working 
solution was added to 20 μL of PBS, FTY720, CS, FS, FSM, or FSMT 
(equivalent [Se] = 12 μg/mL), or to FSMT dispersions at varying con­
centrations (equivalent [Se] = 0, 3, 6, 12 μg/mL). Subsequently, 20 μL of 
the starting working solution was added. The reaction mixture was 
incubated at 37 ◦C for 30 min, and the absorption spectrum was recor­
ded in the range of 400–700 nm using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer 
(Shimadzu UV-3600, Japan).
For the catalase (CAT)-like activity assay, the fluorescence of 2- 
hydroxyterephthalic acid (HTA) was assessed. Specifically, 0.4 mM 
H2O2 was mixed with PBS, FTY720, CS, FS, FSM, or FSMT (equivalent 
[Se] = 12 μg/mL), and incubated at 37 ◦C for 1 h. Then, 10 mM TA was 
added, and the reaction was continued for another hour. Fluorescence 
was measured using a spectrophotometer with excitation at 320 nm and 
emission at 425 nm.
For the peroxidase (POD)-like activity assay, a POD activity assay kit 
(Solarbio, China) was used. According to the manufacturer's in­
structions, the absorption spectra from 300 to 700 nm were recorded 
using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer after mixing the nanoparticles with 
the working solution.
2.6. P-tau targeting and microglial polarization modulation of FSMT
To assess the uptake of FSMT in OA-treated cells, HT-22 cells were 
seeded at a density of 1 × 105 cells per dish in confocal dishes (YA0572, 
Solarbio) and incubated for 24 h. The culture medium was then replaced 
with fresh medium containing 40 nM OA, and the cells were incubated 
for an additional 24 h. DiD-labeled FSM (FSMDiD) or FSMT (FSMTDiD) 
(equivalent [Se] = 8 μg/mL) was subsequently added, and the cells were 
incubated for 4 h. Following incubation, the cells were washed three 
times with PBS, fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 10 min, and per­
meabilized with 0.2 % Triton X-100 for 10 min. After incubation with a 
blocking solution (Beyotime, China) for 10 min, the cells were incubated 
with anti-p-tau (S396) antibody overnight at 4 ◦C. Afterward, the cells 
were washed with PBS three times and incubated with an Alexa Fluor 
488 conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at rt. Followed by washing 
with PBS three times again, the samples were stained with DAPI for 3 
min. Finally, the cells were mounted using an anti-fade mounting so­
lution, and intracellular fluorescence was visualized using CLSM.
To investigate the regulatory effects of nanoparticles on microglial 
polarization, mouse microglia BV-2 cells were seeded in confocal dishes 
at a density of 1 × 105 cells per dish and incubated for 24 h. The culture 
medium was then replaced with fresh medium containing 40 nM OA, 
and the cells were incubated for an additional 12 h. PBS, FTY720, CS, 
CSM, FS, FSM, or FSMT (equivalent [Se] = 8 μg/mL) was then added to 
the dishes, and the cells were incubated for another 12 h. After incu­
bation, the culture medium was collected, and the expression levels of 
inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6) and the anti-inflammatory cyto­
kine (IL-10) in each group were quantified using ELISA. Simultaneously, 
cells were fixed, permeabilized, and blocked before being incubated 
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
3 

overnight at 4 ◦C with either anti-CD16+CD32 or anti-CD206 antibody. 
Subsequent procedures were performed described previously. Fluores­
cence signals were then detected and quantified using both CLSM and 
flow cytometry.
To investigate the role of FSMT in microglial phenotype switching in 
vivo, AD model mice were administered systemic treatments of PBS, FS, 
CS, CSM, FS, FSM or FSMT. The brain tissues were subsequently 
dissected, fixed, dehydrated, and sectioned into frozen slices. The sec­
tions were then incubated with either anti-CD16+CD32 or anti-CD206 
antibody, following the abovementioned method. Representative fluo­
rescence images were acquired using CLSM to analyze the microglial 
polarization status.
2.7. Transport across BBB
A BBB model was established using Transwell plates (Corning 3402, 
USA) based on previous reports [44]. Briefly, bEnd.3 cells were seeded 
at a density of 1 × 104 cells per insert on the apical side of the Transwell 
membrane. After 5 days of incubation, HT-22 cells were seeded at a 
density of 8 × 104 cells per well in the lower chamber. Following 24 h of 
incubation, 40 nM of OA was added to the bottom chamber, and the cells 
were incubated for an additional 12 h Cy5.5-labeled FS, FSM or FSMT 
(Cy5.5FS, Cy5.5FSM or Cy5.5FSMT) (equivalent [Cy5.5] = 0.3 μg/mL) were 
then added to the upper chamber. After 12 h of incubation, fluorescent 
signals from the HT-22 cells in the lower chamber and the culture me­
dium were observed by CLSM and fluorescence spectrophotometer, 
respectively.
2.8. WB analysis
Cells treated with OA and various nanoparticles were lysed using cell 
lysis buffer (Beyotime, China) and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 5 min to 
collect the lysates. Protein samples from each group were quantified, 
heat-treated, separated by SDS-PAGE, and transferred onto PVDF 
membranes following the aforementioned protocol. The membranes 
were blocked and incubated with primary antibodies (phospho-tau 
(Ser396), phospho-tau (Ser404), phospho-tau (Thr231), phospho-tau 
(Ser202), phospho-tau (T205), tau, p-Akt, Akt, p-GSK3β, GSK-3β, 
STAT3, p-STAT3, Bax, cleaved caspase-3 (c-caspase-3), p-p65 or 
GAPDH) overnight at 4 ◦C. After washing with TBST, the membranes 
were incubated with appropriate secondary antibodies for 1 h at rt. 
Finally, the membranes were treated with ECL detection reagent and 
images were captured. The gray values of the protein bands were 
analyzed using the Image J software.
2.9. In vivo fluorescence imaging and brain localization
AD model mice were divided into four groups (n = 3): PBS, FS, FSM 
and FSMT. PBS or Cy5.5-labeled nanoparticles were administered 
intravenously, and in vivo fluorescence imaging was performed using the 
IVIS Lumina system (PerkinElmer, USA) at 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24 h post- 
injection. After 24 h, the mice were sacrificed, and the major organs 
(heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys and brain) were harvested for ex vivo 
fluorescence imaging.
To further evaluate FSMT accumulation at tau-rich regions, brain 
tissues were fixed, dehydrated, and sectioned into frozen slices. The 
sections were incubated overnight with an anti-p-tau (S396) primary 
antibody, followed by incubation with an Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated 
secondary antibody for 1 h and counterstain with DAPI for 3 min. Green 
fluorescence from p-tau protein and red fluorescence from FSMT were 
observed using CLSM.
2.10. Therapeutic efficacy in vivo
On day 2 post-model induction, the AD model mice were randomly 
divided into six groups (n = 7) and i.v. injected with PBS, CS, CSM, FS, 
FSM or FSMT (equivalent [Se] = 1.2 mg/kg) every other day for seven 
doses.
After the dosing, the MWM test was conducted to evaluate the spatial 
learning and memory abilities of mice. The apparatus consisted of a 
circular dark pool (120 cm in diameter and 50 cm deep) filled with water 
maintained at 24–26 ◦C and made opaque using food-grade dye. The 
pool was divided into four quadrants, with a hidden escape platform 
submerged 1 cm below the water surface in the northwest quadrant. 
Mice underwent training for five consecutive days, with four trials per 
day. In each trial, mice were given 60 s to locate the platform. If un­
successful, mice were guided to the platform and allowed to remain for 
15 s. Escape latency was recorded during training. On the sixth day, the 
platform was removed for the probe trial, and the mice were allowed to 
swim freely for 60 s. Their trajectories were tracked using a video 
tracking system (Panlab, SMART V3.0, Spain). The swimming speed, the 
number of platform crossings, and the percentage of time spent in the 
target quadrant were recorded.
PET-CT imaging was performed using the InliView-3000B PET/ 
SPECT/CT system (Novelmedical, China). Mice in each group were 
anesthetized with isoflurane and i.v. injected with 100 μCi of [18F]-S16. 
The exact injection dose was calculated by measuring the radioactivity 
of the syringe before and after injection. CT scans (voltage: 80 mV; 
frames: 360, single-frame acquisition time: 2 s; step angle: 1◦) and PET 
scans (radionuclide: 18F; scan time: 10 min) were performed 30 min 
post-injection for each group. Images were reconstructed in axial, cor­
onal and sagittal planes and subsequently fused. CT images were 
reconstructed with a slice thickness of 0.18 mm, 500 slices, and a pixel 
size of 0.13672 mm. PET images were reconstructed using the FDK al­
gorithm with a slice thickness of 0.8 mm, 112 slices, and a pixel size of 
0.5 mm. Regions of interests (ROI) were delineated in the hippocampus, 
and the mean standardized uptake values (SUVmean) were calculated. 
Uptake values were corrected for injection time and dose and normal­
ized to the body weight of each mouse.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Synthesis and characterization of FSMT
The synthesis of selenium nanoparticles typically involves poly­
saccharide modification, in which the abundant hydroxyl groups react 
with SeO3
2−
to form stable, chain-like intermediates that are subse­
quently reduced to produce spherical selenium nanoparticles [25,45]. 
Despite playing a significant role in stabilization, polysaccharides 
themselves lack therapeutic efficacy and may further result in lower 
encapsulation efficiency of small molecular drugs. In contrast, FTY720, 
an S1P receptor antagonist, not only exhibits significant functions in 
suppressing tau protein phosphorylation but also serves as a highly 
promising stabilizing agent for selenium nanoparticle synthesis due to 
its hydroxyl-rich structure [46]. In this work, we synthesized 
drug-modified selenium nanoassembly (FS) using FTY720 as a func­
tional stabilizer and chitosan-modified selenium nanoparticles (CS) as 
the control group. As shown in Fig. 1A and S1, FS exhibited a uniform, 
well-defined spherical morphology via TEM observations, and SEM-EDS 
analysis further confirmed the presence of Se and C elements within the 
nanoassembly. To fabricate the tau-targeted biomimetic FSMT, B16F10 
cell membranes were extracted and co-extruded with FS using a lipo­
some extruder to obtain FSM. FSM was then mixed with DSPE-­
PEG2000-T807, facilitating the incorporation of the tau-targeting T807 
into the cell membrane via DSPE insertion, resulting in FSMT. After cell 
membrane camouflaging, the hydrodynamic size of FSM increased from 
43.8 ± 2.5 nm for FS to 66.6 ± 1.5 nm. Upon modification with 
DSPE-PEG2000-T807, the diameter of FSMT further increased to 84.3 ±
6.4 nm (Fig. 1B–D). TEM images obtained using phosphotungstic acid 
negative staining (Fig. 1E) revealed the attachment of cell membrane 
structures to the surfaces of FSM and FSMT. The cell membrane cloaking 
of FSM led to a zeta potential shift from 12.3 ± 1.7 mV to −21.6 ± 2.2 
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
4 

mV, while that of FSMT recovered to be 8.6 ± 1.8 mV mainly due to the 
tertiary amines in T807 (Fig. 1F). DLS measurements over a 7-day period 
showed that FSMT maintained good stability in both water and DMEM 
containing 10 % serum (Fig. S2). The loading content of FTY720 in 
FSMT was determined to be 3.06 % by high-performance liquid chro­
matography. In the SDS-PAGE experiment, the FSMT and FSM group 
displayed bands that were analogous to those of membrane proteins 
derived from the source cell membrane, which were absent in the FS 
group (Fig. 1G). As shown in Fig. 1H, the expression of CD44 and gp100, 
which are essential proteins expressed on the B16F10 cell membrane, 
were detected in the FSMT and FSM group by WB analysis.
To demonstrate the modification of T807 in FSMT, DSPE-PEG2000- 
FITC was used as a fluorescent probe and mixed with DiI-labeled FSM. 
After incubating FSMDiI/FITC with HT-22 cells, a considerable colocali­
zation was observed between the green fluorescence of FITC and the red 
fluorescence of DiI via CLSM, indicating successful DSPE insertion and 
T807 decoration on the cell membrane (Fig. 1I). Excessive reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) play a significant role in the development of 
various severe diseases, underscoring the importance of effective ROS 
scavenging for maintaining health [47,48]. To evaluate the 
ROS-scavenging capabilities of different nanoparticles, DCFH was used 
as a probe because it reacts with ROS to generate DCF with strong 
fluorescence. There was a considerable decrease in DCF fluorescence 
following treatment with CS, FS, FSM or FSMT (Fig. 1J) and fluorescence 
intensity exhibited a concentration-dependent reduction as FSMT levels 
increased (Fig. S3), highlighting the enzyme-like ROS-scavenging ac­
tivity of these nanoparticles. In contrast, FTY720 treatment alone did 
not induce a significant change in DCF fluorescence, thus confirming 
that selenium nanoparticles are the active component responsible for the 
observed effect.
We evaluated the CAT, SOD, and POD-like activities of FSMT to 
identify the enzyme-like activities responsible for ROS scavenging. CAT- 
like activity was first evaluated by measuring the fluorescence of HTA at 
425 nm, which is produced through the reaction of TA with H2O2. 
Fig. 1. Characterization of the prepared FSMT. (A) TEM images of FS. Scale bar: 40 nm. Hydrodynamic sizes of FS (B), FSM (C) and FSMT (D). (E) TEM images of 
FSM and FSMT. Scale bar: 40 nm. (F) Zeta potentials of FS, B16F10 cell membrane, FSM and FSMT. SDS-PAGE (G) and WB (H) analyses of membrane proteins. (I) 
Cellular uptake of FSMDiI/FITC by HT-22 cells. The outer B16F10 cell membrane of nanocomposite was labeled with DiI, and the DSPE structure was labeled with 
FITC. Scale bar: 10 μm. Fluorescence spectra of DCF (J) and HTA (K) to determine the ROS-scavenging and CAT-like activities of FS, FSM and FSMT, respectively. 
UV–Vis absorbance spectra to determine the SOD-like activity (L) and POD-like activity (M) of FS, FSM, and FSMT, respectively. Error bars represent the mean ± SD 
(n = 3).
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
5 

Treatment with CS, FS, FSM, or FSMT led to a comparable reduction in 
HTA fluorescence, whereas FTY720 did not, suggesting that selenium 
nanoparticles are the key contributors to the observed CAT-like activity 
(Fig. 1K). In SOD assay, WST-8 reacts with superoxide anions (O2
⋅-) to 
produce a water-soluble formazan dye, while SOD catalyzes the dis­
mutation of O2
⋅-, thereby inhibiting formazan formation. A remarkable 
decrease in the UV absorbance of formazan at 400–700 nm was observed 
upon the addition of various nanoparticles (Fig. 1L), which followed a 
clear concentration-dependent pattern (Fig. S4). POD-like activity was 
analyzed by measuring UV absorbance, as POD catalyzes the oxidation 
of specific substrates via H2O2, resulting in characteristic absorption at 
470 nm. It was worth noting that the substrate absorbance at 470 nm 
Fig. 2. In vitro neuroprotective and ROS scavenging of FSMT. (A) CLSM images of FSM and FSMT in OA-treated HT-22 cells. The immunofluorescence staining of HT- 
22 cells with p-tau (S396) antibody are shown in green fluorescence. FSMDiD and FSMTDiD are shown in red fluorescence. Scale bar: 20 μm. Cell viability of HT-22 
cells treated with OA (B), FTY720 (C) or FSMT (D) at various concentrations. (E) Cell viability of HT-22 cells after treatment with different formulations (equivalent 
[Se] = 8 μg/mL). Live/dead staining assay (F) and Annexin V-FITC/PI apoptosis assay (G) of HT-22 cells after incubation with different treatments (equivalent [Se] 
= 8 μg/mL). Scale bar: 50 μm. (H) Fluorescence images of ROS generation using the DCFH-DA probe and the corresponding bright-field images of HT-22 cells treated 
with the indicated formulations (equivalent [Se] = 8 μg/mL). Scale bar: 100 μm. Error bars represent the mean ± SD (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, 
****p < 0.0001. ns: no significance. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
6 

similarly declined following the addition of CS, FS, FSM, or FSMT, 
confirming the presence of POD-like activity (Fig. 1M). The effective 
scavenging of ⋅OH by FSMT was demonstrated using electron spin 
resonance (ESR) since ⋅OH generated by the Fenton reaction can be 
captured by DMPO to form the DMPO/⋅OH adduct. As displayed in 
Fig. S5, the addition of FSMT significantly weakened the ESR signal 
produced by Fenton reaction. These results confirmed the successful 
preparation of FMST and verified that it exhibited excellent multi- 
enzyme-like antioxidant activity, held great promise for the treatment 
of oxidative stress-related neurodegenerative AD.
3.2. In vitro neuroprotection and ROS scavenging of FSMT
We established an OA-induced tauopathy cell model as previously 
described because OA has been shown to induce abnormal hyper­
phosphorylation of tau, which subsequently leads to neuronal death [38,
49]. Immunofluorescence staining with anti-p-tau (S396) antibody 
confirmed the upregulation of tau phosphorylation in the OA-treated 
cells (Fig. 2A). The internalization of FSMDiD or FSMTDiD by normal 
and OA-treated cells was investigated using CLSM. As displayed in 
Fig. 2A, both FSM and FSMT groups exhibited minimal cellular uptake in 
normal cells. Due to the lack of targeting to p-tau, FSM group compa­
rably showed a negligible fluorescence signal, even in OA-treated cells. 
In contrast, the fluorescence intensity of FSMT group was remarkably 
greater than that of FSM group in OA-treated cells, which can be 
attributed to the T807-facilitated cell targeting.
We investigated the neuroprotection of FSMT on OA-treated tauop­
athy cells. The cytotoxicity of OA was first analyzed using the CCK-8 
assay, and the cell viabilities decreased from 95.80 ± 3.93 % to 35.74 
± 1.91 % when the OA concentration increased from 10 to 120 nM 
(Fig. 2B). Considering the elevated p-tau could accelerate neuronal 
apoptosis, we selected moderate OA concentrations (40 and 80 nM) for 
the subsequent experiments to more evidently clarify the potential 
rescue effects of FSMT. The cytotoxic effect of FTY720 was also evalu­
ated after 24 h of cell incubation. As shown in Fig. 2C, the cell viabilities 
maintained above 90 % when the concentration of FTY720 below 1 μg/ 
mL (Fig. 2C). Both FSM and FSMT demonstrated cell viabilities 
exceeding 94 % at equivalent [Se] concentration below 8 μg/mL, and 
maintained cell viabilities above 74 % throughout the entire tested 
concentration range (Fig. 2D&S6). The biocompatibility of FSMT was 
further validated through a hemolysis assay, which showed a hemolysis 
rate of 3.12 ± 0.06 % at a selenium concentration of 50 μg/mL (Fig. S7). 
Moreover, the in vitro immunogenicity of B16 cell membrane- 
camouflaged FSMT was evaluated using an ELISA assay. The results 
indicated that the levels of TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-10 secreted by RAW264.7 
cells, after 24 h of incubation with FS, FSM or FSMT, remained un­
changed, suggesting negligible immune activation (Fig. S8). Based on 
these findings, the potential of FSMT to mitigate OA-induced cytotox­
icity was further investigated. Following exposure to 80 nM of OA, HT- 
22 cells were subsequently treated with PBS, CS, CSM, FS, FSM, or 
FSMT. Compared to the PBS group, which showed a cell viability of 
55.41 ± 2.83 %, all nanoparticulate treatments enhanced cell survival. 
Among all groups, the FS, FSM, and FSMT groups demonstrated signif­
icantly higher viability than the CS and CSM groups, indicating a syn­
ergistic effect between FTY and selenium nanoparticles in promoting 
cell viability. The highest cell viability was observed in the FSMT group 
(83.97 ± 0.41 %, Fig. 2E), which can be attributed to the targeting 
ability of T807 toward p-tau protein, thereby improving the therapeutic 
efficacy. The neuroprotective effects of FSMT were then visualized using 
Calcein-AM/PI staining to distinguish live and dead cells. FSMT treat­
ment significantly reduced cell death, as evidenced by a marked 
decrease in red fluorescence compared to the OA group (Fig. 2F). Ac­
cording to Annexin V-FITC/PI staining, there was 36.6 ± 1.42 % of 
apoptotic cells in the OA-group, and treatment of either CS, CSM, FS, 
FSM, or FSMT reduced cell apoptosis (Fig. 2G&S9). Notably, FSMT 
treatment resulted in the lowest apoptosis ratio, reducing it to 15.48 ±
1.51 %. In addition, the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 
were upregulated to 74.12 and 15.53 pg/mL in the OA-treated group, 
respectively (Fig. S10), and negligible change in TNF-α and IL-6 secre­
tion was found in the FSMT group.
Thinking about the antioxidant enzyme-like activities of FSMT, we 
assessed changes in ROS levels in OA-induced tauopathy cells following 
different treatments. Compared to the OA group, DCF fluorescence 
decreased following treatment with different nanoparticles (Fig. 2H). 
More importantly, the FSMT group obviously restored cell morphology, 
suggesting its neuroprotective role through antioxidant activity. Flow 
cytometry was further employed to measure intracellular ROS levels 
(Fig. S11). The results were consistent with those obtained from DCF 
staining. The decreased fluorescence intensity in the FSMT group, 
compared to the FSM group, could be explained by the targeting ability 
of the T807 ligand, which enabled FSMT to more efficiently recognize 
the p-tau aggregation within the cells.
3.3. Protective effect on OA-induced microglial polarization and 
neuroinflammation of FSMT
Microglia can polarize into pro-inflammatory M1 and anti- 
inflammatory M2 phenotypes in response to specific cytokines and 
chemical compounds under varying physiological conditions [17]. 
Recent studies have demonstrated that FTY720 induced the transition of 
M1 microglia to the M2 phenotype by upregulating STAT3 phosphory­
lation (p-STAT3) and the subsequent interaction between p-STAT3 and 
NF-κB p65 [50–52]. Furthermore, excessive ROS are a hallmark of 
microglial activation. For instance, NF-κB p65 becomes phosphorylated 
and translocates to the nucleus upon external ROS, where it binds to 
DNA to initiate the expression of pro-inflammatory genes. This process 
promotes the M1 phenotype of microglia and the secretion of 
pro-inflammatory factors (Fig. S12) [53,54]. Given that the 
above-mentioned experiments have shown the strong ROS-scavenging 
capabilities of FSMT, its potential in modulating OA-induced micro­
glial polarization is anticipated.
To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the M1 and M2 microglia 
following various treatments using immunofluorescence staining. As 
shown in Fig. 3A, M1 microglial activation was illustrated by a notable 
increase in CD16/32 (M1 marker) fluorescence and a decrease in the 
CD206 (M2 marker) signal. Following nanoparticulate-treatment, a 
greater proportion of M1 microglia transitioned to M2 phenotype. 
Moreover, the FS, FSM and FSMT groups, which involve FTY720 
encapsulation, led to the highest levels of anti-inflammatory M2 
microglia, suggesting that FTY720 promoted microglial polarization 
toward M2 phenotype. Flow cytometric quantification (Fig. S13) 
revealed that FSMT treatment markedly reduced the mean fluorescence 
intensity of CD16/32 in microglia from 9873 (OA group) to 4341, while 
concurrently increasing the mean fluorescence intensity of CD206 in 
microglia from 45,486 (OA group) to 113,912, thereby further vali­
dating the aforementioned findings.
We next investigated the mechanistic basis underlying microglial 
polarization modulated by FSMT. The expression of p-STAT3 was 
initially assessed using WB. As shown in Fig. S14, OA induction robustly 
increased p-STAT3 levels, with a 2.04-fold increase relative to the con­
trol. The suppression of p-STAT3 activation by all formulations con­
taining FTY720 (i.e., FTY720, FS, FSM and FSMT) indicated that FTY720 
exerted its function by inhibiting the STAT3 pathway, thereby regu­
lating microglial polarization.
On the other hand, WB analysis demonstrated an overexpression of 
phosphorylated p65 (p-p65) following OA treatment, which was 4.47- 
fold higher than that of the control group. However, the over­
expression of p-p65 was partially reversed by treatment with either CS 
or CSM (Fig. 3B&S15). It was worth noting that FS, FSM, and FSMT 
containing FTY720 led to a more pronounced reduction in p-p65 levels, 
supporting a combined role between FTY720 and selenium nano­
particles. The FSMT group realized the greatest reversal, reducing p-p65 
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
7 

expression to 1.14-fold of the control group. BAY-11-7082, a specific NF- 
κB inhibitor, was used to further validate the involvement of the NF-κB 
pathway. As expected, the inhibitor reduced p-p65 expression to a level 
comparable to the baseline (1.00-fold of the control), which was closely 
consistent with the efficacy of FSMT (Figs. S15 and S16).
After microglial polarization, a distinct shift occurs in the secretion 
of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. M1 polarization leads 
to the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and 
IL-6, which are associated with neuroinflammation and neuronal dam­
age. In contrast, M2 polarization promotes the secretion of anti- 
inflammatory cytokines like IL-10 and TGF-β, which support tissue 
repair and resolution of inflammation. The balance between these 
opposing cytokine profiles plays a critical role in regulating the extent 
and outcome of neuroinflammatory responses in the central nervous 
system [51,55]. Accordingly, we examine cytokine secretion following 
different treatments. Compared to the control group, OA stimulation 
markedly elevated pro-inflammatory cytokine levels (TNF-α: 152.25 
pg/mL; IL-6: 196.04 pg/mL) while reducing anti-inflammatory IL-10 
(16.06 pg/mL) (Fig. 3C–E). In contrast, FSMT treatment normalized the 
secretion of TNF-α and IL-6 and significantly upregulated IL-10. These 
results confirmed that FSMT modulated microglial polarization and 
alleviated neuroinflammation by reversing NF-κB p65 activation and 
regulating inflammatory cytokines.
3.4. Protective effect on OA-induced tau phosphorylation and cell 
apoptosis
GSK-3β is a critical kinase involved in tau phosphorylation. The 
activation of GSK-3β directly phosphorylates multiple sites on tau, 
causing its detachment from microtubules, the formation of fibrous 
aggregates, and disruption of neuronal microtubule stability [39]. Akt, 
the upstream regulator of GSK-3β, typically suppresses GSK-3β activity 
through phosphorylation at the Ser9 site [56]. Excessive activation of 
GSK-3β, coupled with Akt inactivation, has been considered as a primary 
mechanism driving tau hyperphosphorylation in AD [57]. Compared to 
the control group, the expression of p-GSK-3β and p-Akt was 
considerably downregulated in the OA-treated group (Fig. 4B and C). In 
contrast, treatment with various nanoparticulate formulations restored 
expression levels of both proteins. The FS, FSM, and FSMT groups 
exhibited higher protein expression levels than both CS and CSM groups, 
suggesting a combined rescue effect of FS nanoassembly. Due to the 
tau-targeting capability of T807, the highest expression of both proteins 
was observed in the FSMT group. To further validate the involvement of 
the Akt/GSK-3β pathway, we employed the Akt agonist SC79 and the 
GSK-3β inhibitor SB216763 in OA-induced cells. As shown in Fig. S17, 
SC79 treatment increased the expression of p-AKT from 0.29-fold (OA 
group) to 1.10-fold of the control, while concurrently elevating down­
stream p-GSK-3β from 0.25-fold to 0.90-fold, an effect consistent with 
that of FSMT. Similarly, inhibition with SB216763 raised p-GSK-3β 
levels from 0.33-fold (OA group) to 0.96-fold of the control (Fig. S18). 
These results collectively suggested that FSMT rescues tau phosphory­
lation by modulating the Akt/GSK-3β pathway.
To further explore the inhibitory effect of FSMT on OA-induced tau 
hyperphosphorylation, we measured the expression of p-tau(S396), p- 
tau(S404), p-tau (Thr231), p-tau(S202), p-tau(T205) and total tau. 
Although there were no significant differences in total tau expression 
among all groups, p-tau (S396), p-tau(S404), p-tau (Thr231), p-tau 
(S202) and p-tau(T205) expression were upregulated following OA 
treatment, 
which is 
in 
agreement 
with 
previous 
literatures 
(Fig. 4D&E&S19) [11,58]. P-tau (S396), p-tau(S404), p-tau (Thr231), 
p-tau(S202) and p-tau(T205) expression in HT-22 cells were reduced to 
0.90-fold, 1.52-fold, 0.97-fold, 1.39-fold and 1.18-fold of the control 
group, respectively, following FSMT-mediated neuroprotection. Except 
for p-tau(S396) and total tau, we also examined the pro-apoptotic Bax 
and its downstream effector, c-caspase-3. Bax activation disrupts mito­
chondrial membrane permeability, accelerating the release of 
death-inducing factors such as cytochrome c, which in turn activates 
caspases to execute the apoptotic process. The relative expression levels 
of both pro-apoptotic proteins indicate whether cells remain viable or 
undergo apoptosis. As anticipated, Bax and c-caspase-3 were upregu­
lated in OA-treated cells, which could be attributed to the pro-apoptotic 
pathway. However, subsequent treatment with CS or CSM resulted in a 
Fig. 3. The protective effect of FSMT on OA-induced microglial polarization and neuroinflammation (equivalent [Se] = 8 μg/mL). (A) CLSM images of BV-2 cells 
after incubation with different treatments. Cells were immunostained with anti-CD16/32 (red) or anti-CD206 (green) antibodies. Scale bar: 20 μm. (B) Semi- 
quantitative analysis of p-p65 expression levels in BV-2 cells treated with various formulations. Quantitative analysis of the expression levels of TNF-α (C), IL-6 
(D) and IL-10 (E) by ELISA assay. Error bars represent the mean ± SD (n = 3); ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (For interpretation of the references to colour in 
this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
8 

slight decrease in Bax and c-caspase-3 expression, while treatment with 
FS, FSM, or FSMT led to a more pronounced reduction in both proteins. 
Among these three groups, FSMT treatment showed the strongest pro­
tein inhibition, with a 0.98- and 1.54-fold decrease in Bax and c-cas­
pase-3 expression, respectively. These findings verified that FSMT 
effectively inhibited tau hyperphosphorylation by rescuing GSK-3β 
overactivation and Akt inactivation, and protected neuronal cells from 
apoptosis by preserving mitochondrial integrity and inhibiting 
pro-apoptotic proteins.
3.5. BBB-crossing and brain-targeting capability
The BBB represents a major challenge for delivering most drugs via 
nanomedicines to the brain. Previous studies have shown that the 
nanoparticles camouflaged with membranes derived from brain- 
metastatic cancer cells can traverse the BBB by reducing the tight 
junctions between endothelial cells and specifically interacting with 
adhesion molecules on these cells [59–61]. In addition, T807, the 
non-radioactive precursor of the PET imaging agent [18F]-T807, owing 
to its low molecular weight and optimal log P (~1.5), has also been 
reported to enhance BBB-penetrating efficiency when conjugated to 
various small molecules or drug delivery systems [37,62]. We estab­
lished an in vitro BBB model to investigate the effect of endothelial cell 
transport and BBB penetrating of FSMT. After incubating various 
Cy5.5-labeled nanoparticles (Cy5.5FS, Cy5.5FSM and Cy5.5FSMT) in the 
upper chamber, negligible fluorescence was observed in the lower 
chamber for the Cy5.5FS group, while strong Cy5.5 signals were detected 
in both Cy5.5FSM and Cy5.5FSMT groups, which were cloaked with 
B16F10 cell membranes (Fig. S20). The significant differences between 
Cy5.5FSM and Cy5.5FSMT groups could be explained by T807-facilitated 
BBB crossing, and this phenomenon was further validated by 
measuring Cy5.5 fluorescence intensity in the culture medium of the 
lower chamber using a fluorescence spectrophotometer. As shown in 
Fig. 5B, the penetration efficiencies of the Cy5.5FS, Cy5.5FSM, and 
Cy5.5FSMT groups were 6.84 %, 29.03 %, and 37.63 %, respectively.
To assess the brain-targeting capability of FSMT in vivo, PBS, Cy5.5FS, 
Cy5.5FSM, or Cy5.5FSMT were intravenously administered to AD model 
mice. We monitored Cy5.5 fluorescence in brain via IVIS Lumna system, 
and the average fluorescence intensities were quantified in ROI. 
Compared to the FS group, which exhibited a gradually decreased Cy5.5 
fluorescence over time, both the FSM and FSMT groups demonstrated 
higher fluorescence intensity in the brain at all time points, with a peak 
at 6 h post-injection (Fig. 5C). In the absence of brain-metastatic mela­
noma cell membrane camouflage and DSPE-PEG2000-T807 decoration, 
FS were rapidly cleared from the bloodstream and failed to efficiently 
cross the BBB, resulting in insufficient brain accumulation. According to 
the semi-quantitative analysis, the average brain fluorescence intensity 
of ROI in the FSM group was (1.99 ± 0.10) × 1010 p/s/cm2/sr at 6 h 
post-injection, whereas the FSMT group exhibited a higher intensity 
(2.31 ± 0.12 × 1010 p/s/cm2/sr) at the same time point, further indi­
cating that advantage of T807 for crossing the BBB (Fig. 5D). After 24 h 
post-injection, all mice were sacrificed, and ex vivo fluorescence imaging 
of brain tissues further confirmed that FSMT realized the greatest tar­
geting efficacy (Fig. 5E and F). The nanoparticular FSMT was mainly 
cleared from the liver, which belongs to reticuloendothelial system 
(Fig. S21). We used immunofluorescence staining to further evaluate 
whether FSMT binds to p-tau in intracranial AD lesions. As shown in 
Fig. S22, intense Cy5.5 fluorescence, which colocalized with p-tau 
staining, was observed in the FSMT group. In contrast, the FSM group 
displayed a diminished Cy5.5 signal, and only minimal fluorescence was 
detected in the FS group. These results suggested the superior BBB 
penetration and AD lesions accumulation of FSMT, attributed to the dual 
Fig. 4. The protective effect of FSMT on OA-induced tau phosphorylation and cell apoptosis. (A) Schematic illustration of the mechanism underlying the efficacy of 
FSMT in ameliorating cognitive impairment in AD. Representative immunoblots (B) and semi-quantitative analysis (C) of the expression levels of p-Akt, Akt, p-GSK-3β 
and GSK-3β in HT-22 cells treated with PBS (1), OA (2), OA + CS (3), OA + CSM (4), OA + FS (5), OA + FSM (6) and OA + FSMT (7). (D) Representative im­
munoblots and (E) semi-quantitative analysis of the expression levels of p-tau (S396), tau, c-caspase-3 and BAX in HT-22 cells treated as described above. Error bars 
represent the mean ± SD (n = 3); ns: no significance, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
9 

Fig. 5. Evaluation of the BBB-crossing and AD lesion targeting of FSMT. (A) Schematic illustration of in vitro BBB construction. (B) Cy5.5 fluorescence of nano­
particles in the lower chamber detected by fluorescence spectrophotometer. (C) In vivo biodistribution of Cy5.5-labeled nanoparticles and (D) semi-quantification of 
Cy5.5 fluorescence in the brains of C57BL/6 mice at 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24 h post-injection of PBS, FS, FSM and FSMT. *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 versus FS 
group; #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01 versus FSM group. (E) Ex vivo images and (F) semi-quantification of Cy5.5 fluorescence in the brain tissues 24 h post-injection. *p <
0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Error bars represent the mean ± SD (n = 3).
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
10 

modifications of B16F10 cell membranes and T807.
3.6. In vivo therapeutic effect of FSMT
Inspired by the enhanced drug accumulation of FSMT at lesions, we 
next studied its therapeutic effect against AD in vivo. As displayed in 
Fig. 6A, the AD model mice were established by bilateral hippocampal 
injection of OA, and the various formulations were i.v. injected every 
two days at a single dosage of 1.2 mg/kg. On the 15th day post-model 
induction, the MWM test was employed to assess the spatial learning 
and memory abilities of AD model mice. Substantial learning impair­
ments induced by OA were verified during the training period, as evi­
denced by the obviously longer escape latencies (Fig. 6B). However, in 
the FSMT-treated group, the performance of the mice was comparable to 
that of the control group, with escape latencies reduced from 52.18 ±
7.98 to 33.81 ± 8.83 compared to the OA group, suggesting a recovery 
of spatial learning ability. The swimming speed of mice was first 
measured after removing the platform. As shown in Fig. 6C, no signifi­
cant differences were found among all groups. Based on similar motor 
function, the FSMT-treated group exhibited spatially oriented swimming 
behavior close to the control group. The percentage of time spent in the 
target quadrant and the number of platform crossings of FSMT group 
were 39.12 ± 10.64 and 2.71 ± 0.49, respectively (Fig. 6D and E).
[18F]-S16 is a radioactive probe used for PET imaging, capable of 
crossing the BBB and targeting tau lesions in the central nervous system 
[63]. It is clinically employed to detect abnormal tau aggregation in 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD [64,65]. After treatment with 
FSMT, [18F]-S16 was used to monitor tau aggregation in the brains of 
mice via micro-PET/CT (Fig. 7A and B). At 0.5 h post-injection, 
[18F]-S16 was highly accumulated in the brain of OA group, with a 
SUVmean of 2.10 ± 0.04, which was 1.44-fold higher than that of the 
control group. Corresponding to the therapeutic effect, there was the 
lowest [18F]-S16 uptake in the FSMT group, suggesting the greatest 
outcome in reducing abnormal tau aggregation.
To further explore the therapeutic mechanism of FSMT in the 
treatment of AD, we observed tau phosphorylation across different 
groups using immunohistochemical staining of brain slices. As shown in 
Fig. 7C, the OA group showed elevated phosphorylated tau (p-tau, 
S396), which was considerably inhibited following treatment with 
various nanoparticles, particularly FSMT. Immunofluorescence staining 
of brain sections confirmed that the phenotypic shift of microglia in the 
hippocampal region from the M1 to the M2 phenotype was most pro­
nounced following FSMT treatment (Fig. S23). The activation of astro­
cytes and microglia, key mediators of neuroinflammation, was assessed 
using immunohistochemical staining for glial fibrillary acidic protein 
(GFAP) and ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule-1 (Iba-1), 
respectively. Compared to the OA group, the FSMT group exhibited the 
most significant reduction in the expression of both GFAP and Iba-1. 
These data suggested that the memory deficits in the AD model mice 
were remarkably alleviated following treatment with FSMT, and the 
therapeutic effect could be attributed to the inhibition of tau phos­
phorylation and alleviation of neuroinflammatory responses.
As a therapeutic nanoagent, safety and effectiveness are equally 
important for FSMT. There was no notable change in alanine amino­
transferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phospha­
tase (ALP), uric acid (UA), creatinine (CREA), urea and the histological 
analysis of major organs among all groups (Figs. S24 and S25). 
Furthermore, during a 14-day treatment period, mice administered FS, 
FSM, or FSMT exhibited no significant changes in body weight 
compared to the control group (Fig. S26A). This favorable biosafety 
profile was further supported by the absence of adverse findings in he­
matological, biochemical, and histopathological examinations, indi­
cating minimal toxicity associated with FSMT (Fig. S26B–D). 
Assessment of serum cytokines (i.e., TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10) suggested a low 
systemic immunogenicity of FSMT treatment (Fig. S27).
In recent years, various nanoplatforms based on organic polymers, 
inorganic metal/non-metal composites, or hybrid nanostructures have 
been extensively developed, definitely advancing AD therapeutic 
research through multi-mechanistic combinatorial strategies (Table S1). 
In contrast to complex chemical reactions, such as polymerization and 
coupling, the preparation of FS is straightforward and reproducible, 
requiring neither an anhydrous nor an O2-free environment, nor 
Fig. 6. Evaluation of the in vivo therapeutic potential of FSMT for AD. (A) Schematic illustration of animal modeling, administration and efficacy assessment. (B) 
Escape latency of different groups during the training phase of MWM test (n = 7). **p < 0.01 versus OA group. Swimming speed (C), percentage of time spent in the 
target quadrant (D), number of platform crossings (E) and representative swimming trajectories (F) of different groups during the probe phase. ns: no significance, 
***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. Error bars represent the mean ± SD (n = 7).
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
11 

complex synthetic techniques. Subsequent preparation of FSMT, 
including cell membrane extraction and camouflaging as well as T807 
functionalization, offers similar advantages, with procedures that are 
easy to handle. Moreover, selenium is an essential element in the human 
body. FTY720 has been FDA-approved for clinical use, T807 is employed 
in clinical PET imaging, and the biocompatibility of the other compo­
nents in FSMT has also been thoroughly validated. Combined with 
preliminary biosafety evaluations, it encourages the further studies on 
the clinical translation of FSMT.
Regarding cell membranes, we selected B16F10 melanoma cell 
membranes due to their ability to cross the BBB. This process is mediated 
by interactions between specific receptor-adhesion molecules, such as 
integrins, selectins, and chemokines, on tumor cells and cerebral endo­
thelial cells, which facilitated transendothelial migration [66–68]. In 
comparison to neurons and stem cells, which are difficult to extract, 
propagate stably, and culture on a large scale, B16F10 membranes offer 
validated BBB-penetrating capabilities and scalable production, making 
them promising for AD therapy. Other cancer cell lines with high brain 
metastatic potential are typically derived from lung or breast cancer. but 
they often require technically demanding in vivo selection and complex 
in vitro culture techniques to maintain their high brain metastatic po­
tential, which limits their accessibility [69,70]. For example, highly 
brain metastatic breast cancer cell lines such as MDA-MB-231/Br and 
4T1/Br have been reported only by a few research groups and are not 
commercially available [71,72]. Considering that the ultimate thera­
peutic efficacy of nanomedicine is not solely dependent on its ability to 
penetrate the BBB, using membranes derived from other cell lines with 
brain metastatic potential may lead to better therapeutic outcomes due 
to additional factors, such as enhanced circulation and improved 
cellular targeting. Consequently, optimizing the selection of cell mem­
branes, such as substituting the B16F10 cell membrane with those from 
other cell lines for a comprehensive comparison, is essential for further 
enhancing the therapeutic outcome of our system.
4. Conclusion
In summary, we successfully fabricated a carrier-free nanoassembly 
camouflaged by melanoma cell membrane for p-tau-targeted AD ther­
apy, which alleviated tau hyperphosphorylation through antioxidant 
and anti-inflammatory mechanisms. By employing FTY720 as a stabi­
lizing agent during selenium nanoparticle synthesis, FSMT exhibited 
enhanced therapeutic efficacy. The melanoma cell membrane camou­
flage prolonged the circulation time of nanoparticles and improved their 
ability to cross the BBB, thereby facilitating effective brain accumula­
tion. Furthermore, T807 modification of the membrane-camouflaged 
nanoparticles not only enhanced BBB penetration but also enabled 
specific targeting toward p-tau protein, further improving therapeutic 
outcomes. This study represented a significant advancement in the 
application of tumor cell membrane-camouflaged biomimetic nano­
particles for AD therapy and provided a promising strategy for p-tau- 
targeted treatment. In this study, we selected OA to induce AD model 
exhibiting an acute tauopathy phenotype. However, this model may not 
fully recapitulate the chronic and multifactorial nature of AD. Therefore, 
validation using transgenic models (e.g., P301S or 3xTg-AD mice) is 
Fig. 7. PET-CT imaging (A) and the average standardized uptake value (B) of [18F]-S16 in the brains of different groups. (C) Representative immunohistochemical 
staining for p-tau (S396), GFAP and Iba-1 in the brains of different groups. Red arrows indicate the p-tau (S396)-positive cells. Scale bar: 100 μm *p < 0.05, ***p <
0.001, ****p < 0.0001. Error bars represent the mean ± SD (n = 3). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the 
Web version of this article.)
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
12 

necessary for further investigation. Despite remaining challenges, such 
as large-scale cell membrane extraction and comprehensive biosafety 
evaluations, our findings highlight the potential of this approach as a 
next-generation tau-targeted therapeutic.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Rui Xue: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Soft­
ware, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Fengyu Wang: Writing – original draft, Visualiza­
tion, Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, 
Data curation. Beibei Zhang: Visualization, Formal analysis, Data 
curation, Funding acquisition. Jin Wu: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition, 
Conceptualization. Ningnannan Zhang: Writing – review & editing, 
Supervision, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. 
Chunyang Sun: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Validation, 
Supervision, 
Methodology, 
Funding 
acquisition, 
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (82171995, 82071907), Joint Funds of the Natural Science 
Foundation of Tianjin (No. 25JCLMJC00020), Tianjin Key Medical 
Discipline Construction Project (TJYXZDXK-3-008C), Health Commis­
sion of Henan Province (LHGJ20230264) and Excellent Young Scientist 
Foundation of Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, China 
(22ZYYYQ02).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2025.123970.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] Jr CR. Jack, J.S. Andrews, T.G. Beach, T. Buracchio, B. Dunn, A. Graf, et al., 
Revised criteria for diagnosis and staging of Alzheimer's disease: alzheimer's 
association workgroup, Alzheimer's Dement. 20 (8) (2024) 5143–5169, https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/alz.13859.
[2] 2024 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures, Alzheimer's Dement. 20 (5) (2024) 
3708–3821, https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.13809.
[3] M. Jucker, L.C. Walker, Alzheimer's disease: from immunotherapy to 
immunoprevention, Cell 186 (20) (2023) 4260–4270, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cell.2023.08.021.
[4] J.Y. Wang, Z.K. Wang, Y.Q. Li, Y.J. Hou, C.Y. Yin, E.D. Yang, et al., Blood brain 
barrier-targeted delivery of double selenium nanospheres ameliorates neural 
ferroptosis in Alzheimer's disease, Biomaterials 302 (2023) 122359, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122359.
[5] M.F. Egan, J. Kost, T. Voss, Y. Mukai, P.S. Aisen, J.L. Cummings, et al., Randomized 
trial of verubecestat for prodromal Alzheimer'S disease, N. Engl. J. Med. 380 (15) 
(2019) 1408–1420, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1812840.
[6] S. Ostrowitzki, T. Bittner, K.M. Sink, H. Mackey, C. Rabe, L.S. Honig, et al., 
Evaluating the safety and efficacy of crenezumab vs placebo in adults with early 
alzheimer disease two phase 3 randomized placebo-controlled trials, JAMA Neurol. 
79 (11) (2022) 1113–1121, https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.2909.
[7] M. Lozupone, V. Dibello, R. Sardone, F. Castellana, R. Zupo, L. Lampignano, et al., 
Lessons learned from the failure of solanezumab as a prospective treatment 
strategy for Alzheimer's disease, Expert Opin. Drug Discovery 19 (6) (2024) 
639–647, https://doi.org/10.1080/17460441.2024.2348142.
[8] Y.J. Chen, Y. Yu, Tau and neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease: interplay 
mechanisms and clinical translation, J. Neuroinflammation 20 (1) (2023) 165, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-023-02853-3.
[9] R. van der Kant, L.S.B. Goldstein, R. Ossenkoppele, Amyloid-β-independent 
regulators of tau pathology in Alzheimer disease, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 21 (1) (2020) 
21–35, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-019-0240-3.
[10] E.E. Congdon, E.M. Sigurdsson, Tau-targeting therapies for alzheimer disease, Nat. 
Rev. Neurol. 14 (7) (2018) 399–415, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-018-0013-z.
[11] Y.T. Gu, Q. Zhang, H.L. Huang, K.H.W. Ho, C.Q. Yi, et al., Tau-targeting 
multifunctional nanocomposite based on tannic acid-metal for near-infrared 
fluorescence/magnetic resonance bimodal imaging-guided combinational therapy 
in Alzheimer's disease, Theranostics 14 (16) (2024) 6218–6235, https://doi.org/ 
10.7150/thno.98462.
[12] J.A. Guo, Y.L. Zhu, J. Zhi, Q.W. Lou, R.R. Bai, Y.L. He, Antioxidants in anti- 
alzheimer's disease drug discovery, Ageing Res. Rev. 107 (2025) 02707, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2025.102707.
[13] G. Plascencia-Villa, G. Perry, Roles of oxidative stress in synaptic dysfunction and 
neuronal cell death in alzheimer's disease, Antioxidants 12 (8) (2023) 1628, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox12081628.
[14] R.R. Bai, J.A. Guo, X.Y. Ye, Y.Y. Xie, T. Xie, Oxidative stress: the core pathogenesis 
and mechanism of Alzheimer's disease, Ageing Res. Rev. 77 (2022) 101619, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2022.101619.
[15] W.F. Zhang, D. Xiao, Q.W. Mao, H.B. Xia, Role of neuroinflammation in 
neurodegeneration development, Signal Transduction Targeted Ther. 8 (1) (2023) 
267, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01486-5.
[16] K.Y. Zhao, J.H. Liu, T. Sun, L. Zeng, Z.D. Cai, Z.R. Li, et al., The miR-25802/KLF4/ 
NF-κB signaling axis regulates microglia-mediated neuroinflammation in 
Alzheimer's disease, Brain Behav. Immun. 118 (2024) 31–48, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bbi.2024.02.016.
[17] Y.J. Kang, S.J. Hyeon, A. McQuade, J. Lim, S.H. Baek, Y.N. Diep, et al., Neurotoxic 
microglial activation via IFNγ-induced Nrf2 reduction exacerbating Alzheimer'S 
disease, Adv. Sci. 11 (20) (2024) e2304357, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
advs.202304357.
[18] K.Y. Lu, P.Y. Lin, E.Y. Chuang, C.M. Shih, T.M. Cheng, T.Y. Lin, et al., H2O2- 
depleting and O2
⋅-generating selenium nanoparticles for fluorescence imaging and 
photodynamic treatment of proinflammatory-activated macrophages, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 9 (6) (2017) 5158–5172, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsami.6b15515.
[19] J.G. Lee, J.Y. Jang, S.M. Baik, Selenium as an antioxidant: roles and clinical 
applications in critically Ill and trauma patients: a narrative review, Antioxidants 
14 (3) (2025) 294, https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox14030294.
[20] Z.J. He, X.Q. Li, Z.X. Yang, X.Q. Liu, F. Xie, X.Q. Lv, et al., Self-assembly of 
selenium-loaded octenyl succinic anhydride-modified starch nanomicelles for 
treating inflammation-related brain diseases, Chem. Eng. J. 483 (2024) 149168, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.149168.
[21] Z.W. Li, H.J. Liang, Y.B. Wang, G.D. Zheng, L.C. Yang, Brain-targeting 
dihydromyricetin-decorated selenium nanoparticles attenuate oxidative stress for 
treatment of Alzheimer'S disease, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 7 (17) (2024) 
20411–20424, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.4c03411.
[22] K. Xu, P. Huang, Y.X. Wu, T. Liu, N.Y. Shao, L.L. Zhao, et al., Engineered selenium/ 
human serum albumin nanoparticles for efficient targeted treatment of parkinson's 
disease via oral gavage, ACS Nano 17 (20) (2023) 19961–19980, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsnano.3c05011.
[23] S.Y. Rao, Y.P. Lin, R. Lin, J.G. Liu, H.S. Wang, W.X. Hu, et al., Traditional Chinese 
medicine active ingredients-based selenium nanoparticles regulate antioxidant 
selenoproteins for spinal cord injury treatment, J. Nanobiotechnol. 20 (1) (2022) 
278, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-022-01490-x.
[24] X.D. Shi, Y.Q. Tian, J.L. Wu, S.Y. Wang, Synthesis, characterization, and biological 
activity of selenium nanoparticles conjugated with polysaccharides, Crit. Rev. Food 
Sci. Nutr. 61 (13) (2021) 2225–2236, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10408398.2020.1774497.
[25] W.W. Chen, Y.F. Li, S. Yang, L. Yue, Q.X. Jiang, W.S. Xia, Synthesis and antioxidant 
properties of chitosan and carboxymethyl chitosan-stabilized selenium 
nanoparticles, Carbohydr. Polym. 132 (2015) 574–581, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbpol.2015.06.064.
[26] T. Lei, Z.X. Yang, C.Q. Jiang, X.R. Wang, W.Q. Yang, X.T. Yang, et al., Mannose- 
integrated nanoparticle hitchhike glucose transporter 1 recycling to overcome 
various barriers of oral delivery for Alzheimer'S disease therapy, ACS Nano 18 (4) 
(2024) 3234–3250, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09715.
[27] Y.L. Sun, F. Hong, L. Zhang, L.Y. Feng, The sphingosine-1-phosphate analogue, 
FTY-720, promotes the proliferation of embryonic neural stem cells, enhances 
hippocampal neurogenesis and learning and memory abilities in adult mice, Br. J. 
Pharmacol. 173 (18) (2016) 2793–2807, https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.13557.
[28] J.J. Liu, T. Wang, J. Dong, Y. Lu, The blood-brain barriers: novel nanocarriers for 
central nervous system diseases, J. Nanobiotechnol. 23 (1) (2025) 146, https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s12951-025-03247-8.
[29] Q.X. Tan, S.J. Zhao, T. Xu, Q. Wang, M. Zhang, L. Yan, et al., Inorganic nano-drug 
delivery systems for crossing the blood-brain barrier: advances and challenges, 
Coord. Chem. Revi. 494 (2023) 215344, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ccr.2023.215344.
[30] C.X. Wang, B. Wu, Y.T. Wu, X.Y. Song, S.S. Zhang, Z.H. Liu, Camouflaging 
nanoparticles with brain metastatic tumor cell membranes: a new strategy to 
traverse blood-brain barrier for imaging and therapy of brain tumors, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 30 (14) (2020) 1909369, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201909369.
[31] D.Y. Zhang, Y.J. Sun, S.Y. Wang, Y. Zou, M. Zheng, B.Y. Shi, Brain-targeting 
metastatic tumor cell membrane cloaked biomimetic nanomedicines mediate 
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
13 

potent chemodynamic and RNAi combinational therapy of glioblastoma, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 32 (51) (2022) 2209239, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202209239.
[32] M. Preusser, D. Capper, A. Ilhan-Mutlu, A.S. Berghoff, P. Birner, R. Bartsch, et al., 
Brain metastases: pathobiology and emerging targeted therapies, Acta 
Neuropathol. 123 (2) (2012) 205–222, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-011- 
0933-9.
[33] G. Morad, C.V. Carman, E.J. Hagedorn, J.R. Perlin, L.I. Zon, N. Mustafaoglu, et al., 
Tumor-derived extracellular vesicles breach the intact blood-brain barrier via 
transcytosis, ACS Nano 13 (12) (2019) 13853–13865, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.9b04397.
[34] Y. Zou, S.S. Li, Y.D. Li, D.Y. Zhang, M. Zheng, B.Y. Shi, Glioblastoma cell derived 
exosomes as a potent vaccine platform targeting primary brain cancers and brain 
metastases, ACS Nano 19 (18) (2025) 17309–17322, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.4c14573.
[35] J.M. Suh, Y. Son, J.Y. Yoo, Y. Goh, N.G. Seidah, S. Lee, et al., Proprotein convertase 
subtilisin/kexin type 9 is required for Ahnak-mediated metastasis of melanoma 
into lung epithelial cells, Neoplasia 23 (9) (2021) 993–1001, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.neo.2021.07.007.
[36] L. Chen, Y. Du, K. Zhang, Z.Y. Liang, J.Q. Li, H. Yu, et al., Tau-targeted 
multifunctional nanocomposite for combinational therapy of Alzheimer'S disease, 
ACS Nano 12 (2) (2018) 1321–1338, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.7b07625.
[37] C.H. Gao, W. Gong, M.Y. Yang, X.Y. Chu, Y.L. Wang, Z.P. Li, et al., T807-modified 
human serum albumin biomimetic nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery across 
the blood-brain barrier, J. Drug Targeting 28 (10) (2020) 1085–1095, https://doi. 
org/10.1080/1061186x.2020.1777420.
[38] Y.Q. Tang, D.J. Zhao, F. Yang, G.J. Pang, Z.H. Sun, J. Chang, et al., Hsp90 co- 
chaperone degradation combined with antioxidation nanostrategy to rescue 
tauopathy-induced Alzheimer's disease, Chem. Eng. J. 432 (2022) 134352, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.134352.
[39] E. Beurel, S.F. Grieco, R.S. Jope, Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3): regulation, 
actions, and diseases, Pharmacol. Ther. 148 (2015) 114–131, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.11.016.
[40] R.Y. Liu, J. Yang, X.Y. Qiu, W.H. Ji, J. Shen, Y. Li, et al., "Cascaded rocket" 
nanosystems with spatiotemporal separation for triple-synergistic therapy of 
Alzheimer'S disease, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 11 (11) (2022) 2101748, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adhm.202101748.
[41] L.L. Cai, C.Y. Yang, W.F. Jia, Y.W. Liu, R. Xie, T. Lei, et al., Endo/lysosome- 
escapable delivery depot for improving BBB transcytosis and neuron targeted 
therapy of Alzheimer'S disease, Adv. Funct. Mater. 30 (27) (2020) 1909999, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201909999.
[42] B.B. Hu, F.Y. Dai, Z.M. Fan, G.H. Ma, Q.W. Tang, X. Zhang, Nanotheranostics: 
congo red/rutin-MNPs with enhanced magnetic resonance imaging and H2O2- 
responsive therapy of Alzheimer'S disease in APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice, 
Adv. Mater. 27 (37) (2015) 5499–5505, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201502227.
[43] Y.K. Chen, X.T. Yang, J. Li, H. Luo, Q.Q. Huang, W.Q. Yang, et al., A nasally 
administrated reactive oxygen species-responsive carrier-free gene delivery 
nanosystem for Alzheimer's disease combination therapy, J. Controlled Release 381 
(2025) 113604, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2025.113604.
[44] M.M. Xu, H. Zhou, Y.N. Liu, J. Sun, W.J. Xie, P. Zhao, et al., Ultrasound-excited 
protoporphyrin IX-modified multifunctional nanoparticles as a strong inhibitor of 
tau phosphorylation and β-amyloid aggregation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 
(39) (2018) 32965–32980, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b08230.
[45] W.W. Chen, H. Cheng, W.S. Xia, Progress in the surface functionalization of 
selenium nanoparticles and their potential application in cancer therapy, 
Antioxidants 11 (10) (2022) 1965, https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox11101965.
[46] S.G. Fagan, S. Bechet, K.K. Dev, Fingolimod rescues memory and improves 
pathological hallmarks in the 3xTg-AD model of Alzheimer'S disease, Mol. 
Neurobiol. 59 (3) (2022) 1882–1895, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-021- 
02613-5.
[47] J.T. Liu, X.Y. Han, T.Y. Zhang, K.Y. Tian, Z.P. Li, F. Luo, Reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) scavenging biomaterials for anti-inflammatory diseases: from mechanism to 
therapy, J. Hematol. Oncol. 16 (1) (2023) 116, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13045- 
023-01512-7.
[48] Y.G. Kim, Y. Lee, N. Lee, M. Soh, D. Kim, T. Hyeon, Ceria-based therapeutic 
antioxidants for biomedical applications, Adv. Mater. 36 (10) (2024) 2210819, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202210819.
[49] Q. Zhang, B.H. Yin, Y.Y. Huang, Y.T. Gu, J.X. Yan, J.R. Chen, et al., A dual "turn-on" 
biosensor based on AIE effect and FRET for in situ detection of miR-125b 
biomarker in early Alzheimer's disease, Biosens. Bioelectron. 230 (2023) 115270, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2023.115270.
[50] K.M.A. De Kleijn, G.J.M. Martens, Molecular effects of FDA-approved multiple 
sclerosis drugs on glial cells and neurons of the central vervous system, Int. J. Mol. 
Sci. 21 (12) (2020) 4229, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21124229.
[51] C. Li, Z.H. Zhao, Y.F. Luo, T.T. Ning, P.X. Liu, Q.J. Chen, et al., Macrophage- 
disguised manganese dioxide nanoparticles for neuroprotection by reducing 
oxidative stress and modulating inflammatory microenvironment in acute 
ischemicstroke, Adv. Sci. 8 (20) (2021) 2101526, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
advs.202101526.
[52] T. Ageeva, A. Rizvanov, Y. Mukhamedshina, NF-κB and JAK/STAT signaling 
pathways as crucial regulators of neuroinflammation and astrocyte modulation in 
spinal cord injury, Cells 13 (7) (2024) 581, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
cells13070581.
[53] W.S. Wang, Y. Wang, F.J. Wang, G.J. Xie, S.Z. Liu, Z.F. Li, et al., Gastrodin 
regulates the TLR4/TRAF6/NF-κB pathway to reduce neuroinflammation and 
microglial activation in an AD model, Phytomedicine 128 (2024) 155518, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2024.155518.
[54] Q.H. Feng, X.L. Zhang, X.W. Zhao, J. Liu, Q. Wang, Y.Q. Yao, et al., Intranasal 
delivery of pure nanodrug loaded liposomes for Alzheimer'S disease treatment by 
efficiently regulating microglial polarization, Small 20 (50) (2024) 2405781, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202405781.
[55] F. Yang, D.J. Zhao, M. Cheng, Y.N. Liu, Z.Y. Chen, J. Chang, et al., mTOR-mediated 
immunometabolic reprogramming nanomodulators enable sensitive switching of 
energy deprivation-induced microglial polarization for Alzheimer'S disease 
management, ACS Nano 17 (16) (2023) 15724–15741, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.3c03232.
[56] L. Fao, S.I. Mota, A.C. Rego, Shaping the Nrf2-ARE-related pathways in alzheimer's 
and parkinson's diseases, Ageing Res. Rev. 54 (2019) 100942, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.arr.2019.100942.
[57] H. Querfurth, H.K. Lee, Mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
complexes in neurodegeneration, Mol. Neurodegener. 16 (1) (2021) 44, https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s13024-021-00428-5.
[58] T.D. Zhang, Z.H. Xue, Q.Q. He, J.L. Yang, Y. Wen, X.H. Lu, et al., Synergistic effects 
of IL-3 release and Mn2+-doped prussian blue nanoparticles camouflaged with 
MES23.5 cell membranes on Alzheimer'S disease therapy, Nano Res. 18 (2) (2025) 
94907175, https://doi.org/10.26599/nr.2025.94907175.
[59] C.D. Arvanitis, G.B. Ferraro, R.K. Jain, The blood-brain barrier and blood-tumour 
barrier in brain tumours and metastases, Nat. Rev. Cancer 20 (1) (2020) 26–41, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568-019-0205-x.
[60] Y. Zou, Y.B. Wang, S. Xu, Y.J. Liu, J.L. Yin, D.B. Lovejoy, et al., Brain co-delivery of 
temozolomide and cisplatin for combinatorial glioblastoma chemotherapy, Adv. 
Mater. 34 (33) (2022) e2203958, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202203958.
[61] S.Y. Chi, L. Zhang, H.M. Cheng, Y.R. Chang, Y.Y. Zhao, X.Y. Wang, et al., 
Biomimetic nanocomposites camouflaged with hybrid cell membranes for accurate 
therapy of early-stage glioma, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 62 (29) (2023) 
e202304419, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202304419.
[62] C.H. Gao, Y.L. Wang, J.J. Sun, Y. Han, W. Gong, Y. Li, et al., Neuronal 
mitochondria-targeted delivery of curcumin by biomimetic engineered 
nanosystems in Alzheimer'S disease mice, Acta Biomater. 108 (2020) 285–299, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2020.03.029.
[63] K.X. Zhou, F. Yang, Y.Y. Li, Y.M. Chen, X.J. Zhang, J.M. Zhang, et al., Synthesis and 
evaluation of fluorine-18 labeled 2-phenylquinoxaline derivatives as potential tau 
imaging agents, Mol. Pharmaceutics 18 (3) (2021) 1176–1195, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.0c01078.
[64] L.P. Fu, J.M. Zhang, K.X. Zhou, X.J. Zhang, H.G. Xie, M.W. Zhu, et al., In vivo 
imaging of tau deposition in Alzheimer'S disease using both [18F]-THK5317 and 
[18F]-S16: A pilot human study, Front. Aging Neurosci. 14 (2022), https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fnagi.2022.994750.
[65] Y. Wang, L. Cai, K.X. Zhou, M.C. Cui, S.B. Yao, Biodistribution and dosimetry 
evaluation for a novel tau tracer [18F]-S16 in healthy volunteers and its application 
in assessment of tau pathology in alzheimer'Alzheimer'S, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 
9 (2022), https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.812818.
[66] C. Fazakas, I. Wilhelm, P. Nagyoszi, A.E. Farkas, J. Hask´o, J. Moln´ar, et al., 
Transmigration of melanoma cells through the blood-brain barrier: role of 
endothelial tight junctions and melanoma-released serine proteases, PLoS One 6 
(6) (2011) e20758, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0020758.
[67] J.Q. Luo, J. Zhang, H.H. Yu, H.H. Zhou, Y.Y. Yuan, J.Z. Du, et al., Genetically 
engineered biomimetic nanoparticles for synergistic activation of glioma- 
associated macrophages against glioblastoma, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 147 (41) (2025) 
37641–37657, https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c12775.
[68] H.Z. Jiang, Y.L. Liu, C. Wang, Y.Y. Song, F.H. Wu, Y.F. Yin, et al., Nanoparticles 
loaded with pralidoxime wrapped in tumor cell membranes: a new strategy to 
counteract the central nervous system effects of organophosphate poisoning, Int. J. 
Nanomed. 20 (2025) 8101–8118, https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S516233.
[69] J.E. Lee, J. Park, E.J. Kim, Y.H. Ko, S.A. Hong, S.H. Yang, et al., Noggin contributes 
to brain metastatic colonization of lung cancer cells, Cancer Cell Int. 23 (1) (2023) 
299, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12935-023-03155-7.
[70] G. Lorusso, C.B. Wyss, F. Kuonen, N. Vannini, C. Billottet, N. Duffey, et al., 
Connexins orchestrate progression of breast cancer metastasis to the brain by 
promoting FAK activation, Sci. Transl. Med. 14 (661) (2022) eaax8933, https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aax8933.
[71] C.R. Wang, A. Nagayach, H. Patel, L. Dao, H. Zhu, A.R. Wasylishen, et al., Utilizing 
human cerebral organoids to model breast cancer brain metastasis in culture, 
Breast Cancer Res. 26 (1) (2024) 108, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13058-024- 
01865-y.
[72] D.P. Fitzgerald, P. Subramanian, M. Deshpande, C. Graves, I. Gordon, Y.Z. Qian, et 
al., Opposing effects of pigment epithelium-derived factor on breast cancer cell 
versus neuronal survival: implication for brain metastasis and metastasis-induced 
brain damage, Cancer Res. 72 (1) (2012) 144–153, https://doi.org/10.1158/0008- 
5472.CAN-11-1904.
R. Xue et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Biomaterials 329 (2026) 123970 
14