Nanoscale
COMMUNICATION
Cite this: Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016
Received 21st February 2022,
Accepted 21st June 2022
DOI: 10.1039/d2nr01003h
rsc.li/nanoscale
Gold nanocluster adjuvant enables the eradication
of persister cells by antibiotics and abolishes the
emergence of resistance†
Zhixin Cao,a,b Xiaohua Chen,a,c Jing Chen,a Anping Xia,a Brian Bacacao,a
Jessica Tran,d Devesh Sharma,a Laurent A. Bekale
*a and Peter L. Santa Maria*a
Persister cells are responsible for relapses of infections common in
cystic ﬁbrosis and chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM). Yet,
there are no Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved anti-
biotics to eradicate persister cells. Frustratingly, the global pre-
clinical bacterial pipeline does not contain antibacterial agents tar-
geting persister cells. Therefore, we report a nontraditional anti-
microbial chemotherapy strategy based on gold nanoclusters adju-
vant to eradicate persister cells by existing antibiotics belonging to
that diﬀerent class. Compared to killing with antibiotics alone,
combining antibiotics and AuNC@CPP sterilizes persister cells and
bioﬁlms. Enhanced killing of up to 4 orders of magnitude in a vali-
dated mouse model of CSOM with Pseudomonas aeruginosa infec-
tion was observed when combining antibiotics and AuNC@CPP,
informing a potential approach to improve the treatment of CSOM.
We established that the mechanism of action of AuNC@CPP is due
to disruption of the proton gradient and membrane hyperpolariz-
ation. The method presented here could compensate for the lack
of new antibiotics to combat persister cells. This method could
also beneﬁt the current eﬀort to slow resistance development
because AuNC@CPP abolished the emergence of drug-resistant
strains induced by antibiotics.
Introduction
Chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM) is a chronically dis-
charging infected middle ear most frequently caused by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), resulting in permanent hearing
loss and surgery. CSOM is a massive global health problem
aﬀecting 330 million people worldwide, making it the leading
cause of permanent hearing loss in the developing world.1 It
predominantly aﬀects lower socioeconomic groups, primarily
indigenous populations, with an incidence of 45%.1,2 It also
has a significant cost burden in the first world, accounting for
between 4 and 11 billion dollars in annual health care costs in
the United States alone.3 CSOM is usually treated with topical
antibiotics or antiseptics, which successfully convert to tem-
porary inactive disease but fail to remove the infection,
making it prone to relapse.4 Patients who fail medical therapy
often undergo middle ear surgery, and only 50% are recur-
rence-free after five years.3 The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) has approved fluoroquinolones for the treatment of
CSOM due to their nonototoxic nature. However, current
topical fluoroquinolone therapy fails to address this disease
because it is ineﬀective against bacterial persister cells within
biofilms.4,5 Frustratingly, fluoroquinolone treatment might
itself enrich the bacterial population of persistent cells. The
reason is that ciprofloxacin induces the TisB toxin that
decreases proton motive force and ATP levels leading to persis-
ter cell formation.6 Together, these results suggest that anti-
bacterial agents targeting persister cells could improve treat-
ment outcomes of CSOM, an unmet medical need.
Treatments that enable the killing of persister cells using
existing antibiotics represent the next frontiers of antibacterial
discovery. This paradigm could compensate for the lack of new
antibiotics to combat persister cells because the global pre-
clinical bacterial pipeline does not contain drugs targeting
persister cells.7 Colistin is a polymyxin antibiotic that retains
bactericidal eﬃcacy against metabolically repressed bacterial
cells. However, it also displays toxicity to human cells.8
Moreover, up to 65% of patients receiving colistin at plasma
concentrations higher than 2.2 mg mL−1 exhibit signs of
nephrotoxicity.9 To allow more tolerable therapies, the combi-
nation of a low amount of colistin with both aminoglycosides
and fluoroquinolones has been able to eradicate persister
cells.10 Combating persister cells through activating bacterial
metabolism has emerged as an alternative to the antibiotic-
†Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1039/d2nr01003h
aDepartment of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Stanford University, 801
Welch Road, Stanford, CA 94305-5739, USA. E-mail: bekale20@stanford.edu,
petersantamaria@stanford.edu
bDepartment of Pathology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Aﬃliated to Shandong First
Medical University, China
cDepartment of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, the First Aﬃliated Hospital,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450000, China
dThe Protein and Nucleic Acid Biotechnology Facility, Beckman Center Stanford
University, 279 Campus Drive, West Stanford, CA 94305, USA
10016 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

colistin combination. For example, metabolites, such as fuma-
rate, stimulate the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle that activates
cellular respiration and generates a proton motive force, which
induces increased uptake of aminoglycosides in nongrowing
bacterial populations.11 This TCA cycle simulation caused by
fumarate enhances aminoglycosides potency against persister
cells.11 Unfortunately, metabolite-based antibiotic potentiation
is specific to aminoglycosides and does not synergize with
other bactericidal antibiotics, including fluoroquinolones and
β-lactams.11 Unless to develop new therapeutic methods to
protect hearing, translating this approach into clinical practice
in the management of CSOM to control chronic infection and
eradicate PA will be challenging due to ototoxicity induced by
aminoglycosides.12
Safe and eﬀective methods to eradicate persister cells with
existing bactericidal antibiotics regardless of their mechanism
of action are critically needed. Here, we develop a better and
more general adjunctive strategy based on non-antimicrobial
gold nanoclusters (AuNC@CPP) that simultaneously helps
fight persister cells and slow resistance development. This
adjunctive strategy can eradicate metabolically active cells,
persister cells, and biofilms by fluoroquinolones and amino-
glycosides. Furthermore, we established that the mechanism
of action of AuNC@CPP is due to disruption of the proton gra-
dient and membrane hyperpolarization. Finally, we demon-
strated that the treatment of CSOM with topical fluoroquino-
lones (ofloxacin) in the presence of AuNC@CPP achieved a
better antibacterial eﬀect than ofloxacin alone.
Results
Synthesis and characterization of gold nanoclusters
Endocytosis drives the internalization of gold nanoparticles
into the eukaryotic cells.13 However, endocytosis does not exist
in bacterial cells. Therefore, the entry route for antimicrobial
agents into Gram-negative bacterial cells is through mem-
brane-embedded
porin
channels
or
direct
translocation
through the cell membrane.14 Porin restricts the entry of lipo-
philic or large compounds with a molecular cutoﬀat around
molecular weight (MW) of 600 Dalton.15,16 Cellpenetrating
peptide (CPP) YGRKKRRQRRR-(β-ala)3-Cys-amide has been
reported to enhance the internalization of 5 nm diameter gold
nanoparticles into Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial
strains.17 However, the internalization of 10 nm gold nano-
particles into the bacterial cells was impossible.17 Therefore,
this study motivated the use of CPP polypeptide and thiolated
polyethylene glycol with a carboxyl termination to increase the
internalization of AuNC@CPP with a diameter less than
10 nm. We engineered a peptide–gold hybrid nanocluster
(AuNC@CPP)
that
comprises
Ac-YGRKKRRQRRR-(β-Ala)-
(β-Ala)-(β-Ala)-Cys-CONH2 and thiolated polyethylene glycol
with a carboxyl termination (an eﬃcient protecting ligand that
confers good stability to AuNC@CPP in solution as well as in
biological
systems).
The
characterizations
of
engineered
AuNC@CPP are presented in Fig. 1. As shown in the inset of
Fig. 1(a), the solution of AuNC@CPP is brownish. UV-Vis spec-
trum of AuNC@CPP showed a monotonous decrease from UV
into the visible but no surface plasmon resonance peak at
520 nm, indicating the formation of gold nanoclusters.18 The
core size of AuNC@CPP was further characterized by trans-
mission electron microscopy (TEM), which confirms that the
size of AuNC@CPP is ultrasmall, about 4.0 ± 1 nm (Fig. 1b and
c). The ζ-potential value of AuNC@CPP was −18.7 ± 2 mV in
water (Fig. 1d). The peptide was purified using the Waters
system by reversephase high-performance liquid chromato-
graphy (RP-HPLC). The molecular masses were determined by
MALDI-TOF
using
the
Voyager-DE
RP
Biospectrometry
Workstation instrument (Fig. S1 and S2†).
AuNC@CPP does not exhibit in vitro and in vivo toxicity
The biocompatibility of AuNC@CPP toward eukaryotic cells
adenocarcinoma human alveolar basal epithelial cells (A549
cells) was demonstrated using an MTT assay. We found that
A549 cells exhibited more than 90% viability upon exposure to
AuNC@CPP at 3200 μg mL−1 for 24 h (Fig. S3†). Since the
AuNC@CPP would be administered directly to the middle ear,
the drug would have less systemic distribution. To further
support the biosafety of AuNC@CPP by supposing that the
entire dose passes into the systemic circulation, we performed
a single dose acute toxicity study. A single administration of
AuNC@CPP at a dose of 8 mg kg−1 (or 0.8 mg mL−1) was evalu-
ated in healthy mice after 24 h. No changes were detected in
the chemistry and hematology parameters (Fig. S4†). Thus,
administration of AuNC@CPP directly to the middle ear is un-
likely to be of concern for systemic toxicity. However, further
studies on the pharmacokinetics of AuNC@CPP in the middle
ear of CSOM mice are necessary to determine the optimal
dosage and potential ototoxicity of AuNC@CPP.
AuNC@CPP does not exhibit antimicrobial activity
In subsequent experiments, we selected 800 μg mL−1 of the
AuNC@CPP as a benchmarked concentration to expand the
biocompatibility. Next, we confirmed that 800 μg mL−1 of
AuNC@CPP has no antibacterial activity against Gram-positive
(Staphylococcus
aureus,
SA25923)
and
Gramnegative
(Pseudomonas
aeruginosa,
PA01)
bacteria
using
the
disk
diﬀusion method. As expected, the ofloxacin disc (OFL 5 μg
antibiotic, a positive control) causes a broad zone of inhibition
(Fig. 2a). In contrast, the paper disc saturated with 800 μg
mL−1 of AuNC@CPP, placed on a lawn of bacteria inoculated
on the surface of an agar medium and incubated overnight,
did not cause an inhibition zone (Fig. 2a). This result suggests
that AuNC@CPP does not exhibit antimicrobial activity.
Furthermore,
the
lack
of
antimicrobial
activity
of
AuNC@CPP was analyzed by enumerating the colony-forming
unit (CFU) after treating the exponential growth phase (actively
dividing cells) with AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1) for 24 h. We
observed that the CFU mL−1 of the bacterial population was
similar before and after AuNC@CPP treatment, confirming the
absence of antimicrobial properties (Fig. 2b). Gold nano-
clusters exert antibacterial eﬀects by targeting thiol-redox
Nanoscale
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032 | 10017
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

homeostasis, causing the accumulation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in bacteria.19 To probe the possibility that the
absence of antimicrobial activity of AuNC@CPP is due to the
lack of thiol-redox homeostasis depletion, which prevents ROS
accumulation in bacteria, we quantify the total thiol levels in
SA and PA bacteria treated with AuNC@CPP (800 µg mL−1) for
two hours in phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) at 37 °C. We
observed that the treatment of bacteria with AuNC@CPP does
not statistically reduce total thiol levels (Fig. S5†). These
results showed that AuNC@CPP is biocompatible and does not
exhibit an antimicrobial activity at 800 μg mL−1.
AuNC@CPP enables the eradication of planktonic persister
cells by ofloxacin (OFL)
Cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP) has been reported
to induce persister cell formation by decreasing ATP pro-
duction through the dissipation of the proton motive force,
thereby leading to a drop in cell metabolic activity.20 The pre-
treatment of the stationary phase with CCCP creates nearly
100% persister cells.21 In contrast, persister cells comprise
about 1% in the CCCP-untreated stationary phase.22,23 The
stationary phase of Gram-negative (PA01) and Gram-positive
(SA25923) was exposed to CCCP at 200 μg mL−1 for 24 h to
generate planktonic persister cells (i.e., CCCP-induced persis-
ter cells). This method eﬃciently induces the generation of
planktonic persister-enriched cultures in PA and SA.23 The
long lag time of persister cells confers tolerance to anti-
biotics.24 We observed that the CCCP-treated stationary phase
of PA01 and SA 25923 has a lag phase over 12 h and 6 h,
respectively. In contrast, the CCCP-untreated stationary phase
(1% persister cells) of PA01 and SA 25923 started to grow at
4.5 h and 2.5 h, respectively (Fig. 3a). Of note, bacterial killing
by aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones is dependent on
intracellular ATP concentration.25 Therefore, we quantify the
level of intracellular ATP in diﬀerent planktonic bacteria popu-
lations, and it decreases as follows: CCCP-induced persister
cells < normal cells (CCCP-untreated stationary phase) < expo-
nential
phase
(metabolically
active)
(Fig.
3b).
Together,
these results suggest that CCCP-induced persister cells are
more
diﬃcult
to
eradicate
than
the
CCCP-untreated
stationary phase (more than 1% persister cells). Thus, in the
remainder of the manuscript, we will thus refer to persister
cells as CCCP-induced persister cells or CCCP-treated station-
ary phase.
Fig. 1
Characterization of the as-prepared AuNC@CPP. (A) UV-vis spectrum of AuNC@CPP. The inset shows a picture of the solution. (B and C)
TEM image of AuNC@CPP and the size distribution with a coeﬃcient of variation equal to 25.1%. (D) Zeta potential of AuNC@CPP in water (pH 7).
Since there are no universally accepted zeta potential standards, only reference materials are available to check the proper operation of zeta poten-
tial instruments. BI-ZR3 is a colloidal pigment used as a zeta potential reference material with Brookhaven’s ZetaPlus instrument. The BI-ZR3 refer-
ence material was included as a positive control.
Communication
Nanoscale
10018 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

Next, we examined whether AuNC@CPP could act as an
adjuvant to eradicate persister cells by OFL. CCCP-induced
persister cells were incubated with OFL (5 × MIC = 10 µg mL−1)
or a combination of AuNC@CPP (800 µg mL−1) plus OFL
(10 µg mL−1) for 24 h at 37 °C to assess the eradication of pers-
ister cells. It is important to emphasize that the eradication
Fig. 2
Susceptibility of bacteria to AuNC@CPP. (A) Photographs of the disk diﬀusion test show the zone of inhibition around OFL, but AuNC@CPP
has no antimicrobial activity against Gram-negative (PA01) and Gram-positive (SA25923). (B) Evaluation of the bactericidal activity of AuNC@CPP
against metabolically active PA01 and SA25923. AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1) did not exhibit bactericidal activity against PA01 and SA25923 after incu-
bating at 37 °C for 72 h. The results are presented as mean ± standard deviation from three independent experiments (n = 3).
Nanoscale
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032 | 10019
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

was performed PBS to avoid CCCP-induced persister cells awa-
kening from their dormant state. The detection limit was zero
CFU mL−1 because the entire bacterial pellet suspended in
100 µL of PBS was plated in agar and incubated for up to 72 h
to confirm the sterilization. We observed that OFL failed to
eradicate CCCP-induced persister cells. In contrast, a combi-
nation of OFL (10 µg mL−1) and AuNC@CPP (800 µg mL−1)
sterilized CCCP-induced persister cells (Fig. 3c). Finally, we
tested the eﬀect of CPP (800 μg mL−1) alone and in combi-
nation with OFL (10 μg mL−1) and found that CPP cannot
potentiates the killing of CCCP-induced persister cells by OFL
(Fig. S6†). This study confirms that the entire entity of
AuNC@CPP was required for the synergistic eﬀect. Thus, the
polypeptide content on AuNC@CPP does not directly contrib-
ute to the synergistic eﬀect causing the eradication of persister
cells by antibiotics. We are somewhat unsurprised that fuma-
Fig. 3
AuNC@CPP enables the eradication of persister cells by oﬂoxacin (OFL). (A) Representative growth curves of CCCP-untreated stationary
phase (i.e., normal cell = non-growing cell) and CCCP-treated stationary phase (i.e., CCCP-induced persister cells = 100% persister cells). Exposure
to CCCP (200 μg mL−1 for 24 h) increased the lag phase of stationary phase PA01 and SA25923 bacterial cells compared to the CCCP-untreated
stationary phase (i.e., normal cell = 1% persister cells). (B) CCCP-treated stationary phase (persister cells, in red) have lower intracellular ATP levels
than the exponential (metabolically active cell, in black) and stationary phase bacteria (normal non-growing cells, in bleu). (C) Representative Petri
dish showing regrowth of persister cells following treatment of CCCP-treated stationary phase with OFL (10 μg mL−1) and OFL (10 μg mL−1) com-
bined with fumarate (4000 μg mL−1). Regrowth was not observed following treatment of CCCP-treated stationary phase by OFL (10 μg mL−1) com-
bined with AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1). Following the treatment, the entire bacterial pellet was suspended in 100 µL of PBS, plated in agar, and incu-
bated for up to 72 h to conﬁrm the sterilization. The images represent Petri dishes from three independent experiments (n = 3) for each condition.
Communication
Nanoscale
10020 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

rate might have reduced the bactericidal activity of OFL
because fumarate could increase the frequency of persister
cells in the inoculum of CCCP-induced persister cells. Cells
preexposed to fumarate before treatment with fluoroquino-
lones showed a 15-fold increase in the frequency of persister
cells.26 Fumarate-mediated increased frequency of persister
cells might explain our observation that the number of remain-
ing persister cells following the treatment with OFL (10 µg
mL−1) in the presence of fumarate (4000 µg mL−1) was more
than that in the group treated with OFL alone (Fig. 3c).
AuNC@CPP enables the eradication of in vitro biofilms by
ofloxacin (OFL)
Our next goal was to investigate whether AuNC@CPP-enabled
eradication of biofilms by OFL. It has previously demonstrated
that the tolerance to antibiotics in PA biofilms largely depends
on the presence of persister cells.27 Moreover, using the
stationary phase cultures of P. aeruginosa, which produce pers-
ister cells at high levels, Lewis confirmed that antibiotic
diﬀusion through biofilm is not the leading cause of antibiotic
treatment failure because biofilms and stationary phase cul-
tures have similar resistance to killing by carbenicillin, ofloxa-
cin and tobramycin.27 Therefore, based on the results observed
with the eradication of planktonic persister cells, we hypoth-
esized that biofilm could be sterilized with OFL in the pres-
ence of AuNC@CPP. Mature 48 h old-biofilms on a Calgary
Biofilm Device were treated for 24 h at 37 °C with OFL (300 ×
MIC = 600 µg mL−1) or (20 × MIC = 40 µg mL−1) combined
with AuNC@CPP (800 µg mL−1) (challenging plate). Similar to
the eradication of planktonic CCCP-induced persister cells
experiment, biofilm eradication was performed in PBS to avoid
awakening persister cells within the biofilm. The challenging
plate was washed to remove the drug after the drug treatment.
Then the challenging plate containing treated biofilm was
deep in fresh Luria–Bertani (LB) broth and incubated in fresh
Luria–Bertani (LB) broth at 37 °C for 48 h to examine for steri-
lization (the recovery plate). 10 µL of recovery LB was spotted
on agar plates and further incubated for 48 h at 37 °C to
confirm sterilization of the biofilm after antibiotics treatment.
We observed that at 600 µg mL−1, OFL failed to eradicate PA
and SA biofilms (Fig. 4). These results suggest that the
minimum biofilm eradication concentration (MBEC) values of
OFL against PA and SA biofilms are above 600 µg mL−1. In
support of our finding, previous work reported that MBEC
values of OFL against 24 h old-biofilms of methicillin-resistant
SA and PA were 750 µg mL−1 and 640 µg mL−1, respectively.28
A combination of OFL (40 µg mL−1) and AuNC@CPP (800 µg
mL−1) was able to sterilize 48 h old-biofilms of PA and SA
(Fig. 4). This result demonstrated that AuNC@CPP might be a
valuable adjuvant to potentiate the eradication of persister
cells hidden inside thick biofilms by clinically achievable anti-
biotic concentrations. Moreover, AuNC@CPP could also help
disperse mature biofilms and remove persister cells from the
biofilm matrix (Fig. S7†). This feature may benefit the steriliza-
tion of biofilms treated with antibiotics and AuNCs.
AuNC@CPP exhibits synergistic eﬀects with ofloxacin (OFL) in
the CSOM mouse model
In vivo eﬃcacy of Floxin®Otic was compared with that of
Floxin®Otic plus AuNC@CPP to determine the clinical rele-
vance of this therapy adjuvant using a validated mouse
model of chronic PA of ear infection mimicking CSOM.5 In
our CSOM model, there is no resistance development after
treatment
with
OFL.
Indeed,
the
luminescence
of
P. aeruginosa infection disappears after treatment with OFL,
meaning that the bacteria infections respond to antibiotic
therapy.5 However, it quickly relapses after antibiotic seces-
sion, resulting in chronic and recurrent infections. In
addition, given that persister cells are the bacteria that resus-
citate after antibiotic treatments, we have quantified bacteria
colonies after antibiotic treatment to evaluate the potential
to kill them in the mouse model. Therefore, the therapeutic
endpoint of our in vivo study was the reduction of the level of
bacterial colonies from eﬀusion of the middle ear 14 days
after stopping treatment. The treatment regime was chosen
to mimic what was already prescribed in the clinic. The anti-
microbial treatments were commenced 14 days after inocu-
lations were performed to create CSOM. An 8 µL drop was
placed in the ear canal twice a day for 14 consecutive days.
The current study intends to establish AuNC@CPP as a class
I adjuvant (i.e., enhancing persister cells’ killing with anti-
biotics). However, investigating whether AuNC@CPP is a
class II adjuvant (i.e., immunomodulator), that enhances the
host’s ability to kill bacteria is beyond the scope of the
current manuscript. Since AuNC@CPP exhibits no anti-
microbial activity at the concentration used in this study, we
performed a superiority study with three arms, including the
placebo
control
group
(phosphatebuﬀered
saline,
PBS),
FLOXIN®Otic (8 µL drop of ofloxacin 3000 µg mL−1 = 24 µg
of ofloxacin), and combination (8 µL drop containing 24 µg
of ofloxacin + 296 µg of AuNC@CPP). Administration of
FLOXIN®Otic showed less than 90% reduction equivalent to
<1 log10 in the bacterial burden compared to placebo control
(6.98 ± 1.45 log10 CFU per mL vs. 7.69 ± 0.26 log10 CFU per
mL) (Fig. 5 and Table 1). In contrast, a combination of
FLOXIN®Otic and AuNC@CPP led to 99.999% reduction in
the bacterial burden compared to placebo control (2.54 ±
0.51 vs. 7.69 ± 0.26 log10 CFU per mL and p < 0.05) (Fig. 5
and Table 1). To be considered eﬀective, antimicrobial
chemotherapy needs to reduce more than 99.9%, equivalent
to 3-log10 bacterial reductions, than a placebo control.
Therefore,
the
current
treatments
for
CSOM
fail,
and
FLOXIN®Otic does not maintain clinical benefit once treat-
ment is stopped. These data inform a potential approach to
improve the treatment of CSOM with OFL, the current stan-
dard of care for CSOM in humans. One should keep in mind
that the superior eﬃcacy of the new intervention compared
to a standard of care does not rule out a possible contri-
bution of AuNC@CPP as an immunomodulator. Further
research is planned to determine the optimal dose and sche-
dule for the maximum in vivo eﬃcacy.
Nanoscale
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032 | 10021
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

AuNC@CPP abolishes the emergence of ofloxacin (OFL)
resistance
Antimicrobial resistance is seen as the next global crisis.
Therefore, actions to preserve existing antibiotics are urgently
needed. The current ways to protect existing antibiotics
include data collection to inform decisions, eﬀorts to reduce
antibiotic abuse in people and animals, great emphasis on
antibiotic stewardship, performance incentives, optimal use of
newer diagnostics, better support for clinical and basic resis-
tance-related research, and novel methods to foster new anti-
biotic development.29 Unfortunately, these seven ways could
not prevent the resistance development during antibiotic treat-
ment. Clinical exposure of the patients to sub-inhibitory con-
centration (sub-MIC) could be due to limited drug accessibil-
ity,30 low dose prophylactic therapy,31 and the use of sub-stan-
dard medicines that often lack the stated amount of active
pharmaceutical ingredient.32 The sub-MIC is not active on bac-
terial growth but is still active in altering bacterial biochemis-
try
and
various
factors
aﬀecting
bacterial
virulence.33
Furthermore, recent evidence demonstrated that resistant
mutants selection could occur at sub-MIC.34–36 For example,
sub-MIC of fluoroquinolones can enrich bacterial populations
with clinically relevant mutants presenting MICs beyond clini-
cal breakpoint.37
Fig. 4
AuNC@CPP enables the eradication of mature bioﬁlms by oﬂoxacin (OFL). Representative Petri dish showing persister cells resuscitation fol-
lowing treatment of 48 h-old PA01 and SA25923 bioﬁlms by OFL (10 μg mL−1), AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1), and their combination for 24 h. The recov-
ery media (10 µL) was inoculated on the Petri dishes and incubated at 37 °C for 72 h. The images represent Petri dishes from three independent
experiments (n = 3) for each condition. No growth of PA01 and SA25923 is seen after treatment of OFL (40 μg mL−1) combined with AuNC@CPP
(800 μg mL−1).
Communication
Nanoscale
10022 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

After the third passage, we observed that the OFL-resistant
mutants emerged in the PA01 exposed to sub-MIC of OFL alone
(MIC = 15.2 µg mL−1 vs. 2 µg mL−1 1st passage) (Fig. 6).
Worrisomely, after the 21st passage, the MIC of the PA01
(972.8 µg mL−1) become above the highest clinically achievable
OFL level (600 µg mL−1) in the middle ear mucosa after topical
administration of 3000 µg mL−1 OFL otic solution.30 Resistance
to fluoroquinolones typically arises due to specific mutations in
the target enzymes (gyrase and topoisomerase IV) or the intro-
duction of plasmidencoded eﬄux pumps that enhance the
expression of pump proteins.38,39 To determine whether the two
resistance mechanisms are involved, the PA01 passage 21st was
selected, and the MIC was determined in the absence and pres-
ence of an eﬄux pump inhibitor (CCCP = 20 µg mL−1). The
MIC value did not decrease in the presence of an eﬄux pump
inhibitor, suggesting that the resistance mechanism was due to
the mutations in the target enzymes (Fig. S8†).
Fig. 5
Preclinical proof of concept in a mouse model of CSOM. Experimental timeline (created with BioRender.com). Comparison of the number of
bacteria per millilitre (CFU mL−1) from middle ear eﬀusion 14 days after the end of the following treatments: placebo control group (phosphate-
buﬀered saline, PBS), FLOXIN®Otic (8 µL drop of oﬂoxacin 3000 µg mL−1 = 24 µg of oﬂoxacin), and combination (8 µL drop containing 24 µg of
oﬂoxacin + 296 µg of AuNC@CPP). The CFU mL−1 from each mouse are plotted as individual points, and error bars represent the standard deviation
within an experimental group. Φ indicates that no middle ear eﬀusion could be sampled due to technical constraints. There was no diﬀerence
between the PBS control group (n = 4) and the oﬂoxacin group (n = 4). Enhanced killing of up to 4 orders of magnitude was achieved 14 days after
the end of treatment with the combination (AuNC@CPP + FLOXIN®Otic). *p ≤0.05 and not signiﬁcant (N.S.). The results are presented as mean ±
standard deviation.
Table 1
Comparison of the antimicrobial eﬃcacy of the treatments
measured by the number of bacterial colonies from an eﬀusion of the
middle ear two weeks after the treatment. Our results are given as the
mean ± standard deviation
Treatments
Eﬀusion (log10 CFU)
PBS
7.69 ± 0.26 (n = 4)
FLOXIN®Otic (OFL)
6.98 ± 1.45 (n = 6)
Combination (FLOXIN®Otic + AuNC@CPP)
2.54 ± 0.51 (n = 4)
Fig. 6
Bacterial resistance toward oﬂoxacin (OFL) vs. combination (OFL
+ AuNC@CPP). Resistance development of planktonic susceptible PA01
during serial passaging in the presence of sub-MIC dosing of OFL with
and without AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1). The fold change and MIC values
for OFL alone and OFL combined with AuNC@CPP before and after
each of 21 passages (1 passage per 24 h) were determined using 2-fold
serial dilutions in 200 μL volumes in a 96-well. The well containing the
highest drug concentration that allowed growth was inoculated a
second serially diluted series of OFL with and without AuNC@CPP then
incubated overnight. This process was repeated 21 times (21 passages).
The results indicate that evolved PA01 remains susceptible to combi-
nation (OFL + AuNC@CPP).
Nanoscale
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032 | 10023
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

Next, we asked whether AuNC@CPP could abolish the
emergence of the resistance triggered by the sub-MIC of OFL.
We found that the development of resistance to OFL did not
occur in the presence of AuNC@CPP. Indeed, after the 21st
passage, the MIC of the PA01 exposed to the combination of
OFL (sub-MIC) and AuNC@CPP (800 µg mL−1) was still below
the clinical breakpoint for resistance (8 µg mL−1 vs. 7.6 µg
mL−1) (Fig. 6). These results suggest that AuNC@CPP adjuvant
help prevent the mutations in the target enzymes triggered by
sub-MIC of OFL. Thus, it could be a valuable tool to preserve
the clinical utility of fluoroquinolones.
The method can be applied to aminoglycosides targeting the
bacterial ribosome
The desired features for best-in-class adjuvant that enable the
eradication of persister cells with existing antibiotics include
the synergistic eﬀect with antibiotics belonging to diﬀerent
families to eradicate persister cells and reduce resistance.
Therefore, we also evaluated the eﬃcacy of AuNC@CPP to
potentiate tobramycin (TOB), and inhalation of aminoglyco-
side solution is used to treat chronic PA lung infection in
cystic fibrosis (CF) patients.40 In addition, previous reports
showed that fumarate appears to enhance the killing of CCCP-
untreated PA stationary phase (1% persister cells) by TOB. In
the presence of fumarate (4000 µg mL−1), TOB enhanced the
killing of the nongrowing cells in the stationary phase by
approximately 4 orders of magnitude relative to TOB alone.41
However,
all
nongrowing
cells
are
not
persister
cells.42
Accordingly, the sterilization of the stationary phase cultures
with TOB in the presence of fumarate was not achieved.41 The
possible reason is that the combination of fumarate and TOB
is ineﬀective against persister cells, which usually comprise
about 1% of the stationary phase.22,23
Furthermore, previous research has shown that fumarate
increases the frequency of persister cells in all three major
classes of antibiotics, including β-lactam, aminoglycosides,
and fluoroquinolones.26 To prove that a combination of fuma-
rate and TOB is ineﬀective against persister cells, we used
CCCP-induced persister cells (more than 1% of persister cells).
We found that TOB (2.5 × MIC = 40 µg mL−1) or a combination
of fumarate (4000 µg mL−1) and TOB (40 µg mL−1) failed to
sterilize CCCP-induced persister cells (Fig. S9†). However,
unlike fumarate, combining AuNC@CPP (800 µg mL−1) with
TOB (40 µg mL−1) sterilizes CCCP-induced persister cells
(Fig. S9†). Furthermore, a combination of AuNC@CPP (800 µg
mL−1) and TOB (40 µg mL−1) was able to sterilize mature 48 h
old-biofilms (Fig. S9†). Collectively, these results demonstrate
that AuNC@CPP is a better adjuvant than fumarate to enhance
the killing of persister cells by aminoglycosides.
The synergistic eﬀect is not due to the AuNC@CPP/antibiotic
complex formation
To address concerns about the complex formation between
AuNC@CPP and antibiotics that could emerge from the bulk
solution and causes the synergistic eﬀect, we performed a
sequential treatment in which the persister cells were first
treated with antibiotics (OFL, 10 µg mL−1 or TOB, 40 µg mL−1)
in the absence of AuNC@CPP. Then the cells were washed
with PBS to remove the drugs (OFL or TOB). After this step, the
persister cells were treated with AuNC@CPP (800 µg mL−1). We
observed sterilization of CCCP-induced persister cells after this
sequential treatment, suggesting that the complex formation
between AuNC@CPP and antibiotics does not cause the syner-
gistic eﬀect (Fig. S10A and B†). Moreover, the order of the
sequential treatment does not aﬀect the synergistic eﬀect.
Started by treating persistent cells with AuNC@CPP (800 µg
mL−1) in the absence of antibiotics, then washing them with
PBS to remove AuNC@CPP, followed by treatment with anti-
biotics (OFL, 10 µg mL−1 or TOB, 40 µg mL−1), provides a
similar synergistic eﬀect (Fig. S10A and C†). This result
suggests that the AuNC@CPP adjuvant does not need to reach
the persister cells simultaneously as the antibiotics to obtain
the synergistic eﬀect.
Surface coating is not crucial for the synergy between
antibiotic and gold nanoclusters
Prior studies have noted that antibacterial gold nanoclusters (d
< 2 nm) cause death in bacteria cells by the accumulation of
ROS attacking membrane lipids, DNA, and other essential cell
components.43,44 The surface ligand chemistry of these AuNCs
has been specified to play a crucial role in causing bacterial
cell death. The more negative the surface charge, the higher
the antimicrobial activity. The reason is that the antimicrobial
AuNC that carries amine groups on their surface quenches the
generated ROS.45 Therefore, if AuNC@CPP potentiates anti-
biotics through ROS generation, one would expect that the
more negative the surface charge, the higher the synergetic
eﬀect. We synthesized a non-antimicrobial AuNC@MHA using
6 mercaptohexanoic acid (MHA) as protecting ligand. The size
of AuNC@MHA is similar to that of AuNC@CPP (d = 4.5 nm).
However, its surface charge is about 1.7 times more negatively
charged (ζ = −30 mV vs. −18.7 mV in water) (Fig. S11A†). Next,
we confirmed that anionic AuNC@MHA could also potentiate
the eradication of persister cells with OFL. The zone of inhi-
bition was not observed in the paper disc saturated with
AuNC@MHA (800 μg mL−1), confirming that it does not
exhibit
antibacterial
activity
against
SA25923
and
PA01
(Fig. S11B†).
Fig. S11C† shows that the killing of CCCP-induced persister
cells with OFL (10 μg mL−1) can be enhanced in the presence
of AuNC@MHA (800 μg mL−1). Therefore, this adjunctive strat-
egy could be generalized to other anionic AuNCs because the
CPP polypeptide ligand plays a minor role. Furthermore,
AuNC@MHA
is
coated
with
a
diﬀerent
ligand
than
AuNC@CPP, suggesting that surface coating is not crucial for
synergizing antibiotics and AuNCs. However, the eﬀectiveness
of the more negatively charged AuNC@MHA is twice as low as
that of the AuNC@CPP adjuvant.
Indeed, complete sterilization of CCCP-induced persister
cells is achieved with OFL (10 μg mL−1) in the presence of
AuNC@MHA (1600 μg mL−1 (Fig. S12†). This suggests no posi-
tive correlation between the level of negative charge of AuNCs
Communication
Nanoscale
10024 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

and the synergistic eﬀect. It should be highlighted that the
adjuvant property is opposite to the antimicrobial property,
where more negatively charged particles lead to better bacterial
killing eﬃciency due to ROS production.45 Such diﬀerence
suggests that the adjuvant activity observed here is not due to
ROS generation. Complete sterilization of CCCP-induced pers-
ister cells is achieved with OFL (10 μg mL−1) in the presence of
AuNC@MHA (1600 μg mL−1 (Fig. S12†). Finally, the present
study demonstrates that although AuNC@MHA is more nega-
tively charged, it is less eﬃcient than AuNC@CPP in potentiat-
ing the eradication of persister cells by OFL. For antimicrobial
AuNCs, more negatively charged particles lead to better bac-
terial killing eﬃciency due to ROS production.45 However, for
antimicrobial
AuNCs
adjuvant,
more
negatively
charged
AuNCs did not induce a better synergistic eﬀect. The absence
of a positive correlation between the level of negative charge of
AuNCs and the synergistic eﬀect with antibiotics suggests that
the adjunctive activity is not due to ROS generation.
Protein corona does not abolish the synergistic eﬀect between
antibiotics and AuNC@CPP
When nanoparticles are exposed to biological media, proteins
are
adsorbed,
forming
a
so-called
protein
corona.46
AuNC@CPP will first encounter many proteins after entering
the middle ear fluids (i.e., eﬀusion) before meeting bacteria,
so it is essential to determine whether the potential modifi-
cation of AuNC@CPP due to protein corona could abolish the
synergistic eﬀect of the antibiotic and AuNC@CPP on the era-
dication of persister cells. In this respect, AuNC@CPP was
incubated in PBS containing 10% of human plasma for 24 h at
37 °C to form protein coronas (Fig. S13A†). CCCP-induced
persister cells (108 CFU mL−1 final concentration) were treated
a combination of OFL (10 µg mL−1) and AuNC@CPP/protein
corona (800 µg mL−1). Following the 24 h treatment, the entire
bacterial pellet was suspended in 100 µL of PBS, plated in
agar, and incubated for up to 72 h to confirm the sterilization.
We observed that proteins did not abolish the sterilization of
CCCP-induced persister treated with OFL combined with
AuNC@CPP/protein corona (Fig. S13B†). This observation
could explain the good in vivo eﬃcacy observed in the CSOM
animal model where the middle ear eﬀusion containing many
proteins is present during the treatment. Further investigation
of the pattern and compositions of both soft- and hard-corona
proteins at the surface of AuNC@CPP is beyond the scope of
the present study but will be explored in future work.
Killing by the combination of AuNC@CPP and antibiotics did
not involve ROS production
It was recently proposed that besides specific drug-target inter-
actions, bactericidal antibiotics kill metabolically active bac-
teria and eradicate persister cells by a common mechanism
involving the production of OH•.47,48 However, our results on
the eﬀect of surface chemistry suggested that the synergistic
eﬀect reported in this work did not involve ROS production. To
eliminate the possibility that OH• contributes to the eradica-
tion
of
persister
cells
by
combining
antibiotics
and
AuNC@CPP, we performed the CCCP-induced persister cells
sterilization experiment under anaerobic conditions. First,
CCCP-induced persister cells inoculum was resuspended in
5 mL of 1× PBS (conductivity of 13 500–17 000 µS cm−1) sup-
plemented with either OFL (10 μg mL−1) or (40 μg mL−1) TOB
in the presence of AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1). At 37 °C, the
maximum dissolved oxygen (DO) in water with 17 000 µS cm−1
conductivity is 6.4 mg L−1. Therefore, nitrogen was purged for
60 min to remove dissolved oxygen in the PBS and create an
anaerobic environment. Following nitrogen purging, the DO
level was 0 mg L−1 measured using CHEMetrics Dissolved
Oxygen Test Kit (Catalog No K-7501). After 24 h treatment, the
bacteria were washed, and the entire pellet was plated on agar.
In Fig. 7, we show that sterilization by antibiotics in the pres-
ence of AuNC@CPP is not due to ROS formation during the
treatment in PBS solution. However, ROS could mediate tox-
icity
on
agar
after
the
treatment
with
antibiotics
and
AuNC@CPP
under anaerobic
conditions.
A
recent
study
showed that ROS could kill bacteria even after removing the
initiating stressor.49 The reason is that the ROS accumulation
continued to occur after plating bacteria on agar due to post-
stress ROS-mediated toxicity.
Once they wake, persister cells grow similarly to exponen-
tially growing cells.50 The persister cells wake up and are trans-
formed into normal cells on agar. Therefore, persister cells
could exhibit the same sensitivity to post-stress ROS-mediated
toxicity because they are transformed into normal cells once
on the agar. This toxicity can be blocked if the counting colo-
nies are performed on an agar plate containing 7.6 mg mL−1
thiourea (i.e., a scavenger of OH•) and 80 µg mL−1 bipyridyl
(i.e., an iron chelator).49 In Fig. 8, we show that sterilization by
antibiotics in the presence of AuNC@CPP is not due to ROS
formation on agar because the counting colonies were per-
formed on an agar plate containing thiourea and bipyridyl.
Overall, these data rule out the contribution of ROS in the
synergistic eﬀect observed between antibiotics and AuNCs.
Killing by the combination of AuNC@CPP and antibiotics is
due to hyperpolarization
All bacteria require a proton motive force (PMF) to grow and
remain viable under non-replicating conditions.51 The non-
growing status alow persister cells to decrease their PMF but
still need it to remain viable.52 The PMF comprises two para-
meters: the membrane potential (ΔΨ) and the transmembrane
proton gradient (ΔpH). Interestingly, dissipation in either
component is compensated for by a counteracting increase in
the other to maintain a constant value of PMF = ΔΨ + ΔpH.53
AuNC@CPP was synthesized using CPP polypeptide and thio-
lated polyethylene glycol with a carboxyl termination. The car-
boxyl group (–COOH) typically has a pKa of 4–5. At pH 7.0, the
unprotonated form of AuNC@CPP (–COO−) is dominant in
bulk media. Initially, anionic AuNC@CPP (or AuNC@MHA)
enters the bacterial cells and dissipates the ΔpH. The selective
dissipation of ΔpH by anionic AuNC@CPP would be compen-
sated by an increase in ΔΨ that would lead to the eﬄux of
intracellular cations making the interior of persister cells more
Nanoscale
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032 | 10025
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

negative. This phenomenon is known as cell hyperpolariz-
ation. In a nutshell, treating persister cells with anionic
AuNC@CPP (or AuNC@MHA) would induce a hyperpolarized
membrane
compared
to
untreated
bacterial
cells.
Hyperpolarization of persister cells induced by AuNC@CPP
was measured using the membrane potential sensitive dye bis-
(1,3-dibutylbarbituric
acid)
trimethine
oxonol,
DiBAC4(3).
DiBAC4(3) enters the cell upon membrane depolarization and
acquires enhanced fluorescence. By contrast, fluorescence
intensity is reduced when the membrane is hyperpolarized.
0.5 µM of DiBAC4(3) was added to CCCP-induced persister
cells after treatment with AuNC@CPP or CPP alone and fol-
lowed by PBS wash using centrifugation. That prevents the
interaction of the AuNC@CPP or CPP with DiBAC to avoid fluo-
rescence artifacts.
Nigericin (8 µg mL−1) was used as a positive control because it
selectively disrupts ΔpH (PMID: 23972939). We found that treat-
ment of CCCP-induced persister cells with AuNC@CPP (800 µg
mL−1) for 3 h induces membrane hyperpolarization, indicated by
a
decrease
in
DiBAC4(3)
fluorescence
intensity
relative
to
untreated cells (Fig.
S14†).
In
contrast,
the treatment
of
CCCPinduced persister cells with CPP (800 µg mL−1) for 3 h
caused
a
significant
membrane
depolarization
relative
to
untreated cells, indicated by increased fluorescence of DiBAC4(3).
Fig. 7
Killing by antibiotics combined with AuNC@CPP is unrelated to ROS production. Photographs of the agar plate showing the sterilization of
CCCP-induced persister cells by either OFL (10 μg mL−1) or TOB (40 μg mL−1) combined with AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1) after 24 h treatment under
anaerobic conditions (dissolved oxygen, PPM (mg mL−1) = 0). Regrowth was observed when OFL (10 μg mL−1) and TOB (40 μg mL−1) were used in
the absence of AuNC@CPP. The photographs represent Petri dishes from three independent experiments (n = 3) for each condition. These data
demonstrate that ROS-mediated persister cells death during the treatment is not involved in the killing mechanism.
Communication
Nanoscale
10026 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

A recent study showed that extracellular magnesium (Mg2+)
suppresses membrane potential-mediated hyperpolarization.54
We then test whether disruption of hyperpolarization could
aﬀect the synergistic eﬀect. We found that the addition of Mg2+
(20 µg mL−1) suppresses the persister cell eradication by OFL in
the presence of AuNC@CPP (Fig. S15†). This data confirms that
the synergistic eﬀect between anionic AuNCs and antibiotics is
due to membrane hyperpolarization. In agreement with our
findings, promoting membrane hyperpolarization has been
reported as an adjuvant strategy to enhance antibiotic eﬃcacy.55
The schematic diagram describing the idea of the adjuvant
strategy based on AuNCs is presented the Fig. 9.
Fig. 8
Killing by antibiotics combined with AuNC@CPP is unrelated to post-stress bacterial cell death mediated by ROS production. CCCP-induced
persister cells were treated with OFL (10 μg mL−1), TOB (40 μg mL−1) and their combination with AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1). After 24 h under anaero-
bic conditions, the bacteria were washed to remove the treatment, and cells were plated on agar containing agents that interfere with ROS accumu-
lation (i.e., thiourea a scavenger of OH• and bipyridyl, an iron chelator); then CFU was determined. Following the treatment by antibiotics combi-
nation with AuNC@CPP, the entire bacterial pellet was suspended in 100 µL of PBS, plated in agar, and incubated for up to 72 h to conﬁrm the steri-
lization. The images represent Petri dishes from three independent experiments (n = 3) for each condition. Thiourea and bipyridyl did not protect
against sterilization of CCCP-induced persister cells treated by antibiotics combination with AuNC@CPP. These data demonstrate that ROS-
mediated post-stress is not involved in the killing mechanism.
Nanoscale
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032 | 10027
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

Discussion
Developing eﬀective therapeutics to eradicate persister cells in
patients with CSOM is an urgent unmet medical need. While
there have been developments in nanotherapeutic approaches
to bacteria, this has been aimed at combating the planktonic
and metabolically active forms.43,56,57 Therefore, treatments
that enable the killing of persister cells, the non-metabolically
active bacteria, represent the next frontiers of antibacterial dis-
covery to eradicate chronic bacterial infections like CSOM.
Non-ototoxic topical fluoroquinolone is the first-line treatment
for CSOM because of the perforation of the tympanic mem-
brane. The advantage of topical therapy in CSOM is delivering
a higher concentration of antibiotics to the treatment site.30,58
However, oxygen limitation and low metabolic activity in the
interior of the biofilm have been shown to correlate with the
survival of PA biofilm.59 This could explain why despite high
antibiotic concentration and good penetration, topical fluoro-
quinolone therapy in CSMO still fails. Mainly, the therapeutic
failure is caused by the presence of persister cells with
dormant metabolically activity to withstand higher antibiotic
concentrations
without
genetic
resistance
mutation.
To
support this assumption, we have shown that topical therapy
failure in CSOM is due to persister cells in biofilms.4 Here we
developed a general adjunctive approach based on gold nano-
clusters to eradicate persister cells and biofilms by existing
antibiotics, especially fluoroquinolones. Like Auranofin, a gold
complex approved by the FDA in 1985 for treating rheumatoid
arthritis, gold nanoclusters can be degraded by lysosomes.60
Additionally, it is attractive for inner ear theranostic, a combi-
nation of therapeutics and diagnostics.61,62 Collectively, these
features led us to choose gold as the metallic core of the nano-
cluster adjuvants.
Grant et al. claimed to eradicate persister cells with anti-
biotic-generated OH•.47 Unfortunately, the correlation between
persister cell killing and OH• they found that using thiourea to
quench OH• is problematic because this compound may have
nonspecific eﬀects, such as slowing down cell metabolism,
leading to increased tolerance killing.47 One of our most
important findings is that killing by the combination of
AuNC@CPP and antibiotics did not involve ROS production.
In support of our findings, the Lewis group shows that killing
by antibiotics does not depend on the OH•.63 Furthermore, our
study refutes the idea that the mechanism of cell death
induced by fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides involves
alterations in the TCA cycle and iron metabolism to produce
OH•.48 The contradiction brought by our results will revive
research interest in the unanswered question of how anti-
Fig. 9
Mechanism of AuNC@CPP. The carboxyl group (–COOH) typically has a pKa of 4 to 5. At pH 7.0, the unprotonated form of AuNC@CPP
(–COO−) is dominant in bulk media. Upon exposure to persister cells, anionic AuNC@CPP enters the cells and dissipates the ΔpH via the protonation
of the carboxyl group (–COOH). The dissipation of ΔpH by anionic AuNC@CPP is compensated by an increase in ΔΨ that lead to membrane hyper-
polarization. Then the increased membrane polarization enhances the susceptibility of persister cells to antibiotics.
Communication
Nanoscale
10028 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

biotics kill bacteria. We demonstrated that AuNC@CPP syner-
gizes with aminoglycosides (ribosome-targeting antibiotics)
and fluoroquinolones (DNA synthesis targeting antibiotics)
under anaerobic conditions. AuNC@CPP is also a better adju-
vant than fumarate to eradicate persister cells by antibiotics.
The clinical implication of this discovery is the possibility for
AuNC@CPP to enable persister cell eradication by aminoglyco-
sides in areas of low oxygen tension, such as thickened
mucous layers in the lungs of CF patients.64
The disruption and permeabilization of the bacteria cell
envelope could increase antibiotic uptake into bacterial cells.
For example, the synergy between colistin and ciprofloxacin
was greater when two antibiotics were administered simul-
taneously.65 The reason is that colistin acts as a rapid external
killer by damaging bacterial cell membrane, which increases
ciprofloxacin penetration.66 We found that the simultaneous
and sequential treatment with antibiotics and AuNC@CPP has
a similar synergistic eﬀect. Furthermore, sterilization was also
achieved when AuNC@CPP and antibiotics were used sequen-
tially in interchangeable order. Thus, the synergistic eﬀect
observed here is unlikely to be caused by increased cell mem-
brane permeability that could facilitate the uptake of anti-
biotics. We established that the mechanism of action of
AuNC@CPP is due to disruption of the proton gradient and
membrane hyperpolarization.
We also found that surface chemistry, especially protein
corona formation, did not influence the potentiation of anti-
biotics by AuNC@CPP to eradicate persister cells. Large nano-
particles (typically >10 nm) formed protein coronas via the
model of multiple proteins binding to one nanoparticle.46,67
In contrast, the model of interactions between small nano-
particles and proteins is similar to small molecules, which
means that nanoparticles may be adsorbed onto the surface of
proteins to form so-called protein–nanoparticle complexes.68,69
Based on this model, we hypothesized that protein inter-
actions
with
AuNC@CCP
lead
to
the
formation
of
proteinAuNC@CCP complexes owing to their ultrasmall sizes
(d = 4 nm). The free (or unbound) fraction of a drug is usually
the portion that exerts a pharmacologic eﬀect. Therefore, in
the presence of proteins, the eradication of persister cells
could be caused by combining free fractions of antibiotics and
free AuNC@CCP.
The emergence and spread of fluoroquinolone-resistant
strains are of great concern for CSOM patients because fluoro-
quinolones are the only classes of antibiotics approved by the
FDA for this clinical indication. We found that OFL resistance
occurs after the 3rd passage, and following the 21st passage, it
is up to 1500-fold MIC. In addition, we found that AuNC@CPP
abolished the emergence of fluoroquinolone-resistant strains
induced by sub-MIC of OFL. The molecular mechanism of how
AuNC@CPP prevents the selection of OFL-resistant mutants
remains elucidated. While the results presented showed that
PA01 rapidly develops resistance to OFL, it should be kept in
mind that this study does not imply that topical fluoroquino-
lones would increase resistance in CSOM as our in vitro experi-
ence does not use the therapeutic dose (600 µg mL−1) and fails
to mimic the pharmacodynamics of antibiotics in the middle
ear. Nevertheless, the adjunctive strategy described in this
work
has
important
implications
for
incorporating
AuNC@CPP into an innovative topical fluoroquinolone formu-
lation that would slow the spread of resistance and eradicate
persister cells.
In preparation to translate our findings into the clinic, we
demonstrated
the
superiority
of
OFL
combined
with
AuNC@CPP compared to OFL treatment alone, informing a
potential
approach to
improve the
treatment
of
CSOM.
However, there are several limitations in the current work.
First, it remains to be determined whether the combination of
OFL and AuNC@CPP is ototoxic. Second, the decreased resis-
tance emergence needs to be confirmed in vivo. Finally,
studies investigating whether AuNC@CPP can reduce anti-
biotic therapy failure in biofilm associated infections such as
chronic PA lung infections in CF, Helicobacter pylori-associated
chronic gastritis and recalcitrant chronic wound biofilms will
help appreciate the potential impact of this discovery.70,71
Materials and methods
Synthesis of AuNC@CPP
Gold nanoclusters were synthesized according to the method
published previously with some modifications.43 Freshly pre-
pared aqueous solutions of HAuCl4 (20 mM, 1 mL) and thio-
lated polyethylene glycol with a carboxyl termination (PEG–
COOH, 18 mg, 2 mL) and CPP (18 mg, 2 mL) were mixed in
water (13.4 mL). After that, an aqueous NaOH solution (1 M,
1.2 mL) was added to the mixture. A freshly prepared NaBH4
solution (112 mM) was obtained by dissolving 43 mg of NaBH4
in 2 mL of NaOH solution (1 M), followed by 8 mL of ultrapure
water. After that, 0.4 mL of NaBH4 solution was added, and
the AuNC@CPP was collected after 24 h. After synthesis, the
AuNC@CPP
solutions
were
dialyzed
(dialysis
membrane,
MWCO = 3000) for 2 days against Milli-Q water, which was
changed every 8 h to remove the unconjugated thiol PEG–
COOH and CPP. The resulting AuNC@CPP were lyophilized
and dried entirely before further use.
AuNC@CPP characterization
UV–vis spectroscopy. Absorption spectra of AuNC@CPP was
recorded in the visible domain of the electromagnetic spec-
trum (400–800 nm) using an absorption spectrophotometer
(spectramMax
M2,
Molecular
Devices,
Downington,
PA).
Aqueous suspension of AuNC@CPP (800 µg mL−1) was put in
a 96-well polypropylene microplate of 1 cm optical path length.
TEM images of AuNC@CPP were acquired to analyze the mor-
phology and measure the core size. In addition, the zeta poten-
tial of the AuNC@CPP was measured by the DLS instrument
(Brookhaven Instrument Nanobrook Omni).
Bacterial strains, growth media, and conditions
We used two antibiotic-sensitive wild-type strains, including
Gram-negative P. aeruginosa PA01 and Gram-positive S. aureus
Nanoscale
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032 | 10029
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

SA 25923. In all experiments, bacterial cells were cultured in
10 mL of Luria–Bertani (LB) broth at 37 °C and were aerated at
200 rpm in 50 mL plastic polypropylene tubes. Exponential
phase cultures were prepared as follows: a stationary overnight
culture was diluted 1 : 1000 in LB and incubated at 37 °C with
aeration at 200 rpm until the optical density at 600 nm (OD600)
= 0.3 was reached. The optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was
read
at
15
minute
intervals
using
a
microplate
reader
(spectramMax M2, Molecular Devices, Downington, PA) to
generate growth curves.
Susceptibility of bacteria to gold nanoclusters using disc
diﬀusion assay
Strains of PA01 and SA 25923 were tested for susceptibility
against ofloxacin using the disc diﬀusion method according to
the Clinical Laboratory Standard Institute (CLSI) guidelines. In
brief, glycerol stocks of each bacteria were streaked on LB
plates and grown overnight at 37 °C. An inoculum was then
prepared by taking several individual colonies and diluting in
PBS with a 0.5 McFarland Standard turbidity. The inoculum
was then spread with sterile cotton swabs on Mueller Hinton
agar plates supplemented with 5% sheep blood. Discs contain-
ing 5 µg of ofloxacin (Oxoid™) were dispensed on the surface
of the plate. For gold nanoclusters, 20 µL of an 800 µg mL−1
solution was dispensed drop-wise on a blank sterile 6 mm
disc. After 24 h incubation at 37 °C, the inhibition zone was
measured using a digital calliper.
Persister cells generation
Persister cells of the bacteria strain PA01, and SA 25923 were
generated by exposing stationary phase cultures to carbonyl
cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazone (CCCP) at 200 µg mL−1.
After 24 h exposure, the samples were washed with PBS and
serially diluted to determine the colony-forming unit per milli-
litre (CFU mL−1).
Assessment of ATP production
According to the manufacturer’s instruction, the ATP levels of
exponential, stationary, and CCCPinduced persisters cells of
PA01 and SA 25923 cultures were measured using a BacTiter
Glo kit (Promega). According to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions, the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay was also performed to
calculate the total protein (Thermo Scientific, Pierce). Results
were analyzed as the ratio of the ATP to the total protein.
Bactericidal activity against persister cells
CCCP-induced persister cells were challenged with OFL (10 μg
mL−1), OFL (10 μg mL−1) plus fumarate (4 mg mL−1), or OFL
(10 μg mL−1) plus AuNC@CPP (800 μg mL−1) for 24 h. After the
survival bacteria were washed 3× with PBS, the pellet was resus-
pended in 100 μL of PBS and then spread on an LB plate. The
plate was incubated for 72 h at 37 °C before assessing growth.
Anaerobic bactericidal activity against persister cells
1 mL of CCCP-induced persister cells was centrifuged, and the
pellet was resuspended in 5 mL of 1× PBS supplemented with
OFL (10 μg mL−1) or OFL (10 μg mL−1) plus AuNC@CPP (800 μg
mL−1). The prepared solutions were then injected through the
stopper of crimp-sealed 10 mL sterile vials using a needle and
syringe. Then, nitrogen purging for 60 min was applied to
remove oxygen in the PBS media and create an anaerobic
environment. The dissolved oxygen level was measured using
CHEMetrics Dissolved Oxygen Test Kit (Catalog No K-7501) to
confirm the absence of any dissolved oxygen.
Eradication of mature biofilms
Overnight cultures of PA01 or SA 25923 were diluted 1 : 1000 in
fresh LB medium, and 150 μL was added to wells in an MBEC
Assay®Biofilm Inoculator with 96 wells. Biofilms were allowed
to develop onto peg lids for 48 h without shaking. The peg lids
were gently rinsed to remove planktonic bacteria and incu-
bated in a new MBEC Assay®Biofilm Inoculator with 96 wells
containing a serial dilution of tested solution in PBS. These
MBEC Assay®Biofilm inoculators with 96 wells were incubated
for 24 h. Then the peg lids were washed and sonicated for
15 min in a new MBEC Assay®Biofilm Inoculator with 96 wells
containing fresh medium (recovery media). Following incu-
bation for 48 h, 5 μL of the recovery media was spotted on LB
agar plates and incubated at 37 °C without shaking for 48 h.
In vivo proof of concept in CSOM animal model
All animal procedures were performed following the guidelines
for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of Stanford University
and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of APLAC 32855.
A validated mouse model of P. aeruginosa CSOM to test potential
therapeutics was used. Briefly, PA01 was incubated at 37 °C
with shaking. After 30 h of incubation, the stationary phase
culture was treated with FLOXIN®Otic (final concentration of
ofloxacin = 5 µg mL−1) for 4 h to select for persister cells. After
creating a subtotal tympanic membrane perforation, we inocu-
lated persister cells (5 µL, 1.6 × 108 CFU mL−1) into the middle
ear cavity. The mice were allowed to rest with the ipsilateral ear
up until recovery. Infection was allowed to develop for 14 days
before the commencement of antibiotic therapy. All therapies
were delivered by placing an 8 µL drop in the ear canal twice a
day for 14 consecutive days. The therapy outcome was the
measurement of the bacterial colonies (CFU mL−1) from
eﬀusion of the middle ear 14 days after stopping treatment.
Resistance development
Serial passage MICs were performed in 96-well microtiter
panels. First, an aliquot of the well with the highest concen-
tration permitting growth was taken and back diluted (1/100)
in new media from inoculated microtiter panels. After over-
night incubation at 37 °C, this suspension was then diluted to
a 0.5 McFarland standard turbidity and used to inoculate a
new MIC panel, resulting in a final concentration of 1.5 × 106
CFU mL−1. Panels were incubated according to CLSI guide-
lines, MICs were recorded, and the next inoculum was pre-
pared from the well containing the highest drug concentration
that identically allowed growth as described above. Twenty-one
repeat passages were performed.
Communication
Nanoscale
10030 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

Statistical analysis
Data are represented as the mean ± s.d. Statistical analyses
(details in figure legends) were calculated with GraphPad
Prism Ver. 9 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA). A p-value of <0.05 was
considered statistically significant. ESI† is available.
Data and materials availability
All data are available in the main text or ESI.†
Author contributions
Conceptualization: L. A. B., P. L. S. M. Methodology: L. A. B.,
Z. C., J. C., X. C., B. B., A. X., P. L. S. M. Investigation: Z. C., J.
C., X. C., B. B., D. S., A. X., L. A. B. Synthesis of cell-penetrating
peptide: J. T. Data analysis: L. A. B., Z. C., J. C., X. C., B. B.,
D.
S.,
A.
X.,
P.
L.
S.
M.
Funding
acquisition:
P. L. S. M. Supervision: L. A. B. Writing – original draft: Z. C.,
L. A. B., P. L. S. M. Writing – review & editing: Z. C., L. A. B.,
J. C., X. C., B. B., D. S., J. T., A. X., P. L. S. M.
Conﬂicts of interest
We declare that L. A. B. and P. L. S. M. are listed inventors on a
provisional patent regarding the antibiofilm activity described
in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the protein and nucleic acid (PAN) biotechnol-
ogy facility at Stanford University to synthesize cell-penetrating
peptides (CPP). Z. C. acknowledges the support of Shandong
Natural Science Foundation ZR2021MH369. X. C. acknowledges
the help of the Henan Province Health Commission Research
and Development Program. No. 2016015.
Support from the National Institute of Health, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (R21-AI154097-01),
Stanford’s Maternal and Child Health Research Institute, the
Stanford SPARK translational medicine program, the Department
of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery at Stanford University
and the Stanford Initiative to Cure Hearing Loss through gener-
ous gifts from the Bill and Susan Oberndorf Foundation. This
research was jointly funded by RNID (RNID T10) and the
Fondation pour l’Audition (FPA RD 2020-12).
Notes and references
1 L. Monasta, L. Ronfani, F. Marchetti, M. Montico, L. Vecchi
Brumatti,
A.
Bavcar,
D.
Grasso,
C.
Barbiero
and
G. Tamburlini, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e36226.
2 J. Acuin, Global burden of disease due to chronic suppurative
otitis media: Disease, deafness, deaths and DALYs, in Chronic
Suppurative Otitis Media-Burden of Illness and Management
Options, Geneva: World Health Organisation, 2004, pp. 9–23.
3 A. Thai, K. A. Aaron, A. C. Kaufman and P. L. Santa Maria,
Otolaryngol.–Head Neck Surg., 2021, 01945998211050626.
4 P. L. Santa Maria, A. C. Kaufman, B. Bacacao, A. Thai,
X. Chen, A. Xia, Z. Cao, A. Fouad and L. A. Bekale, Otol.
Neurotol., 2021, 42, e1263–e1272.
5 K. M. Khomtchouk, A. Kouhi, A. Xia, L. A. Bekale, S. M. Massa,
J. M. Sweere, D. Pletzer, R. E. Hancock, P. L. Bollyky and
P. L. Santa Maria, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabc1828.
6 T. Dörr, M. Vulić and K. Lewis, PLoS Biol., 2010, 8,
e1000317.
7 U. Theuretzbacher, K. Outterson, A. Engel and A. Karlén,
Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2020, 18, 275–285.
8 L. Poirel, A. Jayol and P. Nordmann, Clin. Microbiol. Rev.,
2017, 30, 557–596.
9 L. Sorlí, S. Luque, S. Grau, N. Berenguer, C. Segura,
M. M. Montero, F. Álvarez-Lerma, H. Knobel, N. Benito and
J. P. Horcajada, BMC Infect. Dis., 2013, 13, 1–9.
10 E. J. Zheng, J. M. Stokes and J. J. Collins, Cell Chem. Biol.,
2020, 27, 1544–1552.
11 K. R. Allison, M. P. Brynildsen and J. J. Collins, Nature,
2011, 473, 216–220.
12 X. Fu, P. Wan, P. Li, J. Wang, S. Guo, Y. Zhang, Y. An, C. Ye,
Z. Liu and J. Gao, Front. Cell. Neurosci., 2021, 15, 692762.
13 T. Lunnoo, J. Assawakhajornsak and T. Puangmali, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2019, 123, 38013810.
14 J. D. Prajapati, U. Kleinekathöfer and M. Winterhalter,
Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 5158–5192.
15 A. Pandeya, L. Yang, O. Alegun, C. Karunasena, C. Risko,
Z. Li and Y. Wei, PLoS One, 2021, 16, e0260023.
16 H. Nikaido, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 2003, 67, 593–656.
17 M. Kumar, W. Tegge, N. Wangoo, R. Jain and R. K. Sharma,
Biophys. Chem., 2018, 237, 38–46.
18 V. Amendola, R. Pilot, M. Frasconi, O. M. Marago and
M. A. Iatì, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 203002.
19 J. Meng, Y. Gao, W. Li, J. Wang and X. Chen, Talanta, 2021,
122618.
20 H. Strahl and L. W. Hamoen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.,
2010, 107, 12281–12286.
21 B. W. Kwan, J. A. Valenta, M. J. Benedik and T. K. Wood,
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2013, 57, 1468–1473.
22 K. Lewis, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2007, 5, 48–56.
23 K. Lewis, Bact. Biofilms, 2008, 107–131.
24 E. Şimşek and M. Kim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019,
116, 17635–17640.
25 Y. Shan, A. Brown Gandt, S. E. Rowe, J. P. Deisinger,
B. P. Conlon and K. Lewis, mBio, 2017, 8, e0226702216.
26 J.-S. Kim, D.-H. Cho, P. Heo, S.-C. Jung, M. Park, E.-J. Oh,
J. Sung, P.-J. Kim, S.-C. Lee and D.-H. Lee, Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother., 2016, 60, 2232–2240.
27 A. L. Spoering and K. Lewis, J. Bacteriol., 2001, 183, 6746–6751.
28 M.
M.
Masadeh,
K.
H.
Alzoubi,
W.
S.
Ahmed
and
A. S. Magaji, Pathogens, 2019, 8, 12.
29 J. G. Bartlett, D. N. Gilbert and B. Spellberg, Clin. Infect.
Dis., 2013, 56, 1445–1450.
Nanoscale
Communication
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032 | 10031
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online

30 M. Ohyama, S. Furuta, K. Ueno, K. Katsuda, T. Nobori,
R. Kiyota and Y. Miyazaki, Arch. Otolaryngol., Head Neck
Surg., 1999, 125, 337–340.
31 H. Fisher, Y. Oluboyede, T. Chadwick, M. Abdel-Fattah,
C. Brennand, M. Fader, S. Harrison, P. Hilton, J. Larcombe
and P. Little, Lancet Infect. Dis., 2018, 18, 957–968.
32 T. Kelesidis and M. E. Falagas, Clin. Microbiol. Rev., 2015,
28, 443–464.
33 P. C. Braga, M. D. Sasso and M. T. Sala, J. Antimicrob.
Chemother., 2000, 45, 15–25.
34 I. C. Stanton, A. K. Murray, L. Zhang, J. Snape and
W. H. Gaze, Commun. Biol., 2020, 3, 1–11.
35 C. Ching and M. H. Zaman, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–9.
36 F. Sanz-García, M. B. Sánchez, S. Hernando-Amado and
J. L. Martínez, Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents, 2020, 55, 105965.
37 F. Sanz-García, S. Hernando-Amado and J. L. Martinez,
Environ. Microbiol., 2022, 24(3), 1279–1293.
38 G. A. Jacoby, Clin. Infect. Dis., 2005, 41, S120–S126.
39 K. J. Aldred, R. J. Kerns and N. Osheroﬀ, Biochemistry,
2014, 53, 1565–1574.
40 M. W. Konstan, D. E. Geller, P. Minić, F. Brockhaus,
J. Zhang and G. Angyalosi, Pediatr. Pulmonol., 2011, 46,
230–238.
41 M. Koeva, A. D. Gutu, W. Hebert, J. D. Wager, L. M. Yonker,
G. A. O’Toole, F. M. Ausubel, S. M. Moskowitz and
D. Joseph-McCarthy, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2017,
61, e00987–e00917.
42 M. A. Orman and M. P. Brynildsen, Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother., 2013, 57, 3230–3239.
43 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, ACS Nano,
2017, 11, 6904–6910.
44 K. Zheng and J. Xie, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 1104–1116.
45 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Chem.
Mater., 2018, 30, 2800–2808.
46 J. S. Mosquera, I. García, M. Henriksen-Lacey, M. Martínez-
Calvo, M. N. Dhanjani, J. L. Mascareñas and L. M. Liz-
Marzán, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5382–5391.
47 S. S. Grant, B. B. Kaufmann, N. S. Chand, N. Haseley and
D. T. Hung, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 12147–
12152.
48 M. A. Kohanski, D. J. Dwyer and J. J. Collins, Nat. Rev.
Microbiol., 2010, 8, 423–435.
49 Y. Hong, J. Zeng, X. Wang, K. Drlica and X. Zhao, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 10064–10071.
50 J. S. Kim, R. Yamasaki, S. Song, W. Zhang and T. K. Wood,
Environ. Microbiol., 2018, 20, 20852098.
51 G. M. Cook, C. Greening, K. Hards and M. Berney, Adv.
Microb. Physiol., 2014, 65, 1–62.
52 M. Wang, E. W. C. Chan, Y. Wan, M. H.-Y. Wong and
S. Chen, Commun. Biol., 2021, 4, 1–11.
53 M. A. Farha, C. P. Verschoor, D. Bowdish and E. D. Brown,
Chem. Biol., 2013, 20, 1168–1178.
54 D. L. Dong-yeon, L. Galera-Laporta, M. Bialecka-Fornal,
E. C. Moon, Z. Shen, S. P. Briggs, J. Garcia-Ojalvo and
G. M. Süel, Cell, 2019, 177, 352–360.
55 K. N. Bhaumik, A. Hetényi, G. Olajos, A. Martins, R. Spohn,
L. Németh, B. Jojart, P. Szili, A. Dunai and P. K. Jangir, Mol.
Syst. Des. Eng., 2022, 7, 21–33.
56 J. M. V. Makabenta, A. Nabawy, C.-H. Li, S. Schmidt-Malan,
R. Patel and V. M. Rotello, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2021, 19,
23–36.
57 M. Tang, J. Zhang, C. Yang, Y. Zheng and H. Jiang, Front.
Chem., 2020, 8, 181.
58 J. W. Kutz Jr., P. S. Roland and K. H. Lee, Expert Opin.
Pharmacother., 2013, 14, 2399–2405.
59 M. C. Walters III, F. Roe, A. Bugnicourt, M. J. Franklin and
P. S. Stewart, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2003, 47, 317–323.
60 A. Balfourier, N. Luciani, G. Wang, G. Lelong, O. Ersen,
A. Khelfa, D. Alloyeau, F. Gazeau and F. Carn, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 103–113.
61 M. Kayyali, L. Brake, A. Ramsey, A. Wright, B. O’Malley and
D. D. Li, J. Nanomed. Nanotechnol., 2017, 8(4), 1–6.
62 Y.-C. Lin, C.-P. Shih, H.-C. Chen, Y.-L. Chou, H.-K. Sytwu,
M.-C. Fang, Y.-Y. Lin, C.-Y. Kuo, H.-H. Su and C.-L. Hung,
Front. Pharmacol., 2021, 12, 1623.
63 I. Keren, Y. Wu, J. Inocencio, L. R. Mulcahy and K. Lewis,
Science, 2013, 339, 1213–1216.
64 D. Worlitzsch, R. Tarran, M. Ulrich, U. Schwab, A. Cekici,
K. C. Meyer, P. Birrer, G. Bellon, J. Berger and T. Weiss,
J. Clin. Invest., 2002, 109, 317–325.
65 M. S. Baek, E. S. Chung, D. S. Jung and K. S. Ko,
J. Antimicrob. Chemother., 2020, 75, 917924.
66 I. C. McCall, N. Shah, A. Govindan, F. Baquero and
B. R. Levin, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2019, 63,
e02360–e02318.
67 P. C. Ke, S. Lin, W. J. Parak, T. P. Davis and F. Caruso, ACS
Nano, 2017, 11, 11773–11776.
68 J. Piella, N. G. Bastús and V. Puntes, Bioconjugate Chem.,
2017, 28, 88–97.
69 M.-M. Yin, W.-Q. Chen, Y.-Q. Lu, J.-Y. Han, Y. Liu and
F.-L. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4573–4585.
70 S. L. Percival, K. E. Hill, S. Malic, D. W. Thomas and
D. W. Williams, Wound Repair Regener., 2011, 19, 1–9.
71 P. Bahmaninejad, S. Ghafourian, M. Mahmoudi, A. Maleki,
N. Sadeghifard and B. Badakhsh, JGH Open, 2021, 5, 493–
497.
Communication
Nanoscale
10032 | Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 10016–10032
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Published on 27 June 2022. Downloaded on 6/23/2026 10:34:36 AM. 
View Article Online