Nature Reviews Materials
nature reviews materials
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-023-00537-1
Review article
 Check for updates
Understanding ligand-protected 
noble metal nanoclusters at work
María Francisca Matus 
  1 & Hannu Häkkinen 
  1,2 
Abstract
Ligand-protected noble metal nanoclusters, commonly termed 
‘monolayer-protected metal clusters’ (MPCs), comprise a common set 
of structures with an inorganic core stabilized by an organic layer of 
ligand molecules. The choice of the metals in the inorganic core defines 
the clusters’ physical properties, such as the electronic, optical and 
magnetic properties, whereas the organic ligand shell defines their 
solubility and functionality with the surrounding environment. MPCs 
are currently provoking widespread interest as tunable nanomaterials 
because they can be engineered, in principle, with atomic precision.  
In this Review, we discuss the unique features of MPCs that make  
them ideal nanomaterials for applications in different fields, including 
catalysis and biological applications such as bioimaging, sensing 
and targeted drug delivery. We emphasize how understanding these 
atomically precise nanomaterials requires a tight connection between 
computational modelling and experimental characterization, which 
opens unique possibilities for iterative functionalization and tuning  
for applications.
Sections
Introduction
Hybrid and unique molecular 
structure
A rare interdisciplinary 
feedback loop
Nanocatalysts
Biomedical applications
Outlook
1Department of Physics, Nanoscience Center, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. 2Department of 
Chemistry, Nanoscience Center, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. 
 e-mail: hannu.j.hakkinen@jyu.fi

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
mixing either noble metals or transition metals with noble metals1–6. 
The protecting ligand layer can consist of thiols, alkynyls, carbenes, 
halides or any other species that has a high affinity to the metal core. 
Specific to MPCs is the fact that, in most cases, they are distinct chemi-
cal compounds with a known molecular formula and an atomically 
precise structure as characterized by single-crystal X-ray diffraction 
(SCXRD). They can be treated as any other molecular species with a 
known structure and known set of chemical properties. This fact has 
had an enormous impact in the computational investigations of MPC 
properties, from phenomenological models explaining their relative 
stability to detailed computations of their physical and chemical prop-
erties; in some cases, theory has been able to independently predict 
MPC structures that have later been experimentally observed7 (Box 3).
The precise composition and multiple customizable properties 
make MPCs ideal candidates for next-generation materials in diverse 
areas of materials science. Here, it is necessary to stress an impor-
tant aspect offered by MPCs that is impracticable for conventional 
and polydisperse nanoparticles: the ability to implement a virtuous 
cycle of improvement through the coalescence of computational and 
experimental investigations. This workflow produces a large amount 
of data that can be integrated into adequate data analysis methods 
(such as machine learning), generating a rare and robust feedback loop 
to develop new functional materials (Fig. 2). This feedback approach 
can strengthen the development of MPCs as new catalysts, bioimaging 
and/or sensing agents, and drug carriers in nanomedicine.
This Review provides an overview of the key factors for successfully 
developing tunable MPCs and illustrates how the atomic-level charac-
terization enables more accurate structure–property correlations, 
bringing the iterative loop into motion.
Hybrid and unique molecular structure
MPCs exhibit a discrete size and precise chemical composition that can 
be represented by the definite formula [MnLm]q, where n and m are the 
number of metal atoms (M) and ligands (L), respectively, and q represents 
the net charge1,8,9. As illustrated in Fig. 3, MPCs have a hybrid structure 
consisting of a metal core of 1–3 nm in diameter (from a few tens to a few 
hundred metal atoms) that is stabilized by a covalently bound ligand 
layer1,10. This well-defined molecular structure is especially important for 
determining the exact number of functional molecules that can be con-
jugated to the MPC surface for a given application11–13 and for pinpointing 
how MPCs interact with their environment8. This exactness is in sharp 
contrast to larger, colloidal metal nanoparticles, in which neither the 
metal–ligand interface nor the structure of the ligand surface is known 
on the molecular scale. The peculiar structure of MPCs can therefore 
be divided into three main layers, which can be studied with unrivalled 
precision through interdisciplinary computational–experimental 
strategies8: the compact metal core, the metal–ligand interface 
and the organic ligand layer (Fig. 3). In addition, an extra layer that rep-
resents the interaction of MPCs with different external factors of any 
surrounding environment can be defined. This outermost region thus 
comprises mainly structural alterations of the ligand layer induced by 
intermolecular interactions with, for example, biomolecules (nano–bio 
interface)8,14, specific counterions (such as counterions with surfactant 
properties)15 or different support materials (for catalytic reactions)16,17.
Metal core
So far, various MPC structures consisting of different noble metal cores, 
such as gold3,18, silver19 and copper20, have been successfully revealed 
by SCXRD, obtained in close synergy with theoretical studies based on 
Introduction
Ligand-protected metal nanoclusters are an exceptional class of ultra­
small inorganic–organic nanoparticles that have provoked wide-
spread interest owing to their molecular-like properties1, which are 
not observed in the corresponding bulk counterparts. These metallic 
nanostructures have potential applications as catalysts, agents for bio-
logical imaging and sensing, and tunable nanomaterials for diagnostics 
and therapeutics in personalized nanomedicine.
Atomically precise nanometre-size particles that contain an inor-
ganic core made of noble metals, stabilized by various hydrophobic 
or hydrophilic organic ligand molecules, are commonly known as 
‘monolayer-protected metal clusters’ (MPCs) (Box 1). Their discovery has 
been an interesting journey spanning close to three decades (Fig. 1 and 
Box 2). The most common core metal is gold, but in recent years silver- 
and copper-based MPCs have appeared, together with bimetallic MPCs 
Box 1 
Why atomically precise MPCs?
It is illuminating to contrast the true atom-level monodispersity of 
monolayer-protected metal clusters (MPCs) with the concept of size 
monodispersity used for colloidal metal nanoparticles via a simple 
example: using the density of atoms in macroscopic gold metal 
(59 atoms nm−3), a spherical gold nanoparticle of 5 nm diameter 
contains about 3,860 gold atoms. If we take a random sample with 
10% size variation (well qualified to be termed ‘monodisperse size’ 
in colloid science), the nanoparticles will vary in the seemingly 
tiny range of 4.5–5.5 nm, but this translates to a substantial range 
in the quantity of atoms (about 1,000). These many atoms come 
into play for dictating specific and commonly undesired features. 
For instance, for applications in catalysis, inaccuracy in the surface 
size or surface chemical structure hinders an understanding of the 
reaction mechanisms, such as detailed reaction steps and reasons 
for product selectivity. Likewise, for biomedical applications, 
variations in the number of atoms strongly affect toxicity and 
biodistribution of the nanomaterials.
versus
Colloidal metal nanoparticles
Atomically precise MPCs

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
density functional theory (DFT) calculations21–23 (Box 3). The reported 
structures usually have a highly symmetric core and different types of 
unit cells, such as face-centred cubic24, body-centred cubic25, hexagonal 
close-packed26, icosahedral27,28 and decahedral29, among others20,30. The 
size and geometry of the metal core dictates the physical and electronic 
properties of the MPC31, which can be tuned by the incorporation of a 
different metal (dopant), enhancing, for example, their luminescence 
or catalytic activity32,33.
Metal–ligand interface
The composition of the metal–ligand interface can be understood 
using the ‘divide and protect’ concept (Box 3), which has enabled the 
identification of particular central cores and their protecting units in 
all available MPC crystal structures thus far. Although the interface 
provides structural stability to the MPCs, it is also dynamic, resulting 
in a duality that — although not yet fully understood — has been dem-
onstrated to play a determinant role in isomerism and intercluster 
reactions34. Interdisciplinary studies (combining DFT calculations or 
reactive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with mass spectrom-
etry) on thiolate (SR)-protected Au and Ag MPCs such as Ag44(SR)30 
(ref. 35) and Au25(SR)18 (refs. 36,37) have shown how a particular rearrange-
ment of the metal–ligand interface can give rise to isomeric products in 
the gas phase, whether or not any metal–sulfur bonds actually break. 
Similarly, the first intercluster reaction observed between Au25(SR)18 
and Ag44(SR)18 MPCs38 was attributed to the differing oxidation states 
of atoms in the metal core (neutral) and metal–ligand interface (oxi-
dized) (Box 3). These different chemical states within the same MPC 
triggered redox processes, which, along with metallophilic and pi–pi 
interactions between aromatic ligands, led to destabilization of the 
protecting units and consequently their fragmentation to produce 
the bimetallic MPCs38.
Ligands
The selection of surface ligand depends strongly on the application for 
which the MPCs will be used39. Ligands influence different parameters 
and physicochemical properties of the MPCs, such as geometry40, 
stability41, optical absorption42, reactivity43, luminescence44 and chi-
rality45, and at the same time determine how MPCs interact with the 
environment. For Au MPCs, thiolates have been by far the preferred 
ligands owing to the high affinity of the Au–S bond2, translating to 
higher stability. Despite this strong bond, thiolate-protected Au MPCs 
can participate in thiolate-for-thiolate ligand exchange reactions46–48 
that tune the MPC’s surface properties (such as increasing the biocom-
patibility, reducing the reactivity or providing amphipathic character, 
to name a few). Furthermore, combined computational–experimental 
work (DFT calculations and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spec-
troscopy) has made it possible to identify the exact ligand molecules 
most susceptible to being replaced11,49,50 for site-selective modification. 
The high strength of the metal–S bond has also been reflected in vari-
ous thiolate-protected Ag (refs. 51–53) and a few Cu (ref. 20) MPCs and 
benefits their use in biomedical applications, because it contributes 
to the stability and lower reactivity of the nanoclusters. Alkynyl ligands 
(C≡CR) and selenolates (SeR) have an affinity for Au similar to that of 
thiolates and are thus of interest for Au and Ag MPCs54–58. Conversely, 
ligands with weaker binding energies than thiolates, such as phos-
phines (PR3), have attracted particular attention for developing high-
performance heterogeneous catalysts and studying ligand elimination 
methods59. In these systems, the catalytic activity increases with the 
amount of ligand removed from the MPCs, so a weaker metal–ligand 
interaction is beneficial for selective partial or full ligand elimination 
without causing changes in size or shape of the MPC on the support.
A rare interdisciplinary feedback loop
The well-defined internal structure of MPCs allows unique feedback 
between computations and experimental measurements that is 
scarcely feasible using conventional nanomaterials with batch-to-
batch variability and non-uniform composition (Box 1). This constant 
feedback through interdisciplinary research is especially beneficial 
for developing new functional nanosystems and can be turned into an 
iterative flow with the purpose of improving the nanosystems based 
on their intended application; that is, a feedback loop.
The main steps making up the feedback loop are design/redesign, 
synthesis, characterization and evaluation (Fig. 2). The cycle starts with 
the computational design and modelling of the nanosystem using dif-
ferent theoretical methods for structure prediction, such as DFT, MD 
simulations or a hybrid quantum-mechanics/molecular-mechanics 
Crystal structure of 
Au144(SR)60 (ref.97)
Crystal structure 
of Au38(SR)24 (ref.216)
Crystal structure of 
Au25(SR)18 (ref.27,28)
Crystal structure 
of Au102(SR)44 (ref.29)
Noble metal NCs as 
probes for labelling 
biomolecules123
‘Brust–Shiﬀrin’ 
method206
First ‘magic 
numbers’ and 
‘giant’ water-
soluble NCs210
ESI-MS of 
Au25(SR)18 and 
other discrete 
sizes212
First ligand 
exchange reaction 
for SR-protected 
NCs47
Thiol-SAMs on 
gold surfaces204,205
Correct structure 
prediction of 
Au38(SR)24 (ref.23)
Correct structure 
prediction of 
Au144(SR)60 (ref.96)
First DFT models 
of Au38(SR)24 (ref.213)
‘Divide and 
protect’ concept215
Superatom 
electronic 
structure model86
Correct structure 
prediction of 
Au25(SR)18 (ref.21)
Experimental 
Computational
1980s
1994
1996
1999
2000
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2018
Fig. 1 | Timeline of some key milestones in the field of atomically precise metal 
nanoclusters. The key developments presented in each box are focused on 
gold-based metal nanoclusters because they have been studied most intensively 
and promoted the development of their silver- and copper-based counterparts. 
Au, gold; DFT, density functional theory; ESI-MS, electrospray ionization mass 
spectrometry; NCs, nanoclusters; SAMs, self-assembling monolayers; SR, thiolate.

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
approach. Then the most promising nanosystem obtained in the first 
stage is synthesized and characterized experimentally. Simultaneously, 
the computational and experimental data sets can be integrated into 
efficient analytical tools (for example, those based on machine learn-
ing) to be correctly processed and guide the decision-making process. 
Next, the nanosystem is experimentally evaluated, and the proposed 
model is corroborated. Suppose an undesired effect or deficient per-
formance is observed. In that case, a refinement of the model (redesign) 
is performed, which may consist of changes in the composition of one 
or more structural layers with the aim of improving the nanosystem 
efficacy in the next iteration.
This concept emerges from the distinctive configuration of 
MPCs; thus, it can be implemented in their different application areas. 
For example, to develop new targeted nanosystems in the biomedical 
field, the feedback loop is greatly beneficial for studying the many ways 
in which biomolecules might interact with the nanosystem’s surface 
when it enters the human body and predicting which interactions may 
hinder targeting ability. Possible failures of the nanosystem in biologi-
cal tests (at the in vitro, ex vivo or in vivo level) can thus be anticipated, 
and all necessary modifications can be made to the model at early 
stages to maintain its intended diagnostic or therapeutic features. 
More efficient electrocatalysts can also be developed in this way. The 
design stage of the feedback loop can apply derived methods from 
existing algorithms for structure prediction of MPCs60 combined with 
DFT calculations, which will then be integrated with experiments to 
elucidate the catalytic activity and reactions involved before gener-
ating large experimental data sets with demanding trial-and-error 
laboratory work.
The execution of a constant improvement cycle is enormously 
useful for developing more precise predictive tools to guide the experi-
mental stage, as it can illuminate how a given adjustment to a nano-
system affects its internal structure, ligand dynamics and complex 
interactions with the environment.
Nanocatalysts
Computational studies of the catalytic properties of MPCs began 
in 2010 with a series of systematic DFT calculations to investigate 
the di-oxygen binding and CO oxidation on phosphine- and thiolate-
protected Au MPCs between 1.2 and 2.4 nm (ref. 61). The well-known 
rate-limiting step in the CO oxidation reaction is the binding and 
activation of di-oxygen (stretching the O–O bond) at the catalyst, as 
shown in earlier computational studies on free and oxide-supported 
Au MPCs62–66. The systematic calculations61 showed a clear size effect 
in this rate-limiting step: only MPCs smaller than 2.2 nm were able to 
bind O2 in an activated superoxo form (nominally O2
− species), and the 
CO oxidation reaction proceeded over these MPCs with low energy 
barriers. The proposed mechanism involved partial removal of the 
ligand shell to modify the electronic structure of the Au core, aiding 
efficient electron transfer to the di-oxygen antibonding orbital. The 
size effect introduced the concept that ultrasmall MPCs can be active 
catalysts, motivating further work in the field.
Generally, for any catalysed reaction to proceed, the catalyst has 
to be able to bind to reactants, activate them and release the reaction 
products. In principle, when an MPC is used as a catalyst, its catalytic 
properties can be tuned through separate modifications of the metal 
core, the ligand layer or the MPC–support interaction (Fig. 4). We 
discuss examples in which computational work — explaining either a 
concurrent or published experiment, or predicting mechanisms to be 
investigated in future experiments — has shed light on the key factors 
in performing these modifications.
Effects of the metal core
Single-site hydrogenation catalysts. Copper-hydride complexes 
have potential as catalysts for several technologically important reac-
tions, such as hydrogenation of carbon monoxide, hydroamination of 
alkenes and alkynes, and chemoselective hydrogenation of unsaturated 
ketones to unsaturated alcohols. One such well-known complex is 
the commercially available Stryker’s reagent Cu6H6(PPh3)6 (refs. 67,68). 
Several larger Cu MPCs with hydrides in the Cu core have also been 
synthesized, such as alkynyl-protected Cu53H18 (ref. 69), phosphine-
protected Cu25H22 (ref. 70), and dithiophosphate-protected Cu32H20 
(ref. 71) and Cu20H11 (ref. 72).
Box 2
Brief history of noble metal 
nanoclusters made by wet 
chemistry
Among the first synthesized nanoclusters having a metal nucleus 
with metal–metal bonding were gold compounds from the late 1960s 
and early 1970s with the general formula Au11L7X3 and [Au13L10X2]3+, 
where L = phosphine and X = halide or SCN (ref. 82). Phosphines or 
diphosphines were later applied as protecting ligands to yield larger 
gold nanoclusters and intermetallic gold–silver complexes, as well 
as ‘cluster-of-clusters’ supramolecular structures200–202, and are 
still used today. However, the vast majority of metal nanoclusters 
synthesized and characterized so far have been based on the high 
affinity of thiol(ates) to gold that was first used in the early 1980s 
(Fig. 1) to make thiol-self-assembling monolayers (thiol-SAMs) on gold 
surfaces203–205. Crucial to this development was the demonstration 
by Brust and co-workers in 1994 that thiolates could stabilize 1–3-nm 
gold nanoparticles206. Their synthesis protocol is still widely used 
with various modifications to allow synthesis in organic and aqueous 
solvents, targeting different nanoparticle size regimes. The groups of 
Whetten and Murray showed that the ‘Brust–Shiffrin’ synthesis does 
indeed yield a series of distinct ‘magic’ sizes, and that the electronic 
structure and optical properties show quantization of the electronic 
states207–210. The term monolayer-protected cluster (MPC) was coined, 
assuming that the particles probably had a well-defined size and 
distinct molecular composition structure, giving the idea that there 
exists a series of ‘magic compositions’ akin to the magic numbers 
in gas-phase metal nanoclusters accounting for the stability178,211 
(Box 3). Development in mass spectrometry techniques yielded the 
first molecular formulas for thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters 
(AunSRm) from the work of Tsukuda, Negishi and collaborators around 
2005 (ref. 212), culminating in the first crystal structure of a fairly large 
SR-protected gold nanocluster, Au102(p-MBA)44, by Kornberg’s group 
in 2007 (ref. 29). After this breakthrough, the field developed at a 
very rapid pace, and, currently, about 200 distinct compounds with 
molecular structures are known, involving compounds with other 
noble metals and other ligands such as carbenes and alkynyls.

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
The atomistic mechanisms for hydrogenation of ketones to alco-
hols by a thiolate-protected copper-hydride nanocluster [Cu25H10(SP
hCl2)18]3− have been deciphered in detail via a tight interplay between 
experiment and theory73. DFT analysis of the observed crystal struc-
ture confirmed the location and hydride (H−) form of the ten H atoms 
inside the Cu core. Four different symmetry environments in a 3:3:3:1 
ratio were revealed by 2H NMR data of the deuterated form of the 
nanocluster. MD simulations, using forces calculated from the DFT, 
demonstrated that the hydrides are essential to stabilize the observed 
atomic structure of the Cu core. DFT calculations, which considered 
a simplified model reaction of hydrogenating formaldehyde H2C=O 
(the simplest relevant molecule having the C=O bond) to methanol, 
proposed the intriguing idea that the hydrides in the Cu core par-
ticipate in the reaction; in other words, the copper hydride serves as 
a hydrogen source in the reaction H2 + H2C=O → H3COH, being replen-
ished by ambient H2 during each reaction cycle. Two possible reaction 
routes were identified, involving either one or two hydrides from the 
core (Fig. 4a,b). Measured 2H NMR signals of the reaction product 
indicated that it interacts with only one active hydride site (out of 10) 
of the catalyst, and that two hydrides from the Cu core diffuse to this 
active site to be used during the reaction cycle. This work confirmed, 
through atom-scale information, the lattice-hydride mechanism that 
had earlier been only proposed in electrocatalytic CO2 reduction by 
Cu32H20 nanoclusters71.
Doping of the metal core. It is well known that alloying, or mixing 
another metal into the host metal, can easily modify the electronic 
structure and thus the optical (plasmonic) and catalytic properties of 
colloidal metal nanoparticles. MPCs offer even greater control over 
the physicochemical properties through doping, because the fixed 
number of core metal sites and atom geometry facilitate, in principle, 
one-by-one changes in the metal composition and dopant atom posi-
tion (Fig. 4a). Early DFT calculations74,75 suggested that the electronic 
structure of Au MPCs could be modified by doping the Au core with 
other metals, concentrating on the doped nanocluster [MAu24(SR)18]q 
derived from the eight-electron superatom [Au25(SR)18]−. This idea was 
systematically investigated with a large range of dopants M from ele-
ment groups 1, 2 and 10–16, for overall nanocluster charges of −2 ≤ q ≤ 2 
(ref. 74). The interaction energy between the dopant and the Au24 frame, 
and the electronic HOMO–LUMO energy gap (where HOMO is highest 
occupied molecular orbital and LUMO lowest unoccupied molecular 
orbital), could both be tuned in a wide range, from 2.5 eV to 9 eV, and 
Box 3
Theoretical concepts, developments and breakthroughs
First efforts to model the atomic structure of ligand-protected 
metal nanoclusters in the mid-1990s (Fig. 1) considered crystalline 
nanoparticles of gold covered by alkenethiolates, and thermodynamic 
stability was argued based on filled atom shells in octahedral-shape 
face-centred cubic crystallites of 140, 225, 314 and 459 gold atoms207. 
This corresponded approximately to the observed stable sizes of 
several synthesized alkenethiolate-gold compounds, which had 
approximate masses determined by matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization (MALDI) experiments as 27, 46, 57 and 93 kDa, respectively 
(the size determination assumed that in the MALDI conditions the 
ligand shell is mostly fragmented and the observed nanoparticle 
masses are due to the gold core, for which 1 kDa corresponds to a 
mass of approximately five gold atoms). The first density functional 
theory (DFT) calculation on the electronic structure of the model 
nanocluster Au38(SCH3)24 (SCH3 = methylthiolate) also considered 
a symmetric face-centred-cubic nanocrystallite with an atomically 
sharp gold–thiolate interface in line with the early atomistic models 
of thiolate self-assembling monolayers on an Au(111) surface213. This 
model was challenged by DFT simulations that showed disorder in 
the gold core214. An important discovery from DFT simulations in 2006 
led to the ‘divide and protect’ structural concept215. It suggested that 
two distinct chemical states of gold atoms coexist within the same 
cluster: in the metal core, the Au(0) state (charge-neutral) is found, 
whereas the Au(i) state (oxidized) is present in the metal–ligand 
interface, forming gold–thiolate ring-like structures. According to 
this concept, the chemical composition for the model nanocluster 
Au38(SCH3)24 could be written as Au14@[(AuSCH3)4]6 (using the notation 
core@shell). Although this particular structure model for Au38(SCH3)24 
turned out to be incorrect23,216, it gave a correct description of the gold 
chemistry in these compounds, as was directly proven by the ground-
breaking crystal structure of Au102(SR)44 (SR = p-MBA) in 2007 (ref. 29) 
where the composition could be described as a metal core of 79  
Au atoms protected by 19 RS–Au–SR and 2 RS–Au–RS–Au–SR units  
(Au79@(RS–Au–SR)19(RS–Au–SR–Au–SR)2). DFT calculations, analysing 
the electronic structure of this cluster, stressed the relevance of the  
‘superatom model’ in which additional thermodynamic stability 
comes from electronic ‘magic numbers’ needed to fill cluster electron 
shells86,217. Considering the chemical composition of Au102(SR)44 and 
a few other then-known gold nanoclusters protected by phosphines 
(PR3) or thiolates, applying a simple electron counting formula86  
gave the expected shell-filling numbers, such as eight electrons  
for Au11(PR3)7Cl3 and [Au25(SR)18]− and 58 electrons for Au102(SR)44.  
It is noteworthy that around 1976, Mingos had already predicted, by 
extended Hückel calculations, that PR3-protected gold nanoclusters 
with eight ‘free’ or ‘delocalized’ electrons should have additional 
stability and thus could be synthesized218, the underlying physical 
idea being similar to the superatom model. The superatom model was 
quickly adopted and is still widely used. It can be modified to include 
other noble metals, other electron-withdrawing ligands and non-
spherical shapes of the metal core. After 2008, DFT calculations have 
had an important role in correctly predicting the atomic structure of 
several thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters, such as [Au25(SR)18]− 
(refs. 21,27,28), the chiral structures of Au38(SR)24 (refs. 23,216) and Au144(SR)60 
(refs. 96,97), as well as incoming ligand positions in ligand-exchanged 
phosphine–carbene-protected gold nanoclusters219. Development 
of classical force fields166,220 has been crucial to extend modelling 
capability to molecular dynamics simulations of ligand-protected 
metal nanoclusters in biological environments130,152,221.

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
from 0.8 eV to 1.5 eV, respectively. This tuning substantially affected 
both the chemical stability and chemical reactivity of these ‘doped 
superatoms’.
This concept has since been applied to improve catalysts for the 
electrocatalytic water splitting reaction 2H2O → 2H2 + O2, which con-
sists of two half-reactions: the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) 
and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). MAu24(SR)18 nanoclusters 
doped with platinum or palladium in particular76,77 are efficient HER 
catalysts, paralleling or exceeding the performance of commercial 
Pt HER electrocatalysts. DFT calculations have shown the important 
role of transition metal dopants in regulating the HOMO energy level 
of the metal core and the consequent binding energy of the hydrogen 
to the catalyst78. Pd-doped Au MPCs also catalyse OER and oxygen 
reduction reaction (ORR) more efficiently than the pure Au25(SR)18 
cluster, with the metal core size and the chemical nature of the ligand 
affecting the catalytic performance as well77. DFT studies suggest 
mercury as the ideal dopant for ORR over MAu24(SR)18 catalyst79.
Effects of the ligand layer
Engineering of accessible metal sites. Conceptually, MPCs resemble 
metalloenzymes in that they have a reactive metal cluster at the centre 
(analogous to the metal centre in metalloenzymes) that is chemically 
stabilized by an organic ligand layer (the protein backbone in metallo­
enzymes). An enzyme’s functionality depends on the accessibility of 
the reactive centre, which is regulated by dynamics and conformations 
of the nearby residues. Owing to the shape of the protein backbone and 
the size and charge distribution of the side chains around the enzyme’s 
metal centre, ‘correct’ reactants are guided to the catalytic centre, 
guaranteeing the enzyme’s high specificity in biological processes. 
To mimic this concept, small Au nanoclusters with cores between 
0.9 nm and 4 nm were synthesized with phosphine-functionalized 
calix(4)arenes as bulky ligands to regulate access to the metal core80. 
2-Naphthalenethiol (2-NT), whose fluorescence quenches upon bind-
ing to gold, was used as a chemical probe to study the accessibility of 
guest molecules to the core in solution. Twenty-five per cent of the Au 
sites were accessible in the smallest 0.9 nm particle, but the accessibil-
ity decreased greatly for larger cores. A similar relationship between 
small core size and accessibility was found when N-heterocyclic car-
bene (NHC)-functionalized calix(4)arenes were used as ligands81. For 
designing nanocatalysts, these findings suggest that the accessibility 
of reactants to the metal core can be engineered both by the size of the 
core and by the size of the ligands.
A 0.9-nm-diameter metal core implies about 10 Au atoms. To 
examine why such a small cluster may have so many accessible sites, 
a well-known Au11(PR3)7Cl3 nanocluster82 was used as a reference to 
design a model of the experimental calixarene-protected nanocluster. 
In the model, seven PR3 ligands were replaced by five calix(4)arenes, 
two in a bidentate binding mode to Au and three in a monodentate 
mode, and 2-NT molecules replaced the chlorides83. This configuration 
yields 27% accessibility of 2-NT to Au sites, in close correspondence 
to the experimental results80,81. DFT calculations found that, with the 
three 2-NT molecules adsorbed, the nanocluster’s electronic structure 
satisfies the eight-electron closed-shell rule for the MPC ‘superatom’ 
(Box 3), but when the adsorption sites are free, the nanocluster is an 
11-electron system — that is, it could be a potential donor of three 
electrons to reactants. To confirm this, di-oxygen was used as a model 
Step 3
Elucidation and description 
of physicochemical features
Step 2
Development of the
material based on
the conceived strategy
for future applications
Step 4
Testing and validation of
the desired properties 
Step 1
Computational design and
modelling of the MPC-based
nanosystem using
diﬀerent theoretical methods 
Decision
window
Feedback loop
TRUE
All data
FALSE
End
Loop restart
Loop condition
Data analysis
methods
Input
Output
D
e
si
g
n
/r
e
d
e
si
g
n
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
S
y
n
t
h
e
si
s
E
v
a
l
u
a
ti
o
n
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
C
h
a
r
a
c
t
e
ri
z
a
ti
o
n
Fig. 2 | Feedback loop between computational and experimental studies 
enabled by atomically precise metal nanoclusters. Conceptualization of the 
main steps involved in the interdisciplinary feedback loop where computational 
and experimental approaches act in complementary and synergistic ways, 
favoured by the ultrasmall size and precise molecular composition of  
monolayer-protected metal clusters (MPCs). The cycle starts with the design  
and computational modelling (step 1) of the MPC-based nanosystem using 
different methods such as density functional theory, molecular dynamics 
or quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics simulations. Then the most 
promising nanosystems are synthesized (step 2) and characterized (step 3)  
experimentally, using techniques such as nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy, mass spectrometry and electron microscopy. Next, the developed 
MPC-based nanosystem is experimentally evaluated, and the proposed model is 
corroborated (step 4). The data set collected throughout the loop execution can 
be integrated into efficient analytical tools, such as machine learning algorithms, 
to help guide the decision-making stage. The loop condition is related to the 
agreement between computational and experimental observation according 
to the intended application; if the predictive models or previous improvements 
on the models are sufficient (TRUE), the loop ends, and the final product (new 
functional nanosystem) is obtained. Otherwise, if an undesired effect or deficient 
performance is observed after the data analysis, the nanosystem features are 
considered insufficient (FALSE); thus, a refinement of the model at any structural 
level (metal core, metal–ligand interface, ligand layer) is required (redesign), and 
a new iteration initiates as many times as necessary.

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
of an electroaffine reactant. Three O2 molecules did indeed adsorb to 
the accessible Au sites, and each was activated via electron transfer 
(Fig. 4d). Hence small Au-based MPCs, protected even by bulky mol-
ecules, can retain a proportionally large number of accessible Au sites 
for electron-transfer reactions.
The concept of modifying the MPC ligand layer to increase the 
accessibility of reactants to metal sites has since been illustrated 
further84,85. An Au-based MPC protected with phosphine and dipyri-
dylamido (dpa) ligands, [Au23(Ph3P)10(dpa)2Cl]2+, shows an excellent 
performance towards selective aerobic oxidation of benzyl alcohol to 
benzaldehyde84. Thirty-five per cent of the catalytically active Au sites 
(8 out of 23 Au atoms) are accessible, as confirmed via titration by the 
fluorescent 2-NT molecule. The MPC is also very chemically stable, 
attributable to the negatively charged multidentate dpa ligands and to 
an electronically closed-shell 18-electron configuration86. Similarly, two 
Au MPCs with a mixed layer of NHC and phenylacetylide (PA) ligands, 
[Au16(NHC)5(PA)3Br2]3+ and [Au17(NHC)4(PA)4Br4]+ (ref. 85), are effective 
catalysts for hydroamination of alkynes at 65 °C in air. Both of these 
MPCs have a common 13-atom icosahedral core and feature single or 
paired organometallic NHC–Au(i)–PA molecular species in the ligand 
layer, which expose three or four Au sites, respectively (Fig. 4e). They 
also have an electronically closed-shell eight-electron configuration. 
DFT calculations suggested a reaction mechanism that involves both 
an Au(0) atom in the metal core and an Au(i) atom in the ligand layer, 
rendering these MPCs interesting hybrids between heterogeneous and 
homogeneous catalysts.
Modifying the core electronic structure by ligands. The early sug-
gestions61 of modifying the electronic structure of the metal core for 
catalytic reactions were finally applied87 to prepare two Ag MPCs, 
[Ag21(L)3(L′)6]+ and [Ag21(L′)10(L″)6]+, with a similar icosahedral core 
geometry but differing ligand layers. Here, L is a two-electron-with-
drawing thiacalixarene, L′ is a one-electron-withdrawing phosphi-
nate, and L″ is a one-electron-withdrawing alkynyl ligand. Applying 
the count for the superatom electrons (Box 3), [Ag21(L)3(L′)6]+ has a 
closed-shell eight-electron configuration (21 − (3 × 2) − 6 − 1 = 8), and 
[Ag21(L′)10(L″)6]+ is a four-electron system (21 − 10 − 6 − 1 = 4). These 
electronic structures were also identified by DFT visualizations of the 
frontier orbitals. The eight-electron MPC is highly stable under ambi-
ent light, in toluene solution at 90 °C and even in oxidative conditions. 
The four-electron MPC, though less stable at elevated temperatures 
and in oxidative conditions, is remarkably more active in catalysing 
the reduction of 4-nitrophenol. DFT calculations attributed the higher 
activity to the higher binding energy of the reactant to the open-shell 
four-electron system. Thus, a suitable balance between MPC stability 
and catalytic activity can be tuned by chemical variations in the ligand 
layer, keeping the same overall atomic structure but modifying the 
electronic structure of the metal core.
Weak interligand interactions. In addition to creating accessible metal 
sites for catalytic reactions at the core surface, the specific ligands used 
can substantially affect the characteristics of the ligand layer, modify 
the chemical stability of the MPCs and tune the MPC–environment 
a
b
1–3 nm
Environment–nano
interface
Metal core
Metal–ligand interface
Ligand layer
Metal core
Ligand dynamics and charge distribution
Well-defined sites
for functionalization
Well-known metal–ligand interface
 n : no. of metal atoms 
m : no. of ligands 
q : charge
[MnLm]q
Fig. 3 | Schematic representation of the layered structure of atomically precise 
metal nanoclusters. a, A representative model of a partially ligand-exchanged 
Au102(para-mercaptobenzoic acid)43(RGD peptide)1 nanocluster with two proteins 
attached to its surface is depicted with the layered structure that can be studied at 
atomistic level through combined computational–experimental investigations. 
The three inner layers represent the well-known structure of atomically precise 
monolayer-protected metal clusters (MPCs), consisting of a metal core, metal–
ligand interface and ligand layer. The external layer represents the interface 
between an MPC and its surrounding environment. b, Precise features that can be 
studied and controlled at different levels of the MPC structure are highlighted.

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
interactions. Water-soluble Au MPCs synthesized with different iso-
mers of mercaptobenzoic acid (MBA) offer an interesting example. 
Because the MBA’s carboxylic acid group can be in an ortho (o), meta (m) 
or para (p) position (Fig. 4c), Au25 nanoclusters protected by 18 o-, m- or 
p-MBA molecules have been synthesized to investigate their chemical 
stabilities88. The stability of each was studied via collision-induced dis-
sociation in the gas phase, where the measure of the stability was taken 
as the threshold collision energy that induced cluster fragmentation. 
p-MBA-protected nanoclusters were the most stable, followed by 
m-MBA- and o-MBA-protected isomers. The trend was discussed in 
h
a
b
Doping with metals (M)      :
Symmetry B
Symmetry A
Cu MPCs
Addition of H–
Doping with hydrides (H–)    :
CuxHy MPCs
AuxMy MPCs
c
d
e
f
meta position
ortho position
OH
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
OH
HO
O
para position
OH
O
OH
O
HO
O
g
Support B
Support A
Fragmentation
Ligand
migration
Energy (eV)
Energy (eV)
Route 1 involves one H– from the cluster
0.82
0.72
0.72
0.85
0.43
Route 2 involves two H– from the cluster
CuH10
CuH10
CuH10
CH3OH
CuH10
HCHO
H2
CuH9–OCH3
H2
CuH9–OCH3
CuH10
CuH10
HCHO
CH3OH
CuH10
CuH8
CuH8
CuH8
CuH9–OCH3
Fragmentation on SiO2
Ligand migration on CeO2
Site 2
Site 1
Site 3
Paired
OM motif
Paired
OM motif
Isolated OM motif
OH
O
O
HO
HO
O
Flat
Standing up
Interligand H-bond
O
O
H
Metal core
Ligand layer
Support material

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
terms of the increased strain at the Au–S interface created by the 
m-MBA and particularly o-MBA ligands, where the COOH group can 
interact with the Au core and, if deprotonated, can increase the internal 
Coulomb repulsion in the ligand layer and at the metal–ligand interface, 
leading to a less stable chemical structure.
The orientation of the COOH groups relative to each other can also 
regulate weak interactions in a biological environment, as shown by 
the interactions between (o/m/p)-MBA-protected Au nanoclusters and 
biological nanopores made from α-haemolysin89. Nanopore sensing, 
which can detect variations in the properties of passing nanoclus-
ters at the single-molecule level, implied that interactions between 
m-MBA ligands renders those clusters more stable than the analogous 
p-MBA-protected nanoclusters.
m-MBA-protected Au MPCs can also have slightly different compo-
sitions and a lower-symmetry metal core structure than their p-MBA-
protected counterparts90–92. Three distinct, stable m-MBA-protected 
Au MPCs with between 68 and 144 Au atoms have been character-
ized by low-dose electron microscopy. Exposure of these MPCs to 
thiolated DNA oligomers and a single-chain antibody fragment with 
surface-exposed thiol groups led to irreversible attachment of the 
biomolecules to the cluster, as revealed by electrophoresis analysis. 
m-MBA-protected Au MPCs thus offer an interesting system with excel-
lent overall chemical stability but simultaneous reactivity to a few 
thiol-containing biological molecules. These properties make these 
MPCs useful as high-resolution markers in biological imaging93.
To understand the basis of the reactivity of m-MBA-protected Au 
MPCs towards biomolecules, the structure and chemical properties of 
the ligand layer of m-MBA-protected Au68 and Au144 nanoclusters were 
investigated in detail by both experimental (NMR, UV–vis and infrared 
spectroscopy) and computational (DFT, MD simulations) methods94. 
The nanocluster models were based on electron microscopy data 
of the Au core90,92, while a heuristic algorithm was used to build the 
ligand layer around the core60. Both Au68 and Au144 nanoclusters had a 
low number of ligands, about 32 and 40, respectively, which for Au144 
in particular is remarkably few when compared with the well-known 
organo-soluble counterpart Au144L60 (L = thiolate or alkynyl)95–99. One- 
and two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy indicated that the ligand layer 
of both Au68 and Au144 has only C1 symmetry, unlike the C2 ligand sym-
metry of the crystallographically known Au102(p-MBA)44 (ref. 13). MD 
simulations showed that m-MBA ligands can have several conforma-
tions in the ligand layer at room temperature, some of which were 
also detected in infrared experiments. Three conformations were of 
particular interest: a ‘flat’ conformation in which the phenyl ring has a 
pi⋯Au interaction with the core; a ‘standing up’ conformation in which 
the carboxylic acid OH group points towards an Au atom in the core, cre-
ating an O=C–OH⋯Au interaction; and a conformation producing an 
interligand hydrogen bond, O=C–OH⋯O=C–OH (Fig. 4f). These three 
ligand conformations, not generally found in p-MBA-protected nano-
clusters, can explain the relatively low ligand count of Au144(m-MBA)~40, 
because they are able to protect a larger unit area of gold atoms than a 
neatly packed p-MBA overlayer. These observations also suggest that 
the previously reported ligand exchange reactions of m-MBA-protected 
nanoclusters with thiol-containing biomolecules91 are in fact ligand 
addition reactions, in which reactive Au sites become exposed to thiol 
binding of the incoming ligand when the weaker pi⋯Au or O=C–OH⋯Au 
interactions are momentarily broken by room-temperature ligand 
dynamics. Interestingly, the MD simulations94 detected just a few of 
these weak interactions per nanocluster, which would naturally explain 
the low count of extra ligands bound in the earlier experiment91 after 
saturation of all weakly protected Au sites by an Au–S bond. The weak 
pi⋯Au or O=C–OH⋯Au interactions have given rise to suggestions 
of new ‘Venus flytrap’ catalytic mechanisms in m-MBA-protected Au 
nanoclusters, whereby ligand dynamics can open catalytically active, 
low-coordinated Au sites for inbound reactants100,101. In Au68(m-MBA)32, 
these low-coordinated Au sites have also been found by DFT-MD 
simulations to catalyse preferential formation of an unsaturated 
alcohol, 1-propenol, over the two other possible reaction products 
(propanal and 2-propenol) in selective acrolein hydrogenation101. 
Fig. 4 | Main strategies to enhance the catalytic properties of atomically 
precise metal nanoclusters. a,c,g, Schematic illustrations of the three levels of a 
monolayer-protected metal cluster (MPC) structure that can be tuned to exploit 
their catalytic properties: metal core, ligand layer and interface with the support. 
a, Addition of hydrides (H−) to Cu MPCs are essential to stabilize the atomic 
structure of the metal core and are an example of single-site hydrogenation 
catalysts (top). The fixed number of core metal sites and the fixed atom geometry 
of MPCs allow one-by-one doping of the metal core (bottom). b, Density 
functional theory (DFT) energy profiles of route 1 (one H− from the cluster) and 
route 2 (two H− from the cluster) for the catalytic hydrogenation of HCHO by  
[Cu25H10(SCHCl2)18]3–. Cu25 is depicted as thin brown sticks (ligand layer omitted for  
clarity). Hydrides from the cluster and hydrogens from molecular H2 are shown 
as cyan and blue spheres, respectively. Reactant molecules are shown as spheres 
using the conventional colour code: carbon, grey; oxygen, red; hydrogen, white. 
c, Specific ligands with different substitution pattern (ortho, meta, para) dictate 
the chemical stability of MPCs and their interactions with the surrounding 
environment as a consequence of the interactions formed in the ligand layer 
and at the metal–ligand interface. d, DFT-optimized structure of Au11L5(O2)3 
(L = calix(4)arene) complex showing the three accessible Au sites for electron-
transfer reactions provided by the bulky ligand layer. Au11 core is depicted as 
golden spheres. Molecular oxygen (O2) is shown as red spheres. Calix(4)arene 
ligands are shown as thin sticks using the conventional colour code: carbon, grey; 
oxygen, red; phosphorus, orange; hydrogen, white. e, Total structure of [Au16(NH
C)5(PA)3Br2]3+ (NHC = N-heterocyclic carbene, PA = phenylacetylide) highlighting 
the single or paired organometallic (OM) NHC–Au(i)–PA motifs in the ligand 
layer. The Au13 icosahedral core is depicted as golden spheres. Au(i) atoms in the 
organometallic motifs are highlighted as yellow spheres. NHC (sticks) and PA 
(balls and sticks) ligands in the OM motifs are displayed with the conventional 
colour code: carbon, grey; nitrogen, blue; hydrogen, white; bromine, cyan. 
f, Representative ligand–metal and interligand interactions found in the 
molecular dynamics simulations of meta-mercaptobenzoic acid (MBA)-protected 
Au68 and Au144 nanoclusters (from left to right): syn lying flat on the core, anti close 
to gold core, and interligand hydrogen bond. Colour code in simulated structures: 
gold, golden; carbon, grey; oxygen, red; sulfur, yellow; hydrogen, white. g, The 
support material in MPCs as heterogeneous catalysts plays a crucial role in 
tuning their catalytic activity. Interaction mechanisms between the MPCs and 
support, such as ligand migration or oxidative fragmentation, can be observed 
depending on the acidic nature of the support. h, Structure of [Au9(PPh3)8]3+ 
(PPh3 = triphenylphosphine) accompanied by the lowest-energy geometries 
obtained from DFT for Au9 and PPh3 formed by ligand migration on the ceria 
(CeO2) surface (bottom left panels) and AuPPh3 species formed by oxidative 
fragmentation on the silica (SiO2) surface (bottom right panel). Colour code: gold, 
golden; carbon, grey; phosphorus, orange; oxygen, red; hydrogen, white; cerium, 
ice blue; silicon, magenta. Part b adapted from ref. 73, CC BY 4.0. Part d adapted 
with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. Part e 
adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
Part f adapted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 American Chemical 
Society. Part h adapted with permission from ref. 110, Wiley-VCH.

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
This working concept could be further used in selective hydrogenation 
of unsaturated hydrocarbons to industrially important chemicals.
Effects of the support
The above examples of MPC catalysts active in solvent phase form an 
interesting hybrid case between homogeneous and heterogeneous 
catalysis. However, the vast majority of MPC catalysis research is 
conducted in truly heterogeneous systems; that is, the nanoclusters 
are supported by (usually) oxide materials, and the reactants and 
products are in the gas phase. Au MPCs supported by oxides are active 
in several oxidation reactions, such as oxidation of carbon mono­
xide17,102,103, cyclohexane104,105, aerobic alcohol106 and styrene107,108. 
Preparation of heterogeneous MPC/oxide catalysts for the active stage 
usually requires heat treatment, the effects of which on the atomic 
structure of the catalyst are difficult to ascertain. Consequently, 
it is important to investigate the interaction between an MPC and 
its support to better understand the mechanisms underlying MPC 
catalytic activity.
X-ray spectroscopic studies of Au38(SR)24 on ceria (CeO2) and 
alumina (Al2O3)109 at various temperatures showed that the MPCs 
lose, at least partially, the SR ligand layer at elevated temperature 
and oxidative conditions, as confirmed by the detection of sulfur-
containing species on the oxide. This observation is crucially important 
because the ligand’s migration to the support changes the catalyst 
properties in at least two ways: it uncovers unprotected, reactive 
Au atoms or surface facets for reactants to access and, at the same 
time, modifies the local electronic structure of the oxide close to the 
Au MPC. Ultrasmall PR3-protected Au9 nanoclusters were also inves-
tigated on a range of supports (silica, SiO2; titania, TiO2; oxidized gra-
phitic carbon; and ceria) having either Bronsted acid (proton donor) 
or Lewis acid (electron acceptor) character110. X-ray spectroscopy indi-
cated that on the Bronsted acid supports, silica and oxidized carbon, 
the nanoclusters fragment into Au–PR3 complexes after heat treat-
ment at 120 °C (silica) and 60 °C (carbon). However, on the reducible 
supports (titania and ceria), the phosphine ligands ‘peel off’ from the 
cluster and migrate to the surface at 120 °C, leaving intact Au9 nano-
clusters behind. DFT calculations confirmed both these mechanisms 
at respective conditions (Fig. 4g,h).
Biomedical applications
MPCs are advantageous for biomedical applications owing to their 
facile synthesis, excellent biocompatibility, superior stability, efficient 
renal clearance and special fluorescence properties8,111. Water-soluble 
and monodisperse MPCs are produced through relatively simple and 
direct synthetic strategies without using toxic solvents (green meth-
ods)91,112,113. Moreover, the biocompatibility of some water-soluble MPCs 
can be further improved by taking advantage of their facile surface 
modification1,114. This surface versatility makes MPCs ideal materials 
for diverse applications, such as biosensing, bioimaging and targeted 
drug delivery (Fig. 5).
Conjugation of small colloidal Au nanoparticles to biomolecules 
or drugs for improving their stability, biocompatibility115 or delivery 
efficiency116, so-called monolayer-coated Au nanoparticles117, has been 
shown to be an effective strategy. However, although Au nanoparti-
cles are considered promising scaffolds for drug, gene and protein 
delivery applications118, their size and shape variability still make it 
difficult to control their toxicity119. Fortunately, the concepts learned 
from Au nano­particles, such as gold–thiol bonding, ligand exchange 
reactions and ligand-dependent stability, inform the design and 
functionalization of diverse MPCs and thus offer a controlled approach 
for modifying the physicochemical properties of new biocompatible 
materials.
Despite advances made using MPCs as theranostic (diagnostic 
and therapeutic) agents120,121, the absence of structure elucidation in 
many studies prevents the determination of unambiguous structure–
property relationships. Thus, here we describe representative cases in 
which the close connection between computation and experiments 
has enabled a comprehensive characterization of different parameters 
of atomically precise MPCs that are usually overlooked in the design of 
functionalized nanomaterials for bioapplications, such as control 
of ligand density and dynamics of the ligand layer. We also discuss 
the enormous potential offered by MPCs for understanding in more 
detail the nano–bio interactions through interdisciplinary strategies.
The iconic water-soluble Au102(p-MBA)44
Among biocompatible MPCs, Au102(p-MBA)44 has become the most 
emblematic system explored through combined computational–
experimental studies. In 2016, a complete interpretation of 1H and 13C 
NMR spectra was achieved through a combination of 2D NMR spec-
troscopy, DFT calculations and MD simulations13. Each of the 44 proton 
signals coming from the ligand layer was assigned using DFT and based 
on the crystal structure of the nanocluster29. In addition, five ligand 
environments were identified, representing the interactions that occur 
in the metal–ligand interface (ligand-to-sulfur interaction), between 
the p-MBA ligands and the metal core (ligand-to-gold interaction), 
and between neighbouring p-MBA ligands (‘isolated’ ligand, face-to-
face and edge-to-face aromatic interaction). MD simulations, in turn, 
described the ligand dynamics of the nanocluster in water. Ligand 
mobility and orientation were monitored over 30 ns and showed 
remarkable differences with respect to the initial positions13. This study 
was later complemented with a detailed characterization of the surface 
charge distribution of Au102(p-MBA)44 by using acid–base and infrared 
titration with constant pH MD simulations122. While the experimental 
methods provided essential information about the stability and opti-
cal properties of the nanocluster based on the protonation state of 
the ligand layer, constant-pH MD simulations were useful to deter-
mine the pKa of the 44 individual ligands (in the range of 5.18–7.58) 
and identify a unique non-uniform surface charge distribution that 
depends on ligand position. Such multidisciplinary approaches reveal 
fine details of the internal structure and dynamics of the ligand layer 
of these atomically precise nanomaterials, which is essential for 
site-selective biofunctionalization strategies.
Bioimaging and biosensing
Labelling biomolecules. The first study showing the outstanding 
potential of noble metal nanoclusters as stable probes for labelling bio-
logical structures dates back to the early 1980s123. In this seminal work, a 
phosphine-protected Au11 nanocluster was used to mark the carbohydrate 
moieties of the glycoprotein haptoglobin, such that the haptoglobin– 
haemoglobin complex could be visualized with high resolution via 
scanning transmission electron microscopy123. Studies since have dem-
onstrated that metal nanoclusters can be conjugated to almost any small 
molecule including peptides, lipids and nucleic acids124 and, unlike col-
loidal metal nanoparticles, exhibit high stability, excellent penetration 
into tissues, uniform size and absence of aggregation124–126. Thus, MPCs 
have become a promising alternative to traditional unstable and toxic 
contrast agents for bioimaging127. Au102(p-MBA)44 has been used for 
labelling enteroviruses through different functionalization strategies: 

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
for instance, hydroxylated maleimide linkers were covalently attached to 
the cluster’s p-MBA ligands to target the cysteine residues at the capsid 
of echovirus 1 (EV1) and Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3)128. The MPCs made the 
viral surfaces clearly recognizable by transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) while preserving the viruses’ morphology and infectivity. Simi-
larly, Au102(p-MBA)44 MPCs functionalized with a derivative of the antiviral 
compound pleconaril, kirtan1, could recognize the viral capsid of EV1 and 
Coxsackievirus A9 (CVA9) by replacing the natural pocket factors in the 
hydrophobic pockets of the viruses129. TEM images showed that kirtan1-
functionalized MPCs bound to some of the 60 hydrophobic pockets in 
the capsid of EV1 and CVA9 formed pentamer-like symmetries without 
altering viral infectivity129 (Fig. 5a,d). All-atom MD simulations and non-
equilibrium free energy calculations at the atomic level130 showed that 
the binding affinity of the MPC–virus complex is pH-sensitive: a half-
deprotonated p-MBA ligand layer enhances the binding affinity between 
the MPCs and the hydrophobic pocket factors of the virus, whereas a fully 
deprotonated state does not affect the complex binding interactions. 
This example illustrates how interdisciplinary strategies can identify 
specific parameters of MPCs that can be controlled to enhance desired 
features and whose adaptation is essential for higher-level tests, such 
as studies on the in vivo virus uncoating.
Tracking intracellular pH changes. Hybrid nanomaterials containing 
Au MPCs have also been designed for biosensing. For example, an opti-
cal reversible intracellular pH sensor has been reported by covalently 
linking through esterification a fluorescent dye molecule (azadioxatri-
angulenium) to the surface of Au102(p-MBA)44 MPCs131. A combination 
of different methods, such as UV–vis spectroscopy, TEM, confocal 
microscopy and MD simulations, demonstrated that the pH-dependent 
protonation state of the MPCs’ ligand layer regulates the fluorescence 
intensity inside living cells. That is, when the non-fluorescent MPC–dye 
complex (the proximity of the dye to the MPC quenches its fluorescent 
intensity) enters the cells and is exposed to acidic conditions, the com-
plex dissociates via hydrolysis of the ester bond, greatly changing the 
a
Virus
d
b
e
f
c
Functionalized MPCs
for virus recognition
Labelling biomolecules
Tuning the photoluminescence
by biomolecule conjugation
Tuning the photoluminescence
by ligand modification
Organothiolate-
protected MPCs
Site-speciﬁc
conjugation
Capsid-
targeting
ligand
Water-soluble
ligand
20 nm
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Ligand
modification
Enhanced PL by
intermolecular
interactions
Glutathione
Water
NIR-I emission
NIR-II emission
Glutathione-
protected MPCs
Protein
conjugation
Protein
Cys
MPC
MPC–protein
Glutathione MPC
Organothiolate MPC
Absorbance (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
800
300
900
600
150
0
0
0.5
Absorbance (a.u.)
Rel. PL intensity (a.u.)
1,100
500
1,400
800
2,500
0.20
0
0
Fig. 5 | Atomically precise metal nanoclusters for bioimaging and biosensing. 
a–c, Schematic illustrations of selected strategies of surface engineering of 
monolayer-protected metal clusters (MPCs) for potential uses in bioimaging 
and biosensing. a, Water-soluble Au MPCs functionalized with a capsid-targeting 
ligand are used to label specific components of the surface of enteroviruses. 
b, Photoluminescence (PL) of organothiolate-protected Au MPCs is enhanced 
when the ligand layer is replaced with water-soluble molecules such as glutathione 
that rigidify the MPC surface by intermolecular interactions with the surrounding 
environment. c, Luminescent MPCs with second near-infrared (NIR-II) emissions 
are obtained through the conjugation of water-soluble Au MPCs with specific 
free cysteine (Cys) residues of serum albumin protein. d, Transmission electron 
microscopy images of kirtan1-functionalized MPC–echovirus 1 (EV1) conjugates 
(top panels) and a model structure of EV1 with red spheres denoting the positions 
of the hydrophobic pocket entrances (bottom panels). e, UV–vis absorption 
(left) and PL spectra (right) of Au18(GSH)14 (GSH = glutathione) MPCs in water 
and Au18(SC6H11)14 MPCs in toluene. Optical absorption profiles indicate that 
both Au MPCs have a similar structural framework. GSH-protected MPCs show 
higher (and redshifted) emission intensity than their organothiolate-protected 
counterparts between 650 and 850 nm. f, UV–vis absorption (left) and PL 
spectra (right) of Au25(p-MBA)18 (p-MBA = para-mercaptobenzoic acid)  
and Au25–BSA (BSA = bovine serum albumin) MPCs in water. Similar optical 
absorption features for both MPCs demonstrate that the structure of Au25 core 
is not altered after the protein conjugation. PL signal is enhanced at 850 and 
1,050 nm (excitation at 700 nm) after the conjugation of Au25 MPCs to BSA. 
Part d reprinted with permission from ref. 129, Royal Society of Chemistry. Part e 
reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2018 American Chemical 
Society. Part f adapted with permission from ref. 138, Wiley-VCH.

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
protonation state of the ligand layer (from fully deprotonated to par-
tially or fully protonated) and modifying the electrostatic interaction 
strength with the dye, leading to a recovery of the fluorescence intensity. 
This work opens new avenues for developing highly sensitive pH sensors 
to track intracellular processes in a wide pH range.
Enhancing the photoluminescence. The strong photoluminescence 
(PL) of MPCs also makes them an ideal nanomaterial for bioimaging and 
biosensing132,133. Among thiolate ligands, glutathione (GSH) deserves 
special recognition for its ability to enhance the PL quantum yield of 
Au MPCs134–136. Although the crystal structures of GSH-protected Au 
MPCs are not yet available, considerable computational efforts have 
been devoted to predicting their geometric structure, as the particu-
lar ligand arrangement and its pH-dependent charge distribution 
strongly dictate PL properties132,137. In 2018, the first structure-based 
explanation for the enhanced PL was suggested134. Using a model of 
Au18(GSH)14 MPCs and combining synchrotron X-ray absorption spec-
troscopy with quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics simulations, 
it was observed that the ligand layer encapsulates the metal core via 
intermolecular interactions. Specifically, terminal carboxylic groups 
of the GSH ligands form hydrogen bonds with water molecules, which 
rigidifies the MPC surface against potential structural changes. In 
addition, Au and S atoms in the metal–ligand interface exhibit a higher 
polarization (+0.38e and −0.38e for Au and S, respectively) compared 
with their organothiolate counterparts (+0.35e and −0.35e), and the 
aqueous environment induces a charge transfer from the side chains 
of GSH ligands to the metal–ligand interface (−0.1e and −0.3e to Au and 
S, respectively), which may explain the stronger emission properties 
of GSH-protected than organothiolate-protected Au MPCs (Fig. 5b,e).
PL of Au25(p-MBA)18 MPCs can be modulated through site-specific 
conjugation with bovine serum albumin (BSA) protein, as shown by a 
multidisciplinary study combining MS, small-angle X-ray scattering and 
DFT calculations138. The substitution of one p-MBA ligand with a specific 
free cysteine residue (Cys34) of BSA results in an almost fivefold increase 
in PL quantum yield (from 0.15% to 0.7%) and a redshift in the second 
near-infrared (NIR-II) window compared with the unmodified Au25(p-
MBA)18 MPCs (Fig. 5c,f). Interestingly, neither the Au25 nanocluster nor 
the protein changed greatly in structure after conjugation. Given their 
emission between 700 and 1,300 nm and the preserved biocompat-
ibility of the different components, the conjugates are highly suitable 
for in vivo deep tissue imaging and photoactivation applications. The 
observed PL enhancement in the Au25–BSA conjugates was thought to 
involve a strong contribution of charge-transfer states in the metal–
ligand interface and a reinforced intersystem crossing owing to BSA’s 
rigidification of the ligand layer138, consistent with earlier observations 
linking the ligand layer and surface interactions to fluorescence genera-
tion of MPCs44. Although similar enhancement strategies had previously 
used the same protein139,140 or other biomolecules (such as cyclodex-
trin)141, the reported imprecise structures (that is, no precise molecular 
formula) impeded the elucidation of accurate structure–fluorescence 
relationships. Thus, reports like the one described above with a focus on 
the specific localization of MPCs within bioconjugates are encouraging 
and promote the rapid and reproducible development of a new class of 
fluorophores with adjustable PL properties142.
Drug delivery
Nanoscale drug delivery systems have physical and chemical prop-
erties that allow a controlled and sustained release of drugs, mak-
ing them advantageous for treating diverse chronic and infectious 
diseases, including cancer143. In these systems, the drug is protected 
from premature degradation (that is, before reaching the target site) 
and clearance via their encapsulation with synthetic or natural nano-
materials conferring, for example, higher solubility of hydrophobic 
drugs, increased bioavailability and, consequently, an improved phar-
macological effect143. Despite lots of research into these systems, some 
fundamental questions raised 15 years ago remain unanswered144,145. 
For example, what are the physicochemical factors governing the tox-
icity and biodistribution of nanosystems146? How do these systems 
interact with biomolecules at the intra- and extracellular levels14,147? 
These questions remain open, mainly owing to the use of conventional 
nanomaterials that are not amenable to detailed atomic-level charac-
terization and to the lack of interdisciplinary approaches to develop 
preliminary screening tools that support the decision-making process. 
There is an urgent need, therefore, for a shift in focus towards the use of 
atomically precise nanomaterials like MPCs that can be designed with 
greater control and adjusted at any stage of the experimental phase.
Controlling the ligand density. Targeted drug delivery nanosystems 
are among the most promising therapies148,149 because their surface 
functionalities guide therapeutic cargo selectively to the target cell 
and reduce the damage to healthy tissues. However, it is not enough 
just to attach targeting molecules to the nanocarriers; the exact num-
ber of these molecules must also be controlled to optimize delivery 
performance150. This parameter is often overlooked in the design of 
conventional targeted nanosystems, whose reported size is generally a 
range from tens to hundreds of nanometres, without any details about 
the number of surface-conjugated ligands. As an exception, colloidal 
Au nanoparticles were conjugated with exactly one or two antibodies 
(trastuzumab) that recognize human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 
(HER2). The number of conjugates had contrasting effects in in vitro 
and in vivo testing151: nanoparticles with two antibodies were moder-
ately better at in vitro targeting than those with one antibody, whereas 
in vivo targeting efficacy and renal clearance were clearly improved 
for one-antibody nanoparticles compared with two-antibody nano-
particles151. Even though the number of attached ligands was precisely 
controlled, aggregates and polydispersity observed by TEM indicated 
that the nanoparticles still lacked uniformity151.
In this sense, MPCs serve as ideal platforms to control the surface 
composition of nanosystems with higher precision and carefully 
study the influence of ligand ratio on their therapeutic functionality — 
while maintaining the uniformity of the portion that will act as 
a carrier. Our group computationally designed and characterized a 
set of Au144(p-MBA)60-based nanosystems, featuring both therapeutic 
and targeting ligands, to be potentially used as combination therapy in 
gastric cancer treatment152 (Fig. 6). All-atom MD simulations suggest 
that the ratio between the therapeutic ligand (chemotherapy drugs 
or signalling pathway inhibitors) and targeting ligand (arginine– 
glycine–aspartic acid (RGD) peptides) has a key role in achieving an 
optimal structural conformation of the ligand layer, which deter-
mines the targeting ability of the nanosystem152. The interligand 
and ligand–metal interactions observed in the 28 tested hybrid 
nanosystems suggest that it cannot be assumed, as a general rule, 
that attaching more targeting ligands to the nanosystem always 
improves cancer cell targeting; targeting efficacy depends on a deli-
cate balance between the molecular properties and the ratio of the 
ligands present on the nanosystem surface152. Although it may not 
be as straightforward to achieve this level of control experimentally, 
the detailed structural information that has been collected through 

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
computational–experimental investigations (that is, identification 
of ligand symmetry sites, molecular composition, titratable sites) is 
useful for controlling ligand exchange sites11.
Understanding the nano–bio interface. Biomolecules such as pro-
teins153, lipids and nucleic acids154–156 influence the surface chemis-
try of nanoscale drug delivery systems when they come into contact 
with blood, a process known as biomolecular corona formation14. The 
corona is highly dynamic, alters the pharmacological and toxicologi-
cal profiles of the nanosystems, and hence modulates their potential 
therapeutic functionalities157,158. Although this phenomenon has been 
known for decades157, it is still hardly understood, and most studies 
report variations at the in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo levels157,159,160 without 
detailing how the nanosystem and corona interact with each other. 
This uncertainty is understandable given the variety of proteins pre-
sent in the bloodstream and the use of polydisperse, variable shape 
and large size (hundreds of nanometres) nanomaterials, which make 
it very difficult to standardize procedures and thus begin to com-
prehend the molecular mechanisms underlying corona formation. 
Therefore, the well-defined internal structure of MPCs, aiding accurate 
computational models to support the experimental characterization, 
may help improve understanding in the field.
So far, owing in part to the difficulty of forming a high-quality 
single crystal, only three water-soluble MPCs have been revealed by 
SCXRD: Au102(p-MBA)44, Au146(p-MBA)57 (refs. 24,29) and Ag44(p-MBA)30 
(ref. 161). However, as described above, other analytical tools, such as 
NMR spectroscopy162 and low-dose electron microscopy90,92, have 
also contributed substantially to their in-depth characterization, 
combined in most cases with accurate DFT-based predictions90,96. 
Meanwhile, the free access to crystal structures of biological macro-
molecules deposited in robust repositories such as the Protein Data 
Bank (PDB)163 allows several combinations of biomolecules to be gen-
erated for corona modelling, which when combined with atomically 
precise nanomaterials enables the design of more realistic nano–bio 
complexes. MD-based computational studies have simulated such 
complexes, including those of colloidal metal and polymeric nanopar-
ticles with some of the most abundant plasma proteins164. Although 
these approaches are helpful to complement the experimental find-
ings of the dynamical behaviour of biomolecular coronas, most of 
them are based on coarse-grained models in which the nanosystem is 
represented by a standard and simplified structure, mainly to reduce 
computational cost. However, to what extent is it appropriate to sim-
plify the system? If the main goal is to better understand mechanisms 
such as competitive adsorption or desorption of proteins, formation 
of ‘soft’ and ‘hard’ coronas, or the active role of other metabolites in 
this process165, then an all-atom description may be a better alterna-
tive, and therefore the use of atomically precise MPCs could make a 
difference in terms of structural accuracy of the nano–bio models 
without duplicating the computational cost. Efficient models of MPCs 
with corona are now possible, thanks to the availability of accurate and 
Internalization
Cancer cells dying
Cell recognition
Drug release
Controlling the ligand ratio
Successful recognition process for ligand ratio A
1
No recognition process for ligand ratio B
2
Ligand ratio A
1:2 Targeting ligand: therapeutic ligand
Ligand ratio B
2:1 Targeting ligand: therapeutic ligand
3
Overexpressed receptors
Cancer cells
Therapeutic
ligand
Targeting
ligand
Multifunctional
MPCs
Hidden
targeting
motif
Intermolecular
interactions
Exposed
targeting
motif
Fig. 6 | Atomically precise metal nanoclusters for targeted drug delivery. Schematic illustration of the critical role of ligand ratio in the therapeutic functionality 
and targeting ability of multifunctional Au monolayer-protected metal clusters (MPCs). The target cell recognition process can be hindered by the intermolecular 
interactions formed in the MPC’s ligand layer when the proportion of therapeutic and targeting ligands is not optimal.

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
transferable tools for atomistic MD simulations, such as the AMBER-
compatible force field for thiolate-protected Au MPCs developed 
in our group166, which allows for investigation of the interactions 
between functionalized Au MPCs and diverse biomolecules, such as 
proteins, peptides, nucleic acids and lipids on long timescales (even 
up to microseconds, with the computing power currently available). 
Incorporating an all-atom description for the study of new MPCs-based 
nanosystems promotes the development of preliminary screening 
tools, which is difficult to achieve with purely coarse-grained models 
or truncated systems that, although helpful, are more intended to be 
used as supporting tools.
From an experimental point of view, the analytical techniques used 
to describe the essential physicochemical properties (that is, shape, 
stability, surface charge and size distribution) of nanosystems, such as 
SCXRD, dynamic light scattering, TEM and UV–vis spectroscopy167, are 
often not accurate enough to characterize the nano–bio interface168. 
Interestingly, MS is an outstanding method for accurately character-
izing the size and ligand composition of MPCs169. MS-based proteomics 
is commonly used to study the interaction of proteins with the surface 
of different nanosystems170,171, but it has been a tremendous challenge 
to extend this method to nano–bio complexes composed of ultrasmall 
MPCs (1–3 nm diameter). Nevertheless, MS-based techniques, such as 
MS combined with electrospray, show promise to precisely determine 
the size, charge state and number of ligands at different stages of the 
Au MPC synthesis172. When coupled with separation techniques such as 
liquid chromatography or capillary electrophoresis169, they stand out 
in identifying and quantifying components of the corona with atomic 
precision. Coupling MS with computational modelling may elucidate, 
for example, how exactly the biomolecular corona interferes with cell 
recognition, and how the nanosystems induce conformational changes 
in the biomolecules.
Outlook
Translational nanomedicine
The interactions of atomically precise MPCs with biological barri-
ers, such as nuclear and endosomal membranes, opsonins or efflux 
pumps173, remain largely uncharacterized. Despite the extremely 
valuable investigations into the factors influencing the stability and 
biodistribution of MPCs174,175, some particular methods still need to be 
examined more rigorously to move the field of atomically precise 
biocompatible materials forward. For instance, crystallization tech-
niques should be developed to elucidate the precise structure of new 
reported monodisperse and water-soluble MPCs113, and more combined 
computational–experimental strategies should be used. The incorpora-
tion of the continuous feedback loop (Fig. 2) within the interdisciplinary 
approaches could help to reduce the current discrepancies found at 
different levels of experimental design in most nanoscale drug delivery 
systems145,176. More specifically, during the first stage of computational 
design, interaction modes between the MPCs-based drug delivery 
systems and a certain biofluid can be understood through accurate 
atomistic models. Next, the evaluation stage could be centred on 
in vitro and ex vivo assays only (for example, therapeutic effect on cell 
lines including an ex vivo biomolecular corona). The iterative loop can 
efficiently operate at this level first. Subsequently, after obtaining a 
successful result for in vitro and ex vivo testing, in vivo models can 
be incorporated and execute a reinforced improvement cycle. New 
approaches in this direction could pave the way to clinical validation 
because more robust evidence is collected in the early stages of the 
research process.
Photodynamic therapy
The ultrasmall size (<3 nm diameter) of the MPC metal core imposes a 
quantum confinement such that the valence electrons of the metal form 
a discrete energy spectrum, very distinct from the continuous density 
of electron states found in large colloidal metal nanoparticles177,178. This 
quantum confinement is critical for size-dependent photophysical 
properties of MPCs, including their ability to generate reactive oxygen 
species for photodynamic therapy applications179. Although MPCs 
are experimentally known to serve either as photosensitizers or as 
efficient carriers for photodynamic therapy agents180–184, the exact 
MPC parameters involved in this property are still a mystery. Therefore, 
new hybrid computational methodologies at the interface of quantum 
mechanics methods and classical MD force fields may be useful for 
understanding how the size, chemical composition or ligand-layer 
charge distribution may dictate the generation mechanisms for the 
reactive oxygen species.
Machine learning
In recent years, methods using artificial intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning (ML) have made their way to material research185–188. These 
methods can aid the analysis of large data sets of various material 
properties, finding correlations that help to understand and design 
new materials with tunable properties; and aid the development of 
efficient force fields for atomic interactions that keep the accuracy 
close to the quantum mechanical level. Although applications of AI/ML 
methods to MPC research have been scarce as yet, successful examples 
include deep-learning-accelerated MPC synthesis189, prediction of new 
DNA-stabilized Ag nanoclusters with bright NIR fluorescence190, image 
analysis to match theory and experiment for high-resolution scanning 
tunnelling microscope images of an MPC organic surface191 and electron 
microscopy images of MPC supercrystals192, structural predictions of 
the metal–ligand interface60 and hydride positions inside the metal 
core193, and developed ML force fields for accelerated simulations of 
MPC atom dynamics194–196. In the future, ML methods could help to 
analyse descriptors for chemical reactions at the MPC surface197 or 
to bridge the timescale and length-scale gaps in dealing with crucial 
interactions between MPCs and biomolecules198,199. For the latter, devel-
opment of new hybrid simulation methodology combining ML and MD 
force fields will be necessary.
Published online: xx xx xxxx
References
1.	
Tsukuda, T. & Häkkinen, H. (eds) Protected Metal Clusters: From Fundamentals to 
Applications Vol. 9 (Elsevier, 2015).
2.	
Häkkinen, H. The gold–sulfur interface at the nanoscale. Nat. Chem. 4, 443 (2012).
3.	
Chakraborty, I. & Pradeep, T. Atomically precise clusters of noble metals: emerging link 
between atoms and nanoparticles. Chem. Rev. 117, 8208–8271 (2017).
4.	
Nasaruddin, R. R., Chen, T., Yan, N. & Xie, J. Roles of thiolate ligands in the synthesis, 
properties and catalytic application of gold nanoclusters. Coord. Chem. Rev. 368, 60–79 
(2018).
5.	
Kang, X., Li, Y., Zhu, M. & Jin, R. Atomically precise alloy nanoclusters: syntheses, 
structures, and properties. Chem. Soc. Rev. 49, 6443–6514 (2020).
6.	
Du, Y., Sheng, H., Astruc, D. & Zhu, M. Atomically precise noble metal nanoclusters as 
efficient catalysts: a bridge between structure and properties. Chem. Rev. 120, 526–622 
(2019).
7.	
Fernando, A., Weerawardene, K. L. D. M., Karimova, N. V. & Aikens, C. M. Quantum 
mechanical studies of large metal, metal oxide, and metal chalcogenide nanoparticles 
and clusters. Chem. Rev. 115, 6112–6216 (2015).
8.	
Matus, M. F. & Häkkinen, H. Atomically precise gold nanoclusters: towards an optimal 
biocompatible system from a theoretical–experimental strategy. Small 17, 2005499 (2021).
9.	
Jin, R. Atomically precise metal nanoclusters: stable sizes and optical properties. 
Nanoscale 7, 1549–1565 (2015).
10.	
Jin, R., Zeng, C., Zhou, M. & Chen, Y. Atomically precise colloidal metal nanoclusters and 
nanoparticles: fundamentals and opportunities. Chem. Rev. 116, 10346–10413 (2016).

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
11.	
Heinecke, C. L. et al. Structural and theoretical basis for ligand exchange on thiolate 
monolayer protected gold nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 13316–13322 (2012).
12.	
Ackerson, C. J., Jadzinsky, P. D., Jensen, G. J. & Kornberg, R. D. Rigid, specific, and discrete 
gold nanoparticle/antibody conjugates. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 2635–2640 (2006).
13.	
Salorinne, K. et al. Conformation and dynamics of the ligand shell of a water-soluble 
Au102 nanoparticle. Nat. Commun. 7, 10401 (2016).
14.	
Pearson, R. M., Juettner, V. V. & Hong, S. Biomolecular corona on nanoparticles: a survey 
of recent literature and its implications in targeted drug delivery. Front. Chem. 2, 108 
(2014).
15.	
Cao, Y. et al. Reversible isomerization of metal nanoclusters induced by intermolecular 
interaction. Chem 7, 2227–2244 (2021).
16.	
Liu, Y. et al. Golden carbon nanotube membrane for continuous flow catalysis. Ind. Eng. 
Chem. Res. 56, 2999–3007 (2017).
17.	
Wu, Z. et al. Thiolate ligands as a double-edged sword for CO oxidation on CeO2 
supported Au25(SCH2CH2Ph)18 nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 6111–6122 (2014).
18.	
Ma, Z., Wang, P., Xiong, L. & Pei, Y. Thiolate‐protected gold nanoclusters: structural 
prediction and the understandings of electronic stability from first principles 
simulations. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci. 7, e1315 (2017).
19.	
Xie, Y.-P. et al. Silver nanoclusters: synthesis, structures and photoluminescence. Mater. 
Chem. Front. 4, 2205–2222 (2020).
20.	 Baghdasaryan, A. & Bürgi, T. Copper nanoclusters: designed synthesis, structural 
diversity, and multiplatform applications. Nanoscale 13, 6283–6340 (2021).
21.	
Akola, J., Walter, M., Whetten, R. L., Häkkinen, H. & Grönbeck, H. On the structure of 
thiolate-protected Au25. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 3756–3757 (2008).
22.	 Pei, Y., Gao, Y. & Zeng, X. C. Structural prediction of thiolate-protected Au38: a face-fused 
bi-icosahedral Au core. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 7830–7832 (2008).
23.	 Lopez-Acevedo, O., Tsunoyama, H., Tsukuda, T., Häkkinen, H. & Aikens, C. M. Chirality and 
electronic structure of the thiolate-protected Au38 nanocluster. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 
8210–8218 (2010).
24.	 Vergara, S. et al. MicroED structure of Au146(p-MBA)57 at subatomic resolution reveals 
a twinned FCC cluster. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 8, 5523–5530 (2017).
25.	 Liu, C. et al. Observation of body‐centered cubic gold nanocluster. Angew. Chem. 127, 
9964–9967 (2015).
26.	 Huang, X. et al. Synthesis of hexagonal close-packed gold nanostructures. Nat. Commun. 
2, 292 (2011).
27.	
Zhu, M., Aikens, C. M., Hollander, F. J., Schatz, G. C. & Jin, R. Correlating the crystal 
structure of a thiol-protected Au25 cluster and optical properties. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 
5883–5885 (2008).
28.	 Heaven, M. W., Dass, A., White, P. S., Holt, K. M. & Murray, R. W. Crystal structure of the 
gold nanoparticle [N(C8H17)4][Au25(SCH2CH2Ph)18]. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 3754–3755 
(2008).
29.	 Jadzinsky, P. D., Calero, G., Ackerson, C. J., Bushnell, D. A. & Kornberg, R. D. Structure of 
a thiol monolayer-protected gold nanoparticle at 1.1 Å resolution. Science 318, 430–433 
(2007).
30.	 Wei, X., Xu, C., Li, H., Kang, X. & Zhu, M. Fabrication of a family of atomically precise silver 
nanoclusters via dual-level kinetic control. Chem. Sci. 13, 5531–5538 (2022).
31.	
Aikens, C. M. Electronic and geometric structure, optical properties, and excited state 
behavior in atomically precise thiolate-stabilized noble metal nanoclusters. Acc. Chem. 
Res. 51, 3065–3073 (2018).
32.	 Chen, T. et al. Crystallization-induced emission enhancement: a novel fluorescent Au–Ag 
bimetallic nanocluster with precise atomic structure. Sci. Adv. 3, e1700956 (2017).
33.	 Xie, X. et al. The origin of the photoluminescence enhancement of gold‐doped silver 
nanoclusters: the importance of relativistic effects and heteronuclear gold–silver bonds. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 57, 9965–9969 (2018).
34.	 Krishnadas, K. R. et al. Metal–ligand interface in the chemical reactions of ligand-
protected noble metal clusters. Langmuir 35, 11243–11254 (2018).
35.	 Baksi, A. et al. Isomerism in monolayer protected silver cluster ions: an ion mobility–mass 
spectrometry approach. J. Phys. Chem. C 121, 13421–13427 (2017).
36.	 Matus, M. F. et al. A topological isomer of the Au25(SR)18
− nanocluster. Chem. Commun. 
56, 8087–8090 (2020).
37.	
Kalenius, E. et al. Experimental confirmation of a topological isomer of the ubiquitous 
Au25(SR)18 cluster in the gas phase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143, 1273–1277 (2021).
38.	 Krishnadas, K. R. et al. Intercluster reactions between Au25(SR)18 and Ag44(SR)30. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 138, 140–148 (2016).
39.	 Zhang, B., Chen, J., Cao, Y., Chai, O. J. H. & Xie, J. Ligand design in ligand‐protected gold 
nanoclusters. Small 17, 2004381 (2021).
40.	 Qian, H. et al. Conversion of polydisperse Au nanoparticles into monodisperse Au25 
nanorods and nanospheres. J. Phys. Chem. C 113, 17599–17603 (2009).
41.	
Yuan, X., Goswami, N., Mathews, I., Yu, Y. & Xie, J. Enhancing stability through  
ligand-shell engineering: a case study with Au25(SR)18 nanoclusters. Nano Res. 8, 
3488–3495 (2015).
42.	 Song, Y. et al. Crystal structure of Au25(SePh)18 nanoclusters and insights into their 
electronic, optical and catalytic properties. Nanoscale 6, 13977–13985 (2014).
43.	 Wan, X.-K., Wang, J.-Q., Nan, Z.-A. & Wang, Q.-M. Ligand effects in catalysis by atomically 
precise gold nanoclusters. Sci. Adv. 3, e1701823 (2017).
44.	 Wu, Z. & Jin, R. On the ligand’s role in the fluorescence of gold nanoclusters. Nano Lett. 
10, 2568–2573 (2010).
45.	 Deng, G. et al. From symmetry breaking to unraveling the origin of the chirality of ligated 
Au13Cu2 nanoclusters. Angew. Chem. 130, 3479–3483 (2018).
46.	 Hostetler, M. J., Green, S. J., Stokes, J. J. & Murray, R. W. Monolayers in three dimensions: 
synthesis and electrochemistry of ω-functionalized alkanethiolate-stabilized gold cluster 
compounds. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118, 4212–4213 (1996).
47.	 Hostetler, M. J., Templeton, A. C. & Murray, R. W. Dynamics of place-exchange  
reactions on monolayer-protected gold cluster molecules. Langmuir 15, 3782–3789 
(1999).
48.	 Wang, Y. & Bürgi, T. Ligand exchange reactions on thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters. 
Nanoscale Adv. 3, 2710–2727 (2021).
49.	 Salassa, G., Sels, A., Mancin, F. & Burgi, T. Dynamic nature of thiolate monolayer in 
Au25(SR)18 nanoclusters. ACS Nano 11, 12609–12614 (2017).
50.	 Suzuki, W. et al. Control over ligand-exchange positions of thiolate-protected gold 
nanoclusters using steric repulsion of protecting ligands. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 
12310–12320 (2022).
51.	
Joshi, C. P., Bootharaju, M. S., Alhilaly, M. J. & Bakr, O. M. [Ag25(SR)18]−: the ‘golden’ silver 
nanoparticle. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 11578–11581 (2015).
52.	 Harkness, K. M. et al. Ag44(SR)30
4−: a silver–thiolate superatom complex. Nanoscale 4, 
4269–4274 (2012).
53.	 Baksi, A. et al. Reactivity of monolayer protected silver clusters toward excess ligand:  
a calorimetric study. J. Phys. Chem. C 121, 26483–26492 (2017).
54.	 Wan, X. et al. A near‐infrared‐emissive alkynyl‐protected Au24 nanocluster. Angew. Chem. 
Int. Ed. 54, 9683–9686 (2015).
55.	 Wan, X.-K., Tang, Q., Yuan, S.-F., Jiang, D. & Wang, Q.-M. Au19 nanocluster featuring a 
V-shaped alkynyl–gold motif. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 652–655 (2015).
56.	 Wang, Y. et al. Atomically precise alkynyl-protected metal nanoclusters as a model 
catalyst: observation of promoting effect of surface ligands on catalysis by metal 
nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 3278–3281 (2016).
57.	
Kurashige, W., Yamazoe, S., Kanehira, K., Tsukuda, T. & Negishi, Y. Selenolate-protected 
Au38 nanoclusters: isolation and structural characterization. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 4, 
3181–3185 (2013).
58.	 Kang, X. & Zhu, M. Metal nanoclusters stabilized by selenol ligands. Small 15, 1902703 
(2019).
59.	 Kawawaki, T. et al. Toward the creation of high-performance heterogeneous catalysts 
by controlled ligand desorption from atomically precise metal nanoclusters. Nanoscale 
Horiz. 6, 409–448 (2021).
60.	 Malola, S. et al. A method for structure prediction of metal–ligand interfaces of hybrid 
nanoparticles. Nat. Commun. 10, 3973 (2019).
61.	
Lopez-Acevedo, O., Kacprzak, K. A., Akola, J. & Häkkinen, H. Quantum size effects in 
ambient CO oxidation catalysed by ligand-protected gold clusters. Nat. Chem. 2, 329 
(2010).
62.	 Sanchez, A. et al. When gold is not noble: nanoscale gold catalysts. J. Phys. Chem. A 103, 
9573–9578 (1999).
63.	 Häkkinen, H., Abbet, S., Sanchez, A., Heiz, U. & Landman, U. Structural, electronic, and 
impurity‐doping effects in nanoscale chemistry: supported gold nanoclusters. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 42, 1297–1300 (2003).
64.	 Socaciu, L. D. et al. Catalytic CO oxidation by free Au2
−: experiment and theory. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 125, 10437–10445 (2003).
65.	 Yoon, B., Häkkinen, H. & Landman, U. Interaction of O2 with gold clusters: molecular and 
dissociative adsorption. J. Phys. Chem. A 107, 4066–4071 (2003).
66.	 Yoon, B. et al. Charging effects on bonding and catalyzed oxidation of CO on Au8 clusters 
on MgO. Sci 307, 403–407 (2005).
67.	
Bezman, S. A., Churchill, M. R., Osborn, J. A. & Wormald, J. Preparation and 
crystallographic characterization of a hexameric triphenylphosphinecopper hydride 
cluster. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 93, 2063–2065 (1971).
68.	 Brestensky, D. M., Huseland, D. E., McGettigan, C. & Stryker, J. M. Simplified, ‘one-pot’ 
procedure for the synthesis of [(Ph3P)CUH]6, a stable copper hydride for conjugate 
reductions. Tetrahedron Lett. 29, 3749–3752 (1988).
69.	 Yuan, P. et al. Ether‐soluble Cu53 nanoclusters as an effective precursor of high‐quality 
CuI films for optoelectronic applications. Angew. Chem. 131, 845–849 (2019).
70.	 Nguyen, T.-A. D. et al. A Cu25 nanocluster with partial Cu(0) character. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
137, 13319–13324 (2015).
71.	
Tang, Q. et al. Lattice-hydride mechanism in electrocatalytic CO2 reduction by 
structurally precise copper-hydride nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 9728–9736 
(2017).
72.	 Dhayal, R. S. et al. Diselenophosphate‐induced conversion of an achiral [Cu20H11{S2P(Oi
Pr)2}9] into a chiral [Cu20H11{Se2P(OiPr)2}9] polyhydrido nanocluster. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
54, 13604–13608 (2015).
73.	 Sun, C. et al. Atomically precise, thiolated copper–hydride nanoclusters as single-site 
hydrogenation catalysts for ketones in mild conditions. ACS Nano 13, 5975–5986 (2019).
74.	 Jiang, D. & Dai, S. From superatomic Au25(SR)18
− to superatomic M@Au24(SR)18
q core−shell 
clusters. Inorg. Chem. 48, 2720–2722 (2009).
75.	 Kacprzak, K. A., Lehtovaara, L., Akola, J., Lopez-Acevedo, O. & Häkkinen, H. A density 
functional investigation of thiolate-protected bimetal PdAu24(SR)18
z clusters: doping the 
superatom complex. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 11, 7123–7129 (2009).
76.	 Kwak, K. et al. A molecule-like PtAu24(SC6H13)18 nanocluster as an electrocatalyst for 
hydrogen production. Nat. Commun. 8, 1–8 (2017).
77.	
Kumar, B. et al. Gold nanoclusters as electrocatalysts: size, ligands, heteroatom doping, 
and charge dependences. Nanoscale 12, 9969–9979 (2020).
78.	 Hu, G., Tang, Q., Lee, D., Wu, Z. & Jiang, D. Metallic hydrogen in atomically precise gold 
nanoclusters. Chem. Mater. 29, 4840–4847 (2017).

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
79.	
Sun, F., Deng, C., Tian, S. & Tang, Q. Oxygen electrocatalysis by [Au25(SR)18]: charge, doping, 
and ligand removal effect. ACS Catal. 11, 7957–7969 (2021).
80.	 De Silva, N. et al. A bioinspired approach for controlling accessibility in calix[4]arene-bound 
metal cluster catalysts. Nat. Chem. 2, 1062–1068 (2010).
81.	
Nigra, M. M. et al. Accessible gold clusters using calix[4]arene N-heterocyclic carbene 
and phosphine ligands. Dalton Trans. 42, 12762–12771 (2013).
82.	 McPartlin, M., Mason, R. & Malatesta, L. Novel cluster complexes of gold (0)–gold (I). 
J. Chem. Soc. D 1969, 334 (1969).
83.	 Chen, X. & Häkkinen, H. Protected but accessible: oxygen activation by a calixarene-
stabilized undecagold cluster. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 12944–12947 (2013).
84.	 Yuan, S., Lei, Z., Guan, Z. & Wang, Q. Atomically precise preorganization of open metal 
sites on gold nanoclusters with high catalytic performance. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 
5225–5229 (2021).
85.	 Shen, H. et al. N-heterocyclic carbene-stabilized gold nanoclusters with organometallic 
motifs for promoting catalysis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 10844–10853 (2022).
86.	 Walter, M. et al. A unified view of ligand-protected gold clusters as superatom complexes. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 9157–9162 (2008).
87.	
Guan, Z. et al. Ligand engineering toward the trade‐off between stability and activity in 
cluster catalysis. Angew. Chem. 134, e202116965 (2022).
88.	 Bertorelle, F. et al. Isomeric effect of mercaptobenzoic acids on the synthesis, stability, 
and optical properties of Au25(MBA)18 nanoclusters. ACS Omega 3, 15635–15642 (2018).
89.	 Cox, B. D., Martin, C. R., Bertino, M. F. & Reiner, J. E. Biological nanopores elucidate the 
differences between isomers of mercaptobenzoic-capped gold clusters. Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 23, 7938–7947 (2021).
90.	 Azubel, M. et al. Electron microscopy of gold nanoparticles at atomic resolution. Science 
345, 909–912 (2014).
91.	
Azubel, M. & Kornberg, R. D. Synthesis of water-soluble, thiolate-protected gold 
nanoparticles uniform in size. Nano Lett. 16, 3348–3351 (2016).
92.	 Azubel, M., Koh, A. L., Koyasu, K., Tsukuda, T. & Kornberg, R. D. Structure determination 
of a water-soluble 144-gold atom particle at atomic resolution by aberration-corrected 
electron microscopy. ACS Nano 11, 11866–11871 (2017).
93.	 Azubel, M. et al. FGF21 trafficking in intact human cells revealed by cryo-electron 
tomography with gold nanoparticles. Elife 8, e43146 (2019).
94.	 Tero, T.-R. et al. Dynamic stabilization of the ligand–metal interface in atomically precise 
gold nanoclusters Au68 and Au144 protected by meta-mercaptobenzoic acid. ACS Nano 11, 
11872–11879 (2017).
95.	 Qian, H. & Jin, R. Controlling nanoparticles with atomic precision: the case of 
Au144(SCH2CH2Ph)60. Nano Lett. 9, 4083–4087 (2009).
96.	 Lopez-Acevedo, O., Akola, J., Whetten, R. L., Grönbeck, H. & Häkkinen, H. Structure and 
bonding in the ubiquitous icosahedral metallic gold cluster Au144(SR)60. J. Phys. Chem. C. 
113, 5035–5038 (2009).
97.	
Yan, N. et al. Unraveling the long-pursued Au144 structure by X-ray crystallography. 
Sci. Adv. 4, eaat7259 (2018).
98.	 Lei, Z., Li, J., Wan, X., Zhang, W. & Wang, Q. Isolation and total structure determination  
of an all‐alkynyl‐protected gold nanocluster Au144. Angew. Chem. 130, 8775–8779 (2018).
99.	 Whetten, R. L. et al. Chiral-icosahedral (I) symmetry in ubiquitous metallic cluster 
compounds (145A, 60X): structure and bonding principles. Acc. Chem. Res. 52, 34–43 
(2019).
100.	 Mammen, N., Malola, S., Honkala, K. & Häkkinen, H. Dynamics of weak interactions in the 
ligand layer of meta-mercaptobenzoic acid protected gold nanoclusters Au68(m-MBA)32 
and Au144(m-MBA)40. Nanoscale 12, 23859–23868 (2020).
101.	 Mammen, N., Malola, S., Honkala, K. & Häkkinen, H. Selective acrolein hydrogenation over 
ligand-protected gold clusters: a Venus flytrap mechanism. ACS Catal. 12, 2365–2374 
(2022).
102.	 Ma, G. et al. Stabilizing gold clusters by heterostructured transition-metal oxide–mesoporous 
silica supports for enhanced catalytic activities for CO oxidation. Chem. Commun. 48, 
11413–11415 (2012).
103.	 Li, W. et al. Mild activation of CeO2-supported gold nanoclusters and insight into the 
catalytic behavior in CO oxidation. Nanoscale 8, 2378–2385 (2016).
104.	 Liu, Y. M., Tsunoyama, H., Akita, T., Xie, S. H. & Tsukuda, T. Aerobic oxidation of 
cyclohexane catalyzed by size-conrolled au clusters on hydroxyapatite: size effect in the 
sub-2 nm regime. ACS Catal. 1, 2–6 (2011).
105.	 Zhang, B. et al. Modulation of active sites in supported Au38(SC2H4Ph)24 cluster catalysts: 
effect of atmosphere and support material. J. Phys. Chem. C 119, 11193–11199 (2015).
106.	 Yoskamtorn, T. et al. Thiolate-mediated selectivity control in aerobic alcohol oxidation by 
porous carbon-supported Au25 clusters. ACS Catal. 4, 3696–3700 (2014).
107.	 Turner, M. et al. Selective oxidation with dioxygen by gold nanoparticle catalysts derived 
from 55-atom clusters. Nature 454, 981–983 (2008).
108.	 Liu, J. et al. Ligand‐stabilized and atomically precise gold nanocluster catalysis: a case 
study for correlating fundamental electronic properties with catalysis. Chem. Eur. J. 19, 
10201–10208 (2013).
109.	 Zhang, B. et al. Ligand migration from cluster to support: a crucial factor for catalysis by 
thiolate‐protected gold clusters. ChemCatChem 10, 5372–5376 (2018).
110.	 Longo, A. et al. Towards atomically precise supported catalysts from monolayer‐
protected clusters: the critical role of the support. Chem. Eur. J. 26, 7051–7058 (2020).
111.	 Shang, L., Dong, S. & Nienhaus, G. U. Ultra-small fluorescent metal nanoclusters: 
synthesis and biological applications. Nano Today 6, 401–418 (2011).
112.	 Levi-Kalisman, Y. et al. Synthesis and characterization of Au102(p-MBA)44 nanoparticles.  
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 2976–2982 (2011).
113.	 Sokołowska, K. et al. Towards controlled synthesis of water-soluble gold nanoclusters: 
synthesis and analysis. J. Phys. Chem. C 123, 2602–2612 (2019).
114.	 Auría-Soro, C. et al. Interactions of nanoparticles and biosystems: microenvironment of 
nanoparticles and biomolecules in nanomedicine. Nanomaterials 9, 1365 (2019).
115.	 Gupta, A. et al. Ultrastable and biofunctionalizable gold nanoparticles. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 8, 14096–14101 (2016).
116.	 Hong, R. et al. Glutathione-mediated delivery and release using monolayer protected 
nanoparticle carriers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 1078–1079 (2006).
117.	 Rana, S., Bajaj, A., Mout, R. & Rotello, V. M. Monolayer coated gold nanoparticles for 
delivery applications. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 64, 200–216 (2012).
118.	 Ghosh, P., Han, G., De, M., Kim, C. K. & Rotello, V. M. Gold nanoparticles in delivery 
applications. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 60, 1307–1315 (2008).
119.	 Carnovale, C., Bryant, G., Shukla, R. & Bansal, V. Identifying trends in gold nanoparticle 
toxicity and uptake: size, shape, capping ligand, and biological corona. ACS Omega 4, 
242–256 (2019).
120.	 Zheng, K. & Xie, J. Engineering ultrasmall metal nanoclusters as promising theranostic 
agents. Trends Chem. 2, 665–679 (2020).
121.	 Porret, E., Le Guével, X. & Coll, J.-L. Gold nanoclusters for biomedical applications: 
toward in vivo studies. J. Mater. Chem. B 8, 2216–2232 (2020).
122.	 Koivisto, J. et al. Acid–base properties and surface charge distribution of the water-soluble 
Au102(pMBA)44 nanocluster. J. Phys. Chem. C 120, 10041–10050 (2016).
123.	 Lipka, J. J., Hainfeld, J. F. & Wall, J. S. Undecagold labeling of a glycoprotein: STEM 
visualization of an undecagoldphosphine cluster labeling the carbohydrate sites of 
human haptoglobin–hemoglobin complex. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 84, 120–129 (1983).
124.	 Hainfeld, J. F. & Powell, R. D. New frontiers in gold labeling. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 48, 
471–480 (2000).
125.	 Hainfeld, J. F. A small gold-conjugated antibody label: improved resolution for electron 
microscopy. Science 236, 450–453 (1987).
126.	 Hainfeld, J. F. & Furuya, F. R. A 1.4-nm gold cluster covalently attached to antibodies 
improves immunolabeling. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 40, 177–184 (1992).
127.	 Yang, Y., Wang, L., Wan, B. & Gu, Y. Optical active nanomaterials for bioimaging and 
targeted therapy. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7, 320 (2019).
128.	 Marjomäki, V. et al. Site-specific targeting of enterovirus capsid by functionalized 
monodisperse gold nanoclusters. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 1277–1281 (2014).
129.	 Martikainen, M. et al. Hydrophobic pocket targeting probes for enteroviruses. Nanoscale 
7, 17457–17467 (2015).
130.	 Pohjolainen, E., Malola, S., Groenhof, G. & Häkkinen, H. Exploring strategies for 
labeling viruses with gold nanoclusters through non-equilibrium molecular dynamics 
simulations. Bioconjug. Chem. 28, 2327–2339 (2017).
131.	 Hulkko, E. et al. Covalent and non-covalent coupling of a Au102 nanocluster with a 
fluorophore: energy transfer, quenching and intracellular pH sensing. Nanoscale Adv. 3, 
6649–6658 (2021).
132.	 Weerawardene, K. L. D. M., Guidez, E. B. & Aikens, C. M. Photoluminescence origin of 
Au38(SR)24 and Au22(SR)18 nanoparticles: a theoretical perspective. J. Phys. Chem. C 121, 
15416–15423 (2017).
133.	 Luo, Z., Zheng, K. & Xie, J. Engineering ultrasmall water-soluble gold and silver 
nanoclusters for biomedical applications. Chem. Commun. 50, 5143–5155 (2014).
134.	 Chevrier, D. M. et al. Molecular-scale ligand effects in small gold–thiolate nanoclusters.  
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 15430–15436 (2018).
135.	 Pyo, K. et al. Ultrabright luminescence from gold nanoclusters: rigidifying the Au(I)–thiolate 
shell. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 8244–8250 (2015).
136.	 Yu, Y. et al. Identification of a highly luminescent Au22(SG)18 nanocluster. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
136, 1246–1249 (2014).
137.	 Pei, Y., Tang, J., Tang, X., Huang, Y. & Zeng, X. C. New structure model of Au22(SR)18: 
bitetrahederon golden kernel enclosed by [Au6(SR)6] Au(I) complex. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
6, 1390–1395 (2015).
138.	 Bertorelle, F. et al. Tailoring the NIR‐II photoluminescence of single thiolated Au25 
nanoclusters by selective binding to proteins. Chem. Eur. J. 28, e202200570 (2022).
139.	 Xie, J., Zheng, Y. & Ying, J. Y. Protein-directed synthesis of highly fluorescent gold 
nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 888–889 (2009).
140.	 Chevrier, D. M. et al. Structure and formation of highly luminescent protein-stabilized 
gold clusters. Chem. Sci. 9, 2782–2790 (2018).
141.	 Song, X. et al. A new class of NIR‐II gold nanocluster‐based protein biolabels for in vivo 
tumor‐targeted imaging. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 1306–1312 (2021).
142.	 Kang, X. & Zhu, M. Tailoring the photoluminescence of atomically precise nanoclusters. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 48, 2422–2457 (2019).
143.	 Patra, J. K. et al. Nano based drug delivery systems: recent developments and future 
prospects. J. Nanobiotechnol. 16, 71 (2018).
144.	 Peer, D. et al. Nanocarriers as an emerging platform for cancer therapy. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2, 751–760 (2007).
145.	 He, H., Liu, L., Morin, E. E., Liu, M. & Schwendeman, A. Survey of clinical translation of 
cancer nanomedicines — lessons learned from successes and failures. Acc. Chem. Res. 
52, 2445–2461 (2019).
146.	 Adhipandito, C. F., Cheung, S.-H., Lin, Y.-H. & Wu, S.-H. Atypical renal clearance of 
nanoparticles larger than the kidney filtration threshold. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 11182 (2021).
147.	 Van Hong Nguyen, B.-J. L. Protein corona: a new approach for nanomedicine design.  
Int. J. Nanomed. 12, 3137 (2017).
148.	 Tang, L. et al. Advanced and innovative nano-systems for anticancer targeted drug 
delivery. Pharmaceutics 13, 1151 (2021).

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
149.	 Singh, A. P., Biswas, A., Shukla, A. & Maiti, P. Targeted therapy in chronic diseases using 
nanomaterial-based drug delivery vehicles. Signal. Transduct. Target. Ther. 4, 1–21 (2019).
150.	 Alkilany, A. M. et al. Ligand density on nanoparticles: a parameter with critical impact on 
nanomedicine. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 143, 22–36 (2019).
151.	 Colombo, M. et al. Tumour homing and therapeutic effect of colloidal nanoparticles 
depend on the number of attached antibodies. Nat. Commun. 7, 13818 (2016).
152.	 Matus, M. F., Malola, S. & Häkkinen, H. Ligand ratio plays a critical role in the design of optimal 
multifunctional gold nanoclusters for targeted gastric cancer therapy. ACS Nanosci. Au 1, 
47–60 (2021).
153.	 Walkey, C. D. & Chan, W. C. W. Understanding and controlling the interaction of 
nanomaterials with proteins in a physiological environment. Chem. Soc. Rev. 41, 
2780–2799 (2012).
154.	 Müller, J. et al. Beyond the protein corona — lipids matter for biological response of 
nanocarriers. Acta Biomater. 71, 420–431 (2018).
155.	 Lee, J. Y. et al. Analysis of lipid adsorption on nanoparticles by nanoflow liquid 
chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 410, 6155–6164 
(2018).
156.	 Griffith, D. M., Jayaram, D. T., Spencer, D. M., Pisetsky, D. S. & Payne, C. K. DNA–nanoparticle 
interactions: formation of a DNA corona and its effects on a protein corona. Biointerphases 
15, 51006 (2020).
157.	 Hadjidemetriou, M. & Kostarelos, K. Evolution of the nanoparticle corona. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 12, 288–290 (2017).
158.	 Xiao, W. & Gao, H. The impact of protein corona on the behavior and targeting capability 
of nanoparticle-based delivery system. Int. J. Pharm. 552, 328–339 (2018).
159.	 Bai, X., Wang, J., Mu, Q. & Su, G. In vivo protein corona formation: characterizations, 
effects on engineered nanoparticles’ biobehaviors, and applications. Front. Bioeng. 
Biotechnol. 9, 263 (2021).
160.	 Jain, P. et al. In-vitro in-vivo correlation (IVIVC) in nanomedicine: is protein corona the 
missing link? Biotechnol. Adv. 35, 889–904 (2017).
161.	 Desireddy, A. et al. Ultrastable silver nanoparticles. Nature 501, 399–402 (2013).
162.	 Wong, O. A., Heinecke, C. L., Simone, A. R., Whetten, R. L. & Ackerson, C. J. Ligand 
symmetry-equivalence on thiolate protected gold nanoclusters determined by NMR 
spectroscopy. Nanoscale 4, 4099–4102 (2012).
163.	 Berman, H. M. & Gierasch, L. M. How the protein data bank changed biology: an 
introduction to the JBC reviews thematic series, part 1. J. Biol. Chem. 296, 100748 (2021).
164.	 Lee, H. Molecular modeling of protein corona formation and its interactions with 
nanoparticles and cell membranes for nanomedicine applications. Pharmaceutics 13, 
637 (2021).
165.	 Chetwynd, A. J. & Lynch, I. The rise of the nanomaterial metabolite corona, and 
emergence of the complete corona. Environ. Sci. Nano 7, 1041–1060 (2020).
166.	 Pohjolainen, E., Chen, X., Malola, S., Groenhof, G. & Häkkinen, H. A unified AMBER-
compatible molecular mechanics force field for thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters.  
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 12, 1342–1350 (2016).
167.	 Manaia, E. B. et al. Physicochemical characterization of drug nanocarriers. Int. J. Nanomed. 
12, 4991 (2017).
168.	 Mahmoudi, M. The need for robust characterization of nanomaterials for nanomedicine 
applications. Nat. Commun. 12, 5246 (2021).
169.	 Comby-Zerbino, C., Dagany, X., Chirot, F., Dugourd, P. & Antoine, R. The emergence of 
mass spectrometry for characterizing nanomaterials. Atomically precise nanoclusters 
and beyond. Mater. Adv. 2, 4896–4913 (2021).
170.	 Ge, C. et al. Towards understanding of nanoparticle–protein corona. Arch. Toxicol. 89, 
519–539 (2015).
171.	 Lai, Z. W., Yan, Y., Caruso, F. & Nice, E. C. Emerging techniques in proteomics for probing 
nano–bio interactions. ACS Nano 6, 10438–10448 (2012).
172.	 Soleilhac, A. et al. Size characterization of glutathione-protected gold nanoclusters in 
the solid, liquid and gas phases. J. Phys. Chem. C 121, 27733–27740 (2017).
173.	 Blanco, E., Shen, H. & Ferrari, M. Principles of nanoparticle design for overcoming 
biological barriers to drug delivery. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 941–951 (2015).
174.	 Zeng, C., Chen, Y., Das, A. & Jin, R. Transformation chemistry of gold nanoclusters: from 
one stable size to another. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 2976–2986 (2015).
175.	 Du, B. et al. Glomerular barrier behaves as an atomically precise bandpass filter in a  
sub-nanometre regime. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 1096 (2017).
176.	 Hua, S., De Matos, M. B. C., Metselaar, J. M. & Storm, G. Current trends and challenges 
in the clinical translation of nanoparticulate nanomedicines: pathways for translational 
development and commercialization. Front. Pharmacol. 9, 790 (2018).
177.	 Varnavski, O., Ramakrishna, G., Kim, J., Lee, D. & Goodson, T. Critical size for the observation 
of quantum confinement in optically excited gold clusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 16–17 
(2010).
178.	 Häkkinen, H. Electronic shell structures in bare and protected metal nanoclusters.  
Adv. Phys. X 1, 467–491 (2016).
179.	 Ho-Wu, R., Yau, S. H. & Goodson, T. I. I. I. Efficient singlet oxygen generation in metal 
nanoclusters for two-photon photodynamic therapy applications. J. Phys. Chem. B 121, 
10073–10080 (2017).
180.	 Srinivasulu, Y. G., Mozhi, A., Goswami, N., Yao, Q. & Xie, J. Traceable nanocluster–prodrug 
conjugate for chemo-photodynamic combinatorial therapy of non-small cell lung 
cancer. ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 4, 3232–3245 (2021).
181.	 Liu, P. et al. Concurrent photothermal therapy and photodynamic therapy for cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinoma by gold nanoclusters under a single NIR laser irradiation.  
J. Mater. Chem. B 7, 6924–6933 (2019).
182.	 Yu, Y., Geng, J., Ong, E. Y. X., Chellappan, V. & Tan, Y. N. Bovine serum albulmin protein‐
templated silver nanocluster (BSA‐Ag13): an effective singlet oxygen generator for 
photodynamic cancer therapy. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5, 2528–2535 (2016).
183.	 Jiang, X., Du, B., Huang, Y., Yu, M. & Zheng, J. Cancer photothermal therapy with  
ICG-conjugated gold nanoclusters. Bioconjug. Chem. 31, 1522–1528 (2020).
184.	 Kawasaki, H. et al. Generation of singlet oxygen by photoexcited Au25(SR)18 clusters. 
Chem. Mater. 26, 2777–2788 (2014).
185.	 Moosavi, S. M., Jablonka, K. M. & Smit, B. The role of machine learning in the 
understanding and design of materials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 20273–20287 (2020).
186.	 Fanourgakis, G. S., Gkagkas, K., Tylianakis, E. & Froudakis, G. E. A universal machine 
learning algorithm for large-scale screening of materials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 
3814–3822 (2020).
187.	 Xie, Y. et al. Machine learning assisted synthesis of metal–organic nanocapsules.  
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 1475–1481 (2019).
188.	 Unke, O. T. et al. Machine learning force fields. Chem. Rev. 121, 10142–10186 (2021).
189.	 Li, J. et al. Deep learning accelerated gold nanocluster synthesis. Adv. Intell. Syst. 1, 
1900029 (2019).
190.	 Mastracco, P., Gonzàlez-Rosell, A., Evans, J., Bogdanov, P. & Copp, S. M. Chemistry-
informed machine learning enables discovery of DNA-stabilized silver nanoclusters  
with near-infrared fluorescence. ACS Nano 16, 16322–16331 (2022).
191.	 Zhou, Q. et al. Real-space imaging with pattern recognition of a ligand-protected  
Ag374 nanocluster at sub-molecular resolution. Nat. Commun. 9, 2948 (2018).
192.	 Yao, Q. et al. Supercrystal engineering of atomically precise gold nanoparticles 
promoted by surface dynamics. Nat. Chem. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01079-9 
(2022).
193.	 Wang, S., Liu, T. & Jiang, D. Locating hydrides in ligand-protected copper nanoclusters  
by deep learning. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13, 53468–53474 (2021).
194.	 Pihlajamäki, A. et al. Monte Carlo simulations of Au38(SCH3)24 nanocluster using  
distance-based machine learning methods. J. Phys. Chem. A 124, 4827–4836 (2020).
195.	 Pihlajamäki, A. Machine Learning Approach to Atomic Simulations of Protected Gold 
Nanoclusters. PhD thesis, Univ. Jyväskylä http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-951-39-9309-2 
(2022).
196.	 Pihlajamäki, A., Malola, S., Kärkkäinen, T. & Häkkinen, H. Orientation adaptive minimal 
learning machine: application to thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters and gold-thiolate 
rings. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.09788 (2022).
197.	 Panapitiya, G. et al. Machine-learning prediction of CO adsorption in thiolated, Ag-alloyed 
Au nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 17508–17514 (2018).
198.	 Cha, M. et al. Unifying structural descriptors for biological and bioinspired nanoscale 
complexes. Nat. Comput. Sci. 2, 243–252 (2022).
199.	 Malola, S. & Häkkinen, H. Prospects and challenges for computer simulations of 
monolayer-protected metal clusters. Nat. Commun. 12, 2197 (2021).
200.	Teo, B. K. & Keating, K. Novel triicosahedral structure of the largest metal alloy cluster: 
hexachlorododecakis (triphenylphosphine)-gold-silver cluster [(Ph3P)12Au13Ag12Cl6]m+.  
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 106, 2224–2226 (1984).
201.	 Teo, B. K., Hong, M. C., Zhang, H. & Huang, D. B. Cluster of clusters: structure of the 37‐atom 
cluster [(p‐Tol3P)12Au18Ag19Br11]2⊕ and a novel series of supraclusters based on vertex‐sharing 
icosahedra. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 26, 897–900 (1987).
202.	Teo, B. K. Cluster of clusters: a new series of high nuclearity Au–Ag clusters. Polyhedron 
7, 2317–2320 (1988).
203.	Nuzzo, R. G. & Allara, D. L. Adsorption of bifunctional organic disulfides on gold surfaces. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 105, 4481–4483 (1983).
204.	Nuzzo, R. G., Zegarski, B. R. & Dubois, L. H. Fundamental studies of the chemisorption of 
organosulfur compounds on gold(111). Implications for molecular self-assembly on gold 
surfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 109, 733–740 (1987).
205.	Love, J. C., Estroff, L. A., Kriebel, J. K., Nuzzo, R. G. & Whitesides, G. M. Self-assembled 
monolayers of thiolates on metals as a form of nanotechnology. Chem. Rev. 105, 
1103–1170 (2005).
206.	Brust, M., Walker, M., Bethell, D., Schiffrin, D. J. & Whyman, R. Synthesis of thiol-derivatised 
gold nanoparticles in a two-phase liquid–liquid system. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C39940000801 (1994).
207.	 Whetten, R. L. et al. Nanocrystal gold molecules. Adv. Mater. 8, 428–433 (1996).
208.	Hostetler, M. J. et al. Alkanethiolate gold cluster molecules with core diameters from 1.5 
to 5.2 nm: core and monolayer properties as a function of core size. Langmuir 14, 17–30 
(1998).
209.	Chen, S. et al. Gold nanoelectrodes of varied size: transition to molecule-like charging. 
Science 280, 2098–2101 (1998).
210.	 Schaaff, T. G. & Whetten, R. L. Giant gold−glutathione cluster compounds: intense optical 
activity in metal-based transitions. J. Phys. Chem. B 104, 2630–2641 (2000).
211.	 De Heer, W. A. The physics of simple metal clusters: experimental aspects and simple 
models. Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 611 (1993).
212.	 Negishi, Y., Nobusada, K. & Tsukuda, T. Glutathione-protected gold clusters revisited: 
bridging the gap between gold(I)−thiolate complexes and thiolate-protected gold 
nanocrystals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 5261–5270 (2005).
213.	 Häkkinen, H., Barnett, R. N. & Landman, U. Electronic structure of passivated Au38(SCH3)24 
nanocrystal. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3264 (1999).
214.	 Garzón, I. L. et al. Do thiols merely passivate gold nanoclusters? Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5250 
(2000).
215.	 Häkkinen, H., Walter, M. & Grönbeck, H. Divide and protect: capping gold nanoclusters 
with molecular gold−thiolate rings. J. Phys. Chem. B 110, 9927–9931 (2006).

Nature Reviews Materials
Review article
216.	 Qian, H., Eckenhoff, W. T., Zhu, Y., Pintauer, T. & Jin, R. Total structure determination of 
thiolate-protected Au38 nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 8280–8281 (2010).
217.	 Jena, P. & Sun, Q. (eds) Superatoms: Principles, Synthesis and Applications (Wiley, 2021).
218.	 Mingos, D. M. P. Molecular-orbital calculations on cluster compounds of gold. J. Chem. 
Soc. Dalton Trans. https://doi.org/10.1039/DT9760001163 (1976).
219.	 Narouz, M. R. et al. N-heterocyclic carbene-functionalized magic-number gold 
nanoclusters. Nat. Chem. 11, 419–425 (2019).
220.	Heikkilä, E. et al. Atomistic simulations of functional Au144(SR)60 gold nanoparticles in 
aqueous environment. J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 9805–9815 (2012).
221.	 Heikkilä, E. et al. Cationic Au nanoparticle binding with plasma membrane-like lipid 
bilayers: potential mechanism for spontaneous permeation to cells revealed by atomistic 
simulations. J. Phys. Chem. C 118, 11131–11141 (2014).
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Academy of Finland (grants 318905 and 319208, and H.H.’s 
Academy Professorship).
Author contributions
M.F.M. and H.H. developed and discussed the framework of the article, and wrote and edited 
the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence should be addressed to Hannu Häkkinen.
Peer review information Nature Reviews Materials thanks Christopher Ackerson, Dongil Lee 
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-
archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2023