668
news & views
NANOMEDICINE
Theranostic multimodal gold nanoclusters
Gold nanoclusters stabilized by the milk metalloprotein α-lactalbumin and displaying multicolour and multimodal 
fluorescence aid the detection, resection and treatment of breast tumours in mice.
Gang He, Peng Huang and Xiaoyuan Chen
D
espite the large number of 
nanoprobes for the detection and 
treatment of cancer1, surgery (often 
facilitated by imaging) remains a mainstay 
for the removal of primary tumours 
and some metastatic tumours2. Renally 
clearable nanoprobes that integrate multiple 
imaging and therapeutic modalities could 
be clinically beneficial. Yet developing 
such theranostic multimodal nanoprobes 
is challenging because multicomponent 
theranostic formulations typically suffer 
from complex preparation methods, lack 
precise therapeutic profiles and show poor 
biocompatibility and biodegradability3. 
In this regard, gold nanoparticles are 
advantageous4 because of their surface 
plasmon-resonance properties, which can 
be tuned by altering nanoparticle size and 
morphology; their inherent biocompatibility 
and ease of functionalization, which 
makes them suitable contrast agents for 
photoacoustic imaging, fluorescence (FL) 
imaging, computed tomography (CT) 
imaging and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI); and because they can also integrate 
multiple therapeutic functionalities5,6. Such 
‘all-in-one’ theranostic nanoparticles should 
ideally be synthesized via green processes  
to reduce biological toxicity. Writing in 
Nature Biomedical Engineering, Moritz 
Kircher and colleagues now report the 
one-step green synthesis and theranostic 
application of ultrasmall gold nanoclusters 
(with a core diameter of about 2.5 nm and  
a hydrodynamic diameter smaller than 
6 nm) stabilized by the milk protein 
α-lactalbumin (α-LA; which acts as a mild 
reducing agent)7. The nanoclusters are 
readily cleared by the kidneys, provide 
contrast for FL/MRI/CT trimodal imaging 
(as shown in mice bearing breast tumour 
xenografts or patient-derived xenografts) 
and facilitate the image-guided surgical 
resection of the tumours. The versatility, 
biocompatibility and safety profile of the 
nanoclusters make them ideal candidates  
for translational development.
By varying ligand concentration, pH 
and reaction times, Kircher and co-authors 
designed three types of nanoclusters to 
 
 
705 nm
520 nm
450 nm
a
b
Overlay
1,000 μm 
2,000 μm 
100 μm 
100 μm 
2,000 μm 
1,000 μm 
Fig. 1 | α-lactalbumin/gold-nanocluster complexes for trimodal imaging and cancer therapy. a, Three sets of nanocluster, each injected within a different 
tumour xenograft in mice, emit red, blue and green fluorescence on excitation at 500 nm. b, The presence of intratumourally injected NIR nanoclusters 
(emitting at 705 nm) complexed with BAMLET in orthotopic breast tumours in mice correlates with cell death, as indicated by the matching of spatial patterns 
in the in vivo fluorescence images (left) and the ex vivo histology sections (right). Figure reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Springer Nature Limited.
Nature Biomedical Engineering | VOL 4 | July 2020 | 668–669 | www.nature.com/natbiomedeng

669
news & views
display either one of three fluorescence 
emission peaks (at 450, 520 and 705 nm 
in wavelength, which correspond to blue, 
green and red, respectively) at the same 
excitation wavelength (430 nm). As a proof 
of principle of their combined use, the 
authors show the simultaneous imaging 
(via spectral unmixing of background tissue 
autofluorescence) of three subcutaneous 
tumours in mice, with each tumour injected 
with one type of nanocluster (Fig. 1a). The 
authors also show that the nanoclusters 
emitting near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence 
(at 705 nm) allow for the resection of 
tumours located near the mammary fat pads 
of mice, guided by the images captured with 
a modified lens on a smartphone camera. 
Moreover, because the nanoclusters display 
strong magnetic relaxivities8, the intravenous 
injection of the NIR nanoclusters in mice 
with tumour xenografts enabled the 
acquisition of complementary macroscopic 
and microscopic information via CT and FL 
imaging. Overall, the combination of high 
sensitivity and good temporal and spatial 
resolutions makes the nanoclusters suitable 
for trimodal image guidance.
Furthermore, Kircher and co-authors 
synthesized gold nanoclusters complexed 
with a potent tumoricidal agent: the bovine 
α-LA made lethal to tumour cells (BAMLET; 
which is analogous to its human α-LA 
equivalent, HAMLET). In mice bearing 
orthotopic triple-negative breast cancer 
tumours, the gold-nanocluster/BAMLET 
complexes elicited the recruitment of 
infiltrating macrophages into tumour tissue 
through the rapid surface translocation 
of calreticulin and drove macrophage 
immunostimulatory activation, leading to 
immunogenic cancer cell death (Fig. 1b).  
This immune response is determined 
by the extent of unfolding of the α-LA 
protein and could be blunted by anti-α-LA 
antibodies. The authors also show that 
signalling pathways implied in tumorigenesis 
(specifically, the mitogen-activated 
protein-kinase pathway and the 
phosphoinositide-3-kinase/protein-kinase-B 
pathway) are targeted by the complex. 
Moreover, the complex selectively 
accumulates in the necrotic regions of 
the tumours (as seen via FL imaging and 
corroborated with histology) and, hence,  
it may provide information about 
intratumoral drug distribution.
The gold/α-LA nanoclusters are 
therefore a highly versatile theranostic 
agent. However, they are passive and rely on 
the enhanced permeability-and-retention 
effect of tumour tissue (which they enter 
via macropinocytosis, a non-specific 
cellular uptake mechanism involving 
the engulfment of a small amount of 
extracellular medium). By modifying 
the cancer-targeting ligand (such as folic 
acid or an antibody) on the surface of the 
gold/α-LA nanoclusters, imaging resolution 
and therapeutic efficacy are expected to 
improve. Also, to assess the nanoclusters’ 
suitability for clinical applications, robust 
synthesis protocols will be required for 
production at scale to ensure that the local 
pH and amino acid concentrations, and 
the reactivity, reaction times and even 
conformational changes of α-LA, meet 
batch-to-batch consistency thresholds. 
And although gold nanoparticles should 
have negligible toxicity, the complexes will 
need to undergo preclinical toxicology 
testing in large animals. More generally, 
the development of nanomedicines 
should involve a clearly defined objective 
relevant to a specific clinical scenario9, and 
theranostic nanoparticles need standard 
methods of performance assessment via 
both qualitative and quantitative multimodal 
imaging. Ultimately, the nanoclusters 
will not be clinically useful for precise, 
image-guided tumour resection in the 
operating room unless multimodal imaging 
hardware, image-acquisition algorithms and 
image-data registration are co-developed 
and optimized for the job.
❐
Gang He1, Peng Huang1 ✉ and 
Xiaoyuan Chen 
 2 ✉
1Marshall Laboratory of Biomedical Engineering, 
International Cancer Center, Laboratory of 
Evolutionary Theranostics (LET), School of 
Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University Health 
Science Center, Shenzhen, China. 2Laboratory of 
Molecular Imaging and Nanomedicine, National 
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.  
✉e-mail: peng.huang@szu.edu.cn;  
shawn.chen@nih.gov
Published online: 13 July 2020 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-020-0588-8
References
	1.	 Fan, W. P. et al. Chem. Rev. 117, 13566–13638 (2017).
	2.	 Chen, Q. et al. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 89–97 (2019).
	3.	 Chen, H. et al. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2, 17024 (2017).
	4.	 Zou, T. et al. Chem. Soc. Rev. 44, 8786–8801 (2017).
	5.	 Hu, H. et al. Biomaterials 35, 9868–9876 (2014).
	6.	 Huang, X. L. et al. Chem. Soc. Rev. 47, 2873–2920 (2018).
	7.	 Yang, J. et al. Nat. Biomed. Eng. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-
020-0584-z (2020).
	8.	 Qin, W. et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53, 7316–7319 (2014).
	9.	 Ioannidis, J. P. A. et al. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2, 797–809 (2018).
Nature Biomedical Engineering | VOL 4 | July 2020 | 668–669 | www.nature.com/natbiomedeng