RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advancedscience.com
Dopant-Regulated Piezocatalysts Evoke Sonopiezoelectric
and Enzymatic PANoptosis for Synergistic Cancer Therapy
Linhong Zhong, Xun Guo, Liming Deng, Xiaoting Wang, Hongye He, Nianhong Wu,
Rui Tang, Liang Chen,* Yu Chen,* and Pan Li*
Piezocatalyst-enabled sonopiezoelectric therapy oﬀers noninvasive treatment
with high spatiotemporal selectivity, yet existing piezocatalysts are limited by
suboptimal eﬃcacy, cancer cell resistance to oxidative stress, and biosafety
concerns. Here, hafnia (HfO2), one of the only few FDA-approved inorganic
nanomaterials for clinical trials, is identiﬁed as a promising piezocatalyst with
high translational potential for sonopiezoelectric and enzymatic
PANoptosis-boosted nanocatalytic therapy. Speciﬁcally, engineered transition
metal-substituted HfO2 nanocatalysts are synthesized to optimize
piezoelectric and enzyme-mimicking activities. Among these, Mn-substituted
HfO2 with a 20% Mn ratio (HMO) demonstrates superior performance in
sono-triggered reactive oxygen species generation, attributed to its reduced
bandgap and increased oxygen vacancies. HMO also exhibits multiple
enzyme-mimicking activities, including peroxidase (POD), catalase (CAT), and
glutathione peroxidase (GPx), amplifying oxidative stress through
tumor-speciﬁc catalytic reactions. These dual catalytic eﬀects enable the
activation of cancer cell PANoptosis to elicit a robust antitumor immune
response. Biological evaluations show signiﬁcant tumor suppression and
antitumor immune responses by HMO-mediated nanocatalytic therapy.
Unlike utilizing the radiosensitization ability of HfO2 in the clinic, this work
unveils the distinctive sonopiezoelectric eﬀect and multienzymatic activities of
HfO2-based nanocatalysts for biomedical applications, holding the potential
to overcome the challenges of radiation damage associated with radiotherapy.
1. Introduction
Piezoelectric nanomaterials have attracted growing attention in a
wide range of biomedical applications due to their unique ability
L. Zhong, X. Guo, X. Wang, H. He, N. Wu, R. Tang, P. Li
Ultrasound Department of the Second Aﬃliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Ultrasound Molecular Imaging
Chongqing 400010, P. R. China
E-mail: lipan@hospital.cqmu.edu.cn
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202500406
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH
GmbH. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
DOI: 10.1002/advs.202500406
to convert mechanical energy into electric
energy.[1–9] Ultrasound (US) can serve as a
remotely controlled mechanical trigger to
induce self-polarization and the formation
of a built-in electrical ﬁeld in piezoelec-
tric nanocatalysts. Such a sonopiezoelectric
process consistently separates electrons and
holes, initiating surface redox reactions.
The built-in electric ﬁeld facilitates eﬃcient
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation
by promoting the spontaneous migration of
charge carriers to opposite directions within
the crystal structure, opening new horizons
for conventional sonodynamic therapy. Re-
cently, a diversity of piezoelectric semicon-
ductors, including BaTiO3, Bi2MoO6, ZnO,
SnS, MoS2, KNbO3, Bi4Ti3O12, etc.,[10–20]
have been developed for therapeutic appli-
cations. Nevertheless, low ROS generation
eﬃcacy and undesirable biosafety proﬁles
of most piezoelectric nanocatalysts remain
major obstacles to their clinical translation.
Despite several material engineering strate-
gies that have been developed to enhance
the piezocatalytic ROS generation, single-
mode piezocatalytic therapy often fails to
achieve satisfactory therapeutic outcomes
due to the inherent resistance of can-
cer cells against oxidative damage and the
hypoxia tumor microenvironment. On the other hand, classical
materials engineering strategies, such as constructing hetero-
junctions and defect engineering, might introduce heavy metal
elements or compromise the colloidal stability, causing addi-
L. Deng
The First Aﬃliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University
Chongqing 400010, P. R. China
L. Chen, Y. Chen
Materdicine Lab
School of Life Sciences
Shanghai University
Shanghai 200444, P. R. China
E-mail: liangchenbio@shu.edu.cn;chenyuedu@shu.edu.cn
Y.Chen
Shanghai Instituteof Materdicine
Shanghai 200051, P.R.China
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (1 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
tional biosafety concerns.[21–22] To overcome the drawbacks men-
tioned above, there is an urgent need to develop new piezoelectric
nanocatalysts with favorable biocompatibility and multifaceted
catalytic activities.
While recent years have seen rapid advancements in piezo-
electric nanocatalysts, the biomedical applications of functional
nanomedicine, developed over several decades, continue to face
signiﬁcant challenges in achieving clinical success. Among the
clinical candidates for cancer nanomedicine, hafnium (Hf)-
based nanomaterials have attracted considerable attention, par-
ticularly following the promising clinical trial outcomes of
the nanosized radiosensitizer NBTXR3.[23–29] NBTXR3, com-
prising a spherical HfO2 nanoparticle core with a negatively
charged phosphate shell, signiﬁcantly enhances ionizing radi-
ation eﬃcacy in radiotherapy due to the high atomic number
of Hf. Completed phase II/III trials have demonstrated the su-
perior eﬃcacy of NBTXR3 compared with radiotherapy alone
and their biosafety (ClinicalTrials. gov number: NCT01433068,
NCT02379845, NCT01946867, NCT02721056). Additionally, sev-
eral ongoing clinical trials are recruiting participants to eval-
uate the therapeutic eﬃcacy of combining NBTXR3 with im-
munotherapy (NCT04892173, NCT05039632, NCT05039632).
While HfO2 is one of the only approved biocompatible inorganic
radiosensitizers for clinical trials, their sonopiezoelectric eﬀects
have not been explored.[30] Additionally, the US oﬀers a compar-
ative tissue penetration depth yet superior biosafety with mini-
mal side eﬀects compared to traditional radiosensitization strate-
gies. Recent ﬁrst-principles calculations have highlighted the in-
triguing piezoelectricity of nanoscale doped HfO2,[31–33] yet exper-
imental investigations into the biomedical potential of piezoelec-
tric HfO2 nanomaterials remain underexplored. Given the ability
of piezoelectric nanocatalysts to generate ROS in a spatiotempo-
rally controlled manner under US stimulation, it is highly desir-
able to explore the sonopiezoelectric performance of biocompat-
ible HfO2-based nanocatalysts for versatile biomedical applica-
tions.
PANoptosis, an integrated form of programmed cell death
(PCD) proposed in 2019,[34,35] involves the interactive activation
processes and key features of pyroptosis, apoptosis, and necrop-
tosis. Compared to other PCD pathways independently triggered
by conventional cancer treatments, PANoptosis activation of-
fers distinct advantages for immunotherapy by inducing a ro-
bust and sustained tumor-speciﬁc immune response through ex-
tensive cellular damage and the continuous release of danger-
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).[36,37] Whereas the intri-
cate mechanisms of the PANoptosis pathway in cancer remain
only partially understood, accumulating evidence suggests that
DNA oxidative damage may act as an eﬀective trigger for induc-
ing PANoptosis.[38] Piezoelectric nanocatalysts, which generate
ROS within cancer cells under US stimulation, show signiﬁcant
promise for activating PANoptotic cell death. Nonetheless, chal-
lenges, such as the hypoxic tumor microenvironment and lim-
ited pro-oxidative eﬃcacy may impede this process. Hence, con-
ferring enzyme-mimicking capabilities to piezoelectric nanocat-
alysts is essential to overcoming these limitations and achieving
eﬀective PANoptosis-sensitized immunotherapy.
With the above-mentioned considerations in mind, we pro-
pose a universal engineering strategy to synthesize a series of
transition metals (Cu, Fe, Mn)-substituted HfO2-based nanocat-
alysts, with the aim of optimizing their bifunctional piezoelec-
tric and enzymatic activities, for PANoptosis-sensitized sono-
immunotherapy (Scheme 1). Accordingly, single-, double-, and
ternary-doped HfO2 nanoparticles were synthesized, and their
piezocatalytic eﬀects under mechanical US stimulation, along
with their enzyme-mimicking activities, were comparatively eval-
uated. A notable correlation was observed between the dop-
ing composition and their sonopiezoelectric/enzymatic eﬃcacy.
Among all the evaluated nanocatalysts, rhombohedron-shaped
Mn-doped HfO2 with a doping ratio of 20% (HMO) demon-
strated the optimal balance of sonopiezoelectric ROS generation
and enzyme-mimicking activity. The enhanced piezoelectric re-
sponse may be attributed to the smaller bandgap and increased
oxygen vacancies after Mn substitution. Subsequently, HMO was
selected to serve as a nanoactivator to induce the cancer cell
PANoptosis for dual sonopiezoelectric/enzymatic nanocatalytic
therapy. Compared to the currently developed inorganic piezocat-
alysts, the distinctive advantages of developed HMO lie in their
certiﬁcated biosafety and enzymatically enhanced catalytic eﬃ-
cacy. Speciﬁcally, HMO facilitates the rapid production of sin-
glet oxygen (1O2) through sonopiezoelectric eﬀects, leading to ox-
idative damage in cancer cells. More importantly, the sonopiezo-
electric therapeutic eﬃcacy of HMO can be potentiated by their
multiple enzyme-mimicking activities of POD, GPx, and CAT
under tumor microenvironment (TME). Beneﬁting from that,
HMO upon US irradiation can eﬀectively disrupt intracellular re-
dox homeostasis, inducing PANoptosis in murine breast cancer
cells (4T1) and eliciting an antitumor immune response through
immunogenic cell death (ICD) induction. In vivo biological eval-
uations further revealed that HMO nanocatalysts achieved sig-
niﬁcant therapeutic eﬃcacy in suppressing tumor growth. Given
that both sono-active and enzyme-mimicking abilities of HfO2-
based nanomaterials have been scarcely explored, this study, to
the best of our knowledge, presents the ﬁrst paradigm of HfO2-
based nanocatalysts with sonopiezoelectric and multienzymatic
activity for PANoptosis-augmented sono-immunotherapy.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Doping Optimization and Characterization of HMO
Nanocatalysts
Typically, transition metals-substituted HfO2 nanocatalysts were
synthesized by a facile hydrothermal method. We ﬁrst selected
MnCl2 and HfCl4 as the dopant and precursor, respectively.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images showed that
undoped HfO2 nanoparticles exhibited a regular fusiform shape
(Figure 1a,b). In contrast, the morphology of HMO nanocata-
lysts, referred to HfO2 with 20% Mn doping, changed to irreg-
ular polyhedron (Figure 1c,d; and Figure S1a, Supporting In-
formation). HMO nanocatalysts, referring to the sample with
20% Mn doping, appeared a relatively uniform particle size
and a rhombohedron-like nanoarchitecture. High-angle annular
dark-ﬁeld scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-
STEM) images also revealed the uniform distribution of the
Hf, Mn, and O elements within HMO (Figure 1e–h). The well-
deﬁned nanoscale morphology and element distributions were
also validated by scanning electron microscopy and energy-
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (Figure S2, Supporting Informa-
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (2 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of dopant-regulated HMO sonopiezocatalytic/enzymatic nanocatalysts for nanocatalytic PANoptosis-enhanced sono-
immunotherapy.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (3 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 1. Morphology and characterization of HMO. a,b) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of HfO2. c,d) TEM images and e–h) Elemental
mapping images of HMO. i,j) High-resolution TEM images of HMO. k) X-ray diﬀraction patterns of HfO2 and HMO, and l) partial enlargement for the
XRD diﬀraction at (111) peaks. m) X-ray photoelectron spectrum of HMO. n) Hf 4f spectrum for HMO, and o) Mn 2p spectrum for HMO. p) Electron
paramagnetic resonance spectra of HfO2 and HMO.
tion). Moreover, high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images indi-
cated a distinct lattice fringe with a crystal spacing of 0.28 nm,
corresponding to the (111) diﬀraction plane of HMO (Figure 1i,j).
Several disordered lattice defects were observed in the HRTEM
image, likely attributed to the surface vacancies caused by the
unsaturated coordination of metal atoms. The decrease in crys-
tal spacing compared to dope-free HfO2 nanoparticles is pre-
sumably ascribed to the incorporation of Mn atoms with a
smaller atomic diameter into the lattices of HfO2 (Figure S3,
Supporting Information). Furthermore, selected area electron
diﬀraction (SAED) patterns showed a reduced number of diﬀrac-
tion rings in HMO nanocatalysts, signifying enlarged crystalline
grains and improved crystallinity. In addition, the size distri-
bution and zeta potential of HMO were investigated. Dynamic
light scattering (DLS) results revealed that the hydrodynamic
size of modiﬁed HMO remained almost unchanged in dif-
ferent solutions within a period of 48 h (Figure S1b–d, Sup-
porting Information). Moreover, the zeta potentials of modi-
ﬁed HMO in water, phosphate buﬀer solution (PBS), and fetal
bovine serum (FBS) were determined to be about −25.2, −14.4,
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (4 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
and −20.4 eV, respectively. These results evidence the favor-
able colloidal stability of modiﬁed HMO under the physiological
environments.
Subsequently, the crystal structures of HfO2 before and after
Mn doping were analyzed using X-ray diﬀraction (XRD). As de-
picted in Figure 1k, both samples were characterized by a typi-
cal monoclinic phase with P21/a space group (JCPDS card no.
34-0104). The absence of metallic Mn or oxide phases demon-
strated that Mn atoms were successfully incorporated into the
lattice of HfO2 without altering its phase structure. In the mean-
time, it was noteworthy that the diﬀraction peaks of Mn-doped
HfO2 slightly shifted to higher angles, indicating the shrinking
of lattice space after Mn doping, which may contribute to the lat-
tice distortion and increased polarity of HMO.[21] The increased
intensity and reduced width of peaks further corroborated the
higher crystallinity of HMO than that of pure HfO2 nanoparti-
cles (Figure 1l). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was em-
ployed to survey the surface chemical environments (Figure 1m).
In the case of pure HfO2, the peaks located at 18.85 and 17.20 eV
were assigned to 4f5/2 and 4f7/2 of Hf4+,[39] respectively. After
doping with Mn, the intensities of those two peaks for HMO de-
creased and shifted to higher binding energy (Figure 1n), sug-
gesting that the electron density of Hf decreased owing to Mn
doping.[40] The high-resolution XPS spectrum of Mn 2p3/2 ex-
hibited two separated peaks at 640.5 and 642.0 eV (Figure 1o),
corresponding to Mn2+ and Mn3+, respectively. The mixed va-
lence state of Mn would theoretically endow HMO with enzyme-
like catalytic activity.[41] More importantly, the existence of Mn3+
in the lattice of HMO suggested the nonequivalent substitution
of Hf by Mn, thereby causing the formation of defects in the
HfO2 lattice.[42] Accordingly, the oxygen vacancies (OVs) in HMO
nanocatalysts were further measured by electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) analysis. As shown in Figure 1p, HMO dis-
played an intense signal at g = 2.003, corresponding to the elec-
trons trapped on the OVs, whereas a weaker EPR signal was
detected for HfO2.[43] These OVs were expected to regulate the
electronic structure and promote charge carriers, resulting in en-
hanced catalytic performance of HMO.
To extend the applicability of the doping strategy, the concen-
tration and composition of the doping precursors were varied.
The Mn-substituted HfO2 maintained its rhombohedral mor-
phology even as the doping content increased to 30%, and no
signiﬁcant changes were observed in their crystal structures
(Figure S4, Supporting Information). However, at a feeding ra-
tio of 50% Mn precursor, both the nanoarchitecture and crys-
tal structure were signiﬁcantly disrupted, highlighting the crit-
ical impact of doping concentration. Fe- and Cu-based precur-
sors were also used to prepare single-, binary-, and ternary-doped
HfO2 nanostructures with a total doping content of 30%. Notably,
all the doped HfO2 exhibited well-deﬁned nanostructures (Figure
S5, Supporting Information). Moreover, strong diﬀraction peaks
were detected in XRD patterns, implying the maintained crys-
tallinity of doped HfO2 nanocatalysts. Element mapping images
further validated the presence of corresponding metal elements
within the nanostructures (Figure S6, Supporting Information).
These observations solidify the assertion that such a mild hy-
drothermal method enables the ﬂexible doping of various metal
elements into HfO2, obtaining a bunch of biocompatible piezo-
electric nanocatalysts.
2.2. SonoPiezoelectric Catalytic Performance of HMO
Nanocatalysts
The incorporation of transition metal elements in HfO2 is
expected to endow the engineered nanocatalysts with dual
sonopiezoelectric/enzymatic catalytic eﬀects. First, to identify
nanocatalysts with optimal sonopiezoelectric performance, we
systematically evaluated the singlet oxygen (1O2) generation ca-
pacity of pure and diverse doped HfO2 nanocatalysts under US ir-
radiation, using 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (DPBF) as a ﬂuores-
cent probe (Figure S7, Supporting Information). The results re-
vealed that the sonopiezoelectric eﬃcacy of Mn-substituted HfO2
depended on the doping concentration, with the highest sono-
triggered 1O2 yield achieved in HMO (Figure 2a,b). On the other
hand, a majority of single metal-doped samples exhibited negligi-
ble changes in the characteristic absorbance of DPBF at 420 nm
under US irradiation (Figure 2c), suggesting their limited eﬀec-
tiveness in sonopiezoelectric catalytic 1O2 generation. Addition-
ally, only FeMn-doped samples showed a notable decrease in ab-
sorbance, while other binary and ternary metal-doped HfO2 dis-
played minimal sonopiezoelectric 1O2 generation (Figure 2d).
Therefore, HMO with 20% Mn doping was identiﬁed as an eﬀec-
tive nanocatalyst with ROS generation capability, which presum-
ably resulted from the sonopiezoelectric eﬀects of HfO2. Elec-
tron spin resonance (ESR) measurements were performed to fur-
ther verify the 1O2 generation capacity of HMO upon US irradi-
ation, using 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine (TEMP) as a 1O2 trap-
ping agent. As expected, the US + HMO group exhibited typi-
cal 1:1:1 triplet signals (Figure 2e), with a higher intensity than
that observed in nondoped HfO2.[44] These ﬁndings validate the
hypothesis that the metal-substitution strategy can enhance the
sonopiezoelectric eﬃcacy of HfO2 nanocatalysts.
Next, the piezoelectricity of HfO2 and HMO was directly mea-
sured by piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM). A typical but-
terﬂy amplitude loop and ≈180° phase switching, a typical char-
acteristic of piezoelectric materials, were observed when a bias
voltage from −10 to 10 V was applied (Figure 2f,g).[45] Notably,
the amplitude variation of HMO was higher than that of HfO2,
suggesting their stronger piezoelectric response. The piezoelec-
tric coeﬃcient (d33) is a key characteristic of the piezoelectric ma-
terial, which reﬂects the conversion eﬃciency from mechanical
energy to electricity.[46] Here, the d33 of HMO was calculated to be
≈34.75 pm V−1 based on the amplitude-voltage loop, which was
≈1.5 times higher than that of HfO2 (≈22.1 pm V−1), conﬁrm-
ing the superior piezoelectric performance of HMO. As previous
reports claimed that the piezoelectric eﬀects of HfO2 were phase-
dependent,[47] it is deduced that the piezoresponse of HMO may
induced by the metal doping and resulting OVs.
To gain more insight into the catalytic mechanisms, Mott–
Schottky curves of HfO2 and HMO were measured. The positive
slope of the Mott–Schottky curves revealed the n-type semicon-
ductor of HfO2 and HMO (Figure 2h). To note, HMO showed a
signiﬁcantly smaller slope than that of HfO2, revealing a higher
charge carrier density.[48] Furthermore, we used electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to characterize the separation eﬃ-
ciency of charge carriers in HfO2 and HMO. A smaller diameter
of the semicircle was observed in HMO compared to the non-
doped HfO2 (Figure 2i). This tendency corroborates the lower
charge transfer resistance of the doped nanocatalysts, facilitating
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (5 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 2. Sonopiezoelectric catalytic performance of HMO nanocatalysts. a) UV–vis absorbance changes of DPBF at 420 nm after incubated with the Mn-
substituted HfO2 at diﬀerent Mn-doping content under US excitation. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) (n = 3). b) US-triggered
(1.0 MHz, 1.0 W cm−2, 50% cycle) 1O2 generation catalyzed by HMO. c) UV–vis absorbance changes of DPBF with diﬀerent single metal-ions doped
HfO2 under US irradiation for diﬀerent times. d) UV–vis absorbance changes of DPBF with diﬀerent metal-ion doped HfO2 by US triggered at diﬀerent
time. e) Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra of TEMP/1O2 for the HfO2 and HMO with diﬀerent treatments. f) Amplitude-voltage curves and g) phase
hysteresis loops of HfO2 and HMO. h) Mott–Schottky curves of HfO2 and HMO. i) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) curves of HfO2 and
HMO. j) Schematic illustrations on the bandgap structure and catalytic mechanism for ROS generation capability of HMO under US irradiation. Created
with BioRender.com.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (6 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
the separation of charge carriers upon US irradiation.[49] Sub-
sequently, the bandgaps of HfO2 and HMO were determined
using the Kubelka–Munk (KM) function in the Tauc plot. The
bandgap of HMO was calculated to be only 1.89 eV (Figure S8,
Supporting Information), which is markedly narrower than that
of HfO2 (≈2.89 eV), indicating that the impact of Mn doping
in reducing the bandgap of HfO2. According to these obser-
vations, the catalytic mechanism for the ROS generation capa-
bility of HMO was proposed (Figure 2j). Based on the energy
band level, the US can eﬃciently activate HMO nanocatalysts,
exciting electrons from the valence band (VB) to the conduc-
tion band (CB) and creating holes in the VB. The separation of
these electron–hole pairs is facilitated by the built-in electric ﬁeld,
promoting the surface redox reaction to produce 1O2 and ·OH.
Mn doping improves carrier transport by enhancing piezoelec-
tric responses and generating a stronger internal electric ﬁeld
through lattice distortion and charge redistribution. This built-in
ﬁeld promotes charge carrier separation and inhibits their recom-
bination. Additionally, OVs in HMO can trap electrons, boosting
carrier density and further enhancing catalytic eﬃciency. Taken
together, HMO with optimized 20% Mn doping can acquire
satisfactory piezoelectricity for eﬃcient sonopiezoelctric ROS
production.[50]
2.3. Multiple Enzyme-Mimicking Activities of HMO
Nanocatalysts
Aside from the piezoelectric catalytic eﬀects, transition metal
ions are likely to impart enzymatic enzyme-mimicking catalytic
activity to the metal-substituted nanocatalysts. Thus, we also
measured the POD-like activity of undoped HfO2 and a series of
doped HfO2 nanocatalysts, using methylene blue (MB) as an in-
dicator with a characteristic UV–vis absorption peak at ≈662 nm.
A notable tendency is that binary- and ternary-doped HfO2 exhib-
ited more rapid MB degradation than the single-doped nanocat-
alysts regardless of the doping elements (Figure S9, Support-
ing Information), indicating their higher eﬃcacy in generating
hydroxyl radical (·OH) with H2O2 as the substrate. Among the
binary-doped HfO2, the MB degradation degree of HfO2 doped
with Mn (such as HfO2-CuMn, HfO2-FeMn) is higher than that
of HfO2 without Mn doping (HfO2-CuFe). While other single-
doped HfO2 resulted in no signiﬁcant degradation of MB, the
decrease in absorbance at 662 nm was only observed in HMO
(Figure 3a), evidencing the critical contribution of Mn ions to
the enzymatic activity of doped nanocatalysts. Subsequently, the
impact of the Mn doping molar ratio was also assessed. The
time-dependent spectra revealed that the degradation percent-
age of MB increased with the doping content of Mn elements
(Figure 3b). Despite the higher POD-like activity of HfO2-Mn30%,
HMO with 20% Mn doping was selected for nanocatalytic appli-
cations due to their higher sonopiezoelectric ROS generation ef-
ﬁcacy.
Furthermore, the POD-mimicking catalytic eﬃcacy of un-
doped and doped HMO was further compared by estimating
their Michaelis–Menten constant (Km) and maximal initial ve-
locity (Vmax). It was calculated that HMO featured a signiﬁ-
cantly lower Km (1.622 mm) and higher Vmax (1.157 × 10−7 M
s−1) than doping-free HfO2 (Km = 10.37 mm, Vmax = 4.838 ×
10−8 M s−1) (Figure 3c). This enhanced catalytic eﬃciency is pri-
marily attributed to the incorporation of Mn ions in the doped
nanocatalysts, which promotes eﬃcient eﬀective ·OH generation
within the H2O2-rich TME. The pH-dependent catalytic activ-
ity of HMO was further conﬁrmed by distinct visual changes
observed in the reaction products under diﬀerent pH condi-
tions (Figure S10, Supporting Information). The pronounced
higher eﬃcacy under acidic conditions makes them particularly
favorable for tumor-speciﬁc nanocatalytic therapy. Additionally,
the sonopiezoelectric eﬀects of HMO are expected to further
boost their POD-mimicking catalytic activity. Notably, the de-
crease in absorbance of MB treated with HMO under US irra-
diation was notably greater than that treated without US irradi-
ation (Figure 3d,e), indicating sono-enhanced catalytic degrada-
tion. ESR measurements further conﬁrmed that the character-
istic quartet ESR signals (with a 1:2:2:1 intensity ratio) of ·OH
radicals were signiﬁcantly more pronounced under US activation
(Figure 3f). Collectively, these ﬁndings indicate that the devel-
oped HMO nanocatalysts possess synergistic sonopiezoelectric
and enzyme-mimicking catalytic capacity for eﬃcient ROS gen-
eration, which beneﬁts from the optimized Mn doping in HfO2
NPs.
Previous studies have shown that glutathione (GSH), an an-
tioxidant that is overexpressed by tumor cells, would consume
sono-generated ROS, compromising the therapeutic eﬃcacy of
sonopiezoelectric therapy.[51] To evaluate the GSH depletion ca-
pability of doped HfO2, we used 5,5′-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic
acid) (DTNB) as a probe. The spectral analysis revealed a decrease
in the absorbance intensity of reduced DTNB at ≈400 nm with in-
creasing Mn doping levels from 0% to 30% (Figure 3g; and Figure
S11, Supporting Information), indicating that the enhanced GSH
depletion capacity of HMO is likely attributable to Mn doping.
Moreover, the ampliﬁed GPx activity of HMO compared to bare
HfO2 NPs was veriﬁed by the quantitative results of Km and Vmax
(Figure 3h). It is well known that the overproduced H2O2 in
TME could be decomposed into O2 by CAT-like nanozymes.[52]
We then veriﬁed whether HMO possesses CAT-mimicking ac-
tivity in the presence of H2O2 by using a dissolved-oxygen me-
ter. Not surprisingly, a rapid oxygen evolution was detected when
HMO reacted H2O2 with under ambient conditions (Figure 3i).
Similarly, the oxygen production capability of doped HfO2 in-
creased with the doping ratio of Mn element (Figure S12, Sup-
porting Information). It was also noted that both GSH depletion
ability and CAT-like activity of HMO and 30% Mn-doped HfO2
showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence. Taken together, HMO with op-
timized ROS generation and multiple enzyme-mimicking activ-
ity was selected as the dual-functional nanocatalyst for subse-
quent biological applications, in which their biomimetic oxygen
generation and GSH depletion ability would augment the oxida-
tive damage induced by sonopiezoelectric and POD-like catalytic
eﬀects.
2.4. Theoretical Analysis on the Catalytic Mechanisms of HMO
Nanocatalysts
To gain deeper insight into the sonopiezoelectric and enzymatic
catalytic eﬀects of HMO, theoretical calculations were conducted.
HfO2 can generate a piezoelectric potential due to the separa-
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (7 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 3. Multienzyme-mimicking activities of HMO nanocatalysts. a) UV–vis absorbance changes of MB treated with diﬀerent metal-ion doped HfO2
containing H2O2 as a substrate at diﬀerent times. b) UV–vis absorbance changes of MB and H2O2 exposed to HfO2-Mn with diﬀerent Mn-doping
contents. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) (n = 3). c) Michaelis–Menten curves of MB treated with HMO and HfO2 using H2O2
as a substrate (n = 3). d) ·OH generation catalyzed by HMO and H2O2 using MB as a probe at diﬀerent times. e) ·OH generation catalyzed by HMO and
H2O2 under US irradiation (1.0 MHz, 1.0 W cm−2, 50% cycle) using MB as a ·OH probe at diﬀerent times. f) ESR spectra of DMPO/·OH under diﬀerent
treatments. g) UV–vis absorbance changes of DTNB treated with GSH and HfO2-Mn with diﬀerent Mn-doping contents (n = 3). h) Michaelis–Menten
curves of DTNB and H2O2 catalyzed by HMO and HfO2 using GSH as a substrate (n = 3). i) O2 generation capability under diﬀerent treatments using
H2O2 as a substrate.
tion of positive and negative charge centers when subjected to
an external force. Given that the enhanced catalytic eﬃcacy of
HMO hypothetically arises from Mn substitution and generated
OVs, three structural models were constructed: pristine HfO2,
Mn-doped HfO2 (without OVs), and HMO, to elucidate their spe-
ciﬁc contributions. The optimization diagrams revealed signiﬁ-
cant structural deformation in HMO compared to the other two
models (Figure 4a). Accordingly, changes in atomic bond length
and bond angle in HfO2 before and after Mn doping were an-
alyzed (Figure 4b,c). The results showed that the Hf─O bond
length decreased, while the O─Hf─O bond angle increased af-
ter replacing Hf4+ with Mn, relative to the pristine HfO2. Fur-
thermore, these changes were more pronounced in HMO, with a
further reduction in bond length and an increase in bond angle.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (8 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 4. Theoretical simulations on the catalytic mechanisms of HMO nanocatalysts. a) Geometrically optimized structures of pure HfO2, Mn-doped
HfO2 (without oxygen vacancies), and HMO. b) Bond lengths and c) bond angles of HfO2, Mn-doped HfO2, and HMO. Density of states (DOS) proﬁles
of d) HfO2, e) Mn-doped HfO2, and f) HMO. g) Energy diagrams of the catalytic pathways of H2O2 in the HfO2, Mn-doped HfO2, and HMO. h)
Energy diagrams of the Fenton catalysis pathways in the HfO2, Mn-doped HfO2, and HMO. i) The CAT-like catalytic pathways of modeling surface
conﬁgurations in the HfO2, Mn-doped HfO2, and HMO. j) The POD-like catalysis pathways of modeling surface conﬁgurations in the HfO2, Mn-doped
HfO2, and HMO.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (9 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
These calculations indicate that both Mn doping and the pres-
ence of oxygen vacancies contribute to lattice distortion in HMO,
consistent with previous observations from HRTEM and XRD
analyses.
Given that Mn substitution and structural reconstruction are
likely beneﬁcial for the generation of oxygen vacancies on the
surface of HMO, we calculated the oxygen vacancy formation
energy (EOv). It was found that the EOv of HMOv was calcu-
lated to be 1.7 eV. This vacancy formation energy is lower than
4.6 eV of HfO2, indicating that Mn doping is beneﬁcial for pro-
ducing OVs, which was also conﬁrmed by the XPS and EPR re-
sults (Figure 1n,p). The density of states (DOS) for ideal HfO2,
Mn-doped HfO2, and HMO were also analyzed. HMO exhib-
ited distinct defect states between the conduction band (CB) and
valence band (VB) compared to ideal HfO2 (Figure 4d–f). As a
consequence, sono-triggered electrons are more readily excited
to the CB and transferred to the surface of HMO nanocata-
lysts for redox reactions. At the same time, the introduced de-
fects also trap these electrons to enhance electron–hole pair sep-
aration and suppress their recombination. These ﬁndings sug-
gest that Mn doping induces lattice distortion and creates defect
bands in HMO, thereby boosting their sonopiezoelectric catalytic
eﬃcacy.
To elucidate the enzymatic activity mechanism, key interme-
diate structures and free energy proﬁles were analyzed using
density functional theory (DFT) calculations. In the CAT route,
pure HfO2, Mn-doped HfO2, and HMO all showed compara-
ble energy changes in the initial steps, which involve H2O2
adsorption and subsequent O─O bond cleavage (Figure 4g,i).
Notably, the subsequent deprotonation step on HMO exhib-
ited a larger energy drop of 3.42 eV than HfO2 and Mn-doped
HfO2, implying that the decomposition by HMO with OVs is
thermodynamically more favorable. Moreover, the formation of
O* on the HMO surface, which is the rate-determining step
for CAT-like catalytic reaction, overcame the lowest energy bar-
rier (3.56 eV) compared to other tested conﬁgurations. These
results corroborate that the CAT-like activity of HMOv was
signiﬁcantly enhanced due to the formation of OVs. For the
POD route (Figure 4h,j), HfO2, Mn-doped HfO2, and HMO
also showed negative binding energy for the surface adsorp-
tion of H2O2. Subsequently, energy barriers to produce •OH
from *OH by HMO was 0.29 eV, which is signiﬁcantly lower
than HfO2 and Mn-doped HfO2, These results substantiate
that HMO with intrinsic OVs possess a higher POD-like activ-
ity.
Based on theoretical calculations and experimental results, a
plausible mechanism was proposed to explain the sonopiezocat-
alytic/enzymatic eﬀects of HMO. Mn substitution in the crystal
structure of HfO2 induces lattice distortions and charge imbal-
ances, thereby increasing polarity and generating built-in electric
ﬁelds that improve charge carrier separation under the US.[53]
Moreover, Mn substitution generates abundant oxygen vacan-
cies (OVs), which introduce impurity states and narrow the
bandgap of doped HfO2. These OVs act as charge traps, suppress-
ing the recombination of sono-generated electron–hole pairs
and thereby enhancing charge separation eﬃciency, which sig-
niﬁcantly boosts sonopiezoelectric catalytic performance.[54–56]
Meanwhile, OVs improve the adsorption of intermediate sub-
strates, accelerating enzymatic catalytic reactions. Thus, optimiz-
ing the Mn doping ratio enables HMO to implement eﬀective
dual-mode nanocatalytic therapy.
2.5. In Vitro Therapeutic Eﬃcacy of HMO Nanocatalysts
Considering the mutually enhanced catalytic eﬀects of HMO,
their in vitro therapeutic eﬃcacy was evaluated next. First, we
evaluated the cytotoxicity of HMO on human umbilical vein en-
dothelial (HUVEC), mouse ﬁbroblast (L-929), human embryonic
kidney 293 (HEK-293), and RAW 264.7 cells using the standard
CCK-8 assay. The data revealed that HMO showed minimal cy-
totoxicity on these cells even at a high concentration of 250 μg
mL−1 (Figure 5a; and Figure S13, Supporting Information). Sub-
sequently, we evaluated the anticancer eﬀect of HMO in vitro. On
the other hand, the viability of 4T1 cells slightly decreased with
the increased concentration of HMO (Figure 5b), which may be
explained by the enzyme-mimicking activity that stems from Mn
substitution. Additionally, the anticancer eﬃcacy of HMO under
US irradiation was also assessed. Both the control and US alone
groups exhibited negligible cytotoxicity. In contrast, the HMO
+ US group demonstrated notable cell damage, indicating the
synergistic eﬀects of sonopiezoelectric and enzymatic activities
in promoting 4T1 cell killing (Figure 5c). Next, the intracellular
uptake of the nanocatalysts by cancer cells was also investigated
by visualizing the localization of FITC-labeled HMO. As seen in
Figure 5d, confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) images
demonstrated that the green ﬂuorescence in 4T1 cells became
much brighter with the prolonged incubation time. This is con-
sistent with the results observed by the ﬂow cytometry (FCM)
analysis that the ﬂuorescent intensity of 4T1 cells continuously
increased from 1 to 12 h incubation (Figure 5e; and Figure S14,
Supporting Information), suggesting the eﬃcient internalization
of HMO into cancer cells.
Subsequently, the intracellular ROS generation capacity of
HMO was determined in 4T1 cells. 2,7-dichloroﬂuorescein diac-
etate (DCFH-DA) was selected as an indicator to distinguish the
intracellular ROS generation.[57] Strong green ﬂuorescence sig-
nals were observed in cells treated with HMO and HMO upon
US irradiation (Figure 5f), whereas no signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence
appeared for the control or US group. The data validated that
the treatment of HMO + US enabled speciﬁc ROS generation in
cancer cells, as further supported by FCM analysis (Figure 5g,h).
Additionally, the therapeutic eﬃcacy of HMO was assessed us-
ing an Annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide (PI) staining assay.
The control and HMO groups showed predominant green ﬂu-
orescence, indicating high 4T1 cell viability (Figure 5i). How-
ever, the US + HMO group displayed strong red ﬂuorescence
across the entire observed area, indicating severe cell damage
caused by combined sonopiezoelectric and enzymatic eﬀects. An-
nexin V-FITC/PI staining followed by FCM analysis further con-
ﬁrmed these ﬁndings (Figure 5j,k). While no red ﬂuorescence
was observed in the control or US-only groups, a portion of red
spots were evident in the HMO and HMO + US groups, indi-
cating cell membrane disruption and apoptosis induced by the
nanocatalytic therapy.[58] Therefore, these results highlight that
the developed HMO nanocatalysts can be an eﬀective nanocat-
alyst that combines sonopiezoelectric and enzymatic eﬀects for
tumor therapy.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (10 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 5. In vitro therapeutic eﬃcacy of HMO nanocatalysts. Cell viability of a) human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). b) 4T1 cells incubated
with diﬀerent HMO concentrations for 24 h, and c) 4T1 cells subjected to diﬀerent treatments: I) Control; II) US; III) HMO; IV) HMO+US (n = 3). Data
are presented as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.). d) Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images of cellular phagocytosis behavior in 4T1 cells
incubated with FITC-labeled HMO at diﬀerent time intervals. e) Flow cytometry (FCM) analysis of cellular phagocytosis behavior in 4T1 cells incubated
with FITC-labeled HMO at diﬀerent time intervals. f) CLSM images of ROS generation in 4T1 cells using 2,7-dichloroﬂuorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA)
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (11 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
2.6. PANoptosis Activation and Immunogenic Response by
HMO Nanocatalysts
The therapeutic mechanisms of HMO nanocatalysts were in-
vestigated in detail. As apoptosis can cause oxidative injury
to mitochondria and lead to the loss of membrane potential,
JC-1 staining was ﬁrst performed to monitor mitochondrial
dysfunction.[59] As shown in Figure 6a, the HMO group exhib-
ited slightly weakened red ﬂuorescence compared to the con-
trol group, suggesting a certain degree of mitochondrial dam-
age. The HMO + US group displayed the strongest green ﬂu-
orescence under US irradiation, which evidences severe de-
construction of the mitochondrial membrane after the com-
bined treatment. FCM results further validated the same ten-
dency of a higher green ﬂuorescence intensity in the HMO +
US group (Figure 6b,c). Moreover, the intracellular adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) levels were assessed following various treat-
ments. Notably, HMO + US treatment resulted in a notable re-
duction in ATP production, implying severe mitochondrial dys-
function triggered by piezocatalytic therapy (Figure S15, Sup-
porting Information). It is well-documented in previous pub-
lications that the oxidative damage of mitochondria is implic-
itly associated with cell apoptosis, necroptosis, and pyroptosis.
Thus, to explore the potential of HMO upon US irradiation
in activating PANoptosis, cells were collected after the treat-
ments, stained with YO-PRO-1 (YP1)/PI, and analyzed by FCM.
HMO with US stimulation signiﬁcantly improved the propor-
tion of dead cells (Figure 6d,e), including both YP1-positive
cells (apoptosis or necroptosis) and PI-positive cells (necropto-
sis or pyroptosis).[60] This observation, along with the above-
demonstrated FCM results, corroborates the induction of apop-
tosis, necroptosis, and pyroptosis by the combined nanocatalytic
therapy.
To elucidate the pyroptosis induction eﬀects of HMO, the cell
morphology of 4T1 cells was directly visualized by bright-ﬁeld mi-
croscope imaging. No abnormal morphological alternation was
observed in the control and US groups. In sharp contrast, the im-
ages revealed notable bubbles on the surface of the plasma mem-
brane in the HMO + US group (Figure 6f), which is a hallmark
feature of cell pyroptosis. As a consequence of membrane rup-
ture, the increase of IL-1𝛽expression and LDH release were more
pronounced in the case of HMO upon US irradiation than in
other groups (Figure 6g,h). We then characterized the cell death
type triggered by HMO under US stimulation using western blot
(WB) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses. The com-
bined treatment upregulated the expression of pivotal protein
molecules associated with pyroptotic, apoptotic, and necroptotic
pathways (Figure 6i; and Figure S16, Supporting Information). In
contrast, the control and US groups showed relatively lower ex-
pression of the pyroptotic protein GSDMD (Figure 6j), apoptotic
protein caspase-1 (CASP1) (Figure 6k), and necroptotic protein
MLKL (Figure 6l). Collectively, these ﬁndings suggest that HMO
upon US irradiation eﬀectively induces inﬂammatory PANop-
totic cell death through cooperative activation of multiple PCD
pathways, highlighting the advantages of combined sonopiezo-
electric/enzymatic eﬀects.[36]
The occurrence of PANoptosis would generally lead to im-
munogenic cell death (ICD) of tumor cells. We next examined
the exposure of calreticulin (CRT) and the release of high mobil-
ity group protein B1 (HMGB1), which are two typical hallmark
events of ICD.[61] Treatment with HMO alone can induce a mod-
erate upregulation of CRT and HMGB1 secretion in 4T1 cells
compared to the control and US groups (Figure 6m,n). Moreover,
markedly improved levels of CRT and HMGB1 were observed in
cells treated with HMO plus US irradiation, as evidenced by the
brighter green ﬂuorescence in CLSM images. These results in-
dicated that the synergetic catalytic eﬀect of HMO upon US ir-
radiation could enhance ICD to activate an antitumor immune
response.
2.7. Therapeutic Mechanism Analyses of
SonoPiezoelectric/Enzymatic Catalytic Therapy
To further investigate the immune activation and PANoptosis-
related mechanism of HMO, RNA transcription analysis was per-
formed on 4T1 cells subjected to US + HMO treatment and
control conditions. The analysis identiﬁed 849 diﬀerentially ex-
pressed genes (DEGs) in the experimental group compared to
the control group, providing insights into the molecular response
to US + HMO treatment (Figure 7a). The Kyoto En-cyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO) en-
richment analysis were performed to predict the molecular func-
tion, cellular component, and biological process of the DEGs
(Figure 7b,g). As depicted in Figure 7d, the reactome analysis
and the result in the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) form
illustrated that diﬀerential genes were signiﬁcantly enriched in
signaling pathways related to pyroptosis, apoptosis, and necro-
sis, proving the potential of PANoptosis occurrence after nanocat-
alytic therapy.
Several key upregulated genes are likely associated with
PANoptosis activation and immune modulation, including
Cxcl1, Cxcl5, Cd74, and Gstm1. Cxcl1 and Cxcl5 are chemokines
involved in promoting inﬂammation and immune cell recruit-
ment. Cxcl1 enhances the diﬀerentiation of killer T cells and
M1 polarization of macrophages,[62] while Cxcl5 ampliﬁes the
inﬂammatory response by stimulating inﬂammatory cells to re-
lease proinﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines, contributing
to the regulation of immune responses.[63] Cd74, a key immune
response marker, plays a pivotal role in antigen presentation
and is clinically relevant for monitoring immune activation.[64]
Gstm1 is a critical enzyme involved in oxidative stress regulation,
playing a key role in GSH biosynthesis and lipid peroxide detox-
iﬁcation for inhibiting ferroptosis,[65–67] which was signiﬁcantly
upregulated in the US + HMO treatment. In addition, the over-
expression of Lcn2 and Akap12, which are closely associated with
the induction of ferroptosis and regulation of tumor autophagy,
was observed in the HMO + US group. These ﬁndings further
as probe after diﬀerent treatments. g,h) FCM analysis of ROS generation in 4T1 cells after diﬀerent treatments (n = 3). i) CLSM images of apoptosis in
4T1 cells costained with Annexin V-FITC/PI after diﬀerent treatments. j,k) FCM analysis of apoptosis in 4T1 cells costained with Annexin V-FITC/PI after
diﬀerent treatments (n = 3).
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (12 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 6. PANoptosis activation and immunogenic response by HMO nanocatalysts. a) CLSM images of mitochondrial membrane potentials (MMPs)
in 4T1 cells using JC-1 as a probe for diﬀerent groups: I) Control; II) US; III) HMO; IV) HMO+US. b,c) FCM analysis of MMPs in 4T1 cells after diﬀerent
treatments. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) (n = 3). d,e) FCM analysis of necrosis in 4T1 cells after diﬀerent treatments (n = 3).
f) Bright-ﬁeld microscopy image of 4T1 cells after diﬀerent treatments. g) Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in 4T1 cells after diﬀerent treatments (n = 3).
h) Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of IL-1𝛽expression after diﬀerent treatments (n = 3). i) Western blot (WB) analysis of p-MLKL, Caspase-1 (CASP1),
GSDMD, and IL-1𝛽expressions after diﬀerent treatments (n = 3). PCR of j) GSDMD, k) CASP1, l) MLKL expression (n = 3). CLSM images of m) CRT
and n) HMGB1 exposure of 4T1 cells after diﬀerent treatments.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (13 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 7. Therapeutic mechanism analyses of HMO-mediated sonopiezoelectric/enzymatic catalytic therapy. a) Volcano plot of genes upregulated or
downregulated among the diﬀerentially expressed genes in HMO + US and control groups. b) Circos plots of Gene Ontology (GO) analysis in the two
groups. c) Heatmap of the signiﬁcant diﬀerentially expressed proteins. d) Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) plots of the Reactome enrichment
results. e) Nightingale rose chart of the two groups. f) Bubble plot of the GO enrichment results. g) Chordal plot of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) analysis in the two groups. h) Pearson’s correlation plot of the two groups.
conﬁrmed the potential roles of HMO upon US irradiation in
participating in other PCD pathways (Figure 7c).[68–70]
To explore the induction eﬀects of HMO on ferroptosis upon
US irradiation, the GSH levels and ROS generation capabilities
were evaluated. Bare HfO2 and classic piezocatalysts BaTiO3 were
employed as control groups.[71] After the treatments, HMO + US
demonstrated a signiﬁcant elevation in terms of GSH assump-
tion and ROS generation compared to other groups (Figures S17
and S18, Supporting information), which might be explained
by their combined sonopiezoelectric/enzymatic catalytic eﬀects.
Moreover, we then evaluated the expression of uppermost protein
molecules relevant to ferroptosis by WB. The downregulated ex-
pression of glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) was observed in the
HMO + US group, suggesting that the combined nanocatalytic
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (14 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
therapy holds the potential to induce ferroptosis of tumor cell.
However, microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) ex-
pression, which is a distinct characteristic of autophagy,[72] exhib-
ited no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between various treatments, imply-
ing that HMO upon US irradiation may be incapable of trigger-
ing autophagic cell death (Figure S19, Supporting Information).
The gene abundance map further demonstrated signiﬁcant
activation of the immune-related pathways in the HMO + US
group (Figure 7e,h), including cytokine activity and chemokine
signaling, suggesting a robust in vivo immune response. The re-
sults showed a considerable enrichment of immune-related path-
ways (Figure 7f), such as the TNF signaling pathway, cAMP sig-
naling pathway, cytokine activity, Th1 type immune response,
chemokine signaling pathway, and other immune-related path-
ways, after the HMO + US treatment. Protein–protein inter-
action network interactions also revealed the expression of key
genes associated with immune inﬁltration (Figure 7g).[73] The up-
regulation of several immune-related genes, including Ccl2 and
Cd74, highlighted a marked increase in immune inﬁltration, par-
ticularly in dendritic cell (DC) maturation, M1 macrophage po-
larization, and T-cell diﬀerentiation.[74] The upregulation of IL-
18, an analogue of IL-1𝛽, in the treatment group, may be in-
duced by interferon, which can induce T cells to produce high
levels of IFN-𝛾, suggesting its involvement in immune system
response.[75] Our ﬁndings demonstrate that US + HMO treat-
ment activates PANoptosis and ampliﬁes the immunoactivation
eﬃcacy by upregulating key PANoptosis-related genes and pro-
moting immune inﬁltration.
2.8. HMO-Mediated SonoPiezoelectric/Enzymatic Catalytic
Therapy Inhibits Tumor Growth
Encouraged by the therapeutic outcome in vitro, the antitumor
eﬀect of HMO under US irradiation was further investigated in
tumor-bearing BALB/c mice. The biosafety of HMO was evalu-
ated in terms of histological examination and hemocompatibil-
ity. The major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) were
extracted from mice injected with HMO at a high dosage of 25
mg kg−1. As shown in Figures S20 and S21, Supporting Infor-
mation, no obvious pathological abnormalities were observed,
demonstrating the negligible damage of HMO against normal
organs. Hematological and blood biochemical analysis results re-
vealed no signiﬁcant abnormal indexes after the administration
of HMO (Figure S22, Supporting Information), further suggest-
ing the favorable biocompatibility of HMO. For the in vivo an-
titumor studies, 4T1-tumor-bearing BALB/c mice with diﬀerent
treatments were randomly divided into four groups (n = 5): 1)
saline, 2) US, (3) HMO (dosage, 15 mg kg−1), and 4) HMO +
US (dosage, 15 mg kg−1) (Figure 8a). For the US and HMO +
US groups, the tumor location was exposed to the US (1.0 MHz,
1.0 W cm−2, 50% cycle) for 5 min at 12 h postinjection. The
body weights and tumor volumes of the mice were monitored
every two days throughout the 15 days treatment period. The
tumors in the saline and US treatment groups showed rapid
growth (Figure 8b–e), suggesting that US irradiation had a neg-
ligible inﬂuence on tumor inhibition. Compared to the moder-
ate tumor inhibition rate (44.4%) in the HMO group (Figure 8f),
the tumor growth was drastically suppressed in the HMO +
US group, with the highest inhibition rate (72.7%). The supe-
rior therapeutic outcome of HMO is possibly due to the GSH-
depleted SDT and US-enhanced PANoptosis in tumors by HMO.
In addition, no obvious weight loss was observed for the con-
trol or treatment groups (Figure 8g), suggesting minimal ad-
verse eﬀects of HMO nanocatalysts. To verify the antitumor ef-
fect of HMO at the histological level, a tumor specimen was
randomly selected from each group for hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated de-
oxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining. As
shown in Figure 8h, tumors treated with HMO + US exhibited
the most pronounced wrinkling and a marked reduction in nu-
clei, indicating severe damage and widespread cell death. Fur-
thermore, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) immunohis-
tochemical staining revealed signiﬁcantly decreased proliferation
in the HMO + US group, highlighting its strong inhibitory eﬀect
on tumor aggressiveness (Figure 8h). To further understand the
therapeutic mechanisms, the expression levels of GSDMD and
CASP1 were examined by immunohistochemical staining. The
combined nanocatalytic treatment also showed the highest GS-
DMD and CASP1 expressions (Figure 8i), indicating the occur-
rence of PANoptosis in tumors.
Furthermore, we further evaluated the capacity of HMO to in-
duce PANoptosis and reverse immunosuppressive TME for en-
hanced antitumor immunotherapy of HMO (Figure 8j,k). Since
the maturation of DCs in vivo can strongly stimulate the acti-
vation and proliferation of T cells, FCM was ﬁrst employed to
quantify the maturity of DCs in the lymph.[50] As expected, the
highest maturity of the proportion of mature DCs in the lymph
nodes appeared in the HMO + US group (Figure 8j,l), reveal-
ing robust antigen presentation ability and immune system ac-
tivation. Similarly, HMO + US treatment increased the inﬁltra-
tion rate of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) from 20.5% to 38.2%
(Figure 8k). Compared to the control and US alone groups, we
observed relatively high expression of TGF𝛽, low expression of
IFN-𝛾and CD8+ in the HMO and HMO + US groups (Figure 8i),
indicative of the ampliﬁed immune response and improved in-
ﬁltration of CD8+ T cells.[76,77] These ﬁndings suggested that the
piezoelectric/enzymatic nanocatalytic therapy mediated by HMO
upon US irradiation can exert immune-stimulating eﬀects to po-
tentiate antitumor eﬃcacy. Proinﬂammatory cytokines play a sig-
niﬁcant role in stimulating, recruiting, and expanding immune
cells, thereby augmenting the body’s immune response against
tumors.[78] HMO + US treatment also enhanced the secretion
of antitumor cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-𝛼(TNF-
𝛼), Interleukin (IL)-6, and IL-1𝛽(Figure 8m–o). Overall, HMO
eﬀectively activated antitumor immune responses under US ir-
radiation through the dual action of adaptive immunity triggered
by PANoptosis and innate immunity, guaranteeing satisfactory
inhibition eﬀects on tumor growth.
3. Conclusion
In
summary,
HMO
nanocatalysts
were
developed
as
a
sonopiezoelectric nanocatalyst with multienzymatic activities
for PANoptosis-augmented sono-immunotherapy. Transition
metal engineering was proven to be an eﬀective strategy that
not only can modulate the sonopiezoelectric response of HfO2
nanoparticles but also render the doped nanocatalysts with mul-
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (15 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 8. HMO-mediated sonopiezoelectric/enzymatic catalytic therapy inhibits tumor growth. a) Schematic illustration for the establishment and the
treatment procedure for 4T1 tumor-bearing mice model. b) Individual tumor volume curves in diﬀerent groups: I) Control; II) US; III) HMO; IV) HMO
+ US (n = 5). c) Average volume change curves after diﬀerent treatments. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) (n = 5). d) Average
tumor weight change curves of mice after diﬀerent treatments (n = 5). e) Excised tumors of each group on the 15th day after diﬀerent treatments (n
= 5). f) The tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of each group on the 15th day after diﬀerent treatments (n = 5). g) Body weights of the mice after diﬀerent
treatments (n = 5). h) H&E, TUNEL, and PCNA staining images of tumors after diﬀerent treatments. i) Immunoﬂuorescence staining of CASP1, GSDMD,
and CD8/TGF𝛽/IFN𝛾of the tumor tissues after diﬀerent treatments. j,l) Dendritic cells (DCs) maturation in lymph nodes quantiﬁed analyzed by FCM
(n = 3). k) CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in tumors quantiﬁed by FCM. m–o) ELISA measures TNF-𝛼, IL-6 and IL-1𝛽Interleukinsecretion levels after diﬀerent
treatments (n = 5).
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (16 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
tienzymatic activities that mimic POD, CAT, and GPx. Notably,
20% Mn substitution in HfO2 resulted in oxygen vacancies and
lattice distortions, achieving optimal dual-functional catalytic ef-
ﬁcacy. These features enabled HMO to generate ROS eﬃciently
under US irradiation, relieve hypoxia, and deplete GSH within
the tumor microenvironment, amplifying oxidative stress and
inducing cancer cell death. In addition, HMO nanocatalysts
demonstrated excellent biocompatibility and eﬀectively triggered
PANoptosis, including apoptosis, necroptosis, and pyroptosis,
upon US irradiation. ICD markers, such as CRT and HMGB1,
were signiﬁcantly upregulated, promoting immune system
activation. RNA sequencing and pathway enrichment analysis
revealed that HMO modulated immune-related pathways and
oxidative stress responses. In vivo studies conﬁrmed the targeted
accumulation of HMO at tumor sites, where its combination
with US irradiation eﬀectively inhibited tumor growth and
activated robust antitumor immunity. This study highlights
HMO as a promising nanocatalyst that synergistically combines
sonopiezoelectric and enzyme-mimicking catalytic activities
to induce PANoptosis, providing an eﬀective sono-triggered
immune activation strategy for cancer treatment. Despite the
enormous potential of HMO, it should be noted that the clinical
translation of HMO still faces challenges in batch-to-batch
consistency and long-term safety, which necessitates the devel-
opment of high-throughput synthetic technology and meticulous
biological evaluations.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
L.Z. and X.G. contributed equally to this work. All animal procedures to
be employed in the project were approved by Institutional Animal Care
and Use of Chongqing Medical University (Grant No. IACUC-CQMU-2024-
0748). The authors greatly acknowledge the ﬁnancial support from the Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 82272025 and
52102350), National Key Research and Development Projects (Grant No.
2023YFC230650), The Chenguang Program of the Shanghai Education De-
velopment Foundation and Shanghai Municipal Education Commission,
Shanghai Science and Technology Program (Grant No. 21010500100), the
program from Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Munici-
pality (Grant No. 20Y11912400), and Wenzhou Basic Scientiﬁc Research
Project (Grant No. Y20230135).
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the cor-
responding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
enzymatic activity, hafnium oxide, nanocatalytic therapy, PANoptosis,
piezoelectric biomaterials
Received: January 7, 2025
Revised: February 17, 2025
Published online: March 8, 2025
[1] C. Qiu, B. Wang, N. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, D. Walker, Y. Wang, H.
Tian, T. R. Shrout, Z. Xu, L.-Q. Chen, F. Li, Nature 2020, 577, 350.
[2] W. Deng, Y. Zhou, A. Libanori, G. Chen, W. Yang, J. Chen, Chem. Soc.
Rev. 2022, 51, 3380.
[3] Y. Liu, G. Dzidotor, T. T. Le, T. Vinikoor, K. Morgan, E. J. Curry, R. Das,
A. McClinton, E. Eisenberg, L. N. Apuzzo, K. T. M. Tran, P. Prasad,
T. J. Flanagan, S.-W. Lee, H.-M. Kan, M. T. Chorsi, K. W. H. Lo, C. T.
Laurencin, T. D. Nguyen, Sci. Transl. Med. 2022, 14, eabi7282.
[4] S. Guerin, A. Stapleton, D. Chovan, R. Mouras, M. Gleeson, C.
McKeown, M. R. Noor, C. Silien, F. M. F. Rhen, A. L. Kholkin, N. Liu, T.
Soulimane, S. A. M. Tofail, D. Thompson, Nat. Mater. 2018, 17, 180.
[5] T. Kim, H. J. Kim, W. Choi, Y. M. Lee, J. H. Pyo, J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Kim,
J.-H. Kim, C. Kim, W. J. Kim, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2023, 7, 149.
[6] T. Vinikoor, G. K. Dzidotor, T. T. Le, Y. Liu, H.-M. Kan, S. Barui, M. T.
Chorsi, E. J. Curry, E. Reinhardt, H. Wang, P. Singh, M. A. Merriman,
E. D’Orio, J. Park, S. Xiao, J. H. Chapman, F. Lin, C.-S. Truong, S.
Prasadh, L. Chuba, S. Killoh, S.-W. Lee, Q. Wu, R. M. Chidambaram,
K. W. H. Lo, C. T. Laurencin, T. D. Nguyen, Nat. Commun. 2023, 14,
6257.
[7] Y. Huang, X. Wan, Q. Su, C. Zhao, J. Cao, Y. Yue, S. Li, X. Chen, J. Yin,
Y. Deng, X. Zhang, T. Wu, Z. Zhou, D. Wang, Nat. Commun. 2024, 15,
1643.
[8] B. Sui, T. Ding, X. Wan, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Cui, J. Pan, L. Li, X. Liu,
Exploration 2024, 4, 20230149.
[9] Z. Zhao, Y. Cao, R. Xu, J. Fang, Y. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Huang, R. Li, Smart
Mater. Med. 2024, 5, 291.
[10] Y. Dong, S. Dong, B. Liu, C. Yu, J. Liu, D. Yang, P. Yang, J. Lin, Adv.
Mater. 2021, 33, 2106838.
[11] Y. Zhao, S. Wang, Y. Ding, Z. Zhang, T. Huang, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, Z.
L. Wang, L. Li, ACS Nano 2022, 16, 9304.
[12] Q. T Hoang, V. Ravichandran, T. G. Nguyen Cao, J. H. Kang, Y. T. Ko,
T. I. Lee, M. S. Shim, Chem. Eng. J. 2022, 435, 135039.
[13] A. Wu, L. Jiang, C. Xia, Q. Xu, B. Zhou, Z. Jin, Q. He, J. Guo, Adv. Sci.
2023, 10, 2303016.
[14] Y. Meng, C. Wang, X. Li, L. Wang, M. Huo, Y. Chen, B. Wang, Chem.
Eng. J. 2024, 496, 153887.
[15] H. Xin, Y. Liu, Y. Xiao, M. Wen, L. Sheng, Z. Jia, Adv. Funct. Mater.
2024, 34, 2402607.
[16] J. Ma, M. Yuan, Z. Yang, Z. Ma, J. Zhang, Z. Li, P. a. Ma, Z. Cheng, J.
Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2024, 146, 22348.
[17] S. Wang, C. Chen, J. Wang, C.-B.-W. Li, J. Zhou, Y.-X. Liu, Y.-Q. Jiang, L.
Zhu, C. Li, W. Gong, W. Guo, X. Tang, F.-Z. Yao, K. Wang, Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2022, 32, 2208128.
[18] S. Lu, Z. Shi, C. Ding, W. Wang, W. Zhang, L. Huang, J. Lin, X. Wang,
R. Luo, X. Zeng, W. Zhou, H. Chen, Q. Wang, L. Mei, Biomaterials
2025, 317, 123101.
[19] H. Li, Y. Li, L. Su, K. Zheng, Y. Zhang, J. Li, F. Lv, M. Huang, T. Chen,
H. Zhang, Z. Shi, D. Zhu, X. Dong, W. Zeng, L. Mei, Adv. Sci. 2024,
11, 2308251.
[20] M. Ou, C. Lin, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, W. Wang, Z. Li, W. Zeng, X. Zeng, X. Ji,
L. Mei, J. Controlled Release 2022, 345, 755.
[21] B. Tian, R. Tian, S. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Gai, Y. Xie, D. Yang, F. He, P. Yang,
J. Lin, Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262.
[22] H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Li, M. Ou, Y. Yu, F. Zhang, H. Yin,
Z. Mao, L. Mei, Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 6783.
[23] S. Bonvalot, P. L. Rutkowski, J. Thariat, S. Carrère, A. Ducassou, M.-P.
Sunyach, P. Agoston, A. Hong, A. Mervoyer, M. Rastrelli, V. Moreno,
R. K. Li, B. Tiangco, A. C. Herraez, A. Gronchi, L. Mangel, T. Sy-Ortin,
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (17 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
P. Hohenberger, T. de Baère, A. Le Cesne, S. Helfre, E. Saada-Bouzid,
A. Borkowska, R. Anghel, A. Co, M. Gebhart, G. Kantor, A. Montero,
H. H. Loong, R. Vergés, et al., Lancet Oncol. 2019, 20, 1148.
[24] D. Liu, F. Cao, Z. Xu, C. Zhao, Z. Liu, J. Pang, Z.-X. Liu, M. Moghiseh,
A. Butler, S. Liang, W. Fan, J. Yang, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2308098.
[25] S. Zhang, Y. Lai, J. Pan, M. Saeed, S. Li, H. Zhou, X. Jiang, J. Gao, Y.
Zhu, H. Yu, W. Zhang, Z. Xu, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2314132.
[26] N. Liu, J. Zhu, W. Zhu, L. Chen, M. Li, J. Shen, M. Chen, Y. Wu, F. Pan,
Z. Deng, Y. Liu, G. Yang, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, Y. Yang, Adv. Mater. 2023,
35, 2302220.
[27] Y. Li, Y. Qi, H. Zhang, Z. Xia, T. Xie, W. Li, D. Zhong, H. Zhu, M. Zhou,
Biomaterials 2020, 226, 119538.
[28] Y. Cao, S. Ding, Y. Hu, L. Zeng, J. Zhou, L. Lin, X. Zhang, Q. Ma, R.
Cai, Y. Zhang, G. Duan, X.-w. Bian, G. Tian, ACS Nano 2024, 18, 4189.
[29] W. Fu, X. Zhang, L. Mei, R. Zhou, W. Yin, Q. Wang, Z. Gu, Y. Zhao,
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 10001.
[30] P. Y. Siboro, A. K. Sharma, P.-J. Lai, J. Jayakumar, F.-L. Mi, H.-L. Chen,
Y. Chang, H.-W. Sung, ACS Nano 2024, 18, 2485.
[31] K. P. Kelley, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, Y. Liu, S. S. Fields, S.
T. Jaszewski, T. Mimura, S. Calderon, E. C. Dickey, J. F. Ihlefeld, S. V.
Kalinin, Nat. Mater. 2023, 22, 1144.
[32] H. Cheng, P. Jiao, J. Wang, M. Qing, Y. Deng, J.-M. Liu, L. Bellaiche,
D. Wu, Y. Yang, Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 394.
[33] H. Jing, C. Guan, H. Zhu, npj Comput. Mater. 2024, 10, 160.
[34] R. K. S. Malireddi, S. Kesavardhana, T.-D. Kanneganti, Front. Cell. In-
fect. Microbiol. 2019, 9, 406.
[35] P. Zhu, Z.-R. Ke, J.-X. Chen, S.-J. Li, T.-L. Ma, X.-L. Fan, Front. Immunol.
2023, 14, 1120034.
[36] L. Zhou, J. Lyu, F. Liu, Y. Su, L. Feng, X. Zhang, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36,
2305361.
[37] J. Gao, A. Xiong, J. Liu, X. Li, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Xiong, G. Li,
X. He, Cancer Gene Ther. 2024, 31, 970.
[38] S. Lee, R. Karki, Y. Wang, L. N. Nguyen, R. C. Kalathur, T.-D.
Kanneganti, Nature 2021, 597, 415.
[39] L. Liu, Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Chen, Z. Yang, K.-H. Xue, M. Xu, H. Chen, P.
Zhou, X. Miao, Adv. Sci. 2021, 8, 2005038.
[40] Y. Wen, J. Chen, X. Gao, W. Liu, H. Che, B. Liu, Y. Ao, Nano Energy
2023, 107, 108173.
[41] C. Fu, H. Zhou, L. Tan, Z. Huang, Q. Wu, X. Ren, J. Ren, X. Meng, ACS
Nano 2018, 12, 2201.
[42] Y. Sun, X. Cai, Y. Lai, C. Hu, L. Lyu, Adv. Sci. 2024, 11, e2308519.
[43] D. Zu, Y. Ying, Q. Wei, P. Xiong, M. S. Ahmed, Z. Lin, M. M.-J. Li,
M. Li, Z. Xu, G. Chen, L. Bai, S. She, Y. H. Tsang, H. Huang, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2024, 63, e202405756.
[44] L. Guo, Z. Ding, J. Hu, S. Liu, ACS Nano 2024, 18, 26369.
[45] X. Wu, Y. Li, M. Wen, Y. Xie, K. Zeng, Y.-N. Liu, W. Chen, Y. Zhao, Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2024, 53, 2643.
[46] J. Zou, M. Song, X. Zhou, W. Chi, T. Wei, K. Zhou, D. Zhang, S. Zhang,
Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 8591.
[47] R. Su, J. Zhang, V. Wong, D. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z.-D. Luo, X. Wang, H.
Wen, Y. Liu, J. Seidel, X. Yang, Y. Pan, F.-t. Li, Adv. Mater. 2023, 35,
2303018.
[48] F. Xu, K. Meng, B. Cheng, S. Wang, J. Xu, J. Yu, Nat. Commun. 2020,
11, 4613.
[49] X. Pan, Z. Huang, J. Guo, Q. Wu, C. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, H.
Liu, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2400142.
[50] Y. Du, X. Zhao, F. He, H. Gong, J. Yang, L. Wu, X. Cui, S. Gai, P. Yang,
J. Lin, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2403253.
[51] C. Glorieux, S. Liu, D. Trachootham, P. Huang, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov-
ery 2024, 23, 583.
[52] Y. Yang, J. Zhou, Z. Zhao, G. Sun, S. Moniri, C. Ophus, Y. Yang, Z. Wei,
Y. Yuan, C. Zhu, Y. Liu, Q. Sun, Q. Jia, H. Heinz, J. Ciston, P. Ercius,
P. Sautet, Y. Huang, J. Miao, Nat. Catal. 2024, 7, 796.
[53] Z. Luo, X. Ye, S. Zhang, S. Xue, C. Yang, Y. Hou, W. Xing, R. Yu, J. Sun,
Z. Yu, X. Wang, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 2230.
[54] Z. Dong, M. Huo, J. Li, J. Li, P. Li, H. Sun, L. Gu, Y. Lu, M. Wang, Y.
Wang, Z. Chen, Nature 2024, 630, 847.
[55] K. Zhu, F. Shi, X. Zhu, W. Yang, Nano Energy 2020, 73, 104761.
[56] J. Zhang, Y. Yang, F. Qin, T. Hu, X. Zhao, S. Zhao, Y. Cao, Z. Gao,
Z. Zhou, R. Liang, C. Tan, Y. Qin, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2023, 12,
2302056.
[57] B. Zhao, L. Zeng, D. Chen, S. Xie, Z. Jin, G. Li, W. Tang, Q. He, Sci.
Adv. 2022, 8, eabq0959.
[58] L. Liu, H. Lei, G. Hou, L. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Lu, Z. Pei, J. Ge, J. Wu, J.
Zhou, L. Cheng, ACS Nano 2024, 18, 12830.
[59] L. Du, L. Lin, Q. Li, K. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Wang, K. Cao, X. Chen,
W. Cao, F. Li, C. Shao, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, Cell Metab. 2019, 29,
1363.
[60] J. F. Lin, P. S. Hu, Y. Y. Wang, Y. T. Tan, K. Yu, K. Liao, Q. N. Wu, T. Li,
Q. Meng, J. Z. Lin, Z. X. Liu, H. Y. Pu, H. Q. Ju, R. H. Xu, M. Z. Qiu,
Signal Transduction Targeted Ther. 2022, 7, 54.
[61] X. Meng, Z. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Li, Z. Ran, Y. Zhu, J. Fu, Y. He, Y. Hao, Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2024, 34, 2305915.
[62] B. Yang, G. Li, S. Wang, Y. Zheng, J. Zhang, B. Pan, N. Wang, Z. Wang,
Cell Death Dis. 2024, 15, 743.
[63] C. Yin, B. Liu, Z. Dong, S. Shi, C. Peng, Y. Pan, X. Bi, H. Nie, Y. Zhang,
Y. Tai, Q. Hu, X. Wang, X. Shao, H. An, J. Fang, C. Wang, B. Liu, Nat.
Commun. 2024, 15, 3263.
[64] R. Q. Li, L. Yan, L. Zhang, Y. Zhao, J. Lian, Sci. Rep. 2024, 14, 8125.
[65] Q. Zhang, T. Sun, F. Yu, W. Liu, J. Gao, J. Chen, H. Zheng, J. Liu, C.
Miao, H. Guo, W. Tian, M. Su, Y. Guo, X. Liu, Y. Pei, Z. Wang, S. Chen,
C. Mu, S. M. Lam, G. Shui, Z. Li, Z. Yu, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, C. Lu, A. C.
Midgley, C. Li, X. Bian, X. Liao, Y. Wang, et al., Nat. Chem. Biol. 2024,
20, 835.
[66] P. Li, D. Li, Y. Lu, S. Pan, F. Cheng, S. Li, X. Zhang, J. Huo, D. Liu, Z.
Liu, Front. Immunol. 2024, 15, 1457230.
[67] D.-H. Kim, H.-I. Choi, J. S. Park, C. S. Kim, E. H. Bae, S. K. Ma, S. W.
Kim, Redox Biol. 2022, 54, 102382.
[68] Y. Deng, J. Gao, G. Xu, Y. Yao, Y. Sun, Y. Shi, X. Hao, L. Niu, H. Li,
Cancer Lett. 2022, 549, 215911.
[69] U. Gupta, S. Ghosh, C. T. Wallace, P. Shang, Y. Xin, A. P. Nair, M.
Yazdankhah, A. Strizhakova, M. A. Ross, H. Liu, S. Hose, N. A.
Stepicheva, O. Chowdhury, M. Nemani, V. Maddipatla, R. Grebe, M.
Das, K. L. Lathrop, J.-A. Sahel, J. S. Zigler jr., J. Qian, A. Ghosh, Y.
Sergeev, J. T. Handa, C. M. St Croix, D. Sinha, Autophagy 2023, 19,
92.
[70] B.-K. Jung, Y. Park, B. Yoon, J.-S. Bae, S.-W. Han, J.-E. Heo, D.-E. Kim,
K.-Y. Ryu, Autophagy 2023, 19, 2296.
[71] L. Wang, P. Ji, J. Yu, S. Qiu, B. An, M. Huo, J. Shi, Sci. Adv. 2024, 10,
eadp7540.
[72] N. Kondo, Y. Mimori-Kiyosue, K. Tokuhiro, G. Pezzotti, T. Kinashi,
Nat. Commun. 2025, 16, 1343.
[73] X. Hu, Y. He, Z. Han, W. Liu, D. Liu, X. Zhang, L. Chen, L. Qi, L. Chen,
Y. Luo, Q. Li, P. Chen, Q. Wu, X. Zhu, H. Guo, Cell Death Dis. 2022,
13, 1010.
[74] T. Yoshimura, C. Li, Y. Wang, A. Matsukawa, Cell Mol. Immunol. 2023,
20, 714.
[75] E. Landy, H. Carol, A. Ring, S. Canna, Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 2024, 20,
33.
[76] I. Malenica, J. Adam, S. Corgnac, L. Mezquita, E. Auclin, I.
Damei, L. Grynszpan, G. Gros, V. de Montpréville, D. Planchard,
N. Théret, B. Besse, F. Mami-Chouaib, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12,
5209.
[77] B. G. Nixon, S. Gao, X. Wang, M. O. Li, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2023, 23,
346.
[78] K. A. Deets, R. E. Vance, Nat. Immunol. 2021, 22, 412.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, 2500406
2500406 (18 of 18)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 17, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500406 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License