Metal/metal oxide nanoparticles with antibacterial activity and their 
potential to disrupt bacterial biofilms: Recent advances with emphasis on 
the underlying mechanisms
Alla N. Generalova a,b,*, Anastasia O. Dushina a,b
a Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 117997, Russia
b National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (Moscow Engineering Physics Institute), Moscow 115405, Russia
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Metal/metal oxide nanoparticles
Bacterial cell wall
Antibacterial activity
Oxidative stress
Reactive oxygen species
Bacterial biofilm disruption
A B S T R A C T
The rate of human mortality from infectious diseases caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria is a major public 
concern. Currently, the search for new strategies to treat infections and overcome antimicrobial resistance is a 
challenge. Nanoparticles (NPs) offer an alternative approach to biocide design that involves antibacterial 
mechanisms other than antibiotics. The attention is primarily attracted due to the large surface area, diverse 
physical and chemical properties, variety of precursor materials, and the ability to form hybrid structures. Of 
particular interest are metal and metal oxide NPs that can survive in harsh conditions without losing their 
colloidal stability. They provide long-term antibacterial activity and can destroy bacterial biofilms. This review 
summarizes and discusses recent progress in understanding the antibacterial mechanisms of metal/metal oxide 
NPs, highlighting three key aspects: physical interaction with the cell wall, release of metal ions, and the gen­
eration of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Unlike antibiotics with a single mode of action, NPs can simultaneously 
exhibit multiple mechanisms with a synergistic effect. This leads to the destruction of cell membranes, damage to 
DNAs and proteins, inactivation of enzymes, oxidation of cellular components, and ultimately, cell death. The 
activity of NPs against bacterial biofilms is also considered. In addition, this review focuses on the current state of 
the most widely used metal-containing NPs with a comprehensive discussion of the specific mechanisms for each 
type (Ag, Au, Cu/CuO, TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3/Fe3O4). Finally, the review discusses approaches to enhancing the 
biocidal efficacy of NPs through modification and composite formation, as well as the use of light and magnetic 
field.
1. Introduction
Bacterial infections are estimated to be responsible for approxi­
mately one third of all deaths worldwide [1]. Bacteria are found 
everywhere, and some of them can be beneficial, such as those in human 
digestive systems. However, many bacteria can cause chronic infections 
and become resistant to treatment, which is a significant concern. The 
prevention and treatment of bacterial infections is a constant challenge, 
as the doses of infection are relatively low, but the diversity of dangerous 
pathogens is high. The development of antibiotics, which have been 
utilized to treat harmful bacterial infections since the 1940s, opened a 
new era of vital fight against bacteria. Most antibiotics currently in use 
are organic in nature, as they were originally produced by various mi­
croorganisms, primarily fungi, to fight their competitors. They have 
effectively reduced the level of morbidity and mortality in medicine and 
made modern medical procedures and surgeries possible [2]. Antibiotics 
can be divided into two main categories: bacteriostatic and bactericidal. 
Bacteriostatic antibiotics prevent bacteria from growing, while bacte­
ricidal antibiotics kill bacteria. However, the actual therapeutic effect of 
antibiotics depends largely on their concentration, since they need to 
enter the bacterial cell and accumulate until they reach a sufficient level 
for treatment. This process is associated with bacterial membrane 
structure, which determines the classification of bacteria into Gram- 
negative and Gram-positive [3].
Due to recurrent infections, microorganisms have developed resis­
tance to antibiotics as a result of genetic changes, caused by either 
inappropriate or excessive use of drugs and antimicrobial agents. This 
has a significant impact on the public health system, making it difficult 
* Corresponding author at: Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 117997, Russia.
E-mail addresses: a-generalova@yandex.ru, angeneralova@gmail.com (A.N. Generalova). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cis
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2025.103626
Received in revised form 4 August 2025;   
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
Available online 6 August 2025 
0001-8686/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

to treat infections [4]. Typically, antibiotics affect bacterial cell wall 
synthesis, translation, and DNA replication, and help prevent or elimi­
nate biofilm formation [5]. However, bacteria continuously mutate 
causing resistance to antibiotics, employing multiple mechanisms. For 
example, bacteria produce enzymes that can alter antibiotics, change 
efflux pumps that remove drugs from the cells, bind to target sites, and 
affect drug entry ports [6]. This allows bacteria to gather, followed by 
the formation of biofilms. Approximately 60 % of chronic infections are 
estimated to be associated with biofilms, which are aggregates of bac­
teria embedded in a self-produced, extracellular polymeric substances 
(EPS) and adhered to surface of living or inanimate objects [7]. The 
biofilm resistance to antibacterial agents can be 1000 times higher than 
that of free-floating (planktonic) cells [8]. This requires the develop­
ment of innovative antimicrobial strategies that can suppress antimi­
crobial resistance.
Nanotechnology offers alternative approaches for creating new 
antimicrobial agents that do not rely on existing antibiotic mechanisms 
[9]. In this search, scientists around the world have focused on the study 
of nanomaterials in order to test their antimicrobial activity and their 
potential for treating various diseases. NPs are widely used in biomed­
ical research for various purposes, including drug delivery, labeling and 
targeting specific areas, therapy, detection of biospecific reactions, etc. 
This relies on NP peculiar properties, such as large surface area, wide 
variety of precursors, diverse particle sizes and shapes with narrow sized 
distribution, specific morphology, functionality, as well as the ability to 
attach biologically active molecules and form hybrid structure [10]. NPs 
of about 1–10 nm in size have been shown to have outstanding anti­
microbial activity due to their higher contact area with bacteria 
compared to antibiotics. These NPs have the ability to exhibit high 
antimicrobial activity, even at very low concentrations [11].
Metals and metal oxides have attracted a lot of attention as antimi­
crobial agents since they can survive harsh environments, retain anti­
bacterial activity, and maintain stability. This contrasts with organic 
antimicrobial compounds, which often lack these properties [5,12]. The 
metal-based disinfectants/drugs have long history, for example: silver 
has been used to treat infections since the days of Egyptian civilizations 
and ancient Greece; colloidal silver has been in use since 1909 [13], 
copper materials have been utilized since 2200 BC to produce drink and 
food vessels, preventing spoilage [14]; ZnO has been approved by FDA 
since 1977 for external application in drugs and cosmetics. Among 
antimicrobial nanomaterials, the metal-containing NPs have shown the 
ability to make a significant impact on patient treatment and care, and 
have been subject to extensive research [5,9,15,16].
The antibacterial effect of metal-containing NPs is the result of the 
combined action of their key physicochemical properties, manifesting in 
some cases synergistic action [17]. These NPs may simultaneously 
disrupt both cell walls and intracellular targets via physical interactions, 
ion release and ROS generation [18]. Similar to antibiotics, metal-based 
NPs have different actions on prokaryotic (e.g. bacterial) and eukaryotic 
(e.g. mammalian) cells. This is associated with the fact that the bacteria 
have a rigid cell wall and lack the internalization mechanisms necessary 
for colloidal particle uptake. Thus, the action of metal-based NPs on 
bacterial cells is mainly limited to the effects on or near the cell surface. 
In contrast, most eukaryotic cells have highly developed molecular 
mechanisms for the internalization of NPs [9]. In addition, NPs were 
shown to be promising delivery vehicles for modern antibiotics, 
providing improved drug stability, controlled drug release profile, and 
increased target specificity [19,20].
In this review, we discuss the potential of metal and metal oxide NPs 
as antimicrobial agents. The detailed literature assessment enables us to 
introduce the mechanism behind their activity and analyze their effects 
on both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. The great potential 
of NPs to disrupt bacterial biofilms is demonstrated. The peculiar 
properties of metal and metal oxide NPs, emphasizing their activity 
against bacteria and biofilms, are shown through the examples of NPs: 
Ag, Au, Cu/CuO, TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3/Fe3O4, including those synthesized 
using “green” chemistry. The review outlines the main trends for 
improving NP characteristics and enhancing their antimicrobial activity, 
in particular, through modification and creation of composites. Thus, 
this review focuses on the current state of the most widely used metal- 
containing NPs with a comprehensive examination of the specific anti­
bacterial mechanisms for each NP type, which, to the best of our 
knowledge, are not found in literature.
2. Antimicrobial activities of NPs
2.1. Bacterial cell wall structure
The knowledge of the molecular principles behind bacterial resis­
tance can help to develop metal-based NPs with high antibacterial ac­
tivity. The bacterial surface plays a crucial role in determining the initial 
interactions with NPs and the subsequent manifestation of their anti­
bacterial activity. Most bacteria can be divided into two main groups, 
which differ in their cell wall structures: Gram-positive or Gram- 
negative. In addition to a cytoplasmic membrane, Gram-positive bac­
teria have a thick layer of peptidoglycan in their cell walls, in contrast to 
Gram-negative bacteria, which have a thin peptidoglycan layer, and an 
additional outer membrane composed of lipopolysaccharides (LPSs). 
Moreover, Gram-negative bacteria have an additional membrane layer 
called the periplasm, which is located between the outer layer and the 
plasma membrane (Fig. 1) [21,22].
Bacteria exploit various intrinsic strategies to avoid the effects of 
antimicrobial agents. LPSs are considered to be endotoxins and act as the 
first line of defense against “harmful” chemicals, such as antibiotics. In 
addition, antibiotic resistance may occur due to a reduced permeability 
of the outer membrane to hydrophilic antibiotics. This occurs mainly by 
regulating the number of porins present in the bacterial outer membrane 
and/or replacing them with porins of lower permeability [23]. Another 
important intrinsic mechanism that reduces antibiotic uptake is the 
presence of efflux pumps in bacterial outer membranes. These pumps 
serve as active transporters in cells, moving “harmful” materials out of 
the cell [24]. As a result, only a limited number of antibiotics can 
penetrate the bacterial membrane without losing their activity.
The acquired resistance mechanism involves mutations in genes that 
are commonly targeted by antibiotics. This resistance develops in bac­
teria after antibiotic treatment and can be achieved through: i) direct 
transformation of antibiotics, for example, by hydrolyzing them and 
preventing their binding to the target site), [25] ii) acquisition of foreign 
genetic material through gene transfer, [26] or iii) modification of target 
sites to prevent antibiotic recognition [27]. Today, the search for al­
ternatives to antibiotics whose action relies on mechanisms that are 
principally different from those of existing antibiotics is crucial [9]. NPs 
are of great interest as potential antimicrobial agents. The dimensions of 
NPs, which are larger than molecules but smaller than bacteria, along 
with their large surface-to-volume ratio, and consequently, the large 
number of surface molecules/atoms underlies the strong interaction 
with bacteria and biofilms. In addition, the physical and chemical 
properties, the ability to dissociate in response to environmental stimuli, 
surface charge, effective longevity, and durability all contribute to tar­
geted and prolonged antibacterial activity at low dosages [11]. Besides, 
NPs with antibacterial activity are believed to be promising in reducing 
or eliminating the progression of resistant bacteria. This is because NPs 
can target multiple bacterial biomolecules simultaneously, preventing 
the development of resistance, while conventional antibiotics typically 
attack bacteria through a single mechanism [28].
2.2. Mechanism of NP antibacterial activity
The action of NPs depends on their composition, surface modifica­
tion, intrinsic properties, and the type of targeted microorganism. Fig. 2
summarizes all potential factors leading to the antimicrobial effects of 
metal and metal oxide NPs.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
2 

Although the exact mechanism of metal-based NP action is not fully 
understood, general routes and multiple simultaneous antimicrobial 
activities can be achieved through the following basic mechanisms, 
schematically represented in Fig. 3: 
- bacterial cell wall disruption due to the physical-chemical properties 
of NP structures; [29];
- release of free metal ions from NP surface [30,31];
- inducing the oxidative stress by ROS generation inside or outside the 
cell [32,33].
These mechanisms will be discussed in more detail below.
2.2.1. Bacterial cell wall disruption due to the physical-chemical properties 
of NPs
Previous studies have suggested that the primary antibacterial 
mechanism of NPs is associated with the ion release, while NP-specific 
activity is negligible. To date, there are reports on NP interaction with 
bacterial cells via several pathways implying NP activity. These studies 
highlight the importance of NP physicochemical properties, such as their 
composition, size, shape, charge, surface properties, etc. (Fig. 3) 
[30,34,35].
The bacterial cell wall gives bacteria a unique shape, protects them 
from outside influences, maintains the stability of the internal envi­
ronment, ensures the transport of nutrients and the release of metabo­
lites, as well as contains specific receptors. The disruption of the 
synthesis of cell wall components in bacteria can lead to their death. Cell 
walls are the first barrier against any external harmful substances, e.g. 
oxidative molecules. Metal-based NPs can damage the cell membrane 
integrity and affect its function by electrostatically binding to the cell 
wall, as well as by releasing metal ions and/or ROS [36].
The cell wall destruction is likely caused by NP adsorption, some­
times followed by penetration into the cell, and is considered to be the 
main mechanism of NP toxicity. Adsorption of NPs leads to cell wall 
depolarization, where the typically negative charge of the cell wall 
Fig. 1. Comparison of bacterial cell wall structure of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
Fig. 2. Properties of metal/metal oxide NPs responsible for their antibacterial 
activities: Release of metal ions (Mn+) from NPs. This process can occur both 
outside and inside cells. Physical and structural specific NP properties, such as 
surface and crystal defects, surface morphology, shape, size, etc., which lead to 
ROS formation, cause lipid peroxidation and protein denaturation, resulting in 
membrane damage and subsequent failure of intracellular components. The 
activation of NPs by external stimuli, such as UV irradiation, leads to the for­
mation of ROS, which then react with biological molecules within cells.
Fig. 3. Schematic illustration of main pathways of antibacterial activity of metal/metal oxide NPs.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
3 

becomes less negative, making NP penetration easier [37–39]. In addi­
tion, NPs also contribute to the formation of the irregular “pits” on the 
cell wall [40], which facilitate the entry of ions into the cell and 
complicate transport regulation. The size is crucial for antibacterial 
activity, as small NPs are able to penetrate the microbial cell walls, 
causing irreversible damage to these membranes and DNA [29].
At present, there is no consensus on which type of bacteria is most 
susceptible to the effects of NP attachment. Despite the diversity of 
factors influencing it, the desire to understand how each type of bacteria 
responds to the NP action is of considerable interest. To date, there are 
reports in the literature demonstrating that Gram-positive bacteria are 
more susceptible to NP action [41,42]. However, numerous studies have 
shown greater resistance of Gram-positive bacteria when exposure to 
NPs. It is believed to be linked to the thickness of the bacterial cell walls 
[43,44]. For example, the Gram-negative bacteria, such as Escherichia 
coli, are covered with layers of LPSs of ~1–3 μm thick and peptidogly­
cans of ~8 nm thick. Such a structure may allow the penetration of ions 
released from NPs into the cell. Gram-positive bacteria, such as Staph­
ylococcus aureus, have a peptidoglycan layer that is much thicker than 
the layer in Gram-negative bacteria. This peptidoglycan is ~80 nm thick 
and contains covalently bound teichoic and teichuronic acids. The thick 
peptidoglycan layer in the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria probably 
can protect them from damage caused by physical interaction with NPs. 
Such interaction can be more harmful to Gram-negative bacteria [28].
The once more possible cause for higher sensitivity of Gram-negative 
bacteria to NPs is the outer negatively charged LPS membrane. Both 
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria have a negatively charged 
cell wall, which is hypothesized to affect the interactions between the 
cell walls and NPs or their released ions. Membrane has a higher affinity 
for the positive ions, which most NPs can release. This results in the 
accumulation and increased uptake of these ions, causing intracellular 
damage. Studies on Gram-negative bacteria, such as Salmonella typhi­
murium, have shown that their cell wall contains anionic surface do­
mains rather than a continuous layer [45]. Therefore, the ability to bind 
a large number of NPs to these negatively charged domains may increase 
their focal toxicity due to the relatively high concentration of NPs in 
these areas. In addition, combined electrophoretic mobility studies and 
mathematical calculations showed that E. coli has a higher negative 
charge and is more rigid than S. aureus [46]. In this connection, the 
charge of the NPs is another important factor in antibacterial activity. 
Positively charged NPs have been shown to be more effective, as they 
can promote enhanced toxicity due to electrostatic interaction with the 
negatively charged bacterial cell wall. This facilitates the cell membrane 
damage, leading to increased antimicrobial activity [30,47].
In addition, the interactions with metal-based NPs can disrupt the 
membrane and cause increased oxidative stress, which damages bacte­
rial proteins. It was found that bacterial cells were lysed after treatment 
with NPs (e.g. AgNPs). This was accompanied by the separation of the 
cell membrane from the internal cellular environment and the accu­
mulation of intracellular components around the lysed cells [37,38]. 
Due to the breakdown of the cell barrier, a large amount of water with 
ions from the cytoplasm is released. In order to compensate for this 
damage, cells use the bacterial efflux pumps and electron transport 
systems. However, a high concentration of lost ions can cause serious 
damage to these membrane systems [48]. Overall, this imbalance of ions 
and membrane stability leads to impaired respiration, interruption of 
energy transfer, and ultimately cell death [49]. This phenomenon was 
observed during the interaction of silver, gold, zinc oxide, magnesium 
oxide, and titanium oxide NPs.
Note that, in addition to the most common spherical shape of metal- 
containing NPs, there are other shapes such as sheets, plates, tubes, 
cubes, rods, etc. Nanocubes and nanorods appear to be more effective 
biocides than NPs with other shapes, perhaps due to the exposed planes 
and the oxidation states of the metal. The enhanced toxicity of NPs is 
believed to be associated with the presence of corners, edges, and de­
fects, which result in an increased surface area, facilitating the 
adsorption and binding of compounds [50]. Additionally, the increased 
amount of surface defects raises the surface-to-volume ratio, directly 
increasing ROS generation [28]. Physical deformations of NPs also lead 
to mechanical damage [51].
Of particular note is the fact that NP interactions with the cell wall 
may have a significant contribution to their toxicity, even though they 
do not penetrate the cell. Several studies reported that NPs can destroy 
bacteria without penetrating the cell wall, but by aggregating on the cell 
surface or within the periplasmic space [28,47]. The aggregation can 
lead to cell wall damage, changing the smoothness and thickness of the 
cell. Extracellular NP aggregation has been observed due to either direct 
NP aggregation or NP aggregation after adsorption onto the cell surface 
[47,52].
On the other hand, NP aggregation with each other can be a serious 
problem, preventing NP interaction with the bacterial cell wall and 
reducing the toxic effect. [9]. Therefore, the NP colloidal stability in 
dispersion medium is a prerequisite, and the zeta potential of NPs helps 
to predict their behavior. A stable NP dispersion is considered to have a 
NP zeta potential ~30 mV in absolute value [53]. To maintain the 
required zeta potential, capping agents are usually utilized, which are 
also responsible for NP surface morphology [54].
2.2.2. Release of free metal ions from NPs
The antibacterial activity of NPs is also attributed to the release of 
ions. This mechanism is considered to be predominant, since bacteria 
have rigid cell walls, which makes it difficult to adsorb supramolecular 
and colloidal particles. The toxicity of metal ions appears mainly due to 
their interaction with thiol groups in membrane and cytosolic proteins 
and enzymes in microorganisms, thereby inhibiting their essential bio­
logical functions [55]. Metal ions can also cause DNA damage due to 
their high affinity for phosphates in the DNA molecule. This leads to 
mutation or death of the microorganism (Fig. 3) [9,56].
The electrochemical potential in the Meo/Men+ pair in aqueous so­
lutions is the driving force behind the permanent ion leakage from NPs. 
Metal ions can penetrate through the cell membrane and interact with 
both its components and internal macromolecules, such as proteins and 
DNA [57]. Significant antibacterial effect of metal-based NPs has been 
shown to be related to the release of ions from NPs, although other 
mentioned mechanisms may also be involved [30,31]. Toxicity depends 
largely on NP concentration, the increase of which over time leads to the 
release of more toxic ions. It correlates with the results of higher cell 
death during longer exposure to NPs [57].
Free metal ions (e.g. in the form of saline) added to the bacterial 
cultures are usually distributed throughout the medium without any 
specific localization. In contrast, NPs interact with the bacterial cell wall 
through focal uptake, providing continuous release of ions. As a result, 
ion leakage from NPs occurs near the cell membrane, depending on the 
size and shape of the NPs. This drives a stronger toxic effect due to the 
high concentration of released ions, which can enter the cells [31]. The 
effect of shape has been discussed above. The relatively higher surface 
area of smaller NPs compared to larger NPs results in faster dissolution 
and higher generation of ROS, which can damage and inactivate 
essential biomolecules, including DNA, proteins, and lipids [58]. 
Furthermore, a high surface area implies an increase in the number of 
atoms or molecules on the NP surface rather than in its bulk. This could 
potentially enhance the antimicrobial effects [59].
In addition to size and shape, other factors can also affect ion 
leakage. These include the environment, bacterial defense mechanisms, 
and the physicochemical properties of NPs [30]. It is also worth noting 
that the final dissolution of each NP type depends on the specific con­
ditions used in the experiment. For example, the solubility of ZnONPs in 
culture media (e.g. LB and Minimal Davis (MD) media) has been 
demonstrated to be higher, than in saline, water or PBS [30]. This is 
likely due to the formation of precipitates (Zn3(PO4)2 in PBS) in contrast 
to labile zinc complexes (with citrate and amino acids in MD and LB, 
respectively), which significantly decreased the concentration of Zn2+
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
4 

ions, leading to a lower antimicrobial activity in these media. The same 
effect was also observed for NPs in the presence of proteins [60]. 
Additionally, the other factors, e.g. surface functional groups [61], pH, 
ionic strength, concentration of dissolved oxygen, temperature, the 
presence of organic [9] and inorganic compounds [62] can affect the 
release of NP ions. Therefore, metal-based NPs in aqueous dispersions 
should be considered as a dynamic system capable of ion leakage, which 
depends on the physicochemical properties of NPs and the bacterial 
culture medium.
2.2.3. Inducing oxidative stress by ROS generation inside or outside the cell
The diversity in the chemical composition of NPs and their ability to 
exhibit oxidative properties with the ability to participate in redox re­
actions, make it possible to cause oxidative stress. This underlies another 
important mechanism of NP antimicrobial activity [34]. Oxidative stress 
is currently considered as a condition, in which there is an imbalance 
between the production of oxidants and the presence of antioxidants. 
This imbalance can disrupt the redox signaling and control processes 
within cells, causing molecular damage [63]. Highly reactive oxidants, 
known as ROS, are produced during basic metabolic processes. These 
oxidants can damage important biomolecules within cells, for example 
through lipid peroxidation, alteration of proteins, inhibition of enzymes, 
and RNA/DNA damage. ROS can both promote and prevent cell death, 
cancer, ageing and inflammation [48]. Intracellular mechanisms are 
activated to prevent cell damage. Oxidative stress in a cell can increase 
ROS production to a level that is harmful to the cell. Notably, metal- 
based NPs are significant oxidants, and ROS generation was hypothe­
sized to be one of the important mechanisms by which NPs inhibit 
bacterial growth (Fig. 3) [34].
ROS are formed when oxygen enters undesirable reduced states and 
is converted into superoxide anion radical (O2
-•), hydrogen peroxide 
(H2O2), hydroxyl radical (HO•), peroxyl radical (ROO•), singlet oxygen 
(1O2) and also organic peroxides (ROOH) [64]. Each species has mark­
edly different chemical and biological actions. The antioxidant system 
consists of enzymes and small molecules, such as superoxide dismutase 
(SOD), catalase (CAT), enzymes glutathione peroxidase (GPx), thio­
redoxins, etc., which help to maintain ROS concentration at physiolog­
ical levels [48]. Exposure to NPs can increase the production of oxidants 
by suppressing the ability of the antioxidant system to deal with them, 
leading to oxidative stress [65]. ROS are less likely to cause bacterial 
resistance than conventional antibiotics, as they can irreversibly damage 
vital cell components through multiple mechanisms. The antimicrobial 
activity of ROS produced by NPs has been shown to be diverse, with 
different effects exhibited either individually or in combination. They 
include ROS generation inside or outside the cell, disruption of cell 
membrane integrity by ROS species, and ROS generation by metal ions 
released from NPs outside the cell or after NP internalization [66]. 
Enzyme-like catalytic activity and photodynamic activity are the main 
mechanisms responsible for generating ROS at the NP exposure.
Enzyme-like catalytic activity caused by metal-based NPs leads to an 
increase in the ROS generation in a bacterial cell, triggering the tran­
scription of genes involved in defending the cell against ROS [67]. It 
should be noted that ROS, as a result of NP activity, lead to distortion in 
the production and recycling of ATP in bacteria [68]. This catalytic 
behavior is driven by the oxidase and peroxidase activities of ions during 
partial NP dissolution, which generate ROS without the need for light or 
ultrasound excitation. In addition, both metal ions and particles con­
sisting of metals in their neutral state contribute to ROS generation.
NPs (capable of releasing metal ions) with peroxidase-like activities 
can catalyze the decomposition of H2O2 into HO•, which is the most 
reactive form of oxygen-derived free radicals [69]. HO• can rapidly 
oxidize carbohydrates, proteins, phospholipids, DNA, and small organic 
molecules and can primarily lead to enzyme inactivation. This enhances 
antibacterial efficacy, which is also associated with a decrease in H2O2 
concentration required for bacterial homeostasis. Most released metal 
ions demonstrate free radical-mediated toxicity via the Haber–Weiss 
reaction (see section 3.6), where O2
-• reacts with H2O2 in the presence of 
transition metal ions, such as iron or copper, producing HO•. In addition, 
the metal ions in reduced state can react with H2O2 and form HO•
through Fenton reaction (see section 3.6) [70]. The redox potential of 
Men+1/ Men+
, specific for each NP types, is an important thermodynamic 
characteristic that governs the ROS generation [34].
NPs (capable of releasing metal ions) with oxidase-like activities can 
oxidize organic molecules followed by various ROS production even in 
the absence of oxidizing agents, such as H2O2. There are metal/metal 
oxide-based NPs, for example NPs with cerium ions, mimicking prop­
erties of antioxidant enzymes, such as SOD and CAT. The redox state of 
Ce atoms on NP surface can modulate the NP reactivity to the biologi­
cally significant ROS and oxidize various substrates at an acidic pH 
without any oxidizing agent. At the same time, it exhibits antioxidant 
activity at a physiological pH value [71,72].
Recent studies also focus on the antimicrobial activity of NPs 
composed of metals in a neutral state, which is associated with the ROS 
formation in the presence of dissolved oxygen in solution [9]. Thus, NPs 
can directly damage bacteria through catalytic ROS generation without 
the presence of ions. Increased production of ROS primarily counteracts 
the antioxidant defense of cells and can exceed its capabilities [67]. ROS 
can disrupt and even penetrate cell membranes, damaging various 
intracellular components. The effect of ROS can be manifested by lipid 
oxidation [5]. Note that, in the case of Gram-positive bacteria, signifi­
cant lipid damage was not observed probably due to the protection 
provided by thicker cell wall structure. In addition, some ROS, such as 
OH anion-radicals, are unable to penetrate the negatively charged cell 
membrane due to their negative charge. However, uncharged H2O2 can 
permeates the cell membrane and cause bacterial death [73]. In this 
context the role of capping agents of NPs is crucial. They are used either 
as a stabilizer, or a transfer agent to facilitate aqueous dispersion, or an 
agent for functionalization. n [28]. More information about NP capping 
agents can be found in section 4.
Another mechanism for ROS generation that can effectively elimi­
nate bacterial growth is photodynamic inactivation, which uses light 
irradiation of NPs (Fig. 4) [66]. The role of NPs in photodynamic therapy 
is similar to that of photosensitizers. Photosensitizers are typically 
activated by visible or ultraviolet light and undergo a transition from the 
ground state to a short-lived, single excited state. They then enter a 
triplet excited state and react with surrounding substrates via electron 
transfer or hydrogen abstraction to form free radicals or ion-radicals. 
This pathway is known as the Type I mechanism and occurs mainly in 
the membranes of bacterial cells. It involves the abstraction of hydrogen 
from unsaturated phospholipids, which then react with oxygen to form 
lipid peroxides. This destroys the integrity of the cell membrane, 
allowing more ions to penetrate. The Type II mechanism is based on ROS 
generation via the excitation of ground (triplet) state oxygen to an 
excited singlet state (singlet oxygen 1O2) via energy transfer from 
excited photosensitizer. 1O2 can oxidatively damage important cellular 
precursors or products including membrane components, proteins, and 
DNA, demonstrating high antimicrobial cell activity [74,75].
NPs can act as photosensitizers themselves or as carriers for photo­
sensitizers, providing easy binding, efficient penetration, cellular 
Fig. 4. Schematic illustration of the Type I and Type II pathways for ROS 
generation upon light irradiation of NPs.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
5 

uptake, and a high level of ROS production. This avoids the aggregation 
of the photosensitizing agent and provides the controlled release [66]. 
Over the past decade, the mechanism of antibacterial photodynamic 
therapy (APDT) against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria 
using various NPs have been actively studied. However, only a few 
studies have specifically focused on identifying the ROS involved, and 
there is no consensus on which mechanism is the most effective: Type I 
including OH• or Type II related to1O2 [74,75].
2.3. Antibiofilm activity of NPs
In addition to antibiotic resistance, bacteria can form spatially 
organized structures called biofilms that enhance their survival [76]. 
With increasing concern about resistant bacterial strains and infections 
associated with biofilms, there is an urgent need for an effective, long- 
term antibacterial treatment and prevention of biofilm formation. This 
requires new alternative antimicrobial strategies or unconventional 
approaches that can potentially overcome antimicrobial resistance [77].
Biofilms are widespread, dynamic, structurally complex, integrated 
multicellular communities of surface-adherent bacteria surrounded by a 
self-produced polymer matrix made of EPS. From 40 % to 80 % of 
bacterial microorganisms on earth have been found to produce biofilms 
[78]. Biofilms are associated with nosocomial infections related to 
medical devices and implanted objects. They are also linked to chronic 
infections, such as those involved in cystic fibrosis, chronic wounds, 
ulcers, etc. [35]. Bacteria that adhere to surfaces differ from their 
planktonic (free-floating) forms primarily in their greater resistance to 
antibiotics, which is 1000 times higher. This resistance to antibiotics 
may be due to rapid alterations in their gene expression, leading to 
changes in surface antigens, increased activity of efflux pumps, and the 
development of acquired resistance. In addition, the viscous EPS layer 
limits any kind of diffusion, resulting in slow movement of antibiotics 
into the biofilm. This hindered penetration, as well as the lack of oxygen 
in the matrix, causes antibiotic inactivation before it has a chance to 
spread within the biofilm [77,79].
Biofilms contain, in most cases, approximately 90 % of EPS, although 
the composition of EPS differs among species. It typically includes 
polysaccharides, proteins, lipids, and extracellular DNA (eDNA) [80]. 
Polysaccharides, the most common of which are cellulose, alginate, 
exopolysaccharides, play a fundamental role in the biofilm matrix. 
Proteins are found within the biofilm structure in the form of amyloid 
fibrils, which are responsible for intercellular adhesion during biofilm 
formation, and also in the form of amphiphilic protein associated with 
the cell surface and providing protection from environmental stress. 
eDNA plays an important role in the formation, structural stability, and 
integrity of bacterial biofilms [76]. EPS strengthens the structure of the 
biofilm, while maintaining its remarkable mechanical plasticity. The 
EPS layer often contains a network of water channels that deliver nu­
trients and oxygen to bacteria in the bulk, as well as remove waste [81]. 
The biofilm spatial structure depends on the gradients of oxygen, pH or 
substrates, which provide heterogeneous local microenvironments and 
support a variety of cell types, including slow-growing and persister 
subpopulations [82]. Persisters are stress-resistant microorganisms that 
can survive in the presence of several antibacterial drugs. Such sub­
populations can be found in various bacterial species, such as E. coli, P. 
aeruginosa, S. aureus, and G. vaginalis [76].
The rigid structure of polysaccharides with their high tensile 
strength, promotes the proximity between bacteria, increasing chances 
for cellular communication. This leads to coordination of pathogenic cell 
behavior, known as bacterial quorum sensing (QS). This system is a 
crucial regulatory mechanism for the collective behavior of bacterial 
communities, which respondes on cell density by producing diffusing 
autoinducers. They are signaling molecules that allow biofilm to adapt 
to changing conditions and coordinate their gene expression. This un­
derlies the possibility of horizontal gene transfer, which is likely to be 
one of the main causes of antibiotic resistance. Typically, autoinducers 
in Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria differ, utilizing acyl- 
homoserine lactones and oligopeptides, respectively [83].
Biofilm growth depends on the environment and exhibits diverse 
growth patterns, spatial organization, as well as various phenotypes and 
genetic characteristics. This event is a series of physical, chemical and 
biological processes that occur through several stages, represented in 
Fig. 5a [35].
Initially, planktonic bacteria attach to the surface through special 
moieties on the bacterial surface, such as pili, curli, fimbriae and gly­
cocalyx, and form a layer. This layer can affect the bacterial initial 
adhesion, even by imparting a surface charge that helps to adhere and 
promote biofilm growth [84]. The transport of bacteria to a surface is 
facilitated by motility, Brownian motion, gravity, diffusion, and 
convective transport, etc. This first attachment is reversible, although 
the tendency of attraction to overcome repulsion can promote irre­
versible adhesion [35].
After this stage, bacterial adhesion to the surface is primarily driven 
by biological processes. These include the expression of several genes 
responsible for producing surface proteins like porins. Porins facilitates 
the transport of the polysaccharides involved in the formation of the EPS 
layer. EPS governs biofilm maturation, characterized by an increase in 
size and the formation of a bacterial 3D structure. During the process of 
maturation, cells begin to communicate, providing QS [85]. Moreover, 
microbial cells assemble into highly diverse communities, each per­
forming specific tasks. The formation of tall and wrinkled structures is 
another common feature of a growing biofilm. Such structures are 
characterized by lateral pressure on the cells, pushing them together. 
The pressure is relieved by the accumulation of dead cells in areas that 
promote vertical growth.
The final stage is the dispersion of the biofilm, which is characterized 
by the shedding of cells from the biofilm followed by their adhesion to a 
new surface, forming a new biofilm layer. This completes the life cycle of 
the bacterial biofilm. The cells are forced to revert to the planktonic state 
due to lack of nutrients or the accumulation of toxic residues, resulting 
in a need for a better environment. Bacterial detachment can also be 
caused by mechanical stress (due to shear forces, abrasion, etc.), enzy­
matic cleavage of EPS and the release of its products, production of 
surfactants, imparting motility by new synthesis of flagella, etc. [86].
The most important factors that make bacterial biofilm hard to 
disrupt with antibiotics are: i) the matrix hinders the diffusion and re­
action of biocides; ii) genes preferentially expressed in these bacteria are 
involved in their stress response and antibiotic efflux; iii) stress-resistant 
bacteria emerge with enhanced abilities to survive in adverse conditions 
[35].
NPs have great potential to become promising alternatives to erad­
icate bacterial biofilms. Their action can be realized in two ways. One 
way is the prevention of infections associated with medical devices, 
specifically those that are inserted into the body, such as catheters, 
implants, and prosthetics. In this context, the main strategy focuses on 
designing surface coatings with NPs that prevent bacterial attachment 
and/or eliminate bacteria that come into contact with them. This is a 
highly significant and actively studied area, but in this review, we only 
consider some examples of NP application in medical equipment coat­
ings without providing a thorough discussion. This topic is beyond the 
scope of this review, but it is comprehensively covered in the literature 
[27,87–89].
Another way is related to the development of a strategy to eradicate 
bacterial biofilms both on implant-associated surfaces, and in chronic 
infections. Peculiar properties of NPs enable their effective penetration 
and diffusion in EPS matrix, accompanied by interaction with basic 
biofilm components, including polysaccharides, proteins and eDNA. 
This can lead to the inhibition of QS due to the inactivation of auto­
inducers, which are involved in the bacterial communication circuit 
system [90]. The NP ability to release ions and generate ROS also affects 
the EPS matrix and allows them to reach the bacterial cells, where their 
antibacterial mechanisms can be implemented. In addition, the specific 
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
6 

features of each NP types open viable alternatives for treating biofilm 
infections. For example, APDT and antibacterial photothermal therapy 
(APTT), especially their combination exhibiting a synergistic effect 
under near infrared (NIR) light, provide effective disruption of biofilm 
(see section 3.2). Magnetic hyperthermia, due to the application of 
magnetic NPs, as well as NPs with dual modalities, magnetic and NIR- 
excited photosensitivity, drives the detachment of biofilms (see section 
3.6). Multifunctional NPs in the form of compositions, containing 
several additional components and modes of action, are also received a 
lot of attention. These metal NP-based compositions can include anti­
biotics and enzymes, stimuli-responsive polymers heated in a magnetic 
field (section 4.3); as well as bacteriophages heated with NIR light 
(section 4.1).
The effectiveness of NP action against biofilms is related to the 
ability to reach the interface with the biofilm, adhere to the surface, and 
then diffuse within the matrix (Fig. 5b). The interaction between NPs 
and biofilm components, both within the EPS matrix and on the bacte­
rial surface, depends on the physicochemical characteristics of the NPs 
(size, shape, surface charge, hydrophobicity, functional groups, and 
interactions with EPS components). The properties of EPS matrix, such 
as matrix viscosity, level of compaction, fluidity of liquid, also affect the 
NP action on the biofilm [91]. The precise role, extent, and mechanism 
of each interaction have not yet been fully elucidated, as they take place 
in a dynamic physiological environment in which a series of side effects 
may be triggered by a single specific interaction [76].
The NP size is crucial for the initial step of penetration and should be 
smaller than the size of water-filled channels in biofilms, which range 
from 10 nm up to several micrometers. In addition, the small size (less 
than 20 nm) of NPs ensures not only effective penetration and inter­
nalization into channels, but also enhances the antimicrobial activity 
[92]. The small size of NPs contributes to the selective destruction of 
bacterial cells. The small diameter of NPs and the large number of them 
can increase pressure on the bacterial cells. Such pressure can only affect 
small-sized bacterial cells, while relatively large animal cells remain 
unaffected [93]. Moreover, the small size can help to avoid binding of 
NPs to blood vessels, minimizing damage to the vascular system and 
increasing uptake [94].
The role of NP surface properties is primarily to facilitate interactions 
with EPS. The most important NP–biofilm interactions include electro­
static, hydrophobic, and steric, although covalent and biospecific 
binding also can take place [95]. In general, electrostatic interactions 
determine the first step of NP adhesion to the surface and following 
cohesion of the EPS matrix [76]. Positively charged NPs were found to 
likely interact with the EPS components (polysaccharides, proteins, 
humic and uronic acids, DNA), which, as a rule, possess a negative 
charge, and also interact with typically negatively charged bacterial cell 
wall [96]. Hydrophobic interactions are significant for NP penetration 
and participation in biofilm formation and regulation [76]. It was re­
ported that the hydrophilic NPs were not colocalized with the bacteria, 
demonstrating interaction with EPS only, whereas the hydrophobic NPs 
can assemble within the bacteria [97]. Steric interactions can contribute 
to NP colloidal stability, even in media with high ionic strength, which is 
crucial for the interaction with the EPS. In addition, EPS components can 
associate with NPs, imparting them increased colloidal stability 
compared to when they are in a buffer solution alone [98].
Thus, the NPs-biofilm interaction is often governed by a variety of 
factors, the effect of which are often difficult to identify. The compli­
cations are added by the NP interactions with biological moieties, 
affecting NP properties in terms of chemical, physical, or biological 
transformations that are difficult to predict [99]. Despite the problems, 
controlled size and shape of NPs make it possible to penetrate them into 
both microbial cell walls and biofilm layer, leading to irreversible 
damage of membranes and DNA. The tuned NP surface properties can 
have an inhibitory effect on biofilm homeostasis, as well as the ability to 
embed various drugs, including antibiotics. The potential for long cir­
culation lifetime and high surface-to-volume ratio underlies the ability 
for efficient targeting and drug loading [5].
In the next part of the review, we discuss the progress made in the 
development of the most promising antibacterial metal-containing NPs: 
Ag, Au, ZnO, TiO2, Cu/CuO, Fe3O4. They are discussed with an emphasis 
on mechanisms of action, and the key features are presented in Tables 1 
and 2. Table 1 summarizes the main mechanisms, particularly biofilm 
disruption, using color coding to indicate the importance of each 
mechanism for all NPs. Table 2 shows the antibacterial NP activity 
against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
3. Key metal and metal oxide NPs
3.1. Silver NPs
Silver has a long history of use as an antimicrobial agent, although 
nanoscale silver (AgNPs) has only become widely available in the last 
20 years due to rapid advances in nanotechnology. Today, among all 
antimicrobial NPs, AgNPs are implicated in the largest number and 
variety of consumer and medical products [9]. There are numerous 
publications reporting the antimicrobial activity of AgNPs against a 
Fig. 5. a) Life cycle of a bacterial biofilm. Free bacteria in planktonic state in a medium reversibly adhere to a surface. They secrete EPS, which results in irreversible 
attachment and form a microcolony leading to motility factor inhibition. The biofilm grows and matures until mature cells are released from it; b) Pathways of NP 
activity against bacterial biofilms. APDT - antibacterial photodynamic therapy, APTT – antibacterial photothermal therapy.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
7 

wide range of microorganisms [100–104]. Although AgNPs are actively 
utilized as an antimicrobial agent, their mechanism of action is not fully 
elucidated. There are reports in the literature that consider the antimi­
crobial action of Ag ions as the main mechanism for AgNP toxicity 
[105,106]. To date, it has been widely believed that all three of the 
aforementioned mechanisms contribute to the antibacterial activity 
(Tables 1 and 2) [105].
NP adsorption to the bacterial cell wall can lead to membrane 
damage with irregular “pit” formations, accompanied by the continuous 
release of small amounts of Ag+ [107,108]. Lok et al. [109] reported 
that, according to proteomic analysis, AgNPs were predominantly 
localized in the membranes of treated E. coli cells, and some of them also 
penetrated the cells. It is worth noting that AgNPs and Ag+ appeared to 
exhibit a similar mechanism of targeting the cell wall. However, their 
activity differed: effective concentrations of AgNPs and Ag+ were at 
nanomolar and micromolar levels, respectively. This indicates that 
AgNP antimicrobial activity is higher than that of Ag ions [109,110]. 
The lack of specific localization of Ag ions may cause this effect, while 
the interaction of AgNPs with cell wall results in the continuous release 
of ions, enhancing the toxicity to cells [31]. Morones et al. [110] 
revealed AgNP membrane penetration and accumulation within the 
cells, likely due to membrane damage caused by AgNPs. However, 
Gram-positive bacteria, such as S. aureus, did not behave as if “pit” have 
formed, probably due to the presence of a thicker peptidoglycan layer 
[105].
The exact mechanism of AgNP penetration and accumulation 
through the cell membrane is not completely understood. One of the 
concepts is related to electrostatic attractions of negatively charged 
bacterial surfaces and positively charged AgNPs. Ivask et al. [30] 
showed that AgNPs functionalized with positively charged polymer 
(polyethylenimine) are tightly anchored and fused with bacterial cell 
surface, facilitating Ag ion deliver in higher concentrations. They also 
Table 1 
The main NP characteristics that determine their antibacterial activity.
NPs
NP 
phys.-
chem. 
proper
ties
Ion 
release
ROS 
genera
tion
Light-
induced 
activity
Specific 
activity
Peculiarities
Biofilm
Ref.
Ag
..
…
.
LSPR
Fenton-like 
reaction.
Easy and 
varied
synthesis, 
sizes, shapes.
Disrupt EPS, 
then cells,
surface 
coating for 
implants.
[5,9,
28,
93,
100-
131]
Au
…
-
Au 
unreac
ted 
ions
-
Nanoc
lusters 
(NCs)
LSPR
APTT, 
APDT
NCs generates 
ROS.
Easy and 
varied 
synthesis, 
sizes, shapes,
functionaliza
tion, 
nontoxic.
Only NP 
composites 
affect. 
NCs disrupt 
due to ROS
in APTT, 
APDT.
[5, 
28,
50
133-
160]
Cu
..
…
.
LSPR 
More active, 
than CuO.
Low cost, 
easy convert 
in CuO.
Reduce cell 
adhesion.
[9, 
32, 
161-
173]
CuO
…
..
.
Photocata
lytic
Photocatalytic 
activity is 
lower than 
ZnO, but 
higher than 
Fe3O4, 
Fenton-like 
reactions.
Low cost, 
variety of 
sizes, shapes, 
biocompatibi
lity.
Disrupt EPS, 
then cells, 
activity of 
released ions.
[9, 
32, 
161-
164,
174-
189]
TiO2
..
No 
reports 
on ion 
action
…
Photocata
lytic
High 
photocatalytic 
activity, but 
less than ZnO, 
CuO, Ag.
Low cost, 
biocompatibi
lity, variety 
of sizes,
shapes,
nontoxic, 
more stable, 
than ZnO.
Disrupt EPS, 
then cells, 
activity of 
ROS, surface 
coating for 
implants.
[9, 
29,
33,
190-
200]
ZnO
..
.
…
Photocata
lytic
Highest and
tuning
photocatalytic 
activity.
Biocompatibi
lity, 
nontoxic, 
variety of
sizes, shapes.
“Green” NPs 
reduce cell 
adhesion but 
can promote 
growth. ROS 
disrupt EPS.
[15, 
42,
111, 
132, 
201-
216]
Fe3O4
..
.
…
Photoc-
talytic 
only with 
organic 
molecules 
or as 
compo-
sites
Fenton 
reaction, 
heated in
magnetic field, 
weak activity 
in contrast to 
CuO, ZnO.
Biocompatibi
lity,
nontoxic,
ions can 
increase 
bacterial 
growth.
ROS disrupt 
EPS, surface 
coating for 
implants, but 
can increase 
biofilm 
formation,
magnetother
mal 
disruption.
[11,
20,
42,
117, 
217-
243]
LSPR-local surface plasmon resonance; APTT- antibacterial photothermal therapy; APDT -anti­
bacterial photodynamic therapy; EPS-extracellular polymer substances.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
8 

Table 2 
The antibacterial NP activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
NPs
Size, nm
Gram-negative
Activity
Gram-positive
Activity
Remarks
Ref
Ag
12
E. coli
20 μg cm−3 inhib. 
104 CFU
NP incorporation in cell wall increases ion 
penetration
[100]
Ag
20–25
A. baumanii 
P. aeruginosa 
E. coli
MIC, μg mL−1 
0.4 
0.4 
0.5
B. subtilis 
MRSA 
M. bovis 
S. aureus
MIC, μg mL−1 
1,7 
0.5 
1.1 
0.7
MICs are comparable to those achieved with 
commercial antibiotics
[101]
Ag
18
E. coli
MIC, μg mL−1 
50 
200
Impact on the protein and metabolic 
processes of purine
[102]
Ag
10   
12  
10
Bacillus species
MIC, μg L−1 
600   
10  
3
Citrate-capped do not attach to membrane 
PVP-capped attached 
BPEI-capped strongly attach to membrane
[37]
Ag
39
E. coli
MIC, μg mL−1 
50 
2.5
Spherical NPs 
Triangular NPs
[40]
Ag
17
P. aeruginosa
G = 3.7 fold 
reduction
Citrate-capped
[44]
Ag
5–10
E. coli
Z = 13 mm
S. aureus MTCC 3160
Z = 10 mm
[103]
Ag
2–7
E. coli 
K. mobilis
Z = 9–20 mm
S. aureus 
B. subtilis
Z = 9–20 mm
Composite with hyperbranched poly- 
(amidoamine) with terminal dimethylamine 
group
[104]
Ag
10
E. coli
MIC 
0.4 mg L−1
Membrane damage and ROS generation by 
Ag+ without DNA damage
[105]
Ag
9.3
E. coli
MIC 
1 nM
The same effect as at 1 μM of AgNO3
[109]
Ag
1–10
V. cholerae 
P. aeruginosa 
S. typhus 
E. coli
MIC 
75 μg mL−1
Octahedral NPs caused membrane damage 
thus increasing activity
[110]
Ag
9  
19  
43  
18  
23
E. coli
IC50, 
μg (Ag+) mL−1 
6.4  
15.7  
40.9  
5.5 μg  
2.2 μg
Citrate-capped  
Citrate-capped  
Citrate-capped  
PVP-capped  
BPEI-capped
[30]
Ag ions
E. coli ATCC 23282
S. aureus 
ATCC 35696
Inactivate bacterial protein, result in DNA 
condensation
[115]
Ag
13.5
E. coli
MIC 
3 nM
S. aureus
MIC 
3 nM
ROS disrupt and penetrate the cell wall
[117]
Ag
20
P. mirabilis 
E. coli 
A. baumannii 
K. pneumoniae 
P. aeruginosa 
Salmonella 
V. cholera
MIC 
10 μg mL−1 in dark  
5 μg mL−1 
under light
S. epidermidis 
M. luteus 
L. monocytogenes
MIC 
10 μg mL−1 in dark  
5 μg mL−1 
under light
Exposure to the light at LSPR displayed 4.8 
times more ROS
[118]
green 
Ag
70
P. aeruginosa
MIC 
0.12 μg mL−1
S. aureus  
S. epidermidis
MIC 
0.24 μg mL−1  
0.12 μg mL−1
Synthesized by reducing and stabilizing with 
Dianella dry leaves 
aqueous extract. Effective antibiofilm 
properties
[118]
green Ag
52
P. aeruginosa 
E. coli
Z = 8–12 mm
B. subtilis 
S. aureus
Z = 6–15 mm
Synthesized by reducing and stabilizing with 
Chlorophytum borivilianum L. callus extract
[124]
Au ions
10
E. coli
No inhibition
No oxidative stress, damage of membrane, 
DNA
[105]
Au
80
S. aureus
MIC 
197 μg mL−1
No ions
[135]
Au
16
E. coli
NPs had no effect and did not enhance 
antibiotic activity
[136]
Au
20
E. coli
MIC 
4 μg mL−1
Induce oxidative phosphorylation, ribosome 
pathways, upregulation of chemotaxis. No 
ROS generation
[137]
Au
12
E. coli
More than 
256 μg mL−1
S. aureus
More than 
256 μg mL−1
Weak antibacterial activity, MIC was not 
achieved
[140]
(continued on next page)
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
9 

Table 2 (continued)
NPs 
Size, nm 
Gram-negative 
Activity 
Gram-positive 
Activity 
Remarks 
Ref
Au
2
E. coli 
P. aeruginosa
IC50, μM 
3.3 
3.0
S. aureus 
S. epidermidis 
B. subtilis
IC50, μM 
2.5 
2.8 
2.7
Nanoclusters (NC) have ultrasmall size 
leading to high increase of ROS production
[134]
Au
22
E. coli
10 μg mL−1 weak 
inhibition  
strong 
inhibition
Bacillus Calmette- 
Gu´erin
10 μg mL−1 
weak inhibition  
strong 
inhibition
Citrate-capped   
Polyallylamine-capped
[133]
green 
Au
100–200
E. coli
Z = 18 ± 2 mm
S. aureus
Z = 14 ± 2 mm
Synthesized with cyanobacterium. Produce 
intracellular ROS
[139]
green 
Au
3–37
E. coli 
S. marcescens
MIC, μg mL−1 
62.5 
125
B. subtilis 
S. aureus
MIC, μg mL−1 
62.5 
125
Synthesized by reducing and stabilizing with 
Nigella arvensis leaf extract
[149]
Au
60
P. aeruginosa
MIC 
0.125 nM
Nanorods. Photothermal-induced activity 
against planktonic cells and biofilms at 800 
nm
[152]
Cu
2–350
S. choleraesuis 
P. aeruginosa
Z, mm 
9–11 
8–12
S. aureus 
B. subtilis
Z, mm 
9–11 
9
Chitosan-capped
[41]
Cu
9
E. coli
MIC, μg mL−1 
200
B. subtilis 
S. aureus
MIC, μg mL−1 
20 
140
High affinity to B.subtilis surface
[32]
Cu
50
P. aeruginosa 
biofilm of 19 various 
strains
Inhibition at 
100 ng mL−1
Disrupt biofilm
[167]
green Cu
3–10
E. coli
Inhibition at 
300 μg mL−1
Synthesized by reducing with Opuntia ficus- 
indica, Geranium
[169]
green Cu
33
E. coli 
K. pneumoniae 
S. typhi 
P. aeruginosa
Z, mm 
28 
22 
20 
21
P. acne
Z, mm 
20
Synthesized by reducing with citrus juice
[170]
CuO
80–160
K. pneumoniae 
P. aeruginosa 
S. paratyphi Shigella
Inhibition at 
~5 μg mL−1
[175]
green 
CuO
5–20
E. coli 
Proteus sp. 
K. pneumoniae
Z, mm 
22.2 
16.3 
18.5
Enterococcus sp.
Z, mm 
20.3
Synthesized by reducing with Cissus vitiginea
[186]
CuO
20–100
E. coli 
in MMD media
IC50, μg mL−1 
160
Lactobacillus brevis in 
MRS media
IC50, μg mL−1 
120
Activity depends on NP dissolution and size
[177]
CuO
20 
28.9
E. coli 
P. aeruginosa
Z, mm 
20/14 
21/10
B. subtilis 
S. aureus
Z, mm 
24/15 
22/12
MIC is lower for smaller NPs
[178]
CuO
50–300
E. coli 
V. anguillarum
MIC, μg mL−1 
3.12 
1.56
S. iniae 
S. parauberi
MIC, μg mL−1 
1.56 
1.56
Shape: rice-grain-like, needle-like, most 
effective: plate-like
[182]
CuO
94
E. coli 
P. aeruginosa
Z, mm 
7.8 
11.4
B. subtilis 
S. aureus
Z, mm 
12.9 
7.3
PEG 600-capped, 200 μg
[179]
CuO
25–30
E. coli
Z, mm 
22
S. aureus
Z, mm 
18
2MIC to 1/2MIC almost completely 
eradicated the biofilm with OD545nm < 0.1 
CFU/mL
[189]
TiO2
25–140
E. coli 
C. metallidurans 
CH34
MIC, μg mL−1 
100 
No inhibition
Agglomeration of NPs with bacteria disrupt 
membrane
[29]
TiO2
362
E. coli
Inhibition 
40 %
S. aureus
Inhibition 
20 %
Hollow NPs for photocatalytic deactivation 
(up to 36 %), ROS
[195]
TiO2
23
E. coli MG 1655
MIC, μg mL−1 
10
Positively charged NPs act through 
membrane destabilization
[33]
TiO2
®Riedel-de 
Haen
E. coli
rate constants 
3.7 × 10−1
L. helveticus
rate constants 1.8 ×
10−1/min
Photocatalytic deactivation
[197]
green 
TiO2
88.5
E. coli 
Klebsiella spp.
Z, mm 
21 
13
S. aureus 
S. epidermidis
Z, mm 
27 
18
Synthesized by banana peel extract
[199]
ZnO
50–70  
8
E. coli
Inhibition, % 
40  
95
S. aureus
MIC, μg mL−1 
1.2  
80
Photoactivation (UV 254 nm) had no effect
[202]
ZnO
800   
6.8 
E. coli
MIC, μg mL−1 
5 
Reduction in 
viability, % 
99 
S. aureus
MIC, μg mL−1 
10 
Reduction in 
viability, % 
83 
Treatment for 2 h
[203]
(continued on next page)
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
10 

Table 2 (continued)
NPs 
Size, nm 
Gram-negative 
Activity 
Gram-positive 
Activity 
Remarks 
Ref
260 
800
95 
75
66 
42
ZnO
42-rod 
48-plate
E. coli
Inhibition, % 
no light/ UVA 
24/42  
27/40
S. aureus
Inhibition, % 
no light/ UVA 
53/75  
38/59
UVA irradiation leads to higher inhibition. 
Rod-like is more effective when ROS 
generating
[209]
ZnO
18
E. coli 
P. aeruginosa
MBC, μg mL−1 
18 
14
S. aureus 
B. subtilis
MBC, μg mL−1 
16 
12
More active against gram positive
[42]
green 
ZnO
9–18 
rod
E. coli 
K. pneumoniae 
P. aeruginosa
Z, mm 
24/27 
14/22 
13/23
S. aureus
Z, mm 
20/21
Synthesized using extracts of Aloe vera leaf / 
Hibiscus sabdariffa leaf
[212]
green 
ZnO
100
E. coli 
V. cholerae
MIC  
1.6 × 105–1.2 × 106 
mL−1
Synthesized using extract of C. procera 
Biofilm: 
– disruption 
– no disruption
[132]
IONP
70–110 
Fe2O3
E. coli 
P. aeruginosa 
S. marcescens
Z, mm 
17–22 
16–27 
18–24
S. aureus
Z, mm 
19–23
Synthesized by ablation at laser fluences 
0–80 mJ
[220]
IONP
13
R. erythropolis
Desulfurization rate 
2.5 mmol/ DBT
Oleate-capped NPs adsorbed by cells and 
desulfurized dibenzothiophene (DBT), then 
magnetically separated
[221]
IONP
45–50
R. erythropolis
Rate coefficient, 
cm3s−1 
1.58 × 10−10 
1.01 × 10−10
DBT desulfurization  
– with NPs 
– no NPs
[222]
IONP
2–540
P. aeruginosa
Growth rate, OD/h 
2 nm: −0.1 
43 nm: −0.08 
540 nm: −0.07
Small NPs promote bacterial and biofilm 
growth
[224]
green 
Fe3O4
35    
37
K. pneumoniae 
P. aeruginosa  
K. pneumoniae 
P. aeruginosa
MIC, μg mL−1 
125 
125  
250 
500
S. aureus 
Corynebacterium  
S. aureus 
Corynebacterium
MIC, μg mL−1 
125 
62.6  
250 
500
Synthesized using Malva sylvestris 
Chemical NPs
[234]
green 
IONP
10–30
E. coli 
P. mirabilis
Z, mm green/IONP 
12/7 
17/7
B. subtilis
Z, mm 
green/IONP 
8/7
Synthesized using Argemone mexicana L. leaf 
extract
[235]
IONP
104 
Bio 
Mag®
P. aeruginosa
60 mg/mL disrupt 
most biofilm cells in 
8 min
Inactivate biofilms by hyperthermia under 
magnetic field
[240]
Z – zone of inhibition; MIC - minimal inhibitory concentration; IC50 - half-maximal inhibitory concentration; MBC - minimal bactericidal concentration; green - NPs 
obtained by “green” synthesis.
Fig. 6. Morphology of untreated and treated E.coli: a) untreated; b) condensed form of DNA (arrow) in the center of the electron-light region; c) cell composed of a 
great amount of large electron-dense granules; d) cell wall was seriously damaged (arrow). The formation of the electron-light region in the center of the bacteria was 
suggested to be associated with bacterium response either to cell membrane disruption or to risk factors, such as Ag ions, which induce DNA condensation to protect 
against potential damage. The small electron-dense granules are related to the combination of Ag ions and proteins deposited by these ions. (Reprinted from [115]. 
Copyright © 2000, with permission from J. Wiley and Sons).
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
11 

affect the bacterial electron transport chain and generate ROS at the cell 
membrane. However, the electrostatic-based approach has some limi­
tations, as there have been various reports of negatively charged AgNPs 
adhering to the bacterial cell walls [5,28]. Another concept explains the 
AgNP adherence by the silver–thiol group interaction on the cell surface 
[100].
The second mechanism of AgNP toxicity: the release of Ag ions after 
the direct binding of AgNPs to bacterial membranes [30,100,109–111]. 
Ions can damage bacterial cells through several aforementioned 
different mechanisms: react with thiol groups of amino acids [112], bind 
DNA, inhibit enzymes [113] and generate ROS [114].
Feng et al. [115] demonstrated DNA condensation after the exposure 
of both E. coli and S. aureus species to Ag+ released. This led to a sub­
sequent arrest of cell division. TEM images demonstrate the formation of 
a low-density region (related to low molecular weight compounds) in 
the center of the bacteria, which was suggested to be a defense mech­
anism of bacteria against Ag ions (Fig. 6). This phenomenon can be 
associated with the bacterium response either to cell membrane 
disruption or to risk factors, such as Ag+, which induces DNA conden­
sation to protect against potential damage. It was shown that DNA can 
be further damaged, including the attachment of Ag+ to phosphates, due 
to the high affinity of these ions to DNA. The small electron-dense 
granules outside the electron-light region are related to the combina­
tion of proteins with deposited Ag ions [114].
Ag ions can also generate ROS in oxygen containing systems 
[116,117]. Hwang et al. [105] observed the antimicrobial activity of 
AgNPs only in the presence of oxygen and suggested that the predomi­
nant mechanism was ROS generation by Ag ions, rather than their direct 
biocidal action. Upon contact with bacteria, radicals produced by Ag 
ions can promote the pore formation in the cell wall, leading to cell 
death. This effect inspires researchers to improve the antibacterial ac­
tivity of AgNPs by exposing them to visible light in order to enhance 
localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR is discussed in detail in 
section 3.2). This process facilitates the increased generation of ROS 
[118–120]. In this case, AgNPs can kill bacteria directly through the 
generation of ROS, regardless of the presence of Ag ions.
The implementation of “green” chemistry methods refers to the 
development of alternatives to chemical and physical synthesis, in 
particular biocompatible, nontoxic, and eco-friendly methods for NP 
production [121]. “Green” synthesis of AgNPs, utilizing diverse bio­
logical agents, such as plants, bacteria, fungi, enables NP production, 
avoiding toxic byproducts. Plant-mediated synthesis of AgNPs is the 
preferred method, as it eliminates the need for labor-intensive and 
complex processes required for maintaining a microbial culture. AgNPs 
are obtained by reducing Ag+ with plants, the extracts of which contain 
various phytochemicals. They include alkaloids, flavonoids, terpenoids, 
amino acids, tannins, saponins, phenols, etc., which can act as capping 
and stabilizing agents. Moreover, the presence of phytochemicals on 
AgNP surface imparts unique biocidal properties, enhancing antibacte­
rial activity of AgNPs [122]. Numerous studies have also shown excel­
lent AgNP antimicrobial activity against a variety of Gram-negative and 
Gram-positive bacteria, indicating the potential use as an antibacterial 
agent against antibiotic-resistant bacteria [123–127] (Table 2).
The global issue is the contamination of biomedical devices with 
biofilm-forming microorganisms. In this regard, the ability of AgNPs to 
disrupt biofilm formation is of particular interest. The implication of 
AgNPs in catheter coating prevented the biofilm formation on their 
surfaces in vitro by E. coli, Enterococcus spp., S. aureus, coagulase- 
negative Staphylococci spp., P. aeruginosa and Candida albicans [128]. 
Hussain et al. [129] reported that AgNPs can reduce exopolysaccharide 
production by 79 and 84 % for Gram-negative and Gram-positive bac­
teria, respectively. This is likely due to the inhibition of bacterial QS and 
motility caused by AgNPs. The action of AgNPs is also linked to 
disruption of proteins due to binding their cysteine residues with silver 
ions, which damages and decreases the synthesis of exopolysaccharides 
[130]. AgNPs can also directly access exopolysaccharides through water 
channels that pass through the biofilm, as these channels serve to 
transport nutrients in the biofilm. [131].
However, several biofilm bacteria, such as V. cholerae and ETEC, can 
resist the AgNPs [132]. The biofilm resistance to AgNPs is believed to be 
due to the components of EPS matrix, such as amine, thiol, or carbox­
ylate groups, which interact with Ag+ ions and restrict their diffusion. 
These interactions provide protection for the biofilm cells. In addition, 
the antimicrobial efficacy of AgNPs can be reduced by their aggregation 
[93]. The surface functionalization of AgNPs with other metals, poly­
mers, or antibiotics can help enhance their activity against biofilms, 
prevent aggregation, and reduce cytotoxicity [111].
3.2. Gold NPs
AuNPs have great potential as antimicrobial reagents, since they 
demonstrate nontoxicity, versatility in surface modification, photo­
thermal effects and ease of detection [133]. Gold is a noble metal, inert 
and very stable, unable to dissociate easily into ions compared to silver 
[134]. This leads to their low antibacterial activity, which is only 
evident at high concentrations and provides a small inhibition zone. 
Hern´andez-Sierra et al. [135] reported on antibacterial effect of AuNPs 
against S. aureus, which began at a very high concentration compared to 
AgNPs (Tables 1 and 2).
There are reports in the literature on reduced bacterial growth or 
functional activity after functionalization of AuNPs with biomolecules 
[136]. Some researchers have shown toxicity of small-sized AuNPs 
related to their permeability through the cell wall, while others have not 
observed such effects for the same bacteria [137]. In view of such con­
tradictory results, a discussion on the possible mechanisms of antimi­
crobial activity and toxicity of AuNPs can help to clarify the main trends 
in AuNP antibacterial applications [138].
Cui et al. [137] examined the antimicrobial action of AuNPs on E.coli 
and proposed that AuNPs cause suppression of the oxidative phos­
phorylation pathway (F-type ATP synthase and ATP levels) and ribo­
somal pathways, as well as a temporary enhancing chemotaxis in the 
early-phase reaction. However, ROS-related mechanisms were not 
involved. On the other hand, Zada et al. [139] demonstrated that 
“green” AuNPs reduced ATP levels and promoted ROS generation [55] 
In addition, the presence of unreduced Au1+ and Au3+, as a result of 
incomplete reactions, can have toxic and cytotoxic effects [140,141]. 
Only a few studies have reported on the purification of synthesized 
AuNPs prior to testing for antimicrobial activity [141]. Thus, the 
mechanism of antimicrobial activity of AuNPs is not entirely clear.
The controversial assumption about the action of AuNPs may be due 
to many factors, including size, shape, concentration, and surface 
functionalization, directly associating with the surface charge. Particle 
size has been shown to affect the antibacterial activity of AuNPs in such 
a manner that smaller particles cause greater toxicity than larger par­
ticles. The small size of AuNPs allows them to penetrate cells, altering 
various cellular processes. Some researchers reported on the marked 
toxic effect of AuNPs with a size range of 8–15 nm [142], while other 
researchers showed toxicity induced by 15–35 nm AuNPs. [143]
Enhanced antimicrobial activity can be achieved by reducing the size 
of AuNPs to a value comparable to the Fermi wavelength of electrons 
(~1 nm). Such NPs can form ultrasmall Au nanoclusters (AuNCs) with a 
core size of less than 2 nm [144], which exhibit antimicrobial activity 
due to their catalytic activity, contrary to the popular assumption of 
AuNP inertness [134]. Zheng et al. [134] reported that laser-ablated 
Au25NCs (<2 nm), contained 25 Au atoms, had toxic effect on 96 % of 
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, whereas AuNPs (6 nm) were 
able to kill only 3 % of populations when administered at equal con­
centrations. This action of AuNCs is associated with larger active surface 
(in comparison with AuNPs), which enhances internalization followed 
by inducing a metabolic imbalance in cells. (Fig. 7) This significantly 
increases the ROS production, contributing to effective cell death. It is 
worth noting that AuNPs have been shown to be unable to generate ROS 
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
12 

[145].
Surface functionalization of AuNPs is essential for their antibacterial 
activity. AuNPs with the same shape and size can have different effects 
on the bacteria, depending on the surface coating. Zhou et al. [133] 
reported on the high disruption of E. coli by AuNPs modified with 
positively charged polyallylamine hydrochloride, which strongly 
interact electrostatically with the bacterial membrane. After penetra­
tion, these NPs enter the cytoplasm and have a higher toxic effect than 
citrate-capped AuNPs. This result is in good agreement with the known 
behavior of cationic coatings, exhibiting more antibacterial activity than 
anionic coatings [146]. Zhang et al. [104] also observed strong ionic 
interactions with bacteria for AuNPs coated in the same manner as 
AgNPs. Li et al. [147] systematically examined the role of AuNP surface 
chemistry and found that the hydrophobic surface exhibited strong 
antibacterial activity. This effect was demonstrated in inhibiting the 
growth of multiple strains of uropathogens. (Table 2).
To date, alternative “green” methods for AuNP synthesis have been 
developed [148]. Biosynthesized AuNPs are usually formed with the 
help of bioactive compounds, exhibiting enhanced antimicrobial activ­
ity compared to conventional AuNPs [148]. Chahardoli et al. [149] 
showed the antibacterial activity of AuNPs synthesized using the leaf 
extract of Nigella arvensis. This activity is likely due to the binding of 
AuNPs to the bacterial cell wall, allowing them to penetrate the cell and 
disrupt cellular respiration.
One of the most significant optical properties of AuNPs is their LSPR. 
This phenomenon arises from interactions of the surface electrons with 
light and manifests itself as a strong absorption band in the spectrum of 
AuNPs, as well as in AgNPs, CuNPs. LSPR can be tuned to provide large 
optical cross-sections beyond the spectral range of strong molecular 
electron absorptions. LSPR is responsible for generating an intense local 
electric field (E-field) around individual plasmonic NPs, thereby 
increasing the photoexcitation rate of photosensitizers and hence 
enhancing their photoactivity (Fig. 8). This can significantly reduce the 
photosensitizer concentration required for a pronounced antimicrobial 
effect [50,150].
LSPR is beneficial in many applications, especially in two ap­
proaches, involving light activation: APTT and APDT. AuNPs are 
commonly used in APTT, which is performed under laser irradiation, to 
disinfect biofilms or create local hyperthermia in order to destroy bac­
teria. The efficiency of APTT is associated with the local heat generation, 
which depends on AuNP binding with the cell membrane [151]. The 
photothermal-induced bactericidal activity was shown for phospholipid- 
Fig. 7. a) UV −
vis absorption spectrum of AuNPs; Insets: TEM image (left) and photograph (right) Spectrum shows one absorption peak at ~520 nm, which is the 
characteristic local surface plasmon resonance peak of small Au NPs (typically <20 nm); b) UV −
vis absorption spectrum of Au25 NCs with marked distinctive 
absorption peaks; Insets: TEM image (left) and photograph (right) The spectrum of the Au25NCs shows four distinct absorption peaks at 440, 552, 670, and 760 nm, 
but does not show any peak at ~520 nm, which indicates that the Au25NCs were homogeneously formed without any AuNP byproduct. The solution color is also 
identical to that for Au25NCs with sizes less than 2 nm. Moreover, the Au25 NCs have a more defined structure and size compared to the AuNPs. Therefore, the AuNCs 
are likely to behave in a more molecular-like manner. Reprinted with permission from [134]. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.
Fig. 8. Schematic presentation of NP-plasmon-enhanced excitation of photosensitizer in APDT leading to increased ROS generation, which can be realized via Type I 
or Type II reactions (see Fig. 4). LSPR is responsible for generating an intense local electric field around individual plasmonic NPs, thereby increasing the photo­
excitation rate of photosensitizers and hence enhancing their photoactivity. ISC –intersystem crossing, S-singlet state, T–triplet state, LSPR-local surface plas­
mon resonance.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
13 

modified AuNPs against planktonic and biofilm cultures of P. aeruginosa 
[152], for chitosan-based AuNPs against several Gram-positive and 
Gram-negative bacterial strains [153,154]. Additionally, AuNPs func­
tionalized with various thiol groups and employed as a monolayer on 
glass can eliminate at least 99.9 % of both Gram-positive and Gram- 
negative under NIR irradiation, preventing biofilm formation [155].
APDT is implicated irradiation to generate ROS and thus kill bacte­
ria. APDT is less efficient against Gram-negative bacteria than against 
Gram-positive forms [151]. AuNPs can themselves generate ROS under 
appropriate irradiation, but there are more efficient APDT systems based 
on conjugates with photosensitizers that have been described in the 
literature [150,151,156,157]. The APDT principles with AuNPs are 
shown in Fig. 8.
APDT can be also utilized to affect bacterial biofilms. AuNPs 
embedded in a polyurethane film containing a photosensitizer (crystal 
violet) were able to disrupt E. coli on film surface when exposed to 
visible light [157]. The efficient and selective elimination of clinical 
isolates, including E. coli, K. pneumoniae, and E. cloacae, was achieved 
through the use of photoactivation system, consisting of AuNPs conju­
gated with photosensitizer (methylene blue, λex = 668 nm) and conca­
navalin A (Fig. 9) [158].
Xie et al. [159] showed that AuNCs, functionalized with deoxyri­
bonuclease (DNase), can break down the biofilms formed by Gram- 
positive and Gram-negative bacteria. DNase destroyed EPS during 
APTT and APDT under 808 nm laser irradiation. This allowed the 
removal of the biofilm, eradicating ~90 % of the embedded bacteria 
within a short treatment time (10 min). The promising approach con­
cerns the use of cationic AuNPs (70 nm), which are able to evaporate 
water and form bubbles when irradiated. These bubbles destroyed the 
integrity of the bacterial biofilm [160].
3.3. Copper and copper oxide NPs
Copper and copper-based NPs have attracted a lot of attention due to 
their versatile properties and antimicrobial activity. This makes them 
suitable for use in various fields, such as agriculture, water treatment, 
food packaging, wood preservation, textile production, and medicine 
[161]. An advantage of copper nanomaterials is their cost-effectiveness, 
as they are cheap and widely available. In addition, copper-based NPs 
can serve as an alternative to established noble metal NPs possessing 
LSPR and even have advantages in certain aspects, such as dielectric 
loss, cost, and the easy tuning of near-field and far-field plasmon- 
enhanced intensity distributions [162]. CuNPs hold great promise for 
the future [163]. One of the drawbacks of CuNPs is that they are sus­
ceptible to oxidation when exposed to air. Copper transforms into CuO 
and Cu2O, and then converts to Cu2+ during the preparation process that 
can present challenges for further synthesis of CuNPs [164]. One way to 
prevent oxidation of CuNPs is to synthesize them in the presence of 
polymers, such as polyvinylpyrrolidone, polyethylene glycol, chitosan, 
etc. [164].
CuNP antimicrobial effect (Table 1) is associated with the release of 
copper ions, which can interact with cell membrane, leading to its 
eradication and lipid peroxidation. In addition, Cu ions can also interact 
with DNA after penetration, intercalating into nucleic acid strands and 
disrupt biochemical processes [161]. Cu ions can also produce ROS and 
form chelate complexes with biomolecules, leading to protein function 
deactivation. The dissolution of Cu-based NPs is correlated with factors, 
such as particle size, surface area, chemical composition, pH, tempera­
ture and surface coating [165].
Small-sized CuNPs are believed to be able to diffuse through the cell 
membrane. CuNPs can penetrate the cell membrane by involving ion 
channels and transport proteins [166]. CuNPs effectively eliminate 
various types of bacteria by binding with phosphorous and thiol groups. 
These NPs can directly interact with oxidative organelles, such as 
mitochondria and redox-active proteins, stimulating ROS generation in 
cells.
CuNPs have antibacterial effect on both Gram-positive and Gram- 
negative bacteria (Table 2). Ruparelia et al. [32] found that CuNPs 
have a more significant effect on the Gram-positive bacteria B. subtilis, 
compared to AgNPs. Usman et al. [41] studied the antimicrobial activity 
of CuNPs with various sizes against microorganisms under anaerobic 
conditions and showed that Gram-positive bacteria are more susceptible 
to CuNPs than Gram-negative bacteria. However, in aerobic conditions, 
their effectiveness is reduced due to the rapid oxidation to CuONPs. The 
type of precursors and reducing agents affects CuNP physicochemical 
characteristics and, consequently, antibacterial properties. The increase 
in the biocidal effect can be achieved by reducing the NP size and 
lowering the aggregation, as they have better migration and penetration 
activity, leading to increased cell death [164].
CuNPs exhibit the antibiofilm activity. Lewis et al. [167] reported 94 
% inhibition of P. aeruginosa biofilm. This biofilm inhibition was 
observed at a minimal concentration, thus reducing the risk of toxic 
Fig. 9. a) TEM images of localized AuNPs conjugated with methylene blue and concanavalin A on K. pneumoniae-12 surface and irradiated (for 100 s = 142.9 J cm−2) 
bacterial cell. The image shows the bacterial cells surface disintegration (shown by the violet arrow) and the nanoconjugates are concentrated within the cytoplasm 
(shown by yellow arrow); b) Morphological perturbations shown in SEM micrographs after 60-min treatment: b1) control cells exhibit intact and uniform 
morphology; b2,b3) bacterial cells aggregation due to concanavalin A-mediated attachment of AuNP nanoconjugates (violet arrow); b4) the loss of bacterial cell 
membrane integrity (violet arrow) after irradiation (for 10 min). Reproduced from [158]. Copyright (2017), with permission from Elsevier. (For interpretation of the 
references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
14 

effect. Cu is cost-effective and CuNPs can prevent bacterial biofilm 
growth more effectively than Ag at low concentrations. CuNPs have 
great potential for use in coating surgical devices and medical implants 
to prevent the formation of bacterial biofilms.
High antibacterial properties refer to CuNPs synthesized by utilizing 
“green” chemistry, especially involving plant extracts. Effect of these 
NPs can be higher than antibiotics, such as fluconazole, nystatin, or 
amphotericin B [168]. The inhibition of E. coli growth using “green” 
CuNPs was only detected at high concentrations of NPs [169]. The 
implication of citrus juice in CuNP preparation made it possible to 
significantly inhibit the growth of bacteria [170]. CuNPs synthesized by 
reducing copper nitrate with the help of Garcinia mangostana leaf extract 
were highly effective against E. coli and S. aureus [171].
Rodhe et al. [172] showed that CuNPs have higher toxicity compared 
to CuONPs. This is probably due to the differences in chemical reactions 
that occur at the particle surface, both in solution and when in contact 
with cell surfaces, including ROS production. These differences come 
from the nature of NPs. CuNPs have a metallic Cu core, which is covered 
by a thin layer of spontaneously formed CuO oxide. In contrast, CuONPs 
are a bulk material with no special surface layer [173].
CuONPs exhibit significant antimicrobial action towards various 
bacteria, which was shown against diverse strains of infectious microbes 
[174] (Table 2). Mahapatra et al. [175] reported that CuONPs can 
eradicate bacteria, penetrating through the cell membrane and targeting 
vital enzymes, causing cell death. At the same time, CuONPs turned out 
to be nontoxic for some human cells (HeLa cells).
The effectiveness of CuONPs, like most NPs, depends mainly on 
factors, such as morphology, particle size, pH, and concentration [176] 
(Table 1). For example, Kaweeteerawat et al. [177] demonstrated 
CuONP effective antibacterial activity in depending on the solubility of 
media. This effect is believed to be due to better dissolution and ion 
release from CuONPs under acidic conditions. The lethal effects of 
CuONPs were more pronounced for Gram-positive bacteria compared to 
Gram-negative ones, and they were significantly enhanced for small 
diameter NPs. (e.g., 20 nm). The double membrane structure of Gram- 
negative bacteria was suggested to protect against toxicity of CuONPs. 
[177,178,179]. However, there are contradictory results, indicating 
higher activity against Gram-negative bacteria [180,181]. Morphology 
contributes to antimicrobial activity. Although all NP structural forms 
are bacteriostatic, the selectivity increases from cubic to octahedral 
crystal structure, likely due to differences in surface facets responsible 
for specific adsorption to bacteria [178]. Ananth et al. [182] demon­
strated the influence of different shapes, such as rice-grain-like, needle- 
like, and plate-like, on the antibacterial activity of CuONPs. They found 
that plate-like CuO was more effective at disrupting bacteria than the 
other two shapes. The largest surface area in the case of this type of 
CuONPs is the reason for high activity.
The exact mechanism of antimicrobial activity of CuONPs has not 
been fully explored and is still under discussion [176]. Previous studies 
suggested that the toxic effect of CuONPs, when they come in contact 
with cell walls, is primarily caused by physical disruption and the 
release of Cu ions, which are known for their redox activity [183]. This 
leads to the intracellular ROS production and cell membrane damage, 
causing cell death. Ivask et al. [184] found that CuONPs induce ROS 
through the release of Cu ions, while NPs are not involved. Moreover, 
superoxide anion generation in cell-free media was shown to occur 
primarily due to Cu ions released from CuONPs [185]. Therefore, ROS 
generation can be considered a significant factor that causes bacterial 
disruption when exposed to CuONPs [176].
CuONPs synthesized using “green” chemistry exhibit lower cyto­
toxicity than those synthesized using chemical methods, along with the 
effective suppression of the growth of Gram-negative bacteria [186]. For 
example, altered morphology of bacterial cell membranes was revealed 
after exposure to CuONPs, which were prepared using a reducing agent 
in the form of the aqueous fruit-dried extract of T. terrestris [187], an 
extract of gum karaya [164]. CuONPs synthesized using “green” methods 
have durable photocatalytic properties, as shown by their ability to 
degrade dye Reactive Blue under light exposure with up to 94 % effi­
ciency after the fifth cycle. However, the catalytic activity of CuONPs is 
lower than that of ZnONPs. It is the reason why CuONPs have not been 
widely used for bacterial photodegradation [187,188].
Of particular interest are the CuONP properties, such as absorption, 
adsorption, penetration, and availability, which make these NPs a 
promising agent for the eradication of bacterial biofilms. Agarwala et al. 
[189] showed significantly high dose-dependent antibiofilm activity of 
CuONPs, which was found to be superior to that of Fe2O3NPs. This ac­
tivity is likely caused by damage to the EPS. Then, Cu ions can penetrate 
the bacterium membrane and bind to DNA, destroying it through 
repeated cyclic redox reactions, leading to ROS formation. However, 
oxidative damage caused by Cu ions in some microorganisms can occur 
through the Fenton reaction (see section 3.6).
3.4. Titanium dioxide NPs
Titanium dioxide NPs (TiO2NPs) exhibit properties that make them 
an excellent photocatalytic material with high oxidative power, long- 
term stability, relative nontoxicity and low cost, as well as antimicro­
bial properties. These characteristics mainly determine the highest 
volume of production and the broadest range of applications. They 
include building materials, food, food packaging, cosmetics, medicines, 
and dental products, among others. The use of TiO2 in various consumer 
products, including food, has a long history, highlighted by the fact that 
the FDA approved TiO2 as a food additive back in 1966 [9]. The toxicity 
of TiO2 NPs has been reported [190] to be significantly lower compared 
to other current and potential antimicrobial NPs, such as ZnO, Ag and 
CuO. However, TiO2NPs exhibit excellent photocatalytic properties and 
have been used as antimicrobial agents for a broad spectrum of bacteria, 
including both Gram-positive and Gram-negative. To date, there have 
been no reports showing the release of metal ions from TiO2NPs and 
their significant toxic effects. Thus, biocidal activity is mainly related to 
its photocatalytic and surface properties (Table 1) [9].
The different natural forms of TiO2 govern their application. Rutile is 
the crystalline structure responsible for the material opacity and resis­
tance to oxidation, while the polymorphic form of TiO2, anatase, serves 
as antimicrobial agents. Anatase is the least thermodynamically stable 
form of TiO2, so materials with a high surface area, like NPs, have the 
anatase structure [191]. In this form, TiO2 is 100 times more toxic. In 
particular, exposure to UV–vis light leads to ROS generation, which can 
be controlled by varying the light exposure conditions, illumination 
duration, the medium type, and TiO2 concentrations [93].
TiO2 is a semiconductor whose photocatalytic properties are signif­
icantly improved by generating more ROS when the size is reduced to 
nanoscale, forming TiO2NPs. When irradiated, the absorption of photons 
by TiO2NPs leads to the transfer of electrons from the valence band to 
the conduction band, leaving a positively charged hole in the valence 
band. The band gap energy of the anatase structure is ~3.2 eV. This 
means that photons with a wavelength less than ~385 nm are required 
to activate photocatalysis in this structure (Fig. 10a) [192].
In the photocatalytic process in aerobic aqueous media, positive 
holes (h+) act as oxidants for hydroxyl ions, producing the most 
important oxidant - reactive OH•. The free electrons in the conduction 
band can reduce oxygen adsorbed on TiO2NPs to O2
-•. Oxygen can be 
indirectly formed from superoxide. These species can react to form 
H2O2, hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl radicals. The reaction of radicals with 
organic substances can also occur (Fig. 10b). The produced ROS can 
enter microbial cells through diffusion, damaging their cell membranes 
and internal structures, thereby inhibiting microbial growth [193].
The antibacterial properties of TiO2NPs under light exposure are 
primarily due to the presence of free and surface-bound O2, which is 
responsible for ROS generation, thereby disrupting LPS, peptidoglycan, 
and phospholipid bilayers. However, OH• is short-lived and is unable to 
diffuse more than 1 μm from TiO2 surface, especially in the presence of 
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
15 

organic modifiers. The ability of H2O2 molecules to easily penetrate the 
cell membrane and act at a distance ensures lethal outcome from ROS 
[192]. Moreover, some of the mechanisms of NP attachment and cell 
damage were previously illustrated in Fig. 2.
The antimicrobial toxicity of TiO2NPs depends on light exposure 
conditions, time of illumination, medium, and TiO2 crystalline structure 
and concentration (Table 2). For example, the antibacterial effect of 
TiO2NPs was shown [9] to have a non-linear dependence on the illu­
mination dose. Antibacterial properties decreased when bacteria are 
exposed to a high concentration of TiO2NPs (>100 mg/mL) [29]. Al- 
Awady et al. [194] showed that TiO2NPs reduce microalgae 
C. reinhardtii cell viability at much lower particle concentrations than 
required for yeast S. cerevisiae. This effect was more pronounced under 
UV irradiation than under dark conditions. Moreover, smaller diameter 
of TiO2NPs provided a stronger antimicrobial effect, and the effect of 
anatase TiO2NPs was more noticeable than rutile TiO2. L´opez de 
Dicastillo [195] reported on the best antimicrobial activity of TiO2NPs 
against methicillin-resistant S.aureus after UVA irradiation for 60 min. 
On the other hand, Gelover et al. [196] found that fecal coliforms were 
completely inactivated by 15-min exposure to TiO2NPs. It is worth 
noting that most studies have shown that Gram-positive bacteria are 
more resistant to TiO2NP photocatalytic activity than Gram-negative 
bacteria. The difference is usually due to the variation in their cell 
wall structure [33,197].
The mechanism by which TiO2NPs exhibit bactericidal activity in the 
absence of light is not fully understood. On the one hand, it is supposed 
that the antimicrobial activity of TiO2NPs is enhanced when they are in 
close contact with bacteria, leading to increased oxidative damage to the 
bacteria [198]. This effect is likely due to the increased surface contact 
area available for ROS production. The presence of various ions in the 
medium can prevent the binding of TiO2NPs to bacteria, thereby 
reducing the rate of inactivation. On the other hand, the crystalline 
structure of TiO2NPs is thought to be able to cause physical damage to 
cell membrane upon contact, leading to membrane destabilization, loss 
of membrane potential, and increased membrane permeability. Mech­
anism of TiO2NP toxicity in the dark, associated with free radical pro­
duction, seems to play a minor role [33,192].
The methods of “green” chemistry can be implicated to produce more 
biocompatible TiO2NPs, as plant extracts can serve as capping and 
reducing agents. For example, Hameed et al. [199] synthesized TiO2NPs 
using an aqueous solution of banana peel extract, demonstrating a 
higher antimicrobial activity of TiO2NPs against Gram-positive bacteria, 
than Gram-negative bacteria.
TiO2NPs can also inhibit biofilm formation, primarily through ROS 
generation. Khan et al. [200] reported the eradication of biofilms of two 
strains of S. mitis from the oral cavity. The antibiofilm activity of 
TiO2NPs is associated with their mobility between bacteria, destroying 
the biofilm both mechanically and by generating ROS, which can also 
reduce the formation of extracellular polysaccharide and oxidize 
internal enzymes.
3.5. Zinc oxide NPs
ZnO can be considered the second most widely produced metal 
oxide-containing nanomaterial, after TiO2. ZnO is also a semiconductor 
material that has a wurtzite crystal structure and a wide band gap 
(~3.37 eV). The multifunctional properties of nanoscale zinc oxide 
(ZnONPs), including their ability to generate ROS and exhibit antibac­
terial activity, are believed to be more efficient than those of micro-sized 
zinc oxide. As reported in the literature [15], ZnONPs have a higher 
photocatalytic efficiency and are more biocompatible than TiO2. 
ZnONPs have been approved by the FDA for use in food preservation, 
which helps to increase the shelf life of products and improve 
manufacturing stability. These properties make them a promising 
candidate for use as an antibacterial agent. Although it is commercially 
used, the exact mechanism of antimicrobial activity has not been fully 
understood [201].
To date, the antibacterial activity of ZnONPs is supposed to include 
all three aforementioned mechanisms (Table 1). Direct attachment of 
ZnONPs is the first event in antibacterial action. The interaction with 
cell membrane is currently believed to be dependent on the size, 
morphology and concentration of ZnONPs (Table 2). As for all types of 
metal-based NPs, ZnONPs of small sizes and, consequently with large 
surface area, can easily disrupt the bacterial membrane, thereby 
enhancing the antibacterial effect [201]. Jones et al. [202] showed a 
fivefold enhancement in the antimicrobial properties of 8 nm ZnONPs 
compared to 50–70 nm. Higher antibacterial activity was found for 6.8- 
nm ZnONPs than for 260 or 800-nm particles. In addition, small-sized 
NPs can penetrate cells, despite the fact that the pore sizes of the bac­
terial membrane are 50 times smaller, and there is no mechanism for the 
internalization of colloidal NPs in bacteria [203]. The authors [203] 
proposed that bounded ZnONPs induce “pit” formation, resulting in the 
corresponding membrane channels that mediate the internalization of 
small NPs. Small ZnONPs, according to literature [204], can accumulate 
on the outer membrane, increasing surface tension and membrane de­
polarization due to electrostatic interactions, which allows easier 
penetration.
The antibacterial properties of ZnONPs also depend on their 
morphology, which is related to the number of NP active facets. The 
diversity of ZnO nanostructures with different shapes, such as nanorods, 
nanosphere, nanotubes, nanowires, nanoneedles and nanorings drives a 
variety of structural, optical, and physicochemical properties, which are 
responsible for multiplex application of ZnONPs. [201]. For example, 
NPs with nanoflower shape showed high photocatalytic activity, as 
evidenced by its effectiveness against S. aureus and P. aeruginosa [205] 
(Table 2).
Another proposed antibacterial mechanism of ZnONPs involves their 
partial dissolution and the release of zinc ions [206]. Zn2+ has a strong 
Fig. 10. a) Schematic representation of TiO2NP photocatalytic reactions in aerobic aqueous media. Under irradiation, positive holes (h+) act as oxidants for hydroxyl 
ions, producing reactive hydroxyl radicals (OH•). The free electrons in the conduction band can reduce oxygen adsorbed on TiO2NPs to a superoxide anion radical (O2
- 
•). These species can react to form H2O2, hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl radicals; b) Scheme of reactions under irradiation. Electrons and holes can recombine non- 
radiatively in the bulk of TiO2NPs. At the surface electrons and holes can react with oxygen and organic molecules to give ROS.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
16 

affinity to bacterial sulfhydryl groups. This can inhibit the glycolytic 
enzyme activity and therefore affect the glycolytic pathway. Thus, zinc 
ions can suppress the activity of bacterial respiratory enzymes, ulti­
mately leading to cell death [201]. Note that Zn2+ can enter bacteria 
through various pathways. In the case of Gram-positive bacteria, Zn2+ is 
chelated with teichoic acid and lipoteichoic acid of peptidoglycan 
membrane and penetrate the cell. In Gram-negative bacteria, Zn 2+
passively diffuses into the cell via porins, which act as ion channels 
[201].
The phenomenon of dissolution is somewhat controversial, although 
it has been accepted and recognized. Some researchers [184,207] sug­
gest that the toxicity of ZnONPs is predominantly related to their solu­
bility and the release of Zn2+ into the medium. In contrast, some studies 
demonstrate a minor contribution of Zn2+, since the low solubility of 
ZnONPs promotes the low concentration of released ions [201,208]. The 
concentration of released zinc ions depends on both the physicochemical 
properties of NPs, including porosity, concentration, size, and 
morphology, and the environment, including pH, other chemicals, UV 
radiation, and exposure time [201].
The main mechanism of ZnONP antibacterial activity implicates the 
ROS generation due to the fact that ZnONPs, like TiO2NPs, can strongly 
absorb UV light (Fig. 10). The antimicrobial action of ROS after pene­
tration through the bacterial membrane is associated with damage to 
cellular components [206]. This activity is discussed in detail in the 
section on TiO2NPs. For example, Ann et al. [209] showed enhanced 
inhibition of ZnONP against E. coli and S. aureus under UVA irradiation, 
especially for rod-shaped NPs.
The antibacterial activity of ZnONPs varies among different types of 
bacteria, although both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria are 
affected by these NPs. Gram-positive bacteria were found to be more 
susceptible and sensitive than Gram-negative [42]. This effect is likely 
related to interactions with different types of cell membranes. The outer 
membrane of Gram-positive bacteria allows ZnONPs to penetrate the 
cell wall more easily than the LPS membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. 
LPSs also hinder the permeation of ROS and ions into the cell, thereby 
reducing the antibacterial action [210].
The “green” synthesis of ZnONPs offers several advantages over 
conventional chemical methods, such as biocompatibility, biosafety, 
eco-friendliness, cost-effectiveness, ease of large-scale production, as 
well as significant antibacterial effects [205,211]. There are reports in 
the literature on plant-mediated synthesis of ZnONPs, including Psidium 
guajava leaf extract, Pedalium murex plant extract, Parthenium hyster­
ophorus leaf extract, Gymnema sylvestre leaf extract, Aloe vera and Hibiscus 
sabdariffa plant extracts [201]. For example, Mahendiran et al. [212] 
showed that the best antibacterial effect was observed for ZnONPs 
synthesized using extracts of Aloe vera and Hibiscus sabdariffa leaves.
Noticeable antibiofilm activity was acquired for ZnONPs synthesized 
using “green” methods. This inhibition activity of ZnONPs was shown 
for biofilm of S. pneumonia [213], Rothia dentocariosa and R. mucilaginosa 
[214]. Asif et al. [215] demonstrated the effective disruption of bacterial 
biofilms of MDR strains (S. aureus, B. cereus, E. coli and K. pneumoniae) 
using ZnONPs that were prepared utilizing the cell extract of the 
cyanobacterium Gleocapsa gelatinosa. The leaf extract of the plant Saraca 
asoca provided the synthesis of ZnONPs, which had concentration- 
dependent antibiofilm activity against Bacillus subtilis [216].
Although in some cases, ZnONPs can promote the opposite effect 
[111]. Salem et al. [132] reported a significant reduction in E. coli 
biofilm, while V. cholerae biofilm was significantly increased after 
exposure to ZnONPs. The stimulatory effect of ZnONPs on bacterial 
biofilm is supposed to be related to the inhibition of adenylyl cyclase 
activity, leading to a decrease in the level of second messenger cAMP. 
cAMP is known to be an inhibitor of biofilm formation. Thus, treatment 
with sublethal concentrations of ZnONPs can induce biofilm formation.
3.6. Iron oxide NPs
Iron oxide NPs (IONPs) play an important role in various fields and 
make a significant contribution to the biomedical area. Super­
paramagnetic properties and excellent biocompatibility make IONPs a 
unique class of metal-oxide NPs. The shape, size, and magnetic prop­
erties of IONPs render them a promising antimicrobial agent for killing 
bacteria through the application of an external magnetic field. This in­
creases the therapeutic effect of the treatment, especially when 
compared to conventional antimicrobial treatments.
There are 14 different types of iron oxide crystallites, among which 
magnetite (Fe3O4) and hematite (Fe2O3) have superparamagnetic 
properties at the nanoscale (<20 nm) [217]. In addition, the magnetic 
moments of these iron NPs become aligned under a magnetic field [218]. 
The superparamagnetic properties depend on NP size and shape, which 
can be varied by changing the pH, ionic strength, temperature, and the 
ratio of Fe2+ to Fe3+ [219]. The key mechanisms of the antibacterial 
activity of iron oxide NPs are thought to be all three of the aforemen­
tioned mechanisms. (Table 1).
The damage to cell membranes is governed by their interactions with 
IONPs. This interaction is crucial for the antibacterial activity of IONPs, 
which is typical for all NPs and mainly depends on their physicochem­
ical properties, as well as bacterial cell membrane properties [219]. 
IONPs are supposed to be more toxic to Gram-positive bacteria than to 
Gram-negative bacteria, which have a more complex chemical structure. 
Ismail et al. [220] observed significant antimicrobial effect of α-Fe2O3 
on S. aureus compared to E.coli, P. aeruginosa and S. marcescens [11] 
(Table 2).
Most of IONP characteristics, especially the toxic effect, are related to 
their size. In general, smaller NPs exhibit higher antimicrobial activity at 
equal concentrations, as they can accumulate on the surface in higher 
concentrations and easily permeate the bacterial cell membrane. 
Attachment of IONPs to bacterial cell membrane is driven by electro­
static interactions, hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bond formation, 
as well as nanoscale effect. Some researchers believe that the nanoscale 
effect is the most significant in the process of IONP adsorption. Even 
negatively charged IONPs can attach to the negatively charged bacterial 
membrane. Note that the zeta potential of IONPs may depend on the 
actual pH of the solution [221]. High concentration of IONPs can pro­
mote bacterial cell death to some extent due to molecular clustering, 
providing direct interaction between IONPs and bacteria [42].
Another mechanism of IONP antibacterial activity relates to Fe ion 
release. The solubility of IONPs varies under different environmental 
conditions, and the rate of ion release from NPs typically depends on the 
pH and temperature of the solution [219]. In addition, IONP dissolution 
is correlated with crystal size and crystalline phase. In particular, the 
smaller IONPs, the higher the solubility and the greater the release of 
iron ions.
Ansari et al. [222] showed the enhanced membrane permeability of 
Gram-positive bacterium R.erythropolis after exposure to magnetic 
IONPs (Fe3O4), having high degree of ion release. Moreover, IONPs 
facilitated magnetic field-induced cell separation at the end of the 
desulfurization process. IONPs also demonstrated a concentration- 
dependent inhibitory effect on E. coli that extended to the level of cell 
division, as evidenced by a sharp increase in the length of bacterial cells 
[223]. However, IONPs may have a controversial effect to the bacteria 
killing, namely the cell growth-promoting effect due to increased par­
ticle solubility and the release of a high amount of biogenic iron ions. 
Borcherding et al. [224] found that IONPs (on the example of hematite 
α-Fe2O3) increased bacterial growth and biofilm formation when the 
IONP size was less than 90 nm.(Table 2).
IONPs also implicate another mechanism to eliminate pathogenic 
bacteria by inducing oxidative stress through ROS generation. This 
mechanism is considered to be the most important in biocidal activity of 
IONPs. In biological environment, the predominant reaction on the NP 
surface is the reaction of chemisorbed O2 and H2O, as we described 
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
17 

previously. The reaction on the IONP surface results in the rapid for­
mation of HO• and HO−via the Fenton reactions of primarily formed 
H2O2 with Fe2+ released from the NPs. Fenton reactions are the oxida­
tion of Fe2+ by H2O2 to Fe3+ and other types of ROS species (Fig. 11) 
[225]. In this scenario, ROS generation do not require any light, which is 
needed to activate ZnO or TiO2 [217]. The redox pair Fe2+/Feo can 
oxidize redox-active biomolecules, providing the possibility of a metal 
redox potential shift in a negative direction after interaction [225]. It 
should be noted that metal ions other than Fe2+ (e.g., Mn2+,Co2+, and 
Cu2+) can participate in Fenton-like reactions, which can reduce H2O2 to 
HO• and HO2
• under near-neutral (biologically friendly) conditions 
(Fig. 11) [226].
IONPs are known to catalyze the Haber–Weiss reaction in biological 
systems. In Haber–Wiess reactions, the oxidized iron ions from Fenton 
reactions are reduced and reoxidized by H2O2. This reaction usually 
includes two steps: i) O2
•- reduces Fe3+ to Fe2+ with formation O2; ii) 
Fe2+ is reoxidized back to its original charge, i.e., Fe3+ [225].
In summary, both IONPs and free Fe ions released from NPs can, 
through Fenton and/or Haber–Weiss reactions, generate O2
•-, HO•, and 
HO2
• with the help of H2O2. These extracellular ROS play an important 
role in antibacterial activity by destroying the antioxidant defense 
mechanism against oxidative stress. For example, the role of Fenton 
reaction in the presence of IONPs, resulting in cell death, was described 
in [117,227–229].
It is noteworthy that the antibacterial activity of IONPs is relatively 
weak. For example, Fe2O3NPs are less effective at disrupting bacteria 
E. coli, S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, and B.subtilis compared to ZnO and 
CuONPs [230]. The implication of “green” synthesis enables the prep­
aration of IONPs with comparable antimicrobial effects against both 
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria [231–233]. For example, 
Fe3O4NPs synthesized using Malva sylvestris had a more pronounced 
bactericidal effect [234]. IONPs synthesized in the presence of Argemone 
mexicana extract showed higher antibacterial activity, than conven­
tional IONPs, probably due to synergistic effect of the phytochemicals 
and ROS generation. IONP activity was comparable to that of strepto­
mycin [235].
The potential of IONPs to inhibit bacterial biofilm formation has 
been demonstrated, but this is still a topic of debate, as IONPs may in­
crease bacterial growth and biofilm formation due to their biogenicity, 
as we mentioned previously. There are reports in the literature showing 
that IONPs reduce biofilm growth of S. aureus and P. aeruginosa [236], 
gentamicin resistant Staphylococci [237], E.faecalis [238]. Biofilm for­
mation in medical implantable devices requires new approaches, one of 
which is the incorporation of IONPs in the surface coating. Embedding 
IONPs in a catheter surface coating prepared from the essential oils 
reduced the initial adhesion of S. aureus and K. pneumoniae and 
demonstrated a bactericidal effect. In contrast, treating biofilm with 
IONPs at more mature stages did not significantly inhibit its growth 
[239].
Of particular interest is the strategy when IONPs are used under 
magnetic field conditions. The ability of IONPs to become heated in the 
presence of an alternating magnetic field makes them highly promising 
for hyperthermia treatment. This property of IONPs can serve the 
development of antimicrobial magnetic thermotherapy, causing a local 
increase in temperature. This reduces the viability of biofilm-forming 
bacteria and disrupts the EPS matrix and triggers an innate immune 
response [20]. Park et al. [240] reported the significant inactivation of 
P. aeruginosa through local heating of IONPs under alternating current. 
Magnetic thermotherapy was also exploited to eradicate S. aureus [241]. 
This approach may facilitate the treatment of chronic wound infections, 
multidrug-resistant and biofilm-forming bacteria.
The combined application of magnetic hyperthermia with APDT to 
biofilm eradication remains poorly explored [242], while the synergistic 
effects of elevated temperature, degradation of the biofilm matrix, and 
enhanced ROS can contribute to the effective disruption of bacterial 
biofilms. Li et al. [243] designed mesoporous Fe3O4 NPs embedded with 
IR-820 photosensitizer, which integrate APDT and magnetic therapy. 
The magnetic nature of these NPs enabled generation of thermal energy 
in a magnetic field, which facilitated the release of IR-820. Under 
exposure to NIR light, IR-820 generated ROS. The combination of these 
factors resulted in the effective destruction of both the biofilm and the 
bacteria. The antibacterial activity of these NPs was tested both in vitro 
and in vivo using rat models of infected wounds and subcutaneous ab­
scesses. This strategy offers advanced approach to biofilm-related ther­
apy by employing the synergistic action of APDT and magnetic therapy.
To summarize, the main characteristics of all NP types, highlighting 
the mechanism, are presented in Table 1. The antibacterial NP activity 
against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria is shown in Table 2.
4. Strategy for enhancing metal/metal oxide NP properties
The prominent role of metal and metal oxide NPs in targeting and 
destroying microbes is discussed in this review. However, the desire to 
improve the physical and chemical properties, increase the antibacterial 
activity and reduce toxicity to eukaryotic cells, as well as make NPs more 
cost-effective, governs the development of nanocomposites. These 
nanocomposites are based on NPs coupled with polymers, biologically 
active substances, and antibiotics, as well as on multimetallic NPs, etc. 
Nanocomposites are designed to exhibit the synergistic effect of 
embedded components within a single agent [90].
4.1. Surface modification
Despite various beneficial properties, metal and metal oxide NPs are 
prone to aggregation and oxidation, demonstrating physical and 
chemical instability. This can affect NP antibacterial activity and 
toxicity. Size, surface zeta potential, morphology, solubility, shape 
contribute to colloidal stability and, consequently, reduce NP aggrega­
tion. These characteristics can be controlled during the NP synthesis, a 
description of which can be found in the literature [5,9,28].
Surface properties, including in these characteristics, have a signif­
icant impact on antibacterial activity and can be tuned by surface 
coating, where polymers play a vital role. In the first place, the positive 
charge of NPs was shown to enhance their toxic action due to their 
electrostatic interaction with the negatively charged cell membrane. The 
implication of positively charged polymers for NP surface coating is a 
general approach, demonstrating an obvious effect on killing bacteria. 
The charge density of cationic groups determines the antimicrobial ac­
tivity of cationic polymers. In addition, these polymers perform capping 
function, increasing stability and ensuring a homogeneous state of 
dispersion.
Polymers for coating can be either synthetic or natural. The most 
explored type of synthetic cationic biocides includes polymers with 
quaternary ammonium groups, which contain aromatic or heterocyclic 
structures derived from polystyrene or polyvinyl pyridines. These types 
of polymers also have inherent antibacterial activity. For example, 
quaternized polyvinyl pyridines with different alkyl bromides (from 
propyl to hexadecyl) can eradicate S. epidermidis, P. aeruginosa and E. coli 
bacteria [244]. Their bactericidal properties can be enhanced by copo­
lymerization with hydrophilic and biocompatible 2-hydroxyethyl 
methacrylate and poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate [245]. Biocidal 
polymers can also contain quaternary phosphonium or sulfonium, N- 
halamines, based on derivatives of polyguanidines, polynorbornenes, 
amine- and ammonium-terminated derivatives [246]. Polyvinyl 
Fig. 11. Basic free radical mechanisms based on the Fenton and Haber- 
Weiss reactions.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
18 

pyridine coating of CuNPs enhanced their bactericidal activity, as shown 
against S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, B. subtilis and E. coli. This activity was 
more effective than that of AgNPs with a similar coating [247].
The most explored natural polymers for NP coating are poly­
saccharides, including the widely used positively charged chitosan. The 
antibacterial activity of chitosan is proposed to include electrostatic, 
hydrophobic interactions, and a chelating effect. NPs with chitosan 
coating exhibited higher activity, even at low NP concentrations. This 
effect was observed in AuNPs towards S. aureus and P. aeruginosa due to 
the presence of extended natural polymer chitosan, which facilitates 
easier contact with the cell membrane, causing cell death [248]. Similar 
behavior was also found for zinc oxide [249] and iron oxide NPs [250].
Among natural coatings, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) attract great 
attention. These peptides, such as defensins, cathelicidins (LL-37) and 
magainins, exhibit pronounced antimicrobial activity against bacteria, 
viruses and fungi. AMPs are typically positively charged and contain 
both hydrophobic and hydrophilic segments. This allows them to form 
an amphiphilic structure, which is responsible for NP colloidal stability, 
while maintaining their functional activity [151]. For example, the 
conjugate of His-tagged antimicrobial peptide (HPA3P-His) and DNA 
aptamer-coated AuNPs showed high antimicrobial activity against a 
Gram-negative bacterium, Vibrio vulnificus. This conjugate was able to 
efficiently deliver HPA3P-His into cells [251]. In recent years, there has 
been growing research interest in the production of synthetic antimi­
crobial peptides, which can help to reduce manufacturing cost and 
susceptibility to proteolysis [246].
Alternative promising therapy is based on the use of bacteriophages, 
which are viruses that specifically target and infect bacteria. However, 
treatment of infection by phages meets many concerns, such as a lack of 
biological characterization, which may carry toxin gene [252]. To solve 
this problem, phages were suggested to be conjugated with NPs to create 
a reagent that would be destroyed after use. Peng et al. [253] engineered 
the chimeric phages for specific interaction with various Gram-negative 
bacteria (E. coli, P. aeruginosa, Vibrio cholerae), which were conjugated 
with AuNPs. Conjugates selectively targeted and killed bacterial cells 
after exposure to NIR (808 nm) light. AuNPs released energy through 
non-radiative decay pathways, which locally heated and efficiently 
destroyed targeted bacterial cells, both in solution and within a 
P. aeruginosa biofilm grown on an epithelial cell substrate. This system 
demonstrated highly localized and selective ablation of the bacteria, 
causing minimal damage to epithelial cells and eliminating the phages 
themselves. This avoids replication and reduces the potential risks of 
traditional phage therapy, while providing control over dosage.
The groundbreaking clustered regularly interspaced short palin­
dromic repeats (CRISPR)-associated protein (Cas) (CRISPR/Cas) system 
provides a highly precise and individualized approach to specifically 
targeting, direct killing and editing genome responsible for bacterial 
resistance, as well as DNA imaging [254]. This system utilizes the pre­
cise manipulation of any DNA sequence, guided by a short sequence of 
RNA, to reverse or eliminate drug resistance in bacteria. The surface 
modification of metal-based NPs with CRISPR/Cas has great potential 
for its effective delivery. This approach exhibits enhanced pathogen 
targeting, involving a synergistic effect of the NPs, while reducing 
cytotoxicity and offering ease of production and scalability [255]. There 
are reports on effective delivery of Au-CRISPR/Cas system for diagnosis 
[256], imaging [257], embedding in various types of cells, including 
cancer cells, followed by their breakdown [258]. Although metal-based 
complexes with CRISPR/Cas are still at the very preliminary stage, 
compared to viral, polymer, liposome NPs, and, to the best of our 
knowledge, there are no reports on applying NP/CRISPR systems to 
bacteria treatment. Thus, promising trend is the feasibility of using 
metal-based NPs-CRISPR-Cas to disable resistance genes and improve 
the delivery of CRISPR-Cas [254,259].
The role of NP coating in intensifying antimicrobial activity can also 
be played by positively charged high or low molecular weight sub­
stances. They are presented by proteins (bovine serum albumin, 
concanavalin A, keratin), aminosaccharides (D-glucosamine), photo­
sensitizers (methylene blue), enzymes (lysozyme, protease), poly­
peptides (poly-L-lysine) [146,151,246]. Of particular interest are the 
capping agents that occur on the NP surface during their “green syn­
thesis”, mainly using plant extracts, providing NPs with new biodiverse 
properties, as well as environmental and economic efficiency.
Another direct effect of capping agents on NP toxicity is associated 
with their ability to reduce NP aggregation. Although, the impact of 
ionic strength and pH of the dispersion medium should be taken into 
account. Capping agents play roles of stabilizers, preventing formation 
of large NP agglomerates, thereby enhancing antimicrobial activity, as 
small-sized NPs are known to more easily penetrate the cell membrane 
[28]. For example, AgNP antimicrobial activity against E.coli increased 
when positively charged cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) 
directly adsorbed on specific crystal planes of the NPs, providing a 
synergistic effect of CTAB and AgNPs [40].
It is noteworthy that damage of cell walls caused by small cationic 
NPs is not obvious in some cases. Hayden et al. [260] showed that NPs 
can induce coalescence of hydrophobic regions on the cell membrane, or 
they can aggregate at hydrophobic “hot spots” already present on bac­
teria. This scenario also needs to be considered, as has been shown for 
AuNPs with sizes of 6 or 2 nm, coated with a hexyl-substituted, 
ammonium-functionalized thiol and used against E. coli and B. subtilis. 
The formation of distinctly different AuNP surface aggregates or lysis 
was observed, depending on the size.
The interaction of metal and metal oxide NPs with cells is an 
important property for their pronounced antibacterial activity against 
planktonic cells, while surface coating of medical devices should reduce 
these interactions. Such coating is typically used for prosthetic or graft 
implants in order to protect against bacterial adhesion and biofilm for­
mation. In this case, the negative zeta potential of NPs is preferable to 
minimize the interactions with negatively charged bacteria, while NPs 
may not even exhibit antimicrobial activity. The main impact of NPs is 
to rough up the surface, preventing contact with relatively rigid bacte­
ria. Thus, the implication of capping agents can affect the size, 
morphology and zeta potential of NPs, which in turn can tune the 
antimicrobial properties of medical surfaces [76].
4.2. Composites with other metals
Higher chemical stability, wider physical properties, lower cytotox­
icity, and, in particular, an enhanced antimicrobial effect can be ach­
ieved in bi- or tri-metallic NPs. The synergistic activity of multimetallic 
NPs is associated with a combination of diverse mechanisms, including 
the release of various types of ions, increased production of ROS, unique 
shapes and morphologies [261]. In addition, the creation of multime­
tallic NPs is the approach to development of multifunctional antibac­
terial agents that can exhibit one or more modalities in individual NP, 
such 
as 
catalytic, 
oxidative, 
photocatalityc, 
photothermal, 
photodynamic.
Diverse preparation methods, taking into account the specificity of 
the metals, govern the formation of phase-separated and homogeneous 
alloys or core-shell structures [261]. For example, bimetallic Au–Ag 
NPs exhibited higher antibacterial activity compared to single metal NPs 
due to slower release of Ag ions, as well as with low cytotoxicity to 
human cells [262]. NPs based on blends of metals and metal oxides also 
showed an enhanced antimicrobial effect in contrast to individual NPs. 
Among these NPs are AgCu, ZnOAg, FeZnO, CuNi, CuO/ZnO, AgZnO, 
and PdZnO NPs [261]. The three-component NPs, such as Cu2O–Ag/ 
ZnO, exhibit higher time- and dose-dependent inhibition of bacterial 
growth compared to bimetallic NPs (Cu2O/ZnO and Ag/ZnO) [263].
The homogeneous distribution of components in bimetallic NPs was 
shown to increase antibacterial activity. Yang et al. [264] reported on 
homogeneous alloy of immiscible Ag–Cu NPs, which was found to be 
more effective against bacteria than either AgNPs or CuNPs alone. This 
is likely due to the higher release of Ag ions from the alloy.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
19 

NP core-shell structure enables tuning the antibacterial activity by 
exposure the more sensitive metal to the environment. This was 
demonstrated using the example of globular Au@AgNPs, where the 
silver shell undergoes facile oxidation [265]. In the case of 
Fe3O4@AgNPs, the Ag shell around the cubic core, Fe3O4 NPs, provides 
the release of free Ag ions, improves the NP biocompatibility and 
chemical stability by preventing oxidation of the magnetic core that 
generates ROS [266].
The composites can be synthesized in various morphologies that 
impart combat properties against bacteria. The strong antibacterial ac­
tivity due to the synergistic bactericidal action was observed for Janus- 
like NPs, such as Cu/FeNPs with enhanced release of both ions [267], 
CuNPs on Au nanoplates, which effectively absorb NIR light, facilitating 
photothermal therapy [268]. In addition, Ag-TiO2, modified with argi­
nine, demonstrated robust self-propulsion upon ultrasonic activation, 
resulting in deeper penetration into biofilm and increased localized 
biofilm disruption [269]. The hybrid metal nanoshell structure of 
AuAgNS with a strong NIR irradiation response due to LSPR exhibited 
efficient photothermal effect and Ag ion release. The effect on 
methicillin-resistant S. aureus and extended-spectrum β-lactamase E. coli 
is shown in Fig. 12 [270].
Nanofibers have also gained considerable interest due to their 
enhanced antibacterial properties compared to globular NPs. This effect 
was shown for Zn-doped TiO2 nanofibers [271] and CuZn nanofibers 
[272].
Porous bimetallic monoliths with significant catalytic and antimi­
crobial activity have great potential. There are reports on the antibac­
terial activity of bimetallic monoliths based on Ag–Cu [273], monoliths 
with high porosity using TiO2 as a structural agent, such as Ag/TiO2 and 
CuO/TiO2 [274]. Structural agents can also be selected from meso­
porous zirconium dioxide and mesoporous manganese oxide, among 
others. It is noteworthy that not only metal-based materials act as 
structural agents, but also other materials such as carbon nanotubes 
[274], mesoporous silica, graphene, graphene oxide and reduced gra­
phene oxide [261].
4.3. NP composites with antibiotics
Metal and metal oxide NPs, as we show in this review, are effective 
agents that can overcome bacterial resistance to antibiotics. Although, 
the antibacterial activity of NPs can be achieved at high doses accom­
panied by low biocompatibility and the manifestation of cytotoxicity in 
physiological conditions [275]. One of the attractive approaches is the 
creation composition of NPs with antibiotics, which can provide a 
Fig. 12. a) Brightfield images of ESBL E. coli and MRSA colonies after incubation with Ag or AuAgNSs and/or irradiation with 808-nm laser for 10 min at 1.0 W 
cm−2, and corresponding graphs (b–c). Data are presented as mean ± SD and normalized to that of untreated control. Statistical significance was ***p < 0.001. 
Reprinted from [270]. Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
20 

synergistic effect, thereby reduce the effective dose and decrease 
toxicity to human cells. In addition, the combination of NPs and anti­
biotics helps retain the antibiotics’ ability to disrupt bacteria that have 
become resistant to them [20].
However, the mechanisms behind the increased efficiency of com­
posites and the activation of antibiotics by metal/metal oxide NPs are 
not fully understood. The increased activity of composites is thought to 
be related to their high surface area to volume ratio. This facilitates a 
high density of antibiotic molecules on the surface, which manifests it­
self as a polyvalent effect. Another possible mechanism of composite 
action is based on the complex formation between metal ions and an­
tibiotics [20]. Released metal ions and surface atoms/ions of NPs can 
form coordination bonds with the unshared electron pairs of nitrogen, 
oxygen, phosphorous atoms present in antibiotics. Such interactions can 
alter the exposure of antibiotics to bacterial cells compared to the 
original form of drugs. NPs can also promote penetration of antibiotics 
through the cell membrane. On the other hand, antibiotics may help 
with the more active release of metal ion. The coordination of metal 
atoms/ions of NPs with antibiotics is suggested as a strategy to overcome 
bacterial resistance and enhance the effectiveness of antibiotics [276].
Deng et al. [276] reported on the synergistic effect of AgNPs with 
enoxacin, kanamycin, neomycin, and tetracycline against Salmonella sp. 
The authors assume the multi-step action of NP composites with anti­
biotics. At first, AgNPs interact with antibiotic drugs producing a com­
plex that then attaches to the bacterial membrane. This complex releases 
Ag ions more effectively than individual NPs under the same conditions. 
As a result, the local concentration of Ag+ increases near the cell 
membrane and destroys it, leading to bacterial death. Composites based 
on bimetallic Zn-AlNPs with incorporated penicillin G are believed to 
show sustained antibacterial activity against E. coli due to the release of 
Zn ions [277].
The synergistic effect may be caused by the chelation of Ag with 
hydroxyl and amido groups of the antibiotic, giving a coating on the NP 
surface. This effect was demonstrated for composite AgNPs-ampicillin/ 
kanamycin/erythromycin/chloramphenicol against S.aureus, Micro­
coccus luteus, Salmonella typhi, and E. coli. Antibacterial activity of AgNPs 
increases in the presence of a drug, which affects the cell membrane and 
causes it to lyse, increasing AgNP penetration into the bacterium. This 
complex interacts with DNA and inhibits its unwinding, causing more 
significant damage to bacterial cells [278]. CuONPs, in combination 
with cephalexin, which destroys cell membrane synthesis, exhibited a 
synergistic antibacterial effect against E. coli without increasing Cu2+
release, Cu2+ uptake, or ROS generation. The main mechanism of this 
composite action is likely related to stronger interaction with the bac­
terial cell membrane and more efficient destruction than individual NPs. 
This makes it easier for CuONPs to penetrate the cell and bind with 
proteins and DNA [279].
Of particular interest is the NP implication for antibiotic delivery, as 
they can act as carriers. The NP properties as carriers are mainly gov­
erned by capping agents, which can either target cell membranes or 
affect the affinity between the NP surface and antibiotics [20]. Seyed- 
Talebi et al. [280] produced the TiO2 hollow spheres using a remov­
able template made from sucrose. These NPs serve as an excellent carrier 
for delivering gentamicin directly, while preserving it with TiO2 hollow 
shell, maintaining a high local concentration and a longer release time. 
The composition of TiO2 and gentamicin was more effective in dis­
rupting bacteria compared to inactive hollow TiO2. Note that their ac­
tivity was higher against Gram-positive bacteria (B. subtilis, S.aureus) 
than the Gram-negative bacteria (E.coli, P. aeruginosa).
Certain enzymes are capable of breaking down the polymers of the 
biofilm matrix. This prevents biofilm formation, loosens the matrix 
formed on the surface, and makes bacteria in biofilms more sensitive to 
antibacterial drugs [35]. Kalita et al. [281] developed an antibacterial 
hybrid system, consisting of the antibiotic ampicillin conjugated with 
lysozyme-capped AuNC. This system reduced S. aureus resistance to 
ampicillin and remarkably increased the antibacterial effect of this 
antibiotic against other non-resistant bacterial strains. This system in 
vivo enabled the elimination of infection and increased the survival rate 
of infected animals, as well as accelerating the healing process of dia­
betic wounds. These promising results are thought to be associated with 
higher ampicillin concentrations due to its increased cell penetration, 
lysozyme-induced cell wall lysis, damage to bacterial efflux pumps, and 
Au-induced cell membrane destabilization.
Multifunctional stimuli-responsive nanosystems designed to combat 
bacterial biofilm have attracted a lot of attention. Alvarez et al. [282] 
applied magneto hyperthermia combined with controlled antibiotic 
delivery using a multifunctional nanocarrier for antibiofilm combina­
tion therapy. The nanocarrier was composed of mesoporous silica NPs 
loaded with antibiotic, coated with a thermosensitive polymer, and 
decorated with magnetite (Fe3O4). When a magnetic field was applied, 
the magnetite acted as a “hot spot”, causing the polymer network to 
shrink and the pores to uncap, releasing the antibiotic cargo. Bacteri­
cidal efficacy is demonstrated by a decrease in the viability of almost 
four units log10 CFU/mL compared to the control. The close contact of 
IONPs with the biofilm, providing heating directly on the biofilm, and 
the enhanced antimicrobial activity of IONPs result in the bactericidal 
efficacy. This nanosystem paves the way for the design of multifunc­
tional nanomedicine for local antibiofilm therapy.
5. Conclusion and future perspectives
The rapid spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria is currently hinder­
ing efforts to develop new antimicrobial agents. The development of 
novel strategies to treat infections while overcoming antimicrobial 
resistance is an ongoing challenge. In recent years, metal and metal 
oxide NPs have shown great potential for their effective and prolonged 
antibacterial activity and prevention of biofilm formation. NPs are 
supposed to exhibit antibacterial activity due to three key factors: 
physical interaction with the cell wall, release of metal ions, and the 
generation of ROS that affect both cell membranes and intracellular 
structures. Their unique optical, magnetic, and thermal properties can 
be easily tuned and modified to produce tailored compositions using 
capping agents, drugs (including antibiotics), bioactive molecules, 
photosensitizers, and by embedding other metals into NPs. This 
approach enables the development of synergistically enhanced multi­
modal strategies for treating bacteria using light and magnetic fields. 
This review considers the current state of the most widely used metal- 
containing NPs with a comprehensive discussion of the specific mech­
anisms for each type (Ag, Au, Cu/CuO, TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3/Fe3O4).
However, the exact mechanism behind antibacterial activity is not 
fully understood, and further research is required to explore it. Unlike 
antibiotics with a single mode of action, the multiple pathways that are 
typically activated by NPs make it challenging to discover the exact 
mechanism of action. Meanwhile, the diversity of pathways determines 
the effectiveness of NP exposure, as bacteria are unable to simulta­
neously develop resistance to all factors. The challenges and contro­
versies associated with NP antibacterial activity are summarized in 
Table 3, followed by comments on key aspects of future perspectives.
Accurate and timely detection of bacteria is crucial for identifying 
infectious diseases. The conventional methods of detection, such as plate 
diffusion method and immunoassays are time-consuming processes with 
low detection limit, suffering from false negative or positive results. The 
distinct features of metal-containing NPs, such as LSPR, magnetic 
properties, and the ability to create hybrid structure with molecules 
carrying any signal (color, fluorescent, stimuli-responsive) and/or tar­
geted properties, underlie the potential for designing a variety of rapid, 
selective and highly sensitive methods [283].
The biocompatibility, biosafety, and toxicity of NPs, as well as their 
potential effects on human health and the environment, are important 
factors that must be taken into account when considering their use in 
biomedical applications. NP mechanisms of antibacterial activity may 
also be potentially toxic to human cells consisting of similar 
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
21 

biomolecules (lipids, proteins and DNA), although metals are able to 
distinguish between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. It is important to 
clearly identify human cell damage associated with metal poisoning to 
avoid exposure to such NPs for medical purposes. The development of 
new strategies, overcoming the metal/metal oxide NP toxicity, are at the 
forefront of research.
NP antibacterial effects depend greatly on their physical and chem­
ical properties, such as size, shape, surface morphology, reactivity, 
photochemical characteristics, etc. The assessment of the impact of each 
individual NP characteristics is a challenging task, as the complexity of 
the relationship between various physical and chemical properties 
contributes to its reactivity and toxicity. Various approaches to 
enhancing the properties and activity of NPs, while also increasing their 
safety for human cells, can be employed. These include surface modi­
fication, the creation of compositions combining several metals in one 
NP, the use of biologically active substances, particularly antibiotics, 
and the development of multifunctional construction with diverse mo­
dalities. Methods of “green” chemistry can offer approaches to produce 
NPs with functionalized surfaces that provide exceptional antibacterial 
properties and stabilization. Significant potential for increasing selective 
interaction with bacterial cells is associated with approaches aimed at 
modifying NPs with ligands specific to bacterial cell receptors.
Despite the great progress, most NPs have only been studied in vitro, 
considering them as antibacterial and antibiofilm agents. However, 
these studies should be expanded to in vivo research in order to find a 
balance between the required concentration for desired activity and 
minimized cytotoxicity and immune response. One important aspect is 
Table 3 
The challenges and controversies associated with antibacterial activity of metal/ 
metal oxide NPs.
Challenges
Controversies
Great variety of synthetic methods for 
producing metal/metal oxide NPs, 
which can be divided on:
The variety of NP synthetic protocols 
makes it difficult to compare the results 
of current studies and progress towards 
creating an antibiotic alternative.
❖ physical methods - “top-down” 
approaches (material breaking down 
in nanostructure) using laser 
ablation, UV irradiation, 
sonochemistry, grinding, etc. Large- 
scale, fast production both nano­
clusters (size less than 2 nm), and 
NPs;
High cost, need enormous energy, 
expensive equipment. Hard to control NP 
morphology, surface chemistry, crystal 
structure, aggregation.
❖ chemical methods - “bottom-up” 
approaches (grow from molecules in 
NPs), using chemical reduction, 
solvothermal decomposition, etc. 
Cost-effective for production of NPs 
of various sizes, shapes, morphology, 
crystal structure, surface chemistry, 
etc.
Demand labor-intensive equipment, 
utilize and can generate environmentally 
and biologically toxic chemicals. It is 
necessary to prevent NP aggregation 
during and after synthesis, transfer in 
aqueous media, use capping agents.
❖ “green” synthesis – “bottom-up” 
approaches using plant extracts, 
bacteria, fungi, algae, contained 
various biomolecules, including 
flavonoids, alkaloids, phenolic 
compounds, etc. acting as reducing 
and capping agents. Fast, eco- 
friendly methods for synthesis of NPs 
of various sizes, shapes, morphology, 
crystal structure, surface chemistry 
with antimicrobial properties, etc.
It is necessary to study the biomolecules 
present in plant extracts/microbial 
biomass responsible for the synthesis and 
stabilization with the aim of achieving 
large-scale production.
Variety of metals and their 
combinations in NPs, which 
determines, among other things, 
optical and magnetic properties, size, 
shape, and morphology, along with 
the possibility of surface modification 
using capping agents and targeting 
molecules, including antibiotics and 
biologically active molecules. This has 
the potential to create a wide range of 
NPs.
The same NPs produced using different 
methods exhibit diverse antibacterial 
activities, making it difficult to compare 
NP agents [122].
Antibacterial activity of NPs can be 
acquired using conventional well 
diffusion or disk diffusion methods, 
serological immunological methods.
These methods perform poorly in 
conditions, such as bacteremia. 
Adaptation of spectrophotometric, 
fluorescent, flow cytometry methods, 
magnetic-methods, SERS analysis is 
required [283], as well as the 
development of appropriate guidelines 
and standardization of assays.
The diversity of NP biocidal pathways 
leads to the fact that bacteria are 
unable to simultaneously develop 
resistance to the multi-target activity 
induced by NPs. NP activity due to:
NPs have potential toxicity towards 
mammalian cells, which can be avoided 
by using capping agents specific to 
bacterial cell receptors or using green- 
synthesized NPs.
❖ physical interaction with cell wall, 
which is directly guided by the 
method of synthesis;
The size, shape, surface morphology, 
hydrophobicity and crystal structure are 
essential for an effective interaction, but 
they can also have an impact on toxicity 
and potentially harmful effects. This 
requires the standardization of synthetic 
methods [34].
❖ release of metal ions, which depends 
on the chemical nature, as well as 
medium formulation and 
characteristics, such as pH, 
temperature, ionic strength, etc.;
High concentration of released ions can 
disrupt not only bacteria, but also 
mammalian cells. The effect is 
significantly connected with biogenicity 
of ions (for example, being biologically 
relevant, Fe, Cu, Zn ions can be used in 
higher concentrations) [34].
❖ ROS generation due to intrinsic NP 
properties (Fenton-like reactions, 
photocatalytic, LSPR), light 
ROS can enhance oxidative stress of 
normal cells surrounding infection sites 
and lead to inflammatory responses. It is 
necessary to lighten the side effects of  
Table 3 (continued)
Challenges 
Controversies
irradiation, released ions, oxidative 
stress.
ROS-mediated therapies. Potential 
toxicity to human beings and the 
environment should be systematically 
and accurately evaluated before 
translation to biomedical applications 
[66].
NP peculiarities enable an extension of 
their biocidal pathways against both 
planktonic and biofilm bacteria, 
including magnetic hyperthermia, 
photodynamic and photothermal 
therapy, photocatalytic activity. 
Moreover, multifunctional NP 
composites exhibiting several 
modalities and drug encapsulation 
can significantly enhance the 
eradication of bacterial biofilms.
In the course of biofilm treatment, the 
evaluation of dose effects, duration of 
light irradiation, magnetic field 
exposure, as well as drug release are in 
the early stages of study [243].
Many NPs show a marked antibacterial 
and antibiofilm effect in vitro using 
predominantly standard microbial 
strains.
It is necessary to broaden the range of 
bacteria tested to include more 
challenging anaerobic species, as well as 
clinical samples from patients, 
particularly antibiotic-resistant strains, 
in addition to the standard ones. In 
addition, international standard of 
Clinical and Laboratory Standards 
Institute (CLSI) proposes sensitivity of 
microbial strains to certain antibiotics, 
not NPs. To address this issue, the 
simultaneous performance of NPs against 
microbial strain in the presence of 
antibiotics (from standard) should be 
checked [284].
NPs demonstrate antibacterial and 
antibiofilm effect in vivo, especially in 
the case of multifunctional NPs.
There is no systematic in vivo data on NP 
biosafety, pharmacodynamics, 
pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, 
effects on tissues and organs, potential 
toxicity to mammalian cells, 
inflammation, allergies, etc., as well as 
the special action associated with 
additional modalities and loads. No 
information is available about the impact 
of NPs on the human body [284].
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
22 

related to the possibility of cytotoxicity and systemic toxicity. Research 
on human cell lines has revealed that various NPs exhibit concentration- 
dependent toxicity. Besides, in vivo and intracellular environment can 
affect the characteristics of NPs, primarily through interaction with 
proteins. These interactions can lead to NP destabilization and aggre­
gation, increasing their negative effect on body. For example, AgNPs, 
depending on their characteristics, in vitro can reduce cell viability after 
24 h-exposure, cause inflammation, and DNA damage [283]. Prolonged 
in vivo toxicity studies carried out on rats exposed to AgNPs for 13 
weeks revealed a dose-dependent increase in lung and liver lesions, as 
well as alveolar inflammation [285].
Note that some bacteria, such as Cupriavidus metallidurans, Shewa­
nella oneidensis, adapted to environments contaminated with heavy 
metals (metal stresses), can resist the effects of metal-based NPs. These 
bacteria are supposed to be able to cope with NP exposure through the 
modification of peptidoglycan layer, the activation of genes responsible 
for cell wall repair or ion complexation with metabolites or proteins 
[28]. Moreover, several recent studies have provided preliminary evi­
dence of resistance or reduced susceptibility of bacteria that are not 
under metal stress. This effect, after repeated exposure, is likely to 
emerge through phenotypic changes that destabilize NPs, rather than 
through genetic alterations [283]. Thus, further studies on the long-term 
toxicity of NPs within living organisms are required.
However, cell and animal models cannot predict the actual clinical 
impacts. Therefore, clinical trials are the best way to determine 
biocompatibility, toxicity, and the host response to NPs. The afore­
mentioned limitations hinder the use of metal-based NPs in clinical 
trials. In addition, before clinical translation, it is crucial to gain a 
thorough understanding of the distribution, pharmacodynamics, phar­
macokinetics, interactions between NPs and biological systems, as well 
as the route of administration. Additionally, clinical trials provide more 
data on antimicrobial efficiency and the expected further preventive 
effects against infections. This requires further investigation and 
consideration in future research. It is worth noting that the commercial 
deployment of NP will depend not only on their activity, but also on 
their compliance with regulatory hurdles, in the context of assessing the 
impact of nanomaterials on human health and the environment. At 
present, metal/metal oxide NPs are still in the early stages of develop­
ment, and there are no clinically approved NPs for use [286].
The frequency, significance, and complexity of persistent infections 
associated with biofilms raise the problem of further research aimed at 
identifying and treating such infections, as well as the development of 
new therapeutic agents. NPs show great potential in the fight against 
biofilm, as they can eliminate biofilms, suppress biofilm-induced in­
fections, and prevent biofilm formation on medical devices. The design 
of dual active NPs against planktonic bacteria and bacterial biofilms 
involves NP surface modification for effective penetration, diffusion 
through EPS-matrix and specific interaction with its components, de­
livery of the antibacterial cargo, thereby facilitating the dispersion of 
biofilms. Of particular interest is the implication of “green” synthesis of 
NPs and design of multifunctional structures. For example, structures 
that combine two or more effects within one NP: antibacterial activity of 
NPs, additional modalities responsible, for example, for magneto- and 
photothermal effects, antibiotics and biologically active molecules, for 
example, activated by NIR light.
Despite the vast number of studies that present NPs as antibiofilm 
agents, only a few of them are suitable for clinical use as they lack the 
necessary qualities for in vivo use and most NPs are not fully charac­
terized in terms of their safety. Although NPs, as a part of coatings used 
to prevent biofilm formation on medical devices such as catheters and 
implants, are currently undergoing clinical trials. For example, one 
study aimed to assess the ability of Ag ion released from central venous 
catheters containing AgNPs to prevent catheter-associated infections 
[111]. Future research should focus on expanding knowledge of the 
interaction between bacteria and surfaces, and how these interactions 
contribute to the biofilm formation. This could be accomplished using 
state-of-the-art imaging techniques and sophisticated computational 
modeling.
Due to the variety of NP synthetic protocols described in the litera­
ture, it is difficult to compare the results of current studies and progress 
towards creating an antibiotic alternative. The creation of a database of 
NPs, reflecting relationships of key characteristics, may facilitate future 
progress in the development of antibacterial NPs. Such a database would 
require the participation of experts from different fields and could 
include a systematic evaluation of the correlation between synthesis 
conditions and the critical physical/chemical properties of NPs. The 
systematic study, providing data on the appropriate toxicity in the target 
biological system, as well as the dependence of toxicity on variations in 
NP properties, should also be utilized in the construction of a database. 
In addition, the increasing number of bacterial strains resistant to 
multiple antibiotics should be addressed through testing clinical isolates 
rather than traditional strains from microbial collections. It would also 
be desirable to include this information in the database.
Thus, NPs have shown great potential as an alternative to antibiotics 
for combating resistant bacteria, despite some of the drawbacks that 
have been identified so far. Therefore, further research on the stan­
dardization of NP synthesis and characteristics, cost reduction, impact 
on human cells and tissues, evaluation of long-term effects, and the 
ability to disrupt bacterial biofilms can significantly enhance the po­
tential for widespread use of NPs as antibacterial agents.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Alla N. Generalova: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Visualization, Supervision, Methodology, Data curation, Concep­
tualization. Anastasia O. Dushina: Writing – original draft, Visualiza­
tion, Resources.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This work was carried out within the state assignment of IBCh RAS.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] Vikesland PJ, Wigginton KR. Nanomaterial enabled biosensors for pathogen 
monitoring - a review. Environ Sci Technol 2010;44:3656–69. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/es903704z.
[2] Andersson DI, Hughes D. Antibiotic resistance and its cost: is it possible to reverse 
resistance? Nat Rev Microbiol 2010;8:260–71. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nrmicro2319.
[3] Hajipour MJ, Fromm KM, Akbar Ashkarran A, Jimenez de Aberasturi D, de 
Larramendi IR, Rojo T, et al. Antibacterial properties of nanoparticles. Trends 
Biotechnol 2012;30:499–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2012.06.004.
[4] Davies J, Davies D. Origins and evolution of antibiotic resistance. Microbiol Mol 
Biol Rev 2010;74:417–33. https://doi.org/10.1128/MMBR.00016-10.
[5] Gold K, Slay B, Knackstedt M, Gaharwar AK. Antimicrobial activity of metal and 
metal-oxide based nanoparticles. Adv Ther 2018:1. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adtp.201700033.
[6] Magiorakos A-P, Srinivasan A, Carey RB, Carmeli Y, Falagas ME, Giske CG, et al. 
Multidrug-resistant, extensively drug-resistant and pandrug-resistant bacteria: an 
international expert proposal for interim standard definitions for acquired 
resistance. Clin Microbiol Infect 2012;18:268–81. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
j.1469-0691.2011.03570.x.
[7] Li X, Chen D, Xie S. Current progress and prospects of organic nanoparticles 
against bacterial biofilm. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2021;294:102475. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2021.102475.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
23 

[8] Dong D, Thomas N, Thierry B, Vreugde S, Prestidge CA, Wormald P-J. 
Distribution and inhibition of liposomes on Staphylococcus aureus and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm. PloS One 2015;10:e0131806. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0131806.
[9] Ivask A, George S, Bondarenko O, Kahru A. Metal-containing nano- 
antimicrobials: differentiating the impact of solubilized metals and particles. In: 
Nano-antimicrobials. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2012. 
p. 253–90. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24428-5_9.
[10] Generalova AN, Zubov VP. Design of polymer particle dispersions (latexes) in the 
course of radical heterophase polymerization for biomedical applications. 
Colloids Surfaces B Biointerfaces 2018;166:303–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2018.03.036.
[11] Ogunsona EO, Muthuraj R, Ojogbo E, Valerio O, Mekonnen TH. Engineered 
nanomaterials for antimicrobial applications: a review. Appl Mater Today 2020; 
18:100473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2019.100473.
[12] Jouyandeh M, Sajadi SM, Seidi F, Habibzadeh S, Munir MT, Abida O, et al. Metal 
nanoparticles-assisted early diagnosis of diseases. OpenNano 2022;8:100104. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.onano.2022.100104.
[13] McDonnell G, Russell AD. Antiseptics and disinfectants: activity, action, and 
resistance. Clin Microbiol Rev 1999;12:147–79. https://doi.org/10.1128/ 
CMR.12.1.147.
[14] Hordyjewska A, Popiołek Ł, Kocot J. The many “faces” of copper in medicine and 
treatment. BioMetals 2014;27:611–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10534-014- 
9736-5.
[15] Halbus AF, Horozov TS, Paunov VN. Colloid particle formulations for 
antimicrobial applications. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2017;249:134–48. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2017.05.012.
[16] Zare EN, Makvandi P. Antimicrobial metal-based nanomaterials and their 
industrial and biomedical applications. 2020. p. 123–34. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-981-15-4630-3_7.
[17] Puzyn T, Rasulev B, Gajewicz A, Hu X, Dasari TP, Michalkova A, et al. Using 
nano-QSAR to predict the cytotoxicity of metal oxide nanoparticles. Nat 
Nanotechnol 2011;6:175–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2011.10.
[18] Dizaj SM, Lotfipour F, Barzegar-Jalali M, Zarrintan MH, Adibkia K. Antimicrobial 
activity of the metals and metal oxide nanoparticles. Mater Sci Eng C 2014;44: 
278–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2014.08.031.
[19] Kotrange H, Najda A, Bains A, Gruszecki R, Chawla P, Tosif MM. Metal and metal 
oxide nanoparticle as a novel antibiotic carrier for the direct delivery of 
antibiotics. Int J Mol Sci 2021;22:9596. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22179596.
[20] Shabatina TI, Vernaya OI, Melnikov MY. Hybrid nanosystems of antibiotics with 
metal nanoparticles—novel antibacterial agents. Molecules 2023;28:1603. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules28041603.
[21] Page MGP. The role of the outer membrane of gram-negative Bacteria in 
antibiotic resistance: Ajax’ shield or Achilles’ heel?. 2012. p. 67–86. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-642-28951-4_5.
[22] Rosenfeld Y, Shai Y. Lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin)-host defense antibacterial 
peptides interactions: role in bacterial resistance and prevention of sepsis. 
Biochim Biophys Acta 2006;1758:1513–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbamem.2006.05.017.
[23] Nikaido H. Prevention of drug access to bacterial targets: permeability barriers 
and active efflux. Science (80- ) 1994;264:382–8. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.8153625.
[24] Blair JMA, Webber MA, Baylay AJ, Ogbolu DO, Piddock LJV. Molecular 
mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. Nat Rev Microbiol 2015;13:42–51. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro3380.
[25] Wright G. Bacterial resistance to antibiotics: enzymatic degradation and 
modification. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2005;57:1451–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
addr.2005.04.002.
[26] Carraro N, Matteau D, Luo P, Rodrigue S, Burrus V. The master activator of IncA/ 
C conjugative plasmids stimulates genomic islands and multidrug resistance 
dissemination. PLoS Genet 2014;10:e1004714. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pgen.1004714.
[27] Mi G, Shi D, Wang M, Webster TJ. Reducing bacterial infections and biofilm 
formation using nanoparticles and nanostructured antibacterial surfaces. Adv 
Healthc Mater 2018:7. https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201800103.
[28] Slavin YN, Asnis J, H¨afeli UO, Bach H. Metal nanoparticles: understanding the 
mechanisms behind antibacterial activity. J Nanobiotechnol 2017;15:65. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s12951-017-0308-z.
[29] Simon-Deckers A, Loo S, Mayne-L’hermite M, Herlin-Boime N, Menguy N, 
Reynaud C, et al. Size-, composition- and shape-dependent toxicological impact of 
metal oxide nanoparticles and carbon nanotubes toward Bacteria. Environ Sci 
Technol 2009;43:8423–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/es9016975.
[30] Ivask A, ElBadawy A, Kaweeteerawat C, Boren D, Fischer H, Ji Z, et al. Toxicity 
mechanisms in Escherichia coli vary for silver nanoparticles and differ from ionic 
silver. ACS Nano 2014;8:374–86. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn4044047.
[31] McQuillan JS, Groenaga Infante H, Stokes E, Shaw AM. Silver nanoparticle 
enhanced silver ion stress response in Escherichia coli K12. Nanotoxicology 2012; 
6:857–66. https://doi.org/10.3109/17435390.2011.626532.
[32] Ruparelia JP, Chatterjee AK, Duttagupta SP, Mukherji S. Strain specificity in 
antimicrobial activity of silver and copper nanoparticles. Acta Biomater 2008;4: 
707–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2007.11.006.
[33] Sohm B, Immel F, Bauda P, Pagnout C. Insight into the primary mode of action of 
TiO 2 nanoparticles on Escherichia coli in the dark. Proteomics 2015;15:98–113. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201400101.
[34] Garc´es M, C´aceres L, Chiappetta D, Magnani N, Evelson P. Current understanding 
of nanoparticle toxicity mechanisms and interactions with biological systems. 
New J Chem 2021;45:14328–44. https://doi.org/10.1039/D1NJ01415C.
[35] Sahli C, Moya SE, Lomas JS, Gravier-Pelletier C, Briandet R, H´emadi M. Recent 
advances in nanotechnology for eradicating bacterial biofilm. Theranostics 2022; 
12:2383–405. https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.67296.
[36] Beyth N, Houri-Haddad Y, Domb A, Khan W, Hazan R. alternative antimicrobial 
approach: nano-antimicrobial materials. Evid Based Comp Altern Med 2015; 
2015:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/246012.
[37] El Badawy AM, Silva RG, Morris B, Scheckel KG, Suidan MT, Tolaymat TM. 
Surface charge-dependent toxicity of silver nanoparticles. Environ Sci Technol 
2011;45:283–7. https://doi.org/10.1021/es1034188.
[38] Jung WK, Koo HC, Kim KW, Shin S, Kim SH, Park YH. Antibacterial activity and 
mechanism of action of the silver ion in Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia 
coli. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008;74:2171–8. https://doi.org/10.1128/ 
AEM.02001-07.
[39] Thill A, Zeyons O, Spalla O, Chauvat F, Rose J, Auffan M, et al. Cytotoxicity of 
CeO 2 nanoparticles for Escherichia coli. Physico-chemical insight of the 
cytotoxicity mechanism. Environ Sci Technol 2006;40:6151–6. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/es060999b.
[40] Pal S, Tak YK, Song JM. Does the antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles 
depend on the shape of the nanoparticle? A study of the gram-negative bacterium 
Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007;73:1712–20. https://doi.org/ 
10.1128/AEM.02218-06.
[41] Usman M, El Zowalaty M, Salama M, Shameli K, Zainuddin N, Ibrahim NA. 
Synthesis, characterization, and antimicrobial properties of copper nanoparticles. 
Int J Nanomedicine 2013:4467. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S50837.
[42] Azam A, Ahmed Oves, Khan Habib, Memic A. Antimicrobial activity of metal 
oxide nanoparticles against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria: a 
comparative study. Int J Nanomedicine 2012:6003. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN. 
S35347.
[43] Cavassin ED, de Figueiredo LFP, Otoch JP, Seckler MM, de Oliveira RA, 
Franco FF, et al. Comparison of methods to detect the in vitro activity of silver 
nanoparticles (AgNP) against multidrug resistant bacteria. J Nanobiotechnology 
2015;13:64. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-015-0120-6.
[44] Dorobantu LS, Fallone C, Noble AJ, Veinot J, Ma G, Goss GG, et al. Toxicity of 
silver nanoparticles against bacteria, yeast, and algae. J Nanopart Res 2015;17: 
172. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-015-2984-7.
[45] Magnusson K-E, Bayer ME. Anionic sites on the envelope ofSalmonella 
typhimurium mapped with cationized ferritin. Cell Biophys 1982;4:163–75. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02918311.
[46] Sonohara R, Muramatsu N, Ohshima H, Kondo T. Difference in surface properties 
between Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus as revealed by 
electrophoretic mobility measurements. Biophys Chem 1995;55:273–7. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/0301-4622(95)00004-H.
[47] Pan X, Wang Y, Chen Z, Pan D, Cheng Y, Liu Z, et al. Investigation of antibacterial 
activity and related mechanism of a series of Nano-Mg(OH) 2. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2013;5:1137–42. https://doi.org/10.1021/am302910q.
[48] Nathan C, Cunningham-Bussel A. Beyond oxidative stress: an immunologist’s 
guide to reactive oxygen species. Nat Rev Immunol 2013;13:349–61. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/nri3423.
[49] Pelgrift RY, Friedman AJ. Nanotechnology as a therapeutic tool to combat 
microbial resistance. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2013;65:1803–15. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.addr.2013.07.011.
[50] Makvandi P, Zarepour A, Zheng X, Agarwal T, Ghomi M, Sartorius R, et al. Non- 
spherical nanostructures in nanomedicine: from noble metal nanorods to 
transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets. Appl Mater Today 2021;24:101107. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2021.101107.
[51] Wang L, He H, Yu Y, Sun L, Liu S, Zhang C, et al. Morphology-dependent 
bactericidal activities of ag/CeO2 catalysts against Escherichia coli. J Inorg 
Biochem 2014;135:45–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2014.02.016.
[52] Stoimenov PK, Klinger RL, Marchin GL, Klabunde KJ. Metal oxide nanoparticles 
as bactericidal agents. Langmuir 2002;18:6679–86. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
la0202374.
[53] Zhang Y, Yang M, Portney NG, Cui D, Budak G, Ozbay E, et al. Zeta potential: a 
surface electrical characteristic to probe the interaction of nanoparticles with 
normal and cancer human breast epithelial cells. Biomed Microdevices 2008;10: 
321–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10544-007-9139-2.
[54] Negrescu AM, Killian MS, Raghu SNV, Schmuki P, Mazare A, Cimpean A. Metal 
oxide nanoparticles: review of synthesis, characterization and biological effects. 
J Funct Biomater 2022;13:274. https://doi.org/10.3390/jfb13040274.
[55] Guerrero Correa M, Martínez FB, Vidal CP, Streitt C, Escrig J, de Dicastillo CL. 
Antimicrobial metal-based nanoparticles: a review on their synthesis, types and 
antimicrobial action. Beilstein J Nanotechnol 2020;11:1450–69. https://doi.org/ 
10.3762/bjnano.11.129.
[56] Kumar A, Pandey AK, Singh SS, Shanker R, Dhawan A. Engineered ZnO and TiO2 
nanoparticles induce oxidative stress and DNA damage leading to reduced 
viability of Escherichia coli. Free Radic Biol Med 2011;51:1872–81. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.08.025.
[57] Franco D, Calabrese G, Guglielmino SPP, Conoci S. Metal-based nanoparticles: 
antibacterial mechanisms and biomedical application. Microorganisms 2022;10: 
1778. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms10091778.
[58] Banerjee D, Shivapriya PM, Gautam PK, Misra K, Sahoo AK, Samanta SK. 
A review on basic biology of bacterial biofilm infections and their treatments by 
nanotechnology-based approaches. Proc Natl Acad Sci India Sect B Biol Sci 2020; 
90:243–59. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40011-018-01065-7.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
24 

[59] Singh AV, Laux P, Luch A, Sudrik C, Wiehr S, Wild A-M, et al. Review of emerging 
concepts in nanotoxicology: opportunities and challenges for safer nanomaterial 
design. Toxicol Mech Methods 2019;29:378–87. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
15376516.2019.1566425.
[60] K¨akinen A, Bondarenko O, Ivask A, Kahru A. The effect of composition of 
different Ecotoxicological test media on free and bioavailable copper from CuSO4 
and CuO nanoparticles: comparative evidence from a cu-selective electrode and a 
cu-biosensor. Sensors 2011;11:10502–21. https://doi.org/10.3390/s111110502.
[61] Liu J, Sonshine DA, Shervani S, Hurt RH. Controlled release of biologically active 
silver from nanosilver surfaces. ACS Nano 2010;4:6903–13. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/nn102272n.
[62] Liu J, Hurt RH. Ion release kinetics and particle persistence in aqueous nano- 
silver colloids. Environ Sci Technol 2010;44:2169–75. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
es9035557.
[63] Schaeublin NM, Braydich-Stolle LK, Schrand AM, Miller JM, Hutchison J, 
Schlager JJ, et al. Surface charge of gold nanoparticles mediates mechanism of 
toxicity. Nanoscale 2011;3:410. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0nr00478b.
[64] Ai J, Biazar E, Jafarpour M, Montazeri M, Ali M, Aminifard S, et al. 
Nanotoxicology and nanoparticle safety in biomedical designs. Int J 
Nanomedicine 2011:1117. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S16603.
[65] Sies H. Oxidative stress: a concept in redox biology and medicine. Redox Biol 
2015;4:180–3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2015.01.002.
[66] Xie W, Zhang S, Pan F, Chen S, Zhong L, Wang J, et al. Nanomaterial-based ROS- 
mediated strategies for combating bacteria and biofilms. J Mater Res 2021;36: 
822–45. https://doi.org/10.1557/s43578-021-00134-4.
[67] Leung YH, Ng AMC, Xu X, Shen Z, Gethings LA, Wong MT, et al. Mechanisms of 
antibacterial activity of MgO: non-ROS mediated toxicity of MgO nanoparticles 
towards Escherichia coli. Small 2014;10:1171–83. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
smll.201302434.
[68] Yamanaka M, Hara K, Kudo J. Bactericidal actions of a silver ion solution on 
Escherichia coli, studied by energy-filtering transmission electron microscopy and 
proteomic analysis. Appl Environ Microbiol 2005;71:7589–93. https://doi.org/ 
10.1128/AEM.71.11.7589-7593.2005.
[69] Lipinski B. Hydroxyl radical and its scavengers in health and disease. Oxid Med 
Cell Longev 2011;2011:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/809696.
[70] Magnani ND, Marchini T, Calabr´o V, Alvarez S, Evelson P. Role of mitochondria 
in the redox signaling network and its outcomes in high impact inflammatory 
syndromes. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2020:11. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fendo.2020.568305.
[71] Singh S, Dosani T, Karakoti AS, Kumar A, Seal S, Self WT. A phosphate-dependent 
shift in redox state of cerium oxide nanoparticles and its effects on catalytic 
properties. Biomaterials 2011;32:6745–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2011.05.073.
[72] Lord MS, Berret JF, Singh S, Vinu A, Karakoti AS. Redox active cerium oxide 
nanoparticles: current status and burning issues. Small 2021:17. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/smll.202102342.
[73] Padmavathy N, Vijayaraghavan R. Enhanced bioactivity of ZnO 
nanoparticles—an antimicrobial study. Sci Technol Adv Mater 2008;9:035004. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1468-6996/9/3/035004.
[74] Huang L, Xuan Y, Koide Y, Zhiyentayev T, Tanaka M, Hamblin MR. Type I and 
type II mechanisms of antimicrobial photodynamic therapy: An in vitro study on 
gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. Lasers Surg Med 2012;44:490–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/lsm.22045.
[75] Jia Q, Song Q, Li P, Huang W. Rejuvenated photodynamic therapy for bacterial 
infections. Adv Healthc Mater 2019:8. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adhm.201900608.
[76] Fulaz S, Vitale S, Quinn L, Casey E. Nanoparticle–biofilm interactions: the role of 
the EPS matrix. Trends Microbiol 2019;27:915–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tim.2019.07.004.
[77] Stewart PS, William Costerton J. Antibiotic resistance of bacteria in biofilms. 
Lancet 2001;358:135–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(01)05321-1.
[78] Costerton JW, Stewart PS, Greenberg EP. Bacterial biofilms: a common cause of 
persistent infections. Science (80- ) 1999;284:1318–22. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.284.5418.1318.
[79] Flemming H-C, Wuertz S. Bacteria and archaea on earth and their abundance in 
biofilms. Nat Rev Microbiol 2019;17:247–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579- 
019-0158-9.
[80] Koo H, Allan RN, Howlin RP, Stoodley P, Hall-Stoodley L. Targeting microbial 
biofilms: current and prospective therapeutic strategies. Nat Rev Microbiol 2017; 
15:740–55. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro.2017.99.
[81] Wilking JN, Zaburdaev V, De Volder M, Losick R, Brenner MP, Weitz DA. Liquid 
transport facilitated by channels in Bacillus subtilis biofilms. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
2013;110:848–52. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1216376110.
[82] Sønderholm M, Bjarnsholt T, Alhede M, Kolpen M, Jensen P, Kühl M, et al. The 
consequences of being in an infectious biofilm: microenvironmental conditions 
governing antibiotic tolerance. Int J Mol Sci 2017;18:2688. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ijms18122688.
[83] Rabin N, Zheng Y, Opoku-Temeng C, Du Y, Bonsu E, Sintim HO. Biofilm 
formation mechanisms and targets for developing Antibiofilm agents. Future Med 
Chem 2015;7:493–512. https://doi.org/10.4155/fmc.15.6.
[84] Schneider RP, Marshall KC. Retention of the Gramnegative marine bacterium 
SW8 on surfaces — effects of microbial physiology, substratum nature and 
conditioning films. Colloids Surfaces B Biointerfaces 1994;2:387–96. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0927-7765(94)80002-2.
[85] Qayyum S, Khan AU. Nanoparticles vs. biofilms: a battle against another 
paradigm of antibiotic resistance. Medchemcomm 2016;7:1479–98. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C6MD00124F.
[86] Karatan E, Watnick P. Signals, regulatory networks, and materials that build and 
break bacterial biofilms. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2009;73:310–47. https://doi. 
org/10.1128/MMBR.00041-08.
[87] Li X, Huang T, Heath DE, O’Brien-Simpson NM, O’Connor AJ. Antimicrobial 
nanoparticle coatings for medical implants: design challenges and prospects. 
Biointerphases 2020:15. https://doi.org/10.1116/6.0000625.
[88] Rehner Costache AMG, Moldoveanu E-T, Niculescu A-G, Bîclesanu FC, 
Pangic˘a AM, Grumezescu AM, et al. Advances in dental implants: a review of in 
vitro and in vivo testing with nanoparticle coatings. J Compos Sci 2025;9:140. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/jcs9030140.
[89] Kheiri S, Liu X, Thompson M. Nanoparticles at biointerfaces: antibacterial activity 
and nanotoxicology. Colloids Surfaces B Biointerfaces 2019;184:110550. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2019.110550.
[90] Makvandi P, Wang C, Zare EN, Borzacchiello A, Niu L, Tay FR. Metal-based 
nanomaterials in biomedical applications: antimicrobial activity and cytotoxicity 
aspects. Adv Funct Mater 2020:30. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201910021.
[91] Robino L, Scavone P. Nanotechnology in biofilm prevention. Future Microbiol 
2020;15:377–9. https://doi.org/10.2217/fmb-2019-0327.
[92] Lellouche J, Friedman A, Lellouche J-P, Gedanken A, Banin E. Improved 
antibacterial and antibiofilm activity of magnesium fluoride nanoparticles 
obtained by water-based ultrasound chemistry. Nanomedicine Nanotechnology, 
Biol Med 2012;8:702–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2011.09.002.
[93] Liu T, Cui Q, Wu Q, Li X, Song K, Ge D, et al. Mechanism study of Bacteria killed 
on nanostructures. J Phys Chem B 2019;123:8686–96. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.jpcb.9b07732.
[94] Blanco E, Shen H, Ferrari M. Principles of nanoparticle design for overcoming 
biological barriers to drug delivery. Nat Biotechnol 2015;33:941–51. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/nbt.3330.
[95] Huangfu X, Xu Y, Liu C, He Q, Ma J, Ma C, et al. A review on the interactions 
between engineered nanoparticles with extracellular and intracellular polymeric 
substances from wastewater treatment aggregates. Chemosphere 2019;219: 
766–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.12.044.
[96] Regiel-Futyra A, Dąbrowski JM, Mazuryk O, ´Spiewak K, Kyzioł A, Pucelik B, et al. 
Bioinorganic antimicrobial strategies in the resistance era. Coord Chem Rev 2017; 
351:76–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2017.05.005.
[97] Li X, Yeh Y-C, Giri K, Mout R, Landis RF, Prakash YS, et al. Control of nanoparticle 
penetration into biofilms through surface design. Chem Commun 2015;51:282–5. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CC07737G.
[98] Adeleye AS, Conway JR, Perez T, Rutten P, Keller AA. Influence of extracellular 
polymeric substances on the long-term fate, dissolution, and speciation of copper- 
based nanoparticles. Environ Sci Technol 2014;48:12561–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/es5033426.
[99] Lowry GV, Gregory KB, Apte SC, Lead JR. Transformations of nanomaterials in 
the environment. Environ Sci Technol 2012;46:6893–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
es300839e.
[100] Sondi I, Salopek-Sondi B. Silver nanoparticles as antimicrobial agent: a case study 
on E. Coli as a model for gram-negative bacteria. J Colloid Interface Sci 2004;275: 
177–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2004.02.012.
[101] Martinez-Gutierrez F, Olive PL, Banuelos A, Orrantia E, Nino N, Sanchez EM, et al. 
Synthesis, characterization, and evaluation of antimicrobial and cytotoxic effect 
of silver and titanium nanoparticles. Nanomedicine Nanotechnology, Biol Med 
2010;6:681–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2010.02.001.
[102] Cui L, Chen P, Chen S, Yuan Z, Yu C, Ren B, et al. In situ study of the antibacterial 
activity and mechanism of action of silver nanoparticles by surface-enhanced 
Raman spectroscopy. Anal Chem 2013;85:5436–43. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ac400245j.
[103] Aazam ES, Zaheer Z. Growth of Ag-nanoparticles in an aqueous solution and their 
antimicrobial activities against Gram positive, Gram negative bacterial strains 
and Candida fungus. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 2016;39:575–84. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00449-016-1539-3.
[104] Zhang Y, Peng H, Huang W, Zhou Y, Yan D. Facile preparation and 
characterization of highly antimicrobial colloid ag or au nanoparticles. J Colloid 
Interface Sci 2008;325:371–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2008.05.063.
[105] Hwang ET, Lee JH, Chae YJ, Kim YS, Kim BC, Sang B, et al. Analysis of the toxic 
mode of action of silver nanoparticles using stress-specific bioluminescent 
Bacteria. Small 2008;4:746–50. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.200700954.
[106] Kittler S, Greulich C, Diendorf J, K¨oller M, Epple M. Toxicity of silver 
nanoparticles increases during storage because of slow dissolution under release 
of silver ions. Chem Mater 2010;22:4548–54. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
cm100023p.
[107] Chernousova S, Epple M. Silver as antibacterial agent: ion, nanoparticle, and 
metal. Angew Chemie Int Ed 2013;52:1636–53. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
anie.201205923.
[108] Mukha IP, Eremenko AM, Smirnova NP, Mikhienkova AI, Korchak GI, 
Gorchev VF, et al. Antimicrobial activity of stable silver nanoparticles of a certain 
size. Appl Biochem Microbiol 2013;49:199–206. https://doi.org/10.1134/ 
S0003683813020117.
[109] Lok C-N, Ho C-M, Chen R, He Q-Y, Yu W-Y, Sun H, et al. Proteomic analysis of the 
mode of antibacterial action of silver nanoparticles. J Proteome Res 2006;5: 
916–24. https://doi.org/10.1021/pr0504079.
[110] Morones JR, Elechiguerra JL, Camacho A, Holt K, Kouri JB, Ramírez JT, et al. The 
bactericidal effect of silver nanoparticles. Nanotechnology 2005;16:2346–53. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-4484/16/10/059.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
25 

[111] Al-Wrafy FA, Al-Gheethi AA, Ponnusamy SK, Noman EA, Fattah SA. Nanoparticles 
approach to eradicate bacterial biofilm-related infections: a critical review. 
Chemosphere 2022;288:132603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
chemosphere.2021.132603.
[112] Russell AD, Hugo WB. 7 antimicrobial activity and action of silver. 1994. 
p. 351–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6468(08)70024-9.
[113] Sintubin L, De Gusseme B, Van der Meeren P, Pycke BFG, Verstraete W, Boon N. 
The antibacterial activity of biogenic silver and its mode of action. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol 2011;91:153–62. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-011-3225-3.
[114] Zhang H, Wu M, Sen A. Silver Nanoparticle Antimicrobials and Related Materials. 
Nano-Antimicrobials, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2012, p. 
3–45. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24428-5_1.
[115] Feng QL, Wu J, Chen GQ, Cui FZ, Kim TN, Kim JO. A mechanistic study of the 
antibacterial effect of silver ions onEscherichia coli andStaphylococcus aureus. 
J Biomed Mater Res 2000;52:662–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-4636 
(20001215)52:4<662::AID-JBM10>3.0.CO;2-3.
[116] Park H-J, Kim JY, Kim J, Lee J-H, Hahn J-S, Gu MB, et al. Silver-ion-mediated 
reactive oxygen species generation affecting bactericidal activity. Water Res 
2009;43:1027–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2008.12.002.
[117] Kim J-HJS, Kuk E, Yu KN, Kim J-HJS, Park SJ, Lee HJ, et al. Antimicrobial effects 
of silver nanoparticles. Nanomed Nanotechnol Biol Med 2007;3:95–101. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2006.12.001.
[118] da Silva RTP, Petri MV, Valencia EY, Camargo PHC, de Torresi SIC, Spira B. 
Visible light plasmon excitation of silver nanoparticles against antibiotic-resistant 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther 2020;31:101908. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.101908.
[119] Canaparo R, Foglietta F, Limongi T, Serpe L. Biomedical applications of reactive 
oxygen species generation by metal nanoparticles. Materials (Basel) 2020;14:53. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14010053.
[120] Demina PA, Khaydukov KV, Babayeva G, Varaksa PO, Atanova AV, Stepanov ME, 
et al. Upconversion nanoparticles intercalated in large polymer micelles for tumor 
imaging and chemo/Photothermal therapy. Int J Mol Sci 2023;24:10574. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/ijms241310574.
[121] Zare EN, Padil VVT, Mokhtari B, Venkateshaiah A, Wacławek S, ˇCerník M, et al. 
Advances in biogenically synthesized shaped metal- and carbon-based 
nanoarchitectures and their medicinal applications. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 
2020;283:102236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2020.102236.
[122] Huq MA, Ashrafudoulla M, Rahman MM, Balusamy SR, Akter S. Green synthesis 
and potential antibacterial applications of bioactive silver nanoparticles: a 
review. Polymers (Basel) 2022;14:742. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
polym14040742.
[123] Ahmed SR, Anwar H, Ahmed SW, Shah MR, Ahmed A, Ali SA. Green synthesis of 
silver nanoparticles: antimicrobial potential and chemosensing of a mutagenic 
drug nitrofurazone in real samples. Measurement 2021;180:109489. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.measurement.2021.109489.
[124] Huang F, Long Y, Liang Q, Purushotham B, Swamy MK, Duan Y. Safed musli 
(Chlorophytum borivilianum L.) callus-mediated biosynthesis of silver 
nanoparticles and evaluation of their antimicrobial activity and cytotoxicity 
against human colon cancer cells. J Nanomater 2019;2019:1–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1155/2019/2418785.
[125] Du J, Singh H, Yi T-H. Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles by Novosphingobium 
sp. THG-C3 and their antimicrobial potential. Artif cells, nanomedicine. 
Biotechnol 2017;45:211–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2016.1178135.
[126] Sukweenadhi J, Setiawan KI, Avanti C, Kartini K, Rupa EJ, Yang D-C. Scale-up of 
green synthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles using ethanol extract 
of Plantago major L. leaf and its antibacterial potential. South African J Chem Eng 
2021;38:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sajce.2021.06.008.
[127] Akter S, Huq MA. Biologically rapid synthesis of silver nanoparticles by 
Sphingobium sp. MAH-11 T and their antibacterial activity and mechanisms 
investigation against drug-resistant pathogenic microbes. Artif cells, 
nanomedicine. Biotechnol 2020;48:672–82. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
21691401.2020.1730390.
[128] Roe D, Karandikar B, Bonn-Savage N, Gibbins B, Roullet J-B. Antimicrobial 
surface functionalization of plastic catheters by silver nanoparticles. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2008;61:869–76. https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dkn034.
[129] Hussain A, Alajmi MF, Khan MA, Pervez SA, Ahmed F, Amir S, et al. 
Biosynthesized silver nanoparticle (AgNP) from Pandanus odorifer leaf extract 
exhibits anti-metastasis and anti-biofilm potentials. Front Microbiol 2019:10. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.00008.
[130] Rajivgandhi GN, Ramachandran G, Maruthupandy M, Manoharan N, Alharbi NS, 
Kadaikunnan S, et al. Anti-oxidant, anti-bacterial and anti-biofilm activity of 
biosynthesized silver nanoparticles using Gracilaria corticata against biofilm 
producing K. pneumoniae. Colloids Surf A 2020;600:124830. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.colsurfa.2020.124830.
[131] Ansari MA, Khan HM, Khan AA, Cameotra SS, Pal R. Antibiofilm efficacy of silver 
nanoparticles against biofilm of extended spectrum β-lactamase isolates of 
Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae. Appl Nanosci 2014;4:859–68. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13204-013-0266-1.
[132] Salem W, Leitner DR, Zingl FG, Schratter G, Prassl R, Goessler W, et al. 
Antibacterial activity of silver and zinc nanoparticles against vibrio cholerae and 
enterotoxic Escherichia coli. Int J Med Microbiol 2015;305:85–95. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijmm.2014.11.005.
[133] Zhou Y, Kong Y, Kundu S, Cirillo JD, Liang H. Antibacterial activities of gold and 
silver nanoparticles against Escherichia coli and bacillus Calmette-Gu´erin. 
J Nanobiotechnology 2012;10:19. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-3155-10-19.
[134] Zheng K, Setyawati MI, Leong DT, Xie J. Antimicrobial Gold nanoclusters. ACS 
Nano 2017;11:6904–10. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.7b02035.
[135] Hern´andez-Sierra JF, Ruiz F, Cruz Pena DC, Martínez-Guti´errez F, Martínez AE, 
de Jesús Pozos Guill´en A, et al. The antimicrobial sensitivity of Streptococcus 
mutans to nanoparticles of silver, zinc oxide, and gold. Nanomedicine 
Nanotechnology, Biol Med 2008;4:237–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nano.2008.04.005.
[136] Burygin G, Khlebtsov B, Shantrokha A, Dykman L, Bogatyrev V, Khlebtsov N. On 
the enhanced antibacterial activity of antibiotics mixed with Gold nanoparticles. 
Nanoscale Res Lett 2009;4:794. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11671-009-9316-8.
[137] Cui Y, Zhao Y, Tian Y, Zhang W, Lü X, Jiang X. The molecular mechanism of 
action of bactericidal gold nanoparticles on Escherichia coli. Biomaterials 2012; 
33:2327–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.11.057.
[138] Tao C. Antimicrobial activity and toxicity of gold nanoparticles: research 
progress, challenges and prospects. Lett Appl Microbiol 2018;67:537–43. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/lam.13082.
[139] Zada S, Ahmad A, Khan S, Iqbal A, Ahmad S, Ali H, et al. Biofabrication of gold 
nanoparticles by Lyptolyngbya JSC-1 extract as super reducing and stabilizing 
agents: synthesis, characterization and antibacterial activity. Microb Pathog 
2018;114:116–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2017.11.038.
[140] Gouyau J, Duval RE, Boudier A, Lamouroux E. Investigation of nanoparticle 
metallic core antibacterial activity: gold and silver nanoparticles against 
Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus. Int J Mol Sci 2021;22:1905. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/ijms22041905.
[141] Zhang Y, Shareena Dasari TP, Deng H, Yu H. Antimicrobial activity of gold 
nanoparticles and ionic gold. J Environ Sci Heal Part C 2015;33:286–327. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/10590501.2015.1055161.
[142] Chen Y-S, Hung Y-C, Liau I, Huang GS. Assessment of the in vivo toxicity of gold 
nanoparticles. Nanoscale Res Lett 2009;4:858. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11671- 
009-9334-6.
[143] Chen H, Dorrigan A, Saad S, Hare DJ, Cortie MB, Valenzuela SM. In vivo study of 
spherical gold nanoparticles: inflammatory effects and distribution in mice. PloS 
One 2013;8:e58208. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0058208.
[144] Jin R, Zeng C, Zhou M, Chen Y. Atomically precise colloidal metal nanoclusters 
and nanoparticles: fundamentals and opportunities. Chem Rev 2016;116: 
10346–413. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00703.
[145] Tay CY, Yu Y, Setyawati MI, Xie J, Leong DT. Presentation matters: identity of 
gold nanocluster capping agent governs intracellular uptake and cell metabolism. 
Nano Res 2014;7:805–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-014-0441-z.
[146] Jain A, Duvvuri LS, Farah S, Beyth N, Domb AJ, Khan W. Antimicrobial polymers. 
Adv Healthc Mater 2014;3:1969–85. https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201400418.
[147] Li X, Robinson SM, Gupta A, Saha K, Jiang Z, Moyano DF, et al. Functional gold 
nanoparticles as potent antimicrobial agents against multi-drug-resistant bacteria. 
ACS Nano 2014;8:10682–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/nn5042625.
[148] Timoszyk A, Grochowalska R. Mechanism and antibacterial activity of gold 
nanoparticles (AuNPs) functionalized with natural compounds from plants. 
Pharmaceutics 2022;14:2599. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14122599.
[149] Chahardoli A, Karimi N, Sadeghi F, Fattahi A. Green approach for synthesis of 
gold nanoparticles from Nigella arvensis leaf extract and evaluation of their 
antibacterial, antioxidant, cytotoxicity and catalytic activities. Artif Cells, 
Nanomedicine, Biotechnol 2018;46:579–88. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
21691401.2017.1332634.
[150] An X, Erramilli S, Reinhard BM. Plasmonic nano-antimicrobials: properties, 
mechanisms and applications in microbe inactivation and sensing. Nanoscale 
2021;13:3374–411. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0NR08353D.
[151] Okkeh M, Bloise N, Restivo E, De Vita L, Pallavicini P, Visai L. Gold nanoparticles: 
can they be the next magic bullet for multidrug-resistant bacteria? Nanomaterials 
2021;11:312. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano11020312.
[152] Al-Bakri AG, Mahmoud NN. Photothermal-induced antibacterial activity of gold 
nanorods loaded into polymeric hydrogel against Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
biofilm. Molecules 2019;24:2661. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules24142661.
[153] Bermúdez-Jim´enez C, Romney MG, Roa-Flores SA, Martínez-Casta˜n´on G, Bach H. 
Hydrogel-embedded gold nanorods activated by plasmonic photothermy with 
potent antimicrobial activity. Nanomedicine Nanotechnology, Biol Med 2019;22: 
102093. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2019.102093.
[154] Manivasagan P, Khan F, Hoang G, Mondal S, Kim H, Hoang Minh Doan V, et al. 
Thiol chitosan-wrapped gold nanoshells for near-infrared laser-induced 
photothermal destruction of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Carbohydr Polym 2019; 
225:115228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.115228.
[155] Rovati D, Albini B, Galinetto P, Grisoli P, Bassi B, Pallavicini P, et al. High 
stability thiol-coated gold nanostars monolayers with photo-thermal antibacterial 
activity and wettability control. Nanomaterials 2019;9:1288. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/nano9091288.
[156] Hwang GB, Huang H, Wu G, Shin J, Kafizas A, Karu K, et al. Photobactericidal 
activity activated by thiolated gold nanoclusters at low flux levels of white light. 
Nat Commun 2020;11:1207. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15004-6.
[157] Rossi F, Thanh NTK, Di Su X. Gold nanorods embedded in polymeric film for 
killing bacteria by generating reactive oxygen species with light. ACS Appl Bio 
Mater 2019;2:3059–67. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.9b00343.
[158] Khan S, Khan SN, Meena R, Dar AM, Pal R, Khan AU. Photoinactivation of 
multidrug resistant bacteria by monomeric methylene blue conjugated gold 
nanoparticles. J Photochem Photobiol B Biol 2017;174:150–61. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2017.07.011.
[159] Xie Y, Zheng W, Jiang X. Near-infrared light-activated phototherapy by gold 
nanoclusters for dispersing biofilms. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2020;12:9041–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21777.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
26 

[160] Teirlinck E, Xiong R, Brans T, Forier K, Fraire J, Van Acker H, et al. Laser-induced 
vapour nanobubbles improve drug diffusion and efficiency in bacterial biofilms. 
Nat Commun 2018;9:4518. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06884-w.
[161] Crisan MC, Teodora M, Lucian M. Copper nanoparticles: synthesis and 
characterization, physiology, toxicity and antimicrobial applications. Appl Sci 
2021;12:141. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12010141.
[162] Indhu AR, Dharanya C, Dharmalingam G. Plasmonic copper: ways and means of 
achieving, directing, and utilizing surface Plasmons. Plasmonics 2024;19: 
1303–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11468-023-02034-1.
[163] Chatterjee AK, Chakraborty R, Basu T. Mechanism of antibacterial activity of 
copper nanoparticles. Nanotechnology 2014;25:135101. https://doi.org/ 
10.1088/0957-4484/25/13/135101.
[164] Edis Z, Haj Bloukh S, Ashames A, Ibrahim M. Copper-based nanoparticles, their 
chemistry and antibacterial properties: a review. In: Chem. A clean heal. Planet, 
Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2019. p. 401–28. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-030-20283-5_24.
[165] Fernando S, Gunasekara T, Holton J. Antimicrobial nanoparticles: applications 
and mechanisms of action. Sri Lankan J Infect Dis 2018;8:2. https://doi.org/ 
10.4038/sljid.v8i1.8167.
[166] Chang Y-N, Zhang M, Xia L, Zhang J, Xing G. The toxic effects and mechanisms of 
CuO and ZnO nanoparticles. Materials (Basel) 2012;5:2850–71. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ma5122850.
[167] LewisOscar F, MubarakAli D, Nithya C, Priyanka R, Gopinath V, Alharbi NS, et al. 
One pot synthesis and anti-biofilm potential of copper nanoparticles (CuNPs) 
against clinical strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Biofouling 2015;31:379–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08927014.2015.1048686.
[168] Wo´zniak-Budych MJ, Staszak K, Staszak M. Copper and copper-based 
nanoparticles in medicine—perspectives and challenges. Molecules 2023;28: 
6687. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules28186687.
[169] Bocarando-Chac´on J, Vargas-Vazquez D, Martinez-Suarez F, Flores-Ju´arez C, 
Cortez-Valadez M. Surface-enhanced Raman scattering and antibacterial 
properties from copper nanoparticles obtained by green chemistry. Appl Phys A 
2020;126:530. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00339-020-03704-1.
[170] Shende S, Ingle AP, Gade A, Rai M. Green synthesis of copper nanoparticles by 
Citrus medica Linn. (Idilimbu) juice and its antimicrobial activity. World J 
Microbiol Biotechnol 2015;31:865–73. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11274-015- 
1840-3.
[171] Prabhu YT, Venkateswara Rao K, Sesha Sai V, Pavani T. A facile biosynthesis of 
copper nanoparticles: a micro-structural and antibacterial activity investigation. 
J Saudi Chem Soc 2017;21:180–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jscs.2015.04.002.
[172] Rodhe Y, Skoglund S, Odnevall Wallinder I, Pot´acov´a Z, M¨oller L. Copper-based 
nanoparticles induce high toxicity in leukemic HL60 cells. Toxicol Vitr 2015;29: 
1711–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tiv.2015.05.020.
[173] Midander K, Cronholm P, Karlsson HL, Elihn K, M¨oller L, Leygraf C, et al. Surface 
characteristics, copper release, and toxicity of Nano- and Micrometer-sized 
copper and copper(II) oxide particles: a cross-disciplinary study. Small 2009;5: 
389–99. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.200801220.
[174] Verma N, Kumar N. Synthesis and biomedical applications of copper oxide 
nanoparticles: an expanding horizon. ACS Biomater Sci Eng 2019;5:1170–88. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.8b01092.
[175] Mahapatra O, Bhagat M, Gopalakrishnan C, Arunachalam KD. Ultrafine dispersed 
CuO nanoparticles and their antibacterial activity. J Exp Nanosci 2008;3:185–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17458080802395460.
[176] Maliki M, Ifijen IH, Ikhuoria EU, Jonathan EM, Onaiwu GE, Archibong UD, et al. 
Copper nanoparticles and their oxides: optical, anticancer and antibacterial 
properties. Int Nano Lett 2022;12:379–98. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40089-022- 
00380-2.
[177] Kaweeteerawat C, Chang CH, Roy KR, Liu R, Li R, Toso D, et al. Cu nanoparticles 
have different impacts in Escherichia coli and lactobacillus brevis than their 
microsized and ionic analogues. ACS Nano 2015;9:7215–25. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsnano.5b02021.
[178] Azam A. Size-dependent antimicrobial properties of CuO nanoparticles against 
Gram-positive and -negative bacterial strains. Int J Nanomedicine 2012:3527. 
https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S29020.
[179] Selvaraj SP. Enhanced surface morphology of copper oxide (CuO) nanoparticles 
and its antibacterial activities. Mater Today Proc 2022;50:2865–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.09.574.
[180] Khalaji AD, Pazhand Z, Kiani K, Machek P, Jarosova M, Mazandarani R. CuO 
nanoparticles: preparation, characterization, optical properties, and antibacterial 
activities. J Mater Sci Mater Electron 2020;31:11949–54. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10854-020-03749-1.
[181] Sharmila G, Sakthi Pradeep R, Sandiya K, Santhiya S, Muthukumaran C, 
Jeyanthi J, et al. Biogenic synthesis of CuO nanoparticles using Bauhinia 
tomentosa leaves extract: characterization and its antibacterial application. J Mol 
Struct 2018;1165:288–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2018.04.011.
[182] Ananth A, Dharaneedharan S, Heo M-S, Mok YS. Copper oxide nanomaterials: 
synthesis, characterization and structure-specific antibacterial performance. 
Chem Eng J 2015;262:179–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.09.083.
[183] Kimura T, Nishioka H. Intracellular generation of superoxide by copper sulphate 
in Escherichia coli. Mutat Res Toxicol Environ Mutagen 1997;389:237–42. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1383-5718(96)00153-2.
[184] Ivask A, Bondarenko O, Jepihhina N, Kahru A. Profiling of the reactive oxygen 
species-related ecotoxicity of CuO, ZnO, TiO2, silver and fullerene nanoparticles 
using a set of recombinant luminescent Escherichia coli strains: differentiating the 
impact of particles and solubilised metals. Anal Bioanal Chem 2010;398:701–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-010-3962-7.
[185] Bondarenko O, Ivask A, K¨akinen A, Kahru A. Sub-toxic effects of CuO 
nanoparticles on bacteria: kinetics, role of cu ions and possible mechanisms of 
action. Environ Pollut 2012;169:81–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envpol.2012.05.009.
[186] Wu S, Rajeshkumar S, Madasamy M, Mahendran V. Green synthesis of copper 
nanoparticles using Cissus vitiginea and its antioxidant and antibacterial activity 
against urinary tract infection pathogens. Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol 2020; 
48:1153–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2020.1817053.
[187] Devaraji M, Thanikachalam PV, Elumalai K. The potential of copper oxide 
nanoparticles in nanomedicine: a comprehensive review. Biotechnol Notes 2024; 
5:80–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotno.2024.06.001.
[188] Dulta K, Kos¸arsoy A˘gçeli G, Chauhan P, Jasrotia R, Chauhan PK, Ighalo JO. 
Multifunctional CuO nanoparticles with enhanced photocatalytic dye degradation 
and antibacterial activity. Sustain Environ Res 2022;32:2. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s42834-021-00111-w.
[189] Agarwala M, Choudhury B, Yadav RNS. Comparative study of antibiofilm activity 
of copper oxide and iron oxide nanoparticles against multidrug resistant biofilm 
forming uropathogens. Indian J Microbiol 2014;54:365–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s12088-014-0462-z.
[190] Kahru A, Dubourguier H-C. From ecotoxicology to nanoecotoxicology. Toxicology 
2010;269:105–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2009.08.016.
[191] Kubacka A, Fern´andez-García M, Cerrada ML, Fern´andez-García M. Titanium 
dioxide–polymer nanocomposites with advanced propertieS. In: Nano- 
antimicrobials. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2012. p. 119–49. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24428-5_4.
[192] Foster HA, Ditta IB, Varghese S, Steele A. Photocatalytic disinfection using 
titanium dioxide: spectrum and mechanism of antimicrobial activity. Appl 
Microbiol Biotechnol 2011;90:1847–68. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-011- 
3213-7.
[193] Zhang Y, Ram MK, Stefanakos EK, Goswami DY. Synthesis, characterization, and 
applications of ZnO nanowires. J Nanomater 2012;2012. https://doi.org/ 
10.1155/2012/624520.
[194] Al-Awady MJ, Greenway GM, Paunov VN. Nanotoxicity of polyelectrolyte- 
functionalized titania nanoparticles towards microalgae and yeast: role of the 
particle concentration, size and surface charge. RSC Adv 2015;5:37044–59. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C5RA05577F.
[195] de Dicastillo CL, Pati˜no C, Galotto MJ, V´asquez-Martínez Y, Torrent C, 
Alburquenque D, et al. Novel hollow titanium dioxide nanospheres with 
antimicrobial activity against resistant bacteria. Beilstein J Nanotechnol 2019;10: 
1716–25. https://doi.org/10.3762/bjnano.10.167.
[196] Gelover S, G´omez LA, Reyes K, Teresa Leal M. A practical demonstration of water 
disinfection using TiO2 films and sunlight. Water Res 2006;40:3274–80. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2006.07.006.
[197] Liu H-L, Yang TC-K. Photocatalytic inactivation of Escherichia coli and 
lactobacillus helveticus by ZnO and TiO2 activated with ultraviolet light. Process 
Biochem 2003;39:475–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-9592(03)00084-0.
[198] Li Q, Mahendra S, Lyon DY, Brunet L, Liga MV, Li D, et al. Antimicrobial 
nanomaterials for water disinfection and microbial control: potential applications 
and implications. Water Res 2008;42:4591–602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
watres.2008.08.015.
[199] Hameed RS, Fayyad RJ, Nuaman RS, Hamdan NT, Maliki SAJ. Synthesis and 
characterization of a novel titanium nanoparticals using banana peel extract and 
investigate its antibacterial and insecticidal activity. J Pure Appl Microbiol 2019; 
13:2241–9. https://doi.org/10.22207/JPAM.13.4.38.
[200] Khan ST, Ahmad J, Ahamed M, Musarrat J, Al-Khedhairy AA. Zinc oxide and 
titanium dioxide nanoparticles induce oxidative stress, inhibit growth, and 
attenuate biofilm formation activity of Streptococcus mitis. JBIC J Biol Inorg 
Chem 2016;21:295–303. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00775-016-1339-x.
[201] Xie J, Li H, Zhang T, Song B, Wang X, Gu Z. Recent advances in ZnO 
nanomaterial-mediated biological applications and action mechanisms. 
Nanomaterials 2023;13:1500. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano13091500.
[202] Jones N, Ray B, Ranjit KT, Manna AC. Antibacterial activity of ZnO nanoparticle 
suspensions on a broad spectrum of microorganisms. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2008; 
279:71–6. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2007.01012.x.
[203] Applerot G, Lipovsky A, Dror R, Perkas N, Nitzan Y, Lubart R, et al. Enhanced 
antibacterial activity of nanocrystalline ZnO due to increased ROS-mediated cell 
injury. Adv Funct Mater 2009;19:842–52. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adfm.200801081.
[204] Mahamuni-Badiger PP, Patil PM, Badiger MV, Patel PR, Thorat- Gadgil BS, 
Pandit A, et al. Biofilm formation to inhibition: role of zinc oxide-based 
nanoparticles. Mater Sci Eng C 2020;108:110319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
msec.2019.110319.
[205] Jeevanandam J, Kiew SF, Boakye-Ansah S, Lau SY, Barhoum A, Danquah MK, 
et al. Green approaches for the synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles 
using microbial and plant extracts. Nanoscale 2022;14:2534–71. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/D1NR08144F.
[206] Sirelkhatim A, Mahmud S, Seeni A, Kaus NHM, Ann LC, Bakhori SKM, et al. 
Review on zinc oxide nanoparticles: antibacterial activity and toxicity 
mechanism. Nano-Micro Lett 2015;7:219–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40820- 
015-0040-x.
[207] Adams LK, Lyon DY, Alvarez PJJ. Comparative eco-toxicity of nanoscale TiO2, 
SiO2, and ZnO water suspensions. Water Res 2006;40:3527–32. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.watres.2006.08.004.
[208] Jiang W, Mashayekhi H, Xing B. Bacterial toxicity comparison between nano- and 
micro-scaled oxide particles. Environ Pollut 2009;157:1619–25. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.envpol.2008.12.025.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
27 

[209] Ann LC, Mahmud S, Bakhori SKM, Sirelkhatim A, Mohamad D, Hasan H, et al. 
Effect of surface modification and UVA photoactivation on antibacterial 
bioactivity of zinc oxide powder. Appl Surf Sci 2014;292:405–12. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2013.11.152.
[210] Epand RM, Epand RF. Lipid domains in bacterial membranes and the action of 
antimicrobial agents. Biochim Biophys Acta 2009;1788:289–94. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2008.08.023.
[211] Okaiyeto K, Gigliobianco MR, Di Martino P. Biogenic zinc oxide nanoparticles as a 
promising antibacterial agent: synthesis and characterization. Int J Mol Sci 2024; 
25:9500. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25179500.
[212] Mahendiran D, Subash G, Arumai Selvan D, Rehana D, Senthil Kumar R, 
Kalilur Rahiman A. Biosynthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using plant extracts of 
aloe vera and hibiscus sabdariffa: phytochemical, antibacterial, antioxidant and 
anti-proliferative studies. Bionanoscience 2017;7:530–45. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s12668-017-0418-y.
[213] Bhattacharyya P, Agarwal B, Goswami M, Maiti D, Baruah S, Tribedi P. Zinc oxide 
nanoparticle inhibits the biofilm formation of Streptococcus pneumoniae. Antonie 
Van Leeuwenhoek 2018;111:89–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10482-017-0930- 
7.
[214] Khan ST, Ahamed M, Musarrat J, Al-Khedhairy AA. Anti-biofilm and antibacterial 
activities of zinc oxide nanoparticles against the oral opportunistic pathogens R 
othia dentocariosa and R othia mucilaginosa. Eur J Oral Sci 2014;122:397–403. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/eos.12152.
[215] Asif N, Fatima S, Siddiqui T, Fatma T. Investigation of morphological and 
biochemical changes of zinc oxide nanoparticles induced toxicity against multi 
drug resistance bacteria. J Trace Elem Med Biol 2022;74:127069. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jtemb.2022.127069.
[216] Agrawal A, Sharma R, Sharma A, Gurjar KC, Kumar S, Chatterjee S, et al. 
Antibacterial and antibiofilm efficacy of green synthesized ZnO nanoparticles 
using Saraca asoca leaves. Environ Sci Pollut Res 2023;30:86328–37. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11356-023-28524-7.
[217] Shoudho KN, Uddin S, Rumon MMH, Shakil MS. Influence of physicochemical 
properties of Iron oxide nanoparticles on their antibacterial activity. ACS Omega 
2024;9:33303–34. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.4c02822.
[218] Lu A, Salabas EL, Schüth F. Magnetic nanoparticles: synthesis, protection, 
functionalization, and application. Angew Chemie Int Ed 2007;46:1222–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200602866.
[219] Dinali R, Ebrahiminezhad A, Manley-Harris M, Ghasemi Y, Berenjian A. Iron 
oxide nanoparticles in modern microbiology and biotechnology. Crit Rev 
Microbiol 2017;43:493–507. https://doi.org/10.1080/1040841X.2016.1267708.
[220] Ismail RA, Sulaiman GM, Abdulrahman SA, Marzoog TR. Antibacterial activity of 
magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles synthesized by laser ablation in liquid. Mater 
Sci Eng C 2015;53:286–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2015.04.047.
[221] Li Y-G, Gao H-S, Li W-L, Xing J-M, Liu H-Z. In situ magnetic separation and 
immobilization of dibenzothiophene-desulfurizing bacteria. Bioresour Technol 
2009;100:5092–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2009.05.064.
[222] Ansari F, Grigoriev P, Libor S, Tothill IE, Ramsden JJ. DBT degradation 
enhancement by decorating Rhodococcus erythropolis IGST8 with magnetic Fe 3 
O 4 nanoparticles. Biotechnol Bioeng 2009;102:1505–12. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/bit.22161.
[223] Chatterjee S, Bandyopadhyay A, Sarkar K. Effect of iron oxide and gold 
nanoparticles on bacterial growth leading towards biological application. 
J Nanobiotechnology 2011;9:34. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-3155-9-34.
[224] Borcherding J, Baltrusaitis J, Chen H, Stebounova L, Wu C-M, Rubasinghege G, 
et al. Iron oxide nanoparticles induce Pseudomonas aeruginosa growth, induce 
biofilm formation, and inhibit antimicrobial peptide function. Environ Sci Nano 
2014;1:123. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3en00029j.
[225] Kessler A, Hedberg J, Blomberg E, Odnevall I. Reactive oxygen species formed by 
metal and metal oxide nanoparticles in physiological media—a review of 
reactions of importance to Nanotoxicity and proposal for categorization. 
Nanomaterials 2022;12:1922. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano12111922.
[226] Gilbert JL. Corrosion in the human body: metallic implants in the complex body 
environment. Corrosion 2017;73:1478–95. https://doi.org/10.5006/2563.
[227] Müller K, Skepper JN, Posfai M, Trivedi R, Howarth S, Corot C, et al. Effect of 
ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (Ferumoxtran-10) on 
human monocyte-macrophages in vitro. Biomaterials 2007;28:1629–42. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.12.003.
[228] Weinberg ED. Iron loading and disease surveillance. Emerg Infect Dis 1999;5: 
346–52. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid0503.990305.
[229] Pisanic TR, Blackwell JD, Shubayev VI, Fi˜nones RR, Jin S. Nanotoxicity of iron 
oxide nanoparticle internalization in growing neurons. Biomaterials 2007;28: 
2572–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.01.043.
[230] Gudkov SV, Burmistrov DE, Serov DA, Rebezov MB, Semenova AA, Lisitsyn AB. 
Do iron oxide nanoparticles have significant antibacterial properties? Antibiotics 
2021;10:884. https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics10070884.
[231] Rufus A, Philip D. Synthesis of biogenic hematite (α-Fe 2 O 3) nanoparticles for 
antibacterial and nanofluid applications. RSC Adv 2016;6:94206–17. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C6RA20240C.
[232] Hamdy NM, Boseila AA, Ramadan A, Basalious EB. Iron oxide nanoparticles-plant 
insignia synthesis with favorable biomedical activities and less toxicity, in the 
“era of the-green”: a systematic review. Pharmaceutics 2022;14:844. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14040844.
[233] Aliya S, Rethinasabapathy M, Yoo J, Kim E, Chung J-Y, Cha J-H, et al. Phytogenic 
fabrication of iron oxide nanoparticles and evaluation of their in vitro 
antibacterial and cytotoxic activity. Arab J Chem 2023;16:104703. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2023.104703.
[234] Mousavi SM, Hashemi SA, Zarei M, Bahrani S, Savardashtaki A, Esmaeili H, et al. 
Data on cytotoxic and antibacterial activity of synthesized Fe3O4 nanoparticles 
using Malva sylvestris. Data Br 2020;28:104929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
dib.2019.104929.
[235] Arokiyaraj S, Saravanan M, Udaya Prakash NK, Valan Arasu M, Vijayakumar B, 
Vincent S. Enhanced antibacterial activity of iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles 
treated with Argemone mexicana L. leaf extract: An in vitro study. Mater Res Bull 
2013;48:3323–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.materresbull.2013.05.059.
[236] Sathyanarayanan MB, Balachandranath R, Genji Srinivasulu Y, Kannaiyan SK, 
Subbiahdoss G. The effect of gold and iron-oxide nanoparticles on biofilm- 
forming pathogens. ISRN Microbiol 2013;2013:1–5. https://doi.org/10.1155/ 
2013/272086.
[237] Subbiahdoss G, Sharifi S, Grijpma DW, Laurent S, van der Mei HC, Mahmoudi M, 
et al. Magnetic targeting of surface-modified superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles yields antibacterial efficacy against biofilms of gentamicin-resistant 
staphylococci. Acta Biomater 2012;8:2047–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
actbio.2012.03.002.
[238] Chifiriuc MC, Grumezescu AM, Andronescu E, Ficai A, Cotar AI, Grumezescu V, 
et al. Water dispersible magnetite nanoparticles influence the efficacy of 
antibiotics against planktonic and biofilm embedded Enterococcus faecalis cells. 
Anaerobe 2013;22:14–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.04.013.
[239] Bilcu M, Grumezescu A, Oprea A, Popescu R, Mogoșanu G, Hristu R, et al. 
Efficiency of Vanilla, patchouli and Ylang Ylang essential oils stabilized by Iron 
oxide@C14 nanostructures against bacterial adherence and biofilms formed by 
Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella pneumoniae clinical strains. Molecules 
2014;19:17943–56. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules191117943.
[240] Park H, Park H-J, Kim JA, Lee SH, Kim JH, Yoon J, et al. Inactivation of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01 biofilms by hyperthermia using 
superparamagnetic nanoparticles. J Microbiol Methods 2011;84:41–5. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.mimet.2010.10.010.
[241] Kim M-H, Yamayoshi I, Mathew S, Lin H, Nayfach J, Simon SI. Magnetic 
nanoparticle targeted hyperthermia of cutaneous Staphylococcus aureus 
infection. Ann Biomed Eng 2013;41:598–609. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439- 
012-0698-x.
[242] Di Corato R, B´ealle G, Kolosnjaj-Tabi J, Espinosa A, Cl´ement O, Silva AKA, et al. 
Combining magnetic hyperthermia and photodynamic therapy for tumor ablation 
with photoresponsive magnetic liposomes. ACS Nano 2015;9:2904–16. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/nn506949t.
[243] Li Y, Xue S, Min HS, Chen C, Lu L, Chen Z, et al. Mesoporous Fe 3 O 4 
nanoparticles loaded with IR-820 for antibacterial activity via magnetic 
hyperthermia combined with photodynamic therapy. Adv Healthc Mater 2025. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.202500964.
[244] Park ES, Kim HS, Kim MN, Yoon JS. Antibacterial activities of polystyrene-block- 
poly(4-vinyl pyridine) and poly(styrene-random-4-vinyl pyridine). Eur Polym J 
2004;40:2819–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2004.07.025.
[245] Sellenet PH, Allison B, Applegate BM, Youngblood JP. Synergistic activity of 
hydrophilic modification in antibiotic polymers. Biomacromolecules 2007;8: 
19–23. https://doi.org/10.1021/bm0605513.
[246] Mu˜noz-Bonilla A, Fern´andez-García M. Polymeric materials with antimicrobial 
activity. Prog Polym Sci 2012;37:281–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
progpolymsci.2011.08.005.
[247] Ozay O, Akcali A, Otkun MT, Silan C, Aktas N, Sahiner N. P(4-VP) based 
nanoparticles and composites with dual action as antimicrobial materials. 
Colloids Surfaces B Biointerfaces 2010;79:460–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2010.05.013.
[248] Pachaiappan R, Rajendran S, Show PL, Manavalan K, Naushad M. Metal/metal 
oxide nanocomposites for bactericidal effect: a review. Chemosphere 2021;272: 
128607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.128607.
[249] Bharathi D, Ranjithkumar R, Chandarshekar B, Bhuvaneshwari V. Preparation of 
chitosan coated zinc oxide nanocomposite for enhanced antibacterial and 
photocatalytic activity: as a bionanocomposite. Int J Biol Macromol 2019;129: 
989–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.02.061.
[250] Bharathi D, Ranjithkumar R, Vasantharaj S, Chandarshekar B, Bhuvaneshwari V. 
Synthesis and characterization of chitosan/iron oxide nanocomposite for 
biomedical applications. Int J Biol Macromol 2019;132:880–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.233.
[251] Lee B, Park J, Ryu M, Kim S, Joo M, Yeom J-H, et al. Antimicrobial peptide-loaded 
gold nanoparticle-DNA aptamer conjugates as highly effective antibacterial 
therapeutics against Vibrio vulnificus. Sci Rep 2017;7:13572. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41598-017-14127-z.
[252] Penad´es JR, Chen J, Quiles-Puchalt N, Carpena N, Novick RP. Bacteriophage- 
mediated spread of bacterial virulence genes. Curr Opin Microbiol 2015;23: 
171–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2014.11.019.
[253] Peng H, Borg RE, Dow LP, Pruitt BL, Chen IA. Controlled phage therapy by 
photothermal ablation of specific bacterial species using gold nanorods targeted 
by chimeric phages. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2020;117:1951–61. https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.1913234117.
[254] Wan F, Draz MS, Gu M, Yu W, Ruan Z, Luo Q. Novel strategy to combat antibiotic 
resistance: a sight into the combination of CRISPR/Cas9 and nanoparticles. 
Pharmaceutics 2021;13:352. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics13030352.
[255] Sachithanandan JS, Deepalakshmi M, Rajamohamed H, Mary P, Mohankumar M, 
Vikashini S. Revolutionizing antimicrobial solutions nanotechnology, CRISPR- 
Cas9 and innovative approaches to combat drug resistance in ESKAPE pathogens. 
J Pure Appl Microbiol 2024;18:808–22. https://doi.org/10.22207/ 
JPAM.18.2.30.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
28 

[256] Hu M, Yuan C, Tian T, Wang X, Sun J, Xiong E, et al. Single-step, salt-aging-free, 
and thiol-free freezing construction of AuNP-based bioprobes for advancing 
CRISPR-based diagnostics. J Am Chem Soc 2020;142:7506–13. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jacs.0c00217.
[257] Choi J-H, Lim J, Shin M, Paek S-H, Choi J-W. CRISPR-Cas12a-based nucleic acid 
amplification-free DNA biosensor via au nanoparticle-assisted metal-enhanced 
fluorescence and colorimetric analysis. Nano Lett 2021;21:693–9. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.0c04303.
[258] Allemailem KS, Alsahli MA, Almatroudi A, Alrumaihi F, Alkhaleefah FK, 
Rahmani AH, et al. Current updates of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing 
and targeting within tumor cells: an innovative strategy of cancer management. 
Cancer Commun 2022;42:1257–87. https://doi.org/10.1002/cac2.12366.
[259] Bhattacharjee R, Nandi A, Mitra P, Saha K, Patel P, Jha E, et al. Theragnostic 
application of nanoparticle and CRISPR against food-borne multi-drug resistant 
pathogens. Mater Today Bio 2022;15:100291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
mtbio.2022.100291.
[260] Hayden SC, Zhao G, Saha K, Phillips RL, Li X, Miranda OR, et al. Aggregation and 
interaction of cationic nanoparticles on bacterial surfaces. J Am Chem Soc 2012; 
134:6920–3. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja301167y.
[261] Colino CI, Lanao JM, Gutierrez-Millan C. Recent advances in functionalized 
nanomaterials for the diagnosis and treatment of bacterial infections. Mater Sci 
Eng C 2021;121:111843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2020.111843.
[262] Panicker S, Ahmady IM, Han C, Chehimi M, Mohamed AA. On demand release of 
ionic silver from gold-silver alloy nanoparticles: fundamental antibacterial 
mechanisms study. Mater Today Chem 2020;16:100237. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.mtchem.2019.100237.
[263] Hong D, Cao G, Qu J, Deng Y, Tang J. Antibacterial activity of Cu2O and ag co- 
modified rice grains-like ZnO nanocomposites. J Mater Sci Technol 2018;34: 
2359–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmst.2018.06.011.
[264] Yang L, Chen L, Chen Y-C, Kang L, Yu J, Wang Y, et al. Homogeneously alloyed 
nanoparticles of immiscible Ag–Cu with ultrahigh antibacterial activity. Colloids 
Surfaces B Biointerfaces 2019;180:466–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2019.05.018.
[265] Prabhawathi V, Sivakumar PM, Boobalan T, Manohar CM, Doble M. Design of 
antimicrobial polycaprolactam nanocomposite by immobilizing subtilisin 
conjugated Au/Ag core-shell nanoparticles for biomedical applications. Mater Sci 
Eng C 2019;94:656–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2018.10.020.
[266] Sharaf EM, Hassan A, AL-Salmi FA, Albalwe FM, Albalawi HMR, Darwish DB, 
et al. Synergistic antibacterial activity of compact silver/magnetite core-shell 
nanoparticles core shell against Gram-negative foodborne pathogens. Front 
Microbiol 2022:13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.929491.
[267] Bakina OV, Glazkova EA, Svarovskaya NV, Rodkevich NG, Lerner MI. «Janus»- 
like cu-Fe bimetallic nanoparticles with high antibacterial activity. Mater Lett 
2019;242:187–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matlet.2019.01.105.
[268] Yang Q, Kong H, Tang L, Ma Y, Liu F, Liu M, et al. Au–Cu Janus nanostructures as 
NIR-II photothermal antibacterial agents. ACS Appl Nano Mater 2024;7: 
20783–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.4c03673.
[269] Zhao W, Ding Q, Zhou B, Liu J, Shi Y, Liu C, et al. Nitric oxide-actuated titanium 
dioxide Janus nanoparticles for enhanced multimodal disruption of infectious 
biofilms. Adv Funct Mater 2024:34. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202407626.
[270] He J, Qiao Y, Zhang H, Zhao J, Li W, Xie T, et al. Gold–silver nanoshells promote 
wound healing from drug-resistant bacteria infection and enable monitoring via 
surface-enhanced Raman scattering imaging. Biomaterials 2020;234:119763. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2020.119763.
[271] Amna T, Hassan MS, Barakat NAM, Pandeya DR, Hong ST, Khil M-S, et al. 
Antibacterial activity and interaction mechanism of electrospun zinc-doped 
titania nanofibers. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2012;93:743–51. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00253-011-3459-0.
[272] Choi A, Park J, Kang J, Jonas O, Kim D, Kim H, et al. Surface characterization and 
investigation on antibacterial activity of CuZn nanofibers prepared by 
electrospinning. Appl Surf Sci 2020;508:144883. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apsusc.2019.144883.
[273] Sharma M, Hazra S, Basu S. Synthesis of heterogeneous Ag-Cu bimetallic 
monolith with different mass ratios and their performances for catalysis and 
antibacterial activity. Adv Powder Technol 2017;28:3085–94. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apt.2017.09.023.
[274] Ahirwar D, Bano M, Khan I, Gound SS, Sheikh MUD, Mondal R, et al. Facile 
synthesis of macroporous ag and CuO monoliths as an efficient nonenzymatic 
electrochemical sensor and antimicrobial agent. J Solid State Chem 2019;273: 
233–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jssc.2019.03.002.
[275] Alavi M, Nokhodchi A. Antimicrobial and wound treatment aspects of Micro- and 
Nanoformulations of Carboxymethyl, Dialdehyde, and TEMPO-oxidized 
derivatives of cellulose: recent advances. Macromol Biosci 2020:20. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/mabi.201900362.
[276] Deng H, McShan D, Zhang Y, Sinha SS, Arslan Z, Ray PC, et al. Mechanistic study 
of the synergistic antibacterial activity of combined silver nanoparticles and 
common antibiotics. Environ Sci Technol 2016;50:8840–8. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.est.6b00998.
[277] Li M, Sultanbawa Y, Xu ZP, Gu W, Chen W, Liu J, et al. High and long-term 
antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli via synergy between the antibiotic 
penicillin G and its carrier ZnAl layered double hydroxide. Colloids Surfaces B 
Biointerfaces 2019;174:435–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2018.11.035.
[278] Fayaz AM, Balaji K, Girilal M, Yadav R, Kalaichelvan PT, Venketesan R. Biogenic 
synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their synergistic effect with antibiotics: a 
study against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Nanomedicine 
Nanotechnology, Biol Med 2010;6:103–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nano.2009.04.006.
[279] Zhang Y, Wang L, Xu X, Li F, Wu Q. Combined Systems of Different Antibiotics 
with nano-CuO against Escherichia Coli and the mechanisms involved. 
Nanomedicine 2018;13:339–51. https://doi.org/10.2217/nnm-2017-0290.
[280] Seyed-Talebi SM, Kazeminezhad I, Motamedi H. TiO2 hollow spheres as a novel 
antibiotic carrier for the direct delivery of gentamicin. Ceram Int 2018;44: 
13457–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2018.03.276.
[281] Kalita S, Kandimalla R, Bhowal AC, Kotoky J, Kundu S. Functionalization of 
β-lactam antibiotic on lysozyme capped gold nanoclusters retrogress MRSA and 
its persisters following awakening. Sci Rep 2018;8:5778. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41598-018-22736-5.
[282] ´Alvarez E, Est´evez M, Gallo-Cordova A, Gonz´alez B, Castillo RR, Morales M del P, 
et al. Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles decorated mesoporous silica 
nanosystem for combined antibiofilm therapy. Pharmaceutics 2022;14:163. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14010163.
[283] Guo Z, Jiang H, Song A, Liu X, Wang X. Progress and challenges in bacterial 
infection theranostics based on functional metal nanoparticles. Adv Colloid 
Interface Sci 2024;332:103265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2024.103265.
[284] Moradi F, Ghaedi A, Fooladfar Z, Bazrgar A. Recent advance on nanoparticles or 
nanomaterials with anti-multidrug resistant bacteria and anti-bacterial biofilm 
properties: a systematic review. Heliyon 2023;9:e22105. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e22105.
[285] Sung JH, Ji JH, Yoon JU, Kim DS, Song MY, Jeong J, et al. Lung function changes 
in Sprague-Dawley rats after prolonged inhalation exposure to silver 
nanoparticles. Inhal Toxicol 2008;20:567–74. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
08958370701874671.
[286] Ndayishimiye J, Kumeria T, Popat A, Falconer JR, Blaskovich MAT. 
Nanomaterials: the new antimicrobial magic bullet. ACS Infect Dis 2022;8: 
693–712. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsinfecdis.1c00660.
A.N. Generalova and A.O. Dushina                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 345 (2025) 103626 
29