Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nano Today
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nanotoday
Amyloid-β/Tau burden and neuroinflammation dual-targeted 
nanomedicines synergistically restore memory and recognition of 
Alzheimer’s disease mice
Lingxiao Zhang a,⁎,1, Shengjie Hou b,1, Fatemeh Movahedi c,1, Zijin Li a,1, Li Li c, Jing Hu d,  
Yingbo Jia b, Yaru Huang b, Jie Zhu b,c, Xiaoying Sun b, Linghui Zeng a,⁎, Ruitian Liu b,⁎,  
Zhi Ping Xu c,e,⁎⁎
a Key Laboratory of Novel Targets and Drug Study for Neural Repair of Zhejiang Province, School of Medicine, Hangzhou City University, Hangzhou 310015, China 
b State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 
c Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia 
d Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 211200, China 
e Institute of Biomedical Health Technology and Engineering, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen 518107, China 
a r t i c l e  i n f o
Article history: 
Received 11 August 2022 
Received in revised form 28 December 2022 
Accepted 13 February 2023 
Available online 20 February 2023
Keywords: 
Alzheimer’s disease 
Layered double hydroxides 
Amyloid β 
Tau 
Neuroinflammation
a b s t r a c t
Efficient multi-targeted intervention of complex pathogenic factors may hold promises for Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) treatment due to the continuous failure of single-targeted therapy in clinics. To this end, we 
developed two dual-targeted layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanoparticle (NP)-based nanomedicines in 
this research for simultaneously reducing amyloid β (Aβ)/hyperphosphorylated Tau burden and neuroin­
flammation. LDH NPs were first loaded with two therapeutics, i.e. Rutin and β-site amyloid precursor 
protein cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1) or glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) siRNA. The nanomedicines were 
further functionalized with Ang2 and RVG29 via adsorption of their bovine serum albumin (BSA) con­
jugates. In APP/PS1 and Tau.P301S AD mouse models, nanomedicines efficiently silenced the target genes 
and decreased the expression of abnormal Aβ and hyperphosphorylated Tau, respectively. Moreover, the co- 
delivered Rutin inhibited the Aβ aggregation and normalized the functions of microglia and astrocytes to 
reduce neuroinflammation, synergistically recovering the memory and cognitive deficits of AD mice, 
comparable to that of wide type mice. The successful AD treatment using the dual-targeted LDH nano­
medicines provides a paradigm for the development of multi-targeted nanomedicines and warrants further 
study to combat AD with the complex pathogenic mechanisms.
© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive and unremitting neu­
rodegenerative disease that affects approximately 30–35 million 
people worldwide [1,2]. An important feature of AD is the complex 
pathogenesis involving multiple pathogenic factors such as amyloid 
β (Aβ) aggregates, Tau neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), glia dysfunction 
and neuroinflammation [3–5]. At the early stage of AD, Aβ is cleaved 
from amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-site APP cleaving en­
zyme-1 (BACE1), then aggregated into oligomers or fibrils in the 
extracellular space [6]. Increasing evidence has shown that Aβ is the 
initiator of Tau hyperphosphorylation or aggregation, which is fur­
ther aggravated by enzymes such as glycogen synthase kinase 3β 
(GSK3β) [7–9]. The Aβ and Tau-mediated pathogenic pathways can 
proceed in parallel, collectively leading to microglial dysfunction and 
neuroinflammation [10,11]. Therefore, therapeutic strategies to 
eliminate Aβ [12,13] or Tau [14,15] alone have been developed and 
proven effective in alleviating AD symptoms in mice.
Silencing of BACE1 or GSK3β is beneficial to reduce the accu­
mulation of Aβ aggregates or Tau NFTs in AD brains [16–19]. 
Nevertheless, some trials of BACE1 inhibitors have been suspended 
or questioned due to inability to improve AD symptoms, despite 
reducing Aβ plaque burden, as also shown in application of Aβ- 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2023.101788 
1748-0132/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
]]]] 
]]]]]]
⁎ Corresponding authors.
⁎⁎ Corresponding 
author 
at: 
Australian 
Institute 
for 
Bioengineering 
and 
Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia.
E-mail addresses: zhanglx913@zucc.edu.cn (L. Zhang),  
zenglh@zucc.edu.cn (L. Zeng), rtliu@ipe.ac.cn (R. Liu), gordonxu@uq.edu.au (Z.P. Xu).
1 These authors contribute equally.

specific monoclonal antibody [20–22]. These results suggest that 
targeting one causative factor does not exhibit sufficient treatment 
benefits in the multi-pathogenic AD brain microenvironment. In­
stead, multi-targeted therapy may result in the effective treatment 
of AD [23,24]. Rutin, a natural flavonoid glycoside with high anti- 
inflammatory activity [25]. As a potential drug for multi-targeted 
therapy of AD, Rutin has been shown to play an important role in 
aggregation inhibition, aggregate dissociation, reduction of neuro­
toxicity of Aβ or Tau, as well as normalization of microglia and re­
duction of neuroinflammation [25–28]. Therefore, by synergizing 
with BACE1 or GSK3β inhibitors (e.g., siRNA drugs), Rutin is expected 
to be more effective in relieving abnormal Aβ or hyperpho­
sphorylated Tau burden. On top of this strategy, multi-targeted 
therapeutics usually require simultaneous delivery and generate 
effective synergy, a great challenge to be addressed at the moment. 
Meanwhile, the poor solubility or stability also limits the bioavail­
ability of small molecules including Rutin and siRNA drugs [29,30], 
thus an efficient delivery system is urgently need.
Two-dimensional magnesium/aluminium layered double hydro­
xide (LDH) nanoparticle (NP) is an ideal platform for simultaneous 
delivery of drugs and genes [31,32]. Small molecules such as 5- 
fluorouracil and curcumin have been successfully intercalated into 
the interlayer gallery of LDH NPs, while negatively charged larger 
biomolecules such as siRNA can be adsorbed on the surface of LDH 
NPs to improve their bioavailability [33,34]. However, blood-brain 
barrier (BBB) is still the main obstacle preventing drugs and NPs 
from reaching the brain lesions [35]. To enhance the BBB penetra­
tion, nanoplatforms modified with BBB-targeting ligands have been 
widely investigated to enhance the accumulation of drugs in the 
brain [36,37]. For example, LDH NPs stabilized by bovine serum al­
bumin (BSA) and modified with low-density lipoprotein receptor 1 
(LRP1) ligand angiopep-2 (Ang2) and nicotinic acetylcholine re­
ceptor (nAChR) ligand rabies virus glycoprotein 29 (RVG29) have 
successfully crossed the BBB and reached the brain [38–41]. Notably, 
LDH NP is recently reported to favourably promote the transition of 
microglia from a pro-inflammatory to an anti-inflammatory phe­
notype, which would be beneficial for minimizing the immune in­
flammation caused by the delivery system itself [42,43].
Herein, Aβ/Tau burden and neuroinflammation dual-targeted 
LDH-based nanomedicines (LDH-Rutin-siRNA/Ang2-RVG29, LRsAR) 
were assembled from anti-inflammatory module (LDH/Rutin, LR), 
gene silence module (BACE1 siRNA, siBACE1 or GSK3β siRNA, 
siGSK3β) as well as targeting delivery module (BSA-Ang2 and BSA- 
RVG29 conjugates) (Fig. 1). APP/PS1 and Tau.P301S AD mice were 
treated with the two therapeutic nanomedicines LRsBAR (containing 
siBACE1) and LRsGAR (containing siGSK3β), respectively. On the one 
hand, the siRNA drug effectively down-regulates the expression of 
BACE1 or GSK3β to reduce the Aβ production or inhibit Tau hyper­
phosphorylation. On the other hand, the released Rutin from these 
nanomedicines not only reduces the Aβ/Tau aggregation and miti­
gates their neurotoxicity, but also relieves the neuroinflammation 
brought by the over-activated microglia and astrocytes. Our study 
provides a rational bottom-up design of dual-targeted nanomedi­
cines for treating AD with the complex pathogenic mechanisms, 
holding great promises to restore the lost memory and deficient 
recognition.
Results and discussion
Characterization of nanomedicines
LDH was prepared with the typical hexagonal sheet-like mor­
phology through a hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 2a). Meanwhile, the 
energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) images showed that magne­
sium and aluminum elements were evenly distributed in the LDH 
crystals (Fig. 2b). The intercalation of Rutin slightly increased the 
interlayer gallery from 0.78 nm of LDH to 0.83 nm of LR, as estimated 
based on (003) and (006) peak positions in X-ray diffraction (XRD) 
patterns (Fig. 2c). However, the morphology of LR seemed not ob­
viously different from that of LDH (Fig. 2d). The intercalation of Rutin 
into the interlayer of LDH was evidenced by the characteristic peaks 
(2938 cm−1 for C-H stretching, multiple peaks in 2000–500 cm−1) in 
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra (Fig. 2e). As detected, the 
maximum Rutin loading capacity of LDH was up to 151 μg of Rutin 
per mg of LDH (Fig. 2 f).
Macromolecule-based LDH surface-coating technologies are 
beneficial for maintaining the high colloidal stability of LDH in the 
biological environment [44–48]. Herein, biological macromolecule 
bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used to coat LR to colloidally sta­
bilize NPs in sera, media and buffers. As shown in Fig. 2g, BSA/LR 
aggregated at a low BSA:LR mass ratio (such as 5:3), but became 
stable when the BSA:LR mass ratio increased to 10:3 or higher. Under 
this circumstance, the maximum protein adsorption capacity of LR 
reached 1.5 mg BSA per mg LR (Fig. 2h), which is similar to the value 
of LDH-BSA reported previously [49]. On this basis, the neuron tar­
geting peptide RVG29 and BBB targeting peptide Ang2 were further 
conjugated to BSA before loading to LR by using sulfosuccinimidyl 4- 
(N-maleimidomethyl) 
cyclohexane-1-carboxylate 
(Sulfo-SMCC) 
cross-linker [40]. The cross-linking efficiencies of RVG29 and Ang2 to 
BSA were 94.0% and 97.9%, respectively, and each BSA molecule was 
conjugated with ∼7–8 peptides (Table S1). Thereafter, LDH-Rutin- 
RVG29-Ang2 (LRAR) was prepared by partially replacing natural BSA 
with BSA-RVG29 or BSA-Ang2 to maintain the colloidal stability and 
endow LR with the BBB and neuron dual-targeted capabilities, and 
each mg of LRsAR nanomedicine contained around 14.4 μg of RVG29 
and 10.6 μg of Ang2 peptides in this study, which corresponds to 
∼140–150 Ang2 and RVG29 on each LDH nanoparticle (Table S1-2). 
We used LDH instead of LR here to better observe the adsorption of 
BSA-Ang2/RVG29 on the surface of LDH. As shown in Fig. S1a, pro­
tein-specific N-H (1540 cm−1) and C]O (1650 cm−1) peaks appeared 
in the FT-IR spectrum of LDH/BSA-Ang2/RVG29 (LAR), indicating that 
BSA-Ang2/RVG29 was successfully adsorbed onto the LDH surface. 
siRNA was further loaded onto LRAR to obtain LRsAR by electrostatic 
adsorption [38,40]. When the mass ratio of LRAR to siRNA was 10:1, 
all siRNA was loaded onto LRAR as no bright band was observed at 
the bottom of the agarose gel (Fig. 2i). The TEM images of LRAR and 
LRsBAR showed that the loading of BSA/BSA-peptides and siRNA did 
not obviously change the morphology of LDH (Fig. S1b-c). The dy­
namic light scattering (DLS) data showed that the loading of BSA/ 
BSA-peptides and siRNA increased the size of LDH or LR from 
∼58 nm to ∼91 nm, while decreasing the zeta potential from ∼35 mV 
to ∼− 20 mV (Fig. 2j). The colloidal stability analysis showed that LR, 
LRAR and LRsBAR were all stably dispersed in water (Fig. 2k). In 
sharp contrast, LR aggregated into bigger agglomerates in fetal bo­
vine serum (FBS) for 24 h, while LRsAR were still stably dispersed, 
with no obvious change of the size distribution and morphology 
(Fig. 2k-l). Moreover, LRsAR nanomedicines were well dispersed into 
10% FBS buffers with pH of 6.5 and 7.4 (to mimic endosome and 
cytoplasm, respectively), and the DLS data showed that LRsAR were 
stably dispersed in both buffers within 72 h. Notably, the average 
particle size of LRsAR dispersed in pH 7.4 FBS buffer did not changed 
over 72 h. In contrast, the particle size of LRsAR dispersed in pH 6.5 
FBS buffer decreased slowly, which is related to its continuous dis­
solution in the acidic environment [50,51]. On this basis, the Rutin 
release profile was further detected by incubating LRsAR nanome­
dicines in buffers with different pH values. As shown in Fig. S3, about 
68% and 28% of Rutin was released from LRsAR at pH 5.5 and 6.5 in 
24 h, while the release was very limited in pH 7.4 buffer (∼7% in 
24 h), suggesting that Rutin is slowly released in the extracellular 
neutral environment but rapidly released during internalization in 
acidic endosomes or lysosomes.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
2

Fig. 1. Therapeutic mechanism of LRsAR nanomedicine. The surface-anchored Ang2 enables LRsAR nanomedicines to cross the BBB by interacting with the LRP1, which then 
targets to neuron by RVG29-mediated nAChR recognition. In brain tissues, Rutin released from LRsAR nanomedicines promotes the degradation of Aβ plaques, which accelerates 
their clearance by microglia. At the same time, LRsAR nanomedicine uptake by microglia prevents their over-activation. In neuron cells, siBACE1 or siGSK3β released during the 
endosomal escape of LRsAR nanomedicines down-regulates the expression of BACE1 or GSK3β to reduce the Aβ production or Tau hyperphosphorylation, while the released Rutin 
rescues mitochondrial functions and reduces reactive oxidative species (ROS).
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
3

LRsAR nanomedicines alleviates Aβ/Tau toxicity by reducing 
mitochondrial dysfunction
The cellular uptake of nanomedicines by N2a and BV2 cells was 
investigated firstly. Obviously, both LRsB and LRsBAR nanomedicine 
efficiently delivered siBACE1 (labelled with FITC) into both N2a and 
BV2 cells compared to the free siBACE1 (Fig. 3a). The FITC-positive 
cell percentage seemed to show that N2a and BV2 cells had similar 
phagocytic capacity for LRsB and LRsBAR nanomedicines. Interest­
ingly, the cellular uptake efficiency of LRsBAR nanomedicine by N2a 
was significantly higher than that of BV2 (Fig. 3b and Fig. S5), which 
may benefit from the surface modification with RVG29 and Ang2 
peptides that are usually used to enhance brain targeting efficiency 
and neuronal uptake of NPs [52,53]. The cellular distribution analysis 
showed that both LRsB and LRsBAR nanomedicines efficiently es­
caped from endosomes/lysosomes. As shown in Fig. S5, LRsB or 
LRsBAR nanomedicines (green) were co-localized with endosomes/ 
lysosomes (red; merged into yellow) at 0.5 h. As the incubation time 
was extended to 4 h, the red fluorescence of endosomes/lysosomes 
was quenched due to the endosomal/lysosomal break caused by the 
escape of LDH, and most of the nanomedicines were distributed in 
the cytoplasm as previously reported [54,55].
Both Aβ oligomer (Aβo) and Tau oligomer (Tauo) were highly 
cytotoxic to N2a cells when the concentration was 0.1 μM or higher 
and the cell viability was only ∼30% (Fig. S6). To identify the Aβo 
cytotoxicity inhibitory effect of Rutin, especially in the form of LRAR, 
Aβo and LRsBAR were simultaneously supplemented to culture 
medium and incubated with the cells for 48 h. Obviously, LRsBAR- 
treatment inhibited the cytotoxicity of Aβo to N2a cells to the 
highest degree. For example, LRsBAR-treatment with the Rutin of 
15 µg/mL retained the N2a cell viability of 73% at the Aβo con­
centration of 10 μM, which was significantly higher than that of N2a 
cells treated with LDH, Rutin, LR and LRAR (Fig. 3c). In another 
parallel experiment, the mitigative effect of LRsBAR on the Aβo cy­
totoxicity was further identified by pre-treating N2a cells with Aβo 
for 24 h, then removing Aβo and adding LRsBAR to culture medium. 
Similarly, LRsBAR elevated the N2a cell viability to 80% at the Aβo 
concentration of 10 μM, significantly higher than that of cells treated 
with LDH, free Rutin and LR (Fig. 3d). Similarly, the Tauo cytotoxicity 
inhibition or mitigation assay also indicated that the LRsGAR nano­
medicine effectively alleviated the cytotoxicity of Tauo (Fig. 3e-f).
Rutin attenuates Aβo toxicity mainly by rescuing mitochondrial 
dysfunction and scavenging ROS [27,28], where the cellular transport 
efficiency of Rutin is directly related to its detoxification ability in 
this study. Firstly, the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) 
Fig. 2. Characterization of LRsAR. (a) The TEM image of LDH. (b) Mg, Al and O element analysis in LDH by EDS. (c) XRD patterns of LDH and LR. (d) The TEM image of LR. (e) FTIR 
spectra of LDH, LR and Rutin. (f) The loading profile of Rutin by LDH and the curve fitted with the Langmuir model. (g) The DLS size of LRAR obtained by mixing LR with BSA 
solutions of varying concentrations. (h) Adsorption isotherm of BSA on LR fitted in Langmuir model. (i) The gel retardation images for siRNA loaded by LRAR at different amounts. 
(j) The size distribution and zeta-potential of LDH, LR and LRAR and LRsAR. (k) The colloidal stability of LDH, LR and LRAR and LRsAR in water and FBS for 24 h. (l) The TEM image 
of LRsAR in FBS for 24 h. Data are means ±  SEM.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
4

was evaluated by the 5,5′,6,6′-tetrachloro-1,1′,3,3′-tetraethyl-imi­
dacarbocyanine (JC-1) probe [56]. As shown in Fig. 3g and Fig. S7, 
Aβo treatment decreased the fluorescence ratio of JC-1 red (JC-1 
monomers)/green (JC-1 aggregates) of N2a cells from 1.00 of PBS 
group to 0.65, suggesting that MMP of mitochondria was sig­
nificantly decreased. In contrast, the LRAR or LRsBAR-treatment 
completely restored the MMP by increasing the JC-1 red/green ratio 
to 0.98–0.99. At the same time, the treatment of free Rutin and LR 
only elevated the JC-1 red/green ratio to 0.72 and 0.79, respectively. 
Similarly, LRAR or LRsBAR treatment also effectively scavenged ROS 
in N2a cells pre-treated with Aβo. As shown in Fig. 3h and Fig. S8, the 
ROS level in N2a cells (pre-treated with Aβo at 10 µM) and then 
treated with LDH, free Rutin, or LR-treatment increased by 70%, 56%, 
and 30%, respectively when compared with the cells without Aβo. In 
comparison, the ROS level was only increased by 10% or 7% in LRAR 
or 
LRsBAR-treated 
N2a 
cells. 
In 
consistence, 
LRAR 
or 
LRsGAR treatment also reduced the mitochondrial dysfunction or 
ROS production in N2a cells (Fig. 3i-j).
Furthermore, the gene expression detection showed that LRAR 
did not affect the expression of BACE1 and GSK3β mRNA in N2a cells, 
but the LRsBAR or LRsGAR-treatment significantly reduced the 
BACE1 or GSK3β expression to 15.8% or 18.6%, respectively, much 
lower than 48.1% or 52.4% upon treatment with free siBACE1 or 
siGSK3β (Fig. 3k-l). These data indicate that the enhanced neuronal 
targeting ability of LRsBAR by RVG29 and Ang2 effectively promoted 
more Rutin and siRNA to enter neurons to alleviate mitochondrial 
dysfunction, reduce ROS production and down-regulate the related 
gene expression.
Fig. 3. Evaluation of the anti-Aβo toxicity ability of LRAR in N2a cells. (a) N2a and BV2 cells were incubated with saline, siBACE1, LRsB and LRsBAR nanomedicines for 24 h (the 
siBACE1 was labelled with FITC), then the positive cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. (b) N2a and BV2 cells were incubated with FITC-labelled LRsBAR nanomedicines for 0.5, 
4 and 24 h, then the mean fluorescence intensity of FITC was analyzed by flow cytometry. (c, e) Aβo/Tauo toxicity inhibitory effect of the indicated formulations on N2a cells by co- 
incubating the formulation with Aβo/Tauo for 48 h. (d, f) Aβo/Tauo toxicity mitigative effect of the indicated formulation on N2a cells by adding the formulation to cells pre-treated 
with Aβo/Tauo for 24 h and incubating for an additional 24 h. (g, i) The mitochondrial membrane potential in N2a cells (n = 10,000) was measured with potential-sensing 
fluorescent probe, JC-1. The JC-1 values were obtained by Tecan microplate reader in three times. (h, j) N2a cells were treated with various concentrations of Aβo/Tauo for 24 h, 
then with indicated formulations for 6 h before treating with DCFH-DA probe (20 µM) for 30 min. The fluorescence intensity of DCFH-DA was detected (excitation 485 nm, 
emission 530 nm) and the relative ROS level was calculated. The concentration of Rutin in free form or in NPs was 25 µM (15 µg/mL). (k-l) N2a cells were incubated with free 
siRNA, LRAR and LRsBAR/LRsGAR nanomedicines for 24 h, then the expression of BACE1 (k) and GSK3β (l) was detected by q-PCR. The concentration of LRsBAR/LRsGAR was 50 µg/ 
mL (with siRNA dose of 0.6 µg/mL) in all cases. Data are means ±  SEM. For (a-b), (g), (i) and (k-l), statistical significance was calculated by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc 
test; for (c-f), (h) and (j), statistical significance was calculated by two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
5

LRsAR nanomedicines effectively rescue memory and cognitive deficits 
of AD mice
High expression of low-density lipoprotein (LRP) receptors in 
luminal endothelial cells of BBB enables Ang2-modified NPs to ef­
ficiently recognize and cross BBB [57,58]. To confirm this, LR/siBACE1 
(LRsB) and 
LRsBAR labelled with 
Cy7 were 
intravenously 
administrated to mice and the distribution of NPs was imaged using 
an In Vivo Imaging System. The fluorescence intensity of Cy7 in the 
brain of LRsBAR-treated mice was ∼1.7 times higher than that of LRs- 
treated mice (Fig. 4a-b and Fig. S9a-d). Meanwhile, the analysis of 
the aluminum level in each organ showed that around 1.05% of the 
injected LRsBAR nanomedicines successfully entered and accumu­
lated in the brain, while the value for LRsB was only 0.46% (Fig. S9d). 
Fig. 4. LRsAR nanomedicines alleviate cognitive and memory deficits in AD mice. (a) The in vivo fluorescence images of LRsB and LRsBAR (labelled by Cy7) in the brain 24 h 
after intravenous administration. (b) The mean fluorescence intensity was calculated from (a). (c) Timeframe for the treatment of APP/PS1 or Tau.P301S AD mice. (d) Schematic 
illustration of the Morris water maze test. (e-j) The latency to the position of the removed platform (e, h), the number of platform crossings (f, i), and the time spent in the target 
quadrant (g, i) of APP/PS1 AD mice and Tau.P301S AD mice were measured. (k) Schematic illustration of the object recognition test. (l-m) The novel object preference of APP/PS1 
AD mice and Tau.P301S AD mice treated with the indicated formulations was recorded. (n) Schematic illustration of the Y-maze test. (o-r) The duration time in the new arm (o, q) 
and entries into new arm (p, r) of APP/PS1 AD mice and Tau.P301S AD mice. N = 6 in all experiments. Data are means ±  SEM. Statistical significance was calculated by one-way 
ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
6

These results indicate that the surface modification with Ang2 and 
RVG29 efficiently promotes LRsBAR to accumulate in the brain.
Over-accumulated Aβ plaques or Tau NFTs are the main neuro­
pathological hallmarks of AD [59]. Thus the therapeutic efficacy of 
LRsBAR and LRsGAR NPs was evaluated on Aβ overproduction APP/ 
PS1 and Tau overproduction Tau.P301S AD mice, respectively 
(Fig. 4c). After a 20 days’ treatment with dual-targeted nanomedi­
cines, the recovery of spatial learning and memory of AD mice was 
examined using Morris water maze (MWM) test (Fig. 4d). As shown 
in Fig. S10a, during the acquisition period, LRsBAR (G4)-treated APP/ 
PS1 AD mice took much shorter time to reach the hidden platform 
than mice in control (G1) and LRAR (G2) or LDH-Ang2-RVG29-si­
BACE1 (LsBAR; G3)-treated groups. During the memory retention 
test in the probe trial, APP/PS1 AD mice in LRsBAR (G4)-treated 
group exhibited spatially oriented swimming behaviour and had a 
much quicker escape (Fig. 4e). Meanwhile, APP/PS1 AD mice in 
LRsBAR (G4)-treated group also showed obviously higher frequency 
of platform crossings (Fig. 4f) and spent more time in the target 
quadrant (Fig. 4g). Similarly, Tau.P301S AD mice treated with LRsGAR 
(G4) also exhibited better spatial learning and memory behaviour 
than the mice in control or LRAR (G2) or LsGAR (G3)-treated groups 
(Fig. S10b and Fig. 4h-j).
Moreover, the spatial memory of these mice was also evaluated 
with the novel object recognition (Fig. 4k). Obviously, wild-type 
(WT; G5) and LRsBAR or LRsGAR (G4)-treated mice preferred to in­
vestigate the novel object with the higher frequency than other 
groups (Fig. 4l-m). Similarly, in the Y-maze test, WT (G5) and LRsBAR 
or LRsGAR (G4)-treated mice preferred to enter and retain in the 
new arm after training (Fig. 4n-r). Note that LRsBAR or LRsGAR (G4)- 
treated AD mice behaved very similarly to WT (G5) mice in all the 
tests. Collectively, these results suggested that synergy therapy of 
LRsBAR (synergy between siBACE1 and Rutin) or LRsGAR (synergy 
between siGSK3β and Rutin) significantly recovered the cognitive 
impairment and memory loss of APP/PS1 or Tau.P301S AD mice.
The biosafety of LRsBAR and LRsGAR nanomedicines was further 
evaluated. As shown in Fig. S11a, the body weight of mice treated 
with LRsBAR or LRsGAR nanomedicine was similar to that of mice 
treated with saline. The serum level of ALT, AST and ALP in mice 
treated with LRsBAR and LRsGAR nanomedicines did not change 
obviously (Fig. S11b-d). Moreover, the H&E staining showed that 
LRsBAR or LRsGAR-treatment did not cause obvious pathological 
changes in major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung and kidney; Fig. 
S11e). These observations indicate that both LRsBAR and LRsGAR 
nanomedicines are highly biocompatible.
LRsAR nanomedicines effectively reduce Aβ or Tau burden
The excellent therapeutic efficiency of LRsBAR or LRsGAR nano­
medicines has been also reflected by the expression levels of the 
targeted genes and proteins in the brain. The in vivo BACE1 or GSK3β 
gene silence efficacy of the nanomedicines was determined in the 
brain of APP/PS1 or Tau.P301S AD mice, respectively. As shown in 
Fig. 5a-b, both LsBAR (G3) and LRsBAR (G4) efficiently silenced the 
expression of BACE1 in the cortex and hippocampus of APP/PS1 AD 
mice compared with control and LRAR-treated mice. Similarly, 
LsGAR (G3) and LRsGAR (G4) also significantly decreased the level of 
GSK3β in the cortex and hippocampus of the brain in Tau.P301S AD 
mice (Fig. 5c-d). The Western-blot analysis showed that LRsBAR or 
LRsGAR nanomedicines efficiently decreased the expression of 
BACE1 or GSK3β protein in the brain of APP/PS1 or Tau.P301S AD 
mice (Fig. S12). These data indicate that LRsBAR or LRsGAR nano­
medicines successfully delivered the specific siRNAs to the brain and 
efficiently silenced target genes.
Consistently, the levels of Aβ in APP/PS1 mice and hyperpho­
sphorylated Tau in Tau.P301S mice were significantly decreased. As 
shown in Fig. 5e, much less Aβ plaques were observed in the cortex 
and hippocampus of LRsBAR (G4)-treated APP/PS1 AD mice com­
pared to control, LRAR (G2) and LsBAR (G3)-treated groups. Mean­
while, the level of insoluble rather than soluble Aβ40 or Aβ42 in the 
mouse brain tissues was significantly decreased in LRAR (G2)- 
treated APP/PS1 AD mice (Fig. 5f-i), which may be benefited from the 
pro-depolymerization effect of Rutin on Aβ aggregates [27,28]. More 
significantly, the levels of soluble and insoluble Aβ40 and soluble 
Aβ42 in LsBAR (G3)-treated AD mice were decreased, largely due to 
the down-regulation of Aβ production by silencing BACE1 using si­
BACE1 (Fig. 5f-i). Through the synergy of Rutin-mediated pro-de­
polymerization of Aβ aggregates and siBACE1-mediated inhibition of 
Aβ production, LRsBAR (G4) most efficiently reduced the levels of 
soluble and insoluble Aβ40 and Aβ42 in the brain tissues of APP/PS1 
mice (Fig. 5f-i and Table S2).
Similarly, aggregated Tau was significantly reduced in the brain 
of LRAR (G2)-treated Tau.P301S AD mice through pro-depolymer­
ization effect of Rutin (Fig. 5j) [26]. At the same time, Rutin sy­
nergizing with siGSK3β (G4, LRsGAR in Fig. 5j) dramatically 
decreased the level of hyperphosphorylated Tau in the brain tissues 
of Tau.P301S AD mice. These data indicate that co-delivery of Rutin 
and siBACE1 or siGSK3β effectively decreased the burden of ab­
normal Aβ or Tau in APP/PS1 or Tau.P301S AD mice, respectively.
LRsAR nanomedicines reduce neuroinflammation and rescue 
synapse loss
The mitigation of abnormal Aβ or Tau burden is also beneficial for 
reduce astrogliosis and microgliosis, which are the main culprit of 
neuroinflammation in AD mice [60]. In APP/PS1 AD mice, LRsBAR 
(G4) most significantly inhibited astrogliosis and microgliosis in 
comparison with the other nanomedicines (Fig. 6a-b). Moreover, 
LRAR (G2) and LRsBAR (G4) treatment efficiently decreased the level 
of proinflammatory cytokines in the brain tissues. For example, the 
level of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukins (IL-6) 
was decreased by ∼30–50% compared to the control (G1) group 
(Fig. 6c-d). The level of malondialdehyde (MDA), an indicator of the 
level of oxidative damage [61], was also significantly decreased upon 
treatment of LRAR (G2) and LRsBAR (G4) (Fig. 6e). In contrast, the 
decreased activity of antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dis­
mutases (SOD) was effectively restored upon treatment with LRAR 
(G2) and LRsBAR (G4) NPs (Fig. 6f). Furthermore, both in vitro and in 
vivo data showed that LRsBAR treatment also reduced the NLRP3 
inflammasome activation and IL-18 production in microglia (Fig. 
S13) that are shown to contribute to the Aβ formation and neu­
roinflammation [62]. Collectively, these results indicate that Rutin 
loaded in the nanomedicines effectively relieved the neuroin­
flammation.
It is worth noting that the normalization of the AD brain mi­
croenvironment successfully rescued the synapse loss, which is 
strongly linked to the cognitive deficit [63]. To assess the effect of 
LRsBAR on the synapse density, two synaptic marker proteins, sy­
naptophysin and postsynaptic density protein-95 (PSD95) in the 
brain of APP/PS1 AD mice were stained with immunohistochemistry. 
As shown in Fig. 6g-h, the strong fluorescence and the high colo­
calization of pre- and post-synaptic markers represented the well 
restored structural integrity of synapses upon treatment with 
LRsBAR (G4). The intensity quantification of pre- and post-synaptic 
puncta (synaptophysin and PSD95) revealed a significant increase of 
synapses in APP/PS1 AD mice treated with LRsBAR (G4).
A similar phenomenon was also observed in Tau.P301S AD mice 
treated with LRsGAR and LRAR. As shown in Fig. 7a-b, the ag­
gregated/hyperphosphorylated Tau burden in AD mice treated with 
LRsGAR (G4) and LRAR (G2) was efficiently reduced, which may 
inhibit the overactivation of astrocytes and microglia in the brain of 
Tau.P301S mice. LRsGAR (G4) and LRAR (G2) treatments also de­
creased the inflammatory cytokines and MDA in the brain tissues, 
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
7

but elevated the level of anti-oxidant SOD (Fig. 7c-f). Moreover, re­
duced Tau pathology and neuroinflammation in the brain micro­
environment also efficiently rescued the synaptic loss in Tau.P301S 
AD mice (Fig. 7g-h).
Consistent with our previous studies [26–28], Rutin, as a natural 
compound with both anti-inflammation and anti-aggregation of Aβ 
and Tau, plays an important role in reducing Aβ/Tau burden and 
neuroinflammation. Meanwhile, siBACE1 and siGSK3B directly alle­
viated the abnormal Aβ and Tau burden in the brain tissues by in­
hibiting Aβ production and Tau hyperphosphorylation. By further 
synergizing with Rutin, the brain microenvironment of AD mice was 
successfully normalized by LRsAR nanomedicines, thereby providing 
the possibility for the recovery of synaptic function and the im­
provement of mouse cognition.
We have hypothesized that simultaneous targeting to Aβ pro­
duction/aggregation, Tau hyperphosphorylation/aggregation, and 
neuroinflammation using multifunctional nanomedicines is ex­
pected to synergize the AD treatment efficacy. In this research, we 
developed LDH-based nanomedicines (LRsBAR or LRsGAR) that were 
co-loaded with Rutin (an efficient Aβ/Tau aggregation inhibitor and 
anti-inflammation drug) and BACE1 or GSK3β inhibitory siRNA, and 
surface modification with BBB penetration ligand Ang2 and neuron 
targeting ligand RVG29. These two nanomedicines (LRsBAR and 
LRsGAR) simultaneously delivered Rutin and siBACE1 or siGSK3β to 
the brain of AD mice, successfully reduced the burden of abnormal 
Aβ or Tau, largely recovered the memory and cognitive defects of AD 
mice (Fig. 4).
Fig. 5. LRsAR nanomedicines decrease the Aβ or Tau burden in the brain of AD mice. (a-b) The level of BACE1 mRNA in the cortex or hippocampus of brain in APP/PS1 AD mice. 
(c-d) The level of GSK3β mRNA in the cortex or hippocampus of brain Tau.P301S AD mice. (e) APP/PS1 AD mice were treated with saline, LRAR, LsBAR, LRsBAR. Then the cortex and 
hippocampus of brain slices were stained with FITC anti-6E10 antibody. (f-i) The level of soluble or insoluble Aβ40 or Aβ42 in the brain of APP/PS1 AD mice and WT mice was 
assayed by ELISA. (j) Tau.P301S AD mice were treated with saline, LRAR, LsGAR, LRsGAR, then the AT8-positive Tau aggregate level in the brain of AD mice and WT mice was 
detected by using AT8 (1:500) antibody. Data are means ±  SEM. Statistical significance was calculated by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
8

Such an excellent therapeutic efficacy for AD mice first comes 
from the strong targeting capacity to the brain and neurons. Ligands 
such as Ang2 or RVG29 have been demonstrated to enhance the 
brain and neuron targeting efficiency of nanomedicines [40,53], and 
also confirmed by the enhanced accumulation of LRsBAR and 
LRsGAR in the brain and improved uptake by neurons in this re­
search (Figs. 3–4).
Secondly, Aβ production or Tau hyperphosphorylation in neurons 
[64] is efficiently silenced by delivered siRNA (i.e., siBACE1 or 
siGSK3β) loaded in LRsBAR or LRsGAR nanomedicine in the brain of 
AD mice (Fig. 5). The silencing efficacy of target genes is benefited 
from the enhanced uptake by neurons and the sustained release of 
siRNA from LRsBAR or LRsGAR nanomedicine in neurons, which has 
been previously reported for other siRNA-LDH nanomedicines 
[65–67]. Moreover, Rutin loaded in LDH has significantly inhibited 
Aβ or Tau aggregation (Fig. 5) and reduced neuroinflammation in the 
brain microenvironment (Figs. 6–7) [26,28,68]. Note that either 
siRNA or Rutin just led to very limited improvement of recognition 
and memory in AD mice (Fig. 4). This is also consistent with the fact 
that targeting a single causative factor (such as Aβ, Tau or BACE1) in 
clinics is failed as single targeting may not fundamentally alter the 
course of AD development [21,69,70].
Very excitedly, combining siRNA and Rutin in LDH-based nano­
medicines (LRsBAR or LRsGAR) synergizes the treatment efficacy of 
AD mice. In APP/PS1 AD mice, the neuron-targeted delivery of 
siBACE1 effectively silenced the expression of BACE1 to inhibit the 
Aβ production and co-delivered Rutin released in extra-/intra-cel­
lular space simultaneously neutralized the toxic Aβ aggregates and 
Fig. 6. LRsBAR nanomedicine reduces neuroinflammation and attenuates synaptic damage in APP/PS1 AD mice. (a-b) APP/PS1 AD mice were treated with saline (G1), LRAR 
(G2), LsBAR (G3) or LRsBAR (G4), then the astrogliosis (a) and microgliosis (b) in brain slices of AD and WT (G5) mice were detected by IHC with anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein 
(anti-GFAP) antibody and anti-ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule-1 (anti-Iba-1) antibody, respectively. The astrogliosis and microgliosis in the brain were quantified by 
morphometric analysis. (c) Effect of LRsBAR on the activities of SOD. (d) Effect of LRsBAR on the Aβ-induced production of MDA. (e-f) Effect of LRsBAR on the production of 
inflammatory TNF-α (e) and IL-6 (f) cytokines. (g-h) Postsynaptic marker presynaptic marker synaptophysin (g) and PSD95 (h) in the brain were detected by IHC with anti-PSD95 
antibody and anti-synaptophysin antibody, respectively. Then the levels of pre-synapses and post-synapses in brain were quantified by morphometric analysis. Data are 
means ±  SEM. Statistical significance was calculated by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
9

ROS, reducing the Aβ level to achieve neuron protection (Figs. 5–6). 
Similarly, siGSK3β and Rutin in LRsGAR also relieved the Tau 
symptoms and neuroinflammation (Figs. 5 and 7), greatly improving 
the recognition and memory of Tau.P301S AD mice. Thus, a si­
multaneous and orderly intervention with two causative factors 
(such as Aβ/Tau aggregation/expression and anti-inflammation) re­
sulted in efficient AD treatment [71,72].
Currently, the AD treatment remains as a great challenge due to 
the complex pathogenic factors, inefficient delivery of drugs to 
neurons and the potential side effects brought by the delivery 
system. Compared with the complex step-by-step synthesis of many 
other nanomedicines [12,14,15,73,74], the current LDH can be readily 
prepared repeatably and controllably [75,76], and made into dual- 
functional and dual-targeted nanomedicines LRsBAR and LRsGAR 
through modular construction [39,40,77]. In addition to delivering 
siRNA to reduce the Aβ or Tau burden, LDH materials were cleared by 
microglia and shifted microglia from a pro-inflammatory phenotype 
to an anti-inflammatory phenotype [42]. In sharp contrast, the 
clearance of other most of other NPs by macrophages/microglia may 
cause oxidative stress and exacerbate neuroinflammation [43]. Not 
only that, by synergizing with the anti-inflammatory drug rutin, the 
LRsAR nanomedicine further helps alleviate neuroinflammation 
caused by the hyperactivation of microglia induced by Aβ/Tau ag­
gregates or the NPs themselves [73,78]. Despite this advantage, the 
synergistic effects of siBACE1, siGSK3β and Rutin on simultaneous 
intervention of Aβ aggregation, Tau hyperphosphorylation and 
Fig. 7. LRsGAR nanomedicine reduces neuroinflammation and attenuates synaptic damage in Tau.P301S AD mice. (a-b) Tau.P301S AD mice were treated with saline (G1), 
LRAR (G2), LsGAR (G3) or LRsGAR (G4), then the astrogliosis (A) and microgliosis (B) in brain slices of AD and WT (G5) mice were detected by IHC with anti-glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (anti-GFAP) antibody and anti-ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule-1 (anti-Iba-1) antibody, respectively. The astrogliosis and microgliosis in the brain were 
quantified by morphometric analysis. (c) Effect of LRsGAR on the activities of SOD. (d) Effect of LRsGAR on the tau-induced production of MDA. (e-f) Effect of LRsGAR on the 
production of inflammatory TNF-α (e) and IL-6 (f) cytokines. (g-h) Postsynaptic marker presynaptic marker synaptophysin (g) and PSD95 (h) in the brain were detected by IHC 
with anti-PSD95 antibody and anti-synaptophysin antibody, respectively. Then the levels of pre-synapses and post-synapses in brain were quantified by morphometric analysis. 
Data are means ±  SEM. Statistical significance was calculated by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
10

neuroinflammation have not been evaluated due to limitations in 
animal models. Overall, the dual-targeted LDH-based nanomedicines 
provide a rapid construction paradigm of AD nanomedicines, 
showing a great potential for the treatment of other neurodegen­
erative diseases.
Conclusions
In summary, the dual-targeted nanomedicines have demon­
strated their efficiency in simultaneous reduction of abnormal Aβ/ 
Tau expression and anti-neuroinflammation as a combined AD 
treatment strategy. These nanomedicines possess excellent cap­
ability of protecting neurons from Aβo-induced toxicity and mi­
tochondrial dysfunction. The excellent colloidal stability, BBB 
penetration capability, and neuronal targeting of these nanomedi­
cines enabled efficient delivery of two therapeutic agents into the 
brain tissues and synergistically reduced the abnormal Aβ/Tau 
burden and neuroinflammation, which significantly rescued the 
memory loss and cognitive deficit in both APP/PS1 and Tau.P301S AD 
mice. It is our belief that these dual-targeted nanomedicines for 
combined AD treatment can offer new opportunities to improve the 
therapeutic efficiency for different neurodegenerative diseases in the 
near future.
Materials and method
Materials
MgCl2·6 H2O, AlCl3·6 H2O, and NaOH were purchased from Beijing 
Chemicals (Beijing, China). Bovine serum albumin (BSA), RPMI 
medium 1640 basic, Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), 
FBS, penicillin streptomycin, Sulfo-SMCC, CpG OND1826 were pur­
chased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (MA, USA). Trypsin was pur­
chased from Corning (USA). 5-Diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) 
and DAPI were bought from Solarbio Life Sciences (China). SNARF-1, 
Cy5-SE, Cy7-SE and JC-1 Dye (Mitochondrial Membrane Potential 
Probe) were purchased from Nanjing Goyoo Biotech Co., Ltd. siBACE 
1 and siGSK3β were purchased from Genepharm (Shanghai). Aβ, 
Ang2 (TFFYGGSRGKRNNFKTEEYC) and RVG29 (TWMPENPRPGTPC­
DIFTNSRGKRASNGGGGGGC) were purchased from Chinese Peptide 
(Hangzhou). Rutin was purchased from BeiGene (Beijing).
Cell lines and animals
N2a cells were purchased from the China Infrastructure of Cell 
Line Resources (Beijing, China) and cultured in DMEM culture 
medium containing 10% of FBS and 100 U/mL of penicillin/strepto­
mycin. APP/PS1 AD mice were purchased from Model Animal 
Research Center of Nanjing University. Tau.P301S AD mice were 
generated by breeding Tau.P301S(1N4R) transgenic male mice with 
WT female mice under the original C57BL/6 ×C3H background. All 
experimental protocols were approved by the institutional animal 
care and use committee of Tsinghua University. All experiments 
were performed in accordance with the China Public Health Service 
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Preparation and characterization of LDH-based nanomedicines
The synthesis of LR was conducted according to our previous 
studies with slight modification [38,39,55]. Briefly, LR suspension 
was prepared by rapidly mixing and vigorously stirring 10 mL of 
mixed solution of MgCl2 (0.7 M) and AlCl3 (0.3 M) with 40 mL of 
Rutin solution (dissolved in 0.45 NaOH solution). The LR slurry was 
collected via centrifugation and washed with dd-H2O and the LR 
suspension was hydrothermally treated at 80 °C for 4 h. Then 
50–60 nm LR NPs were collected by centrifugation (10,000 g for 
10 min) and the final concentration was adjusted to around 7 mg 
mL−1. The Rutin loading efficiency was detected by high performance 
liquid chromatography after dissolution of LR suspension in HCl. The 
size and zeta potential of LR were measured using DLS approach. 
BSA-Ang2 and BSA-RVG29 were prepared according to our previous 
study [40].
LRAR was prepared by dropwise adding 1 mL of LR (3 mg mL−1) to 
1 mL of BSA/BSA-Ang2/BSA-RVG29 mixed solution (20 mg mL−1, the 
ratio listed in Table S1), and stirred vigorously for 30 min. LsBAR 
were prepared by dropwise adding 1 mL of LDH (3 mg mL−1) to 1 mL 
of BSA/BSA-Ang2/BSA-RVG29 mixed solution (20 mg mL−1, the ratio 
listed in Table S1) and stirring vigorously for 30 min, then siBACE1 
was added to the above mixture and stirred for another 15 min 
[39,77]. LRsBAR was prepared in the same way as LsBAR, except that 
LDH was replaced by LR. The preparation of LRsGAR followed the 
same procedure as LRsBAR except that siBACE1 was replaced by 
siGSK3β. The initial content of each component in nanomedicines is 
listed in Table S1. The particle size was detected by DLS. The max­
imum protein adsorption was detected using a BCA-kit (Thermo­
Fisher, USA). The loading of siRNA was analysed by agarose gel 
electrophoresis.
The colloidal stability of LDH, LR, LRAR and LRsAR nanomedicines 
in serum was detected by dispersing the nanomedicine in water or 
FBS (1 mg mL−1) for 24 h. Then average size and morphology of the 
nanomedicines were detected by DLS and TEM, respectively. 
Moreover, LRsAR nanomedicine was further dispersed in 10% FBS 
buffers (1 mg mL−1) with different pH (i.e., 6.5 and 7.4) for 0, 2, 4, 24, 
48 and 72 h. Then the particle size was detected by DLS.
LRsAR nanomedicine was dispersed in buffers with different pH 
values (i.e., 5.5, 6.5 and 7.4) for 0–48 h, then the nanomedicines were 
removed by centrifugation, and the concentration of Rutin in the 
supernatant was detected by high performance liquid chromato­
graphy.
Cellular uptake
FITC-labelled siBACE1 (purchased from GenePharm, China) was 
used to prepare the nanomedicines. N2a or BV2 cells were seeded in 
a 12-well plate at a density of 105 cells per well for overnight. Then 
culture medium was replaced by fresh culture medium containing 
free siBACE1, LRsB and LRsBAR, and incubated for 0.5, 4 and 24 h 
before measurement using flow cytometry (CytoFLEX, Beckman) to 
calculate the proportion of FITC-positive cells. To analyze the cellular 
localization of nanomedicines, the cells were stained by Lysotracker 
red (ThermoFisher, USA) to indicate the endosomes/lysosomes.
Aβo cytotoxicity inhibitory and mitigative effect of LRAR
Aβo solution was prepared by dissolving 50 µg of Aβ in 50 μL of 
NaOH (50 mM), vortexed for 3 min and ultrasonicated for 1 min. 
Then, chilled PBS was added and then centrifugated at 20,000 g for 
40 min to get a clear supernatant. The supernatant was incubated for 
2 days at room temperature to prepare Aβo solution. N2a cells were 
seeded in 96-well plate at a density of 5 × 103 cell/well for overnight. 
Then, culture media were replaced with fresh ones containing Aβo at 
the concentration of 0.0005–20 µM and incubated for 24 h, and the 
cell viability was determined using MTT assay [79]. To evaluate the 
inhibitory effect of Rutin-containing NPs, N2a cells were incubated 
with Aβo (10 µM) and LDH, free Rutin (15 µg/mL), LR NPs or LRAR 
(100 µg/mL NPs containing 15 µg Rutin) simultaneously for 48 h, 
then the cell viability was detected by MTT assay. To elucidate the 
mitigative effect of Rutin-containing NPs, N2a cells were incubated 
with Aβo (10 µM) for 24 h, and then culture medium was replaced by 
fresh one containing LDH, free Rutin, LR or LRAR and incubated for 
another 24 h before determining the cell viability.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
11

Mitochondrial membrane potential and ROS assay
The mitochondrial membrane potential was determined by JC-1 
probe according to manufacturer`s protocol. Briefly, N2a cells 
(10,000 cells per well) were seeded in 96-well plate and then treated 
with Aβo/Tauo (10 µM) for 24 h, and then the cells were incubated 
with Rutin-containing LDH NPs for another 24 h. The JC-1 solution 
(5 µg/mL) was added to cells and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. The 
fluorescence intensity of mitochondrial JC-1 in monomer (green; λex 
514 nm, λem 529 nm) or aggregate (red; λex 585 nm, λem 590 nm) 
form was measured by Tecan microplate reader in triple times and 
the relative mitochondrial membrane potential (red/green) was 
determined in comparison to the blank NP-treated group. In another 
parallel experiment, N2a cells (1 × 105 cells per well) were seeded in 
24-well plate for overnight before first treating with Aβ and the 
nanomedicines, and the images of mitochondrial JC-1 staining of 
cells were obtained by confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM; 
Zeiss LSM980).
To evaluate the level of ROS generated, N2a cells treated with 
0.0001–20 µM Aβ for 24 h were further treated with Rutin-con­
taining NPs (2 µM Rutin) for 6 h at 37 °C. Then, the cells were de­
tached and washed with PBS thrice. The collected cells were 
incubated with ROS probe, 20,70-dichlorofluorescein diacetate 
(DCFH-DA, 20 µM) for 30 min at 37 °C in darkness. The chemicals 
were removed and washed with PBS and the fluorescence intensity 
was detected with Tecan plate reader (excitation 485 nm, emission 
530 nm). The relative ROS level was determined by dividing the 
fluorescence of treated cells by the fluorescence of cells with no 
treatment. The images of mitochondrial JC-1 staining of cells were 
obtained by CLSM (Zeiss LSM980).
Biodistribution of LRsAR
BSA was previously labelled with Cy7-SE for preparing Cy7-LR 
and Cy7-LRAR [38]. C57BL/6 mice (6–8 weeks) were used for de­
termining the biodistribution of Cy7-labelled LRsAR NPs. LDH-based 
NP suspension (150 μL) was injected via the mouse tail vein. For in- 
vivo imaging, Cy7 signals were detected at 24 h post injection by In 
Vivo Imaging System (IVIS; Lumina X5 Imaging system). Then mice 
were euthanized to harvest the organs and their ex vivo Cy7 signals 
were detected by IVIS Imaging system. The images were processed 
with ImageJ software. All experiments were carried out according to 
the guidelines of the Animal Ethics Committee of The University of 
Queensland. To further calculate the brain penetration efficiency of 
nanomedicine, the level of Al3+ in brain and the major organs was 
detected by ICP-MS (PerkinElmer NexION 300X, USA). The brain 
penetration efficiency of nanomedicine was calculated by comparing 
the amount of Al3+ in the organ to the injected dose.
Mouse treatment and behavioural tests
APP/PS1 AD mice were intravenously injected with saline 
(200 μL), LRAR NPs, LsBAR and LRsBAR at the dose of 1.0 mg of LDH 
every four days. Similarly, Tau.P301S AD mice were injected in­
travenously with saline (control), LRAR NPs, LsBAR NPs and LRsBAR 
at the dose of 1.0 mg of LDH every four days. WT mice were similarly 
treated with saline.
The behaviours of AD mice were assessed by Morris water maze 
(MWM), novel object recognition (NOR) and Y-maze according to 
previous studies [80,81]. First, AD mice were assessed by MWM 4 
days after the last treatment. On training days 1–5, four groups of 
mice were habituated to a circular pool (diameter of 1.2 m) with the 
temperature of opaque water maintained at 22  ±  1 °C. Mice were 
trained to find the hidden platform below the water surface by 
swimming for 60 s. The mice were trained twice per day, and then 
allowed to stay on the platform for 10 s. The swimming activity of 
each mouse was automatically recorded via a video tracking system 
using a video camera (Sony Corp., Tokyo, Japan) mounted overhead. 
On day 1 after the last training, all AD mice were tested for memory 
retention.
Next, the Novel Object Recognition (NOR) was applied to detect 
cognitive function of AD mice. The NOR test is based on the spon­
taneous tendency of mice to exhibit more interactions with a novel 
rather than a familiar object. In the habituation phase, each mouse 
was allowed to freely explore the open-field area (a white box 40 cm 
wide × 40 cm deep × 40 cm high) in the absence of objects. During 
the familiarization period, each mouse was placed for 5 min in the 
box containing two identical objects. Recognition memory was 
tested after 24 h by exposing the mice to one familiar and one novel 
object. The time spent to explore and sniff each object was recorded.
Finally, the short-term spatial recognition memory of the mice 
was tested by spontaneous Y-maze test. The maze was the same as 
the forced Y-maze, except that the marker at the end of each arm 
was changed to eliminate the effect of the former forced Y-maze. 
This test consisted of a single 5-minute trial, in which the mouse was 
allowed to move freely to all three arms of the Y-maze. The series of 
arm entries, including possible returns into the same arm, was re­
corded with a CCD camera connected to a computer. An alternation 
was defined as entry into all three arms on consecutive occasions. 
The number of maximum alternations was therefore the total 
number of arm entries minus 2, and the percentage of alternations 
was 
calculated 
as 
(actual 
alternations/maximum 
alterna­
tions) × 100%.
Immunohistochemistry
At the end of the behaviour test, all mice were euthanized to 
collect the brain tissues. Then the left half of the brain was fixed in 
4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin before cutting into 
sagittal serial sections of 5-μm thickness. Then the sections were 
dewaxed with antigen retrieval and treated briefly with 80% (vol/vol) 
methanol containing 0.3% H2O2 to prevent endogenous peroxidation. 
For immunohistochemistry, the sections were blocked with 10% 
normal goat serum and 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS to prevent non­
specific 
protein 
binding 
and 
penetrate 
cell 
membranes. 
Subsequently, the sections were incubated with primary antibodies 
6E10 (1:1000; Biolegend), AT8 (1:500; Thermo Fisher Scientific), 
anti-ionized 
calcium-binding 
adaptor 
molecule-1 
(anti-Iba-1) 
(1:100; GeneTex, Irvine, CA, USA), anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein 
(anti-GFAP) (1:100; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), at 
37 °C for 1 h, respectively, followed by incubation with an Alexa 
Fluor 488-labeled secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or 
HRP-labelled secondary antibody at 37 °C for 1 h. For synaptic pro­
tein staining, the sections were immunostained with anti-synapto­
physin (Abcam, ab32127, 1:100) and anti-PSD95 (Abcam, ab12093, 
1:100) antibodies followed by corresponding secondary antibodies 
conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (Santa Cruz, I1112, 1:1000) or Alexa 
Fluor 594 (Abcam, ab150084, 1:1000), respectively. All images were 
collected using a BX60 microscope (Olympus Corp., Shinjuku, Tokyo) 
with 4 × and 10 × lens objectives.
Measurement of Aβ40/42, RNA, cytokines, MDA, SOD, BACE1, GSK3β and 
Caspase-1
The right hemisphere of the brain was homogenized in a mod­
ified RIPA buffer supplemented with complete protease inhibitor 
mixture tablets (Sigma, P2714–1BTL), followed by centrifugation at 
12,000g for 30 min at 4 °C. To determine the level of Aβ in the brain, 
RIPA-soluble and RIPA-insoluble (guanidine-soluble) Aβ fractions 
were quantified by ELISA using Aβ40 and Aβ42 immunoassay kits 
according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The levels of soluble 
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
12

and insoluble Aβ were standardized to the brain tissue weight and 
expressed in micrograms of Aβ per gram of the brain tissues.
The total RNA of right hemisphere lysates was extracted by 
RNeasy Lipid Tissue kit (QIAGEN, 74804). The cDNA was prepared 
from 1 μg of RNA using Prime-Script RT-PCR kit (Takara, RR037Q). 
The expression of BACE1 and GSK3β was analyzed by q-PCR. BACE1 
primers: 5′-CAAGACGACTGTTACAAGTTCG-3′ (forward) and 5′-TCGA 
AGACGACATAGAAACCTT-3′ (reverse). GSK3β primers: 5′-TGGTAGCA 
TGAAAGTTAGCAGA-3′ (forward) and 5′-CTCTCGGTTCTTAAATCGC 
TTG-3′ (reverse). GAPDH primers: 5′-CGGTGCTGAGTATGTCG-3′ 
(forward) and 5′-TTCTGGGTGGCAGTGAT-3′ (reverse).
The levels of IL-6, IL-18 or TNF-α in the supernatant of brain ly­
sates were determined using ELISA kits (Neobioscience technology, 
Beijing, China), according to the manufacturer’s protocols. The ab­
sorbance of the reacted supernatants was measured at 450 nm using 
SpectraMax 
M5 
microplate 
reader 
(Molecular 
Devices, 
Sunnyvale, CA).
The concentration of MDA in brain tissues produced during lipid 
peroxidation was determined by the thiobarbituric acid (TBA) test as 
described [28]. MDA reacts with TBA to form MDA-(TBA)2, a red- 
coloured adduct with the maximum absorbance at 532 nm. The 
activity of SOD in brain tissues was detected by a total SOD assay kit 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, the brain lysates, 
nitroblue tetrazolium and enzyme-working solutions were prepared 
and added into the 96-well plate. The mixtures were incubated at 
37 °C for 20 min, and then the absorbance at 560 nm was recorded 
using Tecan Safire5 microplate reader.
The levels of BACE1, GSK3β and Caspase-1 in the brain tissues 
were analyzed by Western-blot by using anti-mouse BACE1 
(ab183612, Abcam), anti-mouse GSK3β (ab32391, Abcam) and 
Caspase-1 (AF1681, Beyotime) antibodies.
Biosafety evaluation
C57BL/6 mice were intravenously administrated with saline, 
LRsBAR or LRsGAR (1 mg per injection, 5 mg in total). The body 
weight was recorded after each injection. The serum of mice was 
collected at day 20 (4 days after the final injection), and the level of 
ALT, AST and ALP was analyzed. Meanwhile, the major organs (heart, 
liver, spleen, lung and kidney) were collected at day 20 as well, then 
H&E staining was applied for analyzing the pathological changes.
Statistical analysis
Data presented as the mean ±  standard error of the mean and the 
mean based on at least triplicate experiments were analyzed by one- 
way or two-way analysis of variance as indicated, followed by 
multiple comparisons using Tukey’s test within the Prism software 
package (Prism 9.2.0; GraphPad Software, USA, 2021).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Lingxiao Zhang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – 
original draft, Funding acquisition. Shengjie Hou: Writing – original 
draft, Methodology, Visualization. Fatemeh Movahedi: Writing – 
original draft, Methodology, Visualization. Zijin Li: Methodology, 
Visualization. Li Li: Methodology. Jing Hu: Methodology, Funding 
acquisition. Yingbo Jia: Methodology. Yaru Huang: Methodology. Jie 
Zhu: Methodology. Xiaoying Sun: Methodology. Linghui Zeng: 
Supervision, Funding acquisition. Ruitian Liu: Supervision, Project 
administration, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. Zhi 
Ping Xu: Conceptualization, Supervision, Project administration, 
Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing.
Data Availability
Data will be made available on request.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing fi­
nancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The 
authors 
acknowledge 
financial 
support 
from 
the 
Queensland-Chinese Academy of Sciences Collaborative Science 
Fund 
(Grants 
QCAS02017-18RD7 
and 
122111KYSB20180005), 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 32101123, 
82150107 and 22208287), Australian Research Council Discovery 
Project (Grant DP190103486), Hangzhou Agricultural and Social 
Development Research Project (20201203B152), Natural Science 
Foundation of Ningbo Municipality (Grants 2022J273 and 2021J320) 
and Postdoctoral Research Foundation of China (Grant BX20220261, 
2022M712736 and 2021M702816).
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in 
the online version at doi:10.1016/j.nantod.2023.101788.
References
[1] World-Health-Organization, 
2019. 
〈https://www.who.int/news-room/fact- 
sheets/detail/dementia〉.
[2] C.L. Masters, R. Bateman, K. Blennow, Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 1 (2015) 1–18.
[3] L. Cassidy, F. Fernandez, J.B. Johnson, M. Naiker, A.G. Owoola, D.A. Broszczak, 
Complement. Ther. Med. 49 (2020) 102294.
[4] M.T. Heneka, M.J. Carson, J.E. Khoury, G.E. Landreth, F. Brosseron, D.L. Feinstein, 
A.H. Jacobs, T. Wyss-Coray, J. Vitorica, R.M. Ransohoff, K. Herrup, S.A. Frautschy, 
B. Finsen, G.C. Brown, A. Verkhratsky, K. Yamanaka, J. Koistinaho, E. Latz, A. Halle, 
G.C. Petzold, T. Town, D. Morgan, M.L. Shinohara, V.H. Perry, C. Holmes, 
N.G. Bazan, D.J. Brooks, S. Hunot, B. Joseph, N. Deigendesch, O. Garaschuk, 
E. Boddeke, C.A. Dinarello, J.C. Breitner, G.M. Cole, D.T. Golenbock, M.P. Kummer, 
Lancet Neurol. 14 (4) (2015) 388–405.
[5] H.W. Querfurth, F.M. LaFerla, New Engl. J. Med. 362 (4) (2010) 329.
[6] C. Haass, C. Kaether, G. Thinakaran, S. Sisodia, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2 
(5) (2012).
[7] W.S. Shin, J. Di, Q. Cao, B. Li, P.M. Seidler, K.A. Murray, G. Bitan, L. Jiang, 
Alzheimer's Res. Ther. 11 (1) (2019) 86.
[8] C.A. Rankin, Q. Sun, T.C. Gamblin, Mol. Neurodegener. 2 (1) (2007) 12.
[9] B.J. Hanseeuw, R.A. Betensky, H.I. Jacobs, A.P. Schultz, J. Sepulcre, J.A. Becker, 
D.M.O. Cosio, M. Farrell, Y.T. Quiroz, E.C. Mormino, JAMA Neurol. 76 (8) (2019) 
915–924.
[10] D.V. Hansen, J.E. Hanson, M. Sheng, J. Cell Biol. 217 (2) (2018) 459–472.
[11] W.W. Chen, X. Zhang, W.J. Huang, Mol. Med. Rep. 13 (4) (2016) 3391–3396.
[12] R. Liu, J. Yang, L. Liu, Z. Lu, Z. Shi, W. Ji, J. Shen, X. Zhang, Adv. Sci. 7 (2020) 
1901555.
[13] M. Jung, S. Lee, S. Park, J. Hong, C. Kim, I. Cho, H.S. Sohn, K. Kim, I.W. Park, S. Yoon, 
S. Kwon, J. Shin, D. Lee, M. Kang, S. Go, S. Moon, Y. Chung, Y. Kim, B.-S. Kim, Adv. 
Mater. (2022) e2207719.
[14] H. Sun, Z. Yan, H.W. Liao, J.Y. Lee, Y. Chen, L.J. Ma, J.F. Ren, M. Zhao, M.J. Tu, F.Y. Li, 
H. Zhang, M. Tian, D.S. Ling, ACS Nano 15 (2021) 5263–5275.
[15] Q. Chen, Y. Du, K. Zhang, Z. Liang, J. Li, H. Yu, R. Ren, J. Feng, Z. Jin, F. Li, J. Sun, 
M. Zhou, Q. He, X. Sun, H. Zhang, M. Tian, D. Ling, ACS Nano 12 (2018) 1321–1338.
[16] M.E. Kennedy, W. Stamford, X. Chen, Sci. Transl. Med. 8 (2016) 1–13.
[17] R. Howard, K.Y. Liu, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 16 (2) (2020) 63–64.
[18] L. Qi, L. Ke, X. Liu, L. Liao, S. Ke, X. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Lin, Y. Zhou, L. Wu, Z. Chen, 
L. Liu, Eur. J. Pharm. 783 (2016) 23–32.
[19] H. Bian, W. Bian, X. Lin, Z. Ma, W. Chen, Y. Pu, Neurochem. Res. 41 (2016) 
2470–2480.
[20] L. Schneider, Lancet Neurol. 19 (2020) 111–112.
[21] R. Howard, K.Y. Liu, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 16 (2020) 63–64.
[22] A.E. Oxford, E.S. Stewart, T.T. Rohn, Int. J. Alzheimers Dis. 2020 (2020) 5380346.
[23] C.X. Gong, C.L. Dai, F. Liu, K. Iqbal, Front. Aging Neurosci. 14 (2022) 837649.
[24] C.X. Gong, F. Liu, K. Iqbal, J. Alzheimers Dis. 64 (s1) (2018) S107–S117.
[25] X.L. Yu, Y.N. Li, H. Zhang, Y.J. Su, W.W. Zhou, Z.P. Zhang, S.W. Wang, P.X. Xu, 
Y.J. Wang, R.T. Liu, Food Funct. 6 (10) (2015) 3296–3306.
[26] X.Y. Sun, L.J. Li, Q.X. Dong, J. Zhu, Y.R. Huang, S.J. Hou, X.L. Yu, R.T. Liu, 
J. Neuroinflam. 18 (1) (2021) 131.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
13

[27] P.X. Xu, S.W. Wang, X.L. Yu, Y.J. Su, T. Wang, W.W. Zhou, H. Zhang, Y.J. Wang, 
R.T. Liu, Behav. Brain Res 264 (2014) 173–180.
[28] S.W. Wang, Y.J. Wang, Y.J. Su, W.W. Zhou, S.G. Yang, R. Zhang, M. Zhao, Y.N. Li, 
Z.P. Zhang, D.W. Zhan, R.T. Liu, Neurotoxicology. 33 (3) (2012) 482–490.
[29] A.M. Vargason, A.C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri, The evolution of commercial drug 
delivery technologies, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5 (2021) 951–967.
[30] D.M. Moss, M. Siccardi, Br.J. Pharmacol. 171 (2014) 3963–3979.
[31] Z. Cao, B. Li, L. Sun, L. Li, Z.P. Xu, Z. Gu, Small Methods 4 (2) (2019) 1900343.
[32] L. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Jia, R.-t Liu, T. Cai, Z.P. Xu, Nanoscale 13 (2021) 7533–7549.
[33] L. Li, W. Gu, J. Chen, W. Chen, Z.P. Xu, Biomaterials 35 (10) (2014) 3331–3339.
[34] K. Khorsandi, R. Hosseinzadeh, M. Fateh, R.S.C. Adv, RSC Adv. 5 (114) (2015) 
93987–93994.
[35] M.D. Sweeney, Z. Zhao, A. Montagne, A.R. Nelson, B.V. Zlokovic, Physiol. Rev. 99 
(1) (2019) 21–78.
[36] Y. Zhou, Z. Peng, E.S. Seven, R.M. Leblanc, J. Control. Release 270 (2018) 290–303.
[37] D. Furtado, M. Bjornmalm, S. Ayton, A.I. Bush, K. Kempe, F. Caruso, Adv. Mater. 30 
(46) (2018) e1801362.
[38] L.X. Zhang, X.X. Xie, D.Q. Liu, Z.P. Xu, R.T. Liu, Biomaterials 174 (2018) 54–66.
[39] Z. Gu, H. Zuo, L. Li, A. Wu, Z.P. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. B 3 (16) (2015) 3331–3339.
[40] W. Chen, H. Zuo, E. Zhang, L. Li, P. Henrich-Noack, H. Cooper, Y. Qian, Z.P. Xu, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (24) (2018) 20326–20333.
[41] W. Cheng, Y.L. Su, H.H. Hsu, Y.H. Lin, L.A. Chu, W.C. Huang, Y.J. Lu, C.S. Chiang, 
S.H. Hu, ACS Nano 16 (3) (2022) 4014–4027.
[42] R. Zhu, X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang, X. He, Z. Wu, L. Xue, W. Fan, R. Huang, Z. Xu, X. Qi, 
W. Xu, Y. Yu, Y. Ren, C. Li, Q. Cheng, L. Ling, S. Wang, L. Cheng, ACS Nano 15 (2) 
(2021) 2812–2830.
[43] D. Kim, H.J. Kwon, T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater. 31 (19) (2019) e1807965.
[44] C. Vasti, A. Borgiallo, C.E. Giacomelli, R. Rojas, Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. 
Asp. 533 (2017) 316–322.
[45] M. Pavlovic, S. Murath, X. Katona, N.B. Alsharif, P. Rouster, J. Maleth, I. Szilagyi, 
Sci. Rep. 11 (2021) 4321.
[46] C. Vasti, D.A. Bedoya, R. Rojas, C.E. Giacomelli, J. Mater. Chem. B 4 (2016) 
2008–2016.
[47] Z. Somosi, N.V. May, D. Sebok, I. Palinko, I. Szilagyi, Dalton Trans. 50 (2021) 
2426–2435.
[48] A. Szerlauth, S. Murath, I. Szilagyi, Soft Matter 16 (2020) 10518–10527.
[49] L.X. Zhang, Y.B. Jia, Y.R. Huang, H.N. Liu, X.M. Sun, T. Cai, R.T. Liu, Z.P. Xu, Nano 
Res. 14 (2021) 1326–1334.
[50] B. Li, Z. Gu, N. Kurniawan, W.Y. Chen, Z.P. Xu, Adv. Mater. 29 (2017) 1700383.
[51] B. Li, J. Tang, W. Chen, G. Hao, N. Kurniawan, Z. Gu, Z.P. Xu, Biomaterials 177 
(2018) 40–51.
[52] R.G.R. Pinheiro, A. Granja, J.A. Loureiro, M.C. Pereira, M. Pinheiro, A.R. Neves, 
S. Reis, Pharm. Res. 37 (7) (2020) 139.
[53] H. Zuo, W. Chen, H.M. Cooper, Z.P. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (24) (2017) 
20444–20453.
[54] L. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Hu, C. Wang, Y. Jia, C. Zhu, S. Xie, J. Lee, F. Li, D. Ling, Adv. 
Mater. 34 (2022) 2206915.
[55] L. Zhang, Y. Jia, J. Yang, L. Zhang, S. Hou, X. Niu, J. Zhu, Y. Huang, X. Sun, Z.P. Xu, 
R. Liu, ACS Nano 16 (2022) 12036–12048.
[56] H. Wu, F. Xia, L. Zhang, C. Fang, J. Lee, L. Gong, J. Gao, D. Ling, F. Li, Adv. Mater. 34 
(7) (2022) 2108348.
[57] T.E. Park, B. Singh, H. Li, J.Y. Lee, S.K. Kang, Y.J. Choi, C.-S. Cho, Biomaterials 38 
(2015) 61–71.
[58] H. Xin, X. Jiang, J. Gu, X. Sha, L. Chen, K. Law, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Jiang, X. Fang, 
Biomaterials 32 (2011) 4293–4305.
[59] L.X. Zhang, H. Sun, Y. cHEN, M. Wei, J.Y. Lee, F.Y. Li, D.S. Ling, Wiley Inter. Rev. 
Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. (2021) e1696.
[60] K. Ceyzériat, T. Zilli, P. Millet, G.B. Frisoni, V. Garibotto, B.B. Tournier, Curr. 
Alzheimer Res. 17 (2) (2020) 112–125.
[61] K. Schuessel, S. Schäfer, T.A. Bayer, C. Czech, L. Pradier, F. Müller-Spahn, 
W.E. Müller, A. Eckert, Neurobiol. Dis. 18 (1) (2005) 89–99.
[62] C. Ising, C. Venegas, S.S. Zhang, H. Scheiblich, S.V. Schmidt, A. Vieira-Saecker, 
S. Schwartz, S. Albasset, R.M. McManus, D. Tejera, A. Griep, F. Santarelli, 
F. Brosseron, S. Opitz, J. Stunden, M. Merten, R. Kayed, D.T. Golenbock, D. Blum, 
E. Latz, L. Buee, M.T. Heneka, Nature 575 (2019) 669.
[63] B. Dejanovic, M.A. Huntley, A. De Maziere, W.J. Meilandt, T. Wu, K. Srinivasan, 
Z. Jiang, V. Gandham, B.A. Friedman, H. Ngu, O. Foreman, R.A.D. Carano, B. Chih, 
J. Klumperman, C. Bakalarski, J.E. Hanson, M. Sheng, Neuron 100 (6) (2018) 
1322–1336.
[64] L. Zhang, H. Sun, J. Zhao, J. Lee, L. Ee Low, L. Gong, Y. Chen, N. Wang, C. Zhu, P. Lin, 
Z. Liang, M. Wei, D. Ling, F. Li, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 175 (2021) 113832.
[65] Y. Wong, K. Markham, Z.P. Xu, M. Chen, G.Q. Max, Lu, P.F. Bartlett, H.M. Cooper, 
Biomaterials 31 (33) (2010) 8770–8779.
[66] K. Ladewig, M. Niebert, Z.P. Xu, P.P. Gray, G.Q. Lu, Biomaterials 31 (7) (2010) 
1821–1829.
[67] L.-x Zhang, D.-q Liu, S.-w Wang, X.-l Yu, M. Ji, X.-x Xie, S.-y Liu, R.-t Liu, J. Mater. 
Chem. B 5 (31) (2017) 6266–6276.
[68] B. Hu, F. Dai, Z. Fan, G. Ma, Q. Tang, X. Zhang, Adv. Mater. 27 (37) (2015) 
5499–5505.
[69] A. Mullard, Nat Rev, Drug Discov. 20 (1) (2021) 3–5.
[70] S. Ugbaja, I. Lawal, H. Kumalo, M. Lawal, Curr. Drug Targets 23 (3) (2021) 
266–285.
[71] H. Yang, W. Mu, D. Wei, Y. Zhang, Y. Duan, Jx Gao, Xq Gong, Hj Wang, Xl Wu, 
H. Tao, J. Chang, Adv. Sci. 7 (2020) 1902906.
[72] D. Huang, Y. Cao, X. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Li, G. Chen, Q. Wang, Adv. Mater. 33 
(13) (2021) 2006357.
[73] L. Zhang, Xg Liu, Dq Liu, Xl Yu, Lx Zhang, J. Zhu, S. Lu, Rt Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater 30 
(2020) 1910691.
[74] L. Cai, C. Yang, W. Jia, Y. Liu, R. Xie, T. Lei, Z. Yang, X. He, R. Tong, H. Gao, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 30 (2020) 1909999.
[75] Z.P. Xu, G.S. Stevenson, C. Lu, G. Lu, P. Bartlett, P.P. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128 
(2006) 36–37.
[76] Z.P. Xu, G. Stevenson, C.Q. Lu, G.Q. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. B 110 (2006) 16923–16929.
[77] W. Chen, H. Zuo, B. Rolfe, M.A. Schembri, R.N. Cobbold, B. Zhang, T.J. Mahony, 
Z.P. Xu, J. Control. Release 292 (2018) 196–209.
[78] C. Ren, D. Li, Q. Zhou, X. Hu, Biomaterials 232 (2020) 119752.
[79] Y.-x Zhang, S.-w Wang, S. Lu, L.-x Zhang, D.-q Liu, M. Ji, W.-y Wang, R.-t Liu, FEBS 
Lett. 591 (2017) 3615–3624.
[80] S.-w Wang, D.-q Liu, L.-x Zhang, M. Ji, Y.-x Zhang, Q.-x Dong, S.-y Liu, X.-x Xie, R.- 
t Liu, Alzheimers Res. Ther. 9 (1) (2017) 41.
[81] M. Ji, X.X. Xie, D.Q. Liu, X.L. Yu, Y. Zhang, L.X. Zhang, S.W. Wang, Y.R. Huang, 
R.T. Liu, Alzheimers Res. Ther. 10 (1) (2018) 55.
Dr Lingxiao Zhang received his PhD degree from 
Institute of Process Engineering Chinese Academy of 
Sciences in 2020, then he performed his postdoctoral 
research in Zhejiang University from 2020 to 2022. He is 
now an associate professor at Hangzhou City University 
and a Marie Sklodowska-Curie Actions Research Fellow 
at Aarhus University. His research focuses on advanced 
two-dimensional 
nanomaterials 
for 
cancer 
im­
munotherapy and neurodegenerative disease treatment.  
Dr Linghui Zeng received his PhD degree from Osaka 
University in 2005, then she performed her postdoctoral 
research in University of Washington from 2006 to 2009. 
She is now a professor and director of School of Medicine, 
Hangzhou City University. Her research focuses on the 
mechanism of common diseases of the nervous system 
and the development of new drugs. She has published 
more than 80 SCI papers, including Nature, Neuron, STTT, 
Oncogene and other internationally renowned academic 
journals, with a total impact factor of more than 400 and 
a total citation >  1000 times, the highest citation for a 
single article exceeds 500 times.  
Dr Ruitian Liu received his PhD degree from Shandong 
University in 1998, then he was promoted as associate 
professor in 1999. He performed his postdoctoral re­
search in Arizona State University from 2002 to 2005. 
Then he worked in Tsinghua University as associate 
professor from 2005 to 2012. He has been senior group 
leader and professor at Institute of Process Engineering 
Chinese Academy of Sciences since 2012. His research 
focuses on discovering and developing original bio­
technological drugs and biosimilar medicines such as 
vaccines, peptide, recombinant protein and genetic en­
gineering antibodies for the treatment of major diseases 
and infectious diseases.  
Dr Zhiping Xu received his PhD from National University 
of Singapore in 2001. Then he performed his postdoctoral 
research in University of North Texas from 2001 to 2003 
and in The University of Queensland from 2003 to 2007. 
Then he worked in The University of Queensland as as­
sociate professor and professor from 2007 to 2022. 
Currently, he is a senior group leader and professor at the 
Australian 
Institute 
for 
Bioengineering 
and 
Nanotechnology, the University of Queensland, and 
Institute 
of 
Biomedical 
Health 
Technology 
and 
Engineering, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory. His research fo­
cuses on control preparation of layered double hydroxide 
nanomaterials, calcium phosphate nanoparticles, na­
noemulsions, quantum dots, chemosensros and nano­
sensors, and their applications in biomedicine and agriculture.
L. Zhang, S. Hou, F. Movahedi et al. 
Nano Today 49 (2023) 101788
14