This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7201
Cite this: Chem. Commun., 2025,
61, 7201
Ultrasmall coinage metal nanoclusters as
promising antibacterial agents: from design
to applications
Kang Liu,a Zhiwen Xue,b Ting Feng,*a Xinyue Dou,*a Coswald Stephen Sipaut*c and
Xun Yuan
*a
Ultrasmall coinage metal nanoclusters (MNCs, o3 nm) have emerged as a novel class of broad-
spectrum antibacterials due to their unique physicochemical properties. The rapid advances in the
design and applications of MNC-based antibacterials are made possible by the atomic-level core–shell
engineering of MNCs. In this review, we initially explore the fundamental requirements for MNC-based
antibacterials. Following this, we emphasize the significance of antibacterial modalities in the design and
application of these agents by summarizing the key antibacterial modalities of MNCs and highlighting
their mechanisms of action. We then outline the primary design strategies for MNC-based antibacterials.
In the subsequent section, we provide an overview of the representative antibacterial applications of
MNC-based antibacterials across various scenarios. Finally, we offer a comprehensive summary along
with the current opportunities and challenges faced by MNC-based antibacterials. We believe that this
review will illuminate the design of MNC-based antibacterials for future applications and inspire further
innovative research in their development.
1. Introduction
Bacterial infections, as a significant public health threat, trans-
cend regional and temporal boundaries.1–4 According to
authoritative reports, drug-resistant bacterial infections directly
result in over 7.7 million deaths globally each year, having
become the second leading cause of death worldwide after
ischemic
heart
disease.5–11
This
escalating
crisis
incurs
a School of Materials Science and Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and
Technology, Qingdao, Shandong 266042, P. R. China.
E-mail: fengting@qust.edu.cn, douxinyue@qust.edu.cn, yuanxun@qust.edu.cn
b Sino-German Institute of Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and
Technology, Qingdao, Shandong 266042, P. R. China
c Chemical Engineering Programme, Faculty of Engineering, Universiti Malaysia
Sabah, Kota Kinabalu 88400, Sabah, Malaysia. E-mail: css@ums.edu.my
Kang Liu
Kang Liu obtained his BE degree
(2021) and is currently a Master’s
candidate under the supervision of
Prof. Xun Yuan at the Qingdao
University
of
Science
and
Technology. His research centers on
the synthesis, functionalization, and
biomedical
evaluation
of
noble
metal NCs, with a focus on their
applications in disease theranostics
and antimicrobial agents.
Zhiwen Xue
Zhiwen Xue is a Bachelor’s candi-
date in Composite Materials and
Engineering at the Qingdao Univ-
ersity of Science and Technology,
under the mentorship of Prof. Xun
Yuan. His research interests prima-
rily focus on the synthesis and
applications of metal NCs. Passio-
nate about bridging nanomaterials
with practical applications, he acti-
vely participates in interdisciplinary
projects to address challenges in
energy conversion and biomedical
engineering.
Received 8th March 2025,
Accepted 16th April 2025
DOI: 10.1039/d5cc01275a
rsc.li/chemcomm
ChemComm
FEATURE ARTICLE
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

7202 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
economic losses measured in trillions of dollars.12 In clinical
settings, nosocomial infections, chronic wound infections,13,14
and implantable device-related infections15–17 continue to esca-
late, while the emergence of multi-drug-resistant bacteria
poses a crisis for traditional antibiotic treatments.13,18,19 This
dire situation not only exacerbates the medical burden but
also profoundly impacts social productivity and economic
development.20 In this context, the development of new, effi-
cient antibacterial agents has become an urgent priority for the
global scientific research community. The ideal antibacterial
agent should possess rapid bactericidal efficacy, low host
toxicity, broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, and resistance
resilience.21–25 Nevertheless, the constraints of conventional
antibiotics have propelled researchers to delve into the realm
of nanomaterials to innovate effective antibacterial agents.
The history of antibacterials narrates humanity’s enduring
struggle against pathogenic microorganisms.26 As early as the
4th century BC, the ancient Phoenicians used Ag vessels to
preserve water, wine and vinegar to inhibit microbial growth,
while the ancient Chinese ‘‘Compendium of Materia Medica’’
documented the antibacterial use of herbs like Coptis and
Scutellaria. In the 1920s, the discovery of penicillin saved
countless lives from bacterial infections, and thus heralded
a golden era of antibiotics;27 however, its eﬃcacy is swiftly
diminishing as drug-resistant bacteria proliferate due to clin-
ical misuse. To address this challenge, nanotechnology has
introduced innovative solutions: metal nanoparticles (such
as Ag and Au) demonstrate significant antibacterial activity
through their surface plasmon resonance eﬀects and ion
release
properties.28–32
However,
issues
such
as
particle
size heterogeneity, agglomeration tendency, and potential bio-
logical toxicity limit their clinical application. Amidst this
evolution, ultrasmall coinage metal nanoclusters (MNCs) with
typical core sizes of o3 nm and atomic-precision core–shell
structures (Fig. 1) have emerged as a class of promising
antibacterials.30,33 MNCs uniquely bridge the gap between
Ting Feng
Dr Ting Feng received her BS
degree
(2013)
from
Liaocheng
University and PhD (2022) from
the Ocean University of China,
under the co-supervision of Prof.
Lixin
Cao.
She
joined
the
Qingdao
University
of
Science
and Technology in 2022, and
was appointed as an Associate
Professor in 2024. Her research
focuses
on
the
synthesis
and
biomedical
applications
of
metal NCs.
Xinyue Dou
Xinyue Dou earned her BE degree
from the Shandong University of
Technology, China (2008) and a
ME degree under the guidance of
Prof. Jianping Xie at the National
University of Singapore (2014).
She
was
appointed
as
a
Research
Engineer
at
the
Qingdao
University
of
Science
and Technology in 2017. Her
research
specializes
in
the
atomically precise synthesis and
functional engineering of metal
NCs, with a focus on advancing
their applications in catalysis, biosensing, and nanomedicine.
Coswald Stephen Sipaut
Prof. Coswald Stephen Sipaut @
Mohd Nasri is Assistant Vice Chan-
cellor (Industry & Society Network)
at Universiti Malaysia Sabah (UMS)
and a Professor in Chemical Engin-
eering. He holds an MSc (1998) and
PhD (2002) in Polymer Science from
the University of Manchester, UK.
His research focuses on material
synthesis, polymer technologies (poly-
urethane
and
polyolefin),
and
nanotechnology, with internationally
recognized
contributions
through
high-impact
publications
and
awards. He holds 5 patents, 4 trade secrets, and has commercialized
multiple innovations. A dedicated academic leader, he serves as a reviewer
for top journals and provides technical consultancy to industries, bridging
academia and practical applications.
Xun Yuan
Prof. Xun Yuan obtained his BE
(2006) and ME (2009) from the
Shandong University of Techno-
logy, China, and completed his
PhD
(2014)
at
the
National
University of Singapore under Prof.
Jianping Xie. Following a 3-year
postdoctoral
fellowship
at
the
Institute
of
Bioengineering
and
Nanotechnology
(Singapore),
he
joined the Qingdao University of
Science and Technology as a full
professor in 2017. His research
pioneers
atomically
precise
engineering of metal NCs, with a focus on advancing their biomedical
applications (e.g., bioimaging and targeted therapy) and catalytic
functionalities.
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7203
traditional antibiotics and nanomaterials (Table 1). Unlike
antibiotics,34,35
MNCs
exhibit
multimodal
antibacterial
mechanisms (see Section 3), significantly reducing resistance
risks. Compared to Ag nanoparticles or ions,36–39 MNCs offer
low dosage, minimizing cytotoxicity. Their tunable surface
chemistry (via ligand engineering) outperforms rigid carbon
dots40,41 or ZnO42,43 in targeting specific pathogens (e.g.,
biofilm-forming bacteria).
The swift expansion of MNCs began at the dawn of this
century, notably following the groundbreaking discovery of the
exact structure of thiol ligand-protected Au102 NCs in 2007.48
Since then, MNCs have emerged as an innovative class of func-
tional
nanomaterials,49,50
extensively
utilized
in
sensing,51
catalysis,33,52 environmental protection,53 energy conversion,54
and biomedicine.55 In the realm of biomedical applications,
MNCs are particularly appealing in various antibacterial scenarios
due to their multifaceted functionalities in the following aspects:
(i) owing to the pronounced quantum confinement in the r3 nm
range,56 MNCs exhibit fascinating molecule-like properties such
as intensive photoluminescence (PL),57 chirality,58 and HOMO–
LUMO transitions,59 which can be harnessed for antibacterial
purposes, e.g., photodynamic bactericidal actions.60 (ii) The metal-
lic core and ligand shell structure of MNCs can be precisely
altered at the atomic or molecular level, enabling customization
of their physicochemical properties for optimal antibacterial
performance. Specifically, modifying a single atom or ligand can
lead to significant changes in the physicochemical properties of
MNCs, offering numerous opportunities for enhancing their
antibacterial activities.61
In 2013, Xie et al. pioneered the development of a Ag16
NC-based antibacterial agent, discovering its remarkable super-
iority over chloramphenicol in combating Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa (P. aeruginosa).62 Since then, the advancement in the
design and applications of MNC-based antibacterials has
thrived. To date, hundreds of these antibacterials have been
developed. Specifically, by modulating the metal core as well as
Fig. 1
Schematic illustration of the engineering of coinage MNCs with
diﬀerent antibacterial modalities for various antibacterial applications. The
scheme of electrocatalytic antibacterial patterns is reproduced with per-
mission from ref. 44, Copyright 2024 Nature Publishing Group.
Table 1
Comparative advantages and limitations of MNCs with other antibacterial materials
Material
Key advantages
Key limitations
Ref.
Antibiotics
High specificity
Rapid resistance development
34 and 35
Rapid bactericidal action
Ecological toxicity
Cost-eﬀective production
Narrow spectrum
Antimicrobial peptides
Broad-spectrum activity
High synthesis cost
45 and 46
Low resistance risk
Poor stability
Biodegradability
Limited scalability
ZnO NPs
Photocatalytic activity
pH-dependent eﬃcacy
42 and 43
Low toxicity
Limited antibacterial eﬃciency under dark conditions
Cost-eﬀective production
Ag NPs
Broad-spectrum eﬃcacy
Cytotoxicity risks
36 and 38
Long-term stability
Environmental accumulation
Particle aggregation issues
Ag+/Cu+ ions
Rapid bactericidal eﬀect
Severe toxicity
37
Low cost
Short-term activity
Environmental concerns
Carbon dots
Tunable functionality
Mechanism ambiguity
40 and 41
High biocompatibility
Limited antibacterial potency
Photothermal properties
Limited scalability
MNCs
Broad-spectrum yet high eﬃcacy
Poor stability for some Ag/Cu NCs
44 and 47
Tunable antibacterial mechanisms
Scalability challenges
Low resistance risk
Good biocompatibility
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7204 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
the ligand shell, various MNC-based antibacterials with diﬀerent
sizes, compositions (e.g., Ag,63 Cu,64 Au,65 and their alloys66), and
characteristics have been created. Concurrently, a series of MNC
assemblies and various MNC-incorporated composite materials
(e.g., antibacterial hydrogels67 and dressings14) with enhanced
applicability are emerging rapidly, extending the antibacterial
territory of MNCs. Furthermore, benefiting from the multi-
faceted functionalities manipulated by precisely tuning the
core–shell of MNCs, their antibacterial modalities have also
evolved significantly—from initially leveraging the inherent anti-
bacterial properties of the metal core to employing photo-
dynamic or acoustic-dynamic antibacterial modes, electrocatalytic
antibacterial
techniques,
and
enzyme-catalyzed
antibacterial
approaches (Fig. 1). In addition, owing to the large size of family
members with diverse functions, these MNC-based antibacterials
have been applied in various scenarios, such as promoting wound
healing from bacterial infections, treating diseases caused by
bacterial infections like peritonitis and keratitis, disinfecting
water, and providing antibacterial solutions for household pro-
ducts (Fig. 1). Given the robust development of MNC-based
antibacterials in recent years, it is crucial to review the latest
research advancements promptly and foster their continued
evolution.
In this feature article, we initially explore the fundamental
requirements for MNC-based antibacterials. Following this, we
emphasize the significance of antibacterial modalities in the
design and application of these agents by summarizing the key
antibacterial modalities of MNCs and highlighting their
mechanisms of action. We then outline the primary design
strategies for MNC-based antibacterials. In the subsequent
section, we provide an overview of the representative antibac-
terial applications of MNC-based antibacterials across various
scenarios. Finally, we oﬀer a comprehensive summary along
with the current opportunities and challenges faced by MNC-
based antibacterials. We believe that this review will illuminate
the design of MNC-based antibacterials for future applications
and inspire further innovative research in their development.
2. The fundamental requirements for
MNC-based antibacterials
MNCs must satisfy several criteria for antibacterial applications,
including exceptional broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, high
biocompatibility, and good environmental friendliness.18,60,68
Furthermore, they should exhibit seamless adaptability with other
materials (e.g., hydrogels69 and porous substances44) to achieve
various antibacterial scenarios with enhanced performance. For
instance, MNCs should be easily incorporated into rubber, plas-
tics, and fabrics with uniform dispersion to ensure eﬀective
inhibition of bacterial growth.59 Additionally, MNCs should have
the capacity for low-cost and large-scale processability to meet the
demands of extensive applications in areas such as antibacterial
household products and water disinfection.70 This section will
discuss these fundamental requirements for MNC-based antibac-
terials, namely, exceptional broad-spectrum antibacterial activity,
high biocompatibility, good environmental friendliness, cost-
eﬀectiveness and large-scale processability (Fig. 2(a)).
2.1
Exceptional broad-spectrum antibacterial activity
MNCs as novel antibacterial agents are distinguished by their
exceptional broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, a notable con-
trast to the narrow-spectrum characteristic of antibiotics.68 This
broad-spectrum eﬃcacy is attributed to their unique physico-
chemical properties and multifaceted interactions with bacteria.
Studies have demonstrated that MNCs (such as Au, Ag, and Cu
NCs) exhibit significant inhibitory eﬀects against both Gram-
positive bacteria (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus or S. aureus), Gram-
negative bacteria (e.g., Escherichia coli or E. coli), and drug-
resistant strains (e.g., methicillin-resistant S. aureus or MRSA),
with minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC50) as low as micro-
grams per milliliter (mg mL1).64,74,75 This broad-spectrum prop-
erty is primarily due to: (1) ultrasmall size (o3 nm) and tunable
surface chemistry, endowing them with strong membrane
penetration capabilities that disrupt bacterial membrane integ-
rity through physical adsorption; (2) high surface atom ratios as
well as diverse antibacterial modalities (e.g., photo/sonody-
namic bactericidal eﬀect) promoting explosive generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), inducing oxidative stress damage
across a wide range of bacteria; (3) controlled release of
metal species as well as the intact MNCs specifically binding
to intracellular thiol enzymes, interfering with metabolic
pathways. Notably, the multiple MNC-bacteria interactions
and multimodal antibacterial actions of MNCs synergistically
circumvent
bacterial
single-target
resistance
evolution,
further enhancing their broad-spectrum antibacterial activity.
Fig. 2
MNC-based antibacterials with (a) excellent broad-spectrum anti-
bacterial properties, high biocompatibility, good environmental friendliness,
cost-eﬀectiveness and large-scale processability. (b) Low cytotoxicity.
Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, Copyright 2024 Elsevier Ltd. (c)
Renal clearance behavior with increasing size of Au NCs. Reproduced with
permission from ref. 72, Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. (d)
Negligible eﬀect on the main organs. Reproduced with permission from
ref. 73, Copyright 2023 Royal Society of Chemistry.
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7205
Recent
studies
have
also
revealed
that
surface-modified
MNCs (e.g., pH-sensitive polymer modification28,76) enhance
biofilm penetration capabilities, expanding their potential
applications in complex infection environments. These attri-
butes position MNCs as promising frontline candidates for
combating multidrug-resistant bacterial infections.
2.2
High biocompatibility
Beyond their exceptional broad-spectrum antibacterial proper-
ties, high biocompatibility stands as the paramount trait for the
implementation of MNC-based antibacterials.68 Considering the
varied antibacterial contexts, the biocompatibility of MNCs
should be tailored and assessed based on their specific applica-
tion scenarios. In vitro antibacterial uses, such as antibacterial
coatings or disinfection systems, demand that MNCs exhibit
minimal or no cytotoxicity. Conversely, for in vivo antibacterial
applications, such as systemic infection treatments, MNCs must
fulfill comprehensive evaluation criteria including low cytotoxi-
city, eﬃcient metabolic clearance in vivo, and absence of sig-
nificant adverse eﬀects on organs. Indeed, meticulous regulation
of the metal core–ligand shell of MNCs can ensure their
robust multidimensional biocompatibility, marking a notable
advantage in biomedical applications.77,78 This section will
thus explore cytotoxicity, metabolic behavior, and potential side
effects on organs individually, and concurrently highlight how to
enhance the biocompatibility of MNCs through the metal core–
ligand shell engineering.
2.2.1
Cytotoxicity. The ultrasmall dimensions (o3 nm)
and core–shell architecture of MNCs are intrinsically associated
with their low cytotoxicity, while their biocompatibility can be
systematically enhanced through rational metal core–ligand
shell engineering.79 The cytotoxic potential of MNCs is primarily
determined by their metallic composition: noble metal-based
systems (e.g., Au and Pt) exhibit superior biocompatibility due to
their minimal metal species leaching, whereas incorporation of
toxic heavy metals (e.g., Cd and Hg) in the metal core signifi-
cantly elevates cellular toxicity.54,80 Notably, strategic ligand shell
modifications serve as an effective approach to optimize biolo-
gical safety while maintaining antibacterial efficacy, as demon-
strated by three representative strategies:
(1) Surface ligand optimization: non-specific cellular damage
can be mitigated through precise selection of organic ligands. For
instance, glutathione (GSH)-protected Cu NC treated L929 mouse
fibroblasts sustained viability exceeding 94% even at concentra-
tions up to 400 mM (Fig. 2(b)), while simultaneously achieving
499% photodynamic antibacterial eﬃciency against S. aureus,
E. coli, and MRSA at 200 mM under visible light irradiation.71
(2) Biomolecule functionalization: grafting biocompatible
molecules onto the ligand shell significantly improves cellular
tolerance. For example, Dou et al. demonstrated that arginine
(Arg)-modified Au22(GSH)18 NCs show 80% cell viability in L929
fibroblasts at 2.5 mM Au concentration, contrasting sharply
with the 32.7% survival rate observed for its unmodified
analogue at equivalent concentration.81
(3) Chiral ligand engineering: the stereochemistry of surface
ligands critically influences biological interactions. In this
aspect, Jia et al. illustrated that dextral alkynyl-protected Au10
NCs exhibit diminished cytotoxicity, enhanced intracellular
distribution, and a superior radiosensitizing eﬃcacy in com-
parison to their levorotatory equivalents.82
2.2.2
Metabolic toxicity. The in vivo metabolic clearance of
MNCs predominantly relies on renal pathways, with clearance
eﬃciency directly governing their biosafety and antibacterial
eﬃcacy. Studies demonstrate that hydrodynamic diameter
(HD) is a critical determinant of renal clearance rates in MNCs.
The glomerular filtration threshold (B6 nm) dictates that
MNCs with HD o 6 nm exhibit eﬃcient renal excretion, while
those exceeding this threshold tend to accumulate in the liver
and kidneys, posing toxicity risks.24 For example, bovine serum
albumin (BSA, molecular weight 67 kDa)-stabilized Au25 NCs,
owing to their size near the filtration threshold (HD E 6 nm),
predominantly undergo hepatobiliary clearance in mouse
models.83 Conversely, MNCs protected by short peptides or
thiol ligands (generally with HD o 5 nm) are more likely to
undergo glomerular filtration.84,85
Further investigations revealed that the surface chemistry of
MNCs also plays a major role in aﬀecting their in vivo renal
clearance. For example, zwitterionic GSH-protected Au NCs (HD
= 3.8 nm) showed a 2.3-fold enhancement in the renal clearance
rate compared to polyethylene glycol (PEG)-functionalized
counterparts with identical core sizes86 (Fig. 2(c)), whereas
cysteine (Cys)-modified Au NCs exhibited reduced clearance
eﬃciency due to ligand instability-induced core dissociation.87
Moreover, the renal clearance of MNCs also depends on their core
density. For instance, Tang et al. discovered that as the particle
density decreased from 19.3 g cm3 (Au NCs) to 10.5 g cm3
(Ag NCs), the renal clearance rate rose from 0.54 mL h1 to
2.25 mL h1, illustrating an inverse relationship between core
density and clearance eﬃciency.88
These findings collectively highlight that the renal clearance
of MNCs arises from the coupled eﬀects of HD, surface chem-
istry, core density, and stability. Rational design strategies
should aim to balance ‘‘controllable metabolism’’ and ‘‘long-
term antibacterial eﬃcacy’’ through ligand engineering and
core optimization. For example, pH-responsive ligands can
improve retention at infection sites while ensuring swift sys-
temic clearance in healthy tissues.
2.2.3
Influence on major organs. It is crucial to ensure that
MNCs exert minimal or no adverse eﬀects on human organs
during in vivo antibacterial applications. This necessitates that
MNCs neither impair the functionality of major organs such as
the heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys nor induce patho-
logical changes in these organs.73 Leveraging their ultrasmall
size and customizable surface chemistry, MNCs have demon-
strated minimal impact on animal organs, as shown by multi-
parametric evaluations (Fig. 2(d)). For instance, GSH-protected
Au NCs exhibited less than 5% residual accumulation in the
major organs of mouse livers at 14 days post-injection, and
those sub-nanometer GSH-protected Au NCs in major organs
constituted merely 1.5% one month subsequent to injection,
correlating with unaltered serum levels and preserved hepatic
architecture.72,89 Indeed, the minimal adverse influence of
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7206 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
MNCs on major organs is anticipated because most MNCs with a
HD of less than 5 nm exhibit good renal clearance.90 From this
perspective, researchers could engineer the core–shell structure
of MNCs to regulate their metabolic behavior, thereby aligning
antibacterial efficacy with multiorgan biocompatibility.
2.3
Good environmental friendliness
As a new generation of broad-spectrum antibacterial agents, the
environmentally friendly design of MNCs has emerged as a
pivotal consideration in application development. By precisely
controlling the size and surface chemistry of these MNCs, they
achieve exceptional bacteriostatic performance while markedly
reducing the environmental hazards associated with traditional
metal-based
antibacterials.
Their
environmental
safety
is
primarily manifested in several ways: firstly, the ultrahigh anti-
bacterial activity aﬀorded by their ultrasmall size necessitates a
minimal dose in applications, thereby mitigating environmental
impact from the outset. Secondly, the robust ‘‘metal–ligand’’
bonding within these MNCs allows MNCs to decompose into
metal–ligand complexes that exhibit high antibacterial activity
with low toxicity and minimal environmental impact during
antibacterial applications, starkly contrasting with the leaching
of metal ions in conventional antimicrobials, which are both
highly toxic and environmentally detrimental. Consequently, the
negligible metal ion leaching characteristics of these MNCs
effectively inhibit the accumulation of heavy metal ions in the
environment, significantly reducing impacts on ecosystems such
as water and soil.
In addition, surface functionalization of MNCs may confer
selective antibacterial eﬀects against specific bacteria, maintain-
ing the ecological balance of microbial communities by precisely
targeting pathogen membrane structures or disrupting meta-
bolic pathways, rather than indiscriminately eliminating micro-
organisms. Finally, the engineered surface chemistry of MNCs
enhances their capacity to adhere eﬀectively to specific sub-
strates, thereby reinforcing the MNC-support interaction and
preventing potential detachment or ion leaching. Furthermore,
it can prevent the detachment of charged MNCs from the
support by utilizing electrostatic attraction or external electric
fields, thereby further reducing environmental impact. For
instance, in water disinfection applications, Liu et al. attached
negatively charged Ag28(GSH)20 NCs to the metal–organic frame-
work ZIF-67 to develop an anode material.44 This anode can
electrocatalytically produce ROS in situ, while simultaneously
capturing negatively charged bacteria in water and preventing
the detachment of Ag28(GSH)20 NCs from the electrode into the
water through electric field action, facilitating safe, efficient, and
continuous water disinfection. These features bestow MNCs with
unique advantages in fabricating MNC-incorporated household
antibacterial products and exploring environmentally friendly
MNC-involved water disinfection technologies.
2.4
Cost-eﬀective and large-scale processability
The cost-eﬀective and large-scale processability of MNC-based
antibacterials represents a pivotal advancement for their prac-
tical application.91 In this subsection, we will first examine the
cost considerations associated with MNC-based antibacterials,
focusing on the roles of metals (Ag, Cu, and Au) and ligands. We
will then delve into the scalability of the production process.
Both the metal core and ligand shell of MNCs significantly
impact production costs. In terms of the metal core, Ag and Cu
are far more economical than Au. As of 2025, the approximate
market prices for these raw metals are as follows: Cu (B$0.01
per gram) o Ag (B$1.06 per gram) o Au (B$105.36 per gram).
Ag and Cu undeniably demonstrate remarkable intrinsic anti-
bacterial properties at a fraction of Au’s cost, rendering them
more feasible for large-scale applications such as wound dres-
sings and surface coatings. Nevertheless, Au NC-based antibac-
terials retain significance in specialized contexts demanding
unparalleled stability, biocompatibility, or photothermal char-
acteristics. For example, Au NCs may excel in treating internal
bacterial infections due to their superior stability and biocom-
patibility, whereas Ag and Cu NCs may degrade more rapidly.
Therefore, future research should prioritize Ag and Cu NCs as
primary antibacterial agents, reserving Au NCs for specific
applications (e.g., doping to enhance stability).
Ligands critically influence the production cost, stability,
and functionality of MNCs. The most commonly utilized
ligands can be categorized into three groups. The first group
consists of thiolates (e.g., GSH, Cys, 11-mercaptoundecanoic
acid), which are cost-eﬀective (B$30–100 per gram for small
molecules) and efficient in stabilizing MNCs. Certain thiolate
ligands, such as GSH and Cys, also impart biocompatibility or
bioactivity. The second group includes macromolecules (e.g.,
PEG, chitosan or CS), which are moderately priced (B$0.01–5
per gram) and scalable, providing adjustable hydrophilicity and
extended circulation time. The third group encompasses bio-
molecules (e.g., proteins, peptides), which tend to be more
expensive (B$50–500 per gram) but offer targeted antibacterial
activity and lower toxicity. While thiolates and macromolecules
are cost-effective for large-scale industrial production, biomo-
lecular ligands may justify their higher cost in medical applica-
tions that demand biocompatibility and precise targeting.
To achieve eﬃcient integration with diverse substrates,
researchers employed ligand engineering to functionalize the
MNC surfaces by introducing carboxyl, amino, or other functional
groups.92 This enables stable bonding with polymers, cellulose, or
inorganic carriers through covalent bonding, hydrogen bonding,
or electrostatic interaction. This ‘‘plug and play’’ interface compat-
ibility technology allows MNC-based antibacterials to be seam-
lessly incorporated into matrix materials such as plastics, coatings,
and textiles, thus forming functional composites for diverse anti-
bacterial scenarios.59 Taking in situ composite technology as an
example, the uniform loading of MNCs during the polymer curing
phase not only circumvented the agglomeration issues associated
with traditional physical blending but also precisely regulated the
slow-release behavior of antibacterial components.93
In large-scale MNC production, while laboratory-scale pro-
duction of MNCs has achieved gram- or even kilogram-level
outputs,70,71,94 advancing toward industrial-scale tonnage pro-
duction remains critical for enabling cost-eﬀective manufactur-
ing of antibacterial solutions like household antimicrobial
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7207
devices and water disinfection systems. Future eﬀorts may
focus on the following directions: (1) investigating continuous
flow synthesis technology to significantly enhance the prepara-
tion eﬃciency of MNCs. By precisely controlling nucleation-
growth dynamics through microreactors and integrating auto-
mated separation and purification systems, it is anticipated to
achieve single batch yields exceeding 100 kilograms. (2) Devel-
oping solid-phase synthesis techniques at room temperature
with the objective of further reducing energy consumption and
capital costs, thereby enhancing production scale and improv-
ing metal atom utilization rates to minimize the wastage of
precious metal resources. (3) Innovating post-treatment tech-
nologies such as spray drying and freeze granulation to yield
shelf-stable MNC formulations (Z12-month stability) compa-
tible with industrial workflows. For instance, Ag-loaded zeolite
demonstrated immediate applicability in polyethylene-based
film production, where direct blending/extrusion processes
concurrently enhanced antibacterial eﬃcacy and preserve poly-
mer mechanical integrity.95
3. Antibacterial patterns of MNC-
based antibacterials
MNC-based antibacterials can be mainly categorized into five
types based on their bactericidal patterns: (1) MNC-based anti-
bacterials utilizing intrinsic antibacterial patterns; (2) MNC-
based antibacterials employing photodynamic patterns; (3)
MNC-based antibacterials employing sonodynamic patterns; (4)
MNC-based antibacterials leveraging electrocatalytic patterns; (5)
MNC-based antibacterials utilizing enzyme-catalyzed patterns.
In this section, we will examine each of these five antibacterial
patterns of MNC-based antibacterials, emphasizing the under-
lying principles of these antibacterial strategies.
3.1
The intrinsic antibacterial patterns
The intrinsic antibacterial activity of MNCs is primarily linked
to their metal core, functioning through two principal mechan-
isms (Fig. 3(a)): firstly, the controlled breakdown of metal core
in physiological environments releases metal species, which
exert bactericidal eﬀects by compromising the integrity of
bacterial membranes (e.g., binding to membrane phospholi-
pids), disrupting respiratory enzyme activity (e.g., inhibiting
NADH dehydrogenase), and inducing bursts of ROS.96 For
instance, it was found that Ag or Cu species can inhibit the
bacterial thioredoxin and glutathione reductases’ antioxidant
defense system by binding to them.97 Yuan et al. found that
Ag16 NCs can stimulate bacteria to produce ROS, leading to
bacterial death.98 Secondly, some ultrasmall metal core can
exert a direct antibacterial eﬀect without the release of anti-
bacterial metal species, leveraging their high-active surface to
disrupt the structure of bacterial membrane proteins.31
Notably, the intrinsic antibacterial eﬃcacy of MNCs can be
significantly enhanced by manipulating the composition, valence
state, and electronic structure of the metal core.99 For example,
the Xie group developed a full-spectrum of alloy AuxAg25–x(MHA)18
NCs (MHA = 6-mercaptohexanoic acid; x = 0–25), observing a
Fig. 3
Schematic diagrams of (a) intrinsic antibacterial patterns, (b) photo/sonodynamic antibacterial patterns, (c) electrocatalytic antibacterial patterns,
and (d) enzyme-mimetic antibacterial patterns based on core–shell regulation of MNCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 2024
Nature Publishing Group.
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7208 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
U-shaped antibacterial behavior with increasing x, where the alloy
NCs exhibited decreased antibacterial ability contrary to the
common trend of enhancement (Fig. 4(a)).66 This reduced perfor-
mance is attributed to their increased stability post-alloying,
which diminishes their ability to generate ROS necessary for
bacterial eradication, highlighting the crucial role of composi-
tional regulation in optimizing the antibacterial performance
of MNCs.
Additionally, Yuan et al. demonstrated that Ag+-rich NCs,
dominated by Ag+ species, possess significantly higher antibac-
terial activities against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria compared to Ag0-rich NCs (i.e., dominated by Ag0
species), despite having identical size and surface chemistry.98
This underscores that regulating the chemical state of the core
metals is an eﬀective strategy in designing high-performance
MNC-based antibacterials.
In addition to metal core modulation, surface ligand engi-
neering of MNCs oﬀers a multi-dimensional regulatory frame-
work for optimizing their intrinsic antibacterial properties.
Firstly, surface modification of MNCs with positively charged
groups as well as other functional molecules, can significantly
enhance the specific interaction between MNCs and bacteria
for enhancing intrinsic antibacterial activity. For instance,
Wang et al. demonstrated that aminobenzeneboronic acid
(ABA)-modified Au NCs exhibited superior antibacterial activity
against various Gram-negative bacteria, unlike both ABA and
unmodified Au NCs, which showed no notable antibacterial
eﬀects.102 This exceptional antibacterial performance is attrib-
uted to ABA modification enabling Au NCs to disrupt bacterial
cell walls. Recently, our group modified Ag NCs by encapsulat-
ing them within the extract of Luria-Bertani medium (ELB) and
achieved an increase in antibacterial activity by approximately
four orders of magnitude compared to the unmodified ones,
against a broad spectrum of bacteria.100 The key reason is that
the Ag NCs@ELB could significantly enhance bacterial uptake,
leading to increased intracellular ROS generation following
digestion of sacrificial ELB species in bacteria (Fig. 4(b)).
Additionally, grafting functional molecules with inherent anti-
bacterial properties, such as antibiotics, antimicrobial peptides,
and natural phenolic compounds, onto MNC surfaces can
achieve synergistic antibacterial eﬀects between metal core and
organic ligands. For example, daptomycin-modified Ag NCs
exhibited greater intrinsic antibacterial activity than the physical
mixture of daptomycin (a common antibiotic) and Ag NCs
(Fig. 4(c)).101 This is because highly localized concentration of
daptomycin on the surface can eﬀectively disrupt bacterial cell
membranes, allowing Ag NCs to penetrate and generate ROS
within bacteria, causing more severe DNA damage.
Overall, MNC-based antibacterials with intrinsic antibacter-
ial patterns, are among the most diverse MNC-based antibac-
terials, attributed to their straightforward design. The vast array
of such antibacterials eﬀectively addresses antibacterial needs
across various fields.103 Currently, there remains significant
potential for research into enhancing intrinsic antibacterial
activity through MNC ligand engineering, as well as bestowing
MNCs with additional functions to broaden their antibacterial
applications. Moreover, employing ligand engineering to inte-
grate antibiotics with MNCs may rapidly facilitate the clinical
application of MNC-based antibacterials and serve as an eﬀec-
tive strategy to combat antibiotic resistance. These ‘‘inorganic–
organic’’ synergistic approaches may not only reduce the effec-
tive dose of individual components, thereby minimizing toxi-
city, but also delay resistance evolution through multi-target
action. However, such MNCs with intrinsic antibacterial pat-
terns also confront the issue of short antibacterial duration,
prompting researchers to develop other types of MNC-based
antibacterials (e.g., photodynamic/sonodynamic antibacterials)
to fulfill long-term antibacterial needs.
3.2
Photodynamic antibacterial patterns
MNC-based photodynamic antibacterials represent a sustain-
able and enduring antibacterial strategy, without relying on the
self-consumption of MNCs, thus garnering significant interest
across industries requiring long-lasting antibacterial solutions.
The underlying principle of photodynamic antibacterial action
involves the photosensitizer—MNCs in this context—absorbing
light energy of specific wavelengths upon illumination.60,104,105
This absorption elevates the photosensitizer to an excited state,
Fig. 4
(a) Schematic diagram of the transition of the antibacterial perfor-
mance of AuAg NCs as its composition changes. Reproduced with
permission from ref. 66, Copyright 2023 American Chemical Society. (b)
The antibacterial eﬀect of Ag NCs@ELB against four kinds of microbes.
Reproduced with permission from ref. 100, Copyright 2023 Tsinghua
University Press. (c) Schematic illustration of the antibacterial mechanism
for the chemically integrated D–Ag NCs and the physically mixed dapto-
mycin and Ag NCs (D + Ag NCs). Reproduced with permission from ref.
101, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7209
subsequently inducing the generation of ROS via energy or
electron transfer processes (Fig. 3(b)). These ROS inflict
damage on bacterial membranes, proteins, and DNA, culminat-
ing in bacterial death. The fundamental mechanisms of MNC’s
photodynamic antibacterial actions are bifurcated into two
categories: type I reaction entails direct electron transfer from
the excited MNCs to adjacent molecules like H2O or O2, yielding
ROS such as superoxide anion (O2), hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (OH). Conversely, Type II reaction
involves the excited MNCs conveying its energy to ground state
oxygen (3O2), producing highly cytotoxic singlet oxygen (1O2)
that annihilates bacteria through oxidative assault (Fig. 3(b)).
Ultrasmall MNCs can be meticulously engineered to function
as independent photodynamic antibacterials, typically necessi-
tating strong PL and an extended PL lifetime. In this context,
we have successfully synthesized Cu(0)@Cu(I)-GSH NCs with
aggregation-induced emission (AIE) at elevated temperatures
(80 1C).71 Benefiting from the robust PL and extended PL lifetime
on the microsecond scale, the designed Cu(0)@Cu(I)-GSH NCs
exhibited remarkable eﬃcacy in photodynamic broad-spectrum
antibacterial applications and the elimination of drug-resistant
bacterial infections. Moreover, AIE-featured Au NCs could be
synthesized using the same approach, showcasing outstanding
photodynamic broad-spectrum antibacterial eﬃcacy and deo-
dorizing capabilities in diverse applications.59 In addition, the
photodynamic antibacterial activity of MNCs could be enhanced
based on surface engineering. For example, by functionalizing
the surface of Au22 NCs with Arg, we developed a photodynamic
antibacterial agent featuring AIE properties.81 This novel design
demonstrates markedly enhanced photodynamic antibacterial
activity compared to unmodified Au22 NCs. The incorporation of
Arg not only amplifies the NCs’ visible light absorption, boosts
PL intensity, and extends PL lifetime, but also alters the photo-
dynamic production pattern of ROS while producing cytotoxic
reactive nitrogen species (RNS; Fig. 5(a)). The Arg-Au22 NCs
synergistically integrate ROS/RNS-mediated photodynamic anti-
bacterial patterns, delivering exceptional eﬃcacy against both
broad-spectrum bacteria.
Beyond the design of isolated MNCs as photodynamic anti-
bacterials, MNCs can be assembled with themselves or other
photosensitizers to further enhance their photodynamic anti-
bacterial eﬃcacy. For instance, Cys-protected Cu NCs can be
assembled through the robust electrostatic attraction between
the protonated amino group of chitosan (CS) and the deproto-
nated carboxyl group of Cys, forming a highly assembly with
AIE (Fig. 5(b)).94 This assembly demonstrates strong PL (5.1%
quantum yield), a large Stokes shift, and a microsecond PL
lifetime, enabling it to generate substantial quantities of ROS
under light, thus eﬀectively eradicating a variety of microbial
pathogens.
One
recent
study
demonstrated
that
MNCs
assembled with other photosensitizers like carbon dots using
the EDC/NHS cross-linking strategy, could preserve the benefits
of MNCs while addressing their limitations (e.g., insuﬃcient
visible light utilization and low carrier separation eﬃciency).106
These assemblies can exhibit a synergistic eﬀect of charge and
energy transfer, simultaneously demonstrating both type I and
type II photodynamic generation of ROS. These studies shed
light on the design of broad-spectrum and durable MNC-based
photodynamic antibacterials for various applications.
In addition to their green and durable antibacterial proper-
ties, photodynamic antibacterials present another significant
advantage in that Type I reaction mechanisms remain eﬀective
for ROS generation under hypoxic conditions through H2O/O2
electron transfer. However, the clinical implementation of
photodynamic therapy faces inherent limitations due to its
dependence on visible to near-infrared light irradiation, which
exhibits restricted tissue penetration depth (typically o1 cm).
This fundamental constraint may impede its application sce-
narios, particularly in vivo antibacterial treatments requiring
deep-seated tissue targeting.
3.3
Sonodynamic antibacterial patterns
Similar to photodynamic antibacterials, sonodynamic antibacterial
approaches also represent a green and sustainable bactericidal
strategy.107 However, unlike photodynamic antibacterial techni-
ques, sonodynamic antibacterial methods employ ultrasound,
which allows penetration into deeper tissues (45 cm), thus
oﬀering significant advantages in treating infections in vivo. Fun-
damentally, sonodynamic antibacterial techniques utilize the
mechanical energy and cavitation eﬀects of ultrasound to activate
MNCs as acoustic sensitizing agents, stimulating them to ROS
(Fig. 3(b)). The collapse of ultrasonic cavitation bubbles generates
localized high temperatures and pressures, enhancing the electro-
nic excitation of the acoustic sensitizer. Consequently, ROS is
Fig. 5
(a) Arg-modified Au22 NC-based photodynamic antibacterial for
promoted healing of bacteria-infected wounds via producing ROS and
RNS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2024 Royal
Society of Chemistry. (b) CS-induced assembly of Cu NCs and their
photodynamic antibacterial properties against MRSA. Reproduced with
permission from ref. 94, Copyright 2024 Elsevier Ltd.
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7210 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
produced through photodynamic-like mechanisms (type I/type II
reactions), leading to the destruction of bacterial structures.
The development of MNC-based sonodynamic antibacterials
is in its infancy, with only several such antibacterials reported.
For example, Hong et al. devised a Au NC-based sonodynamic
antibacterial
by
coating
Au
NCs
with
Arg
and
6-azido-2-
thiothymidine (ATT).108 This strategy significantly enhanced the
uptake of Au NCs by bacteria under ultrasound, leading to sub-
stantial accumulation of ROS within the bacteria (Fig. 6(a)). This
triggered a bacterial oxidative stress response, disrupted genetic
information transmission, energy metabolism, and protein synth-
esis, thereby eﬀectively reducing bacterial numbers in the infected
area and promoting rapid wound healing. This study enhanced the
acknowledgment of MNCs as powerful acoustic sensitizers and
provided useful insights for creating ultrasound sensitizers with
elevated ROS output to promote in vivo antibacterial applications.
Overall, diﬀerent from photodynamic antibacterials which are
advantageous in providing enduring antibacterial eﬀects in out-
door settings under free sunlight, sonodynamic antibacterials
depend on ultrasound energy, making them more suitable for
in vivo antibacterial applications. Consequently, future research
eﬀorts may prioritize the development of MNC-based sonody-
namic antimicrobials for various in vivo sonodynamic therapy.
3.4
Electrocatalytic antibacterial patterns
The electrocatalytic antibacterial activity of MNCs primarily
mediates ROS generation and bacterial inactivation through
interfacial electron transfer via electrocatalysis. The quantum
confinement eﬀect induced by their ultrasmall size (o3 nm)
enhances charge transfer eﬃciency via discrete electron energy
level structures. Under an applied electric field, MNCs catalyze the
formation of ROS, which disrupts cellular membrane integrity
and induce bacterial death (Fig. 3(c)). Current studies on MNC-
based electrocatalytic sterilization remain in the nascent stage.
Our group has recently designed an electrochemical water disin-
fection system employing atomic precision Ag28 NCs embedded in
ZIF-67 as the electrode material.44 This technology enables eﬃ-
cient, continuous, and residue-free water treatment through three
key design advantages: (1) providing abundant bacterial electro-
adsorption sites for targeted microbial enrichment; (2) enabling
in situ generation of locally concentrated ROS that synergizes
with the intrinsic antibacterial property of Ag28 NCs for dual-
mechanism bacterial inactivation; and (3) leveraging a cyclic
process involving bacterial adsorption, inactivation, and dead
cell desorption to ensure continuous operation (Fig. 6(b)).
Experimental results demonstrate a 499.99% antibacterial rate
against Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria, and fungi.
This advancement not only enhances the eﬃcacy and reliability of
drinking water disinfection but also establishes a novel paradigm
for addressing global water safety challenges.
Future research should aim to achieve precise control over
the correlation between atomic-level structure and electrocata-
lytic antibacterial properties in MNCs, while also advancing
operando characterization methodologies (e.g., in situ XAFS,
electrochemical Raman) to elucidate transient catalytic inter-
mediates
during
dynamic
reactions.
Additionally,
eﬀorts
should focus on mitigating the degradation of electrocatalytic
antibacterial
activity
of
MNCs
under
specific
conditions
through adaptive surface engineering strategies. Employing
machine learning is anticipated to guide the rational design
of multifunctional MNC-based electrocatalytic antibacterial
platforms via high-throughput computational screening of
ligand–metal coordination configurations and predictive mod-
eling of biological interaction dynamics.
3.5
Enzyme-mimetic antibacterial patterns
MNCs demonstrate enzyme-like catalytic activity that allows for
targeted bacterial inactivation through two synergistic pathways.
The first pathway involves peroxidase/oxidase-mimetic ROS gen-
eration (Fig. 3(d)). As is well known, MNCs function as artificial
nanozymes, catalyzing the conversion of endogenous substrates
(H2O2/O2) into OH and O2 through electron transfer cascades.
For example, Shan et al. discovered that Au15 NCs protected with
N-acetyl-L-cysteine ligands (NAC) exhibit 4.3 and 2.7 times greater
peroxidase activity than those Au15 NCs protected by 3-mer-
captopropionic acid (MPA) and 3-mercapto-2-methylpropanoic
acid (MMPA), respectively (Fig. 7(a)).109 The enhanced activity of
Au15(NAC)13 is attributed to the emptier Au atom orbitals resulting
from the electron-withdrawing acetyl amino group in NAC.
Recently, Wu et al. demonstrated that Pt NCs/C3N4 exhibits robust
O2 adsorption and activation capabilities through mutual electron
transfer, displaying both oxidase-like and peroxidase-like activities
while generating ROS in the dark.110 The Pt NCs/C3N4 eﬀectively
eliminated biofilms of S. aureus and E. coli.
The second pathway utilizes the self-cascade catalysis of
MNCs to produce ROS for bactericidal purposes (Fig. 3(d)).
Fig. 6
(a) Schematic diagram of sonodynamic antibacterial therapy using
Arg-ATT-Au NCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108, Copyright
2024 American Chemical Society. (b) Electrocatalytic antibacterial mecha-
nism of Ag28 NCs embedded in ZIF-67. Reproduced with permission from
ref. 44, Copyright 2024 Nature Publishing Group.
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7211
For example, Wang et al. engineered a bimetallic Au/Pt NCs
enzyme by integrating Pt atoms into the structure of Au NCs,
thereby augmenting the peroxidase (POD)-like activity with
high catalytic eﬃciency against H2O2 due to the synergistic
interaction between Au and Pt atoms.111 Subsequently, by
conjugating glucose oxidase (GOX) with Au/Pt NCs, they devel-
oped an MNCs enzyme with self-enhancing antibacterial prop-
erties and excellent biocompatibility. The transformation of
non-toxic glucose into highly toxic OH through a cascade
catalytic reaction inhibits and eradicates F. nucleatum-induced
biofilm in vitro, providing an eﬀective treatment for period-
ontitis in rats (Fig. 7(b)).
Currently, MNCs with diverse enzymatic activities are under
development, and their enzymatic modulation mechanisms are
being explored. It is anticipated that future advancements will
yield a greater variety of MNC-based enzymes, leveraging their
rich enzymatic properties for highly eﬃcient antibacterial appli-
cations. For instance, future MNCs may exploit their enzymatic
activities to disrupt the functions of specific metalloenzymes
(e.g., NADH dehydrogenases, catalases) within bacteria, thereby
impairing redox homeostasis or disrupting energy production,
ultimately leading to bacterial eradication.
4. The design of MNC-based
antibacterials
The design strategies of MNC-based antibacterials mainly focus
on four aspects (Fig. 8): (1) metal core regulation of MNCs;
(2) surface ligand engineering of MNCs; (3) assembly of MNCs;
(4) incorporation of MNCs with other materials. These strategies
are implemented based on diﬀerent antibacterial patterns of
MNC-based antibacterials, but the ultimate goal is to improve
antibacterial performance. In this section, we will discuss each
of these four strategies.
4.1
Metal core regulation
Regulating the metal core of MNCs in terms of composition,
size, valence state, and electronic structure is a commonly used
strategy to manage their antibacterial activity.113 Among these
factors, the majority of research focuses on modulating the
metal core composition to optimize antibacterial properties. It
is widely recognized that many physicochemical properties of
atomic-precision MNCs could be dictated by their metal core,
where even the substitution of a single metal atom can result in
profound changes in these properties. This unique sensitivity
underscores the potential of metal core regulation to enhance
antibacterial functionality from various perspectives.
For instance, simply replacing the metal core from Au to Ag or
Cu could usually markedly amplify the intrinsic antibacterial
activity, as Ag and Cu inherently possess superior antibacterial
properties compared to Au. However, recent findings by the Xie
group indicated that alloy MNCs often exhibit greater stability,114
which may sometimes come at the expense of reduced intrinsic
antibacterial activity compared to mono-metal MNCs. Therefore,
the careful selection and design of metal components are crucial
when developing MNC-based antibacterials that operate through
intrinsic antibacterial mechanisms. Additionally, the composition
Fig. 7
(a) Peroxidase mimic catalytic activity of Au15(NAC)13, Au15(MMPA)13,
and Au15(MPA)13. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110, Copyright 2023
American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of Au/Pt NCs@GOX
synthesis and treatment of F. nucleatum induced periodontitis. Reproduced
with permission from ref. 111, Copyright 2023 Elsevier Ltd.
Fig. 8
Schematic illustration on the design of MNC-based antibacterials
based on (a) metal core regulation, (b) ligand engineering, (c) MNC
assembly, reproduced with permission from ref. 112, Copyright 2022
Nature Publishing Group, and (d) incorporation with other materials.
Reproduced with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 2024 Nature Publish-
ing Group.
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7212 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
modulation of MNCs can augment their PL and stability through
synergistic eﬀects, such as constructing AuAg alloy NCs.115 This
enhancement improves the light-driven generation eﬃciency of
ROS, thereby boosting photodynamic antibacterial eﬃcacy. For
example, substituting the central Ag atom in Ag29 with a Au atom
yields Ag28Au1 NCs, which exhibit PL intensity several times
higher than those of Ag29 NCs.116 Correspondingly, their photo-
dynamic antibacterial performance is significantly improved
(Fig. 9(a)).
Moreover, the composition modulation of MNCs by con-
structing bimetallic MNCs often enhances electrocatalytic or
enzymatic activity, facilitating the production of antibacterial
active substances such as ROS and RNS. This approach enables
precise regulation of the proportions of these ROS/RNS by
elevating the proportion of more active substances, further
amplifying antibacterial eﬃcacy. This method also allows for
precise control over the proportions of ROS or RNS by increas-
ing the concentration of more reactive species (e.g.,
OH
possesses higher oxidative capability than H2O2),118 thereby
enhancing antibacterial eﬀectiveness.
In addition to the core metal composition regulation of
MNCs, the regulation of the core metal valence of MNCs (e.g.
the Ag0/Ag+ ratio) can also be used to regulate their antibacter-
ial activity. This enables the dual antibacterial mechanism of
contact killing and release of active species simultaneously,
thereby overcoming the limitations of traditional antibiotics in
combating drug resistance.98 In addition, reducing the core
size of MNCs could expose more highly active sites and
enhance interactions with bacterial membranes/biomolecules,
which also increases antibacterial activity, reduces dosage, and
reduces the impact on animals and the environment.
4.2
Surface ligand engineering of MNCs
The antibacterial performance of MNC-based antibacterials is
largely correlated with the surface interface formed with
bacteria.119,120 Therefore, precisely modifying the surface of
MNCs through ligand engineering can eﬀectively regulate their
antibacterial activity, selectivity and biocompatibility. Specifically,
ligand engineering mainly from the following dimensions.
Firstly, optimized ligand can be chosen for the design of
MNC-based antibacterials. By introducing diﬀerent charged
ligands or biomolecules (e.g., GSH, polypeptides) to regulate
the charge distribution on the surface of MNCs, the antibacter-
ial activity of MNC-based antibacterials can generally be
improved by regulating the production of ROS or enhancing
their electrostatic adsorption with bacterial membranes (e.g.,
the negatively charged cell membrane of Gram-negative bac-
teria). For example, Zheng et al. synthesized five diﬀerent types
and ratios of surface ligand-protected Au25 NCs.117 The results
showed that the surface charge of Au25 NCs aﬀects its ability to
generate ROS, and the more negative surface charge, the better
the ROS generated can be preserved, resulting in a higher
overall ROS level (Fig. 9(b)). Therefore, too much ROS will
interfere with the metabolic enzymes of the bacteria, disturb
the normal metabolism of the bacteria, and eventually lead to
the death of the bacteria. This finding is diﬀerent from the
usual belief that positively charged antibacterials perform
better bactericidal eﬀects, showing the diﬀerent roles of nano-
material surface ligands in exerting antibacterial properties,
and providing new insights for the design of MNC-based
antibacterials based on surface functionalization.
The ligand engineering of MNCs is also reflected in the
grafting of functional molecules or groups on their surface to
enhance their antibacterial properties via modulating the anti-
bacterial patterns. For example, Arg with more amino groups is
introduced on the surface of Au NCs, which not only improves
the interaction with bacteria carrying negatively charges, but
also endows the Au NCs with enhanced photodynamic or
sonodynamic
antibacterial
performance.81,108
In
addition,
researchers also grafted antibiotics or antibacterial molecules
to achieve enhanced antibacterial performance via synergistic
eﬀects.85,101,121,122 This ligand engineering strategy successfully
Fig. 9
(a) Design of MNC-based antibacterials based on metal core regulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, Copyright 2024 Royal Society
of Chemistry. (b) Developing MNC-based antibacterials via ligand engineering strategies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117, Copyright 2018
American Chemical Society.
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7213
overcomes the problem of resistance to traditional antibiotics,
opens up a new path for the development of eﬃcient and low-
toxicity smart antibacterial agents, and shows great application
potential in anti-infection treatment, medical device coating
and other fields.
In essence, the ligand engineering of MNCs oﬀers a wider scope
for the development of MNC-based antibacterials than does the
modification of their metal core. Consequently, it behooves the
scientific community to invest greater eﬀorts into this domain. For
instance, the strategic attachment of ligands like mannose to the
MNCs’ surface can facilitate targeted recognition of bacterial recep-
tors, concurrently minimizing harm to the host’s cells. Additionally,
the surface of MNCs can be readily adorned with multifunctional
molecules, endowing them with ancillary properties such as anti-
inflammatory eﬀects, hair follicle stimulation, and drug delivery
capabilities during the antibacterial treatment process.
4.3
Assembly of MNCs
The assembly of MNCs aﬀords a multidimensional design
space for regulating antibacterial activity, with its essence lying
in the optimization of the MNCs’ physicochemical properties
(e.g., PL) and biological interface behaviors,123 thereby enhan-
cing bactericidal eﬃcacy. The following discussion elaborates
on the impact of the assembly strategy from two perspectives,
supplemented with illustrative examples.
Initially, specific functional molecules can serve as linkers
for the covalent assembly of MNCs, facilitating the eﬃcient
production of ROS. For instance, our group employed a cobalt
tetraphenyl porphyrin (Co-TCPP) to chemically graft highly
luminescent GSH-protected Au NCs via a conventional EDC/
NHS cross-linking strategy, resulting in the fabrication of Au
NC assemblies (Fig. 10(a)).124 These assemblies demonstrated
enhanced visible light harvesting capabilities, superior electron
carrier separation/migration eﬃciency, and an abundance of
active sites (Co atoms) for oxygen reduction, exhibiting excep-
tional photocatalytic performance in H2O2 production (up to
235.93 mM), surpassing the majority of previously reported
MNC-based and semiconductor photocatalysts. This work pro-
vides insights for designing other MNC assemblies to address
various antibacterial challenges across diﬀerent application
domains.
MNC assembly can be harnessed to integrate with additional
antibacterial agents, such as CS,125 via electrostatic forces,
thereby amplifying the photodynamic antibacterial attributes
of MNCs and synergizing with the intrinsic antibacterial traits
of the antibacterial agents. Our group initially leveraged the
potent electrostatic engagement between the positively charged
amino groups in CS molecules and the negatively charged
carboxyl groups in Cys to promote the assembly of AIE-
featured Cu NCs.94 By manipulating the pH level of the reac-
tion, temperature, and the quantity of CS, the degree of
assembly could be meticulously controlled, thus modulating
the PL intensity of the assembly. This assembly exhibits robust
PL, large Stokes shift, and an elongated PL decay time, facil-
itating the production of a multitude of ROS upon illumination.
Furthermore, the inherent antibacterial properties of CS and
Cu augment the photodynamic antibacterial eﬀectiveness of
the Cu NC assembly. In addition, we employed polymeric
matrices such as polyethylene glycol (PEG) and polyvinyl alco-
hol (PVA) to spatially encapsulate the water-soluble Cu(I)-MBA
complex, successfully fabricating highly stable AIE-featured
Cu(I)-MBA assembly, eﬀectuating a quantum enhancement in
PL performance from negligible to pronounced, and signifi-
cantly intensifying the broad-spectrum photodynamic antibac-
terial impact.126
In short, the assembly of MNCs could augment their anti-
bacterial performance by increasing the highly localized
concentration of antibacterial species and integrating other
Fig. 10
(a) Au NC assembly for promoted H2O2 production. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2022 Royal Society of Chemistry.
(b) In situ formation of Ag NCs inside BC hydrogel (Ag NC@BC) with excellent broad-spectrum antibacterial activities. Reproduced with permission from
ref. 69, Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7214 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
advanced characteristics such as multimodal synergy through
structure-function correlation design, providing a new para-
digm for addressing the challenges posed by drug-resistant
bacteria. Future research should further elucidate the dynamic
evolution of assembly interfaces and the relationship between
antibacterial structure and eﬃcacy, facilitating clinical transla-
tion and application.
4.4
Incorporation of MNCs with other materials
Due to the diverse applications of antibacterial scenarios, MNCs
sometimes fail to meet the specific antibacterial requirements of
certain contexts. This necessitates the integration of MNCs with
other materials, endowing the MNC-based antibacterials with a
rich array of functions, including but not limited to antibacterial
properties, to cater to a variety of antibacterial application needs.
In terms of the integration of MNCs with other materials, there
are primarily two strategies: one involves the in situ synthesis of
MNCs within the substrate materials or vice versa, while the
other strategy entails the physical or chemical bonding of pre-
formed MNCs with the substrate. We will discuss these two
strategies respectively, via illustrative examples.
The in situ synthesis of MNCs within the substrate materials
or vice versa, aﬀords a straightforward yet highly eﬃcient
methodology. This process preserves the intrinsic physico-
chemical characteristics of the pre-existing materials, thereby
enhancing their utility in antibacterial contexts across diverse
applications. For instance, Liu and colleagues documented the
creation of an antibacterial hydrogel impregnated with Ag NCs
(Ag NC@BC), achieved through the in situ formation of Ag NCs
on the nanofibrous network of a bacterial-cellulose (BC) hydro-
gel (Fig. 10(b)).69 The resultant Ag NC@BC composite, which
maintains the fibrous morphology of BC, demonstrates a
sustained release of Ag NCs over an extended period, thereby
conferring
enhanced
and
enduring
antibacterial
eﬃcacy
against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, in
contrast to standalone Ag NCs. Moreover, the Ag NC@BC
combination, benefiting from the low or negligible toxicity of
both Ag NCs and the natural BC hydrogel, exhibits exceptional
biocompatibility. Many other antibacterial composites have
been prepared according to this strategy.93
The second approach, involving the physical or chemical
attachment of pre-formed MNCs to substrates, is particularly
appealing for the scalable production of antibacterial compo-
sites due to its simplicity and wide-ranging applicability. Zhu
and colleagues developed an eﬃcacious photocatalyst by
anchoring Pt NCs onto the surface of a pre-formed C3N4–
MXene composite semiconductor.80 Harnessing the synergistic
attributes of the Pt cores, which act as photoinduced electron
acceptors and catalytically active sites, the C3N4 layer as a
generator of photoinduced electrons, and the MXene (Ti3C2)
as an augmented visible-light absorbent, the resultant Pt NC-
based photocatalyst exhibited a marked proficiency in the
production of H2O2. Furthermore, the minuscule dimensions
and engineerable surface chemistry facilitated their seamless
integration into downstream antibacterial and deodorizing
applications.
Currently, over half of the downstream antibacterial applica-
tions of MNC-based antibacterials rely on the integration of
MNCs with other materials, which is a pivotal strategy for the
large-scale implementation of antibacterial properties. In this
regard, collaborative eﬀorts across multiple disciplines are
essential to devise additional composite strategies, thereby
producing a wider array of MNC-based antibacterials tailored
to diverse antibacterial application scenarios.
5. The applications of MNC-based
antibacterials
Currently, owing to the advancements in MNCs synthesis
techniques, diverse antibacterial modalities, and unique phy-
sicochemical properties, MNC-based antibacterials are exten-
sively applied in various antibacterial deployments, including
but not limited to, in vivo antibacterial treatments (such as
accelerating bacterial-infected wound healing, and treating
bacterial infection-caused diseases), antibacterial household
materials, antibacterial packaging materials, and water disin-
fection. In this section, we will review the antibacterial applica-
tions of MNC-based antibacterials, focusing primarily on their
usage in in vivo antibacterial treatments, antibacterial applica-
tions in household materials, and water disinfection.
5.1
In vivo antibacterial applications
Within the context of in vivo antibacterial protocols, MNC-based
antibacterials are primarily employed for promoting wound
healing in bacterial infections, and treating diseases caused by
bacterial infections, such as keratitis, peritonitis, and period-
ontitis. An elucidation of these dual therapeutic applications of
antibacterial deployment will be provided subsequently.
5.1.1
Promoting bacteria-infected wound healing. Cur-
rently, MNC-based antibacterials are primarily integrated into
gels, dressings or micro needle patches to facilitate wound
healing from bacterial infections, achieving broad-spectrum
antibacterial eﬀects while also providing anti-inflammatory
and promoting follicle regeneration. For example, our group
developed an antibacterial Ag NC-based hydrogel for wound
healing by integrating Ag NCs and mangiferin (MF) molecules
in a CS hydrogel matrix (Fig. 11(a)).93 This hydrogel promotes
wound repair through dual mechanisms: (1) antioxidant-coated
Ag NCs provide broad-spectrum antibacterial activity and cyto-
protection; (2) MF molecules stimulate capillary, hair follicle,
and tissue regeneration. Controlled release of Ag species
ensures sustained antibacterial action via surface Ag enrich-
ment and electrostatic bacterial trapping, enabling low-dose
eﬃcacy. In vivo tests confirmed its ability to eradicate infections
and prevent tissue necrosis in skin wounds. These synergistic
features—antibacterial potency, controlled Ag species release,
and regenerative stimulation—collectively enable rapid wound
closure with minimized complications. Thus far, a myriad of
MNC-loaded antibacterial hydrogels have been specialized
dressings and microneedle patches (Fig. 11(b)), have been
crafted
to
cater
to
the
treatment
of
bacterial-infected
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7215
wounds.65 These flourishing advancements also highlight the
superiority of MNC-based antibacterials in promoting bacteria
infected-wound healing, and there is an anticipation for their
swift clinical application.
5.1.2
Treating diseases caused by bacterial infections. Bac-
terial infections are responsible for a myriad of maladies, and
MNC-based antibacterials have proven eﬀective in surmounting
the resistance to conventional antibiotics, addressing various
negative issues, and exhibiting remarkable prowess in the
therapeutic management of bacterial infections. For instance,
the Jiang group has documented the development of Au23 NCs
with potent antibacterial properties for the treatment of MRSA-
induced keratitis (Fig. 12(a)).127 This innovative antibacterial
agent achieves its eﬃcacy by adjusting the ratio of a ‘‘bulky’’
thiolic compound to a linear zwitterionic linker, which induces
a structural transformation of the Au NCs from Au25 to Au23
configurations, thereby converting latent thiolic groups into
potent antibacterial agents. Notably, the hybrid-ligand stabi-
lized Au23 NCs demonstrate exceptional prowess against MRSA,
with a minimum inhibitory concentration exceeding 1024-fold
lower than that of the unbound ligands. Additionally, it man-
ifests remarkable therapeutic potential in the treatment of
MRSA-induced keratitis in mice, significantly expediting cor-
neal healing by nearly an order of magnitude.
Recently, our group showcased the remarkable therapeutic
eﬃcacy of water-soluble Cu30 NCs in the treatment of primary
peritonitis stemming from E. coli infection.64 Notably, this
intervention precipitated a dramatic decline in drug-resistant
bacterial counts within the peritoneal cavity of aﬀected mice by
over five logarithmic orders, concurrent with the restoration of
normal histological characteristics in both the peritoneum and
spleen. In addition, Zhang et al. leveraged Au NCs with intrinsic
enzymatic activity for the treatment of periodontitis caused by
F. nucleatum colonization (Fig. 12(b)).128 They found that Au
NCs exhibited remarkable proficiency in obstructing biofilm
formation and accelerating the degradation of established
biofilms, attributed to their superior permeability. Moreover, the
eﬃcacy of Au NCs in mitigating periodontal inflammation and
tissue damage, through the reduction of dental plaque accumula-
tion, has been validated in a mice model of periodontitis.
Additionally, localized periodontal administration of Au NCs has
been shown to partially rejuvenate the oral and intestinal micro-
biota equilibrium perturbed by F. nucleatum colonization.
5.2
Antibacterial applications in household materials
In addition to in vivo antibacterial applications, MNC-based
antibacterials have found a significant application in the anti-
bacterial requirements of domestic materials. With the increas-
ing emphasis on fostering a healthy living environment, MNC-
based antibacterials, are emerging as a cornerstone in the
development of the next generation of antibacterial materials.
By integrating MNCs into base materials, these innovations
endow conventional household items with enduring, wide-
ranging antibacterial capabilities.
The principal benefit of MNCs lies in their adaptability for
deployment across diverse downstream applications, owing to
their minute dimensions and engineerable surface chemistry.
Our group elected to utilize AIE-featured Au NCs as photody-
namic antibacterial agents, amalgamating them with a variety
of domestic materials including latex, predominantly featured
in rubber products such as gloves; ceramic glaze, an integral
element of ceramic wares; organic fibers, which serve as the
foundational substance in textiles; and fabric.59 As depicted in
Fig. 13(a), the integration of AIE-featured Au NCs, at a concen-
tration ranging from 2 to 4%, into these matrices markedly
endows them with potent antibacterial capabilities under visi-
ble light exposure. This innovation can eﬀectively eradicate
over 99% of E. coli bacteria. Recently, Ge et al. incorporated
a polymer matrix with hydrophobic Ag NCs, resulting in
the formation of polymer nanowires, which can serve as anti-
bacterial materials in the field of mask production with eﬃ-
cient antibacterial properties against S. aureus and E. coli
(Fig. 13(b)).129
Fig. 11
(a) Schematic illustration on the synthesis of Ag NCs@CH-MF
hydrogel for the healing of bacteria-infected wound. Reproduced with
permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2021 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Au NCs (A-GNCs)
encapsulated fluorescent microneedles array promoting the healing of the
infected skin wounds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65, Copyright
2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.
Fig. 12
(a) Au NCs demonstrated exceptional therapeutic eﬃcacy for
keratitis in terms of both MRSA clearance and the promotion of corneal
recovery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, Copyright 2023 Wiley
Ltd-VCH. (b) Ultrasmall Au NCs exhibited potent antibacterial activity
against F. nucleatum for curing periodontitis. Reproduced with permission
from ref. 128, Copyright 2022 Elsevier Ltd.
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7216 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Currently, a myriad of household materials have been
endowed with antibacterial characteristics through the utilization
of MNC-based antibacterials. This technological framework not
only addresses the issues of traditional antibacterial agents, such
as easy loss and the development of resistance, but also retains
the original mechanical properties and aesthetic texture of the
substrates due to its nanoscale dispersion characteristics. With
the advancement of green synthesis techniques, the adoption of a
new process using plant extracts to prepare biocompatible MNCs
will further promote the proliferation of safe and environmentally
friendly antibacterial household products.
5.3
Water disinfection
MNC-based antibacterials have recently been employed for elec-
trocatalytic antibacterial disinfection of water, catering to the
urgent demand for residue-free and highly eﬃcient drinking
water disinfection techniques. As a representative advancement,
our group has developed an innovative electrochemical water
disinfection system utilizing Ag28 NCs as functional electrode
materials (Fig. 14).44 The implementation of Ag28 NCs establishes
a synergistic antibacterial mechanism through dual pathways: (1)
providing abundant electroadsorption sites for targeted microbial
enrichment and (2) enabling eﬃcient microbial inactivation via
in situ electrocatalytic generation of residue-free ROS coupled with
the intrinsic bactericidal properties of Ag NCs. Remarkably, this
configuration
achieves
a
self-renewing
‘‘bacteria
capture-
inactivation-release’’ cycle, overcoming electrode fouling chal-
lenges while maintaining continuous disinfection capacity. The
system demonstrates exceptional performance metrics including:
(1) broad-spectrum eﬃcacy (99.99% inactivation rate against
diverse pathogens), (2) operational stability (o0.75% eﬃciency
loss over 40 cycles), (3) sustained activity (99.90% maintenance
after 5-hour continuous operation), (4) material versatility (adap-
table to various NCs architectures), and (5) practical scalability
(213.33 L h1 throughput with low energy consumption). This
breakthrough not only provides new insights into interfacial
engineering of MNC-based electrocatalysts but also establishes a
prototype for next-generation intelligent water treatment systems
capable of meeting diverse real-world application demands.
Although MNC-based antibacterials have demonstrated
immense potential in the field of water disinfection, further
research endeavors are urgently required, particularly in the
large-scale preparation of MNC-based electrode materials and
the long-term stability of water disinfection techniques. More-
over, the application of Cu NC-based antibacterials for water
disinfection is highly anticipated.
6. Conclusion and outlook
MNCs have emerged as a revolutionary class of antibacterials,
oﬀering
unparalleled
advantages
in
combating
multidrug-
resistant bacterial infections and addressing diverse antimicrobial
challenges. Their ultrasmall size (o3 nm), atomic precision, and
tunable core–shell architecture enable multifunctional antibacter-
ial mechanisms, including intrinsic bactericidal activity, photo-
dynamic/sonodynamic effects, electrocatalytic ROS generation,
and enzyme-mimetic catalytic actions. By leveraging ligand engi-
neering, metal core modulation, and composite material integra-
tion,
MNC-based
antibacterials
achieve
exceptional
broad-
spectrum activity, biocompatibility, and environmental friendli-
ness while maintaining scalability for industrial applications.
Notably, MNCs have demonstrated transformative potential
across critical domains: (1) in vivo antibacterial therapy. Many
studies have demonstrated that MNC-based antibacterials have
been widely utilized for accelerating bacteria-infected wound
healings, treating diseases caused by bacteria infections such
as keratitis, peritonitis, and periodontitis through synergistic
Fig. 13
(a) MNCs mixed with diﬀerent materials (latex, ceramic glaze, and
fiber) achieving excellent antibacterial performance. Reproduced with
permission from ref. 59, Copyright 2022 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Dodecylamine-
capped Ag NCs as an antibacterial agent for bacterial inhibition of face
masks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 129, Copyright 2023 Amer-
ican Chemical Society.
Fig. 14
Schematic illustration of the working principle and the application
of
capacitive-charging
induced
electrochemical
water
disinfection
(CEWD) system for bacterial killing. Reproduced with permission from
ref. 44, Copyright 2024 Nature Publishing Group.
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7217
antibacterial and regenerative eﬀects; (2) antibacterial household
materials. A series of investigations have revealed that MNCs
incorporation with domestic materials could endow them (e.g.,
plastics, textiles, ceramics, and coatings) with durable antibacter-
ial properties; (3) water disinfection. The deployment of MNCs as
electrocatalytic antibacterial electrode materials could enable
residue-free, continuous water disinfection via in situ electrocata-
lytic generation of residue-free ROS coupled with the intrinsic
bactericidal properties of MNCs. In this Feature Article, essential
information regarding the metal core, ligands, antibacterial pat-
terns, and specific applications of representative MNC-based
antibacterials is summarized in Table 2, oﬀering a more intuitive
overview of the field. These advancements underscore MNCs’
versatility in bridging the gap between fundamental research
and real-world antibacterial solutions.
Despite remarkable progress, several challenges and oppor-
tunities demand attention to propel MNC-based antibacterials
toward clinical and industrial maturity:
(1) Thorough safety assessment: in-depth and methodical in vivo
research is imperative to thoroughly evaluate the long-term compat-
ibility with living organisms, the distribution within the body, and
the interactions with various organs, especially for MNCs that have
the potential to remain in the body for extended periods or those
that may release significant amounts of metal species.
(2) Delving into resistance mechanisms: it is essential to
explore how bacteria adapt to the multifaceted actions of
MNCs, as understanding this process is vital for anticipating
and preventing the development of resistance, as well as for
improving the design and eﬀectiveness of these MNCs.
(3) Clarifying the underlying antibacterial mechanisms:
utilizing sophisticated analytical techniques such as in situ
spectroscopy and single-cell tracking will be instrumental in
deciphering the dynamic interactions between MNCs and
bacteria, as well as the transient stages of catalytic intermedi-
ates involved in the production of ROS/RNS.
(4) Advancing stability characteristics: it is crucial to
improve the resilience and operational consistency of MNCs
under challenging environmental conditions, such as high
salinity or exposure to ultraviolet radiation. This will enhance
their utility in diverse and demanding applications, including
seawater treatment and the coating of medical implants.
(5) Achieving cost-eﬀective and scalable production: research-
ers have focused on developing MNC-based antibacterials in labs,
but there is limited progress in their industrial applications. The
five essential criteria for eﬀective MNC-based antibacterials are
broad-spectrum activity, biocompatibility, environmental friendli-
ness, cost-eﬀectiveness, economic viability for production remains
underexplored. Future research should aim at large-scale, cost-
eﬀective production by selecting aﬀordable ligands and metals,
optimizing synthesis, and refining processes to connect laboratory
innovations with industrial applications. The development of
industrial-scale synthesis methods, such as continuous flow
Table 2
Antibacterial patterns and specific applications of representative MNC-based antibacterialsa
MNCs
Metal
core
Ligand
Support material
Antibacterial
patterns
Applications
Ref.
Ag NCs
Ag16
GSH
—
Intrinsic
Antibacterial fundamentals
47, 101 and 130
Agx
GSH-ELB
—
Intrinsic
Antibacterial fundamentals
131
Ag29
DHLA
Hydrogel
Intrinsic
Wound healing
69 and 132
Agx
GSH
Polymeric membrane
Intrinsic
Water purification
74
Agx
GSH
Hydrogel
Intrinsic
Wound healing
133
Ag28
GSH
ZIF-67
Electrocatalytic
Water disinfection
44
Au NCs
Au22
GSH-Arg
—
Photodynamic
Wound healing
81
Au23
4MMP + C5
—
Intrinsic
Keratitis treatment
134
Au25
MHA + other
thiolates
—/graphene oxide
Intrinsic
Antibacterial fundamentals
50, 117 and 135–137
Au25
MHA
Carbon nanotubes
Electrocatalytic
Water treatment
138
Aux
GSH
—
Photodynamic
Domestic antibacterial materials
59
Aux
GSH
TiO2 nanoparticles
Photodynamic
Antibacterial fundamentals
139
Aux
Cationic BSA
Bioactive glass
nanoparticles
Enzyme-mimetic
Wound healing
140 and 141
Aux
ATT-Arg
—
Sonodynamic
Wound healing
108
Aux
ABA
HA microneedle
Intrinsic
Wound healing
102 and 142
Cu NCs
Cux
MBA
PEG
Photodynamic
Antibacterial fundamentals
126
Cux
GSH
Carbomer gel
Photodynamic
Wound healing
71
Cu30
MBA
—
Intrinsic
Peritonitis therapy
143
Cux
Cys + CS
—
Photodynamic
Wound healing
94
Cux
Theanine peptide
—
Intrinsic
Wound healing
31
AuAg NCs
AuxAg25x
MHA
—
Intrinsic
Antibacterial fundamentals
66
DHLA
ZIF-8
Photodynamic
Wound healing
116
AuxAgy
GSH
Carbon dots
Photodynamic
Antibacterial fundamentals
144
a GSH – glutathione. ELB – extract of Luria-Bertani medium. DHLA – dihydrolipoic acid. Arg – arginine. 4MMP – 4-mercapto-4-methyl-2-pentanol.
C5 – a thiolated zwitterionic ligand. MHA – 6-mercaptohexanoic acid. BSA – bovine serum albumin. ATT – 6-azido-2-thiothymidine. ABA –
aminobenzeneboronic acid. MBA – mercaptobenzoic acid. Cys – cysteine. CS – chitosan. ZIF-67 – a Co-based metal–organic framework. HA –
hyaluronic acid. PEG – polyethylene glycol. ZIF-8 – a Zn-based metal–organic framework.
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7218 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
reactors, and the implementation of cost-eﬀective processing
techniques, like spray drying, are of paramount importance to
satisfy the global need for MNCs in the creation of composite
materials and water treatment solutions.
In addition, the absence of standardized protocols for evaluat-
ing antibacterial activity remains a critical barrier to translating
laboratory-developed MNCs into practical applications. Current
methodologies exhibit significant heterogeneity in bacterial
strains, culture conditions, and endpoint measurements, hinder-
ing cross-study comparability. To address this gap, we propose a
tiered validation framework tailored to application scenarios as a
forward-looking recommendation. Tier 1 involves rapid in vitro
screening under standardized conditions (e.g., ISO 20776-1) to
assess baseline antibacterial eﬃcacy against model pathogens
(E. coli, S. aureus), including determination of MICs and bacter-
icidal kinetics. Tier 2 focuses on scenario-specific validation, such
as biofilm eradication assays for medical coatings, environmental
stability tests (pH/temperature/salinity resistance) for water treat-
ment systems, and cytotoxicity/hemocompatibility evaluations for
biomedical devices. Standardizing such protocols would enhance
reproducibility, streamline the prioritization of promising MNCs,
and expedite their transition from laboratory research to real-
world antibacterial solutions.
Moreover, identifying high-potential real-world implementa-
tion scenarios is crucial for guiding future research and commer-
cialization
of
MNC-based
antibacterials.
Based
on
current
technological advancements and market demands, three applica-
tion areas stand out as most promising: (1) household applica-
tions (e.g., textiles, furniture, kitchenware, and air filters) require
cost-eﬀective, durable, and non-toxic MNCs to meet growing
consumer demand for self-sanitizing surfaces. For instance,
Cu NCs embedded in polymers have shown 499% bacterial
reduction in reusable masks; (2) medical device coatings (e.g.,
catheters, implants) demand MNCs with dual antibacterial and
biofilm-disrupting capabilities, where MNCs exhibit prolonged
stability and biocompatibility in antibacterial trials. (3) Antibac-
terial packaging (e.g., food wraps, pharmaceutical containers)
prioritizes MNCs with environmental stability and low leaching
risks, such as CS-stabilized MNCs inhibiting spoilage microbes
under varied storage conditions. To accelerate translation, stan-
dardized validation protocols (e.g., ISO 22196 for surface materi-
als) must align with scenario-specific requirements.
Future research should also harness emerging technologies,
such as machine learning-guided ligand design and stimuli-
responsive MNCs, to develop ‘‘smart’’ antibacterials that adapt
to dynamic infection microenvironments. By addressing these
challenges, MNC-based systems are poised to redefine antimi-
crobial paradigms, oﬀering sustainable solutions to safeguard
public health and ecological security.
Data availability
No primary research results, software, or code have been
included and no new data were generated or analyzed as part
of this feature article.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Founda-
tion of China (22371153, 22071127, and 52301002), the Shan-
dong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2024JQ002 and
ZR2024QE020), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
(2023M731854), and the Postdoctoral Science Foundation of
Qingdao City (QDBSH20230101003).
References
1 D. Mao, F. Hu, Kenry, S. Ji, W. Wu, D. Ding, D. Kong and B. Liu,
Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1706831.
2 C. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, R. J. Miron, J. Liang, M. Shi, W. Mo,
S. Zheng, Y. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1804023.
3 T. M. Privalsky, A. M. Soohoo, J. Wang, C. T. Walsh, G. D. Wright,
E. M. Gordon, N. S. Gray and C. Khosla, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021,
143, 21127–21142.
4 L. Han, Z. Yuan, H. M. Ren, W. Song, R. Wu, J. Li, Z. Guo, B. Yu,
S. Duan and F. J. Xu, BMEMat, 2024, 2, e12082.
5 J. Xie, M. Zhou, Y. Qian, Z. Cong, S. Chen, W. Zhang, W. Jiang,
C. Dai, N. Shao, Z. Ji, J. Zou, X. Xiao, L. Liu, M. Chen, J. Li and
R. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5898.
6 J. Hu, N. Liu, Q. Fan, Y. Gu, S. Chen, F. Zhu and Y. Cheng, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2024, 63, e202403140.
7 S. Kalita, R. Kandimalla, A. C. Bhowal, J. Kotoky and S. Kundu, Sci.
Rep., 2018, 8, 5778.
8 J. Meng, Z. Hu, M. He, J. Wang and X. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci.,
2021, 602, 846–858.
9 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Coord. Chem. Rev.,
2018, 357, 1–17.
10 X. Zhao, H. Tang and X. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 10066–10087.
11 M.-J. Jiang, Y.-N. Zhang, L.-S. Meng, J. Kang, Y.-J. Li and A. Dong,
Rare Met., 2024, 43, 1747–1757.
12 C. J. L. Murray, K. S. Ikuta and F. Sharara, et al., Lancet, 2022, 399,
629–655.
13 S. Bian, H. Ye, P. Wang, C. Li, X. Guo, M. Guan and S. Feng,
BMEMat, 2025, e12135.
14 J. Xu, L. Chang, Y. Xiong and Q. Peng, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2024,
13, 2401490.
15 S. A. Yavari, S. M. Castenmiller, J. A. G. Strijp and M. Croes, Adv.
Mater., 2020, 32, 2002962.
16 Y. Ren, K. Li, Y.-Z. Wang, S.-P. Zhao, S.-M. Pan, H. Fu, M. Jing,
Y. Wang, F. Yang and C. Liu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2025, 36, 110468.
17 Y.-H. Chen, S.-W. Guan, M. Xing, K. W.-K. Yeung, X.-Y. Liu,
W.-H. Qian, J.-B. Yin and J.-J. Qiu, Rare Met., 2024, 44, 472–488.
18 Y. Chen, L. Ren, L. Sun, X. Bai, G. Zhuang, B. Cao, G. Hu, N. Zheng
and S. Liu, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 56.
19 J. Huo, Q. Jia, H. Huang, J. Zhang, P. Li, X. Dong and W. Huang,
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8762–8789.
20 H.-Q.
Jiang,
L.-Y.
Lu,
Z.-M.
Weng,
K.-Y.
Huang,
Y.
Yang,
H.-H. Deng, Y.-Y. Xu, W. Chen and Q.-Q. Zhuang, ACS Omega,
2023, 8, 47123–47133.
21 Y. Guan, B. Yu, J. Ding, T. Sun and Z. Xie, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2025,
DOI: 10.1016/j.cclet.2024.110645.
22 F. Jiao, W. Zhao, W. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Deng, S. Chang, J. Sun,
Q. Lou, L. Wang, C. X. Shan, Y. Xiao and L. Dong, BMEMat, 2023,
1, e12055.
23 X. Li, D. Mo, S. Hu, M. Pan, M. Wang, T. Yang, C. Qu, Y. Wei, J. Li,
H. Deng, Z. Bei, T. Luo, Q. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Liu, J. Wang and Z. Qian,
Chin. Chem. Lett., 2025, DOI: 10.1016/j.cclet.2024.110674.
24 Y. Huang, M. Yu and J. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2023, 18,
637–646.
25 Y.-N. Zhang, Z. Pei, Z.-H. Wang, C.-E. Wang, F.-F. Liang and
L.-Q. Wei, Rare Met., 2024, 43, 2708–2718.
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220 |  7219
26 Y. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Shi, H. Song and C. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020,
32, e1904106.
27 B. L. Ligon, Semin. Pediatr. Infect. Dis., 2004, 15, 52–57.
28 X. Xie, T. Sun, J. Xue, Z. Miao, X. Yan, W. Fang, Q. Li, R. Tang, Y. Lu,
L. Tang, Z. Zha and T. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005978.
29 H. H. Lara, D. M. Black, C. Moon, E. Orr, P. Lopez, M. M. Alvarez,
G. Baghdasarian, J. Lopez-Ribot and R. L. Whetten, ACS Omega,
2019, 4, 21914–21920.
30 A. Luceri, R. Francese, S. Perero, D. Lembo, M. Ferraris and
C. Balagna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2024, 16, 3955–3965.
31 X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Q. Shu, C. Xu, Q. Zheng, Z. Guo, C. Wang,
Z. Hao, X. Liu, G. Wang, W. Yan, H. Chen and C. Lu, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2021, 31, 2008720.
32 Y. Chen, X. Yang, K. Li, J. Feng, X. Liu, Y. Li, K. Yang, J. Li and S. Ge,
ACS Nano, 2024, 18, 7024–7036.
33 Z. Zhang, R. Yin, Z. Song, M. Zhang, B. Zhang, S. Lu, Q. Yao,
D. Jiang, J. Xie and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2025,
e202500389.
34 P. J. Do¨rner, H. Anandakumar, I. Ro¨wekamp, F. Fiocca Vernengo,
B. Millet Pascual-Leone, M. Krzanowski, J. Sellmaier, U. Bru¨ning,
R.
Fritsche-Guenther,
L.
Pfannkuch,
F.
Kurth,
M.
Milek,
V. Igbokwe, U. Lo¨ber, B. Gutbier, M. Holstein, G. A. Heinz,
M.
F.
Mashreghi,
L.
N.
Schulte,
A.
B.
Klatt,
S.
Caesar,
S. M. Wienhold, S. Oﬀermanns, M. Mack, M. Witzenrath,
S. Jordan, D. Beule, J. A. Kirwan, S. K. Forslund, N. Wilck,
H. Bartolomaeus, M. M. Heimesaat and B. Opitz, Nat. Commun.,
2024, 15, 2788.
35 X. Hu, D. Li, H. Li, Y. Piao, H. Wan, T. Zhou, M. Karimi, X. Zhao,
Y. Li, L. Shi and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2024, 36, 2406156.
36 W. Shi, H. Li, J. Chen, Y. C. Ching, C. H. Chuah, C. Xu, M. Liu,
J. Zhang, K. Y. Ching, Y. Liang, G. Li and W. Tang, Adv. Sci., 2024,
11, 2404451.
37 W. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Zhao, P. Wang, S. Wang, J. Ma and
W. Cheng, Water Res., 2025, 271, 122986.
38 A. Y. Vargas-Lizarazo, M. A. Ali, N. A. Mazumder, G. M. Kohli,
M.
Zaborska,
T.
Sons,
M.
Garnett,
I.
M.
Senanayake,
B. M. Goodson, J. M. Vargas-Mun˜iz, A. Pond, P. J. Jensik,
M. E. Olson, S. D. Hamilton-Brehm and P. Kohli, Sci. Adv., 2024,
10, eado5555.
39 H. Li, Y. Fan, Z. Sun, H. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S.-Q. Ni, W. Wang, C.-H.
Tung and Y. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2023, 57, 6150–6158.
40 S. Cong, J. Cai, X. Li, J. You, L. Wang and X. Wang, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2024, 34, 2401540.
41 S. Qian, X. Wang, Y. Guo, W. He, J. Yang, H. Chen, R. Li, L. Su,
X. Wang, Y. Shao and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2025, 2419209.
42 K. Chen, F. Wang, X. Sun, W. Ge, M. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Zheng,
S. Zheng, H. Tang, Z. Zhou and G. Wu, Bioact. Mater., 2025, 45,
479–495.
43 J. Wang, Y. Xia, Z. Hao, G. Shi, Q. Zhang, C. Wang, M. Zhu,
Y. Huang, L. Guo, T. Luan, T. Zhu, H. Dai and J. Li, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2025, 2422950.
44 Y. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Ma, X. Xu, X. Gao, H. Zhu, T. Feng, X. Dou,
M. Eguchi, Y. Yamauchi and X. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2024, 15, 10175.
45 Z. Lu, W. Fan, Y. Ye, Y. Huang, X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, W. Cui, J. Ji,
K. Yao and H. Han, ACS Nano, 2025, 19, 2268–2285.
46 Y. Yuan, L. Chen, K. Song, M. Cheng, L. Fang, L. Kong, L. Yu,
R. Wang, Z. Fu, M. Sun, Q. Wang, C. Cui, H. Wang, J. He, X. Wang,
Y. Liu, B. Jiang, J. Jiang, C. Wang, X. Yan, X. Zhang and L. Gao, Nat.
Commun., 2024, 15, 5636.
47 X. Yuan, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Nano Res., 2014, 7,
301–307.
48 P. D. Jadzinsky, G. Calero, C. J. Ackerson, D. A. Bushnell and
R. D. Kornberg, Science, 2007, 318, 430–433.
49 W.-Q. Shi, L. Zeng, R.-L. He, X.-S. Han, Z.-J. Guan, M. Zhou and
Q.-M. Wang, Science, 2024, 383, 326–330.
50 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Bioact. Mater.,
2021, 6, 941–950.
51 D. Liu, W.-J. Wang, P. Alam, Z. Yang, K. Wu, L. Zhu, Y. Xiong,
S. Chang, Y. Liu, B. Wu, Q. Wu, Z. Qiu, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Nat.
Photonics, 2024, 18, 1276–1284.
52 T. Sun, B. Ge, S. Huang, X. Wang, Y. Tian, X. Cai, W. Ding and
Y. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2024, 64, e202420274.
53 J. Zhou, F. Pan, T. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Yao, C. Zhu, Y. Zhu, H. Ma
and J. Niu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 295, 121323.
54 M. Sera, S. Hossain, S. Yoshikawa, K. Takemae, A. Ikeda, T. Tanaka,
T. Kosaka, Y. Niihori, T. Kawawaki and Y. Negishi, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2024, 146, 29684–29693.
55 X. Huang, L. Li, Z. Chen, H. Yu, X. You, N. Kong, W. Tao, X. Zhou
and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2023, 35, e2302431.
56 X. Wang, B. Yin, L. Jiang, C. Yang, Y. Liu, G. Zou, S. Chen and
M. Zhu, Science, 2023, 381, 784–790.
57 H. Zhu, J. Li, J. Wang and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces,
2019, 11, 36831–36838.
58 Z. Wang, Y. Tian, J. Hao, Y. Liu, J. Tang, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, B. Tang,
X. Huang, N. Zhu, Z. Li, L. Hu, L. Li, Y. Wang and G. Jiang, ACS
Nano, 2024, 18, 7253–7266.
59 H. Zhu, S. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Song, Q. Yao, X. Yuan and J. Xie,
Biomaterials, 2022, 288, 121695.
60 C. Liu, T. Tian, Y. Shi, M. Li, L. Hong, J. Zhou, J. Liu, Y. Zhong,
X. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Bai, L. Wang, C. Li and Z. Wu, Aggregate,
2025, 6, e666.
61 Y. Zheng, M. Wei, H. Wu, F. Li and D. Ling, J. Nanobiotechnol.,
2022, 20, 328.
62 X. Yuan, M. I. Setyawati, A. S. Tan, C. N. Ong, D. T. Leong and J. Xie,
NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e39–e39.
63 P. Lyu, Z. Ju, J. Hu, H. Pan, X. Li, Y. Liu, J. Ren, B. Shang, X. Liu and
W. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2024, 34, 2400685.
64 Y. Wang, J. Ye, K. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Linghu, T. Feng, Y. Liu, X. Dou,
X. Yuan and H. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2024, 14, 15413–15418.
65 K. Yi, Y. Yu, L. Fan, L. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Zhao, Aggregate, 2024,
5, e509.
66 K. Zheng and J. Xie, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 11533–11541.
67 R. Song, H. Xie and G. Liu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2025, DOI: 10.1016/
j.cclet.2024.110442.
68 W. Ndugire, D. Truong, N. G. Hasitha Raviranga, J. Lao, O. Ramstrom
and M. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202214086.
69 Y. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Wang, Q. Yao, S. Fang, X. Zhou, X. Yuan and
J. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 4846–4850.
70 Y. Song, K. Lambright, M. Zhou, K. Kirschbaum, J. Xiang, A. Xia,
M. Zhu and R. Jin, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9318–9325.
71 Y. Wang, Z. Zuo, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, J. Linghu, Y. Liu, H. Zhu, X. Dou,
T. Feng and X. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2024, 492, 152216.
72 B. Du, X. Jiang, A. Das, Q. Zhou, M. Yu, R. Jin and J. Zheng, Nat.
Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1096–1102.
73 G. Yang, X. Mu, X. Pan, Y. Tang, Q. Yao, Y. Wang, F. Jiang, F. Du,
J. Xie, X. Zhou and X. Yuan, Chem. Sci., 2023, 14, 4308–4318.
74 Q. Guo, J. Li, T. Chen, Q. Yao and J. Xie, ACS Sustainable Chem.
Eng., 2019, 7, 14848–14855.
75 G. B. Hwang, H. Huang, G. Wu, J. Shin, A. Kafizas, K. Karu,
H. D. Toit, A. M. Alotaibi, L. Mohammad-Hadi, E. Allan,
A. J. MacRobert, A. Gavriilidis and I. P. Parkin, Nat. Commun.,
2020, 11, 1207.
76 J. Wu, F. Li, X. Hu, J. Lu, X. Sun, J. Gao and D. Ling, ACS Cent. Sci.,
2019, 5, 1366–1376.
77 K. Chen, A. Najer, P. Charchar, C. Saunders, C. Thanapongpibul,
A. Klo¨ckner, M. Chami, D. J. Peeler, I. Silva, L. Panariello, K. Karu,
C. N. Loynachan, L. C. Frenette, M. Potter, J. S. Tregoning,
I. P. Parkin, A. M. Edwards, T. B. Clarke, I. Yarovsky and
M. M. Stevens, Nat. Commun., 2024, 15, 10321.
78 Q. Zhang, X. Leng, L. Peng, H. Lin, G. Xuan, W. Zhang, H. Mitomo,
K. Ijiro and G. Wang, Small, 2025, 21, 2411723.
79 Y. Huang, X. Ning, S. Ahrari, Q. Cai, N. Rajora, R. Saxena, M. Yu
and J. Zheng, Nat. Rev. Nephrol., 2024, 20, 354–370.
80 H. Zhu, Q. Xue, G. Zhu, Y. Liu, X. Dou and X. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem.
A, 2021, 9, 6872–6880.
81 X. Dou, S. Saalah, C.-K. Chiam, J. Xie and C. S. Sipaut, Nanoscale,
2024, 16, 20089–20099.
82 T.-T. Jia, B.-J. Li, G. Yang, Y. Hua, J.-Q. Liu, W. Ma, S.-Q. Zang,
X. Chen and X. Zhao, Nano Today, 2021, 39, 101222.
83 X. D. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Luo, D. Wu, X. Shen, S. S. Song, Y. M. Sun,
P. X. Liu, J. Zhao, S. Huo, S. Fan, F. Fan, X. J. Liang and J. Xie, Adv.
Healthcare Mater., 2013, 3, 133–141.
84 X. D. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Shen, P.-X. Liu, F.-Y. Fan and S.-J. Fan,
Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 4628–4638.
85 Y. Zheng, W. Liu, Y. Chen, C. Li, H. Jiang and X. Wang, J. Colloid
Interface Sci., 2019, 546, 1–10.
86 J. Liu, M. Yu, X. Ning, C. Zhou, S. Yang and J. Zheng, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12572–12576.
ChemComm
Feature Article
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online

7220 |  Chem. Commun., 2025, 61, 7201–7220
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2025
87 C. Zhou, M. Long, Y. Qin, X. Sun and J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2011, 50, 3168–3172.
88 S. Tang, C. Peng, J. Xu, B. Du, Q. Wang, R. D. Vinluan, M. Yu,
M. J. Kim and J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55,
16039–16043.
89 J. Xu, M. Yu, C. Peng, P. Carter, J. Tian, X. Ning, Q. Zhou, Q. Tu,
G. Zhang, A. Dao, X. Jiang, P. Kapur, J. T. Hsieh, X. Zhao, P. Liu and
J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 57, 266–271.
90 X. Ning, Y. Zhong, Q. Cai, Y. Wang, X. Jia, J. T. Hsieh, J. Zheng and
M. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2024, 36, 2402479.
91 X. Meng, A. He, X. Yan, L. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y. Jia, J. He, S. Guo and
H. Shen, Polyoxometalates, 2025, 4, 9140080.
92 T. Xu, E. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Wei, P. Yin, J. Sun, W. W. Xu and Y. Song,
Dalton Trans., 2023, 52, 18442–18448.
93 X. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Fang, Y. Hou, X. Du, Y. Xie, Q. Xue, X. Zhou
and X. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127589.
94 Z. Jiang, Y. Wei, Y. Wang, S. Han, Z. Li, S. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Li,
T. Feng, H. Zhu and X. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2025, 17, 5778–5787.
95 A. Soleimani, F. Farahmandghavi, J. Morshedian and J. Keyvan
Rad, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2023, 5, 2917–2930.
96 J.-C. Kuo, S.-H. Tan, Y.-C. Hsiao, C. Mutalik, H.-M. Chen,
S. Yougbare´ and T.-R. Kuo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 10,
464–471.
97 I. V. Esarev, B. Karge, H. Zeng, P. Lippmann, P. G. Jones, H. Schrey,
M. Bro¨nstrup and I. Ott, ACS Infect. Dis., 2024, 10, 1753–1766.
98 X. Yuan, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Nano Res., 2013, 7,
301–307.
99 H. T. Draviana, I. Fitriannisa, M. Khafid, D. I. Krisnawati, Widodo,
C.-H. Lai, Y.-J. Fan and T.-R. Kuo, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2023, 21, 428.
100 Z. Wang, Y. Fang, X. Zhou, Z. Li, H. Zhu, F. Du, X. Yuan, Q. Yao and
J. Xie, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 203–208.
101 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, T.-P. Lim, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, ACS
Nano, 2016, 10, 7934–7942.
102 L. Wang, Q. Hou, W. Zheng and X. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15,
17885–17894.
103 W. Li, Y. Tang, B. Liu, J. Zhou, B. Chen, J. Hou, Z. Liu and Z. Guo,
Chem. Eng. J., 2025, 506, 159977.
104 P. He, M. Jia, L. Yang, H. Zhang, R. Chen, W. Yao, Y. Pan, Q. Fan,
W. Hu and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2025, 37, 2418978.
105 X. Wang, J. Ding, X. Chen, S. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Chen, G. Zhang,
J. Liu, T. Shi, J. Song, S. Sheng, G. Wang, J. Xu, J. Su, W. Zhang and
X. Lian, Bioact. Mater., 2024, 41, 385–399.
106 N. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Q. He, Y. Liu, X. Dou, Z. Yin, Y. Li, H. Zhu
and X. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 8183.
107 G. Ma, K. Cheng, X. Wang, Y. Zeng, C. Hu, L. He, Z. Shi, H. Lin,
T. Zhang, S. Sun and P. Huang, Biomaterials, 2025, 318, 123145.
108 L. Hong, W. Li, M. Qi, W. Dong, C. Liu, M. Li, Y. Zhong, Z. Wu,
C. Li, X. Bai and L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2024, 24, 15547–15556.
109 H. Shan, J. Shi, T. Chen, Y. Cao, Q. Yao, H. An, Z. Yang, Z. Wu,
Z. Jiang and J. Xie, ACS Nano, 2023, 17, 2368–2377.
110 T. Wu, J. Sun, J. Lei, Q. Fan, X. Tang, G. Zhu, Q. Yan, X. Feng and
B. Shi, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 17912–17919.
111 Y. Wang, C. Li, B. Shen, L. Zhu, Y. Zhang and L. Jiang, Chem. Eng.
J., 2023, 466, 143292.
112 N. Xia, J. Xing, D. Peng, S. Ji, J. Zha, N. Yan, Y. Su, X. Jiang, Z. Zeng,
J. Zhao and Z. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5934.
113 G. Liu, H. Wang, C. Xu, Q. Fang, H. Wang, Y. Xu, M. Sang, S. Xuan
and L. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2023, 11, 10678–10691.
114 Q. Yao, Y. Feng, V. Fung, Y. Yu, D.-e Jiang, J. Yang and J. Xie, Nat.
Commun., 2017, 8, 1555.
115 X. Kang and M. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2422–2457.
116 Q. He, Z. Jiang, H. Jiang, S. Han, G. Yang, X. Yuan and H. Zhu,
Nanoscale, 2024, 16, 14310–14318.
117 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, Chem. Mater.,
2018, 30, 2800–2808.
118 Y. N. Nosaka and Y. Atsuko, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11302–11336.
119 Z. Yao, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Li, G. Gao and T. Sun, ACS Appl. Bio
Mater., 2024, 7, 3330–3336.
120 Y. Zheng, W. Liu, Z. Qin, Y. Chen, H. Jiang and X. Wang, Bioconju-
gate Chem., 2018, 29, 3094–3103.
121 Z. Ye, H. Zhu, S. Zhang, J. Li, J. Wang and E. Wang, J. Mater. Chem.
B, 2021, 9, 307–313.
122 A. Nakal-Chidiac, O. Garcı´a, L. Garcı´a-Ferna´ndez, F. M. Martı´n-
Saavedra, S. Sa´nchez-Casanova, C. Escudero-Duch, J. San Roma´n,
N. Vilaboa and M. R. Aguilar, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 250, 116973.
123 Y. Li, M. Zhou, Y. Song, T. Higaki, H. Wang and R. Jin, Nature,
2021, 594, 380–384.
124 Q. Xue, Z. Wang, S. Han, Y. Liu, X. Dou, Y. Li, H. Zhu and X. Yuan,
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 8371–8377.
125 A. Ravindran Girija, S. Balasubramanian, R. Bright, A. J. Cowin,
N. Goswami and K. Vasilev, ChemNanoMat, 2019, 5, 1176–1181.
126 Z. Zuo, X. Pan, G. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Zha and X. Yuan, Dalton
Trans., 2023, 52, 2942–2947.
127 Z. Pang, N. Ren, Y. Wu, J. Qi, F. Hu, Y. Guo, Y. Xie, D. Zhou and
X. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2023, 35, 2303562.
128 Y. Zhang, R. Chen, Y. Wang, P. Wang, J. Pu, X. Xu, F. Chen, L. Jiang,
Q. Jiang and F. Yan, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2022, 20, 470.
129 S. Ge, Y. Han, M. Sun, J. Zhao and G. Ma, ACS Omega, 2023, 8,
42678–42688.
130 X. Yuan, M. I. Setyawati, A. S. Tan, C. N. Ong, D. T. Leong and J. Xie,
NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e39.
131 Z. Wang, Y. Fang, X. Zhou, Z. Li, H. Zhu, F. Du, X. Yuan, Q. Yao and
J. Xie, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 203–208.
132 X. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Fang, Y. Hou, X. Du, Y. Xie, Q. Xue, X. Zhou
and X. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127589.
133 Z. Wei, T. Xu, C. Wang, S. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Sun, H. Yu, H. Shi and
Y. Song, Nanoscale, 2024, 16, 10656–10662.
134 Z. Pang, N. Ren, Y. Wu, J. Qi, F. Hu, Y. Guo, Y. Xie, D. Zhou and
X. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2023, 35, 2303562.
135 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, ACS Nano, 2017,
11, 6904–6910.
136 K. Zheng, K. Li, T.-H. Chang, J. Xie and P.-Y. Chen, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2019, 29, 1904603.
137 K. Zheng, S. Li, L. Jing, P.-Y. Chen and J. Xie, Adv. Healthcare
Mater., 2020, 9, 2001007.
138 F. Liu, Y. Liu, Q. Yao, Y. Wang, X. Fang, C. Shen, F. Li, M. Huang,
Z. Wang, W. Sand and J. Xie, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54,
5913–5921.
139 H. Zhu, N. Liu, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, Q. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Yin
and X. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 18996–19003.
140 Y. Li, S. Qu, Y. Xue, L. Zhang and L. Shang, Nano Res., 2023, 16,
999–1008.
141 Z. Xu, T. Wang, Y. Li, M. Wen, K. Liang, C. Ruan, L. Zhang, Y. Xue
and L. Shang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 33, 2209438.
142 K. Yi, Y. Yu, L. Fan, L. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Zhao, Aggregate, 2024,
5, e509.
143 Y. Wang, J. Ye, K. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Linghu, T. Feng, Y. Liu, X. Dou,
X. Yuan and H. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2024, 14, 15413–15418.
144 N. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Q. He, Y. Liu, X. Dou, Z. Yin, Y. Li, H. Zhu
and X. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 8183–8191.
Feature Article
ChemComm
Published on 16 April 2025. Downloaded by QingDao University of Science and Technology on 1/12/2026 2:25:26 AM. 
View Article Online