Between the three Stachys extracts, S. byzantina had the highest 
total phenolic content as 151.64 mg gallic acid equivalent/100 g 
plant. 
 
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.10.432 
 
392 
 
Exercise and Probiotics Attenuate the Development of 
Alzheimer Disease in Mice 
Dora Abraham1, Zsolt Radak1, and Janos Feher1 
1TF, Hungary 
It has been suggested that the gut-brain axis could play a 
significant role in the development of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Therefore, normalization of gut microbiota (microbiome) could be 
important and influence the development of Alzheimer Diseases 
(AD). The genome of microbiome is 100 fold larger than the human 
genome, and microbial compounds give the major input to the 
bidirectional communication between the enteral neuron-immune 
system and the brain. Based on the currently available scientific 
information, we propose that exercise training and probiotic 
treatments could delay inflammation, ameliorate oxidative stress, 
and decrease levels of beta amyloids, thereby attenuating loss in 
brain function. It is hypothesized that probiotic treatment alone and 
combined with exercise training could beneficially effect 
microbiome and delay the development of AD. 
Experimental design: A total thirty six of 32 APP/PS1 transgenic 
male mice were divided into control (C), 20 week treadmill running 
trained (T) 20 week probiotic supplemented (Framelim) (P) and 
combined treated (TP) groups respectively. 
Results: Cognitive test revealed the continuous development in the 
performance of the animals on combined treatment. During Morris 
Water Maze test, on the second day the animals showed 
significantly better performance, the 3rd and 4th day revealed a 
tendency for improved learning skills compared to the control 
group. 6E10 immunohistochemistry against beta-amyloid plaques 
revealed, that the number of plaques in hippocampus in the 
exercise group were significantly lower than in the control and 
combined group. The plaque area in the hippocampus was 
significantly lower in all treated groups when it compared to the 
control group. This suggests an absence of direct link between 
cognitive function and the number of plaques. We observed an 
increased number of astrocytes around the plaques, however 
significant differences in the density of astrocytes in different 
groups were not found. Data revealed that exercise training 
increased DNA repair, hence could attenuated the cell death 
associated with AD. 
Our results confirm that physical exercise and the use of probiotics 
can ameliorate cognitive function in AD via alteration of 
microbiome. 
 
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.10.433 
 
393 
 
ROS-Mediated Loss of Synaptic Akt1 Signaling Leads 
to Deficient Activity-Dependent Protein Translation 
Early in Alzheimer's Disease 
 
Arathy Ramachandran1, Faraz Ahmad1, Eisha Shaw2, Kunal Singh1, 
Debajyoti Das1, Khader Valli Rupanagudi1, Reddy Kommaddi1, and 
Vijayalakshmi Ravindranath1 
1Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, 2Tata Institute of 
Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India 
Synaptic deficits are known to underlie the cognitive dysfunction 
seen in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Generation of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) by β-amyloid has also been implicated in AD 
pathogenesis. However, it is unclear if ROS contributes to synaptic 
dysfunction seen in AD pathogenesis and therefore, we examined 
if altered redox signaling could contribute to synaptic deficits in AD. 
Activity-dependent but not basal translation was impaired in 
synaptoneurosomes 
from 
1 
month 
old 
presymptomatic 
APPSwe/PS1E9 (APP/PS1) mice, and this deficit was sustained till 
middle age (9-10 months). ROS generation leads to oxidative 
modification of Akt1 in the synapse and consequent reduction in 
Akt1-mTOR signaling leading to deficiency in activity dependent 
protein translation. Moreover, we found a similar loss of activity-
dependent protein translation in synaptoneurosomes from post-
mortem AD brains. Loss of activity dependent protein translation 
occurs presymptomatically during pathogenesis of AD. This is 
caused by ROS-mediated loss of pAkt1 leading to reduced 
synaptic Akt1-mTOR signaling and is rescued by overexpression 
of Akt1. ROS mediated damage is restricted to the synaptosomes 
indicating selectivity. We demonstrate that ROS-mediated 
oxidative modification of Akt1 contributes to synaptic dysfunction in 
AD, seen as loss of activity-dependent protein translation which is 
essential for synaptic plasticity and maintenance. Therapeutic 
strategies promoting Akt1-mTOR signaling at synapses may 
provide novel target(s) for disease modifying therapy in AD.    
 
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.10.434 
 
394 
 
The Unfolded Protein Response Initiates the Astrocyte 
Inflammatory Response Following Exposure to the 
Smoking-Associated Oxidant Hypothiocyanous Acid 
 
Benjamin S. Rayner1, Tharani Sabaretnam2, Benjamin Heng2, Gilles J. 
Guillemin2, and Clare L. Hawkins1 
1Heart Research Institute, University of Sydney, Australia, 
2Neuroinflammation 
Group, 
Macquarie 
University, 
Sydney, 
Australia 
 
Exposure to tobacco smoke is recognised as a major risk factor for 
many neurological diseases including stroke, Alzheimer's disease 
and multiple sclerosis. The cyanide detoxification product 
thiocyanate is elevated in the plasma and tissues of smokers and 
provides a favoured substrate for the enzyme myeloperoxidase. 
This peroxidase is released from activated immune cells during 
inflammation, and utilises thiocyanate to form the oxidant 
hypothiocyanous acid (HOSCN). Here we demonstrate that 
exposure of primary human astrocyte cultures to patho-
physiological levels of HOSCN results in the initiation of the 
unfolded protein response (UPR), as evidenced by the increased 
expression of the astrocyte-specific ER stress transducer, 
old astrocyte specifically induced substance (OASIS), activating 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), downstream chaperone and 
signalling regulator  glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78/BiP) and 
growth arrest and DNA damage inducible protein 34 (GADD34). 
This culminates in the increased expression of the pro-apoptotic 
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP). Astrocytes further respond to 
oxidant insult with increased cytosolic calcium (Ca2+) accumulation, 
mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptotic cell death, concurrent with 
decreased 
expression 
of 
the 
anti-apoptotic 
mitochondrial 
protein BCl-2. Furthermore, we demonstrate increased runt-related 
transcription factor 2 (Runx2) activation resulting in increased 
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression and activity in 
response to HOSCN exposure. Interestingly, application of the 
intracellular Ca2+ chelator BAPTA-AM attenuated UPR activation, 
SfRBM / SFRRI 2016
S165