Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
Available online 12 August 2022
0142-9612/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Blood-brain barrier Permeable nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease 
treatment by selective mitophagy of microglia 
Gang Zhong a,b,1, Huiping Long a,1, Tian Zhou c, Yisi Liu b, Jianping Zhao b, Jinyu Han b, 
Xiaohu Yang b, Yin Yu b,**, Fei Chen b,*, Shengliang Shi a,*** 
a Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, 530007, China 
b Center for Materials Synthetic Biology, CAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced 
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, 518055, China 
c Institute of Biomedical and Health Engineering, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, 518055, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Alzheimer’s disease 
Prussian blue 
Polyamidoamine dendrimer 
Nanoparticles 
Microglia modulation 
Mitophagy 
A B S T R A C T   
Current treatments for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) that focus on inhibition of Aβ aggregation failed to show 
effectiveness in people who already had Alzheimer’s symptoms. Strategies that synergistically exert neuro­
protection and alleviation of oxidative stress could be a promising approach to correct the pathological brain 
microenvironment. Based on the key roles of microglia in modulation of AD microenvironment, we describe here 
the development of Prussian blue/polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer/Angiopep-2 (PPA) nanoparticles that 
can regulate the mitophagy of microglia as a potential AD treatment. PPA nanoparticles exhibit superior blood- 
brain barrier (BBB) permeability and exert synergistic effects of ROS scavenging and restoration of mitochondrial 
function of microglia. PPA nanoparticles effectively reduce neurotoxic Aβ aggregate and rescue the cognitive 
functions in APP/PS1 model mice. Together, our data suggest that these multifunctional dendrimer nanoparticles 
exhibit efficient neuroprotection and microglia modulation and can be exploited as a promising approach for the 
treatment of AD.   
1. Introduction 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disease that 
affects more than 30 million people worldwide, with 106 million people 
expected to develop the disease by 2050 [1,2]. The major pathological 
features of AD comprise the accumulation of extracellular amyloid beta 
(Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) in the brain [3]. Many 
clinical trials have tested drugs designed to remove or reduce amyloid-β 
plaques that around neurons, but few successes have been reported. 
Aducanumab, as the newest amyloid-attacking antibody drug (brand 
name: Aduhelm) approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
for AD, has been in the center of controversy after scientists raised 
questions about the drug’s efficacy. The lack of progress in amyloid 
plaques-focused approach thus promoted researchers to try other 
approach. Although the exact mechanism how Aβ affect AD pathogen­
esis has not been fully elucidated yet, Aβ-induced mitochondrial 
dysfunction has been indicated to be a possible cause of AD through 
abnormal production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as super­
oxide anion, hydroxyl radical, and hydrogen peroxide. 
Microglia are immune cells that settle in the brain. When the nervous 
system receives biochemical damage, microglia can proliferate rapidly, 
transmit major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens, migrate and 
change into phagocyte-like morphology to phagocyte foreign substances 
and dead cells [4,5]. However, in Alzheimer’s disease, hyperactive 
microglia will not only lead to the vicious circle of Aβ [6,7], but also 
deprive normal microglia of the function of intracranial scavengers. 
Therefore, in the early stages of AD, microglia can become activated by 
cues such as neuronal death and increased their phagocytic activity and 
releasing pro-inflammatory cytokines, if the states changed to hyper­
active, microglia could further damage normal neurons and accelerate 
the pathological progress of AD [8]. In previous studies, the role of 
microglia as intracranial scavengers has not been fully investigated [7]. 
* Corresponding author. 
** Corresponding author. 
*** Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: yin.yu@siat.ac.cn (Y. Yu), fei.chen1@siat.ac.cn (F. Chen), ssl_1964@163.com (S. Shi).   
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Biomaterials 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biomaterials 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2022.121690 
Received 30 June 2021; Received in revised form 30 May 2022; Accepted 18 July 2022   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
2
Previously, some immunomodulators such as melatonin and N-acetyl 
sphingosine were tested but these small molecules showed short reten­
tion in the brain [9,10]. Some synthetic macromolecular chemical re­
agents are difficult to pass through blood-brain barrier (BBB), which 
limits their applications. Reagents that can pass through the BBB and 
with immunomodulatory functions therefore have significant potential 
in AD therapeutics. 
Previous study demonstrated that pharmaceutical-grade Prussian 
blue (PB, KFeIII [FeII(CN)6]) is a useful sequestering agent and displays 
significant antioxidant effects by removing ROS [11]. The capability of 
PB to effectively scavenge ROS suggest it has potential neuroprotective 
effect for Alzheimer’s disease but suffer from poor permeability across 
the BBB. Poly (amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers are highly tailorable, 
branched macromolecules in the sub-10 nm size scale that have been 
explored as targeting vectors for drug delivery due to its optimized 
circulation lifetime, low polydispersity, and well-defined reactive 
groups on the particle surface. Kannan et al. reported that PAMAM 
dendrimers (PAMAM-G4, ~4 nm) can cross the impaired BBB upon 
systemic administration and selectively target hyperactive microglia in a 
variety of models of neurodegenerative diseases [12]. In addition, due to 
the high degree of branching and the reactive surface sites (primary 
amine group), Angiopep-2 (ANG-2), a ligand that targets low-density 
lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LPR-1) on the surface of brain 
capillary endothelial cells (BCECs) can be conjugated with the func­
tional group of the surface of PAMAM [13–15]. 
Herein, we report a hybrid nanoparticle platform that enables high 
BBB transport efficacy and removal of intracellular ROS. We achieved 
this by incorporation of ANG-2 modified PAMAM with Prussian blue 
nanoparticles to increase the BBB transport efficacy and circulation 
lifetime of PB, with the assumption that the hybrid nanoparticles would 
synergistically scavenge the intracellular ROS and modulation of 
microglia to treat AD. As a commonly used magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) contrast agent, Gadolinium (III) (Gd3+) complexes were intro­
duced due to its powerful paramagnetic properties. We evaluated the 
ability of these hybrid nanoparticles to inhibit the oxidative damage 
stimulated by Aβ-42 in BV-2 microglia cells and studied its ability to 
cross BBB and attenuated the cognitive impairment of APP/PS1 mice. 
Altogether, our data indicate that the PPA NPs are potential therapeutic 
candidate for treating mitochondrial oxidative-stress-induced damage in 
AD. 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Reagents 
Aβ1-42 peptides, thioflavin S (ThS), donepezil (Don), and 3-methyla­
denine (3-MA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, 
USA). Aβ1-42, TNF-α, IL-1β, Beclin-1, and ATG7-specific antibodies for 
western blotting (WB) and immunochemistry assays were obtained from 
Abcam (Cambridge, UK). Goat anti-rabbit IgG was obtained from 
Earthox (San Francisco, California, USA) and β-actin was purchased 
from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). Reactive Oxygen 
Species (ROS), lipid peroxidation malondialdehyde (MDA), Glutathione 
Peroxidase (GSH-Px), and superoxide (SOD) assay kits were purchased 
from Beyotime Co. (Shanghai, China). Mouse enzyme-linked immuno­
sorbent assay (ELISA) kits were acquired from Elabscience Biotech­
nology Co, Ltd (Wuhan, China). PAMAM dendrimers (PAMAM-G3-NH2, 
Mw 6909 Da, containing 128 surface primary amino groups) were 
purchased from Weihai Chenyuan Molecular New Material Co, Ltd. 
(Shandong, China). Angiopep-2 (ANG-2, TFFYGGSRGKRNNFKTEEY) 
was purchased from Bankpeptide biological technology co, LTD. (Hefei, 
China). 1, 1, 1, 3, 3, 3-hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP) was purchased 
from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. 2′,7′-Dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH- 
DA) was acquired from Shanghai BestBio Biotechnology Co, Ltd. 
(Shanghai, China). Donepezil (Don) was purchased from Shanghai 
Yuanye Biological Technology Co, Ltd. (Shanghai, China). All chemicals 
were used as received unless indicated otherwise. 
2.2. Synthesis of PPA nanoparticle 
To synthesize Prussian blue/Gd-PAMAM (PP) nanoparticles, 0.1 mM 
FeCl3 and Gd(NO3)3 were first dissolved in 40 mL of deionized water as 
the A solution. 0.01 μM PAMAM was dissolved in 40 mL of deionized 
water as the B solution. Adjust the pH of solution A and solution B to 7.4 
by using 0.1 M hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide solution, and mix 
them thoroughly for 30 min at 80 ◦C by magnetic stirrer (AREX-6 
Connect PRO, VELP Scientifica Srl, Italy). Next, 20 mL K4Fe(CN)6 (0.1 
mM) aqueous solution was then slowly added to the above mixture with 
vigorously stirring at 80 ◦C. The reaction was continued for 30 min and 
then cooled to room temperature under ambient condition. Finally, PP 
samples were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 10 min and 
the supernatant were discarded. The PP nanoparticles were purified by 
resuspending the PP sample using deionized water with a pH of 3, 
centrifuged again, and subjected to 3 cycles. 
To prepare Prussian blue/polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer/ 
angiopep-2 (PPA) nanoparticles, angiopep-2 polypeptide was modified 
to indicate PP. In detail, angiopep-2 polypeptide was first dissolved in 
MES buffer (1 mL, pH 5.5), 1-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-3-ethyl­
carbodicarbonate (EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) were then 
carefully added at a molar ratio of 1:15:10. The volume of the mixture 
was adjusted to 5 mL using MES buffer (pH 5.5) followed by centrifu­
gation at 25 ◦C at 150 rpm for 20 min. Add the MES solution of 
PB@PAMAM (pH 5.5) according to the mass ratio of angiopep-2: Fe2+ =
1:10, and centrifuge at 150 rpm at 25 ◦C for 24 h to fully react. Finally, 
PPA was obtained by centrifuging at 10,000 rpm for 10 min the mixed 
solution, discarding the supernatant, and purifying it by deionized water 
with pH = 3, and doing it 3 times. 
2.3. Characterization of PPA nanoparticles 
Structural and topographic analysis of PPA NPs were performed 
using by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi TM4000 plusII) 
and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (JEM-2100 F, accelerating 
voltage of 200 kV). For TEM analysis, 10 μL of PPA NPs suspension (2 
mg/mL) was dropped on the copper grid followed by staining with 
phosphotungstic acid (1 wt%). Particle size distribution and zeta po­
tential were measured by Zetasizer Nanoseries (Nano ZS ZEN3600) 
quipped with a standard capillary electrophoresis cell. Data presented 
are mean ± s.d. of three independent preparations. HNMR analysis was 
performed on a Varian Mercury Plus 400 system. Fourier-transform 
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis was performed on a Nicolet iS10 
FT-IR spectrometer. Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDX) was per­
formed by on a JEM-2100 F electron microscope for element content and 
distribution analysis. 
2.4. Peroxidase and catalase-like activities of PPA nanoparticles 
Peroxidase substrates, 2, 2′-azino-di (3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sul­
fonic acid) (ABTS) and 3,5,3′,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) were used 
as substrates to analyze the peroxidase activity of PPA NPs. The catalase 
activity of PPA NPs was demonstrated with pH-dependent PPA NPs. The 
PPA solutions of different pH were reacted with the substrate (H2O2) in a 
20 ◦C water bath for 5 min, and the amount and rate of oxygen gener­
ation were analyzed by microplate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
Waltham, MA USA) at 420 nm (Peroxidase assay, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) 
and at 240 nm (Catalase assay, Sigma-Aldrich, USA). 
2.5. Aβ1–42 oligomerization 
Firstly, Aβ1–42 peptides were dissolved in HFIP to form 1 mM solution 
and then HFIP was evaporated in a fume hood for 24 h to form a thin 
peptide film. The peptide film was re-dissolved in anhydrous dimethyl 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
3
sulfoxide (DMSO) to form a 5 mM solution. To generate soluble oligo­
meric conditions, the peptides were oligomerized by dilution and vor­
texing in Ham’s F-12 (phenol red-free) to form 100 μM solution followed 
by incubation overnight at 4 ◦C. 
2.6. Cell culture 
The BV-2 microglia cell line was kindly provided by Xuanwu Hos­
pital of Capital Medical University, China and grown in Dulbecco’s 
Minimal Essential Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% FBS and 
1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 ◦C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator. 
The culture medium was replaced every two days and cells were 
passaged upon reaching ~80% confluence. 
2.7. Cytotoxicity assay 
BV-2 cells were cultured in 96-well plates (1 × 104 cells/well) for 24 
h and then treated with various nanoparticle concentrations (0.1–8 μg/ 
mL). After incubation at 37 ◦C for 24 h, the cells were washed twice with 
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubated for 2 h with fresh me­
dium containing 10 μL of cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8; Dojindo, Tokyo, 
Japan). The absorbance of the solution was determined at 450 nm using 
a microplate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). 
Three PPA nanoparticle concentrations (0.5, 1, and 2 μg/mL) with 
lowest cytotoxicity were selected for further experiments. The assay was 
repeated three times. 
2.8. Cell viability assay upon Aβ1-42 stimulation 
To investigate the effect of PPA NPs on the viability of BV-2 cells 
treated with Aβ1-42, the cells were cultured in 96-well plates (1 × 104 
cells/well) for 24 h and treated with 5 μM Aβ1-42 with or without 0.5, 1, 
or 2 μg/mL PPA NPs for 24 h, after which 10 μL CCK-8 dye was added 
and the cells were incubated in the dark at 37 ◦C for 2 h. Absorbance was 
measured using a microplate reader at 450 nm. 
2.9. Live/dead assay 
The viability of BV-2 cells upon Aβ1-42 stimulation were further 
tested by Live/Dead Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Francisco, 
California, USA). Briefly, cells were cultured in 24-well plates (5 × 104 
cells/well) for 24 h and then rinsed with PBS, incubated in the dark with 
5 μM calcein-AM and 10 μM propidium iodide (PI, Invitrogen, USA) for 
5 min, and flushed with PBS 3 times. Images were acquired using a 
fluorescence imaging microscope. 
2.10. BBB model in vitro: In vitro 
BBB models were constructed by using Transwell plates [16,17]. 
Briefly, the mice cerebral capillary endothelial cells (2 × 105 cells/well) 
were obtained from Shanghai Qincheng Biological Technology Co, Ltd. 
(Product No. 6380) and seeded on the porous membrane of the apical 
chamber of Transwell and cultured with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s 
medium (DMEM) for about two weeks, and the TEER of the porous 
membrane with the endothelial cells was detected by Millicell ERS 
(Millipore, USA). When the TEER value exceeds 200 Ω cm2, the BBB 
model is regarded to be successful. The PPA nanoparticles (2 μg/mL) 
were dispersed in fresh culture media then added to the apical chamber, 
and the lower layer of the chamber was added to the normal medium in 
Transwell. After incubation for 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 h, the ferrous and/or 
ferric ion of medium in the basolateral chamber was detected by the Iron 
Colorimetric Assay Kit (Applygen, China, E1042) as a judgment of PPA 
crossing BBB. 
2.11. Animal treatment 
Thirty-six six-month-old male mice were purchased from Heze Better 
Biotechnology Co, Ltd, (Shandong, China) including six wild-type (WT) 
mice and eighteen APP/PS1 double transgenic mice which are a well- 
built transgenic animal model of AD on a C57BL/6 background. All 
animal experiments were carried out according to the National Institute 
of Health (NIH) guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals, 
and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee and provided by the 
Animal Center of Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology (No.YSB- 
A0224). APP/PS1 mice were randomly divided into three groups: an 
APP/PS1 group (i.v. injected with 0.2 mL of saline once a week for 4 
weeks), a PPA group (i.v. injected with 0.2 mL of 2 μg/mL PPA nano­
particles once a week for 4 weeks), and a Don group (i.v. injected with 
0.2 mL of 1000 μg/kg donepezil once a week for 4 weeks; n = 6). Age- 
matched WT mice were used as controls. Mice were housed under a 
12-h light/dark cycle and had access to water and standard rodent diet 
ad libitum. After 4 weeks, the mice were sacrificed by injecting an 
overdose of sodium pentobarbital and brain tissue (hippocampus and 
cortex) was obtained for further research. 
2.12. Magnetic resonance imaging analysis 
Three mice per group were used for magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) analysis. After injecting 0.2 mL of normal saline or 2 mg/mL of 
PPA NPs through the tail vein, MRI was performed using Achieva 3.0 T 
MRI scanner (Philips, Netherlands) and the SENSE Wrist-4 channel coil 
(Philips, Netherlands) in being deeply anesthetized with sodium 
pentobarbital. The distribution of PPA nanoparticles in the skull is 
detected using protocols similar to those described previously [18]. MR 
T1 phase imaging was used to assess BBB permeability post-treatment. 
The relative experimental parameters were set as follows: TR = 4279 
ms, TE = 80.0 ms, slice thickness = 1.0 mm, field of view (FOV) = 50 ×
50 mm2; resolution, 0.25 × 0.25 × 1.0 mm. The MRI images were 
assessed with Image J (version 1.47v, National Institutes of Health, NIH, 
USA), with the area of Gd-labeled PPA nanoparticles covering eight 
serial sections of each mice brain surveyed blind by an operator. 
2.13. Frozen sections and fluorescence imaging of microglia 
Mice (n = 3) were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of 0.2 mL 
pentobarbital sodium, carefully exposing the heart. After destroying the 
left atrial appendage (destroying the pulmonary circulation and 
retaining the systemic circulation), 25 mL normal saline and 25 mL 
paraformaldehyde were successively injected into the left ventricle. 
When touching the hard texture of the heart, it indicates that the fixation 
is good. Remove the fur on the head, cut the foramen magnum along the 
midline of the parietal bone after transecting the atlas, remove the skull 
and olfactory bulb, and obtain the separated brain tissue, which is 
immediately placed in paraformaldehyde for 12 h. The fixed brain tissue 
is dehydrated and passed through a 30% sucrose solution for 2 days, and 
then the brain stem is removed and the hippocampus containing the 
ventricles is retained. Perform cryosectioning (20 μm) by using a cryo­
stat. The samples were blocked with 1% Donkey Serum and 0.3 Triton 
for 30 min and incubated with NeuN (Abcam, USA, Rabbit, 1:200) and 
IBA 1 (Abcam, USA, mice, 1:200) overnight, and then incubated with the 
second antibody of the corresponding species (Abcam, USA, 1:400) for 2 
h, then incubated with PBS overnight, and imaged under confocal 
microscope. 
2.14. Cerebral antioxidant capability measurement 
The hippocampus tissues of the mice (n = 5) were homogenized by a 
mechanized homogenization method. The isolated brain tissue blocks 
were rinsed with ice-cold physiological saline to remove blood, dried 
with filter paper, weighed to 250 mg, and then chopped. The 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
4
homogenization medium was prepared using pH7.4, 0.025 mol/L tris- 
HCl, 0.01 mol/L sucrose, 0.1 mmol/L EDTA-2Na solution. Add 2.25 
mL (9 times the mass of brain tissue) of pre-cooled homogenization 
medium to the brain tissue fragments, and place them in a grinder to 
fully grind to homogenize the tissue at 4 ◦C (about 6–8 min) until cell 
disruption was observed under the microscope. 10% tissue homogenate 
is finally obtained. Brain homogenates were diluted with normal saline 
to determine the relative index. SOD and GSH-Px activities, ROS levels, 
and MDA content were determined spectrophotometrically with 
commercially available assay kitss (Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering 
Institute, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then the 
absorbance at 450 nm was recorded using a Fluorescence microplate 
reader (Bio-Tek Instruments, USA). 
2.15. ELISA 
Brain tissue (n = 5) was homogenized in RIPA buffer, sonicated 
briefly, and then centrifuged [19]. The supernatant was collected and 
soluble TNF-α and IL-1β were quantified using ELISA kits (Elabscience 
Biotechnology Co, Ltd, Wuhan, China) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. 
2.16. Immunohistochemistry 
Immunohistochemistry staining was applied using SP9000 (ZSGb 
Bio, China). Briefly, slides (n = 5) after dewaxing were quenched with 
3% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide for 12 min followed by tryptic antigen for 
12 min. The slices were then overlaid with 10% normal goat blocking 
serum for 12 min at room temperature and incubated with antibody for 
Aβ1-42 (1:200; Abcam, USA) overnight at 4 ◦C. The cells were then 
incubated with goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (1:200; Abcam, USA) for 1 
h at room temperature and then 3, 3′ diaminobenzidine tetrahydro­
chloride (DAB) substrate. Sections were counterstained with hematox­
ylin and images captured with an Olympus BX60 microscope. 
2.17. Thioflavin S staining 
Aβ can be stained specifically by Thioflavin S (ThS), showing as apple 
green by fluorescence microscopy. Briefly, brain sections (n = 5) were 
deparaffinized using xylene and rehydrated using ethanol of varying 
concentrations, followed by 2-min water washes. Sections were incu­
bated with 1% filtered Thioflavin S for 8 min at 4 ◦C in the dark. Wash 
twice with 85% ethanol for 3 min and 95% ethanol for 2 min, and then 
three times with distilled water for 1 min, and protect from light over­
night at 4 ◦C in a humid environment. Sections were sealed with xylene 
and green fluorescence-stained plaques were visualized using an 
Olympus BX60 microscope. 
2.18. 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging 
Mice (n = 3)were restricted to food (no water intake) for one night. 
Mice were anesthetized by inhalation of 2% isoflurane/oxygen at a flow 
rate of 0.7 L/min 18 F-FDG was then administered via the tail vein to 
mice (200 μCI per mice). After injection of 18 F-FDG, the mice were 
awakened and transferred to a place away from light. The temperature 
was about 25 ◦C and the tracer was metabolized for 40 min. After 40 
min, mice were maintained under anesthesia with 1.3% isoflurane 
during scan acquisition with PETCT equipment (Super Nova® PET/CT, 
PINGSENG Healthcare Inc, Shanghai, China) for scanning for 10 min. 
The PET images were analyzed using Avatar 1.5 software (PINGSENG, 
Shanghai, China). 
2.19. Morris water maze (MWM) 
The spatial learning and memory abilities of mice (n = 6) from each 
group were evaluated using the MWM, as described previously [20]. The 
water maze was a 1.0 m circular white opaque pool with four quadrants, 
with a transparent platform placed 1 cm below the surface of the water 
(temperature: 22.0 ± 0.5 ◦C) at a fixed position in the target quadrant. 
Two days after receiving the last injection, the mice were placed in a 
beaker and gently put into water. The mice first performed 7 consecutive 
days of visible platform training (once a day), swimming onto a trans­
parent platform (a square surface of 12 cm2), which was marked with a 
black pole. Then, the mice performed hidden platform training for 7 
consecutive days (once a day), swimming to a transparent platform 
without a black pole mark, and the mice that failed to reach the platform 
within 60 s were taken to the platform with a metal escape spoon. After 
each platform testing (including visual and hidden platform training), 
the mice were kept on the platform for 30 s, then returned to their home 
cage from the platform with metal escape spoon. The probe test was 
performed in the pool where the platform was removed, allowing the 
mice to try to search for the platform within 60 s. During the probe test, 
escape latency, time spent in the target quadrant, swimming distance, 
and swimming velocity were recorded and analyzed using Viewer 2 
Tracking Software (Ji Liang Instruments, China). 
2.20. GFP-mRFP-LC3 adenoviral transfection 
GFP-mRFP-LC3 transfection was performed to detect autophagic 
influx. BV-2 cells were infected with adenoviral vectors containing GFP- 
mRFP-LC3 (GenechemCo, Ltd, Shanghai, China) for 8 h. Treated with 
PPA nanoparticles and Aβ1-42 (5 μM) for 24 h, these cells were observed 
under a confocal microscope (Nikon A1, Japan) to calculate the number 
of yellow and green dots for evaluating autophagic influx. 
2.21. Western blotting analysis 
Western blotting analysis was performed to detect protein expression 
of inflammatory mediators such as TNFα and IL-1β. Normal and treated 
cells were collected after being transferred in 6-well polystyrene plates 
(5 × 104 cells/well) for 24 h. Total cellular protein was extracted 
through RIPA lysis buffer (BOSTER, China), sonicated on ice, centri­
fuged at 1400 rpm at 4 ◦C. About 50 μL protein samples were separated 
by SDS-PAGE on 12% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels and transferred to 
polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (PVDF, Millipore, Bedford, MA, 
USA) with 0.22 nm aperture. The membranes were blocked with 5% 
bovine serum albumin and incubated for 1 h, then incubated with pri­
mary antibodies against TNFα (Abcam, Cat# ab273761,USA, 1:1000 
and IL-1β (Abcam, Cat# ab200478,USA, 1:1000) at 4 ◦C overnight on a 
shaker. Then, the goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibodies were incu­
bated for 1 h in dark environment. Densitometric scanning normalized 
against β-actin was used to assess relative protein concentration. Blots 
were imaged using LI-COR Odyssey (Lincoln, NE, USA). 
2.22. Transmission electron microscopy 
TEM was used to observe autophagosome localization in the BV-2 
cells. Briefly, cells were first treated with 5 μM Aβ1-42 and/or 2 μg/mL 
of PPA. Cells were then collected and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min. 
Centrifuged aggregated cells were fixed in 2.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde 
for 24 h then washed four times with double distilled water. The samples 
were then incubated in Osmium tetraoxide (1% (v/v) in PBS) for 4 h to 
stabilize the phospholipid membranes of cells and organelles. The cells 
were then dehydrated using an alcohol concentration gradient (30, 50, 
75, 90, 99, and 100%), washed with PBS, and embedded in resin. Sec­
tions were sliced from the embedded cells and stained with 2% aqueous 
uranyl acetate for 1 h in the dark. Images were captured using TEM 
(Hitachi H-7650, Japan). 
2.23. Intracellular ROS detection 
The level of intracellular ROS was detected by using 2′, 7′- 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
5
dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) dye (ROS detection Kit, 
Beyotime Biotechnology, China), which is a non-fluorescent molecule 
that can cross cell membrane. Once inside the cell, it can be cleaved by 
endogenous esterase into DCFH thus can no longer diffuse out the cell. 
ROS can oxidize non-fluorescent DCFH into fluorescent dichloro­
fluorescein (DCF), as an indicator for the level of intracellular ROS. BV- 
2 cells were seeded into 96-well plates (1 × 104 cells/well). After 
treatment with PPA nanoparticles (0.5, 1, and 2 μg/mL), the cells were 
collected, washed with PBS three times, and incubated with 10 μM 
DCFH-DA in fresh DMEM at 37 ◦C for 30 min. The medium was aspirated 
after centrifuge at × 180 g and the cells were washed three times with 
PBS. The green fluorescence signal was detected and imaged using a 
confocal microscopy (Olympus BX60, Japan), while intracellular ROS 
level were determined using a microplate reader (excitation 485 nm, 
emission 530 nm, Bio-Tek Instruments, USA). 
2.24. MDA, SOD, and GSH-Px measurement 
BV-2 cells were seeded into 6-well polystyrene plates (5 × 104 cells/ 
well) and the cell culture medium was collected after treatment. Anti­
oxidant properties was detected using SOD assay kits and GSH-Px assay 
kits. Oxidative stress levels were evaluated using MDA assay kits ac­
cording to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
2.25. Evaluation of mitochondrial function: Mitochondrial membrane 
potential 
1 × 105 BV2 cells were resuspended in 0.5 mL medium, and 0.5 mL 
JC-1 staining solution (Immunochemistry Technologies, USA, 100 nM) 
was added. After mixing, the cells were incubated at 37 ◦C in dark for 20 
min. After centrifugation at 4 ◦C for 3–4 min, the cells were precipitated 
and the supernatant was discarded. JC-1 buffer was used to wash the 
cells twice and resuspend BV2 cells, and the results were analyzed by 
flow cytometry. 
2.26. Respiratory control rate 
Mitochondria are the center of cellular oxidative phosphorylation 
and respiratory chain, and mitochondrial respiratory control rate is an 
important indicator of mitochondrial function. Pure mitochondrial so­
lution was obtained by gradient centrifugation with the help of Mito­
chondrial Isolation Kit (Beyotime, China, C3601). Buffer solution 
(reagent A, 5 mL) was added to the reaction glass tank, stirred and mixed 
well by a micro magneton, and the oxygen concentration was recorded. 
The initial saturation oxygen concentration was 0.240 μmol molecular 
oxygen/mL (25 ◦C). After 1 min of continuous recording, mitochondria 
(5 μL) to be measured were added. After 1 min of continuous recording, 
substrate solution (Regent B, 5 μL) was added to detect Respiratory State 
IV. After 2 min of continuous recording, substrate solution (Regent C, 5 
μL) was added to detect Respiratory State III. Keep recording until 
obvious linear inflection point appears. The rate of Respiratory State III 
and State IV = Oxygen concentration decrease value/actual time (mi­
nutes). Respiratory control rate = The Rate of Respiratory State III/The 
Rate of Respiratory State III. 
2.27. Mitochondrial ATP content detection 
Mitochondrial ATP content was detected by ATP content detection 
kit (Nanjing Jiancheng, China) according to the instructions. 
2.28. Statistical analysis 
Statistical analysis and graphing were done with GraphPad Prism. All 
values are expressed as the means ± SD. Escape latency during the 
MWM spatial learning tests was analyzed by two-way analysis of vari­
ance (ANOVA) with Student-Newman-Keuls post-hoc tests. All other 
experiments were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post- 
hoc test. A value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
3. Results and discussion 
With the aim of preparing a nanoparticle platform that could effi­
cient cross the BBB and modulate microglia metabolism we specifically 
designed a hybrid nanoparticle platform that comprises of an iron-based 
coordination compound-Prussian blue core which complexed with 
hyperbranched polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer and conjugation 
of ANG-2. Although previous work showed the ROS scavenging and anti- 
inflammatory properties of PB in cancer research [19], to the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first report to demonstrate its neuroprotective 
properties and restoration of mitochondrial function of microglia for AD 
treatment. 
Many attempts have been made to treat AD by modulating the hy­
peractive microglia [20–23], but most of them have limited efficacy, 
mainly because of difficulty of penetration of drugs through blood-brain 
barrier and lacking the capacity of regulating the metabolism of 
microglia [24,25]. The poor transport of high-energy electrons in 
mitochondria leads to the production of ROS in microglia, which is 
correlated with neuroinflammation and might relate to pathologic 
progression of AD. Improving the overall function of mitochondria 
through mitochondrial autophagy can not only reduce the formation of 
amyloid plaques, but also inhibit neurodegeneration [26–28]. 
3.1. PPA NPs exert catalase activity 
The PPA NPs were prepared using simple colloidal chemistry by 
mixing FeCl3 with K4Fe(CN)6 in the presence of PAMAM. To enhance 
BBB transport efficacy, ANG-2 was conjugated to PAMAM through 
carbodiimide chemistry. As shown by scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) (Fig. 1a) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. 1b) 
analysis, spherical NPs with hydrodynamic diameters of ~49 ± 15 nm 
were formed, which was also supported by DLS detection (Fig. 1c). 
While the surface potential of the bare PB NPs was negative (−22 mV), 
the zeta-potentials of the PP and PPA NPs were +23 and + 19 mV 
respectively after the incorporation of PAMAM and ANG-2. In addition, 
NPs with ANG-2 modification showed a slight decrease in zeta-potential 
compared to those with PAMAM incorporation (Fig. 1d). The infrared 
spectrum showed a characteristic absorption peak at 2080 cm−1 which 
corresponds to nitrile CN stretch of cyano group (Fig. 1e), indicating that 
ANG-2 was successfully incorporated to the surface of NPs. In addition, 
NPs with ANG-2 modification showed larger hydrodynamic diameter 
compared to unmodified ones, further indicating that ANG-2 has been 
modified on the surface of NPs (Fig. 1f). As a contrast agent of MRI, 
Gd3+ has been successfully bound to NPs through elemental analysis, 
and its elemental inclusion rate was 0.09% (Fig. 1g). Peroxidase activity 
increases with the concentration of PPA particles in the range of 0–2.0 
μg/mL. The catalase activity of PPA NPs is reflected in the amount of 
oxygen produced in H2O2 solutions with different pH values (Fig. 1h and 
i). The results show that PPA particles produce a large amount of oxygen 
in an alkaline environment, implying their catalase activity. 
3.2. PPA NPs exhibit good cytocompatibility in vitro and in vivo 
We next sought to determine cellular compatibility of PPA nano­
particles with BV-2 cells. CCK-8 assay was performed at different PPA 
concentrations from 0.1 to 8 μg/mL (Fig. 2a). No significant effect on 
cell viability was observed at concentrations below 4 μg/mL; thus, the 
PPA NPs (0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 μg/mL) were used in subsequent in vitro and 
in vivo experiments. To evaluate its potential cytotoxicity, in vivo safety 
experiments were performed through histological staining. PPA solu­
tions of different concentrations were injected into the mice by tail vein 
injection (twice a week for four consecutive weeks). H&E staining re­
sults show that there are no noticeable differences in the internal organs 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
6
(heart, liver, spleen, lung and kidney) of PPA-treated mice compared to 
those untreated mice, suggesting low cytotoxicity of PPA NPs (Fig. S1, 
Supplementary Materials). 
3.3. PPA nanoparticles reduced Aβ1-42 induced cytotoxicity in BV-2 cells 
The effect of PPA on the viability of BV-2 cells treated with Aβ1-42 
(5 μM, 24 h) was then investigated. The results showed that while Aβ1- 
42 markedly decreased the viability of BV-2 cells (by 50.71%) compared 
to untreated group, PPA significantly increased the viability of BV-2 cells 
treated with Aβ1-42 in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 2b); We further 
performed live/dead assays to confirm that PPA could protect BV-2 cells 
against Aβ1-42. As shown in Fig. 2c, BV-2 cell density and viability were 
significantly reduced in Aβ1-42 treated group compared to untreated 
group, incubation of Aβ1-42-treated BV-2 cells with PPA nanoparticles 
markedly increased the viability and density of BV-2 cells, with highest 
increase in density and viability for groups treated with 1 and 2 μg/mL 
of PPA nanoparticles. 
3.4. ANG-2 conjugation increases penetration of NPs across BBB 
We further investigated the mechanism of BBB penetration by PPA 
NPs in vitro BBB model developed with mice brain capillary endothelial 
cells (BCECs) (Fig. 2d). BCECs were seeded on porous membrane until 
tight junction formation, as confirmed by monitoring the trans­
endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) for the cell monolayer every 2 
days until it reached a plateau around 200 Ω cm2, as this value is a 
widely accepted indicator that the BBB model matches the physiological 
structure in vivo [16,17,29]. Then, PPA NPs at a concentration of 2 
μg/mL were added on the apical side. Following predetermined time of 
incubation, aliquots from the basolateral chamber were collected, and 
the number of NPs that crossed the cell layer into the basolateral side 
was quantified by detection of the concentration of Fe2+. As shown in 
Fig. 2e, compared to PP NPs, ANG-2 conjugated PPA NPs showed 
significantly higher penetration across the cell layer following 0.5, 1, 2 
and 4 h incubation, which suggest that ANG-2 ligand plays a crucial role 
in the transport of PPA across BBB. On the animal level, MRI imaging 
was used to detect the intracranial distribution of PPA NPs in APP/PS1 
mice. As shown in Fig. 2f, 4 h after injection of PPA NPs into the tail vein, 
Fig. 1. Nanoparticle characterization. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of PPA nanoparticles; (c) Size distribution histograms of PPA nanoparticles; (d) Zeta potential of 
different nanoparticles (mean ± s.d, n = 3, *p < 0.05); (e) FT-IR spectra of PP and PPA nanoparticles; (f) Hydrodynamic sizes of PP and PPA nanoparticles; (g) EDX 
analysis of PPA nanoparticles; (h) Peroxidase activity of PPA nanoparticles with different concentrations; (i) Oxygen generation catalyzed by PPA nanoparticles 
increased gradually with time at pH values of 3.6, 7.6 and 9.8. 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
7
Fig. 2. PPA NPs’ cytotoxicity and BBB penetration ability. (a) Cytotoxicity to BV-2 cells after 24 h incubation with PPA at varied concentrations (mean ± s.d, n = 6, 
*p < 0.05) (b–c) BV-2 cells were treated with Aβ1-42 (5 μM) and/or various concentrations of PPA nanoparticles (0.5, 1 or 2 μg/mL) for 24 h. Cell viability is assessed 
by CCK-8 (b, bars with different letters are significantly different from each other at p < 0.05) and Live/dead staining (c, Scale bar: 400 μm). (d) Schematic diagram of 
the in vitro BBB model. e) Transcytosis efficiency of PPA in the in vitro BBB model (mean ± s.d, n = 3, *p < 0.05). (f–g) In vivo targeted MRI imaging. f) In vivo T1- 
weighted MR images of PPA. The yellow arrow indicates a positive signal. g) MR signal intensity variations in different groups (mean ± s.d, n = 3, *p < 0.05). (For 
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
8
PPA NPs have a definite permeability to the blood-brain barrier, as 
evidenced by high signal presented in the brain tissue of APP/PS1 mice, 
whereas no positive signal was observed in control group. Taken 
together, these results indicate that PPA NPs have remarkable BBB 
permeability. 
3.5. PPA NPs suppress the activation of microglia to control the oxidation 
and the inflammation in APP/PS1 mice 
As the main neuroimmune cells located throughout the brain, 
microglia constitute 5–12% of CNS cells found within the brain and are 
important for neuronal information transmission, memory formation 
and retention, and maintenance of brain functions [30]. Hyperactive 
microglia are considered to be detrimental as they release a large 
number of neurotoxic substances, such as free radicals and 
pro-inflammatory cytokines, and if unchecked, could worsen AD 
[31–33]. 
To evaluate if PPA NPs could modulate the hyperactive microglia in a 
APP/PS1 model, ionized calcium-binding adaptor protein-1(IBA-1) was 
used as an immunohistochemical marker as it functions in the actin- 
crosslinking involved in membrane ruffling of microglia [34], and 
membrane ruffling is essential for the morphological changes from 
quiescent microglia to hyperactive microglia, thus by labeling IBA-1, we 
can visually determine the activation stage of all individual microglia. 
Fig. 3. PPA nanoparticles suppress the activation of microglia to control the oxidation and the inflammation in APP/PS1 mice. (a) Immunofluorescence of fresh brain 
tissue is detected with IBA-1 labelling. (b–e) ROS, MDA, SOD and GSH-Px content in cerebrospinal fluid (mean ± s.d, n = 5, bars with different letters are 
significantly different from each other at p < 0.05); (f) The levels of IL-1β and TNF-α in brain tissue (hippocampus and cerebral cortex, mean ± s.d, n = 3, bars with 
different letters are significantly different from each other at p < 0.05); (h–i) Plaques in brain tissue were detected by IHC (h) and ThS staining (i), respectively, (mean 
± s.d, n = 3, bars with different letters are significantly different from each other at p < 0.05). 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
9
The microglia in the brain of untreated APP/PS1 mice were labeled with 
IBA1, and continuous PPA NPs treatment effectively suppressed the 
activation of microglia as the cells showed clear outline and extensive 
antennae (Fig. 3a). Consequentially, the content of oxidation products 
(Fig. 3b–e) and inflammatory cytokines (Fig. 3f–g) in brain were also 
significantly reduced. Notably, Aβ, whose buildup directly correlate 
with synaptic dysfunction, inflammation and cell death, was also 
significantly reduced, both in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex 
(Fig. 3h–i). 
3.6. PPA NPs rescue memory and brain function in APP/PS1 model mice 
Neurons are the main components of nervous system which contains 
tens of thousands of dendrites and axons. These dendrites and axons 
connect with each other and form neural reflex arc through synapses. 
Therefore, neurons are widely recognized as the institutional basis for 
the transmission of nerve electrical signals and the construction, storage 
and extraction of memory information [35]. The loss and deterioration 
of memory in Alzheimer’s disease is generally related to the damage of 
neurons by abnormally hyperactive microglia [36–39]. 
Because PPA NPs showed superior effect in reversing the abnormal 
behavior of microglia, we further investigated if reeducated microglia 
could attenuate the impairment of neurons, in turn increase the numbers 
of neurons and rescue memory function. NeuN antibodies were used to 
label neurons, Fig. 4a and b shows that PPA NPs treatment significantly 
increased the number of neurons. 18 F-FDG PET was used to assess the 
glucose metabolism in the brain, which can indirectly reflect neuronal 
function as decreased 18 F-FDG-PET uptake has been shown to reflect 
impaired cognitive function and correlate well with disease severity 
[40]. AD mice treated with PPA NPs exhibited a homogenous 
FDG-distribution and higher uptake in all brain areas compared to un­
treated ones (Fig. 4c and Fig. S2). These results suggest that the number 
and function of neurons have been significantly improved by main­
taining the physiological balance of microglia. Finally, the overall 
memory function and learning acquisition in APP/PS1 mice was eval­
uated through the MWM test (Fig. 4d–f). There was no significant dif­
ference in swimming distance or velocity between the four groups, 
suggesting that PPA nanoparticles did not influence the locomotor ac­
tivity of the mice. However, the time taken to find the hidden platform 
(escape latency) progressively decreased during the seven training days 
(Fig. 4d). Compared with the WT mice, APP/PS1 mice spent more time 
locating the platform, indicating a significant cognitive decline in 
learning. Surprisingly, there was no significant difference between the 
WT mice and those treated with PPA nanoparticles and donepezil (Don), 
indicating that spatial memory was significantly improved by the PPA 
NPs treatment (Fig. 4e). Probe trials were performed to assess spatial 
memory maintenance on day 7. APP/PS1 mice crossed the platform 
position less frequently (Fig. 4d), took more time to reach the missing 
platform (Fig. 4f), and spent less time in the target quadrant than the WT 
mice. In addition, there was no significant difference in swimming dis­
tance or velocity between the four groups, suggesting that PPA nano­
particles did not influence the locomotor activity of the mice (Fig. 4f). 
These results indicate that PPA nanoparticles improved the spatial 
learning and memory of APP/PS1mice. 
3.7. Mitophagy suppresses the activation of microglia through PPA 
treatment 
The activation of microglia is regarded as be an important skeptic of 
culprit of AD. Our results have indicated that PPA nanoparticles can 
reverse the pathological activation of microglia, but the underlying 
mechanism is still unclear. To elucidate the mechanism why PPA NPs 
could facilitate microglia modulation, we assessed the mitochondrial 
metabolism and function of BV-2 cells. As shown in Fig. 5a, autophagy 
flow was visualized by LC3 immunofluorescence, which revealed that 
PPA effectively triggered autophagy in a concentration dependent 
manner. When autophagy is induced, the cytosolic form LC3-I is con­
jugated to phosphatidylethanolamine to form LC3-II, although the exact 
mechanism of why PPA NPs treatment increased the expression of LC3 
was still unclear, we speculate that PPA NPs were internalized by 
microglia and induced AMPK/mTOR autophagy signals [41]. The 
expression of Beclin-1 and ATG7 was also markedly upregulated 
(Fig. 5b). At the same time, autophagosome (AP, yellow arrow) and 
autolysosomes (AL, blue arrow) were visually presented as evidence of 
autophagy in TEM images (Fig. 5c). More importantly, Aβ1-42 treated 
BV-2 cells showed clear mitochondrial contours and structures after 
treatment with PPA NPs (red arrow), which are different from the am­
biguities of mitochondrial structure in Aβ1-42 treated BV-2 cells, but it 
itself is considered to be a manifestation of mitochondrial dysfunction 
and abnormal membrane potential. 
To fully assess the mitochondrial function of BV-2 cells, mitochon­
drial membrane potential (MMP), respiratory control rate (RCR) and 
ATP production rate were also tested. As shown in Fig. 5d–g, PPA NPs 
significantly improved AB1-24-mediated membrane potential reduc­
tion. In the process of respiration and oxidation, the mitochondria store 
the energy generated in the inner mitochondrial membrane with elec­
trochemical potential energy, causing the asymmetric distribution of 
proton and other ion concentrations around it to form the MMP [42]. 
Normal MMP is a prerequisite for maintaining mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation and producing adenosine triphosphate. The mainte­
nance of MMP is correlative to the normal physiological functions of 
cells [43]. Respiratory control rate (RCR) and ATP production rate are 
used as a classic method to evaluate the structural and functional 
integrity of mitochondria and the efficiency of oxidative phosphoryla­
tion. The results showed that PPA nanoparticles effectively increased the 
RCR and ATP production. Therefore, we suggest PPA NPs could activate 
mitophagy and maintain mitochondrial function. 
Mitochondria play central role in the respiratory chain and oxidative 
phosphorylation of microglia, they not only directly affect energy 
metabolism, but also regulate metabolism directly or indirectly[44]. As 
shown in Figs. 5 and 6, along with the regulation of mitochondrial 
function (Fig. 5d–g), the oxidation level (ROS, SOD, MDA and GSH-Px, 
Fig. 6a–c) and inflammatory mediators (IL-1β, TNF-α, Fig. 6de) of 
microglia were significantly inhibited by PPA NPs in a dose-dependent 
manner. Lastly, with the aim of validating the correlation between 
mitophagy and antioxidant effect of PPA, autophagy inhibitor 
(3-methyladenine, 3-MA) was used. Surprisingly, it was observed that 
PPA-mediated reduction of inflammatory mediators (IL-1β, TNF-α, 
Fig. 6f and g) and degree of oxidation (ROS, Fig. 6h) was reversed with 
3-MA treatment. Therefore, we speculate that the mechanism of ROS 
inhibition by PPA NPs lies in the activation of mitophagy to eliminate 
abnormal mitochondria that generate a large amount of ROS. This 
inference could explain why 3-MA as an autophagy inhibitor is able to 
reverse the PPA-mediated ROS reduction. In future work, other auto­
phagy related biomarkers need to be checked to support this 
observation. 
4. Conclusion 
Our Prussian Blue/PAMAM/Angiopep-2 (PPA) 
nanoparticles 
exhibited excellent BBB penetrability and microglia modulation in APP/ 
PS1 model mice study. Importantly, through specifically labelling the 
biomarker for autophagy, we confirmed the synergistic effect of PPA NPs 
for normalization of microenvironment mainly because PPA NPs could 
regulate the metabolism of microglia through activating mitophagy 
(Scheme 1). Notably, by suppressing hyperactive microglia, the Aβ 
deposition in the brain tissue also drops significantly. As neuro­
inflammation, oxidative damage and Aβ deposition are important pro­
moters of neuronal damage in Alzheimer’s disease, the improvement of 
the microenvironment in the brain tissue directly contributes to the 
inhibition of neuronal damage and the improvement of memory func­
tion of APP/PS1 mice. Our results suggest this hybrid nanoparticles 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
10
Fig. 4. PPA nanoparticles rescue memory in APP/PS mice. PPA nanoparticles were injected into the tail vein of APP/PS mice for four consecutive weeks. (a) 
Immunofluorescence (NeuN) shows the number of neurons in brain tissue; (b) Quantitative analysis of immunofluorescence pictures (mean ± s.d, n = 3,*p < 0.05); 
(c)18 F-FDG PET detects glucose metabolism in mice. (d) Representative track images in the probe trial. The red circle represents the position of the mice entering the 
water, and the purple circle represents the position of the platform. (e) Escape latency during spatial acquisition training (mean ± s.d, n = 3,*p < 0.05). (f) Escape 
latency, time spent, swimming distance and swimming velocity in the probe trial. Data are presented as the mean ± s.d, n = 5, bars with different letters are 
significantly different from each other at p < 0.05. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of 
this article.) 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
11
Fig. 5. PPA nanoparticles trigger mitophagy to rescue mitochondrial function. BV-2 cells are treated for 24 h. (a)Immunofluorescence display autophagy flow (LC3, 
Scale bar = 20 μm), and the numbers of autophagosomes per cell in each condition were quantified. (the mean ± s.d, n = 6, *p < 0.05); (b) Transmission electron 
microscopy analysis (Yellow arrows represent Autophagosome, AP; blue arrows represent Autolysosomes, AL; red arrows represent mitochondria), the numbers of AP 
and AL per cell in each condition were quantified (the mean ± s.d, n = 9, *p < 0.05). (c) Expression levels of Beclin-1 and ATG-7 in various groups by western 
blotting. (d–e) Mitochondrial membrane potential (the mean ± s.d, n = 9, *p < 0.05). (f) Respiratory control rate of BV-2 cells (the mean ± s.d, n = 9, *p < 0.05). (g) 
ATP production of BV-2 cells (the mean ± s.d, n = 9, *p < 0.05). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web 
version of this article.) 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
12
Fig. 6. Manipulating autophagy is the key to PPA nanoparticles to inhibit inflammation and antioxidant. (a) ROS staining (Scale bar = 20 μm). (b–c) The content of 
ROS, MDA, SOD and GSH-Px in BV-2 cells (the mean ± s.d, n = 5, bars with different letters are significantly different from each other at p < 0.05). (d) Expression of 
IL-1β and TNF-α in various groups by Western blotting. (e) Expression of TNF-α by immunofluorescence (Scale bar = 25 μm). Autophagy inhibitor 3-MA treatment for 
24 h. (f–g) Expression of IL-1β and TNF-α in various groups by Western blotting (f) and ELISA (g). (h) ROS content (mean ± s.d, n = 20, *p < 0.05). 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
13
platform could become promising neuroprotective agents for the treat­
ment of AD by inducing autophagy of microglia and correction of the 
brain microenvironment. 
Data availability 
Data supporting the findings of this study are available within the 
article and its Supplementary Information files and from the corre­
sponding author upon reasonable request. 
Credit author statement 
Gang Zhong and Huiping Long contributed equally to this work. 
Gang Zhong and Huiping Long: Design and execution of all experi­
ments, manuscript preparation and revision; Gang Zhong, Huiping 
Long, Tian Zhou and Fei Chen: Material preparation and character­
ization; Yisi Liu, Jianping Zhao, Jinyu Han, Xiaohu Yang: aided in 
performing research. Fei Chen, Yin Yu and Shengliang Shi.: Design 
and supervision of all experiments, manuscript preparation, and revi­
sion. The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. 
All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Pingsheng Medical Technology Co., Ltd. 
(Shanghai, China) for providing technical assistance with microCT im­
aging. Graphical Table of Contents was created with Biorender.com. 
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Grant No. 82002355; 32000727), Shenzhen 
Institute of Advanced Technology (SIAT) Innovation Program for 
Excellent Young Researcher (Y9G075) and Shenzhen Institute of Syn­
thetic Biology Scientific Research Program (Grant No. DWKF20190010, 
JCHZ20200005), and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Reuter 
Foundation (Grant No. 2019A1515110948). 
Scheme 1. Illustration of the microglia induced AD microenvironment and mechanisms of regulating the metabolism of microglia through activating mitophagy.  
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
14
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2022.121690. 
References 
[1] J. Gaugler, B. James, T. Johnson, K. Scholz, J. Weuve, Alzheimer’s disease facts and 
figures, Alzheimer’s Dementia 12 (2016) 459–509, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jalz.2016.03.001, 2016. 
[2] S. Bennett, M. Grant, A.J. Creese, F. Mangialasche, R. Cecchetti, H.J. Cooper, 
P. Mecocci, S. Aldred, Plasma levels of complement 4a protein are increased in 
Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 26 (2012) 329–334, https://doi. 
org/10.1097/WAD.0b013e318239dcbd. 
[3] K.S. Kosik, Alzheimer’s disease: a cell biological perspective, Science 256 (1992) 
780–783, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1589757. 
[4] V. Mangale, A.R. Syage, H.A. Ekiz, D.D. Skinner, Y. Cheng, C.L. Stone, R.M. Brown, 
R.M. O’Connell, K.N. Green, T.E. Lane, Microglia influence host defense, disease, 
and repair following murine coronavirus infection of the central nervous system, 
Glia 68 (2020) 2345–2360, https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.23844. 
[5] D. Giulian, Ameboid microglia as effectors of inflammation in the central nervous 
system, J. Neurosci. Res. 18 (1987) 155–171, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
jnr.490180123. 
[6] T. Bartels, S. De Schepper, S. Hong, Microglia modulate neurodegeneration in 
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, Science 370 (2020) 66–69, https://doi.org/ 
10.1126/science.abb8587. 
[7] F. Leng, P. Edison, Neuroinflammation and microglial activation in Alzheimer 
disease: where do we go from here? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17 (2021) 157–172, https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s41582-020-00435-y. 
[8] I. Agrawal, S. Jha, Mitochondrial dysfunction and alzheimer’s disease: role of 
microglia, Front. Aging Neurosci. 12 (2020) 252, https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnagi.2020.00252. 
[9] J.Y. Lee, S.H. Han, M.H. Park, I.S. Song, M.K. Choi, E. Yu, C.M. Park, H.J. Kim, S. 
H. Kim, E.H. Schuchman, H.K. Jin, J. sung Bae, N-AS-triggered SPMs are direct 
regulators of microglia in a model of Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 
2358, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16080-4. 
[10] T. Ali, S.U. Rahman, Q. Hao, W. Li, Z. Liu, F. Ali Shah, I. Murtaza, Z. Zhang, 
X. Yang, G. Liu, S. Li, Melatonin prevents neuroinflammation and relieves 
depression by attenuating autophagy impairment through FOXO3a regulation, 
J. Pineal Res. 69 (2020), e12667, https://doi.org/10.1111/jpi.12667. 
[11] W. Zhang, S. Hu, J.J. Yin, W. He, W. Lu, M. Ma, N. Gu, Y. Zhang, Prussian blue 
nanoparticles as multienzyme mimetics and reactive oxygen species scavengers, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (2016) 5860–5865, https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5b12070. 
[12] A. Sharma, J.E. Porterfield, E. Smith, R. Sharma, S. Kannan, R.M. Kannan, Effect of 
mannose targeting of hydroxyl PAMAM dendrimers on cellular and organ 
biodistribution in a neonatal brain injury model, J. Contr. Release 283 (2018) 
175–189, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2018.06.003. 
[13] M. Demeule, J.C. Currie, Y. Bertrand, C. Che, T. Nguyen, A. Regina, R. Gabathuler, 
J.P. Castaigne, R. Beliveau, Involvement of the low-density lipoprotein receptor- 
related protein in the transcytosis of the brain delivery vector angiopep-2, 
J. Neurochem. 106 (4) (2008) 1534–1544, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471- 
4159.2008.05492.x. 
[14] J.D. Malcor, N. Payrot, M. David, A. Faucon, K. Abouzid, G. Jacquot, N. Floquet, 
F. Debarbieux, G. Rougon, J. Martinez, M. Khrestchatisky, P. Vlieghe, V. Lisowski, 
Chemical optimization of new ligands of the low-density lipoprotein receptor as 
potential vectors for central nervous system targeting, J. Med. Chem. 55 (5) (2012) 
2227–2241, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202000416. 10.1021/jm2014919. 
[15] A. Duro-Castano, C. Borras, V. Herranz-Perez, M.C. Blanco-Gandia, I. Conejos- 
Sanchez, A. Arminan, C. Mas-Bargues, M. Ingles, J. Minarro, M. Rodriguez-Arias, J. 
M. Garcia-Verdugo, J. Vina, M.J. Vicent, Targeting Alzheimer’s disease with 
multimodal polypeptide-based nanoconjugates, Sci. Adv. 7 (13) (2021), https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abf9180. 
[16] K. Liang, Z. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Zhang, F. Yin, L. Xu, H. Chen, H. Wang, Intelligent 
nanocomposites with intrinsic blood-brain-barrier crossing ability designed for 
highly specific MR imaging and sonodynamic therapy of glioblastoma, Small 16 (8) 
(2020), e1906985, https://doi.org/10.5812/iranjradiol.20782. 
[17] Y. Jiang, J. Zhang, F. Meng, Z. Zhong, Apolipoprotein e Peptide-Directed Chimeric 
Polymersomes Mediate an Ultrahigh-Efficiency Targeted Protein Therapy for 
Glioblastoma, ACS Nano 12 (2018) 11070–11079, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.8b05265. 
[18] S. Park, B.K. Kwak, J. Jung, Sensitivity of susceptibility-weighted imaging in 
detecting superparamagnetic iron oxide-labeled mesenchymal stem cells: a 
comparative study, Iran. J. Radiol. 12 (2) (2015), e20782, https://doi.org/ 
10.5812/iranjradiol.20782. 
[19] M. Fahnestock, B. Michalski, B. Xu, M.D. Coughlin, The precursor pro-nerve 
growth factor is the predominant form of nerve growth factor in brain and is 
increased in Alzheimer’s disease, Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 18 (2) (2001) 210–220, 
https://doi.org/10.1006/mcne.2001.1016. 
[20] M.A. Westerman, D. Cooper-Blacketer, A. Mariash, L. Kotilinek, T. Kawarabayashi, 
L.H. Younkin, G.A. Carlson, S.G. Younkin, K.H. Ashe, The relationship between 
Abeta and memory in the Tg2576 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neurosci. 
22 (5) (2002) 1858–1867, https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-05- 
01858.2002. 
[21] W. Chen, K. Zeng, H. Liu, J. Ouyang, L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, L. Deng, Y.N. Liu, 
Cell membrane camouflaged hollow prussian blue nanoparticles for synergistic 
photothermal-/chemotherapy of cancer, Adv. Funct. Mater. 27 (2017), 1605795, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201605795. 
[22] T.K. Ulland, W.M. Song, S.C.C. Huang, J.D. Ulrich, A. Sergushichev, W.L. Beatty, A. 
A. Loboda, Y. Zhou, N.J. Cairns, A. Kambal, E. Loginicheva, S. Gilfillan, M. Cella, H. 
W. Virgin, E.R. Unanue, Y. Wang, M.N. Artyomov, D.M. Holtzman, M. Colonna, 
TREM2 maintains microglial metabolic fitness in alzheimer’s disease, Cell 170 
(2017) 649–663, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201906985. 
[23] K. Schlepckow, K.M. Monroe, G. Kleinberger, L. Cantuti-Castelvetri, S. Parhizkar, 
D. Xia, M. Willem, G. Werner, N. Pettkus, B. Brunner, A. Sülzen, B. Nuscher, 
H. Hampel, X. Xiang, R. Feederle, S. Tahirovic, J.I. Park, R. Prorok, C. Mahon, 
C. Liang, J. Shi, D.J. Kim, H. Sabelstr¨om, F. Huang, G. Di Paolo, M. Simons, J. 
W. Lewcock, C. Haass, Enhancing protective microglial activities with a dual 
function TREM 2 antibody to the stalk region, EMBO Mol. Med. 12 (2020), e11227, 
https://doi.org/10.15252/emmm.201911227. 
[24] Y. Huang, K.E. Happonen, P.G. Burrola, C. O’Connor, N. Hah, L. Huang, 
A. Nimmerjahn, G. Lemke, Microglia use TAM receptors to detect and engulf 
amyloid β plaques, Nat. Immunol. 22 (2021) 586–594. 
[25] T.J. Bussian, A. Aziz, C.F. Meyer, B.L. Swenson, J.M. van Deursen, D.J. Baker, 
Clearance of senescent glial cells prevents tau-dependent pathology and cognitive 
decline, Nature 562 (2018) 578–582, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0543- 
y. 
[26] E. Zenaro, G. Piacentino, G. Constantin, The blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer’s 
disease, Neurobiol. Dis. 107 (2017) 41–56, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nbd.2016.07.007. 
[27] J. Keaney, M. Campbell, The dynamic blood-brain barrier, FEBS J. 282 (2015) 
4067–4079, https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.13412. 
[28] V. Sorrentino, M. Romani, L. Mouchiroud, J.S. Beck, H. Zhang, D. D’Amico, 
N. Moullan, F. Potenza, A.W. Schmid, S. Rietsch, S.E. Counts, J. Auwerx, Enhancing 
mitochondrial proteostasis reduces amyloid-β proteotoxicity, Nature 552 (2017) 
187–193, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25143. 
[29] H. Katayama, H. Hama, K. Nagasawa, H. Kurokawa, M. Sugiyama, R. Ando, 
M. Funata, N. Yoshida, M. Homma, T. Nishimura, M. Takahashi, Y. Ishida, 
H. Hioki, Y. Tsujihata, A. Miyawaki, Visualizing and modulating mitophagy for 
therapeutic studies of neurodegeneration, Cell 181 (2020) 1176–1187, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.025. 
[30] Y. Hou, X. Dan, M. Babbar, Y. Wei, S.G. Hasselbalch, D.L. Croteau, V.A. Bohr, 
Ageing as a risk factor for neurodegenerative disease, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 15 (2019) 
565–581, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-019-0244-7. 
[31] S. Hickman, S. Izzy, P. Sen, L. Morsett, J. El Khoury, Microglia in 
neurodegeneration, Nat. Neurosci. 21 (2018) 1359–1369, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41593-018-0242-x. 
[32] D.M. Paresce, H. Chung, F.R. Maxfield, Slow degradation of aggregates of the 
Alzheimer’s disease amyloid beta-protein by microglial cells, J. Biol. Chem. 272 
(46) (1997) 29390–29397. 
[33] X.D. Pan, Y.G. Zhu, N. Lin, J. Zhang, Q.Y. Ye, H.P. Huang, X.C. Chen, Microglial 
phagocytosis induced by fibrillar beta-amyloid is attenuated by oligomeric beta- 
amyloid: implications for Alzheimer’s disease, Mol. Neurodegener. 6 (2011) 45. 
[34] C. Venegas, S. Kumar, B.S. Franklin, T. Dierkes, R. Brinkschulte, D. Tejera, 
A. Vieira-Saecker, S. Schwartz, F. Santarelli, M.P. Kummer, A. Griep, E. Gelpi, 
M. Beilharz, D. Riedel, D.T. Golenbock, M. Geyer, J. Walter, E. Latz, M.T. Heneka, 
Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-beta in Alzheimer’s disease, 
Nature 552 (7685) (2017) 355–361. 
[35] M. Dani, M. Wood, R. Mizoguchi, Z. Fan, Z. Walker, R. Morgan, R. Hinz, M. Biju, 
T. Kuruvilla, D.J. Brooks, P. Edison, Microglial activation correlates in vivo with 
both tau and amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease, Brain 141 (9) (2018) 2740–2754, 
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awy188. 
[36] Y. Sasaki, K. Ohsawa, H. Kanazawa, S. Kohsaka, Y. Imai, Iba1 is an actin-cross- 
linking protein in macrophages/microglia, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 286 
(2001) 292–297, https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.5388. 
[37] H. Jahn, Memory loss in alzheimer’s disease, Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 15 (2013) 
445–454, https://doi.org/10.31887/dcns.2013.15.4/hjahn. 
[38] R. Socodato, C.C. Portugal, T. Canedo, A. Rodrigues, T.O. Almeida, J.F. Henriques, 
S.H. Vaz, J. Magalhaes, C.M. Silva, F.I. Baptista, R.L. Alves, V. Coelho-Santos, A. 
P. Silva, R. Paes-de-Carvalho, A. Magalhaes, C. Brakebusch, A.M. Sebastiao, 
T. Summavielle, A.F. Ambrosio, J.B. Relvas, Microglia dysfunction caused by the 
loss of rhoa disrupts neuronal physiology and leads to neurodegeneration, Cell Rep. 
31 (12) (2020), 107796, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107796. 
[39] A. Hayes, U. Thaker, T. Iwatsubo, S.M. Pickering-Brown, D.M. Mann, Pathological 
relationships between microglial cell activity and tau and amyloid beta protein in 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease, Neurosci. Lett. 331 (3) (2002) 171–174, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/s0304-3940(02)00888-1. 
[40] M. Kitazawa, T.R. Yamasaki, F.M. LaFerla, Microglia as a potential bridge between 
the amyloid beta-peptide and tau, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1035 (2004) 85–103, 
https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1332.006. 
[41] R. Jin, L. Liu, W. Zhu, D. Li, L. Yang, J. Duan, Z. Cai, Y. Nie, Y. Zhang, Q. Gong, 
B. Song, L. Wen, J.M. Anderson, H. Ai, Iron oxide nanoparticles promote 
macrophage autophagy and inflammatory response through activation of toll-like 
Receptor-4 signaling, Biomaterials 203 (2019) 23–30, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2019.02.026. 
[42] A. Drzezga, D. Altomare, C. Festari, J. Arbizu, S. Orini, K. Herholz, P. Nestor, 
F. Agosta, F. Bouwman, F. Nobili, Z. Walker, G.B. Frisoni, M. Boccardi, Diagnostic 
utility of 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) in 
G. Zhong et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

Biomaterials 288 (2022) 121690
15
asymptomatic subjects at increased risk for Alzheimer’s disease, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. 
Mol. Imag. 45 (2018) 1487–1496, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00259-018-4032-1. 
[43] L.D. Zorova, V.A. Popkov, E.Y. Plotnikov, D.N. Silachev, I.B. Pevzner, S. 
S. Jankauskas, V.A. Babenko, S.D. Zorov, A.V. Balakireva, M. Juhaszova, S. 
J. Sollott, D.B. Zorov, Mitochondrial membrane potential, Anal. Biochem. 552 
(2018) 50–59, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ab.2017.07.009. 
[44] L.D. Osellame, T.S. Blacker, M.R. Duchen, Cellular and molecular mechanisms of 
mitochondrial function, Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metabol. 26 (2012) 
711–723, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2012.05.003. 
G. Zhong et al.