REVIEW
www.advmat.de
Multiscale Bioresponses of Metal Nanoclusters
Yujia Shi, Zhennan Wu,* Manlin Qi, Chengyu Liu, Weinan Dong, Wenyue Sun, Xue Wang,
Feng Jiang, Yuan Zhong, Di Nan, Yu Zhang, Chunyan Li,* Lin Wang,* and Xue Bai*
Metal nanoclusters (NCs) are well-recognized novel nano-agents that hold
great promise for applications in nanomedicine because of their ultraﬁne size,
low toxicity, and high renal clearance. As foreign substances, however, an
in-depth understanding of the bioresponses to metal NCs is necessary but is
still far from being realized. Herein, this review is deployed to summarize the
biofates of metal NCs at various biological levels, emphasizing their
multiscale bioresponses at the molecular, cellular, and organismal levels. In
the parts-to-whole schema, the interactions between biomolecules and metal
NCs are discussed, presenting typical protein-dictated nano–bio interfaces,
hierarchical structures, and in vivo trajectories. Then, the accumulation,
internalization, and metabolic evolution of metal NCs in the cellular
environment and as-imparted theranostic functionalization are demonstrated.
The organismal metabolism and transportation processes of the metal NCs
are subsequently distilled. Finally, this review ends with the conclusions and
perspectives on the outstanding issues of metal NC-mediated bioresponses in
the near future. This review is expected to provide inspiration for tailoring the
customization of metal NC-based nano-agents to meet practical requirements
in diﬀerent sectors of nanomedicine.
Y. Shi, M. Qi, W. Sun, L. Wang
Department of Oral Implantology
Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Sciences and Technology for
Stomatology Nanoengineering
School and Hospital of Stomatology
Jilin University
Changchun 130021, China
E-mail: wanglin1982@jlu.edu.cn
Z.Wu,W.Dong,X.Wang,F.Jiang,Y.Zhong,D.Nan,Y.Zhang,X.Bai
StateKey Laboratory of IntegratedOptoelectronics
Collegeof Electronic ScienceandEngineering
Jilin University
Changchun 130012,China
E-mail: wuzn@jlu.edu.cn;baix@jlu.edu.cn
C.Liu, C.Li
Department of Prosthodontics
Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Tooth Development andBone
Remodeling
School andHospital of Stomatology
Jilin University
Changchun 130021,China
E-mail: cyli@jlu.edu.cn
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202310529
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202310529
1. Introduction
In the wake of nanomedicine advance-
ments,
engineered
metal
nanoparticles
(NPs) have emerged as burgeoning agents,
with a variety of metal NP-based explo-
rations making signiﬁcant headway in
diagnosis,
therapeutics,
imaging,
and
many other ﬁelds.[1–3] However, several
uncertain issues may impede the bio-
logical application of metal NPs. These
include low biocompatibility, large parti-
cle size, biobarrier ﬁltration, long-term
toxicity, thermo-induced aggregation, and
poor water solubility.[4]
Over the past
decades,
ultrasmall
metal
nanoclusters
(NCs) consisting of a few to hundreds
of metal atom cores, typically <3 nm
in
diameter,
have
gained
prominence.
Metal NCs oﬀer several advantages and
are
attracting
increasing
attention.[5,6]
Metal NCs exhibit excellent biocompat-
ibility, ultrasmall size, favorable penetra-
tion, and great stability under physiologi-
cal conditions to overcome the aforemen-
tioned drawbacks. These features, along
with facile synthesis, superior pharmacokinetics, and atomically
customizable structures, make metal NCs promising candidates
for real-world application.[7–10] In particular, their ultra-small size
has conferred metal NCs with superiority in increasing renal
clearance eﬃciency for minimizing in vivo toxicity and enhanc-
ing internalization eﬃcacy through bacterial membrane pores.
Contrary to the assumption of inertness in NPs, bio-ingenuity in
physicochemical traits was observed down to the range of NCs.[11]
The intriguing photoluminescence properties originating from
excitation in their metal core allow researchers a glimpse of
their fate alongside bioimaging testing.[12] The discrete electronic
states and tunable electronic transitions contribute to the genera-
tion of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and, thereby, facilitate their
application in antibacterial and photodynamic therapy.[13] Addi-
tionally, recent advancements have built NC libraries, including
those for Au, Ag, Cu, and their alloys.[14] However, before fully re-
alizing their biomedical beneﬁts, it is crucial to understand how
metal NCs interact with the bioenvironment and bio-entities, of-
ten in an immediate, spontaneous, and stochastic manner. As
such, unleashing the full potential of metal NCs requires a global
view of the relevant bioresponses.
A biosystem is an assembly of small observable units span-
ning various structural hierarchies across multiple scales.[15–17]
Minute movement of biomolecules results in intense chain
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (1 of 31)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 1. Summary of metal NC-mediated bioresponses at the molecular, cellular, and organismal levels. MNCs, metal nanoclusters.
reactions.[18] The vast forests of cells capture light and nutrients,
thereby triggering violent metabolic storms.[19,20] Moreover, rag-
ing torrents of substances ﬂow with the blood to nourish every
internal organ.[21,22] When metal NCs join this fantastic voyage,
unsorted responses inside the biosystem will lead to unrivaled
intricacy. Given that biomolecules are similar to or larger than
metal NCs, the interactions between the molecules and metal
NCs have been discussed in detail. Cells form a reaction center
for foreign substances in the cytoplasm, where metabolic reac-
tions and metal NC–biological interactions occur. Organs with
sophisticated anatomical structures manage the biodistribution
of metal NCs and perform unique metabolic reactions in speciﬁc
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (2 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
sectors. Considering the rapid progress in this area, it is neces-
sary to organize the uniqueness of these separate bioresponses
and extract their fundamental parameter-related eﬀects.
We deployed this review into three levels: from the tiny part
“biomolecules” to the foundational unit “cells”, ending up with
the functioning whole “systematic organs and tissues”. Brieﬂy,
we ﬁrst addressed the eﬀects of particle parameters on metal NC–
biomolecule binding and aggregation and highlighted the im-
pact on subsequent metal NC–biological interactions after pro-
tein adsorption. Next, we present the internalization process and
intracellular functional mechanisms governed by metabolism,
as well as the target strategies for diﬀerent organelles. Next, we
summarized the biodistribution and metabolism in the organs.
With diﬀering emphasis on each level, we hope to gain a holistic
understanding of how metal NCs act as foreign substances in-
side organisms and how metal NCs address the current obstacles
in nanomedicine. We also covered perspectives on opportunities
and challenges for future research on NCs. We envision that this
review will expand the boundaries of NC-based nano-agent de-
sign from a biomedical perspective and accelerate future clinical
translation Figure 1.
2. Bioresponses at the Molecular Scale
For biosafety, it is crucial to investigate the behavior of metal NCs
in complex biological environments. As nanoscale agents, the ad-
ministered metal NCs interact with biomolecules in an intrigu-
ing biological milieu. Biomolecules are adsorbed onto the sur-
face of metal NCs and generate new interfaces between the metal
NCs and biosystems.[23] Subsequently, these interactions may al-
ter the structure and characteristics of biomolecules, including
proteins, nucleic acids, and small molecules, and aﬀect the sub-
sequent in vivo processes of metal NCs.[24] More importantly, spe-
ciﬁc biomolecules, such as proteins, are also crucial targets in
disease treatment, such as the 𝛽-amyloid protein in Alzheimer’s
disease. Therefore, to optimize biomedical utilization and further
modulate cellular responses, we summarized the current knowl-
edge of metal NC–biomolecule interactions. In this section, we
focus on how metal NCs interact with proteins and their eﬀects.
Owing to limited investigations, other small molecules, such as
DNA and RNA, are rarely mentioned. Notably, the current work
is limited to model solutions that are close to the physiological
setup but lack relevance to blood complexity.[25]
2.1. Protein Binding
Proteins are the major constituents of biomolecules in biological
ﬂuids and routinely bind to various ions, molecules, and exoge-
nous substances. Understanding the interactions between pro-
teins and nanomaterials is a prerequisite for nanomedical appli-
cations. Interactions between several nanoscale metal NPs and
proteins have been extensively studied.[26,27] Notably, proteins
have similar or larger sizes and spheroidal shapes than metal
NCs. In addition, the high surface-to-volume ratio and small par-
ticle size of metal NCs render them suitable scaﬀolds for protein
adsorption. As such, proteins have received the most attention in
biomolecule–NC interactions. Previous literature has established
the presence of proteins that inevitably adsorb onto the surface of
larger NPs in biological ﬂuids. This phenomenon is commonly
referred to as the “protein corona” or “protein opsonization” in-
teraction model, which plays a crucial role in governing NP–
biomolecule interactions.[27–29] The concept of “protein corona”
refers to the phenomenon where a large number of proteins,
ranging from tens to hundreds, adsorb onto the surface of a sin-
gle NP (Figure 2a).[30] Consequently, biosystems tend to interact
with protein-coated NPs rather than with pristine NPs. Moreover,
surface-adsorbed proteins may initiate mononuclear phagocytic
system (MPS) phagocytosis, and protein conformational changes
can potentially elicit inﬂammatory reactions.[31–35] Interestingly,
in the case of metal NC–protein interactions, a unique struc-
ture was formed due to the ultrasmall size and special surface
functionalities, which is diﬀerent from the conventional “pro-
tein corona.” As depicted in Figure 2b, the interaction model
“metal NC-protein complex” suggested that one or more metal
NCs were speculated to bind to a protein molecule.[36] Metal NC–
protein interactions are modulated by weak noncovalent interac-
tions between each particle. Moreover, the formation of “hybrid
NC/protein aggregates” was veriﬁed via computational simula-
tions, indicating that each aggregate may contain more than one
metal NC and protein.[37] When binding to metal NCs, each pro-
tein demonstrated diﬀerent binding capabilities. To study these
interactions, agarose gel electrophoresis has been utilized. The
electrophoresis speed of dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA)-coated Au
NCs through the gel in agarose gel electrophoresis decreased no-
ticeably after binding to human serum albumin (HSA; ≈67 kDa).
Particularly, with a change in the molar ratio (metal NC/protein
ratio) from 20:1 to 6:1, an increasing number of metal NCs were
bound to HSA, and the binding stoichiometry of DHLA-Au NCs
to HSA was found to be 9:1.[36]
Although the interaction models are complicated, the essen-
tial properties of metal NCs are retained under these weak non-
covalent interactions. However, this still leads to unique in vivo
behavior. Numerous reviews have been conducted to summarize
the progress and characterization of the interactions of proteins
and nano-sized particles (such as NPs and quantum dots), and
readers are referred to many excellent publications covering this
issue in great detail.[25–27,38] Herein, we focus on the further in-
ﬂuences of metal NC–protein interactions.
2.1.1. Size and Surface Charge Dependency on Protein Adsorption
The particle size is critical for categorizing and characterizing
nanomaterials. The size of ultrasmall metal NCs is comparable to
that of small- to medium-sized globular proteins. Hence, the re-
stricted surface contact area results in a smaller interface for pro-
tein binding compared with the adsorption of proteins on larger
NPs. Metal NPs with a high surface curvature retain the native
conformation of proteins.[39] Thus, metal NCs have the poten-
tial to maintain the native conformation and biological activity of
the proteins to which they bind (Figure 2c). This is in sharp con-
trast to the hard protein corona, which refers to a stable layer of
partially denatured proteins that are permanently bound to the
surface of larger NPs.[25]
The ﬁrst contact between metal NCs and proteins occurs on
the surface coating. To ensure the success of nanotheranostic
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (3 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the inﬂuence of size and surface chemistry on protein adsorption. a,b) Interactions of proteins with NPs and NCs.
This does not represent the real binding behavior but the possible contrast between protein corona (with NPs) and protein complex (with NCs).
c) Surface curvature inﬂuence on metal NC–protein interactions. d) Examples of thiolate ligands for metal NC surface modiﬁcation. e) Surface charge
inﬂuence on protein adsorption onto metal NCs.
applications, it is essential to prevent undesirable adsorption of
biological macromolecules and phagocytic uptake.[38,40] Inspired
by the zwitterionic characteristics common to most cell mem-
branes, various low-molecular-weight zwitterionic polymers have
been explored as biocompatible coatings (Figure 2d). Previous
work has indicated that zwitterionic metal NCs, compared to
atonic (negatively charged) and cationic (positively charged) NCs,
exhibit enhanced resistance to the adsorption of serum proteins
and eﬃcient renal clearance with low systemic accumulation,
while also retaining solubility and stability with a desirable size
(Figure 2e).[25] For instance, the classical zwitterionic polymer
glutathione (GSH) has been used to stabilize ultrasmall metal
NCs. These ultrasmall GSH-coated metal NCs exhibited strong
resistance to the adsorption of serum proteins and blood cells.[41]
Considering the unique core–shell structure of metal NCs, the
hydrodynamic diameter (HD) is equally prevalent in the core
size and surface chemistry. The hydrophobic surface coating ad-
sorbed a higher quantity of proteins, such as IgG, albumin, and
ﬁbrinogen.[42] Conversely, hydrophilic polyethylene glycol (PEG)
surface modiﬁcations are widely used to inhibit serum adsorp-
tion and extend circulation time in the blood.[38] The widely em-
ployed PEG chains have a molecular weight of over 2000 Da. Un-
der high salt concentrations, these chains tended to aggregate,
signiﬁcantly increasing the overall HD.[38,43–45] Thus, when dis-
cussing the size-relevant eﬀects to characterize metal NCs, it is
essential to provide data obtained from both dynamic light scat-
tering and transmission electron microscopy.
2.1.2. Structural and Functional Changes after Interaction
Comprehensive interactions between metal NCs and proteins
may inevitably prevent or promote the aggregation of nano-sized
particles, which raises concerns about their potential toxicity.[20]
Moreover, conformational changes in proteins may cause func-
tional abnormalities, such as enzymatic activity or, even worse,
protein denaturation, thereby requiring further investigation to
accomplish biosafety evaluation. Table 1 summarizes the struc-
tural and functional changes in proteins and metal NCs.
Diﬀerent protein secondary structure types (such as 𝛼-helix,
𝛽-sheet, etc.) exhibit unique circular dichroism (CD) spectra in
the UV region.[46] Therefore, CD spectroscopy has become a pop-
ular method for monitoring conformational changes in proteins.
Absorption spectral changes, such as an increase in absorption
intensity and red shift, are also characteristics of amyloid ﬁbril
formation. As such, the alteration of 𝛽-sheet and 𝛼-helix struc-
ture, as well as the unfolding, agglomeration, or ﬁbril forma-
tion of a protein, can be uncovered. After interacting with NCs,
HSA undergoes amyloid-like ﬁbrillation and partially unfolds, 𝛾-
globulin experiences aggregation, and insulin’s secondary struc-
ture transforms from 𝛼-helix to 𝛽-sheet.[24] On the contrary, stabi-
lized by Cysteine (Cys) via Au─S bonds in HSA, Au NCs@HSA
kept a similar conformation with HSA even though an 𝛼-helix
content decrease was conﬁrmed by CD spectroscopy, which
would beneﬁt its further application in binding to the 𝛽-amyloid
protein.[47] Notably, DHLA-Au NCs have been reported to cause
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (4 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Table 1. Metal NC–protein interactions and the subsequent changes.
NCs
Proteins
Conformation changes
PL changes
Refs.
MBI-Ag NCs
HSA
𝛼-Helical decrease
𝛽-Sheet increase
Fiber formation
Fluorescence quenching and blue shift in the emission maximum intensity of HSA.
[24]
Insulin
𝛼-Helical increase
Fluorescence quenching and red shift of the emission maximum 5 and 10 mm,
respectively.
𝛾-globulin
𝛽-Sheet decrease
DHLA-Au NCs
HSA, apo­Trf, Lys, ApoE4
–
NCs’ ﬂuorescence emission was enhanced and lifetime were prolonged
[51]
HSA
Protein agglomeration
Endothermic dynamic ﬂuorescence quenching
[36]
Trf
Exothermic static ﬂuorescence quenching
DHLA-Ag NCs
HSA
–
NCs’ ﬂuorescence emission was enhanced and lifetime was prolonged
[23]
GSH-Au NCs
HSA
NCs have no obvious eﬀect on the
secondary structure of proteins
Dynamic ﬂuorescence quenching of proteins
[50]
𝛾-Globulin
Trf
Static ﬂuorescence quenching of proteins
AuZw
Lectin ConA
–
NCs’ ﬂuorescence emission was enhanced
[52]
MUTAB-Au NCs
BSA
𝛼-Helix decrease
𝛽-Sheet increase
Biomolecular weight dependent
Fluorescence quenching of NCs:
Trf > BSA > Trp > Mb > Lys
Mb is a dynamic mechanism
BSA and Lys are static mechanisms
[53]
Mb
Trp
–
Trf
–
Lys
No obvious eﬀect
Cu NCs
BSA
–
ﬂuorescence quenching of BSA
[54]
BSA, bovine serum albumin; Mb, myoglobin; Trp, tryptophane.
agglomeration (such as HSA). CD and synchronous ﬂuores-
cence spectroscopy revealed that DHLA-Au NCs caused minimal
changes in the secondary structures of HSA and transferrin (Trf).
This suggests that the DHLA-Au NCs are highly biocompatible
from a molecular perspective.[36]
Lysozyme (Lys; ≈14 kDa), a major component of blood pro-
teins, is abundant in the tissues of living organisms. It is capable
of combating bacteria, particularly Gram-positive bacteria. Mean-
while, chymotrypsin is a digestive enzyme that belongs to the
serine protease family. It is widely used as a model enzyme ow-
ing to its well-deﬁned structure and catalytic mechanism. An in
vitro study using CD and synchronous ﬂuorescence spectroscopy
showed that DHLA-capped Au NCs modify the secondary struc-
tures of Lys[48] and chymotrypsin.[49] This alteration is also re-
sponsible for the observed reduction in enzymatic activity. Con-
comitantly, the GSH-protected Au NCs exhibited little eﬀect. The
protein engages with the two Au NCs through diﬀerent forces,
resulting in varied eﬀects on its functions and properties. GSH-
protected Au NCs did not signiﬁcantly alter the secondary struc-
ture of albumin, 𝛾-globulins, or Trf.[50] These studies underscore
the importance of surface ligand design for speciﬁc biomedicines
when transitioning from bench to clinical applications.
2.1.3. Fluorescent Properties
Metal NCs exhibit broad ﬂuorescence emission ranging from the
near-infrared (NIR) to the visible region. Speciﬁc amino acids in
natural proteins exhibit intrinsic ﬂuorescence. For example, tryp-
tophan, tyrosine, and phenylalanine residues within the polypep-
tide chain may exhibit speciﬁc emission characteristics. How-
ever, owing to protein adsorption, the newly formed interfaces
between the metal NCs and proteins signiﬁcantly inﬂuence their
respective ﬂuorescent properties. For proteins, the abovemen-
tioned conformational changes may cause changes in the mi-
crobioenvironment, thus leading to emission intensity changes.
Speciﬁcally, a blue shift in the emission maximum indicates that
the amino acid residues are located in a more hydrophobic envi-
ronment and are less exposed to the solvent, whereas a red shift
generally means that these residues are exposed to a more hy-
drophilic environment.[24,55]
For instance, upon association with proteins, the ﬂuorescence
intensity of NCs increased, and their luminescence lifetime was
extended.[51] Likewise, the increased ﬂuorescence emission and
reduced luminescence lifetime of Au-ZwTriMan in the pres-
ence of lectin aligned with its aggregation, conﬁrming the spe-
ciﬁc binding between the lectin and the carbohydrate ligand.[52]
The ﬂuorescence quenching of 𝛾-globulins and HSA caused by
GSH-coated Au NCs occurred through a dynamic mechanism,
whereas the ﬂuorescence quenching of Trf occurred through a
static mechanism.[50] They also reported that the intrinsic ﬂuores-
cences of HSA and Trf were quenched by DHLA-Au NCs.[36] Both
DHLA-Au NCs and GSH-Au NCs could quench the intrinsic ﬂu-
orescence of Lys but with diﬀerent quenching mechanisms, in
which the dominant quenching mechanisms were dynamic and
static quenching, respectively.[48] More recently, the ﬂuorescence
quenching of MUTAB-Au NCs was reported to be dependent on
protein concentration. This was demonstrated by a progressive
decrease in ﬂuorescence emission intensity with an increase in
BSA concentration.[53] Moreover, a previous study showed that
the ﬂuorescence intensities of Cys-, TA-, and chitosan-Cu NCs
increased 1.9, 4.0, and 5.6 times, respectively, in the presence of
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (5 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
BSA.[54] These optical changes may be useful in NC-based biosen-
sors and provide an opportunity for metal NCs to act as speciﬁc
biolabels.
2.2. Interaction with DNA and RNA
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms represent the most frequently
occurring hereditary sequence variations in the human genome
and are closely associated with a range of medical and physiolog-
ical characteristics in humans. With the excellent biomedical ap-
plications of metal NCs, it is urgent to assess metal NC–biological
interactions, especially DNA interactions that lead to potential
toxicity and adverse health eﬀects. For instance, Ag NCs specif-
ically hinder the replication of genomic DNA and eliminate the
DNA replication checkpoint but do not aﬀect the nuclear mem-
brane or assembly of nucleosomes in cell-free extracts.[56] The
extracts supplemented with Ag NCs exhibited signiﬁcantly im-
paired loading of the mini chromosome maintenance (MCM)
protein complex. This complex acts as a helicase responsible for
unwinding DNA in front of the replication forks. Immunopre-
cipitation of FLAG-Ag NCs combined with mass spectrometry
analysis of proteins associated with Ag NCs revealed a direct in-
teraction between the MCM complex and Ag NCs. The Ag NCs
directly interfered with the loading of the MCM, obstructing the
formation of the prereplication complex and consequently hin-
dering the initiation of DNA replication.[56] Moreover, when gen-
erated using electrochemical techniques, bare Ag NCs contain-
ing Ag2 and Ag3 can interact with and distort the DNA struc-
ture. Silver atomic quantum clusters obstruct the insertion of
doxorubicin into DNA strands. Additionally, these NCs can im-
pede the attachment of DNA-binding proteins, including topoi-
somerase IV and restriction enzyme III, to DNA.[57,58] In addi-
tion, 1.4 nm Au55 NCs irreversibly bound to natural B-DNA in
vitro. This binding was attributed to the perfect alignment of
the Au55 core with the major groove of the DNA structure. The
Au55 NCs were degraded to Au13 NCs, B-DNA transitioned into
A-DNA in an ultrahigh vacuum, and the major grooves shrunk.
In this binding process, triphenylphosphine monosulfonate par-
tially replaces the negatively charged phosphates in DNA. This
substitution is likely driven by the high electronegativity of metal
NPs, which facilitates their binding to DNA.[59,60] These Au55 NCs
were more toxic than cisplatin to both human cancer and healthy
cell lines.[60] Meanwhile, DNA oligonucleotides, including single-
stranded DNA, DNA duplexes, and triplex DNA strands, are uti-
lized as scaﬀolds for the metal NCs. The synthesis strategy for
DNA-coated metal NCs is discussed below.
2.3. Protective Ligands for Small Biomolecules
Biomolecule-coordinated metallic compounds (or metal NCs) are
increasingly being used as research tools. They are instrumental
in precisely and reliably determining the relationship between
the structure and function of metallic materials. Biomolecules
(including peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids) have various
functional groups that demonstrate a strong aﬃnity for metal
atoms during the synthesis process.[61] Because of their dimen-
sional similarities to NCs, small biomolecules are ideal templates
for stabilizing metal NCs. Biomolecules, which are organic sub-
stances derived from biological systems, play diverse roles in bi-
ological metabolism and impart considerable biocompatibility to
inorganic metal NCs. Thus, metal NC synthesis has entered a
new era because various biomolecules can be employed as pro-
tective ligands.
Owing to advancements in solution-phase synthesis, metal
NCs can be easily produced through the direct mixing of metal
salts and excess ligands in aqueous solutions. As the protective
shell of metal NCs interacts with biosystems, biomolecules ren-
der green synthesis, high aqueous solubility, superb biocompat-
ibility, and versatile surface chemistry for NCs.[62,63] Typically,
three types of metal NCs (peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids)
are used as templates for metal NCs.[64]
Peptides and amino acids (e.g., GSH, Cys, and NAC) with
sulfhydryl groups (–SH) are commonly used as thiolate ligands
to stabilize metal NCs (Figure 3a). Consequently, these thiolate-
protected metal NCs are commonly referred to as [Mn(SR)m]q
(where n, m, and q represent the number of metal atoms, thi-
olate ligands, and the net charge of each cluster, respectively).[65]
Moreover, metal NCs adopt a universal “core–shell” stereostruc-
ture, where the metric metal core is routinely coated by a pattern
of metal(I)-thiolate shell. Taking [Aun(SR)m]q as an example, ex-
cess biothiols can reduce the commercially available ingredient
HAuCl4 (Au(III)) to Au(I) at initial feeding. Thus, [Aun(SR)m]q
(n = 10, 15, 18, 22, 23, 25, 29, 33, and 39) was successfully syn-
thesized and puriﬁed by electrophoresis.[66,67] After the reduction
process, the biomolecules were linked to the metal M(0) core
surface through the metal(I)-thiolate (M(I)-SR) bond, forming an
SR-[M(I)-SR]n complex, namely “motif/oligomers,” in which the
sulfur elements formed strong covalent bonds with metal atoms.
Owing to the tunable amino acid sequences and rich func-
tional chemistry of protein molecules, successful attempts have
been made to prepare protein-stabilized metal NCs. Proteins,
such as BSA, HSA, pepsin, and Lys, are commonly used as
biotemplates for metal NCs (Figure 3b).[47,68–71] In particular, the
sulfhydryl groups of protein molecules are key binding sites in
the synthesis process. In other cases, proteins with histidine
residues can coordinate with metal ions to form NCs.[72] More-
over, it was discovered that protein size plays an important role
in the long-term stability of metal NCs.[63] For instance, proteins
with large steric sizes may protect metal NCs under extreme con-
ditions, such as diﬀerent pH and salt concentrations.
Nucleic acids, such as DNA,[73] are also employed as protect-
ing ligands because of their arbitrary length, sequence, and mod-
iﬁcation ability (Figure 3c). Signiﬁcant progress has been made
in the development of DNA-templated metal NCs.[74,75] Notably,
a DNA sequence is a long chain of diﬀerent deoxynucleotides,
each containing unique nitrogen-based nucleobases, such as ade-
nine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine. Cytosine-rich DNA is most
frequently employed to stabilize metal NCs largely because of
the speciﬁc coordination between the N3 position of cytosine
and metal elements.[76] Besides simple cytosine-rich DNA se-
quences, various other DNA sequences have been explored. How-
ever, thymine-rich DNA is less popular for NC synthesis be-
cause binding to thymine requires deprotonation at the N3 ni-
trogen, a process that is favored at high pH levels.[77] In addi-
tion to single DNA sequences, multiple DNA strand–templated
synthesis strategies have been investigated.[78–80] Moreover,
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (6 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 3. Schematic illustration of biomolecule-coated metal NC synthesis strategies. a) The classic core-shell structure of metal NCs. Peptides and
amino acids with sulfhydryl groups are used as surface ligands for metal NCs. b) Protein-stabilized metal NCs. c) DNA is used as a protective ligand for
metal NCs.
adenine and its derivatives can also produce ﬂuorescent
metal NCs.[81]
In addition, the unique luminescence of metal NCs renders
them suitable probes for biomarker identiﬁcation and biomolec-
ular detection. Fluorescent metal NCs are typically smaller than
other luminescent nanomaterials, such as semiconductor quan-
tum dots and rare-earth up-converting NPs. This small size
makes them appealing for use as ﬂuorescent biomarkers, as they
are less likely to signiﬁcantly disturb the biological processes be-
ing studied when used for NC-based labeling.[82] Moreover, these
ﬂuorescent metal NCs demonstrated tunable emission wave-
lengths from the blue to the NIR regions through speciﬁc ligand
or size designs. Therefore, ﬂuorescent metal NCs are promis-
ing innovative optical probes with broad potential applications in
biodetection, biological imaging, and disease diagnosis.[83] Uti-
lizing spectroscopic characteristics that vary based on the DNA
sequence (such as photoluminescence changes), metal NCs have
been used for nucleic acid detection with high sensitivity.[84] Like-
wise, metal NCs have also been utilized in the detection of pro-
teins or small biomolecules, such as Cys, amyloid, creatinine,
intracellular peroxynitrite, histidine, alkaline phosphatase, and
urea.[85–92]
3. Bioresponses at the Cellular Level
Cells are the building blocks of an entire biosystem. Numerous
cutting-edge applications of nanomedicine, such as bioimaging
and therapeutics, have been designed for use within cells. There-
fore, the ability to penetrate the cell membrane is a fundamen-
tal prerequisite for such nano-agents. As novel nano-agents for
intracellular applications, metal NCs meet three criteria: ultra-
small size for better penetration, a charged surface for greater
accumulation, and a designable atomically precise structure for
speciﬁc utilization. Speciﬁcally, intracellular metal NCs integrate
with physiological reactions, induce various interactions, and in-
terfere with metabolic processes. These anticipated and unantic-
ipated responses, including ROS generation, biocatalyst activity,
and photosensitive properties, could be medically useful for con-
trollable consequences, such as killing bacteria through oxidative
stress to combat inﬂammation through the immune response.
In this section, we explore intracellular interactions depen-
dent on various parameters and metabolism-inspired therapeutic
applications.
3.1. Internalization
Cell membranes separate the cytosolic and extracellular environ-
ments through a lipid bilayer and selectively control the ﬂow of
molecules and ions into or out of the cells. Surprisingly, tak-
ing advantage of their ultra-small size, metal NCs can accumu-
late on the cell membrane, subsequently penetrate the cell, and
cause substantial reactions within an intricate cell environment.
In particular, physicochemical properties (such as their surface
chemistry) may facilitate their internalization and subcellular
distribution.
3.1.1. Mechanism and Process of Penetration
For nanoscale particles, initial contact and subsequent inter-
nalization may exert profound eﬀects on cells.[93] Large macro-
molecules (such as protein assemblies and lipoprotein com-
plexes) and numerous NPs are typically enclosed within vesicles.
These vesicles facilitate their selective movement into and out
of cells via processes known as endocytosis and exocytosis.[29]
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (7 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of the internalization of metal NCs into cells. a) Cellular uptake process and subcellular distribution. b,c) Surface
chemistry eﬀects on cellular uptake. d) Nucleus penetration of metal NCs after surface engineering.
However, owing to their small size, previous studies have shown
that most metal NCs are internalized into cells through active
vesicular clathrin-dependent endocytosis and macropinocytosis,
with the caveolin-mediated pathway playing a less signiﬁcant
role.[94,95] Another study indicated that the endocytic uptake of
metal NCs by human dendritic cells (DCs) involves several mech-
anisms, predominantly clathrin- and F-actin-dependent endo-
cytic pathways, achieved through passive targeting (Figure 4a).[52]
In most cases, metal NCs initially localize to endosomes and sub-
sequently migrate to lysosomes; aggregates of these NCs are not
observed in the nucleus, nor are they found outside organelles or
vesicles. Importantly, because NCs are extremely small, electron
microscopy can only detect aggregates or their accumulations.
Hence, the possibility that individual NCs are present within the
nucleus or cytoplasm cannot be ruled out.[96]
3.1.2. Surface Chemistry Eﬀects on Internalization Eﬃciency
The internalization of metal NCs is likely to be closely linked to
their physicochemical properties, such as surface charge and lig-
and design. Metal NCs can reach various subcellular locations
through intentional surface engineering. Therefore, eﬀorts to
clarify subcellular internalization should begin by unveiling the
parameter-mediated eﬀects of metal NCs.
Surface charge is the main prerequisite owing to the intrin-
sic negative charge of the cell membrane (Figure 4b). Positively
charged ligands may induce greater cytotoxicity through stronger
electrostatic interactions with negatively charged membranes.[53]
However, when proteins are adsorbed on metal NC surfaces,
their internalization by metal NCs markedly decreases, and they
show lower cytotoxicity.[23,93,94] For instance, cell viability has been
reported to increase when MUTAB-Au NCs are presented with
proteins.[53] Strong protein adsorption, that is, BSA and Mb,
can eﬀectively shield the positive charge of MUTAB-Au NCs,
which consequently alleviates their cytotoxicity, whereas weak
protein (Lys) adsorption does not result in an observable al-
teration in cell viability. Despite the overall negative charge of
the cell membrane, it still contained positively charged areas
that attracted negatively charged metal NCs through electrostatic
interactions.[93,97] Similarly, studies have shown that a higher sur-
face charge density may increase the endocytic eﬃciency of metal
NCs. Accordingly, BSA-coated Au NCs, which carry a higher neg-
ative charge, are more likely to bind strongly to positively charged
regions on the cell membrane. This interaction often results in
NCs being enveloped in clusters by the cell membrane, leading
to increased cellular uptake.[97]
The type of surface ligand signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the cellular
uptake pattern. Mercaptopropionic acid (MPA)- and GSH-coated
Au NCs resulted in negatively charged surfaces. However, the cel-
lular internalization rate of MPA-coated Au NCs was roughly ten
times higher than that of GSH-coated NCs (Figure 4c).[93] The
signiﬁcantly lower cellular uptake could be attributed to the zwit-
terionic character of the GSH ligand, which shows high resis-
tance to proteins and hinders membrane aggregation. Thus, sur-
face chemistry plays a pivotal role in cellular uptake eﬃciency,
and predesigning the surface characteristics of NCs should be
considered.
3.1.3. Eﬀects after Internalization—The Subcellular Destination
Among the various organelles, the cell nucleus, housing genetic
information, is widely regarded as a vital target for anticancer
therapies and a key focal point for bioimaging. Smaller nano-
materials have been postulated to be internalized by the nucleus
through the nuclear pore complex (≈6–9 nm in diameter), mean-
ing that only particles with an HD below 9 nm can enter the
nucleus.[98] The ultrasmall size facilitates the diﬀusion of metal
NCs through the nuclear pore complex for intranuclear thera-
peutic eﬃcacy.[98–101] For instance, 2 nm-diameter Au NCs were
designed to deliver triplex-forming oligonucleotides into the nu-
cleus with a higher eﬃciency than 6 nm-diameter Au NPs.[102]
Meanwhile, with the same 2 nm size but diﬀerent surface lig-
ands, Au-Click-FAM and Au-Click-Cy3 were able to enter the
nucleus, whereas Au-CGGpTPAAK-FAM failed to enter the nu-
cleus, indicating that surface chemistry is the key factor that de-
termines the subcellular location (Figure 4d).[103]
Additionally, speciﬁc surface engineering may alter the subcel-
lular destinations of metal NCs. Most nanomaterials enter the cy-
toplasm exclusively, remaining sequestered within the endolyso-
somal system. However, metal NCs can escape endolysosomal
trapping and can target diﬀerent organelles through intentional
surface engineering; for instance, applying 4-(carboxybutyl)
triphenylphosphonium bromide to the surface of Au NCs to
achieve mitochondrial targeting.[104] Furthermore, owing to their
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (8 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 5. Schematic illustration of the internalization of metal NCs into bacterial cells and their penetration into bioﬁlms. a) The internalization process
of metal NCs into bacteria. b) Penetration of NCs and NPs through bacterial membrane pores. c) The uptake eﬃcacy of metal NCs into Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria. d) The molecular-like uptake capability of metal NCs with diﬀerent core sizes. e) Bioﬁlm penetration of metal NCs.
ultrasmall size, which is typically smaller than that of subcellular
organelles, metal NCs are more likely to interact with and poten-
tially damage these cellular components.[105]
3.1.4. Internalization into Bacterial Cells and Penetration into
Bioﬁlms
Unlike mammalian and other eukaryotic cells, the unique phys-
ical defenses on their surfaces allow bacteria to internalize metal
NCs via diﬀerent pathways.[106] By exploiting the luminescence
properties of metal NCs, their penetration processes have been
elucidated. Previous studies have shown that NCs physically ab-
sorb and attach to living bacterial membranes prior to internal-
ization (Figure 5a).[94,107] As a result, the clustered NCs entered
as a whole when reaching the critical local NC density. Typi-
cally, bacteria internalize nanoscale particles through ultrasmall
pores (1.2–2 nm in diameter) on their membranes.[108] As a re-
sult, the “size cutoﬀinternalization” might explain the oppo-
site antibacterial behaviors of NCs and NPs: Au NCs could ef-
fectively diﬀuse into the bacteria through ultrasmall pores and
achieve high wide-spectrum antimicrobial activity (the antimicro-
bial metabolism will be discussed later), while large-sized Au NPs
were poorly internalized and failed to invoke bacterial damage
(Figure 5b).[106,108] Typically, Gram-negative bacteria are tougher
to kill owing to their unique structure, where the thin peptido-
glycan cell wall is sandwiched between the outer bacterial mem-
brane and the inner cytoplasmic cell membrane.[109] NCs demon-
strated a higher internalization eﬃciency in Gram-positive bac-
teria than in Gram-negative bacteria, which limited the internal-
ization of NCs (Figure 5c).[110]
The size of nanoscale particles is a crucial factor in determin-
ing NC uptake eﬃcacy.[96] However, the size eﬀect is not appli-
cable to cluster size. Au NCs showed molecular-like uptake ca-
pability because three NCs (with 25, 102, and 144 Au atoms,
with the same type of protecting ligands) showed similar inter-
nalization ratios (Figure 5d).[106] Positively charged NCs tend to
have a higher cellular uptake eﬃciency. The positively charged
groups (–NH2 in L-Cys) on the surface of the Au25 NCs facili-
tated the initial adhesion of bacterial cells and their subsequent
internalization.[111]
Notably, in realistic biological environments, bacteria can col-
onize the surfaces of various settings and form communities
known as bioﬁlms.[112] Diﬀerent to a single species of planktonic
bacteria, bioﬁlms typically consist of various bacterial species that
live in close proximity to each other. These multispecies bioﬁlms
exhibit increased virulence and oﬀer robust protective barriers
for the bacteria within.[112] In turn, bioﬁlm-enclosed bacteria are
markedly more resistant to antibiotics and remain extremely
diﬃcult to eliminate. By constructing bacterial bead spheroids,
studies demonstrated that the ultrasmall Au NCs could pene-
trate bioﬁlms (≈30 μm thick) and eﬀectively eradicate bacteria
within the spheroids. This ability is a signiﬁcant advantage over
larger Au NPs (Figure 5e).[111] Concomitantly, multiple studies
have reported that metal NCs can eﬀectively kill bacteria in ma-
ture bioﬁlms.[111,113–117] Such characteristics make metal NCs ex-
cellent agents for antibacterial utilization and the imaging of
bioﬁlms.[118]
3.2. Intracellular Oxidation–Reduction
In biosystems, molecular oxygen (O2) typically has little ability
to oxidize other chemical compounds and is consumed in the
electron transfer chain during biological oxidation. Instead, un-
stable free radicals, characterized by the presence of one or more
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (9 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 6. Schematic illustration of ROS-relevant metabolism with metal NCs. Molecular oxygen (O2) is transformed into highly reactive species that
participate in intracellular redox metabolism. Overproduction of ROS results in oxidative stress. Conversely, by scavenging ROS, antioxidants maintain
the homeostasis of intracellular redox and prevent oxidative stress-induced tissue damage.
unpaired electrons in their outer atomic or molecular orbitals,
exhibit higher reactivity than ground-state oxygen. These highly
reactive species, which are converted from oxygen, are collectively
known as ROS. Four major types of ROS, namely superoxide an-
ions (O2
•−), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydroxyl radicals (•OH),
and singlet oxygen (1O2), are produced through electron reduc-
tion during aerobic cellular metabolism. However, as byproducts
of intracellular redox metabolism, intrinsic ROS have multiple ef-
fects on biosystems at diﬀerent concentrations. Overproduction
of ROS results in oxidative stress and tissue damage. Conversely,
antioxidants play a crucial role in maintaining intracellular redox
balance and preventing diseases associated with oxidative stress
by scavenging ROS.[3] Owing to their discrete electronic struc-
ture, precise composition, quantum conﬁnement, and altered ge-
ometric conﬁnement, internalized metal NCs may invade cellu-
lar metabolism and trigger an imbalance between biological oxi-
dation and antioxidant defense mechanisms, such as ROS gener-
ation and ROS scavenging. Consequently, imbalanced situations
oﬀer opportunities for the therapeutic application of metal NCs
after intentional modulation (Figure 6).
3.2.1. ROS-Mediated Therapeutics and Cytotoxicity
ROS are increasingly implicated in various cell-fate decisions and
bioapplications, such as antibacterial and anticancer therapies.
Many nanomaterial-based antibacterial compounds kill bacterial
cells because of their eﬃcacy in reducing ROS production. Metal
NCs have been proven to trigger ROS generation in biological
environments.[110,119] Therefore, metal NCs are becoming eﬃ-
cient nano-agents that are cost-eﬀective and powerful enough to
overcome nanomedical obstacles.
Bacterial infections pose an urgent threat to public health.
Long before the advent of pharmaceutical antibiotics, metals
such as Ag were utilized to treat infections, whereas bulk Au
was recognized for its chemical inactivity and inability to read-
ily dissociate into ions. Intriguingly, when their size is in the
≈2 nm NC range, Au NCs are conferred with antimicrobial
ability.[110] Likewise, with a higher surface-to-volume ratio, Ag
NCs exhibit superior antimicrobial eﬃciency compared to their
bulk counterparts and Ag NPs. The unique antibacterial prop-
erties of water-soluble NCs are attributed to their discrete elec-
tronic states and quantized charging, which exhibit tunable elec-
tronic transitions. Metal NCs (speciﬁcally those made of Au and
Ag) have demonstrated eﬀectiveness in eradicating both Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacteria, highlighting their potential
as broad-spectrum bactericides.
After internalization by bacterial cells, NCs participate in bac-
terial metabolism and induce the generation of ROS, which ox-
idize and damage the bacterial membrane and interfere with
bacterial metabolism (Figure 7a).[120,121] ROS may attack un-
saturated fatty acids within membranes, initiating lipid perox-
idation and creating toxic substances, such as aldehydes.[122]
Disrupted bacterial membranes enhance the uptake of metal
NCs, allowing more NCs to accumulate in the cells. This re-
sults in the leakage of bacterial content and, ultimately, cell
death.[107,110] Metal NCs promote the amino acid degradation of
proteins that oxidize bacterial DNA and cause severe bacterial
DNA fragmentation.[123,124] Metal NCs also disrupt the metabolic
balance in oxidative catabolism, notably by stimulating the upreg-
ulation of genes responsible for pro-oxidative enzymes (such as
4-oxalocrotonate tautomerase, which functions in the citric acid
cycle), while promoting the downregulation of genes responsi-
ble for reductive enzymes (such as ketol acid reductoisomerase),
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (10 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 7. Schematic illustration of the antibacteria mechanism of metal NCs. a) Multipath antibacterial mechanisms, including ROS generation, mem-
brane disruption, metabolic imbalance, and DNA fragmentation. b) Gene expression following treatment with Au NCs, with the control group normalized
to 1.0. Red signiﬁes the upregulation of genes, while green signiﬁes downregulation. Reproduced with permission.[110] Copyright 2017, American Chem-
ical Society. c) The internalization of Au NCs into metabolically inactive bacteria (4 °C) and reduced antimicrobial eﬃcacy. d) A full-spectrum library of
AuxAg25−x(MHA)18 and their antimicrobial ability. e) The inﬂuence of surface chemistry on NC antimicrobial eﬃcacy. With the NH2 group, Au25Cys18
generates less ROS during the antimicrobial process.
leading to the promotion of oxidation and subsequent intracel-
lular ROS accumulation (Figure 7b).[110,125,126] Additionally, the
gene levels of Gapdh, a known intracellular ROS scavenger, di-
minished 2.48-fold, potentially impairing the ability of the cells
to neutralize excess ROS.[127] Notably, these processes are mutu-
ally permeable, and several reactions may occur simultaneously
to achieve antimicrobial ability. Moreover, the antimicrobial ef-
fectiveness of NCs is inﬂuenced by a combination of active cell
metabolism and internalization. This is evidenced by the fact that
the uptake of Au NCs into metabolically inactive bacteria at 4 °C
was about 70% lower than that under normal conditions at 37 °C
(Figure 7c).[110]
During the antibacterial process, metal NCs decompose to re-
lease electrons and form Au(I) or Ag(I) complexes (Figure 7d).
Therefore, O2 can be activated through electrons transferred
from the metal NCs, resulting in the formation of superoxide-
and peroxo-like species (such as O2
•- and H2O2). This induces
the production of ROS within bacteria, contributing to their de-
struction. In contrast, alloy metal NCs with increased stability
do not decompose or lose electrons. O2 is not activated by ROS,
leading to decreased antimicrobial ability.[128] Moreover, Ag NCs
achieve antibacterial properties through decomposition into Ag+
ions, and intracellular ROS generation can accelerate the dissoci-
ation of Ag+ ions, which may further boost antimicrobial perfor-
mance in a positive feedback cycle.[129,130] Even though there have
been signiﬁcant advancements in the research of Au and Ag NCs,
investigations into alternative NCs, such as Cu, remain limited.
This is mainly due to the tendency of Cu to oxidize and the chal-
lenges in creating very small particles.[131] Unexpectedly, by com-
bining their enzyme-like ability (i.e., oxidase-like activity), plat-
inum (Pt)-based NCs can oxidize GSH into colorless glutathione
disulﬁde (GSSG), showing a higher accumulation of intracellular
ROS, thus exhibiting better antimicrobial ability.[132]
To date, the abuse of antibiotics has led to the rise of more
resistant pathogens, and some commonly used antibiotics (i.e.,
vancomycin, which is highly nephrotoxic and has certain ototox-
icity and nephrotoxicity) cannot meet the requirements for long-
term usage, which calls for novel therapeutics and antibiotics.[133]
Owing to their ultrasmall size, NCs may act as delivery vehicles
to ﬁght antibiotic resistance. Antibiotic–NC conjugations[123] or
positively charged ligand modiﬁcations[117] have the potential to
counteract antibiotic resistance by extending the short-lived ef-
fectiveness of antibiotics against multidrug-resistant (MDR) bac-
teria and impairing the function of bacterial eﬄux pumps. For ex-
ample, Ag16(SG)9 and the antibiotic daptomycin were conjugated
through a strong covalent bond, which allowed for the consis-
tent release of both active agents during bacterial treatment.[123]
In this nanohybrid formulation, daptomycin, in its concentrated
form, damaged bacterial membranes more eﬀectively by insert-
ing its lipophilic tail. Ag NCs can also oxidize bacterial lipid bi-
layers. This multipath mechanism may explain the absence of
drug resistance to NCs. Recently, highly monodispersed polyca-
tionic Ag NCs (p-Ag NCs) have been shown to be more eﬀec-
tive in delaying resistance compared to traditional antibiotics,
particularly against anaerobic bacteria like Fusobacterium nuclea-
tum and Streptococcus sanguinis.[115] In addition, quaternary am-
monium (QA) Au NCs have proven to be powerful antibiotics
against MDR Gram-positive bacteria in vivo.[117] More recently,
new nano-antibiotic mercaptophenylboronic acid (MBA)-coated
Au44 NCs, Au44(MBA)18, demonstrated potent antimicrobial ac-
tivity against MDR bacteria, especially vancomycin-resistant En-
terococcus faecalis, without the systemic toxicity associated with
vancomycin, thus oﬀering a potential alternative to vancomycin
for clinical applications.[134]
Surface ligands and their zeta potential can also aﬀect
ROS generation eﬃcacy, which subsequently inﬂuences the
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (11 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
antimicrobial eﬃcacy of metal NCs. Metal NCs with more neg-
atively charged surfaces, such as p-mercaptobenzoic acid (p-
MBA)-coated Au NCs and mercaptohexanoic acid (MHA-coated)
Au NCs, showed higher ROS generation. However, the less neg-
atively charged metal NCs showed much lower ROS generation
ability.[106,111] Moreover, positively charged metal NCs (Au25Cys18)
demonstrated higher bacterial uptake than negatively charged
Au25MHA18 but resulted in less ROS generation and much lower
antimicrobial eﬃcacy. The diﬀerence in ROS production may be
attributed to the redox-buﬀering capacity of the functional groups
(Figure 7e). p-MBA and MHA carry only one functional group
(–COOH), whereas Cys and GSH carry two functional groups
(–COOH and –NH2), indicating that the diminished antimicro-
bial activity was caused by the presence of positively charged
amine groups (–NH2), which quenched the generated ROS. To
prove this, they formed Au25CystmxMHA18−x with diﬀerent ra-
tios of Cys (containing only –NH2) to MHA (containing only –
COOH). This result indicates a negative correlation between the
number of –NH2 groups on the surface of Au25 NCs and their ef-
fectiveness in combating microbes.[111] It can also be elucidated
that GSH acts as an antioxidant in bacteria, which neutralizes
ROS to maintain the intracellular redox state and is then reduced
to GSSG.
In addition to the aforementioned eﬀects, the oxidation states
of metal NCs should be considered. Cationic Ag NCs, which
contain more Ag+ ions, have a better killing eﬀect,[129] whereas
positively charged capping agents (such as MUTAB-Au NCs)
disrupt the membrane via strong electrostatic interactions.[113]
Collectively, the broad-spectrum bactericidal eﬃcacy of metal
NCs, particularly against MDR bacteria, highlights their poten-
tial as alternative bactericides. The unique strong luminescence
of metal NCs facilitates their application as traceable antibacterial
probes.
To ensure the safe utilization of metal NCs, several studies
have demonstrated that negligible cytotoxicity was observed in
human cells exposed to Au NCs at the same concentration used
for bacteria, suggesting diﬀerent toxic mechanisms in diﬀer-
ent biological systems.[93,110,114] After internalization into mam-
malian cells, AuNCs can generate ROS. However, they enhance
mitochondrial metabolism and cell proliferation, rather than
causing DNA damage and cell apoptosis.[93,110] This could be
explained by the less well-understood role of ROS: At low lev-
els, ROS act as critical signaling molecules. Basic biological pro-
cesses, such as cell viability, proliferation, diﬀerentiation, and
survival, are activated by inﬂuencing the mitogen-activated pro-
tein kinase (MAPK) cascade.[135,136] In contrast, it is only when
ROS levels within a biological system become excessive that they
trigger a stress response and disrupt basic cellular functions.[137]
Moreover, Au25(Capt)18 exhibited speciﬁc cytotoxicity in cancer
cells by inhibiting the oxidative phosphorylation of mitochondria
and promoting mitochondrial ROS generation, whereas cellular
vitamin C may protect normal cells from Au25(Capt)18-induced
cytotoxicity.[95] Au NCs are nontoxic to normal cells, indicating
their wide potential in biomedical research and treatment. How-
ever, Ag NCs may exert harmful cytotoxic eﬀects on human cells.
This is primarily because of the high aﬃnity of Ag+ ions and their
complexes for biomolecules.[138] Intriguingly, NCs may also act as
antioxidants to achieve ROS-scavenging properties through bio-
catalysis (discussed below).
3.2.2. Biocatalysts
The high cost, low operational stability, and easy denaturation
under stringent conditions limit the application of natural en-
zymes, thus necessitating the development of novel catalytic
materials.[139] Owing to their superior catalytic activity, versa-
tile enzyme-like selectivity, acceptable biocompatibility, rapid ex-
cretion ability, and resistance to harsh conditions, metal NCs
oﬀer an elegant solution to the above requirements owing to
their ultra-small size, atomically precise structure, and abun-
dant unsaturated active sites. Recently, a series of artiﬁcial en-
zymes based on structurally well-deﬁned metal NCs, namely
clusterzymes, have been developed.[139] Overall, Au, Ag, Cu, Pt,
Mn, and Cd and their alloy clusters exhibit speciﬁc enzyme-
like catalytic activities. They show compelling selectivity in var-
ious functions, including those similar to nucleases, glucose
oxidases, peroxidases (POD), oxidase (OXD), glutathione per-
oxidase (GPx-like), catalase (CAT-like), and superoxide dismu-
tase (SOD-like) activities. (Figure 8). Table 2 summarizes the
clusterzymes with diﬀerent enzyme-like activities and their
applications.
Clusterzymes participate in the redox process of free radicals
and exhibit superior ROS scavenging abilities. For instance, in
a brain injury model, oxidative stress led to excessive ROS gen-
eration, GSH consumption, and harmful lipid peroxide produc-
tion. For example, Au25MPA18 shows negligible •OH scavenging
eﬃciency but high GPx activity, which can be exploited to elimi-
nate lipid peroxides and oxidative damage. In contrast, the single-
atom-substituted Au24Cu1 and Au24Cd1 showed higher antioxi-
dant activities (CAT-like and SOD-like).[152] Clusterzymes can ef-
fectively decrease H2O2 levels and signiﬁcantly recover SOD lev-
els and the GSH/GSSG ratio, maintaining a balance in ROS lev-
els. Compared to Au24Cu1, Au24Cd1 shows a more selective free
radical-scavenging capability, which prevents oxidative damage.
In particular, Au24Cu1 exhibited the best activity for the oxygen
reduction reaction and clearance capability against ROS com-
pared with Au25 and Au24Cd1, suggesting a suppressive eﬀect on
neuroinﬂammation.[139] Au24Ag1MPA18 exhibits a conspicuous
ability to scavenge H2O2, weakening the cascade responses of in-
ﬂammation and thus inhibiting acute neuroinﬂammation at an
early stage.[140]
For Ag-based nanomaterials, eﬀorts have focused on their oxi-
dation properties, including POD-like activities and •OH gener-
ation, which have led to versatile antimicrobial applications and
cancer treatments. However, the antioxidant ability (ROS scav-
enging) of Ag NCs was only recently discovered. The O2
•−scav-
enging ability of Ag14(SG)8 was reported for the ﬁrst time. At
low doses, Ag14(SG)8 exerts radioprotective eﬀects by diminish-
ing and repairing radiation damage to the hematopoietic sys-
tem and bone marrow. Additionally, Ag14(SG)8 alleviates oxida-
tive stress by reinstating endogenous antioxidant enzymes, such
as SOD and CAT, and eliminating excess lipid peroxidation prod-
ucts caused by 𝛾-ray exposure.[146] Ag25MHA18 showed a similar
increase in antioxidant ability after single-atom substitution and
dual-ligand protection compared to Ag24Pt1(MHA/MPA)18 and
Ag24Cu1(MHA)18, indicating modulated catalytic selectivity.[147]
Recently, metal NCs were reported to act as monoamine ox-
idase B inhibitors (MAOI), which paved the way for creating a
more eﬀective drug for Alzheimer’s disease.[142] The Au NCs and
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (12 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 8. Metal NCs demonstrate enzyme-like properties. Catalytic mechanism and selectivity of metal NCs modulated by adjusting doping elements
and surface modiﬁcation. Through Ag, Cu, or Cd doping and MHA or MPA surface ligand exchange, the enzyme-like properties of NCs are improved.
enzymatic substrates exhibit competitive relationships. When Au
NCs bind with MAO active sites like a plug, substrates cannot
access the active sites; therefore, no enzymatic reaction can oc-
cur. Moreover, the production of ROS in the dark by CN-PtNCs,
which exhibited both OXD-like and POD-like properties, was
investigated because of their potent O2 adsorption and activa-
tion abilities.[132] Overall, with unrivaled advantages in versatile
enzyme-like activities, eastern synthesis, high stability, and good
biocompatibility, NC-based nanozymes have attracted wide inter-
est in biotechnology and have shown great potential in real bio-
applications.
3.3. Immunological Properties
The immune system operates as a complex biological net-
work, defending against external threats, such as antigens,
viruses, and bacteria, to safeguard the organism and maintain
homeostasis.[153,154] A key initial response to antigens involves
the maturation of DCs, followed by their interaction with various
lymphocyte groups, leading to lymphocyte proliferation. There-
fore, NC-mediated immunological eﬀects were ﬁrst explored in
DCs.[155] Unlike larger GSH-coated NPs (≈12 nm), smaller GSH-
coated NCs (≈2 nm) were more eﬃciently absorbed by DCs;
Table 2. Metal-based and bimetal metal-based clusterzymes and their applications.
Nanozyme (formula)
Enzyme-like activities
Application
Refs.
Au25MPA18
Au24Cu1MPA18
Au24Cd1MPA18
GPx
CAT
SOD
–
•OH scavenging
O2
•−, DPPH•, •NO, ABTS•+ scavenging
[139]
Au24Ag1MPA18
CAT, GPx
Relieve acute inﬂammation in brain tissues and serum
[140]
Au NCs-NH2
CAT
Neuronal protection against oxidative damage
[141]
Au18,22-CA/Au15,22,25-4ATP
MAOI
Parkinson’s disease treatment via MAO inhibition
[142]
R-DHLA-AuNC-Zn
CAT, GPx
Antioxidant ability for recovering spinal cord injury
[143]
R-DHLA-AuNC-Ce
CAT, GPx
Antioxidant ability for curing rheumatoid arthritis
[144]
LTN@Au NCs
POD
Colorimetric sensing protocol for oxytetracycline testing
[145]
Ag14(SG)8
SOD
Strong •OH scavenging, potential radioprotectants
[146]
Ag24Pt1(MHA/MPA)18
SOD
Recover radiation-induced DNA damage
[147]
Ag24Cu1(MHA)18
SOD
•NO scavenging
pepsin@Cu23
POD
Speciﬁc and sensitive sensing of glucose
[148]
Yeast extract@PtNCs
POD
Human serum glucose sensing
[149]
PtNCs-GSH
SOD
Ionizing radiation-induced ROS scavenging
[150]
CN-PtNCs
OXD, POD
Periodontitis treatment via ROS generation
[132]
Pt2Au4L8
CAT
Hypoxia alleviation and enhancement of cancer radiotherapy
[151]
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (13 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
however, they did not appear to trigger DC maturation or lym-
phocyte proliferation, highlighting the critical role of particle
size in immune responses.[155] The type of surface ligand is
also inﬂuential. For instance, in a separate study, NCs stabilized
with sulfonate-modiﬁed lipoic acid more eﬀectively promoted
DC maturation than those stabilized with PEG-modiﬁed lipoic
acid.[96] This was evidenced by the increased expression of CD80
and HLA-DR, which are markers of mature DCs. The decreased
expression of CD3, CD4, and CD8 indicated that NCs did not lead
to the proliferation of cytotoxic T cells.
In addition to the immune response caused by NCs them-
selves, the biological response of NCs to immune system ab-
normalities has also been studied. These foreign threats attack
the host’s immune system and may induce inﬂammation.[154]
Moreover, tissue destruction caused by inﬂammation is a
key pathological factor in various chronic inﬂammatory dis-
eases, often leading to severe consequences, such as rheuma-
toid arthritis,[144,156] sepsis-induced acute kidney injury,[157,158]
neuroinﬂammation,[140,159] and inﬂammatory bowel disease.[160]
Macrophages, which are central to the immune system, play a
pivotal role in both immune response and inﬂammation, adopt-
ing diﬀerent phenotypes.[161] Depending on the immunomodu-
latory characteristics of the nanomaterial, macrophages can dif-
ferentiate into either the M1 (pro-inﬂammatory) or M2 (anti-
inﬂammatory) phenotype.[162] M1 macrophages, known for their
pro-inﬂammatory nature, release numerous pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines, often through mechanisms such as nuclear fac-
tor kappa B (NF-𝜅B) activation, which contribute to local tis-
sue damage and persistent inﬂammation.[163] In contrast, M2
macrophages, which are prevalent during the resolution phase
of inﬂammation, facilitate tissue repair by producing anti-
inﬂammatory cytokines. Considering this complex immunolog-
ical landscape, the immunomodulatory properties of diﬀerent
types of metal NCs have been the focus of many investigations.
During inﬂammatory processes, NF-𝜅B, an essential tran-
scription factor, signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the regulation of
various pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, thereby initiating and
sustaining inﬂammatory reactions. Intriguingly, metal NCs
inhibit
lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced
inﬂammatory
re-
sponses in macrophages by hindering the NF-𝜅B signaling
pathway.[158,164–167] These metal NCs can eﬀectively suppress
the LPS-induced heightened expression of pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-𝛼(TNF-𝛼), IL-1𝛽, IL-6,
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS, i.e., nitric oxide, NO), and
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2, i.e., prostaglandins, PEG2).[158] Specif-
ically in neuroinﬂammatory scenarios, metal NCs signiﬁcantly
boost the expression of heme oxygenase (an anti-inﬂammatory
enzyme) in neuronal cells, thereby aiding in the protection of
dopaminergic neurons.[159] Additionally, these NCs inhibit the
LPS-induced phosphorylation of I𝜅B kinase 𝛽(IKK𝛽) and NF-𝜅B
inhibitor 𝛼(I𝜅B𝛼) as well as the nuclear translocation of p65.[164]
Of note, as an anti-inﬂammatory therapeutic strategy, adjust-
ing the balance between the M1 and M2 macrophage phenotypes
is promising. Thus, the eﬀect of the metal NCs on macrophage
polarization was evaluated. In peritoneal macrophages, NCs exert
their regulatory eﬀect by activating the antioxidant nuclear fac-
tor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) signaling pathway rather
than the conventional signal transducer and activator of tran-
scription 6 (STAT6).[160] Concurrently, NCs notably enhanced the
expression of M2 macrophage-related genes such as IL-10 and
arginase 1 (Arg1). Consequently, stimulated M2 macrophages
not only help mitigate tissue damage during inﬂammation but
also expedite tissue repair.[168] For example, in microglia, the
central nervous system’s mononuclear phagocytes, NCs signif-
icantly reduced the expression of M1-like markers, including
MHC-II, CD86, IL-1𝛽, IL-6, TNF-𝛼, and iNOS.[158,169] Berberine-
loaded BSA-Au NCs (BRB-Au NCs) exhibited excellent anti-
inﬂammatory and anti-apoptotic eﬀects in spinal cord injury
repair.[170] BRB-Au NCs may induce polarization from M1 to M2
by reducing the M1 marker CD86 and increasing the M2 marker
CD206.
Controlling inﬂammation is essential, but the management of
inﬂammatory bone destruction is critical. During chronic inﬂam-
mation, osteoclast formation escalates, leading to excessive bone
resorption. One crucial cytokine in this process is the receptor
activator of nuclear factor 𝜅B ligand (RANKL), which is critical
for the formation and activation of inﬂammatory cells. RANKL
directly aﬀects the transformation of monocyte/macrophage pre-
cursor cells into osteoclasts and is increased by pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines during chronic inﬂammatory conditions. For exam-
ple, in bone marrow-derived mononuclear cells, which can trans-
form into osteoclasts under inﬂammatory stimulation, NCs sup-
press the expression of parathyroid hormone-related protein
(PTHrP) and runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), sub-
sequently downregulating RANKL expression.[171] RANKL typ-
ically upregulates the expression of crucial osteoclast-speciﬁc
transcription factors, such as the cellular oncogene fos (c-Fos)
and nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFATc1), but metal NCs
can downregulate their expression.[172] Additionally, NCs down-
regulated the expression of the osteoclastogenic genes TRAP
and OSCAR.[173] Besides, NF-𝜅B and MAPK, critical down-
stream signaling pathways of RANKL, play vital roles in osteo-
clast diﬀerentiation.[172] NCs inhibit inﬂammation-driven osteo-
clastogenesis by suppressing the NF-𝜅B pathway and hindering
the phosphorylation of MAPKs, particularly JNK.[174] Thus, NCs
have the potential to impede osteoclast formation and prevent
inﬂammation-induced bone resorption.
Another critical challenge for the host immune system is the
proliferation of tumor cells in response to external threats.[4]
Thioredoxin reductase-1 (TrxR1) is crucial in this context because
it facilitates the NADPH-dependent reduction of thioredoxin and
other oxidized compounds, thus managing the intracellular re-
dox balance and ROS levels. TrxR1 is instrumental in inducing
tumor cell apoptosis and is regarded as a potential target for can-
cer therapy. NCs interact with the active site of TrxR1 to form
coordination bonds, which inhibit TrxR1 activity and boost ROS
generation.[175–177] This increase in ROS contributes to a decrease
in mitochondrial membrane potential, prompting the release of
cytochrome c from mitochondria into the cytosol and activat-
ing caspase-9, which initiates mitochondrial apoptosis in tumor
cells.[164,176] Concurrently, these processes can trigger apoptosis
via the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) pathway.[178] The
anticancer eﬃcacy of metal NCs has been explored in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, a rare form of blood cancer. Within tu-
mor cells, NCs induce an intracellular oxidative stress response,
as evidenced by the promotion of Nrf2 translocation from the cy-
toplasm to the nucleus and the subsequent expression of heme
oxygenase 1.[176]
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (14 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 9. Schematic illustration of the Jablonski energy level diagram. Metal NC energy conversion under photoexcitation. ISC, intersystem crossing;
IC, internal conversion.
Metal NCs can also be assembled as nanohybrids or nanocom-
posites. The Au NCs were assembled on plasma-modiﬁed zeo-
lites to form multifunctional nanohybrids.[179] The nanocompos-
ite downregulated the expression of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines
(IP-10 and IL-12p40) and upregulated the production of anti-
inﬂammatory factors (IL-10, IL-1RA, and Arg 1), indicating a
modulatory eﬀect on inﬂammation that may beneﬁt wound heal-
ing. The nanocomposite Au44(p-MBA)26-NLG enhanced the im-
mune response against tumors.[180] Its application leads to an in-
crease in tumor-speciﬁc T cells, such as CD8+ T cells, which are
eﬀective in killing tumor cells. This eﬀect is particularly notable
in the context of inhibiting indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase expres-
sion in tumor tissues, which interferes with the immunother-
apeutic process by depleting the essential tryptophan supply to
T cells.
Metal NCs engineered for delivery or direct immunomodula-
tion can strategically inﬂuence the innate immune system for
therapeutic applications. These precisely crafted metal NCs can
either enhance or suppress immune reactions through interac-
tions with antigen-presenting cells (APCs), paving the way for
innovative nanovaccine development. Ovalbumin (OVA) is a pop-
ular model antigen owing to its strong cellular and humoral
immune responses via T and B lymphocytes. Adjuvant CpG
oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG ODNs) mimic pathogenic patterns
and activate the immune system. This leads to the growth and
activation of immune cells through pattern recognition, thereby
greatly enhancing vaccine eﬃcacy. The immunostimulatory ac-
tivity of the OVA-Au NCs-CpG conjugates was enhanced. Au NCs
preserved the bioactivity of natural OVA from degradation before
being internalized by APCs and facilitated the intracellular de-
livery of OVA-Au NCs-CpG conjugates, wherein both OVAs and
CpG ODNs were internalized by the same APCs.[181] In addi-
tion, peptide-AuNC-CpG conjugates elicited strong CD8+ cyto-
toxic T lymphocyte responses, which are crucial for chronic viral
diseases.[182]
However, numerous challenges remain before the interac-
tions of metal NCs with the immune system are fully un-
derstood. A full understanding of this interaction may pro-
vide new avenues for two main applications: vaccination and
immunotherapy.
3.4. Energy Conversion under Photoexcitation
When excited with light, metal NCs exhibit remarkable proper-
ties that enable eﬃcient energy conversion. This phenomenon
is crucial for artiﬁcial photosynthesis, in which light energy is
converted into chemical energy.[183] Similarly, in therapeutics,
such as photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy
(PTT), NCs harness light energy for targeted treatment, oﬀering
a less invasive and more precise approach. These applications
highlight the potential of metal NCs for use in renewable energy
and advanced medical treatments (Figure 9).
3.4.1. Artiﬁcial Photosynthesis
The photosensitization of nonphotosynthetic bioorganisms in-
volves the use of sunlight to synthesize chemicals from water
and carbon dioxide. This distinctive energy conversion pathway
presents innovative models for developing sustainable energy
materials and eco-friendly technologies. For instance, the non-
photosynthetic anaerobic bacterium Moorella thermoacetica was
discovered to have an energy conversion site. Electron trans-
fer and durable solar CO2 ﬁxation were achieved by culturing
Au22(SG)18 in living M. thermoacetica and then ﬂawlessly inte-
grating it into the intrinsic metabolic pathway (known as the
Wood–Ljungdahl pathway) (Figure 10a).[184] CO2 ﬁxation was ac-
complished using light-excited electrons provided by implanted
Au22(SG)18. Under anaerobic photosynthetic conditions, the pho-
tooxidative degradation of biomolecules under light exposure can
still generate ROS, which is detrimental to the metabolism of
anaerobic bacteria. Notably, Au22(SG)18 serves as a ROS inhibitor
that maintains high bacterial viability. This was evident because
the ROS concentration in M. thermoacetica treated with Au NCs
was 1.8 times lower compared to untreated M. thermoacetica after
48 h of illumination.
3.4.2. ROS Generation under Photoexcitation
PDT is a minimally invasive therapy for microbial infections, can-
cer, and other diseases.[185] During PDT, photosensitizers (PSs)
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (15 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 10. a) Schematic of the bacterium. Electrons produced by Au NCs under illumination are utilized by enzymatic mediators in the cytoplasm and
ultimately transferred to the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway. Reproduced with permission.[184] Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. b) NCs mediate
PTT and subsequent in vivo clearance pathways. Reproduced with permission.[200] Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.
are excited by light in the presence of O2 and produce excess cyto-
toxic ROS, which induce lethal oxidative stress for therapeutic ap-
plications. There are two categories of photochemical processes:
type I and type II reactions.[186] In the type I reaction, the PS en-
gages with a biomolecule (or O2), triggering an electron transfer
that results in the creation of oxygen free radicals such as O2
−and
•OH. Conversely, in type II reactions, 1O2 is produced by energy
transfer when the excited PS collides with triplet oxygen.[187]
Several organic dye PSs, such as g-C3N4 (CN), crystal violet
(CV), and methylene blue (MB), have been used clinically. How-
ever, to date, one major limitation of clinically used PSs is that
their main absorption band is located in the UV–vis range, and
light penetration into tissue is limited. Pathogen-triggered local
skin infections can cause superﬁcial and ﬂat damage, which can
be directly illuminated by visible or UV light; thus, ROS gen-
erated through direct photoexcitation under visible irradiation
have antimicrobial or anti-inﬂammation applications in epider-
mal, dermal, or mucosal lesions. In contrast, internal lesions
(such as tumors) buried under the skin require deeper light pen-
etration, that is, NIR light, which has a higher resolution, optimal
penetration depth, and lower phototoxicity to normal tissues. Or-
ganic PSs also suﬀer from poor water solubility and photosta-
bility, weak targeting ability, photo-induced decomposition, and
rapid hepatobiliary elimination, limiting their clinical value.
To tackle these challenges, with promising absorption in the
visible (400–750 nm) and NIR (750–1700 nm) ranges, NCs can
act as ideal PS delivery vehicles owing to their bioinertness, ease
of manufacturing, robustness, and eﬀective renal clearance.
Although chlorin e6 (Ce6) is poorly soluble in water, it exhibits
improved photostability when combined with Au NCs. This com-
bination prevents its aggregation and degradation under laser
irradiation.[188] Additionally, Ce6 conjugated with metal NCs en-
hanced cellular uptake and tumor retention, leading to a more
eﬀective PDT than Ce6 alone.[189] MB, a PS with high 1O2 gener-
ation eﬃciency, stabilizes when conjugated with serum albumins
such as BSA, increasing 1O2 generation eﬃciency through reso-
nance energy transfer from Au NCs.[190] CV, which is used for
surgical staining and wound disinfection, exhibits potent bacte-
ricidal activity in combination with Au25(Cys)18 in polymers.[191]
This synergy was eﬀective under white-light exposure, likely be-
cause of the unique band structure of Au25(Cys)18, which facili-
tates alternative electron transfer pathways for enhanced bacteri-
cidal action.
In addition, NCs have shown potential for generating ROS un-
der photoexcitation, even in the absence of organic PSs. There-
fore, metal NCs are promising PS candidates for PDT applica-
tions. Metal NCs have recently been used as novel PSs. The 1O2-
generation eﬃciency of each NC sample was compared at dif-
ferent irradiation wavelengths. It has been noted that the optical
gap of Au25(SR)18 (≈1.3 eV), which is larger than the energy of
1O2 at 0.97 eV, facilitates eﬀective energy transfer to 3O2. Further-
more, when exposed to visible/NIR light (532, 650, and 808 nm),
Au25(Capt)18 eﬃciently produced 1O2.[192] BSA-coated Ag13 NCs
also exhibited high 1O2 generation eﬃciency in cancer cell-killing
processes under 480 nm excitation.[193] In addition, the DHLA-
Au NCs formed a two-photon PDT system (488 and 800 nm irra-
diation), predominantly generating ROS through a type I photo-
physical process.[194]
However, owing to their low cytotoxicity, the PDT eﬃciency
of NCs still needs improvement. For example, the turbidity of
bacterial samples treated with 500 μg mL−1 Au25(Capt)18 was
comparable to that of samples treated with 10 μg mL−1 MB un-
der blue light emitting diode (LED) irradiation (420–460 nm).
Moreover, with increasing dark incubation concentrations (100–
1000 μg mL−1) of Au25(Capt)18, cell viability dropped from 50% to
5%, indicating a negative eﬀect on cellular metabolism.[195] Thus,
eﬀorts must be made to continually expedite the progress of lab-
oratory samples toward nosocomial usage.
3.4.3. Photothermal Conversion
During light irradiation, the photons absorbed by the nanomate-
rials can be converted into heat for PTT. PTT is a rapid and eﬃ-
cient thermal ablation therapy that generates local hyperthermia
by converting light energy into heat using photothermal agents
(PTAs).[196] Excellent thermal stability and eﬃcient thermal gen-
eration are prerequisites for PTT nanoplatforms. Notably, high
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (16 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 11. Schematic illustration of in vivo transportation and metabolic reactions. a–c) Metal NCs penetrate diﬀerent barriers in vivo. d) Extravasation
and enhanced permeability and retention eﬀects of metal NCs. e) Biotransformation of metal NCs in the liver.
temperature may cause collateral damage to normal cells; there-
fore, 42–45 °C is an optimal temperature for PTT.[197] As an im-
portant material for both PTT and PDT, small Au nanorods ex-
hibit superior eﬃciency in photothermal conversion and ROS
generation. However, poor thermal stability and biocompatibility
are potential issues that challenge practical applications.[198] In-
triguingly, studies have shown that Au25(Capt)18 exhibits signif-
icantly higher thermal stability than Au25(SG)18. This enhanced
stability was largely due to the resilience of the captopril ligand.
In contrast, the GSH ligand tends to break down slowly under
light irradiation.[199]
Of note, the light-to-heat conversion of nano-based PTAs es-
sentially depends on the localized surface plasmon resonance
and resonant oscillation of delocalized electrons under an ex-
ternal electromagnetic ﬁeld, indicating that plasmonic NPs are
better candidates for PTT applications.[198] For instance, Au
NCs@HSA-B exhibit a negligible photothermal eﬀect with a
slight increase in temperature during irradiation.[47] Few stud-
ies have reported the use of metal NCs as PTAs for PTT alone.
However, metal NCs can be conjugated with PTAs or crosslinked
with other materials to enhance their in vivo PTT performance.
The well-deﬁned PTA indocyanine green (ICG) has intrinsic
drawbacks, such as serum protein aﬃnity, strong lipophilicity,
and rapid uptake by the liver. However, ICG4-Au25(SG)18, a conju-
gate of ICG and Au25(SG)18, serves as an excellent photothermal
agent with signiﬁcantly enhanced photostability and a 12-fold en-
hancement in blood retention, which further beneﬁts passive tu-
mor targeting and eﬀective renal clearance and oﬀers a new path-
way to meet clinical requirements (Figure 10b).[200] Meanwhile,
its threefold longer half-life compared to free ICG is likely due to
the photoinduced electron transfer process in which excited elec-
trons from ICG are transferred to Au25(SG)18 in the proximity
of O2, resulting in less 1O2 generation and more local heat. Fur-
thermore, it has been observed that peptide-Cys 5.5 crosslinked
Au NCs are highly eﬃcient at harvesting light and subsequently
transforming this optical energy into localized heat. This process
results in targeted and responsive photothermal eﬀects.[201] An
MXene crosslinked Au NC also showed a photothermal conver-
sion eﬃciency of 43.51%.[202] Moreover, an aromatic PTA, hep-
tamethine dye (Cy7), was modiﬁed onto Au44(p-MBA)26 through
click chemistry and showed a photothermal conversion eﬃciency
of 65.12% after surface engineering.[203]
4. Bioresponses at the Organismal Scale
The eﬀective utilization of metal NC-based nano-agents de-
pends on the basic knowledge of their in vivo fate. The
administered metal NCs may undergo an entry–circulation–
biotransformation/utilization–elimination reaction chain in the
body (Figure 11). Therefore, it is important to probe the
structure–property–function relationship in such a complex
physiological environment. For instance, a precisely engineered
structure (including an ultra-small size and modiﬁed surface
chemistry) allows metal NCs to readily penetrate biological barri-
ers and accumulate in speciﬁc suborgan compartments. In ad-
dition, their superior photophysical properties facilitate the vi-
sualization of their journey during transportation and the de-
tailed tracking of metabolic reactions at speciﬁc moieties. In this
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (17 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 12. Schematic illustration of the in vivo transportation of NCs after administration. a) The NIR-II images were taken of both healthy mice and
mice with intestinal cancer after oral administration of RNase-A@AuNCs. Reproduced with permission.[208] Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. b) Time course
of NIR-II images of a mouse’s entire body after i.v. injection. Reproduced with permission.[12] Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. c) Possible scheme illustrating
the margination of high-density and low-density NCs in the bloodstream following tail injection. d) Bright-ﬁeld and ﬂuorescence images of a mouse ear’s
blood vessels after i.v. injection. Reproduced with permission.[218] Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.
section, we summarize the in vivo trajectories of metal NCs and
their metabolic reactions within various organs.
4.1. Administration Pathways
Biofunctional nanomaterials can enter the human body through
inhalation, ingestion, injection, or dermal exposure. For mouse
models, tail vein injection (intravenous; i.v.), intraperitoneal in-
jection (i.p.), as well as intragastric (i.g.), and intranasal (i.n.) ad-
ministration, are the main routes.
To date, theranostic metal NCs have been administered in mul-
tiphase regimes. The bioavailability of NCs in a mouse model
showed that i.p. was more eﬀective than i.n. or i.g. Meanwhile,
i.p. showed the highest retention of NCs in the brain, indicat-
ing that i.p. is a better route for NC administration in mouse
models.[204] Meanwhile, to evaluate the movement from the res-
piratory tract to the bloodstream, intratracheal administration of
1.4 nm Au55 NCs passed the blood–gas barrier after inhalation,
whereas 18 nm NPs were predominantly conﬁned within the
lungs.[205] Additionally, after i.n. administration, NCs were found
in various organs, such as the spleen, liver, lungs, and kidneys,
conﬁrming their ability to pass through the blood–gas barrier of
the lungs.[204]
The poor bioavailability of orally administered drugs is a sig-
niﬁcant challenge, primarily due to limited gastrointestinal ab-
sorption into the bloodstream and ﬁrst-pass metabolism by the
reticuloendothelial system. After oral administration, nanomate-
rials are absorbed into the blood through barriers in the intesti-
nal epithelium.[206,207] The acidic and enzyme-rich environment
of the gastrointestinal tract can degrade NIR-II-emitting probes,
aﬀecting their optical properties and potentially causing harmful
eﬀects. However, RNase-A@Au NCs showed a 25% decrease in
ﬂuorescence in simulated gastric juice. These NCs also moved
evenly through the gastrointestinal tract during gastrointesti-
nal peristalsis, enabling clear visualization of the intricate struc-
tures of the gastrointestinal tract in vivo. In contrast, two other
emitters (Ag2S and NaYF4:Er/Yb) were quenched by more than
95% in simulated gastric juice. The results indicate that RNase-
A@Au NCs are robust in acidic and enzymatic digestion envi-
ronments and have the potential for early diagnosis of intestinal
tumors with a fourfold higher resolution than barium swallow
(Figure 12a).[208] Likewise, oral antibiotics are required to elimi-
nate bioﬁlms eﬃciently without adversely aﬀecting the intestinal
microbiome. When administered orally, AuNC@PEG-OH and
AuNC@PEG-NH2 demonstrated signiﬁcant antibioﬁlm activity
without causing notable changes in the blood parameters.[209]
4.2. Biodistribution and Blood Pharmacokinetics
Many nanomaterials fail to reach the clinical trial stage because
of the limited understanding of their fundamental interactions
with organs and biological barriers.[1] Nanomaterials interact
with physiological barriers in unique ways depending on their
size, exhibit diﬀerent retention times in the body, and follow
distinct metabolic pathways. By quantifying the biodistribution
and blood pharmacokinetics of metal NCs, we can quantitatively
assess the nano–bio interactions in vivo at the sub-nanometer
level. NIR-II imaging (1100–1700 nm) is particularly promising
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (18 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
for medical diagnoses involving blood vessels, owing to its high
resolution and deep penetration.[210] NIR-II-emitting NCs are
rapidly cleared from background tissues, such as the skin, pro-
viding imaging of deep tissues with higher contrast. For instance,
bright NIR-II-emitting contrast agent MHA/TDT-Au NCs oﬀer
prolonged circulation and eﬃcient elimination, making them ef-
fective for mapping vascular networks and identifying vascular
disorders.[211]
4.2.1. Transportation via Blood Circulation
Metal NCs with ultrasmall hydrodynamic sizes demonstrate
pharmacokinetics similar to those of molecules. The in vivo
transportation of metal NCs can be viewed through the time
course of NIR-II imaging after i.v. tail injection in a mouse
model.[212,213] Theoretically, deoxygenated blood carrying NCs
drains into the right atrium through the inferior vena cava,
and heart contractions pump blood into the lungs to complete
gaseous exchange in the pulmonary circulation. Subsequently,
oxygen-rich blood containing metal NCs is dumped into the
left atrium from the lungs, and ﬁnally, systemic arterial blood
is distributed to the whole body. The metal NCs showed high-
resolution imaging signals in the lungs, kidneys, liver, and blad-
der (Figure 12b). Evidence shows that the lung signal is seen at
1 s post-injection (p.i.), and the liver signal is captured at 1.6 s.
The signal in the vessel and kidney occurs after 3.2 and 6.4 s, re-
spectively. With an increase in time up to 1 min, a heightened sig-
nal was observed throughout the body. The signal from the kid-
ney increased incrementally until 130 s. Over time, the transport
of NCs from the liver to the bladder occurred gradually within
≈10 min. No bladder signal was found 24 h p.i., indicating that
the metal NCs were excreted by the kidneys.[12]
Highly vascularized organs, such as the testis, liver, and
spleen, are likely to retain metal NCs and continually excrete or
reﬂux them during 90 d of observation. Negatively charged NCs
showed a higher residual concentration in the liver, whereas pos-
itively charged NCs tended to accumulate in the kidneys after 90
d.[214] PEGylated NCs show signiﬁcantly less MPS uptake than
non-PEGylated NCs.[215] In addition, NCs with high surface ac-
tivities aggregate to sizes ranging from 5–30 nm in the plasma.
These aggregates are readily recognized by macrophages and ac-
cumulate predominantly in highly vascularized organs. After a
28-h study, BSA-protected Au25 NCs had higher concentrations
in the kidney, lungs, and liver but lower concentrations in the
heart than GSH-protected Au25 NCs.[216] Moreover, Au29(SG)27
can be accumulated in the colon for the treatment of inﬂamma-
tory bowel disease.[160]
Extravasation between the tissue interstitial space and artery
has been studied in the mouse ear by observing the ﬂuorescence
intensity. The density-dependent margination eﬀect of metal NCs
in laminar blood ﬂow might enhance extravasation, in which
high-density metal NCs merge to vessel walls faster, move slower,
and are more likely to interact with vascular cells (Figure 12c).[217]
After i.v. injection, metal NCs gradually penetrate the tissue
interstitial space. Interestingly, it has been reported that it is
more diﬃcult for Au18 NCs to cross the endothelium than it is
for Au25 NCs, thereby prolonging the blood retention of Au18
(Figure 12d).
[218] This can be explained by the inverse relationship
between size and ﬁltration rate in gel ﬁltration or size-exclusion
chromatography. During this process, larger molecules or parti-
cles are ﬁltered out more quickly than smaller molecules. This is
because smaller particles can be physically retained by stationary
materials for extended periods.[218]
4.2.2. Biodistribution in Speciﬁc Organs
The high binding capability of Au25(SG)18 to the bone struc-
ture could be due to its abundant carboxylic acid side chains,
which speciﬁcally interact with calcium (Ca) atoms in hydrox-
yapatite. Because of quick elimination via the renal system, the
background signals of soft tissues (such as the skin, liver, and
kidney) decrease gradually to better delineate the bone struc-
tures. All dorsal bone structures from the cranial region to the
spine, including the pelvis and femur, were distinctly visible.
However, unlike the alveolar bones, the teeth showed no ﬂuo-
rescence. Au25(SG)18 stands out for its ability to visualize bone
structures in vivo beneath intact tissues or skin using NIR-II
imaging with high sensitivity and resolution, which cannot be
achieved by other bone-targeting ﬂuorophores without skin re-
moval. Meanwhile, Au25(SG)18 could function under two diﬀer-
ent pH conditions: pH = 7.40 for normal microenvironments
and pH = 6.20 for acidic microenvironments, which are typi-
cal in bone tumors or fractures. Interestingly, its binding eﬃ-
ciency to bone was clearly improved in an acidic environment
(Figure 13a).[219] Meanwhile, several engineered Au44(p-MBA)26
clusters also showed enhanced bone-targeting ability after ligand
modiﬁcation of the cluster surfaces.[156,180]
The penetration of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) is shown in
Figure 13b.[12] The BBB, formed by closely interconnected brain
vascular endothelial cells, astrocytes, and pericytes, serves as an
essential barrier between brain cells, cerebrospinal ﬂuid, and
plasma. This barrier eﬀectively protects the brain from harmful
components of the blood and toxins. However, the BBB presents
a signiﬁcant challenge in the treatment of neurodegenerative dis-
eases. Small NPs are more likely to penetrate the BBB. Ultra-
small NCs can cross the BBB through intercellular spaces and
exhibit excellent neuroprotective eﬀects.[139,204] In addition, the
BBB membrane is negatively charged, making it more receptive
to positively charged substances. Therefore, with their positive
surface charge, QA-coated Au NCs can penetrate the BBB quickly
and eﬃciently.[220]
Metal NCs were used for brain imaging in the NIR-IIa range
(1300–1400 nm) in normal, LPS-injured, and ischemic stroke
mouse models. Initial observations in healthy mice revealed that
arterial vessels were visible at the onset of brain perfusion. As
time progressed to 1.6 s, the NCs moved from the arterial to the
venous vessels. The brain vascular signal diminished rapidly after
14.4 s, with no notable signal in most vessels after 84.8 s, except
in the transverse sinus, inferior cerebral vein, and superior sagit-
tal sinus. In contrast, mice with LPS-induced injuries showed
slower blood ﬂow and prolonged Au NC retention in brain ves-
sels compared with healthy mice. In models of ischemic stroke,
Au NCs can travel to reopened injured vessels, enabling real-time
monitoring of cerebrovascular damage through dynamic ﬂuo-
rescence imaging. Additionally, Au NCs assist in observing new
blood vessel formation in the brain tissue post-stroke.[12]
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (19 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 13. a) NIR-II ﬂuorescence images of bone with NCs. Reproduced with permission.[219] Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. b) Principal component
analysis overlaid images of brain vessels, where arteries are marked in red and veins in blue, in a stroke mouse injected with NCs. c) Dynamic tumor
metastasis imaging with Au NCs. Reproduced with permission.[12] Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. d) Intratumoral NIR ﬂuorescence images of injected
NCs. Reproduced with permission.[224] Copyright 2022, Nature Publishing Group.
4.2.3. Accumulation in Tumors and Lymph Nodes
In ex vivo monolayer cell cultures, metal NCs engineered with
speciﬁc targeting ligands were less internalized. However, in
vivo, they can enter the tumor site after i.v. injection and accu-
mulate inside tumor cells. NCs can bypass the reticuloendothe-
lial system, allowing them to passively target tumors through the
enhanced permeability and retention eﬀect. This makes them
more eﬀective than organic dye molecules for rapid tumor de-
tection. Notably, at 12 h p.i., GSH-coated Au NCs were concen-
trated in tumors at levels tenfold higher than those of the organic
dye molecules. They were also cleared from normal tissues more
than threefold faster (Figure 13c).[221] These NCs demonstrated
signiﬁcant uptake in both primary tumors and lymphatic metas-
tases, with a 10.5-fold higher uptake rate in tumors than in nor-
mal tissues.[12] The ultrasmall size of renal-clearable NCs allows
for rapid penetration and even distribution within tumors, result-
ing in a more potent anticancer eﬀect than larger NP-based drug
carriers.[222] Various in vivo studies have highlighted the eﬀec-
tiveness of NCs in detecting tumors in areas such as the brain,
breast, neck, and kidneys.
The i.v. administration route enables metal NCs to be trans-
ported to local lymph nodes and enter the bloodstream through
capillary lymph vessels.[223] Recently, NCs have been devel-
oped as eﬀective lymph node-targeting and imaging probes
(Figure 13d).[224] Though ICG has been widely used to target can-
cerous tissues in clinical diagnosis, reports have shown that a
small percentage of patients experience side eﬀects. This raises
questions regarding the optimal timing of imaging and surgery.
For example, the time between ICG injection and subsequent
imaging or surgery varied signiﬁcantly, ranging from 15 min to
24 h. However, signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from cyanine dyes, NIR-
II-emitting Au-4-aminophenylphosphorylcholine NCs are trans-
ported through the lymphatic system unimpeded, allow drain-
ing lymph node imaging almost immediately p.i., and provide a
comfortable imaging window of ≈1–2 h. With little timing uncer-
tainty, these NCs could be used in clinical scenarios where quick
diagnostics and intervention decisions are required.[224]
4.2.4. Blood Pharmacokinetics
The highly eﬃcient renal clearance of metal NCs presents a short
half-life in the blood, resulting in limited tumor uptake, which
makes it challenging to further enhance their targeting eﬃcien-
cies. For instance, Au25(SG)18 exhibits rapid elimination, with a
half-life of less than 2 min. The plasma half-life of metal NCs is
highly dependent on the HD and surface chemistry. Therefore,
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (20 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
several studies have been conducted to increase circulating time
by reducing renal elimination. The blood circulation time of Au-
ZwMe2 was slightly enhanced to 6.5 min, leading to improved
retention in the tumors of glioblastoma-bearing mice.[225] More
recently, a bidentate thiol ligand featuring both a charged PE-
Gylated moiety and a hydrophobic zwitterionic component was
utilized. This approach aims to extend the half-life of Au NCs
while ensuring eﬃcient renal clearance.[226] The half-life of short
PEG chain-stabilized Au NCs was enhanced from 5 to 45 min.[227]
Owing to the length of the PEG chain, 64CuAu NCs-PEG1000
showed a twofold longer blood circulation time than 64CuAu
NCs-PEG350.[215] NR@Min-23@Au NCs presented a distribu-
tion half-life of 18.8 ± 1.7 min in mice.[228]
When the number of Au atoms in the GSH-coated Au NCs was
reduced from 25 to 10 at the sub-nanometer scale, there was a lin-
ear increase in the NC blood circulation time and extended reten-
tion in the tumor.[218] Larger molecules can be ﬁltered faster than
smaller molecules owing to their physical retention by stationary
materials. Therefore, controlling the size and surface chemistry
of metal NCs is crucial to achieve an optimal balance between
eﬃcient renal clearance and high tumor retention. The experi-
mental data supported the theory that Au10-12(SG)10-12 exhibit a
two-phase pharmacokinetic proﬁle characterized by a distribu-
tion half-life of 2.4 h and an elimination half-life of 22 h. The
blood concentration of Au10-12(SG)10-12 is 20-fold higher than that
of Au25(SG)18.[229]
4.3. Biotransformation in the Liver
Biotransformation refers to the chemical modiﬁcation of external
substances (xenobiotics), enhancing their absorption (e.g., nutri-
ents) or elimination (e.g., toxins), primarily in the liver. The struc-
ture of the liver includes discontinuous endothelial cells, with
gaps ranging from 50 to 100 nm, whereas the inter-endothelial
cell gaps of the spleen span from 200 to 500 nm.[230] The most
frequent method for removing engineered NPs (>6 nm) from the
bloodstream involves nonspeciﬁc uptake by the reticuloendothe-
lial system, followed by hepatobiliary clearance.[231] However, if
NPs are not biodegradable, their elimination takes longer, poten-
tially leading to liver necrosis. This poses a signiﬁcant challenge
for their clinical application.
GSH-mediated biotransformation is a common liver detoxiﬁ-
cation method used to remove lipophilic substances and heavy
metals. This process also inﬂuences nanomaterial transport, af-
fecting blood retention, disease targeting, and clearance.[229,232]
GSH, a biothiol that is abundant in the liver, is produced in hep-
atocytes. It is then continuously transported into the liver sinu-
soids through the fenestrated sinusoidal endothelium and is sub-
sequently distributed to other body compartments.[233,234] GSH
exported from hepatocytes can reduce cystine to two molecules
of Cys through a thiol–disulﬁde exchange reaction.[235] In addi-
tion, the kidney proximal tubules present the highest level of
𝛾-glutamyl transferase, which can degrade GSH into glycine-
cysteinyl (Gly-Cys).[236,237]
To reveal the details of hepatic GSH-mediated biotransforma-
tion after ultrasmall-scale NP involvement, the conjugation of
ICG onto Au25(SG)18 was constructed and abbreviated as ICG4-
Au25(SG)18, which dissociates at locally high thiol concentrations
(such as in liver sinusoids and the tumor microenvironment).[238]
Au25(SG)18 exhibited a low aﬃnity for serum proteins and min-
imal hepatic accumulation. As a result, when Au25(SG)18 ﬂowed
to the hepatic sinusoid, it escaped uptake by Kupﬀer cells.[215,238]
However, with its high aﬃnity for serum proteins, ICG was
used to enhance the hepatic delivery of Au25(SG)18. This con-
jugate can navigate through endothelial fenestrations, especially
given the slower blood ﬂow in the liver sinusoids compared with
the arteries and veins. This allows it to be transported to the
liver for uptake by hepatocytes while minimizing uptake by MPS
cells. Only a minor fraction of ICG4-Au25(SG)18 was captured by
liver macrophages, such as Kupﬀer cells. ICG also enhanced the
serum protein absorption eﬃciency of ICG4-Au25(SG)18, which
weakened the strength of the Au─S bond. This weakening makes
ICG-GSH more susceptible to displacement by both GSH and
Cys, which are derived from sinusoidal GSH eﬄux in the perisi-
nusoidal space. After dissociation, resulting in a reduced number
of ICGs attached to Au25(SG)18, this complex no longer binds to
serum proteins. The biotransformed ICG4-Au25(SG)18 is trans-
ported back into the bloodstream and circulates to the kidneys,
passing through glomerular ﬁltration and reaching the proximal
tubules of the kidney. At this location, any remaining ICG-GS on
the Au25 NCs was displaced by Gly-Cys. GSH, Cys, and Gly-Cys
were all involved in the biotransformation of ICG4-Au25(SG)18,
which ICG quickly dissociated from Au25 and recovered ﬂuores-
cence (Figure 14a).
GSH-mediated biotransformation extends its scope beyond
metal NCs and has also been observed for a range of PEGylated
Au NPs with core sizes ranging from 5 to 100 nm, as well as for
zwitterionic dopamine sulfonate-modiﬁed amorphous FexMnyO
NPs.[238,239] These ﬁndings pave the way for the development of
novel blood markers. By utilizing speciﬁc NC–biochemical inter-
actions, local disease information can be transmitted to the blood-
stream for early detection and noninvasive monitoring of hepatic
GSH.[240]
4.4. Transport Kinetics and Elimination Pathways
Excretion is a vital biological function that protects against toxic-
ity by removing unnecessary substances from biosystems. Nano-
materials are predominantly eliminated via two routes: renal (via
urine) and hepatic (from bile to feces). Prone to serum protein
binding, NPs are likely to be retained in the body for a long time
and excreted through the reticuloendothelial organs, including
liver metabolism, bile excretion, and fecal elimination. However,
in addition to the liver, the kidneys are major organs involved
in ﬁltration and elimination. This signiﬁcantly reduces the po-
tential toxicity of nanomaterials owing to their rapid clearance
through the kidneys. In addition to “super-stealth” probes in vivo,
most ultrasmall metal NCs are small enough to pass through the
glomerular capillary walls and enter the urine in an intact form
owing to low serum protein binding during circulation.
4.4.1. Physiology and Transport Kinetics in Renal Clearance
Nephrons, which consist of renal corpuscles and tubules, are
the basic structural and functional units of the kidneys.[241] The
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (21 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 14. a) The biotransformation mediated by liver GSH impacts the in vivo transport of ICG4-GS-Au25. Reproduced with permission.[238] Copyright
2019, Nature Publishing Group. b) Schematic of the glomerulus and glomerular ﬁltration membrane structure. c,d) Scaling of size and charge in the
glomerular ﬁltration of NPs. Reproduced with permission.[242] Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.
blood and metal NCs inside the aﬀerent arterioles move to the
capillary bed, namely the glomerulus, which is part of the renal
corpuscle. High blood pressure in the glomerular cavity drives
glomerular ﬁltration. As a result, metal NCs and waste are trans-
ported into Bowman’s space, and the remaining blood is fun-
neled back into the eﬀerent arterioles. The ﬁltration of nano-sized
macromolecules in the glomerulus is highly size- and charge-
selective, owing to the unique ultrastructure of the glomerulus
at the nanoscale.[242] The glomerular ﬁltration membrane, also
known as the glomerular ﬁltration barrier (GFB), is a crucial ﬁl-
tration barrier in the kidneys. This membrane is a sophisticated
structure composed of several layers: the endothelial glycoca-
lyx, endothelial cells (featuring fenestrae measuring 70–90 nm),
glomerular basement membrane (which is a mesh-like structure
with pores ranging from 2–8 nm), and podocytes (equipped with
ﬁltration slits that are 4–11 nm wide) located between the exten-
sions of podocytes.[242,243] This barrier plays a vital role in sepa-
rating the glomerular capillary lumen from the Bowman’s space
(Figure 14b). Podocytes form the architectural backbone, which
provides the mechanical stability and size-selectivity of the GFB,
whereas endothelial cells and the glycocalyx on top form a neg-
atively charged network with proteoglycans, glycoproteins, and
glycolipids.[244,245] The kidney ﬁltration threshold for metal NPs
was deﬁned as 5.5 nm using quantum dots, whereas a thresh-
old of 6 nm was obtained using proteins (owing to the possible
deformation of soft molecules).[246]
In healthy states, NPs with an HD less than 6 nm are prone to
be ﬁltered through the 6 nm pore size of the glomerular ﬁltration
membrane, which is preferred to avoid excessive MPS accumu-
lation (Figure 14c).[242] Cationic NPs with an HD ranging from
6–8 nm, slightly larger than the kidney ﬁltration threshold, can
pass through the GFB owing to electrostatic attraction.[247–249] In
contrast, NPs larger than 8 nm in HD are generally not cleared by
the kidneys.[216] Accordingly, 94% of Au in GSH-protected Au25
NCs, which are 2.1 nm in size, can be excreted quickly from the
renal system even after slight aggregation to 5–30 nm in vivo,
whereas the BSA-protected Au25 NCs (8.2 nm) aggregated up to
40–80 nm and resulted in accumulation within the reticuloen-
dothelial system.[216]
Previous studies have shown that 1.0 nm GSH-coated Au25
and 1.7 nm GSH-Au NCs have almost identical renal clear-
ance eﬃciency at 24 h p.i. (52% ID and 53% ID, respectively),
whereas 2.5 nm GSH-Au640 NCs exhibited 43% ID (24 h p.i.),
and the larger 6 nm GSH-Au8856 NCs retained only 4% ID (24 h
p.i.).[218,250,251] Meanwhile, in the sub-nanometer size regime (be-
low 1 nm), the GFB becomes an atomically precise “bandpass”
barrier to signiﬁcantly slow down the renal clearance of Au NCs
with the same ligands but diﬀerent sizes (Au10-11, Au15, Au18).
In particular, with a few-atom increase (from 10 to 25) in NCs,
the renal clearance eﬃciency of NCs exponentially increases,
whereas engineered NPs with an HD range from 2 to 6 nm (such
as zwitterionic quantum dots and silica NPs) show inversely
size-dependent glomerular ﬁltration.[218,252] Compared with Au25,
smaller Au NCs are more readily and physically arrested by the
glomerular glycocalyx, and their renal clearance eﬃciency is dra-
matically reduced by fourfold to ninefold in the early elimination
stage.[218] Thus, Au25(SG)18 is an ideal tool for preclinical kidney
research, owing to its high renal clearance.
Concomitantly,
the
electrostatic
attraction
between
the
glomerular basement membrane and positively charged NCs
may accelerate renal clearance. Conversely, electrostatic repul-
sion is likely to decrease the excretion eﬃciency of anionic NCs.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (22 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 15. a) Fluorescence images showing the whole body of a mouse after i.v. injection with Au NPs and Ag NPs. b) Representative time-ﬂuorescence
intensity curves of kidneys and background in two groups of mice, each i.v. injected with Au NPs and Ag NPs. Reproduced with permission.[217] Copyright
2016, Wiley-VCH. c) Representative PA images of normal mice pre-injection and post-injection at various time intervals capture the transport of NCs.
Reproduced with permission.[255] Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.
However, several studies have reported an increase in renal
clearance eﬃciency with a decrease in the zeta potential, imply-
ing that NPs with a strong negative charge are eliminated more
quickly than those with a weak negative charge (Figure 14d).[242]
For instance, for Au NCs with similar size but diﬀerent negative
charges: GSH­coated NCs (𝜁= −50 mV), glycine-cysteine-
coated NCs (𝜁= −27.3 mV), and GSH-cysteamine­coated NCs
(𝜁= −22 mV), the renal clearance eﬃciencies at 1 h p.i. are 28%,
15.3%, and 10%, respectively.[253,254] These results indicate that
as the zeta potential of NCs decreases, renal clearance eﬃciency
increases.
Notably, as one of the intrinsic characteristics of inorganic
metal NCs, density controls the margination of metal NCs within
vessels, and therefore inﬂuences kidney ﬁltration. Large NPs
(above 50 nm) with lower densities tend to be more easily and
broadly distributed throughout the body but are also more rapidly
ﬁltered by the kidneys. However, this theory remains valid for
NC scales. Notably, some ultrasmall NPs with an HD below
≈4 nm and capable of renal clearance were also considered NCs
in this section. For instance, even with the same ligands, an al-
most identical HD of ≈3.1 nm, and a similarly greater density
than blood, the density of Au is about twofold higher than Ag.
Therefore, in laminar blood ﬂow, low-density GSH-Ag NPs cir-
culated faster than GSH-Au NPs, and thus remained in blood
circulation for shorter periods and were ﬁltered quicker in the
kidneys.[217] The accumulation of GSH-Ag NPs in highly perme-
able organs (such as the kidneys) was much higher than that of
GSH-Au NPs (Figure 15a,b). While GSH-Ag NPs accumulated in
the cortex similar to GSH-Au NPs, they also signiﬁcantly pene-
trated the medulla, particularly in the area near the renal pelvis,
to a much greater extent than GSH-Au NPs. Likewise, when
comparing the pharmacokinetics-derived clearance parameters
of Au25(SG)18 and FITC-inulin, they share similar blood clear-
ance kinetics in the early elimination stage. However, the diver-
gence of the later elimination stage may be due to the stronger
density-dependent margination eﬀect of Au25(SG)18 during lam-
inar blood ﬂow in vessels, thus increasing its extravasation and
decreasing its excretion eﬃciency.[255]
Using photoacoustic imaging to examine the kidney in a cross-
sectional direction, it has been observed that Au25(SG)18 travels
through the aorta to reach the renal parenchyma. It then moves
from the cortex to the medulla and is rapidly ﬁltered into the re-
nal pelvis (Figure 15c).[255] Histological analysis has conﬁrmed
that when blood is not removed from the vasculature, Au25(SG)18
is primarily located in the glomeruli, tubular lumens, and per-
itubular capillaries, with only minimal presence inside tubular
cells.[255] By successfully quantifying the glomerular ﬁltration
rate, these ﬁndings suggest that in vivo, Au25(SG)18 can also be
eliminated through free glomerular ﬁltration, with minimal in-
volvement of renal tubular secretion or reabsorption.
As previously mentioned, the renal clearance of ultrasmall
NCs depends not only on their inherent physical and chemical
characteristics, such as size, charge, and density, but also on the
physiological structure of the GFB and pathological alterations in
the nephron.
4.4.2. Metal NC–Biological Interactions within the Dysfunctional
Kidney
Dysfunctional kidneys were investigated using a unilateral
ureteric obstruction (UUO) model, in which the left ureter of
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (23 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 16. a) Representative photoacoustic images in UUO mice showing the comparison of pre-injection and post-injection NCs, captured at multiple
time points. Reproduced with permission.[255] Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. b) Representative noninvasive X-ray images of mice pre-injection and post-
injection. c) Magniﬁed in vivo X-ray image at 60 min p.i. d) H&E and silver-stained sections of the UUO kidney. e) H&E-stained tissue obtained from
UUO and contralateral kidneys, collected on the eighth day post-operation. Reproduced with permission.[252] Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.
mice was surgically ligated.[252,255,256] This procedure led to a
marked decrease in blood perfusion and glomerular ﬁltration
rate, resulting in reduced entry of NCs into the obstructed kid-
ney. However, the ﬁltration and transport of these NCs from the
bloodstream through the glomeruli to the cortex were not sig-
niﬁcantly delayed (Figure 16a,b). Concurrently, the excretion of
NCs from the renal cortex and medulla to the pelvis was notably
impeded, leading to the accumulation of these clusters in the
obstructed kidney, accompanied by an increase in renal cellular
uptake. X-ray imaging revealed selective accumulation of NCs at
the interface between the pelvis and medulla (Figure 16c). His-
tological studies conﬁrmed pathological changes in the kidneys,
and extensive tubular dilatation and atrophy were observed at the
boundary of the pelvis and medulla (Figure 16d). Similarly, NCs
were found inside the normal tubular lumen and epithelial cells
at the junction of the cortex and medulla, where extensive tubular
impairment was observed (Figure 16e).
Kidney dysfunction, which is often a silent and asymptomatic
condition in its early stages, can lead to renal failure if not
promptly addressed. Although noninvasive imaging methods,
such as magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography,
and single-photon emission computed tomography, are used in
clinical settings, they carry the potential risk of radiation ex-
posure. Common biomarkers for the noninvasive diagnosis of
kidney dysfunction, such as blood urea nitrogen and creati-
nine, often fail to detect the early stages of the condition. Sim-
ilarly, frequently used preclinical monitoring probes, such as
IRDye 800CW, have limitations, such as poor kidney accessibil-
ity and nonspeciﬁc accumulation in background tissues, which
can obscure genuine kidney signals. To overcome these long-
standing challenges, an advanced renal-clearable NIR-emitting
agent, GSH-coated Au NCs, with a core size of 2.5 nm and
an HD of 3.3 nm, was employed. Oﬀering a 50-fold higher
kidney-background contrast ratio than traditional organic dyes,
this agent enables the monitoring of kidney function impairment
and categorizes renal damage into four levels based on time-
ﬂuorescence intensity curves.[257]
4.4.3. Additional Elimination Pathways
Metallic NCs with various surface-engineering modiﬁcations of-
ten undergo distinct elimination pathways. This was attributed
to alterations in the physicochemical properties of the NCs
post-surface modiﬁcation. In a biological context, factors such
as the size, surface hydrophilicity, and adsorption behavior of
serum proteins are particularly critical considerations. The un-
predictable clearance of metal NCs through the hepatobiliary sys-
tem still occurs in some cases. The majority of the orally adminis-
tered Au NCs were excreted through feces, accounting for ≈91%,
with ≈7% detected in the stomach.[208,209] Moreover, the 1.4 nm
Au55 NCs were eliminated through both the kidneys and hepa-
tobiliary system within 24 h of intratracheal administration.[205]
In i.v. injection studies, Er3+-doped Au NCs (Ln@Au NCs) were
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (24 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
eﬀectively cleared from the body via the hepatobiliary excre-
tion pathway. This clearance mechanism contributed to favor-
able long-term safety in vivo, similar to the safety proﬁle of renal-
clearable Au NCs.[258] Similarly, 64CuAu NCs showed signiﬁcant
renal and hepatobiliary clearance.[215]
5. Conclusions and Perspectives
In summary, as novel nano-agents, metal NCs not only provide
biological beneﬁts but are also active participants in intricate
bioreactions. The atomically precise nanostructure, with slight
diﬀerences in size, surface chemistry, and particle charge, en-
dows NCs with vastly diﬀerent in vivo fates. Therefore, we ad-
vocate a holistic consideration of metal NC-related bioresponses
to contribute to the design and optimization of multifunctional
ultrasmall nanomaterials in biomedicine. Building on laboratory
success, metal NCs provide the basics and applications for clini-
cal translation, addressing initial obstacles, including biocompat-
ibility, potential toxicity, synthesis strategies, and stability. In this
review, we highlight the unique properties of metal NCs in pre-
clinical studies and outline the considerable perspectives from
the aspects discussed below.
5.1. Hypoxic Conditions
In antibacterial therapeutics, eﬀorts to date have primarily in-
volved aerobic and facultative anaerobic bacteria but sporadically
include anaerobic bacteria that reside in a hypoxic milieu. Sim-
ilarly, the phototoxicity elicited during PDT exhibits an absolute
dependence on oxygen, and the continuous consumption of oxy-
gen may potentiate hypoxia. As one of the key components of
PDT, suﬃcient O2 concentration is required in both type I and
type II pathways. Hence, the hypoxic tumor environment and
continuous O2 consumption preclude its therapeutic eﬃcacy and
hamper its practical use. To overcome the “bottleneck” of the hy-
poxia situation, a self-supply O2 strategy has been developed us-
ing NCs. Consequently, to avoid the bottleneck of oxygen short-
age, it is imperative to explore oxygen-independent therapies,
such as utilizing the CAT-like properties of metal NCs to catalyze
H2O2 into O2.[151] Au NCs-NH2 can produce O2 under hypoxic
conditions.[259] Otherwise, developing novel NC-based PSs that
photoinduce electron transfer without oxygen to kill cancer cells
or anaerobic bacteria may be a promising avenue, referring to the
“type III photochemical pathway”.[260,261]
5.2. First-Pass Metabolism
The MPS-mediated ﬁrst-pass metabolism of nanomaterials has
been identiﬁed as a major culprit for their depleted biodistribu-
tion before they reach the ﬁnal target site.[262] In oral administra-
tion, the ﬁrst-pass eﬀect refers to the process by which the drug
accumulates and metabolizes mainly in the liver before reaching
the target site, leading to a reduced concentration of the active
drug in the target tissue and an increased dose in the formula-
tion. However, metal NCs show great promise for escaping MPS
trapping, especially GSH-coated Au NCs, and should be further
investigated to elucidate the details of their metabolic pathways
during oral administration.
5.3. Synergistic Therapeutic Eﬀects
Clinically, a single treatment cannot achieve satisfactory thera-
peutic eﬀects, whereas synergistic therapeutics integrate the mer-
its of each treatment to considerably improve eﬃcacy. Previous
studies have demonstrated that NCs can simultaneously serve as
PTAs and PSs.[220,263,264] In addition, NCs can be utilized as nano-
agents for chemo-PDT.[265–267] The light-to-heat conversion for
therapeutic purposes using NCs has been infrequently explored
owing to the lack of localized surface plasmon resonance, which
results in lower conversion eﬃciency compared to plasmonic
NPs. PTT undergoes nonradiative decay to generate heat and
stimulates the immune system by inducing immunogenic cell
death under mild hyperthermia. Photoimmunotherapy awaits
future application in metal NC research to achieve better ther-
apeutic performance. The relationship between metal NCs and
immune responses should be understood in depth to develop
novel photoimmunotherapy strategies.
5.4. Synthesis Strategies
To facilitate the application of metal NCs in a broad range of
nanobiomedical ﬁelds, it is necessary to employ methods such
as surface chemical engineering. This approach will endow NCs
with a richer set of properties, enabling them to fully exert their
diagnostic and therapeutic functions. We hope that surface mod-
iﬁcations can transform NCs into dual-/triple-functional agents
for theranostics.[268–272] It is worth noting that past experiments
have used imprecise NCs, which undermines the beneﬁts of us-
ing atomically precise NCs. Therefore, the exploration of addi-
tional ligand types for water-soluble, atomically precise NCs is
expected to signiﬁcantly advance the ﬁeld of nanomedicine.
In the ﬂood of twenty-ﬁrst-century metal NC-involved phys-
iochemical achievements, metal NC-based nanomedical funda-
mentals and applications are being increasingly explored. We
believe that the success of metal NC-mediated laboratory trials
bodes well for their eventual theranostic use in nanomedicine. If
we unearth the key structure–function relationship of atomically
precise metal NCs, we will be able to construct ideal metal NCs.
We hope that metal NC-based applications will provide excellent
beneﬁts for nanomedicine in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (T2325015, 82170998, 12174151, 61935009, 11974142, and
U21A2068), the Key Program of Natural Science Foundation of Jilin
Province (20220204128YY), the Funding of Jilin Province Development
and Reform Commission (2022C044-1), and the Funding of Jilin University
graduate innovation research program project (2023CX227).
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Keywords
biological levels, bioresponses, metal nanoclusters, nanomedicines
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (25 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Received: October 10, 2023
Revised: December 21, 2023
Published online: January 2, 2024
[1] W. Poon, B. R. Kingston, B. Ouyang, W. Ngo, W. C. W. Chan, Nat.
Nanotechnol. 2020, 15, 819.
[2] M. J. Mitchell, M. M. Billingsley, R. M. Haley, M. E. Wechsler, N. A.
Peppas, R. Langer, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2021, 20, 101.
[3] Z. Tu, Y. Zhong, H. Hu, D. Shao, R. Haag, M. Schirner, J. Lee, B.
Sullenger, K. W. Leong, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2022, 7, 557.
[4] I. De Lázaro, D. J. Mooney, Nat. Mater. 2021, 20, 1469.
[5] Y. Zheng, J. Wu, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2021, 431,
213689.
[6] X. Zou, X. Kang, M. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2023, 52, 5892.
[7] M. Yu, J. Xu, J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 4112.
[8] Y. Xiao, Z. Wu, Q. Yao, J. Xie, Aggregate 2021, 2, 114.
[9] J. Yang, F. Yang, C. Zhang, X. He, R. Jin, ACS Mater. Lett. 2022, 4,
1279.
[10] G. Yang, Z. Wang, F. Du, F. Jiang, X. Yuan, J. Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2023, 145, 11879.
[11] T. Chen, H. Lin, Y. Cao, Q. Yao, J. Xie, Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2103918.
[12] H. Liu, G. Hong, Z. Luo, J. Chen, J. Chang, M. Gong, H. He, J. Yang,
X. Yuan, L. Li, X. Mu, J. Wang, W. Mi, J. Luo, J. Xie, X.-D. Zhang, Adv.
Mater. 2019, 31, 1901015.
[13] Q. Chen, J. Chen, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. Dong, Z. Liu, Nano Res. 2018,
11, 5657.
[14] Q. Yao, X. Yuan, T. Chen, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30,
1802751.
[15] S. Abbina, L. E. Takeuchi, P. Anilkumar, K. Yu, J. C. Rogalski, R.
A. Shenoi, I. Constantinescu, J. N. Kizhakkedathu, Nat. Commun.
2020, 11, 3048.
[16] M. P. Monopoli, C. Åberg, A. Salvati, K. A. Dawson, Nat. Nanotech-
nol. 2012, 7, 779.
[17] K. M. Tsoi, S. A. Macparland, X.-Z. Ma, V. N. Spetzler, J. Echeverri, B.
Ouyang, S. M. Fadel, E. A. Sykes, N. Goldaracena, J. M. Kaths, J. B.
Conneely, B. A. Alman, M. Selzner, M. A. Ostrowski, O. A. Adeyi, A.
Zilman, I. D. Mcgilvray, W. C. W. Chan, Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 1212.
[18] S. Tenzer, D. Docter, J. Kuharev, A. Musyanovych, V. Fetz, R. Hecht,
F. Schlenk, D. Fischer, K. Kiouptsi, C. Reinhardt, K. Landfester, H.
Schild, M. Maskos, S. K. Knauer, R. H. Stauber, Nat. Nanotechnol.
2013, 8, 772.
[19] P. Makvandi, M. Chen, R. Sartorius, A. Zarrabi, M. Ashraﬁzadeh, F.
Dabbagh Moghaddam, J. Ma, V. Mattoli, F. R. Tay, Nano Today 2021,
40, 101279.
[20] H. H. Gustafson, D. Holt-Casper, D. W. Grainger, H. Ghandehari,
Nano Today 2015, 10, 487.
[21] W. H. De Jong, W. I. Hagens, P. Krystek, M. C. Burger, A. J. A. M.
Sips, R. E. Geertsma, Biomaterials 2008, 29, 1912.
[22] E. Sadauskas, G. Danscher, M. Stoltenberg, U. Vogel, A. Larsen, H.
Wallin, Nanomedicine 2009, 5, 162.
[23] L. Shang, R. M. Dörlich, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns, G. Ulrich Nienhaus,
Nano Res. 2012, 5, 531.
[24] M. Maghsudi, N. Shahabadi, M. R. A. Kooshk, N. Ghaemi, L.
Nemati, S. Parvaneh, K. Adeli, K. Varmira, Int. J. Biol. Macromol.
2018, 119, 838.
[25] A. A. Sousa, P. Schuck, S. A. Hassan, Nanoscale Adv. 2021, 3, 2995.
[26] N. Preeyanka, A. Akhuli, H. Dey, D. Chakraborty, A. Rahaman, M.
Sarkar, Langmuir 2022, 38, 10704.
[27] P. D. Pino, B. Pelaz, Q. Zhang, P. Maﬀre, G. U. Nienhaus, W. J. Parak,
Mater. Horiz. 2014, 1, 301.
[28] B. Pelaz, P. Del Pino, P. Maﬀre, R. Hartmann, M. Gallego, S. Rivera-
Fernández, J. M. De La Fuente, G. U. Nienhaus, W. J. Parak, ACS
Nano 2015, 9, 6996.
[29] L. Shang, K. Nienhaus, G. U. Nienhaus, J Nanobiotechnology 2014,
12, 5.
[30] T. Cedervall, I. Lynch, S. Lindman, T. Berggård, E. Thulin, H. Nilsson,
K. A. Dawson, S. Linse, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2007, 104, 2050.
[31] J. Senior, C. Delgado, D. Fisher, C. Tilcock, G. Gregoriadis, Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1991, 1062, 77.
[32] P. Aggarwal, J. B. Hall, C. B. McLeland, M. A. Dobrovolskaia, S. E.
McNeil, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2009, 61, 428.
[33] N. Bertrand, P. Grenier, M. Mahmoudi, E. M. Lima, E. A. Appel,
F. Dormont, J.-M. Lim, R. Karnik, R. Langer, O. C. Farokhzad, Nat.
Commun. 2017, 8, 777.
[34] T. Lima, K. Bernfur, M. Vilanova, T. Cedervall, Sci. Rep. 2020, 10,
1129.
[35] J. Senior, J. C. W. Crawley, G. Gregoriadis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1985, 839, https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4165(85)90174-6.
[36] M.-M. Yin, W.-Q. Chen, Y.-Q. Lu, J.-Y. Han, Y. Liu, F.-L. Jiang,
Nanoscale 2020, 12, 4573.
[37] A. A. Bhirde, S. A. Hassan, E. Harr, X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C 2014,
118, 16199.
[38] K. P. García, K. Zarschler, L. Barbaro, J. A. Barreto, W. O’malley, L.
Spiccia, H. Stephan, B. Graham, Small 2014, 10, 2516.
[39] A. A. Vertegel, R. W. Siegel, J. S. Dordick, Langmuir 2004, 20, 6800.
[40] Q. Yuan, Y. Wang, L. Zhao, R. Liu, F. Gao, L. Gao, X. Gao, Nanoscale
2016, 8, 12095.
[41] R. D. Vinluan, J. Liu, C. Zhou, M. Yu, S. Yang, A. Kumar, S. Sun, A.
Dean, X. Sun, J. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6, 11829.
[42] M. Sarparanta, L. M. Bimbo, J. Rytkönen, E. Mäkilä, T. J. Laaksonen,
P. Laaksonen, M. Nyman, J. Salonen, M. B. Linder, J. Hirvonen, H.
A. Santos, A. J. Airaksinen, Mol. Pharmaceutics 2012, 9, 654.
[43] T. J. Daou, L. Li, P. Reiss, V. Josserand, I. Texier, Langmuir 2009, 25,
3040.
[44] H. S. Choi, B. I. Ipe, P. Misra, J. H. Lee, M. G. Bawendi, J. V. Frangioni,
Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 2354.
[45] D. Owensiii, N. Peppas, Int. J. Pharm. 2006, 307, 93.
[46] J. S. Mohanty, P. L. Xavier, K. Chaudhari, M. S. Bootharaju, N.
Goswami, S. K. Pal, T. Pradeep, Nanoscale 2012, 4, 4255.
[47] W. Liu, H. Zhang, X. Dong, Y. Sun, Acta Biomater. 2022, 144, 157.
[48] L. Cao, W.-Q. Chen, L.-J. Zhou, Y.-Y. Wang, Y. Liu, F.-L. Jiang, Langmuir
2021, 37, 13787.
[49] W.-Q. Chen, M.-M. Yin, P.-J. Song, X.-H. He, Y. Liu, F.-L. Jiang, Lang-
muir 2020, 36, 6447.
[50] M.-M. Yin, P. Dong, W.-Q. Chen, S.-P. Xu, L.-Y. Yang, F.-L. Jiang, Y.
Liu, Langmuir 2017, 33, 5108.
[51] L. Shang, S. Brandholt, F. Stockmar, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns, G. U.
Nienhaus, Small 2012, 8, 661.
[52] X. Le Guével, M. Perez Perrino, T. D. Fernández, F. Palomares, M.-J.
Torres, M. Blanca, J. Rojo, C. Mayorga, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2015, 7, 20945.
[53] M. Wen, Y. Li, W. Zhong, Q. Li, L. Cao, L.-L. Tan, L. Shang, J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 2022, 610, 116.
[54] A. Akhuli, D. Chakraborty, A. K. Agrawal, M. Sarkar, Langmuir 2021,
37, 1823.
[55] S. H. D. P. Lacerda, J. J. Park, C. Meuse, D. Pristinski, M. L. Becker,
A. Karim, J. F. Douglas, ACS Nano 2010, 4, 365.
[56] Y. Tao, T. Aparicio, M. Li, K. W. Leong, S. Zha, J. Gautier, Nucleic Acids
Res. 2021, 49, 5074.
[57] D. Buceta, N. Busto, G. Barone, J. M. Leal, F. Domínguez, L. J.
Giovanetti, F. G. Requejo, B. García, M. A. López-Quintela, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 7612.
[58] J. Neissa, C. Pérez-Arnaiz, V. Porto, N. Busto, E. Borrajo, J. M. Leal,
M. A. López-Quintela, B. García, F. Dominguez, Chem. Sci. 2015, 6,
6717.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (26 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[59] Y. Liu, W. Meyer-Zaika, S. Franzka, G. Schmid, M. Tsoli, H. Kuhn,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2003, 42, 2853.
[60] M. Tsoli, H. Kuhn, W. Brandau, H. Esche, G. Schmid, Small 2005, 1,
841.
[61] Y. Genji Srinivasulu, Q. Yao, N. Goswami, J. Xie, Mater. Horiz. 2020,
7, 2596.
[62] Y. Yu, B. Y. L. Mok, X. J. Loh, Y. N. Tan, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2016,
5, 1844.
[63] Y. Xu, J. Sherwood, Y. Qin, D. Crowley, M. Bonizzoni, Y. Bao,
Nanoscale 2014, 6, 1515.
[64] B. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Cao, O. J. H. Chai, J. Xie, Small 2021, 17,
2004381.
[65] Z. Liu, Z. Wu, Q. Yao, Y. Cao, O. J. H. Chai, J. Xie, Nano Today 2021,
36, 101053.
[66] Y. Negishi, K. Nobusada, T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127,
5261.
[67] J. Lee, M. H. Naveen, J. Park, K. Pyo, H. Kim, D. Lee, J. H. Bang, ACS
Energy Lett. 2021, 6, 2305.
[68] H. Kawasaki, K. Hamaguchi, I. Osaka, R. Arakawa, Adv. Funct. Mater.
2011, 21, 3508.
[69] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, J. Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 888.
[70] Z. Wang, C. Tang, M. Huang, X. Rong, H. Lin, R. Su, Y. Wang, W. Qi,
Langmuir 2022, 38, 14799.
[71] Á. Turcsányi, D. Ungor, M. Wojnicki, E. Csapó, J. Mol. Liq. 2023, 370,
121002.
[72] A. Aires, I. Llarena, M. Moller, J. Castro-Smirnov, J. Cabanillas-
Gonzalez, A. L. Cortajarena, Angew. Chem. 2019, 131, 6280.
[73] S. Chakraborty, S. Babanova, R. C. Rocha, A. Desireddy, K.
Artyushkova, A. E. Boncella, P. Atanassov, J. S. Martinez, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 11678.
[74] J. Liu, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 2014, 58, 99.
[75] A. Latorre, Á. Somoza, ChemBioChem 2012, 13, 951.
[76] J. T. Petty, J. Zheng, N. V. Hud, R. M. Dickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2004, 126, 5207.
[77] B. Sengupta, C. M. Ritchie, J. G. Buckman, K. R. Johnsen, P. M.
Goodwin, J. T. Petty, J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 18776.
[78] X. Qiu, P. Wang, Z. Cao, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2014, 60, 351.
[79] Y. Zhu, X.-C. Hu, S. Shi, R.-R. Gao, H.-L. Huang, Y.-Y. Zhu, X.-Y. Lv,
T.-M. Yao, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 79, 205.
[80] F. Wu, Q. Lin, L. Wang, Y. Zou, M. Chen, Y. Xia, J. Lan, J. Chen, Talanta
2020, 207, 120257.
[81] A. Lopez, J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 3653.
[82] S. Li, J. Wei, Q. Yao, X. Song, J. Xie, H. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2023,
52, 1672.
[83] Y. Tao, M. Li, J. Ren, X. Qu, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44, 8636.
[84] H.-C. Yeh, J. Sharma, J. J. Han, J. S. Martinez, J. H. Werner, Nano
Lett. 2010, 10, 3106.
[85] J. Zhu, X. Song, L. Gao, Z. Li, Z. Liu, S. Ding, S. Zou, Y. He, Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2014, 53, 71.
[86] S. Kundu, B. Ghosh, S. Nandi, M. Ghosh, A. Pyne, J. Chatterjee, N.
Sarkar, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 2020, 3, 4282.
[87] S. Borse, Z. V. P. Murthy, S. K. Kailasa, J. Mol. Liq. 2022, 368, 120705.
[88] S. He, H. Xiang, G. Zhao, M. Zhang, J. Lin, L. Yang, H. Liu, Sens.
Actuators, B 2023, 378, 133182.
[89] H. S. Al-Mashriqi, M. Cai, S. Qi, H. Zhai, J. Fluoresc. 2023, 33, 697.
[90] L. V. Nair, D. S. Philips, R. S. Jayasree, A. Ajayaghosh, Small 2013, 9,
2673.
[91] J. Xiong, S. Zhang, L. Qin, W. Shan, B. Sun, J. Shen, H. Jiang, Sens.
Actuators, B 2023, 378, 133177.
[92] J. Liu, J. Yin, H. Yuan, Y. Zhao, S. Luo, F. Li, J. Rare Earths 2022, 40,
1382.
[93] C. Y. Tay, Y. Yu, M. I. Setyawati, J. Xie, D. T. Leong, Nano Res. 2014,
7, 805.
[94] L. Yang, L. Shang, G. U. Nienhaus, Nanoscale 2013, 5, 1537.
[95] S. R. Bhattacharya, K. Bhattacharya, V. J. Xavier, A. Ziarati, D. Picard,
T. Bürgi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2022, 14, 29521.
[96] T. D. Fernández, J. R. Pearson, M. P. Leal, M. J. Torres, M. Blanca,
C. Mayorga, X. Le Guével, Biomaterials 2015, 43, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.biomaterials.2014.11.045.
[97] W. Zhong, M. Wen, J. Xu, H. Wang, L.-L. Tan, L. Shang, Chem. Com-
mun. 2020, 56, 11414.
[98] Y. Wang, J. Chen, J. Irudayaraj, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 9718.
[99] D. Desplancq, N. Groysbeck, M. Chiper, E. Weiss, B. Frisch, J.-M.
Strub, S. Cianferani, S. Zafeiratos, E. Moeglin, X. Holy, A. L. Favier,
S. De Carlo, P. Schultz, D. Spehner, G. Zuber, ACS Appl. Nano Mater.
2018, 1, 4236.
[100] R. Vankayala, C.-L. Kuo, K. Nuthalapati, C.-S. Chiang, K. C. Hwang,
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25, 5934.
[101] J.-Y. Zhao, R. Cui, Z.-L. Zhang, M. Zhang, Z.-X. Xie, D.-W. Pang,
Nanoscale 2014, 6, 13126.
[102] S. Huo, S. Jin, X. Ma, X. Xue, K. Yang, A. Kumar, P. C. Wang, J. Zhang,
Z. Hu, X.-J. Liang, ACS Nano 2014, 8, 5852.
[103] V. Sokolova, G. Nzou, S. B. Van Der Meer, T. Ruks, M. Heggen, K.
Loza, N. Hagemann, F. Murke, B. Giebel, D. M. Hermann, A. J. Atala,
M. Epple, Acta Biomater. 2020, 111, 349.
[104] Y. Wang, S. Liang, M. Mei, Q. Zhao, G. She, W. Shi, L. Mu, Anal.
Chem. 2021, 93, 15072.
[105] K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2018,
357, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2017.11.019.
[106] K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, Bioact. Mater. 2021, 6,
941.
[107] K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, Nano Res. 2021, 14,
1026.
[108] R. Benz, Crit. Rev. Biochem. 1985, 19, 145.
[109] R. D. Turner, A. F. Hurd, A. Cadby, J. K. Hobbs, S. J. Foster, Nat.
Commun. 2013, 4, 1496.
[110] K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, ACS Nano 2017, 11,
6904.
[111] K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, Chem. Mater. 2018, 30,
2800.
[112] J. W. Costerton, P. S. Stewart, E. P. Greenberg, Science 1999, 284,
1318.
[113] Y. Li, J. Zhen, Q. Tian, C. Shen, L. Zhang, K. Yang, L. Shang, J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 2020, 569, 235.
[114] R. Grande, F. Sisto, V. Puca, S. Carradori, M. Ronci, A. Aceto, R.
Muraro, G. Mincione, L. Scotti, Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 1705.
[115] H. Haidari, R. Bright, Z. Kopecki, P. S. Zilm, S. Garg, A. J. Cowin, K.
Vasilev, N. Goswami, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2022, 14, 390.
[116] Y. Xie, M. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Liu, W. Zheng, X. Jiang, ACS Biomater.
Sci. Eng. 2020, 6, 1239.
[117] Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Yang, Y. Liu, F. Hu, K. Zhu, X. Jiang, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 3958.
[118] S. S. Evstigneeva, D. S. Chumakov, R. S. Tumskiy, B. N. Khlebtsov,
N. G. Khlebtsov, Talanta 2023, 264, 124773.
[119] Z. Pang, N. Ren, Y. Wu, J. Qi, F. Hu, Y. Guo, Y. Xie, D. Zhou, X. Jiang,
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2303562.
[120] D. P. Linklater, X. Le Guével, G. Bryant, V. A. Baulin, E. Pereiro, P.
G. T. Perera, J. V. Wandiyanto, S. Juodkazis, E. P. Ivanova, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2022, 14, 32634.
[121] J.-C. Kuo, S.-H. Tan, Y.-C. Hsiao, C. Mutalik, H.-M. Chen, S.
Yougbaré, T.-R. Kuo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2022, 10, 464.
[122] E. Birben, U. M. Sahiner, C. Sackesen, S. Erzurum, O. Kalayci, World
Allergy Organ. J. 2012, 5, 9.
[123] K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, T.-P. Lim, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, ACS Nano
2016, 10, 7934.
[124] B. S. Berlett, E. R. Stadtman, J. Biol. Chem. 1997, 272, 20313.
[125] S. Bastian, X. Liu, J. T. Meyerowitz, C. D. Snow, M. M. Y. Chen, F. H.
Arnold, Metab. Eng. 2011, 13, 345.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (27 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[126] M. P. Murphy, H. Bayir, V. Belousov, C. J. Chang, K. J. A. Davies, M.
J. Davies, T. P. Dick, T. Finkel, H. J. Forman, Y. Janssen-Heininger, D.
Gems, V. E. Kagan, B. Kalyanaraman, N.-G. Larsson, G. L. Milne, T.
Nyström, H. E. Poulsen, R. Radi, H. Van Remmen, P. T. Schumacker,
P. J. Thornalley, S. Toyokuni, C. C. Winterbourn, H. Yin, B. Halliwell,
Nat. Metab. 2022, 4, 651.
[127] C. Tristan, N. Shahani, T. W. Sedlak, A. Sawa, Cell. Signalling 2011,
23, 317.
[128] K. Zheng, J. Xie, ACS Nano 2020, 14, 11533.
[129] X. Yuan, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, Nano Res. 2014, 7, 301.
[130] J. Du, Y. Cong, X. Wang, Y. Kang, P. Zhang, L. Li, ACS Appl. Bio Mater.
2023, 6, 3919.
[131] A. Baghdasaryan, R. Grillo, S. R. Bhattacharya, M. Sharma, E.
Reginato, H. Theraulaz, I. Dolamic, M. Dadras, S. Rudaz, E. Varesio,
T. Burgi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2018, 1, 4258.
[132] T. Wu, J. Sun, J. Lei, Q. Fan, X. Tang, G. Zhu, Q. Yan, X. Feng, B. Shi,
Nanoscale 2021, 13, 17912.
[133] X. Zhao, H. Tang, X. Jiang, ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066.
[134] L. Wang, W. Zheng, L. Zhong, Y. Yang, Y. Chen, Q. Hou, P. Yu, X.
Jiang, ACS Nano 2023, 17, 19685.
[135] V. J. Thannickal, B. L. Fanburg, Am. J. Physiol.: Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol.
2000, 279, L1005.
[136] S. Nemoto, K. Takeda, Z.-X. Yu, V. J. Ferrans, T. Finkel, Mol. Cell. Biol.
2000, 20, 7311.
[137] M. I. Setyawati, C. Y. Tay, D. T. Leong, Biomaterials 2013, 34, 10133.
[138] M. Banerjee, S. Sharma, A. Chattopadhyay, S. S. Ghosh, Nanoscale
2011, 3, 5120.
[139] H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Sun, Q. Xin, S. Liu, X. Mu, X. Yuan, K. Chen, H.
Wang, K. Varga, W. Mi, J. Yang, X.-D. Zhang, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12,
114.
[140] S. Sun, H. Liu, Q. Xin, K. Chen, H. Ma, S. Liu, X. Mu, W. Hao, S. Liu,
Y. Gao, Y. Wang, J. Pei, R. Zhao, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Li,
X.-D. Zhang, Nano Lett. 2021, 21, 2562.
[141] C.-P. Liu, T.-H. Wu, Y.-L. Lin, C.-Y. Liu, S. Wang, S.-Y. Lin, Small 2016,
12, 4127.
[142] X. Wu, H. Xu, F. Luo, J. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Yang, H. Cai, P.
Sun, H. Zhou, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2021, 189, 113377.
[143] S. Lin, D. Li, Z. Zhou, C. Xu, X. Mei, H. Tian, J Nanobiotechnology
2021, 19, 281.
[144] S. Lin, Z. Zhou, C. Xu, F. Zeng, Z. Shi, J. Sun, X. Mei, C. Liu, D. Li,
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2022, 14, 18053.
[145] X. Zhang, J. Qiao, W. Liu, L. Qi, Analyst 2021, 146, 5061.
[146] J. Guo, H. Yang, Y. Liu, W. Liu, R. Zhao, H. Li, W. Long, W. Xu, M.
Guo, X. Zhang, J. Nanobiotechnol. 2021, 19, 377.
[147] M. Guo, R. Zhao, H. Liu, H. Ma, J. Guo, H. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y.
Huang, G. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Long, X.-D. Zhang, Bioconjug. Chem.
2021, 32, 2342.
[148] S. Maity, D. Bain, S. Chakraborty, S. Kolay, A. Patra, ACS Sustainable
Chem. Eng. 2020, 8, 18335.
[149] L. Jin, Z. Meng, Y. Zhang, S. Cai, Z. Zhang, C. Li, L. Shang, Y. Shen,
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 10027.
[150] F. Xu, X. Mu, J. Wang, P. Bian, L. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Jing, W. Long, C. Liu,
X.-D. Zhang, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 2017, 13, 1512.
[151] Y. Hua, J.-H. Huang, Z.-H. Shao, X.-M. Luo, Z.-Y. Wang, J.-Q. Liu, X.
Zhao, X. Chen, S.-Q. Zang, Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2203734.
[152] Y. Zhang, S. Sun, H. Liu, Q. Ren, W. Hao, Q. Xin, J. Xu, H. Wang,
X.-D. Zhang, J. Nanobiotechnol. 2021, 19, 319.
[153] M. M. T. Van Leent, B. Priem, D. P. Schrijver, A. De Dreu, S. R. J.
Hofstraat, R. Zwolsman, T. J. Beldman, M. G. Netea, W. J. M. Mulder,
Nat. Rev. Mater. 2022, 7, 465.
[154] B. Sun, H. Hyun, L.-T. Li, A. Z. Wang, Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 2020, 41,
970.
[155] X. le Guével, F. Palomares, M. J. Torres, M. Blanca, T. D. Fernandez,
C. Mayorga, RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 85305.
[156] G. Yang, K. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Pan, J. Ye, Y. Li, F. Du, T. Feng, X. Yuan,
Aggregate 2023, e435, https://doi.org/10.1002/agt2.435.
[157] D. Ni, D. Jiang, C. J. Kutyreﬀ, J. Lai, Y. Yan, T. E. Barnhart, B. Yu, H.-J.
Im, L. Kang, S. Y. Cho, Z. Liu, P. Huang, J. W. Engle, W. Cai, Nat.
Commun. 2018, 9, 5421.
[158] J. Yuan, K. Hou, Y. Yao, Z. Du, C. Lu, Q. Yuan, X. Gao, Nanomaterials
2020, 10, 712.
[159] Q. Yuan, Y. Yao, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, B. Sun, X. Gao, J. Nanosci. Nan-
otechnol. 2019, 19, 1986.
[160] C. Lu, L. Xue, K. Luo, Y. Liu, J. Lai, X. Yao, Y. Xue, W. Huo, C. Meng,
D. Xia, X. Gao, Q. Yuan, K. Cao, ACS Nano 2023, 17, 18421.
[161] C. Yunna, H. Mengru, W. Lei, C. Weidong, Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2020,
877, 173090.
[162] M. Ovais, M. Guo, C. Chen, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1808303.
[163] A. Joorabloo, T. Liu, J. Nanobiotechnol. 2022, 20, 407.
[164] J. Lai, Y. Yao, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Lu, C. Meng, D. Xia, Y. Li, K. Cao, X.
Gao, Q. Yuan, Bioconjug. Chem. 2023, 34, 228.
[165] Y. Liu, C. Meng, Y. Li, D. Xia, C. Lu, J. Lai, Y. Zhang, K. Cao, X. Gao,
Q. Yuan, Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 662.
[166] Z. Zhou, D. Li, X. Fan, S. Lin, Y. Yuan, P. Zhuang, H. Hu, M. Ge, S.
Chen, X. Mei, Mater. Des. 2022, 215, 110465.
[167] X. Chen, X. Cao, D. Zheng, C. Li, Y. Chen, K. Kong, W. Xu, B. Shi, X.
Chen, F. Dai, S. Zhang, Theranostics 2023, 13, 1010.
[168] L. Yang, L. Xiao, T. Liu, W. Gao, Y. Xiao, Front. Mater. 2022, 9, 612052.
[169] L. Xiao, F. Wei, Y. Zhou, G. J. Anderson, D. M. Frazer, Y. C. Lim, T.
Liu, Y. Xiao, Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 478.
[170] Z. Zhou, D. Li, X. Fan, Y. Yuan, H. Wang, D. Wang, X. Mei, Regen.
Biomater. 2022, 9, 072.
[171] Z. Zhang, Y. Yao, Q. Yuan, C. Lu, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, K. Hou, C. Zhang,
Z. Du, X. Gao, X. Chen, Theranostics 2020, 10, 4042.
[172] F. Gao, Q. Yuan, P. Cai, L. Gao, L. Zhao, M. Liu, Y. Yao, Z. Chai, X.
Gao, Adv. Sci. 2019, 6, 1801671.
[173] Q. Yuan, F. Gao, Y. Yao, P. Cai, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, K. Hou, L. Gao, X.
Ren, X. Gao, Theranostics 2019, 9, 1825.
[174] H.-H. Wang, C.-A. J. Lin, Y.-M. Tseng, H.-I. Lee, Y.-N. Lee, H.-I. Yeh,
P.-S. Yang, H.-Y. Peng, Y.-J. Wu, Nanomedicine 2021, 36, 102427.
[175] Z. Du, Z. He, J. Fan, Y. Huo, B. He, Y. Wang, Q. Sun, W. Niu, W.
Zhao, L. Zhao, P. Cao, K. Cao, D. Xia, Q. Yuan, X.-J. Liang, H. Jiang,
Y. Gong, X. Gao, Nano Today 2022, 47, 101686.
[176] Q. Li, Q. Yuan, M. Zhao, Y. Yao, L. Gao, R. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Gong, F.
Gao, X. Gao, Sci. Bull. 2017, 62, 537.
[177] Y. Yao, C. Lu, L. Gao, K. Cao, H. Yuan, X. Zhang, X. Gao, Q. Yuan,
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13, 21108.
[178] R. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Yuan, D. An, J. Li, X. Gao, Chem. Commun. 2014,
50, 10687.
[179] L. E. González García, N. Ninan, J. Simon, R. Madathiparambil
Visalakshan, R. Bright, S. K. Wahono, K. Ostrikov, V. Mailänder, K.
Landfester, N. Goswami, K. Vasilev, Nanoscale 2021, 13, 19936.
[180] G. Yang, X. Pan, W. Feng, Q. Yao, F. Jiang, F. Du, X. Zhou, J. Xie, X.
Yuan, ACS Nano 2023, 17, 15605.
[181] Y. Tao, E. Ju, Z. Li, J. Ren, X. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24, 1004.
[182] Y. Tao, Y. Zhang, E. Ju, H. Ren, J. Ren, Nanoscale 2015, 7, 12419.
[183] W. Hu, P. N. Prasad, W. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res. 2021, 54, 697.
[184] H. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Tian, D. Lu, Y. Yu, S. Cestellos-Blanco, K. K.
Sakimoto, P. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018, 13, 900.
[185] B. Li, L. Lin, Light: Sci. Appl. 2022, 11, 85.
[186] C. S. Foote, Photochem. Photobiol. 1991, 54, 659.
[187] I. Yoon, J. Z. Li, Y. K. Shim, Clin. Endosc. 2013, 46, 7.
[188] L. Qiu, C. Wang, X. Lei, X. Du, Q. Guo, S. Zhou, P. Cui, T. Hong, P.
Jiang, J. Wang, Y.-Q. Li, J. Xia, Biomater. Sci. 2021, 9, 3433.
[189] C. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, C. Bao, S. Liang, Q. Wang, Y. Yang,
H. Fu, K. Wang, D. Cui, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25, 1314.
[190] M. Yamamoto, K. Shitomi, S. Miyata, H. Miyaji, H. Aota, H.
Kawasaki, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2018, 510, 221.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (28 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[191] G. B. Hwang, H. Huang, G. Wu, J. Shin, A. Kaﬁzas, K. Karu, H. D.
Toit, A. M. Alotaibi, L. Mohammad-Hadi, E. Allan, A. J. Macrobert,
A. Gavriilidis, I. P. Parkin, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 1207.
[192] H. Kawasaki, S. Kumar, G. Li, C. Zeng, D. R. Kauﬀman, J. Yoshimoto,
Y. Iwasaki, R. Jin, Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 2777.
[193] Y. Yu, J. Geng, E. Y. X. Ong, V. Chellappan, Y. N. Tan, Adv. Healthcare
Mater. 2016, 5, 2528.
[194] R. Han, M. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Liu, S. Zhu, L. Huang, Y. Wang, L.
Wang, Y. Hong, Y. Sha, Y. Jiang, ACS Nano 2020, 14, 9532.
[195] A. McLean, R. Wang, Y. Huo, A. Cooke, T. Hopkins, N. Potter, Q. Li,
J. Isaac, J. Haidar, R. Jin, R. Kopelman, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2020,
3, 1420.
[196] X. Wang, Z. Jacob, Light: Sci. Appl. 2022, 11, 342.
[197] X. Zhu, W. Feng, J. Chang, Y.-W. Tan, J. Li, M. Chen, Y. Sun, F. Li, Nat.
Commun. 2016, 7, 10437.
[198] J. Chen, Z. Ye, F. Yang, Y. Yin, Small Sci. 2021, 1, 2000055.
[199] S. Kumar, R. Jin, Nanoscale 2012, 4, 4222.
[200] X. Jiang, B. Du, Y. Huang, M. Yu, J. Zheng, Bioconjug. Chem. 2020,
31, 1522.
[201] H. Li, P. Wang, Y. Deng, M. Zeng, Y. Tang, W.-H. Zhu, Y. Cheng, Bio-
materials 2017, 139, 30.
[202] B. Singh, R. Bahadur, P. Maske, M. Gandhi, D. Singh, R. Srivastava,
Nanoscale 2023, 15, 2932.
[203] G. Yang, X. Mu, X. Pan, Y. Tang, Q. Yao, Y. Wang, F. Jiang, F. Du, J.
Xie, X. Zhou, X. Yuan, Chem. Sci. 2023, 14, 4308.
[204] J. Hu, G. Gao, M. He, Q. Yin, X. Gao, H. Xu, T. Sun, Nanomedicine
2020, 15, 563.
[205] M. Semmler-Behnke, W. G. Kreyling, J. Lipka, S. Fertsch, A. Wenk, S.
Takenaka, G. Schmid, W. Brandau, Small 2008, 4, 2108.
[206] D. Zhou, Y. Yin, Z. Zhu, Y. Gao, J. Yang, Y. Pan, Y. Song, ACS Nano
2022, 16, 18503.
[207] Z. Zhang, F. Gao, H. Bu, J. Xiao, Y. Li, Nanomedicine 2012, 8, 740.
[208] W. Wang, Y. Kong, J. Jiang, Q. Xie, Y. Huang, G. Li, D. Wu, H. Zheng,
M. Gao, S. Xu, Y. Pan, W. Li, R. Ma, M. X. Wu, X. Li, H. Zuilhof, X.
Cai, R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 22431.
[209] Z. Cao, J. Chen, J. Tran, X. Chen, B. Bacacao, L. A. Bekale, P. L. Santa
Maria, ACS Appl Bio Mater 2020, 3, 5275.
[210] Y. Chen, S. Wang, F. Zhang, Nat Rev Bioeng 2023, 1, 60.
[211] Z. Yu, B. Musnier, K. D. Wegner, M. Henry, B. Chovelon, A.
Desroches-Castan, A. Fertin, U. Resch-Genger, S. Bailly, J.-L. Coll,
Y. Usson, V. Josserand, X. Le Guével, ACS Nano 2020, 14, 4973.
[212] E. Porret, X. L. Guével, J.-L. Coll, J. Mater. Chem. B 2020, 8, 2216.
[213] W. Yang, F. Knorr, I. Latka, M. Vogt, G. O. Hofmann, J. Popp, I. W.
Schie, Light Sci Appl 2022, 11, 90.
[214] X. Zhang, J. Chen, J.-Y. Wang, H. Wang, X. Shen, Y.-M. Sun, G. Meili,
J. Yang, Int. J. Nanomed. 2016, 11, 3475.
[215] Y. Zhao, D. Sultan, L. Detering, H. Luehmann, Y. Liu, Nanoscale
2014, 6, 13501.
[216] X.-D. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Shen, P.-X. Liu, F.-Y. Fan, S.-J. Fan, Biomate-
rials 2012, 33, 4628.
[217] S. Tang, C. Peng, J. Xu, B. Du, Q. Wang, R. D. Vinluan, M. Yu, M. J.
Kim, J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 16039.
[218] B. Du, X. Jiang, A. Das, Q. Zhou, M. Yu, R. Jin, J. Zheng, Nat. Nan-
otechnol. 2017, 12, 1096.
[219] D. Li, Q. Liu, Q. Qi, H. Shi, E. Hsu, W. Chen, W. Yuan, Y. Wu, S. Lin, Y.
Zeng, Z. Xiao, L. Xu, Y. Zhang, T. Stoyanova, W. Jia, Z. Cheng, Small
2020, 16, 2003851.
[220] Y. Zhuo, Y. Zhang, B. Wang, S. Cheng, R. Yuan, S. Liu, M. Zhao, B.
Xu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, Appl. Mater. Today 2022, 27, 101453.
[221] J. Liu, M. Yu, C. Zhou, S. Yang, X. Ning, J. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2013, 135, 4978.
[222] C. Peng, J. Xu, M. Yu, X. Ning, Y. Huang, B. Du, E. Hernandez,
P. Kapur, J.-T. Hsieh, J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58,
8479.
[223] Z. Pang, W. Yan, J. Yang, Q. Li, Y. Guo, D. Zhou, X. Jiang, ACS Nano
2022, 16, 16019.
[224] A. Baghdasaryan, F. Wang, F. Ren, Z. Ma, J. Li, X. Zhou, L. Grigoryan,
C. Xu, H. Dai, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 5613.
[225] X. Le Guével, M. Henry, V. Motto-Ros, E. Longo, M. I. Montañez,
F. Pelascini, O. De La Rochefoucauld, P. Zeitoun, J.-L. Coll, V.
Josserand, L. Sancey, Nanoscale 2018, 10, 18657.
[226] C. Colombé, X. Le Guével, A. Martin-Serrano, M. Henry, E. Porret,
C. Comby-Zerbino, R. Antoine, I. Atallah, B. Busser, J.-L. Coll, C. A.
Righini, L. Sancey, Nanomedicine 2019, 20, 102011.
[227] J. Liu, M. Yu, X. Ning, C. Zhou, S. Yang, J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 2013, 52, 12572.
[228] Y. Kong, D. Santos-Carballal, D. Martin, N. N. Sergeeva, W. Wang,
G. Liu, B. Johnson, B. Bhayana, Z. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Le Guével, N. H.
de Leeuw, D. Zhou, M. X. Wu, Mater. Today 2021, 51, 96.
[229] X.-D. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Chen, X. Shen, S. Song, Y. Sun, S. Fan, F. Fan,
D. T. Leong, J. Xie, Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 4565.
[230] E. Blanco, H. Shen, M. Ferrari, Nat. Biotechnol. 2015, 33, 941.
[231] S. K. Balasubramanian, J. Jittiwat, J. Manikandan, C.-N. Ong, L. E.
Yu, W.-Y. Ong, Biomaterials 2010, 31, 2034.
[232] X. Gu, J. E. Manautou, Expert Rev. Mol. Med. 2012, 14, e4.
[233] L. Deleve, N. Kaplowitz, Semin. Liver Dis. 1990, 10, 251.
[234] D. A. Dickinson, H. J. Forman, Biochem. Pharmacol. 2002, 64, 1019.
[235] P. C. Jocelyn, Eur. J. Biochem. 1967, 2, 327.
[236] A. Paolicchi, M. Sotiropuolou, P. Perego, S. Daubeuf, A. Visvikis, E.
Lorenzini, M. Franzini, N. Romiti, E. Chieli, R. Leone, P. Apostoli,
D. Colangelo, F. Zunino, A. Pompella, Eur. J. Cancer 2003, 39,
996.
[237] M. H. Hanigan, H. C. Pitot, Carcinogenesis 1985, 6, 165.
[238] X. Jiang, B. Du, J. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14, 874.
[239] K. Liu, B. Kang, X. Luo, Z. Yang, C. Sun, A. Li, Y. Fan, X. Chen, J. Gao,
H. Lin, ACS Nano 2021, 15, 17831.
[240] X. Jiang, Q. Zhou, B. Du, S. Li, Y. Huang, Z. Chi, W. M. Lee, M. Yu,
J. Zheng, Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, 9847.
[241] Y. Huang, M. Yu, J. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2023, 18, 637.
[242] B. Du, M. Yu, J. Zheng, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018, 3, 358.
[243] I. S. Daehn, J. S. Duﬃeld, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2021, 20, 770.
[244] J. Tencer, I.-M. Frick, B. W. Öquist, P. Alm, B. Rippe, Kidney Int. 1998,
53, 709.
[245] W. D. Comper, E. F. Glasgow, Kidney Int. 1995, 47, 1242.
[246] H. Soo Choi, W. Liu, P. Misra, E. Tanaka, J. P. Zimmer, B. Itty Ipe, M.
G. Bawendi, J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol. 2007, 25, 1165.
[247] J. Liu, M. Yu, C. Zhou, J. Zheng, Mater. Today 2013, 16, 477.
[248] M. Longmire, P. L. Choyke, H. Kobayashi, Nanomedicine 2008, 3,
703.
[249] J. Wang, G. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 3008.
[250] C. Zhou, G. Hao, P. Thomas, J. Liu, M. Yu, S. Sun, O. K. Öz, X. Sun,
J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 10118.
[251] C. Zhou, M. Long, Y. Qin, X. Sun, J. Zheng, Angew. Chem. 2011, 123,
3226.
[252] J. Xu, M. Yu, P. Carter, E. Hernandez, A. Dang, P. Kapur, J.-T. Hsieh,
J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 13356.
[253] M. Yu, C. Zhou, L. Liu, S. Zhang, S. Sun, J. D. Hankins, X. Sun, J.
Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 4314.
[254] X. Ning, C. Peng, E. S. Li, J. Xu, R. D. Vinluan, M. Yu, J. Zheng, APL
Mater. 2017, 5, 053406.
[255] X. Jiang, B. Du, S. Tang, J.-T. Hsieh, J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2019, 58, 5994.
[256] S. Yi, Q. Hu, Y. Chi, H. Qu, Y. Xiao, ACS Mater. Lett. 2023, 5,
2164.
[257] M. Yu, J. Zhou, B. Du, X. Ning, C. Authement, L. Gandee, P. Kapur,
J.-T. Hsieh, J. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 2787.
[258] S. Li, Q. Ma, C. Wang, K. Yang, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, J. Song, X. Song,
H. Yang, Anal. Chem. 2022, 94, 2641.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (29 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[259] C.-P. Liu, T.-H. Wu, C.-Y. Liu, K.-C. Chen, Y.-X. Chen, G.-S. Chen, S.-Y.
Lin, Small 2017, 13, 1700278.
[260] M. R. Hamblin, H. Abrahamse, Antibiotics 2020, 9, 53.
[261] Q. Yao, J. Fan, S. Long, X. Zhao, H. Li, J. Du, K. Shao, X. Peng, Chem
2022, 8, 197.
[262] J. J. Milligan, S. Saha, Cancers 2022, 14, 1741.
[263] P. Liu, W. Yang, L. Shi, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, P. Wang, G. Zhang, W. R.
Chen, B. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B 2019, 7, 6924.
[264] M. Wu, Z. Li, J. Yao, Z. Shao, X. Chen, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2019,
5, 4799.
[265] Y. G. Srinivasulu, A. Mozhi, N. Goswami, Q. Yao, J. Xie, ACS Appl.
Bio Mater. 2021, 4, 3232.
[266] Y. Yang, Y. Yu, H. Chen, X. Meng, W. Ma, M. Yu, Z. Li, C. Li, H. Liu,
X. Zhang, H. Xiao, Z. Yu, ACS Nano 2020, 14, 13536.
[267] H. Bi, Y. Dai, P. Yang, J. Xu, D. Yang, S. Gai, F. He, G. An, C. Zhong,
J. Lin, Chem. Eng. J. 2019, 356, 543.
[268] Y. Li, S. Qu, Y. Xue, L. Zhang, L. Shang, Nano Res. 2023, 16, 999.
[269] J. Xu, J. Li, W. Zhong, M. Wen, G. Sukhorukov, L. Shang, Chin. Chem.
Lett. 2021, 32, 2390.
[270] B. Tang, W. Xia, W. Cai, J. Liu, Nano Lett. 2022, 22, 8109.
[271] X. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Qian, N. Liu, L. Sui, X. Yuan, Nanoscale 2020,
12, 6449.
[272] Z. Zhao, H. Chen, K. He, J. Lin, W. Cai, Y. Sun, J. Liu, Anal. Chem.
2023, 95, 5061.
YujiaShiobtainedherBachelorofmedicinedegreefromtheSchoolandHospitalofStomatology,
JilinUniversityin2022.NowsheispursuingherMSDattheSchoolandHospitalofStomatology,Jilin
University.Herresearchfocusesonthedevelopmentofnanomaterialsforbio-imagingandoptical
physicsofatomicprecisemetalnanoclusters.
ZhennanWujoinedJilinUniversityin2021andiscurrentlyafullprofessorattheStateKeyLaboratory
onIntegratedOptoelectronics,CollegeofElectronicScienceandEngineering.HeobtainedhisPh.D.
degree(2016)fromtheStateKeyLaboratoryofSupramolecularStructureandMaterialsatJilinUni-
versityunderthesupervisionofProf.HaoZhang.Thereafter,hejoinedtheteamofProf.Osman,M.
BakrinKAUST(2016–2018),andProf.XieJianpinginNUS(2018–2020)forpost-doctoralresearch.
Hisresearchinterestsarecenteredonthecolloidalsynthesisdynamics,self-assemblychemistry,and
opticalphysicsoffunctionalnanocrystals.
ChunyanLireceivedherPh.D.degreefromJilinUniversity.SheisthecurrentJilinUniversityprofessor,
mastertutor,anddoctoralsupervisorforSchoolofDentistry.Also,sheisservingHospitalofStomatol-
ogy,JilinUniversity.Herresearchinterestisnanoengineeringandbiosensingfordentalapplication.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (30 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
LinWangisaprofessor,andvicedeanoftheSchoolandHospitalofStomatology,atJilinUniversity.
HeobtainedaPh.D.degreefromtheSchoolandHospitalofStomatology,JilinUniversityin2011.He
wasavisitingscholarattheUniversityofMarylandduring2015–2016.Hisresearchfocusesonthe
developmentofnanomaterialsandadvancedsensorsfororaldiseases,particularlyimmuno-related
infections.
XueBaiisaprofessoratStateKeyLaboratoryonIntegratedOptoelectronics,CollegeofElectronicSci-
enceandEngineering,JilinUniversity.SheobtainedherPh.D.degreein2008,fromChineseAcademy
ofScience.From2011to2014,sheworkedasapost-doctorinthedepartmentofchemistryinCICECO,
UniversityofAveiro(Portugal).Sofar,shehaspublishedmorethan100SCI-indexpapers.Herre-
searchinterestsfocusontheopticalpropertiesofrareearthdopednanomaterialsandtheiroptoelec-
tronicdevices.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2310529
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2310529 (31 of 31)
 15214095, 2024, 13, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202310529 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License