Article
Microbiota-derived lysophosphatidylcholine
alleviates Alzheimer’s disease pathology via
suppressing ferroptosis
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d An imbalance of Clostridium and Bacteroides is a key feature
linked to Ab burden
d Supplementation of B. ovatus ameliorates AD pathologies
d Microbial-associated metabolite (LPC) ameliorates AD
pathologies
d LPC inhibits ferroptosis through the orphan receptor GPR119
in an AD mouse model
Authors
Xu Zha, Xicheng Liu, Mengping Wei, ...,
Yuping Xie, Wei Wang, Chen Zhang
Correspondence
liuxicheng@ccmu.edu.cn (X.L.),
wangwei@ccmu.edu.cn (W.W.),
czhang@ccmu.edu.cn (C.Z.)
In brief
Zha et al. reveal that dysbiosis, resulting
from the loss of beneﬁcial microbiota
species, acts as a contributing factor in
the pathogenesis of an AD mouse model.
B.ovatus-triggered LPC-GPR119-
ferroptosis axis ameliorates the
symptoms of AD, showing potential for
AD treatment.
Zha et al., 2025, Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186
January 7, 2025 ª 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2024.10.006
ll

Article
Microbiota-derived lysophosphatidylcholine
alleviates Alzheimer’s disease pathology
via suppressing ferroptosis
Xu Zha,1,2,5 Xicheng Liu,1,2,5,* Mengping Wei,1 Huanwei Huang,1 Jiaqi Cao,1 Shuo Liu,1 Xiaomei Bian,1 Yuting Zhang,1
Fenyan Xiao,1 Yuping Xie,3 Wei Wang,1,* and Chen Zhang1,2,4,6,*
1School of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory of Neural Regeneration and Repair & Beijing Key Laboratory for Tumor Invasion
and Metastasis, Beijing Laboratory of Oral Health, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
2State Key Laboratory of Neurology and Oncology Drug Development, Nanjing, China
3National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of
Lifeomics, Beijing, China
4Chinese Institute for Brain Research, Beijing, China
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead contact
*Correspondence: liuxicheng@ccmu.edu.cn (X.L.), wangwei@ccmu.edu.cn (W.W.), czhang@ccmu.edu.cn (C.Z.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2024.10.006
SUMMARY
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a pervasive neurodegenerative disorder, and new approaches for its prevention
and therapy are critically needed. Here, we elucidate a gut-microbiome-brain axis that offers actionable per-
spectives for achieving this objective. Using the 5xFAD mouse model, we identify increased Clostridium
abundance and decreased Bacteroides abundance as key features associated with b-amyloid (Ab) burden.
Treatment with Bacteroides ovatus, or its associated metabolite lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), signiﬁcantly
reduces Ab load and ameliorates cognitive impairment. Mechanistically, LPC acts through the orphan recep-
tor GPR119, inhibiting ACSL4 expression, thereby suppressing ferroptosis and ameliorating AD pathologies.
Analysis of fecal and serum samples from individuals with AD also reveals diminished levels of Bacteroides
and LPC. This study thus identiﬁes a B.ovatus-triggered pathway regulating AD pathologies and indicates
that the use of single gut microbiota, metabolite, or small molecule compound may complement current
prevention and treatment approaches for AD.
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an incurable neurodegenerative dis-
order and the predominant form of dementia in elderly individ-
uals, characterized by progressive cognitive impairment and a
decline in cognitive function, which gradually prevents patients
from performing daily activities.1,2 To date, many hypotheses
regarding the pathogenesis of AD have been proposed and
experimentally validated.1,3,4 The most widely accepted hypoth-
esis regarding AD pathology is the amyloid cascade hypothesis.
It posits that an imbalance between the production and clear-
ance of b-amyloid (Ab) in the brain is the initial trigger that
eventually results in the degeneration of neurons and the devel-
opment of dementia.1 Misfolding and aggregation of Ab peptides
are recognized as hallmark features of AD and the initial events of
AD development.5 Therefore, the removal of aggregated Ab from
the brain is a major therapeutic strategy, and the effects of
Ab-targeted therapies, such as active and passive immunization
and the administration of secretase inhibitors on sporadic forms
of AD, have been extensively tested.2,6 However, Ab-targeted
immunotherapies appear to be limited or ineffective in modifying
the disease course of symptomatic AD.2,6–8 Due to the limited
efﬁcacy of AD therapies, it is necessary to explore new patho-
physiological mechanisms of the disease.
One such pathophysiological mechanism of interest involves
the gut microbiota.9 Multiple studies have reported gut microbial
dysbiosis in both AD mouse models and individuals with AD and
have found signiﬁcant differences in gut microbiota abundance
and diversity in these subjects compared with wild-type (WT)
animals and control participants, respectively.10–12 Notably,
germ-free (GF) amyloidosis transgenic mice and antibiotic
(ABX)-treated speciﬁc pathogen-free (SPF) AD model mice
have signiﬁcantly reduced Ab plaque deposition,13,14 transfer
of the microbiota of amyloidosis model mice into GF amyloidosis
transgenic mice increases cerebral Ab pathology.13 Although
ABX treatments have shown promising effects in animal models,
such measures may be logistically and ethically challenging to
widely implement in humans. Gut-microbial-derived metabolites
are one of focus to understand the mechanisms by which gut
microbiota can affect brain physiology and pathology. A recent
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025 ª 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
169
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
ll
OPEN ACCESS

(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
170
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

study on AD found that alterations in the composition of the gut
microbiota result in the peripheral accumulation of microbial me-
tabolites, which contributes to AD-associated neuroinﬂamma-
tion.15 Furthermore, accumulating studies suggest that the gut
microbiota and related metabolites regulate microglial matura-
tion and function and impair oligodendrocyte maturation in
normal mice and AD model mice.16,17 These ﬁndings reveal
that microbiota-derived metabolic products inﬂuence glial cell
homeostasis and complex behaviors in AD. Nevertheless, the
precise alterations in the composition of the gut microbiota
that occur in AD are still not fully understood, the speciﬁc
function of the gut microbiota and related metabolites in AD
pathogenesis remain poorly deﬁned, and the underlying mecha-
nisms by which microbiota dysbiosis mediates gut-brain interac-
tions are not well understood.
In this article, we investigated the correlation between gut
microbiota and AD progression also established the gut-micro-
biome-brain axis in regulating AD symptoms. Speciﬁcally,
employing mice model of AD, we observed a signiﬁcant correla-
tion between changes in gut microbiota composition and the
development of AD pathology. Expansion of Clostridium and
loss Bacteroides were key features associated with Ab burden
in this model. Remarkably, the delivery of Bacteroides and lyso-
phosphatidylcholine (LPC) to AD model mice were found to
reduce Ab plaque load, rescue synaptic function, ameliorate
cognitive impairment, decrease gliosis, and alleviate myelin
degeneration. Lastly, we detected decreased abundance of
Bacteroides in feces and reduced expression of LPC in serums
from individuals with AD compared with healthy controls.
Collectively, these ﬁndings suggest that B. ovatus and LPC inter-
ventions hold promise as potential therapeutic avenues for AD.
RESULTS
Gut microbiota dysbiosis occurs in mouse model of AD
To initially determine whether the microbiota is involved in Ab
deposition in the 5xFAD mouse model of AD, we treated
5xFAD mice with a broad-spectrum ABX cocktail to deplete
the microbiota. Nanopore metagenomic sequencing analysis
of fecal pellets showed that the total abundance of gut bacteria
was profoundly reduced at the genus levels in ABX-treated
mice (Figure S1A). The hippocampal Ab plaque burden was
signiﬁcantly reduced in ABX-treated 5xFAD mice compared
with vehicle controls (Figure S1B). Furthermore, the 5xFAD
mice that received fecal microbiota from WT mice reduced
Ab deposition compared with that received microbiota from
5xFAD mice (Figure S1C). The transgenic mice with Ab deposi-
tion exhibit impaired learning and working memory.18 Given
that ABX treatment ameliorated amyloid-related pathology,
we evaluated its beneﬁcial impacts on cognitive function in
5xFAD mice by using the novel object recognition (NOR), the
Morris water maze (MWM) and the contextual fear conditioning
(CFC) assay. We found that learning and memory impairments
of
5xFAD
mice
were
ameliorated
after
ABX
treatment
(Figures S1D–S1G). These data suggest that the microbiota
regulates Ab aggregation and ABX treatment reduces AD path-
ogenesis in 5xFAD mice.
Microbiota-related abnormalities, including disturbances in
community composition, have been identiﬁed in individuals
with AD, but the AD-associated microbial signature is not well
deﬁned.10–12 To determine the features of the microbiota
that affect AD pathogenesis and progression in 5xFAD mouse
model, we conducted nanopore metagenomic sequencing of
the fecal DNA of 2-month-old 5xFAD mice and age-matched
WT mice. We investigated the taxonomic composition and di-
versity of the gut microbiota. The alpha diversity showed no
signiﬁcant differences between 5xFAD and WT mice (Fig-
ure S1H). However, the beta diversity of the gut bacteria was
a notable disparity between 5xFAD and WT mice (Figures 1A
and S1I).
The relative abundance of Bacteroidetes was signiﬁcantly
diminished and the relative abundance of Firmicutes was signif-
icantly elevated in 5xFAD mice in comparison with WT mice,
while the levels of other phyla remained largely unchanged
(Figures 1B, S1J, and S1K), consistent with previous studies.15
Moreover, the abundance of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes
changed in opposite ways as the disease progressed in AD
model mice (Figure 1C), and the same changes were also found
at the genus level (Figure S1L). Of these differentially abundant
genera, Bacteroides was more abundant in WT mice, and
Clostridium and Lachnoclostridium were more abundant in AD
model mice (Figures S1M and S1N). In comparison with WT
mice, 5xFAD mice exhibited notable reductions in the overall
abundance of multiple Bacteroides species, including Bacter-
oides ovatus, Bacteroides dorei, and Bacteroides vulgatus, and
marked elevation in the abundance of Clostridium species,
such as Clostridium pasteurianum, Clostridium innocuum, and
Clostridium beijerinckii (Figure 1D). Notably, the difference in
Figure 1. Dysbiosis of the gut microbiota in 5xFAD mice manifests as increased Clostridium abundance and decreased Bacteroides
abundance
(A) Principal coordinate analysis showing the species-level b-diversity of the gut microbiota in WT and 5xFAD mice.
(B) Stacked bar plots showing normalized abundance of microbiota taxa at phylum level.
(C) Average abundance changes of the gut microbiota at the phylum level in WT and 5xFAD mice at different ages (1, 2, and 6 months old).
(D) Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis of signiﬁcant alterations at the species level.
(E and F) Beta diversity of gut microbial abundance including (E) or excluding (F) the species of Bacteroides and Clostridium in 2-month-old WT and 5xFAD mice.
(G and H) qPCR analysis of Bacteroides (G) and Clostridium (H) relative units in the feces of 5xFAD mice under the indicated treatment conditions.
(I) Experimental design framework for oral administration of bacteria.
(J and K) Example micrographs showing Ab loads of brain slice (J) and quantitation of intensity (K), speciﬁcally in the subiculum region, in control and
B. ovatus-treated 5xFAD mice. Scale bars: 200 mm.
(L and M) Representative micrographs (L) and quantitation (M) of Ab plaques, in the subiculum of hippocampi, in 3-month-old control and C. beijerinckii-treated
5xFAD mice. Scale bars: 200 mm.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not signiﬁcant; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. (Unpaired t test in G, H, K and M,)
See also Figure S1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025
171

Figure 2. B. ovatus alleviates the pathological phenotypes of AD
(A–C) Quantiﬁcation of Ab intensity, speciﬁcally in the subiculum of hippocampi, in control and B. ovatus-treated 5xFAD mice at the ages of 2 (A), 6 (B), and
12 (C) months.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
172
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

the composition of the gut microbiota between WT and 5xFAD
mice was obvious when the sequences of Clostridium and
Bacteroides species were included in principal coordinate anal-
ysis (PCoA) but not when they were speciﬁcally excluded from
PCoA of all other bacterial species (Figures 1E and 1F). Further-
more, compared with WT mice, the abundance of Bacteroides
species signiﬁcantly decreased and the abundance of Clos-
tridium species increased in 5xFAD mice during the progression
of AD (Figures S1O and S1P). These results indicate that
changes in Clostridium and Bacteroides diversity are the main
drivers of the difference in the gut microbiota between WT and
5xFAD mice.
The above results suggest that the presence of Clostridium
might reduce the abundance of Bacteroides. Therefore, we
next tested whether Clostridium affects the colonization of Bac-
teroides species in AD mouse model. ABX-treated 5xFAD mice
were colonized with B. ovatus with or without C. beijerinckii,
and C. beijerinckii with or without B. ovatus. Consistent with
our hypothesis, ABX-treated 5xFAD mice demonstrated a
notable reduction in the abundance of B. ovatus in mice with
C. beijerinckii colonization (Figure 1G). In contrast, the abun-
dance of C. beijerinckii was not affected with B. ovatus coloniza-
tion in ABX-treated 5xFAD mice (Figure 1H). Thus, increased
abundance of Clostridium species, which is seen in 5xFAD
mice, can antagonize the colonization of Bacteroides species.
In AD model mice and humans with neurodegenerative
disease, AD pathology is associated with a loss of functional
diversity within the Bacteroides genus.19,20 To determine the
role of Bacteroides in the AD-like phenotypes of 5xFAD mice,
we treated 2-month-old 5xFAD mice by gavage with ﬁve human
commensal B. ovatus, B. vulgatus, B. dorei, Bacteroides thetaio-
taomicron, and Bacteroides caccae individually and then exam-
ined the effects of this treatment (Figure 1I). Ab plaque formation
in the hippocampal regions, one of the core features of the AD
mouse model, was signiﬁcantly reduced in Bacteroides-treated
5xFAD mice, except those treated with B. thetaiotaomicron
and B. caccae, compared with untreated AD model mice, with
B. ovatus resulting in the most signiﬁcant impact in reducing
Ab plaques (Figures 1J, 1K, and S1Q–S1T). To determine the
role of Clostridium in the development of AD-like phenotypes
in 5xFAD mice, we treated 2-month-old 5xFAD mice with human
commensal C. beijerinckii, Clostridium acetobutylicum, and
Clostridium sporogenes by gavage and then examined the
effects of this treatment by immunoﬂuorescence analysis
(Figure 1I). Remarkably, compared with untreated 5xFAD mice,
C. beijerinckii-, C. acetobutylicum-, and C. sporogenes-treated
5xFAD mice displayed signiﬁcantly increased Ab deposition in
the hippocampal regions (Figures 1L, 1M, S1U, and S1V). Collec-
tively, these results indicate that speciﬁc Clostridium may play a
role in AD pathogenesis, while Bacteroides may be protective.
Bacteroides ameliorates cognitive deﬁcits in
5xFAD mice
Since the recent Ab-immunotherapies mainly slow the progres-
sion of early AD,6,8 we next proceeded to evaluate the potential
of utilizing Bacteroides for the treatment of various stages of
AD. To this end, we treated weaned, 4.5-month-old, and 12.5-
month-old 5xFAD mice with B. ovatus through gavage and
then examined the effects of those treatments (Figures S2A,
S2C, and S2E). Notably, B.-ovatus-treated 5xFAD mice of
different ages displayed signiﬁcantly reduced Ab plaque loads
in hippocampal regions compared with untreated AD model
mice (Figures 2A–2C, S2B, S2D, and S2F). Subsequently, we
supplemented another mouse model of AD (3xTg-AD) with
B. ovatus, which also reduced Ab plaque loads (Figures S2G–
S2I). These results indicate that B. ovatus may whole be effective
in eliminating Ab burdens in the brains of AD mice at different
disease stages and in various mouse models of AD.
Given that Bacteroides ameliorated amyloid-related pathol-
ogy, we evaluated its beneﬁcial impacts on cognitive function
in 5xFAD mice. We found that learning and memory impairments
of 5xFAD mice were ameliorated after B. ovatus treatment in
MWM, CFC, and NOR tests (Figures 2D–2G). Next, we per-
formed fecal microbiota transplants (FMTs) from donors of the
WT or 5xFAD mice into GF mice (Figure S2J). GF mice receiving
FMT from 5xFAD feces (FMT-5xFAD) exhibited learning and
memory deﬁcits, which were ameliorated upon supplementation
with B. ovatus (Figures S2K and S2L). Collectively, these studies
demonstrate that B. ovatus treatment improved the cognitive
functions in 5xFAD mice and FMT-5xFAD GF mice.
Since neurons exposed to Ab peptides have demonstrated a
decrease in the quantity of excitatory synapses.21 To determine
whether B. ovatus treatment could reverse the impairment of
synaptic plasticity in hippocampal neuron of 5xFAD mice, we
assessed long-term potentiation (LTP), a plasticity mechanism
required
for learning.22 Compared
with
untreated
5xFAD
mice, mice treated with B. ovatus showed a moderate reversal
in the decrease in LTP at Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses
(D and E) Graphs showing the latency time (seconds) to reach the platform in the acquisition phase (D) and the time spent in the target quadrant (%) in the probe
trial (E) for mice from various groups in the MWM experiment.
(F) Quantiﬁcation of the freezing behavior percentage in the CFC assay.
(G) Graph of the time percentage for interacting with the novel object during the testing phase of the NOR test.
(H and I) Plot of the mean ﬁeld excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) slopes (H) and summary graph (I) of normalized ﬁeld potentials (FP) slopes during the last
10 min (70–80 min).
(J) Representative ﬂuorescence images, taken from the subiculum, showing co-staining of Iba1 (green), Ab (red), and nuclei (blue). Scale bar: 100 mm.
(K) Quantiﬁcation of Iba1-positive microglia cells.
(L) Typical ﬂuorescence images illustrating co-staining of GFAP (green), Ab (red), and nuclei (blue) in the subiculum region. Scale bar: 100 mm.
(M) Quantiﬁcation of GFAP-positive astrocytes cells.
(N and O) Representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of myelin (N) and quantitation of the g-ratio (r/R) of axons (O), which represents the
thickness of the myelin sheath. Scale bars: 1 mm.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (Unpaired t test in A–C. Ordinary one-way ANOVA in E, G,
I, K, M, and O. Two-way ANOVA in D and F).
See also Figure S2.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025
173

Figure 3. LPC in the serum correlates with the abundance of gut microbes and alleviates AD pathology
(A) Heatmap illustrating differential proﬁle of serum metabolites in 2-month-old WT and 5xFAD mice.
(B) Heatmap showing upregulated serum metabolites in 2-month-old ABX-treated 5xFAD mice compared with the control group.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
174
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

(Figures 2H, 2I, and S2M). Similarly, B. ovatus treatment pre-
vented the decreases in the readily releasable pool (RRP) size
and postsynaptic density (PSD) thickness in synaptic structure
(Figures
S2N–S2P).
These
observations
demonstrate
that
B. ovatus treatment alleviated the deregulation of synaptic
plasticity in 5xFAD mice. Furthermore, large numbers of lyso-
some-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1)-positive imma-
ture lysosomes accumulate around amyloid plaques leading to
the exacerbation of synaptic impairment in AD.23 B. ovatus treat-
ment decreased the number of LAMP1-positive dystrophic neu-
rites in 5xFAD mice (Figures S2Q and S2R), suggesting that
B. ovatus treatment rescued synaptic dysfunction.
To determine whether the decreased Ab burden observed in
AD mouse model following B. ovatus treatment was accompa-
nied with decreased gliosis, which accompanies Ab deposition
and is marked by an augmentation in the numbers of activated
microglia and astrocytes surrounding amyloid plaques,18,24,25
we treated 2-month-old AD model mice with B. ovatus and
examined the effects of this treatment after 1 month. B. ovatus
treatment ameliorated microglia-associated microgliosis, as as-
sessed by the express level of ionized calcium-binding adapter
molecule 1 (Iba1) (Figures 2J and 2K). Similar changes were
observed in the abundance of glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), a marker indicative of mature astrocytes, which were
reduced by B. ovatus treatment (Figures 2L and 2M). Collec-
tively, these results demonstrate that in addition to decreasing
Ab levels and deposition, B. ovatus treatment effectively
reversed abnormalities in the quantity and activation of microglia
and astrocytes, leading to a notable reduction in neuroinﬂamma-
tion in 5xFAD mice.
Since myelin degeneration resulting from myelin-forming
oligodendrocyte dysfunction is an early event in AD that leads
to cognitive deﬁcits.26,27 We next tested whether B. ovatus treat-
ment would impact myelination and myelin repair. To conﬁrm
this, we used electron microscopy to characterize the myelin ul-
trastructure. 5xFAD mice showed uncompact myelin lamellae
and degenerated sheaths. After B. ovatus treatment, the struc-
ture of myelin sheath recovered (Figures 2N and 2O). Together,
these results demonstrate that in 5xFAD mice, B. ovatus amelio-
rated AD pathologies, including the improvement of cognitive
performance and neuronal functions, a decrease in gliosis, and
reduced myelin degeneration.
Microbially induced restoration of the levels of LPC
ameliorates AD pathologies
Metabolites produced or induced to be generated by gut micro-
organisms may signal outside the gastrointestinal tract and regu-
late brain functions via the gut-brain axis.28 To investigate the
mechanism by which the gut microbiota alleviates amyloid-
related pathology, we performed unbiased serum metabolomic
proﬁling of 5xFAD mice and WT mice. Principal-component
analysis (PCA) revealed that the metabolomic composition
was striking differences between the two groups (Figure S3A).
In total, 37 metabolites showed signiﬁcant differences in abun-
dance in AD mice compared with WT controls (Figure S3B).
Those results revealed that the levels of lysolecithin family
members,
including
lysophosphatidic
acids
(LPAs),
LPC,
lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs), lysophosphatidylglycer-
ols (LPGs), lysophosphatidylinositols (LPIs), and lysophos-
phatidylserines (LPSs), were notable decreased in 5xFAD mice
compared with WT (Figure 3A), indicating that lysolecithin meta-
bolism may be altered in 5xFAD mice.
Furthermore, we hypothesized that the abundance of gut bac-
terial species might correlate with the levels of the lysolecithin
metabolites. To this end, we performed correlation analysis
between the abundance of the Clostridium and Bacteroides spe-
cies reported above and the levels of 18 lysolecithin metabolites.
The levels of 17 lysolecithin metabolites, which were expressed
at low levels in 5xFAD mice, exhibited a positive correlation with
the abundance of Bacteroides and a negative correlation with
the abundance of Clostridium species (Figure S3C). Next, we
found that LPC levels were reduced in the sera of different
ages 5xFAD mice, and we also found that the level of phospha-
tidylcholine (PC), which can be hydrolyzed to LPC,29 was
reduced (Figures S3D–S3I). More importantly, the serum LPC
content and partial PC content were rescued in ABX-treated
2-month-old 5xFAD mice compared with untreated 5xFAD (Fig-
ure 3B). Notably, the LPC level, which was markedly decreased
in 5xFAD mice compared with WT mice, was rescued by treat-
ment with B. ovatus (Figure 3C). These results demonstrate
that the gut microbiota regulates the levels of metabolites.
Plasma-derived LPCs are essential for normal brain growth
and cognitive function,30 and the concentrations of PCs and
LPCs are diminished in individuals with AD.31 Consistent with
this, we observed lower LPC concentrations in 5xFAD mice
(C) Ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS)detection of LPC species (16:0 and 18:0) in serum of WT, 5xFAD mice, and
5xFAD mice treated with B. ovatus.
(D and E) The levels of LPC 16:0 in the serum (D) and brain (E) of 5xFAD mice treated with PBS or LPC, measured by UPLC-MS.
(F and G) Example micrographs of Ab plaques (F) and quantitation of ﬂuorescence intensity (G), speciﬁcally in the subiculum region, in 5xFAD mice treated with
intraperitoneal injection of PBS (control) or LPC. Scale bars in (F): 200 mm.
(H–J) Quantiﬁcation of Ab intensity in the subiculum region, in control and LPC-treated 5xFAD mice at the ages of 2 (H), 6 (I), and 12 (J) months.
(K) Graph depicting the percentage of time that mice from different treatment groups spent interacting with the novel object.
(L and M) Graphs showing the latency time (seconds) in trial days (L) and duration of time (%) in the platform quadrant in probe test (M) for each group of mice in
MWM experiment.
(N) Quantiﬁcation of the percentage of freezing behavior exhibited by mice in the indicated group during the CFC assay.
(O and P) Plot of the mean fEPSP slopes (O) and summary graph (P) of normalized FP slopes during the 70th and 80th min in mice of indicated group.
(Q and R) Example micrographs (Q) and quantiﬁcation (R) of Iba1-positive microglia cells. Scale bar: 100 mm.
(S and T) Typical ﬂuorescence images (S) and quantiﬁcation (T) illustrating GFAP-positive astrocytes cells. Scale bar: 100 mm.
(U and V) Typical TEM images of myelin (U) and quantitation of the g-ratio (r/R) of axons (V) per group. Scale bars: 1 mm.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (Unpaired t test in D, E, G–J, and P. Ordinary one-way
ANOVA in C, K, M, R, T, and V. Two-way ANOVA in L and N).
See also Figure S3.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025
175

Figure 4. PLA2 of B. ovatus degrades PC to LPC
(A–C) Example micrographs of Ab plaques (A), quantitative analysis of Ab intensity in the subiculum (B) and the content of LPC in the serum (C) in 5xFAD mice
treated with gavage of medium (control), PC, B. ovatus, or a combination of PC with B. ovatus under choline-deﬁcient diet conditions.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
176
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

than in WT mice. We wondered whether LPC treatment would be
sufﬁcient to reduce the Ab load and rescue cognitive function in
the AD model mice. To explore the link between microbial me-
tabolites and AD symptoms in the AD mouse model, we treated
5xFAD mice with LPC via intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection. LPC
treatment elevated the levels of LPC in both the serum and brain
of 5xFAD mice (Figures 3D and 3E). Remarkably, the Ab plaque
loads in the hippocampal regions exhibited a signiﬁcant
decrease in LPC-treated 5xFAD mice compared with untreated
AD model mice (Figures 3F and 3G). Furthermore, we supple-
mented 3xTg-AD with LPC, which also reduced Ab loads
(Figures S2G–S2I). Moreover, compared with untreated AD
model mice, LPC-treated 25-day-old weaned, 4.5-month-old,
and 12.5-month-old 5xFAD mice displayed markedly reduced
Ab aggregations (Figures 3H–3J, and S3J–S3O), similar to
what was observed in B. ovatus-treated 5xFAD mice of different
ages. These ﬁndings indicate that LPC has a protective role in
the AD model mice.
Consistent with the reduction in amyloid load, we observed
that performance was signiﬁcantly improved in LPC-treated
5xFAD mice compared with untreated AD mice in NOR, MWM,
and CFC tests (Figures 3K–3N), revealing that LPC signiﬁcantly
rescued cognitive function in 5xFAD mice. Interestingly, the
decrease in LTP at Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapses showed
remarkable amelioration in LPC-treated 6-month-old 5xFAD
mice compared with untreated 5xFAD mice (Figures 3O, 3P,
and S3P), and LPC treatment prevented the decrease in RRP
size and PSD thickness in the 5xFAD mice (Figures S3Q–S3S).
Furthermore, LPC-treated mice exhibited a decreased number
of LAMP1-positive dystrophic neurites (Figures S3T and S3U),
indicating the alleviation of deﬁcits in neuron degeneration.
LPC treatment resulted in lower levels of Iba1 (Figures 3Q and
3R) and GFAP (Figures 3S and 3T), suggesting that LPC treat-
ment decreased gliosis in 5xFAD mice. In addition, the myelin
thickness was increased (Figures 3U and 3V), indicating that
LPC treatment inhibited myelin degeneration. Thus, these results
indicate that metabolites produced by the microbiota, like LPC,
are essential for reducing amyloid deposition, thereby amelio-
rated synaptic dysfunction and gliosis while facilitated myelin
nation and repair in AD mouse model.
PLA2 from B. ovatus hydrolyzes PC into LPC
On the basis of recent experimental evidence, higher PC intake is
linked to a lower risk of developing dementia,32 and similar asso-
ciations between PC intake and cognitive performance have been
reported.33 In contrast, treatment with PC via i.p. injection failed to
reduce the Ab plaque load in AD model mice (Figures S4A and
S4B). To explain the reduction in the efﬁcacy of i.p. PC in AD
mice, 5xFAD mice were administered for 2 weeks with ABX as
described above and administered B. ovatus + PC or PC only
via oral gavage. Notably, compared with control and PC-treated
alone 5xFAD mice, B. ovatus + PC-treated 5xFAD mice displayed
a notable decrease in the accumulation of Ab plaques in the hip-
pocampal regions (Figures S4C–S4E). We next sought to further
determine PC function and the features of gut microbiota that
are required for PC hydrolysis. To carry out this goal, we fed
5xFAD mice with choline-deﬁcient diet and administered PC,
B. ovatus, or B. ovatus + PC via oral gavage. We found that under
choline deﬁciency and ABX treatment, B. ovatus + PC treatment
effectively reduced the accumulation of Ab plaques, whereas
B. ovatus- or PC-treatments alone showed weakly reduction of
Ab deposition (Figures 4A and 4B). Similarly, the serum LPC level
of 5xFAD mice was elevated after B. ovatus + PC treatment, con-
ﬁrming B. ovatus as a necessary driver (Figure 4C). Further, we
demonstrated that the culture supernatant of B. ovatus was insuf-
ﬁcient to reduced Ab loads (Figures S4F and S4G). These results
indicate that the effect of PC in modulating Ab accumulation
dependent on B. ovatus activity.
LPC is a metabolite of PC, speciﬁcally as a product of PC
hydrolysis by phospholipase A2 (PLA2).29 We hypothesized that
the PLA2 from B. ovatus might play a crucial role in the hydrolysis
of PC into LPC. To test this, we ﬁrst cloned the Pla2 gene from
B. ovatus into the pET-21b (+) vector and heterologous overex-
pressed inE.coliBL21(E.coli-PLA2)and monitoredtheproduction
of the hydrolysis halos by B. ovatus, E. coli-PLA2 or C. beijerinckii
on egg yolk agar plates, serving as an indicator of PLA2 activity. A
white precipitate ring forms on plates around the previously inoc-
ulated with B. ovatus and E. coli-PLA2, while those inoculated
with C. beijerinckii did not (Figure S4H). Subsequently, we incu-
bated B. ovatus, E. coli-PLA2 or C. beijerinckii with PC in culture
medium. Quantitative analysis showed that B. ovatus and
E. coli-PLA2 transformed PC into LPC, as compared with the con-
trols (Figures 4D and 4E). In contrast, PC was not degraded by
C. beijerinckii. These results demonstrate that B. ovatus are
involved in PC metabolism and generated metabolites LPC.
Next, we supplemented E. coli-PLA2 into 5xFAD mice to
assess whether E. coli-PLA2 could reduce Ab load. The results
showed that the hippocampal Ab plaque burden was signiﬁ-
cantly reduced in E. coli-PLA2-treated 5xFAD mice compared
with vehicle controls (Figures 4F and 4G). Furthermore, the
serum PC levels in the E. coli-PLA2-treated 5xFAD mice were
signiﬁcantly lower than those in the vehicle controls (Figure 4H).
Conversely, the serum LPC levels in the E. coli-PLA2-treated
5xFAD mice were signiﬁcantly increased (Figure 4I). The above
results support our hypothesis that PLA2 from B. ovatus can
hydrolyze PC into LPC, then reducing the Ab plaque load in
5xFAD mice.
LPC alleviates AD pathologies through suppressing
ferroptosis
We next investigated the mechanisms underlying the effect of
LPC on AD development. To this end, we examined the reactions
(D and E) Graphs showing the degradation of PC (D) and production of LPC (E) by culture medium, B. ovatus, E. coli-PLA2, or C. beijerinckii, as detected by
UPLC-MS.
(F and G) Representative photomicrographs (F) and assessment (G) of Ab deposits in the subiculum of hippocampi in 5xFAD mice with E. coli-vector and
E. coli-PLA2 treatment.
(H and I) Concentration of PC (H) and LPC (I) in the serum of the E.coli-vector- and E.coli-PLA2-treated 5xFAD mice, as detected by targeted UPLC-MS.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (Unpaired t test in G–I. Ordinary one-way ANOVA in B–E).
Scale bars: 200 mm. See also Figure S4.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025
177

(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
178
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

of distinct cell types in the hippocampus of 5xFAD mice to
LPC treatment. Neuronal and glial cells (microglial cell, astro-
cyte, and oligodendrocyte)-enriched brain cell suspensions
from LPC-treated mice, LPC-untreated 5xFAD mice and control
mice were subjected to single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-
seq) with Smart-seq2 (Figure S4I). A total of seven groups of
brain cells, comprising neurons, oligodendrocytes, microglia,
and astrocytes were identiﬁed (Figure S4J). Neurons from
5xFAD mice exhibited upregulation of genes that were enriched
in Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) path-
ways associated with various processes, including oxidative
phosphorylation, reactive oxygen species (ROS) in chemical
carcinogenesis, thermogenesis, and AD, and these pathways
are closely linked to ferroptosis and neurodegeneration34
(Figure S4K). Signiﬁcantly, the administration of LPC treatment
resulted in a decrease in the expression of genes enriched in
these KEGG pathways in neurons (Figure S4K). Transcriptional
changes were also found in the brain microglia, astrocytes and
oligodendrocytes, and genes that were regulated in those cells
were mainly involved in ferroptosis (Figures S4L–S4N).
To determine whether the inhibitory effect of LPC on AD pa-
thologies is mediated through ferroptosis, we administered
liproxstatin-1 (Lip-1, an inhibitor of ferroptosis) via i.p. injection
to 5xFAD mice, and parameters of AD pathology were moni-
tored. Strikingly, consistent with LPC treatment, following Lip-1
administration, 5xFAD mice exhibited a signiﬁcant decrease in
Ab plaque loads relative to untreated 5xFAD mice (Figures 5A
and S5A). Furthermore, learning and memory impairments of
5xFAD mice were ameliorated after Lip-1 administration in
MWM, CFC, and NOR tests (Figures 5B–5E). Ferroptosis is a
form of cell death driven by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation.35
The levels of ROS and lipid peroxidation were signiﬁcantly
elevated in hippocampi living cells and tissues from 5xFAD
mice compared with WT mice, which were signiﬁcantly reduced
after treatment with LPC and B. ovatus (Figures 5F–5H and
S5B–S5D). Similarly, with LPC or Lip-1 treatment, the elevated
levels of ROS and lipid peroxidation were also restored in
RSL3-induced neuronal and glial cell lines (Figures 5I–5L and
S5E–S5I). Ferroptotic cell death induced by RSL3 or erastin
was also restored by LPC or Lip-1 (Figures 5M–5Q and
S5J–S5L). Furthermore, we found smaller, ruptured mitochon-
dria (the most prominent characteristic of ferroptosis)36 in the
perinuclei of hippocampal neurons in 5xFAD mice. The mito-
chondrial structure and area were reversed after LPC and
B. ovatus treatment (Figures 5R, 5S, S5M, and S5N). Other forms
of cell death such as apoptosis, pyroptosis, and autophagy were
signiﬁcantly elevated in 5xFAD mice compared with WT mice,
and LPC treatment failed to rescue these death processes
(Figures S5O and S5P). These results suggest that the regulatory
effect of LPC may be dependent on the ferroptosis.
Inhibition of ACSL4-dependent ferroptosis by LPC
requires GPR119
We next investigated the mechanisms for LPC-mediated
ferroptosis inhibition. To this end, we performed RNA-seq of
LPC-treated cells under RSL3 induction. LPC induced marked
changes in global gene expression (Figure S5Q). Among the
genes that were downregulated by LPC was that encoding the
protein ACSL4, an essential regulator of ferroptosis.37 Further-
more, real-time PCR and western blotting analysis revealed a
downregulation of ACSL4 expression following LPC treatment
(Figures 5T, S5R, and S5S).
Phospholipid-bound polyunsaturated fatty acids (PL-PUFAs),
as principal substrates for lipid peroxidation, are intricately
involved in the ferroptotic process.34,38 Their assimilation
into PLs requires ACSL4, a pivotal step in the execution of fer-
roptosis.39 To validate whether LPC inhibits ACSL4-induced lipid
peroxidation, we performed untargeted lipidomic analysis in the
hippocampus tissues of WT mice, 5xFAD mice and LPC-treated
5xFAD mice. PL-PUFAs are signiﬁcantly upregulated in the
hippocampus tissues of 5xFAD mice compared with WT mice
(Figure
S5T),
while
LPC
treatment
signiﬁcantly
reversed
the change in the proﬁle of PL-PUFAs (Figure S5U). Notably,
LPC
treatment
substantially
lowered
phosphatidylethanol-
amines-arachidonoyl
(PE-AAs),
PE-adrenoyl
(AdAs),
and
PC-PUFAs (Figure 5U), which have been conﬁrmed as the
principal PL-PUFAs most closely linked to increased ferroptosis
susceptibility.34,38,40 Additionally, LPC administration did not
change the expression levels of the FSP1 and MBOAT1 proteins
in 5xFAD mice, as compared with untreated 5xFAD mice
Figure 5. LPC suppresses ferroptosis
(A) Quantitative analysis of Ab intensity in the subiculum, within control and Lip-1-treated 5xFAD mice.
(B–E) Graphs showing the latency time (B) and percent of time searching in target quadrant (C) in the MWM test, the freezing behavior in the CFC experiment
(D) and the percentage of time for interacting with the novel object in the NOR test (E) by WT, 5xFAD mice, and 5xFAD + Lip-1 mice.
(F) The quantitative data of relative mean ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) determined by CellROX-labeled ROS in live hippocampal cells from mice in the indicated
groups.
(G) Flow cytometry analysis of lipid peroxidation in single cells isolated from the hippocampi of WT, 5xFAD mice, and LPC-treated 5xFAD mice using BODIPY
581/591 C11 as a marker.
(H) Malondialdehyde (MDA) content in the hippocampi of mice.
(I and J) Flow cytometry analysis showing ROS (I), lipid peroxidation (J) in SH-SY5Y cells after RSL3 treatment with or without LPC.
(K and L) ROS (K) and lipid peroxidation (L) levels in HT22 cells following RSL3 treatment, with or without LPC and Lip-1 supplementation.
(M and N) RSL3 induced cell viability (M) and LDH release (N) in SH-SY5Y cells with or without LPC treatment.
(O and P) RSL3 induced cell viability (O) and LDH release (P) in HT22 cells with or without LPC treatment.
(Q) HT22 cell viability following erastin treatment and LPC or Lip-1 supplementation.
(R and S) Exemplary TEM images (R) and quantitation (S) of the mitochondrial area in the perinuclear.
(T) Western blotting showing the protein levels of ACSL4 and NRF2 expression in hippocampi of mice.
(U) Quantiﬁcation of signiﬁcantly decreased PL-AAs and PL-AdAs in the hippocampi of LPC-treated 5xFAD mice compared with 5xFAD mice, as indicated.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (Unpaired t test in A and U. Ordinary one-way ANOVA in
C, E–Q, and S. Two-way ANOVA in B and D).
See also Figure S5.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025
179

Figure 6. LPC attenuates ferroptosis by regulating NRF2-ACSL4 axis through receptor GPR119
(A and B) Representative micrographs showing Ab plaques of brain slice (A) and quantitation of Ab intensity (B), particularly in the subiculum, in 5xFAD and
Acsl4DNes;5xFAD mice treated with PBS and LPC.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
180
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

(Figure S5P), despite these proteins being conﬁrmed as inhibi-
tors of ferroptosis.38,41 Although LPC treatment upregulated
the expression of GPX4 in 5xFAD mice, LPC continued to inhibit
ferroptosis and alleviate AD pathologies in Gpx4-deﬁcient AD
model mice and Gpx4 KO neuronal cell line (Figures S6A–S6G).
We therefore hypothesized that the reduction of ACSL4 may
be important for LPC-mediated inhibition of AD pathology. To
test this, although Acsl4 knockout (KO) was not as efﬁcient as
LPC, the lipid peroxidation of neuronal and glial cells under the
combinational treatment were comparable to that under LPC
treatment (Figures S6H and S6I). However, overexpression of
Acsl4 was sufﬁcient to increase RSL3-induced lipid peroxidation
and was resistant to LPC treatment (Figures S6J and S6K).
Furthermore, the levels of Ab plaque load, ROS and lipid perox-
idation were reduced in Acsl4-deﬁcient AD model mice, and
those levels did not show further reduction after LPC treatment
(Figures 6A–6D and S6L). These data indicate that ASCL4 could
be a potential target downstream of LPC.
We next sought to determine the mechanisms by which LPC
inhibits ACSL4 expression. Orphan receptor GPR119 has been
previously identiﬁed as the receptor for LPC.42 To test this, we
exposed Gpr119 KO and WT neuronal and glial cell lines to
LPC. Whereas LPC reduced the levels of ROS and lipid peroxi-
dation induced by RSL3 in WT cells, Gpr119 KO cells were resis-
tant to LPC treatment (Figures S6M–S6R). Furthermore, the ROS
and lipid peroxidation levels in neuronal and glial cells under
RSL3 treatment were decreased by APD668, a clinical-stage
agonist of GPR119,42 and these levels did not show further
reduction in cells treated with a combination of LPC and
APD668 (Figures 6E–6G and S6S–S6V). Consistently, the
levels of ACSL4 were diminished upon treatment with APD668
(Figure S6W). The data indicate that the resistance to ferroptosis
mediated by LPC depends on the GPR119-ACSL4 axis.
We thus considered potential mechanisms underlying the
GPR119-regulated expression of ACSL4. Because NRF2 is a
well-known transcription factor that plays a key role in ferropto-
sis, capable of directly or indirectly regulating ferroptosis-related
proteins.43 NRF2 suppressed the expression of ACSL4 in mouse
hippocampal neuronal cell lines.44 We explored whether NRF2
inhibition mediates the effect of GPR119 on ACSL4 expression.
We ﬁrst veriﬁed LPC or APD668 treatment increases the
transcription and translation levels of the Nrf2 gene (Figures 6H
and 6I), thus suggesting NRF2 as a possible mediator of the
effect of LPC. To verify this ﬁnding, we then treated Nrf2-deﬁ-
cient neuronal cell lines with LPC or APD668. Nrf2 deﬁciency
attenuated the inhibitory effect of LPC and APD668 on RSL3-in-
duced ferroptosis compared with the control group (Figures 6J
and 6K). By contrast, Lip-1 still suppressed ROS and lipid perox-
idation in the absence of Nrf2. Furthermore, immunoblot analysis
revealed a decreased expression of NRF2 in the hippocampal
tissues of 5xFAD mice relative to controls, with LPC treatment
effectively reinstating NRF2 protein levels (Figure 5T). These re-
sults indicate that LPC engages GPR119 and subsequently an-
tagonizes cellular ferroptosis through the regulation of the
NRF2-ACSL4 axis.
To further investigate whether the activation of GPR119
explains the inhibition of Ab deposition in an LPC-treated AD
mouse model, we administered APD668 orally once every
2 days. Administration of APD668 reduced Ab deposition in the
brain of 5xFAD mice (Figures 6L, 6M, S6X, and S6Y). Addition-
ally, APD668 delivery increased the expression of NRF2 while
decreasing the expression of ACSL4 (Figure 6N), and the
decrease was accompanied by a reduction in the severity of lipid
peroxidation (Figure 6O). Collectively, our results illustrate that
LPC regulates NRF2-ACSL4 axis by targeting GPR119, and
thereby ameliorating AD pathologies by inhibiting ferroptosis.
Therefore, GPR119 activation is a potential strategy for reducing
brain Ab deposition and alleviating AD symptoms.
Gut microbiota and clinical AD
To elucidate the changes in gut microbiota and LPC levels in hu-
mans, we collected fecal and serum samples from individuals
with AD and age-matched control donors. At the phylum and
genus levels, we found a decrease in the abundance of Bacter-
oidetes and Bacteroides in the fecal samples of individuals with
AD, while the abundance of Firmicutes and Clostridium was
slightly elevated in AD (Figures S7A–S7C). Notably, among the
healthy control donors, B. ovatus exhibited the highest abun-
dance in the fecal samples (Figures 7A and 7B). Subsequently,
we performed lipidomic analysis on the serum samples of
individuals with AD and age-matched control donors. In terms
of metabolites, there was a signiﬁcant reduction in LPC concen-
tration in the sera of individuals with AD (Figures 7C, 7D, and
S7D–S7F).
DISCUSSION
Recent studies have identiﬁed a key role for the gut microbiota in
multiple phenotypes associated with neurological diseases,
including AD, Parkinson’s disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS).45–50 We found that prolonged administration of
ABX severely disrupted the gut microbiota composition, leading
(C and D) The effect of LPC on ROS (C) and lipid peroxidation (D) in Acsl4DNes;5xFAD mice, as evaluated by measuring the MFI of CellROX and the level of MDA.
(E–G) Flow cytometry assessment of RSL3-induced ROS (E), lipid oxidation (F), and lipid hydroperoxides (G) in control and LPC or APD668-treated
SH-SY5Y cells.
(H and I) The mRNA levels (H) and protein levels (I) of NRF2 in SH-SY5Y cells under the indicated treatment.
(J and K) Cell viability (J) and lipid peroxidation (K) of Nrf2 knockout SH-SY5Y cell assessing under RSL3-induced conditions with or without LPC, APD668,
and Lip-1.
(L and M) Example micrographs (L) and quantitation (M) of Ab plaques particularly in the subiculum of control and APD668-treated 5xFAD mice.
(N) Western blotting showing the protein levels of ACSL4 and NRF2 in the hippocampi of mice per group.
(O) Lipid oxidation as determined by BODIPY 581/591 C11 in hippocampal cells from control and APD668-treated 5xFAD mice.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. ns, not signiﬁcant; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (Ordinary one-way ANOVA in B–H, J, and K. Unpaired
t test in M and O).
Scale bars: 200 mm. See also Figure S6.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025
181

Figure 7. B. ovatus and LPC exhibit decreased levels in patients with AD
(A) LEfSe analysis of signiﬁcant alterations in bacterial taxa at the species level.
(B) Bar plot showing the relative abundance of B. ovatus between control group and AD group.
(C) UPLC-MS analysis of LPC content in the serum of healthy individuals and patients with AD.
(D) Violin plot showing changes in the contents of LPC which signiﬁcant decreased in the serum of AD subjects, as analyzed by lipidomics.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. (Wilcoxon Rank Sum and Signed Rank Tests in B. Unpaired t test in C and D).
See also Figure S7.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
182
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

to a notable decrease in Ab deposition in 5xFAD mice. Further-
more, recent research has established that the microbiota can
signiﬁcantly impact the progression of neurodegeneration in a
tauopathy mouse model through increased p-tau pathology.49
This underscores a causal role of the microbiota in the modula-
tion of neurodegenerative processes. Our studies indicate that
the gut microbiota of AD model mice is imbalanced; speciﬁcally,
the abundance of Clostridium is increased, and the abundance
of Bacteroides is reduced. Additionally, cohousing experiments
demonstrated that outgrowth of Clostridium could directly lead
to decreased colonization of Bacteroides. Our ﬁndings demon-
strate that the loss of colonization and activity of Bacteroides
in the intestinal tract of AD model mice and an increase in Clos-
tridium abundance together lead to the progression of AD. The
main mechanism by which Clostridium abundance increases in
AD animal models is still unclear. Our study identiﬁed analogous
alterations in Bacteroides within individuals with AD. While a
moderate uptick in Clostridium abundance was also noted in
AD, it did not reach statistical signiﬁcance, aligning with previous
ﬁndings.51 This difference may be attributed to the fact that hu-
man and mouse microbiota share compositional similarities but
exhibit signiﬁcant quantitative discrepancies.52 These observed
variances between human and mouse studies are needed to
deeper exploration and clariﬁcation in subsequent research.
Gut microbial symbionts form a key endocrine organ that
converts nutrient factors in the environment into microbial-
associated metabolites that play roles in normal physiology
and disease in the human host.53 LPC, a gut ﬂora-regulated
PC metabolite, is a critical regulator of normal brain growth
and cognitive function by transporting docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA) through orphan transporter Mfsd2a,30 and PC and LPC
are deﬁcient in patients with AD.31 Higher dietary PC intake
was found to be associated with a lower risk of dementia in hu-
mans, albeit not in all studies.32,54 Whether dietary intake of PC
is related to cognitive decline and AD is still under debate. Our
study found that in ABX-treated AD model mice, PC could not
reduce Ab deposition, suggesting that the effect of PC requires
the gut microbiota. Our research also found that when PC is
degraded into LPC by the gut microbiota, it can be transported
to the brain, thereby exerting its effects, which suggests that
LPC may be the active form of PC. Seo and colleagues found
that short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) produced by the gut micro-
biota could be involved in modulating tau-mediated neurode-
generation.49 Similarly, our ﬁndings reveal that the relative
abundance of many bacterial-family-level taxa associated
with SCFAs production, such as Ruminococcaceae and Lach-
nospiraceae, were increased in the gut microbiota of AD model
mice. Further characterization of the interaction between me-
tabolites such as LPC and SCFAs, as well as the understanding
of molecular mechanisms inﬂuencing Alzheimer’s risk, may
provide insights for future targeted therapies.
Our studies identiﬁed a mechanism of AD regulation that
relies on the Bacteroides-LPC-GPR119-ferroptosis signaling
axis. We demonstrate that the administration of LPC not
only improves Ab accumulation but also alleviates synaptic
dysfunction, gliosis and myelin degeneration. These effects
are achieved through the regulation of the ferroptosis signaling
pathway. Our study revealed the presence of elevated lipid per-
oxidation levels and a signiﬁcant increase in ROS production in
the brains of mice model with AD. ROS induced lipid peroxida-
tion is pivotal in cell death including apoptosis, autophagy, and
ferroptosis.55 Although apoptosis, pyroptosis, and autophagy
were signiﬁcantly increased in 5xFAD mice, our study prelimi-
narily indicates that LPC may primarily exert its effects in
AD mouse models through the modulation of ferroptosis. In
addition, LPC supplementation regulated NRF2-ACSL4 axis
through GPR119, resulting in the suppressing ferroptosis.
However, our ﬁndings are not sufﬁcient to support the conclu-
sion that ferroptosis is the primary cause of Ab deposition, and
only suggest a potential mechanism concerning the beneﬁcial
effects of LPC on AD pathology. Future investigations should
focus on examining whether and how ferroptosis impact on
hallmarks of AD.
The GPR119 agonists have been veriﬁed to be safe for use
in vivo and are being widely introduced into phase 2 clinical
trials for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).56
We have found that GPR119 agonists can effectively alleviate
AD symptoms. Through the research presented here, we
indicate that interventions with the targets based on the Bac-
teroides-LPC-GPR119-ferroptosis axis show transformative
potential for the treatment of AD.
Limitations of the study
Although our study founded microbiota and metabolites with
neuromodulatory activity and deﬁned the existence of a gut-mi-
crobiome-brain connection in AD model mice, several limitations
should be discussed. First, our study indicated that Clostridium
increase in abundance can directly affect the colonization of
many Bacteroides species; however, how this occurs remains
unknown, and subsequent research is required to elucidate the
underlying mechanism. Second, our study although demon-
strated clear role for B. ovatus and LPC in ameliorating AD
pathology, other microbiota and metabolites may have similar
effects, and studies will be needed to examine their roles and
mechanisms in the future. Third, AD is characterized as a dual
proteinopathy where the pathogenesis is propelled by the Ab
deposition and the aggregated tau accumulation.57 While our
study demonstrated clear role for B. ovatus and LPC in amelio-
rating Ab deposition, further studies to characterize the roles
and mechanisms of the B. ovatus and LPC to tau pathology
are important. Finally, our research was mainly validated on
mice, and the results may not be extended to humans at this
stage. Additionally, the limited size of our human cohort repre-
sents another limitation. Future research will need to incorporate
larger human cohorts to substantiate the present ﬁndings.
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be
directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact, Dr. Chen Zhang
(czhang@ccmu.edu.cn).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
d The raw metadata, raw single-cell RNA-seq data, and RNA-seq data are
available online through the NGDC website (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025
183

with the study accession ID NGDC: PRJCA013503, PRJCA020474,
PRJCA020467, OMIX002459, OMIX002669, and OMIX005085.
d This paper does not report the original code.
d Unprocessed data in this manuscript are available as Data S1-Source
Data. Supplemental tables and ﬁgures are available as supplemental
information.
d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this
paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(81925011, 92149304, 82073126, 32171120, 31871147, and 81874076), the
Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province
(2019B030335001), the Youth Beijing Scholars Program (015), and the Joint
Project of Municipal Education Commission and Municipal Foundation of Bei-
jing (KZ202010025038). We extend our gratitude to the clinicians, researchers,
and staff for their efforts in collecting and processing patient samples,
including Yi Tang, Qiaoran Lin, and Xiaosheng Meng. All data are archived in
Capital Medical University.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, C.Z., W.W., and X.L.; methodology, X.Z. and X.L.; formal
analysis, H.H. and X.L.; investigation, X.Z., X.L., M.W., H.H., J.C., S.L., X.B.,
F.X., Y.Z., and Y.X.; writing – original draft, X.Z. and X.L.; writing – review & ed-
iting, X.Z., C.Z., W.W., and X.L.; funding acquisition, C.Z., W.W., and X.L.; re-
sources, W.W. and C.Z.; supervision, C.Z., W.W., and X.L.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include
the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Human subjects
B Animal models
B Germ-free mice and treatment
d METHOD DETAILS
B ABX cocktail treatment
B Sample collection and DNA extraction
B Nanopore library preparation and sequencing
B Metagenomics analysis
B Bacterial strains culture and Microbial colonization
B Quantitative PCR for microbiota analysis
B Administration of drugs to SPF mice
B Preparation of mouse tissue samples
B Immunoﬂuorescence
B NOR test
B MWM test
B CFC test
B Slice preparation and electrophysiological recordings
B TEM
B Untargeted metabolomics
B UPLC-MS and Lipidomics
B Metabolomic and metagenomic data correlation analysis
B Single-cell sorting
B Single-cell sequencing (Smart-seq2)
B Smart-seq2 data processing
B Quantitative reverse transcription PCR
B Western blot assay
B Malondialdehyde (MDA) content
B Cell lines and culture conditions
B Knockout and overexpression of target genes
B Cell ferroptosis treatment and assessment
B Flow cytometry
B FMT experiments
B Egg yolk agar plate assay for phospholipase activity
B Expression of phospholipase A2 in E. coli
B RNA-sequencing
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cmet.2024.10.006.
Received: October 27, 2023
Revised: April 16, 2024
Accepted: October 4, 2024
Published: November 6, 2024
REFERENCES
1. Blennow, K., de Leon, M.J., and Zetterberg, H. (2006). Alzheimer’s disease.
Lancet 368, 387–403. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69113-7.
2. Panza, F., Lozupone, M., Logroscino, G., and Imbimbo, B.P. (2019). A crit-
ical appraisal of amyloid-beta-targeting therapies for Alzheimer disease.
Nat. Rev. Neurol. 15, 73–88. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41582-018-0116-6.
3. Kametani, F., and Hasegawa, M. (2018). Reconsideration of Amyloid
Hypothesis and Tau Hypothesis in Alzheimer’s Disease. Front. Neurosci.
12, 25. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2018.00025.
4. Chen, X.Q., and Mobley, W.C. (2019). Exploring the Pathogenesis of
Alzheimer Disease in Basal Forebrain Cholinergic Neurons: Converging
Insights From Alternative Hypotheses. Front. Neurosci. 13, 446. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2019.00446.
5. Long, J.M., and Holtzman, D.M. (2019). Alzheimer Disease: An Update on
Pathobiology and Treatment Strategies. Cell 179, 312–339. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.09.001.
6. Jucker, M., and Walker, L.C. (2023). Alzheimer’s disease: From immuno-
therapy to immunoprevention. Cell 186, 4260–4270. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cell.2023.08.021.
7. Holmes, C., Boche, D., Wilkinson, D., Yadegarfar, G., Hopkins, V., Bayer,
A., Jones, R.W., Bullock, R., Love, S., Neal, J.W., et al. (2008). Long-term
effects of Abeta42 immunisation in Alzheimer’s disease: follow-up of a
randomised, placebo-controlled phase I trial. Lancet 372, 216–223.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61075-2.
8. Uhlmann, R.E., Rother, C., Rasmussen, J., Schelle, J., Bergmann, C.,
Ullrich
Gavilanes, E.M., Fritschi, S.K., Buehler, A., Baumann, F.,
Skodras, A., et al. (2020). Acute targeting of pre-amyloid seeds in trans-
genic mice reduces Alzheimer-like pathology later in life. Nat. Neurosci.
23, 1580–1588. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00737-w.
9. Shabbir, U., Arshad, M.S., Sameen, A., and Oh, D.H. (2021). Crosstalk
between Gut and Brain in Alzheimer’s Disease: The Role of Gut
Microbiota Modulation Strategies. Nutrients 13, 690. https://doi.org/10.
3390/nu13020690.
10. B€auerl, C., Collado, M.C., Diaz Cuevas, A., Vin˜ a, J., and Pe´ rez Martı´nez, G.
(2018). Shifts in gut microbiota composition in an APP/PSS1 transgenic
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease during lifespan. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol. 66, 464–471. https://doi.org/10.1111/lam.12882.
11. Zhan, X., Stamova, B., Jin, L.W., DeCarli, C., Phinney, B., and Sharp, F.R.
(2016). Gram-negative bacterial molecules associate with Alzheimer dis-
ease pathology. Neurology 87, 2324–2332. https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.
0000000000003391.
12. Vogt, N.M., Kerby, R.L., Dill-McFarland, K.A., Harding, S.J., Merluzzi, A.P.,
Johnson, S.C., Carlsson, C.M., Asthana, S., Zetterberg, H., Blennow, K.,
et al. (2017). Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’’s disease. Sci.
Rep. 7, 13537. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-13601-y.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
184
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

13. Harach, T., Marungruang, N., Duthilleul, N., Cheatham, V., Mc Coy, K.D.,
Frisoni, G., Neher, J.J., Fa˚ k, F., Jucker, M., Lasser, T., et al. (2017).
Reduction of Abeta amyloid pathology in APPPS1 transgenic mice in the
absence of gut microbiota. Sci. Rep. 7, 41802. https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep41802.
14. Minter, M.R., Zhang, C., Leone, V., Ringus, D.L., Zhang, X., Oyler-Castrillo,
P., Musch, M.W., Liao, F., Ward, J.F., Holtzman, D.M., et al. (2016).
Antibiotic-induced perturbations in gut microbial diversity inﬂuences
neuro-inﬂammation and amyloidosis in a murine model of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Sci. Rep. 6, 30028. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep30028.
15. Wang, X., Sun, G., Feng, T., Zhang, J., Huang, X., Wang, T., Xie, Z., Chu,
X., Yang, J., Wang, H., et al. (2019). Sodium oligomannate therapeutically
remodels gut microbiota and suppresses gut bacterial amino acids-
shaped neuroinﬂammation to inhibit Alzheimer’s disease progression.
Cell Res. 29, 787–803. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-019-0216-x.
16. Erny, D., Hrabe de Angelis, A.L., Jaitin, D., Wieghofer, P., Staszewski, O.,
David, E., Keren-Shaul, H., Mahlakoiv, T., Jakobshagen, K., Buch, T., et al.
(2015). Host microbiota constantly control maturation and function of
microglia in the CNS. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 965–977. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nn.4030.
17. Needham, B.D., Funabashi, M., Adame, M.D., Wang, Z., Boktor, J.C.,
Haney, J., Wu, W.L., Rabut, C., Ladinsky, M.S., Hwang, S.J., et al. (2022).
A gut-derived metabolite alters brain activity and anxiety behaviour in
mice. Nature 602, 647–653. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04396-8.
18. Duan, Y., Ye, T., Qu, Z., Chen, Y., Miranda, A., Zhou, X., Lok, K.C., Chen,
Y., Fu, A.K.Y., Gradinaru, V., et al. (2022). Brain-wide Cas9-mediated
cleavage of a gene causing familial Alzheimer’s disease alleviates amy-
loid-related pathologies in mice. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 6, 168–180. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41551-021-00759-0.
19. Zhao, Y., and Lukiw, W.J. (2018). Bacteroidetes Neurotoxins and
Inﬂammatory
Neurodegeneration.
Mol.
Neurobiol.
55,
9100–9107.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-018-1015-y.
20. Zhuang, Z.Q., Shen, L.L., Li, W.W., Fu, X., Zeng, F., Gui, L., L€u, Y., Cai, M.,
Zhu, C., Tan, Y.L., et al. (2018). Gut Microbiota is Altered in Patients with
Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 63, 1337–1346. https://doi.org/
10.3233/JAD-180176.
21. Shankar, G.M., Bloodgood, B.L., Townsend, M., Walsh, D.M., Selkoe, D.J.,
and Sabatini, B.L. (2007). Natural oligomers of the Alzheimer amyloid-beta
protein induce reversible synapse loss by modulating an NMDA-type gluta-
mate receptor-dependent signaling pathway. J. Neurosci. 27, 2866–2875.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4970-06.2007.
22. Zhao, Y., Sivaji, S., Chiang, M.C., Ali, H., Zukowski, M., Ali, S., Kennedy,
B., Sklyar, A., Cheng, A., Guo, Z., et al. (2017). Amyloid Beta Peptides
Block New Synapse Assembly by Nogo Receptor-Mediated Inhibition of
T-Type Calcium Channels. Neuron 96, 355–372.e6. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neuron.2017.09.041.
23. Gowrishankar, S., Yuan, P., Wu, Y., Schrag, M., Paradise, S., Grutzendler,
J., De Camilli, P., and Ferguson, S.M. (2015). Massive accumulation of
luminal protease-deﬁcient axonal lysosomes at Alzheimer’s disease amy-
loid plaques. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, E3699–E3708. https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1510329112.
24. Oakley, H., Cole, S.L., Logan, S., Maus, E., Shao, P., Craft, J., Guillozet-
Bongaarts, A., Ohno, M., Disterhoft, J., Van Eldik, L., et al. (2006).
Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron
loss in transgenic mice with ﬁve familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations:
potential factors in amyloid plaque formation. J. Neurosci. 26, 10129–
10140. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1202-06.2006.
25. Wilson, D.M., 3rd, Cookson, M.R., Van Den Bosch, L., Zetterberg, H.,
Holtzman, D.M., and Dewachter, I. (2023). Hallmarks of neurodegenerative
diseases. Cell 186, 693–714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.12.032.
26. Zhang, X., Wang, R., Hu, D., Sun, X., Fujioka, H., Lundberg, K., Chan, E.R.,
Wang, Q., Xu, R., Flanagan, M.E., et al. (2020). Oligodendroglial glycolytic
stress
triggers
inﬂammasome
activation
and
neuropathology
in
Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Adv. 6, eabb8680. https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.abb8680.
27. Depp, C., Sun, T., Sasmita, A.O., Spieth, L., Berghoff, S.A., Nazarenko, T.,
Overhoff, K., Steixner-Kumar, A.A., Subramanian, S., Arinrad, S., et al.
(2023). Myelin dysfunction drives amyloid-beta deposition in models of
Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 618, 349–357. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-023-06120-6.
28. Bufﬁngton, S.A., Dooling, S.W., Sgritta, M., Noecker, C., Murillo, O.D.,
Felice, D.F., Turnbaugh, P.J., and Costa-Mattioli, M. (2021). Dissecting
the contribution of host genetics and the microbiome in complex behav-
iors. Cell 184, 1740–1756.e16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.009.
29. Walter, A., Korth, U., Hilgert, M., Hartmann, J., Weichel, O., Hilgert, M.,
Fassbender, K., Schmitt, A., and Klein, J. (2004). Glycerophosphocholine
is elevated in cerebrospinal ﬂuid of Alzheimer patients. Neurobiol. Aging
25, 1299–1303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2004.02.016.
30. Nguyen, L.N., Ma, D., Shui, G., Wong, P., Cazenave-Gassiot, A., Zhang,
X., Wenk, M.R., Goh, E.L.K., and Silver, D.L. (2014). Mfsd2a is a trans-
porter for the essential omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid.
Nature 509, 503–506. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13241.
31. Mapstone, M., Cheema, A.K., Fiandaca, M.S., Zhong, X., Mhyre, T.R.,
MacArthur, L.H., Hall, W.J., Fisher, S.G., Peterson, D.R., Haley, J.M.,
et al. (2014). Plasma phospholipids identify antecedent memory impair-
ment in older adults. Nat. Med. 20, 415–418. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nm.3466.
32. Ylilauri, M.P.T., Voutilainen, S., Lo¨ nnroos, E., Virtanen, H.E.K., Tuomainen,
T.P., Salonen, J.T., and Virtanen, J.K. (2019). Associations of dietary
choline intake with risk of incident dementia and with cognitive perfor-
mance: the Kuopio Ischaemic Heart Disease Risk Factor Study. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 110, 1416–1423. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/nqz148.
33. Aparicio Vizuete, A., Robles, F., Rodrı´guez-Rodrı´guez, E., Lo´ pez-Sobaler,
A.M., and Ortega, R.M. (2010). Association between food and nutrient in-
takes and cognitive capacity in a group of institutionalized elderly people.
Eur. J. Nutr. 49, 293–300. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00394-009-0086-y.
34. Qiu, B., Zandkarimi, F., Bezjian, C.T., Reznik, E., Soni, R.K., Gu, W., Jiang,
X., and Stockwell, B.R. (2024). Phospholipids with two polyunsaturated
fatty acyl tails promote ferroptosis. Cell 187, 1177–1190.e18. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.01.030.
35. Stockwell, B.R. (2022). Ferroptosis turns 10: Emerging mechanisms, phys-
iological functions, and therapeutic applications. Cell 185, 2401–2421.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.06.003.
36. Xie, Y., Hou, W., Song, X., Yu, Y., Huang, J., Sun, X., Kang, R., and Tang, D.
(2016). Ferroptosis: process and function. Cell Death Differ. 23, 369–379.
https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2015.158.
37. Doll, S., Proneth, B., Tyurina, Y.Y., Panzilius, E., Kobayashi, S., Ingold, I.,
Irmler, M., Beckers, J., Aichler, M., Walch, A., et al. (2017). ACSL4 dictates
ferroptosis sensitivity by shaping cellular lipid composition. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 13, 91–98. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2239.
38. Liang, D., Feng, Y., Zandkarimi, F., Wang, H., Zhang, Z., Kim, J., Cai, Y.,
Gu, W., Stockwell, B.R., and Jiang, X. (2023). Ferroptosis surveillance in-
dependent of GPX4 and differentially regulated by sex hormones. Cell 186,
2748–2764.e22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.05.003.
39. Chen, X., Li, J., Kang, R., Klionsky, D.J., and Tang, D. (2021). Ferroptosis:
machinery and regulation. Autophagy 17, 2054–2081. https://doi.org/10.
1080/15548627.2020.1810918.
40. Kim, R., Hashimoto, A., Markosyan, N., Tyurin, V.A., Tyurina, Y.Y., Kar, G.,
Fu, S., Sehgal, M., Garcia-Gerique, L., Kossenkov, A., et al. (2022).
Ferroptosis of tumour neutrophils causes immune suppression in cancer.
Nature 612, 338–346. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05443-0.
41. Doll, S., Freitas, F.P., Shah, R., Aldrovandi, M., da Silva, M.C., Ingold, I.,
Goya Grocin, A., Xavier da Silva, T.N., Panzilius, E., Scheel, C.H., et al.
(2019). FSP1 is a glutathione-independent ferroptosis suppressor.
Nature 575, 693–698. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1707-0.
42. Xu, P., Huang, S., Guo, S., Yun, Y., Cheng, X., He, X., Cai, P., Lan, Y., Zhou,
H., Jiang, H., et al. (2022). Structural identiﬁcation of lysophosphatidylcho-
lines as activating ligands for orphan receptor GPR119. Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 29, 863–870. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00816-5.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025
185

43. Song, X., and Long, D. (2020). Nrf2 and Ferroptosis: A New Research
Direction for Neurodegenerative Diseases. Front. Neurosci. 14, 267.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2020.00267.
44. Wang, J., Zhu, Q., Wang, Y., Peng, J., Shao, L., and Li, X. (2022). Irisin pro-
tects against sepsis-associated encephalopathy by suppressing ferropto-
sis via activation of the Nrf2/GPX4 signal axis. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 187,
171–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2022.05.023.
45. Matheoud, D., Cannon, T., Voisin, A., Penttinen, A.M., Ramet, L., Fahmy,
A.M., Ducrot, C., Laplante, A., Bourque, M.J., Zhu, L., et al. (2019).
Intestinal
infection
triggers
Parkinson’s
disease-like
symptoms
in
Pink1-/- mice. Nature 571, 565–569. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
019-1405-y.
46. Sampson, T.R., Debelius, J.W., Thron, T., Janssen, S., Shastri, G.G., Ilhan,
Z.E., Challis, C., Schretter, C.E., Rocha, S., Gradinaru, V., et al. (2016). Gut
Microbiota Regulate Motor Deﬁcits and Neuroinﬂammation in a Model of
Parkinson’s Disease. Cell 167, 1469–1480.e12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2016.11.018.
47. Burberry, A., Wells, M.F., Limone, F., Couto, A., Smith, K.S., Keaney, J.,
Gillet, G., van Gastel, N., Wang, J.Y., Pietilainen, O., et al. (2020).
C9orf72 suppresses systemic and neural inﬂammation induced by gut
bacteria. Nature 582, 89–94. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2288-7.
48. Bosch, M.E., Dodiya, H.B., Michalkiewicz, J., Lee, C., Shaik, S.M., Weigle,
I.Q., Zhang, C., Osborn, J., Nambiar, A., Patel, P., et al. (2024). Sodium oli-
gomannate alters gut microbiota, reduces cerebral amyloidosis and reac-
tive microglia in a sex-speciﬁc manner. Mol. Neurodegener. 19, 18.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-023-00700-w.
49. Seo, D.O., O’Donnell, D., Jain, N., Ulrich, J.D., Herz, J., Li, Y., Lemieux, M.,
Cheng, J., Hu, H., Serrano, J.R., et al. (2023). ApoE isoform- and micro-
biota-dependent progression of neurodegeneration in a mouse model of
tauopathy. Science 379, eadd1236. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
add1236.
50. Chevalier, G., Siopi, E., Guenin-Mace´ , L., Pascal, M., Laval, T., Rifﬂet, A.,
Boneca, I.G., Demangel, C., Colsch, B., Pruvost, A., et al. (2020). Effect of
gut microbiota on depressive-like behaviors in mice is mediated by the en-
docannabinoid system. Nat. Commun. 11, 6363. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-19931-2.
51. Ferreiro, A.L., Choi, J., Ryou, J., Newcomer, E.P., Thompson, R.,
Bollinger, R.M., Hall-Moore, C., Ndao, I.M., Sax, L., Benzinger, T.L.S.,
et al. (2023). Gut microbiome composition may be an indicator of preclin-
ical Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 15, eabo2984. https://doi.org/
10.1126/scitranslmed.abo2984.
52. Hugenholtz, F., and de Vos, W.M. (2018). Mouse models for human intes-
tinal microbiota research: a critical evaluation. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 75,
149–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-017-2693-8.
53. Wang, Z., Roberts, A.B., Buffa, J.A., Levison, B.S., Zhu, W., Org, E., Gu, X.,
Huang, Y., Zamanian-Daryoush, M., Culley, M.K., et al. (2015). Non-lethal
Inhibition of Gut Microbial Trimethylamine Production for the Treatment of
Atherosclerosis. Cell 163, 1585–1595. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.
11.055.
54. Iannotti, L.L., Lutter, C.K., Waters, W.F., Gallegos Riofrı´o, C.A., Malo, C.,
Reinhart, G., Palacios, A., Karp, C., Chapnick, M., Cox, K., et al. (2017).
Eggs early in complementary feeding increase choline pathway bio-
markers and DHA: a randomized controlled trial in Ecuador. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 106, 1482–1489. https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.117.160515.
55. Su, L.J., Zhang, J.H., Gomez, H., Murugan, R., Hong, X., Xu, D., Jiang, F.,
and
Peng,
Z.Y.
(2019).
Reactive
Oxygen
Species-Induced
Lipid
Peroxidation in Apoptosis, Autophagy, and Ferroptosis. Oxid. Med. Cell.
Longev. 2019, 5080843. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5080843.
56. Manaithiya, A., Alam, O., Sharma, V., Javed Naim, M., Mittal, S., and Khan,
I.A. (2021). GPR119 agonists: novel therapeutic agents for type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Bioorg. Chem. 113, 104998. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioorg.
2021.104998.
57. Gallardo, G., and Holtzman, D.M. (2019). Amyloid-beta and Tau at the
Crossroads
of
Alzheimer’s
Disease.
Adv.
Exp.
Med.
Biol.
1184,
187–203. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-32-9358-8_16.
58. Vaishnava, S., Yamamoto, M., Severson, K.M., Ruhn, K.A., Yu, X., Koren,
O., Ley, R., Wakeland, E.K., and Hooper, L.V. (2011). The antibacterial lec-
tin RegIIIgamma promotes the spatial segregation of microbiota and host
in the intestine. Science 334, 255–258.
59. Seiler, A., Schneider, M., Fo¨ rster, H., Roth, S., Wirth, E.K., Culmsee, C.,
Plesnila, N., Kremmer, E., Ra˚ dmark, O., Wurst, W., et al. (2008).
Glutathione peroxidase 4 senses and translates oxidative stress into 12/
15-lipoxygenase dependent- and AIF-mediated cell death. Cell Metab.
8, 237–248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2008.07.005.
60. Bevins, R.A., and Besheer, J. (2006). Object recognition in rats and mice: a
one-trial non-matching-to-sample learning task to study ‘recognition mem-
ory’. Nat. Protoc. 1, 1306–1311. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.205.
61. Vorhees, C.V., and Williams, M.T. (2006). Morris water maze: procedures
for assessing spatial and related forms of learning and memory. Nat.
Protoc. 1, 848–858. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.116.
62. Shen, L., Feng, C., Zhang, K., Chen, Y., Gao, Y., Ke, J., Chen, X., Lin, J., Li,
C., Iqbal, J., et al. (2019). Proteomics Study of Peripheral Blood
Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) in Autistic Children. Front. Cell. Neurosci.
13, 105. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2019.00105.
63. Wei, M., Zhang, J., Jia, M., Yang, C., Pan, Y., Li, S., Luo, Y., Zheng, J., Ji,
J., Chen, J., et al. (2016). a/b-Hydrolase domain-containing 6 (ABHD6)
negatively regulates the surface delivery and synaptic function of AMPA
receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E2695–E2704. https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1524589113.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
186
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186, January 7, 2025

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Mouse monoclonal anti-6E10
Biolegend
Cat # 803014; RRID: AB_2728527
Rabbit polyclonal anti-Ab
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat # 2425S
Rabbit polyclonal anti-Iba1
Wako
Cat # 019-19741; RRID: AB_839504
Rabbit polyclonal anti-GFAP
Abcam
Cat # ab7260; RRID: AB_305808
Rabbit polyclonal anti-LAMP1
Abcam
Cat # ab24170; RRID: AB_775978
Alexa Fluor 488 Polyclonal Antibody
Invitrogen
Cat # A11094; RRID: AB_221544
Alexa Fluor 594 Polyclonal Antibody
Invitrogen
Cat # A11005; RRID: AB_2534073
Rabbit monoclonal anti-GPX4
Abcam
Cat # ab125066; RRID: AB_10973901
Rabbit monoclonal anti-FACL4
Abcam
Cat # ab155282; RRID: AB_2714020
Rabbit polyclonal anti-NRF2
Invitrogen
Cat # PA5-27882; RRID: AB_2545358
Mouse monoclonal anti-FSP1
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Cat # sc-377120; RRID: AB_2893240
Rabbit polyclonal anti-MBOAT1
Afﬁnit Bioscience
Cat # DF15819
Rabbit monoclonal anti-GSDMD
Abcam
Cat # ab219800; RRID: AB_2888940
Rabbit monoclonal anti- LC3B
Abcam
ab192890; RRID: AB_2827794
Mouse monoclonal anti-actin
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat # 3700; RRID: AB_2242334
Bacterial and virus strains
Bacteroides ovatus
ATCC
Cat # BAA-1304
Bacteroides caccae
ATCC
Cat # 43185
Bacteroides vulgatus
JCM
Cat # 5826T
Bacteroides dorei
JCM
Cat # 13471T
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
JCM
Cat # 5827T
Clostridium beijerinckii
ATCC
Cat # 17778
Clostridium acetobutylicum
CGMCC
Cat # 1.5074
Clostridium sporogenes
CGMCC
Cat # 1.5212
Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3)
TransGen Biotech
Cat # CD601-02
Biological samples
Human feces and serum samples
Xuanwu Hospital of Capital
Medical University
N/A
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins
Ampicillin sodium salt
Solarbio
Cat # A8180
Neomycin sulfate
Solarbio
Cat # A8090
Metronidazole
Solarbio
Cat # M8060
Vancomyci hydrochloride
MP Biomedicals
Cat # 02195540
NEBNext Ultra II End Repair/dA-Tailing Module
New England Biolabs
Cat # E7546
NEBNext FFPE DNA Repair Mix
New England Biolabs
Cat # M6630
NEB Quick Ligation Module
New England Biolabs
Cat # E6056
NEBNext Blunt/TA Ligase Master Mix
New England Biolabs
Cat # M0367
EG broth medium
Hopebio
Cat # HB8594
PYG broth medium
Hopebio
Cat # HB0398
10% egg yolk salt solution
Hopebio
Cat # HB5221a
TRIzol
Life Technologies
Cat # 15596026
Tribromoethanol
Sigma
Cat # T48402
10X Dulbecco’s Phosphate-Buffered Saline (PBS)
Sigma
Cat # D1408
PC
Sigma
Cat # P3556
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025
e1

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
LPC
Sigma
Cat # L4129
EcoRI-HF
New England Biolabs
Cat # R3101S
T4 DNA Ligase
New England Biolabs
Cat # M0202S
Isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG)
MedChemExpress
Cat # HY-15921
RSL3
MedChemExpress
Cat # HY-100218A
Erastin
Abmole
Cat # M2679
Liproxstatin-1
Sigma
Cat # SML1414
Paraformaldehyde (PFA)
Sigma
Cat # P6148
Glutaraldehyde
Sigma
Cat # G5882
Triton X-100
Amresco
Cat # 9,002,931
Bovine serum albumin
Sigma
Cat # A1933
4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
Beyotime
Cat # C1006
Ammonium acetate
Supelco
Cat # 73594
Methanol
Innochem
Cat # M6600
Acetonitrile
Sigma
Cat # 34851
Isopropanol
Sigma
Cat # 34863
RIPA lysis buffer
Applygen Technology
Cat # C1053
PMSF
Beyotime Biotechnology
Cat # ST506
DMEM
GIBCO-Invitrogen
Cat # 11960044
FBS
GIBCO-Invitrogen
Cat # 16140071
C11-BODIPY
ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc
Cat # D3861
SPY-LHP
Dojindo
Cat # L248
Penicillin/streptomycin
GIBCO-Invitrogen
Cat # 15140122
APD668
MedChemExpress
Cat # HY-15565
Complete Protease Inhibitor
EASY Packs EDTA-Free
Roche
Cat # 04693132001
CellROX Green
Invitrogen
Cat # C10444
Zombie Yellow solution
BioLegend
Cat # 423104
Cell Staining Buffer
BioLegend
Cat # 420201
AMPure XP beads
Beckman
Cat# A63881
MinION ﬂow cells (R9.4.1)
Oxford Nanopore Technologies
Cat# FLO-MIN106D
OCT compound
Sakura
Cat# 4583
Anti-O4 MicroBeads
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-094-543
Anti-CD11b (microglia) MicroBeads
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-093-634
Anti-ACSA-2 MicroBeads
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-095-825
Choline deﬁcient (CD) diet
MP Biomedicals
Cat# 02960034-CF
PVDF membrane
Millipore
Cat # IPVH00010
Critical commercial assays
FastDNA Spin Kit for Feces
MP Biomedicals
Cat# 116570200
Qubit 1X dsDNA HS Assay Kit
ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# Q33230
Ligation Sequencing Kit
Oxford Nanopore Technologies
Cat# SQK-LSK109
Adult Brain Dissociation Kit
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-107-677
Adult Neuron Isolation Kit
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-042-303
ReadyProbes Cell Viability Imaging Kit
ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# R37610
Agilent High Sensitivity DNA Kit
Agilent Technologies
Cat# 5067-4626
KAPA Library Quantiﬁcation Kit
Kapa Biosystems
Cat# KK4824
FastPure Cell/Tissue Total RNA Isolation Kit
Vazyme Biotech
Cat# RC101-01
HiScript II One Step RT-PCR Kit
Vazyme Biotech
Cat# P612-01
PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix
ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# A25742
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
e2
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025

Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Lipid Peroxidation (MDA) Assay Kit
Sigma
Cat# MAK085
Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit
ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc
Cat # 23225
TUNEL BrightGreen Apoptosis Detection Kit
Vazyme Biotech
Cat # A112-01
alamarBlue HS Cell Viability Reagent
Invitrogen
Cat # A50100
LDH assay kit
Abcam
Cat # ab65393
Deposited data
Database: Nanopore-based metagenomic
sequencing analysis of 5xFAD mice
(https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/bioproject/)
This study
Accession ID: PRJCA013503
Database: RNA sequencing of BV2 cells induced
by ferroptosis (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/bioproject/)
This study
Accession ID: PRJCA020474
Database: Nanopore-based metagenomic
sequencing analysis of control subjects and patients
with AD (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/bioproject/)
This study
Accession ID: PRJCA020467
Database: Unbiased serum metabolomic proﬁling
of 5xFAD mice (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.
cn/omix/select-edit/OMIX002459)
This study
OMIX ID: OMIX002459
Database: Smart seq2 full-length RNA-sequencing
of 5xFAD mice (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/
omix/select-edit/OMIX002669)
This study
OMIX ID: OMIX002669
Database: Lipidomics analysis of serum metabolomic
proﬁling of control subjects and AD patients (https://
ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/omix/select-edit/OMIX005085)
This study
OMIX ID: OMIX005085
Experimental models: Cell lines
SH-SY5Y
ATCC
CRL-2266; RRID:CVCL_0019
BV2
BMCR
4201MOU-CCTCC00311; RRID:CVCL_0182
HT22
Ubigene
YC-A004; RRID:CVCL_0321
Experimental models: Organisms/strains
Mouse: 5xFAD
The Jackson Laboratory
Cat# 034840
Mouse: 5xFAD
The Jackson Laboratory
Cat# 008730
Mouse: Gpx4ﬂ/ﬂ
The Jackson Laboratory
Cat# 027964
Mouse: Nestin-Cre
The Jackson Laboratory
Cat# J003771
Mouse: Acsl4ﬂ/ﬂ
Cyagen Biosciences
Cat# S-CKO-11400
Mouse: C57BL/6
Charles River
Cat# 219
Mouse: SJL
Charles River
Cat# 216
Oligonucleotides
Eubacteria F 5-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGT-3’
Vaishnava et al.58
N/A
Eubacteria R 5-ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGC-3’
Vaishnava et al.58
N/A
Bacteroides F 5-GGTTCTGAGAGGAGGTCCC-3’
Vaishnava et al.58
N/A
Bacteroides R 5-CTGCCTCCCGTAGGAGT-3’
Vaishnava et al.58
N/A
Clostridium F 5-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGC-3’
Vaishnava et al.58
N/A
Clostridium R 5-GCTTCTTAGTCAGGTACCGTCA-3’
Vaishnava et al.58
N/A
ACSL4 F 5-CCTCCGATTGAAATCACAGAAGA-3’
This Study
N/A
ACSL4 R 5-GCCATAGCGTTTTTCTTAAATGTCC -3’
This Study
N/A
Actin F 5- CTTCGCGGGCGACGAT-3’
This Study
N/A
Actin R 5- CCACATAGGAATCCTTCTGACC-3’
This Study
N/A
Nrf2 F AGGTTGCCCACATTCCCAAA
This Study
N/A
Nrf2 R AGTGACTGAAACGTAGCCGA
This Study
N/A
gRNA (GPR119) CTGCACAGGGTCTTCTGTGT GGG
Ubigene
N/A
gRNA (ACSL4) AAGTGTGTGACAGAGCGATA TGG
Ubigene
N/A
gRNA (NFE2L2) TATTTGACTTCAGTCAGCGA CGG
Ubigene
N/A
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025
e3

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Human subjects
Patients diagnosed with AD and age-matched normal controls were recruited from Department of Neurology in Xuanwu Hospital of
Capital Medical University. Patients with AD were diagnosed using the NINDS/ADRDA criteria and conﬁrmed by experienced neu-
rologists at Department of Neurology. The cognitive functions were evaluated using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and
the instrumental Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). In addition to questionnaires, all participants were screened according to
their medical history, laboratory tests, physical and neurological examinations. Serum and fecal samples were collected from twenty-
nine patients and twenty-nine age-matched normal controls. Subjects or next of kin provided informed consent and consented to the
serum or feces donation. The study was approved by the Capital Medical University Institutional Review Board (Z2022SY091). Sub-
ject baseline characteristics of individuals with AD and controls are presented in Table S1.
Animal models
5xFAD, 3xTg-AD, Gpx4ﬂ/ﬂand Nestin-Cre mice were bought from Jackson Laboratory. Acsl4ﬂ/ﬂmice were procured from Cyagen
Biosciences. C57BL/6 and SJL were purchased from Charles River. Mice were bred at Capital Medical University. Homozygous ner-
vous system speciﬁc Gpx4 knockout mice were neonatally lethal,59 so we generated nervous system-speciﬁc Gpx4 conditional
knockout (CKO) hemizygous mice with the 5xFAD genetic background. All mice were kept under SPF conditions and provided
with unrestricted access of water and food. For the choline-deﬁcient model, mice at eight weeks of age were randomized to receive
either a choline deﬁcient (CD) diet or control chow diet ad libitum for 6 weeks. All experiments were conducted using male mice. the
Animal Experimentation Committee of Capital Medical University set ethical standards for our procedures and treatments
(797C083C-1A26-4599-AFC3-18E41F111E0A).
Germ-free mice and treatment
The male GF mice were individually housed in the sterile cages. In order to recolonize of GF mice with 5xFAD mice microbiota. Donor
samples were collected from either WT or 5xFAD mice. A fecal suspension of 200 mL was administered to the recipient GF mice via
oral gavage for a total of six times. Additionally, mice in their respective groups were administered B. ovatus via oral gavage or LPC via
intraperitoneal injection.
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Software and algorithms
Guppy V6.3.8
Oxford Nanopore Technologies
https://nanoporetech.com
R Studio
R Studio
https://rstudio.com
R
The R Foundation
https://www.r-project.org/
foundation/index.html
ImageJ software
NIH
https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/
UNIFI 1.9.3 software
Waters MS Technologies
https://www.waters.com/nextgen/
cn/zh/search.html?keyword=
UNIFI%201.9.3%20software
&sort=most-relevant
FlowJo software
Tree Star
https://www.ﬂowjo.com/solutions/
ﬂowjo/downloads
GraphPad Prism 8.0
Graphpad Software
www.graphpad.com
Other
AMPure XP beads
Beckman
Cat# A63881
MinION ﬂow cells (R9.4.1)
Oxford Nanopore Technologies
Cat# FLO-MIN106D
OCT compound
Sakura
Cat# 4583
Anti-O4 MicroBeads
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-094-543
Anti-CD11b (microglia) MicroBeads
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-093-634
Anti-ACSA-2 MicroBeads
Miltenyi Biotec
Cat# 130-095-825
Choline deﬁcient (CD) diet
MP Biomedicals
Cat# 02960034-CF
PVDF membrane
Millipore
Cat # IPVH00010
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
e4
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025

METHOD DETAILS
ABX cocktail treatment
Mice were orally administered a mixture of ABX consisting of ampicillin sodium salt (0.5 mg/mL), neomycin sulfate (0.5 mg/mL),
metronidazole (0.5 mg/mL) and vancomycin hydrochloride (0.25 mg/mL) via sterile drinking water. The timeframe of treatment slightly
differed among mice of different ages. In the ABX treatment experiment, mice were administered ABX via drinking water continuously
for one month from the age of 1 month. For 6-weeks-old, 4 and 10-month-old mice, antibiotics were administered beginning 2 weeks
prior to subsequent administration via drinking water. The solutions were replaced twice per week. Twenty-two-day-old mice were
administered ABX by oral gavage for 3 days using animal feeding syringes before undergoing bacterium treatment.
Sample collection and DNA extraction
Feces were collected in sterile EP tubes and freezed in liquid nitrogen rapidly then stored at 80C. FastDNA Spin Kit for Feces were
used to extract microbial DNA. The degradation and contamination of DNA were assessed with 1% agarose gels. DNA purity was
evaluated by a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). DNA concentration was detected on a Qubit 4.0 Fluorometer
(ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc).
Nanopore library preparation and sequencing
We used the Ligation Sequencing Kit (Oxford Nanopore Technologies) to make multiplexed nanopore sequencing libraries as
directed by the manufacturer. In brief, 1000 ng of DNA per sample from 5xFAD and age-matched wild type mice were end-repaired
using NEBNext Ultra II End Repair/dA-Tailing Module. NEBNext FFPE DNA Repair Mix, and AMPure XP beads were used to purify
DNA. Next, Each DNA was ligated with a unique barcode with NEB Quick Ligation Module. After the concentration was measured
with Qubit Fluorometer, twelve or more barcoded DNA samples were pooled in equal mass ratios. Then, the pooled barcoded sam-
ples were ligated to a sequencing adaptor for nanopore sequencing using NEBNext Blunt/TA Ligase Master Mix. Using a MinION ﬂow
cells to prime and load the ligation library, Subsequently, the Mk1C device is operated continuously for approximately 48-72 hours
until no more reads can be obtained.
Metagenomics analysis
Using Guppy (v 6.3.8, Oxford Nanopore Technologies) to perform base calling ofﬂine on the raw reads obtained from fast5 ﬁles. Then
the quality and read length were evaluate by minion_qc (v 1.4.2) and NanoPlot (v 1.33.0). The Shannon index was used to assess
alpha diversity, while the Bray-Curtis index distance method (including PCoA and NMDS) were utilized to determine beta diversity.
For beta diversity, Statistics were calculated using pairwise PERMANOVA. In order to visualize bacterial taxa that exhibited signif-
icant differences in abundance among samples from different groups, the Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) was
used. Statistical analyses of box plot were performed using Wilcoxon Rank Sum and Signed Rank Test.
Bacterial strains culture and Microbial colonization
B. ovatus, B. vulgatus, B. dorei, B. caccae and B. thetaiotaomicron were cultured in EG broth medium supplemented with 5% FBS
under anaerobic conditions at 37C. C. beijerinckii, C. acetobutylicum and C.sporogenes were grown in PYG broth medium at a
temperature of 37C within an anaerobic chamber, until the culture reached OD=0.8-1. ABX treated mice were colonized with
200 ml indicated bacteria consortia or the same volume of medium by oral gavage three times per week for 4 or 6 weeks.
Quantitative PCR for microbiota analysis
After microbiota colonization, feces of mice were collected and the gDNA were extracted. Then the concentrations of gDNA were
quantiﬁed to 1ng/mL. The abundance of speciﬁc intestinal bacterial groups was quantiﬁed by PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix
using group-speciﬁc 16S rRNA gene primers. Total Eubacteria 16S rDNA was served as an internal control.
Administration of drugs to SPF mice
After ABX administration, mice underwent bacterium and metabolite treatment. For bacterium treatment, the mice were gavaged
with a bacterium or culture medium three times a week for 4 or 6 weeks beginning the following day. For metabolite treatment,
the ABX treated mice were gavaged or intraperitoneally injected with PC (20 mM), intraperitoneally injected LPC (20 mM) or the
same volume of 1xPBS three times a week for 4 or 6 weeks. For drug administration, the mice were intraperitoneally injected with
liproxstatin-1 (10 mg/kg) or orally administered with APD668 (10 mg/kg) every two days for a continuous period of 30 days.
Preparation of mouse tissue samples
To prepare tissue samples for RNA extraction, protein isolation, ﬂow cytology and single cell separation, histology, and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM), mice were ﬁrst deeply anesthetized by IP injection of tribromoethanol (125–250 mg/kg). For RNA extrac-
tion, brains of mice were rapidly dissociated on ice, then the hippocampi were directly frozen in 600 ml TRIzol and stored at -80C
refrigerator. In order to extract protein, brains of mice were promptly dissected on ice, the hippocampi were isolated and rapidly
frozen using EP tubes in liquid nitrogen, and then stored at -80C. For ﬂow cytometry and single cell separation, after
anesthetizing the mice, they were perfused with cold PBS through the left heart to reduce the interference of red blood cells, and
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025
e5

hippocampus were digested immediately. For histology, anesthetized mice were transcardially perfused using cold 1xPBS and 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA). The collected brain tissues were postﬁxed in 4% PFA at 4C overnight. For TEM, anesthetized mice were
perfused with 40ml 1x PBS and then perfused with 40 ml of a solution with a concentration of 4% PFA and 1% glutaraldehyde. About
1 mm3 brain tissue separated from the hippocampal subiculum were promptly placed in the 1% glutaraldehyde and store at 4C.
Immunoﬂuorescence
After PFA ﬁxation, brains were treated by sequential equilibration in 15% and 30% sucrose in 1x PBS for 24 h respectively. Then, the
dehydrated brains were immersed in Tissue-Tek OCT compound for embedding. Serial coronal brain sections with a thickness of
40 mm were generated using a sliding, freezing microtome (Leica Microsystems). After washing the sections with PBS for 3 times,
tissues were permeabilizated using a solution of 0.3% Triton X-100 for 20 minutes, followed by blocking with 2% bovine serum al-
bumin (BSA) for a duration of 1 hour. Then the sections were incubated with anti-6E10 (1:500), anti-Ab (1:1000), anti-Iba1 (1:1000),
anti-GFAP (1:100) and anti-LAMP1 (1:200) antibodies for 16 h at 4C. The next day, the sections were underwent incubation with
secondary antibodies that were conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488- and 594 for a duration of 90 minutes at room temperature. Finally,
the nuclei were labeled with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for a period of 20 min at ambient temperature. Images were
captured using a confocal microscope (Olympus, FV3000). The load of Ab plaque and the density of Iba1- and GFAP-immunoreactive
cells were quantiﬁed by ImageJ software.
NOR test
The NOR test was performed as previously described.60 Mice were allowed to acclimate in the experimental room for a minimum of
30 minutes, then tested within a designated chamber (a 25 3 25 3 25 cm white acrylic box). The chamber comprised two identical
objects (referred to as the old objects). The mice were placed faced away from the object inside a chamber and given a 10-minute
period for free exploration, followed by putting them to home cages for an interval of 1 h. During the testing session, one of the objects
was substituted with a new object, and the mice were given 5-minute to explore. After each trial, the chamber and objects were
cleaned with 75% alcohol. The videos were recorded using a camera and subsequently analyzed through manual timing in a blinded
fashion. The time spent exploring each object was assessed when the mouse sniffed or touched the object within a 2 cm range while
visually attending to it. Instances where the mouse sat near the objects, climbed on them, or chewed them were excluded. The novel
object recognition index was computed by dividing the time animal explored the new object by the total time that the mouse explored
with two objects.
MWM test
The MWM test was conducted following the established protocol as previously described.61 During the training phase, mice
were placed in a pool ﬁlled with opaque water with a temperature of 21-23C. Mice underwent a total of four trials every day for
ﬁve consecutive days. The mice were permitted to swim until they located the platform and were required to remain on the it for
at least 15 seconds. If a mouse was unable to locate the platform within 90 seconds, the experimenter would guide it to the platform.
The time gap between each trial was no less than 1 minute. After 5 days of training, probe test was conducted on the next day. On that
day, the platform in the water was removed, and the percentage of time spent in the target quadrant for a 60-second duration was
calculated. Tracking Master software and Panlab SMART video tracking system (Smart 3.0) were used for video recording and data
analysis.
CFC test
During the training phase, the mouse was introduced to a white soundproof cubicle (chamber A), which had a metal wire ﬂoor, an
opaque triangular ceiling and 5% acetic acid. The activity during at ﬁrst 3 minutes was measured as baseline activity. After that, a
continuous tone with a frequency of 4000 Hz and a sound level of 80 dB was presented as a conditioned stimulus (CS). During
the last 2 seconds of the CS period, a continuous foot shock with an intensity of 0.6 mA was delivered as an unconditioned stimulus
(US) to the mouse. This CS-US pairing was repeated 3 times, with a 60-second break between each trial. After the ﬁnal shock, the
mouse was kept in the chamber for an additional 1 minute. The next day, mice were exposed to the chamber A for 3 min without a foot
shock to assess the conditioned freezing (context). The cued test was performed on the third day. The chamber was replaced with a
smooth ﬂoor and a nontriangular ceiling, but without acetic acid. The ﬁrst 3 minutes were recorded as baseline activity, after which the
mice were exposed to the same tone as presented in chamber A without foot shocks. After each training or testing session, using
75% alcohol to sanitize chambers. Using cameras with an automated analysis system to record and analyse freezing time
(VideoFreeze Video Fear Conditioning Software).
Slice preparation and electrophysiological recordings
The brains of six-month-old mice were removed and placed in cold dissection buffer as previously reported.62 Using a vibrating
microtome (VT-1200s, Leica) to prepare 400 mm thick horizontal hippocampal slices. The slices were then incubated in artiﬁcial ce-
rebrospinal ﬂuid (ACSF) and bubbled with 95% O2 and 5% CO2 for 1 hour at room temperature. The formula of ACSF and the
recording and analysis methods of long-term potentiation (LTP) are described in the previous literature.63
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
e6
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025

TEM
After washing the ﬁxed tissues with phosphate buffer (PB) and deionized water, the tissues were soaked in a ferricyanide aqueous
solution containing 1% OsO4 and 1.5% potassium for 2 hours at 4C. Then, the tissues were washed and dehydrated. Samlpes were
then inﬁltrated with a mixture of acetone and SPI-PON812 resin, and ﬁnally transferred to pure resin. After embedding samples in
pure resin with 1.5% BDMA, they were polymerized for 12 hours at 45C and 48 hours at 60C. Finally, the ultrathin sections were
made with a precise thickness of 70 nm and double-stained using uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Subsequently, the sections
were observed with a transmission electron microscope (FEI Tecnai Spirit120kV).
Untargeted metabolomics
Metabolite extraction and detection were performed at Novogene Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). The serum samples were added with
prechilled 80% methanol and mixed by vortexing. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation. Afterwards, the methanol was
diluted to a concentration of 53% using water, and the mixture was centrifuged once again, followed by the collection of the
supernatant for UHPLC‒MS/MS analysis. Using a Hypesil Gold column, the sample ﬂow rate was 0.2 mL/min. Eluent A were
0.1% FA (positive mode) or 5 mM ammonium acetate (negative mode) and Eluent B is methanol. Solvent gradient was programmed
from 2% B for 1.5 minutes, followed by 2%-100% B for 3 minutes. Then, mobile phase was held at 100% B for 10 minutes, followed
by 100%-2% B for 10.1 minutes. Finally, the mobile phase was held at 2% B for 12 minutes. The mass spectrometer was set a voltage
of 3.5 kV, a sheath gas ﬂow rate of 35 psi, a capillary temperature of 320C, an S-lens RF level of 60, an auxiliary gas ﬂow rate of
10 L/min, and an auxiliary gas heater temperature of 350C.
Metabolites which had a Variable Importance in Projection (VIP) value greater than 1 and P-value less than 0.05, and fold change
(FC)R2 or FC%0.5 were considered as differential metabolites. The metaX software was utilized to conduct Principal components
analysis (PCA). Volcano plots was generated using the R language package ‘‘ggplot2’’ in, The R language package ‘‘pheatmap’’ was
used to generate clustering heatmaps.
UPLC-MS and Lipidomics
The content of PC, LPC and APD668 in multiple samples was detected by UPLC-MS. For serum from mice or human patients, 150 ml
of precooled (-80C) methanol was added to 50 ml of serum. After incubating samples on ice for 5 minutes, they were centrifuged at
4C, 15,000 3g for 20 minutes. 100 ml of the supernatant was absorbed and dried under nitrogen gas. Then, the samples were re-
suspended in 500 ml of methanol and detected. For PC degradation by bacteria, indicated strains were cultivated to an OD600 of 1.0.
PC was added to the culture strains at a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mg/ml. After centrifugation at 5000 rpm at 4 C for 10 min, the
supernatants were collected for further detect. The APD668 in the brain was detected by grinding the whole brain tissue in liquid
nitrogen. Then, 100 mg of the resulting powder was weighed and mixed with 5 times the volume of methanol. The mixture was centri-
fuged at 4C, 15,000 3g for 20 minutes. The supernatant was collected for further analysis. For the lipidomics analysis of the ferrop-
totic lipid signature, after grinding the hippocampal tissue in liquid nitrogen, 50mg of powder was accurately weighed. Then, lipids
were extracted using the Folch procedure with the addition of 0.01% butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT). 16:0-18:1 PE-d31(5 mg/mL)
was used as an internal standard. In Acquity I-Class ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography system, C18 column was
used, column temperature was 50C and ﬂow rate was 0.3 mL/minute. Using 60/40 (v/v) acetonitrile/water as eluent A and 90/10
(v/v) isopropanol/acetonitrile as eluent B. Solvent gradient was performed as following: 0-2.5 minutes 30% B, 2.5-8 minutes 50%
B, 8-10 minutes 98% B, 10-15 minutes 98% B, 15-18 minutes 30% B. In mass spectrometer (Waters Vion-IMS-QToF), the voltage
was 2.5 kV, the scan time was 0.1 s, gas ﬂow wad 800 L per hour, and collision energy (MSE) was from 20.00 eV and to 30.00 eV. LPC
and PC were used as standards and detected in negative ion mode. For lipidomics, metabolites with mass ranging from 50 to 1000
m/z were detected in both negative and positive ion mode. The data were analyzed using UNIFI 1.9.3 software. 3D peak detection
was used to evaluate deconvolution and peak picking.
Metabolomic and metagenomic data correlation analysis
A correlation analysis was performed between metagenomic and metabolomic, focusing on genomes and metabolites that were
identiﬁed as signiﬁcantly different between 5xFAD mice and age-matched WT mice. The genome relative abundance and raw metab-
olite values were log-transformed, and Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcients assessment was conducted using R version 4.1.2. The
different species and metabolites with over two-fold changes between the two groups, with a correlation coefﬁcient greater or equal
to 1 and P-value < 0.05, were also analyzed.
Single-cell sorting
The single-cell suspensions of hippocampi were prepared using the Adult Brain Dissociation Kit. According to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the tissues were enzymatically and mechanically dissociated combine components of the kit with a gentleMACS
Dissociator with Heaters. Following dissociation, debris was eliminated using Debris Removal Solution. The resulting single-cell
suspensions were labeled with Mouse Adult Neuron Isolation Kit, anti-O4 MicroBeads, CD11b (microglia) MicroBeads and
anti-ACSA-2 MicroBeads at the dilution suggested. Neuron, oligodendrocytes, microglia and astrocyte cells were isolated using
LS columns (Miltenyi Biotec) and a MACS MultiStand Separator (Miltenyi Biotec).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025
e7

Single-cell sequencing (Smart-seq2)
The cell suspensions were diluted and aliquoted through 384-well plates to ICELL8 350v chips (Clontech). Using the ICELL8
cx Single-Cell System (Takara) and CellSelect software, the nanowells on the chip were imaged and selected manually.
Follow the provided instructions to proceed with the subsequent DNA synthesis process. Brieﬂy, Using SMART-Seq ICELL8
CDS as an oligo dT primer to synthesize the ﬁrst-strand cDNA. Then the template was switched at the 50 end by SMART-
Seq ICELL8 Oligonucleotide. Full-length cDNA was ampliﬁed and tagmented. Then, the tagmented DNA was ampliﬁed using
the ‘‘Library PCR 1 program’’. Subsequently, the library was extracted from the chip and puriﬁed with AMPure XP beads at
a ratio of 1:1. Finally, a sequencing-ready library was prepared with the ‘‘Library PCR 2 program’’ and puriﬁed using AMPure
XP beads. After assessing the library size distribution and quantiﬁcation, the library was sequenced using an Illumina Nextera
instrument.
Smart-seq2 data processing
The reads from the Smart-seq2 data were aligned to the UCSC mm10 mouse genome reference with STAR (version 2.7.9a).
Conducting downstream analyses using the R package Seurat (version 3.1.0). The ReadSTARSolo function was used to import
the matrix of gene-level counts. Using the NormalizeData function, the cell counts were normalized, ensuring that the total count
per cell was 10,000. Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) was used for dimensionality reduction, then visualization
of the data. Wilcoxon rank sum test were used to identify differential expression, and the identify of unique expression proﬁles were
performed between clusters and genotypes.
Quantitative reverse transcription PCR
Total RNA was extracted from hippocampus of the mice and cultured cells using RNA isolation kit. Then the ﬁrst strand cDNA was
synthesized by HiScript II One Step RT-PCR Kit. The PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix was used to conducted the real-time PCR.
The ABI StepOne Plus instrument was used to run the program. The threshold cycle (Ct) value of each gene was normalized to that of
b-actin for quantiﬁcation. The 2-DDCt method was utilized for analysis.
Western blot assay
The hippocampus and cultured cell samples were lysed by RIPA supplemented with PMSF and Complete Proteaseprotease
Inhibitor. The lysates were then homogenized using FastPrep-24 (MP Biomedicals) and kept on ice for 40 minutes. The
supernatant was collected after being centrifuged at 4C, 15000 xg for 20 min, then denatured with loading buffer at 95C
for 10 minutes. Protein amounts of 20-30 mg of were loaded on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gels and run at 80V for 30 minutes followed
by 120V for 60 minutes. The proteins were then transferred from the gel onto a PVDF membrane using eBlot L1 instrument.
The membrane was subsequently blocked with 10% nonfat milk for 1 hour then incubated with antibodies at 4C overnight. The
following antibodies were used: anti-GPX4 (1:1000), anti-FACL4 (1:1000), anti-NRF2 (1:1000), anti-FSP1 (1:1000), anti-MBOAT1
(1:1000), anti-LC3 (1:1000), anti-MBOPB (1:1000) and anti-actin (1:2000). The following day, the membrane was incubated with
secondary antibody then scanned with an infrared ﬂuorescence scanning imaging system (Odyssey). The expression level of the
target band, relative to that of actin, was quantiﬁed with ImageJ software.
Malondialdehyde (MDA) content
The MDA content in the hippocampus of mice was measured with the Lipid Peroxidation (MDA) Assay Kit following the protocols.
In brief, fresh hippocampal tissues were weighed, lysed using MDA lysis buffer added with butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) and
centrifuged. The supernatant was mixed with thiobarbituric acid (TBA) then incubated at 95C for 60 minutes. After cooling on ice
for 10 minutes, the absorbance of the TBA-reactive substances was measured at 532 nm using spectrophotometer. Calculating
MDA in nmol/mg tissue to quantify lipid peroxidation.
Cell lines and culture conditions
BV2 and SH-SY5Y cells were purchased from ATCC, HT22 cells were obtained from Ubigene (Guangzhou, China). Cells were
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin and incubated at 37C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere
with 5% CO2.
Knockout and overexpression of target genes
The genes of ACSL4, GPR119, GPX4, and NRF2 were knocked out using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Single sgRNA guides were de-
signed to target critical exons of these genes to for inactivation. The guides were cloned into the YKO-LV001-single-gRNA vector.
Lentiviruses were prepared by Ubigene (Guangzhou, China). SH-SY5Y-Cas9 and BV2-Cas9 cells were generated by transducing
SH-SY5Y and BV2 cells with YCas-LV001 lentiviral particles, followed by selection using puromycin. Then the Cas9 cells were
seeded onto 12-well plate and co-transfected with the desired sgRNA-expressing plasmid. The single cell clones were picked,
and knockout clones were identiﬁed by sequencing. Lentiviruses for ACSL4 overexpression were prepared by GenePharma
(Shanghai, China). BV2 and SH-SY5Y cells were transducted with lentivirus particles of ACSL4 in a 6-well plate, incubated in a
CO2 incubator for 72 hours to establish stable cell lines.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
e8
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025

Cell ferroptosis treatment and assessment
HT22, SH-SY5Y and BV2 cells were seeded in 96-well plates or 12-well dishes one day prior to the experiment. The following day,
HT22 cells were treated with RSL3 at a concentration of 0.5 mM or erastin at a concentration of 1 mM, while SH-SY5Y and BV2 cell
were treated with RSL3 at a concentration of 7 mM to induce ferroptosis. Correspondingly, 500 nM LPC, 200 nM APD668 or 1.25 mM
Lip-1 were added to the indicated wells for a duration of 20 hours. Control groups were treated with DMSO and PBS. Then cell
viability was assessed using the alamarBlue as an indicator. Cell death was evaluated by measuring LDH release using Cytotoxicity
Assay Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Flow cytometry
Single-cell suspensions of hippocampi were prepared using the Adult Brain Dissociation Kit. Flow cytometry was used to assess
ROS and lipid peroxidation in living hippocampal cells of 5xFAD mice and cells from various treatment groups. For cell suspension
of mice, cells were incubated with Zombie Yellow solution (1:100) for 20 min at room temperature. Following a wash with Cell Staining
Buffer, 10 mM CellROX Green or 5 mM C11-BODIPY (581/591) were used to incubate with cells at 37 C for 30 min prevent exposure
to light. After washing 3 times with PBS, the cells were resuspended in 300 mL of PBS containing 1% BSA for detection. For ferrop-
tosis treated cells, at the last 30 min of treatment, cells were incubated with 5 mM of CellROX Green or C11-BODIPY (581/591) re-
suspended in culture medium. As for SPY-LHP oxidation, cells were cultured with 5 mM of SPY-LHP for 30 minutes at incubator
after seeding for 12 hours, then cells were washed with DMEM and treated to induce ferroptosis. Before harvesting by trypsinization,
cells were washed with PBS. Cells were then resuspended in 300 mL of PBS and analyzed using a ﬂow cytometer (LSRFortessa, BD
Biosciences). The obtained data were analyzed using the FlowJo Software.
FMT experiments
Fresh feces were collected from mice and a suspension was prepared by adding 3 ml of sterile PBS per 10 fecal pellets. Thoroughly
crush the fecal pellets to achieve a homogeneous suspension. Then, settle the suspension for a few minutes to allow the fragments to
sediment. Transfer 200 mL of the suspension into each ABX-pretreated recipient using oral gavage three times per week for a duration
of 4 weeks.
Egg yolk agar plate assay for phospholipase activity
The biological activity of B. ovatus and recombinant E. coli-pla2 were assessed using the egg yolk agar plate. The plate containing
1.09% boric acid, 0.19% borax, 0.66% NaCl, 2% agar, and 4% egg yolk salt solution. A drop of a bacteria suspension (approximately
20 microliters) was placed on the surface of egg-yolk agar plate. The plates were then incubated at 37 C, after 24 hours of incubation,
the formation of precipitation zones was examined.
Expression of phospholipase A2 in E. coli
PLA2 was ampliﬁed by PCR from the chromosomal DNA of B. ovatus using the primers (PLA2F:5’-GCGAATTCACGACTAAGACT
GAG-3’, PLA2R: 5’-GCGAATTCGACACGAAAGTCCTC-3’). The EcoRI restriction site, which was used for subsequent cloning, is
underlined. The PCR product was digested with EcoRI and ligated into the pET-21b (+) vector using T4 ligase. Subsequently, the
vector pET-21b (+) -PLA2 was introduced into E. coli BL21 (DE3) by heat shock transformation. After transformation, LB agar plates
containing ampicillin were used to select positive transformants, which were designated as E. coli-PLA2. E. coli carrying the empty
vector served as the negative control. To expression PLA2 in E. coli, fresh LB broth containing with ampicillin was inoculated with a
1% v/v overnight cultured E. coli-PLA2. After cell density reached to OD600 nm of 0.6, IPTG was added to a ﬁnal concentration of
0.5 mM to induce the expression of the fusion protein for 6 h at 37 C. The cell pellets were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 rpm
for 5 min.
RNA-sequencing
The total RNA from ferroptosis induced cell was extracted and underwent the quality control procedures. RNA sequencing library
was prepared by Novogene Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). mRNA was puriﬁed and fragmented, followed by the synthesis of the ﬁrst strand
cDNA. Then dNTPs and DNA polymerase I were added to initiate the synthesis of the second strand. Then the DNA underwent ter-
minal repaired and was ligated with sequencing adaptors. The cDNA library was made through size selection and PCR enrichment.
The qualiﬁed libraries were loaded onto Illumina Novaseq6000 sequencers to collect paired-end reads.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data were shown as mean ± SEM. Data points of individual observations were displayed. Statistical analyses of the data were
performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0. Differences between groups were assessed using either one- or two-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) and unpaired Student’s t-test. Statistical tests used for group or cluster comparisons in metagenomics, metabolomics, meta-
genome-metabolome correlation, single-cell RNA-seq experiment analysis were speciﬁed in the respective sections in methods. A P
value < 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcance for all data sets. P values were represented on ﬁgures as follows: ns, not signif-
icant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.005, ****p < 0.001. Each experiment was repeated independently for at least three times.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
Cell Metabolism 37, 169–186.e1–e9, January 7, 2025
e9