www.afm-journal.de
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2101040  (1 of 15)
Research Article
Oxygen Self-Sufficient Nanoplatform for Enhanced and 
Selective Antibacterial Photodynamic Therapy against 
Anaerobe-Induced Periodontal Disease
Xiaolin Sun, Jiao Sun, Yue Sun, Chunyan Li, Jiao Fang, Tianshou Zhang, Yao Wan, 
Lin Xu, Yanmin Zhou,* Lin Wang,* and Biao Dong*
The hypoxic microenvironment, continuous oxygen consumption, and poor 
excitation light penetration depth during antimicrobial photodynamic therapy 
(aPDT) tremendously hinder the effects on bacterial inactivation. Herein, a smart 
nanocomposite with oxygen-self-generation is presented for enhanced and selec-
tive antibacterial properties against anaerobe-induced periodontal diseases.  
By encapsulating Fe3O4 nanoparticles, Chlorin e6 and Coumarin 6 in the amphi-
philic silane, combined light (red and infrared) stimulated aPDT is realized due  
to the increased conjugate structure, the corresponding red-shifted absorption, 
and the magnetic navigation performance. To address the hypoxic microenviron-
ment problem, further modification of MnO2 nanolayer on the composites is 
carried out, and catalytical activity is involved for the decomposition of hydrogen 
peroxide produced in the metabolic processing, providing sufficient oxygen 
for aPDT in infection sites. Experiments in the cellular level and animal model 
proved that the rising oxygen content could effectively relieve the hypoxia in a 
periodontal pocket and enhance the ROS production, remarkably boosting aPDT 
efficacy. The increasing local level of oxygen also shows the selective inhibition 
of pathogenic and anaerobic bacteria, which determines the success of peri-
odontitis treatment. Therefore, this finding is promising for combating anaerobic 
pathogens with enhanced and selective properties in periodontal diseases, even 
in other bacteria-induced infections, for future clinical application.
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202101040
Dr. X. Sun, Dr. Y. Sun, Dr. J. Fang, Dr. Y. Wan, Prof. Y. Zhou, Prof. L. Wang
Department of Oral Implantology
School of Dentistry
Jilin University
Changchun 130021, China
E-mail: zhouym@jlu.edu.cn; wanglin1982@jlu.edu.cn
Dr. J. Sun
Department of Cell Biology
Norman Bethune College of Medicine
Jilin University
Changchun 130021, China
Prof. C. Li, Dr. T. Zhang
Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Sciences and Technology  
for Stomatology Nanoengineering
Changchun 130021, China
Prof. L. Xu, Prof. B. Dong
State Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics
College of Electronic Science and Engineering
Jilin University
Changchun 130012, China
E-mail: dongb@jlu.edu.cn
destruction, bone resorption, and even 
tooth loss. Severe periodontitis is consid­
ered as the 6th most prevalent condition 
affecting ≈10% of the global population.[1] 
More seriously, periodontitis is closely 
linked to some systemic diseases, such as 
Alzheimer’s disease,[2] diabetes mellitus,[3] 
cardiovascular diseases,[4] and chronic 
kidney disease.[5] Among the treatments 
for periodontitis, adjunctive antibiotic 
therapy with mechanical debridement 
has been widely used to eliminate patho­
genic microorganism and reduce the 
recolonization of bacteria.[6,7] However, 
limitations of bacterial resistance associ­
ated with the abuse of antibiotics have 
led to the urgency of new alternative 
strategies. Currently, antimicrobial photo­
dynamic therapy (aPDT) is considered 
to be a very promising sterilization way, 
which employs photosensitizers that are 
excited by appropriate light in the pres­
ence of oxygen, to generate cytotoxic 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), especially 
singlet oxygen (1O2).[8] The ROS exerts 
toxic actions on periodontal pathogens 
in either planktonic cultures or biofilm 
status to substantially reduce the bacterial colonization without 
side effects and drug resistance.[9,10] According to the aPDT 
mechanism, it is particularly effective for antibacterial treat­
ment of deep periodontal pockets, when excitation light with 
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202101040.
1. Introduction
Periodontal infection is a bacterially-induced, chronic destruc­
tive inflammatory disease that leads to connective tissue 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (2 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
a large penetration depth is involved to trigger aPDT effect, 
which is difficult to reach by mechanical approaches.
Nowadays, numerous studies have demonstrated the 
favorable therapeutic effect of aPDT against periodontal path­
ogens via different photosensitizers or light with different 
wavelength.[11–13] In our previous study, multifunctional nano­
particles (NPs) were synthesized to exert strong aPDT activity 
against periodontal pathogens, simultaneously with favorable 
biocompatibility, real-time monitoring, and magnetically-
targeting capacities.[11]  This multifunctional NPs based aPDT 
can take actions in the periodontal pocket under magnetic 
field navigation and is controlled by remote red light, showing 
various advantages and no damage to the surrounding normal 
tissues.
Although aPDT has made a lot of progress in the treatment 
of periodontitis, it still lacks sufficient understanding in the 
precise and selective treatment in periodontal pocket environ­
ment. There are several major challenges that are regarded 
as the barriers to limit the clinical application of aPDT in 
periodontal diseases. First, in the complex periodontal pocket 
environment, anaerobes and aerobes contribute differently to 
periodontal diseases, and then require different treatments. 
The anaerobic bacteria inactivation is particularly important 
and deserves extra attention, which, however, has been ignored 
so far. In addition, a periodontal microenvironment actually 
may undergo a shift from normoxic phase to hypoxic phase 
when inflammation initiates and progresses, which would dis­
rupt microcirculation and induce leukocyte infiltration, further 
disturbing the blood and oxygen supply.[14] Therefore, hypoxic 
microenvironments are considered as a propelling factor in 
periodontal diseases, since the circumstance with low oxygen 
tension in the deeper sites offers a favorable colonizing niche 
for more pathogenic and anaerobic bacteria.[15] It also should 
be mentioned that the nature of periodontitis determines the 
need for milder treatments and more selective targeting of 
pathogenic bacteria relative to that for tumor therapy, because 
some non-periopathogenic aerobes are more susceptible to 
aPDT treatment than anaerobic periodontal pathogens due to 
the fact that the particular wall components of aerobes may 
be sensitive to aPDT-generated ROS.[9] Second, excitation light 
based on ultraviolet and visible light is difficult to penetrate into 
the periodontal pocket and the hypoxic environment of the peri­
odontal pocket also has a great impact on aPDT, both of which 
are important elements in aPDT treatment, while seriously 
limiting the clinical application. In addition, aPDT-mediated 
continuous oxygen consumption in the hypoxic microenviron­
ment would tremendously aggravate the local hypoxia to hinder 
the therapeutic outcomes of aPDT for combating microorgan­
isms.[16] Third, in addition to the stimulation on the growth of 
anaerobic bacteria and the limitation effect on aPDT, hypoxia 
may also enhance the immune response of periodontal tissue 
to generate destructive inflammatory mediators, thus leading 
to the deterioration of periodontitis. Therefore, the innovative 
aPDT strategies are urgently needed to relieve local hypoxia and 
improve the light penetration depth and utilization efficiency 
in periodontitis, not only for the enhancement and selective 
killing efficacy of aPDT against pathogenic anaerobes, but also 
for the regulation of inflammatory cytokines in periodontal 
tissue to alleviate and eliminate local inflammation.
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was considered as the optimized 
source of molecular oxygen supplement. Thus, in situ con­
version of H2O2 to O2 inside the periodontal pockets with an 
appropriate catalyst would be a promising strategy to overcome 
hypoxia microenvironment. Recently, catalytic nanozymes such 
as CaO2 NPs, MnO2 NPs, carbon dots, rhodium NPs, and bio­
logical catalase have been developed as bioactive therapeutic 
agents for continuous oxygen generation at the condition of 
H2O2-rich hypoxic environment, which were mainly used 
to overcome the tumor hypoxia for PDT enhancement.[17–21] 
Among the nanozymes, MnO2 nanostructures with low toxicity 
possessed excellent reactivity with a low concentration of H2O2 
to produce O2 for effectively alleviating tumor hypoxia, so as 
to enhance the efficacy of PDT.[20,22–27] Besides PDT in tumor 
treatment, the nano-MnO2 based catalytic reaction of hydrogen 
peroxide to oxygen has also been used in water purification,[28] 
industrial sensors,[29] and air pollution control.[30] While this 
oxygen self-supply method has not been utilized yet in terms 
of alleviating hypoxia of the periodontal disease environment. 
Considering that the content of H2O2 is greatly increased in 
an inflammatory environment and the aPDT enhancement 
brought by the converted oxygen, combining aPDT and nano­
enzymes that catalyze the production of oxygen will be an 
important means to solve the hypoxic environment of the peri­
odontal pocket and enhance the antibacterial effect.
In this work, hybrid nanoplatform integrating nanozymes 
and aPDT nanocomposites (NCs) was developed with oxygen-
self-generation properties for enhanced and selective aPDT 
properties against anaerobe-induced periodontitis. As a proof-
of-concept, we designed and prepared a smart nanoplatform by 
coating MnO2 nanolayer onto an amphiphilic silane modified 
multifunctional NPs which contains Fe3O4 NPs as the core, as 
well as the photosensitizer molecule Chlorin e6 (Ce6) and the 
fluorescent molecule Coumarin 6 (C6) (Figure 1). Ce6, C6, and 
Fe3O4 are all hydrophobic, and can be encapsulated into com­
pact NPs through amphiphilic silanes. With this design, hydro­
phobic small molecules with different functions can be com­
bined to achieve different functional designs. From the point 
of  light source of aPDT activation, the molecular combination 
design of C6 and Ce6 can realizered shift of excitation light to 
infrared light, spanning 20 nm, so that combined infrared light 
and red light can be used in this case to increase the penetra­
tion depth in aPDT treatments. This redshift design was fur­
ther confirmed by theoretical simulations. Therefore, besides 
the real-time monitoring (C6) and magnetically-targeting capac­
ities (Fe3O4 NPs), the photosensitizer Ce6 plays aPDT function 
under the red and NIR light.
It is worth mentioning that this nanoplatform could uti­
lize the nano-enzymatic activity of MnO2 to catalyze endog­
enous H2O2 to produce O2, which provides oxygen for aPDT 
to remarkably enhance the antibacterial efficacy against bacte­
rial pathogens. What’s more, considering that oxygen-intolerant 
bacteria are unable to synthesize a respiratory chain with the 
molecular oxygen as the final electron acceptor, and are even 
very sensitive to the toxic effects of oxygen,[31] therefore, in such 
in situ oxygen generation design, the newly generated O2 would 
also substantially exert selective antibacterial properties against 
anaerobic pathogens in periodontal diseases as an important 
synergy treatment of aPDT. In animal models, this enhanced 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (3 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
and selective antibacterial property leads to a quick recovery 
of local periodontal infections by alleviating pathogenic bac­
terial burdens, consequently reducing the pro-inflammatory 
cytokines in surrounding tissues. This nanoplatform has the 
capacity to overcome the drawback of aPDT treatment against 
infection induced by anaerobic pathogens, simultaneously 
offering a promising strategy for the clinical treatment of peri­
odontal diseases.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Synthesis and Characterization of F@Ce6-M
The protocol for the synthesis of F@Ce6-M is illustrated 
in Figure  1. The preparation of composite NPs modified by 
amphiphilic silane has the advantages of simple and rapid 
synthesis. The hydrophobic chain of silane and the octadecyl 
group on the surface of Fe3O4 are connected by a hydrophobic 
hinge. In this hydrophobic space, hydrophobic small molecules 
can be loaded for different functions. In our work, we loaded 
Ce6 and C6 molecules, which played photosensitizer and fluo­
rescence monitoring functions, and the overall nanomaterial 
size was mainly contributed by Fe3O4 NPs and silane, while the 
organic molecules show less influence on the composite size. 
The product Fe3O4@Ce6/C6 is referred as to “F@Ce6”. Then, 
MnO2 was grown on the F@Ce6 by the redox reaction between 
KMnO4 and MnSO4 in aqueous solution (Figure 2A), the final 
product Fe3O4 @Ce6/C6@MnO2 is referred as to “F@Ce6-M”. 
The Fe3O4 modified by oleic acid became aggregated inside the 
silane (Figure S1, Supporting Information) and exhibited strong 
magnetic targeting capability.[11] As illustrated in the inset of 
Figure 2A, F@Ce6-M NCs were well attracted to the side wall 
of the cuvette by magnetic field, showing the beneficial mag­
netic targeting capability. The morphology and structure of F@
Ce6 and F@Ce6-M NCs were characterized by transmission 
electron microscope (TEM) as shown in Figure 2B,C. Figure 2D 
further shows a thin MnO2 layer which were homogeneously 
modified on the surface of F@Ce6 NCs. The inset displayed 
the enlarged high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the 
local area of a single F@Ce6-M NC and the distinctive lattice 
fringes of both Fe3O4 and MnO2 could be observed within the 
NC which are in accordance with (100) planes of MnO2 NPs 
and (311) planes of Fe3O4 NPs, respectively, confirming the suc­
cessful preparation of F@Ce6-M NC. F@Ce6 NCs presented 
a uniform size of 110  nm, while the size of F@Ce6-M NCs 
was increased relative to F@Ce6 NCs, which was contributed 
by MnO2 coating on F@Ce6 NPs (Figure 2E). The valence of 
manganese was investigated by X-ray-photoelectron spectro­
scopy (XPS). As depicted in Figure 2F, two characteristic peaks 
Figure 1.  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of F@Ce6-M NCs and their application in enhanced and selective antibacterial properties and down-
regulation of the pro-inflammatory cytokines for the treatment of periodontal diseases by ameliorating hypoxia. F@Ce6-M NCs showed a substantial O2 
generation in the presence of H2O2, which would further boost the 1O2 production to exert an enhanced aPDT efficacy. In addition, in situ generated O2 
would elevate the local oxygen tension, which in turn yield potential lethiferous function against anaerobic periodontal pathogens. The MnO2 nanolayer 
modification lead to a species shift in the multispecies biofilm, modulating the biofilm composition shift from a pathogenic state to a non-pathogenic 
state. Significantly, F@Ce6-M NCs could down-regulate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, owing to O2 generation and the virulence fac-
tors of P. gingivalis reduction. Undoubtedly, this multifunctional design by nano-MnO2 modification could be used for enhanced and selective aPDT 
against pathogenic biofilms to overcome the hypoxia-associated resistance, and may show great potential in treatment of periodontal diseases or 
other anaerobe-induced deep infections. C6: coumarin 6; Ce6: chlorin e6; aPDT: antibacterial photodynamic therapy; ROS: reactive oxygen species.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (4 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
at 654.2 and 642.4  eV assigned to Mn 2p1/2 and Mn 2p3/2 
peaks were recorded from F@Ce6-M sample and the binding 
energies of Mn 2p3/2 and Mn 2p1/2 were consistent with the 
valent values of Mn in MnO2.[32] The homogenous elemental 
distribution of Fe, Mn, Si, and C of the F@Ce6-M NC is dem­
onstrated by the element mapping (Figure 2G). From the map­
ping images, it was clearly observed that the Fe element was 
concentrated in a portion of the selection area and the Mn ele­
ment dispersed across the selection area. The merged mapping 
image further supported that MnO2 was successfully formed 
on the surface of F@Ce6 NCs.
From the perspective of molecular design, both C6 and Ce6 
molecules have a relatively flat structure, and the conjugated 
structure in the large plane of the molecule determines the 
optical properties. Enlarging the conjugation property is an 
important way to regulate its infrared absorption. As illustrated 
in Figure S2, Supporting Information, Ce6 molecules had three 
carboxyl groups, which tended to lose H+, having a negative 
charge. While, C6 molecules had two N atoms, which could 
absorb H+, have a positive charge. Inspired by this phenom­
enon, in the nanoplatform design, the Ce6 and C6 molecules 
were loaded in the hydrophobic layer together. We theoretically 
simulated the molecular absorption spectra of Ce6 as the two 
molecules close to each other with different forms by density 
functional theory (DFT) method as shown in Figure  3A. Ce6 
molecules and three combining forms and the corresponding 
UV–visible absorption spectra were calculated, respectively, 
and are shown in Figures 3B and S3, Supporting Information. 
In the case of only a few molecules involved, obviously, when 
Ce6 and C6 molecules combined with each other, the HOMO-
LUMO gap of Ce6 decreased and the absorption position of Ce6 
red-shifted due to the enhanced delocalization of Ce6.
In the NCs we designed, as a large number of molecules 
are loaded in the hydrophobic space, the red-shift will further 
increase to meet the NIR excitation requirements. From the 
UV–visible absorption spectra of Ce6, C6 and F@Ce6-M, a 
broad absorption band from 630 and 740 nm could be observed 
for F@Ce6-M (Figures 3C and Figure S4, Supporting Informa­
tion), while the absorption of Ce6 molecules were located at 
630–700 nm, confirming our hypothesis. The absorption of Ce6 
at 405 nm and that of C6 at 450 nm in the absorption spectra 
of F@Ce6-M NCs were also consistent with the designed struc­
ture. Excitation light source with a large penetration depth is 
essential for the aPDT efficiency. Infrared light (greater than 
Figure 2.  Characterization of NCs: A) Schematic illustration of the microstructure and composition of F@Ce6-M. Inset: the photo shows the F@Ce6-M 
NCs in water are attracted towards the magnets. B,C) TEM images of F@Ce6 and F@Ce6-M. D) Local magnification of TEM image for a single NC. 
The insets in (D) indicated HRTEM images of F@Ce6-M. E) The size distribution of F@Ce6 and F@Ce6-M. F) High-resolution XPS spectra of Mn 2p 
of F@Ce6-M. G) Elemental mappings of Fe, Mn, Si, and C of F@Ce6-M.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (5 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
700  nm) has a deeper tissue penetration depth than visible 
light,[33] which is of great significance for the phototherapy in 
deep tissue. A statistical study demonstrated that the average 
thickness of the free gingiva and buccal bone was respectively 
0.96  ± 0.24  mm (maximum: 1.42  mm) and 0.85  ± 0.45  mm 
(maximum: 3.01  mm),[34] while infrared light (700–900  nm) 
can reach a penetration of more than 1  cm in the simulated 
beef tissue with a maximal intensity decay of 30%.[35] There­
fore, thinking of the NIR light as the aPDT excitation source, 
the tissue penetration experiments had been carried out by 
placing a piece of soft tissue (1 mm in the thickness) in front 
of the aPDT light. As shown in Figure 3D, excitation light with 
different wavelength ranges was regulated using a monochro­
mator in the presence or absence of soft tissues. As shown in 
Figure 3E,F, the F@Ce6-M could generate ROS by 630–650 nm 
irradiation and 700–720  nm irradiation. It was important to 
note that the ROS generation was decreased by 630–650  nm 
irradiation in the presence of soft tissue, while there were no 
significant different changes between 700–720  nm irradiation 
in the present or absence of soft tissue. Surprisingly, the ROS 
generation by 700–720  nm irradiation in the presence of soft 
tissue was basically the same as that by 630–650  nm irradia­
tion in the presence of soft tissue. This means that an enlarged 
range of the excitation light range (630–720 nm) can be used to 
achieve aPDT treatment in the deep periodontal pocket.
Based on the design of F@Ce6-M NC, the NCs-mediated 
aPDT consumed the Ce6 molecules, meanwhile, the inten­
sity of C6 emission spectrum remained constant. Thus, C6 
molecules could serve as a real-time monitoring probe during 
the aPDT.[11] Both the emission spectra of Ce6 and C6 did not 
change under 405 nm wavelength irradiation for 1 min. When 
the irradiation time of 630 nm wavelength was increased, the 
emission spectra of Ce6 decrease, while C6 does not change 
(Figure S5, Supporting Information). Therefore, this branching 
Figure 3.  The red-shift of excitation light to infrared light. A) Schematic illustration of the interaction between Ce6 and C6 molecules in the hydrophobic 
layer. B) The results of computer simulation about the changes in UV–vis spectra of Ce6. C) UV–vis spectra of F@Ce6-M, Ce6, and C6. D) Schematic 
illustration showed the NCs were irradiated by different wavelength light through soft tissue. E) The changes in ROS generation of F@Ce6-M with 
630–650 nm irradiation with or without soft tissue. Inset: a) the ROS generation of F@Ce6-M with 630–650 nm irradiation with soft tissue. b) The ROS 
generation of F@Ce6-M with 630–650 nm irradiation without soft tissue. F) The changes in ROS generation of F@Ce6-M with 700–720 nm irradiation 
with or without soft tissue. Inset: a) the ROS generation of F@Ce6-M with 700–720 nm irradiation with soft tissue. b) The ROS generation of F@Ce6-M 
with 700–720 nm irradiation without soft tissue.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (6 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
ratio of green light (C6) to red light (Ce6) can be used to mon­
itor the photodynamic ability of composite materials.
2.2. Oxygen Generation of F@Ce6-M NCs
In addition to increasing the depth of tissue penetra­
tion, solving the hypoxia problem in the deep periodontal 
pocket is also an important innovation in this work. In peri­
odontal pocket, bacterial biofilm can produce H2O2 in the 
metabolic process. In the F@Ce6-M NCs, MnO2 layer could 
exhibit strong nanoenzyme catalytic capacity on decomposi­
tion of H2O2 to O2, which was desirable for periodontal dis­
eases therapy. The sufficient O2 production would effectively 
relieve the periodontal pocket hypoxia and provide the oxygen 
source for enhancing the ROS production (Figure 4A). To verify 
the influence of F@Ce6-M on aPDT, ROS production was 
investigated using 2,2′-bis(anthracene-9,10-diylbis(methylene))-
dimalonic acid (ABDA) as an indicator. As shown in Figure 4B, 
the ABDA absorbances in F@Ce6 and F@Ce6-M solution at 
260  nm were decreased distinctly compared with pure H2O2 
solution, indicating that both NCs had a certain photosensi­
tization effect, that is, they could produce 1O2 with laser irra­
diation. Compared with F@Ce6 or F@Ce6-M solution alone, 
the ABDA absorbance in F@Ce6 solution showed no obvious 
change after the addition of H2O2 solution. However, in F@
Ce6-M solution after adding H2O2, the decrease of ABDA 
absorbance at 260  nm was accelerated, demonstrating that 
ABDA had been consumed within a short time. The insets 
in Figure 4B and Figure S6, Supporting Information, further 
showed the occurrence of the enhanced intracellular ROS gen­
eration after F@Ce6-M treatment in the presence of H2O2, 
Figure 4.  In vitro evaluation on the O2 and ROS generation. A) Schematic illustration of MnO2 as the nanoenzyme for the O2 production and further 
ROS generation. B) Absorbance changes at 260 nm of ABDA solutions in the presence of H2O2, F@Ce6, F@Ce6-M, F@Ce6 + H2O2, and F@Ce6-M 
+ H2O2, with light irradiation at 630–720 nm (50 mW cm−2). Inset: In vitro fluorescence general images of intracellular ROS generation at 3 min via 
different aqueous solutions with light irradiation (630–720 nm, 50 mW cm−2) via an imaging system in vivo. C) UV–vis absorption spectra of a) TMB 
alone solution; b) F@Ce6 and TMB mixed solution; and c) F@Ce6-M and TMB mixed solution. Inset: images of TMB catalyzed by the different NCs. 
a) TMB alone solution; b) F@Ce6 and TMB mixed solution; and c) F@Ce6-M and TMB mixed solution. D) The concentration changes of the dissolved 
H2O2 in by the different NC solution or vehicles under pH = 6.5. E) O2 generation from different NC solution (F@Ce6, F@Ce6-M). Inset: images of 
F@Ce6 + H2O2 and F@Ce6-M + H2O2 solution. F–I) O2 generation from H2O2 amount (1–4 mm) after adding F@Ce6-M (Mn concentration 40 µm) 
(F); Different pH value (pH = 5, 6.5, 7.4) (G); Different temperature (22, 25, 37 °C) (H); Different F@Ce6-M solutions (Mn concentration 0–80 µm) 
after adding H2O2 (4 mm) (I).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (7 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
thereby improving the antibacterial efficacy against dental bio­
films in the deep site with hypoxia.
To confirm the catalytic activity of F@Ce6-M, the typical 
experiments about the oxidation of TMB were conducted. Since 
MnO2 could catalyze 3,30,5,50-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) to 
produce a blue color in an acetate buffer solution, TMB was 
readily oxidized in the presence of F@Ce6-M NCs, which could 
be proved by the formation of a distinctive absorption at 650 nm 
(Figure 4C). In contrast, F@Ce6 group had no color change of 
the TMB solution. The inset picture in Figure 4C shows that the 
color of the TMB solution changed from colorless to blue in the 
presence of F@Ce6-M NCs, confirming the catalytic capability. 
Interestingly, such a catalytic capability of F@Ce6-M NCs pre­
sented a dose-dependent manner (Figure S7, Supporting Infor­
mation). In addition, the concentration of H2O2 significantly 
reduced within 5  min after the addition of F@Ce6-M NCs, 
while that was nearly no change with the addition of F@Ce6 
NCs (Figure 4D). Moreover, in the mixed solution of F@Ce6-M 
and H2O2, a fast and continuous production of dissolved O2 
could be detected with time extension (Figure  4E). The inset 
picture showed large amounts of O2 bubbles in the F@Ce6-M 
solution with H2O2. These results supported the prominent cat­
alytic activity of F@Ce6-M for providing O2 in the presence of 
H2O2, thereby speeding up the production of 1O2 for enhanced 
aPDT efficacy.
To further verify the in situ oxygen generation, the dissolved 
O2 was measured with different H2O2 concentrations, pH 
values, temperatures, and NC concentrations. The oral cavity 
is a considerably complicated environment in the human body, 
providing a challenge for host defense and indigenous habi­
tats for microbial survival. Currently, numerous studies have 
demonstrated the importance of H2O2 in regulating bacterial 
ecology and signaling.[36] It was reported that the concentration 
of hydrogen peroxide could reach 1.2 mm even beyond 100 mm 
away from the dental biofilm.[37] As shown in Figure 4F, MnO2-
based nanoplatform yielded satisfactory O2 production at the 
H2O2 concentration in range of 1–4 mm. When H2O2 concentra­
tion increased to 4 mm, the catalytical reaction was apparently 
enhanced, resulting in a more dissolved O2 production. Clini­
cally, H2O2 is widely applied to local rinsing for the treatment of 
periodontal diseases. However, bacterial biofilms are resistant 
to the low concentration of H2O2 in a region of 0.33–1 m. Coin­
cidentally, the residual H2O2 after rinsing treatment is suffi­
cient for MnO2-based nanoplatform to catalyze for pronounced 
therapeutic efficacy against periodontal diseases. Besides the 
local H2O2 concentration, the local pH of fluid in oral cavity is 
another crucial parameter. It was reported that the pH range of 
gingival sulcus varied between 6.5 and 8.5.[38] Recent research 
claimed that an increased pocket depth and inflammation have 
been associated with increased alkalinization and severity of 
the inflammatory host response,[39] and oral cavity suffering 
influences such as different acidic food or drinks would further 
reduce the localized oral fluid pH value. Figure 4G shows that 
the MnO2-based nanoplatform had great potential in oxygen 
generation at a (mild) acidic environment (pH = 5.0, 6.5), due 
to the reaction of MnO2 with H2O2 and H+. The temperature 
was also an important influential factor for oxygen generation 
by MnO2. Normally, a high temperature can improve catalytic 
performance for efficient oxygen generation in the presence of 
an MnO2-based nanoplatform. As Figure 4H shows, the normal 
body temperature (37 °C) was favorable for oxygen generation. 
However, when we simulated a patient chewing ice or drinking 
cold water, the lower temperature in oral cavity would compro­
mise the catalytic capabilities of MnO2. Also, previous study 
indicated that the periodontium of pathogenic teeth had higher 
temperatures relative to a normal situation,[38] therefore, this 
nanoplatform is more suitable and promising for periodontitis 
aPDT with enhanced oxygen generation efficacy. The oxygen 
generation efficiency was also correlated to the F@Ce6-M cata­
lyst content (Figure 4I), while in this case, a very low concentra­
tion could ensure a sufficient oxygen supply and bio-safety in 
the treatments of periodontal diseases.
2.3. Biosafety Assay of F@Ce6-M NC
Biosafety assay was further conducted to study the feasibility of 
F@Ce6-M NC as an aPDT agent for periodontal diseases treat­
ment. The cytotoxicity of the NCs was first assessed by real-
time cell analysis (RTCA) assay using the mouse fibroblast cell 
line L929. RTCA system has the common applications for real-
time monitoring of cellular fate. As illustrated in Figure  5A, 
the cell viability of all tested groups gradually decreased with 
the increase NC concentration. Notably, F@Ce6-M NC with a 
Ce6 concentration of 3.4 µg mL–1 would significantly inhibit cell 
growth compared with blank control (0 µg mL−1). The data at 
24 and 72 h also confirmed that F@Ce6-M NC at a Ce6 concen­
tration above 1.7 µg mL−1 had scarcely any cytotoxicity against 
fibroblasts (Figure 5B,C). As shown in Figure S8A, Supporting 
Information, the similar trends in cytotoxicity were detected 
by osteoblasts (MC3T3-E1 cells). In addition, the detailed cell 
morphological parameters were detected by fluorescein isothio­
cyanate (FITC)/4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining 
in human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs). Figures  5D and S8B, 
Supporting Information, show that the number of live HGFs 
and MC3T3-E1 cells decreased at the Ce6 concentration of 
3.4 µg mL−1, and a few round and shrunken cells with con­
densed and lightened nuclei could be observed, which were 
considered as necrotic cells. Finally, the long-term toxicity was 
evaluated by an in vivo model. As depicted in Figure 5E, hema­
toxylin and eosin (H&E) histology analysis of main organs at 
60 days after the administration of F@Ce6-M NCs displayed 
that inappreciable histological abnormalities or inflammation 
occurred. These results confirmed that F@Ce6-M NCs pos­
sessed satisfactory biocompatibility and could be potentially 
applied in clinical application for periodontal diseases, even for 
other severe infections.
2.4. Enhanced Antibacterial Effects of F@Ce6-M NC against 
Periodontal Biofilms
On the condition of periodontal diseases, the oxygen tension in 
the periodontal pockets is only about 13.3 mm Hg (1.8% O2). 
Whereas, aPDT treatment is an oxygen-dependent process, and 
the therapeutic efficacy would be restricted by hypoxic microen­
vironment in periodontal pockets. Owing to the nanoenzyme 
catalytic activity, F@Ce6-M NCs could catalyze the endogenous 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (8 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
H2O2 produced by bacteria, and supply O2 to mitigate the 
hypoxic microenvironment. The newly generated oxygen would 
be beneficial for the enhancement of aPDT efficacy and selec­
tivity of antibacterial properties against anaerobic periodontal 
pathogens (Figure  6A). To verify this hypothesis, the antibac­
terial properties of F@Ce6-M NCs were tested with the addi­
tion of exogenous H2O2 to single or multi-species periodontal 
biofilms.
First, Porphyromonas gingivalis and Fusobacterium nucleatum 
were chosen as representative pathogens for single species peri­
odontal biofilm models. P. gingivalis is widely considered as the 
key pathogen to the development of periodontitis.[40] Similarly, 
F. nucleatum is consistently associated with periodontitis. It is 
also detected in periodontitis. Other than that, it plays poten­
tially enhanced effects with P. gingivalis on its pathogenicity.[41] 
Using different NCs, the antibacterial performances and the 
colony formation unit (CFU) of P. gingivalis and F. nucleatum 
with or without light irradiation are plotted in Figure 6B. When 
no light is involved, the growth of each single species biofilm for 
the different NCs was similar as the control group. Compared to 
the control groups, the biofilm growth of NCs-mediated aPDT 
groups had outstanding reductions for P. gingivalis and F. nucle-
atum (p < 0.05). Notably, the CFU of P. gingivalis and F. nucle-
atum in F@Ce6-M NCs-mediated aPDT group was decreased 
by ≈4 orders of magnitude, while CFU in F@Ce6 NCs-mediate 
aPDT group was reduced by less than 3 orders of magnitude 
(p < 0.05) (Figure 6C,D). A similar trend with the CFU results 
was found by the metabolic activities of the single-species 
biofilms (Figure S9, Supporting Information). For each spe­
cies, the metabolic activity of the NCs without light irradiation 
groups had similar result with the control group (p > 0.1). F@
Ce6-M-mediated aPDT exhibited the lowest metabolic activity 
than other groups (p < 0.05). Moreover, the 3D reconstruction 
of 4-day biofilms are depicted in Figure 6E. The control group 
and NCs without light irradiation had the most remarkably live 
bacteria with stained green. In sharp contrast, F@Ce6-M NC 
with light irradiation had primarily red staining with dead bac­
teria, while F@Ce6 NC-mediated aPDT only had partially dead 
bacteria. The Dead/Live bacteria ratio further confirmed the 
aforementioned results (Figure 6F,G). These results indicated 
Figure 5.  Biosafety assay of F@Ce6-M NCs. A) The proliferation of L929 mouse fibroblast cells with different concentration NCs by RTCA. The data 
at 24 h (orange rectangle) and 72 h (purple rectangle) were detailedly extracted as in (B) and (C), respectively. The cell viability of L929 cells versus 
F@Ce6-M concentration was presented by the ratio of blank control (mean ± sd). The solid line indicates no significant differences between each 
group (p > 0.05). While, the asterisk indicated the significant differences between each group (p < 0.05). D) CLSM images of HGFs incubated with 
F@Ce6-M containing 0, 0.85, 1.7, and 3.4 µg mL−1 of Ce6. Arrows: apoptotic cells. E) Histological images of main organs post-treatment for 60 days 
in BALB/c nude mice.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (9 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
that MnO2 decorated NC possessed an enhanced aPDT efficacy 
against single species periodontal biofilms.
The ROS is highly reactive with biomolecules and would 
induce the oxidation of membrane and DNA, resulting in bac­
terial cell death.[42] The more oxygen in the microenvironments 
would facilitate the generation of ROS, leading to a stronger 
killing efficacy against pathogenic bacteria. In the present 
study, F@Ce6-M could decompose H2O2 into O2, thus boosting 
the generation of ROS. Moreover, it has been suggested that 
MnO2 nanostructure also have highly effective antibacterial 
activity,[43] because of the production of ROS, the increase of 
ATPase activity, the leakage of protein contents and electrolytes. 
On the basis of single bacteria level experiments, the F@Ce6-M 
NCs exerted its enhanced antibacterial effect on the disruption 
of the biofilm by increasing local oxygen tension. The anti-
biofilm activity of F@Ce6-M and F@Ce6 NCs with an external 
magnetic field was also evaluated. Compared to the F@Ce6 
NC-mediated aPDT, the yellow fluorescence represented more 
dead bacteria in the region where F@Ce6-M NCs were magnet­
ically concentrated, displaying the magnetic targeting ability in 
addition to the enhanced aPDT ability (Figure S10, Supporting 
Information).
2.5. Selective Antibacterial Effects of F@Ce6-M NC  
on Multispecies Biofilms
Dental plaque biofilm is microbial communities, which main­
tain in a dynamic homeostasis under healthy conditions.[44] 
Once the microbial balance shifts to the pathogenic-associated 
composition, the oral diseases, such as periodontal diseases 
take place.[45] Therefore, it is crucial to maintain the microbial 
equilibrium for the prevention and treatment of periodontal 
diseases since it is impossible to eliminate all bacteria. In pre­
vious studies on aPDT, the biofilm was normally treated as a 
whole community. While, the composition changes of bacterial 
species in the biofilm were rarely considered.[11–13] Significantly, 
in this study, we constituted the multispecies biofilm to eval­
uate the effect on the population changes by aPDT interference. 
Among all the known oral bacteria, Streptococcus gordonii, as an 
Figure 6.  The enhanced antibacterial capacity of F@Ce6-M NCs against P. gingivalis and F. nucleatum. A) Schematic illustration of alleviating peri-
odontal pocket hypoxia and enhancing aPDT by F@Ce6-M NCs decomposition of H2O2 to produce O2. B) The images of P. gingivalis and F. nucleatum 
clones. C,D) Corresponding statistical data of colonies of P. gingivalis (C) and F. nucleatum (D) biofilms. E,F) The 3D reconstruction of 4-day biofilms 
(dead bacteria, stained red; live bacteria, stained green) and corresponding Dead/Live bacteria ratio for P. gingivalis (E) and F. nucleatum (F). Dissimilar 
letters indicated significant differences from each group (n = 6, p < 0.05).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (10 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
early colonizer and common inhabitant in dental plaque bio­
film, could provide an attachment stratum that facilitates bacte­
rial succession through multimodal, receptor-ligand mediated, 
co-adhesive interactions. On the other side, clinical studies 
indicated that S. gordonii was a benign or even a beneficial bac­
terium since higher proportions of S. gordonii in dental plaque 
are associated with healthy tooth surfaces.[46] Hence, S. gordonii 
was selected with F. nucleatum and P. gingivalis to establish a 
three-species biofilm. Herein, the local hypoxic microenviron­
ment would be significantly improved by the catalytic reac­
tion of an F@Ce6-M nanoplatform. Noticeably, anaerobic 
periodontal pathogens, such as F. nucleatum and P. gingivalis 
are unable to synthesize a respiratory chain with the molecular 
oxygen as the final electron acceptor, and even are very sensi­
tive to the toxic effects of oxygen.[31] Hence, the capability of 
self-oxygen-generation function not only enhanced the aPDT 
performance against periodontal pathogens, but also a selec­
tive antibacterial property by triggering a shift in the microflora 
from a periopathogenic composition to a non-periopathogenic 
state (Figure 7A).
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed 
to investigate the population change of this multispecies bio­
film by using F@Ce6-M nanoplatform. In FISH images 
(Figure  7B), F. nucleatum were stained blue; S. gordonii were 
stained green; and P. gingivalis were stained red. Obviously, 
control group and NCs without light group had an equivalent 
intensity of staining fluorescence. Adversely, the ratio of P. 
gingivalis and F. nucleatum remarkably decreased in the group 
of NCs with light. The quantification of bacterial composition 
in Figure 7C shows F@Ce6 with light irradiation reduced the 
proportion of aerobes from 33.78% (control group) to 26.68%, 
due to the higher sensitivity to ROS.[15] Interestingly, the pro­
portion of anaerobic periodontal pathogens (F. nucleatum and 
P. gingivalis) in multispecies biofilm reduced from 66.21% in 
control group, to 51.91% at the presence of F@Ce6-M with light 
irradiation. The proportion of normal oral bacteria S. gordonii 
Figure 7.  The enhanced and selective antibacterial property of F@Ce6-M NCs against multispecies biofilm. A) Schematic illustration of the changes 
of bacterial composition in multispecies biofilm via F@Ce6-M-mdiated aPDT. B) FISH images of multispecies biofilms with different treatments 
(F. nucleatum, stained blue; P. gingivalis, stained red; S. gordonii, stained green). C) The ratio of F. nucleatum, P. gingivalis, and S. gordonii in multispecies 
biofilms, according to the fluorescent density. D) Relative fluorescent intensity value from different groups. E) qRT-PCR analysis of FimA-II, FimA-IV, 
RgpA, RgpB, and Kgp genes in multispecies biofilms. The value of control group equals to 1. Dissimilar letters indicated significant differences from 
each group (n = 5, p < 0.05).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (11 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
was increased from 33.78% in the control group to 48.09% in 
F@Ce6-M with the light irradiation group, demonstrating that 
the nanoplatform modulates the multispecies biofilm from a 
pathogenic state to a non-pathogenic state. This highly antibac­
terial selectivity was probably due to the self-oxygen-generation 
performance of F@Ce6-M NCs. The in situ generated oxygen 
would fundamentally influence catabolic and anabolic path­
ways of anaerobic bacteria, leading to their death.[47] In peri­
odontal disease this nanoplatform with self-oxygen-generation 
would improve the locally hypoxic microenvironment in the 
periodontal pockets, thus facilitating the therapeutic efficacy 
of aPDT treatment by the exclusive killing potential against 
periodontal anaerobes. As presented in Figure 7D, the biomass 
volume of multispecies biofilm in two aPDT groups were less 
than those in groups without light irradiation and the control 
group. Notably, the most remarkably reduction was observed in 
F@Ce6-M with light irradiation group, further indicating the 
enhanced antibacterial capacity of F@Ce6-M NCs. Importantly, 
most of bacteria such as S. gordonii are pioneer colonizers of 
the tooth surfaces and therefore have the potential to become 
established on the teeth prior to acquisition of oral pathogens. 
In fact, these streptococci possess high capacities to compete 
with pathogenic bacteria and delay the colonization in biofilm, 
serving as a potent deterrent to the initiation of oral diseases.
P. gingivalis, as a vital pathogen, plays crucial roles in the 
development of periodontal diseases.[48] Its pathogenicity was 
mainly attributed to the various virulence factors that could 
induce a host inflammatory reaction and thus lead to the 
destruction of periodontal supporting tissue.[49] In the present 
study, the virulence factors of P. gingivalis, including FimA 
genotypes II, IV, RgpA, RgpB, and Kgp genes were tested after 
the treatment of F@Ce6-M NC in the multispecies biofilms. 
Fimbriae (Fim) and gingipains, as the key P. gingivalis virulence 
factors, are linked with biofilm formation and tissue destruc­
tion by mediating the adhesion and aggregation of the bacteria 
and invade into human epithelial cells.[50,51] FimA genotypes II 
and IV exhibited a stronger pathogenicity as compared to other 
fimA genotypes.[52] Meanwhile, gingipains are the Arg-specific 
and Lys-specific proteinases of P. gingivalis, encoding by RgpA, 
RgpB genes, and Kgp genes. The DNA levels of virulence fac­
tors in multispecies biofilms are plotted in Figure  7E. The 
results showed that aPDT induced the decreased expression 
of P. gingivalis virulence factors (p  <  0.05). These was due to 
the fact that the production of ROS could react with the lipids 
and proteins and subsequently induce the irreversible oxida­
tive damage of DNA, RNA, and transcription factors, leading to 
virulence factors genes reduction.[42,53] Significantly, the nano­
platform with an MnO2 nanolayer upon red and infrared light 
irradiation would further decrease the gene expression of viru­
lence factors (p < 0.05). These might be linked to the genera­
tion of O2, occurring oxidative stress. Primarily, the exposure 
of P. gingivalis to O2 could induce the metabolic conversion of 
O2 to ROS inside bacterial cells, leading the lesion of DNA. In 
addition, DNA damage appears to be the most significant con­
sequence of oxidative stress in bacteria.[54] Hence, F@Ce6-M-
mediated aPDT could disturb the adhesion, aggregation, and 
parasitism of P. gingivalis, thereby displaying the excellent ther­
apeutic efficiency of periodontal diseases, which was further 
explored in vivo.
2.6. Therapeutic Efficacy of F@Ce6-M for Treatment  
of Periodontal Inflammation in Rat Model
To further investigate the antibacterial performance of F@
Ce6-M NCs in vivo, the experimental periodontal disease was 
induced via ligature placement together with local injection of 
P. gingivalis in rat models.[55] Figure  8A clarifies the detailed 
procedure from animal modelling to treatment of periodontal 
diseases in vivo. To observe visually the therapeutic efficacy, 
the photographs of rat faces and the local enlarged ones were 
recorded. As shown in Figure 8B, the gum and lip of rats dis­
played obvious redness and were swollen in the control group. 
Similar symptoms also appeared in the F@Ce6 group and F@
Ce6-M group. However, no evident redness and swelling were 
observed in the NCs with the light irradiation group, espe­
cially in the F@Ce6-M with light irradiation group, which is 
similar with the H2O2 group. Then, the biofilm eradication 
of F@Ce6-M NC-mediated aPDT was explored in vivo. The 
counts of survival bacteria in the bacteria-infected periodontal 
tissue of each group were evaluated via spread plate method 
(Figure  8C,D). The CFU counts displayed an admirable bio­
film ablation effect of F@Ce6-M with light irradiation. Subse­
quently, in vivo fluorescence imaging was further investigated 
to confirm the therapeutic efficacy of F@Ce6-M NCs for the 
treatment of periodontal inflammation. As shown in Figure 8E, 
high fluorescence intensities, which were induced by the bacte­
rial-caused local periodontal inflammation, were detected in the 
control group and NCs without light irradiation group. Mean­
while, the fluorescence intensity was significantly decreased 
in the H2O2 group and the NPs with light irradiation group. 
Noticeably, no fluorescence signals were detected in the F@
Ce6-M with light irradiation group. The quantitative informa­
tion (Figure  8F,G) statistically verified the aforementioned 
graphical results. In animal models, the bacterial infection, 
as the etiological agents of periodontal disease, induced host 
inflammatory reaction and the excessive production of ROS in 
periodontal disease.[56,57] F@Ce6-M NCs could generate over­
whelming ROS for substantially killing pathogens. Whereas, 
the generated ROS was more unstable and aggressive with a 
short life time and short diffusion range in aqueous media.[58] 
Thus, the weak fluorescence intensity in F@Ce6-M with light 
irradiation group represented the enhanced biofilm eradication 
capacity in the animal model. With the eradication of biofilm, 
the symptoms of bacteria-caused periodontal inflammation 
were also alleviated.
In view of the effects of F@Ce6-M NCs on the anti-biofilm 
and O2 generation, an in vivo study was performed to further 
confirm the interventional effects of F@Ce6-M NCs on immu­
noregulation as shown in Figure  9A. The histomorphological 
analysis of the periodontal tissue were harvested and followed 
by H&E staining. In the control group, abundant inflammatory 
cells were present in the gingival tissue, moreover, the fibro­
blasts were significantly decreased and arranged irregularly. 
Similar results were observed in the NCs without light irradia­
tion groups. Instead, an outstanding decrease of inflammatory 
cells was observed in the H2O2 group and the F@Ce6 with light 
irradiation group, while the gingival tissue was similar with 
the healthy tissue in the F@Ce6-M with light irradiation group 
(Figure  9B). The number of inflammation cells reconfirmed 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (12 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
the above results (Figure 9C). These results further confirmed 
that F@Ce6-M-mediated aPDT demonstrated potent anti-bio­
film ability, thereby alleviating the bacteria-caused periodontal 
inflammation.
The IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α expressions in the gingival tissue 
of each group were measured by immunohistochemical anal­
ysis. In immunohistochemical analysis, the positive cell was 
labeled by brownish yellow (Figure 9D). Similar to the control 
group, an obvious immunolabeling for IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-
α were presented in the NCs without light irradiation groups. 
However, there was a weak immunolabeling in the H2O2 group 
and the aPDT group. Notably, negligible immunolabeling was 
observed in the rat treated with F@Ce6-M-mediated aPDT. 
The quantitative positive cells for IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α were 
significantly reduced in the H2O2 group and the aPDT group 
compared with the control group (p  <  0.01), especially in the 
F@Ce6-M-mediated aPDT group (Figure  9 E–G). In inflam­
mation sites, gene expression of pro-inflammation cytokines 
such as IL-1β and IL-6 showed a negligible difference between 
the control group and the NCs without light irradiation group 
(p > 0.05). Compared with control group, the levels of IL-1β and 
IL-6 were significantly decreased in the group treated with NCs 
with light irradiation (p < 0.01), and the lowest pro-inflamma­
tory cytokine levels were evident for the F@Ce6-M with light 
irradiation group. Interestingly, anti-inflammation cytokines 
(Arg-1 and IL-10) had the most substantial elevation trend after 
the F@Ce6-M with light irradiation treatment (Figure 9H). Pre­
vious studies have displayed fimbriae and gingipain facilitating 
the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, 
IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α.[50,59–61] According to previously men­
tioned results, it was speculated that F@Ce6-M NCs-mediated 
aPDT would down-regulate the production of inflammatory 
cytokines via reducing the level of P. gingivalis virulence factors. 
In addition, hypoxia could up-regulate the hypoxia-inducible 
factor (HIF-1α) expression, which induces the immune cell to 
release pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines.[62,63] 
Figure 8.  In vivo anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial capacity of F@Ce6-M-mediated aPDT. A) Schematic illustrations of in vivo experiments approach 
to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of F@Ce6-M-mediated aPDT. B) The intraoral images and local enlarged images of the rats after different treat-
ments. C) The bacteria separated from gingival tissues were cultured on agar plates. D) Corresponding antibiofilm efficiency in vivo. E) In vivo fluo-
rescence images showing the ROS level at infected periodontal tissue after different treatments (top line: images captured at fluorescence activation; 
middle line: images captured at bright field; bottom line: the merged images). F,G) The corresponding statistical data showing the mean density of 
ROS and the area of fluorescence of ROS. Different lowercase letters indicated a significant intergroup difference (n = 5, p < 0.05).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (13 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Manganese ferrite NPs alleviate hypoxic, down-regulating 
HIF-1α.[64] Kim et al. also demonstrated the pro-inflammatory 
macrophages (M1) were down-regulated via O2 generation, 
reducing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines.[65] 
Figure 9.  The in vivo histomorphological evaluation and qRT-PCR analysis of periodontal inflammation in rat models induced by periodontal patho-
gens after different nanocomposites treatments. A) Schematic diagram of immunoregulation of F@Ce6-M-mediated aPDT in vivo. B) H&E stained 
micrographs of periodontal tissues after different treatments. Black arrows: immune cells. C) The corresponding quantification of immune cells in 
H&E staining sections. D) Micrographs of immunohistochemical analysis from different groups. Red arrows: positive cells. E–G) The corresponding 
quantification showing the level of IL-1β (E), IL-6 (F), and TNF-α (G). H) The mRNA expression relative levels of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, and Arg-1.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (14 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Meanwhile, pathogenic bacteria produce toxins and indirectly 
activate an endogenous immune system, leading to the release 
of a series of cytokines.[66] While, F@Ce6-M based aPDT pos­
sessed an excellent biofilm ablation effect, also leading to the 
down-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Thereby, F@
Ce6-M NC-mediated aPDT would down-regulate the produc­
tion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, either by the elimination 
of periodontal pathogens, or by in situ O2 generation in vivo. 
While, the up-regulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines could 
substantially improve the regenerative potential via modulating 
the polarization of macrophages, which might be linked to the 
inhibition of HIF-1α via in situ O2 generation.[65,67] Therefore, 
the enhanced and selective antibacterial properties, as well 
as the anti-inflammatory ability in vivo by F@Ce6-M NCs, 
exhibited an excellent therapeutic potential for the treatment 
of periodontal inflammation or other anaerobe-induced deep 
infections.
3. Conclusion
In summary, the present study presented a smart nanoplat­
form by co-encapsulating Fe3O4, Ce6, and C6 in the amphiph­
ilic silane, and then modified by MnO2 nanolayer for enhanced 
and selective antibacterial properties against anaerobe-induced 
periodontal diseases with satisfactory biocompatibility. This 
nanoplatform possessed a self-oxygen-generated property by 
the catalysis of MnO2 nanolayer, magnetic targeting ability by 
Fe3O4 nanoparticles, red and infrared mediated aPDT function 
by Ce6, and real-time monitoring by C6/Ce6. F@Ce6-M NCs 
showed a substantial O2 generation in the presence of H2O2, 
which would further boost the 1O2 production to exert an 
enhanced aPDT efficacy by one more log CFU reduction. In 
addition, in situ generated O2 would elevate the local oxygen 
tension, which in turn yielded potential lethiferous function 
against anaerobic periodontal pathogens. The MnO2 nanolayer 
modification lead to a species shift in the multispecies bio­
film, reducing the anaerobic P. gingivalis and F. nucleatum 
proportion from 66.21% in control group, to 51.91% at the 
presence of F@Ce6-M with light irradiation. Significantly, F@
Ce6-M NCs also displayed enhanced bacterial eradication and 
anti-inflammatory capability by the down-regulation of pro-
inflammation cytokines in the animal model, exhibiting an 
excellent therapeutic efficacy for the treatment of periodontal 
inflammation. These results indicated that the biocompatible 
F@Ce6-M platform had the potential to modulate the biofilm 
composition shift from a pathogenic state to a non-pathogenic 
state. Undoubtedly, this multifunctional design by nano-MnO2 
modification could be used for improved and selective aPDT 
against pathogenic biofilms to overcome the hypoxia-asso­
ciated resistance, and may show great potential in the treat­
ment of periodontal diseases or other anaerobe-induced deep 
infections.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or 
from the author.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China 
(61775080, 82071152, 52050077), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation 
2017T100213, General program of Natural Science Foundation of Jilin 
Province (20200201356JC, 20200201317JC), Key Scientific and Technological 
Projects of Jilin Province (20170204041GX), Science and Technology 
Project of Jilin Province Financial Department (JCSZ2019378-27), 
Health Department Research Projects in Jilin Province (2020Q21), and 
seed grant from Jilin University School of Dentistry. Animals were used 
under protocols approved by the Committee for Animal Research of Jilin 
University (JLUKQ #SY201912008).
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the 
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
antimicrobial 
photodynamic 
therapies, 
manganese 
dioxide, 
nanocomposites, oxygen generation, periodontal disease, selective killing
Received: January 31, 2021
Revised: February 14, 2021
Published online: March 6, 2021
[1]	 W.  Marcenes, N. J.  Kassebaum, E.  Bernabé, A.  Flaxman, 
M. Naghavi, A. Lopez, C. J. L. Murray, J. Dent. Res. 2013, 92, 592.
[2]	 A. R.  Kamer, R. G.  Craig, R.  Niederman, J.  Fortea, M. J.  de  Leon, 
Periodontology 2000 2020, 83, 242.
[3]	 F.  Graziani, S.  Gennai, A.  Solini, M.  Petrini, J. Clin. Periodontol. 
2018, 45, 167.
[4]	 M. Orlandi, F. Graziani, F. D’Aiuto, Periodontology 2000 2020, 83, 107.
[5]	 L.  Chambrone, A. M.  Foz, M. R.  Guglielmetti, C. M.  Pannuti, 
H. P. C. Artese, M. Feres, G. A. Romito, J. Clin. Periodontol. 2013, 40, 
443.
[6]	 F.  Graziani, D.  Karapetsa, B.  Alonso, D.  Herrera, Periodontology 
2000 2017, 75, 152.
[7]	 D. Herrera, P. Matesanz, C. Martín, V. Oud, M. Feres, W. Teughels, 
J. Clin. Periodontol. 2020, 47, 239.
[8]	 E. T.  Carrera, H. B.  Dias, S. C. T.  Corbi, R. A. C.  Marcantonio, 
A. C. A. Bernardi, V. S. Bagnato, M. R. Hamblin, A. N. S. Rastelli, 
Laser Phys. 2016, 26, 123001.
[9]	 D. Kunz, J. Wirth, A. Sculean, S. Eick, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther. 
2019, 26, 306.
[10]	 A. Pfitzner, B. W. Sigusch, V. Albrecht, E. Glockmann, J. Periodontol. 
2004, 75, 1343.
[11]	 X.  Sun, L.  Wang, C. D.  Lynch, X.  Sun, X.  Li, M.  Qi, C.  Ma, C.  Li, 
B. Dong, Y. Zhou, H. H. K. Xu, J. Dent. 2019, 81, 70.
[12]	 T.  Zhang, D.  Ying, M.  Qi, X.  Li, L.  Fu, X.  Sun, L.  Wang, Y.  Zhou, 
Molecules 2019, 24, 2692.
[13]	 M. Qi, X. Li, X. Sun, C. Li, F. R. Tay, M. D. Weir, B. Dong, Y. Zhou, 
L. Wang, H. H. K. Xu, Dent. Mater. 2019, 35, 1665.
[14]	 J. Karhausen, V. H. Haase, S. P. Colgan, Cell Cycle 2005, 4, 255.
[15]	 R. T.  Mendes, D.  Nguyen, D.  Stephens, F.  Pamuk, D.  Fernandes, 
H. Hasturk, T. E. V. Dyke, A. Kantarci, Clin. Exp. Dent. Res. 2018, 4, 241.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2101040  (15 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
[16]	 D.  Yang, G.  Yang, S.  Gai, F.  He, C.  Li, P.  Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2017, 9, 6829.
[17]	 L. H. Liu, Y. H. Zhang, W. X. Qiu, L. Zhang, F. Gao, B. Li, L. Xu, 
J. X. Fan, Z. H. Li, X. Z. Zhang, Small 2017, 13, 1701621.
[18]	 Q.  Jia, J.  Ge, W.  Liu, X.  Zheng, S.  Chen, Y.  Wen, H.  Zhang, 
P. A. Wang, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1706090.
[19]	 L. H.  Fu, Y.  Wan, C.  Li, C.  Qi, T.  He, C.  Yang, Y.  Zhang, J.  Lin, 
P. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2009848.
[20]	 W. Fan, W. Bu, B. Shen, Q. He, Z. Cui, Y. Liu, X. Zheng, K. Zhao, 
J. Shi, Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 4155.
[21]	 M.  Ding, Z.  Miao, F.  Zhang, J.  Liu, X.  Shuai, Z.  Zha, Z.  Cao, 
Biomater. Sci. 2020, 8, 4157.
[22]	 S.  Zhang, Q.  Li, N.  Yang, Y.  Shi, W.  Ge, W.  Wang, W.  Huang, 
X. Song, X. Dong, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1906805.
[23]	 Q.  Tang, Z.  Cheng, N.  Yang, Q.  Li, P.  Wang, D.  Chen, W.  Wang, 
X. Song, X. Dong, Biomaterials 2019, 205, 1.
[24]	 W. Zhang, S. Li, X. Liu, C. Yang, N. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 28, 
1706375.
[25]	 M. D.  Liu, D. K.  Guo, R. Y.  Zeng, J. J.  Ye, S. B.  Wang, C. X.  Li, 
Y. X.  Sun, S. X.  Cheng, X. Z.  Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 
2006098.
[26]	 J. Zhang, M. Xu, Y. Mu, J. Li, M. F. Foda, W. Zhang, K. Han, H. Han, 
Biomaterials 2019, 218, 119312.
[27]	 J.  Huang, Y.  Huang, Z.  Xue, S.  Zeng, Biomaterials 2020, 262, 
120346.
[28]	 X. He, B. Li, P. Wang, J. Ma, Water Res. 2019, 167, 115111.
[29]	 D.  Barreca, A.  Gasparotto, F.  Gri, E.  Comini, C.  Maccato, Adv. 
Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800792.
[30]	 D. Jampaiah, V. K. Velisoju, P. Venkataswamy, V. E. Coyle, A. Nafady, 
B. M.  Reddy, S. K.  Bhargava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 
32652.
[31]	 S. Ndongo, S. Khelaifia, J. C. Lagier, D. Raoult, Hum. Microbiome J. 
2020, 15, 100068.
[32]	 Q. Chen, L. Feng, J. Liu, W. Zhu, Z. Dong, Y. Wu, Z. Liu, Adv. Mater. 
2016, 28, 7129.
[33]	 S. Cui, D. Yin, Y. Chen, Y. Di, H. Chen, Y. Ma, S. Achilefu, Y. Gu, 
ACS Nano 2013, 676.
[34]	 J. M. Stein, N. Lintel-Höping, C. Hammächer, A. Kasaj, M. Tamm, 
O. Hanisch, J. Clin. Periodontol. 2013, 40, 1132.
[35]	 M. H.  Fang, P. Y.  Huang, Z.  Bao, N.  Majewska, T.  Leśniewski, 
S.  Mahlik, M.  Grinberg, G.  Leniec, S. M.  Kaczmarek, C. W.  Yang, 
K. M. Lu, H. S. Sheu, R. S. Liu, Chem. Mater. 2020, 32, 2166.
[36]	 V. S. Joshi, J. Kreth, D. Koley, Anal. Chem. 2017, 8, 7709.
[37]	 X.  Liu, M. M.  Ramsey, X.  Chen, X.  Chen, D.  Koley, M.  Whiteley, 
A. J. Bard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, 2668.
[38]	 S. P. Barros, R. Williams, S. Offenbacher, T. Morelli, Periodontology 
2000 2016, 70, 53.
[39]	 R. T. V. Kung, B. Ochs, J. M. Goodson, J. Clin. Periodontol. 1990, 17, 
557.
[40]	 P. E. Kolenbrander, R. J. Palmer Jr., A. H. Rickard, N. S. Jakubovics, 
N. I. Chalmers, P. I. Diaz, Periodontology 2000 2006, 42, 47.
[41]	 P. Marsh, E. Zaura, J. Clin. Periodontol. 2017, 44, S12.
[42]	 N. Kashef, M. R. Hamblin, Drug Resist. Updates 2017, 31, 31.
[43]	 T. Du, S. Chen, J. Zhang, T. Li, P. Li, J. Liu, X. Du, S. Wang, Nanoma-
terials 2020, 10, 1545.
[44]	 P. D. Marsh, BMC Oral Health 2006, 6, S14.
[45]	 S. Filoche, L. Wong, C. H. Sissons, J. Dent. Res. 2010, 89, 8.
[46]	 S.  Marchant, S.  Brailsford, A.  Twomey, G.  Roberts, D.  Beighton, 
Caries Res. 2001, 35, 397.
[47]	 N. Pan, J. A. Imlay, Mol. Microbiol. 2001, 39, 1562.
[48]	 J.  Mysak, S.  Podzimek, P.  Sommerova, Y. L.  Mi, J.  Bartova, 
T. Janatova, J. Prochazkova, J. Duskova, J. Immunol. Res. 2014, 2014, 
476068.
[49]	 S. C. Holt, J. L. Ebersole, Periodontology 2000 2005, 38, 72.
[50]	 M. Enersen, K. Nakano, A. Amano, J. Oral Microbiol. 2013, 5, 20265.
[51]	 E.  Connolly, E.  Millhouse, R.  Doyle, S.  Culshaw, G.  Ramage, 
G. P. Moran, Mol. Oral Microbiol. 2017, 32, 35.
[52]	 A.  Amano, I.  Nakagawa, N.  Okahashi, N.  Hamada, J. Periodontal 
Res. 2004, 39, 136.
[53]	 G. Storz, J. A. Imlayt, Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 1999, 2, 188.
[54]	 R. A. Miller, B. E. Britigan, Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 1997, 10, 1.
[55]	 Y. Sun, X, S. , X. Li, W. Li, C. Li, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, B. Dong, Biomate-
rials 2020, 268, 120614.
[56]	 C. Liu, L. Mo, Y. Niu, X. Li, X. Zhou, X. Xu, Front. Physiol. 2017, 8, 
439.
[57]	 H.  Kanzaki, S.  Wada, T.  Narimiya, Y.  Yamaguchi, Y.  Katsumata, 
K.  Itohiya, S.  Fukaya, Y.  Miyamoto, Y.  Nakamura, Front. Physiol. 
2017, 8, 351.
[58]	 R. W.  Redmond, I. E.  Kochevar, Photochem. Photobiol. 2006, 82, 
1178.
[59]	 G.  Hajishengallis, R. I.  Tapping, E.  Harokopakis, S.  Nishiyama, 
P. Ratti, R. E. Schifferle, E. A. Lyle, M. Triantafilou, K. Triantafilou, 
F. Yoshimura, Cell. Microbiol. 2006, 8, 1557.
[60]	 N. Bostanci, G. N. Belibasakis, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2012, 333, 1.
[61]	 Y. Guo, K. A. Nguyen, J. Potempa, Periodontology 2000 2010, 54, 15.
[62]	 T. Wang, H. Liu, G. Lian, S. Zhang, C. Jiang, Mediators Inflammation 
2017, 2017, 9029327.
[63]	 G. Lan, K. Ni, Z. Xu, S. S. Veroneau, Y. Song, W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2018, 140, 5670.
[64]	 J. Kim, H. R. Cho, H. Jeon, D. Kim, C. Song, N. Lee, S. H. Choi, 
T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 10992.
[65]	 J. Kim, H. Y. Kim, S. Y. Song, S. Go, H. S. Sohn, S. Baik, M. Soh, 
K. Kim, D. Kim, H. C. Kim, N. Lee, B. S. Kim, T. Hyeon, ACS Nano 
2019, 13, 3206.
[66]	 L.  Parisi, E.  Gini, D.  Baci, M.  Tremolati, M.  Fanuli, B.  Bassani, 
G.  Farronato, A.  Bruno, L.  Mortara, J. Immunol. Res. 2018, 2018, 
8917804.
[67]	 A. F. McGettrick, L. A. J. O’Neill, Cell Metab. 2020, 32, 524.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101040
 16163028, 2021, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202101040 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License