Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
Available online 7 April 2021
0924-2244/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Dietary prospects of coconut oil for the prevention and treatment of 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD): A review of recent evidences 
S.V. Ramesh a,*, Veda Krishnan b, Shelly Praveen b, K.B. Hebbar a 
a Division of Physiology, Biochemistry and Post-harvest Technology, ICAR-Central Plantation Crops Research Institute (ICAR-CPCRI), Kasaragod, Kerala, 671124, India 
b Division of Biochemistry, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute (ICAR-IARI), New Delhi, 110012, India   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Cognitive decline 
Ketone bodies 
Medium chain fatty acids (MCFAs) 
Lauric acid 
Therapeutics 
Virgin coconut oil (VCO) 
A B S T R A C T   
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a devastating neurodegenerative ailment having pathological hallmarks 
of plaques due to amyloid β (Aβ) peptides and neurofibrillary tangles in brain. These cerebral plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles potentially affect the neuronal synaptic transmission and ultimately cause cognitive 
decline. In the absence of an effective treatment module for AD, alternative therapeutic strategies are being 
explored. 
Scope and approach: Given the fact that dysregulation of brain glucose metabolism is an early detectable trait of 
AD, coconut oil and its variants/derivatives have generated considerable interests as an invaluable therapeutic 
agent for AD. The role of coconut oil-derived medium chain fatty acids (MCFAs) which are rapidly metabolized 
into ketone bodies to serve as an alternate source of energy for the cerebral tissue is well recognized. Recently, 
evidences underlying the mode of action of coconut oil in alleviating the symptoms of AD have started emerging. 
In this review, a comprehensive snapshot of the recent developments and biochemical basis of coconut oil- 
induced amelioration of AD symptoms including its dietary role in suppression of neuro-inflammation, 
reversing the process of neurodegeneration, enhancement of cell survival pathways and inhibition of secretion 
of Aβ peptides are presented. Investigations in animal models and clinical trials in humans using coconut oil and 
its derivatives aimed at reversing the AD-induced cognitive decline are also discussed. To conclude the knowl­
edge gaps in the treatment of AD using coconut oil and way forward are presented. 
Key findings and conclusion: Scientific evidences point toward the immense therapeutic value of coconut oil in the 
prevention or treatment of AD through its multi-pronged biochemical effects. Nevertheless, identification of 
bioactive components, besides MCFAs, responsible for the neuroprotective effects, clinical trials to fix the dosage 
and consolidation of information flow are warranted.   
1. Introduction 
Age-related neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits are the hall 
marks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). AD is recognized as the most com­
mon cause of dementia, morbidity and mortality in aging population 
(Bischof & Park, 2015; Brookmeyer et al., 2007; Swerdlow, 2011). Sci­
entific reports have divulged that at the ages >65 one in eight develops 
AD and the probability of developing the disease is still high (45–50%) 
at the age of 85 (Evans et al., 1989; Hebert et al., 2004). AD is charac­
terized by the gradual accumulation of cerebral extracellular amyloid-β 
(Aβ) peptides (Chetelat et al., 2010) causing senile plaques and intra­
cellular neurofibrillary tangles formed due to phosphorylation of tau, an 
essential microtubule associated protein involved in the process of 
microtubule assembly of the mature neurons (Asih et al., 2014; Iqbal 
et al., 2010). Tau, in its hyperphosphorylated state-as observed during 
AD-gets polymerized into paired helical filaments and amalgamates 
with straight filaments to form the characteristic neurofibrillary tangles 
(Iqbal et al., 2010). In a normal, healthy brain expression and clearance 
of amyloid precursor protein (APP)- proteolytic cleavage of which yields 
Aβ peptides-happen constitutively. However, with the age APP turnover 
activity is affected, causing the pathological condition of accumulation 
of Aβ (Kanekiyo et al., 2013). Another view states that AD is a protein 
mis-folding disease because of the accumulation of abnormally folded 
Aβ peptides, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and tau proteins in the 
brain and their translocation to mitochondrial membrane perpetuates 
neurodegeneration (Hashimoto et al., 2003). In addition, the increased 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: ramesh.sv@icar.gov.in (S.V. Ramesh).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Trends in Food Science & Technology 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tifs 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2021.03.046 
Received 18 July 2020; Received in revised form 15 March 2021; Accepted 29 March 2021   

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
202
oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, impaired cellular energy 
production and chronic inflammatory conditions severely contribute to 
the progression of the disease (Cunnane et al., 2011; Rubio-Perez & 
Morillas-Ruiz, 2012). Further, research evidences underscore the link­
age between the phenomenon of insulin deficiency and insulin resis­
tance with the neurodegeneration of AD which led to the proposal that 
AD represents type 3 diabetes (de la Monte & Wands, 2008). These 
cellular and biochemical modifications are initiated almost couple of 
decades before the clinically visible symptoms of AD (Villain et al., 
2012). Inhibitors of acetyl cholinesterase are primarily prescribed as 
drugs to treat AD which ameliorates the symptoms in some patients 
momentarily though (Hansen et al., 2008). Various factors such as age, 
genetic lineage, diet, environment, life style and metabolism are known 
to be the etiological factors of AD, among which diet could be considered 
to have prominent role in the prevention of this disease (Bhardwaj et al., 
2017). The pharmaceutical industry has not developed a drug or treat­
ment module that could considerably reverse the cognitive decline in 
AD, hence nutraceuticals and nutritive bio-actives are gaining greater 
attention as an alternative therapy to treat AD. In particular, scientific 
literature reveals the concept of utilizing coconut oil and its products in 
alleviating the symptoms associated with AD (Chatterjee et al., 2020; 
Fernando et al., 2015; Hu et al., 2015). The role of coconut oil-derived 
medium chain triglycerides (MCTs) in providing alternate source of 
energy to cerebral tissues during AD is well known (Augustin et al., 
2018; Chatterjee et al., 2020). In addition, we present the potential of 
coconut oil and its derivatives in the prevention or treatment of AD in 
view of recent biochemical findings supporting the efficacy of coconut 
oil in reversing the cognitive decline associated with AD. 
2. Coconut oil, its variants or derivatives and their bioactive 
components 
Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.), belongs to the family Palmae, is an 
important plantation crop grown throughout the tropic and sub-tropical 
regions of the world. The crop is grown in 13 M ha spread over 90 
countries including the India, Philippines, Indonesia, Brazil and Sri 
Lanka with an estimated production of 69836.36 million nuts. 
Commercially coconut oil is derived from the dried endosperm (kernel) 
of the fruit after undergoing various chemical processes such as refining, 
bleaching and deodorization (RBD). Coconut oil and its value-added 
products are rich in phenolics and flavonoids compounds with a 
considerable anti-oxidant potential. Coconut oil is generally extracted 
from the dried kernel (endosperm) for edible and other industrial pur­
poses. A superior variant of coconut oil, virgin coconut oil (VCO), is 
produced in a wet process directly from the coconut milk unlike the 
commercially produced coconut oil which is extracted from dried kernel 
of coconut fruit. VCO from the freshly harvested mature kernel is pro­
duced through hot or fermentation processes (inoculating probiotic 
bacteria such as Lactobacillus plantarum etc) without undergoing RBD 
processes (Manikantan et al., 2016) hence the natural aroma as well as 
nutrients of coconut are preserved and consequently it imparts 
numerous health benefits. Total phenolic content, total flavonoid con­
tent and consequently antioxidant potential are significantly high in 
VCO along with its characteristic aroma cocojam and latik (aroma 
emanating from roasted coconut and sweet aroma of cooked coconut, 
respectively) (Manikantan et al., 2016; Marina, Che Man, & Nazimah, 
2009; Ramesh et al., 2020). For this reason, VCO has been heralded as a 
popular functional food (Gopala Krishna et al., 2010). Coconut oil in 
general and VCO in particular have been demonstrated to have positive 
impact of lowering the plasma cholesterol, blood pressure and blood 
sugar, all of which are pre-disposing factors of AD (Nevin & Rajamohan, 
2004; Ramesh et al., 2019). Comparative analysis of administration of 
hot extracted VCO (HEVCO) and cold extracted VCO (CEVCO) in 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat models divulge that HEVCO was 
effective in reducing the blood glucose levels and lipid levels. Further 
anti-diabetic effect of HEVCO was attributed to its relatively high 
polyphenol content and other antioxidants that could significantly in­
crease the activities of antioxidant enzymes, and reduce the lipid per­
oxidation in liver (Mahadevappa et al., 2011). Similar investigation by 
Iranloye et al. (2013) also confirmed the hypoglycemic effect of CEVCO 
besides ameliorating the diabetes induced oxidative stress. In recent 
years there has been a greater and renewed interest in studying the 
impact of coconut-based diet for the management of AD since coconut 
and its products are proven cognitive enhancers (de la Rubia Ortí et al., 
2018; Rahim et al., 2017; Marina, Che Man, & Nazimah, 2009; Gopala 
Krishna et al., 2010). Although experimental studies have correlated the 
phenomena of hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis with the consumption 
of coconut oil, several reports have highlighted that heart ailments and 
hyperlipidemia are uncommon in geographic regions where coconut oil 
has been consumed profusely (Lindeberg & Lundh, 1993; Kumar, 1997). 
Also, the controlled temperature and other physical conditions applied 
during the preparation of VCO ensure preservation of various bioactive 
components such as tocopherols, tocotrienols, squalene, phytosterols 
and polyphenols (Gopala Krishna et al., 2010; Marina et al., 2009; 
Ramesh et al., 2020; Wagner, Wotruba, & Elmadfa, 2001). Adminis­
tration of VCO in experimental animals had increased the high density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-c), concomitant with the considerable 
decrease in the low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c), and reduced 
the LDL oxidation which are attributed to its rich total phenolic content 
(Nevin & Rajamohan, 2004; Famurewa & Ejezie, 2018). Besides 
phenolic components, fatty acid profile of VCO and coconut oil in gen­
eral are known to have predominance of medium chain triglycerides 
(MCTs). (Table 1). 
3. Coconut oil in AD therapeutics: raison d’ˆetre of medium chain 
fatty acids (MCFAs) 
The chief constituent of coconut oil is saturated fatty acids (~93%) 
and minimal proportion of both the mono-unsaturated fatty acids and 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (~7–9%) ensures its oxidative stability. 
Major proportion of saturated fatty acids in coconut oil is medium chain 
fatty acids (MCFAs) (~45–55%) comprising caproic acid (C6:0), cap­
rylic acid (C8:0), capric acid (C10:0) and lauric acid (C12:0). In addition, 
the triglycerol backbone of coconut oil has over 55% of MCFAs placed in 
either the sn-1 or sn-3 positions that ensures its quicker dietary ab­
sorption compared to the LCFAs prevalent in other vegetable oils 
(Porsgaard & Hoy, 2000; Dayrit, 2015; Orsavova et al., 2015). The 
preponderance of C12–C12–C12, C10–C12–C12 and C10–C12–C14, 
kind of stereo-specific positioning of fatty acids in the triglycerides of 
coconut oil makes it considerably superior in terms of composition and 
Table 1 
Coconut oil and various bioactives (Manikantan et al., 2016; Narayanankutty 
et al., 2018).  
Biochemical features 
Virgin coconut oil 
Commercial coconut oil 
Fatty acid composition (%) 
C6:0 Caproic acid 
0.6 
0.50 
C8:0 Caprylic acid 
0.8 
6.76 
C10:0 Capric acid 
6.4 
6.37 
C12:0 Lauric acid 
48.5 
47.10 
C14:0 Myristic acid 
17.6 
17.19 
C16:0 Palmitic acid 
8.4 
8.80 
C18:0 Stearic acid 
2.5 
3.03 
C18:1 Oleic acid 
6.5 
6.45 
C18:2 Linoleic acid 
1.5 
1.45 
C18:3 Linolenic acid 
– 
0.27 
SFAs (%) 
84.8 
89.75 
MUFAs (%) 
6.5 
6.45 
PUFAs (%) 
1.5 
1.72 
MCFAs (%) 
56.3 
60.73 
Tocopherols (μg/g) 
15–30 
2–6 
Phytosterols 
2.5–3.0 
0.5–1.0 
Total polyphenols content (μg/g) 
500–700 
150–250 
Anti-oxidant potential (%) 
75–90 
35–45  
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
203
metabolism (Dayrit, 2015; Karupaiah & Sundram, 2007). One of the 
early hallmarks of AD is the dysregulation of cerebral glucose meta­
bolism when the brain is unable to use glucose as its principal fuel but 
ketone bodies could be utilized as an alternative energy source (Asih 
et al., 2014). It was also documented that diet rich in MCFAs or ketone 
precursors such as coconut oil have a great potential to provide an 
alternate source of energy for the cerebral tissues (Ota et al., 2019; 
Taylor et al., 2018). Incidentally, the ketogenic diet with high fat (either 
long chain fatty acids-LCFAs or MCFAs) and low carbohydrate content 
has been utilized for the treatment of other neurodegenerative diseases 
such as epilepsy (Freeman & Kossoff, 2010; Martin et al., 2016). Earlier, 
a clinical trial that used a MCFA of coconut oil origin [formulated as 
caprylidene (Ketasyn, AC-1202) caprylic acid] was found to have 
promising effect in improving the cognitive abilities of AD afflicted 
patients (Henderson et al., 2009). It has led the marketing of capric acid 
as ‘medical food’ for tackling AD. 
3.1. Metabolic fate of coconut oil-derived triglycerides 
The dietary triglycerides are hydrolyzed by the activity of lipases in 
the gastro-intestinal tract to release their respective fatty acids. Lipases 
preferentially hydrolyze the MCTs to release MCFAs which are directly 
absorbed by the intestinal wall and are transported to liver through 
portal vein (Ruppin & Middleton, 1980). In contrast, other fats such as 
long chain triglycerides (LCTs), cholesterol and other saturated fats 
combine with proteins to form lipoproteins, which are transported 
through lymphatic system and are stored in the peripheral tissues 
(Ockner et al., 1972). While two-thirds of ingested MCFAs are trans­
ported to liver through portal vein almost all of the LCFAs are combined 
with proteins and are transported in the form of chylomicrons (Bragdon 
& Karmen, 1960). The major fatty acid of coconut oil, lauric acid 
(C12:0), also follows the route of MCFAs in its metabolism and it has 
greater propensity to bypass the lymphatic system and enter portal the 
venous transport system of fatty acids (Dayrit, 2015). Also, MCFAs 
crosses the mitochondrial membrane by passive diffusion unlike the 
LCFAs that are transported across by the membrane carnitine trans­
porters (Pelley, 2007). Metabolic profiling post the ingestion of 
MCFAs-based diet revealed that the diet mimics the conditions of star­
vation, ensuring relatively high blood circulatory ketone bodies whereas 
the blood glucose concentrations get immensely reduced. In the liver, 
MCFAs are rapidly metabolized and the ketone bodies namely 
β-hydroxybutyrate (β-HB), acetoacetate, and acetone are generated 
(Schonfeld & Wojtczak, 2016). β-HB, and acetoacetate are used for the 
energy production whereas acetone is a breakdown product of acetoa­
cetate. Acetoacetate and β-HB are short chain organic acids that liberally 
cross the cell membranes and cross the blood-brain barrier through 
proton-linked, organic acid-based transporters (Morris, 2005). Thus, 
coconut oil-derived ketone bodies effectively cross the blood-brain 
barrier and provide alternative source of energy for the brain cells 
viz., neurons and astrocytes (Morris, 2005; Page et al., 2009). Addi­
tionally, pathological condition of AD delineate that brain cells show 
decreased activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase which routes the 
in-bound glucose to TCA cycle (Veech & King, 2017). Hence, the ketone 
bodies derived from coconut oil rather than the canonical glucose could 
serve as a main source of energy for the brain which ultimately helps in 
the therapeutics of neurodegenerative diseases including AD (Balietti, 
Casoli, et al., 2010; Balietti, Giorgetti, et al., 2010; Henderson, 2008; 
Kashiwaya et al., 2013; Maalouf et al., 2009). This premise has led to the 
use of both the classic and MCT-based ketogenic diet as a potential 
therapeutic option for the treatment of Alzheimers’ disease (Courch­
esne-Loyer et al., 2017; Croteau et al., 2018; Lambrechts et al., 2012). 
Unlike the classic ketogenic diet, which derives 60–80% energy from the 
LCTs of 16–20 C atoms, the “alternative” MCTs-based ketogenic diet 
provides for 45% of the dietary energy from the MCFAs, with a provision 
for inclusion of carbohydrate thereby enhancing the rapid metabolism of 
MCTs to generate ketone bodies (Neal, 2017). In Alzheimer rat models, 
direct application of a ketone body, β-HB protects the neurons of the 
hippocampal region from the effects of amyloid β-toxicity (Kashiwaya 
et al., 2000). Additionally, in human subjects with mild cognitive 
impairment or AD, oral administration of MCTs improved the short term 
cognitive performance only in patients devoid of allele APOE ε4 sug­
gesting food vs. genotype interaction in cognitive functioning (Reger 
et al., 2004). Further, the demonstration of the ketogenic potential of 
lauric acid in the KT-5 astrocyte cell line cultures suggests the thera­
peutic potential of coconut oil in improving the brain health (Nonaka 
et al., 2016). Also, MCTs derived from coconut oil has greatly improved 
the palatability and practicability of the ketogenic diet. Though MCTs 
have overall record of safety in all the species studied including humans 
(Traul et al., 2000) the adverse effects such as gastrointestinal discom­
fort warrants mitigation strategies. In this context, the development of 
novel way of creating hyperketonemia using ketone monoester (KME) is 
a promising approach. To maintain sufficient concentration of ketone 
bodies in plasma, esters of ketone bodies (1,3-butanediol monoester of 
βHB and glyceryl-tris-3-hydroxybutyrate) have been devised and orally 
administered 
as 
a 
potential 
ketotheraphy 
alternative 
for 
cognitive-deficit diseases including AD (Hashim & VanItallie, 2014). 
Ketones blocked the entry of amyloid-β 42, a pathological hall mark 
protein of AD, in to the neurons thereby restoring the mitochondrial 
complex I activity, reducing the oxidative stress and enhanced the 
synaptic plasticity (Yin et al., 2016). Peripheral administration of ketone 
bodies improved the learning and memory in AD mouse models (Yin 
et al., 2016). 
3.2. Ketone bodies as signaling metabolites 
Ketone bodies are long recognized as supplier of energy to the pe­
ripheral tissues including brain during fasting or prolonged physical 
activity. Intriguingly recent evidences have highlighted the role of ke­
tone bodies especially β-HB as acting as signaling metabolite (Møller, 
2020). As a cellular signaling molecule, β-HB, function as a ligand and 
binds the G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) viz., hydroxyl-carboxylic 
acid receptor 2 (HCAR2) and free fatty acid receptor 3 (FFAR3). These 
interactions inhibit lipolysis through a negative feed-back mechanism 
and also cause the reduced sympathetic tone and lower metabolic rate 
(Newman & Verdin, 2014). It was hypothesized that the neuroprotective 
effects of ketone bodies could be ascribed to the effect of β-HB on HCAR2 
(Rahman et al., 2014). β-HB also antagonizes the NOD-like receptor 
protein 3(NLRP3) inflammasome leading to inhibition of inflammation 
and endoplasmic reticulum stress (Bae et al., 2016). Collectively the 
signaling role of β-HB implies that it has anti-inflammatory, anti-­
atherogenic, and anti-oxidative stress potential (Møller, 2020). β-HB 
inhibits class of proteins called histone deacetylases (HDACs) that are 
involved in the suppression of gene expression. Removal of acetyl 
groups from the histone and non-histone proteins mediated by HDACs 
result in transcriptional repression of genes (Yang, Shan, et al., 2019; 
Yang, Xue, et al., 2019). Inhibition of HDACs might be an important 
neuroprotective mechanism of β-HB since Valproic acid (VPA), widely 
used anti-seizure drug, has inhibitory role on HDACs (Monti et al., 
2009). Also, inhibitory effects of β-HB on HDACs have a considerable 
suppressive effect on oxidative stress (Newman & Verdin, 2014; Shi­
mazu et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2017) and anti-ageing processes (Yang 
et al., 2019; Sharma & Ramanathan, 2020). β-HB is recognized as one of 
the ‘hub metabolites’ having role in signaling and epigenetic changes 
associated with aging (Sharma and Ramanathan, 2020). Consequently, 
β-HB could potentially reverse the aging associated metabolic dysregu­
lation observed in AD. Hence, it could be inferred that β-HB has a sub­
stantial neuroprotective role through modulation of HDACs and 
inflammasomes and oxidative stress responses. Recently, combination of 
ketone bodies (β-HB and acetoacetate) has been demonstrated to pro­
mote the Amyloid-β1–40 clearance from brain to blood in a BBB in vitro 
model, brain-like endothelial cells (BLECs). Further, the involvement of 
proteins namely low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
204
(LRP1) and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of protein (called as 
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) was proven in the cellular process of Aβ efflux 
(Versele et al., 2020) lending credence to the role of ketone bodies in 
ameliorating AD. 
The anti-aging gene Sirtuin 1 (Sirt 1) encoding a NAD + dependent, 
class III protein deacetylase is critical for various cellular processes such 
as cell cycle, DNA repair, inflammation, apoptosis, aging and stress 
response (Michan & Sinclair, 2007). The co-operative action of SIRT1 
and retinoic acid receptor-β (RARβ) in the neuron cells activates ADAM 
10 α-secretase gene thereby suppresses the production of Aβ (Lee et al., 
2014). Also, SIRT1 has been involved in the hepatic Aβ clearance 
mechanism under the conditions of diabetes and neurodegenerative 
diseases (Martins, 2017). Deacetylation activity of SIRT1 has been 
shown to improve the cognition and memory through the modulation of 
ROS, Aβ, and p-tau and promote the neuronal survival (Cao et al., 2017). 
Hence, inhibition of Sirtuin 1 protein product in brain and peripheral 
cells due to diet derived ketone bodies could potentially arrest its role in 
suppressing the production of Aβ. But the effects of deacetylation are not 
reported in brain tissues though the transcriptional modifications 
following the deacetylation could cause antioxidative effects in brain 
(Yang et al., 2019). Therefore, the promising role of ketone bodies in 
alleviating the neurodegeneration effects and its therapeutic potential in 
treating AD requires to be considered in conjunction with its effect on a 
major brain HDAC, protein SIRTUIN1. 
3.3. Other potential bioactives of VCO 
VCO has other bio-constituents with sufficient nutritional and health 
potential. For instance considerable amount of polyphenols of phenolic 
acids and flavans (84 mg/100 ml of oil) are present in oil. Processing of 
coconut oil determines the final concentration of bioactive compounds 
since VCO which undergoes limited processing preserves phenolics and 
other constituents than RBD oil. A remarkable link between the total 
phenolic content and its effect on radical scavenging activity and 
reducing power was known (Marina, Che Man, & Nazimah, 2009). 
Further, an increase in GSH content and the effective functioning of 
GSH-mediated antioxidant systems and its interaction with antioxidant 
response element enhances antioxidant potential of the cells due to 
phenolic content of the VCO (Illam et al., 2017). Some of the major 
phenolic acids characterized in VCO are caffeic acid, syringic acid, 
ferulic acid among others (Marina, Che Man, & Nazimah, 2009). Above 
all, ferulic acid is an important phenolic acid component of VCO with 
significant neuroprotective properties owing to its antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory properties (Rahim et al., 2020). The antioxidant po­
tential of ferulic acid is chiefly due to the inhibition of ROS formation, its 
neutralization effects on the free radicals, chelation effect of protonated 
metal proxidants, inhibition of enzymes involved in ROS generation and 
simultaneous enhancement of the activities of enzymes involved in ROS 
scavenger functions. Thus ferulic acid arrest the cascade of ROS re­
actions by trapping the radical ions and forming phenoxy radicals or it 
may act as hydrogen donor to the radicals (Zdu´nska et al., 2018). VCOs 
also constitute a significant quantum of flavonoids (flavanones, dihyr­
doflavonols) and vitamins A and E (Nevin & Rajamohan, 2006). 
Phytosterol content of HEVCO and CEVCO are 2.86 ± 0.01 and 2.25 ±
0.11 μg/g, respectively. Similarly, the corresponding values of tocoph­
erols are 17.87 ± 2.11 and 27.65 ± 3.09 (Srivastava et al., 2017). A 
serving of VCO provides 13.5 mg of phytosterols (Ngampeerapong et al., 
2018) which does not warrant labeling it as a bioactive component 
nonetheless, the role of phytosterols in reducing the blood cholesterol 
levels and thereby according cardiovascular benefits (Yang et al., 2019) 
could not be disregarded. 
4. Neuroprotective effects of coconut oil-outcomes of cell 
culture studies and dietary supplementation 
Besides the protective effect of MCFAs on cerebral tissues, studies 
have been conducted recently to assess the neuroprotective effectiveness 
of coconut oil directly in the cell cultures and also through dietary 
supplementation (Bansal et al., 2019; Mirzaei et al., 2019; Mirzaei et al., 
2019; Nafar et al., 2017; Nafar & Mearow, 2014; Nishimura et al., 2018). 
The multi-pronged modulatory effects of coconut oil on mitochondrial 
irregularities, enhancement of cell survival pathways, amelioration of 
neurological inflammation, and inhibition of Aβ secretion are discussed 
below. 
4.1. Coconut oil reverses the age-related mitochondrial disorders of 
neurons 
Eventhough induction of ketosis through MCFAs has multiple ben­
efits such as improved energy metabolism, proper functioning of mito­
chondria of the neuronal cells and also reduction of the Aβ-peptide 
precursors (Balietti, Giorgetti, et al., 2010; Studzinski et al., 2008), diets 
supplemented with hydrogenated coconut oil exerts vascular changes 
and morphological features that are injurious in rat hippocampus 
(Freeman & Granholm, 2012; Granholm et al., 2008). Hence, a pilot 
study was conducted to investigate the effect of direct administration of 
VCO to cortical neurons of rodent models treated with Aβ peptide (Nafar 
& Mearow, 2014). In vitro study on the cortical neuronal cells co-treated 
with VCO following the exposure of 7.5 μM, Aβ peptide enhanced its 
survival compared to the neuronal cells treated only with Aβ peptides. 
Additionally, presence of coconut oil has ameliorated the mitochondrial 
disorders such as its increased circularity, and decreased size that are 
associated with Aβ treatment (Nafar & Mearow, 2014). It was also 
proposed that the beneficial effect of coconut oil could be due to the 
ketogenic potential of astrocytes, specifically glial cells and the potential 
astrocyte-neuron ketone body shuttle. However, in this study the 
cortical neuronal cells were simultaneously treated with the Aβ peptides 
and coconut oil. It would be of considerable interest to investigate if the 
encouraging effect of coconut oil in reversing the harmful effects of Aβ 
peptides be replicated in neurons previously treated with Aβ. 
4.2. Coconut oil improves the signaling of cell survival pathways 
A time-course study on Aβ peptide treatment of neuron cells and 
direct application of coconut oil revealed that pre-treatment of neuronal 
cells to coconut oil was most effectual however cells pre-exposed to Aβ 
peptide could be rescued by subsequent application of coconut oil even 
after 1–6 h (Nafar et al., 2017). On the other hand, lauric acid also 
showed the protection against Aβ peptide treatment and enhanced the 
survival of cortical neuron cells however it could not match the neuro­
protective effects of complete coconut oil. Immunocytochemistry anal­
ysis of cortical neuron cells exposed to Aβ reveal that coconut oil 
treatment substantially reduce the number of neurons with cleaved 
caspase-3 (ClCasp3) - a biochemical marker of apoptosis. Similarly, 
cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) signals assessed through CellRox 
assay were high when the cells were exposed to Aβ for 6 and 24 h 
however ROS signals were considerably lowered in the presence of co­
conut oil. Similar effects of enhanced activities of enzymatic 
anti-oxidants, along with decreased levels of cholinesterase and nitric 
oxide (NO) were documented by Mirzaei et al. (2019). Pre-treatment of 
coconut oil could effectively alleviate the Aβ-induced loss of synaptic 
puncta (synaptophysin) (Nafar et al., 2017). Further, expression and 
phosphorylation status of enzymes involved in cell survival signaling 
divulged that coconut oil prevented the Aβ-induced hypophosphor­
ylation of Akt (RAC serine/threonine kinase), GSK3 (glycogen synthase 
kinase 3) and ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase). Hence, in the 
presence of coconut oil Akt, GSK3 and ERK enzymes remain in their 
phosphorylated state engendering the activation of Akt, ERK and inhi­
bition of GSK3. It is proposed as a biochemical basis of cell survival 
promoting effects of coconut oil (Nafar et al., 2017). 
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
205
4.3. Coconut oil ameliorates inflammasome-induced neurological 
inflammation 
Neuroinflammation associated with oxidative stress is a character­
istic feature of many neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington’s 
disease, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis and AD. During the 
initial stages of inflammation, neuro-inflammatory cells are activated by 
the inflammasomes– the macromolecular structures with the sensors of 
pathogen or damage-derived molecular patterns causing the production 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and rapid cell death via caspase-1 
(Freeman & Ting, 2016). Prominently, NOD-like receptor family pyrin 
domain-3 containing (NLRP3) inflammasome has a critical role in the 
etiology of neurological disorders (AD) (Saresella et al., 2016) following 
the activation by Aβ in microglia. Therefore, inflammasomes are 
considered as the potential therapeutic targets (Song et al., 2017). 
Further high fat diet (HFD) and obesity are interlinked with the preva­
lence of AD as both these factors cause neurodegeneration, neural 
changes and impairment of memory (Komaki et al., 2015) . Pistell et al. 
(2010) had demonstrated that HFD disturbs the neuro-physiological 
mechanisms underlying memory and cognition, by increasing the pro­
duction of anomalous cytokines which in turn activates the inflamma­
tory signaling pathways. Thus, HFD affects the inflammatory markers 
and increases the oxidative stress resulting in the likelihood of large 
scale outbreak of AD (Swerdlow, 2011). Hence, Mirzaei et al., (2019) 
studied the effects of VCO against AD and HFD in male Wistar rat 
models. Rats receiving Aβ and HFD showed marked impairment in 
memory owing to the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome and oxidative 
stress leading to reduced glutathione levels. Nevertheless, experimental 
animals treated with VCO exhibited reduced expression of genes asso­
ciated with inflammasome formation and reduced the oxidative stress. 
Congo red staining of hippocampus sections showed that the VCO doses 
(8% and 10%) has significantly reduced the number of Aβ-induced 
plaques (Mirzaei et al., 2019). Further, VCO supplementation improved 
the 
number 
of 
intact 
cells 
in 
CA1 
hippocampal 
region. 
Immuno-histochemistry analysis illustrated that VCO significantly (10% 
VCO dosage) reduced the count of positive phosphorylated tau cells in 
CA1 region (Mirzaei et al., 2019). Since the anti-inflammatory (Intah­
phuak et al., 2010), anti-oxidant (Nevin & Rajamohan, 2006), effects of 
VCO along with the lipid lowering properties (Nevin & Rajamohan, 
2008) are already recognized, Mirzaei et al., (2019) corroborated it’s 
potential as a therapeutic agent in simultaneously modulating lipid 
profiles, and reversing the inflammasome-induced neurodegeneration in 
rat models. Also, this study proves the additive effect of dyslipidemia in 
aggravating the neurological effects of Aβ and the potential of VCO in 
reversing those deleterious effects. The injurious effects of Aβ-induced 
neurotoxicity powered by iNOS/NO causing strong rise in the nitric 
oxide levels in hippocampus is potentially reversed by the administra­
tion of VCO (Mirzaei et al., 2019). 
4.4. Coconut oil impairs ADP-ribosylation factor-1 (ARF1) expression to 
hamper Aβ secretion 
Extracellular accumulation of Aβ in rat hippocampal cells is corre­
lated with the suppression of synaptic transmission and cognitive 
diminution in AD (Kamenetz et al., 2003). The secretion of Aβ is 
dependent on the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and its downstream 
processing by β- and γ-secretases to release amyloid peptides (Zhang 
et al., 2011). Supporting the role of APP in the initiation of AD, silencing 
of APP expression enhanced the synaptic transmission of neurons 
(Priller et al., 2006). Following the biosynthesis of APP in Golgi appa­
ratus, it is transported to the cell surface by trans-Golgi network and a 
protein belonging to ras superfamily of GTPases, ADP-ribosylation fac­
tor-1 (ARF1) is critical for the secretion of Aβ (Tang et al., 2015; 
D’Souza-Schorey & Chavrier, 2006). The treatment of N2a cells 
expressing the human APP gene (N2a/APP695) with coconut oil not 
only decreased the APP expression, but also reduced the secretion of 
amyloid peptides. Additionally, immunostaining revealed the disruption 
of co-localization of APP with ARF1 following coconut oil treatment 
suggesting that this molecular interaction is affected and the importance 
of ARF1 in the APP expression was demonstrated. Additionally, 
siRNA-mediated ARF-1 knock-out impaired the secretion of amyloid 
peptides corroborating the interaction of APP and ARF1 in determining 
the extracellular secretion of amyloid peptides (Bansal et al., 2019). 
Thus, this study established that coconut oil impaired the expression of 
ARF1 both at the protein and mRNA level. It has provided a novel mode 
of action or working hypothesis for the biochemical effect of coconut oil 
in alleviating the secretion of Aβ peptides that are characteristic feature 
of AD. 
4.5. Coconut oil alleviates the neuro-inflammatory responses 
Neuropathology of AD is characterized with the hyper-activation of 
microglia, production of nitric oxide (NO), and release of pro- 
inflammatory cytokines. Although microglial activation is essential for 
innate immunity, and removal of cellular toxic debris through its 
phagocytic activity, its hyper-activation in neurodegenerative diseases 
such as AD aggravates the pathophysiology. The effect of lauric acid in 
alleviating the symptoms of AD was explored in lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS)-induced mouse microglial cell line, BV-2 (Nishimura et al., 2018). 
Lauric acid effectively attenuated the LPS-induced oxidative stress by 
curtailing ROS production, suppressed NO production by inhibiting NO 
synthase protein, and affected the production of pro-inflammatory cy­
tokines (IL1β, IL-6, TNF-α) through G-protein-coupled receptor (i.e. 
GPR40)-dependent pathway. It was deduced that the neuroprotective 
effect of lauric acid in inhibiting the NO production was significantly 
reversed by GW 1100 which antagonizes the lauric acid receptor 
[GPR40] on the plasma membrane (Nishimura et al., 2018). Also, the 
phagocytic activity of microglia-induced by aggregated Aβ1-42 (100 nM) 
(C- terminal variant of Aβ) -was reduced by LA treatment. Though 
GPR40-PUFA complex has been suggested as a potent therapeutic agent 
(Khan & He, 2017) for neuropathological conditions including AD, 
Nishimura et al., (2018) proved that suppression of microglial activation 
in AD could occur via GPR40-lauric acid, dependent cascade. In 
conclusion, these orphan G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs)-the large 
family of transmembrane proteins-are recognized as potential drug 
targets for neurodegenerative diseases (Alavi, Karimi, & Roohbakhsh, 
2019). Interestingly, ketone bodies are not involved in the suppressive 
effect of lauric acid on NO production, eventhough previous studies 
have shown that ketone bodies acts as signaling molecules in central 
nervous system (Achanta & Rae, 2017; Newman & Verdin, 2014; 
Rojas-Morales et al., 2016), and most importantly βHB exhibited 
anti-neuroinflammatory effects in neurodegenerative diseases such as 
AD (Koppel & Swerdlow, 2018). 
5. Clinical evidences for the neuroprotective effects of coconut 
oil 
Several investigations have proved that the coconut oil and its de­
rivatives confer neuroprotective effects by improving the cognitive 
functions. Henderson et al. (2009) showed that coconut oil and palm 
kernel oil-derived MCT (>95% of fatty acid C8:0; remaining C6:0 and 
C10:0) exerted significant pharmacological response in terms of 
elevated serum β-HB levels and cognitive scores compared to the pla­
cebo and baseline group. Congruent with the findings of Reger et al., 
2004, the improved cognitive effects were most prominent in 
APOEε4−carriers (Henderson et al., 2009). Similarly, studies have 
indicated the enhanced cognitive functioning in the experimental ani­
mals following the administration of VCO due to increased acetyl 
choline (Ach), causing effective synaptic transmission, and by improving 
the production of anti-oxidants in brain microenvironment (Rahim 
et al., 2017). Mediterranean diet enriched with coconut oil exerted 
improved cognitive functions in AD patients and the positive effect was 
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
206
found more in women patients with mild state of AD (de la Rubia Ortí 
et al., 2018). Similarly, administration of extra virgin coconut oil 
(EVCO) 40 ml/day in patients suffering from Alzheimer’s dementia, 
resulted in statistically significant improvement in cognitive functions of 
subjects especially among the women patients without type II diabetes 
mellitus (Hu et al., 2015). Interestingly, EVCO is extracted from freshly 
grated coconut endosperm by using natural enzymes in a heat-free 
process which not only preserves aroma and flavor but also the 
ethno-medical ingredients of the coconut oil (Bridgemohan & Khan, 
2013). Dietary intervention by designing a novel Keto-Medite approach 
which is rich in vitamins and substituting the saturated animal fat with 
coconut oil along with appropriate physical exercise could delay in the 
onset of AD in middle –aged persons (Perng et al., 2017). Given the 
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of VCO, the prophylactic 
effect of VCO was investigated (5 ml per day for 30 days) in AD model 
rats induced by aluminium chloride (AlCl3). VCO administration 
significantly reduced the levels of glutamate in both the hippocampus 
and prefrontal cortex compared to the control animals. VCO has also 
increased the antioxidant status of the hippocampus and cortex by 
increasing the glutathione (GSH) levels and reducing the concentration 
of malondialdehyde (MDA) only in cortex (Alghamdi, 2018). This study 
is significant considering the fact that there are renewed interests for the 
search of therapeutic agents that modulate the redox homeostasis in 
neurodegenerative diseases (McBean et al., 2017). The multiple health 
benefits of VCO such as attenuation of damage to nerve cells, marked 
reduction in the activities of tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) protein, 
induced nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), acetyl choline esterase (AChE) and 
oxidative stress and reduced number of phosphorylated tau proteins in 
Aβ-induced Alzheimer’s rat models (Mirzaei et al., 2019). Thus, 
multi-targeted approach of VCO augurs well for the treatment of AD. 
Besides the direct administration of coconut oil in AD treatment, the role 
of MCTs in alleviating the symptoms of AD has been recognized since 
long. For instance, oral dose of MCTs in adults with memory disorders 
improved the cognitive functions albeit dependent on APOE genotype 
since only APOEε4−carriers showed improvement (Reger et al., 2004). 
Similarly, in a 3-month pilot trial, dietary oral intake of MCTs by pa­
tients with mild to moderate AD caused increased plasma β-HB levels 
and enhanced cognitive functioning during the period of treatment and 
reverted to baseline after the washout (Taylor et al., 2018). To avoid the 
inconveniences and adverse effects of ketogenic diet that increases the 
atherogenic lipids and minor gastro intestinal discomforts, a ketogenic 
agent (R)-3-hydroxybutyl (R)-3-hydroxybutyrate (also referred as KME) 
was designed to induce hyperketonemia (Newport et al., 2015). It has 
undergone safety and extensive toxicity tests in animals and human and 
meets US-FDA GRAS guidelines. KME based diets have shown improved 
cognitive abilities, behavior in humans (Newport et al., 2015) and 
showed anxiolytic and cognition-sparing properties in mouse model of 
AD (3xTgAD) (Kashiwaya et al., 2013). Further, histochemical exami­
nation of KME fed mice revealed decreased Aβ deposition and reduced 
the levels of hyper-phosphorylated tau whereby ameliorating the pro­
teopathic effects of AD (Kashiwaya et al., 2013). In addition to coconut 
oil, other derivative such as tender coconut water or young coconut juice 
has proven effect in the treatment of AD. Administration of young co­
conut juice to the ovariectomised (ovx) rats significantly reduced the 
deposition of Aβ peptides in the cerebral cortex, concomitant with the 
reduced expression of GFAP and tau1 proteins in cerebral cortex and 
hippocampus respectively (Radenahmad et al., 2011). Since the brain 
hormone profile of ovx rats mimicked menopausal women with AD and 
it was suggested that tender nut water of coconut has a potential ther­
apeutic value for AD in them. 
6. Coconut oil in AD alleviation: ancillary considerations 
The biochemical links between the diet and neurodegenerative dis­
eases such as AD and Parkinson’s disease have started emerging (Martin 
et al., 2016). Studies have demonstrated that the bacterial derived 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and fungal derived mycotoxins regulate 
cholesterol and Aβ metabolism with potential implication for AD treat­
ment (Deane et al., 2009). LPS directly affects the membrane cholesterol 
by binding to cell membranes thereby increasing the interaction with Aβ 
peptide and causing their fibril formation (Martins, 2015). LPS attenu­
ates the transport of brain Aβ to peripheral tissue by disturbing the 
membrane cholesterol homeostasis as the latter is involved in seques­
tration of mycotoxins (Riley et al., 1990). Thus, the synergistic inter­
action between the LPS and mycotoxins cause dyslipidemia and 
neurodegeneration (Martins, 2015). These findings have led to the 
concept of nutritional interventions with diet characterized with low fat, 
cholesterol or carbohydrate is crucial for preventing the absorption of 
lipophilic LPS and mycotoxins and to avoid neurodegeneration (Martins 
2015). Hence, it is imperative to analyse the nature of coconut oil, 
including any potential LPS contamination, used in the treatment of AD. 
Nevertheless, recent studies have highlighted the potential of VCO ob­
tained from fermentation process and coconut oil derived lauric acid in 
ameliorating the LPS-induced cytotoxicity of neuroblastoma in Wistar 
rat models (Rahim et al., 2020) and LPS-induced liver inflammation in 
Sprague Dawley (SD) rat models (Khan et al., 2021), respectively. 
From the food processing perspective, it is imperative to investigate 
the stability and storage of VCO (and or its variants) though coconut oils 
and its derivatives have demonstrated appreciable stability in 
biochemical constituents (Henna Lu & Tan, 2009). Studies have proven 
that both HEVCO and CEVCO remain stable and are suitable for con­
sumption even after a 12 months storage period under room tempera­
ture (15–35 ◦C) or at 37 ◦C (Srivastava et al., 2013). Further blending of 
VCO with other edible oils (VCO-safflower oil and VCO-soybean oil 
blends) have been proven to have 12 months storage stability when kept 
in different packaging systems (Srivastava et al., 2017). 
7. Epidemiology of AD and the role of diet 
Alzheimer’s Association Report (2020) describing the public health 
impact of the disease, warns that the death reported due to 
non-communicable diseases such as stroke, heart ailments and deadly 
communicable disease caused due to HIV have decreased during the 
period 2000–2018 whereas deaths reported due to Alzheimer’s disease 
witnessed an increase of 146.2%. In America alone the total payments 
for the health care and other allied services for old age people with 
dementia has been estimated to be around $305 billion for the year 2020 
implying the substantial monetary pressure on the health care system. At 
global scale, number of individuals who lived with dementia including 
AD was 43.8 million increase of 23.6 million compared to the cases 
reported in 1990 (Nichols et al., 2019). 
In this context, diet components that predispose individuals to AD or 
offers protection against it have been identified. Diets rich in omega 3 
fatty acids not only confer general brain health but also reduce the risk 
of AD (van Gelder, Tijhuis, Kalmijn, & Kromhout, 2007). Similarly, high 
dietary intake of Vitamin D and antioxidant such as Vitamin E has been 
linked to the reduced risk of AD (Morris, 2009). A meta-analysis of in­
vestigations exploring the role of diet and AD reveal that majority of the 
studies have considered Mediterranean diet, and intake of antioxidants 
(including vitamin C, vitamin E and β-Carotene) and AD, whereas some 
studies have analyzed the intake of B vitamins, trans fat, saturated fat, 
cholesterol and total fat, folate, flavonoids, fish and omega-3-fatty acids, 
etc in the context of development of AD (Yusufov, Weyandt, & Pir­
yatinsky, 2017). It also acknowledges the fact that despite the limita­
tions of the methodology followed, diet provides an important point of 
intervention to modify the risk of AD. Majority of the studies have been 
conducted were from US, Canada, Europe and Australia etc ignoring the 
dietary richness of Asian and African geographic regions (Yusufov et al., 
2017). Hence, it warrants deeper analysis of dietary patterns of Eastern 
countries and its implication for the treatment of AD. Further diet-AD 
relationship would also help in devising a personalized nutritional 
recommendation based on anthropometric, genetic and blood 
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
207
Fig. 1. Schematic depiction of the multi-pronged neuroprotective effects of coconut oil and its derivatives offering immense potential for the treatment of 
Alzheimers’ disease (AD). 
Dietary MCFAs derived from the coconut oil undergoes ketogenesis in the liver yielding ketone bodies [β-hydroxybutyrate (β-HB), acetoacetate (AcAc), acetone (Ac)] 
which are transported to the brain and act not only as an alternative source of energy to the brain cells, which are under glucose hypometabolism during AD, but also 
function as signaling metabolites that modulate endogenous histone deacetylases (HDACs), inflammasomes and regulates the process of aging. On the other hand, co- 
application of coconut oil and amyloid –β (Aβ) peptides in cultured human cortical neuron cells or oral administration of virgin coconut oil (VCO) in animal models 
reveal that the oil improves the antioxidant status and activates the cell survival pathways of cortical cells and diminishes pro-inflammatory cytokines and neu­
roinflammation induced by Aβ, respectively. Coconut oil has been demonstrated to impair the co-localization of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and ADP- 
ribosylation factor-1 (ARF-1) in Golgi complex leading to declined secretion of Aβ peptides in N22 cell lines. Lauric acid a major MCFA component of coconut 
oil also attenuates the neuroinflammation stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). With the exception of MCFAs-derived ketone bodies, the bioactive components of 
coconut oil responsible for these biochemical effects have not been pinpointed. (The green upward or downward arrows indicate the biochemical effects of coconut 
oil nevertheless the bioactive components of the oil that causes these actions are yet to be identified; CO-Coconut oil; EVCO-Extra virgin coconut oil). (For inter­
pretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
208
biomarkers (Amini et al., 2020). 
8. Perspectives and concluding remarks 
In view of the dearth of therapies to prevent or delay the progression 
of AD along with the discovery that hypometabolism of glucose is a 
metabolic marker for AD (Bateman et al., 2012), diet-based intervention 
to treat or prevent the disease is a promising approach. Literature review 
has pointed toward that coconut oil either as a component of healthy 
diet or in ketogenic diet provides clinical and epidemiological evidences 
to support its neuroprotective role (Fig. 1). Accumulating evidences and 
clinical studies show that human trials are warranted further to decide 
the dosage of coconut oil for optimal benefits. Nonetheless, likening the 
effects of dietary MCFAs to that of coconut oil requires exercising 
caution and appropriate interpretation because the ketogenic potential 
and metabolic effects of C8 fatty acid cannot be generalized with that of 
coconut oil (Norgren et al., 2020; Vandenberghe et al., 2017). Moreover, 
contrary to the analysis of Dayrit (2015), recent studies report that the 
ketogenic properties of C8, C10 and C12 fatty acids vary significantly 
hence the different pathways of fatty acid metabolism proposed for 
MCFAs and LCFAs has to be proportional rather than an absolute choice 
(Vandenberghe et al., 2017; St-Pierre et al., 2019; Norgren et al., 2020). 
In support of this assertion Augustin et al. (2018) and Fernando et al. 
(2015) state that brain’s health as influenced by MCT and coconut oil 
could not be compartmentalized to the metabolic phenomenon of 
ketogenesis alone. In light of these developments, the biochemical basis 
for the constructive effects of coconut oil in alleviating neurological 
inflammation, mitochondrial disorders, and impairing the expression of 
Aβ secretion along with the augmentation of cell survival pathways 
warrants further in-depth investigations to assign these positive effects 
to specific bioactive components of the coconut oil (Fig. 1). Nonetheless, 
it is crucial to recognize the fact that ketone bodies as a signaling 
metabolite modulate the activities of cellular GPCR, NLRP3 inflamma­
some pathways and improve the anti-oxidant status of brain cells 
providing vital clues to the mode of action of coconut oil in according 
neuroprotective functions. Further, the coconut oil-derived fatty 
acids-led therapeutics have to be investigated in light of the recent ad­
vances in the field of nutriepigenomics divulging the role of dietary fatty 
acids in causing epigenetic changes (Donovan et al., 2020; Gonza­
lez-Becerra et al., 2019). Eventhough structure-function relationship of 
coconut oil derived lauric acid in providing antimicrobial properties is 
available 
(Dayrit, 
2015); 
investigations 
elucidating 
the 
structure-activity relationship for the main bioactive components of the 
coconut oil in conferring neuroprotective effects would be an interesting 
area of future research. 
As previously stated, oxidative stress is a crucial contributing factor 
for the progression of AD. Hence, therapies or nutraceutical approach to 
reduce the oxidative burden is also considered a primary approach to 
tackle AD. In this milieu, the therapeutic potential of coconut oil or VCO- 
derived polyphenols fraction requires a thorough investigation. It is also 
pertinent to devise suitable combination drugs utilizing other potent 
antioxidants such as Vitamins A, Vitamin C and Vitamin E along with 
carotenoids, flavonoids etc and to study their compatibility with VCO- 
derived polyphenol components (Farias et al., 2014). This approach 
appears rational given the fact that treatment of AD depends on multiple 
nutritional components and co-factors. 
It is also crucial to scrutinize the biochemical effects of coconut oil, 
VCO, MCTs and on the lipid profiles of the subjects in clinical trials and 
their propensity for the development of cardiovascular diseases (CVD), a 
risk factor for AD. Also the demerits in some of the clinical trials such as 
short-time of the study to investigate long term effects of AD, the need 
for placebo-controlled randomized trials and use of different neuro­
psychological tests makes it complex to compare among the similar 
studies. Further, the limitations of this review are also acknowledged 
since this compilation is profoundly inclined towards recounting the 
effect of coconut oil-derived MCFAs in alleviating the symptoms of AD, 
even as the scientific literature pertaining to the biochemical and mo­
lecular basis of the therapeutic effects of coconut oil have started 
emerging. It must also be emphasized that the differential effects of 
coconut oil and its variants such as VCO, EVCO, CEVCO, HEVCO and 
coconut oil derivatives such as MCTs have to be factored-in while 
arriving at a meaningful conclusion. Nevertheless, it can be safely 
concluded that coconut oil and its derivatives are very propitious as 
potential nutraceutical agents to treat neurological disorder such as AD. 
Author contribution statement 
Study design and conceptualization: SVR; drafting of various sec­
tions of the manuscript: SVR, VK, SP and KBH; Read and approved the 
final version of the manuscript: All authors. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by funding from ICAR-Central Plantation 
Crops Research Institute (ICAR-CPCRI Grant No: 1000766014 & 
1000767018). 
References 
Achanta, L. B., & Rae, C. D. (2017). β-Hydroxybutyrate in the brain: One molecule, 
multiple mechanisms. Neurochemical Research, 42(1), 35–49. 
Alavi, M. S, Karimi, G, & Roohbakhsh, A (2019). The role of orphan G protein-coupled 
receptors in the pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis: A review. Life sciences, 224, 
33–40. 
Alghamdi, B. S. A. (2018). Possible prophylactic anti-excitotoxic and anti-oxidant effects 
of virgin coconut oil on aluminium chloride-induced Alzheimer’s in rat models. 
Journal of Integrative Neuroscience, 17(3–4), 593–607. 
Alzheimer’s Association. (2020). 2020 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s 
and Dementia, 16, 391–460. https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.12068 
Amini, Y., Saif, N., Greer, C., Hristov, H., & Isaacson, R. (2020). The role of nutrition in 
individualized Alzheimer’s risk reduction. Curr Nutr Rep, 9, 55–63. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s13668-020-00311-7 
Asih, P. R., Chatterjee, P., Verdile, G., Gupta, V. B., Trengove, R. D., & Martins, R. N. 
(2014). Clearing the amyloid in Alzheimer’s: Progress towards earlier diagnosis and 
effective treatments - an update for clinicians. Neurodegenerative Disease Management, 
4, 363–378. 
Augustin, K., Khabbush, A., Williams, S., Eaton, S., Orford, M., Cross, J. H., et al. (2018). 
Mechanisms of action for the medium-chain triglyceride ketogenic diet in 
neurological and metabolic disorders. The Lancet Neurology, 17, 84–93. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30408-8 
Bae, H. R., Kim, D. H., Park, M. H., Lee, B., Kim, M. J., Lee, E. K., et al. (2016). Beta- 
Hydroxybutyrate suppresses inflammasome formation by ameliorating endoplasmic 
reticulum stress via AMPK activation. Oncotarget, 7, 66444–66454. https://doi.org/ 
10.18632/oncotarget.1211 
Balietti, M., Casoli, T., Di Stefano, G., Giorgetti, B., Aicardi, G., & Fattoretti, P. (2010a). 
Ketogenic diets: An historical antiepileptic therapy with promising potentialities for 
the aging brain. Ageing Research Reviews, 9, 273–279. 
Balietti, M., Giorgetti, B., Di Stefano, G., Casoli, T., Platano, D., Solazzi, M., Bertoni- 
Freddari, C., Aicardi, G., Lattanzio, F., & Fattoretti, P. (2010b). A ketogenic diet 
increases succinic dehydrogenase (SDH) activity and recovers age-related decrease 
in numeric density of SDH-positive mitochondria in cerebellar Purkinje cells of late- 
adult rats. Micron, 41, 143–148. 
Bansal, A., Kirschner, M., Zu, L., Cai, D., & Zhang, L. (2019). Coconut oil decreases 
expression of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and secretion of amyloid peptides 
through inhibition of ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1). Brain Research, 1704, 78–84. 
Bateman, R. J., Xiong, C., Benzinger, T. L., Fagan, A. M., Goate, A., Fox, N. C., 
Marcus, D. S., Cairns, N. J., Xie, X., Blazey, T. M., Holtzman, D. M., Santacruz, A., 
Buckles, V., Oliver, A., Moulder, K., Aisen, P. S., Ghetti, B., Klunk, W. E., McDade, E., 
… Morris, J. C. (2012). Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited 
Alzheimer’s disease. New England Journal of Medicine, 367, 795–804. 
Bhardwaj, D., Mitra, C., Narasimhulu, C. A., Riad, A., Doomra, M., & Parthasarathy, S. 
(2017). Alzheimer’s disease—current status and future directions. Journal of 
Medicinal Food, 20(12), 1141–1151. 
Bischof, G. N., & Park, D. C. (2015). Obesity and aging: Consequences for cognition, brain 
structure and brain function. Psychosomatic Medicine, 77(6), 697. 
Bragdon, J. H., & Karmen, A. (1960). The fatty acid composition of chylomicrons of chyle 
and serum following the ingestion of different oils. The Journal of Lipid Research, 1, 
167–170. 
Bridgemohan, P., & Khan, S. (2013). Extra virgin coconut oil (EVCO): Natural skin 
lightning enhancer with curcumin. In III international conference on postharvest and 
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
209
quality management of horticultural products of interest for tropical regions (Vol. 1047, 
pp. 207–210). 
Brookmeyer, R., Johnson, E., Ziegler-Graham, K., & Arrighi, H. M. (2007). Forecasting 
the global burden of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement, 3, 186–191. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2007.04.381 
Cao, Y., Yan, Z., Zhou, T., & Wang, G. (2017). SIRT1 regulates cognitive performance and 
ability of learning and memory in diabetic and non-diabetic models. J Diabetes Res, 
7121827. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/7121827 
Chatterjee, P., Fernando, M., Fernando, B., Dias, C. B., Shah, T., Silva, R., Williams, S., 
Pedrini, S., Hillebrandt, H., Goozee, K., & Barin, E. (2020). Potential of coconut oil 
and medium chain triglycerides in the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Mechanism of Ageing and Development, 186, 111209. 
Chetelat, G., Villemagne, V. L., Bourgeat, P., et al. (2010). Relationship between atrophy 
and b-amyloid deposition in Alzheimer disease. Annals of Neurology, 67, 3 17–324. 
Courchesne-Loyer, A., Croteau, E., Castellano, C. A., St-Pierre, V., Hennebelle, M., & 
Cunnane, S. C. (2017). Inverse relationship between brain glucose and ketone 
metabolism in adults during short-term moderate dietary ketosis: A dual tracer 
quantitative positron emission tomography study. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and 
Metabolism, 37, 2485–2493. 
Croteau, E., Castellano, C. A., Fortier, M., et al. (2018). A cross-sectional comparison of 
brain glucose and ketone metabolism in cognitively healthy older adults, mild 
cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease. Experimental Gerontology, 
18–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2017.07.004, 07. 
Cunnane, S., Nugent, S., Roy, M., Courchesne-Loyer, A., Croteau, E., Tremblay, S., et al. 
(2011). Brain fuel metabolism, aging, and Alzheimer’s disease. Nutrition, 27, 3–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nut.2010.07.021 
D’Souza-Schorey, C., & Chavrier, P. (2006). ARF proteins: Roles in membrane traffic and 
beyond. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 7(5), 347-358. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/nrm1910 
Dayrit, F. M. (2015). The properties of lauric acid and their significance in coconut oil. 
Journal of the American Oil Chemists Society, 92, 1–15. 
Deane, R., Bell, R. D., Sagare, A., & Zlokovic, B. V. (2009). Clearance of amyloid-β 
peptide across the blood-brain barrier: Implication for therapies in Alzheimer’s 
disease. CNS & Neurological Disorders - Drug Targets, 8(1), 16–30. 
Donovan, M. G., Wren, S. N., Cenker, M., Selmin, O. I., & Romagnolo, D. F. (2020). 
Dietary fat and obesity as modulators of breast cancer risk: Focus on DNA 
methylation. British Journal of Pharmacology, 177(6), 1331–1350. 
Evans, D. A., Funkenstein, H. H., Albert, M. S., Scherr, P. A., Cook, N. R., Chown, M. J., … 
Taylor, J. O. (1989). Prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease in a community population of 
older persons: Higher than previously reported. Jama, 262(18), 2551–2556. 
Famurewa, A. C., & Ejezie, F. E. (2018). Polyphenols isolated from virgin coconut oil 
attenuate cadmium induced dyslipidemia and oxidative stress due to their 
antioxidant properties and potential benefits on cardiovascular risk ratios in rats. 
Avicenna Journal of Phytomedicine, 8(1), 73–84. 
Farias, G. A., Guzman-Martinez, L., Delgado, C., & Maccioni, R. B. (2014). 
Nutraceuticals: A novel concept in prevention and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease 
and related disorders. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 42(2), 357–367. 
Fernando, W. M., Martins, I. J., Goozee, K. G., Brennan, C. S., Jayasena, V., & 
Martins, R. N. (2015). The role of dietary coconut for the prevention and treatment 
of Alzheimer’s disease: Potential mechanisms of action. British Journal of Nutrition, 
114, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007114515001452 
Freeman, L. R., & Granholm, A. C. E. (2012). Vascular changes in rat hippocampus 
following a high saturated fat and cholesterol diet. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & 
Metabolism, 32(4), 643–653. 
Freeman, J. M., & Kossoff, E. H. (2010). Ketosis and the ketogenic diet, 2010: Advances 
in treating epilepsy and other disorders. Advances in Pediatrics, 57, 315–329. 
Freeman, L. C., & Ting, J. P. (2016). The pathogenic role of the inflammasome in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Journal of Neurochemistry, 136(Suppl 1), 29–38. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13217 
Gonzalez-Becerra, K., Ramos-Lopez, O., Barron-Cabrera, E., Riezu-Boj, J. I., Milagro, F. I., 
Martinez-Lopez, E., & Martínez, J. A. (2019). Fatty acids, epigenetic mechanisms and 
chronic diseases: A systematic review. Lipids in Health and Disease, 18(1), 178. 
Gopala Krishna, A. G., Raj, G., Bhatnagar, A. S., Prasanth Kumar, P. K., & 
Chandrasekar, P. (2010). Coconut oil: Chemistry, production and its applications: A 
review. Ind Coconut J LIII, 3, 15–27. 
Granholm, A. C, Bimonte-Nelson, H. A, Moore, A. B., Nelson, A. E, Freeman, L. R, & 
Sambamurti, K (2008). Effects of a saturated fat and high cholesterol diet on memory 
and hippocampal morphology in the middle-aged rat. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 
14(2), 133–145. 
Hansen, R. A., Gartlehner, G., Webb, A. P., Morgan, L. C., Moore, C. G., & Jonas, D. E. 
(2008). Efficacy and safety of donepezil, galantamine, and rivastigmine for the 
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical 
Interventions in Aging, 3, 211–225. 
Hashimoto, M., Rockenstein, E., Crews, L., et al. (2003). Role of protein aggregation in 
mitochondrial dysfunction and neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s 
diseases. NeuroMolecular Medicine, 4, 21–23. 
Hashim, S. A., & VanItallie, T. B. (2014). Ketone body therapy: From the ketogenic diet to 
the oral administration of ketone ester. The Journal of Lipid Research, 55(9), 
1818–1826. https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.R046599 
Hebert, L., Scherr, P., Bienial, J., Bennell, D., & Evans, D. (2004). Alzheimer’s disease in 
the US population: Prevalence estimates using the 2000 census. 
Henderson, S. T. (2008). Ketone bodies as a therapeutic for Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neurotherapeutics, 5, 470–480. 
Henderson, S. T., Vogel, J. L., Barr, L. J., Garvin, F., Jones, J. J., & Costantini, L. C. 
(2009). Study of the ketogenic agent AC-1202 in mild to moderate Alzheimer’s 
disease: A randomized, double blind,placebo-controlled, multicenter trial. Nutrition 
and Metabolism, 6, 31. 
Henna Lu, F. S., & Tan, P. P. (2009). A Comparative study of storage stability in virgin 
coconut oil and extra virgin olive oil upon thermal treatment. International Food 
Research Journal, 16, 343–354. 
Hu, I. Y., De, J. L. R. O., Selvi, P. S., Sancho, S. C., Rochina, M. J., Manresa, N. R., & 
Montoya-Castilla, I. (2015). Coconut oil: Non-alternative drug treatment against 
alzheimer S disease. Nutricion Hospitalaria, 32(6), 2822–2827. 
Illam, S. P., Narayanankutty, A., & Raghavamenon, A. C. (2017). Polyphenols of virgin 
coconut oil prevent pro-oxidant mediated cell death. Toxicology Mechanisms and 
Methods, 27(6), 442–450. https://doi.org/10.1080/15376516.2017.1320458 
Intahphuak, S., Khonsung, P., & Panthong, A. (2010). Anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and 
antipyretic activities of virgin coconut oil. Pharmaceutical Biology, 48(2), 151–157. 
Iqbal, K., Liu, F., Gong, C. X., & Grundke-Iqbal, I. (2010). Tau in Alzheimer disease and 
related tauopathies. Current Alzheimer Research, 7(8), 656–664. 
Iranloye, B., Oludare, G., & Olubiyi, M. (2013). Anti-diabetic and antioxidant effects of 
virgin coconut oil in alloxan induced diabetic male Sprague Dawley rats. Journal of 
Diabetes Mellitus, 3, 221–226. https://doi.org/10.4236/jdm.2013.34034 
Kamenetz, F., Tomita, T., Hsieh, H., Seabrook, G., Borchelt, D., Iwatsubo, T., & 
Malinow, R. (2003). APP processing and synaptic function. Neuron, 37(6), 925–937. 
Kanekiyo, T., Cirrito, J. R., Liu, C. C., et al. (2013). Neuronal clearance of amyloid-beta 
by endocytic receptor LRP1. Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 19276–19283. 
Karupaiah, T., & Sundram, K. (2007). Effects of stereospecific positioning of fatty acids in 
triacylglycerol structures in native and randomized fats: A review of their nutritional 
implications. Nutrition and Metabolism, 4, 16. 
Kashiwaya, Y., Bergman, C., Lee, J. H., Wan, R., King, M. T., Mughal, M. R., Okun, E., 
Clarke, K., Mattson, M. P., & Veech, R. L. (2013). A ketone ester diet exhibits 
anxiolytic and cognition-sparing properties, and lessens amyloid and tau pathologies 
in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of Aging, 34, 1530–1539. 
Kashiwaya, Y., Takeshima, T., Mori, N., Nakashima, K., Clarke, K., & Veech, R. L. (2000). 
D-beta hydroxybutyrate protects neurons in models of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s 
disease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
97, 5440–5444. 
Khan, H. U., Aamir, K., Jusuf, P. R., Sethi, G., Sisinthy, S. P., Ghildyal, R., & Arya, A. 
(2021). Lauric acid ameliorates lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced liver inflammation 
by mediating TLR4/MyD88 pathway in Sprague Dawley (SD) rats. Life Sciences, 265, 
118750. 
Khan, M. Z., & He, L. (2017). The role of polyunsaturated fatty acids and GPR40 receptor 
in brain. Neuropharmacology, 113, 639–651. 
Komaki, A, Karimi, S. A, Salehi, I., Sarihi, A, Shahidi, S, & Zarei, M (2015). The treatment 
combination of vitamins E and C and astaxanthin prevents high-fat diet induced 
memory deficits in rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 131, 98–103. 
Koppel, S. J., & Swerdlow, R. H. (2018). Neuroketotherapeutics: A modern review of a 
century-old therapy. Neurochemistry International, 117, 114–125. 
Kumar, P. D. (1997). The role of coconut and coconut oil in coronary heart disease in 
Kerala, south India. Tropical Doctor, 27, 215–217. 
Lambrechts, D. A., Wielders, L. H., Aldenkamp, A. P., Kessels, F. G., de Kinderen, R. J., & 
Majoie, M. J. (2012). The ketogenic diet as a treatment option in adults with chronic 
refractory epilepsy: Efficacy and tolerability in clinical practice. Epilepsy and 
Behavior, 23, 310–314. 
Lee, H. R., Shin, H. K., Park, S. Y., Kim, H. Y., Lee, W. S., Rhim, B. Y., Hong, K. W., & 
Kim, C. D. (2014). Cilostazol suppresses β-amyloid production by activating a 
disintegrin and metalloproteinase 10 via the upregulation of SIRT1-coupled retinoic 
acid receptor-β. Journal of Neuroscience Research, 92(11), 1581–1590. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/jnr.23421 
Lindeberg, S., & Lundh, B. (1993). Apparent absence of stroke and ischaemic heart 
disease in a traditional melanesian island: A clinical study in kitava. Journal of 
Internal Medicine, 233, 269–275. 
Maalouf, M., Rho, J. M., & Mattson, M. P. (2009). The neuroprotective properties of 
calorie restriction, the ketogenic diet, and ketone bodies. Brain Research Reviews, 59, 
293–315. 
Mahadevappa, S., Arunchand, R., & Farhath, K. (2011). Anti-diabetic effects of cold and 
hot extracted virgin coconut oil. Journal of Diabetes Mellitus, 1(4), 118–123. https:// 
doi.org/10.4236/jdm.2011.14016 
Manikantan, M. R., Mathew, A. C., Madhavan, K., Arumuganathan, T., Arivalagan, M., 
Shameena Beegum, P. P., & Hebbar, K. B. (2016). Virgin coconut oil: Hot and 
fermentation process, technical bulletin No. 108. Kasaragod: Centenary Publication 43, 
ICAR-CPCRI & AICRP on PHET.  
Marina, A. M., Che Man, Y. B., & Nazimah, A. H. (2009a). Chemical properties of virgin 
coconut oil. Journal of the American Oil Chemists Society, 86, 301–307. 
Marina, A. M., Che Man, Y. B., Nazimah, S. A., et al. (2009b). Antioxidant capacity and 
phenolic acids of virgin coconut oil. International Journal of Food Sciences & Nutrition, 
60, 114–123. 
Martin, K., Jackson, C. F., Levy, R. G., & Cooper, P. N. (2016). Ketogenic diet and other 
dietary treatments for epilepsy. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2, 
CD001903. 
Martins, I. J. (2015). LPS regulates apolipoprotein E and Aβ interactions with effects on 
acute phase proteins and amyloidosis. Advances in Aging Research, 4, 69–77. 
Martins, I. J. (2017). Calorie sensitive anti-aging gene regulates hepatic amyloid beta 
clearance in diabetes and neurodegenerative diseases. EC Nutr, 1, 30–32. 
McBean, G. J., L´opez, M. G., & Wallner, F. K. (2017). Redox-based therapeutics in 
neurodegenerative disease. British Journal of Pharmacology, 174(12), 1750–1770. 
Michan, S., & Sinclair, D. (2007). Sirtuins in mammals: Insights into their biological 
function. Biochemical Journal, 404(1), 1–13. 
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
210
Mirzaei, F., Khazaei, M., Komaki, A., Amiri, I., & Jalili, C. (2019). Multitarget effects of 
coconut oil (Virgin Type) on Aβ-induced Alzheimer’s disease animal model. Archives 
of Neuroscience, 6(2), Article e85715. https://doi.org/10.5812/ans.85715 
Møller, N. (2020). Ketone body, 3-hydroxybutyrate: Minor metabolite-major medical 
manifestations. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. https://doi.org/ 
10.1210/clinem/dgaa370 
de la Monte, S. M., & Wands, J. R. (2008). Alzheimer’s disease is type 3 diabetes- 
evidence reviewed. Journal of Diabetes Science And Technology, 2(6), 1101–1113. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/193229680800200619 
Monti, B., Polazzi, E., & Contestabile, A. (2009). Biochemical, molecular and epigenetic 
mechanisms of valproic acid neuroprotection. Current Molecular Pharmacology, 2, 
95–109. https://doi.org/10.2174/1874-470210902010095 
Morris, A. A. (2005). Cerebral ketone body metabolism. Journal of Inherited Metabolic 
Disease, 28, 109–121. 
Morris, M. C. (2009). The role of nutrition in Alzheimer’s disease: Epidemiological 
evidence. European Journal of Neurology, 16, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468- 
1331.2009.02735.x 
Nafar, F., Clarke, J. P., & Mearow, K. M. (2017). Coconut oil protects cortical neurons 
from amyloid beta toxicity by enhancing signaling of cell survival pathways. 
Neurochemistry International, 105, 64–79. 
Nafar, F., & Mearow, K. M. (2014). Coconut oil Attenuates the effects of Amyloid-β on 
cortical neurons in vitro. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 39, 233–237. https://doi. 
org/10.3233/JAD-131436 
Narayanankutty, A., Illam, S. P., & Raghavamenon, A. C. (2018). Health impacts of 
different edible oils prepared from coconut (cocos nucifera): A comprehensive 
review. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 80, 1–7. 
Neal, E. (2017). “Alternative” ketogenic diets. In S. A. Masino (Ed.), Ketogenic diet and 
metabolic therapies (pp. 5–15). New York: Oxford University Press.  
Nevin, K. G., & Rajamohan, T. (2004). Beneficial effects of virgin coconut oil on lipid 
parameters and in vitro LDL oxidation. Clinical Biochemistry, 37, 830–835. 
Nevin, K., & Rajamohan, T. (2006). Virgin coconut oil supplemented diet increases the 
antioxidant status in rats. Food Chemistry, 99(2), 260–266. 
Nevin, K., & Rajamohan, T. (2008). Influence of virgin coconut oil on blood coagulation 
factors, lipid levels and LDL oxidation in cholesterol fed Sprague–Dawley rats. Eur. e- 
J. Clin. Nutr. Metab., 3(1), e1–e8. 
Newman, J. C., & Verdin, E. (2014). Ketone bodies as signaling metabolites. Trends in 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 25(1), 42–52. 
Newport, M. T., VanItallie, T. B., Kashiwaya, Y., King, M. T., & Veech, R. L. (2015). 
A new way to produce hyperketonemia: Use of ketone ester in a case of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Alzheimer’s and Dementia, 11(1), 99–103. 
Ngampeerapong, C., Chavasit, V., & Durst, R. W. (2018). Bioactive and nutritional 
compounds in virgin coconut oils. Malaysian Journal of Nutrition, 24(2), 257–267. 
Nichols, E., Szoeke, C. E., Vollset, S. E., Abbasi, N., Abd-Allah, F., Abdela, J., & 
Murray, C. J. (2019). Global, regional, and national burden of Alzheimer’s disease 
and other dementias, 1990–2016: A systematic analysis for the global burden of 
disease study 2016. The Lancet Neurology, 18(1), 88–106. 
Nishimura, Y., Moriyama, M., Kawabe, K., Satoh, H., Takano, K., Azuma, Y. T., & 
Nakamura, Y. (2018). Lauric acid alleviates neuroinflammatory responses by 
activated microglia: Involvement of the GPR40-dependent pathway. Neurochemical 
Research, 43(9), 1723–1735. 
Nonaka, Y., Takagi, T., Inai, M., Nishimura, S., Urashima, S., Honda, K., Aoyama, T., & 
Terada, S. (2016). Lauric acid stimulates ketone body production in the KT-5 
astrocyte cell line. Journal of Oleo Science. , Article ess16069. https://doi.org/ 
10.5650/jos.ess16069 
Norgren, J., Sindi, S., Sandebring-Matton, A., Kåreholt, I., Daniilidou, M., Akenine, U., 
Nordin, K., Rosenborg, S., Ngandu, T., & Kivipelto, M. (2020). Ketosis After intake of 
coconut oil and caprylic Acid—with and without glucose: A cross-over study in 
healthy older Adults. Frontiers in Nutrition, 7, 40. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnut.2020.00040 
Ockner, R. K., Manning, J. A., Poppenhausen, R. B., & Ho, W. K. (1972). A binding 
protein for fatty acids in cytosol of intestinal mucosa, liver, myocardium, and other 
tissues. Science, 177(4043), 56–58. 
Orsavova, J., Misurcova, L., Ambrozova, J. V., Vicha, R., & Mlcek, J. (2015). Fatty acids 
composition of vegetable oils and its contribution to dietary energy intake and 
dependence of cardiovascular mortality on dietary intake of fatty acids. International 
Journal of Molecular Sciences, 16(6), 12871–12890. 
Ota, M., Matsuo, J., Ishida, I., Takano, H., Yokoi, Y., Hori, H., Yoshida, S., Ashida, K., 
Nakamura, K., Takahashi, T., & Kunugi, H. (2019). Effects of a medium-chain 
triglyceride-based ketogenic formula on cognitive function in patients with mild-to- 
moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience Letters, 690, 232–236. 
Page, K. A., Williamson, A., Yu, N., McNay, E. C., Dzuira, J., McCrimmon, R. J., & 
Sherwin, R. S. (2009). Medium-chain fatty acids improve cognitive function in 
intensively treated type 1 diabetic patients and support in vitro synaptic 
transmission during acute hypoglycemia. Diabetes, 58(5), 1237–1244. 
Pelley, J. W. (2007). Fatty acid and triglyceride metabolism. In Elsevier’s integrated 
biochemistry (pp. 79–85). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-03410-4.50016-X 
Perng, B. C., Chen, M., Perng, J. C., & Jambazian, P. (2017). A keto-mediet Approach 
with coconut substitution and exercise may delay the onset of Alzheimer’s disease 
among middle-Aged. The Journal of Prevention of Alzheimer’s Disease, 4(1), 51–57. 
Pistell, P. J., Morrison, C. D., Gupta, S., Knight, A. G., Keller, J. N., Ingram, D. K., & 
Bruce- Keller, A. J. (2010). Cognitive impairment following high fat diet 
consumption is associated with brain inflammation. Journal of Neuroimmunology, 
219(1), 25–32. 
Porsgaard, T., & Hoy, C. E. (2000). Lymphatic transport in rats of several dietary fats 
differing in fatty acid profile and triacylglycerol structure. Journal of Nutrition, 130, 
1619–1624. 
Priller, C., Bauer, T., Mitteregger, G., Krebs, B., Kretzschmar, H. A., & Herms, J. (2006). 
Synapse formation and function is modulated by the amyloid precursor protein. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 26(27), 7212–7221. 
Radenahmad, N., Saleh, F., Sawangjaroen, K., Vongvatcharanon, U., Subhadhirasakul, P., 
Rundorn, W., Withyachumnarnkul, B., & Connor, J. R. (2011). Young coconut juice, 
a potential therapeutic agent that could significantly reduce some pathologies 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease: Novel findings. British Journal of Nutrition, 105 
(5), 738–746. 
Rahim, N. S., Lim, S. M., Mani, V., Abdul Majeed, A. B., & Ramasamy, K. (2017). 
Enhanced memory in Wistar rats by virgin coconut oil is associated with increased 
antioxidative, cholinergic activities and reduced oxidative stress. Pharmaceutical 
Biology, 55(1), 825–832. 
Rahim, N. S., Lim, S. M., Mani, V., Hazalin, N. A. M. N., Majeed, A. B. A., & Ramasamy, K. 
(2020). Virgin coconut oil-induced neuroprotection in lipopolysaccharide- 
challenged rats is mediated, in part, through cholinergic, anti-oxidative and anti- 
inflammatory pathways. Journal of Dietary Supplements, 1–27. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/19390211.2020.1830223 
Rahman, M., Muhammad, S., Khan, M. A., Chen, H., Ridder, D. A., Muller-Fielitz, H., 
et al. (2014). The beta-hydroxybutyrate receptor HCA2 activates a neuroprotective 
subset of macrophages. Nature Communications, 5, 3944. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
ncomms4944 
Ramesh, S. V., Krishnan, V., Praveen, S., & Hebbar, K. B. (2019). Coconut oil-scientific 
facts. Current Science, 117(4), 564–565. 
Ramesh, S. V., Pandiselvam, R., Thushara, R., Manikantan, M. R., Hebbar, K. B., 
Beegum, S., Mathew, A. C., Neenu, S., & Shil, S. (2020). Engineering intervention for 
production of virgin coconut oil by hot process and multivariate analysis of quality 
attributes of virgin coconut oil extracted by various methods. Journal of Food Process 
Engineering, 43(6), e13395. 
Reger, M. A., Henderson, S. T., Hale, C., et al. (2004). Effects of beta-hydroxybutyrate on 
cognition in memory-impaired adults. Neurobiology of Aging, 25, 311–314. 
Riley, R. T., Goeger, D. E., & Hintona, D. M. (1990). Mycotoxin-induced alterations in ion 
transport across cell membranes. In Microbial toxins in foods and feeds (pp. 451–465). 
Boston, MA: Springer.  
Rojas-Morales, P., Tapia, E., & Pedraza-Chaverri, J. (2016). β-Hydroxybutyrate: A 
signaling metabolite in starvation response? Cellular Signalling, 28(8), 917–923. 
de la Rubia Ortí, J. E., García-Pardo, M. P., Drehmer, E., Sancho Cantus, D., Juli´an 
Rochina, M., Aguilar, M. A., & Hu Yang, I. (2018). Improvement of main cognitive 
functions in patients with alzheimer’s disease after treatment with coconut oil 
enriched mediterranean diet: A pilot study. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 65(2), 
577–587. 
Rubio-Perez, J. M., & Morillas-Ruiz, J. M. (2012). A review: Inflammatory process in 
Alzheimer’s disease, role of cytokines. Science World Journal. https://doi.org/ 
10.1100/2012/756357, 756357. 
Ruppin, D. C., & Middleton, W. R. J. (1980). Clinical use of medium chain triglycerides. 
Drugs, 20, 216–224. 
Saresella, M., La Rosa, F., Piancone, F., Zoppis, M., Marventano, I., Calabrese, E., … 
Clerici, M. (2016). The NLRP3 and NLRP1 inflammasomes are activated in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Molecular Neurodegeneration, 11, 23. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s13024-016-0088-1 
Schonfeld, P., & Wojtczak, L. (2016). Short- and medium-chain fatty acids in energy 
metabolism: The cellular perspective. The Journal of Lipid Research, 57, 943–954. 
Sharma, R, & Ramanathan, A (2020). The aging metabolome—biomarkers to hub 
metabolites. Proteomics, 20(5–6), 1800407. 
Shimazu, T., Hirschey, M. D., Newman, J., He, W., Shirakawa, K., Le Moan, N., et al. 
(2013). Suppression of oxidative stress by beta-hydroxybutyrate, an endogenous 
histone deacetylase inhibitor. Science, 339, 211–214. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.1227166 
Song, L., Pei, L., Yao, S., Wu, Y., & Shang, Y. (2017). NLRP3 inflammasome in 
neurological diseases, from functions to therapies. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 
11, 63. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2017.00063 
Srivastava, Y., Semwal, A. D., Sajeevkumar, V. A., & Sharma, G. K. (2017). Melting, 
crystallization and storage stability of virgin coconut oil and its blends by differential 
scanning calorimetry (DSC) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). 
Journal of Food Science and Technology, 54(1), 45–54. 
Srivastava, Y., Semwal, A. D., & Sharma, G. K. (2013). Studies on storage stability of hot 
extracted (HEVCO) and cold extracted virgin coconut oil (CEVCO) in different 
flexible and rigid packaging system. International Food Research Journal, 20(4), 
1971–1976. 
St-Pierre, V., Vandenberghe, C., Lowry, C. M., Fortier, M., Castellano, C. A., Wagner, R., 
& Cunnane, S. C. (2019). Plasma ketone and medium chain fatty acid response in 
humans consuming different medium chain triglycerides during a metabolic study 
day. Frontiers in Nutrition, 6, 46. 
Studzinski, C. M., MacKay, W. A., Beckett, T. L., Henderson, S. T., Murphy, M. P., 
Sullivan, P. G., & Burnham, W. M. (2008). Induction of ketosis may improve 
mitochondrial function and decrease steady-state amyloid-beta precursor protein 
(APP) levels in the aged dog. Brain Research, 1226, 209–217. 
Swerdlow, R. H. (2011). Brain aging, Alzheimer’s disease, and mitochondria. Biochimica 
et Biophysica Acta - Molecular Basis of Disease, 1812(12), 1630–1639. 
Tang, W., Tam, J. H., Seah, C., Chiu, J., Tyrer, A., Cregan, S. P., & Pasternak, S. H. 
(2015). Arf6 controls beta-amyloid production by regulating macropinocytosis of the 
Amyloid Precursor Protein to lysosomes. Molecular Brain, 8, 41. 
Taylor, M. K., Sullivan, D. K., Mahnken, J. D., Burns, J. M., & Swerdlow, R. H. (2018). 
Feasibility and efficacy data from a ketogenic diet intervention in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Alzheimer’s and Dementia, 4, 28–36. 
S.V. Ramesh et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

Trends in Food Science & Technology 112 (2021) 201–211
211
Traul, K. A., Driedger, A., Ingle, D. L., & Nakhasi, D. (2000). Review of the toxicologic 
properties of medium-chain triglycerides. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 38(1), 
79–98. 
Vandenberghe, C., St-Pierre, V., Pierotti, T., Fortier, M., Castellano, C. A., & 
Cunnane, S. C. (2017). Tricaprylin alone increases plasma ketone response more 
than coconut oil or other medium-chain triglycerides: An acute crossover study in 
healthy adults. Curr Dev Nutr. , Article e000257. https://doi.org/10.3945/ 
cdn.116.000257 
van Gelder, B. M., Tijhuis, M, Kalmijn, S, & Kromhout, D. (2007). Fish consumption, n−3 
fatty acids, and subsequent 5-y cognitive decline in elderly men: the Zutphen Elderly 
Study. The American journal of clinical nutrition, 85(4), 1142–1147. 
Veech, R. L., & King, T. M. (2017). Alzheimer’s disease: Causes and treatment. In 
S. A. Masino (Ed.), Ketogenic diet and metabolic therapies (pp. 241–253). Oxford 
University Press.  
Versele, R., Corsi, M., Fuso, A., Sevin, E., Businaro, R., Gosselet, F., & Candela, P. (2020). 
Ketone bodies promote Amyloid-β1–40 clearance in a Human in vitro blood–brain 
barrier model. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 21(3), 934. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/ijms21030934 
Villain, N., Chetelat, G., Grassiot, B., et al. (2012). Regional dynamics of amyloid-b 
deposition in healthy elderly, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: A 
voxelwise PiB-PET longitudinal study. Brain Research Bulletin, 135, 2126–2139. 
Wagner, K. H., Wotruba, F., & Elmadfa, I. (2001). Antioxidative potential of tocotrienols 
and tocopherols in coconut fat at different oxidation temperatures. European Journal 
of Lipid Science and Technology, 103, 746–751. 
Wang, X., Wu, X., Liu, Q., Kong, G., Zhou, J., Jiang, J., et al. (2017). Ketogenic 
metabolism inhibits histone deacetylase. (HDAC) and reduces oxidative stress after 
spinal cord injury in rats. Neuroscience, 366, 36–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neuroscience.2017.09.056 
Yang, H., Shan, W., Zhu, F., Wu, J., & Wang, Q. (2019a). Ketone bodies in neurological 
diseases: Focus on neuroprotection and underlying mechanisms. Frontiers in 
Neurology, 10, 585. https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2019.00585 
Yang, R., Xue, L., Zhang, L., Wang, X., Qi, X., Jiang, J., Yu, L., Wang, X., Zhang, W., 
Zhang, Q., & Li, P. (2019b). Phytosterol contents of edible oils and their 
contributions to estimated phytosterol intake in the Chinese diet. Foods, 8(8), 334. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/foods8080334 
Yin, J. X., Maalouf, M., Han, P., Zhao, M., Gao, M., Dharshaun, T., Reiman, E. M., 
Schweizer, F. E., & Shi, J. (2016). Ketones block amyloid entry and improve 
cognition in an Alzheimer’s model. Neurobiology of Aging, 39, 25–37. 
Yusufov, M., Weyandt, L. L., & Piryatinsky, I. (2017). Alzheimer’s disease and diet: A 
systematic review. International Journal of Neuroscience, 127(2), 161–175. 
Zdu´nska, K., Dana, A., Kolodziejczak, A., & Rotsztejn, H. (2018). Antioxidant properties 
of ferulic acid and its possible application. Skin Pharmacology and Physiology, 31(6), 
332–336. 
Zhang, Y. W., Thompson, R., Zhang, H., & Xu, H. (2011). APP processing in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Molecular Brain, 4, 3. 
S.V. Ramesh et al.