DOI: 10.1002/alz.082645
D R U G D E V E L O P M E N T
POSTER PRESENTATION
NONHUMAN
Donepezil-indolyl hybrids as multipotent
cholinesterase/monoamine oxidase inhibitors for the potential
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease
Kaloyan Yuliyanov Krastev
Medical University- Sofia, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria
Correspondence
Kaloyan YuliyanovKrastev, Medical University-
Sofia, Sofia, Sofia Bulgaria.
Email: kaloyann99@abv.bg
Abstract
Background: Numerous laboratory and clinical studies have evidenced that MAO-B
inhibitors are a potential therapeutic approach for the treatment of AD. Thus, drugs
used to inhibit activated MAO, including rasagiline, ladostigil and selegiline, may pro-
vide neuroprotection against AD by improving cognitive impairment, modulating the
proteolytic cleavage of APP and decreasing levels of Aβ protein fragments that accu-
mulate in the brain. Future clinical studies on MAO inhibitors for the treatment of
AD may provide further insights into the mechanism of action of antioxidants as
therapeutic agents for AD.
Method: Series of donepezil-indolyl hybrids were prepared and characterized via
highresolution mass spectrometry, 1H nuclear magnetic resonance and 13C nuclear
magnetic resonance techniques. In vitro fluorometric assay (by Amplex® UltraRed
reagent to detect hydrogen peroxide or peroxidase activity in biological samples
or enzymes.) was used to investigate the activity of the synthesized compounds
on both MAO-A and MAO-B isozymes as well as acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and
butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE) by Ellman method with modifications.
Result: The biological evaluation of molecules 1-30 showed that most of these com-
pounds are potent, in the nanomolar range, and selective AChEI, with moderate and
equipotent selectivity for MAO-A and MAO-B inhibition. In overall, compound 11, as
a potent and selective dual AChEI, showing a moderate MAO inhibitory profile, can
be considered as an attractive multipotent drug for further development on two key
pharmacological targets playing key roles in the therapy of Alzheimer’s disease.
Conclusion: The pharmacological profile of compound 11, as well as the fact that it is
a readily available compound in a short synthetic sequence, in good chemical yields,
prompts us to select it as a lead-compound for further optimization in our current
research programme targeted to the preparation of new molecules for the potential
treatment of AD.
Alzheimer’s Dement. 2023;19(Suppl. 24):e082645.
© 2023 the Alzheimer’s Association.
1 of 1
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/alz
https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.082645