Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
A probe for NIR-II imaging and multimodal
analysis of early Alzheimer’s disease by
targeting CTGF
Cao Lu1, Cong Meng1, Yuying Li2, Jinling Yuan1, Xiaojun Ren1, Liang Gao
1,
Dongdong Su1, Kai Cao1, Mengchao Cui
2, Qing Yuan
1
& Xueyun Gao
1
To date, earlier diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is still challenging.
Recent studies revealed the elevated expression of connective tissue growth
factor (CTGF) in AD brain is an upstream regulator of amyloid-beta (Aβ) pla-
que, thus CTGF could be an earlier diagnostic biomarker of AD than Aβ plaque.
Herein, we develop a peptide-coated gold nanocluster that speciﬁcally targets
CTGF with high afﬁnity (KD ~ 21.9 nM). The probe can well penetrate the blood-
brain-barrier (BBB) of APP/PS1 transgenic mice at early-stage (earlier than 3-
month-old) in vivo, allowing non-invasive NIR-II imaging of CTGF when there is
no appearance of Aβ plaque deposition. Notably, this probe can also be
applied to measuring CTGF on postmortem brain sections by multimodal
analysis, including ﬂuorescence imaging, peroxidase-like chromogenic ima-
ging, and ICP-MS quantitation, which enables distinguishment between the
brains of AD patients and healthy people. This probe possesses great potential
for precise diagnosis of earlier AD before Aβ plaque formation.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative
disease1,2. Accurate early diagnosis of AD permits timely intervention,
thereby delays AD progression3,4. To date, imaging of Amyloid-β (Aβ)
plaque in the brain is a hallmark of AD diagnosis5,6. However, dis-
appointing results from putative disease-modifying therapies of Aβ
have diverted researchers’ attention to ﬁnding earlier biomarkers for
AD7. Recent works revealed that elevated expression of connective
tissue growth factor (CTGF) is strongly associated with the progression
of clinical dementia and amyloid neuriticplaques (NP) inAD patients8,9.
In AD postmortem brain, CTGF was upregulated in astrocytes
and neurons that associated with senile plaques and the neuritic
components of plaque, while there is no or low expression in normal
brains8,9. In AD mice models, elevated CTGF expression in cortex
and hippocampus was also found to be associated with increased
amyloid plaque burden and the subsequent exacerbation of AD
symptoms9–11. Mechanistic studies indicated that CTGF regulates
amyloid precursor protein (APP) through upregulating γ-secretory
enzyme, and ultimately promotes the elevation of Aβ plaque and its
neuropathology10–12. A well-designed work indicated that inAD models,
the speciﬁc elevated CTGF expression in the hippocampus or cortex
appears at very early stages prior to Aβ accumulation13. Therefore,
CTGF can act as a valuable hallmark for predicting the onset and
progression of AD upstream of Aβ deposition12,13. Therefore, devel-
oping noninvasive probes for in vivo imaging of CTGF in the brain is a
promising strategy for the earlier diagnosis of AD than Aβ plaque
detection.
The ability to cross the blood−brain barrier (BBB) and the pene-
tration depth of deep tissue imaging are two key factors that limit the
diagnostic probe of AD14,15. Near-infrared-II (NIR-II) imaging has been
considered as a promising noninvasive diagnostic method in vivo, for
its advantages in deeper penetration depth, elevated imaging resolu-
tion and superior signal-to-noise ratio that owing to reduced photon
scattering, light absorption and autoﬂuorescence16. There are some
reports for diagnosing AD by using Aβ-targeting NIR-II probes in ani-
mal model17,18. However, the NIR-II probe for CTGF imaging has not
been reported yet.
Received: 8 December 2023
Accepted: 4 June 2024
Check for updates
1Center of Excellence for Environmental Safety and Biological Effects, Department of Chemistry, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, P. R. China.
2Key Laboratory of Radiopharmaceuticals, Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, P. R. China.
e-mail: yuanqing@bjut.edu.cn; gaoxy@ihep.ac.cn
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

In this study, we synthesized a CTGF-targeting peptide-coated
gold nanocluster that can emit both NIR-II and red ﬂuorescence. The
obtained probe (named DGC) is composed of 26 gold atoms and eight
cyclic peptide ligands (named DAG). Notably, the probe is with more
than 1000 times afﬁnity to CTGF than free DAG peptides. Via the
probe’s intrinsic red ﬂuorescence, we found that DGC speciﬁcally binds
to CTGF in cells and brain sections of AD mouse in vitro. In addition,
the precise gold composition of the DGC probe enables quantitative
analysis of CTGC ex vivo by inductively coupled plasma mass spec-
trometry (ICP-MS). Also, the peroxidase-like activity of DGC can cata-
lyze the 3, 3′-diaminobenzidine tertrahydrochloride (DAB) to form
brown color products in situ, thus the expression of CTGF in cells and
AD brain sections can be observed by naked eye directly. In AD mouse,
the DGC probes can well home to the elevated CTGF in brain at earlier
stages via NIR-II imaging, which precedes the appearance of Aβ plaques
(Fig. 1). Finally, the probe can speciﬁcally label CTGF in brain sections
of AD patients and detect CTGF by ﬂuorescence imaging, ICP-MS
quantiﬁcation, and peroxidase-like catalyzed chromogenic imaging,
which further demonstrated its potential in earlier AD diagnosis.
Results
The synthesis and characterization of DGC probe
The cyclic peptide modiﬁed-gold nanocluster was synthesized by a
facile method (see supporting materials and methods). The sequence
of the cyclic peptide is Cys-Asp-Ala-Gly-Arg-Lys-Gln-Lys-Cys (DAG). Its
intrinsic sulfhydryl groups of the two adjacent cysteines were used to
chelate Au nanoclusters via strong Au-S bonds (Fig. 2a). The acquired
probe (DGC) is with good water solubility and the dynamic light
scattering (DLS) measurement showed that the average hydrated size
of DGC is ~2.85 nm (Fig. 2b). The gold nanocluster of DGC has an
average size about 1.8 nm through high-resolution transmission elec-
tron microscopy (HRTEM) (Inset in Fig. 2b). The precise composition
of DGC was determined by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS). The strongest
peak observed at 5634 m/z was assigned to Au26S16 and the spaces
between adjacent main peaks matched the molecular weight of single
DAG peptide (Fig. 2c). Since one DAG peptide has two sulfur-
containing cysteine residues, the precise molecular formula of DGC
can be derived as Au26DAG8
19, e.g., one Au26 gold nanocluster coated
by eight DAG peptides (Fig. 2a). The aqueous solution of DGC emitted
red ﬂuorescence emission at 660 nm upon excitation by ultraviolet
light, while DAG peptide alone showed no ﬂuorescence (Fig. 2d and
Fig. S1a). Notably, under the excitation of 808 nm, DGC has two
obvious emission peaks at 923 and 1036 nm, respectively, and the
1036 nm emission can be used for in vivo NIR-II imaging (Fig. 2e and
Fig. S1b). Moreover, peroxidase (POD)-like activities of DGC can be
used to catalyze the oxidation of 3,3′ 5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine sulfate
(TMB) or 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) to produce
a visible color product in situ20. To test this, a TMB color assay was
applied, in which different concentrations of DGC were added to the
mixture of TMB and H2O2. The colorless solution gradually turned
blue, and the intensity of blue is positively correlated with the con-
centration of DGC (Fig. 2f).
DGC probe speciﬁcally targets CTGF in cells
CTGF is secreted by activated astrocytes and neurovascular endothe-
lial cells in AD lesions13. To evaluate the CTGF-targeting ability of the
DGC probe, we tested its afﬁnity with CTGF by surface plasmon reso-
nance (SPR) assay in vitro. The BIAcore assay showed that both the
DGC probe and free DAG peptide were bound to CTGF (Fig. 3a). The
dissociation equilibrium constants (KD) of DGC and free DAG were
2.19 × 10−8 and 2.23 × 10−5 M, respectively, indicating that the binding
afﬁnity of DGC to CTGF was about 1000 times higher than that of free
DAG peptide. This result is consistent with previous reports that pre-
senting multiple ligands on the probe surface can improve its afﬁnity
to the target21,22. The much stronger afﬁnity of DGC may be due to the
high density of eight DAG peptides on the surface of the probe. The
speciﬁcity afﬁnity between DGC and CTGF was further tested in three
brain cell lines with different CTGF expression levels. Western blotting
analysis in Fig. 3b showed that the expression of CTGF was highest in
activated astrocytoma cells (U87MG), moderate in neuroblastoma
cells (SH-SY5Y), and almost undetectable in normal astrocytes (CTX
TNA2). DGC can effectively label CTGF in these cells and distinguish
different CTGF expression levels in the three cell lines by ﬂuorescence
Fig. 1 | Schematic of the DGC probe identifying early AD by NIR-II imaging and
multimodal analysis. The DGC probe can penetrate the blood–brain-barrier (BBB)
of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) mice at early-stage (earlier than 3-month-old) in vivo,
allowing noninvasive NIR-II imaging of elevated connective tissue growth
factor (CTGF) in AD brain prior to the appearance of amyloid-beta (Aβ) plaque
deposition.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
2

intensity (Fig. 3c and Fig. S2a) and inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry (ICP-MS) analysis (Fig. S2b). Based on the peroxidase
(POD)-like activity of DGC, DAB working solution was introduced into
the DGC-labeled three cell lines and water-insoluble brown precipitate
was subsequently formed in situ. The brown color intensity was also
well correlated with the expression level of CTGF (ﬁfth row in Fig. 3c
and Fig. S2c). To further conﬁrm the speciﬁcity of DGC targeting CTGF
in cells, we stained U87MG cells with CTGF immunoﬂuorescence
antibody (green ﬂuorescence) and DGC probe (red ﬂuorescence) and
observed signiﬁcant colocalization (Fig. 3d). Furthermore, DGC probe
cannot label CTGF in cells pre-blocked by free DAG peptides (Fig. 3d).
Notably, DGC incubation did not cause any obvious cytotoxicity
to all three cell lines, indicating its biosafety and potential for
in vivo application (Fig. S3). These results demonstrated the high
speciﬁcity and sensitivity of DGC against CTGF-expressing cells in the
brain, and DGC probes can be used for multimodal analysis of CTGF in
cells via ﬂuorescence imaging, ICP-MS quantiﬁcation and chromogenic
imaging.
Multimodal analysis of CTGF in brain sections of AD mice
Based on the in vitro results in cell models, we wondered if DGC can
identify CTGF in brain sections of AD mouse, especially at the early-
stage when Aβ plaques have not appeared yet. APP/PS1 transgenic AD
mice, a widely used mouse model of AD with age-related pathological
Fig. 2 | Preparation and characterization of the DGC probe. a Schematic illus-
tration of DGC preparation. b Dynamic light scattering of DGC and Inset is the
transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of DGC. Scale bar = 5 nm. The
experiment was repeated independently for more than three times with similar
results. c MALDI-TOF-MS spectra of DGC in positive ion linear mode. The molecular
formula of DGC is Au26DAG8. d Fluorescence excitation (black line, λ ex = 500 nm)
and emission (red line, λ em = 660 nm) spectra of DGC. Inset are digital images of
DGC under visible light (left) and 365 nm UV light (right), respectively. e NIR
emission spectrum of DGC under 808 nm radiation (red line, λ em = 923 nm and
1036 nm). f Illustration of the peroxidase-like activity of DGC, serial concentration
of DGC mixing with 3,3′ 5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine sulfate (TMB, 500 μM) and H2O2
(100 mM). Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
3

processes, and have obvious amyloid plaque formation starting at
8 months of age23. Thus, the CTGF expression in brain of APP/PS1 mice
from early stages (1-, 2-, and 3-month-old) to establish stages (6- and 9-
month-old) were evaluated by immunoﬂuorescence staining with
CTGF speciﬁc antibody in brain sections. The age-matched wild-type
(WT) mice brain sections were used as controls. Results indicated that
the expression of CTGF in cortex of APP/PS1 mice increased with the
progression of the disease and was signiﬁcantly higher than that in
control WT mice at every age, even at 1-month old (Fig. 4a). To test the
multimodal analysis ability of DGC probe in vitro, brain sections from
early-stage (3-month-old) and Aβ plaque positive stage (9-month-old)
of APP/PS1 mice were labeled by DGC, and the brain sections from age-
matched WT mice were used as negative control. As shown in Fig. 4b,
the overallexpression level of CTGF in brain sections of AD mice can be
detected by DGC through red ﬂuorescence imaging. The CTGF
expression level in AD mice was signiﬁcantly higher than thatof the WT
control. Moreover, the CTGF level was higher in the brain section of 9-
month-old AD mice than that of 3-month-old, which was consistent
with the pathological process of AD in APP/PS1 mice (Fig. 4b and
Fig. S4a). The spatial distribution and expression level of CTGF on
these brain sections was further analyzed by laser ablation inductively
coupled plasma time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-TOF-MS),
which can map the Au signal of DGC on brain sections by scanning
method. The results indicated that elevated CTGF in the AD brain was
mainly located in the cerebrocortex, which is consistent with the
ﬂuorescence intensity observation (Fig. 4b and Fig. S4b). When DAB
working solution was added to the DGC-labeled AD brain sections, the
POD-catalyzed brown product was deposited in situ, and its brown
Fig. 3 | The afﬁnity and speciﬁcity of DGC for targeting CTGF. a SPR data indi-
cates the binding kinetics of free DAG (left) and DGC (right) with CTGF. The KD
value of DAG is 22.3 μM and that of DGC is 21.9 nM. b Immunoblotting of CTGF was
performed in U87MG, SH-SY5Y and CTX TNA2 cells. The CTGF expression levels
are analyzed by imageJ software. Data were presented as mean ± SEM from three
independent experiments (n = 3). **P < 0.01; Student’s t-test. c Representative
confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) ﬂuorescence (red) and visible
chromogenic (brown) images of U87MG, SH-SY5Y, and CTX TNA2 cells after DGC
labeling. d Representative CLSM images of U87MG cells labeled with DGC (red
ﬂuorescence) directly, or blocked with DAG peptide prior to DGC labeling (red
ﬂuorescence), or DGC (red ﬂuorescence) co-staining with anti-CTGF antibody
(green ﬂuorescence). Data were from three independent experiments and one
representative result is shown. Scale bar = 50 μm. Source data are provided as a
Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
4

Fig. 4 | DGC multimodally analyzes CTGF in early AD brain sections of APP/PS1
mice in vitro. a Immunoﬂuorescence staining of FITC-labeled CTGF antibody
(green) and DGC (red) on APP/PS1 mouse brain sections and the age-matched wild-
type (WT) brain sections from 1- to 9-month-old. The merge pictures show the
colocalization of DGC and CTGF in brain sections. Scale bar = 50 μm. b In situ
ﬂuorescence imaging (red), Au elemental of LA-ICP-TOF-MS imaging, and 3, 3′-
diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) chromogenic (brown) imaging of
CTGF in whole brain sections of WT mice (left), 3-month-old APP/PS1 mice (middle)
and 9-month-old APP/PS1 mice (right). Inset pictures are enlarged areas of
DAB chromogenic images. Scale bar = 50 μm. c CLSM ﬂuorescence images
of cortex region in brain sections of WT, 3-month-old APP/PS1 mice and 9-month-
old APP/PS1 mice stained with DGC (red ﬂuorescence) and FITC-labeled CTGF
antibody (green ﬂuorescence). Scale bar = 20 μm. Inset images show the colocali-
zation of DGC and CTGF antibody. Scale bar = 10 μm. d CLSM ﬂuorescence images
of DGC (red ﬂuorescence) and FITC-labeled-Aβ antibody (green ﬂuorescence)
staining show partial colocalization in cortex region in brain sections of WT,
3-month-old APP/PS1 mice and 9-month-old APP/PS1 mice. Scale bar = 50 μm.
The inset pictures show the partial colocalization of DGC and Aβ antibody in
9-month-old APP/PS1 mice. Scale bar = 25 μm. Data were from three independent
experiments.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
5

intensity was also proportional to the expression of CTGF, which could
distinguish the AD mouse brain from the WT mouse brain (Fig. 4b and
Fig. S4c). Furthermore, the speciﬁcity of DGC against CTGF on brain
sections was veriﬁed by colocalization with CTGF antibody. In Fig. 4c,
the 3-month-old AD mice is with obvious higher level of CTGF than WT
mice, and much more CTGF occurred in 9-month-old AD mice. Pre-
vious reports suggested that the elevated CTGF in AD brain is mainly
produced by active astrocytes in the neurovascular unit, and we con-
ﬁrmed this conclusion by co-locating DGC with immunoﬂuorescence
of glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP, a marker of active astrocytes) in
the APP/PS1 brain sections (Fig. S5). Aβ plagues formation in the brain
was examined by immunoﬂuorescence to verify the progression stage
of AD in APP/PS1 mice. As shown in Fig. 4d, obvious Aβ plaques
appeared in the brains of 9-month-old APP/PS1 mice, but no obvious
plaques were detected in the brains of 3-month-old APP/PS1 mice and
age-matched WT mice. In the brain section of 9-month-old APP/PS1
mice, some DGC-labeled CTGF is located in the vicinity of Aβ plagues
(Fig. 4d), which is consistent with previous pathological reports12,13.
Notably, obvious DGC-marked CTGF has been observed in the 3-
month-old APP/PS1 brain sections without signiﬁcant Aβ plaque
deposition (Fig. 4c, d). All these data indicated that DGC can identify
the CTGF in the early-stage AD brain before Aβ plaque formation
(Fig. 4c, d).
In vivo NIR-II imaging of CTGF in AD mice
Rare small molecule probes have been successfully used in NIR-II
imaging of AD in vivo because the blood–brain barrier (BBB)
hindrance17,24. To evaluate whether DGC could penetrate BBB and
further target CTGF in the brains of AD mice, we test the probe in APP/
PS1 mice from 1- to 9-month-old and the age-matched WT mice for
in vivo and ex vivo NIR-II imaging of brains. First, a PAMPA assay
mimicking BBB in vitro were performed to evaluate the potential
penetration of DGC. The result showed the permeability Mean Pe of
DGC is 2.15 ± 0.44 × 10–6 cm/s at 40 μM, indicating a high BBB perme-
ability in vitro (Table S1). To optimize the time points for DGC NIR-II
imaging in vivo. The stability and pharmacokinetics of DGC were
determined in the mice model. Pharmacokinetic study in C57BL/6J
mice suggested the elimination half-life (t1/2z) of DGC in male and
female mice was 21.38 h and 19.80 h, respectively (Table S2). NIR-II
imaging and ICP-MS quantiﬁcation of DGC in serum demonstrated its
high stability during internal circulation (Fig. S6). In vivo NIR-II mon-
itoring results showed that, in APP/PS1 mice, the brain NIR-II
signals increased dramatically after tail vein injection of DGC and
reached a peak at 4 h (Fig. S7). Therefore, this time point was used to
evaluate the diagnostic capability of DGC for NIR-II imaging in AD
mice and the age-matched WT mice. In vivo imaging showed that the
brain ﬂuorescence intensity of AD mice was higher than that of age-
matched WT mice at all test ages, even as early as 1-month-old
(Fig. 5a and S8). The results of ex vivo brain NIR-II imaging after cardiac
perfusion of saline further veriﬁed the early diagnosticability of DGC in
APP/PS1 mice and also demonstrated the BBB penetration of
DGC in vivo due to the cleaned cerebrovascular. The ﬂuorescence
intensity of the APP/PS1 brain was signiﬁcantly stronger than that
of the age-matched WT brain from 1- to 3-month-old (Fig. 5b). Ex vivo
NIR-II imaging also conﬁrmed the age-related elevation of CTGF
expression in APP/PS1 mice brains, which was consistent with the
immunoﬂuorescence staining results of the brain sections in Fig. 4a
(Fig. 5c, d).
In vivo targeting of DGC to CTGF in AD mice brain
In order to clarify the NIR-II signal in AD brains when in vivo imaging is
arisen from the DGC probe that bound to CTGF, we selected 3-month-
old APP/PS1 mice representing early-stage AD and the age-matched
WT mice as control to performed ex vivo multimodal analysis of the
brain sections. As shown in Fig. 6a, the overall NIR-II ﬂuorescence
intensity in the brain of 3-month-old APP/PS1 mice is obviously higher
than that of the WT control. To exclude the inﬂuence of vascular
retention, we emptied the cerebral vessels by cardiac perfusion and
performed ex vivo imaging of the brains. As shown in the fourth row of
Fig. 6a, the brains with cleaned blood vessels still retained a strong NIR-
II ﬂuorescence signal, indicating that the DGC probe had crossed the
BBB and reached the deep brain region. These results demonstrate
that DGC can achieve noninvasive and real-time brain imaging in vivo.
For brain sections made from AD mice after tail vein injection of DGC,
the red ﬂuorescence observation and LA-ICP-TOF-MS of DGC, as well
as a POD-like catalysis test were performed. As shown in Fig. 6b, DGC
maintains its stability in vivo and still enables multimodal analysis of
CTGF in the brain. In Fig. 6c, the colocalization of DGC (red ﬂuores-
cence) and CTGF (green ﬂuorescence) on the ex vivo brain sections
conﬁrmed the speciﬁcity of DGC targeting CTGF in vivo. To further
identify the cellular target of DGC in the brain of APP/PS1 mice, we
carried out immunoﬂuorescence staining on the ex vivo brain sections
after tail vein injection of DGC where cell-speciﬁc ﬂuorescent anti-
bodies for microglia (Iba 1), neurons (NeuN), vascular endothelial cell
(CD31) and reactive astrocytes (GFAP) were applied. In Fig. 6d, DAG co-
localizes with GFAP-positive active astrocytes and CD31-positive
microvessels, but not with neurons or microglia. Moreover, ex vivo
NIR-II observation of major organs shows that DGC is mainly meta-
bolized by the liver and excreted through the kidney and liver, which is
suitable for in vivo imaging application (Fig. S9). The biosafety of DGC
in C57BL/6J mice under the NIR-II imaging condition was evaluated by
blood tests (blood cells and biochemical analysis) and organ patho-
logical analysis (H&E staining). Results indicated that 20 mg/kg DGC
did not induce any abnormalities in blood parameters and major
organs, compared with the untreated normal mice, indicating good
biosafety for in vivo diagnostic applications (Tables S3, S4 and
Fig. S10).
DGC probe speciﬁcally labels CTGF in brain sections from AD
patients
While we have demonstrated that the DGC probe can detect CTGF in
early AD mice, it is important to examine whether DGC also speciﬁcally
marks CTGF in the brains of AD patients. To this end, we tested ex vivo
targeting of DGC on postmortem brain sections from AD patients and
health controls (HC) (Table S5, information on brain donors). As shown
in Fig. 7a, the red ﬂuorescent DGC well labeled the hippocampus and
cortex of AD patient-derived brain sections, but not those from healthy
volunteers. There were also abundant Aβ plaques (green ﬂuorescence)
in the same regions, colocalized with DGC. The colocalization of CTGF
(green ﬂuorescence) and DGC (red ﬂuorescence) in the brain sections
of AD patients was also observed, conﬁrm the targeting speciﬁcity of
DGC against CTGF in human brains (Fig. 7b). In contrast to the
ﬂuorescence-labeled antibody imaging of CTGF, DGC probe can also
easily distinguish CTGF in AD brain sections through POD-catalyzed
chromogenic imaging and ICP-MS quantiﬁcation, respectively (Fig. 7c
and Fig. S11). These results in human-derived AD samples suggested
that DGC possessed the ability to distinguish CTGF in AD patients, thus
raising possibilities for noninvasive diagnosis of AD patients in clinical
settings.
DGC identiﬁed AD patients in brain sections prior to Aβ
accumulation
To support the sensitivity for the detection of early-onset AD patients,
two brain sections from AD patients at a very early stage according to
the Thal standard (Aβ accumulation stage I) and two healthy control
samples were used to test DGC probe in vitro (Table S6, information of
brain donors). As shown in Fig. 8a, b, the ﬂuorescence signal of the
DGC probe (red) in two early AD brain sections (Case 3 and Case 4) was
obviously stronger and signiﬁcantly different from that of the two
healthy controls (Case 1 and Case 2). The quantitative results of ICP-MS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
6

also veriﬁed the signiﬁcant difference (Fig. 8c). Moreover, the DGC
probe (red) can co-locate well with CTGF immunoﬂuorescence stain-
ing with antibody (green) on the AD brain sections (Fig. 8a). Con-
sidering the two AD patients are in Thal stage 1 without obvious Aβ
deposition, these results indicated that DGC probe can identify AD
brain prior to obvious Aβ accumulation, with a potential for early
diagnosis of AD patient.
Discussion
Growing clinical evidence suggested earlier intervention may bring
greater beneﬁts to AD patients3,4. However, inadequate early diagnosis
is a global problem in AD management25. Aβ plaques and later neuro-
ﬁbrillary tangles (NFTs) have long been recognized as two hallmarks
for AD diagnosis and therapy5,6. But the disappointing results
from clinical trials targeting these two targets have diverted
researchers’ attention to earlier diagnosis and intervention prior to Aβ
accumulation7. Recent works suggested that the elevated CTGF in the
brain could be an emerging predictor for the early diagnosis of AD8–13.
Initially, strong CTGF immunoreactivity was observed in the vicinity of
Aβ plaques and NFTs in AD postmortem brains, which mainly appeared
in the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and temporal cortex and
increased with the progression of the disease8,9. In AD mice models,
elevated CTGF expression in the brain was also found to be associated
with the increased amyloid plaque burden and the subsequent exa-
cerbated AD symptoms9–13. When the level of CTGF was reduced in
APP/PS1 transgenic AD mice by tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA)
supplemented, hippocampal and prefrontal amyloid deposition were
decreased, and the spatial, recognition and contextual memory
defects were also prevented10,12. These results demonstrated that CTGF
is an upstream regulator of Aβ, and its elevated expression in AD brain
is signiﬁcantly precedes the appearance of Aβ plaques, which could be
used for early AD diagnosis13.
Fig. 5 | In vivo and ex vivo NIR-II images of DGC in AD mice brains. a The in vivo
NIR-II images of APP/PS1 mice (right) and age-matched wild-type (WT) mice (left)
from 1-month to 3-month-old after intravenous injection of DGC. b The ex vivo
imaging of brains isolated from mice (cardiac perfusion with saline) after DGC
injection for 4 h. c Ex vivo NIR-II imaging APP/PS1 mice brains aged from 1- to
9-month (n = 3). (λ ex = 808 nm). d Semi-quantitative analysis of the ex vivo NIR-II
ﬂuorescence (FL) intensity in APP/PS1 brains from 1-month to 9-month-old (n = 3).
Data were presented as mean ± SD from three independent brains. ***P < 0.001
compared with the 1-month-old brain; Student’s t-test. Source data are provided as
a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
7

NIR-II (1000–1700 nm) probes showed more attractive than con-
ventional visible ﬂuorescent probes for in vivo diagnosis, due to non-
invasive, high signal-to-noise ratio, deeper penetration depth, and
elevated imaging resolution16,26. However, although some probes tar-
geting Aβ oligomers have been attempted, there are still no NIR-II
probes available for AD early diagnosis to date18. Therefore, NIR-II
probes targeting CTGF may offer a promising opportunity.
The blood–brain barrier (BBB) prevents most molecules from
entering the central nervous system, hindering brain imaging appli-
cations of many NIR-II probes24. Recently, atomically precise ultrasmall
gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) have emerged as potential in vivo probes
for bioimaging, due to their emitting of NIR-II photoluminescence (PL)
and good biocompatibility27–29. In particular, the good water solubility
and excellent BBB penetration ability makes them promising for
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
8

application in brain imaging30,31. As expected, we synthesized a CTGF-
targeting peptide-coated AuNC for earlier AD detection even when
there is no obvious Aβ plaque deposition. The probe provides NIR-II
imaging and multimodal measurement of CTGF in the brains of early-
stage AD mice when the CTGF expression level is signiﬁcantly higher
than that of wild-type control and no signiﬁcant Aβ plaque appears.
This probe can also label the higher-expressed CTGF in brain sections
of AD patients and allows CTGF detection by ﬂuorescence imaging,
chromogenic imaging, and quantity mass analysis. These data inspire
researchers to apply this probe for earlier AD diagnosis even without
obvious Aβ plaque occurrence.
Understanding the exact origins of NIR-II PL of AuNCs is of great
signiﬁcance for the development of highly effective NIR-II probes29.
However, the mechanism is very complicated and still under debate32.
So far, only Au25 clusters have been systematically studied for the
correlation of PL origins to their structures, through experimental
characterizations and theoretical calculations33. By examining differ-
ent surface ligands, it was shown that the NIR emission of the Au25
cluster likely originated from the Au13 icosahedral core state33. It was
found that the NIR-II PL of AuNCs can be enhanced by increasing the
rigidity of surface ligands34, and the intrinsic structural rigidity also
strongly affects the NIR PL quantum efﬁciency of thiolated AuNCs35.
Recent studies indicated the great signiﬁcance of the central Au atom
and the surface “lock rings” as well the surface “lock atoms” in
enhancing the NIR-II PL of AuNCs by suppressing the nonradiative
decay36,37. In summary, the NIR-II PL emission of AuNCs is related to the
Au core and the surface ligands as well as the charge transfer states,
which leads to the complexity of their ﬂuorescence origin38.
Although sufﬁcient to produce bright signals in AD mice, the PL
quantum yield of DGC was not very high. Many studies have focused
on enhancing the NIR-II PL of AuNCs, but it remains a challenging
task29. Currently, atom doping and ligand engineering have been
shown to be two major promising strategies for enhancing the NIR-II
PL of AuNCs26,39–41. In particular, the NIR-II PL brightness and quantum
yield (QY) of AuNCs can be signiﬁcantly improved by single hetero-
metallic atom doping, for example, Au25Cd1NCs exhibited about 56
times higher NIR-II PL intensity than Au25NCs42, which may be the
direction of further optimization of DGC probes.
Methods
Ethical statement
The research complies with all relevant ethical regulations. All mice
were purchased from Beijing HFK Bioscience Co., Ltd and the post-
mortem brain sections of AD patients and health controls were
obtained from Chinese Brain Bank Center (CBBC) and Human Brain
Bank, Central South University Xiangya School of Medicine. The pro-
tocol used in all animal experiments and human-derived samples
detection was approved by the Ethics Committee of Beijing University
of Technology, China (Protocol # HS202202009).
Chemicals, cells, and animals
The peptide (CDAGRKQKC, named DAG) was synthesized by a solid-
phase method (Beijing Scilight Biotechnology LLC. Purity: 95%).
Sodium hydroxide (NaOH), nitric acid (HNO3, MOS grade), hydro-
chloric acid (HCl, MOS grade), and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, MOS
grade) were obtained from Beijing Chemical Reagent Co., China.
Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (III) (HAuCl4·3H2O) was purchased from
Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Human astrocytoma cell line
(U87MG), neuroblastoma cell line (SH-SY5Y) and astrocytes line (CTX
TNA2) were purchased from the Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences. The double transgenic (APP/PS1) AD
model mice and wild-type C57BL/6 J mice were purchased from Beijing
HFK Bioscience Co., Ltd., and maintained under standard condition.
Brain samples of AD patients are obtained from the Chinese
Brain Bank Center (CBBC) and Human Brain Bank, Central South Uni-
versity Xiangya School of Medicine. Cell culture medium DMEM/High
Glucose, phosphate buffer solution (PBS), fetal bovine serum, and
trypsin EDTA were acquired from Gibco, USA. Primary antibodies were
purchased from Proteintech, Abcam, BioLegend, and Bioss. A colori-
metric Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) was purchased from Dojindo
Laboratory, Kumamoto, Japan. Cell lysis buffer for immunoblotting,
DAPI staining solution, IgG (H + L) (HRP-labeled Goat Anti-Rabbit
IgG (H + L)), Blocking Buffer for Western Blot, DAB Horseradish Per-
oxidase Color Development Kit and a BCA Protein Assay Kit
and 4% Paraformaldehyde Fix Solution were obtained from the Beyo-
time Institute of Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). All other materials
were commercially available and used as received unless otherwise
mentioned. The water with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ.cm, used through-
out the experiment, was puriﬁed with a Milli-Q system from
Millipore Co.
Synthesis of DGC probe
Brieﬂy, 20 μL HAuCl4 (25 mM aqueous solution) was slowly added to
the DAG peptide solution (1 mM, 500 μL) with stirring. Subsequently,
10 μL freshly prepared sodium citrate (40 mM) was added to the
mixture. Next, 100 μL sodium hydroxide solution (0.5 mM) was added
to the reaction system drop by drop. The whole process takes place at
55 °C and seals away from light for 5 h to obtain DGC. Before use, all
glassware should be soaked in aqua regia (HCl: HNO3, volume
ratio = 3:1) and then rinsed with ultrapure water. The assembled DGC
were puriﬁed and concentrated using an ultraﬁltration tube (Millipore,
MWCO: 3 KDa) by adding H2O to cut off peptide and free ions, leaving
the solution at a pH of 9.0. The puriﬁed sample was sealed and pro-
tected from light at 4 °C for later studies.
Characterization of DGC probe
The luminescence of obtained DGC was observed in the dark by using a
portable ultraviolet analyzer (ZF-5, Nanjing, China). The ﬂuorescence
spectrophotometer (Shimadzu RF-5301, Kyoto, Japan) and NIR spec-
trograph FLS1000 was used to acquire the ﬂuorescence and NIR
spectra of the as-synthesized DGC. The mean hydrated particle size and
size distribution of DGC were further documented by a phase analysis
light-scattering technique (Zetasizer Nano, Malvern). The synthetic
DGC was also observed by using a High-Resolution Transmission
Electron Microscope (HRTEM, FEI Talos F200X-G2) at the accelerated
voltage of 200 kV. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of
Fig. 6 | Speciﬁc DGC marking and imaging of CTGF in AD brain of 3-month-old
APP/PS1 mice in vivo. a The in vivo NIR-II ﬂuorescence images of wild-type (WT)
mice (left) and 3-month-old APP/PS1 mice (right) after intravenous injection of
DGC. And the ex vivo imaging of brains isolated from mice (cardiac perfusion with
saline) after DGC injection (λ ex = 808 nm). The experiment was repeated in three
independent pair of mice with similar results. b In situ ﬂuorescence (red) imaging,
LA-ICP-TOF-MS imaging, and DAB chromogenic (brown) imaging of CTGF in brain
sections prepared from the ex vivo NIR-II analyzed brains. Inset pictures are
enlarged areas of DAB chromogenic imaging. Scale bar = 50 μm. Each experiment
was repeated independently for three times with similar results. c The brain sec-
tions prepared from the brains after ex vivo NIR-II imaging, sections were stained
with FITC-labeled CTGF antibody (green ﬂuorescence). Scale bar = 20 μm. The inset
showed the colocalization of DGC (red ﬂuorescence) and CTGF antibody (green
ﬂuorescence). Scale bar = 20 μm. The experiment was repeated independently in
three pairs of mice with similar results. d Representative images of DGC (red
ﬂuorescence) location in cells of brain sections. GFAP marked reactive astrocytes,
CD31 marked vascular endothelial cells, Neun marked neurons, and Iba 1 marked
microglia cells (all green ﬂuorescence). Scale bar = 20 μm. The inset showed the
colocalization of DGC (red ﬂuorescence) and CTGF (green ﬂuorescence) expressed
by reactive astrocytes and vascular endothelial cells rather than microglia cells and
neurons. Each experiment was repeated independently three times with similar
results.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
9

ﬂight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS, ultraﬂeXtreme, Bruker,
Germany) was used to characterize the molecular composition of the
as-synthesized cluster.
Peroxidase-like activity of DGC in vitro
Under the catalysis of HRP or other peroxidases, 3, 3’, 5, 5’- tetra-
methylbenzidine (TMB) solution can produced soluble blue color
product. Here, the concentration-dependent peroxidase-like activity
of DGC assays was carried out with a series of differing DGC con-
centrations (0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 80 µM) at 100 mM H2O2 and 500 µM
TMB solution system at pH 7.0.
Afﬁnity between DGC and CTGF protein by SPR analysis
Real-time binding and kinetic analyses by surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) were performed on a BIAcore 8 K+ instrument (Pharmacia Bio-
sensor
AB).
The
recombinant
Human
CTGF
protein
(Abcam,
Cat#ab283457) was immobilized on a CM5 chip by using an amine
coupling kit, and the remaining coupling sites were blocked with
ethanolamine. The eluent contained PBS and 0.005% Tween 20.
Binding was evaluated over a range of DAG (0.5–16 μM) or DGC (0.01–
0.16 μM) concentrations at 25 °C. Kinetic parameters were further
determined with Biacore Insight Evaluation 3.0 software.
CTGF expression in cells via Western blot
We evaluated the expression level of CTGF in human astrocytoma cells
(U87MG), neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y), and astrocytes (CTX TNA2)
by a traditional immunoblotting method. U87MG, SH-SY5Y, and CTX
TNA2 cells were plated in a six-well plate at a density of 5 × 105 cells per
well. Subsequently, the cells were collected when harvested and
washed with cold PBS. Then, the total protein was extracted through
RIPA lysis buffer. Protein concentration was tested by the BCA protein
assay kit. The protein samples were added in 10% sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS-PAGE) gel prepared beforehand and transferred to a
(polyvinylidene ﬂuoride) (PVDF) membrane. The membrane was
incubated with the targeted primary CTGF antibodies (dilution 1:1000,
Abacm, Cat#ab6992) at 4 °C overnight after being blocked by blocking
buffer for western blot. Afterward, the membrane was immunized with
HRP-labeled secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. After
being washed with TBST, chemiluminescent HRP substrates (Milli-
pore) were added to the membrane and a gel-imaging system (Tanon,
5200 Multi, China) was applied to capture the chemiluminescence. The
gray value of the CTGF band was analyzed using ImageJ software.
Uncropped blots were presented in the Source Data ﬁle.
Cytotoxicity of DGC
U87MG, SH-SY5Y, and CTX TNA2 cells were seeded into 96-well plates
at a density of 5 × 103 cells per well and were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h.
Then, the cells were treated with 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, and 500 µM DGC for
24 h. Next, 10 µL of a colorimetric Cell Counting Kit (CCK-8) reagent
diluted with 100 µL medium was added to each well, and incubated for
30 min, The absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate
reader (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA). The relative viability
was normalized to control cells. The experiment was performed in
triplicates.
Evaluating the speciﬁcity of DGC to CTGF in cells by ﬂuores-
cence imaging
The U87MG, SH-SY5Y, and CTX TNA2 cells in confocal dishes were
ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution (PFA) for 30 min. Next, the
cells were washed with cold PBS three times, and 3% BSA in PBS
solution was introduced to the cells to block the nonspeciﬁc recog-
nition sites. Then, the cells were incubated with 55 μM DGC for 60 min
at room temperature. The control cells were only incubated with a
Fig. 7 | Speciﬁc DGC marking and imaging of CTGF in AD patient-derived brain
sections and healthy control (HC) brain sections. a The ﬂuorescence imaging of
hippocampal and cortex regions in brain sections from AD patient and HC after
staining with DGC (red ﬂuorescence) and FITC-labeled-Aβ antibody (green ﬂuor-
escence). The merge pictures show the partial colocalization of DGC and Aβ. Scale
bar = 20 μm. b The ﬂuorescence imaging of hippocampal and cortex regions in
brain sections from AD patient and HC after staining with DGC (red ﬂuorescence)
and FITC-labeled CTGF antibody (green ﬂuorescence). The merge pictures indicate
the colocalization of DGC and CTGF. Scale bar = 20 μm. c Representative chro-
mogenic imaging (brown) of hippocampal and cortex regions in brain sections
from AD patient and HC after staining with DGC and DAB working solution.
Scale bar = 20 μm. Each experiment was repeated independently in two AD
patient-derived brain sections and two HC brain sections with similar results.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
10

culture medium. Next, the nuclei were stained with 5 μg/mL DAPI
solution for 5 min. Finally, the cells were observed by a confocal laser
scanning microscope (CLSM, PerkinElmer, USA). The ﬂuorescence
intensity of each cell was measured by ImageJ software, the red
channel was extracted by clicking Split Channels, and the red ﬂuor-
escent region, except the nucleus was selected by Freehand selections.
Then the average ﬂuorescence intensity in this region was measured
and recorded for statistical analysis.
To further determine the speciﬁcity of DGC to CTGF, immuno-
ﬂuorescence staining was performed with CTGF antibodies to deter-
mine the location of CTGF in cells. First, U87MG cells in confocal dishes
were ﬁxed with 4% PFA for 30 min. Next, the cells were washed with
PBS three times, and 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS solution.
Then, the cells were incubated with CTGF antibody (dilution 1:100,
Abcam, Cat#ab6992) in PBS for 4 h at 4 °C, and FITC-labeled Goat Anti-
Rabbit IgG (H + L) (1: dilution 1:200, Bioss, Cat#bs-0370R-FITC) in 3%
BSA solution was added to the cells for another 30 min at 37 °C in the
dark. Subsequently, 55 μM DGC were incubated with the cells for 1 h.
Finally, the cells were stained with DAPI for 5 min and washed with PBS
before the CLSM image (Nikon).
Moreover, a binding site blocking study was performed to con-
ﬁrm the speciﬁcity of the DGC to CTGF. First, U87MG cells were ﬁxed
with 4% PFA. Then, a PBS solution containing 3% BSA was used to block
the nonspeciﬁc recognition sites for 30 min. After BSA blocking, the
cells were pre-incubated with 5 mM of free DAG peptide for 1 h, fol-
lowed by 55 μM DGC added for 60 min. Then, DAPI (5 μg/mL) was
added to U87MG cells to stain the nuclei. Finally, the cells were imaged
by the CLSM system.
Visual observation of CTGF expression in cells by chromogenic
DAB oxidation
To observe accurately the expression level of CTGF in cells with the
naked eye, we optimized the conditions for labeling U87MG, SH-SY5Y,
and CTX TNA2 cells stained with DGC. According to the study, the
optimal incubation concentration of DGC (40 μM) was used to
determine the optimal culture conditions using the DAB Horseradish
Peroxidase Color Development Kit. After the cells were co-stained by
DGC at 4 °C overnight, a DAB chromogenic agent was added to the
cells. Since DGC can label CTGF proteins on the cells, when DAB
chromogenic is added, DGC on the cells can catalyze DAB to produce
an insoluble brown precipitate to attach to the cells.
Quantitating CTGF in cells by ICP-MS
After U87MG, SH-SY5Y, and CTX TNA2 cells were imaged by a laser
confocal microscopy system, these cells labeled with DGC were
quantitatively analyzed by an ICP-MS system (Thermo Elemental X7,
USA). Each cell group in the glass vials was digested by adding 5 mL
aqua regia (HCl: HNO3 = 3:1) overnight. Subsequently, the aqua regia
was heated to evaporate to the last drop to be diluted by a mixture of
2% HNO3 and 1% HCl. A standard curve of Au was made to quantify the
concentration of Au in different cells. ICP-MS was used to test the Au
signal in triplicates.
Immunoﬂuorescence analysis of CTGF in the brain sections of
AD mice
To evaluate the expression of CTGF in the brain of AD mice and the
efﬁcacy of DGC in vitro, brain sections of APP/PS1 transgenic mice
(derived from C57BL/6J) from 1-month to 9-month-old (1-, 2-, 3-, 6- and
9-month-old, female, n = 3) were used as AD model, and brain sections
of the age-matched wild-type C57BL/6J mice were used as controls
(female, n = 3). The brain sections were subjected to CTGF antibody
immunoﬂuorescence staining and DGC ﬂuorescence imaging. The
brains were collected and ﬁxed with 4% PFA. The embedded brain was
then sectioned using a microtome into 5-μm thick consecutive sec-
tions. The brain sections were immersed in Tris-EDTA buffer (pH = 9.0)
at 95 °C for 15 min. The brain sections were then incubated with 3%
bovine serum albumin for 1.5 h. Then, the brain sections were stained
overnight at 4 °C with an anti-CTGF primary antibody (dilution 1:50,
Abcam, Cat#ab6992). After restoring room temperature, they were
washed with TBST (pH = 7.4, 3 × 5 min) and incubated with FITC-
Fig. 8 | DGC identiﬁes early-stage AD patient brain sections. a The ﬂuorescence
imaging of cortex regions in brain sections from an early stage of AD patient (AD)
and Healthy control (HC) after staining with DGC (red ﬂuorescence) and FITC-
labeled CTGF antibody (green ﬂuorescence). The merge pictures show the colo-
calization of DGC and CTGF. Scale bar = 50 μm. b The ﬂuorescence (FL) intensity of
DGC in (a) analyzed by ImageJ software. Data were presented as mean ± SD from
three independent sections of the same case (n = 3). Student’s t-test. c ICP-MS
analysis of DGC (Au) content of per cm2 after incubating DGC with indicated brain
sections. Data were presented as mean ± SD from three independent sections of the
same case (n = 3). Student’s t-test. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
11

labeled Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG (h +L) (1: dilution 1:200, Bioss, Cat#bs-
0370R-FITC) for 1 h. The brain sections were washed with TBST
(pH = 7.4, 3 × 5 min). Finally, overnight staining with DGC (200 μM) at
4 °C and ﬂuorescence imaging were obtained by the CLSM system.
Multimodal analysis of CTGF in the brain sections of AD mice
Brain sections from female APP/PS1 double transgenic mice were used
as AD models, and brain sections of the age-matched female wild-type
C57BL/6J mice were used as controls to evaluate the availability of DGC
in vitro. Three-month-old APP/PS1 mice (early-stage, unestablished Aβ
plaques) and 9-month-old APP/PS1 mice (late-stage, established Aβ
plaques) were chosen for comparison. All mice were purchased from
Beijing HFK Bioscience Co., Ltd and handled in accordance with the
Ethics Committee of Beijing University of Technology, China. To avoid
the interference of strong background ﬂuorescence signals of blood in
cerebral microvessels, the blood vessels were emptied by cardiac
perfusion with saline and PFA before dissociating the brain. After the
completion of perfusion, the brain was collected and ﬁxed with PFA for
a longer time ex vivo. The embedded brain was then sectioned using a
microtome into 5-μm thick continuous sections. The brain sections
were labeled with DGC or CTGF, GFAP, and Aβ antibodies. Depar-
afﬁnization was performed ﬁrst and antigen retrieval was implemented
with immersion of the brain sections into Tris-EDTA buffer (pH = 9.0)
at 95 °C for 15 min. Then, the brain sections were incubated with 3%
bovine serum albumin for 1.5 h.
For ﬂuorescence imaging of CTGF, the brain sections were stained
with anti-CTGF primary antibody (dilution 1:50, Abcam, Cat#ab6992),
anti-glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) primary antibody (diluted 1:400,
Proteintech, Cat#16825-1-AP) or anti-Aβ 17-24 (4G8, diluted 1:1000,
BioLegend, Cat#SIG-39200) at 4 °C for 4 h. After they were washed by
TBST (pH = 7.4, 3 × 5 min) at room temperature, the brain sections were
incubated with the secondary antibody (FITC-labeled Goat Anti-Rabbit
IgG (H + L) (1: dilution 1:200, Bioss, Cat#bs-0370R-FITC) for 1 h. After the
brain sections were washed by TBST (pH = 7.4, 3 × 5 min). Finally, the
brain sections were co-stained by DGC (200 μM) at 4 °C overnight, and
the staining results were acquired on the CLSM system.
To observe the expression level of CTGF in the brain section with
the naked eye, we optimized the conditions for labeling WT mice, 3-
month-old APP/PS1 mice and 9-month-old APP/PS1 mice stained with
DGC. According to the study, the optimal incubation concentration of
DGC (200 μM) was used to determine the conditions using the DAB
Horseradish Peroxidase Color Development Kit. After the brain sections
were co-stained by DGC (200 μM) at 4 °C overnight, a DAB chromogenic
agent was added to the brain sections. Since DGC possesses peroxidase-
mimic activity, when DAB solution is added, DGC binding on the tissue
can catalyze the oxidation of DAB to produce an insoluble brown pre-
cipitate in situ of the brain sections. After the brown product was
imaged by optical microscopy and analyzed by Image Pro Plus software.
In situ visualization/quantiﬁcation of CTGF in brain tissue by LA-
ICP-TOF-MS. Brain tissue isolated from WT, 3-month-old APP/PS1 and
9-month-old APP/PS1 mice was collected after cardiac perfusion with
pre-cooled normal saline. The embedded brain was sectioned to 5 μm
using a microtome after freezing with liquid nitrogen. The frozen
sections were taken out and placed at room temperature for 15 min,
then soaked in water for 10 min, and washed with PBS. After incubation
with 3% BSA solution for 60 min, the brain sections were stained with
DGC (200 μM) overnight at 4 °C. On the second day, the DGC-labeled
brain slices were washed with deionized water three times, and ana-
lyzed by LA-ICP-TOF-MS. An Iridia laser ablation system (Teledyne
Photon Machines, Bozeman, USA) with 193 nm ArF excimer laser and
low dispersion ablation unit was used. The LA system was coupled to
icpTOF 2R ICP-TOF-MS (TOFWERK AG, Thun, Switzerland) by the
Aerosol Rapid Introduction System (ARIS). Using high-purity helium as
transport gas, the ablated aerosol samples were transported from the
ablative chamber to ICP-MS. For LA-ICP-TOF-MS experiments, daily
tuning is performed using the NIST 612 glass standard RM (National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, USA) to obtain
high sensitivity of 59Co, 115In, and 238U signals and low oxidation rates
(e.g., UO+/U+ ≤3%). To obtain the shortest monopulse response, the
ﬂow of the internal and external cells is optimized. Laser spot size was
set to 10 μm, line spacing was set to 10 μm, dosage was set to 1, laser
frequency was set to 200 Hz. The parameters and conditions of the LA-
ICP-TOF-MS are shown in Table S7. Imaging was performed using HDIP
software (Teledyne Photon Machines, Bozeman, USA), TOFware, and
Laser Image Viewer software (TOFWERK AG, Thun, Switzerland).
The DGC in the brain section was measured by ICP-MS. Brieﬂy, the
brain sections were digested with 5 mL mix solution (HNO3 and
H2O2 = 3:1) overnight. Then, each section was digested at a mild boiling
temperature until the solution was evaporated to 0.1–0.2 mL and added
5 mL aqua regia (HCl: HNO3 = 3:1) overnight. Then each section was
digested at a mild boiling temperature until the solution was evaporated
to 0.1– 0.2 mL and diluted by 2% HNO3 and 1% HCl to the ﬁnal volume.
Parallel artiﬁcial membrane permeability assays (PAMPA)
A parallel artiﬁcial membrane permeability assay was performed in a
96-well precoated PAMPA plate system (Corning Gentest # 353015).
The experimental solutions of DGC were prepared by diluting the
stock solutions (10 mM) in PBS at a ﬁnal concentration of 40 μM and
then added to the donor portion of the plate (300 μL/well), while PBS
(200 μL/well) was added to the acceptor portion, and the DMSO
concentration was lower than 1%. The ﬁlter plate was then coupled with
the receiver plate, and the plate assembly was incubated at room
temperature without agitation for 5 h. Samples of the initial donor
solution (C0) were collected and stored at 4 ˚C. At the end of the
incubation, samples were collected from the donor and acceptor
plates and then added to aqua regia (HCl: HNO3, volume ratio = 3:1).
The C0 samples were treated similarly. The ﬁnal concentrations of DGC
in the donor, acceptor, and T0 wells were quantiﬁed by the ICP-MS
system (Thermo Elemental X7, USA). The results were used to calculate
an effective permeability (Pe, cm/s) value. Permeability of DGC was
calculated using the following Eq. (1):
Pe = f-ln½1-CAðtÞ=Ceqg=½A × ð1=V D + 1=V AÞ × t
ð1Þ
Where
A = ﬁlter
area
(0.3 cm2),
t = incubation
time
(seconds),
CA(t) = compound concentration in acceptor well at time t, VD = donor
well
volume
(0.3 mL),
VA = acceptor
well
volume
(0.2 mL),
CD(t) = compound concentration in donor well at time t, and Ceq was
calculated using the following Eq. (2):
Ceq = ½CDðtÞ × V D + CAðtÞ × V A=ðV D + V AÞ
ð2Þ
Monitoring the DGC in blood by ex vivo NIR-II imaging
The C57BL/6J mice (male and female) were injected with DGC
(20 mg/kg) through the tail vein (n = 3). After injection, the blood
samples were collected at 0.083, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 10, 12, 24, and 48 h
through the posterior orbital vein of the mice. The serum was obtained
by centrifugation (1200×g for 5 min) to remove blood cells. The serum
samples were observed through the In vivo Master (Grand-imaging
Technology) equipped with an InGaAs camera C-RED2 (Firstlight) (λ
ex = 808 nm, 1000 nm longpass (LP) ﬁlter (Edmund Optics)) camera to
obtain the NIR-II image (exposure time: 50 ms). ImageJ software was
used to process and analyze the images obtained in the experiment,
and the DGC content in the sample was evaluated according to the
ﬂuorescence intensity of the sample.
The pharmacokinetic study of DGC in C57BL/6J mice
Male and female mice were given a single intravenous dose of 20 mg/ kg
(n = 3). The blood of posterior orbital venous plexus was collected at
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
12

continuous time points (0.083, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 10, 12, 24, and 48 h)
and the serum was rapid separation by centrifugation (1200×g at 4 °C,
10 min). Au content in the serum sample was detected by ICP-MS. The
pharmacokinetic index was obtained by using winnonlin8.4 non-
atrioventricular model.
NIR-II imaging and multimodal analysis of CTGF in AD brain of
APP/PS1 mice
All animal procedures were performed under an approved protocol of
the Ethics Committee of Beijing University of Technology, China.
Female APP/PS1 mice and age-matched wild-type C57BL/6J mice were
shaved before background imaging. For NIR-II imaging in vivo with DGC,
the mice (n = 3) were fasted overnight before the experiment and then
injected intravenously with DGC (20 mg/kg, 200 μL). NIR-II imaging of
the brains was carried out on an In vivo Master (Grand-imaging Tech-
nology) equipped with an InGaAs camera C-RED2 (Firstlight) at different
time points after injection of DGC (λ ex = 808 nm, 1000 nm longpass
(LP) ﬁlter (Edmund Optics)). The excitation intensity of the 808 nm laser
(Wuhan Grand-imaging Technology) was about 100 mW/cm and the
optical images were acquired using an exposure time of 50 ms. Imaging
data were analyzed by ImageJ software.
Mice were then perfused intracardially with saline and 4% PFA,
and major organs (including the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lung, and
kidney were isolated. The dissociated brains were performed NIR-II
imaging ex vivo using the same method as in vivo imaging (n = 3). All
isolated organs were also imaged by the NIR-II imaging system (λ
ex = 808 nm, 1000 nm longpass (LP) ﬁlter (Edmund Optics)). And then,
the brains were kept in 4% PFA overnight and embedded with parafﬁn.
Sections with 5-μm thickness were cut and analyzed by immunos-
taining with antibodies to CTGF (dilution 1: 50, Abcam, Cat#ab6992),
GFAP (dilution 1:100, Proteintech, Cat#16825-1-AP), CD31 (dilution
1:200, Beyotime, Cat#AF6408), Neun (dilution 1:300, abcam, Cat#
ab177487), and Iba 1 (dilution 1:50, Beyotime, Cat# AF7143), respec-
tively. The colocalization of DGC with each antibody was observed in
the brain sections by ﬂuorescence microscope (Nikon).
To visualize the distribution of DGC-labeled CTGF in the brain, the
brain sections were imaged by the LA-ICP-TOF-MS system. Brain tissue
isolated from WT and 3-month-old APP/PS1 mice was collected, frozen
with liquid nitrogen, and sectioned to 5 μm. The brain sections were
stained with DGC and analyzed by LA-ICP-TOF-MS. Laser spot size was
set to 20 μm, line spacing was set to 20 μm, dosage was set to 1, Laser
frequency was set to 200 Hz. The parameters and conditions of the LA-
ICP-TOF-MS are shown in Table S7. Imaging was performed using HDIP
software, TOFware, and Laser Image Viewer software. Finally, The DGC
in the brain section was measured by ICP-MS. Brieﬂy, the brain sections
were digested with 5 mL mix solution (HNO3 and H2O2 = 3:1) overnight.
Then, each section was digested at a mild boiling temperature until the
solution was evaporated to 0.1– 0.2 mL and added 5 mL aqua regia
(HCl: HNO3 = 3:1) overnight. Then each section was digested at a mild
boiling temperature until the solution was evaporated to 0.1– 0.2 mL
and diluted by 2% HNO3 and 1% HCl to the ﬁnal volume.
Multimodal analysis of CTGF in brain samples from AD patients
The brain tissue samples of autopsy-conﬁrmed AD patients were
obtained from the Chinese Brain Bank Center (CBBC) and Human Brain
Bank, Central South University Xiangya School of Medicine. First, the
brain sections were air-dried for 15 min at room temperature, followed
by immersion in water. 5% H2O2 was applied for 15 min at room tem-
perature. The sections were washed three times with PBS for 5 min
each time. Then, tissue repair was performed using trypsin at a tem-
perature of 37 °C for 5 min and washed three times with PBS. We chose
10% sheep serum to block for a duration of 20 min at 37°. Primary
antibodies (CTGF antibody and Aβ antibody) were added to the sec-
tions overnight at 4 °C. FITC-labeled Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG (H + L) (1:
dilution 1:200, Bioss, Cat#bs-0370R-FITC) was applied and incubated
at 37 °C for 20 min in darkness. Subsequent washing steps involved
rinsing the sections three times with PBS, each time lasting for 5 min
while avoiding exposure to light. DAPI staining was performed, taking
care to store the samples away from light during the 5-min procedure.
Then observed by the CLSM system. Then, we chose the optimal
incubation concentration of DGC (200 μM) was used to determine the
conditions using DAB Horseradish Peroxidase Color Development Kit.
After the brain sections were co-stained by DGC (200 μM) at 4 °C
overnight, a DAB chromogenic agent was added to the brain tissue
sections to explore whether DGC can catalyze DAB solutions to pro-
duce insoluble brown precipitate to attach the brain tissue sections
with an optical microscope. Finally, the brain tissue sections were
digested with aqua regia to measure the Au content by the ICP-MS
system.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analysis were performed using GraphPad and Origin. The
data were analyzed using Student’s t-test, and represented as mean ±
SD. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 as indicated in the ﬁgure legends. For each
experiment, unless otherwise noted, the data under each condition
were accumulated from at least three independent experiments.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The authors declare that all data supporting the ﬁndings of this study
are available within the paper and its supplementary information ﬁles.
Source data are provided with this paper.
References
1.
2023 Alzheimer’s disease facts and ﬁgures. Alzheimer’s Dement. 19,
1598–1695 (2023).
2.
Gustavsson, A. et al. Global estimates on the number of persons
across the Alzheimer’s disease continuum. Alzheimer’s Dement. 19,
658–670 (2023).
3.
van Dyck, C. H. et al. Lecanemab in early Alzheimer’s disease. N.
Engl. J. Med. 388, 9–21 (2023).
4.
Sims, J. R. et al. Donanemab in early symptomatic Alzheimer dis-
ease: the TRAILBLAZER-ALZ 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA 330,
512–527 (2023).
5.
Villemagne, V. L., Doré, V., Burnham, S. C., Masters, C. L. & Rowe, C.
C. Imaging tau and amyloid-β proteinopathies in Alzheimer disease
and other conditions. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14, 225–236 (2018).
6.
Porteri, C. et al. The biomarker-based diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
disease. 1-ethical and so cietal issues. Neurobiol. Aging 52,
132–140 (2017).
7.
Cummings, J. L., Morstorf, T. & Zhong, K. Alzheimer’s disease drug-
development pipeline: few candidates, frequent failures. Alzhei-
mer’s Res. Ther. 6, 37 (2014).
8.
Ueberham, U., Ueberham, E., Gruschka, H. & Arendt, T. Connective
tissue growth factor in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 116,
1–6 (2003).
9.
Zhao, Z. et al. Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) expression in
the brain is a downstream effector of insulin resistance‐associated
promotion of Alzheimer’s disease β‐amyloid neuropathology.
FASEB J. 19, 2081–2082 (2005).
10.
Lo, A. C., Callaerts-Vegh, Z., Nunes, A. F., Rodrigues, C. M. P. &
D’Hooge, R. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) supplementation
prevents cognitive impairment and amyloid deposition in APP/PS1
mice. Neurobiol. Dis. 50, 21–29 (2013).
11.
Yang, C.-N. et al. Differential protective effects of connective tissue
growth factor against Aβ neurotoxicity on neurons and glia. Hum.
Mol. Genet. 26, 3909–3921 (2017).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
13

12.
Nunes, A. F. et al. TUDCA, a bile acid, attenuates amyloid precursor
protein processing and amyloid-β deposition in APP/PS1 mice. Mol.
Neurobiol. 45, 440–454 (2012).
13.
Mann, A. P. et al. Identiﬁcation of a peptide recognizing cere-
brovascular changes in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat.
Commun. 8, 1403 (2017).
14.
Streich, L. et al. High-resolution structural and functional deep brain
imaging using adaptive optics three-photon microscopy. Nat.
Methods 18, 1253–1258 (2021).
15.
Park, J.-H., Sun, W. & Cui, M. High-resolution in vivo imaging of
mouse brain through the intact skull. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112,
9236–9241 (2015).
16.
Hong, G., Antaris, A. L. & Dai, H. Near-infrared ﬂuorophores for
biomedical imaging. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1, 0010 (2017).
17.
Liu, Y. et al. Recent advances in small molecular near-infrared
ﬂuorescence probes f or a targeted diagnosis of the Alzheimer
disease. Analyst 147, 4701–4723 (2022).
18.
Li, H. et al. Detection of Aβ oligomers in early Alzheimer’s disease
diagnose by in vivo NIR-II ﬂuorescence imaging. Sens. Actuators B:
Chem. 358, 131481 (2022).
19.
Liu, R. et al. The Au clusters induce tumor cell apoptosis via spe-
ciﬁcally targeting thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1) and suppressing
its activity. Chem. Commun. 50, 10687–10690 (2014).
20. Zhang, X., Yuan, Q. & Gao, X. Assessment of the MT1-MMP
expression level of different cell lines by the naked eye. Sci. China
Life Sci. 61, 492–500 (2018).
21.
Guidotti, N., Eördögh, Á., Mivelaz, M., Rivera-Fuentes, P. & Fierz, B.
Multivalent peptide ligands to probe the chromocenter micro-
environment in living cells. ACS Chem. Biol. 18, 1066–1075 (2022).
22. Jeong, W.-J. et al. Hierarchically multivalent peptide–nanoparticle
architectures: a systematic approach to engineer surface adhesion.
Adv. Sci. 9, e2103098 (2021).
23. Radde, R. et al. Abeta42-driven cerebral amyloidosis in transgenic
mice reveals early and robust pathology. EMBO Rep. 7, 940–946
(2006).
24. Wang, S. et al. Photostable small-molecule NIR-II ﬂuorescent scaf-
folds that cross the blood-brain barrier for noninvasive brain ima-
ging. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 23668–23676 (2022).
25. Nordberg, A. Dementia in 2014. Towards early diagnosis in Alzhei-
mer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 11, 69–70 (2015).
26. Ma, H. et al. Bioactive NIR-II gold clusters for three-dimensional
imaging and acute inﬂammation inhibition. Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828
(2023).
27.
Baghdasaryan, A. et al. Phosphorylcholine-conjugated gold-
molecular clusters improve signal for Lymph Node NIR-II ﬂuor-
escence imaging in preclinical cancer models. Nat. Commun. 13,
5613 (2022).
28. Li, D. et al. Gold nanoclusters for NIR-II ﬂuorescence imaging of
bones. Small 16, e2003851 (2020).
29. Ni, S., Liu, Y., Tong, S., Li, S. & Song, X. Emerging NIR-II lumines-
cent gold nanoclusters for in vivo bioimaging. J. Anal. Test. 7,
260–271 (2023).
30. Hu, J. et al. Optimal route of gold nanoclusters administration in mice
targeting Parkinson’s disease. Nanomedicine 15, 563–580 (2020).
31.
Liu, R. et al. Glymphatic system and subsidiary pathways drive
nanoparticles away from the brain. Research 2022, 9847612
(2022).
32. Kang, X. & Zhu, M. Tailoring the photoluminescence of atomically
precise nanoclusters. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48, 2422–2457 (2019).
33. Zhou, M. & Song, Y. Origins of visible and near-infrared emissions
in [Au25(SR)18]- nanoclusters. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 12, 1514–1519
(2021).
34. Pyo, K. et al. Ultrabright luminescence from gold nanoclusters:
rigidifying the Au(I) -thiolate shell. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137,
8244–8250 (2015).
35. Xia, N. et al. Structural oscillation revealed in gold nanoparticles. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 12140–12145 (2020).
36. Li, Q., Zeman, C. J. T., Schatz, G. C. & Gu, X. W. Source of bright
near-infrared luminescence in gold nanoclusters. ACS Nano 15,
16095–16105 (2021).
37. Li, Q., Zeman, C. J., Ma, Z., Schatz, G. C. & Gu, X. W. Bright NIR‐II
photoluminescence in rod‐shaped icosahedral gold nanoclusters.
Small 17, e2007992 (2021).
38. Ma, H., Wang, J. & Zhang, X.-D. Near-infrared II emissive metal
clusters: from atom physics to biomedicine. Coord. Chem. Rev.
448, 214184 (2021).
39. Wang, Y. et al. Tailoring carbon tails of ligands on Au52(SR)32
nanoclusters enhances the near-infrared photoluminescence
quantum yield from 3.8 to 18.3. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 145,
26328–26338 (2023).
40. Guo, M. et al. Ligand engineering of gold nanoclusters for NIR-II
imaging. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 6, 15945–15958 (2023).
41.
Liu, H. et al. Atomic-precision gold clusters for NIR-II imaging. Adv.
Mater. 31, e1901015 (2019).
42. Huang, Y. et al. Single atom-engineered NIR-II gold clusters with
ultrahigh brightness and stability for acute kidney injury. Small 19,
e2300145 (2023).
Acknowledgements
The authors also thank Dr. Lingna Zheng (Institute of High Energy Phy-
sics, Chinese Academy of Sciences) for the support with LA-ICP-TOF-MS
detection, Prof. Wen Shi (Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of
Sciences) for the support with NIR-II imaging, Dr. Zi Yang (Protein Pre-
paration and Characterization Core Facility of Tsinghua University
Branch, China National Center for Protein Sciences) for the support with
SPR analysis. We also thank the Chinese Brain Bank Center (CBBC,
Wuhan, P. R. China) and Human Brain Bank, Central South University
Xiangya School of Medicine for providing the brain tissues of autopsy-
conﬁrmed AD patients and normal controls. This work was supported by
the National Key Research & Development Program of China (grant No.
2022YFA1207300, X.G. and 2021YFA1201000, Q.Y.), the National Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (22334001, X.G.; U2067214, X.G.;
32171378, Q.Y.; and 22376009, K.C.).
Author contributions
C.L. synthesized the probe and did cell and animal imaging, C.M. and
Y.L. assisted animal studies, J.Y. assisted cell studies. X.R., L.G., D.S.,
K.C., and M.C. provided experimental suggestions. Q.Y. and X.G.
designed the project and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Qing Yuan or Xueyun Gao.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Peng Huang,
Xiaodong Zhang and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their con-
tribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
14

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49409-4
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:5000 
15