Protection of Alzheimer’s disease 
progression by a human-origin 
probiotics cocktail
Santosh Kumar Prajapati1,2,5, Shaohua Wang1,2,4,5, Sidharth P Mishra1,2, Shalini Jain1,2 & 
Hariom Yadav1,2,3
Microbiome abnormalities (dysbiosis) significantly contribute to the progression of Alzheimer’s disease 
(AD). However, the therapeutic efficacy of microbiome modulators in protecting against these ailments 
remains poorly studied. Herein, we tested a cocktail of unique probiotics, including 5 Lactobacillus and 
5 Enterococcus strains isolated from infant gut with proven microbiome modulating capabilities. We 
aimed to determine the probiotics cocktail’s efficacy in ameliorating AD pathology in a humanized AD 
mouse model of APP/PS1 strains. Remarkably, feeding mice with 1 × 1011 CFU per day in drinking water 
for 16 weeks significantly reduced cognitive decline (measured by the Morris Water Maze test) and AD 
pathology markers, such as Aβ aggregation, microglia activation, neuroinflammation, and preserved 
blood-brain barrier (BBB) tight junctions. The beneficial effects were linked to a reduced inflammatory 
microbiome, leading to decreased gut permeability and inflammation in both systemic circulation 
and the brain. Although both male and female mice showed overall improvements in cognition and 
biological markers, females did not exhibit improvements in specific markers related to inflammation 
and barrier permeability, suggesting that the underlying mechanisms may differ depending on sex. 
In conclusion, our results suggest that this unique probiotics cocktail could serve as a prophylactic 
agent to reduce the progression of cognitive decline and AD pathology. This is achieved by beneficially 
modulating the microbiome, improving intestinal tight junction proteins, reducing permeability in 
both gut and BBB, and decreasing inflammation in the gut, blood circulation, and brain, ultimately 
mitigating AD pathology and cognitive decline.
Keywords  Microbiome, Alzheimer’s disease, Probiotics, Gut, Permeability, Inflammation, Dementia, 
Cognition
The prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is increasing and becoming one of the most burdensome public health 
concerns among older adults. The complexity of AD pathology makes treating or reversing fully developed AD 
difficult, but not impossible. However, emerging evidence suggests that early interventions in AD can effectively 
delay and/or prevent the progression of AD symptoms1–3. Therefore, there is a need to develop novel disease-
modifying treatments that can be implemented early in life, ensuring long-term safety and adherence. AD 
exhibits three pathological features: amyloid beta (Aβ) senile plaques, hyperphosphorylated tau neurofibrillary 
tangles, and neuroinflammation, contributing to neurodegeneration and memory loss4,5.
Neuroinflammation is a common among all the pathological features of AD and can emerge from a 
breakdown in the balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory signaling6,7. The production of several cytokines such 
as IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α that activate microglial cells are causal of this neuroinflammation7. Recent evidence 
indicates that neuroinflammation is higher in AD patients’ brains and is often elevated in their blood/systemic 
circulation8,9. Retrospective studies demonstrate that increased systemic inflammation 20 years before (mid-life) 
promotes cognitive decline in older adults later in life10. However, the precise etiology of inflammation in AD 
patients’ circulation and brain remains elusive.
1USF Center for Microbiome Research, Microbiomes Institute, University of South Florida Morsani College of 
Medicine, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. 2Department of Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, Center of Excellence in Aging 
and Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA. 3Department of Internal 
Medicine-Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, 
USA. 4Present address: Department of Biomedical Sciences, Infectious and Tropical Disease Institute, Ohio 
University Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio University, Athens, OH, USA. 5Santosh Kumar Prajapati 
and Shaohua Wang contributed equally to this work. email: hyadav@usf.edu
OPEN
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
1
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports

The human gut harbors a complex mix of trillions of microbes, collectively referred to as the gut microbiome. 
It plays a vital role in human health including brain health. An imbalance in the composition and function of 
these microbes in the gastrointestinal tract (called gut dysbiosis) is a crucial suspect of contributing to systemic 
inflammation. Multiple studies show AD patients’ gut microbiome differs significantly from their control 
counterparts11–14. Furthermore, transplantation of an abnormal microbiome from either humans or mice to 
rodents leads to the development of AD in recipients, suggesting that the gut microbiome is a causal factor for 
AD progression15–17. Although the entire understanding of the mechanism(s) by which a dysbiotic microbiome 
contributes to AD progression remains poorly understood, emerging studies show that a dysbiotic microbiome 
promotes gut permeability, allowing the leakage of proinflammatory mediators from the gut to the blood, 
stimulating systemic inflammation4,17. Therefore, gut permeability as a source of inflammation in AD pathology 
deserves more research attention.
The mechanism by which the microbiome promotes gut permeability involves disrupting tight junction 
barriers in the intestinal epithelia17. Reduced expression of tight junction proteins such as zonula occludens-1 
(Zo-1) and occludin is a common manifestation of gut permeability, observed in AD models18,19. Balance in 
the type and relative abundance of different microbial species is crucial, and dysbiosis leads to increased gut 
permeability. The enrichment of microbes associated with inflammation can cause local inflammation in gut 
tissue, dampening the tight junction barriers to cause gut leakiness, resulting in increased systemic inflammation, 
and ultimately reaching the brain through circulation.
Inflammatory agents in the circulation can impact the integrity of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which 
safeguards the brain20. BBB is a complex structure comprising the cell membranes of various cell types like 
endothelial cells, pericytes and astrocytes that are tightly connected by tight junctions and other junctional 
proteins, along with a basement membrane structure21. Increased systemic inflammation dampens the 
expression of these proteins in the BBB, increasing BBB permeability and allowing certain proinflammatory 
mediators to enter the brain. Brain immune cells called microglia are the first-degree cells that recognize these 
signals and become activated, contributing to neuroinflammation22. This cascade of inflammation from gut to 
brain is a significant pathological contributor to the progression of AD by causing the accumulation of Aβ and 
tau in the brain. Therefore, developing strategies to modulate the gut microbiome to reduce gut permeability 
and inflammation can be an effective strategy to reduce the progression of AD in those at high risk. A few 
studies have demonstrated that probiotics interventions are effective in reducing the progression of AD in 
different mouse models23. However, these studies are limited to single strains, and the effects on the cascade of 
microbiome/ gut permeability/inflammation/BBB/neuroinflammation/ AD pathology are not consistent across 
all studies. Additionally, probiotics strains used in previous studies are either less characterized or of non-human 
origin. In this study, we used a probiotics cocktail that consisted of 5 Lactobacillus and 5 Enterococcus24,25. We 
tested the efficacy of a well-characterized, human-origin probiotics cocktail proven effective in modulating 
both mouse and human microbiomes, reducing gut permeability and inflammation cascade24,25. To observe the 
prophylactic treatment effect of probiotics cocktail we used around 2-months-old amyloid precursor protein 
(APP)/ presenilin-1 (PS1) strains (APP/PS1) of mice and fed them probiotics for up to 6 months. This timeline 
was chosen taking consideration of Bao et al. (2020), who treated two-month-old mice for four months. Further, 
they reported that six-month-old APP/PS1 mice exhibited spatial learning and memory deficits, accompanied 
by increased neuroinflammation, compared to C57 wild-type mice26. Similarly, Zhu et al. (2017), reported that 
the APP/PS1 mice show significant memory deficits and Aβ pathology at 5-months of age and worsened with 
age, reflecting the progressive nature of AD27. Further, we selected the hippocampus for analysis of pathologies 
because that brain region is typically where pathological changes associated with AD first manifest before 
spreading to other parts of the brain. These changes include the buildup of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary 
tangles, characteristics of the disease. Cognitive deterioration, the result of these alterations, interfere with 
neuronal function28,29. Thus, hippocampus is crucial for early pathogenesis as well as for prophylactic treatment 
of AD. In this study the prophylactic treatment with probiotics cocktail showed promising effects in modulating 
this intricate cascade of the gut-brain axis and reducing the progression of AD pathology in a humanized APP/
PS1 AD mouse model.
Results
A human-origin probiotics cocktail protected the AD progression in APP/PS1 mice
 To validate this model, we compared APP/PS1  mice with wild-type (WT) mice of both male and female sex. 
We observed a significant increase in escape latency and accumulation of Aβ in APP/PS1 mice compared to WT, 
implicating the development of AD pathology (Supplementary Figure S1a, b). These findings are consistent with 
previous reports showing that 6-month-old APP/PS1 mice exhibit deficits in spatial learning and memory, along 
with elevated neuroinflammation, compared to C57 wild-type mice26. Next, to ascertain the potential of the 
human-origin probiotics cocktail to protect AD progression in mice expressing human amyloid-β (APP/PS1), 
we showed that the 16 weeks feeding to 6-8-week-old mice significantly mitigated cognitive decline (escape 
latency in the Morris Water Maze [MWM] test) compared to untreated controls (Fig. 1a, b). Notably, mice 
receiving the probiotics cocktail also exhibited decreased Aβ accumulation (immunofluorescence and Aβ42/40 
ratio) in the hippocampal region, as compared to age- and sex-matched control mice (Fig. 1c–e). Further, there 
was a significant decrease in Aβ accumulation, as indicated by thioflavin-S staining (Supplementary Figure 
S1(c)). These results are consistent with the notion that this human-origin probiotics cocktail protected against 
AD progression in APP/PS1 mice by attenuating Aβ accumulation.
Probiotics therapy reduced brain inflammation and improved BBB integrity
 Further, we observed significantly reduced expression of the activated glial cell marker-Iba-1 (Ionized calcium-
binding adaptor molecule- 1) in the hippocampus of mice that had been fed with probiotics cocktail compared 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
2
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Fig. 1.  A human-origin probiotics cocktail protected the progression of behavioral abnormalities and AD 
pathology in APP/PS-1 mice. (a, b) Probiotics therapy reduced cognitive behavioral abnormalities indicated by 
track and escape latency in the MWM test (n = 20). (c, d) Probiotics therapy also reduced the Aβ accumulation 
in the hippocampus, indicated by immunofluorescence staining (n = 10). (e) Probiotics prophylactic treatment 
reduced Aβ42/40 in the brain homogenate of APP/PS1 mice (n = 10). The group control and probiotics cocktail 
are depicted as control (M + F) and probiotics (M + F) represents the combination of male (M) and female 
(F). All the data were presented as mean and standard deviation. To determine statistical significance, we 
used student`s 2-tail t-tests and the p-values with ***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001 indicate level of statistical 
significance.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
3
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

to their control counterparts, indicating probiotics feeding reduced neuroinflammation in mice (Fig. 2a, b). 
Morphological analysis of microglia showed that prophylactic treatment with the probiotics cocktail increased 
the branch length of microglia as compared to controls (see Fig. 2c–g). In addition, the mRNA and protein 
expression levels of inflammatory markers such as IL-6 and TNF-α were significantly reduced in the brain 
homogenates of mice fed with probiotics compared to controls (Fig. 2h, i). To further identify the cause associated 
with neuroinflammation, we observed that probiotics feeding increased the expression of tight junction proteins 
such as Occludin and Zo-1 mRNA expression in the brain of probiotics-fed mice compared to controls (Fig. 2j, 
k), indicating that probiotics improved BBB integrity in APP/PS1 mouse brains. These results demonstrated that 
the probiotics therapy suppressed microglial activation, neuroinflammation, and improved tight junctions in 
BBBs in the APP/PS1 mouse model.
Probiotics reduced systemic inflammation and improved gut barriers
 We also observed that the probiotics therapy significantly reduced the expression of systemic inflammatory 
markers such as IL-6, and TNF-α in blood (plasma) of probiotics-fed APP/PS1 mice as compared to controls 
(Fig. 3a, b). We also found that the mRNA expression of these inflammatory markers (Il-6 and Tnf-a) was 
significantly reduced in the gut of probiotics fed APP/PS1 mice (Fig. 3e). Similarly, levels of gut permeability 
markers such as fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP) were 
significantly reduced in the plasma of probiotics fed mice (Fig. 3c, d); collectively suggesting that probiotics 
therapy suppressed both gut permeability and inflammation (in both gut and blood circulation) in the AD 
mouse model. Further, the mRNA expression of tight junction proteins like Zo-1 and Occludin was significantly 
increased (Fig. 3f) along with improved overall structure and function of intestinal epithelia as characterized by 
increased length of intestinal villi revealed by H&E staining, expression of mucin barriers (Muc2 mRNA) and 
number of goblet cells stained by Alcian blue (Fig. 3g–k). These results suggest that the primary action of the 
probiotics cocktail might originate from the gut through improving the intestinal barrier integrity, thus reducing 
the gut permeability as well as the systemic inflammation.
Probiotics beneficially modulate the gut microbiome which is associated with improvements 
in barriers, leakiness, and inflammation (in both gut and BBB) and AD pathology
 The gut microbiome helps to promote AD pathology, and we showed that the probiotics feeding increased 
the abundance of major bacteria phyla such as Firmicutes and Actinobacteria while decreasing the abundance 
of Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria (Fig. 4a). However, we did not see a significant impact of probiotics on 
the microbiome diversity (both α- and β- diversity indices) (Supplementary Figure S2b, c). The abundance 
of major genera like, Lactobacillus, Adlercreutzia, and Enterococcus increased while the abundance of 
Helicobacter, Bacteroides, and Akkermansia decreased in probiotics fed mice compared to control (Fig. 4b, c; 
Supplementary Table 2). Similarly, at the species level, there was an increase in the abundance of Lactobacillus 
reuteri and a reduction in Akkermansia muciniphila, Mucispirillum schaedleri, Clostridium methylpentosum, 
and Helicobacter hepaticus in probiotics fed mice (Supplementary Table 3). Furthermore, Linear discriminant 
analysis Effect Size (LEfSe) analysis revealed that probiotics therapy induced specific microbiome clades 
(green) than controls (red), indicating, specific changes in the microbiome for prophylactic treatment of 
probiotics. The LEfSe analysis showed that beneficial bacteria taxonomy such as Coriobacteriia at the class 
level, Coriobacteriales and Lactobacillales at the order level were enriched in the probiotics fed mice while 
Proteobacteria and Verrucomicrobia at phyla level, Epsilonproteobacteria and Verrucomicrobiae at the class 
level, Verrucomicrobiales and Campylobacterales at the order level; Helicobacteraceae and Verrucomicrobiaceae 
at the family level were enriched in controls (Fig. 4d) (Supplementary Figure S2a). Further, to decipher the 
microbiome signatures that may help promote gut permeability/ inflammation/ AD axis, and that are modulated 
by probiotics therapy. Interestingly, the MaAsLin2 (Microbiome Multivariate Association with Linear Models) 
analysis revealed that the Deferribacteres and Proteobacteria at the phyla level and Helicobacter, Bacteroides, 
and Akkermansia at genus level are positively associated with increased gut permeability/ inflammation/AD 
with dampened intestinal barriers and BBB integrity (Fig. 4e, f), which means that these microbes are linked 
to accelerated AD pathology with increased dysfunctions in intestinal barriers, enhanced gut permeability and 
inflammation, and dampened BBB barriers with heightened promote neuroinflammation, AD pathology, and 
behavioral changes. Further, probiotics therapy is able to reverse these changes. Similar to our findings, others 
have reported the enrichment of these bacterial genera in AD and in inflammatory disorders30–32. Collectively, 
these results indicate that probiotics therapy significantly modulated the microbiome in a way that promoted 
beneficial bacteria, and intestinal barriers, which in turn reduced gut permeability and systemic inflammation, 
and ultimately had beneficial effects on BBB/ neuroinflammation/ Aβ-AD pathology.
Beneficial effects of probiotics therapy were more prominent in male mice than female
 Biological sex plays an important role in the risk and progression of AD33, and the microbiome also significantly 
differs by sex in rodents and humans34,35. In the current study, we used both male and female mice and we 
segregated the data for male and female mice, we thus could determine whether probiotics therapy exhibited 
any sex-dependent effects (Fig. 5). We found that, whereas prophylactic treatment with a probiotics cocktail 
increased cognitive performance along with reduced Aβ pathology in mice of both sexes, probiotics treated 
male mice showed slightly more significant decrease in escape latency (MWM test) and Aβ pathology (Aβ 
fluorescence intensity and the ratio of Aβ42/40) compared to control mice (Fig. 5a, b; Supplementary Figure 
S3a, b), as well as compared to their female counterparts. Further, the effects of probiotics therapy on microglia 
activation and inflammation in male and female brains were similar as compared to their sex-matched controls 
as evident from reduced expression of Iba, Il-6 and Tnf-α in brain tissue (Fig. 5c, d; Supplementary Figure 
S3c-d). However, the expression of Il-1β was significantly reduced in male but not in female mice (Fig. 5d). 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
4
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Fig. 2.  Probiotics therapy reduced brain inflammation associated with compromised BBB. (a, b) Probiotics 
therapy reduced the levels of microglia activation marker (immunofluorescence of Iba [a] and its fluorescence 
intensity [b]) compared to their controls (scale bar = 100 μm). (c) representative image (scale bar = 50 μm) 
used for single cell morphology analysis. (d) Microphotograph were converted into binary, (e) skeletal 
analysis and (f) outline of selected photomicrograph (scale bar = 10 μm). (g) microglial branch length which is 
increased following probiotics intake (h, i) probiotics cocktail reduced the mRNA expression of inflammatory 
markers such as Il-6, and Tnf-α in brain of APP/PS1 mice (n = 10). (j, k) The mRNA expression of brain tight 
junction protein marker occludin and Zo-1 increased in the probiotics treated mice than their controls (n = 10). 
All the data were presented as mean and standard deviation. To determine statistical significance, we used 
student`s 2-tail t-tests and the p-values with *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001 indicate level 
of statistical significance.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
5
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Fig. 3.  Probiotics reduced systemic inflammation and improved the tight junction and mucin barrier in 
the intestines of APP/PS-1 mice. (a, b, e) Probiotics administration significantly reduced the inflammatory 
markers in both blood (a, b) and intestinal (ileum) tissues (e) of APP/PS1 mice (n = 10). (c) Gut permeability 
markers such as FITC-dextran-4kda leakage from gut to blood (in plasma) and (d) plasma LBP levels 
respectively, were significantly reduced in probiotics treated mice compared to their controls. (f) mRNA 
expression of tight junction protein markers such as Zo-1 and occludin increased in the intestines of probiotics 
treated mice than controls. (g, h) Haematoxylin-eosin staining of small intestine (ileum), and villus length 
in µm respectively, improved in probiotics fed mice compared to their controls. (i) Probiotics therapy also 
increased the Muc2 mRNA expression in the gut of APP/PS1 mice. (j, k) It also increased the number of 
goblet cells (indicated by Alcian blue staining (j) and increased their per villi numbers (k) in APP/PS1 mice 
gut than their controls. All the data were presented as mean and standard deviation. To determine statistical 
significance, we used student`s 2-tail t-tests and the p-values with *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 and 
****p < 0.0001 indicate level of statistical significance.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
6
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Moreover, the expression of tight junction proteins such as Zo-1 and Claudin were significantly increased in the 
brains of male mice treated with probiotics compared to the control group, however no such effects were seen in 
probiotics fed female mice compared the female controls. The expression of Occludin increased in brains of both 
male and female mice treated with probiotics compared to their corresponding controls (Fig. 5d). Furthermore, 
in the intestine, the expression of intestinal barrier markers such as Zo-1, Occludin and Mucin 2 (Muc2) was 
increased only in male mice compared to their male controls, while such differences were not statistically distinct 
in females compared to their female controls (Fig. 5f). Similarly, gut permeability (LBP level) and inflammatory 
markers such as IL-6, and TNF-α protein level expression in plasma (Fig. 5e) and Il-6, Tnf-α, and Il-1β gene level 
expression in intestines (Fig. 5f) were not significantly improved in female mice but were significantly improved 
in male mice compared to their corresponding controls (Fig. 5e, f; Supplementary Figure S4a-e). Additionally, 
the impact of probiotics therapy on microbiome signatures was differed significantly between male female APP/
PS1 mice (Supplementary Figure S5a–i).
Fig. 4.  Probiotics therapy beneficially changed the microbiome in APP/PS1 mice. (a, b) Probiotics 
administration significantly changed the abundance of major phyla and genera repectively, (c) Firmicutes/
Bacteroidetes (F/B) ration and specific bacteria like Bacterioides, Lactobacillus, Helocobacter, Akkermansia, 
Adlercertuzia, Mucispirillum and Enterococcus of gut microbiome in APP/PS1 mice (n = 10). (d) The cladogram 
of major genera changed by probiotics therapy compared to non-treated controls. (e) MaAsLiN2 (Microbiome 
Multivariate Association with Linear model) 2 analysis was conducted to correlate significant bacterial taxa 
with multiple parameters. Heatmap shows the significant bacterial taxa association to various phenotypic 
character with q-value < 0.25. Further, scale bar in which red color represents negative while blue color 
shows positive association of significant bacterial taxa with various phenotype and genotype functional. (f) 
Purported model of how inflammatory microbiome enriched in APP/PS1 may contribute to progression 
of AD through acceleration of gut permeability, inflammation, blood brain barrier (BBB) permeability and 
neuroinflammation, and probiotics therapy reverse them by promoting beneficial changed in microbiome. 
All the data were presented as mean and standard deviation. To determine statistical significance, we used 
student`s 2-tail t-tests and the p-values with *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 indicate level of statistical significance.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
7
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Fig. 5.  Probiotics cocktail reduced the progression of AD in APP/PS-1 mice on sex dependent manner. (a) 
Probiotics therapy significantly but differentially reduced the cognitive decline (presented as escape latency in 
MWM test) (n = 10), (b) Amyloid accumulation (n = 5), (c) microglia activation (n = 5), (d) inflammation and 
BBB tight junction proteins in brain of male and female APP/PS1 mice (n = 5). Similarly, it also modulated 
the (e) gut permeability and plasma inflammatory markers (n = 5), and (f) markers of gut inflammation and 
tight junction protein in male and female APP/PS1 mice compared to their controls (n = 5). All the data were 
presented as mean and standard deviation. To determine statistical significance, we used one-way ANOVA 
and two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test and the p-values with *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, 
***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001 indicate level of statistical significance.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
8
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

During our comparison of male versus female mice treated with probiotics cocktails, we observed no sex 
differences in the probiotics impact on cognitive function (MWM test), Aβ pathology, microglia activation, 
expression of Il-6, Tnf-α and Occludin in brains, or on markers of systemically elevated gut permeability (LBP) 
and inflammation (IL-6 and TNF-α). However, we found that the expression of inflammatory marker in brains 
(only Il-1β) and intestine (all three Il-6, Il-1β and Tnf-α) were decreased, while markers of BBB (Zo-1 and 
Occludin) and intestine (Zo-1, Occludin and Muc2) were increased in male mice upon probiotics treatment, but 
not in female mice. These results indicate that the probiotics therapy was similarly effective to protect the AD 
pathology in both sexes, however, the mechanism may differ in the two sexes.
Discussion
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology is commonly characterized by the heightened accumulation of Aβ aggregates 
in the brain, initiating the neurodegenerative process leading to memory loss and/or cognitive decline36,37. These 
pathologies coincide with increased neuroinflammation, microglia activation, and disruptions in the BBB38. 
Despite significant progress, the precise etiology of these processes remains poorly understood. Emerging 
evidence suggests that abnormalities in the gut microbiota significantly contribute to the progression of AD 
pathology, exacerbating Aβ accumulation, neuroinflammation, microglia activation, and BBB disruptions in 
the brain4. However, promising microbiome modulators to prevent or delay AD progression, as well as their 
mechanistic understanding, have not been well studied. In this study, we demonstrated that a unique, probiotics 
cocktail containing strains of 5 Lactobacillus and 5 Enterococcus25, administered in drinking water, significantly 
reduced Aβ accumulation pathology. This was accompanied by reduced neuroinflammation, microglia 
activation, and BBB tight junction disruptions, delaying cognitive decline in APP/PS1 mice. Contributing to 
our understanding of mechanisms underlying this effect, our findings, along with other emerging evidence24,39, 
indicate that the gut of older and cognitively impaired/AD rodents and humans harbors a significantly 
abnormal gut microbiome, accelerating abnormal gut permeability—an understudied source of chronic 
systemic inflammation. This abnormality is due to the enrichment of inflammatory microbes in the older/AD 
gut40. Interestingly, we observed a significant enrichment of pro-inflammatory microbes (such as Helicobacter, 
Mucispirullum, Bacteroides, Akkermansia, Deferribacteres, and Proteobacteria) in the gut of APP/PS1 mice, as 
others observed in inflammatory diseases30–32. Although, most of these microbes are known to have pathogenic 
and commensal effects, however, some of them acclaimed as beneficial, but may be context dependent. Such as 
there are studies reporting Akkermansia (A.) muciniphila to have positive metabolic benefits, and even proposed 
as a novel probiotics in preventing and ameliorating obesity and associated metabolic disorders, as well as 
infectious diseases41,42. Moreover, previous studies in a similar mouse model (APP/PS1) reported a decrease in 
A. muciniphila in aged APPS1 mice and might be correlated with increases in Aβ pathology43. On other hand, 
recent findings suggest caution in using A. muciniphila as a probiotics in certain neurological conditions. Studies 
have shown elevated levels of Akkermansia in patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD), rapid eye movement sleep 
behavior disorder (a pre-motor PD symptom), and multiple sclerosis (MS)44–52, which are indirectly linked 
with AD pathology too. The discrepancies observed in A. muciniphila findings between the current study and 
previous research could be attributed to its transient increase in response to gut permeability and inflammation 
characteristic of early disease stage of AD. The current study focused on six-month-old APP/PS1 mice, 
representing a relatively young age and the early stages of Aβ pathology. In contrast, studies like Harach et 
al. (2017) examined aged APP/PS1 mice, where disease progression might have been more advanced43. This 
suggests that the role of A. muciniphila may vary with the progression of pathology, highlighting age and other 
neurodegenerative pathologies as a critical factor in such differences.
Furthermore, it has been previously shown that the 3-6-month-old APP/PS1 mouse model has an enrichment 
of Helicobacteraceae, Desulfovibrionaceae and Helicobacter53. By contrast, the probiotics cocktail greatly 
decreased the number of these bacteria and encouraged the enrichment of healthy, non-inflammatory bacteria 
(including Lactobacillus, Adlercreutzia and Actinobacteria). In this context, our earlier studies also showed that 
probiotics cocktail exhibited beneficial effects on modifying the gut microbiome of both mouse and the human 
gut, including aging models25. It enhanced beneficial microbes that generate metabolites like short-chain fatty 
acids (SCFAs) and taurine, both of which have been shown to have beneficial effects on the gut-brain axis and 
aging24,54. These findings imply that probiotics therapy modulated the microbiome in a beneficial manner in the 
gut of humanized AD APP/PS1 mouse model.
Inflammatory signals originating in the gut can travel to the brain through circulation due to the leakage 
of proinflammatory molecules from the gut lumen to the blood55. Heightened inflammation reportedly also 
weakens intestinal barriers, thus reducing tight junction proteins (ZO-1, Occludin, and Claudin) and mucus 
barriers56,57. These changes are common characteristics of aged or inflammatory guts56. The weakening of 
intestinal barriers allows proinflammatory molecules such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to leak from the gut into 
the bloodstream, exacerbating systemic inflammation. This increase in LPS triggers the production in the liver of 
a protein called LPS binding protein (LBP), considered a potential biomarker of gut permeability. Interestingly, 
our study demonstrated that probiotics therapy significantly reduced plasma LBP levels in the APP/PS1 mice 
while enhancing villus length and the expression of tight junction markers (Zo-1 and Occludin), and Muc2 in 
the intestine. In support of the present finding, others reported a reduction on villus length and Zo-1 level in 
inflammatory diseases57,58. This indicates that probiotics therapy reduces gut permeability by strengthening gut 
barriers.
Increased systemic inflammation is associated with accelerated cognitive decline in older adults59,60. AD 
patients and rodent models also commonly exhibit higher systemic inflammation compared to controls61–63. 
Inducing systemic inflammation reportedly exacerbates AD pathology. For example an increase in inflammatory 
markers such as TNF-α, and IL-1β in systemic as well as brain and cerebral Aβ plaque in 6–7-month-old APP/
PS1 mouse model64,65 has been reported. In the present study, we observed a decrease in plasma inflammatory 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
9
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

markers such as IL-6, and TNF-α following prophylactic treatment with probiotics cocktail. This indicates that 
probiotics prophylactic treatments effectively suppressed systemic inflammation, which, in turn, was linked to 
reduced AD pathology. Inflammatory mediators like TNF-α are known to dampen the expression of barrier 
function proteins not only in intestinal tissues but also in the brain66. In the brain, tight junction proteins 
play a crucial role in the BBB, regulating the entry of unnecessary substances from the blood to the brain. 
Loosening BBB permeability allows the entry of proinflammatory cytokines or blood immune cells, accelerating 
neuroinflammation4. Our results show that probiotics-treated APP/PS1 mice BBB exhibited higher expression 
of Zo-1 and Claudin compared to controls, indicating that probiotics therapy effectively suppressed disruptions 
in BBB permeability.
Heightened BBB permeability and neuroinflammation are often accompanied by the activation of microglia, 
the brain’s immune cells67. While activated microglia are common in the brains of AD patients, their contribution 
to AD pathology is still under-studied. Recent reports suggested that microglia activation exacerbates the 
accumulation of Aβ and tau in the brain, leading to cognitive decline68. Further, microglia morphology is crucial 
for neuroinflammation, and it is suggested that the shorter branches may indicate a transition to activated 
microglia, since they frequently change in shape in response to pathological situations like the build-up of Aβ 
plaques in AD69,70. This morphological shift may be the result of modifications to the microglial phenotype, 
such as elevated phagocytic activity or pro-inflammatory cytokine release69,70. The current findings suggest 
that probiotics cocktail administration prevents microglia-induced neuroinflammation in this paradigm by 
mitigating the increased Iba-1 intensity and reduced branch length in APP/PS1 mice, which in turn prevents 
microglia activation.
Microglia activation can also result from an increased influx of proinflammatory molecules from the systemic 
circulation to the brain due to compromised BBB permeability or increased neurodegeneration in the brain. Our 
results indicate that probiotics therapy suppresses the origin of systemic inflammation from the gut by reducing 
gut permeability, thus lowering the inflammatory burden on the BBB. This preservation of BBB function reduces 
the influx of proinflammatory burden on microglia and the brain, ultimately reducing neuroinflammation and 
AD pathology, including Aβ accumulation and memory loss.
Interestingly, our studies also show that the impact of probiotics therapy on reducing the progression of 
AD in APP/PS1 mice was similar in male and female mice, but mechanism, in part, differed between the sexes. 
In humans, the difference between males and females in the prevalence of AD is well established71, but the 
precise reasons and mechanisms remain unknown. The composition and function of the microbiome also 
differ significantly between male and female in both human and rodent models35,72. Therefore, sex-dependent 
differences in the microbiome may contribute to the observed differences of AD prevalence in male versus 
female. Notably, we observed that probiotics therapy had a nearly similar impact on AD pathology, however the 
impact on biological outcomes like inflammation, and permeability barriers, differed between male than female 
mice. Specifically, these differences in the impact of probiotics therapy were primarily seen in tight junction 
proteins, gut permeability, and inflammation. This suggests that these mechanisms may be distinct in male versus 
female. Such sex-specific differences might be due to sex-related dimorphism like those reported earlier in AD 
model73. Moreover, sex hormones also play a critical role in digestion, metabolism, and immune functionality, 
collectively contributing to differences in the microbiome74,75. The intrinsic and intricate differences in the 
microbiome’s physiological mechanisms may be the major contributors to variations in the effects of probiotics 
therapy. However, further studies are needed to comprehend these effects with experimental evidence.
Our studies collectively provide strong evidence that this human-origin probiotics cocktail significantly 
delayed/prevented the progression of AD pathology in APP/PS1 mice. However, this study had limitations 
in explaining certain components. For instance, while we observed a significant increase in inflammatory 
microbes in the gut of APP/PS1 mice and their suppression by probiotics therapy, the mechanism by which 
these inflammatory microbes promote gut permeability and inflammation is not proven. Additionally, the 
changes in microbiome metabolite profiles induced by probiotics therapy were not investigated in this study, 
posing potential areas of interest for future research to better understand how this probiotics modulates the 
production of microbial metabolites. Our studies strongly demonstrated that probiotics suppressed a cascade of 
inflammation originating from the gut to the brain. However, the timelines for when this pathway is activated 
and its risk factors in humans remain poorly studied, requiring further comprehensive investigations beyond 
the scope of this manuscript. Further, some of the key findings such as gut-permeability and neuroinflammation 
need to be validated by using different AD mouse models. Finally, while the probiotics cocktail used here is 
of human origin, its clinical efficacy in reducing the risk of cognitive decline and AD pathology remains to be 
proven.
Despite these minor limitations, our studies are significant and unique, demonstrating that this human-
origin probiotics cocktail can beneficially modulate the gut microbiome. This modulation suppresses the 
origin of inflammation from the gut by preventing gut permeability, thereby keeping systemic inflammation 
in check. This, in turn, preserves the function of the BBB, preventing pro-inflammatory burdens on the brain 
and maintaining control over microglia activation, neuroinflammation, Aβ accumulation. Ultimately, this helps 
preserve cognitive health and protect against AD progression.
Materials and methods
Probiotics cultures and formulation
The five Lactobacillus and five Enterococcus strains employed here were isolated from the human infant gut and 
identified through 16SrDNA sequencing; we showed their probiotics profiles and safety in our previous report25. 
The probiotics cocktail consisted of lactobacillus strains (L. paracasei D3.5, L. rhamnosus D4.4, L. plantarum 
D6.2, L. rhamnosus D7.5 and L. plantarum D13.4) and enterococcus strains (E. raffinosus D24.1, E. INBio D24.2, 
E. avium D25.1, E. avium D25.2 and E. avium D26.1)25. Freshly isolated bacterial cultures were centrifuged 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
10
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

(5,000 g, 10 min), washed with PBS, and mixed equally based on their absorbance at OD600 nm to generate 
glycerol (20%) stocks of the probiotics cocktail. Mice in the probiotics group were fed with drinking water 
containing probiotics cocktail, whereas the control group’s drinking water was added with an equivalent quantity 
of glycerol. Drinking water in both groups was changed every other day with fresh stock additions.
Animal studies
 APPswe/PSΔE9 (APP/PS1) mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, USA). They 
were acclimatized for two weeks in our vivarium with controlled temperature of 22 °C and a 12-hour light-dark 
cycle before experiments began. Three to five (maximum five) littermates were housed in each cage, with males 
and females housed separately, and were fed with normal chow and tap water and/or water with probiotics 
as described below. Adult APP/PS1 (age 6–8 weeks) mice (n = 20 (10 males (M) and 10 females (F) in each 
group)) were randomized into control (M + F) and probiotics (M + F) groups. The animals in the probiotics 
group were treated with a glycerol (20%) stock of probiotics cocktail (1 × 1011CFU/mice/day) in drinking water 
for 16 weeks. Control mice were allowed to drink normal drinking water with 20% glycerol. The probiotics-
cultures dissolved water was changed every other day. Food intake, water intake, and body weight were recorded 
weekly. Fecal samples were collected to analyze the microbiome and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). The Morris 
Water Maze test was performed last week (week-16) of prophylactic treatment with probiotics and then the mice 
were euthanized. Plasma was collected for biochemical analysis, and intestine and brain tissue were collected for 
molecular analyses. All the tests and procedures that involved animals were performed as per Animal Research: 
Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines, and all the experimental protocols were approved 
by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-
Salem, North Carolina, and the University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida. All methods were performed in 
accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
Morris water maze test
Water maze pre-training
For water maze training, the platform was in the SW quadrant of the pool and exposed one inch above the 
surface, so the animal knew it was there. The water temperature was maintained at 25 ± 0.5 °C. Each mouse was 
tested three times, starting by placing the animal on the platform for 20 s. The starting positions for the water 
maze were north (N), east (E), south (S) and west (W) (See depiction of visual cues in Fig. 1a, as demonstrated 
earlier76). Each animal was gently placed in the water and allowed to swim/search for the platform for 60 s. Those 
failing to find the platform in the allotted time were manually guided to it. The procedure was repeated twice 
more, starting from a different direction. After three trials, the animals were towel-dried before being replaced 
into their cages.
Water maze testing
During spatial acquisition trials, each animal underwent 12 testing sessions, including three trials from each 
starting direction. The escape platform (10 cm diameter) was 1 cm below the water surface in the target quadrant. 
The mouse was gently dropped into the water from different directions and given 60 s to find the concealed 
platform. Long-term memory was assessed 24 h after the final spatial acquisition day using a probe trial. Here, 
the platform was removed from target quadrant. The mouse was given a new starting position and permitted 
to swim for 60 s. Using ANY-Maze software, all the tracks from the probe trial were examined, and the escape 
latency was calculated to evaluate long-term memory76.
Brain tissue preparation for analysis
 On the day of sacrifice, the mice (n = 10 out of 20) were injected xylazine (10 mg/kg) and ketamine (100 mg/kg), 
intraperitoneally and euthanized by cervical dislocation. The intestines and brains were removed, weighed, and 
snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for examination. Brains from half the animals (n = 10) were removed and divided 
into two hemispheres. One hemisphere was immediately incubated in RNA Later (Invitrogen) for mRNA 
analysis, while the other was snap frozen for biochemical investigation (ELISA). The other half of the animals 
(n = 10) were perfused with PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for histologic analysis, as described below.
Thioflavin-S staining
 To assess the Aβ pathology, the amount of thioflavin-S-positive plaques in the hippocampus was quantified 
using histological detection (n = 10)77. For this assessment, each animal received a 0.3 mL of xylazine (10 mg/
kg) and ketamine (100 mg/kg) intraperitoneally as an anesthesia. The lack of pedal withdrawal reflexes was a 
reliable gauge of the level of anesthesia. The mouse heart was exposed by making an incision in the right atrium, 
and the left ventricle was cannulated. To perfuse, 20 mL of 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) was added after 20 mL 
of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution. After the mouse brain was carefully removed from the cranial 
vault, it was maintained overnight in a 4% PFA solution and then for up to five days in a 30% sucrose in PBS. 
Each brain specimen was mounted on 25-mm stainless steel chuck filled with Tissue-Tek OCT compound. After 
each brain specimen was cryostat sectioned to approximately bregma − 0.94 mm, the first 25 μm coronal whole 
brain sections were collected on charged slides coated with poly-l-lysine up to a depth of bregma − 2.92 mm. 
These sections were rinsed three times in deionized water before being immersed in a solution of filtered 
1% thioflavin-S for 30 min. The sections were then serial dehydrated by immersing slides in an increasing 
concentration of 70–80% ethanol for one minute. The slides were then placed on a gradient of 80–70% ethanol 
that was decreasing for one minute, followed by one minute of ddH2O. Each slide was cover-slipped using an 
aqueous mounting media (Vector Mounting media, Vector Laboratories, California, USA) after being dried for 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
11
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

at least two hours in a light-protected container. The ImageJ (FIJI) program was used to identify and count the 
total number of plaques in the hippocampal areas.
Immunofluorescence
 To measure the fluorescent intensity of Aβ, the 25 μm brain section slides were kept in the sodium citrate 
buffer for 30 min at 70 °C (n = 10). After this, Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was used to wash them three 
times to prevent masking. After applying methanol to the sections, they were incubated in 5% blocking buffer 
for one hour78, and then incubated for an additional night at 4 °C with one or another of the following primary 
antibodies: anti-Iba1 (rabbit) antibody (Cat#019-19741, FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, USA) 
or anti-beta-amyloid (1–42) (rabbit) antibody (Cat#44–344, Invitrogen, USA). The slices were treated with the 
alexa fluor™ 594 (Cat#A11007, Invitrogen, USA) and alexa fluor™ 488 (Cat#A11034, Invitrogen, USA) relevant 
secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature following PBS washing. Then the sections were counterstained 
with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Fluorescence photomicrography was done using an Olympus 1200 
confocal microscope set at 10x magnification. Each image was then threshold set at 110 with a 10% variance 
using Image J. This threshold was chosen to highlight Aβ and microglia while minimizing background noise. 
After the visual assessment, region of interest (ROI) was selected and the mean intensity were measured.
ImageJ was also used to examine 40× Z-stacks (Fig. 2c–f) for individual microglia morphology. Images were 
binarized and from the binary image, we separated the chosen cell using the ‘region-of-interest’ tool. Then, 
using the original photomicrograph as a guide, we connected any branches that had broken off due to image 
processing and eliminated any fragments that were not associated to the cell using the paintbrush tool. After 
that, isolated microglia were transformed into a skeleton similar what was described earlier79.
mRNA expression-qRT-PCR
 Total RNA from tissues was extracted with RNeasy and transcribed to cDNA with a High-capacity cDNA 
Reverse Transcription Kit as described earlier80,81. Real-time PCR was performed using Real Time PCR system 
(Cat#A28132 Quant Studia 3, USA) to measure the expression of Zo-1, Occludin, Claudin, Muc2, Il-6, Il-1β, and 
Tnf-α (n = 5). We employed 18 S rRNA as an internal control (primer details are presented in Supplementary 
Table S1). Using the ΔΔCt method, fold changes were calculated for each quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis, 
which was conducted in duplicate as technical replicate while each individual sample as biological replicate.
ELISA assay
 The ELISA assays for LBP (Sigma Aldrich, Cat#RAB1181), IL-1β (Cat#RAB0274, Sigma Aldrich), IL-6 
(Cat#RAB0308, Sigma Aldrich), and TNF-α (Cat#RAB0477, Sigma Aldrich), were conducted in accordance 
with earlier research82 (n = 10). All ELISA tests were conducted in compliance with the guidelines provided by 
the manufacturer. In summary, each frozen brain tissue was weighed, homogenized using a mechanical Fischer 
homogenizer, and newly prepared in Tris-buffered saline. The homogenate was centrifuged for 30 min at 4 °C 
at 20,000 g. After being collected, the supernatant was kept at -80 °C. Further, following the manufacturer’s 
instructions, tests for Aβ42 Mouse ELISA Kit (Cat#KMB3441, Invitrogen, USA) and Aβ40 Mouse ELISA Kit 
(Cat#KMB3481, Invitrogen, USA) were performed. Briefly, each brain supernatant was diluted 1:100 with 
standard dilution buffer prior to ELISA test. Amyloid peptide levels were visualized using anti-rabbit HRP-
conjugated secondary antibodies and chromogen dye. The plates were read using a Multimode Plate Reader 
(PerkinElmer, USA) at 450 nm and the Aβ42/40 ratio as suggested earlier83.
Gut permeability assay
 Plasma fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) dextran (4 kDa) was measured to assess gut permeability. Mice were 
given a 1 g/kg body weight solution of (FITC) dextran (4 kDa) after they had fasted for 4–6 h in order to 
determine gut permeability. Following the delivery of FITC-dextran for four hours, blood was drawn from a tail 
vein puncture, and fluorescence spectroscopy was used to measure the amount of FITC-dextran in the resulting 
plasma at 530 nm and 485 nm of excitation.
Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining
 Intestinal tissue (Ileum) was fixed in 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin blocks. The 0.5 μm–thick sections 
of paraffin-embedded tissue were stained with H&E as per the protocol described earlier82. The images were 
captured using Olympus on 10× magnification. The length of villi was counted using FIJI software (NIH).
Microbiome analysis
Following our previously reported techniques56,82, 16 S rRNA sequencing with the MiSeq Illumina technology 
and bioinformatics pipelines were used to examine the composition of the gut microbiota. In summary, a Power 
Fecal Pro DNA Kit (Cat#51804, Qiagen, CA, USA) was used to extract genomic DNA from approximately 
200 mg of mouse feces (n = 10) in each group). The V4-V5 region of the bacterial 16 S rDNA was amplified 
using primers 515 F (barcoded) and 806 R. Following AMPure® magnetic purification beads and a Qubit-3 
fluorimeter for purification and quantification, equivalent volumes (8 pM) of the amplicons were sequenced on 
an Illumina MiSeq sequencer (using Miseq reagent kit v3, Illumina). The sequences underwent demultiplexing, 
quality-filtering, clustering, and analysis through the utilization of R-based analytical tools and Quantitative 
Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME)84. Using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe), 
distinct bacterial taxa that are responsible for group differences were identified85. For five animals in each group, 
microbiome studies were done.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
12
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Statistical analyses
 Unpaired Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA were used to analyze the datasets using GraphPad Prism v9.0. 
An unpaired two-tailed t-test was used to compare the alpha diversity indices and bacterial abundance between 
the two groups. The bacterial beta diversity was presented in principal component analysis (PCA) format and 
analysed using packages ‘ggplot2’, ‘devtools’ and ‘ggbiplot’ in R programming V.4.2.086. Moreover, bacterial 
taxonomy between control and probiotics groups were analyzed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect 
size (LEfSe) (https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/lefse/)85. Microbiome Multivariate Association with Linear 
model 2 (MaAsLiN2) analysis was conducted to determine the association of significant bacterial taxa between 
control and probiotics groups with various phenotypic and genotypic functional ​(​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​h​u​t​t​e​n​h​o​w​e​r​.​s​p​h​.​h​a​r​
v​a​r​d​.​e​d​u​/​m​a​a​s​l​i​n​/​)​​8​6​,​8​7​​. Two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test were applied for the 
sex-based comparison. Additionally, the data was combined when statistical analysis did not detect an effect 
of sex. All the data are presented as mean and standard deviation and *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 and 
****p < 0.0001 were considered statistically significant.
Data availability
The microbiome sequence data of the present study have been deposited in the sequence read archive (SRA) of 
NCBI with the access code ID PRJNA1069660 and link, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​a​t​a​v​i​e​w​.​n​c​b​i​.​n​l​m​.​n​i​h​.​g​o​v​/​o​b​j​e​c​t​/​P​R​J​N​A​1​0​6​9​
6​6​0​?​r​e​v​i​e​w​e​r​=​7​a​7​q​1​7​k​p​q​o​3​5​b​r​2​0​v​8​2​f​7​0​9​k​e​s​. Additional data may be provided by the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request.
Received: 27 January 2024; Accepted: 26 December 2024
References
	 1.	 Nagpal, R., Neth, B. J., Wang, S., Craft, S. & Yadav, H. Modified mediterranean-ketogenic diet modulates gut microbiome and 
short-chain fatty acids in association with Alzheimer’s disease markers in subjects with mild cognitive impairment. EBioMedicine 
47, 529–542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.08.032 (2019).
	 2.	 Crous-Bou, M., Minguillón, C., Gramunt, N. & Molinuevo, J. L. Alzheimer’s disease prevention: From risk factors to early 
intervention. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 9 https://doi.org/10.1186/s13195-017-0297-z (2017).
	 3.	 Kivipelto, M., Mangialasche, F. & Ngandu, T. Lifestyle interventions to prevent cognitive impairment, dementia and Alzheimer 
disease. Nat. Reviews Neurol. 14, 653–666 (2018).
	 4.	 Prajapati, S. K. et al. The triple alliance: Microbiome, mitochondria, and metabolites in the context of age-related cognitive decline 
and Alzheimer’s disease. J. Gerontol. Ser. A. 78, 2187–2202 (2023).
	 5.	 Prajapati, S. K., Pathak, A. & Samaiya, P. K. Alzheimer’s disease: from early pathogenesis to novel therapeutic approaches. Metab. 
Brain Dis., 1–24 (2024).
	 6.	 Akiyama, H. et al. Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging. 21, 383–421 (2000).
	 7.	 Kinney, J. W. et al. Inflammation as a central mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Dementia: Translational Res. Clin. 
Interventions. 4, 575–590 (2018).
	 8.	 Takeda, S., Sato, N. & Morishita, R. Systemic inflammation, blood-brain barrier vulnerability and cognitive/non-cognitive 
symptoms in Alzheimer disease: Relevance to pathogenesis and therapy. Front. Aging Neurosci. 6, 171 (2014).
	 9.	 Varatharaj, A. & Galea, I. The blood-brain barrier in systemic inflammation. Brain. Behav. Immun. 60, 1–12 (2017).
	10.	 Walker, K. A. et al. Systemic inflammation during midlife and cognitive change over 20 years: The ARIC Study. Neurology 92, 
e1256–e1267 (2019).
	11.	 Chaudhari, D. S. et al. Unique trans-kingdom microbiome structural and functional signatures predict cognitive decline in older 
adults. GeroScience, 1–16 (2023).
	12.	 Guo, M. et al. Gut microbiome features of Chinese patients newly diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease or mild cognitive impairment. 
J. Alzheimers Dis. 80, 299–310 (2021).
	13.	 Vogt, N. M. et al. Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 7, 13537 (2017).
	14.	 Haran, J. et al. (ed, P.) Alzheimer’s disease microbiome is associated with dysregulation of the anti-inflammatory P-glycoprotein 
pathway. MBio 10 101128mbio00632–101128mbio00619 (2019).
	15.	 Soriano, S. et al. Fecal microbiota transplantation derived from Alzheimer’s disease mice worsens brain trauma outcomes in wild-
type controls. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 4476 (2022).
	16.	 Grabrucker, S. et al. Microbiota from Alzheimer’s patients induce deficits in cognition and hippocampal neurogenesis. Brain 146, 
4916–4934 (2023).
	17.	 Mishra, S. P. et al. Microbiota induces aging-related leaky gut and inflammation by dampening mucin barriers and butyrate-
FFAR2/3 signaling. bioRxiv, 2018.456856 (2021). 
	18.	 Boschetti, E. et al. Serum zonulin levels are increased in Alzheimer’s disease but not in vascular dementia. Aging Clin. Exp. Res., 
1–9 (2023).
	19.	 Liu, C. C. et al. Tau and apolipoprotein E modulate cerebrovascular tight junction integrity independent of cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Dement. 16, 1372–1383 (2020).
	20.	 Abbott, N. J. Inflammatory mediators and modulation of blood–brain barrier permeability. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 20, 131–147 
(2000).
	21.	 Liebner, S. et al. Functional morphology of the blood–brain barrier in health and disease. Acta Neuropathol. 135, 311–336 (2018).
	22.	 Efthymiou, A. G. & Goate, A. M. Late onset Alzheimer’s disease genetics implicates microglial pathways in disease risk. Mol. 
Neurodegeneration. 12, 1–12 (2017).
	23.	 Naomi, R. et al. Probiotics for Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review. Nutrients 14, 20 (2021).
	24.	 Ahmadi, S. et al. A human-origin probiotic cocktail ameliorates aging-related leaky gut and inflammation via modulating the 
microbiota/taurine/tight junction axis. JCI Insight. 5 https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.132055 (2020).
	25.	 Nagpal, R. et al. Human-origin probiotic cocktail increases short-chain fatty acid production via modulation of mice and human 
gut microbiome. Sci. Rep. 8, 12649. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-30114-4 (2018).
	26.	 Bao, J. et al. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate alleviates cognitive deficits in APP/PS1 mice. Curr. Med. Sci. 40, 18–27 (2020).
	27.	 Zhu, S. et al. The role of neuroinflammation and amyloid in cognitive impairment in an APP/PS 1 transgenic mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 23, 310–320 (2017).
	28.	 Mu, Y. & Gage, F. H. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis and its role in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegeneration. 6, 1–9 (2011).
	29.	 Rao, Y. L. et al. Hippocampus and its involvement in Alzheimer’s disease: a review. 3 Biotech. 12, 55 (2022).
	30.	 Shin, N. R., Whon, T. W. & Bae, J. W. Proteobacteria: Microbial signature of dysbiosis in gut microbiota. Trends Biotechnol. 33, 
496–503 (2015).
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
13
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

	31.	 Chen, C. H., Lin, C. L. & Kao, C. H. Irritable bowel syndrome is associated with an increased risk of dementia: A nationwide 
population-based study. PloS One. 11, e0144589 (2016).
	32.	 Berry, D. et al. Intestinal microbiota signatures associated with inflammation history in mice experiencing recurring colitis. Front. 
Microbiol. 6, 1408 (2015).
	33.	 Dodiya, H. B. et al. Sex-specific effects of microbiome perturbations on cerebral Aβ amyloidosis and microglia phenotypes. J. Exp. 
Med. 216, 1542–1560 (2019).
	34.	 Org, E. et al. Sex differences and hormonal effects on gut microbiota composition in mice. Gut Microbes. 7, 313–322 (2016).
	35.	 Mueller, S. et al. Differences in fecal microbiota in different European study populations in relation to age, gender, and country: A 
cross-sectional study. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 1027–1033 (2006).
	36.	 Hampel, H. et al. The amyloid-β pathway in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Psychiatry. 26, 5481–5503 (2021).
	37.	 Zhang, H. et al. Interaction between Aβ and tau in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 17, 2181 (2021).
	38.	 Minogue, A. M. et al. Age-associated dysregulation of microglial activation is coupled with enhanced blood-brain barrier 
permeability and pathology in APP/PS1 mice. Neurobiol. Aging. 35, 1442–1452 (2014).
	39.	 Cattaneo, A. et al. Association of brain amyloidosis with pro-inflammatory gut bacterial taxa and peripheral inflammation markers 
in cognitively impaired elderly. Neurobiol. Aging. 49, 60–68 (2017).
	40.	 Zhang, L. et al. Altered gut microbiota in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 60, 1241–1257 (2017).
	41.	 Jian, H., Liu, Y., Wang, X., Dong, X. & Zou, X. Akkermansia muciniphila as a next-generation probiotic in modulating human 
metabolic homeostasis and disease progression: A role mediated by gut–liver–brain axes? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24, 3900 (2023).
	42.	 Li, L. et al. Function and therapeutic prospects of next-generation probiotic Akkermansia muciniphila in infectious diseases. Front. 
Microbiol. 15, 1354447 (2024).
	43.	 Harach, T. et al. Reduction of Abeta amyloid pathology in APPPS1 transgenic mice in the absence of gut microbiota. Sci. Rep. 7, 
41802 (2017).
	44.	 Bonnechère, B., Amin, N. & van Duijn, C. What are the key gut microbiota involved in neurological diseases? A systematic review. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 13665 (2022).
	45.	 Zapała, B. et al. Differences in the composition of gut microbiota between patients with parkinson’s disease and healthy controls: a 
cohort study. J. Clin. Med. 10, 5698 (2021).
	46.	 Varesi, A. et al. The interplay between gut microbiota and Parkinson’s disease: Implications on diagnosis and treatment. Int. J. Mol. 
Sci. 23, 12289 (2022).
	47.	 Heintz-Buschart, A. et al. The nasal and gut microbiome in Parkinson’s disease and idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder. Mov. Disord. 33, 88–98 (2018).
	48.	 Cekanaviciute, E. et al. Gut bacteria from multiple sclerosis patients modulate human T cells and exacerbate symptoms in mouse 
models. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 10713–10718 (2017).
	49.	 Jangi, S. et al. Alterations of the human gut microbiome in multiple sclerosis. Nat. Commun. 7, 12015 (2016).
	50.	 Berer, K. et al. Gut microbiota from multiple sclerosis patients enables spontaneous autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 10719–10724 (2017).
	51.	 Zhou, X. et al. Gut microbiome of multiple sclerosis patients and paired household healthy controls reveal associations with disease 
risk and course. Cell 185, 3467–3486 (2022). e3416.
	52.	 Chiantera, V., Laganà, A. S., Basciani, S., Nordio, M. & Bizzarri, M. A critical perspective on the supplementation of Akkermansia 
muciniphila: Benefits and harms. Life 13, 1247 (2023).
	53.	 Shen, L., Liu, L. & Ji, H. F. Alzheimer’s disease histological and behavioral manifestations in transgenic mice correlate with specific 
gut microbiome state. J. Alzheimers Dis. 56, 385–390 (2017).
	54.	 Singh, P. et al. Taurine deficiency as a driver of aging. Science 380, eabn9257 (2023).
	55.	 Jain, S., Marotta, F., Haghshenas, L. & Yadav, H. Treating leaky syndrome in the over 65s: Progress and challenges. Clin. Interv. 
Aging, 1447–1451 (2023).
	56.	 Mishra, S. P. et al. A mechanism by which gut microbiota elevates permeability and inflammation in obese/diabetic mice and 
human gut. Gut (2023).
	57.	 Stolfi, C., Maresca, C., Monteleone, G. & Laudisi, F. Implication of intestinal barrier dysfunction in gut dysbiosis and diseases. 
Biomedicines 10, 289 (2022).
	58.	 Beuling, E. et al. GATA factors regulate proliferation, differentiation, and gene expression in small intestine of mature mice. 
Gastroenterology 140, 1219–1229 (2011).
	59.	 Lin, T. et al. Systemic inflammation mediates age-related cognitive deficits. Front. Aging Neurosci. 10, 236 (2018).
	60.	 Sankowski, R., Mader, S. & Valdés-Ferrer, S. I. Systemic inflammation and the brain: Novel roles of genetic, molecular, and 
environmental cues as drivers of neurodegeneration. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9, 28 (2015).
	61.	 Holmes, C. et al. Systemic inflammation and disease progression in Alzheimer disease. Neurology 73, 768–774 (2009).
	62.	 Lopez-Rodriguez, A. B. et al. Acute systemic inflammation exacerbates neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: IL‐1β drives 
amplified responses in primed astrocytes and neuronal network dysfunction. Alzheimer’s Dement. 17, 1735–1755 (2021).
	63.	 Wohleb, E. S. & Delpech, J. C. Dynamic cross-talk between microglia and peripheral monocytes underlies stress-induced 
neuroinflammation and behavioral consequences. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry. 79, 40–48 (2017).
	64.	 Zuo, Z. et al. Immunization with Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) alleviates neuroinflammation and cognitive deficits in APP/PS1 
mice via the recruitment of inflammation-resolving monocytes to the brain. Neurobiol. Dis. 101, 27–39 (2017).
	65.	 Yue, X. et al. Intermittent hypoxia treatment alleviates memory impairment in the 6-month-old APPswe/PS1dE9 mice and reduces 
amyloid beta accumulation and inflammation in the brain. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 13, 1–16 (2021).
	66.	 Doney, E., Cadoret, A., Dion-Albert, L., Lebel, M. & Menard, C. Inflammation‐driven brain and gut barrier dysfunction in stress 
and mood disorders. Eur. J. Neurosci. 55, 2851–2894 (2022).
	67.	 Takata, F., Nakagawa, S., Matsumoto, J. & Dohgu, S. Blood-brain barrier dysfunction amplifies the development of 
neuroinflammation: understanding of cellular events in brain microvascular endothelial cells for prevention and treatment of BBB 
dysfunction. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 15, 661838 (2021).
	68.	 Malpetti, M. et al. Microglial activation and tau burden predict cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 143, 1588–1602 
(2020).
	69.	 Wang, C. et al. The effects of microglia-associated neuroinflammation on Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Immunol. 14, 1117172 (2023).
	70.	 Baron, R., Babcock, A. A., Nemirovsky, A., Finsen, B. & Monsonego, A. Accelerated microglial pathology is associated with a β 
plaques in mouse models of a lzheimer’s disease. Aging cell. 13, 584–595 (2014).
	71.	 Skup, M. et al. Sex differences in grey matter atrophy patterns among AD and aMCI patients: results from ADNI. Neuroimage 56, 
890–906 (2011).
	72.	 Son, H. J. et al. Sex-related alterations of gut microbiota in the C57BL/6 mouse model of inflammatory bowel disease. J. Cancer 
Prev. 24, 173 (2019).
	73.	 Jiao, S. S. et al. Sex dimorphism profile of Alzheimer’s disease-type pathologies in an APP/PS1 mouse model. Neurotox. Res. 29, 
256–266 (2016).
	74.	 d’Afflitto, M., Upadhyaya, A., Green, A. & Peiris, M. Association between sex hormone levels and gut microbiota composition and 
diversity–a systematic review. J. Clin. Gastroenterol. 56, 384 (2022).
	75.	 Markle, J. G. et al. Sex differences in the gut microbiome drive hormone-dependent regulation of autoimmunity. Science 339, 
1084–1088 (2013).
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
14
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

	76.	 Shen, Y. et al. Ultrasound with microbubbles improves memory, ameliorates pathology and modulates hippocampal proteomic 
changes in a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Theranostics 10, 11794 (2020).
	77.	 Shin, J., Park, S., Lee, H. & Kim, Y. Thioflavin-positive tau aggregates complicating quantification of amyloid plaques in the brain 
of 5XFAD transgenic mouse model. Sci. Rep. 11, 1617 (2021).
	78.	 Prajapati, S. K., Ahmed, S., Rai, V., Gupta, S. C. & Krishnamurthy, S. Suvorexant improves mitochondrial dynamics with the 
regulation of orexinergic and mTOR activation in rats exhibiting PTSD-like symptoms. J. Affect. Disord. (2024).
	79.	 Green, T. R., Murphy, S. M., Moreno-Montano, M. P., Audinat, E. & Rowe, R. K. Reactive morphology of dividing microglia 
following kainic acid administration. Front. NeuroSci. 16, 972138 (2022).
	80.	 Yadav, H., Lee, J. H., Lloyd, J., Walter, P. & Rane, S. G. Beneficial metabolic effects of a probiotic via butyrate-induced GLP-1 
hormone secretion. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 25088–25097 (2013).
	81.	 Wang, S. et al. Lipoteichoic acid from the cell wall of a heat killed Lactobacillus paracasei D3-5 ameliorates aging-related leaky gut, 
inflammation and improves physical and cognitive functions: From C. elegans to mice. Geroscience 42, 333–352 (2020).
	82.	 Nagpal, R. et al. Obesity-linked gut microbiome dysbiosis associated with derangements in gut permeability and intestinal cellular 
homeostasis independent of diet. J. Diabetes Res. (2018).
	83.	 Zimmermann, H. R. et al. Brain-specific repression of AMPKα1 alleviates pathophysiology in Alzheimer’s model mice. J. Clin. 
Investig. 130, 3511–3527 (2020).
	84.	 Navas-Molina, J. A. et al. Methods in Enzymology Vol. 531 371–444 (Elsevier, 2013).
	85.	 Segata, N. et al. Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation. Genome Biol. 12, 1–18 (2011).
	86.	 Mishra, S. P. et al. Multivariate statistical data analysis-principal component analysis (PCA). Int. J. Livest. Res. 7, 60–78 (2017).
	87.	 Mallick, H. et al. Multivariable association discovery in population-scale meta-omics studies. PLoS Comput. Biol. 17, e1009442 
(2021).
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful for all the lab members of Dr. Yadav lab, USF Center for Microbiome Research, Mi­
crobiomes Institute staff, faculty and resources including core facilities. We are also thankful for resources of 
Center of Excellence in Aging and Brain Repair, Byrd Alzheimer’s Center, Department of Neurosurgery and 
Brain Repair, Wake Forest School of Medicine, and and USF Vivarium of USF and Wake Forest and their staff 
for support and help for completing the proposed studies. Special thanks for Dr. John Parks from Wake Forest 
School of Medicine in helping and spearheading the DoD grant with Dr. Yadav.
Author contributions
S.K.P., S.W., S.P.M. and S.J.: Conducted overall experiments and data analysis and wrote first draft: S.K.P. and 
H.Y. edited the manuscript and participated in intellectual discussions; H.Y.: Conceived the idea, arranged the 
resources and funding, wrote, edited, and finalized the manuscript.
Funding
We are thankful for the support provided by the Department of Defense (W81XWH-18-PRARP AZ180098); 
the National Institutes of Health (R56AG069676, R56AG064075, R01AG071762, R21AG072379, U01AG076928 
and R21AG082164); and the Florida Department of Health (22A17) for (HY, SKP, SPM, SW, SJ).
Declarations
Competing interests
Dr. Yadav is a Co-Founder and Chief Scientific Officer of the Postbiotics Inc, and BiomAge Inc, along with 
Dr. Jain is co-founding MusB LLC and MusB Research LLC; however, there contribution and the data of this 
manuscript has no conflict of interest to report currently. Other authors have no conflict to disclose.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​3​8​/​s​4​1​5​9​8​-​0​2​4​-​8​4​7​8​0​-​8​.​
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.Y.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide 
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have 
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to 
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​
n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/​.​
© The Author(s) 2025 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:1589 
15
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-84780-8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/