Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
1 of 17
M AT E R I A L S  S C I E N C E
Interfering with proton and electron transfer enables 
antibacterial starvation therapy
Ji Tan1†, Haifeng Zhang1†, Yisi Liu1, Zhenhao Hou1, Donghui Wang2, Junjie Zhou1, Yuanming Cao3, 
Shi Qian1, Bowen Zheng1, JingJun Nie4, Yuanyuan Cui5, Yun Du6, Kai Huang6, Shengbing Yang6, 
Dafu Chen4*, Xuanyong Liu1,3,7*
Implant-­associated infections are urgently addressed; however, existing materials are difficult to kill bacteria 
without damaging cells. Here, we propose an innovative concept of selective antibacterial starvation therapy 
based on interfering with proton and electron transfer on the bacterial membrane. As a proof-­of-­principle dem-
onstration, a special Schottky heterojunction film composed of gold and alkaline magnesium-­iron mixed metal 
oxides (Au/MgFe-­MMO) was constructed on the titanium implant. Once bacteria contacted this implant, the Au/
MgFe-­MMO film continuously captured the proton and electron participated in respiratory chain of bacteria to 
impede their energy metabolism, leading to the deficit of adenosine 5′-­triphosphate. Prolonged exposure to this 
starvation state inhibited numerous biosynthesis processes and triggered severe oxidative stress in bacteria, ulti-
mately leading to their death due to DNA and membrane damage. In addition, this heterojunction film was com-
fortable for mammalian cells, without inhibiting mitochondrial function. This proposed starvation antibacterial 
therapy gives a notable perspective in designing biosafe smart antibacterial biomaterials.
INTRODUCTION
Infections, especially for implant-­associated infections (IAIs), have 
become one of the most severe postoperative complications (1). In the 
presence of foreign implants, even a small quantity of bacteria may 
form a biofilm on an implant surface to cause infection (2, 3). Biofilms 
help bacteria escape host defense and antibiotic chemotherapy, and, 
therefore, a secondary surgical debridement is often required (4, 5). To 
prevent IAIs, numerous antibacterial functional surfaces have been 
proposed on the basis of metal-­based antibacterial agent leaching 
(6, 7), physical structure puncturing (8–10), thermal damage (11, 12), 
catalytic reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation (13, 14), electrical 
stimulation (15, 16), etc. However, designing smart surfaces to effi-
ciently kill bacteria without damaging cells remains a challenge.
The energy metabolism based on the proton-­coupled electron 
transfer respiratory chain is necessary to most mammalian cells and 
bacteria (17). Under the action of a series of enzymes in the respira-
tory chain, the high-­energy electrons generated by biochemical 
metabolic reactions are transferred step by step (18). The energy re-
leased from this process pumps the protons to generate a transmem-
brane proton motive force (PMF) (19). Driven by this PMF, protons 
flow into the bacteria via adenosine 5′-­triphosphate (ATP) synthase 
to produce the energy currency ATP, which supplies energy for 
various biochemical reactions in cells or bacteria (20, 21). The respi-
ration of mammalian cells and bacteria occurs in different places: 
The former works on the intracellular inner mitochondrial mem-
brane, while the latter is located on the bacterial membrane, which 
gives a breakthrough to selectively kill bacteria (22). On the basis of 
the above, we came up with a rational hypothesis that a material 
with proton-­electron regulating capacity may selectively interfere 
with the bacterial membrane respiration metabolism process to kill 
bacteria but without affecting the operation of the mitochondria 
within the cell (Fig. 1). To verify the hypothesis and explore related 
biological mechanisms, a model material that can capture bacterial 
membrane electron and proton is required.
In a semiconductor field, numerous advanced heterojunctions are 
designed to manipulate charge transfer (23–25). Some special Schott-
ky or type II heterojunctions with suitable energy band structures en-
able the trapping of protons in solution or the directional transport of 
electrons from bacterial membranes (26–30). However, the biocom-
patibility of the above material systems is nonideal. In addition, 
usually, only one of the proton or electron transfer can be manipu-
lated, and in this case, bacteria are difficult to be completely killed 
since the reprogramed metabolic processes. Integrating electron cap-
turing or proton depletion with photo/acoustic thermal/dynamic ef-
fects can achieve better synergistic antibacterial performance (31–34), 
but the corresponding patient compliance is poor, and the high heat 
or excess ROS generated by these processes may still damage normal 
cells or tissues (35). Reversely, simultaneously interfering with proton 
and electron transfer may be more promising to achieve excellent 
antibacterial effects without damaging normal cells. Unfortunately, 
it remains a challenge to tailor a proton-­electron transfer–regulating 
material by nonantibacterial chemical components, so as to clarify 
the underlying antibacterial mechanism based on simultaneously 
interfering with proton and electron transfer.
The mixed metal oxides (MMOs) derived from hydrotalcite, fea-
turing highly customizable compositions and structures, are promis-
ing candidates (36, 37). MMOs, usually as alkaline substances, are 
proton acceptors that capture the proton, and this capacity can also be 
1State Key Laboratory of Advanced Ceramics, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, China. 2School of Health Science and Biomedi-
cal Engineering, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin 300130, China. 3State Key Labo-
ratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Biological 
Science and Medical Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. 4Labo-
ratory of Bone Tissue Engineering, Beijing Laboratory of Biomedical Materials, National 
Center for Orthopaedics, Beijing Research Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics, 
Beijing Jishuitan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100035, China. 5Shimadzu 
China Co. Ltd., Shanghai 200233, China. 6Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orthopaedic 
Implants, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200125, China. 7School of 
Chemistry and Materials Science, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou 310024, China.
*Corresponding author. Email: xyliu@​mail.​sic.​ac.​cn (X.L.); chendafujst@​126.​com (D.C.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2025 The 
Authors, some rights 
reserved; exclusive 
licensee American 
Association for the 
Advancement of 
Science. No claim to 
original U.S. 
Government Works. 
Distributed under a 
Creative Commons 
Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-­NC). 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
2 of 17
modulated by regulating the types and proportions of divalent/triva-
lent metal oxides (38–40). In addition, integrating MMO with a suit-
able metal or semiconductor can form various heterojunctions to 
manipulate the electron transfer. Hence, we tailored a Schottky het-
erojunction array film composed of biocompatible Au nanoparticle 
and Mg-­Fe MMO nanosheet (Au/MgFe-­MMO) with well-­matched 
energy band structure on the titanium implant to manipulate proton 
and electron transfer. Au or MgFe-­MMO film alone will not kill bac-
teria and cells, so the selective antibacterial effect and mechanism 
based on interfering with membrane proton and electron transfer 
can be comprehensively explored. When the bacteria contacted the 
Au/MgFe-­MMO film, continuous transport of protons and electrons 
from the respiratory chain in the bacterial membrane to the implant 
was observed (Fig. 1). Thus, the ATP synthesis, amino acid synthesis, 
and various biological processes of bacteria were disrupted, leading to 
bacterial death from severe starvation state. Meanwhile, this smart an-
tibacterial surface design was also extended to other heterojunction 
systems, proving the universality of the as-­proposed hypothesis. In ad-
dition, the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film was good for both 
osteoblasts and fibroblasts, without inhibiting their mitochondrial 
function. This proposed concept of selective starvation antibacterial 
therapy by interfering with proton and electron transfer gives a nota-
ble perspective in designing biosafe antibacterial biomaterials.
RESULTS
Heterojunction film preparation and characterization
The preparation process of Au/MgFe-­MMO film is shown in Fig. 
2A. The MgFe–layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanosheet arrays 
were firstly grown on titanium using two-­step hydrothermal treat-
ment (fig. S1) and then were calcined at 250°C to transform to 
MgFe-­MMO arrays. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) and 
atomic force microscope (AFM) images of the MgFeO-­Ti sample 
confirm that the titanium surface was uniformly covered by a 
nanosheet array film with a thickness of about 400 nm (Fig. 2, B and 
C). The transmission electron microscope (TEM) photographs show 
that the MgFe-­MMO nanosheets had a layered structure (Fig. 2D) 
and the Mg, Fe, and O elements were uniformly distributed in the 
nanosheets (Fig. 2E). Subsequently, Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunc-
tion films were obtained by magnetron sputtering. As seen from the 
SEM and AFM images of Au/MgFeO-­Ti (Fig. 2, F and G), dense 
nanoparticles were distributed on the surface of the nanosheets. The 
heterostructure of Au nanoparticles and MgFe-­MMO nanosheets 
can be also observed in the TEM high-­resolution images (Fig. 2H). 
Au nanoparticles were distributed on the surface of MgFe-­MMO 
nanosheets, as shown in the elemental mapping images (Fig. 2I). The 
x-­ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Raman spectrum also 
show the signals of the Au, Mg, Fe, and O elements (fig. S2) and the 
characteristic peaks of Au, MgO, and FeO (fig. S3). The above results 
confirm the successful construction of Au/MgFe-­MMO hetero-
junction arrays on the titanium implant.
To further compare and analyze the physicochemical properties 
of Au/MgFe-­MMO, we also prepared nano-­Au films on titanium 
under the same conditions (fig. S4). XPS high-­resolution spectrum 
was used to study the surface electronic structure. As shown in Fig. 
3A, the peaks located at 84.6 and 88.3 eV correspond to the charac-
teristic peaks of Au 4f7/2 and Au 4f5/2, respectively, which belong to 
the simple Au on Au-­Ti (41). In addition, a very small amount of 
oxidized Au was detected, which may be due to the oxidization dur-
ing the magnetron sputtering process. The lower binding energy of 
Au in the Au/MgFeO-­Ti compared to the Au-­Ti indicates that the 
Au nanoparticles in the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction gain elec-
trons. That is, the introduction of MgFe-­MMO reduced the valence 
state of Au in Au/MgFe-­MMO. The peaks located at 711.9 and 725.6 eV 
correspond to the Fe 2p3/2 and Fe 2p1/2, and the peaks located at 
718.9 and 731.7 eV correspond to satellite peaks of Fe, which belong 
to the iron oxides in MgFe-­MMO (Fig. 3B) (42). Both the Fe 2p3/2 
and Fe 2p1/2 binding energies of Fe in the Au/MgFe-­MMO film are 
increased compared to those in MgFe-­MMO films, indicating the 
loss of electrons of Fe in Au/MgFe-­MMO. Similarly, an increase in 
the binding energies of Mg and O elements was observed in the Au/
MgFe-­MMO films compared to the MgFe-­MMO film as well (Fig. 3, 
C and D), indicating that both Mg and O elements lost electrons. 
Combined with the above elemental XPS high-­resolution results, it 
indicates that the Mg, Fe, and O lose electrons, while the Au gained 
electrons in the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction. That is, an interfa-
cial electron transfer occurred between the MgFe-­MMO nanosheets 
and Au nanoparticles, leading to a decrease in the binding energy of 
the Au element and an increase in the Mg, Fe, and O elements.
To further investigate the interfacial electronic interactions between 
Au and MgFe-­MMO, we used ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy 
(UPS) to analyze the energy band structure of the heterojunction. 
As shown in Fig. 3E, the cutoff edge of MgFe-­MMO is 17.15 eV, which 
corresponds to a work function of 4.05 eV (21.2 eV − 17.15 eV = 4.05 eV). 
The work function of Au is 5.1 eV, and its Fermi energy level is lower 
than that of MgFe-­MMO. Therefore, when Au contacted MgFe-­MMO, 
a Schottky heterojunction was formed, and the electrons were trans-
ferred from MgFe-­MMO with a high Fermi energy level to the Au un-
til a new equilibrium was reached in the Au/MgFe-­MMO system, 
which is consistent with the XPS results. As shown in Fig. 3E, the 
cutoff edge of Au/MgFe-­MMO is 16.83 eV, which corresponds to a 
work function of 4.37 eV (21.2 eV − 16.83 eV = 4.37 eV). Further, 
the minimum valence band positions of MgFe-­MMO and Au/
Fig. 1. The illustration of selective antibacterial starvation therapy based on 
heterojunction functional surface interfering with proton and electron trans-
fer. NAD+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (oxidized form); NADH, reduced 
form of NAD+; ADP, adenosine 5′-­diphosphate.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
3 of 17
Fig. 2. Preparation and characterization of Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film. (A) The illustration of the preparation process of the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction 
film. (B) The surface and cross-­sectional morphology of MgFeO-­Ti. (C) The AFM three-­dimensional (3D) morphology image of MgFeO-­Ti surface. (D) The TEM high-­
resolution images and (E) the corresponding Fe, Mg, and O elemental mapping images of MgFe-­MMO nanosheet. (F) The surface and cross-­sectional morphology of Au/
MgFeO-­Ti. (G) The AFM 3D image of Au/MgFeO-­Ti surface. (H) The TEM high-­resolution images and (I) the corresponding Au, Fe, Mg, and O elemental mapping images of 
Au/MgFe-­MMO nanosheet.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
4 of 17
MgFe-­MMO can be determined from the XPS valence band spec-
trum (Fig. 3F) to be 1.70 and 1.55 eV, respectively. The bandgaps of 
MgFe-­MMO and Au/MgFe-­MMO can be determined from the 
ultraviolet-­visible absorption spectrum (fig. S5) to be 2.08 and 2.04 eV, 
respectively. Combining the above results, it can be speculated that the 
electron transfer behavior of the Au/MgFe-­MMO Schottky hetero-
junction interface is as shown in Fig. 3G. On the basis of the difference 
in work function between Au and MgFe-­MMO, the contact caused the 
rearrangement of their Fermi energy levels and the bending of conduc-
tion band (43). Thus, a Schottky contact barrier was formed, pointing 
from the metal to the semiconductor interface, which makes it useful 
for manipulating the charge transfer. The current-­voltage curves of the 
films were measured using the four-­probe method. Both Ti and Au-­Ti 
showed typical ohmic behavior, with the current increasing linearly 
with voltage, and the current of Au-­Ti was relatively larger because of 
the better conductivity of Au (fig. S6). However, the MgFeO-­Ti and 
Au/MgFe-­MMO-­Ti samples exhibited typical semiconductor current-­
voltage characteristic curves (fig. S7). In detail, the MgFe-­MMO 
film exhibited a semiconductor current-­voltage curve, whereas the 
Au/MgFe-­MMO film was unidirectionally conductive to electrons 
within a certain voltage range due to the Schottky barrier. The above 
results confirm that a Schottky heterojunction film composed of Au 
and MgFe-­MMO was successfully constructed.
The electron and proton transfer behaviors were further explored. 
The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were tested, and the results 
are shown in Fig. 3H. The emission fluorescence intensity of the 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti was stronger than that of MgFeO-­Ti under the stimu-
lation of excitation light at a 300-­nm wavelength, which may be caused 
by the plasmon resonance effect of Au nanoparticles. Under the illu-
mination condition, the recombination of the electron-­hole pair gen-
erated by MgFe-­MMO would produce part of the fluorescence. At the 
same time, high-­energy hot electrons were generated because of the 
Fig. 3. Manipulation of proton and electron transfer of Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film. (A) Au 4f, (B) Fe 2p, (C) O 1s, and (D) Mg 1s XPS high-­resolution spectra 
of Au-­Ti, MgFeO-­Ti, and Au/MgFeO-­Ti. a.u., arbitrary units. (E) Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) spectra and (F) XPS valence band of MgFeO-­Ti and Au/MgFeO-­Ti. 
(G) Energy-­band alignment schematic illustration of the Au, MgFe-­MMO, and Au/MgFe-­MMO Schottky heterojunction. (H) PL spectra of MgFeO-­Ti and Au/MgFeO-­Ti. 
(I) Plasmon resonance hot-­electron transfer effect of Au/MgFe-­MMO Schottky heterojunction. (J) The proton concentration of the local microenvironment on Ti, Au-­Ti, 
MgFeO-­Ti, and Au/MgFeO-­Ti surfaces (n = 3). (K) Proton transfer effect of Au/MgFe-­MMO Schottky heterojunction film.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
5 of 17
plasma resonance effect of Au nanoparticles, which, in turn, crossed 
the Schottky barrier into the conduction band of MgFe-­MMO and, 
thus, enhanced the fluorescence of the exciton emission of MgFe-­MMO 
(Fig. 3I). This result indicates that electron flow from gold nanopar-
ticles to MgFe-­MMO semiconductors can be realized under specific 
excitation conditions. This process has important implications for the 
bacterial behaviors, which will be discussed in the subsequent section. 
On the other hand, the samples were immersed in saline, and then the 
local proton concentration on various sample surfaces and the overall 
proton concentration of solution were examined using a pH micro-
electrode, and the results are shown in Fig. 3J. The proton concen-
trations on the surface of the MgFeO-­Ti and Au/MgFeO-­Ti are 
obviously lower compared to Ti and Au-­Ti, confirming the proton 
consuming ability of MgFe-­MMO and Au/MgFe-­MMO. Because the 
MgFe-­MMO nanosheets on Au/MgFeO-­Ti are partially covered by 
Au nanoparticles (Fig. 2, F to I), the contact area between protons and 
the MgFe-­MMO nanosheets was reduced, which weakens their ability 
to consume protons. However, the negatively charged Au nanoparti-
cles would attract the protons in the solution by electrostatic action 
(fig. S8) and further transfer protons to the MgFe-­MMO nanosheets, 
which, in turn, accelerated the effect of proton consumption (Fig. 3K). 
The above double-­edged sword effect resulted in no significant differ-
ence in the local proton concentration between the MgFeO-­Ti and 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti groups, although the overall proton concentration of 
the saline solution in the MgFeO-­Ti group was the smallest (fig. S9). 
The above results confirm the successful construction of Au/MgFe-­
MMO Schottky heterojunction film, and it has the ability to manipu-
late electron and proton transfer.
In vitro antibacterial performances
Both Gram-­positive (Staphylococcus aureus) and Gram-­negative 
(Escherichia coli) bacteria were used to evaluate the antibacterial 
performances of Au/MgFe-­MMO film. As shown in Fig. 4A, com-
pared to Ti, the number of both S. aureus and E. coli colonies on Au-­Ti 
showed no significant change, and that on MgFeO-­Ti slightly reduced. 
Notably, neither S. aureus nor E. coli colonies were observed on 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti. The antibacterial rates of Au-­Ti, MgFeO-­Ti, and 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti samples against S. aureus were −20.882, 27.787, and 
99.977%, respectively (Fig. 4B), and those against E. coli were 11.416, 
44.615, and 99.975%, respectively (Fig. 4C). These results indicate that 
the combination of Au and MgFe-­MMO produced good synergistic 
broad-­spectrum antibacterial performances. In addition, live/dead 
staining was used to further evaluate the antibacterial effect of these 
films, and the results are shown in Fig. 4 (D and E). The surfaces of Ti 
and Au-­Ti were almost completely covered by live bacteria with no 
dead bacteria. The number of bacteria on MgFeO-­Ti was reduced, 
but the dead bacteria were few. In addition, the number of bacteria on 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti samples was negligible, and most bacteria were dead, 
which further confirmed the good antibacterial performance of Au/
MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film. In addition, we also observed the 
morphological structure of the bacteria cultured on various samples 
by SEM. As shown in Fig. 4F, both Ti and Au-­Ti samples were covered 
with numerous S. aureus, which appeared as intact spherical shapes 
without any breakage. The number of S. aureus on the MgFeO-­Ti 
sample was relatively reduced, but their morphology was still intact, 
indicating that the MgFe-­MMO film only inhibited the growth of bac-
teria but did not kill them (this is in agreement with the results of the 
plate colony counting assay and the live/dead staining; Fig. 4, A and 
D). The number of S. aureus on the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction 
film was very low, and the bacterial membrane was indented, while 
some of the bacteria were in a completely broken state. Similarly, the 
growth of E. coli on Ti and Au-­Ti samples was not obviously affected, 
and the bacterial membrane was intact (Fig. 4G), while the number of 
E. coli on MgFe-­MMO films was low, and a small number of bacteria 
showed a longer morphology due to the inhibition of energy metabo-
lism (44). For the Au/MgFe-­MMO, more elongated E. coli were ob-
served, and most of the bacteria have completely broken and collapsed 
(figs. S10 and S11). TEM was further used to observe the membrane 
structure of bacteria on Ti and Au/MgFe-­MMO surfaces after 6 hours 
of incubation to analyze their antibacterial mechanisms, and the 
results are shown in Fig. 4 (H and I). The morphology of the bacterial 
membrane of S. aureus on the Ti surface was complete, the cytoplasm 
was free of leakage, and some bacteria in a state of division (yellow 
arrows) were observed, indicating that it was in a good state of growth. 
Comparatively, the membrane structures of most bacteria on the 
Au/MgFe-­MMO surface were defective, and the cytoplasm was obvi-
ously leaking. For E. coli, a similar broken state was observed on 
Au/MgFe-­MMO. The cytoplasmic leakage of bacteria was further 
examined, and the results are shown in Fig. 4 (J and K). The intracel-
lular protein leakage of the bacteria on the Au/MgFeO-­Ti was signifi-
cantly higher than that of the Ti, Au-­Ti, and MgFeO-­Ti groups. In 
addition, the ROS level of bacteria on Au/MgFeO-­Ti was more than 
10 times higher than that of other groups (Fig. 4, L and M). ROS is 
strongly oxidizing and can destroy the bacterial membrane structure, 
proteins, and DNA substances. The above results suggest that the 
bacteria on Au/MgFe-­MMO film may die because of the destruction 
of their energy metabolism, which, in turn, generates severe oxidative 
stress, leading to the breakage of membrane structure and the leakage 
of cytoplasmic proteins and other substances.
Antibacterial mechanism based on interfering with proton 
and electron transfer
Figure 3 shows that Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film has the 
ability to manipulate electron and proton transfer. To analyze the elec-
tron transfer effect of the film on the bacterial respiratory chain, we 
examined the linear voltammetric scanning (LSV) curves of the sam-
ples in the presence/absence of bacteria (45). When bacteria were 
not present, the saturation currents of Ti, Au-­Ti, MgFeO-­Ti, and 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti groups were all less than 2 μA, with no significant 
difference (fig. S12). However, the Au/MgFeO-­Ti group showed the 
strongest saturation current in the presence of bacteria due to the 
transfer of bacterial membrane electrons to the Au/MgFe-­MMO film 
(Fig. 5A). Furthermore, the membrane electron concentration of 
S. aureus cultured on the samples was detected using 5-­cyano-­2,3-­ditolyl 
tetrazolium chloride (CTC) reagent. The electrons from the respira-
tory transport chain of the bacterial membrane can reduce the CTC 
reagent to substance B to emit red fluorescence, while the bacterial 
DNA can bind to the 4′,6-­diamidino-­2-­phenylindole (DAPI) reagent 
to emit blue fluorescence (46). As shown in Fig. 5B, strong blue 
and red fluorescence was detected on Ti, indicating that the respi-
ratory electron transfer chain worked normally, while the mem-
brane electron concentrations of bacteria on Au-­Ti and MgFeO-­Ti 
were relatively reduced. Very faint red fluorescence was observed 
on Au/MgFeO-­Ti, indicating that bacterial respiratory chain electron 
transfer was severely disrupted. As shown in Fig. 5C, the bacteria rely 
on the operation of the respiratory electron transfer chain on the 
membrane to provide energy, which makes the bacterial membrane 
exhibit n-­type semiconductor properties (26). When the bacteria were 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
6 of 17
Fig. 4. In vitro antibacterial performances of Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film. (A) Photos of bacterial colonies and the corresponding antibacterial rates against 
(B) S. aureus and (C) E. coli of various samples (n = 3). Live/dead staining images of (D) S. aureus and (E) E. coli cultured on various samples. SEM morphology of (F) S. aureus 
and (G) E. coli cultured on various samples. TEM morphology of (H) S. aureus and (I) E. coli cultured on various samples. Protein leakage of (J) S. aureus and (K) E. coli cultured 
on various samples (n = 3). Intracellular ROS level of (L) S. aureus and (M) E. coli cultured on various samples (n = 3). **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
7 of 17
Fig. 5. Antibacterial effect of Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film based on interfering with proton and electron transfer on the bacterial membrane. (A) LSV 
curves of various samples in the presence of S. aureus. (B) CTC/DAPI staining images of S. aureus cultured on various samples for 6 hours. (C) Schematic illustration of 
electron transfer from the bacterial membrane to the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film. (D) Extracellular proton concentration (n = 4) and (E) BCECF/DAPI staining im-
ages of S. aureus cultured on various samples for 6 hours. (F) Schematic illustration of proton transfer from the bacteria to the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film. 
(G) Bacterial activities and (H) ATP level of S. aureus cultured on various samples for 6 hours (n = 3). (I) Volcano plot of transcriptomic analysis of differentially expressed 
genes. (J) Up-­regulated and (K) down-­regulated Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis in Au/MgFeO-­Ti versus Ti group. TCA, tricarbox-
ylic acid; ABC, ATP-­binding cassette. (L) Up-­regulated and (M) down-­regulated Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis in Au/MgFeO-­Ti versus Ti group. ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
8 of 17
in contact with the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction, the electrons 
may be transferred from the bacterial membrane to the Au nanopar-
ticles due to the normalization of the Fermi energy level, so the elec-
tronic state density of Au nanoparticles was increased (47). At the 
same time, the loss of electron energy may cause a fluorescence excita-
tion–like effect, resulting in the emergence of high-­energy hot elec-
trons in the Au nanoparticles (48). These hot electrons flowed across 
the Schottky barrier formed by the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction 
into the conduction band of MgFe-­MMO and subsequently jumped 
into the valence band of MgFe-­MMO. This process led to a con-
tinuous loss of electrons in the respiratory chain of the bacterial 
membrane, which, in turn, negatively affected bacterial respiratory 
metabolic process.
On the other hand, most bacteria have to maintain an externally 
high and internally low transmembrane PMF to drive the synthesis of 
the energy-­currency ATP. To investigate the effect of Au/MgFe-­MMO 
on the PMF, we detected the extracellular proton concentration of 
bacteria cultured on various samples for 6 hours using a pH microelec-
trode. With the extension of incubation time, the concentration of pro-
tons in the bacterial extracellular microenvironment on Ti and Au-­Ti 
remarkably increased to 3.51 × 10−6 and 2.96 × 10−6, respectively 
(Fig. 5D). Under normal survival conditions, S. aureus will acidify 
the extracellular environment by pumping out protons through respi-
ration reaction, which, in turn, enhances the transmembrane PMF 
to synthesize more ATP. Inversely, the bacterial extracellular proton 
concentration of MgFe-­MMO and Au/MgFe-­MMO groups decreased 
by more than a factor of 10, to 2.57 × 10−8 and 1.44 × 10−8, respec-
tively, which would impede the flow of extracellular proton into the 
bacteria to synthesize ATP. The intracellular proton concentration was 
further evaluated by fluorescent probe of 2′,7′-­bis(2-­carboxyethyl)-­5(6)-­
carboxyfluorescein acetoxymethyl ester (BCECF-­AM). The stained 
bacteria on the MgFe-­MMO and Au/MgFe-­MMO emitted stronger 
green fluorescence signals compared to Ti and Au-­Ti, indicating that 
their intracellular proton concentration was remarkably lower (Fig. 
5E), which further confirmed the blocked reflux of protons into the 
bacteria. Overall, MgFe-­MMO and Au/MgFe-­MMO continuously 
consumed protons in the local microenvironment, so the trans-
membrane PMF of bacteria was weaken, leading to the blockage of 
ATP synthesis (Fig. 5F). On the basis of the above dual disrup-
tion of the proton and electron transfer processes, the energy metabo-
lism of bacteria was severely inhibited, resulting in a continuous 
starvation state. Thus, the ATP content level of the bacteria on the 
Au/MgFe-­MMO film was the lowest (Fig. 5G and fig. S13), and 
the bacterial activity was almost completely lost (Fig. 5H and fig. S14). 
The above results indicate that the energy metabolism of the bacteria 
on the Au/MgFe-­MMO film was severely damaged.
Gene transcriptomics was further used to analyze the genes expres-
sion of bacteria. Compared with Ti, 439 genes were up-­regulated and 
428 genes were down-­regulated in S. aureus on the Au/MgFe-­MMO 
film, indicating that their metabolic state remarkably changed (Fig. 
5I). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment 
analysis showed that the bacterial glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, oxida-
tive phosphorylation, tricarboxylic acid cycle, carbon metabolism, 
nitrogen metabolism, and fructose and mannose metabolic pathways 
were obviously up-­regulated (Fig. 5J), indicating that the energy 
metabolism of the bacteria was greatly affected. In addition, the 
degradation of valine, leucine, and isoleucine underwent a dis-
tinct increase. As three essential amino acids for S. aureus, their degrada-
tion would affect the protein synthesis of the bacteria. However, 
their degradation products, succinyl coenzyme A and acetyl–coen-
zyme A, could enter the Krebs cycle to produce energy and gluconeo-
genesis, which are beneficial for their survival in a nutrient-­limited 
environment (49). The above results suggest that S. aureus on Au/
MgFe-­MMO may have to up-­regulate energy metabolism–related 
genes and catabolize proteins for energy supply to sustain their life 
due to impaired energy metabolism. That is to say, the bacteria on Au/
MgFe-­MMO film were in starvation state. On the other hand, the 
down-­regulated metabolic pathways include ribosome, peptidogly-
can biosynthesis, and teichoic acid biosynthesis (Fig. 5K). Ribosomal 
protein synthesis and other metabolic activities are highly energy-­
consuming cellular processes (50), and the low expression of related 
genes can reduce biosynthesis and save energy, which is favorable for 
the survival of bacteria in starvation state. Further analysis of the 
Gene Ontology (GO) gene enrichment results showed that the up-­
regulated gene functions of S. aureus on the Au/MgFe-­MMO surface 
were mainly focused on the metabolism of energy molecules (fig. 
S15). For example, ATP synthesis and metabolism, nucleoside tri-
phosphate, and purine nucleoside triphosphate synthesis and me-
tabolism were obviously up-­regulated (Fig. 5L). The down-­regulated 
gene functions were mainly focused on the synthesis and metabolism 
of biofunctional macromolecules (fig. S16), such as the synthesis of 
nitrogen compounds, nucleobase-­containing compounds, and RNA 
(Fig. 5M). These further confirm that the bacterial energy metabolism 
was inhibited and the nonsurvival essential metabolic genes had to 
be down-­regulated, while the energy synthesis–related functional 
genes and signaling pathways were up-­regulated to maintain the 
life-­essential energy supply. In addition, we unexpectedly found 
significant down-­regulation of the infection-­related pathways of 
S. aureus on the Au/MgFe-­MMO (Fig. 5J), suggesting that its 
toxicity would be weakened under starvation, which would reduce 
the damage to the human body.
Further analysis of bacterial metabolic changes using gene set en-
richment analysis revealed that the expression of genes related to bacte-
rial response to oxidative stress was enhanced on the Au/MgFe-­MMO 
film (Fig. 6A). On one hand, the disruption of the proton and electron 
transfer process in the respiratory chain of the bacterial membrane 
led to electron leakage and the generation of ROS (46). Meanwhile, 
because of the energy scarcity, bacteria may increase the utilization of 
carbon sources or the consumption of oxygen to produce more ATP 
through oxidative phosphorylation, which may lead to the generation 
of excessive ROS. The above changes made the bacteria in a state of 
severe oxidative stress, so the process of oxidation-­reduction reactions 
and oxidoreductase activity were enhanced (Fig. 6, B and C). The ROS 
with high reactivity would damage the intracellular DNA and other 
molecules of bacteria (51), which leads to the up-­regulation of cellular 
response to DNA stimulus and DNA repair–related genes to repair 
DNA (Fig. 6D).
Taking the above results together, a schematic diagram of the anti-
bacterial mechanism based on the disruption of bacterial energy 
metabolism by interfering with proton and electron transfer is illus-
trated in Fig. 6E. When the bacteria contacted the Au/MgFe-­MMO 
heterojunction film, the electrons and protons in the respiratory chain 
of the bacterial membrane in contact with the film were continuously 
transferred to the implant, leading to the disruption of the respiratory 
chain. In turn, the ATP synthesis was blocked and energy was scarce, 
leading the bacteria to a state of severe starvation. For the part of the 
bacteria that is not in contact with the film, it may not be able to 
capture protons and electrons efficiently. Therefore, that part of the 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
9 of 17
respiratory chain of the bacteria may still work, which is why the bac-
teria can survive for some time. However, because of the energy defi-
cit, bacteria have to accelerate the respiratory chain, and more electron 
leakage from this process can lead to the production of ROS. In addi-
tion, because protons cannot flow into the bacteria, there are not 
enough protons to react with the electrons and oxygen in the bacterial 
respiratory chain to produce water, so that electrons and oxygen may 
also react to produce more ROS (46). As a result, the level of ROS in 
the bacteria increased and oxidative stress occurred, leading to the de-
struction of DNA and membrane structure and death.
To verify the universality of this antibacterial heterojunction de-
sign based on interfering with proton and electron transfer, we fur-
ther constructed a similar Pt/MgFe-­MMO Schottky heterojunction 
film (Fig. 6F). The electron and proton transfer behaviors similar to 
those of Au/MgFe-­MMO film were also proved (fig. S17 and S18). 
The results of bacterial experiments showed that the combination of 
Fig. 6. Antibacterial mechanism and the extension of metal/MMO Schottky heterojunction. Gene set enrichment analysis of (A) response to stress, (B) oxidation-­
reduction process, (C) oxidoreductase activity, and (D) DNA repair. NES, normalized enrichment score. (E) Starvation antibacterial mechanism of Au/MgFe-­MMO het-
erojunction film based on interfering with proton and electron transfer. ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; A-­CoA, acetyl–coenzyme A. (F) The characterization of 
Pt/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film. (G) The antibacterial performance of Pt/MgFe-­MMO against S. aureus (n = 3). (H) The SEM morphology and (I) live/dead staining 
images of S. aureus cultured on Pt/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film. ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
10 of 17
Pt and MgFe-­MMO produced significant synergistic antibacterial 
effects against S. aureus (Fig. 6, G and H) and E. coli as well (figs. S19 
and S20). It further confirms our proposed antibacterial concept 
of disrupting bacterial energy metabolism based on interfering with 
bacterial membrane proton and electron transfer.
Osteoblast responses and in vivo anti-­infection and 
bone formation
Osteoblasts were selected to evaluate the biocompatibility of Au/MgFe-­
MMO heterojunction film–modified titanium implants. As shown 
in Fig. 7A, the osteoblasts (MC3T3-­E1) adhered and spread well on all 
samples at 4 and 24 hours. The intracellular mitochondrial membrane 
potential of osteoblasts was further detected using JC-­1 fluorescent 
probe. Different from bacteria, the intracellular mitochondrial mem-
brane potential of MC3T3-­E1 cells on all sample did not decrease 
(Fig. 7B), indicating that the cellular respiration and metabolism were 
normal. This indicates that the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film 
can selectively inhibit the respiratory chain of bacteria and cannot affect 
the mitochondrial energy metabolism of normal cells. The live/dead 
staining and SEM results showed that all samples were almost com-
pletely covered by live cells without dead cells (Fig. 7, C and D). The 
proliferative activity of MC3T3-­E1 cells was further examined using 
alamarBlue reagent, and the results are shown in Fig. 7E. At 4 and 
7 days, the proliferation rate of MC3T3-­E1 cells on Au-­Ti was slightly 
lower than that of Ti, while the proliferation rate of MgFeO-­Ti and 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti groups was significantly higher than that of Ti. This 
may be attributed to the positive effect of the local weakly alkaline 
microenvironment and the built-­in electric field generated by the 
Au/MgFe-­MMO on the osteoblasts (38, 52). These results confirm 
that the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film has good cytocompat-
ibility for osteoblasts.
A rat osteomyelitis model was further constructed to evaluate the 
in vivo antibacterial and osseointegration effects of Au/MgFe-­MMO 
heterojunction–modified titanium implant under infection condi-
tions (Fig. 7F). After implantation for 1 week, the implants were 
removed and the antibacterial effect was evaluated. As shown in 
Fig. 7G, the medium containing Ti implant showed a turbidity state, 
and the number of plate colonies was high, indicating that the Ti 
surface was covered by a large number of bacteria. The medium of 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti group remained clear, and the bacterial colonies were 
less, with a corresponding antibacterial rate of 95.42% (Fig. 7H). The 
Giemsa and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining images of the 
tissue around the implant are shown in Fig. 7I. The number of bacte-
ria in the tissues around the Au/MgFeO-­Ti implant was obviously 
reduced compared to Ti. The H&E staining images show that the 
number of inflammatory cells in the tissues was relatively low and 
the bacterial infection was slight, indicating that the Au/MgFeO-­Ti 
implant can effectively inhibit the initial bacterial infection. After 
implantation for 6 weeks, the new bone formed on the implant sur-
face was analyzed using micro–computed tomography (micro-­CT), 
and the 3D reconstruction results are shown in Fig. 7J. Compared 
with Ti, the amount of new bone generated on Au/MgFeO-­Ti was 
obviously more, and the corresponding bone-­implant contact rate 
and bone volume (BV)/tissue volume (TV) were also obviously high-
er than those of Ti group (Fig. 7, K and L).The Van Gieson (VG) 
staining results also confirmed that more new bone was formed on 
the Au/MgFeO-­Ti surface (Fig. 7M). In summary, the Au/MgFe-­MMO 
film could promote osseointegration under infection conditions and 
also have good biosafety (fig. S21).
Fibroblast responses and in vivo anti-­infection and soft 
tissue sealing
Apart from bone tissue, implants are often used as percutaneous 
implantable devices in direct contact with soft tissue. Fibroblasts 
play an important role in soft tissue repair, so they were also used to 
evaluate biocompatibility of as-­prepared films. As shown in Fig. 8 
(A and B), the initial adhesion and intracellular mitochondrial 
membrane potential of fibroblasts (L929) on Ti, Au-­Ti, MgFeO-­Ti, 
and Au/MgFeO-­Ti were not inhibited as well. In addition, all sample 
surfaces were fully covered by live cells, and no dead cells were ob-
served (Fig. 8, C and D). There was no significant difference in the 
proliferative activity of fibroblasts among all groups at 1 and 7 days 
(Fig. 8E). The proliferation rate of L929 cells on Au/MgFeO-­Ti was 
slightly higher than that on the Ti at 4 days, which may be attributed 
to the built-­in electric field generated by Au/MgFe-­MMO and the 
bioactive Mg ions promoting the proliferation of fibroblasts (53). 
The above results confirm that the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction 
film has good cytocompatibility for fibroblasts as well.
A percutaneous infection model was constructed by implanting 
samples cocultured with bacteria into the back of mice to evaluate 
the in vivo anti-­infection effect and soft tissue integration perfor-
mance of Au/MgFe-­MMO (Fig. 8F). At 1 day of implantation, a 
large number of bacteria existed on Ti implant, while the number on 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti implant was obviously lower (Fig. 8G). After 4 days, 
the number of bacteria on Ti implant was obviously increased, while 
that on Au/MgFeO-­Ti implant was further decreased. The corre-
sponding antibacterial rates of Au/MgFeO-­Ti were 94.196 and 
99.179%, respectively (Fig. 8H). H&E and Giemsa staining results 
(Fig. 8, I and J) showed an obvious reduction in the number of 
inflammatory cells and bacteria in the soft tissues surrounding 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti implant compared to Ti. After 4 days of implanta-
tion, the number of inflammatory cells and bacteria around Ti im-
plant further increased, and the inflammation caused by bacterial 
infection intensified. Whereas fewer inflammatory cells were present 
in the soft tissues around the Au/MgFeO-­Ti implant, the presence of 
bacteria was almost invisible, which suggests that the Au/MgFe-­MMO 
film can effectively inhibit bacterial infection at the initial stage. 
After 7 and 14 days of implantation, Masson and vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) staining was performed to evaluate the effect 
of implant integration with soft tissues. As shown in Fig. 8 (K and L), 
the collagen secretion and VEGF secretion around Au/MgFeO-­Ti 
implant increased obviously. These were conducive to the integra-
tion of the soft tissues at the wound and the implant, thus inhibiting 
the entry of bacteria from the external environment into the inter-
nal tissues to cause infection. The H&E staining images of the 
heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney (fig. S22) also confirmed that 
the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film has good in vivo biosafety. 
Except for hard and soft tissue cells, the immune cells such as mac-
rophages also play an important role in the human body. This 
Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film not only showed no toxicity to 
macrophages (RAW 264.7) but also promoted their proliferation 
(fig. S23). To sum up, the as-­prepared heterojunction film has a 
good application prospect in preventing IAIs.
DISCUSSION
This study proposes an innovative strategy based on interfering with 
bacterial proton-­electron transfer to achieve antibacterial effects, 
which was defined as antibacterial starvation therapy. To realize the 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
11 of 17
Fig. 7. Cytocompatibility to osteoblast in vitro and anti-­infection and bone-­repair performances in vivo of Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction. (A) Cytoskeletal im-
ages of MC3T3-­E1 cells on various samples for 4 and 24 hours (h). (B) JC-­1 staining (mitochondrial membrane potential), (C) live/dead staining, and (D) SEM morphology 
images of MC3T3-­E1 cells cultured on various samples. (E) Proliferation rate of MC3T3-­E1 cells on various samples (n = 4). (F) Diagram of animal experiment. (G) Photo-
graph of bacterial colonies and the Nutrient Broth No. 2 (NB) medium containing Ti and Au/MgFeO-­Ti after implantation for 7 days. (H) Antibacterial rate of Au/MgFeO-­Ti 
in vivo (n = 3). (I) Giemsa and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of bone tissues around the implants (n = 3). (J) 3D images of the reconstructed bone and implant, 
(K) bone-­implant contact ratio, and (L) bone volume (BV)/tissue volume (TV) values measured by micro–computed tomography (micro-­CT) (n = 3). (M) VG staining im-
ages of new bones around the implants. **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
12 of 17
Fig. 8. Cytocompatibility to fibroblast in vitro and the anti-­infection and soft tissue repair performances in vivo of Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction. (A) Cytoskel-
etal images of L929 cells on various samples for 4 and 24 hours. (B) JC-­1 staining (mitochondrial membrane potential), (C) live/dead staining, and (D) SEM morphology 
images of L929 cells cultured on various samples. (E) Proliferation rate of L929 cells on various samples (n = 4). (F) Diagram of animal experiment. (G) Photograph of 
bacterial colonies and (H) the corresponding antibacterial rate of Au/MgFeO-­Ti in vivo (n = 3). (I) H&E and (J) Giemsa staining images of soft tissues around the implants 
at 1 and 4 days. (K) Masson and (L) VEGF staining images of soft tissues around the implants at 7 and 14 days. **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001. h, hours.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
13 of 17
interference of proton and electron transfer, a Schottky heterojunc-
tion film composed of zero-­dimensional (0D) Au nanoparticles and 
2D MgFe-­MMO nanosheet arrays was tailored on titanium. On the 
basis of the plasma resonance effect of Au nanoparticles and the 
Schottky barrier, the electrons were captured and unidirectionally 
transferred from the bacterial membrane to the film, interfering 
with the step-­by-­step transfer of electron in the bacterial respiratory 
chain. Meanwhile, because of the proton-­depleting effect of Mg and 
Fe MMOs on the local microenvironment, it impedes the flow of 
bacterial extracellular protons to intracellular. Under the synergistic 
effect of the above two aspects, the energy-­currency ATP synthesis 
process was hindered, and the process of transmembrane nutrient 
cotransport was also inhibited, leading to a severe starvation state of 
bacteria. As a result, the bacterial ribosome function was inhibited, 
and many energy-­consuming processes including the biosynthesis 
of proteins and some membrane biomolecules such as peptido-
glycan and teichoic acid were blocked, so that the bacterial growth 
was remarkably inhibited. Moreover, the bacterial intracellular 
ROS level increased, and the DNA and membrane components 
were damaged because of severe oxidative stress. The above princi-
ple of antibacterial starvation therapy based on interfering with pro-
ton and electron transfer was also validated in the Pt/MgFe-­MMO 
system, confirming its universality. On the other hand, the adhe-
sion, proliferation, and mitochondrial function of both osteoblasts 
and fibroblasts were not affected because the proton-­coupled respi-
ratory electron transport chain of the mammalian cells is located in 
the intracellular mitochondria, which do not directly contact with 
the extracellular environment. Therefore, Au/MgFe-­MMO hetero-
junction film does not directly interfere with the energy metabolism 
of cells. In addition, bacteria are about 1 μm in size, while the cells 
are tens of micrometers in size. Relatively speaking, bacteria are less 
resistant to environmental physical and chemical stimuli than cells. 
In summary, the selective antibacterial effects of Au/MgFe-­MMO 
heterojunction film were attributed to the differences in membrane 
function and size between cells and bacteria. Furthermore, both rat 
osteomyelitis and mouse percutaneous infection models also con-
firmed that the Au/MgFe-­MMO heterojunction film has good bio-
safety and can effectively kill bacteria and promote soft and hard 
tissue integration in the case of infection.
The orderly transfer of proton and electron plays a key role in the 
energy metabolism of living organisms (54–56). Therefore, designing 
biomaterials with proton-­electron transfer manipulation capability is 
expected to enable the specific regulation of biological behaviors to 
conquer specific biomedical challenges. This study provides a prom-
ising smart biomaterial design reference, demonstrating that an ap-
propriate Schottky heterojunction composed of biocompatible Au 
and MgFe mixed oxides can achieve excellent antibacterial effects 
without damaging or even enhancing cell activity. The results also 
showed that both Au/MgFe-­MMO and Pt/MgFe-­MMO heterojunc-
tion films can manipulate proton and electron transfer to realize 
bacteria-­killing, but their antibacterial effects varied because of the 
different work function of Au and Pt, and the underlying mechanism 
remains to be further investigated. Obviously, there is a lot of room in 
terms of the size, distribution, and component of metal nanoparticles 
and MMOs of Schottky heterojunctions. These factors have an im-
portant influence on the proton-­electron transfer behavior of hetero-
junctions to affect their antibacterial effect. Besides, a variety of in situ 
characterization and dynamic monitoring techniques is still needed 
to accurately analyze the interactions between bacteria/cells and 
materials, as well as the changes in various substances and energy 
metabolic processes of bacteria/cells. We believe that in the future, 
optimal antibacterial and tissue repair performances can be achieved 
by designing a series of heterojunction with different energy band 
structures and the related biological mechanisms could be deeply 
clarified. These materials that can regulate proton and electron trans-
fer are not limited to film and Schottky heterojunction, and other 
systems such as nanomaterials and electroactive materials are prom-
ising candidates as well. Moreover, a biosafe antibacterial material 
that combines contact-­ and release-­based bacterial-­killing functions 
could be designed to achieve better therapeutic effects on IAIs in the 
future. In addition, the stability of film must also be taken into impor-
tant consideration because the long-­term stability of biomedical im-
plant is the basis for its good service performance. In summary, this 
proposed concept of starvation antibacterial therapy based on inter-
fering with proton and electron transfer gives a notable perspective 
on designing biosafe antibacterial biomaterials.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Commercial pure titanium sheets and rods were purchased from Xi’an 
Saitismai Titanium Industry Co. Ltd. Sodium chloride [NaCl; analytical 
reagent (AR)], ferric chloride (FeCl3·6H2O; AR), sodium sulfate 
(Na2SO4; AR), magnesium chloride (MgCl2·6H2O; AR), and potassi-
um hydroxide (KOH; AR) were purchased from Sinopharm Group 
Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. Nitric acid (HNO3; guaranteed reagent 
(GR), 65 to 68%) and hydrofluoric acid (HF; GR, ≥40%) were pur-
chased from Shanghai Lingfeng Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. Gold 
(Au; 99.999%) and platinum (Pt; 99.999%) target purchased from 
China New Metal Materials Technology Co. Ltd. Polyethyleneimine 
(PEI; 8K), Luria-­Bertani (LB) and Nutrient Broth No. 2 (NB) media, 
CTC and BCECF-­AM, and 2′,7′-­dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate 
(DCFH-­DA) were purchased from Sigma-­Aldrich. DAPI, tetramethyl-
rhodamine phalloidin, α–minimum essential medium, newborn calf 
serum (New Zealand origin), the LIVE/DEAD BacLight kit (L13152), 
alamarBlue, and the Pierce Bicinchonininc Acid (BCA) Protein 
Assay Kit were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The JC-­1 
Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Assay Kit and the Enhanced 
ATP Assay Kit were purchased from Beyotime Biotechnology.
Sample preparation
First, the titanium sheet (10 mm by 10 mm by 1 mm) or rod (Ф2 mm 
by 8 mm and Ф2 mm by 20 mm) was treated with a mixed solution 
of HF and HNO3 to clean the surface, with the volume ratio of 
HF:HNO3:H2O being 1:5:34. The as-­prepared sample was denoted as 
Ti. Ti was placed in a hydrothermal kettle, and 50 ml of a mixed solu-
tion containing FeCl3, PEI, and Na2SO4 was added. Subsequently, the 
hydrothermal reactor was placed in an electrothermostatic blast oven 
at 160°C for 30 min to in situ grow a FeOOH film on the Ti surfaces, 
and the obtained samples were labeled as FeOOH-­Ti. Then, the 
FeOOH-­Ti samples and 50 ml of a solution containing 4 mM KOH 
and 30 mM MgCl2 were placed in a hydrothermal kettle and reacted at 
160°C for 24 hours to prepare a MgFe-­LDH film. The obtained samples 
were denoted as MgFe-­LDH-­Ti. The MgFe-­MMO film was obtained 
by thermally induced transformation from the MgFe-­LDH-­Ti sample 
at a calcination temperature of 250°C for 2 hours, and the obtained 
sample was denoted as MgFeO-­Ti. A pure Au target was used to con-
struct Au nanoparticles on the MgFe-­MMO film and Ti by magnetron 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
14 of 17
sputtering technique. The magnetron sputtering parameters were 10 mA 
and 80 s, and the obtained samples were denoted as Au/MgFeO-­Ti and 
Au-­Ti, respectively. Pt/MgFeO-­Ti and Pt-­Ti samples were prepared 
using Pt targets under the same magnetron sputtering condition 
parameters.
Sample characterization
SEM (SU8220, Hitachi, Japan) with an energy-­dispersive spectrometer 
equipment was used to observe the surface and cross-­sectional mor-
phology of various films and analyze the surface element distribution. 
AFMs (Multimode 8, Bruker, Germany) were used to observe the 3D 
structure and potential of the sample surface. TEM (JEM-­F200, JEOL, 
Japan) was used to observe the crystal structure and element distribu-
tion of the film. XPS and UPS measurements (AXIS Supra, Kratos 
Analytical Inc.) were used to detect the element composition, valence 
state, and valence state spectrum of these films with a monochroma-
tized Al Kα radiation (hv = 1486.69 eV, 225 W) source, and the work 
functions of the MgFe-­MMO and Au/MgFe-­MMO films were mea-
sured with an unfiltered He-­discharge lamp (21.22 eV). Raman spec-
trum of various samples was detected by a Raman microscope system 
(LabRAM, Horiba Jobin Yvon, France). Ultraviolet and visible spectro-
photometer (Lambda 750, PerkinElmer) was used to detect the band-
gap of the MgFe-­MMO and Au/MgFe-­MMO films.
Evaluation of proton-­electron transfer regulating behaviors
The current-­voltage curves of the films and substrates were detected 
by the four-­probe method. The scanning voltages of Ti and Au-­Ti 
samples were from −0.06 to 0.06 V, and the scanning voltages of 
MgFeO-­Ti and Au/MgFeO-­Ti samples were from −6 to 6 V. In ad-
dition, the samples were immersed in 1 ml of saline, and the local-
ized proton concentration on the sample surfaces was detected 
using a pH microelectrode (InLab Micro, Mettler Toledo) for im-
mersion times of 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 40, and 60 min (three replicates for 
each group). A PL spectrometer (F-­4600 FL) was used to detect the 
fluorescence emission spectra of the films on various samples, and 
the excitation light wavelength is 310 nm. AFM was used to detect 
the surface potential of the MgFe-­MMO and Au/MgFe-­MMO films.
Antibacterial performance evaluation
Gram-­positive S. aureus (ATCC25923) and Gram-­negative E. coli 
(ATCC25922) were selected to evaluate the antibacterial properties 
of various samples. S. aureus and E. coli were cultured with NB and 
LB media, respectively. Forty microliters of bacterial suspension at a 
density [107 colony-­forming units (CFU)/ml] was inoculated on the 
sample surfaces and incubated in an incubator at 37°C.
After incubation for 12 hours, the antibacterial performances of 
various samples were detected by smear plate method. Briefly, the bac-
terial suspension on various sample surfaces was collected by shaking, 
and diluted 105 times with saline solution. One hundred microliters 
of the diluted bacterial suspension was evenly coated on the agar plate 
and cultured for 18 hours. Then, the agar plate was photographed and 
counted, and the corresponding antibacterial rate was calculated 
according to the following formula: C = 100% × (A − B) / A, where 
C represents the antibacterial rate; A represents the number of bacte-
rial colonies of Ti group; and B represents the number of bacterial 
colonies of Ti, Au-­Ti, MgFeO-­Ti, and Au/MgFeO-­Ti (three replicates 
for each group). Besides, bacteria on the samples were stained using 
a LIVE/DEAD BacLight kit (L13152) and were observed by fluores-
cence microscopy (GX71, Olympus, Japan). For bacterial morphology 
and structure observation, the bacteria were fixed by 2.5% glutaral-
dehyde for 4 hours and subsequently dehydrated and dried by graded 
concentrations of water/ethanol and ethanol/hexamethyldisilazane 
solutions, and the bacterial morphology was observed by SEM 
(S3400, Hitachi, Japan) and TEM (FEI Talos L120C, Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, USA).
Bacterial composition detection
After incubation on various samples for 6 hours, the intracellular 
ROS contents of bacteria were detected using DCFH-­DA fluores-
cent probe (three replicates for each group). Bacterial protein leak-
age in the supernatants on various samples was detected using a 
BCA protein kit (three replicates for each group). After lysis of bac-
teria on various samples, the bacterial intracellular ATP content and 
the total bacterial protein content were measured using the Enhanced 
ATP Assay Kit and the BCA Protein Assay Kit, respectively. The bac-
terial intracellular ATP levels were normalized to the total protein 
and were presented as nanomoles per microgram of total proteins 
(three replicates for each group). The alamarBlue reagent was used 
to detect the activity of the bacteria after 6 hours of incubation on 
the samples (three replicates for each group). The medium contain-
ing 10% alamarBlue was used to coculture with the bacteria, and 
after 2 hours, the fluorescence intensity of 590-­nm emitted light 
stimulated by 560-­nm excitation light of the medium was detected 
using an enzyme-­labeling instrument (Cytation 5, BioTek), and the 
value of fluorescence intensity was positively correlated with the 
bacterial activity.
Exploration of proton transfer of S. aureus
Forty microliters of S. aureus at a concentration of 107 CFU/ml was 
inoculated on the sample surfaces in a 24-­well plate and incubated 
at 37°C for 6 hours. The pH fluorescent probe BCECF-­AM and 
DAPI were added to stain the bacterial intracellular proton concen-
tration and DNA, respectively. A fluorescence microscope (GX71, 
Olympus, Japan) was used to observe the number and the intracel-
lular pH level of bacteria on various samples. BCECF-­AM is a fluo-
rescent dye that can penetrate the cell membrane. BCECF-­AM is 
nonfluorescent and can be hydrolyzed by the bacterial esterase en-
zyme to form BCECF, which is retained within the bacteria. That is, 
the stronger the green fluorescence of BCECF, the higher the intra-
cellular pH of bacteria; the stronger the blue fluorescence of DAPI, 
the higher the number of bacteria. In addition, 500 μl of S. aureus 
suspension with a density of 107 CFU/ml was inoculated on the 
samples, and the local proton concentration of extracellular micro-
environment of bacteria cultured on the sample surfaces for 0, 10, 
30, and 60 min and 2, 4, and 6 hours was detected using a pH micro-
electrode (four replicates for each group).
Exploration of electron transfer of S. aureus
An electrochemical workstation was used to detect the LSV curves 
of the samples. The sample, calomel electrode, and platinum elec-
trode were used as work, reference, and counter electrodes, respec-
tively. The voltage scanning range was from −0.5 to 0.2 V. To further 
investigate the electron transfer effect between bacteria and samples, 
S. aureus (108 CFU/ml) was inoculated on various samples and in-
cubated for 10 min, and then the LSV curves of the samples in the 
presence of bacteria were subsequently measured using an electro-
chemical workstation. In addition, the CTC reagent was used to de-
tect the concentration of electrons in the respiratory chain of the 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
15 of 17
bacterial membrane. Briefly, 40 μl of S. aureus at a concentration of 
107 CFU/ml was inoculated on the sample surfaces and incubated 
for 6 hours at 37°C. The electron in the bacterial membrane was 
stained by adding CTC reagent. The CTC reagent could be reduced 
to CTC formazan by the bacterial membrane respiratory chain elec-
trons, forming a water-­insoluble and red-­fluorescent precipitate in-
side the bacteria. Subsequently, DAPI reagent was used to stain the 
bacterial DNA. A fluorescence microscopy (GX71, Olympus, Japan) 
was used to observe the stained bacteria on various sample surfaces.
Transcriptomic analysis of S. aureus
S. aureus with a density of 108 CFU/ml was incubated on Ti and 
Au/MgFeO-­Ti samples for 6 hours. Then, the bacterial precipitates 
were collected by centrifugation. Bacterial RNA was extracted using 
the RNAprep Pure Cell/Bacteria Kit. RNA sequencing was per-
formed by NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina, CA, USA). Data analysis was 
done by Fastp (v0.23.1). GO (http://www.geneontology.org) and 
KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) were used to analyze gene 
function. Differential gene expression analysis was performed using 
the R package DESeq2 (v1.20.0), and genes that met |log2 fold 
change| > 0 (P < 0.05) were considered differentially expressed genes 
(three replicates for each group).
In vitro cytocompatibility evaluation
The osteoblasts, fibroblasts, and macrophage (MC3T3-­E1, L929, and 
RAW264.7) were used to evaluate the cytocompatibility of various 
samples. The cells were provided by the Cell Center of Shanghai 
Institutes for Life Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences. The 
MC3T3-­E1 and L929 cells were cultured in an incubator (37°C 
and 5% CO2) with α–minimum essential medium (Gibco, USA). 
MC3T3-­E1 and L929 cells (2 × 104 cells per well) were inoculated on 
various samples for 1, 4, and 24 hours. Then, cells were fixed using 
4% paraformaldehyde solution for 10 min. After permeabilizing the 
cells with 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-­100, the nuclei and cytoskeleton were 
stained with DAPI and rhodamine, respectively, and the adhesion 
situation of cells on various samples was observed by fluorescence 
microscopy. The alamarBlue reagent was used to detect the prolifera-
tion rate of cells on the samples for 1, 4, and 7 days (three replicates 
for each group). Meanwhile, the cells cultured on the samples for 
4 days were fixed using a 2.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde solution, fol-
lowed by dehydration and drying by graded concentrations of water/
ethanol and ethanol/hexamethyldisilazane solutions. The bacterial 
morphology was observed by an SEM (S3400, Hitachi, Japan). Cells 
cultured on various samples for 4 days were stained using the cell 
live/dead staining kit, and the cells were observed using a fluores-
cence microscope. The mitochondrial membrane potential of the 
cells on the samples was stained using the JC-­1 kit and was observed 
by fluorescence microscopy (BX63, Olympus, Japan).
In vivo biological performance assessment
Percutaneous infection model
All animal experiments in this study were approved by the Institution-
al Animal Care and Use Committee of Shanghai Rat & Mouse Biotech 
Co., Ltd (approval no. RM202301) (15). The 4-­ to 6-­week-­old C57BL/6J 
male mice were selected for the construction of a percutaneous im-
plant infection model. Ti and Au/MgFeO-­Ti rod samples with a diam-
eter of 2 mm and a length of 20 mm were immersed in S. aureus 
suspension (1 × 107 CFU/ml) and incubated for 2 hours. The mice 
were randomly divided into two groups, and after anesthesia with 
10% chloral hydrate, a wound through the skin was created on the 
back of the mice using a 2-­mm-­diameter Kirschner wire. Then, the rod 
samples with bacteria were implanted subcutaneously in the mice, and 
the ends of the rods were fixed with resin.
After 1 and 4 days of rearing, three mice in each group were ran-
domly selected and euthanized using an overdose of anesthetic. The 
implants were removed from the backs of the mice, and the antibac-
terial effect of the implants was assessed by plate colony counting 
(three replicates for each group). The soft tissues surrounding the 
implants were collected, fixed, dehydrated, embedded, sectioned, 
and then observed under a light microscope after staining with 
Giemsa and H&E.
The mice were euthanized after 7 and 14 days of rearing, and the 
soft tissues around the implants were removed. The soft tissues were 
fixed, embedded, and sectioned, and then the sections were stained 
with Masson and VEGF. To evaluate the in vivo biosafety of the 
samples, mice were executed 14 days after implantation of the sam-
ples, and the heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys, and other organs of 
the mice were removed for fixation, embedding, sectioning, and 
H&E staining, followed by observation using a light microscope.
Osteomyelitis model
The 8-­week-­old male Sprague-­Dawley rats were selected and anes-
thetized using 4% chloral hydrate. After drilling holes with a dia-
tom of 2 mm in the intercondylar area, the Ti and Au/MgFeO-­Ti 
implant rods (2 mm in diameter and 8 mm in length) soaked with 
bacterial suspension were embedded into the holes individually, 
and the surgical area was subsequently sutured. After being reared 
for 1 week, the rats were euthanized by anesthetic overdose, and the 
implants were removed and placed in the NB medium for 16 hours. 
Then, the bacterial colony adhered to implant surfaces was evalu-
ated using spread plate method. In addition, the femoral parts of 
the rats were collected, fixed, dehydrated, embedded, sectioned, 
and then stained with Giemsa and H&E before being observed us-
ing a light microscope.
After 6 weeks of rearing, the rats were euthanized by anesthesia 
overdose, and the femoral parts of the rats were collected and fixed 
with 4% paraformaldehyde. The new bone formation was detected 
using micro-­CT after the samples were embedded in the femur of 
Sprague-­Dawley rats, and the volume of new bone formed around 
the implanted samples was measured by a series of 3D reconstruc-
tions of 2D tomographic images (three replicates for each group). To 
evaluate the in vivo biosafety of the samples, mice were euthanized 
6 weeks after implantation of the samples, and the heart, liver, 
spleen, lungs, kidneys, and other organs of the mice were removed 
for fixation, embedding, sectioning, and H&E staining, followed by 
observation using a light microscope.
Statistics analysis
The statistical analysis was carried out via GraphPad Prism Software, 
and the statistical significance of the difference (P) among groups 
was assessed using one-­way/two-­way analysis of variance (ANOVA). 
P < 0.05 was regarded as statistically significant. The symbols of 
*, **, and *** denote the P values of less than 0.05, 0.01, and 
0.001, respectively.
Supplementary Materials
This PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S23
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
16 of 17
REFERENCES AND NOTES
	 1.	 C. R. Arciola, D. Campoccia, L. Montanaro, Implant infections: Adhesion, biofilm formation 
and immune evasion. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 16, 397–409 (2018).
	 2.	 W. Zimmerli, A. Trampuz, P. E. Ochsner, Current concepts: Prosthetic-­joint infections.  
N. Engl. J. Med. 351, 1645–1654 (2004).
	 3.	 B. H. Kapadia, R. A. Berg, J. A. Daley, J. Fritz, A. Bhave, M. A. Mont, Periprosthetic joint 
infection. Lancet 387, 386–394 (2016).
	 4.	 N. D. Friedman, E. Temkin, Y. Carmeli, The negative impact of antibiotic resistance. Clin. 
Microbiol. Infect. 22, 416–422 (2016).
	 5.	 R. O. Darouiche, Treatment of infections associated with surgical implants. N. Engl. J. Med. 
350, 1422–1429 (2004).
	 6.	 M. Godoy-­Gallardo, U. Eckhard, L. M. Delgado, Y. J. D. de Roo Puente, M. Hoyos-­Nogués, 
F. J. Gil, R. A. Perez, Antibacterial approaches in tissue engineering using metal ions 
and nanoparticles: From mechanisms to applications. Bioact. Mater. 6, 4470–4490 
(2021).
	 7.	 K. Huang, J. Wang, A. Zhuang, Q. Liu, F. Li, K. Yuan, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Chang, Y. Liang, Y. Sun, 
X. Yan, T. Tang, P. J. Stang, S. Yang, Metallacage-­based enhanced PDT strategy for bacterial 
elimination via inhibiting endogenous NO production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, 
e2218973120 (2023).
	 8.	 D. P. Linklater, V. A. Baulin, S. Juodkazis, R. J. Crawford, P. Stoodley, E. P. Ivanova, 
Mechano-­bactericidal actions of nanostructured surfaces. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 8–22 
(2021).
	 9.	 J. Jenkins, J. Mantell, C. Neal, A. Gholinia, P. Verkade, A. H. Nobbs, B. Su, Antibacterial 
effects of nanopillar surfaces are mediated by cell impedance, penetration and induction 
of oxidative stress. Nat. Commun. 11, 1626 (2020).
	10.	 Y. Zhang, J. Cui, K.-­Y. Chen, S. H. Kuo, J. Sharma, R. Bhatta, Z. Liu, A. Ellis-­Mohr, F. An, J. Li,  
Q. Chen, K. D. Foss, H. Wang, Y. Li, A. M. McCoy, G. W. Lau, Q. Cao, A smart coating with 
integrated physical antimicrobial and strain-­mapping functionalities for orthopedic 
implants. Sci. Adv. 9, eadg7397 (2023).
	11.	 J. Huo, Q. Jia, H. Huang, J. Zhang, P. Li, X. Dong, W. Huang, Emerging photothermal-­
derived multimodal synergistic therapy in combating bacterial infections. Chem. Soc. Rev. 
50, 8762–8789 (2021).
	12.	 S. Guan, S. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Hou, F. Wang, S. Qian, H. Zhu, J. Tan, X. Liu, 
Metastructure “trap” coating by acoustic confinement effect for antibacterial 
sonothermal therapy. Adv. Funct. Mater. 34, 2316093 (2024).
	13.	 B. Ran, L. Ran, Z. Wang, J. Liao, D. Li, K. Chen, W. Cai, J. Hou, X. Peng, Photocatalytic 
antimicrobials: Principles, design strategies, and applications. Chem. Rev. 123, 
12371–12430 (2023).
	14.	 A. Y. Vargas-­Lizarazo, M. A. Ali, N. A. Mazumder, G. M. Kohli, M. Zaborska, T. Sons,  
M. Garnett, I. M. Senanayake, B. M. Goodson, J. M. Vargas-­Muniz, A. Pond, P. J. Jensik,  
M. E. Olson, S. D. Hamilton-­Brehm, P. Kohli, Electrically polarized nanoscale surfaces 
generate reactive oxygenated and chlorinated species for deactivation of 
microorganisms. Sci. Adv. 10, 5555 (2024).
	15.	 J. Li, Y. Feng, W. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Ma, S. Chen, S. Liu, C. Cao, Y. Zhang, Electroactive 
materials: Innovative antibacterial platforms for biomedical applications. Prog. Mater. Sci. 
132, 101045 (2023).
	16.	 I.-­Y. Suh, Z.-­Y. Huo, J.-­H. Jung, D. Kang, D.-­M. Lee, Y.-­J. Kim, B. Kim, J. Jeon, P. Zhao, J. Shin,  
S. Kim, S.-­W. Kim, Highly efficient microbial inactivation enabled by tunneling charges 
injected through two-­dimensional electronics. Sci. Adv. 10, 5067 (2024).
	17.	 I. Vercellino, L. A. Sazanov, The assembly, regulation and function of the mitochondrial 
respiratory chain. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 141–161 (2022).
	18.	 L. A. Sazanov, A giant molecular proton pump: Structure and mechanism of respiratory 
complex I. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 375–388 (2015).
	19.	 Y. Z. Lai, Y. Y. Zhang, S. Zhou, J. X. Xu, Z. Q. Du, Z. Y. Feng, L. Yu, Z. Q. Zhao, W. W. Wang,  
Y. T. Tang, X. A. Yang, L. W. Guddat, F. J. Liu, Y. Gao, Z. H. Rao, H. R. Gong, Structure of the 
human ATP synthase. Mol. Cell 83, 2137 (2023).
	20.	 P. D. Boyer, The ATP synthase—A splendid molecular machine. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66, 
717–749 (1997).
	21.	 H. Guo, T. Suzuki, J. L. Rubinstein, Structure of a bacterial ATP synthase. eLife 8, 43128 
(2019).
	22.	 J. G. Hurdle, A. J. O'Neill, I. Chopra, R. E. Lee, Targeting bacterial membrane function: An 
underexploited mechanism for treating persistent infections. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9, 62–75 
(2011).
	23.	 H. Yang, A short review on heterojunction photocatalysts: Carrier transfer behavior and 
photocatalytic mechanisms. Mater. Res. Bull. 142, 111406 (2021).
	24.	 Y. Chen, Z. Wang, S. Chen, H. Ren, L. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. Lu, J. Jiang, C. Zou, Y. Luo, 
Non-­catalytic hydrogenation of VO2 in acid solution. Nat. Commun. 9, 818 (2018).
	25.	 W. Chen, A. Chen, X. Liu, F. Shu, J. Zeng, J. Zhang, H. Xu, G. Peng, Z. Yang, J. Li, G. Liu, 
Customization of 2D atomic-­molecular heterojunction with manipulatable charge-­
transfer and band structure. Adv. Mater. 36, 2410097 (2024).
	26.	 J. Fu, W. Zhu, X. Liu, C. Liang, Y. Zheng, Z. Li, Y. Liang, D. Zheng, S. Zhu, Z. Cui, S. Wu, 
Self-­activating anti-­infection implant. Nat. Commun. 12, 6907 (2021).
	27.	 Q. Zhu, S. Jiang, K. Ye, W. Hu, J. Zhang, X. Niu, Y. Lin, S. Chen, L. Song, Q. Zhang, J. Jiang,  
Y. Luo, Hydrogen-­doping-­induced metal-­like ultrahigh free-­carrier concentration in 
metal-­oxide material for giant and tunable plasmon resonance. Adv. Mater. 32, 2004059 
(2020).
	28.	 G. Wang, K. Tang, Z. Meng, P. Liu, S. Mo, B. Mehrjou, H. Wang, X. Liu, Z. Wu, P. K. Chu, A 
quantitative bacteria monitoring and killing platform based on electron transfer from 
bacteria to a semiconductor. Adv. Mater. 32, 2003616 (2020).
	29.	 L. Wu, Y. Luo, C. Wang, S. Wu, Y. Zheng, Z. Li, Z. Cui, Y. Liang, S. Zhu, J. Shen, X. Liu, 
Self-­driven electron transfer biomimetic enzymatic catalysis of bismuth-­doped PCN-­222 
MOF for rapid therapy of bacteria-­infected wounds. ACS Nano 17, 1448–1463 (2023).
	30.	 J. Li, W. Liu, D. Kilian, X. Zhang, M. Gelinsky, P. K. Chu, Bioinspired interface design 
modulates pathogen and immunocyte responses in biomaterial-­centered infection 
combination therapy. Mater. Horiz. 6, 1271–1282 (2019).
	31.	 Y. Yu, Y. Zeng, Q. Ouyang, X. Liu, Y. Zheng, S. Wu, L. Tan, Ultrasound-­induced abiotic and 
biotic interfacial electron transfer for efficient treatment of bacterial infection. ACS Nano 
17, 21018–21029 (2023).
	32.	 S. Chen, F. Liu, H. Xin, D. Wen, Y. Zhang, B. Li, Y. Han, Boosting MRSA infectious 
osteoporosis treatment: Mg-­doped nanofilm on vacancy-­enriched TiO2 coating for 
providing in situ sonodynamic bacteria-­killing and osteogenic alkaline 
microenvironment. Adv. Funct. Mater. 34, 2311965 (2024).
	33.	 T. Ding, Y. Li, F. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Chen, L. Kong, Y. Han, L. Zhang, Electron spin polarization 
engineering in ferromagnetic bioheterojunction for sonotherapy of osteomyelitis. Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 34, 2401795 (2024).
	34.	 D. Zhang, J. Tan, R. Xu, H. Du, J. Xie, F. Peng, X. Liu, Collaborative design of MgO/FeOx 
nanosheets on titanium: Combining therapy with regeneration. Small 19, 2204852 
(2023).
	35.	 J. Wang, B. Hao, K. Xue, H. Fu, M. Xiao, Y. Zhang, L. Shi, C. Zhu, A smart photothermal 
nanosystem with an intrinsic temperature-­control mechanism for thermostatic 
treatment of bacterial infections. Adv. Mater. 34, 2205653 (2022).
	36.	 H. Du, D. Zhang, F. Peng, K. W. K. Yeung, X. Liu, Two-­dimensional layered double 
hydroxides for biomedical applications: From nano-­systems to surface-­ and body-­
systems. Prog. Mater. Sci. 142, 101220 (2024).
	37.	 T. Hu, Z. Gu, G. R. Williams, M. Strimaite, J. Zha, Z. Zhou, X. Zhang, C. Tan, R. Liang, Layered 
double hydroxide-­based nanomaterials for biomedical applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 51, 
6126–6176 (2022).
	38.	 J. Tan, D. Wang, H. Cao, Y. Qiao, H. Zhu, X. Liu, Effect of local alkaline microenvironment on 
the behaviors of bacteria and osteogenic cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 
42018–42029 (2018).
	39.	 Q. Li, D. Wang, J. Qiu, F. Peng, X. Liu, Regulating the local pH level of titanium via Mg-­Fe 
layered double hydroxides films for enhanced osteogenesis. Biomater. Sci. 6, 1227–1237 
(2018).
	40.	 H. Fu, L. Wang, Q. Bao, D. Ni, P. Hu, J. Shi, Acid neutralization and immune regulation by 
calcium-­aluminum-­layered double hydroxide for osteoporosis reversion. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 144, 8987–8999 (2022).
	41.	 M. P. Casaletto, A. Longo, A. Martorana, A. Prestianni, A. M. Venezia, XPS study of 
supported gold catalysts: The role of Au0 and Au+δ species as active sites. Surf. Interface 
Anal. 38, 215–218 (2006).
	42.	 G. Wang, Y. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Li, Facile 
synthesis of highly photoactive α-­Fe2O3-­based films for water oxidation. Nano Lett. 11, 
3503–3509 (2011).
	43.	 X. Lu, Z. Ma, Y. Chang, S. Wang, X. Li, D. Xu, J. Bao, Y. Liu, Mott–Schottky construction 
boosted plasmon thermal and electronic effects on the Ag/CoV-­LDH nanohybrids for 
highly-­efficient water oxidation. Adv. Mater. 36, 2313057 (2024).
	44.	 P. P. Navarro, A. Vettiger, V. Y. Ananda, P. M. Llopis, C. Allolio, T. G. Bernhardt, L. H. Chao, Cell 
wall synthesis and remodelling dynamics determine division site architecture and cell 
shape in Escherichia coli. Nat. Microbiol. 7, 1621–1634 (2022).
	45.	 H. Wei, Y. Luo, C. Wang, S. Wu, Y. Zheng, Y. Zhang, J. Shen, X. Liu, Metal-­organic 
framework-­derived homologous sulfide heterojunction for robust enzyme-­like 
self-­driven bacteria-­killing through enhanced electron transfer. Small Methods 7, 
2201618 (2023).
	46.	 J. Tan, Z. Liu, D. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Qian, X. Liu, A facile and universal strategy to endow 
implant materials with antibacterial ability via alkalinity disturbing bacterial respiration. 
Biomater. Sci. 8, 1815–1829 (2020).
	47.	 J. Li, J. Wang, D. Wang, G. Guo, K. W. K. Yeung, X. Zhang, X. Liu, Band gap engineering of 
titania film through cobalt regulation for oxidative damage of bacterial respiration and 
viability. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 27475–27490 (2017).
	48.	 J. Li, H. Zhou, S. Qian, Z. Liu, J. Feng, P. Jin, X. Liu, Plasmonic gold nanoparticles modified 
titania nanotubes for antibacterial application. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 261110 (2014).
	49.	 M. Holeček, Branched-­chain amino acids in health and disease: Metabolism, alterations 
in blood plasma, and as supplements. Nutr. Metab. 15, 33 (2018).
	50.	 D. Shore, B. Albert, Ribosome biogenesis and the cellular energy economy. Curr. Biol. 32, 
R611–R617 (2022).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Tan et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadt3159 (2025)     19 March 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
17 of 17
51. B. Ezraty, A. Gennaris, F. Barras, J.-­F. Collet, Oxidative stress, protein damage and repair in 
bacteria. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15, 385–396 (2017).
52. X. Huang, J. Xing, Z. Wang, J. Han, R. Wang, C. Li, C. Xiao, F. Lu, J. Zhai, Z. Zhou, Y. Li, 
L. Zhou, Z. Song, D. Chen, P. Yu, C. Ning, X. Jiang, 0D/1D heterojunction implant with 
electro-­mechanobiological coupling cues promotes osteogenesis. Adv. Funct. Mater. 31, 
2106249 (2021).
53. X. Ma, Y. Zhou, M. Xin, H. Yuan, D. Chao, F. Liu, X. Jia, P. Sun, C. Wang, G. Lu, G. Wallace, A 
Mg battery-­integrated bioelectronic patch provides efficient electrochemical 
stimulations for wound healing. Adv. Mater. 36, 2410205 (2024).
54. P. Mitchell, Coupling of phosphorylation to electron and hydrogen transfer by a 
chemi-­osmotic type of mechanism. Nature 191, 144–148 (1961).
55.	 I. Belevich, M. I. Verkhovsky, M. Wikström, Proton-­coupled electron transfer drives the 
proton pump of cytochrome c oxidase. Nature 440, 829–832 (2006).
56.	 D. Wang, J. Tan, H. Zhu, Y. Mei, X. Liu, Biomedical implants with charge-­transfer 
monitoring and regulating abilities. Adv. Sci. 8, 2004393 (2021).
Acknowledgments: We thank X. Cao for help with the AFM (Bruker BNSM) test and R. Ding for 
help with the Raman and electrical test. Funding: This work was supported by the “Pioneer” 
and “leading Goose” R&d Program of Zhejiang (2024c03080 to X.l.), the national natural 
Science Foundation of china (52450110 to X.l. and 52293382 to J.n.), Science and Technology 
commission of Shanghai Municipality (24ZR1475600 to J.T.), Beijing Municipal health 
commission (BMhc- 2021- 6 and BJRiTO- RdP- 2024 to d.c.), and Beijing Municipal Public 
Welfare development and Reform Pilot Project for Medical Research institutes (JYY2023- 11 
and JYY2023- 8 to d.c.). Author contributions: conceptualization: J.T. and X.l. Writing—
original draft: J.T. investigation: J.T. visualization: J.T. Writing—review and editing: J.T., h.Z., 
Y.l., and X.l. Methodology: J.T., h.Z., Y.l., Z.h., d.W., J.Z., B.Z., Y.cui, S.Q., Y.d., K.h., J.n., and S.Y. 
Project administration: J.T. data curation: J.T. and h.Z. Software: J.T. and Y.cao. Formal analysis: 
J.T. and h.Z. Supervision: X.l. and J.T. Resources: X.l. and d.c. Funding acquisition: X.l., d.c., 
and J.T. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are 
present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 30 October 2024 
Accepted 19 February 2025 
Published 19 March 2025 
10.1126/sciadv.adt3159
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026

Interfering with proton and electron transfer enables antibacterial starvation
therapy
Ji Tan, Haifeng Zhang, Yisi Liu, Zhenhao Hou, Donghui Wang, Junjie Zhou, Yuanming Cao, Shi Qian, Bowen Zheng,
JingJun Nie, Yuanyuan Cui, Yun Du, Kai Huang, Shengbing Yang, Dafu Chen, and Xuanyong Liu
Sci. Adv. 11 (12), eadt3159.  DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adt3159
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.adt3159
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2025 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 24, 2026