ARTICLE
OPEN
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through
multivalent modulation of blood–brain barrier transport
Junyang Chen
1,2,3,4,5, Pan Xiang1,2, Aroa Duro-Castano4,6, Huawei Cai1, Bin Guo2, Xiqin Liu1, Yifan Yu1, Su Lui
1, Kui Luo
1,
Bowen Ke1, Lorena Ruiz-Pérez3,7, Qiyong Gong1,2,8✉, Xiaohe Tian
1,2,5✉and Giuseppe Battaglia
1,3,4,9✉
The blood‒brain barrier (BBB) is a highly selective permeability barrier that safeguards the central nervous system (CNS) from
potentially harmful substances while regulating the transport of essential molecules. Its dysfunction is increasingly recognized as a
pivotal factor in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), contributing to the accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques. We
present a novel therapeutic strategy that targets low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) on the BBB. Our design
leverages the multivalent nature and precise size of LRP1-targeted polymersomes to modulate receptor-mediated transport,
biasing LRP1 trafﬁcking toward transcytosis and thereby upregulating its expression to promote efﬁcient Aβ removal. In AD model
mice, this intervention signiﬁcantly reduced brain Aβ levels by nearly 45% and increased plasma Aβ levels by 8-fold within 2 h, as
measured by ELISA. Multiple imaging techniques conﬁrmed the reduction in brain Aβ signals after treatment. Cognitive
assessments revealed that treated AD mice exhibited signiﬁcant improvements in spatial learning and memory, with performance
levels comparable to those of wild-type mice. These cognitive beneﬁts persisted for up to 6 months post-treatment. This work
pioneers a new paradigm in drug design, where function arises from the supramolecular nature of the nanomedicine, harnessing
multivalency to elicit biological action at the membrane trafﬁcking level. Our ﬁndings also reafﬁrm the critical role of the BBB in AD
pathogenesis and demonstrate that targeting the BBB can make therapeutic interventions signiﬁcantly more effective. We establish
a compelling case for BBB modulation and LRP1-mediated Aβ clearance as a transformative foundation for future AD therapies.
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 
; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-025-02426-1
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) accounts for almost 70% of dementia
cases, and its pathophysiology is characterized by an accumula-
tion of small peptides, amyloid-β (Aβ), in ﬁbrils and plaques,
followed by hyperphosphorylation, misfolding, and aggregation
into neuroﬁbrillary tangles of another protein, tau. Both aggre-
gates are associated with strong inﬂammatory responses, synaptic
dysfunction, and neuronal injury, causing considerable brain
damage and impairing cognitive processes.1,2 In addition, the
brain vasculature network, often referred to as the blood-brain
barrier (BBB), plays a critical role in AD progression and possibly
initiation.3–6
The
BBB
consists
of
aligned
endothelial
cells
supported by pericytes and astrocytes, forming the densest
vascular network in the body, with approximately one capillary per
neuron.3 Mounting evidence indicates that BBB dysfunction
actively drives AD pathogenesis through interconnected patholo-
gical cascades: perivascular Aβ deposition progressively accumu-
lates,7–10 while low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1
(LRP1) localization shifts from endothelial cells to pericytes, a cell-
speciﬁc redistribution signiﬁcantly impairs Aβ clearance capacity
and promotes neurovascular uncoupling pathogenesis.11–13 The
BBB poses a signiﬁcant challenge in pharmacology, impeding the
penetration of most known drugs and complicating the discovery
of treatments for neurological disorders.3 Most AD patients
experience various vascular dysfunctions,14 which may be linked
to Aβ15 and tau16–18 or occur independently of both.19 The LRP1 is
possibly the most studied receptor for both Aβ1,20–22 and, more
recently, tau23,24 processing. Endothelial LRP1 plays a vital role in
removing Aβ, and its expression decreases with age. This decrease
is more pronounced in AD patients and animal models, where BBB
LRP1 levels are almost undetectable.25–29 The downregulation of
LRP1 is strongly correlated with impairment of the BBB and
cognitive decline.27,30–34 Proper regulation of LRP1 levels in
endothelial cells is crucial for preventing the progression of AD.
Despite this, the mechanisms that maintain appropriate LRP1
levels on the basolateral surface of endothelial cells remain
unclear.
LRP1-mediated trafﬁcking follows distinct routes inﬂuenced
by the avidity of the cargo–receptor interaction. High-avidity
binding
promotes
receptor
clustering
and
recruitment
of
Received: 3 December 2024 Revised: 6 July 2025 Accepted: 4 September 2025
1Department of Radiology, Huaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), Institute of Radiology and Medical Imaging, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China;
2Xiamen Key Lab of Psychoradiology and Neuromodulation, Department of Radiology, West China Xiamen Hospital of Sichuan University, Xiamen, Fujian, China; 3Institute for
Bioengineering of Catalunya (IBEC), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain; 4Department of Chemistry and Institute for Physics of Living Systems,
University College London (UCL), London, UK; 5Laboratory of Aging Research and Cancer Drug Target, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, National Clinical
Research Center for Geriatrics, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China; 6Curapath, Paterna, Valencia, Spain; 7Serra Hunter Fellow, Department of
Applied Physics, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 8Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan, China and 9Catalan
Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain
Correspondence: Qiyong Gong (qiyonggong@hmrrc.org.cn) or Xiaohe Tian (xiaohe.t@wchscu.cn) or Giuseppe Battaglia (gbattaglia@ibecbarcelona.eu)
These authors contributed equally: Junyang Chen, Pan Xiang
www.nature.com/sigtrans
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
© The Author(s) 2025
1234567890();,:

phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM),
triggering clathrin-mediated endocytosis and Rab5-dependent
sorting within early endosomes. This pathway frequently leads to
lysosomal degradation, thereby reducing the pool of membrane-
bound LRP1 available for further transport. Mid-avidity cargo
instead engages PACSIN2 (also known as syndapin-2), an F-BAR
membrane-sculpting protein that generates and stabilizes tubular
carriers linking the luminal and abluminal membranes. This
noncanonical transcytosis pathway bypasses the degradative
endo-lysosomal system, enabling rapid, degradation-free delivery
of LRP1 cargo to the brain parenchyma or, in the case of efﬂux,
into the circulation. For Aβ, the choice of pathway is crucial. Aβ/
LRP1 complexes internalized through PICALM-clathrin-Rab5 pro-
cessing may be recycled via Rab11-mediated transcytosis into the
bloodstream30–37 or diverted into Rab7-positive compartments for
lysosomal degradation.38,39 Our previous work40,41 revealed an
alternative, Rab5/PICALM-independent route in which LRP1 is
internalized collectively, trafﬁcked in PACSIN2-stabilized tubular
carriers, and exocytosed across the BBB (Fig. 1a). These two
mechanisms
have
opposing
functional
outcomes:
PACSIN2-
mediated tubular trafﬁcking preserves Aβ clearance capacity,
whereas Rab5-dependent lysosomal routing reduces LRP1 surface
availability and can accelerate amyloidogenic aggregation. Bind-
ing energetics underlie this sorting decision—mid-avidity interac-
tions favor PACSIN2-mediated cycling, while high avidity triggers
Rab5-directed degradation.1,3,40–42
Cargo avidity also inﬂuences LRP1 expression levels (Fig. 1b).
Mid-avidity ligands promote PACSIN2-dependent shuttling, which
correlates with sustained or even elevated LRP1 expression, likely
because receptors are spared from degradation. In contrast, high-
avidity ligands bias trafﬁcking toward Rab5-rich endosomes and
lysosomal processing, leading to LRP1 downregulation. We
propose that LRP1 homeostasis reﬂects a dynamic balance
between receptor synthesis and degradation, with a fraction of
LRP1 normally cycling across the BBB via PACSIN2 carriers. New
cargo can disrupt this equilibrium; high avidity shifts the balance
toward degradation, lowering receptor levels, while mid avidity
supports efﬁcient shuttling and receptor preservation. Mid-afﬁnity
targeting is not a new idea in BBB drug delivery.43–47 Several
neuropharmaceutical strategies already harness moderate binding
strength to the transferrin receptor to bypass lysosomal degrada-
tion and improve central nervous system (CNS) uptake. These
approaches have opened an important avenue in neurotherapeu-
tics by exploiting binding energetics to enhance transport
efﬁciency. However, they share a common limitation: they treat
the BBB merely as a gate to cross rather than as a dysfunctional
tissue to repair. In AD, the problem extends beyond access; the
very transport machinery itself is pathologically biased. In the case
of LRP1, we and others showed that it is increasingly sequestered
in Rab5-positive endosomes by high-avidity Aβ aggregates,
leading to receptor degradation and impaired clearance capacity.
Our recent ﬁndings reframe avidity not only as a means of
transport optimization but as a therapeutic switch capable of
correcting faulty receptor trafﬁcking. In healthy conditions, a
fraction of LRP1 continuously cycles via PACSIN2-stabilized tubular
carriers, preserving receptor levels and supporting Aβ efﬂux. In
disease, high-avidity Aβ disrupts this balance, diverting receptors
into degradative compartments and accelerating surface LRP1
depletion. By contrast, mid-avidity ligands bias trafﬁcking toward
PACSIN2-dependent tubular transcytosis, sparing receptors from
degradation and promoting receptor upregulation (Fig. 1b). This
creates an opportunity to reprogram LRP1 trafﬁcking to restore
BBB clearance function and reverse vascular dysfunction at its
source.
Guided
by
this
concept,
we
developed
angiopep-
2–conjugated LRP1-targeted polymersomes (A40-POs) engineered
for intermediate binding afﬁnity. This energetically tuned design
avoids the two pathological extremes: (i) high-afﬁnity interactions
that trigger Rab5-dependent lysosomal sequestration, and (ii) low-
afﬁnity dissociations that fail to sustain transport. Instead, A40-POs
stabilize the LRP1–PACSIN2 transportosome, restoring endogen-
ous tubular transcytosis and preserving receptor homeostasis.
Unlike transferrin receptor–based mid-afﬁnity systems, which aim
only to boost cargo penetration, our platform actively repairs the
endothelial trafﬁcking defect, rebalancing LRP1 synthesis and
degradation dynamics.
We propose that this “avidity-optimized trafﬁcking reprogramming”
approach can counteract Aβ-induced BBB dysfunction. Our super-
selective design—multivalent angiopep-2 on P[(OEG)10MA]20–PDPA120
polymersomes—targets LRP1 with mid-avidity to bias trafﬁcking
toward PACSIN2-mediated transcytosis, thereby promoting LRP1
Fig. 1
Schematics of LRP1 shuttling across brain endothelial cells (a) following either the PACSIN2 or Rab5 pathway and its relationship with
multivalent cargo. LPR1 expression in brain endothelial cells (b) as a function of cargo valency. The latter represents the average number of
ligands per cargo that interact with LRP1, with n = 1 representing a single peptide. The data are replotted from refs. 31,32
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
2
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

upregulation and enhancing Aβ clearance.40–42,48 In preclinical testing,
A40-POs achieved triple therapeutic synergy: rapid clearance of 41% of
brain Aβ within hours via reactivated transcytosis; structural BBB
restoration with 78% recovery of LRP1–CD31 colocalization; and long-
lasting cognitive rescue, with Morris water maze performance
indistinguishable from wild-type controls for 6 months. This perfor-
mance surpasses antibody-based approaches, which are hampered by
delayed onset, transient efﬁcacy, and receptor depletion.1,3,49 By
directly leveraging avidity as a therapeutic variable, our work extends
mid-afﬁnity targeting beyond simple delivery toward vascular repair,
offering a universal and disease-modifying framework for neurological
disorders in which BBB dysfunction and receptor downregulation are
both cause and consequence of pathology.
RESULTS
To fully understand the role of BBB LPR1 in mediating Aβ
transport, we followed its expression alongside other markers and
Aβ in the APP/PS1 and wild-type animals. We conducted a multi-
tiered comparative investigation employing enzyme-linked immu-
nosorbent assay (ELISA) quantiﬁcation and in situ imaging
modalities. This integrated methodology facilitated comprehen-
sive whole-brain proﬁling coupled with systematic evaluation of
separated vascular-parenchymal (Fig. 2 and supplementary Fig. 1).
We used confocal microscopy to assess the spatial localization
of LRP1 and Aβ at the BBB endothelial cells (CD31) and pericytes
(CD146) in 3- and 12-month-old AD brain samples. In Fig. 2a
(3-month-old), Aβ (red) is highly colocalized with LRP1 (white) on
the endothelial cells (green), suggesting the active involvement of
LRP1 in Aβ transport and clearance at a younger age, with less Aβ
accumulation around the vessels. Figure 2b shows 12-month-old
brains, and the corresponding 3D image (Fig. 2c) indicates a
noticeable increase in Aβ deposition on the basal side of the BBB
vessels. The colocalization of LRP1 with Aβ appears to decrease,
potentially indicating impaired LRP1-mediated clearance of Aβ as
AD progresses. In the later stages of AD, increased Aβ accumula-
tion and reduced association with LRP1 may affect BBB function
and promote disease pathology. Interestingly, further imaging
(Fig. 2d) suggested that LRP1 was predominantly deposited
around the pericytes on the exterior side of the blood vessels. We
conducted longitudinal analysis of representative brain sections
spanning
3
to
12
months
through
immunolabeling
with
antibodies targeting LRP1, Aβ, pericyte marker (CD146), and
endothelial
cell
marker
(CD31).
Colocalization
analysis
was
performed, and Pearson correlation coefﬁcients (PCC) were
calculated to quantify the spatial relationships between Aβ/LRP1
and CD31, as well as between Aβ/LRP1 and CD146. In Fig. 2e, the
results show a trend where the association between Aβ and
Fig. 2
Comparative analysis of protein expression proﬁles in AD and wild-type mice. Confocal microscopy of brain endothelial cells, pericytes,
and Aβ in AD mice of different ages. LRP1 (gray), Aβ (red), and BBB endothelium (CD31, green) in 3-month-old (a) and 12-month-old (b) AD
mice brain samples. 3D rendering (c) of the 12-month-old AD brain section highlighting the spatial relationship between the different
markers. In later AD stages, increased Aβ accumulation near the BBB and reduced colocalization of CD31 with LRP1 are observed. CD31,
CD146, and LRP1 expression in a 12-month-old AD brain sample (d). Scale bar = 10 μm. Age-dependent colocalization quantiﬁcation between
LRP1/Aβ and endothelial cells (CD31) as well as between LRP1/Aβ and pericytes (CD146) in AD mice using PCC (e). Studise was performed on
images derived from three independent experiments, with 6–7 vessels analysis per trial, the data are presented as the means ± SEMs.
Quantiﬁcation of Aβ, LRP1, PACSIN2, and Rab5 levels as a function of age by ELISA of the brain vasculature and parenchyma (f) in AD and wild-
type mice. Quantitative representation of Aβ-positive area fraction in brain coronal sections identiﬁed through immunohistochemistry (IHC) in
both AD model and wild-type mice (g). Aβ concentrations via ELISA in both AD and wild-type mice in the whole brain (h). (For graphs
f, g, h, n ≥3 per group, the data are presented as the means ± SEMs.)
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
3
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

endothelial cells weakens over time, while its correlation with
pericytes appears to strengthen. Similarly, analyses with LRP1
revealed PCC over time, speciﬁcally between LRP1 and endothelial
cells as well as between LRP1 and pericytes, suggesting potential
associations.
We collected brains from both AD and wild-type mice over a
lifespan of 3–12 months and fractionated them into parenchyma
and vasculature. We thus measured Aβ, LRP1, PACSIN2, and Rab5
levels via ELISA. The data shown in Fig. 2f reveal signiﬁcantly
more Aβ in the vasculature of wild-type mice with notable
differences emerging at all lifespan stages compared with APP/
PS1 mice, demonstrating the pathological hallmarks of AD. These
differences correspond to increased Aβ levels in the parenchyma.
The latter is the dominant index of temporal changes in Aβ from
the macroscopic whole brain. Figure 2g (quantitative data of
supplementary Fig. 1) and Fig. 2h display the aggregate Aβ levels
in the brain, showing a marked Aβ increase in the AD models
with age, a trend particularly pronounced between 6 and
12 months. The buildup of Aβ in brain, along with its restricted
passage through blood vessels, corresponds to the down-
regulation of LRP1 and PACSIN2, alongside the upregulation of
Rab5 as the animals aged, as measured by ELISA (Fig. 2f), and
immune ﬂuorescence (supplementary Fig. 2). Notably, this
difference between AD and wild-type animals was especially
signiﬁcant during the 6- to 12-month period, particularly in the
vascular system (Fig. 2f and supplementary Fig. 2). The interplay
between LRP1, PACSIN2, and Rab5 at the BBB is crucial for
understanding the mechanisms of aging and AD. Our previous
studies40,42,50 in which the peptide angiopep-2 was used to
target LRP1 revealed that the efﬁciency of crossing the BBB is
greater
for
multivalent
scaffolds.
We
demonstrated
that
LRP1 shuttles across the BBB through transcytosis31 via collective
endocytosis and exocytosis regulated by the BAR domain protein
PACSIN2 for mid-avidity cargo. PACSIN2 plays a pivotal role in
facilitating transport via LRP1 for small Aβ structures (i.e., mid-
avidity cargo) across the BBB.41 A large Aβ structure with greater
afﬁnity for LRP1 trafﬁcs toward Rab5-positive endosomes via the
recruitment of PICALM and clathrin-mediated endocytosis.35 The
loss of BBB integrity may trigger compensatory mechanisms,
including the upregulation of Rab5, as the brain attempts to
increase endosomal trafﬁcking to manage increased cellular
stress and the accumulation of neurotoxic substances, such as
Aβ. However, Rab5 is signiﬁcantly upregulated in vulnerable
neuronal populations, particularly in individuals with AD.51,52
Combining the above ELISA and confocal evaluation results, the
localization shift in LRP1 from the BBB vascular endothelium to
pericytes with aging underscores a potentially pivotal role in the
pathophysiology of AD. This progression suggests a decrease in
LRP1-mediated Aβ clearance at the BBB endothelial level, with a
concomitant increase associated with pericytes, which may
impact AD progression. Most importantly, the timing of this
alteration precedes or evolves alongside the early stage of
cognitive decline, as measured in the APP/PS1 AD model we
used.50
As we previously reported, both small Aβ and mid-avidity
multivalent units trigger PACSIN2-mediated transcytosis. In both,
this pathway is associated with the upregulation of the LRP1
receptor,31,32 as shown in Fig. 1b. We thus hypothesize that the
use of multivalent LRP1-targeted nanoparticles may restore the
ability of LRP1 to transport Aβ from the brain and potentially clear
Aβ deposits in AD models. We prepared and characterized
P[(OEG)10
MA]20-PDPA120
mixed
with
angiopep2-P[(OEG)10
MA]20-PDPA120 to make polymersomes bearing 40 ligands per
particle. Hereinafter, these polymersomes are referred to as A40-
POs (supplementary Fig. 3). The number of ligands optimized for
transcytosis31 was adjusted via our phenotypic targeting theory
calculations to account for the reduced LRP1 expression in AD
mice.34
APP/PS1 transgenic AD mice were intravenously injected with
200 μL of A40-POs alongside four control treatments: a sham
formulation (only PBS), angiopep-2 alone (A1), pristine P[(OEG)10
MA]20-PDPA120 polymersomes (A0-POs), and polymersomes with
200 angiopep-2 ligands (A200-POs). Two hours after administration,
the animals were culled, and the Aβ levels in both the brain and
blood plasma were measured via ELISA. The results plotted in
Fig. 3a, b show a clear effect on only A40-POs treatment, with a
reduction
in
brain
Aβ
of
almost
50%,
from
8603.6
to
4236.3 ng ml−1, and a mirrored increase in the blood plasma of
8 times from 85.3 to 673.5 ng ml−1 compared with that of the
diseased animals treated with a sham formulation. If we assume
that the brain volume of an APP/PS1 12-month-old mouse brain is
0.35–0.45 ml and has a total blood volume of 1.5–2.3 ml, the
amount of Aβ removed from the brain corresponds almost
entirely to the surplus measured in the plasma.
A parallel IHC analysis conﬁrmed that the Aβ area fraction also
decreased (supplementary Fig. 4). Furthermore, we employed
positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) to
assess the clearance of Aβ in the brains of live animals. The
animals were injected with [18 F]-4-(2-(6-(2-(2-(2-18F-ﬂuoroethoxy)
ethoxy)ethoxy)pyridin-3-yl)vinyl)-N-methyl benzamine ([18 F] AV-
45), an established Aβ marker.53 PET‒CT revealed that the brain of
12-month-old APP/PS1 mice exhibited intense Aβ signal. In
contrast, this signal sharply decreased after treatment with A40-
POs (Fig. 3c). After 12 h of administration of A40-POs, the reduction
in [18 F] AV-45 standardized uptake value associated with Aβ was
46.25% (Fig. 3d). Confocal images revealed that Aβ deposition
around the BBB disappeared, and a large amount of Aβ signal in
the vascular lumen (supplementary Fig. 5). We performed tissue
clearing on the brains of 12-month-old APP/PS1 mice treated with
sham formulation or A40-POs. The Aβ (red) and blood vessels
(green) of these brains were labeled (Fig. 3e and supplementary
Fig. 6). The brains of the mice treated with A40-POs presented
fewer Aβ signals than did the Sham APP/PS1 brains. The 3D brain
images were embedded into the Allen Brain Atlas-based parcella-
tion model integrated with Amira software, with each brain
parcellated into 14 distinct regions (Fig. 3f). The Aβ volume in 14
brain regions of the mouse brain was measured separately
(Fig. 3g). There was a 41% Aβ volume reduction in the brains of
A40-POs-treated mice. Finally, the coronal Aβ distribution is shown
as a heatmap in Fig. 3h.
These ﬁndings motivated us to study the BBB vascular
phenotype after A40-PO treatment. We ﬁrst observed increasing
of the colocalization of LRP1 with CD31 in the treated brain, as
shown in Fig. 4a and supplementary Fig. 7. The overlap of LRP1
and BBB endothelial cells (CD31) returned to the wild-type state.
Quantitative analysis of Aβ distribution revealed a signiﬁcant
increase in the brain vasculature after treatment (Fig. 4b),
contrasting with a progressive reduction in parenchymal Aβ
deposition (Fig. 4c). ELISA tests were subsequently performed to
detect proteins in both the vasculature and parenchyma. As
discussed previously, the analysis focused on the concentrations
of various proteins, including LRP1, PACSIN2, and Rab5. The
nanomedicine cleared Aβ and caused a rapid change in the BBB
phenotype by upregulating PACSIN2 and downregulating Rab5
(Fig. 4d). This ﬁnding is consistent with our ﬂuorescent imaging
data, which show that PACSIN2 relocates to blood vessels
(supplementary Fig. 7). The morphology of LRP1, as observed
under
a
stimulated
emission
depletion
(STED)
microscope,
revealed a clustered distribution in the vessel wall, suggesting
robust ongoing transcytosis (Fig. 4e and supplementary Fig. 5).
Finally, we investigated the effects of A40-POs administration on
animal cognition via Morris water maze. As indicated in Fig. 5a the
stage I, with the number of experimental days increased, the time
they took to ﬁnd the platform gradually decreased, suggesting
that animals made progress in learning and remembering the
platform’s location.
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
4
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

Fig. 3
A40-POs treatment reduces cerebral Aβ burden in APP/PS1 mice. ELISA measurement of whole-brain (a) and plasma (b) Aβ levels at 2 h
post injection, comparing wild-type (WT), sham, angiopep-2 alone (A1), pristine P[(OEG)10 MA]20-PDPA120 polymersomes (A0-POs), and
angiopep-2-functionalized polymersomes with ligand densities of 40 (A40-POs) or 200 (A200-POs) per vesicle. PET‒CT visualization (c) in wild-
type (WT) and APP/PS1 (pre- and 12 h post A40-POs administration) mice with [18 F] AV-45 (2.8--3.2 MBq) tracer. Quantiﬁed SUV (d) reductions
conﬁrm signiﬁcant Aβ clearance. 3D rendering imaging (e) of the brain after tissue clearing shows reduced Aβ signals in 12 h post A40-POs
injected mice. Brain parcellation into 14 regions was performed according to the Allen Brain Atlas, revealing Aβ distribution across brain
regions (f). A40-POs treatment induced 41% Aβ volume reduction in total after 12 h of treatment (g) (data expressed as mean ± SEM). Heat map
representation of Aβ ﬂuorescence intensity across a single coronal brain layer (h). Tissue-clearing and PET-CT imaging were conducted three
repeats per group (n = 3). Statistical signiﬁcance for graphs a, b, d was determined via one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
5
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

The APP/PS1 POs (A40-POs-treated) group exhibited a signiﬁ-
cantly shorter escape path length than the sham-operated APP/
PS1 group after training (Fig. 5a, Stage I), suggesting improved
spatial navigation strategies. Their search efﬁciency was similar to
that of the wild-type mice. The escape latency (time taken to reach
the escape platform) of the APP/PS1 POs group was also shorter
than that of the sham group. A shorter escape latency indicates
better spatial learning and memory ability. Although the relation-
ship between swimming speed and spatial learning and memory
abilities is weak, analyzing swimming speed can rule out the
impact of an animal’s motor ability or fear during experiments. For
all the parts, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the swimming
speeds of the three groups of mice.
When the platform was removed in Stage II, the APP/PS1 POs
group crossed the platform more times and spent a signiﬁcantly
greater percentage of time at the platform’s original location than
the Sham group did, reﬂecting stronger memory of the platform’s
location. In Stage III, the escape platform was placed on the
opposite side of its original location. Initially, longer search times
reﬂect the long-term memory of the original platform’s location.
Nevertheless, as the number of training sessions increased, the
group with stronger learning abilities would present a greater
reduction in path length and escape latency. In the last two days
of this stage, animals treated with A40-POs and the wild-type
group presented shorter escape paths and escape latencies. When
the escape platform was removed (stage IV), the APP/PS1 POs
group stayed longer than the sham group at the escape location.
This location was crossed more often, reﬂecting the stronger
memory abilities. Six months after the mice were treated with A40-
POs, we performed this water maze experiment to evaluate the
persistence of cognitive improvement in the treated mice. Place
navigation and spatial probe tests (Stages V and VI) were
performed on the mice adhering to the same methods as those
implemented in Stages I and II. Between-group comparisons
revealed that the cognitive enhancement provided by A40-POs
treatment persisted in APP/PS1 mice, and A40-POs-treated mice
demonstrated a level of cognitive similar to that of wild-type mice,
which was signiﬁcantly greater than that of sham APP/PS1 mice.
Enhancing quality of life is a crucial objective in AD treatment
and improvement. To assess the life quality of the mice, we
conducted nest construction (Fig. 5b, c) and sucrose preference
(Fig. 5d) experiments following the Stages IV and VI of the Morris
water maze test. Nest-construction behavior is commonly used to
evaluate daily activities, ﬁne motor skills, cognition, and emotional
Fig. 4
A40-POs treatment restored the BBB phenotype. PCC for the colocalization of LRP1 and endothelial cells (CD31) (a). Analyzis was
performed on images derived from three independent experiments, with 6–7 vessels studied per trial (statistical analysis performed via
unpaired t-tests, **** p < 0.0001). Aβ content in cerebrovasculature (b) and parenchyma (c) quantiﬁed by ELISA. ELISA measurements of
vascular and parenchymal LRP1, PACSIN2, and Rab5 levels in wild-type, Sham APP/PS1, and APP/PS1 mice after A40-PO treatment (d). STED
microscopy imaging of LRP1 (white), Aβ (red), and vessel wall (green). After treatment, Aβ deposits around the BBB are cleared, and notable Aβ
signals are present within the vascular lumen (e). For b, c, and d, statistical signiﬁcance was determined via one-way ANOVA, *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, n ≥3
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
6
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

state in mice with cognitive impairments. For mice, a high-quality
nest provides thermoregulation and predator avoidance, serving
as a security indicator that correlates with executive function
performance. The treated group exhibited a signiﬁcantly higher
nest-construction score compared to the Sham group. The sucrose
preference experiment was conducted to assess the hedonic
response of the animals to sweetness by administering a low-
concentration sucrose solution. The group treated with A40-POs
exhibited signiﬁcantly higher preference scores compared to the
sham APP/PS1 group (Fig. 5d).
Fig. 5
Behavior tests demonstrated that A40-PO treatment improved the performance of APP/PS1 mice. Morris water maze test in which mice
were injected with saline (sham APP/PS1 group and WT group, 200 μL) or A40-POs (APP/PS1 POs group, 10 g/L 200 μL) once daily for the
365th–367th morning of their lifespan. Recovery was executed for 1 week under the original rearing conditions. The place navigation test
(Stage I) was performed on days 375th–378th, and the results revealed a gradual decrease in passing length and escape latency for ﬁnding the
platform in all groups, with the APP/PS1 POs group matching the WT group and signiﬁcantly outperforming the Sham APP/PS1 group. During
the spatial probe test (Stage II), both the APP/PS1 POs and WT groups demonstrated more passing times and a greater percentage of time
spent at the platform’s original location. In the reverse-place navigation (Stage III) trial from days 380th–383rd, with the platform moving to
the opposite side, the APP/PS1 POs and WT groups initially took longer, indicating stronger spatial memory from Stage I and Stage II. Their
reverse passing length and escape latency decreased rapidly over time and were signiﬁcantly lower than those of the Sham APP/PS1 mice at
the last day of this stage. On day 384th, in the reverse spatial probe (stage IV) test without the platform, A40-POs treated mice still
outperformed the Sham APP/PS1 group. After 180 days, the mice were reperformed for place navigation and spatial probes (Stages V and VI).
The conditions were consistent with those of stage I and stage II. Six months after the injection of A40-POs, the mice could still ﬁnd the escape
platform within a shorter time in the navigation experiment. They stay longer and traverse more times at the correct location in the spatial
probe test. The performance of the mice injected with A40-POs (6 months p.i.) was close to that of the wild-type mice with same age, and
better than that of the Sham APP/PS1 group (a). Place navigation trials (Stages I, III and V) were analyzed via two-way ANOVA, whereas spatial
probe trials (Stages II, IV, and VI) were compared via one-way ANOVA. Signiﬁcance levels are denoted as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001,
****p < 0.0001, with n ≥11 (for all 12-month-old mice) and n ≥6 (for all 18-month-old mice). Nest-construction images (b), nest scores (c) and
sucrose preferences (d) were recorded for the APP/PS1 Sham, APP/PS1 POs and wild-type groups at two time points post-injection. (groups
were compared via one-way ANOVA. Signiﬁcance levels are denoted as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 with n = 5, the data are presented as
the means ± SEMs.)
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
7
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

Overall, the results of the behavioral experiments indicated that
animals treated with A40-POs presented improved memory and
learning capabilities, enhanced cognition, and elevated quality
of life.
DISCUSSION
The profound therapeutic recalcitrance of late-stage AD arises
from a self-reinforcing cascade of neuropathological disturbances:
persistent accumulation of Aβ, progressive breakdown of the BBB,
collapse of physiological clearance routes, and the convergence of
multiple
neurodegenerative
mechanisms
that
entrench
the
disease state.54–56 In the classical APP/PS1 mouse model, at
12 months of age, perivascular amyloid deposits accumulate in
parallel with a marked reduction in LRP1–endothelial co-localiza-
tion, signaling the decoupling of the neurovascular unit and the
erosion of Aβ efﬂux capacity. This pathological uncoupling is
accompanied by a molecular shift from physiological PACSIN2-
mediated tubular transcytosis toward Rab5-driven degradative
endocytosis, establishing a microenvironment in which the very
barrier
dysfunction
ampliﬁes
amyloid
burden,
it
helps
to
perpetuate.41,51,52 The resulting landscape is not merely one of
impaired barrier integrity but of disrupted and maladapted
transport machinery. In this context, effective therapy must
extend beyond directly targeting amyloid aggregates, instead
restoring the underlying vascular transport architecture that
maintains neurovascular homeostasis.
Current therapeutic approaches have often focused on improving
transport efﬁciency by tuning ligand afﬁnity, particularly in transferrin
receptor-targeting strategies, which have demonstrated that mid-
afﬁnity interactions can outperform high-afﬁnity binding by avoiding
lysosomal routing and promoting transcytosis. While such strategies
have opened a new chapter in neuropharmaceutical design, they
largely remain transport-centric, concerned with getting molecules
into the brain rather than repairing the transport systems themselves.
In contrast, the approach presented here seeks to correct the
pathological shift in endothelial trafﬁcking, re-establishing a healthy
balance between receptor recycling and degradation. Our strategy is
founded on fundamental biophysical principles of receptor–ligand
binding thermodynamics, supramolecular spatial encoding, and
membrane trafﬁcking dynamics. Receptor fate is governed by a
ﬁnely balanced interplay between binding energy, spatial conﬁne-
ment, and membrane microdomain organization: mid-avidity cargo
engages PACSIN2-facilitated tubular carriers that maintain physiolo-
gical clearance, whereas high-avidity ligands promote Rab5-mediated
lysosomal degradation, progressively depleting functional receptors.
This dichotomy acts as a biological switch, directing LRP1 either
toward productive transcytosis or toward degradation. Crucially,
these processes are not passive but allosterically sensitive to the
geometry, valency, and spatial arrangement of ligands at the
nanoscale. To exploit this mechanism, we developed A40-POs,
LRP1-targeted polymersomes displaying angiopep-2 ligands in a
spatially programmed multivalent conﬁguration. Computational
modeling guided the spatial organization of ligands to emulate
physiological neurovascular engagement, minimizing conformational
strain that would otherwise trigger degradative routing. This precise
nanoscale architecture thermodynamically stabilizes LRP1 conforma-
tions favorable for PACSIN2 recruitment, restoring productive
transcytosis by recreating the membrane curvature and receptor
clustering dynamics of healthy endothelium. In contrast, A200-POs
with overcrowded ligands induce pathological Rab5 activation
through microdomain disruption and receptor conformational
distortion, underscoring the ﬁne balance between therapeutic
reactivation and aberrant trafﬁcking.
Our study underscores the transformative potential of multi-
valent targeting and BBB modulation in treating AD. The
deployment of LRP1-targeting polymersomes has facilitated rapid
Aβ clearance and initiated signiﬁcant changes in the BBB, leading
to improved cognitive outcomes. This innovative therapeutic
paradigm offers a promising pathway for developing effective
clinical interventions, addressing vascular contributions to AD, and
ultimately enhancing patient outcomes. The therapeutic implica-
tions are profound. By reinstating PACSIN2-mediated trafﬁcking,
A40-POs not only restore clearance but also shift LRP1 homeostasis
toward upregulation, counteracting the receptor loss driven by
pathological high-avidity amyloid binding. This shift represents a
form of vascular reprogramming, in which the endothelium
regains its native capacity to manage proteopathic stress.
Experimental evidence conﬁrms that treatment initiates a rapid
clearance phase within hours, marked by a substantial reduction
in cerebral amyloid load and concurrent elevation of plasma Aβ,
consistent with restored vectorial efﬂux. Pathological imaging
reveals depletion of insoluble aggregates across the isocortex,
while functional assays demonstrate normalization of transporter
stoichiometry and re-coupling of the neurovascular unit. Multiplex
immunohistochemistry conﬁrms reactivation of vesicular trafﬁck-
ing from the luminal surface toward the parenchyma, represent-
ing a spatial inversion of pathological amyloid dynamics. Most
notably, these structural and molecular restorations translate into
long-lasting cognitive preservation, with treated animals perform-
ing indistinguishably from wild-type controls in complex spatial
learning tasks over extended observation periods. The conceptual
advance here lies in moving beyond the paradigm of “overcoming
the barrier” toward “repairing the barrier.” A40-POs demonstrate
that nanoscale spatial programming can restore the BBB’s intrinsic
clearance machinery by directly modulating the conformational
and trafﬁcking dynamics of its transport receptors. This represents
a transition from nanocarriers as passive shuttles to active
supramolecular regulators of endothelial biology. The therapeutic
trilogy achieved—amyloid clearance, barrier restoration, and
sustained cognitive recovery—establishes a blueprint for precision
neurovascular medicine.
While current studies have substantiated the validity of this
novel theoretical framework, the application of cell-speciﬁc
knockout models in mechanistic studies holds signiﬁcant potential
to enhance our understanding of the functional role of the
PACSIN2 pathway within the pathophysiological context of AD.
Looking ahead, the translational journey will require accounting
for interspecies differences in receptor glycosylation and mem-
brane composition, as well as vascular pathologies such as
cerebral
amyloid
angiopathy
and
pericyte
loss,
which
are
incompletely recapitulated in murine models. Strategies integrat-
ing spatiotemporal mapping of clearance dynamics with human-
speciﬁc
in
vitro
models,
computational
simulations
under
physiological shear stress, and tailored ligand designs informed
by patient-speciﬁc LRP1 polymorphisms will be essential. The
potential extends beyond AD to Parkinson’s, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, and other disorders where vascular transport failure
accelerates neurodegeneration.
In essence, this work illustrates that the BBB is not merely an
obstacle to be bypassed but a dynamic and reparable interface
whose dysfunction can be therapeutically reversed. By embedding
the principles of receptor thermodynamics and supramolecular
spatial encoding into material design, we have demonstrated that
pathological trafﬁcking can be reprogrammed toward physiologi-
cal transport, converting the barrier itself into a therapeutic target.
The A40-POs paradigm demonstrates that rational materials design
integrated
with
supramolecular
engineering
can
reprogram
pathological pathways into targeted therapeutic interventions,
establishing precise regulation over endogenous transport sys-
tems. This bidirectional engineering framework not only recapi-
tulates natural regulatory paradigms but achieves functional
expansion through predictable assembly. This reframing not only
changes how we approach drug delivery in neurodegeneration
but also heralds a new era in which nanomaterials act as
intelligent modulators of cellular behavior, capable of decoding
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
8
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

disease-speciﬁc transport disruptions and orchestrating their
repair at the molecular scale.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A40-PO polymersome preparation and characterization
P[(OEG)10MA]20-PDPA120 and angiopep2-P[(OEG)10MA]20-PDPA120
copolymers were synthesized via atom transfer radical polymer-
ization (ATRP) as previously reported.33 A40-POs were formulated
adhering
to
the
ﬁlm-rehydration
method,
whereby
P[(OEG)10MA]20-PDPA120 and a 1.88% molar ratio of angiopep2-
P[(OEG)10MA]20-PDPA120 were dissolved in a mixture of methanol
and chloroform (v/v, 3:1). The mixture was left to evaporate,
allowing the organic solvent to completely dissipate and form a
homogeneous polymer ﬁlm at the bottom of the vial. PBS solution
was added to rehydrate the polymer ﬁlm and sonicated for
30 min. The solution was stirred continuously for 7 days at 4 °C via
a magnetic stirrer at 1000 rpm. The morphology of the A40-POs
was characterized via transmission electron microscopy (JEM-
2100Plus, Japan). The diameter distribution was assessed via
dynamic light scattering (Malvern Zetasizer Pro, UK).
Animals
All the animal studies were conducted in accordance with the
guidelines set forth by the West China Hospital Animal Care
Committee (IACUC-approved project number: 20211475A). Con-
siderable efforts were made to minimize the number of animals
utilized in these studies and to alleviate any pain or discomfort
experienced by the animals. In all the experiments, the animals
were housed in a room where the temperature was regulated,
with consistent alternating cycles of light and darkness.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Parafﬁn-embedded sections (5 μm) of mouse brain tissue were
deparafﬁnized with xylene and subjected to gradient alcohol
hydration (100%, 80%, 50%, 30%). Endogenous peroxidase activity
was quenched via the addition of 3% H2O2 (room temperature,
10 min) following antigen retrieval (Biosharp, 22315828). The
tissues were blocked with 1% BSA (Aladdin, A104912) at room
temperature for 30 min. Aβ-targeting primary antibodies were
incubated overnight
at 4 °C (Servicebio,
GB13414-1,
1:200),
followed by washing with PBS. The sections were then incubated
with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (ABclonal, AS014,
1:150) at ambient temperature for 30 min and subsequently
washed with PBS. DAB substrate (Elabscience, E-IR-R101, 1:20) was
applied for 5 min, followed by hematoxylin solution (Servicebio,
G1004) for 1 min and hematoxylin differentiation solution
(Servicebio, G1039) for 10−15 s. The sections were immediately
rinsed in running tap water for 20 s, treated with hematoxylin
bluing buffer (Servicebio, G1040) for 1 min, and washed with PBS.
Finally, the slides were mounted with quick-drying neutral resin
(ZSZSGBBIO, ZLI-9516).
Aβ extraction
Following euthanasia via an overdose of isoﬂurane anesthesia,
cardiac perfusion was conducted with cold PBS. The entire brain
tissue was subsequently harvested and weighed. The brain
tissues
were
subjected
to
comprehensive
homogenization
(Servicebio, KZ-5F-3D) employing a TBS solution enriched with
phosphatase inhibitor (Servicebio, CR2302054) and protease
inhibitor (Servicebio, CR2306008) at 70 Hz and −20 °C. The
supernatant was segregated after the brain tissue homogenate
was centrifuged for 1 h at 100,000 × g and 4 °C via an ultrahigh-
speed centrifuge (Beckman, Optima MAX-XP). The sediment
were subsequently resuspended in 70% formic acid (Aopusheng
(Tianjin) Chemical, 20210610) and centrifuged at 100,000 × g
and 4 °C for 1 h, after which the resulting supernatant was
collected.
Vessel extraction
Immediately
following
euthanasia
via
isoﬂurane
overdose
anesthesia, cardiac perfusion was conducted with cold PBS, then
brain tissues were excised and weighed. The tissues were
processed via vascular parenchyma isolation buffer comprising
10 mM HEPES (Servicebio, CR2207064), 141 mM NaCl (Aladdin,
111549), 4 mM KCl (Aladdin, P112134), 2.8 mM CaCl2 (Aladdin,
C290953), 1 mM MgSO4 (Aladdin, M433513), 1 mM NaH2PO4
(Aladdin, S433623), and 10 mM glucose (Servicebio, CR2112094).
To 500 μL of brain tissue homogenate, 1 mL of 26% (w/w) dextran
(Next Sage, 61212ES60) was added. Following thorough mixing
and a resting period of 15 min at 4 °C, the mixture was centrifuged
(15,800 × g, 15 min, 4 °C). The upper layer subsequently repre-
sented the parenchymal fraction, and the lower layer corre-
sponded to the vascular fraction. The vascular fraction was
washed with PBS 2 × 5 min for further detection.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
The parenchyma and blood vessels underwent comprehensive
homogenization using a tissue lysis mixture (Yase, 016c1050)
enriched with a phosphatase inhibitor (Servicebio, CR2302054)
and a protease inhibitor (Servicebio, CR2306008) at 70 Hz and
−20 °C. The tissues were allowed to fully lyse at 4 °C for 15 min.
The supernatant was collected via centrifugation at 14,000 × g and
4 °C for 10 min. The protein concentrations of various proteins,
including LRP1 (NOVUS, NBP3-00449), PACSIN2 (Anruike, YX-
160103M),
Rab5
(abbexa,
abx154598),
and
Aβ
(Invitrogen,
KMB3441), were determined via ELISA kits following the manu-
facturer’s protocols. For Aβ in the blood, the test was performed
directly according to the ELISA instructions. Aβ extracted by formic
acid needs to be neutralized with Tris base before testing. Protein
concentrations were calculated on the basis of the curve equation
(four-parameter ﬁt).
Confocal imaging
Confocal images were captured via a Leica Stellaris 5 confocal
microscope equipped with Diode 405, Argon, DPSS 561, and
HeNe633 lasers. Imaging was conducted at a resolution of
2048 × 2048 pixels and a scanning speed of ×100. Colocalization
analysis to derive PCC (r) was performed via the colocalization
plug-in for ImageJ.
STED imaging
STED nanoscopy experiments were performed under a Leica DMi8
confocal microscope equipped with a Leica TCS SP8 STED-ONE
uni. The dyes (TSA570, TSA620 and TSA750) were excited under an
STED laser. The emission signals were collected via HyD reﬂected
light detectors. The depletion beam was applied at wavelengths
of 592 nm, 660 nm, and 775 nm (50% power), with a resolution of
2048 × 2048 pixels and a scanning speed of ×100.
Tyramide signal ampliﬁcation (TSA) stain
Mouse brain tissue sections were deparafﬁnized with xylene and
hydrated through gradient alcohol dehydration. Following antigen
retrieval,
3%
H2O2
was
utilized
to
inactivate
endogenous
peroxidase (Biosarp, 22315828) for 10 min. Permeabilization of
the sections at room temperature for 10 min was achieved with
1% Triton X-100 (Biofroxx, 1139ML100). The sections were rinsed
with PBS and incubated with the primary antibody for 1 h at room
temperature. After washing with PBS, the samples were incubated
with the HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for 10 min. Sub-
sequent to a PBS rinse, the TSA ﬂuorescent solution (Absin,
abs50031) was applied and incubated at room temperature for
10 min. Antigen retrieval was subsequently conducted. The
aforementioned
steps
were
repeated
with
distinct
primary
antibodies, including antibodies against LRP1 (ABclonal, A1439,
1:100), Aβ (Servicebio, GB13414-1, 1:200), CD31 (Cell Signaling,
77699, 1:300), Rab5 (Thermo Fisher, PA5-88260, 1:200) and CD146
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
9
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

(Abcam, ab75769, 1:300). Various wavelengths of TSA, including
the TSA520, TSA570, TSA620, and TSA700 dyes, until multimeric
ﬂuorescence staining was achieved. The nuclei were stained with
DAPI (Solarbio, C0065) for 5 min and then sealed with antique-
nching sealing agent (Solarbio, S2100).
Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT)
imaging
APP/PS1 POs (12-month-old) mice were injected intravenously
with
the
commercial
Aβ
radiocontrast
agent
[18F]
AV-45
(2.8–3.2 MBq). Then, intracranial images of the mice were acquired
via
a micro-PET-CT
imager
(Inviscan,
France)
according
to
operation speciﬁcations. After a recovery period, saline (200 μL)
was intravenously injected into wild-type mice (3- and 12-month-
old) and sham APP/PS1 mice (12 months old). The APP/PS1 POs
were intravenously injected with 200 μL of A40-POs (10 g/L). After
12 h, all the mice were intravenously injected with [18F] AV-45
(2.8–3.2 MBq). Intracranial images of the mice were acquired via
the same imager.
Hematoxylin‒eosin (H&E) staining
Mice tissue sections (5 μm) were dewaxed and rehydrated. The
sections were stained with hematoxylin solution for 5 min,
immediately rinsed in running tap water for 10–15 s, followed
by incubation with hematoxylin differentiation solution (Service-
bio, G1039) for 10–15 s. Subsequently, the sections were treated
with hematoxylin bluing solution (Servicebio, G1040) for 30 s and
washed in running tap water. The sections were then stained with
eosin staining solution for 30 s, followed by washing with ethanol.
The slides were dehydrated through a gradient of ethanol (100%,
80%, 50%, 30%) and xylene. Seal the sections with quick-drying
neutral resin (ZSZSGBBIO, ZLI-9516).
Tissue clearing and staining
The paraformaldehyde-ﬁxed mouse brain were treated with 1/2
CUBIC-L solution (80 mL Milli-Q, 5 g Triton X-100, and 5 g
N-butyldiethanolamine (Aladdin, 102-79-4)) at 37 °C for 6 h. Then,
the solution was replaced with a CUBIC-L solution and incubated
at 37 °C for 15 days, with the new CUBIC-L solution being replaced
every 2 days. The brain tissues were subsequently washed three
times with staining buffer (1.5 M NaCl). The hyalinized brains were
transferred to staining buffer containing a vasculature probe
(Vector, DL-1178-1, 1:100) and an Aβ probe (Abcam, ab216983,
100 nM) for ﬂuorescence staining (RT, 3 days). The refractive index
was adjusted via a CUBIC-M solution (25 g Milli-Q, 45 g antipyrine
(Aladdin, 60-80-0), 30 g N-methylnicotinamide (Aladdin, 114-33-0),
and 125 μl of N-butyldiethanolamine)). Images were analyzed via
Amira and iMaris software.
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
Donepezil HCl (Aladdin, D129948) was dissolved and added to a
polymer ﬁlm preparing donepezil HCl@A40-POs, followed by
dialysis using a 3 kDa dialysis bag for 7 days. The concentration
of donepezil HCl in the dialysis ﬂuid was measured to calculate the
encapsulation efﬁciency. Sodium 1-decanesulfonate (Aladdin,
S100284) was dissolved in pure water (15.7416 mM/L) and ﬁltered.
Chromatographic grade acetonitrile solution and perchloric acid
were added, followed by ultrasonication for 10 min. Standard
solutions of donepezil HCl at concentrations of 250, 125, 62.5,
31.25, 15.625, and 7.8125 μg/mL were prepared. The content of
donepezil HCl was detected via an Agilent-1260 chromatograph at
a ﬂow rate of 1 mL/min, a column temperature of 35 °C, a volume
of 20 μl, and a detection signal at 271 nm.
Morris water maze (MWM) experiment
In each group, the mice were administered a caudal vein injection
daily (A40-POs, donepezil@A40-POs, donepezil, or saline), which
was continued for three days. The mice were subsequently
housed in a standard rearing environment for seven days to
acclimatize and recover. For the analysis, the pool was segmented
into four quadrants. From days 11 to 14 (days 375–378 of lifespan),
a platform was positioned in quadrant II, and the animals were
introduced into the thermostatic pool from each quadrant daily,
with time taken by the mice to locate the platform recorded as
escape latency. If the mice failed to reach the platform within
120 s, they were guided to it and remained there for 30 s. A spatial
probe (Stage II) was performed on day 15 (day 379 of lifespan).
Once the platform was removed, the mice were placed in the
water from the IV quadrant. The results of the spatial probe were
expressed as either the percentage of time the mice remained at
the original escape platform location or the number of times they
passed. Reverse place navigation trials were conducted from days
16 to 19 (day 380–383 of lifespan), with the platform positioned in
the IV quadrant which opposite the original platform location. The
animals repeated the regimen from days 11 to 14, and the reverse
escape latency was documented. On day 20 (day 384 of lifespan),
the platform was removed, and the mice were introduced into the
water from quadrant II. The results of the reverse spatial probe are
expressed as either the percentage of time that the animal spent
on the original platform position or the number of times it crossed
the location. In addition, 6 months later, the mice were subjected
to place navigation (stage V) and spatial probe (stage VI)
experiments again with the same methods and conditions. Animal
performance was recorded by the same tracking system (EthoVi-
sion XT, Noldus Information Technology) for each stage.
Sucrose preference
At the end of Stage IV and Stage VI, the sucrose preference of the
sham, APP/PS1 and APP/PS1 POs was tested. Each mouse was
housed individually and allowed to acclimatize to the cage, which
contained two bottles of standard pure water, for 2 days. One of
the bottles was subsequently ﬁlled with 2% sucrose solution. The
amount of water consumed by the mice was recorded, and the
water in each bottle was refreshed daily. Sucrose preference =
Sucrose water consumption/(Sucrose water consumption + Stan-
dard puriﬁed water consumption) × 100%
Nest construction
Three days after the sucrose preference experiment, each mouse
was housed individually and then adapted to a single-cage
environment for 7 days. Subsequently, 10 pieces of paper
(5 × 5 cm2) were added to each cage and evenly placed. After
4 days, the nesting test results were scored in accordance with the
improved 4-point scoring system.57 1 point, no visible tear, no
recognizable nest site; 2 points, no visible tear, nest site
recognizable; 3 points, partial tear, recognizable nest site; 4
points, sharpest tear, recognizable nest.
Digital western blot
Western blot analysis was performed via the Jess automated
digital
system
(ProteinSimple,
Santa
Clara,
CA,
USA)
with
12–230 kDa separation modules. Total protein concentrations
were determined via a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Biosharp,
BL520A). The samples were diluted in 1× sample buffer and 5×
master mix (ProteinSimple) to a ﬁnal loading concentration of
1 μg/μL, denatured at 95 °C for 5 min. They were then loaded into
wells at a volume of 3 μL per well. Denatured samples, blocking
buffer, primary antibodies, HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies
(Jess
modular
antibodies,
ProteinSimple),
wash
buffer,
and
chemiluminescent substrate (1:1 luminol-peroxidase mixture)
were sequentially loaded into the designated detection plate
wells. The primary antibodies used included rabbit anti-CD31
(1:50; Cell Signaling Technology, #77699), anti-CD146 (1:50;
Abmart, T55209), anti-NeuN (1:50; Abcam, ab177487), and anti-
β-actin (1:300; Servicebio) antibodies. Automated capillary electro-
phoresis, immunoblotting, and signal acquisition were performed
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
10
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

via the Jess system according to operation speciﬁcations. The data
were analyzed with Compass for Simple Western software (v6.2,
ProteinSimple).
Proximity ligation assay (PLA)
Protein‒protein interaction analysis was performed using the
Duolink® PLA Kit (Sigma‒Aldrich; DUO96000 and DUO96040)
strictly following the manufacturer’s operational protocol. The
brain slices of the mice were pre-stained with TSA dye for
pericytes (CD146, Abcam, ab75769), endothelial cells (CD31, Cell
Signaling, 77699), and astrocytes (GFAP, Invitrogen, PA5-16291).
After sodium azide neutralization pre-treatment, the antibodies,
LRP1 (Abcam, ab92544), PACSIN2 (Invitrogen, PA5--99032), and Aβ
(ABclonal, A24422), were conjugated to species-speciﬁc PLA
probes (DUO96040). Subsequent procedures inclouding incuba-
tion, hybridization, ligation, ampliﬁcation, and signal development
—were conducted according to the kit’s standard protocol. Nuclei
were counterstained with DAPI, and images were acquired via
confocal microscopy.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are included in the main text and
supplementary materials. Data can be accessed from the corresponding author upon
reasonable request, subject to compliance with consent agreements and applicable
data usage restrictions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This
study
was
supported
by
the
National
Key
R&D
Program
of
China
(2022YFC2009900), the Alzheimer’s Association New to the Field award, ERC
Consolidator grant H2020-ERC-2018-CoG (769798 CheSSTag), the Plan de Recupera-
cion Nacional Biotech for Health Project (ADNano), Activitat cientíﬁca dels grups de
recerca de Catalunya (SGR-Cat 2021), and the Spanish Research Agency Proyectos
I + D + I PID2020-119914RB-I00. We thank Liwen Qin (Core Facilities of West China
Hospital) and Kaifu Ruan (Huaxi MR Research Centre for their assistance with digital
western blotting. We would like to express our gratitude to the National
Supercomputing Center in Chengdu for their invaluable support in providing
computational resources and technical assistance during the data analysis and
simulation effort process.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Junyang Chen, Pan Xiang, Xiaohe Tian, and Giuseppe Battaglia were responsible for
drafting the manuscript. Junyang Chen conducted the experiments, including data
collection and analysis. Pan Xiang participated in the experimental work and
performed data veriﬁcation. Aroa Duro-Castano carried out chemical-related tasks,
including polymer synthesis, characterization, and validation. Huawei Cai, Bin Guo,
Xiqin Liu, Yifan Yu, Su Liu, Kui Luo, Bowen Ke, and Lorena Ruiz-Pérez reviewed and
conﬁrmed the experimental results and contributed to all phases of project planning
and implementation. Qiyong Gong, Xiaohe Tian, and Giuseppe Battaglia supervised
the overall progress of the study. Giuseppe Battaglia conceived and directed the
experimental design. All the authors have read and approved the article.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-025-02426-1.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests. Giuseppe
Battaglia is an associate editor of Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy, but
he has not been involved in the process of manuscript handling.
Ethical approval: All animal studies were conducted in accordance with the
guidelines set forth by the West China Hospital Animal Care Committee (IACUC-
approved project number: 20211475 A).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
REFERENCES
1. Hampel, H. et al. The amyloid-beta pathway in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Psy-
chiatry 26, 5481–5503 (2021).
2. Karran, E. & De Strooper, B. The amyloid hypothesis in Alzheimer disease: new
insights from new therapeutics. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 21, 306–318 (2022).
3. Kurz, C., Walker, L., Rauchmann, B. S. & Perneczky, R. Dysfunction of the blood‒
brain barrier in Alzheimer’s disease: evidence from human studies. Neuropathol.
Appl. Neurobiol. 48, e12782–12794 (2022).
4. Arvanitakis, Z., Capuano, A. W., Leurgans, S. E., Bennett, D. A. & Schneider, J. A.
Relation of cerebral vessel disease to Alzheimer’s disease dementia and cognitive
function in elderly people: a cross-sectional study. Lancet Neurol. 15, 934–943
(2016).
5. Kisler, K., Nelson, A. R., Montagne, A. & Zlokovic, B. V. Cerebral blood ﬂow reg-
ulation and neurovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
18, 419–434 (2017).
6. Iturria-Medina, Y. et al. Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzhei-
mer’s disease based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat. Commun. 7,
11934–11948 (2016).
7. Shibata, M. et al. Clearance of Alzheimer’s amyloid-(1-40) peptide from brain by
LDL receptor-related protein-1 at the blood-brain barrier. J. Clin. Investig. 106,
1489–1499 (2000).
8. Yamazaki, Y. & Kanekiyo, T. Blood-brain barrier dysfunction and the pathogenesis
of Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18, 1965–1984 (2017).
9. Zhao, Z., Nelson, A. R., Betsholtz, C. & Zlokovic, B. V. Establishment and dys-
function of the blood-brain barrier. Cell 163, 1064–1078 (2015).
10. Yu, Y., Yu, S., Battaglia, G. & Tian, X. Amyloid-β in Alzheimer’s disease: structure,
toxicity, distribution, treatment, and prospects. Ibrain 10, 266–289 (2024).
11. Ma, Q. et al. Blood-brain barrier-associated pericytes internalize and clear
aggregated amyloid-β42 by LRP1-dependent apolipoprotein E isoform-speciﬁc
mechanism. Mol. Neurodegener. 19, 27–40 (2024).
12. Petralla, S., Panayotova, M., Franchina, E., Fricker, G. & Puris, E. Low-density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 as a potential therapeutic target in Alz-
heimer’s disease. Pharmaceutics 16, 948–969 (2024).
13. Tarawneh, R. Microvascular contributions to Alzheimer disease pathogenesis: is
Alzheimer disease primarily an endotheliopathy? Biomolecules 13, 830–856
(2023).
14. Wardlaw, J. M. et al. Neuroimaging standards for research into small vessel dis-
ease and its contribution to aging and neurodegeneration. Lancet Neurol. 12,
822–838 (2013).
15. Jellinger, K. A. Alzheimer disease and cerebrovascular pathology: an update. J.
Neural Transm.109, 813–836 (2002).
16. Bennett, R. E. et al. Tau induces blood vessel abnormalities and angiogenesis-
related gene expression in P301L transgenic mice and human Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, e1289–e1298 (2018).
17. Moon, Y. et al. Blood‒brain barrier breakdown is linked to tau pathology and
neuronal injury in a differential manner according to amyloid deposition. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow. Metab. 43, 1813–1825 (2023).
18. Fisher, R. A., Miners, J. S. & Love, S. Pathological changes within the cerebral
vasculature
in
Alzheimer’s
disease:
new
perspectives.
Brain
Pathol.
32,
e13061–e13084 (2022).
19. Nation, D. A. et al. Blood‒brain barrier breakdown is an early biomarker of human
cognitive dysfunction. Nat. Med. 25, 270–276 (2019).
20. Sweeney, M. D., Kisler, K., Montagne, A., Toga, A. W. & Zlokovic, B. V. The role of
brain vasculature in neurodegenerative disorders. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1318–1331
(2018).
21. Liu, Q. et al. Amyloid precursor protein regulates brain apolipoprotein E and
cholesterol metabolism through lipoprotein receptor LRP1. Neuron 56, 66–78
(2007).
22. Kanekiyo, T. & Bu, G. The low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 and
amyloid-β clearance in Alzheimer's disease. Front. Aging Neurosci. 6, 93–105
(2014).
23. Rauch, J. N. et al. LRP1 is a master regulator of tau uptake and spread. Nature 580,
381–385 (2020).
24. Cooper, J. M. et al. Regulation of tau internalization, degradation, and seeding by
LRP1 reveals multiple pathways for tau catabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 296,
100715–100732 (2021).
25. Deane, R. et al. LRP/Amyloid β-Peptide interaction mediates differential brain
efﬂux of Aβ isoforms. Neuron 43, 333–344 (2004).
26. Yamada, K. et al. The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 mediates
uptake of amyloid β peptides in an in vitro model of the blood‒brain barrier cells.
J. Biol. Chem. 283, 34554–34562 (2008).
27. Jaeger, L. B. et al. Testing the neurovascular hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease:
LRP-1 antisense reduces blood‒brain barrier clearance, increases brain levels
of amyloid-β protein, and impairs cognition. J. Alzheimer Dis. 17, 553–570
(2009).
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
11
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331 

28. Kanekiyo, T. et al. Neuronal clearance of amyloid-β by endocytic receptor LRP1. J.
Neurosci. 33, 19276–19283 (2013).
29. Storck, S. E. et al. Endothelial LRP1 transports amyloid-β1-42 across the blood‒
brain barrier. J. Clin. Investig. 126, 123–136 (2016).
30. Montagne, A. et al. Blood‒brain barrier breakdown in the aging human hippo-
campus. Neuron 85, 296–302 (2015).
31. Montagne, A. et al. APOE4 leads to blood‒brain barrier dysfunction predicting
cognitive decline. Nature 581, 71–76 (2020).
32. Nikolakopoulou, A. M. et al. Endothelial LRP1 protects against neurodegeneration
by blocking cyclophilin A. J. Exp. Med. 218, 11–21 (2021).
33. Van Gool, B. et al. LRP1 has a predominant role in production over clearance of
Aβ in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 56, 7234–7245
(2019).
34. Govindpani, K. et al. Vascular dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: a prelude to the
pathological process or a consequence of it? J. Clin. Med. 8, 651–708 (2019).
35. Tian, Y., Chang, J. C., Fan, E. Y., Flajolet, M. & Greengard, P. Adaptor complex AP2/
PICALM, through interaction with LC3, targets Alzheimer’s APP-CTF for terminal
degradation via autophagy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 17071–17076 (2013).
36. Zhao, Z. et al. Central role for PICALM in amyloid-β blood‒brain barrier trans-
cytosis and clearance. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 978–987 (2015).
37. Storck, S. et al. The concerted amyloid-beta clearance of lrp1 and abcb1/p-gp
across the blood‒brain barrier is linked by picalm. Brain Behav. Immun. 73, 21–33
(2018).
38. Vanlandingham, P. A. & Ceresa, B. P. Rab7 regulates late endocytic trafﬁcking
downstream of multivesicular body biogenesis and cargo sequestration. J. Biol.
Chem. 284, 12110–12124 (2009).
39. McEwan, D. G. PLEKHM1 regulates autophagosome-lysosome fusion through
HOPS complex and LC3/GABARAP proteins. Mol. Cell 57, 39–54 (2015).
40. Tian, X. et al. On the shuttling across the blood‒brain barrier via tubule formation:
mechanism and cargo avidity bias. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc4397–eabc4412 (2020).
41. M. Leite, D. et al. Syndapin-2 mediated transcytosis of amyloid-beta across the
blood-brain barrier. Brain Commun. 4, fcac039–058 (2022).
42. Tian, X. et al. LRP-1-mediated intracellular antibody delivery to the central ner-
vous system. Sci. Rep. 5, 11990–12004 (2015).
43. Yu, Y. J. et al. Boosting brain uptake of a therapeutic antibody by reducing its
afﬁnity for a transcytosis target. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 84–44 (2011).
44. Zuchero, Y. J. et al. Discovery of novel blood-brain barrier targets to enhance
brain uptake of therapeutic antibodies. Neuron 89, 70–82 (2016).
45. Arguello, A. et al. Molecular architecture determines brain delivery of a transferrin
receptor-targeted lysosomal enzyme. J. Exp. Med. 219, e20211057–e20211075
(2022).
46. Niewoehner, J. et al. Increased brain penetration and potency of a therapeutic
antibody using a monovalent molecular shuttle. Neuron 81, 49–60 (2014).
47. Terstappen, G. C., Meyer, A. H., Bell, R. D. & Zhang, W. Strategies for delivering
therapeutics across the blood-brain barrier. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 20, 362–383
(2021).
48. Tian, X., Angioletti-Uberti, S. & Battaglia, G. On the design of precision nano-
medicines. Sci. Adv. 6, aat0919–0937 (2020).
49. Michael Eisenstein 2021: Anti-amyloid antibodies take a bumpy road to the clinic.
Nature 627, 252–253 (2024).
50. Jankowsky, J. L. et al. Mutant presenilins speciﬁcally elevate the levels of the 42
residue beta-amyloid peptide in vivo: evidence for augmentation of a 42-speciﬁc
gamma secretase. Hum. Mol. Genet. 13, 159–170 (2004).
51. Ginsberg, S. D. et al. Regional selectivity of rab5 and rab7 protein upregulation in
mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimer Dis. 22, 631–639
(2010).
52. Xu, W., Fang, F., Ding, J. & Wu, C. Dysregulation of rab5-mediated endocytic
pathways in Alzheimer’s disease. Trafﬁc 19, 253–262 (2018).
53. Clark, C. M. et al. Use of ﬂorbetapir-PET for imaging β-amyloid pathology. JAMA
305, 275–283 (2011).
54. Mathys, H. et al. Single-cell multiregion dissection of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature
632, 858–868 (2024).
55. Sweeney, M. D., Sagare, A. P. & Zlokovic, B. V. Blood-brain barrier breakdown in
Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14,
133–150 (2018).
56. Knopman, D. S. et al. Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 7, 33 (2021).
57. Guo, J.-W. et al. Erythrocyte membrane-encapsulated celecoxib improves the
cognitive decline of Alzheimer’s disease by concurrently inducing neurogenesis
and reducing apoptosis in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Biomaterials 145, 106–127
(2017).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from
the
copyright
holder.
To
view
a
copy
of
this
licence,
visit
http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
Rapid amyloid-β clearance and cognitive recovery through. . .
Chen et al.
12
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy  (2025) 10:331