1020   
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
Gut microbiome and health: mechanistic insights
Willem M de Vos  ‍ ‍ ,1,2 Herbert Tilg  ‍ ‍ ,3 Matthias Van Hul  ‍ ‍ ,4 Patrice D Cani  ‍ ‍ 4
To cite: de Vos WM, Tilg H, 
Van Hul M, et al. Gut 
2022;71:1020–1032.
1Human Microbiome Research 
Program, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland
2Laboratory of Microbiology, 
Wageningen University, 
Wageningen, The Netherlands
3Department of Internal 
Medicine I, Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology, Endocrinology & 
Metabolism, Medical University 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
4Louvain Drug Research 
Institute (LDRI), Metabolism 
and Nutrition research group 
(MNUT), UCLouvain, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Walloon 
Excellence in Life Sciences 
and BIOtechnology (WELBIO), 
Brussels, Belgium
Correspondence to
Professor Patrice D Cani, 
Louvain Drug Research Institute, 
WELBIO, Metabolism and 
Nutrition, UCLouvain, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 
Belgium;  
​patrice.​cani@​uclouvain.​be
WMdV, HT, MVH and PDC 
contributed equally.
Received 15 December 2021
Accepted 14 January 2022
Published Online First 
1 February 2022
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2022. Re-­use 
permitted under CC BY. 
Published by BMJ.
ABSTRACT
The gut microbiota is now considered as one of the key 
elements contributing to the regulation of host health. 
Virtually all our body sites are colonised by microbes 
suggesting different types of crosstalk with our organs. 
Because of the development of molecular tools and 
techniques (ie, metagenomic, metabolomic, lipidomic, 
metatranscriptomic), the complex interactions occurring 
between the host and the different microorganisms 
are progressively being deciphered. Nowadays, gut 
microbiota deviations are linked with many diseases 
including obesity, type 2 diabetes, hepatic steatosis, 
intestinal bowel diseases (IBDs) and several types of 
cancer. Thus, suggesting that various pathways involved 
in immunity, energy, lipid and glucose metabolism are 
affected.
In this review, specific attention is given to provide a 
critical evaluation of the current understanding in this 
field. Numerous molecular mechanisms explaining 
how gut bacteria might be causally linked with the 
protection or the onset of diseases are discussed. 
We examine well-­established metabolites (ie, short-­
chain fatty acids, bile acids, trimethylamine N-­oxide) 
and extend this to more recently identified molecular 
actors (ie, endocannabinoids, bioactive lipids, phenolic-­
derived compounds, advanced glycation end products 
and enterosynes) and their specific receptors such as 
peroxisome proliferator-­activated receptor alpha (PPARα) 
and gamma (PPARγ), aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), 
and G protein-­coupled receptors (ie, GPR41, GPR43, 
GPR119, Takeda G protein-­coupled receptor 5).
Altogether, understanding the complexity and the 
molecular aspects linking gut microbes to health will 
help to set the basis for novel therapies that are already 
being developed.
THE HUMAN GUT MICROBIOME
The human microbiome is considered here as the 
collection of microbes, their genes and their prod-
ucts that colonise our body since birth and are 
transferred vertically.1 2 While all body sites are 
colonised (figure 1), the highest microbial numbers 
are found in the gut that has been studied exten-
sively.3 Here, we review the main and most recent 
findings that address the way gut microbes, their 
activities and mediator molecules can contribute to 
our health.
In healthy subjects, the oral and saliva microbi-
omes contain millions of microbes that are swal-
lowed daily with our food, but their persistence in 
the gut is impeded by many factors, including the 
acidity of the stomach, the production of bile acids 
(BAs), digestive enzymes and antimicrobial proteins 
in the duodenum and beyond. A great number of 
other major variables affect further downstream 
microbial colonisation, such as chemical parameters 
like pH, oxygen concentrations and redox poten-
tial, the biological production of mucus, bile and 
antibodies, as well as physical aspects, including gut 
architecture, peristalsis and transit times (figure 1). 
Hence, a concentration gradient of microbes is found 
along the small intestine, as microbial abundance in 
duodenal aspirates were found to be a 1000-­fold 
lower than that of oral samples, although consisting 
of somewhat similar microbial taxa.4 Consequently, 
the small intestine contains an increasing number 
of thousands to several hundred million of cells 
per gram of content with partly oxygen-­tolerant 
Firmicutes and Proteobacteria as major phyla.5 6 
This all culminates in the lower gut where climax 
communities of up to 100 billion cells per gram 
reside for up to a few days, since transit in the 
colon is over a dozen times longer than that in the 
small intestine. Hence, the colonic microbiome is 
dominated by mainly anaerobic bacteria, including 
thousands of species and millions of genes, distrib-
uted among the major phyla of Firmicutes (predom-
inantly Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae), 
Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria and 
Verrucomicrobia 
(Akkermansia)7–10 
(figure 
1). 
Excreted as faeces, it is this biomass that makes 
up what is usually termed the gut microbiome that 
has been associated with a plethora of diseases and 
is highly modifiable by diet and drugs (table 1). It 
provides the starting material for faecal microbiota 
transplantation (FMT) that has been shown to cure 
patients with recurrent Clostridioides difficile infec-
tions and other diseases.11–15
It is important to note that we can live without a 
colon but not without a small intestine that features 
the largest mucosal surfaces of our body where our 
food is further digested and taken up, contains most 
of the gut receptors, immune and nerve cells and 
is increasingly implied in essential microbe-­host 
crosstalk. While hard to approach experimentally, 
a variety of new technologies have been developed 
in recent years, which include catheters or capsules 
to sample, deliver or inspect.16–18 In addition, small 
intestinal effluent obtained from ileostomies was 
studied and found to contain up to 100 million 
microbes per gram wet weight that formed person-
alised communities, showing day and night rhythms 
reflecting food intake and processing.19 Functional 
(transcriptomics and targeted metabolomics) and 
metagenomic analysis of such samples revealed the 
colonising Streptococcus and Lactobacillus spp to 
express a large reservoir of highly effective trans-
port systems that compete with the host for sugar 
uptake and use, generating lactate and acetate 
that are substrates for Veillonella spp and are 
converted then into propionate.20 Recent studies 
using specially developed catheters confirmed these 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1021
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
communities and revealed that the duodenal microbiota exhib-
ited higher compositional dynamics correlating with the pH as 
compared with the jejunum, which is the intestinal compart-
ment with the largest surface and is responsible for most sugar, 
protein and lipid digestion and absorption.5 21 While there is a 
continuum between the duodenum and jejunum, the more prox-
imal ileum has a large mucus layer, reminiscent of the colon, 
and is colonised with several anaerobes, including members of 
the Bacteroidia, Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae, some of 
which are also implied in BAs transformation (see section bioac-
tive lipids/bile acids).21 22
The duodenum and its microbes have emerged as a major 
factor in a variety of metabolic and possibly immune diseases.23 
Support for this and further new insight derived from duodenal 
delivery of FMT that alleviated symptoms of metabolic syndrome 
or autoimmune disease.24–26 Moreover, duodenal perfusions of 
live or dead Lactobacillus spp have been found to affect the host 
immune response, providing an experimental system for human 
discovery.27–29 This has been recently exploited for the analysis 
of a single duodenal dose of Anaerobutyricum soehngenii (previ-
ously known as Eubacterium hallii)30 that increased the duodenal 
expression level of the gene for regenerating islet-­protein 1B 
almost 10-­fold and also increased serum glucagon-­like peptide-­1 
(GLP-­1) and secondary bile salts in metabolic syndrome subjects, 
thereby potentially explaining their improved response to 
glucose.31 32
Although there is an evident vertical gradient in the gut, a 
horizontal gradient also exists and has been studied most exten-
sively in the colon. Importantly, there exist oxygen, redox and 
mucus gradients that starts at the mucosal surface and stretches 
to the lumen, resulting in architecture of the microbial commu-
nities.33 Broadly speaking, these start with mucus-­degrading 
consortia that are usually dominated by the mucolytic and 
microaerophilic Akkermansia muciniphila and end with strictly 
anaerobic communities, including butyrate-­producing and 
propionate-­producing Ruminococcaceae, Lachnospiraceae and 
Bacteroidia as well as homoacetogens and methanogens that 
convert hydrogen and carbon dioxide into acetate or methane, 
respectively.
Figure 1  Total abundance of bacteria according to the different body sites. Bounds for bacteria number in different organs, derived from bacterial 
concentrations and volume.190 191
Table 1  PubMed-­listed articles regarding topics, “microbiome and 
diseases”
Diseases
PubMed search PubMed search
“disease & 
microbiome”
“disease & microbiome/
clinical trial”
IBDs
2867
36
Coeliac disease
524
20
IBS
1516
96
Colorectal carcinoma
1525
43
Liver disease
4927
113
Pancreatic disease
766
20
Obesity
7146
292
Type 2 diabetes
2155
99
Non-­alcoholic fatty liver disease
1383
31
PubMed search 15 December 2021.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1022
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
THE GUT MICROBIOME AND VARIOUS INTESTINAL AND 
EXTRAINTESTINAL DISEASES
The gut microbiome has been associated with several intestinal 
and extraintestinal disorders.34 Many large studies investigating 
the gut microbiome and its relevance have been performed in 
specific gastrointestinal (GI) disorders such as intestinal bowel 
diseases (IBDs),35 coeliac disease,36 irritable bowel syndrome 
(IBS),37 colorectal cancer (CRC),38 chronic liver diseases39 40 or 
pancreatic disorders.41 42 IBDs, prototypic inflammatory disor-
ders of the intestine, are associated with deviating gut micro-
biome composition and indeed facultative anaerobes outgrow 
have been reported, especially in the context of active inflam-
mation and metabolite disturbances including BAs, short chain 
fatty acids (SCFAs) and acylcarnitine pathways.35 Longitudinal 
analysis in infants at risk for coeliac disease, another frequent 
inflammatory intestinal disorder, demonstrated an increased 
presence of several microbial species such as Dialister invisus, 
Parabacteroides spp or Lachnospiraceae and certain metabolites 
such as tryptophan metabolites before disease onset whereas 
various anti-­inflammatory strains such as Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii or Clostridium clostridioforme were decreased.36 
IBS, a frequent functional disorder of the GI tract, has been 
associated with IBS subtype-­specific changes in the gut micro-
biome and related metabolites, with purine metabolism being 
especially affected.37 CRC, the most common malignancy in the 
lower gut, has been convincingly correlated with a disturbed 
gut microbiome and implicated certain bacteria such as Fuso-
bacterium nucleatum, Escherichia coli or Bacteroides fragilis, 
some of which are derived from the oral microbiome.38 Chronic 
liver diseases, especially advanced liver diseases such as liver 
cirrhosis, are characterised by profound microbial aberrations 
and data from interventional studies with prebiotics, probiotics 
and antibiotics have well established that the gut microbiome 
plays a key role in these diseases.40 Pancreatic adenocarcinoma, 
an increasingly recognised malignancy in the Western world, has 
also been linked to an impaired gut microbiome as intratumoral 
microbiome composition affects the host immune response and 
natural history of the disease.42
The gut microbiome has been extensively investigated in the 
past years in obesity and obesity-­related disorders such as type 
2 diabetes (T2D) and non-­alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). 
Many studies have tried to link an altered gut microbiome to 
obesity and indeed interventional studies with certain bacterial 
strains such as Akkermansia muciniphila have shown effects on 
obesity-­related parameters.43 T2D has also been characterised 
by an impaired gut microbiome in Asian and European popula-
tions.44 45 In T2D, microbial variations were strongly correlated 
with the presence of insulin resistance and several studies implied 
that the gut microbiome affects glucose regulation.46 NAFLD is 
currently the most common chronic liver disease in the Western 
world and is considered a prototypic metabolic disorder at 
the interface of obesity, metabolic syndrome and T2D. There 
is growing evidence that the gut microbiome-­liver axis plays a 
role in NAFLD, especially in cases of fibrosis and progression 
towards more advanced disease stages, such as non-­alcoholic 
hepatic steatosis.47 Several studies have now demonstrated that 
NAFLD is characterised by a bloom in certain Enterobacteria-
ceae, E. coli and a decrease in F. prausnitzii. Recent data also 
suggest that in NAFLD microbiome deviations and instability 
may exist over many years and might even precede development 
of NAFLD and T2D.48 There is a growing number of GI and 
metabolic disorders where the gut microbiome has been investi-
gated (see table 1 for an overview).
GUT MICROBES AND METABOLIC DISORDERS: MOLECULAR 
ACTORS
The gut bacterial community plays an important role in the regu-
lation of multiple aspects of metabolic disorders. This regula-
tion depends, among other things, on the production of a wide 
variety of metabolites by the microbiota and on their interactions 
with receptors on host cells that can activate or inhibit signalling 
pathways, and either be beneficial and detrimental to the host’s 
health (figure 2).
The bacterial metabolites involved in these interactions are 
very diverse and range from small molecules to large macromol-
ecules. They include by-­products of bacterial metabolism, such 
as SCFAs, and complex macromolecules necessary for bacterial 
integrity, such as peptidoglycan and lipopolysaccharides (LPS) 
(figure 2).
The abundance and availability of these metabolites are depen-
dent on the microbial composition and are therefore subject to 
modulation by diet and environmental factors.49–51 The main 
molecular actors are discussed below.
Short chain fatty acids and impact on host health: molecular 
mechanisms
The small intestine is highly specialised in the break-
down, emulsification and absorption of nutrients and 
few nutrients will escape digestion. In normal condi-
tions, for example, <5 g/day of fat will reach the colon. 
The same principle is true for the digestion and absorp-
tion of simple carbohydrates (broken down into sugar 
molecules) and most proteins (converted into amino 
acids), although, depending on the level of intake, some 
proteins will reach the colon. Conversely, complex 
carbohydrates, such as dietary fibres are non-­digestible, 
meaning that the body lacks the necessary enzymes to 
digest them allowing them to escape digestion in the 
small intestine. In the colon, however, they can be used 
as an energy source by specific resident bacteria. Various 
Figure 2  Molecules and metabolites produced by the gut microbiota 
according to the nutrients or metabolic source and their derived 
compounds. BSCFA, branched SCFA; LPS, lipopolysaccharides; PAMPs, 
pathogen-­associated molecular patterns; SCFA, short chain fatty acids.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1023
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
gut microbes will contribute to the metabolisation of 
these non-­digestible carbohydrates into different SCFAs 
molecules (eg, acetate, butyrate and propionate). SCFAs 
are chemically well-­characterised and their impact on 
health has already been extensively documented.52–54 
These compounds regulate numerous metabolic path-
ways in the gut and at distance such as in the liver, the 
adipose tissue, the muscles and the brain (figure 3).55–57 
Nowadays, these microbial metabolites are known to 
contribute to numerous physiological effects ranging 
Figure 3  Molecular mechanisms linking gut microbiota and host health in both healthy and pathological situation. In healthy situation, colonocytes 
use butyrate as energy substrate via the beta-­oxidation in the mitochondria, thereby consuming oxygen and directly contributing to maintain 
anaerobic condition in the lumen. Butyrate also binds to peroxisome proliferator-­activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) which in turn repress inducible 
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), decreases nitric oxide production (NO) and eventually nitrate production. Conversely, in pathological situations low 
butyrate content in the lumen is associated with lower PPARγ activity, increased glycolysis and lower oxygen consumption. This is associated with 
a higher expression of iNOS which in turn produces more NO and eventually increases nitrates availability for specific pathogens. Butyrate can also 
stimulate immune cells such as regulatory T cells (Treg) to reduce inflammation. The nuclear transcription factor aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is 
highly expressed and activated in healthy colonocytes, whereas agonists of AhR are lower or reduced AhR activity can lead to altered gut barrier 
function. Enteroendocrine cells (L-­cells) are expressing several key receptors activated by short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), specific endocannabinoids 
(eCBs) and bile acids (BAs). Activating these receptors increase the secretion of key gut peptides such as glucagon-­like peptide (GLP)-­1, GLP-­2 and 
peptide YY (PYY). Altogether, the interaction between the gut microbes and these molecular actors contributes to reduce intestinal permeability, 
to improve insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity, to reduce food intake, to lower plasma lipids and to avoid hepatic steatosis and metabolic 
endotoxaemia. All these effects are associated with lower inflammation. Conversely, opposite effects have been observed in pathological situations.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1024
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
from the modulation of energy homeostasis, glucose/
lipid metabolism, inflammation and even immunity and 
cancer.52
Thanks to a series of experimental studies, many of the molec-
ular mechanisms by which a diet enriched with fermentable 
dietary fibres (eg, prebiotics) are able to decrease body weight 
gain, fat mass development, insulin resistance and energy intake 
have been discovered.58–62 Among them, it was found that 
modulating the gut microbiota using prebiotics led to a higher 
endogenous production (ie, mRNA and peptides) and portal 
vein secretion of several gut peptides produced by the L-­cells 
such as GLP-­1, GLP-­2 and peptide YY (PYY) (figure 3).59–61 63–65
These effects are not exclusively limited to one type of 
fermentable carbohydrates since the microbial fermentation of 
resistant starches or arabinoxylans into SCFAs produces similar 
physiological effects linked to increased plasma GLP-­1 and PYY 
levels.66–69 However, the chemical structure of the fermentable 
fibres is directly related to the SCFA production profile since 
the quantity of butyrate, acetate or propionate generated will 
depend on the type of fibres. For example, inulin is described as 
propionogenic, whereas resistant starches are more butyrogenic. 
Of note, several colonic bacteria use alternative pathways to also 
produce butyrate from amino acids such as lysine or propionate 
from plant compounds such as phytate.70 71 It is worth noting 
that the sources of SCFAs are derived from the diet and they can 
originate from the host itself via the fermentation of the intes-
tinal mucus that covers the intestinal epithelial cells.72
SCFAs stimulate the secretion of gut peptides by acting on 
specific G-­protein-­coupled receptors expressed at the surface 
of the enteroendocrine L-­cells that are specifically abundant 
in the terminal ileum and colon. These receptors, named G 
protein-­coupled receptor (GPR)43 (or free fatty acid receptor 2 
(FFAR2)) and GPR41 (or FFAR3) (figure 4),73 are also expressed 
in a wide variety of tissues and cell types (eg, adipocytes, 
immune cells).74–76 The key role played by the microbiome on 
the secretion of the gut peptides has been elucidated by using 
mouse models lacking either GPR43 or GPR41. Mice lacking 
these receptors exhibit reduced secretion of GLP-­1 and PYY after 
exposure to SCFAs or specific prebiotics (figure 3).77–79
In addition to their well-­known role and mechanisms of 
action, some SCFAs might also exert different functions from 
what has previously been thought. For example, butyrate has 
been described many times as an essential energy source for the 
colonic cells to proliferate and maintain the gut barrier. However, 
recent evidence shows that butyrate also strongly influences the 
microbial environment by communicating with colonic cells. 
Indeed, the abundance of oxygen in the luminal part of the gut 
and its gradually decreasing concentration towards the epithe-
lium is a key requirement for anaerobic bacteria to remain in 
the close vicinity of the epithelium as opposed to facultative 
anaerobes such as Enterobacteriaceae (phylum Proteobacteria) 
that have been shown to increase the risk of intestinal inflam-
mation (figure  3).80 81 Butyrate contributes to control of the 
anaerobic condition in the colon by activating the β-oxidation 
in the mitochondria. By activating the nuclear receptor peroxi-
some proliferator-­activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) in the 
colonic cells, butyrate limits the diffusion of oxygen from the 
colonocytes to the luminal part, thereby maintaining the anaer-
obic conditions. The activation of PPARγ also represses the 
expression of the gene encoding inducible nitric oxide synthase, 
thereby reducing NO production and ultimately luminal nitrate 
levels that are specific energy sources used for the proliferation 
of putative pathogenic facultative anaerobes (Enterobacteria-
ceae) (figure 3).
Similar observations have been done in humans with severe 
intestinal inflammation, such as during IBD, cancer, obesity and 
diabetes,52 82–84 in which an increased abundance of Enterobac-
teriaceae has been detected.
Strikingly, numerous papers are pointing to the fact that all 
these diseases are also associated with a decreased abundance of 
bacteria that produce SCFAs, mostly propionate and butyrate.85 
This is the case for instance of the bacteria F. prausnitzii, A. 
muciniphila and more recently Dysosmobacter welbionis.86 A 
specific case is made for Anaerostipes and Anaerobutyricum spp 
that generate butyrate from lactate in the presence of acetate 
Figure 4  Colonocytes and endocrine cells express a variety of 
receptors able to sense and transmit signals from the microbial 
environment. Microbial/Pathogen-­associated molecular patterns 
(PAMPs), lipopolyscaccharides (LPS) from the microbiota are detected 
by pattern recognition receptors, including toll-­like receptors (TLRs). 
Amuc_1100 is a protein expressed on the outer membrane of 
Akkermansia muciniphila and which has been shown to signal through 
TLR2 to improve gut barrier function and reduce inflammation. 
Metabolites secreted by certain microbes (eg, endocannabinoids 
(eCBs)), generated by microbial digestion of dietary components (eg, 
short chain fatty acids (SCFAs)) or by transformation of host-­derived 
factors (eg, eCBs and bile acids) can be sensed through various 
receptors and pathways to alter intestinal integrity and host health. 
CB1, CB2, cannabinoid receptor type 1 and type 2; TRPV1, transient 
receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1; FXR, 
farnesoid X receptor; AhR, aryl hydrocarbon receptor; GPR119, GPR43, 
GPR41, G-­protein coupled receptor 119, 43 and 41; MYD88, myeloid 
differentiation primary response 88; PPARα/γ, peroxisome proliferator-­
activated receptors alpha and gamma; TGR5, Takeda G protein-­coupled 
receptor 5.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1025
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
using the acetyl-­CoA pathway.87 These can form trophic chains 
in the small intestine as well as the colon where a variety of 
bacteria produce lactate. Accumulation of lactate, an undesired 
acid, in the gut environment results in GI disorders, potentially 
explaining some benefits of interventions with butyrogenic A. 
soehngenii in metabolic syndrome subjects.32 88
Besides propionate and butyrate, the impact of succinate is also 
being investigated. Succinate is best known as an intermediate of 
the Krebs cycle and considered as a substrate for mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation, but is also a metabolic product from 
bacteria. In this context, succinate has been classically ignored 
because it was considered as being mainly a key intermediate 
in propionate synthesis. Currently, the role of succinate remains 
largely a matter of debate89 as there have been reports of both 
beneficial and opposite associations between succinate and 
insulin resistance, obesity and inflammation.90–93
Lipopolyscaccharides/Pathogen-associated molecular patterns
The gut barrier is a complex and dynamic collection of phys-
ical and chemical structures that surveil the environment and 
protects the host from microbial invaders and harmful stimuli. 
Some of these hazardous components coming from the environ-
ment are the so-­called pathogen-­associated molecular patterns 
(PAMPs), of which bacterial LPS are the prototypical class.94
LPS, endotoxins found on the cell membranes of Gram-­
negative bacteria, are potent activators of the inflammatory 
response and release of even small amounts of LPS into the 
circulation are sufficient to elicit an inflammatory response.
LPS and other PAMPs exert their activity through activation of 
specific pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that sense micro-
organisms and infectious agents and signal a defensive response. 
There are four major subfamilies of PRRs: the toll-­like recep-
tors (TLRs), the nucleotide-­binding oligomerisation domain-
leucine-­rich repeats (LRR)-­containing receptors, the retinoic 
acid-­inducible gene 1 (RIG-­1)-­like receptors (aka RIG-­1-­like 
helicases) and the C-­type lectin receptors.95 Among those the 
TLRs, a family of receptors comprising 10 members in human 
(13 in mice), are the best characterised. Each of the TLRs medi-
ates responses to distinct microbial components derived from 
pathogens. Two typical examples are TLR2, which senses bacte-
rial lipoproteins,96 and TLR4, which recognises bacterial LPS.97 
Together the TLRs cover a wide range of both external stimuli 
(PAMPs)98 and internal signals derived from tissue damage 
(damage-­associated molecular patterns (DAMPs)) (figures 3 and 
4).99 These ligands come in many forms and sizes: from nucleic 
acids to lipids, from small compounds to macromolecules. TLRs 
are widely distributed in immune cells including macrophages, 
neutrophils, dendritic cells, natural killer cells, mast cells, 
basophils and eosinophils,99 but also in other body cells, such 
as intestinal epithelial cells. Their activation induces antigen-­
presenting cell activation, thereby bridging the innate and the 
adaptive immune responses, and stimulates signalling cascades as 
an attempt to fend off microbial invaders or repair the damaged 
tissue. Although this inflammatory response is required to 
eliminate the infection, excessive activation of TLRs can lead 
to disruption of immune homeostasis and the sustained pro-­
inflammatory cytokines and chemokine production can increase 
the risk of inflammatory diseases and autoimmune disorders. 
This is the case in metabolic endotoxaemia, in which high-­fat 
diet and weight gain have been associated with a higher gut 
permeability and subsequent systemic (mild) elevation in circu-
lating plasma LPS.100 This causes a state of low-­grade inflam-
mation, which is a pathological feature of a range of chronic 
conditions including T2D, NAFLD, chronic kidney disease and 
atherosclerosis.38 39 101 102 Interestingly, LPS from different types 
of bacteria have distinct effects on gut-­barrier function, adipose 
inflammation, intestinal glucose absorption, blood glucose, 
insulin and incretins, indicating that the net effect of metabolic 
endotoxaemia levels on host metabolism can vary in function of 
gut microbiota composition.103
Disruption of PRRs expression has been associated with alter-
ations in the microbiota composition that favour inflammation. 
For example, mice deficient in TLR5, which is activated by 
bacterial flagellin, develop colitis or metabolic syndrome, associ-
ated with an altered microbiota.104 105
The TLR activation of downstream signalling pathways has 
been shown to be dependent on myeloid differentiation factor 
88 protein (MyD88) (figure 4). MyD88 is an essential adaptor 
protein for all TLRs, except TLR3106 and deletion of MyD88 
in the intestines partially protects against diet-­induced obesity, 
diabetes and inflammation and increases anti-­inflammatory 
endocannabinoids (eCBs), restores antimicrobial peptides 
production and increases intestinal regulatory T cells during 
diet-­induced obesity.107
Although many questions remain to be answered before we 
have a full understanding of how PAMS/DAMPS, PRRs, the 
microbiome and disease state interact, our growing under-
standing of this complex interplay is opening new therapeutic 
possibilities for inflammation-­dependent disorders.
Bioactive lipids
Endocannabinoid system
Over the last two decades, the eCB system has been widely 
explored because of its extensive range of physiological effects. 
Among its pleiotropic effects, the eCB signalling system appears 
to play a key role in regulating energy, glucose and lipid metab-
olism but also in immunity, inflammation and more recently in 
microbiota-­host interactions.108109
Historically, it was in 1988 that the first endogenous cannabi-
noid receptor type 1 (CB1) was identified as being activated by 
the psychoactive compound of Cannabis sativa, Δ9-­tetrahydro-
cannabinol,110 followed by the discovery of a second receptor in 
1993, the cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CB2).111 Both receptors 
are GPRs and share common signalling mechanisms.112 The first 
endogenous agonist identified was anandamide (N-­arachido-
noylethanolamide (AEA)). AEA is one of the key members of 
a large group of bioactive lipids that belong to the N-­acyletha-
nolamine (NAE) family.113 The second key ligand identified was 
2-­arachidonoylglycerol (2-­AG).114 Since the discovery of these 
two major compounds, the eCB family has been expanded and 
is no longer restricted to only eCBs with specific activity on CB1 
and CB2 receptors. For example, some eCBs also interact with 
PPARα and PPARγ, as well as with other membrane receptors 
such as GPR55, or transient receptor potential vanilloid type-­1 
(TRPV1) (figure  4). Besides the so-­called ‘true’ eCBs, that is, 
eCBs able to bind CB1 and CB2, numerous other compounds 
with structural resemblance to the prototypical eCBs have been 
shown to interfere with the eCB response without directly 
activating CB1 or CB2 eCB receptors. All these molecules are 
referred to as eCB-­like compounds or congeners and are bioac-
tive lipids including other NAEs or members of the acylglycerol 
family.115 116 However, eCB-­like compounds can also exert phar-
macological activity of their own. For example, N-­oleoyletha-
nolamine (OEA) or N-­palmitoylethanolamine (PEA) can activate 
PPARα and TRPV1, and OEA, N-­linoleylethanolamine (LEA) 
and 2-­oleoylglycerol (2-­OG) are able to activate GPR119.117 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1026
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
More recently, it was shown that both 1-­palmitoylglycerol (1-­PG) 
and 2-­palmitoylglycerol (2-­PG) are PPARα agonists (figure 4).118
In 2010, it was discovered that among the metabolic systems 
involved in the regulation of the gut barrier function the eCB 
system was playing a major role.108 It began with the finding 
that the intestinal eCB system is altered during obesity and 
diabetes, with an increased abundance of AEA that triggers gut 
permeability via CB1-­dependent mechanisms.108 Interestingly, 
this modification of the eCB system tone was associated with 
changes in the gut microbiota. Moreover, pharmacological acti-
vation of the eCB system with a potent eCB agonist increased 
adipogenesis and disrupted the gut barrier.119 In a series of inde-
pendent studies, the link between gut microbiota, adipose tissue 
metabolism and the eCB system has been confirmed since both 
genetically obese and diabetic mice (ob/ob and db/db) present 
a profound shift in their gut microbiota composition, which is 
associated with altered whole body tissue metabolism and eCB 
system tone.120 121 Taken together, these data strongly support 
a link between specific bioactive lipids, belonging to the eCB 
system, and the gut microbiota, the development of the adipose 
tissue and intestinal function.
To further explore the underlying mechanisms and to demon-
strate whether the synthesis of these NAEs could be involved in 
the onset of metabolic disorders and changes in the gut micro-
biota, several mouse models have been generated in which 
N-­acylphosphatidylethanolamine-­hydrolysing-­specific 
phos-
pholipase D (NAPE-­PLD), a key synthesis enzyme, has been 
inactivated in either adipocytes, intestinal epithelial cells or 
hepatocytes.122–125
Mice lacking NAPE-­PLD in adipocytes spontaneously devel-
oped obesity, insulin resistance and inflammation on a normal 
caloric diet and were more sensitive to high-­fat diet-­induced meta-
bolic disorders.122 The adipocyte-­specific deletion of NAPE-­PLD 
decreased the thermogenic programme (ie, browning/beiging) in 
adipose tissue and resulted in a profound shift in the gut micro-
biota composition. Moreover, transferring the microbiota from 
adipose tissue NAPE-­PLD deleted mice to germ-­free recipient 
mice replicated the overall phenotype,122 suggesting a causal role 
of the gut microbiota. When deleting NAPE-­PLD in intestinal 
epithelial cells, a different phenotype occurred. Mice became 
hyperphagic on first exposure to a high-­fat diet and then devel-
oped exacerbated diet-­induced obesity and hepatic steatosis. 
Mechanistically, this was attributed to a defect in the gut-­to-­
brain axis, as hypothalamic Pomc neurons alterations were 
found, likely explained by changes in both intestinal and plasma 
eCBs. Strikingly, the gut microbiota was also affected in this 
model and modulating the microbiota could partially revert the 
phenotype.123 In the last model, mice deleted for the NAPE-­PLD 
in the hepatocyte developed a high-­fat diet-­like phenotype under 
normal diet (ie, increased fat mass gain, hepatic steatosis, liver 
inflammation). These effects were related to changes in other 
key bioactive lipids known to be influenced by the gut micro-
biota such as BAs.124 Collectively, all these data and animal 
models suggest that the eCB system, through the NAPE-­PLD, is 
dialoguing with the gut microbiota via the production of bioac-
tive lipids, and it turn any dysregulation of this enzyme can lead 
to metabolic complications.
To further explore the potential links between the gut micro-
biota and the regulation of the eCB system, the endocannabinoi-
dome (eCBome) of germ-­free mice was compared with that of 
conventionalised mice at different time-­points. The eCBome is 
an extension of the eCB system that comprises over 50 receptors 
and metabolic enzymes, and >20 lipid mediators with important 
functions.126 An age-­dependent modification in intestinal 
eCBome gene expression and lipid mediator levels was found. 
Strikingly, faecal material transplantation from control mice 
donors to age-­matched germ-­free mice reversed several of these 
alterations, already after only 1 week.126 Altogether, this set of 
studies demonstrate that the gut microbiota is directly impacting 
the host eCBome.
In conclusion, all evidence points towards a bidirectional 
cross-­talk between the host’s eCB system and the gut microbiota. 
However, further investigations are warranted to untangle the 
many remaining mysteries of this relationship. Adding to the 
complexity, it has recently been shown that the gut microbiota 
itself is able to produce specific eCBs.127 This opens new exiting 
opportunities of exploring the microbiota to host interaction 
and offers several novel putative targets for therapy.
Bile acids
Primary BAs, such as cholic acid (CA) and chenodeoxycholic 
acid (CDCA) in humans (and muricholic acid (MCA) in rodents), 
are amphipathic molecules synthesised in the liver from choles-
terol.128 They can be conjugated to glycine or taurine prior to 
their secretion into bile and storage in the gallbladder. When 
food is ingested, BAs are released into the small intestine where 
they assist in the digestion and absorption of dietary fat. Around 
95% of intestinal BAs are reabsorbed in the ileum to return to 
the liver for re-­secretion. This enterohepatic circulation of BAs 
occurs several times a day and is an important physiological 
mechanism for maintaining whole body glucose, lipid and energy 
homeostasis to prevent hyperglycaemia, dyslipidaemia and 
obesity, and it protects against inflammatory metabolic diseases 
of the digestive and cardiovascular systems.129 Only a small frac-
tion of the BAs will escape this highly efficient loop and reach 
the colon. These BAs are then either reabsorbed passively into 
the circulation or excreted via the faeces. The losses in BAs are 
compensated by de novo hepatic synthesis, which is regulated by 
fibroblast growth factor-­19 (FGF19) in humans signalling in the 
small intestine (FGF15 in rodents).
Although the primary function of BAs is to regulate the diges-
tion and absorption of cholesterol, triglycerides and fat-­soluble 
vitamins, it has been recently recognised that BAs also serve an 
endocrine function as they act as signalling molecules. More-
over, BAs have been shown to modulate epithelial cell prolif-
eration, gene expression, lipid, glucose and energy metabolism 
by activating several receptors. These receptors are the vitamin 
D receptor,130 pregnane X receptor,131 constitutive andros-
tane receptor,132 farnesoid X receptor and G-­protein-­coupled 
bile acid receptor-­1 (also known as Takeda G protein-­coupled 
receptor 5 (TGR5)) (figure 4). These receptors are present in 
numerous tissues including the liver, intestine, muscle, brown 
adipose tissue and central and peripheral nervous systems and 
mediate the signalling cascade and activate expression of genes 
involved in the metabolism of BA, lipids and carbohydrates and 
in energy expenditure and inflammation. Signalling through 
FXR and TGR5 receptors has also been linked to the secretion 
of GI hormones such as PYY and GLP-­1 (figures 3 and 4), known 
to be integral to the maintenance of energy and metabolic 
homeostasis. The role of BAs in the control of glucose, lipid and 
energy metabolism has been reviewed previously128 133 134 and 
will therefore not be reviewed in detail here.
Primary BAs are susceptible to be modified by gut microbes all 
along the intestinal tract. These modifications include deconju-
gation (the removal of amino acid residues) via bile salt hydrolase 
(BSH) activity and further metabolisation via removal of hydroxyl 
groups (dehydroxylation), oxidation (dehydrogenation) or 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1027
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
epimerisation.135 136 This results in the formation of secondary 
BAs such as deoxycholic acid, lithocholic acid and ursodeoxy-
cholic acid (a secondary BA in humans, although a primary BA 
in rodents). This bacterial metabolism changes the bioavail-
ability and bioactivities of BAs, and consequently their impact 
on the metabolic responses they are involved in.137 Because of 
their signalling capacities and the fact that BAs are chemically 
transformed by the gut microbiota, BAs can therefore be consid-
ered as microbiota-­derived signalling metabolites. Interestingly, 
there is a spatio-­temporal pattern to be recognised as BAs are 
released after food intake and then encounter different microbial 
communities along the intestinal tract. While BSH activity can 
be carried out by a wide variety of bacteria distributed among 
many phylogenetically different bacterial divisions, including 
species able to colonise the small intestine,138 the other reactions 
are thought to be more restricted to more specialised bacterial 
species that reside in the distal part of the gut. Therefore, to 
fully understand the role of the gut microbiota on host metab-
olism, it is essential to study the involvement of the different 
bacteria capable of converting BAs. A recent study in centenar-
ians suggested that their specific gut microbiota signatures may 
partially account for their decreased susceptibility to ageing-­
associated illnesses, chronic inflammation and infectious diseases 
by generating unique secondary BAs. This implies that manipu-
lating the BA pool via modulation of the gut microbiota compo-
sition could represent a feasible way to combat diseases.139
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor: a link to energy metabolism, 
inflammation and gut microbiome
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is expressed ubiquitously 
in vertebrate cells and this transcription factor is activated after 
ligand binding. Numerous AhR ligands exist including environ-
mental triggers, nutrition-­derived signals, various phytochem-
icals and bacterial metabolites such as tryptophan (figure  2). 
AhR ligand binding results in translocation of the AhR into 
the nucleus where it is bound to its dimerisation molecule AhR 
nuclear translocator resulting in the transcription of numerous 
genes involved in immunity and inflammatory processes 
(figure 3). Bacterial products and metabolites play a key role as 
activators and therefore several reports from the past years have 
tried to figure out the interplay of AhR with the gut microbiota 
(figures 3 and 4).48 140 Importantly, this AhR pathway has also 
been linked to energy metabolism and metabolic syndrome as 
there exists a reduced capacity both in preclinical and clinical 
settings of metabolising tryptophan into AhR binding deri-
vates in metabolic syndrome.141 These authors showed that 
an increase of AhR ligands achieved by the administration of 
a Lactobacillus strain improved metabolic functions paralleled 
by ameliorated intestinal barrier and reduced hepatic steatosis. 
Indigo, a naturally occurring AhR ligand with potent anti-­
inflammatory activities, protects against high-­fat diet-­induced 
obesity and metabolic disturbances by upregulation of Lacto-
bacillus spp and the key barrier cytokines interleukin (IL)-­10 
and IL-­22.142 Microbial tryptophan metabolites such as indole-­
3-­ethanol, indole-­3-­pyruvate and indole-­3-­aldehyde protect 
the gut epithelial barrier by affecting the integrity of the apical 
junctional complex including myosin IIA and ezrin.143 In exper-
imental alcoholic liver disease, a disease where the gut micro-
biome is substantially impaired,144 induction of AhR ligands 
and administration of 6-­formylindolo (3,2-­b) carbazole (Ficz) 
improved alcoholic liver disease.145 Caspase recruitment domain 
family member 9−/− mice are more susceptible to colitis and 
their microbiota fail to metabolise tryptophan to its respective 
metabolites.146 Transfer of this microbiota into wild-­type mice 
increases colitis and can be improved by treatment with Lactoba-
cillus strains delivering high amounts of AhR ligands. The AhR 
pathway might have also major implications for other inflamma-
tory GI disorders such as coeliac disease.147 Patients with active 
coeliac disease show reduced AhR ligand production in their gut 
compared with non-­coeliac control subjects and furthermore 
in non-­obese diabetic mice expressing DQ8 (a transgenic mice 
that carry only human MHC class II DQ8), a high-­tryptophan 
diet, treatment with Limosilactobacillus reuteri, a bacterial strain 
producing large amounts of AhR ligands or treatment with the 
AhR ligand Ficz decreased intestinal pathologies after gluten 
exposure.147 Germ-­free mice show an impaired differentiation 
and repair of the epidermal barrier and mice lacking AhR in 
keratinocytes specifically are highly susceptible to cutaneous 
infections and barrier damage and colonisation with a defined 
group of bacteria restored the barrier. It remains to be estab-
lished in this model which role intestinal bacteria might play in 
a putative gut-­skin axis.148 The AhR pathway therefore reflects a 
prototypic pathway at the interface microbiota-­epithelial barrier-­
metabolism and immune functions.
Key bacteria and their specific molecules
Most signalling metabolites can be produced by large numbers 
of different gut bacteria, and hence have limited specificity. 
However, various bacteria can make specific molecules that 
have unique interactions with the host (figures 2–4). For obvious 
reasons, these have been very well characterised in patho-
gens that can make specific toxins, synthesise polysaccharides 
to evade the immune system or induce the host to synthesise 
receptors, allowing them to invade. However, recent research 
has identified new and unique host signalling molecules that are 
found in potentially symbiotic gut bacteria. These include immu-
nomodulatory polysaccharides and sphingolipids produced by 
Bacteroides spp149 150 and muropeptides formed by Enterococcus 
spp.151
A special class of unique molecules formed are proteins that 
are genetically encoded by one or a few strains of the same 
species. Some have been studied in detail and often involve 
stable or post-­translationally modified proteins that have the 
potential to interact with host receptors as they are secreted, or 
cell envelope located. Some of these derived from bacteria that 
are already widely marketed as probiotics, including L. acidoph-
ilus NCFM that produces a large, likely glycosylated surface 
layer protein signalling to the DC-­SIGN receptor,152 the 90 kDa 
pilus protein SpaC of L. rhamnosus GG that is a partly glyco-
sylated mucus-­binding protein with unusual signalling capacity 
to DC-­SIGN receptor on dendritic cells152 153 and the pilus-­
located Tad protein found in some Bifidobacterium spp that 
promotes colonic persistence and epithelial proliferation.154 155 
A recently studied protein is the caseinolytic protease B (ClpB) 
of E. coli that is an antigen-­mimetic of alpha-­melanocyte-­
stimulating hormone and increases satiety via increased plasma 
GLP-­1 and PYY production.156 ClpB proteins are well-­known 
moonlighting proteins found to be partially secreted by a variety 
of bacteria, including Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria. The speci-
ficity of ClpB, however, may be not so high as a ClpB-­producing 
Hafnia alvei was also found to suppress satiety to some extent in 
a human trial.157
Considering the effectiveness of live and pasteurised A. 
muciniphila administration in a proof-­of-­principle human 
trial,43 118 158 it is not surprising that several proteins from A. 
muciniphila have recently been identified with potential signalling 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1028
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
capacity. A recent one is an 84 kDa protein (encoded by the 
Amuc_1831 gene) termed P9, which after oral administration 
was found to induce serum GLP-­1 in mice. In vitro studies indi-
cated that P9 interacts with the intercellular adhesion molecule 2 
receptor.159 160 Another recently discovered protein identified is 
the A. muciniphila 50 kDa Amuc_1434* protein that was found 
to suppress LS174T cell viability via tumour-­necrosis-­factor-­
related apoptosis-­inducing ligand (TRAIL)-­mediated apoptosis 
pathway.161 However, both of these proteins are found in many 
bacteria other than A. muciniphila, both are annotated as prote-
ases suggesting enzymatic activity, and both have not been local-
ised outside the cells, not excluding the possibility that cell lysis 
is needed for their activity. Even more importantly, their stability 
has not been addressed, which is of interest as pasteurised A. 
muciniphila cells were as effective or even more than live cells 
both in human and mice models.43 162 163 All these arguments do 
not apply to the other A. muciniphila protein that was discov-
ered to be signalling to TLR2 (figure 4).163 This is the 30 kDa 
Amuc_1100 protein that has been defined as an outer membrane 
protein with virtually no homology to other bacteria outside the 
Verrucomicrobia and in fact is suggested to be a pilus-­associated 
protein.164 Further studies showed Amuc_1100 to be thermo-
stable and preventing diet-­induced obesity in a mouse model.163 
When comparing all three proteins for their absolute abundance, 
it is evident that Amuc_1100 is much more abundant than the 
other two signalling candidates in proteomes of A. muciniphila 
grown on mucin.165 Hence, future comparative studies should 
determine which proteins or combinations thereof can explain 
the observed activity of A. muciniphila in humans.
Newly identified molecules, impact on health and their 
targets
Besides the classical molecules such as SCFAs, BAs or PAMPs 
and gut peptides (ie, GLP-­1, PYY), all described as regulators of 
the host metabolism, gut barrier and inflammation, the role of 
a novel class of molecules called ‘enterosynes’ is emerging. The 
concept of enterosynes has been recently introduced and defined 
as ‘molecules originating from the gut which have the capacity to 
modulate duodenal contraction by targeting the enteric nervous 
system (ENS). Enterosynes can be chemically diverse and related 
to hormones, bioactive peptides/lipids, nutrients, microbiota and 
immune factors’.166
The origin of this concept is based on the observation that 
subjects with T2D are characterised by a duodenal hypermotility 
which favours glucose absorption and contributes to hypergly-
caemia.166 167 It has been demonstrated that duodenal contrac-
tions are sensed by the hypothalamus167–170 and that during 
diabetes the duodenal hypermotility creates aberrant afferent 
nervous messages to the brain.169 171 Conversely, restoring 
natural duodenal contraction by acting on ENS neurons restores 
the gut-­brain axis and improves insulin sensitivity.166
The connections between gut microbiome, brain function 
and glucose metabolism are becoming a hot topic in this area 
of research and the role of the ENS emerged as a new target 
to tackle diseases such as diabetes. Although various papers are 
discussing strategies to modulate the gut microbiome, such as 
probiotics, prebiotics and faecal transplants, in view of allevi-
ating features of metabolic syndrome, few, if not none, of them 
are characterising intestinal actors such as enterosynes.
In search of novel gut molecules and receptors involved in 
glucose metabolism, the action of specific fibres known to change 
the gut microbiota and improve diabetes was explored. The 
administration of oligofructose decreased duodenal contraction 
frequency by controlling enteric neurons activity. This led to 
reduced hyperglycaemia and decreased inflammatory markers 
in the adipose tissue of the diabetic mice.170 By using lipidomic 
analysis, it was discovered that this oligofructose feeding selec-
tively increased the abundance of an intestinal bioactive lipid 
(12-­hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12-­HETE)) in the colonic 
cells. Strikingly, the administration of 12-­HETE to diabetic mice 
improved glucose metabolism. The effect of 12-­HETE was also 
confirmed ex vivo. Furthermore, they discovered that the molec-
ular mechanism by which this bioactive lipid acts on duodenal 
contractility is dependent on the presence of the mu-­opioid 
receptors (MOR) (activated by enkephalin) and PPARγ. The 
preclinical findings were supported by human data showing a 
reduction in the levels of 12-­HETE and a decreased expression 
of the proenkephalin and MOR in the duodenum of patients 
with diabetes as compared with healthy subjects.170
Using various approaches with dietary supplements to tackle 
IBDs, new bioactive lipids with anti-­inflammatory properties 
were identified.172 Exploiting mass spectrometry of the E. coli 
Nissle 1917 (EcN), a well-­studied strain marketed as a probi-
otic for the treatment of colitis, led to the discovery that the 
concentration of 3-­hydroxyoctadecaenoic acid (C18-­3OH) was 
increased. They found that oral administration of C18-­3OH 
decreased colitis. To determine whether other bacteria present 
in the gut microbiota produce C18-­3OH, the gut microbiota was 
modulated by using oligofructose. The authors found that the 
anti-­inflammatory properties of oligofructose were associated 
with an increase in colonic C18-­3OH concentration. Finally, 
they identified specific bacteria producing this bioactive lipid 
and discovered that C18-­3OH acts by activating PPARγ.172
Altogether, these two examples show that the gut micro-
biota is the source of putative numerous bioactive compounds 
(figure 2) acting on host receptors involved in the regulation of 
metabolism and inflammation (figure 3).
Whereas some metabolites are desired for health, others may 
be harmful, but evidence only derives from association studies 
or animal testing. Three metabolites with negative impact have 
been subject to recent studies, including fructoselysine, an 
advanced glycation end product (AGE), trimethylamine N-­oxide 
(TMAO) and imidazole propionate (IMP).
AGEs are Maillard reaction products formed in our foods 
by thermal processing when free amino groups of proteins 
and amino acids react with reducing carbohydrates, forming 
compounds that are poorly bioavailable. A body of mechanistic 
evidence has linked AGEs to T2D and CRC through stimula-
tion of the pro-­inflammatory response via the activation of 
the receptor of AGEs,173 174 an increase in gut permeability—
allowing closer interaction of AGEs with colonic epithelium—
and consequential leakage of bacterial toxins into the systemic 
circulation.175 Fructoselysine is an Amadori product formed 
from lysine and glucose that is one of the primary dietary AGEs. 
Earlier studies showed that E. coli has the capacity to respire 
fructoselysine.176 However, recent analysis showed that it can 
be converted into butyrate by members of the genus Intestin-
imonas spp via a novel pathway.70 Of note, the capability to 
degrade fructoselysine was experimentally and computation-
ally only observed in formula-­fed but not in breast-­fed infants, 
which may relate to high contents of this compound in formulas 
after thermal treatment.177 Further studies should address the 
causality of fructoselysine and other AGEs in T2D and other 
diseases and the involvement of intestinal bacteria in their 
conversion. A recent study also described the complete utilisa-
tion of N-ε-carboxymethyllysine, another major AGE, by Cloac-
ibacillus and potentially Oscillibacter spp.178
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1029
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
TMAO is related to the intake of quaternary amines, such as 
betaine, choline and L-­carnitine, which are commonly found in 
vegetables, fruits, meat and seafood and are well-­known bacte-
rial osmoprotectants.179 180 Several gut bacteria including several 
Proteobacteria can convert these quaternary ammonium ions 
via TMA lyase and its activating enzyme (CutCD) into acetal-
dehyde and trimethylamine (TMA). TMA then can enter the 
bloodstream and is converted by flavin monooxygenase in the 
liver to TMAO. Recent studies have shown that TMAO in serum 
is strongly associated with atherosclerosis and cardiovascular 
risks.181 In addition, TMAO has been shown to promote forma-
tion of atherosclerotic plaques in a mouse model.182 Moreover, 
TMAO is a common uraemic toxin.183 Hence, there is consider-
able interest in understanding the metabolism of these quater-
nary ammonium ions into compounds that do not lead to TMA 
or other TMAO precursors. New insight has come from the 
biochemical and pathway analysis of Eubacterium limosum and 
its related gut isolate E. maltosivorans that were found to deam-
inate betaine and other quaternary amines in a novel process 
involving bacterial cell compartments and leading to the produc-
tion of acetate and butyrate.184–186 While the latter bacteria 
are highly related and appear to have a unique vitamin B12-­
dependent metabolic pathway, this does not hold for the metab-
olism of histidine that may lead to the production of IMP. It 
has been shown that concentration of IMP was increased in the 
serum of patients with T2D.187 It was recently found that IMP 
is produced from histidine by intestinal bacteria that impaired 
insulin signalling and glucose tolerance through the mamma-
lian target of rapamycin complex 1-­dependent pathway.188 Two 
unrelated bacteria, Streptococcus mutans and Eggerthella lenta 
have been identified as IMP producers, confirming the fact that 
many metabolites are produced by several groups of intestinal 
bacteria that may not share any phylogenetic relations. Alto-
gether, these examples indicate the involvement of intestinal 
bacteria in generating undesired compounds but identified also 
new anaerobes that may detoxify these and even convert these in 
products such as butyrate that have beneficial signalling poten-
tial (figures 2 and 3).
GENERAL CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
Over the last two decades, considerable progress has been 
achieved. From initial clinical observations to more mechanistic 
approaches, the field of gut microbiota and health is evolving to 
irrefutable causal links. However, there are still numerous studies 
that claim causality when in fact only correlations are being 
demonstrated. Moving from correlation to causality remains an 
important and required step to better design putative interven-
tions based on the modulation of the gut microbiota or by using 
specific active compounds.50 189 Thanks to the numerous efforts 
and the advance in omics analysis, the scientific community is 
gradually moving towards personalised medicine and the micro-
biome era is clearly an important part of the paradigm shift in 
the future of medicine and nutritional approaches.
Correction notice  This article has been corrected since it published Online First. 
Figure 3 has been enlarged.
Twitter Matthias Van Hul @matthias_vanhul and Patrice D Cani @MicrObesity
Contributors  PDC has prepared a proposal on the conception of the overall 
content of the manuscript. PDC, HT, WMdV and MVH have revised, amended and 
approved the proposal. PDC, HT, WMdV and MVH have collected content, selected 
the key references, written and critically reviewed the content of the manuscript. PDC 
and MVH have prepared the figures. PDC, HT, WMdV and MVH have all revised the 
final version of the manuscript. PDC, HT, WMdV and MVH contributed equally to this 
paper.
Funding  PDC is research director at FRS-­FNRS (Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique) 
and the recipient of grants from FNRS (Projet de Recherche PDR-­convention: FNRS 
T.0030.21, CDR-­convention: J.0027.22, FRFS-­WELBIO: WELBIO-­CR-­2017C-­02E, 
WELBIO-­CR-­2019C-­02R, EOS: program no. 30770923 and EOS program no. 
40007505). WMDV was supported by the SIAM Gravitation Grant (024.002.002) 
of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research. HT is supported by the 
excellence initiative VASCage (Centre for Promoting Vascular Health in the Ageing 
Community), an R&D K-­Centre (COMET program—Competence Centers for 
Excellent Technologies) funded by the Austrian Ministry for Transport, Innovation and 
Technology, the Austrian Ministry for Digital and Economic Affairs and the federal 
states Tyrol, Salzburg and Vienna.
Competing interests  PDC and WMdV are inventors on patent applications 
dealing with the use of Akkermansia muciniphila and its components in the 
treatment of metabolic disorders. PDC and WMdV are co-­founders of A-­Mansia 
Biotech. PDC is co-­founder of Enterosys. WMdV is co-­founder of Caelus Health and 
inventor on patents on the use of Eubacterium hallii.
Patient consent for publication  Not applicable.
Ethics approval  This study does not involve human participants.
Provenance and peer review  Commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any 
purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given, 
and indication of whether changes were made. See: https://creativecommons.org/​
licenses/by/4.0/.
ORCID iDs
Willem M de Vos http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0273-3166
Herbert Tilg http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4235-2579
Matthias Van Hul http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5503-107X
Patrice D Cani http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2040-2448
REFERENCES
	 1	 Korpela K, de Vos WM. Early life colonization of the human gut: microbes matter 
everywhere. Curr Opin Microbiol 2018;44:70–8.
	 2	 Korpela K, Helve O, Kolho K-­L, et al. Maternal fecal microbiota transplantation in 
Cesarean-­Born infants rapidly restores normal gut microbial development: a proof-­
of-­concept study. Cell 2020;183:324–34.
	 3	 Lloyd-­Price J, Mahurkar A, Rahnavard G, et al. Strains, functions and dynamics in the 
expanded human microbiome project. Nature 2017;550:61–6.
	 4	 Barlow JT, Leite G, Romano AE, et al. Quantitative sequencing clarifies the role of 
disruptor taxa, oral microbiota, and strict anaerobes in the human small-­intestine 
microbiome. Microbiome 2021;9:214.
	 5	 Seekatz AM, Schnizlein MK, Koenigsknecht MJ, et al. Spatial and temporal analysis 
of the stomach and small-­intestinal microbiota in fasted healthy humans. mSphere 
2019;4:e00126–19.
	 6	 Leite GGS, Weitsman S, Parodi G, et al. Mapping the segmental Microbiomes in 
the human small bowel in comparison with stool: a REIMAGINE study. Dig Dis Sci 
2020;65:2595–604.
	 7	 Zoetendal EG, Rajilic-­Stojanovic M, de Vos WM. High-­Throughput diversity 
and functionality analysis of the gastrointestinal tract microbiota. Gut 
2008;57:1605–15.
	 8	 Qin J, Li R, Raes J, et al. A human gut microbial gene Catalogue established by 
metagenomic sequencing. Nature 2010;464:59–65.
	 9	 Rajilić-Stojanović M, de Vos WM. The first 1000 cultured species of the human 
gastrointestinal microbiota. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2014;38:996–1047.
	 10	 Li J, Jia H, Cai X, et al. An integrated catalog of reference genes in the human gut 
microbiome. Nat Biotechnol 2014;32:834–41.
	 11	 van Nood E, Vrieze A, Nieuwdorp M, et al. Duodenal infusion of donor feces for 
recurrent Clostridium difficile. N Engl J Med 2013;368:407–15.
	 12	 Lynch SV, Pedersen O. The human intestinal microbiome in health and disease. N 
Engl J Med 2016;375:2369–79.
	 13	 Fan Y, Pedersen O. Gut microbiota in human metabolic health and disease. Nat Rev 
Microbiol 2021;19:55–71.
	 14	 Hanssen NMJ, de Vos WM, Nieuwdorp M. Fecal microbiota transplantation in 
human metabolic diseases: from a murky past to a bright future? Cell Metab 
2021;33:1098–110.
	 15	 Wang R, Tang R, Li B, et al. Gut microbiome, liver immunology, and liver diseases. 
Cell Mol Immunol 2021;18:4–17.
	 16	 O’Grady J, Murphy CL, Barry L, et al. Defining gastrointestinal transit time 
using video capsule endoscopy: a study of healthy subjects. Endosc Int Open 
2020;8:E396–400.
	 17	 Ding Z, Wang W, Zhang K, et al. Novel scheme for non-­invasive gut bioinformation 
acquisition with a magnetically controlled sampling capsule endoscope. Gut 
2021;70:2297–306.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1030
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
	 18	 Ph van Trijp M, Wilms E, Ríos-­Morales M, et al. Using naso- and oro-­intestinal 
catheters in physiological research for intestinal delivery and sampling in vivo: 
practical and technical aspects to be considered. Am J Clin Nutr 2021;114:843–61.
	 19	 Booijink CCGM, El-­Aidy S, Rajilić-Stojanović M, et al. High temporal and inter-­
individual variation detected in the human ileal microbiota. Environ Microbiol 
2010;12:3213–27.
	 20	 Zoetendal EG, Raes J, van den Bogert B, et al. The human small intestinal 
microbiota is driven by rapid uptake and conversion of simple carbohydrates. Isme J 
2012;6:1415–26.
	 21	 Lema I, Araújo JR, Rolhion N, et al. Jejunum: the understudied meeting place of 
dietary lipids and the microbiota. Biochimie 2020;178:124–36.
	 22	 Wang M, Ahrné S, Jeppsson B, et al. Comparison of bacterial diversity along the 
human intestinal tract by direct cloning and sequencing of 16S rRNA genes. FEMS 
Microbiol Ecol 2005;54:219–31.
	 23	 van Baar ACG, Nieuwdorp M, Holleman F, et al. The duodenum harbors a broad 
Untapped therapeutic potential. Gastroenterology 2018;154:773–7.
	 24	 Vrieze A, Van Nood E, Holleman F, et al. Transfer of intestinal microbiota from 
lean donors increases insulin sensitivity in individuals with metabolic syndrome. 
Gastroenterology 2012;143:913–6.
	 25	 Kootte RS, Levin E, Salojärvi J, et al. Improvement of insulin sensitivity after lean 
donor feces in metabolic syndrome is driven by baseline intestinal microbiota 
composition. Cell Metab 2017;26:611–9.
	 26	 de Groot P, Nikolic T, Pellegrini S, et al. Faecal microbiota transplantation halts 
progression of human new-­onset type 1 diabetes in a randomised controlled trial. 
Gut 2021;70:92–105.
	 27	 Troost FJ, van Baarlen P, Lindsey P, et al. Identification of the transcriptional response 
of human intestinal mucosa to Lactobacillus plantarum WCFS1 in vivo. BMC 
Genomics 2008;9:374.
	 28	 van Baarlen P, Troost FJ, van Hemert S, et al. Differential NF-­kappaB pathways 
induction by Lactobacillus plantarum in the duodenum of healthy humans 
correlating with immune tolerance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:2371–6.
	 29	 van Baarlen P, Troost F, van der Meer C, et al. Human mucosal in vivo 
transcriptome responses to three lactobacilli indicate how probiotics may 
modulate human cellular pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108 Suppl 
1:4562–9.
	 30	 Shetty SA, Zuffa S, Bui TPN, et al. Reclassification of Eubacterium hallii as 
Anaerobutyricum hallii gen. nov., comb. nov., and description of Anaerobutyricum 
soehngenii sp. nov., a butyrate and propionate-­producing bacterium from infant 
faeces. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2018;68:3741–6.
	 31	 Koopen A, Witjes J, Wortelboer K, et al. Duodenal Anaerobutyricum soehngenii 
infusion stimulates GLP-­1 production, ameliorates glycaemic control and beneficially 
shapes the duodenal transcriptome in metabolic syndrome subjects: a randomised 
double-­blind placebo-­controlled cross-­over study. Gut 2021. doi:10.1136/
gutjnl-2020-323297. [Epub ahead of print: 25 Oct 2021].
	 32	 Gilijamse PW, Hartstra AV, Levin E, et al. Treatment with Anaerobutyricum 
soehngenii: a pilot study of safety and dose-­response effects on glucose metabolism 
in human subjects with metabolic syndrome. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes 2020;6:16.
	 33	 Swidsinski A, Loening-­Baucke V, Verstraelen H, et al. Biostructure of fecal microbiota 
in healthy subjects and patients with chronic idiopathic diarrhea. Gastroenterology 
2008;135:568–79.
	 34	 Cani PD. Human gut microbiome: hopes, threats and promises. Gut 
2018;67:1716–25.
	 35	 Lloyd-­Price J, Arze C, Ananthakrishnan AN, et al. Multi-­Omics of the gut microbial 
ecosystem in inflammatory bowel diseases. Nature 2019;569:655–62.
	 36	 Leonard MM, Valitutti F, Karathia H, et al. Microbiome signatures of progression 
toward celiac disease onset in at-­risk children in a longitudinal prospective cohort 
study. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2021;118:e2020322118.
	 37	 Mars RAT, Yang Y, Ward T, et al. Longitudinal multi-­omics reveals Subset-­Specific 
mechanisms underlying irritable bowel syndrome. Cell 2020;183:1137–40.
	 38	 Tilg H, Adolph TE, Gerner RR, et al. The intestinal microbiota in colorectal cancer. 
Cancer Cell 2018;33:954–64.
	 39	 Tilg H, Cani PD, Mayer EA. Gut microbiome and liver diseases. Gut 
2016;65:2035–44.
	 40	 Trebicka J, Macnaughtan J, Schnabl B, et al. The microbiota in cirrhosis and its role in 
hepatic decompensation. J Hepatol 2021;75 Suppl 1:S67–81.
	 41	 Adolph TE, Mayr L, Grabherr F, et al. Pancreas-­Microbiota cross talk in health and 
disease. Annu Rev Nutr 2019;39:249–66.
	 42	 Riquelme E, Zhang Y, Zhang L, et al. Tumor microbiome diversity and composition 
influence pancreatic cancer outcomes. Cell 2019;178:795–806.
	 43	 Depommier C, Everard A, Druart C, et al. Supplementation with Akkermansia 
muciniphila in overweight and obese human volunteers: a proof-­of-­concept 
exploratory study. Nat Med 2019;25:1096–103.
	 44	 Qin J, Li Y, Cai Z, et al. A metagenome-­wide association study of gut microbiota in 
type 2 diabetes. Nature 2012;490:55–60.
	 45	 Karlsson FH, Tremaroli V, Nookaew I, et al. Gut metagenome in European women 
with normal, impaired and diabetic glucose control. Nature 2013;498:99–103.
	 46	 Wu H, Tremaroli V, Schmidt C, et al. The gut microbiota in prediabetes and diabetes: 
a population-­based cross-­sectional study. Cell Metab 2020;32:379–90.
	 47	 Loomba R, Seguritan V, Li W, et al. Gut Microbiome-­Based metagenomic signature 
for non-­invasive detection of advanced fibrosis in human nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Cell Metab 2019;30:607.
	 48	 Frost F, Kacprowski T, Rühlemann M, et al. Long-­Term instability of the intestinal 
microbiome is associated with metabolic liver disease, low microbiota diversity, 
diabetes mellitus and impaired exocrine pancreatic function. Gut 2021;70:522–30.
	 49	 Cani PD, Van Hul M. Do diet and microbes really ’PREDICT’ cardiometabolic risks? 
Nat Rev Endocrinol 2021;17:259–60.
	 50	 Cani PD, Moens de Hase E, Van Hul M. Gut microbiota and host metabolism: from 
proof of concept to therapeutic intervention. Microorganisms 2021;9:1302.
	 51	 Cani PD, Van Hul M. Mediterranean diet, gut microbiota and health: when age and 
calories do not add up! Gut 2020;69:1167–8.
	 52	 Cani PD, Jordan BF. Gut microbiota-­mediated inflammation in obesity: a link with 
gastrointestinal cancer. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;15:671–82.
	 53	 Louis P, Flint HJ. Formation of propionate and butyrate by the human colonic 
microbiota. Environ Microbiol 2017;19:29–41.
	 54	 Chambers ES, Preston T, Frost G, et al. Role of gut Microbiota-­Generated short-­chain 
fatty acids in metabolic and cardiovascular health. Curr Nutr Rep 2018;7:198–206.
	 55	 Frost G, Sleeth ML, Sahuri-­Arisoylu M, et al. The short-­chain fatty acid acetate 
reduces appetite via a central homeostatic mechanism. Nat Commun 2014;5:3611.
	 56	 Canfora EE, Jocken JW, Blaak EE. Short-­Chain fatty acids in control of body weight 
and insulin sensitivity. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2015;11:577–91.
	 57	 Rastelli M, Cani PD, Knauf C. The gut microbiome influences host endocrine 
functions. Endocr Rev 2019;40:1271–84.
	 58	 Daubioul CA, Taper HS, De Wispelaere LD, et al. Dietary oligofructose lessens hepatic 
steatosis, but does not prevent hypertriglyceridemia in obese Zucker rats. J Nutr 
2000;130:1314–9.
	 59	 Cani PD, Dewever C, Delzenne NM. Inulin-­type fructans modulate gastrointestinal 
peptides involved in appetite regulation (glucagon-­like peptide-­1 and ghrelin) in rats. 
Br J Nutr 2004;92:521–6.
	 60	 Cani PD, Neyrinck AM, Maton N, et al. Oligofructose promotes satiety in rats fed a 
high-­fat diet: involvement of glucagon-­like peptide-­1. Obes Res 2005;13:1000–7.
	 61	 Cani PD, Knauf C, Iglesias MA, et al. Improvement of glucose tolerance and hepatic 
insulin sensitivity by oligofructose requires a functional glucagon-­like peptide 1 
receptor. Diabetes 2006;55:1484–90.
	 62	 Delzenne NM, Cani PD, Daubioul C, et al. Impact of inulin and oligofructose on 
gastrointestinal peptides. Br J Nutr 2005;93 Suppl 1:S157–61.
	 63	 Cani PD, Hoste S, Guiot Y, et al. Dietary non-­digestible carbohydrates promote L-­cell 
differentiation in the proximal colon of rats. Br J Nutr 2007;98:32–7.
	 64	 Everard A, Lazarevic V, Derrien M, et al. Responses of gut microbiota and glucose 
and lipid metabolism to prebiotics in genetic obese and diet-­induced leptin-­resistant 
mice. Diabetes 2011;60:2775–86.
	 65	 Cani PD, Possemiers S, Van de Wiele T, et al. Changes in gut microbiota control 
inflammation in obese mice through a mechanism involving GLP-­2-­driven 
improvement of gut permeability. Gut 2009;58:1091–103.
	 66	 Wang X, Gibson GR. Effects of the in vitro fermentation of oligofructose and inulin 
by bacteria growing in the human large intestine. J Appl Bacteriol 1993;75:373–80.
	 67	 Aziz AA, Kenney LS, Goulet B, et al. Dietary starch type affects body weight 
and glycemic control in freely fed but not energy-­restricted obese rats. J Nutr 
2009;139:1881–9.
	 68	 Keenan MJ, Zhou J, McCutcheon KL, et al. Effects of resistant starch, a non-­digestible 
fermentable fiber, on reducing body fat. Obesity 2006;14:1523–34.
	 69	 Zhou J, Martin RJ, Tulley RT, et al. Dietary resistant starch upregulates total GLP-­1 
and PYY in a sustained day-­long manner through fermentation in rodents. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2008;295:E1160–6.
	 70	 Bui TPN, Ritari J, Boeren S, et al. Production of butyrate from lysine and the Amadori 
product fructoselysine by a human gut commensal. Nat Commun 2015;6:10062.
	 71	 Bui TPN, Mannerås-­Holm L, Puschmann R, et al. Conversion of dietary inositol into 
propionate and acetate by commensal Anaerostipes associates with host health. Nat 
Commun 2021;12:4798.
	 72	 Rajilić-Stojanović M, Shanahan F, Guarner F, et al. Phylogenetic analysis of dysbiosis 
in ulcerative colitis during remission. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2013;19:481–8.
	 73	 Brown AJ, Goldsworthy SM, Barnes AA, et al. The orphan G protein-­coupled 
receptors GPR41 and GPR43 are activated by propionate and other short chain 
carboxylic acids. J Biol Chem 2003;278:11312–9.
	 74	 Le Poul E, Loison C, Struyf S, et al. Functional characterization of human receptors 
for short chain fatty acids and their role in polymorphonuclear cell activation. J Biol 
Chem 2003;278:25481–9.
	 75	 Kimura I, Inoue D, Hirano K, et al. The SCFA receptor GPR43 and energy metabolism. 
Front Endocrinol 2014;5:85.
	 76	 Nøhr MK, Pedersen MH, Gille A, et al. GPR41/FFAR3 and GPR43/FFAR2 as cosensors 
for short-­chain fatty acids in enteroendocrine cells vs FFAR3 in enteric neurons and 
FFAR2 in enteric leukocytes. Endocrinology 2013;154:3552–64.
	 77	 Brooks L, Viardot A, Tsakmaki A, et al. Fermentable carbohydrate stimulates FFAR2-­
dependent colonic PYY cell expansion to increase satiety. Mol Metab 2017;6:48–60.
	 78	 Psichas A, Sleeth ML, Murphy KG, et al. The short chain fatty acid propionate 
stimulates GLP-­1 and PYY secretion via free fatty acid receptor 2 in rodents. Int J 
Obes 2015;39:424–9.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1031
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
	 79	 Koh A, De Vadder F, Kovatcheva-­Datchary P, et al. From dietary fiber to 
host physiology: short-­chain fatty acids as key bacterial metabolites. Cell 
2016;165:1332–45.
	 80	 Litvak Y, Byndloss MX, Tsolis RM, et al. Dysbiotic Proteobacteria expansion: a 
microbial signature of epithelial dysfunction. Curr Opin Microbiol 2017;39:1–6.
	 81	 Litvak Y, Mon KKZ, Nguyen H, et al. Commensal Enterobacteriaceae protect 
against Salmonella colonization through oxygen competition. Cell Host Microbe 
2019;25:128–39.
	 82	 Seksik P, Rigottier-­Gois L, Gramet G, et al. Alterations of the dominant faecal 
bacterial groups in patients with Crohn’s disease of the colon. Gut 2003;52:237–42.
	 83	 Morgan XC, Tickle TL, Sokol H, et al. Dysfunction of the intestinal microbiome in 
inflammatory bowel disease and treatment. Genome Biol 2012;13:R79.
	 84	 Shelton CD, Byndloss MX. Gut epithelial metabolism as a key driver of 
intestinal dysbiosis associated with noncommunicable diseases. Infect Immun 
2020;88:e00939–19.
	 85	 Blaak EE, Canfora EE, Theis S, et al. Short chain fatty acids in human gut and 
metabolic health. Benef Microbes 2020;11:411–55.
	 86	 Le Roy T, Moens de Hase E, Van Hul M, et al. Dysosmobacter welbionis is a newly 
isolated human commensal bacterium preventing diet-­induced obesity and 
metabolic disorders in mice. Gut 2022;71:534–43.
	 87	 Shetty SA, Boeren S, Bui TPN, et al. Unravelling lactate-­acetate and sugar conversion 
into butyrate by intestinal Anaerobutyricum and Anaerostipes species by comparative 
proteogenomics. Environ Microbiol 2020;22:4863–75.
	 88	 Wang SP, Rubio LA, Duncan SH, et al. Pivotal roles for pH, lactate, and Lactate-­
Utilizing bacteria in the stability of a human colonic microbial ecosystem. mSystems 
2020;5:e00645–20.
	 89	 Fernández-­Veledo S, Vendrell J. Gut microbiota-­derived succinate: friend or foe in 
human metabolic diseases? Rev Endocr Metab Disord 2019;20:439–47.
	 90	 De Vadder F, Kovatcheva-­Datchary P, Zitoun C, et al. Microbiota-­Produced 
succinate improves glucose homeostasis via intestinal gluconeogenesis. Cell Metab 
2016;24:151–7.
	 91	 Wang K, Liao M, Zhou N, et al. Parabacteroides distasonis alleviates obesity and 
metabolic dysfunctions via production of succinate and secondary bile acids. Cell 
Rep 2019;26:222–35.
	 92	 Tannahill GM, Curtis AM, Adamik J, et al. Succinate is an inflammatory signal that 
induces IL-­1β through HIF-­1α. Nature 2013;496:238–42.
	 93	 Wan Y, Yuan J, Li J, et al. Overweight and underweight status are linked to specific 
gut microbiota and intestinal tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates. Clin Nutr 
2020;39:3189–98.
	 94	 Bertani B, Ruiz N. Function and biogenesis of lipopolysaccharides. EcoSal Plus 
2018;8:ESP-­0001-­2018.
	 95	 Walsh D, McCarthy J, O’Driscoll C, et al. Pattern recognition receptors--molecular 
orchestrators of inflammation in inflammatory bowel disease. Cytokine Growth 
Factor Rev 2013;24:91–104.
	 96	 Quesniaux VJ, Nicolle DM, Torres D, et al. Toll-­like receptor 2 (TLR2)-­dependent-­
positive and TLR2-­independent-­negative regulation of proinflammatory cytokines by 
mycobacterial lipomannans. J Immunol 2004;172:4425–34.
	 97	 Poltorak A, He X, Smirnova I, et al. Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and 
C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in TLR4 gene. Science 1998;282:2085–8.
	 98	 Belkaid Y, Harrison OJ. Homeostatic immunity and the microbiota. Immunity 
2017;46:562–76.
	 99	 Fitzgerald KA, Kagan JC. Toll-­Like receptors and the control of immunity. Cell 
2020;180:1044–66.
	100	 Cani PD, Amar J, Iglesias MA, et al. Metabolic endotoxemia initiates obesity and 
insulin resistance. Diabetes 2007;56:1761–72.
	101	 Régnier M, Van Hul M, Knauf C, et al. Gut microbiome, endocrine control of gut 
barrier function and metabolic diseases. J Endocrinol 2021;248:R67–82.
	102	 Tilg H, Burcelin R, Tremaroli V. Liver tissue microbiome in NAFLD: next step in 
understanding the gut-­liver axis? Gut 2020;69:1373–4.
	103	 Anhê FF, Barra NG, Cavallari JF, et al. Metabolic endotoxemia is dictated by the type 
of lipopolysaccharide. Cell Rep 2021;36:109691.
	104	 Vijay-­Kumar M, Aitken JD, Carvalho FA, et al. Metabolic syndrome and altered gut 
microbiota in mice lacking Toll-­like receptor 5. Science 2010;328:228–31.
	105	 Vijay-­Kumar M, Sanders CJ, Taylor RT, et al. Deletion of TLR5 results in spontaneous 
colitis in mice. J Clin Invest 2007;117:3909–21.
	106	 Takeda K, Akira S. Microbial recognition by Toll-­like receptors. J Dermatol Sci 
2004;34:73–82.
	107	 Everard A, Geurts L, Caesar R, et al. Intestinal epithelial MyD88 is a sensor switching 
host metabolism towards obesity according to nutritional status. Nat Commun 
2014;5:5648.
	108	 Muccioli GG, Naslain D, Bäckhed F, et al. The endocannabinoid system links gut 
microbiota to adipogenesis. Mol Syst Biol 2010;6:392.
	109	 Cani PD, Plovier H, Van Hul M, et al. Endocannabinoids--at the crossroads between 
the gut microbiota and host metabolism. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2016;12:133–43.
	110	 Devane WA, Dysarz FA, Johnson MR, et al. Determination and characterization of a 
cannabinoid receptor in rat brain. Mol Pharmacol 1988;34:605–13.
	111	 Munro S, Thomas KL, Abu-­Shaar M. Molecular characterization of a peripheral 
receptor for cannabinoids. Nature 1993;365:61–5.
	112	 Howlett AC, Barth F, Bonner TI, et al. International Union of pharmacology. XXVII. 
classification of cannabinoid receptors. Pharmacol Rev 2002;54:161–202.
	113	 Devane WA, Hanus L, Breuer A, et al. Isolation and structure of a brain constituent 
that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. Science 1992;258:1946–9.
	114	 Mechoulam R, Ben-­Shabat S, Hanus L, et al. Identification of an endogenous 
2-­monoglyceride, present in canine gut, that binds to cannabinoid receptors. 
Biochem Pharmacol 1995;50:83–90.
	115	 Cristino L, Bisogno T, Di Marzo V. Cannabinoids and the expanded 
endocannabinoid system in neurological disorders. Nat Rev Neurol 
2020;16:9–29.
	116	 Di Marzo V. New approaches and challenges to targeting the endocannabinoid 
system. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2018;17:623–39.
	117	 Syed SK, Bui HH, Beavers LS, et al. Regulation of GPR119 receptor activity with 
endocannabinoid-­like lipids. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2012;303:E1469–78.
	118	 Depommier C, Vitale RM, Iannotti FA, et al. Beneficial effects of Akkermansia 
muciniphila are not associated with major changes in the circulating 
Endocannabinoidome but linked to higher Mono-­Palmitoyl-­Glycerol levels as new 
PPARα agonists. Cells 2021;10:185.
	119	 Geurts L, Muccioli GG, Delzenne NM, et al. Chronic endocannabinoid system 
stimulation induces muscle macrophage and lipid accumulation in type 2 diabetic 
mice independently of metabolic endotoxaemia. PLoS One 2013;8:e55963.
	120	 Geurts L, Lazarevic V, Derrien M, et al. Altered gut microbiota and endocannabinoid 
system tone in obese and diabetic leptin-­resistant mice: impact on apelin regulation 
in adipose tissue. Front Microbiol 2011;2:149.
	121	 Suriano F, Manca C, Flamand N, et al. Exploring the endocannabinoidome in 
genetically obese (ob/ob) and diabetic (db/db) mice: links with inflammation and gut 
microbiota. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids 2022;1867:159056.
	122	 Geurts L, Everard A, Van Hul M, et al. Adipose tissue NAPE-­PLD controls fat mass 
development by altering the browning process and gut microbiota. Nat Commun 
2015;6:6495.
	123	 Everard A, Plovier H, Rastelli M, et al. Intestinal epithelial N-­
acylphosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D links dietary fat to metabolic 
adaptations in obesity and steatosis. Nat Commun 2019;10:457.
	124	 Lefort C, Roumain M, Van Hul M, et al. Hepatic NAPE-­PLD is a key regulator of liver 
lipid metabolism. Cells 2020;9:1247.
	125	 Rastelli M, Van Hul M, Terrasi R, et al. Intestinal NAPE-­PLD contributes to short-­term 
regulation of food intake via gut-­to-­brain axis. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 
2020;319:E647–57.
	126	 Manca C, Boubertakh B, Leblanc N, et al. Germ-­Free mice exhibit profound gut 
microbiota-­dependent alterations of intestinal endocannabinoidome signaling. J 
Lipid Res 2020;61:70–85.
	127	 Cohen LJ, Esterhazy D, Kim S-­H, et al. Commensal bacteria make GPCR ligands that 
mimic human signalling molecules. Nature 2017;549:48–53.
	128	 Lefort C, Cani PD. The liver under the spotlight: bile acids and oxysterols as pivotal 
actors controlling metabolism. Cells 2021;10:400.
	129	 Chiang JYL, Ferrell JM. Bile acids as metabolic regulators and nutrient sensors. Annu 
Rev Nutr 2019;39:175–200.
	130	 Makishima M, Lu TT, Xie W, et al. Vitamin D receptor as an intestinal bile acid sensor. 
Science 2002;296:1313–6.
	131	 Ihunnah CA, Jiang M, Xie W. Nuclear receptor PXR, transcriptional circuits and 
metabolic relevance. Biochim Biophys Acta 2011;1812:956–63.
	132	 Wagner M, Halilbasic E, Marschall H-­U, et al. Car and PXR agonists stimulate hepatic 
bile acid and bilirubin detoxification and elimination pathways in mice. Hepatology 
2005;42:420–30.
	133	 Kuipers F, Bloks VW, Groen AK. Beyond intestinal soap--bile acids in metabolic 
control. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2014;10:488–98.
	134	 Ahmad TR, Haeusler RA. Bile acids in glucose metabolism and insulin signalling - 
mechanisms and research needs. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2019;15:701–12.
	135	 Ridlon JM, Kang D-­J, Hylemon PB. Bile salt biotransformations by human intestinal 
bacteria. J Lipid Res 2006;47:241–59.
	136	 Ridlon JM, Harris SC, Bhowmik S, et al. Consequences of bile salt biotransformations 
by intestinal bacteria. Gut Microbes 2016;7:22–39.
	137	 de Aguiar Vallim TQ, Tarling EJ, Edwards PA. Pleiotropic roles of bile acids in 
metabolism. Cell Metab 2013;17:657–69.
	138	 Jones BV, Begley M, Hill C, et al. Functional and comparative metagenomic analysis 
of bile salt hydrolase activity in the human gut microbiome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2008;105:13580–5.
	139	 Sato Y, Atarashi K, Plichta DR, et al. Novel bile acid biosynthetic pathways are 
enriched in the microbiome of centenarians. Nature 2021;599:458–64.
	140	 Dong F, Perdew GH. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor as a mediator of host-­microbiota 
interplay. Gut Microbes 2020;12:1859812.
	141	 Natividad JM, Agus A, Planchais J, et al. Impaired aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligand 
production by the gut microbiota is a key factor in metabolic syndrome. Cell Metab 
2018;28:737–49.
	142	 Lin Y-­H, Luck H, Khan S, et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist indigo protects 
against obesity-­related insulin resistance through modulation of intestinal and 
metabolic tissue immunity. Int J Obes 2019;43:2407–21.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as 

1032
de Vos WM, et al. Gut 2022;71:1020–1032. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789
Recent advances in basic science
	143	 Scott SA, Fu J, Chang PV. Microbial tryptophan metabolites regulate gut 
barrier function via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2020;117:19376–87.
	144	 Grander C, Adolph TE, Wieser V, et al. Recovery of ethanol-­induced Akkermansia 
muciniphila depletion ameliorates alcoholic liver disease. Gut 2018;67:891–901.
	145	 Wrzosek L, Ciocan D, Hugot C, et al. Microbiota tryptophan metabolism induces 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation and improves alcohol-­induced liver injury. Gut 
2021;70:1299–308.
	146	 Lamas B, Richard ML, Leducq V, et al. Card9 impacts colitis by altering gut 
microbiota metabolism of tryptophan into aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands. Nat 
Med 2016;22:598–605.
	147	 Lamas B, Hernandez-­Galan L, Galipeau HJ, et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligand 
production by the gut microbiota is decreased in celiac disease leading to intestinal 
inflammation. Sci Transl Med 2020;12:eaba0624.
	148	 Uberoi A, Bartow-­McKenney C, Zheng Q, et al. Commensal microbiota regulates skin 
barrier function and repair via signaling through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Cell 
Host Microbe 2021;29:1235–48.
	149	 Erturk-­Hasdemir D, Oh SF, Okan NA, et al. Symbionts exploit complex signaling 
to educate the immune system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2019. doi:10.1073/
pnas.1915978116. [Epub ahead of print: 06 Dec 2019].
	150	 Oh SF, Praveena T, Song H, et al. Host immunomodulatory lipids created by 
symbionts from dietary amino acids. Nature 2021;600:302–7.
	151	 Griffin ME, Espinosa J, Becker JL, et al. Enterococcus peptidoglycan remodeling 
promotes checkpoint inhibitor cancer immunotherapy. Science 2021;373:1040–6.
	152	 Konstantinov SR, Smidt H, de Vos WM, et al. S layer protein A of Lactobacillus 
acidophilus NCFM regulates immature dendritic cell and T cell functions. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:19474–9.
	153	 Tytgat HLP, van Teijlingen NH, Sullan RMA, et al. Probiotic gut microbiota isolate 
interacts with dendritic cells via glycosylated heterotrimeric pili. PLoS One 
2016;11:e0151824.
	154	 O’Connell Motherway M, Zomer A, Leahy SC, et al. Functional genome analysis 
of Bifidobacterium breve UCC2003 reveals type IVb tight adherence (TAD) pili 
as an essential and conserved host-­colonization factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2011;108:11217–22.
	155	 O’Connell Motherway M, Houston A, O’Callaghan G, et al. A bifidobacterial 
pilus-­associated protein promotes colonic epithelial proliferation. Mol Microbiol 
2019;111:287–301.
	156	 Breton J, Tennoune N, Lucas N, et al. Gut Commensal E. coli Proteins Activate 
Host Satiety Pathways following Nutrient-­Induced Bacterial Growth. Cell Metab 
2016;23:324–34.
	157	 Legrand R, Lucas N, Dominique M, et al. Commensal Hafnia alvei strain reduces food 
intake and fat mass in obese mice-­a new potential probiotic for appetite and body 
weight management. Int J Obes 2020;44:1041–51.
	158	 Depommier C, Everard A, Druart C, et al. Serum metabolite profiling yields insights 
into health promoting effect of A. muciniphila in human volunteers with a metabolic 
syndrome. Gut Microbes 2021;13:1994270.
	159	 Yoon HS, Cho CH, Yun MS, et al. Akkermansia muciniphila secretes a glucagon-­like 
peptide-­1-­inducing protein that improves glucose homeostasis and ameliorates 
metabolic disease in mice. Nat Microbiol 2021;6:563–73.
	160	 Cani PD, Knauf C. A newly identified protein from Akkermansia muciniphila 
stimulates GLP-­1 secretion. Cell Metab 2021;33:1073–5.
	161	 Meng X, Zhang J, Wu H, et al. Akkermansia muciniphila Aspartic Protease 
Amuc_1434* Inhibits Human Colorectal Cancer LS174T Cell Viability via TRAIL-­
Mediated Apoptosis Pathway. Int J Mol Sci 2020;21:3385.
	162	 Depommier C, Van Hul M, Everard A, et al. Pasteurized Akkermansia muciniphila 
increases whole-­body energy expenditure and fecal energy excretion in diet-­induced 
obese mice. Gut Microbes 2020;11:1231–45.
	163	 Plovier H, Everard A, Druart C, et al. A purified membrane protein from Akkermansia 
muciniphila or the pasteurized bacterium improves metabolism in obese and diabetic 
mice. Nat Med 2017;23:107–13.
	164	 Ottman N, Reunanen J, Meijerink M, et al. Pili-­like proteins of Akkermansia 
muciniphila modulate host immune responses and gut barrier function. PLoS One 
2017;12:e0173004.
	165	 Ottman N, Davids M, Suarez-­Diez M, et al. Genome-­Scale Model and Omics Analysis 
of Metabolic Capacities of Akkermansia muciniphila Reveal a Preferential Mucin-­
Degrading Lifestyle. Appl Environ Microbiol 2017;83:e01014–7.
	166	 Knauf C, Abot A, Wemelle E, et al. Targeting the Enteric Nervous System to Treat 
Metabolic Disorders? "Enterosynes" as Therapeutic Gut Factors. Neuroendocrinology 
2020;110:139–46.
	167	 Fournel A, Drougard A, Duparc T, et al. Apelin targets gut contraction to control 
glucose metabolism via the brain. Gut 2017;66:258–69.
	168	 Knauf C, Cani PD, Perrin C, et al. Brain glucagon-­like peptide-­1 increases insulin 
secretion and muscle insulin resistance to favor hepatic glycogen storage. J Clin 
Invest 2005;115:3554–63.
	169	 Abot A, Lucas A, Bautzova T, et al. Galanin enhances systemic glucose 
metabolism through enteric nitric oxide Synthase-­expressed neurons. Mol Metab 
2018;10:100–8.
	170	 Abot A, Wemelle E, Laurens C, et al. Identification of new enterosynes using 
prebiotics: roles of bioactive lipids and mu-­opioid receptor signalling in humans and 
mice. Gut 2021;70:1078–87.
	171	 Abot A, Cani PD, Knauf C. Impact of intestinal peptides on the enteric nervous 
system: novel approaches to control glucose metabolism and food intake. Front 
Endocrinol 2018;9:328.
	172	 Pujo J, Petitfils C, Le Faouder P, et al. Bacteria-­Derived long chain fatty acid exhibits 
anti-­inflammatory properties in colitis. Gut 2021;70:1088–97.
	173	 Sakellariou S, Fragkou P, Levidou G, et al. Clinical significance of AGE-­RAGE axis in 
colorectal cancer: associations with glyoxalase-­I, adiponectin receptor expression 
and prognosis. BMC Cancer 2016;16:174.
	174	 Peppa M, Mavroeidi I. Experimental animal studies support the role of dietary 
advanced glycation end products in health and disease. Nutrients 2021;13:3467. 
doi:10.3390/nu13103467
	175	 Qu W, Yuan X, Zhao J, et al. Dietary advanced glycation end products modify gut 
microbial composition and partially increase colon permeability in rats. Mol Nutr 
Food Res 2017;61:mnfr.201700118:1700118.
	176	 Wiame E, Delpierre G, Collard F, et al. Identification of a pathway for the 
utilization of the Amadori product fructoselysine in Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 
2002;277:42523–9.
	177	 TPN B, Troise AD, Nijsse B. Intestinimonas-­like bacteria are important butyrate 
producers that utilize Nε-fructosyllysine and lysine in formula-­fed infants and adults. 
Journal of Functional Foods 2020;70:103974.
	178	 Bui TPN, Troise AD, Fogliano V, et al. Anaerobic degradation of N-ε-
Carboxymethyllysine, a major glycation end-­product, by human intestinal bacteria. J 
Agric Food Chem 2019;67:6594–602.
	179	 Zeisel SH, Mar M-­H, Howe JC, et al. Concentrations of choline-­containing 
compounds and betaine in common foods. J Nutr 2003;133:1302–7.
	180	 Demarquoy J, Georges B, Rigault C, et al. Radioisotopic determination of 
L-­carnitine content in foods commonly eaten in Western countries. Food Chem 
2004;86:137–42.
	181	 Brown JM, Hazen SL. Microbial modulation of cardiovascular disease. Nat Rev 
Microbiol 2018;16:171–81.
	182	 Koay YC, Chen Y-­C, Wali JA, et al. Plasma levels of trimethylamine-­N-­oxide can be 
increased with ’healthy’ and ’unhealthy’ diets and do not correlate with the extent 
of atherosclerosis but with plaque instability. Cardiovasc Res 2021;117:435–49.
	183	 Velasquez MT, Ramezani A, Manal A, et al. Trimethylamine N-­oxide: the good, the 
bad and the unknown. Toxins 2016;8:326.
	184	 Picking JW, Behrman EJ, Zhang L, et al. MtpB, a member of the MttB superfamily 
from the human intestinal acetogen Eubacterium limosum, catalyzes proline betaine 
demethylation. J Biol Chem 2019;294:13697–707.
	185	 Kountz DJ, Behrman EJ, Zhang L, et al. MtcB, a member of the MttB superfamily from 
the human gut acetogen Eubacterium limosum, is a cobalamin-­dependent carnitine 
demethylase. J Biol Chem 2020;295:11971–81.
	186	 Feng Y, Bui TPN, Stams AJM, et al. Comparative genomics and proteomics 
of Eubacterium maltosivorans: functional identification of trimethylamine 
methyltransferases and bacterial microcompartments in a human intestinal 
bacterium with a versatile lifestyle. Environ Microbiol 2022. doi:10.1111/1462-
2920.15886. [Epub ahead of print: 02 Jan 2022].
	187	 Molinaro A, Bel Lassen P, Henricsson M, et al. Imidazole propionate is increased in 
diabetes and associated with dietary patterns and altered microbial ecology. Nat 
Commun 2020;11:5881.
	188	 Koh A, Molinaro A, Ståhlman M, et al. Microbially produced imidazole propionate 
impairs insulin signaling through mTORC1. Cell 2018;175:947–61.
	189	 Van Hul M, Le Roy T, Prifti E, et al. From correlation to causality: the case of 
Subdoligranulum. Gut Microbes 2020;12:1–13.
	190	 Sender R, Fuchs S, Milo R. Are we really Vastly Outnumbered? revisiting the ratio of 
bacterial to host cells in humans. Cell 2016;164:337–40.
	191	 Neugent ML, Hulyalkar NV, Nguyen VH, et al. Advances in understanding the 
human urinary microbiome and its potential role in urinary tract infection. mBio 
2020;11:e00218–20.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on June 23, 2026
 
http://gut.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
1 February 2022. 
10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326789 on 
Gut: first published as