This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186 |  5171
Cite this: Mater. Chem. Front.,
2023, 7, 5171
Recent advances in nanotechnology for
combating Alzheimer’s disease
Chuan Hu,†a Baoyu Wu,†c Yihan Wu,a Mingyi Shi,c Jiaqi Ma,a Huile Gao
*b and
Jinming Zhang
*ac
As the population ages, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) has become a serious health problem worldwide.
However, there is almost no eﬀective method in the clinic for AD therapy due to the complicated
pathogenesis and the multiple physiological barriers for brain drug delivery, especially the presence of
the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Nowadays, nanotechnology has been explored for its great potential in
brain drug delivery via improving bioavailability, overcoming the BBB, precise targeting and achieving
drug co-delivery. In this review, we briefly introduce the widely studied targets of AD at first. Then, we
summarize the recent advances in nanotechnology for AD treatment; strategies are broadly categorized
according to the therapeutic targets, including toxic protein modulation, cell targeting in AD lesion sites
or microenvironment modulation. Finally, the challenges and our perspectives for future directions of
nanotechnology to combat AD are also discussed.
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenera-
tive disease.1,2 With the aging of population, the prevalence
and incidence of AD around the world are increasing year
by year, creating a huge and expanding healthcare burden.3
Although impressive eﬀorts have been made, AD remains
incurable and currently approved therapies can only help
in managing the symptoms, they cannot delay or stop its
progression.4,5 Therefore, there is an urgent need for eﬀective
strategies to combat AD. There are two major obstacles for AD
treatment;6 one is the complex pathogenesis of AD. So far,
many hypotheses have been proposed to explain the patho-
genesis of AD; the most widely studied targets include amyloid-
beta
peptide
(Ab)
deposition,7
tau-protein
neurofibrillary
tangles,8 disordered microglia,9 loss of cholinergic neurons,10
and oxidative stress microenvironment.11–13 Although research-
ers have proposed a variety of multifunctional agents for AD
diagnosis and treatment based on these hypotheses, the AD
a State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, School of
Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu,
611137, P. R. China. E-mail: cdutcmzjm@126.com
b Key Laboratory of Drug-Targeting and Drug Delivery System of the Education
Ministry, West China School of Pharmacy, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610064,
P. R. China. E-mail: gaohuile@scu.edu.cn
c School of Intelligent Medicine, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Chengdu, China
Chuan Hu
Chuan Hu obtained her PhD
degree
in
Pharmaceutics
from
the Sichuan University under the
supervision of Professor Huile
Gao
in
2022,
and
then
she
joined the School of Pharmacy/
School of Modern Chinese Medi-
cine Industry, Chengdu Univer-
sity
of
Traditional
Chinese
Medicine in 2023. Her research
focuses on the rational design of
intelligent drug delivery systems
to achieve targeted drug delivery
and controlled drug release.
Baoyu Wu
Baoyu Wu is an undergraduate
student at the School of Intelli-
gent Medicine at Chengdu Uni-
versity
of
Traditional
Chinese
Medicine, studying for a master’s
degree
under
the
guidance
of
Professor Jinming Zhang.
† Dr Hu and Ms Wu contributed equally to this work.
Received 30th April 2023,
Accepted 11th July 2023
DOI: 10.1039/d3qm00493g
rsc.li/frontiers-materials
MATERIALS CHEMISTRY
FRONTIERS
REVIEW
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

5172 |  Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
treatment outcome is still far from satisfactory.14,15 The other
obstacle is the low brain-targeted drug delivery efficacy, espe-
cially the existence of the impenetrable blood–brain barrier
(BBB), which prevents foreign substances and most drugs from
moving from the circulatory system into the brain parenchyma
in order to maintain a stable brain microenvironment16–18 and
greatly hinders the AD-treatment outcome. Hence, it is neces-
sary to carry out combinational treatment and improve the
brain-targeted drug delivery efficiency.
The past few decades have witnessed the rapid development of
nanotechnology for brain targeting drug delivery.19–23 Compared
with traditional small molecular agents, peptide-based therapeutics
or gene-based drugs, nanoparticles (NPs) have a large surface
area, high surface-to-volume ratio, good water solubility and long
circulation time. NPs have been explored for its great potential for
improving the bioavailability of encapsulated cargos, overcoming
the BBB, precise targeting, and achieving drug co-delivery and
controlled release to increase the safety and efficacy of therapeutic
agents,24,25 thereby potentially making nanotechnology a promis-
ing drug delivery strategy, especially in AD treatment.26
In a previous review, we provided a comprehensive overview
of the design requirements for more eﬃcient and specific
brain-targeting drug delivery systems.27 We analyzed the entire
brain-targeting drug delivery process and proposed a six-step
CRITID delivery cascade. We concluded that the fate of NPs in
blood circulation, the BBB and brain endothelial cells (BECs),
brain parenchymal and diseased cells jointly determine their
brain-targeting drug delivery eﬃciency. Usually, NPs easily
meet the requirements of blood circulation because NPs exhibit
a long blood circulation time and high stability. Meanwhile,
it is easy to achieve multiple drug co-delivery with NPs,28 which
is suitable for the treatment of diseases with complex patho-
genesis.29 Second, NPs have unique advantages in delivering
drugs across the BBB. Receptor-mediated transcytosis (RMT),
carrier-mediated transcytosis (CMT) and adsorptive-mediated
transcytosis (AMT) are the most widely studied strategies for
mediating active brain-targeting and BBB penetration of NPs,30–32
which have been elegantly summarized by Han and co-workers.33
Recently, some studies have focused on the heterogeneous
microenvironment of lesions of the BBB for specific targeting
strategies.34 However, intracellular transport with brain endo-
thelial cells is generally ignored after recognizing the receptors
on the BBB, which may lead to a low BBB penetration efficiency.
Furthermore, the following steps, from diseased cell targeting
and internalization to finally controlled-drug release, should
also be reasonably designed to achieve ideal therapeutic effects
and reduce side effects.35–37
Much eﬀort has been made to meet the requirements for
AD-targeted drug delivery. For example, high-density lipo-
protein-derived NPs and metal-based NPs have been developed
with great potential for BBB penetration, Ab capture, and
microglial targeting.38–42 Furthermore, a better brain targeting
efficiency has been achieved via biomimetic modification,
such as tailored multifunctional exosomes that can successfully
deliver various cargos for the diagnosis and treatment of
AD.43–46 Importantly, multifunctional NPs with intelligent
architectures,
bio-responsive
moieties
and
multi-targeting
agents have been developed to almost meet the six-step CRITID
delivery cascade and achieved excellent anti-AD effects.47,48
In this review, we provide an overview of the current pro-
gress of nanotechnology that is designed to improve the
therapeutic eﬃciency of AD (Scheme 1). First, we summarize
the widely studied pathogenic mechanism of AD. Then, the
recent advances in the application of nanotechnology for the
AD treatment based on those pathogenic mechanisms are
comprehensively presented. In the end, our perspectives on
the remaining challenges and future directions of nanotech-
nology for AD treatment are discussed.
2. AD treatment targets
AD is a complex and mysterious disease. Although various
hypotheses, such as the amyloid cascade hypothesis and the
Huile Gao
Huile Gao obtained his PhD in
Pharmaceutics from Fudan Uni-
versity in 2013 and then joined
West China School of Pharmacy,
Sichuan University, as a lecturer.
In 2017, Gao was promoted as a
professor. His research focuses on
the rational design of drug deli-
very systems for central nervous
system diseases and tumors.
Jinming Zhang
Jinming Zhang obtained his PhD
degree in Biomedicine from the
University of Macau under the
supervision
of
Professor
Yitao
Wang
in 2016,
and
then
he
joined the School of Pharmacy/
School of Modern Chinese Medi-
cine Industry, Chengdu Univer-
sity
of
Traditional
Chinese
Medicine. In 2020, Zhang was
promoted as a professor. His
current research focuses on the
development of novel drug deli-
very systems to achieve eﬃcient
delivery and controlled release of
Chinese medicine.
Review
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186 |  5173
tau hyper-phosphorylation hypothesis,49,50 have been proposed
to explain the pathogenesis of AD, the exact pathogenesis
remains unclear.51 In this section, we will present recent widely
studied targets for AD treatment, including toxic amyloid-beta
peptides and tau proteins, disordered microglial cells and
neurons, and neuroinflammatory and oxidative stress brain
microenvironment.
2.1.
Toxic amyloid-b (Ab) plaques and tau protein
For a long time, the presence of amyloid-b (Ab) plaques and
tau-protein neurofibrillary tangles in the brain has been thought
to be the main pathological hallmarks of AD.52 The amyloid
cascade hypothesis suggests that the imbalance between the
production and removal of Ab promotes the extracellular accu-
mulation of toxic Ab oligomers and then triggers fibrillation and
the production of large deposits or plaque, leading to synapse
dysfunction and neuronal degeneration.53 In addition, metal ion
imbalance, especially the dysregulation of copper (Cu) and zinc
(Zn), significantly contributes to AD development via accelerating
Ab plaque deposition and ROS formation. Metal-ion chelation has
been proven to be a potent strategy for AD treatment.54 The
intracellular tau aggregation is recognized as the vital event that
is involved in tau hyper-phosphorylation.50 In normal neurons, tau
binds with tubulin to a stable microtubule, which plays an impor-
tant role in the intracellular traﬃcking modulation. In contrast,
under AD conditions, the normal tau becomes hyper-phosphory-
lated, which disrupts the function of microtubules. Meanwhile,
the formation of toxic self-aggregated tau leads to significant loss of
synaptic and neuronal functions.55 In addition, accumulating
evidence suggests that Ab and tau pathologies work synergisti-
cally to accelerate AD progression. For example, Ab aggregation
is also closely related to the conversion of normal tau into a
toxic state.56 Therefore, an Ab and tau pathology co-targeting
approach is expected to be more eﬀective than single therapy.
2.2
Microglia
Microglia, a population of central nervous system-resident
macrophages that are critical for the regulation of metabolism
in the brain, are demonstrated to be a desirable therapeutic
target for AD treatment.57 Under normal conditions, microglia
work hard to maintain a stable brain environment through
phagocytizing abnormal proteins and diseased cells and
secreting various cytokines, such as pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cytokines.58 However, under AD conditions, the
microglia are disordered, losing their ability to manage the
abnormal proteins and cells. The generation of excessive toxic
agents leads to an abnormal brain environment, especially
inflammation of the brain, which in turn causes neuron
damage and promotes the dysfunction of microglia.59 As a
result, the AD condition worsens significantly. Various studies
have focused on targeting microglia for AD therapy and showed
more satisfactory therapeutic outcomes. For example, signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) plays an
important role in the secretion of inflammatory mediators.
Downregulation of STAT3 in dysfunctional microglia alleviates
the inflammatory environment and accelerates Ab clearance.60,61
Inhibition of b-site amyloid precursor protein (APP) cleaving
enzyme-1 (BACE-1) in microglia oﬀers a superior therapeutic
outcome of AD mice by enhancing Ab uptake and degradation
eﬀectively.62
2.3
Neurons
Neurons, especially cholinergic neurons, are highly related to
memory formation.63 Healthy neurons protect themselves
against inflammatory mediator attacks by expressing a multi-
tude of molecules.64 During AD progress, some neurons are
damaged, and the formation of intracellular neurofibrillary
tangles is the most prominent pathological eﬀect in these
neurons. In addition, the abnormal tau pathway in neurons
leads to cascade dysfunction, such as energy dysfunction and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production,65 which further
activate microglia. Then, activated microglia secrete inflamma-
tory mediators, which in turn exacerbate neuron damage.66
Therefore, neurons and microglia contribute to each other’s
dysfunction. Apart from the abnormal tau pathway, mitochon-
drial dysfunction in neurons is another typical feature in AD,67
which occurs early in AD pathogenesis and plays a pivotal role
in increasing Ab and tau accumulation through associated
oxidative stress.68,69 Hence, regulation of dysfunctional neurons
via multiple pathways, such as the combination of antioxidation
and tau-targeting or the combination of neuroprotection and
mitochondrial targeting, may exhibit synergistic therapeutic
eﬀects and delay AD progression.
2.4
Oxidative stress environment
Studies have demonstrated that markers of oxidative stress
appear before pathological damage in the progress of AD.70
With the aim of studying in depth the contribution of redox
situation in AD progress, numerous studies have focused on
the modulation of the oxidative stress environment to rescue
oxidative damage of neurons.71 Oxidative stress results from
the imbalance between the formation and clearance of ROS,
which causes the oxidative damage of cellular components.72
Several AD-related pathways are involved in the production of
Scheme 1
Schematic overview of NPs for AD-targeted treatment.
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Review
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

5174 |  Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
ROS; for example, Ab accumulation accelerates the production
of ROS. In addition, mitochondrial dysfunction highly contri-
butes to the occurrence of oxidative stress.73 The high level of
ROS leads to the activation of microglia and astrocytes, which
in turn triggers a cascade pro-inflammatory response that
further promotes ROS production. Moreover, excessive ROS
also contributes to both synaptic dysfunction and neuron
degeneration. Restoring ROS homeostasis in the brain has
shown significant eﬀects on AD prevention and therapy.74,75
3. Recent advances in nanotechnology
for combating AD
Nanotechnology has been explored for its great potential in AD
therapy via improving bioavailability, overcoming the BBB,
precise targeting and achieving drug co-delivery. Many reviews
have elegantly summarized the BBB characteristics, the strate-
gies for BBB crossing and the superiorities of NPs for brain-
targeted drug delivery.33,76,77 So, we mainly focus on the recent
advances in application of nanotechnology for the AD treatment
based on various pathogenic mechanisms.
3.1
Targeting Ab and tau protein
The generation of extracellular toxic Ab fibrillogenesis and
intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) of hyperphosphory-
lated tau protein are the central features closely associated with
AD progression.78 A series of reversible noncovalent or covalent
inhibitors have been proposed to inhibit Ab aggregation and
toxicity.34,79–82 A review from Du and co-workers summarized
the current strategies for modulating Ab aggregation with
multifunctional agents, such as aggregation inhibitors, copper
chelators, Ab photoxidation, and dissociation of Ab aggre-
gates.14 Here, we mainly focus on recent advances in nanotech-
nology for Ab and tau protein targeting. As shown in Table 1,
many NPs have been developed for inhibiting Ab and tau
aggregation, promoting Ab and tau degradation and clearance
for AD management.
Using NPs as a decoy is widely studied for inhibiting Ab or
tau aggregation. The KLVFF peptide, which originates from Ab,
is proved to be the key peptide that induces the formation
of b-sheet fibres.83 NPs modified with KLVFF show good aﬃnity
with Ab via co-assembly, thus preventing the formation of
toxic Ab aggregation.84–86 Luo and co-workers reported a self-
destructive nanosweeper, which was modified with KLVFF and
Beclin-1.87 With the guidance of KLVFF, the nanosweeper
targeted and co-assembled with extracellular Ab specifically
inhibited the formation of toxic Ab aggregation. Autophagy
plays a critical role in the clearance of toxic Ab and other
damaged organelles.88 Then, the nanosweeper delivered Ab
into cells and activated autophagy by the modification of
Beclin-1, contributing to the enhancement of Ab clearance.
This study provides a good example of a peptide-based NP
decoy for inhibiting Ab aggregation and clearance. Metal-based
NPs are another potential candidate to target Ab.89 Selenium is
a component of natural enzymes. Selenium NPs have been
proved to possess the functions of Ab affinity and reduce
neurotoxicity, making them a potential drug carrier for AD
therapy.90,91 A study from Guo and co-workers introduced
selenium quantum dots (SeQDs) for multitarget therapy of
AD.92 The ultrasmall size of SeQDs facilitated the BBB penetra-
tion. Because of the fluorescence characteristics of SeQDs, AD
progress could be diagnosed and tracked easily. As expected,
the in vitro and in vivo results proved that SeQDs inhibited toxic
Ab aggregation and prevented the AD cascade reaction. In
addition, tau protein phosphorylation and oxidative stress were
also reduced, significantly improving memory impairment of
AD mice. Phototherapy has emerged as a powerful strategy for
inhibiting Ab self-assembly through the use of photo-responsive
chemicals and materials. Zhang and co-workers conjugated
KLVFFAED (KD8) to NIR-II light-activated hydrogen-bonded
organic frameworks (HOFs), named DSM@n-HOF-6@KD8, for Ab
targeting phototherapy.93 As demonstrated, DSM@n-HOF-6@KD8
Table 1
Smart NPs for modulating toxic proteins for AD treatment
Targets
Specific recognition mechanism
Therapeutic agents
Formulations
Ref.
Ab
Erythrocyte membrane with KLVFF peptide
CuxO core with multiple
antioxidant enzyme-like
activities
Biomimetic nanozyme
86
Ab
KLVFF peptide co-assembles with Ab
Inhibits Ab aggregation and
Beclin-1
Nanosweeper
87
Ab
High aﬃnity to Ab
Selenium quantum dots
Selenium quantum dots
92
tau
(D)-TLKIVW (TLK) binds with the tau
aggregation motif (VQIVYK)
D-Peptide tau inhibitor
Micelle
95
tau
VQIVYK devised peptide co-assembles with
the tau aggregation motif
Inhibits tau aggregation
Micelle
96
Ab
T7 peptide for BBB penetration and Tet1 for
neuron targeting
BACE1 siRNA; D-amino acid
inhibitor
Dendritic NPs; acid endo/lysosome triggered the
BBB penetration eﬀects
62
Ab
CDAGRKQKC peptide for AD lesion targeting
and KLVFF peptide for Ab capture
Rapamycin
Micelle; AD lesion BBB targeting; endo/lysosome
triggered BBB penetration; ROS-responsive drug
release
47
Ab
Aleuria aurantia lectin (AAL) for nasal
to brain transport and KLVFF peptide
for Ab capture
BACE1 siRNA and
rapamycin
Dendritic NPs; nasal nano-drug delivery system
101
Review
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186 |  5175
could traverse the BBB via KLVFFAED modification and then
prevent fibrillation of Ab monomers and reduce cytotoxicity of
Ab by photooxygenation under the NIR-II light irradiation. This
study provides new insights into the application of HOFs as
photo-therapeutic agents for AD treatment.
The aberrant tau protein aggregation is demonstrated to be
the key process in tau-related AD progression.94 D-Peptide tau
inhibitor (D)-TLKIVW (TLK) was designed by structure-based
computational design. TLK can recognize the tau aggregation
motif (VQIVYK) and specifically bind to tau aggregates with
high eﬃciency. Zhu and co-workers decorated the TLK peptide
on a micellar surface and devised a multifunctional nanoinhi-
bitor, which could bind to tau aggregates via recognition of
VQIVYK.95 The formation of a complex between the nanoinhi-
bitor and tau inhibited the growth and seeding of tau aggre-
gates, reducing neuron death significantly. Xu and co-workers
tailored
an
intracellular
pathological
tau-targeted
nano-
chaperone (Tau-nChap) for AD therapy (Fig. 1).96 A tau protein-
derived VQIINK peptide was modified on the surface of a self-
assembled micelle, which was equipped with chaperone-like
hydrophobic microdomains and confined spaces.97 Owing to
the unique surface structure, tau-nChap could escape from the
lysosome and accumulate in the cytoplasm with high concen-
tration. Owing to the synergistic eﬀect of the modification of the
tau-captured VQIINK peptide and the confined hydrophobic
microdomain on the surface, the cytosol-arrived tau-nChap
selectively captured pathological tau and their aggregation was
inhibited significantly. Thereby, tau-mediated neurotoxicity on
neuronal cells was rescued eﬃciently, the cognitive deficits of AD
mice were ameliorated.
To further improve the targeting drug delivery eﬃcacy at
diseased AD sites, our group introduced a series of smart drug
delivery systems for cascade BBB transport and precise accu-
mulation at AD lesions for management of Ab and tau. These
smart drug delivery systems are close to satisfying the require-
ments of the six-step CRITID delivery cascade. First, we developed
an NP with endo/lysosome-escapable and diseased neuron
targeting abilities.48 A T7 peptide was linked to dendrigraft
poly-l-lysines (DGL) via an acid-cleavable long polyethylene
glycol (PEG) to target transferrin receptors (TfRs) overexpressed
on the BBB, achieving high internalization. Then, acid endo/
lysosome triggered the separation of NPs from TfR to transport
through the BBB and enter brain parenchyma. Short PEG-
linked Tet1,98,99 which can specifically target diseased neurons,
is exposed. As a result, the production of Ab is reduced by the
loading of small interfering RNA of b-site APP cleaving enzyme-
1 (BACE1 siRNA).62 In addition, tau protein phosphorylation
(p-tau) is inhibited by the co-loaded D-amino acid inhibitor
(Dp, sequence: D-TLKIVWGKKKC).
Based on this strategy, we established a nanocleaner which
could specifically penetrate the BBB at AD lesions to capture
and bring Ab to the microglia (Fig. 2).47 The acid-cleavable DAG
peptide and the KLVFF peptide were modified on the surface of
a rapamycin-loaded ROS-responsive NP, named R@(ox-PLGA)-
KcD]. DAG is a cyclic peptide (sequence: CDAGRKQKC), which
can drive R@(ox-PLGA)-KcD to the AD lesions by targeting
the overexpressed connective tissue growth factor (CTGF).
Then, the nanocleaner escaped from the acid endo/lysosome
and transported through the BBB at AD lesions successfully. The
exposed KLVFF-modified nanocleaner captured and co-assembled
with Ab and then carried it into the microglia to enhance the
clearance of Ab. Furthermore, high ROS conditions at AD
lesions triggered rapamycin release from the nanocleaner,
promoting autophagy of microglia to enhance Ab degradation
and normalizing inflammatory conditions. Recently, we have
proposed a multifunctional melanin-like NP with the abilities
of pathological BBB crossing, metal-ion chelation and neuro-
inflammation regulation against AD.34 This nanoplatform
Fig. 1
Tau-targeted nanochaperone for selectively capturing intracellular
pathological tau and inhibiting their aggregation in neurons. Reproduced
with permission.96 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.
Fig. 2
Ab targeted nanocleaner with high BBB penetration at AD lesions
and inflammation regulation abilities for AD treatment. Reproduced with
permission.47 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Review
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

5176 |  Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
(named PDA@K) was constructed by intrinsically bioactive
material polydopamine NPs (PDA) with potent metal-ion che-
lating and ROS scavenging eﬀects. The KLVFF peptide was
decorated on the surface of PDA@K for pathological BBB
crossing and lesion site accumulation via Ab hitchhiking. This
study opens up a new avenue for utilizing the intrinsic proper-
ties of nanomaterials as therapeutics for AD treatment therapy.
Apart from making eﬀorts on enhancing drug delivery eﬃ-
ciency of intravenous administration, intranasal administra-
tion, which is non-invasive and can bypass the BBB directly
through the olfactory mucosa into the brain, has attracted
increasing attention for AD therapy.100 Our group introduced
aleuria aurantia lectin (AAL) and KLVFF peptide co-modified
DGL NPs (Rapa@DAK/siRNA) for co-delivery of BACE1 siRNA
and rapamycin from nasal to brain AD lesions.101 AAL modi-
fication significantly improved the transportation eﬀect of NPs
from the nasal region to brain by specifically binding with
L-fucose on the olfactory epithelium. Furthermore, the KLVFF
peptide guided the NPs to Ab and inhibited the aggregation of
Ab successfully by co-assembling with Ab. The encapsulated
BACE1 siRNA and rapamycin reduced BACE1 expression and
Ab deposition and also promoted autophagy. Consequently, the
cognition of transgenic AD mice improved significantly. This
study provides a potential strategy for the use of a nasal nano-
drug delivery system for AD combination therapy.
3.2
Targeting microglia
Microglia are the eﬀective phagocytes in the brain and have
been proved as a double-edged sword in AD pathology.59 There
is a self-perpetuating cycle existing between Ab deposition and
microglial dysfunction.102 Normally, microglia can sense and
degrade toxic Ab deposition via phagocytosis to keep home-
ostasis in the brain. However, under AD conditions, the over-
loaded Ab degradation mediated dysfunction of microglia,
resulting in losing phagocytic capability and promoting the
production of pro-inflammatory mediators, which in return
exacerbated the production and accumulation of Ab.103 There-
fore, the modulation of microglial dysfunction is considered to be
a potent strategy for AD therapy.
Apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) is a natural functional high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) and possesses eﬀective eﬃciency of
BBB penetrating and Ab-binding aﬃnity.104 The amphipathic
structure promotes apoA-I to insert into the lipid layer and form
a protein–lipid nanocomposite (PLN). Therefore, the ApoA-I-
based PLN is a promising nanoplatform for brain-targeted drug
delivery and Ab clearance, maintaining great potential as
a ‘‘Drug-Carrier’’ platform for AD therapy.105,106 Han and co-
workers designed a biomimetic PLN-based apoA-I (APLN) to
simultaneously target Ab and tau-associated pathways for AD
treatment.107 A PLN was prepared through the biomimetic self-
assembly of phosphatidylcholine and apoA-I. Methylene blue
(MB), which can inhibit tau aggregation,108 was loaded in the
hydrophilic core of the PLN to form PLN/MB. Then, the apoA-I
mimicking peptide of 4F was further fused on the surface of
APLN/MB to enhance the efficiencies of BBB penetration and
microglial-targeted Ab clearance. As expected, in AD-Ab-Tau-bearing
mouse models, APLN was highly accumulated in the brain after
intravenous administration. Ab was captured and carried to
microglia by APLN for clearance. The p-tau level was reduced by
the internalization of MB in neuronal cells. Finally, APLN/MB
achieved a satisfactory AD therapeutic outcome by targeting
Ab and tau pathways. In another study, Zhang and co-workers
exploited a native HDL-based nanoscavenger (pHDL/Cur-siBACE1)
to co-deliver curcumin (Cur) and BACE1 siRNA for synergistic
regulation of microglial dysfunction (Fig. 3A).42 First, pHDL/
Cur-siBACE1 could penetrate the BBB and accumulate at Ab
plaque (Fig. 3B and C), facilitating Ab clearance without caus-
ing microglial dysfunction. Second, the encapsulated natural
compound Cur inhibited the neuroinflammation response by
regulating the nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) pathway.109 Moreover,
BACE1 siRNA reduced the production of Ab in neurons. In a
word, pHDL/Cur-siBACE1 provided a promising tactic for AD
treatment by the three-pronged modulation of microglial neuro-
inflammation (Fig. 3D).
The mannose analog 4-aminophenyl a-D-mannopyranoside
(Man) is a specific ligand of mannose receptors, which are
overexpressed in both endothelial cells of the BBB and actived
microglia. So, the modification of Man can guide NPs to
penetrate BBB and target microglia.111,112 Liu and co-workers
established Man-modified zwitterionic poly(carboxybetaine)
(PCB)-based NPs for AD treatment via microglial-targeted nor-
malization (Fig. 4).110 To reduce the inflammatory mediators’
production and secretion, the chemotherapeutic agent fingolimod
was encapsuled in the hydrophobic region.113 Negative-charged
siRNA of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3) was loaded via charge adsorption. Furthermore, ZnO,
which is beneficial for normalizing the polarization of micro-
glia, was also encapsulated in the hydrophobic region.114 The
formed PCBPB/ZnO/fingolimod/siSTAT3 NPs (MCPZFS NPs)
normalized the dysfunctional microglia successfully via the
specific microglial targeting ability and the co-delivery of multi-
ple drugs for synergistic inflammatory modulation. After sys-
tematic treatment with MCPZFS NPs, the crosstalk between
microglia and Ab was inhibited successfully and AD pathology
was relieved. The neural cell adhesion molecules (NCAMs) are
overexpressed on glial cells and the BBB. P2 is a mimic peptide
of NCAM and can bind to the NCAM Ig1 domain with
high aﬃnity.115 Wang and co-workers designed a P2-peptide-
medicated nanoplatform for precise microglial-targeted gene
delivery.116 Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2
(TREM2) is exclusively expressed by the microglia in brain, and
is associated with phagocytosis regulation and inflammatory
signaling inhibition. Increasing the expression of TREM2 helps
to enhance microglia phagocytosis and anti-inflammatory
M2-phenotype
translation.117
They
condensed
TREM2-
encoding plasmid (pTREM2) with fluorinated polyethylenimine
(PF/pTREM2) to form the core of NPs. P2 and cis-aconitic
anhydride (AA) co-conjugated human serum albumin (PHSA)
was coated with PF/pTREM2 to form a core–shell structured
nanocomplex (PHSA@PF/pTREM2). PHSA enhances the BBB
penetration and microglia targeting efficacy of the gene system.
Then, the acid endo/lysosome triggered the breaking of the
Review
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186 |  5177
cis-aconitic amide bond;118 the positively charged PF/pDNA was
released for efficient endo-lysosomal escape and gene transfec-
tion. Finally, elevated TREM2 levels normalized dysfunctional
microglia and the cognitive performance of amyloid-b precursor
protein/presenilin-1 (APP/PS1) mice was improved significantly.
3.3
Targeting neurons
Numerous studies suggested that mitochondrial dysfunction of
neurons is closely associated with the pathogenesis of AD by
ROS generation, apoptosis, and inflammation of neurons.119,120
However, mitochondria-targeted anti-AD therapy faces many
challenges, such as the low eﬃciency of drug delivery due to the
hard BBB, poor precise cell targeting ability after entering the
brain parenchyma and the unsatisfactory treatment outcome
of monotherapy. Extracellular vehicle (EV)-based drug delivery
systems have shown considerable potential for brain targeted
drug delivery. In addition, EVs have strong plasticity and can be
engineered to express various proteins for the regulation of
targeted cells.121 Mitophagy plays a critical role in neuronal protec-
tion and memory improvement. Src homology 2 domain-containing
protein tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP2) negatively regulates neu-
roinflammation via inducing mitophagy.122 Xu and co-workers
rationally tailored an engineered-EV (MSC-EVs-SHP2) with SHP2
high expression for eﬀective AD therapy by inducing mito-
phagy.123 MSC-EVs-SHP2, derived from mesenchymal stem cells,
possessed high BBB penetration ability and could facilitate the
accumulation of SHP2 in the brain. Then, MSC-EVs-SHP2
induced mitophagy of neuronal cells, alleviating the apoptosis
and neuroinflammation of neuronal cells. This study provides a
potential engineered-EV strategy for eﬀective AD therapy by
inducing mitophagy. A study from Qian and co-workers provided
a good sample for programmed mitochondria-targeted anti-AD
therapy (Fig. 5A). They developed a nanosystem to deliver
multifunctional hybrid peptide HNSS, which was composed of
mitochondrial targeting and antioxidant peptide SS31 and neuro-
protective peptide S14GHumanin.124 Fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1 (FGFR1) is highly expressed on both BBB and vulner-
able cholinergic neurons in the AD area.125 The ligand of FGFR1,
FGL peptide (EVYVVAENQQGKSKA), was modified on the surface
of NPs for precise drug delivery to cholinergic neurons in
Fig. 3
(A) Schematic diagram of HDL-based nanoscavenger preparation. (B) Measurement of brain targeting eﬃcacy via in vivo imaging of DiR and Cy5
double-labeled nanoparticles in the whole body. (C) Quantitative assessment of in vivo fluorescence intensity in the brain of B (n = 3) and confocal
images of colocalization between nanoparticles and Ab in the brain. (D) Representative swimming trajectories of mice in the Morris water maze.
Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Review
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

5178 |  Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
lesion sites. An FDA-approved polymer, polyethylene glycol-
polytrimethylene carbonate with carboxyl group modification,
named PTMC(Cit), was the drug carrier. The negative charge of
PTMC(Cit) ensured the high loading eﬃciency of the positive-
charged HNSS peptide via electrostatic interaction. Impor-
tantly, the good charge-switching feature of PTMC(Cit) in the
acid lysosome contributed to sensitive HNSS peptide-release
behaviour. As a result, FGL-NP(Cit)/HNSS accumulated in the
AD lesion area with high concentration (Fig. 5B and C). After
treatment with FGL-NP(Cit)/HNSS, an improved spatial learn-
ing ability of 3xTg-AD mice was observed, as illustrated by
increased platform crossing times and the percentage of the
swimming distance in the targeted quadrant (Fig. 5D–F). These
results proved that the FGL-NP(Cit)/HNSS achieved excellent
anti-AD therapeutic effects.
The a7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (a7 nAChR) is a
receptor that is overexpressed on both the BBB and neurons.
The RVG29 peptide can specifically bind with a7 nAChR.126
miR-124 is the most abundant miRNA in the brain but signifi-
cantly decreased in AD brain tissues.127 Ouyang and co-workers
conducted a study proving that targeted delivery of miR-124 to
diseased neurons is a promising strategy for AD treatment.128
The authors used DNA nanoflowers (DFs) to deliver miR-124 via
hybridization. RVG29 was modified on the surface of DFs for
realizing BBB penetration and neuron targeting. Furthermore,
an ancillary drug, Rutin, was co-loaded into the DFs via p–p
stacking. In vitro and in vivo results suggested that targeted co-
delivery of miR-124 and Rutin to neurons could effectively
inhibit ROS activity and down-regulate both BACE1 and APP
synergetically, resulting in a significant suppression of Ab
generation and neuroinflammation.
Apart from targeted drug delivery strategies through system
circulation, stereotactic injection seems also to be a promising
method for brain disease. Stereotactic transplantation of neural
stem cells (NSCs) has achieved some success in the treatment
of
neurodegenerative
diseases
associated
with
cognitive
disorder.129 However, the therapy outcome is still unsatisfac-
tory. There are many factors that aﬀect the eﬃciency of NSCs,
such as loss of stemness, cytomembrane damage or apoptosis
during NSC transplantation progress.130 Yu and co-workers
used HOFs to encapsulate NSCs in order to enhance the
therapeutic eﬃcacy.131 Porous carbon nanospheres (PCNs) with
catalase and superoxide dismutase-like activities were doped
into the HOF shell to ensure the activity of NSCs. Furthermore,
the use of photo-responsive chemicals and materials for the
on-demand NSC release was also meaningful for precise
treatment. In this study, thermal-responsive NSC release was
realized via hydrogen bond dissociation under NIR-II irradiation.
The results showed that the proposed strategy could enhance NSC
Fig. 5
(A) Schematic illustration of the cholinergic neuron targeting
nanosystem for combinatorial mitochondrial therapy in AD. (B) Brain target
analysis via in vivo fluorescence imaging and (C) ex vivo imaging and
semiquantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity of the brain at 1 h after
intravenous injection of DiR-loaded NP(Cit) and FGL-NP(Cit) to nude mice,
respectively (n = 3). (D) Mean escape latency in the Morris water maze
experiment of AD mice in each group. (E) Percentage of swimming
distance in the targeted quadrant. (F) Times of path crossing over
the expected-platform area (n = 10). Reproduced with permission.124
Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.
Fig. 4
Schematic illustration of the Man-medicated NP (MCPZFS NPs) for
AD treatment via microglial-targeted normalization. Schematic diagram of
(A) preparation of the MCPZFS NPs and (B) the mechanism of the MCPZFS
NPs for AD therapy. The NPs crossed the BBB, recruited Ab and targeted
microglia. Then, the complexes were endocytosed into microglia. The
encapsuled fingolimod, siSTAT3, ZnO, and Ab were released in the ROS
environment, and the dysfunctional microglia were normalized. Repro-
duced with permission.110 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.
Review
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186 |  5179
activity, promote neurogenesis and improve cognitive dysfunction
in AD mice.
3.4
Modulation of the oxidative stress microenvironment
Recently, the intricate crosstalk among cells and inflammatory
responses in the brain have been regarded as the hallmark
features of the early stages of AD. Liu and co-workers reported
an
ROS-responsive
dendrimer–peptide
conjugate
(APBP)
platform for the treatment of early AD by modulating AD
inflammatory responses at an early stage.132 Various studies
proved that Ab could be easily internalized into the brain via
the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE),
which are overexpressed on the diseased BBB.133 Inspired by
this natural process, they modified an Ab-derived peptide
KLVFFAED (designated Ab peptide) on the APBP for AD lesion
area active targeting. The Nrf2-mediated signaling pathway is
closely related to ROS accumulation, neuron damage, micro-
glial activation and Ab aggregates.134 The LQLDEETGEFLPIQ
peptide (designated p-Nrf2), which can actively target the Nrf2-
mediated signaling pathway, was modified on the APBP via an
ROS-sensitive and clearance linker for AD therapy. As a result,
p-Nrf2 accumulated in the infected brain efficiently by the
modification of the Ab peptide. The levels of oxidative stress,
Ab aggregation, and glial cell activation were all normalized by
the synergistic effect of polymers and p-Nrf2 and eventually
achieved a satisfactory AD therapy outcome. This study pro-
vided a new idea for early AD management by normalizing
the function of damaged cells to regulate the inflammatory
microenvironment. Another study from our group proved the
superiority of AD treatment by anti-neuroinflammation and
neuroprotection.135 We introduced RAGE-targeted and ROS-
responsive
NPs
for
co-delivery
of
ibuprofen
and
FK506
(Ibu&FK@RNPs). The RAP peptide (sequence: CELKVLMEKEL),
a specific ligand of RAGE, was modified on the surface of NPs
to assist the transport of Ibu&FK@RNPs to the diseased AD site.
Then, triggered by the high level of ROS, Ibu&FK@RNPs
collapsed, encapsulated ibuprofen and FK506 released imme-
diately (Fig. 6A). As a result, due to the significant effects of
Ibu&FK@RNPs on reducing neurotoxicity (Fig. 6B) and sup-
pressing the neuroinflammatory response (Fig. 6C and D), the
cognition of AD mice improved successfully. Besides chemo-
therapeutic agents and biological medicine, the natural phyto-
antioxidant also showed great value in AD management.
Quercetin (QC), a multifunctional biological protective agent,
widely occurs in fruits and vegetables.136,137 Dou and co-workers
encapsulated QC in HSA to form HSA@QC NPs (HQ NPs) as a
natural phyto-antioxidant.138 After intranasal administration, HQ
NPs attenuated oxidative stress and reversed cognitive decline in
advanced AD mice.
Recently, the establishment of nanoenzyme platforms with
catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD) or peroxidase
(POD)-mimicking activity to regulate oxidative stress in brains
has aroused remarkable attention for AD treatment. Compared
with natural enzymes, nanoenzyme platforms have the advan-
tages of a low production cost, adjustable catalytic activity and
excellent eﬃciency.139 Octahedral palladium nanoparticles
(Pd NPs) possess potent POD and SOD-mimetic activities, and
can scavenge cytotoxic oxygen radicals, protect the function of
mitochondria, and avoid the oxidation of functional lipids,
protein, and DNA in high oxidation environments.140 Jia and
co-workers established a nanozyme platform by modifying
Pd NPs with borneol (Pd@PEG@Bor) for AD treatment. Bor
modification enhanced the epithelial cell penetrability, thus
increasing the brain accumulation of Pd@PEG@Bor.141 Then,
ROS and Ca2+ contents were eliminated by Pd NPs, thereby
reducing Ab accumulation and ameliorating mitochondrial
dysfunction. Eventually, AD pathological characteristics were
alleviated in AD mice. In addition to Pt NPs, ceria nanoparticles
Fig. 6
(A) Diagram depicting the preparation of Ibu&FK@RNPs, inducing RAGE-targeted, ROS-responsive drug release of Ibu&FK@RNPs and then
treatment of AD by anti-neuroinflammation and neuroprotection. (B) Neuroprotective eﬀects of Ibu&FK@RNPs via Nissl staining in the hippocampus. The
black box shows the hippocampal CA1 area. Scale bars represent 100 and 10 mm, respectively. Anti-neuroinflammatory eﬀects of Ibu&FK@RNPs in APP/
PS1 mice, measured by (C) Western blot of NF-kB and (D) ELISA assays of IL-1b in the brain protein, n = 3. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright
2022, Elsevier.
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Review
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

5180 |  Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
(CeO2 NPs) also exhibit excellent CAT and SOD-like activities.142
Ge and co-workers coated CeO2 NPs on both the ends of gold
nanorods (Au NRs) and modified the Ab-targeted peptides
on the middle surface of gold nanorods (KLVFF@Au-CeO2)
for AD treatment through photocatalysis and photothermal
therapies.143 Du and co-workers constructed a 2D niobium
carbide (Nb2C) MXene-based nano-chelator (named Nb2C
MXenzyme) for AD treatment.144 Nb2C MXenzyme exhibited a
good photothermal eﬀect and BBB permeability under near-
infrared laser irradiation and enhanced the accumulation of
Nb2C MXenzyme in the brain. The increasing evidence suggests
that Cu2+ facilitates the formation of oligomerization and
amyloid via binding with Ab.145 Nb2C MXenzyme exhibited a
specific chelating eﬀect toward Cu2+, thus suppressing Cu2+-
induced accumulation of Ab deposits. In addition, Nb2C
MXenzyme exhibited a powerful ROS scavenging performance
similar to those of natural antioxidant enzymes (e.g., SOD and
CAT), alleviating mitochondrial and neuroglial damage. As a
result, Nb2C MXenzyme achieved a satisfactory therapy out-
come in APP/PS1 double-transgenic AD mouse mode.
4. Conclusions and future
perspectives
In this review, we presented the recent advances in nanotech-
nology for the treatment of AD. The applications of nanotech-
nology are summarized according to the widely studied targets
of AD, including targeting toxic proteins (Ab fibrillogenesis and
tau protein) to prevent their aggregation and promote their
clearance, alleviating disordered microglial cells and neuronal
cells, and modulating oxidative stress microenvironments.
Although nanotechnology has demonstrated excellent anti-AD
eﬀects in the preclinical phase, clinical translation of nano-
medicine is still a long way oﬀ.
The BBB remains the major challenge for brain-targeted
drug delivery. Although RMT has been widely used for BBB
penetration, there is a big dilemma between the aﬃnity of the
ligand to its receptor and transcytosis eﬃciency.146 In general,
low-aﬃnity ligands require high or oversaturated concentration
of ligand modification to ensure binding to the receptors,
thereby mediating the endocytosis of the BBB. In contrast,
high-aﬃnity ligands can bind with their receptors eﬀectively
and mediate the endocytosis of modified NPs at low concen-
tration, while they are usually trapped in endo/lysosomes due
to the high aﬃnity, hindering the penetration of NPs into brain
parenchyma.147–149 This dilemma is associated with the step
of intracellular transport with brain endothelial cells but is
generally overlooked. Our group has developed a series of acid-
cleavable ligand-medicated NPs to solve this dilemma. These
smart NPs bind with receptors on the BBB with high affinity;
then the NPs detach from the ligand–receptor complex in acid
endo/lysosomes, promoting transcytosis of high-affinity ligand-
modified nanoparticles through the BBB. The exposed second
ligand recognizes the diseased cells and releases the loaded
drugs specifically. These NPs basically meet the requirements
of the six-step CRITID delivery cascade and exhibit good
therapy outcomes in brain cancer, AD and autism spectrum
disorder.47,48,135,150,151 Further studies should also take into
account the changes in the BBB during the disease state, which
may influence the recognition and phagocytosis of NPs.
The lack of more predictive preclinical animal AD models
hinders the development of nanotechnology for combating AD.
AD is a complex disease with multi-pathologies and long
preclinical periods, but preclinical models such as the most
commonly used APP/PS1 mouse are mostly based on single or
double contributors of the AD phenotype, which is far from
truly representative AD models.152 The diversity and complexity
in the pathogenesis of AD also result in the lack of eﬀective
treatment modalities. The development of new AD drugs is
especially diﬃcult. Over the years, global pharmaceutical com-
panies have invested heavily in the development of AD drugs,
but most have failed. Since the beginning of the 21st century,
more than 320 clinical trials have failed.153 A few drugs have
been approved by the FDA for AD treatment, including four
cholinesterase inhibitors, one N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA)
receptor antagonist and two Ab antibodies.154 It is reported that
after 18 months of treatment with the newly approved Ab
antibody, Lecanemab, the rate of cognitive and functional
declination slowed by 27%. However, there are questions about
the safety of Lecanemab.155,156 Therefore, it is urgent to develop
new therapeutic strategies to improve the therapeutic eﬀect of
AD. With a deep understanding of AD, there are many potent
therapeutic targets for AD therapy, which distribute in diﬀerent
areas in the brain. For example, Ab mainly spreads in the
extracellular space, while toxic tau protein mainly exists
in neurons. Furthermore, disordered microglia and neurons
exhibit neuroinflammation. NPs have been explored for its
great potential in AD therapy. The establishment of multifunc-
tional and smart NPs, which can easily cross the BBB and reach
the AD diseased site and then cruise into lesion sites, and
programmed release of loaded-drugs or secondary targeted NPs
at specific areas will greatly improve the therapeutic eﬀect.
However, the dilemma between the versatility of NPs for eﬀec-
tive AD treatment and the complex design of NPs for clinical
translation should be carefully considered.
The safety of NPs is a critical issue for their further clinical
use. The metabolism of NPs for AD therapy is very important
but has been rarely studied. In our previous study, we proposed
that a glymphatic system was the most feasible way for gold
nanoclusters (AuNCs) to leave the brain. The BBB and microglia
played a synergistic role with the glymphatic system in facili-
tating AuNC elimination. This study provided a basis for
further brain delivery of gold nanoparticles.157 However, more
research is needed to validate the universality of the theories on
diﬀerent NPs, which will contribute to the development of
potent NPs to treat AD. For example, metal-containing NPs,
such as Cu2+- and Fe3+-based NPs, play a key role in accelerating
the aggregation of the Ab; thus, the nanomaterials containing
certain metal ions may contribute to ROS generation, inflam-
matory factor release, and microglial activation reducing
neurotoxicity.158 On the other hand, their accumulation in
Review
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186 |  5181
non-targeted organs may cause toxic and side eﬀects. For
example, CeO2 NPs play an excellent role in neuroprotection,
but they accumulate in the liver, kidneys, and other organs for a
long time, which may induce a long-term toxic eﬀect.159 In
addition, peptides derived from Ab fibrillogenesis and tau
protein are usually modified on the surface of the NPs for
active targeting, and then the toxic protein is assembled with
NPs for inhibiting the aggregation and promoting its clearance.
However, the neurotoxicity of the formed complex between NPs
and toxic protein has been rarely studied. Furthermore, for
microglial and neuron targeting strategies, the precise target-
ability of NPs is very important because various therapeutics
may have diﬀerent pharmacological eﬀects in diﬀerent cells.
At the same time, precise targeting can avoid toxic and side
eﬀects on normal cells. Based on this, more precise targeting
strategies should be explored in the future, such as intelligent
screening of more specific targeting molecules using high-
throughput equipment, so as to improve the targeting eﬃ-
ciency in focal cells or subcellular organelles.
In summary, AD is a complex and mysterious disease with a
limited understanding of its physiopathology. This review gives
an illustrated description of recent advances in nanotechnology
against AD, which provides a potential insight into future
treatment directions. Although there are still multiple obstacles
for AD management, we anticipate that one day, AD will be
completely cured with a further understanding of AD and
advances in nanotechnology in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (81872806), the 111 Project (B18035),
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central University
(China), Talents Cultivation Program of National Administra-
tion of Traditional Chinese Medicine (ZYYCXTD-D-202209) and
Sichuan Science and Technology Program (2023NSFSC1195).
Notes and references
1 J. Avila and G. Perry, A Multilevel View of the Development
of Alzheimer’s Disease, Neuroscience, 2021, 457, 283–293.
2 D. Knopman, H. Amieva and R. Petersen, et al., Alzheimer
disease, Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers, 2021, 7, 33.
3 G. Cornutiu, The Epidemiological Scale of Alzheimer’s
Disease, J. Clin. Med. Res., 2015, 7, 657–666.
4 J. Cummings, G. Lee and K. Zhong, et al., Alzheimer’s
disease
drug
development
pipeline:
2021,
Alzheimers
Dement (N Y), 2021, 7, e12179.
5 D. Veitch, M. Weine and P. Aisen, et al., Understanding
disease progression and improving Alzheimer’s disease
clinical trials: Recent highlights from the Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Alzheimers Dement, 2019,
15, 106–152.
6 D. Mehta, R. Jackson and G. Paul, et al., Why do trials for
Alzheimer’s disease drugs keep failing? A discontinued
drug perspective for 2010-2015, Expert Opin. Invest. Drugs,
2017, 26, 735–739.
7 J. Hardy and D. Allsop, Amyloid deposition as the central
event in the aetiology of Alzheimer’s disease, Trends
Pharmacol Sci, 1991, 12, 383–388.
8 B. Frost, R. Jack and M. Diamond, Propagation of tau
misfolding from the outside to the inside of a cell,
J. Biol. Chem., 2009, 284, 12845–12852.
9 S. Brioschi, Y. Zhou and M. Colonna, Brain Parenchymal
and
Extraparenchymal
Macrophages
in
Development,
Homeostasis, and Disease, J. Immunol., 2020, 204, 294–305.
10 H. Hampel, M. Mesulam and A. Cuello, et al., The choli-
nergic system in the pathophysiology and treatment of
Alzheimer’s disease, Brain, 2018, 141, 1917–1933.
11 C. Cheignon, M. Tomas and D. Bonnefont-Rousselot, et al.,
Oxidative stress and the amyloid beta peptide in Alzhei-
mer’s disease, Redox Biol, 2018, 14, 450–464.
12 T. Jiang, Q. Sun and S. Chen, Oxidative stress: A major
pathogenesis and potential therapeutic target of antioxi-
dative agents in Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, Prog. Neurobiol., 2016, 147, 1–19.
13 Z. Reijyeh and R. Karaman, Comprehensive Review on
Alzheimer’s Disease: Causes and Treatment, Molecules,
2020, 25, 5789.
14 Z. Du, M. Li and J. Ren, et al., Current Strategies for
Modulating Ab Aggregation with Multifunctional Agents,
Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 2172–2184.
15 H. Moorthy and T. Govindaraju, Dendrimer Architectonics
to Treat Cancer and Neurodegenerative Diseases with
Implications in Theranostics and Personalized Medicine,
ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 1115–1139.
16 R. Deane and B. Zlokovic, Role of the blood–brain barrier
in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease, Curr. Alzheimer
Res., 2007, 4, 191–197.
17 Y. Song, C. Hu and Y. Fu, et al., Modulating the blood–
brain tumor barrier for improving drug delivery efficiency
and efficacy, VIEW, 2022, 3, 20200129.
18 M. Pardridge, Tyrosine hydroxylase replacement in experi-
mental Parkinson’s disease with transvascular gene ther-
apy, NeuroRx, 2005, 2, 129–138.
19 A. Wilczewska, K. Niemirowicz and K. Markiewicz, et al.,
Nanoparticles as drug delivery systems, Pharmacol. Rep.,
2012, 64, 1020–1037.
20 H. Zeng, Y. Qi and Z. Zhang, et al., Nanomaterials toward
the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: Recent advances and
future trends, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 1857–1868.
21 R. Liu, C. Luo and Z. Pang, et al., Advances of nanoparticles
as drug delivery systems for disease diagnosis and treat-
ment, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2023, 34, 107518.
22 T. Ling, S. Chandrasegaran and L. Xuan, et al., The
Potential Benefits of Nanotechnology in Treating Alzhei-
mer’s Disease, BioMed Res. Int., 2021, 5550938.
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Review
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

5182 |  Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
23 S. Ribaricˇ, Nanotechnology Therapy for Alzheimer’s Disease
MemoryImpairmentAttenuation,Int.J.Mol.Sci.,2021,22,1102.
24 J. Li and K. Kataoka, Chemo-physical Strategies to Advance
the in Vivo Functionality of Targeted Nanomedicine: The
Next Generation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 538–559.
25 M. Mitchell, M. Billingsley and R. M. Haley, et al., Engi-
neering precision nanoparticles for drug delivery, Nat. Rev.
Drug Discov, 2021, 20, 101–124.
26 Y. Cao and R. Zhang, The application of nanotechnology in
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol.,
2022, 10, 1042986.
27 S. Ruan, Y. Zhou and X. Jiang, et al., Rethinking CRITID
Procedure of Brain Targeting Drug Delivery: Circulation,
Blood Brain Barrier Recognition, Intracellular Transport,
Diseased Cell Targeting, Internalization, and Drug Release,
Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2004025.
28 R. Singh and J. Lillard, Nanoparticle-based targeted drug
delivery, Exp. Mol. Pathol., 2009, 86, 215–223.
29 M. Mitchell, M. Billingsley and R. Haley, et al., Engineering
precision nanoparticles for drug delivery, Nat. Rev. Drug
Discov., 2021, 20, 101–124.
30 M. Patel and B. Patel, Crossing the Blood–Brain Barrier:
Recent Advances in Drug Delivery to the Brain, CNS Drugs,
2017, 31, 109–133.
31 Y. Chen and L. Liu, Modern methods for delivery of drugs
across the blood–brain barrier, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev., 2012,
64, 640–665.
32 Y. Zhang, A. Warden, K. Ahmad and Y. Liu, et al., Single-
Cell Microwell Platform Reveals Circulating Neural Cells as
a Clinical Indicator for Patients with Blood–Brain Barrier
Breakdown, Research, 2021, 9873545.
33 L. Han and C. Jiang, Evolution of blood–brain barrier in
brain diseases and related systemic nanoscale brain-
targeting drug delivery strategies, Acta Pharm. Sin. B,
2021, 11, 2306–2325.
34 Q. Huang, C. Jiang and X. Xia, et al., Pathological BBB
Crossing Melanin-Like Nanoparticles as Metal-Ion Chelators
and
Neuroinflammation
Regulators
against
Alzheimer’s
Disease, Research, 2023, 6, 0180.
35 H. Gao, Progress and perspectives on targeting nano-
particles for brain drug delivery, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2016,
6(4), 268–286.
36 H. Gao, Perspectives on Dual Targeting Delivery Systems for
Brain Tumors, J. Neuroimmune Pharmacol., 2017, 12, 6–16.
37 X. Jiao, Y. Yu and J. Meng, et al., Dual-targeting and
microenvironment-responsive micelles as a gene delivery
system to improve the sensitivity of glioma to radiother-
apy, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2019, 9, 381–396.
38 M. Rotman, M. Welling and A. Bunschoten, et al.,
Enhanced glutathione PEGylated liposomal brain delivery
of an anti-amyloid single domain antibody fragment in a
mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease, J. Controlled Release,
2015, 203, 40–50.
39 S. Sonawane, A. Ahmad and S. Chinnathambi, Protein-
Capped Metal Nanoparticles Inhibit Tau Aggregation in
Alzheimer’s Disease, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 12833–12840.
40 Q. Song, M. Huang and L. Yao, et al., Lipoprotein-based
nanoparticles rescue the memory loss of mice with Alzhei-
mer’s disease by accelerating the clearance of amyloid-
beta, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2345–2359.
41 F. Meng, S. Asghar and S. Gao, et al., A novel LDL-mimic
nanocarrier for the targeted delivery of curcumin into the
brain to treat Alzheimer’s disease, Colloids Surf., B, 2015,
134, 88–97.
42 H. Zhang, W. Jiang and Y. Zhao, et al., Lipoprotein-
Inspired Nanoscavenger for the Three-Pronged Modula-
tion of Microglia-Derived Neuroinflammation in Alzhei-
mer’s Disease Therapy, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 2450–2460.
43 G. Morad, C. Carman and E. Hagedorn, et al., Tumor-
Derived Extracellular Vesicles Breach the Intact Blood–
Brain Barrier via Transcytosis, ACS Nano, 2019, 13,
13853–13865.
44 E. Batrakova and M. Kim, Using exosomes, naturally-
equipped nanocarriers, for drug delivery, J. Controlled
Release, 2015, 219, 396–405.
45 T. Li, X. Wang and C. Sheng, et al., Extracellular vesicles as
an emerging tool for the early detection of Alzheimer’s
disease, Mech. Ageing Dev., 2019, 184, 111175.
46 S. Lakshmi, M. Essa and R. Hartman, et al., Exosomes in
Alzheimer’s Disease: Potential Role as Pathological Med-
iators, Biomarkers and Therapeutic Targets, Neurochem.
Res., 2020, 45, 2553–2559.
47 T. Lei, Z. Yang and X. Xia, et al., A nanocleaner specifically
penetrates the blood–brain barrier at lesions to clean toxic
proteins
and
regulate
inflammation
in
Alzheimer’s
disease, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2021, 11, 4032–4044.
48 L. Cai, C. Yang and W. Jia, et al., Endo/Lysosome-Escapable
Delivery Depot for Improving BBB Transcytosis and Neu-
ron Targeted Therapy of Alzheimer’s Disease, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2020, 30, 1909999.
49 D. Selkoe and J. Hardy, The amyloid hypothesis of Alzhei-
mer’s disease at 25 years, EMBO Mol. Med., 2016, 8,
595–608.
50 K. Iqbal, A. Alonso and S. Chen, et al., Tau pathology in
Alzheimer disease and other tauopathies, Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, 2005, 1739, 198–210.
51 P. Delbreil, J. Rabanel and X. Banquy, et al., Therapeutic
nanotechnologies for Alzheimer’s disease: A critical analy-
sis of recent trends and findings, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.,
2022, 187, 114397.
52 M. Busche and B. Hyman, Synergy between amyloid-b and
tau in Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Neurosci., 2020, 23,
1183–1193.
53 J. Hardy and D. Selkoe, The amyloid hypothesis of Alzhei-
mer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to
therapeutics, Science, 2002, 297, 353–356.
54 S. Sensi, A. Granzotto and M. Siotto, et al., Copper and Zinc
Dysregulation in Alzheimer’s Disease, Trends Pharmacol.
Sci., 2018, 39, 1049–1063.
55 R. Medeiros, V. Baglietto and F. LaFerl, The role of tau in
Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders, CNS Neurosci.
Ther., 2011, 17, 514–524.
Review
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186 |  5183
56 P. d’Errico and L. Meyer-Luehmann, Mechanisms of
Pathogenic Tau and Ab Protein Spreading in Alzheimer’s
Disease, Front. Aging Neurosci., 2020, 12, 265.
57 A. Mahmood and V. Miron, Microglia as therapeutic
targets for central nervous system remyelination, Curr.
Opin. Pharmacol., 2022, 63, 102188.
58 S. Hickman, S. Izzy and P. Sen, et al., Microglia in neuro-
degeneration, Nat. Neurosci., 2018, 21, 1359–1369.
59 P. Fu¨ger, J. Hefendehl and K. Veeraraghavalu, et al., Micro-
glia turnover with aging and in an Alzheimer’s model via
long-term in vivo single-cell imaging, Nat. Neurosci., 2017,
20, 1371–1376.
60 J. Wan, A. Fu and F. C. F. Ip, et al., Tyk2/STAT3 signaling
mediates beta-amyloid-induced neuronal cell death: impli-
cations in Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neurosci., 2010, 30,
6873–6881.
61 T. Chiba, M. Yamada and S. Aiso, Targeting the JAK2/
STAT3 axis in Alzheimer’s disease, Expert Opin. Ther.
Targets, 2009, 13, 155–1167.
62 N. Singh, B. Das and J. Zhou, et al., Targeted BACE-1
inhibition in microglia enhances amyloid clearance and
improved cognitive performance, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabo3610.
63 G. Stanciu, A. Luca and R. Rusu, et al., Alzheimer’s Disease
Pharmacotherapy
in
Relation
to
Cholinergic
System
Involvement, Biomolecules, 2019, 10, 40.
64 V. Vasic, K. Barth and M. Schmidt, Neurodegeneration and
Neuro-Regeneration-Alzheimer’s Disease and Stem Cell
Therapy, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2019, 20, 4272.
65 K. Kopeikina, G. Carlson and R. Pitstick, et al., Tau
accumulation causes mitochondrial distribution deficits
in neurons in a mouse model of tauopathy and in human
Alzheimer’s disease brain, Am. J. Pathol., 2011, 179, 2071–2082.
66 Z. Szepesi, O. Manouchehrian and S. Bachiller, et al.,
Bidirectional Microglia-Neuron Communication in Health
and Disease, Front. Cell. Neurosci., 2018, 12, 323.
67 P. Moreira, C. Carvalho and X. Zhu, et al., Mitochondrial
dysfunction is a trigger of Alzheimer’s disease patho-
physiology, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2010, 1802, 2–10.
68 J. Yao, R. Irwin and L. Zhao, et al., Mitochondrial bioener-
getic deficit precedes Alzheimer’s pathology in female
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 14670–14675.
69 R. Swerdlow, Mitochondria and Mitochondrial Cascades
in Alzheimer’s Disease, J. Alzheimers Dis., 2018, 62,
1403–1416.
70 M. Zabel, A. Nackenoﬀand W. Kirsch, et al., Markers of
oxidative damage to lipids, nucleic acids and proteins and
antioxidant enzymes activities in Alzheimer’s disease
brain: A meta-analysis in human pathological specimens,
Free Radicals Biol. Med., 2018, 115, 351–360.
71 A. Ionescu-Tucker and C. Cotman, Emerging roles of
oxidative stress in brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease,
Neurobiol. Aging, 2021, 107, 86–95.
72 X. Wang, W. Wang and L. Li, et al., Oxidative stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease, Bio-
chim. Biophys. Acta, 2014, 1842, 1240–1247.
73 R. Bai, J. Guo and X. Ye, et al., Oxidative stress: The core
pathogenesis and mechanism of Alzheimer’s disease,
Ageing Res. Rev., 2022, 77, 101619.
74 M. Ferreira, A. Vasconcelos and T. Vilhena, et al., Oxidative
Stress in Alzheimer’s Disease: Should We Keep Trying
Antioxidant Therapies?, Cell. Mol. Neurobiol., 2015, 35,
595–614.
75 B. Moosmann and C. Behl, Antioxidants as treatment for
neurodegenerative disorders, Expert Opin. Invest. Drugs,
2002, 11, 1407–1435.
76 G. Terstappen, A. H. Meyer and R. D. Bell, et al., Strategies
for delivering therapeutics across the blood–brain barrier,
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov., 2021, 20, 362–383.
77 W. Zhang, A. Mehta and Z. Tong, et al., Development of
Polymeric Nanoparticles for Blood–Brain Barrier Trans-
fer—Strategies and Challenges, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003937.
78 F. Leng and P. Edison, Neuroinflammation and microglial
activation in Alzheimer disease: where do we go from
here?, Nat. Rev. Neurol., 2021, 17, 157–172.
79 N. Gao, Z. Du and Y. Guan, et al., Chirality-Selected
Chemical Modulation of Amyloid Aggregation, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6915–6921.
80 H. Sun, J. Liu and S. Li, et al., Reactive Amphiphilic
Conjugated Polymers for Inhibiting Amyloid b Assembly,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5988–5993.
81 N. Gao, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, et al., Site-Directed Chemical
Modification of Amyloid by Polyoxometalates for Inhibi-
tion of Protein Misfolding and Aggregation, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202115336.
82 H. Moorthy, L. P. Datta and S. Samanta, et al., Multi-
functional
Architectures
of
Cyclic
Dipeptide
Copoly-
mers and Composites, and Modulation of Multifaceted
Amyloid-b Toxicity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14,
56535–56547.
83 S. Chafekar, H. Malda and M. Merkx, et al., Branched
KLVFF tetramers strongly potentiate inhibition of beta-
amyloid aggregation, ChemBioChem, 2007, 8, 1857–1864.
84 D. Liu, D. Fu and L. Zhang, et al., Detection of amyloid-
beta by Fmoc-KLVFF self-assembled fluorescent nano-
particles for Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis, Chin. Chem.
Lett., 2021, 32, 1066–1070.
85 P. Yang, C. Yang and K. Zhang, et al., KLVFF peptide
functionalized nanoparticles capture Ab42 by co-assembly
for decreasing cytotoxicity, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29,
1811–1814.
86 M. Ma, Z. Liu and N. Gao, et al., Self-Protecting Biomimetic
Nanozyme for Selective and Synergistic Clearance of
Peripheral Amyloid-b in an Alzheimer’s Disease Model,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21702–21711.
87 Q. Luo, Y. Lin and P. Yang, et al., A self-destructive
nanosweeper that captures and clears amyloid b-peptides,
Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1802.
88 R. Nixon, Autophagy, amyloidogenesis and Alzheimer
disease, J. Cell Sci., 2007, 120, 4081–4091.
89 K. Hou, J. Zhao and H. Wang, et al., Chiral gold nano-
particles enantioselectively rescue memory deficits in a
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Review
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

5184 |  Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Commun., 2020,
11, 4790.
90 M. Loef, G. Schrauzer and H. Walach, Selenium and
Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review, J. Alzheimers
Dis., 2011, 26, 81–104.
91 J. Zhang, X. Zhou and Q. Yu, et al., Epigallocatechin-3-
gallate (EGCG)-stabilized selenium nanoparticles coated
with Tet-1 peptide to reduce amyloid-b aggregation and
cytotoxicity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8475–8487.
92 X. Guo, Q. Lie and Y. Liu, et al., Multifunctional Selenium
Quantum Dots for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease by
Reducing Ab-Neurotoxicity and Oxidative Stress and Alle-
viate Neuroinflammation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces,
2021, 13, 30261–30273.
93 H. Zhang, D. Yu and S. Liu, et al., NIR-II Hydrogen-Bonded
Organic Frameworks (HOFs) Used for Target-Specific Amy-
loid-b Photooxygenation in an Alzheimer’s Disease Model,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202109068.
94 Y. Wang and E. Mandelkow, Tau in physiology and pathol-
ogy, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2016, 17, 5–21.
95 L. Zhu, L. Xu and X. Wu, et al., Tau-Targeted Multifunc-
tional Nanoinhibitor for Alzheimer’s Disease, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 23328–23338.
96 L. Xu, Y. Ding and F. Ma, et al., Engineering a pathological
tau-targeted nanochaperone for selective and synergetic
inhibition of tau pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease, Nano
Today, 2022, 43, 101388.
97 P. Seidler, D. Boyer and J. Rodriguez, et al., Structure-based
inhibitors of tau aggregation, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 170–176.
98 J. Liu, Q. Teng and M. Garrity, et al., A novel peptide
defined through phage display for therapeutic protein and
vector
neuronal
targeting,
Neurobiol.
Dis.,
2005,
19,
407–418.
99 S. Townsend, G. Evrony and F. Gu, et al., Tetanus toxin C
fragment-conjugated
nanoparticles
for
targeted
drug
delivery to neurons, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 5176–5184.
100 M. Agrawal, S. Saraf and S. Saraf, et al., Nose-to-brain drug
delivery: An update on clinical challenges and progress
towards approval of anti-Alzheimer drugs, J. Controlled
Release, 2018, 281, 139–177.
101 X. Yang, W. Yang and X. Xia, et al., Intranasal Delivery of
BACE1 siRNA and Rapamycin by Dual Targets Modified
Nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s Disease Therapy, Small,
2022, 18, 2203182.
102 C. Venegas, S. Kumar and B. Franklin, et al., Microglia-
derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-b in Alzheimer’s
disease, Nature, 2017, 552, 355–361.
103 P. Wes, F. Sayed and F. Bard, et al., Targeting microglia for
the treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease, Glia, 2016, 64,
1710–1732.
104 H. Zhang, Y. Zhao and M. Yu, et al., Reassembly of native
components with donepezil to execute dual-missions in
Alzheimer’s disease therapy, J. Controlled Release, 2019,
296, 14–28.
105 C. Reitz, M. Tang and N. Schupf, et al., Association of
higher levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in
elderly individuals and lower risk of late-onset Alzheimer
disease, Arch. Neurol., 2010, 67, 1491–1497.
106 B. Sahoo, M. Bekier and Z. Liu, et al., Structural Interaction
of Apolipoprotein A-I Mimetic Peptide with Amyloid-b
Generates Toxic Hetero-oligomers, J. Mol. Biol., 2020,
432, 1020–1034.
107 G. Han, K. Bai and X. Yang, et al., ‘‘Drug-Carrier’’ Synergy
Therapy for Amyloid-b Clearance and Inhibition of Tau
Phosphorylation via Biomimetic Lipid Nanocomposite
Assembly, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, e2106072.
108 M. Oz, D. Lorke and G. Petroianu, Methylene blue
and Alzheimer’s disease, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2009, 78,
927–932.
109 A. Begum, M. Jones and G. Lim, et al., Curcumin structure-
function, bioavailability, and eﬃcacy in models of neu-
roinflammation and Alzheimer’s disease, J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther., 2008, 326, 196–208.
110 R. Liu, J. Yang and L. Liu, et al., An ‘‘Amyloid-b Cleaner’’
for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease by Normalizing
Microglial Dysfunction, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1901555.
111 A. Sharma, J. Porterfield and E. Smith, et al., Eﬀect of
mannose targeting of hydroxyl PAMAM dendrimers on
cellular and organ biodistribution in a neonatal brain
injury model, J. Controlled Release, 2018, 283, 175–189.
112 D. Du, N. Chang and S. Sun, et al., The role of glucose
transporters in the distribution of p-aminophenyl-a-d-
mannopyranoside modified liposomes within mice brain,
J. Controlled Release, 2014, 182, 99–110.
113 K. Fukumot, H. Mizoguchi and H. Takeuchi, et al., Fingo-
limod increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels
and ameliorates amyloid b-induced memory impairment,
Behav. Brain Res., 2014, 268, 88–93.
114 R. Roy, S. Kumar and A. Verma, et al., Zinc oxide nano-
particles provide an adjuvant eﬀect to ovalbumin via a
Th2 response in Balb/c mice, Int. Immunol., 2014, 26,
159–172.
115 V. Soroka, D. Kiryushko and V. Novitskaya, et al., Induction
of neuronal diﬀerentiation by a peptide corresponding to
the homophilic binding site of the second Ig module of the
neural cell adhesion molecule, J. Biol. Chem., 2002, 277,
24676–24683.
116 P. Wang, P. Yang and K. Qian, et al., Precise gene delivery
systems
with
detachable
albumin
shell
remodeling
dysfunctional
microglia
by
TREM2
for
treatment
of
Alzheimer’s disease, Biomaterials, 2022, 281, 121360.
117 C. Lee, A. Daggett and X. Gu, et al., Elevated TREM2 Gene
Dosage Reprograms Microglia Responsivity and Amelio-
rates Pathological Phenotypes in Alzheimer’s Disease
Models, Neuron, 2018, 97, 1032–1048.e5.
118 Y. Lee, T. Ishii and H. Kim, et al., Eﬃcient delivery of
bioactive antibodies into the cytoplasm of living cells by
charge-conversional polyion complex micelles, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2552–2555.
119 W. Wang, F. Zhao and X. Ma, et al., Mitochondria dys-
function in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: recent
advances, Mol. Neurodegener., 2020, 15, 30.
Review
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186 |  5185
120 J. Xu, W. Du and Y. Zhao, et al., Mitochondria targeting
drugs for neurodegenerative diseases-Design, mechanism
and application, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2022, 12, 2778–2789.
121 I. Herrmann, M. Wood and G. Fuhrmann, Extracellular
vesicles as a next-generation drug delivery platform, Nat.
Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 748–759.
122 W. Liu, M. Wang and L. Shen, et al., SHP2-mediated
mitophagy boosted by lovastatin in neuronal cells allevi-
ates parkinsonism in mice, Signal Transduction Targeted
Ther., 2021, 6, 34.
123 F. Xu, Y. Wu and Q. Yang, et al., Engineered Extracellular
Vesicles with SHP2 High Expression Promote Mitophagy
for Alzheimer’s Disease Treatment, Adv. Mater., 2022,
34, e2207107.
124 K. Qian, X. Bao and Y. Li, et al., Cholinergic Neuron
Targeting Nanosystem Delivering Hybrid Peptide for Com-
binatorial Mitochondrial Therapy in Alzheimer’s Disease,
ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 11455–11472.
125 V. Liberto, D. Borroto-Escuela and M. Frinchi, et al., Exis-
tence of muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) and
fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) heteroreceptor
complexes and their enhancement of neurite outgrowth
in neural hippocampal cultures, Biochim. Biophys. Acta,
Gen. Subj., 2017, 1861, 235–245.
126 J. Ren, S. L. Zhang and X. L. Wang, et al., Expression levels
of the a7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in the brains of
patients with Alzheimer’s disease and their eﬀect on
synaptic proteins in SH-SY5Y cells, Mol. Med. Rep., 2020,
22, 2063–2075.
127 X. Zhang, X. Huang and C. Fang, et al., miR-124 Regulates the
Expression of BACE1 in the Hippocampus Under Chronic
Cerebral Hypoperfusion, Mol. Neurobiol., 2017, 54, 2498–2506.
128 Q. Ouyang, K. Liu and Q. Zhu, et al., Brain-Penetration and
Neuron-Targeting DNA Nanoflowers Co-Delivering miR-
124 and Rutin for Synergistic Therapy of Alzheimer’s
Disease, Small, 2022, 18, e2107534.
129 R. Zhang, Y. Li and B. Hu, et al., Traceable Nanoparticle
Delivery of Small Interfering RNA and Retinoic Acid with
Temporally Release Ability to Control Neural Stem Cell
Diﬀerentiation for Alzheimer’s Disease Therapy, Adv.
Mater., 2016, 28, 6345–6352.
130 T. Bai and F. Sun,L. Zhang, et al., Restraint of the Diﬀer-
entiation of Mesenchymal Stem Cells by a Nonfouling
Zwitterionic Hydrogel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126,
12943–12948.
131 D. Yu, H. Zhang and Z. Liu, et al., Hydrogen-Bonded
Organic Framework (HOF)-Based Single-Neural Stem Cell
Encapsulation and Transplantation to Remodel Impaired
Neural Networks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202201485.
132 P. Liu, T. Zhang and Q. Chen, et al., Biomimetic
Dendrimer-Peptide
Conjugates
for
Early
Multi-Target
Therapy of Alzheimer’s Disease by Inflammatory Micro-
environment Modulation, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2100746.
133 V. Srikanth, A. Maczurek and T. Phan, et al., Advanced
glycation endproducts and their receptor RAGE in Alzheimer’s
disease, Neurobiol. Aging, 2011, 32, 763–777.
134 A. Rojo, M. Pajares and P. Rada, et al., NRF2 deficiency
replicates transcriptomic changes in Alzheimer’s patients
and worsens APP and TAU pathology, Redox Biol., 2017, 13,
444–451.
135 X. He, X. Wang and L. Yang, et al., Intelligent lesion blood–
brain barrier targeting nano-missiles for Alzheimer’s dis-
ease treatment by anti-neuroinflammation and neuropro-
tection, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2022, 12, 1987–1999.
136 Y. Tang, J. Li and C. Gao, et al., Hepatoprotective Eﬀect of
Quercetin on Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Inflam-
mation after Intense Exercise in Mice through Phosphoi-
nositide 3-Kinase and Nuclear Factor-Kappa B, Oxid. Med.
Cell. Longevity, 2016, 2016, 8696587.
137 J. Mlcek, T. Jurikova and S. Skrovankova, et al., Quercetin
and Its Anti-Allergic Immune Response, Molecules, 2016,
21, 623.
138 Y. Dou, D. Zhao and F. Yang, et al., Natural Phyto-
Antioxidant Albumin Nanoagents to Treat Advanced Alz-
heimer’s Disease, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13,
30373–30382.
139 H. Wei and E. Wang, Nanomaterials with enzyme-like
characteristics
(nanozymes):
next-generation
artificial
enzymes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6060–6093.
140 C. Ge, G. Fang and X. Shen, et al., Facet Energy versus
Enzyme-like Activities: The Unexpected Protection of Pal-
ladium Nanocrystals against Oxidative Damage, ACS Nano,
2016, 10, 10436–10445.
141 B. Yu, M. Ruan and X. Dong, et al., The mechanism of the
opening of the blood–brain barrier by borneol: a pharma-
codynamics and pharmacokinetics combination study,
J. Ethnopharmacol., 2013, 150, 1096–1108.
142 H. Kwon, M. Cha and D. Kim, et al., Mitochondria-
Targeting Ceria Nanoparticles as Antioxidants for Alzhei-
mer’s Disease, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2860–2870.
143 K. Ge, Y. Mu and M. Liu, et al., Gold Nanorods with Spatial
Separation of CeO2 Deposition for Plasmonic-Enhanced
Antioxidant Stress and Photothermal Therapy of Alzheimer’s
Disease, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 3662–3674.
144 C. Du, W. Feng and X. Dai, et al., Cu2+ -Chelatable and
ROS-Scavenging MXenzyme as NIR-II-Triggered Blood–
Brain Barrier-Crossing Nanocatalyst against Alzheimer’s
Disease, Small, 2022, 18, e2203031.
145 K. Reybier, S. Ayala and B. Alies, et al., Free Superoxide is
an Intermediate in the Production of H2O2 by Copper(I)-
Ab Peptide and O2, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55,
1085–1089.
146 Y. Yu, Y. Zhang and M. Kenrick, et al., Boosting brain
uptake of a therapeutic antibody by reducing its aﬃnity for
a transcytosis target, Sci. Transl. Med., 2011, 3, 84ra44.
147 P. Friden, L. Walus and G. Musso, et al., Anti-transferrin
receptor antibody and antibody-drug conjugates cross the
blood–brain barrier, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1991, 88,
4771–4775.
148 J. Lajoie and E. Shusta, Targeting receptor-mediated trans-
port for delivery of biologics across the blood–brain
barrier, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2015, 55, 613–631.
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Review
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online

5186 |  Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 5171–5186
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Chinese Chemical Society 2023
149 A. Widera, F. Norouziyan and W. Shen, Mechanisms of
TfR-mediated transcytosis and sorting in epithelial cells
and applications toward drug delivery, Adv. Drug Deliv.
Rev., 2003, 55, 1439–1466.
150 S. Ruan, L. Qin and W. Xiao, et al., Acid-Responsive Transfer-
rin Dissociation and GLUT Mediated Exocytosis for Increased
Blood–Brain Barrier Transcytosis and Programmed Glioma
Targeting Delivery, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802227.
151 X. He, J. Xie and J. Zhang, et al., Acid-Responsive Dual-
Targeted Nanoparticles Encapsulated Aspirin Rescue the
Immune Activation and Phenotype in Autism Spectrum
Disorder, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, e2104286.
152 K. Mullane and M. Williams, Preclinical Models of Alzheimer’s
Disease: Relevance and Translational Validity, Curr. Protoc.
Pharmacol., 2019, 84, e57.
153 S. Gauthier and P. Scheltens, Can we do better in developing
new drugs for Alzheimer’s disease?, Alzheimers Dement, 2009,
5, 489–491.
154 S. Ewen, A. Fauzi and Y. Q. Tang, et al., A review on
advances of treatment modalities for Alzheimer’s disease,
Life Sci., 2021, 276, 119129.
155 S. Hoy, Lecanemab: First Approval, Drugs, 2023, 83,
359–365.
156 S. Mead and N. C. Fox, Lecanemab slows Alzheimer’s
disease: hope and challenges, Lancet Neurol., 2023, 22,
106–108.
157 R. Liu, W. Jia and Y. Wang, et al., Glymphatic System and
Subsidiary Pathways Drive Nanoparticles Away from the
Brain, Research, 2022, 9847612.
158 X. Chang, J. Li and S. Niu, et al., Neurotoxicity of metal-
containing nanoparticles and implications in glial cells,
J. Appl. Toxicol., 2021, 41, 65–81.
159 B. Rzigalinski, C. Carfagna and M. Ehrich, Cerium oxide
nanoparticles in neuroprotection and considerations for
eﬃcacy and safety, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nano-
biotechnol., 2017, 9, 1444.
Review
Materials Chemistry Frontiers
Published on 31 July 2023. Downloaded on 8/13/2024 9:30:45 AM. 
View Article Online