Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
1 of 19
N E U R O S C I E N C E
Neuronal YTHDF2 suppresses innate immune activation 
in Aβ pathology by promoting m6A-­dependent decay 
of cytosolic mitochondrial mRNAs
Wenqi Pan1†, Lin Yang1†, Yao Zhang1†, Yan Chen1, Yuesi Xu1, Yifan Li1, Yujie Fu1, Chunhui Ma1, 
Chunying Liu2, Qing Li1, Hailong Liu3, Hailin Wang3, Qi Xu4*, Wei-­Min Tong1*, Yamei Niu1,5*
Dysregulation of RNA m6A modification has been implicated in Alzheimer’s disease (AD), but the molecular 
mechanisms remain largely unclear. Here, we identified the presence of m6A on mitochondria-­encoded messen-
ger RNAs (mt-­mRNAs) in the brain, with elevated levels correlated with amyloid-­β (Aβ) deposition. Under phys-
iological conditions, cytosolic m6A-­modified mt-­Nd4 is recognized and degraded by the m6A reader protein 
YTHDF2, thereby preventing aberrant activation of the RIG-­I–MAVS innate immune pathway in neurons. Under 
Aβ-­associated pathological conditions, YTHDF2 expression is markedly down-­regulated in neurons, leading to 
the accumulation of m6A-­modified mt-­Nd4 in the cytosol. This accumulation triggers RIG-­I–MAVS activation and 
type I interferon (IFN) responses. Neuron-­derived IFN-­β then amplifies neuroinflammation by activating sur-
rounding microglia through a paracrine mechanism. Furthermore, neuronal Ythdf2 deficiency exacerbates Aβ-­
associated neuroinflammation and cognitive decline. Together, these findings reveal a previously unrecognized 
m6A/YTHDF2-­dependent regulatory axis that links mitochondrial RNA metabolism to innate immune activation 
and neuroinflammation in Aβ pathology.
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most prevalent neurodegenerative dis-
order, is pathologically characterized by the presence of amyloid-­β (Aβ) 
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (1). Aβ deposition begins in the pre-
clinical stage and triggers a cascade of pathological events, such as 
mitochondrial dysfunction, tau aggregation, and neuroinflammation 
(2). Recent trials of Aβ immunotherapies, which promote the clear-
ance of amyloid plaques and slow disease progression, underscore the 
critical role of Aβ in AD pathogenesis. Despite these efforts, how-
ever, the limited cognitive improvements observed in these thera-
pies suggest that targeting Aβ alone is insufficient (3). This limitation 
highlights the importance of identifying optimal treatment windows 
as interventions may be more effective before irreversible down-
stream damage occurs (4). A deep understanding of how Aβ deposi-
tion triggers subsequent pathological processes is, therefore, critical 
for developing multitarget therapeutic strategies and improving clini-
cal outcomes in AD.
Mounting evidence suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction plays 
a crucial role in AD, with mitophagy acting as a key quality control 
mechanism to preserve mitochondrial homeostasis by eliminating 
damaged mitochondria (5). However, this protective process is often 
disrupted by amyloid deposition, resulting in the release of proin-
flammatory mitochondrial components such as reactive oxygen spe-
cies and mitochondrial nucleic acids (6–8). For instance, cytosolic 
mitochondria-­encoded DNA (mtDNA) has been shown to activate 
the innate immune response of microglia through the cyclic GMP-­
AMP synthase–stimulator of interferon genes (cGAS-­STING) path-
way, thereby linking mitochondrial damage to neuroinflammatory 
processes in aging and AD (7, 9–11). Cytosolic mitochondrial RNA 
(mtRNA) is also recognized as a potent activator of innate immune 
signaling in various cell types (12–15); however, its specific role in AD 
pathogenesis remains poorly understood. Given its parallels with 
mtDNA and the growing appreciation of neuroimmune dysregula-
tion in AD, further investigation into mtRNA’s contribution to neuro­
inflammatory processes is warranted.
Epigenetic modifications have been proposed to link environ-
mental factors and susceptibility genes in the complex pathogenesis 
of AD, underscoring the importance of developing epigenetic-­based 
therapeutic strategies (16). Among these, N6-­methyladenosine (m6A), 
the most abundant epitranscriptional mark in the mammalian brain, 
plays essential roles in neurodevelopment (17), adult neurogenesis 
(18, 19), and learning and memory (20–23), primarily through its 
regulation of RNA metabolism (24). Emerging evidence indicates 
that dysregulated m6A is associated with multiple phenotypes and 
risk factors for AD (25), such as aging (26, 27), neuroinflammation 
(28, 29), and synaptic dysfunction (30–32). However, due to the com-
plex and heterogeneous nature of AD, the directionality and con-
sistency of m6A alterations remain under debate. Therefore, it is 
important to investigate specific risk factors within defined brain re-
gions and distinct cell types to better understand the role of m6A in 
AD. YTH N6-­methyladenosine RNA binding protein F2 (YTHDF2) 
is a well-­characterized m6A reader protein that plays a central role 
in RNA stability regulation via recruitment of the catabolite repres-
sion 4 (CCR4)-­negative on TATA-­less (NOT) transcription complex 
1Department of Pathology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences & School of Basic 
Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing 100005, China. 2Center for Experimental Animal Research, Institute of Basic 
Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China. 3State Key Laboratory of En-
vironmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-­Environmental 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China. 4State Key Labo-
ratory of Common Mechanism Research for Major Diseases, Institute of Basic 
Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sci-
ences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China. 5State Key Lab-
oratory of Complex, Severe, and Rare Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 
100730, China. 
*Corresponding author. Email: xuqi@​pumc.​edu.​cn (Q.X.); wmtong@​ibms.​pumc.​edu.​
cn (W.-­M.T.); niuym@​ibms.​pumc.​edu.​cn (Y.N.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2026 The 
Authors, some rights 
reserved; exclusive 
licensee American 
Association for the 
Advancement of 
Science. No claim to 
original U.S. 
Government Works. 
Distributed under a 
Creative Commons 
Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-­NC). 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
2 of 19
deadenylase complex (33, 34). This mechanism also enables host cells 
to degrade exogenous or endogenous immunostimulatory RNA, pre-
venting aberrant activation of innate immune sensors (35–38). How­
ever, whether YTHDF2 modulates mtRNA metabolism and innate 
immune signaling in the context of AD remains unknown.
Here, we show that YTHDF2 safeguards neuronal homeostasis by 
degrading m6A-­modified, cytosolic mitochondria-­encoded mRNAs 
(mt-­mRNAs). Aβ-­associated down-­regulation of YTHDF2 in neurons 
leads to cytosolic mt-­mRNA accumulation, subsequently triggering 
retinoic acid-­inducible gene I (RIG-­I)–mediated innate immune ac-
tivation. Neuron-­secreted interferon-­β (IFN-­β) then activates sur-
rounding microglia and promotes neuroinflammation. Together, these 
findings reveal a previously unrecognized role for neuronal YTHDF2 
as a suppressor of innate immune activation, linking RNA methyla-
tion and mitochondrial dysfunction to neuroinflammation under 
Aβ-­associated pathological conditions.
RESULTS
Aβ deposition elevates m6A level on mitochondrial mRNAs 
in AD models
Given the emerging evidence that RNA methylation contributes to 
neurodegenerative pathology, we investigated how Aβ deposition 
affects m6A modification. To this end, we examined m6A profiles in 
transgenic mouse models of amyloidosis, in patients with AD exhib-
iting pathological Aβ deposition, and in cellular models stimulated 
directly with oligomerized Aβ (oAβ) (Fig. 1A).
In the temporal cortices of APP/PS1 mice, a classic model of Aβ 
pathology, we identified ~20,000 m6A peaks per sample via m6A im-
munoprecipitation (IP) sequencing (m6A-­seq), with enrichment of 
the UGGAC consensus motif (fig. S1A and data S1 and S2). Consis-
tent with previous reports, these peaks were predominantly located 
in coding sequences, 3′ untranslated regions, and near stop codons 
(fig. S1B). In total, 4089 differentially methylated RNAs (DMRs) were 
identified between wild-­type (WT) and amyloid precursor protein/
presenilin 1 (APP/PS1) mice (Fig. 1B), which were enriched in path-
ways related to transcription regulation, brain development, and cell-­ 
cell adhesion (fig. S1C and data S3). Among all chromosomes, only the 
mitochondrial chromosome exhibited exclusively hyper-­methylated 
regions (fig. S1D), which led us to further examine m6A modifi-
cation on mitochondrial transcripts. Notably, multiple mt-­mRNAs 
exhibited consistently increased m6A methylation, such as mt-­Nd2, 
mt-­Nd4, mt-­Nd5, and Cytb (Fig. 1C).
To determine whether a similar phenomenon was present in hu-
man brain samples with Aβ deposition, we performed transcriptome-­
wide m6A-­seq on postmortem cortical tissues from three pairs of 
patients with AD and age-­matched healthy controls (fig. S1, E and F, 
and data S1 and S4). We identified 1135 DMRs enriched in path-
ways related to nervous system development, long-­term synaptic 
potentiation, and membrane organization (Fig. 1D, fig. S1G, and 
data S3 and S5). Intriguingly, in line with our findings in mice, most 
mt-­mRNAs exhibited hypermethylation in the cortices of patients 
with AD (Fig. 1E and fig. S1H). To further strengthen the reproduc-
ibility of these observations, we analyzed publicly available m6A-­seq 
datasets from three additional pairs of AD and control brains (39). 
Consistent with our own data, a subset of mt-­mRNAs exhibited 
elevated m6A levels in these independent datasets (fig. S2A). To 
evaluate whether the observed m6A alterations were secondary to 
changes in mitochondrial transcript abundance, we next examined 
mt-­mRNA expression levels in both publicly available transcrip-
tomic datasets and our in-­house RNA sequencing (RNA-­seq) data 
derived from the same cortical samples. Across datasets, mt-­mRNA 
expression did not exhibit consistent or directional changes between 
AD and control groups (fig. S2B), suggesting that the altered mt-­
mRNA m6A landscape in AD brains is unlikely to be attributable to 
changes in mitochondrial transcript abundance.
To provide orthogonal biochemical evidence supporting elevat-
ed m6A levels on mitochondrial transcripts, we used multiple com-
plementary approaches. Dot blot analysis confirmed the presence of 
m6A signals on mtRNAs isolated from the cortices of APP/PS1 mice 
(fig. S3A). In addition, ultrahigh-­performance liquid chromatography 
coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-­MS/MS) analy-
sis of mitochondrial poly(A) RNAs validated m6A modifications on 
mt-­mRNAs, revealing an m6A/A ratio of ~0.15% (Fig. 1F). To pinpoint 
specific mitochondrial transcripts contributing to this hypermethyl-
ation pattern, we next performed m6A–IP–quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction (qPCR) for 13 mt-­mRNAs. The hypermethylation of 
mt-­Nd2 and mt-­Nd4 was most pronounced in the temporal cortices 
of both APP/PS1 (Fig. 1G and fig. S3B) and five familial Alzheimer’s 
disease mutations (5×FAD) mice, another well-­established model of 
Aβ pathology (Fig. 1H and fig. S3C). Notably, increased m6A on 
mt-­ND4 was also observed in an independent cohort comprising three 
additional patients with AD (Fig. 1I and fig. S3D) and was therefore 
selected as a representative target for subsequent analyses. To rule out 
potential false positives due to antibody specificity, we repeated m6A-­
IP using an antibody from a different manufacturer and successfully 
validated the hypermethylation of mt-­Nd4 (fig. S3E). Furthermore, 
by using SRAMP (40), an online tool for m6A site prediction, we 
identified a high-­confidence m6A site on mt-­Nd4 (fig. S3F). Con-
sistent with this prediction, single-­base elongation-­ and ligation-­
based qPCR (SELECT-­qPCR) (41) demonstrated that the m6A level 
at this site was increased by ~1.5-­fold in the cortices of APP/PS1 mice 
(Fig. 1J and fig. S3G).
In APP/PS1 mice, Aβ plaques emerge around the sixth month of 
age and progressively intensify with age (42). Analysis of m6A levels in 
the cortices and hippocampi of mice at different ages revealed a pro-
gressive increase in mt-­Nd4 m6A levels with aging (fig. S3H), suggest-
ing a cumulative association between Aβ burden and hypermethylation. 
To identify the specific neural cell types responsible for the observed 
m6A alterations, we treated both primary neurons and microglia with 
oAβ (fig. S3I). A notable increase in m6A on mt-­Nd4 was detected 
exclusively in the stimulated neurons, whereas microglia showed no 
appreciable change (Fig. 1, K and L, and fig. S3J). Consistently, both 
oAβ-­stimulated retinoic acid (RA)–induced differentiated N2a cells 
(RA-­N2a) and APP-­overexpressing N2a (N2a/APP) cells exhibited 
mt-­Nd4 hypermethylation, whereas BV2 cells did not (Fig. 1, K and 
L, and fig. S3J). Together, the above results indicate that Aβ deposi-
tion during AD progression leads to the hypermethylation of mt-­
mRNAs, especially mt-­Nd4, in neurons.
Interaction of YTHDF2 with cytosol-­distributed mt-­Nd4 
in neurons
Because the regulatory function of m6A modification is mediated by 
reader proteins, we next sought to identify the proteins that interact 
with m6A on mt-­Nd4. Two RNA oligonucleotides corresponding to 
mt-­Nd4 were synthesized in vitro: one harboring a site-­specific m6A 
modification at the identified position (m6A-­oligo) and the other lacking 
this modification (A-­oligo) (data S6). We performed RNA pull-­down 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
3 of 19
assay using cortical lysates from APP/PS1 mice, followed by MS/MS 
analysis to identify candidate m6A-­binding proteins (Fig. 2A). Among the 
candidates, three known m6A reader proteins—YTHDF2, YTHDF3, 
and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein C (hnRNPC)—were 
specifically enriched by m6A-­oligo (Fig. 2B), with YTHDF2 exhibit-
ing the strongest binding affinity to m6A-­oligo in both APP/PS1 mouse 
cortical tissues and AD cell models (Fig. 2C). Moreover, fluores-
cence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed colocalization 
of mt-­Nd4 with YTHDF2 in AD cell models (Fig. 2D), supporting 
a physiological interaction between them.
YTHDF2 is crucial for RNA degradation via its recognition of 
m6A-­modified RNAs in the cytosol (33). To determine the subcellular 
distribution of YTHDF2 and mt-­Nd4, we performed mitochondria/
cytosol fractionation analysis in both APP/PS1 mice and AD cell models. 
We found that YTHDF2 was exclusively confined to the cytosol and 
absent from mitochondria (Fig. 2E). Notably, mt-­Nd4 was also present 
Fig. 1. Increased m6A modification of mitochondrial mRNAs in AD models. (A) Schematic overview of the experimental workflow for m6A analysis in AD models. Cre-
ated in BioRender. Ma, C. (2026) https://BioRender.com/3swd5th. (B) Volcano plot showing hypomethylated (Hypo) and hypermethylated (Hyper) RNAs in cortical tissues 
from wild-­type (WT) and APP/PS1 mice (n = 2). (C) IGV tracks illustrating the distributions of m6A peaks on mitochondrial transcripts in WT and APP/PS1 mouse cortices. 
FDR, false discovery rate. (D) Volcano plot showing hypomethylated and hypermethylated RNAs in cortices from control (Con) and patients with AD (n = 3). (E) IGV tracks 
illustrating m6A peaks distributions on mitochondrial transcripts in the cortices from Con and patients with AD. (F) Absolute quantification of m6A levels in poly(A) RNA 
isolated from total lysate (T), cytosolic (C), and mitochondrial (M) fractions of APP/PS1 mouse cortices (n = 3). Data are presented as the ratio of m6A to unmodified ade-
nosine (m6A/A). (G to I) m6A-­IP-­qPCR of selected mt-­mRNAs in the cortices of WT versus APP/PS1 mice [(G), n = 4], WT versus 5×FAD mice [(H), n = 6], and Con versus pa-
tients with AD [(I), n = 3]. The y axis represents IP/input normalized to the m6A-­modified spike-­in control (Gluc). (J) SELECT-­qPCR of site-­specific m6A levels of mt-­Nd4 in 
cortices of WT and APP/PS1 mice (n = 6). Amplification efficiency is represented by Ct values. (K and L) m6A levels of mt-­Nd4 in oAβ-­stimulated primary neurons, oAβ-­
stimulated RA-­induced N2a (RA-­N2a) cells, and N2a/APP cells measured by m6A-­IP-­qPCR (K) and m6A-­SELECT-­qPCR (L), EV, empty vector; OE, overexpression. [(G) to (L)] 
Two-­sided unpaired t tests. Data are means ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
4 of 19
Fig. 2. YTHDF2 binds cytosol-­localized mitochondrial mRNA. (A) Schematic overview of the identification of m6A–mt-­Nd4–binding proteins in the cortices of APP/PS1 
mice (n = 2). (B) Scatter plot showing proteins enriched by m6A-­oligo versus A-­oligo. (C) Representative immunoblots of candidate proteins binding to m6A-­oligo or A-­
oligo in the cortices of APP/PS1 mice and AD cell models; GAPDH as loading control. (D) Representative confocal images of YTHDF2 (green) costained with mt-­Nd4 RNA 
probe (red) in oAβ-­stimulated RA-­N2a cells (left), and correlation analysis of signal intensities between YTHDF2 and mt-­Nd4 (right). (E) Subcellular fractionation of YTHDF2 
in mouse cortices and AD cell models. GAPDH as cytosolic (C) marker; TOMM20 and HSP60 as mitochondrial (M) marker. (F to I) RT-­qPCR of cytosolic mt-­Nd4 abundance 
and cytosolic/mitochondrial ratios in APP/PS1 mouse cortices (F and G, n = 3) and oAβ-­stimulated primary neurons (H and I). (J to M) ddPCR of absolute cytosolic mt-­Nd4 
copy numbers and cytosolic/mitochondrial ratios in APP/PS1 mouse cortices (J and K, n = 3) and oAβ-­stimulated primary neurons (L and M) (N) Representative images of 
TOMM20 (green) costained with mt-­Nd4 RNA probe (red) in Con and oAβ-­stimulated RA-­N2a cells. Insets show enlarged regions; white dotted lines mark areas used for 
red, green, and blue (RGB) line profiling analysis (right: red, mt-­Nd4+; green, TOMM20+). (O) Manders’ correlation analysis of mt-­Nd4 colocalization with TOMM20. a.u., ar-
bitrary units. (P) RT-­qPCR of cytosolic mt-­Nd4 abundance in Pink1-­knockdown N2a cells. (Q) RIP-­qPCR of selected mt-­mRNAs bound to YTHDF2 in APP/PS1 mouse cortices. 
Representative YTHDF2 immunoblots confirm IP efficiency. (R) m6A-­IP-­qPCR of selected mt-­mRNAs following Mettl17 knockdown. (S) RIP-­qPCR of selected mt-­mRNAs 
bound to YTHDF2 following Mettl17 knockdown. [(F) to (M), and (O)] Two-­sided unpaired t tests. [(P), (R), and (S)] Two-­sided one-­way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed 
by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Data are means ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
5 of 19
in the cytosol, and its abundance increased markedly in both APP/
PS1 mice (Fig. 2, F and G) and oAβ-­stimulated primary neurons (Fig. 
2, H and I). To further validate these findings with absolute quan-
tification, we performed droplet digital polymerase chain reaction 
(ddPCR), which revealed markedly higher cytosolic mt-­Nd4 copy num­
bers in APP/PS1 mice, whereas mitochondrial mt-­Nd4 remained un-
changed, thereby resulting in a higher cytosolic-­to-­mitochondrial ratio 
(Fig. 2, J and K; and fig. S4, A and B). A similar pattern was observed 
in primary neurons, where oAβ treatment increased the cytosolic 
proportion of mt-­Nd4 (Fig. 2, L and M; and fig. S4, C and D). Con-
sistently, oAβ stimulation reduced the colocalization of mt-­Nd4 with 
the mitochondrial marker translocase of outer mitochondrial mem-
brane 20 (TOMM20) compared with control conditions (Fig. 2, N 
and O). These findings suggest that the cytosolic accumulation of 
mt-­Nd4 result from impaired mitochondrial quality control mecha-
nisms, such as mitophagy, which has previously been shown to be 
disrupted by Aβ deposition in AD (6). PINK1-­mediated mitophagy 
has been closely linked to amyloid pathology (43), and impairment 
of this process has been reported to result in cytosolic accumulation 
of mtDNA in macrophages (44). In line with this, knockdown of 
Pink1 led to a marked increase in cytosolic mt-­Nd4 levels, suggest-
ing that the cytosolic accumulation of mt-­mRNAs observed in AD 
can be attributed, at least, in part, to impaired mitophagy (fig. S4E 
and Fig. 2P).
Furthermore, YTHDF2–RNA IP (RIP)–qPCR assays in APP/PS1 
mouse cortices and AD cell models revealed robust interactions between 
YTHDF2 and several cytosolic mt-­mRNAs, including mt-­Nd2, mt-­Nd4, 
and mt-­Nd5 (Fig. 2Q and fig. S4F). Consistent with this, previous cross-­
linking immunoprecipitation sequencing (CLIP-­seq) studies (33, 45) 
have also identified YTHDF2-­binding (6) sites on multiple mt-­mRNAs 
(fig. S4G). In addition, neuronal knockdown of methyltransferase-­like 
protein 17 (METTL17) (fig. S4H), a reported mitochondrial regula-
tor of m6A on mRNAs (46), rather than the cano­nical m6A methyl-
transferase METTL3 (fig. S4, I and J), reduced mitochondrial m6A 
content (fig. S4K) and specifically lowered the modification levels of 
mt-­Nd2, mt-­Nd4, and mt-­Nd5 (Fig. 2R). Notably, METTL17 knock-
down also markedly impaired YTHDF2 binding to cytosolic mt-­mRNAs 
(Fig. 2S), confirming that the interaction is m6A dependent.
In addition, to determine whether other RNA modifications con-
tribute to this interaction, we examined whether YTHDF2 could also 
recognize and bind mtRNAs via m1A modifications, which have been 
previously reported to be recognized by YTHDF2 and are also present 
on mtRNAs (46–48). Our mass spectrometry (MS) analysis confirmed 
that the overall m1A content in mt-­mRNAs isolated from APP/PS1 
mouse brains was much lower than that of m6A (fig. S4L). Consis-
tently, reanalysis of published CLIP-­seq (45) and m1A-­MAP (46) data­
sets from 293T cells revealed that the YTHDF2 binding sites on 
mt-­mRNAs do not overlap with m1A-­modified sites (fig. S4M). Fur-
thermore, knockdown of TRMT10C, which catalyzes m1A modifi-
cations on mt-­Nd5 (48), an mtRNA exhibiting strong binding affinity 
for YTHDF2, did not appreciably affect YTHDF2 binding (fig. S4, N 
and O). Together, these findings demonstrate that YTHDF2 primar-
ily interacts with cytosolic mt-­mRNAs through an m6A-­dependent 
mechanism rather than via m1A modifications.
m6A modification attenuates the cytosolic mtRNA–induced 
innate immune response in neurons
Cytosolic mtRNAs have been shown to function as damage-­associated 
molecular patterns (DAMPs) to activate the downstream innate immune 
response in tumor cells and macrophages (12–15). In contrast, m6A 
modification can serve as a “self” label to suppress the innate im-
mune response elicited by exogenous RNA (35, 49, 50). These find-
ings prompted us to investigate whether mtRNAs similarly trigger 
the innate immune response in neurons and how m6A influences 
this process.
When mtRNAs isolated from the mitochondria of Neuro2a (N2a) 
cells were transfected into intact cells (Fig. 3A), cytosolic mt-­Nd4 
levels markedly increased (fig. S5A), accompanied by robust up-­
regulation of Ifnb expression (Fig. 3A), indicating activation of the 
innate immune response. Exogenous RNA is known to trigger inflam-
matory responses through different receptors and signaling pathways 
(51). Specifically, MDA5 senses double-­stranded RNA (dsRNA), 
whereas RIG-­I and Toll-­like receptor 7/8 recognize single-­stranded 
RNA (ssRNA) (Fig. 3B). To determine which pathway mediates the 
mtRNA-­induced response, we knocked down key components of 
these pathways. In AD cell models, knockdown of Mavs, but not 
Myd88, suppressed the mtRNA-­induced up-­regulation of Ifnb expres-
sion, suggesting a predominant role for the mitochondrial antiviral-­
signaling protein (MAVS)-­dependent pathway (Fig. 3C and fig. S5, 
B to D). Moreover, knockdown of either Ddx58 or Mda5 reduced 
Ifnb production, suggesting that both ssRNA and dsRNA contribute 
to the mtRNA-­induced immune response (Fig. 3, D and E; and fig. 
S5, E and F). To characterize the involved RNA species, we performed 
IP using a monoclonal antibody (J2) specific for dsRNA (12) and ob-
served only minimal m6A modification on dsRNAs (fig. S5G). Ac-
cordingly, dot blot analysis showed that the RNAs bound to YTHDF2 
contained little dsRNA (fig. S5H). In addition, the transfection of exo­
genous mtRNAs robustly activated the RIG-­I–MAVS signaling path­
way (Fig. 3F). These results led us to focus subsequent analyses 
on mitochondrial ssRNA to investigate how m6A modification and 
YTHDF2 modulate their immunogenicity.
Intriguingly, impaired mitophagy also led to cytosolic mtRNA 
accumulation and subsequent innate immune activation. Specifi-
cally, Pink1 knockdown activated its upstream RIG-­I–MAVS signaling 
pathway (Fig. 3G) and increased Ifnb expression (fig. S5I). Similarly, 
oAβ-­treatment led to RIG-­I–MAVS pathway activation and elevated 
Ifnb levels in both primary neurons (Fig. 3H and fig. S5J) and AD 
cell models (fig. S5, K to M). Notably, activation of the RIG-­I–MAVS 
path­way was also observed in the cortices of both AD mouse models 
(Fig. 3I and fig. S5N) and patients with AD (Fig. 3J), providing 
in vivo evidence that this innate immune axis is involved in Aβ pathol-
ogy. To further validate the causative role of mtRNA, we inhibited 
mitochondrial transcription using inhibitor of mitochondrial tran-
scription 1 (IMT1) (fig. S5O), which led to a significant reduction 
in cytosolic mt-­Nd4 levels (fig. S5P). Consequently, IMT1 treat-
ment mark­edly reduced Ifnb expression induced by either Pink1 
knockdown (Fig. 3K) or oAβ stimulation (Fig. 3L), supporting the 
notion that mtRNA deregulation is a key upstream trigger of neuro-
nal innate immune activation.
Having established that cytosolic mtRNAs trigger the RIG-­I– 
MAVS pathway, we next asked whether m6A modification could at-
tenuate this immune activation. Compared with unmodified Cluc 
RNA, m6A-­modified RNA (Gluc) induced lower Ifnb expression and 
reduced activation of the RIG-­I–MAVS pathway (Fig. 3, M and N). 
Furthermore, we transcribed mt-­Nd4 in vitro with varying levels of 
m6A modification (fig. S5, Q and R) and found that the innate immune 
response caused by exogenous mt-­Nd4 progressively decreased as the 
m6A level increased (Fig. 3, O and P, and fig. S5S). Together, these 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
6 of 19
Fig. 3. m6A modification suppresses innate immune activation triggered by cytosolic mtRNAs in neurons. (A) Schematic of mtRNA transfection strategies (left) and 
RT-­qPCR analysis of Ifnb expression in mtRNA-­treated N2a cells (right). (B) Overview of RNA-­mediated innate immune signaling pathways in neurons. (C to E) RT-­qPCR 
analysis of Ifnb expression in mtRNA-­transfected N2a cells following knockdown of Mavs (C), Ddx58 (D), or Mda5 (E). (F to J) Representative immunoblots and quantifica-
tions of RIG-­I–MAVS pathway proteins in mtRNA-­treated N2a cells (F), Pink1-­knockdown N2a cells (G), oAβ-­treated primary neurons (H), cortices of Con versus patients with 
AD [(I), n = 6], and WT versus APP/PS1 mice [(J), n = 3]. (K and L) RT-­qPCR analysis of Ifnb expression in Pink1-­knockdown (K) and IMT1-­pretreated N2a cells followed by 
oAβ stimulation (L). (M and N) RT-­qPCR analysis of Ifnb expression (M) and representative immunoblots of RIG-­I–MAVS pathway proteins (N) in Cluc-­ or Gluc-­treated N2a 
cells. (O to P) RT-­qPCR analysis of Ifnb expression (O) and representative immunoblots of RIG-­I–MAVS pathway proteins (P) in N2a cells transfected with in vitro-­transcribed 
mt-­Nd4 containing different levels of m6A modification. [(A) and (B)] Created in BioRender. Ma, C. (2026) https://BioRender.com/3wzccyr. [(A), (F), and (H) to (K)] Two-­sided 
unpaired t tests. [(C) to (E), (G), and (O)] One-­way ANOVA and (L) two-­way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Data are presented as means ± SEM. 
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
7 of 19
results reveal that cytosolic mtRNA accumulation elicits a neuronal 
innate immune response via the RIG-­I–MAVS pathway, while m6A 
attenuates this activation.
YTHDF2 down-­regulation contributes to the type I IFN 
response in neurons
To investigate why the innate immune response remained activated 
despite elevated m6A levels on mt-­mRNAs in AD, we examined 
whether dysregulation of YTHDF2 might be involved. Transcrip-
tomic data from the AlzData database (52) revealed notably reduced 
YTHDF2 mRNA expression across multiple brain regions in patients 
with AD (Fig. 4A). In line with this observation, YTHDF2 protein 
levels were markedly reduced in the cortical tissues of six patients with 
AD compared with age-­matched healthy controls (Fig. 4B and fig. 
S6A). A similar reduction was observed in the cortices of APP/PS1 
and 5×FAD mice (Fig. 4, C and D). Immunohistochemical analyses 
further showed that this reduction was predominantly restricted to 
neurons in the cortices of APP/PS1 mice (Fig. 4, E and F). In agreement 
with these findings, YTHDF2 protein levels were also decreased in 
primary neurons exposed to oAβ and in other amyloid-­related cell 
models (Fig. 4G and fig. S6B).
YTHDF2 is known to suppress the innate immune response by 
recognizing m6A modifications on viral and circular RNAs (35, 38). 
We therefore asked whether YTHDF2 similarly regulated cytosolic 
mt-­mRNAs in an m6A-­dependent manner. Given that YTHDF2 is a 
key regulator of RNA degradation, we first assessed its impact on 
mt-­Nd4 stability. Knockdown of YTHDF2 selectively increased the 
stability of cytosolic mt-­Nd4 (fig. S6C and Fig. 4H), without affecting 
mitochondria-­distributed mt-­Nd4 (fig. S6D), thereby leading to in-
creased mt-­Nd4 abundance in the cytoplasm (Fig. 4I). Consequently, 
we observed markedly increased expression of Ifnb (Fig. 4J), sup-
porting a role of YTHDF2 in modulating innate immune responses 
triggered by mtRNAs. YTHDF2 did not bind to innate immunity-­
related transcripts, thus excluding the possibility of direct regulation 
(fig. S6E). Intriguingly, Ythdf2 knockdown counteracted the inhibi-
tory effect of m6A modification on Ifnb expression in response 
to both Gluc and m6A-­modified exogenous mt-­Nd4 (fig. S6F and 
Fig. 4K). Conversely, overexpression of YTHDF2 markedly sup-
pressed Ifnb induction by 50 ng of mtRNA, whereas this inhibitory 
effect diminished at 100 ng (fig. S6, G and H). Parallel quantification 
of cytosolic mt-­Nd4 showed a similar trend (fig. S6I), further indi-
cating a positive correlation between cytosolic mtRNA abundance 
and Ifnb expression. Furthermore, Ifnb expression decreased pro-
portionally with increasing YTHDF2 levels, demonstrating dose-­
dependent suppression of mt-­Nd4–triggered immune activation 
(fig. S6J and Fig. 4L). In addition, YTHDF2 overexpression also at-
tenuated Ifnb up-­regulation caused by endogenous mtRNA leakage 
following Pink1 knockdown (Fig. 4M).
We next examined whether YTHDF2 suppressed mtRNA-­induced 
immune activation in an m6A-­dependent manner. METTL17 knock­
down in oAβ-­treated RA-­N2a cells markedly weakened the protective 
effect conferred by YTHDF2 overexpression (Fig. 4N), indicating that 
YTHDF2’s immunosuppressive function relies on m6A-­modified 
mtRNAs. We further asked whether reduction of m6A level alone 
was sufficient to trigger immune activation. As shown in fig. S6K, 
although METTL17 knockdown in primary neurons markedly de-
creased m6A levels on mtRNAs, the abundance of cytosolic mtRNAs 
remained unchanged (fig. S6L). Consequently, IFN responses re-
mained unchanged under both basal and oAβ-­stimulated conditions 
(fig. S6M). Western blot analysis confirmed that, while oAβ stimula-
tion reduces YTHDF2 protein levels, METTL17 knockdown did 
not appreciably alter YTHDF2 expression under either condition 
(fig. S6N). Together, these results indicate that, while m6A modifi-
cation alone does not trigger immune activation, it is essential for 
YTHDF2 to recognize and degrade cytosolic mtRNAs, thereby sup-
pressing neuronal innate immunity.
To further clarify how YTHDF2 modulated RIG-­I sensing of 
mtRNAs, we examined whether m6A modification directly affects 
RIG-­I binding. First, m6A-­oligo pull-­down assays showed that m6A 
modification alone did not alter the interaction between RIG-­I and 
RNA (Fig. 4O), indicating that m6A modification per se does not inter­
fere with RIG-­I recognition. However, in AD cell models, YTHDF2 
overexpression reduced the abundance of mt-­Nd4 bound to RIG-­I 
(Fig. 4, P and Q). These findings suggest that YTHDF2 limits RIG-­I– 
mediated sensing of cytosolic mtRNAs not by altering recognition 
but by selectively degrading m6A-­modified mtRNAs. This degradation 
effectively reduces the pool of RNA available for RIG-­I engagement. 
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that reduced YTHDF2 ex-
pression in AD facilitates cytosolic accumulation of m6A-­modified 
mt-­mRNAs, thereby enhancing their recognition by RIG-­I and trig-
gering innate immune activation.
Ythdf2 deficiency in neurons activates cocultured microglia
Although immune cells such as macrophages are the primary pro-
ducers of IFN-­β, other cell types, including neurons, can also produce 
this cytokine, particularly in response to viral infection or cellular 
stress (53). Having shown that Ifnb mRNA was up-­regulated in AD 
cell models, we next examined whether these cells actively secreted 
IFN-­β. Measurement of culture supernatants of RA-­N2a revealed a 
notable increase in extracellular IFN-­β levels after oAβ treatment (fig. 
S7A). Consistently, transfection of exogenous mtRNA or Cluc RNA 
induced robust IFN-­β secretion (fig. S7, B and C), whereas Gluc or in-
creasing m6A levels on mt-­Nd4 transcripts progressively suppressed 
this effect (fig. S7, C and D), further highlighting the inhibitory role 
of m6A modification.
Given that cross-­talk between microglia and neurons is essential 
for microglial surveillance and homeostasis (54), we hypothesized that 
neuronal mtRNA-­induced type I IFN signaling might influence sur-
rounding microglia through a paracrine mechanism. To test this 
hypothesis, we established separate primary cultures of neurons and 
microglia (Fig. 5A). As expected, oAβ stimulation increased IFN-­β 
secretion in primary neuronal cultures (Fig. 5B). Notably, treatment 
with IMT1, which inhibits mtRNA transcription and reduces cyto-
solic mtRNA levels (fig. S4, O and P), decreased Ifnb expression in 
neurons (Fig. 5C), and lowered IFN-­β content in the culture medi-
um (Fig. 5D). Exposure of microglia to neuron-­conditioned medi-
um robustly up-­regulated ISGs, whereas this effect was substantially 
attenuated when neurons were pretreated with IMT1 (Fig. 5E). Col-
lectively, these results indicate that neuronal mtRNA deregulation 
promotes IFN-­β–mediated paracrine activation of microglia.
Building on the role of neuronal mtRNA in regulating IFN-­β 
production, we next examined whether YTHDF2 modulates neuron-
to-­microglia cross-­talk under Aβ pathology. Knockout of Ythdf2 in 
primary neurons increased IFN-­β secretion following oAβ stimula-
tion (Fig. 5F and fig. S7E), whereas overexpression of YTHDF2 
markedly suppressed it (Fig. 5G and fig. S7F). When primary mi-
croglia were exposed to conditioned medium from these neurons, the 
ISGs were robustly up-­regulated in the Ythdf2 knockout condition and 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
8 of 19
Fig. 4. YTHDF2 down-­regulation promotes type I IFN response in neurons. (A) Box plots showing YTHDF2 mRNA levels in the entorhinal cortex (EC), frontal cortex (FC), 
hippocampus (HP), and temporal cortex (TC) from Con and patients with AD (n = 78, 232, 140, and 91, respectively). (B to D) Immunoblots and quantifications of YTHDF2 
in cortices of Con and patients with AD (B, n = 6), APP/PS1 mice (C, n = 3), and 5×FAD mice (D, n = 3). (E) Representative multiplex immunohistochemistry (mIHC) images 
showing YTHDF2 expression (green) in neurons (NeuN, orange), microglia [ionized calcium-­binding adapter molecule 1 (IBA1), red], and astrocytes [glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP), yellow] in WT and APP/PS1 mice cortices (n = 3). (F) Quantification of fluorescence intensity of YTHDF2 in different cell types. (G) Representative immu-
noblots and quantification of YTHDF2 in oAβ-­treated primary neurons. (H and I) RNA stability assay (H) and RT-­qPCR analysis of cytosolic mt-­Nd4 (I) in Ythdf2-­knockdown 
N2a cells. (J to M) RT-­qPCR of Ifnb in Ythdf2-­knockdown (J), mt-­Nd4–transfected (K), mtRNA-­transfected with graded YTHDF2 (L), and Pink1-­knockdown with YTHDF2 
overexpression (M) N2a cells. (N) RT-­qPCR of Ifnb expression in YTHDF2-­overexpressing N2a cells with oAβ treatment, Mettl17 knockdown, or the combination of both 
treatments. (O) Western blot validation of RIG-­I binding to m6A-­oligo or A-­oligo in AD cell models. (P) Representative immunoblots of MYC and YTHDF2 demonstrating IP 
and overexpression efficiency. (Q) RIP-­qPCR showing mt-­Nd4 binding to exogenous RIG-­I in YTHDF2-­overexpressing oAβ-­stimulated RA-­N2a cells. [(A) to (D), (F), (G) and 
(M)] Two-­sided unpaired t tests. [(H) and (N)] Two-­way ANOVA and [(I) to (L)] one-­way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Data are presented as 
means ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
9 of 19
attenuated by YTHDF2 overexpression, confirming a biologically mean-
ingful paracrine signaling mechanism (Fig. 5, H and I). Consistent with 
these molecular changes, microglia exposed to conditioned medium 
from oAβ-­treated neurons exhibited a higher proportion of activated, 
amoeboid cells with enlarged somas and fewer branches, indicative of 
enhanced microglial activation (Fig. 5J). YTHDF2 overexpression 
reversed microglial morphological changes, restoring a more quiescent 
phenotype (Fig. 5J). Together, these results indicate that down-­regulation 
of neuronal YTHDF2 promotes mtRNA-­mediated IFN-­β signaling, 
which, in turn, drives microglial activation and disrupts microglial 
homeostasis under Aβ pathology.
Ythdf2 deficiency in neurons accelerates 
Aβ-­induced pathology
To determine the in vivo effect of neuronal YTHDF2 on Aβ pathol-
ogy, we generated a mouse model with excitatory neuron–specific 
Fig. 5. Ythdf2 deficiency in neurons promotes activation of cocultured microglia. (A) Schematic illustration of the experimental design for stimulating primary mi-
croglia with conditioned medium from oAβ-­treated primary neurons. Created in BioRender. Ma, C. (2026) https://BioRender.com/x7xnbp5. (B) Enzyme-­linked immuno-
sorbent assay (ELISA) of IFN-­β levels in the culture medium of oAβ-­treated primary neurons. (C) RT-­qPCR analysis of Ifnb expression in IMT1-­pretreated primary neurons 
after oAβ stimulation. (D) ELISA of IFN-­β levels in the culture medium of IMT1-­pretreated, oAβ-­stimulated primary neurons. (E) RT-­qPCR analysis of representative IFN-­
stimulated genes (ISGs) in primary microglia treated with conditioned medium from IMT1-­pretreated, oAβ-­stimulated primary neurons. (F and G) ELISA showing the ef-
fects of Ythdf2 knockout (F) or overexpression (G) on IFN-­β production in oAβ-­treated primary neurons. (H and I) RT-­qPCR analysis showing the effects of Ythdf2 knockout 
(H) or overexpression (I) in oAβ-­treated primary neurons on ISG expression in primary microglia. (J) Representative bright-­field (BF; top) images and IBA1 staining (bottom) 
of primary microglia treated with conditioned medium from oAβ-­treated primary neurons with Ythdf2 knockout or overexpression. Quantification of microglial morpho-
logical phenotypes is shown on the right. [(B), (G), and (I)] Two-­sided unpaired t tests. [(C) to (E)] Two-­way ANOVA and [(F) and (H)] one-­way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s 
multiple comparisons test. Data are presented as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
10 of 19
deletion of Ythdf2 [Camk2α-­cre; Ythdf2flox/flox, hereafter conditional 
knockout (cKO) mice; Fig. 6A and fig. S8, A and B]. We subsequently 
induced acute Aβ damage by injecting oAβ into the lateral ventricle 
and monitored the behavioral and pathological manifestations of the 
mice over time (Fig. 6B). The cKO mice were born at Mendelian 
ratios and developed normally, with no overt abnormalities under 
baseline conditions (fig. S8C). Measurements of body weight, brain 
volume and morphology, and neuromuscular strength revealed no 
differences between cKO and control (Ctrl) mice (fig. S8, D to G). 
Furthermore, behavioral analyses via the Y-­maze and Morris water 
maze tests indicated that the deletion of YTHDF2 in neurons did not 
impair learning or spatial memory, suggesting that neuronal ythdf2 
deletion did not affect baseline cognitive performance (Fig. 6, C to 
E, and fig. S8H).
In contrast, under Aβ-­associated pathological conditions, the ab-
sence of YTHDF2 markedly altered the neuronal response. Follow-
ing oAβ injection, both the Ctrl and cKO mice exhibited cognitive 
impairments, but the deficits were more severe in the cKO mice, as 
evidenced by poorer performance in the Y-­maze (Fig. 6C) and water 
maze tests (Fig. 6, D and E, and fig. S8H). These findings suggest that 
Ythdf2 deficiency exacerbates oAβ-­induced cognitive dysfunction. In 
parallel with behavioral changes, histological analyses revealed robust 
glial activation in response to oAβ administration. Both microglia and 
astrocytes exhibited enhanced activation and aggregation in the cor-
tices of oAβ-­injected mice (Fig. 6F and fig. S8I). Notably, this phe-
nomenon was not observed in untreated cKO mice as multiplex 
immunofluorescence staining showed that Ythdf2 deletion alone did 
not alter glial number or morphology in either the cortex or hippo-
campus (fig. S8J). However, following oAβ exposure, the neuroin-
flammatory response was intensified in cKO mice, with enhanced 
glial activation extending beyond the immediate site of injection (Fig. 6, 
F to H). These results suggest that, under amyloid stress, Ythdf2 dele-
tion primes microglia for an exaggerated proinflammatory response, 
thereby amplifying neuroinflammation.
Consistent with our in vitro findings, Ythdf2 cKO mice exhibited 
elevated expression of Ifnb and enhanced activation of the RIG-­I– 
MAVS signaling pathway following oAβ injection (Fig. 6, I and J). In line 
with our observations in both patients with AD and APP/PS1 mice, 
oAβ injection led to increased m6A modification on mt-­Nd4 (Fig. 6, 
K and L). This increase was further enhanced in the absence of 
YTHDF2, reinforcing the role of YTHDF2 in maintaining cytosolic 
mt-­mRNA homeostasis. Together, these findings demonstrate that 
neuronal deletion of YTHDF2 exacerbates amyloid-­induced neuro-
inflammation and accelerates AD-­like pathology in vivo, likely through 
disruption of cytosolic mt-­mRNA homeostasis.
DISCUSSION
Previous studies have established a critical link between RNA m6A 
methylation and AD pathogenesis (25, 26, 32), yet the underlying 
mechanisms remain unclear. In this study, we demonstrated that, in 
addition to nuclear-­encoded RNAs, mt-­mRNAs in the brain also 
undergo m6A methylation, with elevated levels observed in Aβ-­
driven AD models and patient samples exhibiting amyloid plaque 
deposition. Under physiological conditions, m6A serves as a mo-
lecular “mark” on mtRNAs, allowing YTHDF2 to act as a “scaven-
ger” that selectively recognizes and degrades these marked cytosolic 
mtRNAs, thereby preventing aberrant activation of the downstream 
RIG-­I–MAVS pathway. However, under Aβ-­related pathological 
conditions, neuronal YTHDF2 is down-­regulated, leading to im-
paired clearance of cytosolic mt-­mRNAs and subsequent activation 
of the innate immune response. The resulting neuronal IFN-­β se-
cretion further stimulates surround­ing microglia, amplifying neu-
roinflammation and exacerbating Aβ pathology (Fig. 7). Overall, 
these findings highlight neuronal YTHDF2 as a crucial regulator that 
maintains immune homeostasis by restraining mtRNA-­induced im-
mune activation in Aβ-­associated AD pathology.
Although m6A methylation has been extensively studied on 
nuclear-­encoded transcripts, whether mtRNAs undergo this modi-
fication has long been uncertain. Prior reports briefly alluding to 
m6A signals on mtRNAs, primarily in cancer cells, lacked direct ex-
perimental validation or functional insight (55–57). Our study 
rigorously used multiple methods to demonstrate that a subset of 
mt-­mRNAs undergoes m6A methylation in both mouse and human 
brain. Consistent with our findings, two recently published transcriptome-
wide m6A mapping studies (39, 58) independently detected m6A 
modifications on mt-­mRNAs in the human brain, further validating the 
presence of m6A-­modified mtRNAs. Our reanalysis of one of these 
datasets (fig. S1I) also revealed elevated mtRNA methylation levels in 
brains from patients with AD compared with healthy controls, re-
inforcing the pathological relevance of this modification. Together 
with our experimental data from oAβ-­stimulated neuronal models and 
transgenic mouse models of amyloidosis, these findings indicate that 
amyloid deposition contributes to increased m6A modification of mt-­ 
mRNAs. The positive correlation between mtRNA m6A methylation and 
Aβ burden suggests that m6A acts as a molecular intermediary link-
ing Aβ deposition to downstream molecular disturbance in neurons.
YTHDF2, the prototypical m6A reader, recognizes and promotes 
degradation of m6A-­modified nuclear-­encoded RNAs to regulate 
diverse processes (33, 34). We extend this paradigm to mtRNAs, 
showing that YTHDF2 selectively binds and degrades cytosolic m6A-
modified mt-­mRNAs. Although YTHDF2 can interact with m1A-­
modified RNAs (47) and m1A occurs on mtRNAs (46, 48), comparative 
CLIP-­seq analysis (45) and functional experiments—silencing 
the m1A writer TRMT10C (48) had no effect, whereas knocking 
down the m6A writer METTL17 (57) strongly reduced binding to 
mt-­Nd5—confirm that m6A, not m1A, mediates YTHDF2–mt-­mRNA 
association. Analogous to its role in suppressing innate immunity trig-
gered by viral or exogenous circRNAs (38, 50), YTHDF2 degrades 
m6A-­modified cytosolic mtRNAs to prevent their accumulation and 
aberrant immune activation in neurons. Notably, m6A alone is insuf-
ficient to block type I IFN induction: METTL17 knockdown lowered 
mtRNA m6A levels without increasing cytosolic mtRNA or triggering 
IFN expression. Because RIG-­I senses mtRNAs independently of m6A 
status, the immunosuppressive effect relies on YTHDF2-­mediated 
degradation that limits cytosolic exposure. In AD, Aβ exposure down-
regulates neuronal YTHDF2 [validated in public datasets (52) and 
multiple AD models], disrupting this protective mechanism, causing 
cytosolic accumulation of m6A-­modified mtRNAs, enhanced RIG-­I 
engagement, and activation of the neuronal type I IFN pathway.
Consistent with our in vitro findings, we observed aggravat-
ed neuroinflammation and cognitive decline in an acute AD mouse 
model with excitatory neuron–specific Ythdf2 deficiency. Support-
ing our observation, a machine learning–based study identified 
YTHDF2 as the YTHDF family member most strongly associated 
with AD progression (59), with high predictive accuracy in AD di-
agnosis. To date, the YTHDF1, YTHDF2, and YTHDF3 proteins have 
been reported to function redundantly in inducing RNA degradation 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
11 of 19
Fig. 6. Neuronal Ythdf2 deficiency exacerbates Aβ pathology and cognitive impairment. (A) Genome-­editing strategy for generating conditional knockout (cKO) 
mice. Ythdf2flox/flox mice (Ctrl), carrying loxP sites flanking the 5′ untranslated region and exon 1 (E1), were crossed with Camk2α-­Cre mice to generate Ythdf2 cKO mice. 
(B) Schematic overview of the procedure for establishing an acute AD mouse model and subsequent behavioral tests (n = 6). icv, intracerebroventricular. (C) Spontaneous 
arm alternation performance of Ctrl and cKO mice with or without oAβ injection in the Y-­maze test. (D) Representative path tracings of mice in the Morris water maze. 
(E) Percentage of time spent in the target quadrant (out of 60 s total) during the probe test of the Morris water maze. (F) Representative images of Nissl staining and im-
munostaining for IBA1 and GFAP in the cortices of Ctrl and cKO mice in the acute AD model. (G and H) Quantification of IBA1-­positive (G) and GFAP-­positive (H) areas from 
(F) (n = 3). (I and J) RT-­qPCR analysis of Ifnb expression (I) and representative immunoblots of RIG-­I–MAVS pathway proteins (J) in the cortices of Ctrl and cKO mice with or 
without oAβ injection. (K and L) m6A-­IP-­qPCR analysis of mt-­Nd4 m6A levels (K) and m6A-­SELECT-­qPCR analysis of site-­specific m6A levels on mt-­Nd4 (L) in the cortices of 
acute AD model mice generated from Ctrl and cKO mice. Two-­sided unpaired t tests. Data are presented as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
12 of 19
(60, 61). Thus, the absence of neurological deficits in unstimulated 
Ythdf2-­cKO mice likely reflects compensatory mechanisms in-
volving YTHDF1 or YTHDF3. Under oAβ-­stimulated conditions, 
however, defective mitophagy facilitates mtRNA leakage into the 
cytosol, and the loss of YTHDF2 further impairs their degradation, 
leading to excessive cytosolic mtRNA accumulation and enhanced 
immune activation. Nevertheless, while our findings primarily focus 
on mtRNA-­mediated mechanisms, nuclear-­encoded transcripts may 
also contribute to the observed phenotypes. For instance, YTHDF2 
has been shown to play a distinct role from YTHDF1 and YTHDF3 in 
regulating the incorporation of RNAs into RNA granules (62–64). The 
involvement of RNA granules, such as stress granules and P-­bodies, 
in neuronal function has recently gained wide recognition (65). There­
fore, future studies are warranted to clarify whether these parallel 
pathways also participate in the neuronal response to Aβ pathology. 
Collectively, these observations highlight the context-­dependent 
role of YTHDF2 in maintaining neuronal homeostasis, particularly 
under conditions of cellular stress or disease.
Neurons, despite not being classical immune cells, can detect and 
respond to immune signals (9). Owing to their high energy demands, 
neurons are particularly vulnerable to impaired mitophagy, which can 
result in the release of mitochondrial nucleic acids. These nucleic acids 
act as potent DAMPs, triggering intracellular innate immune responses, 
which, in turn, contribute to the progression of neurodegenerative 
diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (66), Huntington’s dis-
ease (67), and Parkinson’s disease (68, 69). In the context of AD, how-
ever, the key cytosolic DNA sensors in the cGAS-­STING pathway are 
expressed at low levels in neurons (70, 71), suggesting that mtRNA, 
rather than mtDNA, may serve as the primary trigger of neuro-
nal innate immune responses. While prior work has focused on 
mt-­dsRNA (14), our data demonstrate that cytosolic accumulation 
of mt-­ssRNAs can also potently activate immune responses, a pre-
viously unrecognized mechanism in neurons. In line with that, 
YTHDF2 protein is predominantly expressed in neurons and 
markedly down-­regulated in AD. Although m6A-­modified mt-­mRNAs 
were detected in both neurons and microglia, oAβ-­induced elevation of 
mt-­mRNA m6A levels was observed exclusively in neurons. Con-
sequently, neurons with oAβ stimulation or mitophagy defects exhib-
ited increased cytosolic mt-­mRNA levels, which, in turn, triggered 
innate immune responses. The ensuing neuronal IFN-­β secretion 
activated nearby microglia, promoting their transition into type I 
IFN–responsive states. Thus, our results demonstrate that amyloid 
plaques indirectly drive microglial activation by triggering neuronal in-
nate immune responses, thereby exacerbating neuroinflammation.
However, despite the strengths of our findings, certain limita-
tions should be acknowledged. First, this study primarily centered on 
mt-­Nd4 as a representative example; thus, the functional roles and regu-
latory mechanisms of m6A on other mt-­mRNAs remain to be fully 
Fig. 7. Proposed mechanism of YTHDF2 in protecting neurons from cytosolic mtRNA–induced innate immune response in Aβ pathology. Under normal condi-
tions, the limited amount of mtRNA released into the cytosol could be timely recognized and degraded by YTHDF2 (“Scavenger”) in an m6A (“Mark”)–dependent manner, 
thereby preventing RIG-­I recognition. However, in the presence of Aβ, the down-­regulation of YTHDF2, combined with mitochondrial dysfunction, leads to an in-
creased distribution of mtRNAs in the cytosol. This accumulating mtRNA is recognized by RIG-­I, activating the downstream type I IFN pathway. Pathological neurons 
subsequently secrete IFN-­β into the extracellular space, activating surrounding microglia and exacerbating neuroinflammation. Created in BioRender. Ma, C. (2026) 
https://BioRender.com/o2uf900.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
13 of 19
elucidated. Second, although m6A modifications are generally ab-
sent from dsRNA structures, it remains unclear whether m6A in-
fluences dsRNA formation or stability, thereby indirectly modulating 
dsRNA-­triggered type I IFN responses. Third, nuclear-­encoded RNAs 
may also contribute to YTHDF2-­mediated regulation of neuronal 
innate immune responses—for example, via RNA granules or P-­
bodies—and their precise contribution warrants further investigation. 
Last, although our data and reanalysis of independent methylated 
RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeRIP-­seq) datasets support 
elevated mt-­mRNA m6A levels in AD brains, not all publicly avail-
able datasets reproduced this trend (58). Such discrepancies may 
reflect differences in patient selection criteria, particularly with re-
spect to amyloid pathology in control cohorts, as well as method-
ological variability among m6A detection approaches. Therefore, 
further studies using standardized cohorts and complementary tech-
nologies will be important to establish the generalizability of mt-­
mRNA methylation changes in AD.
In summary, we identify YTHDF2 as a critical regulator that re-
strains mtRNA-­induced innate immune activation in neurons under 
Aβ-­associated stress. Aβ-­driven down-­regulation of YTHDF2 im-
pairs this regulatory axis, leading to excessive type I IFN signaling 
and neuroinflammation. Targeting the pathways that preserve or re-
store YTHDF2 function, or modulate m6A-­dependent mtRNA me-
tabolism, may represent promising therapeutic strategies to mitigate 
neuroinflammation and slow AD progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Postmortem human brain tissues
Frozen brain tissue blocks and paraffin-­embedded sections were ob-
tained from the National Human Brain Bank for Development and 
Function, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, with full, informed consent from tissue donors 
(approval no. 2022125). Tissue samples were selected on the basis of the 
level of AD pathology and were assessed according to current diag-
nostic consensus criteria (72). The clinical and demographic data 
for all patients included in this study are summarized in data S4. 
Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Institutional 
Review Board of the Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences (approval no. 2019054).
Mouse models and treatments
APP/PS1 [B6.Cg-­Tg (APPswe,PSEN1dE9)-­85Dbo/Mmjax], 5×FAD 
[B6SJL-­Tg (APPSwFlLon, PSEN1*M146L*L286V)6799Vas/Mmjax], 
and Camk2α-­Cre [B6. Cg-­Tg (Camk2α-­cre) T29-­1Stl/J] were pur-
chased from Model Animal Research Center and Shanghai Model 
Organisms Center, respectively. Ythdf2flox/flox mice were provided by 
A. Klungland (Oslo University Hospital, Norway) (73). To generate 
Ythdf2 cKO mice, Ythdf2flox/flox mice were bred with Camk2α-­Cre 
mice. All experimental mice were bred and housed under specific 
pathogen–free (SPF) conditions, with controlled temperature (23.1°C) 
and humidity (30 to 60%), under a 12-­hour light/dark cycle, with 
ad libitum access to food and water. All experimental procedures 
were conducted following protocols approved by the Animal Care 
and Use Committee of Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences (ACUC-­XMSB-­2024-­099). The geno-
types were determined via polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using 
the primers listed in data S6.
Behavioral tests
The Morris water maze test
The Morris water maze was performed as previously described (74). 
Briefly, a transparent 12-­cm-­diameter platform was placed 1 cm below 
the water surface at a fixed position. During the training phase, each 
mouse underwent continuous training for 5 days with 4 trials/day, 
lasting 90 s each or until the mouse found the hidden platform. On 
the probe trial day, the platform was removed, and the mice were 
allowed to swim for 60 s, starting from the quadrant opposite the 
location of the platform. Behavioral parameters were recorded via a 
video camera positioned above the water tank, and the data were 
analyzed via EthoVision XT 11 software (Noldus).
Y-­maze test
For the Y-­maze test, spontaneous alternations were measured via a 
Y-­shaped maze [35 cm (length) by 5 cm (width) by 15.5 cm (height) per 
arm, with a 120° angle between each arm]. The mice were randomly 
placed in one of the arms and allowed to explore freely for 8 min, and 
the camera system was used to record their behavioral changes. The 
total number of arm entries and the number of three-­arm cycles were 
recorded to calculate the percentage of spontaneous alternations 
(numbers of three-­arm cycles/total number of arm entries).
Grip strength test
The grip strength of the mice was measured via BIO-­GS3 (Bioseb). 
Each mouse’s forelimb was placed on the device’s grid, and the tail was 
gently held and pulled back until the forelimb released the grid. 
The grip strength was recorded in newtons. Each test was repeated 
three times per mouse, with intervals of at least 30 min between trials.
Intracerebroventricular injection of oAβ
To prepare oAβ, synthetic Aβ1-­42 peptides pretreated with hexafluo-
roisopropanol (Sigma-­Aldrich, AG968) were dissolved according to 
the established protocols. Briefly, a monomeric Aβ1-­42 solution was 
prepared by diluting a stock solution (dimethyl sulfoxide, 5 mM) 
with F12 medium to achieve a final concentration of 100 μΜ. Mono-
merization was achieved by incubating the monomeric Aβ42 solution at 
4°C for 24 hours. Six-­month-­old Ythdf2 cKO and Ythdf2flox/flox mice 
(Ctrl) were anesthetized with tribromoethanol (20 mg/ml, 20 μl/g) 
before surgery, which was performed after the head was secured in a 
stereotaxic frame. Pulled long-­shaft borosilicate pipettes were back-
filled with mineral oil before loading. A volume of 4 μl of oAβ solution 
or sterile phosphate-­buffered saline (PBS) vehicle was injected into the 
right lateral ventricle via a microinjector (HAMILTON, 80300). 
The coordinates used for the stereotaxic injections were anteropos-
terior (AP) −0.58, mediolateral (ML) 1.00, and dorsoventral (DV) 
−2.00. After injection, the mice were housed under SPF conditions 
until further analysis.
Isolation and culture of primary neurons and microglia
The embryonic mouse cortex [embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) to E16.5] 
was used to isolate primary neurons following approved animal pro-
tocols (75). Briefly, pregnant mice were euthanized, and embryos were 
removed and placed in ice-­cold Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS; 
Invitrogen, 1417509). After decapitation, cortices were dissected and 
stripped of meninges. The sheared tissues were then dissociated in 
0.125% trypsin-­EDTA at 37°C for 15 min and then suspended in 
complete medium [Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) 
sup­plemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)] supplemented 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
14 of 19
with deoxyribonuclease I (DNase I; 0.1 mg/ml; MilliporeSigma, 
260913). After filtration through 40-­μm cell strainers, dissociated 
cells were plated onto poly-­d-­lysine (PDL)–coated culture plates and 
cultured in neurobasal medium (Gibco, 21103049) supplemented with 
2% B27 (Gibco, 17504044) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). Medium 
was replaced after 24 hours. After 8 to 10 days in vitro, neurons were 
treated with 20 μM oAβ for 24 hours to establish the AD cell model.
For primary microglia, brains from mouse pups at postnatal days 1 
to 3 were rinsed with ice-­cold HBSS After removing blood vessels, 
the brains were minced into small pieces. The dissected tissues were dis-
sociated in 0.25% trypsin-­EDTA at 37°C for 15 min, followed by brief 
digestion with DNase I. Trypsin was neutralized with DMEM con-
taining 10% FBS, and cells were passed through 70-­μm cell strainers 
and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The cell suspension was seeded 
at a density of two to three brains per 75-­cm2 flask. After 10 to 14 days, 
microglia were detached by shaking at 200 rpm for 2 hours, collected, and 
replated onto PDL-­coated six-­well plates for subsequent experiments.
Immunofluorescence analysis
The mice were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) after deep 
anesthesia with tribromoethanol, and the brains were extracted and 
fixed in 4% PFA at 4°C for 6 hours, followed by dehydration in 30% 
sucrose until sectioning. The brains were embedded in Optimal Cut-
ting Temperature (OCT) compound (Sakura, 4583) and sectioned 
into 60-­μm-­thick tissue sections via a freezing microtome (Leica, 
CM3050S). For staining, the frozen sections were washed in 1× PBS 
and blocked at room temperature (RT) for 1 hour in blocking buffer 
(2.5% goat serum and 1% Triton X-­100 in 1× PBS). Primary anti-
bodies were applied to the sections overnight at 4°C. The tissues 
were washed with 1× PBS three times and then incubated with fluo-
rescent secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer for 1 hour at 
RT. After a final wash in PBS, the sections were mounted on glass 
slides with 4′,6-­diamidino-­2-­phenylindole (DAPI) mounting me-
dium (Sigma-­Aldrich, F6057). A list of the antibodies used in this 
study is provided in data S6.
The cortex region of each mouse brain section was visualized 
with a 20× objective on a confocal microscope (Olympus, LV1200). 
Images were taken with z stacks of 20-­μm intervals at a 1-­μm step 
size and analyzed by ImageJ.
Immunohistochemistry analysis
Formalin-­fixed paraffin-­embedded (FFPE) tissue sections (4 μm) 
were deparaffinized in xylene and then hydrated in ethanol. Anti-
gen retrieval was performed by heating the sections for 15 min in 
citrate buffer pH 6.0 (Agilent-­Dako, S236984). After cooling to 
RT, the slides were rinsed twice in 1× PBS for 5 min. The tissue sec-
tions were blocked with 2.5% goat serum at RT for 30 min, followed 
by overnight incubation with primary antibody at 4°C. The sec-
tions were then washed in 1× PBS and incubated with a horseradish 
peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated secondary antibody at RT for 45 min. 
After being washed with 1× PBS, the sections were incubated with 
3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) (Vector, SK-­4100) for 1 to 3 min and 
then counterstained with hematoxylin via a standard procedure. A 
3DHISTECH digital slice scanner was used to scan the slice images 
at different magnifications.
Multiplex immunohistochemistry
Multiplex immunohistochemistry (mIHC) staining was conducted 
via the Opal 6-­Plex Detection Kit (NEL871001KT, Akoya Biosciences) 
following established protocols. Briefly, FFPE tissue sections (4 μm) 
were heated at 60°C for 2 hours, followed by deparaffinization, rehy-
dration, and heat-­induced epitope retrieval. The slides were then 
incubated with primary antibodies, followed by a 10-­min incubation 
with Polymer HRP Mouse + Rabbit at RT. Next, the slides were 
treated with Opal Fluorophore Working Solution (1:100 dilution) for 
10 min. After tyramide signal amplification, heat-­induced epitope 
retrieval was repeated to strip the tissue-­bound primary and sec-
ondary antibody complexes before additional labeling. This process 
was repeated until all four markers were labeled. Details of the anti-
bodies used in this study are provided in data S4. Images of mIHC 
staining were captured via the Vectra Polaris Automated Quantita-
tive Pathology Imaging System and analyzed via ImageJ.
Cell culture and treatments
Mouse N2a neuroblastoma cells, mouse BV2 microglia, and human 
embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells were purchased from the National 
Infrastructure of Cell Line Resources (Beijing, China) and cultured 
in DMEM-­H supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% P/S at 37°C with 
5% CO2. N2a/APP cells (76), provided by H. Xu (Xiamen University), 
were maintained in DMEM-­H/Opti-­MEM (1:1) supplemented with 
10% FBS, P/S (1 U/ml), and G418 (200 mg/ml). All the cell lines were 
subjected to standard mycoplasma contamination tests.
To establish the AD cell model, N2a cells were seeded at 40 to 50% 
confluence and treated with differentiation medium (DMEM-­H, 0.5% 
FBS, and 20 μM RA) for 24 hours to induce cell differentiation. The 
differentiated N2a cells were subsequently exposed to 100 nM oAβ for 
24 hours to establish the AD cell model. To activate microglia, BV2 
cells or primary microglia were exposed to 100 nM oAβ for 24 hours.
For enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), cell-­free su-
pernatants from N2a or primary neuron cultures were analyzed for 
IFN-­β production via a Mouse IFN-­β ELISA Kit (Beyotime, PI568) 
following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Gene knockdown, knockout, and overexpression
For gene knockdown, N2a cells were cultured for 24 hours before trans-
fection using Rfect (Biogenerating Biotechnology Corp., 11012). Pri-
mary neurons were cultured for 7 days before transfection via CALNP 
RNAi (D-­nano, DN001). All small interfering RNAs used for the 
experiments were synthesized by Shanghai GenePharma, and the de-
tails are provided in data S6.
For gene knockout in primary neurons, the CRISPR-­Cas9 system 
was adopted. The single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) against YTHDF2 
and scramble sgRNA were designed, cloned, and inserted into 
pLentiCRISPR v2 by GenScript. Lentiviruses were generated by 
cotransfecting lentiCRISPR v2-­sgRNAs and packaging plasmids 
[psPAX2 (Addgene, no. 12260) and pMD2.G (Addgene, no. 12259)] 
into HEK293T cells via Neofect (Tengyi Biotech, TF201201). The 
supernatant was collected and filtered through a 0.45-­μm filter after 
transfection. Primary neurons were transduced with lentivirus ex-
pressing sgRNA and selected with puromycin for 4 days.
For overexpression, the mouse YTHDF2-­overexpressing plasmid 
(pCAX-­mYTHDF2) and its parental vector (pCAX) were purchased 
from Origene, and the mouse RIG-­I–overexpressing plasmid 
(pcDNA3.1–mRIG-­I–MYC) was provided by M. Jiang (IBMS/PUMC). 
The above plasmids were transfected via Neofect. Unless otherwise 
stated, the cells were harvested 48 hours posttransfection. JetPRIME 
(Polyplus, 101000027) was used to transfect plasmid DNA into pri-
mary neurons.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
15 of 19
Immunocytochemistry analysis
The cells cultured on coverslips were fixed in 4% PFA in PBS for 10 
to 20 min, followed by washing with 1× PBS and permeabilization 
in 0.1% Triton X-­100–PBS for 20 min. Subsequently, the cells were 
blocked in a 2.5% goat serum blocking solution at RT for 60 min. 
Primary antibodies were then applied and incubated overnight at 
4°C. After the samples were washed with PBS, secondary antibodies 
were applied, and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 45 min in 
the dark. Last, the coverslips were mounted onto glass microscope 
slides with DAPI. The slides were visualized via a 63× oil objective 
on a confocal microscope (STELLARIS 5, Leica). Images were taken 
at each focus point, averaged three times, and then analyzed via LAS 
X software. Protein colocalization was assessed via the plot profile 
function in ImageJ and further analyzed via the plugin JACoP.
Combined FISH and immunofluorescence analysis
The cyanine 3 (Cy3)-­labeled RNA probe was synthesized by Biotech 
Shanghai, and the detailed sequence is described in data S6. The 
FISH methods were adapted from previous articles with minor mod-
ifications (77). Briefly, cells were fixed with freshly prepared 4% PFA at 
RT for 10 min, followed by permeabilization with 0.5% Triton X-­100 
in PBS at 4°C for 10 min. Subsequently, the cells were blocked with 
1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) at RT for 30 min. Primary anti-
bodies were incubated at RT for 2 to 3 hours. After washing with 
PBS, secondary antibodies were applied and incubated at 37°C for 
45 min in a dark, humidified chamber. Samples were postfixed with 
4% PFA at RT for 5 min and equilibrated in 2× saline-­sodium citrate 
(SSC) twice for 10 min. Next, the cells were incubated with 100 μl of 
hybridization mixture [50% formamide, 2× SSC, dextran sulfate, 
yeast tRNA (1 mg/ml), ribonuclease (RNase) inhibitor, and 1 μM 
probe] at 37°C overnight. The coverslips were subsequently washed 
with freshly prepared 50% formamide or 2× SSC at 37°C for 5 min. 
Subsequently, the cells were successively washed with 2× SSC, 1× 
SSC, or 4× SSC at 37°C for 5 min. Last, the coverslips were mounted 
onto glass microscope slides with DAPI. The slides were visualized via 
a 63× oil objective on a confocal microscope (STELLARIS 5, Leica).
RNA extraction and real-­time qPCR
Temporal cortices of the mouse or human brains or cells were homo­
genized in TRIzol (Sigma-­Aldrich, T9424), and RNA was extracted 
and precipitated successively with trichloroethanol and isopropanol. 
The precipitates were dissolved in RNase-­free water, and the con-
centration was determined via a NanoPhotometer. The RNA was 
reverse transcribed via ReverTra Ace qPCR RT Master Mix (TOYOBO, 
FSQ-­301), and real-­time qPCR (RT-­qPCR) was performed in tripli-
cate via SYBR qPCR Mix (TOYOBO, QPS-­201) on a qPCR instru-
ment. Gapdh was used as an internal reference for all RT-­qPCR 
experiments, except where otherwise indicated. A list of the se-
quences of the primers used is provided in data S6.
Droplet digital PCR
cDNA was used as a template for ddPCR on the QX200 system (Bio-­Rad 
Laboratories). A TaqMan probe specific for mt-­Nd4 was designed 
(data S6). The ddPCR reaction mixture (20 μl), containing cDNA and 
the probe, was loaded into a disposable droplet generator cartridge, and 
70 μl of droplet generation oil was added. Droplets were generated 
using the QX200 droplet generator and transferred to a 96-­well PCR 
plate for PCR amplification. A negative control was included in each 
run. Absolute mt-­Nd4 copy numbers were quantified as copies per 
microliter using QuantaSoft software (Bio-­Rad Laboratories).
N6-­methyladenosine–immunoprecipitation–quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction
For m6A-­IP-­qPCR, total RNA was fragmented to 300 to 400 nucleo-
tides (nt) via RNA fragmentation reagents at 85°C for 30 s. m6A-­
modified Gaussia luciferase RNA (Gluc) and nonmodified Cypridina 
luciferase RNA (Cluc) [New England Biolabs (NEB), E1610S] were 
mixed with 10 μg of fragmented RNA as spike-­in control RNA. Anti-
bodies from two different companies (Synaptic Systems, 202003; and 
Abcam, ab151230) were applied for m6A-­IP to exclude false positive 
results from individual antibodies. IP and RNA recovery were con-
ducted via the aforementioned methods. Input (100 ng) and IP 
products were used for reverse transcription and qPCR. The y axis 
represents the relative enrichment normalized to Gluc.
Single-­base elongation-­ and ligation-­based qPCR
SELECT was performed as previously described (41). Briefly, relative 
quantification of target RNA was conducted via qPCR, with Gapdh 
serving as the internal reference. Total RNA containing equal amounts 
of target RNA was mixed with 40 nM Up primer, 40 nM Down primer, 
and 5 μM deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) (NEB, N0477V) 
in 17 μl of reaction buffer (NEB, B6004V). The mixture was then 
subjected to an annealing extension procedure: 90°C for 1 min, 80°C 
for 1 min, 70°C for 1 min, 60°C for 1 min, 50°C for 1 min, and 40°C 
for 6 min. Subsequently, the mixture was combined with 0.01 U of Bst 
2.0 DNA Polymerase (NEB, M0537S), 0.5 U of SplintR Ligase (NEB, 
M0375S), and 10 nM adenosine 5′-­triphosphate (ATP; NEB, P0756S) 
to a final volume of 20 μl. The final reaction mixture was incubated 
at 40°C for 20 min, followed by 80°C for 20 min, to facilitate recog-
nition and ligation at single bases. qPCR was then carried out as 
described above. The y axis displays the qPCR cycle threshold (Ct) 
values, which directly reflect the presence of m6A modification at the 
interrogated site.
dsRNA immunoprecipitation
Total RNA from the cortex of APP/PS1 mice was extracted via TRIzol 
reagent. For IP, 50 μg of RNA was incubated with 4 μg of the dsRNA 
antibody (J2) in IP buffer (10 mM tris-­HCl, 250 mM NaCl, and 0.1% 
NP-­40, supplemented with RNase inhibitor) overnight at 4°C. 
Following incubation, the RNA-­antibody mixture was transferred to 
Dynabeads Protein A and incubated for an additional 120 min at 
RT. The beads were then washed three times with IP buffer to re-
move non-­specifically bound material. Last, the RNA was recovered 
via ammonium acetate-­ethanol precipitation.
Dot blot analysis
Different amounts of RNA were heated at 95°C for 3 min to disrupt 
the secondary structure, followed by immediate placement on ice. 
The RNA samples were then applied to an Amersham Hybond-
­N+ membrane, followed by ultraviolet cross-­linking (125 mJ/cm2 
at 254 nm) and methylene blue staining. Afterward, the mem-
brane was washed with 1× Tris-­buffered saline with 0.1% Tween 20 
(TBST) buffer, blocked with 5% nonfat milk in TBST, and in-
cubated with m6A antibody or dsRNA antibody (J2) overnight at 
4°C. Fol­low­ing incubation with an HRP-­conjugated anti-­rabbit 
immunoglobulin G (IgG) secondary antibody at RT for 1 hour, the 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
16 of 19
membrane was visualized via the Tanon High-­sig ECL Western 
Blotting Substrate (Tanon, 180-­5001).
m6A and m1A quantification by UHPLC/MS-­MS
Poly(A) RNA was isolated from total RNA via a Dynabeads mRNA 
DIRECT Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Fifty nano-
grams of poly(A) RNA was digested with 1 μl of nuclease P1 (1 U/ml) 
in reaction buffer (20 mM ZnCl2 and 100 mM NaCl) at 37°C for 
2 hours. Subsequently, 1 μl of calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase 
(CIAP) (Promega, M1821) was added to CIAP buffer (Promega, 
M1821) and further incubated for another 2 hours at 37°C. The di-
gested DNA or RNA was diluted twofold with nuclease-­free H2O 
and filtered through a 0.22-­μm filter (Millipore, SLGVR04NL). For 
UHPLC-­MS/MS analysis, a 2-­μl sample was injected, and the nucle-
osides were separated via an Agilent Technologies 6470 Triple Quad 
LC/MS (Agilent Technologies, 6470) for analysis. The nucleosides 
were quantified via nucleoside-­to-­base ion mass transitions of 282.1 
to 150.1 (m6A), 282.1 to 150.1 (m1A), 268.0 to 136.0 (A), and 244.0 
to 112.0 (C).
RNA pulldown and MS/MS analysis
Biotin-­labeled RNA oligonucleotides containing adenosine or m6A 
were synthesized by Takara, and the sequences and modification 
sites are detailed in data S6. The RNA probe was denatured at 95°C 
for 5 min and rapidly cooled on ice. Two hundred picomol of RNA 
was then incubated with streptavidin magnetic beads (NEB, S1420S) in 
RNA capture buffer [20 mM tris-­HCl (pH 7.5), 0.5 M NaCl, 1 mM 
EDTA, and 1 μl of RNasin] at RT with gentle agitation (20 to 30 rpm) 
for 30 to 45 min. The RNA-­bead complex was subsequently incu-
bated with 1 mg of sample protein in protein-­RNA binding buffer 
[20 mM tris-­HCl (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1% Tween 
20, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1× protease inhibitor cocktail, and 
RNasin (0.04 U/ml)] overnight at 4°C. After thorough washing, bio-
tin elution buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 20164) was added, and 
the mixture was incubated at 37°C for 15 to 30 min to recover the 
RNA-­binding protein. The RNA-­protein complexes were dissolved in 
5× SDS loading buffer, separated via 10% SDS–polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis, and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250 stain-
ing solution. For MS analysis, proteins in gel slices (1 cm by 1 cm) 
were digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed via 
a rapid separation liquid chromatography (RSLC) nano-­LC system 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, ULTIM3000RSLCNANO) coupled online 
to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Beijing Genomics Insti-
tute) for nLC-­MS/MS analyses. All raw MS data were searched using 
MaxQuant on the mouse proteome, and peptides or proteins were 
filtered to a 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant.
RNA immunoprecipitation
Mouse brain tissues (20 mg) or cells (5 × 107) were lysed with 5 vol-
umes of nondenaturing lysis buffer [50 mM tris-­HCl (pH 7.4), 250 mM 
NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-­100, 1 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaF, 1× 
protease inhibitor cocktail, and RNasin (0.04 U/ml)]. The anti-­
YTHDF2 antibody (MEDICAL & BIOLOGICAL LABORATORIES, 
RN123PW) and a corresponding rabbit IgG control (Cell Signaling 
Technology, 2729S) were added to the precleared lysate, followed by 
incubation at 4°C for 5 hours. BSA-­blocked beads were then added 
to the mixture and incubated overnight at 4°C. After washing with 
low-­salt buffer [50 mM tris-­HCl (pH 7.4), 250 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 
1 mM NaF, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail, and RNasin (0.04 U/ml)] 
three times, the beads were resuspended in 2× proteinase K buffer 
[100 mM tris-­HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 12.5 mM EDTA, and 2% 
SDS], followed by digestion with proteinase K (1.2 mg/ml) at 55°C 
for 30 min. The input and IP RNAs were recovered via TRIzol ex-
traction and analyzed via qPCR.
RNA stability assay
mtRNA stability assay was conducted as previously described (78). 
Briefly, cells were treated with ethidium bromide (EtBr) (500 ng/ml), 
which binds to and inhibits mitochondrial DNA transcription. The 
cells were collected at the four designated time points (0, 1, 2, and 
3 hours), followed by cytosolic RNA extraction and RT-­qPCR analy-
sis as previously described. The primer sequences are provided in 
data S6. Consistent with previous studies (79), the following equa-
tion was used to determine the RNA half-­life (t1/2)
In vitro transcription
In vitro RNA was synthesized via the HiScribe T7 High Yield RNA 
Synthesis Kit (NEB, E2040S) following the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. The plasmid template (pGEM-­T–mt-­Nd4) was synthesized by 
Tsingke Beijing and linearized with Bst XI (NEB, R0113V) at 37°C 
for 2 hours. A total of 1 μg of linearized template DNA was incu-
bated with 20 μl of reaction mixture (100 mM nucleoside triphos-
phates, 0.1 M DTT, and 5 mM T7 RNA Polymerase Mix) at 37°C for 
2 hours. RNA with varying m6A contents was produced by adjusting 
the ratio of ATP to N6-­methyl ATP (Trilink, N-­1013-­5). To remove 
template DNA, 2 μl of DNase I (2000 units/ml) was added. The size 
and concentration of the synthesized RNA were analyzed via agarose 
gel electrophoresis and a NanoPhotometer assay, respectively.
Subcellular fractionation analysis
Mitochondria and cytoplasm were isolated via a Qproteome Mito-
chondria Isolation Kit (QIAGEN, 37612) following the manufac-
turer’s instructions. Washed cells (1 × 107) or homogenized mouse 
brain tissues (20 mg) were suspended in lysis buffer, which selectively 
disrupts the cell membrane without solubilizing it. After centrifuga-
tion, the supernatant containing the cytoplasm and the precipitate 
containing the compartmentalized organelles were separated. The re-
sulting pellet was resuspended in disruption buffer, passed repeat-
edly through a narrow-­gauge needle, and recentrifuged to pellet 
the nuclei, cell debris, and unbroken cells. The resulting superna-
tant was subsequently recentrifuged to pellet the mitochondria. 
Following removal of the supernatant, the mitochondria were washed 
and resuspended in mitochondria storage buffer. The efficiency of 
mitochondrial isolation was verified by Western blot analysis, 
with glyceraldehyde-­3-­phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) used as a 
cytoplasmic marker and TOMM20 used as a mitochondrial marker.
Protein extraction and Western blotting analysis
The cells were washed with PBS and lysed in ice-­cold lysis buffer, and 
the protein concentration was quantified via a BCA protein assay kit 
(GenStar, E162-­05). Equal amounts of protein from each sample were 
resolved on tris-­glycine gels and transferred onto a 0.45-­μm polyvi-
nylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore, IPVH00010). The mem-
branes were blocked with TBST blocking buffer (5% milk powder 
and 0.05% Tween 20) and then incubated with primary antibodies 
overnight at 4°C. After being washed with 1× TBST, the membranes 
t1∕2 = ln(2∕kdecay
)
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
17 of 19
were incubated with a peroxidase-­conjugated secondary antibody at 
RT for 1 hour. Subsequently, the membranes were incubated with 
Clarity ECL Western blot Substrate (Bio-­Rad, 170–5060) according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions.
m6A-­seq and analysis
For m6A-­seq, total RNA extracted from the cerebral cortices of pa-
tients with AD and mice was fragmented to 100 to 150 nt using RNA 
fragmentation reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, AM8740) at 70°C 
for 10 to 15 min. Following RNA fragmentation, 5 μg of fragmented 
RNA was incubated with 5 μl of anti-­m6A antibody (Synaptic Sys-
tems, 202003) at 4°C for 4 hours. Precleared Dynabeads Protein A 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, 10002D) were added to the complex mix-
ture and incubated overnight at 4°C. m6A nucleotides were used to 
competitively elute targeted RNA, followed by RNA recovery via the 
RNeasy MinElute Cleanup Kit (QIAGEN, 74204). cDNA libraries 
were constructed from immunoprecipitated RNAs and input RNAs via 
the SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-­seq Kit v2-­Pico (Takara, 634413) and 
subsequently subjected to next-­generation sequencing on an Illumina 
NovaSeq 6000 platform with a pair-­end 150–base pair read length.
The identification of m6A peaks in all the samples followed previous 
methods (80). Briefly, the raw sequencing reads from both the m6A-­IP 
and input libraries were trimmed for adapters and low-­quality bases 
with Trimmomatic (v.0.36). The clean reads were subsequently map­
ped back to the human (hg38) or mouse (mm10) genome with hisat2 
(v.2.1.0) (81). Only uniquely mapped reads and those with a map-
ping quality greater than 20 were subjected to m6A peak scanning. 
The ExomePeak R package (82) was used to call m6A peaks across 
transcriptomes by comparing two Poisson distributions between the 
m6A-­IP and input libraries. The differentially methylated peaks be-
tween different groups were also identified via ExomePeak. The en-
richment of m6A was denoted as the enrichment score, which was 
calculated as IP_fpkm divided by Input_fpkm in a specific region 
(IP/Input_fpkm: fragments per kilobase of transcript per million map­
ped reads in the IP/Input library). Gene Ontology (GO) functional en­
richment analysis was performed with the clusterProfiler R package.
RNA-­seq analysis
We obtained the processed MeRIP-­seq peak bigWig files from the 
Gene Expression Omnibus database (accession no. GSE266459) and 
visualized the m6A peaks on mitochondrial mRNAs using Integra-
tive Genomics Viewer (IGV). In the original study, m6A peaks were 
identified using MACS3 (v3.0.0a6) with the parameters -­-­nomodel 
-­-­extsize 100. Peaks with q ≤ 1 × 10−5 and fold change ≥ 5 were re-
tained as high-­confidence sites, and only those detected in at least 
three replicates were considered reproducible. The comparison of 
YTHDF2 expression between AD and control samples across multi­
ple brain regions was implemented on data obtained from the com-
prehensive database AlzData (www.alzdata.org).
Statistical analysis
The data are presented as the means ± SEMs. The number of ex-
perimental repeats and the sample sizes are detailed in the figure 
legends. Statistical analyses were conducted via GraphPad Prism 9. 
Comparisons were performed via two-­tailed t tests, one-­way analy-
sis of variance (ANOVA), or two-­way ANOVA, as specified in the 
figure legends. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statisti-
cally significant.
Supplementary Materials
The PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S8
Legends for data S1 to S6
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:
Data S1 to S6
REFERENCES
	 1.	 P. Scheltens, B. De Strooper, M. Kivipelto, H. Holstege, G. Chételat, C. E. Teunissen,  
J. Cummings, W. M. van der Flier, Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 397, 1577–1590 (2021).
	 2.	 J. Gallego-­Rudolf, A. I. Wiesman, A. P. Binette, S. Villeneuve, S. Baillet, PREVENT-­AD 
Research Group, Synergistic association of Aβ and tau pathology with cortical 
neurophysiology and cognitive decline in asymptomatic older adults. Nat. Neurosci. 27, 
2130–2137 (2024).
	 3.	 M. Jucker, L. C. Walker, Alzheimer’s disease: From immunotherapy to immunoprevention. 
Cell 186, 4260–4270 (2023).
	 4.	 Y. Lian, Y.-­J. Jia, J. Wong, X.-­F. Zhou, W. Song, J. Guo, C. L. Masters, Y.-­J. Wang, Clarity on the 
blazing trail: Clearing the way for amyloid-­removing therapies for Alzheimer’s disease. 
Mol. Psychiatry 29, 297–305 (2024).
	 5.	 J. A. Pradeepkiran, P. H. Reddy, Defective mitophagy in Alzheimer’s disease. Ageing Res. Rev. 
64, 101191 (2020).
	 6.	 A. Mary, F. Eysert, F. Checler, M. Chami, Mitophagy in Alzheimer’s disease: Molecular 
defects and therapeutic approaches. Mol. Psychiatry 28, 202–216 (2023).
	 7.	 J. I. Jiménez-­Loygorri, B. Villarejo-­Zori, Á. Viedma-­Poyatos, J. Zapata-­Muñoz,  
R. Benítez-­Fernández, M. D. Frutos-­Lisón, F. A. Tomás-­Barberán, J. C. Espín, E. Area-­Gómez, 
A. Gomez-­Duran, P. Boya, Mitophagy curtails cytosolic mtDNA-­dependent activation of 
cGAS/STING inflammation during aging. Nat. Commun. 15, 830 (2024).
	 8.	 Y. Jiang, S. Krantz, X. Qin, S. Li, H. Gunasekara, Y.-­M. Kim, A. Zimnicka, M. Bae, K. Ma,  
P. T. Toth, Y. Hu, A. N. Shajahan-­Haq, H. H. Patel, S. Gentile, M. G. Bonini, J. Rehman, Y. Liu,  
R. D. Minshall, Caveolin-­1 controls mitochondrial damage and ROS production by 
regulating fission -­ fusion dynamics and mitophagy. Redox Biol. 52, 102304 (2022).
	 9.	 E. R. Roy, G. Chiu, S. Li, N. E. Propson, R. Kanchi, B. Wang, C. Coarfa, H. Zheng, W. Cao, 
Concerted type I interferon signaling in microglia and neural cells promotes memory 
impairment associated with amyloid β plaques. Immunity 55, 879–894.e6 (2022).
	10.	 Y. Li, J. Cui, L. Liu, W. S. Hambright, Y. Gan, Y. Zhang, S. Ren, X. Yue, L. Shao, Y. Cui, J. Huard, 
Y. Mu, Q. Yao, X. Mu, mtDNA release promotes cGAS-­STING activation and accelerated 
aging of postmitotic muscle cells. Cell Death Dis. 15, 523 (2024).
	11.	 S. Quan, X. Fu, H. Cai, Z. Ren, Y. Xu, L. Jia, The neuroimmune nexus: Unraveling the role of 
the mtDNA-­cGAS-­STING signal pathway in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 20, 25 
(2025).
	12.	 A. Dhir, S. Dhir, L. S. Borowski, L. Jimenez, M. Teitell, A. Rötig, Y. J. Crow, G. I. Rice, D. Duffy, 
C. Tamby, T. Nojima, A. Munnich, M. Schiff, C. R. de Almeida, J. Rehwinkel, A. Dziembowski, 
R. J. Szczesny, N. J. Proudfoot, Mitochondrial double-­stranded RNA triggers antiviral 
signalling in humans. Nature 560, 238–242 (2018).
	13.	 A. Hooftman, C. G. Peace, D. G. Ryan, E. A. Day, M. Yang, A. F. McGettrick, M. Yin,  
E. N. Montano, L. Huo, J. E. Toller-­Kawahisa, V. Zecchini, T. A. J. Ryan, A. Bolado-­Carrancio, 
A. M. Casey, H. A. Prag, A. S. H. Costa, G. De Los Santos, M. Ishimori, D. J. Wallace,  
S. Venuturupalli, E. Nikitopoulou, N. Frizzell, C. Johansson, A. Von Kriegsheim,  
M. P. Murphy, C. Jefferies, C. Frezza, L. A. J. O’Neill, Macrophage fumarate hydratase 
restrains mtRNA-­mediated interferon production. Nature 615, 490–498 (2023).
	14.	 J. Yoon, S. Kim, M. Lee, Y. Kim, Mitochondrial nucleic acids in innate immunity and 
beyond. Exp. Mol. Med. 55, 2508–2518 (2023).
	15.	 T. Doke, S. Mukherjee, D. Mukhi, P. Dhillon, A. Abedini, J. G. Davis, K. Chellappa, B. Chen,  
J. A. Baur, K. Susztak, NAD+ precursor supplementation prevents mtRNA/RIG-­I-­
dependent inflammation during kidney injury. Nat. Metab. 5, 414–430 (2023).
	16.	 B. Maloney, D. K. Lahiri, Epigenetics of dementia: Understanding the disease as a 
transformation rather than a state. Lancet Neurol. 15, 760–774 (2016).
	17.	 H. Xu, Y. Dzhashiashvili, A. Shah, R. B. Kunjamma, Y.-­L. Weng, B. Elbaz, Q. Fei, J. S. Jones,  
Y. I. Li, X. Zhuang, G.-­L. Ming, C. He, B. Popko, m6A mRNA methylation is essential for 
oligodendrocyte maturation and CNS myelination. Neuron 105, 293–309.e5 (2020).
	18.	 K.-­J. Yoon, F. R. Ringeling, C. Vissers, F. Jacob, M. Pokrass, D. Jimenez-­Cyrus, Y. Su, N.-­S. Kim, 
Y. Zhu, L. Zheng, S. Kim, X. Wang, L. C. Doré, P. Jin, S. Regot, X. Zhuang, S. Canzar, C. He, 
G.-­L. Ming, H. Song, Temporal control of mammalian cortical neurogenesis by m6A 
methylation. Cell 171, 877–889.e17 (2017).
	19.	 Y. Wang, Y. Li, M. Yue, J. Wang, S. Kumar, R. J. Wechsler-­Reya, Z. Zhang, Y. Ogawa, M. Kellis, 
G. Duester, J. C. Zhao, N6-­methyladenosine RNA modification regulates embryonic neural 
stem cell self-­renewal through histone modifications. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 195–206 (2018).
	20.	 J. Widagdo, Q.-­Y. Zhao, M.-­J. Kempen, M. C. Tan, V. S. Ratnu, W. Wei, L. Leighton,  
P. A. Spadaro, J. Edson, V. Anggono, T. W. Bredy, Experience-­dependent accumulation of 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
18 of 19
N6-­methyladenosine in the prefrontal cortex is associated with memory processes in 
mice. J. Neurosci. 36, 6771–6777 (2016).
	21.	 J. L. Koranda, L. Dore, H. Shi, M. J. Patel, L. O. Vaasjo, M. N. Rao, K. Chen, Z. Lu, Y. Yi, W. Chi, 
C. He, X. Zhuang, Mettl14 is essential for epitranscriptomic regulation of striatal function 
and learning. Neuron 99, 283–292.e5 (2018).
	22.	 H. Shi, X. Zhang, Y.-­L. Weng, Z. Lu, Y. Liu, Z. Lu, J. Li, P. Hao, Y. Zhang, F. Zhang, Y. Wu,  
J. Y. Delgado, Y. Su, M. J. Patel, X. Cao, B. Shen, X. Huang, G.-­L. Ming, X. Zhuang, H. Song,  
C. He, T. Zhou, m6A facilitates hippocampus-­dependent learning and memory through 
YTHDF1. Nature 563, 249–253 (2018).
	23.	 M. Zhuang, X. Geng, P. Han, P. Che, F. Liang, C. Liu, L. Yang, J. Yu, Z. Zhang, W. Dong, S.-­J. Ji, 
YTHDF2 in dentate gyrus is the m6A reader mediating m6A modification in 
hippocampus-­dependent learning and memory. Mol. Psychiatry 28, 1679–1691 (2023).
	24.	 X. Jiang, B. Liu, Z. Nie, L. Duan, Q. Xiong, Z. Jin, C. Yang, Y. Chen, The role of m6A 
modification in the biological functions and diseases. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 6, 74 
(2021).
	25.	 W. Pan, Y. Chen, Y. Xu, W.-­M. Tong, Y. Niu, RNA m6A methylation and Alzheimer’s disease: 
Current evidence and future perspectives. Human Brain 3, e1796 (2024).
	26.	 A. M. Shafik, F. Zhang, Z. Guo, Q. Dai, K. Pajdzik, Y. Li, Y. Kang, B. Yao, H. Wu, C. He,  
E. G. Allen, R. Duan, P. Jin, N6-­methyladenosine dynamics in neurodevelopment and 
aging, and its potential role in Alzheimer’s disease. Genome Biol. 22, 17 (2021).
	27.	 R. Castro-­Hernández, T. Berulava, M. Metelova, R. Epple, T. Peña Centeno, J. Richter,  
L. Kaurani, R. Pradhan, M. S. Sakib, S. Burkhardt, M. Ninov, K. E. Bohnsack, M. T. Bohnsack, 
I. Delalle, A. Fischer, Conserved reduction of m6A RNA modifications during aging and 
neurodegeneration is linked to changes in synaptic transcripts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
120, e2204933120 (2023).
	28.	 Q. Li, S. Wen, W. Ye, S. Zhao, X. Liu, The potential roles of m6A modification in regulating 
the inflammatory response in microglia. J. Neuroinflammation 18, 149 (2021).
	29.	 H. Yin, Z. Ju, M. Zheng, X. Zhang, W. Zuo, Y. Wang, X. Ding, X. Zhang, Y. Peng, J. Li, A. Yang, 
R. Zhang, Loss of the m6A methyltransferase METTL3 in monocyte-­derived macrophages 
ameliorates Alzheimer’s disease pathology in mice. PLoS Biol. 21, e3002017 (2023).
	30.	 D. Merkurjev, W.-­T. Hong, K. Iida, I. Oomoto, B. J. Goldie, H. Yamaguti, T. Ohara,  
S.-­Y. Kawaguchi, T. Hirano, K. C. Martin, M. Pellegrini, D. O. Wang, Synaptic N6-­
methyladenosine (m6A) epitranscriptome reveals functional partitioning of localized 
transcripts. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1004–1014 (2018).
	31.	 M. N. Flamand, K. D. Meyer, m6A and YTHDF proteins contribute to the localization of 
select neuronal mRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, 4464–4483 (2022).
	32.	 F. Zhao, Y. Xu, S. Gao, L. Qin, Q. Austria, S. L. Siedlak, K. Pajdzik, Q. Dai, C. He, W. Wang,  
J. M. O’Donnell, B. Tang, X. Zhu, METTL3-­dependent RNA m6A dysregulation contributes 
to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease through aberrant cell cycle events. Mol. 
Neurodegener. 16, 70 (2021).
	33.	 X. Wang, Z. Lu, A. Gomez, G. C. Hon, Y. Yue, D. Han, Y. Fu, M. Parisien, Q. Dai, G. Jia, B. Ren,  
T. Pan, C. He, N6-­methyladenosine-­dependent regulation of messenger RNA stability. 
Nature 505, 117–120 (2014).
	34.	 H. Du, Y. Zhao, J. He, Y. Zhang, H. Xi, M. Liu, J. Ma, L. Wu, YTHDF2 destabilizes m6A-­
containing RNA through direct recruitment of the CCR4-­NOT deadenylase complex. Nat. 
Commun. 7, 12626 (2016).
	35.	 M. Lu, Z. Zhang, M. Xue, B. S. Zhao, O. Harder, A. Li, X. Liang, T. Z. Gao, Y. Xu, J. Zhou,  
Z. Feng, S. Niewiesk, M. E. Peeples, C. He, J. Li, N6-­methyladenosine modification enables 
viral RNA to escape recognition by RNA sensor RIG-­I. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 584–598 (2020).
	36.	 A. F. Durbin, C. Wang, J. Marcotrigiano, L. Gehrke, RNAs containing modified nucleotides 
fail to trigger RIG-­I conformational changes for innate immune signaling. MBio 7, 
e00833-­16 (2016).
	37.	 G.-­W. Kim, H. Imam, M. Khan, A. Siddiqui, N6-­Methyladenosine modification of hepatitis B 
and C viral RNAs attenuates host innate immunity via RIG-­I signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 295, 
13123–13133 (2020).
	38.	 Y. G. Chen, R. Chen, S. Ahmad, R. Verma, S. P. Kasturi, L. Amaya, J. P. Broughton, J. Kim,  
C. Cadena, B. Pulendran, S. Hur, H. Y. Chang, N6-­Methyladenosine modification controls 
circular RNA immunity. Mol. Cell 76, 96–109.e9 (2019).
	39.	 B. Hu, Y. Shi, F. Xiong, Y.-­T. Chen, X. Zhu, E. Carrillo, X. Wen, N. Drolet, C. S. Rajpurohit, X. Xu, 
D.-­F. Lee, C. Soto, S. Zhong, V. Jayaraman, H. Zheng, W. Li, Rewired m6A of promoter 
antisense RNAs in Alzheimer’s disease regulates neuronal genes in 3D nucleome. Nat. 
Commun. 16, 5251 (2025).
	40.	 Y. Zhou, P. Zeng, Y.-­H. Li, Z. Zhang, Q. Cui, SRAMP: Prediction of mammalian N6-­
methyladenosine (m6A) sites based on sequence-­derived features. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, 
e91 (2016).
	41.	 Y. Xiao, Y. Wang, Q. Tang, L. Wei, X. Zhang, G. Jia, An elongation-­ and ligation-­based qPCR 
amplification method for the radiolabeling-­free detection of locus-­specific N6-­
methyladenosine modification. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 57, 15995–16000 (2018).
	42.	 M. Garcia-­Alloza, E. M. Robbins, S. X. Zhang-­Nunes, S. M. Purcell, R. A. Betensky, S. Raju,  
C. Prada, S. M. Greenberg, B. J. Bacskai, M. P. Frosch, Characterization of amyloid 
deposition in the APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 24, 
516–524 (2006).
	43.	 E. F. Fang, Y. Hou, K. Palikaras, B. A. Adriaanse, J. S. Kerr, B. Yang, S. Lautrup,  
M. M. Hasan-­Olive, D. Caponio, X. Dan, P. Rocktäschel, D. L. Croteau, M. Akbari, N. H. Greig, 
T. Fladby, H. Nilsen, M. Z. Cader, M. P. Mattson, N. Tavernarakis, V. A. Bohr, Mitophagy 
inhibits amyloid-­β and tau pathology and reverses cognitive deficits in models of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 401–412 (2019).
	44.	 J. Willemsen, M.-­T. Neuhoff, T. Hoyler, E. Noir, C. Tessier, S. Sarret, T. N. Thorsen,  
A. Littlewood-­Evans, J. Zhang, M. Hasan, J. S. Rush, D. Guerini, R. M. Siegel, TNF leads to 
mtDNA release and cGAS/STING-­dependent interferon responses that support 
inflammatory arthritis. Cell Rep. 37, 109977 (2021).
	45.	 D. P. Patil, C.-­K. Chen, B. F. Pickering, A. Chow, C. Jackson, M. Guttman, S. R. Jaffrey, m6A 
RNA methylation promotes XIST-­mediated transcriptional repression. Nature 537, 
369–373 (2016).
	46.	 X. Li, X. Xiong, M. Zhang, K. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Zhou, Y. Mao, J. Lv, D. Yi, X.-­W. Chen, C. Wang, 
S.-­B. Qian, C. Yi, Base-­resolution mapping reveals distinct m1A methylome in nuclear-­ and 
mitochondrial-­encoded transcripts. Mol. Cell 68, 993–1005.e9 (2017).
	47.	 X. Gu, A. Zhuang, J. Yu, L. Yang, S. Ge, J. Ruan, R. Jia, X. Fan, P. Chai, Histone lactylation-­
boosted ALKBH3 potentiates tumor progression and diminished promyelocytic leukemia 
protein nuclear condensates by m1A demethylation of SP100A. Nucleic Acids Res. 52, 
2273–2289 (2024).
	48.	 M. Safra, A. Sas-­Chen, R. Nir, R. Winkler, A. Nachshon, D. Bar-­Yaacov, M. Erlacher,  
W. Rossmanith, N. Stern-­Ginossar, S. Schwartz, The m1A landscape on cytosolic and 
mitochondrial mRNA at single-­base resolution. Nature 551, 251–255 (2017).
	49.	 R. Winkler, E. Gillis, L. Lasman, M. Safra, S. Geula, C. Soyris, A. Nachshon, J. Tai-­Schmiedel, 
N. Friedman, V. T. K. Le-­Trilling, M. Trilling, M. Mandelboim, J. H. Hanna, S. Schwartz,  
N. Stern-­Ginossar, m6A modification controls the innate immune response to infection by 
targeting type I interferons. Nat. Immunol. 20, 173–182 (2019).
	50.	 N. Li, H. Hui, B. Bray, G. M. Gonzalez, M. Zeller, K. G. Anderson, R. Knight, D. Smith, Y. Wang, 
A. F. Carlin, T. M. Rana, METTL3 regulates viral m6A RNA modification and host cell innate 
immune responses during SARS-­CoV-­2 infection. Cell Rep. 35, 109091 (2021).
	51.	 M. Olejniczak, P. Galka, W. J. Krzyzosiak, Sequence-­non-­specific effects of RNA 
interference triggers and microRNA regulators. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, 1–16 (2010).
	52.	 M. Xu, D.-­F. Zhang, R. Luo, Y. Wu, H. Zhou, L.-­L. Kong, R. Bi, Y.-­G. Yao, A systematic 
integrated analysis of brain expression profiles reveals YAP1 and other prioritized hub 
genes as important upstream regulators in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 14, 
215–229 (2018).
	53.	 C. C. Escoubas, L. C. Dorman, P. T. Nguyen, C. Lagares-­Linares, H. Nakajo, S. R. Anderson,  
J. J. Barron, S. D. Wade, B. Cuevas, I. D. Vainchtein, N. J. Silva, R. Guajardo, Y. Xiao,  
P. V. Lidsky, E. Y. Wang, B. M. Rivera, S. E. Taloma, D. K. Kim, E. Kaminskaya, H. Nakao-­Inoue, 
B. Schwer, T. D. Arnold, A. B. Molofsky, C. Condello, R. Andino, T. J. Nowakowski,  
A. V. Molofsky, Type-­I-­interferon-­responsive microglia shape cortical development and 
behavior. Cell 187, 1936–1954.e24 (2024).
	54.	 K. Borst, A. A. Dumas, M. Prinz, Microglia: Immune and non-­immune functions. Immunity 
54, 2194–2208 (2021).
	55.	 Z. Hao, T. Wu, X. Cui, P. Zhu, C. Tan, X. Dou, K.-­W. Hsu, Y.-­T. Lin, P.-­H. Peng, L.-­S. Zhang,  
Y. Gao, L. Hu, H.-­L. Sun, A. Zhu, J. Liu, K.-­J. Wu, C. He, N6-­Deoxyadenosine methylation in 
mammalian mitochondrial DNA. Mol. Cell 78, 382–395.e8 (2020).
	56.	 L.-­S. Zhang, Q.-­P. Xiong, S. Peña Perez, C. Liu, J. Wei, C. Le, L. Zhang, B. T. Harada, Q. Dai,  
X. Feng, Z. Hao, Y. Wang, X. Dong, L. Hu, E.-­D. Wang, T. Pan, A. Klungland, R.-­J. Liu, C. He, 
ALKBH7-­mediated demethylation regulates mitochondrial polycistronic RNA processing. 
Nat. Cell Biol. 23, 684–691 (2021).
	57.	 H. Li, K. Yu, H. Hu, X. Zhang, S. Zeng, J. Li, X. Dong, X. Deng, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, METTL17 
coordinates ferroptosis and tumorigenesis by regulating mitochondrial translation in 
colorectal cancer. Redox Biol. 71, 103087 (2024).
	58.	 J. L. Libera, J. Hu, T.-­A. Nguyen, Z. Wang, S. J. F. van der Spek, K. Schult, L. Dorrian, J. Majka, 
K. Tobunluepop, S. Puri, A. Kynshov, N. M. Kanaan, P. T. Nelson, K. Meyer, L. Hou, X. Zhang, 
B. Wolozin, Loss of age-­associated increase in m6A-­modified RNA contributes to 
GABAergic dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease. bioRxiv 651974 [Preprint] (2025). https://
doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.02.651974.
	59.	 S. Tasaki, D. R. Avey, N. A. Kearns, A. Iatrou, C. Yu, S. De Tissera, H. Vyas, J. Xu, D. J. Flood,  
K. Rothamel, A. P. Wingo, T. S. Wingo, N. T. Seyfried, P. L. De Jager, G. Yeo, C. Gaiteri,  
D. A. Bennett, Y. Wang, The YTHDF proteins shape the brain gene signatures of 
Alzheimer’s disease. bioRxiv 619425 [Preprint] (2024). https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2024.10.23.619425.
	60.	 S. Zaccara, S. R. Jaffrey, A unified model for the function of YTHDF proteins in regulating 
m6A-­modified mRNA. Cell 181, 1582–1595.e18 (2020).
	61.	 Z. Zou, C. Sepich-­Poore, X. Zhou, J. Wei, C. He, The mechanism underlying redundant 
functions of the YTHDF proteins. Genome Biol. 24, 17 (2023).
	62.	 Q. Li, J. Liu, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Liu, H. Cheng, L. Deng, J. Qiu, K. Zhang,  
W. S. S. Goh, Y. Wang, Q. Peng, Decoding the interplay between m6A modification and 
stress granule stability by live-­cell imaging. Sci. Adv 10, eadp5689 (2024).
	63.	 Y. Fu, X. Zhuang, m6A-­binding YTHDF proteins promote stress granule formation.  
Nat. Chem. Biol. 16, 955–963 (2020).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eadz0887 (2026)     19 June 2026
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
19 of 19
	64.	 R. J. Ries, S. Zaccara, P. Klein, A. Olarerin-­George, S. Namkoong, B. F. Pickering, D. P. Patil,  
H. Kwak, J. H. Lee, S. R. Jaffrey, m6A enhances the phase separation potential of mRNA. 
Nature 571, 424–428 (2019).
	65.	 M. A. Kiebler, K. E. Bauer, RNA granules in flux: Dynamics to balance physiology and 
pathology. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 25, 711–725 (2024).
	66.	 C.-­H. Yu, S. Davidson, C. R. Harapas, J. B. Hilton, M. J. Mlodzianoski, P. Laohamonthonkul, 
C. Louis, R. R. J. Low, J. Moecking, D. De Nardo, K. R. Balka, D. J. Calleja, F. Moghaddas, E. Ni, 
C. A. McLean, A. L. Samson, S. Tyebji, C. J. Tonkin, C. R. Bye, B. J. Turner, G. Pepin,  
M. P. Gantier, K. L. Rogers, K. McArthur, P. J. Crouch, S. L. Masters, TDP-­43 triggers mitochondrial 
DNA release via mPTP to activate cGAS/STING in ALS. Cell 183, 636–649.e18 (2020).
	67.	 A. Jauhari, S. V. Baranov, Y. Suofu, J. Kim, T. Singh, S. Yablonska, F. Li, X. Wang, P. Oberly,  
M. B. Minnigh, S. M. Poloyac, D. L. Carlisle, R. M. Friedlander, Melatonin inhibits cytosolic 
mitochondrial DNA-­induced neuroinflammatory signaling in accelerated aging and 
neurodegeneration. J. Clin. Invest. 130, 3124–3136 (2020).
	68.	 H. Matsui, J. Ito, N. Matsui, T. Uechi, O. Onodera, A. Kakita, Cytosolic dsDNA of 
mitochondrial origin induces cytotoxicity and neurodegeneration in cellular and 
zebrafish models of Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Commun. 12, 3101 (2021).
	69.	 D. A. Sliter, J. Martinez, L. Hao, X. Chen, N. Sun, T. D. Fischer, J. L. Burman, Y. Li, Z. Zhang,  
D. P. Narendra, H. Cai, M. Borsche, C. Klein, R. J. Youle, Parkin and PINK1 mitigate 
STING-­induced inflammation. Nature 561, 258–262 (2018).
	70.	 C. Marques, A. Held, K. Dorfman, J. Sung, C. Song, A. S. Kavuturu, C. Aguilar, T. Russo,  
D. H. Oakley, M. W. Albers, B. T. Hyman, L. Petrucelli, C. Lagier-­Tourenne, B. J. Wainger, 
Neuronal STING activation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. 
Acta Neuropathol. 147, 56 (2024).
	71.	 X. Xie, G. Ma, X. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Zhao, J. Zeng, Activation of innate immune cGAS-­STING 
pathway contributes to Alzheimer’s pathogenesis in 5×FAD mice. Nat. Aging 3, 202–212 
(2023).
	72.	 W. Qiu, H. Zhang, A. Bao, K. Zhu, Y. Huang, X. Yan, J. Zhang, C. Zhong, Y. Shen, J. Zhou,  
X. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Shu, B. Tang, Z. Zhang, G. Wang, R. Zhou, B. Sun, C. Gong, S. Duan,  
C. Ma, Standardized operational protocol for human brain banking in China. Neurosci. Bull. 
35, 270–276 (2019).
	73.	 M. Li, X. Zhao, W. Wang, H. Shi, Q. Pan, Z. Lu, S. P. Perez, R. Suganthan, C. He, M. Bjørås,  
A. Klungland, Ythdf2-­mediated m6A mRNA clearance modulates neural development in 
mice. Genome Biol. 19, 69 (2018).
	74.	 T. Dong, Z.-­Q. Zhang, L.-­H. Sun, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, L. Lin, L. Yang, A. Lv, C. Liu, Q. Li,  
R.-­F. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Niu, H.-­Z. Chen, D.-­P. Liu, W.-­M. Tong, Mic60 is essential to maintain 
mitochondrial integrity and to prevent encephalomyopathy. Brain Pathol. 33, e13157 (2023).
	75.	 L. Lin, J. Ding, S. Liu, C. Liu, Q. Li, X. Gao, Y. Niu, W.-­M. Tong, Protein phosphatase 2ACα 
regulates ATR-­mediated endogenous DNA damage response against microcephaly.  
Mol. Neurobiol. 62, 1266–1281 (2025).
	76.	 Y. Luo, J. V. Smith, V. Paramasivam, A. Burdick, K. J. Curry, J. P. Buford, I. Khan, W. J. Netzer, 
H. Xu, P. Butko, Inhibition of amyloid-­β aggregation and caspase-­3 activation by the 
Ginkgo biloba extract EGb761. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 12197–12202 (2002).
	77.	 G. Zheng, J. A. Dahl, Y. Niu, P. Fedorcsak, C.-­M. Huang, C. J. Li, C. B. Vågbø, Y. Shi,  
W.-­L. Wang, S.-­H. Song, Z. Lu, R. P. G. Bosmans, Q. Dai, Y.-­J. Hao, X. Yang, W.-­M. Zhao,  
W.-­M. Tong, X.-­J. Wang, F. Bogdan, K. Furu, Y. Fu, G. Jia, X. Zhao, J. Liu, H. E. Krokan,  
A. Klungland, Y.-­G. Yang, C. He, ALKBH5 is a mammalian RNA demethylase that impacts 
RNA metabolism and mouse fertility. Mol. Cell 49, 18–29 (2013).
	78.	 Y. V. Surovtseva, T. E. Shutt, J. Cotney, H. Cimen, S. Y. Chen, E. C. Koc, G. S. Shadel, 
Mitochondrial ribosomal protein L12 selectively associates with human mitochondrial 
RNA polymerase to activate transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 17921–17926 
(2011).
	79.	 Z.-­W. Zhang, X. Teng, F. Zhao, C. Ma, J. Zhang, L.-­F. Xiao, Y. Wang, M. Chang, Y. Tian, C. Li,  
Z. Zhang, S. Song, W.-­M. Tong, P. Liu, Y. Niu, METTL3 regulates m6A methylation of PTCH1 
and GLI2 in Sonic hedgehog signaling to promote tumor progression in SHH-­
medulloblastoma. Cell Rep. 41, 111530 (2022).
	80.	 C. Ma, M. Chang, H. Lv, Z.-­W. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. He, G. Wu, S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, D. Wang,  
X. Teng, C. Liu, Q. Li, A. Klungland, Y. Niu, S. Song, W.-­M. Tong, RNA m6A methylation 
participates in regulation of postnatal development of the mouse cerebellum. Genome 
Biol. 19, 68 (2018).
	81.	 A. M. Bolger, M. Lohse, B. Usadel, Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence 
data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120 (2014).
	82.	 J. Meng, X. Cui, M. K. Rao, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, Exome-­based analysis for RNA epigenome 
sequencing data. Bioinformatics 29, 1565–1567 (2013).
Acknowledgments: We thank the National Human Brain Bank for Development and Function 
for providing the human postmortem brain tissues, as well as brain donors and families for 
tissue samples used in this study. We thank A. Klungland for providing Ythdf2flox/flox mice. We 
thank H. Xu for providing N2a/APP cells. We thank M. Jiang for providing the pcDNA3.1–mRIG-­I 
plasmid. We thank D. Trono for providing the psPAX2 and pMD2.G plasmid. The graphic 
diagrams in the figures were produced by BioRender. Funding: This work was supported by 
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32293213 to Q.X.), the Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences (2021-­I2M-­1-­020 to Y.N.), 
the Brain Science and Brain-­like Intelligence Technology-­National Science and Technology 
Major Project no. 2021ZD0201100 Task 1 (2021ZD0201101 to Y.N.), the Noncommunicable 
Chronic Diseases-­National Science and Technology Major Project (2023ZD0507100 to  
C.M.), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (3332024155 to W.P.). 
Author contributions: Conceptualization: Q.X., W.-­M.T., and Y.N. Methodology: W.P., L.Y., 
Y.Z., Y.C., Y.X., Y.L., H.L., and H.W. Software: L.Y. and Y.F. Validation: W.P., Y.C., Y.X., Y.L., and H.W. 
Formal analysis: W.P. and L.Y. Investigation: W.P. and L.Y. Resources: C.M., C.L., Q.L., and H.W. 
Data curation: L.Y., Y.F., and H.W. Writing—original draft: W.P., L.Y., and Y.N. Writing—review 
and editing: W.P., L.Y., Y.Z., Y.C., Y.X., Y.L., Y.F., C.M., C.L., Q.L., H.W., Q.X., W.-­M.T., and Y.N. 
Visualization: W.P. and L.Y. Supervision and project administration: H.W., W.-­M.T., and Y.N. 
Funding acquisition: W.P., C.M., H.W., Q.X., and Y.N. Competing interests: The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. Data, code, and materials availability: All 
data and code needed to evaluate and reproduce the results in the paper are present in 
the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. All the sequencing data involved in this study 
are deposited on the Genome Sequence Archive (GSA) database under accession no. 
PRJCA020074 (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/bioproject/browse/PRJCA020074). Materials generated 
by this study can be made available upon request via the corresponding authors.
Submitted 17 May 2025 
Accepted 8 May 2026 
Published 19 June 2026 
10.1126/sciadv.adz0887
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026

Neuronal YTHDF2 suppresses innate immune activation in A# pathology by
promoting m6A-dependent decay of cytosolic mitochondrial mRNAs
Wenqi Pan, Lin Yang, Yao Zhang, Yan Chen, Yuesi Xu, Yifan Li, Yujie Fu, Chunhui Ma, Chunying Liu, Qing Li, Hailong Liu,
Hailin Wang, Qi Xu, Wei-Min Tong, and Yamei Niu
Sci. Adv. 12 (25), eadz0887.  DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adz0887
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.adz0887
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2026 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on July 20, 2026