Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences (2019) 76:473–493 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-018-2943-4
REVIEW
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities
Atanu Adak1 · Mojibur R. Khan1
Received: 22 February 2018 / Revised: 4 October 2018 / Accepted: 9 October 2018 / Published online: 13 October 2018 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2018
Abstract
Gut microbiota has evolved along with their hosts and is an integral part of the human body. Microbiota acquired at birth 
develops in parallel as the host develops and maintains its temporal stability and diversity through adulthood until death. 
Recent developments in genome sequencing technologies, bioinformatics and culturomics have enabled researchers to explore 
the microbiota and in particular their functions at more detailed level than before. The accumulated evidences suggest that 
though a part of the microbiota is conserved, the dynamic members vary along the gastrointestinal tract, from infants to 
elderly, primitive tribes to modern societies and in different health conditions. Though the gut microbiota is dynamic, it per-
forms some basic functions in the immunological, metabolic, structural and neurological landscapes of the human body. Gut 
microbiota also exerts significant influence on both physical and mental health of an individual. An in-depth understanding 
of the functioning of gut microbiota has led to some very exciting developments in therapeutics, such as prebiotics, probiot-
ics, drugs and faecal transplantation leading to improved health.
Keywords  Gut microbiota · Functions · Health · Therapeutics
Introduction
The life forms on this earth can be clustered into three broad 
domains: namely Archaea, Bacteria and Eukaryota [1]. All 
life has evolved from a simple unicellular common ancestor 
over billion years of evolution giving rise to a complexity 
of cells within an organism. The human is a superorganism 
that functions in harmony with trillions of symbiotic bacteria 
and eukaryotic cells. The host and its symbionts together are 
called a “holobiont,” and their collective genome is known 
as “hologenome”. Variation in the hologenome either by 
changes in the host genome or the microbiome may occur 
with reasonable fidelity maintaining plasticity of the hol-
obiont [2]. In 2001, the human genome project was com-
pleted after which it was correctly argued that the “crowning 
achievement” in biology would be incomplete until the syn-
ergistic activities between human and microbes are under-
stood [3–5]. Subsequently, several scientific efforts were 
initiated to understand the relationships between human and 
human-associated microbial communities. Discoveries of 
the Human Microbiome Project (HMP) and the Metagenome 
of Human Intestinal Tract (MetaHIT) opened new horizons 
in microbiome research for an enhanced understanding of 
host–microbe interactions at four major colonisation sites 
of the human body; viz. oral, gut, vagina and skin. Of these 
four sites, the human gut microbiota has drawn the atten-
tion of microbiologists for its clinical significance. Several 
gut microbiome projects including the Australian Gut Pro-
ject, the American Gut project, the British gut project, the 
Canadian Microbiome Initiative, the Human MetaGenome 
Consortium Japan, the My NewGut project of the European 
Union and the International Human Microbiome Consor-
tia, etc. were undertaken for a better understanding of the 
complex gut ecosystem and its role in health and diseases. 
The human gut (200–300 m2 of mucosa) is the “secret gar-
den” of ten trillion diverse symbionts (50 bacterial phyla and 
about 100–1000 bacterial species), collectively known as the 
‘microbiota’. Microbiota are ten times more abundant than 
our somatic and germ line cells of the body. The collective 
genes of microbiota are known as the ‘microbiome’ which 
is 150 times larger than the human genome [6, 7]. In an 
individual, 150–170 bacterial species predominate and get 
benefits from the warm nutrient rich environment of the gut 
and perform protective, metabolic and structural functions. 
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
 *	 Mojibur R. Khan 
	
mojibur.khan@gmail.com
1	
Molecular Biology and Microbial Biotechnology Laboratory, 
Life Science Division, Institute of Advanced Study 
in Science and Technology (IASST), Guwahati, India

474
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
In this review, we have summarised (a) the general features 
of the gut microbiota, the laws of symbiosis and its develop-
ment along with its distribution in the gastrointestinal (GI) 
tract; (b) the relationships between the gut microbiota in 
a metabolic, immunological and structural landscapes of 
the human body and (c) promising therapeutic approaches 
including prebiotics, probiotics, drugs and faecal microbiota 
transplantation that involve in modulation of the gut micro-
bial ecology.
Methods to study gut microbiota
Culture‑dependent
In 1881, Robert Koch introduced the plating technique both 
to culture and identify microorganisms by characterising 
their biochemical and physiological properties. A culture-
based method detects only 30–50% of the bacteria inhabit-
ing in the intestine. Artificial cultural conditions provide a 
less favourable environment for the growth of uncultivable 
bacteria. Conventionally, different selective and nutrient agar 
media are used to isolate and culture the bacteria. Improved 
methods, such as the enrichment culture technique and pre-
incubation of faeces in blood culture bottles, rumen fluid 
and sterile stool extract were introduced in different culture 
and physicochemical conditions. These cultural modifica-
tions act as natural simulants and facilitate the isolation 
of previously uncultivable bacteria [8–11]. However, the 
growth of predominant bacteria in faeces masks the isola-
tion of less dominant ones. Further modifications including 
the use of antibiotics, bacteriophages and filtration overcome 
these difficulties. For example, the dominant population of 
Escherichia coli under Proteobacteria phylum hindered the 
isolation and identification of new bacterial species. The 
addition of lytic bacteriophages in the culture plate lysed E. 
coli and facilitated growth of an unknown bacterial species 
(Enterobacter massiliensis) of the Enterobacteriaceae fam-
ily that was not previously detected using classical culture 
methods. An extensive study on the culturomics approach 
highlighted the gap between culture-dependent and inde-
pendent studies and estimated the number of the uncultured 
microbes from the different microbiome projects [9]. They 
introduced three modifications to isolate uncultured bacteria 
with multiple cultural conditions viz. (1) preincubation of a 
sample in a blood culture bottle, (2) the addition of rumen 
fluid and (3) the addition of sheep blood that enhanced the 
isolation of bacterial species by 56, 40 and 25%, respec-
tively. This culture-based approach also used the matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization based time-of-flight 
mass spectrometry to discriminate a large number colonies 
and 16S rRNA sequencing for bacterial identification. This 
culturing approach had identified 1057 prokaryotic species 
that include (1) 531 species to the human gut repertoire of 
which 146 bacteria were previously not reported in the gut, 
(2) 187 bacteria and 1 archaea (Haloferax alexandrinus) not 
previously isolated from humans and (3) 197 potentially 
new species. Therefore, the application of culturomics is 
significant in exploring gut microbial diversity as well as 
in understanding their causative or curative roles in health 
and disease.
Culture‑independent
With the advent of Sanger sequencing in 1970, Carl Woese and 
his colleagues introduced 16S rRNA to investigate the bacte-
rial taxa and their phylogeny based on conserved sequences of 
hypervariable (V1–V9) region [12]. In the following 30 years, 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based methods, such as 
denaturing/temperature gradient gel electrophoresis, single-
strand-conformation polymorphism, restriction fragment 
length polymorphism, terminal restriction fragment length 
polymorphism and quantitative PCR have been developed to 
study the diversity of microorganisms. Likewise, non-PCR-
based molecular techniques, such as microarray and fluores-
cence in situ hybridization have also been adopted to aid the 
exploration of microbial diversity [13]. In the 1990s, prepara-
tion of a clonal library and sequencing of the metagenome by 
Sanger’s method paved the way to identify taxonomic compo-
sition and phylogeny of a microbial community in an ecologi-
cal niche. In the following years, a number of improvements 
were made to Sanger’s sequencing method which mostly 
involved the replacement of phosphor tritium-radiolabelling 
with fluorescently tagged bases and its fluorometric detec-
tion through capillary-based electrophoresis. About a decade 
later in 2005, high-throughput sequencing technique (next 
generation of sequencing called NGS) was developed to over-
come the difficulties identified in Sanger’s method in term of 
ease, cost and time [13]. In this technique, adapter-bracketed 
DNA molecules are passed over a lawn of complementary 
oligonucleotides bound to a flow-cell. Thereafter, the bound 
DNA fragment undergoes a process known as bridge ampli-
fication and produces a cluster of clonal populations. During 
amplification, each fluorescent labelled deoxyribonucleotide 
triphosphate is detected during sequential cycles of DNA 
synthesis and identified by fluorophore excitation in a mas-
sive and parallel fashion. A typical workflow involved in a 
culture-independent study of the microbiota is presented in 
Fig. 1. In 2010, catalogues of 3.3 million non-redundant fae-
cal microbial genes were reported using NGS. This number 
of genes was 200 times more than any previous studies [6]. 
Thereafter, a catalogue of 9.8 million non-redundant microbial 
genes was published from the metagenomic data with 1267 
samples; including 760 European from MetaHIT, 139 Ameri-
can from the HMP and 368 from China (large diabetic study). 
Each sample consisted of 750,000 genes of which 300,000 

475
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
genes were similar in more than 50% of the individuals [14]. 
A Danish study of 540 adults reported the concept of high 
and low gene counts of the gut microbiome related to obesity 
[15]. In the recent years, sequencing of the whole genome 
by NGS involves a fragmentation step before sequencing and 
then assembling into one long contiguous sequence in silico. 
Moreover, DNA extraction, library preparation, choice of 
primer and short read lengths of DNA could be prone to errors 
[16]. Now, the third generation of DNA sequencing techniques 
such as PacBio RS II and the MinION nanopore device have 
shown substantial advancement over second-generation DNA 
sequencing. In 2011, the PacBio developed a technology 
based on single molecule real-time sequencing platform using 
zero-mode waveguides properties. MinION was developed 
by Oxford Nanopore’s technology in which DNA is passed 
through a nanoscale pore structure to measure the changes of 
electrical field surrounding the pore which is base depend-
ent. Both technologies can produce longer reads over the NGS 
and can cover the whole genome. Hence, these techniques can 
bypass the computational challenges of genome assembly and 
transcript reconstruction. In addition, epigenetic modifications 
such as DNA methylation at CpG site and histone modification 
are detected directly without tagging, breaking and filtering 
of the DNA. Moreover, the third generation of sequencers are 
potable and require minimal pre-processing. Therefore, data 
are collected and analysed in real time for efficient diagnosis 
and rapid remedial actions. For example, Ebola virus (EBV) 
was detected within 44 s using Oxford Nanopore’s MinION.
Features of GI microbiota
Symbiosis and stability
The gut microbial community is dynamic and has adapted to 
colonize in the GI. Some specific characteristics are pivotal 
for colonization, such as an arsenal of enzymes to utilize 
available nutrients, the right cell-surface molecular pattern 
Individual identification
Subject recruitment and metadata 
collection
Metagenome extraction
Build OTU table
Per sample OTU 
count
Phylogenetic tree and 
evolutionary 
relationship
Fasttree, ClearCut
α-diversity and 
rarefaction
Phylogenetic 
Diversity, Chao1, 
observed species
β-diversity and
rarefaction
UniFrac, Bray-
Curtis, Jaccard
Visualization of data 2-D, 3-D  PCoA plot, 
distance histogram, OTU heatmap, OTU 
network, Jackknifed hierarchical clustering
Shotgun Sequencing of RNA
Host-microbes interaction 
Functional capacity of 
microbiota
Filtering and assembly
QIIME, mothur, CD-HIT
Assign taxonomy
RDP classifier, 
BLAST
Align sequence
PYNAST, 
INFERNAL
Find differentially abundant taxa, genes and pathways 
LEfSe 
Identify associations between metadata and abundance data
MaAsLin
Amplification and library preparation
Next generation sequencing
DNA
RNA
Functional 
analysis 
HUMAnN 
Microbial Clade 
Identification
MetaPhIAn
De novo 
taxonomic 
selection
MetaPhlAn
Reference-based
taxonomic selection 
Greengenes
Community function 
profiling
CAZy
Fig. 1   Bioinformatics work flow of culture independent approach. 
QIIME quantitative insights into microbial ecology, MG-RAST 
metagenomics rapid annotation using subsystem technology, CAZy 
carbohydrate active-enzymes, MetaPhlAn metagenomic phylogenetic 
analysis, KEGG Kyoto encyclopaedia for genes and genomics, COG 
clusters of orthologous group, PICRUst phylogenetic investigation of 
communities by reconstruction of unobserved states, HUMAnN The 
Human Microbiome Project Unified Metabolic Analysis Network, 
LEfSe Linear Discriminate Analysis with Effect Size, MaAsLin Mul-
tivariate Association with Linear Models, MetaPhlAn Metagenomic 
Phylogenetic Analysis, PICRUSt Phylogenetic Investigation of Com-
munities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States, rRNA ribosomal 
RNA

476
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
to attach at the “right” habitat, ability to evade bacterio-
phages and fitness to the reaction-ready immune system of 
host. A microbe should withstand the physical and chemical 
stresses in the gut to proliferate rapidly without washing out 
[17]. Finally, it should survive in the dry and toxic stresses 
of the “ex-host” environment when making a jump to other 
hosts [18]. The relationship between host and microbes 
is commensal (one partner benefits while the other seems 
unaffected) rather than mutualistic (both partners benefited). 
The homeostasis of gut microbiota is maintained through 
feedback mechanisms. Positive feedback disrupts the coop-
eration of the microbial community in which two microbial 
species increase in their abundance and can generate a runa-
way effect [19, 20]. For example, cooperation between two 
species to increase their abundances in which upsurges of 
one species increases the abundance of the second and so on. 
The upsurges of both microbes disrupt the overall diversity 
and abundance of a community in an ecological niche. Three 
negative feedback mechanisms have been proposed by which 
host can create a selective pressure between the cooperat-
ing microbes to maintain their homeostasis in the gut. First, 
the host immune response shapes the microbial community 
by provoking a specific immune response. Second, spatial 
segregation of microbial species as these can grow in sepa-
rate locations as their interaction will be weakened. Finally, 
supplementation of microbes with alternative carbon sources 
in such a way that these species no longer rely on their coop-
erative partners [21]. Mostly, two levels of natural selection 
of an individual maintain the law of symbiosis and its stabil-
ity. At the host level, “top-down” selection on the microbial 
community favours stable societies with a high degree of 
functional redundancy. An opposing “bottom-up” selec-
tion pressure originates from the microbes to allow them to 
become functionally specialized [17]. Existing relationships 
between the host and adaptation of the microbial community 
maintains the gut ecological niche by nurturing its richness 
and diversity.
Diversity and integrity
The human gut microbiota consists of several types of 
microbes including bacteria, archaea, eukarya, viruses and 
parasites [19]. The gut microenvironment mainly favours 
the growth of bacteria from seven predominant divisions 
(Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria, 
Proteobacteria, Verrucomicrobia and Cyanobacteria) [22]. 
Among these seven divisions, the Bacteroidetes and Fir-
micutes constitute more than 90% of the total population. 
Most of the species under the phylum Bacteroidetes belong 
to the genera of Bacteroides and Prevotella. Bacterial 
species under the phylum Firmicutes such as Clostridium 
clusters IV and XIVa which include the genera Clostrid-
ium, Eubacterium and Ruminococcus are predominant in 
gut. Methanobrevibacter smithii a hydrogen-consuming 
methanogen and halophilic Haloferax alexandrinus and 
Haloferax massiliensis spp. nov. from Archaea had been 
reported from human gut [9]. Apart from taxonomic clas-
sification, the human microbiome is classified into three 
discrete enterotypes: Bacteroides or Prevotella or Rumi-
nococcus. Enterotype 1 is characterised by dominance of 
Bacteroides with saccharolytic and proteolytic activities 
[23]. Enterotype 2 is Prevotella dominant and acts as a 
mucin glycoprotein degrader. Enterotypes 1 involved in 
synthesis of biotin, riboflavin, pantothenate and ascorbate, 
while enterotype 2 involved in thiamine and folate synthe-
sis. Enterotype 3 is characterised by dominance of Rumi-
nococcus with mucin degrading activities and membrane 
transportation of sugars. However, the concept enterotypes 
is debated due to the observation of a high degree of vari-
ation between individuals and some data showing more 
of a continuum rather than three discrete clusters, i.e. the 
debate is not related to diet differences, though clearly diet 
drives different composition types [24]. Intake of animal 
protein and fat for a long period enriched for Bacteroides 
enterotype while carbohydrate-enriched diet encouraged 
Prevotella. Sometimes, the enterotypes Ruminococcus and 
Bacteroides are overlapped and found to be indistinguish-
able [25]. A group of researchers from Taiwan classified 
enterotypes into Bacteroides, Prevotella and Enterobacte-
riaceae and also correlated with their dietary habits. They 
also claimed that Enterobacteriaceae could be a new sub-
enterotypes in the Asian population [26]. Whatever may 
be the enterotypes, the abundance of bacterial phyla may 
vary significantly from individual to individual in where 
some microbial members function as “core microbiota”, 
while others act more like a “flexible pool”. The “core 
microbiota” adapts for reproducibility the “flexible pool” 
helps in adaptation of a host. The flexible pool is generally 
acquired from ingested food, water and various compo-
nents from the environment [27]. The microbial species, 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Roseburia intestinalis and 
Bacteroides uniformis are considered as core bacterial spe-
cies (< 0.5% relative abundance). Sometimes, exchange 
of genetic material between core and flexible pool confers 
the fitness to host for adaptation either to an environment 
or to a dietary habit. For example, the genes of porphy-
ranases, agarases and its associated proteins were found 
in the marine bacterium, Zobellia galactanivorans living 
outside the gut. These genes has been transferred to the 
gut bacterium Bacteroides plebeius in Japanese individu-
als due to consumption of seaweeds that are absent in the 
North American [28]. In spite of the exchange of genes, 
different individuals share similar metabolic and func-
tional pathways, including fructose/mannose metabolism, 
amino-sugar metabolism and N-glycan degradation [29].

477
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
Gut microbiota composition
The GI tract is divided functionally and anatomically into 
the stomach, small and large intestine (LI). The distinct 
microenvironment and physiochemical barrier of each com-
partment selects the growth of specific microbiota (Fig. 2).
Stomach
Previously the stomach was thought to be sterile and unre-
ceptive to bacterial growth due to a bactericidal barrier, 
reflux of bile acids, thickness of the mucus layer and gas-
tric peristalsis. In 1981, the Lancet reported a large number 
of acid-resistant bacterial strains, such as Streptococcus, 
Neisseria and Lactobacillus in the stomach. While in 1982, 
Campylobacter pyloridis was discovered by Robin War-
ren and Barry Marshall and later in 1984, it was named as 
Helicobacter pylori. In stomach, more than 65% of phylo-
types originated from the mouth. These mouth originated 
bacteria such as Veillonella, Lactobacillus and Clostridium 
were found to be acid-resistant and transient [30]. Healthy 
human stomach is normally inhabited by five major phyla 
viz. Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Fusobacte-
ria and Proteobacteria and the bacterial genera Prevotella, 
Streptococcus, Veillonella, Rothia and Haemophilus [31].
Small intestine (SI)
The SI majorly helps in digestion and absorption of foods 
and nutrients. The SI is divided into three parts: duodenum, 
jejunum and ileum. Duodenum microenvironment is charac-
terised by bile acids, pancreatic secretions, and antimicrobi-
als agents where faster transit of food and plenty of oxygen 
limits the bacterial density ­(103–4 CFU/ml) and diversity. 
Firmicutes and Actinobacteria are the predominant phyla in 
the duodenum [32]. The jejunum supports the bacterial colo-
nisation in terms of diversity and density ­(103–7 CFU/ml) 
and mostly supports the growth of Gram-positive aerobes 
and facultative anaerobes ­(103–7 CFU/ml) including Lacto-
bacilli, Enterococci and Streptococci [32]. In the transition 
to the ileum, the bacterial density reaches up to ­109 CFU/
ml with predominance of aerobic species. In contrast, the 
distal part of ileum close to the ileocecal valve is populated 
with anaerobes and Gram-negative organisms similar to the 
colon.
Large intestine (LI)
The LI majorly consists of ascending, transverse and 
descending colon and cecum. It is a predominant site of 
water absorption and fermentation of undigested food due 
to the slower transit of food and its anaerobic condition. In 
the LI, the number of anaerobes outnumbers the aerobes 
by a factor of 100–1000. The bacterial density reaches to 
­1012 CFU/ml and is mainly dominated by Firmicutes and 
Bacteroidetes [33]. The ratio of these two bacterial phyla 
may alter in different stages of life and even in various 
pathophysiological conditions. The ratio of Firmicutes and 
Bacteroidetes is considered as a predictive marker of health 
and diseases [34]. In the lumen of LI, bacterial genera such 
Fig. 2   Distribution of normal gut flora in different parts of intestine and its functional activities and GBA. GBA gut brain axis

478
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
as Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus, Entero-
bacteriaceae, Enterococcus, Clostridium, Lactobacillus 
and Ruminococcus are predominant, whereas Clostridium, 
Lactobacillus, Enterococcus and Akkermansia are associ-
ated with the mucosa. In addition, a few pathogens including 
Campylobacter jejuni, Salmonella enterica, Vibrio cholera, 
E coli and Bacteroides fragilis may present in the LI with 
lower abundance (0.1%) [35].
Change of microbiota with age
The human microbiota has evolved along with its host and 
is an integral part of human body. Microbiota is acquired 
at birth and develops in parallel with the host and plays an 
important role in the body through adulthood until death. A 
century of research had claimed that the womb, placenta, 
amniotic fluid and meconium are sterile and microbiota 
starts to be acquired after birth. However, recent PCR and 
DNA sequencing-based methods suggested the presence of 
bacterial communities in the placenta, amniotic fluid and 
meconium [36]. Although these advanced techniques over-
come the limitations of the cultivable approach, however, 
they have some inherent limitations. First, the detected bac-
terial DNA may come from either live or dead bacteria. For 
example, Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus were detected 
in placenta by the molecular approach; however, the same 
bacteria were unculturable even though these are readily cul-
tivable organisms [37]. Second, DNA-based assessments of 
a sample with low microbial biomass are extremely prone to 
error and contamination in a clinical setting. There is con-
troversy over two opposing hypotheses “sterile womb” and 
“in utero colonisation” [36]. Apart from this controversy, 
various maternal factors including prenatal stress, antibiotic 
therapies and prolong gestation have roles in colonisation 
of the gut microbiota of a new-born baby. A few studies 
showed the changes of hormonal profiles during pregnancy 
that encouraged the growth of Lactobacillus (iners, crispa-
tus, jensenii and johnsonii) and Clostridiales, Bacteroidales 
and Actinomycetales in the vagina [38, 39]. During vaginal 
birth, a baby acquires these microbes in their gut. In con-
trast, a baby born by caesarean section (C-section) acquires 
microbes from the mother’s skin including Staphylococcus, 
Corynebacterium and Propionibacterium spp. Lower micro-
bial diversity and delayed colonisation of Bacteroidetes in 
the C-section baby makes the baby vulnerable to certain 
pathogens and atopic diseases [40]. After birth, breast-fed 
babies consume more lysozyme, immunoglobins, lacto-
ferrin, glycans, sialylated and other complex oligosaccha-
rides through mother’s milk than formula-fed babies. As 
a result, gut microflora of breast fed babies are dominated 
by Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus sp. whereas formula 
fed baby are dominated with Clostridium, Granulicatella, 
Citrobacter, Enterobacter and Bilophila [7, 41]. These evi-
dences indicate that vaginal birth and breast-fed babies have 
healthier gut microbes compared to the formula-fed babies. 
Thereafter by the age of 3–5 years, the unstable structure 
and composition of microbiota starts to differentiate and 
acquires similarity (40–60%) to that of adult [7]. During 
this period, the gut microbiome also changes in parallel from 
the earliest lactate utilization to plant polysaccharide diges-
tion, vitamin biosynthesis and xenobiotic degradation [42]. 
The composition and functions of the established microbiota 
remain the same if there is no change in long-term dietary 
habits, antibiotics treatment, stress and pathophysiology in 
adulthood. In China, research on longevity revealed that 
the genera Roseburia and E. coli were significantly higher, 
whereas Lactobacillus, Faecalibacterium, Parabacteroides, 
Butyricimonas, Coprococcus, Megamonas, Mitsuokella, Sut-
terella, and Akkermansia were significantly less in centenar-
ians [43]. In Italy, research on centenarians showed a decline 
in the abundance of core microbiota (Ruminococcaceae, 
Lachnospiraceae, and Bacteroidaceae) with the prevalence 
of subdominant genera and families (Eggerthella, Akker-
mansia, Anaerotruncus, Synergistaceae, Bilophila, and 
Christensenella) along with age. Abundance of Akkerman-
sia, Bifidobacterium and Christensenella has been identi-
fied as a putative signature in the gut ecosystem for healthy 
ageing and longevity [43–45]. In the centenarians, lifespan 
decreased due to changes within the phylum Firmicutes and 
enrichment of ‘pathobionts’ and proinflammatory response 
mediated by the cytokines TNF-α, IL-6, MCP-1 and IL-8 
[46]. In contrast, microbial secreted colanic acid, a polysac-
charide that has been found to regulate fission and fusion 
dynamics of mitochondria for tuning longevity of Caeno-
rhabditis elegans [47].
Genetic variation
Host genetics can influence gut microbiota and its meta-
bolic phenotype. A study in the UK analysed > 1000 faecal 
samples from 416 twin pairs and showed that host genetics 
shapes the gut microbiome and obesity phenotype. They 
found that Christensenellaceae family is the heritable taxon 
and formed a co-occurrence network with other heritable 
bacteria and methanogenic Archaea. Transplantation of 
Christensenella minuta in germ-free mice altered the gut 
microbiota and reduced adiposity and weight in the recipient 
mice [48]. In a transcriptional analysis, it was found that the 
expression of 6000 genes of the colonic epithelia was linked 
to gut microbiota. They identified 12 allele-specific single-
nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) linked to gut microbiota 
and 8 were found to be associated with diseases including 
colorectal cancer, Type 2 diabetes (T2D) and obesity [49]. 
A large-scale cohort study on 1561 healthy individuals 

479
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
indicated that one-third of the faecal bacterial taxa were her-
itable and 58 SNPs in 1098 subjects were associated with the 
relative abundance of 33 taxa. Among these, four loci were 
replicated in the second cohort of 463 subjects related to 
Rikenellaceae, Faecalibacterium, Lachnospira, and Eubac-
terium [50]. A genome-wide study on Hutterites, a reli-
giously isolated group of people in North America showed 
that at least eight bacterial taxa were associated with SNPs 
of the host. The bacterial genus Akkermansia was found to 
be related to obesity and body mass index. Besides, a gender 
wise variation of gut microbiota was also observed due to 
difference of their social practices and daily activities [51]. 
Gut microbial composition also depends on secretor status 
of ABH antigen in mucosa. The enzyme fucosyltransferase 2 
encoded by FUT2 gene that converts type 1 N-acetyllactosa-
mine glycan into H antigen which functions as a precursor 
for the A, B and Lewis b antigens. Non-secretor individual is 
unable to secrete ABH antigen in their mucus due to a non-
sense mutation in the FUT2 gene. Bifidobacterial diversity 
and richness, particularly B. bifidum, B. adolescentis and B. 
catenulatum/pseudocatenulatum was found to be reduced 
in the non-secretor individual [52]. Research from Israel 
showed that environmental factors dominate over genetics 
in shaping the gut microbiota. A cohort of 1046 healthy indi-
viduals showed that genetically unrelated individuals had 
similar gut microbiota composition rather than their relatives 
who did not have a history of household sharing. They also 
analysed the previous data of 2252 twins from the UK and 
found that only 1.9–8.1% of microbiome taxa was heritable. 
In contrast, 20% of the inter-person microbiome variability 
is associated with factors such as diet, drugs, anthropometric 
parameters and lifestyle [53].
Geographical location
The ‘Baas-Becking’ hypothesis proposed that all microbes 
distributed everywhere and the local environment is the 
determinant of the microbial biodiversity [54]. For exam-
ple, the diet and foraging lifestyle of the hunter-gatherer 
group (Hadza of Tanzania) determined microbial richness 
and diversity in the gut in comparison with urban Italian 
and the African rural farming groups [57]. The dominance 
of Prevotella, Treponema and unclassified Bacteroidetes in 
the Hadza aided in the digestion of plant originated fibrous 
foods [55]. The functionalities study of microbiome on the 
same group showed that metabolic pathways involved in 
digestion of a broad-spectrum of carbohydrates, branched-
chain amino acid degradation and aromatic amino acid bio-
synthesis. In contrast, microbiomes of the urban Italians had 
resistome functionality that was similar to antibiotic resist-
ance genes found in their environment [56]. In the Western 
lifestyle, the intake of more amino acids, lipids, cholesterol 
and dairy supports the growth of Faecalibacterium, Rumino-
coccus, Bifidobacterium, Bacteroides, Blautia, Bilophila and 
Alistipes while consumption of sugar and complex carbo-
hydrates by the non-industrialized ethnic societies supports 
the growth of Prevotella [57]. Microbial profiling of rural 
and urban cohorts from seven ethnic groups of 9 provinces 
in China reported nine core bacteria (Balutia, Clostridium, 
Ruminococcus, Faecalibacterium, Subdoligranulum, Rose-
buria, Coproccus, Bacteroides and Phascolarctobacterium) 
linked to their ethnicities/geographies and lifestyles [58]. In 
India, we have reported six core bacteria (Faecalibacterium, 
Eubacterium, Clostridium, Blautia, Ruminococcus, and 
Roseburia) from 15 ethnicities of four geographical loca-
tions. The gut bacterial profiles of Indian ethnicities were 
similar to the Mongolian population [59]. However, faecal 
metabolites were dissimilar due to a degree of association 
of gut microbiota across the ethnicities [60]. Exposure to 
extreme environments such as high altitude (above 1493 m) 
is also a factor responsible for altering the gut microbiota 
due to lower pressure of atmospheric oxygen. As a result, 
high-altitude visitors like pilgrims, trekkers, climbers and 
military personnel suffer from non-specific GI complica-
tions [61–63]. The cold environmental stress is also a factor 
for changing of the gut microbiota and energy homeostasis. 
The transplantation of gut microbiota from cold stress mice 
to the germ-free mice promoted the conversion of the white 
fat into more brown fat. In addition, gut microbiota enhanced 
the absorption of nutrients during stress by increasing the 
length of villi and microvilli of the intestine to satisfy the 
demand of the energy in cold condition [64].
Functions of microbiota
Gut microbiota perform their function on four different land-
scapes in the human body: metabolic, protective structural 
and neurological.
Metabolic
Dietary fibres
The GI of humans digests about 85% of carbohydrates, 
66–95% of proteins and all fats. In the colon, gut micro-
biota scavenge ~ 10–30% of energy and the rest is excreted as 
faeces [65]. Dietary fibres including lignin, non-starch poly-
saccharides, resistant starch (RS) and oligosaccharides [e.g. 
fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS) and galacto-oligosaccharides 
(GOS)] are resistant to digestion by host digestive enzymes 
[66]. Gut microbes have an array of enzymes for utilisation 
of these diverse carbohydrates. carbohydrate active enzyme 
(CAZy) a database (http://www.cazy.org/) documented all 
of the enzymes and categorised these into four families of 

480
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
glycosidases such as glycoside hydrolases (153 subfami-
lies), glycosyltransferases (106 subfamilies), polysaccha-
ride lyases (28 subfamilies) and carbohydrate esterases (16 
subfamilies) [67]. Members of the phyla Bacteroidetes and 
Firmicutes have the largest set of GH encoding genes in 
their genomes for utilization of different polysaccharides as 
carbon sources. Gut microbiota of the LI ferments all of the 
dietary fibres, resulting in the releases of gases (methane, 
hydrogen and carbon dioxide), SCFAs (formate, acetate, 
propionate, butyrate, valerate, isovalerate and hexanoate), 
smaller amounts of organic acids (lactate and succinate) and 
alcohols (methanol and ethanol). Gut microbial species such 
as Roseburia spp., Eubacterium rectale and Faecalibacte-
rium prausnitzii and Clostridium groups IV and XIVa are 
the main producers SCFAs [68]. Among the SCFAs acetate, 
propionate and butyrate are prevalent and present in cecum 
in the molar ratio of 40:40:20 to 75:15:10 depending on diet. 
SCFAs (90–95%) are absorbed in the colon through passive 
diffusion or by ion exchange process and meets about 10% 
of caloric demand of the human [69]. Acetate is found in 
the blood (0.10–0.15 mM) and serves as an energy source 
to peripheral tissues and lipogenesis and cholesterol bio-
synthesis in liver. Butyrate serves as an energy source of 
colonocytes and produces ketone bodies and carbon diox-
ide. Apart from being energy source, butyrate also regulates 
energy homeostasis by stimulating gut enteroendocrine cells 
for the production of leptin from adipocytes including the 
production Glucagon-like peptide-1 in L cells [70, 71]. It 
also reduces the effect of harmful metabolites of bile acids 
and phenols. Propionate generally traverses the colonocytes 
and transports to the liver where it functions as acetate [72].
Protein and amino acids
In the LI, undigested protein is broken into peptides, amino 
acids and other metabolites via extracellular bacterial pro-
teases and peptidases. These metabolites can be broadly 
classified into neuroactive compounds (nitric oxide, the 
tryptamine and phenethylamine), sulphide-containing 
metabolites ­(H2S), aromatic compounds (phenol, p-cresol 
and indole), polyamines (spermine, spermidine and cadav-
erine), SCFAs (isobutyrate, 2-methylbutyrate and isovalerate 
from branch chain amino acids) and ammonia. Some of the 
metabolites such as phenol, p-cresol and indole have been 
shown to induce IBD, colorectal cancer and kidney dysfunc-
tion [70]. The MEROPS database documented the peptidase 
and protease enzymes of the gut bacteria [73]. According 
to this database Clostridium spp. Bacteroides spp., Lacto-
bacillus spp., etc. have a large diversity of proteases. [74]. 
The sources of dietary protein have a distinct effect on gut 
microbial composition. For example, a beef meat rich diet 
increased the population of Bacteroides and Clostridia but 
had a lower abundance of Bifidobacterium adolescentis [75]. 
In contrast, pea and whey proteins encouraged the growth of 
both Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, while whey addi-
tionally suppressed the pathogenic Bacteroides fragilis and 
Clostridium perfringens [76, 77]. Interestingly, protein and 
amino acids in association with the commensals also influ-
ence food choice, behaviour and reproduction. In Drosophila 
melanogaster, commensal bacteria elicited specific appetites 
for amino acid rich food. It was observed that two gut bacte-
ria, Acetobacter pomorum and Lactobacilli, influenced the 
preference of flies for sucrose in absence of isoleucine in a 
food [78]. In addition, availability of dietary protein to car-
bohydrate ratio determines the catabolic pathways of the gut 
microbiota. Catabolism resulted in the production of GABA 
(Lactobacillus spp., Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactococcus 
lactis), norepinephrine (Escherichia spp. and Bacillus spp.), 
dopamine (Bacillus spp.), histamine and serotonin (Strepto-
coccus spp., Escherichia spp. and Enterococcus spp.) [74]. 
These catabolic products may have an influential role in 
modulating the gut–brain axis or in maintaining the nitro-
gen balance of a host.
Lipid
A high-fat diet (HFD) induces microbial dysbiosis, enhances 
adiposity and low-grade inflammation in the adipose tis-
sue. In rodents, feeding of HFD promoted an increase in 
Bilophila wadsworthia, a sulphite-reducing pathobiont. Fur-
ther, increase in the population of B. wadsworthia exerted a 
pro-inflammatory response mediated by TH1 cell of geneti-
cally susceptible Il10(−/−), but not in wild-type mice [79]. 
Experimental evidences suggested that consumption of 
HFD caused a decrease in Bacteroidetes and an increase 
in both Firmicutes and Proteobacteria [80]. Gut microbiota 
transplantation from obese mice to germ-free mice induced 
some obesity-associated phenotypes, i.e. increased intes-
tinal permeability and inflammation enhanced lipogenesis 
and adipogenesis. Diets rich in saturated fat increased the 
population of Bacteroides, Bilophila and F. prausnitzii, 
while unsaturated fatty acid increased the Lactic acid bac-
teria, Bifidobacteria and A. muciniphila [81, 82]. African 
Americans consume higher animal protein and fat and lower 
fibre diet than rural Africans. This dietary practice elevated 
the level of colonic secondary bile acids, lowered colonic 
short-chain fatty acid and increased the risk of colon cancer 
in the African Americans [83].
Bile salt
Bile acid is a steroid acid that is synthesized by at least 
17 different enzymes in the liver for the excretion of 
excess cholesterol. Hydroxylation of cholesterol initiates 
synthesis of primary bile via the action of cholesterol 7α 
hydroxylase and produces chenodeoxycholic acid (45%) 

481
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
and cholic acid (31%). Before secretion of primary bile 
acids into the canalicular lumen, they are conjugated via 
an amide bond at the terminal carboxyl group of glycine 
or taurine. The glycoconjugates and tauroconjugates are 
more amphipathic in nature to facilitate the metabolism 
of dietary fat, fat-soluble vitamins and cholesterol [84]. 
The released conjugated bile salt in the duodenum is reab-
sorbed (95%) from the distal ileum via sodium-dependent 
bile transporter present in the brush border membrane of 
the enterocytes. A small portion of the unabsorbed bile salt 
undergoes deconjugation by the action of bile salt hydro-
lase of gut microbiota and produces deoxycholate, ursode-
oxycholate and lithocholate [70, 85]. These secondary bile 
acids are passively absorbed in the colon and are trans-
ported back to the liver through enterohepatic circulation 
and the rest is excreted through faeces. The transformation 
of bile acids is mainly performed by anaerobic bacteria 
of the genera Bacteroides, Eubacterium and Clostridium 
(Clusters XIVa and XI) and a minor fraction of aerobic 
bacteria such as Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria. Bile 
salt hydrolase is also found in the human gut including 
members of Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria. Deconjuga-
tion by 7αβ-dehydroxylation of bile salts increases their 
hydrophobicity and lowers its absorption and showed 
pathological effects including obesity and cancer [86, 87].
Choline
Choline is an essential water-soluble nutrient and a constitu-
ent of lecithin, which is present in many plants and animal 
organs. Choline and its metabolites help to maintain the 
structural integrity and signalling roles of cell membranes, 
cholinergic neurotransmission (acetylcholine synthesis), 
and a source for methyl groups via its metabolite, trimeth-
ylglycine (betaine), which participates in the biosynthesis 
of S-adenosylmethionine. The gut microbiota metabolizes 
choline into trimethylamine (TMA) which is absorbed in 
the gut. Moreover, TMA is converted to trimethylamine-N-
oxide (TMAO) by flavin monooxygenases 1 and 3 (FMO1 
and FMO3) in the liver. The formation of TMAO exacer-
bates hepatic insulin signalling and glucose tolerance and 
also promotes adipose tissue inflammation, atherosclerosis 
and cardiovascular diseases [88]. Now, the microbial conver-
sion of dietary choline is an emerging metabolic hallmark 
of cardiovascular diseases. Eight gut bacteria including C. 
sporogenes, Anaerococcus hydrogenalis, Providencia rett-
geri, C. asparagiforme, C. hathewayi, E. fergusonii, Pro-
teus penneri and Edwardsiella tarda have been identified 
to produce TMA due to the consumption of a choline-rich 
diet [89]. Two enzymes (CutC and CutD) were reported in 
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans that can convert the choline into 
TMA and acetaldehyde [90].
Polyphenol
Polyphenols are secondary metabolites formed in a variety 
of plants through shikimate/phenylpropanoid and/or polyke-
tide pathways which contain more than one phenolic unit 
and are broadly classified into two main groups, flavonoids 
and non-flavonoids. The majority of the polyphenols are pre-
sent as glycosides with conjugation of different sugars such 
as glucose, galactose, rhamnose, ribulose, arabinopyrinose 
and arabinofuranose units. Inactive polyphenols including 
flavones, flavonols, flavanones, flavanols, catechins, antho-
cyanins, isoflavones, hydroxycinnamic acids, lignans, etc. 
are transformed into active compounds after removal of the 
sugar by the gut microbiota in the SI [91]. The polyphenols 
such as hydroxycinnamic acids are commonly esterified to 
sugars, organic acids and lipids which are transformed into 
aglycone by microbial esterases. The aglycones are found 
to be absorbed in the SI or colon and metabolized into 
hydroxyphenylacetic acids. Another dietary polyphenol such 
as ellagic acid and ellagitannins are transformed into uro-
lithin A (an anti-inflammatory metabolite) by Gordonibacter 
spp. [92]. Polyphenols can also detoxify gut metabolites and 
repress the growth of pathogenic bacteria, such as Clostrid-
ium perfringens, Clostridium difficile and Bacteroides spp. 
[70]. Experimental evidence suggested that supplementation 
of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (GCG) and resveratrol (RES) 
altered the human gut microbial composition. Supplemen-
tation with GCG and RES increased oxidation of fat with 
reduced abundance of Bacteroidetes and F. prausnitzii in 
men but not in women [93].
Protective
The GI tract is the interactional scaffold of gut micro-
biota and gut immune system [94]. The first layer of the 
gut immune system including gut-associated lymphoid and 
Peyer’s patches developed due to fundamental intertwin-
ing with gut commensal. The developed immune barrier 
and a set of immune mechanisms limit the direct contact of 
commensal to the epithelial cell surface. A second layer of 
immunity rapidly detects and kills the bacteria without pen-
etration to intestinal tissue. A third set of immune responses 
localized within the mucosa without activating the systemic 
immune system. The innate immune barrier consists of 
mucus, antimicrobial peptides and secretory IgA.
Mucus layer
The mucus layer consists of mucin glycoprotein secreted 
from goblet cell and assembled into a viscous gel-like layer 
on the intestinal epithelia that protects from the attachment 
of microbes directly to epithelia. It also acts as a lubricant 
and transports the luminal contents without hampering the 

482
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
epithelial lining. Chemically, mucin backbone consists of 
a peptide with alternating O-linked glycosylated (70–80%) 
and non-glycosylated domains. N-Acetylglucosamine, 
N-acetylgalactosamine, fucose and galactose are the four 
primary mucin oligosaccharides with either terminal sialic 
acid or sulfate groups. The sulfated (sulfomucins) or nonsul-
fated (sialomucins) mucins are acidic in nature, expressed 
throughout the LI epithelia. The mucus layer is about 
150 µm thick epithelia and forms two distinct strata of alter-
nating sialo- and sulphomucins. The acidic sulfated mucin 
is proximal to epithelia and is less degradable by bacterial 
glycosidases and host proteases. The acidic mucin prevents 
direct adherence of commensal to colonic epithelial cells 
[95]. The mucin not only acts as a barrier but also provides a 
direct source of carbohydrates and peptides for commensals. 
For example, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron produces multi-
ple fucosidases that cleave fucose from glycans and activate 
the goblet cells in secretion of mucin. Besides, Bacteroides 
fragilis synthesizes fucosylated capsular polysaccharides, 
a component of the bacterial outer membrane which con-
fers advantages for competitive and preferential colonisa-
tion [96]. Bifidobacterium bifidum can produce endo-α-
N-acetylgalactosaminidase and 1, 2-α-l-fucosidase to use 
mucins as an energy source in vitro [97]. In contrast, muco-
lytic bacteria such as Ruminococcus torques, Ruminococcus 
gnavus may also increase in intestinal bowel disease (IBD) 
and provide the substrate to other non-mucolytic bacteria 
[98]. Some of the other pathogenic bacteria are genetically 
equipped and try to cross the mucus barrier to induce the 
infection. For example, H. pylori produce urease to increase 
the pH and to lower viscosity of mucus for the penetration of 
epithelial cell surface [99]. Pathogens such as Campylobac-
ter jejuni and Salmonella spp. use their flagella to cross the 
mucus barrier. E. coli and Shigella flexneri do so by secret-
ing a mucin-binding serine protease which rapidly digests 
mucus and also induce its hyper secretion to compete against 
indigenous bacteria [100].
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs)
Antimicrobial peptides (AMP) are secreted by intestinal 
epithelial cells including enterocytes, Goblet and Paneth 
cells which restrict the access of commensals as well as 
pathogens to epithelia. The AMPs including defensins, 
cathelicidins and C-type lectins are a group of conserved 
small (20–40 amino acids) cationic proteins virtually 
retained in the mucus layer. These can bind either with 
negatively charged microbial cell membranes or enzy-
matically attack the cell wall to disrupt the outer or inner 
membrane. Defensins are major antimicrobial peptide clas-
sified into α, β and θ defensins. α-Defensin expressed con-
stitutively as pro-cryptdin irrespective of a microbial signal 
(Fig. 3). Later it is converted into mature-cryptdin by matrix 
metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7) to defend microbial adher-
ence to mucosa [101]. Mice lacking of the MMP-7 gene are 
unable to produce mature cryptdin and are highly susceptible 
to Salmonella typhimurium infection [102]. β-Defensin is 
expressed both in SI and LI epithelia through the signalling 
of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing 
protein 2 (NOD2) and depends on a microbial signal derived 
from the lumen. NOD2 deficiency in mice resulted in an 
increased susceptibility to Listeria monocytogenes infection 
due to lower expression of defensins [103]. θ-Defensin has 
only been reported in the leukocytes of rhesus macaques. 
Cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (mCRAMP) is 
encoded by the gene Cnlp and its expression is restricted 
to surface colonic epithelia. Colonic epithelial cell extracts 
from ­Cnlp +/+ and mutant ­Cnlp−/− mice showed that lack of 
mCRAMP expression increased the adherence of enteric 
pathogen Citrobacter rodentium to intestinal epithelial cells 
[104]. The C-type lectins are a superfamily consisting of 
more than 1000 proteins having one or more characteristic 
C-type lectin-like domains. C-type lectins play an important 
role in innate and adaptive immunity to control the gut bac-
terial infections. Microorganism-associated molecular pat-
terns activate toll-like receptors (TLRs) recruiting cytosolic 
adaptor myeloid differentiation primary-response protein 
88 (MYD88) to restrict the penetration of bacteria through 
epithelial layer (Fig. 3). For example, RegIIIγ, a secreted 
antibacterial lectin effective against Gram-positive bacteria 
and maintaining a ~ 50 μm zone that physically separate the 
microbiota from the epithelial surface of SI [105].
IgA
Secretory IgA (SIgA) serves as the third line of defence 
and protects the intestinal epithelia from enteric toxins and 
pathogenic microorganisms. Differential immune recogni-
tion of pathogens and commensals maintains immune tol-
erance and activation of the cells present in Pyers’ patches, 
lymphoid follicle or lamina propia. The macrophage-like 
non-migratory ­CX3CR1+ dendritic cells (DCs) of Peyer’s 
patches randomly capture luminal antigens through tran-
sepithelial transport. The captured antigen is transferred to 
migratory ­CD103+ DCs which move to the interfollicular 
area of Payer’s patches [106, 107]. The ­CD103+ DCs inter-
acts with Treg cells to promote B cells for IgA-induction 
with the assistance of retinoic acid, transforming growth 
factor-β (TGF-β), IL-10 and cytokine thymic stromal lym-
phopoietin. Activation of Treg cells by commensals induces 
B cell to differentiate into plasma B cells for producing of 
IgA. Thereafter, the secreted IgA translocate from lym-
phoid sites to the intestinal lamina propria and transcytosis 
across the epithelial cell layer. Transcytosis of IgA in the 
lumen entraps bacteria in mucus to neutralize toxins and 
pathogens as blocking their access to epithelial receptors. It 

483
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
also facilitates their removal by peristaltic and mucociliary 
activities [108]. The population density of commensals vs. 
pathobionts or its associated endogenous molecules deter-
mine the IgA secretion in the gut. For example, endogenous 
polysaccharide A from a commensal, Bacteroides fragilis 
mediated an anti-inflammatory response characterized by 
induction of Treg cells and IL-10 and TGF-β. In addition, 
metabolites such as butyrate made by commensals can also 
activate the same anti-inflammatory response mediated by 
Treg cells. In dysbiotic condition, a certain subsets of com-
mensal are increased in their abundance and act as “patho-
bionts” [94]. The bloom of pathobionts and breakdown of 
tolerance to immune system activate the pro-inflammatory 
response. For example, in experimental colitis H. hepaticus 
activated the TH17 cell which is mediated by inflammatory 
cytokines such as IL-17, IL-23 and TNF-α. The malnourish-
ment of children is also a factor to alter the gut microbial 
composition and IgA responses. Malnourishment phenotype 
of Malawian infants can be transferred after the transplanta-
tion of 11 IgA(+) bacterial consortium to gnotobiotic mice. 
The transplantation of the bacterial consortium caused a 
rapid disruption of the intestinal epithelial barrier, weight 
loss and sepsis. These sepsis conditions were prevented by 
the administration of two IgA-targeted bacterial species from 
a healthy microbiota [109].
Innate and adaptive immunity
The innate immune response can discriminate between 
commensals and pathogens via germline-encoded pattern-
recognition receptors. Toll like receptors (TLRs) identify the 
conserved microbial-associated molecular patterns includ-
ing bacterial-derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS), lipoprotein, 
flagellin and unmethylated CpG-containing DNA of patho-
gens. The subfamilies of TLR1, TLR2 and TLR6 recognise 
lipids, whereas TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 recognise nucleic 
acids. However, TLR5 identify flagellin and TLR4 can rec-
ognise several structurally unrelated ligands such as lipopol-
ysaccharide and plant diterpene paclitaxel [110]. The cyto-
solic antigens including γ-d-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelic 
acid and muramyl dipeptide of bacterial peptidoglycan layer 
are recognised by the NOD like receptors [111, 112]. Anti-
gen-presenting cells like DCs and macrophages also express 
TLRs which ingest and degrade pathogens and express 
Innate immunity
Adaptive immunity
IL-23, IL-17F
MYD88
NOD2
REG3γ
α-defensins
Naive CD4+T cells
Treg 
TH1    
TH2 
TH17  
TR1 
Muramyl dipeptide
MAMP
Plasma B cell
IgA+ B cell
Dendritic cell
Mesenteric lymph
node
Peyer’s patch
IgA
T cell
B cell
M cell
Goblet 
cell 
Mucin
T
L
R
IL-4, IL-5, IL-13
IFNγ
IL-10
TGFβ
β-defensins
1
2
3
4
5
Fig. 3   Immune mechanisms for limiting the commensals within the 
epithelial layer. Innate immunity: (1) mucin glycoproteins of the gob-
let cells form a layer over the epithelia to restrict bacterial adhesion; 
(2) constitutive expression of α-defensins from epithelial cells with-
out microbial signal; (3_ β-defensin expression by muramyl dipeptide 
of Gram positive bacteria mediated by cytosolic nucleotide-binding 
oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 (NOD2); (4) C-type lec-
tin regenerating islet-derived protein 3γ (REG3γ) via microorganism-
associated molecular patterns (MAMP) activates toll-like receptors 
(TLRs) recruiting cytosolic adaptor myeloid differentiation primary-
response protein 88 (MYD88) to restrict bacterial penetration through 
epithelial layer; (5) dendritic cells (DC) located beneath the epithelial 
dome of Peyer’s patches take up bacteria and migrate to mesenteric 
lymph node and induce B cells to differentiate into ­IgA+ plasma cells 
for secretion of IgA. Transcytosis of IgA across the epithelial cell 
layer limits bacterial association with the epithelium. Adaptive immu-
nity: transcytosis of bacteria through M cells and luminal antigen 
activates DC in the Peyer′s patch and helps to differentiate the naive 
­CD4+ T cells into Treg and TR1 characterized by expression of anti-
inflammatory cytokines transforming growth factor (TGFβ) and IL10. 
The TH1, TH2, and TH17 cells are characterized by proinflammatory 
cytokines including (1) IFNγ, (2) IL-4, 5 and 13 and (3) IL-23 and 
IL-17F, respectively

484
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
co-stimulatory molecules and cytokines. These cytokines 
help to differentiate the naive ­CD4+ T into T helper 1 (TH1), 
TH2, TH17 and Treg and TR1 cells (Fig. 3). A balance of 
Treg cells and the ­CD4+ effector T cells in the intestinal 
mucosa discriminate commensal and pathogenic microbial 
constituents. Microbial dysbiosis may induce inflammatory 
response mediated by TH1, TH2 and TH17 cells. The sub-
set of TH1 and TH2 cell activation is characterized by the 
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-4, 
IL-5, IFN-γ and IL-13. TH17 cell is characterized by the 
synthesis of IL-17 which stimulates stromal cells to express 
the pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-6 and IL-8 and 
IL-22 [113, 114].
Microbiota produced metabolites in immunity
Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs)  The carbohydrates that 
escape from the digestion and absorption in SI are utilized 
by a number of microbes present in LI. The saccharolytic 
activities of the microbes present in LI ferment the undi-
gested carbohydrates resulting in SCFAs production, viz. 
acetate, propionate and butyrate. SCFAs are either trans-
ported or diffused into host cells and sensed by binding with 
G protein-coupled receptors such as GPR41, GPR43 and 
GPR109A on epithelial and immune cells [71]. Butyrate 
binds with GPR43 and activates anti-inflammatory cytokine 
production such as TGFβ and IL-10 as well as upregulates 
the FOXP3 of Treg cells. Butyrate also inhibits histone dea-
cetylase activity and down regulates the nuclear factor-κβ 
mediated inflammatory response. Experimental evidence 
indicated that acetate had greater binding affinity to GPR43 
than butyrate. Feeding of acetate stimulated in secretion of 
IgA in the intestine of wild type mice but not in ­GPR43−/− 
knockout mice. Acetate induced expression of Aldh1a2 in 
DC which converts vitamin A into retinoic acid mediating 
the signalling of B and goblet cells in secretion of mucins 
and IgA to fortify the barrier function [115]. The knockout 
of the receptor GPR43 in mice showed an increased suscep-
tibility to dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis by increas-
ing chemotaxis of neutrophils and inflammatory gene 
expression. Propionate and butyrate in combination also 
effective to inhibit LPS induced inflammation by activating 
Treg cell and reduced production of inflammatory cytokines 
such as IL-6 and IL-12 [116].
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)  AHR is a cytoplasmic 
ligand-induced receptor expressed by epithelial and some 
tumour cells. Kynurenine, a metabolite of tryptophan is 
a ligand of AHR. Three groups of microbial metabolites, 
viz. (1) tryptophan derived (indole, indole-3-acetate and 
tryptamine), (2) bacterial virulence factors (phenazine, 
naphthoquinone and phthiocol) and (3) short chain fatty 
acids also binds to AHR. Some dietary components includ-
ing flavonoids, stilbenes, carotenoids and indoles from 
plants are also ligands of AHR [71, 117]. AHR ligands pre-
vent the infection of Citrobacter rodentium and Candida 
albicans by snatching of metal ions. Supplementation of 
dietary synthetic AHR ligands and transfusion of intraepi-
thelial lymphocytes to ­Ahr−/− mice help to restore the epi-
thelial barrier function and normalized dysbiotic bacterial 
population [118].
Polyamines  The polyamines are polycationic in nature and 
found in all the life forms. There are three major sources of 
polyamines, viz. food, cellular biosynthesis and microbial 
biosynthesis in the gut. The major polyamines are putres-
cine, spermidine and spermine synthesized from arginine 
by the enzyme arginase 1 (which converts arginine to orni-
thine). The ornithine decarboxylase (which synthesizes 
putrescine from ornithine) and other enzymes sequentially 
interconverts putrescine to spermidine and spermine [71]. 
Arginase 1 and nitric oxide synthase compete for arginine 
to produce either polyamines or nitric oxide to balance 
immune responses. Administration of arginine in combi-
nation with B. animalis subsp. lactis LKM512 was shown 
to increase colonic polyamines which lowered the colonic 
and circulatory TNF-α and IL-6 [119]. Apart from argi-
nine supplementation, spermine can also inhibit the acti-
vation of M1 macrophage by suppressing the expression 
of ornithine decarboxylase in the synthesis of pro-inflam-
matory cytokines without modifying the expression anti-
inflammatory mediators TGFβ and IL-10 [120]. Polyamine 
enrichment to breast feed rat pups accelerated maturation 
of intraepithelial ­CD8+ and ­CD4+ T cells with early appear-
ance of B cells in spleen [121]. Higher production of mucus 
and secretory IgA was also observed in the SI that closely 
resembled to that of breast-fed mice. These findings indi-
cated that polyamines in the diet provide immunological 
benefits to the host.
Structural
Hippocrates (400 bc) stated that “bad digestion is at the 
root of all evil” and “death sits in the bowels” suggesting 
that the gut may act as a “motor” of critical illness. This 
hypothesis states that overgrowth and imbalance of com-
mensal flora increases gut permeability which may cause 
systemic sepsis that may lead to death [122]. The intesti-
nal epithelium is a single layer of columnar cells which are 
tightly bound together by intercellular junctional complexes 
that regulate the paracellular permeability. The junctional 
complexes consist of tight junction (ZO; zonula occludens), 
adherens junction (zonula adherens) and desmosome. The 
adherens junctions are located beneath the tight junction 
and both together make the apical junctional complexes that 
are associated with actin cytoskeleton. A bridging between 

485
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
apical junctional complexes and actin filaments involved 
in cell–cell adhesion and intracellular signalling whereas 
adherens junctions and desmosomes provide the adhesive 
forces necessary for the maintenance of intercellular interac-
tions [123]. The tight junction barrier exhibits both size and 
charge selectivity with two distinct routes across an intact 
epithelial monolayer, termed as the ‘pore’ and ‘leak’ path-
ways. The pore pathway refers to a high-capacity, size-selec-
tive and charge-selective route, whereas the leak pathway 
is a low-capacity pathway that has more limited selectivity 
[124]. The enterotoxins of some bacterial pathogens such 
as enteropathogenic E. coli, C. difficile and C. perfringens 
are capable of weakening the barrier functions of the tight 
junctions [123, 125, 126]. Cytokines are produced in the 
intestine including IL-4, IL-6, IL-13, IL-1β, TNF-α and 
IFN-γ promote to lose the tight junctions and increase the 
permeability. Cell culture and animal model based studies 
revealed that cytokines including IL-10, IL-17 and TGF-β 
renovate the intestinal barrier to decrease permeability [124, 
127]. Nutrients and food factors such as glutamine depriva-
tion, fatty acid molecules (eicosapentaenoic, docosahexae-
noic, c-linoleic acids, capric acid and lauric acid), ethanol 
and acetaldehyde increase intestinal permeability. The amino 
acids glutamine and tryptophan and other nutritional fac-
tors including casein peptide, SCFAs vitamin A and D and 
polyphenolic molecules (quercetin and curcumin) restrict 
the infiltration of luminal content [128]. Furthermore, treat-
ments of probiotics such as L. plantarum DSM 2648 and E. 
coli Nissle 1917 on Caco-2 cells have been shown to upregu-
late the expression of tight junction proteins [129, 130].
Neurological
The bidirectional communication between the gut and the 
brain is known as gut-brain axis (GBA). The gut is con-
nected to the brain through the enteric nervous system 
(ENS) involving parallel outflow of the parasympathetic 
(vagus nerve) and sympathetic (prevertebral ganglia) nerv-
ous systems and hypothalamic- pituitary- adrenal axis (HPA) 
(Fig. 2) [131, 132]. The ENS is regarded as the “second 
brain” of the gut and consists of millions of neurons and 
is divided into two types of ganglia (myenteric and sub-
mucosal plexuses). Activities of gut microbiota can control 
the ENS as well as CNS via (1) production, expression and 
turnover of neurotransmitters and neurotrophic factors, (2) 
maintaining the intestinal barrier and tight junction integrity, 
(3) modulating the enteric sensory afferents, (4) production 
of bacterial metabolites and (5) mucosal immune regula-
tion. The ENS can sense more than 30 neurotransmitters 
most of which are found in the CNS, such as acetylcholine, 
dopamine and serotonin. More than 90% of serotonin and 
50% of dopamine originate in the gut which are mainly pro-
duced by the gut microbiota. These two neurotransmitters 
play an important role in transmission of “fight to flight” 
message to the brain in controlling of mood, happiness and 
pleasure of an individual [133]. Bacterial metabolites, par-
ticularly SCFAs were shown to induce tryptophan hydroxy-
lase 1 in enterochromaffin cells to release serotonin in the 
gut. Serotonin can stimulate the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem to influence memory and learning process. Emerging 
data supports the fact that dysbiosis in gut microbiota dur-
ing functional GI disorders disrupts the GBA and leads to 
mood disorders. Experimental evidences also suggested that 
probiotic can induce brain derived neurotrophic factors in 
the hippocampus and cerebral cortex and regulate cogni-
tive functions as well as muscle repair, regeneration, and 
differentiation [131]. In parallel, probiotics can modulate 
the HPA to reduce the release of cortisol from the adrenal 
glands. The attenuated level of cortisol and a complex inter-
action with the amygdala, hippocampus and hypothalamus 
to lower anxiety-like behaviour and stress reactivity [131]. 
A study on IBS grouped the IBS population into two sub-
groups, IBS1 (microbial profile distinct from healthy con-
trol) and healthy control like-IBS (microbial profile indis-
tinguishable from healthy control). The microbial genera 
Blautia, Streptococcus and Bacteroides differentiated gut 
microbiota of the IBS1 patients and healthy controls. Such 
dysbiosis in gut microbiota was associated with the volume 
of the brain region including sensory- and salience-related 
regions and with a history of early life trauma [134]. A study 
from China showed a relationship between the gut micro-
biota with major depressive-like disorder (MDD). They 
found that abundance of Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria and 
Actinobacteria and inadequacy of Firmicutes was linked 
to “active major depressive disorder” (high score of clini-
cally significant depression) and “responded MDD” (reduc-
tion of MDD after 4 weeks of treatment) [135]. Treatment 
with efficacious probiotics like Bifidobacterium longum 
NCC3001 reduced depression in IBS patients and improved 
their quality of life. Although the probiotic bacterium had no 
effect on IBS symptoms, they however reduce the response 
of negative emotional stimuli in multiple regions of brain, 
including amygdala and fronto-limbic region [136]. The 
neurodegenerative disease Alzheimer’s is characterized by 
extracellular amyloid beta (Aβ) deposits and plaque forma-
tion in the brain. Gut microbial profiling of Aβ-precursor 
protein (APP) of transgenic mice exhibited a remarkable 
shift as compared to non-transgenic wild-type mice. There 
was a reduced abundance of Allobaculum, Akkermansia and 
unclassified genera in Rikenellaceae and S24-7 was found 
as compared to wild-type mice. Subsequently, they found 
that transplantation of gut microbiota from conventionally 
raised APP transgenic mice to germ-free APP transgenic 
mice increased the cerebral Aβ pathology unlike the trans-
plantation of microbiota from wild-type mice [137].

486
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
Therapeutic interventions
Probiotics
Élie Metchnikoff (1905) believed that some Bulgarian 
peasants who consumed a fermented milk product called 
‘kefir’ had better health and longer lives. Subsequently, 
the bacterium Lactobacillus delbrueckii ssp. subsp. bul-
garicus was isolated from ‘kefir’ and has since been used 
in commercial curd preparations. During the First World 
War, the physician Alfred Nissle isolated a strain of E. 
coli (E. coli Nissle 1917) from a healthy soldier from an 
army suffering from infectious diarrhoea and has since 
been used as a commercial probiotic. Such empirical 
observations introduced the concept of probiotics, pres-
ently defined as “live microorganisms which, when admin-
istered in adequate amounts confer health benefit to the 
host” [138, 139]. Commercially available probiotics are 
commonly of Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus and Strep-
tococcus genera as well as yeasts of the Saccharomy-
ces genus either singly or in combinations. To date, the 
mechanisms of action of probiotics are ascribed to their 
adhesion to the intestinal–lumen interface, competition 
with pathogens for nutrients and receptor binding, fortifi-
cation of mucosal barrier, promotion of innate and adap-
tive immune responses of host, production of bacteriocins, 
production of signalling molecules via CNS and modula-
tion of cell kinetics [140]. For adhesion to the mucosal 
surface of the intestine, probiotics such as Lactococcus 
lactis ssp. lactis BGKP1 exhibit auto-aggregation and 
its mucin binding surface protein attaches to the gastric 
mucin protein MUC5AC [141]. The protein “Transaldo-
lase” of B. bifidum has also been reported to act as an 
important colonisation factor. Recently, a group of pro-
teins called moonlighting proteins including elongation 
factor Tu (EF-Tu), α-enolase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase, etc. have been shown to play an important 
role in colonisation of human gut by degradation of extra-
cellular matrix or by facilitating a close contact with the 
epithelium [142, 143]. Directly, probiotics exhibit anti-
microbial effect against pathogens by secreting an array 
of antibacterial substances which includes organic acids, 
hydrogen peroxide and bacteriocins. These compounds 
mainly help to reduce the viable count of pathogens as 
well as their metabolisms and toxin production through the 
reduction of luminal pH and production of SCFAs. Over 
60% of the human population suffers from lactose intoler-
ance due to lower level and activity of lactase enzyme. 
The lactose intolerance depends on several factors, such 
as age, race and integrity of the SI membrane and transit 
time. The probiotics can produce lactase which promote 
the digestion of unabsorbed lactose and prevent acid and 
gas formation [144]. Probiotics also prevent the cardio-
vascular disease by regulating the metabolism of lipid, 
viz. (1) decreasing the absorption of cholesterol through 
co-precipitation with the deconjugated bile salts, (2) incor-
porating and assimilating the cholesterol in the cell mem-
brane, (3) converting the cholesterol into coprostanol and 
(4) inhibiting the expression of cholesterol transporter in 
the enterocytes [145]. Recently, researchers are explor-
ing the role of probiotics in modulating of inflammatory 
disease, obesity, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, 
autoimmuno psoriasis, arthritis and cancer. A randomized 
double-blind placebo-controlled study of a formulation of 
probiotics with fermented milk containing (S. salivarius 
subsp. thermophilus, E. faecium, L. rhamnosus GG, L. aci-
dophilus, L. plantarum, L. paracasei, L. delbrueckii subsp. 
Bulgaricus, B. breve and B. animalis subsp. lactis) and 
fructooligosaccharides (FOS) was found to be effective in 
management of constipation associated with Parkinson’s 
disease [146]. Another formulation of probiotics in which 
consumption of milk (200 ml/day) containing L. acidophi-
lus, L. casei, B. bifidum and L. fermentum (2 × 109 CFU/g 
for each) for 12 weeks was shown to improve cognitive 
function in elderly Alzheimer’s patients without effect-
ing the biomarkers of oxidative stress and inflammation, 
fasting plasma glucose and lipid profiles [147]. Based on 
more than 38 studies, the probiotic bacteria Bifidobacteria 
and Lactobacilli have been reported to improve psychiatric 
disorder including anxiety, depression, autism spectrum 
disorder, obsessive–compulsive disorder and memory abil-
ities (spatial and non-spatial) [148]. A large-scale trial in 
India has shown that administration of L. plantarum and 
FOS to new-borns within 7 days of birth reduced neonatal 
sepsis and morbidity rate to 5.4% as compared to 9% in 
their first two months of life [149]. In Finland, results of 4 
trials conducted between 1997 and 2012 (with 10–15 years 
of follow-up) showed that perinatal administration of pro-
biotic L. rhamnosus GG singly or in combinations with 
B. lactis Bb-12, L. paracasei ST11 and B. longum BL999 
reduced allergic diseases [150]. Treatment with Saccha-
romyces boulardii for 12 weeks in HIV patients decreased 
population of Clostridiaceae family and reduced chronic 
inflammation [151].
Prebiotics
Gibson and Roberfroid (1995) defined prebiotics as a class 
of compounds that stimulate the growth and/or activity of 
a limited number of beneficial bacteria (Lactobacilli and/or 
Bifidobacteria) in the colon to improve host health [152]. 
However, this definition has now been broadened and 
included carbohydrate and non-carbohydrate substances 
that confer microbiota-mediated health benefits [153]. The 
European Union has approved prebiotics (inulin, FOS and 

487
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
GOS) as safe food ingredients whereas the FDA has not 
yet recognised these. In the GI tract, prebiotics can resist 
gastric acidity and can reach in LI where their selective 
utilization by microbiota produces SCFAs. Prebiotics such 
as FOS and GOS including the patented GOS produced by 
Bimuno (B-GOS) modulate neural growth factors such as 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor, neurotransmitters and 
synaptic proteins including synaptophysin and NMDA 
receptor subunits [154, 155]. Hence, prebiotic utilization by 
gut microbiota may confer health benefits elsewhere in the 
body. For example, GOS stimulated growth of Bifidobacte-
ria in the mouse gut that led to modulation of cortical IL-1β 
and 5-HT2A receptor expression that reduced anxiety lev-
els and increased brain barrier function in obese mice [156, 
157]. Experimental evidence also suggested that prebiotic 
supplementation was effective against stunted memory, Alz-
heimer’s disease and dementia. In rats, improved memory 
was observed due to administration of polydextrose/GOS 
mixture and oligofructose-enriched inulin [158, 159]. Previ-
ously, it was reported that the metabolism of sialic acid of 
sialyllactose enhanced memory [160]. Recently, deficiency 
of sialylated human milk oligosaccharides of Malawian 
mothers have shown to cause stunted infants. Transplanta-
tion of faecal microbiota of a 6-month-old stunted baby to 
germ-free animal model on Malawian diet prototype with 
sialylated bovine milk oligosaccharides promoted quality 
composition of gut microbiota for anabolic process, lean 
body mass gain and brain metabolism [161]. A similar 
study on infant formula showed that bovine milk-derived 
oligosaccharides and B. animalis ssp. lactis (CNCM I-3446) 
improved the GI health markers (microbiota pattern, faecal 
IgA and stool pH) as compared to breastfed infants. No dif-
ference has been found in diarrhoea and febrile infection 
across the studied population [162].
Faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT)
Faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) refers to a “stool 
transplant” into the GI tract from a healthy individual to a 
patient for the treatment of specific diseases. During Dong-
jin dynasty in the fourth century, the benefits of FMT were 
recognised in Chinese medicine. The doctor prescribed the 
use of faecal suspension orally for patients who suffered 
from food poisoning or severe diarrhoea. In the sixteenth 
century, FMT was known as “yellow soup” and a medical 
miracle that brought patients back from the brink of death. 
In the seventeenth century, an Italian anatomist, Fabricius 
Aquapendente, introduced faecal therapy in veterinary medi-
cine for compelling rumination. In United States, the FDA 
has considered human faeces as an experimental drug since 
2013. Now, FMT has been used experimentally to treat GI 
diseases including colitis, constipation, IBD, and chronic 
fatigue syndrome, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis 
[163, 164]. In modern medicine, FMT has been shown to 
be more effective against pseudomembranous colitis and C. 
difficile infection (CDI) than neurological and other com-
plications. The success rate of FMT on CDI patients was 
found to be over 90% who had failed to respond to antibiotic 
treatment [164, 165]. In recent techniques of FMT, enemas, 
nasogastric intubation, enteric intubation, colonoscopes 
and gastroscopes are used for faecal transplantation. The 
treatment of CDI with antibiotics including metronidazole, 
vancomycin, or fidaxomicin may cause recurrent infection, 
antibiotics resistance and dysbiosis of normal gut microbiota 
[166]. A study on CDI patients showed profound dysbiosis 
commonly characterized by complete disappearance of Bac-
teroidetes with a marked reduction in Firmicutes and mas-
sive increases in the relative abundances of Proteobacteria 
[167]. FMT increased the abundance of the families Bacte-
roidaceae, Rikenellaceae and Porphyromonadaceae under 
Bacteroidetes and Ruminococcaceae, Lachnospiraceae, 
Verrucomicrobiaceae and unclassified Clostridiales under 
Firmicutes and reduced the population of Proteobacteria in 
CDI patients. In addition to dysbiosis of normal microbiota 
in CDI, presence of primary bile salts such as taurocholate, 
cholate and chenodeoxycholic acid stimulate the germina-
tion of C. difficile spore. In contrast, post-FMT increased 
secondary biles (lithocholic acid and deoxycholate) of donor 
samples that inhibit spore germination as well as vegeta-
tive growth of C. difficile [168]. A systematic review on 
FMT based on 18 studies with 611 patients highlighted that 
primary cure, overall recurrence, early and late recurrence 
rates of CDI were 91.2, 5.5, 2.7 and 1.7%, respectively. The 
adverse events such as IBD flare, infectious and autoim-
mune diseases did not have any significant relation with 
FMT [169]. Moreover, in-depth study on understanding of 
the mechanisms of FMT, optimisation of methodologies for 
FMT including donor screening, stool preparation and routes 
of administration may improve the efficacy and safety for a 
better clinical application.
Drugs
The gut microbial enzymes process pharmaceutical com-
pounds and alter pharmacokinetics, absorption, distribu-
tion, metabolism and elimination [170, 171]. Drug efficacy 
may vary from individual to individual due to variation 
in the microbial composition of their gut. In 1971, a pre-
clinical study in rats showed that oral administration of 
prontosil or Neoprontosil transformed to inactive sul-
phanilamide by gut microbiota before absorption [172]. 
Similarly, in the 1980s, researchers discovered that the 
bacterium Eggerthella lenta (Actinobacteria phyla) inac-
tivated digoxin (a cardiac glycoside) and its bioavailabil-
ity, therapeutic index and induced toxicity [173]. Cardiac 
glycoside reductase is the homolog of FAD-dependent 

488
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
fumarate reductases responsible for the reduction and 
inactivation of digoxin [174]. Paracetamol, a common 
analgesic and antipyretic drug is detoxified in the liver 
by glucuronidation and sulfation. The microbial metabo-
lite p-cresol produced by C. difficile acts as competitive 
inhibitor of hepatic sulfotransferases for sulfonation that 
elevate the risk of hepatotoxicity [175]. Irinotecan (CPT-
11) is a chemotherapeutic drug that is transformed into 
the active form (SN-38) by carboxylesterases in the host 
tissues and acts as an inhibitor of topoisomerase I in colon 
tumor cells. Hepatic UDP-glucuronosyltransferases con-
jugate SN-38 into nontoxic SN-38-G before secreting into 
the SI. However, conversion of the nontoxic SN-38-G to 
SN-38 by β-glucuronidase activity of E. coli, Bacteroides 
vulgatus and C. ramosum leads to diarrhoea, inflammation 
and anorexia [171, 176]. Levodopa, a dopamine precur-
sor undergoes decarboxylation within the central nervous 
system and exerts dopaminergic effect against Parkin-
son’s disease. Gut microbiota can transform levodopa into 
m-tyramine and m-hydroxyphenylacetic by dehydroxyla-
tion that leads to decreased bioavailability and induces 
H. pylori infection [176]. Metformin is a popular drug 
and used in controlling T2D. The treatment of metformin 
increased the abundance of butyrate producers such as 
Roseburia spp., Subdoligranulum spp. and a cluster of 
butyrate-producing Clostridiales spp. as compared to a 
metformin-untreated group. Microbial shifts under met-
formin treatment enhanced its efficacy to control glucose 
level in plasma [177]. Similarly, Gegen Qinlian Decoction 
is a traditional Chinese herbal formula used for treatment 
of T2D patients that increased F. prausnitzii and short-
chain fatty acid production [178]. Berberine is a Chinese 
herb (Coptis chinensis) that also induces the growth of 
Allobaculum and Blautia, as well as SCFA levels in HFD-
fed rats [179]. These findings suggest a role for the gut 
microbiota in drug metabolism that needs to be considered 
as a new parameter for assessment of a drug’s therapeutic 
index to treat diseases.
Future perspective
Modern lifestyle and the growing environmental stresses 
are bringing new challenges to the human race to sus-
tain on this planet. The human race cannot evolve quickly 
to adapt to such changes. However, the hidden design in 
the “hologenome” of human body may help to adapt to 
the changing environment. Nowadays, there is evidence 
that diets with smart microbial communities may assist in 
human-microbe symbiosis for better health. An in-depth 
understanding of the functioning of microbiota in dif-
ferent health and disease conditions may further help to 
formulate a strategy for targeted intervention as and when 
required.
Acknowledgements  The authors are thankful to Department of Sci-
ence and Technology, India and author A.A. is thankful to Department 
of Biotechnology, India for supporting with fellowship under Unit of 
Excellence Project (BT/550/NE/U-Excel/2014). The authors are also 
thankful to Dr. Josephine Brennan (Scientist, Department of Agricul-
ture, Food and Marine, Ireland) for help in improving the English of 
the manuscript.
References
	 1.	 Woese CR, Fox GE (1977) Phylogenetic structure of the prokary-
otic domain: the primary kingdoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
74(11):5088–5090
	 2.	 Rosenberg E, Zilber-Rosenberg I (2016) Microbes drive evo-
lution of animals and plants: the hologenome concept. MBio 
7(2):e01395-01315
	 3.	 Davies J (2001) In a map for human life, count the microbes, too. 
Science 291(5512):2316
	 4.	 NHW Group, Peterson J, Garges S, Giovanni M, McInnes P, 
Wang L et al (2009) The NIH Human Microbiome Project. 
Genome Res 19(12):2317–2323. https​://doi.org/10.1101/
gr.09665​1.109
	 5.	 Relman DA, Falkow S (2001) The meaning and impact of the 
human genome sequence for microbiology. Trends Microbiol 
9(5):206–208
	 6.	 Qin J, Li R, Raes J, Arumugam M, Burgdorf KS, Manichanh C 
et al (2010) A human gut microbial gene catalogue established 
by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 464(7285):59–65. https​://
doi.org/10.1038/natur​e0882​1
	 7.	 Bäckhed F, Roswall J, Peng Y, Feng Q, Jia H, Kovatcheva-
Datchary P et al (2015) Dynamics and stabilization of the human 
gut microbiome during the first year of life. Cell Host Microbe 
17(5):690–703
	 8.	 Browne HP, Forster SC, Anonye BO, Kumar N, Neville BA, 
Stares MD et al (2016) Culturing of ‘unculturable’ human 
microbiota reveals novel taxa and extensive sporulation. Nature 
533(7604):543–546. https​://doi.org/10.1038/natur​e1764​5
	 9.	 Lagier JC, Khelaifia S, Alou MT, Ndongo S, Dione N, Hugon 
P et al (2016) Culture of previously uncultured members of the 
human gut microbiota by culturomics. Nat Microbiol 1:16203. 
https​://doi.org/10.1038/nmicr​obiol​.2016.203
	 10.	 Lagier JC, Hugon P, Khelaifia S, Fournier PE, La Scola B, 
Raoult D (2015) The rebirth of culture in microbiology through 
the example of culturomics to study human gut microbiota. 
Clin Microbiol Rev 28(1):237–264. https​://doi.org/10.1128/
CMR.00014​-14
	 11.	 Lau JT, Whelan FJ, Herath I, Lee CH, Collins SM, Bercik P 
et al (2016) Capturing the diversity of the human gut micro-
biota through culture-enriched molecular profiling. Genome Med 
8(1):72. https​://doi.org/10.1186/s1307​3-016-0327-7
	 12.	 Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR (1977) DNA sequencing 
with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
74(12):5463–5467
	 13.	 Metzker ML (2005) Emerging technologies in DNA sequenc-
ing. Genome Res 15(12):1767–1776. https​://doi.org/10.1101/
gr.37705​05
	 14.	 Li J, Jia H, Cai X, Zhong H, Feng Q, Sunagawa S et al (2014) 
An integrated catalog of reference genes in the human gut micro-
biome. Nat Biotechnol 32(8):834–841. https​://doi.org/10.1038/
nbt.2942

489
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
	 15.	 Le Chatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin J, Prifti E, Hildebrand F, Falony 
G et al (2013) Richness of human gut microbiome correlates 
with metabolic markers. Nature 500(7464):541–546. https​://
doi.org/10.1038/natur​e1250​6
	 16.	 Liu L, Li Y, Li S, Hu N, He Y, Pong R et al (2012) Comparison 
of next-generation sequencing systems. J Biomed Biotechnol 
2012:251364. https​://doi.org/10.1155/2012/25136​4
	 17.	 Ley RE, Peterson DA, Gordon JI (2006) Ecological and evo-
lutionary forces shaping microbial diversity in the human 
intestine. Cell 124(4):837–848. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2006.02.017
	 18.	 Lederberg J (2000) Infectious history. Science 
288(5464):287–293
	 19.	 Lozupone CA, Stombaugh JI, Gordon JI, Jansson JK, Knight 
R (2012) Diversity, stability and resilience of the human gut 
microbiota. Nature 489(7415):220–230. https​://doi.org/10.1038/
natur​e1155​0
	 20.	 Allesina S, Tang S (2012) Stability criteria for complex ecosys-
tems. Nature 483(7388):205–208. https​://doi.org/10.1038/natur​
e1083​2
	 21.	 McNally L, Brown SP (2016) Microbiome***: Ecology of 
stable gut communities. Nat Microbiol 1:15016. https​://doi.
org/10.1038/nmicr​obiol​.2015.16
	 22.	 Backhed F, Ley RE, Sonnenburg JL, Peterson DA, Gordon JI 
(2005) Host-bacterial mutualism in the human intestine. Science 
307(5717):1915–1920. https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.11048​16
	 23.	 Arumugam M, Raes J, Pelletier E, Le Paslier D, Yamada T, 
Mende DR et al (2011) Enterotypes of the human gut microbi-
ome. Nature 473(7346):174–180. https​://doi.org/10.1038/natur​
e0994​4
	 24.	 Knights D, Ward TL, McKinlay CE, Miller H, Gonzalez A, 
McDonald D et al (2014) Rethinking “enterotypes”. Cell Host 
Microbe 16(4):433–437
	 25.	 Wu GD, Chen J, Hoffmann C, Bittinger K, Chen Y-Y, Keilbaugh 
SA et al (2011) Linking long-term dietary patterns with gut 
microbial enterotypes. Science 334(6052):105–108
	 26.	 Liang C, Tseng HC, Chen HM, Wang WC, Chiu CM, Chang JY 
et al (2017) Diversity and enterotype in gut bacterial community 
of adults in Taiwan. BMC Genom 18(Suppl 1):932. https​://doi.
org/10.1186/s1286​4-016-3261-6
	 27.	 Shapira M (2016) Gut microbiotas and host evolution: scaling 
up symbiosis. Trends Ecol Evol 31(7):539–549. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tree.2016.03.006
	 28.	 Hehemann JH, Correc G, Barbeyron T, Helbert W, Czjzek 
M, Michel G (2010) Transfer of carbohydrate-active enzymes 
from marine bacteria to Japanese gut microbiota. Nature 
464(7290):908–912. https​://doi.org/10.1038/natur​e0893​7
	 29.	 Turnbaugh PJ, Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Knight R, Gordon 
JI (2009) The effect of diet on the human gut microbiome: a 
metagenomic analysis in humanized gnotobiotic mice. Sci Transl 
Med 1(6):6ra14. https​://doi.org/10.1126/scitr​anslm​ed.30003​22
	 30.	 Kazor CE, Mitchell PM, Lee AM, Stokes LN, Loesche WJ, 
Dewhirst FE et al (2003) Diversity of bacterial populations on 
the tongue dorsa of patients with halitosis and healthy patients. 
J Clin Microbiol 41(2):558–563
	 31.	 Nardone G, Compare D (2015) The human gastric microbiota: Is 
it time to rethink the pathogenesis of stomach diseases? United 
Eur Gastroenterol J 3(3):255–260
	 32.	 El Aidy S, van den Bogert B, Kleerebezem M (2015) The small 
intestine microbiota, nutritional modulation and relevance for 
health. Curr Opin Biotechnol 32:14–20. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
copbi​o.2014.09.005
	 33.	 Eckburg PB, Bik EM, Bernstein CN, Purdom E, Dethlefsen 
L, Sargent M et al (2005) Diversity of the human intestinal 
microbial flora. Science 308(5728):1635–1638. https​://doi.
org/10.1126/scien​ce.11105​91
	 34.	 Mariat D, Firmesse O, Levenez F, Guimaraes V, Sokol H, Dore 
J et al (2009) The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio of the human 
microbiota changes with age. BMC Microbiol 9(1):123. https​://
doi.org/10.1186/1471-2180-9-123
	 35.	 Hollister EB, Gao C, Versalovic J (2014) Compositional and 
functional features of the gastrointestinal microbiome and their 
effects on human health. Gastroenterology 146(6):1449–1458. 
https​://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastr​o.2014.01.052
	 36.	 Perez-Muñoz ME, Arrieta M-C, Ramer-Tait AE, Walter J (2017) 
A critical assessment of the “sterile womb” and “in utero colo-
nization” hypotheses: implications for research on the pioneer 
infant microbiome. Microbiome 5(1):48
	 37.	 Satokari R, Gronroos T, Laitinen K, Salminen S, Isolauri 
E (2009) Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus DNA in the 
human placenta. Lett Appl Microbiol 48(1):8–12. https​://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1472-765X.2008.02475​.x
	 38.	 Farage MA, Miller KW, Sobel JD (2010) Dynamics of the vagi-
nal ecosystem–hormonal influences. Infect Dis Res Treat 3:1
	 39.	 Aagaard K, Riehle K, Ma J, Segata N, Mistretta TA, Coarfa 
C et al (2012) A metagenomic approach to characterization 
of the vaginal microbiome signature in pregnancy. PLoS One 
7(6):e36466. https​://doi.org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.00364​66
	 40.	 Dominguez-Bello MG, Costello EK, Contreras M, Magris M, 
Hidalgo G, Fierer N et al (2010) Delivery mode shapes the acqui-
sition and structure of the initial microbiota across multiple body 
habitats in newborns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(26):11971–
11975. https​://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.10026​01107​
	 41.	 Pacheco AR, Barile D, Underwood MA, Mills DA (2015) The 
impact of the milk glycobiome on the neonate gut microbiota. 
Annu Rev Anim Biosci 3(1):419–445
	 42.	 Koenig JE, Spor A, Scalfone N, Fricker AD, Stombaugh J, 
Knight R et al (2011) Succession of microbial consortia in the 
developing infant gut microbiome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
108(Suppl 1):4578–4585. https​://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.10000​
81107​
	 43.	 Wang F, Yu T, Huang G, Cai D, Liang X, Su H et al (2015) 
Gut microbiota community and its assembly associated with 
age and diet in Chinese centenarians. J Microbiol Biotechnol 
25(8):1195–1204
	 44.	 Biagi E, Franceschi C, Rampelli S, Severgnini M, Ostan R, 
Turroni S et al (2016) Gut microbiota and extreme longev-
ity. Curr Biol 26(11):1480–1485. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cub.2016.04.016
	 45.	 Derrien M, Belzer C, de Vos WM (2017) Akkermansia mucin-
iphila and its role in regulating host functions. Microb Pathog 
106:171–181. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpa​th.2016.02.005
	 46.	 Franceschi C, Garagnani P, Vitale G, Capri M, Salvioli S (2017) 
Inflammaging and ‘Garb-aging’. Trends Endocrinol Metab 
28:199–212
	 47.	 Han B, Sivaramakrishnan P, Lin CJ, Neve IAA, He J, Tay LWR 
et al (2017) Microbial genetic composition tunes host longev-
ity. Cell 169(7):1249–1262 e1213. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2017.05.036
	 48.	 Goodrich JK, Waters JL, Poole AC, Sutter JL, Koren O, Ble-
khman R et al (2014) Human genetics shape the gut microbiome. 
Cell 159(4):789–799. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.053
	 49.	 Richards AL, Burns MB, Alazizi A, Barreiro LB, Pique-Regi 
R, Blekhman R et al (2016) Genetic and transcriptional analysis 
of human host response to healthy gut microbiota. mSystems 
1(4):e00067-16. https​://doi.org/10.1128/mSyst​ems.00067​-16
	 50.	 Turpin W, Espin-Garcia O, Xu W, Silverberg MS, Kevans D, 
Smith MI et al (2016) Association of host genome with intesti-
nal microbial composition in a large healthy cohort. Nat Genet 
48(11):1413–1417. https​://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3693
	 51.	 Davenport ER, Cusanovich DA, Michelini K, Barreiro LB, 
Ober C, Gilad Y (2015) Genome-wide association studies of the 

490
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
human gut microbiota. PLoS One 10(11):e0140301. https​://doi.
org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.01403​01
	 52.	 Wacklin P, Mäkivuokko H, Alakulppi N, Nikkilä J, Tenkanen H, 
Räbinä J et al (2011) Secretor genotype (FUT2 gene) is strongly 
associated with the composition of Bifidobacteria in the human 
intestine. PLoS One 6(5):e20113
	 53.	 Rothschild D, Weissbrod O, Barkan E, Kurilshikov A, Korem T, 
Zeevi D et al (2018) Environment dominates over host genetics 
in shaping human gut microbiota. Nature 555:210–215
	 54.	 Baas-Becking LGM (1934) Geobiologie; of inleiding tot de 
milieukunde. WP Van Stockum and Zoon NV
	 55.	 Schnorr SL, Candela M, Rampelli S, Centanni M, Consolandi 
C, Basaglia G et al (2014) Gut microbiome of the Hadza hunter-
gatherers. Nat Commun 5:3654. https​://doi.org/10.1038/ncomm​
s4654​
	 56.	 Rampelli S, Schnorr SL, Consolandi C, Turroni S, Severgnini 
M, Peano C et al (2015) Metagenome sequencing of the Hadza 
hunter-gatherer gut microbiota. Curr Biol 25(13):1682–1693. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.04.055
	 57.	 Singh RK, Chang HW, Yan D, Lee KM, Ucmak D, Wong K et al 
(2017) Influence of diet on the gut microbiome and implications 
for human health. J Transl Med 15(1):73. https​://doi.org/10.1186/
s1296​7-017-1175-y
	 58.	 Zhang J, Guo Z, Xue Z, Sun Z, Zhang M, Wang L et al (2015) 
A phylo-functional core of gut microbiota in healthy young Chi-
nese cohorts across lifestyles, geography and ethnicities. ISME 
J 9(9):1979–1990. https​://doi.org/10.1038/ismej​.2015.11
	 59.	 Dehingia M, Devi KT, Talukdar NC, Talukdar R, Reddy N, 
Mande SS et al (2015) Gut bacterial diversity of the tribes of 
India and comparison with the worldwide data. Sci Rep 5:18563. 
https​://doi.org/10.1038/srep1​8563
	 60.	 Dehingia M, Sen S, Bhaskar B, Joishy TK, Deka M, Talukdar NC 
et al (2017) Ethnicity influences gut metabolites and microbiota 
of the tribes of Assam, India. Metabolomics 13(6):69. https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s1130​6-017-1206-y
	 61.	 Adak A, Maity C, Ghosh K, Pati BR, Mondal KC (2013) Dynam-
ics of predominant microbiota in the human gastrointestinal tract 
and change in luminal enzymes and immunoglobulin profile dur-
ing high-altitude adaptation. Folia Microbiol 58(6):523–528. 
https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1222​3-013-0241-y
	 62.	 Adak A, Maity C, Ghosh K, Mondal KC (2014) Alteration of 
predominant gastrointestinal flora and oxidative damage of large 
intestine under simulated hypobaric hypoxia. Z Gastroenterol 
52(2):180–186. https​://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-13360​07
	 63.	 Adak A, Ghosh K, Mondal KC (2014) Modulation of small 
intestinal homeostasis along with its microflora during accli-
matization at simulated hypobaric hypoxia. Indian J Exp Biol 
52(11):1098–1105
	 64.	 Chevalier C, Stojanovic O, Colin DJ, Suarez-Zamorano N, Tar-
allo V, Veyrat-Durebex C et al (2015) Gut microbiota orches-
trates energy homeostasis during cold. Cell 163(6):1360–1374. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.004
	 65.	 Bergman EN (1990) Energy contributions of volatile fatty-acids 
from the gastrointestinal-tract in various species. Physiol Rev 
70(2):567–590
	 66.	 Anderson JW, Baird P, Davis RH Jr, Ferreri S, Knudtson M, 
Koraym A et al (2009) Health benefits of dietary fiber. Nutr Rev 
67(4):188–205. https​://doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00189​
.x
	 67.	 Lombard V, Golaconda Ramulu H, Drula E, Coutinho PM, 
Henrissat B (2013) The carbohydrate-active enzymes database 
(CAZy) in 2013. Nucleic Acids Res 42(D1):D490–D495
	 68.	 Louis P, Flint HJ (2009) Diversity, metabolism and microbial 
ecology of butyrate-producing bacteria from the human large 
intestine. FEMS Microbiol Lett 294(1):1–8. https​://doi.org/10.1
111/j.1574-6968.2009.01514​.x
	 69.	 Duncan SH, Belenguer A, Holtrop G, Johnstone AM, Flint HJ, 
Lobley GE (2007) Reduced dietary intake of carbohydrates by 
obese subjects results in decreased concentrations of butyrate 
and butyrate-producing bacteria in feces. Appl Environ Micro-
biol 73(4):1073–1078. https​://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02340​-06
	 70.	 Nicholson JK, Holmes E, Kinross J, Burcelin R, Gibson G, 
Jia W et al (2012) Host-gut microbiota metabolic interactions. 
Science 336(6086):1262–1267
	 71.	 Rooks MG, Garrett WS (2016) Gut microbiota, metabolites 
and host immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 16(6):341–352. https​://
doi.org/10.1038/nri.2016.42
	 72.	 Donohoe DR, Garge N, Zhang X, Sun W, O’Connell TM, 
Bunger MK et al (2011) The microbiome and butyrate regu-
late energy metabolism and autophagy in the mammalian 
colon. Cell Metab 13(5):517–526. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cmet.2011.02.018
	 73.	 Rawlings ND, Barrett AJ, Thomas PD, Huang X, Bateman A, 
Finn RD (2017) The MEROPS database of proteolytic enzymes, 
their substrates and inhibitors in 2017 and a comparison with 
peptidases in the PANTHER database. Nucleic Acids Res 
46(D1):D624–D632
	 74.	 Portune KJ, Beaumont M, Davila AM, Tome D, Blachier F, 
Sanz Y (2016) Gut microbiota role in dietary protein metab-
olism and health-related outcomes: the two sides of the coin. 
Trends Food Sci Technol 57:213–232. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tifs.2016.08.011
	 75.	 Hentges DJ, Maier BR, Burton GC, Flynn MA, Tsutakawa RK 
(1977) Effect of a high-beef diet on the fecal bacterial flora of 
humans. Cancer Res 37(2):568–571
	 76.	 Swiatecka D, Narbad A, Ridgway KP, Kostyra H (2011) The 
study on the impact of glycated pea proteins on human intesti-
nal bacteria. Int J Food Microbiol 145(1):267–272. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijfoo​dmicr​o.2011.01.002
	 77.	 Meddah AT, Yazourh A, Desmet I, Risbourg B, Verstraete W, 
Romond MB (2001) The regulatory effects of whey retentate 
from bifidobacteria fermented milk on the microbiota of the Sim-
ulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem (SHIME). J 
Appl Microbiol 91(6):1110–1117
	 78.	 Leitao-Goncalves R, Carvalho-Santos Z, Francisco AP, Fioreze 
GT, Anjos M, Baltazar C et al (2017) Commensal bacteria and 
essential amino acids control food choice behavior and reproduc-
tion. PLoS Biol 15(4):e2000862. https​://doi.org/10.1371/journ​
al.pbio.20008​62
	 79.	 Devkota S, Wang Y, Musch MW, Leone V, Fehlner-Peach H, 
Nadimpalli A et al (2012) Dietary fat-induced taurocholic acid 
production promotes pathobiont and colitis in IL-10−/− mice. 
Gastroenterology 142(5):S-12
	 80.	 Murphy EA, Velazquez KT, Herbert KM (2015) Influence of 
high-fat diet on gut microbiota: a driving force for chronic dis-
ease risk. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 18(5):515–520. https​
://doi.org/10.1097/MCO.00000​00000​00020​9
	 81.	 Benítez-Páez A, Del Pulgar EMG, Kjølbæk L, Brahe LK, Astrup 
A, Larsen L et al (2016) Impact of dietary fiber and fat on gut 
microbiota re-modeling and metabolic health. Trends Food Sci 
Technol 57:201–212
	 82.	 Vaughn AC, Cooper EM, DiLorenzo PM, O’Loughlin LJ, Konkel 
ME, Peters JH et al (2017) Energy-dense diet triggers changes 
in gut microbiota, reorganization of gut-brain vagal communica-
tion and increases body fat accumulation. Acta Neurobiol Exp 
77(1):18–30
	 83.	 O’Keefe SJ, Li JV, Lahti L, Ou J, Carbonero F, Mohammed K 
et al (2015) Fat, fibre and cancer risk in African Americans and 
rural Africans. Nat Commun 6:6342
	 84.	 Thomas C, Pellicciari R, Pruzanski M, Auwerx J, Schoonjans K 
(2008) Targeting bile-acid signalling for metabolic diseases. Nat 
Rev Drug Discov 7(8):678–693. https​://doi.org/10.1038/nrd26​19

491
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
	 85.	 Selwyn FP, Csanaky IL, Zhang Y, Klaassen CD (2015) Impor-
tance of large intestine in regulating bile acids and glucagon-like 
peptide-1 in germ-free mice. Drug Metab Dispos 43(10):1544–
1556. https​://doi.org/10.1124/dmd.115.06527​6
	 86.	 Wahlström A, Sayin SI, Marschall H-U, Bäckhed F (2016) Intes-
tinal crosstalk between bile acids and microbiota and its impact 
on host metabolism. Cell Metab 24(1):41–50
	 87.	 Long SL, Gahan CGM, Joyce SA (2017) Interactions between 
gut bacteria and bile in health and disease. Mol Aspects Med 
56:54–65. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2017.06.002
	 88.	 Schugar RC, Shih DM, Warrier M, Helsley RN, Burrows A, 
Ferguson D et al (2017) The TMAO-producing enzyme flavin-
containing monooxygenase 3 regulates obesity and the beiging 
of white adipose tissue. Cell Rep 19(12):2451–2461
	 89.	 Romano KA, Vivas EI, Amador-Noguez D, Rey FE (2015) Intes-
tinal microbiota composition modulates choline bioavailability 
from diet and accumulation of the proatherogenic metabolite 
trimethylamine-N-oxide. MBio 6(2):e02481-02414
	 90.	 Thibodeaux CJ, van der Donk WA (2012) Converging on a 
mechanism for choline degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
109(52):21184–21185. https​://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.12195​34110​
	 91.	 Marin L, Miguelez EM, Villar CJ, Lombo F (2015) Bioavail-
ability of dietary polyphenols and gut microbiota metabolism: 
antimicrobial properties. Biomed Res Int 2015:905215. https​://
doi.org/10.1155/2015/90521​5
	 92.	 Romo-Vaquero M, Garcia-Villalba R, Gonzalez-Sarrias A, Belt-
ran D, Tomas-Barberan FA, Espin JC et al (2015) Interindividual 
variability in the human metabolism of ellagic acid: contribution 
of Gordonibacter to urolithin production. J Funct Foods 17:785–
791. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.jff.2015.06.040
	 93.	 Most J, Penders J, Lucchesi M, Goossens GH, Blaak EE (2017) 
Gut microbiota composition in relation to the metabolic response 
to 12-week combined polyphenol supplementation in overweight 
men and women. Eur J Clin Nutr 71(9):1040–1045. https​://doi.
org/10.1038/ejcn.2017.89
	 94.	 Round JL, Mazmanian SK (2009) The gut microbiota shapes 
intestinal immune responses during health and disease. Nat Rev 
Immunol 9(5):313
	 95.	 Johansson ME, Phillipson M, Petersson J, Velcich A, Holm L, 
Hansson GC (2008) The inner of the two Muc2 mucin-dependent 
mucus layers in colon is devoid of bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 105(39):15064–15069. https​://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.08031​
24105​
	 96.	 Xu J, Bjursell MK, Himrod J, Deng S, Carmichael LK, Chiang 
HC et al (2003) A genomic view of the human-Bacteroides the-
taiotaomicron symbiosis. Science 299(5615):2074–2076
	 97.	 Ruas-Madiedo P, Gueimonde M, Fernandez-Garcia M, de los 
Reyes-Gavilan CG, Margolles A (2008) Mucin degradation 
by Bifidobacterium strains isolated from the human intestinal 
microbiota. Appl Environ Microbiol 74(6):1936–1940. https​://
doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02509​-07
	 98.	 Png CW, Linden SK, Gilshenan KS, Zoetendal EG, McSweeney 
CS, Sly LI et al (2010) Mucolytic bacteria with increased preva-
lence in IBD mucosa augment in vitro utilization of mucin by 
other bacteria. Am J Gastroenterol 105(11):2420–2428. https​://
doi.org/10.1038/ajg.2010.281
	 99.	 Celli JP, Turner BS, Afdhal NH, Keates S, Ghiran I, Kelly 
CP et al (2009) Helicobacter pylori moves through mucus 
by reducing mucin viscoelasticity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
106(34):14321–14326. https​://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.09034​38106​
	100.	 Navarro-Garcia F, Gutierrez-Jimenez J, Garcia-Tovar C, Castro 
LA, Salazar-Gonzalez H, Cordova V (2010) Pic, an autotrans-
porter protein secreted by different pathogens in the Enterobac-
teriaceae family, is a potent mucus secretagogue. Infect Immun 
78(10):4101–4109. https​://doi.org/10.1128/Iai.00523​-10
	101.	 Putsep K, Axelsson LG, Boman A, Midtvedt T, Normark S, 
Boman HG et al (2000) Germ-free and colonized mice gener-
ate the same products from enteric prodefensins. J Biol Chem 
275(51):40478–40482. https​://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M0078​16200​
	102.	 Wilson CL, Ouellette AJ, Satchell DP, Ayabe T, López-Boado 
YS, Stratman JL et al (1999) Regulation of intestinal α-defensin 
activation by the metalloproteinase matrilysin in innate host 
defense. Science 286(5437):113–117
	103.	 Boneca IG, Dussurget O, Cabanes D, Nahori MA, Sousa S, 
Lecuit M et al (2007) A critical role for peptidoglycan N-dea-
cetylation in Listeria evasion from the host innate immune sys-
tem. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(3):997–1002. https​://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.06096​72104​
	104.	 Iimura M, Gallo RL, Hase K, Miyamoto Y, Eckmann L, Kag-
noff MF (2005) Cathelicidin mediates innate intestinal defense 
against colonization with epithelial adherent bacterial pathogens. 
J Immunol 174(8):4901–4907
	105.	 Cash HL, Whitham CV, Behrendt CL, Hooper LV (2006) Symbi-
otic bacteria direct expression of an intestinal bactericidal lectin. 
Science 313(5790):1126–1130
	106.	 Macpherson AJ, Uhr T (2004) Induction of protective IgA by 
intestinal dendritic cells carrying commensal bacteria. Science 
303(5664):1662–1665. https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.10913​34
	107.	 Rescigno M, Urbano M, Valzasina B, Francolini M, Rotta G, 
Bonasio R et al (2001) Dendritic cells express tight junction pro-
teins and penetrate gut epithelial monolayers to sample bacteria. 
Nat Immunol 2(4):361–367. https​://doi.org/10.1038/86373​
	108.	 Suzuki K, Meek B, Doi Y, Muramatsu M, Chiba T, Honjo T et al 
(2004) Aberrant expansion of segmented filamentous bacteria in 
IgA-deficient gut. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(7):1981–1986. 
https​://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.03073​17101​
	109.	 Kau AL, Planer JD, Liu J, Rao S, Yatsunenko T, Trehan I et al 
(2015) Functional characterization of IgA-targeted bacterial 
taxa from undernourished Malawian children that produce 
diet-dependent enteropathy. Sci Transl Med 7(276):276ra224–
276ra224. https​://doi.org/10.1126/scitr​anslm​ed.aaa48​77
	110.	 Akira S, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O (2006) Pathogen recogni-
tion and innate immunity. Cell 124(4):783–801. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.015
	111.	 Chamaillard M, Hashimoto M, Horie Y, Masumoto J, Qiu S, 
Saab L et al (2003) An essential role for NOD1 in host recogni-
tion of bacterial peptidoglycan containing diaminopimelic acid. 
Nat Immunol 4(7):702–707. https​://doi.org/10.1038/ni945​
	112.	 Kobayashi KS, Chamaillard M, Ogura Y, Henegariu O, Ino-
hara N, Nunez G et al (2005) Nod2-dependent regulation of 
innate and adaptive immunity in the intestinal tract. Science 
307(5710):731–734. https​://doi.org/10.1126/scien​ce.11049​11
	113.	 Hooper LV, Midtvedt T, Gordon JI (2002) How host-microbial 
interactions shape the nutrient environment of the mammalian 
intestine. Annu Rev Nutr 22(1):283–307. https​://doi.org/10.1146/
annur​ev.nutr.22.01160​2.09225​9
	114.	 Ivanov II, Frutos Rde L, Manel N, Yoshinaga K, Rifkin DB, 
Sartor RB et al (2008) Specific microbiota direct the differen-
tiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in the mucosa of the 
small intestine. Cell Host Microbe 4(4):337–349. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chom.2008.09.009
	115.	 Wu W, Sun M, Chen F, Cao AT, Liu H, Zhao Y et al (2017) 
Microbiota metabolite short-chain fatty acid acetate promotes 
intestinal IgA response to microbiota which is mediated by 
GPR43. Mucosal Immunol 10(4):946
	116.	 Morrison DJ, Preston T (2016) Formation of short chain fatty 
acids by the gut microbiota and their impact on human metabo-
lism. Gut Microbes 7(3):189–200
	117.	 Hubbard TD, Murray IA, Bisson WH, Lahoti TS, Gowda 
K, Amin SG et  al (2015) Adaptation of the human aryl 

492
	
A. Adak, M. R. Khan 
1 3
hydrocarbon receptor to sense microbiota-derived indoles. Sci 
Rep 5:12689. https​://doi.org/10.1038/srep1​2689
	118.	 Li Y, Innocentin S, Withers DR, Roberts NA, Gallagher 
AR, Grigorieva EF et al (2011) Exogenous stimuli maintain 
intraepithelial lymphocytes via aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
activation. Cell 147(3):629–640. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2011.09.025
	119.	 Kibe R, Kurihara S, Sakai Y, Suzuki H, Ooga T, Sawaki E et al 
(2014) Upregulation of colonic luminal polyamines produced by 
intestinal microbiota delays senescence in mice. Sci Rep 4:4548. 
https​://doi.org/10.1038/srep0​4548
	120.	 Zhang M, Wang H, Tracey KJ (2000) Regulation of macrophage 
activation and inflammation by spermine: a new chapter in an old 
story. Crit Care Med 28(4 Suppl):N60–66
	121.	 Perez-Cano FJ, Gonzalez-Castro A, Castellote C, Franch A, Cas-
tell M (2010) Influence of breast milk polyamines on suckling rat 
immune system maturation. Dev Comp Immunol 34(2):210–218. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.dci.2009.10.001
	122.	 Clark JA, Coopersmith CM (2007) Intestinal crosstalk: a new 
paradigm for understanding the gut as the “motor” of critical 
illness. Shock 28(4):384–393. https​://doi.org/10.1097/shk.013e3​
18055​69df
	123.	 Saitoh Y, Suzuki H, Tani K, Nishikawa K, Irie K, Ogura Y et al 
(2015) Structural insight into tight junction disassembly by 
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin. Science 347(6223):775–778
	124.	 Odenwald MA, Turner JR (2017) The intestinal epithelial barrier: 
a therapeutic target? Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 14(1):9–21. 
https​://doi.org/10.1038/nrgas​tro.2016.169
	125.	 Yuhan R, Koutsouris A, Savkovic SD, Hecht G (1997) Enter-
opathogenic Escherichia coli-induced myosin light chain phos-
phorylation alters intestinal epithelial permeability. Gastroenter-
ology 113(6):1873–1882
	126.	 Hecht G, Koutsouris A, Pothoulakis C, LaMont JT, Madara JL 
(1992) Clostridium difficile toxin B disrupts the barrier function 
of T 84 monolayers. Gastroenterology 102(2):416–423
	127.	 Lee SH (2015) Intestinal permeability regulation by tight junc-
tion: implication on inflammatory bowel diseases. Intest Res 
13(1):11–18. https​://doi.org/10.5217/ir.2015.13.1.11
	128.	 Ulluwishewa D, Anderson RC, McNabb WC, Moughan PJ, Wells 
JM, Roy NC (2011) Regulation of tight junction permeability by 
intestinal bacteria and dietary components. J Nutr 141(5):769–
776. https​://doi.org/10.3945/jn.110.13565​7
	129.	 Anderson RC, Cookson AL, McNabb WC, Kelly WJ, Roy 
NC (2010) Lactobacillus plantarum DSM 2648 is a poten-
tial probiotic that enhances intestinal barrier function. FEMS 
Microbiol Lett 309(2):184–192. https​://doi.org/10.111
1/j.1574-6968.2010.02038​.x
	130.	 Putaala H, Salusjarvi T, Nordstrom M, Saarinen M, Ouwehand 
AC, Bech Hansen E et al (2008) Effect of four probiotic strains 
and Escherichia coli O157:H7 on tight junction integrity and 
cyclo-oxygenase expression. Res Microbiol 159(9–10):692–698. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.resmi​c.2008.08.002
	131.	 Carabotti M, Scirocco A, Maselli MA, Severi C (2015) The gut-
brain axis: interactions between enteric microbiota, central and 
enteric nervous systems. Ann Gastroenterol 28(2):203
	132.	 Rhee SH, Pothoulakis C, Mayer EA (2009) Principles and clini-
cal implications of the brain–gut-enteric microbiota axis. Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 6(5):306–314. https​://doi.org/10.1038/
nrgas​tro.2009.35
	133.	 Sarkar A, Lehto SM, Harty S, Dinan TG, Cryan JF, Burnet PW 
(2016) Psychobiotics and the manipulation of bacteria–gut–brain 
signals. Trends Neurosci 39(11):763–781
	134.	 Labus JS, Hollister EB, Jacobs J, Kirbach K, Oezguen N, Gupta 
A et al (2017) Differences in gut microbial composition correlate 
with regional brain volumes in irritable bowel syndrome. Micro-
biome 5(1):49. https​://doi.org/10.1186/s4016​8-017-0260-z
	135.	 Zheng P, Zeng B, Zhou C, Liu M, Fang Z, Xu X et al (2016) 
Gut microbiome remodeling induces depressive-like behaviors 
through a pathway mediated by the host’s metabolism. Mol Psy-
chiatry 21(6):786–796. https​://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2016.44
	136.	 Pinto-Sanchez MI, Hall GB, Ghajar K, Nardelli A, Bolino C, 
Lau JT et al (2017) Probiotic Bifidobacterium longum NCC3001 
reduces depression scores and alters brain activity: a pilot study 
in patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 
153:448–459
	137.	 Harach T, Marungruang N, Duthilleul N, Cheatham V, Mc Coy 
K, Frisoni G et al (2017) Reduction of Abeta amyloid pathology 
in APPPS1 transgenic mice in the absence of gut microbiota. Sci 
Rep 7:41802
	138.	 Nissle A (1961) Old and new experiences on therapeutic suc-
cesses by restoration of the colonic flora with mutaflor in gas-
trointestinal diseases. Die Med Welt 29:1519
	139.	 Podolsky SH (1998) Cultural divergence: Elie Metchnikoff’s 
Bacillus bulgaricus therapy and his underlying concept of health. 
Bull Hist Med 72(1):1–27
	140.	 Sassone-Corsi M, Raffatellu M (2015) No vacancy: how benefi-
cial microbes cooperate with immunity to provide colonization 
resistance to pathogens. J Immunol 194(9):4081–4087. https​://
doi.org/10.4049/jimmu​nol.14031​69
	141.	 Lukic J, Strahinic I, Jovcic B, Filipic B, Topisirovic L, Kojic 
M et al (2012) Different roles for lactococcal aggregation fac-
tor and mucin binding protein in adhesion to gastrointestinal 
mucosa. Appl Environ Microbiol 78(22):7993–8000. https​://
doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02141​-12
	142.	 Gonzalez-Rodriguez I, Sanchez B, Ruiz L, Turroni F, Ventura M, 
Ruas-Madiedo P et al (2012) Role of extracellular transaldolase 
from Bifidobacterium bifidum in mucin adhesion and aggrega-
tion. Appl Environ Microbiol 78(11):3992–3998. https​://doi.
org/10.1128/AEM.08024​-11
	143.	 Jeffery CJ (2003) Moonlighting proteins: old proteins learning 
new tricks. Trends Genet 19(8):415–417. https​://doi.org/10.1016/
S0168​-9525(03)00167​-7
	144.	 Oak SJ, Jha R (2018) The effects of probiotics in lactose intoler-
ance: a systematic review. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. https​://doi.
org/10.1080/10408​398.2018.14259​77
	145.	 Cho YA, Kim J (2015) Effect of probiotics on blood lipid con-
centrations: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Medicine 94(43):e1714
	146.	 Barichella M, Pacchetti C, Bolliri C, Cassani E, Iorio L, Pusani C 
et al (2016) Probiotics and prebiotic fiber for constipation associ-
ated with Parkinson disease: an RCT. Neurology 87(12):1274–
1280. https​://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.00000​00000​00312​7
	147.	 Akbari E, Asemi Z, Daneshvar Kakhaki R, Bahmani F, Kouchaki 
E, Tamtaji OR et al (2016) Effect of probiotic supplementation 
on cognitive function and metabolic status in Alzheimer’s dis-
ease: a randomized, double-blind and controlled trial. Front 
Aging Neurosci 8:256. https​://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi​.2016.00256​
	148.	 Wang H, Lee IS, Braun C, Enck P (2016) Effect of probiotics 
on central nervous system functions in animals and humans: a 
systematic review. J Neurogastroenterol Motil 22(4):589–605. 
https​://doi.org/10.5056/jnm16​018
	149.	 Panigrahi P, Parida S, Nanda NC, Satpathy R, Pradhan L, Chan-
del DS et al (2017) A randomized synbiotic trial to prevent sepsis 
among infants in rural India. Nature 548(7668):407–412
	150.	 Lundelin K, Poussa T, Salminen S, Isolauri E (2017) Long-term 
safety and efficacy of perinatal probiotic intervention: evidence 
from a follow-up study of four randomized, double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trials. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 28(2):170–175. 
https​://doi.org/10.1111/pai.12675​
	151.	 Villar-García J, Güerri-Fernández R, Moya A, González A, 
Hernández JJ, Lerma E et al (2017) Impact of probiotic Sac-
charomyces boulardii on the gut microbiome composition in 

493
An insight into gut microbiota and its functionalities﻿	
1 3
HIV-treated patients: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-con-
trolled trial. PLoS One 12(4):e0173802
	152.	 Gibson GR, Roberfroid MB (1995) Dietary modulation of the 
human colonic microbiota: introducing the concept of prebiotics. 
J Nutr 125(6):1401–1412
	153.	 Gibson GR, Hutkins R, Sanders ME, Prescott SL, Reimer RA, 
Salminen SJ et al (2017) Expert consensus document: the Inter-
national Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics 
(ISAPP) consensus statement on the definition and scope of 
prebiotics. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 14(8):491–502. https​
://doi.org/10.1038/nrgas​tro.2017.75
	154.	 Savignac HM, Corona G, Mills H, Chen L, Spencer JP, Tzortzis 
G et al (2013) Prebiotic feeding elevates central brain derived 
neurotrophic factor, N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor subu-
nits and d-serine. Neurochem Int 63(8):756–764. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuin​t.2013.10.006
	155.	 Williams S, Chen L, Savignac HM, Tzortzis G, Anthony DC, 
Burnet PW (2016) Neonatal prebiotic (BGOS) supplementa-
tion increases the levels of synaptophysin, GluN2A-subunits 
and BDNF proteins in the adult rat hippocampus. Synapse 
70(3):121–124. https​://doi.org/10.1002/syn.21880​
	156.	 Savignac HM, Couch Y, Stratford M, Bannerman DM, Tzortzis 
G, Anthony DC et al (2016) Prebiotic administration normalizes 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced anxiety and cortical 5-HT2A 
receptor and IL1-beta levels in male mice. Brain Behav Immun 
52:120–131. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2015.10.007
	157.	 de Cossio LF, Fourrier C, Sauvant J, Everard A, Capuron L, 
Cani PD et al (2017) Impact of prebiotics on metabolic and 
behavioral alterations in a mouse model of metabolic syn-
drome. Brain Behav Immun 64:33–49. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bbi.2016.12.022
	158.	 Messaoudi M, Rozan P, Nejdi A, Hidalgo S, Desor D (2005) 
Behavioural and cognitive effects of oligofructose-enriched inu-
lin in rats. Brit J Nutr 93(Suppl 1):S27–30
	159.	 Waworuntu R, Hain H, Chang Q, Thiede L, Hanania T, Berg B 
(2014) Dietary prebiotics improve memory and social interac-
tions while reducing anxiety when provided early in life to nor-
mally developing rodents (6375). FASEB J 28(1 Suppl):637.635
	160.	 Wang B, Yu B, Karim M, Hu H, Sun Y, McGreevy P et al (2007) 
Dietary sialic acid supplementation improves learning and mem-
ory in piglets. Am J Clin Nutr 85(2):561–569
	161.	 Charbonneau MR, O’Donnell D, Blanton LV, Totten SM, Davis 
JC, Barratt MJ et al (2016) Sialylated milk oligosaccharides 
promote microbiota-dependent growth in models of infant 
undernutrition. Cell 164(5):859–871. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2016.01.024
	162.	 Radke M, Picaud JC, Loui A, Cambonie G, Faas D, Lafeber HN 
et al (2017) Starter formula enriched in prebiotics and probiot-
ics ensures normal growth of infants and promotes gut health: a 
randomized clinical trial. Pediatr Res 81(4):622–631. https​://doi.
org/10.1038/pr.2016.270
	163.	 Rossen NG, MacDonald JK, de Vries EM, D’Haens GR, de Vos 
WM, Zoetendal EG et al (2015) Fecal microbiota transplantation 
as novel therapy in gastroenterology: a systematic review. World 
J Gastroenterol 21(17):5359–5371. https​://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.
v21.i17.5359
	164.	 Zhang F, Luo W, Shi Y, Fan Z, Ji G (2012) Should we standard-
ize the 1,700-year-old fecal microbiota transplantation? Am J 
Gastroenterol 107(11):1755 (author reply p. 1755)
	165.	 Eiseman Á, Silen W, Bascom G, Kauvar A (1958) Fecal enema 
as an adjunct in the treatment of pseudomembranous enterocol-
itis. Surgery 44(5):854–859
	166.	 Bagdasarian N, Rao K, Malani PN (2015) Diagnosis and treat-
ment of Clostridium difficile in adults: a systematic review. JAMA 
313(4):398–408. https​://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2014.17103​
	167.	 Weingarden AR, Chen C, Zhang N, Graiziger CT, Dosa PI, Steer 
CJ et al (2016) Ursodeoxycholic acid inhibits Clostridium dif-
ficile spore germination and vegetative growth, and prevents 
the recurrence of ileal pouchitis associated with the infection. 
J Clin Gastroenterol 50(8):624–630. https​://doi.org/10.1097/
MCG.00000​00000​00042​7
	168.	 Weingarden AR, Chen C, Bobr A, Yao D, Lu Y, Nelson VM et al 
(2014) Microbiota transplantation restores normal fecal bile acid 
composition in recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. Am J 
Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 306(4):G310–319. https​://doi.
org/10.1152/ajpgi​.00282​.2013
	169.	 Li YT, Cai HF, Wang ZH, Xu J, Fang JY (2016) Systematic 
review with meta-analysis: long-term outcomes of faecal micro-
biota transplantation for Clostridium difficile infection. Ali-
ment Pharmacol Ther 43(4):445–457. https​://doi.org/10.1111/
apt.13492​
	170.	 Evans WE, Relling MV (2004) Moving towards individualized 
medicine with pharmacogenomics. Nature 429(6990):464–468. 
https​://doi.org/10.1038/natur​e0262​6
	171.	 Jia W, Li H, Zhao L, Nicholson JK (2008) Gut microbiota: a 
potential new territory for drug targeting. Nat Rev Drug Discov 
7(2):123–129. https​://doi.org/10.1038/nrd25​05
	172.	 Gingell R, Bridges JW, Williams RT (1971) The role of the gut 
flora in the metabolism of prontosil and neoprontosil in the rat. 
Xenobiotica 1(2):143–156
	173.	 Lindenbaum J, Rund DG, Butler VP Jr, Tse-Eng D, Saha JR 
(1981) Inactivation of digoxin by the gut flora: reversal by 
antibiotic therapy. N Engl J Med 305(14):789–794. https​://doi.
org/10.1056/NEJM1​98110​01305​1403
	174.	 Koppel N, Bisanz J, Turnbaugh P, Balskus EP (2017) Char-
acterization of a cardiac drug-inactivating enzyme from the 
prominent human gut microbe. Eggerthella lenta. FASEB J 31(1 
Suppl):608.603
	175.	 Clayton TA, Baker D, Lindon JC, Everett JR, Nicholson JK 
(2009) Pharmacometabonomic identification of a significant 
host-microbiome metabolic interaction affecting human drug 
metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(34):14728–14733. 
https​://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.09044​89106​
	176.	 Wilson ID, Nicholson JK (2017) Gut microbiome interac-
tions with drug metabolism, efficacy, and toxicity. Transl Res 
179:204–222. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.trsl.2016.08.002
	177.	 Forslund K, Hildebrand F, Nielsen T, Falony G, Le Chatelier 
E, Sunagawa S et al (2015) Disentangling type 2 diabetes and 
metformin treatment signatures in the human gut microbiota. 
Nature 528(7581):262–266. https​://doi.org/10.1038/natur​e1576​6
	178.	 Xu J, Lian F, Zhao L, Zhao Y, Chen X, Zhang X et al (2015) 
Structural modulation of gut microbiota during alleviation 
of type 2 diabetes with a Chinese herbal formula. ISME J 
9(3):552–562
	179.	 Zhang X, Zhao Y, Zhang M, Pang X, Xu J, Kang C et al (2012) 
Structural changes of gut microbiota during berberine-mediated 
prevention of obesity and insulin resistance in high-fat diet-fed 
rats. PLoS One 7(8):e42529