Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biosensors and Bioelectronics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bios
Facile combination of beta-cyclodextrin host-guest recognition with
exonuclease-assistant signal ampliﬁcation for sensitive electrochemical
assay of ochratoxin A
Yonghong Wanga, Ge Ningb, Yaohui Wua, Shun Wua, Baiquan Zenga, Gaoqiang Liua,⁎,
Xiaoxiao Hec, Kemin Wangc
a Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory for Forestry Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Technology, Central South University of Forestry and Technology, 410004,
Changsha, China
b International Education Institute, Hunan University of Chinese Medicine, 410208, Changsha, China
c State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, 410082 Changsha,
China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Electrochemical
Ochratoxin A
Host-guest recognition
RecJf exonuclease
Signal ampliﬁcation
A B S T R A C T
Smartly coupling exonuclease-induced target recycling signal ampliﬁcations with β-cyclodextrin host-guest re-
cognition, a novel “signal-on” aptamer sensor for sensitive determination of ochratoxin A (OTA) was proposed
for the ﬁrst time. Firstly, the formation of double-strand DNA (dsDNA) was occurred by hybridizing OTA ap-
tamer with its complementary DNA (cDNA) and as the probe DNA the cDNA at its 3′ terminal was labeled with
methylene blue (MB). Next, when OTA was present, the aptamer tended to form aptamer-OTA complex with
conformation of G-quadruplex instead of aptamer-cDNA duplex, leading to thus the probe DNA separating from
dsDNA complex. Then the RecJf exonuclease was added, demolishing partially G-quadruplex structure and re-
leasing a certain number of OTA. Sequentially, those released OTA would continue to react with the rest of
aptamer in dsDNA, drawn into development of a new round of G-quadruplex complex, where the target cycling
was realized. Meanwhile, as a signal molecule, MB modiﬁed on cDNA was liberated along with the cDNA being
digested into monoucleotides by RecJf exonuclease, capable of diﬀusing onto the electrode surface due to host-
guest recognition with β-cyclodextrin, whereupon the signal was enriched and yielded. In this way, cycles of
target with continuous output of signal indicators were undergone, in which the detection of target was in return
fulﬁlled with signal ampliﬁcation owing to the joint endeavor of exonuclease and β-cyclodextrin. Under the
optimal conditions, the raising signal maintained a linear relation with the logarithm of the target concentrations
ranging from 10 pg/mL to 10.0 ng/mL and the detection limit reached as low as 3 pg/mL. This brand-new
strategy was simple and low-cost but satisfactory in terms of detection limit, range and sensitivity, in all pos-
sibility to be applied extensively for diverse targets detection by easily alternating the corresponding aptamers.
1. Introduction
Given its hazardous nature of carcinogenicity, nephrotoxicity and
immunuetoxicity, ochratoxin A (OTA) is recently an interest for re-
search pursued by diverse ﬁelds worldwide (Mayura et al., 1984; Assaf
et al., 2004). To track its origin, as one of mycotoxins, OTA was a toxic
secondary metabolite commonly secreted by fungi Aspergillus and Pe-
nicillium, presenting ubiquitously in a variety of foodstuﬀs involving
rice, peanut, wheat, maize and ultimately ﬁnding its way to the human
body through food chain (Wang et al., 2018; Marin et al., 2013). With
apprehension for the risks this bugbear might bring to human health,
authorities exerted a relatively strict control over OTA. For instance,
International Agency for Research on Cancer proclaimed its possible
carcinogenicity towards humans; the European Commission raised the
threshold for regulating a maximized amount of OTA as low as 5 μg/kg
from raw cereal grains (Pfohl-Leszkowicz et al., 2007; Dall'Asta et al.,
2010). Nevertheless, appreciable uncertainties were arisen presumably
from robust chemical stability of OTA which enabled its survival from
the modern food process under even severe physicochemical condi-
tions. Worse, once ingested by human, it was metabolized quite slowly
that could exist in the body for over one month, adversely aﬀecting
human health for an extended period. Therefore, the surging practical
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2018.10.007
Received 7 August 2018; Received in revised form 22 September 2018; Accepted 3 October 2018
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: bionano@163.com (Y. Wang), gaoliuedu@163.com (G. Liu).
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 124–125 (2019) 82–88
Available online 11 October 2018
0956-5663/ © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
T

need for accurately monitoring the level of OTA is calling admitting of
no delay for imperative developments in superior strategies on its assay
with well-performed sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
Various analytical methods were hitherto employed for OTA
quantiﬁcation, such as mass spectrometry (De Santis et al., 2017;
Ventura et al., 2003), high-performance liquid chromatography (Asadi,
2018), gas chromatography (Soleas et al., 2001) enzyme-linked im-
munosorbent assay (Garcia-Fonseca et al., 2016), capillary electro-
phoresis (Lee et al., 2013), surface enhanced Raman scattering (Li et al.,
2018a), electrochemiluminescence (Zhang et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2016a), ﬂuorescence assay (Wang et al., 2017, 2015; Ma et al., 2018)
and colorimetric assay (Lin et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018). Admittedly,
these reported methods made undeniable progress otherwise compro-
mised somewhat by unavoidable deﬁciencies of expensive equipment,
time-consuming, unsatisfying sensitivity, and complicated process and
demanding expert operators. To be noted however, electrochemical
sensors became prevalent as an intriguing approach for biosensing and
garnered considerable attention by virtue of desirable sensitivity, spe-
ciﬁcity, rapidity and aﬀordability for instruments, operators-friendly
process and miniaturization of the instruments (Madhurantakam et al.,
2018; Abi et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018b; Li et al., 2018c). In particular,
when associated with a single stranded oligonucleotide sequence-ap-
tamer who was capable of binding with versatile targets with im-
pressive aﬃnity and speciﬁcity, the aptasensor raised considerable
concerns about assaying mycotoxins attributed to the exceptional
merits of outstanding binding constants for the majority of mycotoxins
along with dissociation constants in the scope of nanomole (Zhu et al.,
2018; Jiang et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2018).
Target recycling assisted by enzymes oﬀered an appealing alter-
native for fulﬁllment of signal ampliﬁcation. As a speciﬁc biocatalyst
enzyme, nucleases could initiate signal ampliﬁcation, in which a single
target would result in appreciable cycles of target, eﬀectively re-
cognizing and sensitively cleaving the phosphodiester bonds both from
the ends and internally between nucleotides of nucleic acids (Chen
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Cui et al., 2018). It is of superiority over
many other ampliﬁcation strategies catalyzed by substances as nano-
particles, graphene and quantum dot due mainly to its simpliﬁed pro-
cess without demanding complicated preparation, thus enjoying wide
employment in signal ampliﬁcation (Wang et al., 2016b; Jiang et al.,
2014; Chu et al., 2016). Previously, signal ampliﬁcation strategies in
this kind were reported utilizing exonucleases. To name a few, Zhao
et al. established an OTA detection platform based on signal ampliﬁ-
cation by exonuclease III and ﬂuorescence quenching by gold nano-
particles (Zhao et al., 2018). Ni et al. developed a label-free electro-
chemiluminescence
aptasensor
using
exonuclease-assisted
target
recycling ampliﬁcation for the detection of OTA (Ni et al., 2018). More
interestingly, as a speciﬁc exonuclease acting exclusively on ssDNA,
RecJf exonuclease bore the capability of catalyzing the deoxy-nucleo-
tide monophosphates's removal from ssDNA in the direction of 5′ →3′,
even including those aptamers bound with target in a complex of target-
aptamer, which turned themselves to be a favorite introduced to var-
ious novel electrochemical aptasensors strategy.
Inspired by as-mentioned items, in this study, using exonuclease-
catalyzed target recycling signal ampliﬁcation and β-cyclodextrin host-
guest recognition, an OTA aptasensor on the basis of electrochemistry
was thus fabricated. At ﬁrst, the hybridization was done between OTA
aptamer and its complementary DNA (probe DNA) modiﬁed with MB as
signal indicator for formation of dsDNA. Then OTA was added binding
with aptamer to shape OTA-aptamer complex with structure of G-
quadruplex, which dissociated the hybridized cDNA from dsDNA si-
multaneously. Afterwards, RecJf exonuclease was added, functioning as
a catalyst, destroying certain amounts of OTA-aptamer complexes and
releasing the OTA who would engage in another loop of G-quadruplex
formation. With the same pace of above cycling, cDNA would be di-
gested into mononucleotides by the exonuclease, releasing the signal
molecules that were capable of diﬀusing easily onto the electrode
surface through host-guest recognition with β-cyclodextrin, and con-
tributing accordingly to the enrichment and production of the signal
revealed by diﬀerential pulse voltammetry (DPV). Hence the quantiﬁ-
cation of OTA was expected to be accomplished by recording the signal
variances on electrode surface before and after the addition of OTA. To
be noted, two tricks would be employed for the realization of pre-
eminence performance by this proposed assay: for one hand, exonu-
clease was adopted to resect both OTA-aptamer and cDNA into frag-
ments, resulting in the former's release of OTA involved in reaction
cycles, and the latter's continuous liberation of MB with the same pace
of the cycle served as the signal molecules accessible to the electrode
surface where the signal was produced and ampliﬁed. For the other
hand, β-cyclodextrin modiﬁed on the electrode surface could facilitate
signiﬁcantly the signal molecule enrichment via the host-guest inter-
action. In this way, a versatile and sensitive exonuclease-activated
target recycling electrochemical tactic was presented which was un-
precedentedly reported integrating all these novel elements to the best
of our knowledge, holding thus a profound potential to be extensively
applied for the quantiﬁcation of the rest of targets after conveniently
replacing the corresponding aptamer.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Reagents and materials
The OTA (10 μg/mL in acetonitrile, analytical standard, Sigma-
Aldrich), mercapto-β-cyclodextrin (β-CD-SH), aﬂatoxin B1 (AFB1),
ochratoxin B (OTB), aﬂatoxin M1 (AFM1), ochratoxin C (OTC) were all
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Sigma-Aldrich, China) and utilized
without treatment. 10 × NEBuﬀer 2 (10 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2,
50 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, pH = 7.9) and RecJf exonuclease were bought
in New England Biolabs Ltd. (Beijing, China). The remnant reagents
were all in analytical grade directly utilized as purchased with no
treatments. As the solvent, the ultrapure water was exploited with
which the solutions were prepared and diluted from the Millipore Milli-
Q system (Millipore, Billerica, MA, 18.2 MΩ cm).
The cDNA sequences and aptamer of OTA were all synthesized and
puriﬁed by Shanghai Sangon Biotechnology Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China).
MB for the purpose of realizing the signal transmission was modiﬁed on
3′ end of cDNA. The oligonucleotide sequences of aptamer and cDNA
were exhibited below:
Aptamer: 5′-GAT CGG GTG TGG GTG GCG TAA AGG GAG CAT CGG
ACA-3′
cDNA: 5′- TGT CCG ATG CTC CCT TTA CGC CAC CCA CAC CCG
ATC- MB-3′
2.2. Pretreatment of electrode
A portable screen-printed electrode (SPE, DRP-C220AT, Metrohm
China Limited) was utilized comprising an Ag reference electrode, a
gold working electrode, as well as a gold counter electrode. Prior to
treatment with pure water for about 10 min for removal of residual
organic contaminants, for another 10 min the electrodes were foremost
cleaned in an ultrasonicator with ethanol. Sequentially, the electrodes
were rinsed with suﬃcient amount of pure water, blew till dried by N2.
At room temperature every electrochemical measurement was im-
plemented with a CHI660E electrochemical workstation (Shanghai
Chenhua Instrument Corporation, China). It was also at room tem-
perature to steer DPV in sensor interrogation. The potentials were with
reference to Ag reference electrode. Each step was operated by in-
dependent experiments repeating for no less than ﬁve times.
2.3. RecJf exonuclease-assisted target recycling reaction
Before usage, every oligonucleotide was heated for 5 min at 95 °C,
Y. Wang et al.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 124–125 (2019) 82–88
83

cooled down to room temperature for upcoming experiments, ensuring
the aptamer and cDNA to adjust to their inherent conformations. The
occurrence of hybridization between the aptamer and cDNA was in
200 μL of 1 × NEBuﬀer 2, experiencing identically the process of an-
nealing. After above process, a range of OTA concentrations as well as
2 μL RecJf exonuclease (1 U/μL) were dropped into the solution and
then incubated for 90 min at 37 °C for adequate reaction. AFB1 (10 ng/
mL), AFM1 (10 ng/mL), OTC (10 ng/mL) and OTB (10 ng/mL) were
picked out to displace OTA in the speciﬁcity test.
2.4. Gel electrophoresis
Putting 0.75 g of agarose powder into TAE buﬀer (40 mM Tris-
Acetic Acid; 2 mM EDTA), a 2% agarose gel was thus made. Heat was
used for the dissolution of the power into the mixed solution.
Sequentially, the gel was poured into the gel setting tray. Eventually,
5 μL
aptamer,
MB-cDNA,
dsDNA,
dsDNA + RecJf
exonuclease,
aptamer + RecJf exonuclease, dsDNA + RecJf exonuclease without
and with OTA mixed respectively with 1 μL of DNA loading dye to be
electrophoresed for 80 min at 120 V. The results of electrophoretogram
were observed and photographed by a Gel Doc XR System (BIO-RAD,
USA).
2.5. Determination of OTA
First of all, at room temperature, 5.0 μg/mL β-CD-SH was added
onto the electrode surface and then incubated for 120 min. Next,
through rinsing with PBS buﬀer for 3 times, the needless β-CD-SH was
eliminated from the electrode surface. Based on the β-CD/SPE, at last
the above mentioned reaction solution after addition of RecJf exonu-
clease was designated to determine target at various concentrations
under optimal circumstance. Sequentially 10 μL reaction solutions were
dropped onto the β-CD/SPE's surface. After capturing for 60 min, the
electrode rinsed with PBS buﬀer before electrochemical measurements.
2.6. Selectivity
Employing analogs in the sensing platform, the speciﬁcity of the as-
proposed strategy was assessed. Four diﬀerent interfering mycotoxins
as representatives-AFM1 and AFB1, OTB, OTC were appointed respec-
tively for examining the selectivity of the strategy at the concentration
of 10 ng/mL, going through the same experimental process as the one
illustrated for the OTA detection. The results were compared with the
one using 1.0 ng/mL OTA.
2.7. Determination of OTA in real samples
Recovery was validated in red wine samples using OTA at various
concentrations. The possibility and reliability towards the method
being applied in practice were established in regard of evaluating the
recovery rate in actual samples. At standard samples (1.0, 2.0 and
5.0 ng/mL), the red wine samples were spiked with a range of con-
centrations of OTA. The procedures were identical with the above one
elaborated.
3. Results and discussions
3.1. Sensing principle of the aptasensor for OTA detection
The principle of this proposed strategy was exhibited in Fig. 1:
ﬁrstly, in homogeneous solution, the aptamer of target and its cDNA
(probe DNA) were hybridized to develop dsDNA, whereas the MB as
signal indicator was modiﬁed on cDNA. At this stage, very limited
amount of dsDNA could diﬀuse onto the surface of the electrode be-
cause of the steric-hindrance eﬀect between the dsDNA complex and
the β-cyclodextrin modiﬁed electrode, thereby leading to limited
variation of the DPV signal. Whereas when the target presented, the
aptamer was inclined to stay aptamer-target complex rather than the
aptamer-cDNA duplex because of robust aﬃnity eﬀects including the
electrostatic, hydrogen bond, and spatial matching eﬀects, separating
therefore the dsDNA into aptamer-target complex and the cDNA labeled
with signal molecules. After that, RecJf exonuclease was added, capable
of digesting both cDNA and the aptamer from 5′ termini direction.
Attributed to the presence of RecJf exonuclease, liberated was the
target from the aptamer-target complex, participating in a new round of
association with aptamer in dsDNA duplex and realizing thus the target
cycling. Simultaneously, the MB modiﬁed on cDNA was released as the
same pace of the cDNA being hydrolyzed by exonuclease, getting an
easier access to the electrode surface through the host-guest recognition
with β-cyclodextrin. Hence strong DPV signal related with the OTA
concentration could be detected based on the above principle. Several
designing tips were expected to have promoted the performance of this
method: (1) it adopted RecJf exonuclease, capable of selectively de-
grading single-stranded DNA including the aptamer-target complex and
its cDNA, thereby engining the target reaction cycles and on-going
outputs of signal indicators in sync with the target cycling, due to which
a stronger electrochemical readout could be fulﬁlled. (2) The host-guest
recognition with β-cyclodextrin guided the released MB a shortcut to
the electrode surface, enriching accordingly the signals detected. (3) As
novel type of ssDNA recognition probes, aptamers were employed to
ensure the speciﬁcity of detection. Hence by this cyclic reaction, a sane
electrochemical aptasensor was developed to assay the target.
3.2. Gel electrophoresis
For veriﬁcation of target recycling induced by the exonuclease,
agarose gel electrophoresis was carried out in this strategy. Agarose gel
electrophoresis of aptamer (lane 1), cDNA (lane 2), dsDNA (OTA ap-
tamer + cDNA, lane 3), dsDNA (OTA aptamer + cDNA) with RecJf
exonuclease (lane 4), aptamer-OTA complex with RecJf exonuclease
(lane 5), aptamer with OTA (lane 6), dsDNA digestion product without
(lane 7) and with (lane 8) OTA were studied. After 90 min of exonu-
clease incubation and subsequent 10 min of exonuclease inactivation
(incubate at 37 °C), the exonuclease digestion products were acquired.
As performed in Fig. 2, two obvious bands were presented respectively
in lane 1 and lane 2, which represented the aptamer and the cDNA.
Lane 3 displayed the dsDNA alone and lane 4 did dsDNA with RecJf
exonuclease whose bands were both evident, manifesting that RecJf
exonuclease could not digest dsDNA. But after RecJf exonuclease was
added into the OTA aptamer, no band was observed in lanes 5, in-
dicating that the oligonucleotides were degraded into fragments by
RecJf exonuclease and then moved out of the gel. Lane 8 revealed a
negligible-seen band, suggesting that RecJf exonuclease could make the
oligonucleotide of OTA-aptamer digested. Overall, the results demon-
strated that the structure of dsDNA could survive itself from being di-
gested by RecJf exonuclease. But the ssDNA such as cDNA and aptamer
even in aptamer-OTA complex could be degraded by RecJf exonuclease
reﬂected by agarose gel electrophoresis, implying that the release of
OTA involved in reaction cycles was because of the enzymolysis to-
wards OTA-aptamer by RecJf exonuclease.
3.3. Feasibility of the sensing strategy
The feasibility of the RecJf exonuclease-assistant signal ampliﬁca-
tion for sensitive electrochemical assay of OTA was investigated. Fig. 3
displayed the DPV signal responses prior to and after the OTA addition.
Before the participation of the target, the uncleaved aptamer-cDNA was
maintained and the hybridization of the aptamer and the MB modiﬁed
cDNA obstructed the reaction with RecJf exonuclease, thus generating a
low DPV background signal (curve a). It was in a great degree because
the MB modiﬁed on the dsDNA could hardly diﬀuse freely to the surface
of electrode on account of steric hindrance interfered in the electrode
Y. Wang et al.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 124–125 (2019) 82–88
84

and dsDNA. Also, it exhibited a weak enhancement of the DPV readout
when OTA existed alone (curve b), principally arisen from the reason
that OTA possessed a robust binding aﬃnity towards its aptamer which
induced a fraction of dsDNA probes being dissociated, thus causing the
release of the MB-cDNA diﬀusing onto the electrode surface via beta-
cyclodextrin host-guest recognition. While in the addition of both the
RecJf exonuclease and OTA, the signal responses got steeply increased
(curve c) owing to the RecJf exonuclease digestion of the OTA-aptamer
complex and cDNA modiﬁed with MB, liberating the OTA reused for the
next reaction and resulting in a dramatically increasing number of free
MB in the solution. Thus feasibility of the proposed strategy was de-
monstrated substantially.
3.4. Optimization of experimental parameters
Experiment-concerned parameters were optimized respectively such
as the concentration of RecJf exonuclease, variables MB-cDNA con-
centration, digesting time, capturing time between immobilized β-CD
and MB for the sake of giving full play to the electrochemical sensing
superiority in determination. Firstly, the concentration of RecJf
exonuclease was evaluated by the DPV. The oxidation peak current rose
with increasing concentration of RecJf exonuclease. But when the RecJf
exonuclease concentration was over 2.0 U, not a distinct peak current
change was seen, indicating that the maximum concentration was al-
most reached for cleavage reaction (Fig. 4A). Hence the concentration
of RecJf exonuclease at 2.0 U was ﬁxed for the following experiments.
To exhibit an optimal electrochemical signal, the MB-cDNA con-
centration was investigated. The concentrations of the aptamer and MB-
cDNA were equal and the electrodes were investigated in 0.1 M PBS
+ 0.1 M KNO3 (pH 7.4). The currents of modiﬁed electrode after
treated with 10 μL mixture containing diﬀerent MB-cDNA concentra-
tion were shown (see Fig. 4B), indicating that the current enhanced
with an increase of MB-cDNA concentration but began to level oﬀafter
the MB-cDNA concentration reached to 2 μM. This manifested that the
MB-cDNA concentration had approached saturation. Therefore, MB-
cDNA concentration of 2 μM was pinpointed as the optimal value.
Since both the RecJf exonuclease and targets were added to the
aptasensor for the recycling initiation, so the time of digesting aptamer-
target by exonuclease was also tested because it impacted heavily on
the sensitivity of this developed system. As displayed in Fig. 4C, the
currents intensity increased remarkably along with the enhancement of
Fig. 1. Sensing principle of aptamer electrochemical platform for OTA detection based on β-cyclodextrin host-guest recognition and exonuclease-assistant signal
ampliﬁcation.
Fig. 2. Gel electrophoresis of aptamer (lane 1), MB-cDNA (lane 2), dsDNA
(aptamer + MB-cDNA) (lane 3), dsDNA + RecJf exonuclease digestion product
(lane 4), aptamer-OTA + RecJf exonuclease digestion product (lane 5), ap-
tamer with OTA (lane 6), and dsDNA + RecJf exonuclease digestion product
without (lane 7) and with (lane 8) OTA.
Potential / V
-.4
-.3
-.2
-.1
0.0
Currents / 1e-7A
0
1
2
3
a
b
c
+  target
-  target
no signal amplification
+  target
signal amplification
Fig. 3. DPV curves of a) β-CD modiﬁed SPE in the absence of OTA, b) β-CD
modiﬁed SPE after incubation with OTA in the (b) absence and (c) presence of
RecJf exonuclease, respectively, and the electrodes were investigated in 0.1 M
PBS buﬀer + 0.1 M KNO3 (pH 7.4).
Y. Wang et al.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 124–125 (2019) 82–88
85

incubation time for the aptasensor with target and RecJf exonuclease
from 10 min to 2 h. Actually it was turned out that the cleavage process
was basically accomplished within 60 min since the continuously in-
creased signal indicated that the RecJf exonuclease catalyzed target
recycling process indeed took place and the signal reached saturation at
60 min. But to guarantee the complete cleavage reaction, the time was
extended to 90 min. Thus 90 min was regarded as the optimal reaction
time for the subsequent experiment.
As another important factor, the capture time between β-CD and MB
was also investigated due to the close linkage between the capture ef-
ﬁciency and the detection sensitivity. Hence the capture time was op-
timized to ensure that the signal molecules were to a maximum extent
brought to the electrode surface. As exhibited in Fig. 4D, the current
signal increased from 10 min to 120 min and trended to be the top value
at 60 min, indicating the capture process was complete. As a result,
60 min was considered to be the optimal capture time.
3.5. Analytical performance of the biosensor
With the optimal preparation of the experimental condition, cou-
pling the compelling host-guest recognition ability of β-cyclodextrin
with the preferred exonuclease-assistant signal ampliﬁcation, the de-
signed electrochemical biosensor was with success fabricated for the
sensitive quantiﬁcation of OTA. Upon the addition of OTA, the MB
current was increased and the dynamic range was observed (Fig. 5A).
The current response increased accordingly with the enhancement of
the OTA concentration. Meanwhile, as observed in Fig. 5B, the aptamer
biosensor's peak current changes kept a linear dependence with the
logarithm of the target concentrations ranging from 10 pg/mL to
10.0 ng/mL. The equation was ΔI (1e-7A) = 1.1044 Log COTA (pg/mL) -
1.0992 (R2 = 0.9878) and according to the formula S/N = 3, LOD was
derived to be 3 pg/mL, where ΔI represented the value that peak cur-
rent deducted the background signal in the presence of OTA. The sa-
tisfying sensitivity was presumably on account of the exonuclease-as-
sistant signal ampliﬁcation, driving great amounts of MB captured for
electrochemical sensing. Furthermore, the other meritorious con-
tributor went to β-cyclodextrin who not only beneﬁted the im-
mobilization of signal probes via host-guest recognition, but also en-
riched the signals on the electrode surface, thus promoting collectively
the sensitive performance of biosensor. Indeed, the proposed method
performed better with a lower LOD than others done for OTA de-
termination (Table S1). In terms of these comparisons, the LOD of the
approach developed hereby could rival that of novel methods or/and
conventional instrument-used methods and immuno-used sensing sys-
tems.
3.6. Selectivity test
For evaluation of the speciﬁcity of this method, the inﬂuence by
OTA analogs including AFB1, AFM1, OTB and OTC on the currents
intensity was assessed via determining the variations when they inter-
fered in. As shown in Fig. 6, the target could exclusively result in a
remarkable current increase tested by the sensing system and there
were scarcely any changes in the currents intensity in the presence of
other analogs even at as high as 10 times of concentration than that of
OTA, manifesting that OTA could be distinguished by proposed sensor
Fig. 4. Inﬂuence of the relevant experimental factors on the currents intensity of detection system. (A) RecJf exonuclease concentrations, (B) MB-cDNA con-
centrations (C) the time of exonuclease digesting and (D) capture time between β-CD and signal molecules. The concentrations of OTA was 10 ng/mL.
Y. Wang et al.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 124–125 (2019) 82–88
86

with ease in the presence of OTA analogs, which thus showed a desir-
able selectivity for target to diﬀerentiate analogs.
3.7. Biosensing in actual samples
It was in red wine samples to measure the target for deep validation
of the practical application of this constructed analytical platform. The
recovery was acquired ranging from 95.6% to 102.7% with RSD (n = 5)
between 4.14% and 7.21% after the samples were spiked with target at
each level, showing a satisfactory result. In this way, the fabricated
electrochemical biosensors might be a competitive candidate for target
determination in actual samples with acceptable accuracy.
4. Conclusions
In summary, a sensitive and speciﬁc detection for target was
achieved by proposed strategy coupled the exonuclease-assisted target
recycling via introducing a single target to yield a mass of signals so as
to obtaining well performed signal ampliﬁcation, with utilizing the β-
cyclodextrin for the realization of signal molecule enrichment through
the host- guest interaction. This assay for OTA showed a wide detection
range, low limit, and sound accuracy, which was convenient because it
needed neither a complex preparation nor an excessive amount of
sample. Compared with the previous-reported methods, this approach
was
highly
sensitive,
orientated,
easy-operated
and
signiﬁcantly
eﬃcient, which held a great prospective to be miniaturization and in-
tegration for OTA quantiﬁcation. In a broad sense, this strategy could
be further popularized in evaluating extensive ranges of targets due to
the ﬂexibility of replacing the corresponding aptamer, thus providing a
versatile and universal platform for target detection in real aqueous
biological samples with preferable selectivity and sensitivity.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Hunan Provincial Natural
Science Foundation of China (2018JJ3869), National Natural Science
Foundation of China (21305164, 31772374), Research Foundation of
Education Bureau of Hunan Province, China (16A227) and National
Key R & D Programs of Intergovernmental International Science and
Technology Cooperation (2017YFE0108100).
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the
online version at doi:10.1016/j.bios.2018.10.007.
References
Abi, A., Mohammadpour, Z., Zuo, X.L., Safavi, A., 2018. Biosens. Bioelectron. 102,
479–489.
Asadi, M., 2018. Mycotoxin Res. 34, 15–20.
Assaf, H., Azouri, H., Pallardy, M., 2004. Toxicol. Sci. 79, 335–344.
Chen, X., Li, T., Tu, X., Luo, L., 2018. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 265, 98–103.
Chu, X.F., Dou, X.W., Liang, R.Z., Li, M.H., Kong, W.J., Yang, X.H., Luo, J.Y., Yang, M.H.,
Zhao, M., 2016. Nanoscale 8, 4127–4133.
Cui, L., Li, Y., Lu, M., Tang, B., Zhang, C., 2018. Biosens. Bioelectron. 99, 1–7.
Dall'Asta, C., Galaverna, G., Bertuzzi, T., Moseriti, A., Pietri, A., Dossena, A., Marchelli, R.,
2010. Food Chem. 120, 978–983.
De Santis, B., Debegnach, F., Gregori, E., Russo, S., Marchegiani, F., Moracci, G., Brera, C.,
2017. Toxins 9, 169.
Garcia-Fonseca, S., Ballesteros-Gomez, A., Rubio, S., 2016. Anal. Chim. Acta 935,
129–135.
Jiang, C.M., Lan, L.Y., Yao, Y., Zhao, F.N., Ping, J.F., 2018. TrAC Trend Anal. Chem. 102,
236–249.
Jiang, L., Qian, J., Yang, X.W., Yan, Y.T., Liu, Q., Wang, K., Wang, K., 2014. Anal. Chim.
Acta 806, 128–135.
Lee, T.P., Saad, B., Salleh, B., Mat, I., 2013. Microchim. Acta 180, 1149–1156.
Lin, C.Y., Zheng, H.X., Sun, M., Guo, Y.J., Luo, F., Guo, L.H., Qiu, B., Lin, Z.Y., Chen, G.N.,
2018. Anal. Chim. Acta 1002, 90–96.
Li, Y., Chen, Q., Xu, X.F., Jin, Y.P., Wang, Y., Zhang, L.Y., Yang, W.J., He, L.D., Feng, X.Y.,
Chen, Y.Q., 2018a. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 266, 115–123.
Li, J.H., Jiang, J.B., Xu, Z.F., Liu, M.Q., Tang, S.P., Yang, C.M, Qian, D, 2018b.
Electrochim. Acta. 260, 526–535.
Li, J.H., Jiang, J.B., Xu, Z.F., Liu, M.Q., Tang, S.P., Yang, C.M., Qian, D., 2018c. Sensor
Actuat B: Chem. 260, 529–540.
Ma, C.B., Wu, K.F., Zhao, H., Liu, H.S., Wang, K.M., Xia, K., 2018. Microchim. Acta 185,
Fig. 5. A) DPV of developed system in the presence of diﬀerent concentrations of OTA (10, 50, 80, 100, 500, 1000, 5000, 10000 pg/mL) in 100 mM PBS
buﬀer + 0.1 M KNO3 solution (pH 7.4); B) Linear relationship between currents and target concentrations.
Fig. 6. Speciﬁcity of the proposed sensor. a) AFM1, b) AFB1, c) OTC, d) OTB
and e) OTA. The concentrations of analogs and OTA were 10 ng/mL and 1.0 ng/
mL respectively.
Y. Wang et al.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 124–125 (2019) 82–88
87

347.
Madhurantakam, S., Babu, K.J., Rayappan, J.B.B., Krishnan, U.M., 2018. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 116, 67–80.
Marin, S., Ramos, A.J., Cano-Sancho, G., Sanchis, V., 2013. Food Chem. Toxicol. 60,
218–237.
Mayura, K., Parker, R., Berndt, W.O., Phillips, T.D., 1984. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 48,
1186–1188.
Ni, J., Yang, W., Wang, Q., Luo, F., Guo, L., Qiu, B., Lin, Z., Yang, H., 2018. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 105, 182–187.
Pfohl-Leszkowicz, A., Manderville, R.A., 2007. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 51, 61–99.
Shi, L., Rong, X.J., Wang, Y., Ding, S.M., Tang, W.Y., 2018. Biosens. Bioelectron. 102,
41–48.
Soleas, G.J., Yan, J., Goldberg, D.M., 2001. J. Agric. Food Chem. 49, 2733–2740.
Ventura, M., Vallejos, C., Anaya, I.A., Broto-Puig, F., Agut, M., Comellas, L., 2003. J.
Agric. Food Chem. 51, 7564–7567.
Wang, C., Qian, J., Wang, K., Wang, K., Liu, Q., Dong, X., Wang, C., Huang, X., 2015.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 68, 783–790.
Wang, Q.L., Chen, M.M., Zhang, H.Q., Wen, W., Zhang, X.H., Wang, S.F., 2016a. Sens.
Actuators B: Chem. 222, 264–269.
Wang, Q.L., Chen, M.M., Zhang, H.Q., Wen, W., Zhang, X.H., Wang, S.F., 2016b. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 79, 561–567.
Wang, S., Zhang, Y.J., Pang, G.S., Zhang, Y.W., Guo, S.J., 2017. Anal. Chem. 89,
1704–1709.
Wang, Y.J., Nie, J.Y., Yan, Z., Li, Z.X., Cheng, Y., Chang, W.X., 2018. Food Control. 88,
181–189.
Yang, S., You, M., Zhang, F., Wang, Q., He, P., 2018. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 258,
796–802.
Yu, X.H., Lin, Y.H., Wang, X.S., Xu, L.J., Wang, Z.W., Fu, F.F., 2018. Microchim. Acta
185, 5.
Zhang, H.F., Zhuo, Z.S., Chen, L.J., Chen, C.Q., Luo, F., Chen, Y.T., Guo, L.H., Qiu, B., Lin,
Z.Y., Chen, G.N., 2018. Electrochem. Commun. 88, 75–78.
Zhao, Y., Liu, R., Sun, W., Lv, L., Guo, Z., 2018. Sens. Actuators B: Chem 255, 1640–1645.
Zhu, X., Kou, F.X., Xu, H.F., Han, Y.J., Yang, G.D., Huang, X.J., Chen, W., Chi, Y.W., Lin,
Z.Y., 2018. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 270, 263–269.
Y. Wang et al.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics 124–125 (2019) 82–88
88