2005679  (1 of 15)
© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
www.advmat.de
Communication
Antibacterial Action of Nanoparticles by Lethal Stretching 
of Bacterial Cell Membranes
Denver P. Linklater, Vladimir A. Baulin, Xavier Le Guével, Jean-Baptiste Fleury, Eric Hanssen, 
The Hong Phong Nguyen, Saulius Juodkazis, Gary Bryant, Russell J. Crawford, 
Paul Stoodley, and Elena P. Ivanova*
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202005679
Nanoparticles (NPs) are heavily used in 
biomedical, industrial, and commercial 
applications due to the benefits associ-
ated with the specific physical and chem-
ical properties of both the bulk and the 
nanoscale material. The antimicrobial 
activity of NPs is widely recognized, but the 
mechanisms of their underlying toxicity 
remain unclear despite repeated attempts 
to establish a structure–function relation-
ship 
between 
their 
physicochemical 
properties and their interactions with 
biological systems.[1,2] NP uptake in 
mammalian cells is generally consid-
ered to be an active process, mediated by 
endocytosis. Indeed, transport across the 
cell membrane and intracellular accumu-
lation dictates the nanoparticle fate and 
cytotoxicity.[3] The critical size for NPs 
non-disruptively (passively) crossing cellular 
membranes is below 10  nm, irrespective 
of surface functionalization,[4–7] Figure 1. 
For this reason, there is a slowly forming 
consensus that smaller NPs bear greater 
toxicity than larger ones.[8,9] Similarly, the 
antibacterial properties of small NPs have 
It is commonly accepted that nanoparticles (NPs) can kill bacteria; however, 
the mechanism of antimicrobial action remains obscure for large NPs that 
cannot translocate the bacterial cell wall. It is demonstrated that the increase 
in membrane tension caused by the adsorption of NPs is responsible for 
mechanical deformation, leading to cell rupture and death. A biophysical model 
of the NP–membrane interactions is presented which suggests that adsorbed 
NPs cause membrane stretching and squeezing. This general pheno­menon 
is demonstrated experimentally using both model membranes and Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus, representing Gram-positive 
and Gram-negative bacteria. Hydrophilic and hydrophobic quasi-spherical and 
star-shaped gold (Au)NPs are synthesized to explore the antibacterial mecha-
nism of non-translocating AuNPs. Direct observation of nanoparticle-induced 
membrane tension and squeezing is demonstrated using a custom-designed 
microfluidic device, which relieves contraction of the model membrane surface 
area and eventual lipid bilayer collapse. Quasi-spherical nanoparticles exhibit 
a greater bactericidal action due to a higher interactive affinity, resulting in 
greater membrane stretching and rupturing, corroborating the theoretical 
model. Electron microscopy techniques are used to characterize the NP–bacte-
rial-membrane interactions. This combination of experimental and theoretical 
results confirm the proposed mechanism of membrane-tension-induced 
(mechanical) killing of bacterial cells by non-translocating NPs.
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202005679.
Dr. D. P. Linklater, Prof. G. Bryant, Prof. R. J. Crawford, Prof. E. P. Ivanova
School of Science
RMIT University
P.O. Box 2476, Melbourne, Victoria 3001, Australia
E-mail: elena.ivanova@rmit.edu.au
Dr. D. P. Linklater, Prof. S. Juodkazis
Opical Sciences Centre
Swinburne University of Technology
Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia
Dr. V. A. Baulin
Department d’Enginyeria Quimica
Universitat Rovira i Virgili
26 Av. dels Paisos Catalans, Tarragona 43007, Spain
Dr. X. L. Guével
Insitute for Advanced Biosciences
University Grenoble-Alpes
Allee des Alpes, La Tronche 38700, France
Dr. J.-B. Fleury
Experimental Physics and Center for Biophysics
Saarland University
Saarbrücken 66123, Germany
E. Hanssen
Ian Holmes Imaging Centre
Bio21 Institute
University of Melbourne
30 Flemington Rd, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
Dr. T. H. P. Nguyen
Faculty of Applied Sciences
Ton Duc Thang University
Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam
Prof. P. Stoodley
Infectious Diseases Institute
The Ohio State University
716 Biomedical Research Tower, 460 West 12th Avenue, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Prof. P. Stoodley
National Centre for Advanced Tribology at Southampton (nCATS)
National Biofilm Innovation Centre (NBIC)
Mechanical Engineering
University of Southampton
Southampton SO17 1Bj, UK
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (2 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
been linked to the formation of large irreversible pores during 
their translocation across the bacterial cell membrane.[10–12] At 
the same time, there has been an increasing number of com-
munications that have reported the killing of bacteria with NPs 
in the range of 80–100 nm that are unable to freely translocate 
across the bacterial cell membrane.[13–17] The mechanism of 
antibacterial activity of this size NP has yet to be clearly identi-
fied, since the variability in parameters such as concentration, 
dimensions, physical and chemical properties, as used in dif-
ferent studies, have not produced consistent results.[2,18]
The mechano-bactericidal activity of nanomaterials is a new 
area of research, which promises to combat bacterial adhesion, 
biofilm formation, and infections with comparable effective-
ness to traditional antibacterial methods.[19–21] The emergence 
of antibiotic resistance in pathogenic bacteria over the past 
few decades has posed a severe risk to public health.[22,23] Like-
wise, the decrease in the development of new antibiotics, for 
which bacteria have not yet developed a resistance, calls for the 
development of innovative techniques to combat multi-drug 
resistance. This new route of designing antibacterial nano-
materials exploits nanostructure geometry to deliver deadly 
mechanical forces to bacterial cells. The mechano-bactericidal 
antimicrobial effect was first exhibited in nature, as a topo-
graphical characteristic of insect wings.[21,24,25] The pioneering 
research in this area has mostly focused on the synthesis of 
biomimetic nanopillars and nanospikes on surfaces to create 
mechano-bactericidal topographies.[26–28] Nanostructures at the 
surfaces of bactericidal patterns can rupture bacterial cell walls 
by stretching the membrane that is adsorbed on the pattern.[1] 
This mechanism also works for gold-coated natural bactericidal 
surfaces,[2] showing that it is geometrical parameters of nano-
structures that are key factors for this mechanism, not specific 
interactions or chemical components that are usually attrib-
uted to be responsible for the nanotoxicity of nanomaterials. 
The rupture of cell membranes under mechanical stress is an 
integral component of the toxicity of nanomaterials. However, 
the fundamental mechanisms by which NPs might induce 
mechanical rupture of biological membranes have not yet been 
determined.
In this study, we provide evidence of the (mechano-)bacte-
ricidal mechanism of non-translocating NPs. The develop-
ment of a biophysical model shows that the adhesion of large, 
chemically inert NPs leads to increased tension and consequent 
rupture of the bacterial cell membrane, Figure  1B. This pro-
posed mechanism was studied in two independent systems: a 
model membrane in a custom-designed microfluidic platform, 
and in vitro bacterial cell experiments. (Cryo)-transmission 
and scanning electron microscopy were employed to visualize 
the impact of spherical and star-shaped NPs of approximately 
100 nm in diameter on the viability of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
ATCC 9721 and Staphylococcus aureus CIP 65.8T bacterial cells. 
The contraction (squeezing) of the lipid bilayer by adsorbed 
AuNPs of varying surface hydrophobicity and shape and 
eventual rupture was demonstrated in both systems.
We present a biophysical model of the adhesion of large 
nanoparticles to a lipid bilayer to evaluate the effects of clus-
ters of different size versus individual NPs on the stretching of 
the elastic layer, and determine the effects of NP aggregation 
(clustering) on global membrane stretching. Within this model, 
the membrane is described as an infinite elastic layer character-
ized by elastic modulus k. The adsorption of NPs to the elastic 
layer is described by the interaction parameter, ε per adsorp-
tion site, while the density of adsorption sites n0 is assumed to 
be constant on the surface of NPs. It turns out that these para­
meters can be absorbed in a dimensionless control parameter 
0
ζ
ε
= −n
k
 that describes the interaction with a surface of a NP. 
Within this model ζ describes the interplay between attractive 
forces and elastic deformation of the membrane bilayer that 
leads to an equilibrium stretching of the elastic layer and partial 
wrapping of the spherical NPs by the elastic layer, that is, mem-
brane stretching–compression.
The interaction of non-interacting individual NPs with an 
elastic layer is considered in the approach similar to the con-
struction of Wigner–Seitz cells as a result of Voronoi decom-
position of the surface with individual NPs in the center of 
the cell. In average, an area that corresponds to an adsorbed 
NP is determined by the average density of adsorbed NPs at 
the membrane (Figure  2). Then the area that corresponds to 
each NP is divided in two regions for the sake of simplicity: A 
Figure 1.  Two separate mechanisms of NP–membrane interactions. 
A) Small NPs or clusters of NPs, with overall diameter less than the 
thickness of the phospholipid bilayer (<10 nm), are either trapped inside 
the bilayer or form a pore, enabling translocation.[34] B) Large NPs, with 
diameter greater than the thickness of the cell membrane (>10 nm) are 
wrapped by the membrane, regardless of surface chemistry.[6] The adhe-
sion of large NPs to the lipid membrane leads to cell deformation and/or 
crumpling as the elasticity of the membrane comes into play. The degree 
of membrane deformation depends on the balance between the ener-
getic gain attributed to maximization of the contact area between the 
lipid membrane and the NP and the free energy cost of the membrane 
deformation.[77]
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (3 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
is the region of cell membrane interacting with the surface of 
the NP and B is the region of the cell membrane between each 
adsorbed NP (Figure 2A). Local stretching–compression of the 
elastic layer is determined by the balance between two energies: 
the attraction energy to the surface of the NPs, characterized by 
the energy gain
F
n r
A∫ε
σ
( )
=
d
gain

(1)
and energy loss due to stretching of the area between NPs and 
compression on the surface of the NP,
F
k
r n r
n
∫
α
σ
( ) ( )
=
+ 2
d
loss
2
0
A B

(2)
Here n(r) is the density of attraction points at the surface 
in the position r and dσ is the element of the surface of the 
NP, α(r) is the local stretching at the point r. The resulting free 
energy after minimization with the constraint that the projec-
tion of unperturbed and stretched areas on the surface plane 
remains constant, yields
F
n S
k
S
S
k
S
S
Si
i
ε
α
α
α
α
α
λ
α
α
α
=
+
+
+
+
+



+
+
+
+
−
+




1
2 1
1
1
1
1
0
A
A
A
2
A
A
B
2
B
B
A
A
B
B
(3)
where index i indicates the initial values of area S and stretching 
α. Here λ is the Lagrange multiplier, which ensures the conser-
vation of the area to the initial area S0
r
S
∫
σ
α ( )
+
=
+
d
1
0
A B

(4)
The above equations allow for calculation of the stretching 
and compressions of two regions, A and B, considering that the 
stretching is uniform throughout the whole region, which is a 
reasonable approximation for an elastic layer.
The tension of the membrane Σ is related to the relative 
stretching of the non-adsorbed part of the membrane αB  ≈ 
(S − S0)/S0 as
0
0
Σ =
−
k S
S
S

(5)
where S is the actual area of the membrane under tension and 
S0 is the area of a unstressed membrane. Since the lipid bilayer 
area compressibility modulus is known, k = 100 mN m−1, the 
tension of the membrane and the relative area change are 
directly related.
Non-aggregating individual NPs interact with the bilayer 
independently, thus providing an additive effect on stretching 
and scaling linearly with the number of adsorbed nanoparti-
cles. Therefore, to compare the stretching of NPs of different 
sizes it is practical to fix the surface fraction of NPs at the mem-
brane, thus comparing equal area fractions of NPs at the sur-
face. As a reference, we choose the density close to saturation 
of 100 nm NPs, when the distance between each NP is equal to 
the NP diameters and use this corresponding fraction for NPs 
of other diameters. Stretching of the membrane as a function 
of NPs diameters is shown in Figure 2 for different dimension-
less parameters ζ describing the attraction to the bilayer and 
initial stretching αi.
To evaluate the effect of clustering on the application of 
forces to the membrane, we assume that the AuNPs are 
grouped in clusters of spherical shape and C(N) is the distribu-
tion function of clusters containing N NPs.
For equilibrium distribution of clusters, the free energy of 
clusters is given by the mean field expression
F
kT
C N
C N
N
N
N
∑
ε
[
]
(
)
(
)
=
−+
=
∞
ln
1
1

(6)
where εN is the energy in terms of kBT of the cluster containing 
N NPs, kB is Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. For 
spherical clusters it is given by: 
0
1
3
N
N
ε
ε
δ
=
+
∞
.5 Here 
0
ε∞ is the 
bulk energy and δ is the cohesive energy per NP. Minimization 
of the free energy with respect to C(N) leads to the equilibrium 
cluster distribution
C N
C
e
N
(
)
( )
≈

δ
1

(7)
with the average size of the cluster 
,
N
e
σ
≈
δ  which depends 
on the surface density of NPs at the membrane σ. For spherical 
aggregates, the distribution C(N) is sharply peaked around the 
average size. Thus, in the following, we will consider a mono-
disperse distribution of clusters around the average size where, 
N is the average size of the cluster. Thus, assuming dense 
packing of NPs in the clusters, the radius of a spherical cluster 
is given by 
1
3
R
rN
=
, where r is the radius of an individual nano-
particle. With this, the surface density of the clusters φ of equal 
size is related to the surface density of the nanoparticles σ, 
adsorbed at the surface as
R
r
φ
σ
=




−3

(8)
In the case of individual NPs, φ  =  σ, but if the NPs are 
aggregated in large clusters, the surface density of clusters is 
significantly lower than surface density of individual NPs. 
However, the stretching of the membrane by large clusters is 
larger than that imposed by the individual NPs.
The model of interaction of clusters with the elastic layer has 
the following parameters: the elastic layer is described by the 
elastic modulus k, and the clusters are described by the diam-
eter, D  =  2R, the attractive interaction to the surface, ε, and the 
surface density of clusters, ϕ. For a fixed interaction parameter 
ε, layer stretching as a function of the surface density of clus-
ters and cluster diameter is shown in Figure 2D.
We assume that individual NPs and clusters do not interact 
at the surface and are distributed equally in repetitive arrange-
ment (pure translation) in unit cells. This approximation allows 
us to study a single cluster of variable size in a square box with 
periodic boundary conditions (Figure 2). The area of the box L2 
is then translated in the density of clusters, 
1
2L
φ ≈
. Although 
this approximation neglects cooperative effects and interac-
tions between nanoparticles and clusters, this is a good first 
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (4 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Figure 2.  Global stretching of a lipid bilayer by individual and clustered NPs. A) Schematic representation of a layer adsorbed to NPs of diameter, D, and 
two membrane regions: adsorbed, A, and suspended, B. Individual NPs are arranged in repetitive cell units. The average surface density of adsorbed 
NPs corresponds to a distance between NPs, which determines the area of the layer per NP. The same number of NPs grouped in a cluster of nine 
NPs for the same surface density of NPs, σ. NPs may group in clusters to reduce tension. B) Membrane stretching as a function of NPs diameters for 
a fixed surface density of NPs at the membrane, σ  = 10−4  nm−2 (i.e., the distance between centers that corresponds to full packing for 100 nm NPs) for 
tensionless membrane and for a membrane under tension. C) Membrane stretching as a function of cluster diameter for fixed surface density of NPs. 
D) Cumulative membrane stretching αB as a function of the cluster diameter and surface density of clusters φ. E) Cumulative membrane stretching as 
a function of the cluster diameter and surface density of NPs.
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (5 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
approximation for comparison of effects of clustering on the 
local and global stretching of the lipid bilayer.
As expected, membrane stretching is increased with increased 
cluster diameter and the density of clusters, which corresponds 
to a higher concentration of NP. In turn, higher interaction 
parameters lead to greater membrane stretching. However, it 
is more interesting to represent these results as a function of 
a surface density of the nanoparticles composing the cluster, σ 
as seen in Figure 2C. These plots indicate that if the number of 
NPs attached to the surface is fixed, the cumulative stretching is 
higher for dispersed individual NPs (maximum at smaller cluster 
diameters) than for NPs aggregated in clusters (Figure S2, Sup-
porting Information). Nevertheless, the stretching exerted by one 
large cluster increases with the size of the cluster (Figure  2D, 
φ  =  0) and one large cluster alone can rupture the 
membrane.[29]
Nonspecific attractive forces that promote nanomaterial–
membrane interactions are mediated by inherent nanomate-
rial characteristics such as surface charge, hydrophobicity, and 
roughness. Hydrophobic NPs tend to agglomerate and are 
therefore less likely to undergo membrane interactions. How-
ever, for more hydrophilic nanomaterials, surface membrane 
interactions may be determined by their relative hydrophilici-
ties. Membrane interactions can also be affected by nanoscale 
surface roughness. NP surface protrusions or depressions have 
been shown to influence affinity for the cell membrane. Sim-
ulations of NP–membrane interactions show that NP surface 
roughness greatly minimizes repulsive interactions, thereby 
promoting adhesion.[30,31]
In the present work, hydrophilic and hydrophobic 100  nm 
quasi-spherical (AuNSPs) and star (AuNSTs) shape AuNPs 
were synthesized to explore the antibacterial mechanism of 
non-translocating AuNPs as a function of size, shape, and sur-
face charge.[5,32] The surface charge and chemical properties of 
the NPs were determined by capping agents which play a cru-
cial role in controlling the interactions between bacteria and the 
NPs (Figure 3). Hydrophilic AuNPs were coated with mercap-
tohexanoic acid (MHA) while hydrophobic AuNPs were stabi-
lized with a modified sulfobetaine ligand (ZwBuEt).[33]
To visualize the adsorption of quasi-spherical and nanostar 
AuNPs onto a model lipid membrane, a novel 3D μchip was 
developed (Figure S3, Supporting Information), in which a 
lipid bilayer was formed through the sandwiching of lipid in 
oil phase (DOPC:DOPS+squalene) between two water phases. 
The bilayer is stable at least for 2 h. The lipid bilayer formed 
(final diameter 200 ± 10 µm) upon drainage of the oil phase at 
the intersection of the upper well and the bottom channel and 
can be viewed optically. AuNPs were introduced into the μchip 
upper well and attachment to the bilayer was visually recorded 
over a period of 30 min by dark field microscopy.
The AuNSP and AuNST functionalized with MHA or 
ZwBuET were studied independently. In Figure  4, the lipid 
bilayer annulus is clearly visible, and its shape could be approx-
imated to a free-standing quasi-2D circle with radius, r, and 
area A = πr². As seen in Figure 4A,B, the bilayer area dimin-
ished with time due to the presence of the AuNSP that were 
adhering permanently to the entire surface of the lipid bilayer 
(for MHA and ZwBuET ligand). By contrast, AuNST were found 
to adhere permanently only at the lipid bilayer annulus (just at 
the lipid-oil/water interface), and they did not strongly adhere 
to the lipid membrane (see Figure S4, Supporting Information). 
AuNST were unable to place the same amount of tension on 
the lipid membrane with time (for AuNST with either MHA or 
ZwBuET ligands) to cause a contraction of the bilayer area. The 
spontaneous bilayer contraction by AuNSP adsorption was also 
investigated for smaller AuNSPs with effective diameters of 
20 and 50 nm (Figures S5, Supporting Information). Thus, the 
phenomena of the NP-induced contraction of the free-standing 
lipid bilayer exists for a large of NP size range.
As seen in Figure 4C,D, by plotting the bilayer radius as a 
function of time, we calculated that the bilayer radius dimin-
ished at a rate of 1.4  µm s−1 for both AuNSP-ZwBuEt and 
AuNSP-MHA (at the concentration of 100 µg Au mL−1), which 
corresponded to a reduction of approximately 0.7% (of the 
bilayer total radius) per second. Under our experimental setup, 
on average, both NPs appeared to consistently shrink the bilayer 
at a similar rate with the bursting time between 100 and 200 s 
when the bilayer radius reached ≈75  µm. The estimated ten-
sion (ΔT) force was in the order of approximately 0.1–1 mN m−1  
(see section Results, Supporting Information).
To quantify the stretching and disruption of the membrane 
because of quasi-spherical NP attachment, the model mem-
brane was supported in a custom-designed microfluidic set-up 
(Figure  4A); the formation of the DOPC:DOPS lipid bilayer 
was confirmed by electrophysiological measurements, which 
give the capacitance of the bilayer. Capacitance values could be 
normalized according to the bilayer area. To express the results 
in specific capacitance Cs values, with Cs = 5.9 mF m−2 for the 
DOPC: DOPS (9:1) bilayer. Using the electrical replacement 
circuit of a plate capacitor, the DOPC layer thickness could be 
calculated as d  ≈  ε0εL/Cs  ≈  3.3 nm, with vacuum permittivity 
ε0  ≈  8.85  ×  10−12 F m−1 and  εL ≈  εoil  ≈  2.2.[33,34] Thus, the 
specific capacitance of the pure bilayer should decrease if 
AuNPs were either fully or partially inserted into the mem-
brane.[33] From the values of the surface tension and the bilayer 
contact angle θ, which were obtained from pendant drop meas-
urements or optical microscopy images (Figure 5), respectively, 
the bilayer tension could be calculated using Young’s equation 
(see Experimental Section).
As can be seen in Figure 5B, there is a significant increase 
in the as-measured bilayer tension between experiments with 
no NPs and with AuNSPs. AuNSP-MHA achieved the largest 
increase in membrane tension. When the experiment was con-
ducted over a range of concentrations (50–200  µg Au mL−1) 
there was a linear increase in the measured bilayer tension 
(Figure S6, Supporting Information). Similarly, when analyzing 
the capacitance measurements, there is a general decline in 
membrane bilayer capacitance when AuNSP functionalized 
with ZwBuEt and then MHA is introduced to the system. This 
corresponds to attachment, or partial insertion of the NP into 
the model bilayer.[35] Furthermore, to confirm physical contact 
with the membrane by AuNSP-MHA/ZwBuEt, a fluorescent 
lipid bilayer composed of 3% DOPC-Rho and 5 mg mL−1 DOPS 
extract, was monitored using a fluorescence microscope. The 
bilayer appeared bent for mechanical stability (Figure 5A). The 
AuNSP functionalized with MHA appeared to be fluorescent 
for 30  min following interaction with the lipid bilayer (these 
interactions were recorded, Movie S1, Supporting Information), 
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (6 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
thus indicating that the AuNSPs were adsorbed to the cell 
membrane.
Synthetic lipid bilayers are a convenient model system for 
NP–membrane interactions that enable detailed physical insight 
to be obtained thanks to their relative structural simplicity and 
well-characterized properties; however, real biological mem-
branes are far more complex in structure. In this section we 
describe the interaction of large NPs with bacterial cells and 
demonstrate the stretching effect on bacterial cell membranes.
To assess the antimicrobial activity of the two types of AuNPs 
studied in the model system, the following parameters/factors 
were considered and investigated: i) the influence of surface 
hydrophobicity, ii) the impact of the concentration of the NPs 
(25, 50, 100, and 200 µg Au mL−1), iii) kinetics of bactericidal 
activity over time, and iv) the effect of shape (quasi-spherical 
or star).
Analysis of the bactericidal activity (Figure  6) indicated 
that quasi-spherical AuNPs with increased hydrophobicity 
showed less antimicrobial efficiency toward both gram-
negative P. aeruginosa and gram-positive S. aureus. Indeed, no 
significant reductions in viable bacteria were noted for P. aerug-
inosa when (Figure 6A). By contrast, hydrophilic AuNSP-MHA 
achieved complete inactivation of both bacterial species after a 
30 min incubation period at concentrations ≥100 µg Au mL−1 
(Figure  6A,B); significant reductions (p  <  0.02) in CFU mL−1 
were observed at concentrations ≥10  µg Au mL−1 (Figure S7, 
Supporting Information). The differences in antibacterial 
activity may be attributed to the variable affinities (due to 
altered hydrophobicity) of the AuNPs toward bacterial cells. 
Bidentate zwitterionic (hydrophobic) ligands exhibit excel-
lent colloidal stability under conditions of high concentration, 
however, when the functionalized NPs are serially diluted, an 
Figure 3.  Characterization of AuNSTs and AuNSPs. A) Schematic depiction of gold surfaces coated with zwitterionic ligands MHA and ZwBuEt. 
B) DLS measurements of the different AuNPs in water (pH 7). C) TEM images of AuNSPs and AuNSTs. AuNSTs show stars of uniform conforma-
tion with average diameter of 103.9 ± 11.9 nm, an average of 12 ± 2 nm spikes and spike length of 18.2 ± 3.7 nm. AuNSPs are uniformly 100 ± 20 nm.
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (7 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Figure 4.  Optical microscopy visualization of the forces placed on the phospholipid membrane. A) Time series of the bilayer contraction due to the 
presence of 100 µg Au mL−1 of 100 nm AuNSP-MHA in contact with the bilayer (bilayer diameter is ≈1 mm). An AuNSP agglomerate is visible in 
the last image (t = 183 s), indicated by the black arrow. The scale bar is 500 µm and the magnification is ×5. At this magnification single NPs are not 
visible under dark-field microscopy. B)Time-lapse series of microscopy images of the lipid bilayer interacting with the AuNSPs over 6 min observed from 
top view with dark-field microscopy, magnification ×50 in the presence of 100 µg Au mL−1 of AuNSP-MHA. C) The measured radius as function of time 
for five separate lipid bilayers in contact with 100 µg Au mL−1 AuNSP-MHA and D) the measured radius as function of time for a lipid bilayer in contact 
with 100 µg Au mL−1. AuNSP-ZwBuEt. Measurements were recorded when the bilayer radius was approximately 200 µm. At this high concentration, 
the bilayer bursts due to interaction with the AuNPs when the radius of the bilayer has been reduced to approximately 75 µm (sharp drop of bilayer 
radii to 0 correlated to bursting, indicated by the cyan arrow). The bursting effect of the phospholipid membrane is consistently observed between 
100 and 200 s as confirmed using the two different types of the NPs. The movie showing the squeezing and bursting of the lipid bilayer can be found 
as Movie S2, Supporting Information.
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (8 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
increase in non-specific adsorption and aggregation has previ-
ously been noted.[36] The zwitterionic coating may also impart 
novel antibiofouling properties to the nanomaterials and func-
tionalized NPs would not exhibit non-specific adhesion to living 
cells.[37] In this work, under physiological conditions, MHA-NPs 
(hydrophilic) showed higher stability and less aggregation than 
ZwBuEt-NPs (hydrophobic) (Figure S1, Supporting Informa-
tion). The antibacterial efficacy of the AuNPs used in this study 
was also confirmed via fluorescence microscopy (Figure 6E).
In accordance with the model membrane experiments 
above, Au nanostars exhibited considerably less antibacterial 
efficacy toward both P. aeruginosa and S. aureus compared to 
that of the quasi-spherical NPs and the antimicrobial activity 
was not greatly affected by surface chemical functionalization. 
Matching data for the antibacterial effects of AuNSTs are shown 
in Figure S8, Supporting Information.
To visualize the AuNP-induced disruption of bacterial cells by 
AuNSPs and AuNSTs on both P. aeruginosa and S. aureus, elec-
tron microscopy was used to examine the morphology of the 
bacterial cells (Figure 7). Bacterial cells that were treated for 2 h 
with AuNPs showed severe morphological changes. Analysis of 
the SEM and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images 
revealed the attachment of NPs onto P. aeruginosa and S. aureus 
cell membranes, and in some cases, complete encapsulation of 
bacterial cells leading to the destruction of the original cell mor-
phology (Figure 7B,C,D). NPs were observed to attach directly onto 
the membrane causing stretching (Figure  7A) or indentations 
(Figure 7B) in the membrane or complete cell lysis (Figure 7C′).
AuNSPs (and to a lesser extent AuNSTs) adversely affect 
bacterial cells by inducing high local stress on the bacterial cell 
membrane at the time of the interactions, eventually causing 
lysis of the cell (as seen in Figure 7C′). It was presumed that 
the cell damage was not incurred through “internalization” of 
the nanoparticles due to their large size (approximately 100 nm) 
and no evidence of internalization was observed, in agreement 
with previous studies of AuNP anchorage onto gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacterial membranes.[38] TEM experiments 
(Figure S8, Supporting Information) show that the AuNST 
nanospikes are embedded in the bacterial capsule but do not 
have sufficient length to interact with the bacterial membrane.
Nanoparticle affinity for the bacterial membrane was deter-
mined using Cryo-TEM. The brief incubation period allowed 
for the initial interactions between NPs and bacteria to be 
visualized, as they would appear in liquid/native conditions 
(Figure 7G, Figure S9, Supporting Information). The function-
alization of the NPs greatly affected the behavior of the NPs 
Figure 5.  A) The lipid membrane in a microfluidic device observed by optical microscopy, indicated by the black arrow and the lipid bilayer in contact 
with AuNSP-ZwBuEt and AuNSP-MHA. A distinct difference in the contact angle is visible in the presence of the two AuNP. B) Membrane tension as 
function of the two types of quasi-spherical AuNSP adsorption on the lipid membrane. C) The measured specific capacitance of the bilayer in contact 
with AuNSP-MHA and AuNSP-ZwBuEt. Capacitance measurements, Cs = C/A. A concentration of 100 µg Au mL−1 of AuNSP-MHA and ZwBuEt was 
used to measure the changes in membrane tension of the model membrane. From the electrostatic point of view, this is equivalent to a plane dielectric 
(i.e., the bilayer) in series with a spherical dielectric (AuNP), which is leading to a decrease in the overall capacitance.
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (9 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Figure 6.  A,B) Concentration-dependent antibacterial activity of AuNSP toward P. aeruginosa (A) and S. aureus (B) expressed as the number of colony-
forming units per mL (CFU mL−1). NPs were incubated with bacteria at concentrations of 25, 50, 100, and 200 µg Au mL−1 for 2 h. AuNSP showed 
strong concentration-dependent antimicrobial activity against both bacterial strains. C,D) The kinetics of bactericidal efficiency of the AuNPs over time 
investigated at specific time points of 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2 h. AuNSPs showed a steady increase in their antibacterial efficiency over the course of 2 h. 
AuNSP at concentrations of 50, 100, and 200 µg Au mL−1 achieved complete inactivation of S. aureus at the maximum incubation time. AuNSP-MHA 
achieved 100% inactivation of P. aeruginosa cells at concentrations ≥50 µg Au mL−1. Data are displayed as a % reduction as calculated from the log10CFU. 
E) Representative confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus incubated with AuNSP-MHA and AuNSP-ZwBuEt. 
CLSM scale bar is 5 µm. Bacterial suspensions were incubated for 2 h with 100 µg Au mL−1 AuNPs and subsequently stained with propidium iodide 
(PI) and Syto 9. PI (red) indicates non-viable bacterial cells caused by membrane disruption and Syto 9 (green) indicates viable bacteria.
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (10 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
toward bacteria and toward each other in bacterial suspension. 
For quasi-spherical NPs, the hydrophobic zwitterionic ligand 
(ZwBuEt) did not enhance the particle affinity for bacterial 
membranes, indeed there seemed to be almost no interaction 
between bacteria and AuNSP-ZwBuEt. By contrast, AuNSP-
MHA appeared greatly attracted to the bacteria in suspension 
Figure 7.  Morphology of bacterial cells post-incubation with AuNPs. A–F) SEM and TEM images of the changes in cell morphology of P. aeruginosa and 
S. aureus bacteria incubated with 200 µg mL−1 AuNSPs for a period of 2 h in comparison to healthy cell morphology. The white arrows (SEM images) 
and blue arrows (TEM images) indicate areas of membrane deformation due to AuNP adsorption. Interaction between P. aeruginosa and AuNSPs lead 
to the formation of membrane blebbing (indicated by blue arrow, (A′)) and the complete rupture of the bacterial cell (C′). AuNSPs were observed to 
adsorb onto the S. aureus cell membrane (D,D′) and cause membrane deformation (B) and eventual loss of cellular integrity (B, inset). E) Cryo-TEM 
analysis of the AuNP affinity for and attachment to bacterial membranes. P. aeruginosa was incubated with each NP AuNSP-ZwBuEt and AuNSP-MHA 
in PBS buffer for a brief period (15 min) and then 10 µL aliquots were vitrified and G) visualized using Cryo-TEM at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. 
The red arrows indicate bacterial cells and blue arrows point out single or clustered NPs. The bacteria/NP suspensions are vitrified on a lacy carbon 
grid, which provides the lattice structure in the background. SEM scale bars are 1 µm.
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (11 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
and could be seen encapsulating the cell, as shown in 
Figure 7G. Weak interactions between the phospholipid bilayer 
and AuNSTs were additionally confirmed using cryo-TEM. This 
result is supported by our experimental model demonstrating 
that nanostars exhibit weaker antibacterial activity because of 
reduced contact area with the cell membrane. For AuNSTs, 
those capped with ZwBuEt were observed in large clusters 
while those capped with MHA were distributed across the grid 
with no interaction with bacteria. This directly corresponds 
to the increased rates of antibacterial efficiency observed for 
AuNSP-MHA over AuNSP-ZwBuEt.
It is known that the exposure of NPs to bacterial cells can 
lead to membrane damage caused by NP adsorption. In the 
case of TiO2, CeO2, MgO, and Au-NPs, the interaction with the 
cell wall is the main source of toxicity to bacteria even though 
no cell penetration occurs (Table S3, Supporting Information). 
In such cases, the NPs electrostatically adsorb onto the bacterial 
cell wall and destroy the cell wall due to the NP aggregation 
observed only at the cell surface.[39–42] These studies suggest 
that NP adsorption on the cell wall followed by its disintegra-
tion is the primary reason for toxicity, although no definitive 
mechanisms have been put forward.
The adsorption of large NPs (where the NP diameter is greater 
than the thickness of the membrane) on model lipid bilayers 
has been studied both theoretically and experimentally. This 
includes studies of wrapping of NPs by lipid membranes,[43–46] 
effective interactions at the surfaces and collective behavior of 
adsorbed NPs.[47–49] Electrostatic interactions between the NPs 
and the membrane are found to be the most important factor 
for inducing membrane disruption.[29,50–52] In particular, it was 
shown that large NPs adsorbed on lipid bilayers will always at 
least partially wrap,[6,53] while membrane wrapping may in turn 
lead to eventual collapse of the lipid bilayer.[54] Wrapping and 
membrane tension in the adhesion of NPs are coupled such 
that low tension membranes allow for higher wrapping and 
vice versa.[55] Nevertheless, most membrane wrapping studies 
are focused on NP uptake by mammalian cells whereby mem-
brane wrapping is triggered by many NP–ligand–surface 
receptor interactions for NP engulfment. Less attention has 
been focused on NP–membrane interactions of bacterial cells.
We recently demonstrated a mechanism of tension induced 
permeation of cell membranes by the adhesion of large non-
translocating apatite nanoparticles that provoked nondisruptive 
permeation of red blood cells (that do not undertake endocy-
tosis).[56] In another study the internalization of large silica 
nanoparticles into giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) was con-
firmed to be mediated by the spreading forces of the lipid 
bilayer on the silica surface. The lipid membrane was observed 
to strongly adhere to the NP surface and “creep” along the 
silica surface, causing deformation of the liposome.[57] Similar 
behavior was observed for the adherence of silica particles on 
red blood cells.[58] The haemolytic activity of silica NPs has been 
found to increase with increasing particle size due to preferen-
tial adsorption of the NPs onto the red blood cell membrane, 
causing deformation until rupture.[58,59]
In the work presented here, the antibacterial performance 
of the hydrophilic quasi-spherical AuNPs appears to be medi-
ated by NP–membrane interaction which is driven by the 
attractive force between the NPs and the phospholipid bilayer. 
As the particle size increases, the adhesion energy increases, 
leading to a greater area of contact and overall stretching of 
the membrane. Individually adhered NPs provoke an additive 
stretching effect where the total membrane stretching is the 
sum of individual NP contributions. In the case of NP clusters, 
the stretching effect is cumulative at the attachment points 
but does not exceed the tensions delivered to the membrane 
by single, spatially dispersed NPs. This agrees with a previous 
model of the hemolytic potential of silica NPs.[60] In the case 
of clustering between individual NPs, the elastic response of 
the membrane depends on the size of the clusters and their 
number. In addition, if the clusters are placed close to each 
other, the membrane acts as a medium, affecting the interac-
tions between NPs and even inducing their clustering.[48] The 
developed theoretical model provides insight to explain the 
results for both experiments: NPs induced tension in the model 
lipid bilayer and the in vitro bacterial cell killing mechanism 
showing that low dispersity of NPs achieved greater antibacte-
rial efficiency. Individual NPs were visualized attached to the 
exterior of the cell, encapsulating it and deforming the shape, 
by independent experimental techniques, and in some cases, 
complete cell lysis was observed.
The in vitro model used to mimic the interactions of a phos-
pholipid membrane and NPs demonstrated the delivery of 
tension forces that resulted in cell perturbation by the attach-
ment of NPs onto the membrane. Previous theoretical models 
have predicted that NPs can translocate a tethered DOPC lipid 
bilayer membrane and/or become wrapped in by the mem-
brane, depending on the balance of contact-adhesion energy 
and curvature energies.[61] The minimum nanoparticle size for 
such wrapping effects is estimated to be 30 nm, which repre-
sents a state of transition between free NP and partially lipid 
coated NP.[62] In the work presented here, direct physical inter-
actions between the quasi-spherical NPs (both hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic) and the phospholipid membrane resulted in an 
increase in membrane tension and decrease in capacitance of 
the synthetic lipid bilayer that correlated to partial insertion 
of the NPs into the lipid bilayer. Using fluorescently tagged 
DOPC, AuNPs were confirmed to contact the lipid bilayer 
(verified by consequent fluorescence of the NPs through 
removal of phospholipids from the bilayer); however, no trans-
port across the bilayer was observed, yet the bilayer appeared 
“bent” for mechanical stability. Hydrophilic NPs delivered the 
greatest forces to the lipid bilayer upon membrane adsorption, 
achieving the greatest resultant membrane tension measure-
ments. Hydrophilic quasi-spherical NPs also elicited the largest 
antibacterial response amongst both shaped particles achieving 
100% bacterial cell death at a concentration of 100 µg Au mL−1. 
Nevertheless, at high concentrations (100 µg Au mL−1) of both 
hydrophilic and hydrophobic quasi-spherical NPs large num-
bers of attached NPs to the lipid bilayer produced enough force 
to contract the membrane until it collapsed. This is analogous 
to the squeezing of a balloon until it bursts.
It was assumed that a greater hydrophobicity of the particle 
would results in greater affinity for bacterial membranes.[38] 
Chemical modification by bidentate sulfobetaine zwitterionic 
molecules led to an increase in hydrophobicity;[63] however, 
NP–membrane interactions were offset by the NP tendency 
to aggregate into clusters.[64] Herein, the NPs that exhibited 
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (12 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
low dispersity, such as hydrophilic quasi-spherical NPs, also 
demonstrated the greatest antimicrobial effects whereas 
hydrophobic quasi-spherical NPs did not achieve statistically 
significant reductions in viable cells. Thus, the affinity of the 
NP toward bacterial cells played an important role in facili-
tating bacterial cell inactivation. It was further hypothesized 
that the introduction of spikes to the nanomaterial surface 
would result in greater cell membrane perturbation. We have 
demonstrated previously that nanostructuring of surfaces to 
exhibit an array of high aspect ratio nanoprotrusions, similar to 
the surface topography of insect wings, can mechanically lyse 
contacting bacterial cells.[65] Bacterial cell death is mediated by 
the membrane adsorption to the nanopillars, which leads to 
wide-spread stretching of the adsorbed membrane[24] (similar to 
the findings for global stretching of bacterial cell membranes 
by colloidal nanomaterials presented in this study) by which 
the mechanism is independent of surface chemical function-
ality. For example, silicon nanopillar surfaces (black silicon) 
were the first synthetic surfaces demonstrated to mechanically 
kill attaching bacterial cells.[19] More recently, nanostructured 
surfaces of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes,[20] graphene 
nanoflakes,[66] adsorbed NPs,[67,68] TiO2 nanowires,[28] and 
more have been demonstrated to kill bacteria by nanomaterial-
induced rupture. However, in this work the surface spikes did 
not enhance the killing effects of the AuNPs, in fact star-shaped 
AuNPs displayed only very modest antibacterial performance. It 
is assumed that the introduction of surface spikes actually led 
to a reduction in the available contact area of the NP surface, 
as confirmed by model membrane experiments where AuNSTs 
exhibited a reduced ability to adsorb to the lipid bilayer and 
were not observed to exert the same forces delivered by quasi-
spherical NPs.
The mechanism of mechanical killing of bacterial cells by 
non-translocated NPs was elucidated using a combination of 
complementary experimental and theoretical studies. A bio-
physical model was developed to explain the induced stretching 
of a membrane by large NPs with diameters much larger than 
the thickness of the membrane. Interactions between indi-
vidual NPs and the elastic bacterial membrane induces an 
increase in membrane tension due to adsorption of the NPs 
to the membrane.[44,45,69] The importance of membrane ten-
sion for biological membranes is not always considered for 
fluid membranes, while tension can be even more important 
for elastic membranes such as bacterial cell walls due to their 
lack of cytoskeleton to compensate for external mechanical 
forces. Attractive forces acting between each NP and the mem-
brane tend to increase the area of contact,[55] thus provoking 
the overall stretching of the membrane. Spatially distributed 
individual NPs provoke an additive effect, when the overall 
stretching is the sum of individual NP contributions, while 
clustered NPs created cumulative stretching at the attach-
ment points. The cumulative effect of clustered particles may 
be locally stronger than the tensions delivered by a single NP; 
however, the combined forces administered by separated indi-
vidual NPs encapsulating a cell would still be greater. Although 
the nature of the membranes used in both experiments are very 
different: the DOPC:DOPS lipid bilayer is a fluid membrane, 
whereas the bacterial cell wall is an elastic layer, both experi-
ments confirmed that chemically inert AuNPs can rupture 
model lipid bilayer and kill bacteria via adsorption onto the cell 
membrane and increase of membrane tension. Such an elastic 
model is not limited by the type of NPs and the origin of the 
elastic layer. The universality of the model suggests that the 
described phenomenon of the stretching of the membranes 
by adsorbing NPs can go beyond the studied NPs and bacteria 
and it can be applied as a universal mechanism of mechanical 
stretching and rupture of cells, vesicles, droplets, and other 
soft objects with NPs. The demonstration of this stretching 
mechanism in both model and real bacterial system suggests 
its generality and applicability to a wide range of biological 
membranes. The results of this work may provide new guide-
lines for the synthesis of universal antibacterial colloids.
Experimental Section
Design and Fabrication of Microfluidic Device: Microchannels with a 
rectangular cross section were fabricated using typical soft lithography 
protocols.[70] Channel dimensions were 300 µm in width and 140 µm in 
height. The device was molded with an SU-8 photoresist on a silicon 
wafer using Sylgard 184 (Dow Corning, USA). The surface of the Sylgard 
184 devices was exposed to nitrogen plasma (Diener electronic GmbH, 
Germany) and sealed with a plasma treated glass cover slide. The sealed 
device was rendered hydrophobic by heating it to 135  °C overnight. 
The liquids were dispensed from syringes (Hamilton Bonaduz AG, 
Switzerland), which were connected to the microfluidic device by Teflon 
tubing. Computer-controlled syringe pumps were used to control the 
injection of the water and oil phases, respectively (Figure S9, Supporting 
Information). DOPC (1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) and 
DOPS (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine) were purchased from 
Avanti Polar Lipids. Experiments were performed at room temperature 
to have the lipids in a fluid phase. Using a volume-controlled system 
with syringe pumps, two water droplets were injected face to face 
into microchannels to produce a free-standing lipid bilayer. After a 
few seconds, the water−oil interface of each finger was covered with a 
monolayer of lipids molecules. Once the two liquid fingers were brought 
into contact, the two lipid monolayers interacted to form a lipid bilayer 
within a short time.[34,71,72] The system was then stable and could be 
analyzed, simultaneously, using optical microscopy (axiovert Z1, Zeiss) 
and by electrophysiological inspection. The 3D-microfluidic device 
was produced based on the principle detailed in ref. [73]. Dark-field 
measurements were recorded on a Leica DM2700 microscope.
Measurement of Bilayer Tension: The surface tensions of the various 
lipid monolayers at oil/water interfaces were measured with the pendant 
drop method using a commercial measurement device (OCA 20, 
DataPhysics Instruments GmbH, Filderstadt, Germany). An oil solution 
with a concentration of 5  mg mL−1 lipids concentration (90% DOPC, 
10% DOPS) was produced by introducing a droplet from a steel needle 
into the surrounding oil phase. The shapes of all droplets were fitted 
with the Young−Laplace equation to obtain their interfacial tension γ. 
The experiments were then re-done in the presence of the two types of 
NPs (ZwBuEt and MHA). From the values of the surface tension and 
the bilayer contact angle θ, which were obtained from pendant drop 
measurements or optical microscopy images (see Figure 6), respectively, 
the bilayer tension can be calculated using Young’s equation.[74]
γ
θ
Γ = 2
cos

(9)
Capacitance Measurements: Ag/AgCl electrodes were prepared by 
inserting an electrode in a borosilicate glass pipet (outer diameter 
1.5  mm, inner diameter 0.86  mm, Sutter) containing an electrolyte 
agarose solution (Sigma). The electrodes were carefully introduced 
into the buffer compartment of the Sylgard 184 device using a 
micromanipulator. The lipid membrane conductance was measured 
using the standard function provided by the patch clamp amplifier EPC 
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (13 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
10 USB (HekaElectronics). A 10 mV sinusoidal wave with a frequency of 
20 kHz was used as an excitation signal.
Characterization of AuNSP and AuNST: Spectrophotometry: UV–vis 
absorption spectra of the AuNSP and AuNSTs sols were collected using 
a UV-1800 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu). The spectra were collected in 
transmission mode.
Dynamic Light Scattering: Hydrodynamic size measurements of the 
different AuNPs were performed in water using a zetasizer (Malvern 
Instruments).
Bacterial Cell Growth Conditions: P. aeruginosa ATCC 9721 and S. 
aureus CIP 65.8T bacterial strains were obtained from American Type 
Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA) and Culture Institute Pasteur 
(Paris, France), respectively. Prior to each experiment, bacterial cultures 
were refreshed on nutrient agar (Oxoid) from stocks (B.D., USA) at 
37 °C for 24 h. From the stock plate, fresh bacterial suspensions were 
grown overnight at 37 °C in 5 mL of nutrient broth (B.D., USA). Bacterial 
cells were collected at the logarithmic stage of growth (data not shown). 
Bacterial cells were then pelleted using centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 
3 min and resuspended in 10 mm phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.4). 
The density of bacterial suspensions was adjusted to OD600 = 0.1 using 
UV−vis spectrophotometry (Dynamica HALO RB-10) at a wavelength of 
600 nm.
Antibacterial Assay: Standard plate count methods were used to 
estimate the number of viable cells following treatment with AuNPs, 
P. aeruginosa and S. aureus stock solutions were serially diluted in 
phosphate buffered saline (10 mm PBS, pH 7.4) until infectious doses 
were achieved (1000 CFU mL−1 P. aeruginosa[75] and 100 000 CFU mL−1 
S. aureus[76]). The AuNSP and NSTs sols were sonicated for 2  min 
and added to suspensions of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus (500  µL) at 
concentrations of 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, and 200  µg mL−1. Nanoparticle/
bacterial suspensions were then incubated in a rotary shaker at 37  °C 
for up to 2 h at 220 rpm. Bacterial suspensions in PBS, with no added 
nanoparticles, but an equal volume of MilliQ H2O, were used as controls 
for each given concentration. The NP/bacterial suspensions and controls 
were then spread plated on five separate nutrient agar (Oxoid) plates 
and incubated at 37 °C overnight to estimate the number of viable cells.
Statistical Analysis: All plate count experiments were performed in 
replicates of five and repeated a minimum of three times. Data are 
expressed as a mean ± standard deviation of at least five independent 
samples. Statistical comparisons were made between results using a 
two-tailed Student’s t-test where p < 0.05 was considered significant.
Scanning Electron Microscopy: The morphology of synthesized 
AuNPs of various shapes and sizes were analyzed using SEM (Raith, 
GmBH). AuNSPs and NSTs were drop-cast onto plain silicon wafers 
and allowed to air dry under ambient conditions overnight. SEM images 
were obtained using a Raith150 Two direct write EBL instrument (Raith, 
GmBH) with SEM capabilities at 5 kV.
The morphology of bacterial cells incubated with nanoparticles 
was also examined using SEM (Raith, GmBH). The AuNPs/bacterial 
suspensions were incubated for 2 h in a rotary shaker at 37  °C at 
220 rpm and then prepared for SEM by placing a 100  µL aliquot on 
clean silicon wafer, leaving for 1 h for cells to adhere to the substrate, 
then washing once briefly with MilliQ H2O to remove salt and other 
contaminants. Cells were then fixed on the substrate with 2.5% 
glutaraldehyde and the surfaces were then dehydrated with ethanol in 
30%, 50%, 70%, 90%, and 100% concentrations. The substrata were 
kept in 100% ethanol and transferred to a critical point dryer (Polaron 
E3100, Quorum Technologies Ltd.). The samples were immersed 
in liquid CO2 via a series of ethanol/liquid CO2 exchanges, and the 
liquid CO2 was then heated to supercritical temperature and pressure 
(31.1 °C and 1000 psi). The dried samples were then sputtered with gold 
for 2  min using a NeoCoater MP-19020NCTR (JEOL, Frenchs Forest, 
Australia). SEM images were obtained using the Raith150 Two direct 
write EBL instrument (Raith, GmBH) with SEM capabilities at 5 kV at 
magnifications of ×5 k, ×10 k, × 25 k, and ×50 k.
Transmission Electron Microscopy: Suspensions of AuNSP and AuNST 
sols were drop-cast onto TEM grids and viewed at an accelerating 
voltage of 200 kV using a Jeol JEM-1010 machine.
TEM (JEM-1010, JEOL) was used to view cross sections of bacterial 
cells incubated with nanoparticles. Samples were incubated with 
bacteria at concentrations of 200 µg mL−1 in a rotary shaker at 37 °C at 
220 rpm for 2 h. After incubation, cell suspensions were washed twice 
with PBS (10 mm, pH 7.4) using centrifugation at 1300 rpm for 5 min at 
25 °C. The pellets were then suspended in 2 mL of 1% glutaraldehyde 
in PBS for 1 h, and then washed twice in PBS for 5 min. After the final 
washing step, the cell suspensions were mixed thoroughly with 0.5 mL 
of molten 4% agarose gel by stirring. The agar was then immediately 
cooled to 4 °C by refrigeration for 30 min, then cut into 1 mm3 cubes 
and fixed with 1 mL of 1% osmium tetroxide (OsO4) for 1 h. Samples 
containing the cell suspension were washed twice in nanopure H2O 
(with a resistivity of 18.2 MW cm−1) for 20 min each. Samples were then 
dehydrated by passing them through a graded ethanol series (20%, 40%, 
and 60%) (2 mL) for 20 min on ice and then stained for 8 h with 2% 
uranyl acetate in 70% ethanol (2  mL). After staining, the cell blocks 
were further dehydrated by passing the samples through another graded 
ethanol series (80%, 90%, and 100%) for 15 min each (2 mL) on ice.
The embedding medium was prepared using London Resin Gold 
(ProSciTech). To embed the samples, each agar sample containing the 
cell suspension was incubated in 2  mL of 100% ethanol and LR gold 
monomer (1:1 ratio) for 8 h on ice, followed by a transfer to 100% ethanol 
and LR gold monomer (1:3 ratio) for 8 h, then finally a transfer into the 
pure LR gold monomer for 8 h. Each sample was then transferred into 
a gelatin capsule containing fresh LR gold monomer mixed with 1% dry 
benzoyl peroxide, which was then polymerized for 24 h at 4 °C. The final 
blocks were trimmed, then cut into ultrathin sections (50 nm thickness) 
using a Leica EM UC7 Ultramicrotome (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, 
Germany) with a diamond knife (Diatome, Pennsylvania, USA). Sections 
were placed onto 300 mesh copper grids and examined using a JEM 1010 
instrument (JEOL). Approximately 40 TEM images were taken at ×10 000 
and ×20 000 magnifications for each sample analyzed.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or 
from the author.
Acknowledgements
X.L.G. would like to thank Cancéropôle Lyon Auvergne Rhône-Alpes 
(CLARA), Plan Cancer (C18038CS), and ARC (R17157CC) for their 
financial support. Funding from the Australian Research Council (ARC) 
Industrial Transformation Research Hubs Scheme (Project Number 
IH130100017) and ARC Industrial Transformation Training Centre (ITTC) 
scheme (Project number IC180100005) are gratefully acknowledged. 
D.P.L would like to acknowledge the Australian Institute of Nuclear 
Science and Engineering (AINSE) for travel support. J.-B.F. acknowledges 
funding from the SFB1027 (DFG). P.S. acknowledges funding by NIH 
R01GM124436 National Institutes of Health. The authors acknowledge at 
the RMIT University Microscopy & Microanalysis Facility.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords
mechano-bactericidal activity, nanoparticles, nanotoxicity
Received: August 20, 2020
Revised: October 5, 2020
Published online: November 12, 2020
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (14 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
[1]	 P.  Nisar, N.  Ali, L.  Rahman, M.  Ali, Z. K.  Shinwari, JBIC, J. Biol. 
Inorg. Chem. 2019, 24, 929.
[2]	 Y. N. Slavin, J. Asnis, U. O. Häfeli, H. Bach, J. Nanobiotechnol. 2017, 
15, 65.
[3]	 D.  Guarnieri, S.  Sabella, O.  Muscetti, V.  Belli, M. A.  Malvindi, 
S. Fusco, E. D.e Luca, P. P. Pompa, P. A. Netti, Nanoscale 2014, 6, 
10264.
[4]	 M.  Werner, T.  Auth, P. A.  Beales, J. B.  Fleury, F.  Höök, H.  Kress, 
R. C. Van Lehn, M. Müller, E. P. Petrov, L. Sarkisov, J.-U. Sommer, 
V. A. Baulin, Biointerphases 2018, 13, 028501.
[5]	 S. Pogodin, M. Werner, J.-U. Sommer, V. A. Baulin, ACS Nano 2012, 
6, 10555.
[6]	 J. Lin, L. Miao, G. Zhong, C.-H. Lin, R. Dargazangy, A. Alexander-
Katz, Commun. Biol. 2020, 3, 205.
[7]	 S. Burgess, Z. Wang, A. Vishnyakov, A. V. Neimark, J. Colloid Inter-
face Sci. 2020, 561, 58.
[8]	 I. L. Bergin, F. A. Witzmann, Int. J. Biomed. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 
2013, 3, 163.
[9]	 A. Sukhanova, S. Bozrova, P. Sokolov, M. Berestovoy, A. Karaulov, 
I. Nabiev, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2018, 13, 44.
[10]	 E. A.  Ortiz-Benítez, N.  Velázquez-Guadarrama, N. V. D.  Figueroa, 
H. Quezada, J. d. J. Olivares-Trejo, Metallomics 2019, 11, 1265.
[11]	 K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, ACS Nano 2017, 11, 
6904.
[12]	 X. Xing, W. Ma, X. Zhao, J. Wang, L. Yao, X. Jiang, Z. Wu, Langmuir 
2018, 34, 12583.
[13]	 Y. Zhou, Y. Kong, S. Kundu, J. D. Cirillo, H. Liang, J. Nanobiotechnol. 
2012, 10, 19.
[14]	 D.  MubarakAli, N.  Thajuddin, K.  Jeganathan, M.  Gunasekaran, 
Colloids Surf., B 2011, 85, 360.
[15]	 V. D. Badwaik, L. M. Vangala, D. S. Pender, C. B. Willis, Z. P. Aguilar, 
M. S.  Gonzalez, R.  Paripelly, R.  Dakshinamurthy, Nanoscale Res. 
Lett. 2012, 7, 623.
[16]	 C.  Bankier, R. K.  Matharu, Y. K.  Cheong, G. G.  Ren, 
E. Cloutman-Green, L. Ciric, Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 16074.
[17]	 S.  Shaikh, N.  Nazam, S. M. D.  Rizvi, K.  Ahmad, M. H.  Baig, 
E. J. Lee, I. Choi, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 2468.
[18]	 Y.  Zhang, T. P.  Shareena Dasari, H.  Deng, H.  Yu, J. Environ. Sci. 
Health, Part C: Environ. Carcinog. Ecotoxicol. Rev. 2015, 33, 286.
[19]	 E. P. Ivanova, J. Hasan, H. K. Webb, G. Gervinskas, S. Juodkazis, 
V. K. Truong, A. H. Wu, R. N. Lamb, V. A. Baulin, G. S. Watson, Nat. 
Commun. 2013, 4, 2838.
[20]	 D. P.  Linklater, M. D.e  Volder, V. A.  Baulin, M.  Werner, S.  Jessl, 
M.  Golozar, L.  Maggini, S.  Rubanov, E.  Hanssen, S.  Juodkazis, 
E. P. Ivanova, ACS Nano 2018, 12, 6657.
[21]	 E. P.  Ivanova, J.  Hasan, H. K.  Webb, V. K.  Truong, G. S.  Watson, 
J. A.  Watson, V. A.  Baulin, S.  Pogodin, J. Y.  Wang, M. J.  Tobin, 
C. Löbbe, R. J. Crawford, Small 2012, 8, 2489.
[22]	 Y. J. Hu, B. J. Cowling, K. Fukuda, Lancet Infect. Dis. 2018, 18, 597.
[23]	 Y.  Pan, J.  Zeng, L.  Li, J.  Yang, Z.  Tang, W.  Xiong, Y.  Li, S.  Chen, 
Z. Zeng, mSystems 2020, 5, e00821.
[24]	 S.  Pogodin, J.  Hasan, V. A.  Baulin, H. K.  Webb, V. i. K.  Truong, 
T. H. P.  Nguyen, V.  Boshkovikj, C. J.  Fluke, G. S.  Watson, 
J. A.  Watson, R. J.  Crawford, E. P.  Ivanova, Biophys. J. 2013, 104, 
835.
[25]	 D. E.  Mainwaring, S. H.  Nguyen, H.  Webb, T.  Jakubov, M.  Tobin, 
R. N. Lamb, A. H. F. Wu, R. Marchant, R. J. Crawford, E. P. Ivanova, 
Nanoscale 2016, 8, 6527.
[26]	 E. P. Ivanova, J. Hasan, H. K. Webb, G. Gervinskas, S. Juodkazis, 
V. K. Truong, A. H. F. Wu, R. N. Lamb, V. A. Baulin, G. S. Watson, 
J. A. Watson, D. E. Mainwaring, R. J. Crawford, Nat. Commun. 2013, 
4, 359.
[27]	 C. M. Bhadra, M. Werner, V. A. Baulin, V. K. Truong, M. A. Kobaisi, 
S. H. Nguyen, A. Balcytis, S. Juodkazis, J. Y. Wang, D. E. Mainwaring, 
R. J. Crawford, E. P. Ivanova, Nano-Micro Lett. 2018, 10, 36.
[28]	 J. V.  Wandiyanto, S.  Cheeseman, V. K.  Truong, M. A.  Kobaisi, 
C.  Bizet, S.  Juodkazis, H.  Thissen, R. J.  Crawford, E. P.  Ivanova, 
J. Mater. Chem. B 2019, 7, 4424.
[29]	 B. Y.  Moghadam, W.-C.  Hou, C.  Corredor, P.  Westerhoff, 
J. D. Posner, Langmuir 2012, 28, 16318.
[30]	 E. M. V. Hoek, G. K. Agarwal, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2006, 298, 50.
[31]	 J. D.  Olarte-Plata, G.  Brekke-Svaland, F.  Bresme, Nanoscale 2020, 
12, 11165.
[32]	 T.  Lunnoo, J.  Assawakhajornsak, T.  Puangmali, J. Phys. Chem. C 
2019, 123, 3801.
[33]	 E. Porret, L. Sancey, A. Martín-Serrano, M. I. Montañez, R. Seeman, 
A.  Yahia-Ammar, H.  Okuno, F.  Gomez, A.  Ariza, N.  Hildebrandt, 
J.-B. Fleury, J.-L. Coll, X. L.e Guével, Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 7497.
[34]	 Y. Guo, E. Terazzi, R. Seemann, J. B. Fleury, V. A. Baulin, Sci. Adv. 
2016, 2, e1600261.
[35]	 K. L. Chen, G. D. Bothun, Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 48, 873.
[36]	 E. Giovanelli, E. Muro, G. Sitbon, M. Hanafi, T. Pons, B. Dubertret, 
N. Lequeux, Langmuir 2012, 28, 15177.
[37]	 Y.  Li, Y.  Xu, C. C.  Fleischer, J.  Huang, R.  Lin, L.  Yang, H.  Mao, 
J. Mater. Chem. B 2018, 6, 9.
[38]	 W.  Pajerski, D.  Ochonska, M.  Brzychczy-Wloch, P.  Indyka, 
M.  Jarosz, M.  Golda-Cepa, Z.  Sojka, A.  Kotarba, J. Nanopart. Res. 
2019, 21, 186.
[39]	 J. Bresee, C. M. Bond, R. J. Worthington, C. A. Smith, J. C. Gifford, 
C. A. Simpson, C. J. Carter, G. Wang, J. Hartman, N. A. Osbaugh, 
R. K. Shoemaker, C. Melander, D. L. Feldheim, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014, 136, 5295.
[40]	 Y. Zhao, X. Jiang, Nanoscale 2013, 5, 8340.
[41]	 Z. V.  Feng, I. L.  Gunsolus, T. A.  Qiu, K. R.  Hurley, L. H.  Nyberg, 
H. Frew, K. P. Johnson, A. M. Vartanian, L. M. Jacob, S. E. Lohse, 
M. D. Torelli, R. J. Hamers, C. J. Murphy, C. L. Haynes, Chem. Sci. 
2015, 6, 5186.
[42]	 J. T.  Buchman, A.  Rahnamoun, K. M.  Landy, X.  Zhang, 
A. M.  Vartanian, L. M.  Jacob, C. J.  Murphy, R.  Hernandez, 
C. L. Haynes, Environ. Sci.: Nano 2018, 5, 279.
[43]	 A. E.  Nel, L.  Mädler, D.  Velegol, T.  Xia, E. M. V.  Hoek, 
P.  Somasundaran, F.  Klaessig, V.  Castranova, M.  Thompson, Nat. 
Mater. 2009, 8, 543.
[44]	 A. H. Bahrami, M. Raatz, J. Agudo-Canalejo, R. Michel, E. M. Curtis, 
C. K. Hall, M. Gradzielski, R. Lipowsky, T. R. Weikl, Adv. Colloid Inter-
face Sci. 2014, 208, 214.
[45]	 M. Deserno, T. Bickel, Europhys. Lett. 2003, 62, 767.
[46]	 K.  Xiong, J.  Zhao, D.  Yang, Q.  Cheng, J.  Wang, H.  Ji, Soft Matter 
2017, 13, 4644.
[47]	 C. van der Wel, A. Vahid, A. Šarić, T. Idema, D. Heinrich, D. J. Kraft, 
Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 32825.
[48]	 A. Vahid, A. Šarić, T. Idema, Soft Matter 2017, 13, 4924.
[49]	 B. J. Reynwar, G. Illya, V. A. Harmandaris, M. M. Müller, K. Kremer, 
M. Deserno, Nature 2007, 447, 461.
[50]	 W.-C.  Hou, B. Y.  Moghadam, C.  Corredor, P.  Westerhoff, 
J. D. Posner, Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 1869.
[51]	 Y. Bunga, R. Kataky, J. Electroanal. Chem. 2020, 872, 114302.
[52]	 H.  Zhang, X.  Wei, L.  Liu, Q.  Zhang, W.  Jiang, Sci. Total Environ. 
2019, 673, 414.
[53]	 J. K.  Sheavly, J. A.  Pedersen, R. C.  Van Lehn, Nanoscale 2019, 
11, 2767.
[54]	 S. Zhang, A. Nelson, P. A. Beales, Langmuir 2012, 28, 12831.
[55]	 M. Deserno, Phys. Rev. E 2004, 69, 031903.
[56]	 M.  Stefanic, K.  Ward, H.  Tawfik, R.  Seemann, V.  Baulin, Y.  Guo, 
J.-B. Fleury, C. Drouet, Biomaterials 2017, 140, 138.
[57]	 O. L.e  Bihan, P.  Bonnafous, L.  Marak, T.  Bickel, S.  Trépout, 
S.  Mornet, F. D.e  Haas, H.  Talbot, J.-C.  Taveau, O.  Lambert, 
J. Struct. Biol. 2009, 168, 419.
[58]	 A. Dias, M. Werner, K. R. Ward, J.-B. Fleury, V. A. Baulin, Nanoscale 
2019, 11, 2282.
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2005679  (15 of 15)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
[59]	 Y. Zhao, X. Sun, G. Zhang, B. G. Trewyn, I. I. Slowing, V. S. Y. Lin, 
ACS Nano 2011, 5, 1366.
[60]	 L. C. J.  Thomassen, V.  Rabolli, K.  Masschaele, G.  Alberto, 
M.  Tomatis, M.  Ghiazza, F.  Turci, E.  Breynaert, G.  Martra, 
C. E. A. Kirschhock, J. A. Martens, D. Lison, B. Fubini, Chem. Res. 
Toxicol. 2011, 24, 1869.
[61]	 Y.  Liu, R. M.  Worden, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 2015, 
1848, 67.
[62]	 Y.  Roiter, M.  Ornatska, A. R.  Rammohan, J.  Balakrishnan, 
D. R. Heine, S. Minko, Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 941.
[63]	 J. Park, J. Nam, N. Won, H. Jin, S. Jung, S. Jung, S.-H. Cho, S. Kim, 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21, 1558.
[64]	 R. J. Crawford, H. K. Webb, V. K. Truong, J. Hasan, E. P. Ivanova, 
Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2012, 179–182, 142.
[65]	 D. P. Linklater, V. A. Baulin, S. Juodkazis, R. J. Crawford, P. Stoodley, 
E. P.  Ivanova, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41579-020-0414-z.
[66]	 F.  Zou, H.  Zhou, D. Y.  Jeong, J.  Kwon, S. U.  Eom, T. J.  Park, 
S. W. Hong, J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 1343.
[67]	 L. Su, Y. Yu, Y. Zhao, F. Liang, X. Zhang, Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 24420.
[68]	 P. A.  Tran, N.  O’Brien-Simpson, J. A.  Palmer, N.  Bock, 
E. C.  Reynolds, T. J.  Webster, A.  Deva, W. A.  Morrison, 
A. J. O’Connor, Int. J. Nanomed. 2019, 14, 4613.
[69]	 M. Deserno, W. M. Gelbart, J. Phys. Chem. B 2002, 106, 5543.
[70]	 D. J. Lipomi, R. V. Martinez, L. Cademartiri, G. M. Whitesides, in 
Polymer Science: A Comprehensive Reference, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands 2012.
[71]	 H.  Bayley, B.  Cronin, A.  Heron, M. A.  Holden, W. L.  Hwang, 
R. Syeda, J. Thompson, M. Wallace, Mol. BioSyst. 2008, 4, 1191.
[72]	 J. N. Vargas, R. Seemann, J.-B. Fleury, Soft Matter 2014, 10, 9293.
[73]	 P.  Heo, S.  Ramakrishnan, J.  Coleman, J. E.  Rothman, J.-B.  Fleury, 
F. Pincet, Smll 2019, 15, 1900725.
[74]	 D. Needham, K. Kinoshita, A. Utoft, Micromachines 2019, 10, 105.
[75]	 H. C. Leggett, C. K. Cornwallis, S. A. West, PLoS Pathog. 2012, 8, 
e1002512.
[76]	 D. Vidlak, T. Kielian, Infect. Immun. 2016, 84, 1957.
[77]	 M.  Mendozza, L.  Caselli, A.  Salvatore, C.  Montis, D.  Berti, Soft 
Matter 2019, 15, 8951.
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2005679
 15214095, 2020, 52, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202005679 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License