Drug Metabolism Reviews
ISSN: 0360-2532 (Print) 1097-9883 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/idmr20
Eﬀects of intestinal ﬂora on pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics of drugs
Amina Džidić-Krivić, Jasna Kusturica, Emina Karahmet Sher, Nejra Selak,
Nejra Osmančević, Esma Karahmet Farhat & Farooq Sher
To cite this article: Amina Džidić-Krivić, Jasna Kusturica, Emina Karahmet Sher, Nejra Selak,
Nejra Osmančević, Esma Karahmet Farhat & Farooq Sher (2023) Eﬀects of intestinal ﬂora
on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs, Drug Metabolism Reviews, 55:1-2,
126-139, DOI: 10.1080/03602532.2023.2186313
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/03602532.2023.2186313
© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 14 Mar 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 6812
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 34 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=idmr20

REVIEW ARTICLE
Effects of intestinal flora on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
drugs
Amina Dzidic-Krivica,b, Jasna Kusturicac, Emina Karahmet Sherd
, Nejra Selake, Nejra Osmancevice,
Esma Karahmet Farhatb,f and Farooq Sherg
aZenica Cantonal Hospital, Zenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina; bInternational Society of Engineering Science and Technology,
Nottingham, UK; cFaculty of Medicine, University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina; dDepartment of Biosciences, School
of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK; eDom zdravlja Zenica, Zenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina;
fDepartment of Food and Nutrition Research, Faculty of Food Technology, Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia;
gDepartment of Engineering, School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK
ABSTRACT
Gut microbiota is known as unique collection of microorganisms (including bacteria, archaea,
eukaryotes and viruses) that exist in a complex environment of the gut. Recently, this has
become one of the most popular areas of research in medicine because this plays not only an
important role in disease development, but gut microbiota also influences drug pharmacokinet-
ics. These alterations in drug pharmacokinetic pathways and drug concentration in plasma and
blood often lead to an increase in the incidence of toxicological events in patients. This review
aims to present current knowledge of the most commonly used drugs in clinical practice and
their dynamic interplay with the host’s gut microbiota as well as the mechanisms underlying
these metabolic processes and the consequent effect on their therapeutic efficacy and safety.
These new findings set a foundation for the development of personalized treatments specific to
each metabolism, maximizing drugs’ therapeutic effects and minimizing the side effects because
they are one of the major limiting factors in treating patients.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 15 November 2022
Accepted 24 February 2023
KEYWORDS
Gut microbiota; drug
metabolism; pharmacokinet-
ics; prodrug; absorption;
enzymology and xenobiotic
transformation
1. Introduction
The human gut was not considered an important organ
in the human body in the past, except for its well-
known roles in digestion and absorption of food and
drugs. Recently, this ’forgotten’ organ has become an
uprising star of many studies (Wilson and Nicholson
2017).
The intestine of human being is home to a large
population of microorganisms and it has almost 100
trillion inhabitants. It largely outnumbers all other com-
munities of microbes connected with the body’s surface
(Schupack et al. 2022). Therefore, the gut microbiota
can be portrayed as a unique and special organ that
has many different functions (Yang et al. 2022). Namely,
the human organism is in harmony with a countless
number of symbiotic bacteria that are a constitutive
part of the gut microbiota (Adak and Khan 2019). These
microorganisms create an environment rich in nutrients
needed for their own survival. In return, they make
extremely important contributions to vitally important
processes for human health, such as the proper func-
tion of the immune system and the metabolism of
nutrients,
drugs
and
different
neurotransmitters
(Rinninella et al. 2019).
For a longer period of time, the main problem for
scientists was the lack of adequate techniques for the
identification of gut composition. One of the main
methods being used was the culturing of samples but
it had many limitations such as a small number of bac-
terial species that were isolated and observed (Li and
Hu 2019). In recent years, the standard technology used
in the studies was 16S rRNA sequencing. It is usually
extracted from feces and further investigated with poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR). Nowadays, metagenomic
sequencing (MGS) has become the new standard for
microbiota evaluation (Li and Hu 2019). Many studies
have shown that the pharmacokinetic process and the
bioavailability of different drugs are often in a complex
CONTACT Farooq Sher
farooq.sher@ntu.ac.uk; Emina Karahmet Sher
emina.sher@isest.org
Department of Engineering, School of Science and
Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, NG11 8NS, UK
 2023 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/),
which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any
way. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.
DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS
2023, VOL. 55, NOS. 1–2, 126–139
https://doi.org/10.1080/03602532.2023.2186313

and dynamic dialogue with gut microbiota. This has an
important effect on the efficacy of these drugs, as well
as on the occurrence of different unwanted toxico-
logical events (Zhang et al. 2021). Therefore, gut micro-
biota is recognized as one of the crucial environmental
factors influencing the metabolism of drugs and xeno-
biotics as well as the inter-individual variations of drug
effects (Koppel et al. 2017; Wilson and Nicholson 2017;
Adak and Khan 2019; Adak and Khan 2019).
The four fundamental processes of pharmacokinetics
that are under the possible influence of microbiota are
absorption,
distribution,
metabolism
and
excretion
(ADME). These are separate yet, in many aspects, inter-
related processes that occur between the administra-
tion and elimination of drugs from the body (Ioannidis
2019). One of the most common ways of drug adminis-
tration is oral administration. It is usually preferred by
patients because it is more convenient, comfortable
and easy to comply with medication counseling. Ideally,
after oral administration, the drug would be completely
and quickly absorbed from the gut and it would affect
only therapeuticly targeted cells. However, in the real
world this scenario is not commonly noted. After oral
ingestion, drugs start their journey through the digest-
ive tract and are initially faced with trillions of bacteria
that actively produce and secrete important metabolic
enzymes such as oxidase, reductase and transferase.
These enzymes have the ability to alter the pharma-
ceutical compounds of drugs, resulting in a change
of
their
pharmacokinetic
properties
and
half-life.
Therefore, the intestinal microbiota can transform these
drugs, even before the first-pass effect through the liver
(Lee
et
al.
2019).
However, there
are
still
many
unknowns effects of the gut microbiota on orally
administered drugs (Xie et al. 2020).
The rediscovery of the impact that the gut has on
disease development such as cancer, neurodegenera-
tive diseases and inflammatory diseases of the bowel as
well as its ability to alter drug pharmacokinetics has led
to a renewed interest in this research area (Wilson and
Nicholson 2017). The bioavailability of some drugs
(such as acetaminophen, amlodipine, tamoxifen, metro-
nidazole etc.) as well as their efficacy and toxicity are
affected by bacterial enzymes in the gut (Xie et al.
2020). Additionally, this relationship is bidirectional
because drugs also can alter the composition of bacter-
ial genera in the gut (Winston and Theriot 2020). Efforts
to discover and research the impact of gut microbiota
on human health have increased dramatically and the
important effects of this organ are the focus of many
different studies. Therefore, this study aims to portray
the
changes
noted
in
the
pharmacokinetics
of
commonly used drugs that occur by the action of differ-
ent enzymes produced by the gut microbiota. The cur-
rent knowledge and new findings in this area are
discussed further in the review as well as the possible
implementations of these findings in everyday clinical
practice.
2. Dialogue between gut microbiota and its
environment
The gut microbiota is a quite dynamic surrounding that
is susceptible to important inter- and intra-individual
variations. The composition of microbiota community
in intestines is tightly connected to many different
environmental factors, nutrition, intake of drugs, organ-
ism’s age and genetics of the human hosts. However,
different environmental stressors such as heat, noise,
cold, intensive physical activity and disruption of the
circadian cycle can alter the protective function of gut-
blood barrier and healthy bacterial genera in the gut.
For example, after exposure to these stress factors, the
reduction of beneficial bacteria such as Bacteroidetes
was noted. On the other hand, pro-inflammatory bac-
terial genera such as Firmicutes showed an increased
abundance. Consequently, different metabolic disorders
occur such as insulin intolerance and hyperlipidemia.
Additionally, it was shown that the disruption of cir-
cadian rhythm and chronic psychological stress could
alter the composition of bacterial genera in the gut
such as the reduction of Lactobacillus that is well-
known for their beneficial effects (Hills et al. 2019). The
combination of all of these factors leads to increased
inflammation and gut dysbiosis as shown in Figure 1.
Some recent studies (Karl et al. 2018; Hills et al. 2019;
Gacesa et al. 2022) noted that there is a strong link
between the weight and calculated body mass index of
patients, their cholesterol levels, nutrition, insulin toler-
ance and the microbiota. A recently conducted study
(Gacesa et al. 2022) on Dutch population consisting of
three generations of Dutch families, aimed to show a
profile of gut microbiota in the population. The study
found important correlations between the environment
and gut composition. It showed that patient surround-
ing is the main factor shaping the microbiota in
humans and that both physical and psychological fac-
tors affect its composition (Gacesa et al. 2022).
Changes in non-living environment and climate
(such as acute plateau hypoxia) can effect the collection
and quantity of intestinal flora (Xie et al. 2020).
Although there are many factors, inside and outside of
the host organism (endogenous and exogenous factors)
such as age, genetics and climate that have been
DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS
127

discovered as the potential changer of the gut commu-
nity. Furthermore, a patient’s diet is recognized as an
extremely important determinant of its structure and
function (Nakov and Velikova 2020). There are many dif-
ferences between the intestinal microbiota of patients
who are predominantly on Western diet and the micro-
biota of patients who mostly eat food rich in fiber such
as the food represented in the Mediterranean diet
(Gomaa 2020). Namely, the alterations in the structure
of gut microbiota were noted in different subjects in
the
study
conducted
by
Gomaa
(Gomaa
2020).
Statistical analysis showed that these alterations were
closely connected to the differences in the subject’s
diet and nutrition habits. Therefore, a particular diet
and consumption of specific types of foods such as
fibers, promotes the growth and reproduction of spe-
cific bacterial strains, consequently bringing a change
in fermentation metabolism. It also directly effects
intestinal acidity and basicity in the gut (pH levels) that
could be responsible for the development of patho-
genic flora (Gomaa 2020). As it is already well known,
most drugs are weak acids and bases and have specific
and optimal pH and pKa for their solubility and bio-
availability. It means that each change in the host’s
intestine pH could effect the solubility and bioavailabil-
ity of the drugs that could directly effect the ADME pro-
cess. Many authors discussed options, how to improve
the bioavailability of drugs and the pharmaceutical
industry is searching for practical solutions last 30 years.
However, pH and pKa are one of the easiest solutions
(Taniguchi et al. 2014).
3. Effects of gut microbiota on drugs
undergoing liver metabolism
The complex dialogue occurring between the liver and
gut microbiota enzymes, bile acid metabolism and drug
metabolism is still being researched. Namely, different
studies discovered that bile acids, after they are
excreted into the bile undergo a process of being
metabolized by gut microbiota. Afterwards, the bile
acids are reabsorbed into the blood that is the final
step in the process and marked as the enterohepatic
cycle of bile acids (Zimmermann et al. 2019). There are
Figure 1. Environmental stressors effecting the gut microbiota composition (Karl et al. 2018).
128
A. DŽIDIĆ-KRIVIĆ ET AL.

many metabolizing enzymes involved in different proc-
esses that are happening in mucosa of the small intes-
tine but the most valuable ones are cytochromes P450
(CYPs). They are particularly important enzymes, which
are responsible for the major part of the first phase
reactions that take place while administered drugs are
being metabolized (Hu et al. 2022). A large number of
drug interactions that are mediated through the activa-
tion or inhibition of CYP enzymes, especially CYP3A
have been initially assumed to be expressed exclusively
in liver but the research showed that they are also
being expressed at the level of the gut (Zhang et al.
2018).
Generally, in healthy organism and physiological
conditions, the gut microbiota could modulate the
proteome as well as the set of RNA transcripts.
Transcriptome and collection of metabolites called
metabolome in the liver mainly by down-regulating
CYP-mediated xenobiotic metabolism and changing the
hepatic expression of genes. After the secretion of bile
acids from the liver to the bile, their enterohepatic cycle
starts. The bile acids are reabsorbed in the ileum, where
they interact with the farnesoid X receptor (FXR). FXR is
placed in the gut and could detect an increased con-
centration of bile acids intracellularly. This onsets the
production of different growth factors, such as fibro-
blast growth factor 19 that enters the portal blood cir-
culation and interacts with fibroblast growth factor 4
(Dempsey and Cui 2019). Consequently, downregula-
tion of CYP7A1 and a decrease in the production of
new primary bile acids could be noted as shown in
Figure 2. Interestingly, it was shown that the expression
of FXR is effected by changes in microbiota compos-
ition. The lower levels of Lactobacillus genera lead to a
lower production of an enzyme called bile salt hydro-
lase (BHS). This increased the levels of tauro-b-muri-
cholic acid (MCA) that is the potent antagonist of FXR,
consequently leading to the development of insulin
resistance, obesity and fatty liver disease. Therefore, the
FXR has a protective role in the organism and it is pos-
sible to enhance its effects by altering the gut micro-
biota and bacterial genera that are included in its
expression (Dempsey and Cui 2019).
Furthermore, Bj€orkholm et al. (2009) showed that the
microbiota has an important effect on the expression of
different
genes
in
mice.
Namely,
key
genes
are
described as the genes that regulate the metabolic
function of liver. It was noted that they are being more
expressed (mostly chimeric antigen receptor) in germ-
free mice compared with mice that have been conven-
tionally raised and that are pathogen-free (SPF). These
changes in the gene expressions are most likely a
consequence of the gut microbiota actions and its
metabolism of endogenous molecules (Bozward et al.
2021). Moreover, Claus et al. (2011) used germ-free
mice to portray the important effects of microbial activ-
ity in the creation of metabolic phenotype in the gut of
axenic (germ-free) mice. They examined the effects that
exposure to a typical microbial environment of the gut
of mice has on axenic mice. It was noted that the levels
of CYP3A11, CYP2C29 and CYP8B1 in the liver were sig-
nificantly less expressed in the germ-free mice.
After 20 days of the gut being colonized by bacteria
and the bacteria adapting to its surrounding, an
increase in CYP2E1 and CYP2D9 was noted. More
importantly, there was no reduction in the levels of
CYP3A11, CYP2C29 and CYP8B1 (Dempsey and Cui
2019). Selwyn et al. (2015) also used RNA sequencing
on the feces collected from germ-free mice to try to
portray the effect of bacteria in the gut on the regula-
tion of the expression of a large number of genes that
Figure 2. The enterohepatic pathway of primary bile acids
and its effect on CYP enzymes (Bozward et al. 2021).
DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS
129

effect drug metabolism and processing. Germ-free mice
showed a 51% increase in the expression of messenger
RNA responsible for coding the CYP1A2. Interestingly,
the production of mRNA that codes CYP4A14 increased
by 202%. In addition, there was an up-regulation in
some
of
the
important
bile
acids
transporters.
Therefore, the research showed that intestinal bacteria
have an important role in the differences that occurred
in the individual response to drugs and the metabolism
of bile acids (Selwyn et al. 2015). Ishii et al. (2012) exam-
ined how enteric bacteria change and regulate CYP
expression.
The
authors
compared
CYP3A
mRNA
expression levels in GF and SPF mice and the results
showed the higher activity and expression of CYP3A
protein and the higher activity of CYP3A in SPF mice
than in GF mice. This confirms that the bacteria that is
a part of the gut microbiota community, increase
CYP3A expression in the liver (Ishii et al. 2012).
One of the most commonly used antibiotics, effective
for anaerobic infections is metronidazole. It eliminates
bacteria from the organism by acting as a ’Trojan horse’
– metronidazole enters the bacterial cell as a prodrug
and is being transformed into deadly metabolites. As
many other drugs do, metronidazole goes through
phases of liver transformation and undergoes the kid-
neys’ metabolism to be eliminated from the patient’s
organism (Dingsdag and Hunter 2018). Yet, although
being used in clinical practice for years, the exact
metabolism of this drug is still not deciphered com-
pletely. Recent studies have shown that CYP2A6 is one
of the main enzymes in the liver that allows metronida-
zole to release its potential as an antibiotic. It was also
shown that gut microbiota can alter metronidazole
metabolism by the action of CYPs placed in the gut
itself (Dingsdag and Hunter 2018; Zemanova et al.
2021). For example, it was observed that metronidazole
is being modified by enzymes produced by Clostridium
perfringens. These enzymes modify the structure of the
imidazole ring, consequently reducing the levels of
metronidazole metabolites (Dingsdag and Hunter 2018).
Moreover, Zemanova et al. (2021) compared the effect
of gut microbiota on the pharmacokinetics of metro-
nidazole in observed populations. This experiment
included control groups, which were germ-free (GF) and
specific-pathogen-free (SPF) mice that were not applied
with metronidazole. The experimental groups consisted
of GF and SPF mice that have been followed after the
application of metronidazole (n ¼ 4). They were adminis-
tered one intragastric dose (5 mg/kg) of this drug.
After examination, it was found that GF mice had sig-
nificantly higher levels of metronidazole in their blood,
almost 30% than SPF mice (Zemanova et al. 2021). In
addition, the expression of mRNA that encodes CYP2A5/4
was increased after 24h in SPF mice that is one of the
possible reasons behind the enhancement of metronida-
zole effects. It was noted that the expression of transcrip-
tion factor CAR that is included in the regulation of CYPs
expression in the liver was increased in SPF mice. In GF
mice, there was no measured increase in CAR expression.
In addition, the study measured alterations in the expres-
sion of various CYPs such as CYP2B10. Interestingly, after
metronidazole application in SPF mice, enzyme activity
increased whereas their activity in GF mice was not
affected. Further studies should confirm these findings
and discover a way to enhance the effect of pharmaco-
therapy with metronidazole by alterations in the gut com-
position (Zemanova et al. 2021).
The dynamic dialogue between enzymes that metab-
olize drugs and the gut microbiota is well known. The
activity of CYP3A expressed in the liver is presumed to
be changed by gut microbiota. Therefore, bacteria that
are homed in the gut should be under surveillance and
monitored in order to better the safety profile of drugs
and minimize the side effects (Togao et al. 2020). With
new methods being widely used, such as culture and
strain isolation, DNA extraction, PCR amplification, differ-
ent quantitative PCR assays, and tandem mass spec-
trometry
for
metabolite
qualitative
analysis.
More
insight into the gut microbiota composition, its altera-
tions and effects on the pharmacokinetics of drugs is
being researched. The modulation of the gut microbiota
composition
is
the
future
of
precision
medicine,
although many more studies are required to gather
enough knowledge to be able to create clinical guide-
lines as well as to produce drugs for the targeted altera-
tions of the bacterial genera in the gut or at least to get
information about expected individual reactions of
patients to specific drug’s formulations. Additionally,
future studies should use new emerging methods,
called in silico methods that combine computer algo-
rithms with existing knowledge about gut microbiota to
recapitulate
microbial
and
host
dynamic
interplay.
Furthermore, supervised machine learning can predict
outcomes of possible interventions as well as to screen
different drugs for their possible alterations by the gut
microbiota. This optimizes drug development and leads
to the production of better formulations and dose opti-
mization for patients (Togao et al. 2020).
4. Relationship of gut microbiota and drugs
pharmacokinetics
Many studies have been conducted in the last two dec-
ades attempting to prove the interplay between gut
130
A. DŽIDIĆ-KRIVIĆ ET AL.

microbiota and drug pharmacokinetics as shown in
Table 1. Four basic processes researched in the area of
pharmacokinetics are drug absorption, their distribution
in the organism followed by drug metabolism. The final
step is drug elimination or excretion. This dialogue
between four complex pharmacokinetic processes has
an important role in the successful clinical outcome
after the treatment with the observed drug in the
organism as well as in the occurrence of drug potential
side effects. As it is known, the same drug can show
positive and toxicological effects. The most important
differing factor is the used dosage that is highly influ-
enced by the dynamic of basic pharmacokinetic proc-
esses (Chen et al. 2021).
Moreover,
Zimmermann-Kogadeeva
et
al.
(2020)
observed changes in drug kinetics in two groups of ani-
mals. The first group of gnotobiotic mice was germ-free
and the second group had unaltered microbiota. The
study showed a significant reduction of drug in the
large intestine in the second group confirming the
hypothesis that gut microbiota has the power to alter
drug pharmacokinetics. It is important to highlight that
this process goes bidirectional, meaning that different
drugs could alter the bacteria genera in the gut. On the
other hand, gut microbiota could also interfere with
drug metabolism and, both indirectly and directly, alter
their structure and function in the organism as shown
in Figure 3. One of the metabolites that gut microbiota
produces
from
dietary
choline,
marked
as
Trimethylamine-N-oxide
(TMAO),
is
associated
with
major cardiovascular events. In addition, the gut enhan-
ces
the
production
of
some
beneficial
molecules
through food fermentation and their release into the
circulation, such as short chain fatty acids (SCFA). These
molecules have strong anti-inflammatory properties
and they help to maintain the integrity of the intestinal
barrier (Zimmermann-Kogadeeva et al. 2020).
4.1. Gut microbiota interplay with drugs used in
cardiology
Haiser
et
al.
(2013)
studied
the
effect
of
gut
Actinobacterium Eggerthella lenta on the inactivation of
a drug often used in cardiology - digoxin. Digoxin is
classified as a cardiac glycoside and was used even in
the Roman Empire. It is produced from the foxglove
plant and is then mostly used for the treatment of con-
gestive heart failure. This pharmacokinetic study was
conducted
on
gnotobiotic
mice
and
showed
an
increased intake of dietary proteins can alter the com-
position of the gut microbiota. Additionally, it reduces
in
vivo
the
metabolism
of
digoxin,
consequently
significantly altering drug concentrations in the serum
and urine. It is considered the possible cause of the
individual alterations of digoxin doses noted in the
patient’s blood and serum that are based on the indi-
vidual diversity and composition of the gut microbiota.
(Haiser et al. 2013; Tuteja and Ferguson 2019). It paves
the way for the possibility of using the gut microbiota
as a tool for reducing digoxin toxicity through its micro-
biota manipulation (Lu et al. 2014; Li et al. 2016).
Matuskova et al. (2014) investigated whether the
probiotic
E.
coli
strain
Nissle
1917
influences
the
pharmacokinetics of the concomitantly taken antiar-
rhythmic drug amiodarone and showed increased drug
absorption caused by this probiotic by tracking several
pharmacokinetic parameters. Furthermore, gnotobiotic
mice
experiments
revealed
that
increased
protein
intake can limit microbial drug inactivation (Haiser et al.
2014). This should be thoroughly investigated given the
narrow therapeutic range and possible toxicity of amio-
darone (Noh et al. 2017). Amlodipine is classified as a
calcium channel blocker and it is often prescribed for
the treatment of hypertension (Tuteja and Ferguson
2019). Yoo et al. (2016) conducted a study in which rat
feces has been incubated with amlodipine to investi-
gate the effect of enzymes produced by gut microbiota
on amlodipine’s metabolism and pharmacokinetics.
By using spectrophotometric techniques, Kim et al.
(2016) analyzed and identified the exact chemical mole-
cules that are amlodipine metabolites, produced by the
action of gut microbiota-produced enzymes such as
M1. Interestingly, M1 is also known as an important
metabolite formed in the liver by metabolic enzymes
placed in hepatic cells. The pharmacokinetics of amlodi-
pine was compared between two groups. The first
group was formed by control rats, which have not been
exposed to antibiotics that alter the microbiota com-
position. The second group consisted of rats that have
been administered ampicillin. It was noticed that antibi-
otics, when ingested orally increased the plasma levels
of amlodipine, the parent drug (Kim et al. 2016).
Therefore, alterations in gut microbiota composition by
taking antibiotics concomitantly with antihypertensive
drugs result in changes in the level of antihypertensive
drugs. Therefore, their efficacy in blood pressure control
is interrupted (Kim et al. 2016).
Statins are widely prescribed drugs and have been
used for years, however yet the considerable individual
variation in therapeutic response remains one of the
main problems in statins therapy. Genetics is only one
small part of this variability (Yoo et al. 2014). Lovastatin
and simvastatin can be taken as an example. Yoo et al.
(2014)
investigated
on
rats
how
gut
microbiota
DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS
131

involved in lovastatin metabolism, particularly focusing
on its biotransformation to one of the important lova-
statin metabolites, the active hydroxy-acid metabolite
(M8). The authors compared how the profile of lovasta-
tin and its metabolites concentration, especially M8
changes in plasma, after the oral administration of this
drug. Two groups of animals were used. The control
group
of
rats
has
not
been
administered
with
antibiotics. On the other hand, the experimental group
of rats have been treated with antibiotics such as ampi-
cillin or they have been treated with a mixture of antibi-
otics,
containing
erythromycin,
cefadroxil
and
oxytetracycline. Pharmacokinetic analyses showed an
experimental group of rats had significantly lower levels
of systemic exposure to lovastatin metabolite M8 as
opposed to the control group of rats. The resulting
Table 1. A brief overview of studies researching gut microbiota and drug pharmacokinetics.
Observed drug
Drug classification
Observed bacterias
Bacterial enyzmes mechanism of
action
References
Digoxin
Cardiac glycosides
Eggerthella lenta
E.lenta encodes cardiac glycoside
reductase (cgr) operon, leading to
the production of enzymes
responsible for reduction and
inactivation of digoxin.
(Tuteja and Ferguson 2019)
Amiodarone
Antiarrhytmic drug
E. coli strain Nissle 1917
E. coli strain Nissle 1917 decreases pH
in the gut, leading to a better
ionization of amiodarone and its
increases bioavailability.
E. coli strain Nissle 1917 increases
expression of the Oatp2B1
transporter, increasing influx of
the drug in the gut cells and in
circulation.
(Matuskova et al. 2014)
Levodopa
Dopamine agonists
Lactobacillus and
Enterococcus genera
Increses the production of microbial
decarboxylases that metabolize
levodopa, changing its plasma
values and bioavailability.
(Maini Rekdal et al. 2019)
Levodopa
Dopamine agonist
Helicobacter pylori
Decreases absorption of levodopa
from the gut by increase of
bacterial metabolism of drug or by
slowing gastric emptying.
(Narozanska et al. 2014)
Lovastatin and
simvastatin
Statins
Bacteroidetes
Alternate the gene expression
regulating bile acid metabolism
pathways in the host.
Variability in FXR receptor
signaling.
(Yoo et al. 2014)
Acetylsalicylic acid
NSAID
Enterococci, Enterobacteria,
and Lactobacilli
Change the pharmacokinetics of
salicylic acid, lengthening bleeding
time after the oral administration
of aspirin and increasing its side-
effects.
(Kim et al. 2016)
Acetaminophen
Analgesics, antipyretic
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Decrease liver damage by
biotransformation of 1-phenyl-1,2-
propanedione (PPD).
(Gong et al. 2018)
Tamoxifen
Selective estrogen
receptor modulator
Carya aquatica
Altering the tadC gene that encodes
a component of the type II
secretion system, resulting in an
increased cellular uptake of
tamoxifen and increased toxicity.
(Diot et al. 2021)
Irinotecan
Topoisomerase I
inhibitors
Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes,
Verrucomicrobia, and
Proteobacteria
Increased production of bacterial
b-glucuronidase (GUS), resulting in
the release of active metabolite
(SN-38) in GI tract, which inflicts
epithelial damage and onsets
diarrhea after irinothecan
treatment.
(Wallace et al. 2010)
Irinotecan
Topoisomerase I
inhibitors
Escherichia coli Nissle 1917,
Proteobacteria
The application of Escherichia coli
Nissle 1917 ahd protective effects
on intestinal injury induced by
irinotecan by increasing the
Proteobacteria relative abundance.
(Wang et al. 2019)
Anti-PD-1 drugs
PD-1 inhibitors
Collinsella aerofaciens,
Bifidobacterium longum
and Enterococcus faecium.
Activate dendritic cells in the host
organism and increase effector
function of CD8þ T cells, leading
to increased efficacy and
bioavailability of the drug
(Matson et al. 2018)
132
A. DŽIDIĆ-KRIVIĆ ET AL.

pharmacokinetic parameters suggested that the forma-
tion of lovastatin active metabolite M8 is effected by
the enzymes produced by gut microbiota (Yoo et al.
2014).
4.2. Gut microbiota interplay with drugs used in
neurology and psychiatry
The metabolism of gut microbiome can affect not only
locally acting drugs but also the efficacy of the drugs
targeting distant organ systems (Weersma et al. 2020).
One example is levodopa, a drug primarily used as a
therapy option for Parkinson’s disease. In the recent
decade, different studies (Naro_zanska et al. 2014; Maini
Rekdal et al. 2019) have shown that enzymes called
microbial decarboxylases have the ability to metabolize
levodopa, consequently changing its plasma values.
These enzymes are produced by the activity of bacteria
in human gut. Therefore, the authors proposed that
noted variations in microbial activity in the gut and the
production of their enzymes are a contributing factors
to the wide range of responses to levodopa in patients
as well as the lower efficacy of levodopa and the devel-
opment of its adverse side effects (Naro_zanska et al.
2014). In addition, many researchers have attempted to
establish a relationship between Helicobacter pylori (HP)
and its products with changes in the pharmacokinetics
of levodopa by comparing H. pylori-positive and H.
pylori-negative
patients
(Pierantozzi
et
al.
2006;
Adamiak et al. 2010).
These studies have shown that the infection with HP
prolonged the onset time of levodopa action and its
beneficial effects on the motor and nonmotor symp-
toms of Parkinson disease, as opposed to the onset of
its action in patients that do not have HP infections.
Additionally, it was shown that the ’on-time’, which is
the time period when levodopa effectively controls the
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease was shorter when
compared to PD patients who did not have HP infec-
tion. These data suggest that HP prevents the absorp-
tion of levodopa in PD patients, however, the exact
mechanism is still not deciphered and further studies
are needed to investigate this phenomenon. After
administering antibiotic treatment to PD patients to
eradicate HP, the ’onset’ time decreased and the ’on-
time’ increased when compared to the pretreatment
values. Therefore, by the use of pharmacokinetic ana-
lysis, it was proven that HP eradication increases the
efficacy
of
levodopa
treatment
in
patients
with
Parkinson’s disease (Lee et al. 2021).
Epilepsy is one of the most emerging health prob-
lems in the modern world and quite often, the standard
therapy protocols that are being used in clinical prac-
tice do not have the effect that is expected. In addition,
one of the main issues is the development of drug-
resistant epilepsy. Recent studies proposed that the gut
microbiota composition, affected by an unhealthy diet
is one of the important reasons for increased resistance
to anti-epileptic drugs. A group of scientists evaluated
feces samples taken from a group of patients that have
Figure 3. Pharmacokinetics of drugs effected by gut microbiota (Chen et al. 2021).
DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS
133

epilepsy and respond to antiepileptic drugs. These
feces samples were compared to the feces samples
taken from the group of patients that do not respond
to the therapy. Statistical analysis showed that the com-
position of the gut microbiota was different in both
groups. Patients who responded to the treatment had a
relative
abundance
of
Bacteroides
finegoldii
and
Bifidobacterium sp., as opposed to the patients did not
respond to the therapy and had a relative abundance
of Negativicutes sp. (Whang et al. 2019). This is the
potential marker for detecting the group of patients
that will not respond well to the antiepileptic drug ther-
apy as shown in Figure 4.
4.3. Gut microbiota interplay with drugs used in
diabetology
Given the emerging role of gut microbiome in over-
weight patients with diabetes mellitus, mostly type 2,
the dynamic dialogue between gut microbiome and
drugs used as antidiabetics remains of immediate
research interest (Aoki et al. 2017). Aoki et al. (2017)
investigated how the probiotic Bifidobacterium lactis
effects the efficacy of metabolic syndrome treatment in
mice. In addition, the underlying mechanisms of probi-
otics involved in the effects of antidiabetic therapy
were observed. Results of this study suggested that
Bifidobacterium lactis, a commonly used proliferative
and viable probiotic, enhances the effects of drugs in
treating metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus.
Further, an improved glucose tolerance was noticed in
mice. Moreover, the accumulation of visceral fat was
lowered
through
changes
in
the
composition
of
bacteria consisting in the gut microbiota and the eleva-
tions in the levels of short-chain fatty acids were noted
(Aoki et al. 2017).
Liraglutide is a second and third line of drugs used
in the treatment of patients diagnosed with type 2
diabetes, especially when the control of glycemia was
not satisfactory after administration of metformin.
Liraglutide acts as a glucagon-like peptide-1 agonist
(Shyangdan et al. 2011). Zhao et al. (2018) investi-
gated the potential ability of liraglutide to modulate
the composition of bacteria in the gut. 16S ribosomal
RNA gene sequencing was used to detect alterations
in the gut microbiota. The results showed that liraglu-
tide, through modulation of the structure of the gut
microbiota such as an increase in Bacteroidetes and a
decrease in Firmicutes, altered glucose and lipid
metabolism. Therefore, the authors proved that lira-
glutide lowers the body weight of the rats who were
overweight and the rats who were simultaneously
overweight and had diabetes (Zhao et al. 2018).
Similarly,
Tilg
and
Moschen
(2014)
placed
great
emphasis on the specific member of the microbiota,
Akkermansia muciniphila because the decreased levels
of this bacteria were described in the gut of patients
with diabetes. In addition, when administered to mur-
ine, Akkermansia muciniphila expresses antidiabetic
effects (Tilg and Moschen 2014).
4.4. Gut microbiota interplay with drugs used in
pain treatment
Kim et al. (2016) investigated pharmacological interac-
tions between antibiotics and acetylsalicylic acid, a
widely used analgesic and antipyretic. By using a tech-
nique called tail-bleeding assay, the authors evaluated
how the antithrombotic activity of acetylsalicylic acid
altered after the antibiotic treatment. It was found that
ampicillin
administration
significantly
lengthened
bleeding time in rats that were also administered
acetylsalicylic acid. In order to discover possible altera-
tions in gut microbiota, the researchers performed
medium
culture
and
pyrosequencing
techniques.
Analysis of rat fecal samples in these assays indicated
that ampicillin treatment resulted in a disturbance in
the amounts and compositional profile of gut micro-
biota. The number and variety of gut microbiota were
reduced. When it comes to the phylum level, therapy
with
ampicillin
leads
to
a
significant
increase
in
Proteobacteria and a significant decrease in Firmicutes.
In addition, the authors indicated that therapy with
ampicillin significantly reduces the levels of acetylsali-
cylic acid. This was metabolized by the activity of the
Figure 4. Potential therapies for epilepsy based on gut micro-
biota (Ding et al. 2021).
134
A. DŽIDIĆ-KRIVIĆ ET AL.

gut microbiota for 67% of observed rats (Kim et al.
2016). Zhang et al. (2019) monitored the interaction
between amoxicillin and acetylsalicylic acid in observed
rats. The study results showed that amoxicillin alters
the pharmacokinetics of salicylic acid that is an active
product of the metabolism of acetylsalicylic acid. This
also slowed down the metabolism of acetylsalicylic acid
and dynamic pharmacokinetic alterations of this drug,
occurring because of the altered activity of the gut
microbiota (Zhang et al. 2019). All of the above sug-
gests that concomitant administration of antibiotics
and acetylsalicylic acid results in changes in the safety
profile and efficacy of acetylsalicylic acid, mostly due to
the composition alterations of gut flora.
The consequences of action of gut microbiota
enzymes on the pharmacokinetics of acetaminophen
have been questioned, especially considering acet-
aminophen is one of the most used over-the-counter
drugs. Malfatti et al. (2020) found that the administra-
tion of amoxicillin or the combination of ampicillin and
neomycin in observed mice modify the bioavailability
of acetaminophen marked with carbon. They adminis-
tered orally a single dose of the drug (100 mg/kg) to
two groups of animals. The control group of rats that
have not received any antibiotics had the three most
prevalent
phyla:
Proteobacteria,
Actinobacteria
and
Bacteroidetes. The group who received antibiotics had
only
phyla
Trypanosomatidae
and
Proteobacteria
detected. In addition, the sulfate metabolite was signifi-
cantly decreased in the urine of rats’ group that have
been administered antibiotics, when compared to the
controls. On the opposite, the glucuronide metabolite
was increased in the rats who received an antibiotic.
Therefore, it is proposed that the change in the acet-
aminophen (APAP) metabolism is caused by abnormal-
ities in the gut microbiota and the alterations of its
composition caused by antibiotic use (Malfatti et al.
2020).
Gong et al. (2018) investigated whether the gut
microbiota modulates diurnal variations in acetamino-
phen-induced hepatotoxicity because acetaminophen-
induced hepatotoxicity is more severe with nocturnal
intake than with morning intake. Mice were separated
into two groups; one group was given antibiotics that
were non-absorbable continuously for 3 days, the other
group was not administered any antibiotics. The goal of
antibiotic administration in the first group was to
deplete the gut microbiota and to investigate the effect
of gut microbiota and its enzymes on acetaminophen
(APAP) induced diurnal variation of hepatotoxicity. The
toxic dose (300 mg/kg) of APAP was orally administered
when the light is on that was the start of the resting
period (ZT0) and then when the light is off that was a
start of an active period (ZT12). It was shown that APAP
did not induce hepatotoxic events when the light was
on but significant liver damage occurred when the light
was off after the same dose of APAP was administered
(Tilg and Moschen 2014).
To clarify the effect of gut microbiota on liver injury
started by APAP, the authors transplanted fecal micro-
biota to observed mice. The fecal content was first col-
lected from mice in both phases. The next step was to
orally administer fecal content to mice recipients who
were previously administered antibiotics that depleted
their gut microbiota. By using the 16S RNA sequencing
technique,
it
was
noted
that
clusters
overlapped
between the ZT0 donor and recipient. The clusters also
overlapped between the ZT12 donor and ZT12 recipi-
ent. These findings suggested that fecal microbiota
between donor and recipient was similar. Interestingly,
the livers of mice that received ZT12 fecal contents dis-
played a significantly larger area of necrosis, when com-
pared to the necrosis in the liver of mice that received
ZT0 content after APAP was given in the ZT0 phase. In
addition, the level of a gut microbial metabolite called
1-phenyl-1,2-propanedione (PPD) that also enhanced
liver damage caused by APAP administration (In vivo
and in vitro) was significantly higher at the ZT12 phase
than at the ZT0 phase. They found that yeast fungi
called Saccharomyces cerevisiae could be used to ameli-
orate the PPD effects and the decrease in liver damage
induced by APAP at ZT12 (Gong et al. 2018).
4.5. Gut microbiota interplay with drugs used in
oncology
Irinotecan, also called CPT-11 is an anti-cancer chemo-
therapeutic drug mostly used intravenously to treat
colon cancer. The side effect of irinotecan is severe diar-
rhea caused by the action of symbiotic enzymes called
b-glucuronidases, produced from bacteria in the gut
that activates this drug into its active metabolic form.
These enzymes are mostly responsible for irinotecan
reactivation in the gut and the development of side
effects such as severe diarrhea that are mitigated or
avoided by the use of their inhibitors. The bacteria
involved are Clostridium ramosum, Escherichia coli and
Bacteroides vulgatus. Wallace et al. (2010) found that
oral intake of inhibitor of bacterial enzymes such as
microbial b-glucuronidases, protected mice from CPT-
11-induced toxicity.
In addition, the results noticed in the study con-
ducted by Wang at al. (Wang et al. 2019) that the
administration
of
Escherichia
coli
Nissle
1917
had
DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS
135

protective effects on intestinal injury induced by irino-
tecan. The key findings were that irinotecan treatment
altered the diversity of gut microbiota composition.
This drug increased the Proteobacteria relative abun-
dance, compared with its abundance in control group.
Therefore, Escherichia coli Nissle application improved
the gut microbiota dysbiosis (Wang et al. 2019). In
recent years, there were many studies (Diot et al. 2021)
that have been developing a model system by using
the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to assess the
response of the animals to different drugs such as tam-
oxifen. It belongs to the class of drugs called SERMs,
selective estrogen receptor modulators that is the
standard treatment for breast cancers positive for estro-
gen receptors together with chemotherapy and radi-
ation therapy. The authors of this study (Diot et al.
2021) changed the diet of larval stage animals with one
of the three following bacteria: C.aquatica, B. subtilis or
E. coli. After the tamoxifen administration to C.elegans,
it was proven that tamoxifen toxicity increased in ani-
mals fed by C.aquatica and B. subtilis that showed a
delay in development.
On the other hand, there was little, if any effect on the
animals fed by E. coli, which showed that a bacterial diet
can modify tamoxifen toxicity. The genetic screens were
conducted on those bacterial species and the results indi-
cated that it is not E. coli that affects this drug but it is
C.aquatica. Two detected types of C.aquatica increased
and two decreased tamoxifen toxicity most likely by
changing the tamoxifen transport and the amount of
tamoxifen being taken up by the C. elegans. In addition, B.
subtilis that is present in many available probiotics on the
market was shown to induce the non-apoptotic mecha-
nisms of cells death after tamoxifen applications than
C.aquatica and E. coli by activating apoptotic pathways as
shown in Figure 5. One of the emerging new treatments
in oncology is the use of immune checkpoint inhibitors
(ICI) because its administration starts the powerful cas-
cade-induced activation of the T-lymphocytes and it
boosts the immune system to fight against cancer.
A recent study (Derosa et al. 2018) has shown that
gut microbiota is one of the factors affecting outcomes
of this therapy. It was shown that the patients with
renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and patients with non-small-
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), who were receiving anti-pro-
grammed cell death ligand-1 monoclonal antibody
(mAb) monotherapy and prior to that antibiotics for
30 days
had
shorter
progression-free
survival
and
shorter
overall
survival
(Derosa
et
al.
2018).
Furthermore, Routy et al. (2018) showed that the mono-
clonal antibodies that attack PD-1 (Programmed cell
death
protein)
are
effected
by
dysbiosis
of
gut
microbiota. They conducted a study on mice with pro-
ven sarcoma and RET melanoma who were treated with
PD-1 antibody or its combination with CTLA-4 monoclo-
nal antibody. Firstly, mice were in an environment with-
out pathogen and one group received a 14 days course
of 3 antibiotics (colistin, streptomycin and ampicillin)
while the control group did not receive any drugs.
The results showed that mice who were receiving
antibiotics had lower survival time and the effect of ICI
was not as good as in the control group. The authors
also studied the effect of gut microbiota change caused
by taking antibiotics in patients with urothelial carcin-
oma and non-small-cell lung carcinoma, who were
treated with PD-1 immunotherapy. The results indi-
cated that group of patients who were taking antibiot-
ics had overall survival shorter than the control group
of patients who were not treated with antibiotics.
Statistical analysis indicated that the use of antibiotics
is a predictive factor for patients the development of
resistance to immunotherapy with PD-1 monoclonal
antibodies (Routy et al. 2018). Matson et al. (2018)
studied the reasons behind noticeable variability in
therapeutic response of individuals fighting metastatic
melanoma who are being administered anti-PD-1 drugs.
They collected fecal samples from the patients before
they received anti-PD-1 therapy, in order to find an
association between the composition of their gut
microbiota and the response to the treatment. The
study showed that the gut microbiota can moderate
the clinical impact of therapy with anti-PD-1 drugs. It
was also noted that the patients who responded better
to this treatment had more present three bacterial spe-
cies: Collinsella aerofaciens, Bifidobacterium longum and
Enterococcus faecium. These data could be used in the
future for applying probiotics that contain these bac-
teria as the enhancer of the anti-PD-1 therapy effect
(Whang et al. 2019).
Figure 5. The interplay between Tamoxifen and effect of dif-
ferent bacterial species on its toxicity (Diot et al. 2021).
136
A. DŽIDIĆ-KRIVIĆ ET AL.

5. Conclusion
Every human organism is a universe yet to be deciphered
and one of the many unknowns is gut microbiota.
Studies showed that gut microbiota is an important rea-
son for different individual reactions to orally adminis-
tered drugs such as lovastatin and acetaminophen. There
are many different metabolic pathways that gut micro-
biota uses to influence drug pharmacokinetics such as
digoxin,
amiodarone,
amlodipine,
liraglutide
etc.
Although many studies that have been conducted on
mice and rats showed that the gut effects a large number
of previously mentioned clinically important and fre-
quently used drugs, there is a small number of studies
that confirm these findings on humans. Therefore, present
knowledge is still limited. In future studies, it should be
precisely determined how microorganisms effect each
drug in vivo in human organisms and the exact underly-
ing pharmacokinetic pathways. This would set a founda-
tion for the development of personalized medicine,
unlock the doors for manipulation of gut microbiota and
set a foundation for building better pharmacokinetic
models that can quantitatively predict microbiota contri-
butions to systemic drug exposure.
Acknowledgement
The authors are grateful for the financial support from the
International Society of Engineering Science and Technology
(ISEST) UK.
Disclosure statement
No
potential
conflict
of
interest
was
reported
by
the
author(s).
Funding
This
work
was
supported
by
International
Society
of
Engineering Science and Technology (ISEST) UK.
ORCID
Emina Karahmet Sher
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0913-
5759
Farooq Sher
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2890-5912
References
Adak A, Khan MR. 2019. An insight into gut microbiota and
its functionalities. Cell Mol Life Sci. 76(3):473–493.
Adamiak U, Kaldonska M, Klodowska-Duda G, Wyska E,
Safranow
K,
Bialecka
M,
Gawronska-Szklarz
B.
2010.
Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling of levodopa
in
patients
with
advanced
Parkinson
disease.
Clin
Neuropharmacol. 33(3):135–141.
Aoki R, Kamikado K, Suda W, Takii H, Mikami Y, Suganuma N,
Hattori
M,
Koga
Y.
2017.
A
proliferative
probiotic
Bifidobacterium strain in the gut ameliorates progression
of metabolic disorders via microbiota modulation and
acetate elevation. Scient Rep. 7(1):1–10.
Bj€orkholm B, Bok CM, Lundin A, Rafter J, Hibberd ML,
Pettersson S. 2009. Intestinal microbiota regulate xeno-
biotic metabolism in the liver. PloS One. 4(9):e6958.
Bozward AG, Ronca V, Osei-Bordom D, Oo YH. 2021. Gut-liver
immune
traffic:
deciphering
immune-pathogenesis
to
underpin translational therapy. Front Immunol. 12:711217.
Chen H-Q, Gong J-Y, Xing K, Liu M-Z, Luo J-Q. 2021.
Pharmacomicrobiomics:
exploiting
the
drug-microbiota
interactions in antihypertensive treatment. Front Med. 8:
742394.
Claus SP, Ellero SL, Berger B, Krause L, Bruttin A, Molina J,
Paris A, Want EJ, de Waziers I, Cloarec O, et al. 2011.
Colonization-induced host-gut microbial metabolic inter-
action. MBio. 2(2):e00271-00210–e00210.
Dempsey JL, Cui JY. 2019. Microbiome is a functional modi-
fier of P450 drug metabolism. Curr Pharmacol Rep. 5(6):
481–490.
Derosa L, Hellmann MD, Spaziano M, Halpenny D, Fidelle M,
Rizvi H, Long N, Plodkowski AJ, Arbour KC, Chaft JE, et al.
2018. Negative association of antibiotics on clinical activity
of
immune
checkpoint
inhibitors
in
patients
with
advanced renal cell and non-small-cell lung cancer. Ann
Oncol. 29(6):1437–1444.
Ding M, Lang Y, Shu H, Shao J, Cui L. 2021. Microbiota–gut–
brain axis and epilepsy: a review on mechanisms and
potential therapeutics. Front Immunol. 12:742449.
Dingsdag SA, Hunter N. 2018. Metronidazole: an update on
metabolism, structure–cytotoxicity and resistance mecha-
nisms. J Antimicrob Chemother. 73(2):265–279.
Diot C, Garcıa-Gonzalez AP, Vieira AF, Walker M, Honeywell
M, Doyle H, Rivera Y, Na H, Zhang H, Lee M. 2021.
Bacteria modulate tamoxifen-induced death via host fatty
acid metabolism. bioRxiv.
Gacesa R, Kurilshikov A, Vich Vila A, Sinha T, Klaassen MAY,
Bolte LA, Andreu-Sanchez S, Chen L, Collij V, Hu S, et al.
2022. Environmental factors shaping the gut microbiome
in a Dutch population. Nature. 604(7907):732–739.
Gomaa EZ. 2020. Human gut microbiota/microbiome in
health and diseases: a review. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek.
113(12):2019–2040.
Gong S, Lan T, Zeng L, Luo H, Yang X, Li N, Chen X, Liu Z, Li
R, Win S, et al. 2018. Gut microbiota mediates diurnal vari-
ation of acetaminophen induced acute liver injury in mice.
J Hepatol. 69(1):51–59.
Haiser HJ, Gootenberg DB, Chatman K, Sirasani G, Balskus EP,
Turnbaugh PJ. 2013. Predicting and manipulating cardiac
drug inactivation by the human gut bacterium Eggerthella
lenta. Science. 341(6143):295–298.
Haiser
HJ,
Seim
KL,
Balskus
EP,
Turnbaugh
PJ.
2014.
Mechanistic
insight
into
digoxin
inactivation
by
Eggerthella lenta augments our understanding of its
pharmacokinetics. Gut Microbes. 5(2):233–238.
Hills RD, Jr., Pontefract BA, Mishcon HR, Black CA, Sutton SC,
Theberge CR. 2019. Gut Microbiome: profound implica-
tions for diet and disease. Nutrients. 11(7):1613.
Hu H, Shao W, Liu Q, Liu N, Wang Q, Xu J, Zhang X, Weng Z,
Lu Q, Jiao L. 2022. Gut microbiota promotes cholesterol
DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS
137

gallstone formation by modulating bile acid composition
and biliary cholesterol secretion. Nature Commun. 13(1):1–
13.
Ioannidis
JPA.
2019.
Reproducible
pharmacokinetics.
J
Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 46(2):111–116.
Ishii M, Toda T, Ikarashi N, Ochiai W, Sugiyama K. 2012.
Effects of intestinal flora on the expression of cytochrome
P450 3A in the liver. Yakugaku Zasshi. 132(3):301–310.
Karl JP, Hatch AM, Arcidiacono SM, Pearce SC, Pantoja-
Feliciano IG, Doherty LA, Soares JW. 2018. Effects of psy-
chological. Environmental and Physical Stressors on the
Gut Microbiota. Front Microbiol. 9:2013.
Kim IS, Yoo D-H, Jung I-H, Lim S, Jeong J-J, Kim K-A, Bae O-
N, Yoo HH, Kim D-H. 2016. Reduced metabolic activity of
gut microbiota by antibiotics can potentiate the antith-
rombotic effect of aspirin. Biochem Pharmacol. 122:72–79.
Koppel N, Maini Rekdal V, Balskus EP. 2017. Chemical trans-
formation of xenobiotics by the human gut microbiota.
Science. 356(6344)
Lee SH, Choi N, Sung JH. 2019. Pharmacokinetic and pharma-
codynamic insights from microfluidic intestine-on-a-chip
models. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 15(12):1005–
1019.
Lee H, Lee S, Lee DH, Kim DW. 2021. A comparison of the
gut microbiota among adult patients with drug-responsive
and drug-resistant epilepsy: an exploratory study. Epilepsy
Res. 172:106601.
Li H, He J, Jia W. 2016. The influence of gut microbiota on
drug metabolism and toxicity. Expert Opin Drug Metab
Toxicol. 12(1):31–40.
Li J, Hu FB. 2019. Research digest: reshaping the gut micro-
biota. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 7(9):671.
Lu L, Wu Y, Zuo L, Luo X, Large PJ. 2014. Intestinal micro-
biome and digoxin inactivation: meal plan for digoxin
users? World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 30(3):791–799.
Maini Rekdal V, Bess EN, Bisanz JE, Turnbaugh PJ, Balskus EP.
2019. Discovery and inhibition of an interspecies gut bac-
terial
pathway
for
Levodopa
metabolism.
Science.
364(6445):eaau6323.
Malfatti MA, Kuhn EA, Murugesh DK, Mendez ME, Hum N,
Thissen JB, Jaing CJ, Loots GG. 2020. Manipulation of the
gut microbiome alters acetaminophen biodisposition in
mice. Scientific Reports. 10(1):1–10.
Matson V, Fessler J, Bao R, Chongsuwat T, Zha Y, Alegre M-L,
Luke JJ, Gajewski TF. 2018. The commensal microbiome is
associated with anti–PD-1 efficacy in metastatic melanoma
patients. Science. 359(6371):104–108.
Matuskova
Z,
Anzenbacherova
E,
Vecera
R,
Tlaskalova-
Hogenova
H,
Kolar
M,
Anzenbacher
P.
2014.
Administration of a probiotic can change drug pharmaco-
kinetics: effect of E. coli Nissle 1917 on amidarone absorp-
tion in rats. PloS One. 9(2):e87150.
Nakov R, Velikova T. 2020. Chemical metabolism of xenobiot-
ics by gut microbiota. Curr Drug Metab. 21(4):260–269.
Naro_zanska E, Białecka M, Adamiak-Giera U, Gawronska-
Szklarz B, Sołtan W, Schinwelski M, Robowski P, Madalinski
MH, Sławek J. 2014. Pharmacokinetics of levodopa in
patients with Parkinson disease and motor fluctuations
depending on the presence of Helicobacter pylori infec-
tion. Clin Neuropharmacol. 37(4):96–99.
Noh K, Kang YR, Nepal MR, Shakya R, Kang MJ, Kang W, Lee
S, Jeong HG, Jeong TC. 2017. Impact of gut microbiota on
drug metabolism: an update for safe and effective use of
drugs. Arch Pharm Res. 40(12):1345–1355.
Pierantozzi M, Pietroiusti A, Brusa L, Galati S, Stefani A,
Lunardi
G,
Fedele
E,
Sancesario
G,
Bernardi
G,
Bergamaschi A, et al. 2006. Helicobacter pylori eradication
and l-dopa absorption in patients with PD and motor fluc-
tuations. Neurology. 66(12):1824–1829.
Rinninella E, Raoul P, Cintoni M, Franceschi F, Miggiano GAD,
Gasbarrini A, Mele MC. 2019. What is the healthy gut
microbiota composition? a changing ecosystem across
age, environment, diet, and diseases. Microorganisms. 7(1):
14.
Routy B, Le Chatelier E, Derosa L, Duong CPM, Alou MT,
Daillere R, Fluckiger A, Messaoudene M, Rauber C, Roberti
MP, et al. 2018. Gut microbiome influences efficacy of PD-
1–based
immunotherapy
against
epithelial
tumors.
Science. 359(6371):91–97.
Schupack DA, Mars RAT, Voelker DH, Abeykoon JP, Kashyap
PC. 2022. The promise of the gut microbiome as part of
individualized treatment strategies. Nat Rev Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 19(1):7–25.
Selwyn FP, Cui JY, Klaassen CD. 2015. RNA-Seq quantification
of hepatic drug processing genes in germ-free mice. Drug
Metab Dispos. 43(10):1572–1580.
Shyangdan
D,
Cummins
E,
Royle
P,
Waugh
N.
2011.
Liraglutide for the treatment of type 2 diabetes: a single
technology appraisal. Health Technol Assess. 15(1):77–86.
Taniguchi C, Kawabata Y, Wada K, Yamada S, Onoue S. 2014.
Microenvironmental pH-modification to improve dissol-
ution behavior and oral absorption for drugs with pH-
dependent solubility. Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 11(4):505–
516.
Tilg H, Moschen AR. 2014. Microbiota and diabetes: an evolv-
ing relationship. Gut. 63(9):1513–1521.
Togao M, Kawakami K, Otsuka J, Wagai G, Ohta-Takada Y,
Kado S. 2020. Effects of gut microbiota on in vivo metab-
olism and tissue accumulation of cytochrome P450 3A
metabolized drug: midazolam. Biopharm Drug Dispos.
41(7):275–282.
Tuteja S, Ferguson JF. 2019. Gut microbiome and response
to cardiovascular drugs. Circ Genom Precis Med. 12(9):
e002314.
Wallace BD, Wang H, Lane KT, Scott JE, Orans J, Koo JS,
Venkatesh M, Jobin C, Yeh L-A, Mani S, et al. 2010.
Alleviating cancer drug toxicity by inhibiting a bacterial
enzyme. Science. 330(6005):831–835.
Wang Y, Sun L, Chen S, Guo S, Yue T, Hou Q, Feng M, Xu H,
Liu Y, Wang P. 2019. The administration of Escherichia coli
Nissle 1917 ameliorates irinotecan–induced intestinal bar-
rier dysfunction and gut microbial dysbiosis in mice. Life
Sciences. 231:116529.
Weersma RK, Zhernakova A, Fu J. 2020. Interaction between
drugs and the gut microbiome. Gut. 69(8):1510–1519.
Whang A, Nagpal R, Yadav H. 2019. Bi-directional drug-micro-
biome interactions of anti-diabetics. EBioMedicine. 39:591–
602.
Wilson ID, Nicholson JK. 2017. Gut microbiome interactions
with drug metabolism, efficacy, and toxicity. Transl Res.
179:204–222.
Winston JA, Theriot CM. 2020. Diversification of host bile
acids by members of the gut microbiota. Gut Microbes.
11(2):158–171.
138
A. DŽIDIĆ-KRIVIĆ ET AL.

Xie Y, Hu F, Xiang D, Lu H, Li W, Zhao A, Huang L, Wang R.
2020. The metabolic effect of gut microbiota on drugs.
Drug Metab Rev. 52(1):139–156.
Yang L, Yuan TJ, Wan Y, Li WW, Liu C, Jiang S, Duan JA.
2022. Quorum sensing: a new perspective to reveal the
interaction between gut microbiota and host. Future
Microbiol. 17:293–309.
Yoo D-H, Kim IS, Van Le TK, Jung I-H, Yoo HH, Kim D-H. 2014.
Gut microbiota-mediated drug interactions between lovasta-
tin and antibiotics. Drug Metab Dispos. 42(9):1508–1513.
Yoo HH, Kim IS, Yoo D-H, Kim D-H. 2016. Effects of orally
administered antibiotics on the bioavailability of amlodi-
pine:
gut
microbiota-mediated
drug
interaction.
J
Hypertens. 34(1):156–162.
Zemanova N, Lnenickova K, Vavreckova M, Anzenbacherova
E, Anzenbacher P, Zapletalova I, Hermanova P, Hudcovic T,
Kozakova H, Jourova L. 2021. Gut microbiome affects the
metabolism of metronidazole in mice through regulation
of hepatic cytochromes P450 expression. PloS One. 16(11):
e0259643.
Zhang X, Han Y, Huang W, Jin M, Gao Z. 2021. The influence
of the gut microbiota on the bioavailability of oral drugs.
Acta Pharm Sin B. 11(7):1789–1812.
Zhang J, Sun Y, Wang R, Zhang J. 2019. Gut microbiota-
mediated drug-drug interaction between amoxicillin and
aspirin. Scient Rep. 9(1):1–8.
Zhang J, Zhang J, Wang R. 2018. Gut microbiota modulates
drug pharmacokinetics. Drug Metab Rev. 50(3):357–368.
Zhao L, Chen Y, Xia F, Abudukerimu B, Zhang W, Guo Y,
Wang N, Lu Y. 2018. A glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor
agonist lowers weight by modulating the structure of gut
microbiota. Front Endocrinol. 9:233.
Zimmermann M, Zimmermann-Kogadeeva M, Wegmann R,
Goodman AL. 2019. Separating host and microbiome con-
tributions to drug pharmacokinetics and toxicity. Science.
363(6427):eaat9931.
Zimmermann-Kogadeeva M, Zimmermann M, Goodman AL.
2020. Insights from pharmacokinetic models of host-micro-
biome drug metabolism. Gut Microbes. 11(3):587–596.
DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS
139