Natl Sci Rev, 2021, Vol. 8, nwaa208
CHEMISTRY
Special Topic: Aggregation-Induced Emission
Aggregation-induced emission in luminescent metal nanoclusters
Zhennan Wu1, Qiaofeng Yao1, Shuang-quan Zang3 and Jianping Xie
1,2,∗
Few-
to
hundred-atom
luminescent
metal nanoclusters (NCs) protected
by an organic monolayer have re-
cently emerged as a novel class of
chromophores, with facile preparation,
ultrafine size, low toxicity, high renal
clearance and excellent photostability
[1].
Luminescent
metal
NCs
hold
great promise for broad applications
in lighting, imaging, sensing and thera-
peutics [2]; however, the unsatisfactory
emission intensity of metal NCs has
constrained their further practical ap-
plications. In particular, the complexity,
diversity and mutability in terms of their
total structures preclude an in-depth
understanding of their emission origin
[1,3]. Therefore, there are very limited
approaches and principles available for
the desired improvements and tailoring
of their luminescence performance.
In this context, inspired by the con-
cept of aggregation-induced emission
(AIE) first coined by Tang in 2001 to
clarify the organic fluorophores involved
in photophysical variation upon aggrega-
tion [4], we successfully designed a new
family of ultrabright Au(0)@Au(I)-SR
(SR: deprotonated thiol ligands) core-
shell NCs in 2012, by preserving a high
content of Au(I)-SR complexes in the
protecting shell. Thereafter, AIE-type
luminescent metal NCs were developed
with markedly improved emission in-
tensity, leading to an increasing number
of studies in both the fundamental and
practical sectors [5].
In sharp contrast to the structure
of
large-sized
metal
nanoparticles
(>3 nm), in which the individual ligand
is attached directly to the close-packed
metal
core
substrate,
the
structure
of metal NCs can be illustrated by a
‘divide-and-protect’ model (Fig. 1a–c)
with the ‘staple motifs’ of metal(I)-
ligand wrapping over the metal core
[6,7]. The composition and structure of
metal(I)-ligand motifs are diverse (e.g.
from monomeric ML2 to heptameric
M7L8 in the case of Au NCs, where
M and L denote the metal and ligand,
respectively) and mostly determined
by curvature of the metal core. The AIE
concept allows emission enhancement
of metal NCs by effective restriction
of intra-/intermolecular motion (i.e.
vibration and rotation) of surface motifs,
minimizing non-radiative decay [8].
Keeping this in mind, the AIE of metal
NCs is, in essence, an affair closely
related to the surface-emission state
on the basis of ligand-to-metal charge
transfer
(LMCT)
and/or
ligand-to-
metal-metal charge transfer (LMMCT),
generating radiative relaxation via a
metal-centered triplet [1,9]. Therefore,
the AIE-type luminescent metal NCs
feature long decay lifetime (μs-level),
low emission energy (<2.2 eV) and
large Stokes shifts (>100 nm), and their
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the typical structure model of organic layer-protected (a) metal
nanoparticles (NPs) and (b and c) metal nanoclusters (NCs). In metal NPs, individual ligand is at-
tached independently and directly to the close-packed metal core; whereas in metal NCs, unique
staple-like metal(I)-ligand motifs (short and long/interlocked motifs for (b) and (c), respectively)
wrap over the metal(0) core of metal NCs, following a ‘divide-and-protect’ model. (d) and (e) are
the corresponding aggregates of (b) and (c), respectively. (Ligands: pink patches; metal(I): golden
patches; metal(0): golden spheres; all hydrocarbon tails of ligands are omitted for clarity.)
emission intensity is highly dependent
on the features of their surface and
interface [5,10].
This scenario imparts a fundamental
principle for performance improvement
of AIE-type luminescent metal NCs,
that is to positively affect the LMCT
and/or LMMCT process dictated by the
landscape of the surface (a synergy from
ligand-centered charge transfer process).
In this vein and at a single-cluster level,
several efficient strategies have been
identified: 1) to strengthen metal(I)-
ligand contacts by i) endowing surface
ligands with increased electron donation
capability to the core; ii) introducing
electron-rich
atoms
or
groups
into
surface ligands; and iii) increasing the
content of metal(I) species in the surface
motifs to strengthen the charge transfer
process of LMCT and/or LMMCT; 2)
to improve rigidity of the surface shell by
i) constructing long and/or interlocked
surface motifs (polymeric chain-like or
Page 1 of 3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nsr/article/8/6/nwaa208/5898676 by Qingdao Science and Technology Information Institute user on 25 June 2026

Natl Sci Rev, 2021, Vol. 8, nwaa208
ring-like metal(I)-ligand compounds)
(Fig. 1c); and ii) conferring ligands with
multiple interaction sites to anchor the
metal core, and to enhance the rates of
radiative energy transfer by suppressing
ligand-related nonradiative relaxation of
excited states. All these cases are related
to controlling the excited state relaxation
dynamics of LMCT and/or LMMCT
with different emphases on each other,
thus allowing production of brighter
AIE-type luminescent metal NCs.
In addition, beyond the single-cluster
level, treating metal NCs as building
blocks to direct their aggregation is
another well-recognized and effective
strategy for rendering the strong lu-
minescence of the metal NCs (Fig. 1d
and e). Aggregation of NCs can alter
ligand–ligand (e.g. restraining molec-
ular
vibrations),
ligand–metal
(e.g.
varying
conformation
of
interfaces)
and metal–metal (e.g. forming metal-
lophilic bonding) interactions, which
would further influence the excited
state relaxation dynamics. At present,
the most widely used methods are the
solvent- and cation-induced aggregation
of metal NCs triggered by disturbance
of solvent polarity and introduction of
electrostatic/coordination interactions,
respectively. However, both of these
approaches are challenging for homo-
geneity control over the NC aggregates,
which in general leads to poor color
purity. In contrast, exploring the directed
self-assembly of metal NCs is more
advanced for aggregating component
metal NCs into ordered, customizable
and versatile patterns, giving rise to
enhanced emission properties with high
controllability. Besides, this also provides
a platform to unravel the relationship
between
cluster
luminescence
and
packing attributes (e.g. spatial distri-
bution and inter-NC interactions). In
parallel to self-assembly, continuous
progress has been made on the crystal-
lization and the scaffold (e.g. zeolites,
metal/covalent-organic
frameworks)
confinement of metal NCs to attain
excellent AIE properties [11,12]. Some
fundamental inspirations are obtained
in these exquisite systems. For example,
the metal(I) species-related metal defect
state is evidently responsible for the
unexpected enhancement of emission
intensity of metal NC ensembles. In the
crystalline state, metal NCs can show
red-shift of the emission band, which
is caused by a combined effect of elec-
tronic coupling and lattice-originated,
nonradiative decay pathways occurring
through electron–photon interaction.
Moreover, a positive influence of host–
guest
interaction,
polarization
effect
and the localization of excitons on the
emission intensity of metal NCs is ob-
served in a surface confinement system
imposed by layered double hydroxide
nanosheets.
Although the surface engineering is
the most immediate breakthrough in
investigation of AIE-type luminescent
metal NCs, the contribution of metal(0)
core is also important and deserves fur-
ther attention. The metal(0) core can act
as the substrate to anchor surface motifs
for their condensation. And, with an ox-
idation agent, it is able to increase the
content of metal(I) species in sacrifice
of metal(0) core. In some cases, large
metal(0) core (i.e. 2–5 nm) dictated sur-
face plasmon resonance (SPR) can in-
duce a strong coupling effect with the
metal(I) involved surface emitter, lead-
ing to remarkable emission enhancement
of AIE-type metal NCs. Most impor-
tantly, the emission states derived from
the metal(0) core and the metal(I) sur-
face, generally with a fluorescence and
a phosphorescence feature, respectively,
can coexist or transform each other in the
scheme of AIE-type luminescent metal
NCs [1].
To sum up, the AIE mechanism has
been widely accepted and continuously
improved upon in the research commu-
nityofluminescentmetalNCs.However,
thecurrentdevelopmentofclusterchem-
istry has not yet reached unambiguous
agreement on the AIE fundamentals of
metal NC luminescence. In the near fu-
ture, it is likely that studies on AIE-type
metalNCswillremainaresearchhotspot,
which could include but is not limited to:
– Defining the relationship between the
structures and the AIE properties of
metal NCs to molecular-level preci-
sion, which would be greatly beneficial
for rational prediction, tailoring and
thus customization of highly lumines-
cent metal NCs.
– Tapping the potential of AIE-type
metal NCs in applications of related
biological systems. The development
of water-soluble, small-sized, highly
luminescent AIE-type metal NCs,
especially with near-infrared (NIR-I
and NIR-II regime) absorption and/or
emission, is still in its infancy.
– Adding high conductivity, thermosta-
bility and processability, etc., to AIE-
type metal NCs, thus allowing con-
struction of metal NC-based photo-
electric devices.
– Beyond the most investigated noble
metals (Au, Ag and their alloys), the
earth-abundant, low-cost metals (e.g.
Cu, Zn and other transition metals)
also deserve extensive exploration. For
instance, it would be worth explor-
ing AIE properties in Cu NCs, not
only because of their electronic con-
figuration (d10s1) which is similar to
that of Au/Ag, but also because of
the wide range of accessible oxidation
states (Cu0, CuI, CuII, and CuIII) [13].
– Understanding of the AIE concept has
deepened with increasing structural
recognition of luminescent metal NCs.
For example, it is more appropriate
to use ‘aggregation-induced emission
enhancement’ (AIEE) to describe
cases that involve the isolated metal
NCs with weak emission rather than
non-luminescence. Most recently, the
AIE of metal NCs has been categorized
as clusterization-triggered emission
(CTE) in consideration of their totally
nonconjugated structures, in which
the chromophores in clusterolumino-
gens are attributed to the significant
through-space
conjugation
(TSC)
built in the inter-/intra-NCs [14].
FUNDING
This work was supported by the Ministry of Educa-
tion, Singapore, Academic Research Grants R-279-
000-580-112 and R-279-000-538-114.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
Zhennan Wu1, Qiaofeng Yao1, Shuang-quan Zang3
and Jianping Xie
1,2,∗
1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, National University of Singapore,
Page 2 of 3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nsr/article/8/6/nwaa208/5898676 by Qingdao Science and Technology Information Institute user on 25 June 2026

Natl Sci Rev, 2021, Vol. 8, nwaa199
Singapore; 2Joint School of National University of
Singapore and Tianjin University, International
Campus of Tianjin University, China and 3Green
Catalysis Center, and College of Chemistry,
Zhengzhou University, China
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail: chexiej@nus.edu.sg
REFERENCES
1. Quintanilla M and Liz-Marz´an LM. Science 2018;
361: 645.
2. Shang L, Xu J and Nienhaus GU. Nano Today
2019; 28: 100767.
3. Wu Z, Yao Q and Chai OJH et al. Angew Chem Int
Ed 2020; 59: 9934–9.
4. Mei J, Leung NLC and Kwok RTK et al. Chem Rev
2015; 115: 11718–940.
5. Luo Z, Yuan X and Yu Y et al. J Am Chem Soc 2012;
134: 16662–70.
6. Jadzinsky PD, Calero G and Ackerson CJ et al.
Science 2007; 318: 430–3.
7. Walter M, Akola J and Acevedo OL et al. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 9157–62.
8. Kang X, Wang S and Song Y et al. Angew Chem
Int Ed 2016; 55: 3611–4.
9. Zhou M, Higaki T and Hu G et al. Science 2019;
364: 279–82.
10. Pyo K, Thanthirige VD and Kwak K et al. J Am
Chem Soc 2015; 137: 8244–50.
11. Huang R, Wei Y and Dong X et al. Nat Chem 2017;
9: 689–97.
12. Chen T, Yang S and Chai J et al. Sci Adv 2017; 3:
e1700956.
13. Wu Z, Liu J and Gao Y et al. J Am Chem Soc 2015;
137: 12906–13.
14. Zhang H, Zhao Z and McGonigal PR et al. Mater
Today 2020; 32: 275–92.
National Science Review
8: nwaa208, 2021
doi: 10.1093/nsr/nwaa208
Advance access publication 28 August 2020
Page 1 of 3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/nsr/article/8/6/nwaa208/5898676 by Qingdao Science and Technology Information Institute user on 25 June 2026