Full-length Article
A pentavalent peptide vaccine elicits Aβ and tau antibodies with
prophylactic activity in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model
Yiting Song a,1, Chun-Ling Dai b,1, Mitsuru Shinohara c, Yunn Chyn Tung b, Shiqi Zhou a,
Wei-Chiao Huang a,d, Amal Seffouh e, Yuan Luo a, Matthew Willadsen d, Yang Jiao a,
Maho Morishima f, Yuko Saito f, Seong-Ho Koh g, Joaquin Ortega e, Cheng-Xin Gong b,*,
Jonathan F. Lovell a,*
a Department of Biomedical Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA
b Department of Neurochemistry, Inge Grundke-Iqbal Research Floor, New York State Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY 10314,
USA
c Department of Aging Neurobiology, Research Institute, National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, 7-430, Morioka, Obu, Aichi 474-8511, Japan
d POP Biotechnologies, Buffalo, NY 14228, USA
e Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 0C7, Canada
f Department of Neuropathology (the Brain Bank for Aging Research), Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, 35-2, Sakaecho, Itabashi-ku,
Tokyo 173-0015, Japan
g Department of Neurology, Hanyang University Guri Hospital, Guri-si, Gyeonggi-do 11923, Republic of Korea
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Active immunotherapy
Vaccine
Peptides
Tau
Aβ
A B S T R A C T
Amyloid-β (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated tau protein are targets for Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) immunotherapies,
which are generally focused on single epitopes within Aβ or tau. However, due to the complexity of both Aβ and
tau in AD pathogenesis, a multipronged approach simultaneously targeting multiple epitopes of both proteins
could overcome limitations of monotherapies. Herein, we propose an active AD immunotherapy based on a
nanoparticle vaccine comprising two Aβ peptides (1–14 and pyroglutamate pE3-14) and three tau peptides
(centered on phosphorylated pT181, pT217 and pS396/404). These correspond to both soluble and aggregated
targets and are displayed on the surface of immunogenic liposomes in an orientation that maintains reactivity
with epitope-specific monoclonal antibodies. Intramuscular immunization of mice with individual epitopes
resulted in minimally cross-reactive antibody induction, while simultaneous co-display of 5 antigens (“5-plex”)
induced antibodies against all epitopes without immune interference. Post-immune sera recognized plaques and
neurofibrillary tangles from human AD brain tissue. Vaccine administration to 3xTg-AD mice using a prophy-
lactic dosing schedule inhibited tau and amyloid pathologies and resulted in improved cognitive function. Im-
munization was well tolerated and did not induce antigen-specific cellular responses or persistent inflammatory
responses in the peripheral or central nervous system. Antibody levels could be reversed by halting monthly
vaccinations. Altogether, these results indicate that active immune therapies based on nanoparticle formulations
of multiple Aβ and tau epitopes warrant further study for treating early-stage AD.
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common irreversible, progres-
sive neurodegenerative disease, characterized by progressive loss of
memory and other cognitive functions (McKhann et al., 2011; Norton
et al., 2014). At present, there are no effective treatments available to
slow or halt disease progression. The two histopathological hallmarks in
the brains of AD patients are extracellular senile plaques comprising
amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides (Glenner and Wong, 1984) and intracellular
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) comprising hyperphosphorylated tau
protein (Grundke-Iqbal et al., 1986). Both pathologies trigger neuronal
dysfunction, neurotoxicity, synaptic loss and inflammation, leading to
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: Chengxin.Gong@csi.cuny.edu (C.-X. Gong), jflovell@buffalo.edu (J.F. Lovell).
1 Equal contribution
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Brain Behavior and Immunity
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ybrbi
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2024.08.028
Received 3 December 2023; Received in revised form 19 June 2024; Accepted 11 August 2024
Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
Available online 12 August 2024 
0889-1591/© 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

cognitive impairment, affecting memory and behavior, culminating
with severe dementia and death (Vogt et al., 2023).
Harnessing the immune system to prevent or clear Aβ and tau ag-
gregates is an active area of research (Dai et al., 2015; Winblad et al.,
2014). Based on the Aβ cascade hypothesis (Hardy and Selkoe, 2002),
most therapeutic approaches focus on reducing Aβ plaques in the brain
(Giacobini and Gold, 2013). However, prior Aβ active or passive im-
munotherapies targeting different Aβ epitopes did not show cognitive
benefit in moderate to severe AD patients (Doody et al., 2014; Pasquier
et al., 2016; Salloway et al., 2014; Siemers et al., 2016; Vandenberghe
et al., 2016). Therefore, treatment during the early stages of clinical
symptoms may be more effective in delaying downstream events, such
as neuroinflammation and tau pathology (Lemere, 2013; Rajan et al.,
2015; Shrestha et al., 2023). Immunotherapy for AD is being investi-
gated for the prevention and early treatment of AD (Dai et al., 2022).
Indeed, the Aβ monoclonal antibody Aducanumab has been approved
for patients with mild to moderate AD (Dunn et al., 2021) as well as
Lecanemab for early AD (Larkin, 2023). At the same time, multivariate
analyses indicate that the density of NFTs, neuronal loss and synapse
loss, but not amyloid load, correlate with cognitive impairment in pa-
tients with AD (Alafuzoff et al., 1987; Arriagada et al., 1992; Gianna-
kopoulos et al., 2003; Terry et al., 1991). Targeting tau pathology could
alternatively be just as efficacious as Aβ-directed clearance therapy for
patients with AD. Immunotherapies targeting different tau epitopes,
including non-phosphorylated, phosphorylated, oligomeric, and trun-
cated tau, have shown beneficial effects in preclinical and ongoing
clinical AD studies (Ji and Sigurdsson, 2021).
The epitopes selected for Aβ and tau immunotherapy play a role in
therapeutic outcomes and also unforeseen side effects. AN1792, the first
Aβ vaccine consisted of Aβ1-42, caused aseptic meningoencephalitis in
6 % of treated patients, possibly due to Aβ-specific T-cell mediated pro-
inflammatory responses (Monsonego et al., 2003; Orgogozo et al., 2003;
Vogt et al., 2023). Epitope mapping studies clarified that central part of
full-length Aβ, Aβ16-33, mediated the T-cell response (Monsonego et al.,
2003). Several Aβ immunotherapies targeting the N-terminus of Aβ have
shown beneficial effects in preclinical studies, but clinical trials did not
demonstrate improvement in cognitive performance in patients with
moderate to severe AD (Ackley et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2022; Marciani,
2019). A liposome-based vaccine, ACI-24.060 targeting Aβ1-15 (Clinical
Trials.gov # NCT05462106), developed by AC Immune was well-
tolerated and facilitated antibody production against Aβ variants with
completed phase I and ongoing phase 1b/2a trail in patients with mild-
staged AD (Muhs et al., 2007). Studies indicate that N-terminal–-
truncated and pyroglutamate-modified Aβ peptides at residue 3 (pE3-
Aβ) are abundant in cored and diffuse Aβ deposits in the brains of AD
patients (Bayer, 2022; Lowe et al., 2021; Mintun et al., 2021; van Dyck,
2018). Thus, immunotherapy against the N-terminus of Aβ, including
pE3-Aβ may present a promising approach for AD treatment and indeed
the antibody Donanemab, which recognizes pE3-Aβ, is currently in large
scale clinical testing.
While Aβ is involved in the pathogenesis of AD, tau pathology is also
predominantly correlated with cognitive impairment in AD patients
(Arriagada et al., 1992; Giannakopoulos et al., 2003). Unlike normal tau
that interacts with tubulin and promotes its assembly in microtubules,
abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau is prone to form oligomers and
consequently neurofibrillary tangles, the hallmark brain pathology of
tauopathies (Alonso et al., 1996a; Alonso et al., 1994; Kopke et al.,
1993). Thus, tau immunotherapy may be more effective in improving
dementia symptoms and cognitive function in AD patients than Aβ
immunotherapy. Immunotherapies targeting different epitopes and
species of tau have also shown beneficial effects in preclinical studies,
and in clinical trials of these immunotherapies for AD are ongoing (Ji
and Sigurdsson, 2021). Clearance of extracellular tau might be the pri-
mary mechanism of tau immunotherapy. Studies have indicated that tau
can be actively released into the extracellular space under physiological
conditions (Katsinelos et al., 2018; Wang and Mandelkow, 2016) and be
passively released during neurodegeneration. Hyperphosphorylated tau
at the site threonine 181 (pTau181) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) has
been extensively validated as a biomarker of AD and is currently widely
used as one of the diagnostic criteria in clinical practice and for patient
selection in clinical trials (Dubois et al., 2014; Molinuevo et al., 2018;
Ossenkoppele et al., 2022). Recent studies indicate that hyper-
phosphorylated tau at threonine 217 in CSF is also a promising
biomarker of AD (Janelidze et al., 2021; Janelidze et al., 2020). Addi-
tionally, phosphorylation of tau protein at sites Serine 396/404 is one of
the earliest events in AD (Mondragon-Rodriguez et al., 2014). In pre-
clinical studies, active and passive immunotherapy targeting pTau396/
404 with different monoclonal antibodies decreased tau pathology and
improved cognitive function in other AD mouse models (Asuni et al.,
2007; Boutajangout et al., 2011; Boutajangout et al., 2010; Gu et al.,
2013). Additionally, passive immunization with antibody 77E9 target-
ing tau 184–195 also decreased tau pathology and improved cognitive
function in 3xTg-AD mice (Dai et al., 2017). Importantly, active
immunotherapy with ACI-35 vaccine targeting pTau396/404 is in Phase
II clinical trials in early AD patients (Clinical Trial #NCT04445831), and
passive immunization with Lu AF87908 against tau pS396/S404 is in
phase I and II trials in healthy and early AD patients (Clinical Trial
#NCT04149860
and
NCT04619420).
Passive
immunization
with
JNJ−63733657 against pTau212/217 is in phase I clinical trials in
healthy participants (Clinical Trial #NCT05407818) (Dai et al., 2022).
Some recent studies have targeted multiple epitopes from Aβ and tau
as a proof-of-concept active immunotherapy (Davtyan et al., 2019).
However, most immunotherapy studies have only targeted either Aβ or
tau, focusing on single epitopes within Aβ or tau (Marciani, 2019;
Plotkin and Cashman, 2020). Considering the pivotal role of both Aβ and
tau pathologies in the pathogenesis and progression of AD, a novel
immunotherapeutic strategy targeting simultaneously multiple epitopes
of both Aβ and tau proteins is expected to maximally clear the Aβ and tau
aggregates and inhibit the formation and propagation of Aβ and tau
pathologies in the brain. Several studies have shown the efficacy of
Aβ level reduction in response to β-secretase (BACE) inhibitors in both
preclinical and clinical trial (e.g. Clinical Trial # NCT01978548) (Oblak
et al., 2022; Timmers et al., 2016). Therefore, facilitating prophylactic
therapies for early stage of AD is also encouraged before patients have
progressed into an overt dementia.
An
adjuvant-based
liposome
containing
cobalt-porphyrin-
phospholipids (CoPoP) promotes spontaneous biostable binding of his-
tagged antigens that incorporate into a bilayer due to the interaction
with intrabilayer chelated cobalt (Shao et al., 2015a). Modified CoPoP
liposome with Phosphorylated HexaAcyl Disaccharide 3D6A (abbrevi-
ated herein as PHAD) elicits high immunogenicity of functional anti-
body responses against several pathogens due to high antigen presenting
cells (APCs) uptake (Huang et al., 2022; Sia et al., 2021a; Zhou et al.,
2023). At present, CoPoP/PHAD formulated vaccine technology has
been successfully used for a human-tested COVID-19 vaccine (Huang
et al., 2020; Lovell et al., 2022; Mabrouk et al., 2021), and preclinical
vaccines for cancer immunotherapy (He et al., 2021), malaria (Huang
et al., 2018b), lyme disease (Federizon et al., 2020), and influenza (Sia
et al., 2021b). CoPoP/PHAD liposome can be further co-formulated with
another adjuvant, such as QS-21, that is well-known for stimulating Th1
and Th2 response to enhance immune response (Lacaille-Dubois, 2019).
In this study, we propose a novel vaccine, termed 5-plex, generated
by
admixture
of
short
his-tagged
N-terminal
Aβ
(Aβ1-14),
pyroglutamate-modified Aβ (AβpE3-14), tau171-191 (tau-pT181), tau207-227
(tau-pT217), and tau388-407 (tau-pS396/S404) peptides with liposomes
containing CoPoP/PHAD to assess its prophylactic effect on AD-like
pathologies and cognitive function in 3xTg-AD mice at early stage.
The epitopes of the 5-plex vaccine were selected on the basis of previous
preclinical studies of individual single-epitope biomarker and immu-
notherapy approaches. We initiated the first vaccination at 3 months
(prior to the onset of amyloid plaques that start at ~ 6 months of age and
of neurofibrillary tangles that start at ~ 12 months of age in 3xTg-AD
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
186 

mice (Belfiore et al., 2019a)), followed with three boosters at a 3-week
interval, performed behavioral tests, and euthanized the animals 32
weeks after completion of the vaccination. We found that the 5-plex
vaccine induced high titers of antibodies against their specific antigens
without induction of detectable inflammatory responses in the periph-
eral or central nervous system. Active immunization with 5-plex was
well tolerated, decreased AD-like pathologies, and improved cognitive
function in 3xTg-AD mice.
2. Results
2.1. Nanoparticle formulation of multivalent synthetic Aβ/tau epitopes
CoPoP/PHAD liposomes promote a biostable vaccine platform dis-
playing multivalent antigens on the surface and rapidly forms nano-
particles through a simple admixture. The synthetic peptides (Aβ1-14,
AβpE3-14, taupT181, taupT217, and taupS396/S404) were modified with 2, 3 or
4 exogenous histidine residues, so that they would contain 4 consecutive
histidine residues which are sufficient for interaction with CoPoP, for
stable display on liposome surfaces as depicted in Fig. 1A. The binding of
individual peptide or multivalent peptides to CoPoP/PHAD liposomes or
PoP/PHAD liposomes, which lack cobalt, was assessed. After incubating
with liposomes for 3 h at 37 ◦C, over 85 % of peptides bound to CoPoP/
PHAD liposomes in both individual and multiplexed formats, whereas
peptides did not bind efficiently to cobalt-free PoP liposomes (Fig. 1B).
To examine the conformational integrity of peptides bound to the lipo-
somes, an immuno-slot blot assay was carried out after incubation.
Epitope-specified monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) or polyclonal anti-
bodies (pAbs) were found to target their specific antigens in particle
format, as shown in a chemiluminescence blot (Fig. 1C). The weak
detection for AβpE3-14 against 6E10 appeared to be due to the similar
peptide sequence as Aβ1-14, except pyroglutamate-modified on 3rd
amino acid position. The 5-plex vaccine was effectively recognized by all
antibodies, indicating that each antigen was bound to liposomes and
retained peptide epitope surface accessibility. When CoPoP/PHAD was
replaced with PoP/PHAD liposomes or PBS, the soluble peptides would
easily pass through the nitrocellulose membrane and became less
apparent to be accessible with the detection antibodies (SI Figure 1A,B).
Additionally, the morphology of liposomes was studied by using
cryo-transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM). We observed that
the liposomes were spherical with liposome sizes of ~ 100 nm in
diameter after being bound with or without antigens (Fig. 1D). This
cryo-TEM result was also confirmed by dynamic light scattering (DLS)
with measured size ~ 100–120 nm in diameter and polydispersity index
less than 0.20 (SI Figure 1C and D), indicating that there were no sig-
nificant liposome aggregations appeared during particleization. The
analytical RP-HPLC revealed different elution times for individual
peptides absorbed at UV 220 nm, and consequently, all corresponding
five peptide peaks were quantified and observed separately in the 5-plex
(Fig. 1E). Taken together, both individual and multivalent Aβ and tau
peptides displayed on CoPoP/PHAD liposomes remained intact with
evidence of unaltered antigen conformations.
2.2. Antibody induction by multivalent vaccine and immunoreactivities to
AD pathology
To elucidate antigen efficacy when particleized, monovalent and
multivalent antigens incubated with either CoPoP/PHAD liposome or
alum were used to immunize mice intramuscularly on days 0 and 21,
with serum collected on day 42 for ELISA testing of immunoglobulin G
(IgG) titers (Fig. 2A). Compared to the titer levels from mice immunized
with alum admixture or untreated control mice, CoPoP/PHAD liposome-
displayed Aβ1-14, AβpE3-14, taupT181, taupT217, and taupS396/S404 gener-
ated higher levels of antibodies against their own antigen sequences
(apart from Aβ1-14 antisera against to fibrillar Aβ1-42). Due to overlapped
sequence, there was cross-reactivity observed at lower IgG titer levels
between Aβ1-14 and AβpE3-14, and statistical analysis showed a substan-
tial difference in targeting its own specified antigen. In contrast, the
multivalent antigens with alum induced no significant antibody induc-
tion. Similarly, monovalent liposomal antigen immunization did not
induce antibodies against other antigens excluded from the liposomal
formulation. The 5-plex vaccine revealed robust antibody responses
Fig. 1. Admixture of his-tagged Aβ/Tau peptides spontaneously form nanoparticles with CoPoP/PHAD liposomes. (A) Schematic representation of particle formation
of 5-plex displaying on CoPoP/PHAD liposomes. (B) Binding percentage of individual antigens and 5-plex to CoPoP/PHAD or PoP/PHAD liposomes (served as a
control) after 3 h incubation at 37 ◦C, using a microcentrifugal filtration assay. Error bars show mean ± SD of triplicated tests. Statistical analysis was performed by
unpaired t-test (two tailed), ****p < 0.0001. (C) Immuno-slot blot assay showing specific immunoreaction of 10 ng/mL CoPoP/PHAD liposome-bound antigens,
which was detected by using Aβ or Tau epitope-specific antibodies as indicated on the left side of the blot. (D) Cryo-electron microscopy image of CoPoP/PHAD
liposomes after incubation with (right) or without (left) 5-plex peptides at 37 ◦C for 3 h. A 50 nm scale bar is shown. (E) Reversed Phase High Performance Liquid
Chromatography (RP-HPLC) chromatographs of peptide elution with UV detection at 220 nm.
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
187 

Fig. 2. Multivalent vaccine elicits antibodies in mice that recognize Aβ plaques and NFTs. (A) IgG antibody titers were monitored and assessed by ELISA. The serum
was collected from ICR mice (n = 5) immunized with immunogens of Aβ or tau or 5-plex with CoPoP/PHAD liposome or alum on days 0 and 21, and bled on day 42.
Vaccine was incubated with liposomes in either “mosaic” way displaying multiple antigens per liposome or “cocktail” way displaying one antigen per liposome on the
surface. 5-plex “mosaic” shown in green box was the vaccine used in further 3xTg-AD mice immunization. Error bars show mean ± SD for n = 5. *P<0.05,
**P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001, as determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test using log-transformed values. (B) Representative IHC staining
of serial AD brain tissue sections with anti-Aβ1-14, anti-taupS396/S404, 2-plex, and control sera targeted at parahippocampal gryus regions. Scale bar: 500 μm. (C)
Enlarged views of 100 μm scale bar indicate the neurofibrillary tau tangles (red arrows) and amyloid plaques (blue arrows) stained with anti-Aβ1-14, anti-taupS396/S404,
5-plex, and control sera in temporal cortex. (D) Staining of amyloid-beta and phosphorylated tau using control, anti-Aβ1-14, anti-AβpE3-14, anti-taupT181, anti-taupT217,
anti-taupS396/S404, 2-plex and 5-plex antibodies were observed in the amygdala section with 100 μm scale bars. Images in B and D used samples from an 83-year-old
male AD patient, wheras images in C used samples from a 73 year-old male AD patient. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
188 

against all Aβ and tau coated antigens. We also compared the immu-
nogenicity among different immunogen formats and found no signifi-
cant differences in IgG titers between the monovalent and the 5-plex
vaccines in either mosaic or cocktail format against Aβ1-14, AβpE3-14,
taupT181, taupT217, (SI Fig 2A–D). An exception was observed for vac-
cines against taupS396/404, where a small difference in the titers was
found between the monovalent and the mosaic form (SI Fig 2E). How-
ever, no significant titer difference was observed in cross-reactivity of
phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated tau peptides. (SI Fig 3A and B).
AD brain tissue immunohistochemical staining was further assessed
with those anti-sera from mice immunized with individual, duplex (2-
plex), or multiplexed (5-plex) antigen liposomal vaccine. Serial sections
of AD brains were immunostained with enhanced anti-Aβ antibodies for
Aβ plaques detection or anti-Tau antibodies for NFT detection. In the
amygdala and its adjacent areas, parahippocampal gyrus and temporal
cortex, a significant number of Aβ plaques (diameter > 30 µm) and tau
tangles (diameter > 10 µm) indicated the apparent immunoreactive
responses with anti-Aβ1-14, anti-AβpE3-14, anti-taupT181, anti-taupT217,
anti-taupS396/S404, 2-plex and 5-plex antibodies, whereas negligible
pathologic hallmarks were observed from control mouse antisera
(Fig. 2B–D). With its specified view at amygdala and temporal cortex, Aβ
plaques (pointed by blue arrows) and tau tangles (pointed by red ar-
rows) were appreciably stained by those indicated antisera (Fig. 2C and
D). Multiple diffused Aβ plaques were detected by with anti-Aβ1-14, and
anti-AβpE3-14, while neurofibrillary tau tangles were detected by anti-
taupT181, anti-taupT217, and anti-taupS396/404 antibodies in amygdala
sections. Correspondingly, multivalent liposomal vaccines containing
five
antigens
successfully
induced
antibodies
to
recognize
both
hallmarks (Fig. 2C and D). Compared to the monovalent liposomal
vaccines that only induced either anti-Aβ or anti-Tau antibodies, the 5-
plex vaccine not only promoted a wider targeting site against Aβ1-14,
AβpE3-14, taupT181, taupT217, and taupS396/404 simultaneously, but also
elicited strong antibodies that detected pathological Aβ plaques and tau
tangles in human brain sections.
2.3. Evaluation of antibody generation after immunization of mice with 5-
plex vaccine
To evaluate the functional antibodies induced by the liposomal 5-
plex vaccine, both B6129SF2/J-WT and 3xTg-AD mice were intramus-
cularly administered with four doses of 5-plex immunizations to access
anti-Aβ or anti-Tau IgG titers. In contrast, no immunization was per-
formed on control WT and 3xTg-AD mice. After the initial priming on
week 0, vaccinated mice at aged 3 or 4 months were administered the
boost every 3 weeks until week 9, and 100 μL blood was collected from
all mouse groups prior to subsequent immunization through subman-
dibular bleeding until week 12 for assessing the immunogenicity by
ELISA assay. Mice were quarantined at Charles River Lab for 9 weeks
before the behavior tests started (Fig. 3A). A serological analysis of
serum IgG was measured against Aβ42 fibrillar (Fig. 3B), AβpE3-14
(Fig. 3C), taupT181(Fig. 3D), taupT217 (Fig. 3E), taupS396/404 (Fig. 3F) at
every 3 weeks after post-immunizations. We found marked generation of
specific antibodies against all the five expected epitopes starting three
weeks after initial immunization (Fig. 3B–F). The antibody titers
increased remarkably with boosting doses and appeared to reach the
peaks after three doses of vaccines. There was no difference in the
Fig. 3. 5-plex vaccine induces specific antibodies in 3xTg-AD and WT mice. (A) Immunization schedule for mice vaccinated with the 5-plex vaccine. Groups of WT
(aged 13–14 weeks) and 3xTg-AD mice (aged 15–16 weeks) were vaccinated, quarantined, and sent out for behavior testing at the times indicated. Prime vaccination
(week 0) at mice aged 3 or 4 months is performed. Submandibular blood was collected prior to the next immunization to examine the antibody levels by ELISA
coating with (B) Aβ1-42 fibrils, (C) AβpE3-14, (D) taupT181, (E) taupT217, (F) taupS396/404. Error bars show mean ± SD for n = 20 per group for WT/vaccinated, WT/
control, 3xTg-AD/vaccinated, and 3xTg-AD/control groups initially. **P<0.01 and ****P<0.0001, as determined by unpaired two-tailed t-test using log-
transformed values of IgG titers on week 12 and week 39.
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
189 

immunogenicity of this vaccine between the 3xTg-AD mice and WT
mice. As expected, mice without receiving any vaccine injections
showed only the background levels of IgG titers at all time points
(Fig. 3A–F). At week 37 when the mice had not received further boosting
doses, the specific antibody titers reduced to 21–34 % of the highest
titers, but the antibody levels were still significantly higher than the
background levels. Taken together, these results indicated that the im-
munization with 4 doses of multivalent 5-plex vaccine can induce high
levels of specific anti-Aβ and anti-tau antibodies for a reasonable period
of time (weeks to months) in mice.
2.4. Prevention of cognitive impairment of 3xTg-AD mice by
immunization with 5-plex vaccine
To investigate whether immunization with the 5-plex vaccine can
prevent cognitive impairment in 3 × Tg-AD mice, we conducted open
field test, Morris water maze (MWM) and reversal Morris water maze
(rMWM) tasks to assess the special learning and reference memory
(Fig. 4A). Since anxiety can adversely affect cognitive function (Mah
et al., 2016; Scott et al., 2015), we first assessed whether there is a
difference in anxiety among WT and 3xTg-AD mice immunized with the
5-plex vaccine or placebo. We found that the immunization with the 5-
plex vaccine reduced the locomotive activity in the 3xTg-AD mice but
not in the WT mice (Fig. 4B). 3xTg-AD mice travelled similar distances in
the apparatus compared with the WT mice, suggesting no difference in
the
locomotive
activity
between
the
3xTg-AD
and
WT
mice.
Additionally, the 3xTg-AD mice exhibited similar central entries (SI
Figure 4A), time spent in the central area (SI Figure 4B), and central
distance travelled (%) compared to the WT mice (SI Figure 4C), which
indicates that there is no significant difference in the anxiety between
the 3xTg-AD and WT mice. The 3xTg-AD and WT mice vaccinated with
5-plex have similar central entries and time in the central area compared
to their control animals (SI Figure 4A–C), which suggests that immuni-
zation with 5-plex does not affect animals’ anxiety.
During MWM test, the 3xTg-AD mice took a significantly longer time
than the WT mice to find the hidden platform in the acquisition phase
(Fig. 4C). They also spent less time in the target quadrant (Fig. 4D) and
platform area (Fig. 4E) and had fewer target crossings (Fig. 4F) than the
WT mice in the probe test phase. These results indicate that the 3xTg-AD
mice exhibited special learning and memory impairments. No signifi-
cant difference was observed in the latency to the first entry into the
platform area (Fig. 4G). However, immunization with the 5-plex vaccine
did not significantly affect the escape latency in the acquisition phase or
the time in the target quadrant and platform area in 3xTg-AD and WT
animals during the probe trial test.
During the rMWM test, we observed that the 3xTg-AD mice after
prior immunization with the 5-plex vaccine not only took less time than
the control 3xTg-AD mice to find the hidden platform in the acquisition
phase (Fig. 4I), but also spent more extended time in the platform area
(Fig. 4K), had more target crossings (Fig. 4L), and took much less time to
enter the target quadrant (Fig. 4M) during probe trial test. Unlike the
unvaccinated 3xTg-AD mice that showed clear cognitive impairment,
Fig. 4. Immunization with 5-plex vaccine prevents cognitive impairment in 3xTg-AD mice. (A) Schematic representation of open field test,MWM test and rMWM test.
(B) Total distance travelled in apparatus was recorded. (C-H), MWM test. (C), the escape latency (sec) to reach the hidden platform during acquisition phase for 4
consecutive days. Percent time in the quadrant (D), percent time in the platform area (E), number of target crossings (F), latency to first entrance into target zone (G),
and swim speed (H) during the probe trial. (I-N), rMWM test. (I), the escape latency (sec) to reach the hidden platform during acquisition phase for 3 consecutive
days. Percent time in the quadrant (J), percent time in the platform area (K), number of target crossings (L), latency to first entrance into target zone (M), and swim
speed (N) during the probe trial. N=20 for WT/5-plex, 17 for WT/control, 17 for 3xTg-AD/5-plex, and 16 for 3xTg-AD/control. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
by two-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni’s posthoc test.
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
190 

the performance of the vaccinated 3xTg-AD mice in the rMWM was
indistinguishable from the WT control mice. These results indicate that
prior immunization with the 5-plex vaccine can prevent the deficits in
special learning and memory of the 3xTg-AD mice. No significant dif-
ference was observed in the swim speed among the groups of mice
(Fig. 4H and N), which otherwise could affect the performance of mice in
the water maze.
2.5. Reduction of tau pathology in the brains of 3xTg-AD mice after
immunization with 5-plex vaccine
The 3xTg-AD mice develop AD tau pathology in the brain gradually.
We thus investigated whether immunization of these mice with the 5-
plex vaccine before the appearance of tau pathology can delay or pre-
vent tau pathology in the mouse brain. Monoclonal antibody AT8, which
recognizes tau hyperphosphorylated at Ser202/Thr205 as well as NFTs,
is widely used for tau pathology studies and thus was used in this study
to assess tau pathology through immunohistochemical studies. We
observed immunostaining with AT8 antibody in 3xTg-AD mice but not
in WT animals (Fig. 5A), which indicated that it is the specific AT8
staining observed in 3xTg-AD animals. Importantly, we observed a clear
overall reduction of AT8 immunoreactivity throughout the brains of
3xTg-AD mice after prior immunization with the 5-plex vaccine
compared to those without immunization. The AT8 immunostaining was
abundant in the hippocampus where its reduction with immunization
was clearly seen (Fig. 5A) and quantified (Fig. 5B). These results indicate
that immunization with the 5-plex vaccine can delay or reduce tau pa-
thology in the brains of 3xTg-AD mice.
We also determined the level and phosphorylation state of tau pro-
tein in the mouse brains by semi-quantitative western blots of the hip-
pocampal tissue homogenates. The 43D blot confirmed tau transgene of
the 3xTg-AD mice since this antibody recognizes only human tau but not
mouse tau (Fig. 5C). Polyclonal antibody R134d was used to measure the
total tau level in the tissue homogenates, as this antibody recognizes
both human tau and mouse tau independent of its phosphorylation state.
Surprisingly, our analysis revealed that more tau level, as measured with
antibody R134d, is in the hippocampi of 3xTg-AD mice after prior im-
munization with 5-plex vaccine than those without prior immunization
(Fig. 5C,D). However, contrary to our expectations, we did not observe a
marked reduction in tau band intensities with phosphorylation-
dependent tau antibodies in the vaccinated 3xTg-AD mice group
compared to those of non-vaccinated group (Fig. 5C), suggesting a
reduction in the net phosphorylation level of tau proteins (i.e., the ratio
of pTau/total tau) in the vaccinated group. Quantifications of the net tau
phosphorylation levels by normalization of pTau intensity with the total
tau level confirmed that the prior immunization of 3xTg-AD mice with
the 5-plex vaccine reduced the net phosphorylation of tau (pTau/total
tau) at T181, S202/T205 (AT8 sites) and T217 (Fig. 5D). These results
are consistent with our immunohistochemical findings that immuniza-
tion with the 5-plex vaccine can delay or decrease tau pathology in the
brains of 3xTg-AD mice. In addition, reduction of net tau phosphoryla-
tion level at T181, S199, S202/T205, T212, T217 and Ser396/Ser404
(PHF1 sites) was also observed in WT mice after immunization with the
5-plex vaccine.
We further investigated the levels of sarkosyl-soluble and −insoluble
tau in the cerebrocortical tissue. Consistent with the results in the hip-
pocampus, we also found significantly more soluble tau level in the
cortex of 3xTg-AD mice after prior immunization with the 5-plex vaccine
than those without prior immunization (Fig. 5E and F). Quantifications
of the net tau phosphorylation levels by normalization of pTau intensity
with the total tau level indicated that the prior immunization with the 5-
plex vaccine reduced the net phosphorylation of tau at T181, T217, and
S396/S404 (PHF1 sites) in 3xTg-AD mice, and at T181 and T217 in WT
mice (Fig. 5E and F). Importantly, immunization with 5-plex signifi-
cantly reduced the ratio of insoluble to soluble total tau, as determined
by using antibody R134d (Fig. 5G and H), suggesting that the vaccine
can prevent or reduce the aggregation of tau in the mouse brain. The
levels of phosphorylated tau at T181, T217, and S396/S404 (PHF1 sites)
were also found to be decreased significantly after immunization with
the vaccine in 3xTg-AD mice (Fig. 5G and H). In wild-type control mice,
immunization with 5-plex only reduced the level of sarkosyl-insoluble
tau phosphorylated tau at S396/S404 (PHF1 sites) significantly. Alto-
gether, these results suggest that immunization with 5-plex can prevent
and/or reduce hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of tau in the
brains of 3xTg-AD mice.
2.6. Reduction of amyloid pathology in the brains of 3xTg-AD mice after
immunization with 5-plex vaccine
The 5-plex vaccine was designed to attack both tau and amyloid
pathologies in the brain. To investigate whether early vaccination can
prevent or reduce the development of amyloid pathology in the 3xTg-AD
mouse brains, we studied Aβ pathology by both Thioflavin S (Ths) and
Aβ staining of the brain tissue sections and ELISA of the brain tissue
extracts. We found amyloid plaques scattering in the brains of 3xTg-AD
mice, as stained by Ths that typically stains the β-pleated sheet confor-
mation of mature amyloid plaques. The majority of Ths-positive plaques
were observed in the subiculum of the mouse brains (Fig. 6A). As ex-
pected, a noticeable reduction in the number of amyloid plaques was
seen in the brains of 3xTg-AD mice after immunization with the 5-plex
vaccine compared to the mice without prior immunization, which was
confirmed by quantification analysis (Fig. 6B). These results suggest that
immunization with the 5-plex vaccine can delay or reduce amyloid pa-
thology in the brains of 3xTg-AD mice. However, when the areas of the
Ths-positive staining were quantified, such a reduction did not reach
statistical significance (Fig. 6C). Since Ths stains mature amyloid fibrils
with a β-sheet conformation only, we further stained the brain tissue
sections with an Aβ antibody. As expected, the Aβ immunofluorescent
staining revealed more and larger amyloid plaques than the Ths staining
in the subiculum (Fig. 6C and E). Importantly, immunization with 5-plex
significantly reduced the amyloid plaque area in the subiculum (Fig. 6D
and E). The amyloid plaques tested by both Ths and Aβ antibody staining
were found to be restricted in the subiculum area of 3xTg-AD mice. In
addition, the ELISA assays of Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels in the brain extracts
did not show significant differences between the 3xTg-AD mice with
prior immunization with the 5-plex vaccine and those without prior
immunization (SI Figure 5A–C).
2.7. Effects of immunization of 3xTg-AD mice with 5-plex vaccine on
neuronal and glial proteins
Neuronal and synaptic loss are among the pathological features of
AD and correlates strongly with the progression of the disease. We thus
studied the neuronal and synaptic proteins in the brains of mice post
immunization with the 5-plex vaccine. We found significant increase in
the level of presynaptic protein synapsin 1, postsynaptic protein PSD95,
and neuronal marker NeuN in the 3xTg-AD mice after immunization as
compared to those without immunization (Fig. 7). These results suggest
that the cognitive benefits of the vaccine observed in this study might
partially be attribute to the protection of neurons and synapses with the
immunization. We also determined the astrocyte marker GFAP and
microglia marker Iba1, as elevations of these two markers in the brain
indicate neuroinflammation. We found a slight decrease in the GFAP
level and no change in the Iba1 level with the 5-plex vaccination (Fig. 7).
These results indicate that immunization with the 5-plex vaccine does
not induce chronic neuroinflammation.
2.8. Safety of the 5-plex vaccine
The most significant adverse effects of the amyloid immunotherapy
for AD are the increased risk for microhemorrhages and cerebral amy-
loid angiopathy (Pfeifer et al., 2002), which are probably caused by
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
191 

(caption on next page)
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
192 

Fig. 5. Immunization with 5-plex decreases tau pathology in mouse brains. (A) Immunostaining with AT8 antibody of the CA1 sector of the hippocampus of mice
with or without prior immunization with the 5-plex vaccine. (B) Quantification of AT8 immunostaining intensity in the CA1 region was done from 6 sections which
were from every 6th sagittal brain section per mouse. N=13 for 3xTg-AD/control, and 14 for 3xTg-AD/5-plex. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. **p < 0.01 by
unpaired two-tailed t-test. (C) Representative Western blots of the hippocampus developed with 43D against human transgenic tau, R134d against total tau, and with
several phosphorylation-dependent and site-specific tau antibodies. (D) Densitometric quantification of the blots in C after normalization with total tau level (R134d
blot). (E) Representative Western blots of sarkosyl-soluble fraction of the cerebrocortex developed with R134d against total tau, and with several phosphorylation-
dependent and site-specific tau antibodies. (F) Densitometric quantification of the blots in E after normalization with total tau level (R134d blot). (G) Representative
Western blots of sarkosyl insoluble fraction of the cortex developed with R134d against total tau, and with several phosphorylation-dependent and site-specific tau
antibodies. (H) Densitometric quantification of the insoluble tau (F) after normalization with the soluble total tau level (R134d blot). Data are the percentage of
control-treated animals and are presented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 ***p < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test. For C −F, N=6 for WT/control, 6 for WT/
5-plex, 10 for 3xTg-AD/control, and 10 for 3xTg-AD/5-plex.For G and H, N=6 for WT/control, 6 for WT/5-plex, 10 for 3xTg-AD/control, and 8 for 3xTg-AD/5-plex.
Fig. 6. Immunization with 5-plex reduces amyloid plaques in 3xTg-AD mouse brains. (A) Staining of the subiculum of 3xTg-AD mouse brains with thioflavin S. (B)
Quantification of the number of thioflavin S positive (Ths+) amyloid plaques (Arrow), and (C) the area of amyloid plaques in the subiculum from 6 sections (every 6th
sagittal brain section per mouse). (D) Staining of the subiculum of 3xTg-AD mouse brains with an Aβ antibody. (E) Quantification of the area of amyloid plaques in
the subiculum from 6 sections (every 6th sagittal brain section per mouse). Data are presented as mean ± SEM *p < 0.05 by unpaired two-tailed t test. N=13 for
3xTg-AD/control, and 14 for 3xTg-AD/5-plex.
Fig. 7. Immunization with 5-plex increases synaptic proteins. (A), Representative Western blots of the hippocampus developed with antibodies against synaptic
proteins and neuroinflammation markers. (B), Densitometric quantification of the blots. Data are the percentage of control-treated animals and are presented as mean
± SEM. N=6 for WT/control, 6 for WT/5-plex, 10 for 3xTg-AD/control, and 10 for 3xTg-AD/5-plex. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 by unpaired two-tailed t test.
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
193 

vaccine-induced overactivation of immune response such as T-cell
response (Kinney et al., 2018). Therefore, we investigated the T-cell
immune response by using IFN-γ ELISpot. We found no activation of the
T-cell response after the post-immune spleen were restimulated with Aβ
or Tau antigens used for the 5-plex vaccine, as assessed by counting the
IFN-γ dots (Fig. 8A and B). On the contrary, robust stimulation of the T-
cell response was observed in mice immunized with BRM28, an unre-
lated malaria protein antigen developed previously and described
therein as 6C.mAgE2 (McLeod et al., 2022), along with QS-21 as an
adjuvant under the same immunization conditions. The elevated spot
count implies that the adjuvant enhances the T-cell response (SI
Figure 6A and B), suggesting the existence of T-cell epitopes within the
larger BRM28 proteins, unlike in Aβ or Tau peptides. These results
suggest that immunization with our multivalent liposomal vaccine does
not induce heightened Aβ-specific or Tau-specific cellular responses in
mice.
We further investigated whether immunization of mice with the 5-
plex vaccine causes microhemorrhage by Prussian blue staining of the
mouse brain tissue sections. The Prussian blue staining was only sparsely
and randomly distributed in the brain. We found minimal number of
Prussian blue staining in the brain sections of WT mice (Fig. 8C). This
number was even smaller in 3xTg-AD mice than in WT mice (Fig. 8D).
Immunization with the 5-plex vaccine did not increase the Prussian blue
staining in WT mice. A moderate increase in the Prussian blue staining
was seen in 3xTg-AD after immunization, but the Prussian blue staining
of these brain sections was still less than it in the WT mice (Fig. 8D).
These results suggest that immunization with the 5-plex vaccine has no
or minimal risk for inducing brain microhemorrhages.
To investigate whether immunization with the 5-plex vaccine causes
any peripheral immune/inflammatory activation in mice, we collected
blood samples when the mice were sacrificed for measurements of the
serum cytokine and chemokine levels. We observed some differences in
the cytokine and chemokine levels between the 3xTgAD mice and WT
control mice, suggesting the role of the transgenes in the immune/in-
flammatory homeostasis in mice. Importantly, no serum cytokine or
chemokine, except for GM-CSF in WT mice, showed higher levels in the
vaccinated mice as compared to the unvaccinated mice (Fig. 8E, SI
Table 1A–C). Instead, the vaccination was found to significantly reduce
the level of IL-β, TNFα, and MCP-1/CCL2 in the WT mice (SI Table 1A)
and of IL-6, IL-12p70, and GM-CSF in the 3xTg-AD mice (Fig. 8E). These
results, together with the absence of neuroinflammation in the brains of
the vaccinated mice observed above, suggest that immunization with
the 5-plex vaccine does not cause any detectable chronic inflammatory
response in the brain or in the periphery.
We also monitored the general conditions of the mice during and
after immunization with the 5-plex vaccine. We did not observe any
noticeable changes in general health conditions or behaviors with the
vaccination. The growth curves were not significantly different between
the vaccinated and unvaccinated mice, although the 3xTg-AD mice
showed moderately heavier body weights than the WT control mice (SI
Figure 7). The small, temporary body weight losses seen during weeks
32–37 correlated to the stress induced by behavioral tests performed on
these mice.
3. Discussion
Aß and tau play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis and progression of
AD; therefore, the development of clinically effective immunotherapy
targeting Aß and/or tau is a promising disease-modifying approach for
treating AD. In this study, we developed and characterized a novel AD
vaccine, the 5-plex, which targets two epitopes of Aβ peptide and three
epitopes of tau proteins simultaneously. The high binding efficiency and
Fig. 8. Multivalent 5-plex appears to be safe and well-tolerated in mice. (A) Representative ELISpot image of 5 immunogens with CoPoP/PHAD/+/-QS21 liposomes
immunized mice and control mice producing IgG antibodies reacted to the specific immunogens. Negative (Medium) and positive (PHA-L) controls were included. (B)
Quantifying IFN-γ dots from (A) were counted with data shown in mean ± SD, and analyzed by a two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test, *P<0.05,
**P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001. The samples were performed in n = 5 mice per group. (C) Representative image for Prussian blue staining in WT/control,
WT/5-plex, 3xTg-AD/Control, and 3xTg-AD/5-plex mice. (D) Quantification of Prussian blue positive profiles. The Prussian blue positive profiles were counted from
6 sections which were from every 6th sagittal brain section per mouse. N=14 for WT/control, 16 for WT/5-plex, 13 for 3xTg-AD/control, and 14 for 3xTg-AD/5-plex.
*p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001 by ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni’s posthoc test or by unpaired two-tailed t-test. (E) The level of proinflammatory cytokines on IL-6, IL-
12p70, GM-CSF, and IFN-γ was analyzed by Luminex multiplex assay. *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001 by ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni’s posthoc test or by unpaired
two-tailed t-test. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
194 

conformational rigidity of the 5-plex vaccine were confirmed by the
filtration assays and epitope-specific antibody in slot blots, indicating
that the his-tagged antigens readily particlelized with CoPoP liposomes,
but not PoP liposomes. HPLC was performed to separate peptides in 5-
plex, which is useful for eventual AD vaccine component quantifica-
tion. Both individual and multivalent antigens from the 5-plex effec-
tively exhibited enhanced antibodies in mice when complexed with
CoPoP/PHAD liposomes, showing the rapid cellular uptake of smaller
particle-based antigens in draining lymph nodes to trigger immunoge-
nicity (Huang et al., 2018a). The 5-plex vaccine elicited high titers of
specific antibodies against both Aß and tau in mice and reacted to am-
yloid plaques and NFTs in IHC staining without significant immune
interference effects. Mice after vaccination can produce high levels of
specific antibodies for a relative long period of time, since 21–34 % of
the highest antibody titers was still observed 28 weeks after the last
boosting dose.
To assess the efficacy of this novel vaccine in treating AD, we tested it
in 3xTg-AD mice, a commonly used transgenic mouse model for AD by
initial immunization at the age of 3–4 months (prior to the development
of AD-like brain pathology and cognitive deficits), followed by 3
boosters with a 3-week interval. It is interesting to note that the 3xTg-AD
mice after immunization with 5-plex showed reduced locomotive ac-
tivity in the open field test. However, the anxiety level of the mice did
not appear to be altered by the vaccine since the central entries, the
times spent in the central area, and the central distances travelled in the
open field test were not significantly differed between the two groups.
No significant differences were observed between 3xTg-AD mice and the
WT control mice either. The reduced locomotive activity in the open
field did not cause bias for MWM assessment because 3xTg-AD mice
immunized with or without 5-plex exhibited similar swimming speed
during both MWM and rMWM tests. When the spatial memory was
assessed in MWM at the age of 11 months, no significant effects of the
vaccine were observed. Thus, we proceeded with rMWM test, which is
more sensitive than the standard MWM test for assessing the cognitive
function in rodents. We found that the 3xTg-AD mice immunized with
the 5-plex vaccine displayed better spatial learning and reference
memory than the control-treated 3xTg-AD mice in rMWM. These results
suggest that the 5-plex vaccine can prevent or slow down the develop-
ment of cognitive impairment in this AD mouse model. This prophylactic
efficacy of the vaccine is consistent with the reduction of tau hyper-
phosphorylation and of amyloid plaques, as well as the increases in
neuronal/synaptic markers, in the brains of mice after immunization,
compared with unimmunized mice.
We noticed that the antibodies generated by our selected phospho-
Tau peptides for this study also reacted to the non-phosphorylated tau
peptide counterparts with slightly weaker affinities. However, the cross-
reactivity
of
tau
antibodies
generated
in
mouse
sera
to
non-
phosphorylated tau peptides is unlikely to raise any concerns or to
prevent the development of the multivalent vaccine for clinical use. In
AD brain, abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau aggregates together
with normal tau to form tau seeds and neurofibrillary tangles (Alonso
et al., 1996b),(Guo and Lee, 2011). It is currently believed that tau pa-
thology propagates from degenerative neurons to healthy neurons
through seeding mechanisms (Ruan and Ikezu, 2019), (Granholm and
Hamlett, 2024). Therefore, tau immunotherapy may potentially act
through blocking the spreading of oligomeric/aggregated tau at the
extracellular space. If tau seeds at the extracellular space are cleared by
tau antibodies against either normal tau or phosphorylated tau, thera-
peutic efficacy could be expected. Antibodies against phospho-tau and
unphosphorylated tau are both currently under investigation for the
development of AD therapeutics.
Both active and passive immunotherapy might induce over-
activation of the innate and adaptive immune systems, resulting in
adverse side effects. The development of a clinically effective AD vaccine
should avoid unforeseen neuroinflammation in the brain. The clinical
trials of AN1792, a vaccine targeting full-length Aβ, were terminated
due to the occurrence of T cell-mediated meningoencephalitis in 6 % of
treated AD patients (Orgogozo et al., 2003). To avoid overactive Aβ-
induced specific T-cell responses, the vaccine targeting different mini-
mal epitopes and forms of Aβ lacking T-cell epitopes may be helpful.
Active vaccine with partial sequences selected from Aβ1-14 can facilitate
B-cell receptor (BCR) binding onto a B cell surface, which triggers
intracellular signaling pathways and strong B-cell activation without T-
cell help in order to induce immune response (Winblad et al., 2012).
Therefore, our 5-plex liposomal vaccine containing Aβ1-14 and
AβpE3-14 without T-cell epitope 16–33 (Monsonego et al., 2003) did not
activate overt T-cell immune responses. Animals demonstrated tolera-
bility to the current immunization procedure without significant in-
flammatory responses. Monitoring the cellular immune response of
secreted IFN-γ using ELISpot assays after sacrificing mice on day 42
provides insight into autoreactive T-cells inactivation in vitro. Impor-
tantly, immunization with the 5-plex vaccine decreased the peripheral
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-β, TNFα, IL-6, IL-
12p70, and GM-CSF. Furthermore, immunization with the 5-plex did not
activate the microglia cells in the brain. Taken together, these data
indicate that the 5-plex vaccine does not cause any detectable inflam-
matory response in both WT and 3xTg-AD mice.
Immunotherapy against Aβ can lead to microhemorrhages and ce-
rebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) in different human APP transgenic
mouse models (Burbach et al., 2007; Karlnoski et al., 2008; Pfeifer et al.,
2002; Racke et al., 2005; Schroeter et al., 2008; Wilcock et al., 2006;
Wilcock and Colton, 2009; Wilcock et al., 2009; Wilcock et al., 2007;
Wilcock et al., 2004). The exact mechanisms leading to micro-
hemorrhage remain to be elucidated. One hypothesis is that the clear-
ance of amyloid from the brain might cause the accumulation of CAA,
and this CAA might result in overall weakening and leakage of vascu-
lature, leading to microhemorrhage (Wilcock and Colton, 2009). The
functional consequences of microhemorrhage remain unclear. Aβ
immunotherapy significantly improved cognitive function with the
presence of microhemorrhages in different mouse models. In the present
study, we found that immunization with four doses of the 5-plex vaccine
caused only a slight increase in microhemorrhages above the baseline in
3xTg-AD mice, but no increase at all in WT mice. In addition, the level of
microhemorrhages in the vaccinated 3xTg-AD mice was still lower than
the baseline level of the WT mice. These observations suggest that our 5-
plex vaccine is safe and is unlikely to lead to significant micro-
hemorrhages in the brain. Since the 5-plex vaccine did not cause
microhemorrhages in WT mice, the slight increase in microhemorrhages
observed in 3xTg-AD mice with the vaccination might be due to the
amyloid-related abnormalities, which have been observed in human
clinical trials. The incidence of amyloid-related imaging abnormalities
with microhemorrhage is variable in clinical trials from 4.9 % for Sol-
anezumab and Crenezumab, 10.7 % for Lecanemab, 16.2 % for Gante-
nerumab, 19.5 % for Aducanumab, and 30.5 % for Donanemab
(Cogswell et al., 2022). Fortunately, amyloid-related imaging abnor-
malities with microhemorrhage are generally not associated with clin-
ical sequelae, similar to microhemorrhages and superficial siderosis
when occurring independently from anti-amyloid therapy (Cogswell
et al., 2022).
The present prophylactic study demonstrates the efficacies of the 5-
plex vaccine in preventing or reducing the development of cognitive
impairment and AD-like brain pathologies in 3xTg-AD mice. The
multivalent AD vaccine approach targeting both key AD pathologies
simultaneously has a potential to produce better therapeutic efficacy
than any single target AD immunotherapies. Future studies are needed
to assess the efficacies in reducing and even reversing cognitive
impairment and AD-like brain pathologies using a therapeutic approach,
i.e., immunization of mice after the onset of cognitive impairment and
brain pathologies. Studies incorporating both male and female trans-
genic mice should be addressed to explore potential gender-specific
differences, and enhance the applicability of our results for Alz-
heimer’s Disease. Finally, more thorough safety and immunological
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
195 

analysis is desired. The immune response against the abbreviated his-
tags (3–4 histidine residues used to display each peptide with CoPoP
liposomes) was not assessed, but previous clinical studies for a COVID-
19 vaccine showed that even full length his-tags (6 histidine residues)
did not induce appreciable anti-his tag antibodies in human clinical
testing. (Lovell et al., 2022; Lovell et al., 2024).
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, we found that CoPoP/PHAD liposome rapidly gener-
ated a spontaneous particle formation of Aβ and tau peptides and
induced robust antibody production with high levels of IgG titers
through intramuscularly administrated 5-plex in both WT and 3xTg-AD
mice. In 3xTg-AD mice, active 5-plex vaccination reduced AD-like pa-
thologies and cognitive impairment. Immunization appeared to be well-
tolerated without activating T-cell immune responses for neuro-
inflammation. This 5-plex multivalent vaccine targeting multiple epi-
topes of both Aβ and tau simultaneously may potentially offer a novel
therapeutic opportunity for AD.
5. Materials and Methods
5.1. Materials
His-tagged Aβ1-14 (DAEFRHDSGYEVHH-HH), AβpE3-14 (pEFRHDS-
GYEVHH-HH, N-terminal pyroglutamate-modified), taupT181 (HHHH-
IPAKTPPAPK[phospho-T]PPSSGEPPKS), taupT217 (HHHH-GSRSRTPSLP
[phospho-T]PPTREPKKVA),
taupS396/S404
(HGAEIVYK[phospho-S]
PVVSGDT[phospho-S]PRH-HHH) peptides were synthesized by Gen-
Script. CoPoP was produced as described previously (Shao et al., 2015a).
CoPoP liposome was synthesized using the following lipids: CoPoP, 1,2-
dipalmitoylsn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC, Corden # LP-R4-078),
cholesterol
(PhytoChol,
Wilshire
Technologies),
Monophosphoryl
Hexa-acyl Lipid A, 3-Deacyl (Synthetic PHAD, Avanti Cat # 699855P).
Other reagents used were alhydrogel 2 % aluminum gel (InvivoGen,
CAS# 21645–51-2), goat anti-mouse IgG HRP (Novex, # A16072), and
3,3′,5,5′- tetramethylbenzidine solution (Surmodics, TMBW-0100–01).
QS-21 was obtained from Desert King, and ELISpot kit (Mouse IFN-γ
Single-Color) was obtained from Mabtech.
5.2. Preparation and characterization of liposomes
CoPoP/PHAD liposomes were prepared by ethanol injection, fol-
lowed by nitrogen-pressurized lipid extrusion in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) as previously described (Shao et al., 2015b). The CoPoP/
PHAD (CP) liposome formulation had a mass ratio of [DOPC:CHOL:
PHAD:CoPoP] [20: 5: 0.4: 1], while PoP/PHAD liposomes served as
control liposomes with a formulation of [DOPC:CHOL:PHAD:PoP] [20:
5: 0.4: 1]. PoP lipids were similar to CoPoP, but lack of cobalt. Lipids
were first dissolved in ethanol at 55 ◦C for 10 min, and then re-dissolved
in PBS at 55 ◦C for another 10 min. Sonication of dissolved lipid could be
used to break up large undissolved particles. Liposomes were extruded
multiple times via 200-, 100-, and 80- nm stacked polycarbonate
membrane filters in a lipid extruder [Northern Lipids] under nitrogen
pressure. Excess ethanol was removed through dialysis in 1 L PBS at 4 ◦C
overnight. The final concentration was adjusted 320 μg/mL CoPoP or
PoP and stored at 4 ◦C. QS-21 (1 mg/mL) was added at the same mass
ratio as PHAD after the liposome has synthesized. Dynamic light scat-
tering (DLS) with a NanoBrook 90Plus PALS instrument was used to
measure liposome sizes and polydispersity index (PDI) of samples after
500-fold dilution in PBS.
5.3. Vaccine preparation
CoPoP/PHAD/+/-QS21 liposomes (320 μg/mL) and peptides (80
μg/mL) were incubated at a 4:1 mass ratio of CoPoP-to-peptide for 3 h at
37 ◦C and then stored at 4 ◦C overnight. Bivalent (2-plex) was carried out
by incubating Aβ1-14 and taupS396/S404 with liposomes, whereas 5-plex
was admixed Aβ1-14, AβpE3-14, taupT181, taupT217, and taupS396/S404 with
liposomes, and was incubated in either way: “mosaic” refers to lipo-
somes that display multiple antigens per liposome (antigens mixed with
liposomes), and “cocktail” refers to liposomes that display only one
antigen per liposome (each antigen incubated with liposomes first, then
mixed before injection). All liposomal vaccines were further recon-
stituted to a final concentration of 1 μg individual antigen or 3 μg
bivalent antigens (1.5 μg for each) or 5 μg multivalent antigens per 50 μL
diluted with PBS before injection. Alum vaccine was prepared by mixing
indicated five antigens with 1.5 mg/mL of 2 % aluminum gel (Inviv-
oGen, CAS# 21645–51-2) diluting within HEPES buffer (10 mM HEPES,
150 mM NaCl, pH 7.0) for 1 h, and was resuspended by pipetting before
injection.
5.4. Antigen-Liposome binding assay
CoPoP/PHAD or PoP/PHAD liposome binding with antigens were
admixed and incubated at 37 ◦C for 3 h with a 4:1 mass ratio of liposome
to antigen. The binding percentage of liposomes to antigen was carried
out by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA, Fisher catalog# PI23235) using a
micro-centrifugal filtration assay. A 50-µL of incubated mixture was
diluted to 200 µL with PBS, and centrifuged at 1200 g using a 100 kDa
centrifugal tube (PALL) for 60 min at room temperature to allow free
peptides in supernatant to be extracted from liposomes. The supernatant
was further incubated with BCA reagent at 1:1 vol ratio at 60 ◦C for 30
min, and transferred 100 µL into a 96-well plate in triplicate. The
absorbance was measured at 562 nm, and the following equation
calculated the binding percentage:
% Binding = [1-OD562 of filtered liposome + peptides/ OD562 of filtered
peptides in supernatant only] × 100 %.
5.5. Slot blot assay
His-tagged synthetic Aβ and phosphorylated Tau peptides were
reconstituted to 80 μg/mL with PBS, followed by a 3 h incubation at
37 ◦C with 320 μg/mL CP or 2HP [4:1 liposome: antigen]. Peptides alone
serve as a negative control. A 48-well slot blot apparatus (Bio-Rad,
catalog# 1706542) was set up as described in the manufacturer’s in-
structions. Fifty microliters of PBS were first applied to each well to
investigate any leakage. A hundred microliters of diluted samples (10
ng/mL) were loaded into a prewetted 0.2-μm nitrocellulose membrane
(Thermofisher, catalog# 77012). The membrane was further cut into
strips and blocked using 5 % BSA in PBS on a plate shaker for 1 h at room
temperature. After blocking, the strips were incubated with antigen-
specific primary antibodies in 5 % BSA: anti-Aβ clone 6E10 diluted
1:2500 (Biolegend, catalog# 803004), anti-Glu3 clone 337.48 diluted
1:2500 (Biolegend, catalog# 822301), anti-Tau Phospho (Thr181) clone
M7004D06 diluted 1:2500 (Invitrogen, catalog# 710561), anti-Tau
Phospho (Thr217) diluted 1:2500 (Invitrogen, catalog# 44–744), and
anti-Tau Phospho (Ser396/Thr404) clone PHF-1 (from lab of Albert
Einstein College) diluted at 1:5000 for 1 h at room temperature. The
strips were separately incubated with anti-mouse (Cell Signaling, cata-
log #7076S) or anti-rabbit (Cell Signaling, catalog #7074S) HRP-
conjugated secondary antibody (1:2000 dilution) in 5 % BSA for 30
min after rinsing with PBS twice. VisiGlo HRP substrate mixture (VWR,
catalog# 97063–148) was applied onto the membrane after washing
with PBS twice. The membrane was imaged using a Bio-Rad Chem-
iDoc™Imager.
5.6. ELISA (Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay)
The 96-well microtiter plates were coated with 2.5 µg/mL fibrillar
Aβ1-42, pyroglutamate-modified AβpE3-14, taupT181, taupT217, or taupS396/
S404 peptides in 0.1 M sodium carbonate/bicarbonate buffer, pH 9.6, for
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
196 

1 h at 37
◦C. The preparation of fibrillar Aβ42 was performed as
described (Hoogerhout et al., 2011). After washing the plates with PBST
(0.05 % Tween-20 in PBS) twice, non-specific binding sites were blocked
with 2 % bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBST for 1 h at 37 ◦C. Sub-
sequently, 100 µL of serially diluted mice antisera (collected from blood
after centrifuged at 2000 g for 20 min) was added to the wells for 1 h
incubation at 37 ◦C after washing with PBST 3 times, followed by the
incubation of 100 µL secondary anti-mouse IgG conjugated HRP at a
dilution of 1:2000 for 30 min at 37 ◦C. The 3,3′,5,5′- tetramethylbenzi-
dine solution was applied to the wells for signal detection, and the re-
action was stopped by 1 M HCl after 15 min. The absorbance was read at
an optical density (OD) 450 nm. Antigen-specific IgG titers were
calculated as the reciprocal serum dilution at which absorbance at 450
nm exceeded background value by 0.5 absorbance unit.
5.7. Reverse-Phase HPLC analysis
RP-HPLC analysis on peptides was carried out by an analytical col-
umn and run as follows: sample peptide concentrations were diluted to
50 μg/mL in DI water. 20 μL of each sample was injected into a Inertsil
ODS-3 column (250 mm x 4.6 mm, 100 Å, 37 ◦C) at 1 mL/min flow rate
with column heating to 37 ◦C. Mobile phase A: 0.065 % trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA) in distilled water, mobile phase B: 0.05 % Trifluoroacetic
Acid (TFA) in acetonitrile. Gradient method: 0 min – 5 % B, 25 min – 65
% B, 25.1 min – 95 % B, 32 min – 95 % B, 32.01 min – 5 % B, 35 min – 5
% B. UV absorption was detected at 220 nm.
5.8. Immunization of mice
The animal studies were approved by University at Buffalo Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and New York State
Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disability IACUC. Groups
of female CD-1 mice (from Envigo RMS LLC) of age 5–6 weeks (n = 5)
were immunized by intramuscular injection of 50 µL liposomal vaccines
on day 0 and 21. They were bled for serum collection on day 42 under
isoflurane anesthesia. The serum was examined by ELISA and sent to the
Department of Aging Neurobiology at National Center for further IHC
staining analysis. Similarly, adult female triple-transgenic(3xTg)-AD
mice (MMRRC: 034830-JAX) of age 3 months and B6129SF2/J WT
mice (strain #101045 from Jackson Laboratory) of age 2 months (n = 20
for wild type/5-plex, n = 20 for wild type/control, n = 20 for 3xTg-AD/
5-plex, and n = 20 for 3xTg-AD/control) were vaccinated prophylacti-
cally beginning at the age of 3 or 4 months. The 3xTg-AD mice develop
AD-like pathologies and cognitive impairment in an age-dependent
manner, including neuroinflammation, amyloid plaques, and cognitive
impairment starting at ~ 6 months of age, and neurofibrillary tangles
starting at ~ 12 months of age (Belfiore et al., 2019b),(Oddo et al.,
2003). The pathologies are predominantly restricted to the hippocam-
pus, amygdala, and cerebral cortex. Compared to males, female 3 × Tg-
AD mice exhibit more consistent brain pathologies and cognitive
impairment and thus were employed in this first study (Carroll et al.,
2010; Clinton et al., 2007). Both B6129SF2/J wild type and 3xTg-AD
transgenic mice were immunized with 5 μg of 5-plex once per month
to maintain a steady antibody level, and submandibular blood collection
was performed before subsequent immunization. After four injections at
three-week intervals, those mice were quarantined at Charles River and
sent to the Department of Neurochemistry at New York State Institute
for Basic Research for behavior testing and biochemistry analysis. All
mice were sacrificed at age 12–12.6 months, i.e., after completion of
behavioral tests.
5.9. Splenocytes collection and ELISpot
Antigen-specific antibody response of IFN-γ was measured by
enzyme-linked immune absorbent spot (ELISpot) assay. Splenocytes
were harvested from immunized mice after being euthanized on day 42.
Each spleen was mashed through a 70 μm cell strainer, and splenocytes
were collected in a 50 mL centrifuge tube. Cells were centrifuged at 500
g for 5 min and applied 5 mL red blood cell lysis buffer for another 5 min
on ice. After incubation, splenocytes in lysis buffer were diluted with 40
mL of PBS and centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min. Cells (1:100 dilution) were
counted in a hemocytometer after resuspended in 1 mL PBS. ELISpot
plate was seeded 3x105 splenocytes and admixed with 10 μg/mL pep-
tides, or PHA-L positive control, or media alone for negative control in
each well. Cells were further cultured in a humidified chamber (5 % CO2
/ 95 % air at 37 ◦C) for 24 h. The spot detection was performed regarding
to the manufacturer instructions using Murine IFN-γ Single-Color ELI-
Spot kit from Immunospot. The images with number of spots counted
were acquired by CTL ImmunoSpot S6 FLuoroCore analyzer.
5.10. Immunohistochemical staining
Paraffin-embedded postmortem brain slides of AD patient were ob-
tained from the Brain Bank for Aging Research (BBAR) at the Tokyo
Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology under the
approval of the institutional ethics committees (No.1719–2). The data
shown in Figure 2C is from paraffin-embedded slides from a 73-year-old
male AD patient, purchased commercially from BioChain (temporal
lobe, Cat. #T2236078Alz, Lot # C508078). After deparaffinization,
brain sections were submerged in EDTA buffer (1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0)
and microwaved at 500 W for 15 min. These sections were immersed in
95 % formic acid for 30 min for antigen retrieval. Then, endogenous
peroxidase activity was quenched by incubating with 3 % hydrogen
peroxide for 5 min at room temperature. After blocking with Protein
Block solution (Dako), sections were incubated with 100-fold diluted
each anti-serum at 4 ◦C overnight. The next day, sections were incubated
with anti-mouse HRP-conjugated secondary antibody, and then reacted
with diaminobenzidine reaction mixture (ImmPACT DAB substrate kit,
Vector Laboratories). Sections were counterstained with Gill’s Haema-
toxylin II (Muto Pure Chemicals, Tokyo, Japan), mounted by Entellan®
new (Merck), and observed under a microscope (BZ-X810, Keyence,
Osaka, Japan).
5.11. Cryo-Electron microscopy
Sample vitrification was performed using a Vitrobot Mark IV
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). Holey carbon grids (C-Flat 2/2-3Cu-T) were
washed with chloroform for 2 h before sample vitrification. Grids were
treated with negative glow discharge in air at 5 mA for 15 sec, right
before the sample was applied. For all samples, a volume of 3.6 μL of the
liposome sample was applied to a holey carbon grid and manually
blotted using the Vitrobot blotting paper (Standard Vitrobot Filter
Paper, Ø55/20 mm, Grade 595). Then a volume of 3.6 μL of the same
sample was applied for a second time to the same holey carbon grid, and
the grid was blotted once in the Vitrobot for 3 sec using a blot force + 1
before plunging it into liquid ethane at ~ -190 ◦C. The Vitrobot was set
at 25 ◦C and 100 % relative humidity. Data was acquired using SerialEM
software on the Titan Krios electron microscope at FEMR-McGill,
operated at 300 kV (Schorb et al., 2019). The sample was kept at
−190 ◦C during imaging. Images were collected with a Gatan K3 direct
electron detector equipped with a Bioquantum imaging filter. The
nominal defocus was set at −
3.00 µm. Images were collected using a
total exposure of 50 e−/Å2 at a nominal magnification of 81,000 ×
corresponding to a calibrated pixel size of 1.09 Å.
5.12. General examination of mice
A general examination of all the mice was conducted in the home
cages throughout the whole study. Any gross abnormalities in overall
health, home cage nesting, sleeping, feeding, grooming, and condition of
the fur of animals were noted. Body weight was measured once a week
during the period of the study.
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
197 

5.13. Open field
The Open field test was commonly used to simultaneously locomo-
tion, exploration and anxiety in rodents (Walsh and Cummins, 1976)
and was performed as previously described (Chen et al., 2014; Zhao
et al., 2020). Briefly, the mice were carried to the test room to habituate
1 h before starting the test. Each mouse was placed in the open field
arena (made of opaque white plastic material, 50 cm × 50 cm × 40 cm,
length × width × height) by a blinded experimenter and allowed to
explore the arena for 10 min. The distance travelled (meters) in open
field arena, entries. Time spent in the central area, and distance travelled
(%) in the central area (10 cm × 10 cm), were automatically recorded by
a video tracking system (Any maze version 4.5 software, Stoelting Co.).
5.14. Morris water maze task
Morris water maze (MWM) task was used to evaluate the spatial
learning and memory of the mice (D’Hooge and De Deyn, 2001; Vorhees
and Williams, 2006; Zhao et al., 2020). The test was performed in a
circular white pool (with a diameter of 180 cm and a height of 60 cm)
filled with non-toxic white dye tinted water and maintained at room
temperature (20 ± 1 ◦C). The maze was designated of two virtual
principal axes with each line bisecting the maze perpendicular to the
other one to divide the maze into four equal quadrants. The end of each
line demarcates four cardinal points: North (N), South (S), East (E) and
West (W). A platform was positioned in the middle of one of the quad-
rants submerged 0.5 cm below the water surface. Each mouse performed
4 trials on for 4 consecutive days from semi-random start positions
(Vorhees and Williams, 2006) to find the hidden platform. Each trial was
terminated after the mouse climbed onto the hidden platform. If a mouse
failed to find the platform within 90 sec, it was gently guided to the
platform. At the end of each trial, the mouse was left on the platform for
15 sec, then removed, dried and returned to its home cage. A 90-sec
probe test without a platform was performed 24 h after the last trial.
Escape latency (sec) in initial training, and latency to 1st entrance into
target (platform location area), time spent in target quadrant (sec) and
in the platform area, target crossings and swim speed (cm/sec) in probe
test were recorded through an automated tracking system (Smart video
tracking system, version 2.0.14, Panlab; Harvard Apparatus).
5.15. Reversal Morris water maze test
The reversal Morris water maze (rMWM) task was conducted 9 days
after the probe test in the MWM. A similar procedure was used in the
MWM, except the invisible platform was moved to the quadrant, which
was in an opposite location in the MWM. The probe test was conducted
after 3 consecutive days of initial training.
5.16. Tissue processing
All mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Forebrain cortex and
hippocampus were detached immediately from the right hemisphere
and frozen in dry ice for biochemical analysis. The left hemisphere was
fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in 100 mM phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) for 24 h at room temperature. Tissues were then post-fixed in a 30
% sucrose solution at 4 ◦C for overnight. Forty µm sagittal sections of the
entire half hemisphere were cut using a freezing microtome. The sec-
tions were stored in glycol anti-freeze solution (ethylene glycol, glycerol
and 100 mM PBS in 3:3:4 ratio) at −20 ◦C until further processing.
5.17. Mouse serum collection
Blood collected via cardiac puncture immediately after cervical
dislocation at the experimental endpoint was storted at 4 ◦C for 1 h. The
serum was collected by centrifuge at 1000 g × 10 min at 4 ◦C. The serum
was aliquoted for antibodies titers and cytokines analysis (Creative
Proteomics, NY, USA).
5.18. Mouse cytokines analysis
The levels of preinflammatory cytokines, anti-inflammatory cyto-
kines, and preinflammatory chemokines were analyzed by Luminex
multiplex assay by Creative Proteomics (New York, USA).
5.19. Western blot analysis
Mouse hippocampus was homogenized in pre-chilled buffer con-
taining 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 100 mM sodium fluoride, and 1 mM
sodium othovanadate, 1 mM EGTA, 0.5 mM AEBSF, 10 μg/ml aprotinin,
10 μg/ml leupeptin, 4 μg/ml pepstatin. Each homogenate was boiled in
2 × Laemmli’s buffer for 10 min, and protein concentration was
measured by PierceTM 660 nm protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Rock-
ford, IL, USA). The samples were resolved by 10 % or 12 % SDS-PAGE
and electro-transferred onto Immobilon-P membrane (Millipore, Bed-
ford, MA, USA). The blots were then probed with primary antibodies and
developed with the corresponding horseradish peroxidase–conjugated
secondary antibody and ECL kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Densitometrical
quantification of protein bands in Western blots were analyzed by using
the Multi Gauge V3.0 software (Fuji Photo Film Co., Ltd).
5.20. Sarkosyl-soluble and −insoluble tau
Cortical sarkosyl-soluble and −insoluble tau were prepared by ho-
mogenization of cortical tissue from brains of WT/Control. WT/5-plex,
3xTg-AD/Control, and 3xTg-AD/5-plex mice with 8 volumes of buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaF, 2 mM EGTA, 2 mM Na3VO4, 0.5 mM
AEBSF, and 10 µg/ml aprotinin, leupeptin, and pepstatin). The ho-
mogenates were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min at 4 ◦C. The super-
natant was adjusted to 1 % N-lauroylsarcosine and incubated for 1 h at
room temperature. After the incubation, supernatant was spun at
200,000 g for 45 min at 25 ◦C. The supernatant (sarkosyl soluble) and
the pellet (sarkosyl insoluble) was dissolved in Laemmli sample buffer
and subjected to Western blot analysis (18658135).
5.21. Immunofluorescence and thioflavin s staining
Serial 6 free-floating sagittal sections per mouse from 13 to 14 mice
per group were washed in 10 mM PBS (15 min x 3) and then incubated in
0.3 % Triton X-100 for 1 h. The sections were blocked in blocking so-
lution (5 % normal goat serum, 0.1 % Triton X-100 and 0.05 % Tween-
20 in PBS) for 1 h. Sections were then incubated with AT8 antibody
against phosphorylated tau at Ser202/Thr205 (0.2 µg/ml) at 4
◦C
overnight. After washing three times for 15 min each with 10 mM PBS,
sections were incubated with Alexa 594-conjugated donkey anti-mouse
IgG secondary antibodies (1:500, Molecular Probes, Carlsbad, CA, USA)
in 10 mM PBS with 0.05 % Tween-20 for 2 h at room temperature fol-
lowed by incubating with 0.1 µg/ml DAPI for 10 min. Sections were
subsequently washed and mounted on a slide, and dried for overnight at
room temperature. Sections were stained with 0.05 % thioflavin-S in
water in dark for 8 min. Finally, sections were washed in 80 % ethanol
for 2 min and in water for 3 min, and mounted and cover slipped using
prolong gold antifade reagent from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc (Wal-
tham, MA, USA). For Aβ immunofluorescence staining, serial 6 free-
floating sagittal sections per mouse from 13 to 14 mice per group
were washed in 10 mM PBS (15 min x 3) and then incubated in 0.3 %
Triton X-100 for 1 h. The sections were blocked in blocking solution (5 %
normal goat serum, 0.1 % Triton X-100 and 0.05 % Tween-20 in PBS) for
1 h. Sections were then incubated with Aβ antibody (0.25 µg/ml, Cell
Signaling, Cat#8243S) at 4 ◦C overnight. After washing three times for
15 min each with 10 mM PBS, sections were incubated with Alexa 488-
conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibodies (1:1000, Molecu-
lar Probes, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in 10 mM PBS with 0.05 % Tween-20 for
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
198 

2 h at room temperature followed by incubating with 0.1 µg/ml DAPI for
10 min. Sections were subsequently washed and mounted on a slide, and
cover slipped using prolong gold antifade reagent (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA).The maximum projection images were
taken with Olympus Fluoview FV3000 confocal laser scanning micro-
scope. AT8 positive neurons in the hippocampus CA1 area,thioflavin-S
positive plaque load in subiculum, and Aβ positive staining in sub-
iculum were quantified using NIH Fiji (Image J) software.
5.22. Human Aβ40 and Aβ42 measurements by ELISA
Forty microliter hippocampus homogenate was mixed with 60 µl
guanidine hydrochloride buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 8.3 M gua-
nidine hydrochloride) 4 h at room temperature and then stored at −
80 ◦C. For ELISA measurement, each brain homogenate was diluted 1:25
with ice-cold PBS containing 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem,
cat#539131) and centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 20 min at 4 ◦C. The final
concentration of AEBSF was 1 mM to prevent proteolysis of Aβ peptides,
and the final concentration of guanidine hydrochloride was 0.1 M. The
supernatant was further diluted 1:4 with standard diluent buffer and
assessed using ELISA kit specific for Human Aβ40 (Cat #KHB3481) or
Aβ42 (Cat #KHB3441) and calibrated with synthetic Aβ peptides from
Invitrogen according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The Aβ40 and
Aβ42 peptide standards were prepared with the same composition of the
buffer used to dilute the samples. The concentration of Human Aβ40 and
Human Aβ42 was further normalized to the total protein in the hippo-
campus homogenate measured by PierceTM 660 nm protein assay.
5.23. Prussian blue staining
Prussian blue reaction is one of the most sensitive histochemical tests
for microhemorrhages. Treatment of brain sections with acid solutions
of ferrocyanides will liberate loosely bound ferric iron from protein.
Ferric ion present in the tissue will combine with the ferrocyanide and
form a bright blue pigment called Prussian blue, or ferric ferrocyanide
(Wilcock et al., 2009). Six serial sagittal brain sections (40 µm) per
mouse from 13 to 16 mice per group were washed with PBS, mounted on
the slide and dried for overnight at room temperature. On the second
day, the sections was hydrated in distilled water for 3 min and then
stained for hemosiderin using 5 % potassium ferrocyanide (ThermoF-
hishe Scientific, Cat#424130025) in 5 % hydrochloric acid (J.T.Baker,
Cat#9535–00) for 15 min. After washing two times with distilled water,
the sections were counterstained with nuclear fast red solution (Thermo
Scientific, Cat#J61010.AP) for 10 min. The sections were washed twice
with distilled water and then dehydrated in 90 % alcohol × 3 min, 95 %
alcohol × 3 min, 100 % alcohol for 2 × 3 min. Finally, the slide was
cleared with 100 % xylene for 2 × 3 min, followed by a coverslip. The
numbers of Prussian blue-positive sites were counted on all sections and
the average number of sites per section was calculated. All images were
acquired using Olympus Fluoview FV3000 confocal laser scanning
microscope.
5.24. Statistical analysis
Statistically significant differences in results were analyzed by un-
paired t-tests, one-way or two-way ANOVA analysis with Tukey’s mul-
tiple comparisons test as indicated. The p values of < 0.05 were
considered significant differences. All statistical analyses were per-
formed using GraphPad Prism version 9.0 for MacOS (GraphPad Soft-
ware, San Diego, CA, USA).
Data of biochemical data and behavior tests were analyzed using
GraphPad Prism version 5.0 (GraphPad Software Inc, La Jolla, CA, USA)
and one-way or two-way ANOVA (as appropriate) followed by a Bon-
ferroni’s posthoc test. Further intergroup comparisons were also per-
formed using an un-paired two-tailed t-test. All data are presented as
means ± SEM. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yiting Song: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Chun-Ling Dai:
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology. Mitsuru Shinohara:
Formal analysis. Yunn Chyn Tung: Formal analysis. Shiqi Zhou:
Formal analysis. Wei-Chiao Huang: Formal analysis. Amal Seffouh:
Formal analysis. Yuan Luo: Formal analysis. Matthew Willadsen:
Formal analysis. Yang Jiao: Formal analysis. Maho Morishima:
Methodology. Yuko Saito: Methodology. Seong-Ho Koh: Writing –
review & editing. Joaquin Ortega: Formal analysis. Cheng-Xin Gong:
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing –
review & editing. Jonathan F. Lovell: Conceptualization, Formal
analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
J.F.L. and W-C.H. hold interest in POP Biotechnologies. W-C.H. and
M.W. are employees of POP Biotechnologies. Other authors declare that
they have no known competing financial interests or personal re-
lationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in
this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) grant (R41AG082620) to C.L.D and W.C.H. C.L.D, Y.C.T., and C.
X.G are supported in part by the New York State Office for People with
Developmental Disabilities. This work was supported in part by the
Research Funding for Longevity Sciences from National Center for Ge-
riatrics and Gerontology (21-12 to MS); Grants-in-Aid from Japan Pro-
motion of Science (21H03391 to MS; JP 22H04923 (CoBiA) to YS); a
Takeda Science Foundation Research Encouragement Grant (to MS);
AMED (JP21wm0425019 to YS); Integrated Research Initiative for
Living Well with Dementia (IRIDE) of the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute
for Geriatrics and Gerontology (to YS); MHLW Research on rare and
intractable diseases Program (JPMH23FC1008 to YS). We thank staff
members of the Facility for Electron Microscopy Research (FEMR) at
McGill University for help in microscope operation and data collection.
FEMR is supported by the Canadian Foundation for Innovation, the
Quebec government, and McGill University. We thank Jean-Philippe
Julien for providing the BRM28 protein antigen.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bbi.2024.08.028.
References
Ackley, S.F., Zimmerman, S.C., Brenowitz, W.D., Tchetgen Tchetgen, E.J., Gold, A.L.,
Manly, J.J., Mayeda, E.R., Filshtein, T.J., Power, M.C., Elahi, F.M., Brickman, A.M.,
Glymour, M.M., 2021. Effect of reductions in amyloid levels on cognitive change in
randomized trials: instrumental variable meta-analysis. BMJ 372, n156.
Alafuzoff, I., Iqbal, K., Friden, H., Adolfsson, R., Winblad, B., 1987. Histopathological
criteria for progressive dementia disorders: clinical-pathological correlation and
classification by multivariate data analysis. Acta Neuropathol. 74, 209–225.
Alonso, A.C., Zaidi, T., Grundke-Iqbal, I., Iqbal, K., 1994. Role of abnormally
phosphorylated tau in the breakdown of microtubules in Alzheimer disease. PNAS
91, 5562–5566.
Alonso, A.C., Grundke-Iqbal, I., Iqbal, K., 1996. Alzheimer’s disease
hyperphosphorylated tau sequesters normal tau into tangles of filaments and
disassembles microtubules. Nat. Med. 2, 783–787.
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
199 

Arriagada, P.V., Growdon, J.H., Hedley-Whyte, E.T., Hyman, B.T., 1992. Neurofibrillary
tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurology 42, 631–639.
Asuni, A.A., Boutajangout, A., Quartermain, D., Sigurdsson, E.M., 2007. Immunotherapy
targeting pathological tau conformers in a tangle mouse model reduces brain
pathology with associated functional improvements. J. Neurosci. 27, 9115–9129.
Bayer, T.A., 2022. Pyroglutamate Abeta cascade as drug target in Alzheimer’s disease.
Mol. Psychiatry 27, 1880–1885.
Belfiore, R., Rodin, A., Ferreira, E., Velazquez, R., Branca, C., Caccamo, A., Oddo, S.,
2019a. Temporal and regional progression of Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology in
3xTg-AD mice. Aging Cell 18, e12873.
Belfiore, R., Rodin, A., Ferreira, E., Velazquez, R., Branca, C., Caccamo, A., Oddo, S.,
2019b. Temporal and regional progression of Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology in
3xTg-AD mice. Aging Cell 18, e12873.
Boutajangout, A., Quartermain, D., Sigurdsson, E.M., 2010. Immunotherapy targeting
pathological tau prevents cognitive decline in a new tangle mouse model.
J. Neurosci. 30, 16559–16566.
Boutajangout, A., Ingadottir, J., Davies, P., Sigurdsson, E.M., 2011. Passive
immunization targeting pathological phospho-tau protein in a mouse model reduces
functional decline and clears tau aggregates from the brain. J. Neurochem. 118,
658–667.
Burbach, G.J., Vlachos, A., Ghebremedhin, E., Del Turco, D., Coomaraswamy, J.,
Staufenbiel, M., Jucker, M., Deller, T., 2007. Vessel ultrastructure in APP23
transgenic mice after passive anti-Abeta immunotherapy and subsequent
intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurobiol. Aging 28, 202–212.
Carroll, J.C., Rosario, E.R., Kreimer, S., Villamagna, A., Gentzschein, E., Stanczyk, F.Z.,
Pike, C.J., 2010. Sex differences in β-amyloid accumulation in 3xTg-AD mice: Role of
neonatal sex steroid hormone exposure. Brain Res. 1366, 233–245.
Chen, Y., Liang, Z., Tian, Z., Blanchard, J., Dai, C.L., Chalbot, S., Iqbal, K., Liu, F.,
Gong, C.X., 2014. Intracerebroventricular streptozotocin exacerbates Alzheimer-like
changes of 3xTg-AD mice. Mol. Neurobiol. 49, 547–562.
Clinton, L.K., Billings, L.M., Green, K.N., Caccamo, A., Ngo, J., Oddo, S., McGaugh, J.L.,
Laferla, F.M., 2007. Age-dependent sexual dimorphism in cognition and stress
response in the 3xTg-AD mice. Neurobiol. Dis. 28, 76–82.
Cogswell, P.M., Barakos, J.A., Barkhof, F., Benzinger, T.S., Jack Jr., C.R., Poussaint, T.Y.,
Raji, C.A., Ramanan, V.K., Whitlow, C.T., 2022. Amyloid-Related Imaging
Abnormalities with Emerging Alzheimer Disease Therapeutics: Detection and
Reporting Recommendations for Clinical Practice. AJNR Am. J. Neuroradiol. 43,
E19–E35.
Dai, C.L., Chen, X., Kazim, S.F., Liu, F., Gong, C.X., Grundke-Iqbal, I., Iqbal, K., 2015.
Passive immunization targeting the N-terminal projection domain of tau decreases
tau pathology and improves cognition in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer
disease and tauopathies. J. Neural Transm. (Vienna) 122, 607–617.
Dai, C.L., Tung, Y.C., Liu, F., Gong, C.X., Iqbal, K., 2017. Tau passive immunization
inhibits not only tau but also Abeta pathology. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 9, 1.
Dai, C.L., Liu, F., Iqbal, K., Gong, C.X., 2022. Gut Microbiota and Immunotherapy for
Alzheimer’s Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23.
Davtyan, H., Hovakimyan, A., Kiani Shabestari, S., Antonyan, T., Coburn, M.A.,
Zagorski, K., Chailyan, G., Petrushina, I., Svystun, O., Danhash, E., Petrovsky, N.,
Cribbs, D.H., Agadjanyan, M.G., Blurton-Jones, M., Ghochikyan, A., 2019. Testing a
MultiTEP-based combination vaccine to reduce Aβ and tau pathology in Tau22/
5xFAD bigenic mice. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 11, 107.
D’Hooge, R., De Deyn, P.P., 2001. Applications of the Morris water maze in the study of
learning and memory. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 36, 60–90.
Doody, R.S., Thomas, R.G., Farlow, M., Iwatsubo, T., Vellas, B., Joffe, S., Kieburtz, K.,
Raman, R., Sun, X., Aisen, P.S., Siemers, E., Liu-Seifert, H., Mohs, R., Alzheimer’s
Disease Cooperative Study Steering, C., Solanezumab Study, G., 2014. Phase 3 trials
of solanezumab for mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 370, 311-
321.
Dubois, B., Feldman, H.H., Jacova, C., Hampel, H., Molinuevo, J.L., Blennow, K.,
DeKosky, S.T., Gauthier, S., Selkoe, D., Bateman, R., Cappa, S., Crutch, S.,
Engelborghs, S., Frisoni, G.B., Fox, N.C., Galasko, D., Habert, M.O., Jicha, G.A.,
Nordberg, A., Pasquier, F., Rabinovici, G., Robert, P., Rowe, C., Salloway, S.,
Sarazin, M., Epelbaum, S., de Souza, L.C., Vellas, B., Visser, P.J., Schneider, L.,
Stern, Y., Scheltens, P., Cummings, J.L., 2014. Advancing research diagnostic criteria
for Alzheimer’s disease: the IWG-2 criteria. Lancet Neurol. 13, 614–629.
Dunn, B., Stein, P., Cavazzoni, P., 2021. Approval of Aducanumab for Alzheimer Disease-
The FDA’s Perspective. JAMA Intern. Med. 181, 1276–1278.
Federizon, J., Frye, A., Huang, W.C., Hart, T.M., He, X., Beltran, C., Marcinkiewicz, A.L.,
Mainprize, I.L., Wills, M.K.B., Lin, Y.P., Lovell, J.F., 2020. Immunogenicity of the
Lyme disease antigen OspA, particleized by cobalt porphyrin-phospholipid
liposomes. Vaccine 38, 942–950.
Giacobini, E., Gold, G., 2013. Alzheimer disease therapy–moving from amyloid-beta to
tau. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 9, 677–686.
Giannakopoulos, P., Herrmann, F.R., Bussiere, T., Bouras, C., Kovari, E., Perl, D.P.,
Morrison, J.H., Gold, G., Hof, P.R., 2003. Tangle and neuron numbers, but not
amyloid load, predict cognitive status in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 60,
1495–1500.
Glenner, G.G., Wong, C.W., 1984. Alzheimer’s disease: initial report of the purification
and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 120, 885–890.
Granholm, A.-C., Hamlett, E.D., 2024. The Role of Tau Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease
and Down Syndrome. J. Clin. Med. 13, 1338.
Grundke-Iqbal, I., Iqbal, K., Tung, Y.C., Quinlan, M., Wisniewski, H.M., Binder, L.I.,
1986. Abnormal phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) in
Alzheimer cytoskeletal pathology. PNAS 83, 4913–4917.
Gu, J., Congdon, E.E., Sigurdsson, E.M., 2013. Two novel Tau antibodies targeting the
396/404 region are primarily taken up by neurons and reduce Tau protein
pathology. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 33081–33095.
Guo, J.L., Lee, V.-M.-Y., 2011. Seeding of Normal Tau by Pathological Tau Conformers
Drives Pathogenesis of Alzheimer-like Tangles. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 15317–15331.
Hardy, J., Selkoe, D.J., 2002. The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress
and problems on the road to therapeutics. Science 297, 353–356.
He, X., Zhou, S., Dolan, M., Shi, Y., Wang, J., Quinn, B., Jahagirdar, D., Huang, W.C.,
Tsuji, M., Pili, R., Ito, F., Ortega, J., Abrams, S.I., Ebos, J.M.L., Lovell, J.F., 2021.
Immunization with short peptide particles reveals a functional CD8(+) T-cell
neoepitope in a murine renal carcinoma model. J. Immunother. Cancer 9.
Hoogerhout, P., Kamphuis, W., Brugghe, H.F., Sluijs, J.A., Timmermans, H.A.M.,
Westdijk, J., Zomer, G., Boog, C.J.P., Hol, E.M., Van Den Dobbelsteen, G.P.J.M.,
2011. A Cyclic Undecamer Peptide Mimics a Turn in Folded Alzheimer Amyloid β
and Elicits Antibodies against Oligomeric and Fibrillar Amyloid and Plaques. PLoS
One 6, e19110.
Huang, W.-C., Deng, B., Lin, C., Carter, K.A., Geng, J., Razi, A., He, X., Chitgupi, U.,
Federizon, J., Sun, B., Long, C.A., Ortega, J., Dutta, S., King, C.R., Miura, K., Lee, S.-
M., Lovell, J.F., 2018. A malaria vaccine adjuvant based on recombinant antigen
binding to liposomes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 1174–1181.
Huang, W.-C., Chiem, K., Martinez-Sobrido, L., Lovell, J.F., 2022. Intranasal
Immunization with Liposome-Displayed Receptor-Binding Domain Induces Mucosal
Immunity and Protection against SARS-CoV-2. Pathogens 11, 1035.
Huang, W.C., Zhou, S., He, X., Chiem, K., Mabrouk, M.T., Nissly, R.H., Bird, I.M.,
Strauss, M., Sambhara, S., Ortega, J., Wohlfert, E.A., Martinez-Sobrido, L.,
Kuchipudi, S.V., Davidson, B.A., Lovell, J.F., 2020. SARS-CoV-2 RBD Neutralizing
Antibody Induction is Enhanced by Particulate Vaccination. Adv. Mater. 32,
e2005637.
Janelidze, S., Stomrud, E., Smith, R., Palmqvist, S., Mattsson, N., Airey, D.C., Proctor, N.
K., Chai, X., Shcherbinin, S., Sims, J.R., Triana-Baltzer, G., Theunis, C., Slemmon, R.,
Mercken, M., Kolb, H., Dage, J.L., Hansson, O., 2020. Cerebrospinal fluid p-tau217
performs better than p-tau181 as a biomarker of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun.
11, 1683.
Janelidze, S., Berron, D., Smith, R., Strandberg, O., Proctor, N.K., Dage, J.L., Stomrud, E.,
Palmqvist, S., Mattsson-Carlgren, N., Hansson, O., 2021. Associations of Plasma
Phospho-Tau217 Levels With Tau Positron Emission Tomography in Early Alzheimer
Disease. JAMA Neurol. 78, 149–156.
Ji, C., Sigurdsson, E.M., 2021. Current Status of Clinical Trials on Tau Immunotherapies.
Drugs 81, 1135–1152.
Karlnoski, R.A., Rosenthal, A., Alamed, J., Ronan, V., Gordon, M.N., Gottschall, P.E.,
Grimm, J., Pons, J., Morgan, D., 2008. Deglycosylated anti-Abeta antibody dose-
response effects on pathology and memory in APP transgenic mice. J. Neuroimmune
Pharmacol. 3, 187–197.
Katsinelos, T., Zeitler, M., Dimou, E., Karakatsani, A., Muller, H.M., Nachman, E.,
Steringer, J.P., Ruiz de Almodovar, C., Nickel, W., Jahn, T.R., 2018. Unconventional
Secretion Mediates the Trans-cellular Spreading of Tau. Cell Rep. 23, 2039–2055.
Kinney, J.W., Bemiller, S.M., Murtishaw, A.S., Leisgang, A.M., Salazar, A.M., Lamb, B.T.,
2018. Inflammation as a central mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &
Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions 4, 575-590.
Kopke, E., Tung, Y.C., Shaikh, S., Alonso, A.C., Iqbal, K., Grundke-Iqbal, I., 1993.
Microtubule-associated protein tau. Abnormal phosphorylation of a non-paired
helical filament pool in Alzheimer disease. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 24374–24384.
Lacaille-Dubois, M.-A., 2019. Updated insights into the mechanism of action and clinical
profile of the immunoadjuvant QS-21: A review. Phytomedicine 60, 152905.
Larkin, H.D., 2023. Lecanemab Gains FDA Approval for Early Alzheimer Disease. J. Am.
Med. Assoc. 329, 363.
Lemere, C.A., 2013. Immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s disease: hoops and hurdles. Mol.
Neurodegener. 8, 36.
Lovell, J.F., Baik, Y.O., Choi, S.K., Lee, C., Lee, J.Y., Miura, K., Huang, W.C., Park, Y.S.,
Woo, S.J., Seo, S.H., Kim, J.O., Song, M., Kim, C.J., Choi, J.K., Kim, J., Choo, E.J.,
Choi, J.H., 2022. Interim analysis from a phase 2 randomized trial of EuCorVac-19: a
recombinant protein SARS-CoV-2 RBD nanoliposome vaccine. BMC Med. 20, 462.
Lovell, J.F., Miura, K., Baik, Y.O., Lee, C., Lee, J.Y., Park, Y.S., Hong, I., Lee, J.H., Kim, T.,
Seo, S.H., Kim, J.O., Song, M., Kim, C.J., Choi, J.K., Kim, J., Choo, E.J., Choi, J.H.,
2024. One-year antibody durability induced by EuCorVac-19, a liposome-displayed
COVID-19 receptor binding domain subunit vaccine, in healthy Korean subjects. Int.
J. Infect. Dis. 138, 73–80.
Lowe, S.L., Willis, B.A., Hawdon, A., Natanegara, F., Chua, L., Foster, J., Shcherbinin, S.,
Ardayfio, P., Sims, J.R., 2021. Donanemab (LY3002813) dose-escalation study in
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement (n y) 7, e12112.
Mabrouk, M.T., Chiem, K., Rujas, E., Huang, W.C., Jahagirdar, D., Quinn, B., Surendran
Nair, M., Nissly, R.H., Cavener, V.S., Boyle, N.R., Sornberger, T.A., Kuchipudi, S.V.,
Ortega, J., Julien, J.P., Martinez-Sobrido, L., Lovell, J., 2021. Lyophilized,
thermostable Spike or RBD immunogenic liposomes induce protective immunity
against SARS-CoV-2 in mice. Sci. Adv. 7, eabj1476.
Mah, L., Szabuniewicz, C., Fiocco, A.J., 2016. Can anxiety damage the brain? Curr. Opin.
Psychiatry 29, 56–63.
Marciani, D.J., 2019. Promising Results from Alzheimer’s Disease Passive
Immunotherapy Support the Development of a Preventive Vaccine. Research (wash
D c) 2019, 5341375.
McKhann, G.M., Knopman, D.S., Chertkow, H., Hyman, B.T., Jack Jr., C.R., Kawas, C.H.,
Klunk, W.E., Koroshetz, W.J., Manly, J.J., Mayeux, R., Mohs, R.C., Morris, J.C.,
Rossor, M.N., Scheltens, P., Carrillo, M.C., Thies, B., Weintraub, S., Phelps, C.H.,
2011. The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from
the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic
guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 7, 263–269.
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
200 

McLeod, B., Mabrouk, M.T., Miura, K., Ravichandran, R., Kephart, S., Hailemariam, S.,
Pham, T.P., Semesi, A., Kucharska, I., Kundu, P., Huang, W-C., Johnson, M.,
Blackstone, A., Pettie, D., Murphy, M., Kraft, J.C., Leaf, E.M., Jiao, Y., van de Vegte-
Bolmer, M., van, Gemert., Ramjith, J., King, C.R., MacGill, R.S., Wu, Y., Lee, K.K.,
Jore, M.M., King, N.P., Lovell, J.F., Julien, J-P., 2022. Vaccination with a structure-
based stabilized version of malarial antigen Pfs48/45 elicits ultra-potent
transmission-blocking antibody response. Immunity 55, 1680.
Mintun, M.A., Lo, A.C., Duggan Evans, C., Wessels, A.M., Ardayfio, P.A., Andersen, S.W.,
Shcherbinin, S., Sparks, J., Sims, J.R., Brys, M., Apostolova, L.G., Salloway, S.P.,
Skovronsky, D.M., 2021. Donanemab in Early Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med.
384, 1691–1704.
Molinuevo, J.L., Ayton, S., Batrla, R., Bednar, M.M., Bittner, T., Cummings, J., Fagan, A.
M., Hampel, H., Mielke, M.M., Mikulskis, A., O’Bryant, S., Scheltens, P., Sevigny, J.,
Shaw, L.M., Soares, H.D., Tong, G., Trojanowski, J.Q., Zetterberg, H., Blennow, K.,
2018. Current state of Alzheimer’s fluid biomarkers. Acta Neuropathol. 136,
821–853.
Mondragon-Rodriguez, S., Perry, G., Luna-Munoz, J., Acevedo-Aquino, M.C.,
Williams, S., 2014. Phosphorylation of tau protein at sites Ser(396–404) is one of the
earliest events in Alzheimer’s disease and Down syndrome. Neuropathol. Appl.
Neurobiol. 40, 121–135.
Monsonego, A., Zota, V., Karni, A., Krieger, J.I., Bar-Or, A., Bitan, G., Budson, A.E.,
Sperling, R., Selkoe, D.J., Weiner, H.L., 2003. Increased T cell reactivity to amyloid
beta protein in older humans and patients with Alzheimer disease. J. Clin. Invest.
112, 415–422.
Muhs, A., Hickman, D.T., Pihlgren, M., Chuard, N., Giriens, V., Meerschman, C., van der
Auwera, I., van Leuven, F., Sugawara, M., Weingertner, M.-C., Bechinger, B.,
Greferath, R., Kolonko, N., Nagel-Steger, L., Riesner, D., Brady, R.O., Pfeifer, A.,
Nicolau, C., 2007. Liposomal vaccines with conformation-specific amyloid peptide
antigens define immune response and efficacy in APP transgenic mice. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 104, 9810-9815.
Norton, S., Matthews, F.E., Barnes, D.E., Yaffe, K., Brayne, C., 2014. Potential for primary
prevention of Alzheimer’s disease: an analysis of population-based data. Lancet
Neurol. 13, 788–794.
Oblak, A.L., Cope, Z.A., Quinney, S.K., Pandey, R.S., Biesdorf, C., Masters, A.R., Onos, K.
D., Haynes, L., Keezer, K.J., Meyer, J.A., Peters, J.S., Persohn, S.A., Bedwell, A.A.,
Eldridge, K., Speedy, R., Little, G., Williams, S.P., Noarbe, B., Obenaus, A.,
Sasner, M., Howell, G.R., Carter, G.W., Williams, H., Lamb, B.T., Territo, P.R., Sukoff
Rizzo, S.J., 2022. Prophylactic evaluation of verubecestat on disease- and symptom-
modifying effects in 5XFAD mice. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research &
Clinical Interventions 8.
Oddo, S., Caccamo, A., Shepherd, J.D., Murphy, M.P., Golde, T.E., Kayed, R.,
Metherate, R., Mattson, M.P., Akbari, Y., Laferla, F.M., 2003. Triple-Transgenic
Model of Alzheimer’s Disease with Plaques and Tangles. Neuron 39, 409–421.
Orgogozo, J.M., Gilman, S., Dartigues, J.F., Laurent, B., Puel, M., Kirby, L.C.,
Jouanny, P., Dubois, B., Eisner, L., Flitman, S., Michel, B.F., Boada, M., Frank, A.,
Hock, C., 2003. Subacute meningoencephalitis in a subset of patients with AD after
Abeta42 immunization. Neurology 61, 46–54.
Ossenkoppele, R., van der Kant, R., Hansson, O., 2022. Tau biomarkers in Alzheimer’s
disease: towards implementation in clinical practice and trials. Lancet Neurol. 21,
726–734.
Pasquier, F., Sadowsky, C., Holstein, A., Leterme Gle, P., Peng, Y., Jackson, N., Fox, N.C.,
Ketter, N., Liu, E., Ryan, J.M., Team, A.C.C.S., 2016. Two Phase 2 Multiple
Ascending-Dose Studies of Vanutide Cridificar (ACC-001) and QS-21 Adjuvant in
Mild-to-Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 51, 1131-1143.
Pfeifer, M., Boncristiano, S., Bondolfi, L., Stalder, A., Deller, T., Staufenbiel, M.,
Mathews, P.M., Jucker, M., 2002. Cerebral hemorrhage after passive anti-Abeta
immunotherapy. Science 298, 1379.
Plotkin, S.S., Cashman, N.R., 2020. Passive immunotherapies targeting Abeta and tau in
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 144, 105010.
Racke, M.M., Boone, L.I., Hepburn, D.L., Parsadainian, M., Bryan, M.T., Ness, D.K.,
Piroozi, K.S., Jordan, W.H., Brown, D.D., Hoffman, W.P., Holtzman, D.M., Bales, K.
R., Gitter, B.D., May, P.C., Paul, S.M., DeMattos, R.B., 2005. Exacerbation of cerebral
amyloid angiopathy-associated microhemorrhage in amyloid precursor protein
transgenic mice by immunotherapy is dependent on antibody recognition of
deposited forms of amyloid beta. J. Neurosci. 25, 629–636.
Rajan, K.B., Wilson, R.S., Weuve, J., Barnes, L.L., Evans, D.A., 2015. Cognitive
impairment 18 years before clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease dementia.
Neurology 85, 898–904.
Ruan, Z., Ikezu, T., 2019. Tau Secretion. Adv Exp Med Biol 1184, 123–134.
Salloway, S., Sperling, R., Fox, N.C., Blennow, K., Klunk, W., Raskind, M., Sabbagh, M.,
Honig, L.S., Porsteinsson, A.P., Ferris, S., Reichert, M., Ketter, N., Nejadnik, B.,
Guenzler, V., Miloslavsky, M., Wang, D., Lu, Y., Lull, J., Tudor, I.C., Liu, E.,
Grundman, M., Yuen, E., Black, R., Brashear, H.R., Bapineuzumab, Clinical Trial, I.,
2014. Two phase 3 trials of bapineuzumab in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease.
N Engl J Med 370, 322-333.
Schorb, M., Haberbosch, I., Hagen, W.J.H., Schwab, Y., Mastronarde, D.N., 2019.
Software tools for automated transmission electron microscopy. Nat. Methods 16,
471–477.
Schroeter, S., Khan, K., Barbour, R., Doan, M., Chen, M., Guido, T., Gill, D., Basi, G.,
Schenk, D., Seubert, P., Games, D., 2008. Immunotherapy reduces vascular amyloid-
beta in PDAPP mice. J. Neurosci. 28, 6787–6793.
Scott, S.B., Graham-Engeland, J.E., Engeland, C.G., Smyth, J.M., Almeida, D.M., Katz, M.
J., Lipton, R.B., Mogle, J.A., Munoz, E., Ram, N., Sliwinski, M.J., 2015. The Effects of
Stress on Cognitive Aging, Physiology and Emotion (ESCAPE) Project. BMC
Psychiatry 15, 146.
Shao, S., Geng, J., Ah Yi, H., Gogia, S., Neelamegham, S., Jacobs, A., Lovell, J.F., 2015a.
Functionalization of cobalt porphyrin-phospholipid bilayers with his-tagged ligands
and antigens. Nat. Chem. 7, 438–446.
Shao, S., Geng, J., Ah Yi, H., Gogia, S., Neelamegham, S., Jacobs, A., Lovell, J.F., 2015b.
Functionalization of cobalt porphyrin–phospholipid bilayers with his-tagged ligands
and antigens. Nat. Chem. 7, 438–446.
Shrestha, R., Mallik, S.K., Lim, J., Gurung, P., Magar, T.B.T., Kim, Y.W., 2023. Efficient
Synthesis of Chlorin e6 and Its Potential Photodynamic Immunotherapy in Mouse
Melanoma by the Abscopal Effect. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24.
Sia, Z.R., He, X., Zhang, A., Ang, J.C., Shao, S., Seffouh, A., Huang, W.-C., D’Agostino, M.
R., Teimouri Dereshgi, A., Suryaprakash, S., Ortega, J., Andersen, H., Miller, M.S.,
Davidson, B.A., Lovell, J.F., 2021a. A liposome-displayed hemagglutinin vaccine
platform protects mice and ferrets from heterologous influenza virus challenge.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, e2025759118.
Sia, Z.R., He, X., Zhang, A., Ang, J.C., Shao, S., Seffouh, A., Huang, W.C., D’Agostino, M.
R., Teimouri Dereshgi, A., Suryaprakash, S., Ortega, J., Andersen, H., Miller, M.S.,
Davidson, B.A., Lovell, J.F., 2021. A liposome-displayed hemagglutinin vaccine
platform protects mice and ferrets from heterologous influenza virus challenge.
PNAS 118.
Siemers, E.R., Sundell, K.L., Carlson, C., Case, M., Sethuraman, G., Liu-Seifert, H.,
Dowsett, S.A., Pontecorvo, M.J., Dean, R.A., Demattos, R., 2016. Phase 3
solanezumab trials: Secondary outcomes in mild Alzheimer’s disease patients.
Alzheimers Dement. 12, 110–120.
Terry, R.D., Masliah, E., Salmon, D.P., Butters, N., DeTeresa, R., Hill, R., Hansen, L.A.,
Katzman, R., 1991. Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease:
synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment. Ann. Neurol. 30,
572–580.
Timmers, M., Van Broeck, B., Ramael, S., Slemmon, J., De Waepenaert, K., Russu, A.,
Bogert, J., Stieltjes, H., Shaw, L.M., Engelborghs, S., Moechars, D., Mercken, M.,
Liu, E., Sinha, V., Kemp, J., Van Nueten, L., Tritsmans, L., Streffer, J.R., 2016.
Profiling the dynamics of CSF and plasma Aβ reduction after treatment with JNJ-
54861911, a potent oral BACE inhibitor. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational
Research & Clinical Interventions 2, 202–212.
van Dyck, C.H., 2018. Anti-Amyloid-beta Monoclonal Antibodies for Alzheimer’s
Disease: Pitfalls and Promise. Biol. Psychiatry 83, 311–319.
Vandenberghe, R., Rinne, J.O., Boada, M., Katayama, S., Scheltens, P., Vellas, B.,
Tuchman, M., Gass, A., Fiebach, J.B., Hill, D., Lobello, K., Li, D., McRae, T., Lucas, P.,
Evans, I., Booth, K., Luscan, G., Wyman, B.T., Hua, L., Yang, L., Brashear, H.R.,
Black, R.S., Bapineuzumab, Clinical Study, I., 2016. Bapineuzumab for mild to
moderate Alzheimer’s disease in two global, randomized, phase 3 trials. Alzheimers
Res Ther 8, 18.
Vogt, A.S., Jennings, G.T., Mohsen, M.O., Vogel, M., Bachmann, M.F., 2023. Alzheimer’s
Disease: A Brief History of Immunotherapies Targeting Amyloid beta. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
24.
Vorhees, C.V., Williams, M.T., 2006. Morris water maze: procedures for assessing spatial
and related forms of learning and memory. Nat. Protoc. 1, 848–858.
Walsh, R.N., Cummins, R.A., 1976. The Open-Field Test: a critical review. Psychol. Bull.
83, 482–504.
Wang, Y., Mandelkow, E., 2016. Tau in physiology and pathology. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
17, 5–21.
Wilcock, D.M., Alamed, J., Gottschall, P.E., Grimm, J., Rosenthal, A., Pons, J., Ronan, V.,
Symmonds, K., Gordon, M.N., Morgan, D., 2006. Deglycosylated anti-amyloid-beta
antibodies eliminate cognitive deficits and reduce parenchymal amyloid with
minimal vascular consequences in aged amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice.
J. Neurosci. 26, 5340–5346.
Wilcock, D.M., Colton, C.A., 2009. Immunotherapy, vascular pathology, and
microhemorrhages in transgenic mice. CNS Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets 8, 50–64.
Wilcock, D.M., Rojiani, A., Rosenthal, A., Subbarao, S., Freeman, M.J., Gordon, M.N.,
Morgan, D., 2004. Passive immunotherapy against Abeta in aged APP-transgenic
mice reverses cognitive deficits and depletes parenchymal amyloid deposits in spite
of increased vascular amyloid and microhemorrhage. J. Neuroinflammation 1, 24.
Wilcock, D.M., Jantzen, P.T., Li, Q., Morgan, D., Gordon, M.N., 2007. Amyloid-beta
vaccination, but not nitro-nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug treatment, increases
vascular amyloid and microhemorrhage while both reduce parenchymal amyloid.
Neuroscience 144, 950–960.
Wilcock, D.M., Gharkholonarehe, N., Van Nostrand, W.E., Davis, J., Vitek, M.P.,
Colton, C.A., 2009. Amyloid reduction by amyloid-beta vaccination also reduces
mouse tau pathology and protects from neuron loss in two mouse models of
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 29, 7957–7965.
Winblad, B., Andreasen, N., Minthon, L., Floesser, A., Imbert, G., Dumortier, T.,
Maguire, R.P., Blennow, K., Lundmark, J., Staufenbiel, M., Orgogozo, J.-M., Graf, A.,
2012. Safety, tolerability, and antibody response of active Aβ immunotherapy with
CAD106 in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, first-in-human study. The Lancet Neurology 11, 597–604.
Winblad, B., Graf, A., Riviere, M.E., Andreasen, N., Ryan, J.M., 2014. Active
immunotherapy options for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 6, 7.
Zhao, Y., Qian, R., Zhang, J., Liu, F., Iqbal, K., Dai, C.L., Gong, C.X., 2020. Young blood
plasma reduces Alzheimer’s disease-like brain pathologies and ameliorates cognitive
impairment in 3xTg-AD mice. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 12, 70.
Zhou, S., Yu, K.O.A., Mabrouk, M.T., Jahagirdar, D., Huang, W.-C., Guerra, J.A., He, X.,
Ortega, J., Poole, S.T., Hall, E.R., Gomez-Duarte, O.G., Maciel, M., Lovell, J.F., 2023.
Antibody induction in mice by liposome-displayed recombinant enterotoxigenic
Escherichia coli (ETEC) colonization antigens. Biomedical. Journal.
Y. Song et al.
Brain Behavior and Immunity 122 (2024) 185–201 
201