Research briefing
Microglia drive 
amyloid-β 
clearance in 
immunized 
patients with 
Alzheimer’s 
disease
Microglia have a central role in 
the clearance of amyloid-β after 
immunotherapy in Alzheimer’s 
disease. By integrating spatial 
transcriptomics and single-cell 
RNA sequencing, we identified 
distinct microglial states that 
mediate removal of amyloid-β. 
APOE and TREM2 emerged as 
key regulators of amyloid-β 
clearance and indicators of 
treatment response, and thereby 
represent potential therapeutic 
targets.
The problem
Alzheimer’s disease is marked by the  
accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques in 
the brain. Immunotherapies that promote 
the clearance of Aβ have shown promise1, 
but the mechanisms that drive such clear-
ance in the brain remain unclear. Microglia, 
the resident immune cells of the brain, can 
clear Aβ after immunization against Aβ, yet 
their effectiveness varies among people. 
Microglia have high expression of many 
genes associated with a risk of developing 
Alzheimer’s disease, including APOE and 
TREM2, which underscores the central role 
of microglia in Alzheimer’s disease and 
their potential influence on the response to 
treatment. Understanding how microglia re-
spond to immunotherapy and the molecular 
mechanisms that drive successful clearance 
of Aβ is essential for optimizing treatment 
strategies and improving the outcomes of 
people with Alzheimer’s disease.
The discovery
We analyzed postmortem brain tissue from 
people with Alzheimer’s disease who had 
received either active immunization against 
Aβ (with AN1792)2,3 or passive immunization 
against Aβ (with lecanemab)4,5. Active im-
munization (such as with AN1792) stimulates 
the immune system to produce antibodies 
against Aβ, whereas passive immuniza-
tion (such as with lecanemab) involves the 
administration of pre-formed antibod-
ies to enhance the clearance of Aβ. Using 
spatial transcriptomics and single-cell RNA 
sequencing, we identified distinct microglial 
states linked to the clearance of Aβ after 
each immunization approach (Fig. 1).
In patients who had been treated with 
AN1792 and showed evidence of extensive 
removal of Aβ, microglia more closely  
resembled those in control brains from  
people without neurological disease, 
expressing genes encoding molecules asso-
ciated with neuronal support and metabolic 
homeostasis. Conversely, microglia from 
the brains of patients with limited clearance 
of Aβ expressed genes encoding molecules 
linked to an activated and inflammatory 
state. In both cases, microglia had high 
expression of TREM2 and APOE.
In a brain from a patient who had been 
treated with lecanemab, we observed a 
distinct microglial transcriptional profile 
characterized by increased expression of 
SPP1 and CHI3L1 — genes encoding molecules 
linked to tissue remodeling and immu-
noregulation. Microglia with this particular 
profile were most prominent in brain regions 
with enhanced recruitment of microglia to 
Aβ and clearance of Aβ, which highlights the 
regional variation of microglial responses.
In both immunization strategies, 
stress-associated and inflammatory micro-
glial states diminished after treatment.  
This effect was more pronounced in AN1792- 
immunized people with extensive clearance 
of Aβ than in those with limited clearance, 
indicative of resolution of microglial inflam-
mation after the removal of Aβ. Additionally, 
expression of APOE and TREM2 was associ-
ated with microglia-mediated clearance of 
Aβ and anti-AN1792 antibody titers, which 
reinforced the proposal of APOE and TREM2 
as key regulators of this process.
The implications
Our findings suggest that microglial state 
and activation profiles are associated with 
Aβ clearance efficacy after immunization 
in people with Alzheimer’s disease. Thus, 
strategies that can alter microglial states, 
facilitating removal of Aβ and mitigating 
chronic inflammation, might enhance  
immunotherapy efficacy. Furthermore, the 
identification of APOE and TREM2 as being 
associated with this process positions them 
as therapeutic targets for fine-tuning micro-
glial activity in Alzheimer’s disease.
Further research is needed to determine 
how genetic factors, such as APOE genotype 
(a known genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s 
disease), influence microglial responses to 
immunization and how treatments can be  
refined to minimize vascular immune- 
related side effects. Targeted pharmacologi-
cal interventions that promote beneficial 
microglial functions while limiting vascular 
immune reactivity hold promise for safer 
and more effective Aβ-targeted therapies in 
Alzheimer’s disease.
Importantly, despite full clearance of Aβ 
in some AN1792-immunized patients, all 
patients developed dementia and exhibited 
continued propagation of tau pathology. 
Thus, Aβ removal alone is either insufficient 
or must occur earlier to prevent downstream 
pathological cascades.
Lynn van Olst & David Gate
Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
This is a summary of: 
van Olst, L. et al. Microglial mechanisms 
drive amyloid-β clearance in immunized 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-025-03574-1 
(2025).
Publisher’s note 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Published online: 22 April 2025
 Check for updates
Nature Medicine | Volume 31 | May 2025 | 1418–1419
1418

REFERENCES
1.	 Karran, E. & De Strooper, B. The amyloid 
hypothesis in Alzheimer disease: new 
insights from new therapeutics. Nat. Rev. 
Drug Discov. 21, 306–318 (2022).  
This review article discusses the role of 
Aβ-targeting drugs in Alzheimer’s disease 
and the need for early intervention.
2.	 Holmes, C. et al. Long-term effects 
of Aβ42 immunisation in Alzheimer’s 
disease: follow-up of a randomised 
placebo-controlled phase I trial. Lancet 
372, 216–223 (2008).  
This paper reports that immunization with 
AN1792 clears the Aβ load but does not 
halt dementia progression in a clinical 
follow-up at 6 years.
3.	 Nicoll, J. A. R. et al. Persistent 
neuropathological effects 14 years 
following amyloid-β immunization in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 142, 2113–2126 
(2019).  
This paper reports sustained clearance of 
Aβ after immunization with AN1792 in a 
15-year post-mortem neuropathological 
follow-up.
4.	 Reish, N. J. et al. Multiple cerebral 
hemorrhages in a patient receiving 
lecanemab and treated with t-PA for stroke. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 388, 478–479 (2023).  
This paper reports severe cerebral 
hemorrhages in a lecanemab-treated 
patient, the same case used in our study.
5.	 Castellani, R. J. et al. Neuropathology of 
anti-amyloid-β immunotherapy: a case 
report. J. Alzheimers Dis. 93, 803–813 
(2023).  
This paper reports post-mortem 
analysis of a lecanemab-treated patient, 
revealing clearance of Aβ alongside 
histiocytic vasculitis, in the same case 
used in our study.
DAPI/CD68/IBA1/Aβ
DAPI
IBA1
CD68
Aβ
LCMB hippocampus
50 µm
a
Aβ-plaque
Nuclei <20 µm
to Aβ plaque  
Nuclei ≥20 µm
to Aβ plaque  
Nuclear distance to Aβ plaque 
b
Myeloid
AST-1
AST-2
AST-3
AST-4
Neuron-1
Neuron-2
Neuron-3
Neuron-4
Neuron-5
Neuron-6
Neuron-7
Neuron-8
Neuron-9
Neuron-10
Oligo-1
Oligo-2
Oligo-3
Oligo-4
Vasc-1
Vasc-2
Vasc-3
Vasc-4
Vasc-5
Vasc-6
Vasc-7
Vasc-8
Unknown-1
Unknown-2
Unknown-3
20 µm
DAPI/Pan-Aβ (D54D2)
Fig. 1 | Profiling of Aβ plaque-associated microglia in the brain of immunized patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease. a, Confocal images showing CD68+IBA1+ myeloid cells surrounding Aβ deposits in the hippocampus 
of a lecanemab (LCMB)-treated patient. DAPI, 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. b, Spatial plots (top) indicating 
the distance between spatially sequenced nuclei and Aβ plaques in the hippocampus of a lecanemab-treated 
patient; bottom, cell type annotations. AST, astrocyte; Oligo, oligodendrocyte; Vasc., vascular cell.  
© 2025, van Olst, L. et al., CCBY 4.0.
EXPERT OPINION
“The authors present a comprehensive 
study showcasing the utility of spatial 
transcriptomics in banked brain tissues, 
including samples from 25-year-old 
Alzheimer’s disease immunotherapy 
trials, to examine microglial function. 
The findings address a critical gap in 
understanding cellular heterogeneity and 
spatial organization, particularly in response 
to immunotherapies such as lecanemab.” 
Özgün Gökçe, University of Bonn,  
Bonn, Germany.
BEHIND THE PAPER
Our research was motivated by the 
observation that immunization against 
Aβ results in variable plaque clearance 
among patients. Access to rare postmortem 
samples from AN1792- and lecanemab-
immunized patients provided a unique 
opportunity to investigate the molecular 
mechanisms underpinning Aβ clearance. 
By integrating spatial transcriptomics 
and single-cell RNA sequencing, we 
uncovered distinct microglial states linked 
to immunization efficacy. Collaborations 
with neuropathologists and computational 
biologists were instrumental in refining 
our analyses. Our findings pave the way for 
future efforts to optimize immunotherapy in 
Alzheimer’s disease. L.v.O. & D.G.
FROM THE EDITOR
“The findings of this paper are important, 
as they provide the first detailed insights 
into the mechanisms underlying the 
therapeutic response, in human patients, to 
both passive and active Aβ immunotherapy. 
Passive Aβ immunotherapies are the only 
approved disease-modifying therapies for 
the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, and 
there is still debate about their safety and 
efficacy.” Editorial Team, Nature Medicine.
FIGURE
1419
Nature Medicine | Volume 31 | May 2025 | 1418–1419