RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advancedscience.com
Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor Deﬁciency Impairs
Hippocampal Glutamate Homeostasis and Cognitive
Function by Downregulating Astrocytic GLT-1
Jin-Hui Shi, Qi-Long Tang, Jin-Hong Wang, Yan-Lan Long, Sai-Feng Zhao, Zhen Zhao,
Wan-Ting Xie, Zi-Ming Li, Hao-Ming Lu, Tian-Xiao Gao, Zhen-Zhen Fang, Ti Zhou,
Bo-Xing Li,* Xia Yang,* Guo-Quan Gao,* and Wei-Wei Qi*
Maintenance of glutamate homeostasis is essential for synaptic plasticity and
cognition. Disrupted glutamate-glutamine cycling causes chronic
excitotoxicity, a key driver of cognitive deﬁcits in Alzheimer’s disease (AD),
though regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. Pigment epithelium-derived
factor (PEDF), a neuroprotective protein declining with age, is demonstrated
here to play a novel role in synaptic glutamate clearance. Analysis of
peripheral blood samples from 19 patients with AD and 75 non-dementia
control subjects revealed lower levels of PEDF in patients, and loss of PEDF
correlates with cognitive decline. PEDF-deﬁcient mice exhibit defective
learning and memory, and higher susceptibility to AD. Furthermore, PEDF
deﬁciency impaired synaptic plasticity and dendritic spine morphology.
Mechanistically, PEDF inhibits ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent degradation
of astrocytic glutamate transporter-1 (GLT-1) and normally guarantees
elimination of synaptic glutamate by modulating the protein kinase C
signaling pathway. Strikingly, restoring PEDF rescued cognitive deﬁcits in a
mouse model of AD, and upregulation of GLT-1 rescued cognitive impairment
in PEDF-deﬁcient mice. Collectively, these ﬁndings reveal PEDF is a
physiologic regulator of synaptic glutamate homeostasis. Targeting PEDF
deﬁciency-induced neural impairment may provide a novel avenue for the
development of new therapeutic applications for neurodegenerative diseases
associated with glutamate-induced excitotoxicity.
J.-H. Shi, Q.-L. Tang, J.-H. Wang, Y.-L. Long, Z. Zhao, W.-T. Xie, H.-M. Lu,
Z.-Z. Fang, T. Zhou, X. Yang, G.-Q. Gao, W.-W. Qi
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Zhongshan School
of Medicine
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510080, China
E-mail: yangxia@mail.sysu.edu.cn;gaogq@mail.sysu.edu.cn;
qiww3@mail.sysu.edu.cn
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202500402
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH
GmbH. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
DOI: 10.1002/advs.202500402
1. Introduction
Cognitive function involves a series of psy-
chologically and socially based behaviors,
including learning memory and spatial ori-
entation, that are crucial for survival.[1]
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a highly hetero-
geneous aging-related disease, and the most
frequent cause of cognitive decline.[2] Aber-
rant glutamate-induced excitability is a sig-
niﬁcant risk factor for pathological changes
in the early stage of AD.[3] Disruption of
glutamate homeostasis causes a variety of
progressive neurologic disorders.[4] Gluta-
mate homeostasis refers to the tightly reg-
ulated balance of glutamate levels in the ex-
tracellular space to ensure optimal synap-
tic function while preventing excitotoxicity.
This balance is maintained by coordinated
processes such as glutamate release from
presynaptic neurons, uptake by glial cells
and neurons (primarily through excitatory
amino acid transporters), and the synthesis
and recycling of glutamate. Disruption in
glutamate homeostasis can lead to either ex-
cessive accumulation, contributing to neu-
rotoxicity, or insuﬃcient glutamate levels,
S.-F. Zhao, Z.-M. Li, B.-X. Li, G.-Q. Gao, W.-W. Qi
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease,
Zhongshan School of Medicine
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510080, China
E-mail: liboxing@mail.sysu.edu.cn
G.-Q.Gao
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Diabetology
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, China
S.-F.Zhao, B.-X.Li
Key Laboratory of Human MicrobiomeandChronic Diseases (Sun Yat-sen
University), Ministry of Education
Guangzhou 510655, China
W.-W.Qi
Guangdong Engineering & Technology Research CenterforGeneManipu-
lation andBiomacromolecularProducts (Sun Yat-sen University)
Guangzhou 510080, China
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (1 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
impairing synaptic transmission.[5] Glutamate homeostasis rep-
resents the balance between glutamate release and elimination
and depends on neuron-glia interactions.[6] Astrocytes, the ma-
jority of glial cells, ensheath most excitatory synapses and help to
regulate neuronal transmission.[7] Astrocytes express high levels
of glutamate transporters in their end-feet, and thus help to bal-
ance the synaptic glutamate concentration in the brain and gener-
ally maintain glutamate homeostasis between synapses.[8] Astro-
cytic uptake of glutamate (as a consequence of astrocytic activity)
has been shown to actively modulate neuronal excitability and
synaptic transmission, and plasticity.[9] Glutamate transporter 1
(GLT-1; or excitatory amino acid transporter 2, EAAT2), the major
glutamate transporter protein in the brain, is almost exclusively
expressed by astrocytes and accounts for ≈90% of functional up-
take of extracellular glutamate.[10,11] A smaller fraction of GLT-1
is expressed in neurons, speciﬁcally in axon terminals.[12–14] The
majority of GLT-1 protein is located in astrocytes, where it plays
a crucial role in glutamate uptake and maintaining proper brain
function.[15,16] Expression of GLT-1 has been reported to be signif-
icantly reduced in the brains of elderly individuals and patients
with AD.[17] However, the molecular mechanisms that underlie
the regulation of astrocytic GLT-1 are not yet fully understood.
Accumulating evidence indicates the serine protease inhibitor
(SERPIN) superfamily plays essential roles in the onset and pro-
gression of multiple neurodegenerative disease.[18–20] A study of
708 prospectively collected autopsied brains revealed lower ser-
ine protease inhibitor F1 (SERPINF1) levels in subjects with
AD and individuals who were pre-symptomatic,[21] suggesting
that SERPINF1 deﬁciency may be an essential feature associated
with the onset and progression of AD. Given this notable asso-
ciation between decreased SERPINF1 expression and the bur-
den of AD pathology, it is plausible to suggest that SERPINF1
deﬁciency may be a risk factor for the onset of AD. The gene
SERPINF1, which encodes the secreted glycoprotein pigment
epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), was initially described as a
neurotrophic factor and is a non-inhibitory member of the SER-
PINs superfamily.[22] PEDF was originally identiﬁed in retinal
pigment epithelial cells. An analysis of the adult human brain
and spinal cord showed signiﬁcant levels of the PEDF transcript
in most regions of the nervous system.[22] Ventricular membrane
cells may be an essential source of PEDF in human cerebrospinal
ﬂuid (CSF), suggesting that a substantial portion of the brain
may be impregnated with it.[23] PEDF has been demonstrated
G.-Q. Gao
China Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control (Sun Yat-sen
University), Ministry of Education
Guangzhou 510080, China
J.-H. Shi
Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou 510120, China
J.-H. Shi
Department of Neurology, Chaozhou People’s Hospital
Chaozhou 521011, China
T.-X. Gao
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine
Guangzhou 510060, China
to play critical roles in neuroprotection,[24] development,[25] stem
cell diﬀerentiation,[26] and neurogenesis.[27] PEDF has been re-
ported to possibly play an essential role in activating microglial
metabolism while blocking proliferation, and soluble factors re-
leased by PEDF-stimulated microglia similarly block the prolifer-
ation of astrocytes.[28] Moreover, PEDF exerts anti-inﬂammatory
properties, inhibiting the activation of astrocytes and reducing
the secretion of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as TNF-𝛼and
IL-1𝛽, thereby reducing the inﬂammatory response.[29] It is worth
noting that overexpression of PEDF signiﬁcantly reduced the
glutamate concentration in the hippocampus of chronic unpre-
dictable mild stress models of depression.[30] Although PEDF has
been found to exhibit neuroprotective eﬀects against excitotoxi-
city, the majority of studies on the mechanism of PEDF are re-
stricted to cell culture or animal model systems under patho-
logical conditions.[23,31] Therefore, the physiological functions of
PEDF in the nervous system, especially in astrocytes, are still
poorly understood.
Previous studies have demonstrated that PEDF expression de-
clines with age.[32,33] Similarly, lower serum and hippocampal
PEDF levels were observed in aged C57BL/6 mice.[32] However,
the mechanisms by which PEDF exerts neuroprotective eﬀects
have not been thoroughly elucidated. Here, we reveal previously
unknown roles for PEDF in cognitive function through the reg-
ulation of glutamate homeostasis. Our results suggest, for what
we believe is the ﬁrst time, that PEDF can protect hippocampal
pyramidal neurons from excitotoxicity by regulating the levels of
astrocytic GLT-1 and indicate that downregulation of PEDF plays
an essential role in the development and progression of AD. We
demonstrate that restoring PEDF expression to prevent astrocytic
GLT-1 degradation may represent a promising therapeutic strat-
egy for AD and related neurodegenerative disorders.
2. Results
2.1. PEDF is Downregulated in the Hippocampus of Patients
with AD and Mouse Model of AD
First, we evaluated the relationship between PEDF and AD.
Cross-platform normalized analysis of SERPINF1 mRNA levels
using the AlzData database revealed that SERPINF1 mRNA was
expressed at signiﬁcantly lower levels in various regions of the
brain in patients with AD compared to age-matched healthy con-
trol subjects (Figure S1A, Supporting Information). Moreover,
analysis of RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) datasets (GSE36980) pub-
lished in the NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database
also showed that SERPINF1 was reduced in the hippocampus of
AD patients compared to healthy controls (Figure 1A). Further-
more, merged analysis of multiple GEO databases (GSE28146,
GSE29378, GSE36980, GSE48350, and GSE5281) also revealed
reduced expression of SERPINF1 in the hippocampus of patients
with AD (Figure 1B; Figure S1B, Supporting Information). No-
tably, analysis of a cohort from a reported CSF proteomics study
showed a signiﬁcant decrease in PEDF level in the CSF of AD
patients compared to the control (Figure 1C).
Next, we examined the levels of PEDF in peripheral blood from
66 patients with non-AD dementia (30 males and 36 females), 19
patients with AD (7 males and 12 females), and 75 non-dementia
control subjects (34 males and 41 females). The demographic and
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (2 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 1. PEDF is decreased in the hippocampus of AD patients. A), The relative SERPINF1 mRNA level in the hippocampus of AD patients (3 males
and 4 females) and healthy controls (5 males and 5 females), the dataset was obtained from GSE36980. B), The normalized SERPINF1 transcripts in the
hippocampus of AD patients (n = 66) and healthy controls (n = 74), the dataset was merged from GSE28146, GSE29378, GSE36980, GSE48350, and
GSE5281. C), PEDF levels in CSF from a cohort of the large-scale CSF proteomic analyses (https://doi.org/10.7303/syn20933797). AD patients (n = 23),
control (n = 10). D), PEDF concentration in peripheral blood from AD patients (n = 19), non-AD dementia patients (n = 66), and non-dementia control
(n = 75) subjects. E), Correlation of serum PEDF level with MMSE score, and MoCA score; Pearson’s correlation analysis (Two-sided). All data are
presented as mean ± S.E.M. One-way ANOVA combined with Tukey’s multiple comparison (D); Comparison by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test
unless otherwise indicated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; n.s., not signiﬁcant. See the source data for the statistical details.
clinical characteristics of the subjects are listed in Table S1 (Sup-
porting Information). PEDF levels were signiﬁcantly lower in pa-
tients with non-AD dementia and AD than in the non-dementia
subjects (Figure 1D). Moreover, lower serum PEDF negatively
correlated with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) or
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) cognitive scale scores
of the patients with dementia and AD (Figure 1E).
PEDF is ubiquitously expressed in the adult mouse brain, in-
cluding the cerebellum (CB), medulla (MY), thalamus (TH), ol-
factory cortical areas (OLF), and hippocampus (HPF) (Figure
S1C,D, Supporting Information). Western blotting (WB) showed
that PEDF was signiﬁcantly downregulated in the hippocampus
of 6-month-old APP/PS1 mice and 8-week-old 5 × FAD model
mice compared to wild-type controls (Figure S1E,F, Supporting
Information). Taken together, these data indicate that decreased
PEDF levels may be a risk factor for AD.
2.2. PEDF Deﬁciency Results in Learning and Memory Defects
To investigate the potential eﬀects and AD-related phenotypes re-
lated to the deletion of SERPINF1, we generated a global serpinf1-
deletion mouse line (Figure 2A). Serpinf1 knockout (KO) mice ex-
hibited normal body sizes and brain weights (Figure S2A,B, Sup-
porting Information). After verifying that hippocampal PEDF lev-
els were almost wholly reduced (Figure S2C–F, Supporting Infor-
mation), we investigated the behavioral performance of the KO
mice and WT controls. No diﬀerences were observed in general
locomotion in the open ﬁeld test (OFT) (Figure S2G–M, Support-
ing Information). The KO mice displayed an object recognition
deﬁcit at 9 months-of-age in the novel object recognition (NOR)
test (Figure 2B–D), but did not exhibit spatial memory deﬁcits at
12 months-of-age in the Morris water maze (MWM) or fear condi-
tioning (FC) (Figure S2N–U, Supporting Information). However,
the KO mice showed a spatial reference learning deﬁcit in the
MWM and Y-maze task at 15 months-of-age (Figure 2E-J; Figure
S3A–D, Supporting Information) and impaired performance in
the MWM and Y-maze task at 18 months of age (Figure S3E–N,
Supporting Information).
Next, principal component analysis (PCA) of RNA-seq data in-
dicated signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the gene expression patterns of
hippocampal tissues from 9-month-old KO and WT mice. These
diﬀerences were further supported by the clustering heatmap
of diﬀerentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Figure 2K). Notably,
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (3 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 2. Deletion of PEDF impairs learning and memory in mice. A), Overview of the strategy to generate serpinf1−/−(KO) mice. B), Representative
track and heat map images by 9-mo-old WT and KO mice in the NOR test. C), Quantiﬁcation of percentage time spent in the novel and familiar object
during the test phase (n = 7 mice per group). D), The discrimination index is calculated as the ratio of interaction time with the novel or familiar object to
total interaction time with the novel object and familiar object. Two-tailed paired Student’s t-test. E), Latency to reach the hidden platform during spatial
training in the Morris water maze. Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison. F), Representative track images by 15-mo-old WT and KO
mice in the probe trial of the MWM test. G–J), Time spent in target quadrant G), platform crossing count H), latency of ﬁrst time to enter the initial
platform I) and mean swimming speed J) in the probe trial of the MWM test (n = 5 mice in WT group and n = 6 mice in KO group). K), PCA analysis
and heat map of DEGs in the hippocampus of KO and WT groups (n = 3 per group). L), KEGG enrichment analysis of DEGs. All data are presented as
mean ± S.E.M. Comparison by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test unless otherwise indicated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; n.s., not signiﬁcant. See the source
data for the statistical details.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (4 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene-
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) pathway enrichment analysis
of the DEGs revealed high enrichment of genes and pathways
involved in neurodegenerative diseases, with Alzheimer’s dis-
ease as the top-ranked enriched disease type (Figure 2L; Figure
S3O, Supporting Information). GSEA analysis within the bi-
ological process (BP) category of Gene Ontology (GO) path-
way analysis indicated signiﬁcant suppression of terms related
to cognitive function, as well as learning and memory (Figure
S3P, Supporting Information). Subsequently, the top 50 pro-
teins encoded by DEGs were subjected to protein-protein inter-
action (PPI) network functional enrichment analysis using the
STRING database, and further KEGG pathways enrichment anal-
ysis showed that these proteins were signiﬁcantly enriched for
the development of AD (Figure S3Q and Table S2, Supporting In-
formation). Moreover, the gene expression dataset of hippocam-
pus from AD patients (GSE48350) was used for comparison with
the DEGs identiﬁed in the current study (Figure S3R, Support-
ing Information). Together, these data indicate PEDF deﬁciency-
induced age-related cognitive decline and an AD-like phenotype.
2.3. PEDF Bidirectionally Regulates the Progression of Cognitive
Deﬁcits in a Mouse Model of AD
To determine whether PEDF deﬁciency exacerbates progression
of the pathological behavioral manifestations of AD and clarify
the function of PEDF in AD, we crossed serpinf1−/−mice with 5 ×
FAD mice (Figure 3A; Figure S4A–G, Supporting Information).
8-week-old serpinf1−/−5 × FAD mice demonstrated impairments
to cognitive function in the NOR (Figure S4H–J, Supporting In-
formation), spatial learning memory in the MWM (Figure 3B–F;
Figure S4O, Supporting Information), and short-term working
memory in the Y-maze task (Figure S3K–N, Supporting Infor-
mation).
Next, to investigate the consequences of overexpressing PEDF
in the hippocampus, we infused AAV-serpinf1 or AAV-con viruses
into the hippocampal CA1 region of 6-month-old APP/PS1 mice
(Figure 3G–H; Figure S4P, Supporting Information). In the OFT,
no behavioral changes were observed for APP/PS1 mice infected
with AAV-serpinf1 in the CA1 (Figure S4Q–T, Supporting Infor-
mation). However, the AAV-serpinf1-infected mice exhibited im-
proved memory for a novel object in the NOR (Figure S3U–W,
Supporting Information) and better spatial learning memory in
the MWM (Figure 3I–M; Figure S4b, Supporting Information)
and working memory in the Y-maze task (Figure S4X-a, Support-
ing Information). Collectively, these data suggest that reduced
expression of PEDF aggravated the behavioral abnormalities in
a mouse model of AD, while overexpression of PEDF exerted a
protective role.
2.4. PEDF Deﬁciency Coincides With Disrupted Glutamatergic
Signaling and Downregulated Astrocytic GLT-1
Next, we investigated the underlying mechanisms by which
PEDF regulates AD-like behavior. Three diﬀerent categories, BP,
cellular compartment (CC), and molecular function (MF), were
enriched from DEGs of RNA-seq analysis between serpinf1−/−
and WT mice. In the BP category, synaptic-related processes,
including neurotransmitter transport, neurotransmitter uptake,
and reuptake, were enriched in serpinf1−/−mice (Figure 4A;
Figure S5A, Supporting Information). Notably, glutamatergic
synapses were signiﬁcantly enriched in serpinf1−/−mice in GSEA
analysis of the CC category (Figure 4B).
To conﬁrm the evidence obtained from the GO functional en-
richment analysis, we examined the levels of key proteins in-
volved in the glutamate-glutamine cycle, which is related to neu-
rotransmitter (mainly glutamate) uptake and reuptake function
(Figure 4C). WB showed that GLT-1 was signiﬁcantly decreased
in the hippocampus of 6-month-old serpinf1−/−mice compared
to WT controls. However, there were no signiﬁcant changes
in the levels of the L-glutamate-L-aspartate transporter (GLAST,
also known as EAAT1), glutamine synthetase (GS), or excitatory
amino acid carrier 1 (EAAC1, also known as EAAT3) in serpinf1−/-
mice (Figure 4D). The IF staining demonstrated that the ﬂuores-
cence intensity of GLT-1 was signiﬁcantly lower in the hippocam-
pal CA1 region of serpinf1−/−mice than WT controls (Figure
S5C, Supporting Information). We also repeated the above exper-
iments in serpinf1−/−and WT mice at 18 months-of-age (Figure
S5B–D, Supporting Information).
GLT-1 is mainly expressed in astrocytes, with a small fraction
also expressed at the axon terminals of neurons (Figure 4C). WB
showed that GLT-1 was signiﬁcantly decreased in cultured as-
trocytes, but not neurons (Figure 4E). Additionally, IF staining
demonstrated that GLT-1-positive area was signiﬁcantly smaller
in serpinf1−/−astrocytes compared to WT controls (Figure 4F).
When treated with recombinant mouse-derived PEDF pro-
tein (rmPEDF), WB showed that GLT-1 expression increased in
a concentration-dependent manner above 25 ng mL−1 (physi-
ological concentration in mice: 5 ng mL−1, 1/1000 of that in
humans[34]) in both primary astrocytes (Figure 4G; Figure S5E,
Supporting Information) or C6 cell line (Figure S5H, Supporting
Information). IF staining conﬁrmed that the GFAP-labeled astro-
cytes from serpinf1−/−mice expressed higher levels of GLT-1 after
treatment with rmPEDF (Figure 4H).
Furthermore, WB analysis conﬁrmed overexpression of GLT-
1 in primary astrocytes (Figure S5F,G, Supporting Information)
or C6 cell line (Figure S5I, Supporting Information) transfected
with a PEDF-overexpressing plasmid with pcDNA3.1+ as vector.
Furthermore, WB and IF staining analysis revealed a signiﬁcant
decrease in GLT-1 expression in primary astrocytes transfected
with a small interfering RNA for PEDF (si-serpinf1) (Figure 4I;
Figure S5J,K, Supporting Information). Overall, these results in-
dicate that PEDF regulates the expression of astrocytic GLT-1 in
the hippocampus.
2.5. PEDF Deﬁciency Disrupts Glutamate Homeostasis and
Synaptic Transmission
The glutamate concentration was reduced by almost 50% after
4 h in the WT astrocytes, while the glutamate-uptake ability was
signiﬁcantly impaired in serpinf1−/−astrocytes (Figure 5A). In
addition, serpinf1−/−astrocytes had signiﬁcantly lower intracellu-
lar glutamate concentrations than WT astrocytes, indicating KO-
astrocytes had lower glutamate-uptake ability (Figure 5B). More-
over, transfection with the PEDF-overexpressing adenovirus im-
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (5 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 3. PEDF bidirectionally regulates cognitive deﬁcits in mouse model of AD. A), Schematic representation of breeding strategies in the serpinf1−/−
5 × FAD mice. This strategy requires repeated breeding for three generations. B), Average time to reach the platform in the training process of serpinf1−/−
5 × FAD and 5 × FAD mice in MWM test (n = 7 mice per group). C–F), Time spent in target quadrant C), platform crossing count D), latency of ﬁrst time
to enter the initial platform E), and representative track and heat map images F) of mice of serpinf1−/−5 × FAD and 5 × FAD mice in the probe trial of the
MWM test. G), Schematic diagram showing the strategy of the AAV vectors engineered to overexpress PEDF in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice. H),
Representative images of AAV injection sites and infection validation in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice. Scale bars: 200 μm (right, magniﬁed view of
the left image); 1000 μm (left). I), Average time to reach the platform in the training process of AAV-serpinf1 and AAV-con mice in MWM test (n = 5 mice
per group). J–M), Time spent in target quadrant J), platform crossing count K), latency of ﬁrst time to enter the target L) and representative track and
heat map images M) of AAV-serpinf1 and AAV-con mice in the probe trial of the MWM test. All data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. Two-way ANOVA
with the Bonferroni’s multiple comparison B), I); Comparison by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test unless otherwise indicated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01;
n.s., not signiﬁcant. See Source data for the statistical details.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (6 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 4. Reduction in astrocytic GLT-1 expression and glutamatergic signaling under PEDF-deﬁcient condition. A), The BP category of GO enrichment
of DEGs comparing serpinf1−/−mice to WT mice (n = 3). Two-tailed Fisher’s exact test and corrected p < 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant. B), Top
signiﬁcantly enriched (normalized enrichment score, NES > 0) and de-enriched (NES < 0) gene sets revealed by GSEA comparing serpinf1−/−mice to
WT mice (n = 3). GO-CC: gene ontology-cellular component. Discovery Rate (FDR) was calculated to adjust for multiple comparisons, and pathways
with FDR < 0.05 were considered statistically signiﬁcant. C), Overview of the glutamate-glutamine cycle in the glutamatergic synapses. D), Western
blotting analysis of GLT-1, GLAST, GS, and EAAC1 in the hippocampus of 6-mo-old KO and WT mice (left panel). Protein levels were normalized to
𝛽-actin (right panel, n = 3 mice per group). E), Western blotting analysis of GLT-1 in primary cultured astrocytes and neurons of KO and WT P0 mice
(left panel). Protein levels were normalized to 𝛽-actin (right panel, 3 biological replicates). F), Representative images of GLT-1 co-stained with GFAP in
primary cultured astrocyte of KO and WT P0 mice (left panel); quantiﬁcation of GLT-1+ intensity on GFAP+ cells (right panel). Data point represents
primary astrocyte prepared from KO and WT P0 mice (n = 10 individual cells per group), from three independent experiments. Scale bars: 20 μm. G),
Western blotting analysis of GLT-1 in primary cultured astrocytes at indicated concentration recombinant PEDF (rmPEDF) treatment (left panel). Protein
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (7 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
proved the glutamate-uptake ability of C6, but did not alter
glutamate-release (Figure S6A–E, Supporting Information).
Next, AAV-iGluSnFR virus was infused into the hippocampus
of 6-month-old serpinf1−/−and WT mice, and acute hippocam-
pal slices were obtained at 20 days after infection and observed
by two-photon microscopy (Figure 5C–E). Analysis of glutamate-
signaling revealed serpinf1−/−mice exhibited higher baseline and
maximum glutamate signaling after hypoxic stimulation than the
WT mice (Figure 5E–G). Although the serpinf1−/−mice demon-
strated higher glutamate release than WT control mice, the diﬀer-
ence was not signiﬁcant (Figure 5H). Furthermore, we obtained
consistent results in the oﬀspring of 8-week-old 5 × FAD mice
crossed with serpinf1−/−5 × FAD mice (Figure S6F–I, Support-
ing Information).
Serpinf1−/−mice exhibited a signiﬁcantly lower frequency and
amplitude of miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEP-
SCs) compared to WT controls (Figure 5I–K). Additionally, the
decay time for single mEPSCs was elevated in serpinf1−/−mice,
indicating longer glutamate clearance in synapses (Figure 5L,M).
These results indicate reduced expression of PEDF disrupted
basal glutamatergic synaptic transmission, a phenomenon in
accordance with the alterations observed at the level of gluta-
matergic synaptic proteins, including vesicular glutamate trans-
porter 1 (VGlut1) (Figure S6J, Supporting Information). More-
over, GABAergic synapses did not appear to be aﬀected in
serpinf1−/−mice (Figure S6K, Supporting Information). Further-
more, serpinf1−/−mice exhibited abnormal activation of astro-
cytes at 6 months-of-age and the levels of activation progressively
deteriorated with age, whereas no signiﬁcant changes in either
microglial number or activity status were observed in serpinf1−/−
mice (Figure S6L–N, Supporting Information).
Notably, impaired synaptic glutamate clearance has been pre-
viously implicated in vulnerability to epileptic seizures.[35] As an-
ticipated, intraperitoneal administration of a single subthreshold
dose of 2 mg kg−1 kainic acid did not cause any seizure-related re-
sponse in WT control mice. However, most of the KO mice devel-
oped clonic seizures as early as 30–40 min after injection (Figure
S6O, Supporting Information). Thus, these data conﬁrm that the
loss of PEDF leads to functional alterations in the synapses of the
hippocampus.
2.6. Loss of PEDF Impairs Neuronal Morphology and Synaptic
Plasticity
Neurons adjust their dendritic growth and branching to compen-
sate for changes in synaptic transmission, and these processes
are termed structural homeostasis.[36] Previous reports showed
that abnormally high levels of extracellular glutamate cause den-
dritic atrophy and spine loss.[37] Sholl analysis after Golgi stain-
ing conﬁrmed reduced dendrite complexity and dendritic spine
density in CA1 neurons from serpinf1−/−mice at 6 months-of-age
(Figure 6A–D), and more signiﬁcant reductions at 18 months-of-
age (Figure S7A–D, Supporting Information).
Long-term potentiation (LTP) is considered to be the neu-
rological basis of learning memory.[38] We therefore recorded
the Schaﬀer collaterals (SC) for CA1 pathway LTP in serpinf1−/−
and WT mice. Based on a 30 min baseline recording of ﬁeld
excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) compared with the
ﬁrst 10 min and last 10 min after high-frequency stimulation
(HFS), 9-month-old WT mice induced normal LTP. In contrast,
serpinf1−/−mice exhibited an impairment in HFS-induced LTP
(Figure 6E-F). Previous studies have shown that LTP in the SC-
CA1 of the hippocampus is dependent on N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor (NMDAR)-mediated excitatory postsynaptic currents
(EPSCs).[39] Accordingly, whole-cell recording of CA1 pyramidal
neurons revealed signiﬁcantly smaller amplitudes of NMDAR-
mediated EPSC in the neurons of 6-month-old serpinf1−/−mice
than WT controls (Figure S7E,F, Supporting Information). WB
conﬁrmed reduced levels of synaptophysin and postsynaptic den-
sity protein 95 (PSD-95) in the hippocampus of serpinf1−/−mice.
(Figure 6G).
Reduced astrocytic GLT-1 levels may elevate the concentra-
tion of glutamate at synapses and subsequently trigger excito-
toxic cell death via a NMDAR–mediated increase in intracellular
Ca2+.[40] Nissl staining did not reveal any signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in the hippocampal CA1 region of serpinf1−/−mice at 6, 9, and 12
months-of-age. However, neuronal loss was signiﬁcantly greater
in serpinf1−/−mice at 15 months-of-age compared to WT controls
(Figure S7G, Supporting Information) and by 18 months-of-age,
serpinf1−/−exhibited signiﬁcant neuronal loss in other regions of
the hippocampus, including CA3 and DG (Figure S7H, Support-
ing Information). Furthermore, serpinf1−/−5 × FAD mice also
exhibited signiﬁcantly greater neuronal loss than 5 × FAD mice
(Figure S8A, Supporting Information). On the contrary, infusion
of AAV-serpinf1 into the hippocampus CA1 of APP/PS1 mice at 6
months-of-age attenuated neuronal loss (Figure S8B, Supporting
Information).
Changes in glutamate transporter expression have been identi-
ﬁed to occur at an early stage of AD, which indicates that dysfunc-
tional glutamate transport might be an early event in the pathol-
ogy of the disease.[41] Interestingly, glutamate and amyloid 𝛽have
been shown to aﬀect each other.[42] Apart from aﬀecting amyloid
𝛽production, there is evidence that interactions between gluta-
mate and amyloid 𝛽inﬂuence tau phosphorylation.[43] IF staining
revealed that neither amyloid 𝛽production nor tau phosphory-
lation was signiﬁcantly altered in serpinf1−/−mice at 6 months-
of-age (Figure S8C–E, Supporting Information). However, at 18
months-of-age, both soluble amyloid 𝛽and tau phosphorylation
were signiﬁcantly increased in the hippocampus of serpinf1−/−
mice compared to WT controls (Figure S8F–H, Supporting In-
formation). Notably, AAV-serpinf1 treatment led to a marked
levels were normalized to 𝛽-actin, from three independent experiments (right panel). One-way ANOVA combined with the Tukey’s multiple comparison.
H), Representative images of GLT-1 co-stained with GFAP in primary cultured astrocyte of KO P0 mice at 25 ng mL−1 concentration rmPEDF treatment
(left panel); quantiﬁcation of GLT-1+ intensity on GFAP+ cells (right panel). Data point represents primary astrocyte prepared from KO P0 mice (n = 10
individual cells per group), from three independent experiments. Scale bars: 20 μm. I), Western blotting analysis of GLT-1 and PEDF with small interfering
RNAs (si-serpinf1 and si-NC) treatment in primary cultured astrocytes of P0 mice (left panel). Protein levels were normalized to 𝛽-actin, from three
independent experiments (right panel). All data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. Comparison by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test unless otherwise
indicated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; n.s., not signiﬁcant. See Source data for the statistical details.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (8 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 5. PEDF deﬁciency disrupts astrocytic glutamate uptake ability and glutamate homeostasis in mice. A), Representative confocal micrographs of
the morphology of primary astrocyte prepared from KO and WT P0 mice (left panel). Astrocytes incubated in an uptake buﬀer containing 100 μm unlabeled
glutamate for extracellular glutamate assay: Extracellular glutamate concentrations were determined in samples from the uptake buﬀer collected at the
indicated time points (right panel). Data were veriﬁed in three independent experiments. Scale bars: 25 μm. B), Intracellular glutamate concentration
after the extracellular glutamate assay, from three independent experiments. C,D), Schematic of the AAV vectors engineered to express the glutamate
sensor (iGluSnFR) under a syn promoter C) and representative images of the injection sites in the hippocampus D). Scale bars: 50 μm (right, magniﬁed
view of the left image); 500 μm (left). E), Representative 2D and 3D images of baseline and maximum glutamate signaling in the hippocampal slices
of KO and WT mice. Scale bars: 20 μm (2D); 200 μm (3D). F,G), Representative heatmap of average iGluSnFR intensity during the time course F) and
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (9 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
reduction in amyloid 𝛽deposition in the hippocampal CA1 re-
gion of APP/PS1 mice, as evidenced by Thioﬂavin-T (Th T) stain-
ing (Figure S8I). Consistently, it also signiﬁcantly attenuated
phosphorylated tau level (Figure S9A–C, Supporting Informa-
tion). Taken together, these data indicate depletion of PEDF in-
creases the concentration of glutamate at synapses in the early
stage of AD by reducing the expression of GLT-1 astrocytes, and
these changes signiﬁcantly contribute to the age-related progres-
sion of AD pathology, including impaired synaptic plasticity, neu-
ronal loss, amyloid 𝛽production and tau phosphorylation.
2.7. Reduction of PEDF Facilitates PKC𝜶
Phosphorylation-Activated Ubiquitin-Proteasome-Dependent
Degradation of GLT-1
To investigate the mechanisms by which deﬁciency of PEDF
reduces astrocytic expression of GLT-1, we quantiﬁed Slc1a2
mRNA (gene name of GLT-1) in hippocampal tissues and pri-
mary astrocytes isolated from serpinf1−/−and WT mice by RT-
qPCR. In line with our previous RNA-seq analysis of hippocam-
pal tissues from serpinf1−/−and WT mice, PEDF deﬁciency did
not transcriptionally modulate astrocytic GLT-1 (Figure 7A). No-
tably, the GSEA analysis of the CC category from our RNA-
seq analysis indicated that the ubiquitin-dependent proteasome
degradation pathway is signiﬁcantly activated in the hippocam-
pus of serpinf1−/−mice (Figure 7B; Figure S10A, Supporting In-
formation).
GLT-1 is a relatively stable protein.[44] However, GLT-1 can be
ubiquitinated and degraded by the proteasome,[45] and treating
astrocytes with the proteasomal inhibitor MG132 elevated the
level of GLT-1. Aberrant ubiquitination of GLT-1 was reported to
reduce both GLT-1 protein expression and glutamate uptake in
astrocytes.[46] Accordingly, we inhibited protein using cyclohex-
imide (CHX) to examine the half-life of GLT-1 in C6 cells. The
protein levels of GLT-1 decreased signiﬁcantly as the duration of
CHX treatment increased. However, these eﬀects were partially
rescued by the addition of MG132, by which the half-life period
of GLT-1 was estimated to be around 12 h (Figure S10B, Sup-
porting Information). Similar trends were observed in primary
astrocytes treated with CHX for 12 and 24 h (Figure 7C). The re-
sults showed that GLT-1 protein levels were lower in si-serpinf1
cells compared to si-NC cells, however, the reduction in GLT-1
in the si-serpinf1 cells was signiﬁcantly alleviated by the addition
of MG132, suggesting that deﬁciency of PEDF enhances protea-
somal degradation of GLT-1 (Figure 7D). Furthermore, the co-
immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) analysis showed a signiﬁcant in-
crease in ubiquitin-binding GLT-1 following knockdown of PEDF
expression on primary astrocytes (Figure 7E). Conversely, in pri-
mary astrocytes pretreated with CHX for 24 h, we observed sig-
niﬁcantly elevated protein GLT-1 expression after treatment with
rmPEDF, which suggests that the presence of PEDF attenuated
degradation of GLT-1 (Figure S10C, Supporting Information). In
parallel, co-IP assays demonstrated that treatment of primary as-
trocytes with rmPEDF signiﬁcantly reduced ubiquitin-binding
GLT-1 (Figure S10D, Supporting Information).
Ubiquitination of GLT-1 is strongly associated with activation
of protein kinase C alpha (PKC𝛼).[47] Notably, in our previous
RNA-seq analysis, GSEA analysis of the MF category revealed in-
creased activation of PKC in serpinf1−/−mic (Figure 7B). Thus,
to examine the interaction between GLT-1 and phosphorylation
of PKC𝛼, we performed WB of phosphorylated PKC𝛼(Thr638).
PKC𝛼was signiﬁcantly activated in primary P0 astrocytes ex-
tracted from the hippocampus of serpinf1−/−mice compared with
WT controls (Figure 7F). Subsequently, cultured astrocytes were
collected, immunoprecipitated with GLT-1, and blotted with pan-
serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation and GLT-1 antibod-
ies. Co-IP assays showed that the levels of phosphorylated GLT-1
were higher in cells transfected with si-serpinf1, with the input
group showing a signiﬁcant increase in phosphorylated PKC𝛼
(Thr638), which suggests that activation of PKC𝛼may lead to
phosphorylation of GLT-1 (Figure 7G). Additionally, inhibition
of PKC𝛼activation in cells transfected with si-serpinf1 using the
PKC inhibitor 𝛼Ro-31-8220 increased the expression of GLT-1
(Figure 7H). As further reverse validation, treatment with phor-
bol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), an agonist of PKC𝛼, con-
ﬁrmed that activation of PKC𝛼signiﬁcantly decreased the expres-
sion of GLT-1 in astrocytes. However, treatment with rmPEDF
signiﬁcantly alleviated the decrease in GLT-1 expression caused
by activation of PKC𝛼using PMA (Figure 7I). IF staining showed
treatment with PMA reduced GLT-1 expression in astrocytes, and
this eﬀect could be rescued by the addition of rmPEDF (Figure
S10E, Supporting Information). Interestingly, PKC𝛼expression
was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the hippocampus of serpinf1−/−
mice and WT controls. However, the levels of phosphorylated
PKC𝛼were signiﬁcantly higher in serpinf1−/- mice, suggesting
that a lack of PEDF may endogenously activate PKC𝛼(Figure
S10F, Supporting Information).
To undertake a preliminary investigation of the pathways by
which PEDF inhibits the activation of PKC𝛼, we investigated the
structure of PEDF. Previous studies have reported that the neu-
roprotective function of PEDF is derived from a 44 amino acid-
containing peptide (Val78-Thr121)[48] that acts as a ligand and
binds to the PEDF receptor (PEDF-R, also known as Adipose
Triglyceride Lipase, ATGL; encoded by the PNPLA2 gene) (Figure
S10G, Supporting Information). Therefore, we ﬁrst investigated
the basal levels of PEDF-R in the mouse brain and found that
PEDF-R is highly expressed in the hippocampus (Figure S10H,
Supporting Information). PEDF-R, as an deﬁned (ATGL) that ex-
hibits esterase function, degrades triglycerides to produce diacyl-
glycerol (DAG), which can increase PKC activity.[49] We did not
observe any signiﬁcant diﬀerences in DAG expression in primary
quantiﬁcation of the average ﬂuorescence intensity G) (n = 3 mice per group). H), Quantiﬁcation of pre- and post-hypoxia stimulated glutamate changes
by the ratio of the diﬀerence between the baseline and maximum level of the glutamate signal to the baseline (n = 3 mice per group). I), Representative
traces of mEPSCs recorded from WT and KO mice. J,K), Cumulative distribution and mean mEPSC frequency j) and amplitudes k) (n = 6–8 cells from 3
individual mice). L), Representative traces of mean individual mEPSCs from WT and KO mice. M), Cumulative distribution and mean value of mEPSC
decay time (n = 8 WT group; n = 6 KO group, from 3 individual mice per group). All data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. Two-way ANOVA with the
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison A,G); Comparison by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test unless otherwise indicated. *p < 0.05, ****p < 0.0001; n.s.,
not signiﬁcant. See Source data for the statistical details.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (10 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 6. PEDF deﬁciency impairs dendritic spine morphology and LTP formation. A), Representative confocal micrographs of the morphology of pyra-
midal neurons in the hippocampus of 6-mo-old WT and KO mice (left panel). 3D neuron tracking reconstruction and Sholl analysis images (right panel).
Scale bar: 500 μm (a1, a5), 200 μm (a2, a6), 50 μm (a3, a7, Track Neuron), 20 μm (a4, a8). B,C), Total cumulative lengths of basal dendritic processes
neuron (B) and Sholl analysis of dendritic arbors of pyramidal neurons C) in the hippocampus (n = 10–12 cells from 3 individual mice per group). D),
Representative confocal micrographs and spines-skeletonized images of dendritic spines of pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus of WT and KO mice
(left panel). Scale bar: 10 μm. Quantitative analysis of dendritic spine density (n = 10–12 cells from 3 individual mice per group) (right panel). One-way
ANOVA with Fisher’s LSD test. E), A 100-Hz high-frequency stimulation (HFS)-induced LTP was recorded in the hippocampus slices from KO and WT
mice (left panel). Representative fEPSP waveform recordings (right panel) (n = 6 slices from 3 mice in WT group, n = 5 slices from 3 mice in KO group).
F), Ratio of mean to baseline fEPSP amplitude in the last 10 min after high-frequency stimulation (n = 3 mice per group). G), Western blotting analysis
of PSD-95 and synaptophysin in the hippocampus of WT and KO mice (left panel). Protein levels were normalized to 𝛽-actin (right panel, n = 5 mice
per group). All data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. Two-way ANOVA with the Bonferroni’s multiple comparison C); Comparison by two-tailed unpaired
Student’s t-test unless otherwise indicated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001; n.s., not signiﬁcant. See Source data for the statistical details.
astrocytes from serpinf1−/−and WT mice (Figure S10I, Support-
ing Information). Thus, we knocked down PEDF-R in C6 cells
using a small interfering RNA (si-pnpla2), which increased the
phosphorylation of PKC𝛼, and inhibition of PKC𝛼phosphoryla-
tion by rmPEDF was blocked (Figure S10J–L, Supporting Infor-
mation). Notably, PEDF-R can exert calcium-independent phos-
pholipase A2 (iPLA2) activity upon binding to PEDF, which stim-
ulates the release of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) from cell mem-
brane phospholipids, where DHA has been reported to inhibit
the activity of PKC𝛼.[50] In agreement with these reports, knock-
down of PEDF-R using si-pnpla2 in C6 cells resulted in signiﬁ-
cantly lower levels of DHA (Figure S10M, Supporting Informa-
tion). These data suggest that PEDF deﬁciency may promote
phosphorylation of PKC𝛼, which increases ubiquitin proteaso-
mal degradation of GLT-1 by blocking the PEDF-R/iPLA2/DHA
pathway.
2.8. Upregulation of GLT-1 Rescues Cognitive Impairment in
serpinf1−/−Mice
If decreased GLT-1 expression is a major cause of cognitive de-
cline in serpinf1−/−mice, we hypothesized that increasing GLT-1
expression may improve spatial learning and short-term working
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (11 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 7. PEDF deﬁciency drives abnormal PKC𝛼phosphorylation-activated, leading to the increasing ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent degradation
of GLT-1. A), Gene expression of serpinf1 and slc1a2 mRNA in the hippocampus (left panel) and primary astrocyte (right panel) of WT and KO mice
(n = 6 mice per group; 3 biological replicates). B), Top enriched (NES > 0) gene sets revealed by GSEA. GO-MF: gene ontology-molecular function. C),
Western blotting analysis and quantiﬁcation of GLT-1 in primary cultured astrocytes incubated in 100 μg mL−1 CHX with or without MG132 treatment
at the indicated time points. D), Western blotting analysis and quantiﬁcation of GLT-1 in control (si-NC), PEDF-silenced (si-serpinf1), or PEDF-silenced
with MG132 treatment primary cultured astrocytes. E), Astrocytes were transfected with si-NC or si-serpinf1 in the presence of MG132. GLT-1 was
immunoprecipitated (IP). Western blotting analysis and quantiﬁcation of ubiquitinated proteins or GLT-1. F), Representative western blotting analysis
and quantiﬁcation of GLT-1, PKC𝛼, and p-PKC𝛼in primary cultured astrocytes of WT and KO P0 mice. G), Astrocytes were transfected with si-NC or si-
serpinf1 in the presence of MG132. GLT-1 was IP. Western blotting analysis and quantiﬁcation of phosphorylated proteins and GLT-1 (left panel). Protein
levels were normalized to 𝛽-actin, from three independent experiments (right panel). H), Representative western blotting analysis and quantiﬁcation
of GLT-1, PKC𝛼, and p-PKC𝛼in astrocytes treated with si-NC, si-serpinf1, Ro-31-8220 (10 nm), or both for 24 h, as indicated. I), Representative western
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (12 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
memory. We injected saline or ceftriaxone (CEF), a 𝛽-lactam an-
tibiotic, which has been reported to exert neuroprotective eﬀects
by upregulating the transcription of GLT-151, into 15-month-old
serpinf1−/−mice for 5 days and carried out cognitive memory be-
havior tests (Figure S11A, Supporting Information). Serpinf1−/−
mice that received CEF spent more time interacting with the
novel arm than the saline group in the Y-maze test, indicat-
ing CEF improved their short-term working memory, although
the eﬀect was not signiﬁcant (Figure S11B–E, Supporting In-
formation). CEF-injected serpinf1−/−mice showed a better learn-
ing curve during the escape latency period and improved mem-
ory for the platform position in the test phase compared to
saline-injected serpinf1−/−mice in the MWM test (Figure S11F–K,
Supporting Information) and improved contextual memory in
an injection-based fear conditioning test (Figure S11L–N, Sup-
porting Information). Injection of CEF signiﬁcantly increased
the mRNA and protein levels of GLT-1 in the hippocampus tis-
sues. However, the protein level GLT-1 in CEF-injected serpinf1−/−
mice was still signiﬁcantly lower compared to saline-injected
WT mice, which suggested that CEF may have improved the
behavioral performance of serpinf1−/−mice through other ef-
fects (Figure S11O,P, Supporting Information). Nissl staining
showed a trend towards a higher number of normal neurons in
serpinf1−/−treated with CEF. However, this eﬀect was not signif-
icant compared with the serpinf1−/−saline mice (Figure S11Q,
Supporting Information).
Due to the limited eﬀects of CEF treatment and diﬃculty of
exclude the inﬂuence of other mechanisms of action of CEF as
an antibiotic, we employed LDN-212320 (also known as OSU-
212320), a small-molecule agonist that has been reported to ex-
tend the lifespan of mice in a model of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), to exert a neuroprotective function by increas-
ing translation of GLT-1.[52] We injected serpinf1−/−mice with
20 mg/kg LDN-212320 or vehicle for 10 consecutive days and
assessed cognitive memory behavior (Figure 8A). In the NOR,
LDN-212320-treated mice exhibited a signiﬁcantly longer ex-
ploration time for the new object and better recognition abil-
ity, suggesting LDN-212320 improved the cognitive function of
serpinf1−/−mice (Figure 8B–D). Similarly, LDN-212320 signiﬁ-
cantly improved discrimination between the old and new arm
in the Y-maze test by serpinf1−/−mice (Figure S12A-D). In the
MWM task, LDN-212320-treated serpinf1−/−mice exhibited a sig-
niﬁcantly shorter escape latency during the orientation naviga-
tion phase from day 2 until day 5 (Figure 8E) and a signiﬁ-
cantly better exploration strategy for the platform during the spa-
tial exploration phase (Figure 8F–I; Figure S12E, Supporting In-
formation). In conﬁrmation of the rescue eﬀect, WB analysis
showed that LDN-212320 signiﬁcantly increased GLT-1 protein
expression in the hippocampus (Figure 8J). Finally, Nissl stain-
ing of the hippocampus showed a signiﬁcant reduction in neu-
ronal loss in serpinf1−/−mice in response to LDN-212320 treat-
ment (Figure 8K). These data demonstrate that LDN-212320 ef-
fectively increased GLT-1 protein expression through translation
and attenuated the development of neurodegenerative lesions in
serpinf1−/−mice.
3. Discussion
This study identiﬁed a novel role for PEDF in the maintenance
of glutamate homeostasis and cognitive function. Our data show
that a deﬁciency of PEDF leads to aberrant extracellular glu-
tamate concentration, synaptic plasticity, and altered dendritic
spine morphology as a result of glutamate excitotoxicity due to
reduced expression of GLT-1 in astrocytes, and has long-lasting
consequences on cognitive behavior in the mouse.
To address the controversy surrounding whether PEDF expres-
sion is altered in AD, our comprehensive analysis of multiple
RNA-seq databases provided strong evidence for decreased ex-
pression of PEDF in the hippocampus of patients with AD. Fur-
thermore, we veriﬁed the reduction in PEDF levels through a
combination of blood tests and scale assessments in a relatively
large cohort of patients with AD and individuals without demen-
tia. Through the analysis of a previous proteomics report, it was
found that the level of PEDF in CSF was also signiﬁcantly re-
duced in the AD population. Thus, we speculate that the levels
of PEDF are systemically decreased in AD, in line with the ex-
pectation that PEDF levels in peripheral blood may be indica-
tive of PEDF levels in the central nervous system (CNS). Notably,
our previous study provided conclusive evidence that PEDF lev-
els decline with age.[32] Our data also suggested there is a close
correlation between reduced PEDF levels and cognitive deﬁcits,
which could potentially represent a theoretical molecular basis
for aging as a risk factor for AD. Thus, assessment of PEDF
may hold potential a valuable diagnostic indicator for the onset
and progression of age-related diseases. Future studies will re-
quire larger, pathologically conﬁrmed AD cohorts combined with
paired CSF/blood to be realized.
There is prior evidence for impaired glutamate homeostasis in
AD.[53] Glutamate homeostasis plays essential roles in dendritic
spine morphology, the postsynaptic proteins that regulate den-
dritic spine morphology, glutamate signaling, and the physiol-
ogy of glutamate synaptic.[6] Our study provides the ﬁrst demon-
stration that PEDF plays an indispensable physiological role in
glutamate homeostasis by modulating astrocytic GLT-1. Gluta-
mate is a potent excitotoxin that invokes rapid- and delayed-
type neurotoxicity.[54] The synapse loss observed in our PEDF-
deﬁcient mice seems to represent a form of delayed neuronal
death. Moreover, loss of PEDF promoted vulnerability to epilep-
tic seizures in response to sub-threshold doses of kainic acid,
which may be due to increased accumulation of glutamate in
the hippocampus. It is hypothesized that a deﬁciency of PEDF
in the early stage of AD may lead to further continuous deterio-
ration during the progression of the disease, which implies that
PEDF is an essential factor in limiting AD progression. Undeni-
ably, there may be other systemic eﬀects of the PEDF-deﬁcient
model,[55,56] while our study focused on verifying the causal role
blotting analysis and quantiﬁcation of GLT-1, PKC𝛼, and p-PKC𝛼in astrocytes treated with PMA (100 nm), Ro-31-8220 (10 nm), rmPEDF (25 ng mL−1),
or both for 24 h, as indicated. Protein levels were normalized to 𝛽-actin, from three independent experiments. All data are presented as mean ± S.E.M.
Two-way ANOVA with the Bonferroni’s multiple comparison C,H,I); Comparison by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test unless otherwise indicated.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; n.s., not signiﬁcant. See Source data for the statistical details.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (13 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Figure 8. Enhancing GLT-1 expression by LDN-212320 rescues learning and memory impairment in PEDF deﬁcient mice. A), Schematic diagram showing
the LDN-212320 treatment strategy in KO mice. B), Representative track and heat map images by KO mice treated with vehicle and LDN-212320 in the
NOR test. C) and D), Quantiﬁcation of percentage time spent in the novel and familiar object C), and discrimination index D) during the test phase
(n = 7 mice of vehicle group, n = 6 mice of LDN-212320 group). E), Latency to reach the hidden platform during spatial training in the MWM. One-way
ANOVA with Fisher’s LSD test. F–I), Representative track and heat map images of mice F), platform crossing count G), latency of ﬁrst time to enter
the target H), and time spent in target quadrant I) in the probe trial of the MWM test. J), Western blotting analysis and quantiﬁcation of GLT-1 in the
hippocampus of KO mice treated with vehicle and LDN-212320 (n = 4 mice per group). K), Representative images of Nissl staining of the hippocampal
CA1 of KO mice treated with vehicle and LDN-212320 (left panel); quantiﬁcation of the density of normal neurons (right panel) (n = 4 mice per group).
Scale bar: 100 μm. All data are presented as mean ± S.E.M. Two-tailed paired Student’s t-test D); Two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison
E); Comparison by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test unless otherwise indicated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; n.s., not signiﬁcant. See Source data for the
statistical details.
of the PEDF-GLT-1 axis in ad-related neurodegeneration. Limi-
tations do not detract from the core conclusion that our study
reveals a key mechanism of the PEDF-GLT-1 pathway in AD.
The focus on the male mouse model in our study is primar-
ily based on the fact that estrogen has been shown to signif-
icantly downregulate PEDF expression,[57–59] and using males
avoids the variability induced by the estrous cycle. Speciﬁcally, fe-
male AD mice exhibited lower survival rates compared to males,
which could introduce confounding variables and complicate
data interpretation.[60,61] Additionally, hormonal ﬂuctuations in
females could have added further variability, making it diﬃcult
to maintain experimental consistency. These factors led us to fo-
cus on male mice. We acknowledge that the exclusion of female
subjects is a limitation of the present study. Given the growing
recognition of sex as a biological variable in neurodegenerative
research, future investigations are warranted to evaluate poten-
tial sex-speciﬁc responses to PEDF treatment. Incorporating both
male and female models will be essential to fully elucidate the
therapeutic potential and translational relevance of PEDF in AD.
Ubiquitination is implicated in endocytosis and degradation
of numerous membrane proteins, including other neurotrans-
mitter transporters such as the dopamine transporter.[62] Endo-
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (14 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
cytosis of GLT-1 depends on its ubiquitination, which is trig-
gered by activated PKC𝛼.[63] GLT-1 can be phosphorylated at
multiple serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues,[64] thus we
used a pan-serine/threonine/tyrosine antibody. Ubiquitination
is also necessary for the traﬃcking and degradation of GLT-
1.[65] Our results suggest that deﬁciency of PEDF promotes
PKC𝛼activation-dependent ubiquitination of GLT-1. Activation
of PKC𝛼is strongly implicated in the progression of AD, muta-
tions in PKC𝛼signiﬁcantly increase the risk of AD, and a slight
increase in PKC𝛼activity suﬃcient to lead to the development
of an AD phenotype in mice.[66] Thus, our data indicate that
PEDF may act as a novel endogenous inhibitor of PKC𝛼activ-
ity. Furthermore, in addition to mutations in PKC𝛼, deﬁciency
of PEDF may be a key mechanism that leads to endogenous ac-
tivation of PKC𝛼. However, further research is required to deter-
mine whether the PEDF deﬁciency-mediated activation of PKC𝛼,
which we observed in astrocytes also occurs in other cell types.
Glutamate-receptor antagonists have not been a very success-
ful strategy in humans because they aﬀect normal synaptic sig-
naling and lead to adverse side eﬀects by blocking the physio-
logical functions of the receptor. Memantine is a relatively safe
drug with few side eﬀects, but it exerts inadequate clinical eﬀects
on cognition, global functioning, and activities of daily living.[67]
In neurodegenerative disorders, an insuﬃcient level of GLT-1 is
considered to be the leading cause of excitotoxicity.[68] Clinical
studies and experimental models have shown that a loss of GLT-
1 is involved in the pathological features of AD.[68,69] Accordingly,
restoring GLT-1 protein expression and function may reduce ex-
citotoxicity and provide therapeutic beneﬁts in AD. Ceftriaxone
was the ﬁrst drug to be shown to induce GLT-1 expression via
transcriptional activation.[51] Ceftriaxone was previously reported
to be administered mainly intravenously and intranasally. The
Drugbank database shows that ceftriaxone has a blood-brain bar-
rier penetration of 97.48%, indicating that the drug can enter
the CNS. Regarding its pharmacokinetics, ≈85%–95% of ceftri-
axone is bound to plasma proteins and has an elimination half-
life in plasma of ≈6–9 h.[70] However, the clinical use of cef-
triaxone is limited by its high risk of gallstones (>40% in chil-
dren) and its broad-spectrum antimicrobial properties that dis-
rupt the gut-brain axis.[71,72] Although the drug increases the pro-
tein levels of GLT-1 in vitro, ceftriaxone had limited therapeu-
tic eﬃcacy in chronic epilepsy[73] and AD.[74] Pharmacological
restoration of GLT-1 expression using LDN-212320 was reported
to attenuate cognitive deﬁcits in a mouse model of AD.[68] LDN-
212320 enhances the translation of GLT-1, but does not aﬀect
the half-life of the protein.[75] Molecular weight of LDN-212320 is
293.4 Da, which theoretically has a certain passive diﬀusion po-
tential. GLT-1 in the hippocampus and anterior cingulate cortex
was signiﬁcantly up-regulated after intraperitoneal injection of
LDN-212320, suggesting that the drug did reach the brain tissue,
which indirectly conﬁrms that LDN-212320 acts in the CNS.[76]
The side eﬀects of LDN-212320 are small but limited to animal
experiments, and no acute toxicity or lethality has been detected
in vivo tests in mice.[77] However, further research is required to
determine whether increasing the expression of GLT-1 provides
beneﬁcial eﬀects in humans.[75] One possible explanation for the
potential ineﬀectiveness of GLT-1 is that excessive degradation of
GLT-1 in disease conditions neutralizes the eﬀects of increasing
GLT-1 expression. We speculate that inhibition of GLT-1 degra-
dation might more eﬀectively treat excitotoxicity than promote
GLT-1 expression. Therefore, the data in this study indicate that
inhibition of excessive degradation of GLT-1 by targeting PEDF
may provide an alternative, more feasible treatment strategy to
restore, or rather preserve, physiological levels of GLT-1 in neu-
rological disorders.
Beyond improving behavioral deﬁcits, PEDF treatment also
attenuated key pathological features of AD. Our data show that
AAV-Pedf signiﬁcantly reduced both amyloid-𝛽plaque deposi-
tion and phosphorylated tau levels in AD mice (Figures S8I
and S9A–C, Supporting Information). These results suggest that
PEDF confers multifaceted beneﬁts—rescuing cognitive func-
tion while simultaneously targeting molecular hallmarks of AD.
This dual action highlights its translational potential as a promis-
ing therapeutic strategy beyond conventional single-target ap-
proaches. Collectively, our ﬁndings indicate delivery of the SER-
PINF1 gene or protein therapy could represent a promising strat-
egy to prevent excitotoxicity, especially in the early stage of dis-
ease. Targeting these novel functions of PEDF may provide a
strategy to restore physiological glutamate homeostasis as an in-
tervention against neurodegenerative diseases associated with ex-
citotoxicity.
4. Experimental Section
Ethics Statements:
Human materials used in this study were approved
by the Institutional Research Ethics Committee at Zhongshan People’s
Hospital, Zhongshan Third People’s Hospital, Guangdong Provincial Peo-
ple’s Hospital, and Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital. All participants pro-
vided written informed consent. This study was approved by the Medical
Ethics Committees of Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen Univer-
sity (Approval number: ZZSOM-MEC-2021-072). All animal experimental
protocols were approved by the Ethics Committee of Experimental Ani-
mals of Sun Yat-sen University in accordance with Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee guidelines for animal research (Approval num-
ber: SYSU-IACUC-2022-B1862). The authors are responsible for the accu-
racy of the statements provided in the manuscript.
Human Subjects:
A total of 75 control samples without dementia
were obtained from Zhongshan People’s Hospital (n = 50), Zhongshan
Third People’s Hospital (n = 14), and Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital
(n = 11). 85 dementia subjects, including 19 AD patients, were obtained
from Zhongshan Third People’s Hospital (n = 41, including 6 AD sam-
ples), Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital (n = 26, including 12 AD
samples), and Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital (n = 19, including 1 AD
samples). All patients with AD met the National Institute of Neurolog-
ical and Communicative Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer’s Disease and
Related Disorders Associations criteria for probable AD and the National
Institute on Ageing-Reagan Institute criteria for high likelihood of AD. The
collection was in strict agreement with the institutionally approved guide-
lines, and written informed consent was required from all participants. The
study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (ethi-
cal principles for medical research involving human subjects). The clinical
characteristics of the subjects are presented in Table S1 (Supporting In-
formation). Scores for the MMSE and MoCA were extracted from clinical
notes. These examinations were performed owing to concern for cognitive
problems as part of clinical care and often recorded within neuropsychi-
atric evaluations.
Animals:
All animal experimental protocols were approved by the
Ethics Committee of Experimental Animals of Sun Yat-sen University in
accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guide-
lines for animal research. Four to ﬁve mice were socially housed and
maintained under standard housing conditions on corn cob litter in a
temperature-(23 ± 1 °C) and humidity-(40%) controlled animal room. All
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (15 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
mice were maintained under a 12 h light/dark cycle (lights on at 07:30,
oﬀat 19:30) with food and water ad libitum. The sample size was deter-
mined based on literature from the same ﬁeld, and in consideration of
the animal size limit due to animal welfare requirements and animal ex-
perimental ethical code. Although no systematic randomization method
was used, animals were assigned randomly to each group. Wild-type
C57BL/6J mice were obtained from the Institute of Experimental Animals
of Sun Yat-sen University (Guangzhou, China). APP/PS1 and 5 × FAD mice
were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Stock No. 34829-JAX and No.
006554, USA). The construction of serpinf1 knockout model mice (serpinf1-
KO, serpinf1−/−) (C57BL/6J background) referenced reported studies.[78]
serpinf1−/−mice were generously provided by Professor Jian-Xing Ma (De-
partment of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
USA). serpinf1−/−5 × FAD mice were generated by crossing 5 × FAD
mice with serpinf1−/−mice. Only male mice with a normal appearance
and weight were used for all tests. All behavioral tests were conducted
by experimenters blinded to the experimental groups. Exclusion of exper-
imental mice is strictly based on the following criteria (Internationally ac-
cepted principles of exclusion of laboratory animals):[79] a) Surgical com-
plications (injection site infection or cranial injury); b) Abnormal behav-
ioral manifestations (>50% reduction in voluntary activity or seizures); c)
Failure of tissue sampling (incomplete cerebral perfusion or sample dam-
age); d) Outliers (Grubbs test, 𝛼= 0.05). Intraoperatively, the mice were
kept warm and protected from burns using a small electric blanket and
a small LED surgical baking lamp, which were maintained until the mice
awoke. After surgery, the wounds were sutured and sterilized with iodine,
and the mice were placed in a standard SPF feeding environment with
high-protein soft food and 5% dextrose water for nutritional supplemen-
tation. The mice were housed individually to observe the wound healing
and the status of the mice, and if infected, they required further debride-
ment or antidote administration, and in addition, the degree of pain of the
mice was assessed by behavioral assessment, and analgesic drugs, such
as non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) were administered as
necessary, and if the mice reached the endpoint index, euthanasia was per-
formed.
Virus Injection:
Before surgery, mice were anesthetized with 1.25%
avertin (250 mg kg−1) and ﬁxed in a stereotactic frame (RWD, China). The
virus was stereotaxically injected into the unilateral or bilateral hippocam-
pus (AP: −2.18; ML: ± 2.03; DV: −1.65 mm, where AP denotes antero-
posterior from bregma, ML denotes mediolateral from the midline, and
DV denotes dorsoventral from the brain surface). The adeno-associated
virus (AAV) serotype 9 for PEDF overexpression was designed and con-
structed by OBiO Technology (Shanghai, China). Brieﬂy, mice were stereo-
tactically injected with AAV expressing pAAV-CMV-SERPINF1-3×Flag-P2A-
mNeonGreen-tWPA (designated as AAV-serpinf1) or pAAV-CMV-3×Flag-
P2A-mNeonGreen-tWPA (designated as AAV-con) at a dose of 2.0 × 1012
viral genomes (vg), with 0.6 μL injected into each hippocampal hemi-
sphere. This injection was administered once, and the phenotypic analysis
was conducted four weeks later. rAAV-hsyn-iGluSnFR was obtained from
Brain Case (Shenzhen, China), and the virus was injected into the left hip-
pocampus of mice in a volume of 0.4 μL with a titer of 1 × 1013 vg mL−1.
The viruses were all injected using a 2.0 μL microsyringe (Hamilton, USA)
at a rate of 0.02 μL min−1. The syringe was not removed until 10 min af-
ter the end of the infusion to allow the diﬀusion of the virus. The surgical
incisions were sutured with absorbable sutures and smeared with antisep-
tic. Lastly, the mice were placed on an electric blanket to prevent a drop
in body temperature after removal from the ﬁxation apparatus, and then
returned to the cage after the mice recovered from waking.
Cell Lines and Cell Culture:
All cells were grown and maintained at
37 °C, 5% CO2. Primary astrocytes and neurons were isolated and cul-
tured as previously described, with slight modiﬁcations. In brief, mouse
pups at P0 were sacriﬁced by decapitation, and the brain was collected
in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS). Olfactory bulb and cerebel-
lum were removed, and the meninges were peeled oﬀ. The tissue was
grossly minced, and incubated with 0.25% trypsin (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entiﬁc, USA) in 0.5 mm EDTA at 37 °C for 15 min. DMEM high glucose
(Gibco, USA), supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% pen-strep (PS) was
added to the preparation at a 3:1 ratio (for neurons, Start Medium: Neu-
robasal Medium-A + 1% B27 + Glutamine (Sigma, USA) 0.5 mm + Glu-
tamate 25 μm; Culture Medium: Neurobasal Medium-A + 1% B27 + Glu-
tamine 0.5 mm; for astrocytes, DMEM + 10% FBS). Cells were pelleted at
1000 rpm for 5 min at room temperature (RT). The pellet was resuspended
in fresh culture medium, and the supernatant cell suspension was sepa-
rated by stopping at 1500 rpm in rapid centrifugation mode. Lastly, the cell
suspension was centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min followed by resuspen-
sion of the pellet in fresh medium and plated in a T75 cell culture ﬂask
at a density of 4.0-5.0 × 106 cells. Medium was replaced on the next day.
Cells were diﬀerentiated for 7 d and medium was obtained from the Amer-
ican Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Manassas, VA, USA, and includes the
speciﬁc catalog number ATCC CCL-107, in DMEM with 10% FBS.
Western Blotting Analysis:
Cells and mouse brain tissues were lysed in
ice-cold 1 × sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), supplemented with protease in-
hibitors (PMSF, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA) and phosphatase inhibitor
cocktails (Sigma, USA). Samples were spin at 12000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C.
The supernatant was collected, and protein concentration was determined
via BCA Protein Assay (KGP902, KEYGEN BIOTECH, China) following
manufacturer’s instructions. For Western blotting, 20–30 μg protein sam-
ples were separated on 4%–15% sodium dodecylsulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS‒PAGE) gels and subsequently transferred onto
polyvinylidene diﬂuoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore, Germany) in ice-
cold buﬀer (25 mm Tris HCl, 192 mM glycine, and 20% methanol) using
a semi-dry transfer protocol for 2 h. The membrane was incubated with
primary antibodies (see Table S3, Supporting Information), overnight af-
ter blocking with 5% nonfat milk for 1 h. Membranes were then washed 3
times with TBST for 5 min at RT and incubated with secondary antibodies.
After 3 washes with TBST (Tris-buﬀered saline with Tween 20), the bands
of membranes were visualized and quantiﬁed by the imaging system (Bio-
rad, USA). The protein expression level for each sample was normalized
to 𝛽-actin.
Coimmunoprecipitation:
Coimmunoprecipitation analyses were per-
formed as previously described.[80] Collected treated cells were lysed us-
ing RIPA Lysis Buﬀer (P0013D, Beyotime, China). Lysates were mixed and
incubated with antibodies or IgG and Protein A/G–Sepharose beads (Bey-
otime, China) overnight at 4 °C. Beads were then washed with lysis buﬀer
for 3–5 times, and bound proteins were separated with subsequent im-
munoblotting analysis using sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).
Immunoﬂuorescence Staining:
Brain Slices: Mice were anesthetized us-
ing 1.25% avertin and were transcardially perfused with 1× PBS (137 mm
NaCl, 2.7 mm KCl, 10 mm Na2HPO4, 1.8 mm KH2PO4, pH 7.4) for 2 min,
following 4% paraformaldehyde for 5 min at a rate of 10 mL min−1. Fixed
brains were sliced using a Vibratome VT1500S (Leica, Germany) at 10 μm
thickness. Slices were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in 1× PBS
for 20 min at RT, followed by incubation with blocking buﬀer (2% BSA in
permeabilization buﬀer) for 1 h at RT and then with primary antibodies
in blocking buﬀer overnight at 4 °C. Brain slices were then washed in 1×
PBS and further incubated with ﬂuorescently labeled secondary antibodies
(1:200 in blocking buﬀer) for 1 h at RT. After additional washes in 1× PBS,
nuclei were stained for 10 min at RT with DAPI (1 μg mL−1 in 1× PBS). Anti-
fade solution (P36970, Invitrogen, USA) was applied for mounting. Finally,
slices were mounted on microscope slides. Acquisitions were taken at a
Zeiss slide scanner (AxioScan.Z1, Germany), with a 20× or 40× objective.
Cells:
Cultured cells were seeded on coverslips at the appropriate den-
sity. The cells were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min and perme-
abilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in 1× PBS for 10 min at RT, followed by in-
cubation with a blocking buﬀer (2% BSA in permeabilization buﬀer) for 1 h
at RT, and then with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. On the following
day, the samples were washed and incubated with a secondary antibody for
1 h at RT. The nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. The coverslips were
mounted onto glass slides with anti-fade solution and visualized under a
Leica (DM6B, Germany) ﬂuorescence microscope.
Dendritic Spines Density Quantiﬁcation (Golgi-Cox Staining):
To deter-
mine the density of dendritic spines, brain tissue was processed for Golgi-
cox staining followed by confocal imaging of the CA1 region dendrites
and spines. Speciﬁcally, mice were terminally anesthetized with 1.25%
avertin and perfused with ice-cold 1× PBS (10 ml total volume, over 3 min).
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (16 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
Impregnation solution preparation was prepared as follows: Solution A
including 5% solution of potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7, Guangzhou
chemical reagent factory); Solution B including 5% solution of mercuric
chloride (HgCl2, Guangzhou chemical reagent factory, China); Solution
C including 5% solution of potassium chromate (K2CrO4, Guangzhou
chemical reagent factory, China). First, mixed 5 mL solution A, 5 mL so-
lution B, 4 mL solution C, and 10 mL distilled water to get Golgi-Cox so-
lution. After suﬃciently mixing the solution, it was kept in the dark at RT
for 3 days. After reddish precipitates form, aspirate the supernatant to get
the working solution. Finally, slices were treated with a working solution,
and protected from light exposure whenever possible. After 10 days of im-
pregnation, transferred slides into the 30% sucrose (Guangzhou chemi-
cal reagent factory, China) solution for 6 h. The slides were incubated in
14% ammonia solution (Aladdin, China) for 10 min in the dark by gently
shaking them. Next, the slides were dehydrated through 70%, 80%, 95%,
and 100% (twice) ethanol for 5 min each, transferred to the xylol (Macklin,
China) for 10 min, then mounted the sections with a permanent mounting
medium. Images were obtained with a Zeiss slide scanner (AxioScan.Z1,
Germany), with a 40× objective. For analysis, reconstruction of individ-
ual pyramidal neuron, dendrites lengths, Sholl intersections, and spines
counting was performed using Fiji (v1.54F).
Nissl
Staining:
Nissl
staining
was
performed
as
previously
described.[81] After the hippocampus tissues ﬁxed in 4% PFA were
dehydrated in a series of graded alcohols (70–100%), the tissues were
embedded in paraﬃn and sliced to a thickness of 10 μm using a rotary
microtome. The sections were placed on a microscope slide, dried at 56 °C
for 2 h, and stored at RT. For Nissl staining, sections were deparaﬃnized
and rehydrated using xylene and graded alcohols (100%–70%), and
then rinsed in distilled water. Tissue sections were incubated with Nissl
Staining Solution (Beyotime, China) at RT for 10 min, and washed with
distilled water and 70% ethanol twice. Sections were quickly dehydrated
in 95% and 100% ethanol, cleared in xylene, and mounted with a resinous
mounting medium. Images were obtained with a Zeiss slide scanner
(AxioScan.Z1, German), with a 40× objective and analyzed using Fiji
(v1.54F).
RNA Extraction and Quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
(qPCR) Analysis:
Total RNA was extracted with Trizol reagent (Invitrogen,
USA), and RNA concentration was measured by NanoDrop spectrome-
ter. Prime Script RT reagent Kit Perfect Real Time kit (TAKARA, Japan)
was used to reverse cDNA transcription. Real-time quantitative PCR was
performed using SYBR-Green ﬂuorescent dye (RK21203, Abclonal, China)
with a Biorad CFX 96 (USA). The related primer sequences were in Table
S4 (Supporting Information). Each reaction was performed in triplicate.
Results were analyzed by the comparative CT method. Average CT values
for each sample were normalized to the average CT values of the house-
keeping gene. The diﬀerences in gene expression were calculated by the
2−ΔΔCT method and were presented as the fold change.
Small
Interfering
RNAs
(si-RNAs)
Construction
and
Cell
Trans-
fection:
Mouse
si-serpinf1,
rat
si-pnpla2,
and
si-NC
control
were
constructed
by
Ribobio
(Guangzhou,
China).
Sense
Se-
quences:
5′-TCACCCGACTTCAGCAAGA-3′(si-m-serpinf1);
5′-
AGACCAUCCGUGGUUGUCUACUGAA-3′(si-rat-pnpla2).
Cells
were
grown to 70% conﬂuence and transfected using Lipofectamine 3000
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA) according to the manufacturer’s proto-
col. The cells were transfected for 24 h at 37 °C.
Recombinant PEDF Treatment:
For treatment with mouse PEDF
(8295-SF, R&D Systems, USA), medium containing graded concentrations
of PEDF were added to appropriate densities of astrocytes or C6. Recombi-
nant PEDF was maintained in the medium for an additional 12 h through-
out the experiment.
Measurement of Serum PEDF Level:
To quantify PEDF level, the serum
was centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 10 min. Serum PEDF concentrations were
measured with an ELISA kit (DY1177-05, R&D Systems, USA), following
the manufacturer’s instructions.
Evaluation of Glutamate Uptake Ability:
Primary astrocytes and C6
cells were treated with 100 μm L-glutamate (Sigma, USA) and incubated
for 4 h at 37 °C. At each time point, the concentration of glutamate in the
medium was measured with a glutamate assay kit (BC1585, Solarbio life
sciences, China) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and the gluta-
mate uptake ability was calculated as follows: concentration at each time
point-concentration 0 min.
Behavioral Tests:
Open Field: The open-ﬁeld arena was a light blue box
(50 × 50 cm area, 40 cm high walls) illuminated with an ambient light (15
lux), placed inside a sound-insulated chamber. The mice were placed into
the arena facing a wall and allowed to explore the arena for 10 min. The
total distance traveled, as well as the distances traveled and time spent
in the 20 × 20 cm center zone were tracked and analyzed by the TopScan
(Clever Sys. Inc, USA) software.
Novel Object Recognition:
The mice were habituated to the experimen-
tal room for 3 consecutive days before the training phase, during which the
mice were allowed to freely explore the light blue testing arena (50 × 50 cm
area, 40 cm high walls) with dim light (15 lux) for 10 min per day. For the
training, two identical objects were placed in 2 corners of the arena 10 cm
from the wall. After 5 min of freely exploring the objects, the mice were
placed in individual cages and were not returned to their original cages,
as this might aﬀect the behavior of the remaining mice to be tested. Mem-
ory of the object was tested 60 min after training. One of the familiar ob-
jects was replaced by a novel object that was diﬀerent from the familiar
ones, and the locations of these objects were unchanged. The percentage
of time that the mice spent exploring the novel object in 3 min was calcu-
lated as the capacity for memory of the object. All objects were previously
screened, and the mice showed no signiﬁcant preference for these objects.
The arena and objects were wiped clean with a paper towel soaked in 75%
ethanol and dried thoroughly after each test session. The discrimination
index is calculated as time in the novel object /total time in the novel object
and familiar object × 100% and given as a percentage.
Y-Maze:
Y-maze testing was adapted from published protocols.[82]
The Y-maze apparatus consisted of 3 arms joined in the middle to form
a Y shape. The walls of the arms were 10 cm high, and each was marked
with a single large black letter to serve as a spatial landmark and clue. With
one arm of the maze closed, mice were allowed to explore the other two
arms for 15 min before being returned to their home cage. 60 min later,
mice were returned to the Y-maze and allowed to explore all three arms for
5 min while being video recorded. The time spent in each arm was quanti-
ﬁed. The discrimination index is calculated as time in the novel arm/total
time in the novel arm and familiar arm × 100% and given as a percentage.
Morris Water Maze:
The Morris water maze test was performed with
minor adjustments as previously described.[82] Spatial memory testing
was conducted in a circular tank (diameter 1.2 m) ﬁlled with opaciﬁed wa-
ter at 22 °C. The water tank was dimly lit and surrounded by a black curtain.
The maze was virtually divided into four quadrants, with one containing a
hidden platform (diameter 10 cm) that was submerged 1 cm below the wa-
ter level. Four prominent cues were placed outside the maze as spatial ref-
erences. Before testing phase, mice were allowed to acclimate to the test-
ing room for 3 days. Mice were placed in the water facing the tank wall at
diﬀerent start positions across trials in a quasi-random fashion to prevent
strategy learning. Mice were allowed to search for the platform for 70 s. If
the mice did not ﬁnd the platform, they were guided towards it where they
remained for 20 s. Each mouse underwent four trials (one from each start
position) daily for 5–7 consecutive days. Each trial required an interval of
at least 2 min. After each trial, the mouse was dried and placed back into
its cage until the start of the subsequent trial. All mouse movements were
recorded by the computerized tracking system TopScan (Clever Sys. Inc,
USA), which calculated distances moved and time required to reach the
platform (escape latency), along with swim speed. The spatial probe trial
was conducted 24 h after the last training session (on day 6 or day 8). For
the probe trial, the platform was removed, and mice were allowed to swim
for 70 s. The following events are required to be recorded: the duration of
the mice spent in the quadrant where the platform was previously located,
the number of crossings over the location where the platform was initially
positioned, and the time taken by the mice to reach the original platform
location for the ﬁrst time. Data were calculated as time spent in the quad-
rant where the original platform was located/70 s × 100% and is given as
a percentage.
Fear Conditioning:
The fear conditioning test was based on the Pavlo-
vian fear conditioning paradigm, in which a previously neutral (condi-
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (17 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
tioned) stimulus was paired with an aversive (unconditioned) stimulus,
which resulted in a measurable state of fear. Fear conditioning training
was conducted in a chamber (28 × 28 × 30 cm) with black walls and a
speaker. The ﬂoor was made of stainless-steel rods spaced at 0.5 cm and
connected to a shock delivery apparatus. The conditioning apparatus was
placed in a sound-reducing chamber (typical background noise was 10 db)
illuminated with an ambient light (100 lux). Mice were placed in the ap-
paratus freely for 2 min, during which the light intensity and background
noise were kept constant. Following a 2 min acclimation period (baseline
activity), mice were exposed to a 30 s tone (40 db) that co-terminated with
a 2 s foot-shock (0.50 mA). The duration between pairings was 90 s and
lasted 3 times. After the last pairing, the mice were left in the condition-
ing chamber for 90 s. Be cautious not to return the mice to their initial
cages since the mice were irritable after training, which may aﬀect the be-
havior of the remaining mice to be tested. Contextual memory: The day
following the conditioning session mice were returned to context under
identical conditions as their training session (100 lux, 10 db) without any
stimuli, including tones and foot-shock. Cued memory: The following day
after the contextual memory test, mice were placed in an altered context
(including changes in visual and odour cues) for 3 min of free movement.
The light was kept at 100 lux while the background noise was changed
to 5 db, and then the mice were given a 40 db tone for 3 min without
foot-shock. Freezing was measured concerning the threshold of baseline
activity. Movement was tracked using FreezeFrame software (Actimetrics,
COULBOURN, USA) and freezing calculated as a percentage.
Ex Vivo Glutamate-Imaging of Acute Hippocampal Slices:
The mice
were anesthetized with 1.25% avertin. The brain was quickly removed
from the skull after decapitation, and 400 μm coronal slices containing
the hippocampus were prepared using a Leica LS1500s vibrating micro-
tome in ice-cold oxygenated artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid (ACSF) contain-
ing (in mm) (Sigma, USA): 2.5 KCl, 220 sucrose, 1 NaH2PO4, 1.3 CaCl2,
2.5 MgSO4, 26 NaHCO3, and 10 glucose. The slices were transferred to a
chamber and held at 35 °C for 30 min and at RT for 1 h. The slices were
then kept at RT until recording. A slice was transferred to the recording
chamber that was constantly perfused with oxygenated ACSF at 35 °C.
The slice was viewed under an Olympus FVMPE-RS two-photon micro-
scope (Olympus, Japan) equipped with a 25× water immersion objective
and a laser wavelength of 920 nm. Glutamate imaging was recorded in
the stratum radiatum of hippocampal CA1. The baseline activities were
recorded during a 10 min period. After a hypoxic stimulus, i.e., the oxy-
genated ACSF was replaced with 95% N2-5% CO2 ACSF, the relative ﬂuo-
rescent value F was recorded and quantiﬁed. Time-series images were cap-
tured with a scanning thickness of 150 μm and a 10 μm interval between
scans. The total scanning time was at least 40 min, with each time-lapse
sequence lasting ≈30 s or 1 min. The scanning resolution of images was
set at 1024 × 1024 pixels. The ﬂuorescence signals were normalized within
each mouse by calculating the delta ﬂuorescence/ﬂuorescence (ΔF/F0) as
(F–F0)/F0, where F0 is the baseline ﬂuorescence signal averaged before the
onset of the stimulus event. The positions of the recording sites in mice
used in the in vitro recording experiments were veriﬁed after recording.
Ex Vivo Electrophysiology:
Whole-cell recordings were performed as de-
scribed previously.[83,84] Brieﬂy, mice were anesthetized with 1.25% avertin
and transcardially perfused with ice-cold solution containing the follow-
ing (in mm): 212.7 sucrose, 3 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 3 MgCl2, 1 CaCl2, 26
NaHCO3, and 10 dextrose, bubbled with 95% O2 / 5% CO2. Coronal slices
from hippocampus (≈400 μm) were prepared using a tissue slicer (Vi-
bratome 3000, Leica, German) in ice-cold dissection buﬀer, which is the
same as perfusion solution. The slices were immediately transferred to
ACSF at 35 °C for 30 min before recordings. The recipe of ACSF was simi-
lar to the dissection buﬀer, except that sucrose was replaced with 124 mm
NaCl, and the concentrations of MgCl2 and CaCl2 were changed to 1 and
2 mm, respectively. All recordings were performed at 28°C–30 °C. Pyra-
midal cells in CA1 were identiﬁed visually under infrared diﬀerential inter-
ference contrast optics based on their pyramidal somata and prominent
apical dendrites. Recording electrodes with a resistance of 4–8 MΩ were
pulled from borosilicate glass capillaries (1.5 mm outside diameter [OD])
using a P-97 electrode puller. The internal pipette solution contained (in
mm) (Sigma, USA) 125 cesium methanesulfonate, 5 CsCl, 10 HEPES, 0.2
EGTA, 1 MgCl2, 4 Mg-ATP, 0.3 Na-GTP, 10 phosphocreatine, and 5 QX314
(pH 7.40, 290 mOsm). The recordings were obtained using an Integrated
Patch-Clamp Ampliﬁer (Sutter Instrument, Novato, CA, USA) controlled
by Igor 7 software (WaveMetrics, Portland, OR, USA) ﬁltered at 5 kHz and
sampled at 20 kHz. Igor 7 software was also used for acquisition and anal-
ysis. mEPSCs were recorded in the presence of 1 μm tetrodotoxin (Aladdin,
China) and 20 μm bicuculine (Sigma, USA).
Extracellular Field Recordings:
Hippocampal brain slice preparation
was performed in this study using 9-month-old wild-type (WT) and ser-
pinf1 knockout (KO) mice. Mice were anesthetized with 1.25% avertin and
transcardially perfused with cold cutting solution. After perfusion, brains
were rapidly removed and immersed in a cold high-sucrose cutting solu-
tion containing (in mm): 200 sucrose, 12 MgSO4, 10 glucose, 0.2 CaCl2,
2 KCl, 1.3 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, and 1.8 ascorbic acid. Coronal hip-
pocampal slices (350 μm) were obtained using a vibrating microtome (Le-
ica VT-1200S) and incubated in ACSF at 32 °C for 30 min, followed by an
additional 1 h at RT to facilitate recovery. The ACSF solution was com-
posed of (in mm): 126 NaCl, 3 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 10 glu-
cose, 2 CaCl2, 1 MgSO4, and 1.8 ascorbic acid. Both cutting solution and
ACSF were continuously bubbled with a 95% O2/5% CO2 gas mixture to
maintain physiological pH and tissue viability throughout the slicing and
recording procedures.
LTP recordings were performed in the stratum radiatum of the CA1
region.[85] A bipolar stimulating electrode was placed in the Schaﬀer col-
lateral pathway, and fEPSPs were recorded using glass micropipettes (1–
4 MΩ) ﬁlled with ACSF. Baseline synaptic responses were evoked every
30 s, and the average of two consecutive fEPSP responses was taken at
each time point for analysis. Input-output curves were generated by in-
crementing the stimulus intensity. A stimulation strength evoking 1/3-1/2
of the maximal fEPSP amplitude was used for baseline and subsequent
LTP induction. After achieving a stable baseline for at least 20 min, high-
frequency stimulation (HFS) was applied, consisting of two trains of 100
Hz stimulation separated by a 10 s interval. Recordings were continuous
for 60 min following HFS. LTP magnitude was quantiﬁed by normalizing
each fEPSP amplitude to the average baseline value. The ﬁnal LTP level
was calculated by averaging the fEPSP amplitude recorded during the last
10 min of the 60 min post-HFS period, which was used to plot a box plot
of percentage change.
Seizure Susceptibility Assessment Upon Kainic Acid Administration:
Mice
were injected intraperitoneally with 2 mg kg−1 kainic acid (KA, HY-N2309,
MCE, USA) in saline, and their behavior was videorecorded and blindly
scored for 2 h according to the modiﬁed Racine scale. Data were ana-
lyzed by plotting the highest behavioral score assigned to each animal over
30 min intervals, for the 2 h of observation.
Library Preparation and RNA Sequencing:
The library preparation and
RNA sequencing were carried out by SEQUMED (Guangzhou, China). The
Ultrapure RNA Kit (CWBIO, China) was used to amplify the RNAs and
prepare the cDNA library. Then the libraries were loaded onto an Illu-
mina HiSeq instrument (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) for paired-end
150 bp sequencing. The raw sequencing reads were ﬁltered for remov-
ing adapter sequencing, primers, polyA tail sequences, and reads of low-
quality bases. The quality of the reads was evaluated using Trimmomatic.
Then the processed sequences were aligned to the reference genomes
based on BWT and FM index using HISAT2. DESeq2 was used to nor-
malize the raw counts and perform diﬀerential expression analysis. Diﬀer-
entially expressed genes (DEGs) were deﬁned as p < 0.05 and an abso-
lute value of FoldChange > 2. The heatmap and volcano plot of the DEGs
were generated using the pheatmap package in R. Functional enrichments
were performed with the gene-set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to identify
KEGG pathways and gene ontology that were diﬀerentially enriched in the
KO group and the control counterparts. Gene expression dataset of diﬀer-
ent brain regions from AD patients (GEO accession number: GSE48350)
was used for comparison with the DEGs identiﬁed in the current
study.
Postmortem Brain Tissue Bioinformatics Analysis:
The GEO dataset
(GSE36980) was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
database, consisted of hippocampus from 7 AD patients and 10 non-
AD controls (Sample GSM4764672 was excluded). These brain samples
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (18 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
were donated for the Hisayama study. The dataset of hippocampus in the
MergedGEO included GSE28146, GSE29378, GSE36980, GSE48350, and
GSE5281. All diﬀerential expression results were adjusted for the age and
sex of the samples.
Statistical Analysis:
The statistical methods used for each analysis are
described in the ﬁgure legends. Brieﬂy, paired Student’s t test and paired
Wilcoxon test were used to determine signiﬁcant diﬀerences for the com-
parison between two paired groups. The unpaired Student’s t test was
used to detect whether there were signiﬁcant diﬀerences between two in-
dependent groups. One-way ANOVA combined with Tukey’s multiple com-
parison method was used to conduct pairwise comparisons among mul-
tiple independent groups (≥3). Two-way ANOVA combined with Tukey’s
or Bonferroni’s multiple comparison method was used to perform pair-
wise comparisons among multiple groups with two factors. All statistical
tests were two-sided, and the statistical results are presented as the mean
± S.E.M. All experiments were repeated at least three times, yielding con-
sistent results. Representative outcomes and images are presented. Sta-
tistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism (version 8.0.1). For
correlation analysis, the correlation was computed using Pearson correla-
tion coeﬃcients. p values of 0.05 or less were considered to denote signiﬁ-
cance. Statistical signiﬁcance was set at *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001,
and **** p < 0.0001. n.s., no signiﬁcance.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank all members of the Gao lab for discussion and techni-
cal assistance during the execution of this project. The authors thank the
following core facilities for the generous provision of human serum sam-
ples: Zhongshan People’s Hospital, Zhongshan Third People’s Hospital,
Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital, and Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hos-
pital. The authors thank Professor Jian-Xing Ma at Wake Forest University
School of Medicine in the U.S.A., and Professor Ya-Mei Tang at Sun Yat-
sen Memorial Hospital for animal resources support. The authors thank
Dr. Fang-Fang Qi and Professor Kai-Hua Guo for technical pieces of ad-
vice on virus injection, and Professor Bin Jiang for Ex vivo electrophysiol-
ogy support. This project was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grants 82273116, 82203661); Guangdong Natural
Science Fund (Grants 2024A1515010149, 2023A1515010214); Guangzhou
Key Laboratory for Metabolic Diseases (Grants 202102100004).
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Author Contributions
W.-W.Q., G.-Q.G., X.Y. and B.-X.L. conceived and directed the project; J.-
H.S., and W.-W.Q. designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript.
J.-H.S., Q.-L.T., Z.Z., W.-T.X., S.-F.Z., Z.-M.L. and H.-M.L carried out the
experiments; J.-H.S., J.-H.W., Q.-L.T. and Y.-L.L. analyzed and interpreted
the data; T.-X.G., Z.-Z.F. and T.Z. revised the manuscript. All authors con-
tributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the cor-
responding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
alzheimer’s disease (AD), glutamate homeostasis, glutamate transporter-
1 (GLT-1), pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF)
Received: January 7, 2025
Revised: September 2, 2025
Published online: September 14, 2025
[1] C. M. Bird, N. Burgess, In Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, (Ed: L. R.
Squire), Academic Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 2009, pp. 187–
194.
[2] J. M. Long, D. M. Holtzman, Cell 2019, 179, 312.
[3] M. E. Conway, Biogerontology 2020, 21, 257.
[4] J. M. Wilcox, D. C. Consoli, A. A. Tienda, S. Dixit, R. A. Buchanan, J.
M. May, W. P. Nobis, F. E. Harrison, Neurobiol Dis 2021, 158, 105486.
[5] S. Mahmoud, M. Gharagozloo, C. Simard, D. Gris, Cells 2019, 8.
[6] P. W. Kalivas, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2009, 10, 561.
[7] N. J. Allen, C. Eroglu, Neuron 2017, 96, 697.
[8] A.
O.
Cuellar-Santoyo,
V.
M.
Ruiz-Rodríguez,
T.
B.
Mares-
Barbosa, A. Patrón-Soberano, A. G. Howe, D. P. Portales-Pérez,
A. Miquelajáuregui Graf, A. M. Estrada-Sánchez, Front. Cell Neurosci.
2022, 16, 1037641.
[9] L.-Y. Zhang, Y.-Q. Zhou, Z.-P. Yu, X.-Q. Zhang, J. Shi, H.-W. Shen, Neu-
ropsychopharmacology 2021, 46, 970.
[10] N. J. Maragakis, J. Dietrich, V. Wong, H. Xue, M. Mayer-Proschel, M.
S. Rao, J. D. Rothstein, Glia 2004, 45, 133.
[11] K. Kim, S.-G. Lee, T. P. Kegelman, Z.-Z. Su, S. K. Das, R. Dash, S.
Dasgupta, P. M. Barral, M. Hedvat, P. Diaz, J. C. Reed, J. L. Stebbins,
M. Pellecchia, D. Sarkar, P. B. Fisher, J. Cell. Physiol. 2011, 226, 2484.
[12] J. D. Rothstein, L. Martin, A. I. Levey, M. Dykes-Hoberg, L. Jin, D. Wu,
N. Nash, R. W. Kuncl, Neuron 1994, 13, 713.
[13] A. R. Peterson, D. K. Binder, Frontiers in molecular neuroscience 2019,
12, 164.
[14] L. F. McNair, J. V. Andersen, B. I. Aldana, M. C. Hohnholt, J. D.
Nissen, Y. Sun, K. D. Fischer, U. Sonnewald, N. Nyberg, S. C. Webster,
K. Kapur, T. S. Rimmele, I. Barone, H. Hawks-Mayer, J. O. Lipton,
N. W. Hodgson, T. K. Hensch, C. J. Aoki, P. A. Rosenberg, H. S.
Waagepetersen, J. Neurosci. : Oﬃc. J. Soc. Neurosci. 2019, 39, 4847.
[15] K. Tanaka, K. Watase, T. Manabe, K. Yamada, M. Watanabe, K.
Takahashi, H. Iwama, T. Nishikawa, N. Ichihara, T. Kikuchi, S.
Okuyama, N. Kawashima, S. Hori, M. Takimoto, K. Wada, Science
(New York, N.Y.) 1997, 276, 1699.
[16] T. S. Rimmele, P. A. Rosenberg, Neurochem. Int. 2016, 98, 19.
[17] A. Sharma, S. F. Kazim, C. S. Larson, A. Ramakrishnan, J. D. Gray, B.
S. McEwen, P. A. Rosenberg, L. Shen, A. C. Pereira, Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2019, 116, 21800.
[18] H. M. Nielsen, L. Minthon, E. Londos, K. Blennow, E. Miranda, J.
Perez, D. C. Crowther, D. A. Lomas, S. M. Janciauskiene, Neurology
2007, 69, 1569.
[19] M. Zattoni, M. Mearelli, S. Vanni, A. Colini Baldeschi, T. H. Tran, C.
Ferracin, M. Catania, F. Moda, G. Di Fede, G. Giaccone, F. Tagliavini,
G. Zanusso, J. W. Ironside, I. Ferrer, G. Legname, Mol. Neurobiol.
2022, 59, 3778.
[20] N. Habib, C. McCabe, S. Medina, M. Varshavsky, D. Kitsberg, R. Dvir-
Szternfeld, G. Green, D. Dionne, L. Nguyen, J. L. Marshall, F. Chen,
F. Zhang, T. Kaplan, A. Regev, M. Schwartz, Nat. Neurosci. 2020, 23,
701.
[21] P. L. De Jager, G. Srivastava, K. Lunnon, J. Burgess, L. C. Schalkwyk,
L. Yu, M. L. Eaton, B. T. Keenan, J. Ernst, C. McCabe, A. Tang, T.
Raj, J. Replogle, W. Brodeur, S. Gabriel, H. S. Chai, C. Younkin, S. G.
Younkin, F. Zou, M. Szyf, C. B. Epstein, J. A. Schneider, B. E. Bernstein,
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (19 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
A. Meissner, N. Ertekin-Taner, L. B. Chibnik, M. Kellis, J. Mill, D. A.
Bennett, Nat. Neurosci. 2014, 17, 1156.
[22] J. Tombran-Tink, C. J. Barnstable, Nature reviews. Neuroscience 2003,
4, 628.
[23] M. M. Bilak, A. M. Corse, S. R. Bilak, M. Lehar, J. Tombran-Tink, R. W.
Kuncl, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 1999, 58, 719.
[24] M. M. Bilak, S. P. Becerra, A. M. Vincent, B. H. Moss, M. S. Aymerich,
R. W. Kuncl, J. Neurosci. 2002, 22, 9378.
[25] K. C. Behling, E. M. Surace, J. Bennett, Mol Vis 2002, 8, 449.
[26] R. Fan, L. Su, H. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Z. Yu, X. Zhang, X. Li, J. Nanobiotech-
nol. 2023, 21, 327.
[27] C. Ramírez-Castillejo, F. Sánchez-Sánchez, C. Andreu-Agulló, S. R.
Ferrón, J. D. Aroca-Aguilar, P. Sánchez, H. Mira, J. Escribano, I.
Fariñas, Nat. Neurosci. 2006, 9, 331.
[28] Y. Sugita, S. P. Becerra, G. J. Chader, J. P. Schwartz, J. Neurosci. Res.
1997, 49, 710.
[29] B. Ma, Y. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Zhang, T. Yang, C. Hu, Y. Gao, Q. Lan, Y.
Liu, X. Yang, H. Qi, The ocular surface 2021, 20, 70.
[30] M. Bai, H. Yu, C. Chen, X. Xu, Y. He, Y. Wang, Y. Tian, Z. Wu, T. Lan,
Y. Li, X. Chen, Z. Chen, L. Zhao, L. Fang, D. Yang, K. Cheng, P. Xie,
Neurosci. Lett. 2022, 771, 136423.
[31] T. Yabe, T. Sanagi, H. Yamada, Curr. Mol. Med. 2010, 10, 259.
[32] M. Huang, W. Qi, S. Fang, P. Jiang, C. Yang, Y. Mo, C. Dong, Y. Li, J.
Zhong, W. Cai, Z. Yang, T. Zhou, Q. Wang, X. Yang, G. Gao, Neurother-
apeutics 2018, 15, 728.
[33] R. Abooshahab, C. R. Dass, Mech. Ageing Dev. 2021, 196, 111478.
[34] S. V. Petersen, Z. Valnickova, J. J. Enghild, Biochem. J. 2003, 374, 199.
[35] D. A. Coulter, C. Steinhäuser, Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015, 5,
a022434.
[36] M. Tripodi, J. F. Evers, A. Mauss, M. Bate, M. Landgraf, PLoS Biol.
2008, 6, 260.
[37] J. Lewerenz, P. Maher, Front Neurosci 2015, 9, 469.
[38] M. Baudry, In International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sci-
ences, (Eds: N. J. Smelser, P. B. Baltes), Elsevier, Amsterdam 2001,
pp. 9081–9083.
[39] C. Lüscher, R. C. Malenka, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2012, 4.
[40] S. Satarker, S. L. Bojja, P. C. Gurram, J. Mudgal, D. Arora, M.
Nampoothiri, Cells 2022, 11.
[41] A. L. Sheldon, M. B. Robinson, Neurochem. Int. 2007, 51, 333.
[42] B. Zott, M. M. Simon, W. Hong, H.-J. Chen-Engerer, M. P. Frosch, B.
Sakmann, D. M. Walsh, A. Konnerth, Science 2019, 365, 559.
[43] T. J. Revett, G. B. Baker, J. Jhamandas, S. Kar, J Psychiatry Neurosci
2013, 38, 6.
[44] L. Sha, X. Wang, J. Li, X. Shi, L. Wu, Y. Shen, Q. Xu, J. Exp. Med. 2017,
214, 547.
[45] N. García-Tardón, I. M. González-González, J. Martínez-Villarreal, E.
Fernández-Sánchez, C. Giménez, F. Zafra, J. Biol. Chem. 2012, 287,
19177.
[46] C. Muñoz-Ballester, A. Berthier, R. Viana, P. Sanz, Bioch. Biophys. Acta
2016, 1862, 1074.
[47] I. M. González-González, N. García-Tardón, C. Giménez, F. Zafra,
Glia 2008, 56, 963.
[48] J. He, M. S. Cortina, A. Kakazu, H. E. Bazan, Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2015, 56, 3505.
[49] S. A. Brown, F. Morgan, J. Watras, L. M. Loew, Biophys. J. 2008, 95,
1795.
[50] B. Mirnikjoo, S. E. Brown, H. F. S. Kim, L. B. Marangell, J. D. Sweatt,
E. J. Weeber, J. Biol. Chem. 2001, 276, 10888.
[51] J. D. Rothstein, S. Patel, M. R. Regan, C. Haenggeli, Y. H. Huang, D.
E. Bergles, L. Jin, M. Dykes Hoberg, S. Vidensky, D. S. Chung, S. V.
Toan, L. I. Bruijn, Z.-Z. Su, P. Gupta, P. B. Fisher, Nature 2005, 433,
73.
[52] Q. Kong, L.-C. Chang, K. Takahashi, Q. Liu, D. A. Schulte, L. Lai, B.
Ibabao, Y. Lin, N. Stouﬀer, C. D. Mukhopadhyay, X. Xing, K. I. Seyb,
G. D. Cuny, M. A. Glicksman, C.-L. G. Lin, J. Clin. Invest. 2014, 124,
1255.
[53] H. A. Scott, F. M. Gebhardt, A. D. Mitrovic, R. J. Vandenberg, Neuro-
biol. Aging 2011, 32, 553.
[54] D. W. Choi, Neuron 1988, 1, 623.
[55] S. Crowe, L. E. Wu, C. Economou, S. M. Turpin, M. Matzaris, K. L.
Hoehn, A. L. Hevener, D. E. James, E. J. Duh, M. J. Watt, Cell Metab.
2009, 10, 40.
[56] R. Carnagarin, A. M. Dharmarajan, C. R. Dass, Mol. Cell. Endocrinol.
2015, 401, 98.
[57] M. L. Franco-Chuaire, S. Ramírez-Clavijo, L. Chuaire-Noack, Iran. J.
Basic Med. Sci. 2015, 18, 837.
[58] K. Parvathaneni, J. G. Grigsby, B. S. Betts, A. T. Tsin, J. Ocul. Pharma-
col. Therap. 2013, 29, 27.
[59] L. W. Cheung, S. C. Au, A. N. Cheung, H. Y. Ngan, J. Tombran-Tink,
N. Auersperg, A. S. T. Wong, Endocrinology 2006, 147, 4179.
[60] H. Roberts, Y. Fang, K. Quinn, T. Hill, M. R. Peck, A. Bartke, K. N.
Hascup, E. R. Hascup, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. : JAD 2025, 105, 56.
[61] E. W. Waigi, L. Pernomian, A. M. Crockett, T. J. Costa, P. Townsend,
R. C. Webb, J. A. McQuail, C. G. McCarthy, F. Hollis, C. F. Wenceslau,
GeroScience 2024, 46, 5517.
[62] M. Miranda, C. C. Wu, T. Sorkina, D. R. Korstjens, A. Sorkin, J. Biol.
Chem. 2005, 280, 35617.
[63] A. L. Sheldon, M. I. González, E. N. Krizman-Genda, B. T. Susarla, M.
B. Robinson, Neurochem. Int. 2008, 53, 296.
[64] M. Casado, A. Bendahan, F. Zafra, N. C. Danbolt, C. Aragón, C.
Giménez, B. I. Kanner, J. Biol. Chem. 1993, 268, 27313.
[65] C. Boehmer, M. Palmada, J. Rajamanickam, R. Schniepp, S. Amara,
F. Lang, J. Neurochem. 2006, 97, 911.
[66] J. A. Callender, Y. Yang, G. Lordén, N. L. Stephenson, A. C. Jones,
J. Brognard, A. C. Newton, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018, 115,
E5497.
[67] R. J. van Marum, Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2009, 5, 237.
[68] K. Takahashi, Q. Kong, Y. Lin, N. Stouﬀer, D. A. Schulte, L. Lai, Q. Liu,
L.-C. Chang, S. Dominguez, X. Xing, G. D. Cuny, K. J. Hodgetts, M.
A. Glicksman, C.-L. G. Lin, J. Exp. Med. 2015, 212, 319.
[69] P. Mookherjee, P. S. Green, G. S. Watson, M. A. Marques, K. Tanaka,
K. D. Meeker, J. S. Meabon, N. Li, P. Zhu, V. G. Olson, D. G. Cook, J.
Alzheimers Dis. 2011, 26, 447.
[70] F. Alasmari, M. S. Alasmari, H. M. Muwainea, H. A. Alomar, A. F.
Alasmari, S. Alsanea, A. Alshamsan, M. F. Rasool, F. Alqahtani, Front.
Pharmacol. 2023, 14, 1200828.
[71] U. B. Schaad, J. Wedgwood-Krucko, H. Tschaeppeler, Lancet (London,
England) 1988, 2, 1411.
[72] R. Chakraborty, V. Lam, S. Kommineni, J. Stromich, M. Hayward, C.
J. Kristich, N. H. Salzman, Infect. Immun. 2018, 86, 12.
[73] L. H. Zeng, A. W. Bero, B. Zhang, D. M. Holtzman, M. Wong, Neuro-
biol. Dis. 2010, 37, 764.
[74] I. Karaman, G. Kizilay-Ozﬁdan, C. H. Karadag, A. Ulugol, Pharmacol.
Biochem. Behav. 2013, 108, 61.
[75] A. S. Limpert, N. D. Cosford, J. Clin. Invest. 2014, 124, 964.
[76] G. Alotaibi, S. Rahman, European journal of pain (London, England)
2019, 23, 765.
[77] G. Alotaibi, A. Khan, S. Rahman, Behav. Brain Res. 2025, 482,
115440.
[78] D. M. Valenzuela, A. J. Murphy, D. Frendewey, N. W. Gale, A. N.
Economides, W. Auerbach, W. T. Poueymirou, N. C. Adams, J. Rojas,
J. Yasenchak, R. Chernomorsky, M. Boucher, A. L. Elsasser, L. Esau,
J. Zheng, J. A. Griﬃths, X. Wang, H. Su, Y. Xue, M. G. Dominguez, I.
Noguera, R. Torres, L. E. Macdonald, A. F. Stewart, T. M. DeChiara,
G. D. Yancopoulos, Nat. Biotechnol. 2003, 21, 652.
[79] N. Percie du Sert, V. Hurst, A. Ahluwalia, S. Alam, M. T. Avey, M.
Baker, W. J. Browne, A. Clark, I. C. Cuthill, U. Dirnagl, M. Emerson,
PLoS Biol. 2020, 18, 3000410.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (20 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advancedscience.com
[80] L. Zhou, R. He, P. Fang, M. Li, H. Yu, Q. Wang, Y. Yu, F. Wang, Y.
Zhang, A. Chen, N. Peng, Y. Lin, R. Zhang, M. Trilling, R. Broering,
M. Lu, Y. Zhu, S. Liu, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 98.
[81] M. Boldrini, C. A. Fulmore, A. N. Tartt, L. R. Simeon, I. Pavlova, V.
Poposka, G. B. Rosoklija, A. Stankov, V. Arango, A. J. Dwork, R. Hen,
J. J. Mann, Cell Stem Cell 2018, 22, 589.
[82] C.-Z. Cai, X.-X. Zhuang, Q. Zhu, M.-Y. Wu, H. Su, X.-J. Wang, A.
Iyaswamy, Z. Yue, Q. Wang, B. Zhang, Y. Xue, J. Tan, M. Li, H. He,
J.-H. Lu, Theranostics 2022, 12, 1738.
[83] S. Li, L. Wang, X. Tie, K. Sohya, X. Lin, A. Kirkwood, B. Jiang, J. Neu-
rosci. 2017, 37, 9353.
[84] D. Guo, Y. Peng, L. Wang, X. Sun, X. Wang, C. Liang, X. Yang,
S. Li, J. Xu, W.-C. Ye, B. Jiang, L. Shi, Mol. Psychiatry 2021, 26,
1505.
[85] J. E. Tullis, M. E. Larsen, N. L. Rumian, R. K. Freund, E.
E.
Boxer,
C.
N.
Brown,
S.
J.
Coultrap,
H.
Schulman,
J.
Aoto,
M.
L.
Dell’Acqua,
K.
U.
Bayer,
Nature
2023,
621,
146.
Adv. Sci. 2025, 12, e00402
e00402 (21 of 21)
© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
 21983844, 2025, 45, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202500402 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License