Bionic engineering of COFs/g-C3N4 heterojunctions-enhanced poly-schiff
base self-renewing coatings toward long-lasting anti-biofouling via boosted
photocatalytic antibacterial activity
Saijun Wua,b, Minglong Yana,*, Wenjie Zhaoa,**
a State Key Laboratory of Advanced Marine Materials, Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, China
b University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Bionic surface
Heterojunction
Photocatalytic antibacterial
Anti-Biofouling
Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
A B S T R A C T
Solar-powered photocatalysis offers a sustainable anti-biofouling strategy free of chemical release and pollution.
However, practical application in anti-fouling coatings faces inherent limitations, including low photocatalyst
utilization, poor long-term stability, and insufficient exposure of the active site. Herein, a COF/g-C3N4 hetero-
junction photocatalyst with enhanced light response and utilization is prepared by in situ growth of hollow
tubular 1D-COF on a flake-like 2D g-C3N4 surface. Inspired by biological molting, the heterojunction is further
integrated with a degradable poly-Schiff base polymer (DSP) to fabricate a hybrid anti-fouling coating (D-COF/
CNx) that exhibits both biofouling-release and photocatalytic bactericidal activity. Leveraging a “water-triggered
and reactive oxygen species (ROS)-responsive” dual degradation mechanism, the coating realizes desirable self-
renewal and sustained exposure of photocatalytic active sites. Exposed COF/g-C3N4 efficiently facilitates the
separation and transfer of photogenerated charge carriers, boosting the bactericidal ROS yield by 1.99 to 2.61
folds compared to pristine g-C3N4 and COF-1. Under the synergistic effect of photocatalytic sterilization and
biofouling release, the coating achieves a nearly 100 % fouling-free surface at an ultra-low loading of 5% under
high-biofouling conditions (108 to 109 CFU mL–1), thereby markedly reducing bacterial/microalgal adhesion and
biofilm formation. After prolonged service, it retains excellent cyclic antibacterial stability and mechanical
durability, providing novel insights for developing high-performance and versatile photocatalytic coatings with
long-lasting biofouling resistance.
1. Introduction
Marine biofouling poses a significant threat to ships and offshore
structures during long-term service, as submerged surfaces are highly
susceptible to colonization by bacteria, algae, mussels, and other fouling
organisms [1]. A critical initiating step occurs when surface-adhered
microorganisms secrete adhesive extracellular polymeric substances
(EPS) to form biofilms, which facilitate further attachment and prolif-
eration of macrofoulers, ultimately resulting in severe biofouling [2].
Biofouling is more than just a nuisance. It slows down vessels, speeds up
metal corrosion, and can even introduce invasive species [3]. The global
marine industry loses approximately $1 billion annually due to this
issue, making it one of the most significant challenges in ocean
engineering [4]. Typical anti-fouling coatings predominantly rely on a
“biocide-centric” strategy, releasing harsh toxins (e.g., Cu2O, organo-
tins) to indiscriminately eliminate fouling organisms, which can be
harmful to marine ecosystems [5]. Therefore, developing efficient,
eco-friendly, and durable anti-fouling technologies has become an
imperative for sustainable marine operations. The key to biofouling
prevention lies in intercepting the fouling chain at its source by inhib-
iting the initial attachment of bacteria and microalgae, thereby pre-
venting biofilm formation. Compared to physical methods such as
mechanical cleaning and UV irradiation, applying polymer-based
anti-fouling coatings to target surfaces demonstrates superior univer-
sality, operability, and effectiveness for practical large-scale marine
applications [6,7].
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: yanminglongivip@163.com (M. Yan), zhaowj@nimte.ac.cn (W. Zhao).
Peer review under the responsibility of Chongqing University
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nano Materials Science
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/cn/journals/nano-materials-science/
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoms.2025.11.013
Received 11 September 2025; Received in revised form 12 October 2025; Accepted 14 November 2025
Available online xxxx
2589-9651/© 2025 Chongqing University. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
Please cite this article as: S. Wu et al., Bionic engineering of COFs/g-C3N4 heterojunctions-enhanced poly-schiff base self-renewing coatings toward
long-lasting
anti-biofouling
via
boosted
photocatalytic
antibacterial
activity,
Nano
Materials
Science
,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nanoms.2025.11.013

Among various anti-fouling strategies, photocatalytic technology is
gaining prominence owing to its unique photochemical conversion
mechanism and non-releasing strategy [8]. Photocatalytic materials
demonstrate significant potential in marine anti-fouling applications,
effectively
inhibiting
microbial
activity,
including
representative
Gram-negative (e.g., Escherichia coli) and Gram-positive (e.g., Staphy-
lococcus aureus) bacteria, marine bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa), and common microalgae (e.g., Microcystis aeruginosa) [9–11].
This technology harnesses solar energy as the driving force, generating
reactive oxygen species (ROS, e.g., O2⋅-, ⋅OH) under light irradiation to
disrupt microbial structures and metabolic processes [12]. Notably, it is
characterized by no chemical release, no secondary pollution, and no
induction of bacterial resistance. Two-dimensional (2D) graphitic car-
bon nitride (g-C3N4), a polymeric semiconductor composed of tri-
azine/heptazine rings, features an extended in-plane conjugated π
system, robust physicochemical stability, and distinctive optical and
electrical properties [13,14]. However, g-C3N4 suffers from a narrow
light absorption range and a low specific surface area, resulting in
suboptimal bactericidal efficiency at low concentrations and thereby
restricting its application scope [15]. 2D covalent organic frameworks
(COFs), with their planar and symmetric molecular architectures,
facilitate π-π stacking to form long-range ordered crystalline structures
with high specific surface areas, thereby providing abundant photo-
catalytic active sites [16–18]. Nevertheless, COFs generally possess
narrow band gaps and lack efficient charge transfer pathways, leading to
rapid recombination of photogenerated carriers and compromised
photocatalytic
activity
[19,20].
Previous
studies
have
utilized
single/dual-atom doping or integration with noble metal cocatalysts (e.
g., Pt, Au) to mitigate charge recombination [21–23]. Unfortunately,
these strategies are hindered by high costs and environmental risks
associated with the release of metal ions. In our preliminary study, we
leveraged interfacial interactions between conjugated materials, such as
π-π stacking, hydrogen bonding, and van der Waals forces, to optimize
the interfacial charge distribution [24]. This approach enabled the
construction of COF nanotube/2D nanosheet heterojunctions (e.g., with
g-C3N4, WSe2, or Ti3C2Tx), which markedly enhance photocatalytic ef-
ficiency by broadening light absorption and establishing an effective
interfacial electric field, offering a highly promising strategic pathway
for green anti-fouling materials design.
Despite continuous advances in photocatalytic materials, the prac-
tical application in antibacterial and anti-fouling coatings remains
constrained by several challenges, such as poor environmental toler-
ance, short-term efficacy, and functional singularity. Firstly, photo-
catalyst particles are typically immobilized inside or on the material
surfaces through methods such as organic binder crosslinking, resin
matrix blending, or fiber membrane loading [25,26]. This immobiliza-
tion pattern leads to insufficient exposure and accessibility of photo-
catalytic active sites, resulting in low light utilization efficiency [27].
During prolonged service, active sites are prone to being obstructe-
d/obscured by accumulated microbial debris and organic deposits, or
rendered invalid by external impacts, progressively diminishing photo-
catalytic activity and anti-fouling durability. Therefore, developing
innovative immobilization strategies that enable both sufficient and
sustained active site exposure is of paramount importance. Secondly,
under low-light or complete darkness conditions, photocatalytic efficacy
decreases substantially. Thus, sole reliance on photocatalytic mecha-
nisms proves inadequate for combating the diverse fouling organisms
prevalent in complex marine environments. Inevitably, this inherent
constraint severely compromises the reliability and long-term stability
of photocatalytic anti-fouling systems, thereby impeding their scalable
adoption in marine engineering applications.
Reptiles and mammals, including humans, maintain epidermal
cleanliness by continuously renewing the stratum corneum and shed-
ding aged or damaged outer layers along with attached contaminants
and microorganisms. This suggests that effective biofouling control re-
lies not on biocidal toxicity, but on disrupting the stability of
attachment, thereby transforming organisms from an attached state to a
free state. Similarly, degradable resin can endow coatings with a “dy-
namic surface” that enables a “molting-like” mechanism through the
degradation process [28]. Even under static hydraulic conditions, such
coatings can actively release firmly adhered biofouling organisms.
Among these materials, poly-Schiff bases stand out as a particularly
promising candidate due to their stimuli-responsive behavior and broad
substrate compatibility, which applies to various surfaces, such as steel,
textiles, and plastics [29–31]. These polymers are synthesized through
step-growth polymerization of monomers (e.g., dialdehydes and di-
amines) via Schiff base reactions, forming imine-linked (-C=N-)
macromolecular chains. Their dynamic character stems from the
reversible hydrolysis of imine bonds, allowing the coating to achieve
continuous
self-renewal
through
water-triggered
release
of
low-molecular-weight fragments. Nevertheless, relying exclusively on
dynamic surface mechanisms proves inadequate to meet the rigorous
anti-fouling requirements of practical applications, which still necessi-
tate the incorporation of toxic chemical additives in current strategies
[32]. Therefore, we consider the integration of poly-Schiff base matrices
with photocatalysts into a composite coating a promising alternative,
which harnesses the self-renewing capability of the degradable resin to
ensure persistent exposure of active photocatalytic sites, while syner-
gistically enhancing anti-fouling performance.
Specifically, we herein innovatively integrated the characteristics of
light-driven antibacterial activity and animal epidermal molting into the
design, constructing a COF/g-C3N4 heterojunction-modified poly-Schiff
base hybrid anti-fouling coating (D-COF/CNx). A one-pot method was
employed to grow COF nanotubes (COF-1) in situ on g-C3N4 nanosheets,
thereby forming a 1D/2D heterojunction photocatalyst. The interfacial
electric field (IEF) and new charge transfer channel (CTC) at the het-
erojunction interface could optimize the separation and migration of
photo-generated carriers, effectively suppressing charge recombination
and promoting carrier utilization. Owing to enhanced light absorption,
reinforced photoexcitation efficiency, and prolonged excited-state life-
times, the heterojunction exhibited highly efficient generation of
bactericidal ROS with respect to g-C3N4 and COF-1. Simultaneously,
inspired by the biological molting, the poly-Schiff base polymer (DSP)
with “water-triggered and ROS-responsive” dual degradation mecha-
nisms was designed. Self-renewing photocatalytic antifouling coatings
were prepared by uniformly dispersing the COF/g-C3N4 heterojunction
within the DSP. During degradation, the internally embedded photo-
catalysts could be continuously exposed via layer-by-layer renewal,
supporting nearly 100% utilization of photocatalysts and addressing the
issue of insufficient and unsustainable exposure of active sites in tradi-
tional photocatalytic coatings. Additionally, the controllable dynamic
self-renewal capability and superior photocatalytic activity overwhelm
the poor anti-fouling performance of the coating under weak-light
conditions (an inherent shortcoming of photocatalysis), while actively
releasing surviving and residual microorganisms to mitigate biofilm
formation. The coating retained excellent cycling antibacterial effect
and mechanical durability after long-term use. This study proposes a
universal immobilization strategy for achieving sufficient and sustained
exposure of photocatalytic active sites, providing valuable insights for
the development of high-efficiency, stable, and long-lasting photo-
catalytic coatings for application in anti-fouling.
2. Experiment
2.1. Materials
Melamine, toluene, sodium chloride, methanol, acetone, K2Cr2O7,
and anhydrous ethanol were all purchased from Sinopharm Chemical
Reagent Co., Ltd. Polyetheramine D-230, 1,4-phthalaldehyde (TPA),
KCl, Nafion solution (5 wt%), isopropyl alcohol (iPrOH), K3[Fe(CN)6],
p-phenylenediamine
(Pa),
and
5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline
N-oxide
(DMPO) were all obtained from Macklin Co., Ltd. Isophorone diamine,
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
2

1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol
(Tp),
1,3,5-trimethylbenzene,
1,4-
dioxane, ascorbic acid, and Tempol were purchased from Shanghai
Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. Propylene glycol methyl
ether acetate was acquired from Shanghai Mairel Co., Ltd. Phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) was purchased from Beijing Sola Biotechnology
Co., Ltd. ITO (indium tin oxide) glass was obtained from Luoyang
Tengjing Glass Co., Ltd. Escherichia coli (E3342B) and Staphylococcus
aureus (G5740B) were provided by Shanghai Luwei Technology Co., Ltd.
Epoxy resin laminate (EP), as a common non-degradable substrate and
used as one of the control groups, was supplied by Dongguan Yuyi
Plastic Products Co., Ltd. All chemical reagents were of analytical grade
and used without further purification.
2.2. Materials preparation
2.2.1. Synthesis of graphitic carbon nitrides (g-C3N4) nanosheets
A mixture of 3 g of melamine and 30 g of sodium chloride powder
was ground for 10 min until uniformly mixed, then ball-milled at 500 r
min–1 for 20 min. The mixture was placed into a quartz crucible, and the
surface of the quartz crucible was tightly wrapped with tin foil. The
quartz crucible was heated in a muffle furnace under an air atmosphere
with a heating rate of 5 ◦C min–1 to 550 ◦C for 3 h. The powder was then
repeatedly washed with deionized water and isopropyl alcohol and
filtered, yielding a final yield of 41.65%. 1 g of powder was sonicated
with 150 mL of isopropyl alcohol for 9 h, centrifuged at 3 000 r min–1 for
10 min to remove agglomerated powder, and then filtered, yielding g-
C3N4 nanosheets with a yield of 76%.
2.2.2. Synthesis of COF nanotube (COF-1) and COF/g-C3N4
The COF nanotube was prepared based on a previously reported
procedure with slight adjustments [33]. COF/g-C3N4 heterojunction was
prepared using methods referenced from previous literature and in-
cludes the following steps: 190 mg of g-C3N4 nanosheets were dissolved
in 6 mL of a mixed solvent of dioxane and mesitylene (volume ratio: 1:1)
in a Schlenk tube, respectively. Then, 2,4,6-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp,
252.0 mg, 1.2 mmol) was added to the Schlenk tube and subsequently
sonicated for 10 min. P-Phenylenediamine (Pa, 192.0 mg, 1.8 mmol)
was dissolved in 6 mL of the mixed solvent and added dropwise to the
Schlenk tube, which was stirred at 600 r min–1, followed by vigorous
stirring for several minutes. Then, 2 mL of 3 M aqueous acetic acid was
added. After thorough mixing, the Schlenk tube was frozen in a liquid
nitrogen bath and degassed through three freeze-vacuum-thaw cycles.
The tube was sealed off and then heated at 120 ◦C for 72 h. COF-1 was
obtained when the content of added nanosheets was 0. To activate and
purify the samples, solvent exchange was performed with methanol and
acetone. The obtained solids were finally filtered and vacuum-dried at
90 ◦C. The obtained precipitates were isolated by filtration and named
COF-1 and COF/g-C3N4.
2.2.3. Synthesis of poly-Schiff base polymer and COF/g-C3N4-modified
coating (D-COF/CNx)
First, 26.826 g of terephthalaldehyde (TPA) was added to a reaction
flask containing a mixed solvent of toluene and methyl ethyl ketone
(volume ratio: 1:1, 40 mL). Then, while stirring, 23 g of polyetheramine
D-230 and 17.03 g of isophorone diamine were added dropwise to the
solvent mixture at 300 r min–1 to a total volume of 90 mL. The mixture
was heated and stirred at 90 ◦C under a nitrogen atmosphere for 24 h,
and the by-product water was removed by vacuum distillation and
separation. Upon completion of the condensation reaction, the poly-
Schiff base polymer solution (approximately 45 wt% in toluene) was
cooled to ambient temperature for stored.
g-C3N4 (0.15 g), COF-1 (0.15 g), and COF/g-C3N4 (0.075 g and
0.15 g, two samples) were separately dispersed and sonicated (15 min)
in a mixed solution of toluene (2 mL) and propylene glycol methyl ether
acetate (2 mL). Then, 1.5 g of poly-Schiff base polymer solution was
added and sonicated until uniformly mixed (the addition ratios of g-
C3N4, COF-1, and COF/g-C3N4 relative to the poly-Schiff base polymer
were 10 wt%, 10 wt%, and 5 wt% and 10 wt%, respectively). Subse-
quently, 350 μL of the diluted solution was uniformly coated onto the
surface of a clean glass substrate (coating area: 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm). The
sample was then dried at room temperature until most of the solvent
evaporated. Finally, the sample was dried at 50 ◦C for 24 h to ensure
complete curing. The content of g-C3N4, COF-1, and COF/g-C3N4 in the
composite coating was determined by TG analysis, with values of
10.34 wt%, 10.02 wt%, and 4.38 wt% and 10.32 wt%, respectively,
which were consistent with the added amounts (Fig. S8, Supporting
Information). Therefore, the coated samples were named D-CN10, D-
COF10, D-COF/CN5, and D-COF/CN10, respectively. The sample without
any photocatalyst was used as the control group and named DSP.
For comprehensive details regarding the material synthesis and
characterization methods, please refer to the Supporting Information.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Structure and morphology characterization
g-C3N4 nanosheets were synthesized in situ through a soluble salt-
assisted calcination route, using a ball-milled mixture of melamine
and sodium chloride as the precursor (Figs. S1 to S4, Supporting Infor-
mation). This approach eliminates safety hazards associated with con-
ventional strong acid etching, and also reduces wastewater pollution
and energy dissipation typically caused by ultrasonic exfoliation. Sub-
sequently, a COF/g-C3N4 heterojunction was constructed in situ via the
Schiff base reaction between 2,4,6-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp) and p-
phenylenediamine (Pa), which induced the growth of 1D COF-1 nano-
tubes on the surface of g-C3N4 nanosheets (Fig. 1a). SEM and TEM
characterization revealed that the synthesized COF-1 possessed a hollow
nanotubular morphology with a uniform aspect ratio, approximately
6–8 μm in length and 150 nm in inner diameter (Figs. 1b to d, and S1,
Supporting Information). After heterojunction formation, the surface of
g-C3N4 became noticeably rougher, suggesting successful growth of
COF-1 (Figs. 1c and d). EDS analysis further confirmed the composite
structure,
showing
elemental
compositions
dominated
by COF-1
(Figs. 1d and S5, Supporting Information). Meanwhile, the outer walls
of the COF-1 nanotubes also exhibited a roughened texture, featuring 2D
vertically aligned nanosheets approximately 150 nm thick (Fig. 1c).
In COF/g-C3N4, typical peaks at 4.6◦, 8.2◦, and 26.5◦were assigned
to the (100), (110), and (001) planes of COF-1, respectively, while the
peak at 27.5◦corresponded to the (002) plane of g-C3N4 (Fig. 1e) [33,
34]. COF-1 adopted a hexagonal P6/m crystal structure with AA stacking
and a pore size of approximately 3.88 nm (Fig. S6, Supporting Infor-
mation).
The
crystalline
characteristics
of
g-C3N4
were
further
confirmed by distinct electron diffraction rings (Fig. S7, Supporting In-
formation). Thermogravimetric (TG) analysis revealed an actual COF-1
mass ratio of approximately 0.8 in the heterojunction, closely matching
the theoretical value of 0.67, indicating unimpaired nucleation and
growth of COF-1 (Fig. S8, Supporting Information). Both COF-1 and the
heterojunction exhibited excellent thermal stability below 400
◦C
(Fig. S9, Supporting Information). In addition, the DTG peak of
COF/g-C3N4 appeared at 491.58 ◦C, higher than that of pure COF-1
(485.15 ◦C), indicating enhanced thermal stability likely due to strong
interfacial interactions between the two components.
N2 adsorption-desorption curve showed that the composite possessed
a BET surface area of 349.21 m2 g–1 and a pore volume of 0.39 cm3 g–1,
representing 3.70- and 3.43-fold increases over COF-1, and 32.45- and
9.02-fold improvements compared to g-C3N4, respectively (Fig. 1f). The
planar structure of g-C3N4 provided growth sites for the curling COF-1
nanotubes, improving dispersion and reducing agglomeration, while
the hollow curled COF-1 nanotubes increase the contact area with the
medium/light source. This hierarchical architecture is more conducive
to light absorption and reflection, thereby enhancing photon utilization
efficiency. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra confirmed
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
3

that all three photocatalysts were primarily composed of C, N, and O
(Fig. S10, Supporting Information). In the high-resolution N 1s spectrum
of the COF/g-C3N4, the peak at 399.86 eV was assigned to N-C in COF-1,
while the signal at 398.8 eV corresponded to C-N=C in g-C3N4 (Fig. 1g)
[35]. The C 1s spectrum showed a blue shift of 0.5 eV for the peak at
288.26 eV (Fig. 1h), suggesting electronic interaction between the
components. We attribute the enhanced thermal and structural stability
to covalent bonding formed between aldehyde groups in Tp and amino
groups at the g-C3N4 edges (Fig. S11, Supporting Information). These
stable chemical bonds and interfacial interactions facilitate efficient
electron transport within the heterojunction. Furthermore, the XPS
spectra signals remained virtually unchanged before and after illumi-
nation, demonstrating the high structural and compositional stability of
the heterojunction under long-term operational conditions (Fig. S12,
Supporting Information).
The poly-Schiff base polymer was synthesized via dehydration
condensation using isophorone diamine (enhancing resin toughness),
polyetheramine (imparting flexibility and appropriate hydrophilicity),
and terephthalaldehyde (TPA), generating dynamically reversible imine
bonds (-C=N-) (Fig. 2a). In the 1H NMR spectroscopy, the signal at
8.26 ppm to 8.40 ppm (labeled as “a”) corresponds to the aryl-linked
-C=N- group (Fig. 2B), and no obvious chemical shift signal from
amino groups was observed, which confirms the molecular structure of
the poly-Schiff base polymer (Fig. 2B). In the FT-IR spectra, the peak at
808 cm−1 was associated with the triazine ring breathing mode in g-
C3N4, while absorptions at 1 586 cm−1 and 1 608 cm−1 were attributed
to C=C and C=O stretching in the keto form, respectively (Fig. 2c) [36].
The presence of C=O and C=C bands confirmed the transformation of
COF-1 from an enol-imine to a β-ketoenamine tautomer, which was
expected to regulate light-harvesting ability and promote effective car-
rier dissociation and movement [37].
The FT-IR spectra of DSP and all composite coatings exhibited a
distinct -C=N- stretching vibration at 1 640 cm−1 (Fig. 2C–S13, Sup-
porting Information). Additionally, D-COF/CN10 showed characteristic
C=C and C=O vibrations at 1 586 cm−1 and 1 606 cm−1, respectively.
Combined XRD, NMR, and FT-IR analyses consistently verify the
Fig. 1. Synthesis and characterization of COF/g-C3N4 heterojunction. (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation for g-C3N4, COF-1, and COF/g-C3N4. TEM images of
(b) COF-1 and (c) COF/g-C3N4. (d) SEM images with corresponding EDS spectra (scale bar: 2 μm) and (e) XRD patterns. (f) N2 sorption isotherms. High resolution XPS
spectra of (g) N 1s and (h) C 1s.
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
4

successful synthesis of both COF/g-C3N4 and the D-COF/CNx. All coat-
ings demonstrated good thermal stability below 260 ◦C (Fig. S9, Sup-
porting Information). Upon incorporation of COF/g-C3N4, the maximum
DTG peak temperature decreased by 19.09 ◦C in D-COF/CN5 and D-
COF/CN10 (315.27 ◦C) compared to pure DSP (334.36 ◦C). This indi-
cated that intermolecular interactions such as hydrogen bonding and π-π
stacking between poly-Schiff base polymer and COF/g-C3N4 may pro-
mote phonon transport, enhancing heat conduction in molecular chains
or across interfaces (Fig. 2a).
3.2. Photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic antibacterial properties of
COF/g-C3N4
The energy band structure serves as a fundamental parameter gov-
erning the photochemical behavior of semiconductor materials, as it
dictates both light absorption capability and redox potential, thereby
underpinning photocatalytic antibacterial and anti-fouling perfor-
mance. The band structures of the photocatalysts were characterized
using ultraviolet–visible diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV–Vis DRS)
and Mott-Schottky (M −
S) measurements. After hybridization with
COF-1, the absorption edge of COF/g-C3N4 was extended to 603 nm
(Fig. 3a), indicating a broadened spectral response. The band gaps (Eg)
of g-C3N4, COF-1, and COF/g-C3N4, derived from Tauc plots, were
calculated to be 2.72 eV, 2.04 eV, and 2.10 eV, respectively (Fig. 3a)
[38]. M −
S analysis revealed n-type semiconductor behavior with
positive slopes, and the corresponding conduction band (CB) levels were
estimated at −0.48 eV, −0.63 eV, and −0.74 eV (vs. NHE), respectively
(Figs. 3b and S14, Supporting Information). XPS-VB spectra indicated
the energy differences from the Fermi level (EF) to the valence band (VB)
maximum for g-C3N4 and COF-1 were 1.89 eV and 1.72 eV, respectively
(Fig. S15, Supporting Information). It can be concluded that the energy
level diagram of the heterojunction was established. Notably, both the
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied
molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels of the hybrid material exhibited
a slight downward shift, probably due to the delocalized π-system
formed by the 2Pz orbitals of C and N, accompanied by a modest increase
in the band gap (Fig. 3C).
The nanotube/nanosheet heterojunction structure enhanced light
harvesting by increasing the reflection and refraction pathways within
the material, prompting the strongest absorption intensity observed in
COF/g-C3N4 (Figs. 3d and e). Under light irradiation, the Nyquist arc
radius in the EIS spectrum of COF/g-C3N4 decreased significantly
(Fig. 3f), and the charge transfer resistance (Rct) dropped from 42.04 Ω
in the dark to 0.15 Ω (Fig. S16, Supporting Information), indicating
markedly facilitated carrier migration. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra
reduced 97.08% fluorescence intensity at 466 nm for COF/g-C3N4
compared to g-C3N4 (Fig. 3g), demonstrating effective suppression of
radiative electron (e−)- hole (h+) recombination [39]. The hetero-
junction also exhibited a photocurrent density of 0.79 μA cm–2 under
light, which was 7.18 times higher than that of g-C3N4, along with an
86.08% improvement in photoelectric conversion efficiency (Fig. 3h).
Furthermore, time-resolved fluorescence (TRPL) decay measurements
revealed a prolonged carrier lifetime of 2.96 ns for COF/g-C3N4,
compared to 1.13 ns for COF-1 (Fig. 3i and Table S1, Supporting In-
formation), confirming enhanced charge separation and providing
prolonged
temporal
opportunities
for
redox
reactions
during
photocatalysis.
Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) were
employed as representative Gram-negative and Gram-positive model
organisms, respectively, in antimicrobial experiments relevant to
biofouling [40,41]. Antibacterial activity was quantified via the plate
counting method under visible light irradiation at an intensity of 15 mW
cm–2 (considerably lower than typical solar intensity of 100 mW cm–2) to
simulate realistic low-light marine environments (Fig. 4a). For E. coli,
after 6 h of illumination, the bactericidal rates of g-C3N4, COF-1, and
COF/g-C3N4 (at 20 μg mL–1) against a high-concentration bacterial
suspension (106 CFU mL–1) reached 99.95%, 99.77%, and 99.93%,
respectively, achieving complete sterilization (100%) after 12 h (Fig. 4b
and Fig. S17, Supporting Information). In the case of S. aureus under the
same experimental conditions, the sterilization rates of g-C3N4, COF-1,
Fig. 2. Synthesis and characterization of DSP and D-COF/CNx. (a) Schematic diagram of coating fabrication and intermolecular interactions between COF/g-C3N4
and DSP. (b) 1H NMR spectrum of poly-Schiff base polymer. (c) FT-IR spectra of different samples.
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
5

and COF/g-C3N4 after 12 h of illumination reached 84.31%, 84.53%,
and
86.36%,
respectively
(Fig.
S18,
Supporting
Information).
COF/g-C3N4 achieved complete sterilization (100%) after 24 h. Under
dark conditions, bacterial survival rates remained comparable to the
blank control, confirming the negligible inherent cytotoxicity of all three
materials. Thus, their antibacterial activity was exclusively mediated by
photocatalytic processes. SEM observations revealed extensive cellular
damage, including cytoplasmic leakage, membrane depression, and
rupture (Fig. 4c and Fig. S19, Supporting Information). Evident close
contact and adsorption between bacterial cells and COF/g-C3N4 short-
ened the diffusion distances of bactericidal reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and reduced the transmission losses by quenching.
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra further demon-
strated the superior ROS generation capability of COF/g-C3N4 (Fig. 4d).
No radical signals were detected in the dark for any catalyst. After 30 s of
light exposure, COF/g-C3N4 and COF-1 exhibited strong DMPO-⋅OOH
adduct signals in aqueous medium (g = 2.005, AN = 12.7 G,
AHβ = 10.3 G, AHγ = 1.6 G), whereas g-C3N4 produced a characteristic
DMPO-⋅OH quartet (g = 2.006, AN = 14.4 G, AHβ = 14.7 G, intensity
ratio 1:2:2:1) [42]. In methanol solution, distinct DMPO-O2⋅- signals
were detected (g = 2.006, AN = 12.8 G, AHβ = 10.2 G), confirming that
the ECB of all materials satisfied the thermodynamic requirement for O2
reduction to O2⋅- (−0.33 eV vs. NHE) [19].
The radical generation pathways were proposed as follows:
COF=g-C3N4; g-C3N4; COF-1 →
hν e- + h+
(1)
In methanol system:
O2 + e- →O2⋅-
(2)
In H2O system:
O2 + e- →O2⋅-
(3)
O2⋅- + H2O ⇌⋅OOH + OH-
(4)
h+ + OH- →
hν ⋅OH
(5)
Importantly, the ⋅OOH radical signal intensity generated by COF/g-
C3N4 was 2.61 times higher than that of COF-1, while its O2⋅- radical
signal intensity exceeded those of COF-1 and g-C3N4 by factors of 1.99
and 2.19, respectively (Fig. S20, Supporting Information). These radi-
cals (⋅OH, ⋅OOH, and O2⋅-) act directly on the bacterial cell membrane at
Fig. 3. Light absorption and electrochemical properties of the samples. (a) UV–Vis DRS (inset: Tauc plots). (b) Mott-Schottky curve. (c) Energy band structure. (d)
Absorption spectra of photocatalyst in ultrapure water (0.1 mg mL–1). (e) Schematic diagram of COF/g-C3N4 light absorption. (f) EIS Nyquist spectra (light/dark). (g)
PL spectra (320 nm laser excitation). (h) Transient photocurrent curve. (i) TRPL spectra and decay fitting curves.
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
6

the catalyst-bacteria interface, rapidly damaging nucleic acids, proteins,
and lipids [39]. This induces severe oxidative stress, disrupts structural
integrity, and substantially reduces cell viability. When the photo-
catalyst concentration was reduced tenfold to 2 μg/mL, significant dif-
ferences in
bactericidal rates were observed among
them. The
bactericidal rate of g-C3N4 dropped to 47.09%, whereas COF-1 main-
tained 99.76%, and COF/g-C3N4 achieved complete sterilization (100%)
(Figs. 4e and f). These results clearly demonstrated the superior anti-
bacterial activity of COF/g-C3N4 even at extremely low concentrations.
The heterojunction enormously enhanced the ROS generation rate,
leading to extensive oxidative damage and bacterial death. This superior
photocatalytic antibacterial performance suggests strong potential for
applications in marine environments characterized by weak-light or
significant light attenuation (Fig. 4g).
3.3. Charge transfer mechanism of the COF/g-C3N4
The superior antibacterial efficiency of COF/g-C3N4 over its indi-
vidual components drove a detailed investigation of its charge transfer
dynamics via femtosecond transient absorption (fs-TA) spectroscopy.
Upon excitation with an intense pulsed laser, ground-state bleaching
(GSB-1, negative peaks) was observed within 1 ps for both COF-1 and
COF/g-C3N4, arising from the photoexcitation of ground-state particles
to higher energy levels and corresponding to the absorption edge of
COF-1 (Figs. 5a to f) [43]. Notably, a new bleaching feature (GSB-2)
emerged at 610 nm to 720 nm in the heterojunction, exhibiting 2.8 times
higher intensity and a prolonged recovery delay of 7 ns compared to
GSB-1, which provided direct evidence of a highly efficient charge
transfer pathway at the heterojunction interface [44]. The GSB-2 peak at
655 nm aligned with a charge transition energy of 1.89 eV (hν = 1
240/λ) from the conduction band (CB) of COF-1 to the valence band
(VB) of g-C3N4, indicating the formation of a new charge transfer
channel (CTC). Multi-exponential fitting of decay kinetics revealed three
relaxation components (Figs. 5g to i): a short-lived τ1 (3.09 ps to 3.58 ps)
representing electron diffusion, τ2 (30.53 ps to 53.28 ps) attributed to
trap-assisted recombination, and a long-lived τ3 (388.00 ps) assigned to
interfacial charge recombination between electrons in the CB of g-C3N4
and holes in the VB of COF-1 via the CTC. The proportion of τ1 decreased
from 67.7% to 69.9% in single components to 46.6% in the hetero-
junction, confirming facilitated charge migration.
Moreover, the
average excited-state lifetime (τaᵥe) of COF/g-C3N4 increased by 6.8- and
7.4-fold compared to COF-1 and g-C3N4, respectively, consistent with
TRPL curves (Fig. 3I).
On the nanosecond timescale (after 2 ns), a broad positive absorption
signal (ESA) appeared within 450 nm to 550 nm, which stemmed from
the excited-state absorption of trapped electrons and indicated the
Fig. 4. Photocatalytic bactericidal performance of COF/g-C3N4 in high-biofouling conditions under weak-light irradiation (15 mW cm–2). (a) Schematic diagram of
photocatalytic antibacterial tests. (b) Viable E. coli counts after exposure to photocatalyst solutions (20 μg mL–1) under dark/light conditions. (c) Morphological
characterization of E. coli in sample suspensions under light irradiation (scale bar: 500 nm). (d) In situ EPR spectra of photocatalyst suspensions under darkness and
irradiation (30 s, λ > 400 nm). a COF-1, b g-C3N4, and c COF/g-C3N4. (e) Photographs of E. coli colony counts after exposure to low concentrations of photocatalyst
suspensions (2 μg mL–1) under light conditions. (f) Viable E. coli counts in the suspension and the corresponding bactericidal efficiency. (g) Schematic illustration of
the bacterial cell damage mechanisms induced by the photocatalytic system. (Error bars indicate the standard deviation in three parallel antibacterial tests).
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
7

presence of long-lived excited species and effective charge separation
(Figs. 5c to f) [45]. These enhanced GSB and ESA signals collectively
demonstrated that the heterojunction promoted excited-state generation
and suppressed charge recombination, thereby improving photon utili-
zation.
Radical
trapping
experiments
further
elucidated
the
contributions of charge species to antibacterial activity (Fig. S21, Sup-
porting Information). The addition of iPrOH (⋅OH scavenger) reduced
the antibacterial rate from 88.74% to 79.16%; with Cr (VI) (e−scav-
enger), it further decreased to 69.14%, confirming the minor role of ⋅OH
[46]. In contrast, introducing ascorbic acid (h+ scavenger) increased the
Fig. 5. Multispectral analysis of deep-level carrier excitation, separation, and transfer dynamics in COF/g-C3N4. (a–c) fs-TA spectra of COF-1, g-C3N4, and COF/g-
C3N4. (d–f) Correlation between the fs-TA spectra and the results from UV–Vis DRS and PL spectra. (g–i) Transient decay kinetics and corresponding fitted electronic
relaxation paths. (j) Schematic illustration of the interfacial electric field (IEF) and charge transfer channels (CTC) at the COF/g-C3N4 interface.
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
8

antibacterial rate to 100%, while Tempol (O2⋅- scavenger) drastically
reduced it to 13.23%, unequivocally identifying O2⋅- as the primary
antibacterial species. Specifically, scavenging h+ promoted e−partici-
pation in O2 reduction, enhancing O2⋅- generation. These results sug-
gested that the GSB-2 signal originated from accumulated electrons at
the heterointerface, directly correlating with improved antibacterial
activity.
Combining spectroscopic, EPR, and antibacterial results, we propose
a charge transfer mechanism for the COF/g-C3N4 heterojunction
(Fig. 5j), comprising three key steps. Firstly, energy level alignment and
Fermi level differences drive spontaneous electron transfer from COF-1
to g-C3N4, inducing band bending and forming an interfacial electric
field (IEF). Furthermore, enhanced light absorption generates more e−-
h+ pairs, which are efficiently separated via the CTC, where excited
electrons from COF-1 transfer to the VB of g-C3N4, and the IEF further
directs e−to the VB of COF-1 and h+ to the CB of g-C3N4 (Fig. 3l). Ul-
timately, spatial separation enables electrons to reduce O2 to O2⋅- and
⋅OOH, while the CTC facilitates recombination of residual charges,
minimizing bulk recombination and enhancing ROS generation. This
interfacial charge regulation enables COF/g-C3N4 to efficiently produce
ROS even under weak-light and low-concentration conditions, exhibit-
ing superior photocatalytic antibacterial performance.
3.4. Degradation mechanism of D-COF/CNx coating
Initially, all coatings on glass substrates showed a smooth and flat
surface with a dense cross-section morphology (Fig. 6a, and Figs. S22
and S23, Supporting Information). After 7 days of immersion in ultra-
pure water, circular pores (1–3 μm in diameter) emerged on the DSP
surface, whereas D-COF10, D-COF/CN5, and D-COF/CN10 appeared with
irregular pores due to the exposure of photocatalytic components (COF-
1 and COF/g-C3N4) (Fig. S24, Supporting Information). Even after 30
d of immersion, the structural integrity of all coatings was maintained.
The DSP coating exhibited sponge-like pores (1 μm to 2 μm) with high
density and uniformity on and beneath the surface (Figs. 6a and b, and
Figs. S25 and S26, Supporting Information). In contrast, D-COF10, D-
COF/CN5 showed interwoven networks of photocatalysts and polymer,
with internal pore sizes expanding to 3 μm to 5 μm. This degradation
mechanism overcomes the limitation where encapsulated photocatalytic
anti-fouling agents in the coating fail to reach the surface for efficient
light energy conversion. Elemental analysis indicated that C, N, and O
remained the primary surface constituents before and after degradation
(Fig. S27, Supporting Information). After immersion, the C=N content
decreased by 9.22% (w-DSP), 14.13% (w-D-COF10), and 11.76% (w-D-
COF/CN10), while C-N content increased correspondingly by 9.81%,
14.72%, and 11.54%, respectively (Figs. 6c and d, and Figs. S28 and
S29, Supporting Information). These changes are attributed to the
reversible hydrolysis of imine bonds (-C=N-), yielding hydrophilic
aldehyde (-CHO) and amine (-NH2) fragments that leach out and
generate porosity (Fig. 6f).
The composite coatings displayed lower water contact angles (79.35◦
to 81.29◦) than DSP (86.80◦) after 7 d, indicating faster surface degra-
dation and self-renewal (Fig. S30, Supporting Information). Mechani-
cally, D-COF/CN5 exhibited superior hardness (+87.25%) and Young's
modulus (+18.63%) compared to DSP (Fig. 6e, and Figs. S31 and S32,
Supporting
Information).
Post-degradation,
all
samples
showed
increased hardness: w-DSP (180.00 MPa), w-D-CN10 (173.67 MPa), and
w-D-COF/CN5 (171.50 MPa). This suggested that hydrophilic poly-
etheramine segments were preferentially released, while the residual
matrix maintained structural stability and “locked” the photocatalysts to
prolong the exposure time. Degradation kinetics were monitored via
UV–Vis absorption at 262 nm, corresponding to terephthalaldehyde
(TPA) release (as the main chromophoric group) (Fig. S33, Supporting
Information). Under day-night cycling, composite coatings exhibited
dramatically stronger absorption than in dark conditions (Fig. 6g, and
Fig. S34, Supporting Information). For instance, D-CN10 reached 9.6 a.u.
versus 3.3 a.u. D-COF10, D-COF/CN5, and D-COF/CN10 showed absor-
bances of 6.1 a.u., 6.0 a.u., and 6.3 a.u., respectively, all higher than
their dark counterparts (3.1 a.u., 2.0 a.u., and 2.9 a.u.).
During 30 d of immersion, the degradation process of the coatings
tended to be stable and followed the pseudo-first-order kinetics:
ln(R) = −kt
(6)
where k is the degradation rate constant, t is time, and R is the residual
mass ratio of the coating (Fig. 6h). The k value for DSP was similar under
day-night cycling and dark (1.98 × 10−4 d−1 vs. 1.58 × 10−4 d−1). Under
light, D-CN10 showed the highest k (1.31 × 10−3 d−1), approximately
1.66-fold that of D-COF10 (7.84 × 10−4 d−1), D-COF/CN10 (7.87 × 10−4
d−1), and D-COF/CN5 (7.72 × 10−4 d−1). Coating service life (t1/2
(years) = ln2/k, first-order reaction kinetic half-life equation) for a
100 μm thickness was estimated as: DSP (19.2) > D-COF/CN5
(4.92) > D-COF10 (4.85) > D-COF/CN10 (4.83) > D-CN10 (2.9). 1H NMR
confirmed that only the -CHO (TPA) signal was markedly enhanced after
in-situ light exposure, without new byproducts (Fig. S35, Supporting
Information). Since g-C3N4 primarily produces ⋅OH, while COF/g-C3N4
and COF-1 generate O2⋅- and ⋅OOH (Fig. 4d), and no radical production
occurs in darkness. Therefore, it can be reasonably concluded that ROS
(particularly ⋅OH) plays a key role in accelerating the self-renewal of
poly-Schiff base coatings.
3.5. Antibacterial and anti-algal properties of D-COF/CNx coating
Marine biofouling initiates with the attachment and colonization of
bacteria and microalgae [47]; the resulting biofilms provide favorable
habitats and nutrient-exchange sites for the subsequent firm adhesion of
macrofouling, such as potentially pathogenic bacteria, barnacles, and
mussels [48]. Hence, inhibiting early microbial adhesion is essential for
preventing macrofouling organisms. To evaluate inherent antibacterial
activity, composite coatings were immersed in high-fouling conditions
(108 CFU mL–1) for 24 h (Fig. 7a). The degradation products released
from the coatings reduced bacterial viability (in the bacterial suspension
➀) by 41.87% to 45.43%, significantly outperforming DSP (17.46%)
(Fig. 7B–D). At low-fouling conditions (103 CFU mL–1), D-COF10,
D-COF/CN5, and D-COF/CN10 achieved bactericidal rates of 99.36%,
99.36%, and 100%, respectively, compared to 82.32% for DSP. These
results indicated that -CHO and -NH2 fragments released from
poly-Schiff base degradation possessed intrinsic antibacterial properties,
effectively suppressing biofilm formation.
Surface-adhered microorganisms, beyond planktonic bacteria, serve
as primary contributors to metal-based equipment corrosion and
biofouling.
Coatings
were
incubated
in
high-fouling
conditions
(109 CFU/mL), transferred to fresh PBS, and statically cultured under
light/dark conditions. Bacteria in the suspension (non-adherent➁) and
on the coating (adherent➂) were quantified separately (Fig. 7a). For
glass and epoxy (EP) substrates, most E. coli remained adherent, pro-
moting biofilm formation (Fig. 7e and f, and Fig. S36, Supporting In-
formation). In contrast, composite coatings under dark conditions
showed reduced adherent bacteria and increased free bacteria, indi-
cating a transition from adherent to non-adherent states due to surface
self-renewal. Anti-adhesion rates improved by 80.37% (DSP), 65.70%
(D-CN10), 94.12% (D-COF10), 74.57% (D-COF/CN5), and 93.86% (D-
COF/CN10). Under light irradiation, both non-adherent and adherent
bacteria further decreased for photocatalytic coatings (D-CN10, D-
COF10, D-COF/CN5, D-COF/CN10). Surface antibacterial rates reached
98.06%, 99.84%, 100%, and 100%, respectively, due to ROS generation
from exposed catalysts (Fig. 7g). Notably, the anti-adhesion rate of
S. aureus on the composite coating surface was increased to 100%, even
with DSP achieving a high rate of 99.59% (Fig. S37, Supporting
Information).
SEM revealed significant bacterial damage on D-COF/CN5, consis-
tent with photocatalytic ROS attack (Figs. 7h(a), 4c, S38, Supporting
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
9

Fig. 6. Evolution of morphology and internal structure of the D-COF/CNx during the degradation. (a) Surface morphology of the coating at the initial stage and after
degradation for 7 days and 30 days. (b) Cross-sectional morphology of the coating after 30 days of degradation (the prefix “w-” is added to the names of degraded
samples by water immersion). (c) Deconvoluted N 1s XPS spectra of the coating before and after degradation. (d) Quantitative analysis of nitrogen species in different
chemical environments before and after coating degradation. (e) Nanoindentation hardness measured at different indentation depths before and after coating
degradation. (Error bars represent the standard deviation from six parallel measurements) (f) Schematic illustration of the degradation process of the poly-Schiff base
coating in an environment containing water and ROS. (g) UV–Vis absorption spectra of cumulative degradation products at different time intervals under day-night
cycles and continuous darkness conditions. (h) The degradation process of the coating follows a pseudo-first-order kinetic model.
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
10

Information). During self-renewal of D-COF/CN5 and D-COF/CN10,
released catalysts reduced E. coli in solution by 1.75 times to 3.94 times
compared to DSP, with sustained bactericidal rates of 90.22% to 94.67%
from degradation products. Surprisingly, the degradation products of
the poly-Schiff base coating itself exhibited strong inhibitory activity
against S. aureus in solution under both light and dark conditions,
achieving nearly 100% antibacterial efficacy in each case (Fig. S37,
Supporting Information). This pronounced suppression of Gram-positive
bacteria effectively compensates for the relatively weaker antibacterial
performance of the photocatalyst against such strains. In conclusion, the
optimized composite coating demonstrated excellent antibacterial ac-
tivity against both typical Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria.
A single test, which is common practice, fails to characterize the
durability of photocatalytic antibacterial agents and the cyclic antibac-
terial performance of coatings. Therefore, we conducted three repeated
fouling-antibacterial cycles to simulate the long-term service scenario
of the coatings. Following three fouling-antibacterial cycles, the
anti-adhesion rates remained high: 99.27% for D-CN10, 100% for
Fig. 7. Antibacterial and anti-algal activity of D-COF/CNx. (a) Schematic illustration of the anti-biofouling test under simulated high-fouling conditions. (b) and (c)
E. coli colony count photographs and corresponding bacterial counts in solution on samples under high (108 CFU mL–1) and low (103 CFU mL–1) fouling conditions,
corresponding to ➀in Fig. (a). (d) Antibacterial efficiency of the samples relative to the glass control, representing the intrinsic antibacterial capability. (e) Pho-
tographs of E. coli colony counts in the solution (non-adherent bacteria, corresponding to ➁in Fig. (a) and on the surface (adherent bacteria, representing biofilm-
forming bacteria, corresponding to ➂in Fig. (a) under light conditions. (f) Viable E. coli counts remaining at positions ➁and ➂on samples under light/dark
conditions. (g) Relative antibacterial efficiency of the samples compared to the glass control. (h) Adhesion status and morphological features of bacteria and
microalgae (Nitzschia closterium f. minutissima) on the sample surface (scale bar: a) 1 μm, b) 5 μm). (i) Absorbance of the culture medium after co-culturing
microalgae with the samples, representing the quantity of unattached microalgae cells. (j) The coverage ratios of biofilm (bacteria and microalgae) on the sam-
ple surface. (k) Diverse antibacterial mechanisms of D-COF/CNx under dark and light conditions. (l) Radar chart integrating sample degradation and antibacterial
performance. (Error bars indicate the standard deviation in three parallel antibacterial and anti-algal tests).
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
11

D-COF/CN5, and 100% for D-COF/CN10, respectively (Figs. 7g and S39,
Supporting Information). Notably, it is shown that self-renewal of the
coating ensures the continuous exposure of photocatalysts, eliminating
the “deactivation” of the anti-fouling agents caused by sediment
coverage in conventional immobilization methods.
Microalgal adhesion, another key step in biofouling, was evaluated
using Nitzschia closterium f. minutissima (~2 × 108 cells mL–1) in arti-
ficial seawater. The culture medium for D-COF10, D-COF/CN5, and D-
COF/CN10 showed higher absorbance than blank controls (glass and
EP), with D-COF/CN5 reaching 0.15 a.u., approximately 1.2 times that
of controls (Fig. 7i). The elevated concentration of non-adherent cells
indicated effective suppression of microalgal attachment, with no
apparent toxic effects from the degradation products on microalgal
viability. SEM analysis revealed dense bacterial-algal biofilms on glass
and EP (coverages >40.19% and 88.63%), while composite coatings
exhibited only sporadic attachment (<1.65%) (Figs. 7h(b) and S41,
Supporting Information). D-COF/CN5 and D-COF/CN10 showed the
lowest algal adhesion, with anti-attachment rates of 99.85% and
99.89%, respectively (Fig. 7j).
3.6. Anti-fouling mechanism of D-COF/CNx
To overcome the light-dependent limitation of conventional photo-
catalytic antifouling coatings, the specially designed D-COF/CNx dem-
onstrates adaptive multifunctional anti-fouling behavior, effectively
operating under both light and dark conditions (Fig. 7k). In darkness,
hydrolysis of the poly-Schiff base matrix releases degradation products
that actively remove adhered bacteria and microalgae from the coating
surface, reminiscent of biological molting in corals and reptiles. The
degradable
poly-Schiff
base
polymer
provides
a
crucial
light-
independent antifouling function by releasing products that suppress
microbial attachment and viability in darkness. Under light irradiation,
the exposed and anchored COF/g-C3N4 heterojunction acts as a photo-
catalytic platform, generating ROS that considerably impair bacterial
activity (Fig. 8a). Concurrently, ROS enhances the self-renewal rate of
the coating, promoting continuous exposure of fresh photocatalytic sites
and accelerating the biofouling-release rate (Fig. 8b). Thus, D-COF/CNx
achieves robust antifouling performance with or without light through a
dual
biofouling
resistance
strategy
that
integrates
the
dynamic
Fig. 8. The anti-fouling mechanism of D-COF/CNx. (a) Schematic illustration of the continuous degradation of the D-COF/CNx surface and activation of photo-
catalytic bactericidal activity. (b) The ROS generated by COF/g-C3N4 can also regulate (and promote) the degradation of DSP into smaller molecules. (c) The four
anti-fouling mechanisms demonstrated by the D-COF/CNx composite.
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
12

self-renewing capability of the degradable poly-Schiff base in aqueous
environments with photocatalytic antibacterial activity under illumi-
nation. A comprehensive evaluation based on multiple parameters,
including self-renewal rate, intrinsic antibacterial activity, anti-algal
adhesion performance, sustained antibacterial efficiency, and synergis-
tic antibacterial rate, identified D-COF/CN10 and D-COF/CN5 as the top-
performing coatings (Fig. 7l). Notably, D-COF/CN5 achieved exceptional
performance with only 5 wt% photocatalyst loading.
Even under high-fouling pressure from bacteria and microalgae, D-
COF/CNx actively eliminates adhered microorganisms through the dual
anti-biofouling strategy (Fig. 8c). The anti-fouling mechanism illus-
trated in Fig. 8c involves three synergistic steps. In the first step, the self-
renewal process, driven by hydrolysis and ROS-accelerated degradation,
actively releases the fouling-adhered surface layer (I). This then exposes
fresh photocatalytic sites, which generate ROS under light. The ROS not
only eradicate residual and stubbornly attached microorganisms but
also further promote the self-renewal process by accelerating polymer
matrix degradation (II, III). Finally, continuous surface self-renewal
prevents the accumulation of biological deposits (thereby inhibiting
biofilm formation) and avoids the occlusion of active sites, thereby
ensuring long-term antifouling efficacy (IV). Therefore, during the cycle
of biofouling, the D-COF/CNx reaches a fouling-free surface by inte-
grating multiple anti-fouling mechanisms, providing robust, durable,
and efficient anti-fouling protection for both stationary and mobile de-
vice structures.
4. Conclusions
In summary, we developed a superior anti-fouling coating (D-COF/
CNx) by integrating a COF/g-C3N4 heterojunction with a degradable
poly-Schiff base polymer. This coating efficiently inhibits bacterial and
microalgae adhesion while realizing sufficient and sustained exposure of
photocatalytic active sites. The key innovation lies in the synergistic
combination
of
high-efficiency
photocatalysis
and
dynamic
self-
renewal, forming a dual-functional anti-fouling interface with photo-
catalytic antibacterial and active biofouling-release. The 1D/2D COF/g-
C3N4 heterojunction, synthesized via in-situ growth, exhibits signifi-
cantly enhanced light absorption, excitation efficiency, and excited-state
stability. This is mainly due to the successful construction of the IEF and
the novel CTC, which strongly facilitates the separation and migration of
photo-generated charges and suppresses charge recombination. Even
under low concentration (2 μg mL–1) and weak light (15 mW cm–2), it
generated substantial ROS (O2⋅-, ⋅OH, ⋅OOH) that potently compromised
bacterial integrity. Similar to biological molting, the D-COF/CNx
continuously exposes and anchors photocatalytic active sites on the
surface by “water-triggered and ROS-responsive” surface self-renewal,
thereby enhancing interfacial light utilization efficiency and active
biofouling-release capability. This strategy effectively addresses the
challenge of low photocatalytic activity and insufficient catalyst expo-
sure in conventional photocatalytic coatings, achieving nearly 100%
catalyst availability. Notably, the D-COF/CN5, containing only 5 wt%
photocatalyst,
demonstrated
exceptional
performance
in
high-
biofouling environments (108 to 109 CFU mL–1), almost 100% surface
antibacterial rate and 99.85% anti-algal adhesion rate. With an esti-
mated service life of 4.92 years at 100 μm thickness, it also maintains
outstanding cyclic antibacterial stability and mechanical durability
during long-term degradation, overcoming the limitation of active-site
deactivation in recurrent fouling. This work establishes a robust foun-
dation for the design of superior and long-term anti-fouling coatings and
offers a strategic reference for developing photocatalytic systems with
sufficient and sustainable exposure of active sites.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Saijun Wu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft,
Validation, Investigation, Data curation. Minglong Yan: Writing –
review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology,
Investigation,
Formal
analysis,
Conceptualization.
Wenjie
Zhao:
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Methodology,
Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the “Pioneer” and “Leading Goose” R&D
Program of Zhejiang (2023C03013), the Tianjin Science and Technology
Program (25YFYSHZ00150 and 24YFZCSN00070), the National Science
Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of China (52425501).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nanoms.2025.11.013.
Data availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript and SI. Detailed data are
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
References
[1] H. Hong, A. Deng, Y. Tang, Z. Liu, How to identify biofouling species in marine and
freshwater, Biofouling 40 (2024) 130–152.
[2] M. Yan, S. Wu, Y. Zhong, Y. Wu, Y. Wu, X. Lan, W. Zhao, Constructing self-
renewing silicone-hydrogel hybrid coatings with integrated fouling resistant/
release/killing mode toward superior biofouling defense, Small 21 (2025)
2504089.
[3] I. Valchev, A. Coraddu, M. Kalikatzarakis, R. Geertsma, L. Oneto, Numerical
methods for monitoring and evaluating the biofouling state and effects on vessels'
hull and propeller performance: a review, Ocean. Eng. 251 (2022) 110883.
[4] H.-C. Flemming, Microbial biofouling: unsolved problems, insufficient approaches,
and possible solutions, in: H.-C. Flemming, J. Wingender, U. Szewzyk (Eds.),
Biofilm Highlights, vol. 5, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011,
pp. 81–109.
[5] I. Mu~noz, M.J. Martínez Bueno, A. Agüera, A.R. Fernandez-Alba, Environmental
and human health risk assessment of organic micro-pollutants occurring in a
Spanish marine fish farm, Environ. Pollut. 158 (2010) 1809–1816.
[6] M. Yan, X. Lan, W. Zhao, Self-renewal poly-schiff base/gallium-based liquid metal
composite coatings triggered via water for superior antimicrobial performance
under water, Prog. Org. Coating 186 (2024) 108075.
[7] C. Song, W. Cui, Review of underwater ship hull cleaning technologies, J. Mar. Sci.
Appl. 19 (2020) 415–429.
[8] L. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Yu, F. Gao, Z. Shen, X. Zhang, S. Ge, J. Liu, Z. Gu, C. Chen, An
all-organic semiconductor C3N4/PDINH heterostructure with advanced
antibacterial photocatalytic therapy activity, Adv. Mater. 31 (2019) 1901965.
[9] X. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, Z. Cui, Y. Sun, B. Hou, Fabrication of InVO4/
AgVO3 heterojunctions with enhanced photocatalytic antifouling efficiency under
visible-light, Appl. Catal. B Environ. 220 (2018) 57–66.
[10] A. Zhou, S. Li, W. Sand, X. Wang, Y. Geng, X. Ban, Z. Jin, R. Zhang, Self-growing
composite photocatalytic materials for surface self-renewal of marine antifouling
coatings, Separ. Purif. Technol. 354 (2025) 129387.
[11] L. Yue, M. Tao, L. Xu, C. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Cao, J.C. White, Z. Wang, Size-
dependent photocatalytic inactivation of microcystis aeruginosa and degradation
of microcystin by a copper metal organic framework, J. Hazard Mater. 462 (2024)
132799.
[12] B. Ran, L. Ran, Z. Wang, J. Liao, D. Li, K. Chen, W. Cai, J. Hou, X. Peng,
Photocatalytic antimicrobials: principles, design strategies, and applications,
Chem. Rev. 123 (2023) 12371–12430.
[13] F. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Li, L. Shi, L. Yuan, Y. Ren, H.C. van der Mei, Y. Liu, Single-atom
Cu anchored on carbon nitride as a bifunctional glucose oxidase and peroxidase
nanozyme for antibacterial therapy, ACS Nano 19 (2025) 10816–10828.
[14] L. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Yu, F. Gao, Z. Shen, X. Zhang, S. Ge, J. Liu, Z. Gu, C. Chen,
An all-organic semiconductor C3N4/PDINH heterostructure with advanced
antibacterial photocatalytic therapy activity, Adv. Mater. 31 (2019) 1901965.
[15] Z. Liu, M. Li, Q. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Huang, Q. Zeng, X. Li, K. Rao, J. Ning, M. Zhao, B. Li,
F. Li, H. Liu, S. Zhou, B. Shu, B. Yang, J. Zheng, Y. Liao, Eradicating fungal biofilm-
based infections by ultrasound-assisted semiconductor sensitized upconversion
photodynamic therapy, Nat. Commun. 16 (2025) 6499.
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
13

[16] W. Zhang, L. Chen, S. Dai, C. Zhao, C. Ma, L. Wei, M. Zhu, S.Y. Chong, H. Yang,
L. Liu, Y. Bai, M. Yu, Y. Xu, X.-W. Zhu, Q. Zhu, S. An, R.S. Sprick, M.A. Little,
X. Wu, S. Jiang, Y. Wu, Y.-B. Zhang, H. Tian, W.-H. Zhu, A.I. Cooper, Reconstructed
covalent organic frameworks, Nature 604 (2022) 72–79.
[17] F. Hao, C. Yang, X. Lv, F. Chen, S. Wang, G. Zheng, Q. Han, Photo-driven quasi-
topological transformation exposing highly active nitrogen cation sites for
enhanced photocatalytic H2O2 production, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62 (2023)
e202315456.
[18] W. Weng, J. Guo, The effect of enantioselective chiral covalent organic frameworks
and cysteine sacrificial donors on photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Nat.
Commun. 13 (2022) 5768.
[19] J. Liu, C. Tuo, W.-Y. Xiao, M.-Y. Qi, Y. Yusran, Z. Wang, H. Li, C. Guo, J. Song,
S. Qiu, Y.-J. Xu, Q. Fang, Constructing donor-acceptor covalent organic
frameworks for highly efficient H2O2 photosynthesis coupled with oxidative
organic transformations, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 64 (2025) e202416240.
[20] Q. Pan, M. Abdellah, Y. Cao, W. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Meng, Q. Zhou, Q. Zhao, X. Yan,
Z. Li, H. Cui, H. Cao, W. Fang, D.A. Tanner, M. Abdel-Hafiez, Y. Zhou, T. Pullerits,
S.E. Canton, H. Xu, K. Zheng, Ultrafast charge transfer dynamics in 2D covalent
organic Frameworks/re-complex hybrid photocatalyst, Nat. Commun. 13 (2022)
845.
[21] W. Zhong, A. Meng, Y. Su, H. Yu, P. Han, J. Yu, Achieving free-electron transfer
reversal and dz2-Orbital occupancy modulation on core-shell nis@au cocatalysts
for highly selective H2O2 photosynthesis, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 64 (2025)
e202425038.
[22] Z. Chen, G. Ding, Z. Wang, Y. Xiao, X. Liu, L. Chen, C. Li, H. Huang, G. Liao,
Precision molecular engineering of carbon nitride for efficient and selective
photoreduction of CO2 to C2H6 in pure water, Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 (2025)
2423213.
[23] Y. Zeng, H. Qin, F. Wu, J. Gao, W. Li, J. Li, S. Wu, P. Xu, C. Lai, Z. Wang, Oxygen
doping enables tailored Built-In electric fields in FeOCl/g-C3N4 heterojunctions for
enhanced peroxymonosulfate activation, Adv. Funct. Mater. 35 (2025) 2423664.
[24] S. Wu, M. Yan, Y. Zhong, J. Cheng, W. Zhao, COF nanotubes/2D nanosheets
heterojunction for superior photocatalytic bactericidal activity even at low
concentration and weak light, J. Hazard Mater. 492 (2025) 138111.
[25] P. Ghazanfaripanah, M.R. Farahpour, Z.G. Tabatabaei, A novel chitosan hydrogel
nanocomposite, embedded with polydopamine-modified graphitic carbon nitride,
for accelerating the healing process of infected wounds, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 304
(2025) 140900.
[26] C. Sun, Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Luo, H. Zheng, X. Li, L. Chen, F. Li,
Adsorption–photocatalysis synergistic removal of perfluoroalkyl/polyfluoroalkyl
substances by reusable chitin/polyethylene imine/O-g-C3N4 sponges in water
environments, Chem. Eng. J. 511 (2025) 162006.
[27] Z.-Y. Hu, T. Liu, Y.-R. Yang, A.K. An, K.M. Liew, W.-W. Li, Binder-free
immobilization of photocatalyst on membrane surface for efficient photocatalytic
H2O2 production and water decontamination, Nano-Micro Lett. 17 (2025) 301.
[28] M. Wang, C. Ma, G. Zhang, Dynamic surface antifouling materials, Chin. J. Chem.
41 (2023) 2881–2888.
[29] W. Liu, M. Yan, W. Zhao, Antibacterial-renew dual-function anti-biofouling
strategy: self-assembled Schiff-base metal complex coatings built from natural
products, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 629 (2023) 496–507.
[30] M. Yan, Y. Guo, W. Zhao, Cross-linked but self-healing and entirely degradable
poly-schiff base metal complex materials for potential anti-biofouling, Adv. Mater.
Interfac. 9 (2022) 2101920.
[31] S. Wu, M. Yan, Y. Wu, Y. Wu, X. Lan, J. Cheng, W. Zhao, Designing a photocatalytic
and self-renewed g-C3N4 nanosheet/poly-schiff base composite coating towards
long-term biofouling resistance, Mater. Horiz. 11 (2024) 4438–4453.
[32] Y. Guo, M. Yan, W. Zhao, Cinnamaldehyde grafted porous aerogel-organ gel liquid
infused surface for achieving difunctional long-term dynamic antifouling,
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 653 (2024) 833–843.
[33] S. Kandambeth, A. Mallick, B. Lukose, M.V. Mane, T. Heine, R. Banerjee,
Construction of crystalline 2D covalent organic frameworks with remarkable
chemical (Acid/Base) stability via a combined reversible and irreversible route,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 (2012) 19524–19527.
[34] N. Lazaar, S. Wu, S. Qin, A. Hamrouni, B. Bikash Sarma, D.E. Doronkin, N. Denisov,
H. Lachheb, P. Schmuki, Single-atom catalysts on C3N4: minimizing single atom Pt
loading for maximized photocatalytic hydrogen production efficiency, Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 64 (2025) e202416453.
[35] Z. Guo, D. Jin, H. Li, X. Zhu, T. Zheng, Z. Xu, Y. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Song, D. Wang,
X. Yan, X. Ma, Liquid metal amplified charge separation in photocatalytic micro/
nanomotors for antibacterial therapy, ACS Nano 19 (2025) 20037–20050.
[36] Y. Li, Y. Chen, Q. Wang, Y. Ye, J. Zeng, Z. Liu, Realizing C–C coupling via
accumulation of C1 intermediates within dual-vacancy-induced dipole-limited
domain field to propel photoreduction of CO2-to-C2 fuel, Adv. Mater. 37 (2025)
2414994.
[37] F. Chu, G. Hai, D. Zhao, S. Liu, Y. Hu, G. Zhao, B. Peng, G. Wang, X. Huang,
Regulating keto–enol tautomerism of β-Ketoenamine covalent–organic frameworks
for photocatalytic oxidative coupling of amines, ACS Catal. 13 (2023)
13167–13180.
[38] H. Li, Y. Li, X. Lv, C. Liu, N. Zhang, J. Zang, P. Yue, Y. Gao, C. Liu, Y. Li, A covalent
organic framework as photocatalyst for smart conversion between photooxidation
and photoreduction and H2O2 production in full pH environment, Adv. Mater. 37
(2025) 2415126.
[39] C. Sun, Y. Han, H. Guo, R. Zhao, Y. Liu, Z. Lin, Z. Xiao, Z. Sun, M. Luo, S. Guo,
Proton reservoir in covalent organic framework compensating oxygen reduction
reaction enhances hydrogen peroxide photosynthesis, Adv. Mater. 37 (2025)
2502990.
[40] E. Giaouris, E. Heir, M. Hebraud, N. Chorianopoulos, S. Langsrud, T. Møretrø,
O. Habimana, M. Desvaux, S. Renier, G.-J. Nychas, Attachment and biofilm
formation by foodborne bacteria in meat processing environments: causes,
implications, role of bacterial interactions and control by alternative novel
methods, Meat Sci. 97 (2014) 298–309.
[41] A. Bridier, R. Briandet, V. Thomas, F. Dubois-Brissonnet, Resistance of bacterial
biofilms to disinfectants: a review, Biofouling 27 (2011) 1017–1032.
[42] L. Chen, J. Duan, P. Du, W. Sun, B. Lai, W. Liu, Accurate identification of radicals
by in-situ electron paramagnetic resonance in ultraviolet-based homogenous
advanced oxidation processes, Water Res. 221 (2022) 118747.
[43] J. Qiu, K. Meng, Y. Zhang, B. Cheng, J. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Yu, COF/In2S3 S-Scheme
photocatalyst with enhanced light absorption and H2O2-Production activity and fs-
TA investigation, Adv. Mater. 36 (2024) 2400288.
[44] C. Cheng, J. Zhang, B. Zhu, G. Liang, L. Zhang, J. Yu, Verifying the charge-transfer
mechanism in S-Scheme heterojunctions using femtosecond transient absorption
spectroscopy, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62 (2023) e202218688.
[45] D.H.K. Murthy, H. Matsuzaki, Z. Wang, Y. Suzuki, T. Hisatomi, K. Seki, Y. Inoue,
K. Domen, A. Furube, Origin of the overall water splitting activity of Ta3N5
revealed by ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy, Chem. Sci. 10 (2019)
5353–5362.
[46] Y. Chen, A. Lu, Y. Li, L. Zhang, H.Y. Yip, H. Zhao, T. An, P.-K. Wong, Naturally
occurring sphalerite as a novel cost-effective photocatalyst for bacterial
disinfection under visible light, Environ. Sci. Technol. 45 (2011) 5689–5695.
[47] P.-Y. Qian, A. Cheng, R. Wang, R. Zhang, Marine biofilms: diversity, interactions
and biofouling, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 20 (2022) 671–684.
[48] H.-J. Kim, J.S. Park, T.-K. Lee, D. Kang, J.-H. Kang, K. Shin, S.W. Jung, Dynamics of
marine bacterial biofouling communities after initial Alteromonas genovensis
biofilm attachment to anti-fouling paint substrates, Mar. Pollut. Bull. 172 (2021)
112895.
S. Wu et al.
Nano Materials Science xxx (xxxx) xxx
14