Advanced Materials
www.advmat.de
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Self-Evolving Hydrogel Dressing Temporally Accelerates
Infected Diabetic Wound Healing
Chenyang Liu1
Huichen Zhao2
Junmin Qian1
Mofan Xiao2
Jinlei Wang3
Yaping Wang2
Xinyu Li2
Bei Han4
Zhuanli Bai5
Weijun Xu1
Aili Suo2
1State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
2Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
3School of Clinical Medicine, Xi’an Medical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
4School of Public
Health, Health Science Center of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
5Department of Plastic and Aesthetic Maxillofacial Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
Correspondence: Junmin Qian (jmqian@mail.xjtu.edu.cn)
Weijun Xu (weijun.xu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn)
Aili Suo (ailisuo@mail.xjtu.edu.cn)
Received: 22 November 2025
Revised: 3 April 2026
Accepted: 16 April 2026
Keywords: diabetic wound | dual dynamic hyaluronic acid/poly(aspartic acid) hydrogel | Fe3N/Fe3O4 nanoheterojunction | silver nanozymes | temporal niche
regulation
ABSTRACT
Diabetic wounds usually involve disorganized redox and immune homeostasis and are prone to bacterial infection, often
leading to delayed healing and worse outcomes. However, existing therapeutic strategies cannot simultaneously achieve potent
antibacterial action and temporal microenvironment modulation. Herein, a self-evolving hyaluronan/poly(aspartic acid) hydrogel
dressing integrating in situ Ag+-to-Ag nanozyme conversion function and hydrolyzable Fe3N/Fe3O4 nanoheterojunction (nHJ) is
presented to meet the intricate requirements of consecutive healing stages. At infectious inflammatory stage, nHJ-based self-
oxygenated photodynamic and photothermal effects synergize with Ag+ to combat multidrug-resistant biofilm-forming bacteria.
Subsequently, Ag nanozymes with superoxide dismutase/catalase-like activities continuously scavenge reactive oxygen species
while generating oxygen, facilitating macrophage M1-to-M2 repolarization and ensuing inflammatory-to-proliferative phase
transition. Accumulated ammonia enhances cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis. The dressing demonstrates exceptional
biocompatibility and bioactivity in accelerating Staphylococcus aureus-infected full-thickness cutaneous wound healing in a
diabetic rat model, as validated by hemostatic, broad-spectrum antibacterial, antioxidative and immunomodulatory abilities,
enhanced oxygenation and cell proliferation, and extensive collagen deposition, vascularization and re-epithelialization. RNA-seq
results further reveal the activation of multiple pro-healing signaling axes. Consequently, this platform offers a powerful dynamic
strategy of realizing robust antibacterial activity and active temporal niche modulation to guide the healing of infected diabetic
wounds.
1
Introduction
Diabetes mellitus affects approximately 589 million people
globally, with about 25% of patients suffering from cutaneous
wounds [1, 2]. Diabetic wounds, characterized by macrophage
dysfunction, redox imbalance, and angiogenesis impairment, are
one of the most intractable diabetic complications, posing sub-
stantial social and economic burdens [3, 4]. Furthermore, open
wounds are extremely susceptible to bacterial infection owing
to their hyperglycemic microenvironment and dysregulated
Chenyang Liu and Huichen Zhao contributed equally to this work.
© 2026 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Advanced Materials, 2026; 38:e23302
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202523302
1 of 22

immunity, severely disturbing orchestrated healing progression:
hemorrhage, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling [5, 6].
In serious cases, tissue necrosis, amputation and even death
occur, with a 5-year mortality rate exceeding 30% [7]. Existing
therapeutic strategies, such as offloading, debridement, and
antiinfection, cannot achieve satisfactory efficacies because of
blurred pathogenesis and undesired side effects [8, 9]. Besides,
increasingly serious population aging and rising obesity rate
are exacerbating the prevalence of diabetic wounds [10]. These
all manifest that the effective management of infected diabetic
wounds remains a central challenge. Consequently, developing
synergistic intervention strategies integrating potent antibacterial
and temporal niche-modulation functions is urgently needed.
Diabetic wound infections frequently involve bacterial biofilms,
and anti-bacterial therapy seems essential. Antibiotics are pre-
ferred for combating biofilm-forming bacteria and have saved
innumerable lives [11]. However, their actual therapeutic effi-
cacies face the challenge of multidrug-resistant bacteria which
make antibiotics hardly exert effects by enzymatically inactivat-
ing antibiotics and reducing membrane permeability to impede
the penetration of antibiotics [12, 13]. Even worse, upon biofilm
formation, they aggravate multidrug resistance and induce per-
sistent inflammation, often leading to therapeutic failure. This
underscores the imminency of developing alternative antibac-
terial tactics. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as singlet
oxygen (1O2), hydroxyl radicals (⋅OH) and superoxide anion
radicals (⋅O2
−), which are usually generated by photodynamic,
sonodynamic and chemodynamic reactions and nanozymes, have
garnered special interest [14]. ROS offer unique bactericidal
advantages, including broad-spectrum activity, multiple mecha-
nisms and low resistance propensity, and function by irreversibly
damaging bacterial membranes and internal biomolecules [15].
Typically, photodynamic therapy (PDT) demonstrates reliable
and controllable antibacterial effects [3]. However, conventional
organic photosensitizers face challenges, such as complicated
synthesis, single type of ROS, and declining activity. Oppositely,
inorganic photosensitizers, especially heterojunctions and het-
erostructures, possess prominent ROS-generating efficiency and
stability [16]. Nevertheless, there are still concerns regarding
biosafety and biocompatibility. Rare reports have revealed the
great promise of metal nitride nanozymes for tumor and infection
treatments [17, 18]. Inspired by this, we assume that biocompati-
ble and biodegradable iron nitride (Fe3N)-based heterojunction
is a powerful and biosafe photosensitizer that can generate
multiple ROS to combat bacteria and simultaneously promote
wound healing. Such a strategy has not been explored to date.
On the other hand, the germicidal efficacy of ROS is severely
restrained by short diffusion distance and low permeable bac-
terial membranes. Fortunately, Ag+, the strongest antibacterial
metallic ions, can significantly increase bacterial membrane
permeability by directly destroying membranes [19]. This can
not only realize unexpected germicidal effect but make bacteria
highly susceptible to other treatments. Besides, ROS are easily
depleted by glutathione (GSH) overexpressed in wound beds [20].
Thus, exploiting a strategy integrating Fe3N heterojunction-based
PDT, Ag+ and GSH depletion holds great promise in eradicating
biofilm-forming bacteria.
An ignored but important dilemma is that both ROS and Ag+
are double-edged swords for infected diabetic wound healing [21].
High levels of ROS and Ag+ exhibit favorable potent antibacterial
activities, but they not only inevitably inflict direct damage on
healthy mammalian cells but aggravate oxidative stress elicited
by dysfunctional macrophages, thus potentially impairing wound
healing [7]. Therefore, the prompt removal of ROS and Ag+
post-antibacterial treatment is crucial to maximize therapeutic
efficacy. However, utilizing a single system to realize the precise
temporal control of massive ROS/Ag+ production for antibacteria
and timely ROS/Ag+ removal for pro-healing remains extremely
challenging. For ROS modulation, several approaches like PDT
have achieved on-demand ROS generation. Concurrently, despite
natural antioxidants, artificial nanozymes, and reductive gases
have been proven to scavenge ROS [22], they cannot achieve
on-demand ROS elimination. Hence, it is vital to integrate on-
demand ROS generation and elimination bifunctions into a
single system to precisely regulate the redox state in wounds.
Recent studies demonstrate the antioxidant, proangiogenic and
anti-inflammatory functions of Ag nanozymes with superoxide
dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) activities [23]. Furthermore,
low levels of Ag+ may promote fibroblast proliferation and re-
epithelialization [19]. These emphasize the necessity of timely
Ag+-to-Ag nanozymes conversion. Based on this inspiration,
we propose an approach to achieve in situ conversion of Ag+
to Ag nanozymes in wounds. This strategy not only ensures
potent antibacterial performance but reduces cytotoxicity by
balancing ROS/Ag+ and Ag nanozymes. Another vital challenge
for infected diabetic wound healing is persistent inflammation
governed by M1 macrophages, which prevents the transition to
proliferation and remodeling phases [24]. Meanwhile, bacterial
infection frequently occurs and accordingly M1 macrophages
oversecrete ROS (mainly ⋅O2
−and H2O2) and inflammatory
cytokines [25], resulting in a vicious cycle of infection and
inflammation, thus impeding tissue-repairing M2 macrophages
repolarization [11]. Prolonged immune imbalance has devastating
effects on wound healing, including impaired neovascularization,
collagen deposition and re-epithelialization as well as poor skin
appearance. Given the decisive role of macrophages in initiating
tissue regeneration [26], timely inducing phenotypic transition
is essential for accelerating wound healing. Thereby, exploiting
rational tactics that can simultaneously achieve macrophage
reprogramming, antibacteria and antioxidation is significant.
Infected diabetic wound healing is an exceedingly complicated
pathophysiological process, and it frequently cannot progress
in an orderly and timely manner. A significant interference in
any stage will have a knock-on effect on subsequent stages,
eventually ending with delayed healing and even non-healing.
Moreover, diabetic wounds are typically covered with inflamma-
tory exudates and biofilms, preventing therapeutic agents from
reaching targeted tissues. Hence, developing well-orchestrated
versatile therapeutic strategies adapting to the niches at distinct
healing stages is desirable yet challenging. Hydrogels, espe-
cially dynamic hydrogels, are prevalent in managing wounds
because of their outstanding advantages [27, 28], such as exudate
absorption, shape adaptability, and biocompatibility. Regrettably,
pristine hydrogels are largely used for passive wound protection
and moisturizing and usually lack biofunctionalities required
for wound healing, including antibacteria, antioxidation, anti-
inflammation, and hypoxia alleviation. Therefore, it is essential to
integrate hydrogels with biofunctional agents. However, existing
strategies primarily focus on either incorporation of individual
2 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 1
Schematic illustration of FAHP hydrogel formation and its mechanisms for promoting infected diabetic wound healing.
functions or disordered copresence of multiple functions [29].
They have only limited success owing to their inability to tempo-
rally adapt to dynamic wound healing process [30], highlighting
the indispensability of time-phased comprehensive therapeutic
interventions of wounds when multiple functions are applied.
Besides, compared with delivery of premade nanozymes, in situ-
forming nanozymes inside hydrogels are more desirable owing
to the circumvention of complex preparation and dispersion
processes [31]. Despite great progress in passively accommodat-
ing wound microenvironments, intelligent hydrogels that can
actively and temporally guide the niches across consecutive
healing stages have been scarcely explored.
Herein, we present a self-evolving hydrogel dressing as a
bactericidal and temporal niche-modulating platform for syn-
ergistic infectious diabetic wound therapy (Figure 1). This
dressing (FAHP) is constructed from hydrazided hyaluronic acid
(HHA), aldehyde poly(aspartic acid) (APA), Ag+, and hydrolyz-
able Fe3N/Fe3O4 nanoheterojunction (FNO nHJ) photosensitizer
through synchronous coordination/Schiff base dual dynamic
crosslinking process. The “self-evolving” nature enables the
FAHP hydrogel to dynamically adapt its therapeutic functions to
the changing needs of wound microenvironment across different
healing stages. Specifically, at the initial stage, rapid hemostasis
may be achieved through the combined action of hydrogel’s liquid
absorption and Ag+/aldehyde groups’ procoagulant effects, as
validated using rat liver injury model. In the case of bacterial
infection, the nHJ realizes on-demand self-oxygenated PDT (1O2
and ⋅O2
−) and hyperthermia, which synergize with Ag+ to erad-
icate drug-resistant bacteria and disrupt biofilms. Additionally,
the hydrogel’s disulfide bonds deplete GSH, further enhancing
antibacterial ability. Notably, hyaluronic acid/poly(aspartic acid)
hydrogel mediates the gradual reduction of Ag+ to Ag nanozymes
in situ [32]. In the late stage of inflammation, cumulative
Ag nanozymes eliminate various ROS and produce oxygen via
cascade reactions, especially with the assistance of hyperther-
mia, thus alleviating oxidative stress and hypoxia. Meanwhile,
ammonia generated not only stimulates endothelial angio-
genesis and fibroblast/keratinocyte proliferation but impedes
Ag nanozymes to release Ag+ by neutralizing weakly acidic
wound niche [33–35]. Restored redox homeostasis together with
iron oxide promotes macrophage M2 polarization [36]. These
Advanced Materials, 2026
3 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

compounding effects forward the establishment of favorable
pro-healing microenvironment and smooth inflammation-to-
proliferation phase transition. Impressively, our dressing sub-
stantially accelerates infectious full-thickness cutaneous wound
healing in a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)-
infected diabetic rat model through orchestrated temporal regu-
lation of dressing functions. Transcriptomic sequencing analysis
reveals the multiple pro-healing mechanisms. Overall, our novel
concept of active and temporal comprehensive therapeutic strat-
egy proposes a new horizon for integrated solution to the chal-
lenges of hemorrhage, oxidative stress, bacterial infection, and
immune dysfunction in infected diabetic wounds, distinguished
from existing strategies that mainly regulate single healing stage.
2
Results and Discussion
2.1
Synthesis and Characterization of FNO nHJ
Heterojunction shows great promise in biomedical applications
owing to its exceptional catalytic activity and stability. It is
noteworthy that certain metal nitrides can undergo hydrolysis to
produce metal nitride/metal oxide heterojunctions while releas-
ing ammonia. Given the potential of Fe3N and iron(II, III) oxide
(Fe3O4) in infected wound healing, herein we present a facile
saline-assisted hydrolysis method to synthesize FNO nHJ.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observation indicates
that both raw Fe3N and as-synthesized Fe3N/Fe3O4 nanoparticles
display noticeable agglomeration (Figure S1). Moreover, they
exhibit superparamagnetism, with Fe3N/Fe3O4 nanoparticles
having a higher saturation magnetization than Fe3N nanoparti-
cles (Figure S2). This may be related to the enhanced nanoparticle
agglomeration. To resolve this problem, by means of an ultrasonic
probe method, uniformly dispersed spherical FNO nHJ particles
were obtained with an average diameter of 79.7 ± 30.0 nm
(Figure 2A,B; Figure S3a), which is in close agreement with the
result determined by dynamic light scattering (Figure S3b). High-
resolution TEM (HRTEM) image (Figure 2C) shows lattice fringes
with spacings of 0.242 and 0.175 nm, which correspond to the (222)
and (422) crystal planes of Fe3O4, respectively. Meanwhile, the
interplanar spacings of 0.221 and 0.239 nm match the (002) and
(110) crystal planes of Fe3N. By extracting greyscale information
from the HRTEM image, the crystal surface information of FNO
nHJ is visually displayed. EDS mapping further demonstrates the
compositions of FNO nHJ (Figure 2D; Figure S4). The Fe, N, and
O are uniformly interspersed throughout the particles, indicating
partial oxidization of Fe3N to form Fe3O4.
The crystalline and phase information of Fe3N and FNO nHJ
were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Figure 2E). Fe3N
exhibits multiple diffraction peaks at 37.703◦, 40.928◦, 43.084◦,
56.787◦, and 67.883◦that match well with the characteristic (110),
(002), (-1-11), (-1-12), and (300) planes of Fe3N (PDF#72-2125). In
contrast, FNO nHJ not only retains the diffraction peaks of Fe3N
but also displays additional peaks at 30.049◦, 35.363◦, 56.503◦,
62.552◦, and 89.591◦, which correspond to the (220), (311), (511),
(440), and (731) planes of Fe3O4 (PDF#99-0073). Further analysis
of the relationship between saline hydrolysis duration and the
oxidation ratio of Fe3N was conducted (Figure S5). After 12 h of
hydrolysis, approximately 6.8% of Fe3N was oxidized to Fe3O4,
whereas after 24 h, an oxidation conversion of 18.8% for Fe3N was
observed.
High-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was
used to determine the chemical composition and elemental
valence states. In the N 1s spectrum of Fe3N (Figure S6), a
distinct Fe─N peak is observed at 399.3 eV [37]. Following the
transformation of Fe3N into FNO nHJ, the proportion of Fe─N
decreases from 72.4% to 50.7%. The Fe in Fe3N exists in both Fe(II)
and Fe(III) states, with a ratio of 68.5: 31.5 (Figure 2F), while the
ratio in FNO nHJ shifts to 60.5: 39.5. The retention of a significant
amount of Fe(II) is crucial for ensuring the effective Fenton
reaction activity of FNO nHJ. Furthermore, Fe─N bonding is
observed at 705.6 eV in both Fe3N and FNO nHJ, indicating
the retention of Fe3N component [38]. Compared with Fe3N,
the O 1s spectrum of FNO nHJ exhibits a lattice oxygen peak
at 530.1 eV (Figure 2G), which supports the formation of Fe3O4
[39]. Notably, during the hydrolysis of Fe3N to FNO nHJ, all
peaks in the Fe 2p spectrum exhibit slight negative shifts (ΔBE ≈
−0.28 eV), while those in the O 1s spectrum display pronounced
positive shifts (ΔBE ≈+0.86 eV). These results indicate electron
transfer between Fe3N and Fe3O4, confirming the formation of a
heterojunction.
UV–vis absorption spectra (Figure 2H) show that Fe3N exhibits
relatively uniform absorption across the 200–1000 nm range
and FNO nHJ possesses markedly higher broadband absorbance.
Notably, the latter displays a near-symmetric localized surface
plasmon resonance band at approximately 420 nm, attributed to
the existence of Fe3O4 phase [40]. Kubelka-Munk analysis with
Tauc plots indicates optical bandgaps of 1.66 eV for Fe3N and
1.43 eV for FNO nHJ (Figure 2I). The narrower bandgap of FNO
nHJ theoretically favors photon absorption and photogenerated
carrier excitation.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements
yielded work functions (Φ) of 4.58 eV for Fe3N and 4.35 eV
for FNO nHJ (Figure 2J,K). The reduced Φ suggests an upward
Fermi-level shift in FNO nHJ, potentially decreasing interfacial
electron injection barriers and improving carrier transport. Pho-
tocurrent measurements revealed substantially higher current
density for FNO nHJ, evidencing enhanced carrier generation
and charge separation (Figure S7a). Electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy Nyquist plots corroborated this, and FNO nHJ
exhibited a smaller semicircle (Figure S7b), indicating lower
charge-transfer resistance and faster interfacial transport. In
summary, as compared to Fe3N, FNO nHJ exhibits superior spec-
tral absorbance, carrier generation/separation, and interfacial
charge-transfer kinetics. Consequently, FNO nHJ is expected to
improve energy-utilization efficiency and therapeutic response in
PDT and photothermal therapy.
The ammonia release behavior of FNO nHJ was quantitatively
evaluated under simulated physiological temperature and fluid
conditions. The results (Figure S8) showed that the ammonia
released from FNO nHJ was negligible in ultrapure water at 20◦C.
In contrast, the release rate of ammonia increased markedly in
physiological saline at 37◦C. By comparing the data obtained
in ultrapure water at 37◦C and in physiological saline at 20◦C,
it was found that NaCl exerted a stronger promotive effect on
ammonia release than temperature. Considering the moist and
4 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 2
Characterizations of FNO nHJ synthesized in 1% NaCl solution at 37◦C for 24 h followed by sonication in 28% ammonia for 30 min.
Low (A) and high (B) magnification TEM images of FNO nHJ. (C) HRTEM image with measured interplanar spacings corresponding to Fe3N (002) and
(110) planes and Fe3O4 (222) and (422) planes. (D) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mappings of Fe (red), N (yellow), and O (blue) for FNO nHJ.
(E) XRD patterns comparing Fe3N and FNO nHJ. XPS spectra of the elements Fe (F) and O (G) in Fe3N and FNO nHJ. UV–vis absorption spectra (H)
and optical bandgaps (I) of Fe3N and FNO nHJ. UPS spectra of Fe3N (J) and FNO nHJ (K).
saline microenvironment of wounds, these results suggest the
potential of ammonia released by FNO nHJ at wound sites in
contributing to an effective therapeutic outcome.
2.2
Enzymatic-Like Activities and
Photodynamic Evaluation of FNO nHJ
Given the capability of Fe2+ to conduct the Fenton reaction,
the FNO nHJ should be able to decompose H2O2 to generate
⋅OH [41]. The chemodynamic therapy (CDT) capability of FNO
nHJ was evaluated using 3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB)
as a chromogenic substrate. An increase in the absorption at
652 nm was observed with prolonged reaction time, accompanied
by a visible color change of the solution from transparent to
blue (Figure 3A). Quantitative assessment of ⋅OH generation
was performed via electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy
using 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide (DMPO) as a trapping
agent [42]. The distinct quadruple resonance peaks of ⋅OH
were observed after the reaction between FNO nHJ and H2O2,
Advanced Materials, 2026
5 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 3
Evaluation of enzymatic activities and photodynamic/photothermal performances of FNO nHJ. (A) POD-like activity of FNO nHJ in
PBS buffer (10 mm, pH 4.0; H2O2: 1.0 mm; TMB: 0.2 mm). (B) Absorption spectra showing DPBF depletion by FNO nHJ under 808 nm laser irradiation
(1.0 W cm−2, DPBF: 0.1 mm). ESR spectra reflecting ⋅O2−(C), ⋅OH (D) and 1O2 (E) generation. (F) The fitting curve of the mass extinction coefficient of
FNO nHJ. (G) Temperature elevation curves of FNO nHJ, Fe3N, and Fe3N/Fe3O4 mixture under 808 nm laser irradiation at 1.0 W cm−2. (H) Temperature
elevation curves of FNO nHJ at varied 808 nm laser power densities. (I) Concentration-dependent photothermal effect of FNO nHJ under 808 nm laser
irradiation at 1.0 W cm−2. (J) Photothermal stability of FNO nHJ: Temperature curves over five on/off cycles (808 nm, 1.0 W cm−2). (K) Photothermal
conversion efficiency calculation. (L) Schematic diagram of the enzymatic activity and photoresponsivity of FNO nHJ.
6 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

displaying a signal intensity ratio of 1:2:2:1 (Figure 3D). The
signal intensity was enhanced with increasing H2O2 concen-
tration, demonstrating that the chemodynamic activity of FNO
nHJ is both time-dependent and H2O2-dependent. Moreover,
as the FNO nHJ concentration increased, the concentration of
generated O2 rose from 10.2 to 16.8 mg L−1, demonstrating strong
CAT-like activity (Figure S9).
To evaluate the peroxidase (POD)-like activity of Fe3N and FNO
nHJ, Michaelis-Menten kinetics analysis was performed using
various concentrations of H2O2 as the substrate. The results
(Figure S10) indicated that Fe3N exhibited a maximum reaction
rate (Vmax) of 1.221 × 10−7 M s−1 and a Michaelis constant (Km) of
0.196 m. In contrast, FNO nHJ demonstrated a Vmax of 2.520 ×
10−7 M s−1 and a Km of 0.156 m. Compared to Fe3N, FNO nHJ
displayed a higher Vmax and a lower Km, suggesting its stronger
affinity for the substrate and enhanced catalytic efficiency, thus
generating more ⋅OH to support the CDT effect. Furthermore, the
CAT-like activity was characterized by monitoring the O2 release
rate using a dissolved oxygen meter. FNO nHJ exhibited a Vmax
of 6.620 mg (L min)−1 and a Km of 0.046 m, both superior to
those of Fe3N (Vmax = 4.473 mg (L min)−1, Km = 0.073 m) (Figure
S11), indicating a stronger CAT-like catalytic capability. These
performance enhancements are attributed to both the in situ
formation of Fe3O4 which possesses favorable POD-/CAT-like
activities and the heterostructure interface effect which promotes
carrier separation and reactive intermediate formation, thereby
synergistically amplifying the overall catalytic activity.
The PDT efficiency of FNO nHJ was investigated using 1,3-
diphenylisobenzofuran (DPBF) as a 1O2 trapping agent. A signifi-
cant decrease in the DPBF absorption profile was observed in the
presence of FNO nHJ under near-infrared (NIR) laser irradiation,
indicating the generation of 1O2 (Figure 3B). Concurrently, the
ESR spectra show typical peaks in a 1:1:1 ratio, further confirming
the production of 1O2 (Figure 3E). Importantly, the capacity of
FNO nHJ to generate ⋅O2
−under NIR laser irradiation was iden-
tified by ESR spectroscopy (Figure 3C), and the six characteristic
peaks of ⋅O2
−were evident within only 5 min. In sharp contrast,
no detectable signal was observed for Fe3N after 10 min under
identical conditions (Figure S12).
The optical properties of FNO nHJ were first investigated by
UV–vis absorption spectroscopy (Figure 3F). The extinction coef-
ficient of FNO nHJ (8.59 L (g cm)−1) is significantly higher than
those of both Fe3N (4.18 L (g cm)−1) and Fe3O4 (6.07 L (g cm)−1),
indicating its superior light-harvesting capability. A comparative
analysis of temperature elevation was conducted among FNO
nHJ, Fe3N, and a physical mixture of Fe3N and Fe3O4 (mass
ratio matching FNO nHJ based on XRD quantification) under
identical conditions (concentration: 400 µg mL−1; laser: 808 nm,
1.0 W cm−2, 10 min). FNO nHJ exhibits a higher temperature
elevation (ΔT = 25.91◦C) than Fe3N (ΔT = 20.57◦C) and the
physical mixture (ΔT = 18.43◦C) (Figure 3G). This enhancement
is attributed not only to the altered phase composition but to the
heterojunction-induced amplification of photo absorption and
utilization efficiency.
Temperature elevation capability of FNO nHJ (400 µg mL−1) was
further examined under gradient laser power densities (0.5, 0.8,
1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 W cm−2). A notable laser power density-dependent
photothermal effect was observed (Figure 3H), and the tempera-
ture of FNO nHJ irradiated with NIR laser (1.0 W cm−2) increased
considerably by 25.91◦C. Concentration-dependent photothermal
behavior was observed under NIR laser irradiation (1.0 W cm−2)
(Figure 3I): At 200 µg mL−1 FNO nHJ, temperature increased
to 47◦C within 10 min, whereas at 400 µg mL−1 FNO nHJ,
temperature surpassed 50◦C after only 5 min. This provides
sufficient hyperthermia for antibacterial efficacy. Considering the
good cytocompatibility of FNO nHJ (Figure S13), a concentration
of 400 µg mL−1 was selected for subsequent experiments. Addi-
tionally, negligible attenuation in peak temperature occurred over
five laser-on/off cycles, indicating the remarkable photothermal
stability of FNO nHJ (Figure 3J). The photothermal conversion
efficiency (η) of FNO nHJ was calculated to be 28.62% based on
the cooling phase (Figure 3K).
These results collectively demonstrate that the FNO nHJ exhibits
POD-/CAT-like activities for generating ⋅OH and O2 in the pres-
ence of H2O2. Furthermore, under 808 nm NIR laser irradiation,
FNO nHJ can serve as both a photosensitizer to produce both
1O2 and ⋅O2
−and a photothermal agent to generate hyperther-
mia. These functions make it well-suited for achieving potent
antibacterial effects (Figure 3L).
2.3
Preparation and Characterization of FAHP
Hydrogel
FNO nHJ and AgNO3 were incorporated into a hydrogel matrix
composed of HHA and APA (HP), resulting in a dual dynamic
hydrogel. APA and HHA were synthesized according to the
reported processes, and their chemical structures were confirmed
by FTIR and 1H NMR spectroscopy (Figure 4A,B; Figures S14
and S15). The characteristic peaks of polysuccinimide (PSI) at
1711 cm−1 and 1782 cm−1 are attributed to the coupling of two
carbonyl groups separated by one nitrogen atom [43]. The peak at
1720 cm−1 for APA is attributed to the stretching vibration of the
C═O bond of aldehyde group. Compared with HA, HHA exhibit
two additional characteristic peaks at 3201 and 1494 cm−1. The
former is attributed to the stretching vibration of N─H bonds in
3,3’-dithiobis(propionic hydrazide) moiety, while the latter arises
from the bending vibration of its N─H bonds. The formation of
HP hydrogel was confirmed by FTIR spectroscopy, which shows
a characteristic peak at 1640 cm−1 corresponding to the C═N bond
stretching vibration. This result indicates that the crosslinking
between HHA and APA via a Schiff base reaction formed the
hydrogel.
We recently reported the first observation of a series of HHA-
metal ion hydrogels formed through hydrazide-metal coordina-
tion crosslinking [32]. During the experiments, a distinct color
transition from transparent to orange-yellow occurred during the
HHA-Ag+ hydrogel formation. To further investigate the changes
in physicochemical properties elicited by the incorporation of Ag+
into HP, the following experiments were conducted.
First, rheological tests were performed to evaluate the moduli
of three hydrogels: HP, Ag+-incorporated HP (AHP), and FNO
nHJ-loaded AHP (FAHP). The sol-gel transformation of the
mixed solution of HHA and APA took approximately 30 s,
whereas the incorporation of Ag+ reduced this time to 1–2 s.
Advanced Materials, 2026
7 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 4
Preparation and characterization of FAHP Hydrogel. (A) FTIR spectra of PSI, PA, and APA. (B) FTIR spectra of HA, HHA, and HP.
(C) Self-healing behavior and stretchability of FAHP hydrogel. (D) Skin adhesion of FAHP hydrogel. Rheological behaviors of hydrogels: frequency
sweep (E), strain sweep (F), alternating step strain switched from 1% to 470% (G), and shear thinning curve (Inset: injectability demonstration) (H).
(I) SEM images of hydrogels (red circles indicated protrusions; green circles indicated particulate matter). (J) Element distribution of FAHP hydrogel.
(K) Release profiles of ions from FAH and FAHP hydrogels. (L) Swelling ratios of hydrogels in deionized water for 60 min. (M) In vitro procoagulant
performances of different hydrogels. (N) Hemostatic abilities of different hydrogels and commercial gelatin sponge in a rat liver hemorrhage model.
8 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Frequency-dependent scanning analysis showed that the addi-
tion of Ag+ led to a decrease in the storage modulus (G′) and
an increase in the loss modulus (G′′), while the loading of FNO
nHJ resulted in a slight decrease in both G′ and G′′ (Figure 4E).
Furthermore, the FAHP hydrogel could withstand strains up
to 420% without collapse of the hydrogel network (Figure 4F).
When subjected to alternating high and low strains, the hydrogel
network rapidly recovered, demonstrating excellent self-healing
property (Figure 4G). Shear-thinning tests (Figure 4H) revealed
that the viscosities of all three hydrogels decreased with increas-
ing shear rate, enabling their use for filling wounds of varying
shapes, sizes, and depths through syringe injection. Furthermore,
the hydrogel displayed excellent macroscopic self-healing behav-
ior (Figure 4C), attributable to the reversible nature of both the
Schiff base and hydrazide-metal coordination linkages within
the hydrogel network [44]. This may provide a stable physical
barrier for skin wounds. Additionally, the FAHP hydrogel could
fit closely to joint surfaces. The incorporation of Ag+ enhanced
the adhesive strength to some extent, fulfilling the adhesive
requirements for wound dressing applications (Figure 4D; Figure
S16). The adhesiveness of HP hydrogel is primarily attributed
to the aldehyde groups of APA, since Ag+ may preferentially
interact with the hydrazide groups of HHA, which increases the
availability of aldehyde groups for reaction with amine groups on
the skin, resulting in enhanced adhesion.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) revealed the porous struc-
tures of the hydrogels (Figure 4I; Figure S17). The HP hydrogel
exhibited smooth pore walls with non-uniform pore size distribu-
tion. After incorporation of Ag+, numerous protrusions appeared
on the pore walls, likely arising from the agglomeration of
generated Ag nanozymes. A concomitant reduction in average
pore diameter by approximately 10 µm was also observed, which
is attributed to an increase in crosslinking density. Following the
loading of FNO nHJ, backscattered electron imaging revealed
the presence of particulate matter. EDS and inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) analysis confirmed the
successful loading of FNO nHJ and the uniform distribution of
Ag+ and Ag nanozymes inside the hydrogel network (Figure 4J;
Figure S18).
Traditional Ag+/Ag nanoparticles-embedded hydrogels exhibit
broad-spectrum antibacterial activity and are usually used as
wound dressings [45]. However, uncontrolled Ag+ release and
toxicity from silver accumulation significantly limit their prac-
tical applications. To address these issues, our hydrogel matrix
components can complex with Ag+, thus enabling controlled Ag+
release while influencing the size of generated Ag nanozymes
[32, 46]. ICP-MS analysis revealed that APA incorporation had
no significant effect on iron release but markedly reduced Ag+
release (Figure 4K), indicating APA’s ability to effectively bind
Ag+ via its carboxyl and aldehyde groups.
In PBS at pH 5.5 mimicking the wound microenvironment, the
HP hydrogel degraded rapidly, retaining only 30.1% of its initial
mass by day 14 (Figure S19), because of the tendency of Schiff-base
linkages to hydrolyze under acidic conditions [47]. In contrast,
the incorporation of Ag+ produced a more stable crosslinking
network, maintaining approximately 50.9% of the initial mass
at day 14, which helps prevent excessive Ag+ release from
overly rapid degradation and provides more sustained wound
protection. Swelling tests demonstrated significant acceleration
in water absorption following Ag+ incorporation. The dry FAHP
hydrogel achieved a swelling ratio of 147 after only 1 h of
water immersion, markedly surpassing that (70.8) of the dry HP
hydrogel (Figure 4L). This accelerated absorption may contribute
to the improved coagulation performance. The FAHP group
exhibited a reduced blood clotting time of approximately 2.37 min,
significantly faster than the control group (7.2 min) and HP
group (4.9 min) (Figure 4M; Figure S20a). These are attributable
to faster water absorption and the procoagulant effects of Ag+
and aldehyde groups. In vivo hemostatic performance of FAHP
hydrogel was further validated in a Sprague-Dawley (SD) rat liver
hemorrhage model. A 5 mm-length incision was created on the
liver, and the hydrogel was immediately injected to cover the
bleeding site. After 1 min, the untreated group (control) exhibited
a severe blood loss (305.7 mg), while the FAHP group and the
commercial gelatin sponge group showed comparable blood loss
of approximately 116 mg (Figure 4N; Figure S20b).
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that the FAHP hydrogel
possesses inherent self-healing ability, injectability, and tissue
adhesion for effective wound sealing and hemostasis. Notably,
it achieves controlled Ag+ release, highlighting its potential for
clinical translation.
2.4
In Situ Generation of Ag Nanozymes within
FAHP Hydrogel and Their Antioxidant Activity
The formation rate of Ag nanozymes inside the hydrogel is
controllable by modulating the ratio of Ag+ to hydrazide groups.
Over time, Ag+ was in situ reduced gradually by HHA to form
Ag nanozymes, which exhibit multiple functionalities, includ-
ing antioxidant and anti-inflammatory abilities. This enables a
programmed ROS regulation strategy where ROS are generated
via FNO nHJ-mediated PDT and CDT for bacterial eradication
and subsequently scavenged by Ag nanozymes formed gradually
(Figure S21).
The valence state conversion of silver in the FAHP hydrogel over
three days was monitored by XPS spectroscopy (Figure 5A,B).
Significant change in peak shape within the Ag 3d spectra was
observed. After one day, Ag+ and Ag0 accounted for 40% and
60%, respectively. As the conversion time extended, a distinct
darkening of the hydrogel color occurred. By the third day,
the proportion of Ag0 exceeded 95%. Accordingly, the UV-vis
absorption spectrum of the AHP hydrogel displays a broad peak
at 420 nm on the first day (Figure 5C), which is attributed to
the surface plasmon resonance of Ag nanozymes [48]. Once
time was prolonged, the peak blue-shifted and became sharper,
indicating the continuous formation of Ag nanozymes. TEM
studies revealed that in situ-generated Ag nanozymes exhibited
a uniform particle size distribution with an average diameter of
3.59 ± 1.47 nm (Figure 5D; Figure S22).
The antioxidant capacities of HP, AHP, and FAHP hydrogels
were comprehensively evaluated (Figure 5E–I). The HP hydrogel
exhibited very weak radicals- and ROS-scavenging activities
owing to the presence of disulfide groups. In contrast, the AHP
hydrogel demonstrated excellent antioxidant capacity. Moreover,
this was not affected by FNO nHJ loading. Intriguingly, freshly
Advanced Materials, 2026
9 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 5
In situ generation of Ag nanozymes and antioxidant ability of FAHP hydrogel. (A) Time-dependent XPS spectra of silver element in
FAHP hydrogel. (B) Macroscopic observation of in situ generation of Ag nanozymes within AHP hydrogel. (C) UV–vis spectra of AHP hydrogel at
different times. (D) Size distribution of Ag nanozymes determined by SEM (based on 200 particles). Free radical scavenging by hydrogels: DPPH∙(E),
ABTS∙+ (F), ⋅OH (G), H2O2 (H), and ⋅O2−(I). (J) Oxygen release capacities of different hydrogels at 1 mm H2O2. (K) Semiquantitative fluorescence
data of JC-1 monomers (n = 3) (FI: fluorescence intensity). (L) Semiquantitative fluorescence data of DCFH-DA fluorescent probe (n = 3). (M) JC-1
staining of L929 cells after different treatments under H2O2 exposure. Blue: DAPI, Green: JC-1 monomers, Red: JC-1 aggregates. (N) DCFH-DA staining
of L929 cells after different treatments under H2O2 exposure. (O) Representative flow cytometry histograms of ROS levels in L929 cells after different
treatments using DCFH-DA fluorescent probe labeling. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) and statistical significance was assessed
using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (ns: non-significant, p > 0.05; ***p < 0.001).
10 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

prepared FAHP lacked free radical scavenging ability but devel-
oped antioxidant activity after 1–2 h. Combined UV–vis/ESR
spectroscopy revealed that the FAHP hydrogel effectively scav-
enged multiple radical species and ROS, including 2,2-diphenyl-
1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH⋅), 2,2’-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-
6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS⋅+), ⋅OH, H2O2, and ⋅O2
−(Figure S23).
Subsequent dissolved oxygen assay demonstrated that both
FNO nHJ and Ag nanozymes possessed CAT-like activity and
could efficiently decompose H2O2 to release substantial oxygen
(Figure 5J). These results suggest that the FAHP hydrogel exhibits
SOD-CAT cascade catalytic activity and can effectively scavenge
excess H2O2 and ⋅O2
−and simultaneously increase local oxygen
level to alleviate hypoxia.
Given the scavenging capacity of the FAHP hydrogel against
multiple free radicals and ROS, its antioxidant activity was further
evaluated at the cellular level. An oxidative stress cell model was
established by treating L929 cells with 0.4 mm H2O2 solution. JC-
1 probe analysis revealed that after H2O2 treatment, the green
fluorescence intensity of JC-1 monomers significantly increased,
indicating a reduction in mitochondrial membrane potential
and an increased propensity for apoptosis (Figure 5K,M) [49].
In contrast, both FAHP and AHP groups exhibited similar red
fluorescence intensities to the control group, implying that Ag
nanozymes formed in the two hydrogels efficiently mitigated
H2O2-induced mitochondrial damage. A similar phenomenon
was observed in the fluorescence images and flow cytomet-
ric analysis using 2’,7’-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA)
probe (Figure 5L,O), where the FAHP group showed a signifi-
cantly lower ROS level than the H2O2 group. Notably, most cells
in the H2O2 group exhibited signs of apoptosis, while the FAHP-
treated cells maintained a normal spindle-shaped morphology
(Figure 5N).
2.5
In Vitro Bioactivity and Biocompatibility of
FAHP Hydrogel
Wound healing requires a synchronized sequence of immune
events. An aberrant macrophage phenotypic switch is recognized
as a critical factor contributing to delayed healing [50]. Pro-
inflammatory M1 macrophages play vital roles in host defense
and the removal of damaged tissue during the initial healing
phase. However, their prolonged presence leads to sustained
inflammation and delayed re-epithelialization [51]. Conversely,
anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages greatly promote wound heal-
ing by releasing anti-inflammatory cytokines like IL-4, IL-10,
TGF-β and various growth factors including VEGF, FGF, and EGF
[52]. Therefore, promoting macrophage phenotype transition
from the M1 to the M2 is crucial for chronic wound healing.
In our study, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophages
were used as a positive control, with all hydrogel treatments
performed in the presence of LPS stimulation. As expected, LPS
stimulation induced a clear transition towards the M1 phenotype,
evidenced by a significant increase in CD86 expression (a M1-
type macrophage marker) (Figure 6A; Figure S24). Both AHP and
FAHP groups exhibited stronger CD206 expression (a M2-type
macrophage marker) than the control group and significantly
downregulated CD86 expression compared to the LPS group.
Flow cytometry analysis further confirmed that the CD86+ cell
population in the FAHP group (25.9 ± 2.1%) was significantly
lower than that in the LPS group (47.4 ± 1.3%) (Figure 6B;
Figure S25). The CD206 positive rate of the FAHP-incubated
macrophages was 24.8 ± 3.6%, contrasting sharply with the
3.6 ± 1.0% observed in the LPS group (Figure 6C), providing
strong evidence that FAHP hydrogel promoted the transition
of macrophages from the M1 to the M2 phenotype. This was
also corroborated by the levels of pro-inflammatory factors and
anti-inflammatory factors in each group (Figure 6D–G): LPS
stimulation elevated the levels of pro-inflammatory factors (TNF-
α, IL-1β), while FAHP treatment significantly suppressed the
secretion of these cytokines and upregulated anti-inflammatory
factors (IL-10, TGF-β). Critically, no significant differences were
observed between FAHP and AHP groups, confirming that the
loading of FNO nHJ had no negative effects on the antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory functions of the AHP hydrogel.
After 24 h of co-culture with L929 cells, the AHP hydrogel showed
some inhibitory effect on cell proliferation, whereas the FAHP
hydrogel caused no impairment (Figure 6H,I). After extending
the culture time to 72 and 120 h, the cell viabilities in the
FAHP group were significantly higher than those in the control
group. Cell lysis analysis of FAHP-treated cells revealed elevated
ammonia level (Figure S26), suggesting that low-concentration
ammonia released during FNO nHJ hydrolysis promoted cell
proliferation and migration. In fact, epithelial regeneration at
the wound site depends not only on cell proliferation but
also critically on epithelial cells migration [53]. The ability of
hydrogels to promote cell migration was assessed by cell scratch
assay (Figure 6J,K). The control group achieved only a 10%
migration ratio at 24 h, whereas the FAHP hydrogel reached
35%. By 48 h, the scratch area in the FAHP group was 73%
covered, significantly higher than those in the AHP group (44.2%)
and the control group (20.6%). Angiogenesis within granulation
tissues provides essential nourishment to the healing area, and
poor vascularization contributes to the delayed wound healing
[54]. The tube formation test confirmed that the FAHP group
not only formed a mesh-like vascular structures more quickly
but also showed more junctions and greater total tube length
(Figure 6L–N).
For hydrogel dressings in direct contact with the body, biocom-
patibility is closely related to treatment outcomes and safety. To
evaluate the cytocompatibility of FNO nHJ, the CCK-8 assay was
employed. When the FNO nHJ concentration reached 200 µg
mL−1, L929 cells maintained a high survival rate of 94.6%, whereas
HUVEC cells showed a relatively low survival rate (84.7%) (Figure
S13), which may be attributed to their higher sensitivity to
pH changes. To further reveal whether photothermal heating
induced thermal injury, systematic assessments at the cellular
and tissue levels were conducted (Figure S27). The results indi-
cated that the FAHP hydrogel under specified NIR irradiation
caused no detectable adverse influences on cellular viability,
tissue morphology, and inflammatory responses, demonstrating
favorable biosafety. Hemolysis test demonstrated that the AHP
group had a hemolysis ratio of 3.3%. Notably, the FAHP group
showed a reduced hemolysis ratio of 2.1% (Figure 6O). To
investigate whether the FAHP hydrogel would induce cumulative
toxicity to animal organs, histological analyses were conducted
on the hearts, livers, spleens, lungs, and kidneys of rats (Figure
S28). No significant damage was observed in any examined
Advanced Materials, 2026
11 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 6
Macrophage polarization effect and biocompatibility assessment of hydrogels. (A) Representative immunofluorescence images of
RAW264.7 macrophage phenotypes after different treatments (red: CD86; green: CD206; blue: DAPI). (B) Flow cytometry analysis of CD86 expression
in RAW264.7 cells after different treatments. (C) Flow cytometry analysis of CD206 expression in RAW264.7 cells after different treatments. Cytokine
levels measured by ELISA: TNF-α (D), IL-1β (E), IL-10 (F), and TGF-β (G) (n = 3). (H) Proliferation staining images of L929 cells on day 5 after hydrogel
treatments. (I) Proliferation of L929 cells on days 1, 3, and 5 (n = 3). (J) Scratch images of L929 cells at different time points after hydrogel treatments.
(K) Statistical analysis of L929 cell migration ratio at different time points (n = 3). (L) Representative images of the HUVEC tube formation assay. (M)
Junctions number analysis of tube structure (n = 5). (N) Quantification of total tube length (n = 5). (O) Hemolysis ratio of red blood cells after hydrogel
treatments (n = 3). (P) Blood routine and biochemical indices (n = 3). Data are presented as mean ± S.D. and statistical significance was assessed using
one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (ns: non-significant, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001).
12 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

organs. Furthermore, all the tested blood routine and biochemical
indicators were within normal ranges (Figure 6P), confirming the
good biocompatibility and safety of the FAHP hydrogel.
2.6
In Vitro Antibacterial and Anti-Biofilm
Activities of FAHP Hydrogel
The eradication of bacteria and biofilms from wound sites is
a critical prerequisite for chronic wound healing. Initially, the
photothermal performance of FAHP hydrogel was evaluated. The
results (Figure S29) were comparable to those observed for FNO
nHJ nanosuspension, with a temperature window of 50–55◦C
sufficient to suppress bacterial viability while further enhancing
the antibacterial effect of Ag+. To ensure ROS-mediated steriliza-
tion, the consumption of bacterial GSH is essential [55]. In the
present study, GSH can be efficiently consumed by the FAHP
hydrogel and the ROS free radicals generated under irradia-
tion through thiol-disulfide exchange and oxidization reactions
(Figure S30). Clinically isolated Gram-positive MRSA and Gram-
negative Escherichia coli (E. coli) were used as model strains
to evaluate the antibacterial properties and mechanisms of the
FAHP hydrogel.
The antibacterial effects of different hydrogels were assessed
using the agar plate assay (Figure 7A). The results showed
that the HP hydrogel exhibited no antibacterial activity. The
incorporation of Ag+ into the HP hydrogel significantly enhanced
antibacterial activity, achieving antibacterial ratios of 83.2%
against MRSA and 81.3% against E. coli (Figure 7B). Further-
more, the loading of FNO nHJ into AHP hydrogel did not
induce a significant change in antibacterial activity. The reason
for this is that endogenous H2O2 is insufficient to support
effective CDT. In contrast, upon 808 nm laser irradiation,
the FAHP hydrogel achieved a satisfactory antibacterial ratio
exceeding 97% against both bacterial strains. The SYTO9/PI
assay revealed negligible red fluorescence in the control and
HP groups (Figure 7C). In contrast, the AHP group exhibited
intense red fluorescence, signifying severe bacterial membrane
disruption. The FAHP+NIR group had the highest clearance
ratios for both bacteria (MRSA: 91%, E. coli: 96%), consistent
with the agar plate assay. Freshly prepared FAHP hydrogels and
those aged for several days exhibited comparable antibacterial
activity. This is partially attributable to the inherent antibacterial
properties of Ag nanozymes and a reversible, dynamic intercon-
version between Ag+ and Ag nanozymes within the hydrogel.
The Ag nanozymes in the hydrogel could dissolve and release
Ag+, thus contributing to antibacterial activity through an ion-
mediated mechanism [56]. As the bacterial load was very low,
the conversion of Ag+ to Ag nanozymes was favorable at the
hydrogel’s periphery, specifically at the interface with remaining
bacteria. This dynamic interconversion may enable the hydrogel
to maintain long-term antibacterial and immunomodulatory
effects.
Using the DCFH-DA probe, it was observed that Ag+ induced
a certain degree of oxidative stress, while the FAHP hydrogel
under NIR irradiation significantly elevated ROS level in bacteria
(Figure S31). As revealed by continuous monitoring of the optical
density (OD) at 600 nm of bacterial suspensions co-cultured with
the hydrogels, the bacteria in the AHP groups retained prolifer-
ative capacity, whereas the bacterial growth of the FAHP+NIR
groups was completely suppressed (Figure S32). These results
demonstrate that the potent antibacterial activity of the FAHP
hydrogel under NIR irradiation arises from the synergistic effect
of Ag+, ROS and hyperthermia.
To illuminate the antibacterial mechanism of the FAHP
hydrogel, the morphologies of bacteria co-cultured with the
hydrogels were observed by SEM (Figure 7D). Both MRSA
and E. coli treated with AHP hydrogel exhibited leakage
of
intracellular
contents,
with
distinct
leakage
patterns.
This difference may be attributed to the distinct cell wall
structures: The cell wall of E. coli bacteria is relatively thin
and rich in proteins. Ag+ can complex with thiol groups
within
these
proteins,
leading
to
extensive
membrane
disruption and substantial leakage of intracellular contents.
In contrast, the cell wall of MRSA bacteria is primarily
composed of a peptidoglycan layer tens of nanometers thick,
which can effectively prevent membrane deformation [57].
The FAHP+NIR combination treatment, which generated
both hyperthermia and ROS, further enhanced leakage of
bacterial contents and affected bacterial surface morphology.
These observations suggest that the disruption of bacterial
membrane integrity is likely the primary cause of bacterial
death.
To verify this hypothesis, polymyxin B (PMB), an antibiotic
known to target bacterial membranes, was chosen as a positive
control in further experiments. The extent of protein leakage from
bacteria following various treatments was quantified using the
BCA protein assay (Figure S33a,b). The leakage levels induced
by AHP treatment were comparable to those caused by PMB.
In contrast, the FAHP+NIR group exhibited 1.41 times higher
leakage level for MRSA and 1.24 times higher leakage level for
E. coli compared to the PMB group. Unexpectedly, the HP group
showed the greatest protein leakage for both bacterial strains. To
figure out the underlying reason, the BCA reagent was mixed with
the two components of HP hydrogel (HHA and APA), respec-
tively. It was found that APA itself reacted with the BCA reagent,
producing an intense purple color (Figure S33c). During co-
culture with bacteria, the HP hydrogel was completely degraded,
which resulted in the presence of APA in the supernatant after
centrifugation, thus leading to the abnormally high absorbance
reading. In contrast, neither AHP hydrogel nor FAHP hydrogel
was degraded by bacteria, and their absorbance levels were within
the normal range. Additionally, the membrane permeability of E.
coli was assessed using the O-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside
assay (Figure S33d). The FAHP+NIR group exhibited the highest
level of β-galactosidase leakage, indicating increased bacterial
membrane permeability. This enhanced permeability facilitates
the entry of Ag+ and ROS into bacteria, thus contributing to their
antibacterial efficacy.
Biofilms are formed by bacterial aggregates and their secreted
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) rich in polysaccharides,
nucleic acids, and proteins. These components confer bacterial
resistance to antibiotics [58]. To evaluate the ability of FAHP
hydrogel to disrupt mature MRSA biofilms, FITC-labeled con-
canavalin A and PI were used to stain polysaccharides and
dead bacteria within the biofilm, respectively. The control and
HP groups exhibited extensive green fluorescence (Figure 7E),
Advanced Materials, 2026
13 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 7
In vitro antibacterial and antibiofilm activities of hydrogels. (A) Representative agar plate images and live/dead staining images of
MRSA and E. coli after different treatments (green: SYTO 9, red: PI). (B) Statistical analysis of colony counts (n = 3). (C) Statistical analysis of bacteria
live/dead ratio (n = 3). (D) Representative SEM images and magnified images of MRSA and E. coli after different treatments. (E) Confocal laser scanning
microscopy images of MRSA biofilms after different treatments (green: FITC-labeled concanavalin A; red: PI). (F) Crystal violet staining images of MRSA
biofilms after different treatments. (G) Scavenging ratio of mature MRSA biofilm calculated from the EPS-retained area (n = 3). (H) Statistical analysis
of crystal violet staining (n = 3). (I) Statistical analyses of biofilm thickness and distribution range of dead bacteria after different treatments (n = 3).
Data are presented as mean ± S.D. and statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (*p < 0.05;
**p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001).
14 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

indicating an intact EPS structure. In stark contrast, the AHP
group displayed intense red fluorescence and a reduced green
fluorescence coverage area, reaching only 47.9% of the control
group’s area (Figure 7G). Upon application of NIR laser irra-
diation, FAHP hydrogel achieved a biofilm clearance rate of
83.7%. Additionally, the biofilm thickness decreased substantially
from 11.3 µm in the control group to 5.2 µm, with bacteri-
cidal effects extending to bacteria within a thicker range of
15.4 µm (Figure 7I). Crystal violet staining revealed distinct
fading of the violet color in the biofilm co-cultured with the
AHP hydrogel, confirming that Ag+ disrupted the biofilm,
though insufficiently for complete eradication (Figure 7F).
Remarkably, the FAHP+NIR group exhibited the lowest biofilm
retention ratio (17.94%), highlighting the superior efficacy of
the synergistic bactericidal action of Ag+ and phototherapy
(Figure 7H).
2.7
FAHP Hydrogel Promotes Infected Diabetic
Wound Healing
The excellent in vitro antioxidant, macrophage phenotypic mod-
ulation, and antibacterial activities of FAHP hydrogel inspired
us to further explore its in vivo antibacterial and pro-healing
efficacies on diabetic wounds. Therefore, we designed the treat-
ment procedure (Figure 8A). First, type 1 diabetes was induced
in SD rats using streptozotocin (STZ). After blood glucose level
had stabilized, two circular full-thickness skin defects with an
8 mm diameter were created on the back of each rat, followed
by infection with 100 µL of MRSA suspension at 108 CFU
mL−1. The infected rats were randomly divided into five groups
and subjected to different treatments: commercial Tegaderm
film (control group), HP, AHP, FAHP, and FAHP+NIR. Wound
imaging and sampling were performed at predetermined time
points.
Wound healing progression from day 0 to day 12 (Figure 8B)
revealed significantly accelerated closure in the FAHP+NIR
group. After 6 d of treatment, only 20.7% of the wound area
remained in the FAHP+NIR group, far lower than 54.6% in
the control group. Meanwhile, wound exudates were collected
for the agar plate assays. Notably, the FAHP+NIR group had
the lowest bacteria survival rate of 8.5% (Figure 8C,F). This
potent antibacterial effect is attributed to the synergistic action
of Ag+, PDT and hyperthermia, which effectively eliminated
stubborn bacteria and significantly promoted wound healing.
On day 9, the control and AHP groups still had large wound
areas of 27.4% and 19.7%, respectively. In contrast, the FAHP
group displayed enhanced wound healing, with a remaining
wound area of only 11.1%. This is attributable to the enhanced
cellular proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis by FNO nHJ-
released ammonia. The FAHP+NIR group exhibited the most
significant healing effect, with only about 6.7% of the original
wound area remaining. After 12 d of treatment, the wounds
in the FAHP+NIR group were nearly healed (97.1%), while
other treatment groups showed varying degrees of incomplete
healing (Figure 8E). Infrared thermal images demonstrated
excellent in vivo photothermal performance of FAHP hydrogel
(Figure 8D). The FAHP hydrogel elicited a rapid tempera-
ture increase to 50◦C within 6 min, whereas the PBS group
showed a minimal temperature elevation of only 5◦C after
10 min of irradiation. Stable body weights throughout the treat-
ment indicated good biocompatibility of all hydrogel dressings
(Figure 8G).
Histological analysis (H&E staining, Picro-Sirius red staining,
and Masson staining) provided detailed insights into the wound
healing process. Wound tissues harvested on day 6 revealed supe-
rior healing effects in the FAHP+NIR group, while other groups
had not formed complete epithelia (Figure 8H). The FAHP+NIR
group showed nearly no dermal gaps and an epidermal thickness
of 133 µm, with an average granulation tissue thickness 1.68
times that of the control group (Figure 8I; Figure S34a). Sirius
red staining analysis indicated that type III collagen (critical for
early healing) predominated [59], with the FAHP+NIR group
displaying organized collagen covering 49.4% of the area (Figure
S34b). Masson staining visualized collagen synthesis and deposi-
tion in newly formed tissues (Figure 8J). The FAHP+NIR group
exhibited 1.27 to 1.8 times higher collagen deposition rates than
those of other groups (Figure 8K), with uniformly arranged dense
collagen fibers. Collectively, these findings demonstrated that
the FAHP+NIR treatment accelerated infected diabetic wound
healing through enhanced antiinfection, re-epithelialization and
collagen deposition.
2.8
Mechanisms of FAHP Hydrogel in
Promoting Infected Diabetic Wound Healing
To elucidate the pro-healing mechanisms of FAHP hydrogel in
infected diabetic wounds, tissue samples collected at different
time points were analyzed using immunofluorescence staining
and RNA transcriptome sequencing analysis. On day 3, the
expression levels of HIF-1α in the control and HP groups are
significantly higher than that in the AHP group (Figure 9A),
indicating that AHP hydrogel activated the SOD-CAT cascade
reaction, effectively alleviating tissue hypoxia. Notably, further
HIF-1α downregulation observed in the FAHP and FAHP+NIR
groups suggests supplemental CAT-like activity from the FNO
nHJ (Figure 9B), enhancing oxygen supply. Consistently, dihy-
droethidium staining images show markedly weakened fluores-
cence signals in the FAHP and FAHP+NIR groups, indicative
of reduced ROS levels in the wound microenvironments (Figure
S35). Collectively, these findings demonstrate that FAHP hydrogel
can alleviate hypoxia and oxidative stress, thereby facilitating
wound repair.
Macrophage phenotypic transition and the secretion of asso-
ciated cytokines were assessed on day 6 post-treatment. In
the control and HP groups, CD86 expression levels were high,
while CD206 fluorescence signals were negligible (Figure 9C).
Following FAHP+NIR treatment, CD86 expression was markedly
downregulated, while CD206 expression was upregulated (Figure
S36). These findings are consistent with the aforementioned
immunofluorescence staining and flow cytometry analyses in
LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells, indicating that FAHP hydrogel
could induce macrophage polarization from the M1 to the M2
phenotype. The changes in cytokine expression further corrobo-
rated this switch: Compared with the control group, FAHP+NIR
treatment downregulated TNF-α expression from 40.6 to 9.3
(Figure 9D,E) and upregulated IL-10 expression from 15.4 to 60.5
(Figure 9F,G). By restoring macrophage phenotype and redox
Advanced Materials, 2026
15 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 8
Effects of FAHP hydrogel on healing of infected wounds in diabetic rats. (A) Schematic illustration of the timeline of animal
experiments. (B) Representative wound photographs and contour maps depicting wound healing in different groups on days 0, 3, 6, 9, and 12.
(C) Representative photographs of bacterial colonies from wound exudates collected on day 6. (D) Representative infrared thermal images of skin wound
temperature elevation during the FAHP+NIR treatment (1.0 W cm−2, 10 min). (E) Statistical analysis of remaining wound area (n = 5). (F) Relative
bacterial viabilities in wounds after different treatments (n = 5). (G) Body weight changes in rats during the treatments (n = 5). (H) Representative
H&E staining and Picro-Sirius red staining images of wound tissues on day 6. (I) Statistical analysis of granulation tissue thickness on day 6 (n = 5).
(J) Representative Masson staining images of wound tissues on day 12. (K) Statistical analysis of collagen deposition on day 12 (n = 5). Data are presented
as mean ± S.D. and statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (***p < 0.001).
16 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 9
In vivo histopathological analysis of wound tissues after different treatments. Representative immunofluorescence staining images:
HIF-1α on day 3 (A), CD86 and CD206 on day 6 (C), TNF-α on day 6 (D), IL-10 on day 6 (F), and Ki67 on day 12 (H). Semiquantitative analyses for
HIF-1α (B), TNF-α (E), IL-10 (G), and Ki67 (FI: fluorescence intensity) (I). (J) Representative immunohistochemical staining images of CD31 on day 12.
(K) Semiquantitative analysis of immunohistochemical staining for CD31 (AOD: average optical density). Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 5).
Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (**p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001).
homeostasis, FAHP+NIR treatment facilitated the transition
from the inflammatory to the proliferative phase.
Cell proliferation and angiogenesis are critical during the prolif-
erative phase. On day 12, significant Ki67 and CD31 expression
was observed at the wound sites across all groups (Figure 9H,J).
Compared with the control group, the FAHP+NIR group shows
a significant reduction in Ki67 expression (Figure 9I), prevent-
ing excessive proliferation and scar formation. Notably, the
FAHP+NIR group exhibits the highest vessel count but smaller
individual vessel area (Figure 9K), indicating initiation of the
transition to the remodeling phase, during which most nascent
vessels regress to achieve a vascular density akin to normal tissue
[60, 61]. These findings demonstrate that the FAHP hydrogel
dynamically adapts to the requirements of each healing stage,
significantly promoting the healing of infected diabetic wounds.
RNA sequencing analysis was conducted on wound tissues
collected on day 6 to elucidate the mechanism underlying
the difference in therapeutic effects between the control and
FAHP+NIR groups. The squares of Pearson’s correlation coeffi-
cients for all samples are above 0.97, indicating high reliability of
the tissue samples (Figure 10A). Volcano plot analysis shows 395
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the FAHP+NIR
and control groups, with 213 genes upregulated (53.92%) and
182 genes downregulated (46.08%) (Figure 10B). Notably, down-
regulated genes include inflammation-related genes (IL-6 and
Tnfsf11), proliferation-inhibiting gene (Hoxa11), and muscle
Advanced Materials, 2026
17 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 10
Transcriptomic analysis of wound tissues from FAHP+NIR group. (A) Heatmap of Pearson’s correlation coefficient matrix for tested
samples. (B) Volcano plot showing the DEGs between control group and FAHP+NIR group on day 6 (|log2 fold-change| ≥1.5; p < 0.05). Volcano plots of
significantly downregulated (C) and upregulated (D) DEGs. (E) Chord diagram obtained through GO enrichment analysis. (F) GO enrichment analysis
between control group and FAHP+NIR group. (G) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis between control group and FAHP+NIR group. GSEA analyses
for hair follicle morphogenesis (H), skin development (I), and Hedgehog signaling pathway (J). (K) Heatmap of Hedgehog signaling pathway–related
DEGs between control group and FAHP+NIR group. (L) Heatmap of DEGs involved in immune responses and wound healing process. Western blot
analysis (M) and relative protein expressions (N) of Shh, Ptch1, Smo, and Gli1 in L929 cells after different treatments for 24 h. Levels of IL-17 (O) and
TNF-α (P) measured by ELISA. Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 3). Statistical significance was assessed using a Student’s t-test (two-tailed).
(ns: non-significant, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001).
18 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

fiber-suppressing gene (Myh6) (Figure 10C). In contrast, the
genes associated with injured tissue clearance (Timd4), interme-
diate filament formation (Krt72, Krt83, and Krt87), epithelial cell
differentiation (Lcn2), and cell proliferation and differentiation
(Shh) are significantly upregulated (Figure 10D).
Subsequently, Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses were con-
ducted to elucidate the biological functions of these DEGs
(Figure 10F,G). GO enrichment analysis reveals that the DEGs
are mainly associated with immune system processes, inflam-
matory responses, skin epidermis development, hair follicle
development, and cell proliferation and differentiation. This
suggests that FAHP+NIR treatment accelerates wound heal-
ing by modulating inflammation, enhancing proliferation, and
promoting hair follicle formation. The chord diagram of GO
enrichment analysis highlights core genes such as Shh, Thbs1,
Serpine2, Clec7a, Hmox1, Hpse, IL-1α, Msx2, Nfkbiz, Trem1,
Adm, Clu, Csf3, and Ngfr, which are frequently involved in
various biological processes, indicating their crucial regulatory
roles (Figure 10E). KEGG pathway enrichment analysis further
reveals that the DEGs are primarily enriched in pathways
related to infection and inflammation, such as rheumatoid
arthritis, S. aureus infection, and IL-17 signaling pathways,
highlighting the role of FAHP hydrogel in treating infection
and regulating inflammation. The FAHP hydrogel may also
promote osteoclast differentiation and upregulate Hedgehog
signaling pathway to accelerate wound healing. Gene set enrich-
ment analysis (GSEA) demonstrates significant upregulation
in hair follicle morphogenesis (NES = 1.88), skin develop-
ment (NES = 1.71), and Hedgehog signaling pathway (NES
= 1.41) in the FAHP+NIR group (Figure 10H–J). A heatmap
further confirms significant upregulation of Hedgehog signaling
pathway-related DEGs (Shh, Ptch1, Gli1, Gli2, Scube1) in the
FAHP+NIR group (Figure 10K) [62]. Given the established roles
of Hedgehog signaling in stem cell proliferation and differenti-
ation, hair follicle regeneration, and microvascular remodeling,
these results suggest that the healing effects of FAHP+NIR
treatment may stem from the activation of this signaling path-
way.
Heatmap visualization of key DEGs shows the downregula-
tion of chemotaxis-related genes (Ccl2, Ccl3, Ccl7, Ccl9, Cxcl1,
Cxcl3, and Cxcl6) and pro-inflammatory genes (Map3k8, Mmp8,
Csf3, and Sca1) following FAHP+NIR treatment (Figure 10L).
Notably, genes involved in hair follicle development (Sp6),
hair cycle regulation (Foxn1), and keratinization promotion
(Tgm3) are upregulated, suggesting favorably improved skin
function [63]. Additionally, the genes that promote wound heal-
ing (Tnfrsf19, Fgfr2, Fgfr3, Fgfr4, Mkx, Itgb4, and Adora1) are
upregulated, indicating enhanced cell migration and tissue repair
capabilities.
To validate the activation of relevant signaling pathways at the
protein level, Western blot analysis was performed on L929
cells treated with PBS and FAHP+NIR to systematically assess
the expression levels of key proteins in the Hedgehog pathway
(Figure 10M). Compared with the PBS group, the expression
levels of Hedgehog pathway-related proteins, including the lig-
and Shh, the receptor Ptch1, the signal transducer Smo, and
the downstream transcription factor Gli1, were significantly
upregulated in the FAHP+NIR group (Figure 10N), indicating
activation of this pathway. In addition, ELISA assays revealed
that FAHP+NIR treatment significantly reduced TNF-α and IL-
17 secretion in L929 cells (Figure 10O,P), suggesting that the
FAHP hydrogel participated in the regulation of inflammatory
responses.
In conclusion, FAHP+NIR treatment accelerated wound healing
through multiple mechanisms, including reduction of exces-
sive inflammation, promotion of hair follicle development, and
enhancement of cell proliferation and tissue remodeling. These
findings underscore the potential of FAHP hydrogel as a promis-
ing therapeutic strategy.
3
Conclusions
We developed a self-evolutionary Fe3N/Fe3O4 nHJ-incorporated
hyaluronan/poly(aspartic acid) hydrogel dressing through Ag+-
hydrazide coordination and Schiff base dual dynamic crosslink-
ing strategy, aiming at meeting the requirements of different
wound healing stages. The hydrogel mediated in situ reduction
of Ag+ to gradually generate Ag nanozymes with superox-
ide dismutase-like and catalase-like activities. Fe3N/Fe3O4 nHJ
photosensitizer continuously released ammonia via hydrolysis,
generated 1O2 and ⋅O2
‒ and heat under 808 nm laser irradiation,
and exhibited peroxidase-/catalase-like activities. The dressing
displayed exceptional biocompatibility, self-healing capacity and
injectability, and could conduct effective hemostasis, cascade
catalytic reaction and phototherapy. The multifunctional dress-
ing could actively and temporally modulate wound niche to
substantially promote infected full-thickness wound closure
in diabetic rats, with potent broad-spectrum antibacterial and
anti-biofilm activities from Ag+ and phototherapy at initial
infectious stage, favorable redox and immune rebalancing func-
tions by ROS scavenging and macrophage M2 polarization
mediated by antioxidative Ag nanozymes and nHJ during the
inflammatory period, and extensive cell proliferation, vascular-
ization, collagen deposition and re-epithelialization boosted by
ammonia and oxygenation in the proliferative stage. mRNA
sequencing analysis validated the upregulation of multiple
pro-healing signaling pathways. This study demonstrates an
active temporal therapeutic strategy to efficiently accelerate
MRSA-infected cutaneous wound healing, offering a promising
option for the phased treatment of clinical refractory chronic
wounds.
4
Experimental Section
4.1
Statistical Analysis
All results were presented as mean ± S.D. Differences between
two groups were analyzed using a t-test. For comparisons among
more than two groups, one-way ANOVA or two-way ANOVA
was performed using GraphPad Prism 9.0 software. Statistical
significance was denoted as “ns” (no significant difference),
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001.
The preparation and characterization methods of the nanoparti-
cles and hydrogels are available in the Supporting Information.
Advanced Materials, 2026
19 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (82272802), the Medical Career Development Fund of Xi’an
Jiaotong University (XJYG2025-SFJJ014), the Wu Jieping Medical Foun-
dation (320.6750.2023-17-19, 320.6750.2025-17-3, and 320.6750.2025-26-16),
the Clinical Research Foundation of the First Affiliated Hospital of
Xi’an Jiaotong University (XJTU1AF-CRF-2023-023), the China Postdoc-
toral Science Foundation (2023TQ0268 and 2023M732801), Institutional
Foundation of The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University
(2024-QN-27), and the Natural Science Foundation of Shaanxi Province of
China (2024GX-YBXM-315 and 2024JC-YBMS-640). We also would like to
thank XiaoFei Wang at Biomedical Experimental Center of Xi’an Jiaotong
University for his technical support.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Ethics Statement
All animal experiments were approved by the Ethical Committee of Xi’an
Jiaotong University (ethics no. XJTUAE2023-1414).
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
References
1. I. Genitsaridi, P. Salpea, A. Salim, et al., “11th edition of the IDF Diabetes
Atlas: global, regional, and national diabetes prevalence estimates for
2024 and projections for 2050,” Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology 14 (2026):
149–156, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(25)00299-2.
2. D. G. Armstrong, T. W. Tan, A. J. M. Boulton, and S. A. Bus, “Diabetic
Foot Ulcers,” JAMA 330 (2023): 62–75, https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2023.
10578.
3. X. Wang, X. Qin, Y. Liu, et al., “Plasmonic Supramolecular Nanozyme-
Based Bio-Cockleburs for Synergistic Therapy of Infected Diabetic
Wounds,” Advanced Materials 36 (2024): 2411194, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.202411194.
4. P. Ye, Y. Yang, M. Liu, et al., “Co-Delivery of Morphologically Switch-
able Au Nanowire and Hemoglobin-Resveratrol Nanoparticles in the
Microneedle for Diabetic Wound Healing Therapy,” Advanced Materials
37 (2025): 2419430, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202419430.
5. Y. L. Jin, S. H. Liu, X. Y. Wang, C. Y. Wang, Q. F. Ruan, and
W. Li, “Multifunctional Microneedle Patches Loaded with Engineered
Nitric Oxide-Releasing Nanocarriers for Targeted and Synergistic Chronic
Wound Therapy,” Advanced Materials 37 (2025): 2413108, https://doi.org/
10.1002/adma.202413108.
6. J. Y. Shan, X. Y. Wu, J. Y. Che, J. J. Gan, and Y. J. Zhao, “Reactive
Microneedle Patches with Antibacterial and Dead Bacteria-Trapping
Abilities for Skin Infection Treatment,” Advanced Science 11 (2024):
2309622, https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202309622.
7. D. Pranantyo, C. K. Yeo, Y. Wu, et al., “Hydrogel Dressings with
Intrinsic Antibiofilm and Antioxidative Dual Functionalities Accelerate
Infected Diabetic Wound Healing,” Nature Communications 15 (2024):
954, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44968-y.
8. H. Li, S. Wei, Q. Ling, et al., “Nanozyme-Reinforced Hydrogel Spray
as a Reactive Oxygen Species-Driven Oxygenator to Accelerate Diabetic
Wound Healing,” Advanced Materials 37 (2025): 2504829, https://doi.org/
10.1002/adma.202504829.
9. S. M. Andrabi, S. M. S. Shahriar, Y. Tian, et al., “Engineered Peptides-
Based Hybrid-Nested Microneedle Effectively Treat Biofilm-Infected
Diabetic Wounds,” Advanced Functional Materials 35 (2025): 2422150,
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202422150.
10. J. Jiang, H. Liang, Y. Ye, et al., “Stem Cell Secretome Armed Magneto-
Actuated Micromotors as Spatio-Temporal Manipulators for Wound
Healing Acceleration,” Nature Communications 16 (2025): 6754, https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61914-8.
11. M. Li, C. Wang, Q. Yu, et al., “A Wearable and Stretchable Dual-
Wavelength LED Device for Home Care of Chronic Infected Wounds,”
Nature Communications 15 (2024): 9380, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
024-53579-6.
12. Z. Jiang, W. Zhang, C. Zhu, et al., “Copper Telluride@Sodium
Alginate-Poly(vinyl Alcohol) Nanofiber/Gauze Wound Dressing for
Gram-Negative Bacteria-Infected Wounds,” ACS Nano 19 (2025): 26170–
26192, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c07686.
13. Y. X. Huang, J. L. Li, Z. H. Yu, J. Y. Li, K. N. Liang, and Y.
Deng, “Elaborated Bio-Heterojunction with Robust Sterilization Effect
for Infected Tissue Regeneration via Activating Competent Cell-Like
Antibacterial Tactic,” Advanced Materials 36 (2024): 2414111, https://doi.
org/10.1002/adma.202414111.
14. X. N. Hou, H. S. Wang, X. Y. Yao, Q. L. Zhou, and X. D. Niu, “Pt-Induced
Sublattice Distortion Facilitates Enzyme Cascade Reactions for Erad-
icating Intracellularly Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus and
Enhancing Diabetic Wound Healing,” ACS Nano 19 (2025): 17709–17727,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c01894.
15. M. He, X. Yang, D. Xiang, et al., “Jahn–Teller-Driven Electronic Modu-
lation of Bio-Heterojunction for Wound Regeneration after Postoperative
Tumor Resection,” Nano Letters 25 (2025): 6828–6838, https://doi.org/10.
1021/acs.nanolett.5c01632.
16. D. Wang, H. Wang, L. Ji, et al., “Hybrid Plasmonic Nanodumbbells
Engineering for Multi-Intensified Second Near-Infrared Light Induced
Photodynamic Therapy,” ACS Nano 15 (2021): 8694–8705, https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsnano.1c00772.
17. J. Liu, A. Wang, S. Liu, et al., “A Titanium Nitride Nanozyme
for pH-Responsive and Irradiation-Enhanced Cascade-Catalytic Tumor
Therapy,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 60 (2021): 25328–
25338, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202106750.
18. Z. Yang, L. Wang, X. Zhang, et al., “Nitrogen Vacancy Modulation
of Tungsten Nitride Peroxidase-Mimetic Activity for Bacterial Infection
Therapy,” ACS Nano 18 (2024): 24469–24483, https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsnano.4c07856.
19. J. W. Guan, J. L. Wang, X. S. Zhang, J. W. Chi, Z. L. Ma, and
X. J. Zhang, “Silver Nanoparticles with Multimodal Biological Activi-
ties Integrated into Advanced Material Platforms for Chronic Wound
Management,” Nanoscale 17 (2025): 18409–18445, https://doi.org/10.1039/
d5nr02066b.
20. L. Yang, D. Zhang, W. Li, et al., “Biofilm Microenvironment Trig-
gered Self-Enhancing Photodynamic Immunomodulatory Microneedle
for Diabetic Wound Therapy,” Nature Communications 14 (2023): 7658,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43067-8.
21. Y. Yang, Q. Fang, J. Wang, et al., “Glucose-Activated Programmed
Hydrogel with Self-Switchable Enzyme-like Activity for Infected Diabetic
Wound Self-Adaptive Treatment,” Advanced Materials 37 (2025): 2419158,
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202419158.
22. H. Tao, Y. Xia, T. Tang, et al., “Self-Responsive H2-Releasing
Microneedle Patch Temporally Adapts to the Sequential Microenviron-
ment Requirements for Optimal Diabetic Wound Healing,” Chemical
Engineering Journal 489 (2024): 151200, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.
151200.
23. C. Tyavambiza, M. Meyer, and S. Meyer, “Cellular and Molecular
Events of Wound Healing and the Potential of Silver Based Nanoformula-
tions as Wound Healing Agents,” Bioengineering 9 (2022): 712, https://doi.
org/10.3390/bioengineering9110712.
24. F. Zhang, H. Zhang, S. Wang, et al., “A Dynamically Phase-Adaptive
Regulating Hydrogel Promotes Ultrafast Anti-Fibrotic Wound Healing,”
20 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Nature Communications 16 (2025): 3738, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
025-58987-w.
25. Y. Kang, L. Xu, J. Dong, et al., “Programmed Microalgae-Gel Promotes
Chronic Wound Healing in Diabetes,” Nature Communications 15 (2024):
1042, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45101-9.
26. B. Zhao, J. Sun, Y. Xu, et al., “Programmed Temporal Modulation
by Using a Magnetoelectric Wound Dressing for Ultra-Fast Early-Stage
Wound Healing,” Biomaterials 325 (2026): 123569, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2025.123569.
27. Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, et al., “Microenvironment-Feedback
Regulated Hydrogels as Living Wound Healing Materials,” Nature
Communications 16 (2025): 6050, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-
60858-3.
28. H. Shu, T. Zhang, Y. Jiang, et al., “Mechanoregulative Hydrogel
Facilitates Rapid Scarless Healing by Self-Adaptive Control of Wound
Niche at Different Stages,” Science Advances 11 (2025): adv9895, https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adv9895.
29. T. Wei, T. Pan, X. Peng, et al., “Janus Liposozyme for the Modulation
of Redox and Immune Homeostasis in Infected Diabetic Wounds,” Nature
Nanotechnology 19 (2024): 1178–1189, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-024-
01660-y.
30. L. Cheng, Z. Zhuang, M. Yin, et al., “A Microenvironment-Modulating
Dressing with Proliferative Degradants for the Healing of Diabetic
Wounds,” Nature Communications 15 (2024): 9786, https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41467-024-54075-7.
31. Y. Ma, C. Xie, C. Liao, et al., “Zinc-Coordinated Trienzyme Nanogel
Cascade Therapy for Accelerated Post-Pancreatectomy Cutaneous Wound
Healing,” Advanced Materials 37 (2025): 08538, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.202508538.
32. J. Qian, L. Ji, W. Xu, et al., “Copper-Hydrazide Coordinated Mul-
tifunctional Hyaluronan Hydrogels for Infected Wound Healing,” ACS
Applied Materials & Interfaces 14 (2022): 16018–16031, https://doi.org/10.
1021/acsami.2c01254.
33. A. Merhi, P. Delrée, and A. M. Marini, “The Metabolic Waste Ammo-
nium Regulates mTORC2 and mTORC1 Signaling,” Scientific Reports 7
(2017): 44602, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep44602.
34. S. Sergio, B. Spedicato, G. Corallo, et al., “β-Catenin/c-Myc Axis
Modulates Autophagy Response to Different Ammonia Concentra-
tions,” Advanced Biology 9 (2025): 2400408, https://doi.org/10.1002/adbi.
202400408.
35. J. Zhu, Q. Zeng, Y. Liu, et al., “Smart Nanosilver Strikes Twice:
Precision Bacteria Killing Meets Autophagy-Boosted Healing for Infected
Wounds,” Advanced Functional Materials 35 (2025): 2507797, https://doi.
org/10.1002/adfm.202507797.
36. Y. Gao, X. Chen, L. Liu, et al., “Transdermal Microneedle Integrat-
ing a Biomimetic Self-Enhancing Fenton Reaction Nano-Reactor for
Alleviating Rheumatoid Arthritis by Inflammatory Microenvironment
Remodeling,” Theranostics 15 (2025): 7180–7196, https://doi.org/10.7150/
thno.114855.
37. Z. Huang, F. H. Li, Y. D. Liu, S. G. Chen, Z. D. Wei, and Q. Tang,
“The Role of Nitrogen Sources and Hydrogen Adsorption on the Dynamic
Stability of Fe–N–C Catalysts in Oxygen Reduction Reaction,” Chemical
Science 15 (2024): 1132–1142, https://doi.org/10.1039/d3sc05378d.
38. H. Hu, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, et al., “Engineered Nickel–Iron Nitride
Electrocatalyst for Industrial-Scale Seawater Hydrogen Production,”
Advanced Materials 37 (2025): 2415421, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.
202415421.
39. Y. Wu, Y. Zhao, P. Zhai, et al., “Triggering Lattice Oxygen Activation of
Single-Atomic Mo Sites Anchored on Ni–Fe Oxyhydroxides Nanoarrays
for Electrochemical Water Oxidation,” Advanced Materials 34 (2022):
2202523, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202202523.
40. Y. Zhao, M. E. Sadat, A. Dunn, et al., “Photothermal Effect on Fe3O4
Nanoparticles Irradiated by White-Light for Energy-Efficient Window
Applications,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 161 (2017): 247–254,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.11.039.
41. Y.
Liu
and
J.
L.
Wang,
“Multivalent
Metal
Catalysts
in
Fenton/Fenton-Like Oxidation System: A Critical Review,” Chemical
Engineering Journal 466 (2023): 143147, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.
2023.143147.
42. W. Xu, Y. Wang, G. Hou, et al., “Tumor Microenvironment Respon-
sive Hollow Nanoplatform for Triple Amplification of Oxidative Stress
to Enhance Cuproptosis-Based Synergistic Cancer Therapy,” Advanced
Healthcare Materials 12 (2023): 2202949, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.
202202949.
43. H. Adelnia, H. D. N. Tran, P. J. Little, I. Blakey, and H. T. Ta,
“Poly(aspartic Acid) in Biomedical Applications: From Polymerization,
Modification, Properties, Degradation, and Biocompatibility to Appli-
cations,” ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering 7 (2021): 2083–2105,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.1c00150.
44. X. Y. Zhang, Y. P. Liang, S. F. Huang, and B. L. Guo, “Chitosan-Based
Self-Healing Hydrogel Dressing for Wound Healing,” Advances in Colloid
and Interface Science 332 (2024): 103267, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2024.
103267.
45. S. Chernousova and M. Epple, “Silver as Antibacterial Agent: Ion,
Nanoparticle, and Metal,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 52
(2013): 1636–1653, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201205923.
46. Z. L. Zhu, J. Y. Gao, F. T. Li, and H. R. Zhang, “The Study of Adsorption
of L-Aspartic Acid on Silver Sol by Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering,”
Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis 24 (2004): 68–70.
47. J. P. Xu, Y. Liu, and S. H. Hsu, “Hydrogels Based on Schiff Base
Linkages for Biomedical Applications,” Molecules (Basel, Switzerland) 24
(2019): 3005, https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules24163005.
48. M. A. Raza, Z. Kanwal, A. Rauf, A. N. Sabri, S. Riaz, and S. Naseem,
“Size- and Shape-Dependent Antibacterial Studies of Silver Nanoparticles
Synthesized by Wet Chemical Routes,” Nanomaterials 6 (2016): 74, https://
doi.org/10.3390/nano6040074.
49. W. Xu, A. Suo, A. J. M. Aldai, et al., “Hollow Calcium/Copper
Bimetallic Amplifier for Cuproptosis/Paraptosis/Apoptosis Cancer Ther-
apy via Cascade Reinforcement of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and
Mitochondrial Dysfunction,” ACS Nano 18 (2024): 30053–30068, https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c11455.
50. M. Kharaziha, A. Baidya, and N. Annabi, “Rational Design of
Immunomodulatory Hydrogels for Chronic Wound Healing,” Advanced
Materials 33 (2021): 2100176, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202100176.
51. K. G. Harding, H. L. Morris, and G. K. Patel, “Science, Medicine, and
the Future: Healing Chronic Wounds,” BMJ 324 (2002): 160–163, https://
doi.org/10.1136/bmj.324.7330.160.
52. T. A. Wynn and K. M. Vannella, “Macrophages in Tissue Repair,
Regeneration, and Fibrosis,” Immunity 44 (2016): 450–462, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.immuni.2016.02.015.
53. V. Falanga, “Wound Healing and Its Impairment in the Diabetic Foot,”
The Lancet 366 (2005): 1736–1743, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(05)
67700-8.
54. O. A. Peña and P. Martin, “Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Skin
Wound Healing,” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 25 (2024): 599–
616, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-024-00715-1.
55. B. Ezraty, A. Gennaris, F. Barras, and J. F. Collet, “Oxidative Stress,
Protein Damage and Repair in Bacteria,” Nature Reviews Microbiology 15
(2017): 385–396, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro.2017.26.
56. L. Xu, Y. Y. Wang, J. Huang, C. Y. Chen, Z. X. Wang, and H. Xie,
“Silver Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Medical Applications and Biosafety,”
Theranostics 10 (2020): 8996–9031, https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.45413.
57. L. Pasquina-Lemonche, J. Burns, R. D. Turner, et al., “The Architecture
of the Gram-Positive Bacterial Cell Wall,” Nature 582 (2020): 294–297,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2236-6.
Advanced Materials, 2026
21 of 22
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

58. H. C. Flemming, J. Wingender, U. Szewzyk, P. Steinberg, S. A. Rice,
and S. Kjelleberg, “Biofilms: An Emergent Form of Bacterial Life,” Nature
Reviews Microbiology 14 (2016): 563–575, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro.
2016.94.
59. L. Gardeazabal and A. Izeta, “Elastin and Collagen Fibres in Cuta-
neous Wound Healing,” Experimental Dermatology 33 (2024): 15052,
https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.15052.
60. L. A. DiPietro, “Angiogenesis and Wound Repair: When Enough Is
Enough,” Journal of Leukocyte Biology 100 (2016): 979–984, https://doi.
org/10.1189/jlb.4MR0316-102R.
61. G. C. Gurtner, S. Werner, Y. Barrandon, and M. T. Longaker, “Wound
Repair and Regeneration,” Nature 453 (2008): 314–321, https://doi.org/10.
1038/nature07039.
62. J. Briscoe and P. P. Thérond, “The Mechanisms of Hedgehog Signalling
and Its Roles in Development and Disease,” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology 14 (2013): 416–429, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3598.
63. M. Zhu, Y. Fang, Y. Huang, et al., “Transcriptomics Sequencing
Reveals Qu-Shi-Yu-Fa Decoction Promotes Hair Cycle and Keratinization
by Upregulating FOXN1 and TGM3 to Treat Androgenetic Alopecia,”
Phytomedicine 143 (2025): 156837, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2025.
156837.
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting
Information section.
SupportingFile: adma73169-sup-0001-SuppMat.docx.
22 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 2026, 30, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202523302 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License