RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advmat.de
Co-Assembled Nanoparticles toward Multi-Target
Combinational Therapy of Alzheimer’s Disease by Making
Full Use of Molecular Recognition and Self-Assembly
Wen-Bo Li, Lin-Lin Xu, Si-Lei Wang, Ying-Yue Wang, Yu-Chen Pan,* Lin-Qi Shi,*
and Dong-Sheng Guo*
The complex pathologies in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) severely limit the
eﬀectiveness of single-target pharmic interventions, thus necessitating
multi-pronged therapeutic strategies. While ﬂexibility is essentially demanded
in constructing such multi-target systems, for achieving optimal synergies
and also accommodating the inherent heterogeneity within AD. Utilizing the
dynamic reversibility of supramolecular strategy for conferring suﬃcient
tunability in component substitution and proportion adjustment, amphiphilic
calixarenes are poised to be a privileged molecular tool for facilely achieving
function integration. Herein, taking 𝜷-amyloid (A𝜷) ﬁbrillation and oxidative
stress as model combination pattern, a supramolecular multifunctional
integration is proposed by co-assembling guanidinium-modiﬁed calixarene
with ascorbyl palmitate and loading dipotassium phytate within calixarene
cavity. Serial pivotal events can be simultaneously addressed by this versatile
system, including 1) inhibition of A𝜷production and aggregation, 2)
disintegration of A𝜷ﬁbrils, 3) acceleration of A𝜷metabolic clearance, and 4)
regulation of oxidative stress, which is veriﬁed to signiﬁcantly ameliorate the
cognitive impairment of 5×FAD mice, with reduced A𝜷plaque content,
neuroinﬂammation, and neuronal apoptosis. Confronted with the extremely
intricate clinical realities of AD, the strategy presented here exhibits ample
adaptability for necessary alterations on combinations, thereby may
immensely expedite the advancement of AD combinational therapy through
providing an exceptionally convenient platform.
W.-B. Li, L.-L. Xu, S.-L. Wang, Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-C. Pan, L.-Q. Shi, D.-S. Guo
College of Chemistry
Key Laboratory of Functional Polymer Materials (Ministry of Education)
Nankai University
Tianjin 300071, China
E-mail: panyuchen@mail.nankai.edu.cn;lqshi@nankai.edu.cn;
dshguo@nankai.edu.cn
W.-B.Li, Y.-Y.Wang, Y.-C.Pan,D.-S.Guo
StateKey Laboratory of Elemento-OrganicChemistry
Frontiers ScienceCenterforNew OrganicMatter
CollaborativeInnovation Centerof Chemical ScienceandEngineering
(Tianjin)
Nankai University
Tianjin 300071,China
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202401918
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202401918
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progres-
sive and multifactorial neurodegenerative
disorder of the central nervous system,
pathologically featured by the presence
of senile plaques, neuroﬁbrillary tangles,
chronic inﬂammation, and aberrant neu-
ronal apoptosis.[1] It is the most preva-
lent form of senile dementia, representing
60−80% of all cases, and also the seventh
leading cause of death worldwide.[2] Over
decades of intensive clinical trials, substan-
tial ﬁnancial resources, and human capi-
tal have been invested in AD drug develop-
ment. Regrettably, only the two monoclonal
antibodies targeting 𝛽-amyloid (A𝛽) pep-
tide, Aducanumab and Lecanemab, hold
promise for partially reversing the patho-
logical condition.[3] The remaining phar-
maceutical interventions approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA), including several cholinesterase
inhibitors and N-methyl-d-aspartate recep-
tor antagonist, only provide symptomatic
relief without fundamentally modifying the
disease’s progression.[4] This therapeutic
limitation may be attributed to the intricate
L.-L. Xu, S.-L. Wang, L.-Q. Shi
State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology
Nankai University
Tianjin 300071, China
L.-Q. Shi
Haihe Laboratory of Sustainable Chemical Transformations
Tianjin 300090, China
D.-S. Guo
Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Novel Functional Materials Chemistry
College of Chemistry and Environmental Sciences
Kashi University
Kashi 844000, China
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (1 of 15)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
and interconnected signaling pathways implicated in AD.[5]
Wherein, a plethora of molecular alterations and pathologi-
cal disorders are observed, such as the overexpression and ag-
gregation of A𝛽, disturbances in metal ion homeostasis, up-
regulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inﬂammatory
mediators, hyperphosphorylation of microtubule-associated pro-
tein tau, cholinergic dysfunction, and synaptic loss.[6] These
complex pathological mechanisms engender a daunting chal-
lenge for single-target drugs, as they can only address a lim-
ited facet of the disease process, leading to restricted eﬃ-
cacy in comprehensively intervening in the entire pathological
pathway.[7]
Thus, multi-target therapy is emergingly recognized as
a breakthrough strategy for the treatment of AD.[5,6,8] The
synergistic eﬀect engendered by concomitantly targeting mul-
tiple pathological processes can mitigate the complemental
interference between distinct signaling pathways, eﬀectively
interrupting the cascading reaction and vicious spiral inherent
in AD pathology,[6d] meanwhile compensate for the down-
stream side eﬀects that may ensue from manipulating a single
target.[6a,9] In fact, this potentially more comprehensive approach
has already been practiced in clinical settings. For instance, the
combination of Donepezil and Memantine has been approved
by the FDA as the ﬁfth prescription for patients with moderate
to severe AD;[5] the multi-target drug Blarcamesine, which acts
as a double agonist of sigma-1 and muscarinic receptors, as
well as an inhibitor of GSK-3𝛽, is currently undergoing phase 3
clinical trials.[10] Novel strategies in developing such multi-target
systems are currently under enthusiastic investigations as an
emerging trend, while still in the nascent stage with limited
advanced research cases available. Given the aforementioned
extensive array of pathological alterations in AD, as well as the
substantial heterogeneity observed within AD populations,[11]
careful deliberation is imperative on the selection of com-
bined target types that potentially exhibit optimal eﬃcacy or
improved individual suitability. For instance, it is worthwhile
to explore whether choosing simultaneous modulation on the
upstream and downstream biological processes within the
same pathological pathway, or intervening in interconnected
but relatively parallel processes; as well as determine whether
concurrently targeting the underlying pathogenic mechanisms
and superﬁcial pathological manifestations, or focusing on the
former is factually suﬃcient.[12] Hence, given these perplexing
concerns, comprehensively understanding AD combinational
therapy assumes paramount practical implications in guiding
its rational design, thus poses a high demand on establishing
an adaptable platform with robust integrating universality
for diverse types of drugs, as well as suﬃcient adjusting
ﬂexibility for deliberate component substitution according
to needs.
Considering these factors, supramolecular strategies, en-
compassing molecular recognition and self-assembly,[13] appear
to be a highly promising function integration method fully
accommodating these requirements,[14] as advantaged by the
intrinsic characteristics of dynamic reversibility, stimulus re-
sponsibility, adaptability and modularity.[15] Speciﬁcally, the
recognition and assembly processes with inherent dynamic
nature are under thermodynamic control,[16] allowing for sim-
pliﬁed fabrication processes of materials due to the spontaneity
and modularity, and the self-correction capability derived as
well also contributes in reducing the inconsistencies between
batches.[17] Additionally, it is able to provide ample tunability
for ﬂexible substitution of drug types and subtle adjustment
of their ratios,[18] which facilitates the identiﬁcation of the
most synergistic combinations, thus providing opportuni-
ties to address the aforementioned inquiries regarding target
selection.
In light of this, a platform strategy based on supramolecu-
lar multifunctional integration was introduced in this study for
conveniently constructing AD combinational therapy system, in
which the amphiphilic calixarene was utilized as the core build-
ing block, allowing for deliberate incorporation of other func-
tional molecules through co-assembly and host-guest recogni-
tion. Two representative targets, A𝛽ﬁbrillation and oxidative
stress, were selected as the model combination pattern in this
work, carefully considering their widely noticed reciprocal causal-
ity in generating detrimental feedback betwixt.[19] The speciﬁc
system was constructed through co-assembling guanidinium-
modiﬁed calixarene (GCA) with ascorbyl palmitate (AP), and fur-
ther loading dipotassium phytate (IP6) within the GCA cavity, re-
ferred to as IP6@GCA/AP (Scheme 1). Wherein, the two incor-
porated components, AP and IP6, are both commercially avail-
able. GCA with abundant guanidinium groups modiﬁed on its
upper rim, was designed to generate strong interactions with the
negatively charged amino acid residues rich in A𝛽42 sequence
(e.g., aspartic acid and glutamic acid), thereby facilitating the ef-
fective inhibition and reversion on A𝛽42 ﬁbrillation. The robust
transmembrane capability deriving from guanidinium with low
hydration energy and positive charge,[20] further promoted the
phagocytosis and clearance of A𝛽42 through microglia. Besides,
the alkyl chains existing at the lower rim of GCA endowed it
with assembly capability.[20a,21] AP, as a L-ascorbic acid deriva-
tive with pronounced reducing nature,[22] imparted extraordinary
antioxidant prowess to the co-assembly, thus contributed in al-
leviating the inﬂammatory environment in AD brain. And the
hydroxyl groups in its structure provided extra hydrogen bond
binding sites. This gave a rise to the formation of heteromulti-
valent recognition in conjunction with GCA, and consequently
improved the binding aﬃnity toward A𝛽42, leading to height-
ened eﬀectiveness in inhibiting and reversing ﬁbrillation. IP6,
as a 𝛽-secretase inhibitor,[23] could be precisely released through
biomarker displacement activation (BDA) strategy for inhibiting
the production of A𝛽42. Hence, serial functions can be simulta-
neously achieved by this versatile system, as 1) inhibition of A𝛽
production and aggregation; 2) disintegration of the pro-existed
A𝛽ﬁbrils; 3) acceleration of A𝛽metabolic clearance, as well as 4)
regulation of oxidative stress, resulting in the eﬀective disruption
of the inherent vicious circle and veriﬁed to generate satisfactory
therapeutic outcome on AD mouse model. As a platform strategy,
the supramolecular approach introduced in this study allows for
ﬂexible module substitution and precise ratio adjustment, thus
presents immense potential in accomplishing numerous diverse
combinations. This consequently oﬀers a pathway to address the
perplexity involved in target selecting, as well as achieve optimal
function integration for pursuing easily accessible individualized
AD prescriptions.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (2 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Scheme 1. Illustration for the construction of IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly and its comprehensive intervention within both A𝛽ﬁbrillation and oxidative
stress pathological processes. The IP6@GCA/CD co-assembly was fabricated by co-assembling the two amphiphilic components, GCA and AP, and
further loading IP6 in the cavity of GCA. Serial crucial events in the target pathways are addressed, including 1) inhibiting A𝛽generation through
reducing 𝛽-secretase activity, inhibiting A𝛽aggregation as forming 2) oligomers and 3) ﬁbrils, 4) disintegrating pre-existed A𝛽ﬁbrils, 5) accelerating the
clearance of A𝛽through microglial phagocytosis, as well as 6) scavenging ROS and alleviating oxidative stress. These together promisingly prevent 7)
A𝛽-induced ROS production, 8) ROS-induced enhancement of 𝛽-secretase activity, as well as 9) ROS-induced impairment on microglial phagocytosis,
ultimately leading to the eﬀective disruption of the vicious cycle between the two targets.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Construction of the GCA/AP Co-Assembly and Ratio
Screening
GCA was synthesized according to established procedures,[21b]
and the GCA/AP co-assembly was fabricated by hydrating a
mixture of GCA and AP in 10 mm HEPES buﬀer at pH 7.4
(see Experimental Section, Supporting Information for more de-
tails). With the aim of identifying the optimal combination ra-
tio that concurrently ensures stable nanoparticle formation and
satisﬁed therapeutic eﬃcacy, co-assemblies with diﬀerent pro-
portions of the two components as 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2 were to-
gether established, in which the concentration of GCA remained
unchanged. According to zeta potential measurement, the ob-
tained co-assemblies displayed obvious positive surface poten-
tial of 50.7 ± 2.1, 43.0 ± 0.5, and 35.4 ± 2.3 mV, respectively
(Figure S1a and Table S2, Supporting Information), as a result
of the presence of ﬁve positive charges in single GCA relative
to only one negative charge in single AP. The values exhibited
a slight decrease as the proportion of AP increased, which pro-
vided evidence for the expected blending of the two components.
Subsequently, the particle sizes of the co-assemblies were charac-
terized using dynamic light scattering (DLS). No signiﬁcant alter-
ation presented by varying AP proportions, as determined to be
30.4 ± 0.3, 30.5 ± 0.6, and 36.0 ± 0.9 nm, respectively (Figure S1b,
Supporting Information, Figure 1d, Table S2, Supporting Infor-
mation), possibly due to the suﬃcient interspace in the assem-
bly for accommodating AP molecules with relative small heads
and ﬂexible tails. The diameter values kept consistent over a
period of 7 days at room temperature in all cases (Figure S1b,
Supporting Information), which suggested the favorable stabil-
ity of the co-assemblies as well as the ﬂexibility of non-covalent
assembly in modulating composition ratios. Further character-
izations were performed taking GCA:AP = 1:1 co-assembly as
the representative. Firstly, a mixed system named as GCA+AP
formed by combining separately prepared GCA and AP assem-
bly in one solution was established for comparison, signiﬁcant
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (3 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 1. The characterization of GCA/AP co-assembly and its binding aﬃnity toward A𝛽42. a) The chemical structures of GCA, AP, and IP6. b) Zeta
potential of diﬀerent components, the signiﬁcance level between GCA/AP co-assembly and GCA+AP system was ****p < 0.0001, analyzed by one-
way ANOVA with Tukey’s test. c) The TEM images of GCA/AP and IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly (scale bar = 50 nm). d) The diameter of GCA/AP and
IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly in HEPES buﬀer (10 mm, pH 7.4), measured by DLS through number-based lognormal distribution model. e) The stability
of GCA/AP and IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly measured in HEPES buﬀer (10 mm, pH 7.4) at room temperature, the data was obtained through number-
based lognormal distribution model of DLS. f) The stability and zeta potential of IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly measured in rat CSF at room temperature,
the data were obtained through number-based lognormal distribution model of DLS. g) Competitive ﬂuorescence titration of A𝛽42 in the presence of
Fl (1.0 μm) and GCA/AP co-assembly (0.5 μm/0.5 μm) in HEPES buﬀer (10 mm, pH 7.4) at 25 °C (𝜆ex = 494 nm), and h) the associated titration curve
(𝜆em = 512 nm) ﬁtted according to the N:1 binding stoichiometry (N was ﬁxed as 2) (see Supporting Information for more details of the ﬁtting method).
i−j) ITC analysis of L-ascorbic acid (1.0 mm) binding to A𝛽42 (20 μm). The value of binding aﬃnity (Ka), binding sites (N), enthalpy change (ΔH),
Gibbs free energy (ΔG), and entropy change (−TΔS) were given insert. k) The Ka value between diﬀerent assembly and A𝛽42. All data were expressed
as mean ± s.d. from three independent experiments (n = 3).
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (4 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
distinction in surface potential between GCA/AP co-assembly
(43.0 ± 0.5 mV) and the GCA+AP system (56.9 ± 0.8 mV)
was discovered (Figure 1b), indicating that no self-selection
was occurred within the co-assembly, aligning with the entropy
favorability principle and also corresponded with our previous
veriﬁcation on co-assembly behavior.[21a,24] Transmission elec-
tron microscopy (TEM) image showed a spherical vesicle-like ap-
pearance for GCA/AP (Figure 1c). And the morphologic structure
was further conﬁrmed by utilizing static and dynamic light scat-
tering (SLS-DLS), in which the value of Rg/Rh was calculated to
be 1.10 representing the vesicular morphology (Figure S2, Sup-
porting Information).
Subsequently, the binding aﬃnities of the as-prepared co-
assemblies toward A𝛽42 were investigated as a basis for screen-
ing the assembly proportions, since the ability to recognize A𝛽42
is the key function fundamentally requested. By competitive
ﬂuorescence titration using ﬂuorescein (Fl) as a reporter dye,
we found that the binding constant (Ka) of GCA:AP = 1:1 co-
assembly and GCA:AP = 2:1 co-assembly with A𝛽42 was high
up to be (5.22 ± 1.54) × 1014 m−1 and (2.96 ± 0.68) × 1014 m−1,
respectively, one order of magnitude stronger than that of pure
GCA assembly as (5.45 ± 1.93) × 1013 m−1 (Figure 1g,h,k,
Figures S4 and S5, Table S3, Supporting Information). The bind-
ing constant was ﬁtted out according to the N:1 binding sto-
ichiometry, based on the concentration of the peptide by as-
suming an isodesmic model with independent binding sites on
the assembly, and the obtained Ka expressed the aﬃnity of N
GCA binding one peptide coupled with or without the syner-
gistic eﬀect of AP.[25] Molar concentration of GCA was used
in the ﬁtting process, as it was each single GCA molecule that
acted as a functional unit interacting with A𝛽42 through bind-
ing.
Meanwhile, through isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)
analysis, the Ka between the head group of AP (L-ascorbic acid)
with A𝛽42 was determined to be (1.10 ± 0.27) × 104 m−1, accom-
panied by concomitant negative changes in both enthalpy (ΔH)
and entropy (ΔS) (Figure 1i,j), which was consistent with our
previous speculation regarding the dominant role of hydrogen
bonding interactions within the binding process of AP and A𝛽42.
Therefore, as reasonably explained, the enhanced binding aﬃn-
ity observed above could be attributed to the heteromultivalent
eﬀect generated by the integration of GCA and AP,[21a,24] wherein
GCA could interact with the negative charged amino acid (e.g., as-
partic acid and glutamic acid) and the hydroxyl in AP molecules
could act as hydrogen bond donor providing extra binding sites
with the hydrogen bond acceptor in A𝛽(e.g., the oxygen atoms
on the carbonyl group and nitrogen atoms in the free amino
and guanidinium groups) (Figure 2a). The Ka value decreased
in GCA:AP = 1:2 co-assembly as (6.42 ± 2.10) × 1013 m−1
(Figure 1k, Figure S5, Table S3, Supporting Information), pos-
sibly due to the reduced positive surface charge by excessive
amount of AP, which interfered the electrostatic interaction be-
tween co-assembly and negatively charged A𝛽42. This observa-
tion underscored the inherent advantage of the co-assembled het-
eromultivalent platform that allowed for adjustable proportions,
thereby avoiding potential antagonistic eﬀects. In light of the
above results, we chose the GCA:AP = 1:1 co-assembly as the op-
timal pattern for the follow-up experiments (hereafter referred to
GCA/AP). It is worth noted that the preparation method for con-
structing co-assembly with such diﬀerent proportion of compo-
nents was basically same without additional adjustment, which
showcased the advantaged convenience of non-covalent assem-
bly in selecting the optimal ratio.
Conceivably, an ideal A𝛽inhibitor should exhibit robust
and speciﬁc binding toward A𝛽, while displaying compara-
tively lower aﬃnity for other widely present proteins in biolog-
ical systems. Hence, the recognition selectivity of the GCA/AP
was further examined. Two proteins with the highest abun-
dance in blood or cerebrospinal ﬂuid, as human serum albu-
min (HSA) and immunoglobulin G (IgG), were selected as
the representative for veriﬁcation. Through ﬂuorescent titra-
tion, the Ka between GCA/AP and HSA was determined to be
(1.69 ± 0.12) × 104 m−1 (Figures S6a,b, Supporting Information),
and (2.74 ± 0.69) × 106 m−1 for IgG (Figures S6c,d, Supporting
Information). These values were several orders of magnitude (8
and 10, respectively) lower than that for A𝛽42, which indicated
that these proteins were incapable of imparting signiﬁcant inter-
ference on the capture of A𝛽42 by the co-assembly, thereby ensur-
ing its functionality in authentic physiological environment.
2.2. Inhibition of A𝜷42 Fibrillation and Disintegration of Its
Mature Fibrils
The capability of GCA/AP for inhibiting A𝛽42 ﬁbrillation and dis-
integrating its mature ﬁbrils was further examined, ﬁrstly us-
ing thioﬂavine T (ThT) as a ﬂuorescent probe for detecting the
𝛽-sheet content in protein or peptide. All of the GCA/AP and
two individual components, GCA and AP, were found to have
no discernible impact on the ThT ﬂuorescence (Figure S7, Sup-
porting Information). When GCA/AP with equimolar quantity to
A𝛽42 was added, minimal increase in ThT ﬂuorescence (as only
0.7% relative to the control group) could be observed after co-
incubation for 96 h, indicating the complete inhibition on the
A𝛽42 ﬁbrillation, and nearly none increase was determined upon
enhanced dosage as twice (Figure 2b, Table S4, Supporting Infor-
mation). Besides, the pre-existed A𝛽42 ﬁbrils were entirely disin-
tegrated within 6 h through co-incubation with GCA/AP, as evi-
denced by the total reduction in ThT ﬂuorescence (9.6% and 2.1%
residual for equal and twice dosage, respectively) (Figure 2c, Table
S4, Supporting Information). Additionally, parallel experiments
were also conducted on individual GCA and AP. Compared to
single GCA (Figure S8c, d, Table S4, Supporting Information),
the noticeable higher eﬃciency of GCA/AP was attributed to its
increased binding aﬃnity toward A𝛽42 due to the heteromultiva-
lent eﬀect aforementioned. It was conﬁrmed in the results of AP,
as certain inhibition eﬀect has also been measured (Figure S8e,f,
Table S4, Supporting Information), indicating that the extra hy-
drogen bond interactions provided by the integration of AP could
also function in inhibiting aggregation of A𝛽42 and reversing its
ﬁbrosis.
Subsequently, the morphological alterations of A𝛽42 through
co-incubation with GCA/AP were characterized using TEM
(Figure S9, Supporting Information). In the control group with-
out GCA/AP added, abundant ﬁbrils were generated after incuba-
tion for 96 h. While as the dosage of the co-assembly increased,
the ﬁbrils decreased in both quantity and length, and even be-
came negligible upon 1.0 equiv. or more. A corresponded trend
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (5 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 2. The inhibition on A𝛽42 ﬁbrillation and disintegration of its mature ﬁbrils, loading and competitive release of IP6, as well as the antioxidant
capacity of GCA/AP co-assembly. a) Schematic illustration of the BDA strategy and the heteromultivalent recognition for GCA/AP co-assembly toward
A𝛽42. The relative ﬂuorescence of ThT (25 μm) of b) A𝛽42 monomer (20 μm), and c) pre-formed A𝛽42 ﬁbrils (20 μm) co-incubated with or without
GCA/AP co-assembly of diﬀerent equalization. d) The A𝛽42 oligomer content generated during the progress of A𝛽42 monomer aggregation and A𝛽42
ﬁbrils disintegration, with or without diﬀerent concentration of GCA/AP co-assembly co-incubated. e) Competitive ﬂuorescence titration of IP6 in the
presence of Fl (1.0 μm) and GCA/AP co-assembly (0.5 μm/0.5 μm) in HEPES buﬀer (10 mm, pH 7.4) at 25 °C (𝜆ex = 494 nm), and f) the associated
titration curve (𝜆em = 512 nm) ﬁtted according to the 1:1 binding stoichiometry. g) The ﬂuorescence recovery of Fl@GCA/AP co-assembly (1.0 μm,
1.0 μm/1.0 μm) after adding A𝛽42 (5.0 μm) and incubated in 37 °C. h) Zeta potential of GCA/AP co-assembly before and after adding IP6 or A𝛽42, and
IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly after adding A𝛽42, the signiﬁcance levels with **p < 0.01 and ns as no signiﬁcance, were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s test. i) EPR spectrum of ·OH (up) and −O2· (down) before and after adding GCA/AP co-assembly. j) The normalized scavenge rate of ·OH
and −O2· for GCA/AP, GCA, and AP, as well as their anti-lipid peroxidation eﬃciency. All data were expressed as mean ± s.d. from three independent
experiments (n = 3).
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (6 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
also arose during the disintegration process, wherein the pre-
formed ﬁbrils were completely disintegrated in the addition of
twice dosage. Additionally, circular dichroism spectroscopy for
analyzing the secondary structure of A𝛽42 was also utilized. The
addition of the GCA/AP did not alter the secondary structure of
A𝛽42 monomer as an obvious random coil at the initial stage, in-
dicated by the negative peak at 195 nm (Figure S10a, Support-
ing Information). While after 96 h of incubation, the A𝛽42 trans-
formed into a ﬁbrillar structure predominantly rich in 𝛽-sheet,
featured by the negative peak at 210 nm and the positive peak
at 195 nm. Contrarily, no signiﬁcant 𝛽-sheet structure emerged
after co-incubation with GCA/AP for 96 h (Figure S10b, Support-
ing Information), and the pre-existed 𝛽-sheet peaks of the A𝛽42
ﬁbrils disappeared through co-incubation with the co-assembly
for 6 h (Figure S10c, Supporting Information). These collectively
demonstrated the excellent inhibition eﬀect of the co-assembly
in both inhibition and disintegration processes, corresponding
with the results in ThT and TEM analysis.
Additionally, particular attention should be paid to the gener-
ation of A𝛽oligomers during the intervention process, as they
are widely recognized as the most toxic forms of A𝛽.[26] In light
of this, the quantiﬁcation of A𝛽oligomers was identiﬁed using
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. As illustrated in Figure 2d,
the A𝛽oligomers produced during ﬁbrillation signiﬁcantly de-
creased under incubation of GCA/AP with diﬀerent equivalent
(Figure S11, Table S5, Supporting Information). Notably, in the
process of inhibiting aggregation, the application of a concen-
tration equal to or greater than 0.5 equiv. elicited a remarkable
reduction in the content of A𝛽42 oligomers, surpassing a mag-
nitude of 20-fold. Likewise, in the process of disintegration, em-
ploying a concentration of 2.0 equiv. yielded a profound 12-fold
decrease in the content of A𝛽42 oligomers. These exhilarating re-
sults indicated that the involvement of GCA/AP did not make the
process solely halt at the stage of oligomer, instead, it facilitated
their disintegration, thus avoiding the potential toxicity and en-
suring the safety of the treatment.
2.3. Construction and Characterization of the IP6@GCA/AP
Co-Assembly
Promoting the metabolic balance of A𝛽requires not only in-
hibiting the A𝛽ﬁbrillation, but also reducing its production.
In brain, the generation of A𝛽fragments originates from the
consecutive cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by 𝛽-
secretase and 𝛾-secretase,[27] and increased activity of the former
has been veriﬁed attributing to the accumulation of brain A𝛽in
late-onset sporadic AD.[28] Thus, the inhibition of 𝛽-secretase ac-
tivity is recognized to be one viable approach to reduce A𝛽pro-
duction, with several phase 3 clinical trials involved.[27] Accord-
ingly, additional IP6, investigated to exhibit certain eﬃcacy as
a 𝛽-secretase inhibitor with an IC50 range of 250−690 nm,[23]
was aimed to be loaded within the cavity of the GCA, extra lever-
aging its functionality as a drug carrier. Through ﬂuorescence
titration, the Ka between IP6 and GCA/AP was determined to be
(6.08 ± 0.74) × 107 m−1 (Figure 2e,f), conﬁrming the anticipated
encapsulation. Subsequently, serial characterization was consec-
utively performed on IP6@GCA/AP (Table S2, Supporting Infor-
mation). Firstly, the surface potential of IP6@GCA/AP was de-
termined to be 38.7 ± 0.9 mV, a little negatively shifted as the
result of successful loading of IP6 (Figure 1b). Additionally, sim-
ilar to GCA/AP, IP6@GCA/AP exhibited a spherical vesicle-like
morphology in the TEM image (Figure 1c). The DLS result for
IP6@GCA/AP kept consistent with the TEM observation, reveal-
ing a diameter of 33.7 ± 2.2 nm, and remained stable over a pe-
riod of 7 days in HEPES buﬀer (10 mm, pH 7.4) (Figure 1d,e). Ad-
ditionally, we further explored its stability in cerebrospinal ﬂuid
(CSF) of rats, which served as an in vitro simulated physiological
environment. As illustrated in Figure 1f, both the size and zeta
potential of the IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly remained consistent
over a period of 7 days (Figure S3, Supporting Information), in-
dicating its favorable stability in such circumstance (the increase
in the particle size, as well as the decrease in zeta potential com-
pared with the values measured in HEPES buﬀer or deionized
water, were speculated to be owing to the change of operation
environment).
Notably, the Ka between IP6 and GCA/AP mentioned above
was 3 and 1 orders of magnitude higher than the interfering pro-
teins, HSA and IgG, respectively, and more importantly, it was
considerably weaker (7 orders of magnitude) than that toward
A𝛽42, implying the prospective feasibility for precise drug deliv-
ery through the BDA strategy, in which the loading drug can
be released speciﬁcally when meeting the biomarkers overpro-
duced in focal zones by competing the host cavities with them
(Figure 2a).[21b] To verify the eﬀective release of the drug, Fl with
similar binding aﬃnity with IP6 toward GCA/AP, was engaged as
the substitute of IP6. After incubation with A𝛽42 at 37 °C, the ﬂu-
orescence of Fl@GCA/AP was observed to get complete recovery
to its initial level, indicating the total release of guest (Figure 2g).
Besides, the zeta potential of IP6@GCA/AP upon the addition
of A𝛽42 transferred from 38.7 ± 0.9 to 30.1 ± 2.7 mV, and ex-
hibited no discernible disparity with that of A𝛽42@GCA/AP as
31.6 ± 0.3 mV (Figure 2h). These collectively evidenced that IP6
could be released upon the competition of A𝛽42, thereby guaran-
teeing the targeted drug release at the speciﬁc site featured by
A𝛽42 overexpression.
2.4. Antioxidant Capacity Test
In addition to A𝛽ﬁbrillation, oxidative stress represents an-
other core pathology in AD, and the interdependence between
the two as mutual promotion exacerbates the treatment chal-
lenges through forming a vicious cycle.[19a,29] Speciﬁcally, ele-
vated level of ROS contributes to increased expression of APP,
as well as enhanced 𝛽and 𝛾secretase activity, resulting in aug-
mented A𝛽production, meanwhile impedes the clearance of
A𝛽through multiple pathways (e.g., impairing the phagocyto-
sis capacity of microglia).[19b] While metal icons complex with
A𝛽catalyze the production of ROS through Fenton reaction,[30]
the NADPH oxidase activated by A𝛽oligomers and the pro-
inﬂammatory cytokine released by microglial activated by A𝛽
in M1 phenotype,[19c,31] also facilitate the generation of ROS,
these consequently induce lipid peroxidation and Ca2+ overload,
leading to mitochondrial dysfunction, and ultimately promoting
the burst of ROS in turn.[19a] Therefore, simultaneous interven-
tion on both facets may promisingly yield signiﬁcant beneﬁts,[32]
proven by several researches recently reported.[19d-g,29c]
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (7 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Given the inherent high reducibility of AP molecule and
the ROS scavenging capability of calixarene skeleton reported
previously,[13d,21a] it is reasonable to expect a potent antioxidant
eﬃciency in the GCA/AP co-assembly. Two typical ROS was
initially selected, the superoxide anion (−O2·) abundant in organ-
isms, and the hydroxyl radical (OH·) known for its intense tox-
icity. The electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy
was ﬁrstly employed for intuitively visualizing the elimination ef-
fect, using 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide (DMPO) as the spin
trapping reagents for OH· and 5-tert-butoxycarbonyl-5-methyl-1-
dihydro-pyrroline N-oxide (BMPO) for −O2·. OH· was generated
by the Fenton reaction between H2O2 and Fe2+, while −O2· was
generated by the catalysis of xanthine by xanthine oxidase. As il-
lustrated in Figure 2i, both the EPR amplitudes were substan-
tially reduced after adding GCA/AP, representing the diminu-
tion of the two paramagnetic adducts (DMPO-OOH for DMPO
and OH·, BMPO-OH for BMPO and −O2·, respectively), thus
demonstrated the remarkable eﬀectiveness for GCA/AP as a ROS
scavenger. The corresponded scavenging eﬃciency was further
quantiﬁed using commonly utilized chemical assays (see Sup-
porting Information for more details), robust elimination was
determined for not only GCA/AP, but also individual GCA and
AP (Figure 2j, Table S6, Supporting Information), indicating that
both the two components contributed to the scavenging activity
of the co-assembly.
Additionally, two representative nitrogen-containing radicals,
1,1-diphenyl-2-picryl-hydrazyl radical (DPPH·) and 2,2′-azino-
bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) radical (ABTS+·) were
further engaged for detection. As illustrated in Figure S12c,e
(Supporting Information), AP served as the primary agent for
scavenging these two radicals. With increased concentration of
GCA/AP up to 30 μm/30 μm, over 80% DPPH· and 90% ABTS+·
were eliminated, accompanied by a noticeable lightening of the
solution color (Figure S12d,f, Supporting Information). More-
over, since lipid peroxidation was both one of the predominant
trigger and severe consequence of cellular oxidative stress,[33]
the anti-lipid peroxidation capacity was additionally evaluated by
measuring the generation of the lipid peroxidation product, mal-
ondialdehyde (Figure S12a, Supporting Information). GCA/AP
exhibited a remarkable capacity in combating this peroxidation
process, surpassing the combined eﬀects of GCA and AP alone,
in line with the color disparity established, which showcased the
advantageous synergistic eﬀect (Figure 2j, Figure S12b, Support-
ing Information). To sum up, the GCA/AP co-assembly exhibited
evident scavenging proﬁciency toward various ROS as well as po-
tent anti-lipid peroxidation eﬃciency, highlighting its formidable
antioxidant potential, and accordingly establishing a foundation
for ameliorating the oxidative stress and neuroinﬂammation in
AD brain.
2.5. In Vitro Alleviation on Cytotoxicity Caused by A𝜷42
For in vitro invesigations, the biocompatibility of IP6@GCA/AP
was ﬁrstly evaluated using CCK-8 assay (Figure S13, Support-
ing Information). In the concentration range below 20 μm (de-
termined by GCA concentration as a demonstration of the func-
tional unit amount, the same hereafter), the co-assembly was ob-
served exhibiting no discernible cytotoxicity on the three cell lines
employed, as human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y), murine
microglial cells (BV-2), and human embryonic kidney epithelial
cells (HEK-293T), respectively, demonstrating its favorable bio-
logical safety. Subsequently, to further validate the above ﬁndings
regarding the eﬀective inhibition and disintegration of A𝛽42 ﬁb-
rillation in solution, the alleviating eﬀect of the assemblies on
A𝛽42-mediated cytotoxicity was assessed on SH-SY5Y cells as a
neuronal model. As illustrated in Figure 3a, upon the addition
of A𝛽42 ﬁbrils, the cell viability measured by CCK-8 assay de-
creased to ≈60%. However, the value increased to ≈69%, 80%,
and 88%, respectively, with the involvement of GCA, GCA/AP,
or IP6@GCA/AP with equimolar quantity. Correspondingly in
the ﬂow cytometry analysis (Figure 3b−d, Figure S14, Support-
ing Information), the expression level of Bax proapoptotic pro-
tein (reported to cause the release of cytochrome C and facilitate
the cell apoptosis), as well as Cleaved Caspase-3 (another widely
used biomarker for apoptosis) was signiﬁcantly increased upon
the addition of A𝛽42 ﬁbrils, whereas the introduction of GCA,
GCA/AP and IP6@GCA/AP substantially attenuated their level
(as lowered by 27%, 84%, and 88% of the control for Bax; 14%,
90%, and 93% of the control for Cleaved Caspase-3, respectively.
The method for grouped comparison was given in supporting
information). Additionally, the expression level of Bcl-2, known
to prevent the activation of Bax, was found just to be opposite
(as increased by 15%, 74%, and 85% of the control, respectively).
All these results obviously indicated the eﬀective safeguard po-
tency of the assemblies against A𝛽42-induced nerve cell death.
And it can be observed that the eﬀectiveness in alleviating toxic-
ity improved as the variety of components in the formulation in-
creased, indicating that the incorporated AP and IP6 also played
a role in the eﬀectiveness along with GCA. This was conceiv-
ably attributed to the as-veriﬁed stronger binding capability of
GCA/AP co-assembly toward A𝛽42, resulting in better A𝛽42 dis-
integration. In addition, IP6 has also been reported exhibiting
certain anti-inﬂammatory activity,[34] thereby may partially atten-
uated the toxic eﬀect of A𝛽as inducing the redox homeostasis
imbalance of cells,[35] making it another beneﬁcial component in
such circumstance.
2.6. In Vitro Inhibition on 𝜷-Secretase Activity and Amelioration
of Cellular Oxidative Stress
Given that the loading of IP6 as the 𝛽-secretase enzyme in-
hibitor, further investigation was conducted to elucidate the in-
hibitory potential of the assemblies on 𝛽-secretase enzyme ac-
tivity. Cultured SH-SY5Y cells were treated with GCA, GCA/AP
or IP6@GCA/AP, respectively, followed by being lysed. The cel-
lular 𝛽-secretase enzyme activity was subsequently determined
using a BACE1 activity ﬂuorometric assay kit. As illustrated in
Figure 3e, as expected, GCA/AP and the individual component
GCA did not exhibit signiﬁcant inhibitory eﬀect on the activity of
the 𝛽-secretase enzyme, since the exceptional anti-interference
capability of the co-assembly prevented its impact on the enzy-
matic activity, inferring from our previous cognition.[21a] In con-
trast, a noticeable decrease in 𝛽-secretase enzyme activity, with
≈26%, was observed in the IP6@GCA/AP group, aligning with
previous reports on the inhibitory eﬀect of IP6 on 𝛽-secretase
enzyme activity.[23] Notably, according to the observations on
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (8 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 3. In vitro investigations of IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly. a) The cell viability with A𝛽42 ﬁbrils (20 μm) co-incubated with diﬀerent assembly (20 μm)
measured by CCK-8. The ﬂuorescence intensity of b) Bax, c) Cleaved Caspase-3, and d) Bcl-2 in diﬀerent groups measured by ﬂow cytometry. e) The cellular
𝛽-secretase enzyme activity treated with diﬀerent assembly (20 μm) determined using a BACE1 activity ﬂuorometric assay kit. f) The corresponding
ﬂuorescence intensity of DCFH-DA in g) the confocal laser-scanning images for intracellular ROS detection with the concentration of assembly as
20 μm. h) The confocal laser-scanning images representing the cellular uptake of A𝛽42 by BV-2 cells, and i) the corresponding ﬂuorescence intensity in
diﬀerent groups, with the concentration of assembly as 20 μm. j) The confocal laser-scanning images illustrating the colocalization of A𝛽42 (20 μm) and
diﬀerent assembly (20 μm), and k) the corresponding calculated Pearson correlation coeﬃcient. The signiﬁcance levels with ****p < 0.0001, ***p < 0.001,
**p < 0.01, *p < 0.05 and ns as no signiﬁcance, were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (9 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
BACE1 knockout mice as well as multiple clinical investigations,
complete inhibition of 𝛽-secretase enzyme activity may lead to
certain side eﬀects,[27] possibly due to its normal physiological
role in nervous system (e.g., maintaining synaptic homeostasis
and plasticity).[36] Therefore, our results were factually positive as
simultaneously taking eﬀects on reducing A𝛽production while
limiting the treatment-associated risks.[28a]
Subsequently, the capacity of the assemblies to improve cel-
lular oxidative stress was further evaluated in vitro. The intra-
cellular level of ROS was assessed using the commonly em-
ployed probe, 2′,7′-dichlorodihydroﬂuorescein diacetate (DCFH-
DA) through confocal laser-scanning microscopy. As depicted in
Figure 3f,g, co-incubation with A𝛽42 ﬁbrils resulted in a substan-
tial increase in ROS level within SH-SY5Y cells, as evidenced by
a signiﬁcant rise (4.1 fold compared to the control) in the ﬂuo-
rescence intensity (Figure S15, Supporting Information). This in-
crease was attributed to the inducement of lipid peroxidation and
mitochondrial dysfunction by A𝛽42, for instance, resulted from
the augmented Fenton reaction catalyzed by A𝛽42-complexed
metal ions (e.g., Fe3+/Fe2+ and Cu2+/Cu1+).[30] However, varying
degrees of reduction in ROS content were observed in the GCA,
AP, GCA/AP, and IP6@GCA/AP groups, and the value of the
last two were generally comparable to those of the control group
without A𝛽42 ﬁbrils added (as 74%, 82%, 98%, and 99%, respec-
tively). These results clearly indicated that the introduction of AP,
possessing an exceptional strong reducing ability, enabled the co-
assemblies to eﬀectively mitigate ROS and signiﬁcantly alleviate
cellular oxidative stress together with GCA.[34]
2.7. In Vitro Acceleration on the Microglial Phagocytosis of A𝜷42
Nevertheless, only fulﬁlling the function as reversal on A𝛽42 ﬁ-
brosis, resulting in their shift toward the monomeric state within
the brain, proves to be inadequate for comprehensively address-
ing A𝛽-related pathology. This insuﬃciency arises from the fol-
lowing reasons, as 1) uncleared A𝛽peptides, regardless of their
monomeric or aggregated states, possess the ability to complex
metal ions and generate ROS through Fenton reaction, thus pro-
voke neuronal inﬂammation, and consequently, expedite A𝛽pro-
duction and the progression of AD.[30,37] 2) The presence of un-
cleared aggregated forms of A𝛽could serve as catalytic surfaces,
facilitating the generation of toxic A𝛽oligomers from excessive-
expressed and uncleared A𝛽monomers persisted in the brain,
through secondary nucleation,[38] which potentially engenders
neurotoxic eﬀects and thereby undermines the therapeutic ef-
ﬁcacy of A𝛽intervention. Accordingly, augmenting the brain’s
immune system in enhancing the clearance of A𝛽assumes
paramount importance for elevating the treatment outcome of
AD.[39]
Taken these considerations, we conducted supplementary in-
vestigations to appraise the assembly’s capability on enhancing
A𝛽phagocytosis by microglia. Sulfo-Cyanine5-labeled A𝛽42 ﬁb-
rils (Cy5-A𝛽42) together with GCA, GCA/AP or IP6@GCA/AP,
respectively, were co-incubated with BV-2 cells. And the phago-
cytic uptake of A𝛽42 by microglia was evaluated through confocal
laser-scanning microscopy. As illustrated in Figure 3h, the addi-
tion of Cy5-A𝛽42 alone resulted in feeble intracellular green ﬂu-
orescence signal, indicating limited microglial phagocytosis of
A𝛽42. However, under the treatment in conjunction with GCA,
GCA/AP or IP6@GCA/AP, the intracellular green signal exhib-
ited a substantial increase, reaching 1.5, 2.5, 2.4-fold of the ﬂu-
orescence intensity exhibited by the control group, respectively
(Figure 3i, Figures S16 and S17, Supporting Information). This
compellingly suggested that these assemblies demonstrated a
pronounced ability to eﬀectively enhance the phagocytic uptake
of A𝛽42 by BV-2 cells.
Furthermore, through the incorporation of the hydrophobic
dye, nile red (NiR), within the interstitial region of diverse as-
sembly, congruence was observed between the ﬂuorescence emit-
ted by intracellular A𝛽42 (here labeled with ﬂuorescein isothio-
cyanate, as FITC-A𝛽42) and that of NiR within the nanomaterials
(Figure 3j, Figures S18 and S19, Supporting Information), and
the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient for each group was calculated
to be 0.36, 0.58, 0.59, respectively (Figure 3k). This clearly veri-
ﬁed that the assemblies could serve as a vehicle for the uptake
of A𝛽42 by microglia. As reasonably speculated, it is the guani-
dinium groups with positive charge and low hydration energy
displayed on the surface of the assembly, facilitated the transloca-
tion of A𝛽42 across the microglial membrane.[20a-d] And the supe-
rior performance of GCA/AP as well as IP6@GCA/AP was corre-
spondingly attributed to their enhanced ability in capturing A𝛽,
as well as the mitigation of oxidative stress experienced by mi-
croglia exposed to A𝛽, resulting in improvement of their phago-
cytic capability.
2.8. In Vivo Amelioration of the Cognitive Impairment on 5×FAD
Mice
Encouraged by these positive outcomes detailed above, we pro-
ceeded to evaluate the therapeutic eﬃcacy of the assemblies
in ameliorating cognitive impairment on 5×FAD mice, a well-
established AD model pathologically featured by A𝛽deposition
and plaque formation in brain. Diﬀerent formulations, includ-
ing HEPES, GCA, GCA/AP, and IP6@GCA/AP, were separately
administered to 6-month-old 5×FAD mice through stereotaxic in-
tracerebral injection, lasting over a period of 10 days (Figure 4a).
Subsequently, nesting test, new object recognition (NOR) test and
Morris water maze (MWM) test, were sequentially executed for
evaluating the social behavior, cognitive ability, as well as learn-
ing and memory capacity of the animals, which closely correlates
with the hippocampal functional integrity.
In the nesting test (Figure 4b), the nesting scores based on
the distribution and tearing degree of kitchen paper in the cage,
were remarkably higher in GCA, GCA/AP and IP6@GCA/AP
groups. The value increased by 22%, 43%, and 66%, respectively,
compared to the 5×FAD mice in control group treated with
HEPES and taking WT mice with HEPES as 100% (Figure 4c),
suggesting a pronounced enhancement in the social behavior of
5×FAD mice due to the administration. Meanwhile, in NOR test
(Figure 4d, Figure S20, Supporting Information), the 5×FAD
mice in three assembly groups showed heightened interest in
questing novel objects as determined by their searching paths.
Speciﬁcally, the calculated discrimination index (DI) increased
by 23%, 42%, and 69% of the control, respectively, indicating
that the assemblies substantially enhanced the cognitive ability
of AD mice (Figure 4e). Furthermore, consistently in MWM test
(Figure 4f−i, Figure S21, Supporting Information), the 5×FAD
mice in three assembly groups showed reduced escape latency
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (10 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 4. In vivo investigations of IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly on ameliorating the cognitive impairment of 5×FAD mice. a) Time schedule of the exper-
imental procedure. b) The digital photographs illustrating the nesting condition of mice in diﬀerent groups, and c) the corresponding nesting scores
evaluated. d) Representative searching paths of mice in diﬀerent groups for NOR test, and e) the corresponding calculated DI. f) Representative swim-
ming track, g) escape latency, h) target quadrant occupancy, and i) platform visits of mice in diﬀerent groups on the test day in MWM test. The signiﬁcance
levels with ****p < 0.0001, ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, and *p < 0.05, were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (11 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
(lowered by 9%, 58% and nearly 100% of the control, respec-
tively), longer swimming time in target quadrant (increased by
37%, 76%, and nearly 100% of the control, respectively) and
higher platform crossing numbers (increased by of 8%, 39%,
and 77% of the control, respectively), unequivocally demon-
strating that considerable improvement in the learning capacity
of 5×FAD mice was achieved under administration. Notably,
among all the three ethology tests, the mice in IP6@GCA/AP
group exhibited the most exceptional performance, surpassing
the GCA and GCA/AP groups and closely approaching the WT
mice. This convincingly validated that the integration of di-
verse pathological interventions through combinational therapy
greatly improved the eﬀectiveness on ameliorating the cognitive
impairment of AD mice. Additionally, the test results of WT mice
in IP6@GCA/AP group exhibited no detectable diﬀerence in
the above parameters from that of the HEPES group, suggesting
no detrimental eﬀects for the co-assembly on the behavior of
normal mice.
2.9. In Vivo Reduce of A𝜷Plaque Content, Neuroinﬂammation,
Neuronal Apoptosis in the Brain of 5×FAD Mice
Following the ethology experiments, we euthanized the mice and
collected their brain tissues to characterize the change of con-
cerned pathological conditions in brain. Firstly, the deposition
of A𝛽was accessed through thioﬂavine S (ThioS) staining as-
say. As depicted in Figure 5a, the hippocampus sections from
5×FAD mice in control group exhibited a substantial presence
of A𝛽plaques, as evidenced by the observation of numerous ﬂu-
orescent spots and intense ﬂuorescence, in stark contrast to the
WT mice. However, the ﬂuorescent signal was dramatically de-
creased in GCA, GCA/AP, and IP6@GCA/AP groups compared
to the control, representing a lowered content of A𝛽plaques fol-
lowing the administration of the assemblies. Notably, the ﬂu-
orescent spots were barely detectable in IP6@GCA/AP group,
meanwhile the GCA/AP group exhibited superior eﬀect com-
pared to the GCA group. Correspondingly, the area fraction of
ThioS in these three groups was calculated lowered by 34%, 57%,
and 87% of the control, respectively (Figure 5e). These observa-
tions demonstrated that the comprehensive intervention of in-
hibiting A𝛽production, disintegrating A𝛽ﬁbrils and promoting
their clearance contributed jointly to minimize the A𝛽burden in
mice brain.
Next, the content of 2′-deoxy-8-oxoguanosine (8-OHG), a cru-
cial biomarker indicative of oxidative damage to DNA caused by
ROS, was measured to evaluate the ROS level in brain tissue
through immunoﬂuorescence assay. As shown in Figure 5b, ap-
parent decrease in ROS level exhibited in GCA, GCA/AP, and
IP6@GCA/AP groups, evidenced by the reduced ﬂuorescence in-
tensity compared to that observed in control (lowered by 33%,
54%, and 79%, respectively) (Figure 5f). Moreover, as illustrated
in Figure 5c, the expression of the inﬂammatory cytokine, TNF-
𝛼, was also determined to be signiﬁcantly decreased in the three
assembly groups (lowered by 47%, 75%, and 91%, respectively)
(Figure 5g). To be noted, the IP6@GCA/AP and GCA/AP groups
exhibited a higher degree of decrease in both the level of ROS
and TNF-𝛼, compared to the GCA group, which collectively in-
dicated that the introduction of robustly reductive AP molecules
through co-assembly played a crucial role in ROS clearance and
alleviating brain inﬂammation in AD mice.
Subsequently, the level of Cleaved Caspase-3 representing the
extent of neuronal apoptosis in the mice brain was further evalu-
ated through immunoﬂuorescence assay. As shown in Figure 5d,
the neuronal apoptosis was signiﬁcantly improved in the GCA,
GCA/AP, and IP6@GCA/AP groups, with a pronounced de-
crease in the ﬂuorescence intensity (lowered by 33%, 62%, 93%
of control, respectively) (Figure 5h). Besides, the results of hema-
toxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of hippocampal region revealed
alleviative neuron damage in the three assembly groups with re-
duced cell shrinkage and karyopyknosist (Figure 5i). Correspond-
ingly with other results mentioned above, IP6@GCA/AP exhib-
ited the most pronounced improvement in both sets of experi-
ments, indicating the collaboration eﬀect generated by combi-
national therapy. Furthermore, the H&E staining of brain tis-
sues, as well as heart, liver, spleen, lung and kidney from WT
and 5×FAD mice treated with diﬀerent assembly, did not show
any pathological abnormalities, demonstrating their desirable
biosafety (Figure 5i, Figure S22, Supporting Information).
Overall, beneﬁted from the combination of comprehensive in-
tervention on A𝛽pathology and alleviation of oxidative stress, the
IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly proved to eﬀectively reduce the A𝛽42
burden, mitigate the neuroinﬂammation, as well as prevent neu-
ronal apoptosis in the brain of 5×FAD mice, which taking direct
responsibility for the improved performance observed in ethol-
ogy tests.
3. Conclusion
In summary, we provided a novel approach for AD combina-
tional therapy utilizing amphiphilic macrocyclic receptor as the
core building block, fully leveraging molecular recognition and
self-assembly. The developed IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly imple-
mented comprehensive intervention on both A𝛽metabolic im-
balance and oxidative stress pathology by addressing a succes-
sion of pivotal events, encompassing inhibiting A𝛽production
and aggregation, disintegrating mature A𝛽ﬁbrils, promoting A𝛽
metabolic clearance, as well as ameliorating oxidative stress and
neuroinﬂammation. Resultingly, the system has been substanti-
ated to signiﬁcantly alleviate the cognitive impairment observed
in 5×FAD mice, unequivocally attesting to the eﬃcacy of our ther-
apeutic paradigm. Beneﬁting from the tunability conferred by the
dynamically reversible nature of both recognition and assembly
processes, this approach exhibits remarkable ﬂexibility in mod-
ulating the incorporated components types and adjusting their
proportions, thereby can serve as a platform strategy for conve-
nient functional integration. With such inﬁnite rich alteration
possibilities for diverse combinations, it is rationally expected
holding tremendous promise for tackling the formidable chal-
lenges posed by complex diseases treatment extending beyond
the purview of AD, especially in the aspect of target selection, ef-
ﬁcacy screening and tailored healthcare advancement.
4. Experimental Section
Animals:
Female C57/6J and 5×FAD mice at 6 months of age were
procured from Cyagen Biosciences Inc. (Suzhou, China). All animal exper-
iments conducted in this study were approved by the Animal Committee
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (12 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 5. In vivo investigations of IP6@GCA/AP co-assembly on reducing A𝛽plaque content, neuroinﬂammation, neuronal apoptosis in the brain of
5×FAD mice. a) The ﬂuorescence images for ThioS staining in diﬀerent groups. Immunoﬂuorescence images in diﬀerent groups for the detection of b) 8-
OHG, c) TNF-𝛼, and d) Cleaved Caspase-3. The corresponding statistics for e) area fraction of ThioS, f) ﬂuorescence intensity of 8-OHG, g) ﬂuorescence
intensity of TNF-𝛼, h) ﬂuorescence intensity of Cleaved Caspase-3 in diﬀerent groups. i) The H&E staining of hippocampal region in diﬀerent groups.
The signiﬁcance levels with ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, and *p < 0.05, were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test.
of Nankai University (Approval Number: ACSNKU-51933006) and were
performed in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the National In-
stitutes of Health guide for the care and use of laboratory animals (NIH
Publications No. 8023, revised 1978).
Statistical Analysis:
All data were expressed as mean ± s.d., from three
independent experiments (n = 3). Statistical signiﬁcance was analyzed
through one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test by GraphPad Prism 8.3.0 soft-
ware, with ns as no signiﬁcance, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and
****p < 0.0001.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
W.-B.-L.
and
L.-L.-X.
contributed
equally
to
this
work.
This
work
was
supported
by
the
National
Natural
Science
Foun-
dation
of
China
(U20A20259,
51933006,
22201141,
52293383,
52303188,
and
22371147),
the
National
Key
R&D
Program
of
China
(No.
2022YFA1205702),
Fundamental
Research
Funds
for
the
Central
Universities,
which
are
gratefully
acknowl-
edged.
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (13 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Data Availability Statement
Research data are not shared.
Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, combinational therapy, molecular recognition, self-
assembly, 𝛽-amyloid ﬁbrillation
Received: February 5, 2024
Revised: April 10, 2024
Published online: May 6, 2024
[1] a) D. S. Knopman, H. Amieva, R. C. Petersen, G. Chételat, D. M.
Holtzman, B. T. Hyman, R. A. Nixon, D. T. Jones, Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers
2021, 7, 33; b) C. L. Masters, R. Bateman, K. Blennow, C. C. Rowe,
R. A. Sperling, J. L. Cummings, Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 2015, 1, 15056;
c) K. Blennow, M. J. de Leon, H. Zetterberg, Lancet 2006, 368, 387;
d) P. Scheltens, K. Blennow, M. M. B. Breteler, B. de Strooper, G. B.
Frisoni, S. Salloway, W. M. Van der Flier, Lancet 2016, 388, 505.
[2] a) Alzheimer’s Dementia 2017, 13, 325; b) Alzheimer’s Dementia 2022,
18, 700.
[3] a) M. Markovi´c, J. Miloševi´c, W. Wang, Y. Cao, Mol. Pharmacol. 2024,
105, 1; b) R. Perneczky, F. Jessen, T. Grimmer, J. Levin, A. Flöel, O.
Peters, L. Froelich, Brain 2023, 146, 842.
[4] a) K. G. Yiannopoulou, S. G. Papageorgiou, Ther. Adv. Neurol. Disord.
2012, 6, 19; b) W. V. Graham, A. Bonito-Oliva, T. P. Sakmar, Annu. Rev.
Med. 2017, 68, 413.
[5] Y. Ju, K. Y. Tam, Neural Regener. Res. 2022, 17, 543.
[6] a) M. G. Savelieﬀ, G. Nam, J. Kang, H. J. Lee, M. Lee, M. H. Lim,
Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 1221; b) J. M. Long, D. M. Holtzman, Cell
2019, 179, 312; c) C.-X. Gong, F. Liu, K. Iqbal, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2018,
64, S107; d) D. M. Wilson, M. R. Cookson, L. Van Den Bosch, H.
Zetterberg, D. M. Holtzman, I. Dewachter, Cell 2023, 186, 693; e) R.
G. Canter, J. Penney, L.-H. Tsai, Nature 2016, 539, 187.
[7] F. Mangialasche, A. Solomon, B. Winblad, P. Mecocci, M. Kivipelto,
Lancet Neurol. 2010, 9, 702.
[8] a) O. Benek, J. Korabecny, O. Soukup, Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2020, 41,
434; b) Z. Sang, K. Wang, J. Dong, L. Tang, Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2022,
238, 114464; c) S. Gauthier, J. Alam, H. Fillit, T. Iwatsubo, H. Liu-
Seifert, M. Sabbagh, S. Salloway, C. Sampaio, J. R. Sims, B. Sperling,
R. Sperling, K. A. Welsh-Bohmer, J. Touchon, B. Vellas, P. Aisen, J.
Prev. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2019, 6, 164; d) P. Zhang, S. Xu, Z. Zhu, J. Xu,
Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2019, 176, 228; e) C.-X. Gong, C.-L. Dai, F. Liu, K.
Iqbal, Front. Aging Neurosci. 2022, 14, 837649.
[9] H. Hampel, A. Elhage, M. Cho, L. G. Apostolova, J. A. R. Nicoll, A.
Atri, Brain 2023, 146, 4414.
[10] J. Cummings, G. Lee, K. Zhong, J. Fonseca, K. Taghva, Alzheimer’s
Dementia 2021, 7, e12179.
[11] a) K. Poulakis, J. B. Pereira, J.-S. Muehlboeck, L.-O. Wahlund, Ö.
Smedby, G. Volpe, C. L. Masters, D. Ames, Y. Niimi, T. Iwatsubo,
D. Ferreira, E. Westman, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 4566; b) J. W.
Vogel, A. L. Young, N. P. Oxtoby, R. Smith, R. Ossenkoppele, O. T.
Strandberg, R. L. Joie, L. M. Aksman, M. J. Grothe, Y. Iturria-Medina,
M. J. Pontecorvo, M. D. Devous, G. D. Rabinovici, D. C. Alexander, C.
H. Lyoo, A. C. Evans, O. Hansson, Nat. Med. 2021, 27, 871; c) C. H.
Latta, H. M. Brothers, D. M. Wilcock, Neuroscience 2015, 302, 103; d)
T. L. Young-Pearse, H. Lee, Y.-C. Hsieh, V. Chou, D. J. Selkoe, Trends
Neurosci. 2023, 46, 426.
[12] a) A. Salehipour, M. Bagheri, M. Sabahi, M. Dolatshahi, D. Boche,
J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2022, 87, 1433; b) J. L. Cummings, G. Tong, C.
Ballard, J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2019, 67, 779.
[13] a) H. Cui, B. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 6430; b) Y.-C. Pan, X.-Y.
Hu, D.-S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 2768; c) E. Busseron,
Y. Ruﬀ, E. Moulin, N. Giuseppone, Nanoscale 2013, 5, 7098; d) S. Li,
R. Ma, X.-Y. Hu, H.-B. Li, W.-C. Geng, X. Kong, C. Zhang, D.-S. Guo,
Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2203765; e) W.-C. Geng, J. L. Sessler, D.-S. Guo,
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2020, 49, 2303; f) J. Zhou, G. Yu, F. Huang, Chem. Soc.
Rev. 2017, 46, 7021; g) M. A. Beatty, F. Hof, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2021, 50,
4812.
[14] a) M. J. Webber, R. Langer, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 6600; b) Y.-C.
Pan, J.-H. Tian, D.-S. Guo, Acc. Chem. Res. 2023, 56, 3626.
[15] a) D. Xia, P. Wang, X. Ji, N. M. Khashab, J. L. Sessler, F. Huang, Chem.
Rev. 2020, 120, 6070; b) A. S. Braegelman, M. J. Webber, Theranos-
tics 2019, 9, 3017; c) G. Yu, K. Jie, F. Huang, Chem. Rev. 2015, 115,
8944; d) X. Chen, H. Gao, Y. Deng, Q. Jin, J. Ji, D. Ding, ACS Nano
2020, 14, 5121; e) Y.-X. Yue, Y.-L. Lin, M.-M. Chen, H.-W. Tian, R. Ma,
Z.-H. Wang, F.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Pan, D.-S. Guo, Sci. China Chem. 2023,
67, 1697. f) A. J. Selinger, F. Hof, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023, 62,
e202312407.
[16] E. Mattia, S. Otto, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 111.
[17] S. Li, J.-J. Li, Y.-Y. Zhao, M.-M. Chen, S.-S. Su, S.-Y. Yao, Z.-H. Wang, X.-
Y. Hu, W.-C. Geng, W. Wang, K.-R. Wang, D.-S. Guo, ACS Nano 2023,
17, 25468.
[18] a) H. Chen, X. Zeng, H. P. Tham, S. Z. F. Phua, W. Cheng, W. Zeng,
H. Shi, L. Mei, Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 7641;
b) Z. Zhang, Y.-X. Yue, L. Xu, Y. Wang, W.-C. Geng, J.-J. Li, X.-L.
Kong, X. Zhao, Y. Zheng, Y. Zhao, L. Shi, D.-S. Guo, Y. Liu, Adv.
Mater. 2021, 33, 2007719; c) S. Li, Y. Wang, X. Wang, J. Feng, D.-
S. Guo, Z. Meng, Y. Liu, S.-K. Sun, Z. Zhang, ACS Nano 2023, 17,
22399.
[19] a) G. Ganguly, S. Chakrabarti, U. Chatterjee, L. Saso, Drug Des., Dev.
Ther. 2017, 11, 797; b) M. T. Heneka, M. J. Carson, J. E. Khoury, G. E.
Landreth, F. Brosseron, D. L. Feinstein, A. H. Jacobs, T. Wyss-Coray,
J. Vitorica, R. M. Ransohoﬀ, K. Herrup, S. A. Frautschy, B. Finsen,
G. C. Brown, A. Verkhratsky, K. Yamanaka, J. Koistinaho, E. Latz, A.
Halle, G. C. Petzold, T. Town, D. Morgan, M. L. Shinohara, V. H.
Perry, C. Holmes, N. G. Bazan, D. J. Brooks, S. Hunot, B. Joseph,
N. Deigendesch, et al., Lancet Neurol. 2015, 14, 388; c) F. Leng, P.
Edison, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2021, 17, 157; d) P. Liu, T. Zhang, Q. Chen,
C. Li, Y. Chu, Q. Guo, Y. Zhang, W. Zhou, H. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Wang,
Z. Zhao, Y. Luo, X. Li, H. Song, B. Su, C. Li, T. Sun, C. Jiang, Adv.
Mater. 2021, 33, 2100746; e) L. Zhao, F. Meng, Y. Li, S. Liu, M. Xu,
F. Chu, C. Li, X. Yang, L. Luo, Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2210879; f) J.
Wang, P. Shangguan, X. Chen, Y. Zhong, M. Lin, M. He, Y. Liu, Y.
Zhou, X. Pang, L. Han, M. Lu, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Yang, J. Chen, C.
Song, J. Zhang, X. Wang, B. Shi, B. Z. Tang, Nat. Commun. 2024, 15,
705; g) R. Liu, J. Yang, X. Qiu, W. Ji, J. Shen, Y. Li, Z. Lu, Y. Wu, W.
Wang, J. Wang, J. Hao, X. Zhang, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2022, 11,
2101748.
[20] a) W.-C. Geng, Z. Ye, Z. Zheng, J. Gao, J.-J. Li, M. R. Shah, L. Xiao, D.-S.
Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 19614; b) B.-B. Han, Y.-C. Pan,
Y.-M. Li, D.-S. Guo, Y.-X. Chen, Chem. Commun. 2020, 56, 5512; c)
X.-Y. Hu, J. Gao, F.-Y. Chen, D.-S. Guo, J. Controlled Release 2020, 324,
124; d) M. Nishihara, F. Perret, T. Takeuchi, S. Futaki, A. N. Lazar, A.
W. Coleman, N. Sakai, S. Matile, Org. Biomol. Chem. 2005, 3, 1659; e)
S. Guo, Q. Huang, J. Wei, S. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Wang, R. Wang, Nano
Today 2022, 43, 101396.
[21] a) Y.-C. Pan, H. Wang, X. Xu, H.-W. Tian, H. Zhao, X.-Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, Y.
Liu, G. Ding, Q. Meng, B. J. Ravoo, T. Zhang, D.-S. Guo, CCS Chem.
2020, 3, 2485; b) J. Gao, J. Li, W.-C. Geng, F.-Y. Chen, X. Duan, Z.
Zheng, D. Ding, D.-S. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 4945.
[22] S. K. Karmee, Lipid Technol. 2011, 23, 227.
[23] a) C. Xue, W. Yu, H. Song, X. Huang, J. Ren, Analyst 2022, 147, 1357;
b) T. K. Abe, M. Taniguchi, FEBS Open Bio 2014, 4, 162.
[24] Z. Xu, S. Jia, W. Wang, Z. Yuan, B. Jan Ravoo, D.-S. Guo, Nat. Chem.
2019, 11, 86.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (14 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[25] G. Ghale, A. G. Lanctôt, H. T. Kreissl, M. H. Jacob, H. Weingart,
M. Winterhalter, W. M. Nau, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53,
2762.
[26] a) A. B. Reiss, H. A. Arain, M. M. Stecker, N. M. Siegart, L. J.
Kasselman, Rev. Neurosci. 2018, 29, 613; b) J. An, K. Kim, H. J. Lim,
H. Y. Kim, J. Shin, I. Park, I. Cho, H. Y. Kim, S. Kim, C. McLean,
K. Y. Choi, Y. Kim, K. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, Nat. Commun. 2024, 15,
1004.
[27] a) R. Yan, R. Vassar, Lancet Neurol. 2014, 13, 319; b) B. De Strooper,
R. Vassar, T. Golde, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2010, 6, 99.
[28] a) L. McConlogue, M. Buttini, J. P. Anderson, E. F. Brigham, K. S.
Chen, S. B. Freedman, D. Games, K. Johnson-Wood, M. Lee, M.
Zeller, W. Liu, R. Motter, S. Sinha, J. Biol. Chem. 2007, 282, 26326;
b) L.-B. Yang, K. Lindholm, R. Yan, M. Citron, W. Xia, X.-L. Yang, T.
Beach, L. Sue, P. Wong, D. Price, R. Li, Y. Shen, Nat. Med. 2003, 9, 3.
[29] a) V. Calsolaro, P. Edison, Alzheimer’s Dement. 2016, 12, 719; b) T.
Jiang, Q. Sun, S. Chen, Prog. Neurobiol. 2016, 147, 1; c) Y. Wu, J. Yang,
Y. Geng, X. Jiao, Z. Lu, T. Zhang, R. Zhao, J. Guo, W. Wang, J. Wang,
X. Zhang, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2024, 13, 2302851.
[30] M. A. Greenough, J. Camakaris, A. I. Bush, Neurochem. Int. 2013, 62,
540.
[31] C. K. Glass, K. Saijo, B. Winner, M. C. Marchetto, F. H. Gage, Cell
2010, 140, 918.
[32] R. Bai, J. Guo, X.-Y. Ye, Y. Xie, T. Xie, Ageing Res. Rev. 2022, 77, 101619.
[33] a) P. R. Angelova, N. Esteras, A. Y. Abramov, Med. Res. Rev. 2021, 41,
770; b) I. Villalón-García, S. Povea-Cabello, M. Álvarez-Córdoba, M.
Talaverón-Rey, J. M. Suárez-Rivero, A. Suárez-Carrillo, M. Munuera-
Cabeza, D. Reche-López, P. Cilleros-Holgado, R. Piñero-Pérez, J. A.
Sánchez-Alcázar, Neural Regener. Res. 2023, 18, 1196.
[34] L. Dilworth, D. Stennett, F. Omoruyi, Biomolecules 2023, 13, 972.
[35] M. P. Mattson, Nature 2004, 430, 631.
[36] H. Hampel, R. Vassar, B. De Strooper, J. Hardy, M. Willem, N. Singh,
J. Zhou, R. Yan, E. Vanmechelen, A. De Vos, R. Nisticò, M. Corbo, B. P.
Imbimbo, J. Streﬀer, I. Voytyuk, M. Timmers, A. A. Tahami Monfared,
M. Irizarry, B. Albala, A. Koyama, N. Watanabe, T. Kimura, L. Yarenis,
S. Lista, L. Kramer, A. Vergallo, Biol. Psychiatry 2021, 89, 745.
[37] A. Abelein, Acc. Chem. Res. 2023, 56, 2653.
[38] M. Törnquist, T. C. T. Michaels, K. Sanagavarapu, X. Yang, G. Meisl,
S. I. A. Cohen, T. P. J. Knowles, S. Linse, Chem. Commun. 2018, 54,
8667.
[39] Q. Luo, Y.-X. Lin, P.-P. Yang, Y. Wang, G.-B. Qi, Z.-Y. Qiao, B.-N. Li, K.
Zhang, J.-P. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Wang, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 1802.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2401918
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2401918 (15 of 15)
 15214095, 2024, 28, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202401918 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License