M AT ER IAL S SCI EN CE
Bioactive NIR-II gold clusters for three-dimensional
imaging and acute inflammation inhibition
Huizhen Ma1,2†, Xiaoning Zhang1†, Ling Liu1†, You Huang1, Si Sun2, Ke Chen1, Qi Xin1, Pengfei Liu1,
Yuxing Yan1, Yili Wang1, Yuan Li2, Haile Liu2, Ruoli Zhao2, Kexin Tan1, Xinzhu Chen1, Xun Yuan3,
Yonghui Li2, Ying Liu2, Haitao Dai2, Changlong Liu2, Hao Wang1*, Xiao-Dong Zhang1,2*
Strong fluorescence and high catalytic activities cannot be achieved simultaneously due to conflicts in free elec-
tron utilization, resulting in a lack of bioactivity of most near-infrared-II (NIR-II) fluorophores. To circumvent this
challenge, we developed atomically precise Au22 clusters with strong NIR-II fluorescence ranging from 950 to
1300 nm exhibiting potent enzyme-mimetic activities through atomic engineering to create active Cu single-
atom sites. The developed Au21Cu1 clusters show 18-fold higher antioxidant, 90-fold higher catalase-like, and 3-
fold higher superoxide dismutase–like activities than Au22 clusters, with negligible fluorescence loss. Doping
with single Cu atoms decreases the bandgap from 1.33 to 1.28 eV by predominant contributions from Cu d
states, and Cu with lost electron states effectuates high catalytic activities. The renal clearable clusters can
monitor cisplatin-induced renal injury in the 20- to 120-minute window and visualize it in three dimensions
using NIR-II light-sheet microscopy. Furthermore, the clusters inhibit oxidative stress and inflammation in the
cisplatin-treated mouse model, particularly in the kidneys and brain.
Copyright © 2023 The
Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
original U.S. Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
INTRODUCTION
Near-infrared-II (NIR-II, 1000 to 1700 nm) imaging with high
tissue penetration depth and signal-to-noise ratio has shown great
potential and gained wide attention in real-time monitoring, path-
ogenesis, and pathological evolution for cancer diagnosis as well as
neuroscience (1–10). Meanwhile, the biocatalytic or bioactive NIR-
II molecular agent is highly desired for real-time monitoring of
pathological processes and the molecular mechanism of treatment
(11–14). From a physical point of view, photoluminescence gener-
ally requires the sufficient electron-hole pair between the valance
band and the conduction band in the semiconductor for radiative
recombination (15, 16). However, infrared emission is always ac-
companied by lots of nonradiative recombination, causing ineffi-
cient luminescence quantum yield. Meanwhile, biocatalysts are
always involved in electron transfer between surface-active atoms
and substrate molecules, which will lead to losing free electrons con-
tinuously (11, 17–19), and the free electrons involved in the emis-
sion of light will be drastically reduced. Thus, this conflict caused
failure to obtain the higher efficient fluorescence and catalytic activ-
ity synchronously.
Most oxidative stress–related diseases require early intervention
and real-time monitoring of pathological evolution (20). However,
most traditional noninvasive imaging tools, such as single-photon
emission computed tomography, positron emission tomography,
computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging, meet ob-
struction of low temporal-spacial resolution to achieve precise
diagnosis and real-time monitoring. Oxidative stress and inflamma-
tion-related diseases are common in clinics, where the collaborative
real-time monitoring and intervention is still an urgent unmet need.
Chemotherapeutics often cause injury to normal tissues and organs
during medical treatment. For example, cisplatin, which is widely
used as an anticancer drug in clinics, can cross-link to DNA and
induce oxidative stress and inflammation, which may cause severe
side effects, especially nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity (21–23).
Cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury (AKI) (24–27), one of the
most common side effects, presents as a sudden decrease in
kidney function within a few hours or days. AKI is a typical
disease that requires real-time monitoring for early diagnosis as
well as early interventions to inhibit oxidative stress and acute in-
flammation (8, 28–30). Earlier studies shed light on the drug treat-
ment and monitoring process for AKI (31). For instance,
mitochondria targeting ceria nanoparticles with atorvastatin
display anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects, improving the
therapeutic effect of AKI (32). Molybdenum-based polyoxometa-
late nanoclusters are developed as nano-antioxidants for the treat-
ment of AKI (33). However, these materials lack the ability to
monitor renal function in real time. Multiple kidney-targeting fluo-
rescent probes enable renal monitoring functions but do not
provide renal protection (34, 35). The present molecular agent
cannot simultaneously both real-time monitor and decrease inflam-
mation. Therefore, it is desirable to develop biocatalytic NIR-II mo-
lecular agents to address real-time monitoring and achieve the
inhibition of oxidative stress and early inflammation synchronously
(36, 37).
In this work, we developed atomic precision Au22 clusters with
NIR-II emission and biocatalytic enzyme–mimicking activity
(Fig. 1). The single-atom engineering was used to create the Cu
single-atom active site in the outer layer of Au22 clusters, leading
to 18 times higher antioxidant, 90 times higher catalase (CAT)–
like, and 3 times higher superoxide dismutase (SOD)–like activity
with negligible luminescence loss. Meanwhile, Au22 clusters can
1Tianjin Key Laboratory of Brain Science and Neural Engineering, Academy of
Medical Engineering and Translational Medicine, Tianjin University, Tianjin
300072, China. 2Department of Physics and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Low Dimen-
sional Materials Physics and Preparing Technology, School of Sciences, Tianjin Uni-
versity, Tianjin 300350, China. 3School of Materials Science and Engineering,
Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao, Shandong 266042,
China.
*Corresponding author. Email: xiaodongzhang@tju.edu.cn (X.-D.Z.); hao_wang@
tju.edu.cn (H.W.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
1 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

distinguish and monitor the cisplatin-induced AKI after 20 to 120
min injection at the NIR-II window and achieve three-dimensional
(3D) imaging under light-sheet microscopy. The Au22 clusters show
superior performance in inhibiting oxidative stress and inflamma-
tion partially in the injured kidney and brain.
RESULTS
Structural characterization of gold clusters
The Au22 clusters are prepared and purified as per the previously
reported method (38–40). Au22(SG)18 clusters with glutathione as
the ligand are composed of a prolate Au8 core, two trimeric, and
two tetrameric motifs, which have been proved to be the stable
structure model (Fig. 2A) (40). The transmission electron micro-
scope (TEM) image and the size distribution histogram show that
the core size of Au22 clusters is about 1.5 nm (Fig. 2B), suggesting
the ultrasmall size (41, 42). Dynamic light scattering (DLS) deter-
mines that the mean hydrodynamic size of Au22 is 2.01 nm in phos-
phate-buffered saline (PBS) (Fig. 2C), slightly larger than the core
size due to the stretching of the outer ligands. Since the renal filtra-
tion threshold value is 5.5 nm, the ultrasmall size further indicates
its highly efficient renal clearance. Electrospray ionization mass
spectra (ESI-MS) reveal a distinct mass/charge ratio (m/z) peak at
~1968.44, corresponding to the calculated molecular weight of
[Au22(SG)18-5H]5−(Fig. 2D) and indicating that atomic-precise
Au22 clusters have been successfully obtained. The characteristic ab-
sorption peak of Au22 clusters is observed at 515 nm, with the emis-
sion center located at 925 nm and a broad tail extending to 1300 nm
through the charge transfer between ligand and gold core (Fig. 2E)
(43, 44). The excitation spectrum shows a very wide excitation range
(fig. S1A). Besides, the characteristic absorption peak at 515 nm is
still evident after the 100 K filtration (Fig. 2F), and the NIR-II signal
exhibits negligible fluorescence loss (fig. S1B). The quantum yield of
the Au22 clusters is about 0.16%, which is slightly lower than
Au25(GSH)18 and higher than other materials (44, 45). As illustrated
in Fig. 2 (G and H), Au22 clusters exhibit excellent photostability
under continuous excitation at 808 nm and good fluorescence
stability in deionized (DI) water and PBS at room temperature for
a week. Meanwhile, Au22 clusters demonstrate good stability
without obvious signal loss from 300 to 900 nm for a week in DI
water, PBS, and fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Fig. 2I and fig. S2).
These results reveal that the Au22 clusters with well-defined
atomic precision hold ultrasmall size, great water solubility, and
stable structure, which is favorable for further application (46).
We also use atom engineering to modify Au22 clusters with
various metallic elements. The optical absorption spectra of
doped clusters with different metals and different molar concentra-
tions are shown in fig. S3. While the doping molar ratio increases to
15:7 or the highest ratio 11:11, the peaks of absorption spectra di-
minish or even disappear for Cu-, Pt-, Zn-, Cd-, Er-, and Ag-doped
Au22 clusters (fig S3). The density functional theory (DFT) simula-
tions (fig. S4) reveal that the highest ratio can significantly induce
the reduction of the Au sp and 5d states in the highest occupied mo-
lecular orbital (HOMO) and the energy levels below HOMO, which
further affects the optical transition, leading to great changes in ab-
sorption peaks. In addition, an obvious distortion in cluster struc-
ture caused by heteroatom doping at high concentrations, especially
for Zn, Cd, and Er, will also affect the electronic structure of doping
clusters and thus have a distinct impact on optical properties. The
TEM images demonstrate that Au21Cu1 clusters with ultrasmall size
still have good homogeneity and dispersion, which is consistent
with Au22 clusters (fig. S5A). The full x-ray photoelectron spectro-
scopy (XPS) of Au21Cu1 clusters has more Cu 2p peaks than that of
Au22 clusters (fig. S6). XPS further confirms that the Cu atom sub-
stitution in Au22 clusters induces a shift in the binding energy with
the Au 4f region (Fig. 2J) (11, 47). Compared to pure Au22 clusters,
the full XPS spectrum of the binding energy of Au21Cu1 clusters
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the properties and biomedical applications of Au22 clusters. We introduced Cu single-atom active sites to the atomic-precision Au22
clusters having strong NIR-II fluorescence. This atom engineering procedure reduces the bandgap from 1.33 to 1.28 eV via contributions of Cu s and p states, and Cu atom
with lost electron states contributes to potent enzyme-mimicking activities. Consequently, the bioactive NIR-II clusters exhibit good capacities for highly accurate mon-
itoring of cisplatin-induced kidney injury and inhibition of oxidative stress and inflammation in multiple organs of the cisplatin-treated mouse model, particularly in the
kidneys and brain.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
2 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

shows a Cu signal, and the Cu 2p XPS spectrum can be found
(Fig. 1K). To identify the doping of the Cu atom, the energy disper-
sive spectrometer (EDS) was performed and shows the signal of Cu,
S, and Au (fig. S5B); meanwhile, the inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) was recorded, revealing metal
element percentages of 95.25 and 4.75% for Au and Cu, respectively
(fig. S7). In addition, the extended x-ray absorption fine structure
(EXAFS) spectra were recorded to demonstrate the formation of
the Cu-S bonds (Fig. 2L). It can be seen that the dominant peak
of Au21Cu1 clusters in the R-space is shorter than that of Cu foil,
suggesting the successful single-atom substitution.
Enzyme-like properties of gold clusters
Au21Cu1 clusters with a Cu single-atom active site show high cata-
lytic activity, and the catalytic process is shown in Fig. 3A. The ad-
sorption strength of reactant molecules and free radicals is a
prerequisite for the consequent catalytic reaction. Thus, the adsorp-
tion energies (Eads) of different species were tested in Fig. 3 to inves-
tigate the reactive oxygen and nitrogen species adsorption ability of
Au22 and Au21Cu1 by DFT. Meanwhile, we also assessed the anti-
oxidative properties of gold clusters to pinpoint biocatalytic
enzyme–mimicking activity using the 2,2’-azino-bis(3-ethylbenz-
thiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) method. The Eads of ABTS•+ is
calculated to be −2.18 and −1.19 eV for Au21Cu1-trimer and
Au21Cu1-tetramer, respectively (Fig. 3B), implying the relatively
strong interaction between ABTS•+ and the Au21Cu1 clusters,
whereas it is difficult for ABTS•+ to adsorb on the Au22 cluster
with a positive value Eads of 1.59 eV. Furthermore, the antioxidant
activity of Au21M1 (M: Ag, Zn, Cu, Pt, Cd, and Er) clusters was per-
formed by controlling for different times and concentrations
(Fig. 3C and fig. S8A). In particular, Au21Cu1 clusters display 18
times higher antioxidant activity than that of Au22 clusters,
Fig. 2. Structural characterization of gold clusters. (A) The structure illustration of Au22. Both blue and yellow represent Au atoms, and red represents S atoms. (B)
Typical TEM image of Au22 clusters with an average size of 1.5 nm. (C) The hydrodynamic size was measured to be 2.01 nm using DLS. (D) The ESI-MS of Au22 clusters. The
illustration shows the molecular weight of Au22 in the m/z range from 1967 to 1970. (E) Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra and emission spectra of Au22
clusters. The black line represents the absorption spectrum, and the red line represents the emission spectrum. (F) UV-vis absorption spectra and NIR-II fluorescence
images of Au22 cluster aqueous solution excited at 808 nm before and after filtration with the 100 K ultrafiltration tube (illustration: 1000 nm long pass filter, 100 ms). (G)
Photostability of Au22 clusters excited with an 808 nm laser for 30 min. (H) NIR-II fluorescence stability of Au22 clusters in DI water and PBS before and after a week. (I)
Stability of optical characteristic absorption peaks of Au22 clusters of 7 days in water. (J) Au 4f region of Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters. (K) Cu 2p XPS spectrum of Au21Cu1
clusters. (L) Fourier-transformed magnitude of the Cu K-edge EXAFS spectra of Au21Cu1 and Cu foil, showing the radial distance of Cu-S bond and Cu-Cu bond.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
3 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Fig. 3. The enzyme-mimicking activity of gold clusters. (A) Schematic illustration of the enzyme-mimicking activity of Au22 clusters. (B) The adsorption energy of
ABTS•+ on Au22, Au21Cu1-trimer, and Au21Cu1-tetramer clusters, respectively. Time-dependent curves (C) and quantitative results (D) of ABTS•+ of Au22 and Au21M1 (M: Ag,
Zn, Cu, Pt, Cd, and Er) clusters. (E) The adsorption energy of O2
•−on Au22, Au21Cu1-trimer, and Au21Cu1-tetramer clusters, respectively. Time-dependent curves (F) and
quantitative results (G) of O2
•−of Au22 and Au21M1 clusters. (H) The adsorption energy of H2O2 on Au22, Au21Cu1-trimer, and Au21Cu1-tetramer clusters, respectively.
Diagram (I) and quantitative results (J) of the CAT-like activity of Au22 and Au21M1 clusters. (K) The adsorption energy of ONOO−on Au22, Au21Cu1-trimer, and Au21Cu1-
tetramer clusters, respectively. Time-dependent curves (L) and quantitative results (M) of ONOO−of Au22 and Au21M1 clusters.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
4 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

indicative of fantabulous antioxidant activity (Fig. 3D). In addition,
adsorbed O2
•−and H2O2 on Au21Cu1 show a relatively high Eads in
the range of −0.79 to −0.50 eV; these negative adsorption energies
also indicate the moderate interactions between the catalytic sites of
Au21Cu1 clusters and the adsorbates O2
•−and H2O2. (Fig. 3, E and
H). Meanwhile, Au21Cu1 clusters show the strongest SOD-like ac-
tivity among all the clusters (Fig. 3F and fig. S8B). The inhibition
rate of pure Au22 only reaches 26%, while that of Au21Cu1 clusters
can be increased to 77% (Fig. 3G). Au21Cu1 clusters exhibit high
catalytic degradation ability against H2O2, an illustration of CAT-
like catalytic activity (Fig. 3I). Quantitative result shows that the
CAT-like activity of Au21Cu1 clusters is 90 times higher than that
of pure Au22 clusters (Fig. 3J). For further verification, the free-
radical scavenging capability for ONOO−is also investigated,
which is a highly toxic molecule generated in disease states. The
ONOO−absorbate on the Au21Cu1 clusters exhibits relatively
lower Eads of −0.23 and −0.14 eV with different Cu sites than
Au22 (Fig. 3K). For Au22 clusters, the positive Eads (0.16 eV) of
ONOO−indicates that the adsorption system is energetically unfa-
vorable and thus results in the weak interaction between the
ONOO−absorbate and catalytic site on cluster. Furthermore,
Au21Cu1 clusters still manifest a higher scavenging efficiency com-
pared to pure Au22 and other metal doped clusters (Fig. 3L). The
quantitative result is presented in Fig. 3M. Thus, the increase of
various unique enzyme-mimicking activities can contribute to the
Cu single-atom active site in the Au22 clusters. Metal clusters with
catalytic properties have been widely reported in previous studies,
but clusters with NIR-II properties are rarely mentioned, which play
important and essential roles in bioscience (48–51). Thus, biocata-
lytic NIR-II molecular agents are urgent and of great significance to
understand the mechanism.
DFT calculations of gold clusters
To further explore the mechanism of higher CAT-like and SOD-like
activities of Au21Cu1 clusters, the electronic properties of Au21Cu1
clusters were studied using DFT. To ensure the reliability and accu-
racy of this simulation, the structure of Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters
protected by thiolate were adopted. Considering that the catalytic
reaction is more likely to occur at the exposed active site of the clus-
ters, two types of replacements on the staple motifs of the Au22
cluster for the guest metallic atoms have been taken into consider-
ation: trimer motif and tetramer motif. The DFT-optimized struc-
tures are shown in Fig. 4 (A, E, and I); the Cu doping causes the
tetramer and trimer motifs to distort (Fig. 4, E and I). They are dif-
ferent from the normal S-Au-S chain, which aligns in a nearly
straight line (Fig. 4A). The doped Cu shrinks the S-X-S chain; com-
pared with the typical bond length of S-Au at 2.32 Å, the S-Cu bond
is 2.20 Å (11, 52). The similarity between the Cu and Au atoms
guarantees that the binding of S-Cu-S is so “tight” that the relative
positions of Cu to S atoms can be hardly shifted by the dynamics
during the catalytic processes. In addition, DFT optimization con-
firms the stability of the modeled Au21Cu1 clusters, and the doping
formation energies of the two Cu-doped structures are calculated.
As shown in Fig. 4 (E and I), the structures of Au21Cu1-tetramer and
Au21Cu1-trimer have slightly positive doping formation energies
(Ef-doping), and the tetramer motif-doping Cu is more stable
(0.003 eV), demonstrating comparable structural stability to Au22
clusters. Moreover, the formation energies (Ef) of Au22, Au21Cu1-
tetramer, and Au21Cu1-trimer are also calculated. As shown in fig.
S9, the Ef of Au22, Au21Cu1-tetramer, and Au21Cu1-trimer are all
negative (about −15 eV), demonstrating that the three cluster con-
figurations are all energetically favored. Furthermore, charge trans-
fer and distributions on the undoped and two Cu-doped
configurations were predicted by DFT. As shown in Fig. 4 (B, F,
and J), the charge density differences between the metal atom (Au
or Cu) and the surrounding S atoms are similar to some extent, and
it can be seen that the metal atoms Au/Cu on motifs would donate
electrons to the adjacent S atoms. Besides, the electron distribution
around the active site on motifs in these configurations is further
analyzed by the electron localization function (ELF). Since the
ELF value describes the localization of electrons, a large ELF
value indicates that there is a covalent bond or a lone pair. As
seen from Fig. 4 (C, G, and K), the localization of electrons
between Cu-S is distinctly lower than Au-S. Thus, it is easy for
Cu to exchange with external electrons and form a bond with the
small units in the catalytic process. Therefore, the catalyst efficiency
of Au21Cu1 clusters may benefit from the Cu doping on the motifs.
With the electronic structure predicted by DFT, energy levels of
undoped and two Cu-doped Au22 clusters were calculated. As
shown in Fig. 4D, the HOMO–lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital (LUMO) gap of the pure Au22 cluster is predicted to be
1.33 eV. In the electronic structure of Au22(SCH3)18, LUMO is
mainly composed of Au 5d and Au 6p. The HOMO can be
mainly assigned to Au 5d and Au 6s atomic orbitals. Both
HOMO and LUMO energy levels have an obvious degree of S 3p
states. With Cu doping at the site of tetramer or trimer motif, the
HOMO-LUMO gap of the Au22 cluster slightly decreases to around
1.27 eV; in Fig. 4 (H and L), Cu-doping can introduce the previously
unidentified energy levels, which can be mainly attributed to Cu 3d
atomic orbitals. The energy level diagram of Au22 clusters and
Au21Cu1 clusters is shown in Fig. 4M. In addition, the DFT-simu-
lated optical properties of Au22 and two types of Au21Cu1 clusters
are also shown in Fig. 4. The imaginary part of the dielectric func-
tion is highly related to the absorption of the materials. Au22 and
two types of Au21Cu1 clusters show peaks at about 2.46 and 2.80
eV in the imaginary part of the complex dielectric functions
(Fig. 4N), corresponding to the absorption peaks at about 505 nm
and around 443 nm (Fig. 4O). It shows reasonable agreement with
the experimental absorption peaks (515 and 450 nm) (40, 53).
NIR-II light-sheet microscopy and real-time monitoring
of kidney
Early diagnosis of kidney injury is extremely needed in clinics, as-
cribing to a remarkable capacity to withstand insults for an extend-
ed period, and needs a robust method for clinical diagnosis (54, 55).
Sensitive and specific tests for early diagnosis rely heavily on ideal
biomarker with high sensitivity and specificity (56, 57). Cisplatin is
widely used in clinics, which is excreted through the kidney and
could trigger AKI at high incidence (58). Herein, cisplatin is used
for AKI mouse modeling to reveal the monitoring and treatment of
Au22 clusters. We conducted an ex vivo 3D imaging through NIR-II
Airy beam–based light-sheet microscopy on the mouse kidney (59,
60) and a visualization study with wide-field bioimaging in vivo
after being injected with different doses of cisplatin (Fig. 5A). We
evaluated the existence of AKI based on a more direct way, which
was 3D microimaging through NIR-II Airy beam–based light-sheet
microscopy (Fig. 5, B to I). The homogeneity of the glomerulus for
the control group (Fig. 5C) is much better than the cisplatin group,
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
5 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

which shows some abnormal enlargements and nodules indicated
by the arrows in Fig. 5F. Similarly, some tubules of the cisplatin
group evolved to be abnormally coarse (Fig. 5G), while better ho-
mogeneity of the tubule morphology is found for the control group
(Fig. 5D). Figure 5 (H and I) shows the statistical data from the
arrows and cross lines in Fig. 5 (C, D, F, and G), suggesting quan-
titative differences between the two groups, confirming the micro-
pathological feature of AKI. To further reveal the great potential of
gold clusters for real-time monitoring of renal dysfunction, NIR-II
imaging was performed in vivo on mice. As shown in Fig. 5J, the
fluorophore intensity of the kidney and bladder for the normal
group surpasses a peak between 5 and 20 min after the injection
and then decreases rapidly because of the high renal clearance of
the clusters. Signals in the kidneys and bladder of the mice were ob-
served at 20 min after injection in the cisplatin group. However,
signals decreased slowly and remained at a high level even 120
min after the injection (Fig. 5, K and L). In addition, the bladder-
to-kidney intensity ratio of the cisplatin group was 2.4 times higher
at 20 min than that of the normal group after intravenous injection.
However, the bladder-to-kidney intensity ratio in the cisplatin
group mice remained around 0.65 at 120 min, while no signals of
the kidneys and bladder were observed in the normal group
(Fig. 5M). This may be attributed to the severe impairment of
kidney function in mice after cisplatin injection, and the filtering
effect of the glomeruli is weakened, resulting in further accumula-
tion of gold clusters in the kidney. These above results confirmed
that Au22 clusters can achieve 3D visualization under NIR-II
light-sheet microscopy and distinguish and monitor the AKI after
20 to 120 min of injection due to its high sensitivity, high specificity,
and high fluorescence intensity. Thus, Au22 clusters show great po-
tential to be used for the clinical diagnosis and monitoring of AKI-
related diseases.
In vitro treatment of cisplatin-induced AKI with gold
clusters
To pinpoint the biological activity of Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters,
cytotoxicity tests for human proximal tubular cells (HK2) and
mouse microglia (BV2) were performed, revealing almost no toxic-
ity of gold clusters even at concentrations up to 200 ng/μl (fig. S10).
Furthermore, the ability of Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters to regulate
Fig. 4. DFT calculations of gold clusters. The geometrically optimized structures of (A) Au22, (E) Au21Cu1-tetramer, and (I) Au21Cu1-trimer clusters. Orange, yellow, and
blue balls represent Au, S, and Cu atoms, respectively. The locally enlarged version of charge density difference of (B) Au22, (F), Au21Cu1-tetramer, and (J) Au21Cu1-trimer
clusters. The ELF images of (C) Au22, (G) Au21Cu1-tetramer, and (K) Au21Cu1-trimer clusters. The energy levels of (D) Au22, (H) Au21Cu1-tetramer, and (L) Au21Cu1-trimer
clusters were simulated by density DFT. (M) The energy level diagram of Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters. (N) The imaginary part of the dielectric function ε2 (ω). (O) The
absorption spectra of the Au22, Au21Cu1-tetramer, and Au21Cu1-trimer system.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
6 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

the level of oxidative stress was shown in vitro. As shown in Fig. 6 (B
to E) and fig. S11, Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters markedly increased
the survival of HK2 and BV2 cells treated with cisplatin. Meanwhile,
fluorescence staining illustrates that the level of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) increased after cisplatin and lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) treatment in HK2 cells but decreased with the intervention
of gold clusters (Fig. 6, F to H, and fig. S12). More precisely, the
level of excess O2
•−after cisplatin and LPS stimulation was signifi-
cantly reduced after the intervention of Au22 clusters (Fig. 6, F to H,
and fig. S12). The corresponding quantitative results for the level of
total ROS and O2
•−in different treatment groups were detected by a
flow cytometer (Fig. 6, I to N, and fig. S13), and the results showed
the same trend as cytofluorescent staining, indicating that gold clus-
ters can effectively reduce oxidative stress at the cellular level and
exhibit favorable biological activity.
To simulate and investigate the influence of AKI on the nervous
system, HK2 cells were stimulated with cisplatin to simulate periph-
eral inflammatory conditions in vitro. The inflammatory mediators
produced by HK2 cells were transferred into the medium of BV2
cells to explore the relationship between AKI and neuroinflamma-
tion as well as the therapeutic effects of Au22 clusters. As shown in
Fig. 6A, the content of inflammatory cytokines [tumor necrosis
factor–α (TNF-α)] in the supernatant of BV2 cells was detected
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The results
showed that the inflammatory cytokines that stimulated cisplatin
in HK2 cells were reduced after treatment with Au22 and Au21Cu1
clusters (Fig. 6O). Figure 6P demonstrates that hyperinflammatory
HK2 cells induce a high production of inflammatory cytokines in
BV2 cells, while the level of inflammatory cytokines in BV2 can
be significantly reduced after intervention of HK2 cells with gold
clusters. This suggests that peripheral inflammatory mediators pro-
duced by kidney cells can effectively mediate the inflammation of
the nervous system and that bioactive gold clusters can effectively
reduce neuroinflammation by eliminating peripheral inflammation,
exhibiting excellent systemic inflammatory regulation.
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is important in inducing inflamma-
tory factors and will overexpress and further induce inflammatory
factors after external stimulation (61). After being stimulated by cis-
platin, the TLR4 expression in HK2 cells is markedly elevated, as
displayed by immunofluorescence. In contrast, gold clusters
visibly down-regulated TLR4 levels, which, in turn, reduced inflam-
mation at the cellular level (Fig. 6, Q and R). The combined cellular-
level results indicate that cisplatin caused a large amount of periph-
eral inflammation by increasing the expression of TLR4, which
induced microglia to produce large amounts of inflammatory
factors. The bioactive gold clusters could alleviate peripheral in-
flammation by reducing the TLR4 expression, achieving the effect
of modulating neuroinflammation.
Fig. 5. NIR-II imaging of light-sheet microscopy and real-time monitoring process of gold clusters. (A) Schematic illustration of the cisplatin-induced AKI disease
model. The gold clusters can monitor cisplatin-induced kidney injury at the NIR-II window and realize 3D visualization using NIR-II light-sheet microscopy. 3D mouse
kidney of the control group (B) and the AKI group (E). Scale bar, 200 μm. Glomerular markers (C and F) and renal tubule markers (D and G) for control mice and cisplatin
mice, respectively. Scale bar, 100 μm. Quantitative analysis of (H) glomeruli and (I) renal tubules for the control group and the AKI group. (J) Real-time monitoring process
of the kidney and bladder for the control group and the AKI group in the NIR-II window under an 808 nm laser. (K to M) Kidney and bladder fluorescence quantitative
analysis results and kidney fluorescence value/bladder fluorescence value results.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
7 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Modulation of the oxidative stress and inflammation
induced by cisplatin
Cisplatin, widely used for cancer treatment, is limited by strong side
effects, especially nephrotoxicity. To reveal the biological activity of
Au22 clusters, AKI induced by cisplatin is used, which is character-
ized by renal-function decline, causing ischemic injury (Fig. 7A),
and associated with severe ROS and inflammation, pronounced
mortality, and comorbidities in other organs such as the brain
(32, 62). High levels of serum creatinine (CREA) and blood urea
nitrogen (BUN) are clinical manifestations of a build-up of nitrog-
enous wastes and can serve as effective indices of kidney excretory
function (30, 62, 63). CREA and BUN levels are indeed increased in
AKI groups over time, indicative of severe kidney injury (Fig. 7B
and fig. S14). However, high levels of CREA and BUN can be inhib-
ited by Au22 and Au21Cu1 at 72 hours after intervention, suggesting
the restoration of renal function. Proteinuria, which also exhibits
progressive deterioration of kidney function (64), shows the same
trend as CREA and BUN (fig. S15). Hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) staining further illustrated that cisplatin can induce severe
nephrotoxicity over time and notable recovery after gold cluster in-
tervention (Fig. 7C and fig. S16). As shown in Fig. 7D, the indicators
of H2O2, malondialdehyde (MDA), SOD, and reduced glutathione/
oxidized glutathione disulfide (GSH/GSSG) levels for the AKI
group are increasingly serious over time.
However, this decrease of GSH/GSSG and SOD can be recovered
closer to the normal levels after Au22 and Au21Cu1 cluster treat-
ment. As the bioproducts of oxidative stress, lipid peroxides and
H2O2 show higher accumulation in the kidney following AKI, indi-
cating severe oxidative stress. Both clusters significantly inhibit the
production of these harmful molecules, showing superior clearance
Fig. 6. In vitro treatment of cisplatin-induced AKI with gold clusters. (A) Schematic diagram of cellular level experiments. HK2 cell viability in the presence of cisplatin
with or without treatment of Au22 clusters (B) and Au21Cu1 (C) determined by CCK8 assays (n = 3 per group). BV2 cell viability in the presence of cisplatin with or without
treatment of Au22 clusters (D) and Au21Cu1 (E) determined by CCK8 assays (n = 3 per group). (F) Fluorescence microscopic images of intracellular ROS and O2
•−levels
induced by cisplatin with or without gold clusters. Quantitative analysis of ROS (G) and O2
•−(H) fluorescence intensity (n = 3 per group). (I to K) Fluorescence quantifi-
cation of HK2 cells staining for ROS and O2
•−by flow cytometry (n = 3 per group). (L to N) Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) results and fluorescence quantifi-
cation of BV2 cells staining for ROS and O2
•−by flow cytometry (n = 3 per group). The level of TNF-α in the cellular supernatant of HK2 cells (O) and BV2 cells (P) (n = 2 per
group). (Q) Representative fluorescence image of TLR4 in HK2 cells. (R) Quantitative analysis of TLR4 fluorescence intensity. Data are presented as means ± SD; *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 compared with the control group and cis group, analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the Tukey test.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
8 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

of H2O2 and MDA after 72 hours, which is consistent with the
enzyme-like activities in vitro (Fig. 3). Cisplatin-induced AKI can
trigger immune cells to infiltrate the damaged kidney, recruiting
large amounts of cytokines and chemokines and triggering a
strong inflammatory response. The expression levels of inflamma-
tory cytokines are significantly up-regulated following AKI at 6
hours after injury, indicative of strong local inflammation.
Au21Cu1 can sharply down-regulate the inflammatory cytokines in-
cluding monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1β, ker-
atinocyte-derived chemokine (KC), and complement-reactive
protein (CRP), illustrative of anti-inflammation effects (Fig. 7, E
to G, J, and K). AKI groups exhibit slight apoptosis in the kidney
at 6 hours after injury and severe apoptosis at 24 hours even to 72
hours after injury (Fig. 7, C and I). However, the apoptosis of kidney
can be rescued by Au22 clusters with prominent recoveries at 24
hours (Fig. 7, H and L, and fig. S17). These results demonstrate
that Au21Cu1 clusters have great effects on the local protection of
the kidney via ROS scavenging and inflammation reduction.
Kidney disease often exhibits multiple organ dysfunction (65)
that is caused, in part, by marked connectivity between the
kidney and other organs and tissues, especially the brain (Fig. 8A)
(62, 66). Cisplatin-induced AKI produces harmful molecules that
can act on the brain and consume amounts of endogenous antiox-
idants in the brain. Au21Cu1 clusters can lower H2O2 and MDA and
restore the SOD and GSH/GSSG in the brain (Fig. 8, B to D, and fig.
S18), indicating ROS scavenging ability of Au21Cu1 clusters. As
neurons and glial cells are the main components in brains, studies
with markers for astrocytes [glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)],
neurons (NeuN), and microglia (Iba-1) were performed (Fig. 8, E to
G and N to P, and fig. S19). The results reveal that neurons are
sharply depleted, and astrocytes and microglia are activated after
Fig. 7. The oxidative stress and inflammation levels in kidney before and after treatment of gold clusters. (A) Schematic diagram of AKI. (B) Serum CREA and BUN
levels of mice at 6, 24, and 72 hours with or without gold cluster treatment (n = 3 per group). (C)Representative H&E staining in kidneys on day 3 after injury.(D) Levels of
H2O2, MDA, SOD, and GSH/GSSG in kidneys at 6, 24, and 72 hours with or without cluster intervention (n = 3 per group). (E and F) Representative IL-6 and IL-1β staining in
kidneys on day 3 after injury. (G) Levels of IL-6, IL-1β, CRP, G-CSF, KC, and MCP-1 in kidneys at 6, 24, and 72 hours with or without cluster intervention (n = 3 per group). (H)
Representative terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining in kidneys on day 3 after injury. (I to L)
Relative quantification of H&E, IL-6, IL-1β, and TUNEL. Data are presented as means ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 compared with the control group and AKI
group, analyzed by ANOVA.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
9 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

AKI. In contrast, with the intervention of Au22 and Au21Cu1 clus-
ters, most of these nerve cells are retrieved. Besides, the morphology
of AKI-activated astrocytes can be recovered to near-normal levels
after intervention with clusters. Meanwhile, immunostaining illus-
trates that neuroinflammation is induced because of AKI, and
Au21Cu1 clusters can relieve the inflammatory response (Fig. 8, H
and Q, and fig. S20). ELISA further validates the immunostaining
results that the Au21Cu1 clusters are capable of altering several in-
flammatory cytokines in brain tissues (Fig. 8, J to M, and fig. S20),
therefore alleviating inflammation induced by AKI. H&E staining
further confirmed that cisplatin could exhibit side effects on the
brain, while Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters can inhibit the
Fig. 8. The oxidative stress and inflammation levels in the brain before and after treatment of gold clusters. (A) Schematic diagram of oxidative stress and infl-
ammation in the brain. (B to D) Levels of MDA, H2O2, and SOD in the brain at 6, 24, and 72 hours after AKI with or without cluster intervention (n = 3 per group). (E to I)
Staining results of astrocytes (GFAP), neurons (NeuN), microglia (Iba-1), TNF-α, and H&E staining in the brain with or without gold clusters at 72 hours after AKI. (J to M) The
levels of inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6, KC, and CRP in brain tissues using ELISA kits at 6, 24, and 72 hours after AKI with or without gold cluster treatment (n
= 3 per group). (N to R) Relative quantification of astrocytes (GFAP), neurons (NeuN), microglia (Iba-1), TNF-α, and H&E staining in the brain with or without gold clusters at
72 hours after AKI (n = 3 per group). Data are means ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 compared with the control group and AKI group, as analyzed by ANOVA.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
10 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

corresponding neuroinflammation (Fig. 8, I and R, and fig. S21).
These results further confirmed that single atom–engineered Au22
clusters with enzyme-mimicking activity show great effects on oxi-
dative stress– and inflammation-related diseases.
It is assumed that inflammatory response in the brain can be at-
tributed to the amplification of peripheral inflammation, oxidative
stress, and dysregulation of the tryptophan-kynurenine pathway
related to neurological diseases (Fig. 9A). The accumulation of cis-
platin triggers increased production of inflammatory cytokines and
ROS, gradually stimulating inflammation, oxidative stress, vascular
injury (65), and apoptotic pathways (67). In addition, cisplatin has
been recognized as an activating ligand for TLR4, which has been
implemented as a major contributor in driving pathogenesis and
development of AKI through up-regulation of inflammation and
subsequent renal dysfunction, renal injury, and nephrotoxicity
(68). Western blots confirmed that TLR4 increased in AKI groups
and decreased with Au22 cluster intervention in the kidney (Fig. 9, B
and C), which may contribute to brain-kidney interactions by acti-
vation of the innate immune system during AKI through TLR4 (61).
Meanwhile, the activation of TLR4 can activate the downstream in-
flammation, resulting in peripheral inflammation, where peripheral
inflammatory cytokines can cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB)
and induce neuroinflammation (65, 69). Levels of inflammatory
cytokines in serum including MCP-1, G-CSF, IL-6, IL-1β, KC,
and CRP perform similar trends to the kidney and brains (Fig. 9,
D to G, and fig. S22), further confirming that cisplatin-induced
AKI could up-regulate proinflammatory cytokines and evoke neu-
roinflammation. However, with the intervention of Au22 clusters,
the levels of inflammatory cytokines in serum were down-regulated,
demonstrating that clusters can alleviate local and global inflamma-
tion. Both clinical and experimental studies have shown that periph-
eral inflammation is associated with BBB disruption (70). To
observe the integrity of the BBB, we studied the tight junction
protein ZO-1, which acted as an important indicator for BBB.
The results revealed that cisplatin-induced AKI can lead to the
slight degradation of ZO-1 (Fig. 9H), resulting from the altered
BBB permeability. Combined with brain uptake of clusters (fig.
S23), it is rational to conclude that few clusters can enter into
brains due to the ultrasmall size and slightly altered BBB permeabil-
ity induced by high doses of cisplatin. Then, the Au22 clusters scav-
enge ROS and alleviate inflammation by inhibiting glia activation
owing to the enzyme-like activities of clusters. In addition, we hy-
pothesized that metabolic small molecules would also be involved in
kidney-brain interactions. The results demonstrated that cisplatin-
induced AKI indeed influences metabolic small molecules such as
5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan and kynurenic acid (Fig. 9I and figs. S24
Fig. 9. Kidney-brain interaction with gold clusters in AKI. (A) Possible signal pathways in cisplatin-induced AKI leading to brain inflammation. (B) Western blots for
TLR4 in the kidneys at 24 hours with cluster intervention after AKI and (C) the corresponding quantitative analysis. (D to G) ELISA quantitative analysis of proinflammatory
cytokine levels in serum at 6, 24, and 72 hours with or without cluster intervention (n = 3 per group), respectively. (H) Immunofluorescence of tight junction protein ZO-1.
(I) Comparison of differential metabolites in serum at 72 hours after cluster intervention among the control group, the AKI group, and the Au22 group. Data are means ±
SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 compared with the control group and AKI group, as analyzed by ANOVA.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
11 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

and S25), involved in the tryptophan kynurenine pathway, which
can link the interaction of the brain and kidney (71, 72). Meanwhile,
the Au22 clusters can regulate the disorder of these metabolic small
molecules to near-normal levels. Thus, the kidney-brain interaction
can be attributed to peripheral inflammation and dysregulation of
the tryptophan-kynurenine pathway.
To further illustrate the effects of clusters on neuroinflamma-
tion, we used an LPS-induced brain injury model. LPS stimulation
has been used as a useful model for the study of mechanisms under-
lying neuronal injury, which promotes the secretion of proinflam-
matory cytokines (68, 73). ROS has been proven as a causative factor
in the damage of the BBB. Once BBB breakdown occurs, clusters
could enter BBB. The clusters uptake in the brain from LPS-stimu-
lated mice suggested that clusters can penetrate the brain across the
BBB (fig. S26). Figures S27 to S29 reveal that LPS stimulation can
induce oxidative stress and inflammation around the whole body.
With the intervention of clusters, levels of indicators for oxidative
stress and inflammation in serum, brain, and kidney can all be
down-regulated. Glia activation and apoptosis of neurons can also
be observed in the brain after LPS stimulation (fig. S29), indicative
of strong neuroinflammation. Meanwhile, the Au22 cluster–treated
groups showed a decrease in the numbers of activated glia and ap-
optotic neurons. As astrocyte reactivity and glia activation are me-
diated by ROS, the mechanism of clusters for anti-inflammation can
be ascribed to the antioxidative and enzyme-like activities of the
Au22 clusters.
Biocompatibility and pharmacokinetics of gold clusters
Biosafety, especially excretion, is crucial for NIR-II in vivo imaging
probes. The Au22 clusters show rapid accumulation in the kidneys
and bladder (figs. S30 and S31A). Time-course fluorescence
imaging reveals that the signal in the kidney and bladder gradually
decreases. No obvious signal of the kidney is observed at 72 hours
after injection with ultrahigh concentration at 50 mg/ml (fig. S31B).
The signal from isolated organs like the lung, liver, kidney, and
spleen uncovers that Au22 clusters can accumulate most in the
kidney and can be excreted rapidly by renal clearance after injection
(fig. S31C and D), consistent with their ultrasmall size (Fig. 2, B and
C). The profiles exhibit that the size of the kidney is about 6.29 mm,
close to the renal size of 5.1 mm, and further demonstrates the high
spatial resolution of Au22 clusters in NIR-II imaging (fig. S31E). Bi-
odistribution confirmed that the kidney and bladder are the domi-
nant concentrated organs of Au22 clusters, indicative of renal
clearance and good biosafety (fig. S31F). Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters
show the blood half-time of 30.6 and 23.2 min, respectively, consis-
tent with the results performed by fluorescence imaging of renal ex-
cretion and blood samples by analyzing the content of Au and Cu
elements (fig. S32). In addition, the average urine excretion of Au22
clusters is 85% (fig. S33), further illustrating the superior renal
clearance. Meanwhile, no obvious toxicity is found at ultrahigh in-
jection doses in organs, biochemistry, and hematology (figs. S34
to S36).
Noninvasive and hypersensitive NIR-II imaging combined with
high-efficiency biocatalytic intervention is crucial for serious dis-
eases, and it is urgent to develop biosafety diagnostics and therapeu-
tics with nanotechnology. The gold clusters exhibited excellent
NIR-II fluorescence with high temporal-spatial resolution and
were used for imaging critical diseases such as tumors and traumatic
brain injury (TBI) (44, 74). In addition, gold clusters showed
potential for the biocatalytic treatment of diseases associated with
oxidative stress and inflammation such as TBI and Parkinson’s
disease, based on their high enzyme-like activities (11, 75). As a
precise approach, manipulation at the single-atom level can mini-
mally affect the recombination between electrons and holes,
thereby ensuring no fluorescence loss. The present approach
applies not only to cluster systems but also to other semiconductor
quantum dots, polymers, rare earth up-conversion nanoparticles,
and emerging 2D material systems (76–80). The current biocatalytic
activity focuses on mimicking oxidoreductases, and atomic engi-
neering can design a variety of non-oxidoreductases such as trans-
ferases and hydrolases in luminescence gold clusters by precisely
creating catalytic active sites, which is crucial to chemical biology.
At the same time, atomized clusters with biocatalysis can be used for
precise tracking of intracellular molecular-level therapy and real-
time molecular dynamic pathological detection via infrared emis-
sion. Therefore, single atom–engineered clusters can endow mate-
rials with biocatalysis and NIR-II luminescence, which has
important scientific significance and clinical value in the molecular
therapy and evolution of oxidative stress diseases.
DISCUSSION
In summary, we reported an atom engineering approach to create a
Cu single-atom active site in atom-precision Au22 clusters with ul-
trahigh enzyme-mimicking activity and without fluorescence loss.
Compared with pure Au22 clusters, the antioxidant activity of
Au21Cu1 clusters is increased 18-fold by introducing the Cu
single-atom active site. Besides, Au21Cu1 clusters show 90-fold
and 3-fold higher CAT-like and higher SOD-like activity than
those of Au22 clusters, respectively. DFT calculations manifest
that Au21Cu1 clusters have strong catalytic activity due to the lost
electron state. Real-time fluorescence imaging shows that gold clus-
ters can achieve early disease surveillance behavior. The biological
experiment results show that the Au22 clusters can inhabit the oxi-
dative stress and inflammation levels in the injured kidney and
brain. Last, ultrasmall gold clusters can be excreted rapidly by
renal clearance, revealing nontoxicity at a high dose. In conclusion,
the Au22 clusters could be a biosafety, efficient, and multifunctional
platform for developing multipurpose agents of high performance
of NIR-II fluorescence and enzymatic catalytic activities via atom
engineering. In addition, the Au22 clusters show great potential
for real-time imaging and early intervention of oxidative stress–
and inflammation-related diseases like AKI and are promising for
clinical translation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design
The primary objective of the experiment was to find out whether
gold clusters with enzyme-like activity can have a mitigating
effect on biological diseases. We designed an atom-precise Au22
cluster with biocatalytic mimetic enzymatic activity and fluores-
cence emission in the NIR-II window. We found that the Au22
cluster can be manipulated again at the atomic level to achieve mul-
tiple enzymatic activities using a series of physicochemical charac-
terization and enzyme-like tests. The biological experiment results
show that the Au22 clusters can monitor the cisplatin-induced AKI
and achieve 3D imaging under light-sheet microscopy, as well as
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
12 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

inhibit the oxidative stress and inflammation levels partially in the
injured kidney and brain.
Materials
All chemicals are commercially available with the highest purity and
used without further treatment. Gold chloride (HAuCl4·3H2O) was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich; sodium hydroxide (NaOH),
sodium borohydride (NaBH4), silver nitrate (AgNO3), zinc nitrate
[Zn(NO3)2],
copper
nitrate
[Cu(NO3)2],
cadmium
nitrate
[Cd(NO3)2], erbium nitrate [Er(NO3)3], and GSH were purchased
from Aladdin. Ultrapure water was used for all the experiments.
Materials preparation
Au22(SG)18 clusters were synthesized according to the reported
method. In detail, aqueous solutions of HAuCl4 (20 mM, 12.5
ml) and GSH (50 mM, 7.5 ml) were added to water (180 ml) and
stirred vigorously for 2 min. Then, an aqueous NaOH solution (1
M) was added to adjust pH to 12.0, followed by the addition of 0.24
mg NaBH4 dissolved in 0.1 ml solution, stirring at 500 rpm at room
temperature for 30 min. An aqueous HCl solution (0.33 M) was
added to adjust the pH to 2.5. The reaction solution was then
sealed airtight and stirred at 200 rpm for 8 hours. For further puri-
fication of Au22(SG)18 clusters, we used ultrafiltration tubes of 3 K at
3500 rpm for ultrafiltration to remove impurities for further testing
and application. Au21M1(SG)18 clusters are synthesized on the basis
of the same method. The only difference was that HAuCl4 solution
(20 mM, 12.5 ml) was mixed with Ag+, Zn2+, Cu2+, Pt2+, Cd2+, and
Er3+ metal ions (20 mM, 0.57 ml), respectively.
Materials characterization
The clusters dispersed in ethanol solution were prepared on copper
or molybdenum grids by drop-drying for TEM and EDS on a JEM-
2100F TEM. Meanwhile, more than 100 clusters were analyzed to
measure the average size of the clusters. DLS was measured by a
Malvern Zetasizer nano ZS90 (UK) to test the hydrodynamic size
of clusters. Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra were
measured in aqueous solution in the range of 300 to 900 nm
using a Shimadzu 3600 UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer, and the
background was corrected for contribution from water. ESI-MS
was recorded on the Bruker microTOF-Q system. XPS of the gold
cluster was obtained by a K-Alpha spectrometer with a monochro-
matic Al Kα x-ray source operating at 300 W (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific). The metallic elements were determined by using ICP-MS
with Agilent 7900 ICP-MS. The EXAFS data were obtained at the
1W1B station (2.5 GeV, maximum current of 230 mA) of the
Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility and analyzed by the
ATHENA and ARTEMIS software.
Enzyme mimicking activity test
Total antioxidant capacity test (ABTS rapid method)
The total antioxidant capacity of clusters was determined by the
rapid ABTS method using a prepared ABTS•+ aqueous solution.
The antioxidant capacity was analyzed by monitoring the absorp-
tion value at 414 nm using a UV-vis spectrophotometer. In the con-
centration-dependent experiments, we adjusted the concentration
of clusters to 0.45, 0.9, 1.8, 2.4, and 3.5 μg/μl quantified by charac-
teristic absorption value (the molar extinction coefficient of clus-
ters: ɛ520 nm = 4199 M−1 cm−1).
ONOO−scavenging test
ONOO−was prepared on the basis of methods from previous
reports. Specifically, the cold aqueous solution of NaNO2 (50
mM, 5 ml) and H2O2 (50 mM, 5 ml) was rapidly stirred under an
ice bath. Then, HCl (1 M, 2.5 ml) and NaOH (1.5 mM, 2.5 ml)
aqueous solutions were quickly added, and stirring continued for
5 min to obtain the yellowish ONOO−solution. The scavenging ca-
pacity of ONOO−was determined by monitoring the absorption
value at 302 nm using a UV-vis spectrophotometer after the addi-
tion of 3.5 μg/μl clusters.
SOD-like test
The SOD-like activity of clusters was determined according to the
description in the SOD activity assay kit. The SOD-like activity was
evaluated by monitoring the absorption value at 560 nm using a
UV-vis spectrophotometer.
CAT-like test
The CAT-like activity of clusters was tested by monitoring the char-
acteristic absorption value of H2O2 at 240 nm using a UV-vis spec-
trophotometer.
The
optical
density
decreases
with
the
decomposition of H2O2 resulting from the CAT-like activity of clus-
ters. The reaction solutions contained 40 mM H2O2 and 0.35 μg/μl
of clusters in 200 μl of aqueous solution.
Computational details
The calculations were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simu-
lation Package code, which is based on the framework of DFT. The
elemental core and valence electrons were represented using the
projector augmented wave method, and the cutoff energy for the
plane-wave basis was chosen as 450 eV. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzer-
hof functional, one of the most famous generalized gradient ap-
proximation functionals, is used to describe the exchange-
correlation potential. The model was built by placing the
undoped and Cu-doped Au22 clusters in a 23 Å by 23 Å by 30 Å
box to avoid the interaction between molecules due to periodicity.
In calculations, a Gamma-centered 1 by 1 by 1 grid was used to
sample the Brillouin zone of the system. The convergence criteria
of the electronic energy and forces were set to 10−5 eV and −0.03
eV/Å, respectively. In this work, the doping formation energies (Ef)
of two different Cu-doped Au22 structures were calculated by the
following expression
Ef ¼ ECu  doped   Eundoped þ EAu   ECu
ð1Þ
where ECu−doped and Eundoped are the total energies of Cu-doped and
undoped Au22 clusters, respectively. EAu and ECu are energy per
atom for the Au and Cu atoms, respectively. The negative value of
Ef indicated the stability of the structure with doped impurity atoms.
To investigate the adsorption behaviors of various free radicals
on Au22 and Au21Cu1, it is necessary to determine their adsorption
energy. The adsorption energy (Eads) of free radicals on Au21Cu1
was calculated by the following expression
Eads ¼ EtotalðAu22=Au21Cu1 þ adsorbateÞ
  EtotalðAu22=Au21Cu1Þ   EtotalðadsorbateÞ
ð2Þ
where Etotal(Au22/Au21Cu1 + adsorbate), Etotal(Au22/Au21Cu1), and
Etotal(adsorbate) represent the total energy of Au22/Au21Cu1 with
adsorbed species, the Au22/Au21Cu1 nanocluster itself, and the ad-
sorbed species, respectively.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
13 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

In vitro cell experiments
Mouse microglia BV2 cells were obtained from Tianjin Huanhu
Hospital. The human renal tubular epithelial cell line (HK-2) was
purchased from Procell (Wuhan, China). BV2 cells were cultured
in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Gibco), supple-
mented with 10% FBS (BI) at 37°C with 5% CO2. HK2 cells were
cultured in minimum essential medium, supplemented with 10%
FBS (BI) at 37°C with 5% CO2. Penicillin (100 U/ml) and strepto-
mycin sulfate (100 mg/ml; Solomo) were applied according to the
growth state.
Cytotoxicity assay
BV2 cells (3 × 103) and HK2 cells (3 × 103) were seeded in 96-well
plates overnight. The culture medium was replaced by different
doses of Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters dissolved in the DMEM, and
then cells were incubated for another 24 hours. Cell toxicity was an-
alyzed by CCK8 assay.
Cell viability
BV2 cells (3 × 103) and HK2 cells (3 × 103) were cultured in a 96-
well plate in 100 μl of culture media. When roughly 60% confluence
was reached in each well, cells were stimulated by 20 μM cisplatin or
LPS (200 μg/ml) for 6 hours. Then, the culture media were substi-
tuted by fresh media containing Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters at dif-
ferent doses, and the cells were incubated overnight. Cell viability
was determined by CCK8 assay.
Measurement of intracellular oxidative stress
BV2 cells (2 × 105) and HK2 cells (2 × 105) were cultured in a six-
well plate in a 2 ml culture medium. Cells were grown to 60% con-
fluence and treated for 6 hours under 20 μM cisplatin or 200 μg/ml
LPS conditions. The solution was replaced by a fresh culture
medium with 10% FBS containing Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters
(100 ng/μl), and cells were incubated for another 18 hours. The in-
tracellular oxidative stress was measured using various fluorescent
probes, including 20,70-dichlorofluorescein diacetate for general
ROS, and dihydroethidium for superoxide. According to the proto-
cols from the manufacturer, cells were kept at 37°C for the appro-
priate period in the dark. Intracellular oxidative stress was captured
by using a fluorescence microscope (EVOS, AMG), data were col-
lected by a fluorescence-activated cell sorting flow cytometer (BD
AccuriTM C6), and Flowjo 10.6.2 was used for quantitative analysis
of free radicals.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
BV2 cells (2 × 105) and HK2 cells (2 × 105) were cultured in a six-
well plate in a 2 ml culture medium. HK2 cells were grown to 60%
confluence and treated for 6 hours under 20 μM cisplatin condi-
tions. The solution was replaced by a fresh culture medium with
10% FBS containing Au22 and Au21Cu1 clusters (100 ng/μl), and
cells were incubated for another 24 hours. HK2 cell supernatant
was removed, half of which was used for ELISA. The other half of
the supernatant was used to replace the original culture medium of
BV2 cells. After 24 hours, the BV2 cell supernatant was removed
for ELISA.
Live-cell staining
HK2 cells (2 × 105) were cultured in a 24-well plate with a coverslip
on the bottom. HK2 cells were grown to 60% confluence and treated
for 6 hours under 20 μM cisplatin conditions. The solution was re-
placed by a fresh culture medium with 10% FBS containing Au22
and Au21Cu1 clusters (100 ng/μl), and cells were incubated for
another 24 hours. Then, the cells were washed three times in PBS
and fixed into 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 30 min. Cells were
washed three times in PBS again and permeabilized with 0.5%
Triton X-100 followed by 10% goat serum for 20 min at room tem-
perature. Subsequently, the sections were incubated in primary an-
tibody (anti-TLR4, Bioss, BS-20594R) overnight at 4°C. After being
washed with PBS three times, the cells were incubated with second-
ary antibodies for 2 hours at room temperature. Subsequently, the
cell nuclei were stained with 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) for 5 min, and cells were viewed under a fluorescence
microscope.
In vivo and ex vivo animal experiments
All animal testing was authorized in accordance with the standards
established by the Institute of Radiation Medicine, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences. Male C57 mice (6 to 10 weeks)
were used for all acute toxicity experiments. Male C57BL/6J mice
(6 to 8 weeks) were purchased from Beijing Vital River Laboratory
Animal Technology Co. Ltd. Mice were kept in a standard 12-hour
light/12-hour dark cycle under specific pathogen–free conditions
and were allowed food and water ad libitum.
Model construction and kidney collection of mice
Mice were treated with cisplatin to induce kidney injury and cere-
bral complications. The mice were divided into two groups. The ne-
phritis group was injected intraperitoneally with 200 μl of cisplatin
(20 mg/kg). The control mice were injected intraperitoneally with
200 μl of 0.9% saline. All mice were raised under 12-hour dark/light
cycles and used for NIR-II imaging. Au21Cu1(SG)18 was injected
into the tail vein. Two minutes later, we dissected the mouse and
took out the kidneys for fixation and solvent cleared.
The mice were intraperitoneally injected with LPS (10 mg/ml),
followed by the intravenous injection of gold clusters for the mice in
the LPS + cluster group at the dose of 5 mg/ml with 200 μl. The
injection volume of LPS or nanozyme was 200 μl.
Fluorescent labeling and tissue collection
Two groups of C57 mice (nephritis and control groups) were first
injected with 200 μl of Au21Cu1(SG)18 (5 mg/ml) through the tail
vein. Mice were euthanized 2 min after injection, and kidneys
were taken out. The kidneys were cleaned twice in PBS before
being preserved at room temperature in 10% neutral-buffered for-
malin. After fixation in formalin overnight at 4°C, the kidneys were
solvent cleared using 3DISCO. The 3DISCO method is convenient
and fast, and has little effect on the fluorescence signal. Tetrahydro-
furan was used to dehydrate the sample and used in concentrations
of 50% (v/v), 70% (v/v), 80% (v/v), and 100% (v/v). Dichlorome-
thane was used as the lipid-solving agent. Dibenzyl ether (DBE)
was used to match the refractive index. The sample can be stored
in the DBE after being processed. During imaging, DBE was used
as an immersion solvent.
Imaging in vitro
The effective numerical aperture (NA) of the imaging system was
NA = nsinα = nsin[arctan (D/2f )], where n is the refractive index,
α is half of the aperture angle, D is the illumination pupil diameter
of the light sheet [adjusted by holographically controlling of spatial
light modulator (SLM)] as it exits the illumination objective, and f is
the focal length of the illumination objective. D can be measured by
placing scattered paper close to the aperture of the illumination ob-
jective when given a mask on SLM. Furthermore, it can be changed
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
14 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

by adjusting the coordinate factor u. The experimentally measured
beam parameters (light waist and Rayleigh length) were consistent
with the theoretical values based on effective NA values. For all
imaging, the effective NA of the illumination objective was 0.27,
the coordinate factor u corresponding to SLM is 1, α = 7, and the
resulting imaging field of view is 632 μm. Uncleared tissue is imaged
using 1X PBS immersion, and cleared tissue is imaged using DBE-
matched refractive index. When switching between different wave-
lengths and beam types for imaging, we kept the beam power at the
back aperture between 3.5 and 12.2 mW and kept it constant. The
displacement stage is linked to the camera exposure time to scan
biological samples in steps of 500 nm. The exposure time of the bi-
ological samples was 20 ms.
Imaging in vivo
For real-time NIR-II imaging, Au22 clusters of 200 μl with a concen-
tration of 10 mg/ml were intravenously injected after using 180 μl of
5% chloral hydrate solution. The mouse was mounted on the plat-
form below the 808 nm diode laser for real-time monitoring. A 2D
InGaAs array (Princeton Instruments, 640 × 512 pixels) was oper-
ated to collect images in NIR-II regions. Excitation light was provid-
ed by an 808 nm diode laser coupled to a 4.5 mm collimator. The
fluorescence signal in the NIR-II region was collected by the detec-
tor using a 1000 nm long pass filter.
Kit detection
Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and cleaned with 10 ml of
PBS perfusion on day 3 after AKI. Kidney and brain samples were
harvested quickly from the body. Homogenates were centrifuged at
6000g for 15 min three times, and the supernatant was stored at
−80°C for preparation. Protein concentration was determined
with an enhanced bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Be-
yotime, P0010). Indicators for oxidative stress were detected with a
lipid peroxidation MDA assay kit (Beyotime, S0131S), a hydrogen
peroxide assay kit (Beyotime, S0038), a total SOD assay kit with
WST-8 (Beyotime, S0101M), and a GSH and GSSG assay kit (Beyo-
time, S0053). Inflammatory cytokines were determined by ELISA
kits (Abcam, ab100712, ab197742, and ab208348; Proteintech,
KE10007, KE10003, KE1006, and KE10023, respectively). The
assays were performed according to the instructions provided by
the manufacturer.
Immunostaining
All organs were harvested from the mice and fixed into 4% PFA for
24 to 48 hours, embedded in paraffin, and mounted on slides (4 μm
coronal sections). The slides were dewaxed in xylene and dehydrat-
ed in gradient alcohol. Then, endogenous peroxidase was extin-
guished, and antigen retrieval was performed in a citrate antigen
retrieval solution (C1032, Solarbio, China). Immediately afterward,
the slides were blocked with serum, and the primary antibody was
added to the slides and incubated overnight at 4°C. The information
about the primary antibody is as follows: anti–TNF-α antibody
(1:150, Abcam, ab183218), anti–IL-6 antibody (1:100, Proteintech,
66146-1-lg), anti–IL-1β (1:100, Affinity, AF5130), anti–ZO-1
(1:100, Proteintech, 21773-I-AP), anti-GFAP (1:100, Proteintech,
16823-1-AP), and anti–Iba-1 antibody (1:100, Proteintech, 10904-
1-AP). After being rinsed three times, the secondary antibody was
incubated with slides in the dark for 1 to 1.5 hours. The information
about the secondary antibody is as follows: goat anti–rabbit
immunoglobulin G (IgG) H&L (Alexa Fluor488) (1:300, Abcam,
ab150077), CoraLite488-conjugated Affinipure goat anti–mouse
IgG (H + L) (1:100, Proteintech, SA00013-1), and Cy3-conjugated
Affinipure goat anti–rabbit IgG (H + L) (1:100, Proteintech,
SA00009-2). Next, the slides were mounted with an anti-fade
mounting medium with DAPI (S2110, Solarbio, China) and cap-
tured with a fluorescence microscope (EVOS, AMG). Terminal de-
oxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate
nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay was carried out using the
TUNEL apoptosis assay kit (C1089, Beyotime, China). Slides were
also stained with H&E for toxicological analysis and pathological
observation. The quantification was analyzed with ImageJ and as-
sessed by the target expression levels.
Western blotting
Tissue samples (n = 3 per group per point) were lysed and operated
on ice, and protein was extracted from brain homogenates in radio-
immunoprecipitation
assay
lysis
buffer
(strong)
(CWBIO,
CW2333) containing protease inhibitors at 95°C for 5 min. Tissue
extract supernatant protein concentrations were determined by a
BCA assay (Beyotime, P0010). SDS–polyacrylamide gel electropho-
resis was performed to resolve protein lysates (50 μg) before protein
lysates were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (CWBIO,
CW0022S). Antibodies specific for TLR4 (Abcam, ab217274)
were used.
BBB penetration
Mice in deep anesthesia were perfused with 0.01 M PBS to clean out
blood in blood vessels at the point of 1, 4, 6, 12, 24, and 72 hours (n =
3 per group per point). Brain tissues were harvested and weighed,
and the Au element was detected on ICP-MS to evaluate the BBB
penetration.
Targeted analysis of metabolites by UHPLC-Q/Orbitrap MS
The targeted metabolomics analysis of serum was carried out with
the help of the Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Analytical Testing Center, based on ultrahigh-performance liquid
chromatography tandem quadrupole Orbitrap MS, (UHPLC-Q/
Orbitrap MS). The raw data consisted of 12 quality control
samples and 30 experimental serum samples. A total of 260 com-
pounds were targeted for peak extraction, and 75% of the detectable
compounds in each group were taken to build a matrix. A total of
103 compound peak areas were extracted from plasma, and the nor-
malized areas obtained on the basis of the peak areas of internal
standard compounds were used as raw data. After that, the
missing values were filled by one-half of the minimum value for
simulation (missing value recoding), and the data were normalized.
Normalization was performed using the sum of peak areas for each
sample. After obtaining the collated data, we performed principal
components analysis on the multivariate variables. The results
were then analyzed using the statistical method of orthogonal
partial least squares–discriminant analysis. Last, the differential me-
tabolites were obtained by permutation test and multivariate statis-
tical analysis.
Pharmacokinetic and toxicological studies
Healthy control mice were intravenously injected with Au22 (10 mg/
kg in 200 μl volume) to conduct pharmacokinetic and toxicological
studies and excretion. The blood was collected at different time
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
15 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

points by the orbital venous plexus blood collection method. The
element Au was detected using ICP-MS and fluorescence imaging
for half-time studies. Some of the blood samples and all organs were
harvested for hematology, biochemistry, and pathological studies
on day 7 after injection. The blood was collected into anticoagula-
tion tubes, and the serum was separated by centrifugation for bio-
chemistry analysis. All organs were weighed and detected with Au
content to determine the biodistribution using ICP-MS. Urine was
collected at different time points within 24 hours, and the Au
element was determined with ICP-MS as well to analyze the excre-
tion of Au22 clusters. The pathological studies were conducted with
H&E staining and observed with a digital light microscope. For
serum CREA and BUN in AKI mice on day 3 after AKI, the
method is the same as above.
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as means ± SD (standard deviation) or SEM
(standard error of mean). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with the Tukey test was used to assess differences among groups.
Asterisks indicate significant differences (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
***P < 0.001).
Supplementary Materials
This PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S36
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. W. Xu, D. Wang, B. Z. Tang, NIR-II AIEgens: A win-win integration towards bioapplications.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 7476–7487 (2021).
2. P. Pei, Y. Chen, C. Sun, Y. Fan, Y. Yang, X. Liu, L. Lu, M. Zhao, H. Zhang, D. Zhao, X. Liu,
F. Zhang, X-ray-activated persistent luminescence nanomaterials for NIR-II imaging. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 16, 1011–1018 (2021).
3. A. Ji, H. Lou, C. Qu, W. Lu, Y. Hao, J. Li, Y. Wu, T. Chang, H. Chen, Z. Cheng, Author correction:
Acceptor engineering for NIR-II dyes with high photochemical and biomedical perfor-
mance. Nat. Commun. 13, 4979 (2022).
4. Q. X. Wang, Y. F. Yang, X. F. Yang, Y. Pan, L. D. Sun, W. Y. Zhang, Y. L. Shao, J. Shen, J. Lin,
L. L. Li, C. H. Yan, Upconverted/downshifted NaLnF4 and metal-organic framework het-
erostructures boosting NIR-II imaging-guided photodynamic immunotherapy toward
tumors. Nano Today 43, 101439 (2022).
5. H. Z. Ma, J. Y. Wang, X. D. Zhang, Near-infrared II emissive metal clusters: From atom
physics to biomedicine. Coord. Chem. Rev. 448, 214184 (2021).
6. Q. Yang, Z. Ma, H. Wang, B. Zhou, S. Zhu, Y. Zhong, J. Wang, H. Wan, A. Antaris, R. Ma,
X. Zhang, J. Yang, X. Zhang, H. Sun, W. Liu, Y. Liang, H. Dai, Rational design of molecular
fluorophores for biological imaging in the NIR-II window. Adv. Mater. 29, 1605497 (2017).
7. Z. Lei, F. Zhang, Molecular engineering of NIR-II fluorophores for improved biomedical
detection. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 16294–16308 (2021).
8. Y. Chen, P. Pei, Z. Lei, X. Zhang, D. Yin, F. Zhang, A promising NIR-II fluorescent sensor for
peptide-mediated long-term monitoring of kidney dysfunction. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60,
15809–15815 (2021).
9. H. Y. Huang, Z. Q. Sun, H. C. Yang, X. H. Yang, F. Wu, Y. Sun, C. Y. Li, M. Tian, H. Zhang,
Q. B. Wang, Precise examination of peripheral vascular disease for diabetics with a novel
multiplexed NIR-II fluorescence imaging technology. Nano Today 43, 101378 (2022).
10. A. L. Antaris, H. Chen, K. Cheng, Y. Sun, G. Hong, C. Qu, S. Diao, Z. Deng, X. Hu, B. Zhang,
X. Zhang, O. K. Yaghi, Z. R. Alamparambil, X. Hong, Z. Cheng, H. Dai, A small-molecule dye
for NIR-II imaging. Nat. Mater. 15, 235–242 (2016).
11. H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Sun, Q. Xin, S. Liu, X. Mu, X. Yuan, K. Chen, H. Wang, K. Varga, W. Mi, J. Yang,
X. D. Zhang, Catalytically potent and selective clusterzymes for modulation of neuroi-
nflammation through single-atom substitutions. Nat. Commun. 12, 114 (2021).
12. X. Zhang, S. Li, H. Ma, H. Wang, R. Zhang, X. D. Zhang, Activatable NIR-II organic fluorescent
probes for bioimaging. Theranostics 12, 3345–3371 (2022).
13. P. Pei, H. Hu, Y. Chen, S. Wang, J. Chen, J. Ming, Y. Yang, C. Sun, S. Zhao, F. Zhang, NIR-II
ratiometric lanthanide-dye hybrid nanoprobes doped bioscaffolds for in situ bone repair
monitoring. Nano Lett. 22, 783–791 (2022).
14. Y. Zhan, S. Ling, H. Huang, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, S. Huang, C. Li, W. Guo, Q. Wang, Rapid
unperturbed-tissue analysis for intraoperative cancer diagnosis using an enzyme-activated
NIR-II nanoprobe. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 2637–2642 (2021).
15. S. Chatterjee, C. Ell, S. Mosor, G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, W. Hoyer, M. Kira, S. W. Koch,
J. P. Prineas, H. Stolz, Excitonic photoluminescence in semiconductor quantum wells:
Plasma versus excitons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 067402 (2004).
16. J. Shaver, J. Kono, O. Portugall, V. Krstic, G. L. Rikken, Y. Miyauchi, S. Maruyama,
V. Perebeinos, Magnetic brightening of carbon nanotube photoluminescence through
symmetry breaking. Nano Lett. 7, 1851–1855 (2007).
17. S. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Sun, L. Liu, X. Mu, S. Liu, M. Jiao, X. Chen, K. Chen, H. Ma, T. Li, X. Liu,
H. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Yang, X. D. Zhang, Single-atom nanozymes catalytically surpassing
naturally occurring enzymes as sustained stitching for brain trauma. Nat. Commun. 13,
4744 (2022).
18. H. Wang, K. Wan, X. Shi, Recent advances in nanozyme research. Adv. Mater. 31,
e1805368 (2019).
19. R. Yan, S. Sun, J. Yang, W. Long, J. Wang, X. Mu, Q. Li, W. Hao, S. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Gao,
L. Ouyang, J. Chen, S. Liu, X. D. Zhang, D. Ming, Nanozyme-based bandage with single-
atom catalysis for brain trauma. ACS Nano 13, 11552–11560 (2019).
20. S. Sun, H. L. Liu, Q. Xin, K. Chen, H. Z. Ma, S. H. Liu, X. Y. Mu, W. T. Hao, S. J. Liu, Y. L. Gao,
Y. Wang, J. H. Pei, R. L. Zhao, S. F. Zhang, X. N. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. H. Li, X. D. Zhang, Atomic
engineering of clusterzyme for relieving acute neuroinflammation through lattice expan-
sion. Nano Lett. 21, 2562–2571 (2021).
21. J. B. Stone, L. M. DeAngelis, Cancer-treatment-induced neurotoxicity—Focus on newer
treatments. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 13, 92–105 (2016).
22. T. Liu, B. Xiao, F. Xiang, J. Tan, Z. Chen, X. Zhang, C. Wu, Z. Mao, G. Luo, X. Chen, J. Deng,
Ultrasmall copper-based nanoparticles for reactive oxygen species scavenging and alle-
viation of inflammation related diseases. Nat. Commun. 11, 2788 (2020).
23. P. H. Cheng, K. Y. Pu, Molecular imaging and disease theranostics with renal-clearable
optical agents. Nat. Rev. Mater. 6, 1095–1113 (2021).
24. J. A. Kellum, P. Romagnani, G. Ashuntantang, C. Ronco, A. Zarbock, H. J. Anders, Acute
kidney injury. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers. 7, 52 (2021).
25. N. Tomasev, X. Glorot, J. W. Rae, M. Zielinski, H. Askham, A. Saraiva, A. Mottram, C. Meyer,
S. Ravuri, I. Protsyuk, A. Connell, C. O. Hughes, A. Karthikesalingam, J. Cornebise,
H. Montgomery, G. Rees, C. Laing, C. R. Baker, K. Peterson, R. Reeves, D. Hassabis, D. King,
M. Suleyman, T. Back, C. Nielson, J. R. Ledsam, S. Mohamed, A clinically applicable ap-
proach to continuous prediction of future acute kidney injury. Nature 572, 116–119 (2019).
26. E. F. Carney, The molecular genetics of AKI. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 17, 14 (2021).
27. A. Vijayan, Tackling AKI: Prevention, timing of dialysis and follow-up. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 17,
87–88 (2021).
28. J. Huang, J. Li, Y. Lyu, Q. Miao, K. Pu, Molecular optical imaging probes for early diagnosis of
drug-induced acute kidney injury. Nat. Mater. 18, 1133–1143 (2019).
29. C. Yao, Y. Chen, M. Zhao, S. Wang, B. Wu, Y. Yang, D. Yin, P. Yu, H. Zhang, F. Zhang, A. Bright,
Renal-clearable NIR-II brush macromolecular probe with long blood circulation time for
kidney disease bioimaging. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 61, e202114273 (2022).
30. Q. Weng, H. Sun, C. Fang, F. Xia, H. Liao, J. Lee, J. Wang, A. Xie, J. Ren, X. Guo, F. Li, B. Yang,
D. Ling, Catalytic activity tunable ceria nanoparticles prevent chemotherapy-induced
acute kidney injury without interference with chemotherapeutics. Nat. Commun. 12,
1436 (2021).
31. T. Sun, D. Jiang, Z. T. Rosenkrans, E. B. Ehlerding, D. Ni, C. Qi, C. J. Kutyreff, T. E. Barnhart,
J. W. Engle, P. Huang, W. Cai, A melanin-based natural antioxidant defense nanosystem for
theranostic application in acute kidney injury. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1904833 (2019).
32. H. Yu, F. Jin, D. Liu, G. Shu, X. Wang, J. Qi, M. Sun, P. Yang, S. Jiang, X. Ying, Y. Du, ROS-
responsive nano-drug delivery system combining mitochondria-targeting ceria nanopar-
ticles with atorvastatin for acute kidney injury. Theranostics 10, 2342–2357 (2020).
33. D. Ni, D. Jiang, C. J. Kutyreff, J. Lai, Y. Yan, T. E. Barnhart, B. Yu, H. J. Im, L. Kang, S. Y. Cho,
Z. Liu, P. Huang, J. W. Engle, W. Cai, Molybdenum-based nanoclusters act as antioxidants
and ameliorate acute kidney injury in mice. Nat. Commun. 9, 5421 (2018).
34. Y. Lv, C. Dan, S. Dongdong, M. Chen, B. C. Yin, L. Yuan, X. B. Zhang, Visualization of oxidative
injury in the mouse kidney using selective superoxide anion fluorescent probes. Chem. Sci.
9, 7606–7613 (2018).
35. F. Wang, X. Jiang, H. Xiang, N. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Yao, P. Wang, H. Pan, L. Yu, Y. Cheng, Y. Hu,
W. Lin, X. Li, An inherently kidney-targeting near-infrared fluorophore based probe for
early detection of acute kidney injury. Biosens. Bioelectron. 172, 112756 (2021).
36. R. Zhou, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Y. Xu, R. Ziniuk, H. Xu, L. Liu, J. Qu, Tumor-microenvironment-
activated NIR-II nanotheranostic platform for precise diagnosis and treatment of colon
cancer. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14, 23206–23218 (2022).
37. D. Jana, B. He, Y. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, A defect-engineered nanozyme for targeted NIR-II
photothermal immunotherapy of cancer. Adv. Mater., e2206401, 2206401 (2022).
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
16 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

38. H. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Tian, D. Lu, Y. Yu, S. Cestellos-Blanco, K. K. Sakimoto, P. Yang, Bacteria
photosensitized by intracellular gold nanoclusters for solar fuel production. Nat. Nano-
technol. 13, 900–905 (2018).
39. K. Pyo, V. D. Thanthirige, K. Kwak, P. Pandurangan, G. Ramakrishna, D. Lee, Ultrabright
luminescence from gold nanoclusters: Rigidifying the Au(I)-thiolate shell. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
137, 8244–8250 (2015).
40. Y. Yu, Z. Luo, D. M. Chevrier, D. T. Leong, P. Zhang, D. E. Jiang, J. Xie, Identification of a
highly luminescent Au22(SG)18 nanocluster. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 1246–1249 (2014).
41. C. Zhang, A. Zhang, W. Hou, T. Li, K. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. M. de la Fuente, W. Jin, D. Cui,
Mimicking pathogenic invasion with the complexes of Au22(SG)18-engineered assemblies
and folic acid. ACS Nano 12, 4408–4418 (2018).
42. K. Pyo, N. H. Ly, S. Y. Yoon, Y. Shen, S. Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee, S. W. Joo, D. Lee, Highly luminescent
folate-functionalized Au22 nanoclusters for bioimaging. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 6,
1700203 (2017).
43. P. N. Day, R. Pachter, K. A. Nguyen, R. Jin, Theoretical prediction of optical absorption and
emission in thiolated gold clusters. J. Phys. Chem. A 123, 6472–6481 (2019).
44. H. Liu, G. Hong, Z. Luo, J. Chen, J. Chang, M. Gong, H. He, J. Yang, X. Yuan, L. Li, X. Mu,
J. Wang, W. Mi, J. Luo, J. Xie, X. D. Zhang, Atomic-precision gold clusters for NIR-II imaging.
Adv. Mater. 31, e1901015 (2019).
45. M. J. O’Connell, S. M. Bachilo, C. B. Huffman, V. C. Moore, M. S. Strano, E. H. Haroz,
K. L. Rialon, P. J. Boul, W. H. Noon, C. Kittrell, J. Ma, R. H. Hauge, R. B. Weisman, R. E. Smalley,
Band gap fluorescence from individual single-walled carbon nanotubes. Science 297,
593–596 (2002).
46. H. Deng, K. Huang, L. Xiu, W. Sun, Q. Yao, X. Fang, X. Huang, H. A. A. Noreldeen, H. Peng,
J. Xie, W. Chen, Bis-Schiff base linkage-triggered highly bright luminescence of gold
nanoclusters in aqueous solution at the single-cluster level. Nat. Commun. 13, 3381 (2022).
47. S. R. Sahoo, S. C. Ke, Spin-orbit coupling effects in au 4f core-level electronic structures in
supported low-dimensional gold nanoparticles. Nanomaterials (Basel) 11, 554 (2021).
48. Y. Gao, N. Shao, Y. Pei, X. C. Zeng, Icosahedral crown gold nanocluster Au43Cu12 with high
catalytic activity. Nano Lett. 10, 1055–1062 (2010).
49. S. Tian, Y. Cao, T. Chen, S. Zang, J. Xie, Ligand-protected atomically precise gold nano-
clusters as model catalysts for oxidation reactions. Chem. Commun. (Camb.) 56,
1163–1174 (2020).
50. T. Higaki, Y. Li, S. Zhao, Q. Li, S. Li, X. S. Du, S. Yang, J. Chai, R. Jin, Atomically tailored gold
nanoclusters for catalytic application. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 58, 8291–8302 (2019).
51. S. Yamazoe, K. Koyasu, T. Tsukuda, Nonscalable oxidation catalysis of gold clusters. Acc.
Chem. Res. 47, 816–824 (2014).
52. K. A. Kacprzak, O. Lopez-Acevedo, H. Hakkinen, H. Gronbeck, Theoretical characterization
of cyclic thiolated copper, silver, and gold clusters. J. Phys. Chem. C 114,
13571–13576 (2010).
53. B. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Chuang, S. Chen, P. Yang, Size transformation of the Au22(SG)18
nanocluster and its surface-sensitive kinetics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 11514–11520 (2020).
54. P. Cheng, W. Chen, S. Li, S. He, Q. Miao, K. Pu, Fluoro-photoacoustic polymeric renal re-
porter for real-time dual imaging of acute kidney injury. Adv. Mater. 32, e1908530 (2020).
55. J. Huang, C. Xie, X. Zhang, Y. Jiang, J. Li, Q. Fan, K. Pu, Renal-clearable molecular semi-
conductor for second near-infrared fluorescence imaging of kidney dysfunction. Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 58, 15120–15127 (2019).
56. P. Cheng, Q. Miao, J. Huang, J. Li, K. Pu, Multiplex optical urinalysis for early detection of
drug-induced kidney injury. Anal. Chem. 92, 6166–6172 (2020).
57. Z. Zeng, S. S. Liew, X. Wei, K. Pu, Hemicyanine-based near-infrared activatable probes for
imaging and diagnosis of diseases. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 26454–26475 (2021).
58. K. Shen, J. Miao, Q. Gao, X. Ling, Y. Liang, Q. Zhou, Q. Song, Y. Luo, Q. Wu, W. Shen, X. Wang,
X. Li, Y. Liu, S. Zhou, Y. Tang, L. Zhou, Annexin A2 plays a key role in protecting against
cisplatin-induced AKI through β-catenin/TFEB pathway. Cell Death Discov. 8, 430 (2022).
59. P. F. Liu, T. Z. Shi, H. W. Li, H. Y. Chen, Y. Huang, H. Z. Ma, T. Y. Zhu, R. Zhao, Y. Li, Q. Xin, L. Liu,
S. Sun, H. M. Nie, W. Long, H. Wang, J. W. Wang, X. D. Zhang, D. Ming, Airy beam assisted
NIR-II light-sheet microscopy. Nano Today 47, 101628 (2022).
60. P. F. Liu, R. Zhao, H. W. Li, T. Y. Zhu, Y. Li, H. Wang, X. D. Zhang, Near-infrared-II deep tissue
fluorescence microscopy and application. Nano Res. 16, 692–714 (2023).
61. M. Salama, S. M. Farrag, S. Abulasrar, M. M. Amin, A. A. Ali, H. Sheashaa, M. Sobh, O. Arias-
Carrion, Up-regulation of TLR-4 in the brain after ischemic kidney-induced encephalop-
athy in the rat. CNS Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets 12, 583–586 (2013).
62. R. Zhang, L. Cheng, Z. Dong, L. Hou, S. Zhang, Z. Meng, O. Betzer, Y. Wang, R. Popovtzer,
Z. Liu, Ultra-small natural product based coordination polymer nanodots for acute kidney
injury relief. Mater Horiz. 8, 1314–1322 (2021).
63. D. Jiang, Z. Ge, H. J. Im, C. G. England, D. Ni, J. Hou, L. Zhang, C. J. Kutyreff, Y. Yan, Y. Liu,
S. Y. Cho, J. W. Engle, J. Shi, P. Huang, C. Fan, H. Yan, W. Cai, DNA origami nanostructures can
exhibit preferential renal uptake and alleviate acute kidney injury. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2,
865–877 (2018).
64. S. N. Heyman, I. Raz, J. P. Dwyer, R. W. Sibony, J. B. Lewis, Z. Abassi, Diabetic proteinuria
revisited: Updated physiologic perspectives. Cell 11, 2917 (2022).
65. R. Lu, M. C. Kiernan, A. Murray, M. H. Rosner, C. Ronco, Kidney-brain crosstalk in the acute
and chronic setting. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 11, 707–719 (2015).
66. M. Liu, Y. Liang, S. Chigurupati, J. D. Lathia, M. Pletnikov, Z. Sun, M. Crow, C. A. Ross,
M. P. Mattson, H. Rabb, Acute kidney injury leads to inflammation and functional changes
in the brain. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 19, 1360–1370 (2008).
67. N. A. Hukriede, D. E. Soranno, V. Sander, T. Perreau, M. C. Starr, P. S. T. Yuen, L. J. Siskind,
M. P. Hutchens, A. J. Davidson, D. M. Burmeister, S. Faubel, M. P. de Caestecker, Experi-
mental models of acute kidney injury for translational research. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 18,
277–293 (2022).
68. K. R. McSweeney, L. K. Gadanec, T. Qaradakhi, B. A. Ali, A. Zulli, V. Apostolopoulos, Mech-
anisms of cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury: Pathological mechanisms, pharmacolog-
ical interventions, and genetic mitigations. Cancer 13, 1572 (2021).
69. A. Varatharaj, I. Galea, The blood-brain barrier in systemic inflammation. Brain Behav.
Immun. 60, 1–12 (2017).
70. B. V. Zlokovic, The blood-brain barrier in health and chronic neurodegenerative disorders.
Neuron 57, 178–201 (2008).
71. M. Platten, E. A. A. Nollen, U. F. Rohrig, F. Fallarino, C. A. Opitz, Tryptophan metabolism as a
common therapeutic target in cancer, neurodegeneration and beyond. Nat. Rev. Drug
Discov. 18, 379–401 (2019).
72. H. N. Wee, J. J. Liu, J. Ching, J. P. Kovalik, S. C. Lim, The kynurenine pathway in acute kidney
injury and chronic kidney disease. Am. J. Nephrol. 52, 771–787 (2021).
73. X. Y. Mu, J. Y. Wang, Y. H. Li, F. J. Xu, W. Long, L. F. Ouyang, H. L. Liu, Y. Q. Jing, J. Y. Wang,
H. T. Dai, Q. Liu, Y. M. Sun, C. L. Liu, X. D. Zhang, Redox trimetallic nanozyme with neutral
environment preference for brain injury. ACS Nano 13, 1870–1884 (2019).
74. A. Baghdasaryan, F. Wang, F. Ren, Z. Ma, J. Li, X. Zhou, L. Grigoryan, C. Xu, H. Dai, Phos-
phorylcholine-conjugated gold-molecular clusters improve signal for lymph node NIR-II
fluorescence imaging in preclinical cancer models. Nat. Commun. 13, 5613 (2022).
75. G. Gao, R. Chen, M. He, J. Li, J. Li, L. Wang, T. Sun, Gold nanoclusters for Parkinson’s disease
treatment. Biomaterials 194, 36–46 (2019).
76. H. Li, M. Wang, B. Huang, S. W. Zhu, J. J. Zhou, D. R. Chen, R. Cui, M. Zhang, Z. J. Sun,
Theranostic near-infrared-IIb emitting nanoprobes for promoting immunogenic radio-
therapy and abscopal effects against cancer metastasis. Nat. Commun. 12, 7149 (2021).
77. M. J. Afshari, C. Li, J. Zeng, J. Cui, S. Wu, M. Gao, Self-illuminating NIR-II bioluminescence
imaging probe based on silver sulfide quantum dots. ACS Nano 16, 16824–16832 (2022).
78. R. Tian, Q. Zeng, S. Zhu, J. Lau, S. Chandra, R. Ertsey, K. S. Hettie, T. Teraphongphom, Z. Hu,
G. Niu, D. O. Kiesewetter, H. Sun, X. Zhang, A. L. Antaris, B. R. Brooks, X. Chen, Albumin-
chaperoned cyanine dye yields superbright NIR-II fluorophore with enhanced pharmaco-
kinetics. Sci. Adv. 5, eaaw0672 (2019).
79. X. Wu, Y. Jiang, N. J. Rommelfanger, F. Yang, Q. Zhou, R. Yin, J. Liu, S. Cai, W. Ren, A. Shin,
K. S. Ong, K. Pu, G. Hong, Tether-free photothermal deep-brain stimulation in freely be-
having mice via wide-field illumination in the near-infrared-II window. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 6,
754–770 (2022).
80. S. L. Song, Y. J. Wang, Y. Zhao, W. B. Huang, F. Zhang, S. J. Zhu, Q. Wu, S. Fu, B. Z. Tang,
D. Wang, Molecular engineering of AIE luminogens for NIR-II/IIb bioimaging and surgical
navigation of lymph nodes. Matter 5, 2847–2863 (2022).
Acknowledgments
Funding: This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China (2021YFF1200700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
nos. 91859101, 81971744, U1932107, 82001952, and 11804248), the Outstanding Youth Funds
of Tianjin (2021FJ-0009), the National Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (nos.
19JCZDJC34000, 20JCYBJC00940, 21JCZDJC00620, and 21JCYBJC00490), the Innovation
Foundation of Tianjin University, CAS Interdisciplinary Innovation Team (JCTD-2020-08), the
Tianjin Health Science and Technology Project (ZC20152), and the Incubation Project of the
National Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin Third Central Hospital (2019YNR3). Author
contributions: X.-D.Z. conceived and designed the experiments. H.M. and X.Z. contributed to
physical and chemical measurement, and L.L. and R.Z. contributed to the simulation of the
theoretical calculation. Y.Y., K.T., and P.L. contributed to 3D imaging experiment. K.C., S.S., Q.X.,
Y.W., and X.C. contributed to the biological experiment, and Y.Y. contributed to the cell
experiment. X.-D.Z., H.W., H.M., X.Z., L.L., Y.H., P.L., X.Y., and C.L. analyzed the data. X.-D.Z., H.M.,
L.L., P.L., S.S., and H.L. prepared the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and
commented on the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the
conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 14 March 2023
Accepted 3 July 2023
Published 2 August 2023
10.1126/sciadv.adh7828
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Ma et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh7828 (2023)
2 August 2023
17 of 17
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026

Bioactive NIR-II gold clusters for three-dimensional imaging and acute
inflammation inhibition
Huizhen Ma, Xiaoning Zhang, Ling Liu, You Huang, Si Sun, Ke Chen, Qi Xin, Pengfei Liu, Yuxing Yan, Yili Wang, Yuan
Li, Haile Liu, Ruoli Zhao, Kexin Tan, Xinzhu Chen, Xun Yuan, Yonghui Li, Ying Liu, Haitao Dai, Changlong Liu, Hao
Wang, and Xiao-Dong Zhang
Sci. Adv. 9 (31), eadh7828.  DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adh7828
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.adh7828
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2023 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on June 27, 2026