Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety
COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW
Recent Progress on Silver-Based Antibacterial Food
Packaging
Tao Luo1
Ting Yao1
Zhongxu Zhan2
Bei Gan2
Xin Wu2
Hengyi Xu1
1State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Resources, Nanchang University, Nanchang, P. R. China
2Jiangxi General Institute of Testing and Certification Food
Testing Institute, Nanchang, P. R. China
Correspondence: Hengyi Xu (kidyxu@163.com; HengyiXu@ncu.edu.cn)
Received: 16 August 2025
Revised: 17 November 2025
Accepted: 21 November 2025
Keywords: Ag-based nanomaterials | antibacterial mechanism | food packaging | green synthesis | silver nanoparticles
ABSTRACT
Contamination by foodborne pathogens has become a serious threat to human health and has caused significant economic
losses. As a protective barrier, food packaging can protect food from bacteria, ultraviolet rays, and other external factors. Among
these, antibacterial silver food packaging shows great potential for extending food shelf life and controlling foodborne pathogen
contamination due to its excellent antibacterial and barrier properties. This paper offers a comprehensive review of recent progress
in the application of antibacterial silver nanomaterials in food packaging. In addition to an overview of the various synthesis
methods for antibacterial silver nanomaterials, the green synthesis of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) and the synthesis of Ag-based
nanomaterials are highlighted. Furthermore, two main antimicrobial mechanisms of AgNPs and the effects of AgNPs on the
properties of packaging are also discussed in detail. Subsequently, we also explore the application of various types of antibacterial
silver food packaging for vegetable, fruit, and meat preservation, with a focus on highlighting the potential of smart food packaging
for food safety applications. Finally, the future prospects and development of silver-based nanomaterials for antibacterial food
packaging are discussed, and the challenges that need to be addressed in the application of silver-based nanomaterials to ensure
safety and reliability are outlined. Overall, antibacterial silver food packaging is emerging as a new and effective means of
preserving food.
1
Introduction
Over the past few decades, contamination of food by pathogens
and other harmful substances has emerged as a paramount
concern for human health (Tang et al. 2024). Compelling reports
reveal that, on an annual basis, around 48 million people in
the United States become infected with foodborne illnesses. The
far-reaching consequences of this issue include approximately
128,000 hospital admissions, 3100 fatalities, and staggering eco-
nomic losses amounting to a colossal $75 billion (Hoffmann et al.
2024; Wu et al. 2024). Food packaging represents a significant
aspect of food safety, which in turn plays a pivotal role in
public health and social well-being. One potential strategy to
mitigate the incidence of foodborne illness is the incorporation
of antibacterial packaging (Dey et al. 2025; S. Yang et al. 2024).
Food packaging functions as a protective barrier, shielding food
products from various external elements, including ultraviolet
radiation, oxygen, water vapor, and pressure (F. Wang et al. 2024;
W. Yang et al. 2024; W. Yu et al. 2025). Moreover, it is instrumental
in prolonging the shelf-life of food products. By effectively block-
ing the intrusion of chemical and microbiological contaminants,
it not only preserves the quality of food but also ensures that
food can be transported and stored securely (Alizadeh Sani et al.
2025; Sitong Liu et al. 2024). In particular, antibacterial food
packaging represents a remarkable innovation. It has the capacity
to retard food spoilage triggered by microbial proliferation (X.
© 2025 Institute of Food Technologists R
⃝.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026; 25:e70366
https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.70366
1 of 23

Wang et al. 2024). Given its outstanding antibacterial properties,
it holds immense potential in curbing the contamination of
foodborne pathogenic bacteria, thereby playing a crucial role in
enhancing food safety and reducing the incidence of food-related
illnesses (Khan et al. 2024; Y. Zhang et al. 2025). Furthermore,
antibacterial food packaging with antibacterial nanoparticles
has multiple advantages over conventional packaging in food
safety and practical use. When integrated into packaging mate-
rials, nanoparticles can significantly enhance their physical and
mechanical properties (G. Jiang et al. 2025; D. Yang et al. 2023).
For instance, they increase mechanical strength, better resisting
external forces during handling, storage, and transportation.
They also add flexibility, enabling more versatile designs. The
durability of the materials improves, creating a longer—lasting
protective barrier for food. Additionally, nanoparticles optimize
oxygen and water permeability, vital for food freshness and
quality. Moreover, they enhance the durability of packaging
materials, promoting a more sustainable approach in line with
global environmental conservation efforts (K. Wang et al. 2024).
Active packaging is characterized as packaging materials that
incorporate a diverse range of active substances, such as essential
oils and AgNPs (J.-D. Wang et al. 2024). In contrast to con-
ventional food packaging, active packaging has the ability to
leverage the components within the packaging to either absorb
or release specific substances. This functionality serves to retard
the oxidation and enzymatic reactions occurring in food products.
Additionally, it effectively inhibits the growth of microorganisms
by antibacterial agents, thereby extending the shelf—life and
maintaining the quality of the food (Y. Liu 2024). It not only
prolongs the shelf life of food but also safeguards the quality
and safety of food products. Moreover, the evolution of smart
packaging, which builds upon the foundation of active packaging,
has made it possible to monitor the surrounding environment
in real-time (S. Liang et al. 2025). Through the use of sensors,
smart packaging can also provide reports on the quality status
of food, offering consumers and producers more comprehensive
information about the food’s condition throughout its storage and
distribution journey (H. Jiang et al. 2024). The novel material
utilized in smart packaging has the ability to perceive alterations
occurring within food products. By means of sensors, it can
convey pertinent information to consumers. This remarkable
feature opens up extensive and promising application prospects,
heralding a new era in the realm of food packaging and consumer-
food interaction.
Metal nanoparticles and metal oxide nanoparticles are among
the most common antibacterial nanoparticles with excellent
physicochemical properties (Sebastian et al. 2024)—for example,
AgNPs (D. Yang, et al. 2023), CuO (Ihsan et al. 2024), SeNPs (Y. Yu
et al. 2024), ZnO (A.G. Silva et al. 2023), and Ti2O (Hidayat et al.
2024). Due to the distinct physicochemical properties of different
nanoparticles, an increasing number of smart food packaging
solutions doped with metal nanoparticles have been developed.
These innovative packaging systems are able to identify quality
and safety parameters of food products by detecting changes in
factors such as biogenic amine concentration, UV–visible spectral
characteristics, and pH values. In this way, they play a key role
in improving food safety standards and ensuring the integrity
of food products throughout the supply chain (Y. Kang, et al.
2024; Rabee et al. 2023; L. Zhang et al. 2024). Among the many
antibacterial metal materials, AgNPs are a superior material with
excellent antibacterial performance and biological properties that
have a wide range of applications in environmental protection
and biomedical (Ali et al. 2025; Dai et al. 2024). The morphology
and properties of AgNPs can be significantly influenced by
the synthesis method and conditions (Sarkar et al. 2024). In
general, the synthesis of AgNPs is divided into top-down and
bottom-up methods, but the bottom-up method is widely used
due to its mild synthesis conditions, lower energy consumption,
and cost effectiveness (Abid et al. 2022). Bottom-up synthesis
of AgNPs can regulate the morphology, size, and stability of
nanoparticles by changing various parameters such as metal
precursor, reducing agent, capping agent, reaction temperature,
and pH. In addition, AgNPs prepared using non-toxic or low-
toxicity compounds such as plant extracts and microbial extracts
are widely used in biomedical and food applications due to their
high biocompatibility and environmental benefits (Yan et al.
2024), as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, the incorporation of AgNPs
into a diverse array of other materials, such as metal–organic
framework (MOF), graphene oxide (GO), and MXene, can lead to
a remarkable enhancement in the physicochemical properties of
the resultant materials. This integration endows the composites
with distinctive characteristics, thereby broadening their scope of
applications across various fields (Zheng et al. 2024).
This paper overviews various synthesis methods of antibacterial
silver nanomaterials, highlighting the green synthesis of AgNPs
(using plant and microbial extracts) and the synthesis of Ag-
based nanomaterials. The two main antibacterial mechanisms of
AgNPs are detailed. We then explore the impact of AgNPs doping
on packaging performance and the use of different antibacterial
silver food packaging for preserving vegetables, fruits, and meat,
emphasizing the potential of smart food packaging for food safety.
Finally, we discuss the future prospects and development of
antibacterial silver nanomaterials in food packaging, and outline
the challenges for ensuring their safe and reliable application.
2
Synthesis of AgNPs
The synthesis of AgNPs typically employs similar techniques
to those used for the preparation of other metal NPs. These
approaches can be broadly classified as either top-down or
bottom-up (Figure 2). As the name implies, the top-down
approach is a physical or mechanical process that dismantles
larger substructures into nanoscale materials. In the context
of AgNPs synthesis, this typically entails the production of
nanoscale silver from metallic silver in solid or aerosol form.
Physical techniques such as ball milling, laser ablation, and
sputtering fall within this category of activity (Alhajj et al. 2023;
Jayaramudu et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2023). The principal benefit of
utilizing a top-down approach is that AgNPs can be prepared
in a very short time. However, the primary drawback of this
methodology is the potential for the surface structure of metallic
AgNPs to induce defects that can significantly impact their
physicochemical attributes and surface chemistry. This technique
is particularly unsuitable for the synthesis of AgNPs with a high
surface finish in anisotropic morphologies and narrow size dis-
tributions. Furthermore, this technique necessitates prolonged
etching periods, substantial energy consumption, and expensive
instrumentation (Kumar et al. 2024). In contrast, the bottom-up
2 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 1
Synthesis of AgNPs, antibacterial mechanisms and applications in food packaging.
FIGURE 2
Top-down and bottom-up methods and process for the synthesis of AgNPs.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
3 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

TABLE 1
Reported methods for the synthesis of AgNPs.
No.
Stabilizer
Reducing agent
Shape
Size
Ref
1
Cyanobacteria extract
Cyanobacteria extract
Irregular
50–100 nm
Nowruzi et al. (2024)
2
Azadirachta indica bark extract
Azadirachta indica bark extract
Spherical
30.6 nm
Singhal et al. (2024)
3
Persicaria odorata leaf extract
Persicaria odorata leaf extract
Spherical
34.3 ± 1.8 nm
Hadi et al. (2024)
4
Citrus medica L. fruit juice
Citrus medica L. fruit juice
Spherical
20–30 nm
Shende et al. (2024)
5
Waste tea leaves extract
Waste tea leaves extract
Spherical
63.61 nm
Biswas et al. (2024)
6
Extract of straw
Extract of straw
Spherical
31.2 nm
L. Zhang et al. (2025)
7
Ampelopsis brevipedunculata
extract
Ampelopsis brevipedunculata
extract
Spherical
28.82 nm
Huang et al. (2024)
8
Periplaneta americana L.
glycoprotein
Periplaneta americana L.
glycoprotein.
Spherical
8.8 ± 2.8 nm
X. Li et al. (2025)
9
Vigna mungo extract
Vigna mungo extract
Spherical
5–20 nm
Mazumder et al.
(2024)
10
Hordeum vulgare L. extract
Hordeum vulgare L. extract
Spherical
5–24 nm
Mansee et al. (2024)
11
Cranberry polyphenols
Cranberry polyphenols
Spherical
68.35 nm
L. Wang et al. (2024)
13
Carboxymethyl lignin
Carboxymethyl lignin
Spherical
3.8 ± 0.1 nm
W. Jiang et al. (2024)
14
Ovalbumin
Ovalbumin
Spherical
30–40 nm
X.-T. Wang et al.
(2024)
15
Polydopamine
Polydopamine
Spherical
7 nm
Ding et al. (2024)
16
Walnut green husk
polysaccharide
NaBH4
Spherical
15–20 nm
G. Wang et al. (2024)
17
Chitosan
NaBH4
Spherical
29.53 nm
J. Liang et al. (2024)
18
Gliadins
Sodium citrate
Spherical
2–3 nm
X. Huang et al.
(2024)
19
Hyaluronic acid
Sodium citrate
Spherical
120 nm
Antunes et al. (2024)
20
PVP
Ascorbic acid
Spherical
143 nm
C. Xing et al. (2024)
approach uses precursors at the atomic level to synthesize materi-
als at the nanoscale, using the chemical environment to precisely
control the size, shape, composition, surface chemistry, and
crystallography of nanostructures (Vinnacombe-Willson et al.
2023). The most commonly used methods for bottom-up synthesis
of AgNPs are mainly classified into chemical reduction, green
synthesis, sonochemical-mediated synthesis, and microwave-
assisted synthesis, and some examples are summarized in Table 1.
In this article, we will mainly introduce the first three synthe-
sis methods: chemical reduction, plant extracts synthesis, and
microbial-assisted reduction.
2.1
Chemical Reduction
Chemical reduction is one of the most common and widely
used methods to produce AgNPs. Typically, the method is based
on the use of a silver salt as a precursor, which then directs
or controls the morphology of the AgNPs in the presence of
a combination of stabilizing or capping agents and reducing
agents. The most commonly used silver salt precursor is silver
nitrate, which can be synthesized as AgNPs in the presence of
various reducing agents such as sodium borohydride, ascorbic
acid, sodium citrate, glucose, alcohol, and catechol (Cheng et al.
2024; Khatoon et al. 2023; Kurian et al. 2024; S. Li et al. 2024; Y.-L.
Liu et al. 2023; Qu et al. 2023; Shen et al. 2024). The shape and size
of AgNPs synthesized by reducing agents with different reductive
properties are also different, and suitable stabilizing or capping
agents can modulate the growth and production of different
shapes of AgNPs, including polymers, surfactants, and ligands,
such as polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), polyethylene glycol (PEG),
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and glutathione (GSH) (AbdEl-
Salam and Ewais 2023; Pargoletti et al. 2021; Yadav and Preet
2023). For example, F. Liu et al. (2024) successfully prepared some
peculiar nanostructures such as nanobipyramids, nanocubes, and
nanowires by changing the substitution degree of the stabilizer
hydroxyethyl cellulose and the concentration of bromide ions
using ethylene glycol (EG) as the reducing agent and silver nitrate
as the precursor (Figure 3a–c). Compared to EG, sodium citrate
and sodium borohydride are much more reducing and can reduce
Ag+ under milder conditions. By adding sodium citrate solution
dropwise to a boiling silver nitrate solution, Zanoni Souto et al.
(2025) produced AgNPs with a particle size of less than 20 nm.
In another study, Khatoon et al. prepared spherical nanoparticles
with a particle size in the range of 10–50 nm by reducing and
stabilizing silver nitrate with sodium borohydride. The results
of the agar diffusion method showed that the AgNPs exhibited
a significant antibacterial effect against Staphylococcus aureus,
Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, and Candida albicans (Khatoon
et al. 2023). Similarly, C. Li et al. (2024) prepared spherical AgNPs
4 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 3
TEM and SEM images of AgNPs prepared by different synthesis methods. (a–c) Adapted from F. Liu, et al. (2024). Copyright from ACS
Publication; (d) Adapted from Y. Xing et al. (2021). Copyright from MDPI; (e) Adapted from Moorthy et al. (2024). Copyright from MDPI; (f) Adapted
from Yan He et al. (2022). Copyright from Elsevier; (g) Adapted from Kim, et al. (2024). Copyright from Spring Link; (h) Adapted from Mondal et al.
(2020). Copyright from Taylor & Francis Group.
with an average particle size of 12 nm using PVP and polyvinyl
alcohol (PVA) as stabilizers and ascorbic acid as a reducing agent,
and the AgNPs were able to significantly scavenge cells within the
biofilm at a concentration of 50 ppm.
2.2
Plant Extracts Synthesis
The chemical synthesis method is very simple, fast, and suitable
for mass synthesis, but it involves the use of toxic reagents
and produces pollutants that are not ecologically sound, which
severely hinders the use of AgNPs in food packaging and
biomedical applications (Lekshmi et al. 2022). In recent decades,
green synthesis is gaining popularity over traditional chemical
synthesis due to its environmental friendliness, improved bio-
compatibility, low toxicity, and cost-effectiveness (Gong et al.
2024). Plant extracts, including proteins, amino acids, enzymes,
polysaccharides, alkaloids, phenols, saponins, terpenes, vitamins,
and other biomolecules, play a crucial role in the green synthesis
of AgNPs as they can act either as reducing agents to reduce
metal ions to nanoparticles and as stabilizers or capping agents to
control the morphology and size of the nanoparticles. The green
synthesis of AgNPs from bio-waste is currently attracting a lot of
research attention. Xing et al. reduced SDS-stabilized AgNO3 by
hydrothermal extraction of polyphenols from mango peels and
obtained spherical and rod-like AgNPs with sizes ranging from 25
to 70 nm, which showed significant antibacterial activity against
E. coli and S. aureus. The authors concluded that the hydroxyl
and aldehyde groups of flavonoids, polyphenolic compounds, and
vitamin C in mango peel can stabilize and reduce Ag+ and control
the size and shape of AgNPs (Figure 3d) (Y. Xing et al. 2021).
Similarly, Anguraj et al. synthesized spherical AgNPs ranging
from 52 to 79 nm by mixing silver nitrate with the aqueous extract
of dragon fruit peel. The authors also found that plant extract-
reduced AgNPs would exhibit stronger antioxidant activity than
plant extract alone, which was mainly due to the electrostatic
interactions between positively charged AgNPs and negatively
charged plant extracts, which enhanced the bioactivity of plant
extracts (Anguraj et al. 2024). The properties of AgNPs are affected
by different plant extracts, such as herbal extracts. Moorthy et al.
synthesized spherical AgNPs with a mean particle size of 19.7 nm
under microblogging-assisted heating using an aqueous extract
of Houttuynia cordata (HC) as a stabilizer and reducing agent.
The AgNPs showed excellent stability, excellent antioxidant
properties, strong antibacterial activity, and low cytotoxicity. The
antibacterial properties were maintained after 160 days of storage,
and the MIC of the AgNPs was in the range of 4–8 µg/mL against
both S. aureus and E. coli. Like the findings of Anguraj et al., the
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
5 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

antioxidant properties of HC-synthesized AgNPs were stronger
than those of HC extracts (Figure 3e) (Moorthy et al. 2024). Apart
from aqueous extracts, alcoholic–water extracts also work well for
the synthesis of AgNPs, as some chemicals in the plant are more
soluble in ethanol. Nguyen et al. prepared AgNPs with average
particle sizes of 26.2 and 27.5 nm from aqueous and alcoholic
aqueous extracts of Cleistocalyx operculatus bud, respectively.
Through comparative experiments, the authors found that the
synthesis efficiency of the alcoholic aqueous extract (75.6%) was
higher than that of the aqueous extract (59.5%). This is mainly due
to the fact that alcohol–water solvent can extract water-insoluble
compounds from plants more efficiently (T. D. Nguyen et al.
2023).
2.3
Microbial-Assisted Synthesis
Similar to plant extract synthesis, microbial-assisted synthesis is
also a green synthesis method with several advantages, including
simplicity, low cost, low pollution, and low energy consumption.
However, microbial-mediated synthesis is a more complex pro-
cess compared to plant extract synthesis, which is mainly due
to the longer cultivation cycle of microorganisms, the extraction
process involving operations such as cell fragmentation, and
the presence of more complex components in microorganisms,
such as enzymes, proteins, DNA, and reducing cofactors (Her-
rera Pérez et al. 2024). Cyanobacteria are microorganisms that
have low nutrient requirements, high reproduction rates, and
rich endogenous biopolymers. He et al. extracted Microcystis
aeruginosa (FACHB 905) using hydrothermal methods at pH 9
and employed it as a reducing and stabilizing agent to reduce
AgNO3 with stirring for 180 min at 90◦C. The final product
was spherical AgNPs with an average diameter of 6.8 nm. The
antibacterial results demonstrated that the minimum bactericidal
concentration (MBC) of these AgNPs against E. coli and S. aureus
was 40 and 80 mg/L, respectively (Figure 3f) (Yan He et al.
2022). In another study, Danaei et al. reduced AgNO3 with
Spirulina extract and dried powder to obtain spherical particles
with a particle size of 20–30 nm. The antioxidant properties
of the algal extracts were found to be less pronounced than
those of the synthesized AgNPs, in a manner analogous to that
observed with the plant extracts. Subsequently, the authors found
through antibacterial experiments that the AgNPs exhibited
significant antibacterial activity against Acinetobacter baumannii
and S. aureus, and showed strong anti-biofilm effects against A.
baumannii (Danaei et al. 2021).
Fungi produce a variety of biological components, such as
quinine, anthracenediones, and reduction-related enzymes, that
not only reduce Ag+ but some fungal proteins also promote
the formation of structurally sound AgNPs. For example, Kim
et al. synthesized spherical and elliptical AgNPs with an average
diameter of 18 nm for the purpose of reducing AgNO3 via the
use of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae extract. The authors discovered
that the utilization of alkaline and elevated temperatures resulted
in a more uniform size of AgNPs. Antibacterial experiments
demonstrated that the MICs of AgNPs against E. coli and S. aureus
were 30 and 50 ppm, respectively (Figure 3g) (Kim et al. 2024).
In another study, Wang et al. synthesized spherical, homoge-
neous AgNPs with an average size of 12 ± 2 nm by reducing
AgNO3 in the cell filtrate of Aspergillus sydowii. The AgNPs
had a broader antifungal spectrum and good antifungal activity
compared to itraconazole and fluconazole, including Aspergillus
spp., Fusarium spp., Candida spp., Cryptococcus neoformans, and
Sporothrix schenckii (D. Wang et al. 2021). Yeast, mold, and
other fungal intracellular substances can reduce Ag+, as can
bacteria. Gajera et al. screened a potent Bacillus subtilis from
soil and then synthesized AgNPs of spherical and some other
morphologies with an average particle size of 65.21 nm from its
extracellular metabolites. Through antifungal realizations, they
found that the potential of these AgNPs to control Fusarium wilt
was stronger than the fungicide (Gajera et al. 2022). It is not
the only case; Mondal et al. synthesized spherical AgNPs with
an average size of 38 nm by reducing and stabilizing AgNO3
with the supernatant of a culture of Shewanella sp. ARY1. The
MICs of AgNPs against E. coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae were
8 and 16 µg/mL, respectively, and showed low hemolysis at a
concentration of 16 µg/mL (Figure 3h) (Mondal et al. 2020).
There are many methods for synthesizing AgNPs, and each has its
own advantages and limitations, as shown in Table 2. Traditional
chemical synthesis is convenient but uses toxic substances that
can cause environmental pollution. Green synthesis is environ-
mentally friendly and has low toxicity and low cost, but the
process is relatively complex, and the composition of the extract
is not clear. Researchers have explored new synthesis methods
to produce AgNPs of desired shapes and sizes in a simple and
environmentally friendly manner. However, the experimental
conditions from the synthesis of precursors, stabilizers, and
reducing agents to temperature and light have profound effects on
the stability, morphology, and other physicochemical properties
of AgNPs, which need to be investigated in depth to find a more
efficient method.
3
Synthesis of Supported Ag-Based
Nanomaterials
The intrinsic properties of nanoparticles (NPs) may not always
align with the requirements of a given application. Additionally,
NPs are susceptible to agglomeration, which can negatively
impact their performance. The integration of NPs with a car-
rier can significantly alter the physicochemical properties of
the resulting material. By selecting an appropriately supported
material, it is possible to impart unique properties to the NPs,
thereby enhancing their suitability for a specific application.
In this section, we have selected some representative common
supported materials for NPs to be introduced and categorized
according to the chemical composition, which are metal–MOF-
based supported material, carbon-based supported material, and
other supported material.
3.1
MOF-Supported AgNPs
MOFs, also known as porous coordination polymers that are
periodic network structures, are formed by the self-assembly of
inorganic metal nodes and organic linkers (Jerozal et al. 2023;
Jiao et al. 2019). The large number of metal ions and organic
linkers, and the diverse assemblies that they form, have led
to the reporting of more than 20,000 MOFs. The structures of
these MOFs are not only abundant and interesting but also can
6 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

TABLE 2
Characteristics of different AgNP synthesis methods.
Method
Characteristics
Top-down
Ball milling (Jayaramudu et al. 2016).
Laser ablation (Alhajj et al. 2023).
Sputtering fall (Xu et al. 2023).
∙Rapid preparation.
Large quantities.
∙Surface structure defects.
High energy consumption and expensive
equipment.
Bottom-up
Chemical reduction (Cheng et al. 2024).
∙Simple to operate.
Fast process.
Suitable for mass synthesis.
Use of toxic reagents.
Producing hazardous pollutants.
Plant extracts synthesis (Gong et al. 2024).
Microbial-assisted reduction (Herrera Pérez
et al. 2024).
Environmental friendliness.
Good biocompatibility.
Low toxicity.
Cost-effectiveness.
∙Complex process and composition.
be designed and customized. Moreover, the inherent properties
of MOFs, such as high surface area and uniform pore size,
make them very promising for various applications such as
gas adsorption, drug delivery, and sensing (Ma et al. 2023).
Additionally, the inherent advantages of MOFs, such as good
dispersion, low toxicity, and biodegradability, make them an
optimal carrier for drug delivery. The combination of MOFs with
AgNPs can address the limitations of AgNPs as antibacterial
nanomaterials and facilitate the development of nanocomposites
with enhanced antibacterial effects (Z. He et al. 2023).
Zeolite imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) are porous hybrid mate-
rials that are structurally similar to zeolites, consisting of a
network of four connections of tetrahedral units in which metal
ions such as Zn2+ or Co2+ are linked together by N atoms
in the ditopic imidazolate anion. Among the ZIF family, ZIF-
8 is the most widely studied and applied material (Lee et al.
2023). Joo et al. successfully prepared a composite material called
AgNPs@ZIF-8(α) by first synthesizing ZIF-8 in a methanol and
AgNO3 solution system and then reducing Ag+ to grow AgNPs
in situ inside ZIF-8. They added the synthesized ZIF-8 to the
AgNO3 solution and stirred it well before reducing Ag+, and
prepared the composite material called AgNPs@ZIF-8(β) with
in situ growth of AgNPs on the surface of ZIF-8. Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) showed that AgNPs@ZIF-8(α) was a
dodecahedral rhombic structure, while AgNPs@ZIF-8(β) was a
dodecahedral rhombic structure with rounded edges due to the
coating of AgNPs. The TEM patterns showed that the loaded
AgNPs of both materials were less than 10 nm. The IC50 values
of AgNPs@ZIF-8(α) and AgNPs@ZIF-8(β) were 33 and 31.4 µg/mL,
respectively, which indicated their good biocompatibility. The
MIC of AgNPs@ZIF-8(β) against E. coli and S. aureus was about
400 µg/mL, much higher than that of AgNPs@ZIF-8(α) (Figure 4a)
(Salari Joo et al. 2023). In another study, Davoodi et al. prepared
Ag@ZIF-7 by adding ZIF-7 and AgNO3 to quartz test tubes
containing a 50% ethanol solution, removing the air from the
tubes with nitrogen, and then irradiating the tubes with UV
light for one hour with stirring under nitrogen protection. The
results of the agar pore diffusion assay showed that Ag@ZIF-7
had significant antibacterial activity against both S. aureus and
E. coli. Strikingly, the Ag@ZIF-7 continued to release Ag+ for up
to 11 days, suggesting that the composite has excellent sustained
antibacterial capacity (Davoodi et al. 2023).
In addition to ZIF, there are MOFs composed of Cu2+, Zr4+,
Ce4+, and other metal ions, and MOFs composed of different
metal ions have different physicochemical properties and mor-
phologies. PCN-224 is a Zr4+-based MOF with photodynamic
antibacterial activity. Nie et al. immersed a piece of knitted
cotton fabric in a dimethylformamide (DMF) solution containing
ZrOCl2 and 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin. The
solution was sonicated for 10 min and then subjected to a
heating and stirring reaction at 90◦C for 5 h to synthesize knitted
cotton textiles@PCN-224 (KCT@PCN). Subsequently, they suc-
cessfully prepared KCT@PCN-Ag by in situ reduction of Ag+ to
KCT@PCN using triethylamine as the reducing agent and DMF
as the solvent. The results showed that the bactericidal effect
of KCT@PCN-Ag was significantly enhanced under illumination
conditions. When the illumination time was extended to 40 min,
the inhibition rates of KCT@PCN-Ag on both S. aureus and E.
coli reached 99.999%. KCT@PCN-Ag inactivated only 19.71% of
E. coli and had no inhibitory effect on S. aureus when incubated
in the dark for 60 min (Nie et al. 2021). Acoustic dynamic MOF
is an emerging MOF with high potential for wound therapy.
Sun et al. doped porphyrins in Uio-66 and reduced AgNPs in
situ on the MOF surface, resulting in a narrowing of the energy
band gap of the MOF, while the presence of AgNPs accelerated
electron transfer and improved carrier utilization. The MOF was
able to kill almost all the bacteria under ultrasound irradiation,
while the sterilization rate of the control group was only 70%
(Figure 4b) (Sun et al. 2024). In another study, Gao et al. prepared
an Ag-based MOF with good stability and excellent antibacterial
properties by in situ reduction of AgNPs on Cu-BTC, and it was
shown that AgNPs showed a disordered filamentary structure on
the MOF. The antibacterial performance and thermal stability of
Cu-BTC were enhanced with the increase of silver content, and
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
7 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 4
TEM and SEM images of Ag-based nanomaterials prepared by different synthesis methods. (a) Adapted from Salari Joo et al. (2023).
Copyright from Elsevier; (b) Adapted from Sun et al. (2024). Copyright from Elsevier; (c) Adapted from X. Zhu et al. (2020). Copyright from The Royal
Society of Chemistry; (d) Adapted from Xie et al. (2017). Copyright from ACS Publication; (e) Adapted from You et al. (2024). Copyright from Elsevier;
(f) Adapted from H. Zhang et al. (2024). Copyright from Wiley; (g) Adapted from Qu et al. (2023). Copyright from Elsevier; (h) Adapted from Shao et al.
(2023). Copyright from Elsevier.
the antibacterial performance reached its strongest at the silver
content of 21% (Yan Gao et al. 2024).
3.2
Carbon-Supported AgNPs
Carbon-based nanomaterials benefit from their excellent optical,
thermal, electron transfer, and mechanical properties and large
specific surface area, making them extremely versatile for use in
materials, computing, and medicine (Dalla Colletta et al. 2022).
2D carbon-based nanomaterials (2DCBN), such as MXenes,
graphene, and graphene oxide, not only have a large specific
surface area and are often used as carriers for antibacterial
drugs, such as a variety of metals, organic substances, or other
antibacterial substances, but also possess a unique antibacterial
mechanism. 2DCBN can interact with bacterial cell membranes
through its own structural properties and can also induce oxida-
tive stress, which is the cause of bacterial death (B. Li et al.
2022).
MXene is a material with easy aggregation, good stability,
and high biocompatibility, and the modification of AgNPs can
improve the dispersibility of MXene, while MXene can improve
the dispersibility of AgNPs, and the combination of the two
materials can produce a one-two effect. Chen et al. ultrasonically
dispersed MXene in an aqueous solution, added AgNO3 under
stirring, and then ultrasonically reacted the mixture at 50◦C for
2 h to synthesize Ag-MXene, an antibacterial nanomaterial with
peroxidase activity. SEM images showed successful loading of
AgNPs with diameters of 20–25 nm on the MXene. The authors
then found that treatment of S. aureus with the nano-enzyme
alone or H2O2 alone had almost no effect on the bacteria, but
that H2O2 and Ag-MXene together inhibited the bacteria by 99.9%
(Chen et al. 2024). Many 2DCBNs have superior photothermal
conversion capabilities. The combination of photothermal effect
and metal nanoparticles can have a synergistic bactericidal
effect, which will greatly enhance the antibacterial properties of
nanomaterials. Zhu et al. successfully prepared Ag/Ti3C2Tx by
adding MXene to a vigorously stirred AgNO3 solution and then
heating it to boiling, followed by dropwise addition of sodium
citrate. In the absence of NIR irradiation, the bacteriostatic
inhibition of E. coli at a concentration of 200 µg/mL was 42%,
47%, and 82% for AgNPs, Ti3C2Tx, and Ag/Ti3C2Tx, respectively.
After irradiation at 808 nm NIR for 15 min, the antibacterial rates
of Ti3C2Tx and Ag/Ti3C2Tx3 were increased to 98% and 100% at a
concentration of 100 µg/mL only, whereas the antibacterial rate
8 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

of AgNPs alone at 100 µg/mL was only 30% (Figure 4c) (Zhu
et al. 2020). GO and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) have similar
physical and chemical properties to MXene. Xie et al. placed the
ultrasonically dispersed GO and AgNO3 mixture under vacuum at
room temperature for 48 h, and then irradiated with UV light for
1 h to reduce Ag+. TEM images showed that the GO nanosheets
were successfully loaded with AgNPs with an average diameter
of 6 nm. Under 660 nm visible light irradiation, the material
containing AgNPs killed almost all the bacteria, while the other
groups had almost zero bactericidal rate. The authors analyzed
that this was mainly because GO improved the dispersion of
AgNPs, and the high electrical conductivity of GO enhanced
the photocatalytic properties of AgNPs, which resulted in the
generation of free electrons through surface plasmon resonance,
leading to the production of a large amount of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which effectively killed the bacteria (Figure 4d)
(Xie et al. 2017).
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), similar to graphene oxide derivatives,
are carbon nanomaterials with well-defined structures and large
specific surface areas. You et al. used mulberry leaf extract
as a reducing agent to reduce AgNPs in situ on CNTs loaded
with mesoporous silica. The results of the antibacterial assay
showed that CNT-Ag prepared with mulberry leaf extract had
the strongest bactericidal effect and biofilm removal ability,
and exhibited significant antibacterial activity against E. coli,
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, and S. aureus (Figure 4e) (You
et al. 2024).
3.3
Other AgNPs
Ag can act as a component of many materials. In addition to
MOFs and carbon-based nanomaterials, Ag is often used as a
component of bimetallic, trimetallic, or even high-entropy alloys,
or loaded onto polymers, silicon-based materials, and so on. Their
synthesis methods are similar to those mentioned above, but
there are differences in the optical, electrical, bactericidal, and
other properties they exhibit.
Alloyed metals are categorized into hybrid and loaded types.
The ability to combine the properties of different metals in a
simple way can mitigate their individual drawbacks, resulting in
synergistic benefits (Lee et al. 2024). Zhang et al. successfully
prepared a dart-like nanomaterial by depositing Ag/Pd on one
end of gold nanobipyramids through electrical substitution and
Ostwald ripening. Under infrared illumination, the temperature
of the nanodarts heated up to 90.8◦C in 5 min, with a pho-
tothermal conversion efficiency of 86%, and the presence of Pd
endowed the nanodarts with excellent peroxidase activity, which
enabled them to kill bacteria quickly and efficiently using a
low concentration of hydrogen peroxide. The good photothermal
performance and peroxidase activity make the nanodarts have
the powerful performance of combined photothermal catalytic
sterilization (Figure 3f) (H. Zhang et al. 2024). In another study,
Sathiyaseelan et al. mixed 200 µM AgNO3, 400 µM PtCl2, and
1 mM citric acid; adjusted the pH to 5.5 with NaOH; reacted at
80◦C for 2 h; and then incubated at room temperature for 24 h.
The authors prepared AgPtNPs with peroxidase activity in the
size range of 15.99–51.75 nm by a simple method. Moreover, the
antibacterial effect of AgPtNPs was stronger than that of AgNPs
and PtNPs alone, with AgPtNPs showing significant antibacterial
activity against E. coli, S. aureus, Bacillus cereus, and Salmonella
enterica (Sathiyaseelan et al. 2022).
Biomaterials with strong adhesive properties inspired by mussels
have attracted strong research interest from scientists over the
past year. Mussel-inspired biomaterials with strong adhesive
properties have attracted considerable research interest in recent
years. At the same time, this type of material can also improve the
shortcomings of AgNPs with low adsorption and poor dispersion.
Qu et al. synthesized silver-loaded catechol formaldehyde resin
microspheres (Ag@CFR) of uniform size using AgNO3, catechol,
and hexamethylenetetramine as precursor materials by a one-
pot method. The authors then prepared Ag@CFR-coated fabrics
by dipping cotton fabrics in Ag@CFR solution for 10 min, then
drying. The antibacterial results showed that the MIC of cotton
fabrics soaked with different concentrations of Ag@CFR against
C. albicans, S. aureus, and E. coli were as low as 256, 32, and
64 µg/mL, which demonstrated a strong antibacterial ability
(Figure 3g) (Qu et al. 2023). In another similar study, Ding et al.
successfully prepared silver-loaded polydopamine microspheres
with uniform particle size by reducing Ag+ with polydopamine.
The composite was able to kill all E. coli at a concentration
of 2 µg/mL, demonstrating excellent antibacterial properties. In
addition, the microspheres have good photothermal properties
and photothermal stability, and can remove bacterial biofilm well
with the help of infrared light (Ding et al. 2024).
Mesoporous silicon is a type of silicon-based material character-
ized by high stability and homogeneous particle size, which is
widely used in the fields of biomedicine, sensing, and detection.
Shao et al. prepared Ag@mSiO2 by in situ reduction of AgNPs on
SiO2 using ascorbic acid as a reducing agent. TEM results showed
that the material is a homogeneously dispersed spherical shape.
In the antibacterial experiments, Ag@mSiO2 showed excellent
antibacterial properties against Aspergillus niger and Penicillium
citrinum with MIC of 30 µg/mL and 20 µg/mL, respectively. In
addition, after aging treatment at 230◦C for a good period of
time, the Ag@mSiO2 still showed good antibacterial properties,
indicating that the material had good stability (Figure 3h) (Shao
et al. 2023).
The types of carriers that can interact with AgNPs are very diverse
and rich in classes, and the MOF family alone has more than
20,000 members. Carriers can not only improve the dispersibility
of AgNPs, but some of them can also improve the adhesion
of AgNPs through their own physicochemical properties, such
as photodynamic antibacterial, photothermal antibacterial, per-
oxidase activity, prolonging the shelf life of AgNPs, reducing
toxicity, and improving adhesion. It has been a common method
for researchers to select suitable carriers to compensate for the
defects of AgNPs to meet the needs of applications.
4
Antibacterial Mechanism
Numerous scientific studies have concluded that the release
of Ag+ is the main antibacterial mechanism of AgNPs. In a
completely anaerobic environment, AgNPs are unable to release
Ag+ to such an extent that they lose their inhibitory effect on
bacteria, and even at relatively high concentrations of AgNPs,
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
9 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 5
Silver ions release is promoted by acidic and aerobic environment (a). Antibacterial mechanisms associated with AgNPs (b): (1)
disruption of cell membranes; (2,3) oxidative damage to lipids and DNA; (4) binding of Ag+ to relevant proteins and chromosomes, affecting enzyme
activity and DNA replication; (5) cell membrane rupture leads to leakage of cell contents.
they still have no effect on bacteria. However, under aerobic
conditions, AgNPs not only release large amounts of Ag+ but
also produce ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydroxyl
radicals (∙OH), and superoxide radicals(∙O2
‒). In addition, acidic
conditions promote the release of Ag+. These can severely damage
cellular components such as proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids;
disrupt normal cellular metabolism; and thus kill bacteria (L.
Feng et al. 2023). In this section, we will discuss the antibacterial
mechanism of AgNPs in terms of both Ag+ release and ROS
production (Figure 5).
4.1
Ag+ Sterilization Mechanism
AgNPs are oxidized to produce and release Ag+, which can
interact with membrane proteins containing sulfhydryl groups,
leading to cell membrane damage. According to the soft–hard
acid–base theory, sulfhydryl is a soft base, and Ag+ can be
considered a soft acid, a cation with high affinity that can bind
to sulfhydryl groups on proteins and enzymes, leading to protein
inactivation and thus structural damage to cells (Morozova 2021).
Furthermore, Ag+ can cause DNA damage and protein inacti-
vation by binding to a number of other groups, such as amino
and phosphate groups (Pryshchepa et al. 2020). In conclusion, the
interaction of Ag+ with membrane proteins leads to an increase
in membrane permeability and an increase in intracellular ATP
consumption, while Ag+ binds to proteins of the respiratory
chain, which in turn inhibits cellular energy metabolism, and
Ag+ can also lead to cell shrinkage and DNA condensation
phenomena, which can have a lethal effect on the cell (P.-P. Li
et al. 2023).
4.2
Generation of ROS
In an aerobic environment, AgNPs undergo oxidation to form
Ag+, a process that generates ROS. In addition, Ag+ itself
can also induce the production of ROS, albeit at significantly
reduced levels (Falco et al. 2020). AgNPs have been shown to
upregulate genes associated with oxidative stress, superoxide
radical scavenging, and cellular redox homeostasis, in contrast
to the negligible modulatory effect of silver ions alone (Q. Zhang
et al. 2024). The researchers found that the presence of AgNPs
inactivated aconitase and succinate dehydrogenase so rapidly
that the respiratory chain was inhibited and the iron–sulfur
clusters in the respiratory chain were disrupted by ROS, resulting
in the production of Fe3+, which triggered a Fenton reaction
leading to oxidative damage to DNA and lipids (Wen et al. 2024).
Furthermore, ROS can damage the bacterial cell membrane,
leading to leakage of contents and allowing AgNPs to enter the
10 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

cell, leading to more ROS production (X. Wang et al. 2023).
For denitrifying bacteria, the more ROS, the lower the activity
of denitrifying enzymes, and bacterial denitrification would be
inhibited and ultimately cause oxidative stress damage to destroy
the microbial morphology (Xiang et al. 2024).
5
AgNPs in Food Packaging Films
AgNPs exhibit broad application prospects in packaging materials
due to their unique physicochemical properties, including excel-
lent thermal conductivity, broad-spectrum antibacterial activity,
and high-efficiency barrier performance. Incorporating AgNPs
into packaging substrate systems not only significantly enhances
the material’s antibacterial function but also improves the sub-
strate’s microstructure through its nano-effect, thereby compre-
hensively elevating the packaging’s physicochemical properties
and barrier characteristics. In this section, I will summarize the
preparation of AgNPs-based food packaging and the effect of
AgNPs on the performance of food packaging, focusing on the
mechanical and barrier properties.
5.1
Synthesis of Packaging Films Containing
AgNPs
Common AgNPs-based food packaging substrates are categorized
into natural polymers and synthetic polymers, such as starch,
protein, chitosan, polylactic acid, polyethylene, and polypropy-
lene (Tajeddin and Arabkhedri 2020). Natural polymers garner
significant attention for their sustainability and environmen-
tal friendliness, while synthetic polymers are widely adopted
due to their superior performance and processing convenience.
However, their preparation processes exhibit little difference.
AgNPs-based food packaging is mainly produced by extrusion
and solution casting. The extrusion process is a method with
short drying time and high production efficiency, and it is highly
favored by the industry because it can produce thin, thick, and
flexible films with uniform thickness, which greatly reduces the
generation of structural defects in the film (Dutta and Sit 2024).
For example, Yin et al. (2024) rapidly prepared a smooth, flat
film without delamination through automated extrusion, coating,
and scraping methods. In contrast, the solution casting method
requires very simple equipment and processes, but the method
in the preparation of films need to consume a large amount
of solution and need a long drying time; more importantly, the
casting method is prone to thin and thick film inconsistency,
and the generation of air bubbles is not conducive to industrial
production (Mu et al. 2025). J. Liu et al. (2022) formed the film
by pouring the membrane solution mixed with AgNPs onto a flat
plastic Petri dish and drying it at 50◦C for 12 h, a process that took
a considerable amount of time.
5.2
Effect on Antimicrobial Performance
The most direct and significant impact of AgNPs doping on food
packaging is the enhancement of the film’s antimicrobial prop-
erties, which also represents one of the fundamental differences
between active packaging and traditional packaging (Alhariry
and Poluri 2025; Rao et al. 2024). These films can kill bacteria
that come into contact with them, thereby protecting the food
inside from microbial contamination in the external environ-
ment. The experimental results by Li et al. demonstrated that
incorporating AgNPs endowed the film with potent antibacterial
properties. Furthermore, as contact time increased, more AgNPs
were released from the film, thereby enhancing its antibacterial
efficacy (Shuying Li et al. 2024). Similarly, Zhu et al. evaluated
the antibacterial properties of films containing AgNPs at varying
concentrations. The findings demonstrated that films incorporat-
ing AgNPs exhibited remarkable antibacterial efficacy, with their
effectiveness correlating positively with the AgNPs concentration
within the specified range (Y. Zhu et al. 2025). Additionally,
the antibacterial mechanism of AgNPs-based food packaging
was similar to that of AgNPs. Both work by releasing Ag+ and
generating ROS to disrupt cell structures and contents, thereby
impairing normal cellular metabolism and killing bacteria.
5.3
Effect on Mechanical Properties
The mechanical properties of food packaging mainly include
tensile strength (TS), elongation at break (EB), and Young’s
modulus of these three important parameters, and excellent
mechanical properties of food packaging can be better in the
storage and transportation process to protect food from external
factors (Dharini et al. 2022; Yujie Gao et al. 2025). It has been
shown that the incorporation of AgNPs significantly improves the
mechanical properties of the films. In the study of Zhuo et al.,
a film was prepared by mixing AgNPs with a 2 wt% chitosan
solution, followed by casting and drying. The incorporation of
AgNPs increased the thickness of the film from 0.011 to 0.103 mm
when the content of AgNPs increased from 0 to 5%, mainly
because AgNPs themselves have a certain particle size; therefore,
the doping of AgNPs improves the thickness of the film. In
addition, the incorporation of AgNPs improves the TS and EB
of the films from 15.804 MPa and 28% to 42.939 MPa and 112%,
respectively, which is attributed to the reinforcing effect of the
metal nanostructures and the increase in the crystallinity of the
films (Zhuo et al. 2025). In another study, Li et al. added 6.25 wt%
of Ag NPs to a solution of equal masses of pectin and gelatin and
then dried the films. They found that the TS of the films increased
significantly while the EB tended to decrease with the increase of
AgNPs content. When the silver content was 2.5%, the TS and EB
of the films were 14.54 MPa and 51.1%, respectively, while when
the silver content was increased to 6.25%, the TS and EB of the
films decreased to 12.85 MPa and 49.2%, respectively, which was
attributed to the fact that excess AgNPs resulted in the disruption
of the film, decreased the flexibility and brittleness of the film,
and reduced the polymer chains between the interaction force.
Therefore, the selection of the appropriate amount of AgNPs to
be added to the films is crucial (Shuying Li et al. 2024).
5.4
Impact on Barrier Properties
Moisture, oxygen, and UV light are common causes of food
spoilage. One of the basic functions of food packaging is to
protect food from external factors in order to extend shelf life
(An et al. 2022; da Silva et al. 2022). Low oxygen and water
vapor transmission rates protect food components from oxidative
deterioration and reduce moisture loss to maintain food quality.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
11 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

In Li et al.’s study, the pectin/gelatin film with added 5 wt%
tannic acid and 0.5 wt% AgNPs had a transmittance below 5%
in the range of 200–280 nm, showing excellent performance in
blocking almost all UV light. In addition, AgNPs increased the
thickness of the films, while the filling effect of AgNPs hindered
the water vapor transport path of the films, further reducing the
water vapor transmission rate of the films and showing good
potential for preserving fruits and vegetables (S. Li et al. 2025).
Furthermore, this was further investigated by Yang et al. First,
the incorporation of 3 wt% AgNPs increased the UV shielding
ability of 2 wt% chitosan-based films at 280–320 and 320–400 nm
from 50.45% and 31.5% to 98.95% and 95.47%, respectively, which
was mainly attributed to the unique surface plasmon resonance
properties of AgNPs. Research findings suggested that AgNPs
had significantly stronger UV-shielding properties than other
nanomaterials, such as TiO2, ZnO, and CuO. Second, the doping
of AgNPs makes the structure of the film denser and thus reduces
the moisture content of the film, which effectively reduces the
diffusion of water molecules in the film and thus improves the
water resistance of the film, which the authors summarize as
a lower hygroscopic film with a stronger water vapor barrier.
In addition, the authors found that the oxygen permeability of
the film was negatively correlated with the content of AgNPs;
the incorporation of the nanomaterials distorted the diffusion
pathways of gases in the film, thus hindering the penetration of
oxygen and reducing the oxidation of the food (Hoseinnejad et al.
2018; Z. Yang et al. 2025).
6
Practical Applications
Fruits, vegetables, and meats serve as vital sources of essential
human nutrients, including vitamins, inorganic salts, proteins,
carbohydrates, and fats. However, over one-third of fruits and
vegetables are lost annually due to microbial contamination, envi-
ronmental stressors, and improper storage conditions (Perumal
et al. 2022). The primary mechanisms underlying postharvest
deterioration of fruits and vegetables involve moisture loss, nutri-
ent depletion, and biochemical alterations, including pH shifts,
microbial proliferation, and oxidative damage. Similarly, spoilage
microorganisms contribute to protein and lipid degradation in
meat products, leading to an estimated 20% annual loss in meat
quality and edibility (Fan et al. 2025). Antimicrobial silver-based
food packaging has emerged as a promising solution, combining
excellent mechanical and barrier properties with potent microbial
growth inhibition capabilities, thereby effectively extending food
shelf life. The following section presents case studies demon-
strating the efficacy of antimicrobial silver food packaging in
perishable food preservation.
6.1
Vegetables
Vegetables and fruits are a rich source of minerals, vitamins,
and other nutrients, and constitute an essential component of
the human diet. However, the perishable nature of fruits and
vegetables presents significant challenges with regard to storage,
resulting in the loss of nutrients and the contamination of the
product by microorganisms (Deng et al. 2024). Silver-based food
packaging not only exhibits excellent antioxidant properties and
ultraviolet absorption capabilities, but also inhibits microbial
growth and reproduction. Therefore, silver-based food packaging
is considered a promising food packaging solution with favorable
application prospects.
6.1.1
Paper-Based Food Packaging
Paper-based packaging materials are attracting a lot of atten-
tion because of their versatility, excellent performance, and the
sustainability they provide to the packaging industry. Lu et al.
eventually created an antibacterial wrapping paper by loading
silver into ceramic powder through chemical electroplating and
then doping the paper through coating, filling, and coating–
filling methods. During the preservation experiments on spinach,
the package achieved 99% inhibition of both E. coli and S.
aureus. On the eighth day of storage, the spinach wrapped in
the antibacterial paper remained fresh in appearance, whereas
the spinach wrapped in the control paper had wilted and turned
yellow-green (Lu et al. 2024). Similarly, Sharma et al. prepared
AgNPs with bacteriocins and sprayed them on fiber paper for
tomato preservation. The results of the inhibition cycle showed
that the fiber paper had significant antibacterial capacity, inhibit-
ing B. cereus and S. aureus by 22 and 24 mm, respectively. In
the freshness preservation experiments, the antibacterial fiber
paper prolonged the storage period of the tomato up to 10 days,
maintaining the appearance and hardness of the tomato very well
(Sharma et al. 2023).
6.1.2
Film
Compared to traditional petrochemical plastic packaging, which
is not easily degradable, natural polymers are attracting a lot
of attention for their degradability and sustainability. Zhou
et al. prepared pectin-based composite films using polydopamine-
modified silver nanosheets as fillers. Compared with the pure
pectin films, the composite films had improved barrier, mechan-
ical, and UV resistance properties. In the Agaricus bisporus
mushroom preservation experiment, the composite film signifi-
cantly delayed the browning and spoilage of the mushroom and
extended its shelf life to six days (Figure 6a–c) (Zhou et al. 2023).
6.2
Fruit
6.2.1
Film
Typically, fruit has a higher market value than vegetables, and
there are more examples of research into fruit preservation.
Zhang et al. prepared an alginate-choline/tannic acid/Ag antibac-
terial film for strawberry preservation. The film not only had
good flexibility and thermal stability but also showed significant
antibacterial activity against S. aureus and E. coli, and the
antibacterial film was able to preserve strawberries for 48 h
above 25◦C, while the commercial PE film group of strawberries
had completely deteriorated after 48 h of storage (Figure 6d–f)
(X. Zhang et al. 2024). In another study, Liu et al. constructed
arginine-modified chitosan-based composite films with the slow-
release effect of AgNPs. The composite film not only had excellent
physicochemical properties but also released 11.27% of AgNPs in
20 days, indicating that the film had a good long-term antibacte-
12 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 6
(a) Preparation process of pectin film; (b) appearance of Agaricus bisporus preserved in different packages and periods; (c) the nutrient
content changes of mushrooms during 5 days: total phenolic content, total soluble sugar content, and total soluble protein content. Adapted from Zhou
et al. (2023). Copyright from Elsevier. (d) Preparation process of antibacterial films; (e) UV shielding performance evaluation of films; (f) appearance of
strawberry preserved in different packages. Adapted from X. Zhang et al. (2024). Copyright from Elsevier. (g) Preparation process of composite films; (h)
appearance of cherry tomatoes preserved in different packages and periods. Adapted from Siqun Liu et al. (2024). Copyright from Elsevier. (i) Preparation
process of antibacterial coatings; (j) appearance of banana preserved in different packages and periods; (k) the physicochemical changes of bananas
during 5 days at 25◦C: titratable acidity, pH, and total soluble sugar. Adapted from T. T. Nguyen et al. (2021). Copyright from Elsevier.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
13 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

rial function. The results of the preservation experiments showed
that the composite film greatly reduced the water loss of cherry
tomatoes and prolonged their shelf life by 9 days (Figure 6g–h)
(Siquin Liu et al. 2024).
6.2.2
Coating
Antibacterial coatings are also a preservation technology that
protects food by insulating it from external influences. However,
compared to antibacterial films, antibacterial coatings signifi-
cantly reduce the amount of film base material and antibacterial
material used and have a higher level of safety (Fu and Dudley
2021). Similarly, Nguyen et al. combined PVA, agar, maltodextrin,
and AgNPs to develop a high-performance antibacterial coating
and wrapped bananas by pressure spraying to extend shelf life.
The coating was dense, smooth, and flexible with good antibacte-
rial properties. In the preservation trials, the untreated bananas
showed obvious black spots on the second day, while the coated
preservation group showed them on the fifth day, indicating that
the coating has good application prospects (Figure 6i–k) (T. T.
Nguyen et al. 2021).
6.2.3
AgNPs-Based Food Packaging
AgNPs-based nanomaterials have excellent physicochemical
properties, not only strong antibacterial properties and good
biocompatibility but also good stability. They show great potential
in long-lasting antibacterial and freshness preservation. Zhang
et al. prepared Ag-MOF@CS by crosslinking chitosan with silver-
based MOF, which enhanced the water stability and long-term
antibacterial ability of Ag-MOF@CS. The amino and hydroxyl
groups on chitosan were cross-linked with Ag-MOF@CS, which
improved the water stability of Ag-MOF@CS from 6 to 168 h.
In addition, the Ag-MOF@CS maintained its excellent antibac-
terial performance after 100 days of storage. In the freshness
preservation experiment, the fruit sprayed with the Ag-MOF@CS
suspension had a shelf life of 14 days, while the control group
was already moldy and rotten on the seventh day. Moreover, the
suspension is characterized by easy cleaning and no residue, and
the metal residue is almost undetectable on the skin of the cleaned
fruit, which has good safety (Figure 7a,b) (Y. Zhang et al. 2022).
In another study, Kang et al. combined ZIF-67 loaded with AgNPs
with carboxymethyl cellulose to prepare antibacterial films with
excellent properties. The characterization results showed that the
electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bond formation between
Ag@MOF and cellulose gave the films a more compact and
dense structure, which greatly improved the thermal stability and
mechanical properties of the films. The presence of AgNPs closed
the pores of the MOF, which effectively impeded the penetration
of water vapor and improved the water vapor barrier rate of the
films. In the peach preservation experiment, the control group
was moldy and soft by the sixth day, while the peaches in the
experimental group remained hard and firm, effectively reducing
water loss and bacterial growth (Figure 7c,d) (L. Kang et al. 2024).
The use of carbon-based materials as ideal carriers can lead
to the development of nanocomposites with excellent proper-
ties and superior antibacterial properties. Yin et al. skillfully
combined ZIF-L, graphene oxide, quercetin, and AgNPs to
prepare Quercetin@ZIF-L/GO@AgNPs composite films capable
of releasing quercetin under acidic conditions. The results of
film property measurements showed that the water flux and
hydrophobicity of the films increased with increasing GO@AgNP
content, which was mainly because GO@AgNPs were water-
insoluble and porous. In freshness preservation experiments, the
film extended the shelf life of strawberries to 8 days, while the
control group showed mold on the third day. In addition, the
metal migration test results showed that the silver ion content
in the strawberries was 0.37 µg/L on the eighth day, which was
far below the relevant EU standard (Yin et al. 2024). In another
similar study, Yang et al. immobilized tea polyphenol-reduced
AgNPs on Go and then combined glycerol and sodium alginate to
prepare a composite film with excellent properties. The authors
found that the addition of Go improved the tensile strength
and thermal stability of the film, and the water insolubility of
AgNPs and Go also improved the hydrophobicity of the film. The
antibacterial and antioxidant properties of the films with added
amounts of AgNPs and Go were improved by about 20-fold and
40%, respectively, compared to the pure sodium alginate films.
In the preservation experiments, the composite films effectively
slowed the weight loss and wrinkling of blueberries, significantly
extending their 8-day shelf life (Figure 7e–g) (Jun Yang et al.
2024).
6.3
Meat
Meat and its products are rich in proteins, fatty acids, vitamins,
etc., and are a food that is more susceptible to spoilage and micro-
bial infection than other foods. In addition, oxidation of the lipids
in meat can adversely affect its flavor, texture, color, and odor.
Antibacterial food packaging can not only inhibit the growth of
microorganisms but also has good antioxidant properties, which
can be a good way to extend the shelf life of meat. Furthermore,
as meat products deteriorate during storage, alkaline substances
such as ammonia are released to raise the pH of the environment,
making the development of ammonia/pH-sensitive functional
food packaging for timely freshness monitoring a hot research
topic in the recent past (S. Feng et al. 2023).
6.3.1
Film
There is no doubt that green synthetic AgNPs are gaining popular-
ity due to their high biocompatibility, low toxicity, and economic
benefits. Eesa et al. prepared an edible AgNPs-containing film
for preserving chicken meat. The results of the experiment
showed that the film made of green synthesized AgNPs had
better bioactivity than the film made of AgNPs synthesized by
the chemical synthesis method. According to the bacterial count
results, the number of bacteria in the green synthetic AgNPs
antibacterial group was 6.92 log CFU/g when stored in the
refrigerator for 12 days, whereas the maximum acceptable total
thermophilic bacteria of fresh meat was 7.0 log CFU/g. Compared
with the blank group and the chemically synthesized AgNPs
group, the total bacterial count, pH, and volatile alkaline nitrogen
content of the green synthesized AgNPs group were closest to
that of fresh chicken meat (Mohammed Ali Eesa et al. 2023).
Similarly, Khan et al. prepared active biocomposite films using
14 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 7
(a) Synthesis of Ag-MOF and spraying process of fruits; (b) appearance of cut pitaya stalks preserved in different packages and periods.
Adapted from Y. Zhang et al. (2022). Copyright from Elsevier. (c) Schematic of Ag@ZIF-67 synthesis; (d) appearance of peaches preserved in different
packages and periods. Adapted from L. Kang et al. (2024). Copyright from Elsevier. (e) Preparation process of composite films; (f) appearance of blueberry
preserved in different packages and periods; (g) The physicochemical changes of blueberry during 8 days: weight and wrinkle index. Adapted from J.
Yang et al. (2024). Copyright from Elsevier.
green-synthesized AgNPs, chitosan, glycerol, acetic acid, Tween
80, and berry wax. The films were very dense and smooth with
excellent optical properties and water vapor barrier properties at
1.25% AgNPs addition. In the rabbit meat preservation experiment
at 4◦C, the film kept the rabbit meat fresh for 16 days (S. Khan et al.
2024).
6.3.2
Aerogel
Aerogels are characterized by high surface area, low density,
and excellent liquid absorption, which makes them show great
potential in replacing traditional meat absorbent pads. Yang
et al. developed an antibacterial aerogel with AgNPs for fresh
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
15 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

meat preservation. The density of the aerogel was in the range
of 5–6 mg/cm3, which could be easily supported by a spring,
and the aerogel had strong water absorption and water vapor
adsorption ability. SEM images showed that the aerogel exhib-
ited significant antibacterial activity against E. coli, S. aureus,
Listeria monocytogenes, and B. cereus. In fresh beef preservation
experiments, the aerogel resulted in inhibition of pH rise during
storage and absorption of exudate from the meat to reduce
bacterial colonization, which significantly reduced color loss and
total colony count of the beef up to the seventh day of storage
(Figure 8a,b) (Yang et al. 2022).
6.3.3
Smart Food Packaging
The biogenic amines produced during the spoilage of meat
cause an increase in pH, which can change the color of pH-
sensitive pigments, further enabling real-time monitoring of
food freshness. In the case of anthocyanins, which are a group
of phenolic derivatives, changes in pH cause the anthocyanin
functional group to change and produce a color change; below pH
2, it is a flavylium cation; at pH 2–4, it is a quinoidal base; and at
pH 4–6, it is a pseudo base. He et al. developed an antibacterial
freshness indicator color pad based on purple sweet potato
anthocyanins and AgNPs, and the interaction of AgNPs and PEG
improved the uniformity of the pad. The authors found that the
addition of AgNPs made the yellow color of the anthocyanin
solution more pronounced, but the trend of color change with
pH remained evident. This imetric pad not only had good
antibacterial, antioxidant, and hydrophobic properties but can
also reflect the freshness of pork through its own color change,
which was pink for freshness and brown and gray for decay. In
freshness tests, the colorimetric pads were able to keep pork fresh
for 120 h at 4◦C with a total bacterial count not exceeding 6 log10
CFU/g (Figure 8c–e) (Yue He et al. 2023). In another study, a two-
layer preservation film had been developed by Li et al. The inner
layer was an indication layer consisting of tannic acid (TA), purple
potato anthocyanin extract (PAE), and agar, and the molecular
interactions between TA and PAE result in the formation of a
supramolecular complex, which greatly improves the stability of
the anthocyanins. The outer layer was prepared from a blend
of K-carrageenan, oregano essential oil picolin emulsion (OPE),
and tannic acid–reduced AgNPs, which has good hydrophobicity,
UV shielding ability, antibacterial performance, and excellent
antioxidant performance. The bilayer films exhibited significant
color changes in the pH 2–12 range and were highly sensitive
to the production of volatile ammonia within 2 min. The film
extended the shelf life of beef by 24 h in the 20◦C freshness
test, and more importantly, the color change of the film can be
combined with smartphone analysis software to achieve rapid
monitoring of beef freshness (Figure 8f–i) (R. Li et al. 2024).
In addition to the common anthocyanin-based smart packaging,
curcumin also has a pH-responsive behavior, where the color
of curcumin changes with the pH of the environment, being
yellow at pH 3–8, light red at 9–10, and dark red at 11–12. Li
et al. prepared pectin/gelatin films loaded with curcumin and
AgNPs by solution casting. The films changed from light yellow
to dark brown with increasing silver content. The results of film
property measurements showed that the films with lower water
vapor transmission rate and higher antioxidant capacity due to
the incorporation of pectin and curcumin could be suitable for
meat preservation. In the fresh shrimp preservation experiment,
the color of the film changed from initial yellow to light orange,
and the production of volatile saline nitrogen in fresh shrimp was
well monitored (Shuying Li et al. 2024).
7
Challenges and Future Perspectives
AgNPs-based food packaging has great potential for extending
food shelf life and preventing microbial contamination. In recent
years, AgNPs-based food packaging has made remarkable scien-
tific and technological progress and has shown broad research
and application prospects, but in the future, the field will face the
following challenges:
1. Applications of Ag-based materials: Loading AgNPs onto
other materials, such as MOF and MXene, not only improves
the s of AgNPs but also plays a synergistic role in improving
the physicochemical properties of the materials and expand-
ing the application of AgNPs in bio-pharmaceutical and food
packaging. At present, there are fewer applications of Ag-
based materials in food packaging, which still need to be
explored and developed.
2. Intelligent food packaging for fruits and vegetables: The vast
majority of smart food packaging currently involves meat,
fish, and seafood products. Therefore, the development of
AgNP smart food packaging for fruits and vegetables has a
broad research perspective.
3. Safety of AgNPs: AgNP packaging materials are still at the
experimental stage. Although the vast majority of current
research findings indicated that green-synthesized AgNPs
were highly biocompatible and environmentally friendly, and
that the migration levels of silver elements from silver-based
food packaging remained well below relevant standards,
the physiological toxicity, degradability, and environmental
impact of AgNPs were also significant concerns that cannot
be overlooked. Therefore, in-depth studies on the safety and
reliability of AgNP application in food packaging are needed
to ensure that it does not affect the ecological environment
and human health, and also to provide a basis for the
popularization of AgNPs-based food packaging.
8
Conclusion
AgNPs have a wide range of applications in food packaging due
to their excellent physicochemical and antibacterial properties,
and the morphology and size of AgNPs are tunable, which has
an important effect on their antibacterial activity. In this review,
we present three methods for the synthesis of AgNPs, of which
green-synthesized AgNPs have been extensively examined due
to their cost-effectiveness, environmental compatibility, and high
biocompatibility. In addition, the synthesis and characterization
of various silver-based nanomaterials are also discussed in detail.
Subsequently, we introduced the mechanisms by which AgNPs
damage cell membranes and intracellular material: the release
of Ag+ and the generation of ROS. We also explored their
impact on the properties of various food packaging materials.
16 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 8
(a) Preparation process of CMC@AgNPs/BC/CA aerogel; (b) the physicochemical changes of beef during storage: pH value, color
indices, and cumulative release rates. Adapted from Yang et al. (2022). Copyright from Elsevier. (c) Preparation process of antibacterial colorimetric pad;
(d) the physicochemical changes of TVC, TVB-N, and pH of pork samples during storage and sensory analysis at 72 h; (e) appearance of pork preserved in
different packages and periods. Adapted from Y. He et al. (2023). Copyright from Wiley. (f) Schematic of film preparation and beef freshness monitoring;
(g) color change of PAE and TA-PAE solutions at different pH values solutions; (h) appearance of beef preserved in different packages and changes in
film color during 5 days; (i) the process of image color analysis using a smartphone app. Adapted from R. Li et al. (2024). Copyright from Elsevier.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
17 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

We demonstrated how AgNPs can improve the mechanical
properties and barrier characteristics of food packaging. Finally,
we are exploring the application of AgNPs in food packaging. In
particular, intelligent monitoring of food packaging using color
changes in ammonia/pH-sensitive materials to visually deter-
mine the freshness of meat products can significantly improve
food safety. This innovative approach holds significant potential
for application in the field of food packaging.
Author Contributions
Tao Luo: writing – original draft, visualization. Ting Yao: writing –
review and editing. Zhongxu Zhan: writing – review and editing. Bei
Gan: writing – review and editing. Xin Wu: writing – review and
editing. Hengyi Xu: writing – review and editing, funding acquisition,
supervision, project administration.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Project of State Key Laboratory of Food
Science and Resources, Nanchang University (Project No. SKLF-ZZB-
202328) for financial support.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Data Availability Statement
No data were used for the research described in the article.
References
Silva, F. A. G. S., M. Carvalho, T. B. de Carvalho, M. Gama, F. Poças, and P.
Teixeira. 2023. “Antimicrobial Activity of In-Situ Bacterial Nanocellulose-
Zinc Oxide Composites for Food Packaging.” Food Packaging and Shelf
Life 40: 101201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2023.101201.
AbdEl-Salam, A. H., and H. A. Ewais. 2023. “Effect of Non-Toxic Polysac-
charide Carboxymethylcellulose as Reducing and Stabilizing Agents in
the Formation of Nanosilver in Aqueous and Micellar Media.” Russian
Journal of Physical Chemistry A 97: 3081–3088. https://doi.org/10.1134/
S0036024423130034.
Abid, N., A. M. Khan, S. Shujait, et al. 2022. “Synthesis of Nanomaterials
Using Various Top-Down and Bottom-up Approaches, Influencing Fac-
tors, Advantages, and Disadvantages: A Review.” Advances in Colloid and
Interface Science 300: 102597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2021.102597.
Alhajj, M., M. Safwan Abd Aziz, A. A. Salim, S. Sharma, W. H. A.
Kamaruddin, and S. K. Ghoshal. 2023. “Customization of Structure,
Morphology and Optical Characteristics of Silver and Copper Nanopar-
ticles: Role of Laser Fluence Tuning.” Applied Surface Science 614: 156176.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2022.156176.
Alhariry, J., and K. M. Poluri. 2025. “Proteinaceous Nanofibers Loaded
With Nano-Silver for Active Food Packaging Applications.” Food Packag-
ing and Shelf Life 50: 101559. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2025.101559.
Ali, S., A. Bahadur, A. Hassan, S. Ahmad, W. Shah, and S. Iqbal.
2025. “Optimized Silver Nanostructures for Enhanced Antibacterial
Potential: Recent Trends and Challenges in the Development of Metallo-
Antimicrobials.” Chemical Engineering Journal 507: 160470. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cej.2025.160470.
Alizadeh Sani, M., A. Khezerlou, M. Rezvani-Ghalhari, D. J. McClements,
and R. S. Varma. 2025. “Advanced Carbon-Based Nanomaterials: Appli-
cation in the Development of Multifunctional Next-Generation Food
Packaging Materials.” Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 339:
103422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2025.103422.
An, L., X. Hu, P. Perkins, and T. Ren. 2022. “A Sustainable and
Antimicrobial Food Packaging Film for Potential Application in Fresh
Produce Packaging.” Frontiers in Nutrition 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.
2022.924304.
Anguraj, A., H. S. R. Michael, S. Sugumaran, G. R. Madhusudhanan,
and R. K. Sivaraman. 2024. “A Comparative Study on Biosynthesized
Silver Nanoparticles From H. undatus Fruit Peel and Their Therapeutic
Applications.” Discover Nano 19: 49. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-024-
03995-w.
Antunes, D. R., M. M. L. H. Forini, Y. A. Coqueiro, et al. 2024. “Effect
of Hyaluronic Acid-Stabilized Silver Nanoparticles on Lettuce (Lactuca
sativa L.) Seed Germination.” Chemosphere 364: 143080. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2024.143080.
Biswas, K., Z. Ahamed, T. Dutta, et al. 2024. “Green Synthesis of
Silver Nanoparticles From Waste Leaves of Tea (Camellia sinensis) and
Their Catalytic Potential for Degradation of Azo Dyes.” Journal of
Molecular Structure 1318: 139448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2024.
139448.
Chen, Y., C. Rong, W. Gao, et al. 2024. “Ag-MXene as Peroxidase-
Mimicking Nanozyme for Enhanced Bacteriocide and Cholesterol Sens-
ing.” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 653: 540–550. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcis.2023.09.097.
Cheng, J., L. Xing, A. Li, et al. 2024. “Fabrication of the Ag/Silk Fibers
for Electrically Conductive Textiles.” Surfaces and Interfaces 48: 104284.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfin.2024.104284.
daSilva, D. J., M. M. de Oliveira, S. H. Wang, D. J. Carastan, and D. S. Rosa.
2022. “Designing Antimicrobial Polypropylene Films With Grape Pomace
Extract for Food Packaging.” Food Packaging and Shelf Life 34: 100929.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2022.100929.
Dai, Q., R. Jia, H. Li, J. Yang, and Z. Qin. 2024. “Preparation and
Application of Sustained-Release Antibacterial Alginate Hydrogels by
Loading Plant-Mediated Silver Nanoparticles.” ACS Sustainable Chem-
istry & Engineering 12: 1388–1404. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.
3c04907.
Dalla Colletta, A., M. Pelin, S. Sosa, L. Fusco, M. Prato, and A. Tubaro.
2022. “CARBON-BASED Nanomaterials and SKIN: An Overview.” Car-
bon 196: 683–698. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2022.05.036.
Danaei, M., M. M. Motaghi, M. Naghmachi, F. Amirmahani, and R.
Moravej. 2021. “Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles (AgNPs) by
Filamentous Algae Extract: Comprehensive Evaluation of Antimicrobial
and Anti-biofilm Effects Against Nosocomial Pathogens.” Biologia 76:
3057–3069. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11756-021-00808-8.
Davoodi, A., K. Akhbari, and M. Alirezvani. 2023. “Prolonged Release of
Silver and Iodine From ZIF-7 Carrier With Great Antibacterial Activity.”
CrystEngComm 25: 3931–3942. https://doi.org/10.1039/D3CE00529A.
Deng, P., Y. Zhang, Q. Deng, et al. 2024. “Multifunctional Sodium
Alginate-Based Self-healing Edible Cross-linked Coating for Banana
Preservation.” Food Hydrocolloids 151: 109753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodhyd.2024.109753.
Dey, M., S. Bera, P. Tyagi, and L. Pal. 2025. “Mechanisms and Strategic
Prospects of Cannabinoids Use: Potential Applications in Antimicrobial
Food Packaging—A Review.” Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and
Food Safety 24: e70113. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.70113.
Dharini, V., S. Periyar Selvam, J. Jayaramudu, and R. Sadiku Emmanuel.
2022. “Functional Properties of Clay Nanofillers Used in the Biopolymer-
Based Composite Films for Active Food Packaging Applications—
Review.” Applied Clay Science 226: 106555. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clay.
2022.106555.
Ding, M., Y. Zhang, X. Li, et al. 2024. “Simultaneous Biofilm Disruption,
Bacterial Killing, and Inflammation Elimination for Wound Treat-
ment Using Silver Embellished Polydopamine Nanoplatform.” Small 20:
2400927. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202400927.
Dutta, D., and N. Sit. 2024. “Comprehensive Review on Developments in
Starch-Based Films Along With Active Ingredients for Sustainable Food
18 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Packaging.” Sustainable Chemistry and Pharmacy 39: 101534. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scp.2024.101534.
Falco, W. F., M. D. Scherer, S. L. Oliveira, et al. 2020. “Phytotoxicity of
Silver Nanoparticles on Vicia faba: Evaluation of Particle Size Effects on
Photosynthetic Performance and Leaf Gas Exchange.” Science of the Total
Environment 701: 134816. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134816.
Fan, Y., K. Zhang, Q. Liu, et al. 2025. “Mechanism, Application, and
Prospect of Bioprotective Cultures in Meat and Meat Products.” Food
Chemistry 476: 143474. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2025.143474.
Feng, L., Y. Liu, Y. Chen, et al. 2023. “Injectable Antibacterial Hydrogel
With Asiaticoside-Loaded Liposomes and Ultrafine Silver Nanosilver Par-
ticles Promotes Healing of Burn-Infected Wounds.” Advanced Healthcare
Materials 12: 2203201. https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.202203201.
Feng, S., Q. Tang, Z. Xu, K. Huang, H. Li, and Z. Zou. 2023. “Development
of Novel Co-MOF Loaded Sodium Alginate Based Packaging Films With
Antimicrobial and Ammonia-Sensitive Functions for Shrimp Freshness
Monitoring.” Food Hydrocolloids 135: 108193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodhyd.2022.108193.
Fu, Y., and E. G. Dudley. 2021. “Antimicrobial-Coated Films as Food
Packaging: A Review.” Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food
Safety 20: 3404–3437. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.12769.
Gajera, H. P., D. G. Hirpara, R. V. Bhadani, and B. A. Golakiya. 2022.
“Green Synthesis and Characterization of Nanosilver Derived From
Extracellular Metabolites of Potent Bacillus subtilis for Antifungal and
Eco-Friendly Action Against Phytopathogen.” Biometals 35: 479–497.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10534-022-00382-9.
Gao, Y., H. Dou, Y. Ma, et al. 2024. “Antibacterial Performance Effects
of Ag NPs In Situ Loaded in MOFs Nano-Supports Prepared by
Post-Synthesis Exchange Method.” Journal of Environmental Chemical
Engineering 12: 112133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2024.112133.
Gao, Y., R. Li, J. Wang, H. Xu, M. Wang, and H. Wang. 2025.
“Development of κ-Carrageenan/Tourmaline Composite for Active Food
Packaging Applications: Improved Mechanical, Gas Barrier, and Antimi-
crobial.” Carbohydrate Polymers 354: 123304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbpol.2025.123304.
Gong, X., N. D. Jadhav, V. V. Lonikar, et al. 2024. “An Overview of
Green Synthesized Silver Nanoparticles Towards Bioactive Antibacterial,
Antimicrobial and Antifungal Applications.” Advances in Colloid and
Interface Science 323: 103053. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2023.103053.
Hadi, A. A., N. A. N. N. Malek, J. Matmin, et al. 2024. “Synergistic
Antibacterial Effect of Persicaria odorata Synthesised Silver Nanoparti-
cles With Antibiotics on Drug-Resistant Bacteria.” Inorganic Chemistry
Communications 159: 111725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inoche.2023.111725.
He, Y., S. Chen, D. Xu, D. Ren, and X. Wu. 2023. “Fabrication of
Antimicrobial Colorimetric Pad for Meat Packaging Based on Polyvinyl
Alcohol Aerogel With the Incorporation of Anthocyanins and Silver
Nanoparticles.” Packaging Technology and Science 36: 745–755. https://doi.
org/10.1002/pts.2754.
He, Y., Y. Xie, Y. Huang, et al. 2022. “Optimization of Cyanobacteria Micro-
cystis aeruginosa Extract to Improve the Yield of Ag Nanoparticles With
Antibacterial Property.” International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation
171: 105407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibiod.2022.105407.
He, Z., H. Yang, Y. Gu, et al. 2023. “Green Synthesis of MOF-Mediated
pH-Sensitive Nanomaterial AgNPs@ ZIF-8 and Its Application in Improv-
ing the Antibacterial Performance of AgNPs.” International Journal of
Nanomedicine 18: 4857–4870. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S418308.
Herrera Pérez, G. M., L. E. Castellano, and C. A. Ramírez Valdespino.
2024. “Trichoderma and Mycosynthesis of Metal Nanoparticles: Role of
Their Secondary Metabolites.” Journal of Fungi 10, no. 7: 443. https://doi.
org/10.3390/jof10070443.
Hidayat, R., G. Fadillah, S.-I. Ohira, F. I. Fajarwati, D. A. Setyorini, and A.
Saputra. 2024. “Facile Green Synthesis of Ag Doped TiO2 Nanoparticles
Using Maple Leaf for Bisphenol-A Degradation and Its Antibacterial
Properties.” Materials Today Sustainability 26: 100752. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.mtsust.2024.100752.
Hoffmann, S., A. E. White, R. B. McQueen, J.-W. Ahn, L. B. Gunn-Sandell,
and E. J. Scallan Walter. 2024. “Economic Burden of Foodborne Illnesses
Acquired in the United States.” Foodborne Pathogens and Disease 22: 4–14.
https://doi.org/10.1089/fpd.2023.0157.
Hoseinnejad, M., S. M. Jafari, and I. Katouzian. 2018. “Inorganic and
Metal Nanoparticles and Their Antimicrobial Activity in Food Packaging
Applications.” Critical Reviews in Microbiology 44: 161–181. https://doi.
org/10.1080/1040841X.2017.1332001.
Huang, T.-Y., J.-Y. Lin, and W.-T. Su. 2024. “Coaxial Nanofibers Encapsu-
lated With Ampelopsis brevipedunculata Extract and Green Synthesized
AgNPs for Wound Repair.” Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 235:
113771. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2024.113771.
Huang, X., B. Liu, J. Ma, et al. 2024. “Development of Gliadin@AgNPs
Hybrid Nanoparticles as Building Blocks for Constructing Antimicrobial
Protein-Based Porous Materials.” Chemical Engineering Journal 482:
148924. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.148924.
Ihsan, S., H. Munir, Z. Meng, et al. 2024. “Tragacanth Gum-Based Cop-
per Oxide Nanoparticles: Comprehensive Characterization, Antibiofilm,
Antimicrobial and Photocatalytic Potentials.” International Journal of
Biological Macromolecules 268: 131600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.
2024.131600.
Jayaramudu, T., G. M. Raghavendra, K. Varaprasad, et al. 2016. “Prepara-
tion and Characterization of Poly(ethylene glycol) Stabilized Nano Silver
Particles by a Mechanochemical Assisted Ball Mill Process.” Journal of
Applied Polymer Science 133. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.43027.
Jerozal, R. T., T. A. Pitt, S. N. MacMillan, and P. J. Milner. 2023. “High-
Concentration Self-Assembly of Zirconium- and Hafnium-Based Metal–
Organic Materials.” Journal of the American Chemical Society 145: 13273–
13283. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c02787.
Jiang, G., W. Sheng, L. Yang, et al. 2025. “Temperature-Controllable
Antibacterial Film Mediated by a Photoresponsive Metal-Polyphenol
Framework for Long-Term Food Preservation.” Food Control 172: 111137.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2025.111137.
Jiang, H., S. Zhao, Z. Li, L. Chen, H. Mo, and X. Liu. 2024. “Swan-
Feathers Inspired Smart-Responsive Sustainable Carboxymethyl Cellu-
lose/Polyvinyl Alcohol Based Food Packaging Film for Robustly Inte-
grated Intelligent and Active Packaging.” Nano Today 56: 102272. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2024.102272.
Jiang, W., Y. Zhang, D. Yang, X. Qiu, and Z. Li. 2024. “Ultrasonic-
Assisted Synthesis of Lignin-Based Ultrasmall Silver Nanoparticles for
Photothermal-Mediated Sterilization.” International Journal of Biologi-
cal Macromolecules 262: 129827. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.
129827.
Jiao, L., J. Y. R. Seow, W. S. Skinner, Z. U. Wang, and H.-L. Jiang. 2019.
“Metal–Organic Frameworks: Structures and Functional Applications.”
Materials Today 27: 43–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2018.10.038.
Kang, L., Q. Liang, Y. Liu, et al. 2024. “Preparation Technology and
Preservation Mechanism of Novel Ag NPs-Loaded ZIF-67 Packaging
Film.” Food Packaging and Shelf Life 45: 101338. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.fpsl.2024.101338.
Kang, Y., D. Zhao, D. Cai, et al. 2024. “Novel Copper-Based Metal–Organic
Skeleton Smart Tags That Respond to Ammonia for Real-Time Visual
Freshness Monitoring of Shrimp.” Chemical Engineering Journal 495:
153388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.153388.
Khan, A., Z. Riahi, J. T. Kim, and J.-W. Rhim. 2024. “Effect of Carbon Dot-
Doped Ti-MOF on CMC/Agar Film and Active Packaging Application on
Storage Quality of Fruits.” Food Chemistry 455: 139911. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.foodchem.2024.139911.
Khan, S., S. B. H. Hashim, M. Arslan, et al. 2024. “Development of an
Active Biogenic Silver Nanoparticles Composite Film Based on Berry
Wax and Chitosan for Rabbit Meat Preservation.” International Journal of
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
19 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Biological Macromolecules 275: 133128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.
2024.133128.
Khatoon, U. T., A. Velidandi, and G. V. S. Nageswara Rao. 2023.
“Sodium Borohydride Mediated Synthesis of Nano-Sized Silver Parti-
cles: Their Characterization, Anti-Microbial and Cytotoxicity Studies.”
Materials Chemistry and Physics 294: 126997. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matchemphys.2022.126997.
Kim, D.-Y., M. Kim, J.-S. Sung, et al. 2024. “Extracellular Synthesis of
Silver Nanoparticle Using Yeast Extracts: Antibacterial and Seed Priming
Applications.” Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 108: 150. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00253-023-12920-7.
Kumar, P., N. Thakur, K. Kumar, et al. 2024. “Catalyzing Innova-
tion: Exploring Iron Oxide Nanoparticles—Origins, Advancements, and
Future Application Horizons.” Coordination Chemistry Reviews 507:
215750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2024.215750.
Kurian, S., V. V. Gande, P. Subramaniam, and R. Bauri. 2024. “Synthesis
and Separation of Silver Nanoparticles Using an Aqueous Two-Phase
System With Citrate as Reducing Agent.” Journal of Nanoparticle Research
26: 51. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-024-05958-9.
Lee, S., D. Nam, D. C. Yang, and W. Choe. 2023. “Unveiling Hidden
Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks Guided by Intuition-Based Geometrical
Factors.” Small 19: 2300036. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202300036.
Lee, S., Q. Zhao, S. Lee, et al. 2024. “Two- and Three-Dimensional Ag–
Au Nanoalloying: Heterogeneous Building Blocks Enhancing near-Field
Focusing.” ACS Nano 18: 29880–29890. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.
4c10219.
Lekshmi, G. S., R. Tamilselvi, R. Geethalakshmi, et al. 2022. “Multifunc-
tional Oil-Produced Reduced Graphene Oxide—Silver Oxide Composites
With Photocatalytic, Antioxidant, and Antibacterial Activities.” Journal
of Colloid and Interface Science 608: 294–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.
2021.08.048.
Li, B., Y. Luo, Y. Zheng, X. Liu, L. Tan, and S. Wu. 2022. “Two-Dimensional
Antibacterial Materials.” Progress in Materials Science 130: 100976. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2022.100976.
Li, C., B. Wei, Z. Cai, et al. 2024. “Synthesis and Synergistic Effects of
Antibacterial and Corrosion Inhibition Based on Concentrated Hydrosols
of Silver Nanoparticles.” Corrosion Science 233: 112102. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.corsci.2024.112102.
Li, P.-P., Y. Zhang, C. Wang, et al. 2023. “Promotion of Reactive
Oxygen Species Activated by Nanosilver Surface Engineering for Resis-
tant Bacteria-Infected Skin Tissue Therapy.” Rare Metals 42: 4167–4183.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12598-023-02481-z.
Li, R., H. Feng, S. Wang, D. Zhuang, Y. Wen, and J. Zhu. 2024. “A
Double-Layer Film Based on the Strategy of Tannic Acid-anthocyanin Co-
pigmentation and Tannic-Crosslinked-Gelatin/−Reduced Ag Nanoparti-
cles for Beef Preservation and Monitoring.” Food Chemistry 460: 140642.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2024.140642.
Li, S., C. Fang, N. Wei, et al. 2025. “Antimicrobial, Antioxidative, and UV-
Blocking Pectin/Gelatin Food Packaging Films Incorporated With Tannic
Acid and Silver Nanoparticles for Strawberry Preservation.” International
Journal of Biological Macromolecules 308: 142445. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijbiomac.2025.142445.
Li, S., N. Wei, J. Wei, et al. 2024. “Curcumin and Silver Nanopar-
ticles Loaded Antibacterial Multifunctional Pectin/Gelatin Films for
Food Packaging Applications.” International Journal of Biological Macro-
molecules 266: 131248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.131248.
Li, S., C. Zhang, L. Ma, S. Ji, and D. Yang. 2024. “Heterogeneous
Nucleation Optimization From AgCl and Reduction Control in Ethylene
Glycol for Fast and Reproducible Synthesis of Silver Nanowires.” Physica
Scripta 99: 055525. https://doi.org/10.1088/1402-4896/ad367e.
Li, X., L. Pang, J. Duan, et al. 2025. “Eco-friendly Antibacterial Electro-
spinning Nanofibrous Film Containing Nano-Silver Green-Synthesized
by Natural Glycoprotein for Infected Wound Healing.” Journal of Colloid
and Interface Science 683: 256–268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2024.12.
019.
Liang, J., X. Tian, M. Zhou, et al. 2024. “Shikonin and Chitosan-Silver
Nanoparticles Synergize Against Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Through
RIPK3-Triggered Necroptotic Immunogenic Cell Death.” Biomaterials
309: 122608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2024.122608.
Liang, S., X. Wang, C. Wei, L. Xie, and X. Dang. 2025. “Engineering a Nat-
ural Multifunctional Biomass-Based Composite Nanosystem for Active
Smart Packaging and Colorimetric Labels.” ACS Sustainable Chem-
istry & Engineering 13: 3066–3077. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.
4c07279.
Liu, F., W. L. Robinson, T. Kirscht, K. A. Fichthorn, and S. Jiang. 2024.
“Biobased Polymers Enabling the Synthesis of Ultralong Silver Nanowires
and Other Nanostructures.” Nano Letters 24: 14381–14388. https://doi.org/
10.1021/acs.nanolett.4c04130.
Liu, J., Z. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Pei, and K. Tang. 2022. “Soluble Soybean
Polysaccharide Films Containing In-Situ Generated Silver Nanoparticles
for Antibacterial Food Packaging Applications.” Food Packaging and Shelf
Life 31: 100800. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2021.100800.
Liu, S., S. Qiao, J. Zhu, et al. 2024. “Enhanced Barrier and Antioxidant
Properties of Gelatin Films by Structural-Colored Bioactive Materials for
Food Packaging.” Food Hydrocolloids 150: 109744. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.foodhyd.2024.109744.
Liu, S., M. Xu, Y. Guo, et al. 2024. “Fabrication of an Antibacterial System
of Arginine-Modified Chitosan With AgNPs-Loaded Montmorillonite for
Food Preservation.” Food Hydrocolloids 156: 110258. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.foodhyd.2024.110258.
Liu, Y.-L., Y. Li, Y.-F. Si, et al. 2023. “Synthesis of Nanosilver Particles
Mediated by Microbial Surfactants and Its Enhancement of Crude
Oil Recovery.” Energy 272: 127123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.
127123.
Liu, Y., M. Zheng, and Z. Xie. 2024. “Chiral Organic Nanoparticles
Based Photodynamic Antibacterial Films for Food Preservation.” Chem-
ical Engineering Journal 486: 150361. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.
150361.
Lu, D., Y. Ning, X. Liu, et al. 2024. “Preparation and Properties of
Antibacterial Food-preservative Paper Incorporating Ceramic Pigments.”
Packaging Technology and Science 37: 273–282. https://doi.org/10.1002/pts.
2797.
Ma, D., X. Huang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, and B. Wang. 2023. “Metal-
Organic Frameworks: Synthetic Methods for Industrial Production.”
Nano Research 16: 7906–7925. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-023-5441-4.
Mansee, A. H., A. M. Ebrahim, and E. A. Koreish. 2024. “A Promising
Sustainable Green Nanosilver Formula for p-Nitrophenol and Methylene
Blue Remediation From Wastewater.” Applied Water Science 14: 205.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13201-024-02258-4.
Mazumder, D., R. Mittal, and S. K. Nath. 2024. “Green Synthesis of
Silver Nanoparticles From Waste Vigna Mungo Plant and Evaluation
of Its Antioxidant and Antibacterial Activity.” Biomass Conversion and
Biorefinery. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13399-024-05375-x.
Mohammed Ali Eesa, A., B. Bazargani-Gilani, and S. Obaid Hasson.
2023. “Comparison of Green and Synthetic Silver Nanoparticles in Zein-
Based Edible Films: Shelf-Life Study of Cold-Stored Turkey Breasts.” Food
Science & Nutrition 11: 7352–7363. https://doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.3661.
Mondal, A. H., D. Yadav, S. Mitra, and K. J. Mukhopadhyay. 2020.
“Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Culture Supernatant of She-
wanella sp. ARY1 and Their Antibacterial Activity.” International Journal
of Nanomedicine 15: 8295–8310. https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S274535.
Moorthy, K., K.-C. Chang, H.-C. Huang, W.-J. Wu, and C.-K. Chiang.
2024. “Evaluating Antioxidant Performance, Biosafety, and Antimicrobial
Efficacy of Houttuynia cordata Extract and Microwave-Assisted Synthesis
of Biogenic Silver Nano-Antibiotics.” Antioxidants 13, no. 1: 32. https://
doi.org/10.3390/antiox13010032.
20 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Morozova, O. V. 2021. “Silver Nanostructures: Limited Sensitivity of
Detection, Toxicity and Anti-Inflammation Effects.” International Jour-
nal of Molecular Sciences 22, no. 18: 9928. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms22189928.
Mu, Y., S. Lv, J. Liu, et al. 2025. “Recent Advances in Research on
Biomass-Based Food Packaging Film Materials.” Comprehensive Reviews
in Food Science and Food Safety 24: e70093. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-
4337.70093.
Nguyen, T. D., H. T. Nguyen, Y. H. Hoang, H. T. Tran, and N. T.-T. Thai.
2023. “Silver Nanoparticles Green-Synthesized Ethanol–Water Extract
of Cleistocalyx operculatus Buds and Their Antimicrobial Activities.”
Chemical Papers 77: 7589–7601. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11696-023-03023-
8.
Nguyen, T. T., T.-T. Huynh Nguyen, B.-T. Tran Pham, et al. 2021. “Devel-
opment of Poly(vinyl alcohol)/Agar/Maltodextrin Coating Containing
Silver Nanoparticles for Banana (Musa acuminate) Preservation.” Food
Packaging and Shelf Life 29: 100740. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2021.
100740.
Nie, X., S. Wu, S. Liao, et al. 2021. “Light-Driven Self-Disinfecting Textiles
Functionalized by PCN-224 and Ag Nanoparticles.” Journal of Hazardous
Materials 416: 125786. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.125786.
Nowruzi, B., M. Majidi, and R. Darvishi. 2024. “Antifungal Screening of
Silver Nanoparticles Biosynthesized by Aliinostoc Oryzae Against Plant
Pathogenic Fungi.” South African Journal of Botany 171: 473–484. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.sajb.2024.06.023.
Pargoletti, E., M. A. Ortenzi, and G. Cappelletti. 2021. “Stable Coloured
Micrometric Films From Highly Concentrated Nano-Silver Sols: The Role
of the Stabilizing Agents.” Nanomaterials 11, no. 4: 980. https://doi.org/10.
3390/nano11040980.
Perumal, A. B., L. Huang, R. B. Nambiar, Y. He, X. Li, and P. S.
Sellamuthu. 2022. “Application of Essential Oils in Packaging Films for
the Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables: A Review.” Food Chemistry 375:
131810. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.131810.
Pryshchepa, O., P. Pomastowski, and B. Buszewski. 2020. “Silver Nanopar-
ticles: Synthesis, Investigation Techniques, and Properties.” Advances
in Colloid and Interface Science 284: 102246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.
2020.102246.
Qu, L.-Y., J.-L. Liu, A.-L. Yang, et al. 2023. “Silver Nanoparticle@Catechol
Formaldehyde Resin Microspheres: One-Pot Synthesis and Applica-
tion for Producing Durable Antimicrobial Cotton Fabrics.” Chemical
Engineering Journal 476: 146839. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2023.146839.
Rabee, M., S. A. Elmogy, M. Morsy, S. Lawandy, M. A. H. Zahran, and H.
Moustafa. 2023. “Biosynthesis of MgO Nanoparticles and Their Impact
on the Properties of the PVA/Gelatin Nanocomposites for Smart Food
Packaging Applications.” ACS Applied Bio Materials 6: 5037–5051. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.3c00723.
Rao, M. M. V., N. Mohammad, S. Banerjee, and P. K. Khanna. 2024.
“Synthesis and Food Packaging Application of Silver Nano-Particles:
A Review.” Hybrid Advances 6: 100230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hybadv.
2024.100230.
Salari Joo, H., M. Behzadi Tayemeh, H. Abaei, and S. A. Johari. 2023.
“On How Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework-8 Reduces Silver Ion Release
and Affects Cytotoxicity and Antimicrobial Properties of AgNPs@ZIF8
Nanocomposite.” Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineer-
ing Aspects 668: 131411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2023.131411.
Sarkar, J., A. Naskar, A. Nath, et al. 2024. “Innovative Utilization of Har-
vested Mushroom Substrate for Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles:
A Multi-Response Optimization Approach.” Environmental Research 248:
118297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2024.118297.
Sathiyaseelan, A., K. Saravanakumar, and M.-H. Wang. 2022. “Bimetallic
Silver-Platinum (AgPt) Nanoparticles and Chitosan Fabricated Cotton
Gauze for Enhanced Antimicrobial and Wound Healing Applications.”
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 220: 1556–1569. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.09.045.
Sebastian, S., Priya, Y. Rohila, et al. 2024. “Environmentally Benign
Self-assembled Biopolymer-Peptoid Nanosilver Composite Hybrid Gel
Beads via Ion-Crosslinking for Antimicrobial and Catalytic Applications.”
Applied Materials Today 41: 102512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2024.
102512.
Shao, Y., Y. Luan, C. Hao, J. Song, L. Li, and F. Song. 2023. “Antimicrobial
Protection of Two Controlled Release Silver Nanoparticles on Simulated
Silk Cultural Relic.” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 652: 901–911.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2023.08.116.
Sharma, S., N. Sharma, and N. Kaushal. 2023. “Utilization of Novel Bac-
teriocin Synthesized Silver Nanoparticles (AgNPs) for Their Application
in Antimicrobial Packaging for Preservation of Tomato Fruit.” Fron-
tiers in Sustainable Food Systems 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2023.
1072738.
Shen, Y., H. He, C. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Z. Xu, and L. Han. 2024. “Effect of
Silver Nanoparticles Modified by Depolymerized Monomer From Waste
PET on the Thermo-Induced Shape Memory Properties of PVA.” Polymer
Engineering and Science 65, no. 2: 745–754. https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.
27039.
Shende, S. S., A. K. Gade, T. M. Minkina, et al. 2024. “Exploring
Sustainable Management by Using Green Nano-Silver to Combat Three
Post-Harvest Pathogenic Fungi in Crops.” Discover Nano 19: 53. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s11671-024-03986-x.
Singhal, M., L. Loveleen, R. Manchanda, et al. 2024. “Design, Synthesis
and Optimization of Silver Nanoparticles Using Azadirachta indica Bark
Extract and Its Antibacterial Application.” Journal of Agriculture and
Food Research 16: 101088. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jafr.2024.101088.
Sun, S., X. Meng, J. Xu, Z. Yang, X. Zhang, and H. Dong. 2024.
“Ag-Decorated Multivariate Metal-Organic Frameworks for Enhanced
Sonodynamic Therapy of Bacterial Infections in Wound Healing.” Nano
Today 55: 102181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2024.102181.
Tajeddin, B., and M. Arabkhedri. 2020. “Chapter 16 - Polymers and
Food Packaging.” In Polymer Science and Innovative Applications 525–543.
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816808-0.00016-0.
Tang, X., M. Lu, J. Wang, S. Man, W. Peng, and L. Ma. 2024. “Recent
Advances of DNA-Templated Metal Nanoclusters for Food Safety Detec-
tion: From Synthesis, Applications, Challenges, and Beyond.” Journal of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 72: 5542–5554. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.jafc.3c09621.
Vinnacombe-Willson, G. A., Y. Conti, A. Stefancu, P. S. Weiss, E. Cortés,
and L. Scarabelli. 2023. “Direct Bottom-Up in Situ Growth: A Paradigm
Shift for Studies in Wet-Chemical Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles.”
Chemical Reviews 123: 8488–8529. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.
2c00914.
Wang, D., B. Xue, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, and Y. Zhou. 2021. “Fungus-
mediated Green Synthesis of Nano-Silver Using Aspergillus sydowii and
Its Antifungal/Antiproliferative Activities.” Scientific Reports 11: 10356.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89854-5.
Wang, F., Z. Xu, L. Chen, et al. 2024. “Super Absorbent Resilience
Antibacterial Aerogel With Curcumin for Fresh Pork Preservation.” Food
Control 159: 110289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2024.110289.
Wang, G., X. Yang, X. Chen, et al. 2024. “Construction and Antibacterial
Activities of Walnut Green Husk Polysaccharide Based Silver Nanopar-
ticles (AgNPs).” International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 276:
133798. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.133798.
Wang, J.-D., S.-L. Yang, G.-S. Liu, et al. 2024. “A Degradable Multi-
functional Packaging Based on Chitosan/Silk Fibroin via Incorporating
Cellulose Nanocrystals-Stabilized Cinnamon Essential Oil Pickering
Emulsion.” Food Hydrocolloids 153: 109978. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodhyd.2024.109978.
Wang, K., X. Yang, J. Liang, et al. 2024. “Preparation, Character-
ization, Antimicrobial Evaluation, and Grape Preservation Applica-
tions of Polyvinyl Alcohol/Gelatin Composite Films Containing Zinc
Oxide@Quaternized Chitosan Nanoparticles.” International Journal of
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
21 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Biological Macromolecules 277: 134527. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.
2024.134527.
Wang, L., Y. Wang, Z. Chen, et al. 2024. “Silver Nanoparticles Stabilized
by Cranberry Polyphenols Exhibited Enhanced Protective Effects Against
Hemolysis and Preservative Effects on Fresh Blueberries.” Food Bioscience
62: 105373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fbio.2024.105373.
Wang, X.-T., Q.-C. Sun, L.-L. Chen, et al. 2024. “Utilization of Ovalbumin
and Visible Light Irradiation for Efficient and Eco-Friendly Production of
AgNPs Composite.” Applied Organometallic Chemistry 38: e7361. https://
doi.org/10.1002/aoc.7361.
Wang, X., Y.-P. Chen, S.-Y. Liu, J.-S. Guo, F. Fang, and P. Yan. 2023. “The
Effect of Silver Nanoparticles on Aerobic Denitrifying Bacteria During
Biological Nitrogen Removal: A New Perspective Based on Morphological
Effects.” Chemical Engineering Journal 471: 144538. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cej.2023.144538.
Wang, X., S. Xuan, K. Ding, P. Jin, Y. Zheng, and Z. Wu. 2024. “Photother-
mal Controlled Antibacterial Ta4C3Tx-AgNPs/Nanocellulose Bioplastic
Food Packaging.” Food Chemistry 448: 139126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2024.139126.
Wen, Y., W. Chen, R. Wu, et al. 2024. “Chitosan-Stabilized PtAu Nanopar-
ticles With Multienzyme-Like Activity for Mixed Bacteria Infection
Wound Healing and Insights Into Its Antibacterial Mechanism.” Small
Structures 5: 2300553. https://doi.org/10.1002/sstr.202300553.
Wu, S., L. Sheng, X. Lu, et al. 2024. “Screening of Bio-Recognition
Elements by Phage Display and Their Application in the Detection of
Foodborne Pathogens.” TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 171: 117481.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2023.117481.
Xiang, Z., Y. Xu, W. Dong, Y. Zhao, and X. Chen. 2024. “Effects of Sliver
Nanoparticles on Nitrogen Removal by the Heterotrophic Nitrification-
Aerobic Denitrification Bacteria Zobellella sp. B307 and Their Toxicity
Mechanisms.” Marine Pollution Bulletin 203: 116381. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.marpolbul.2024.116381.
Xie, X., C. Mao, X. Liu, et al. 2017. “Synergistic Bacteria Killing Through
Photodynamic and Physical Actions of Graphene Oxide/Ag/Collagen
Coating.” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9: 26417–26428. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acsami.7b06702.
Xing, C., M. Luo, Q. Sheng, et al. 2024. “Silk Fabric Functionalized
by Nanosilver Enabling the Wearable Sensing for Biomechanics and
Biomolecules.” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 16: 51669–51678.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.4c10253.
Xing, Y., X. Liao, X. Liu, et al. 2021. “Characterization and Antimicrobial
Activity of Silver Nanoparticles Synthesized With the Peel Extract of
Mango.” Materials. 14.
Xu, Y., J. Zhang, F. Liang, M. Yin, and M. He. 2023. “Investigation of
Magnetron Sputtered Nano-Silver Coating on Titanium Surface With
Micro-Nanostructure.” Surfaces and Interfaces 38: 102770. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.surfin.2023.102770.
Yadav, R., and S. Preet. 2023. “Comparative Assessment of Green
and Chemically Synthesized Glutathione Capped Silver Nanoparticles
for Antioxidant, Mosquito Larvicidal and Eco-Toxicological Activities.”
Scientific Reports 13: 8152. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-35249-7.
Yan, Y., G. Li, M. Su, and H. Liang. 2024. “Scutellaria Baicalensis
Polysaccharide-Mediated Green Synthesis of Smaller Silver Nanoparticles
With Enhanced Antimicrobial and Antibiofilm Activity.” ACS Applied
Materials & Interfaces 16: 45289–45306. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.
4c07770.
Yang, D., Q. Liu, Y. Gao, et al. 2023. “Characterization of Silver
Nanoparticles Loaded Chitosan/Polyvinyl Alcohol Antibacterial Films for
Food Packaging.” Food Hydrocolloids 136: 108305. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.foodhyd.2022.108305.
Yang, J., G. Goksen, M. R. Khan, N. Ahmad, and W. Zhang. 2024. “Green-
Synthesized Silver Nanoparticles Immobilized on Graphene Oxide for
Fruit Preservation in Alginate Films.” Food Bioscience 62: 105127. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fbio.2024.105127.
Yang, J., X. Zhang, L. Chen, et al. 2022. “Antibacterial Aerogels With
Nano‑Silver Reduced In Situ by Carboxymethyl Cellulose for Fresh Meat
Preservation.” International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 213:
621–630. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.05.145.
Yang, S., P. Shang, K. Zhang, et al. 2024. “PBAT/PLA Food Packag-
ing Film Containing Sodium Dehydroacetate-Loaded Diatomite as an
Antibacterial Agent: Fabrication, Water-Gas Regulation and Long-Acting
Antimicrobial Mechanism.” Food Chemistry 446: 138880. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.foodchem.2024.138880.
Yang, W., Y. Ning, Z. Ren, S. Xu, J. Li, and L. Wang. 2024. “Fabricating
Anti-Ultraviolet and Antibacterial Films With Lower Water Solubility
From Chitosan, Glycerol and Aloe Emodin for Pork Preservation.”
Food Hydrocolloids 153: 110030. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2024.
110030.
Yang, Z., T. Wen, and F. Peng. 2025. “Integrating Green Synthesized
Lichenan-Silver Nanoparticles Into Lichenan/Chitosan Matrix for Photo-
Responsive Multifunctional Food Packaging Application.” Chemical
Engineering Journal 514: 163197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2025.163197.
Yin, C., X. Ding, Z. Lin, et al. 2024. “Preparation and Characteriza-
tion of Quercetin@ZIF-L/GO@AgNPs Nanocomposite Film for Room-
Temperature Strawberry Preservation.” Food Chemistry 450: 139411.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2024.139411.
You, H.-S., S.-J. Ryu, H.-Y. Lee, and J.-S. Baek. 2024. “Enhanced Antibac-
terial Activity of Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Loaded With Hot-Melt
Extruded Mulberry Leaf Silver Nanoparticles.” Colloids and Surfaces A:
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 699: 134522. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.colsurfa.2024.134522.
Yu, W., G. Wang, H. Chen, et al. 2025. “Sustained Antimicrobial Polymer
Film From γ-CD-MOF Humidity Switch for Fruit and Vegetable Preser-
vation.” Food Chemistry 479: 143856. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.
2025.143856.
Yu, Y., J. Zhou, Q. Chen, et al. 2024. “Self-Reinforced Multifunctional
Starch Nanocomposite Film for Litchi Fruit Postharvest Preservation.”
Chemical Engineering Journal 486: 150262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.
2024.150262.
Zanoni Souto, C. A., F. Gomes de Souza, K. Pal, et al. 2025. “Efficacy of
Silver Nanoparticle-Modified Bullfrog Skin as an Antimicrobial Wound
Dressing.” Journal of Molecular Structure 1321: 139961. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.molstruc.2024.139961.
Zhang, H., Y. Lu, R. Zhang, et al. 2024. “Synthesis of Multifunctional
Plasmonic Nanodarts Through One-End Deposition on Gold Nanobipyra-
mids for Tumor Organoid Ablation and Antimicrobial Applications.”
Advanced Functional Materials 34: 2405588. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.
202405588.
Zhang, L., S. Li, F. Tang, et al. 2025. “Preparation of Silver Nanoparticles
Through the Reduction of Straw-Extracted Lignin and Its Antibacterial
Hydrogel.” International Journal of Minerals, Metallurgy and Materials 32:
504–514. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12613-024-2978-5.
Zhang, L., D. Yu, Y. Gu, et al. 2024. “Green Halochromic Smart and
Active Packaging Materials Based on Chitosan Film Loading Nanopar-
ticles: Functionality, Physicochemical Properties and Application.” Food
Hydrocolloids 150: 109667. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2023.109667.
Zhang, Q., H. Zhou, P. Jiang, L. Wu, and X. Xiao. 2024. “Silver Nanopar-
ticles Facilitate Phage-Borne Resistance Gene Transfer in Planktonic
and Microplastic-Attached Bacteria.” Journal of Hazardous Materials 469:
133942. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.133942.
Zhang, X., X. Li, H. Zhang, et al. 2024. “Self-Supporting Noncovalent
Choline Alginate/Tannic Acid/Ag Antibacterial Films for Strawberry
Preservation.” International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 265:
130936. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.130936.
Zhang, Y., Z. Lin, Q. He, et al. 2022. “Enhanced Aqueous Stability
and Long-Acting Antibacterial of Silver-Based MOFs via Chitosan-
Crosslinked for Fruit Fresh-Keeping.” Applied Surface Science 571: 151351.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2021.151351.
22 of 23
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Zhang, Y., W. Song, S. Mao, Y. Qian, Q. Gui, and J. Du. 2025. “An Antibac-
terial and Antioxidant Food Packaging Film Based on Amphiphilic
Polypeptides-Resveratrol-Chitosan.” Small 21: 2408767. https://doi.org/
10.1002/smll.202408767.
Zheng, M., X. Wang, J. Zhang, et al. 2024. “Nature-Skin-Derived Multi-
Responsive E-Skin as On-Demand Drug-Delivery System Facilitated
Melanoma Postoperative Therapy.” Journal of Materials Science & Tech-
nology 188: 155–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmst.2023.12.010.
Zhou, Y., W. Wu, L. Wang, G. Goksen, and P. Shao. 2023. “Multifunctional
Pectin Films Based on Mussel-Inspired Modified 2D Ag Nanosheets
for Long-Lasting Antibacterial and Enhanced Barrier Properties.” Food
Hydrocolloids 137: 108331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2022.108331.
Zhu, X., Y. Zhu, K. Jia, et al. 2020. “A near-Infrared Light-Mediated
Antimicrobial Based on Ag/Ti3C2Tx for Effective Synergetic Antibac-
terial Applications.” Nanoscale 12: 19129–19141. https://doi.org/10.1039/
D0NR04925E.
Zhu, Y., X. Pang, W. Zhang, et al. 2025. “Green Synthesis of Silver Nanopar-
ticles Using Persimmon Polysaccharides for Enhanced Polysaccharide-
Based Film Performance.” Food Research International 209: 116252.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2025.116252.
Zhuo, M., C. Liu, Q. Wang, et al. 2025. “Catharanthus roseus Extract-
Assisted Silver Nanoparticles Chitosan Films With High Antioxidant
and Antimicrobial Properties for Fresh Food Preservation.” International
Journal of Biological Macromolecules 309: 142771. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijbiomac.2025.142771.
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 2026
23 of 23
 15414337, 2026, 1, Downloaded from https://ift.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1541-4337.70366 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License