Journal Pre-proof
A
synergistic
piezo-photocatalytic
strategy
via
BaTiO3
heterophase homojunctions for MRSA-infected diabetic wound
therapy
Lei Qian, Han Lin, Min Wu, Zheng Fang, Jiawei Li, Yao Han,
Jinxia Zhai, Peng Yu, Cairong Xiao, Chengyun Ning
PII:
S1385-8947(26)06111-5
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2026.178650
Reference:
CEJ 178650
To appear in:
Received date:
10 December 2025
Revised date:
29 May 2026
Accepted date:
20 June 2026
Please cite this article as: L. Qian, H. Lin, M. Wu, et al., A synergistic piezo-photocatalytic
strategy via BaTiO3 heterophase homojunctions for MRSA-infected diabetic wound
therapy, (2026), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2026.178650
This is a PDF of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as
the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability. This version
will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in
its final form. As such, this version is no longer the Accepted Manuscript, but it is
not yet the definitive Version of Record; we are providing this early version to give
early visibility of the article. Please note that Elsevier’s sharing policy for the Published
Journal Article applies to this version, see: https://www.elsevier.com/about/policies-and-
standards/sharing#4-published-journal-article.
Please
also
note
that,
during
the
production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2026 Published by Elsevier B.V.

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
A 
Synergistic 
Piezo-Photocatalytic 
Strategy 
via 
BaTiO3 
Heterophase 
Homojunctions for MRSA-Infected Diabetic Wound Therapy 
Lei Qian1, Han Lin1, Min Wu, Zheng Fang, Jiawei Li, Yao Han, Jinxia Zhai*, Peng 
Yu*, Cairong Xiao*, Chengyun Ning* 
L. Qian, H. Lin, J. Li, Y. Han, P. Yu, C. Ning 
National Engineering Research Center for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, 
School of Materials Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, 
Guangzhou 510641, China 
E-mail: imyup@scut.edu.cn, imcyning@scut.edu.cn 
M. Wu 
School of Food Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, 
Guangzhou 510641, China 
Z. Fang 
School of Materials and Chemical Engineering, Biomass 3D Printing Materials 
Research Center, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, 
Guangdong, China 
J. Zhai 
College of Medical Instruments, Guangdong Food and Drug Vocational College, 
Guangzhou 510520, China 
E-mail: zhaijinxia@gdyzy.edu.cn 
C. Xiao 
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Key Laboratory of Tropical Biological Resources 
of Ministry of Education, Hainan University, Haikou 570228, China 
E-mail: 996867@hainanu.edu.cn 
Funding: The National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 52533013, 
U22A20160, U21A2055, 52422108, 52472283), Medical Research Foundation of 
Guangdong Province (B2025659), Youth S&T Talent Support Programme of 
Guangdong Provincial Association for Science and Technology (SKXRC2025049), 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2025ZYGXZR102), Key-
Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province (No. 
2024B0101080001), Open Foundation Project of Hubei Province Key Laboratory 
(2024KQHM08). 
Keywords: heterophase homojunctions, piezo-photocatalytic, core-shell barium 
titanate, diabetic wound 
Abstract:  
The treatment of diabetic wound infections is severely challenged by biofilm-
associated antibiotic resistance. Although photocatalytic generation of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) provides a promising antibacterial strategy, the performance of 
conventional semiconductors remains constrained by rapid charge carrier 
recombination. Herein, we report a piezoelectrically enhanced photodynamic system 
based on a unique tetragonal@amorphous heterophase homojunction within core–
shell barium titanate nanoparticles (CSB-120). Under ultrasonic excitation, the 
piezoelectric field generated by the tetragonal core effectively drives charge 
separation and migration in the amorphous shell, leading to markedly enhanced ROS 
production. 
This 
piezoelectric–photocatalytic 
synergy, 
delivers 
exceptional 
antibacterial efficiencies of 99.72% and 97.17% against Staphylococcus aureus and 
Escherichia coli, respectively. Furthermore, the built-in electric field at the 
homojunction interface, arising from the Fermi-level difference between the two 
phases, promotes angiogenesis in vivo and accelerates the repair of infected diabetic 
wounds. This study pioneers the application of heterophase homojunction 
piezoelectric materials for diabetic wound management, offering a multimodal 
therapeutic strategy that simultaneously combats antibiotic-resistant bacteria and 
facilitates tissue regeneration. 
1. Introduction.  
Diabetic ulcers are among the most prevalent and persistent complications in 
diabetic patients, accounting for approximately one-third of total diabetes-related 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
healthcare expenditures.[1-3] A hallmark of diabetic wounds is the sustained 
hyperglycemic microenvironment, which increases susceptibility to bacterial 
infections.[4-7] It is estimated that 40%-80% of diabetic ulcers eventually become 
infected, with bacterial colonization recognized as a key factor impairing wound 
healing.[8-10] Pathogenic bacteria trigger chronic inflammation at the infection site, 
which disrupts angiogenesis and further delays tissue repair.[11-13] Therefore, there is 
an urgent need to develop advanced therapeutic platforms capable of rapidly 
eliminating bacteria, mitigating inflammation, and promoting angiogenesis in chronic 
diabetic wounds. 
Nanomaterial-based antibacterial strategies, such as photodynamic, photothermal, 
and photocatalytic therapies, have shown promise in treating bacterial infections.[14-16] 
Conventional photosensitizers, including titanium dioxide (TiO2) [17,18] and zinc oxide 
(ZnO)[19] can be activated by visible light to exert antibacterial effects. However, their 
wide bandgaps (≈3.2 eV) limit visible-light absorption, and rapid recombination of 
photogenerated charge carriers severely restricts their redox efficiency.[20,21] To 
address these limitations, various strategies have been explored to enhance the 
photocatalytic performance of semiconductor nanomaterials. Heterojunctions 
constructed from materials with different work functions can modulate the separation 
and migration of electrons and holes, thereby promoting photocatalytic ROS 
generation 
for 
antibacterial 
applications.[22,23] 
Several 
semiconductor-based 
heterojunctions, such as MoS2/TiO2,[24] g-C3N4/TiO2,[25] CuS/MXene[26] and 
Ti3C2/FeS[27] have been developed to improve photocatalytic performance. 
Nevertheless, the dissimilar chemical compositions and mismatched lattice structures 
at conventional heterojunction interfaces often lead to suboptimal charge separation 
efficiency. 
In contrast, heterophase homojunctions composed of materials with similar 
chemical compositions but distinct crystalline phases offer a promising solution to the 
challenge of charge carrier recombination.[28,29] Their uniform composition and near-

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
perfect lattice matching facilitate efficient charge transfer across the interface. For 
instance, anatase-TiO2/rutile-TiO2 heterophase homojunctions have been shown to 
promote rapid charge separation and migration by directing the transfer of 
photogenerated electrons from the rutile to the anatase phase.[29,30] Similarly, the 
group of Wenping Hu constructed a COK/MIL-125 heterophase homojunction within 
a metal-organic framework, which significantly enhanced interfacial carrier separation. 
[31] 
Compared 
to 
conventional 
heterojunctions, 
heterophase 
homojunction 
photocatalysts exhibit superior electron-hole separation efficiency due to their lattice 
coherence, identical composition, and continuous bonding at the phase interface, 
which collectively prolong carrier lifetime and facilitate charge transport. These 
attributes highlight the great potential of heterophase homojunctions in antibacterial 
applications.[29,32,33] 
While heterophase homojunctions significantly improve photogenerated charge 
separation and prolong carrier lifetimes due to their excellent lattice matching and 
continuous interfacial bonding, standalone photocatalysis remains constrained by 
fundamental limitations.[29] In the intricate microenvironment of infected wounds, the 
restricted tissue penetration of light and the inherent thermodynamic recombination of 
photogenerated electron-hole pairs severely limit the overall yield of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS). [13,34]This hinders the complete eradication of robust biofilms and 
drug-resistant bacteria. To break through the charge separation bottleneck of single-
mode photocatalysis, the introduction of piezoelectric materials to supply an 
additional physical driving force is a highly promising approach. Under external 
mechanical stress—such as highly penetrating ultrasound—piezoelectric materials 
establish a powerful built-in piezoelectric field. This spontaneously generated field 
acts as a continuous driving force that forcefully drives electrons and holes in 
opposite directions, drastically inhibiting carrier recombination.[35,36] Therefore, 
synergizing the piezoelectric field with the highly efficient interfacial transport 
properties of heterophase homojunctions offers a fundamental solution to the high 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
charge recombination rates that plague traditional semiconductor photocatalysts. 
In this work, we designed a tetragonal phase@amorphous phase core-shell 
BaTiO₃ structure (denoted as CSB) as a model heterophase homojunction. The 
tetragonal phase confers piezoelectric properties, while the amorphous shell, rich in 
oxygen defects, introduces additional energy levels. Under ultrasound excitation, the 
piezoelectric field generated by the tetragonal core promotes the separation and 
migration of photogenerated carriers, drastically enhancing ROS production (Figure 
1a). Under combined ultrasound and NIR irradiation, CSB achieved high antibacterial 
rates of 97.17% and 99.72% against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA) and Escherichia coli (E. coli), respectively. Moreover, the Fermi level 
alignment between the tetragonal and amorphous phases creates a built-in electric 
field at the homojunction interface. This field can augment the endogenous electric 
field of the wound, thereby stimulating angiogenesis and accelerating the healing of 
non-healing diabetic wounds (Figure 1b).  
 
 
Figure 1. (a) A schematic diagram of the energy band structure during the 
transformation of tetragonal barium titanate into heterophase homojunctions CSB 
nanostructures. (b) A piezoelectric-enhanced photodynamic therapeutic strategy based 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
on heterophase homojunctions CSB nanoparticles was developed to effectively treat 
MRSA-induced diabetic ulcers. 
2. Results and discussion 
2.1 Characterization of Core-shell BaTiO3(CSB) nanoparticles (NPs) 
CSB is synthesized via high-temperature approach with Nitrogen protection.  
The sintering duration strongly influences the thickness of the surface amorphous 
layer on the nanoparticles. Therefore, we examined the crystal structure evolution of 
CSB nanoparticles after heat treatment for 90, 120, and 150 min, which were 
designated as CSB-90, CSB-120, and CSB-150, respectively. The TEM and X-ray 
diffraction (XRD) were utilized to examine the crystal structure. As shown in Figure 
2a and Figure S1(Supporting Information), unlike the well-defined lattice fringes 
observed in barium titanate nanoparticles, CSB-120 exhibits an amorphous surface 
layer lacking crystalline order, while distinct lattice fringes are still visible within the 
particle interior. These features confirm the formation of a heterophase core-shell 
structure in CSB-120. The formation of amorphous layer may be related to the 
introduction of oxygen vacancies (Vo).[37] The TEM revealed a 0.283nm crystal lattice 
spacing in BTO (Figure S1, Supporting Information), matching the (110) crystal plane. 
And the crystal lattice spacing of CSB-120 (Figure 2a) measures 0.279 nm, which is 
marginally reduced compared to BTO. This observation implies that the presence of 
Vo has induced a contraction in the crystal lattice spacing.[38] As seen in Figure 2d, the 
XRD peaks of all samples correspond to the tetragonal phase of BTO, which are 
characterized by non-centrosymmetric crystal structure. The splitting diffraction peak 
at 45° indicating that BTO had a good tetragonal phase structure. After the 
introduction of amorphous layer, the splitting diffraction peak becomes blurred, 
suggesting a mixture of tetragonal and amorphous phases.[39] The EDS image (Figure 
2b) exhibited that thermal reduction does not change the elemental composition of the 
nanoparticles. The SEM was used to examine the surface characteristics of the 
nanoparticles. Both BTO (Figure S2, Supporting Information) and CSB-120 (Figure 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
2c) consist of NPs in size of 100-200 nm with certain level of agglomeration. This is 
consistent with the result of particle size distribution test (Figure S3, Supporting 
Information).  
 
Figure 2. Morphology and structural characterization of CSB NPs. TEM images (a) 
and EDS-mapping image (b) of CSB-120. (c) SEM images of CSB-120. (d) XRD 
pattern  of NPs. (e) XPS peak of scan spectra. (f) XPS peak of O 1s (i) and Ti 2p (ii).  
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted to determine the surface 
chemical composition of the samples. Figure 2e shows the XPS survey spectra, 
confirming the presence of Ba, Ti, and O in the samples, with no detectable 
byproducts from NaBH4, such as B or Na. As shown in Figure 2f, the high-resolution 
O 1s spectra of the samples (i) can be fitted with three Gaussian peaks, which are 
lattice oxygen (529.6 eV), oxygen defects (531.2 eV), and surface-adsorbed oxygen 
(532.4 eV).[40]This confirms that the defective states in the amorphous layer on the 
CSB surface stemmed from oxygen vacancies (Ovs), possibly resulting from the 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
reaction between active hydrogen from NaBH4 and lattice oxygen during thermal 
reduction.[41] Ti elements (ii) exhibited peaks at 464.3 (2p1/2) and 458.5 eV (2p3/2). 
Peaks for Ti4+ were located at 458.1 and 464.4 eV, while peaks at 458.8 and 462.6 eV 
corresponded to Ti3+. The reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ in neighboring Ti ions led to the 
generation of Ovs to preserve local charge equilibrium.[42]The above results 
demonstrate that both heterophase and homogeneous barium titanate piezoelectric 
nanoparticles were successfully synthesized through heat treatment. 
2.2 Piezo-photocatalytic mechanism of CSB 
Owing to their similar chemical composition and well-matched crystal structures, 
the interface between the heterophase and homojunctions can effectively modulate the 
transport behavior of interfacial charge carriers. An electrochemical workstation was 
applied to measure the photoresponsive current of the sample and EIS. Figure 3a 
summarizes the photoresponsive current density of samples. CSB-120 generated the 
photoresponsive current density of 85.3 nA/cm2, which was much higher than BTO 
(57.7 nA/cm2). It was indicated that the amorphous structure was beneficial to the 
separation of e-/h+ pairs. Figure 3b shows EIS of different NPs, and the amorphous 
structure contributes to a reduction in the electrical impedance, thereby facilitating the 
charge transfer. The piezoelectric property of CSB-120 was measured by 
piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM). As shown in Figure S4a (Supporting 
Information), CSB-120 showed a clear spheric morphology with a size of about 100-
200 nm, which was consistent with those in SEM. The amplitude image (Figure S4b, 
Supporting Information) and phase image (Figure S4c, Supporting Information) of 
CSB-120 had clear outlines and matched well with the morphological image. It was 
indicated that the CSB-120 had a strong piezoelectric response. The piezoelectric 
nature of CSB-120 was evidenced by two key measurements. First, an applied electric 
field induced a clear 180° phase shift in the output signal (Figure 3c), demonstrating 
the switching of local polarization. Second, the material exhibited a classic butterfly 
hysteresis loop under cycling voltages of ±10 V (Figure 3d), confirming its inherent 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
piezoelectricity. The above results indicate that the heterophase homojunction 
interface in CSB exhibits more efficient electron–hole separation and lower interfacial 
impedance. As illustrated in the Figure S5 (Supporting Information), the effective d33 
values for BTO and CSB-120 were measured to be 25.9 pm/V and 31.2 pm/V, 
respectively. These data confirm that both materials possess robust piezoelectric 
properties. Combined with the PFM results presented in Figure 3c–d, we propose that 
the enhanced piezoelectric response in CSB-120 is attributed to the introduction of 
surface oxygen vacancies, which induces local distortion of the tetragonal lattice. 
As shown in Figure 3e, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy 
was utilized to intuitively confirm the formation of Vo defects. Compared with other 
samples, the signal of CSB-120 was obviously intensified (Figure S6, Supporting 
Information). This may be attributed to the fact that the concentration of oxygen 
defects increases with prolonged reaction time; however, excessively long reaction 
times may lead to the interaction of oxygen defects with other ions, such as Ti4+, 
resulting in their consumption. To elucidate the origin of the high piezocatalytic 
efficacy of CSB-120, UV-Vis diffuse reflectance absorption spectra were recorded 
(Figure 3f). The band gap (Eg) was derived from the Kubelka-Munk function:  
αhυ = A (hυ− Eg)2 
where α, hυ, and A are the absorption coefficient, photon energy, and light 
absorption coefficient, respectively. CSB-120 exhibited a narrowed band gap of 3.19 
eV compared to 3.56 eV for pristine BTO (Figure 3g). This reduction is likely 
attributable to the amorphous structure and the presence of oxygen vacancies (OVs), 
which can promote the formation of Ti3+/Ti4+ valence alternation to suppress electron-
hole recombination. Furthermore, a smaller band gap facilitates easier energy band 
bending under mechanical stress, potentially leading to enhanced charge separation 
and ROS generation. 
To quantify ROS production, we first assessed the generation of singlet oxygen 
(¹O₂) by the samples under ultrasound (US) irradiation using the chemical probe 1,3-

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
diphenylisobenzofuran (DPBF). DPBF can be oxidized by 1O2, showing a reduction 
in absorption intensity (420 nm). As shown in Figure 3h, the absorption intensity of 
the CSB-120 decreased significantly overtime, while the other groups only decreased 
slightly (Figure 3i), indicating that the CSB-120 can produce more 1O2. Then the 
generation of superoxide anions (•O2
-) of samples was measured using nitro blue 
tetrazole (NBT). The presence of superoxide anions (•O2
-) is detected by 
Nitrotetrazolium Blue (NBT), which reacts with •O2
- to yield a blue-colored 
compound that absorbs maximally at 525 nm. As shown in Figure 3j, the generation 
of •O2
- in CSB-120 increased significantly. This is consistent with the results of ESR 
(Figure S7, Supporting Information). 
To address this comment and further elucidate the underlying mechanism, density 
functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed to systematically investigate the 
electronic structures of pristine BTO and the CSB heterophase homojunction 
containing oxygen vacancies. Models of pristine BTO and CSB with a surface defect 
layer enriched in oxygen vacancies were constructed (Figure S8a, Supporting 
Information). As shown in the calculated DOS (Figure S8b, Supporting Information), 
compared with pristine BTO with a relatively wide bandgap, the introduction of 
oxygen vacancies in CSB induces new defect states (impurity bands) near the Fermi 
level. These additional electronic states effectively narrow the bandgap, which is 
consistent with the bandgap reduction observed in Fig. 3g (from 3.56 eV to 3.19 eV). 
To further verify the energy level alignment and interfacial interactions between the 
crystalline core (base layer) and the amorphous shell (defect layer), the charge density 
difference (Figure S8c, Supporting Information) and planar-averaged charge density 
difference (Figure S8d, supporting information) were calculated. The results clearly 
show that, upon the introduction of oxygen vacancies, significant charge 
redistribution occurs at the interface between the base layer and the defect layer (blue 
and green regions represent electron depletion and accumulation, respectively). The 
charge density fluctuation profile in Figure S8d (Supporting Information) further 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
quantifies this phenomenon, indicating directional charge transfer and accumulation at 
the interface. This interfacial charge transfer, driven by Fermi level differences, 
directly demonstrates the formation of a strong built-in electric field at the CSB 
heterojunction interface, which serves as the fundamental driving force for the 
efficient separation and migration of charge carriers under ultrasound excitation. The 
specific mechanism was depicted in Figure 3k. Under near-infrared (NIR) light 
irradiation, CSB nanoparticles generates free electrons; however, their short lifetime 
leads to rapid recombination with holes,  
 
Figure 3. Mechanism of enhanced photocatalytic activity of CSB nanoparticles via 
Piezoelectric Effect. (a) photocurrent response curve. (b) EIS spectra of samples. (c) 
Piezo-responsive phase curve and (d) amplitude curve of CSB-120. (e) EPR spectra of 
samples. (f) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra. (g) Kubelka-Munk plots via UV-Vis 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. (h, i) 1O2 detection of samples detected by DPBF. (j) 
•O2
- detection of samples detected by NBT. (k) Mechanism diagram of enhanced 
piezo-photocatalytic activity of core-shell BTO NPs. 
resulting in limited catalytic activity. Upon ultrasound excitation, cavitation induces 
transient high voltages that generate a built-in electric field within CSB-120, 
effectively promoting the separation of electron-hole pairs. Meanwhile, the oxygen-
deficient amorphous layer on the surface of CSB-120 forms a core-shell 
heterojunction with the crystalline BaTiO3 core, narrowing the bandgap and 
facilitating the transfer of photoexcited electrons to the surface, thereby enhancing 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. In addition, surface oxygen vacancies 
further contribute to ROS formation under external field stimulation. Consequently, 
these synergistic effects markedly enhance the piezoelectric–photocatalytic activity of 
CSB-120. 
2.3 In vitro antibacterial Properties of CSB NPs 
The immune system of individuals with diabetes was compromised, resulting in 
poorer resistance in the body and increased susceptibility to bacterial infections in 
wounds. To evaluate the antimicrobial properties of CSB-120, we selected MRSA and 
E. coli for antimicrobial experiments. Figure 4a,b,d. reveal that the combined 
application of ultrasound and near-infrared irradiation (US+NIR) significantly 
enhanced the antibacterial performance of CSB-120. According to plate counting and 
bacterial viability staining, this treatment resulted in high antibacterial rates of 97.17% 
against MRSA and 99.72% against E. coli. The SEM observations (Figure 4c) showed 
that the bacteria on the blank, US+NIR and CSB-120 groups maintained their 
relatively intact structures, while the CSB-120 under US and NIR displayed 
significant concavity and deformation. Intracellular ROS levels in CSB-120 treated 
bacteria were assessed using DCFH-DA staining. With strong green fluorescence was 
detected in the CSB-120+US+NIR group (Figure S9, Supporting Information), 
indicating that CSB-120 could confirm robust ROS production under dual-trigger 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
conditions. The remarkable antibacterial efficacy observed in the CSB-120 under US 
and NIR group in this study may be due to the ROS. The potent antibacterial action, 
largely attributable to ROS-induced damage, highlights the potential of CSB-120 
under the US+NIR to support healing in diabetic wounds by reducing bacterial load 
and moderating inflammatory responses. To further elucidate the antibacterial 
mechanism of CSB-120, L-histidine and Tiron were employed as selective scavengers 
for singlet oxygen (¹O₂) and superoxide anion (O₂⁻), respectively. As evidenced by the 
plate colony counting images and the corresponding antibacterial efficiency data, 
CSB-120 exhibited a bactericidal rate of 98.2% against MRSA under the synergistic 
stimulation of US and NIR irradiation. Upon the introduction of L-histidine or Tiron, 
the 
antibacterial 
efficiencies 
of 
the 
CSB+US+NIR+L-histidine 
and 
CSB+US+NIR+Tiron groups decreased to 72.4% and 61.3%, respectively. Notably, 
when both scavengers were simultaneously added, the antibacterial rate of the 
CSB+US+NIR+L-histidine+Tiron group sharply declined to 8.9%. Collectively, these 
results indicate that the antibacterial activity of CSB-120 under US and NIR co-
stimulation is predominantly mediated by the generation of ¹O₂ and O₂⁻ radicals, 
highlighting their synergistic contribution to the bactericidal effect （Figure S10, 
Supporting Information）. 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
 
Figure 4. In vitro Antibacterial efficacy of CSB-120 against E. coli and MRSA under 
various conditions. (a) Representative photographic images of bacterial colonies. (b) 
Fluorescent images distinguishing live (green) and dead (red) bacteria. (c) SEM 
images of bacteria morphology. (d) The quantitative antibacterial rates derived from 
plate counts. Data are presented as mean ± SD (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 
0.001). 
2.4 In vitro effect of CSB-120 on angiogenesis 
As shown in the figure S11(Supporting Information), live/dead staining and 
CCK-8 assays demonstrated that CSB-120 concentrations ranging from 50 μg/mL to 1 
mg/mL exhibited no significant cytotoxicity compared with the blank group. In 
contrast, at 1.5 mg/mL and 2.0 mg/mL, the number of viable cells decreased markedly, 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
which can be attributed to the inhibitory effect of excessively high CSB-120 
concentrations on HUVEC proliferation. Consequently, the reduced VEGF expression 
observed at 1.5 mg/mL CSB-120 relative to 1 mg/mL is primarily due to the mild 
cytotoxicity induced at this higher concentration. To investigate the influence of CSB-
120 on angiogenesis in vitro, a 2D matrigel assay was used to examine tube formation. 
Compared with the tube-like structures formed by the interconnection of a few cells in 
other groups, a well-connected vascular network was promoted in the 1 mg/mL group 
(Figure 5a and d), this suggests that wireless electrical stimulation significantly 
accelerated and enhanced the self-assembly capability of endothelial cells into 
vascular constructs. Given the critical role of VEGF in promoting angiogenesis, 
endothelial cell proliferation, and functional vessel formation, we further assessed its 
expression via immunofluorescence staining. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed 
intensely amplified red fluorescence signals corresponding to VEGF in the 1 mg/mL 
group, with distinct intracellular localization and accumulation (Figure 5b), this result 
indicates that the treatment elicits a potent pro-angiogenic response. 
The piezoelectricity of BaTiO3 is intrinsically linked to its crystalline symmetry. 
The tetragonal phase exhibits piezoelectric properties because the Ti atom is displaced 
from the center of the TiO6 octahedron, leading to non-coincident centers of positive 
and negative charges (non-centrosymmetric structure). In contrast, the cubic phase 
possesses a centrosymmetric structure and is therefore non-piezoelectric. Given their 
identical chemical composition, cubic-phase barium titanate serves as an ideal control 
to isolate the biological effects of electrical signals from those of the material's 
chemistry. As shown in Figure S12 (Supporting Information), the number of tubes and 
total tube length in the cubic phase BTO group showed no significant difference 
compared to the blank group. However, these parameters were significantly lower 
than those observed in the CSB-120 group. These findings provide robust evidence 
that the superior pro-angiogenic performance of CSB-120 is not merely a result of its 
chemical components but is specifically attributed to the localized electrical 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
stimulation provided by the built-in electric field at the heterophase homojunction 
interface. 
Functioning as a critical second messenger in endothelial cells, intracellular 
calcium ([Ca2+]i) regulates key events including eNOS activation and the release of 
vasoactive factors. [43]As shown in Figure 5c, the higher the content of CSB-120 
nanoparticles, the more the intracellular distribution of [Ca2+]i increased, implying 
that the wireless electrical stimulation via CSB-120 could elevate the supplement of 
[Ca2+]i from other sources like endoplasmic reticulum storage and extracellular milieu. 
Statistical analysis showed that 1 mg/mL group achieved the highest [Ca2+]i level 
(Figure 5e), demonstrating the superior capacity of this electrical stimulation based on 
CSB-120 to modulate calcium signaling and subsequently activate downstream 
signaling pathways for endothelial cell regulation. Since angiogenesis involves 
complex, multi-stage signaling, we further analyzed key angiogenic genes via qRT-
PCR. The results revealed that the expression of VEGF and eNOS was significantly 
upregulated in the 1 mg/mL group (Figure 5f). Compared with the other two 
concentrations (0.5 mg/mL and 1.5 mg/mL), the 1.0 mg/mL CSB-120 group exhibited 
the highest VEGF expression level and protein content. These results demonstrate that 
CSB-120 can effectively promote angiogenesis owing to the built-in electric field 
generated at the interface between the amorphous layer and the tetragonal phase. 
However, the diminished pro-angiogenic effect observed at 1.5 mg/mL may be 
attributed to the certain cytotoxicity induced by an excessively high concentration of 
CSB-120 (Figure S13, Supporting Information). It has been reported that eNOS 
functions as a rate-limiting regulator in nitric oxide (NO) synthesis, and the eNOS/NO 
pathway was indispensable for the improvement of endothelial function, regulation of 
angiogenesis, and promotion of vascular maturation. As shown in Figure S14a and b 
(Supporting Information), cells treated with 1 mg/mL CSB-120 exhibited the highest 
intracellular NO fluorescence intensity. Quantitative analysis using a multifunctional 
microplate reader further confirmed that the NO concentration reached a maximum of 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
4.23 μM at this concentration (Figure S14c, Supporting Information). This optimal 
effect can be attributed to the mild cytotoxicity induced by 1.5 mg/mL CSB-120 
(Figure S11), whereas 0.5 mg/mL CSB-120 failed to provide sufficient electrical 
stimulation to substantially promote NO production in HUVECs. Based on these in 
vitro findings demonstrating that CSB-120 promotes angiogenesis via wireless 
electrical stimulation, we therefore transitioned to an in vivo evaluation of its 
antibacterial efficacy and histocompatibility. This was assessed using a full-thickness 
skin defect model with bacterial infection. 
 
Figure 5. Effect of CSB-120 on angiogenesis in vitro. (a) Representative fluorescence 
micrographs of endothelial tube formation. (b) Immunofluorescence staining for 
VEGF (red)，with cytoskeletal F-actin and nucleus counterstained in Actin-Tracker 
Green (green) and DAPI (blue). (c) Intracellular [Ca2+]i fluorescence imaging. (d) 
Quantitative analysis of tube branch relative fluorescence intensity. (e) Quantitative 
analysis of relative [Ca2+]i fluorescence intensity. (f) Expressions levels of the 
angiogenesis-related genes in HUVECs after 48 hours of culture. Data are presented 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
as mean ± SD (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 or ***p < 0.001). 
2.5 In vivo diabetic wound healing 
To investigate the translational potential of CSB-120, which exhibits excellent 
antibacterial properties and piezoelectric stimulation-enhanced healing, an in vivo 
full-thickness skin defect infection model was employed to assess its combined 
wound repair and anti-infection capabilities (Figure 6a). The previously prepared 
CSB-SA hydrogel was used as a carrier to deliver the nanoparticles onto the wound 
surface.  
Sodium alginate was employed to construct nanocomposite hydrogel dressing, 
leveraging 
its 
straightforward 
preparation, 
cost-effectiveness, 
and 
superior 
biocompatibility.[44,45] We have clarified the first use of CSB-SA and CSB-SA-3 in the 
revised manuscript to avoid ambiguity. In this study, “CSB-SA-1, CSB-SA-2, and 
CSB-SA-3” correspond to CSB concentrations of 0.5 mg/mL, 1.0 mg/mL, and 1.5 
mg/mL, respectively. The nanocomposite hydrogel, termed CSB-SA, was prepared by 
blending CSB-120 nanoparticles with sodium alginate, followed by the addition of D-
(+)-gluconic acid δ-lactone (GDL) to gradually lower the pH and crosslinking with 
Ca2+ ions released from the dispersion of CaCO3.[46]
 The morphologies of CSB-SA 
hydrogels were characterized by FE-SEM. The SA hydrogel and CSB-SA hydrogels, 
as depicted in Figure S15 (Supporting Information), display uniform porous 
architectures characteristic of freeze-dried hydrogels. EDS in Figure S4c (Supporting 
Information) confirms the successful incorporation of CSB NPs into the hydrogel. 
The FT-IR spectrum in Figure S16 (Supporting Information) reveals that the 
characteristic peak of CSB NPs is obscured in the CSB-SA hydrogel by SA hydrogel. 
The peaks of SA hydrogel largely overshadow the characteristic peaks of CSB NPs in 
CSB-SA hydrogel.[47] Rheological test (Figure S17a, Supporting Information) 
indicates that across the frequency range of 0.1–10 Hz, the storage modulus (G′) 
exceeded the loss modulus (G″) for all samples, suggesting the stability of the 
hydrogels. Furthermore, Figure S17b (Supporting Information) demonstrates that the 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
CSB-SA hydrogel retains its rapid gelation capability even after the incorporation of 
CSB NPs.  
As shown in the figure S18 (Supporting Information), the nanocomposite 
hydrogel exhibited a burst release of Ca²⁺ within the first 1–4 h, followed by a plateau 
that was reached at approximately 24 h. The final cumulative release was about 0.12 
mM. Previous studies have indicated that such a low concentration of calcium ions 
exerts a negligible effect on angiogenesis. As shown in the figure S19 (Supporting 
information), the CSB–SA hydrogel exhibits a relatively slow degradation rate in 
ultrapure water, reaching approximately 11.2% by day 5, whereas under enzymatic 
conditions, the degradation rate increases to 37.8% over the same period. In addition, 
compared with conventional gauze dressings, the composite hydrogel achieves a 
swelling ratio of ~30% within the first 2 h. These results indicate that the hydrogel 
system can effectively prevent the burst release of CSB nanoparticles or their 
premature clearance by wound exudates at the early stage, while enabling sustained 
and controlled release of the nanoparticles as the hydrogel matrix gradually degrades. 
On day 3, bacteria harvested from wound sites were cultured on agar plates for 24 
hours. Imaging and quantification of the resulting colonies demonstrated markedly 
fewer bacteria in the CSB-SA+US+NIR group, which achieved a high antibacterial 
rate of 89.8% (Figure 6c, d.), indicating its robust antibacterial efficacy. We record the 
area and inflammation stage of wound to investigate the healing process. Macroscopic 
evaluation of the wounds on day 3 revealed abscess formation in the control groups, 
whereas wounds in the CSB-SA+US+NIR group were drier and had begun to form 
scabs (Figure 6b). Throughout the study, this treatment group demonstrated a 
significantly accelerated healing rate. By day 12, these wounds were nearly fully 
closed (98.2% healing rate), in stark contrast to the unhealed, eschar-covered wounds 
observed in the other groups (Figure 6b, e, f.). 
To elucidate the histological features underlying the enhanced healing, skin tissue 
sections from the wound site were analyzed using H&E and Masson's trichrome 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
staining on day 7. Examination of H&E-stained sections indicated substantial 
inflammatory cell accumulation in the wound areas of certain groups (Figure 6g). 
However, in the treatment group, almost no expression of inflammatory cells was 
observed near the wound area, while a large number of fibroblasts were collected and 
entered the proliferation stage in the wound area. By day 12, histological assessment 
revealed superior tissue regeneration in the CSB-SA+US+NIR group, characterized 
by a narrower granulation tissue band and enhanced hair follicle neogenesis compared 
to other treatments. This group also displayed more substantial collagen deposition 
(Figure 6h), facilitating effective tissue remodeling. These in vivo observations align 
with prior cellular experiments, confirming the material's capacity to stimulate 
collagen production under the US+NIR irradiation, thereby accelerating wound 
closure. Furthermore, H&E staining of major organs detected no significant 
pathological damage, inflammation, or other abnormalities across all groups (Figure 
S20, Supporting Information), indicating a favorable biosafety profile. 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
 
Figure 6. In vivo evaluation of wound healing efficacy. (a) Schematic timeline of the 
therapeutic regimen. (b) Representative photographic documentation of wounds in 
different groups on days 0, 3, 7, and 12. (c) Plates counting and (d) corresponding 
quantitative analysis from wounds harvested on day 3. (e) Tracing of wound 
boundaries. (f) Quantitative of the relative wound area over the treatment course. The 
H&E (g) and Masson's trichrome staining (h) of the wound area after 7 and 12 days of 
treatment. Data are presented as mean ± SD (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001). 
The healing of diabetic wounds is often significantly impeded by elevated blood 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
sugar levels, which would contribute to chronic inflammation and restricted vascular 
growth. Using a few specific markers like CD31, iNOS and Arg-1 to assess vascular  
 
Figure 7. Histological evaluation of wound healing following CSB-120 treatment. 
Representative immunofluorescence images of (a, b) CD31, (c, d) iNOS, and (e, f) 
Arg-1 in wound tissues on days 7 and 12. The quantification analysis of (g) CD31, (h) 
iNOS and (i) Arg-1 at days 7 and 12. Data are presented as mean ± SD (*p < 0.05, 
**p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001). 
regeneration and inflammatory responses. Notably, the CSB-SA+US+NIR group 
displayed significantly higher CD31 expression levels on days 7 and 12 compared to 
all other groups (Figure 7a,b,g), indicating that the treatment effectively stimulates 
angiogenesis, thereby enhancing vascular density in the regenerating tissue. As 
depicted in Figures 7c,e,h, all groups exhibited inflammatory expression (indicated by 
iNOS, green) during the early stages of diabetic wound healing at day 7. Notably, the 
CSB-SA+US+NIR group demonstrated significantly lower levels of inflammation 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
compared to the other groups, while displaying higher levels of Arg-1 expression. On 
the 12th day, the level of iNOS expression in the treatment group showed a 
considerable decrease by the expression of Arg-1 increased (Figures 7d,f,i.), 
indicating that the CSB-SA can effectively alleviate the inflammatory response of 
diabetic wounds. This in vivo evidence, consistent with our in vitro data, confirms that 
the CSB-SA+US+NIR treatment promotes the healing of diabetic wounds by 
concurrently dampening inflammation and stimulating angiogenesis. 
3. Conclusion 
In summary, we successfully synthesized core-shell CSB nanoparticles featuring 
an oxygen-deficient amorphous shell through a simple and controllable approach, and 
further developed a piezoelectric nanoparticle-based wound dressing with both 
antibacterial and angiogenic functions using a sodium alginate (SA) hydrogel as the 
carrier. The introduction of oxygen vacancies led to the formation of an amorphous 
layer on the CSB surface, increasing the carrier concentration and enhancing ROS 
generation under external electric field stimulation. The built-in electric field of the 
CSB core effectively facilitated electron-hole pair separation, while the heterophase 
homojunction formed at the core-shell interface narrowed the bandgap, collectively 
boosting ROS production. Owing to this synergistic mechanism, CSB-120 exhibited 
outstanding antibacterial and angiogenic performance in vitro. Furthermore, this core-
shell nanostructure demonstrated excellent biocompatibility, strong electrical 
stimulation driven wound-healing capability, and potent antibacterial activity in vivo, 
significantly accelerating the repair of infected skin wounds in diabetic rats and 
highlighting its great potential for clinical skin regeneration applications. In this study, 
in vivo eNOS expression was not directly measured. A systematic evaluation of 
eNOS/NO signaling in wound tissues (including eNOS immunostaining and local NO 
quantification) will be the focus of our future research. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of China 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
(Nos. 52533013, U22A20160, U21A2055, 52422108, 52472283), Medical Research 
Foundation of Guangdong Province (B2025659), Youth S&T Talent Support 
Programme of Guangdong Provincial Association for Science and Technology 
(SKXRC2025049), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities 
(2025ZYGXZR102), Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong 
Province (No. 2024B0101080001), Open Foundation Project of Hubei Province Key 
Laboratory (2024KQHM08), Science and Technology Innovation Talent of Hainan 
Rising Star Project (Grant No. NHXXKJCX202507) 
Data Availability Statement 
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding 
author upon reasonable request. 
References 
[1] D. G. Armstrong, A. J. Boulton, S. A. Bus, N. Engl. J. Med. 2017, 376, 2367. 
[2] R. T. Crews, B.-J. Shen, L. Campbell, P. J. Lamont, A. J. M. Boulton, M. Peyrot, R. S. 
Kirsner, L. Vileikyte, Diabetes Care 2016, 39, 1371. 
[3] T. T. van Sloten, S. Sedaghat, M. R. Carnethon, L. J. Launer, C. D. A. Stehouwer, Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2020, 8, 325. 
[4] L. Dieltjens, K. Appermans, M. Lissens, B. Lories, W. Kim, E. V. Van der Eycken, K. R. 
Foster, H. P. Steenackers, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11. 
[5] D. Şen Karaman, U. K. Ercan, E. Bakay, N. Topaloğlu, J. M. Rosenholm, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2020, 30. 
[6] A. Lin, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, X. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Zhou, X. Qin, J. Liu, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 13965. 
[7] S. Cheng, H. Wang, X. Pan, C. Zhang, K. Zhang, Z. Chen, W. Dong, A. Xie, X. Qi, ACS 
applied materials & interfaces 2022, 14, 11144. 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
[8] W. J. Jeffcoate, L. Vileikyte, E. J. Boyko, D. G. Armstrong, A. J. M. Boulton, Diabetes 
Care 2018, 41, 645. 
[9] A. Sotto, J.-L. Richard, N. Jourdan, C. Combescure, N. Bouziges, J.-P. Lavigne, o. b. o. t. 
N. m. U. H. W. G. o. t. D. Foot, Diabetes Care 2007, 30, 2051. 
[10] X. Qi, Y. Li, Y. Xiang, Y. Chen, Y. Shi, X. Ge, B. Zeng, J. Shen, Cell Biomaterials 2025, 1. 
[11] L. Yang, G.-C. Rong, Q.-N. Wu, World J. Diabetes 2022, 13, 1014. 
[12] E. W. Gregg, Y. Li, J. Wang, N. Rios Burrows, M. K. Ali, D. Rolka, D. E. Williams, L. 
Geiss, N. Engl. J. Med. 2014, 370, 1514. 
[13] Y. Xiang, P. Zhuge, X. Qi, X. Ge, J. Xiang, H. Xu, E. Cai, Y. Lan, X. Chen, Y. Li, 
Bioactive Materials 2024, 39, 562. 
[14] A. P. Rogers, S. J. Mileto, D. Lyras, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2023, 21, 260. 
[15] W. Wang, F. Wu, Q. Zhang, N. Zhou, M. Zhang, T. Zheng, Y. Li, B. Z. Tang, ACS Nano 
2022, 16, 7961. 
[16] H. Xin, Y. Liu, Y. Xiao, M. Wen, L. Sheng, Z. Jia, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2024, 34. 
[17] S. Cong, J. Cai, X. Li, J. You, L. Wang, X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2024, 34. 
[18] Y. Fan, J. Zhai, Z. Wang, Z. Yin, H. Chen, M. Ran, Z. Zhu, Y. Ma, C. Ning, P. Yu, C. Mao, 
Adv. Mater. 2024, 37. 
[19] Y. Yang, P. Sha, P. Li, Z. Xu, Y. Cui, X. Ban, Z. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Guo, Z. Yu, Z. Zhang, 
L. Ren, Nano Lett. 2025, 25, 12769. 
[20] Y. Li, C. Liao, S. C. Tjong, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21. 
[21] C. Liao, Y. Li, S. C. Tjong, Nanomaterials 2020, 10. 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
[22] R. He, Y. Gu, J. Jia, F. Yang, P. Wu, P. Feng, C. Shuai, Nanoscale Horiz. 2025, 10, 681. 
[23] B. Ran, L. Ran, Z. Wang, J. Liao, D. Li, K. Chen, W. Cai, J. Hou, X. Peng, Chem. Rev. 
2023, 123, 12371. 
[24] Y. Lin, X. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Xu, Small 2021, 17. 
[25] J. Yang, L. Chu, R. Hu, W. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Ma, W. Ahmad, X. a. Li, Nano Res. 2021, 14, 
2139. 
[26] B. Li, W. Yang, R. Shu, H. Yang, F. Yang, W. Dai, W. Chen, Y. K. Chan, D. Bai, Y. Deng, 
Adv. Mater. 2023, 36. 
[27] M. Qin, X. Zhang, H. Ding, Y. Chen, W. He, Y. Wei, W. Chen, Y. K. Chan, Y. Shi, D. 
Huang, Y. Deng, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36. 
[28] F. Wang, K. Pei, Y. Li, H. Li, T. Zhai, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33. 
[29] J. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Wang, C. Li, Accounts Chem. Res. 2025, 58, 787. 
[30] M. Xu, X. Ruan, M. Z. Shahid, D. Meng, G. Fang, C. Ding, W. Zhang, J. Leng, S. Wang, 
S. K. Ravi, X. Cui, Adv. Sci. 2025, 12. 
[31] K. Yuan, Z. Liu, Z. Yan, Q. Yun, T. Song, J. Guo, X. Zhang, D. Zhong, Z. Tang, T. Lu, 
Angew. Chem.-Int. Edit. 2024, e202402693. 
[32] J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh, A. A. Al‐Ghamdi, Adv. Mater. 2017, 29. 
[33] L. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Yu, J. Yu, Adv. Mater. 2022, 34. 
[34] P. Dang, H. Zhao, C. Zhang, J. Wang, F. Zhu, Q. Zhong, W. Zeng, X. Wang, Y. Chen, X. 
Yan, Adv. Sci. 2026, e12700. 
[35] P. Zhao, H. Li, M. Ji, T. Ying, X. Jiang, W. Bu, Adv. Mater. 2025, e07881. 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
[36] B. Zhang, M. Zhao, K. Cheng, J. Wu, S. Kubuki, L. Zhang, Y.-C. Yong, Coordination 
Chemistry Reviews 2025, 523, 216234. 
[37] J. Strand, A. L. Shluger, Advanced Science 2024, 11, 2306243. 
[38] D. He, W. Wang, N. Feng, Z. Zhang, D. Zhou, J. Zhang, H. Luo, Y. Li, X. Chen, J. Wu, 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2023, 15, 15140. 
[39] J. Wei, J. Xia, X. Liu, P. Ran, G. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Li, Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental 2023, 328, 122520. 
[40] Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, J. Sunarso, Y. Zhong, Z. Shao, Advanced Functional Materials 2016, 
26, 5862. 
[41] J. Cai, A. Cao, J. Huang, W. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Jiang, X. Li, Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental 2020, 267, 118378. 
[42] D. Mei, X. Zhu, C. Wu, B. Ashford, P. T. Williams, X. Tu, Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental 2016, 182, 525. 
[43] C. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Yao, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, B. Yang, J. Huang, W. Li, C. Ning, J. Zhai, P. 
Yu, Y. Wang, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2023, 12. 
[44] K. Teng, Q. An, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering 
2021, 7, 1302. 
[45] Y. Han, Y. Li, Q. Zeng, H. Li, J. Peng, Y. Xu, J. Chang, Journal of Materials Chemistry B 
2017, 5, 3315. 
[46] Z. Zhang, J. Xie, J. Xing, C. Li, T. M. Wong, H. Yu, Y. Li, F. Yang, Y. Tian, H. Zhang, 
Advanced Healthcare Materials 2023, 12, 2201565. 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
[47] L. Wang, H. J. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, X. Liu, X. You, ACS Applied Polymer 
Materials 2021, 3, 3197. 
  
 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
A 
Synergistic 
Piezo-Photocatalytic 
Strategy 
via 
BaTiO3 
Heterophase 
Homojunctions for MRSA-Infected Diabetic Wound Therapy 
Lei Qian1, Han Lin1, Min Wu, Zheng Fang, Jiawei Li, Yao Han, Jinxia Zhai*, Peng 
Yu*, Cairong Xiao*, Chengyun Ning* 
ToC figures 
 
 
Rapid bacterial eradication and effective wound healing remain critical yet 
challenging in the management of diabetic ulcers. we developed an innovative 
tetragonal-phase@amorphous-phase core–shell BaTiO3 structure (CSB) as a 
homojunction model. Consequently, our piezoelectric–photodynamic hybrid therapy 
achieved exceptional antibacterial performance, with inhibition rates of 97.17% 
against MRSA and 99.72% against E. coli. Beyond antibacterial efficacy, the internal 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
Fermi-level difference between the tetragonal and amorphous phases establishes a 
built-in electric field at the homojunction interface, which promotes angiogenesis and 
accelerates diabetic wound healing through localized electrical stimulation. This dual-
function material thus enables both infection control and tissue regeneration within a 
single therapeutic platform. 
 
 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
Declaration of interests 
  
☒ The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or 
personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper. 
  
☐ The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which 
may be considered as potential competing interests: 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 

Journal Pre-proof
Journal Pre-proof
Highlights 
 
Developed a tetragonal-phase@amorphous-phase core–shell BaTiO3 structure 
(CSB) as a homojunction model. 
 
Both infection control and tissue regeneration within a single therapeutic 
platform. 
 
Multifunctional piezoelectric nanomaterials with broad potential in antibacterial 
therapy and regenerative medicine.