Review
Gold nanoclusters - A promising atomically precise atomic 
aggregation-based drug and its biomedical applications
Chao Xu a,*, Yuan Zhang d, Chunyu Zhang b,*
, Xueyun Gao c,*
a College of Chemistry and Material Science, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, Shandong 271018, China
b School of Pharmaceutical Sciences & Institute of Materia Medica, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong 
250117, China
c Department of Chemistry, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China
d Department of Orthopaedics, Children’s Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Chongqing Key 
Laboratory of Structural Birth Defect and Reconstruction, 136 Zhongshan Er Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing 400014, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Au NCs
Atomically precise nanomedicine
Biocompatible
Biomedical application
A B S T R A C T
Gold nanoclusters (Au NCs) are regarded as the most promising nanomedicine due to their precise structure 
composition, good biocompatibility, faster kidney clearance, and distinctive biological effects. They have 
demonstrated excellent potential in inhibiting tumors, antiviral, and antibacterial activities, as well as immu­
nomodulatory effects. Simultaneously, the biological effects of Au NCs are significantly impacted by the synthetic 
strategies employed during their fabrication. In this review article, we have summarized the synthetic strategy 
used to achieve good biocompatibility of atomically precise Au NCs and highlight their biological effect and 
potential applications as biomedical drugs. The biological effects of Au NCs can be determined by their structure 
and composition. Therefore, various synthesis strategies for obtaining biocompatible Au NCs are summarized. 
Their physicochemical properties, biosafety, and metabolic characteristics are also discussed. Secondly, we 
explore the biomedical applications of Au NCs in therapeutics and drug delivery, highlighting the opportunities 
they present for antitumor, antiviral, antibacterial, and immune regulation applications. Finally, we provide an 
outlook on the current status and future efforts surrounding the synthesis and biomedical applications of Au NCs. 
We hope this review article will provide a comprehensive synthetic strategy to obtain the atomically precise Au 
NCs with good biocompatibility and give a comprehensive understanding of their biomedical application.
Introduction
Since the rapid development of nanoscience and nanotechnology, 
nanomedicine, as an important branch of nanomaterial applications, has 
flourished in the past two decades. Nanomedicine has also evolved from 
the initial stage of liposome-encapsulated nanodrugs to develop 
advanced drug delivery systems designed as multifunctional therapy 
platforms targeting various diseases. Tracing the history of nano­
medicine's development, the development of inorganic nanomedicine 
has witnessed a transformative shift from initially focusing on biological 
medical imaging towards the design of targeted platforms for disease 
therapies, and eventually culminating in the establishment of an inte­
grated system that combines the regulation of the immune microenvi­
ronment with targeted therapy to achieve effective disease treatment 
[1]. While the advantages of targeted delivery, active targeting design, 
the passive targeting effect of the enhanced permeability and retention 
(EPR) effect, combination therapy effects, and favorable pharmacoki­
netics have profoundly improved therapeutic outcomes in nano­
medicine [2], there are still challenges to overcome and explore, such as 
precise composition information, low drug utilization, and the balance 
between toxicity and efficacy. Among these challenges, the good 
dispersion, uniformity, and precise composition information of the 
nanomedicine is critical for nanomedicine to be recognized as a viable 
option for drug development. Fortunately, the advent of atomically 
precise metal NCs has turned this fascination into a reality, where no two 
nanoparticles are the same.
Metal NCs with a metal core of less than 2 nm typically contain 
several to hundreds of metal atoms. The ultrasmall size reaching the 
Femi wavelength of electrons makes the metal NCs exhibit discrete 
electronic structures, tunable HOMO-LUMO transitions, and size- 
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: xuc@sdau.edu.cn (C. Xu), zhangchunyu@sdfmu.edu.cn (C. Zhang), gaoxy@ihep.ac.cn (X. Gao). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nano Today
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nanotoday
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2026.102985
Received 14 October 2025; Received in revised form 19 December 2025; Accepted 16 January 2026  
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
Available online 21 January 2026 
1748-0132/© 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

dependent tuned optical properties [3–5]. Meanwhile, the size of metal 
NCs bridges the gap between metal atoms and traditional nanoparticles. 
Studying the metal NCs’ structure and growth process is beneficial for 
our understanding of the evolution and growth processes of nano­
particles. It also helps us comprehend the ultimate fate and interaction 
mechanisms of metal ions or nanoparticles within biological systems. 
The fluorescence properties are owned by the highest occupied orbital 
and the lowest unoccupied orbital (HOMO-LUMO) transition of the 
electrons between the occupied d bands and sp bands, the selective 
enzyme-like catalytic activity, and the immune regulation performance 
make metal NCs ideal candidates for next-generation materials in 
diverse areas of biomedical science. Though some metal NCs possess the 
potential to kill tumor cells, inhibit bacteria, combat viruses, and 
regulate immune activities, the further application of these metal NCs is 
restricted by their potential toxicity. For instance, the Ag NCs could 
exhibit potential toxicity, leading to damage or even death of normal 
cells, disrupting the balance of normal flora, and even exhibiting 
neurotoxic effects [6]. Similarly, Pt NCs have exhibited good biological 
safety at the same concentration as first-line antitumor drugs. However, 
it is crucial to carefully assess and investigate the availability and po­
tential toxicity of Pt NCs since it depends on DNA damage through the 
production of Pt ions during metabolism [7]. Hence, both the bioeffect 
and biological toxicity should be carefully balanced when considering 
metal NCs as a biological medical treatment.
Au NCs generally exhibit favorable in vivo biosafety profiles, a key 
advantage underpinned by their efficient renal clearance. This clearance 
capability minimizes long-term systemic retention and reduces off- 
target accumulation in vital organs, thereby lowering toxicity risks [8, 
9]. Recent mechanistic insights have further elucidated this process. For 
instance, ultrasmall Au NCs can be efficiently filtered and excreted, 
bypassing extensive sequestration by the mononuclear phagocyte sys­
tem [10]. More profoundly, paradigm-shifting studies reveal that renal 
clearance is an actively regulated process. At the glomerulus, the barrier 
functions as an atomically precise “bandpass filter” for sub-nanometer 
clusters, where size-dependent interactions with the glycocalyx dictate 
clearance rates [11]. Concurrently, proximal tubules employ a 
charge-dependent “organelle extrusion” mechanism to actively elimi­
nate endocytosed nanoparticles, ensuring the removal of even bio­
transformed materials [12]. These foundational insights into charge- 
and size-specific clearance pathways provide a critical framework for 
the rational design of safe, clinically translatable Au NC-based 
nanomedicines.
The structurally tunable optical properties, ranging from the ultra­
violet (UV) region to the near-infrared II (NIR-II) region, make it a 
promising candidate for biosensors and bioimaging applications. The 
most promising clinical application is the utilization of near-infrared 
fluorescence for tumor surgery. In the near-infrared region, the combi­
nation of weak biological background and high tissue permeability fa­
cilitates improved imaging and guided surgery at the site of the lesion. 
Moreover, due to the enhanced fluorescent quantum yields of Au NCs, 
singlet oxygen (1O2) can be generated through the intersystem crossing 
and subsequent relaxation from the triplet state to the ground state. This 
property can facilitate the realization of fluorescence imaging-assisted 
photodynamic therapy. As a high-Z element, Au is commonly utilized 
as a radiosensitizer to enhance the local radiation dose by absorbing, 
scattering, and emitting radiation energy for radiation therapy. 
Compared to normal tissue, it can be increased by 100 times in the keV 
energy range and is used for radiation therapy [13]. Scattering photons, 
electrons, electron-positron pairs, or fluorescence generated by X-ray 
radiation may also cause secondary effects, ultimately leading to dam­
age and killing cancer cells. Compared with traditional Au nano­
particles, the atomically precise Au NCs tend to have faster kidney 
clearance from the body, which reduces accumulation in the liver and 
spleen, thereby reducing changes in gene expression and the occurrence 
of liver necrosis [14]. The stability of the simultaneous structure also 
decreases the potential damage to the body caused by ions generated 
from the degradation of Au NCs. Besides, on the one hand, Au NCs can 
inhibit virus replication and amplification by regulating key enzyme 
activity or influencing viral transfection and replication processes. On 
the other hand, Au NCs can exhibit antibacterial activities by diffusing 
into bacteria and inducing a burst of reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
resulting in the oxidation of bacterial membranes and disruption of 
bacterial metabolism. Most importantly, Au NCs also exhibited antiox­
idant and immune regulation activities by upregulating the expression 
level of antioxidant enzymes and inhibiting proinflammatory cytokines 
[15].
Collectively, Au NCs have demonstrated unique bioeffect perfor­
mance and have enormous potential for application in the biomedical 
field. Numerous reviews on Au NCs have been published, focusing on 
specific optical properties, synthesis methods, or their broad diagnostic 
and therapeutic roles [16–20]. However, a comprehensive systematic 
review is needed to elucidate its applications in the field of biomedical 
research from a perspective of biological effects. Therefore, this review 
aims to explore the mechanisms of its biological effects and derive its 
biological applications, particularly focusing on its applications in the 
prevention, control, and treatment of diseases and pathogenic micro­
organisms. Given this, as described in Scheme 1, this review primarily 
focuses on the following aspects: Firstly, the design strategies for pre­
paring the atomically precise Au NCs with good biocompatibility and 
biosafety. Secondly, review the mechanisms of its biological effects and 
the biomedical applications in the prevention, control, and treatment of 
diseases and pathogenic microorganisms. Moreover, this article will 
systematically review the application prospects and challenges of Au 
NCs, including our optimistic views and thoughts on the future appli­
cations of Au NCs in the biomedical field.
Preparation of biocompatible Au NCs
Atomically precise nanoparticles are desired by nanochemists, as 
they would overcome the limitation of nanoparticle heterogeneity, and 
solve the frustration that no two nanoparticles are the same. Until the 
emergence of the precisely characterized structures NCs, nanoscience 
has opened up a new direction and field. The emergence of atomically 
precise nanoparticle NCs provides an ideal platform for understanding 
the formation process from atoms to nanoparticles. It also enables 
detailed investigations of the structure-dependent physical and chemical 
properties at the atomic level. In previous studies, multiple synthetic 
strategies have been exploited to achieve the synthesis of atomically 
precise Au NCs, such as the gold salt reduction method, ligand induction 
method, anti-galvanic reaction method, top-down etching reaction, and 
so on. Some reviews have provided comprehensive coverage of these 
synthesis strategies. For further details, readers are directed to numerous 
reviews and references [3–5,21–23]. Herein, we briefly summarize the 
preparation strategies for biocompatible and hydrophilic Au NCs, which 
hold great promise in the field of biomedicine. When delving into the 
synthesis mechanism, we offer a brief introduction, drawing upon the 
work of Xie. Notably, as illustrated in Fig. 1, Xie pioneered the concept 
of total synthesis and spearheaded the development of comprehensive 
synthesis pathways and mechanisms for achieving atomically precise 
metal NCs [5]. It provides a guideline for future NCs synthesis practices 
and offers us a profound understanding of the mechanism of NCs for­
mation process.
Understanding the structural information of Au NCs will greatly aid our 
comprehension of subsequent structure-property relationships and biological 
effects. As atomically precise NCs, the formula MnLx (n: the number of metal 
atoms; x: the number of ligands) is commonly employed to define the 
composition of NCs. Hence, here we utilize the classic Au25 NCs as an 
exemplar to illustrate the structural particulars of Au NCs. As depicted in 
Fig. 2, Au NCs are usually considered to be composed of a metal core formed 
by the aggregation of metal atoms and a shell protected by outer ligands, 
which means it has a typical core-shell structure. X-ray crystallography also 
showed that the metal core of Au25 NCs was composed of a centered 
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
2 

icosahedral Au13 core and an exterior shell composed of the remaining 
twelve Au atoms. Au25 NCs capped by 18-SR ligands with extended "staple" 
motif, S-Au-S-Au-S bridging pattern, and binding to icosahedral core through 
S-Au and Au-Au bonds [24]. The common surface ligands can be classified 
into those containing thiolates, phosphines [25,26], carbenes [27,28], sele­
nolates [29], and mixed ligands. These ligands are vital in stabilizing Au NCs 
and significantly impact NCs’ physicochemical properties and biocompati­
bility. Since the crystal structure information of Au102(p-MBA)44 with X-ray 
structure determination was reported in 2007, more NCs structure infor­
mation has been given with X-ray structure determination, such as 
Au25(SCH2CH2Ph)18, Au36(SPh-tBu)24, Au144(SCH2Ph)60, Au25(p-MBA)18, 
and so on [30–35]. The acquisition of structural information about these NCs 
aids in our comprehension of the structural assembly of Au NCs, surface 
protection modes, and the structure-performance relationship.
However, more Au NCs structural information is obtained through 
theoretical calculations and simulations. Moreover, some NCs with large 
molecular ligands, such as proteins and peptides, lack well-defined rigid 
structures or suitable crystallization conditions, making it difficult to 
form crystals through the process of crystallization. Herein, it will be a 
great challenge to directly acquire precise and detailed structural in­
formation of NCs with experimental means. In this chapter, our objec­
tive is to systematically review the different synthesis strategies 
employed for biocompatible Au NCs with various functional ligands. 
The mechanism for preparing these Au NCs and the structure-function 
relationship between the Au NCs and different ligands were also sys­
tematically elaborated.
Synthesis of Au NCs with biosynthesis approach
The biosynthesis approach is considered an environmentally friendly 
strategy, usually synthesizing the Au NCs under mild conditions with 
functional biological molecules. The prepared Au NCs with this strategy 
can realize reduced immunogenicity and ensure the preservation of li­
gands or biomolecules' biological activity. Common molecules were 
employed to synthesize biocompatible Au NCs, including peptides, 
proteins, or functional sulfhydryl molecules. Furthermore, additional 
synthetic strategies have also been employed as crucial approaches for 
functionalizing the prepared Au NCs assemblies.
Synthesis of Au NCs with functional peptide
When tracing back to peptides-protected Au NCs, Au NCs prepared 
using glutathione (GSH) exhibit pioneering characteristics. As an 
important functional peptide, GSH plays a crucial role in maintaining 
cellular redox homeostasis, antioxidant defense, detoxification, and 
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of the potential biomedical applications of Au NCs, encompassing four aspects: antibacterial, antitumor, antiviral, and 
immunomodulatory.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
3 

immune support in the body. Furthermore, the biomaterials loaded with 
GSH on the surface could enhance cell uptake by activating the GSH 
transporter on the cell surface and escaping the RES absorption [36]. 
Therefore, GSH is an ideal ligand employed to exploit functional bio­
materials for biomedical applications. The earliest appearance of 
GSH-protected Au NCs can be traced back to Whetten’s work, since the 
earlier isolated and identified the most abundant species Au28(SG)16 
formula was corrected to a definitive formula with Au25(SG)18 [37]. 
Nevertheless, a standard protocol was established by following the 
Brust-Schiffrin synthesis, which involves two steps. Firstly, a polymeric 
Au(I)-SG was rapidly formed using a large excess of thiol as the ligand. 
Secondly, the Au(I) species was further reduced to Au(0) by inducing a 
reducing reagent, such as NaBH4 [5,38]. However, GSH-protected Au 
NCs synthesized through the aqueous phase method often suffer from 
the drawback of yielding complex products with low purity. Herein, 
various pure methods were employed to provide comprehensive 
information about reaction products. Tatsuya Tsukuda and co-workers 
synthesized and characterized a range of GSH-protected Au NCs by 
using PAGE separation and ESI-MS, and obtained more comprehensive 
information on GSH-prepared Au NCs [39]. In addition, other research 
groups have tried to devise diverse strategies to synthesize pure Au NCs 
with GSH [40]. Moreover, some amino acids exhibit good reducibility 
due to their reducible functional groups as the phenolic hydroxyl, thiol, 
and indole. Therefore, Gao’s group developed a green strategy to pre­
pare peptide-conjugated Au NCs without the emergence of additional 
reducing reagents under mild conditions. In this strategy, the con­
structed functional peptide as shown in Fig. 3, the peptide 
H2N-CCYRGRKKRRQRRR-COOH can be divided into the synthetic 
functional domain and the bioactive domain. In this context, the syn­
thetic functional domain is usually constructed from the CCY sequence. 
In which the thiol groups of cysteine and the phenolic hydroxyl groups 
of tyrosine exhibit reduced activities under alkaline conditions. 
Fig. 1. Schematic overview of total synthesis strategies for metal NCs. (a→b) formation of M(I)-SR complexes, (b→c) reduction growth, (c→d) seeded growth, (c→f) 
alloying reaction, (c→g) ligand-exchange process, (c→h) self-assembly of metamaterials, and (d→e) evolution from metal NCs to metal nanocrystals. Reprinted with 
permission from ref. [5]. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.
Fig. 2. Crystal structure of Au25(SR)18 NCs (where the R represents the phenylethyl group). The icosahedral Au13 core (left); The Au13 core plus the exterior 12 Au 
atoms (middle); The whole Au25 NCs protected by 18 thiolate ligands (magenta, Au; yellow, S) (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. [24]. Copyright 2008, 
American Chemical Society.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
4 

Simultaneously, the thiol groups of cysteine also play the role of coor­
dinating Au(I) and forming the protecting shell by forming the -Au 
(I)-SR- structures. The bioactive domain can keep the biological activ­
ities of the peptide under mild synthetic conditions [41]. With these 
design strategies, different functional Au NCs with special biological 
activities have been successfully synthesized, such as nucleus localiza­
tion SV-Au NCs, integrin αIIbβ3 probe integrin CV-Au NCs, MT1- 
MMP-targeting probe Au-CL NCs, etc [42–44].
Synthesis of Au NCs with functional protein
As an excellent biomineralization or biomimetic mineralization 
template, proteins containing abundant functional groups such as 
carboxyl, sulfhydryl, or amino, usually employed to prepare stable 
biocompatible inorganic nanoparticles. Some amino acids in protein, 
such as cysteine, selenocysteine, and tyrosine, which can reduce Au3+ at 
pH above 10 (pKa of Tyr), or tryptophan, with abundant reducible 
functional groups can participate in the redox processes during the 
material preparation [45]. On the other hand, the fast kinetics of the NCs 
formation could be slowed down when using a single protein crystal 
template for in situ growth, which helps to facilitate structural charac­
terization and mechanism research of the system. From the perspective 
of material biocompatibility, protein-coated nanomaterials reduce the 
immunogenicity of the encapsulated material and minimize the forma­
tion of protein coronas. Simultaneously, proteins can serve as sacrificial 
Fig. 3. Caption explaining a straightforward preparation strategy for synthesizing peptide-protected Au NCs. A polypeptide template design with two functional 
domains is employed. Domain 1, CCY, is responsible for the synthesis function, involving the reduction and bonding necessary for the synthesis of Au NCs. Domain 2, 
TAT, represents a biologically active region that retains its functionality after preparation. Reprinted with permission from ref. [41]. Copyright 2017, Royal Society 
of Chemistry.
Fig. 4. An illustration depicting the synthesis process of Au NCs. An Au1+-NLf complex forms when the Au3+ is added to the native lactoferrin (NLf) solution; 
Afterwards, the Au NCs were formed upon the addition of a specific concentration of NaOH into the reaction solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. [45]. 
Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
5 

molecules, enhancing the stability of nanoparticles during metabolic 
processes in the body. When referring to protein-coated Au NCs, the 
groundbreaking work can be traced back to Xie and co-workers in 2009. 
Xie developed a green and simple synthesis strategy to prepare red 
fluorescent Au NCs at physiological temperatures [46]. To comprehend 
the development process of luminescent Au NCs within protein tem­
plates, Thalappil Pradeep and co-workers tracked the material forma­
tion process using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass 
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
(XPS), and photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL). As is described in 
Fig. 4, the mechanism of Au NCs prepared with protein is similar to that 
of polypeptides as the former mentioned. Involves the following two 
steps: firstly, at neutral pH, an Au1+-protein complex was formed after 
the Au3+ was added to the protein solution. Then, after the pH was 
adjusted above 12, these bound Au ions were further reduced to Au(0), 
and nucleation and growth of the Au NCs commenced [45]. Besides, 
perhaps Lu and their co-workers can provide us with some insights into 
the mechanism of protein-mediated nanomaterial synthesis. In their 
work, they used complete lysozyme single crystals to slow down growth 
and conducted detailed kinetic studies on Au nanoparticles to investi­
gate their time-dependent and protein-directed growth. Au (I) first co­
ordinates with the 1-N of His15 and the chlorine atom in linear 
geometry. The gold atom also interacts with Tyr23 of lysozyme. As the 
reaction proceeds, Au (I) dissociates from His15 and disproportionately 
decomposes into Au (0) and Au (III) within the crystal. The free Au (I) in 
the reaction solution also continuously enters the lysozyme crystal and 
disproportionately enters Au (0) and Au (III) within the crystal. Within 
the crystal, Au (0) is further assembled into Au nanoparticles [47]. This 
discovery will aid us in comprehending the growth process of Au NCs, 
thereby providing new insights into the mechanism of different amino 
acid residues during the formation of these Au NCs. Herein, there is an 
urgent need to develop more advanced analytical technologies and 
methods to investigate the evolution of Au NCs and assess their evolu­
tionary processes. However, as is widely recognized, it’s an enormous 
challenge to obtain protein-encapsulated nanomaterial crystals for the 
necessary reaction reagents, and the reaction will disrupt the crystalline 
lattice. Therefore, the precise structural information and reaction pro­
cesses of protein-synthesized nanomaterials in situ have rarely been 
obtained. Lu’s work could provide us with a good method to study the 
formation mechanism of the biomineralization method to prepare 
protein-encapsulated Au NCs. Following the research report on Au NCs 
using BSA as a template, other Au NCs were prepared using various 
proteins, including Lysozyme [48,49], Human Serum Albumin (HAS) 
[50,51], Transferrin [52,53], Apoferritin [54], and so on. These 
protein-encapsulated Au NCs exhibited good biocompatibility and 
photoluminescence properties, and have been employed as biosensors 
and biomedical applications.
Synthesis of Au NCs with functional sulfhydryl molecules
Besides proteins and peptides, other biological molecules can also be 
utilized to synthesize Au NCs. Nucleic acid aptamers possess several 
advantages, including low immunogenicity, small molecular weight, 
ease of synthesis, and modification [55]. Meanwhile, the unique tertiary 
structure makes aptamers possess high affinity and specificity for targets 
[56]. Hence, aptamers can be designed to prepare targeted Au NCs for 
biomedical imaging, therapy, and analyte detection. To summarize the 
current reports, the preparation strategies of aptamer-encapsulated Au 
NCs are usually divided into two types. The first type involves the 
aptamer modified with sulfhydryl (-SH), which has a strong affinity for 
Au. Within this method, the Au NCs are prepared by introducing a 
reducing agent into the reaction solution. The second type involves the 
modification of functional aptamers on the surface of Au NCs using 
conjugation reagents such as EDC (1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) 
carbodiimide) and NHS (N-hydroxysuccinimide) [57,58]. Besides, other 
molecules have also been employed to prepare the hydrophilia Au NCs, 
such as dendrimers and polymers, dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA). This 
review will not provide detailed coverage as it has already been exten­
sively covered in other reviews.
Synthesis of Au NCs with ligand exchange strategy
Besides the aforementioned direct methods for preparing Au NCs, as 
a post-synthesis modification method, the ligand exchange method is 
also being extensively studied [59]. Many mechanisms for the ligand 
exchange strategy have been proposed, with the most widely applied 
mechanism among them is the SN-2-like substitution reaction. 
Combining the experimental and theoretical simulation calculations 
results, the influence factors for this method can be concluded as fol­
lows: Firstly, the speed and magnitude of ligand replacement reactions 
rise as the positive electronic charge on the Au NCs core increases. 
Secondly, the stability of Au NCs will affect the ligand exchange reac­
tion. Thirdly, the exchange reactions can also be influenced by the size 
of the incoming ligand and the length of the carbon chain in the pro­
tective monolayer [5,12,60,61]. In addition, as illustrated in Fig. 5, the 
adsorption of the incoming species at defect sites followed by place 
exchange is also employed to elucidate the ligand exchange mechanism 
[62].
Functional modification of Au NCs with functional biomolecules
The biomedical application of Au NCs relies on their distinctive 
physicochemical properties and biological effects. Modifying and sur­
face decorating these Au NCs are key strategies to achieve targeted drug 
delivery and enhance drug utilization. The common strategy was 
reviewed as follows: Firstly, the ligand exchange strategy mentioned 
earlier refers to the method of altering the surface chemistry and func­
tionality of Au NCs by replacing the existing ligand molecules. The 
commonly modified ligand includes the targeted protein, peptide, and 
other sulfhydryl-containing molecules [63]. Secondly, the surface of Au 
NCs can be functionalized using reactions involving activated ester re­
agents, Mannich reactions, or acylation reactions. The EDC and NHS are 
common bioconjugation reagents that can utilize the carboxyl groups of 
functional molecules to covalently bind to amino groups on the mate­
rials’ surface [64].
As a biomedical drug, good biocompatibility is essential for its 
further application. Enhancing drug efficiency can be achieved through 
targeted delivery, design optimization, and strategies to circumvent 
drug phagocytosis by the macrophage phagocytic system, ultimately 
extending the drug's metabolic half-life in the body [65]. While 
considering a pertinent issue, one cannot overlook the debate sur­
rounding drug design systems: should they strive for complexity or 
simplicity? This inquiry is prompted by the fact that even subtle struc­
tural disparities in a drug molecule can yield profound distinctions in its 
pharmacological and pharmacokinetic properties [66]. This discussion 
challenges us to determine whether a more intricate or streamlined 
approach to drug design is more scientifically sound. As an atomically 
precise, ultrasmall-sized atomic aggregate drug, it serves as a bridge 
between metal small molecule drugs and metal-based nanomedicines. 
Its finely tuned structure and size make it a strong candidate for 
researching the metabolic behavior and biological effects of metal drugs 
or metal-based nanomedicines, providing valuable insights into metal 
drug design considerations. Beyond the aforementioned functionaliza­
tion via organic ligands, introducing a second or multiple metal atoms 
into the core of gold clusters to form atomically precise alloy nano­
clusters (e.g., AuAg, AuPt, AuCu) represents another critical dimension 
for modulating their physicochemical properties and biological effects. 
This “metal synergistic effect” effectively regulates the clusters' elec­
tronic structure, optical properties, catalytic activity, and stability. By 
way of illustration, doping with atomic-level Pt markedly amplifies the 
peroxidase- and oxidase-mimicking activities of the nanoclusters, 
thereby efficiently attenuating tumour hypoxia. Alloying with Ag or Cu 
systematically modulates both the antibacterial efficacy and the 
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
6 

biodegradation kinetics of the resultant nanoclusters. Importantly, 
alloying does not merely introduce new functionalities; it can also 
mitigate intrinsic cytotoxicity while preserving therapeutic potency, as a 
consequence of engineered release kinetics and the altered chemical 
speciation of the constituent metal atoms [67,68].
As detailed in Section 2, the synthesis methods used to produce Au 
NCs, such as ligand engineering, biomolecular templating, and post- 
synthetic modification, critically determine their atomic structure, sur­
face chemistry, and physicochemical properties. These structural fea­
tures govern essential biological behaviors, including enzyme 
inhibition, redox activity, cellular uptake, and clearance pathways. 
Therefore, the biomedical function of Au NCs is fundamentally rooted in 
synthesis-driven structure-property relationships. The following section 
discusses these applications within this unified framework.
Biomedical applications of Au NCs
The antitumor biological effect and antitumor strategy design
As a global epidemic disease, cancer takes away the lives of over ten 
million people every year. Early diagnosis and precision treatment are 
important strategies to achieve extended survival for cancer patients. In 
clinical treatment, surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy are the 
most commonly used treatment strategies. However, the incomplete 
surgical removal of tumors in cancer patients can result in significant 
risks and complications. Drug resistance and drug toxicity also have 
posed significant challenges to the application of anticancer drugs. 
Herein, it is urgent to develop new types of anti-cancer drugs and stra­
tegies. Au nanoparticles have exhibited good stability excellent X-ray 
absorption capabilities, and special biological effects. Moreover, by 
employing functionalization strategies and various fabrication tech­
niques, it is possible to create Au nanoparticles with diverse biological 
effects and designs for drug delivery. As the Au nanoparticles, Au NCs 
possess ultrasmall size, atomically precise structure, high biocompati­
bility, faster kidney clearance, and distinctive biological effects. The 
robust X-ray adsorption, scattering, radiation re-emission, and rapid 
renal clearance properties of Au NCs make them excellent candidates as 
radiosensitizers for effective radiotherapy. Reduced dose usage would 
also decrease the side effects of radiation to normal tissues. The EPR 
effect facilitates the accumulation of Au NCs at the tumor site. The 198
79 Au 
NCs also could exhibit the radiotherapy effect by the emission of Auger 
and Coster–Kronig electrons without additional radioactive sources 
[69]. Additionally, Au NCs have demonstrated antitumor activities 
through the inhibition of specific enzymes or modulation of signal 
pathways within living organisms. In the subsequent section, we will 
elucidate the mechanisms of tumor inhibition and present a compre­
hensive review of the latest antitumor strategies based on these 
mechanisms.
Radiosensitizers for effective radiotherapy
In current clinical cancer treatment, approximately 50 % of cancer 
treatments rely on radiotherapy [70]. In traditional radiotherapy, the 
radiation source can directly damage DNA, cellular components, and 
organelles like mitochondria. These radiations also ionize the medium, 
producing radicals, reactive species (e.g., ⋅OH radicals), and secondary 
electrons, leading to both direct and indirect damage. However, due to 
the lack of specificity for tumor tissue, high-dose radiation can be 
delivered to healthy tissue along the path of the photon [71]. Herein, 
enhancing the absorbability of the tumor tissue is a crucial objective in 
radiotherapy, and radiosensitizers effectively address this issue. Good 
radiosensitizers possess the following advantages: Firstly, an advantage 
to selective deposition at the tumor site and lead to increasing energy 
deposited in tumor tissue, which in turn reduces the required amount of 
radiosensitizer. Secondly, rapid clearance from the organism aims to 
minimize potential toxicity and damage to normal tissues. Thirdly, the 
high abilities for robust radiation adsorption, scattering, and radiation 
re-emission are instrumental in assisting the realization of highly 
effective radiotherapy. Fourthly, as ideal radiosensitizers, precise 
structural and molecular information is necessary to research the 
structure-function relationship. As a high-Z element, Au element ex­
hibits higher radiation absorbance compared to normal tissue, resulting 
in a 100-fold enhancement in the keV energy range. Experiments have 
also confirmed that the radio enhancement mechanism originates from 
the surge of ROS upon irradiation, facilitated by the presence of 
emerging Au NCs, ultimately leading to irreversible cellular apoptosis 
[72–75]. The EPR effect, combined with easily modifiable surface li­
gands, can assist in designing Au NCs for targeted tumor deposition. 
Furthermore, the ultrasmall size (< 2 nm) allows the Au NCs to be 
rapidly cleared through the renal system. The atomically precise struc­
ture and the regulated composition nature could assist us in compre­
hending the structure-function relationship between the Au NCs and the 
effectiveness of radiotherapy. Herein, Au NCs are considered the most 
promising radiosensitizers designed for practical clinical applications in 
radiotherapy. Based on this advantage, different research groups have 
designed various strategies to develop Au cluster photosensitizers. As a 
classic example of Au NCs with excellent biocompatibility and 
Fig. 5. The ligand exchange reaction mechanism in the scFv-Au25(SG)18-complex computed by QM/MM calculations. (a) Substitution at the side SG. (b) Substitution 
at the apex SG. Reprinted with permission from ref. [62]. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
7 

hydrophilic, GSH-capped Au NCs have been extensively researched for 
various purposes, including preparation strategies, delivery technolo­
gies, and structure identification. Meanwhile, the exposed GSH ligand 
on the Au NCs could reduce the immunogenicity escape the RES uptake, 
and activate the GSH transporter on the cell surface which could facil­
itate the uptake of Au NCs by tumor cells [76]. Xie’s group developed a 
facilitated two-step method to synthesize ultrasmall Au10−12(SG)10−12 
NCs for cancer radiotherapy. The prepared Au NCs possessed the 
advantage of increasing tumor uptake and tumor deposition through 
improved EPR effect, and rapid renal clearance. The radiotherapy 
experiment was conducted under the irradiated 137Cs gamma radiation 
of 3600 Ci at a 5 Gy. A significantly enhanced radiotherapy outcome 
was achieved through combined treatment with radiation and Au NCs, 
resulting in a 65 % and 57 % reduction in tumor volume compared to 
the control group and mice treated with radiation alone [36]. Further­
more, their group has achieved promising chemotherapy results using 
the Au29–43(SG)27–37 NCs [77]. To investigate the potential influencing 
factors on radiotherapy, various groups have attempted to engineer 
GSH-Au NCs to enhance the uptake of tumor tissue or cells. For example, 
the radiotherapy effect of GSH-capped Au NCs and BSA-capped Au NCs 
under the 137Cs gamma radiation of 3600 Ci at a 5 Gy dose was also 
investigated. The result revealed that the GSH-capped Au NCs have a 
Fig. 6. (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of Au NCs in cancer radiotherapy via ROS burst, cell cycle arrest, and DNA damage. (b) Cytotoxicity mechanisms 
of L/D-Au NCs under X-ray irradiation, showing enhanced intracellular ROS generation and DNA damage. (c) Tumor volume growth curves of mice in different 
treatment groups. Reprinted with permission from ref. [79]. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
8 

better radiotherapy effect compared to the BSA-capped Au NCs. This 
indicates that the choice of ligand influences the uptake of NCs, which 
ultimately reflects the radiotherapy effect [40]. The cell results also 
revealed that the mechanism contributes to enhanced DNA damage 
induced by radiotherapy. Besides investigating the impact of surface 
ligands on the uptake, Zhang et.al modified either ethanediamine or 
ethanedioic acid to investigate the charged influence on radiotherapy 
[78]. The results revealed that the negative Au NCs exhibited the highest 
tumor uptake and the strongest radiosensitization effect. At the same 
time, to further boost the uptake efficiency of Au NCs and improve the 
therapeutic effect of radiation therapy, another synthesis strategy was 
also developed, such as indirect synthesis through chiral design, tar­
geted ligands, engineering modifications of existing Au NCs, and func­
tional design of Au NCs with specific biological effects. Zhao et al. 
utilized the human body's selectivity towards chiral molecules and 
employed a pair of enantiomeric alkynyl to successfully prepare the 
alkynyl-protected L/D-Au10(C13H17O5)10. As the results are shown in 
Fig. 6, the D-Au NCs demonstrated greater safety and exhibited mono­
dispersity in the biological system. Compared to the control group, 
which was treated only with X-ray under the 4 Gy conditions, the D-Au 
Fig. 7. (a) Schematic illustration of how the Pt2Au4 cluster modulates tumor hypoxia to enhance radiotherapy. (b) Characterization of the Pt2Au4 cluster: alkyne 
coordination modes, positive-mode ESI-TOF-MS spectrum, and optical properties. (c) In vivo therapeutic efficacy of Pt2Au4 against HeLa tumor-bearing mice. 
Reprinted with permission from ref. [84]. Copyright 2022, Wiley.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
9 

NCs demonstrated a more effective radiotherapy effect, resulting in a 
significant halving of tumor volume [79].
The targeted functional molecular, such as peptide, preparation of 
Au NCs possesses the advantage of a high affinity to the targeted site and 
unique physicochemical properties of Au elements. Such as the RGD 
peptide (c(RGDyC)), which specifically targets the αvβ3 integrin, and the 
CY-PSMA-1 ligand, known for its high affinity to PSMA, were employed 
to indirectly prepare functional Au NCs, thereby assisting in the uptake 
of the nanoparticles [80,81].
Other integrated strategies have been developed to enhance the 
radiotherapy effect. For instance, Zang et.al integrated the fluorescence 
properties, high radiation absorption capacity of Au NCs, and •OH 
increasing based on the Fenton reaction of IONC, and developed a 
Fenton catalysis-assisted enhanced radiotherapy strategy [82]. He and 
his cooperators also developed a mitochondria-targeting ability 
Au25(STPP)18 radiosensitizers. In this research, the enhanced targeting 
ability of Au25(STPP)18 NCs resulted in more severe disruption and 
damage to mitochondria under X-ray radiation. Moreover, these NCs 
exhibited an inhibition of thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) and facilitated 
more robust antitumor immune responses, ultimately promoting the 
overall effectiveness of radiotherapy on tumors [83]. An atomically 
precise Pt2Au4 alloy NCs was also designed by Zang and colleagues, as 
depicted in Fig. 7. The prepared NCs displayed catalase-like activity, 
facilitating the generation of O2 by inducing endogenous H2O2 decom­
position in hypoxic tumors. This capability enhances the effectiveness of 
cancer radiotherapy, ultimately improving its therapeutic outcome [84]. 
In addition to other measures, the use of Au NCs@His enables simulta­
neous external and internal regulations. By employing this approach, 
intracellular antioxidants (e.g., GSH) can be depleted, and the radio­
sensitizing G2/M phase can be effectively regulated [85]. Yuan and 
cooperatores prepared Au44MBA26-Cy7 NCs, and Au44MBA26-NLG NCs 
by ligand engineering of NIR-II emitting Au44MBA26 NCs, respectively, 
and realized noninvasive NIR-II PL and PA imaging-guided cancer PTT 
[86].
As a pivotal modality in cancer therapy, radiotherapy holds a 
prominent role in the treatment of oncological patients. The potential 
side effects on healthy tissues lead to dose limitations, thereby con­
straining radiation therapy. Developing the radiosensitizer is an 
important strategy to reduce the radiotherapy's impact on normal tis­
sues. By enhancing the sensitivity of tumor cells to radiation, radio­
sensitizers allow for lower radiation doses to be effective, thus 
minimizing damage to surrounding healthy tissues. Just as summarized 
earlier, Au NCs have exhibited radiosensitization effects. The functional 
modification and EPR effect could realize the Au NCs deposited at the 
tumor site. Combining the higher radiation absorbance ability of Au 
elements, the low radiation doses, and enhanced tumor radiotherapy 
effect could be realized. To summarize the above-mentioned research, 
the main strategies for enhancing tumor uptake could be concluded as 
follows: First, choosing the appropriate ligands or template for directly 
preparing the Au NCs, including the targeting ligand design chiral ligand 
design, and so on. Secondly, by employing biomolecular conjugation or 
ligand exchange methods to realize Au NCs modification. Thirdly, 
integrating the different elements or materials properties to construct 
multiple functional biomedical materials.
However, there are still issues that need to be addressed. Firstly, the 
structure-activity relationship in radiotherapy should be further 
explored. Secondly, the secondary electrons generated during radio­
therapy can play a significant role. However, there is limited research 
reporting on the potential interactions of Au NCs as sensitizers with 
these secondary electrons. Further investigation into this aspect could 
shed light on the potential mechanisms underlying the enhanced 
radiotherapy effects achieved by utilizing Au NCs. Thirdly, an integrated 
therapy strategy could be developed. For instance, Au NCs possess the 
capability to efficiently convert X-rays into optical luminescence. This 
property could be harnessed to excite conjugated photosensitizers for 
photodynamic therapy (PDT) [75].
Chemotherapy drug acts directly on the tumor
As a chemotherapy drug, it is necessary to have a precise molecular 
structure and a clearly defined mechanism of action. One of the disad­
vantages of some nanomedicines is the heterogeneity of their structure 
and the uncertainty of molecular information, which poses a significant 
challenge for researching the relationship between structure and func­
tion and studying their pharmacology. The emergence of Au NCs allows 
for addressing certain challenges posed by traditional nanomedicine due 
to their atomically precise molecular information and distinctive bio­
logical effects. Therefore, in this section, we conduct a systematic review 
of Au NCs as a direct chemotherapy or drug delivery system treatment 
for tumors and elucidate the action mechanism of Au NCs in this process. 
When it comes to the anti-tumor mechanism of Au NCs as chemotherapy 
drugs, we can draw the following conclusions: firstly, the inhibition of 
key enzymes with specific biological activities leads to a decrease in 
enzyme activity. For example, Specific Inhibition of hTrxR by Au(I): the 
biological activity of Au NCs is ultimately mediated by released mono­
valent gold ions (Au(I)), the released monovalent gold ions covalently 
bind to Cys189 of hTrxR. This binding induces an allosteric conforma­
tional change that disrupts the electron transfer interface between hTrxR 
(Sec498) and its substrate thioredoxin (Cys32), effectively inhibiting 
enzyme activity. ROS Generation Pathway: the consequent inhibition of 
hTrxR, a central redox regulator, is a primary cause of the observed 
rapid accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to oxida­
tive stress, ultimately resulting in cell apoptosis [87,88]. Secondly, some 
Au NCs can induce mitochondrial damage, resulting in disrupted energy 
metabolism, increased oxidative stress, and cell apoptosis [89,90]. 
Thirdly, the EPR effect, along with their special biological effects, makes 
Au NCs an excellent candidate for developing a drug delivery system in 
combination with existing chemotherapeutic drugs to achieve a syner­
gistic tumor inhibition effect. Referring to Au NCs as a promising new 
chemotherapeutic agent poses a huge challenge because of the lack of a 
well-defined 
mechanism 
and 
a 
clear 
understanding 
of 
the 
structure-activity relationship. Some advanced technologies assist us in 
getting the precise molecular information and physiochemical proper­
ties of Au NCs, such as X-ray single crystal diffraction, MALDI-TOF-MS, 
ESI-MS, and computer theoretical simulation for assistance. However, 
obtaining the precise structure information for hydrophilic Au NCs is 
challenging due to their soft surface ligands, which disrupt the ordered 
arrangement and hinder crystal growth. It remains a significant chal­
lenge to obtain a clear structure-activity relationship. Some research 
groups are making every effort within the existing technologies to 
elucidate the mechanism of Au NCs as chemotherapeutic drugs. Gao’s 
group has been consistently focused on the biological effects of Au NCs 
modified with functional peptides, as depicted in Fig. 8. The 
polypeptide-capped Au NCs exhibit good biocompatibility, low immu­
nogenicity, and simultaneously retain the bioactivity of functional 
peptides. The widespread reports also demonstrate that Au-based drugs 
can directly inhibit human thioredoxin reductase (hTrxR), thereby 
triggering tumor cell apoptosis [91]. Therefore, Gao's group synthesized 
artificial RGD peptide-coated Au4 NCs to investigate their potential as 
chemotherapeutic drugs and their antitumor mechanism. The antitumor 
mechanism revealed that the Au (I) ion, which is a metabolite of Au NCs, 
could specifically bind to the Cys189 site of hTrxR, which significantly 
inhibits hTrxR activity. The molecular dynamic simulation also revealed 
that the electron transfer from Sec498 of hTrxR to Cys32 of thioredoxin 
was disrupted by the specific binding of the Au4 NCs. This disruption 
induces an increase in ROS, triggers the apoptosis pathway of tumor 
cells, and ultimately significantly inhibits tumor growth [92]. These 
experiments offer the initial direct evidence that Au NCs, through 
metabolism within the organism, can bind to a crucial enzyme, modu­
lating its enzymatic activity, and ultimately triggering apoptosis in 
tumor cells. In their previous research, the Au25 NCs coated with a tri­
decapeptide were also found to exhibit antitumor activities through 
their interaction with TrxR1, resulting in suppressing its activity [93]. 
Furthermore, they explored the size effect in tumor therapy by preparing 
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
10 

Au5Peptide3 and Au22Peptide10, both coated with the same polypeptide 
(H2N-YHWYGYTPQNVI-KKKKYCC-COOH), which specifically targets 
the epidermal growth factor receptor. The experiment conducted with 
human nasopharyngeal cancer cells (CNE1 cells) and in vivo revealed 
that Au5Peptide3 exhibited superior antitumor efficacy compared to 
Au22Peptide10. The mechanism investigation revealed that the 
small-size Au5Peptide3 could enter CNE1 cell mitochondria and induce 
cell apoptosis, leading to a reduction in mitochondrial transmembrane 
potential and activation of the Mcl-1-caspase 9-caspase 3-PARP 
pathway. The results were further verified in vivo experiments [94]. 
They also employed molecular dynamics simulation to assist in 
designing the peptide-Au NCs that induced tumor cell apoptosis by 
targeting glutathione peroxidase-1. Furthermore, they employed the 
B1P peptides, known for their antagonistic activity to BCL-2, to syn­
thesize the BGC through a one-step synthesis process. The resulting BGC 
not only specifically inhibited thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) activity but 
also bound to BCL-2 on mitochondria, triggering BCL-2 family-mediated 
mitochondrial apoptosis [95]. The BSA-coated Au NCs also displayed 
the ability to suppress migration, invasion, and colony formation of 
MDA-MB-23 cells. The Au NCs strongly inhibited both MDA-MB-231CM 
triggered and RANKL-induced osteoclast formation from BMMs in vitro, 
while cell studies indicated that they suppressed the expression of 
osteolysis-related factors in MDA-MB-231 cells and inhibited the sub­
sequent activation of the NF-κB pathway in BMMs [96]. In summary, the 
above results demonstrate that the direct chemotherapeutic effects of Au 
NCs highly depend on their ligand, size, structure, and stability. Herein, 
we can design personalized anti-tumor drugs by controlling the syn­
thesis strategy.
Additionally, through their ultrasmall size, Au NCs also demonstrate 
the EPR effect. Moreover, their good biocompatibility and stability make 
Au NCs a promising candidate tool for achieving targeted drug delivery. 
For instance, Wang and collaborators developed a pH-sensitive Au-BSA- 
DOX-FA drug delivery system, which achieves targeted delivery of the 
chemotherapeutic DOX by utilizing the affinity of folic acid (FA) re­
ceptors with FA and the EPR effect of Au NCs [97]. An enhanced tumor 
therapy was obtained by this drug delivery system.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) strategy for tumor therapy
Due to the potential risks associated with and high recurrence rate of 
surgery, new and innovative antitumor strategies are continuously being 
developed to minimize the invasiveness of surgical traumas, including 
photodynamic therapy (PDT), photothermal therapy (PTT), cryo­
ablation, immunotherapy, and others. Among these strategies, PDT and 
PTT are particularly dependent on photosensitizers that can efficiently 
convert optical energy into highly toxic ROS or thermal energy. These 
photosensitizers are essential in the success of photodynamic therapy 
and photothermal therapy, as they enable targeted and localized tumor 
destruction while minimizing damage to surrounding healthy tissues. 
The tumor environment is an essential consideration when designing 
PDT photosensitizers. For instance, PDT-II pathway photosensitizers 
rely on the presence of oxygen (O2) in the tumor environment to 
generate cytotoxic singlet oxygen (1O2). The long lifetime of the elec­
tronic excitations and the well-defined O2 adsorption sites are the key 
factors to promote energy transfer from Au NCs to molecular oxygen, 
thus facilitating the formation of 1O2. The size and ligand of Au NCs are 
key factors in generating the 1O2 [98]. However, Sun et al. exploited that 
Type I PDT can generate O2
•- and •OH by producing free radicals that 
originate from directly transferring a proton or electron from biological 
substrates, reacting with water molecules in a hypoxic tumor environ­
ment [99]. Herein, the development of strategies to alleviate tumor 
Fig. 8. (a) The surface presentation of Au-hTrxR adducts homodimer with chain A and chain B. (b) The presentation of one Au-hTrxR monomer. (c, d) The enlarged 
views of Cryo-EM densities of Au (I) and FAD from one hTrxR monomer. (e) Electrostatic potential surface map of Au-hTrxR-Au adducts. (f) The surrounding residues 
of the Au (I)-binding pocket. Reprinted with permission from ref. [92]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
11 

hypoxia and achieve O2
- -replenishment is crucial for enhancing PDT 
efficiency when referring to the PDT-II pathway. Gui and coworkers 
developed a novel multifunctional AuPd-BSA CN nanotheranostic agent 
and 
realized 
the 
dual-modal 
NIR-II 
FL/Photoacoustic 
(PA) 
imaging-guided type I/II PDT. In this strategy, as illustrated in Fig. 9, the 
prepared AuPd-BSA CN alloy exhibits enhanced NIR absorption and FL 
intensity attributed to increased electron and hole pair separation. 
Additionally, the intrinsic glucose oxidase (Gox)-like activity and GSH 
elimination ability collectively modify the tumor microenvironment and 
improve therapy efficiency. The prepared AuPd-BSA CN eventually 
achieved efficient killing of hypoxic tumors combined with type I/type II 
PDT [99]. Lin and coworkers also utilized Au NCs as a foundation to 
construct biodegradable MnO2–Pt@Au25 nanosheets, which promote 
the photodynamic and chemotherapy effects through Glutathione and 
H2O2 consumption. In the integrated nanosheets, MnO2 reacts with the 
excessive H2O2 in the cancer tissue microenvironment to generate O2, 
thereby increasing the concentration of O2 at the tumor site. The inte­
grated nanosheets containing MnO2 and Pt(IV) prodrugs can also 
eliminate reducing GSH through a redox reaction. The decrease in GSH 
and increase in O2 enhance the PDT effect of Au25 [100]. Other strate­
gies, such as Au NCs sensitized Black TiO2−x nanotubes, and 
NIR-emitting Au NCs capped with lipoic acid (L-AuC), try to build an 
enhanced photodynamic therapy platform [101,102]. These synthetic 
strategies often leverage elemental doping to potentiate the efficacy of 
PDT. Rational design of both the core architecture and surface ligands of 
Au NCs can directly impart intrinsic hypoxia-relieving capability within 
the tumor microenvironment. For example, Li et al. synthesized atomi­
cally precise Au NCs exhibiting intrinsic peroxidase-like activity and 
excitability in NIR-II window. This nanocluster efficiently catalyzes the 
intratumoral conversion of endogenous H2O2 to O2, thereby mitigating 
hypoxia, and simultaneously acts as a potent NIR-II photosensitizer for 
singlet-oxygen generation. This dual-functional mechanism enables 
markedly enhanced type I/II combined photodynamic therapy against 
deep-seated tumors [103].
Fig. 9. (a) Schematic illustration of AuPd-BSA NCs nanotheranostics for NIR-II FL/PA imaging-guided PDT hypoxia tumor therapy. (b) Time-dependent NIR-II 
fluorescence imaging (1000 LP and 100 ms) of 4T1-tumor-bearing mice treated with AuPd-BSA. (c) In vivo therapeutic efficacy of AuPd-BSA NCs against 4T1 tumor- 
bearing mice. Reprinted with permission from ref. [99]. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
12 

Other strategies and mechanisms for tumor therapy
Autophagy and apoptosis are essential physiological processes that 
determine the fate of cells. Research has shown that autophagy under 
endoplasmic reticulum stress has a dual effect, either supporting or 
inhibiting apoptosis, depending on the degree of ER stress. Continuously 
inducing endoplasmic reticulum stress through apoptosis and autophagy 
as combined therapeutic targets could achieve dual-programmed cell 
death. Jiang and coworkers prepared peptide-based Au NCs (AP1P2-PEG 
NCs), which induce ER stress and activate autophagy and apoptosis 
pathways, thereby promoting tumor cell death without the obvious side 
effects, as depicted in Fig. 10 [76]. Joseph Irudayaraj conjugated 
BSA-protected Au NCs with Herceptin, a humanized monoclonal 
antibody targeting the extracellular domain of the HER-2 receptor, to 
create an AuNCs-Her drug. The AuNCs-Her could escape the endolyso­
somal pathway, enter the nucleus of cancer cells, and eventually induce 
DNA damage [104].
In clinical practice, surgical resection remains the cornerstone 
intervention for solid tumors, with its efficacy heavily dependent on the 
operating surgeon's expertise and the precision of tumor margin delin­
eation. Incomplete resection often leads to tumor recurrence, necessi­
tating reoperation. Thus, surgeons usually tend to opt for wider excision 
margins, sacrificing more normal tissue to achieve complete tumor 
resection. However, this operative strategy risks dual complications of 
impaired organ function and sustained inflammatory sequelae. Herein, 
Fig. 10. Illustration of AP1P2-PEG NCs synthesis and antitumor mechanism. (a) Synthesis process diagram of AP1P2-PEG NCs. (b) AP1P2-PEG NCs activated auto­
phagy and apoptosis signaling pathways of tumor cells by continuous endoplasmic reticulum stimulation, demonstrating effective tumor growth inhibition of AP1P2- 
PEG NCs in subcutaneous and orthotopic liver tumor models. Reprinted with permission from ref. [76]. Copyright 2023, Wiley.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
13 

advancing real-time imaging technologies for precise intraoperative 
demarcation of oncologic margins will critically enhance the preserva­
tion of functional parenchyma. Optical imaging technology provides a 
non-invasive approach for real-time intraoperative visualization of 
tumor margin, facilitating precision resection. Wavelength modulation 
across the visible-NIR spectrum (400–1700 nm) enables deep-tissue 
penetration at millimeter-scale depths, overcoming optical scattering 
barriers [105,106].
NIR-II imaging is recognized as a premier in vivo real-time imaging 
modality among optical technologies, characterized by deep tissue 
penetration, cellular resolution, suppressed scattering artifacts, and 
minimized absorption interference. Engineered Au NCs exhibit good 
biocompatibility, ultrasmall size-dependent renal clearance, and visible- 
to-NIR-II tunable emission (400–1700 nm), positioning them as ideal 
probes for deep-tissue and high-resolution imaging. Xie et al. reported 
an atomically precise gold-cluster nanoassembly that concurrently ex­
hibits intense NIR-II fluorescence for high-contrast tumor imaging and 
efficiently generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) upon laser irradia­
tion for photodynamic therapy, thereby enabling precise theranostic 
integration with “see-and-treat” functionality. This element-specific, 
atomically precise theranostic platform provides new insights into sur­
gical navigation, real-time therapeutic monitoring, and adaptive inter­
vention strategies [12]. The high-contrast NIR-II photoluminescence 
imaging of the brain, liver, kidney, vasculature, and gastrointestinal 
organs has been achieved by employing Au NCs. The Dai group utilized 
stealth phosphorylcholine-coated AuPC clusters to achieve NIR-II 
imaging-guided tumor resection in a preclinical 4T1 breast cancer 
model. Concurrently, intratumoral administration of AuPC nanoclusters 
(25 mg mL−1, 20–40 µL) to 4T1-tumour-bearing mice followed by 
808 nm laser irradiation (300 mW/cm−2, 30 min) elevated intratumoral 
temperatures to 53–60 ℃ within 3 min, resulting in complete tumour 
ablation and a 60-day survival rate of 94.4 % (n = 18) [107].
The antibacterial biological effect
The antibacterial biological effects of Au NCs have been systemati­
cally summarized in previous review articles [108]. Therefore, in this 
section, we pay more attention to examining the antibacterial mecha­
nisms of Au NCs, including factors such as surface charge, ligands, and 
the size effect, and provide a concise overview of their applications in 
antibacterial therapy. Xie and colleagues conducted a systematic study 
to discover the potential antibacterial mechanisms of Au NCs and their 
relationship with their structure. Antibacterial efficacy of internalized 
Au NCs mediated via intracellular ROS modulation by augmentation of 
pro-oxidative enzymes and inhibition of anti-oxidative enzymes, 
inducing oxidative disruption of bacterial membranes and perturbation 
of bacterial metabolism, resulting in a severe bacterial killing effect 
[93]. During the internalization process, the size factor exerts an 
important impact on effectiveness. Bacteria exhibit a heightened ability 
to readily internalize ultrasmall Au NCs due to their diminutive di­
mensions, which means the small-sized Au NCs could easily penetrate 
biological membrane barriers, especially pass through the pores of the 
cell wall. Thereby overcoming bacterial physical defenses and promot­
ing effective internalization [109,110]. For example, the minimum 
inhibitory concentration (MIC) of atomically precise Au25(SR)18 clusters 
against fusobacterium nucleatum has been reported to be as low as 
2 µg mL−1, whereas polydisperse ~20 nm gold nanoparticles prepared 
by conventional routes exhibit MIC values of up to 10 µg mL−1, under­
scoring the superior antimicrobial efficacy of atomically precise clusters 
[111]. This superiority originates from their enlarged specific surface 
area, enhanced bacterial-membrane penetration, and precisely tunable 
surface chemistry that optimizes ROS generation.
In antibacterial materials, antimicrobial agents with a higher posi­
tive charge typically demonstrate stronger bacterial inhibition effects, 
owing to the attractive forces between the antibacterial materials and 
the negatively charged bacterial cell wall. However, during their 
investigation of the ligand effects of Au NCs in antibacterial applica­
tions, Xie and his colleagues uncovered that Au NCs with a higher 
negative charge exhibited increased production of ROS. This, in turn, 
resulted in a more effective bacterial killing efficiency. The surfacing of 
positively charged −NH2 groups on Au NCs ligand was capable of both 
quenching singlet oxygen and diminishing the generated ROS [112]. 
They also employed the Au-MBA and Au-SG NCs as traceable probes to 
continuously observe the interaction mechanism between Au NCs and 
bacteria in real-time. The process confirmed that Au NCs initially 
attached to the bacterial membrane, penetrated it, and then accumu­
lated inside the bacteria. Compared with Au-SG NCs, the Au-MBA NCs 
demonstrated enhanced ROS production and a more effective antibac­
terial bioeffect. [113] Additionally, Au25(Capt)18 NCs were utilized as a 
novel photosensitizer for antimicrobial photodynamic therapy, and the 
results showed that they could generate 1O2 and effectively suppress the 
growth of oral bacterial cells when exposed to blue LED light [114,115]. 
In summary, Au NCs exert antibacterial activity primarily attributed to 
their ultrasmall size, enabling them to traverse cell wall pores. The 
internalized Au NCs possess the ability to regulate the production of ROS 
and similar compounds, ultimately resulting in metabolic imbalance and 
the disruption of bacterial cell membranes. Hence, when designing 
antibacterial Au cluster drugs, the strategic ligand design to effectively 
boost the production of ROS is of paramount importance in enhancing 
the drug's antibacterial efficacy.
The antivirus biological effect and antivirus strategy design
Viral infections remain one of the primary causes of diseases in 
humans. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic at the end of 2019 
rapidly swept across the globe, causing immense damage to people's 
health and the world economy. Existing single-function antivirus drugs 
only demonstrate singular advantages in inhibiting viruses or treating 
associated complications. They have failed to achieve an effective 
combination of virus inhibition and the treatment of inducible diseases. 
Therefore, the development of novel drugs that can simultaneously 
inhibit viruses and treat viral infection complications holds significant 
importance for virus prevention, control, and treatment. Gold-based 
drugs have a long history as therapeutic agents [116]. Research has 
revealed that some gold-based compounds exhibit promising biological 
activities, including virus inhibition and immune modulation [117, 
118]. The preliminary reporting indicates that Au NCs exhibit unique 
immunoregulatory and enzyme-inhibitory abilities [6]. Au NCs could 
demonstrate outstanding capability in inhibiting viral replication and 
suppressing the expression of intrinsic inflammatory cytokines, and 
exhibited better therapeutic outcomes than Remdesivir in COVID-19 
hamster treatments, as depicted in Fig. 11. The mechanism revealed 
that the inhibition of viral replication mainly originates from the release 
of Au (I) from the GA, which covalently binds to the thiolate of Cys145 of 
SARS-CoV-2 Mpro, thereby inhibiting the activities of Mpro. Further­
more, GA directly intrinsically downregulates the NF-κB pathway, 
therefore significantly inhibiting the expression of inflammatory cyto­
kines in cells. The pathological results showed that GA treatment 
significantly reduced lung inflammatory injuries when compared to 
those of Remdesivir-treated COVID-19 hamsters [119]. Other groups 
also reported that Au NCs could exhibit the antivirus activities, such as 
Liang et.al investigated the antivirus activities of different ligand-coated 
Au NCs. The results indicated that histidine-stabilized Au NCs (His-Au 
NCs) exhibit a stronger inhibitory effect on the proliferation of PRV 
compared to mercaptoethane sulfonate Au NCs. Further investigation 
reveals that His-Au NCs could exhibit antivirus activities by blockage of 
the viral replication rather than the processes of attachment, penetra­
tion, or release. Their deduction attributes the varied antiviral biological 
effects to the differential localization of Au NCs in host cells, which is 
influenced by the presence of different ligands [120].
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
14 

Immune regulation and therapeutic strategies for immune diseases
Au-based drugs have demonstrated extended activity in immune 
regulation and antioxidant activity. A typical FDA-approved clinical 
drug, Auranofin, has been utilized for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis since 1985. Subsequent studies have shown that Au-based drugs 
also exhibited potential therapeutic applications in cancer, antivirus, 
bacterial infections, and neurodegenerative disorders. The mechanism 
of the Au-based drugs involves the following: Firstly, the inhibition of 
special enzyme activity, such as TrxR, induces endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress, resulting in cellular oxidative stress and intrinsic apoptosis. 
Secondly, Au-based drugs, especially Au nanoparticles, exhibit potential 
properties of regulating ROS. High concentrations of ROS could lead to 
oxidative stress, which leads to cell damage by oxidizing proteins, lipids, 
and DNA molecules. Oxidative stress also activates inflammatory fac­
tors, triggering an immune response and exacerbating oxidative stress- 
induced damage. Some Au nanoparticles could be employed as bio­
mimetic enzymes with the activities of catalase, superoxide dismutase, 
and glutathione peroxidase can efficiently act as antioxidants to scav­
enge the excessive amount of ROS. Thirdly, Au-based drugs reduce 
cytokine production and stimulate cell-mediated immunity. Such as 
inhibiting the signaling pathways that could regulate the major proin­
flammatory mediator genes. Au-based drugs could suppress the receptor 
activator of nuclear factor-κB (RANK) and mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways to modulate cytokines, ultimately 
leading to the potential therapeutic application in rheumatoid arthritis 
treatment. However, few papers have been devoted to reviewing the use 
of Au NCs as immune-regulating drugs to discuss the immune regulation 
mechanisms and applications in disease therapy. To highlight the sig­
nificance of Au NCs in immune regulation drugs for therapeutic pur­
poses in immune diseases, this section aims to elaborate on the different 
treatment strategies and mechanisms for various immune diseases.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an incurable chronic disease, resulting 
in self-inflammation and irreversible bone destruction. In severe cases, it 
can even cause systemic complications and early death. The pathogen­
esis of RA is complex and continuously being studied, involving in­
teractions between various immune cells, cytokines, and inflammatory 
responses. The chrysotherapy has been used to treat RA patients for over 
70 years, and a typical FDA-approved clinical drug, Auranofin, has been 
utilized for RA treatment since 1985. The undesired side effects and non- 
negligible high toxicity limit the further application of these Au-based 
drugs in clinical practice. As a novel Au-based drug, Au NCs have 
shown good biocompatibility and immune regulatory activities. Several 
Au cluster drugs were used for treating RA, and have shown more 
satisfactory efficiency and biosafety. As illustrated in Fig. 12, Gao’s 
group utilized Au NCs, which were synthesized with GSH, and directly 
used to treat RA in vitro/vivo. Preclinical studies on RA in rats have 
shown that the prepared Au NCs have a strong preventive effect on type 
II collagen-induced RA in rats and reverse cartilage/bone destruction to 
a normal state. Compared to the first-line drug methotrexate, Au NCs 
Fig. 11. Schematic illustration of the X-ray crystal structure of Mpro treated with AF and GA in a state where they form covalent bonds with Au-S. (a) Surface 
representation of the Mpro homodimer in the bound state with Chain A and Chain B depicted in green and violet, respectively. (b) Illustration of a single Mpro 
monomer with Domains I-III colored in light blue, light pink, and pale cyan. Detailed views of the binding sites for Au (I)-S are enlarged. (c) Comparison between the 
Au (I)-Cys145 bound state and the native state of Mpro. (d) Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations illustrate the interaction between Au (I) ions and Cys145 
and Cys156 of Mpro, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. [119]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
15 

demonstrated an equally effective inhibition of inflammation in vivo. 
The mechanism investigation revealed that Au NCs could exhibit anti- 
inflammatory effects by regulating the signaling pathways driven by 
NF-κB and MAPK activation, eventually reducing the serum and joint 
tissue levels of the cytokines TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6. In vivo experiments 
have shown that Au NCs can directly inhibit the formation and function 
of osteoclasts (OC) by suppressing the RANKL-induced NF-κB and MAPK 
signaling pathways, as well as downstream transcription factors c-fos, 
NFATc1, and osteoclastogenesis genes [121,122]. They also systemati­
cally investigated the optimal dose of Au NCs for RA therapy using a rat 
model. From the result, a dosage as low as 5 mg Au/kg can significantly 
alleviate RA symptoms without causing any noticeable toxicity or side 
effects, restoring a state closely resembling that of the normal control 
group [123].
Macrophages are essential for the immune response and inflamma­
tion. Different macrophage phenotypes exhibit distinct functions in 
regulating the initiation, progression, and resolution of inflammation. 
The M1 macrophage phenotype is a typical pro-inflammatory phenotype 
that is crucial for combating infectious pathogens.
The M2 macrophage phenotype is an anti-inflammatory phenotype 
that is beneficial for tissue repair. Li and his collaborators utilized R- 
DHLA as the synthesis ligand to construct the Ce-modified R-DHLA- 
AuNCs-Ce drug platform. The developed drug platform possessed an 
ultrasmall size and renal clearance capabilities. It also demonstrated 
oxygen radical scavenging abilities and enzyme-like activities, including 
CAT-like, and GPx-like, leading to a reduction in macrophage ROS 
levels. Moreover, the platform inhibited M1 polarization in IL-6, TNF-α, 
and IL-17 (ITI)-treated macrophages, inducing a shift from the M1 
phenotype to the M2 phenotype under hyperinflammatory conditions, 
ultimately leading to a reduction in the secretion of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines. By combining the remarkable effects of scavenging ROS 
and reducing inflammation through the regulation of macrophage po­
larization, R-DHLA-AuNCs-Ce could alleviate RA symptoms in a rat 
model [124]. Li et al. also investigated whether cells treated with 
R-DHLA-AuNCs-Ce could acquire immune memory and realize the 
treatment of advanced-stage RA. The findings of the study demonstrated 
that R-DHLA-AuNCs-Ce could inhibit the immune response triggered by 
B cells, inducing B cells to generate immune memory. Consequently, this 
treatment significantly curtailed B cell-mediated adaptive immunity, 
leading to heightened anti-inflammatory effects [125]. Microglia, as a 
special immune cell in the central nervous system (CNS), are essential in 
CNS tissue injury, repair, and regeneration. External stimuli, such as 
pathogens or injuries, can trigger activation and polarization of micro­
glia. The M1-like and M2-like phenotypes are the two extremes of this 
Fig. 12. The therapeutic effects of Au NCs in the rat RA model. (a) Representative histopathological images of joint sections from nonimmunized rats and CIA rats 
treated with vehicle, MTX, and Au NCs on day 42. b) Histological scores of inflammation and cartilage and bone erosion in CIA rats treated with different drugs. (c) 
Representative micro-CT images of metatarsal bone and ankle articulations in CIA rats treated with different drugs. (d–i) Representative images of immunohisto­
chemistry (IHC) of phosphor-IKK, phosphor-IκBα, and phosphor-p65 antigenicity (d,f,h) and percentages of p-IKK+ , p-IκBα+ , and p- p65 + cells (e,g,i) in joint 
tissues from nonimmunized rats and CIA rats treated with vehicle, MTX, and Au NCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. [121]. Copyright 2019, Wiley.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
16 

polarization. Similar to macrophages, M1 microglia could induce neu­
roinflammation by producing pro-inflammatory cytokines, leading to 
neural damage and impaired neurogenesis. M2 microglia could induce 
neurogenesis 
and 
brain 
tissue 
regeneration 
by 
secreting 
anti-inflammatory neurotrophic factors. Xiao et.al found that the pre­
pared DHLA−Au NCs could restrain inflammation by directing BV2 cell 
polarization from M1 toward M2 under stimulated inflammatory con­
ditions. Moreover, the conditioned medium produced by BV2 cells 
treated with DHLA-Au NCs enhanced neurogenesis. Additionally, 
DHLA-Au NC treatment demonstrated improvement in tissue damage 
within an ex vivo stroke model [126].
As a special arthritis, gout usually occurs when excessive accumu­
lation of urate crystals in the joints causes inflammation. Gout flares 
could be relieved by taking immunosuppressive drugs. As illustrated in 
Fig. 13, Mei and coworkers synthesized FA-modified lysozyme-pro­
tected Au NCs (FLA). In vitro, experimental results showed that FLA 
effectively suppressed the cytokine IL-1β, which is known to contribute 
to the exacerbation of gout flares. The experiment results revealed a 
reduction in cytokines, including IL-1β, Caspase1, IL-6, COX-2, NF-κβ, 
and TNF-α, in the FLA treatment group both in vivo and in vitro. They 
inferred that the downregulation of COX-2, an enzyme involved in 
regulating the pain mediator inflammatory mediator prostaglandin 2 
(PGE2), could alleviate pain. In vivo recovery of gout flares experiment 
results showed that the rats treated with FLA exhibited noticeable 
relaxation and an enhanced pain threshold. In the FLA-treated group, 
the lesions observed in the gout rat group, characterized by a smaller 
joint cavity, fluid exudation, inflammatory cell infiltration, cartilage 
layer thinning, vacuolar changes, and degenerative necrosis in chon­
drocytes, were significantly reduced [127].
In the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, Qian and collabo­
rators synthesized Au25 NCs with GSH and investigated their potential 
for treating the disease. As depicted in Fig. 14, the prepared Au25 NCs 
exhibited the ability to eliminate ROS, such as ABTS radicals, •O2−, and 
•OH, and also upregulated the expression levels of antioxidant enzymes. 
By combining the ability to inhibit the expression of proinflammatory 
cytokines, effective prevention and delayed treatment of IBD can 
eventually be realized by interrupting the inflammatory circuit associ­
ated with IBD [128]. Huang and colleagues combined the properties of 
renal clearance with the multienzyme mimetic activity of Au NCs, pre­
pared N-acetylcysteine-protected Au NCs, and applied them in the 
therapy of acute kidney injury (AKI). The prepared Au NCs could ach­
ieve renal-targeted and rapid clearance from the body. The experiment 
results confirmed that Au NCs could effectively eliminate intracellular 
multiple ROS and suppress ROS-induced inflammation. The rat model 
experiment also revealed that Au NCs-NAC could efficiently alleviate 
and treat AKI at a low dose [129].
Conclusions and perspectives
Being a highly promising nanomedicine, Au NCs exhibited capti­
vating attributes, including atomically precise structures, exceptional 
biocompatibility, rapid kidney clearance, and unique biological effects. 
Their precisely adjusted optical properties spanning from the visible 
light range to the near-infrared II region position Au as an outstanding 
candidate for applications in biomedical imaging and photodynamic 
therapy, among others. With inherent prolonged blood circulation, the 
EPR effect, and facile surface functionalization, Au NCs demonstrate 
enhanced accumulation at tumor sites, thereby elevating drug utiliza­
tion rates. Furthermore, the robust X-ray adsorption, scattering, radia­
tion re-emission, and rapid renal clearance properties of Au NCs make 
them excellent candidates as radiosensitizers for effective radiotherapy. 
The potential to selectively inhibit specific enzyme activities and 
modulate signaling pathways positions it as a promising candidate for 
use in antitumor, antiviral, and immunoregulatory therapeutics. In this 
review article, we provide a comprehensive overview of the strategies 
employed in the preparation of atomically precise Au NCs and explore 
their diverse range of applications in the field of biomedicine. We 
endeavor to thoroughly explain the distinct mechanisms at play within 
the scope of biomedical applications. Overall, this review aims to 
facilitate an understanding of how to design diverse functional 
biomedical Au NCs based on the variations in objectives.
Although research demonstrates that Au NCs have the latent capacity 
to become promising nanomedicine with precise atomic structures, 
there are still numerous untapped opportunities for their biomedical 
applications: First, scalable, reproducible, and cost-effective synthesis 
methods must be developed to enable the large-scale production of 
atomically precise nanoclusters with consistent quality fundamental 
prerequisite for clinical translation. Secondly, a critical challenge lies in 
systematically evaluating the risk-benefit balance between therapeutic 
efficacy and long-term in vivo safety, a task complicated by the current 
paucity of data on chronic toxicity, therapeutic dose windows, and 
detailed metabolic fate. Therefore, future research must prioritize 
standardized chronic toxicity studies employing relevant in vivo models 
to establish safety thresholds and therapeutic indices, thereby laying an 
essential foundation for clinical translation.
Beyond the aforementioned translational challenges, Au NCs possess 
considerable untapped potential and offer diverse, unexplored research 
avenues in biomedicine. Importantly, the in-depth exploration of these 
very avenues constitutes a vital strategy for addressing these barriers:
(1) Many recent studies have noted that Au NCs, as a type of metallic 
pharmaceutical, exhibit diverse biological activities throughout 
the process of disease treatment. It has the potential to demon­
strate antitumor activities by inhibiting thioredoxin reductase 
(TrxR) or inducing endoplasmic reticulum stress and mitochon­
drial damage, increasing ROS levels within the tumor, and ulti­
mately inducing cellular apoptosis. However, its enzyme-like 
catalytic activity also exhibits its ability to scavenge free radicals 
simultaneously. Certainly, during this process, the diverse li­
gands, the uptake of drugs, and the distinctive target cells or 
tissues play a pivotal role in determining its functional configu­
ration. Nevertheless, the precise role of the Au core in mediating 
the biological effects within the Au NCs remains an area that 
demands further investigation. Meanwhile, although studies have 
identified the precise target (Cys189 of hTrxR) for the inhibitory 
action of released Au(I) ions, the detailed molecular and cellular 
mechanisms of the initial step-namely, how Au NCs are “acti­
vated” within cells to release these ions-require deeper 
exploration.
(2) Ligands and structure are essential in mediating the biological 
effects of Au NCs. The design of ligands for Au NCs and the 
formulation of preparation strategies are of utmost significance in 
the development of personalized Au NCs therapeutics. Therefore, 
it is essential to establish advanced analysis methods and exper­
imental platforms to delve deeper into the structure-function 
relationship of Au NCs. For instance, synchrotron radiation X- 
ray techniques can offer valuable insights for investigating the 
distribution and transformation processes, aiming to elucidate 
the bioeffect mechanism of Au NCs. Gaining insight into how 
diverse ligands and the structural composition of Au NCs influ­
ence distribution and transformation processes will facilitate the 
design of personalized Au-based drugs.
(3) In a clinical biomedical field, precise molecular structures and 
well-defined structure-function relationships are key factors for 
achieving clinical translation. Hydrophilic Au NCs typically 
possess good biocompatibility, and the existing research on the 
bioactivity of Au NCs is also based on those with excellent hy­
drophilicity and biocompatibility. Although with the assistance 
of advanced detection technologies, such as ESI-MS and MALDI- 
TOF-MS, it can obtain certain compositional information of Au 
NC, the methods for acquiring precise structural information still 
require further exploration. The most effective approach is 
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
17 

Fig. 13. (a) and (b) Fluorescence imaging and the corresponding immunofluorescence analysis of IL-1β in Raw 246.7 cell culture. (c) Schematic representation for 
inhibition of IL-1β RAW 264.7 cell cultures by FLA. (d) Western blot and corresponding quantitative analysis of IL-1b (e), Caspase1 (f), ASC (g), IL-6 (h), TNF-α (i), 
COX-2 (j), and NF-κB (k). Reprinted with permission from ref. [127]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
18 

crystallographic analysis after crystallization. However, the sol­
ubility, the coverage density of ligands, uniformity of size, and 
the rigidity of Au cluster molecule preparation are all contrib­
uting factors that impede the crystallization of hydrophilic Au 
NCs. Hence, further exploration of crystallization conditions or 
techniques for single-molecule structural characterization is 
warranted.
(4) In past research, computational chemistry, such as quantum 
chemistry calculations, molecular dynamics simulations, and 
molecular mechanics calculations, has provided significant 
assistance in our understanding of the structure of Au NCs and in 
predicting their structures. The rise of artificial intelligence, 
including machine learning, has notably advanced the tailored 
synthesis and design of Au NCs, along with enhancing our 
comprehension of structure-function correlations and enabling 
the prediction of molecular properties and reactions within these 
NCs. The integration of artificial intelligence is emerging as a 
transformative approach in NCs design [130]. Specifically, ma­
chine learning models can decode the complex relationships be­
tween synthetic parameters, atomic structures, and functional 
properties, enabling atomically precise reverse design and per­
formance prediction. Meanwhile, deep learning algorithms can 
analyze high-throughput experimental and computational data to 
rapidly screen NCs candidates with optimal therapeutic indices 
and simultaneously guide the refinement of their synthesis pro­
tocols. Together, AI-driven strategies pioneer a paradigm shift 
toward the on-demand design of next-generation, intelligent gold 
nanomedicines.
(5) Certainly, Au NCs have shown considerable promise for 
biomedical applications, particularly due to their compatibility 
with near-infrared II (NIR-II) imaging. This imaging window of­
fers distinct advantages such as deeper tissue penetration, 
reduced autofluorescence and scattering, and an improved signal- 
to-noise ratio. By precisely tuning the emission or surface plas­
mon resonance of Au NCs within the NIR-II region, biological 
background interference can be significantly minimized while 
enhancing penetration depth, enabling high-resolution, high- 
contrast in vivo imaging. These capabilities support early tumor 
detection, identification of micrometastases, and reliable preci­
sion in image-guided surgery. Beyond imaging, Au NCs exhibit 
strong potential in integrated theranostics. They can act simul­
taneously as efficient NIR-II imaging probes and as carriers for 
drugs or photothermal agents. Under real-time imaging guidance, 
this enables targeted treatment modalities such as photothermal 
therapy (PTT), photodynamic therapy (PDT), or controlled drug 
delivery, fostering synergistic diagnostic and therapeutic out­
comes. Such an integrated approach holds meaningful promise 
for advancing precision oncology. Meanwhile, a critical challenge 
lies in systematically evaluating the risk-benefit balance between 
therapeutic efficacy and long-term in vivo safety, a task compli­
cated by the current paucity of data on chronic toxicity, thera­
peutic dose windows, and detailed metabolic fate. Therefore, 
future research must prioritize standardized chronic toxicity 
studies employing relevant in vivo models to establish safety 
thresholds and therapeutic indices, thereby laying an essential 
foundation for clinical translation.
Fig. 14. Synthesis of Au25 NCs and mechanism of treatment of DSS-induced colitis in mice. In the host’s immune system, AUR impedes the reception of inflammatory 
cytokines, blocks key nodes in inflammatory signaling, and ultimately reduces immune effector molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. [128]. Copyright 
2022, KeAi Communications Co. Ltd.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
19 

(6) Although this review primarily addresses monometallic gold 
nanoclusters, it is imperative to recognize that bimetallic nano­
clusters (e.g., Au-Pt, Au-Ag, Au-Cu) exhibit substantial potential 
for enhancing catalytic activity (e.g., mitigating hypoxia and 
generating reactive oxygen species), modulating the immune 
microenvironment, and attenuating metal-ion toxicity via inter­
metallic electronic synergy and functional complementarity. 
Future research should therefore aim to establish universal syn­
thetic protocols that afford structurally well-defined binary and 
multicomponent alloy clusters, to delineate the precise contri­
butions of individual metal centers to biological outcomes, and to 
systematically assess their stability, metabolic fate, and long-term 
biosafety in complex biological milieus.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yuan Zhang: Investigation. Chao Xu: Writing – original draft, 
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Xueyun Gao: 
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. Chunyu Zhang: 
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the General Project of the Natural Sci­
ence Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2022MB146), and the Na­
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (22334001, 22527808, 
22504076, 82303800).
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] S. Peng, F. Xiao, M. Chen, H. Gao, Adv. Sci. 9 (2022) 2103836.
[2] H. Chen, Z. Gu, H. An, C. Chen, J. Chen, R. Cui, S. Chen, W. Chen, X. Chen, 
X. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Ding, Q. Dong, Q. Fan, T. Fu, D. Hou, Q. Jiang, H. Ke, 
X. Jiang, G. Liu, S. Li, T. Li, Z. Liu, G. Nie, M. Ovais, D. Pang, N. Qiu, Y. Shen, 
H. Tian, C. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Xu, J.-F. Xu, X. Yang, S. Zhu, X. Zheng, 
X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, W. Tan, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Sci. China Chem. 61 (2018) 
1503–1552.
[3] I. Chakraborty, T. Pradeep, Chem. Rev. 117 (2017) 8208–8271.
[4] R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou, Y. Chen, Chem. Rev. 116 (2016) 10346–10413.
[5] Q. Yao, T. Chen, X. Yuan, J. Xie, Acc. Chem. Res. 51 (2018) 1338–1348.
[6] X. Chen, X. Ren, X. Gao, Chin. J. Chem. 40 (2021) 267–274.
[7] C. Zhang, C. Xu, X. Gao, Q. Yao, Theranostics 12 (2022) 2115–2132.
[8] X.-D. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Shen, P.-X. Liu, F.-Y. Fan, S.-J. Fan, Biomaterials 33 (2012) 
4628–4638.
[9] M. Longmire, P.L. Choyke, H. Kobayashi, Nanomedicine 3 (2008) 703–717.
[10] Y. Qi, M. Xu, H. Lu, X. Wang, Y. Peng, Z. Wang, F. Liang, X. Jiang, B. Du, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 63 (2024) e202409477.
[11] B. Du, X. Jiang, A. Das, Q. Zhou, M. Yu, R. Jin, J. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol. 12 
(2017) 1096–1102.
[12] Y. Huang, M. Yu, J. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol. 18 (2023) 637–646.
[13] Y. Wang, C. Xu, J. Zhai, F. Gao, R. Liu, L. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Chai, X. Gao, Anal. 
Chem. 87 (2015) 343–345.
[14] I. Zare, M.T. Yaraki, G. Speranza, A.H. Najafabadi, A. Shourangiz-Haghighi, A. 
B. Nik, B.B. Manshian, C. Saraiva, S.J. Soenen, M.J. Kogan, J.W. Lee, N.V. Apollo, 
L. Bernardino, E. Araya, D. Mayer, G. Mao, M.R. Hamblin, Chem. Soc. Rev. 51 
(2022) 2601–2680.
[15] P. Khandelwal, P. Poddar, J. Mater. Chem. B 5 (2017) 9055–9084.
[16] Z. Liu, L. Luo, R. Jin, Adv. Mater. 36 (2023) 2309073.
[17] S.M. van de Looij, E.R. Hebels, M. Viola, M. Hembury, S. Oliveira, T. Vermonden, 
Bioconjug. Chem. 33 (2022) 4–23.
[18] A. Baghdasaryan, H. Dai, Chem. Rev. 125 (2025) 5195–5227.
[19] H. Liu, G. Hong, Z. Luo, J. Chen, J. Chang, M. Gong, H. He, J. Yang, X. Yuan, L. Li, 
X. Mu, J. Wang, W. Mi, J. Luo, J. Xie, X.D. Zhang, Adv. Mater. 31 (2019) 
1901015.
[20] B. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Cao, O.J.H. Chai, J. Xie, Small 17 (2021) 2004381.
[21] X. Kang, Y. Li, M. Zhu, R. Jin, Chem. Soc. Rev. 49 (2020) 6443–6514.
[22] W. Kurashige, Y. Niihori, S. Sharma, Y. Negishi, Coord. Chem. Rev. 320-321 
(2016) 238–250.
[23] K. Zheng, J. Xie, Trends Chem. 2 (2020) 665–679.
[24] C.M.A.Manzhou Zhu, Frederick J. Hollander, George C. Schatz, Rongchao Jin, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130 (2008) 5883–5885.
[25] R.H. Adnan, J.M.L. Madridejos, A.S. Alotabi, G.F. Metha, G.G. Andersson, Adv. 
Sci. 9 (2022) 2105692.
[26] X.K. Wan, S.F. Yuan, Z.W. Lin, Q.M. Wang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 53 (2014) 
2923–2926.
[27] M.R. Narouz, S. Takano, P.A. Lummis, T.I. Levchenko, A. Nazemi, S. Kaappa, 
S. Malola, G. Yousefalizadeh, L.A. Calhoun, K.G. Stamplecoskie, H. Hakkinen, 
T. Tsukuda, C.M. Crudden, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141 (2019) 14997–15002.
[28] H. Shen, S. Xiang, Z. Xu, C. Liu, X. Li, C. Sun, S. Lin, B.K. Teo, N. Zheng, Nano Res 
13 (2020) 1908–1911.
[29] S. Hossain, W. Kurashige, S. Wakayama, B. Kumar, L.V. Nair, Y. Niihori, 
Y. Negishi, J. Phy. Chem. C. 120 (2016) 25861–25869.
[30] W.T.E.Huifeng Qian, Yan Zhu, Tomislav Pintauer, Rongchao Jin, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 132 (2010) 8280–8281.
[31] A.D.Michael W. Heaven, Peter S. White, Kennedy M. Holt, Royce W. Murray, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130 (2008) 3754–3755.
[32] N. Yan, N. Xia, L. Liao, M. Zhu, F. Jin, R. Jin, Z. Wu, Sci. Adv. 10 (2018) eaat7259.
[33] G.C.Pablo D. Jadzinsky, Christopher J. Ackerson, David A. Bushnell, Roger 
D. Kornberg, Science 318 (2007) 430–433.
[34] Q. Yao, L. Liu, S. Malola, M. Ge, H. Xu, Z. Wu, T. Chen, Y. Cao, M.F. Matus, 
A. Pihlajamaki, Y. Han, H. Hakkinen, J. Xie, Nat. Chem. 15 (2023) 230–239.
[35] C. Zeng, H. Qian, T. Li, G. Li, N.L. Rosi, B. Yoon, R.N. Barnett, R.L. Whetten, 
U. Landman, R. Jin, Engl, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 51 (2012) 13114–13118.
[36] X.D. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Chen, X. Shen, S. Song, Y. Sun, S. Fan, F. Fan, D.T. Leong, 
J. Xie, Adv. Mater. 26 (2014) 4565–4568.
[37] G.K.T. Gregory Schaaff, Marat N. Shafigullin, Raymond F. Borkman, R. 
L. Whetten, J. Phy. Chem. B 102 (1998) 10643–10646.
[38] M.W.Mathias Brust, Donald Bethell, David J. Schiffrin, Robin Whyman, J. Chem. 
Soc. Chem. Commun. (7) (1994) 801–802.
[39] Y. Negishi, K. Nobusada, T. Tsukuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127 (2005) 5261–5270.
[40] X.D. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Luo, D. Wu, X. Shen, S.S. Song, Y.M. Sun, P.X. Liu, J. Zhao, 
S. Huo, S. Fan, F. Fan, X.J. Liang, J. Xie, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 3 (2014) 133–141.
[41] Q. Yuan, Y. Wang, L. Zhao, R. Liu, F. Gao, L. Gao, X. Gao, Nanoscale 8 (2016) 
12095–12104.
[42] C. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Han, Y. Fang, X. Liu, X. Wang, G.I.N. Waterhouse, C. Xu, 
H. Yin, X. Gao, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 3 (2020) 1934–1943.
[43] J. Zhai, Y. Wang, C. Xu, L. Zheng, M. Wang, W. Feng, L. Gao, L. Zhao, R. Liu, 
F. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Chai, X. Gao, Anal. Chem. 87 (2015) 2546–2549.
[44] X. Zhang, R. Liu, Q. Yuan, F. Gao, J. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Z. Chai, L. Gao, X. Gao, 
ACS Nano 12 (2018) 11139–11151.
[45] K. Chaudhari, P.L. Xavier, T. Pradeep, ACS Nano 5 (2011) 8816–8827.
[46] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, J.Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131 (2009) 888–889.
[47] H. Wei, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, S. House, Y.G. Gao, L. Yang, H. Robinson, L.H. Tan, 
H. Xing, C. Hou, I.M. Robertson, J.M. Zuo, Y. Lu, Nat. Nanotechnol. 6 (2011) 
93–97.
[48] A. Baksi, P.L. Xavier, K. Chaudhari, N. Goswami, S.K. Pal, T. Pradeep, Nanoscale 5 
(2013) 2009–2016.
[49] B.A. Russell, B. Jachimska, P. Komorek, P.A. Mulheran, Y. Chen, Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 19 (2017) 7228–7235.
[50] P.H. Chan, Y.C. Chen, Anal. Chem. 84 (2012) 8952–8956.
[51] B.A. Russell, B. Jachimska, I. Kralka, P.A. Mulheran, Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B 4 
(2016) 6876–6882.
[52] L.Y. Chen, C.W. Wang, Z. Yuan, H.T. Chang, Anal. Chem. 87 (2015) 216–229.
[53] P.L. Xavier, K. Chaudhari, P.K. Verma, S.K. Pal, T. Pradeep, Nanoscale 2 (2010) 
2769–2776.
[54] X. Jiang, C. Sun, Y. Guo, G. Nie, L. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron. 64 (2015) 165–170.
[55] Y. Wu, B. Lin, Y. Lu, L. Li, K. Deng, S. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Zhu, Engl, 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62 (2023) 202218106.
[56] J.M. Carothers, S.C. Oestreich, J.W. Szostak, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128 (2006) 
7929–7937.
[57] B. Feng, Y. Xing, J. Lan, Z. Su, F. Wang, Talanta 212 (2020) 120796.
[58] F. Xia, A. He, H. Zhao, Y. Sun, Q. Duan, S.J. Abbas, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, W. Tan, ACS 
Nano 16 (2022) 169–179.
[59] B. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Cao, O.J.H. Chai, J. Xie, Small 17 (2021) 2004381.
[60] Y. Niihori, Y. Kikuchi, A. Kato, M. Matsuzaki, Y. Negishi, ACS Nano 9 (2015) 
9347–9356.
[61] Q. Yao, Y. Feng, V. Fung, Y. Yu, D.E. Jiang, J. Yang, J. Xie, Nat. Commun. 8 
(2017) 1555.
[62] V. Rojas-Cervellera, L. Raich, J. Akola, C. Rovira, Nanoscale 9 (2017) 3121–3127.
[63] E. Guerrero, T. Rojas, M. Multigner, P. Crespo, M. Munozmarquez, M. Garcia, 
A. Hernando, A. Fernandez, Acta Mater. 55 (2007) 1723–1730.
[64] C. Xu, Y. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Jia, Y. Luo, X. Gao, Nanoscale 9 (2017) 4620–4628.
[65] Z. Geng, Z. Cao, J. Liu, Exploration 3 (2023) 20210117.
[66] X. Bai, S. Wang, X. Yan, H. Zhou, J. Zhan, S. Liu, V.K. Sharma, G. Jiang, H. Zhu, 
B. Yan, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 289–302.
[67] Y. Liu, Y. Qing, L. Jing, W. Zou, R. Guo, Langmuir 37 (2021) 7364–7372.
[68] T. Chen, Q. Chu, M. Li, G. Han, X. Li, J. Nanobiotech 19 (2021) 206.
[69] S. Xuan, A. de Barros, R.C. Nunes, E. Ricci-Junior, A.X. da Silva, M. Sahid, L.M. 
R. Alencar, C.C. Dos Santos, V. Morandi, F. Alexis, S.H. Iram, R. Santos-Oliveira, 
Artif. Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol. 48 (2020) 1214–1221.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
20 

[70] D. De Ruysscher, G. Niedermann, N.G. Burnet, S. Siva, A.W.M. Lee, F. Hegi- 
Johnson, Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 5 (2019) 13.
[71] K. Haume, S. Rosa, S. Grellet, M.A. Smialek, K.T. Butterworth, A.V. Solov'yov, K. 
M. Prise, J. Golding, N.J. Mason, Cancer Nanotechnol. 7 (2016) 8.
[72] D. Luo, X. Wang, S. Zeng, G. Ramamurthy, C. Burda, J.P. Basilion, Small 15 
(2019) 1900968.
[73] X. Fang, Y. Wang, X. Ma, Y. Li, Z. Zhang, Z. Xiao, L. Liu, X. Gao, J. Liu, J. Mater. 
Chem. B 5 (2017) 4190–4197.
[74] T.T. Jia, G. Yang, S.J. Mo, Z.Y. Wang, B.J. Li, W. Ma, Y.X. Guo, X. Chen, X. Zhao, 
J.Q. Liu, S.Q. Zang, ACS Nano 13 (2019) 8320–8328.
[75] W. Sun, L. Luo, Y. Feng, Y. Cai, Y. Zhuang, R.J. Xie, X. Chen, H. Chen, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 59 (2020) 9914–9921.
[76] F. Xiao, Y. Chen, J. Qi, Q. Yao, J. Xie, X. Jiang, Adv. Mater. 35 (2023) 2210412.
[77] X.D. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Chen, S. Song, X. Yuan, X. Shen, H. Wang, Y. Sun, K. Gao, 
L. Zhang, S. Fan, D.T. Leong, M. Guo, J. Xie, Sci. Rep. 5 (2015) 8669.
[78] J.Y. Wang, J. Chen, J. Yang, H. Wang, X. Shen, Y.M. Sun, M. Guo, X.D. Zhang, Int. 
J. Nanomed. 11 (2016) 3475–3485.
[79] T.-T. Jia, B.-J. Li, G. Yang, Y. Hua, J.-Q. Liu, W. Ma, S.-Q. Zang, X. Chen, X. Zhao, 
Nano Today 39 (2021) 101222.
[80] G. Liang, X. Jin, S. Zhang, D. Xing, Biomaterials 144 (2017) 95–104.
[81] D. Luo, X. Wang, S. Zeng, G. Ramamurthy, C. Burda, J.P. Basilion, Small 15 
(2019) 1900968.
[82] Y. Hua, Y. Wang, X. Kang, F. Xu, Z. Han, C. Zhang, Z.Y. Wang, J.Q. Liu, X. Zhao, 
X. Chen, S.Q. Zang, J. Nanobiotechnol 19 (2021) 438.
[83] Y. Hua, Z.H. Shao, A. Zhai, L.J. Zhang, Z.Y. Wang, G. Zhao, F. Xie, J.Q. Liu, 
X. Zhao, X. Chen, S.Q. Zang, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 7837–7846.
[84] Y. Hua, J.H. Huang, Z.H. Shao, X.M. Luo, Z.Y. Wang, J.Q. Liu, X. Zhao, X. Chen, S. 
Q. Zang, Adv. Mater. 34 (2022) 2203734.
[85] X. Zhang, X. Chen, Y.W. Jiang, N. Ma, L.Y. Xia, X. Cheng, H.R. Jia, P. Liu, N. Gu, 
Z. Chen, F.G. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (2018) 10601–10606.
[86] G. Yang, X. Pan, W. Feng, Q. Yao, F. Jiang, F. Du, X. Zhou, J. Xie, X. Yuan, ACS 
Nano 17 (2023) 15605–15614.
[87] W. Niu, Z. Du, C. Zhang, D. Xu, J. Li, M. Sun, L. Wu, H. Yao, L. Zhao, X. Gao, Chin. 
Chem. Lett. 33 (2022) 3488–3491.
[88] R. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Yuan, D. An, J. Li, X. Gao, Chem. Commun. 50 (2014) 
10687–10690.
[89] H. Xiong, J. Ye, M. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Liu, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 218 (2022) 114763.
[90] S. Basu, U. Goswami, A. Paul, A. Chattopadhyay, J. Mater. Chem. B 6 (2018) 
1650–1657.
[91] J. Zhang, H. Zou, J. Lei, B. He, X. He, H.H.Y. Sung, R.T.K. Kwok, J.W.Y. Lam, 
L. Zheng, B.Z. Tang, Engl, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 59 (2020) 7097–7105.
[92] Z. Du, Z. He, J. Fan, Y. Huo, B. He, Y. Wang, Q. Sun, W. Niu, W. Zhao, L. Zhao, 
P. Cao, K. Cao, D. Xia, Q. Yuan, X.-J. Liang, H. Jiang, Y. Gong, X. Gao, Nano 
Today 47 (2022) 101686.
[93] R. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Yuan, D. An, J. Li, X. Gao, Chem. Commun. 50 (2014) 
10687–10690.
[94] M. Liu, L. Gao, L. Zhao, J. He, Q. Yuan, P. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Gao, Sci. Rep. 7 
(2017) 131.
[95] Y. Yao, C. Lu, L. Gao, K. Cao, H. Yuan, X. Zhang, X. Gao, Q. Yuan, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 13 (2021) 21108–21118.
[96] Z. Zhang, Y. Yao, Q. Yuan, C. Lu, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, K. Hou, C. Zhang, Z. Du, 
X. Gao, X. Chen, Theranostics 10 (2020) 4042–4055.
[97] H. Huang, D.P. Yang, M. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, G. Zhou, W. Liu, Y. Cao, W. 
J. Zhang, X. Wang, Int. J. Nanomed. 12 (2017) 2829–2843.
[98] H. Kawasaki, S. Kumar, G. Li, C. Zeng, D.R. Kauffman, J. Yoshimoto, Y. Iwasaki, 
R. Jin, Chem. Mater. 26 (2014) 2777–2788.
[99] S. Ren, R. Dai, Z. Zheng, X. Chen, S. Wu, R. Zhang, Z. Gui, J. Mater. Chem. B 11 
(2022) 109–118.
[100] H. Bi, Y. Dai, P. Yang, J. Xu, D. Yang, S. Gai, F. He, G. An, C. Zhong, J. Lin, Chem. 
Eng. J. 356 (2019) 543–553.
[101] L.V. Nair, S.S. Nazeer, R.S. Jayasree, A. Ajayaghosh, ACS Nano 9 (2015) 
5825–5832.
[102] D. Yang, A. Gulzar, G. Yang, S. Gai, F. He, Y. Dai, C. Zhong, P. Yang, Small 13 
(2017), 1703007.
[103] Q. Dan, Z. Yuan, S. Zheng, H. Ma, W. Luo, L. Zhang, N. Su, D. Hu, Z. Sheng, Y. Li, 
Pharmaceutics 14 (2022) 1645.
[104] Y. Wang, J. Chen, J. Irudayaraj, ACS Nano 5 (2011) 9718–9725.
[105] S. Yoon, S.Y. Cheon, S. Park, D. Lee, Y. Lee, S. Han, M. Kim, H. Koo, Biomater. 
Res. 26 (2022) 57.
[106] G. Pirovano, S. Roberts, S. Kossatz, T. Reiner, J. Nucl. Med. 61 (2020) 1419–1427.
[107] A. Baghdasaryan, H. Liu, F. Ren, R. Hsu, Y. Jiang, F. Wang, M. Zhang, 
L. Grigoryan, H. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 121 (2024) e2318265121.
[108] K. Zheng, J. Xie, Acc. Mater. Res. 2 (2021) 1104–1116.
[109] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Bioact. Mater. 6 (2021) 941–950.
[110] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, ACS Nano 11 (2017) 6904–6910.
[111] Y. Zhang, R. Chen, Y. Wang, P. Wang, J. Pu, X. Xu, F. Chen, L. Jiang, Q. Jiang, 
F. Yan, J. Nanobiotech 20 (2022) 470.
[112] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Chem. Mater. 30 (2018) 2800–2808.
[113] K. Zheng, M.I. Setyawati, D.T. Leong, J. Xie, Nano Res 14 (2020) 1026–1033.
[114] H. Zhu, N. Liu, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, Q. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Yin, X. Yuan, 
Nanoscale 13 (2021) 18996–19003.
[115] S. Miyata, H. Miyaji, H. Kawasaki, M. Yamamoto, E. Nishida, H. Takita, 
T. Akasaka, N. Ushijima, T. Iwanaga, T. Sugaya, Int. J. Nanomed. 12 (2017) 
2703–2716.
[116] T. Zou, C.T. Lum, C.N. Lok, J.J. Zhang, C.M. Che, Chem. Soc. Rev. 44 (2015) 
8786–8801.
[117] Q. Pena, A. Wang, O. Zaremba, Y. Shi, H.W. Scheeren, J.M. Metselaar, 
F. Kiessling, R.M. Pallares, S. Wuttke, T. Lammers, Chem. Soc. Rev. 51 (2022) 
2544–2582.
[118] S. Shen, J. Shen, Z. Luo, F. Wang, J. Min, Coord. Chem. Rev. 493 (2023) 215323.
[119] Z. He, F. Ye, C. Zhang, J. Fan, Z. Du, W. Zhao, Q. Yuan, W. Niu, F. Gao, B. He, 
P. Cao, L. Zhao, X. Gao, X. Gao, B. Sun, Y. Dong, J. Zhao, J. Qi, X.J. Liang, 
H. Jiang, Y. Gong, W. Tan, X. Gao, Nano Today 44 (2022) 101468.
[120] C. Feng, P. Fang, Y. Zhou, L. Liu, L. Fang, S. Xiao, J. Liang, Glob. Chall. 2 (2018), 
1800030.
[121] F. Gao, Q. Yuan, P. Cai, L. Gao, L. Zhao, M. Liu, Y. Yao, Z. Chai, X. Gao, Adv. Sci. 6 
(2019), 1801671.
[122] Q. Yuan, F. Gao, Y. Yao, P. Cai, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, K. Hou, L. Gao, X. Ren, X. Gao, 
Theranostics 9 (2019) 1825–1836.
[123] Q. Yuan, Y. Zhao, P. Cai, Z. He, F. Gao, J. Zhang, X. Gao, ACS Omega 4 (2019) 
14092–14099.
[124] S. Lin, Z. Zhou, C. Xu, F. Zeng, Z. Shi, J. Sun, X. Mei, C. Liu, D. Li, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 14 (2022) 18053–18063.
[125] S. Lin, W. Gao, J. Sun, K. Gao, D. Li, X. Mei, Mater. Today Bio 15 (2022) 100331.
[126] L. Xiao, F. Wei, Y. Zhou, G.J. Anderson, D.M. Frazer, Y.C. Lim, T. Liu, Y. Xiao, 
Nano Lett. 20 (2020) 478–495.
[127] J. Sun, P. Zhuang, S. Wen, M. Ge, Z. Zhou, D. Li, C. Liu, X. Mei, Mater. Des. 217 
(2022) 110642.
[128] F. Wang, Q. Li, T. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Jiang, Y. Ma, X. Li, W. Wang, H. Qian, Fundam. Res. 
5 (2022) 381–390.
[129] D.Y. Zhang, T. Tu, M.R. Younis, K.S. Zhu, H. Liu, S. Lei, J. Qu, J. Lin, P. Huang, 
Theranostics 11 (2021) 9904–9917.
[130] S. Das, H. Mazumdar, K.R. Khondakar, A. Kaushik, BMEMat 3 (2024) e12117.
C. Xu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Nano Today 67 (2026) 102985 
21