RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advmat.de
A Peptide-Drug Conjugate-Based Nanoplatform for
Immunometabolic Activation and In Situ Nerve
Regeneration in Advanced-Stage Alzheimer’s Disease
Peixin Liu, Tongyu Zhang, Yuxing Wu, Qinjun Chen, Tao Sun, and Chen Jiang*
The formidable protection of physiological barriers and unclear pathogenic
mechanisms impede drug development for Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
As defenders of the central nervous system, immune-metabolism function,
and stemness of glial cells remain dormant during degeneration, representing
a signiﬁcant challenge for simultaneously targeting and modulating.
Here, a modular nanoplatform is presented composed of peptide-drug
conjugates and an inﬂammation-responsive core. The nanoplatform is
transported through the blood-brain barrier via transcytosis and disassembles
in the oxidative stress microenvironment upon intravenous administration.
The released drug-conjugated modules can speciﬁcally target and deliver
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) to microglia and
astrocytes, respectively. The immune function of chronic tolerant microglia is
activated by metabolic modulation, and reactive astrocytes trans-diﬀerentiate
into functional neurons. In a transgenic mouse model, nanoplatform
reduces levels of toxic proteins and inﬂammation while increasing neuronal
density. This results in the amelioration of learning and memory decline.
The modular nanoplatform provides design principles for multi-cellular
targeting and combination nano-therapy for inﬂammation-related diseases.
1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative dis-
order for which there are currently no eﬀective therapeutic
P. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Wu, Q. Chen, T. Sun, C. Jiang
Department of Pharmaceutics
School of Pharmacy
Key Laboratory of Smart Drug Delivery
Ministry of Education
State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center
for Brain Science
Fudan University
Shanghai 201203, China
E-mail: jiangchen@shmu.edu.cn
C.Jiang
Department of DigestiveDiseases
National Regional Medical Center
Binhai Campus of theFirst AﬃliatedHospital
Fujian Medical University
Fuzhou 350212,China
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202408729
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202408729
interventions to prevent or halt disease pro-
gression. The incidence of AD rapidly in-
creases with age, classifying it as an age-
related disease.[1] Traditional drug discovery
approaches have focused on downstream
molecular events associated with abnormal
aging biomarkers, such as amyloid plaque
and neuroﬁbrillary tangles.[2] However, the
impact of abnormal aging on brain cells
and its promotion of AD progression have
been largely neglected. Recent studies have
highlighted the signiﬁcance of aging neu-
rovascular units in AD pathogenesis.[3] Al-
though neuronal loss is irreversible in the
advanced stages of AD, functionally im-
paired glial cells enter a self-protective dor-
mant state.[4] Consequently, awakening dor-
mant glial cells may represent a promising
strategy for AD treatment.
Cellular aging is accompanied by alter-
ations in metabolic levels, which directly
contribute to immune function and cell
phenotype modiﬁcations.[5] For instance,
microglia polarize to the M1 phenotype and
secrete pro-inﬂammatory cytokines while
being recruited to sites of inﬂammation and enhancing phago-
cytosis during the early stages of inﬂammation.[6] However, if
this process persists unchecked, microglia will enter a dormant
state of immune tolerance where they appear unresponsive to
stimulation.[7] Although immune tolerance can reduce inﬂam-
mation, it contributes to immune cell dysfunction in various
diseases.[8] Therefore, activating and controlling the immune
function of microglia is crucial for disease treatment. The in-
tricate interplay between metabolism and immunity presents
promising avenues for further investigation. Microglial activa-
tion is characterized by metabolic reprogramming, which in-
volves a shift in cellular metabolism from oxidative phospho-
rylation (OXPHOS) to glycolysis.[9] This process involves mul-
tiple signaling pathways, which are of particular importance to
the mammalian target of the rapamycin (mTOR) pathway.[10]
Activation of mTOR can regulate cellular glucose, lipid, and
amino acid metabolism while positively inﬂuencing cellular im-
mune function.[11] Recent studies have demonstrated that the
mTOR-hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1𝛼) pathway plays a piv-
otal role in determining the immunological function of mi-
croglia by activating cellular glycolysis and enhancing phagocyto-
sis capabilities.[12] Consequently, targeting modulation within the
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (1 of 21)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Scheme 1. Self-assembly process of nanoplatform (DA-PPHATK@PDA) and the mechanism of glial cells-targeting therapy of nanoplatform in advanced
stage AD.
microglial immuno-metabolic network holds potential for treat-
ing AD.
In contrast to the dormant state of microglia, astrocytes exhibit
a hidden capacity for self-renewal during AD progression.[13] As-
trocytes and neurons originate from neural stem cells in the cen-
tral nervous system, enabling astrocytes to retain their prolifer-
ative properties and respond to disease stimuli by becoming ac-
tivated and undergoing proliferation.[14] Reactive astrocytes ex-
hibit speciﬁc characteristics resembling stem cells and positively
correlate with their degree of activation.[15] Reprogramming cells
with stemness to diﬀerentiate into neurons represents an eﬀec-
tive strategy for reversing neurodegenerative diseases.[16] Studies
have demonstrated that NeuroD1 expression could facilitate the
trans-diﬀerentiation of astrocytes into neurons.[17] Therefore, in-
ducing an in situ transition of reactive astrocytes into neurons
may contribute to neuronal regeneration within the AD brain.
We propose a modular-designed nano-alarm clock to awaken
dormant microglia and astrocytes (Scheme 1). In advanced-
stage AD, hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and all-trans retinoic
acid (ATRA) are selected as model immune-activating and
diﬀerentiation-inducing drugs, respectively. The drugs are cova-
lently linked to the polymer backbone (D-PPA and A-PPH) to en-
sure stability and consistency in vitro and in vivo behavior. Fur-
thermore, a polydopamine (PDA) nanocore module is synthe-
sized to disintegrate in the oxidative stress microenvironment
of the AD brain, enabling the sensitive release of drug-loaded
modules for further targeting glial cells. The drug-loaded mod-
ule and nanocore module self-assemble into DA-PPHA@PDA
through electrostatic adsorption. To enhance the systemic sta-
bility of the nanoplatform, a ROS-sensitive cross-linker is intro-
duced, resulting in the formation of DA-PPHATK@PDA. Follow-
ing intravenous administration, DA-PPHATK@PDA actively tar-
gets brain endothelial cells under AD conditions while crossing
the BBB via the transcytosis mechanism. HCQ is explicitly de-
livered to microglia to activate the immune response and restore
energy metabolism. In contrast, ATRA selectively targets astro-
cytes, promoting their trans-diﬀerentiation into functional neu-
rons while alleviating inﬂammation levels. Our research demon-
strates a promising approach for modulating glial cells in treat-
ing advanced-stage AD. It proposes a novel multicellular tar-
geting nanoplatform for the targeted therapy of AD and other
inﬂammation-related diseases.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (2 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
2. Results
2.1. Hallmarks of Dormant Glial Cells and Modulation by HCQ
and ATRA
To ascertain the temporal proﬁle of microglia transitioning
into immune tolerance in APP/PS1 mice, the expression of
Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway was investigated (Figure S1, Sup-
porting Information). p-mTOR, a pivotal regulator of immune
function and metabolism, substantially increased in the hip-
pocampus of 7- and 8-month-old mouse brains. While an ap-
parent decline in p-mTOR was observed over the subsequent
two months. Western blot (WB) results also demonstrated the
shift from an immune-active to an immune-tolerant state of mi-
croglia as AD progressed. In addition, previous studies have in-
dicated that massive (𝛽-amyloid) A𝛽deposition, astrocyte over-
activation, and neuron loss were observed during this period,
which was identiﬁed as the advanced stage of AD.[18] We com-
prehensively analyzed the alterations in the Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼
signaling pathway during the aging process of microglial cells
using single-cell RNA sequencing database analysis (Figure S2,
Supporting Information).[19] By comparing the expression pro-
ﬁles of this pathway in microglia at distinct stages of youth
(3 months), middle age (14 months), and old age (24 months)
obtained through live cell sorting, we observed a consistent pat-
tern of upregulation followed by downregulation for these three
genes throughout the aging process. Notably, these ﬁndings are
in accordance with our observations regarding alterations in the
immune status within microglia in APP/PS1 brains. Therefore,
we hypothesized that ≈9 months of age represented a critical pe-
riod for modulating glial cells in APP/PS1 mice.
Glial cell targeting is a critical step in the modulation of bio-
logical function. Receptor-mediated BBB penetration or cell tar-
geting has been demonstrated to be an auspicious approach for
targeted delivery.[20] Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), a
matricellular protein that is highly expressed in AD brain, has
been reported to play an active role in mediating the transport of
substrates (such as DAG peptide) across the BBB via transcyto-
sis and subsequent astrocyte targeting.[21] Immunoﬂuorescence
staining and WB results of APP/PS1 mouse brains showed that
the expression level of CTGF was 1.4 times higher than that in
control brain tissue and sustainedly upregulated along with as-
trocyte activation (Figure S3, Supporting Information). Accord-
ingly, we assumed DAG peptide modiﬁcation would facilitate the
speciﬁc delivery of nanoplatform across the BBB and into reac-
tive astrocytes. Besides, the receptor for advanced glycation end-
products (RAGE) has been demonstrated to mediate A𝛽trans-
portation across BBB and microglia phagocytosis in AD brain.[22]
Therefore, an A𝛽-derived peptide (Ab peptide) was selected as
a BBB-permeable and microglia-targeting domain to mimic the
transport of A𝛽into the brain without cytotoxicity.[23] Targeting
peptides modiﬁed with polyethylene glycol (PEG) are incorpo-
rated into the drug-conjugated modules for enhanced physiolog-
ical barrier crossing and cell internalization.
Since AD is a chronic disease, an A𝛽chronic stimulation
model was established in vitro according to previous studies
with some modiﬁcations.[12] Fewer doses and longer exposure
time of A𝛽1-42 oligomers (oA𝛽1-42) were applied compared with
models of acute inﬂammation commonly used before.[18c,d] The
level of Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway of BV2 cells was not acti-
vated after oA𝛽1-42 treatment, indicating that BV2 cells entered a
state of immune tolerance (Figure S4, Supporting Information).
HCQ, a well-known autophagy inhibitor, was reported to regu-
late mTOR pathway and show positive therapeutic eﬀects in AD
treatment.[24] HCQ treatment has been observed to activate the
Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway at ≈1.88 μg ml−1 while exhibiting
cytotoxicity at high doses in oA𝛽1-42 chronically stimulated BV2
cells. These data indicate that HCQ may rescue microglia from
immune tolerance at low doses. In light of previous studies sug-
gesting that reactive astrocytes increased stemness, it is intrigu-
ing to consider whether astrocytes in AD brains could be trig-
gered to trans-diﬀerentiate into neurons, potentially compensat-
ing for neuron loss. Recent ﬁndings suggest that NeuroD1 could
induce astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in vivo, and ATRA was a
potential agonist.[17,25] Compared with exogenous stem cell trans-
plantation, this in situ cell conversion strategy is more eﬃcient
and has the advantage of long-term cell survival.[16] To test this,
we treated oA𝛽1-42 chronically exposed primary astrocytes with
diﬀerent concentrations of ATRA. Immunoblot analyses showed
that activation of NeuroD1 is proportional to the concentration
of ATRA and is optimal in diﬀerentiation media at the dose of
1 μg ml−1 (Figure S5, Supporting Information). Based on the
above results, it was determined that HCQ and ATRA should be
delivered to microglia and astrocytes by nanoplatform at a ratio
of 1.88:1, respectively.
2.2. Preparation and Characterization of DA-PPHATK@PDA
For the proportional delivery of HCQ and ATRA to microglia
and astrocytes, respectively, the synthesis of A-PPH and D-PPA
involved the grafting of HCQ, ATRA, PEG, and targeting pep-
tide to the PAH backbone (Figure 1a; Figures S6 and S7, Sup-
porting Information). The structures of these synthesized poly-
mers were conﬁrmed by 1H-NMR, ESI-MS, and GPC (Figures
S9–S14, S17 and Table S1, Supporting Information). To assem-
ble diﬀerent drug conjugates into one system, a PDA nanocore
was prepared which could adsorb amino-rich polymers by ultra-
sound to form DA-PPHA@PDA. To enhance the internal stabil-
ity of nanoplatform and facilitate the sensitive release of drug
conjugates, we synthesized a ROS-sensitive TK-linker to cross-
link the amino groups of polymers and neutralize the surface po-
tential of nanoplatform, thereby obtaining DA-PPHATK@PDA.
The structure of TK-linker was veriﬁed by 1H-NMR and ESI-MS
(Figures S8,S15, and S16, Supporting Information). Through op-
timization, we have identiﬁed the optimal ratio among nanocore,
drug conjugates, and TK-linker (Figure S18, Supporting Infor-
mation). Based on the above results, diﬀerent control nanoplat-
forms including DA-PPTK@PDA without drug conjugating and
PPHATK@PDA without targeting peptide modiﬁcation were also
created similarly.
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) showed that the hydrodynamic
diameter of PDA was ≈60 nm (Figure 1b). The particle size
of DA-PPHA@PDA was ≈24 nm larger than that of PDA due
to self-assembly with the drug conjugates (Figure 1c). While
this size was decreased to ≈75 nm following cross-linking of
TK-linker (Figure 1d). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
images showed that all nanoplatforms exhibited a spherical
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (3 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 1. Design and characterization of DA-PPHATK@PDA co-delivery platform. a) Schematic depicting the structure and composition of DA-
PPHATK@PDA. HCQ and ATRA are covalently linked via ester bonds to similar polymeric backbones modiﬁed with corresponding targeting peptides.
TK linker is a thioketal cross-linking agent with ROS sensitivity. b–d) Representative size distribution and TEM images of (b) PDA, (c) DA-PPHA@PDA,
and (d) DA-PPHATK@PDA. Scale bars, 100 nm; scale bars for enlarged images, 50 nm. e) Zeta potentials of PDA, DA-PPHA, and DA-PPHATK@PDA.
Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 4 independent experiments). f) Elemental mapping of C, N, O, S, and Cl in DA-PPHATK@PDA. Representative
images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale bar, 100 nm. g) UV–vis absorbance spectra of HCQ,
ATRA, PDA, and DA-PPHATK@PDA. h) Schematic diagram of esterase-induced drug prototype releasing of D-PPA and A-PPH. Data are presented as
mean ± s.d. (n = 3 independent experiments).
morphology (Figure 1b–d). The surface potentials of these
nanoplatforms were then characterized, revealing near neu-
tralization of DA-PPTK@PDA after cross-linking which im-
proved stability under physiological conditions (Figure 1e; Figure
S19, Supporting Information). The molar ratio of HCQ:ATRA
was ﬁxed at 1.88:1 based on the immunoblotting results of
Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway and NeuroD1 (Figures S4 and S5,
Supporting Information). The drug-loading capacities of DA-
PPHATK@PDA were ≈9.54% for HCQ and 5.02% for ATRA
(Table S2, Supporting Information).
We next attempted to determine nanoplatform components.
Elemental mapping and UV–vis spectrum results suggested the
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (4 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
successful deposition of HCQ, ATRA, and TK-linker in DA-
PPHATK@PDA during the preparation (Figure 1f,g; Figure S20,
Supporting Information). Whether the covalently conjugated
drugs can be released as prototype is the key to maximize ther-
apeutic eﬃcacy. We estimated the esterase-responsive release of
HCQ and ATRA from A-PPH and D-PPA in vitro, respectively
(Figure 1h; Figures S21 and S22, Supporting Information). Cova-
lently conjugated HCQ and ATRA by ester bond exhibited a low
release rate of less than 10% in PBS buﬀer within 24 h. How-
ever, the release rate was accelerated under esterase incubation
and acidic conditions. Moreover, the extent of drug release was
positively correlated with the esterase concentration, with ≈90%
of the drug released within 24 h at a concentration of 30 U ml−1.
2.3. ROS-Sensitive Properties and TK-Linker-Mediated
Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) Eﬀect
Nanoplatform was designed to disassemble in the oxidative stress
microenvironment caused by neuroinﬂammation of AD and re-
lease drug conjugates for further targeted delivery (Figure 2a).
To test this hypothesis, DA-PPHATK@PDA was analyzed by DLS
and TEM after exposure to O2
•- (Figure 2b,c). We found that
DA-PPHATK@PDA exhibited a rapid response and notable ex-
pansion and collapse within 50 min, indicating a high sensi-
tivity of nanoplatform to ROS stimulation. To further charac-
terize the general free radical scavenging activity of nanoplat-
form, DPPH• was employed.[26] DPPH• showed a strong UV–
vis absorbance peak at 525 nm. The absorbance decreased in
a concentration-dependent manner upon incubation with DA-
PPHATK@PDA which indicated the ROS scavenging (Figure 2d).
Interestingly, we found that the DPPH• scavenging process could
be accomplished within 5 min according to the scavenging ki-
netics assay (Figure S23a, Supporting Information). This rapid
ROS scavenging ability was primarily attributed to the intense
potency of polyphenol in PDA. Moreover, the nanoplatform ex-
hibited a more pronounced DPPH• elimination eﬃciency after
cross-linking compared to DA-PPHA@PDA, verifying the eﬀects
of TK-linker (Figure S23b, Supporting Information).
While preparing DA-PPHATK@PDA, we unexpectedly found
a decreased hydrodynamic diameter after cross-linking with the
TK-linker. This phenomenon inspired us to hypothesize that the
distance between drug conjugates may be shortened by cross-
linking, which in turn may induce a FRET eﬀect (Figure 2e).
To test this hypothesis, we replaced HCQ and ATRA with FITC
and AF555 to investigate the changes of ﬂuorescence spectrum.
Following excitation with a 488 nm laser, the emission spec-
trum of DA-PP@PDA showed the emission peaks of FITC and
AF555 consistent with that of the free probe (Figure 2f; Figure
S24, Supporting Information). However, the emission peak of
FITC was absent and that of AF555 was increased after cross-
linking with TK-linker to obtain DA-PPTK@PDA. This repre-
sented a classic FRET eﬀect generation process consistent with
previous ﬁndings. Besides, the emission peak of FITC was re-
covered after being treated with O2
•-, possibly due to the disas-
sembly of the nanoplatform triggered by O2
•-. To further charac-
terize the FRET eﬀect of DA-PPTK@PDA, ﬂuorescence-labeled
nanoplatform was observed by the super-resolution mode of con-
focal (Figure 2g). We found the colocalization signal of FITC
and AF555 in DA-PP@PDA. In contrast, the signal of FITC in
DA-PPTK@PDA was not discernible. After incubation with O2
•-,
the disruption of nanoplatform was observed, and the separated
FITC signal was subsequently recovered. Considering the above
results, we speculated that the FRET eﬀect initiated by TK-linker
could help us monitor the fate of nanoplatform in vitro and in
vivo with greater clarity and even be potentially utilized in diag-
nosing inﬂammation-related diseases.
2.4. BBB Penetration and Glial Cells Selective-Targeted Delivery
It is known that BBB is one of the most challenging ob-
stacles for brain-targeted delivery.[27] Thus, an in vitro BBB
model was established using mouse cerebral endothelial cells
(bEnd.3) to investigate the penetration eﬃciency of nanoplat-
form (Figure 2h). We ﬁrst investigated the mechanism of cel-
lular uptake in bEnd.3 cells. Diﬀerent inhibitory uptake condi-
tions were applied to cells before the incubation of nanoplat-
form, including chlorpromazine (CPZ) for clathrin inhibition,
methyl-𝛽-cyclodextrin (m𝛽CD) for caveolin inhibition, colchicine
(COL) for macropinocytosis inhibition and 4 °C for energy in-
hibition (Figure 2i; Figure S25, Supporting Information). Flow
cytometry results revealed that DAG and Ab peptide modiﬁca-
tion could facilitate the uptake of nanoplatform compared with
PPHATK@PDA and this enhanced uptake could be signiﬁcantly
inhibited by COL, excess targeting peptide and 4 °C conditions.
We speculated that the internalization of DA-PPTK@PDA in
bEnd.3 cells was dependent on an energy- and macropinocytosis-
dependent pathway. To further validate the transport eﬃciency,
nanoplatforms were added to the donor pool of the transwell sys-
tem. 14C-sucrose permeability value (4.3 × 10−3 cm min−1) and
the resistance value of this system were also tested before and af-
ter the experiments (Figure S26, Supporting Information). After-
ward, the ﬂuorescence signals of reception pool were monitored
in real-time and the apparent permeability coeﬃcient (Papp) was
calculated (Figure 2j). As a result, nanoplatform modiﬁed with
targeting peptide showed higher transport across the monolayer
compared with unmodiﬁed nanoplatform and pre-incubation
with free peptide could inhibit CTGF and RAGE-mediated tran-
scytosis. Importantly, the delivery system is required to cross BBB
in an intact structure for subsequent targeting, which can be
conﬁrmed by the FRET eﬀect. The ratio of ﬂuorescence inten-
sity at the maximum emission wavelength of FITC and AF555
labeled DA-PPTK@PDA under 488 nm laser excitation was de-
tected (Figure 2k). The value of the ﬂuorescence ratio before and
after the transport was similar (≈3), which meant the FRET eﬀect
was always in an activated state and the structure of nanoplatform
remained complete.
We then investigated the glial cells targeting ability of DA-
PPTK@PDA (Figure 2l). FITC labeled A-PP and Cy5 labeled
D-PP were synthesized to obtain DA-PPTK@PDA. To mimic
the disassembly of nanoplatform in the oxidative microenviron-
ment, DA-PPTK@PDA was treated with O2
•- before incubation
with primary microglia or astrocytes. Through ﬂow cytometry
analysis, we found that Ab peptide modiﬁcation could promote
the uptake of FITC-conjugates by microglia but not by as-
trocytes (Figure 2m–o). In contrast, DAG peptide-modiﬁed
Cy5-conjugates
displayed
the
opposite
uptake
selectivity.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (5 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 2. The ROS-responsive performance and glial cells-selective targeting eﬀects of DA-PPHATK@PDA in vitro. a) Schematic diagram of ROS-induced
structural decomposition of DA-PPHATK@PDA. b) Changes of the size distribution of DA-PPHATK@PDA after incubation with O2•- (100 μm) for 50 min.
c) Representative TEM images of DA-PPHATK@PDA after oxidation by O2
•- for 1 h. d) UV–vis absorbance spectra of DPPH• after incubation with diﬀer-
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (6 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Furthermore, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in uptake
between microglia and astrocytes without modiﬁcation. To
further simulate the distribution and growth state of glial cells
in the brain, a co-culture system of microglia and astrocytes was
established in vitro. Cy5 labeled A-PP and D-PP were synthe-
sized to obtain A-PPTK@PDA and D-PPTK@PDA, respectively.
O2
•- pre-treated nanoplatform was added into the co-culture
systems. CD11b and GFAP immunostaining were performed to
distinguish microglia and astrocytes (Figure 2p). We next ana-
lyzed the distribution of nanoplatform in glial cells by confocal
imaging. Consistent with the ﬂow cytometry results, targeting
peptide modiﬁcation enabled the selective targeting of glial
cells by nanoplatform. After clarifying glial cells targeting of
nanoplatform, we are more concerned about the cellular uptake
mechanism of drug-conjugates. Similar results were obtained in
the uptake pathway inhibition assay of microglia and astrocytes
(Figure S27, Supporting Information). These results indicated
that RAGE- or CTGF-mediated glial cell internalization of drug
conjugates depended on the clathrin-related pathway. Hence,
lysosomal escape was necessary for drug release and therapeutic
eﬀects of drug conjugates. We found that FITC-labeled conju-
gates could rapidly accumulate in the lysosomes of microglia
and astrocytes within 2 h (Figure S28, Supporting Information).
However, the signals were gradually distributed in the cytoplasm
after 4 h of incubation, indicating the escape from lysosomes. We
reasoned that the tertiary amine of HCQ and DPA could generate
a proton sponge eﬀect in the acidic environment of lysosome to
facilitate the conjugates into the cytoplasm. The above results
conﬁrmed that the nanoplatform could be transported across the
BBB in an intact form via a “Trojan horse” route, disassemble
in the oxidative microenvironment, selectively target glial cells,
and then release conjugated drugs in microglia and astrocytes
in vitro.
2.5. Metabolic Modulation and Reversal of Immune Tolerance in
Microglia
Previous studies have demonstrated that A𝛽could activate mi-
croglia and reprogram the metabolic phenotype from OXPHOS
to glycolysis in an acute stimulatory manner (Figure 3a).[12]
However, metabolism would completely break down with poor
responses after long-term chronic stimulation of A𝛽. The
Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway is the key to modulating this pro-
cess. To evaluate whether targeted delivery of HCQ could rescue
mTOR signaling, impaired cellular metabolism, and immune
function, we ﬁrst detected the protein level of mTOR signaling in
BV2 cells. Immunoblotting results showed that the expression of
Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway could be activated by HCQ delivery
(Figure 3b; Figure S29, Supporting Information). Since the status
of immune cells is reﬂected in metabolism, the mitochondrial
function of BV2 cells was assessed by real-time measurement
of changes in the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) after treat-
ment with an ATP synthase inhibitor (oligomycin), H+ ionophore
(FCCP), or electron transport chain inhibitor (rotenone and an-
timycin A). We found that oA𝛽1-42 treatment signiﬁcantly dimin-
ished the maximal respiratory capacity while A-PPHTK@PDA
could reverse this defect (Figure 3c,d). Detecting mitochondrial
membrane potential and the expression of cytochrome C (Cyt C)
in the cytoplasm also suggested that nanoplatform could protect
mitochondria from ﬁssion (Figures S30 and S31, Supporting In-
formation).
Nutrient uptake and metabolite levels can also reﬂect the
metabolic state of cells.[28] Glucose uptake provides essen-
tial energy for cellular metabolism. 2-NBDG is a ﬂuorescent
glucose analog that monitors glucose uptake in live cells.[29]
Flow cytometry results showed enhanced ﬂuorescence signals
in nanoplatform-treated BV2 cells, which was an indicator of
metabolic activation (Figure 3e; Figure S32, Supporting Infor-
mation). Moreover, quantitative analysis of ATP production and
lactate secretion also demonstrated the up-regulation of glycol-
ysis levels (Figure 3f,g). Metabolic reprogramming toward gly-
colysis could underline microglial inﬂammation. We found that
chronic oA𝛽1-42 treatment made it diﬃcult to activate the secre-
tion of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines (IL-1𝛽) in BV2 cells, which
represented the diminished inﬂammatory responses (Figure 3h).
Surprisingly, A-PPHTK@PDA could signiﬁcantly elevate the ex-
pression of IL-1𝛽, suggesting that aerobic glycolysis is a critical
process in the regulation of inﬂammatory activation of microglia.
The phagocytic activity of microglia directly aﬀects their im-
mune function to eliminate cytotoxic proteins.[30] We hope
the immune function of tolerant microglia can be restored by
metabolic modulation. To examine this hypothesis, the phago-
cytic phenotype of treated BV2 cells was ﬁrst investigated by
ent concentrations of DA-PPHATK@PDA. e) Schematic diagram of cross-linking-triggered shortening of the spatial distance of polymers, which induces
the FRET eﬀect of ﬂuorescence probe labeled DA-PPTK@PDA. f) Fluorescence emission spectrum of DA-PP@PDA before and after cross-linking and
DA-PPTK@PDA incubated with diﬀerent concentrations of O2•- under the excitation of 488 nm. g) Super-resolution images of ﬂuorescence probe labeled
DA-PP@PDA, DA-PPTK@PDA, and DA-PPTK@PDA incubated with for O2
•- (100 μm) 1 h. Representative images from random ﬁelds of view in one of
the three biologically independent samples. Scale bars, 400 nm; scale bars for enlarged images, 100 nm. h) Schematic diagram of RAGE and CTGF-
mediated transcytosis of DA-PPTK@PDA in bEnd.3 monolayer transwell model. i) Cellular uptake of PPTK@PDA and DA-PPTK@PDA in bEnd.3 cells
pre-incubated with diﬀerent uptake inhibitors. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 3 independent experiments). j) The permeability of PPTK@PDA
and DA-PPTK@PDA with or without free targeting peptide pre-incubation. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 3 independent experiments).
k) Fluorescence intensity ratio of the transwell model’s donor and reception pool solutions at the emission wavelength of FITC and AF555. Data are
presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 4 independent experiments); n.s., not signiﬁcant. l) Schematic diagram of disassembly of nanoparticles in the pro-
inﬂammatory microenvironment and mechanism of glial cells-speciﬁc targeting. m) Flow cytometry analysis of FITC and Cy5 labeled PPTK@PDA or
DA-PPTK@PDA uptake in primary microglia and astrocyte. Data are representative from three biological independent samples. n,o) Quantiﬁcation of
ﬂuorescence intensity of FITC labeled A-PPH (n) and Cy5 labeled D-PPA (o) in primary microglia and astrocyte. Data are presented as mean ± s.d.
(n = 3 independent experiments); n.s., not signiﬁcant. p) Representative confocal microscopic images of the internalization of Cy5 labeled PPTK@PDA,
A-PPTK@PDA, and D-PPTK@PDA in co-cultured primary microglia and astrocyte after 1 h incubation. Data are representative from three biological in-
dependent samples. Scale bars, 100 μm. Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test for panels (i,j), unpaired t test for
panel (k) and multiple t test for panels (n, o). **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (7 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 3. DA-PPHATK@PDA reverses microglia immune tolerance in vitro. a) Schematic diagram of mechanisms of A𝛽-induced immune activation
and tolerance status. b) Changes of Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway expression in diﬀerent treated BV2 cells. Data are representative from three biological
independent samples. Uncropped blots are provided in the Supporting Information. c) OXPHOS determined by measuring OCR in BV2 cells treated
with PBS, oA𝛽1-42 or A-PPHTK@PDA. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 4 independent experiments). d) Quantiﬁcation of basal respiration,
proton leak, and maximal respiration of BV2 cells in c. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 4 independent experiments). e) Flow cytometry analysis
of glucose probe (2-NBDG) ﬂuorescence intensity in diﬀerent treated BV2 cells. Data are representative from three biological independent samples.
f–h) Quantiﬁcation of the concentration of intracellular ATP (f), extracellular lactic acid (g), and supernatant IL-1𝛽(h) in diﬀerent treated BV2 cells. Data
are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 4 independent experiments). i) Flow cytometry analysis of the activated BV2 cells after diﬀerent treatments. Data are
representative from four biological independent samples. The solid black box shows the proportion of CD11b positive BV2 cells. j) Quantiﬁcation of the
proportion of BV2 cells with phagocytic properties in i. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 4 independent experiments). k) Representative confocal
microscopic images of ﬂuorescently labeled oA𝛽1-42 colocalized with lysosomes in BV2 cells after diﬀerent treatments. Representative images from
random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale bars, 50 μm. Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA
with Tukey post-test for panels (d, f, g, h, j). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001.
ﬂow cytometry. CD11b, the marker of microglial activation, was
not up-regulated signiﬁcantly after chronic oA𝛽1-42 treatment
but showed a noticeable increase (≈40%) after HCQ and A-
PPHTK@PDA treatment (Figure 3i,j). Next, the phagocytic activ-
ity of BV2 cells was veriﬁed by co-incubation with FITC-labeled
oA𝛽1-42 after being treated with diﬀerent nanoplatforms. Re-
search has proved that A𝛽could be degraded through lysoso-
mal/autophagic or proteasomal pathways.[31] Confocal images
showed that more A𝛽signals could be found in BV2 cells and
colocalized with lysosomes compared with the chronic treatment
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (8 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
group, indicating that HCQ delivery promoted A𝛽clearance of
BV2 cells (Figure 3k). In addition, the ﬂuorescence intensity of
A𝛽in the supernatant of treated cells was also detected to sup-
port the above results (Figure S33, Supporting Information).
In the above experiments, we discovered that Ab peptide
modiﬁcation could signiﬁcantly enhance the regulatory eﬀects
of A-PPHTK@PDA compared with PPHTK@PDA group in
vitro. Besides, we also unexpectedly found that the drug-free
nanoplatform (A-PPTK@PDA) did not show signiﬁcant ther-
apeutic eﬀects, even with PDA delivery. This phenomenon
can be concluded that a single antioxidant strategy was com-
plex to modulate immune-tolerant microglia. To sum up,
we conﬁrmed that the combination of PDA and HCQ de-
livery could modulate the metabolism and boost the im-
mune function recovery of oA𝛽1-42 chronically treated microglia
in vitro.
2.6. Reprogramming of Reactive Glial Cells into Functional
Neurons
During AD progression, glial cells become over-activated and
proliferative.[4a] To investigate whether reactive astrocytes can be
reprogrammed into mature neurons (Figure 4a). Primary astro-
cytes were isolated from the suckling mouse brain and applied to
the oA𝛽1-42 chronic stimulation model. ATRA was reported to ac-
tivate NeuroD1 signaling through the PI3K/Akt pathway, which
might promote the trans-diﬀerentiation of astrocytes.[32] There-
fore, reactive astrocytes were treated with D-PPATK@PDA to
test this theory. A signiﬁcant increase in the PI3K/Akt/NeuroD1
pathway was observed by immunoblotting after treatment with
ATRA and D-PPATK@PDA (Figure 4b; Figures S34 and S35,
Supporting Information). We further monitored the trans-
diﬀerentiation process by immunostaining speciﬁc neuronal
markers (Figure 4c). O2
•--pretreated D-PPATK@PDA was added
to astrocytes every two days after chronic oA𝛽1-42 stimulation.
After seven days of treatment, doublecortin (DCX), an imma-
ture neuronal marker, could be observed in ATRA-containing
groups (Figure 4d). More importantly, the signal of DCX was colo-
calized with GFAP and the morphology of astrocytes changed
into elongated branches. These phenomena indicated that reac-
tive astrocytes transformed into immature neurons upon ATRA
administration. Then, we investigated whether D-PPATK@PDA
could promote the maturation of neurons and what proper-
ties the converted neurons had. Immunostaining for mature
neuron markers (microtubule association protein-2, MAP2) and
vesicular glutamate transporter-1 (vGlut1) was performed af-
ter 21 days of treatment. As shown in Figure 4e, most cells
were MAP2-positive and possessed morphological characteris-
tics of neurons with ATRA treatment. Meanwhile, the absent
GFAP expression and NeuN immunostaining results also sup-
ported the transformation of mature neurons (Figure S36, Sup-
porting Information). In addition, the ﬂuorescent signal of vG-
lut1 was observed on the axon of mature neurons (Figure 4e).
Immunoblotting results also revealed that the majority of neu-
rons were positive for vGlut1 but virtually none stained for glu-
tamic acid decarboxylase (GAD67) (Figure 4f; Figure S37, Sup-
porting Information). Thus, ATRA delivery reprogramed astro-
cytes into glutamatergic neurons. To further examine whether
the converted neurons have functional activity, we performed
patch clamp recordings to conﬁrm this. As expected, we recorded
remarkable synaptic events in converted neurons, which could
be blocked by the glutamate receptor antagonist CNQX, but not
by GABAA receptor antagonist bicuculline (BIC) (Figure 4g).
These results conﬁrmed that the converted neurons were
glutamatergic.
In glial cell reprogramming experiments, we found that
PPATK@PDA exhibited less diﬀerentiation-inducing activity
than ATRA or D-PPATK@PDA, probably due to ATRA’s in-
eﬃcient uptake without DAG peptide modiﬁcation. Further-
more, D-PPTK@PDA treatment didn’t induce any signs of trans-
diﬀerentiation of reactive astrocytes, indicating the leading role of
ATRA during the modulation. To summarize, we demonstrated
that targeted delivery ATRA with nanoplatform could repro-
gram reactive astrocytes into functional glutamatergic neurons
in vitro.
2.7. Remission of Neuroinﬂammation
In the context of AD, neuroinﬂammation tends to be a chronic
process and is considered a signiﬁcant driver of the disease.[33]
The innate immune cells involved in this process are primarily
microglia and astrocytes. During this process, pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines and ROS produced by glial cells can cause oxidative
stress and even neuronal death. To mimic the above neuroin-
ﬂammatory interactions between cells, a co-culture system of
SH-SY5Y and glial cells was established by transwell in vitro
(Figure S38a, Supporting Information). O2
•--pretreated nanoplat-
forms were added into the oA𝛽1-42 stimulated glial cells layer. Af-
ter 24 h treatment, SH-SY5Y cells in the reception pool were
harvested and analyzed by ﬂow cytometry. DHE, a ROS de-
tection probe, exhibited a weaker ﬂuorescence signal in PDA-
incorporated groups with targeting peptide modiﬁcation com-
pared to free drugs and PPHATK@PDA groups (Figure S38b,c,
Supporting Information). This could be attributed to the eﬃ-
cient delivery of PDA antioxidants to alleviate the oxidative stress
caused by glial cells and further rescue SH-SY5Y cells from apop-
tosis (Figure S38d, Supporting Information). Taken together,
modulation of glial cells by nanoplatform could protect neurons
from the inﬂammatory response and have the potential to nor-
malize the microenvironment.
2.8. In Vivo Distribution Monitoring and Inﬂammation Diagnosis
Mediated by the FRET Eﬀect
The FRET eﬀect induced by cross-linking could reﬂect the in-
tegrity of nanoplatform in real-time. Therefore, we hypothe-
sized to monitor the systemic circulation stability of nanoplat-
form by FRET eﬀect in vivo. FITC and AF555 labeled nanoplat-
form were synthesized and intravenously injected into SD rats.
FITC and AF647 labeled nanoplatform without FRET eﬀect
were prepared as a control. The ﬂuorescence intensity of blood
was measured at timed intervals. The half-life of free probes
was calculated as ≈2.16 h (FITC), 7.63 h (AF555), and 9.85 h
(AF647) (Figure S39 and Table S3, Supporting Information).
Interestingly, we found these values could be enhanced to be
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (9 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 4. DA-PPHATK@PDA promotes the trans-diﬀerentiation of astrocytes into functional neurons in vitro. a) Schematic diagram of the process
and mechanism of the trans-diﬀerentiation. b) Changes of PI3K/Akt/NeuroD1 pathway expression in diﬀerent treated primary astrocytes. Data are
representative from three biological independent experiments. Uncropped blots are provided in the Supporting Information. c) Schematic diagram
of changes in markers during astrocyte trans-diﬀerentiation into neurons. d) Representative confocal microscopic images of expression of immature
neuronal markers in diﬀerent treated primary astrocytes. Representative images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent
samples. Scale bars, 50 μm. e) Representative confocal microscopic images of expression of mature neuronal markers and functional transporters in
diﬀerent treated primary astrocytes. Representative images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. The white
dashed boxes show the zoomed area of the axons of converted neurons. Scale bars, 100 μm; scale bars of the zoom view, 10 μm. f) The expression
of functional transporters in converted neurons. Brain lysates of C57BL/6 mice were used as a positive control. Data are representative from three
biological independent experiments. Uncropped blots are provided in the Supporting Information. g) Spontaneous synaptic events recorded from
converted neurons under diﬀerent conditions. The black dashed box shows the IPSC proﬁle. Data are representative from three biological independent
experiments.
≈33.76 h (FITC) and 30.68 h (AF647) in DA-PPTK@PDA. These
increased pharmacokinetic properties are mainly attributed to
the covalent conjugation strategies and PEG modiﬁcation of
nanoplatform. Notably, the half-life values of the two ﬂuores-
cent probes modiﬁed on the nanoplatform were close to each
other, suggesting that the cross-linked nanoplatform could main-
tain structural stability during systemic circulation. While, DA-
PP@PDA showed a more signiﬁcant diﬀerence between FITC
(10.56 h) and AF555 (19.88 h), probably due to the solid posi-
tive charge resulted in fast clearance without cross-linking with
TK-linker (Figure 5a). The FRET eﬀect was then evaluated in
FITC and AF555 labeled DA-PPTK@PDA. Notably, FITC showed
relatively low ﬂuorescence intensity compared with AF555 in
24 h, which indicated the FRET eﬀect was always on dur-
ing the circulation and the nanoplatform remained intact. Be-
sides, the half-life of AF555 and the value calculated under the
FRET condition of DA-PPTK@PDA was close to that of FITC
and AF647 labeled DA-PPTK@PDA ≈30 h, indicating that the
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (10 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 5. The in vivo fate and FRET eﬀect-mediated real-time diagnosis of inﬂammation in AD model mice. a) Plasma pharmacokinetics of FITC and
AF555 labeled DA-PP@PDA or DA-PPTK@PDA after i.v. injection. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 3 independent experiments). b) Schematic
diagram of the mechanism of real-time inﬂammation diagnosis of Cy5 and Cy5.5 labeled DA-PPTK@PDA in AD model mice. c) IVIS imaging of WT and
APP/PS1 mice brains at timed intervals after i.v. injection of PPTK@PDA, DA-PPTK@PDA or DA-PP@PDA. Data are representative from three biological
independent experiments. d) Ex vivo ﬂuorescence imaging of major organs after 24 h injection. Data are representative from three biological independent
experiments. e,f) Radiant eﬃciency of Cy5.5 ﬂuorescence intensity in major organs (e) and brains (f) in d. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 3
independent experiments). g,h) ID% quantiﬁcation in major organs (g) and brains (h) in d. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 3 independent
experiments). i,k) Distribution of Cy5 signals in blood vessels (i) and oxidative damage (k) stained brain sections from WT or APP/PS1 mice. Repre-
sentative images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale bars, 200 μm. j,l) Cy5 and blood vessels (j) or
oxidative damage (l) ﬂuorescence intensity along the white arrows in i and k, respectively. Data are representative from three biological independent
experiments. m,n) The colocalization of Cy5 signals with microglia (m) or astrocytes (n) in brain sections from WT or APP/PS1 mice. Yellow arrows show
the colocalized signals. Representative images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale bars, 100 μm.
Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test for panels (e, f, g, h). **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (11 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
cross-linking strategy could improve the stability of nanoplatform
in vivo.
Encouraged by the promising performance of nanoplatform in
BBB penetration and glial cells targeting experiments in vitro, its
biodistribution was further investigated. Cy5 and Cy5.5 labeled
DA-PPTK@PDA, PPTK@PDA, and DA-PP@PDA were prepared
and monitored using an in vivo imaging system (IVIS). Wild-
type mice and APP/PS1 mice were used as control and AD an-
imal models, respectively (Figure 5b). Compared with normal
mice, a gradually enhanced Cy5.5 ﬂuorescence signal was ob-
served in the AD mice brain within 8 h after DA-PPTK@PDA
administration, indicating that targeting peptide modiﬁcation
could achieve disease-speciﬁc targeting and retention (Figure 5c).
Moreover, PPTK@PDA didn’t show signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence sig-
nal in AD mice brain compared with DA-PPTK@PDA group,
indicating the critical role of targeting peptides in brain target-
ing. In addition, we found an apparent signal of DA-PP@PDA
in AD mice brains immediately after injection, while it declined
rapidly over time. This ﬁnding suggested that a strong positive
charge of the uncross-linked nanoplatform might cause rapid
clearance, which was consistent with the pharmacokinetic re-
sults. We then switched the imaging channel to observe the
changes in the Cy5 signal. Interestingly, we found the Cy5 signal
of DA-PPTK@PDA in AD mice brain gradually increased after
8 h post-injection, indicating DA-PPTK@PDA might disassemble
in the AD brain and the FRET eﬀect might be turned oﬀ. How-
ever, DA-PPTK@PDA in the control mouse and the PPTK@PDA
group showed lower ﬂuorescence signals due to the FRET ef-
fect and weak BBB penetration. Meanwhile, the variation trend
of Cy5 signal of DA-PP@PDA without FRET eﬀect was similar
to its Cy5.5 signal in AD mice brains. To further investigate the
FRET eﬀect, mice were imaged with the excitation wavelength
of Cy5 and detected with the emission wavelength of Cy5.5. For
DA-PPTK@PDA with FRET eﬀect, signiﬁcant signals could be
detected signiﬁcant signals upon injection and the diminished
signal could be found in AD mice brain after 8 h. By contrast,
DA-PP@PDA without FRET eﬀect didn’t show obvious signals
within the monitoring procedure. Images of isolated organs at
24 h post-injection also demonstrated the enhanced retention of
DA-PPTK@PDA compared with PPTK@PDA and the disassem-
ble of DA-PPTK@PDA could be detected by the FRET eﬀect in
AD mice brains (Figure 5d). Notably, we found the accumula-
tion of DA-PP@PDA in the liver of AD mice was much higher
than that of other groups. This observation further demonstrated
that cross-linking strategy could decrease the surface potential
of the nanoplatform and reduce protein corona formation and
accumulation in the liver. Quantitative analysis of the radiant
eﬃciency and injection dose percentage per gram of wet tis-
sue weight (ID%/g) also suggested that modiﬁcation of Ab and
DAG peptide promoted AD brain recognition of nanoplatform
and TK-linker enhanced the stability of the systemic circulation
(Figure 5e–h).
As illustrated in Figure 1a, nanoplatform was designed to
cross BBB, disassemble in the inﬂammatory microenvironment
and target reactive glial cells. This intracerebral distribution pro-
cess was further clariﬁed by immunoﬂuorescence staining of
brain slices at 24 h post-injection. More ﬂuorescent signals of
Cy5 labeled DA-PPTK@PDA were observed away from brain ves-
sels stained with CD34 antibody compared with other groups
in the hippocampus (Figure 5i). Results of localization analy-
sis of the signals also demonstrated the eﬃcient penetration
of cross-linked nanoplatform with targeting peptide modiﬁca-
tion (Figure 5j). We then investigated whether nanoplatform
could accumulate in the inﬂammatory lesions which were es-
sential for the drug-conjugates release. 8-hydroxyguanosine (8-
OHG), a marker of oxidative stress damage, was found to be el-
evated in the hippocampus of AD mice brains compared with
WT mice (Figure 5k). The results of co-localization analysis
showed that more Cy5 signals of DA-PPTK@PDA co-localized
with 8-OHG signals. At the same time, PPTK@PDA exhibited
weaker and non-speciﬁc distribution (Figure 5l). Encouraged
by the success in targeting AD lesions, we continued to ex-
plore the glial cells-targeting ability of nanoplatform. Cy5 la-
beled A-PP and D-PP were synthesized to form A-PPTK@PDA
and D-PPTK@PDA, respectively. After 24 h post-injection into
AD mice, brain slices were stained with Iba-1 and GFAP an-
tibodies to display the location of microglia and astrocytes. As
shown in Figure 5m, most Cy5-labeled A-PP was co-localized
with Iba-1, indicating that Ab peptide mediated the microglia
targeting. In addition, Cy5 labeled D-PP showed speciﬁc ac-
cumulation with GFAP (Figure 5n). According to the above
results, we conﬁrmed that targeting peptide modiﬁcation fa-
cilitated BBB penetration of nanoplatform and further accu-
mulation in the inﬂammatory lesions, resulting in the ROS-
sensitive disassembly to release drug-conjugates for target-
ing glial cells, with therapeutic potential for the treatment
of AD.
2.9. Ameliorating Cognitive Degeneration in AD Mice
We then investigated the therapeutic eﬀects of nanoplatform in
9-month-old AD mice. Diﬀerent groups of nanoplatform were
intravenously injected every ﬁve days for three months and WT
mice were treated with Saline as a control (Figure 6a). After
each month of treatment, mice were sacriﬁced and brains were
collected to evaluate the modulatory eﬀects. Behavioral tests
were performed after three months of treatment. The learn-
ing and memory abilities of AD mice were ﬁrst tested us-
ing the Morris water maze (MWM) assay. Before the test in
MWM experiment, mice were trained every day for six days
and the escape latency was recorded (Figure S40, Supporting
Information). During the training process, DA-PPHATK@PDA
treated AD mice showed lower escape latency even close to
the WT group. In the ﬁnal test, AD mice treated with DA-
PPHATK@PDA exhibited a three-fold decrease in latency time
(≈10 s), a two-fold increase in time in the target quadrant (≈30%)
and a three-fold increase in number of crossings (≈3) com-
pared to Saline-treated AD mice (Figure 6b–e). Moreover, the
hippocampal function of AD mice was also examined using
a nest-building assay. As shown in Figure 6f, the nest built
by DA-PPHATK@PDA treated AD mice exhibited more regular
and concentrated than that of other groups. Therefore, higher
nest behavioral scores were achieved by DA-PPHATK@PDA
group (Figure 6g; Figure S41, Supporting Information). Taken to-
gether, DA-PPHATK@PDA nanoplatform could signiﬁcantly at-
tenuate cognitive and memory impairments in AD transgenic
mice.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (12 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 6. DA-PPHATK@PDA rescues the degeneration of learning and memory ability in AD model mice. a) Timeline of APP/PS1 mice feeding, injection
cycle, pathological monitoring, and therapeutic evaluation. b) Representative swimming paths of mice in Morris water maze after three months of
diﬀerent treatments. Data are representative from eight biological independent experiments. c–e) Quantiﬁcation of escape latency (c), time in targeted
quadrant (d), and number of crossings (e). Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 8 independent experiments). f) Representative images of the nest
constructed by mice after three-month diﬀerent treatments. Data are representative from six biological independent experiments. g) Scores of nest
behavior observed in f. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 6 independent experiments). Scale bars, 4 cm. Statistical analysis was performed by
one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test for panels (c, d, e, g). **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001.
2.10. Veriﬁcation of Eﬃcacy and Glial Cell Modulation
Mechanisms in AD Mice
Reactive glial cells are hypothesized to cause chronic neu-
roinﬂammation manifested in oxidative stress and neuronal
apoptosis.[34] In response, we supposed that DA-PPHATK@PDA
might have a direct role in modulating the oxidative microenvi-
ronment due to the antioxidant core of nanoplatform. Consis-
tent with in vitro experiments, we found oxidative damage in
both hippocampus and cortex from AD mice could be allevi-
ated by targeting delivery of PDA-containing nanoplatform af-
ter one month of treatment, which was indicated by DHE probe
staining (Figure S42, Supporting Information). Free drugs and
PPHATK@PDA group didn’t show suﬃcient ROS scavenging ef-
ﬁcacy due to the restriction of BBB. Next, we investigated whether
the damaged neurons could be rescued by nanoplatform. After
three months of treatments, TUNEL staining was performed and
obvious apoptosis signals could be observed in AD mice brains
at advanced stage (Figure S43, Supporting Information). Notably,
DA-PPHATK@PDA treatment signiﬁcantly decreased the red sig-
nals while only a slightly attenuated signal was found in DA-
PPHATK@PDA group even with strong ROS scavenging capac-
ity. This phenomenon may indicate that ROS scavenging alone
was insuﬃcient to cope with advanced AD’s complex pathology.
Similar results were also obtained by Nissl staining (Figure S44,
Supporting Information). Taken together, the oxidative stress
level in the AD microenvironment could be controlled after DA-
PPHATK@PDA treatment and neuronal apoptosis was inhibited.
To understand the neuroprotection and behavioral improve-
ment mechanisms in AD mice, we further investigated the mod-
ulating eﬀects of nanoplatform on microglia and astrocytes. In
order to gain deeper insight into the immune function of mi-
croglia after treatment, the expression level of Akt/mTOR/HIF-
1𝛼pathway in brain was ﬁrst analyzed by immunoblotting af-
ter one month of therapy (Figure 7a; Figure S45, Support-
ing Information). Meanwhile, the immunostaining of immune
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (13 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 7. Mechanisms of DA-PPHATK@PDA modulation of glial cells and AD microenvironment in vivo. a) Changes of Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway
expression in WT or APP/PS1 mice brains after one-month treatment. Data are representative from three biological independent experiments. Uncropped
blots are provided in the Supporting Information. b) Representative ﬂuorescence images of the activation of p-mTOR in reactive microglia of one-
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (14 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
activation marker (p-mTOR) and Iba-1 was also detected
(Figure 7b). These data demonstrated that treatment of AD mice
with targeted delivery HCQ boosted the impaired mTOR pathway
and showed potential to rescue the immune-tolerant microglia.
It has been reported that the number and size of A𝛽plaques
are highly correlated with the immune function of microglia.
Activated microglia can recognize and eliminate these cytotoxic
proteins. To verify this biological eﬀect, 82E1 and Iba-1 antibod-
ies were used to label A𝛽1-42 and microglia, respectively. Mas-
sive microglial activation and A𝛽plaque burden were observed
during AD progression (Figure 7c; Figure S46, Supporting In-
formation). These pathological markers gradually decreased after
two months of DA-PPHATK@PDA treatment, and this therapeu-
tic eﬀect became more remarkable after the last month. To fur-
ther monitor the phagocytic processes of microglia, we observed
the morphology of microglia around A𝛽plaques (Figure 7d;
Figure S47, Supporting Information). During the ﬁrst month
of treatment, the size of A𝛽plaques did not decrease signiﬁ-
cantly, but the number of recruited microglia increased signiﬁ-
cantly. Over the next month, we observed a gradual disintegration
of A𝛽plaques and increased microglial inﬁltration. After three
months of treatment, the size of A𝛽plaques was signiﬁcantly re-
duced and microglia morphology was restored (reduced cell bod-
ies and increased branching). Semi-quantiﬁcation results of the
DA-PPHATK@PDA group showed a three-fold increase in the
number of microglia around plaque (≈6), a two-fold decrease in
the volume of microglia (≈2100 μm2), and a three-fold reduction
in the volume of plaque (≈2000 μm2) after three-month treatment
(Figure 7e–g). The A𝛽degradation eﬀect of DA-PPHATK@PDA
was also demonstrated by dot blot assay (Figure S48, Supporting
Information). Taken together, the microglia modulation mecha-
nism in AD brain after DA-PPHATK@PDA treatment could be
summarized into three steps as illustrated in Figure 7h: 1) acti-
vation of mTOR pathway in microglia (10 m); 2) enhanced mi-
gration and phagocytosis of immune-activated microglia (11 m);
and 3) degradation of A𝛽plaques and normalization of microglia
(12 m).
Next, we were curious about whether the in situ trans-
diﬀerentiation of astrocytes into neurons in AD mice brains
could be achieved by ATRA-targeted delivery. First, we found
that the DA-PPHATK@PDA group could signiﬁcantly activate the
PI3K/Akt/NeuroD1 pathway after one-month treatment, which
was proven to promote the trans-diﬀerentiation in vitro by im-
munoblotting (Figure 7i; Figure S49, Supporting Information).
In particular, the expression of NeuroD1 was increased only
after DA-PPHATK@PDA treatment while a slight increase in
PPHATK@PDA group owing to the insuﬃcient delivery of ATRA
(Figure S50, Supporting Information). Afterward, the process of
trans-diﬀerentiation was monitored during three-month treat-
ment. DCX and GFAP were applied to labeled immature neu-
rons and astrocytes in AD mice brain slices, respectively. The
expression of DCX was increased after two months of DA-
PPHATK@PDA treatment compared with the Saline-treated AD
mice group (Figure 7j; Figure S51, Supporting Information).
What counts is that we only found obvious colocalization sig-
nals of DCX with GFAP both in the hippocampus and cortex of
AD mice brain after DA-PPHATK@PDA treatment (Figure 7k).
In addition, the morphological changes of astrocyte were re-
ﬂected in the reduced number of branches and the forma-
tion of elongated axons. This phenomenon indicated the trans-
diﬀerentiation of astrocytes into immature neurons. To further
verify the regeneration of mature neurons, MAP2 and GFAP
were utilized to label mature neurons and astrocytes after three
months of treatments. Immunostaining results revealed an in-
crease of MAP2 expression and a decrease of GFAP expression
in the DA-PPHATK@PDA group (Figure 7l; Figure S52, Support-
ing Information). It is suggested that the GFAP signals were
gradually lost during the trans-diﬀerentiation process. There-
fore, the regeneration of mature neurons could be observed after
ATRA-targeted delivery in vivo. In conclusion, the astrocyte trans-
diﬀerentiation mechanism in AD brain after DA-PPHATK@PDA
treatment could be summarized into three steps as illustrated in
Figure 7m: 1) activation of NeuroD1 pathway in astrocyte (10 M);
2) increased DCX-positive immature neurons (11 M); and 3) re-
generation of MAP2 positive mature neurons (12 M).
Glial cells play a central role in neuroinﬂammation during
AD progression.[33a] Encouraged by the successful modulation
of glial cells, we supposed that the neuroinﬂammation could
be alleviated simultaneously. Quantiﬁcation of pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines (TNF-𝛼and IL-1𝛽) and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines
(IL-10 and Arg1) in AD brains after three months of treatment
showed an improved microenvironment (Figure 7n–q). This may
be due to the normalization of microglial immune function and
the in situ neuronal regeneration. It can be concluded that the
month treated mouse brain sections. Representative images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale
bars, 50 μm. c) Representative ﬂuorescence images of A𝛽plaque and reactive microglia in three-month treated mouse brain sections. Representative
images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale bars, 200 μm. d) Representative zoomed ﬂuorescence
images of A𝛽plaque and reactive microglia in APP/PS1 mouse brain sections at timed intervals after DA-PPHATK@PDA treatment. Representative
images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale bars, 20 μm. e–g) Quantiﬁcation of the number of
Iba-1 positive cells around per A𝛽plaque (e), volume of Iba-1 positive cells (f), and volume of per A𝛽plaque (g) in mouse brain sections after three-
month treatment. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 6 independent experiments). h) Schematic diagram of the mechanisms and processes
by which DA-PPHATK@PDA modulates microglia. i) Changes of PI3K/Akt/NeuroD1 pathway expression in WT or APP/PS1 mouse brains after one-
month treatment. Data are representative from three biological independent experiments. Uncropped blots are provided in the Supporting Information.
j,k) Representative ﬂuorescence images of immature neuronal markers expression (j) and zoomed converted astrocytes (k) in mouse brain sections after
two months of diﬀerent treatments. Representative images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale bars,
200 μm; scale bars of the zoom view, 20 μm. l) Representative ﬂuorescence images of mature neuronal markers expression mouse brain sections after
three months of diﬀerent treatments. Representative images from random ﬁelds of view in one of the three biologically independent samples. Scale bars,
100 μm. m) Schematic diagram of mechanisms and processes by which DA-PPHATK@PDA promotes trans-diﬀerentiation of astrocytes into neurons.
n–q) Quantiﬁcation of proinﬂammation (n,o) and anti-inﬂammation (p,q) related cytokines in mouse brains after three months of diﬀerent treatments.
Data are presented as mean ± s.d. (n = 6 independent experiments). Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test for
panels (e, f, g, n, o, p, q). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (15 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
modulation of glial cells is of great signiﬁcance for the treatment
of advanced AD.
2.11. Biosafety In Vitro and In Vivo
Hemolysis, cytotoxicity, pathologic histomorphology, and or-
gan functions were assessed to investigate the safety proﬁle of
nanoplatform through intravenous administration. Hemolysis
experiments showed that the delivery system had good compat-
ibility with red blood cells in vitro (Figure S53, Supporting In-
formation). The cytotoxicity of the nanoplatform was then val-
idated in all the cells involved in this study. Results showed
that cross-linking strategy could signiﬁcantly reduce cytotoxic-
ity caused by positive surface charge (Figure S54, Supporting In-
formation). No apparent histological changes were found in the
principal organs of nanoplatform-treated mice (Figure S55, Sup-
porting Information). However, we found the liver toxicity caused
by HCQ+ATRA group which was consistent with in vitro cyto-
toxicity assay (Figure S56, Supporting Information) and previ-
ous studies demonstrating that free ATRA might induce hepa-
totoxic (Figure S57a, Supporting Information). Targeted delivery
of ATRA by nanoplatform could increase drug concentration at
the target lesion and reduce oﬀ-target toxicity. Besides, the results
of liver and kidney function markers in nanoplatform-treated AD
mice were all within the normal range (Figure S57b, Supporting
Information). Taken together, these results demonstrated that
nanoplatform possessed good in vitro and in vivo biosafety, which
was critical for the clinical application.
3. Discussion
The current pharmacological treatment of AD encompasses
three main categories of drugs: those that improve cognitive
symptoms, those that improve psycho-behavioral symptoms, and
disease-modifying therapeutic drugs.[35] Despite the continuous
drug research and development for AD, their numbers that suc-
cessfully complete clinical trials is exceedingly low. The main
challenges it faces can be broadly categorized into four main ar-
eas: 1) The pathogenesis of AD is complex and unknown.[36] It
is challenging to ascertain the upstream and downstream posi-
tions of drug development targets in the pathological process,
with only multiple hypotheses currently available; 2) AD is a poly-
genic and complex disease, with the majority of mutations being
dispersed, which presents a challenge for treatment;[37] 3) AD
is a clinically heterogeneous disease, with patients exhibiting a
wide variety of symptoms.[38] This renders diagnosis and symp-
tomatic treatment more challenging; 4) Other diseases, such as
cerebrovascular injury may accompany the progression of AD.[39]
The challenges above necessitate the development of more so-
phisticated diagnostic techniques, multi-target therapies, preci-
sion medicine, and personalized treatment strategies.
A growing number of researchers have concluded that
monotherapy is an ineﬀective approach to inhibiting the pro-
gression of AD.[40] Consequently, combination therapies that
can synergistically modulate multiple targets are becoming in-
creasingly relevant. However, maintaining similar pharmacoki-
netic properties in vivo is challenging when combining multiple
drugs, leading to signiﬁcant inter-individual diﬀerences in ther-
apeutic eﬃcacy. In this study, two medicines that modulate glial
cells were covalently modiﬁed as peptide drug conjugates. Subse-
quently, the two small molecules were loaded onto the surface of
PDA nanoparticles according to a speciﬁc ratio. Following cross-
linking with a ROS-sensitive linker, the stability of the two small
molecules could be maintained during circulation, thus ensur-
ing that the drugs could be delivered into the brain according to
a speciﬁc ratio. Furthermore, the particle size of PDA nanoparti-
cles can be readily adjusted to regulate the in vivo distribution and
fate of the nanoplatform. Consequently, the co-delivery system
developed in this study represents a novel approach to designing
combination therapies in multi-target therapy. This system is an-
ticipated to address the inconsistent in vivo behavior of multiple
drugs.
With the deepening of targeted therapy research, the con-
cept of precision medicine has received much attention and
exploration.[41] In the past, researchers focused more on im-
proving drug delivery eﬃciency to the brain.[42] Nowadays, we
are more interested in designing delivery systems to transport
therapeutic agents to speciﬁc brain regions, speciﬁc cells, or
even speciﬁc organelles.[43] This often places higher demands
on the design of targeted delivery systems, but also complicates
their composition. Among them, targeted peptides have been
used more frequently in the design of delivery systems, espe-
cially peptides with both BBB penetration and focal cell target-
ing functions.[44] In this study, Ab and CTGF peptides were se-
lected for modiﬁcation, both of which could target transporters
whose expression is upregulated under AD pathological condi-
tions, thus targeting damaged glial cells. This lesion-speciﬁc tar-
geting strategy may improve drug selectivity and reduce toxic side
eﬀects on normal brain tissue, which is important for precision
medicine.
As AD is a long-term chronic progressive disease, the intrac-
erebral microenvironment has diﬀerent characteristics at diﬀer-
ent stages.[45] Therefore, there is a need to adequately study the
stages of AD process, which has important implications for per-
sonalized treatment. In contrast to the large number of studies
on the early inﬂammatory response in AD recently, our work fo-
cused on resting glial cells in the middle and advanced stages
of AD. We found that at this time, microglia have entered the
stage of immune tolerance, exhibiting a breakdown of metabolic
and immune functions. In addition, astrocytes show a shift in
stem cell fate. Therefore, we aimed to deliver HCQ and ATRA
to microglia and astrocytes via a nanoplatform to activate the
metabolic-immune function of microglia and promote the trans-
diﬀerentiation of astrocytes into neurons. Developing targeted
therapeutic strategies for diﬀerent stages of AD progression is
important.
Finally, given the chronic and long-term nature of AD, early
treatment is essential to inhibit disease progression. However,
due to its insidious onset, early diagnosis of AD remains a sig-
niﬁcant challenge.[46] Recent studies have shown that the gen-
eration of inﬂammatory responses in the AD brain usually pre-
cedes the appearance of biomarkers.[47] Therefore, the FRET ef-
fect generated by cross-linking the nanoplatforms in this study
can be used as a tool to detect inﬂammatory responses in the
AD brain, thus providing new prospects for early diagnosis
of AD.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (16 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
4. Experimental Section
Materials:
Peptides
Ab
(thiohydracrylic
acid-KLVFFAED),
DAG
(cyclo
(CDAGRKQK))
and
A𝛽1-42
(DAEFRHDSGYEVHHQKLVF-
FAEDVGSNKGAIIGLMVGGVVIA) was synthesized by ChinaPeptides.
Maleimide-poly(ethylene glycol)-Succinimidyl Carboxymethyl Ester (Mal-
PEG-NHS, Mw = 5000) and Methoxy-poly(ethylene glycol)-Succinimidyl
Carboxymethyl Ester (mPEG-NHS, Mw = 5000) was purchased from
Jenkem Technology. All the other chemicals and solvents were purchased
from Energy Chemical, unless otherwise stated. Soluble ﬂuorescent
probe, such as FITC, AF555-NHS, Cy5-NHS, and Cy5.5-NHS, HEPES,
penicillin, streptomycin, BIC, CNQX, JC-10, titanium dioxide, Annexin
V-PE/7-AAD apoptosis detection kit, and cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8)
were purchased from Dalian Meilun Biotechnolgy. Esterase, gelatin,
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), Immobilon Western HRP Sub-
strate, syringe ﬁlter, poly(allylamine) solution (PAH, average Mw ≈15000,
20 wt.% in H2O), and centrifugal ﬁlter unit (Mw = 10 kDa, 100 kDa) were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. LysoTracker Deep Red was purchased
from Molecular Probes. RIPA lysis solution, Bradford protein quantiﬁ-
cation kits, citrate antigen retrieval solution, Nissl staining solution,
QuickBlock™Western Blocking Buﬀer, QuickBlock™Primary Antibody
Dilution Buﬀer, NADPH, and ATP quantiﬁcation kits were purchased from
Beyotime. Lactic acid assay kit was purchased from Nanjing Jiancheng
bioengineering Institute. Cell culture insert (1.0 μm), T-25 and T-75 ﬂask
were purchased from Corning. ELISA kits (Mouse TNF-𝛼, IL-1𝛽, Arg-1,
IL-10), ﬂuorescein diacetate (FDA), DHE, 2-NBDG, B27, N2 supplement
and all the plates used for cells were purchased from Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc. DMEM, DMEM/F12, 0.25% trypsin-EDTA, poly-D-Lysine (PDL),
goat serum and foetal bovine serum (FBS) were purchased from Gibco.
EGTA, Na2GTP, and Na-phosphocreatine were purchased from Shanghai
Yuanye Biological Technology. TUNEL staining kit, 4% paraformaldehyde
(PFA) ﬁx solution and HBSS were purchased from Servicebio. Antifade
mounting medium with DAPI was purchased from Vector Laboratories.
MgATP solution was purchased from R&D systems. EGF, FGF2, BDNF,
and PAGE gel quick preparation kit were purchased from Yeasen Biotech-
nology. Seahorse XF Cell Mito Stress Test kit was purchased from Agilent.
TEM sampler holder support membrane was purchased from Electron
Microscopy China. Rabbit anti-Akt (Abcam (ab179463), 1:1000), rabbit
anti-Akt1 (phospho S473) (Abcam (ab81283), 1:1000), rabbit anti-mTOR
(Abcam (ab32028), 1:1000), rabbit anti-mTOR (phospho S2448) (Abcam
(109 268), 1:1000 for WB and 1:100 for IHC), rabbit anti-HIF-1𝛼(Abcam
(ab179483), 1:1000), rabbit anti-GFAP (Abcam (ab68428), 1:1000), rabbit
anti-CTGF (Abcam (ab6992), 1:1000 for WB and 1:400 for IHC), rabbit
anti-NeuroD1 (Abcam (ab205300), 1:1000 for WB and 1:200 for IHC),
rabbit anti-Cyt C (Abcam (ab133504), 1:1000), rabbit anti-NeuN (Abcam
(ab177487), 1:1000), rabbit anti-Iba-1 (Abcam (ab178846), 1:1000), rabbit
anti-Doublecortin (Abcam (ab207175), 1:200), rabbit anti-CD11b (Abcam
(ab8878), 1:100), rabbit anti-vGluT1 (Abcam (ab227805), 1:1000), rabbit
anti-GAD67 (Abcam (ab213508), 1:1000), mouse anti-8-OHG (Abcam
(ab62623), 1:1000), rabbit anti-CD34 (Abcam (ab81289), 1:200) were
obtained from Abcam. Mouse anti-GFAP (GB12090, 1:200) and Mouse
anti-Iba-1 (GB12105, 1:200) were obtained from Servicebio. Mouse
anti-GAPDH (AF0006, 1:1000) was purchased from Beyotime. Mouse
anti-GFAP Alexa Fluor™488 (53-9892-80, 1:1000), rabbit anti-oligomer
A11 (AHB0052, 1:1000) and CD11b-APC (17-0112-82, 1:50) were obtained
from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Rabbit anti-PI3K (A0265, 1:1000) and rab-
bit anti-phospho-PI3K (AP0427, 1:1000) were purchased from Abclonal.
Mouse anti-Amyloid 𝛽(82E1, 1H-103, 1:1000) was a gift from Prof. Bin Ji
(Fudan University). All the ﬂuorescent secondary antibody (1:1000) were
obtained from Abcam. Goat anti-rabbit or mouse secondary antibodies
conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (1:1000) were purchased
from Beyotime.
Animals:
All animal experiments were carried out in accordance
with guidelines evaluated and approved by Fudan University Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee (2019-03-YJ-JC-01). C57BL/6
mice (male, 18–20 g), C57BL/6 suckling mice (male, within 24 h af-
ter birth) and SD rats (male, 200–250 g) were purchased from the
Sino-British SIPPR/BK Lab Animal Ltd. APPswe/PSEN1dE9 mice (male,
20–25 g) were purchased from Shanghai Model Organisms Center
lnc.
Cell Lines:
Mouse BV2 cells and mouse bEnd.3 cells were purchased
from Procell Life Science&Technology Co.,Ltd. Human SH-SY5Y cells were
purchased from Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, CAS.
All the cell lines were cultured in DMEM or DMEM/F12 medium sup-
plemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were in-
cubated at 37 °C under a saturating humidity atmosphere containing
5% CO2. The primary astrocyte and microglia were extracted from the
C57BL/6 suckling mouse cortical tissue. Brieﬂy, meninges were carefully
removed from the cerebral cortices and placed in ice-cold Ca2+- and Mg2+-
free HBSS solution. Then the tissue was cut into small pieces and digested
with 0.125% trypsin-EDTA for 15 min with shaking every 5 min. An equal
amount of medium was added to terminate digestion and discard the
supernatant. This procedure was repeated three times and 2 ml culture
medium was added. The tissue suspension was repeatedly blown 20 times
with a pipette and allowed to rest until the upper liquid was free of tissue
debris before ﬁltered through a syringe ﬁlter (0.45 μm). This procedure was
repeated three times until no signiﬁcant precipitation was observed when
the suspension was left to rest. The ﬁltered single-cell suspension was ﬁrst
plated on a T-75 ﬂask for 15 min to remove endothelial cells and pericyte.
Then the non-adherent cell suspension was plated on a PDL coated T-25
ﬂask. After a 24-h incubation at 37 °C in a humidiﬁed 5% CO2 incubator,
culture medium (DMEM/F12 with 10% FBS, 1% P/S, B27, 10 ng ml−1 EGF
and 10 ng ml−1 FGF2) was changed to remove ﬂoating debris. The culture
medium was changed every two days until the cell fusion reached 90%.
Then the ﬂasks were shaken rigorously (200 rpm) overnight to separate
the astrocyte and microglia. The adherent cells were astrocyte and avail-
able for subsequent use. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged to
enable the harvest of microglia. After centrifuge, cells were resuspended
and seeded on PDL coated plates.
Preparation of oA𝛽1-42:
A𝛽1-42 peptides were dissolved in 1,1,1,3,3,3-
hexaﬂuoro-2-propanol (HFIP) to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mm to form
monomers. Then the HFIP was evaporated under nitrogen purging and
the dried peptides ﬁlm were stored at −80 °C. oA𝛽1-42 were prepared by
diluting the monomers solution to 10 μm in cultured medium and incu-
bated overnight at 4 °C.
oA𝛽1-42 Chronic Stimulation Model In Vitro:
oA𝛽1-42 solution was di-
luted to 2 μm and cells were incubated with vehicle or oA𝛽1-42 for 2 days.
Cells were harvested and protein was extracted to analyze the expression
of Akt/mTOR/HIF-1𝛼pathway by WB.
Synthesis and Characterization of D-PPA:
A representative synthetic
procedure for ATRA-CDI was as follows: ATRA (200 mg, 1.2 equiv.), ethy-
lene glycol (34.39 mg, 1 equiv.), DMAP (67.77 mg, 1 equiv.) and EDC
(106.3 mg, 1 equiv.) were dissolved in 5 ml DCM under an atmosphere
of N2. The reaction was carried out at R.T. for 10 h. The crude product was
puriﬁed by column chromatography on silica gel (EtOAc/PE 25:75) to give
compound ATRA-OH in the form of yellow solid. Then, ATRA-OH (100 mg,
1 equiv.) and CDI (76 mg, 2 equiv.) were dissolved in 4 ml DCM under an
atmosphere of N2. The reaction was carried out at R.T. for 2 h. The reac-
tion mixture was diluted with DCM and washed with water twice and brine
once. The solution was dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate and then re-
moved with rotary evaporation to obtain compound ATRA-CDI in the form
of yellow solid. The obtained ATRA-OH and ATRA-CDI were characterized
by 1H-NMR and ESI-MS.
A representative synthetic procedure for DPA-NHS-sulfo was as fol-
lows: DPA (200 mg, 1 equiv.) and SA (151 mg, 1.1 equiv.) were dissolved
in 5 ml THF. The reaction was carried out at 80 °C overnight in a heated
reﬂux device. The solvent of reaction mixture was directly removed with
rotary evaporation without puriﬁcation to obtain DPA-COOH white solid
crude product. Then, the crude product (12.25 mg, 1 equiv.), sulfo-NHS
(12.3 mg, 1.1 equiv.), and EDC (10.86 mg, 1.1 equiv.) were dissolved in
PBS (pH = 6). The reaction was carried out at R.T. for 15 min and directly
added into next procedure without puriﬁcation. The obtained DPA-COOH
was characterized by ESI-MS.
A representative synthetic procedure for DAG-PEG-NHS was as follows:
MAL-PEG-NHS (18 mg, 1.1 equiv.) and DAG peptide (4.4 mg, 1.5 equiv.)
were dissolved in HEPES (10 mm, pH = 7) under an atmosphere of N2.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (17 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
The reaction was carried out at R.T. for 2 h. The reaction mixture was then
directly added into next procedure.
A representative synthetic procedure for D-PPA was as follows: PAH
(25 mg, 1 equiv.), ATRA-CDI (14.6 mg, 20 equiv.), DMAP (4 mg, 20 equiv.)
and TEA (3.37 mg, 20 equiv.) were dissolved in MeOH under an atmo-
sphere of N2. The reaction was carried out at R.T. overnight and dia-
lyzed against deionized water for 24 h. The PAH-ATRA water solution was
changed into HEPES (500 mm, pH = 7.4) solution and DPA-NHS-sulfo
solution was added into the mixture for further 2 h reaction. Then the
DAG-PEG-NHS solution was added into the mixture for another 2 h re-
action. Finally, the reaction mixture was dialyzed against deionized water
for 24 h before lyophilization to obtain compound D-PPA in the form of
yellow solid. The obtained D-PPA was characterized by 1H-NMR and GPC.
Synthesis and Characterization of A-PPH:
A representative synthetic
procedure for HCQ-NHS-sulfo was as follows: HCQ (200 mg, 1 equiv.)
and SA (65.55 mg, 1.1 equiv.) were dissolved in 5 ml THF. The reaction
was carried out at 80 °C overnight in a heated reﬂux device. The solvent
of reaction mixture was directly removed with rotary evaporation without
puriﬁcation to obtain HCQ-COOH white solid crude product. Then, the
crude product (29 mg, 1 equiv.), sulfo-NHS (15.2 mg, 1.1 equiv.), and EDC
(13.42 mg, 1.1 equiv.) were dissolved in PBS (pH = 6). The reaction was
carried out at R.T. for 15 min and directly added into next procedure with-
out puriﬁcation. The obtained HCQ-COOH was characterized by ESI-MS.
A representative synthetic procedure for Ab-PEG-NHS was as follows:
MAL-PEG-NHS (18 mg, 1.1 equiv.) and Ab peptide (5.28 mg, 1.5 equiv.)
were dissolved in HEPES (10 mm, pH = 7) under an atmosphere of N2.
The reaction was carried out at R.T. for 2 h. The reaction mixture was then
directly added into next procedure.
A representative synthetic procedure for A-PPH was as follows: PAH
(25 mg, 1 equiv.) was dissolved in HEPES (500 mm, pH = 7.4) and HCQ-
NHS-sulfo solution (20 equiv.) was added into the mixture for further 2 h
reaction. Then the Ab-PEG-NHS solution and AC (2.72 mg, 10 equiv.) were
added into the mixture for another 2 h reaction. Finally, the reaction mix-
ture was dialyzed against deionized water for 24 h before lyophilization to
obtain compound A-PPH in the form of white solid. The obtained A-PPH
was characterized by 1H-NMR and GPC.
Synthesis and Characterization of PDA:
The PDA nanocore was synthe-
sized by the oxidative polymerization of dopamine. Brieﬂy, 9 ml deionized
water, 4 ml ethanol and 0.8 ml ammonium hydroxide were stirred together
at 25 °C for 30 min. Then 50 mg dopamine hydrochloride was dissolved in
the mixture and the stirring was continued for another 24 h. The color of
the solution gradually changed from colorless to brown to black. The PDA
was puriﬁed by the centrifugal ﬁlter unit (Mw = 100 kDa) to remove un-
converted monomer until the lower liquid became clear. After that, PDA so-
lution was ﬁltered by 0.22 μm ﬁlter membrane to obtain the PDA nanocore.
The concentration of PDA was determined by lyophilization. The obtained
PDA was characterized by DLS and TEM.
Synthesis
and
Characterization
of
DA-PPHATK@PDA:
The
DA-
PPHATK@PDA was synthesized by the self-assemble between PDA and
D-PPA and A-PPH and cross-linking with TK linker. Diﬀerent mass ratio
of PDA and polymers were mixed together and self-assemble to form
DA-PPHA@PDA under the condition of ultrasound for 10 min. Then
diﬀerent mass of TK linker was added into the mixture and the stirring was
continued for 1 h to obtain DA-PPHATK@PDA. The DA-PPHATK@PDA
solution was further puriﬁed by ultraﬁltration to remove free polymers
and TK linker. The obtained DA-PPHATK@PDA was characterized by DLS,
TEM, elemental mapping and UV–vis absorbance spectrometer.
Drug Release:
D-PPA and A-PPH were diluted to 5 mg mL−1 with PBS
(pH
=
5.0 or 7.4), and diﬀerent concentrations of esterase (10 and
30 U mL−1) were added to the solutions, while the control group with-
out esterase was set to simulate the extracellular environment. The above
solutions were incubated for 24 h at 37 °C on a shaker (100 rpm) and
samples were taken at diﬀerent time points (0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 24 h). The
samples were centrifuged (14 000 g, 5 min) and reconstituted in methanol.
The concentration of HCQ and ATRA were determined by HPLC. (Figure
S22, Supporting Information).
HPLC method for quantifying ATRA: 90% methanol, 10% H2O (3%
acetic acid), 1.0 ml min−1, injection volume 10 μl, wavelength 358 nm.
HPLC method for quantifying HCQ: 14% acetonitrile, 86% NaH2PO4
buﬀer (0.01 m, pH = 3), 1.0 ml min−1, injection volume 10 μl, wavelength
330 nm.
The activity of esterase of BV2 cells and astrocyte was tested by the
FDA probe (Figure S20, Supporting Information). Brieﬂy, FDA solution
(10 μg ml−1) was added into the cell culture medium and the ﬂuorescence
intensity (Ex = 480 nm, Em = 530 nm) was immediately detected by
microplate reader every 10 min at 37 °C for 1 h. Fixed cells by 4% PFA
solution were used as negative control.
ROS Sensitive and Scavenging Eﬀects:
The ROS sensitive ability of DA-
PPHATK@PDA was examined by incubation with O2
•- (100 μm). The
change of size distribution was detected by DLS and TEM. DPPH•,
stable free radicals, was used to test the ROS scavenging eﬀects of
DA-PPHATK@PDA. Diﬀerent concentrations of DA-PPHATK@PDA were
added into DPPH ethanol solution (0.3 mm), followed by continuous vor-
tex in the dark. The UV absorbance at 517 nm was monitored every 5 min
for 30 min, and UV–vis spectra of 400-800 nm were measured at 30 min.
FRET Eﬀect:
Water soluble AF555 and FITC or Cy5 and Cy5.5, whose
spectral overlap over 30%, were selected as the model ﬂuorescence probe.
Probe labeling was achieved by covalently linking the NHS group of probes
to the amino group of the polymer skeleton. AF555 and FITC labeled DA-
PP@PDA or DA-PPTK@PDA before and after treated with O2
•- (100 μm)
was excited at 488 nm and the emission spectrum of 520–650 nm was
scanned by microplate reader.
Cellular Uptake and Mechanism of Internalization:
Fluorescence probe
labeled PPTK@PDA or DA-PPTK@PDA were incubated with uptake in-
hibitive condition pre-treated bEnd.3, microglia or astrocyte for 30 min.
Then, cells were harvested and the ﬂuorescence intensity was analyzed by
ﬂow cytometry.
For the glial cells selective targeting veriﬁcation, FITC labeled A-PP
or PP and Cy5 labeled D-PP or PP were synthesized to obtained DA-
PPTK@PDA or PPTK@PDA. Microglia or astrocyte were incubated with the
above nanoplatform pre-treated with O2•- (100 μm) for 30 min. Then, cells
were harvested and the ﬂuorescence intensity of microglia and astrocyte
was analyzed by ﬂow cytometry. For the confocal imaging experiment, Cy5
labeled A-PP, D-PP, and PP were synthesized to obtained D-PPTK@PDA,
A-PPTK@PDA, or PPTK@PDA. Microglia and astrocyte co-culture system
was incubated with the above nanoplatform pre-treated with O2•- (100 μm)
for 30 min. Then, cells were ﬁxed and stained with GFAP and CD11b anti-
body to distinguish microglia and astrocyte. The distribution of Cy5 signals
was observed under a confocal microscopy.
For the escape of lysosomes assay, FITC labeled D-PPA or A-PPH were
synthesized to obtained D-PPATK@PDA and A-PPHTK@PDA. Microglia
or astrocyte were incubated with A-PPHTK@PDA or D-PPATK@PDA for
30 min, respectively. The cell supernatant was then replaced and incubated
for another 8 h. Confocal images were taken at timed points after cells were
stained with Hoechst and Lysotracker deep red for 30 min.
Transcytosis Across the In Vitro BBB Model:
bEnd.3 cells monolayer in
a transwell system was established as the in vitro BBB model. Brieﬂy,
bEnd.3 cells were seeded into a 0.3 cm2 cell culture insert at a density
of 2 × 104 cells per well and allowed to achieve conﬂuence for several
days. AF555/FITC labeled PPTK@PDA or DA-PPTK@PDA in 250 μl FBS-
free medium was added to the donor chamber and 800 μl medium to the
reception pool. Cells were incubated at 37 °C on a rocking platform at
50 rpm while 50 μl samples were taken at 5, 10, 15, and 30 min for ﬂuores-
cence detection and 50 μl fresh medium was replenished. The apparent
permeability (Papp) was calculated as described below.
Papp = (dQ∕dt) × (1∕C0) × (1∕A)
(1)
where dQ/dt is the permeability rate (nmol s−1), C0 is the initial concen-
tration (nmol ml−1) in the donor chamber, and A is the surface area (cm2)
of the membrane ﬁlter.
For the integrity veriﬁcation of nanoplatform across BBB, FRET eﬀect
was detected both in the donor and reception pool. The ﬂuorescence in-
tensity ratio of DA-PPTK@PDA at Em wavelength of AF555 and FITC was
calculated to compare the structural integrity of the nanoplatform before
and after crossing the BBB.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (18 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Western Blot Analysis:
Lysates from cells or brain tissues were obtained
in RIPA lysis buﬀer containing a cocktail of protease and phosphatase in-
hibitors. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. The
protein samples were mixed with loading buﬀer and boiled at 95 °C for
10 min to denature the protein. Then the protein samples were isolated by
4-12% SDS-PAGE at 150 V and transferred to 0.45 μm PVDF membrane
at 200 mA for 60 min. The membrane was primarily blocked with the pro-
tein free rapid-blocking buﬀer for 20 min at room temperature. Primary
antibodies were incubated overnight at 4 °C, then with the HRP conju-
gated secondary antibody (1:1000) for 1 h at room temperature after wash-
ing with TBST. Finally, the ECL system was utilized to visualize the blot
bands.
For the dot blot assay, brain samples (5 μl, 20 μg) were blotted onto
nitrocellulose membrane and air-dried. After 1 h blocking in protein free
rapid-blocking buﬀer at R.T. for 30 min, the membranes were incubated
for 2 h at R.T. with A11 antibody. The membranes were then washed three
times with TBST and incubated with HRP conjugated secondary anti-rabbit
antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Then stripes were detected using
the ECL system.
Mitochondrial Potential Assay:
JC-10 probe was used to monitor the
changes of mitochondrial membrane potential of BV2 cells. After treated
with A-PPHTK@PDA, BV2 cells were incubated with JC-10 and Hoechst
solution for 30 min at 37 °C and then washed twice with HBSS. The ﬂuo-
rescence of JC-10 was observed with a confocal microscopy.
Measurement of Real-Time OCR:
OCR was measured using a Sea-
horse XF96 analyzer according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy,
1 × 104 cells were plated on the XF96 cell culture microplate and cultured
with diﬀerent nanoplatform with or without oA𝛽1-42 as indicated. The car-
tridge plate was hydrated with XF calibrant buﬀer and incubated overnight
(37 °C, CO2-free). The assay medium (XF base medium containing 1 mm
pyruvate, 4 mm glutamine, and 25 mm glucose) was prepared immedi-
ately before assay. For OCR measurements, oligomycin (1.5 μm), FCCP
(1 μm), and rotenone (1 μm) were automatically added into the microplate
at timed point during the measurement, and then OCR was monitored ev-
ery 6 min for 72 min.
Measurement of Metabolic Hallmarks (Glucose, NADPH, ATP, Lactate):
2-NBDG, a glucose analogue ﬂuorescence probe, was used to detected the
level of glucose metabolism of cells. Treated BV2 cells were incubated with
2-NBDG diluted with glucose-free culture medium for 15 min at 37 °C.
Then cells were washed with ice-cold HBSS three times. After that, cells
were harvested and the ﬂuorescence intensity of 2-NBDG in BV2 cells were
analyzed by ﬂow cytometry.
For the ATP and NADPH measurement, cells or tissue were obtained
after treatment and lysed with the provided extracting solution. The con-
centration of ATP and NADPH was measured according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions after the protein concentration was quantiﬁed.
For the lactate measurement, the cell lysis and cultured medium were
obtained after treatment and the concentration of lactate was quantiﬁed
according to the manufacturer’s instructions after the protein concentra-
tion was quantiﬁed.
Evaluation of Phagocytic Ability In Vitro:
For the investigation of phago-
cytic phenotype of BV2 cells. oA𝛽1-42 chronically treated BV2 cells were in-
cubated with HCQ containing diﬀerent nanoplatform for 24 h. Then cells
were obtained and stained with CD11b-APC antibody. The expression of
CD11b was analyzed by ﬂow cytometry.
For the investigation of phagocytic eﬀects of A𝛽, FITC labeled A𝛽was
synthesized and the oligomer form was incubated with nanoplatform pre-
treated BV2 cells for 1 h at 37 °C. Then cells were washed three times with
HBSS and incubated with Hoechst and Lysotracker deep red for 30 min
at 37 °C. The colocalization of A𝛽and lysosome was observed under a
confocal microscopy.
Flow Cytometry:
Treated cells were collected and washed with HBSS
three times. Afterward, cells were blocked with 5% BSA for 20 min at R.T.
Primary antibodies was added into the cell suspension and incubated in
dark at R.T. for 30 min. Lastly, cells were injected into the ﬂow cytometer
to analyze the expression of target protein.
Cytochemistry:
Treated cells were ﬁxed with ice-cold 4% PFA for 15 min
and washed with HBSS three times. Then cells were permeabilized by
treating with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 min and incubated with primary anti-
bodies at 4 °C overnight. After washed with HBSS three times, cells were
further incubated with ﬂuorescent secondary antibody for 1 h and DAPI
for 15 min at R.T. Fluorescence imaging was performed using a confocal
laser-scanning microscope.
Histology and Immunohistochemistry:
Anesthetized mice were per-
fused with ice-cold Saline and 4% PFA, after which brains were incubated
in 4% PFA for 24 h at 4 °C. Next, serial coronal sections of brains (10 μm
thickness) were prepared using a cryostat after dehydration. For immuno-
histochemistry, brain sections were washed with PBS three times and incu-
bated with antibodies solution (primary antibodies, 10% goat serum, and
1% Triton X-100) overnight at 4 °C. Slices were subsequently incubated for
1 h at R.T. with ﬂuorescent secondary antibody and then counterstained
with DAPI for 15 min. Slices were imaged using ﬂuorescence microscope
imaging.
For the DHE staining, anesthetized mice were perfused with ice-
cold Saline and brains were obtained immediately without ﬁxation and
dehydration. Next, serial coronal sections of brains (10 μm thickness)
were prepared using a cryostat. Brain slices were washed with PBS
three times and incubated with DHE solution (20 μm) for 30 min
at 37 °C. Then slices were fully washed and counterstained with
DAPI for 15 min. Slices were imaged using ﬂuorescence microscope
imaging.
For Nissl and HE staining, brain or tissue slices were ﬁxed with 4% PFA
for 10 min and then washed with water for 4 min. Nissl or HE staining
solutions were added to the slices and incubated for 5 min at room tem-
perature. Afterward, the slices were washed with water, 95% EtOH, and
70% EtOH for three times. The slices were observed by ﬂuorescence mi-
croscope imaging.
Trans-Diﬀerentiation of Astrocyte into Neuron:
After astrocytes in-
cubated with ATRA containing nanoplatform and oA𝛽1-42 stimulation
for 24 h, the culture medium was completely replaced by a diﬀer-
entiation medium that included DMEM/F12, 0.5% FBS, 3.5 mm glu-
cose, penicillin/streptomycin, BDNF (20 ng ml−1) and N2 supple-
ment. The cultures were changed every two days to promote synap-
tic maturation. After 14 days treatment, astrocytes were stained with
DCX antibody and ﬂuorescence imaging was performed using a con-
focal laser-scanning microscope to verify the immature neuron for-
mation. The mature neuron was observed by stained with MAP2
or NeuN antibodies to prove the tans-diﬀerentiation after 28 days
treatment.
For the identiﬁcation of neuron types, diﬀerent transporters antibodies
were added into treated astrocytes and observed under a confocal laser-
scanning microscope. In addition, WB was also performed to test the ex-
pression of transporter protein.
Patch-Clamp Recordings in Cell Cultures:
For astrocytes-converted neu-
rons, whole-cell recordings were performed using multi-clamp 700A
patch-clamp ampliﬁer. The chamber was constantly perfused with a bath
solution consisting of 128 mm NaCl, 30 mm glucose, 25 mm HEPES, 5 mm
KCl, 2 mm CaCl2, and 1 mm MgCl2. The pH of bath solution was adjusted
to 7.3 with NaOH, and osmolarity was at 315−325 mOsm/l. Patch pipettes
were pulled from borosilicate glass (3−5 MU) and ﬁlled with a pipette
solution consisting of 135 mm KCl, 5 mm Na-phosphocreatine, 10 mm
HEPES, 2 mm EGTA, 4 mm MgATP, and 0.5 mm Na2GTP (pH 7.3, ad-
justed with KOH). The series resistance was typically ≈20 MU. For voltage-
clamp experiments, the membrane potential was typically held at −70 or
−80 mV. Diﬀerent inhibitors were added into bath solution and the sponta-
neous synaptic events were recorded. Data were collected using pClamp 9
software.
SH-SY5Y and Glial Cells Co-Culture Systems:
A transwell system was
used to mimic the neuroinﬂammation caused by glial cells in vitro. As-
trocyte and microglia were plated on the donor pool and SH-SY5Y cells
were seeded on the reception pool. oA𝛽1-42 and nanoplatform were added
into the donor pool for 24 h and the ROS production and cell apoptosis of
SH-SY5Y cells were further investigated by DHE and Annexin V-PE/7-AAD
staining and ﬂow cytometry.
Behavioral Assessment:
For the morris water maze test: The water tem-
perature was set as 21 °C. The round pool was in a quiet test room with
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (19 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
constant light during the experiment. Four diﬀerent geometric ﬁgures were
placed on the wall of the pool which evenly divided the pool into four quad-
rants. A 10 cm diameter platform was placed in the center of quadrant I
and its position was unchanged during the training trials. Water was ﬁlled
in the pool until the surface was 1.5 cm higher than the platform, and
titanium dioxide was added to make the platform invisible in the water.
A digital camera was set above the pool and connected to a tracking de-
vice to record the path taken by the mice. Six training trials per day were
conducted for six consecutive days before the experimental test for each
group. Each mouse was released in the water facing wall of water maze
at random starting position. The time to reach the platform was recorded
in each trial with a maximal time limit of 60 s, and mouse was manually
moved to stay on the platform for 15 s. If the platform was not found within
60 s, the latency was recorded at 60 s and the mouse was gently guided
to the platform and allowed to remain on the platform for 20 s. The time
that the mouse spent in each quadrant was analyzed with a computerized
tracking system.
For the nest behavior testing: After the three-month treatment, dif-
ferent groups of mice were moved into cages with 10 pieces of paper
(5 × 5 cm2) added. Mice were allowed to move at random, and the nest-
ing behavior was recorded every day by taking photos and calculating
scores.
Pharmacokinetics In Vivo:
AF647, AF555, or FITC labeled DA-
PPTK@PDA and DA-PP@PDA were synthesized and intravenously in-
jected to SD rats with free probe as the control. Blood was collected
through the eyeball at scheduled time points. Two hundred microliters
whole blood was collected to detect ﬂuorescence intensity with a mi-
croplate reader.
In Vivo Distribution and Clearance:
Cy5.5 and Cy5 labeled PPTK@PDA,
DA-PPTK@PDA, and DA-PP@PDA were synthesized and intravenously in-
jected to WT or APP/PS1 mice. The ﬂuorescence changes of brains at dif-
ferent time points were imaged by In Vivo Imaging System (IVIS). The
mice were sacriﬁced and the brains and major organs were removed at
24 h post injection. The isolated brains and major organs were imaged
by IVIS. Then the ID% of nanoplatform in vivo was calculated by measur-
ing the concentration of ﬂuorescence probe in major organ by microplate
reader.
To investigate the intracerebral distribution of nanoplatform, brain
frozen sections were prepared and immunostaining of blood vessel and
oxidative damage cells were performed which further observed by ﬂuores-
cence microscope imaging.
To
verify
the
glial
cells-selective
targeting
ability,
Cy5
labeled
PPTK@PDA, A-PPTK@PDA, D-PPTK@PDA, A-PP@PDA, and D-PP@PDA
were prepared and injected into APP/PS1mice. The colocalization of Cy5
and glial cells were observed by ﬂuorescence microscope after brain slices
were stained with GFAP and Iba-1.
Biosafety Assessment:
For the hemolysis assay of nanoplatform, red
blood cells were obtained from C57 mice and diluted to 4% cell suspen-
sion with isotonic solution. Diﬀerent concentration of nanoplatform were
prepared and mixed with an equal volume of red blood cell suspension.
The mixture was vortexed continuously at 37 °C for 2 h. Red blood cells
were obtained by centrifuge and the integrity of cells were analyzed by ﬂow
cytometry.
For the in vivo safety of nanoplatform, APP/PS1 mice were sacriﬁced
after being treated with diﬀerent formulations for three months, and main
organs were excised and ﬁxed in 4% PFA. The tissue sections embedded in
paraﬃn were stained with HE solution, and observed with a microscope.
Tissue sections of WT mice were used as a control. Plasma was obtained
to test the ALT, AST, DBIL, TBIL, ALB, ALP, 𝛾-GT, TBA, BUN, CREA, and
UA level of mice.
Statistical Analysis:
All experiments were repeated at least three times.
Results were analyzed by GraphPad Prism 8 software and presented as
mean ± SD or mean ± SEM. Comparisons between multiple groups
were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test unless other-
wise indicated. Com-parison between the two groups was done by un-
paired t test or multiple t test. Latency time curves were analyzed
by one-way repeated measures ANOVA. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and
***p < 0.001.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (32030059, 82273865, and 82121002), Shanghai Mu-
nicipal Science and Technology Major Project (Grant 2018SHZDZX01),
and ZJLab. Scheme 1, Figure 2h, Figure 2l, Figure 3a, Figure 4a, Figure 5b,
Figure 6a, Figure 7h, Figure 7m, Figure S38a (Supporting Informa-
tion), and TOC were partly created by BioRender (https://www.biorender.
com/). The publication license numbers are ZY2798IC13, GE2798J03V,
NR2798IOVU, GC2798J1KC, LX2798J5BF, RM2798IRBI, AN2798IYBF,
QY2798J72W, PX2798J8AT, JU2798ITFH and ZX2798J41R.
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
combination nano-therapy, glial cells targeting, metabolic modulation,
modular nanoplatform, trans-diﬀerentiation
Received: June 19, 2024
Revised: September 2, 2024
Published online: September 26, 2024
[1] J. Graﬀ-Radford, K. X. X. Yong, L. G. Apostolova, F. H. Bouwman, M.
Carrillo, B. C. Dickerson, G. D. Rabinovici, J. M. Schott, D. T. Jones,
M. E. Murray, Lancet Neurol. 2021, 20, 222.
[2] a) B.-L. Sun, W.-W. Li, C. Zhu, W.-S. Jin, F. Zeng, Y.-H. Liu, X.-L. Bu,
J. Zhu, X.-Q. Yao, Y.-J. Wang, Neurosci. Bull. 2018, 34, 1111; b) R.
Ossenkoppele, R. van der Kant, O. Hansson, Lancet Neurol. 2022,
21, 726.
[3] B. De Strooper, E. Karran, Cell 2016, 164, 603.
[4] a) M. S. Uddin, L. W. Lim, Ageing Res. Rev. 2022, 78, 101622; b) M. H.
Murdock, L.-H. Tsai, Nat. Neurosci. 2023, 26, 181.
[5] a) C. Lopez-Otin, M. A. Blasco, L. Partridge, M. Serrano, G. Kroemer,
Cell 2023, 186, 243; b) M. P. Mattson, T. V. Arumugam, Cell Metab.
2018, 27, 1176.
[6] C. Gao, J. Jiang, Y. Tan, S. Chen, Signal Transduction Targeted Ther.
2023, 8, 359.
[7] A.-C. Wendeln, K. Degenhardt, L. Kaurani, M. Gertig, T. Ulas, G. Jain,
J. Wagner, L. M. Häsler, K. Wild, A. Skodras, T. Blank, O. Staszewski,
M. Datta, T. P. Centeno, V. Capece, M. R. Islam, C. Kerimoglu, M.
Staufenbiel, J. L. Schultze, M. Beyer, M. Prinz, M. Jucker, A. Fischer,
J. J. Neher, Nature 2018, 556, 332.
[8] M. S. Anderson, M. A. Su, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2016, 16, 247.
[9] R. Orihuela, C. A. McPherson, G. J. Harry, Br. J. Pharmacol. 2016, 173,
649.
[10] Y. Hu, W. Mai, L. Chen, K. Cao, B. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Lou, S.
Duan, Z. Gao, Glia 2020, 68, 1031.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (20 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[11] G. Y. Liu, D. M. Sabatini, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2020, 21, 183.
[12] S. H. Baik, S. Kang, W. Lee, H. Choi, S. Chung, J. I. Kim, I. Mook-Jung,
Cell Metab. 2019, 30, 493.
[13] H. Kahroba, B. Ramezani, H. Maadi, M. R. Sadeghi, H. Jaberie, F.
Ramezani, Ageing Res. Rev. 2021, 65, 101211.
[14] M. Linnerbauer, M. A. Wheeler, F. J. Quintana, Neuron 2020, 108, 608.
[15] C. García-Cáceres, E. Balland, V. Prevot, S. Luquet, S. C. Woods, M.
Koch, T. L. Horvath, C.-X. Yi, J. A. Chowen, A. Verkhratsky, A. Araque,
I. Bechmann, M. H. Tschöp, Nat. Neurosci. 2018, 22, 7.
[16] H.-G. Lee, M. A. Wheeler, F. J. Quintana, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery
2022, 21, 339.
[17] Z. Guo, L. Zhang, Z. Wu, Y. Chen, F. Wang, G. Chen, Cell Stem Cell
2014, 14, 188.
[18] a) P. Scheltens, B. De Strooper, M. Kivipelto, H. Holstege, G.
Chételat, C. E. Teunissen, J. Cummings, W. M. van der Flier, Lancet
2021, 397, 1577; b) P. Denver, A. English, P. L. McClean, Brain, Be-
hav., Immun. 2018, 70, 423; c) P. Liu, T. Zhang, Q. Chen, C. Li, Y. Chu,
Q. Guo, Y. Zhang, W. Zhou, H. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y.
Luo, X. Li, H. Song, B. Su, C. Li, T. Sun, C. Jiang, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33,
2100746; d) Y. Lu, Z. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Zhang, Q. Guo, Q. Chen,
X. Chen, X. He, L. Liu, C. Ruan, T. Sun, B. Ji, W. Lu, C. Jiang, Adv. Sci.
2018, 6, 1801586.
[19] X. Li, Y. Li, Y. Jin, Y. Zhang, J. Wu, Z. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Cai, S. Gao, T.
Liu, F. Zeng, Y. Wang, W. Wang, T. F. Yuan, H. Tian, Y. Shu, F. Guo, W.
Lu, Y. Mao, X. Mei, Y. Rao, B. Peng, Nat. Aging 2023, 3, 1288.
[20] a) J. Xie, Z. Shen, Y. Anraku, K. Kataoka, X. Chen, Biomaterials 2019,
224, 119491; b) L. Han, C. Jiang, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 2021, 11, 2306;
c) P. Liu, C. Jiang, WIREs Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2022, 14, 1818.
[21] A. P. Mann, P. Scodeller, S. Hussain, G. B. Braun, T. Molder, K. Toome,
R. Ambasudhan, T. Teesalu, S. A. Lipton, E. Ruoslahti, Nat. Commun.
2017, 8, 1403.
[22] Y. Kong, C. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Qi, C. Zhang, B. Sun, J. Wang, Y. Guan,
Front. Aging Neurosci. 2020, 12, 227.
[23] C. Cai, X. Dai, Y. Zhu, M. Lian, F. Xiao, F. Dong, Q. Zhang, Y. Huang,
Q. Zheng, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2015, 100, 825.
[24] a) V. R. Varma, R. J. Desai, S. Navakkode, L.-W. Wong, C. Anerillas, T.
Loeﬄer, I. Schilcher, M. Mahesri, K. Chin, D. B. Horton, S. C. Kim, T.
Gerhard, J. B. Segal, S. Schneeweiss, M. Gorospe, S. Sajikumar, M.
Thambisetty, Mol. Psychiatry 2022, 28, 1312; b) M. Kocak, S. E Erdi, G.
Jorba, I. Maestro, J. Farrés, V. Kirkin, A. Martinez, O. Pless, Autophagy
2021, 18, 473.
[25] a) Z. Wu, M. Parry, X.-Y. Hou, M.-H. Liu, H. Wang, R. Cain, Z.-F.
Pei, Y.-C. Chen, Z.-Y. Guo, S. Abhijeet, G. Chen, Nat. Commun. 2020,
11, 1105; b) G. López-Carballo, L. Moreno, S. Masiá, P. Pérez, D.
Barettino, J. Biol. Chem. 2002, 277, 25297.
[26] P. Ionita, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 1545.
[27] M. D. Sweeney, A. P. Sagare, B. V. Zlokovic, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2018,
14, 133.
[28] N. N. Pavlova, J. Zhu, C. B. Thompson, Cell Metab. 2022, 34, 355.
[29] C. Zou, Y. Wang, Z. Shen, J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods 2005, 64, 207.
[30] S. A. Wolf, H. W. G. M. Boddeke, H. Kettenmann, Annu. Rev. Physiol.
2017, 79, 619.
[31] J. S. Kerr, B. A. Adriaanse, N. H. Greig, M. P. Mattson, M. Z. Cader,
V. A. Bohr, E. F. Fang, Trends Neurosci. 2017, 40, 151.
[32] S. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Hu, J. Wu, Q. Cao, S. Chen, Y. Gao, Mol. Cell.
Endocrinol. 2016, 422, 243.
[33] a) F. Leng, P. Edison, Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2020, 17, 157; b) V. Calsolaro,
P. Edison, Alzheimer’s Dementia 2016, 12, 719.
[34] R. Bai, J. Guo, X.-Y. Ye, Y. Xie, T. Xie, Ageing Res. Rev. 2022, 77, 101619.
[35] F. Mangialasche, A. Solomon, B. Winblad, P. Mecocci, M. Kivipelto,
Lancet. Neurol. 2010, 9, 702.
[36] S. Khan, K. H. Barve, M. S. Kumar, Curr. Neuropharmacol. 2020, 18,
1106.
[37] C. Ferrari, S. Sorbi, Physiol. Rev. 2021, 101, 1047.
[38] M. Jorﬁ, A. Maaser-Hecker, R. E. Tanzi, Genome Med. 2023, 15, 6.
[39] M. Cortes-Canteli, C. Iadecola, J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2020, 75, 942.
[40] M. T. Kabir, M. S. Uddin, A. A. Mamun, P. Jeandet, L. Aleya, R. A.
Mansouri, G. M. Ashraf, B. Mathew, M. N. Bin-Jumah, M. M. Abdel-
Daim, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 3272.
[41] R. S. Isaacson, C. A. Ganzer, H. Hristov, K. Hackett, E. Caesar, R.
Cohen, R. Kachko, J. Meléndez-Cabrero, A. Rahman, O. Scheyer,
M. J. Hwang, C. Berkowitz, S. Hendrix, M. Mureb, M. W. Schelke,
L. Mosconi, A. Seifan, R. Krikorian, Alzheimer’s Dementia 2018, 14,
1663.
[42] H. Gao, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 2016, 6, 268.
[43] P. Liu, C. Jiang, Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2022, 14, 1818.
[44] Y. S. Zhu, K. Tang, J. Lv, Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2021, 42, 857.
[45] B. L. Sun, W. W. Li, C. Zhu, W. S. Jin, F. Zeng, Y. H. Liu, X. L. Bu, J.
Zhu, X. Q. Yao, Y. J. Wang, Neurosci. Bull. 2018, 34, 1111.
[46] A. P. Porsteinsson, R. S. Isaacson, S. Knox, M. N. Sabbagh, I. Rubino,
J. Prev. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2021, 8, 371.
[47] A. C. Cuello, Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2017, 38, 956.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2408729
© 2024 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2408729 (21 of 21)
 15214095, 2024, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202408729 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [26/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License