Leading Edge
Review
Alzheimer Disease:
An Update on Pathobiology
and Treatment Strategies
Justin M. Long1 and David M. Holtzman1,*
1Department of Neurology, Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
*Correspondence: holtzman@wustl.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.09.001
Alzheimer disease (AD) is a heterogeneous disease with a complex pathobiology. The presence of
extracellular b-amyloid deposition as neuritic plaques and intracellular accumulation of hyperphos-
phorylated tau as neuroﬁbrillary tangles remains the primary neuropathologic criteria for AD diag-
nosis. However, a number of recent fundamental discoveries highlight important pathological roles
for other critical cellular and molecular processes. Despite this, no disease-modifying treatment
currently exists, and numerous phase 3 clinical trials have failed to demonstrate beneﬁts. Here,
we review recent advances in our understanding of AD pathobiology and discuss current treatment
strategies, highlighting recent clinical trials and opportunities for developing future disease-
modifying therapies.
Dementia describes an intra-individual pattern of decline in
memory and thinking impairing at least two domains of cognition
(McKhann et al., 2011). Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most com-
mon cause of dementia. The majority of cases occur after age
65, constituting late-onset AD (LOAD), while cases occurring
earlier than age 65 are considerably rarer, constituting less
than 5% of all cases and are termed early-onset AD (EOAD)
(Alzheimer’s Association, 2019). Approximately 1%–2% of AD
is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion (ADAD) and can
present with very early age of onset and a more rapid rate of pro-
gression, and it is sometimes associated with other neurologic
symptoms seen less frequently in sporadic AD (Bateman et al.,
2012). Clinical syndromes consistent with AD are deﬁned by
classical symptoms and cognitive proﬁles. However, AD as a
distinct entity is now deﬁned biologically by the presence of a
speciﬁc neuropathological proﬁle (Jack et al., 2018a): extracel-
lular deposition of b-amyloid (Ab) in the form of diffuse and
neuritic plaques and the presence of intraneuronal neuroﬁbrillary
tangles (NFTs) and neuropil threads within dystrophic neurites
consisting of aggregated hyperphosphorylated tau protein
(Duyckaerts et al., 2009).
Dementia due to AD is associated with the onset of signiﬁcant
and progressive disability throughout the disease course,
with death an inevitable outcome generally occurring within
5–12 years of symptom onset (Vermunt et al., 2019). The burden
on caregivers and the public health sector is enormous (Alz-
heimer’s Association, 2019). There is a dire need for disease-
modifying therapies that may prevent or slow the rate of disease
progression, but unfortunately none are currently available. The
history of pharmaceutical development for AD has been plagued
by a seemingly endless parade of mid-to-late-stage clinical trial
failures. Nonetheless, signiﬁcant strides have been made in
recent years in clarifying key aspects of the underlying pathobi-
ology of AD. Though the therapeutic pipeline has faced struggles
and some pharmaceutical companies have chosen to abandon
their AD drug development divisions, novel therapeutic strate-
gies are still being actively developed and tested. This Review
discusses recent advances in our understanding of the pathobi-
ology of AD and summarizes treatment strategies as well as the
challenges and opportunities on the path to development of truly
disease-modifying treatments.
Clinical and Preclinical Disease
Symptomatic AD follows an insidious and progressive course.
Typical amnestic cases are characterized by early impairment in
learning and memory, followed by later impairments in complex
attention, executive function, language, visuospatial function,
praxis,
gnosis,
and
behavior
and/or
social
comportment
(McKhannetal.,2011).SymptomaticADmayalsopresentasatyp-
ical clinical syndromes in which there is early impairment in non-
memory domains. Posterior cortical atrophy presents with early
deﬁcits in visuospatial function, praxis, and gnosis (Tang-Wai
et al., 2004). Logopenic variant of primary progressive aphasia is
characterized by dysﬂuent language with prominent word-ﬁnding
impairment and severe impairment in repetition (Gorno-Tempini
et al., 2008). The behavioral/dysexecutive variant of AD presents
with early executive dysfunction or behavioral impairment (espe-
cially apathy, hyperorality, and perseveration) (Ossenkoppele
et al., 2015). Clinical dementia severity can be graded by use of
standardized instruments such as the Clinical Dementia Rating
(CDR) (Burke et al., 1988; Morris, 1997), which grades disease
severity based on composite level of dysfunction in domains of
memory,orientation,judgementand problem solving,involvement
in community affairs, function in home and hobbies, and self-care.
Antemortem AD neuropathologic diagnoses can now be
made with reasonable validity using cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF)
312
Cell 179, October 3, 2019 ª 2019 Elsevier Inc.

or positron emission tomography (PET) imaging biomarkers as
surrogate markers for cerebral Ab and tau deposition (Brier
et al., 2016; Fagan et al., 2006, 2007; Lowe et al., 2019; Morris
et al., 2009). Recent studies demonstrate the ability to detect
CNS Ab deposition via the use of plasma assessment of Ab spe-
cies (Nakamura et al., 2018; Ovod et al., 2017; Palmqvist et al.,
2019). Longitudinal studies of cognitive function and CSF and
neuroimaging biomarker changes in ADAD and LOAD have iden-
tiﬁed a signiﬁcant preclinical phase of disease preceding onset
of clinical symptoms by at least 10–20 years (Vermunt et al.,
2019), characterized by early deposition of Ab in the precuneus
and other cortical regions comprising the default mode network,
followed sequentially by regional cortical hypometabolism,
accumulation of tau pathology, hippocampal volume loss, and
onset of symptomatic cognitive impairment (Figure 1; Bateman
et al., 2012; Fagan et al., 2006, 2007, 2014; Gordon et al.,
2016, 2018; Hanseeuw et al., 2019; Jack and Holtzman, 2013;
Morris et al., 2009; Vos et al., 2013). Synaptic and neuronal
loss in the entorhinal cortex generally correlates well with onset
of cognitive impairment (Go´ mez-Isla et al., 1996). CSF and
plasma neuroﬁlament light chain (NfL) is an emerging biomarker
that appears to track the level of general neurodegeneration
across all forms of neurodegenerative dementias (Bridel et al.,
2019; Mielke et al., 2019). Studies of both ADAD and LOAD
have demonstrated that rate of change in CSF and plasma NfL
levels correlates with cortical thickness on structural MRI and
cognitive
performance
(Mattsson
et
al.,
2019;
Preische
et al., 2019).
Pathophysiology of AD
Amyloid
Ab peptide was ﬁrst identiﬁed as the primary constituent of me-
ningovascular amyloid in 1984 (Glenner and Wong, 1984) and
subsequently as the main constituent in amyloid neuritic plaques
(Masters et al., 1985). Over the ensuing decades, enormous
research efforts were expended to clarify the underlying biology
of this peptide and its role in AD pathophysiology. Ab is produced
by sequential cleavage of b-amyloid precursor protein (APP) by
b-secretase and g-secretase (Figure 2A; for review, see Haass
et al. [2012]). The b-secretase enzyme (BACE1) cleaves APP at
the N terminus of the Ab sequence, releasing secreted APP-b
and the membrane-bound C99 fragment (Vassar et al., 1999).
The g-secretase complex consists of four protein subunits: pre-
senilin (PSEN), presenilin enhancer (PEN), APH, and Nicastrin.
There are multiple isoforms of PSEN (PSEN1/PSEN2) and
APH (APHA, APH B/C); up to four different g-secretase com-
plexes may exist in single cell (Voytyuk et al., 2018; Xia, 2019).
Following cleavage by BACE1, the g-secretase complex binds
to N-terminally cleaved APP fragment (C99) and intramembra-
nously cleaves at the ε-site releasing C-terminal fragment
(CTF) and Ab48. The g-secretase complex then processes along
the remaining Ab C-terminal end, producing sequentially shorter
peptides until the Ab peptide is released from the complex
(generally after producing peptides 38-, 40-, and 42-amino acids
in length). Recent publication of high-resolution substrate-
enzyme cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) molecular
structures for g-secretase-APP C83 fragment and g-secretase-
Notch 100 fragment (Yang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2019) has
deﬁnitively determined substrate binding sites for g-secretase
and lends strong evidence for a helix-unwinding model of
sequential substrate processing. BACE1, g-secretase, and
APP form a large molecular complex in vivo, suggesting that
Ab production may be facilitated by directly shuttling APP from
one processing enzyme to another (Liu et al., 2019). Ab is pro-
duced predominantly in endosomes, and its release from neu-
rons is modulated by synaptic activity (Kamenetz et al., 2003;
Wei et al., 2010) both presynaptically (Cirrito et al., 2005, 2008)
and postsynaptically (Verges et al., 2011).
Ab peptides are prone to aggregate into b sheet conformations
in the form of higher-order oligomers, protoﬁbrils, and ﬁbrils,
which are detectable in AD brain. Owing to increased hydropho-
bicity of its expanded C terminus, Ab42 has a greater propensity
for aggregation. Recent cryo-EM experiments have elucidated
the structure of synthetically derived Ab42 ﬁbrils, demonstrating
Figure 1. Timing of Major AD Pathophysio-
logical Events in Relation to Clinical Course
A protracted preclinical phase of disease is char-
acterized by the early onset of amyloid deposition.
This is detected by a reduction in CSF and plasma
levels of Ab42 or increased global signal on amy-
loid PET imaging. Concurrently, there are early
neuroinﬂammatory changes (such as microglial
activation). Microgliosis can be detected longitu-
dinally via use of PK11195 PET imaging, though
better agents are needed. This is followed by the
spread of neuroﬁbrillary tangle (NFT) tau pathol-
ogy
from
the
medial
temporal
lobes
into
neocortex. Increased signal on tau PET imaging
and increased CSF phospho-tau levels mark this
change in patients. Synaptic dysfunction, synapse
loss, and neurodegeneration accumulate with
pathologic spread of tau aggregates. Imaging
analysis of hippocampal and cortical volumes al-
lows for longitudinal tracking of neurodegenera-
tive changes. Onset and progression of cognitive
impairment correlates with accumulation of tau
and hippocampal volume loss but not amyloid deposition. Onset and severity of clinical symptoms in AD can be staged by use of the Clinical Dementia Rating
(CDR) scale, where a score of 0 indicates normal cognition and scores of 0.5, 1, 2, and 3 indicate questionable, mild, moderate, and severe dementia,
respectively.
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
313

7 nm diameter ﬁbrils containing two twisted protoﬁlaments con-
sisting of Ab42 monomers assuming an ‘‘LS’’ shape stacked in
parallel with in-register cross-b structure (Gremer et al., 2017).
8 nm amyloid ﬁbrils are present in the center of neuritic plaques,
Figure 2. Selected Roles of Ab and Tau in
AD Pathophysiology
(A) Ab is derived from APP via the proteolytic
functions of BACE1 and g-secretase. BACE1 and
APP are co-localized to endosomes, which is the
location of intracellular Ab production. Ab is
secreted into the interstitial ﬂuid via a pathway that
is enhanced in the setting of neuronal activity.
Following secretion, Ab aggregates into higher-
order oligomers and ﬁbrils that have numerous
effects on cellular function including impaired
synaptic activity and synapse loss, impaired
cerebral capillary blood ﬂow, and direct promotion
of
tau
pathology
by
stimulating
tau
hyper-
phosphorylation as well as other pathways.
(B) Pathological tau aggregation (blue shading) in
the medial temporal lobes occurs with aging and is
not always associated with cognitive impairment
(primary
age-related
tauopathy).
The
earliest
accumulation of Ab deposition (red shading) is in
the precuneus and posterior cingulate. Longitudi-
nal CSF and imaging biomarker studies suggest
that global amyloid accumulation is required for
the pathologic spread of tau from the medial
temporal lobes to other cortical regions in AD. In
this way, AD may represent an amyloid-facilitated
tauopathy.
(C) Pathologic spread of tau aggregates in AD
usually occurs in a stereotyped fashion along
neuroanatomically
connected
networks.
Mis-
folded tau likely acts in a prion-like manner to
promote templated misfolding of native mono-
mers, leading to seeding of new pathological tau
aggregates. Tau pathology can subsequently
spread trans-synaptically to distant neurons, rep-
resenting a molecular correlate for pathologic tau
spreading noted in human AD brain.
whereas oligomers appear to be detect-
able among the halo of dystrophic neu-
rites surrounding neuritic plaques (Mas-
ters
and
Selkoe,
2012).
There
is
evidence that the process of Ab aggrega-
tion may require Ab uptake by microglia
followed by intracellular seeding and ag-
gregation (Sosna et al., 2018).
Ab ﬁbrillization can be ‘‘seeded’’ in a
prion-like manner by the presence of
small assemblies of misfolded b sheet-
containing Ab seeds that template the
formation of larger amyloid aggregates
(Walker and Jucker, 2015). Brain extracts
containing minute amounts of misfolded
Ab prepared from AD brain or APP trans-
genic mice, when injected into APP trans-
genic animals via intracerebral or intra-
peritoneal routes, will induce cerebral
amyloidosis (Eisele et al., 2009, 2010;
Ye et al., 2015). There is strong evidence
that human-to-human transmission of
amyloid pathology is possible. Patients who developed iatro-
genic Creutzfeld–Jakob disease (CJD) following injections of
prion-contaminated growth hormone derived from pooled
cadaveric pituitary extracts prior to 1985 have been found in
314
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

some cases to have signiﬁcant cerebral and vascular amyloid
pathology (congophilic amyloid angiopathy [CAA]) (Jaunmuk-
tane et al., 2015). When injected intracerebrally into APP trans-
genic mice, these extracts are able to seed CAA pathology and
cerebellar amyloid deposition (Purro et al., 2018).
Based on a number of lines of evidence, Hardy and Higgins
proposed the amyloid cascade hypothesis in 1992, positing
that deposition of Ab in the brain is the initiating step of AD path-
ogenesis, leading to subsequent tau deposition, neuron and syn-
aptic loss, and cognitive decline (Hardy and Higgins, 1992). This
hypothesis has been the leading model of AD pathogenesis
since it was ﬁrst proposed, although portions have been revised
or supplemented over time (Musiek and Holtzman, 2015; Selkoe
and Hardy, 2016). The hypothesis is supported by the discovery
that exclusively genetic forms of AD, such as ADAD, Down syn-
drome (trisomy 21), or APP locus duplications, produce an
increase in the Ab42/40 ratio, total Ab production, or Ab ﬁbrillino-
genic properties and are sufﬁcient to induce typical AD pathol-
ogy (Tcw and Goate, 2017). Also, a rare APP mutation A673T
that reduces risk of developing AD causes decreased Ab pro-
duction (Jonsson et al., 2012; Martiskainen et al., 2017). In addi-
tion, the strongest genetic risk factor for LOAD, apolipoprotein E
(APOE), in large part appears to increase risk via inﬂuencing Ab
seeding and clearance (Bales et al., 1997; Castellano et al.,
2011; Verghese et al., 2013). While the genetic evidence strongly
supports the importance of Ab aggregation in instigating the AD
cascade, it seems clear that Ab is necessary but not sufﬁcient
and that there are other downstream factors that play a key
role. For example, there is minimal correlation between phases
of amyloid deposition and degree of cognitive decline (Nelson
et al., 2012). Also, patterns of regional cerebral amyloid deposi-
tion do not correlate with patterns of regional cerebral hypome-
tabolism on functional neuroimaging (Altmann et al., 2015; Edi-
son et al., 2007), although a recent study suggests that
regional amyloid deposition does correlate with distant regional
hypometabolism, suggesting that amyloid reduces the meta-
bolic activity of distant neurons projecting to regions of amyloid
deposition (Pascoal et al., 2019). Finally, despite decades of in-
vestment by the pharmaceutical industry in anti-amyloid thera-
pies and numerous phase 3 clinical trials, no amyloid-targeting
therapy has been successful in limiting progression of cognitive
impairment in symptomatic AD. These data suggest that while
amyloid accumulation may be key in beginning the pathological
process, other downstream events, such as neuroinﬂammation
and tau accumulation, may be the main drivers of neurodegen-
eration.
One extension of the amyloid hypothesis is the ‘‘cellular
phase’’ of AD, proposed by Bart De Strooper and Eric Karran
(De Strooper and Karran, 2016). This extension proposes that
accumulation of cerebral amyloid and tau pathology (the
‘‘biochemical phase’’) is a slow, gradual process that is tolerated
by CNS cells early in the course of disease, serving as a risk fac-
tor for development of clinical disease, but that the disease only
manifests clinically when cellular homeostatic mechanisms fail,
leading to impaired clearance of aggregated pathologic protein
(proteopathy), increased cellular stress, and a complex break-
down of ﬁnely tuned intercellular physiologic functions that ulti-
mately lead to neurodegeneration. Speciﬁcally, the cellular
phase is characterized by dysfunction of the neurovascular
unit, aberrant neuronal network activity, and impaired astrocyte
and microglia homeostatic functions and/or possible gain-of-
toxic functions.
Several lines of evidence suggest Ab deposition may be
required for progression of tau pathology in AD (Figure 2B).
Neuropathological studies in humans have demonstrated that
tau pathology generally does not progress from the entorhinal
cortex into the neocortex in the absence of co-occurring amyloid
pathology (Pontecorvo et al., 2019; Price and Morris, 1999; Price
et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2016). Longitudinal assessment of amy-
loid and tau PET imaging suggests that the rate of amyloid accu-
mulation predicts onset of tau accumulation whereas the rate of
tau accumulation predicts onset of cognitive impairment (Han-
seeuw et al., 2019). A study of tau kinetics in humans and cell cul-
ture using stable isotope labeling techniques demonstrates that
tau production correlates with the presence of amyloid, suggest-
ing a mechanistic link (Sato et al., 2018). A three-dimensional (3D)
in vitro culture system consisting of human neurons differentiated
from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) overexpressing
human APP containing FAD mutations generates robust Ab42
production and amyloid deposition. Importantly, this model
also develops elevated phospho-tau levels and ﬁbrillary tau ag-
gregates, suggesting that elevated Ab levels alone are sufﬁcient
to drive tau pathology in human neurons (Choi et al., 2014). Mul-
tiple studies have assessed the effect of combined Ab deposition
on local tau pathology by either crossing tau transgenic and APP
transgenic mice or by injecting Ab42 ﬁbrils into tau transgenic
mice. In these studies, tau pathology and neurodegeneration
are enhanced in mice harboring both pathologies, whereas amy-
loid pathology is generally unaffected by concurrent tau pathol-
ogy (Bolmont et al., 2007; Go¨ tz et al., 2001; Hurtado et al.,
2010; Lewis et al., 2001; Pooler et al., 2015). This was demon-
strated in a recent study where intracerebral injection of tau ﬁbrils
derived from human AD brain into Ab plaque-bearing mice led to
seeding of aggregated human tau in periplaque dystrophic neu-
rites followed by development of NFTs (He et al., 2018).
Ab may also lead to cognitive impairment in ways independent
from its effects on tau. Soluble oligomers isolated from AD brain
have been shown to potently inhibit long-term potentiation (LTP),
enhance long-term depression (LTD), and reduce dendritic spine
density in rodent hippocampal slice cultures (Kamenetz et al.,
2003; Shankar et al., 2007; Wei et al., 2010). They also cause
impairment in cognitive tasks when injected into the lateral ventri-
cles of rodent models (Shankar et al., 2008). It is unclear whether
soluble oligomers in human AD brain mediate synaptotoxic effects
sufﬁcient to cause cognitive impairment. One issue is that it is difﬁ-
culttodeterminewhethersolubleoligomersdeﬁnitivelyexistinvivo
due to technical challenges related to the biochemical extraction
procedures required to detect them. A recent study shows that
the presence of Ab also causes capillary constriction in human
cortical slices by acting on pericytes to generate reactive oxygen
species (ROS), leading to endothelin-1 release (Nortley et al.,
2019).Abmayalsoleadtoreducedcerebralbloodﬂowbyinducing
neutrophils to occlude and stall capillary ﬂow (Cruz Herna´ndez
et al., 2019). Hypoxia can induce increased Ab production,
possibly via increased BACE1 expression (Sun et al., 2006), sug-
gesting the possibility of a pathological feedforward loop.
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
315

In summary, the available data still strongly support the central
role of pathologic Ab accumulation in mediating AD pathogen-
esis as outlined in the original description of the amyloid cascade
hypothesis, although its mechanism may be less direct than orig-
inally anticipated and requires further clarity via ongoing studies.
Tau
Multiple lines of evidence suggest that aggregated, hyperphos-
phorylated forms of tau may be a primary driver of neurodegen-
eration in AD. Clinico-neuropathologic correlation analyses have
demonstrated that tau pathology propagates throughout the AD
brain in a stereotyped fashion across neuroanatomically con-
nected networks (Figure 2C), forming the basis of Braak staging
(Braak and Braak, 1991). However, recent cross-sectional and
longitudinal tau-PET imaging studies in cognitively normal amy-
loid-positive individuals demonstrate widely distributed and
continuous accumulation of tau pathology outside of the entorhi-
nal cortex, suggesting that tau propagation may not be as
spatially restricted as previously thought (Jack et al., 2018b;
Schultz et al., 2018). Unlike Ab, the stage of tau pathology
correlates well with the progression of cognitive impairment
(Giannakopoulos et al., 2003; Nelson et al., 2012). With age,
tau pathology accumulates in the entorhinal cortex and medial
temporal lobes, even in the absence of cognitive decline—this
is termed primary age-related tauopathy (PART) (Crary et al.,
2014). Cognitive impairment in AD is only noted when tau
spreads from the entorhinal cortex into the neocortex in neuro-
pathological studies (Price and Morris, 1999; Price et al.,
2009). On longitudinal and cross-sectional studies of tau- and
amyloid-PET imaging combined with structural MRI, only the
presence or accumulation of tau was a predictor of cognitive
impairment, whereas the presence or accumulation of amyloid
was a predictor of more severe tau-associated cognitive impair-
ment (Aschenbrenner et al., 2018; Hanseeuw et al., 2019). These
ﬁndings have led to the hypothesis that cognitive decline and
neurodegeneration in AD is primarily driven by onset and spread
of tau pathology.
Tau protein is encoded by MAPT gene on chromosome 17, is
primarily expressed by neurons in the brain, and is alternatively
spliced at the N-terminal domain (N) and microtubule-binding
repeat domain (R) to form six distinct isoforms (0N3R, 0N4R,
1N3R, 1N4R, 2N3R, and 2N4R), which are differentially ex-
pressed during brain development. Although NFTs in AD contain
both 3R and 4R isoforms, different tau isoforms are over-repre-
sented in pathological aggregates in other human tauopathies
(Guo et al., 2017). The physiological role of tau in the CNS is
not entirely clear, although numerous in vitro experiments have
documented important roles in microtubule assembly, stabiliza-
tion of neuronal axons, and regulation of microtubule transport
(Dixit et al., 2008; Weingarten et al., 1975). However, tau
knockout (KO) mice do not have a severe developmental pheno-
type (van Hummel et al., 2016) but do exhibit subtle deﬁcits such
as delayed neuronal maturation in cell culture (Dawson et al.,
2001) and impaired synaptic plasticity (Ahmed et al., 2014).
Tau protein is subject to numerous post-translational modiﬁ-
cations,
including
phosphorylation,
acetylation,
glycation,
O-GlcNAcylation, nitration, SUMOylation, ubiquitination, and
truncation (Marcelli et al., 2018). Tau can be phosphorylated
at 85 different residues (Guo et al., 2017). Pathological types
and patterns of tau phosphorylation can occur even prior to
development of NFT. In many cases, aberrant phosphorylation
results in decreased binding afﬁnity for microtubules (Biernat
et al., 1993; Mandelkow et al., 2007). This disassembly in-
creases the cytosolic pool of tau and is thought to promote
aggregation and ﬁbrillization. Hyperphosphorylated tau is also
redirected from the axonal compartment to the somatodendritic
compartment where it can impair synaptic function by inhibiting
glutamate receptor trafﬁcking or synaptic anchoring (Hoover
et al., 2010). Tau acetylation has been shown to reduce degra-
dation of phosphorylated tau and increase tau pathology (Min
et al., 2010) but has also been shown to inhibit tau phosphoryla-
tion at certain residues and limit further aggregation (Cook et al.,
2014). Tau acetylation has also been shown to result in axon
initial segment cytoskeletal instability followed by mislocaliza-
tion of tau to the somatodendritic compartment (Sohn et al.,
2016). O-GlcNAc modiﬁcation of tau inhibits toxic self-assem-
bly (Ryan et al., 2019).
There are a number of tau kinases that mediate tau phos-
phorylation. They comprise three groups—proline-directed
serine-threonine protein kinases, non-proline directed serine-
threonine protein kinases, and tyrosine protein kinases. Exam-
ples include glycogen synthase kinase (GSK) 3, cyclin-depen-
dent
kinase-5
(Cdk5),
mitogen-activated
protein
kinase
(MAPK), cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), and cal-
cium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), among
many others (Guo et al., 2017). Various kinases have been pro-
posed as putative drug targets for AD.
Tau is generally a soluble protein that is natively unfolded but
under the right conditions will aggregate into oligomers and
ﬁbrils. NFT and neuropil threads contain an insoluble form of
tau aggregated into b sheet-containing amyloid ﬁbrils, known
as paired helical ﬁlaments (PHFs) (Crowther and Wischik,
1985; Kidd, 1963; Mandelkow et al., 2007). These aggregated
ﬁbrils are known to be polymorphic (Frost et al., 2009) and differ
in conformation when derived synthetically or from brains of
patients with various tauopathies. (Guo et al., 2016; Sanders
et al., 2014). Recent cryo-EM structures of tau ﬁbrils derived
from brains of AD patients (Fitzpatrick et al., 2017) and other
tauopathies have demonstrated unexpected insights into ﬁbril
structures and conﬁrm that synthetic tau ﬁbrils assume a vastly
different folded structure as compared to AD brain-derived tau
ﬁbrils (for review, see Lippens and Gigant [2019]).
Since tau is normally highly soluble in its native monomeric
form and does not have signiﬁcant intrinsic hydrophobicity, the
question arises as to what prompts tau aggregation in disease.
Numerous studies over the last decade have demonstrated the
prion-like ability of aggregated human tau ﬁbrils to self-propa-
gate, for both synthetically prepared ﬁbrils and those derived
from human AD brain. Exogenously supplied ﬁbrils will seed
aggregation of transgenic human and endogenous mouse tau
ﬁbrils in mouse tauopathy models by enhancing nucleation of
new ﬁbrils. These aggregates then spread transsynaptically to
remote, anatomically connected brain regions, inducing further
seeding and aggregation, similar to the pathologic spread of
tau noted in AD brain (de Calignon et al., 2012; Clavaguera
et al., 2009, 2013; Frost et al., 2009; Iba et al., 2013; Liu et al.,
2012). Thus, prion-like seeding and spreading may represent a
316
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

mechanism whereby tau pathology propagates from the entorhi-
nal cortex to the neocortex in AD (DeVos et al., 2018).
ApoE
ApoE protein is an apolipoprotein whose major function is to
serve as a lipid-binding protein in lipoprotein particles and partic-
ipate in transport and delivery of lipids to target sites. ApoE is
expressed at the highest levels in the liver and brain. In the brain,
ApoE is expressed primarily in astrocytes and to a lesser degree
in microglia.
APOE is the strongest genetic risk factor for LOAD (Corder
et al., 1993; Strittmatter et al., 1993). The strength of this
association has been conﬁrmed in numerous clinical, patholog-
ical, epidemiological, genome-wide association (GWASs), and
whole-genome sequencing studies over the years (Kunkle et al.,
2019). The APOE gene has three common alleles encoding three
protein isoforms—ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4—which differ in
sequence by single amino acid substitutions at two different res-
idues (E2 cys112/cys158, E3 cys112/arg158, and E4 arg112/
arg158). A single inherited copy of the APOE ε4 allele increases
risk of developing LOAD by 3- to 4-fold, while two inherited
copies increases risk by 12-fold (Roses, 1996). Inheritance of
the APOE ε2 allele is protective. Longitudinal CSF, MRI, and
PET imaging studies of the preclinical phase of AD have estab-
lished that APOE ε4 allele carriers develop enhanced cerebral am-
yloid deposition with age, do so at an earlier age, and accumulate
amyloid at a more rapid rate relative to non-carriers (Bussy et al.,
2019; Grimmer et al., 2010; Mishra et al., 2018; Morris et al., 2010;
Risacher et al., 2015). The effect of APOE ε4 on measures of tau
accumulation and hippocampal atrophy are less certain. ApoE
has additionally been implicated in numerous AD-relevant neuro-
biological processes, many of which are mediated differentially by
ApoE isoforms, likely contributing to its role in AD pathogenesis
(Figure 3).
ApoE likely regulates AD risk in large part via effects on amyloid
pathology (Figure 3A; Huynh et al., 2017a). ApoE directly binds to
Ab present in plaques (Namba et al., 1991). APP transgenic animal
models demonstrate markedly reduced ﬁbrillar Ab deposition and
Ab levels in the setting of ApoE KO, suggesting ApoE inhibits
clearance and/or promotes Ab seeding (Bales et al., 1997, 1999;
Bien-Ly et al., 2012; Huynh et al., 2017b; Kim et al., 2011; Liu
et al., 2017; Ulrich et al., 2018). In APP transgenic-ApoE targeted
replacement (ApoE-TR) mice, where human ApoE isoforms are
expressed under the inﬂuence of endogenous murine ApoE regu-
latory sequences, ApoE isoforms have differential effects on
amyloid pathology. ApoE4-TR mice have enhanced amyloid
deposition and higher Ab levels (Bales et al., 2009). Studies on
the effects of ApoE on Ab production are conﬂicting. In one study
where iPSC-derived human neurons were co-cultured with mouse
glia expressing human ApoE isoforms, neuronal Ab production
was signiﬁcantly increased in ApoE4 glia co-cultures (Huang
et al., 2017). However, this effect was not observed in other
studies using different culture systems. (Biere et al., 1995;
Cedazo-Mı´nguez et al., 2001). Experiments where ApoE expres-
sion is controlled temporally, either via inducible expression or
via the use of intrathecal antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), high-
light that ApoE promotes the initial seeding of ﬁbrillar Ab deposi-
tion, whereas subsequent plaque growth after seeding seems to
rely on other factors (Huynh et al., 2017b; Liu et al., 2017). Detailed
in vivo microdialysis and stable isotope labeling kinetics experi-
ments have demonstrated that ApoE regulates clearance of Ab
in the brain in an isoform-dependent manner (ApoE4-TR mice
have diminished Ab clearance relative to other TR mice), whereas
Ab production was not inﬂuenced by ApoE isoform (Castellano
et al., 2011). Although it was initially postulated that ApoE regu-
lates clearance via direct interactions with Ab, in fact, there is little
direct binding of monomeric, soluble Ab with ApoE in vivo.
Instead, ApoE regulates clearance of Ab by competitively binding
to Ab receptors, such as LDLR-related protein 1 (LRP1) on the sur-
face of astrocytes, and blocking Ab uptake. In this way, ApoE KO
mice exhibit the highest rates of clearance since there is no
competition with Ab receptors (Verghese et al., 2013). Possible
routes of Ab clearance include astrocytic uptake (Basak et al.,
2012), microglial phagocytosis (Heckmann et al., 2019), blood-
brain barrier transport (Castellano et al., 2012; Zlokovic, 2013),
glymphatic clearance (Iliff et al., 2012), and meningeal lymphatics
(Da Mesquita et al., 2018).
ApoE also has modulatory effects on tau pathology and tau-
related neurodegeneration (Figure 3B; Shi and Holtzman,
2018). Tau binds to ApoE3 but not ApoE4 in vitro (Strittmatter
et al., 1994). In a recent study assessing the effect of ApoE-TR
in the PS19 (tauP301S) tauopathy mouse model, ApoE4 dramat-
ically exacerbated tau-mediated neurodegeneration (Shi et al.,
2017). ApoE genetic deletion signiﬁcantly reduced the extent
of neuron and volume loss in PS19 mice and strongly attenuated
microglial and astrocyte activation. A recent study failed to repli-
cate the neurotoxic effect of ApoE4 in tauopathy mice. In this
study, AAV viral transduction was used at postnatal day 0 to
overexpress tauP301L in ApoE-TR mice. They found that
ApoE2 mice, rather than ApoE4, had enhanced tau pathology,
astrogliosis, and behavioral impairment (Zhao et al., 2018). Of
note, neurodegeneration was not observed in this model at
6 months of age, the time of endpoint analysis. Therefore,
discrepancies between these studies are likely explained by dif-
ferences in experimental models.
ApoE4 may mediate risk for AD through modulation of immune
and microglial responses. APOE ε4 carriers have a stronger
systemic inﬂammatory response to an intravenous lipopolysac-
charide (LPS) challenge, including more intense hyperthermia
and higher levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) secretion in
whole blood (Gale et al., 2014). ApoE expression in microglia is
required for the phenotypic expression of disease-associated
microglia (see Neuroimmune Activation below). ApoE also pro-
motes microglial clustering around Ab plaques, and in the
absence of ApoE expression, there is strong reduction in the to-
tal amount of ﬁbrillar plaques and plaque size but an increase in
overall Ab-immunoreactive deposits (Figure 3C). Plaques appear
less compact with fewer periplaque microglia and enhanced
neuritic dystrophy (Ulrich et al., 2018). ApoE is also required for
microglial intracellular endolytic degradation of Ab by neprilysin
and insulin-degrading enzyme (Jiang et al., 2008). This suggests
that ApoE plays an important role in mediating the microglial
response to Ab plaques.
ApoE4 may have direct pathologic effects on neurons and
neuronal networks independent of effects on amyloid and tau
pathology (Figure 3D; Najm et al., 2019). In primary neuronal
cell culture, exogenously applied ApoE4 directly inhibits neurite
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
317

outgrowth, whereas ApoE3 stimulates neurite outgrowth (Holtz-
man et al., 1995; Nathan et al., 1994). In an ApoE transgenic
model, ApoE3 expression in neurons was protective against
kainic acid-induced excitotoxic neuronal damage, whereas
neuronal ApoE4 expression had no protective effect (Buttini
et al., 1999). When ApoE3 and ApoE4 were instead expressed
in astrocytes, both isoforms were protective (Buttini et al.,
2010). ApoE4-TR adult mice also have lower dendritic spine
density and spine length in the cortex (but not the hippocam-
pus)
relative
to
ApoE2-
and
ApoE3-TR
mice
(Dumanis
et al., 2009).
ApoE4-TR mice have enhanced neural activity in the hippo-
campus and entorhinal cortex, as evidenced by hypermetabo-
lism on fMRI, increased high-frequency oscillations measured
by in vivo electrophysiology, and reduced inhibitory input to
neurons of entorhinal cortex (Nuriel et al., 2017). Along these
lines, ApoE4-TR adult mice are prone to seizures (Hunter et al.,
2012). In cognitively normal human APOE ε4 carriers, there is
Figure 3. Postulated Roles of ApoE in AD Pathophysiology
(A) ApoE enhances seeding and ﬁbrillization of Ab, leading to enhanced amyloid deposition. ApoE (especially E4) impedes Ab clearance from brain parenchyma
by competitively binding to Ab receptors on glial cells.
(B) ApoE (especially E4) enhances tau pathogenicity. Presence of ApoE leads to increased microgliosis and enhanced neuroinﬂammatory cytokine release from
glial cells, ultimately leading to exacerbation of tau-mediated neurodegeneration.
(C) ApoE regulates the microglial response to amyloid plaques. In the presence of ApoE, phagocytically active disease-associated microglia (DAM) and microglial
neurodegenerative phenotype (MGnD) are located near plaques. Tight microglial clustering results in plaque compaction. In the absence of ApoE, periplaque
microglia are sparser, and amyloid plaques become larger and less compact. Neuritic dystrophy is signiﬁcantly increased. On the other hand, if ApoE levels are
lower but not absent, neuritic dystrophy is lower.
(D) ApoE may contribute to AD pathophysiology via direct effects on neurons and neuronal network activity. In cell culture, exogenously supplied ApoE4 inhibits
neurite outgrowth relative to ApoE3. ApoE4 also contributes to dysfunctional neuronal network activity as evidenced by reduced hilar GABAergic interneurons,
increased hippocampal network activity, and a propensity for seizures in ApoE4 target replacement mice.
(E) ApoE4 may directly impair blood-brain barrier (BBB) function in AD by failing to efﬁciently bind to LRP1 expressed on cells such as pericytes. There is evidence
that this leads to increased activation of cyclophilin A signaling pathways and the ultimate breakdown of BBB, resulting in passage of serum proteins (such as
ﬁbrin) into the brain parenchyma and eventual neuronal death.
318
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

increased signal intensity and number of activated regions in the
hippocampus on fMRI during memory-activation tasks. These
data suggest that ApoE4 may cause neuronal dysfunction via
direct neurotoxic effects and by promoting hyperactivity in hip-
pocampal neuronal networks.
Neuronal
hyperactivity
may
be
mediated
by
impaired
GABAergic input. GABAergic inhibitory networks are impaired
in AD and may contribute to cognitive impairment (Najm et al.,
2019). ApoE4-TR mice have decreased numbers of GABAergic
interneurons in the hippocampus, and this correlates with
learning deﬁcits. When given non-lethal doses of pentobarbital
over
4
weeks
to
boost
GABAergic
pathways,
learning
deﬁcits were reduced in ApoE4-TR mice. Pan-neuronal and
GABAergic-neuronal conditional ApoE KO in ApoE4-TR mice
was protective against neuron loss and memory deﬁcits
(Knoferle et al., 2014). Finally, neurons derived from iPSCs
from E4/E4 patients as compared to E3/E3 or congenics had
higher amounts of hyperphosphorylated tau and reduced
GABAergic neurons, effects reduced after treating with a small
molecule ApoE structure corrector (Wang et al., 2018).
ApoE4 may also mediate neuropathological effects by directly
modulating blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity (Figure 3E). Studies
in the Zlokovic lab have demonstrated that ApoE4 does not efﬁ-
ciently engage LRP1 on pericytes. Lack of ApoE-mediated
signaling via this receptor results in activation of proinﬂammatory
cyclophilin-A-NFkB-MMP-9 signaling cascade. Overactivation of
this cascade leads to breakdown of BBB basement membrane
and tight junctions, resulting in extravasation of serum proteins
(e.g., ﬁbrin) into the brain parenchyma. Exposure to serum pro-
teins can then contribute to neurodegeneration (Bell et al., 2012;
Zlokovic, 2013).
Neuroimmune Activation
No area of AD research has experienced more intense investiga-
tion in the recent past than the role of the innate immune system
in the pathophysiology of AD. Multiple lines of evidence suggest
that activation of immune mediators is a critical regulator of AD
pathology. Reactive astrogliosis and microgliosis are known to
be prominent pathological features in AD brain. Numerous
SNPs and rare coding variants in immune-related genes thought
to be implicated in microglial function have been identiﬁed as risk
factors for AD in whole-genome sequencing and GWAS ana-
lyses (for review, see Efthymiou and Goate [2017]; Karch and
Goate [2015]), including TREM2, CR1, SHIP1, BIN1, CD33,
PICALM, CLU, and the MS4A gene cluster. A non-synonymous
coding variant in PCLG2, a gene with suspected immune func-
tion, has been associated with decreased risk of AD (van der
Lee et al., 2019). Of note, many of these immune-related AD
risk factor SNPs or coding variants (Apoe, Trem2, Cd33,
Ms4a6d) have been identiﬁed as genes differentially expressed
in models of Ab deposition as compared to tauopathy, suggest-
ing they may represent amyloid response genes (Matarin et al.,
2015). Systems-level analyses of gene regulatory networks in
post-mortem human LOAD brain specimens have identiﬁed the
immune-microglial molecular network as most highly associated
with pathophysiology in LOAD (Zhang et al., 2013). A recent,
detailed morphological analysis of microglial activation state in
brain specimens from two cohorts of cognitive aging found
that the proportion of activated microglia (PAM) strongly corre-
lated with the presence of pathologic AD (Felsky et al., 2019).
PAM was also strongly associated with the total Ab load and
number of neuritic plaques and less strongly associated with
the amount of PHF tau. Causal mediation modeling generated
a model consistent with a proposed pathologic sequence of
increased PAM triggering increased PHF tau accumulation,
leading to cognitive decline.
Single-cell transcriptomic methods have been employed to
identify unique microglial phenotypes associated with Ab plaque
deposition in animal models of amyloidosis (APP/PS1 and
5XFAD)
(Figure
4A).
Termed
microglial
neurodegenerative
phenotype (MGnD) or disease-associated microglia (DAM),
these cells are deﬁned by a unique expression proﬁle consisting
of the upregulation of certain inﬂammatory transcripts (e.g.,
Apoe, Trem2, Clec7a) and downregulation of homeostatic tran-
scripts (e.g., P2ry12, Tmem119). In two studies, these microglia
were found to be in close association with neuritic plaques. In
one study, MGnD could be induced in wild-type (WT) mouse
brain by injection of apoptotic neurons and required ApoE
expression for induction (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017; Krasemann
et al., 2017). Single-nuclear transcriptomic techniques have
recently been applied to human AD brain specimens and have
identiﬁed microglial subtypes with increased Apoe expression
but have failed to identify DAM or MGnD subpopulations similar
to what has been seen in the mouse brain (Mathys et al., 2019).
Further work to better understand similarities and differences
between microglia in mouse models versus the human brain
are needed.
Disparate Roles of Microglia in AD Pathogenesis. Although
microglial activation is associated with disease pathology in
AD, it is difﬁcult to parse whether microglial activation in AD is
damaging or protective. This may be because of disease-
stage-speciﬁc effects, with activation being protective in the
setting of amyloid deposition (Figure 4B) and damaging in the
setting of tau accumulation (Figure 4C).
Phagocytic Microglia Can Limit Amyloid-Associated Pathol-
ogy. As an example, TREM2 is an AD risk gene with a rare variant
allele, R47H, associated with signiﬁcantly increased risk of AD
(Gratuze et al., 2018). TREM2 protein is expressed on microglia,
promotes microglial phagocytosis, modulates inﬂammatory
signaling, and promotes microglial survival. TREM2 also binds
to soluble oligomers of Ab and promotes phagocytosis of Ab.
R47H is thought to be a loss-of-function variant (Gratuze et al.,
2018; Shi and Holtzman, 2018). In TREM2 deletion and haploin-
sufﬁciency studies using mouse models of Ab deposition
(APPPS1-21 and 5xFAD), levels of Ab were decreased at
2 months of age (before plaque deposition) but increased at
8.5 months of age (after plaque deposition), suggesting an
age- or amyloid-burden effect (Ulrich et al., 2014). Importantly,
there was also a reduction in plaque-associated microglia with
associated impairments in plaque compaction and increased
levels of dystrophic neurites around plaques (Leyns et al.,
2017; Song et al., 2018). Either TREM2 KO or TREM2 R47H
transgene expression in mice that develop amyloid deposition
results in enhanced amyloid seeding as well as enhanced tau
seeding and spreading near neuritic plaques (Leyns et al.,
2019; Parhizkar et al., 2019). This suggests a role of Trem2 func-
tion in suppressing amyloid-induced local toxicity that also
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
319

inhibits tau seeding and spreading. CD33 is another AD-suscep-
tibility locus that encodes a transmembrane glycoprotein ex-
pressed on the surface of microglia. Increased surface CD33
expression results in decreased microglial activation. In the
J20 amyloid mouse model, CD33 expression resulted in reduced
microglial-mediated phagocytosis of Ab and increased amyloid
pathology (Bradshaw et al., 2013; Griciuc et al., 2013). CD33
KO results in decreased amyloid pathology and improved cogni-
tion in 5xFAD mice. This is abrogated by additional TREM2 KO;
however, CD33 KO does not reciprocally abrogate effects of
TREM2 KO, suggesting that CD33 acts upstream of TREM2 (Gri-
ciuc et al., 2019). Microglia appear to clear Ab through a process
termed LC3-associated endocytosis (LANDO) that also recycles
Ab receptors (CD36, TREM2, and TLR4) back to the cell surface;
if this is genetically deleted in 5xFAD mice, there is increased Ab
accumulation, microgliosis with release of proinﬂammatory cyto-
kines, tau hyperphosphorylation, synapse dysfunction, neuron
loss, and cognitive impairment (Heckmann et al., 2019). These
data in models of Ab deposition would suggest that dysfunc-
tional microglia are less able to sequester Ab pathology within
compact plaques and less able to inhibit amyloid and tau seed-
ing near plaques, resulting in neuronal damage.
Activated Microglia Can Enhance Amyloid Pathology. Alter-
natively, phagocytosis of Ab by microglia can lead to microglial
activation. Following phagocytosis by microglia, Ab activates
the NLRP3 inﬂammasome, leading to caspase-1 activation
and IL-1b maturation and release (Halle et al., 2008). NLRP3 in-
ﬂammasone is activated in AD and mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) brains and in APPPS1 mice. NLRP3 and caspase-1 ge-
netic deletion results in decreased Ab deposition, reduced IL-
1b release from microglia, and improved cognitive performance
in APPPS1 mice (Heneka et al., 2013). Following NLRP3 activa-
tion, monomers of the apoptosis-associated speck-like protein
containing a CARD domain (ASC) can form ﬁbrils and recruit
caspase-1, resulting in autoproteolysis and caspase-1 activa-
tion as well as leading to further assembly of ASC ﬁbrils into
paranuclear specks. Following inﬂammasome activation, ASC
specks can be leaked extracellularly, after which they can be
taken up by neighboring microglia to sustain the innate immune
response. Extracellular ASC specks have been found to bind to
Ab and can cross-seed Ab oligomerization and plaque forma-
tion in APPPS1 mice (Figure 4D). This can be reversed by ge-
netic deletion of ASC or use of an anti-ASC neutralizing
antibody (Venegas et al., 2017). In support of a role for micro-
glia in exacerbating amyloid pathology, a recent study using
Figure 4. Selected Roles of the Innate Immune System in AD Path-
ophysiology
(A) Transcriptomic analyses of microglia isolated from mice with amyloid pa-
thology have demonstrated a unique microglial subpopulation (DAM or MGnD)
only found in diseased animals, deﬁned by reduced expression of homeostatic
genes and increased expression of genes involved in phagocytosis and
microglial activation. Expression of ApoE and TREM2 is necessary for the
development of this disease-speciﬁc subpopulation.
(B) Microglial activation and phagocytosis have disparate effects based on the
prominent pathology studied. TREM2 KO results in a microglial phenotype that
is less activated and less phagocytic. In mouse models of amyloid deposition,
TREM2 KO leads to reduced peri-plaque microglial clustering, increased Ab
seeding and deposition, and increased dystrophic neurites with enhanced
plaque-associated tau pathology.
(C) Conversely, in PS19 tauopathy mice, TREM2 KO leads to reduced neu-
rodegeneration and microgliosis.
(D) Ab phagocytosis leads to increased microglial activation. Lysosomal
damage by Ab can lead to activation of NLRP3 inﬂammasome, resulting in IL-
1b secretion. Extracellular ASC specks released from activated microglial can
then further cross-seed ﬁbrillization of Ab into ﬁbrils.
320
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

pharmacological depletion of microglia in amyloid mice during
the period of plaque deposition demonstrated reduced paren-
chymal plaques following robust microglial depletion (Spangen-
berg et al., 2019). Therefore, phagocytosis of Ab by microglia
may be a double-edged sword: it may serve to limit the spread
of amyloid pathology in certain contexts or, alternatively, may
promote the spread of amyloid pathology via the mechanisms
described above.
Activated Microglia Exacerbate Tau-Associated Pathology.
Different results have been observed in models of tau pathology
that develop neurodegeneration (Figure 4C). In the PS19 tauop-
athy mouse, TREM2 deletion signiﬁcantly reduced tau-mediated
neurodegeneration and astrogliosis (Leyns et al., 2017; Sayed
et al., 2018). These data would suggest that microglia contribute
to neuron death in models of tau-mediated neurodegeneration.
Microglial-derived exosomes appear necessary for tau propaga-
tion in a model of tau spreading using AAV viral transduced
expression of P301Ltau to induce rapid tau spreading from the
entorhinal cortex to the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus
(Asai et al., 2015). Depletion of microglia or pharmacological
inhibition of exosome secretion led to reduced tau spreading in
this model.
Direct Microglial Effects on Neuron Viability. Activated micro-
glia can directly secrete toxic proinﬂammatory cytokines
(Colonna and Butovsky, 2017; Kinney et al., 2018) or secrete
indirect mediators that stimulate astrocytes to secrete a neuro-
toxic substance (Liddelow et al., 2017). Microglia may also be
directly synaptotoxic. Complement binding (C1q) and microglial
phagocytosis lead to early synapse loss in a mouse model with
Ab plaque deposition (J20 model). C1q binds to synapses and,
in the presence of soluble Ab oligomers, promotes microglia
phagocytosis of synaptic contents (Hong et al., 2016).
Role of Gut Microbiome in Innate Immunity and AD Pathogen-
esis. There is increasing evidence that interactions between the
gut microbiome and the CNS innate immune system (gut-brain
axis) may modulate AD pathogenesis. Various aspects of CNS
physiology are regulated by the microbiome, including microglial
maturation and function (Abdel-Haq et al., 2019). Germ-free
mice develop microglia with an immature phenotype, blunted
response
to
inﬂammatory
stimuli,
and
defective
immune
response to infection (Erny et al., 2015). The mechanism may
involve microbe-derived metabolites. Several studies have pro-
ﬁled the composition of the gut microbiota in both mouse models
of amyloidosis (APP/PS1) and in human participants with de-
mentia due to AD and have found signiﬁcant differences in the
overall abundance and diversity of microbial species relative to
WT animals or non-demented control participants, respectively
(Ba¨ uerl et al., 2018; Saji et al., 2019; Vogt et al., 2017). These
alterations may inﬂuence microglial responses to disease
pathology. Indeed, one study demonstrated that APP/PS1DE9
mice chronically administered a cocktail of high-dose antibiotics
to modulate microbiome composition had signiﬁcantly reduced
Ab plaque load, reduced plaque size, increased soluble Ab42
levels, and reduced plaque-associated microglia and reactive
astrocytes (Minter et al., 2016). Further studies are required to
validate these ﬁndings, explore the effect of microbiome modu-
lation on other types of AD pathology (e.g., tau), and elucidate
underlying mechanisms.
In summary, activation of the innate immune system undoubt-
edly plays a role in AD pathophysiology. However, data
regarding role of activated microglia in animal models suggest
possibly divergent effects depending on disease context. Gut
microbiota may also modulate the microglial response to pathol-
ogy. Future studies will need to characterize the expression
proﬁles of microglia from both amyloid- and tau-based animal
models using single-cell techniques to determine whether
different microglial subpopulations with distinct pathology-
associated phenotypes exist. The role of these various micro-
glial-mediated mechanisms in modulating pathology in the
human AD brain is unclear and is being actively investigated.
Infectious Hypothesis
Multiple recent studies have revived interest in a long-standing
hypothesis that there may be an underlying infectious basis for
AD. Dating back to 1991, studies have demonstrated the pres-
ence of herpesvirus in brains of patients with AD, as well as
within amyloid plaques (Carbone et al., 2014; Jamieson et al.,
1991, 1992; Wozniak et al., 2009). A recent systems-level molec-
ular network analysis of preclinical AD brain identiﬁed a set of
network driver genes noted to be enriched for viral-susceptibility
genes. Follow-up analyses in AD brain specimens found detect-
able human herpesvirus (HHV)-6 and herpes simplex virus
(HSV)-1 DNA in three separate cohorts and identiﬁed many puta-
tive viral-host interactions that regulate gene networks pertinent
to AD biology, including innate immunity and APP processing
(Readhead et al., 2018).
Ab exhibits characteristics of an antimicrobial peptide.
Synthetic and AD-brain-derived Ab peptide ﬁbrils signiﬁcantly
inhibit the growth of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria,
fungus (Soscia et al., 2010), and herpesvirus, while additionally
inhibiting the entry of herpesvirus into cells (Bourgade et al.,
2015). Ab also forms ﬁbrils that entrap bacteria and fungal cells,
leading to agglutination in vitro (Kumar et al., 2016; Spitzer et al.,
2016). The presence of Ab in brain parenchyma is linked with
protection against infectious bacterial encephalomyelitis exper-
imentally induced by intracerebral inoculation with Salmonella
enterica typhimurium bacteria in 4-week-old 5xFAD mice.
5xFAD mice survived longer with less severe disease than WT
mice, while APP KO mice had slightly increased mortality
compared to WT mice. At sites of bacterial deposition in the
brain, signiﬁcant Ab deposition was also noted. (Kumar et al.,
2016). Similarly, presence of parenchymal Ab in 5xFAD mice re-
sults in decreased mortality following direct intracerebral HSV
inoculation. Areas of brain parenchyma containing deposits of
HSV-1 infection also demonstrated increased Ab deposition
(Eimer et al., 2018).
These experiments have led to the antimicrobial protection
hypothesis of AD that suggests intracerebral infection by certain
pathogens may induce Ab ﬁbrillization as an antimicrobial de-
fense mechanism, leading to amyloid seeding and deposition
and thereby initiating the amyloid cascade. (Moir et al., 2018).
In support of this theory, HSV-1 viral particles have recently
been shown to directly catalyze the ﬁbrillization of Ab42 in vitro
by nucleating aggregation via contact with the viral surface
(Ezzat et al., 2019).
Two recent Taiwanese-based nationwide, matched-control,
retrospective cohort studies have evaluated the association of
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
321

HSV and varicella zoster virus (VZV) infection with risk of demen-
tia. One study demonstrated a signiﬁcantly increased risk of
developing all-cause dementia (3-fold increase) in patients
greater than 50 years of age following a new HSV infection.
This risk was nearly eliminated in patients who received antiher-
petic treatment (Tzeng et al., 2018). A second study demon-
strated a very slight increased risk of developing all-cause
dementia after zoster infection (HR 1.12). Again, a signiﬁcant
decrease in dementia risk was observed in patients that received
antiherpetic treatment (HR 0.47) (Chen et al., 2018). The results
of these studies will need to be replicated, ideally in a large
prospective, longitudinal, observational cohort study, before
accepting herpesvirus infection as a bona ﬁde risk factor for
AD or related dementias.
Another recent study suggests that periodontal infections may
contribute to AD pathogenesis. In this study, periodontal bacte-
rial proteins (gingipains) and DNA were identiﬁed in human AD
brain. Oral infection of WT mice with Porphyromsonas gingivalis
resulted in elevated intraparenchymal Ab levels, and inhibition of
gingipain activity led to reduced intracerebral bacterial burden,
decreased Ab levels, and reduced neuroinﬂammation (Dominy
et al., 2019). Based on these results, a phase 2/3 double-blind,
randomized control trial testing use of gingipain inhibitor
COR388 is underway in mild-to-moderate AD (ClinicalTrials.
gov, ID# NCT03823404).
Sleep
Sleep impairment can lead to impaired attention, concentration,
and working memory but may also inﬂuence development of
underlying AD pathology. Women with sleep-disordered breath-
ing have a higher risk of developing MCI or dementia relative to
non-sleep-disordered breathing patients (Yaffe et al., 2011). A
single night of sleep deprivation leads to elevated CSF Ab42
levels in healthy middle-aged men (Ooms et al., 2014). Reduced
slow-wave sleep in cognitively normal elderly participants is also
associated with increased CSF Ab42 (Varga et al., 2016). A study
exploring the effect of selective reduction of overnight slow-
wave sleep via an automated detection-intervention method in
healthy volunteers also demonstrated increased CSF Ab levels
in participants receiving the study intervention (Ju et al., 2017).
However, in a recent study of partial sleep deprivation lasting
5–8 days, no changes in AD CSF biomarkers were noted,
although that study did not alter the quantity of slow-wave sleep
(Olsson et al., 2018).
In animal microdialysis experiments, interstitial ﬂuid (ISF) Ab
levels correlate with wakefulness and signiﬁcantly increase
following acute sleep deprivation or orexin infusion. In mice over-
expressing Ab, acute sleep deprivation caused a signiﬁcant
increase in amyloid plaque deposition. A decrease in amyloid
plaque deposition was observed after chronic orexin receptor
blockade, resulting in increased sleep (Kang et al., 2009). In
mice overexpressing Ab, sleep-wake cycle and diurnal ﬂuctua-
tions in ISF and CSF Ab levels are normal before an age when
animals develop amyloid plaque formation. However, after Ab
plaque formation, there is an impaired sleep-wake cycle and
loss of diurnal ﬂuctuation in ISF or CSF Ab levels (Roh et al.,
2012). Two main mechanisms have been proposed as to how
sleep deprivation or increased wakefulness increases extracel-
lular Ab in the brain. Studies from the lab of Maiken Nedergaard
suggest that glymphatic clearance is slower during wakefulness
versus sleep (Iliff et al., 2012; Xie et al., 2013). Increased synaptic
Ab release due to elevated neuronal metabolism and/or activity
during
wakefulness
versus
sleep
is
another
mechanism.
Increased synaptic and network activity has been previously
shown to stimulate release of extracellular Ab and tau from neu-
rons (Bero et al., 2011; Brody et al., 2008; Cirrito et al., 2005; Ya-
mada et al., 2014). In a recent study of amyloid kinetics in human
CSF using stable isotope labeling, there was an increase in Ab
levels following sleep deprivation but no change in rate of Ab
clearance. This suggests the mechanism for increased Ab is
increased production (Lucey et al., 2018). Similar ﬁndings are
also noted with extracellular tau. Sleep deprivation in tauopathy
mice and healthy human participants resulted in increased ISF or
CSF tau levels (Holth et al., 2019). When seeded with recombi-
nant synthetic tau ﬁbrils, sleep-deprived animals had more
signiﬁcant tau spreading relative to non-sleep-deprived animals.
In summary, these studies provide compelling evidence that
sleep deprivation stimulates increased levels of Ab and tau in
human CSF and animal model brains and enhances intracerebral
pathology.
Therapeutic Strategies for Alzheimer Disease
There are currently four FDA-approved medications for the man-
agement of cognitive impairment and dysfunction in global activ-
ities in symptomatic AD. These include three cholinesterase
inhibitors (ChEIs; donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine)
and memantine, an uncompetitive NMDA receptor modulator.
Despite enormous efforts by the pharmaceutical industry, there
remains no effective disease-modifying therapy available today.
More than 20 compounds have completed large phase 3,
double-blind, randomized control trials in cohorts of patients at
various stages of AD, and none has demonstrated any efﬁcacy
in slowing cognitive decline or improving global functioning
(Table 1). These many trial failures highlight the need for different
approaches to clinical trial design in AD.
First, most of the failed phase 3 trials intervened on patients
with mild-to-moderate symptomatic AD. Though this represents
an intermediate phase of clinical disease, this is actually an
advanced stage of the biological disease when considering
that pathology accumulates in the AD brain 15–20 years prior
to onset of clinical symptoms (Vermunt et al., 2019). At this stage
of disease pathogenesis, signiﬁcant and irreversible synaptic
and neuronal loss has occurred, and the pathological cascade
would likely be very difﬁcult to reverse (Go´ mez-Isla et al.,
1996). Instead, disease-modifying clinical interventions applied
as early in the preclinical phase of disease as possible in a pre-
ventative study design might have a better chance of changing
disease trajectory before the onset of frank neurodegeneration.
Several recent large-scale clinical trials have adopted a second-
ary or primary prevention paradigm: the Dominantly Inherited
Alzheimer Network Trials Unit (DIAN-TU) drawing from the large
DIAN cohort of ADAD patients (Bateman et al., 2017), the A4 trial
enrolling participants with conﬁrmed preclinical AD by biomarker
assessment (Sperling et al., 2014), and the Alzheimer Prevention
Initiative (API) using a cohort of patients with ADAD as well as a
separate cohort of older homozygous APOE ε4/ε4 carriers
(Reiman et al., 2011). Importantly, each study is testing
322
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

Table 1. Discontinued Phase 3 Disease-Modifying Drug Trials in AD, Excluding ChEI and Memantine Trials
Drug (Study
Name)
Study Population
Target/Mechanism
Type of
Molecule
Outcome
ClinicalTrials.gov
NCT Identiﬁer
Reference
Bapinezumab
Mild-to-moderate AD
Soluble and
ﬁbrillar Ab
Monoclonal
antibody
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT00575055
NCT00574132
(Salloway et al.,
2014)
Solanezumab
(EXPEDITION-1,
2 and 3)
Mild-to-moderate
AD; mild AD
Soluble monomeric
Ab
Monoclonal
antibody
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT00905372
NCT00904683
(Doody et al.,
2014; Honig
et al., 2018)
Crenezumab
(CREAD-1/2)
very-mild-to-mild
AD with amyloid
positive biomarkers
Oligomeric, ﬁbrillar
and plaque-based
Ab
Monoclonal
antibody
No effect on cognition
or ADL on preliminary
analysis
NCT03114657
Aducanumab
(ENGAGE;
EMERGE)
Mild AD
Conformation-
speciﬁc Ab
aggregates
Monoclonal
Antibody
No change in rate of
cognitive decline
NCT03639987
(Selkoe, 2019)
AN-1792
Mild-to-moderate AD
Active
immunization
Full-length Ab42
immunogen
Trial halted due to
development of
meningoencephalitis
in 4 patients
NCT00021723
Semagacestat
(IDENTITY-1/2)
Mild-to-moderate AD
g-secretase
inhibitor
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL; increased
risk of skin cancer
NCT01035138
NCT00594568
(Doody et al.,
2013)
Tarenﬂurbil
Mild AD
g-secretase
modulator
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT00105547
(Green et al.,
2009)
CNP520
(Umibecestat)
(API Generation)
Cognitively normal
APOE ε4/ ε4
carriers
BACE1 inhibitor
Small molecule
Worse cognitive
performance, weight
loss
NCT03131453
NCT02565511
(Lopez Lopez
et al., 2019)
Lanabecestat
(AMARANTH;
DAYBREAK-ALZ)
Very-mild-to-mild AD
BACE1 inhibitor
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT02783573
NCT02245737
Atabecestat
Preclinical AD; positive
amyloid, normal
cognition
BACE1 inhibitor
Small molecule
Worse performance
on some cognitive
tests; in some cases,
prominent side effects
NCT02569398
(Henley et al.,
2019)
Verubecestat
(APECS)
Prodromal AD
BACE1 inhibitor
Small molecule
Worse performance
on some cognitive tests
and in ADL
NCT01953601
(Egan et al.,
2018, 2019)
Elenbecestat
(MISSION-AD1/2)
Mild AD
BACE1 inhibitor
Small molecule
Unspeciﬁed safety
concerns upon
interim review
NCT02956486
NCT03036280
Intepirdine
Mild-to-moderate AD
5-HT6 receptor
antagonist
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT02585934
Idalopirdine
(STARBEAM)
Mild-to-moderate AD
5-HT6 receptor
antagonist
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT02006641
(Atri et al.,
2018)
Dimebon
Mild-to-moderate AD
Pleiotropic:
anti-histamine,
mitochondria,
others
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT00675623
(Cano-Cuenca
et al., 2014)
Nilvadipine
Mild-to-moderate AD
Calcium channel
blocker
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT02017340
(Lawlor et al.,
2018)
Naproxen,
celecoxib
(ADAPT study)
Prevention study;
Cognitively normal
elderly with parent or
sibling with dementia
Anti-inﬂammatory;
COX inhibitor
(NSAID)
Small molecule
No delay in time to
incident cognitive
impairment after 1–3
years treatment and
7 years follow-up
NCT00007189
(ADAPT-FS
Research
Group, 2015)
Indomethacin
Mild-to-moderate AD
Anti-inﬂammatory;
COX inhibitor
(NSAID)
Small molecule
No effect after 1 year
treatment on cognition
or ADL; study under-
powered
NCT00432081
(de Jong
et al., 2008)
(Continued on next page)
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
323

anti-amyloid therapies in cognitively normal patients who are at
high risk for developing the disease.
Second, it is important to reconsider assumptions and under-
lying hypotheses with regard to disease pathogenesis. While the
underlying evidence for the amyloid cascade hypothesis remains
solid, new discoveries should continually inform and update our
understanding of disease pathobiology, eventually leading to the
development of novel treatment approaches.
The current AD clinical pipeline has over 100 different com-
pounds being tested in various phases of clinical trials (Hara
et al., 2019). We will now review available symptomatic treat-
ments and developments on the path to identifying disease-
modifying therapies.
Symptomatic Treatment
Cholinesterase Inhibitors
During the course of AD pathogenesis, cholinergic neurons in the
nucleus basalis of Meynert and other septal nuclei that project
widely throughout the cortex are lost, causing a general cholin-
ergic deﬁcit (Bartus et al., 1982). This loss of cholinergic input
is thought to contribute to early attention and memory dysfunc-
tion in AD. ChEIs work to reverse this deﬁciency by increasing
synaptic levels of acetylcholine. Three ChEIs are currently
approved for use in mild-to-moderate AD: donepezil, rivastig-
mine, and galantamine. They differ primarily in their pharmacoki-
netic proﬁles (donepezil has a much longer half-life than the
others and is dosed once daily) and formulation (rivastigmine is
available as a continuous-release transdermal patch) but not in
overall efﬁcacy. Their symptomatic beneﬁt in AD has been
conﬁrmed via meta-analyses assessing both cognitive perfor-
mance and global functioning (Birks, 2006). However, the overall
effect size is modest (mean difference in Mini-Mental State
Examination [MMSE] of 1.37 points after 6 months treatment),
and there is no effect on long-term disease progression. Avail-
able data do not support the use of ChEIs in very mild AD (i.e.,
mild cognitive impairment), and in fact, ChEI may worsen cogni-
tion at this early clinical stage (Han et al., 2019).
Anti-NMDA
Memantine is an uncompetitive NMDA receptor modulator that
may act to inhibit glutamate-mediated neurotoxicity that de-
velops as neurons die during AD progression, although the pre-
cise mechanism of its effect is unclear (Greenamyre et al., 1988;
Livingston et al., 2017). Meta-analysis conﬁrms the efﬁcacy of
memantine in moderate-to-severe AD on measures of cognition,
activities of daily living (ADL), and neuropsychiatric symptoms
(McShane et al., 2006). However, as with ChEI, the effect size
is quite small, and the medication has no effect on long-term dis-
ease progression. Effects in mild-to-moderate stage disease
were marginal, and therefore, it is not recommended that this
medication be prescribed to patients with mild AD.
Disease-Modifying Treatments
Ab-Directed Therapeutics
The goal of many Ab-directed therapies is to lower levels of
parenchymal Ab and amyloid deposits in the AD brain. The am-
yloid cascade hypothesis suggests that Ab accumulation trig-
gers disease pathogenesis, so therapies that lower parenchymal
Ab might be expected to slow disease progression. Since no in-
tegrated AD animal model exists in which to deﬁnitively test the
validity of the amyloid cascade hypothesis, clinical trials using
Ab-directed therapies in humans have been considered one of
the most direct ways to test this. Unfortunately, many clinical tri-
als have been inadequately designed to robustly test the amyloid
hypothesis, such that negative trial results cannot be necessarily
Table 1.
Continued
Drug (Study
Name)
Study Population
Target/Mechanism
Type of
Molecule
Outcome
ClinicalTrials.gov
NCT Identiﬁer
Reference
Prednisone
Mild-to-moderate AD
Anti-inﬂammatory
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT00000178
(Aisen et al.,
2000)
Intravenous
immunoglobulin
(IVIg)
Mild-to-moderate AD
Immunomodulator
Pooled Ig
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT00818662
(Relkin et al.,
2017)
LMTM
Very-mild-to-mild AD
Tau aggregation
inhibitor; methylene
blue derivative
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT01689233
(Gauthier et al.,
2016)
Simvastatin
(CLASP and
ESPRIT studies)
Mild-to-moderate AD
HMGCoA-
reductase inhibitor;
cholesterol
lowering agent
Small molecule
Some improvement
on a few cognitive
tests but no effect
on ADL
NCT00053599
NCT00486044
(Carlsson et al.,
2008; Sano
et al., 2011)
Atorvastatin
Mild-to-moderate AD
HMGCoA-
reductase inhibitor;
cholesterol-
lowering agent
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT00151502
(Feldman
et al., 2010)
Rosiglitazone
(REFLECT-2/3)
Mild-to-moderate AD
PPARg agonist
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT00594568
NCT00428090
(Harrington
et al., 2011)
Tricaprilin
Mild-to-moderate AD
Improve
mitochondrial
metabolism
Small molecule
No effect on cognition
or ADL
NCT01741194
324
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

interpreted as a rejection of the amyloid hypothesis (Karran and
Hardy, 2014; Karran et al., 2011). Active and passive immuniza-
tion strategies and use of secretase inhibitors have been the
primary modes of targeting Ab in clinical trials.
Active Immunization. Ab-directed immunotherapy has been
explored as a disease-modifying therapy in AD for the last 20
years (Gallardo and Holtzman, 2017). The ﬁrst successful
demonstration of antibody-mediated clearance of Ab was in
1999, when active immunization of PDAPP mice using full-length
human Ab42 peptide resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in existing
amyloid deposits in animals vaccinated at an older age and
almost completely prevented the development of amyloid depo-
sition in animals vaccinated at a younger age (Schenk et al.,
1999). This subsequently led to the development of the ﬁrst
human Ab immunotherapy trial using AN-1792, a mixture of syn-
thetic full-length human Ab42 with adjuvant. In a phase 2a trial,
four patients developed aseptic meningoencephalitis, leading
to the discontinuation of the trial, although ongoing neuroimag-
ing and neuropathologic follow-up allowed for assessment of
long-term treatment response. 25 of 129 patients were deemed
to be antibody responders. Post-mortem evaluation determined
that there was signiﬁcant variability in degree of amyloid clear-
ance but that some vaccinated patients had long-lasting, nearly
complete clearance of Ab deposits. However, they still had
prominent tau pathology with advanced Braak staging, and
most had severe dementia at time of death, even despite plaque
clearance (Nicoll et al., 2019; Vellas et al., 2009). Active vaccina-
tion strategies using Ab peptides as immunogens are still being
pursued, with CAD106 in a phase 3 trial (Table 2) and ABVac40
currently in phase 2 trials (Lacosta et al., 2018; Vandenberghe
et al., 2016). Both claim to avoid the risk of meningoencephalitis
by excluding portions of the Ab peptide responsible for inducing
Th1 immune responses.
Passive Immunization. Passive immunotherapy is another
strategy for immunologically targeting Ab clearance. With infu-
sions of a monoclonal antibody, there is less variability in
efﬁcacy from patient to patient, and since titer levels can be
more tightly controlled, there is less risk of adverse events. Six
different monoclonal antibodies directed against Ab have
advanced to phase 3 clinical trials. The ﬁrst monoclonal antibody
to do so was bapinezumab. This is a humanized version of
mouse 3D6 antibody that targets N-terminal Ab peptide and
binds to soluble and ﬁbrillar Ab, triggering microglial phagocy-
tosis of Ab deposits. This antibody was tested in two parallel
phase 3 trials in mild-to-moderate AD patients and had no effect
on cognition or ADL at the doses tested (Salloway et al., 2014). In
high concentrations, it was associated with amyloid-related
imaging abnormalities (ARIA) edema and microhemorrhages.
Solanezumab is a humanized version of mouse antibody m226
whose epitope lies within the Ab mid-domain and binds only to
soluble Ab, not ﬁbrillar or plaque-based Ab. Preclinical studies
demonstrated
that
peripheral
administration
sequestered
peripheral Ab and led to a dramatic and rapid rise in peripheral
Ab levels. It was hypothesized that the antibody might alter the
equilibrium between plasma and CNS Ab, the so-called periph-
eral sink hypothesis (DeMattos et al., 2001), as well as directly
binding soluble Ab in the CNS. Two phase 3 trials of solanezu-
mab in mild-to-moderate AD failed to demonstrate a marked
beneﬁt on cognition or ADL and did not reduce cerebral amyloid
deposition (Doody et al., 2014). A third phase 3 trial in mild AD
also failed to demonstrate a signiﬁcant beneﬁt on the primary
endpoint (Honig et al., 2018). Aducanumab is a fully human
IgG1 antibody that binds a speciﬁc conformational epitope of
Ab. There was initial excitement for this antibody, as it was
demonstrated to actively engage and clear amyloid plaques
both in transgenic APP models and in human participants with
prodromal or mild AD based on ﬂorbetapir-PET imaging. Further,
after 1 year of monthly infusions, participants receiving aducanu-
mab had slower decline in CDR-sum of boxes and MMSE in a
phase 1b trial (Sevigny et al., 2016). Unfortunately, two phase 3
trials in mild AD were stopped early for futility in March 2019, after
interim analysis suggested no change in cognitive decline (Sel-
koe, 2019). Crenezumab is a fully human IgG4 antibody that
binds oligomeric, ﬁbrillar, and plaque-based Ab. Two phase 3 tri-
als were terminated early in January 2019 for futility after interim
analysis failed to demonstrate any beneﬁt. Gantenerumab is a
Table 2. Active Phase 3 Disease-Modifying Drug Trials in AD
Drug
Study Population
Target
Type of Molecule
Status
ClinicalTrials.gov
NCT Identiﬁer
Gantanerumab
Very-mild-to-mild AD
Conformational epitope
found only on ﬁbrillar AD
Monoclonal
antibody
Phase 3 enrolling
NCT03444870
BAN2401 (CLARITY)
Very-mild-to-mild AD with
positive amyloid biomarkers
Ab protoﬁbrils
Monoclonal
antibody
Phase 3 enrolling
NCT03887455
ALZT-OP1 (cromolyn
sodium/ibuprofen)
Very mild AD with positive
CSF amyloid
Anti-inﬂammatory
Small molecule
Phase 3 enrolling
NCT02547818
Levetiracetam
Very mild AD with positive
amyloid PET imaging
SV2A
Small molecule
Phase 3 enrolling
NCT03486938
CAD106
Cognitively normal ApoE
ε4/ε4 homozygotes
Active immunization with
Ab1-6 peptide fused to
virus-like particles
Immunogen
Phase 3 no longer
enrolling; API Generation
primary prevention study
NCT02565511
COR388
Mild-to-moderate AD
Periodontal bacteria
gingipain inhibitor
Small molecule
Phase 3 enrolling
NCT03823404
ANAVEX 2-73
Very-early-to-mild AD with
positive amyloid biomarkers
Sigma-1 protein agonist
Small molecule
Phase 3 enrolling
NCT03790709
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
325

fully human IgG1 antibody that binds to a conformational epitope
on aggregated Ab ﬁbrils within plaques and triggers Fc-mediated
microglial phagocytosis of Ab. Gantenerumab entered a phase 3
clinical trial for mild AD in 2014 that ultimately stopped enrolling
early due to futility. The study was continued as an open label
extension at high dose for 2 years. Follow-up analyses demon-
strated a dramatic decline in Ab deposition in participants in
the open extension, such that some became amyloid negative
on imaging. Based on this, a new high-dose phase 3 trial has
been initiated in very-mild-to-mild AD (Ostrowitzki et al., 2017).
BAN2401 is a humanized version of murine antibody mAb158
that binds large soluble Ab protoﬁbrils in vitro. Phase 2 trials
demonstrated signiﬁcant engagement and clearance of cerebral
amyloid deposits and possible reduction in cognitive decline. It
has now entered a phase 3 clinical trial in very-mild-to-mild AD
patients (Logovinsky et al., 2016). Donanemab, a monoclonal
antibody developed by Lilly that uniquely targets Ab(p3-42)
(a pyroglutamate form of Ab exclusively found in plaques) in
which the goal is to directly engage plaque-based Ab for clear-
ance, is currently in a phase 2 trial.
Though the data for Ab-directed monoclonal antibodies in
symptomatic AD have been discouraging, several antibodies
are currently being used in primary and secondary prevention
studies where dose administration at an earlier disease stage
might provide a better opportunity for disease modiﬁcation.
DIAN-TU is using solanezumab and gantenerumab in a phase
2/3 adaptive design clinical trial in ADAD mutation carriers
known to inevitably develop disease (Bateman et al., 2017).
Crenezumab is being used in the API ADAD Colombia trial of
known mutation carriers (Tariot et al., 2018), whereas active im-
munization with CAD106 is being used in the API Generation trial
of APOE ε4 homozygotes (Lopez Lopez et al., 2019).
Secretase Inhibitors. An alternative strategy for reducing Ab
levels is to reduce production via inhibition of b- and g-secretase
activities. The rate-limiting step for Ab production is enzymatic
cleavage by BACE1, so this would seem to be a particularly
attractive target. In mouse amyloidosis model, BACE1 inhibition
limits initiation of new plaque formation but does not prevent
growth of established plaques (Peters et al., 2018). Thus,
BACE1 inhibition might be expected to work synergistically in
combination with Ab-directed monoclonal antibodies to reduce
Ab deposition by addressing both clearance and production of
Ab. Ideally, BACE1 inhibition would be the preferred target for
primary prevention studies, as blocking Ab production prior to
onset of pathology would be sufﬁcient to prevent the develop-
ment of pathology. The reality of BACE1 inhibitors in clinical
testing has been more challenging.
A number of BACE1 inhibitors have entered clinical trials in
recent years. Lilly inhibitors LY2886721 and LY3202626 failed
in phase 2 trials due to hepatotoxicity and impaired cognitive
performance, respectively. Five additional BACE1 inhibitors
have now failed phase 3 clinical trials due to lack of efﬁcacy
and/or associated side effects (Table 1). Verubecestat failed
to slow cognitive decline in a phase 3 trial of mild-to-moderate
AD and resulted in worse cognition on some measures. (Egan
et al., 2018, 2019). Lanabacestat was discontinued after interim
analysis in biomarker-conﬁrmed very-mild-to-mild AD failed to
detect any reduction in cognitive decline, despite evidence of
target engagement (Clinicaltrials.gov, ID# NCT#02783573). Ata-
becestat was discontinued after a trial in preclinical AD demon-
strated frequent hepatotoxicity and worse cognitive outcomes
than placebo (Henley et al., 2019). CNP520 (umibecestat) was
initially found to be safe and well tolerated in early phase 1
and 2a studies. This inhibitor was then incorporated into one
arm of the phase 2/3 API Generation study (along with
CAD106; see above) for secondary prevention of AD in older
APOE ε4/ε4 homozygotes (Lopez Lopez et al., 2019). Unfortu-
nately, study sponsors announced discontinuation of this arm
in July 2019, when interim analysis demonstrated worse
cognition, increased brain atrophy, and more weight loss in
the treatment group relative to placebo. Only one BACE1 inhib-
itor, elenbecestat, was left standing in clinical trials until
September 2019, when study sponors announced discontinua-
tion of ongoing clinical trials in biomarker-positive MCI and/or
prodromal AD after review of interim safety data. The Alz-
heimer’s Clinical Trials Consortium had planned to use elenbe-
cestat in upcoming primary and secondary prevention studies
but now will proceed only with BAN2401 (Panza et al., 2018).
At this point, no additional BACE1 inhibitors are being actively
investigated in clinical trials.
At this point, it appears that worsening cognitive function
and weight loss are possible class effects for BACE1 inhibi-
tors, as they were observed as adverse effects across multiple
trials. These may not be simply off-target effects. BACE1 has
substrates other than APP that are likely important in neurode-
velopment, as evidenced by the fact that BACE1 KO mice
develop seizures (Hitt et al., 2010), myelination deﬁcits (Willem
et al., 2006), cognitive impairment (Laird et al., 2005), and axon
guidance
defects
(Rajapaksha
et
al.,
2011).
Conditional
BACE1 KO in adulthood mitigates many of these side effects,
but there remain impaired axon guidance defects (Ou-Yang
et al., 2018). Based on these data, it may be difﬁcult to
develop a BACE1 inhibitor without some expected on-target
side effects.
Two g-secretase inhibitors (GSIs) have been tested clinically
as disease-modifying therapies for AD, and each have failed
due to lack of efﬁcacy or worsening of cognition combined
with dose-limiting adverse side effects. Avagacestat phase 2 tri-
als in mild-to-moderate and prodromal AD were terminated after
it failed to demonstrate any reduction in cognitive decline and
caused adverse effects at higher doses, such as nausea, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, rash, pruritis, and increased incidence of non-
melanoma skin cancer (Coric et al., 2015). Semagacestat was
the ﬁrst GSI to enter a phase 3 trial for AD. However, the trial
was halted early due to concerns of worsening cognition,
increased incidence of skin cancers and infection, and weight
loss relative to placebo (Doody et al., 2013). Likely the broad-
spectrum nature of these GSIs contributed to their side-effect
proﬁle, as Notch signaling and downstream pathways from other
substrates would be inhibited (De Strooper, 2014). Alternatively,
side effects might be attributable to on-target inhibition of APP
processing, resulting in accumulating levels of membrane-
bound N-terminally cleaved APP fragments. The same concern
might also apply to BACE1 inhibitors.
An alternative means of inhibiting amyloidogenic processing of
Ab by g-secretase is to use g-secretase modulators (GSMs) that
326
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

alter processing of APP (lower Ab42 and higher Ab40 levels)
without inﬂuencing processing of other substrates (Xia, 2019).
The mechanism appears to be related to slowed dissociation of
ε-cleaved C99 fragment, thereby increasing enzyme processivity
and leading to generation of shorter Ab fragments (Okochi et al.,
2013). The ﬁrst GSMs were discovered by recognizing that
ibuprofen, indomethacin, and sulindac reduce Abeta42 levels
(Weggen et al., 2001) through modulation of g-secretase activity
(Eriksen et al., 2003). This eventually led to identiﬁcation of R-ﬂur-
biprofen (tarenﬂurbil), a molecule having GSM activity but without
inhibitory effects on cyclooxygenase activity. Despite promising
preclinical data, unfortunately, a phase 3 clinical trial did not
demonstrate any beneﬁts on cognition or ADLs over the course
of 18 months (Green et al., 2009). However, signiﬁcant CNS
Ab42 lowering was not likely achieved (Karran and Hardy, 2014);
therefore, more efﬁcacious GSMs may still be a viable conceptual
approach. Indeed, there are other promising GSMs now in devel-
opment that may enter human trials in the near future (Wagner
et al., 2017). With the recent publication of high-resolution sub-
strate-enzyme cryo-EM structures for g-secretase-APP C83 frag-
ment and g-secretase-Notch 100 fragment (Yang et al., 2019;
Zhou et al., 2019), it may now be possible to more easily develop
substrate-speciﬁc g-secretase inhibitors or modulators.
Tau-Directed Therapeutics
Tau is considered a critical target for developing disease-modi-
fying therapies. Multiple strategies have been proposed for
reducing tau pathogenicity in AD. One of the ﬁrst compounds
tested in a clinical trial was methylene blue. Any putative beneﬁt
attributed to methylene blue has been thought to be secondary
to reduced tau ﬁbrillization and aggregation and induction of
autophagy, which leads to reduced tau pathology and neuron
death in mouse models of tauopathy (Congdon et al., 2012;
Crowe et al., 2013; Wischik et al., 1996). A second-generation
stabilized and reduced derivative of methylene blue called
LMTM was created and moved to clinical trials. Unfortunately,
in two different phase 3 trials testing LMTM in all-cause dementia
and mild-to-moderate AD, there was no reduction in rate of
decline of cognition or ADL compared to placebo (Gauthier
et al., 2016). Whether LMTM at the doses administered pre-
vented accumulation of aggregated tau or decreased existing
deposits was not tested.
A second strategy for reducing tau pathogenicity is to inhibit
abnormal hyperphosphorylation through use of tau kinase
inhibitors. A GSK-3 inhibitor, tideglusib, was shown in a pre-
clinical study using double transgenic mice expressing human
tau and APP to reduce tau phosphorylation, decrease amyloid
deposition, lead to less neuronal loss, and improve cognition
(Sereno´ et al., 2009). However, a phase 2 trial in mild-to-
moderate AD did not demonstrate any reduction in rate of
cognitive or functional decline as compared to placebo (Love-
stone et al., 2015).
As with Ab, a signiﬁcant amount of investment has been
made in developing immunotherapies to facilitate tau pathol-
ogy clearance from the brain, including both active and pas-
sive immunization. Two active immunization strategies are be-
ing investigated. AADvac-1 consists of tau peptide containing
amino acids 294–305 conjugated to keyhole limpet hemocya-
nin with use of adjuvant. AADvac-1 recently completed phase
1 testing and is currently undergoing phase 2 trials (Novak
et al., 2019). ACI-35 is another active vaccination attempt us-
ing 16 copies of synthetic phosphorylated tau fragment
embedded in liposome. The goal is to generate an immune
response against pathologic phosphorylated tau with no
cross-reactivity
against
non-pathologic
tau.
This
has
completed phase 1 clinical testing and awaits further phase
2 testing in the future.
Numerous tau-directed monoclonal antibodies have been
generated and are currently being tested in clinical trials. In pre-
clinical studies, mouse anti-human tau monoclonal antibody
HJ8.5 demonstrated reduced tau seeding, hyperphosphoryla-
tion and thioﬂavin S staining, reduced levels of detergent insol-
uble tau, and reduced brain atrophy and cognitive deﬁcits in
PS19 (P301S) mice—whether administered via intraventricular
infusion (Yanamandra et al., 2013) or peripherally (Yanamandra
et al., 2015) prior to the development of signiﬁcant tau pathology.
This antibody has been humanized and, in a single patient with
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), led to increased plasma
tau concentrations after intravenous injection. In PS19 mice,
plasma tau was found to inversely correlate with brain soluble
tau levels, suggesting that peripheral tau levels reﬂect changes
occurring in the CNS (Yanamandra et al., 2017). The humanized
version of HJ8.5 (ABBV-8E12) has been tested in a phase 1 trial
and found to be safe; ABBV-8E12 has now advanced to two
phase 2 trials including patients with early AD and PSP (West
et al., 2017). The PSP study was just terminated following a futil-
ity analysis. A separate Biogen humanized anti-tau monoclonal
antibody (BIIB092) has also been tested in phase 1 study in
PSP patients, passed safety parameters, and was demonstrated
to reduce N-terminal tau in CSF of patients. This antibody has
now advanced to phase 2 testing in PSP and AD (Boxer et al.,
2019). Biogen and other companies have additional monoclonal
antibodies targeting tau that are in the clinical pipeline:
R07105705, BIIB076, JNJ-63733657, LY3303560, MC1-L, and
UCB1017. A critical issue is to determine the extent to which
pathological seeding and spreading of tau pathology occurs
via extracellular forms of tau and whether such a mechanism
occurs in humans. It is likely that if a peripherally administered
anti-tau antibody is to be efﬁcacious in a disease such as AD,
such a mechanism would need to occur, and an antibody would
need to inhibit this process. If antibody-based methods are
developed to degrade and reduce intracellular, cytoplasmic
forms of tau, this may prove to be a more effective way to not
only prevent but also clear existing tau pathology.
Finally, a separate strategy to limit tau-mediated pathology
would be to reduce tau expression. One clinically viable
approach is the use of intrathecally delivered ASOs. ASO-based
clinical treatments have demonstrated dramatic success in
cases of spinal motor atrophy (Finkel et al., 2017) and are being
tested in Huntington’s disease (Tabrizi et al., 2019). Preclinical
studies using tau-overexpressing mice suggest this approach
may be viable in tauopathies (DeVos et al., 2017). Ionis has initi-
ated a phase 1/2 trial of anti-tau ASOs (MAPTRx) in mild AD
(Clinicatrials.gov, ID# NCT03186989).
ApoE-Directed Therapeutics
To date, no in-human AD clinical trials have targeted ApoE.
However, a number of preclinical studies in relevant animal
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
327

models have investigated ApoE-directed therapies that may
eventually translate clinically.
Multiple studies employing ApoE genetic deletion (Bales et al.,
1999; Verghese et al., 2013), conditional expression of ApoE iso-
forms (Liu et al., 2017), or ASO-mediated knockdown of ApoE
expression (Huynh et al., 2017b) suggest that lowering ApoE
levels reduces relevant pathology in both amyloidosis and tau-
opathy mouse models (Shi et al., 2017). Use of anti-ApoE ASO
delivered via intracerebroventricular injection in ApoE-TR/
APPPS1-21 mice demonstrated dramatically reduced Ab plaque
deposition if administered prior to plaque seeding but not after.
Neuritic dystrophy was also signiﬁcantly attenuated, indepen-
dent of an effect on amyloid deposition even when administered
after amyloid deposition (Huynh et al., 2017b). Therefore, target-
ing ApoE3 or ApoE4 expression via ASO delivery in AD may be
beneﬁcial, especially if administered in early preclinical phases.
Since ApoE promotes plaque-associated microgliosis resulting
in plaque compaction and reduced neuritic dystrophy (Ulrich
et al., 2018), therapeutically reducing ApoE levels may also
have unexpected effects on the innate immune response to
established plaques. An alternative strategy for lowering Ab
levels via targeting a certain form of ApoE is the use of passive
immunization. Monoclonal antibody HJ6.3 delivered peripherally
to APP/PS1 mice either before or after plaque deposition re-
sulted in reduced Ab levels and ﬁbrillary amyloid pathology,
increased microglial activation, and improved spatial-memory
performance (Kim et al., 2012; Liao et al., 2014). HAE-4 is a
monoclonal antibody that targets non-lipidated, aggregated
ApoE3 and E4 preferentially located within amyloid plaques.
Delivery of this antibody centrally or peripherally reduced ﬁbril-
lary amyloid plaque load along with soluble and insoluble Ab
levels without reducing cerebral or plasma ApoE levels. Instead,
data suggest the antibody mediates its effect by binding apoE in
plaques followed by antibody-mediated plaque opsonization by
microglia, likely promoting peri-plaque Ab phagocytosis (Liao
et al., 2018).
Another proposed strategy is to utilize gene-therapy methods
to overexpress ApoE2 in APOE ε4/ε4 carriers as a means to
overcome loss of function associated with ApoE4 (Rosenberg
et al., 2018). This strategy would only be effective if ApoE4-
mediated disease mechanisms are truly due to loss of function
or, if secondary to ApoE4 toxic gain of function, if ApoE2 is
able to act in dominant protective fashion to inhibit ApoE4 toxic
effects. While there are data to support the concept that ApoE2
expression may be protective using a gene-transfer approach
(Hu et al., 2015; Hudry et al., 2013), it would be useful to validate
protective effects and lack of toxicity in a number of different
models. ApoE modulates AD pathobiology through various path-
ways (see above), so it will be important to conﬁrm that APOE2
overexpression has only salutary effects on these many dis-
ease-relevant biological functions. This is especially critical after
a recent study in the preclinical literature demonstrated that
APOE2 expression via viral delivery exacerbated pathology in
tauopathy mice (Zhao et al., 2018). It is unclear whether
ApoE2 gene delivery would be a superior strategy to simply
lowering ApoE levels (discussed above). A recent study tested
APOE2 gene delivery in non-human primates using AAVrh.10
hAPOE2-HA vector to deliver an APOE2 expression cassette.
This study found that intracisternal viral injection led to the widest
area of cerebral transduction with only minimal surgery (Rosen-
berg et al., 2018). A phase 1 clinical trial in humans using intracis-
ternal injection of this vector is planned (ClinicalTrials.gov,
ID# NCT03634007).
Immune Modulation
Interest in anti-inﬂammatory treatments for AD were initially
stoked by ﬁndings from multiple epidemiologic studies suggest-
ing that chronic use of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) was associated with lower incidence of AD, with the
most pronounced effect seen in patients
taking chronic
ibuprofen (in t’ Veld et al., 2001; Vlad et al., 2008). However,
follow-up clinical trials testing the effect of low-dose prednisone
(Aisen et al., 2000), low-dose aspirin (AD2000 Collaborative
Group et al., 2008), NSAIDs (Aisen et al., 2003; de Jong et al.,
2008), and selective COX-2 inhibitors (Aisen et al., 2003; Thal
et al., 2005) failed to show any reduction in rate of cognitive
decline in mild-to-moderate AD. Prevention studies of naproxen
and celecoxib in patients at risk for preclinical AD also failed to
demonstrate
any
protective
beneﬁt
(ADAPT-FS
Research
Group, 2015; Meyer et al., 2019). Therefore, a generic anti-in-
ﬂammatory treatment approach for AD does not appear viable
for secondary prevention or treatment of symptomatic patients.
In one study, patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with
etanercept, TNFa decoy receptor, had lower incidence of AD,
but no effect was noted with use of other anti-rheumatic medica-
tions (e.g., prednisone, sulfasalazine, and rituximab) or anti-TNF
agents (e.g., inﬂiximab and adalimumab) (Chou et al., 2016). A
phase 2 trial of etanercept in mild-to-moderate AD established
safety but saw no signiﬁcant reduction in cognitive decline on
analysis of secondary clinical outcomes (Butchart et al., 2015).
It is notable that etanercept does not cross the BBB. One strat-
egy to enhance etanercept delivery across the BBB is by fusing
the molecule to transferrin receptor. This approach demon-
strated reduced amyloid burden and improvement in recognition
memory in preclinical studies using APP/PS1 mice (Chang et al.,
2017). Preclinical models have demonstrated protection from
synaptic deﬁcits in rodent amyloidosis models following treat-
ment with inﬂammasome inhibitors before onset of amyloid
plaques (Qi et al., 2018).
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) is an immunomodulatory
treatment approved for treatment of various neurologic and
rheumatologic autoimmune diseases. However, a phase 3 trial
of IVIg did not demonstrate any cognitive beneﬁts in mild AD
despite a favorable safety proﬁle (Relkin et al., 2017).
A separate treatment approach is to boost microglial activa-
tion or phagocytic function, since several AD gene risk variants
in TREM2 and CD33 act to decrease microglial activation and
phagocytosis (see above). TREM2-activating monoclonal anti-
bodies have entered phase I clinical trials (Clinicaltrials.gov,
ID#
NCT03635047).
CD33-blocking
antibodies
are
also
being planned for phase 1 clinical trials (Clinicaltrials.gov,
ID# NCT03822208).
Young Blood
Recent heterochronic parabiosis experiments demonstrated
that introduction of young blood in old mice led to increased neu-
rogenesis and dendritic spine density and improved age-related
cognitive impairment (Katsimpardi et al., 2014; Villeda et al.,
328
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

2014). This effect was also seen after injection of human umbili-
cal cord blood (Castellano et al., 2017). Serum from young mice
promoted increased numbers of functional synapses, increased
dendritic arborization, increased synaptic response to stimuli,
and increased NMDA synaptic responses in co-cultures of
human neurons with mouse glia. Such effects were not seen
with serum from old mice or fetal bovine serum (FBS). Proteomic
and functional validation experiments suggest that the effect is at
least partly mediated by SPARC1L and thrombospondin-4 (Gan
and Su¨ dhof, 2019). Heterochronic parabiosis and direct injection
of young mouse plasma in APP amyloidosis mice resulted in
increased levels of synaptic protein and improvement in cogni-
tive performance on standard tests of spatial working memory
and hippocampal-dependent associative learning (Middeldorp
et al., 2016).
These studies have led to increased off-label clinical adminis-
tration of young-donor plasma to individuals for a list of age-
related conditions, leading the FDA to release a statement
recommending against this given the lack of current evidence
to support the practice (Commissioner, 2019).
This approach is being tested currently in clinical trials. A
completed phase 1 trial of weekly infusions of 1 unit of young
fresh, frozen plasma from male donors (aged 18–30) versus sa-
line in patients with mild-to-moderate AD for a total of 4 weeks
demonstrated that the intervention was mostly well tolerated
(Sha et al., 2019). A concentrated plasma fraction derived from
young-donor plasma is now being tested in a phase 2 trial (Khei-
fets and Braithwaite, 2019). Plasma exchange may work to
simply remove detrimental plasma components from old blood
or mobilize CSF Ab rather than supply therapeutic factors from
young blood. The AMBAR trial, a current phase 2b/3 trial, is
testing this hypothesis by assessing the effect of monthly plasma
exchange with albumin replacement on mild-to-moderate AD
(Boada et al., 2019).
Combination Therapies
Using the example of treatment paradigms for other chronic dis-
eases, such as hypertension, congestive heart failure, epilepsy,
HIV, and others, a combinatorial treatment strategy for AD
seems more likely to yield clinical successes than monotherapy
(Gauthier et al., 2019; Morris, 2019; Stephenson et al., 2015).
Many of the diseases just listed are only effectively managed
when multiple medications spanning different drug classes are
employed. Given the multifactorial nature and underlying
complexity of AD pathobiology, the expectation that a single
agent targeting a single pathological pathway would be highly
effective in slowing disease progression seems irrational once
different pathologies of varying types are present. In fact, combi-
nation strategies have begun to be employed in clinical trial
design. The Lilly TRAILBLAZER phase 2 trial initially tested the
combination of the BACE1 inhibitor LY3202626 with anti-pyro-
glutamate Ab monoclonal antibody donanemab. Unfortunately,
LY3202626 was found to be associated with slight cognitive
worsening in dedicated phase 2 trials, so the combination treat-
ment arm was ultimately dropped. Nonetheless, combination
strategies in clinical trials should continue to be encouraged,
especially those with combinations spanning different drug clas-
ses. Ideally, this type of treatment approach would also be
applied to preventative or preclinical AD trials.
Conclusions
AD research is at a unique moment. Despite signiﬁcant advances
in our understanding of AD pathobiology, we have not yet iden-
tiﬁed a disease-modifying therapy that has proven effective in
humans. While biochemical analyses, in vitro and in vivo studies,
genetic analyses, and longitudinal imaging studies lend strong
support to the role of Ab aggregation in initiating disease patho-
genesis, the clinical trials as conducted have not panned out.
So far, amyloid-based therapeutics appear to be ineffective in
modifying the disease course for symptomatic AD. Future clin-
ical trial efforts should instead focus on applying these anti-
amyloid treatment strategies to the preclinical disease—the
earlier the better—with drugs shown to hit their target effectively.
It is now more important than ever to also pursue non-amyloid-
based therapies. Tau- and ApoE-directed therapeutics remain
at an early stage of development, and both hold great potential
going foward. There is also huge potential for therapies that
modulate the neuroimmune or microglial response in AD, and
this class of drug development is signiﬁcantly under-repre-
sented. Combination therapy is a strategy that should be
employed more widely in AD clinical trial design. Finally, AD
pathobiology is complex, and the older one is, the greater the
likelihood that other age-related diseases contribute to cognitive
decline together with AD pathology. Ongoing intensive investiga-
tion in this area will be critical to making key discoveries that will
ultimately unveil novel therapeutic approaches leading to truly
disease-modifying medications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by a grant from the Alzheimer’s Association to J.M.L.
(AACSF-18-564776) and NIH grants (NS090934, AG047644, and NS074969)
as well as grants from the Tau consortium, the JPB Foundation, and Cure
Alzheimer’s Fund to D.M.H.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, J.M.L. and D.M.H.; Writing – Original Draft, J.M.L.; Writing –
Revising & Editing, J.M.L. and D.M.H.; Funding Acquisition, J.M.L. and D.M.H.;
Supervision, D.M.H.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
J.M.L. reports serving as sub-investigator on the Lilly TRAILBLAZER trial but
receives no ﬁnancial compensation. D.M.H. reports being a co-founder of
C2N Diagnostics; being on the scientiﬁc advisory board of C2N Diagnostics,
Denali, and Genentech; and being a consultant for AbbVie and Idorsia.
D.M.H is an inventor on a submitted patent #PCT/US2013/049333 ‘‘Antibodies
to tau’’ that is licensed by Washington University to C2N Diagnostics. This pat-
ent was subsequently licensed to AbbVie. D.M.H. is an inventor on patent
number 8,591,894 ‘‘Humanized antibodies that sequester amyloid beta’’ that
was licensed by Washington University to Eli Lilly. D.M.H. is an inventor on pat-
ent number 8,232,107 ‘‘Methods for measuring the metabolism of neurally
derived biomolecules in vivo’’ that was licensed by Washington University to
C2N Diagnostics.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Haq, R., Schlachetzki, J.C.M., Glass, C.K., and Mazmanian, S.K. (2019).
Microbiome-microglia connections via the gut-brain axis. J. Exp. Med. 216,
41–59.
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
329

ADAPT-FS Research Group (2015). Follow-up evaluation of cognitive function
in the randomized Alzheimer’s Disease Anti-inﬂammatory Prevention Trial and
its Follow-up Study. Alzheimers Dement. 11, 216–225.e1.
Ahmed, Z., Cooper, J., Murray, T.K., Garn, K., McNaughton, E., Clarke, H.,
Parhizkar, S., Ward, M.A., Cavallini, A., Jackson, S., et al. (2014). A novel in vivo
model of tau propagation with rapid and progressive neuroﬁbrillary tangle pa-
thology: the pattern of spread is determined by connectivity, not proximity.
Acta Neuropathol. 127, 667–683.
Aisen, P.S., Davis, K.L., Berg, J.D., Schafer, K., Campbell, K., Thomas, R.G.,
Weiner, M.F., Farlow, M.R., Sano, M., Grundman, M., and Thal, L.J. (2000).
A randomized controlled trial of prednisone in Alzheimer’s disease. Alz-
heimer’s Disease Cooperative Study. Neurology 54, 588–593.
Aisen, P.S., Schafer, K.A., Grundman, M., Pfeiffer, E., Sano, M., Davis, K.L.,
Farlow, M.R., Jin, S., Thomas, R.G., and Thal, L.J.; Alzheimer’s Disease
Cooperative Study (2003). Effects of rofecoxib or naproxen vs placebo on
Alzheimer disease progression: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 289,
2819–2826.
Altmann, A., Ng, B., Landau, S.M., Jagust, W.J., and Greicius, M.D.; Alz-
heimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2015). Regional brain hypometabo-
lism is unrelated to regional amyloid plaque burden. Brain 138, 3734–3746.
Alzheimer’s Association (2019). 2019 Alzheimer’s disease facts and ﬁgures.
Alzheimers Dement. 15, 321–387.
Asai, H., Ikezu, S., Tsunoda, S., Medalla, M., Luebke, J., Haydar, T., Wolozin,
B., Butovsky, O., Ku¨ gler, S., and Ikezu, T. (2015). Depletion of microglia and
inhibition of exosome synthesis halt tau propagation. Nat. Neurosci. 18,
1584–1593.
Aschenbrenner, A.J., Gordon, B.A., Benzinger, T.L.S., Morris, J.C., and
Hassenstab, J.J. (2018). Inﬂuence of tau PET, amyloid PET, and hippocampal
volume on cognition in Alzheimer disease. Neurology 91, e859–e866.
Atri, A., Fro¨ lich, L., Ballard, C., Tariot, P.N., Molinuevo, J.L., Boneva, N., Wind-
feld, K., Raket, L.L., and Cummings, J.L. (2018). Effect of Idalopirdine as
Adjunct to Cholinesterase Inhibitors on Change in Cognition in Patients With
Alzheimer Disease: Three Randomized Clinical Trials. JAMA 319, 130–142.
Bales, K.R., Verina, T., Dodel, R.C., Du, Y., Altstiel, L., Bender, M., Hyslop, P.,
Johnstone, E.M., Little, S.P., Cummins, D.J., et al. (1997). Lack of apolipopro-
tein E dramatically reduces amyloid beta-peptide deposition. Nat. Genet. 17,
263–264.
Bales, K.R., Verina, T., Cummins, D.J., Du, Y., Dodel, R.C., Saura, J., Fishman,
C.E., DeLong, C.A., Piccardo, P., Petegnief, V., et al. (1999). Apolipoprotein E
is essential for amyloid deposition in the APP(V717F) transgenic mouse model
of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 15233–15238.
Bales, K.R., Liu, F., Wu, S., Lin, S., Koger, D., DeLong, C., Hansen, J.C., Sulli-
van, P.M., and Paul, S.M. (2009). Human APOE isoform-dependent effects on
brain beta-amyloid levels in PDAPP transgenic mice. J. Neurosci. 29,
6771–6779.
Bartus, R.T., Dean, R.L., 3rd, Beer, B., and Lippa, A.S. (1982). The cholinergic
hypothesis of geriatric memory dysfunction. Science 217, 408–414.
Basak, J.M., Verghese, P.B., Yoon, H., Kim, J., and Holtzman, D.M. (2012).
Low-density lipoprotein receptor represents an apolipoprotein E-independent
pathway of Ab uptake and degradation by astrocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 287,
13959–13971.
Bateman, R.J., Xiong, C., Benzinger, T.L.S., Fagan, A.M., Goate, A., Fox, N.C.,
Marcus, D.S., Cairns, N.J., Xie, X., Blazey, T.M., et al.; Dominantly Inherited
Alzheimer Network (2012). Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly in-
herited Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 795–804.
Bateman, R.J., Benzinger, T.L., Berry, S., Clifford, D.B., Duggan, C., Fagan,
A.M., Fanning, K., Farlow, M.R., Hassenstab, J., McDade, E.M., et al.;
DIAN-TU Pharma Consortium for the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network
(2017). The DIAN-TU Next Generation Alzheimer’s prevention trial: Adaptive
design and disease progression model. Alzheimers Dement. 13, 8–19.
Ba¨ uerl, C., Collado, M.C., Diaz Cuevas, A., Vin˜ a, J., and Pe´ rez Martı´nez, G.
(2018). Shifts in gut microbiota composition in an APP/PSS1 transgenic mouse
model of Alzheimer’s disease during lifespan. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 66,
464–471.
Bell, R.D., Winkler, E.A., Singh, I., Sagare, A.P., Deane, R., Wu, Z., Holtzman,
D.M., Betsholtz, C., Armulik, A., Sallstrom, J., et al. (2012). Apolipoprotein E
controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A. Nature 485, 512–516.
AD2000 Collaborative Group, Bentham, P., Gray, R., Sellwood, E., Hills, R.,
Crome, P., and Raftery, J. (2008). Aspirin in Alzheimer’s disease (AD2000): a
randomised open-label trial. Lancet Neurol. 7, 41–49.
Bero, A.W., Yan, P., Roh, J.H., Cirrito, J.R., Stewart, F.R., Raichle, M.E., Lee,
J.-M., and Holtzman, D.M. (2011). Neuronal activity regulates the regional
vulnerability to amyloid-b deposition. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 750–756.
Bien-Ly, N., Gillespie, A.K., Walker, D., Yoon, S.Y., and Huang, Y. (2012).
Reducing human apolipoprotein E levels attenuates age-dependent Ab accu-
mulation in mutant human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice.
J. Neurosci. 32, 4803–4811.
Biere, A.L., Ostaszewski, B., Zhao, H., Gillespie, S., Younkin, S.G., and Selkoe,
D.J. (1995). Co-expression of beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) and
apolipoprotein E in cell culture: analysis of betaAPP processing. Neurobiol.
Dis. 2, 177–187.
Biernat, J., Gustke, N., Drewes, G., Mandelkow, E.M., and Mandelkow, E.
(1993). Phosphorylation of Ser262 strongly reduces binding of tau to microtu-
bules: distinction between PHF-like immunoreactivity and microtubule bind-
ing. Neuron 11, 153–163.
Birks, J. (2006). Cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer’s disease. Cochrane
Database Syst. Rev. (1), CD005593.
Boada, M., Lo´ pez, O., Nu´ n˜ ez, L., Szczepiorkowski, Z.M., Torres, M., Grifols,
C., and Pa´ ez, A. (2019). Plasma exchange for Alzheimer’s disease Manage-
ment by Albumin Replacement (AMBAR) trial: Study design and progress.
Alzheimers Dement. (N. Y.) 5, 61–69.
Bolmont, T., Clavaguera, F., Meyer-Luehmann, M., Herzig, M.C., Radde, R.,
Staufenbiel, M., Lewis, J., Hutton, M., Tolnay, M., and Jucker, M. (2007).
Induction of tau pathology by intracerebral infusion of amyloid-beta -contain-
ing brain extract and by amyloid-beta deposition in APP x Tau transgenic mice.
Am. J. Pathol. 171, 2012–2020.
Bourgade, K., Garneau, H., Giroux, G., Le Page, A.Y., Bocti, C., Dupuis, G.,
Frost, E.H., and Fu¨ lo¨ p, T., Jr. (2015). b-Amyloid peptides display protective
activity against the human Alzheimer’s disease-associated herpes simplex
virus-1. Biogerontology 16, 85–98.
Boxer, A.L., Qureshi, I., Ahlijanian, M., Grundman, M., Golbe, L.I., Litvan, I.,
Honig, L.S., Tuite, P., McFarland, N.R., O’Suilleabhain, P., et al. (2019). Safety
of the tau-directed monoclonal antibody BIIB092 in progressive supranuclear
palsy: a randomised, placebo-controlled, multiple ascending dose phase 1b
trial. Lancet Neurol. 18, 549–558.
Braak, H., and Braak, E. (1991). Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-
related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 82, 239–259.
Bradshaw, E.M., Chibnik, L.B., Keenan, B.T., Ottoboni, L., Raj, T., Tang, A.,
Rosenkrantz, L.L., Imboywa, S., Lee, M., Von Korff, A., et al.; Alzheimer Dis-
ease Neuroimaging Initiative (2013). CD33 Alzheimer’s disease locus: altered
monocyte function and amyloid biology. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 848–850.
Bridel, C., van Wieringen, W.N., Zetterberg, H., Tijms, B.M., Teunissen, C.E.,
Alvarez-Cermen˜ o, J.C., Andreasson, U., Axelsson, M., Ba¨ ckstro¨ m, D.C., Bar-
tos, A., et al.; and the NFL Group (2019). Diagnostic Value of Cerebrospinal
Fluid Neuroﬁlament Light Protein in Neurology: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol. Published online June 17, 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.1534.
Brier, M.R., Day, G.S., Snyder, A.Z., Tanenbaum, A.B., and Ances, B.M.
(2016). N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis mediates loss of intrinsic
activity measured by functional MRI. J. Neurol. 263, 1083–1091.
Brody, D.L., Magnoni, S., Schwetye, K.E., Spinner, M.L., Esparza, T.J., Stoc-
chetti, N., Zipfel, G.J., and Holtzman, D.M. (2008). Amyloid-beta dynamics
correlate with neurological status in the injured human brain. Science 321,
1221–1224.
330
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

Burke, W.J., Miller, J.P., Rubin, E.H., Morris, J.C., Coben, L.A., Duchek, J.,
Wittels, I.G., and Berg, L. (1988). Reliability of the Washington University Clin-
ical Dementia Rating. Arch. Neurol. 45, 31–32.
Bussy, A., Snider, B.J., Coble, D., Xiong, C., Fagan, A.M., Cruchaga, C., Ben-
zinger, T.L.S., Gordon, B.A., Hassenstab, J., Bateman, R.J., and Morris, J.C.;
Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (2019). Effect of apolipoprotein E4
on clinical, neuroimaging, and biomarker measures in noncarrier participants
in the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network. Neurobiol. Aging 75, 42–50.
Butchart, J., Brook, L., Hopkins, V., Teeling, J., Pu¨ ntener, U., Culliford, D.,
Sharples, R., Sharif, S., McFarlane, B., Raybould, R., et al. (2015). Etanercept
in Alzheimer disease: A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, phase
2 trial. Neurology 84, 2161–2168.
Buttini, M., Orth, M., Bellosta, S., Akeefe, H., Pitas, R.E., Wyss-Coray, T.,
Mucke, L., and Mahley, R.W. (1999). Expression of human apolipoprotein E3
or E4 in the brains of Apoe-/- mice: isoform-speciﬁc effects on neurodegener-
ation. J. Neurosci. 19, 4867–4880.
Buttini, M., Masliah, E., Yu, G.-Q., Palop, J.J., Chang, S., Bernardo, A., Lin, C.,
Wyss-Coray, T., Huang, Y., and Mucke, L. (2010). Cellular source of apolipo-
protein E4 determines neuronal susceptibility to excitotoxic injury in transgenic
mice. Am. J. Pathol. 177, 563–569.
Cano-Cuenca, N., Solı´s-Garcı´a del Pozo, J.E., and Jorda´ n, J. (2014). Evidence
for the efﬁcacy of latrepirdine (Dimebon) treatment for improvement of cogni-
tive function: a meta-analysis. J. Alzheimers Dis. 38, 155–164.
Carbone, I., Lazzarotto, T., Ianni, M., Porcellini, E., Forti, P., Masliah, E., Gabri-
elli, L., and Licastro, F. (2014). Herpes virus in Alzheimer’s disease: relation to
progression of the disease. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 122–129.
Carlsson, C.M., Gleason, C.E., Hess, T.M., Moreland, K.A., Blazel, H.M.,
Koscik, R.L., Schreiber, N.T.N., Johnson, S.C., Atwood, C.S., Puglielli, L.,
et al. (2008). Effects of simvastatin on cerebrospinal ﬂuid biomarkers and
cognition
in
middle-aged
adults
at
risk
for
Alzheimer’s
disease.
J. Alzheimers Dis. 13, 187–197.
Castellano, J.M., Kim, J., Stewart, F.R., Jiang, H., DeMattos, R.B., Patterson,
B.W., Fagan, A.M., Morris, J.C., Mawuenyega, K.G., Cruchaga, C., et al.
(2011). Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-b peptide
clearance. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 89ra57.
Castellano, J.M., Deane, R., Gottesdiener, A.J., Verghese, P.B., Stewart, F.R.,
West, T., Paoletti, A.C., Kasper, T.R., DeMattos, R.B., Zlokovic, B.V., and
Holtzman, D.M. (2012). Low-density lipoprotein receptor overexpression
enhances the rate of brain-to-blood Ab clearance in a mouse model of
b-amyloidosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 15502–15507.
Castellano, J.M., Mosher, K.I., Abbey, R.J., McBride, A.A., James, M.L., Berd-
nik, D., Shen, J.C., Zou, B., Xie, X.S., Tingle, M., et al. (2017). Human umbilical
cord plasma proteins revitalize hippocampal function in aged mice. Nature
544, 488–492.
Cedazo-Mı´nguez, A., Wiehager, B., Winblad, B., Hu¨ ttinger, M., and Cowburn,
R.F. (2001). Effects of apolipoprotein E (apoE) isoforms, beta-amyloid (Abeta)
and apoE/Abeta complexes on protein kinase C-alpha (PKC-alpha) transloca-
tion and amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing in human SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells and ﬁbroblasts. Neurochem. Int. 38, 615–625.
Chang, R., Knox, J., Chang, J., Derbedrossian, A., Vasilevko, V., Cribbs, D.,
Boado, R.J., Pardridge, W.M., and Sumbria, R.K. (2017). Blood-Brain Barrier
Penetrating Biologic TNF-a Inhibitor for Alzheimer’s Disease. Mol. Pharm.
14, 2340–2349.
Chen, V.C.-H., Wu, S.-I., Huang, K.-Y., Yang, Y.-H., Kuo, T.-Y., Liang, H.-Y.,
Huang, K.-L., and Gossop, M. (2018). Herpes Zoster and Dementia: A Nation-
wide Population-Based Cohort Study. J. Clin. Psychiatry 79, 16m11312.
Choi, S.H., Kim, Y.H., Hebisch, M., Sliwinski, C., Lee, S., D’Avanzo, C., Chen,
H., Hooli, B., Asselin, C., Muffat, J., et al. (2014). A three-dimensional human
neural cell culture model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 515, 274–278.
Chou, R.C., Kane, M., Ghimire, S., Gautam, S., and Gui, J. (2016). Treatment
for Rheumatoid Arthritis and Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease: A Nested Case-Con-
trol Analysis. CNS Drugs 30, 1111–1120.
Cirrito, J.R., Yamada, K.A., Finn, M.B., Sloviter, R.S., Bales, K.R., May, P.C.,
Schoepp, D.D., Paul, S.M., Mennerick, S., and Holtzman, D.M. (2005). Synap-
tic activity regulates interstitial ﬂuid amyloid-beta levels in vivo. Neuron 48,
913–922.
Cirrito, J.R., Kang, J.-E., Lee, J., Stewart, F.R., Verges, D.K., Silverio, L.M., Bu,
G., Mennerick, S., and Holtzman, D.M. (2008). Endocytosis is required for syn-
aptic activity-dependent release of amyloid-beta in vivo. Neuron 58, 42–51.
Clavaguera, F., Bolmont, T., Crowther, R.A., Abramowski, D., Frank, S.,
Probst, A., Fraser, G., Stalder, A.K., Beibel, M., Staufenbiel, M., et al. (2009).
Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain. Nat.
Cell Biol. 11, 909–913.
Clavaguera, F., Akatsu, H., Fraser, G., Crowther, R.A., Frank, S., Hench, J.,
Probst, A., Winkler, D.T., Reichwald, J., Staufenbiel, M., et al. (2013). Brain
homogenates from human tauopathies induce tau inclusions in mouse brain.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 9535–9540.
Colonna, M., and Butovsky, O. (2017). Microglia Function in the Central
Nervous System During Health and Neurodegeneration. Annu. Rev. Immunol.
35, 441–468.
Commissioner, O. of the (2019). Statement from FDA Commissioner Scott
Gottlieb, M.D., and Director of FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research Peter Marks, M.D., Ph.D., cautioning consumers against receiving
young donor plasma infusions that are promoted as unproven treatment for
varying conditions.
Congdon, E.E., Wu, J.W., Myeku, N., Figueroa, Y.H., Herman, M., Marinec,
P.S., Gestwicki, J.E., Dickey, C.A., Yu, W.H., and Duff, K.E. (2012). Methylthio-
ninium chloride (methylene blue) induces autophagy and attenuates tauopathy
in vitro and in vivo. Autophagy 8, 609–622.
Cook, C., Carlomagno, Y., Gendron, T.F., Dunmore, J., Scheffel, K., Stetler, C.,
Davis, M., Dickson, D., Jarpe, M., DeTure, M., and Petrucelli, L. (2014). Acet-
ylation of the KXGS motifs in tau is a critical determinant in modulation of tau
aggregation and clearance. Hum. Mol. Genet. 23, 104–116.
Corder, E.H., Saunders, A.M., Strittmatter, W.J., Schmechel, D.E., Gaskell,
P.C., Small, G.W., Roses, A.D., Haines, J.L., and Pericak-Vance, M.A.
(1993). Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s
disease in late onset families. Science 261, 921–923.
Coric, V., Salloway, S., van Dyck, C.H., Dubois, B., Andreasen, N., Brody, M.,
Curtis, C., Soininen, H., Thein, S., Shiovitz, T., et al. (2015). Targeting Prodro-
mal Alzheimer Disease With Avagacestat: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA
Neurol. 72, 1324–1333.
Crary, J.F., Trojanowski, J.Q., Schneider, J.A., Abisambra, J.F., Abner, E.L.,
Alafuzoff, I., Arnold, S.E., Attems, J., Beach, T.G., Bigio, E.H., et al. (2014).
Primary age-related tauopathy (PART): a common pathology associated
with human aging. Acta Neuropathol. 128, 755–766.
Crowe, A., James, M.J., Lee, V.M.-Y., Smith, A.B., 3rd, Trojanowski, J.Q.,
Ballatore, C., and Brunden, K.R. (2013). Aminothienopyridazines and methy-
lene blue affect Tau ﬁbrillization via cysteine oxidation. J. Biol. Chem. 288,
11024–11037.
Crowther, R.A., and Wischik, C.M. (1985). Image reconstruction of the
Alzheimer paired helical ﬁlament. EMBO J. 4 (13B), 3661–3665.
Cruz Herna´ ndez, J.C., Bracko, O., Kersbergen, C.J., Muse, V., Haft-
Javaherian, M., Berg, M., Park, L., Vinarcsik, L.K., Ivasyk, I., Rivera,
D.A., et al. (2019). Neutrophil adhesion in brain capillaries reduces
cortical blood ﬂow and impairs memory function in Alzheimer’s disease
mouse models. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 413–420.
Da Mesquita, S., Louveau, A., Vaccari, A., Smirnov, I., Cornelison, R.C., King-
smore, K.M., Contarino, C., Onengut-Gumuscu, S., Farber, E., Raper, D., et al.
(2018). Functional aspects of meningeal lymphatics in ageing and Alzheimer’s
disease. Nature 560, 185–191.
Dawson, H.N., Ferreira, A., Eyster, M.V., Ghoshal, N., Binder, L.I., and Vitek,
M.P. (2001). Inhibition of neuronal maturation in primary hippocampal neurons
from tau deﬁcient mice. J. Cell Sci. 114, 1179–1187.
de Calignon, A., Polydoro, M., Sua´ rez-Calvet, M., William, C., Adamowicz,
D.H., Kopeikina, K.J., Pitstick, R., Sahara, N., Ashe, K.H., Carlson, G.A.,
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
331

et al. (2012). Propagation of tau pathology in a model of early Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Neuron 73, 685–697.
de Jong, D., Jansen, R., Hoefnagels, W., Jellesma-Eggenkamp, M., Verbeek,
M., Borm, G., and Kremer, B. (2008). No effect of one-year treatment with indo-
methacin on Alzheimer’s disease progression: a randomized controlled trial.
PLoS ONE 3, e1475.
De Strooper, B. (2014). Lessons from a failed g-secretase Alzheimer trial. Cell
159, 721–726.
De Strooper, B., and Karran, E. (2016). The Cellular Phase of Alzheimer’s Dis-
ease. Cell 164, 603–615.
DeMattos, R.B., Bales, K.R., Cummins, D.J., Dodart, J.C., Paul, S.M., and
Holtzman, D.M. (2001). Peripheral anti-A beta antibody alters CNS and plasma
A beta clearance and decreases brain A beta burden in a mouse model of Alz-
heimer’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 8850–8855.
DeVos, S.L., Miller, R.L., Schoch, K.M., Holmes, B.B., Kebodeaux, C.S., We-
gener, A.J., Chen, G., Shen, T., Tran, H., Nichols, B., et al. (2017). Tau reduc-
tion prevents neuronal loss and reverses pathological tau deposition and
seeding in mice with tauopathy. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaag0481.
DeVos, S.L., Corjuc, B.T., Oakley, D.H., Nobuhara, C.K., Bannon, R.N., Chase,
A., Commins, C., Gonzalez, J.A., Dooley, P.M., Frosch, M.P., and Hyman, B.T.
(2018). Synaptic Tau Seeding Precedes Tau Pathology in Human Alzheimer’s
Disease Brain. Front. Neurosci. 12, 267.
Dixit, R., Ross, J.L., Goldman, Y.E., and Holzbaur, E.L.F. (2008). Differential
regulation of dynein and kinesin motor proteins by tau. Science 319,
1086–1089.
Dominy, S.S., Lynch, C., Ermini, F., Benedyk, M., Marczyk, A., Konradi, A.,
Nguyen, M., Haditsch, U., Raha, D., Grifﬁn, C., et al. (2019). Porphyromonas
gingivalis in Alzheimer’s disease brains: Evidence for disease causation and
treatment with small-molecule inhibitors. Sci Adv 5, eaau3333.
Doody, R.S., Raman, R., Farlow, M., Iwatsubo, T., Vellas, B., Joffe, S.,
Kieburtz, K., He, F., Sun, X., Thomas, R.G., et al.; Alzheimer’s Disease Coop-
erative Study Steering Committee; Semagacestat Study Group (2013). A
phase 3 trial of semagacestat for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl.
J. Med. 369, 341–350.
Doody, R.S., Thomas, R.G., Farlow, M., Iwatsubo, T., Vellas, B., Joffe, S., Kie-
burtz, K., Raman, R., Sun, X., Aisen, P.S., et al.; Alzheimer’s Disease Cooper-
ative Study Steering Committee; Solanezumab Study Group (2014). Phase 3
trials of solanezumab for mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J.
Med. 370, 311–321.
Dumanis, S.B., Tesoriero, J.A., Babus, L.W., Nguyen, M.T., Trotter, J.H., Ladu,
M.J., Weeber, E.J., Turner, R.S., Xu, B., Rebeck, G.W., and Hoe, H.S. (2009).
ApoE4 decreases spine density and dendritic complexity in cortical neurons
in vivo. J. Neurosci. 29, 15317–15322.
Duyckaerts, C., Delatour, B., and Potier, M.-C. (2009). Classiﬁcation and basic
pathology of Alzheimer disease. Acta Neuropathol. 118, 5–36.
Edison, P., Archer, H.A., Hinz, R., Hammers, A., Pavese, N., Tai, Y.F., Hotton,
G., Cutler, D., Fox, N., Kennedy, A., et al. (2007). Amyloid, hypometabolism,
and cognition in Alzheimer disease: an [11C]PIB and [18F]FDG PET study.
Neurology 68, 501–508.
Efthymiou, A.G., and Goate, A.M. (2017). Late onset Alzheimer’s disease
genetics implicates microglial pathways in disease risk. Mol. Neurodegener.
12, 43.
Egan, M.F., Kost, J., Tariot, P.N., Aisen, P.S., Cummings, J.L., Vellas, B., Sur, C.,
Mukai, Y., Voss, T., Furtek, C., et al. (2018). Randomized Trial of Verubecestat for
Mild-to-Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 378, 1691–1703.
Egan, M.F., Kost, J., Voss, T., Mukai, Y., Aisen, P.S., Cummings, J.L., Tariot,
P.N., Vellas, B., van Dyck, C.H., Boada, M., et al. (2019). Randomized Trial
of Verubecestat for Prodromal Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 380,
1408–1420.
Eimer, W.A., Vijaya Kumar, D.K., Navalpur Shanmugam, N.K., Rodriguez, A.S.,
Mitchell, T., Washicosky, K.J., Gyo¨ rgy, B., Breakeﬁeld, X.O., Tanzi, R.E., and
Moir, R.D. (2018). Alzheimer’s Disease-Associated b-Amyloid Is Rapidly Seeded
by Herpesviridae to Protect against Brain Infection. Neuron 99, 56–63.e3.
Eisele, Y.S., Bolmont, T., Heikenwalder, M., Langer, F., Jacobson, L.H., Yan,
Z.-X., Roth, K., Aguzzi, A., Staufenbiel, M., Walker, L.C., and Jucker, M.
(2009). Induction of cerebral beta-amyloidosis: intracerebral versus systemic
Abeta inoculation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 12926–12931.
Eisele, Y.S., Obermu¨ ller, U., Heilbronner, G., Baumann, F., Kaeser, S.A., Wol-
burg, H., Walker, L.C., Staufenbiel, M., Heikenwalder, M., and Jucker, M.
(2010). Peripherally applied Abeta-containing inoculates induce cerebral
beta-amyloidosis. Science 330, 980–982.
Eriksen, J.L., Sagi, S.A., Smith, T.E., Weggen, S., Das, P., McLendon, D.C.,
Ozols, V.V., Jessing, K.W., Zavitz, K.H., Koo, E.H., and Golde, T.E. (2003).
NSAIDs and enantiomers of ﬂurbiprofen target gamma-secretase and lower
Abeta 42 in vivo. J. Clin. Invest. 112, 440–449.
Erny, D., Hrabe de Angelis, A.L., Jaitin, D., Wieghofer, P., Staszewski, O., Da-
vid, E., Keren-Shaul, H., Mahlakoiv, T., Jakobshagen, K., Buch, T., et al. (2015).
Host microbiota constantly control maturation and function of microglia in the
CNS. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 965–977.
Ezzat, K., Pernemalm, M., Pa˚ lsson, S., Roberts, T.C., Ja¨ rver, P., Dondalska, A.,
Bestas, B., Sobkowiak, M.J., Leva¨ nen, B., Sko¨ ld, M., et al. (2019). The viral
protein corona directs viral pathogenesis and amyloid aggregation. Nat. Com-
mun. 10, 2331.
Fagan, A.M., Mintun, M.A., Mach, R.H., Lee, S.-Y., Dence, C.S., Shah, A.R.,
LaRossa, G.N., Spinner, M.L., Klunk, W.E., Mathis, C.A., et al. (2006). Inverse
relation between in vivo amyloid imaging load and cerebrospinal ﬂuid Abeta42
in humans. Ann. Neurol. 59, 512–519.
Fagan, A.M., Roe, C.M., Xiong, C., Mintun, M.A., Morris, J.C., and Holtzman,
D.M. (2007). Cerebrospinal ﬂuid tau/beta-amyloid(42) ratio as a prediction of
cognitive decline in nondemented older adults. Arch. Neurol. 64, 343–349.
Fagan, A.M., Xiong, C., Jasielec, M.S., Bateman, R.J., Goate, A.M., Benzinger,
T.L.S., Ghetti, B., Martins, R.N., Masters, C.L., Mayeux, R., et al.; Dominantly
Inherited Alzheimer Network (2014). Longitudinal change in CSF biomarkers in
autosomal-dominant Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 226ra30.
Feldman, H.H., Doody, R.S., Kivipelto, M., Sparks, D.L., Waters, D.D., Jones,
R.W., Schwam, E., Schindler, R., Hey-Hadavi, J., DeMicco, D.A., and Breazna,
A.; LEADe Investigators (2010). Randomized controlled trial of atorvastatin in
mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: LEADe. Neurology 74, 956–964.
Felsky, D., Roostaei, T., Nho, K., Risacher, S.L., Bradshaw, E.M., Petyuk, V.,
Schneider, J.A., Saykin, A., Bennett, D.A., and De Jager, P.L. (2019). Neuro-
pathological correlates and genetic architecture of microglial activation in
elderly human brain. Nat. Commun. 10, 409.
Finkel, R.S., Mercuri, E., Darras, B.T., Connolly, A.M., Kuntz, N.L., Kirschner,
J., Chiriboga, C.A., Saito, K., Servais, L., Tizzano, E., et al.; ENDEAR Study
Group (2017). Nusinersen versus Sham Control in Infantile-Onset Spinal
Muscular Atrophy. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 1723–1732.
Fitzpatrick, A.W.P., Falcon, B., He, S., Murzin, A.G., Murshudov, G., Garringer,
H.J., Crowther, R.A., Ghetti, B., Goedert, M., and Scheres, S.H.W. (2017).
Cryo-EM structures of tau ﬁlaments from Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 547,
185–190.
Frost, B., Ollesch, J., Wille, H., and Diamond, M.I. (2009). Conformational di-
versity of wild-type Tau ﬁbrils speciﬁed by templated conformation change.
J. Biol. Chem. 284, 3546–3551.
Gale, S.C., Gao, L., Mikacenic, C., Coyle, S.M., Rafaels, N., Murray Dudenkov,
T., Madenspacher, J.H., Draper, D.W., Ge, W., Aloor, J.J., et al. (2014). APOε4
is associated with enhanced in vivo innate immune responses in human sub-
jects. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 134, 127–134.
Gallardo, G., and Holtzman, D.M. (2017). Antibody Therapeutics Targeting Ab
and Tau. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 7, a024331.
Gan, K.J., and Su¨ dhof, T.C. (2019). Speciﬁc factors in blood from young but
not old mice directly promote synapse formation and NMDA-receptor recruit-
ment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116, 12524–12533.
Gauthier, S., Feldman, H.H., Schneider, L.S., Wilcock, G.K., Frisoni, G.B., Har-
dlund, J.H., Moebius, H.J., Bentham, P., Kook, K.A., Wischik, D.J., et al.
(2016). Efﬁcacy and safety of tau-aggregation inhibitor therapy in patients
332
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

with mild or moderate Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, controlled, double-
blind, parallel-arm, phase 3 trial. Lancet 388, 2873–2884.
Gauthier, S., Alam, J., Fillit, H., Iwatsubo, T., Liu-Seifert, H., Sabbagh, M., Sal-
loway, S., Sampaio, C., Sims, J.R., Sperling, B., et al. (2019). Combination
Therapy for Alzheimer’s Disease: Perspectives of the EU/US CTAD Task
Force. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis. 6, 164–168.
Giannakopoulos, P., Herrmann, F.R., Bussie` re, T., Bouras, C., Ko¨ vari, E., Perl,
D.P., Morrison, J.H., Gold, G., and Hof, P.R. (2003). Tangle and neuron
numbers, but not amyloid load, predict cognitive status in Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurology 60, 1495–1500.
Glenner, G.G., and Wong, C.W. (1984). Alzheimer’s disease: initial report of the
puriﬁcation and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 120, 885–890.
Go´ mez-Isla, T., Price, J.L., McKeel, D.W., Jr., Morris, J.C., Growdon, J.H., and
Hyman, B.T. (1996). Profound loss of layer II entorhinal cortex neurons occurs
in very mild Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 16, 4491–4500.
Gordon, B.A., Blazey, T., Su, Y., Fagan, A.M., Holtzman, D.M., Morris, J.C.,
and Benzinger, T.L.S. (2016). Longitudinal b-Amyloid Deposition and Hippo-
campal Volume in Preclinical Alzheimer Disease and Suspected Non-
Alzheimer Disease Pathophysiology. JAMA Neurol. 73, 1192–1200.
Gordon, B.A., Blazey, T.M., Su, Y., Hari-Raj, A., Dincer, A., Flores, S., Christen-
sen, J., McDade, E., Wang, G., Xiong, C., et al. (2018). Spatial patterns of neuro-
imaging biomarker change in individuals from families with autosomal dominant
Alzheimer’s disease: a longitudinal study. Lancet Neurol. 17, 241–250.
Gorno-Tempini, M.L., Brambati, S.M., Ginex, V., Ogar, J., Dronkers, N.F., Mar-
cone, A., Perani, D., Garibotto, V., Cappa, S.F., and Miller, B.L. (2008). The
logopenic/phonological variant of primary progressive aphasia. Neurology
71, 1227–1234.
Go¨ tz, J., Chen, F., van Dorpe, J., and Nitsch, R.M. (2001). Formation of neuro-
ﬁbrillary tangles in P301l tau transgenic mice induced by Abeta 42 ﬁbrils.
Science 293, 1491–1495.
Gratuze, M., Leyns, C.E.G., and Holtzman, D.M. (2018). New insights into the
role of TREM2 in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 13, 66.
Green, R.C., Schneider, L.S., Amato, D.A., Beelen, A.P., Wilcock, G., Swabb,
E.A., and Zavitz, K.H.; Tarenﬂurbil Phase 3 Study Group (2009). Effect of taren-
ﬂurbil on cognitive decline and activities of daily living in patients with mild
Alzheimer disease: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 302, 2557–2564.
Greenamyre, J.T., Maragos, W.F., Albin, R.L., Penney, J.B., and Young, A.B.
(1988). Glutamate transmission and toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease. Prog. Neu-
ropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 12, 421–430.
Gremer, L., Scho¨ lzel, D., Schenk, C., Reinartz, E., Labahn, J., Ravelli, R.B.G.,
Tusche, M., Lopez-Iglesias, C., Hoyer, W., Heise, H., et al. (2017). Fibril struc-
ture of amyloid-b(1-42) by cryo-electron microscopy. Science 358, 116–119.
Griciuc, A., Serrano-Pozo, A., Parrado, A.R., Lesinski, A.N., Asselin, C.N., Mullin,
K., Hooli, B., Choi, S.H., Hyman, B.T., and Tanzi, R.E. (2013). Alzheimer’s disease
risk gene CD33 inhibits microglial uptake of amyloid beta. Neuron 78, 631–643.
Griciuc, A., Patel, S., Federico, A.N., Choi, S.H., Innes, B.J., Oram, M.K., Cer-
eghetti, G., McGinty, D., Anselmo, A., Sadreyev, R.I., et al. (2019). TREM2 Acts
Downstream of CD33 in Modulating Microglial Pathology in Alzheimer’s Dis-
ease. Neuron 103, 820–835.e7.
Grimmer, T., Tholen, S., Youseﬁ, B.H., Alexopoulos, P., Fo¨ rschler, A., Fo¨ rstl,
H., Henriksen, G., Klunk, W.E., Mathis, C.A., Perneczky, R., et al. (2010). Pro-
gression of cerebral amyloid load is associated with the apolipoprotein E ε4
genotype in Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Psychiatry 68, 879–884.
Guo, J.L., Narasimhan, S., Changolkar, L., He, Z., Stieber, A., Zhang, B., Gath-
agan, R.J., Iba, M., McBride, J.D., Trojanowski, J.Q., and Lee, V.M. (2016).
Unique pathological tau conformers from Alzheimer’s brains transmit tau pa-
thology in nontransgenic mice. J. Exp. Med. 213, 2635–2654.
Guo, T., Noble, W., and Hanger, D.P. (2017). Roles of tau protein in health and
disease. Acta Neuropathol. 133, 665–704.
Haass, C., Kaether, C., Thinakaran, G., and Sisodia, S. (2012). Trafﬁcking and
proteolytic processing of APP. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2, a006270.
Halle, A., Hornung, V., Petzold, G.C., Stewart, C.R., Monks, B.G., Reinheckel,
T., Fitzgerald, K.A., Latz, E., Moore, K.J., and Golenbock, D.T. (2008). The
NALP3 inﬂammasome is involved in the innate immune response to amy-
loid-beta. Nat. Immunol. 9, 857–865.
Han, J.-Y., Besser, L.M., Xiong, C., Kukull, W.A., and Morris, J.C. (2019).
Cholinesterase Inhibitors May Not Beneﬁt Mild Cognitive Impairment and
Mild Alzheimer Disease Dementia. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 33, 87–94.
Hanseeuw, B.J., Betensky, R.A., Jacobs, H.I.L., Schultz, A.P., Sepulcre, J.,
Becker, J.A., Cosio, D.M.O., Farrell, M., Quiroz, Y.T., Mormino, E.C., et al.
(2019). Association of Amyloid and Tau With Cognition in Preclinical Alzheimer
Disease: A Longitudinal Study. JAMA Neurol. Published online June 3, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.1424.
Hara, Y., McKeehan, N., and Fillit, H.M. (2019). Translating the biology of aging
into novel therapeutics for Alzheimer disease. Neurology 92, 84–93.
Hardy, J.A., and Higgins, G.A. (1992). Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid
cascade hypothesis. Science 256, 184–185.
Harrington, C., Sawchak, S., Chiang, C., Davies, J., Donovan, C., Saunders,
A.M., Irizarry, M., Jeter, B., Zvartau-Hind, M., van Dyck, C.H., and Gold, M.
(2011). Rosiglitazone does not improve cognition or global function when
used as adjunctive therapy to AChE inhibitors in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s
disease: two phase 3 studies. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 8, 592–606.
He, Z., Guo, J.L., McBride, J.D., Narasimhan, S., Kim, H., Changolkar, L.,
Zhang, B., Gathagan, R.J., Yue, C., Dengler, C., et al. (2018). Amyloid-b pla-
ques enhance Alzheimer’s brain tau-seeded pathologies by facilitating neuritic
plaque tau aggregation. Nat. Med. 24, 29–38.
Heckmann, B.L., Teubner, B.J.W., Tummers, B., Boada-Romero, E., Harris, L.,
Yang, M., Guy, C.S., Zakharenko, S.S., and Green, D.R. (2019). LC3-Associ-
ated Endocytosis Facilitates b-Amyloid Clearance and Mitigates Neurodegen-
eration in Murine Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell.
Heneka, M.T., Kummer, M.P., Stutz, A., Delekate, A., Schwartz, S., Vieira-
Saecker, A., Griep, A., Axt, D., Remus, A., Tzeng, T.-C., et al. (2013). NLRP3
is activated in Alzheimer’s disease and contributes to pathology in APP/PS1
mice. Nature 493, 674–678.
Henley, D., Raghavan, N., Sperling, R., Aisen, P., Raman, R., and Romano, G.
(2019). Preliminary Results of a Trial of Atabecestat in Preclinical Alzheimer’s
Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 380, 1483–1485.
Hitt, B.D., Jaramillo, T.C., Chetkovich, D.M., and Vassar, R. (2010). BACE1-/-
mice exhibit seizure activity that does not correlate with sodium channel level
or axonal localization. Mol. Neurodegener. 5, 31.
Holth, J.K., Fritschi, S.K., Wang, C., Pedersen, N.P., Cirrito, J.R., Mahan, T.E.,
Finn, M.B., Manis, M., Geerling, J.C., Fuller, P.M., et al. (2019). The sleep-wake
cycle regulates brain interstitial ﬂuid tau in mice and CSF tau in humans. Sci-
ence eaav2546.
Holtzman, D.M., Pitas, R.E., Kilbridge, J., Nathan, B., Mahley, R.W., Bu, G.,
and Schwartz, A.L. (1995). Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein
mediates apolipoprotein E-dependent neurite outgrowth in a central nervous
system-derived neuronal cell line. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 9480–9484.
Hong, S., Beja-Glasser, V.F., Nfonoyim, B.M., Frouin, A., Li, S., Ramakrishnan,
S., Merry, K.M., Shi, Q., Rosenthal, A., Barres, B.A., et al. (2016). Complement
and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science
352, 712–716.
Honig, L.S., Vellas, B., Woodward, M., Boada, M., Bullock, R., Borrie, M.,
Hager, K., Andreasen, N., Scarpini, E., Liu-Seifert, H., et al. (2018). Trial of
Solanezumab for Mild Dementia Due to Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J.
Med. 378, 321–330.
Hoover, B.R., Reed, M.N., Su, J., Penrod, R.D., Kotilinek, L.A., Grant, M.K., Pit-
stick, R., Carlson, G.A., Lanier, L.M., Yuan, L.-L., et al. (2010). Tau mislocaliza-
tion to dendritic spines mediates synaptic dysfunction independently of neuro-
degeneration. Neuron 68, 1067–1081.
Hu, J., Liu, C.-C., Chen, X.-F., Zhang, Y.-W., Xu, H., and Bu, G. (2015).
Opposing effects of viral mediated brain expression of apolipoprotein E2
(apoE2) and apoE4 on apoE lipidation and Ab metabolism in apoE4-targeted
replacement mice. Mol. Neurodegener. 10, 6.
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
333

Huang, Y.A., Zhou, B., Wernig, M., and Su¨ dhof, T.C. (2017). ApoE2, ApoE3,
and ApoE4 Differentially Stimulate APP Transcription and Ab Secretion. Cell
168, 427–441.e21.
Hudry, E., Dashkoff, J., Roe, A.D., Takeda, S., Kofﬁe, R.M., Hashimoto, T.,
Scheel, M., Spires-Jones, T., Arbel-Ornath, M., Betensky, R., et al. (2013).
Gene transfer of human Apoe isoforms results in differential modulation of am-
yloid deposition and neurotoxicity in mouse brain. Sci. Transl. Med. 5,
212ra161.
Hunter, J.M., Cirrito, J.R., Restivo, J.L., Kinley, R.D., Sullivan, P.M., Holtzman,
D.M., Koger, D., Delong, C., Lin, S., Zhao, L., et al. (2012). Emergence of a
seizure phenotype in aged apolipoprotein epsilon 4 targeted replacement
mice. Brain Res. 1467, 120–132.
Hurtado, D.E., Molina-Porcel, L., Iba, M., Aboagye, A.K., Paul, S.M., Trojanow-
ski, J.Q., and Lee, V.M.-Y. (2010). Abeta accelerates the spatiotemporal pro-
gression of tau pathology and augments tau amyloidosis in an Alzheimer
mouse model. Am. J. Pathol. 177, 1977–1988.
Huynh, T.V., Davis, A.A., Ulrich, J.D., and Holtzman, D.M. (2017a). Apolipopro-
tein E and Alzheimer’s disease: the inﬂuence of apolipoprotein E on amyloid-b
and other amyloidogenic proteins. J. Lipid Res. 58, 824–836.
Huynh, T.V., Liao, F., Francis, C.M., Robinson, G.O., Serrano, J.R., Jiang, H.,
Roh, J., Finn, M.B., Sullivan, P.M., Esparza, T.J., et al. (2017b). Age-Depen-
dent Effects of apoE Reduction Using Antisense Oligonucleotides in a Model
of b-amyloidosis. Neuron 96, 1013–1023.e4.
Iba, M., Guo, J.L., McBride, J.D., Zhang, B., Trojanowski, J.Q., and Lee,
V.M.-Y. (2013). Synthetic tau ﬁbrils mediate transmission of neuroﬁbrillary tan-
gles in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s-like tauopathy. J. Neurosci.
33, 1024–1037.
Iliff, J.J., Wang, M., Liao, Y., Plogg, B.A., Peng, W., Gundersen, G.A., Benve-
niste, H., Vates, G.E., Deane, R., Goldman, S.A., et al. (2012). A paravascular
pathway facilitates CSF ﬂow through the brain parenchyma and the clearance
of interstitial solutes, including amyloid b. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 147ra111.
in t’ Veld, B.A., Ruitenberg, A., Hofman, A., Launer, L.J., van Duijn, C.M., Stij-
nen, T., Breteler, M.M., and Stricker, B.H. (2001). Nonsteroidal antiinﬂamma-
tory drugs and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 345,
1515–1521.
Jack, C.R., Jr., and Holtzman, D.M. (2013). Biomarker modeling of Alzheimer’s
disease. Neuron 80, 1347–1358.
Jack, C.R., Jr., Bennett, D.A., Blennow, K., Carrillo, M.C., Dunn, B., Haeber-
lein, S.B., Holtzman, D.M., Jagust, W., Jessen, F., Karlawish, J., et al.; Contrib-
utors (2018a). NIA-AA Research Framework: Toward a biological deﬁnition of
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 14, 535–562.
Jack, C.R., Jr., Wiste, H.J., Schwarz, C.G., Lowe, V.J., Senjem, M.L., Vemuri,
P., Weigand, S.D., Therneau, T.M., Knopman, D.S., Gunter, J.L., et al. (2018b).
Longitudinal tau PET in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 141,
1517–1528.
Jamieson, G.A., Maitland, N.J., Wilcock, G.K., Craske, J., and Itzhaki, R.F.
(1991). Latent herpes simplex virus type 1 in normal and Alzheimer’s disease
brains. J. Med. Virol. 33, 224–227.
Jamieson, G.A., Maitland, N.J., Wilcock, G.K., Yates, C.M., and Itzhaki, R.F.
(1992). Herpes simplex virus type 1 DNA is present in speciﬁc regions of brain
from aged people with and without senile dementia of the Alzheimer type.
J. Pathol. 167, 365–368.
Jaunmuktane, Z., Mead, S., Ellis, M., Wadsworth, J.D.F., Nicoll, A.J., Kenny,
J., Launchbury, F., Linehan, J., Richard-Loendt, A., Walker, A.S., et al.
(2015). Evidence for human transmission of amyloid-b pathology and cerebral
amyloid angiopathy. Nature 525, 247–250.
Jiang, Q., Lee, C.Y.D., Mandrekar, S., Wilkinson, B., Cramer, P., Zelcer, N.,
Mann, K., Lamb, B., Willson, T.M., Collins, J.L., et al. (2008). ApoE promotes
the proteolytic degradation of Abeta. Neuron 58, 681–693.
Jonsson, T., Atwal, J.K., Steinberg, S., Snaedal, J., Jonsson, P.V., Bjornsson,
S., Stefansson, H., Sulem, P., Gudbjartsson, D., Maloney, J., et al. (2012). A
mutation in APP protects against Alzheimer’s disease and age-related cogni-
tive decline. Nature 488, 96–99.
Ju, Y.S., Ooms, S.J., Sutphen, C., Macauley, S.L., Zangrilli, M.A., Jerome, G.,
Fagan, A.M., Mignot, E., Zempel, J.M., Claassen, J.A.H.R., and Holtzman,
D.M. (2017). Slow wave sleep disruption increases cerebrospinal ﬂuid amy-
loid-b levels. Brain 140, 2104–2111.
Kamenetz, F., Tomita, T., Hsieh, H., Seabrook, G., Borchelt, D., Iwatsubo, T.,
Sisodia, S., and Malinow, R. (2003). APP processing and synaptic function.
Neuron 37, 925–937.
Kang, J.-E., Lim, M.M., Bateman, R.J., Lee, J.J., Smyth, L.P., Cirrito, J.R.,
Fujiki, N., Nishino, S., and Holtzman, D.M. (2009). Amyloid-beta dynamics
are regulated by orexin and the sleep-wake cycle. Science 326, 1005–1007.
Karch, C.M., and Goate, A.M. (2015). Alzheimer’s disease risk genes and
mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. Biol. Psychiatry 77, 43–51.
Karran, E., and Hardy, J. (2014). A critique of the drug discovery and phase 3
clinical programs targeting the amyloid hypothesis for Alzheimer disease. Ann.
Neurol. 76, 185–205.
Karran, E., Mercken, M., and De Strooper, B. (2011). The amyloid cascade hy-
pothesis for Alzheimer’s disease: an appraisal for the development of thera-
peutics. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 698–712.
Katsimpardi, L., Litterman, N.K., Schein, P.A., Miller, C.M., Loffredo, F.S.,
Wojtkiewicz, G.R., Chen, J.W., Lee, R.T., Wagers, A.J., and Rubin, L.L.
(2014). Vascular and neurogenic rejuvenation of the aging mouse brain by
young systemic factors. Science 344, 630–634.
Keren-Shaul, H., Spinrad, A., Weiner, A., Matcovitch-Natan, O., Dvir-Sztern-
feld, R., Ulland, T.K., David, E., Baruch, K., Lara-Astaiso, D., Toth, B., et al.
(2017). A Unique Microglia Type Associated with Restricting Development of
Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290.e17.
Kheifets, V., and Braithwaite, S.P. (2019). Plasma-Based Strategies for Thera-
peutic Modulation of Brain Aging. Neurotherapeutics 16, 675–684.
Kidd, M. (1963). Paired helical ﬁlaments in electron microscopy of Alzheimer’s
disease. Nature 197, 192–193.
Kim, J., Jiang, H., Park, S., Eltorai, A.E.M., Stewart, F.R., Yoon, H., Basak,
J.M., Finn, M.B., and Holtzman, D.M. (2011). Haploinsufﬁciency of human
APOE reduces amyloid deposition in a mouse model of amyloid-b amyloid-
osis. J. Neurosci. 31, 18007–18012.
Kim, J., Eltorai, A.E.M., Jiang, H., Liao, F., Verghese, P.B., Kim, J., Stewart,
F.R., Basak, J.M., and Holtzman, D.M. (2012). Anti-apoE immunotherapy in-
hibits amyloid accumulation in a transgenic mouse model of Ab amyloidosis.
J. Exp. Med. 209, 2149–2156.
Kinney, J.W., Bemiller, S.M., Murtishaw, A.S., Leisgang, A.M., Salazar, A.M.,
and Lamb, B.T. (2018). Inﬂammation as a central mechanism in Alzheimer’s
disease. Alzheimers Dement. (N. Y.) 4, 575–590.
Knoferle, J., Yoon, S.Y., Walker, D., Leung, L., Gillespie, A.K., Tong, L.M., Bien-
Ly, N., and Huang, Y. (2014). Apolipoprotein E4 produced in GABAergic inter-
neurons causes learning and memory deﬁcits in mice. J. Neurosci. 34,
14069–14078.
Krasemann, S., Madore, C., Cialic, R., Baufeld, C., Calcagno, N., El Fatimy, R.,
Beckers, L., O’Loughlin, E., Xu, Y., Fanek, Z., et al. (2017). The TREM2-APOE
Pathway Drives the Transcriptional Phenotype of Dysfunctional Microglia in
Neurodegenerative Diseases. Immunity 47, 566–581.e9.
Kumar, D.K.V., Choi, S.H., Washicosky, K.J., Eimer, W.A., Tucker, S., Gho-
frani, J., Lefkowitz, A., McColl, G., Goldstein, L.E., Tanzi, R.E., and Moir,
R.D. (2016). Amyloid-b peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse
and worm models of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 340ra72.
Kunkle, B.W., Grenier-Boley, B., Sims, R., Bis, J.C., Damotte, V., Naj, A.C., Bo-
land, A., Vronskaya, M., van der Lee, S.J., Amlie-Wolf, A., et al.; Alzheimer Dis-
ease Genetics Consortium (ADGC); European Alzheimer’s Disease Initiative
(EADI); Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology Con-
sortium (CHARGE); Genetic and Environmental Risk in AD/Deﬁning Genetic,
Polygenic and Environmental Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease Consortium
(GERAD/PERADES) (2019). Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed Alzheimer’s
disease identiﬁes new risk loci and implicates Ab, tau, immunity and lipid pro-
cessing. Nat. Genet. 51, 414–430.
334
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

Lacosta, A.-M., Pascual-Lucas, M., Pesini, P., Casabona, D., Pe´ rez-Grijalba,
V., Marcos-Campos, I., Sarasa, L., Canudas, J., Badi, H., Monleo´ n, I., et al.
(2018). Safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of an active anti-Ab40 vaccine
(ABvac40) in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, phase I trial. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 10, 12.
Laird, F.M., Cai, H., Savonenko, A.V., Farah, M.H., He, K., Melnikova, T., Wen,
H., Chiang, H.-C., Xu, G., Koliatsos, V.E., et al. (2005). BACE1, a major deter-
minant of selective vulnerability of the brain to amyloid-beta amyloidogenesis,
is essential for cognitive, emotional, and synaptic functions. J. Neurosci. 25,
11693–11709.
Lawlor, B., Segurado, R., Kennelly, S., Olde Rikkert, M.G.M., Howard, R., Pas-
quier, F., Bo¨ rjesson-Hanson, A., Tsolaki, M., Lucca, U., Molloy, D.W., et al.;
NILVAD Study Group (2018). Nilvadipine in mild to moderate Alzheimer dis-
ease: A randomised controlled trial. PLoS Med. 15, e1002660.
Lewis, J., Dickson, D.W., Lin, W.L., Chisholm, L., Corral, A., Jones, G., Yen,
S.H., Sahara, N., Skipper, L., Yager, D., et al. (2001). Enhanced neuroﬁbrillary
degeneration in transgenic mice expressing mutant tau and APP. Science 293,
1487–1491.
Leyns, C.E.G., Ulrich, J.D., Finn, M.B., Stewart, F.R., Koscal, L.J., Remolina
Serrano, J., Robinson, G.O., Anderson, E., Colonna, M., and Holtzman, D.M.
(2017). TREM2 deﬁciency attenuates neuroinﬂammation and protects against
neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
114, 11524–11529.
Leyns, C.E.G., Gratuze, M., Narasimhan, S., Jain, N., Koscal, L.J., Jiang, H.,
Manis, M., Colonna, M., Lee, V.M.Y., Ulrich, J.D., and Holtzman, D.M.
(2019). TREM2 function impedes tau seeding in neuritic plaques. Nat. Neuro-
sci. 22, 1217–1222.
Liao, F., Hori, Y., Hudry, E., Bauer, A.Q., Jiang, H., Mahan, T.E., Lefton, K.B.,
Zhang, T.J., Dearborn, J.T., Kim, J., et al. (2014). Anti-ApoE antibody given af-
ter plaque onset decreases Ab accumulation and improves brain function in a
mouse model of Ab amyloidosis. J. Neurosci. 34, 7281–7292.
Liao, F., Li, A., Xiong, M., Bien-Ly, N., Jiang, H., Zhang, Y., Finn, M.B., Hoyle,
R., Keyser, J., Lefton, K.B., et al. (2018). Targeting of nonlipidated, aggregated
apoE with antibodies inhibits amyloid accumulation. J. Clin. Invest. 128,
2144–2155.
Liddelow, S.A., Guttenplan, K.A., Clarke, L.E., Bennett, F.C., Bohlen, C.J.,
Schirmer, L., Bennett, M.L., Mu¨ nch, A.E., Chung, W.-S., Peterson, T.C.,
et al. (2017). Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated micro-
glia. Nature 541, 481–487.
Lippens, G., and Gigant, B. (2019). Elucidating Tau function and dysfunction in
the era of cryo-EM. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 9316–9325.
Liu, L., Drouet, V., Wu, J.W., Witter, M.P., Small, S.A., Clelland, C., and Duff, K.
(2012). Trans-synaptic spread of tau pathology in vivo. PLoS ONE 7, e31302.
Liu, C.-C., Zhao, N., Fu, Y., Wang, N., Linares, C., Tsai, C.-W., and Bu, G.
(2017). ApoE4 Accelerates Early Seeding of Amyloid Pathology. Neuron 96,
1024–1032.e3.
Liu, L., Ding, L., Rovere, M., Wolfe, M.S., and Selkoe, D.J. (2019). A cellular
complex of BACE1 and g-secretase sequentially generates Ab from its full-
length precursor. J. Cell Biol. 218, 644–663.
Livingston, G., Sommerlad, A., Orgeta, V., Costafreda, S.G., Huntley, J., Ames,
D., Ballard, C., Banerjee, S., Burns, A., Cohen-Mansﬁeld, J., et al. (2017).
Dementia prevention, intervention, and care. Lancet 390, 2673–2734.
Logovinsky, V., Satlin, A., Lai, R., Swanson, C., Kaplow, J., Osswald, G.,
Basun, H., and Lannfelt, L. (2016). Safety and tolerability of BAN2401–a clinical
study in Alzheimer’s disease with a protoﬁbril selective Ab antibody.
Alzheimers Res. Ther. 8, 14.
Lopez Lopez, C., Tariot, P.N., Caputo, A., Langbaum, J.B., Liu, F., Riviere,
M.-E., Langlois, C., Rouzade-Dominguez, M.-L., Zalesak, M., Hendrix, S.,
et al. (2019). The Alzheimer’s Prevention Initiative Generation Program: Study
design of two randomized controlled trials for individuals at risk for clinical
onset of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. (N. Y.) 5, 216–227.
Lovestone, S., Boada, M., Dubois, B., Hu¨ ll, M., Rinne, J.O., Huppertz, H.-J.,
Calero, M., Andre´ s, M.V., Go´ mez-Carrillo, B., Leo´ n, T., and del Ser, T.;
ARGO investigators (2015). A phase II trial of tideglusib in Alzheimer’s disease.
J. Alzheimers Dis. 45, 75–88.
Lowe, V.J., Lundt, E.S., Albertson, S.M., Przybelski, S.A., Senjem, M.L., Parisi,
J.E., Kantarci, K., Boeve, B., Jones, D.T., Knopman, D., et al. (2019). Neuroi-
maging correlates with neuropathologic schemes in neurodegenerative dis-
ease. Alzheimers Dement. 15, 927–939.
Lucey, B.P., Hicks, T.J., McLeland, J.S., Toedebusch, C.D., Boyd, J., Elbert,
D.L., Patterson, B.W., Baty, J., Morris, J.C., Ovod, V., et al. (2018). Effect of
sleep on overnight cerebrospinal ﬂuid amyloid b kinetics. Ann. Neurol. 83,
197–204.
Mandelkow, E., von Bergen, M., Biernat, J., and Mandelkow, E.-M. (2007).
Structural principles of tau and the paired helical ﬁlaments of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Brain Pathol. 17, 83–90.
Marcelli, S., Corbo, M., Iannuzzi, F., Negri, L., Blandini, F., Nistico, R., and
Feligioni, M. (2018). The Involvement of Post-Translational Modiﬁcations in
Alzheimer’s Disease. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 15, 313–335.
Martiskainen, H., Herukka, S.-K., Stanca´ kova´ , A., Paananen, J., Soininen, H.,
Kuusisto, J., Laakso, M., and Hiltunen, M. (2017). Decreased plasma b-amy-
loid in the Alzheimer’s disease APP A673T variant carriers. Ann. Neurol. 82,
128–132.
Masters, C.L., and Selkoe, D.J. (2012). Biochemistry of amyloid b-protein and
amyloid deposits in Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2,
a006262.
Masters, C.L., Simms, G., Weinman, N.A., Multhaup, G., McDonald, B.L., and
Beyreuther, K. (1985). Amyloid plaque core protein in Alzheimer disease and
Down syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82, 4245–4249.
Matarin, M., Salih, D.A., Yasvoina, M., Cummings, D.M., Guelﬁ, S., Liu, W., Na-
haboo Solim, M.A., Moens, T.G., Paublete, R.M., Ali, S.S., et al. (2015). A
genome-wide gene-expression analysis and database in transgenic mice dur-
ing development of amyloid or tau pathology. Cell Rep. 10, 633–644.
Mathys, H., Davila-Velderrain, J., Peng, Z., Gao, F., Mohammadi, S., Young,
J.Z., Menon, M., He, L., Abdurrob, F., Jiang, X., et al. (2019). Single-cell tran-
scriptomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 570, 332–337.
Mattsson, N., Cullen, N.C., Andreasson, U., Zetterberg, H., and Blennow, K.
(2019). Association Between Longitudinal Plasma Neuroﬁlament Light and
Neurodegeneration in Patients With Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Neurol. 76,
791–799.
McKhann, G.M., Knopman, D.S., Chertkow, H., Hyman, B.T., Jack, C.R., Jr.,
Kawas, C.H., Klunk, W.E., Koroshetz, W.J., Manly, J.J., Mayeux, R., et al.
(2011). The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommenda-
tions from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups
on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 7,
263–269.
McShane, R., Areosa Sastre, A., and Minakaran, N. (2006). Memantine for de-
mentia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. (2), CD003154.
Meyer, P.-F., Tremblay-Mercier, J., Leoutsakos, J., Madjar, C., Lafaille-
Maignan, M.-E´ ., Savard, M., Rosa-Neto, P., Poirier, J., Etienne, P., and Breit-
ner, J.; PREVENT-AD Research Group (2019). INTREPAD: A randomized trial
of naproxen to slow progress of presymptomatic Alzheimer disease.
Neurology 92, e2070–e2080.
Middeldorp, J., Lehallier, B., Villeda, S.A., Miedema, S.S.M., Evans, E., Czirr,
E., Zhang, H., Luo, J., Stan, T., Mosher, K.I., et al. (2016). Preclinical Assess-
ment of Young Blood Plasma for Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Neurol. 73,
1325–1333.
Mielke, M.M., Syrjanen, J.A., Blennow, K., Zetterberg, H., Vemuri, P., Skoog, I.,
Machulda, M.M., Kremers, W.K., Knopman, D.S., Jack, C., Jr., et al. (2019).
Plasma and CSF neuroﬁlament light: Relation to longitudinal neuroimaging
and cognitive measures. Neurology 93, e252–e260.
Min, S.-W., Cho, S.-H., Zhou, Y., Schroeder, S., Haroutunian, V., Seeley, W.W.,
Huang, E.J., Shen, Y., Masliah, E., Mukherjee, C., et al. (2010). Acetylation of
tau inhibits its degradation and contributes to tauopathy. Neuron 67, 953–966.
Minter, M.R., Zhang, C., Leone, V., Ringus, D.L., Zhang, X., Oyler-Castrillo, P.,
Musch, M.W., Liao, F., Ward, J.F., Holtzman, D.M., et al. (2016). Antibiotic-
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
335

induced perturbations in gut microbial diversity inﬂuences neuro-inﬂammation
and amyloidosis in a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 6, 30028.
Mishra, S., Blazey, T.M., Holtzman, D.M., Cruchaga, C., Su, Y., Morris, J.C.,
Benzinger, T.L.S., and Gordon, B.A. (2018). Longitudinal brain imaging in
preclinical Alzheimer disease: impact of APOE ε4 genotype. Brain 141,
1828–1839.
Moir, R.D., Lathe, R., and Tanzi, R.E. (2018). The antimicrobial protection hy-
pothesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 14, 1602–1614.
Morris, J.C. (1997). Clinical dementia rating: a reliable and valid diagnostic and
staging measure for dementia of the Alzheimer type. Int. Psychogeriatr. 9
(Suppl 1), 173–176, discussion 177–178.
Morris, J.C. (2019). Editorial: Is Now the Time for Combination Therapies for
Alzheimer Disease? J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis. 6, 153–154.
Morris, J.C., Roe, C.M., Grant, E.A., Head, D., Storandt, M., Goate, A.M., Fa-
gan, A.M., Holtzman, D.M., and Mintun, M.A. (2009). Pittsburgh compound B
imaging and prediction of progression from cognitive normality to symptom-
atic Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol. 66, 1469–1475.
Morris, J.C., Roe, C.M., Xiong, C., Fagan, A.M., Goate, A.M., Holtzman, D.M.,
and Mintun, M.A. (2010). APOE predicts amyloid-beta but not tau Alzheimer
pathology in cognitively normal aging. Ann. Neurol. 67, 122–131.
Musiek, E.S., and Holtzman, D.M. (2015). Three dimensions of the amyloid hy-
pothesis: time, space and ‘wingmen’. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 800–806.
Najm, R., Jones, E.A., and Huang, Y. (2019). Apolipoprotein E4, inhibitory
network dysfunction, and Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 14, 24.
Nakamura, A., Kaneko, N., Villemagne, V.L., Kato, T., Doecke, J., Dore´ , V.,
Fowler,
C.,
Li,
Q.-X.,
Martins,
R.,
Rowe,
C.,
et
al.
(2018).
High
performance plasma amyloid-b biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. Nature
554, 249–254.
Namba, Y., Tomonaga, M., Kawasaki, H., Otomo, E., and Ikeda, K. (1991).
Apolipoprotein E immunoreactivity in cerebral amyloid deposits and neuroﬁ-
brillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease and kuru plaque amyloid in Creutz-
feldt-Jakob disease. Brain Res. 541, 163–166.
Nathan, B.P., Bellosta, S., Sanan, D.A., Weisgraber, K.H., Mahley, R.W., and
Pitas, R.E. (1994). Differential effects of apolipoproteins E3 and E4 on neuronal
growth in vitro. Science 264, 850–852.
Nelson, P.T., Alafuzoff, I., Bigio, E.H., Bouras, C., Braak, H., Cairns, N.J., Cas-
tellani, R.J., Crain, B.J., Davies, P., Del Tredici, K., et al. (2012). Correlation of
Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of
the literature. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 71, 362–381.
Nicoll, J.A.R., Buckland, G.R., Harrison, C.H., Page, A., Harris, S., Love, S.,
Neal, J.W., Holmes, C., and Boche, D. (2019). Persistent neuropathological ef-
fects 14 years following amyloid-b immunization in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain,
2113–2126.
Nortley, R., Korte, N., Izquierdo, P., Hirunpattarasilp, C., Mishra, A., Jaunmuk-
tane, Z., Kyrargyri, V., Pfeiffer, T., Khennouf, L., Madry, C., et al. (2019). Amy-
loid b oligomers constrict human capillaries in Alzheimer’s disease via
signaling to pericytes. Science 365, eaav9518.
Novak,P.,Zilka,N.,Zilkova,M., Kovacech,B., Skrabana,R., Ondrus,M.,Fialova,
L., Kontsekova, E., Otto, M., and Novak, M. (2019). AADvac1, an Active Immuno-
therapy for Alzheimer’s Disease and Non Alzheimer Tauopathies: An Overview of
Preclinical and Clinical Development. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis. 6, 63–69.
Nuriel, T., Angulo, S.L., Khan, U., Ashok, A., Chen, Q., Figueroa, H.Y., Emrani,
S., Liu, L., Herman, M., Barrett, G., et al. (2017). Neuronal hyperactivity due to
loss of inhibitory tone in APOE4 mice lacking Alzheimer’s disease-like pathol-
ogy. Nat. Commun. 8, 1464.
Okochi, M., Tagami, S., Yanagida, K., Takami, M., Kodama, T.S., Mori, K.,
Nakayama, T., Ihara, Y., and Takeda, M. (2013). g-secretase modulators and
presenilin 1 mutants act differently on presenilin/g-secretase function to
cleave Ab42 and Ab43. Cell Rep. 3, 42–51.
Olsson, M., A¨ rlig, J., Hedner, J., Blennow, K., and Zetterberg, H. (2018). Sleep
deprivation and cerebrospinal ﬂuid biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. Sleep
(Basel) 41.. https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsy025.
Ooms, S., Overeem, S., Besse, K., Rikkert, M.O., Verbeek, M., and Claassen,
J.A.H.R. (2014). Effect of 1 night of total sleep deprivation on cerebrospinal
ﬂuid b-amyloid 42 in healthy middle-aged men: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Neurol. 71, 971–977.
Ossenkoppele, R., Pijnenburg, Y.A.L., Perry, D.C., Cohn-Sheehy, B.I., Schel-
tens, N.M.E., Vogel, J.W., Kramer, J.H., van der Vlies, A.E., La Joie, R., Rosen,
H.J., et al. (2015). The behavioural/dysexecutive variant of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease: clinical, neuroimaging and pathological features. Brain 138, 2732–2749.
Ostrowitzki, S., Lasser, R.A., Dorﬂinger, E., Scheltens, P., Barkhof, F., Nikol-
cheva, T., Ashford, E., Retout, S., Hofmann, C., Delmar, P., et al.; SCarlet
RoAD Investigators (2017). A phase III randomized trial of gantenerumab in
prodromal Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 9, 95.
Ou-Yang, M.-H., Kurz, J.E., Nomura, T., Popovic, J., Rajapaksha, T.W., Dong,
H., Contractor, A., Chetkovich, D.M., Tourtellotte, W.G., and Vassar, R. (2018).
Axonal organization defects in the hippocampus of adult conditional BACE1
knockout mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao5620.
Ovod, V., Ramsey, K.N., Mawuenyega, K.G., Bollinger, J.G., Hicks, T.,
Schneider, T., Sullivan, M., Paumier, K., Holtzman, D.M., Morris, J.C., et al.
(2017). Amyloid b concentrations and stable isotope labeling kinetics of human
plasma speciﬁc to central nervous system amyloidosis. Alzheimers Dement.
13, 841–849.
Palmqvist, S., Janelidze, S., Stomrud, E., Zetterberg, H., Karl, J., Zink, K., Bitt-
ner, T., Mattsson, N., Eichenlaub, U., Blennow, K., and Hansson, O. (2019).
Performance of Fully Automated Plasma Assays as Screening Tests for Alz-
heimer Disease-Related b-Amyloid Status. JAMA Neurol. Published online
June 24, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.1632.
Panza, F., Lozupone, M., Solfrizzi, V., Sardone, R., Piccininni, C., Dibello, V.,
Stallone, R., Giannelli, G., Bellomo, A., Greco, A., et al. (2018). BACE inhibitors
in clinical development for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Expert Rev.
Neurother. 18, 847–857.
Parhizkar, S., Arzberger, T., Brendel, M., Kleinberger, G., Deussing, M., Focke,
C., Nuscher, B., Xiong, M., Ghasemigharagoz, A., Katzmarski, N., et al. (2019).
Loss of TREM2 function increases amyloid seeding but reduces plaque-asso-
ciated ApoE. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 191–204.
Pascoal, T.A., Mathotaarachchi, S., Kang, M.S., Mohaddes, S., Shin, M., Park,
A.Y., Parent, M.J., Benedet, A.L., Chamoun, M., Therriault, J., et al. (2019).
Ab-induced vulnerability propagates via the brain’s default mode network.
Nat. Commun. 10, 2353.
Peters, F., Salihoglu, H., Rodrigues, E., Herzog, E., Blume, T., Filser, S., Dor-
ostkar, M., Shimshek, D.R., Brose, N., Neumann, U., and Herms, J. (2018).
BACE1 inhibition more effectively suppresses initiation than progression of
b-amyloid pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 135, 695–710.
Pontecorvo, M.J., Devous, M.D., Kennedy, I., Navitsky, M., Lu, M., Galante, N.,
Salloway, S., Doraiswamy, P.M., Southekal, S., Arora, A.K., et al. (2019). A mul-
ticentre longitudinal study of ﬂortaucipir (18F) in normal ageing, mild cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease dementia. Brain 142, 1723–1735.
Pooler, A.M., Polydoro, M., Maury, E.A., Nicholls, S.B., Reddy, S.M., Weg-
mann, S., William, C., Saqran, L., Cagsal-Getkin, O., Pitstick, R., et al.
(2015). Amyloid accelerates tau propagation and toxicity in a model of early
Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 3, 14.
Preische, O., Schultz, S.A., Apel, A., Kuhle, J., Kaeser, S.A., Barro, C., Gra¨ ber,
S., Kuder-Buletta, E., LaFougere, C., Laske, C., et al.; Dominantly Inherited
Alzheimer Network (2019). Serum neuroﬁlament dynamics predicts neurode-
generation and clinical progression in presymptomatic Alzheimer’s disease.
Nat. Med. 25, 277–283.
Price, J.L., and Morris, J.C. (1999). Tangles and plaques in nondemented ag-
ing and ‘‘preclinical’’ Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 45, 358–368.
Price, J.L., McKeel, D.W., Jr., Buckles, V.D., Roe, C.M., Xiong, C., Grundman,
M., Hansen, L.A., Petersen, R.C., Parisi, J.E., Dickson, D.W., et al. (2009).
Neuropathology of nondemented aging: presumptive evidence for preclinical
Alzheimer disease. Neurobiol. Aging 30, 1026–1036.
Purro, S.A., Farrow, M.A., Linehan, J., Nazari, T., Thomas, D.X., Chen, Z., Men-
gel, D., Saito, T., Saido, T., Rudge, P., et al. (2018). Transmission of amyloid-b
336
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

protein pathology from cadaveric pituitary growth hormone. Nature 564,
415–419.
Qi, Y., Klyubin, I., Cuello, A.C., and Rowan, M.J. (2018). NLRP3-dependent
synaptic plasticity deﬁcit in an Alzheimer’s disease amyloidosis model in vivo.
Neurobiol. Dis. 114, 24–30.
Rajapaksha, T.W., Eimer, W.A., Bozza, T.C., and Vassar, R. (2011). The
Alzheimer’s b-secretase enzyme BACE1 is required for accurate axon guid-
ance of olfactory sensory neurons and normal glomerulus formation in the ol-
factory bulb. Mol. Neurodegener. 6, 88.
Readhead, B., Haure-Mirande, J.-V., Funk, C.C., Richards, M.A., Shannon, P.,
Haroutunian, V., Sano, M., Liang, W.S., Beckmann, N.D., Price, N.D., et al.
(2018). Multiscale Analysis of Independent Alzheimer’s Cohorts Finds Disrup-
tion of Molecular, Genetic, and Clinical Networks by Human Herpesvirus.
Neuron 99, 64–82.e7.
Reiman, E.M., Langbaum, J.B.S., Fleisher, A.S., Caselli, R.J., Chen, K., Ayu-
tyanont, N., Quiroz, Y.T., Kosik, K.S., Lopera, F., and Tariot, P.N. (2011).
Alzheimer’s Prevention Initiative: a plan to accelerate the evaluation of pre-
symptomatic treatments. J. Alzheimers Dis. 26 (Suppl 3), 321–329.
Relkin, N.R., Thomas, R.G., Rissman, R.A., Brewer, J.B., Raﬁi, M.S., van Dyck,
C.H., Jack, C.R., Sano, M., Knopman, D.S., Raman, R., et al.; Alzheimer’s Dis-
ease Cooperative Study (2017). A phase 3 trial of IV immunoglobulin for Alz-
heimer disease. Neurology 88, 1768–1775.
Risacher, S.L., Kim, S., Nho, K., Foroud, T., Shen, L., Petersen, R.C., Jack,
C.R., Jr., Beckett, L.A., Aisen, P.S., Koeppe, R.A., et al.; Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (2015). APOE effect on Alzheimer’s disease bio-
markers in older adults with signiﬁcant memory concern. Alzheimers Dement.
11, 1417–1429.
Roh, J.H., Huang, Y., Bero, A.W., Kasten, T., Stewart, F.R., Bateman, R.J., and
Holtzman, D.M. (2012). Disruption of the sleep-wake cycle and diurnal ﬂuctu-
ation of b-amyloid in mice with Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Sci. Transl.
Med. 4, 150ra122.
Rosenberg, J.B., Kaplitt, M.G., De, B.P., Chen, A., Flagiello, T., Salami, C., Pey,
E., Zhao, L., Ricart Arbona, R.J., Monette, S., et al. (2018). AAVrh.10-Mediated
APOE2 Central Nervous System Gene Therapy for APOE4-Associated
Alzheimer’s Disease. Hum. Gene Ther. Clin. Dev. 29, 24–47.
Roses, A.D. (1996). Apolipoprotein E alleles as risk factors in Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Annu. Rev. Med. 47, 387–400.
Ryan, P., Xu, M., Davey, A.K., Danon, J.J., Mellick, G.D., Kassiou, M., and
Rudrawar, S. (2019). O-GlcNAc Modiﬁcation Protects against Protein Misfold-
ing and Aggregation in Neurodegenerative Disease. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 10,
2209–2221.
Saji, N., Niida, S., Murotani, K., Hisada, T., Tsuduki, T., Sugimoto, T., Kimura,
A., Toba, K., and Sakurai, T. (2019). Analysis of the relationship between the
gut microbiome and dementia: a cross-sectional study conducted in Japan.
Sci. Rep. 9, 1008.
Salloway, S., Sperling, R., Fox, N.C., Blennow, K., Klunk, W., Raskind, M.,
Sabbagh, M., Honig, L.S., Porsteinsson, A.P., Ferris, S., et al.; Bapineuzumab
301 and 302 Clinical Trial Investigators (2014). Two phase 3 trials of bapineu-
zumab in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 370,
322–333.
Sanders, D.W., Kaufman, S.K., DeVos, S.L., Sharma, A.M., Mirbaha, H., Li, A.,
Barker, S.J., Foley, A.C., Thorpe, J.R., Serpell, L.C., et al. (2014). Distinct tau
prion strains propagate in cells and mice and deﬁne different tauopathies.
Neuron 82, 1271–1288.
Sano, M., Bell, K.L., Galasko, D., Galvin, J.E., Thomas, R.G., van Dyck, C.H.,
and Aisen, P.S. (2011). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of
simvastatin to treat Alzheimer disease. Neurology 77, 556–563.
Sato, C., Barthe´ lemy, N.R., Mawuenyega, K.G., Patterson, B.W., Gordon,
B.A., Jockel-Balsarotti, J., Sullivan, M., Crisp, M.J., Kasten, T., Kirmess,
K.M., et al. (2018). Tau Kinetics in Neurons and the Human Central Nervous
System. Neuron 97, 1284–1298.e7.
Sayed, F.A., Telpoukhovskaia, M., Kodama, L., Li, Y., Zhou, Y., Le, D., Hauduc,
A., Ludwig, C., Gao, F., Clelland, C., et al. (2018). Differential effects of partial
and complete loss of TREM2 on microglial injury response and tauopathy.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 10172–10177.
Schenk, D., Barbour, R., Dunn, W., Gordon, G., Grajeda, H., Guido, T., Hu, K.,
Huang, J., Johnson-Wood, K., Khan, K., et al. (1999). Immunization with amy-
loid-beta attenuates Alzheimer-disease-like pathology in the PDAPP mouse.
Nature 400, 173–177.
Schultz, S.A., Gordon, B.A., Mishra, S., Su, Y., Perrin, R.J., Cairns, N.J., Morris,
J.C., Ances, B.M., and Benzinger, T.L.S. (2018). Widespread distribution of
tauopathy in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 72, 177–185.
Selkoe, D.J. (2019). Alzheimer disease and aducanumab: adjusting our
approach. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 15, 365–366.
Selkoe, D.J., and Hardy, J. (2016). The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease at 25 years. EMBO Mol. Med. 8, 595–608.
Sereno´ , L., Coma, M., Rodrı´guez, M., Sa´ nchez-Ferrer, P., Sa´ nchez, M.B.,
Gich, I., Agullo´ , J.M., Pe´ rez, M., Avila, J., Guardia-Laguarta, C., et al. (2009).
A novel GSK-3beta inhibitor reduces Alzheimer’s pathology and rescues
neuronal loss in vivo. Neurobiol. Dis. 35, 359–367.
Sevigny, J., Chiao, P., Bussie` re, T., Weinreb, P.H., Williams, L., Maier, M., Dun-
stan, R., Salloway, S., Chen, T., Ling, Y., et al. (2016). The antibody aducanu-
mab reduces Ab plaques in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 537, 50–56.
Sha, S.J., Deutsch, G.K., Tian, L., Richardson, K., Coburn, M., Gaudioso, J.L.,
Marcal, T., Solomon, E., Boumis, A., Bet, A., et al. (2019). Safety, Tolerability,
and Feasibility of Young Plasma Infusion in the Plasma for Alzheimer Symptom
Amelioration Study: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol. 76, 35–40.
Shankar, G.M., Bloodgood, B.L., Townsend, M., Walsh, D.M., Selkoe, D.J.,
and Sabatini, B.L. (2007). Natural oligomers of the Alzheimer amyloid-beta pro-
tein induce reversible synapse loss by modulating an NMDA-type glutamate
receptor-dependent signaling pathway. J. Neurosci. 27, 2866–2875.
Shankar, G.M., Li, S., Mehta, T.H., Garcia-Munoz, A., Shepardson, N.E.,
Smith, I., Brett, F.M., Farrell, M.A., Rowan, M.J., Lemere, C.A., et al. (2008).
Amyloid-beta protein dimers isolated directly from Alzheimer’s brains impair
synaptic plasticity and memory. Nat. Med. 14, 837–842.
Shi, Y., and Holtzman, D.M. (2018). Interplay between innate immunity and
Alzheimer disease: APOE and TREM2 in the spotlight. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
18, 759–772.
Shi, Y., Yamada, K., Liddelow, S.A., Smith, S.T., Zhao, L., Luo, W., Tsai, R.M.,
Spina, S., Grinberg, L.T., Rojas, J.C., et al.; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative (2017). ApoE4 markedly exacerbates tau-mediated neurodegenera-
tion in a mouse model of tauopathy. Nature 549, 523–527.
Sohn, P.D., Tracy, T.E., Son, H.-I., Zhou, Y., Leite, R.E.P., Miller, B.L., Seeley,
W.W., Grinberg, L.T., and Gan, L. (2016). Acetylated tau destabilizes the cyto-
skeleton in the axon initial segment and is mislocalized to the somatodendritic
compartment. Mol. Neurodegener. 11, 47.
Song, W.M., Joshita, S., Zhou, Y., Ulland, T.K., Gilﬁllan, S., and Colonna, M.
(2018). Humanized TREM2 mice reveal microglia-intrinsic and -extrinsic ef-
fects of R47H polymorphism. J. Exp. Med. 215, 745–760.
Soscia, S.J., Kirby, J.E., Washicosky, K.J., Tucker, S.M., Ingelsson, M., Hy-
man, B., Burton, M.A., Goldstein, L.E., Duong, S., Tanzi, R.E., and Moir, R.D.
(2010). The Alzheimer’s disease-associated amyloid beta-protein is an antimi-
crobial peptide. PLoS ONE 5, e9505.
Sosna, J., Philipp, S., Albay, R., 3rd, Reyes-Ruiz, J.M., Baglietto-Vargas, D.,
LaFerla, F.M., and Glabe, C.G. (2018). Early long-term administration of the
CSF1R inhibitor PLX3397 ablates microglia and reduces accumulation of intra-
neuronal amyloid, neuritic plaque deposition and pre-ﬁbrillar oligomers in
5XFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 13, 11.
Spangenberg, E., Severson, P.L., Hohsﬁeld, L.A., Crapser, J., Zhang, J., Bur-
ton, E.A., Zhang, Y., Spevak, W., Lin, J., Phan, N.Y., et al. (2019). Sustained
microglial depletion with CSF1R inhibitor impairs parenchymal plaque devel-
opment in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Nat. Commun. 10, 3758.
Sperling, R.A., Rentz, D.M., Johnson, K.A., Karlawish, J., Donohue, M.,
Salmon, D.P., and Aisen, P. (2014). The A4 study: stopping AD before symp-
toms begin? Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 228fs13.
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
337

Spitzer, P., Condic, M., Herrmann, M., Oberstein, T.J., Scharin-Mehlmann, M.,
Gilbert, D.F., Friedrich, O., Gro¨ mer, T., Kornhuber, J., Lang, R., and Maler, J.M.
(2016). Amyloidogenic amyloid-b-peptide variants induce microbial agglutina-
tion and exert antimicrobial activity. Sci. Rep. 6, 32228.
Stephenson, D., Perry, D., Bens, C., Bain, L.J., Berry, D., Krams, M., Sperling,
R., Dilts, D., Luthman, J., Hanna, D., et al. (2015). Charting a path toward com-
bination therapy for Alzheimer’s disease. Expert Rev. Neurother. 15, 107–113.
Strittmatter, W.J., Saunders, A.M., Schmechel, D., Pericak-Vance, M., En-
ghild, J., Salvesen, G.S., and Roses, A.D. (1993). Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity
binding to beta-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset
familial Alzheimer disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 1977–1981.
Strittmatter, W.J., Saunders, A.M., Goedert, M., Weisgraber, K.H., Dong, L.M.,
Jakes, R., Huang, D.Y., Pericak-Vance, M., Schmechel, D., and Roses, A.D.
(1994). Isoform-speciﬁc interactions of apolipoprotein E with microtubule-
associated protein tau: implications for Alzheimer disease. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 91, 11183–11186.
Sun, X., He, G., Qing, H., Zhou, W., Dobie, F., Cai, F., Staufenbiel, M., Huang,
L.E., and Song, W. (2006). Hypoxia facilitates Alzheimer’s disease pathogen-
esis by up-regulating BACE1 gene expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
103, 18727–18732.
Tabrizi, S.J., Leavitt, B.R., Landwehrmeyer, G.B., Wild, E.J., Saft, C., Barker,
R.A., Blair, N.F., Craufurd, D., Priller, J., Rickards, H., et al.; Phase 1–2a
IONIS-HTTRx Study Site Teams (2019). Targeting Huntingtin Expression in
Patients with Huntington’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 380, 2307–2316.
Tang-Wai, D.F., Graff-Radford, N.R., Boeve, B.F., Dickson, D.W., Parisi, J.E.,
Crook, R., Caselli, R.J., Knopman, D.S., and Petersen, R.C. (2004). Clinical,
genetic, and neuropathologic characteristics of posterior cortical atrophy.
Neurology 63, 1168–1174.
Tariot, P.N., Lopera, F., Langbaum, J.B., Thomas, R.G., Hendrix, S.,
Schneider, L.S., Rios-Romenets, S., Giraldo, M., Acosta, N., Tobon, C.,
et al.; Alzheimer’s Prevention Initiative (2018). The Alzheimer’s Prevention
Initiative Autosomal-Dominant Alzheimer’s Disease Trial: A study of crenezu-
mab versus placebo in preclinical PSEN1 E280A mutation carriers to evaluate
efﬁcacy and safety in the treatment of autosomal-dominant Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, including a placebo-treated noncarrier cohort. Alzheimers Dement.
(N. Y.) 4, 150–160.
Tcw, J., and Goate, A.M. (2017). Genetics of b-Amyloid Precursor Protein in
Alzheimer’s Disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 7, a024539.
Thal, L.J., Ferris, S.H., Kirby, L., Block, G.A., Lines, C.R., Yuen, E., Assaid, C.,
Nessly, M.L., Norman, B.A., Baranak, C.C., and Reines, S.A.; Rofecoxib Pro-
tocol 078 study group (2005). A randomized, double-blind, study of rofecoxib
in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychopharmacology 30,
1204–1215.
Tzeng, N.-S., Chung, C.-H., Lin, F.-H., Chiang, C.-P., Yeh, C.-B., Huang, S.-Y.,
Lu, R.-B., Chang, H.-A., Kao, Y.-C., Yeh, H.-W., et al. (2018). Anti-herpetic
Medications and Reduced Risk of Dementia in Patients with Herpes Simplex
Virus Infections-a Nationwide, Population-Based Cohort Study in Taiwan.
Neurotherapeutics 15, 417–429.
Ulrich, J.D., Finn, M.B., Wang, Y., Shen, A., Mahan, T.E., Jiang, H., Stewart,
F.R., Piccio, L., Colonna, M., and Holtzman, D.M. (2014). Altered microglial
response to Ab plaques in APPPS1-21 mice heterozygous for TREM2. Mol.
Neurodegener. 9, 20.
Ulrich, J.D., Ulland, T.K., Mahan, T.E., Nystro¨ m, S., Nilsson, K.P., Song, W.M.,
Zhou, Y., Reinartz, M., Choi, S., Jiang, H., et al. (2018). ApoE facilitates the mi-
croglial response to amyloid plaque pathology. J. Exp. Med. 215, 1047–1058.
van der Lee, S.J., Conway, O.J., Jansen, I., Carrasquillo, M.M., Kleineidam, L.,
van den Akker, E., Herna´ ndez, I., van Eijk, K.R., Stringa, N., Chen, J.A., et al.;
DESGESCO (Dementia Genetics Spanish Consortium), EADB (Alzheimer
Disease European DNA biobank); EADB (Alzheimer Disease European DNA
biobank); IFGC (International FTD-Genomics Consortium), IPDGC (The Inter-
national Parkinson Disease Genomics Consortium); IPDGC (The International
Parkinson Disease Genomics Consortium); RiMod-FTD (Risk and Modifying
factors in Fronto-Temporal Dementia); Netherlands Brain Bank (NBB); GIFT
(Genetic Investigation in Frontotemporal Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease)
Study Group (2019). A nonsynonymous mutation in PLCG2 reduces the risk
of Alzheimer’s disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal de-
mentia, and increases the likelihood of longevity. Acta Neuropathol. 138,
237–250.
van Hummel, A., Bi, M., Ippati, S., van der Hoven, J., Volkerling, A., Lee, W.S.,
Tan, D.C.S., Bongers, A., Ittner, A., Ke, Y.D., and Ittner, L.M. (2016). No Overt
Deﬁcits in Aged Tau-Deﬁcient C57Bl/6.Mapttm1(EGFP)Kit GFP Knockin Mice.
PLoS ONE 11, e0163236.
Vandenberghe, R., Riviere, M.-E., Caputo, A., Sovago, J., Maguire, R.P., Far-
low, M., Marotta, G., Sanchez-Valle, R., Scheltens, P., Ryan, J.M., and Graf, A.
(2016). Active Ab immunotherapy CAD106 in Alzheimer’s disease: A phase 2b
study. Alzheimers Dement. (N. Y.) 3, 10–22.
Varga, A.W., Wohlleber, M.E., Gime´ nez, S., Romero, S., Alonso, J.F., Ducca,
E.L., Kam, K., Lewis, C., Tanzi, E.B., Tweardy, S., et al. (2016). Reduced
Slow-Wave Sleep Is Associated with High Cerebrospinal Fluid Ab42 Levels
in Cognitively Normal Elderly. Sleep (Basel) 39, 2041–2048.
Vassar, R., Bennett, B.D., Babu-Khan, S., Kahn, S., Mendiaz, E.A., Denis, P.,
Teplow, D.B., Ross, S., Amarante, P., Loeloff, R., et al. (1999). Beta-secretase
cleavage of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein by the transmembrane as-
partic protease BACE. Science 286, 735–741.
Vellas, B., Black, R., Thal, L.J., Fox, N.C., Daniels, M., McLennan, G., Tomp-
kins, C., Leibman, C., Pomfret, M., Grundman, M., et al. (2009). Long-term
follow-up of patients immunized with AN1792: reduced functional decline in
antibody responders. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 6, 144–151.
Venegas, C., Kumar, S., Franklin, B.S., Dierkes, T., Brinkschulte, R., Tejera, D.,
Vieira-Saecker, A., Schwartz, S., Santarelli, F., Kummer, M.P., et al. (2017).
Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-b in Alzheimer’s disease.
Nature 552, 355–361.
Verges, D.K., Restivo, J.L., Goebel, W.D., Holtzman, D.M., and Cirrito, J.R.
(2011). Opposing synaptic regulation of amyloid-b metabolism by NMDA re-
ceptors in vivo. J. Neurosci. 31, 11328–11337.
Verghese, P.B., Castellano, J.M., Garai, K., Wang, Y., Jiang, H., Shah, A., Bu,
G., Frieden, C., and Holtzman, D.M. (2013). ApoE inﬂuences amyloid-b (Ab)
clearance despite minimal apoE/Ab association in physiological conditions.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, E1807–E1816.
Vermunt, L., Sikkes, S.A.M., van den Hout, A., Handels, R., Bos, I., van der
Flier, W.M., Kern, S., Ousset, P.-J., Maruff, P., Skoog, I., et al. (2019). Duration
of preclinical, prodromal, and dementia stages of Alzheimer’s disease in rela-
tion to age, sex, and APOE genotype. Alzheimers Dement. 15, 888–898.
Villeda, S.A., Plambeck, K.E., Middeldorp, J., Castellano, J.M., Mosher, K.I.,
Luo, J., Smith, L.K., Bieri, G., Lin, K., Berdnik, D., et al. (2014). Young blood re-
verses age-related impairments in cognitive function and synaptic plasticity in
mice. Nat. Med. 20, 659–663.
Vlad, S.C., Miller, D.R., Kowall, N.W., and Felson, D.T. (2008). Protective ef-
fects of NSAIDs on the development of Alzheimer disease. Neurology 70,
1672–1677.
Vogt, N.M., Kerby, R.L., Dill-McFarland, K.A., Harding, S.J., Merluzzi, A.P.,
Johnson, S.C., Carlsson, C.M., Asthana, S., Zetterberg, H., Blennow, K.,
et al. (2017). Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep.
7, 13537.
Vos, S.J., Xiong, C., Visser, P.J., Jasielec, M.S., Hassenstab, J., Grant, E.A.,
Cairns, N.J., Morris, J.C., Holtzman, D.M., and Fagan, A.M. (2013). Preclinical
Alzheimer’s disease and its outcome: a longitudinal cohort study. Lancet Neu-
rol. 12, 957–965.
Voytyuk, I., De Strooper, B., and Cha´ vez-Gutie´ rrez, L. (2018). Modulation of
g- and b-Secretases as Early Prevention Against Alzheimer’s Disease. Biol.
Psychiatry 83, 320–327.
Wagner, S.L., Rynearson, K.D., Duddy, S.K., Zhang, C., Nguyen, P.D., Becker,
A., Vo, U., Masliah, D., Monte, L., Klee, J.B., et al. (2017). Pharmacological and
Toxicological Properties of the Potent Oral g-Secretase Modulator BPN-
15606. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 362, 31–44.
Walker, L.C., and Jucker, M. (2015). Neurodegenerative diseases: expanding
the prion concept. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 38, 87–103.
338
Cell 179, October 3, 2019

Wang, C., Najm, R., Xu, Q., Jeong, D.-E., Walker, D., Balestra, M.E., Yoon,
S.Y., Yuan, H., Li, G., Miller, Z.A., et al. (2018). Gain of toxic apolipoprotein
E4 effects in human iPSC-derived neurons is ameliorated by a small-molecule
structure corrector. Nat. Med. 24, 647–657.
Wang, L., Benzinger, T.L., Su, Y., Christensen, J., Friedrichsen, K., Aldea, P.,
McConathy, J., Cairns, N.J., Fagan, A.M., Morris, J.C., et al. (2016). Evaluation
of Tau Imaging in Staging Alzheimer Disease and Revealing Interactions Be-
tween b-Amyloid and Tauopathy. JAMA Neurol. 73, 1070–1077.
Weggen, S., Eriksen, J.L., Das, P., Sagi, S.A., Wang, R., Pietrzik, C.U., Findlay,
K.A., Smith, T.E., Murphy, M.P., Bulter, T., et al. (2001). A subset of NSAIDs
lower amyloidogenic Abeta42 independently of cyclooxygenase activity. Na-
ture 414, 212–216.
Wei, W., Nguyen, L.N., Kessels, H.W., Hagiwara, H., Sisodia, S., and Malinow,
R. (2010). Amyloid beta from axons and dendrites reduces local spine number
and plasticity. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 190–196.
Weingarten, M.D., Lockwood, A.H., Hwo, S.Y., and Kirschner, M.W. (1975). A
protein factor essential for microtubule assembly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
72, 1858–1862.
West, T., Hu, Y., Verghese, P.B., Bateman, R.J., Braunstein, J.B., Fogelman, I.,
Budur, K., Florian, H., Mendonca, N., and Holtzman, D.M. (2017). Preclinical
and Clinical Development of ABBV-8E12, a Humanized Anti-Tau Antibody,
for Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Tauopathies. J. Prev. Alz-
heimers Dis. 4, 236–241.
Willem, M., Garratt, A.N., Novak, B., Citron, M., Kaufmann, S., Rittger, A.,
DeStrooper, B., Saftig, P., Birchmeier, C., and Haass, C. (2006). Control of
peripheral nerve myelination by the beta-secretase BACE1. Science 314,
664–666.
Wischik, C.M., Edwards, P.C., Lai, R.Y., Roth, M., and Harrington, C.R. (1996).
Selective inhibition of Alzheimer disease-like tau aggregation by phenothia-
zines. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 11213–11218.
Wozniak, M.A., Mee, A.P., and Itzhaki, R.F. (2009). Herpes simplex virus type 1
DNA is located within Alzheimer’s disease amyloid plaques. J. Pathol. 217,
131–138.
Xia, W. (2019). g-Secretase and its modulators: Twenty years and beyond.
Neurosci. Lett. 701, 162–169.
Xie, L., Kang, H., Xu, Q., Chen, M.J., Liao, Y., Thiyagarajan, M., O’Donnell, J.,
Christensen, D.J., Nicholson, C., Iliff, J.J., et al. (2013). Sleep drives metabolite
clearance from the adult brain. Science 342, 373–377.
Yaffe, K., Laffan, A.M., Harrison, S.L., Redline, S., Spira, A.P., Ensrud, K.E.,
Ancoli-Israel, S., and Stone, K.L. (2011). Sleep-disordered breathing, hypoxia,
and risk of mild cognitive impairment and dementia in older women. JAMA
306, 613–619.
Yamada, K., Holth, J.K., Liao, F., Stewart, F.R., Mahan, T.E., Jiang, H., Cirrito,
J.R., Patel, T.K., Hochgra¨ fe, K., Mandelkow, E.-M., et al. (2014). Neuronal ac-
tivity regulates extracellular tau in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 211, 387–393.
Yanamandra, K., Kfoury, N., Jiang, H., Mahan, T.E., Ma, S., Maloney, S.E.,
Wozniak, D.F., Diamond, M.I., and Holtzman, D.M. (2013). Anti-tau antibodies
that block tau aggregate seeding in vitro markedly decrease pathology and
improve cognition in vivo. Neuron 80, 402–414.
Yanamandra, K., Jiang, H., Mahan, T.E., Maloney, S.E., Wozniak, D.F., Dia-
mond, M.I., and Holtzman, D.M. (2015). Anti-tau antibody reduces insoluble
tau and decreases brain atrophy. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 2, 278–288.
Yanamandra, K., Patel, T.K., Jiang, H., Schindler, S., Ulrich, J.D., Boxer, A.L.,
Miller, B.L., Kerwin, D.R., Gallardo, G., Stewart, F., et al. (2017). Anti-tau anti-
body administration increases plasma tau in transgenic mice and patients with
tauopathy. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaal2029.
Yang, G., Zhou, R., Zhou, Q., Guo, X., Yan, C., Ke, M., Lei, J., and Shi, Y.
(2019). Structural basis of Notch recognition by human g-secretase. Nature
565, 192–197.
Ye, L., Fritschi, S.K., Schelle, J., Obermu¨ ller, U., Degenhardt, K., Kaeser, S.A.,
Eisele, Y.S., Walker, L.C., Baumann, F., Staufenbiel, M., et al. (2015). Persis-
tence of Ab seeds in APP null mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1559–1561.
Zhang, B., Gaiteri, C., Bodea, L.-G., Wang, Z., McElwee, J., Podtelezhnikov,
A.A., Zhang, C., Xie, T., Tran, L., Dobrin, R., et al. (2013). Integrated systems
approach identiﬁes genetic nodes and networks in late-onset Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Cell 153, 707–720.
Zhao, N., Liu, C.-C., Van Ingelgom, A.J., Linares, C., Kurti, A., Knight, J.A.,
Heckman, M.G., Diehl, N.N., Shinohara, M., Martens, Y.A., et al. (2018).
APOE ε2 is associated with increased tau pathology in primary tauopathy.
Nat. Commun. 9, 4388.
Zhou, R., Yang, G., Guo, X., Zhou, Q., Lei, J., and Shi, Y. (2019). Recognition of
the amyloid precursor protein by human g-secretase. Science 363, eaaw0930.
Zlokovic, B.V. (2013). Cerebrovascular effects of apolipoprotein E: implica-
tions for Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 70, 440–444.
Cell 179, October 3, 2019
339