Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
567
nature reviews materials
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-024-00695-w
Review article
 Check for updates
Precision drug delivery to the 
central nervous system using 
engineered nanoparticles
Jingjing Gao1 
, Ziting (Judy) Xia2, Swetharajan Gunasekar2, Christopher Jiang2, Jeffrey M. Karp2,3,4,5,6 
 
& Nitin Joshi 
  2,3 
Abstract
Development of novel therapies for central nervous system (CNS) 
disorders has experienced a high failure rate in clinical trials owing to 
unsatisfactory efficacy and adverse effects. One of the major reasons for 
limited therapeutic efficacy is the poor penetration of drugs across the 
blood–brain barrier. Despite the development of multiple drug delivery 
platforms, the overall drug accumulation in the brain remains sub-
optimal. Another critical but overlooked factor is achieving precision 
delivery to a specific region and cell type in the brain. This specificity 
is crucial because most neurological disorders exhibit region-specific 
vulnerabilities. Multiple trials have failed owing to adverse CNS effects 
induced by nonspecific drug targeting. In this Review, we highlight 
the key regions and cell types that should be targeted in different 
CNS diseases. We discuss how physiological barriers and disease-
mediated changes in the blood–brain barrier and the overall brain can 
impact the precision delivery of therapeutics via the systemic route. 
We then perform a systematic analysis of the current state-of-the-
art approaches developed to overcome these barriers and achieve 
precision targeting at different levels. Finally, we discuss potential 
approaches to accelerate the development of precision delivery 
systems and outline the challenges and future research directions.
Sections
Introduction
Selective vulnerabilities 
in the CNS
Barriers towards precision 
delivery in the CNS
Precision brain targeting at 
different levels
Conclusion and outlook
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Center for Bioactive Delivery, Institute for Applied Life Sciences, 
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA. 2Center for Nanomedicine, Department of Anesthesiology, 
Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 3Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA. 4Harvard-MIT Program in Health Sciences and Technology, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
5Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA. 6Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.  
 e-mail: jgao@umass.edu; jmkarp@bwh.harvard.edu; njoshi@bwh.harvard.edu

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
568
Review article
necessitate precision delivery strategies. Next, we examine the physi-
ological barriers that exist at different stages during the journey of 
NPs to the brain via the systemic route, and how these barriers influ-
ence NP-mediated precision delivery of therapeutics. We also discuss 
how pathophysiological alterations to these barriers may impact NP 
targeting. We then perform a systematic analysis of the current state-
of-the-art approaches developed to overcome barriers at different 
stages and achieve precision targeting at different levels, such as the 
brain endothelium, across the BBB in the entire brain, specific brain 
regions, or specific cell types in the brain. Finally, we discuss potential 
avenues to expedite the development of precision delivery systems 
and outline the challenges and future research directions that might 
ultimately accelerate their clinical translatability.
Selective vulnerabilities in the CNS
The brain has a multifaceted architecture, wherein specific regions 
govern distinct functions, rendering them susceptible to different 
diseases. Selective vulnerabilities in neuroscience are mainly defined 
based on end-pathology studies (such as investigations into struc-
tural changes and neuronal losses, or immunostaining), which reflect 
the specific regions or populations of cells that are affected by the 
pathology of interest. Although a more fundamental understanding is 
required to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying selective 
cellular vulnerability, advances in single-cell profiling, spatial tran-
scriptomics and pool screening with gene perturbations have shown 
great promise in dissecting the involvement of specific regions and cell 
types in the diseased brain10–12. For example, a complete mouse brain 
was mapped through the BRAIN Initiative® programme, creating a 
first-of-a-kind brain atlas that provides incredible insights into the struc-
tural, chemical (neurotransmitters and neuropeptides), transcriptomic 
and epigenetic profiles of neural cell types, bringing us closer to the 
effective precision targeting of neuropathologies13.
The CNS exhibits a complex tapestry of regional vulnerabilities 
across a broad spectrum of neurological disorders (Fig. 1). For example, 
cerebral palsy (CP), a common group of movement disorders in 
children, is often categorized based on the anatomical sites of brain 
lesions (that is, the cerebral cortex, pyramidal tract, extrapyramidal 
system and cerebellum). The frontal lobes, vital for executive functions, 
may bear the brunt of traumatic brain injuries (TBIs), whereas the 
temporal lobes, critical for memory, become focal points in temporal 
lobe epilepsy. Various subregions of the prefrontal cortex, includ-
ing the medial prefrontal cortex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and 
ventral prefrontal cortex, are associated with the cognitive decline 
typically seen in neurodegenerative disorders. The prefrontal cortex, 
with its dense bidirectional projections to thalamic, basal ganglia and 
limbic structures, has a critical role in neuronal signalling, inflamma-
tion and degeneration across various brain regions14,15. Notably, in 
psychiatric disorders such as depression, emerging evidence points to 
Introduction
Drugs that target disorders of the central nervous system (CNS) face 
greater challenges and a higher failure rate in clinical trials compared 
to drugs targeting non-CNS conditions. This trend is particularly 
pronounced in disease-modifying treatments for neurodegenerative 
diseases. These failures primarily stem from unsatisfactory thera-
peutic efficacy and the persistent threat of adverse effects within 
the brain. Different routes of administration can be used for drug 
delivery to the brain, such as intranasal delivery, intrathecal and 
intracerebroventricular injections1,2, and systemic injection. Despite 
accounting for only ~2% of the body weight, the brain receives 
nearly 20% of the cardiac output, making systemic administration 
the most widely applied delivery method for CNS therapeutics3 
and, thus, in this Review, we focus solely on systemic drug delivery 
to the brain. One well-known issue limiting the therapeutic efficacy 
of systemically administered CNS drugs is the blood–brain barrier 
(BBB) that blocks the entry of 99% administered small molecules 
and biotherapeutics. Although ongoing efforts aim to overcome 
the BBB to enhance systemic drug delivery to the brain, one chal-
lenge remains in the form of nonspecific targeting within the brain 
parenchyma, which continues to be a major factor contributing to 
clinical failures4,5.
When examining the current clinical landscape of CNS drug 
development, biotherapeutics including monoclonal antibodies and 
gene therapy dominate up to 90% of phase III clinical trials. However, 
antibodies penetrate the brain at a mere 0.1–1% after intravenous 
injection6,7, and despite being locally delivered, gene therapies suffer 
from poor tissue and cell specificity. Moreover, the predominant use 
of viral vectors for gene therapy has raised concerns regarding their 
immunogenicity, neurotoxicity and high manufacturing costs8,9. Thus, 
without a precision non-viral delivery system capable of maximizing 
brain penetration and specifically targeting pathological regions and 
cell types within the brain, the development of effective CNS therapies 
will remain stagnant.
In light of these challenges, nanoparticles (NPs) offer a beacon of 
hope for advancing CNS drug delivery owing to their inherent advan-
tages, including versatility for encapsulating both small molecules and 
biotherapeutics, controlled release and targeted delivery. NP-based 
delivery platforms are extremely versatile as they are composed of a 
wide range of building blocks, ranging from lipids, synthetic polymers, 
peptides and oligonucleotides to inorganic materials such as gold, 
silica and iron. Although numerous NP systems have been designed to 
enhance brain accumulation and targeting specificity, only a few have 
progressed to clinical trials.
In this Review, we aim to provide an authoritative and balanced 
overview of different NP strategies to achieve precision delivery within 
the CNS. We first highlight the pivotal regions and cell types in the 
brain that are associated with different CNS diseases and therefore 
Fig. 1 | Selective vulnerabilities of CNS diseases. a,b, The end-pathology 
effects of central nervous system (CNS) diseases highlight their regional 
(part a) and cellular (part b) vulnerabilities. c, A comprehensive summary 
of the impacted brain regions and cell types associated with prevalent 
neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer disease, Parkinson 
disease, Huntington disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multiple 
sclerosis is presented. For instance, hippocampus and cholinergic neurons 
are frequently affected regions and cell types in Alzheimer disease. Colours 
indicated are with respect to the brain regions shown in part a. A, astrocyte; 
BC, Betz cell; ChN, cholinergic neuron; CN, cortical neuron; CoN, corticostriatal 
neuron; CPN, cortical projection neuron; dlPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; 
DN, dopaminergic neuron; GMSN, GABAergic medium spiny neuron; HN, 
histaminergic neuron; I, interneuron; M, microglia; MN, motor (upper, lower, 
oculomotor) neuron; mPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; NN, noradrenergic 
neuron; O, oligodendrocyte; OBN, olfactory bulb neuron; ON, orexin and 
hypocretin neuron; PFC, prefrontal cortex; PgN, pigmented neuron; PrN, 
preganglionic neuron; PN, pyramidal neuron; SN, serotonergic neuron;  
SPN, striatal projection neuron; vPFC, ventral prefrontal cortex.

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
569
Review article
region-specific aberrations in the prefrontal cortex and limbic system16. 
Neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease (AD), Parkin-
son disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and multiple 
sclerosis (MS), involve multiple distinct brain regions, often character-
ized by region-specific neurodegeneration. For instance, PD primarily 
affects hallmark regions such as the basal ganglia and substantia nigra, 
resulting in impaired motor coordination and cognitive functioning. 
During diagnosis, clinicians assess for loss of dopaminergic neurons by 
dopamine transporter scans (DaTSCAN) or Lewy body accumulation 
in multiple simultaneous brain regions, including the cranial nerves, 
olfactory system, brainstem (including locus coeruleus, dorsal raphe) 
and substantia nigra17. ALS impacts the spinal cord and primary motor 
cortex, leading to critical impairments in voluntary muscle control 
and certain executive functions18,19. Meanwhile, MS is characterized by 
focal, demyelinating lesions in the white and grey matter of the CNS, 
with distinct neurodegenerative patterns observed amongst different 
brain regions20,21. Progressive neurodegenerative diseases such as 
AD are characterized by the aggregation and spread of pathological 
proteins in stereotypical patterns across multiple brain regions22. 
Such regional distribution is often correlated with disease severity. 
For instance, intracellular tau tangles are a pathological hallmark of AD 
and are first seen in the entorhinal cortex (Braak stages I and II), then 
M
A
O
ChN
DN
PN
NN
SN
MN
CN
PrN
OBN
PgN
HN
ON
SPN
CoN
BC
GMSN
I
CPN
Alzheimer disease
Aﬀected regions
Aﬀected cell types
Parkinson disease
Huntington disease
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis
M, A, ChN, PN, PgN, NN, ON, HN
M, A, DN, NN, SN, ChN, PN, CoN, OBN, PrN
M, A, SPN, CN, GMSN, I
M, A, MN, BC
M, A, O, CPN
Frontal cortex
Temporal cortex
Parietal cortex
Occipital
cortex
Cerebellum
Brain stem or spinal cord
Precuneus/
cuneus
Corpus callosum
Cingulate cortex
Superior colliculus/
periventricular region/
substantia nigra
Limbic system structures
Nucleus accumbens
Lateral entorhinal cortex
Basal ganglia structures
Subventricular zone
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
PFC
dlPFC
mPFC vPFC
Aﬀected brain regions
a
Aﬀected cell types
b
Example of CNS diseases
c

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
570
Review article
the hippocampus and thalamus (Braak stages III and IV), and finally 
in the neocortex (Braak stages V and VI). This sequence is typically 
synchronous with cognitive decline from mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) into severe dementia23.
Selective vulnerabilities, however, extend beyond the confines of 
brain regions and reach the cellular level, beginning with the vascular 
components of the BBB (Fig. 1). Brain endothelial cells (BECs) are 
vulnerable to inflammation in cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy (CALD)24 
and to psychosis in schizophrenia25. The vulnerability of BECs has also 
been well documented in AD pathology, alongside other vascular 
cell populations such as smooth muscle cells, fibroblast-like cells 
and pericytes26–28. Notably, pericytes have displayed heterogeneous 
vulnerability among different brain regions in various pathological 
conditions29. Moving further into the parenchyma, the varying vulner-
ability of different neural cell types to stressors is strongly implicated in 
the pathogenesis of various CNS disorders. For instance, degeneration 
of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra is usually associated 
with PD and HD30–32, whereas degeneration in the hippocampus is 
linked to AD33,34. Conversely, the degeneration of cholinergic neurons 
in the basal forebrain is a hallmark characteristic of AD pathology35–37. 
Substantial neuronal loss are exhibited by Purkinje neurons, integral 
to movement coordination in the cerebellum, in several neurodegen-
erative diseases such as ALS, AD and HD38–40. Notably, in PD, Purkinje 
neuron axonal swelling is observed, a phenomenon common in other 
disorders with cerebellar damage41. Additionally, interneurons, pivotal 
for neuro-connectivity, govern the firing patterns of diverse cell types 
within distinct brain subregions through mechanisms of excitation 
and inhibition. Dysfunction of this neural cell type can be detrimental 
to brain circuitry and is observed in neurodegenerative diseases. 
For example, in ALS, the loss of multiple subtypes of interneurons 
impairs the motor circuitry of a patient42.
Most neurodegenerative disorders are also marked by the 
involvement of astrocytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes, warranting 
careful consideration of any vulnerability patterns that they might 
exhibit. In PD mouse models, neuroglia, along with few vascular 
cells, are selectively vulnerable to oxidative stress and mitochondrial 
dysfunction43. Likewise, varying activity and susceptibility of glial cells 
in the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area (VTA) could influence 
the vulnerability of dopaminergic neurons within these regions44. 
Oligodendrocytes also appear to exhibit selective vulnerability to glu-
tamate excitotoxicity45 and transient ischaemia46 and are often affected 
more so than neurons by these same stressors. The vulnerability of 
astrocytes and microglia to impaired glutamatergic transmission has 
also been documented in psychiatric conditions such as treatment-
resistant depression47. Lastly, neurons and neuroglia could be rendered 
vulnerable to the cytotoxic effects elicited by T cells that accumulate 
within the brain parenchyma in certain inflammatory pathological 
conditions48. It is also important to appreciate that vulnerabilities 
of cell populations in other pathologies, such as rare neurological 
disorders49 and those of neuropsychiatric origins50, are just begin-
ning to be comprehended, and future research will contribute to 
their deeper understanding. Collectively, the fact that distinct CNS 
diseases have region and cell-specific vulnerabilities underscore the 
importance of developing precision delivery approaches to enhance 
therapeutic efficacy.
Barriers towards precision delivery in the CNS
Intravenously administered nanomedicine typically needs to traverse 
various barriers to reach the CNS. To perform a systematic analysis of 
these physiological barriers that influence the precision delivery of 
NPs, we classify the journey of NPs to the brain into four stages (Fig. 2). 
In stage 1, NPs circulate through the vascular network and marginate 
towards the brain endothelium to initiate particle-cell binding at the 
BBB. Subsequently, stage 2 involves the penetration of NPs across 
the BBB through either transcellular or paracellular transport pathways. 
Stage 3 entails the transport of NPs through interstitial barriers and, 
finally, Stage 4 describes cellular barriers towards targeted accumu-
lation of NPs in specific cell types within the brain. Within each stage, 
various biological and physical barriers act as roadblocks, leading to 
short circulatory half-lives, accelerated degradation, off-target effects 
and dampened therapeutic potential.
Clearance from systemic circulation and margination (stage 1)
After intravenous injection, NPs are distributed throughout the blood-
stream. Around 25% of the blood is pumped from the heart towards 
the brain51, and the rest towards other organs. The kidney and liver 
are the two most prominent sites of blood filtration and clearance, 
with the renal and hepatic blood flow reaching over 45% of the cardiac 
output combined52,53. NPs of different sizes are removed from the 
body via distinct clearance mechanisms while exhibiting preferential 
biodistribution in different organs54. For instance, NPs with a size less 
than 5–8 nm are rapidly cleared by kidneys at the glomerular filtration 
units55,56, whereas medium-sized (20–150 nm) NPs tend to be cleared 
by the reticuloendothelial system (RES) at the liver site54,57,58. Kupffer 
cells, which are resident macrophages in the liver, are known for their 
prominent phagocytic potential and along with endothelial cells, are 
responsible for trapping up to 90% of NPs within the liver59–61. NPs larger 
than 200 nm are more resilient to RES clearance and accumulate in the 
liver, spleen and lung54,57,62.
Another critical factor that governs the biodistribution of intra-
venously injected NPs is the formation of protein corona, which is a 
result of proteins that adsorb on the NPs from the bloodstream63,64. 
The composition of protein corona strongly dictates the biological 
identity of NPs and their ultimate fate in the body65. The intrinsic proper-
ties of NPs, such as size, shape, core and surface properties can all affect 
the adsorption patterns of various serum proteins66,67. For instance, 
mass spectrometry-based proteomics have revealed widely diverse 
protein corona composition isolated from liposomes68, quantum 
dots69, metallic NPs70,71, silica NPs72, polymeric NPs or lipid NPs (LNPs)73. 
The protein corona is especially detrimental to NPs that use an ‘active 
targeting’ strategy, which is commonly used in brain-targeted delivery. 
Ligands such as small molecules, peptides and antibody domains can be 
engineered to the NP surface to increase their targetability to the brain. 
However, the altered surface properties can further encourage corona 
formation through charge-specific or intermolecular interactions74. As 
the corona masks the targeting ligand, the tissue-homing efficiency of 
NPs undergoes a substantial decline75,76. For instance, transferrin (TF)-
modified PEGylated silica NPs incubated in fetal bovine serum were less 
internalized and demonstrated less TF targeting specificity in transfer-
rin receptor (TFR)-expressing tumour cells, whereas they exhibited 
high TFR-mediated endocytosis in serum-free media or phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS)75. Another obstacle posed by the protein corona 
is immune system activation triggered by the interactions between NPs 
and macrophages, which can cause inflammation and tissue damage74. 
For instance, NPs larger than200 nm are at high risk of attracting com-
plement component 3 (C3) to their protein corona and subsequently 
activating an immunological response77–79. Nevertheless, not all NPs 
attract protein corona formation, and strategies have been proposed 

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
571
Review article
NP clearance from systemic circulation and their margination (stage 1)
a
Penetration across the BBB (stage 2)
b
Crossing the interstitial space and cellular uptake 
and targeting (stages 3 and 4)
c 
ECM aﬀect
NP diﬀusion 
Neurotoxic debris 
hinders NP diﬀusion
A diseased BBB alters interstitial 
flow rate and pressure, impacting 
NP transport eﬀiciency
Diseased physiology
Endothelial cell shrinkage
Normal physiology
Transport
proteins
Increase in
receptor expression
Leaky BBB
Protein corona
NP injection
Clearance
Arterial vessel
Glomerulus
NPs <8 nm
are cleared
Liver sinusoids
Margination barrier
Margination is required for NP penetration and
can be controlled by NP stiﬀness and shape
Kupﬀer
cells
Endothelial
cells
Hepatic
B cells
Clearance
20–150 nm
RES system clearance
Organ
accumulation
Immune cell uptake
Renal clearance
Lymphatic system
clearance
Cell membrane and
endosome barriers
Pericyte
dissociation
Pericyte
Parenchyma
Fig. 2 | Biological barriers to precision NPs en route to the brain. 
To achieve central nervous system (CNS) delivery through intravenous 
injection, nanoparticles (NPs) have to bypass distinct barriers in four 
different stages during their journey to the brain. a, As NPs enter circulation, 
they undergo clearance through two distinct pathways: the renal system 
and reticuloendothelial system (RES). Simultaneously, serum proteins in 
circulation absorb onto NPs, forming protein coronas, leading to immune cell 
uptake and NP removal. However, if NPs are larger than 200 nm, they will resist 
RES clearance, leading to accumulation in the liver, lung and spleen. Beyond 
systemic clearances, particles must undergo margination towards endothelial 
cells to ensure successful entry into the targeted regions. b, Endothelial cells 
with tight junctions, along with other cell types, make up the blood–brain 
barrier (BBB), acting as a protective barrier against NP entry into the brain 
parenchyma. Even if NPs manage to bypass this layer, the lymphatic system 
and efflux transporters efficiently remove them. Furthermore, under diseased 
conditions, the integrity of the barrier may be compromised, resulting in a 
leaky BBB, altered receptor expression, endothelial cell shrinkage and pericyte 
dissociation — all of which can collectively impact BBB permeability. c, Finally, 
beyond the BBB, interstitial barriers such as the extracellular matrix (ECM), 
neurotoxic debris and variations in interstitial flow rate and pressure affect 
NP diffusion, presenting a challenge to their transport efficiency. In addition, 
cellular barriers, including the cell membrane and endosome, can further 
impede NP entry.

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
572
Review article
to circumvent corona formation. For instance, the surface affinity of 
gold NPs to serum proteins can be reduced by glutathione coating or 
surface functionalization with lysine and cysteine80. Synthetic polymer 
conjugates (such as amphiphilic N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide 
(HPMA) copolymer) can also provide NPs an ‘invisibility cloak’ against 
serum proteins by minimizing their nonspecific interactions with the 
particle surface81.
To target the brain endothelium or penetrate across the BBB, NPs 
also need to undergo margination. Margination dynamics encompass 
the lateral movement of NPs away from the vessel core, wherein most 
red blood cells (RBCs) accumulate, and towards the endothelial surface. 
This migration towards the vessel walls constitutes the initiating event 
of extravasation82,83. Although all NPs eventually reach vessel walls, 
the propensity of margination largely depends on the physiochemical 
characteristics of the NPs, primarily shape and deformability82. 
For instance, spherical particles tend to marginate slightly better than 
their flatter, ellipsoidal counterparts82. Nevertheless, non-spherical 
NPs adhere to vessel walls more efficiently, as they experience a lower 
drag force compared to spherical particles of the same volume82,84. 
In addition, collision between a stiff and soft particle in suspension 
(such as in the blood) results in a greater displacement of the stiff 
particle towards the wall region, which drives the initial step of margina-
tion85. Our understanding of margination dynamics comes mainly from 
in vitro studies, and more detailed in vivo studies should be conducted 
to validate these findings. In addition, a deeper understanding of 
margination dynamics could be helpful to maximize the interactions 
between the NPs and the endothelium. Overall, various factors collec-
tively contribute to limited brain delivery of systemically administered 
NPs, which emphasizes the importance of tailoring NP design to extend 
circulation time and minimize their nonspecific biodistribution.
Penetration across the BBB (stage 2)
The BBB is the most direct circulatory entry into the brain paren-
chyma, thus making it the main focus of brain-related drug delivery 
studies86. Nevertheless, the anatomical layout of the BBB also acts as 
a major impediment for NPs to access the brain. Briefly, the BBB con-
sists of a monolayer of non-fenestrated endothelial cells connected 
by tight junctions and wrapped around by basal lamina in which peri-
cytes and astrocytic end feet are embedded to maintain structural 
integrity87. The unique cellular arrangement of the BBB enables it to 
exert tight regulation over the influx and efflux of materials across 
the brain. Further, the BECs are specialized to have reduced pinocytic 
activity, transcellular vesicle trafficking and pore formation, greatly 
limiting both paracellular and transcellular transport of materials88. 
Although small molecules (molecular weight (MW) < 400 Da) can pas-
sively diffuse across the BBB, NPs must rely on transcytosis to gain entry. 
Brain endothelium intrinsically has multiple transcytosis mechanisms, 
including carrier-mediated, adsorptive-mediated transcytosis and 
receptor-mediated transcytosis (RMT), which are specific for different 
classes of macromolecules. Therefore, one must consider the turnover 
rate and efficiency of each pathway when choosing ligands for NP active 
targeting. Nevertheless, even if the NPs manage to marginate towards 
the vessel wall and are decorated with receptor-targeting ligands, the 
rate of transcytosis across the BBB remains limited. Through the study 
of RMT of TFR-targeting liposomes across the brain, it was surprisingly 
found that liposomes were sequestered by the brain endothelium at 
capillaries and arterioles, whereas transcytosis-mediated uptake mainly 
occurred at post-capillary venules89, revealing the heterogeneity of 
NP uptake in brain vasculature, independent of the gene expression 
level of TFR. Finally, after successful penetration across the BBB, the 
efflux transporter located on the BBB, such as the ATP-binding cassette 
(ABC) transporters, can actively pump the NPs out of the brain90, which 
poses another challenge for efficient drug delivery. Nevertheless, if 
the goal is to target abnormal brain endothelium and vessel, as in the 
case of macular degeneration91 and other vascular-associated CNS 
disorders, selecting targeting strategies that induce endocytosis, but 
not transcytosis or efflux transport, is optimal to achieve maximal 
cargo retainment within the brain endothelium.
Disruptions in BBB have been associated with various CNS dis-
orders. For example, damages in blood vessels are thought to be a 
key initiating factor in the development of AD, leading to an influx 
of neurotoxic blood-derived components, which results in neuronal 
dysfunction92. Similar BBB impairments have been observed in PD and 
Huntington disease (HD)93,94. Therefore, it is critical to understand how 
diseases affect the original BBB architecture and the resulting impacts on 
effective drug delivery. Structural changes of BBB in CNS disorders often 
include endothelial degeneration and shrinkage, reduced expression 
of tight junctions, basal lamina thickening, basement membrane 
disintegration, pericyte dissociation and astrocytic end feet detach-
ments92,95,96. These changes contribute to increased BBB permeability 
and an elevated transendothelial bulk flow into the brain parenchyma, 
which might provide a window for the increased brain accumulation 
of NPs. For instance, a brief opening of the BBB, as a result of optical 
nerve transection, can dramatically increase the biodistribution of sys-
tematically administered large (up to 200 nm) albumin-functionalized 
polymeric NPs in the brain. Other acute assaults, such as TBI and ischae-
mic stroke, can also breach the BBB for a short window of time, which 
forms a valuable therapeutic window for the efficient penetration of 
drug-loaded NPs97,98. Both passive and active targeting strategies can 
increase the delivery of a wide range of therapeutics, ranging from 
vitamins99, antioxidants100, peptide drugs101, neurotransmitters102 or 
erythropoietin103 to successfully curb local neuroinflammation and 
infarct volume in TBI and strokes, respectively.
Although BBB breakdown and temporary breach may seem to be 
a benefit for drug delivery, there are underlying complexities. Disrup-
tions to the BBB can trigger the formation of fibrotic scars mediated 
by the deposition of various extracellular components and could alter 
the physiological composition of the BBB and potentially hinder access 
to the parenchyma104,105. Likewise, transcriptomic studies on human 
and animal brain tissues have revealed a global shift in transporter and 
receptor expression as well as transcytosis patterns in the vasculatures 
of diseased and ageing brains, which can heavily impact NP delivery 
via the RMT pathway106–108. For instance, expression of glucose trans-
porter 1 (GLUT1), a main entry point for glucose into the brain, and a 
popular target for active brain targeting, was substantially reduced in 
the luminal side of the BBB in AD109. Remarkably, the administration of a 
glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP1R) agonist was able to reverse the 
reduced GLUT1 expression and lead to functional recovery of the BBB in 
an ageing mouse model of AD110. In addition to GLUT1, genes coding for 
stress response pathways and regulation of BBB transcellular transport 
and transcytosis were substantially downregulated in the endothelial 
cells of the aged brain. By contrast, various transcription factors and 
immune signalling genes were strongly upregulated. GLP1R treatment 
also proved successful in attenuating age-dependent microglial prim-
ing and in reversing ageing signatures in the neurovascular cell popu-
lation, thereby offering promise for the therapeutic alteration of key 
phenotypic and genotypic changes associated with neurodegenerative 
disease76,111. By comprehensively mapping the transcriptome of over 

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
573
Review article
20,000 cerebrovascular cells, it was found that carriers of the APOE4 
risk allele for AD had substantially downregulated expression of trans-
port genes in endothelial cells, pericytes and fibroblasts106. Another 
commonly targeted receptor in brain drug delivery, the low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor, is expressed at lower levels in the AD brain 
endothelium, which was correlated to reduced amyloid-β clearance112. 
The closely associated low-density receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) is 
also downregulated in ageing and AD, and it contributes to impaired 
amyloid-β transport across the BBB113. Importantly, the timescale of 
BBB breakdown also differs between diseases. Although BBB break-
down is a gradual neurodegenerative process and precedes cognitive 
decline for several years, other more acute diseases such as TBI can lead 
to BBB breach moments after the physical injury114. Consequently, the 
BBB tends to self-repair with complete recovery after 2 weeks of injury. 
Therefore, differences in the speed of the BBB breakdown dictate 
effective therapeutic windows and dosing strategies.
Crossing the interstitial space (stage 3)
The interstitial system of the brain, consisting of interstitial fluid 
and extracellular matrix, has a crucial role in nurturing parenchymal 
cells, facilitating nutrient, gas and ion exchange, and aiding in waste 
removal115. However, this system is effectively gated from systemic 
circulation and is dynamically irregular and tortuous116, thereby 
hindering nanocarriers from reaching specific regions and cells within 
the brain. Additionally, interstitial flow is intricately linked with the 
dynamic flow of cerebrospinal fluid, creating an environment marked 
by constant turnover and drainage117 that can negatively impact carrier 
residence time and cellular contact. The rate and pressure of this flow 
determine the transport efficiency of NPs118 and could pose upper 
thresholds on the shear stress that can be sustained by them. Owing 
to the breakdown of the BBB during most CNS diseases, the influx of 
blood-derived proteins (that is, albumin, plasmin and fibrinogen) 
often leads to local inflammation of the brain, thus recruiting circu-
lating neutrophils and macrophages that affect the rate and pressure 
of interstitial fluid flow119,120 which, in turn, can impact NP distribution 
and efficacy. Whole-brain 3D atlas findings have revealed an abrupt 
reduction in vessel diameter, density and altered branch angle in 
the hippocampal region of an AD mouse model121, all of which could 
potentially alter the therapeutic distribution as well. Moreover, the 
accumulation of neurotoxic debris in the perivascular space can also 
hinder the normal diffusion of NPs, causing them to be trapped within 
the pathological regions without reaching their targets122,123. Lastly, the 
extracellular matrix presents a dense, viscous and charged environment 
within the brain parenchyma124,125, which can retard NP diffusion. It is 
also worth noting that the entire extracellular architecture undergoes 
dynamic remodelling, facilitated by the degrading activities of enzymes 
secreted by neurons and glial cells in physiological and pathological 
states116, which can further complicate NP delivery.
Cellular uptake and targeting (stage 4)
For therapeutic agents that act intracellularly, NPs need to cross the cell 
membrane and escape the endosome after reaching the pathological 
brain region. NPs with fine-tuned charge, size and hydrophobic–
hydrophilic balance can enter the cells via passive diffusion. The 
delicate bilayer model of cell plasma membranes poses a highly 
selective filter to contents that can gain entry into cells126. Active entry 
typically involves interactions with cell surface receptors, which vary 
between cell types and can change expression levels in response to 
various physiological and pathological signals. As mentioned earlier, 
receptor-mediated uptake is complicated by the presence of the pro-
tein corona and other detoxification strategies triggered by the cell in 
response to external stimuli127. If nanomaterials successfully contact 
the cell membrane, they can enter the cells via phagocytic or pinocytic 
pathways, with receptor-mediated endocytosis being the most com-
mon route of entry128. Endocytosed materials are typically fated for 
degradation in the acidic environment of the lysosome, prompting 
intelligent design considerations to facilitate endosomal escape and 
release into the cytoplasm129. Even within the cytoplasm, nanomate-
rials can be enveloped by autophagosomes and recycled back to the 
lysosomes, adding a further layer of complexity128,130. In addition to 
the various physicochemical factors of the nanocarrier, the biological 
identity of the cell can determine the feasibility and efficiency of cel-
lular uptake128,131. For example, microglia are notoriously hard to target 
considering the spectrum of phenotypic and genotypic forms they 
can adopt, depending on the pathological state in question. Further 
research is also required to delineate the transcriptomic changes 
that these cells express in both physiological and pathological states, 
and could eventually enable us to safely target certain receptors that 
are exclusively expressed in a disease of interest132–134. As the primary 
immune responders of the CNS, their inherent capacity to phagocy-
tose any foreign material could further question the validity of a truly 
‘microglia-selective’ targeting approach. The same challenge echoes for 
astrocytes, as they express an important proportion of receptors that 
are also distributed among other cell types within the brain, and could 
therefore lead to the uptake of an astrocyte-targeted NP by another cell 
and thereby diminish the intended therapeutic outcomes135. Neuron 
specificity is uniquely hampered by the need to target them in particular 
brain regions, as mentioned in previous sections, and requires the 
development of strategies beyond active targeting to limit NP diffusion 
to said regions. Although further research is required to support the 
development of such complex and precise nanosystems, there is a 
growing body of techniques adopted by researchers to guarantee 
cell-specific and region-specific delivery of NPs.
Precision brain targeting at different levels
Precision targeting can be achieved at four different levels (Fig. 3). 
At level 1, targeting is directed towards the brain endothelium. At level 2, 
BBB penetration is attained to target the entire brain comprehensively. 
Moving further, levels 3 and 4 involve the realization of region-specific 
and cell-specific targeting, respectively. The determination of the 
target level is contingent upon the nature of the specific disease and 
its underlying pathophysiology. For example, NPs intended for the 
modulation of neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative diseases such 
as AD or TBI would require the targeting of activated microglia136–138. 
However, repairing the BBB after TBI or treating BEC dysfunction in AD 
and other diseases may require targeting the brain endothelium and 
other extracellular components26,139,140. To achieve effective precision 
delivery, it is critical to design NPs to address the barriers summarized 
above, which vary depending on the desired level of precision targeting 
(Fig. 4). For instance, for endothelium targeting, challenges include 
clearance during circulation, dynamics of margination, and ensur-
ing efficient uptake by BECs. Conversely, for microglial or neuronal 
targeting, the comprehensive resolution of all barriers outlined in the 
preceding section becomes imperative.
Targeting the brain endothelium (level 1)
Prolonging the circulation half-life is a critical step to increase 
the chance of NPs interacting with the brain endothelium. Varying 

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
574
Review article
the size, surface charge and charge density of NPs have proven effec-
tive in tuning their pharmacokinetic properties58,74,141. For instance, 
NPs within 50–100 nm showed reduced RES clearance, whereas neu-
tral or slightly negatively charged NPs tend to circulate longer than 
positively charged ones74,142,143. However, if the charge density of cati-
onic NPs is maintained at a low level, they can achieve comparable 
circulation time and safety profiles144. To evade protein corona and 
subsequent clearance by the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS), 
surface modification of NPs with polyethylene glycol (PEG) polymers 
as a ‘stealth coating’58,145 proves to be an effective approach. Variations 
in PEG chain length and coating density can further influence the cir-
culation time of NPs. For example, NPs with PEG-coating density lower 
than 0.2 PEG nm−2 were insufficient to prevent opsonization and MPS 
clearance and thus led to faster clearance146. Coating NPs with PEG5000 
substantially reduces serum protein adsorption to NPs, leading to the 
longest circulation time among other PEG chain lengths147. Besides 
tuning the physicochemical properties of NPs, cloaking them with 
membranes isolated from erythrocytes, leukocytes and platelets can 
enhance their stealthy circulation and substantially reduce protein 
absorption and phagocytic uptake148,149. As the physicochemical prop-
erties of NPs that govern clearance also influence margination, trade-
offs are inevitable. For instance, although stiffer NPs have a higher 
propensity to marginate, they also face more rapid clearance by phago-
cytes in the bloodstream74. Conversely, non-spherical NPs, although 
a
Targeting specific brain cells (level 4)
Targeting brain endothelium (level 1)
b BBB penetration and comprehensive brain targeting (level 2)
c Targeting specific brain regions (level 3)
Brain
parenchyma
d 
Barriers in level 1
•  Particle clearance
• Margination dynamics
 of particles
Endothelial cell uptake
Brain
parenchyma
Cingulate cortex
Corpus callosum
Putamen
Particle diﬀusion or
distribution
Barriers in level 2
• BBB
Hippocampus
Neuron cell uptake
Barriers in level 3
• Interstitial flow
• Lymphatic clearance
• Eﬀlux transporters
• ECM and neurotoxic
 debris
Barriers in level 4
• Targeting specificity
• Endosomal escape
Fig. 3 | Distinct levels of precision targeting in CNS. Precision targeting of 
nanoparticles (NPs) in the central nervous system (CNS) requires a strategic 
approach within four different levels. a, It starts with designing NPs for prolonged 
systemic circulation and enhanced margination to target endothelial cells, 
facilitating interactions with endothelium and endothelial uptake. b, In the 
second level, NPs should be engineered to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) 
and reach the brain parenchyma in a comprehensive manner. c, The third level 
involves NPs to target specific regions to address regional vulnerability. d, Finally, 
achieving therapeutic effects in CNS diseases requires a focus on addressing 
cell-specific vulnerability. To accomplish this, NPs must efficiently diffuse to 
distinct affected brain regions and enter affected cell types. It is crucial to note 
that the barriers presented at each level are cumulative. Thus, addressing barriers 
at all stages is imperative to achieve effective targeting at the cellular level. ECM, 
extracellular matrix.

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
575
Review article
demonstrating a higher tendency for adhesion to vessel walls, often 
suffer from less efficient cellular internalization owing to their irregular 
shape and attract more protein corona150,151. Therefore, researchers 
have to become the arbitrators of this ‘pulling contest’ to decide on the 
physical parameters that lead to optimal delivery to the CNS.
Rational design choices are essential to facilitate active endothelial 
targeting given that BBB dysfunction is a hallmark of various neuro-
pathologies. Existing research predominantly focuses on targeting 
receptors on the endothelium to facilitate NP entry into the brain 
(Table 1), but there is also a need to explore localization within damaged 
brain endothelium. The dynamic endosomal compartments within 
these cells often redirect endocytosed materials to different locations 
within the brain, limiting retention within the vascular cells. Despite 
the availability of highly selective cell surface markers for cells such 
as pericytes, ligand-targeted approaches against them remain unex-
plored152,153. Notably, targeting TFR or low-density lipoprotein receptors 
(LDLR) can mediate NP penetration past the BBB. However, their high 
internalization ratios make them unsuitable for BEC localization154. 
By contrast, cell membrane components with low endocytic removal 
rates — such as the homing peptide CFAGTPSILMLA — can internalize 
selectively within BECs154. Combining the delicate interplay between 
controlled endocytosis of vascular cell surface components, targeted 
NPs and efflux transport mechanisms is crucial for achieving maximal 
BEC targeting. Together, these considerations can inspire the devel-
opment of novel approaches to target neovascular cell populations, 
addressing vascular dysfunction following a pathological assault.
BBB penetration and comprehensive brain targeting (level 2)
Despite the continuous tight junctions of the brain endothelium making 
paracellular transport and passive diffusion highly restricted, several 
material designs can enhance passive targeting delivery of NPs across 
the BBB. For instance, gold NPs of a particularly small size (10–15 nm) 
can cross the BBB via transmembrane diffusion155. Similarly, superpara-
magnetic iron oxide NPs (SPIONs) with a size of 50 nm or less can also 
cross the BBB in the event of AD or ischaemic stroke156. Furthermore, 
NPs made of lipophilic cores such as liposomes and LNPs are inherently 
more efficient at passive brain targeting owing to endogenous interac-
tion between lipids and LDLR, which are expressed by both BECs and 
neurons157–159. By altering the specific types of lipids used in fabricating 
the NPs, one may be able to control the composition of its associated 
protein corona to further enhance BBB permeability160. More rigorous 
studies are warranted in the future to gain a deeper understanding 
of BBB penetration of different NPs with varying physiochemical 
properties.
The most promising avenue for brain drug delivery to date has 
been the use of active targeting strategies to improve NP penetra-
tion through the BBB. Ideally, the target receptors should be highly 
expressed in the luminal side of the brain vasculature, with minimal 
expression on the peripheral vessel to reduce off-targeting161. These 
strategies involve surface modifications of NPs with molecules such as 
glycoproteins, peptides, hormones and antibodies, aiming to improve 
transcytosis by interacting with specific receptors on brain blood ves-
sels162 (Table 1). Although the quest for receptors exclusively expressed 
in the brain endothelium remains challenging, several promising 
targets have emerged.
As the most thoroughly investigated receptor for brain drug deliv-
ery, the TFR was shown to be widely expressed in the brain capillary 
beds compared to other tissues163. Successful brain drug delivery has 
been achieved by conjugating full-length antibodies (such as OX26 
and DNL310)164, single-chain Fv165,166, single antigen-binding frag-
ment167,168, peptides76,111 and aptamers169 that target TFR. Aside from 
antibodies, synthetic peptides specific to TFR can also be conjugated 
to NPs to direct BBB targeting. Despite having only 1–10% binding 
activity compared to their parent antibodies, these bioactive pep-
tides (10 kDa) are considerably smaller than antibodies (150 kDa) and 
possess lower immunogenicity, stronger penetration and reduced 
production cost76,111. For instance, the conjugation of a CRT peptide — 
an iron-mimicry moiety specific for TF–TFR complex — to PLGA-NPs 
led to a 2.4-fold and 1.4-fold increase in brain accumulation compared 
to TF-NP and bare NPs. Furthermore, CRT-NPs also demonstrated a 
substantially higher extravasation distance into the brain parenchyma. 
Consequently, mice bearing orthotopic glioma treated with paclitaxel-
loaded CRT-NPs showed the greatest prolonged survival of all groups, 
with a 2.5-fold increase compared to saline-treated negative controls170.
The LDLR family, which binds to a variety of substrates includ-
ing cholesterol, reelin and apolipoproteins (ApoE, ApoB)171, presents 
another avenue for effective BBB penetration. Directly decorating 
the NPs with these substrates through physical adsorption or cova-
lent conjugation substantially increases intraparenchymal accumu-
lation172–174. For instance, a near-infrared light-activatable nanogel 
camouflaged with ApoE peptide-decorated erythrocyte membrane 
showed a prolonged circulation half-life (8 h as opposed to 4 h), as 
well as substantially enhanced BBB entry owing to the ApoE pep-
tides, resulting in >5% of injected dose detected in brain parenchyma 
8 h post-injection175. Other peptide ligands, such as VH434, angiopep-2 
and MTF peptide developed from melanotransferrin (MTF), were also 
developed for LDLR targeting and functionalized on NPs, showing a 
statistically significant increase in BBB penetration compared to the 
non-coated controls176–178. The effect of coating density on a wide range 
of ligands on NPs, including polysorbate 80 (PS80), a substrate for 
LDLR, has also been investigated. It was found that increasing PS80 
coating density almost doubled the intracellular uptake and brain 
accumulation of the NPs114.
Other targeting strategies also include the decoration of NPs 
with insulin receptor-binding antibodies (IgG) and glucose that rely 
on GLUT1. These active targeting strategies provide valuable insights 
into optimizing the surface properties of NPs to overcome the chal-
lenges of delivering therapeutics to the brain. However, there is often 
a trade-off between the binding avidity and/or affinity and brain pen-
etrance. Although high avidity increases NP accumulation within brain 
capillaries, NPs with lower avidity tend to translocate to the abluminal 
side more efficiently. For instance, TF-decorated gold NPs can reach 
the brain parenchyma through TFR-mediated transcytosis. High TF 
content (200 TF per NP) on NPs, which correlates with high avidity, 
increased association with endothelial cells, causing most of the NPs 
to stay within brain capillaries. Conversely, lower TF content (20 TF per 
NP) promoted NP-TFR interaction on the luminal side of the BBB and 
translocation of the complex across to the abluminal side179.
Another innovative method to boost BBB crossing is to leverage 
innate cells and cellular products, which have a natural tendency to 
home to diseased tissues. Cellular hitchhiking has emerged as a promis-
ing strategy, wherein NPs are attached to the surface of either immune 
cells or red blood cells to not only prolong their circulation time, but 
also target specific receptors expressed by the BBB. For instance, 
in most neurological disorders, neuroinflammation is a prevalent 
hallmark accompanied by the upregulation of endothelial adhesion 
proteins such as vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM1) and inter-
cellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) owing to local cytokine release. 

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
576
Review article
This upregulation results in the widespread infiltration of circulat-
ing immune cells, primarily macrophages and leukocytes, into the 
brain parenchyma180. For example, ‘cellular backpacks’ consisting of 
a polymer particle of 7–10 µm in diameter and a few hundred nano-
metres in thickness carried by macrophages (as the particle is too 
large to be phagocytosed) could penetrate the inflamed brain in an 
Mannose and
MS1 receptors
Cell adhesion
molecules
GT1B
receptor
Tet-1
Fibroblast growth
factor receptor 1
Fibroblast
growth factor
ligand
Membranotrophic
peptide
gH625
peptide
Astrocyte
homing peptide
CD11b surface
marker
CD11b surface
antibody
RVG
Dopamine
receptor
NP shape enhances wall adhesion
Stiﬀness enhance margination
TLR4
NTR and nicotinic
LPS acetylcholine
receptors
LPS
TPP
TPP
Dopamine
Ligands to enable cell-specific targeting for level 4 targeting
Strategies to enable region-specific accumulation of NPs for level 3 targeting
Ligands to enable endothelium uptake and
BBB penetration for level 1 and 2 targeting
Physicochemical modification to tune clearance 
and margination for level 1 targeting
ROS
ROS
ROS
FUS
External stimuli-assisted delivery
External stimuli-assisted delivery
FUS
Facilitate localized
drug release
Near-infrared stimuli
TF receptors
TF ligand
Cholesterol 
Reelin 
ApoE
IgG antibody
Glucose
LDL receptor family
Insulin receptor
GLUT1
Size
Stiﬀness
Charge
Shape
Environmentally triggered NP accumulation
Microglia
Neuron
Astrocytes
TF
ApoE

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
577
Review article
encephalitis brain model, but not when the backpacks were injected 
alone without their cellular carriers181. As an alternative cell vehicle, 
RBCs are highly abundant and have relatively long circulation times 
compared to NPs. NPs adsorbed on the surface of RBCs demonstrate 
decreased liver clearance and deposit within the capillary network 
wherein NPs can be ‘shed off’ from the RBCs as they squeeze through 
the narrow blood vessel182. This RBC hitchhiking strategy was imple-
mented in brain vasculature targeting by using intra-carotid arterial 
injection. An astonishingly high BBB penetration (~12% injected dose) 
was achieved, which was about tenfold higher than the penetration 
achieved with affinity moieties183 such as antibodies or ligands.
Moreover, the expression of the receptor and transport mecha-
nisms may vary in different CNS diseases owing to dysregulated 
molecular transport. For instance, the brain endothelium of patients 
with AD or HD is marked with a decrease in GLUT1 and LRP expression 
levels184. Conversely, ischaemic stroke is characterized by an elevated 
GLUT1 expression185. Therefore, researchers should tailor the targeting 
ligand depending on the disease of interest.
External interferences have also been used to transiently open the 
BBB to increase NP delivery to the brain parenchyma. Microbubble-
assisted focused ultrasound (MB-FUS) is one of the most advanced non-
invasive methods to improve intravenous delivery through the BBB. 
Rapid short-pulse ultrasound can introduce a local acoustic pressure 
just above the pressure threshold of local BBB opening with minimum 
adverse bioeffects, such as red blood cell extravasation and inflam-
mation. Following FUS application, the BBB integrity is restored in as 
short as 10 min, reducing the probability of serum protein extravasa-
tion. The utility of MB-FUS was demonstrated for the co-delivery of 
an mRNA-encapsulated LNP formulation with microbubbles to mice 
with healthy brains, leading to a substantially enhanced transfection 
rate in CD31+ BECs186. In 2019, the first-in-human trial that evaluated the 
effectiveness of MR-guided FUS for BBB opening in the visual cortex 
was completed in four patients with ALS. Successful BBB opening was 
proven by permeation of otherwise impermeable imaging contrast 
agents, such as gadolinium187.
When the NPs extravasate from brain vasculature, their mass 
transport relies predominantly on diffusion within the extracellular 
space (ECS), which is morphologically heterogeneous188. Although 
some studies suggest that convective transport may be at play in pro-
moting particle motion within the brain interstitial, controversies 
around its existence and extent persist122,189,190. To avoid confusion, 
in this Review, we mainly focus on diffusive transport191,192. Particle 
diffusion is primarily defined by local ECS geometry and tortuosity 
and secondarily impacted by interstitial fluid viscosity and binding 
interactions with ECS components188. Surface modification of the NPs 
naturally plays a part in determining the diffusivity of the NPs within 
the ECS. For instance, the effect of 5 biocompatible and commonly used 
stabilizing surfactants on the transport of NPs to and within the brain 
was studied. It was found that poloxamer 188 (F68) and poloxamer 407 
(F127) inhibit P-glycoprotein efflux transporter to remain localized 
intracellularly193, whereas PS80 increases the brain accumulation of 
NPs. Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and anionic cholic acid (CHA) were also 
studied because both are common surfactants to improve NP stabili-
zation. It was found that the anionic surfactant CHA greatly enhanced 
NP diffusive transport compared to no surfactant. By contrast, the 
presence of non-ionic surfactants, PVA, F127, F68 and PS80 resulted in 
shorter diffusion distances194. Nevertheless, when administered in vivo, 
PS80 demonstrated impressive brain uptake, particularly by neurons 
and microglia, owing to its ability to recruit ApoE and ApoB adsorption, 
again highlighting the importance of protein corona composition 
in dictating NPs fate within the brain194. ECS composition can also 
influence diffusion; by studying the diffusion coefficients of 40-nm 
NPs within the brain ECS in rat brain slices at different developmental 
stages, an inverse relationship between diffusivity and age could be 
built195. In contrast to diffusion, NPs can be delivered via bulk flow to 
the brain by utilizing convection-enhanced delivery196, but this strategy 
requires stereotaxic injection and is not applicable for systemically 
administered NPs. Lastly, the fate of NPs within the brain is dictated 
by a fine balance between accumulation and clearance, though little 
is known about the mechanisms that facilitate the latter. Previously, 
we discussed the roles of IF, cerebrospinal fluid and lymphatic flow in 
contributing to the removal of NPs from the parenchymal environment 
and it has been shown that organic NPs are cleared from the brain via 
the glymphatic pathway197. Further research is therefore required to 
reach a better understanding of the clearance mechanisms within 
the brain and explore the possibilities of engineering NPs that could 
potentially circumvent the same and ensure prolonged parenchymal 
residence time.
Targeting specific regions in the brain (level 3)
Region-specific drug delivery to the brain is in dire need owing to the 
differential vulnerability of brain regions to various neuropathologies. 
One of the main strategies for directing NPs to specific brain regions 
is to take advantage of the compromised neurovascular units and 
resulting local microenvironment changes in specific CNS diseases. 
For instance, after a TBI, the influx of thrombin to the injury site forms a 
hotspot that can be used to attract NPs decorated with peptide (CAQK) 
that can selectively bind to thrombin in the injured area198,199. Similarly, 
NPs conjugated with a stroke homing peptide (SHp, CLEVSRKNC) were 
used to successfully deliver neuroprotective agents to the stroke 
Fig. 4 | Strategies to achieve precision targeting in CNS. Various strategies 
and materials have been developed to overcome barriers at different targeting 
levels. Physiochemical modifications, including adjustments in size, charge, 
stiffness and shape, enhance particle circulation and margination to enable 
endothelium targeting at level 1. Ligand conjugation on nanoparticles (NPs) 
have been applied to target receptors present on the blood–brain barrier (BBB) 
endothelium, such as transferrin (TF) receptors, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
receptors, insulin receptors and glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) transporters 
for level 1 targeting or to enable BBB penetration for targeting the entire brain 
(level 2). To achieve region-specific targeting (level 3), diverse approaches have 
been investigated. For example, focused ultrasound can facilitate deep brain 
tissue penetration and regional targeting. External stimuli, such as near-infrared 
light, can guide particles such as gold nanorods to specific brain regions. 
Additionally, environmental conditions within the brain can contribute to 
regional targeting, as seen in central nervous system (CNS) diseases wherein 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) can trigger NP drug release in the targeted region. 
Achieving cellular targeting (level 4) often involves various ligands to target 
microglia, astrocytes and neurons. The boxes represent different but cumulative 
material design considerations across different levels: the smallest boxes 
present considerations required for efficient level 1 targeting, whereas efficient 
level 4 targeting requires the combination of the design considerations for all 
levels. FUS, focused ultrasound; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; NTR, neurotrophin 
receptor; RVG, rabies virus glycoprotein; TLR4, Toll-like receptor 4; TPP, 
tetraphenylporphyrin.

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
578
Review article
Table 1 | Different receptors, ligands and NP formulations previously developed to achieve targeting of BBB endothelium 
and penetration through BBB in different diseases
Receptor
Ligand
NP composition
Therapeutic cargo
Disease
Animal
BBB penetration
Ganglioside 
receptor
A fusion peptide: cell-
penetrating TGN peptide 
and a neuron-binding 
peptide Tet-1
PEG–PLA NP
NAP peptide
AD
Mice
Brain accumulation of the TGN/Tet-1 peptide-
coated NP is 5.8-fold higher than that of bare 
NP and 1.7-fold higher than that of angiopep2-
coated NP; NPs predominantly accumulated 
in neurites251
GLUT 
receptor
Glucose (covalent 
conjugation)
Liposomes (with 
different PEG 
chain lengths)
Coumarin 6
–
Mice
Longer PEG chain length resulted in lower 
brain accumulation probably owing to 
steric hindrance; but higher glucose 
showed more effective transendothelial 
transport287
Glucose
Polymeric 
micelle
–
–
Mice
Simply modifying the micelles with glucose did 
not substantially improve brain accumulation, 
but when coupled with external glucose to 
induce intracellular recycling, GLUT-modified 
NP achieved elevated brain accumulation288
Galactose (covalent 
conjugation)
Polymeric NP
BACE1 siRNA
AD
Mice
Induced hypoglycaemia to elevate GLUT1 
receptor expression before administration; 
Gal-modified NP showed 5.8-fold higher 
accumulation in the brain than bare NPs289
Dual targeting: GLUT 
transporter-specific 
mannose; brain-targeted 
cell-penetrating peptide
Liposome
VGF protein-
encoding plasmids
–
Mice
Mannose-functionalized liposomes showed 
~2-fold increase in plasmid transfection in 
the brain290
Insulin 
receptor
mAb antibody for insulin 
receptor
Antibody–drug 
conjugate
α-l-iduronidase; 
iduronate 2-sulfatase
MPS
Rhesus 
monkey
Radiolabelled antibody–drug conjugate 
showed detectable brain uptake for 2 h (ref. 291)
Integrin 
receptor
c(RGD) peptide
Liposomes
Edaravone
Cerebral 
ischaemia
Mice
Penetration of the c(RGD)-NP is highly reliant 
on infiltration of monocytes and/or neutrophils; 
this also give region specificity to the 
NP as the monocytes and/or neutrophils 
preferentially accumulated in the ischaemic 
sites292
LDLR
ApoE (covalent 
conjugation)
Bovine serum 
albumin NPs
–
–
Mice
ApoE-conjugated NPs were detected in the 
brain after 30 min, uniformly spread across all 
six major brain regions293
ApoB (BBB-binding 
domain)
APOB–drug 
conjugation
Suphamidase
Mucopolysaccha­
ridoses type IIIA 
(MPS-IIIA)
Mice
10–15% greater enzymatic activity detected in 
treated mice; ApoB–drug conjugate showed 
intracellular uptake in both astrocytes and 
neurons294
ApoB (BBB-binding 
domain)
Recombinant 
ApoB–enzyme 
fusion protein
Neprilysin
AD
Mice
ApoB–enzyme conjugate achieved 1.7% 
injected dose at 24 h post-delivery; treated 
mice showed lower amyloid-β in the brain and 
improved neuronal synapses295
ApoE (covalent 
conjugation)
ApoE-
reconstituted 
nanocarrier with 
synthetic lipids
α-Mangostin
AD
Mice
Following injection 2–4 weeks, ApoE 
nanocarrier-treated mice showed less 
astrogliosis and rescued memory296
LDLR-specific cyclic 
peptide VH434 and 
VH4127
Peptide protein 
conjugate
Fc fragment of 
human IgG protein
–
Mice
Mechanistically showed that the two cyclic 
peptides cross the BBB through receptor-
mediated transcytosis via LDLR176
Lactoferrin
Lipid NP
Curcumin
AD
Rats
Successful transcytosis demonstrated 
with notably reduced astrogliosis in 
treated rats297
Dual targeting; LDLR-
specific; ApoE peptide 
and amyloid-β-specific 
phosphatidic acid
Liposome
Aß peptide-specific 
phosphatidic acid
AD
Mice
ApoE-modified liposome reached 
5-fold higher brain accumulation (0.3%) 
compared to non-modified NP 24 h 
post-injection298
Leptin-30 peptide
Dendrigraft
Plasmid DNA
–
Mice
Leptin 30-modified NPs resulted in significant 
brain accumulation 80 min after injection and 
resulted in high gene transfection efficiency 
in microglia cells299

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
579
Review article
regions in mice, leading to reductions in infarct volume and increased 
functional recovery200. Other microenvironmental changes such as 
pH and reactive oxygen species (ROS) at the site of CNS disease could 
be used as a smart sensitive trigger for controlled drug release in the 
pathological region. For instance, NPs sensitive to oxidative stress 
effectively accumulated in the wound cavity after TBI and promoted 
functional recovery201. Certain chemical coatings on NPs have shown 
region-specific accumulation after intravenous injection. For example, 
PS80-coated PLGA NPs were found to accumulate in the cortex after 
systemic administration114,202. The reason for such preferential accumu-
lation is not known and future investigations are needed to broaden the 
list of similar materials that can achieve region-specific accumulation.
Harnessing external stimuli such as light, magnetic field and ultra-
sound offers great potential to dictate the localization of NPs within 
desired brain regions. Factors such as NP shape, ligand coating density, 
and responsiveness to light can be engineered to achieve regional 
accumulation. For example, when gold nanorods are coated with TF 
and activated by near-infrared stimulation, they specifically accumu-
late in the hippocampus and subventricular zones of healthy mice203. 
Similarly, magnetic stimulus was used to guide mesenchymal stem cells 
labelled with superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs to the hippocampus of 
AD mice204. However, how to control NPs smoothly to cover the whole 
pathological brain region without migrating to other regions remains 
unknown, which might require extensive iteration of physiochemical 
properties of NPs including size, charge or stiffness.
Targeting specific cell types in the brain (level 4)
Advances in single-cell omics and sequencing have allowed the identi-
fication of distinct cellular and molecular signatures associated with 
healthy and diseased states of the brain205–207. Furthermore, the selective 
vulnerability of cell populations and the resulting patterns of spatiotem-
poral degeneration15,208 necessitate cell-specific delivery approaches 
to maximize therapeutic efficacy while minimizing cytotoxicity and 
off-target effects76 (Fig. 4).
Astrocytes. Astrocytes are pivotal guardians of cerebral homoeostasis, 
exerting their influence on BBB maintenance, neurotransmitter 
recycling, synaptic remodelling and regulation of ion concentra-
tions209–211. Targeted delivery to astrocytes is of great importance to 
ameliorate neuropathological manifestations in the CNS. Owing to the 
structural proximity of astrocyte feet to the brain endothelium and 
given the disruption of BBB in multiple CNS diseases, astrocytes could 
Receptor
Ligand
NP composition
Therapeutic cargo
Disease
Animal
BBB penetration
Leptin 
receptor
Angiopep-2 peptide
Polypeptide 
NP with proline 
neuroprotective 
residues
BDMC
AD
Mice
Brain accumulation is predominantly in the 
hippocampus, cortex and olfactory bulb; signal 
is the highest in layer II/III of cortex177
LRPR
MTF peptide
Peptide–protein 
conjugate
IL-1R antagonist mAb
Neuropathic pain
Mice
Peptide–antibody fusion reached ~2.2% 
injected dose in the brain with >95% in 
parenchyma; in a neuropathic pain model, the 
fusion vector achieved significant analgesic 
effects300
RVG peptide
Exosome 
(dendritic cell-
derived) NPs
SNCA siRNA 
and curcumin
Parkinson disease
Mice
RVG-coated NP showed significantly 
higher brain accumulation and specifically 
colocalization with neurons in substantia 
nigra301
nAChR
Diferric TF or OX26 
(entire antibody vs 
Fab fragment)
Antibody–drug 
conjugate
HRP
–
Mice
OX26-HRP and TF-HRP, but not OX26(Fab)-HRP, 
underwent transcytosis through BBB302
OX26 (covalent 
conjugation)
Human serum 
albumin NPs
Loperamide
–
Mice
Notable anti-nociceptive effects induced 
after injection of OX26-HSA NP as opposed to 
control isotype303
TFR antibody 
(heavy chain)
Bispecific 
antibody
Anti-amyloid 
antibody
AD
Mice
Brain uptake of the fusion protein was 3.5% of 
injected dose and amyloid-β concentration 
was reduced 40% in treated mice166
TFR antibody (heavy 
chain, low affinity)
Bispecific 
antibody
Anti-BACE1 antibody
AD
Mice
Low affinity antibody exhibited high transcytotic 
potential and showed broad brain distribution 
24 h after injection; high amyloid-β reduction in 
mouse brain neurons after treatment304
Dual targeting; TFR 
antibody and ICAM1 
antibody
Polystyrene NP
Acid 
sphingomyelinase
Niemanne–Pick 
disease types A 
and B
Mice
The dual-targeted NP achieved higher BBB 
penetration than TFR-antibody alone, but lower 
than ICAM1-antibody alone; enzyme delivery 
enhanced compared to free enzyme305
TFR
TF
Gold NP
–
–
Mice
Large amount of TF functionalization trapped 
NPs in the luminal side of brain endothelium 
whereas less TF enabled greater transcytosis179
Note that all NPs listed were administered intravenously. AD, Alzheimer disease; BBB, blood–brain barrier; BDMC, bisdemethoxycurcumin; HRP, horseradish peroxidase; MPS, 
mucopolysarcharidosis; MTF, melanotransferrin; nAchR, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor; NP, nanoparticle; PLA, poly(lactic) acid; RVG, rabies virus glycoprotein; siRNA, small interfering RNA; 
TF, transferrin; TFR, transferrin receptor.
Table 1 (continued) | Different receptors, ligands and NP formulations previously developed to achieve targeting of BBB 
endothelium and penetration through BBB in different diseases

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
580
Review article
make for attractive candidates for passive targeting. Several groups 
have exploited ligand-conjugated NPs that offer selective targeting 
towards astrocytes (Table 2). For example, an arginine-rich poly-
plex gene delivery system transfected primary human astrocytes, 
with very minor localization observed within neurons when tested 
in vivo212. The functionalization of NPs with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
enabled the targeting of reactive astrocytes in an in vivo model of spinal 
cord injury, although some uptake was noted in neurons as well213. 
Other ligands such as a triphenylphosphonium cation214, a homing 
peptide specific to reactive astrocytes (AS1)215, and peptide gH625 
(ref. 1) are also promising for preferential delivery towards astrocytes 
over other neural cells. Further studies seeking to uncover astrocyte 
homing entities will benefit from exploring the differential expression 
of receptors and transporters under pathophysiological conditions.
Microglia. Microglia constitute the dense network of resident immune 
cells of the brain, playing vital parts in the elimination of dead cells 
and debris, the secretion of neurotrophic factors, the modulation of 
neural circuits and the maintenance of the overall homoeostatic wel-
fare of the CNS216. However, the phenotypic and genotypic profiles of 
these cells vary across a broad spectrum in response to various healthy 
and diseased states, offering unique opportunities and challenges to 
precision delivery217,218. NP geometry substantially influences micro-
glial uptake, with microglia demonstrating a preference for spiked 
nano-urchins over spherical or rod-shaped materials219–221. Although 
the inherent phagocytic capacity of microglia could contribute to 
preferential uptake over other cells, most NPs have previously relied 
on microglia receptors for active targeting (Table 2). For instance, func-
tionalizing ceria-zirconia NPs with CD11b antibody led to substantial 
internalization within microglia in a mouse model of neuropathic 
pain222. Similarly, functionalizing liposomes targeting TLR4 receptors 
with LPS led to selective internalization in microglia and delayed disease 
progression. Microglia-specific LNPs (MG-LNP) were screened amongst 
a library of seven formulations and resulted in effective delivery of 
small interfering RNA (siRNA) against the gene encoding PU.1 in mouse 
models of chronic neuroinflammation223. Remarkably, MG-LNPs carry-
ing siRNA localize within the microglia and reduce neuroinflammation, 
regardless of whether they were injected intracisternally or intraperi-
toneally223. NPs that target microglia-specific receptors (such as the 
scavenger receptor, RAGE and CD receptor) have achieved increased 
uptake in microglia in vitro, warranting further evaluations of their 
specificities in animal models with neurological disease conditions219.
Neurons. Neurons exhibit functional and morphological diversity 
across spatiotemporal regions and disease conditions. Further, these 
distinct neuronal populations are selectively vulnerable to a range of 
neurodegenerative disorders15,28,224–226, prompting precision delivery 
towards specific CNS diseases. The shape of NPs can influence neuronal 
regeneration, differentiation and survival, with specific attention drawn 
to nanoscaffolds, nanotubes, nanowires and nanocones227. The influ-
ence of NP size on neuronal uptake has only been reliably investigated 
with gold NPs; smaller gold NPs (15 nm) are preferentially uptake of 
whereas differentiated cells internalized larger ones (40 nm)228. None-
theless, other studies demonstrate that smaller NPs appear to elicit 
greater neurotoxic effects229,230. In addition to shape and size, the sur-
face charge of NPs also has a role in targeting neurons. For example, in a 
neuron-glial co-culture, negatively charged NPs interacted selectively 
with the neuronal membranes compared with positive and neutrally 
charged particles231. Similarly, negatively charged quantum dots were 
selectively internalized by neurons232. Such exciting findings await eval-
uation in vivo, especially in the context of epileptic disorders whereby 
local surface charges could impact seizure thresholds233.
Glossary
Blood–brain barrier
(BBB). A selective barrier formed by 
endothelial cells, astrocytes and 
pericytes that regulates the passage 
of substances from the bloodstream 
into the central nervous system.
Braak stages
A classification system that describes 
the progression of abnormal protein 
deposits, particularly tau proteins, 
within specific brain regions, providing 
insights in pathology progression in 
neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer disease.
Cerebrospinal fluid
Produced by the choroid plexus in 
brain ventricles; it surrounds the brain 
and spinal cord, providing mechanical 
support, nutrient delivery, waste removal 
and regulation of intracranial pressure 
within the central nervous system.
Convection-enhanced 
delivery
A local delivery method that 
utilize pressure to drive the flow of 
therapeutic agents through the brain 
parenchyma.
Extracellular matrix
A dynamic network of proteins and 
carbohydrates in the brain that surround 
neurons and glial cells, influencing 
synaptic plasticity, cell adhesion and 
neuronal migration.
Glymphatic pathway
A waste clearance system unique 
to the brain that relies on glial cells 
(especially astrocytes) to facilitate 
the cerebrospinal fluid–interstitial 
fluid exchange in the perivascular 
space.
Interstitial fluid
A fluid that fills the brain interstitial 
space and directly surrounds neurons 
and glial cells for nutrient delivery, waste 
removal and cell signalling.
Parenchyma
The main functional tissue of 
the brain, consisting of neurons, 
glial cells and other acellular 
supporting structures to maintain the 
cognitive and physiological function 
of the brain.
Protein corona
A layer of proteins that adsorb 
onto the surface of nanoparticles 
upon exposure to biological 
fluids, influencing their behaviour, 
interactions and biological 
responses.
Reticuloendothelial system
(RES). A network of phagocytic cells, 
mainly macrophages, that are primarily 
located in the liver and spleen and 
actively remove foreign substances 
via engulfment.
Tight junctions
Specialized intercellular junctions 
between endothelial cells that create 
a barrier to control the passage of ions, 
molecules and cells across epithelial 
and endothelial cell layers.
Transcytosis
The process by which macromolecules 
or particles are transported across a 
cell, involving their uptake on one side 
through endocytosis, intracellular 
transport, and release on the opposite 
side through exocytosis.

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
581
Review article
Table 2 | NPs developed to target specific cell types in the brain
Cell type
Ligand
Receptor
NP composition
Cargo
Disease
Animal 
model
Entry
Treatment outcome
Astrocytes –
–
PEG-PEI polyplex
Plasmid 
DNA
–
Mice
i.v.
Predominant gene expression restricted to 
astrocytes in the cortical regions212
LPS
Toll-like 
receptor 4
Chitosan and polyacrylic 
acid-bound quantum 
dots
–
SCI
Rats
Intrathecal
pH-responsive smart NPs selectively targeted 
reactive astrocytes and achieved successful 
endosomal escape213
TPP
–
Polymeric NPs
Coenzyme 
and aspirin
ALS
Rats
i.v.
Cargos efficiently crossed the BBB and localized 
within astrocyte mitochondria, leading to 
significant reduction of ROS levels214
Astrocyte 
homing 
peptide
–
Self-assembled nucleic 
acid framework
Adenosine 
kinase and 
ASO
Epilepsy
Mice
i.v.
Efficient silencing of ADK gene expression 
leading to reduced frequency of seizure215
gH625 
peptide
Membrane-
tropic
–
Direct 
delivery of 
gH625
–
Rats
i.v.
Proof-of-principle showing that gH625 was able 
to target astrocytes in vitro but localized within 
neurons in vivo306
Microglia
CD11b 
antibody
CD11b 
surface 
receptor
Inorganic NPs
–
Pain
Mice
Intrathecal
Significant reduction of microglial activation 
and pro-inflammatory gene expression and 
subsequent inhibition of mechanical allodynia222
–
MS1 receptor Microglial toxin-coated 
quantum dots
–
–
Mice
Intracranial
Specific uptake of saporin-coated NPs depleted 
microglial populations and enabled the 
preservation of neurons against microglia-
mediated amyloid-β toxicity307
–
VCAM1 and 
α4β1 integrin
Neuron membrane-
coated NP
–
PD
Mice
i.v.
Biomimetic NPs localized within microglia in 
the substantia nigra and striatum following BBB 
sonication and promoted conversion to the 
anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype and rescued 
dopamine levels in the CSF308
Neurons
RVG
p75 
neurotrophin 
and nAchR
NPs with intracellular 
trafficking transportan 
peptide
CASP3 
siRNA
TBI
Mice
i.v.
50% knockdown of caspase 3 gene that is normally 
upregulated following TBI and induces neuronal 
apoptosis235
Exosome membrane-
coated NP
–
–
Mice
i.v.
Enhanced targeting of neurons in vivo236
MSN
Favipiravir
VSV
Mice
i.v.
MSNs selectively accumulated in neurons, 
effectively inhibiting viral infection and proliferation 
and promoting enhanced survival of mice309
PLGA NP
–
–
Mice
Intranasal
Better understanding of spatiotemporal 
distribution of RVG NPs among the olfactory bulb 
and trigeminal nerve239
Liposome conjugated 
with TF peptide
Plasmid 
DNA
–
Rats
i.v.
Dual targeting strategy enhanced permeation 
across the BBB and transfection of neuronal 
populations
PLA-PEG NPs coated 
with RVG and contrast-
enhanced gadolinium
Rifampicin
AD
Mice
i.v.
Neuron-targeted delivery of rifampicin 
dramatically reduced amyloid-β levels, 
re-established synaptic plasticity and improved 
learning and memory capacity of AD mice238
Tet-1
GT1B
Polymeric NPs 
conjugated with BBB-
penetrating CGN peptide
BACE1 
siRNA
AD
Mice
i.v.
Significant knockdown of BACE1 expression 
reduced amyloid plaque and tau accumulation 
in the hippocampus248
PEG-PLA NP conjugated 
to BBB-penetrating TGN 
peptide
NAP peptide AD
Mice
i.v.
Overall high neuronal uptake with reduced 
oxidative stress, amyloid toxicity and reduced 
memory impairment251
Dopamine Dopamine 
receptor
MSN
GSH
–
–
–
Proof-of-concept in vitro study that highlighted 
the potential for specifically targeting 
dopaminergic neurons261
Fibroblast 
growth 
factor
Fibroblast 
growth 
factor 
receptor
Polymeric NP
Antioxidants 
and neuro-
protective 
peptide
AD
Mice
–
Demonstrated targeting to cholinergic neurons and 
intracellular trafficking to mitochondria to attenuate 
oxidative stress, amyloid-β and tau accumulation, 
and rescue of spatial memory impairment259
AD, Alzheimer disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; ASO, antisense oligonucleotide; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; GT1B, trisialoganglioside clostridial toxin receptor; i.v., intravenous; LPS, 
lipopolysaccharide; MS1, mannose and macrophage scavenger; MSN, mesoporous silica nanoparticle; NP, nanoparticle; PD, Parkinson disease; RVG, rabies virus glycoprotein; SCI, spinal cord 
injury; siRNA, small interfering RNA; TBI, traumatic brain injury; TPP, tetraphenylporphyrin; TF, transferrin; VSV, vesicular stomatitis virus.

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
582
Review article
Active targeting approaches to neurons typically involve the func-
tionalization of NPs with cell-penetrating peptides (Fig. 4). For instance, 
NPs functionalized with rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG) peptide 
showed specific binding to neuronal cells in vivo234 and were used 
to successfully deliver siRNA against the gene encoding caspase 3 to 
neurons in a preclinical model of TBI235. Another interesting strategy 
Optimal NP or
nanomaterial design
In vitro models
(e.g. 3D BBB model)
Brain organoids
On-chip models
Barcode sequence
Peptide barcoding
Patient 1
Patient 2
Heterogeneity leads to
inconsistent therapy
Diseased population
Lack of biomarkers to
track disease progression
Targeted
intervention
Treated population
Significant diﬀerences
with human brain
Improve
stratification
method
Optimal
homing
peptide
In vivo phage display
Spatial transcriptomics
Single-cell RNA sequencing
t-SNE1
t-SNE2
–30
–30
–20
–20
–10
–10
0
0
10
 10
20
 20
30
 30
1
3
5
7
2
4
6
8
Cell type
Discovering new receptors
AI-assisted NP screening
a
b
High-throughput screening for NPs and targeting ligands
In vitro evaluation using specialized models
Patient heterogeneity
Poor animal model
Clinical trial design and lack of
biomarkers for monitoring
Strategies to
advance CNS
delivery
Other
factors to
consider

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
583
Review article
to promote selective endocytosis by neurons relied on coating gold 
NPs with engineered exosomes that carried an RVG-Lamp2b fusion 
peptide236. RVG has also been used in conjunction with polymeric, inor-
ganic and metallic NPs as well237–240. Although RVG facilitates neuronal 
specificity by interacting with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors241, 
evidence suggests that astrocytes and microglia can overexpress 
the same subtypes of receptors under pathological conditions242–245, 
legitimizing cautious scrutiny when determining targeting success. 
Another popular peptide, Tet-1, is derived from the tetanus toxin and 
has a high binding capacity to motor neurons246 owing to its affin-
ity for ganglioside receptors247. Tet-1 has been conjugated to diverse 
families of NPs resulting in efficient delivery of therapeutic payloads 
to neurons248–250, especially when used in tandem with BBB targeting 
peptides such as TGN, CGN and D-T7 (refs. 251–253). Another category 
of ligands includes nerve growth factors (NGFs), dopamine, TF and 
lactoferrin254–256, which are involved in signalling pathways critical 
to neuronal homoeostasis. Indeed, silica NPs grafted with dopamine 
selectively delivered antioxidants to dopaminergic neurons in vitro257, 
highlighting the potential for targeting individual subtypes of neu-
rons implicated in discrete pathologies. Fibroblast ligand was modi-
fied on NPs to utilize the heightened expression of fibroblast growth 
factor receptors (FGFR1) in cholinergic neurons characteristic of AD 
pathology258, by delivering a hybrid antioxidant and neuroprotective 
peptide259, the NPs ameliorated mitochondrial stress in cholinergic 
neurons, leading to significant physiological and functional recovery 
among AD mouse models, with no observed toxicity. Studies have yet 
to examine the potential for targeting other classes such as dopamin-
ergic, glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons in vivo. To maximize the 
efficacy of targeted delivery, we need to have a deep understanding 
of the dynamism of receptor expression within and across patho-
logical states. For example, in HD, dopamine receptors are usually 
decreased260, whereas in PD, they can be either downregulated or 
upregulated depending on the stage of the disease. Similarly, although 
the cholinergic system is known to be globally affected in various neuro-
pathologies, the specific subtype of neuronal muscarinic receptors that 
are expressed and affected varies by the disease and brain region261–263.
Conclusion and outlook
Overall, NP platforms offer great promise because of their tunable size, 
shape, surface charge and their ability to conjugate a variety of ligands, 
which provide a versatile toolbox to optimize brain delivery with high 
precision. To accelerate the advancement of NPs for CNS diseases, 
additional efforts are required (Fig. 5). Integration of machine learning 
tools in the design process can facilitate high-throughput, efficient 
and precise synthesis of nanomaterials264–266. Optimization algorithms 
can incorporate an incredible number of variables to better inform 
experimental design parameters, enabling parsimonious and feasible 
target selection267. In vivo phage display can enable multiplexed, high-
throughput screening of homing peptides268, and it has already shown 
success in identifying brain-targeting moieties247,269–272, which could one 
day be functionalized to the next generation of nanovehicles. Moreo-
ver, the effective utilization of single-cell RNA sequencing and spatial 
transcriptomics will allow efficient mapping of the molecular identities 
of various cell types in the brain and provide a comprehensive under-
standing of how different cell types contribute to specific brain function 
and their involvement in different CNS disease273,274, which can propel 
precision delivery forward. Public sharing of such a large dataset would 
be extremely useful to guide drug discovery and precision delivery. In 
addition to dissecting how these cells are affected in various diseases, it 
is imperative for future research to explore how NPs and their payloads 
are distributed among different cells within the brain under different 
disease states. As we have emphasized above, a robust communication 
network exists between and within neurons and glia, creating strong 
implications for the reciprocal modulation of the function of down-
stream cells by the effector population275–278. For instance, delivery of 
an antioxidant-loaded NP targeted to the microglia could achieve a 
localized reduction of oxidative stress, but may also result in beneficial 
effects among other cell types in the vicinity. However, whether a given 
cell population might express the functional readout of an NP that has 
been internalized by another cell type awaits further inquiry.
Although in vivo screening of NP libraries with varying physio­
chemical and material parameters can be a promising strategy to 
identify compositions with high BBB permeability or efficient preci-
sion targeting, this process can be extremely expensive and laborious. 
Advances in machine learning tools, in vitro models, on-chip systems, 
and organoids can aid in the conscientious design of NPs (Fig. 5). 
For instance, novel 3D models of the BBB circumventing the reductive 
and static limitations of the older 2D transwells not only offer better 
recapitulation of cellular dynamics279 but also allow for an improved 
understanding of the haemorheological behaviour of nanosystems280. 
Newly developed models also account for specific receptors expressed 
on the BBB, while accurately capturing the microenvironment in healthy 
and diseased states279,281. Functionally competent bioengineered models 
have been generated in the context of a variety of neurodegenerative, 
neurodevelopmental and injury-related disorders of the CNS, contrib-
uting to greater resolution of regional differences282. As technology 
advances, compromises between physiological accuracy and material 
constraints might narrow, paving the way for the modelling of specific 
sub-classes of brain cells and their connectivity. In addition, machine 
learning can predict the in vivo pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of delivery systems and their interactions with specific cellular 
receptors283,284, which can then be compared with actual in vivo data to 
train artificial intelligence (AI) for predicting brain-targeted delivery.
The biological complexity of neurological disorders necessi-
tates the development of NPs to achieve pathology-specific resolu-
tion. However, increasing the complexity of NPs will provide additional 
reproducibility, scalability and economic challenges. Therefore, novel 
industrial approaches are required to support the development of 
Fig. 5 | Outlook of future research. a, The integration of artificial intelligence 
(AI) and machine learning holds promise for high-throughput screening of 
nanoparticles (NPs) to pinpoint optimal nanomaterials tailored for targeted 
delivery. Techniques such as computational approaches, spatial transcriptomics 
and single-cell RNA sequencing can help to identify receptors or pathways for 
precise targeting. Additionally, peptide and phage-based sequencing methods 
have been applied to discern optimal lipid NP (LNP) formulations and homing 
peptides, respectively. To complement these advancements, enhancing in vitro 
models is pivotal. b, Other key factors should be considered to promote success 
in clinical translation, such as selecting an animal model that more closely 
mirrors humans, addressing patient heterogeneity, and clinical trial designs. 
By carefully incorporating suitable stratification methods, refining our choice 
of animal models, and discovering additional biomarkers for use in clinical 
studies, we can enhance the likelihood of clinical successes in central nervous 
system (CNS) delivery. BBB, blood–brain barrier.

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
584
Review article
biologically and commercially relevant platforms. Biological rele-
vance further impinges on the promises offered by precision medicine, 
which requires tailoring to the genetic and molecular dispositions 
of individuals as well as diseased populations. However, much is still 
unknown about the genotypic characteristics underlying various 
neuropathologies, which can be attributed to the mismatch between 
in vitro and in vivo findings and the choice of animal models used. 
Rodents remain a popular preclinical model, but they possess stark 
differences in neural and glial architecture, receptor expression and 
ligand affinity compared to humans, leading to disappointing rates of 
clinical translation285,286. Moreover, clinical trial design must account 
for patient heterogeneity and improve the stratification methods.
Overall, we believe the stagnant landscape of disease-modifying 
therapies for neurological disorders would substantially benefit from 
the development of precision delivery system, especially in the context 
of novel therapeutic modalities such as gene therapies, the clinical 
success of which heavily relying on the delivery system. Although there 
has been limited progress in non-viral precision drug delivery systems 
for brain targeting, the growing understanding of neuropathology and 
the development of rationally designed delivery systems, in conjuga-
tion with novel tools such as AI or machine learning, will build strong 
momentum towards the clinical translation of precision NPs for CNS 
disorders.
Published online: 25 June 2024
References
1.	
Valori, C. F., Possenti, A., Brambilla, L. & Rossi, D. Challenges and opportunities 
of targeting astrocytes to halt neurodegenerative disorders. Cells 10, 2019 (2021).
2.	
Prabakaran, A. et al. Nose-to-brain drug delivery for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: 
current advancements and challenges. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 19, 87–102 (2022).
3.	
Markowicz-Piasecka, M. et al. Current approaches to facilitate improved drug delivery 
to the central nervous system. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 181, 249–262 (2022).
4.	
Doody, R. S. et al. A phase 3 trial of semagacestat for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 369, 341–350 (2013).
5.	
Imbimbo, B. P. & Giardina, G. A. M. γ-Secretase inhibitors and modulators for the treatment 
of Alzheimer’s disease: disappointments and hopes. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 11, 1555–1570 
(2011).
6.	
Kouhi, A. et al. Brain disposition of antibody-based therapeutics: dogma, approaches and 
perspectives. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 6442 (2021).
7.	
Chang, H.-Y. et al. Brain pharmacokinetics of anti-transferrin receptor antibody affinity 
variants in rats determined using microdialysis. mAbs 13, 1874121 (2021).
8.	
Keiser, M. S. et al. Toxicity after AAV delivery of RNAi expression constructs into nonhuman 
primate brain. Nat. Med. 27, 1982–1989 (2021).
9.	
Ling, Q., Herstine, J. A., Bradbury, A. & Gray, S. J. AAV-based in vivo gene therapy for 
neurological disorders. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 22, 789–806 (2023).
10.	
Lee, H. et al. Multi-omic analysis of selectively vulnerable motor neuron subtypes 
implicates altered lipid metabolism in ALS. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 1673–1685 (2021).
11.	
Herb, B. R. et al. Single-cell genomics reveals region-specific developmental 
trajectories underlying neuronal diversity in the human hypothalamus. Sci. Adv. 9, 
eadf6251 (2023).
12.	
Vialle, R. A., de Paiva Lopes, K., Bennett, D. A., Crary, J. F. & Raj, T. Integrating whole-
genome sequencing with multi-omic data reveals the impact of structural variants 
on gene regulation in the human brain. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 504–514 (2022).
13.	
Yao, Z. et al. A high-resolution transcriptomic and spatial atlas of cell types in the whole 
mouse brain. Nature 624, 317–332 (2023).  
This article introduces a collaborative effort from the BRAIN Initiative Cell Census 
Network, presenting cellular maps of the mouse brain with high spatial resolution.
14.	
Chini, M. & Hanganu-Opatz, I. L. Prefrontal cortex development in health and disease: 
lessons from rodents and humans. Trends Neurosci. 44, 227–240 (2021).
15.	
Fu, H., Hardy, J. & Duff, K. E. Selective vulnerability in neurodegenerative diseases. 
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1350–1358 (2018).  
This paper provides a comprehensive overview of the current understanding of 
biological mechanisms underpinning selective neuronal and regional vulnerability 
in neurological disorders.
16.	
Goodkind, M. et al. Identification of a common neurobiological substrate for mental 
illness. JAMA Psychiatry 72, 305–315 (2015).
17.	
Del Tredici, K., Rüb, U., De Vos, R. A. I., Bohl, J. R. E. & Braak, H. Where does Parkinson 
disease pathology begin in the brain? J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 61, 413–426 (2002).
18.	
De Marchi, F. et al. Cognitive dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: can we predict 
it? Neurol. Sci. 42, 2211–2222 (2021).
19.	
Crockford, C. et al. ALS-specific cognitive and behavior changes associated with advancing 
disease stage in ALS. Neurology 91, e1370–e1380 (2018).
20.	 Lassmann, H. Multiple sclerosis pathology. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 8, a028936 
(2018).
21.	
Haider, L. et al. The topograpy of demyelination and neurodegeneration in the multiple 
sclerosis brain. Brain 139, 807–815 (2016).
22.	 Knopman, D. S. et al. Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 7, 33 (2021).
23.	 Schöll, M. et al. Biomarkers for tau pathology. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 97, 18–33 (2019).
24.	 Musolino, P. L. et al. Brain endothelial dysfunction in cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy. 
Brain 138, 3206–3220 (2015).
25.	 Pong, S., Karmacharya, R., Sofman, M., Bishop, J. R. & Lizano, P. The role of brain 
microvascular endothelial cell and blood-brain barrier dysfunction in schizophrenia. 
Complex Psychiatry 6, 30–46 (2020).
26.	 Estudillo, E. et al. Thinking outside the black box: are the brain endothelial cells the new 
main target in Alzheimer’s disease? Neural Regen. Res. 18, 2592 (2023).
27.	
Yang, A. C. et al. A human brain vascular atlas reveals diverse mediators of Alzheimer’s 
risk. Nature 603, 885–892 (2022).
28.	 Mrdjen, D. et al. The basis of cellular and regional vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Acta Neuropathol. 138, 729–749 (2019).
29.	 Bennett, H. C. & Kim, Y. Pericytes across the lifetime in the central nervous system. 
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 15, 627291 (2021).
30.	 Giguère, N., Burke Nanni, S. & Trudeau, L.-E. On cell loss and selective vulnerability 
of neuronal populations in Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurol. 9, 455 (2018).
31.	
Mamelak, M. Parkinson’s disease, the dopaminergic neuron and gammahydroxybutyrate. 
Neurol. Ther. 7, 5–11 (2018).
32.	 Reiner, A. & Deng, Y.-P. Disrupted striatal neuron inputs and outputs in Huntington’s 
disease. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 24, 250–280 (2018).
33.	 Spoleti, E. et al. Dopamine neuron degeneration in the ventral tegmental area causes 
hippocampal hyperexcitability in experimental Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Psychiatry 29, 
1265–1280 (2024).
34.	 Nobili, A. et al. Dopamine neuronal loss contributes to memory and reward dysfunction 
in a model of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun. 8, 14727 (2017).
35.	 Chen, X.-Q. & Mobley, W. C. Exploring the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease in 
basal forebrain cholinergic neurons: converging insights from alternative hypotheses. 
Front. Neurosci. 13, 446 (2019).
36.	 Baker-Nigh, A. et al. Neuronal amyloid-β accumulation within cholinergic basal forebrain 
in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 138, 1722–1737 (2015).
37.	
Vana, L. et al. Progression of tau pathology in cholinergic basal forebrain neurons in mild 
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Pathol. 179, 2533–2550 (2011).
38.	 Tan, R. H. et al. Cerebellar neuronal loss in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases with 
ATXN2 intermediate repeat expansions. Ann. Neurol. 79, 295–305 (2016).
39.	 Fukutani, Y., Cairns, N. J., Rossor, M. N. & Lantos, P. L. Purkinje cell loss and astrocytosis in the 
cerebellum in familial and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Lett. 214, 33–36 (1996).
40.	 Singh-Bains, M. K. et al. Cerebellar degeneration correlates with motor symptoms 
in Huntington disease. Ann. Neurol. 85, 396–405 (2019).
41.	
Louis, E. D. et al. Torpedoes in Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, essential tremor, 
and control brains. Mov. Disord. 24, 1600–1605 (2009).
42.	 Crabé, R., Aimond, F., Gosset, P., Scamps, F. & Raoul, C. How degeneration of cells 
surrounding motoneurons contributes to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Cells 9, 2550 
(2020).
43.	 Elgayar, S. A. M., Abdel-Hafez, A. A. M., Gomaa, A. M. S. & Elsherif, R. Vulnerability of glia 
and vessels of rat substantia nigra in rotenone Parkinson model. Ultrastruct. Pathol. 42, 
181–192 (2018).
44.	 Cragnolini, A. B. et al. Regional brain susceptibility to neurodegeneration: what is the 
role of glial cells? Neural Regen. Res. 15, 838–842 (2019).
45.	 Matute, C., Alberdi, E., Ibarretxe, G. & Sánchez-Gómez, M. V. Excitotoxicity in glial cells. 
Eur. J. Pharmacol. 447, 239–246 (2002).
46.	 Petito, C. K., Olarte, J. P., Roberts, B., Nowak, T. S. & Pulsinelli, W. A. Selective glial 
vulnerability following transient global ischemia in rat brain. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 
57, 231–238 (1998).
47.	
Kim, Y.-K. & Na, K.-S. Role of glutamate receptors and glial cells in the pathophysiology 
of treatment-resistant depression. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 70, 
117–126 (2016).
48.	 Giuliani, F., Goodyer, C. G., Antel, J. P. & Yong, V. W. Vulnerability of human neurons to 
T cell-mediated cytotoxicity. J. Immunol. 171, 368–379 (2003).
49.	 Paß, T., Wiesner, R. J. & Pla-Martín, D. Selective neuron vulnerability in common and rare 
diseases — mitochondria in the focus. Front. Mol. Biosci. 8, 676187 (2021).
50.	 Penzes, P., Buonanno, A., Passafarro, M., Sala, C. & Sweet, R. A. Developmental vulnerability 
of synapses and circuits associated with neuropsychiatric disorders. J. Neurochem. 126, 
165–182 (2013).
51.	
Purves, D. et al. in Neuroscience 2nd edn Ch. 1 (Sinauer Associates, 2001).
52.	 Eipel, C., Abshagen, K. & Vollmar, B. Regulation of hepatic blood flow: the hepatic arterial 
buffer response revisited. World J. Gastroenterol. 16, 6046–6057 (2010).
53.	 Dalal, R., Bruss, Z. S. & Sehdev, J. S. Physiology, Renal Blood Flow and Filtration 
(StatPearls, 2023).
54.	 Cabral, H., Li, J., Miyata, K. & Kataoka, K. Controlling the biodistribution and clearance 
of nanomedicines. Nat. Rev. Bioeng. 2, 214–232 (2024).  
This comprehensive review details consequence of different NP designs on their 
pharmacokinetics, with abundant clinical data included.

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
585
Review article
55.	 Du, B., Yu, M. & Zheng, J. Transport and interactions of nanoparticles in the kidneys. 
Nat. Rev. Mater. 3, 358–374 (2018).
56.	 Wang, J. & Liu, G. Imaging nano–bio interactions in the kidney: toward a better understanding 
of nanoparticle clearance. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 57, 3008–3010 (2018).  
This review details quantitative NP–kidney interactions along with coverage on strategies 
to modulate NP size, shape and surface chemistry to minimize glomerular clearance.
57.	
Rawal, M., Singh, A. & Amiji, M. M. Quality-by-design concepts to improve 
nanotechnology-based drug development. Pharm. Res. 36, 153 (2019).
58.	 Blanco, E., Shen, H. & Ferrari, M. Principles of nanoparticle design for overcoming 
biological barriers to drug delivery. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 941–951 (2015).  
This seminal review discusses the design principles of NPs to avoid delivery challenges, 
with focus on opsonization, blood vessel fluid dynamics and site-directed entry.
59.	 Park, J.-K. et al. Cellular distribution of injected PLGA-nanoparticles in the liver. 
Nanomedicine 12, 1365–1374 (2016).
60.	 Poon, W. et al. Elimination pathways of nanoparticles. ACS Nano 13, 5785–5798 (2019).
61.	
Lazarovits, J. et al. Supervised learning and mass spectrometry predicts the in vivo fate 
of nanomaterials. ACS Nano 13, 8023–8034 (2019).
62.	 Anraku, Y., Kishimura, A., Kobayashi, A., Oba, M. & Kataoka, K. Size-controlled long-
circulating PICsome as a ruler to measure critical cut-off disposition size into normal 
and tumor tissues. Chem. Commun. 47, 6054–6056 (2011).
63.	 Lundqvist, M. et al. The evolution of the protein corona around nanoparticles: a test study. 
ACS Nano 5, 7503–7509 (2011).
64.	 Cai, R. & Chen, C. The crown and the scepter: roles of the protein corona in nanomedicine. 
Adv. Mater. 31, e1805740 (2019).
65.	 Monopoli, M. P., Åberg, C., Salvati, A. & Dawson, K. A. Biomolecular coronas provide the 
biological identity of nanosized materials. Nat. Nanotech 7, 779–786 (2012).
66.	 Lundqvist, M. et al. Nanoparticle size and surface properties determine the protein 
corona with possible implications for biological impacts. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 
14265–14270 (2008).
67.	
García-Álvarez, R., Hadjidemetriou, M., Sánchez-Iglesias, A., Liz-Marzán, L. M. & 
Kostarelos, K. In vivo formation of protein corona on gold nanoparticles. The effect 
of their size and shape. Nanoscale 10, 1256–1264 (2018).
68.	 Palchetti, S. et al. The protein corona of circulating PEGylated liposomes. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta 1858, 189–196 (2016).
69.	 Wang, H. et al. The nature of a hard protein corona forming on quantum dots exposed to 
human blood serum. Small 12, 5836–5844 (2016).
70.	 Dobrovolskaia, M. A. et al. Interaction of colloidal gold nanoparticles with human blood: 
effects on particle size and analysis of plasma protein binding profiles. Nanomedicine 5, 
106–117 (2009).
71.	
Sakulkhu, U., Mahmoudi, M., Maurizi, L., Salaklang, J. & Hofmann, H. Protein corona 
composition of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles with various physico-chemical 
properties and coatings. Sci. Rep. 4, 5020 (2014).
72.	 Lesniak, A. et al. Effects of the presence or absence of a protein corona on silica 
nanoparticle uptake and impact on cells. ACS Nano 6, 5845–5857 (2012).
73.	 Liu, K. et al. Multiomics analysis of naturally efficacious lipid nanoparticle coronas 
reveals high-density lipoprotein is necessary for their function. Nat. Commun. 14, 4007 
(2023).
74.	 Mitchell, M. J. et al. Engineering precision nanoparticles for drug delivery. Nat. Rev. Drug 
Discov. 20, 101–124 (2021).
75.	 Salvati, A. et al. Transferrin-functionalized nanoparticles lose their targeting capabilities 
when a biomolecule corona adsorbs on the surface. Nat. Nanotech 8, 137–143 (2013).
76.	 Zhao, Z., Ukidve, A., Kim, J. & Mitragotri, S. Targeting strategies for tissue-specific drug 
delivery. Cell 181, 151–167 (2020).
77.	
Chen, F. et al. Complement proteins bind to nanoparticle protein corona and undergo 
dynamic exchange in vivo. Nat. Nanotech 12, 387–393 (2017).
78.	 Hoshyar, N., Gray, S., Han, H. & Bao, G. The effect of nanoparticle size on in vivo 
pharmacokinetics and cellular interaction. Nanomedicine 11, 673–692 (2016).
79.	 Moghimi, S. M., Simberg, D., Skotland, T., Yaghmur, A. & Hunter, A. C. The interplay 
between blood proteins, complement, and macrophages on nanomedicine performance 
and responses. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 370, 581–592 (2019).
80.	 Huang, W., Xiao, G., Zhang, Y. & Min, W. Research progress and application opportunities 
of nanoparticle–protein corona complexes. Biomed. Pharmacother. 139, 111541 (2021).
81.	
Klepac, D. et al. Interaction of spin-labeled HPMA-based nanoparticles with human blood 
plasma proteins — the introduction of protein-corona-free polymer nanomedicine. 
Nanoscale 10, 6194–6204 (2018).
82.	 Müller, K., Fedosov, D. A. & Gompper, G. Margination of micro- and nano-particles in blood 
flow and its effect on drug delivery. Sci. Rep. 4, 4871 (2014).
83.	 Lane, L. A. Physics in nanomedicine: phenomena governing the in vivo performance 
of nanoparticles. Appl. Phys. Rev. 7, 011316 (2020).
84.	 Cooley, M. et al. Influence of particle size and shape on their margination and wall-adhesion: 
implications in drug delivery vehicle design across nano-to-micro scale. Nanoscale 10, 
15350–15364 (2018).
85.	 Kumar, A., Rivera, R. G. H. & Graham, M. D. Flow-induced segregation in confined 
multicomponent suspensions: effects of particle size and rigidity. J. Fluid Mech. 738, 
423–462 (2014).
86.	 Tosi, G., Duskey, J. T. & Kreuter, J. Nanoparticles as carriers for drug delivery of 
macromolecules across the blood-brain barrier. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 17, 23–32 (2020).
87.	
Pandit, R., Chen, L. & Götz, J. The blood-brain barrier: physiology and strategies for drug 
delivery. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 165–166, 1–14 (2020).
88.	 Arvanitis, C. D., Ferraro, G. B. & Jain, R. K. The blood-brain barrier and blood-tumour 
barrier in brain tumours and metastases. Nat. Rev. Cancer 20, 26–41 (2020).
89.	 Kucharz, K. et al. Post-capillary venules are the key locus for transcytosis-mediated brain 
delivery of therapeutic nanoparticles. Nat. Commun. 12, 4121 (2021).
90.	 Uchida, Y. et al. Quantitative targeted absolute proteomics of human blood-brain barrier 
transporters and receptors. J. Neurochem. 117, 333–345 (2011).
91.	
Yeo, N. J. Y., Chan, E. J. J. & Cheung, C. Choroidal neovascularization: mechanisms 
of endothelial dysfunction. Front. Pharmacol. 10, 1363 (2019).
92.	 Sweeney, M. D., Sagare, A. P. & Zlokovic, B. V. Blood–brain barrier breakdown in 
Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14, 133–150 
(2018).  
This comprehensive review discusses the BBB dysfunction in multiple neurological 
disorders using neuroimaging studies in living human and post-mortem brain tissues.
93.	 Malek, N. et al. Vascular disease and vascular risk factors in relation to motor features 
and cognition in early Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 31, 1518–1526 (2016).
94.	 Drouin-Ouellet, J. et al. Cerebrovascular and blood-brain barrier impairments in 
Huntington’s disease: potential implications for its pathophysiology. Ann. Neurol. 78, 
160–177 (2015).
95.	 Profaci, C. P., Munji, R. N., Pulido, R. S. & Daneman, R. The blood-brain barrier in health 
and disease: important unanswered questions. J. Exp. Med. 217, e20190062 (2020).
96.	 Nguyen, B., Bix, G. & Yao, Y. Basal lamina changes in neurodegenerative disorders. 
Mol. Neurodegener. 16, 81 (2021).
97.	
Prakash, R. & Carmichael, S. T. Blood–brain barrier breakdown and neovascularization 
processes after stroke and traumatic brain injury. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 28, 556–564 
(2015).
98.	 Price, L., Wilson, C. & Grant, G. in Translational Research in Traumatic Brain Injury Ch. 4 
(eds Laskowitz, D. & Grant, G.) (CRC, 2016).
99.	 Clond, M. A. et al. Reactive oxygen species-activated nanoprodrug of ibuprofen for 
targeting traumatic brain injury in mice. PLoS ONE 8, e61819 (2013).
100.	 Xu, J. et al. Theranostic oxygen reactive polymers for treatment of traumatic brain injury. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 26, 4124–4133 (2016).
101.	 Ruozi, B. et al. PLGA nanoparticles loaded cerebrolysin: studies on their preparation and 
investigation of the effect of storage and serum stability with reference to traumatic brain 
injury. Mol. Neurobiol. 52, 899–912 (2015).
102.	 Gaudin, A. et al. Squalenoyl adenosine nanoparticles provide neuroprotection after stroke 
and spinal cord injury. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 1054–1062 (2014).
103.	 Chen, H. et al. Nanoerythropoietin is 10-times more effective than regular erythropoietin 
in neuroprotection in a neonatal rat model of hypoxia and ischemia. Stroke 43, 884–887 
(2012).
104.	 D’Ambrosi, N. & Apolloni, S. Fibrotic scar in neurodegenerative diseases. Front. Immunol. 
11, 1394 (2020).
105.	 Fernández-Klett, F. & Priller, J. The fibrotic scar in neurological disorders. Brain Pathol. 24, 
404–413 (2014).
106.	 Sun, N. et al. Single-nucleus multiregion transcriptomic analysis of brain vasculature in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 970–982 (2023).  
This transcriptomic study across 6 brain regions from 220 individuals with AD and 208 
age-matched controls demonstrates a large number of differentially expressed genes 
in neurovascular units, including endothelium, astrocytes and pericytes.
107.	 Zhang, W. et al. Differential expression of receptors mediating receptor-mediated 
transcytosis (RMT) in brain microvessels, brain parenchyma and peripheral tissues of the 
mouse and the human. Fluids Barriers CNS 17, 47 (2020).
108.	 Yang, A. C. et al. Physiological blood–brain transport is impaired with age by a shift in 
transcytosis. Nature 583, 425–430 (2020).
109.	 Winkler, E. A. et al. GLUT1 reductions exacerbate Alzheimer’s disease vasculo-neuronal 
dysfunction and degeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 521–530 (2015).
110.	 Zhao, L. et al. Pharmacologically reversible zonation-dependent endothelial cell 
transcriptomic changes with neurodegenerative disease associations in the aged brain. 
Nat. Commun. 11, 4413 (2020).
111.	 Liu, M., Fang, X., Yang, Y. & Wang, C. Peptide-enabled targeted delivery systems for 
therapeutic applications. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9, 701504 (2021).
112.	 Deane, R., Sagare, A. & Zlokovic, B. The role of the cell surface LRP and soluble LRP in 
blood-brain barrier Aβ clearance in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Pharm. Des. 14, 1601–1605 
(2008).
113.	 Sweeney, M. D., Zhao, Z., Montagne, A., Nelson, A. R. & Zlokovic, B. V. Blood-brain barrier: 
from physiology to disease and back. Physiol. Rev. 99, 21–78 (2019).
114.	 Li, W. et al. BBB pathophysiology-independent delivery of siRNA in traumatic brain injury. 
Sci. Adv. 7, eabd6889 (2021).
115.	 Hladky, S. B. & Barrand, M. A. Mechanisms of fluid movement into, through and out of the 
brain: evaluation of the evidence. Fluids Barriers CNS 11, 26 (2014).
116.	 Shetty, A. K. & Zanirati, G. The interstitial system of the brain in health and disease. 
Aging Dis. 11, 200–211 (2020).
117.	 Nakada, T. & Kwee, I. L. Fluid dynamics inside the brain barrier: current concept 
of interstitial flow, glymphatic flow, and cerebrospinal fluid circulation in the brain. 
Neuroscientist 25, 155–166 (2019).
118.	 Gao, Y. et al. Simulation study of the effects of interstitial fluid pressure and blood 
flow velocity on transvascular transport of nanoparticles in tumor microenvironment. 
Comput. Methods Prog. Biomed. 193, 105493 (2020).
119.	 Glass, C. K., Saijo, K., Winner, B., Marchetto, M. C. & Gage, F. H. Mechanisms underlying 
inflammation in neurodegeneration. Cell 140, 918–934 (2010).

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
586
Review article
120.	 Whiteford, J. R., De Rossi, G. & Woodfin, A. Mutually supportive mechanisms of 
inflammation and vascular remodeling. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 326, 201–278 (2016).
121.	 Zhang, X. et al. High-resolution mapping of brain vasculature and its impairment in the 
hippocampus of Alzheimer’s disease mice. Natl Sci. Rev. 6, 1223–1238 (2019).
122.	 Wolak, D. J. & Thorne, R. G. Diffusion of macromolecules in the brain: implications for 
drug delivery. Mol. Pharm. 10, 1492–1504 (2013).
123.	 Hammarlund-Udenaes, M., Fridén, M., Syvänen, S. & Gupta, A. On the rate and extent 
of drug delivery to the brain. Pharm. Res. 25, 1737–1750 (2008).
124.	 Barua, S. & Mitragotri, S. Challenges associated with penetration of nanoparticles across 
cell and tissue barriers: a review of current status and future prospects. Nano Today 9, 
223–243 (2014).
125.	 Engin, A. B. et al. Mechanistic understanding of nanoparticles’ interactions with extracellular 
matrix: the cell and immune system. Part. Fibre Toxicol. 14, 22 (2017).
126.	 Chen, K. L. & Bothun, G. D. Nanoparticles meet cell membranes: probing nonspecific 
interactions using model membranes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 873–880 (2014).
127.	 Mahmoudi, M. et al. Cell ‘vision’: complementary factor of protein corona in nanotoxicology. 
Nanoscale 4, 5461–5468 (2012).
128.	 Behzadi, S. et al. Cellular uptake of nanoparticles: journey inside the cell. Chem. Soc. Rev. 
46, 4218–4244 (2017).
129.	 Smith, S. A., Selby, L. I., Johnston, A. P. R. & Such, G. K. The endosomal escape of 
nanoparticles: toward more efficient cellular delivery. Bioconjug. Chem. 30, 263–272 
(2019).
130.	 Foroozandeh, P. & Aziz, A. A. Insight into cellular uptake and intracellular trafficking 
of nanoparticles. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13, 339 (2018).
131.	 Treuel, L., Jiang, X. & Nienhaus, G. U. New views on cellular uptake and trafficking 
of manufactured nanoparticles. J. R. Soc. Interface 10, 20120939 (2013).
132.	 Biber, K. et al. Microglial drug targets in AD: opportunities and challenges in drug discovery 
and development. Front. Pharmacol. 10, 840 (2019).
133.	 Fatoba, O., Itokazu, T. & Yamashita, T. Microglia as therapeutic target in central nervous 
system disorders. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 144, 102–118 (2020).
134.	 Mahmood, A. & Miron, V. E. Microglia as therapeutic targets for central nervous system 
remyelination. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 63, 102188 (2022).
135.	 Kimelberg, H. K. & Nedergaard, M. Functions of astrocytes and their potential as 
therapeutic targets. Neurotherapeutics 7, 338–353 (2010).
136.	 Leng, F. & Edison, P. Neuroinflammation and microglial activation in Alzheimer disease: 
where do we go from here? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17, 157–172 (2021).
137.	 Zhang, G., Wang, Z., Hu, H., Zhao, M. & Sun, L. Microglia in Alzheimer’s disease: a target 
for therapeutic intervention. Front. Cell Neurosci. 15, 749587 (2021).
138.	 Donat, C. K., Scott, G., Gentleman, S. M. & Sastre, M. Microglial activation in traumatic 
brain injury. Front. Aging Neurosci. 9, 208 (2017).
139.	 Kandell, R. M., Kudryashev, J. A. & Kwon, E. J. Targeting the extracellular matrix in traumatic 
brain injury increases signal generation from an activity-based nanosensor. ACS Nano 15, 
20504–20516 (2021).
140.	 Lutton, E. M. et al. Endothelial targeted strategies to combat oxidative stress: improving 
outcomes in traumatic brain injury. Front. Neurol. 10, 582 (2019).
141.	 Wang, R. et al. Strategies for the design of nanoparticles: starting with long-circulating 
nanoparticles, from lab to clinic. Biomater. Sci. 9, 3621–3637 (2021).
142.	 Zhu, G. H., Gray, A. B. C. & Patra, H. K. Nanomedicine: controlling nanoparticle clearance 
for translational success. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 43, 709–711 (2022).
143.	 Soo Choi, H. et al. Renal clearance of quantum dots. Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 1165–1170 (2007).
144.	 Weiss, M. et al. Density of surface charge is a more predictive factor of the toxicity 
of cationic carbon nanoparticles than zeta potential. J. Nanobiotechnol. 19, 5 (2021).
145.	 Dilliard, S. A. & Siegwart, D. J. Passive, active and endogenous organ-targeted lipid and 
polymer nanoparticles for delivery of genetic drugs. Nat. Rev. Mater. 8, 282–300 (2023).
146.	 Bertrand, N. et al. Mechanistic understanding of in vivo protein corona formation on 
polymeric nanoparticles and impact on pharmacokinetics. Nat. Commun. 8, 777 (2017).
147.	 Wang, J.-L. et al. The effect of surface poly(ethylene glycol) length on in vivo drug 
delivery behaviors of polymeric nanoparticles. Biomaterials 182, 104–113 (2018).
148.	 Ben-Akiva, E. et al. Biomimetic anisotropic polymeric nanoparticles coated with red blood 
cell membranes for enhanced circulation and toxin removal. Sci. Adv. 6, eaay9035 (2020).
149.	 Hu, C.-M. J. et al. Erythrocyte membrane-camouflaged polymeric nanoparticles as a 
biomimetic delivery platform. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 10980–10985 (2011).
150.	 Gurnani, P. et al. Probing the effect of rigidity on the cellular uptake of core-shell 
nanoparticles: stiffness effects are size dependent. Small 18, 2203070 (2022).
151.	 Madathiparambil Visalakshan, R. et al. The influence of nanoparticle shape on protein 
corona formation. Small 16, 2000285 (2020).
152.	 Cheng, J. et al. Targeting pericytes for therapeutic approaches to neurological disorders. 
Acta Neuropathol. 136, 507–523 (2018).
153.	 Geranmayeh, M. H., Rahbarghazi, R. & Farhoudi, M. Targeting pericytes for neurovascular 
regeneration. Cell Commun. Signal. 17, 26 (2019).
154.	 Porro, G. M. et al. Identifying molecular tags selectively retained on the surface of brain 
endothelial cells to generate artificial targets for therapy delivery. Fluids Barriers CNS 20, 
88 (2023).
155.	 Lasagna-Reeves, C. et al. Bioaccumulation and toxicity of gold nanoparticles after 
repeated administration in mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 393, 649–655 (2010).
156.	 Liu, D.-F. et al. Magnetic resonance imaging of post-ischemic blood-brain barrier damage 
with PEGylated iron oxide nanoparticles. Nanoscale 6, 15161–15167 (2014).
157.	 Shankar, R., Joshi, M. & Pathak, K. Lipid nanoparticles: a novel approach for brain 
targeting. Pharm. Nanotechnol. 6, 81–93 (2018).
158.	 Dehouck, B. et al. A new function for the LDL receptor: transcytosis of LDL across the 
blood–brain barrier. J. Cell Biol. 138, 877–889 (1997).
159.	 Jose, S. et al. In vivo pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of resveratrol-loaded solid 
lipid nanoparticles for brain delivery. Int. J. Pharm. 474, 6–13 (2014).
160.	 Cox, A. et al. Evolution of nanoparticle protein corona across the blood-brain barrier. 
ACS Nano 12, 7292–7300 (2018).  
This study reveals drastic changes in protein corona composition around NPs as they 
pass form the blood to the brain side, which can alter their final distribution inside the 
brain parenchyma.
161.	 Terstappen, G. C., Meyer, A. H., Bell, R. D. & Zhang, W. Strategies for delivering therapeutics 
across the blood–brain barrier. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 20, 362–383 (2021).
162.	 Ciofani, G. et al. Roadmap on nanomedicine for the central nervous system. J. Phys. Mater. 
6, 022501 (2023).
163.	 Jefferies, W. A. et al. Transferrin receptor on endothelium of brain capillaries. Nature 312, 
162–163 (1984).
164.	 Sheridan, C. Drugs catch a ride through the blood–brain barrier. Nat. Biotechnol. 41, 
1182–1184 (2023).
165.	 Hultqvist, G., Syvänen, S., Fang, X. T., Lannfelt, L. & Sehlin, D. Bivalent brain shuttle increases 
antibody uptake by monovalent binding to the transferrin receptor. Theranostics 7, 308–318 
(2017).
166.	 Zhou, Q.-H. et al. Receptor-mediated abeta amyloid antibody targeting to Alzheimer’s 
disease mouse brain. Mol. Pharm. 8, 280–285 (2011).
167.	 Weber, F. et al. Brain shuttle antibody for Alzheimer’s disease with attenuated peripheral 
effector function due to an inverted binding mode. Cell Rep. 22, 149–162 (2018).
168.	 Niewoehner, J. et al. Increased brain penetration and potency of a therapeutic antibody 
using a monovalent molecular shuttle. Neuron 81, 49–60 (2014).
169.	 Li, X. et al. Enhanced in vivo blood–brain barrier penetration by circular tau–transferrin 
receptor bifunctional aptamer for tauopathy therapy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 3862–3872 
(2020).
170.	 Kang, T. et al. Enhancing glioblastoma-specific penetration by functionalization of 
nanoparticles with an iron-mimic peptide targeting transferrin/transferrin receptor 
complex. Mol. Pharm. 12, 2947–2961 (2015).
171.	 Lane-Donovan, C. E., Philips, G. T. & Herz, J. More than cholesterol transporters: 
lipoprotein receptors in CNS function and neurodegeneration. Neuron 83, 771–787 
(2014).
172.	 Kreuter, J. et al. Apolipoprotein-mediated transport of nanoparticle-bound drugs across 
the blood-brain barrier. J. Drug Target. 10, 317–325 (2002).
173.	 Hartl, N., Adams, F. & Merkel, O. M. From adsorption to covalent bonding: apolipoprotein 
E functionalization of polymeric nanoparticles for drug delivery across the blood-brain 
barrier. Adv. Ther. 4, 2000092 (2021).
174.	 Neves, A. R., Queiroz, J. F., Lima, S. A. C., Reis, S. & Apo, E. Functionalization of solid lipid 
nanoparticles enhances brain drug delivery: uptake mechanism and transport pathways. 
Bioconjug. Chem. 28, 995–1004 (2017).
175.	 Zhang, D. et al. Near infrared-activatable biomimetic nanogels enabling deep tumor drug 
penetration inhibit orthotopic glioblastoma. Nat. Commun. 13, 6835 (2022).
176.	 Molino, Y. et al. Use of LDL receptor-targeting peptide vectors for in vitro and in vivo 
cargo transport across the blood-brain barrier. FASEB J. 31, 1807–1827 (2017).
177.	 Duro-Castano, A. et al. Targeting Alzheimer’s disease with multimodal polypeptide-based 
nanoconjugates. Sci. Adv. 7, eabf9180 (2021).
178.	 Zhang, Z. et al. Brain-targeted drug delivery by manipulating protein corona functions. 
Nat. Commun. 10, 3561 (2019).
179.	 Wiley, D. T., Webster, P., Gale, A. & Davis, M. E. Transcytosis and brain uptake of transferrin-
containing nanoparticles by tuning avidity to transferrin receptor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
110, 8662–8667 (2013).
180.	 Banks, W. A. & Erickson, M. A. The blood-brain barrier and immune function and 
dysfunction. Neurobiol. Dis. 37, 26–32 (2010).
181.	 Klyachko, N. L. et al. Macrophages with cellular backpacks for targeted drug delivery to 
the brain. Biomaterials 140, 79–87 (2017).  
This article presents one of the early successful demonstrations of cellular backpacks 
as a means to transport NPs across the BBB.
182.	 Wu, J. R., Hernandez, Y., Miyasaki, K. F. & Kwon, E. J. Engineered nanomaterials that 
exploit blood-brain barrier dysfunction for delivery to the brain. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 197, 
114820 (2023).
183.	 Brenner, J. S. et al. Red blood cell-hitchhiking boosts delivery of nanocarriers to chosen 
organs by orders of magnitude. Nat. Commun. 9, 2684 (2018).
184.	 Knox, E. G., Aburto, M. R., Clarke, G., Cryan, J. F. & O’Driscoll, C. M. The blood-brain 
barrier in aging and neurodegeneration. Mol. Psychiatry 27, 2659–2673 (2022).
185.	 Nian, K., Harding, I. C., Herman, I. M. & Ebong, E. E. Blood-brain barrier damage in 
ischemic stroke and its regulation by endothelial mechanotransduction. Front. Physiol. 
11, 605398 (2020).
186.	 Ogawa, K. et al. Focused ultrasound/microbubbles-assisted BBB opening enhances 
LNP-mediated mRNA delivery to brain. J. Control. Release 348, 34–41 (2022).
187.	 Abrahao, A. et al. First-in-human trial of blood–brain barrier opening in amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis using MR-guided focused ultrasound. Nat. Commun. 10, 4373 (2019).
188.	 Tønnesen, J., Hrabĕtová, S. & Soria, F. N. Local diffusion in the extracellular space of the 
brain. Neurobiol. Dis. 177, 105981 (2023).
189.	 Iliff, J. J. et al. A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma 
and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid β. Sci. Transl Med. 4, 147ra111 
(2012).

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
587
Review article
190.	 Abbott, N. J. Evidence for bulk flow of brain interstitial fluid: significance for physiology 
and pathology. Neurochem. Int. 45, 545–552 (2004).
191.	 Jin, B.-J., Smith, A. J. & Verkman, A. S. Spatial model of convective solute transport in 
brain extracellular space does not support a “glymphatic” mechanism. J. Gen. Physiol. 
148, 489–501 (2016).
192.	 Ray, L., Iliff, J. J. & Heys, J. J. Analysis of convective and diffusive transport in the brain 
interstitium. Fluids Barriers CNS 16, 6 (2019).
193.	 Kreuter, J. Influence of the surface properties on nanoparticle-mediated transport 
of drugs to the brain. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 4, 484–488 (2004).
194.	 Surfactants influence polymer nanoparticle fate within the brain. Biomaterials 277, 121086 
(2021).
195.	 McKenna, M., Shackelford, D., Ferreira Pontes, H., Ball, B. & Nance, E. Multiple particle 
tracking detects changes in brain extracellular matrix and predicts neurodevelopmental 
age. ACS Nano 15, 8559–8573 (2021).
196.	 Negron, K., Khalasawi, N. & Suk, J. S. in Nanotherapy for Brain Tumor Drug Delivery 
(eds Agrahari, V. et al.) 179–204 (Springer, 2021).
197.	 Gu, X. et al. Clearance of two organic nanoparticles from the brain via the paravascular 
pathway. J. Control. Release 322, 31–41 (2020).
198.	 Waggoner, L. E. et al. Porous silicon nanoparticles targeted to the extracellular matrix 
for therapeutic protein delivery in traumatic brain injury. Bioconjug Chem. 33, 1685–1697 
(2022).
199.	 Mann, A. P. et al. A peptide for targeted, systemic delivery of imaging and therapeutic 
compounds into acute brain injuries. Nat. Commun. 7, 11980 (2016).
200.	Zhao, Y. et al. Dual targeted nanocarrier for brain ischemic stroke treatment. J. Control. 
Release 233, 64–71 (2016).
201.	 Han, Z. et al. A novel targeted nanoparticle for traumatic brain injury treatment: combined 
effect of ROS depletion and calcium overload inhibition. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 11, 2102256 
(2022).
202.	Carron, S. F., Alwis, D. S. & Rajan, R. Traumatic brain injury and neuronal functionality 
changes in sensory cortex. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 10, 47 (2016).
203.	Praça, C. et al. A nanoformulation for the preferential accumulation in adult neurogenic 
niches. J. Control. Release 284, 57–72 (2018).
204.	Hour, F. Q. et al. Magnetic targeted delivery of the SPIONs-labeled mesenchymal stem 
cells derived from human Wharton’s jelly in Alzheimer’s rat models. J. Control. Release 321, 
430–441 (2020).
205.	Merienne, N. et al. Cell-type-specific gene expression profiling in adult mouse brain 
reveals normal and disease-state signatures. Cell Rep. 26, 2477–2493.e9 (2019).
206.	Lake, B. B. et al. Integrative single-cell analysis of transcriptional and epigenetic states 
in the human adult brain. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 70–80 (2018).
207.	 Skene, N. G. & Grant, S. G. N. Identification of vulnerable cell types in major brain disorders 
using single cell transcriptomes and expression weighted cell type enrichment. Front. 
Neurosci. 10, 16 (2016).
208.	Pak, V. et al. Distinctive whole-brain cell-types strongly predict tissue damage patterns 
in eleven neurodegenerative disorders. eLife 12, RP89368 (2023).
209.	Lee, H.-G., Wheeler, M. A. & Quintana, F. J. Function and therapeutic value of astrocytes 
in neurological diseases. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 21, 339–358 (2022).
210.	 Kwon, H. S. & Koh, S.-H. Neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative disorders: the roles 
of microglia and astrocytes. Transl. Neurodegen. 9, 42 (2020).
211.	 Maragakis, N. J. & Rothstein, J. D. Mechanisms of disease: astrocytes in neurodegenerative 
disease. Nat. Clin. Pract. Neurol. 2, 679–689 (2006).
212.	 Joshi, C. R. et al. Reaching for the stars in the brain: polymer-mediated gene delivery 
to human astrocytes. Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 12, 645–657 (2018).
213.	 Sabourian, P. et al. Targeting reactive astrocytes by pH-responsive ligand-bonded polymeric 
nanoparticles in spinal cord injury. Drug Deliv. Transl. Res. 13, 1842–1855 (2023).
214.	 Surnar, B. et al. Nanotechnology-mediated crossing of two impermeable membranes 
to modulate the stars of the neurovascular unit for neuroprotection. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 115, E12333–E12342 (2018).
215.	 Zhu, J. et al. Reactive A1 astrocyte-targeted nucleic acid nanoantiepileptic drug 
downregulating adenosine kinase to rescue endogenous antiepileptic pathway. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15, 29876–29888 (2023).
216.	 Colonna, M. & Butovsky, O. Microglia function in the central nervous system during 
health and neurodegeneration. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 35, 441–468 (2017).
217.	 Ortiz, C. et al. Molecular atlas of the adult mouse brain. Sci. Adv. 6, eabb3446 (2020).
218.	 Vanlandewijck, M. et al. A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature. 
Nature 554, 475–480 (2018).
219.	 Zhao, N., Francis, N. L., Calvelli, H. R. & Moghe, P. V. Microglia-targeting nanotherapeutics 
for neurodegenerative diseases. APL Bioeng. 4, 030902 (2020).
220.	Albanese, A., Sykes, E. A. & Chan, W. C. W. Rough around the edges: the inflammatory 
response of microglial cells to spiky nanoparticles. ACS Nano 4, 2490–2493 (2010).
221.	 Hutter, E. et al. Microglial response to gold nanoparticles. ACS Nano 4, 2595–2606 (2010).
222.	 Choi, B. et al. Highly selective microglial uptake of ceria–zirconia nanoparticles for 
enhanced analgesic treatment of neuropathic pain. Nanoscale 11, 19437–19447 (2019).
223.	 Ralvenius, W. T. et al. Nanoparticle-mediated delivery of anti-PU.1 siRNA via localized 
intracisternal administration reduces neuroinflammation. Adv. Mater. 36, e2309225 
(2023).
224.	 Roussarie, J.-P. et al. Selective neuronal vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease: a network-
based analysis. Neuron 107, 821–835.e12 (2020).
225.	 Schirmer, L. et al. Neuronal vulnerability and multilineage diversity in multiple sclerosis. 
Nature 573, 75–82 (2019).
226.	 Surmeier, D. J., Obeso, J. A. & Halliday, G. M. Selective neuronal vulnerability in Parkinson 
disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 101–113 (2017).
227.	 Khan, F. A., Almohazey, D., Alomari, M. & Almofty, S. A. Impact of nanoparticles on neuron 
biology: current research trends. Int. J. Nanomed. 13, 2767–2776 (2018).
228.	 Stojiljković, A. et al. High-content analysis of factors affecting gold nanoparticle uptake 
by neuronal and microglial cells in culture. Nanoscale 8, 16650–16661 (2016).
229.	 Orlando, A. et al. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles trigger mitophagy in endothelial 
cells and perturb neuronal network activity in a size- and time-dependent manner. 
Int. J. Nanomed. 12, 3547–3559 (2017).
230.	Prabhu, B. M., Ali, S. F., Murdock, R. C., Hussain, S. M. & Srivatsan, M. Copper nanoparticles 
exert size and concentration dependent toxicity on somatosensory neurons of rat. 
Nanotoxicology 4, 150–160 (2010).
231.	 Dante, S. et al. Selective targeting of neurons with inorganic nanoparticles: revealing the 
crucial role of nanoparticle surface charge. ACS Nano 11, 6630–6640 (2017).
232.	 Walters, R. et al. Nanoparticle targeting to neurons in a rat hippocampal slice culture 
model. ASN Neuro 4, 383–392 (2012).
233.	Zapukhliak, O. S., Kachanovska, V. O., Isaeva, E. V., Netsyk, O. V. & Isaev, D. S. Surface 
charge impact in nonsynaptic model of epilepsy in rat hippocampus. Fiziol. Zhurnal 62, 
35–40 (2016).
234.	Gao, Y. et al. RVG-peptide-linked trimethylated chitosan for delivery of siRNA to the brain. 
Biomacromolecules 15, 1010–1018 (2014).
235.	 Kwon, E. J., Skalak, M., Lo Bu, R. & Bhatia, S. N. Neuron-targeted nanoparticle for siRNA 
delivery to traumatic brain injuries. ACS Nano 10, 7926–7933 (2016).
236.	Khongkow, M. et al. Surface modification of gold nanoparticles with neuron-targeted 
exosome for enhanced blood–brain barrier penetration. Sci. Rep. 9, 8278 (2019).
237.	 Ren, M. et al. Functionalized nanoparticles in prevention and targeted therapy of viral 
diseases with neurotropism properties, special insight on COVID-19. Front. Microbiol. 12, 
767104 (2021).
238.	Zhou, R. et al. Targeted brain delivery of RVG29‐modified rifampicin‐loaded 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment and diagnosis. Bioeng. Transl. Med. 7, 
e10395 (2022).
239.	Chung, E. P. et al. Targeting small molecule delivery to the brain and spinal cord 
via intranasal administration of rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG29)-modified PLGA 
nanoparticles. Pharmaceutics 12, 93 (2020).
240.	Dos Santos Rodrigues, B., Arora, S., Kanekiyo, T. & Singh, J. Efficient neuronal targeting 
and transfection using RVG and transferrin-conjugated liposomes. Brain Res. 1734, 
146738 (2020).
241.	 Lian, M., Hueffer, K. & Weltzin, M. M. Interactions between the rabies virus and nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors: a potential role in rabies virus induced behavior modifications. 
Heliyon 8, e10434 (2022).
242.	 Fontana, I. C., Kumar, A. & Nordberg, A. The role of astrocytic α7 nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 19, 278–288 (2023).
243.	Hoogland, I. C. M. et al. Microglial cell response in α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-
deficient mice after systemic infection with Escherichia coli. J. Neuroinflamm. 19, 94 
(2022).
244.	Jurado-Coronel, J. C. et al. Targeting the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) in 
astrocytes as a potential therapeutic target in Parkinson’s disease. Curr. Pharm. Des. 22, 
1305–1311 (2016).
245.	 Moon, J. H., Kim, S. Y., Lee, H. G., Kim, S. U. & Lee, Y. B. Activation of nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor prevents the production of reactive oxygen species in fibrillar β amyloid peptide 
(1-42)-stimulated microglia. Exp. Mol. Med. 40, 11–18 (2008).
246.	Park, I.-K., Lasiene, J., Chou, S.-H., Horner, P. J. & Pun, S. H. Neuron-specific delivery of 
nucleic acids mediated by Tet1-modified poly(ethylenimine). J. Gene Med. 9, 691–702 
(2007).
247.	 Liu, J. K. et al. A novel peptide defined through phage display for therapeutic protein and 
vector neuronal targeting. Neurobiol. Dis. 19, 407–418 (2005).
248.	 Wang, P. et al. Systemic delivery of BACE1 siRNA through neuron-targeted nanocomplexes 
for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Control. Release 279, 220–233 (2018).
249.	 Zhang, Y. et al. Targeted delivery of Tet1 peptide functionalized polymersomes to the rat 
cochlear nerve. Int. J. Nanomed. 7, 1015–1022 (2012).
250.	Mathew, A. et al. Curcumin loaded-PLGA nanoparticles conjugated with Tet-1 peptide for 
potential use in Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS ONE 7, e32616 (2012).
251.	 Guo, Q. et al. A dual-ligand fusion peptide improves the brain-neuron targeting of 
nanocarriers in Alzheimer’s disease mice. J. Control. Release 320, 347–362 (2020).
252.	 Guo, Q. et al. Brain-neuron targeted nanoparticles for peptide synergy therapy at dual-
target of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Control. Release 355, 604–621 (2023).
253.	Hou, Q. et al. Dual targeting nanoparticles for epilepsy therapy. Chem. Sci. 13, 
12913–12920 (2022).
254.	Garcia-Chica, J. et al. An overview of nanomedicines for neuron targeting. Nanomedicine 
15, 1617–1636 (2020).
255.	 Spencer, A. P. et al. Breaking barriers: bioinspired strategies for targeted neuronal 
delivery to the central nervous system. Pharmaceutics 12, 192 (2020).
256.	Zhang, F., Lin, Y.-A., Kannan, S. & Kannan, R. M. Targeting specific cells in the brain with 
nanomedicines for CNS therapies. J. Control. Release 240, 212–226 (2016).
257.	 Zhang, H. et al. Selective neuronal targeting, protection and signaling network analysis 
via dopamine-mediated mesoporous silica nanoparticles. Med. Chem. Commun. 6, 
1117–1129 (2015).
258.	Ferreira-Vieira, T. H., Guimaraes, I. M., Silva, F. R. & Ribeiro, F. M. Alzheimer’s disease: 
targeting the cholinergic system. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 14, 101–115 (2016).

Nature Reviews Materials | Volume 9 | August 2024 | 567–588
588
Review article
259.	 Qian, K. et al. Cholinergic neuron targeting nanosystem delivering hybrid peptide for 
combinatorial mitochondrial therapy in Alzheimer’s disease. ACS Nano 16, 11455–11472 
(2022).
260.	Luthi-Carter, R. et al. Decreased expression of striatal signaling genes in a mouse model 
of Huntington’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9, 1259–1271 (2000).
261.	 Dencker, D. et al. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes as potential drug targets 
for the treatment of schizophrenia, drug abuse, and Parkinson’s disease. ACS Chem. 
Neurosci. 3, 80–89 (2011).
262.	 Piggott, M. A. et al. Muscarinic receptors in basal ganglia in dementia with Lewy bodies, 
Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease. J. Chem. Neuroanat. 25, 161–173 (2003).
263.	Rinne, J. O., Lo¨nnberg, P., Marjama¨ki, P. & Rinne, U. K. Brain muscarinic receptor subtypes 
are differently affected in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease. Brain Res. 483, 
402–406 (1989).
264.	Liu, W. et al. Applications of machine learning in computational nanotechnology. 
Nanotechnology 33, 16 (2022).
265.	 Reker, D. et al. Computationally guided high-throughput design of self-assembling drug 
nanoparticles. Nat. Nanotechnol. 16, 725–733 (2021).
266.	Lv, H. & Chen, X. Intelligent control of nanoparticle synthesis through machine learning. 
Nanoscale 14, 6688–6708 (2022).
267.	 Tao, H. et al. Nanoparticle synthesis assisted by machine learning. Nat. Rev. Mater. 6, 
701–716 (2021).
268.	Pasqualini, R. & Ruoslahti, E. Organ targeting in vivo using phage display peptide libraries. 
Nature 380, 364–366 (1996).
269.	Pleiko, K. et al. In vivo phage display: identification of organ-specific peptides using deep 
sequencing and differential profiling across tissues. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, e38 (2021).
270.	 Bakhshinejad, B., Karimi, M. & Khalaj-Kondori, M. Phage display: development of 
nanocarriers for targeted drug delivery to the brain. Neural Regen. Res. 10, 862–865 (2015).
271.	 Li, J. et al. Identification of peptide sequences that target to the brain using in vivo phage 
display. Amino Acids 42, 2373–2381 (2012).
272.	 Li, J. et al. Targeting the brain with PEG-PLGA nanoparticles modified with phage-displayed 
peptides. Biomaterials 32, 4943–4950 (2011).
273.	 Ruta, A., Krishnan, K. & Elisseeff, J. H. Single-cell transcriptomics in tissue engineering 
and regenerative medicine. Nat. Rev. Bioeng. 2, 101–119 (2024).
274.	 Jung, N. & Kim, T.-K. Spatial transcriptomics in neuroscience. Exp. Mol. Med. 55, 
2105–2115 (2023).
275.	 Garland, E. F., Hartnell, I. J. & Boche, D. Microglia and astrocyte function and communication: 
what do we know in humans? Front. Neurosci. 16, 824888 (2022).
276.	 Matejuk, A. & Ransohoff, R. M. Crosstalk between astrocytes and microglia: an overview. 
Front. Immunol. 11, 1416 (2020).
277.	 Szepesi, Z., Manouchehrian, O., Bachiller, S. & Deierborg, T. Bidirectional microglia–neuron 
communication in health and disease. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 12, 323 (2018).
278.	 Jha, M. K., Jo, M., Kim, J.-H. & Suk, K. Microglia-astrocyte crosstalk: an intimate molecular 
conversation. Neuroscientist 25, 227–240 (2019).
279.	 Linville, R. M. & Searson, P. C. Next-generation in vitro blood–brain barrier models: 
benchmarking and improving model accuracy. Fluids Barriers CNS 18, 56 (2021).
280.	Bagchi, S. et al. In-vitro blood-brain barrier models for drug screening and permeation 
studies: an overview. Drug Des. Dev. Ther. 13, 3591–3605 (2019).
281.	 Pérez-López, A., Torres-Suárez, A. I., Martín-Sabroso, C. & Aparicio-Blanco, J. An overview of 
in vitro 3D models of the blood-brain barrier as a tool to predict the in vivo permeability  
of nanomedicines. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 196, 114816 (2023).
282.	 Rouleau, N., Murugan, N. J. & Kaplan, D. L. Functional bioengineered models of the central 
nervous system. Nat. Rev. Bioeng. 1, 252–270 (2023).
283.	Dara, S., Dhamercherla, S., Jadav, S. S., Babu, C. M. & Ahsan, M. J. Machine learning in 
drug discovery: a review. Artif. Intell. Rev. 55, 1947–1999 (2022).
284.	Vora, L. K. et al. Artificial intelligence in pharmaceutical technology and drug delivery 
design. Pharmaceutics 15, 1916 (2023).
285.	 Dawson, T. M., Golde, T. E. & Lagier-Tourenne, C. Animal models of neurodegenerative 
diseases. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1370–1379 (2018).
286.	Kodamullil, A. T. et al. Of mice and men: comparative analysis of neuro-inflammatory 
mechanisms in human and mouse using cause-and-effect models. J. Alzheimers Dis. 59, 
1045–1055 (2017).
287.	 Xie, F. et al. Investigation of glucose-modified liposomes using polyethylene glycols 
with different chain lengths as the linkers for brain targeting. Int. J. Nanomed. 7, 163–175 
(2012).
288.	Anraku, Y. et al. Glycaemic control boosts glucosylated nanocarrier crossing the BBB into 
the brain. Nat. Commun. 8, 1001 (2017).
289.	 Zhou, Y. et al. Blood-brain barrier-penetrating siRNA nanomedicine for Alzheimer’s disease 
therapy. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc7031 (2020).
290.	Arora, S. & Singh, J. In vitro and in vivo optimization of liposomal nanoparticles based 
brain targeted Vgf gene therapy. Int. J. Pharm. 608, 121095 (2021).
291.	 Boado, R. J. et al. Genetic engineering of a lysosomal enzyme fusion protein for 
targeted delivery across the human blood-brain barrier. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 99, 475–484 
(2008).
292.	Hou, J. et al. Accessing neuroinflammation sites: monocyte/neutrophil-mediated drug 
delivery for cerebral ischemia. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau8301 (2019).
293.	Zensi, A. et al. Albumin nanoparticles targeted with Apo E enter the CNS by transcytosis 
and are delivered to neurones. J. Control. Release 137, 78–86 (2009).
294.	Sorrentino, N. C. et al. A highly secreted sulphamidase engineered to cross the blood-
brain barrier corrects brain lesions of mice with mucopolysaccharidoses type IIIA. 
EMBO Mol. Med. 5, 675–690 (2013).
295.	Spencer, B. et al. A neuroprotective brain-penetrating endopeptidase fusion protein 
ameliorates Alzheimer disease pathology and restores neurogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 
17917–17931 (2014).
296.	Song, Q. et al. Biomimetic ApoE-reconstituted high density lipoprotein nanocarrier for 
blood-brain barrier penetration and amyloid beta-targeting drug delivery. Mol. Pharm. 
13, 3976–3987 (2016).
297.	 Meng, F. et al. A novel LDL-mimic nanocarrier for the targeted delivery of curcumin into 
the brain to treat Alzheimer’s disease. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 134, 88–97 (2015).
298.	Bana, L. et al. Liposomes bi-functionalized with phosphatidic acid and an ApoE-derived 
peptide affect Aβ aggregation features and cross the blood-brain-barrier: implications 
for therapy of Alzheimer disease. Nanomedicine 10, 1583–1590 (2014).
299.	Liu, Y. et al. A leptin derived 30-amino-acid peptide modified pegylated poly-l-lysine 
dendrigraft for brain targeted gene delivery. Biomaterials 31, 5246–5257 (2010).
300.	Thom, G. et al. A peptide derived from melanotransferrin delivers a protein-based 
interleukin 1 receptor antagonist across the BBB and ameliorates neuropathic pain in a 
preclinical model. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 39, 2074–2088 (2019).
301.	 Liu, L. et al. Targeted exosome coating gene-chem nanocomplex as ‘nanoscavenger’ for 
clearing α-synuclein and immune activation of Parkinson’s disease. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba3967 
(2020).
302.	Broadwell, R. D., Baker-Cairns, B. J., Friden, P. M., Oliver, C. & Villegas, J. C. Transcytosis 
of protein through the mammalian cerebral epithelium and endothelium. III. Receptor-
mediated transcytosis through the blood-brain barrier of blood-borne transferrin and 
antibody against the transferrin receptor. Exp. Neurol. 142, 47–65 (1996).
303.	Ulbrich, K., Hekmatara, T., Herbert, E. & Kreuter, J. Transferrin- and transferrin-receptor-
antibody-modified nanoparticles enable drug delivery across the blood-brain barrier 
(BBB). Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 71, 251–256 (2009).
304.	Yu, Y. J. et al. Boosting brain uptake of a therapeutic antibody by reducing its affinity 
for a transcytosis target. Sci. Transl Med. 3, 84ra44 (2011).
305.	Papademetriou, I. T., Garnacho, C., Schuchman, E. H. & Muro, S. In vivo performance 
of polymer nanocarriers dually-targeted to epitopes of the same or different receptors. 
Biomaterials 34, 3459–3466 (2013).
306.	Valiante, S. et al. Peptide gH625 enters into neuron and astrocyte cell lines and crosses 
the blood–brain barrier in rats. Int. J. Nanomed. 10, 1885–1898 (2015).
307.	 Minami, S. S. et al. Selective targeting of microglia by quantum dots. J. Neuroinflamm. 9, 
22 (2012).
308.	Liu, H. et al. Targeting microglia for therapy of Parkinson’s disease by using biomimetic 
ultrasmall nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 21730–21742 (2020).
309.	Ren, M. et al. RVG peptide-functionalized favipiravir nanoparticle delivery system 
facilitates antiviral therapy of neurotropic virus infection in a mouse model. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
24, 5851 (2023).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank all authors whose work in CNS drug delivery and related areas contributed 
to this Review. The authors also thank the reviewers for their constructive suggestions, which 
helped them to improve this Review.
Author contributions
All authors researched data for the article. J.G., Z.J.X., S.G., J.M.K. and N.J. contributed 
substantially to the discussion of the content. J.G., Z.J.X., S.G. and C.J. wrote the article. C.J. 
crafted all the figures. All authors reviewed and/or edited the manuscript before submission.
Competing interests
N.J. and J.M.K. have one pending patent on nanoparticles for gene delivery in the brain. The 
other authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Peer review information Nature Reviews Materials thanks Horacio Cabral and the other, 
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-
archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law.
Related links
Basal Ganglia: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/body/23962-basal-ganglia
Cognitive functioning: https://mayfieldclinic.com/pe-pd.htm
© Springer Nature Limited 2024