REVIEW SUMMARY
◥
BIOCATALYSIS
From nature to industry: Harnessing enzymes
for biocatalysis
R. Buller, S. Lutz, R. J. Kazlauskas, R. Snajdrova, J. C. Moore, U. T. Bornscheuer*
BACKGROUND: Biocatalysis is an approach to
synthetic chemistry in which enzymes carry
out chemical reactions. Historically, enzymes
from natural sources have been used to break
down oils and proteins in laundry detergents,
produce semisynthetic antibiotics, and create
simple chiral precursors for the pharmaceuti-
cal industry. In the past 5 years, the number of
available protein sequences has increased by a
staggering 20-fold, accelerating the discovery
of enzymes with useful activities and proper-
ties. Directed evolution, the cornerstone of our
ability to tailor enzymatic properties, is allowing
researchers to tailor enzymes for the synthesis of
complex molecules, the modification of biol-
ogical therapeutics, and the breakdown of
plastic waste. Machine learning–driven protein-
structure prediction, coupled with advances in
automation and high-throughput screening, is
further advancing our ability to create enzymes
with desired function. The ability to add non-
biological catalytic elements to enzymes means
that enzyme engineers no longer have to rely
solely on natural catalytic machinery. Scientists
have thus gained the capacity to redesign,
reimagine, and repurpose enzymes. Illustrative
applications include enzyme cascades to man-
ufacture the antivirals islatravir and molnupir-
avir, biocatalysts that can generate and control
radicals, and enzymes that exploit photo-
catalysis to affect stereocontrolled C–C couplings,
hydroaminations, or Diels-Alder reactions.
ADVANCES: The past 5 years have witnessed a
surge in the development of data-driven tools
enabling the accelerated discovery, engineering,
and deployment of enzymes for applications
in chemistry, medicine, and food technology.
By leveraging enzymes’ ability to control the
environment of a chemical reaction, scientists
have developed successful platforms for the
construction of complex small molecules from
suitable starting materials or even CO2. In ad-
dition to their use in (chemo)-enzymatic cas-
cade reactions, precisely tailored biocatalysts
can manufacture new therapeutic modalities,
such as antisense oligonucleotide therapeutics,
and bioconjugates. DNA synthesis, which still
relies on phosphoramidite chemistry, is being
reinvented with template-independent deoxy-
nucleotidyl transferases to make the process
faster and cheaper. Machine learning, already
dominating protein-structure prediction and
design, is finding applications in enzyme en-
gineering, including improvement of functions
such as enantioselectivity, activity, and stability.
OUTLOOK: In the decade ahead, biocatalysis
research and applications will continue to pro-
fit from advances in data mining, machine
learning, and DNA reading and writing. The
combinatorial design of enzymes and the ease
with which new enzyme variants can be ex-
perimentally generated lends itself to train
data-intense machine-learning algorithms.
Ideally, the sequence-function data of variants
screened in a directed-evolution campaign could
be used to predict which variants to evaluate
next. Machine learning works best with clean
and reproducible data, mandating the stan-
dardization and reporting of data and the fur-
ther development of experimental techniques,
including molecular biology methods, automa-
tion, and high-throughput screening assays.
The toolbox of drug discovery is expanding
beyond traditional small molecules (molecular
weights <500 g/mol) to include RNA therapeu-
tics, protein degraders, cyclopeptides, antibody
drug conjugates, and gene therapy. Consequent-
ly, the synthetic complexity of lead molecules
and clinical candidates is increasing with a
growing percentage of chiral and beyond-rule-
of-5 molecules. Enzymatic synthesis will play a
key role beyond its present impact in small-
molecule drug discovery and development.
The discovery of new enzyme families and the
rational design of new enzyme functions will
expand the toolbox of available biocatalysts.
Development and deployment of retrosynthetic
tools containing enzymatic reactions will be an
important step toward democratizing biocatal-
ysis and making it available to the nonexpert.
Fueled by these innovations, nature’s catalysts
will be profitably used to address current chal-
lenges, including the fight against diseases,
provision of affordable clean energy, and reduc-
tion of industrial and consumer waste.▪
RESEARCH
The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online.
*Corresponding author: Email: uwe.bornscheuer@uni-greifswald.de
Cite this article as R. Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615
(2023). DOI: 10.1126/science.ahd8615
READ THE FULL ARTICLE AT
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adh8615
Applications
In silico and experimental tools
Wild-type enzyme panels
Directed evolution
Redesigning enzyme 
mechanism
Computational design
(Chemo)enzymatic cascades 
to value-added products
Biotherapeutics
Re- and upcycling
The accelerating development of biocatalysis. In silico and experimental tools developed in the last
decade allow the fast creation of tailored enzymes. In addition to the concise synthesis of complex small
molecules in elegant (chemo)-enzymatic cascades, newly accessible applications include enzymatic
DNA synthesis, the generation of therapeutic oligonucleotides, and up- and recycling of plastic waste.
[Figure created with Canva]
Buller et al., Science 382, 899 (2023)
24 November 2023
1 of 1

REVIEW
◥
BIOCATALYSIS
From nature to industry: Harnessing enzymes
for biocatalysis
R. Buller1, S. Lutz2, R. J. Kazlauskas3, R. Snajdrova4, J. C. Moore5, U. T. Bornscheuer6*
Biocatalysis harnesses enzymes to make valuable products. This green technology is used in countless
applications from bench scale to industrial production and allows practitioners to access complex
organic molecules, often with fewer synthetic steps and reduced waste. The last decade has seen an
explosion in the development of experimental and computational tools to tailor enzymatic properties,
equipping enzyme engineers with the ability to create biocatalysts that perform reactions not present in
nature. By using (chemo)-enzymatic synthesis routes or orchestrating intricate enzyme cascades,
scientists can synthesize elaborate targets ranging from DNA and complex pharmaceuticals to starch
made in vitro from CO2-derived methanol. In addition, new chemistries have emerged through the combination
of biocatalysis with transition metal catalysis, photocatalysis, and electrocatalysis. This review highlights
recent key developments, identifies current limitations, and provides a future prospect for this rapidly
developing technology.
T
o innovate in synthetic chemistry, aca-
demic and industrial scientists increas-
ingly apply enzymes to make simple and
complex functionalized (bio)molecules
(1). Inspired by the precise control that
enzymes can exert over reaction outcomes,
chemists are using biocatalytic transforma-
tions that complement or even substitute for
more traditional chemical routes (2). However,
as synthetically relevant reactions rarely have
a counterpart in nature, the challenge in bio-
catalysis is the identification of a suitable en-
zyme catalyst for the desired application. Early
uses of biocatalysis relied on accessible wild-
type enzymes used in food or other industries
to produce laundry detergents, semisynthetic
antibiotics, and simple chiral precursors for
the pharmaceutical industry (3–5). Although
such repurposing still occurs occasionally, most
new applications require the discovery of en-
zymes with distinct reactivity or the engineer-
ing of existing enzymes to catalyze the desired
reaction, accept the desired substrate, and be
stable and active at the desired application
conditions. The computational and experimen-
tal advances of the past few years have sped
and simplified the tailoring of biocatalysts to
access a rapidly growing set of chemical trans-
formations. Today, strategies for the development
of performant biocatalysts include screening
natural diversity to discover a desired enzyme
activity, engineering biocatalysts to alter the
substrate range, redesigning mechanisms to
create previously unknown reactivity, and
computationally designing enzymes de novo
(Fig. 1). These strategies now allow the field to
be much bolder in choosing which reactions
are attempted enzymatically. Biocatalysts are
being redesigned, reimagined, and repurposed
to grant access to the desired targets with
great efficiency.
Here, we evaluate the recent experimental
and computational developments that led to
this boost in biocatalysis and its applications
(Fig. 2). Highlighted experimental innovations
include optimized strategies to read and write
DNA, advanced tools for automation and high-
throughput screening, and the ability to incor-
porate novel catalytic elements into enzymes,
including noncanonical amino acids. Compu-
tational progress is reflected in improved ac-
cess to suitable enzyme-encoding sequences,
machine learning–based methods to accurately
predict protein structures, and data-driven tools
to guide enzyme engineering in the creation
of information-enriched, functional variant
libraries. These achievements have translated
into a variety of applications, including (chemo-)
enzymatic cascade reactions, new-to-nature
chemistries, enzymatic plastic degradation,
and the synthesis of biologics and therapeutics
(Fig. 2).
Developing biocatalysts
There are several approaches that can be used
to find or create an enzyme with the desired
catalytic activity (Fig. 1) (6). First, the target
activity could exist in nature but needs to be
discovered. High-quality, low-cost sequencing
of DNA has now revealed complete genomes
of species from all over the globe (7, 8), as well
as DNA fragments from metagenome samples.
The number of available protein sequences
increased more than 20-fold in the last 5 years
[2023, >2.4 billion (9, 10); 2018, ~123 million
(11)]. Searching these sequences reveals many
putative enzymes, some with predictable ac-
tivities and many that are of unknown func-
tion. Combining this sequence data with
computational tools such as sequence simi-
larity networks (12), phylogenetic analyses (13),
and protein-structure prediction improves the
precision of the search.
In a representative example, polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) hydrolases (PETases) to
degrade PET plastics were found through clas-
sical screening (14), bioinformatics searches
(15), and sequencing of environmental sam-
ples (16). Alternatively, legacy enzyme collec-
tions of enzymes that proved useful in the
past are an invaluable resource for identifying
suitable biocatalysts or advanced starting points
for engineering projects. Commercially avail-
able enzyme screening kits and private libraries
of enzyme variants for frequently used enzymes
such as lipases, esterases, ketoreductases, and
transaminases can considerably shorten time-
lines toward yielding biocatalysts with the de-
sired target activity. More recently, advances
in protein structure prediction (see “Compu-
tational tools” section below) have further im-
proved the search for suitable enzymes in
sequence databases. For example, in a search
for dehalogenases, a sequence similarity search
identified 2905 putative target enzymes (17).
Subsequent analysis of homology models—
which considered the size of the active site,
the presence of catalytic residues, and tunnels
to access the active site—narrowed the search
to 45 genes, 40 of which yielded catalytically
active dehalogenases.
The most common strategy to access a de-
sired enzymatic function is repurposing of an
existing enzyme that fits many, but not all,
requirements for the new application. Often
an existing enzyme catalyzes the desired re-
action but does not accept the desired sub-
strate or does not produce the desired product
isomer. In this situation, protein engineering is
required to shift the substrate or product pref-
erence of the enzyme. For example, the redesign
of an aspartase enabled the hydroamina-
tion of a,b-unsaturated carboxylic acids to make
b-amino acids (18). The target substrates con-
tained a hydrophobic substituent at the position
corresponding to the a-carboxylate of aspartic
acid. The design replaced four mostly polar
amino acids in the binding site with hydro-
phobic amino acids. In another case, triggered
by the need for selective halogenation reac-
tions, researchers expanded the substrate
range of Fe(II)/a-ketoglutarate–dependent hal-
ogenases to include nonnatural substrates
RESEARCH
1Competence Center for Biocatalysis, Institute of Chemistry
and Biotechnology, Zurich University of Applied Sciences,
8820 Wädenswil, Switzerland. 2Codexis Incorporated,
Redwood City, CA 94063, USA. 3Department of Biochemistry,
Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Biotechnology Institute,
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, MN 55108, USA. 4Novartis
Institutes for BioMedical Research, Global Discovery Chemistry,
4056 Basel, Switzerland. 5MRL, Merck & Co., Rahway, NJ
07065, USA. 6Institute of Biochemistry, Dept. of Biotechnology
and Enzyme Catalysis, Greifswald University, Greifswald,
Germany.
*Corresponding author. Email: uwe.bornscheuer@uni-greifswald.de
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
1 of 11

(19–21), such as the macrolide soraphen A, a
potent fungicide. By using algorithm-aided
engineering, the apparent turnover number
(kcat) for soraphen was improved >100-fold,
turning the halogenase into a suitable cat-
alyst for aiding in structure-activity relationship
studies in medicinal chemistry. The halogenase
also accepts other anions, including azide, ni-
trate, and nitrite, enabling the creation of a
wider range of products (22). In another ex-
ample the selectivity of a protease was altered
to degrade gluten peptides as a potential sup-
plement for patients with celiac disease (23).
The starting protease favored hydrolysis af-
ter a Pro-Arg/Lys sequence, whereas gluten
contains many Pro-Gln-Gln/Leu sequences.
Hydrolysis was desired between Gln and
Gln/Leu residues. The researchers introduced
eight substitutions, two in the new Gln site,
one in the Gln/Leu site, and five more distant
substitutions to stabilize the protein. The mod-
ified protease is currently undergoing clin-
ical trials.
The concept of “substrate walking”—evolving
an enzyme from transforming its natural sub-
strate to accepting an industrially relevant sub-
strates was rarely applied (24, 25) a little over a
decade ago. The evolution of a transaminase to
manufacture sitagliptin (26) is an early exam-
ple. Today, Pictet-Spenglerases that use benz-
aldehyde (27), flavin-dependent halogenases
active on high–molecular weight indoles and
carbazoles (28), opine dehydrogenases (reduc-
tive aminases) that use amines and ketones as
opposed to amino- and ketoacids (29), and
transketolases that use nonpolar aromatic
substrates (30) have all been created through
substrate walking.
In more difficult cases, no enzyme with the
desired reactivity exists, but an enzyme with a
mechanistically similar catalytic activity is
known. Combining chemical reasoning with
protein engineering can extend the natural
catalytic activity to the desired activity (6, 31).
One example is the expansion of the catalytic
repertoire of cytochrome P450 monooxygenases
to catalyze carbene and nitrene reactions. Their
oxidase mechanism involves an iron porphyrin
oxo (Fe=O) intermediate, and it was reasoned
that iron carbene [Fe=C(R1)(R2)] and iron ni-
trene (Fe=NR) species might form similarly
given the appropriate reactive substrate (32, 33).
Initial experiments revealed inefficient reac-
tions, but optimization by directed evolution
and replacement of the proximal thiolate heme
ligand with the more weakly donating serine—
yielding the so-called P411 scaffolds—led to
catalysts capable of new-to-nature chemistry,
including cyclopropanation, cyclopropena-
tion, Si–C bond formation, B–C bond forma-
tion, C–H insertion, and alkyl transfer (Fig. 3)
(34), as well as aziridination, sulfide imida-
tion, C–H amidation, and C–H amination (Fig.
3) (35). These examples are enzyme-catalyzed
reactions in vitro, butthis new-to-nature carbene-
transfer chemistry was also used to extend
biosynthesis in vivo. Engineered Streptomyces
strains biosynthesized a carbene-transfer re-
agent, azaserine, as well as the acceptor styrene,
to yield unnatural cyclopropanes (36). P450
monooxygenases can also be repurposed by
following other strategies. For example, the
P450 monooxygenase from Labrenzia agreggata
was fashioned into a ketone synthase capable
of the direct oxidation of internal arylalkenes
to ketones by harnessing highly reactive car-
bocation species as key intermediates (37). To
cite another example, researchers found that
P450-based radical cyclases could be developed
through the exploitation of a metalloredox
strategy to catalyze stereoselective atom-transfer
radical reactions yielding substituted g-lactams
(38) or arenes (39).
Changes in catalytic activity can also be more
drastic; for example, a reductase was extended
to a cyclase that forms C–C bonds through
radical intermediates. Flavin-dependent “ene”
reductases normally catalyze the reduction of
electronically activated alkenes through the
stepwise addition of H2—the first step occur-
ring through a hydride transfer (a two-electron
transfer) from the flavin hydroquinone, followed
by the second step, a proton transfer from a
conserved tyrosine residue (Fig. 3). In other
enzymes, flavins reduce substrates through
two single-electron transfers, which creates
radical intermediates. By replacing the ac-
tivated alkene substrate of an ene reductase
with an a-bromo ketone, which is a radical
Fig. 1. Strategies for bio-
catalyst development.
(Top left) Screening
natural diversity from
environmental samples or
from enzyme libraries can
aid in discovering the
desired enzyme activity.
(Top right) Directed evolution
starts with an enzyme that
has a small amount of
performance on a desired
reaction and tunes the
enzyme to work well under
desired reaction conditions.
Substrate walking by means
of directed evolution
expands that capability by
starting with an enzyme
that is mechanistically
competent to catalyze a
desired reaction (but
doesn’t actually catalyze it)
and engineers the enzyme
to execute the reaction on the target substrate to make a desired product (i.e., alters its substrate range). (Bottom left) Redesigning the enzyme mechanism exploits
chemical intuition to create new chemical functionality—for example, through cofactor repurposing and the addition of new prosthetic groups. (Bottom right)
Computational design equips inert protein structures with enzymatic function. All images from stock.adobe.com, except where noted. Circled images, clockwise from
bottom left: images 1 and 2, ylivdesign; image 3, Lifeking; image 4, ylivdesign. Images in boxes, clockwise from bottom left: box 1, by author; box 2, images 1 to 3
(left to right) by davooda, image 4 by SkyLine; box 3, Lifeking; box 4, by author.
Directed
Evolution
Redesigning
Enzyme Mechanism
Computational
Design
Screening
Nature‘s Diversity
Performance
Generations
native
substrate
non-native
substrate
Performance
Sequence space
Performance
Accessible chemistry
chemical
intuition
Performance
Structure space
theozyme
scaffold
optimization
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
2 of 11

precursor, the ene reductase changes its mech-
anism and transfers a single electron. Rapid loss
of bromide yields the corresponding a-ketonyl
radical. In an appropriately selected substrate,
this radical may cyclize, forming a C–Cbond and
abstracting a hydrogen atom from the flavin
semiquinone (40). The surrounding active site
guides the formation of new stereocenters in
the product. Thus, the resulting reaction is an
enantioselective reductive cyclization.
In other cases, radical precursors are less
reactive and require light irradiation to initi-
ate the single-electron transfer. In photobio-
catalysis, a cofactor or amino acid within the
protein active site is photoexcited to promote
the electron or energy transfer required to con-
vert starting materials to desired products.
Only three natural enzymes follow this syn-
thetic logic: fatty acid photodecarboxylase (41),
DNA photolyase (42), and protochlorophyllide
reductase (43). Whereas the latter two en-
zymes have less synthetic relevance, fatty-acid
decarboxylases have been studied to catalyze
the hydrodecarboxylation of fatty acids, a redox-
neutral reaction that leads to alkanes, ren-
dering them promising catalysts for biofuel
production (44) and chemical building-block
synthesis (45).
Apart from radical cyclizations of well-chosen
organohalides (46), the photobiocatalysis ap-
proach similarly allows the alkylation of arenes
(47), the asymmetric cross-electrophile coupling
of alkyl halides and nitroalkanes (48) (Fig. 3),
and hydroaminations through the generation
of amidyl radicals (49). Nonenzymatic photo-
redox catalysts can also generate substrates
for enzymes to create new reactions. Adding
xanthene-based photocatalysts enabled an
ene reductase to catalyze an enantioselective
deacetoxylation (50). In another example, non-
canonical amino acids were synthesized by
using separate photocatalysis and enzymatic
steps. The photocatalysis generates an alkyl
radical from an alkyl trifluoroborate precursor.
In the same solution, a modified tryptophan
Fig. 2. Advances in experimental and computational tools have broadened the range of applications in biocatalysis. All images from stock.adobe.com, except
where noted. Clockwise from bottom left: image 1 (Biologics and therapeutics), Sir.Vector; image 2, by author; images 3 and 4, ylivdesign; images 5 and 6, Artco;
image 7, ylivdesign; image 8, muhamad; image 9, ylivdesign; image 10, davooda; image 11, Artco; image 12, RaulAlmu; image 13, ylivdesign; image 14, Skyline.
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
3 of 11

synthase catalyzes the dehydration of serine to
form an enzyme-bound pyridoxyl-5′-phosphate
aminoacrylate intermediate. Quenching of the
radical and release of the intermediate yields a
noncanonical amino acid. Adjusting the shape
of the active site fine-tuned the enantioselec-
tivity of all described reactions for up to three
stereocenters (51).
Instead of modifying or extending exist-
ing enzymatic activities, researchers have also
computationally designed new catalytic activi-
ties into a protein scaffold. This de novo design
approach identifies the transition state of the
desired transformation and then builds a bind-
ing site to stabilize it, reducing the problem of
biocatalysis to one of molecular recognition.
Although de novo enzyme design has created
protein catalysts for model transformations,
including proton-transfer, bimolecular-aldol,
and Diels-Alder reactions (52). The initial ac-
tivities of the designer catalysts were low,
but directed evolution increased their cata-
lytic activities. For example, directed evolu-
tion of a designed retroaldolase increased
its catalytic activity from barely detectable
to that of natural enzymes. The directed evo-
lution introduced 31 substitutions, leading to
a million-fold increase in activity (53). More
recently, a deep learning–based approach
generated large numbers of idealized protein
structures and the sequences that encode it.
The diverse scaffolds were employed to de-
sign an artificial luciferase. Three substitu-
tions introduced by site-saturation mutagenesis
yielded a 100-fold–higher photon flux than
did the parent design (kcat/Km = 106 M−1 s−1)
(54) (where kcat/Km is the catalytic efficiency
and Km is the Michaelis constant). Although
de novo design of enzymes with activities that
rival their natural counterparts remains a major
challenge at present, these studies have im-
proved our understanding of how sequences
fold into proteins and of how basic enzyme
activity is created. De novo enzyme design will
continue to grow as our understanding of the
sequence-function relationship in enzymes im-
proves, protein design methods mature, and
computational power increases.
Experimental tools
Regardless of the strategy chosen to identify a
suitable biocatalyst, laboratory work is always
required to produce and, if needed, to tailor
the target enzyme. The range of experimental
tools available to protein engineers is con-
sistently expanding, whether by lowering the
cost of synthetic genes, speeding up individual
directed-evolution cycles, or allowing for intro-
duction of new catalytic elements to be added
to proteins.
Biocatalyst development starts with a DNA
construct encoding the enzyme of interest,
which requires artificial DNA synthesis. Present
DNAsynthesisusesphosphoramiditechemistry
developed 40 years ago (55); however, DNA
synthesis performed with enzymes (56–58)
Fig. 3. Examples of redesigning the enzyme mechanism. (A) (Top)
Oxygenation catalyzed by wild-type cytochrome P450 monooxygenase. The
structural similarity of Fe oxenes and Fe nitrenes inspired the use of synthetic
reagents to carry out new chemistries with engineered P450 enzymes. (Bottom left)
These so-called P411 enzymes, which contain a serine residue as proximal ligand
(denoted as X), were evolved to assemble C−C bonds through sp3 C−H
functionalization (34) and to aminate at benzylic and allylic (not shown) positions
to yield (bottom right) enantioenriched, unprotected primary amines (35). Piv,
pivaloyl; Tf, trifluoromethanesulfonyl. (B) (Top left) Asymmetric double-bond
reduction catalyzed by an ene reductase through a hydride transfer (two-electron
transfer) from flavinmononucleotide (FMN) followed by a proton transfer from
a conserved tyrosine residue (not shown). By applying photocatalysis, the
catalytic machinery of the ene reductase can be repurposed when radical precursors
are used as substrates (as shown here, an a-chloro ketone). EWG, electron
withdrawing group. (Top right) Thermally allowed [4+2] cycloaddition between
4-carboxybenzyl-trans-1,3-butadiene-1-carbamate and N,N-dimethylacrylamide
catalyzed by a designed Diels-Alderase (155). (Bottom left) Irradiation initiates
a single-electron transfer from the flavin hydroquinone cofactor and facilitates the
formation of an a-ketonyl radical, which can engage in stereoselective
sp3–sp3 cross electrophile couplings in the confines of the engineered enzyme
scaffold (48). (Bottom right) Installation of the noncanonical amino acid
4-benzoylphenylalanine (green) by genetic-code expansion expands the reaction
scope of the Diels-Alderase. Upon irradiation of the designer enzyme, the ncAA
allows for triplet energy transfer to appropriately selected substrates, giving
access to thermally forbidden reactions, such as intra- and bimolecular (not
shown) [2+2] cycloadditions with high stereoselectivities (156). Structural
illustrations are adapted from the PDB (PDB IDs: 2IJ2, cytochrome P450BM3;
7TNB, ene reductase; and 3I1C, Diels-Alderase).
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
4 of 11

yields higher-quality DNA and may be faster
and cheaper, thus representing a biocatalytic
solution in and of itself. Terminal deoxynu-
cleotidyl transferases (TdTs) (Fig. 4) polymer-
ize deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) to
the 3′-end of a DNA sequence in a template-
independent fashion. Using dNTPs with a
blocked 3′-hydroxyl stops TdT action after a
single nucleotide incorporation, hence con-
trolling an otherwise runaway polymerization.
Native TdTs react slowly with blocked dNTPs,
so improved TdTs were engineered for this
application (59, 60). TdT-based approaches
have driven DNA oligonucleotide synthesis to
(literally) new lengths of up to 1000 nucleo-
tides, enabled by incorporation efficiencies of
>99.6%, reviving the promise for rapid, single-
run whole-gene synthesis. Milder aqueous re-
action conditions also benefit DNA quality and
greatly improve the overall process sustainabil-
ity, opening up opportunities for gene editing
and diagnostic applications. TdTs can also as-
semble short synthetic RNA fragments. Such
sequences, containing modified nucleotides in
addition to the standard RNA building blocks,
hold substantial therapeutic potential as anti-
sense oligonucleotides and small interfering
RNAs (61–63).
Despite the advances in enzymatic DNA syn-
thesis, most laboratories still rely on traditional
molecular biology strategies to create large,
randomized libraries through methods such as
error-prone polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
or the construction of a few specific variants
through site-directed mutagenesis by using a
chemically synthesized gene as template. Build-
ing libraries of predefined enzyme variants
remains expensive and challenging with these
traditional approaches. “Oligo-pools,”—which
consist of a few hundred up to 1000 distinct
polynucleotides with a length of about 300 base
pairs—are a less-expensive alternative solution
(0.00001 to 0.001 USD per nucleotide, depend-
ing on length, scale, platform, or vendor) (64).
Despite disadvantages such as truncated DNA
molecules and high error rates (65), the oligo-
pool option may be more cost-effective than
the degenerate or reduced codon-coverage
primers typically used for library construc-
tion and may allow more flexible library de-
sign (66).
The cornerstone of protein engineering
(1, 3, 67, 68), the Nobel prize–winning strategy
of directed evolution, relies heavily on such
randomized gene libraries. When directed evo-
lution appeared three decades ago, error-prone
PCR was the driver of sequence variability, re-
sulting in round-over-round accumulation of
single mutations and an approximated two-
fold improvement of enzyme performance per
round of evolution (69) (Fig. 4, light blue curve).
The contemporaneous addition of recombina-
tion techniques upgraded the rate of improve-
ment to between 2.75 and 4 per evolution cycle
(Fig. 4, dashed curves) by incorporating multiple
mutations per round, reflecting the state of the
art over the past two decades. Computational
and molecular biology efforts have improved
mutation prediction and accelerated enzyme-
variant creation so that the screening burden
can be reduced, but not to the point that screen-
ing cycles or improvements per cycle have been
greatly altered from these historical norms (70).
Additionally, protein engineers continue to in-
crease the complexity of attempted evolution
campaigns. Together, these developments point
to an increasing bottleneck in biocatalysis:
higher demand for protein-engineering re-
sources and a lack of improvement in the way
evolution experiments are performed. Tech-
nical innovations are on the horizon, however.
Cell-free protein-expression technologies pro-
vide all the necessary components to transcribe
and translate many DNA sequences into func-
tional proteins, avoiding the time-consuming
steps of cell transformation, growth, and in-
duction (71). Using this technology to produce
enzyme libraries for testing in evolution exper-
iments has the potential to accelerate the time to
complete a round of evolution by ~1.6-fold (Fig.
4, green curve). Turning to the biological world,
continuous-evolution strategies tie the success of
a desired enzyme activity to the growth rate of a
producing microbe and simultaneously provide
the microbe with a mechanism of introducing
mutation into the DNA coding for the desired
protein only (72, 73). Evolution of the desired
proteinthenoccursincontinuousculture, which
circumvents the same laboratory manipulations
required for cell-free protein expression and in
addition avoids the man-made construction of
new variant libraries, leading to an eightfold
increase in the rate of evolution performance
compared with error-prone PCR [and a five-
fold improvement compared with current state
of the art (Fig. 4, periwinkle curve)]. For ex-
ample, mRNA display libraries (74) have gen-
erated new proteins, new types of catalytic
activity, and binding proteins with very high
affinity for their targets. Similarly, microfluidic
technologies have demonstrated the ability to
Fig. 4. Modeling of
directed evolution meth-
odologies. Recursive accu-
mulation of single-point
mutations, such as those
generated by error-prone
PCR methods, produces
fitness improvements on the
order of 2N (light blue curve).
Adding recombination
techniques to evolution
improves fitness accumulation
to between 2.75N (26) and
4N (122, 152) (dashed
curves), averaging ~3.2N
(pink curve). Cell-free
expression technologies
increase the rate at which a
cycle of evolution can
be performed (green curve),
and continuous-evolution
techniques are estimated to
accelerate accumulation
of point mutations even more quickly (periwinkle curve). Microfluidics-based ultrahigh throughput screening has yielded 100-fold improvements per round (76).
N indicates the number of evolution cycles. In this overview, it is assumed that one evolution cycle can be carried out per month.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Fold Improvement
Months
2N
2.75N
4N
3.2N
3.21.6·N
2.5 week rounds
24·N
1 week rounds
100N
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
5 of 11

screenlarge librarysizes, which positively changes
the nature of directed-evolution experiments
(Fig. 4, black curve) (75). Encapsulating cells into
picoliter-sized droplets, along with a lysis reagent
and an analytical readout, has allowed scientists
to assay thousands of samples per second, which
is on par with the rates achieved by fluorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS) techniques. Be-
cause millions of samples can be analyzed,
libraries with multiple mutations per sequence
can be screened deeply enough to uncover rare
events, reaching 100-fold improvements per
evolution round or greater (76). Although lack of
commercialized hardware, relatively high imple-
mentation costs, and technical complexity has
so far limited the use of such tools to expert
practitioners, these strategies show promise
for managing the longer evolution timelines
required for increasingly complex targets.
Other emerging tools that include useful in
protein engineering include cryo–electron mi-
croscopy (cryo-EM), which has been profit-
ably employed to guide improvement of a
nitrilase (77), and microcrystal electron diffrac-
tion (MicroED), which supported the mecha-
nistic investigation of carbene transfer in a
designed protein (78). Both methods enable
gathering of mechanistic insights and struc-
tural data complementary to x-ray crystallog-
raphy, which nevertheless remains an important
tool for generating high-resolution structures,
especially of smaller enzymes.
Complementing the biocatalysts obtained
by enzyme-engineering campaigns, some ap-
plications require researchers to equip pro-
teins with new-to-nature functionalities. This
is achieved through the incorporation of non-
canonical amino acids (ncAAs) by using either
amber stop-codon suppression or promiscuous
aminoacyl tRNA synthetases (aaRSs), which
expands the repertoire of available catalytic
elements beyond those encoded in the 20 pro-
teinogenic amino acids (79). ncAAs can be
harnessed to tune enzyme properties, reveal
mechanisms in complex catalytic machineries,
and create enzymes with functions not found
in nature.
An illustrative example of tuning enzyme
properties by incorporating ncAAs is the in-
troduction of Nd-methylhistidine (NMH) as
proximal ligand into the heme protein ascorbate
peroxidase, which led to substantial increases
in turnover number without compromising
catalytic efficiency (80). Similarly, introduc-
ing NMH modulates the reactivity of com-
pound II in cytochrome c peroxidase (81, 82)
and enhances the promiscuous peroxidase
(83) and cyclopropanation (84, 85) activities of
myoglobin. Most recently, this noncanonical
nucleophile was introduced into a designer
enzyme created for the Morita-Baylis-Hillman
reaction. During evolution, NMH substantially
altered the evolutionary trajectory, yielding an
order of magnitude– more-active variant com-
pared with previously engineered enzymes that
did not include the new catalytic entity (86).
The installation of tyrosine analogs is a val-
uable tool for mechanistic investigations of en-
zymes involving radical intermediates, in which
such residues may play a catalytic role. Incor-
porating halogenated tyrosine analogs at key
positions in the active site of Escherichia coli ribo-
nucleotide reductase (87) or verrucologen syn-
thase (88), an Fe(II)/a-ketoglutarate–dependent
dioxygenase, enabled the use of analytical tools
such as electron magnetic resonance, giving
key insights into the reaction mechanism.
Installation of a photosensitizer through the
use of amber stop-codon suppression created an
enzyme that catalyzes a photoinduced [2+2]-
cycloaddition. Upon irradiation of the unnatural
amino acid 4-benzoylphenylalanine—which was
installed in the active site of a de novo designed
Diels-Alderase—triplet energy transfer initiated
thermally forbidden [2+2]-cycloadditions. Di-
rected evolution to fine-tune the enzyme yielded
a catalyst with high enantioselectivity for
both intra- and intermolecular reactions (89)
(Fig. 3).
Computational tools
Machine learning–based structure-prediction
tools promise to limit the excessive screening
or selection necessary to analyze the huge lib-
raries typically generated during directed evolu-
tion. The advanced statistics system AlphaFold2,
developed by DeepMind, predicts protein struc-
tures from amino acid sequence with much
greater accuracy than did previous methods.
AlphaFold2 uses deep neural networks to pre-
dict inter-residue distances from amino acid
sequences (90). Its predictions rely on the
structural data in the Protein Data Bank (PDB)
(www.wwpdb.org), which contains the three-
dimensional structures of 200,000 proteins and
nucleic acids. The neural networks assume that
substructures that appear frequently in the
database are more stable than absent or rarely
occurring substructures. At present, a database
of predicted structures (https://alphafold.com/)
contains over 200 million entries and is contin-
uously growing. Similarly useful alternatives are
RoseTTAFold (91) and ESMFold (92), created by
Meta Platforms.
Structure prediction has the potential to re-
veal the arrangement of active-site residues
of the target enzyme, guiding enzyme optimi-
zation (93). However, enzymatic function also
requires substrate binding and product release
and often relies on cofactors or metal ions.
Tools such as AlphaFill (94) and DiffDock
(95) project missing organic molecules and
metal ions into the protein pockets, providing
a model that may more accurately reflect the
desired chemistry. To capture motion, Alpha-
Fold2 can approximate conformational hetero-
geneity by, for example, reducing the depth of
the multiple sequence alignments that serve as
input for the algorithm (96), as demonstra-
ted when researchers used AlphaFold2 to create
models of alternate conformations of a trypto-
phan synthase (97).
The deep neural networks trained to predict
native protein structures from their amino
acid sequences can be inverted to design new
proteins (98–101). The first step is to predict
the structure of a random amino acid sequence,
which yields parts of a structure with confident
predictions and other parts with uncertain
predictions. Repeated modification of the amino
acid sequence of the uncertain regions even-
tually leads to a sequence whose entire struc-
ture is predicted confidently. Testing these
predictions often yields stable proteins with
structures close to those predicted. These neu-
ral network approaches to protein design are
faster than physics-based methods such as
Rosetta Match (102), Rosetta Design (103), and
Rosetta Ligand (104) because they do not at-
tempt to optimize interactions such as side-
chain packing. However, the neural network
approaches lack the physical transparency of
methods such as Rosetta. Adding diffusion
models trained on proteins [similar to Stable
Diffusion, used to generate images (105), or
ChatGPT, used to generate text] to protein de-
sign expands the number and variety of de-
signs generated, thus increasing the chances
of success (106). Furthermore, language models
can generate functional protein sequences
across diverse families (107).
Although the design of protein structures is
improving, design of proteins with catalytic
function remains challenging. Design typically
yields inefficient enzymes, which then require
extensive optimization by directed evolution
(see “Experimental tools” section above). This
might be because efficient catalysis requires
more precise positioning of catalytic groups
than is presently achievable with the algo-
rithms. Another reason for this problem is an
incomplete understanding of the structural
features, including motions, that are needed
for catalysis. Classical protein-structure de-
termination with x-ray crystallography uses
transition-state analogs or suicide substrates
to reveal how a substrate binds to the active
site of an enzyme, to learn where binding pock-
ets are located, and to gather information about
protein motions that contribute to catalysis.
For instance, the structural basis for the higher
catalytic activity of lipases at an oil-water inter-
face remained a puzzle despite several availa-
ble x-ray structures of lipases, which showed a
buried catalytic site. Brzozowski et al. solved
this puzzle in 1991 with a lipase structure that
showed a dramatic movement of a helical lid
covering the catalytic site (108). A more recent
puzzle was a monoamine oxidase, whose x-ray
structure also showed a closed conformation
that could not explain the effects of mutations
on catalytic activity and substrate scope. In
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
6 of 11

this case, a computational approach using
long-timescale molecular dynamics identified
partially and fully open conformations that
could account for the changes in catalysis (109).
Current structure-prediction tools do not include
protein dynamics in most cases and likewise do
not include information about disulfide bonds
and posttranslational modifications (which are
often not covered in protein sequences in data-
bases) such as glycosylations and acetylations,
mandating the use of complementary computa-
tional tools and experiments.
Connecting protein structures to protein
functions such as reactivity or selectivity is an
advancing field in machine learning. Both
neural networks based on protein structure
(110) and those based on sequences using con-
trastive learning have increased their reliabil-
ity to predict protein function (111). In many
cases, the application of machine learning to
catalytic properties of proteins is limited by
the availability of reliable experimental data to
train the neural network; recently, the Enzy-
meML database was established to address
this issue (112). In special cases in which the
properties of tens of thousands of protein var-
iants have been measured, machine learning
can predict variants with improved binding
properties (113, 114). The use of data from
computational modeling predictions has also
aided machine-learning approaches to design
more-selective enzymes (115, 116).
A further challenge in enzyme design is pre-
dicting the effects of distant amino acid sub-
stitutions. Experiments reveal that such residues
influence catalysis, making their prediction
from PET (149)
1 step from
polyethylene terephthalate
1 enzyme (1 evolved)
substrate load: 200 g/L 
productivity: 16.5 g/(L•h)
conversion: >95%
7 PenG acylase variant panel to 
protect/deprotect all possible 
combinations of the three insulin 
primary amines in 65-99 % yield. 
Allows for facile synthesis of any 
desired insulin amine conjugate.
Insulin analogs (124)
3 steps from
thiophosphate mononucleotides
chemical synthesis: 27 steps
4 enzymes (4 evolved)
PMI: 881
substrate load: 22 g/L
productivity: 6.8 g/(L•d)
overall yield: 62 % yield
Ulevostinag (120)
Islatravir (122)
3 steps from
2-ethynylglycerol
chemical synthesis: 16 steps
5 enzymes (5 evolved)
4 auxiliary enzymes
PMI: 360
substrate load: 200 mM
productivity: 16 g/(L•d) 
overall yield: 51%
Molnupiravir (121)
3 steps (1 chemical step) from 
ribose, uracil and isobutyric anhydride
chemical synthesis: 10 steps
3 enzymes (2 evolved)
3 auxiliary enzymes (2 evolved)
PMI: 125
substrate load: 30 g/L
productivity: 131 g/(L•d)
overall yield: 69%
Ikarugamycin (123)
1 step from
acetyl-CoA, malonyl-CoA and L-ornithine
chemical synthesis: 27-32 steps
3 enzymes (all wildtype)
3 auxiliary enzymes
overall yield: 9%
from blocked
nucleoside triphosphates
2 enzymes (2 evolved)
≥ 1 auxiliary enzymes
overall yield: >99.6% (per nucleotide)
Oligonucleotides
(60)
1 step from
homofarnesol
1 enzyme (1 evolved)
substrate load: 300 g/L
overall yield: >95%
Ambrofix (127 -129)
2 steps from
3-oxo-1-cyclohexene-1-carboxylate
2 enzymes (2 evolved)
1 auxiliary enzyme (1 evolved)
PMI: 170
substrate load: 67 g/L
overall yield: 99% conversion, >99% de/ ee
Intermediate to
BMS-986278 
(130,131)
Pharmaceuticals 
and
Fragrances
Biotherapeutics
(Potential)
Bulk Products
Biocatalysis-based
Products
Engineered α-galactosidase A (157)
10-20 fold increased stability 
at both lysosomal and blood 
pH stability
Starch (126)
11 steps from
methanol
10 enzymes (3 evolved)
4 auxiliary enzymes
substrate load: 1.6 g/L 
productivity: 320 mg/(L•h)
Fig. 5. Selected examples of recent biocatalysis-based products. Examples shown include biotherapeutics [engineered a-galactosidase A (157), insulin
analogs (124), and oligonucleotides synthesized from TdTs (60)]; potential bulk products [starch synthesized from CO2 (126) and plastic bottles recycled from
PET (149)]; pharmaceuticals [molnupiravir (121), ulevostinag (120), islatravir (122), ikarugamycin (123), and an intermediate to BMS-986278 (130, 131)]; and the
fragrance Ambrofix (127–129).
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
7 of 11

essential to the design of efficient enzymes.
These residues are too far away to directly in-
teract with the substrate. They may act through a
domino-like effect as the protein flexes and
moves to alter positioning and flexibility of the
catalytic residues and the substrate(s) within
the active site, similarly to allostery. One prom-
ising computational approach to capture the
effect of relevant distant residues is the short-
est path map (117). Starting from a molecular
dynamics simulation, this approach identi-
fies residues that move together and are con-
nected to the catalytic residues. When this
strategy was applied, distant substitutions abo-
lished the allosteric activation of tryptophan
synthase B, activating it permanently (118).
Applications
Combining several engineered enzymes into a
cascade creates new biochemical pathways
(119). Recent examples (Fig. 5) include the syn-
theses of pharmaceuticals—such as the cyclic
dinucleotide ulevostinag (120), molnupiravir
(121), islatravir (122), and ikarugamycin (123)—
and bioconjugates to make novel insulins (124),
as well as artificial sweeteners. CO2-fixation
pathways capable of yielding compounds through
the CETCH cycle (125), and even starch synthe-
sis from CO2-derived methanol (126), are further
examples of complex engineered pathways.
In the fragrance industry, (–)-Ambrox, which
has an ambery and woody odor, is one of the
most widely used biodegradable fragrance in-
gredients. The previoussynthesis of (–)-Ambrox
(marketed as Ambrofix) was a multistep route
from the diterpene sclareol isolated from clary
sage. A new one-step process from biosyn-
thetically manufactured homofarnesol uses
an engineered squalene-hopene cyclase (Fig.
5) (127–129).
Another example of an enzyme cascade is a
one-pot, two-enzyme reduction of allylic ketone
3-oxocyclohexene-1-carboxylate to the corre-
sponding saturated alcohol reported in early
2023 by Bristol Myers Squibb (130) and Codexis
(131). The ene reductase (ERED) and ketoreduc-
tase (KRED) process showed high enantio- and
chemoselectivity. Maximum product yields
benefited from the compatibility of the co-
factor regeneration system and avoidance of
side reactions. Separately, substrate inhibition
and enzyme robustness under process condi-
tions were improved to deliver a scalable en-
zyme cascade while greatly reducing the number
of synthesis steps, improving overall yield, and
lowering process mass intensity (PMI)—an
indicator of environmental impact—from a
value of 2017 for the initial chemical route to
a PMI of only 170.
The development of novel enzyme cascades
has been simplified by the availability of retro-
synthesis tools—the disconnection approach
used by organic chemists for decades—to plan
synthetic routes (132, 133). Programs [e.g.,
RetroBioCat (134)] identify possible routes
for the multistep biocatalysis reactions while
keeping in mind aspects such as commercial
availability, cofactor requirements, and sol-
vent tolerance (135–138). Machine learning
can also assist with this purpose (139). Sim-
ilarly, metabolic pathway planning predicts
routes to complex natural products and also
simpler molecules such as 1,4-butanediol (140).
Developing drugs for more difficult-to-drug
targets leads to molecules with increasing num-
bers of chiral centers, beyond-rule-of-5 scaffolds
(141), and bioconjugates (142) [e.g., radiother-
apeutics, antisense oligonucleotide therapeu-
tics, and antibody-drug conjugates (143)]. To
address these synthetic (and later manufac-
turing) challenges requires finding enzymatic
tools to produce these complex scaffolds. For
example, it was reported that selective acyla-
tion of three amino groups of insulin—either of
the two amino termini or at an internal lysine
residue—was achieved by using engineered
penicillin G acylase. These enzyme variants
enabled installation of a cleavable phenylacet-
amide protecting group in a programmable
manner, while leaving one or more amino groups
unprotected for subsequent chemical modifi-
cation. The high enzymatic regioselectivity im-
proved the overall purity and yield of the insulin
conjugates (124) (Fig. 5).
Despite the fact that chemical synthesis meth-
odologies for modified oligonucleotides are
well established, large-scale manufacturing in
a sustainable and economically feasible man-
ner remains challenging (144). Errors in the
chemical coupling efficiency accumulate as
the length of the oligonucleotide increases.
Several companies and academic laboratories
have developed technology to enzymatically
assemble chemically modified oligonucleotides
(62, 145). The approach uses the well-known
catalytic activity of RNA ligases to form an
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)–dependent co-
valent bond between the 3′-OH and 5′-PO4
termini of two oligoribonucleotides to form
one larger, continuous strand (146). A recent
method describes the use of such an RNA ligase
to synthesize a chemically modified RNA start-
ing from short (≤9-nucleotide) oligonucleotide
fragments (147) with 40 to 80% conversion.
An orthogonal enzymatic approach to oli-
gonucleotides (62) used self-priming (hairpin-
like) templates added in catalytic amounts.
DNA polymerase amplifies the complemen-
tary sequence in the presence of nucleoside
triphosphate (NTP) building blocks. A spe-
cific endonuclease cleaves the newly synthe-
sized chain and then releases the template
for the next catalytic cycle. The synthesis uses
unprotected building blocks in water, without
large amounts of acetonitrile (as is typically the
case in solid-phase synthesis), hence addressing
a major sustainability challenge. Whether the
unprotected NTP will be possible to source on
sufficiently large scales with acceptable time-
lines and cost to fully embed this concept on
a manufacturing scale remains to be seen.
However, given the success of enzymatic syn-
thesis of unnatural mono- and dinucleosides
(e.g., ulevostinag, Fig. 5), biocatalytic produc-
tion can be considered feasible.
Enzymes can also be used to address plas-
tic pollution. Since the 1950s, almost 9 billion
tons of plastics have been manufactured, and
waste plastics are a major environmental con-
cern worldwide. Considerable efforts have been
made to degrade and recycle commodity plastics
with biocatalytic approaches (148)—especially
for polyesters, polyamides, and polyurethanes—
because key chemical bonds can be hydrolyzed
to yield the corresponding monomers, which
can be used to make new virgin polymer. The
most advanced recycling process has been re-
ported for PET. Rational design methods cre-
ated a quadruple mutant of the leaf-branch
compost cutinase (LCC) that is efficient enough
to establish a robust process currently imple-
mented on an industrial scale (149) (Fig. 5). In a
more recent example, a PETase from Ideonella
sakaiensis was engineered by using machine
learning (150). Present research efforts focus
on polyamide and polyurethane hydrolyzing
enzymes; the first candidate enzymes were re-
cently identified in a metagenome library (151).
Conclusions
Advanced tools developed in the past few years
have sped up protein engineering to the point
where enzymes are an equal counterpart to
conventional organic synthesis catalysts, re-
sulting in an upsurge of biocatalysis applica-
tions in pharmaceutical manufacture (152) and
many other areas. Future enzyme engineering
also needs to speed up discovery-design-test
cycles to maintain momentum and expand
synthetic contributions to new enzyme classes.
Likewise, the combination of enzymes with
other (catalytic) synthetic chemistry methods
such as transition metal catalysis, photocat-
alysis, and electrocatalysis (119, 153, 154) will
be required to address humankind’s challenges,
such as combating climate change, degrading
plastic waste, transitioning to renewable en-
ergy, and developing new therapies for medical
treatment. Repurposing of enzyme mechanisms
to broaden the repertoire of biocatalytic reac-
tions represents a new concept for creating
desired activities in enzyme catalysts. Other
exciting strategies en route to novel enzymatic
reactivities are de novo enzyme design (54)
and computer “hallucination” (98).
Eleven years ago, the third wave of biocat-
alysis catapulted enzyme technology from
“designing a biocatalytic process around the
limitations of the enzyme to engineering the
enzyme to fit the specifications of the process”
(1). Now, the technology has taken yet another
leap: The enzyme engineer no longer has to
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
8 of 11

depend on the enzyme’s native catalytic prow-
ess to define the accessible chemistry but can
instead dream up bold new-to-nature reactiv-
ities and bring these to biocatalytic reality.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
U. T. Bornscheuer et al., Engineering the third wave of
biocatalysis. Nature 485, 185–194 (2012). doi: 10.1038/
nature11117; pmid: 22575958
2.
K. Chen, F. H. Arnold, Engineering new catalytic activities in
enzymes. Nat. Catal. 3, 203–213 (2020). doi: 10.1038/
s41929-019-0385-5
3.
E. L. Bell et al., Biocatalysis. Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 1, 46
(2021). doi: 10.1038/s43586-021-00044-z
4.
K. Buchholz, V. Kasche, U. T. Bornscheuer, Biocatalysts and
Enzyme Technology. (Wiley-VCH, ed. 2, 2012).
5.
A. S. Bommarius, B. R. Riebel, Biocatalysis. (Wiley-VCH, 2004).
6.
C. Klaus, S. C. Hammer, New catalytic reactions by enzyme
engineering. Trends Chem. 4, 363–366 (2022). doi: 10.1016/
j.trechm.2022.03.002
7.
L. R. Thompson et al., A communal catalogue reveals Earth’s
multiscale microbial diversity. Nature 551, 457–463 (2017).
doi: 10.1038/nature24621; pmid: 29088705
8.
H. A. Lewin et al., Earth BioGenome Project: Sequencing life
for the future of life. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115,
4325–4333 (2018). doi: 10.1073/pnas.1720115115;
pmid: 29686065
9.
The Uniprot Consortium, UniProt: The universal protein
knowledgebase in 2021. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D480–D489
(2020).
10.
L. Richardson et al., MGnify: The microbiome sequence data
analysis resource in 2023. Nucleic Acids Res. 51 (D1), D753–D759
(2023). doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac1080; pmid: 36477304
11.
M. Steinegger, J. Söding, Clustering huge protein sequence
sets in linear time. Nat. Commun. 9, 2542 (2018).
doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-04964-5; pmid: 29959318
12.
J. A. Gerlt et al., Enzyme Function Initiative-Enzyme
Similarity Tool (EFI-EST): A web tool for generating protein
sequence similarity networks. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. - Prot.
Proteom. 1854, 1019–1037 (2015). doi: 10.1016/j.
bbapap.2015.04.015
13.
D. M. Emms, S. Kelly, SHOOT: Phylogenetic gene search and
ortholog inference. Genome Biol. 23, 85 (2022). doi: 10.1186/
s13059-022-02652-8; pmid: 35346327
14.
R.-J. Müller, H. Schrader, J. Profe, K. Dresler, W.-D. Deckwer,
Enzymatic Degradation of Poly(ethylene terephthalate):
Rapid Hydrolyse using a Hydrolase from T. fusca. Macromol.
Rapid Commun. 26, 1400–1405 (2005). doi: 10.1002/
marc.200500410
15.
E. Erickson et al., Sourcing thermotolerant poly(ethylene
terephthalate) hydrolase scaffolds from natural diversity.
Nat. Commun. 13, 7850 (2022). doi: 10.1038/
s41467-022-35237-x; pmid: 36543766
16.
S. Sulaiman et al., Isolation of a novel cutinase homolog with
polyethylene terephthalate-degrading activity from leaf-
branch compost by using a metagenomic approach. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 78, 1556–1562 (2012). doi: 10.1128/
AEM.06725-11; pmid: 22194294
17.
M. Vasina et al., Advanced database mining of efficient
haloalkane dehalogenases by sequence and structure
bioinformatics and microfluidics. Chem Catal. 2, 2704–2725
(2022). doi: 10.1016/j.checat.2022.09.011
18.
R. Li et al., Computational redesign of enzymes for regio- and
enantioselective hydroamination. Nat. Chem. Biol. 14,
664–670 (2018). doi: 10.1038/s41589-018-0053-0;
pmid: 29785057
19.
T. Hayashi et al., Evolved Aliphatic Halogenases Enable
Regiocomplementary C-H Functionalization of a
Pharmaceutically Relevant Compound. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
58, 18535–18539 (2019). doi: 10.1002/anie.201907245;
pmid: 31589798
20.
J. Büchler et al., Algorithm-aided engineering of aliphatic
halogenase WelO5* for the asymmetric late-stage
functionalization of soraphens. Nat. Commun. 13, 371
(2022). doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-27999-1; pmid: 35042883
21.
S. Duewel et al., Directed Evolution of an Fe II -Dependent
Halogenase for Asymmetric C(sp 3 )–H Chlorination.
ACS Catal. 10, 1272–1277 (2020). doi: 10.1021/
acscatal.9b04691
22.
A. Papadopoulou, F. Meyer, R. M. Buller, Engineering Fe(II)/
a-Ketoglutarate-Dependent Halogenases and Desaturases.
Biochemistry 62, 229–240 (2023). doi: 10.1021/acs.
biochem.2c00115; pmid: 35446547
23.
C. Wolf et al., Engineering of Kuma030: A Gliadin
Peptidase That Rapidly Degrades Immunogenic Gliadin
Peptides in Gastric Conditions. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137,
13106–13113 (2015). doi: 10.1021/jacs.5b08325;
pmid: 26374198
24.
J. M. Smith, Natural selection and the concept of a protein
space. Nature 225, 563–564 (1970). doi: 10.1038/
225563a0; pmid: 5411867
25.
M. Kaltenbach, N. Tokuriki, Dynamics and constraints of
enzyme evolution. J. Exp. Zool. B Mol. Dev. Evol. 322,
468–487 (2014). doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22562; pmid: 24522979
26.
C. K. Savile et al., Biocatalytic asymmetric synthesis of chiral
amines from ketones applied to sitagliptin manufacture.
Science 329, 305–309 (2010). doi: 10.1126/science.1188934;
pmid: 20558668
27.
E. Eger et al., Asymmetric Biocatalytic Synthesis of 1-
Aryltetrahydro-b-carbolines Enabled by “Substrate Walking”.
Chemistry 26, 16281–16285 (2020). doi: 10.1002/
chem.202004449; pmid: 33017078
28.
J. T. Payne, C. B. Poor, J. C. Lewis, Directed evolution of
RebH for site-selective halogenation of large biologically
active molecules. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 54, 4226–4230
(2015). doi: 10.1002/anie.201411901; pmid: 25678465
29.
O. Alvizo, M. A. Mayo, J. C. Moore, US Patent
US10370648B2. (2014).
30.
P. E. Affaticati et al., Structural Analysis of an
Evolved Transketolase Reveals Divergent Binding Modes.
Sci. Rep. 6, 35716 (2016). doi: 10.1038/srep35716;
pmid: 27767080
31.
H. Renata, Z. J. Wang, F. H. Arnold, Expanding the enzyme
universe: Accessing non-natural reactions by mechanism-
guided directed evolution. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 54,
3351–3367 (2015). doi: 10.1002/anie.201409470;
pmid: 25649694
32.
O. F. Brandenberg, R. Fasan, F. H. Arnold, Exploiting and
engineering hemoproteins for abiological carbene and nitrene
transfer reactions. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 47, 102–111 (2017).
doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2017.06.005; pmid: 28711855
33.
Y. Yang, F. H. Arnold, Navigating the Unnatural Reaction
Space: Directed Evolution of Heme Proteins for Selective
Carbene and Nitrene Transfer. Acc. Chem. Res. 54,
1209–1225 (2021). doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.0c00591;
pmid: 33491448
34.
R. K. Zhang et al., Enzymatic assembly of carbon-carbon
bonds via iron-catalysed sp3 C-H functionalization. Nature
565, 67–72 (2019). doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0808-5;
pmid: 30568304
35.
Z.-J. Jia, S. Gao, F. H. Arnold, Enzymatic Primary Amination
of Benzylic and Allylic C(sp3)-H Bonds. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142,
10279–10283 (2020). doi: 10.1021/jacs.0c03428;
pmid: 32450692
36.
J. Huang et al., Complete integration of carbene-transfer
chemistry into biosynthesis. Nature 617, 403–408
(2023). doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06027-2;
pmid: 37138074
37.
S. Gergel et al., Engineered cytochrome P450 for direct
arylalkene-to-ketone oxidation via highly reactive carbocation
intermediates. Nat. Catal. 6, 606–617 (2023). doi: 10.1038/
s41929-023-00979-4
38.
Q. Zhou, M. Chin, Y. Fu, P. Liu, Y. Yang, Stereodivergent
atom-transfer radical cyclization by engineered cytochromes
P450. Science 374, 1612–1616 (2021). doi: 10.1126/science.
abk1603; pmid: 34941416
39.
W. Fu et al., Enzyme-controlled stereoselective radical
cyclization to arenes enabled by metalloredox biocatalysis.
Nat. Catal. 6, 628–636 (2023). doi: 10.1038/
s41929-023-00986-5
40.
H. Fu et al., Ground-State Electron Transfer as an Initiation
Mechanism for Biocatalytic C-C Bond Forming Reactions.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143, 9622–9629 (2021). doi: 10.1021/
jacs.1c04334; pmid: 34114803
41.
T. M. Hedison, D. J. Heyes, N. S. Scrutton, Making molecules
with photodecarboxylases: A great start or a false dawn?
Curr. Res. Chem. Biol. 2, 100017 (2022). doi: 10.1016/
j.crchbi.2021.100017
42.
A. Sancar, Structure and function of DNA photolyase
and cryptochrome blue-light photoreceptors. Chem. Rev. 103,
2203–2237 (2003). doi: 10.1021/cr0204348;
pmid: 12797829
43.
P. Vedalankar, B. C. Tripathy, Evolution of light-independent
protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase. Protoplasma 256,
293–312 (2019). doi: 10.1007/s00709-018-1317-y;
pmid: 30291443
44.
M. A. Emmanuel et al., Photobiocatalytic Strategies for
Organic Synthesis. Chem. Rev. 123, 5459–5520 (2023).
doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00767; pmid: 37115521
45.
W. Zhang et al., Photobiocatalytic synthesis of chiral
secondary fatty alcohols from renewable unsaturated fatty
acids. Nat. Commun. 11, 2258 (2020). doi: 10.1038/
s41467-020-16099-7; pmid: 32382158
46.
K. F. Biegasiewicz et al., Photoexcitation of flavoenzymes
enables a stereoselective radical cyclization. Science 364,
1166–1169 (2019). doi: 10.1126/science.aaw1143;
pmid: 31221855
47.
C. G. Page et al., Regioselective Radical Alkylation of
Arenes Using Evolved Photoenzymes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 145,
11866–11874 (2023). doi: 10.1021/jacs.3c03607;
pmid: 37199445
48.
H. Fu et al., An asymmetric sp3-sp3 cross-electrophile
coupling using ‘ene’-reductases. Nature 610, 302–307
(2022). doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05167-1; pmid: 35952713
49.
Y. Ye et al., Using enzymes to tame nitrogen-centred
radicals for enantioselective hydroamination. Nat. Chem. 15,
206–212 (2023). doi: 10.1038/s41557-022-01083-z;
pmid: 36376390
50.
K. F. Biegasiewicz, S. J. Cooper, M. A. Emmanuel, D. C. Miller,
T. K. Hyster, Catalytic promiscuity enabled by photoredox
catalysis in nicotinamide-dependent oxidoreductases.
Nat. Chem. 10, 770–775 (2018). doi: 10.1038/
s41557-018-0059-y; pmid: 29892028
51.
L. Cheng et al., Stereoselective amino acid synthesis by
synergistic photoredox-pyridoxal radical biocatalysis.
Science 381, 444–451 (2023). doi: 10.1126/science.adg2420;
pmid: 37499030
52.
S. L. Lovelock et al., The road to fully programmable protein
catalysis. Nature 606, 49–58 (2022). doi: 10.1038/
s41586-022-04456-z; pmid: 35650353
53.
R. Obexer et al., Emergence of a catalytic tetrad during
evolution of a highly active artificial aldolase. Nat. Chem.
9, 50–56 (2017). doi: 10.1038/nchem.2596;
pmid: 27995916
54.
A. H.-W. Yeh et al., De novo design of luciferases using
deep learning. Nature 614, 774–780 (2023). doi: 10.1038/
s41586-023-05696-3; pmid: 36813896
55.
S. L. Beaucage, M. H. Caruthers, Deoxynucleoside
phosphoramidites—A new class of key intermediates for
deoxypolynucleotide synthesis. Tetrahedron Lett. 22,
1859–1862 (1981). doi: 10.1016/S0040-4039(01)90461-7
56.
A. Hoose, R. Vellacott, M. Storch, P. S. Freemont,
M. G. Ryadnov, DNA synthesis technologies to close the gene
writing gap. Nat. Rev. Chem. 7, 144–161 (2023). doi: 10.1038/
s41570-022-00456-9; pmid: 36714378
57.
D. Verardo et al., Multiplex enzymatic synthesis of DNA with
single-base resolution. Sci. Adv. 9, eadi0263 (2023).
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adi0263; pmid: 37418522
58.
S. Palluk et al., De novo DNA synthesis using polymerase-
nucleotide conjugates. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 645–650 (2018).
doi: 10.1038/nbt.4173; pmid: 29912208
59.
I. Sarac, M. Hollenstein, Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl
Transferase in the Synthesis and Modification of Nucleic
Acids. ChemBioChem 20, 860–871 (2019). doi: 10.1002/
cbic.201800658; pmid: 30451377
60.
C. Ching et al, Codexis Inc., World Intellectual Property
Organization Patent Application WO 2023/069865, US
Patent Application PCT/US2022/078071 (2023).
61.
M. Friedrich, A. Aigner, Therapeutic siRNA: State-of-the-Art
and Future Perspectives. BioDrugs 36, 549–571 (2022).
doi: 10.1007/s40259-022-00549-3; pmid: 35997897
62.
E. R. Moody, R. Obexer, F. Nickl, R. Spiess, S. L. Lovelock,
An enzyme cascade enables production of therapeutic
oligonucleotides in a single operation. Science 380,
1150–1154 (2023). doi: 10.1126/science.add5892;
pmid: 37319201
63.
D. J. Wiegand et al., A platform for controlled template-
independent enzymatic synthesis of RNA oligonucleotides
and therapeutics. bioRxiv 2023.06.2029.547106 [Preprint]
(2023). doi: 10.1101/2023.06.29.547106
64.
S. Kosuri, G. M. Church, Large-scale de novo DNA
synthesis: Technologies and applications. Nat. Methods
11, 499–507 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2918;
pmid: 24781323
65.
B. P. Kuiper, R. C. Prins, S. Billerbeck, Oligo Pools as an
Affordable Source of Synthetic DNA for Cost-Effective Library
Construction in Protein- and Metabolic Pathway Engineering.
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
9 of 11

ChemBioChem 23, e202100507 (2022). doi: 10.1002/
cbic.202100507; pmid: 34817110
66.
D. Patsch, M. Eichenberger, M. Voss, U. T. Bornscheuer,
R. M. Buller, LibGENiE - A bioinformatic pipeline for the design
of information-enriched enzyme libraries. Comput. Struct.
Biotechnol. J. 21, 4488–4496 (2023). doi: 10.1016/
j.csbj.2023.09.013; pmid: 37736300
67.
S. Wu, R. Snajdrova, J. C. Moore, K. Baldenius,
U. T. Bornscheuer, Biocatalysis: Enzymatic Synthesis for
Industrial Applications. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 88–119
(2021). doi: 10.1002/anie.202006648; pmid: 32558088
68.
D. Yi et al., Recent trends in biocatalysis. Chem. Soc. Rev.
50, 8003–8049 (2021). doi: 10.1039/D0CS01575J;
pmid: 34142684
69.
J. C. Moore, F. H. Arnold, Directed evolution of a para-
nitrobenzyl esterase for aqueous-organic solvents.
Nat. Biotechnol. 14, 458–467 (1996). doi: 10.1038/
nbt0496-458; pmid: 9630920
70.
J. C. Moore et al., “Site and Mutation”-Specific Predictions
Enable Minimal Directed Evolution Libraries. ACS Synth. Biol.
7, 1730–1741 (2018). doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.7b00359;
pmid: 29782150
71.
A. D. Silverman, A. S. Karim, M. C. Jewett, Cell-free gene
expression: An expanded repertoire of applications. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 21, 151–170 (2020). doi: 10.1038/s41576-019-0186-3;
pmid: 31780816
72.
R. S. Molina et al., In vivo hypermutation and continuous
evolution. Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 2, 36 (2022).
doi: 10.1038/s43586-022-00119-5; pmid: 37073402
73.
X. Yi, J. Khey, R. J. Kazlauskas, M. Travisano, Plasmid
hypermutation using a targeted artificial DNA replisome.
Sci. Adv. 7, eabg8712 (2021). doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abg8712;
pmid: 34272238
74.
B. Seelig, J. W. Szostak, Selection and evolution of
enzymes from a partially randomized non-catalytic scaffold.
Nature 448, 828–831 (2007). doi: 10.1038/nature06032;
pmid: 17700701
75.
M. Gantz, S. Neun, E. J. Medcalf, L. D. van Vliet, F. Hollfelder,
Ultrahigh-Throughput Enzyme Engineering and Discovery in
In Vitro Compartments. Chem. Rev. 123, 5571–5611 (2023).
doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00910; pmid: 37126602
76.
A. Debon et al., Ultrahigh-throughput screening enables
efficient single-round oxidase remodelling. Nat. Catal. 2,
740–747 (2019). doi: 10.1038/s41929-019-0340-5
77.
A. E. Mulelu, A. M. Kirykowicz, J. D. Woodward, Cryo-EM
and directed evolution reveal how Arabidopsis nitrilase
specificity is influenced by its quaternary structure. Commun.
Biol. 2, 260 (2019). doi: 10.1038/s42003-019-0505-4;
pmid: 31341959
78.
E. Danelius, N. J. Porter, J. Unge, F. H. Arnold, T. Gonen,
MicroED Structure of a Protoglobin Reactive Carbene
Intermediate. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 145, 7159–7165 (2023).
doi: 10.1021/jacs.2c12004; pmid: 36948184
79.
F. Agostini et al., Biocatalysis with Unnatural Amino Acids:
Enzymology Meets Xenobiology. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56,
9680–9703 (2017). doi: 10.1002/anie.201610129;
pmid: 28085996
80.
A. P. Green, T. Hayashi, P. R. Mittl, D. Hilvert, A Chemically
Programmed Proximal Ligand Enhances the Catalytic
Properties of a Heme Enzyme. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138,
11344–11352 (2016). doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b07029;
pmid: 27500802
81.
M. Ortmayer et al., Rewiring the “Push-Pull” Catalytic
Machinery of a Heme Enzyme Using an Expanded Genetic
Code. ACS Catal. 10, 2735–2746 (2020). doi: 10.1021/
acscatal.9b05129; pmid: 32550044
82.
M. Ortmayer et al., A Noncanonical Tryptophan Analogue
Reveals an Active Site Hydrogen Bond Controlling Ferryl
Reactivity in a Heme Peroxidase. JACS Au 1, 913–918 (2021).
doi: 10.1021/jacsau.1c00145; pmid: 34337604
83.
M. Pott et al., A Noncanonical Proximal Heme Ligand
Affords an Efficient Peroxidase in a Globin Fold. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 140, 1535–1543 (2018). doi: 10.1021/jacs.7b12621;
pmid: 29309143
84.
D. M. Carminati, R. Fasan, Stereoselective Cyclopropanation
of Electron-Deficient Olefins with a Cofactor Redesigned
Carbene Transferase Featuring Radical Reactivity. ACS Catal.
9, 9683–9697 (2019). doi: 10.1021/acscatal.9b02272;
pmid: 32257582
85.
T. Hayashi et al., Capture and characterization of a
reactive haem–carbenoid complex in an artificial
metalloenzyme. Nat. Catal. 1, 578–584 (2018).
doi: 10.1038/s41929-018-0105-6
86.
R. Crawshaw et al., Engineering an efficient and
enantioselective enzyme for the Morita-Baylis-Hillman
reaction. Nat. Chem. 14, 313–320 (2022). doi: 10.1038/
s41557-021-00833-9; pmid: 34916595
87.
G. Kang, A. T. Taguchi, J. Stubbe, C. L. Drennan, Structure of
a trapped radical transfer pathway within a ribonucleotide
reductase holocomplex. Science 368, 424–427 (2020).
doi: 10.1126/science.aba6794; pmid: 32217749
88.
C.-Y. Lin et al., Use of Noncanonical Tyrosine Analogues to
Probe Control of Radical Intermediates during Endoperoxide
Installation by Verruculogen Synthase (FtmOx1). ACS Catal. 12,
6968–6979 (2022). doi: 10.1021/acscatal.2c01037;
pmid: 37744570
89.
J. S. Trimble et al., A designed photoenzyme for
enantioselective [2+2] cycloadditions. Nature 611, 709–714
(2022). doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05335-3; pmid: 36130727
90.
J. Jumper et al., Highly accurate protein structure prediction
with AlphaFold. Nature 596, 583–589 (2021). doi: 10.1038/
s41586-021-03819-2; pmid: 34265844
91.
M. Baek et al., Accurate prediction of protein structures
and interactions using a three-track neural network. Science
373, 871–876 (2021). doi: 10.1126/science.abj8754;
pmid: 34282049
92.
Z. Lin et al., Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level
protein structure with a language model. Science 379,
1123–1130 (2023). doi: 10.1126/science.ade2574;
pmid: 36927031
93.
G. Casadevall, C. Duran, S. Osuna, AlphaFold2 and Deep
Learning for Elucidating Enzyme Conformational Flexibility
and Its Application for Design. JACS Au 3, 1554–1562 (2023).
doi: 10.1021/jacsau.3c00188; pmid: 37388680
94.
M. L. Hekkelman, I. de Vries, R. P. Joosten, A. Perrakis,
AlphaFill: Enriching AlphaFold models with ligands and
cofactors. Nat. Methods 20, 205–213 (2023). doi: 10.1038/
s41592-022-01685-y; pmid: 36424442
95.
G. Corso, H. Stärk, B. Jing, R. Barzilay, T. Jaakkola, DiffDock:
Diffusion Steps, Twists, and Turns for Molecular Docking.
arXiv:2210.01776v2 [q-bio.BM] (2023).
96.
R. A. Stein, H. S. Mchaourab, SPEACH_AF: Sampling protein
ensembles and conformational heterogeneity with
Alphafold2. PLOS Comput. Biol. 18, e1010483 (2022).
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010483; pmid: 35994486
97.
G. Casadevall, C. Duran, M. Estévez-Gay, S. Osuna,
Estimating conformational heterogeneity of tryptophan
synthase with a template-based Alphafold2 approach.
Protein Sci. 31, e4426 (2022). doi: 10.1002/pro.4426;
pmid: 36173176
98.
I. Anishchenko et al., De novo protein design by deep network
hallucination. Nature 600, 547–552 (2021). doi: 10.1038/
s41586-021-04184-w; pmid: 34853475
99.
J. Dauparas et al., Robust deep learning-based protein
sequence design using ProteinMPNN. Science 378, 49–56
(2022). doi: 10.1126/science.add2187; pmid: 36108050
100. J. Wang et al., Scaffolding protein functional sites using deep
learning. Science 377, 387–394 (2022). doi: 10.1126/
science.abn2100; pmid: 35862514
101. B. I. M. Wicky et al., Hallucinating symmetric protein
assemblies. Science 378, 56–61 (2022). doi: 10.1126/
science.add1964; pmid: 36108048
102. A. Zanghellini et al., New algorithms and an in silico
benchmark for computational enzyme design. Protein Sci. 15,
2785–2794 (2006). doi: 10.1110/ps.062353106;
pmid: 17132862
103. B. Kuhlman et al., Design of a novel globular protein fold with
atomic-level accuracy. Science 302, 1364–1368 (2003).
doi: 10.1126/science.1089427; pmid: 14631033
104. J. Meiler, D. Baker, ROSETTALIGAND: Protein-small molecule
docking with full side-chain flexibility. Proteins 65, 538–548
(2006). doi: 10.1002/prot.21086; pmid: 16972285
105. R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, B. Ommer,
High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion
Models. arXiv:2112.10752v2 [cs.CV] (2021).
106. J. L. Watson et al., Broadly applicable and accurate protein
design by integrating structure prediction networks and
diffusion generative models. bioRxiv2022.2012.2009.519842
[Preprint] (2022). https://doi.org/10.1101/
2022.12.09.519842.
107. A. Madani et al., Large language models generate functional
protein sequences across diverse families. Nat. Biotechnol.
41, 1099–1106 (2023). doi: 10.1038/s41587-022-01618-2;
pmid: 36702895
108. A. M. Brzozowski et al., A model for interfacial activation in
lipases from the structure of a fungal lipase-inhibitor
complex. Nature 351, 491–494 (1991). doi: 10.1038/
351491a0; pmid: 2046751
109. C. Curado-Carballada, F. Feixas, J. Iglesias-Fernández,
S. Osuna, Hidden Conformations in Aspergillus niger
Monoamine Oxidase are Key for Catalytic Efficiency. Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 58, 3097–3101 (2019). doi: 10.1002/
anie.201812532; pmid: 30600584
110. V. Gligorijević et al., Structure-based protein function prediction
using graph convolutional networks. Nat. Commun. 12, 3168
(2021). doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23303-9; pmid: 34039967
111.
T. Yu et al., Enzyme function prediction using contrastive
learning. Science 379, 1358–1363 (2023). doi: 10.1126/
science.adf2465; pmid: 36996195
112. S. Lauterbach et al., EnzymeML: Seamless data flow and
modeling of enzymatic data. Nat. Methods 20, 400–402 (2023).
doi: 10.1038/s41592-022-01763-1; pmid: 36759590
113. S. Gelman, S. A. Fahlberg, P. Heinzelman, P. A. Romero,
A. Gitter, Neural networks to learn protein sequence-function
relationships from deep mutational scanning data. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2104878118 (2021). doi: 10.1073/
pnas.2104878118; pmid: 34815338
114. K. K. Yang, Z. Wu, F. H. Arnold, Machine-learning-guided
directed evolution for protein engineering. Nat. Methods 16,
687–694 (2019). doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0496-6;
pmid: 31308553
115. Z. Wu, S. B. J. Kan, R. D. Lewis, B. J. Wittmann, F. H. Arnold,
Machine learning-assisted directed protein evolution with
combinatorial libraries. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116,
8852–8858 (2019). doi: 10.1073/pnas.1901979116;
pmid: 30979809
116. E. J. Ma et al., Machine-Directed Evolution of an Imine
Reductase for Activity and Stereoselectivity. ACS Catal. 11,
12433–12445 (2021). doi: 10.1021/acscatal.1c02786
117. S. Osuna, The challenge of predicting distal active site
mutations in computational enzyme design. WIREs Comput.
Mol. Sci. 11, e1502 (2021). doi: 10.1002/wcms.1502
118. M. A. Maria-Solano, T. Kinateder, J. Iglesias-Fernández,
R. Sterner, S. Osuna, In Silico Identification and Experimental
Validation of Distal Activity-Enhancing Mutations in
Tryptophan Synthase. ACS Catal. 11, 13733–13743 (2021).
doi: 10.1021/acscatal.1c03950; pmid: 34777912
119. F. Rudroff et al., Opportunities and challenges for combining
chemo- and biocatalysis. Nat. Catal. 1, 12–22 (2018).
doi: 10.1038/s41929-017-0010-4
120. J. A. McIntosh et al., A kinase-cGAS cascade to synthesize a
therapeutic STING activator. Nature 603, 439–444 (2022).
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04422-9; pmid: 35296845
121. J. A. McIntosh et al., Engineered Ribosyl-1-Kinase Enables
Concise Synthesis of Molnupiravir, an Antiviral for COVID-19.
ACS Cent. Sci. 7, 1980–1985 (2021). doi: 10.1021/
acscentsci.1c00608; pmid: 34963891
122. M. A. Huffman et al., Design of an in vitro biocatalytic
cascade for the manufacture of islatravir. Science 366,
1255–1259 (2019). doi: 10.1126/science.aay8484;
pmid: 31806816
123. C. Greunke, A. Glöckle, J. Antosch, T. A. M. Gulder, Biocatalytic
Total Synthesis of Ikarugamycin. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56,
4351–4355 (2017). doi: 10.1002/anie.201611063;
pmid: 28128495
124. A. Fryszkowska et al., A chemoenzymatic strategy for
site-selective functionalization of native peptides and
proteins. Science 376, 1321–1327 (2022). doi: 10.1126/
science.abn2009; pmid: 35709255
125. T. Schwander, L. Schada von Borzyskowski, S. Burgener,
N. S. Cortina, T. J. Erb, A synthetic pathway for the fixation of
carbon dioxide in vitro. Science 354, 900–904 (2016).
doi: 10.1126/science.aah5237; pmid: 27856910
126. T. Cai et al., Cell-free chemoenzymatic starch synthesis from
carbon dioxide. Science 373, 1523–1527 (2021). doi: 10.1126/
science.abh4049; pmid: 34554807
127. E. Eichhorn, B. Schilling, D. Wahler, L. Fourage, E. Locher,
Givaudan SA, World Intellectual Property Organization Patent
WO 2016/170099 (2015).
128. E. Eichhorn, C. Baumgartner, M. Biermann, Biotechnology
– A Tool to Transform Givaudan’s Fragrance Ingredients
Palette. Chimia 77, 384–389 (2023). doi: 10.2533/
chimia.2023.384
129. E. Eichhorn, C. Ullmann, Givaudan SA, World Intellectual
Property Organization Patent Application WO 2021/110848
(2019).
130. S. McKenna et al., Bristol Myers Squibb, World Intellectual
Property Organization Patent Application WO 2023/178061
(2023).
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
10 of 11

131. C. Ching D. Elgart et al., Codexis, World Intellectual Property
Organization Patent Application WO 2023/150568 (2023).
132. E. J. Corey, Robert Robinson Lecture. Retrosynthetic thinking—
Essentials and examples. Chem. Soc. Rev. 17, 111–133 (1988).
doi: 10.1039/CS9881700111
133. S. Warren, P. Wyatt, Organic Synthesis: The Disconnection
Approach (Wiley-Blackwell, ed. 2, 2008).
134. W. Finnigan, L. J. Hepworth, S. L. Flitsch, N. J. Turner,
RetroBioCat as a computer-aided synthesis planning tool for
biocatalytic reactions and cascades. Nat. Catal. 4, 98–104
(2021). doi: 10.1038/s41929-020-00556-z; pmid: 33604511
135. R. O. M. A. de Souza, L. S. M. Miranda, U. T. Bornscheuer, A
Retrosynthesis Approach for Biocatalysis in Organic
Synthesis. Chemistry 23, 12040–12063 (2017). doi: 10.1002/
chem.201702235; pmid: 28514518
136. M. Hönig, P. Sondermann, N. J. Turner, E. M. Carreira,
Enantioselective Chemo- and Biocatalysis: Partners in
Retrosynthesis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 8942–8973 (2017).
doi: 10.1002/anie.201612462; pmid: 28407390
137. N. J. Turner, L. Humphreys, Biocatalysis in Organic Synthesis:The
Retrosynthesis Approach (Royal Society of Chemistry, 2018).
138. N. J. Turner, E. O’Reilly, Biocatalytic retrosynthesis. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 9, 285–288 (2013). doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1235;
pmid: 23594772
139. T. Yu et al., Machine learning-enabled retrobiosynthesis of
molecules. Nat. Catal. 6, 137–151 (2023). doi: 10.1038/
s41929-022-00909-w
140. H. Yim et al., Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for
direct production of 1,4-butanediol. Nat. Chem. Biol. 7,
445–452 (2011). doi: 10.1038/nchembio.580;
pmid: 21602812
141. C. A. Lipinski, F. Lombardo, B. W. Dominy, P. J. Feeney,
Experimental and computational approaches to estimate
solubility and permeability in drug discovery and
development settings. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 46, 3–26 (2001).
doi: 10.1016/S0169-409X(00)00129-0; pmid: 11259830
142. A. Debon, E. Siirola, R. Snajdrova, Enzymatic Bioconjugation:
A Perspective from the Pharmaceutical Industry. JACS Au 3,
1267–1283 (2023). doi: 10.1021/jacsau.2c00617;
pmid: 37234110
143. A. Ali et al., European Medicinal Chemistry Leaders in
Industry (EMCL) - On the Status and Future of Medicinal
Chemistry Research in Europe. ChemMedChem 18,
e202300127 (2023). doi: 10.1002/cmdc.202300127;
pmid: 37276375
144. B. I. Andrews et al., Sustainability Challenges and
Opportunities in Oligonucleotide Manufacturing. J. Org.
Chem. 86, 49–61 (2021). doi: 10.1021/acs.joc.0c02291;
pmid: 33253568
145. A. Crameri et al., Glaxo Smith Kline, World Intellectual
Property Organization Patent WO 2018/011067 A2 (2018).
146. J. Nandakumar, S. Shuman, C. D. Lima, RNA ligase structures
reveal the basis for RNA specificity and conformational
changes that drive ligation forward. Cell 127, 71–84 (2006).
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.038; pmid: 17018278
147. G. Mann et al., Biocatalytic assembly of chemically modified
oligonucleotides. Tetrahedron Lett. 93, 153696 (2022).
doi: 10.1016/j.tetlet.2022.153696
148. V. Tournier et al., Enzymes’ Power for Plastics Degradation.
Chem. Rev. 123, 5612–5701 (2023). doi: 10.1021/acs.
chemrev.2c00644; pmid: 36916764
149. V. Tournier et al., An engineered PET depolymerase to
break down and recycle plastic bottles. Nature 580,
216–219 (2020). doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2149-4;
pmid: 32269349
150. H. Lu et al., Machine learning-aided engineering of hydrolases
for PET depolymerization. Nature 604, 662–667 (2022).
doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04599-z; pmid: 35478237
151. Y. Branson et al., Urethanases for the Enzymatic Hydrolysis
of Low Molecular Weight Carbamates and the Recycling of
Polyurethanes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62, e202216220
(2023). doi: 10.1002/anie.202216220; pmid: 36591907
152. D. L. Hughes, Biocatalysis in Drug Development—Highlights
of the Recent Patent Literature. Org. Process Res. Dev. 22,
1063–1080 (2018). doi: 10.1021/acs.oprd.8b00232
153. S. González-Granda, J. Albarrán-Velo, I. Lavandera,
V. Gotor-Fernández, Expanding the SyntheticToolbox through
Metal-Enzyme Cascade Reactions. Chem. Rev. 123, 5297–5346
(2023). doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00454; pmid: 36626572
154. H. Gröger, F. Gallou, B. H. Lipshutz, Where Chemocatalysis
Meets Biocatalysis: In Water. Chem. Rev. 123, 5262–5296
(2023). doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00416; pmid: 36473100
155. J. B. Siegel et al., Computational design of an enzyme
catalyst for a stereoselective bimolecular Diels-Alder
reaction. Science 329, 309–313 (2010). doi: 10.1126/
science.1190239; pmid: 20647463
156. A. Crossley et al., A non-canonical nucleophile unlocks a new
mechanistic pathway in a designed enzyme. Research
Square, [Preprint] (2023). doi: https://doi.org/10.21203/
rs.3.rs-2922796/v1
157. W. C. Hallows et al., Optimizing human a-galactosidase for
treatment of Fabry disease. Sci. Rep. 13, 4748 (2023).
doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-31777-4; pmid: 36959353
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank T. Schwander and F. Özgen for help with figure
preparation. Funding: R.J.K. thanks the NSF (CBET-2039039 and
CBET-1930825), and U.T.B. thanks the German Research
Foundation, DFG (NFDI4CAT and Bo1862/25-1). R.M.B. thanks
NCCR Catalysis, a National Centre of Competence in Research
funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation (Grant no.
180544). Competing interests: U.T.B. is a shareholder and head
of the Supervisory Board of Enzymicals AG (Greifswald, Germany),
head of the Advisory Board of the Toulouse White Biotechnology
center (Toulouse, France), and a member of the Advisory Board of
Carbios (Paris, France). R.S. is an employee of Novartis Pharma AG
(Basel, Switzerland). S.L. is an employee of Codexis. (Redwood,
CA, USA). J.C.M. is an employee of Merck Sharp & Dohme, a
subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA, and is an
Advisory Board member of EU Horizon’s EVOdrops program. R.K.
has served as a consultant to Sasya, a biotechnology company.
R.K. is a co-inventor on a patent related to work cited (73). R.B. is
a member of the Research Oversight Commitee Genome Canada
Project, “Optimizing a microbial platform to break down and
valorize waste plastic,” a board member of the Swiss Academy of
Natural Sciences - Chemistry Platform, a board member of the
working group “Biotransformations” (VAAM/DECHEMA), a
Steering Board member of the National Competence Center of
Research “Catalysis,” and Swiss Delegate of the European Section
of Applied Biocatalysis (ESAB) Scientific Commitee. License
information: Copyright © 2023 the authors, some rights reserved;
exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of
Science. No claim to original US government works. https://www.
science.org/about/science-licenses-journal-article-reuse
Submitted 14 July 2023; accepted 17 October 2023
10.1126/science.adh8615
RESEARCH
|
REVIEW
Buller et al., Science 382, eadh8615 (2023)
24 November 2023
11 of 11