Nature Reviews Bioengineering
nature reviews bioengineering
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44222-024-00161-w
Review article
 Check for updates
Subcutaneous drug delivery 
from nanoscale systems
Lorenzo Tomasini 
  , Marianne Ferrere & Julien Nicolas 
   
Abstract
Various types of nanoscale drug delivery systems (DDSs) have been 
developed for therapeutic and/or diagnostic applications. However, 
most systems have been designed for intravenous or intramuscular 
delivery, which may have drawbacks such as pain during injection, the 
inability for self-administration and the requirement for hospitalization, 
causing patient discomfort and high treatment costs. The subcutaneous 
route of administration is an attractive approach to circumvent 
many of these drawbacks. However, the subcutaneous route remains 
underexplored and is not yet used to its full potential. In this Review, we 
present key advances in the design of nanoscale DDSs (polymer–drug 
conjugates, liposomes, nanoparticles, micelles) for subcutaneous 
delivery. Additionally, we discuss nanoscale DDS-loaded hydrogels to 
create drug depots after subcutaneous administration, and outline 
relevant predictive in vitro, ex vivo, in silico and in vivo preclinical 
models for subcutaneous delivery. Finally, we highlight subcutaneous 
nanoscale DDSs in clinical trials and on the market and outline 
translational opportunities.
Sections
Introduction
Intravenous, intramuscular 
and subcutaneous 
administration
Considerations for 
subcutaneous nanoscale 
drug delivery systems
Nanoscale drug delivery 
systems for subcutaneous 
administration
Clinical translation of 
subcutaneously injected 
drug delivery systems
Outlook
Institut Galien Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Orsay, France. 
 e-mail: julien.nicolas@
universite-paris-saclay.fr

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
vaccines, comprising mRNA-loaded LNPs encoding the SARS-CoV-2 
viral glycoprotein spike, developed by Moderna and BioNTech13.
Subcutaneous (SC) administration has become an attractive alter-
native to IV, IM and oral administration for treating various diseases14. It 
can bypass most of the disadvantages associated with IV and IM routes, 
in addition to its ease of use and patient compliance15. For example, 
the IM route may cause pain at the injection site and tissue damage, 
in addition to the limited injection volumes, whereas the IV route is 
costly and causes discomfort for the patient15. In 2018, the Subcutane-
ous Drug Delivery & Development Consortium has been established 
as a pre-competitive collaboration of industry and academic experts 
in pharmaceutical drug delivery, device development and commer-
cialization, with the aim of identifying and addressing challenges and 
opportunities in the SC drug delivery field16 (Box 1). However, despite 
the advantages offered by SC delivery, this route of administration 
remains underexplored compared with IV administration and is not 
yet used to its full potential. For example, the options available for SC 
cancer therapy remain limited owing to the irritant or vesicant nature 
of most anticancer drugs17.
In this Review, we discuss advances in SC delivery of nanoscale 
DDSs, with the aim of stimulating the search for further effective SC 
treatments. We describe key considerations for SC administration of 
nanoscale DDSs and specifically discuss the design of the main classes 
of nanoscale DDSs loaded with therapeutic drugs for SC delivery. More-
over, we examine SC delivery of in situ-forming hydrogel-embedded 
nanoscale DDSs, which may enable various biomedical applications. 
Finally, we highlight nanoscale DDS systems in clinical trials and those 
on the market.
Intravenous, intramuscular and subcutaneous 
administration
IV, IM and SC administration are distinct routes of administration, 
each with its own particularities (Fig. 1). IV administration is often 
associated with patient discomfort and high cost16,18, particularly in 
the treatment of cancer17,19. IV formulations are prepared daily in the 
hospital and often administered throughout a central IV line, which 
requires an implantable chamber. The patient must remain in hospital 
during treatment to be monitored for early detection of infusion-related 
toxicities (from drugs and/or excipients)20, during which catheter 
failures and life-threatening infections can also occur21,22.
IM administration is commonly used for vaccination, allowing 
effective vaccine delivery to stimulate an immune response. Similar 
to IV administration, IM administration requires the intervention 
of health-care professionals, except that large volumes cannot be 
administered intramuscularly. In addition, IM injections may entail 
risks, such as nerve damage or improper drug deposition. Moreo-
ver, IM administration can cause pain, swelling or irritation at the 
injection site15.
Compared with the IV and IM route, SC delivery of therapeutic 
molecules is beneficial for patient comfort and compliance, as well 
as time and money saving23,24. Patients show higher preference to SC 
than to IV injections of equal safety and efficacy25–27. For example, in 
an open-label randomized clinical trial (NCT01401166), 124 women 
with human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2)-positive inva-
sive breast carcinoma received SC trastuzumab by a single-use injec-
tion device followed by IV trastuzumab, and 124 received the reverse 
sequence25. Results revealed that only 16 patients preferred the IV treat-
ment. Indeed, SC administration is less painful and invasive, offering 
the patient better mobility compared with IV. In addition, two clinical 
Key points
•
• Subcutaneous (SC) drug delivery can bypass limitations of 
intravenous and intramuscular administration, particularly in terms 
of patient comfort, treatment costs and drug delivery modalities.
•
• The SC Drug Delivery & Development Consortium, composed of 
academic and industry experts, has identified opportunities in SC drug 
delivery development to improve and extend the applications of SC 
technology.
•
• SC delivery can be applied to a range of nanoscale drug delivery 
systems (DDSs), including polymer–drug conjugates, liposomes, 
nanoparticles, micelles and hydrogel-embedded nanoscale DDSs.
•
• By specifically designing nanoscale DDSs for SC delivery, different 
therapeutic effects can be obtained, such as lymph node targeting, 
rapid systemic absorption, sustained release of drugs from the SC 
tissue and vaccination.
•
• Several nanoscale DDSs for SC delivery have reached the clinical trial 
stage and some are available on the market.
Introduction
Understanding the physiological barriers to drug delivery and 
disease-associated mechanisms provides a crucial impetus for the 
development of various types of nanoscale drug delivery systems 
(DDSs) as effective diagnostic and/or therapeutic tools1–3. With their 
nanometric size and tunable properties, nanoparticles can convey 
a wide range of therapeutic drugs by increasing their water solubil-
ity and stability, and protecting them from early degradation and 
recognition by the immune system. In addition, nanoscale DDSs can 
be designed to specifically accumulate in diseased areas through 
favourable pharmacokinetics and biodistribution and/or the imple-
mentation of targeting capabilities4,5 and stimulus responsiveness6. 
These attributes can help to improve the efficacy and reduce the side 
effects of therapeutics for many pathologies, such as cancer, infec-
tious, neurodegenerative and cardiac diseases7,8. The most studied 
nanoscale DDSs can be classified into four categories8,9: polymer–drug 
conjugates, which are obtained by grafting polymers (for example, 
poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)) onto small drugs or therapeutic proteins 
or peptides; lipid-based systems including liposomes and lipid-based 
nanoparticles (LNPs), such as solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs); polymer 
nanoparticles or micelles; and inorganic nanoparticles, which are 
typically made of gold, iron or silica, possessing distinct physical, 
magnetic and optical properties.
The route of administration of nanoscale DDSs is a crucial aspect to 
consider for drug delivery, as it influences bioavailability, biodistribu-
tion and drug release kinetics, ultimately impacting the effectiveness 
and safety of the treatment10. Most of these systems are designed for 
intravenous (IV) administration, guaranteeing quantitative bioavail-
ability and precise dosing. Although oral administration is the most 
convenient to most patients, the highly variable bioavailability and 
first pass effect of drugs11 decrease its credibility for precise dosing12. 
Intramuscular (IM) delivery is another commonly investigated route 
of administration for nanoscale DDSs. It has been primarily stud-
ied for vaccination purposes, as in the case of the COVID-19 mRNA 

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
studies on rituximab (NCT01200758 and NCT01724021) have high-
lighted that SC treatments can effectively reduce hospitalization time 
and the requirement of qualified health-care professionals, as the 
time required for SC injection is a few minutes compared with several 
hours for IV administration26,27. Moreover, SC administration can be 
achieved at home by health-care staff or self-administration, which fur-
ther reduces the associated costs23,28. SC administration also decreases 
the use of dedicated equipment (for example, infusion bags and pumps, 
venous access devices, catheters, and imaging machines to ensure that 
the central line is in place) and consumables (for example, gauze and 
bandage)28. Additionally, SC treatments are commonly administered 
with a fixed dose for all body weights of patients16, decreasing drug and 
vial wastage compared with a weight-based dosing commonly used for 
IV treatments. Importantly, SC administration can help improve the life 
quality of patients with poor venous access or who receive long-term 
treatments, for whom repeated IV injections are particularly painful15. 
However, age-related skin changes, including reduced fat content and 
poor blood circulation, can affect SC drug administration29–31. Thus, 
individual patient characteristics must be considered when choosing 
drug delivery routes.
Considerations for subcutaneous nanoscale drug 
delivery systems
The structure of the skin comprises three layers: the epidermis, der-
mis and hypodermis (Fig. 1). The hypodermis, or SC tissue, is a loosely 
organized connective tissue predominantly containing adipocytes, 
fibroblasts and immune cells within a vascularized collagenous extra-
cellular matrix (ECM)32,33. The ECM is a structured network of collagen 
and glycosaminoglycans, such as hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sul-
fate, in the interstitial fluid. The negative charge of the ECM, primarily 
from hyaluronic acid, affects the transport and stability of drugs and 
excipients in the SC space, especially for biotherapeutics such as pro-
teins and monoclonal antibodies. The density of blood and lymphatic 
capillary networks and the low proteolytic activity in the SC tissue 
make SC administration an attractive route for the delivery of phar-
maceutical compounds and nanoscale DDSs28,34. However, compared 
with IV administration, SC injections have a slower onset of action 
(tens of seconds versus tens of minutes), as the drug must diffuse from 
the SC tissue into the bloodstream before exerting its effect. The SC 
route is also rather limited in terms of injection volume35, as the dense 
fibrous nature of the SC tissue does not allow injection of volumes 
>2–3 ml without causing pain, discomfort, leakage at the injection site 
and/or tissue distortion.
The thickness of the SC tissue and the dense, negatively charged 
hyaluronic acid network are responsible for limiting fluid flow in the 
ECM, which affects drug transport to the systemic circulation, result-
ing in slow absorption rates (typically a few millilitres per hour) and 
incomplete bioavailability, typically in the range of maximum 9–90% 
(ref. 16), but generally between 50 and 80% (refs. 36–38). The specific 
architecture and composition of the SC space32 can also influence 
the fate of SC-injected nanoscale DDSs. As assessed for therapeutic 
proteins29,39, the polyanionic ECM can interact with SC-injected DDSs, 
affecting their fate. For example, negatively charged liposomes show 
the highest lymphatic uptake, followed by positively charged and neu-
tral liposomes as tested in vivo in rats40. Although these features may 
pose challenges when developing nanoscale DDSs for SC administra-
tion, they may increase the safety of the SC route compared with the 
IV route. IV administration induces high peak plasma drug concentra-
tions, which may be associated with toxicity and severe side effects as 
in the case of chemotherapy41. By contrast, the slow drug absorption 
from SC administration is an opportunity to improve tolerability and 
prolonged drug exposure.
Box 1
The Subcutaneous Drug Delivery & Development Consortium
The Subcutaneous Drug Delivery & Development Consortium was 
established in 2018 with the goal of identifying and addressing key 
issues, gaps, challenges and opportunities in the field of SC delivery 
to improve and expand its use. It operates as a pre-competitive 
collaboration of industrial partners (Alexion, Amgen, AstraZeneca, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly and Company, Halozyme, Merck, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Radius Health, Regeneron, Sanofi and Takeda) 
and academic experts in pharmaceutical drug delivery, device 
development and commercialization. Consortium members have 
identified and prioritized eight existing and upcoming critical unmet 
requirements related to subcutaneous (SC) delivery: high-dose 
and high-volume SC technology development, bioavailability, 
immunogenicity, patient-preference intravenous (IV) versus SC, 
patient–physician interactions, clinical trial strategy, payer preference 
and discomfort, and patient experience16.
Among the recommendations, considerable effort must be 
made to design SC delivery technologies for biotherapies capable 
of injecting large volumes (>2 ml) and large, well-tolerated doses18. 
Reliable preclinical tools to predict SC bioavailability38 in humans and 
testing methodologies to assess SC immunogenicity200 must also 
be developed. To achieve these goals, close collaboration between 
academia and industry is needed to achieve a shared knowledge 
to understand the crucial factors controlling SC drug delivery and, 
consequently, improve SC formulation and drug design.
Another gap that needs to be addressed relates to the 
development strategy of SC products. First, there is a lack of 
understanding and criteria regarding the optimal time to start a 
clinical trial: either as soon as efficacy has been established by 
IV treatments or from early preclinical stages16. In addition, SC 
development must take into account the preferences of patients, 
health-care providers24 and payers23. The SC route is generally 
preferred by patients and health-care providers because it allows 
rapid and potentially home-based administration, with considerable 
benefits in terms of patient compliance and quality of life. It also 
reduces the financial burden of treatment23, which is a key point for 
payers. However, the ability to quantify patient experience of pain 
and discomfort during the drug development process remains to be 
established16.

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
Macromolecules below a molecular weight of 1 kDa reach the sys-
temic circulation by crossing the basal membrane of blood capillaries, 
and those above approximately 16 kDa are absorbed through the lym-
phatic system owing to the high permeability of the basal membrane 
of lymphatic capillaries42 (Fig. 1). Furthermore, therapeutic molecules 
can be drained through the lymphatic circulation, passing through 
the lymph nodes before reaching the systemic circulation43. Similarly, 
it is possible to adjust the size and surface properties of SC-injected 
nanoscale DDSs to specifically target either the lymphatic system or 
the blood circulation, or to create a depot in the SC space44,45. For exam-
ple, nanoscale DDSs >500 nm in diameter remain at the injection site, 
serving as reservoir systems for the drug as they degrade. By contrast, 
nanoscale DDSs ≤100–120 nm in diameter are absorbed by the lym-
phatic system to be either trapped by lymph nodes or enter the blood-
stream to varying degrees, depending on their nature and surface 
properties (for example, surface charge, surface coating and presence 
of targeting ligands)44,45. Targeting lymph nodes may be of interest as 
they have a crucial role in specific diseases, such as metastatic cancer 
or HIV infection, wherein lymphatic circulation is a pathway used by 
tumour cells and pathogens to enter the systemic circulation46. Con-
versely, objects <10 nm in diameter can escape lymph node entrapment 
and directly access the systemic circulation after SC administration47.
Subcutaneous (SC)
• Improved patient compliance and comfort
• Minimally invasive, multiple injection sites
• Slow absorption rate and prolonged drug 
exposure
• Lymph node targeting
• Reduced costs, hospitalization time, 
waste of drug and consumables
• Variable bioavailability
• Small injection volumes (<2–3 ml)
• Risk of local site reactions
Intramuscular (IM)
• Rapid absorption, ideal for emergencies
• Minimally invasive
• Lymph node targeting
• Small injection volumes (<2–3 ml)
• Potential local pain and discomfort
• Risk of nerve or blood vessel damage
• Limited injection sites with variable absorption
• Injection performed by trained professionals; 
self-administration can be diﬀicult
Intravenous  (IV)
Quantitative bioavailability, precise control of the dose
Administration of large volumes
Fastest onset of the drug after administration
Invasive and painful, extended observation
post-administration
High peak plasma concentration
Injection performed by health-care professionals
Daily preparation of sterile formulations
High costs and long hospitalization stays
Blood 
capillaries
Lymphatic
capillaries
Small
molecules
Large
molecules
Antibodies
(mAb, IgG)
Therapeutic
proteins or
hormones
Epidermis
siRNA
Vaccines
Small
molecules
IV
IM
SC
SC
Dermis
Hypodermis
Muscle
Fig. 1 | Anatomy of the skin and comparison of administration routes. Fate 
of subcutaneously (SC), intramuscularly (IM) and intravenously (IV) injected 
therapeutics (small molecule, therapeutic protein, monoclonal antibody, 
small interfering ribonucleic acid, and vaccines). The main advantages and 
disadvantages are highlighted for each route. mAb, monoclonal antibody; siRNA, 
small interfering RNA.

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
Nanoscale drug delivery systems for 
subcutaneous administration
Polymer–drug conjugates
Many developed polymer–drug conjugates9 have been applied to SC 
administration to improve the pharmacokinetics and efficacy of thera-
peutics, overcoming limitations, such as poor water solubility of drugs 
and inadequate diffusion from the SC tissue (Fig. 2a).
PEGylation, or the covalent linkage of PEG to small molecules, 
therapeutic proteins or DDSs, is a widely used strategy to improve 
the performance of SC-injected therapeutics48. For example, differ-
ent PEGylated protein conjugates are commercially available for SC 
administration49 (Table 1). However, PEGylation can be associated 
with drawbacks, such as the development of anti-PEG antibod-
ies, non-biodegradability of PEG and the risk of macromolecular 
syndrome48. Thus, natural polymers, such as polysaccharides, are 
considered as alternative carriers for SC-injected therapeutics. For 
example, hyaluronic acid is a promising biocompatible candidate 
with high hydrophilicity and low immunogenicity that can increase 
the bioavailability and circulation time of drugs after SC administra-
tion (Fig. 2a). Interestingly, unlike PEG, a single hyaluronic acid chain 
is composed of repeating units of d-glucuronic acid and N-acetyl-
d-glucosamine disaccharide units offering multiple carboxylic reactive 
sites that can be conjugated to various drug molecules, making the 
polymer suitable for macromolecular prodrug design. For example, 
by using Michael addition reaction to conjugate hyaluronic acid with 
exendin-4, an incretin mimetic for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, 
a prodrug can be designed with an average of 10 peptides per hyalu­
ronic acid chain. Administrating the prodrug subcutaneously in mice 
prolongs the hypoglycaemic effect of exendin-4 from 1 to 3 days, 
thus reducing the dosing frequency from daily to twice per week50. 
Moreover, considering the overexpression of hyaluronic acid recep-
tors in invasive breast cancer cells and the physiological catabolism 
of hyaluronic acid in the lymph nodes, hyaluronic acid-based targeted 
prodrugs of cisplatin and doxorubicin (Dox) have been developed. 
These prodrugs exhibit improved intratympanic delivery compared 
with the free drug on lymphatically active metastatic breast cancer 
murine models after SC administration without local, renal or cardiac 
toxicity, as lymph nodes are the most common sites of metastasis51–53. 
By screening different types of linkers between the drugs and the 
polymer, multidrug–hyaluronic acid conjugates can be synthesized for 
SC delivery of gemcitabine and Dox, exhibiting a synergistic effect 
for the treatment of triple-negative breast cancer in mice54. Another 
example of polymer–drug conjugates is based on 2-hydroxypropyl-β-
cyclodextrins (HPβCDs), which are currently intrathecally injected at 
high and potentially toxic doses for the treatment of Niemann–Pick 
type C1 (NPC) disease. However, a HPβCD-based prodrug with degra-
dable ketal linkers can be subcutaneously administrated to cross the 
blood–brain barrier and accumulate in the cytoplasm of large neurons, 
resulting in more than 4 weeks longer lifespan of NPC mice at a dose five 
times lower than that of free HPβCD for the same efficacy55.
Aiming to replace IV chemotherapies, polyacrylamide-based 
prodrugs are used for SC delivery of vesicant and irritant anticancer 
drugs56, such as paclitaxel, which is strongly hydrophobic and vesi-
cant. Paclitaxel can be linked to polyacrylamide by the drug-initiated 
method57,58, which consists in growing a polymer chain in a con-
trolled fashion from a drug, resulting in a water-soluble paclitaxel–
polyacrylamide prodrug, owing to the presence of the hydrophilic 
polymer. The prodrug shows no toxicity at the injection site nor in 
the SC tissue in mice, and it exhibits 8.2 times longer circulation time, 
outperforming the anticancer efficacy of Taxol, the commercial 
formulation of paclitaxel, administered intravenously. In another 
strategy, pendant alkyne group-containing polyoxazolines (POZ) are 
functionalized with cannabinoids and neurological drugs through 
Cu(I)-catalysed click chemistry59 (Table 1). The conformation of the 
resulting POZ prodrugs in solution leads to a slower hydrolytic drug 
release than that of the corresponding PEG-based and dextran-based 
prodrugs, and thus leads to more favourable pharmacokinetic 
profiles suitable for once-weekly SC injection.
Targeted molecular prodrugs have also been designed to reduce 
the off-target toxicity of certain anticancer agents. For example, 
prostate cancer cells express specific proteases that are commonly 
detected as serum cancer markers. In this context, two thapsigargin 
prodrugs have been designed to be selectively cleaved in the presence 
of prostate-specific antigen (PSA)60 or human glandular kallikrein 2 
(hK2)61, two specific prostate cancer proteases. Continuous infusion 
of PSA-targeted prodrugs through an SC-implanted mini-pump results 
in complete inhibition of PSA-producing prostate tumour growth in 
mice compared with daily IV administration, with no effect on non-PSA-
producing renal carcinoma cells60. A camptothecin-based prodrug 
has also been developed to target integrin-overexpressing tumours. 
The prodrug comprises camptothecin covalently bound to the hydro-
philic Arg–Gly–Asp–Ser (RGDS) peptide to a hydrophobic alkyl chain, 
promoting self-assembly into 20-nm-diameter nanofibres, resulting 
in tumour growth inhibition in hepatoma22-bearing mice after SC 
injection62.
Liposomes
Liposomes are nano-sized spherical structures composed of phos-
pholipid bilayers surrounding an aqueous core. Their capacity to 
encapsulate a diverse range of therapeutic agents and their biocom-
patibility make them an efficient and versatile drug delivery platform63. 
SC administration of liposomes is a versatile practice, as it is possible 
to modulate their fate, and thus their therapeutic effects, simply by 
adjusting their size64. Liposome size is the key factor determining the 
extent of absorption from the SC tissue, as the reticular structure of 
the ECM matrix hampers the movement of large particles64. Addition-
ally, liposomes do not have direct access to the systemic circulation 
after SC administration, and they either are taken up by the lymphatic 
circulation or remain at the injection site depending on their size. Small 
liposomes (<100–120 nm) are primarily absorbed from the injection 
site by the lymphatic system and, depending on their surface proper-
ties, they may be retained by the lymph nodes or reach the systemic 
circulation64,65 (Fig. 2b). Although both events can occur simultane-
ously, any modification of liposomes can favour one pathway over 
the other66 (Fig. 2b). Conversely, large liposomes (>500 nm) mainly 
accumulate at the injection site, wherein they slowly release their cargo 
during degradation64 (Fig. 2b).
Although lymphatic uptake of small liposomes is high, only 
approximately 1–2% of the injected dose is retained by lymph nodes64. 
Conversely, lymph nodes tend to retain large liposomes owing to their 
high filtration and phagocytosis by resident macrophages. Accord-
ingly, modifications of the surface properties of small liposomes are 
used to improve their recognition by resident macrophages and, 
thus, their uptake by lymph nodes (Fig. 2b). For example, modifica-
tion of the lipid composition by the addition of negatively charged 
phosphatidylserine triggers recognition by resident macrophages 
and increases uptake by lymph nodes66,67. Interestingly, negatively 
charged phosphatidylserine-modified liposomes (~145 nm in diameter), 

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
loaded with buparvaquone, reduce the parasite load in lymphoid organs 
after SC injection more than after IV or IM administration in hamsters 
(for example, infection reduction in liver: 96% for SC versus 45% for IV 
and no reduction for IM)67. Surface modification with specific ligands, 
such as mannose, increases macrophage uptake in albino rats, leading 
to higher accumulation in lymph nodes than the unmodified negatively 
Improves half-life of 
therapeutic proteins 
and mAbs
Multiple reactive  
site for multidrug 
therapy
Slow hydrolytic 
drug release
Safe SC administration 
of Ptx, while 
outperforming Taxol®
pH-sensitive linkage
HA
POZ
Polyacrylamide
HPβCD
PEG
a  Polymer–drug conjugates
b  Liposomes 
Small liposomes (<100–120 nm)
Large liposomes (>500 nm)
Surface-engineered stealth liposomes
• Lymph node 
targeting (+++)
Surface-engineered
conventional liposomes
• Lymph node targeting 
(+++)
Conventional cationic liposomes
• Lymph node targeting (++)
Conventional uncharged 
liposomes
• Lymph node targeting (+)
Multivesicular
liposomes
(>10 µm)
• Depot system in the SC tissue
• Sustained release upon degradation
Stealth liposomes
• Lymph node 
targeting (+)
• Sustained release 
of intact vesicles
Multilamellar
liposomes
(>500 nm)
Conventional anionic liposomes
• Lymph node targeting (++)
O
O
HO
HO
O
O
HO
HO
O
O
HO
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
O
OH
OH
O
OOH
OH
O
OHO
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
HO
HO
HO
n
OH
O
O
NH
OH
HO
n
O
O
HO
OH
O
O
O
OH
N
n
O
R
n
O
H2N
O
O
N
N N
N
N
N
Paclitaxel
Uncharged lipid
Charged lipids
PEG (brush 
conformation)
PEG (mushroom 
conformation)
Cholesterol
Avidin
Biotin
Targeting 
ligand
Non-specific 
IgG
Anticancer
drugs
Peptides
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
CH3
N
N N
O
O
Cannabinoids
Neurological drugs
–
–
–
–
–
Fig. 2 | Polymer–drug conjugates and liposomes for subcutaneous 
administration. a, Structure and main characteristics of polymer–drug 
conjugates for subcutaneous (SC) administration: PEGylated therapeutic 
proteins and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), hyaluronic acid (HA)-based 
macromolecular prodrugs, cyclodextrin (CD)-based prodrugs, polyoxazoline 
(POZ)-based prodrugs and polyacrylamide-based prodrugs. b, Structure and 
main characteristics of small liposomes (conventional uncharged, stealth, 
conventional charged or surface-functionalized for lymph node targeting), 
multivesicular liposomes and multilamellar liposomes for SC administration. 
PEG, poly(ethylene glycol); HPβCD, 2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin.

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
charged liposomes (15% versus 10% of administered dose of zidovudine, 
an antiretroviral drug)68. Furthermore, targeted liposomes can be recog-
nized by specific receptors overexpressed by metastatic lymph nodes. 
For example, surface positively charged docetaxel-loaded liposomes 
can be functionalized through electrostatic interaction with either 
negatively charged hyaluronic acid69 or low molecular weight heparin 
(LMWHEP)70, against the CD44 receptor and heparanase, respectively. 
In vivo studies following SC administration in mice have demonstrated 
increased accumulation of docetaxel in metastatic lymph nodes by a 
factor of ~2 and ~3 for hyaluronic acid-coated and LMWHEP-coated vesi-
cles, respectively, compared with uncoated liposomes, and higher lym-
phatic drainage owing to the steric stabilization effect and hydrophilic 
Table 1 | Subcutaneously injectable nanocarriers in clinical trials and on the market
Drug and trade name
Technology
Targets
Status
Refs. or clinical 
trial identifiers
Polymer–drug conjugates
IFNα-2a
Pegasys (Roche)
PEGylation
Chronic hepatitis B
Chronic hepatitis C
Marketed (2002)
184
IFNα-2b
PEGIntron (Merck)
PEGylation
Chronic hepatitis C
Marketed (2001)
Withdrawn (2021)
185
IFNβ-1a
Plegridy (Biogen)
PEGylation
Multiple sclerosis
Marketed (2014)
213
Recombinant hG-CSF Neulasta (Amgen)
PEGylation
Chemotherapy-induced neutropenia
Marketed (2002)
186
Certolizumab
Cimzia (UCB)
PEGylation
Active rheumatoid arthritis, axial 
spondylarthritis, psoriatic arthritis, 
plaque psoriasis
Marketed (2009)
189
Pegvisomant
Somavert (Pfizer)
PEGylation
Acromegaly
Marketed (2003)
214
Pegvaliase
Palynziq (BioMarin)
PEGylation
Phenylketonuria
Marketed (2019)
215
Erythropoietin
Mircera (Roche)
PEGylation
Anaemia associated with chronic 
kidney disease
Marketed (2007)
216
Peginesatide
Omontys (Affymax and Takeda 
Pharmaceuticals)
PEGylation
Anaemia associated with chronic 
kidney disease
Withdrawn (2013)
217
Recombinant native human leptin
PEG-OB
PEGylation
Obesity
Prospective, randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trials
218,219
Recombinant mammalian uricase
Pegloticase KRYSTEXXA (Horizon 
Therapeutics)
PEGylation
Refractory gout
Phase I
203
Rotigotine
SER-214 (Serina Therapeutics)
POZ™
Parkinson disease
Phase I
NCT02579473
Liposomes
Bupivacaine
Exparel liposomal (Pacira BioSciences)
Multivesicular liposome
Post-operative pain
Marketed (2021)
192
Proliposomal ropivacaine oil
Multilamellar liposome
Anaesthetic
Phase I/II
NCT00883194
Tecemotide
StimuVax (Merck KGaA)
Conventional liposome
Non-small-cell lung cancer
Phase III (discontinued)
NCT02049151
Metastatic breast cancer
Phase III
NCT00925548
Progressive multiple myeloma
Phase II
NCT01094548
Rectal cancer
Phase II
NCT01507103
Prostate cancer
Phase II
NCT01496131
Myelin basic protein
Xemys (Pharmsynthez PJSC)
Targeted liposome
Multiple sclerosis
Phase I
194
Nanoparticles
NY-ESO-1 protein and HER2 protein
CHP nanoparticles
Anticancer immunotherapy
Phase I
NTC00291473
SER-214 is a poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline)–polymer conjugate of rotigotine. Xemys are mannosylated liposomes targeting CD206 and loaded with immunodominant peptides. CHP, 
cholesterol-bearing pullulan; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2; hG-CSF, human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; INF, interferon; NY-ESO-1, New York oesophageal 
squamous cell carcinoma 1; PEG, poly(ethylene glycol); PEG-OB, PEGylated recombinant human leptin; POZ, polyoxazolines.

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
properties of the polysaccharides. Another strategy is to induce the 
aggregation of small liposomes in the lymphatic circulation to keep 
them retained in the lymph nodes. Aggregation can, for example, be 
achieved by consecutive SC injection of surface-biotinylated liposomes 
and avidin, resulting in liposome bridging via avidin–biotin interac-
tions, leading to an approximately sevenfold increase in uptake by 
lymph nodes71.
Small liposomes have also been extensively studied for vaccination 
purposes, as they can serve as vaccine-adjuvant delivery systems72. 
Tecemotide (formerly known as StimuVax, Merck KGaA), is a liposo-
mal vaccine formulation for SC administration that reached phase III 
clinical trials (NCT02049151, Table 1) as a cancer immunotherapy. It can 
trigger a cellular immune response against cells overexpressing mucin 1 
(MUC1) glycoprotein, such as in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)73. 
Liposomes were formulated with a synthetic lipopeptide-miming 
MUC1 and monophosphoryl lipid A as the adjuvant74. However, in 2014, 
Merck KGaA decided to discontinue the development of Tecemo-
tide for the treatment of NSCLC, following disappointing clinical trial 
results (EMR63325-009). Importantly, the liposome composition has 
a fundamental role in vaccine retention at the injection site and in the 
immunostimulatory capacity. For example, cationic liposomes with 
surface ammonium headgroups, such as dimethyldioctadecylam-
monium bromide (DDA), trehalose 6,6-dibehenate (TDB) or 1,2-diole-
oyl-3-trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP), used as adjuvants, are 
immunostimulatory after IM or SC administration, promoting the 
retention of the delivered antigen at the injection site75,76. Incorporat-
ing TDB in DDA liposomes increases their drainage to lymph nodes and 
monocyte influx at the injection site in mice75. Moreover, the positive 
charge of liposomes enables superficial absorption of soluble antigens, 
allowing their delivery to the draining lymph nodes after SC injection. 
Additionally, cationic liposomes act as efficient transfection vectors 
after SC injection by forming complexes with negatively charged DNA 
(lipoplexes). For example, SC co-administration in mice of the mouse 
angiostatin kringle 1–3 gene (pFLAG-AngioK1/3) and the endostatin 
gene (pFLAG-Endo) complexed with cationic liposomes inhibits 81% 
of tumour growth compared with treatment with an empty liposomes, 
and suppresses lung metastases of B16BL6 melanoma cells77.
Coating the liposome surface with sterically stabilizing hydro-
philic polymers that prevent non-specific interactions, such as PEG, 
can resolve liposomal aggregation in SC tissue after injection, which is 
responsible for the limited lymphatic drainage from the interstitium64 
(Fig. 2b). Thus, PEGylation can accelerate drainage into the lymphatic 
circulation, improving lymph node accumulation. However, the steric 
repulsion by PEG chains can reduce macrophage uptake, negatively 
impacting lymph node uptake. In fact, the role of PEG in SC-injected 
PEGylated liposomes has been the subject of much debate. Small, 
PEGylated liposomes (<100–120 nm) reach the bloodstream to a greater 
extent than bare liposomes (with a factor of 4 between the levels of 
PEGylated and non-PEGylated liposomes found in blood), owing to 
reduced retention in lymph nodes, as a result of the stealth property 
of PEG that reduces recognition by resident macrophages, as tested in 
mice65. Independent from being PEGylated, liposomes that are >120 nm 
in diameter and SC-injected to mice do not enter the blood circulation, 
highlighting the importance of the size. However, the accumulation 
of liposomes in the lymph nodes is not solely dependent on their 
internalization by macrophages. Indeed, the reduced tendency to 
aggregate and increased lymphatic absorption of PEGylated liposomes 
may lead to an overall accumulation in lymph nodes, comparable to 
that of their non-PEGylated counterparts (Fig. 2b), which conversely 
are less efficiently absorbed by the lymphatic system but are more 
efficiently trapped by the lymph nodes via macrophage recognition78. 
Interestingly, the drainage and retention of PEGylated liposomes into 
lymph nodes can be modulated by adjusting the surface conformation 
of the PEG chains79–81. For example, liposomes containing 15 mol% of 
PEG350–1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylethanolamine (DSPE) in 
their lipid bilayer (composed of PC, cholesterol and dicetylphosphate) 
compared with liposomes bearing 6.7 mol% of PEG2000–DSPE show, in 
rats, slower drainage from the SC tissue (24% versus 37% of the injected 
dose drained from the interstitial injection site into the initial lym-
phatic system after 6 h, respectively) but higher retention in the lymph 
nodes (140% versus 60% of the injected dose per gram of node after 6 h, 
respectively)80. Such observation can be explained by the mushroom–
brush transitional conformation of long PEG2000 chains on the liposome 
surface, which is better recognized by resident macrophages than the 
non-overlapping mushroom conformation observed with shorter 
PEG350 chains. Lymphatic retention can be further improved by conjugat-
ing non-specific IgG to the distal end of PEG chains80. Modulating the 
surface conformation of PEG chains also improves the interaction of IgG 
with ground substance (amorphous gel-like substance in the extracel-
lular space containing glycosaminoglycans, such as HA, proteoglycans 
and glycoproteins). Another strategy to promote accumulation of 
PEGylated liposomes in draining lymph nodes is to perform adjacent 
SC injection of pentameric IgM against IgG-modified liposomes, induc-
ing the formation of immune aggregates in the lymphatic vessels82. 
The PEG density seems to have a key role in lymphatic trafficking. For 
example, incorporating 1 mol% of PEG2000–lipid in DOTAP cationic 
liposomes leads to a twofold increase in lymph node accumulation after 
SC in mice compared with 5 mol% of the same PEGylated lipid, resulting 
in better lymphatic targeting compared with non-coated vesicles81. 
However, high PEG densities can increase hepatic tropism, underlying 
lymph node retention and systemic dispersion81. Thus, further clari-
fications are required to optimize the characteristics of liposomes to 
prioritize lymphatic or systemic targeting. The conjugation of specific 
antibodies83 or ligands84 to liposomes is also promising for targeted 
therapies, increasing their accumulation in pathological lymph nodes.
Given their long-circulating properties, SC administration of 
small, PEGylated liposomes can be an alternative to IV injections65. 
Indeed, although the accumulation in lymph nodes cannot be avoided, 
the favourable lymphatic absorption from the injection site and the 
extended circulatory properties of PEGylated liposomes facilitate 
their entry into the systemic circulation as intact vesicles, in which 
they behave as if administered intravenously85 (Fig. 2b). Conversely, 
small, non-coated liposomes reach the blood circulation in mice at a 
rate four times lower than that of PEGylated liposomes, owing to their 
higher lymphatic uptake and increased retention at the injection site65. 
This can be helpful in the treatment of arthritis owing to the accumula-
tion of small vesicles into inflamed body sites86,87. SC administration of 
small, PEGylated liposomes loaded with superoxide dismutase86 and 
glucocorticoids87 shows a half-life, pharmacodynamics and biodistri-
bution profiles comparable to those administered intravenously in 
rats. The SC route delays entry into the bloodstream and lowers drug 
plasma peak concentration, as the liposomes are absorbed by the inter-
stitium before reaching the bloodstream87. However, the hydrophilicity 
and small size of fast-draining liposomes limit their ability to achieve 
sustained release from the SC tissue over a long period of time. Alter-
natively, small PEGylated liposomes can be loaded into SC-implantable 
silicon membranes to prolong the release of intact vesicles in vitro for 
more than 18 days88.

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
Additionally, the inherent accumulation of liposomes at the injec-
tion site above the SC drainage threshold can serve as a sustained 
release depot of therapeutics upon degradation (Fig. 2b). A commonly 
implemented technology known as DepoFoam (Pacira Pharmaceuti-
cals) is based on multivesicular liposomes (MVLs), which consist of 
vesicles that are 10–20 μm in diameter formed by multiple noncon-
centric polyhedral compartments89. Bupivacaine DepoFoam (Pacira 
Pharmaceuticals) is currently FDA-approved for SC delivery90. In addi-
tion, a combination DDSs composed of donor MVL and large unila-
mellar liposome acceptor has been developed to promote prolonged 
anaesthesia by ropivacaine91. MVLs are also suitable for the sustained 
SC release of peptides92 and proteins93.
Nanoparticles
Polymer and lipid nanoparticles can be engineered for SC delivery to 
facilitate the prolonged release of drug molecules and to target lymph 
nodes (Fig. 3a). The fate and biodistribution of nanoparticles after 
SC injection can be finely tuned by adjusting their nature, composi-
tion and colloidal characteristics (for example, size, surface charge 
and hydrophilic coating)45. Studying the influence of their colloidal 
properties on their fate could help provide guidelines for develop-
ing efficient nanoscale DDSs (Fig. 3a). For example, the size of LNPs 
impacts their uptake and distribution in lymph nodes, with nanopar-
ticles 30 nm in diameter taken up by lymph nodes 2.0 and 3.8 times 
more than their counterparts that are 100 nm and 200 nm in diam-
eter, respectively, after SC injection in mice94. Moreover, negatively 
charged 30-nm LNPs show higher translocation in draining lymph 
nodes compared with their neutral and positively charged counter-
parts. Increasing the hydrophilicity of polymer nanoparticles by PEGyla-
tion also increases lymphatic drainage95,96. For example, PEGylation of 
poly(d,l-lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles of different sizes 
(50, 100 and 200 nm) increases accumulation in lymph nodes after SC 
injection in rats compared with unmodified nanoparticles of equiva-
lent size95. Importantly, the lymph node uptake is size-dependent, 
with PEGylated 50-nm-diameter polymer nanoparticles exhibiting the 
highest lymph node uptake. Moreover, PEGylation of 200-nm polysty-
rene nanoparticles increases their recognition by dendritic cells and 
decreases internalization by B cells after SC administration in mice, 
illustrating their potential for the development of synthetic vaccines97. 
PEG chain length also influences nanoparticle accumulation in lymph 
nodes. For example, poly-l-lysine dendrimers, grafted with long PEGs 
(570 and 2,000 Da), show higher accumulation in lymph nodes com-
pared with dendrimers grafted with small PEGs (200 Da) after SC admin-
istration in rats (around 4%–6% versus 0.7% of the injected dose per 
gram of wet lymph nodes, respectively)98.
LNPs have been widely studied for the encapsulation of hydro­
phobic drugs owing to their biocompatibility, easy preparation 
method and accumulation in lymph nodes after SC administration 
(Fig. 3a), making them ideal drug carriers against HIV reservoirs99 or 
lymphomas100. SC injection of etoposide-loaded tripalmitin nano-
particles shows 59-fold higher tumour accumulation in Dalton lym-
phoma tumour-bearing mice than nanoparticles injected via the IV 
route, despite their average size (~380 nm) being above the optimal 
size for lymph node targeting100. Owing to their tendency to accu-
mulate in lymph nodes, LNPs can be designed for SC antigen deliv-
ery for vaccination101,102. Another application for LNPs is their use as 
long-term drug delivery platforms for the systemic delivery of RNA 
(small interfering RNA (siRNA) and mRNA) after SC administration103,104. 
However, owing to their favourable accumulation in lymph nodes, it is 
not straightforward to rationalize the design of LNPs, as lymph node 
targeting and systemic release tend to occur in tandem. For example, 
~15–90-nm-diameter glyceryl mono­stearate SLNs show higher half-life 
and mean resident times by the SC route than by the IM route in rats, 
although their uptake by lymph nodes has not been compared105. Fur-
thermore, the fate of PEGylated LNPs encapsulating siRNA against 
factor VII has been investigated after SC injection in mice depending on 
their size and surface properties103. Although 30-nm LNPs show higher 
lymph node deposition than their 80-nm counterparts, their accumula-
tion in the liver is also increased, suggesting their capability of reaching 
the systemic circulation as intact nanoparticles103. Therefore, when 
considering and comparing different systems designed for lymphatic 
targeting or systemic absorption, it is important to know that the two 
events tend to occur simultaneously.
Nanoparticles based on natural polysaccharides are explored 
for lymphatic targeting after SC administration, especially for cancer 
immunotherapy (Fig. 3a). For example, cholesterol-bearing pullulan 
(CHP) nanoparticles of ~30–60 nm in diameter have been designed for 
SC antigen delivery106. CHP nanoparticles form by self-assembly owing 
to the hydrophobic interactions between the cholesterol moieties 
and the encapsulated peptides or proteins. They induce an immune 
response mediated by cytotoxic T lymphocytes owing to their stealth 
properties, allowing them to deliver antigens to lymph nodes. The 
particles are applied for the SC delivery of ovalbumin (OVA), resulting 
in higher lymph node accumulation and greater anti-tumour efficacy 
than those of the free antigen in mice after SC injection106. Alternatively, 
pullulan can be replaced by a highly branched polysaccharide, such 
as cluster dextrin, to obtain nanoparticles that are smaller (~20 nm in 
diameter) and stiffer than CHP nanoparticles, resulting in higher lymph 
node accumulation, owing to the reduced size106. This SC delivery 
system has also been applied to the delivery of other antigens, which is 
being evaluated in clinical trials (Table 1). Alginate is another polysac-
charide of interest that can be easily functionalized and formulated 
into targeted nanoparticles to deliver antigens to dendritic cells for 
cancer immunotherapy107. For example, alginate nanoparticles can be 
obtained by ionic cross-linking using CaCl2 and dual functionalized with 
mannose and OVA, resulting in pH-sensitive nanoparticles of 310 nm 
in diameter. These nanoparticles induce a twofold-to-fourfold higher 
cytokine production compared with dendritic cells exposed to free 
OVA and growth inhibition of E.G7-OVA mouse lymphoma with minimal 
off-target toxicity after SC administration. Mannose-functionalized 
alginate is also used as a coating for chitosan nanoparticles of 120 nm in 
diameter loaded with tumour cell lysate generated from B16 melanoma 
for targeted dendritic cell delivery108. Importantly, in both the alginate 
and chitosan nanoparticles107,108, the size is larger than that generally 
recommended for lymphatic accumulation (~30 nm in diameter)95, 
highlighting the many parameters at play when predicting the fate of 
SC-injected nanoscale DDSs and some contradictory trends observed 
in different studies, arguing for systematic comparative studies.
Synthetic biodegradable polymers, such as PLGA and poly(alkyl 
cyanoacrylate) (PACA), are commonly applied for the design of nano-
particles for SC delivery (Fig. 3a). For example, PLGA nanoparticles have 
been designed as sustained-release formulations for targeted lymphatic 
delivery in cancer immunotherapy95,109,110. SC administration of PLGA 
nanoparticles with different sizes and surface properties (for example, 
negatively charged or PEGylated) shows that small size (~50 nm in diam-
eter) and a PEG corona allow high accumulation in lymph nodes and low 
systemic exposure after SC administration in rats95. By contrast, larger 
(around 200 nm in diameter) uncoated PLGA nanoparticles loaded 

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
c  Nanocarrier-loaded hydrogel
Silica NPs
• Lymph node targeting (+)
• Vaccination
Gold NPs
• Lymph node targeting (+++)
• Vaccination
Polysaccharides NPs
• Lymph node targeting (+/+++)
• Vaccination
Lipid-based NPs (LNPs)
a  Nanoparticles
b  Micelles
Polymeric NPs
Inorganic NPs
Stealth LNPs
• Rapid drainage 
from the SC tissue
• Prolonged blood 
circulation
Soluble ELPs and ELPs NPs
• Soluble ELP prodrugs 
enhance tumour accumulation
Lipid-based micelles
Natural polymers matrix 
Synthetic polymers matrix
Synthetic polymer-based micelles
PEl-g-SA/DSPE-PEG 
hybrid micelles
• Lymph node 
targeting (++)
PEG-b-PABPE micelles
• Glucose–H202-responsive 
insulin release
PEG-b-PCL–PEI-g-PCL hybrid micelles
• Lymph node targeting (++)
Reverse micelles
• Prolonged blood 
circulation
Crosslinked PEG-
b-PHPMAmLacn
micelles
• Tunable 
drug release
PAsp(DET)–
PEG-b-PAsp(DET) 
hybrid micelles
• Lymph node 
targeting (++)
POZ-b-PLA–pluronic F127 hybrid 
micelles
• Lymph node targeting (++)
O
HO
O
NH2
OH
OH
NH2
O
HO
O
n
O
HO
O
O
O
OH
O
O
O
O
n
HO
O
x
O
x
y
O
H
O
y
O
z
O
x
x
O
O
H
O
O
y
O
O
O
H
x
O
O
O
O
x
y
H
O
O
H
R
P
N
R
x
y
x
NH
O
NH2
O
O
NH2
DSPE–PEG micelles
• Lymph node 
targeting (++)
PLGA NPs
• Lymph node 
targeting (++/+++)
• Prolonged 
blood circulation
PACA NPs
• Prolonged blood 
circulation
• Lymph node 
targeting (+)
+ + +
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
++
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Chitosan
Chitosan
PEG-b-PPO-b-PEG
PEG-b-PPO-b-PEG
PLGA-b-PEG-b-PLGA
PLGA-b-PEG-b-PLGA
PCL-b-PEG-b-PCL
Carbon 
nanotube
CND
Protein
coacerevate
Liposome
PDA-AuNP
Folate–
PEI–PZZ/
siRNA
Folate-PEI-PZZ/
siRNA/Au-Fe3O
Polymeric NP
Polymeric 
micelle
Salting-out or
neutralizing agent
PCL-b-PEG-b-PCL
PZZ
PZZ
PNAm
PNAm
Methylcellulose
Methylcellulose
Conventional LNPs
• Lymph node 
targeting (+)
Lipid
matrix
Doxorubicin
Organic
solvent
HO
HO
HO
+ ++
Lipids
Gox
Targeting 
ligand
PEI
Cholesterol
PEG
PLHMGA
HO
HO
PEGylated 
drug

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
with a TLR7/8 agonist can trigger activation and expansion of dendritic 
cells within the lymph nodes, with therapeutic efficacy in melanoma, 
bladder and renal cell carcinoma mice tumour models, while reduc-
ing systemic metastasis compared with the soluble agonist110. These 
findings highlight the diversity of systems used to achieve lymphatic 
targeting and the need to define and follow guidelines to obtain optimal 
lymph node accumulation. In addition to the ability of PEGylation to 
promote nanoparticle accumulation in the lymph nodes, the stabiliz-
ing effect of PEG can overcome limitations of bare PLGA nanoparticles, 
for example, protein inactivation and burst or incomplete release, to 
promote the sustained systemic release of therapeutics after SC injec-
tion. For example, insulin-loaded PEG-b-PLGA nanoparticles promote 
sustained release of the hormone and reduce lipid peroxidation levels 
compared with SC injection of free insulin in diabetic rats111. Developing 
more hydrophilic polyester nanoparticles may also be beneficial for 
improved compatibility with peptide and protein loadings. For example, 
poly(d,l-lactic-co-hydroxymethyl glycolic acid) (PLHMGA) is more 
hydrophilic than PLGA and releases its acidic degradation products 
faster, thus avoiding premature protein denaturation112. PLHMGA nano-
particles (~400–500 nm in diameter) loaded with synthetic oncopep-
tides for vaccine purposes and SC-injected to mice are similarly effective 
in inhibiting tumour growth as traditional adjuvants based on mineral 
oils (such as incomplete Freund’s adjuvant), generally used to create 
a sustained-release depot at the injection site. These nanoparticles 
could provide a safer alternative to incomplete Freud’s adjuvant in 
the formulation of cancer vaccines, owing to their better tolerability 
evaluated in mice112. Targeted cisplatin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles 
attached to tetraiodothyroacetic acid, which binds to integrin αvβ3 
receptors overexpressed in cancer cells, lead to a five times increase in 
intratumoural drug concentration, when subcutaneously injected 
in a bladder cancer murine model, compared with the SC administra-
tion of the free drug113. Although PACA nanoparticles can also target 
lymphatics114, their degradation by bioerosion115 makes them suitable 
for use as reservoir nanoparticles for sustained SC delivery of therapeu-
tic peptides and proteins, such as calcitonin in rats116, human growth 
hormone (hGH)-releasing factor in mice117 and insulin in diabetic rats118. 
It is also suggested that drug release can be controlled by modifying 
the length of the alkyl side chain of the monomer117,119,120.
The fate of the same polymers may differ when the polymer is 
self-assembled into nanoparticles from their soluble form. For exam-
ple, elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs) conjugated to rapamycin, which 
is an immunosuppressive drug for cancer therapy, are cleared more 
rapidly from SC tissue and accumulate to a greater extent in a breast 
cancer xenograft mouse model when administered as soluble ELPs 
than as self-assembled nanoparticles121.
Inorganic nanoparticles, such as gold or silica nanoparticles, 
are also applied for SC delivery (Fig. 3a). Gold nanoparticles are 
used for vaccination as antigen delivery systems and adjuvants to 
activate dendritic cells in lymph nodes122. They can be easily func-
tionalized with thiol-containing molecules, such as antigens123,124 or 
targeting ligands125. Moreover, positively charged gold nanoparti-
cles are promising for DNA delivery to dendritic cells. For example, 
SC administration of DNA-loaded gold nanoparticles functionalized 
with thiolated mannose and guanidine to mice improves dendritic 
cell transfection in cancer vaccination compared with non-targeted 
nanoparticles125. Alternatively, mesoporous silica nanoparticles have 
a large surface area available for drug loading and versatile particle 
and pore sizes126. In SC delivery, mesoporous silica nanoparticles can 
protect fragile drugs from early degradation and promote their sus-
tained release127,128 for targeted chemotherapy128, theragnostic appli-
cations128,129 and vaccination130. When SC-administered, they can act 
as adjuvant and antigen carrier to the lymph nodes for immunization 
against cancer131, hepatitis B virus132 or enterohaemorrhagic Escheri-
chia coli133. Superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPION) can act as contrast 
agents for lymph node staging by photoacoustic imaging134,135, as 
SC-administered SPIONs in rats target regional nodes, wherein they 
are taken up by nodal macrophages.
Micelles
Micelles are 5–50-nm self-assembled colloids of amphiphilic copoly-
mers or lipid–polymer conjugates136. Their small size and core-shell 
structure render them promising for SC delivery of hydrophobic drugs 
and fragile molecules137 (Fig. 3b).
Lipid-based micelles comprise phospholipids or fatty acids, which 
are the main components of cell membranes. Phosphatidylethanola-
mines, in particular, DSPE, are widely used as DSPE–PEG conjugates 
to form micellar formulations for SC delivery (Fig. 3b). DSPE–PEG 
micelles can be used for sustained systemic release of fragile molecules, 
such as glucagon-like peptide-1 after SC administration138. Moreover, 
lipid-based micelles are used to target the lymphatics, owing to their 
hydrophilic shell and small sizes (~20–45 nm in diameter), for drug (for 
example, Dox)139 or imaging agent (for example, indium-111 (111In) and 
gadolinium chelates)140 delivery for lymphatic metastases. Lymph node 
retention can be optimized by adjusting the physicochemical proper-
ties of the hydrophilic corona of micelles, for example, by modulating 
the surface charge. Similarly to PEGylated micelles, positively charged 
polyethylenimine-graft-stearic acid (PEI-g-SA) micelles loaded with 
tyrosinase-related protein 2 (TRP2) also reduce systemic dispersion 
and promote dendritic cell maturation after SC administration in mice, 
inhibiting tumour growth more efficiently than the soluble antigen141. 
Fig. 3 | Nanoscale drug delivery system-loaded thermosensitive hydrogels 
for subcutaneous administration. a, Structure and main characteristics of 
conventional or stealth lipid-based nanoparticles (LNPs), polymer nanoparticles 
based on PLGA (conventional, stealth or surface-functionalized for lymph node 
targeting), PACA, polysaccharide (conventional or surface-functionalized for 
lymph node targeting) or ELPs, and inorganic nanoparticles based on silica or 
gold for subcutaneous (SC) administration. b, Structure and main characteristics 
of micelles based on lipids (stealth neutral or stealth charged) or polymers 
(stealth neutral or stealth charged) for SC administration c, Structure and main 
characteristics of combinations of thermosensitive polymer nanoscale drug 
delivery systems (DDSs) based on polymer nanoparticles, polymer micelles, 
protein coacervates, liposomes, PZZ-based micelles, PDA-Au nanoparticles  
and carbon nanotubes, to synthesize nanoscale DDS-loaded hydrogels for SC  
administration. CNDs, clay nanodisks; DSPE–PEG, 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-
phosphorylethanolamine–PEG; ELPs, elastin-like polypeptides; Gox, glucose 
oxidase; PACA, poly(alkyl cyanoacrylate); NP, nanoparticle; Pasp(DET), poly(N- 
(N-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminoethyl)aspartamide); PCL-b-PEG-b-PCL, polycaprolactone- 
b-PEG-b-polycaprolactone; PDA, polydopamine; PEG, poly(ethylene glycol); 
PEG-b-PABPE, PEG-b-poly(amino phenylboronic ester); PEG-b-PCL, PEG-b-
polycaprolactone; PEG-b-PHPMAmLacn, PEG-b-poly(N-(2-hydroxypropyl)
methacrylamide-lactate); PEG-b-PPO-b-PEG, PEG-b-poly(oxypropylene)-b-PEG; 
PEI, polyethylenimine; PEI-g-PCL, polyethylenimine-g-polycaprolactone; PEI-g-SA, 
polyethylenimine-g-stearic acid; PLGA, poly(d,l-lactic-co-glycolic acid); PLHMGA, 
poly(d,l-lactic-co-hydroxymethyl glycolic acid); POZ-b-PLA, polyoxazolines- 
b-poly(d,l-lactide); PNAm, poly(N-acryloyl glycinamide-co-acrylamide);  
PZZ, poly(organophosphazene).

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
Nevertheless, the positive surface charge may hinder micelle drain-
age from the injection site owing to its strong interaction with the 
negatively charged HA. Therefore, to maximize accumulation in lymph 
nodes and minimize undesirable interaction with other tissues, hybrid 
micelles combining an equimolar ratio of cationic PEI-g-SA with anionic 
DSPE–PEG have been developed for Trp2-based immunotherapy of 
metastatic melanoma in mice142. The PEG shield can mask positive 
charges of the micelles to avoid interaction with the ECM and can 
maintain their hydrophilicity for drainage into lymphatics.
Other interesting SC delivery platforms are synthetic diblock 
copolymer micelles owing to the diverse structures they offer (Fig. 3b). 
For example, poly(ethylene glycol)-block-polycaprolactone (PEG-b-
PCL) micelles that contain the FDA-approved and biodegradable poly-
mer PCL can be loaded with NLG919, an indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 
immunomodulator143. Immunotherapy and photothermal therapy 
(PTT) can be combined with this system by co-encapsulating NLG919 
and IR780 dye, as the photosensitizer, suppressing tumour margin and 
distal tumour growth after PTT in mice, following consecutive IV admin-
istration of NLG919–IR780 micelles and SC administration of NLG919 
micelles to stimulate the immune cells. The co-formulation of diblock 
copolymers of different types can produce hybrid micelles with tun-
able physicochemical properties. For example, PEG-b-PCL–PEI-g-PCL 
(90:10) mixed micelles exhibit adequate surface charge and properties 
for the targeted delivery of Trp2 and CpG oligodeoxynucleotide to 
lymph nodes after SC administration in mice144. It leads to an optimal 
balance between lymph node distribution, immunization and low 
toxicity to dendritic cells, resulting in a greater anti-tumour efficacy 
than that of micelles without PEI-g-PCL. Owing to their lymph node 
tropism after SC injection, PEGylated cationic micelles are promising 
for the SC delivery of cancer vaccines owing to their ability to form 
polyplexes with DNA. One example is mixed micelles of PEGylated 
poly(N-(N-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminoethyl)aspartamide) (PAsp(DET)–
PEG-b-PAsp(DET)) used for the delivery of tumour-associated antigen 
SART3 along with adjuvants145. When loaded with DNA, their SC admin-
istration shows comparable efficacy to the intraperitoneal route in 
reducing lymph node metastasis in mice, whereas their IV administra-
tion or their electroporation fails to inhibit tumour growth compared 
with untreated mice. Other micellar vaccines have been developed from 
different polymer mixtures; for example, POZ-block-polylactic acid–
carboxylated Pluronic F127 (which is a PEG-block-poly(oxypropylene)-
b-PEG (PEG-b-PPO-b-PEG) triblock copolymer, also known as poloxamer 
407) micelles can deliver OVA antigen and a Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) 
agonist146. The negatively charged carboxyl-terminated Pluronic F127 
can target scavenger receptor-mediated dendritic cells internalization 
pathways, and the pH sensitivity of POZ enables the cytosolic release 
of antigens. Interestingly, the small size (<60 nm in diameter) and 
the negative charge of the micelles lead to rapid uptake into the lym-
phatic system after SC administration in mice, owing to the repulsive 
interactions with the negatively charged ECM33.
Polymer micelles can also be engineered to achieve sustained sys-
temic release after SC administration (Fig. 3b). For example, linear (four 
arms) poly(glycerol methacrylate) and star (eight arms) poly(glycerol 
methacrylate) self-assembled into vasopressin-loaded reverse micel­
les, consisting of a polar core surrounded by a hydrophobic shell, of 
~20–60 nm in diameter, allow the water-free formulation of ethyl 
oleate, resulting in the fivefold prolongation of the antidiuretic effect 
of the peptide after SC administration compared with the aqueous 
solution147. Alternatively, drugs can be linked to the polymers to achieve 
polymer prodrug micelles. For example, dexamethasone and paclitaxel 
can be grafted to methacrylate monomers through different sulfonated 
linkers, and they can be independently polymerized in the presence 
of PEG-block-poly(N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide-lactate) 
(PEG-b-PHPMAmLacn) to produce core-crosslinked micelles with tun-
able drug release profiles, depending on the nature of the linker, and 
high systemic availability (42%) after SC administration in mice148. 
Other polymer micelles have been designed, such as stimuli-sensitive 
PEG-block-poly(amino phenylboronic ester) (PEG-b-PABPE) polymer 
micelles, which exhibit dual-responsiveness to glucose–hydrogen 
peroxide, enabling the self-regulation of insulin delivery after SC 
administration in diabetic mice149. In practice, co-encapsulating glu-
cose oxidase, which produces hydrogen peroxide by catalytic oxida-
tion of glucose, further facilitates insulin release by hydrolysing the 
phenylboronic ester group, offering superior hypoglycaemic effects.
Nanoscale drug delivery system-loaded hydrogels
In situ formation of thermosensitive systems150 is of particular interest 
for the production of SC injectable formulations. Here, SC injection is 
facilitated as the gel is not formed before injection, resulting in a depot 
system at body temperature, mediated by the low critical solution tem-
perature (LCST) of the polymers, without requiring chemical reactions 
or other external stimuli. The SC-injected in situ-forming thermosensi-
tive hydrogels can deliver nanoscale DDSs that are released to achieve 
sustained drug release and limit burst release (Fig. 3c).
Most natural polymers, especially polysaccharides, have unfa-
vourable LCSTs for SC delivery. For example, methylcellulose forms a 
hydrogel above body temperature (~40–50 °C). Its LCST, however, can 
be adjusted by the addition of a salting-out agent (for example, ammo-
nium sulfate), leading to the formation of injectable depot systems, as 
applied to control the release of protein-containing coacervates151 or 
docetaxel-loaded Pluronic F127 micelles152, in rats and mice, respec-
tively. Similarly, chitosan solutions can be converted into thermosen-
sitive aqueous gel-forming solutions by neutralizing chitosan with 
glycerol phosphate. This technology, termed GP–CS and available as 
BST-Gele (BioSyntech), has been applied to the preparation of PLGA 
nanoparticle-loaded GP–CS hydrogels to increase the bioavailability of 
ellagic acid by achieving a sustained systemic release from the SC tissue 
in rats153. Similarly, incorporating 150-nm insulin-loaded biodegradable 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) nanoparticles154 into 
GP–CS hydrogels increases pharmacological bioavailability by around 
38-fold and prolongs the hypoglycaemic effect by around eightfold, 
compared with insulin-loaded GP–CS155.
Synthetic polymers can have LCSTs suitable to the design of in 
situ-forming hydrogels for SC administration (Fig. 3c). For example, 
Pluronic and poloxamer150 are the most commonly used copolymers 
for the in situ formation of thermosensitive hydrogels. The hydro-
gels can be combined with nanoparticles for the sustained release of 
hydrophobic156 and hydrophilic drugs157. SC-injected systems based on 
PLGA-b-PEG-b-PLGA hydrogels can also extend the delivery of PEGylated 
drugs in mice158, drug–phospholipid in rabbits159 or polysaccharide–
peptide complexes in rats160, and liposomes in mice161. For example, 
salmon calcitonin–oxidized calcium alginate (sCT–OCA) complexes 
loaded in PLGA-b-PEG-b-PLGA micelles, forming a hydrogel at body 
temperature160, prolong the therapeutic efficacy to treat osteopenia in 
rats after SC injection to up to 30 days, owing to sustained sCT release 
mediated by both hydrogel degradation and sCT–OCA decomposition. 
The same copolymer can be combined with clay nanodisks (CNDs) 
and Dox, resulting in a gel with Dox molecules intercalated between 
CNDs162, which suppresses burst release and extends anti-tumour 

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
efficacy against human cervical carcinoma after a single SC injection 
in mice. Similarly, a PCL-b-PEG-b-PCL thermosensitive hydrogel loaded 
with chitosan-multiwalled carbon nanotubes has been developed for 
near-infrared light-triggered photothermal SC drug delivery of Dox163.
Poly(organophosphazene) (PZZ)-based in situ-forming thermo-
sensitive hydrogels are applied for SC delivery of therapeutic proteins 
(Fig. 3c). PZZ is functionalized by protamine164,165 or polyethylenimine166 
to form a complex with the therapeutic protein and overcome 
its initial burst release. Similarly, PZZ can also be combined with 
poly-l-arginine167 or protamine168 polyelectrolyte–therapeutic pro-
tein nano-complexes. These systems form a hydrogel depot after SC 
injection to mice or rats, enabling the sustained release of hormones, 
such as hGH164,166–168 and exendin-4 (ref. 165). Moreover, targeted folate–
PEI–PPZ–siRNA micelleplexes show in situ gel formation and sustained 
release of siRNA after SC injection in mice, enabling their selective 
accumulation in PC-3 prostatic tumour and anticancer efficacy owing 
to siRNA release enabling gene silencing169. Although these micelles 
are proposed to enter the circulation pathway through the lymphatic 
and blood vessels, no evaluation has been performed. Furthermore, 
quadruple-functional hydrogels based on folate–PEI–PZZ–siRNA com-
plexes have been engineered to form thermosensitive nanocapsules 
of approximately 150 nm in diameter loaded with Au–Fe3O4 nanopar-
ticles. After SC injection in mice, the release of nanoparticles from the 
hydrogel shows increased accumulation in breast cancer cells owing to 
triple targeting features: enhanced permeability and retention effect, 
targeting folate receptor and magnetic control of nanoparticles170.
Clinical translation of subcutaneously injected 
drug delivery systems
Predictive models for SC injection
The development of predictive preclinical models for SC delivery (Fig. 4) 
is one of the crucial challenges highlighted by the Subcutaneous Drug 
Delivery & Development Consortium for successful preclinical to clini-
cal translation16 (Box 1). In parallel with the development of reliable 
Drug
diﬀusion
3D skin models
• Diﬀerent models and cellular 
types
• Drug toxicity and transport 
assessment
• Limited complexity
HypoSkin
• Living human biopsies
• Immunocompetent and metabolic 
active tissue
• Drug toxicity, immunogenicity and 
transport assessment
• Lack of systemic absorption
• No bioavailability prediction
Empirical or physiologically based
mechanistic models
• Improve knowledge management and decision-
making
• Reduce animal studies and costs
• Guide experimental design, test hypotheses 
and understand underlying quantitative 
process mechanisms
• Limited understanding of quantitative aspects 
of SC absorption
• Lack of generic modelling framework
Animal models
• Living organisms
• Local and systemic toxicity, pharmacokinetics, 
biodistribution and eﬀicacy studies
• Physiological and anatomical intraspecies and 
interspecies diﬀerences
• Lower injection volume
• Poor correlation with human outcomes
Ex vivo
In vitro
In vivo
In silico
Drug aggregation
and precipitation
Excipient
aggregation
Drug or excipient
aggregation
Drug (for example, small 
molecule, proteins, antibodies)
Formulation excipients
SCISSOR
• Evaluation of critical events 
at the injection site (for 
example, aggregation, 
precipitation)
• Drug diﬀusion assessment
• Bioavailability prediction
• Acellular matrix
• Lack of metabolic events
Human skin
Fig. 4 | Comparison of the main preclinical models for subcutaneous 
administration. Different in vitro (subcutaneous injection site simulator 
(SCISSOR) instrument, which simulates environmental changes and monitor 
real-time diffusion in the subcutaneous (SC) tissue, 3D skin models that 
range from single-cell models, reconstructed human epidermis and full-
thickness skin models), ex vivo (HypoSkin model, based on preserved human 
skin biopsies, thus reflecting the anatomical complexity and physiological 
response of living human skin), in silico (mathematical models, either empirical 
or physiologically based mechanistic, to predict drug absorption from the 
injection site and pharmacokinetics) and in vivo preclinical animal models to 
study SC administration of drug delivery systems, including advantages and 
disadvantages.

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
predictive models and tools to assess key parameters associated with 
the SC administration of therapeutics (for example, stability, safety, effi-
cacy, absorption and bioavailability), the use of animal models remains 
necessary, even in the early stage of research171. However, studies on 
animal models often do not correlate well with clinical trials owing 
to disagreement between SC absorption and bioavailability values 
obtained in different animal models and those obtained in humans172.
Early and rapid detection of events following SC administration 
is critical in evaluating the success or failure of SC formulations. 
Once administered, the formulation undergoes an abrupt transition 
from the formulation medium to the SC tissue, facing changes in pH, 
temperature, buffer condition and pressure, which may result in 
loss of stability and activity34. Kinetics may also be affected (for exam-
ple, aggregation and precipitation) by the SC tissue environment 
and possible interactions with ECM components, hindering their 
passage into the systemic circulation34. A number of instruments 
and in vitro methods, such as dialysis-based, flow-through-based and 
hydrogel-based setups, have been developed to predict in vivo perfor-
mance of SC-injected formulations173. Among them, the subcutaneous 
injection site simulator (SCISSOR) instrument174 (Box 2) can simulate 
release and diffusion through the ECM, and uptake through the blood 
capillaries and/or the lymph vessels (Fig. 4). The SCISSOR is made of 
a modified dialysis cassette with an acellular extracellular matrix-like 
made of HA, maintained at pH 7.4 and 34 °C to simulate environmental 
changes and monitor real-time diffusion in the SC tissue. Although it 
does not predict metabolic events, it provides a rapid screening of 
potential candidates for SC application by identifying critical events 
at the injection site, such as the stability of drugs and their absorption 
rate175,176, adding to their bioavailability and pharmacokinetics before 
clinical studies174,175,177.
Developing in vitro 3D models of human skin to replace animal 
studies progresses, particularly in the cosmetics industry (Fig. 4). 
There are various 3D human skin models, ranging from single-cell mod-
els (for example, human keratinocytes), the so-called reconstructed 
human epidermis, such as EpiSkin (Episkin) and EpiDerm (MatTek), 
to full-thickness skin models, comprising human dermal fibroblasts 
and keratinocytes seeded sequentially to create a dermal–epidermal 
structure178. However, their use in pharmacological research is limited, 
as they do not reproduce the complex organization and physiology of 
human skin despite their complexity179. In this context, the recent devel-
opment of the subcutaneous coculture tissue-on-a-chip for injection 
simulation (SubCuTIS)180, a microfluidic platform featuring a 3D cocul-
ture tissue architecture, which enables quantitative determination of 
drug transport rate constants for monoclonal antibody formulations, 
could be advantageously applied to nanoscale DDSs. Alternatively, an 
ex vivo culture system has been developed by Genoskin, based on pre-
served human skin biopsies181 (Fig. 4), donated by adult volunteers after 
surgery, which are embedded in a solid matrix that retains its physiol-
ogy, barrier function and metabolism for about 7 days181. This skin 
model reflects the anatomical complexity and physiological response 
of living human skin, which is more relevant and predictive than in vitro 
3D models. For example, HypoSkin is a promising, full-thickness, living 
human skin model useful to assess compound toxicity, absorption and 
metabolism after SC administration. This model is a fully immunocom-
petent living tissue and can, thus, be applied to assess immuno­toxicity 
and vaccine immunogenicity. However, the static nature of this system, 
which does not consider the dilution effect of the blood flow or lym-
phatic absorption, suggests that it is poorly predictive for drug release 
and bioavailability studies.
In silico models can facilitate the development of new subcutane-
ously administered drugs as they predict drug absorption from the 
injection site and pharmacokinetics182,183 (Fig. 4). These are mathemati-
cal models, either empirical, which measure concentrations in plasma 
or serum, or physiologically based mechanistic, which simultaneously 
describe the pharmacokinetics profile and the amount of drug in the 
lymphatic system. Although physiologically based mechanistic models 
have potential for bridging the gap between in vitro and preclinical 
data and clinical results, their use is limited owing to the complexity 
Box 2
The SCISSOR instrument
The SCISSOR instrument by Pion is an in vitro system to simulate 
environmental changes (for example, pH, temperature, buffer 
condition and pressure) to subcutaneously (SC) injected 
formulations at the injection site174. The system consists of a 
modified dialysis cassette filled with an acellular extracellular matrix 
(ECM)-like hyaluronic acid gel matrix of controlled pH (7.4) and 
temperature (34 °C), mimicking SC tissue, placed in a compartment 
filled with a bicarbonate-based physiological buffer of serum-like 
composition, representing the infinite sink of the body. The passage 
of the formulation components from the injection chamber to the 
infinite sink chamber simulates the absorption of the drug from 
the SC injection site through the blood and lymphatic capillaries. 
Using a pH probe and spectrophotometer, events at the injection 
site (for example, precipitation and gelling) can be monitored in 
real time175,176. Samples can also be taken to determine the release 
profile of the drug into the systemic-like circulation, thus predicting 
its bioavailability174,175,177.
The SCISSOR instrument has been used, for example, to predict the 
bioavailability of eight monoclonal antibodies, resulting in good 
correlation between SCISSOR results, preclinical models (minipigs 
and cynomolgus monkey) and data from human studies177. The 
SCISSOR can also detect precipitation at the injection site of 
proteins, such as glatiramer acetate, which has low systemic 
diffusion owing to its retention in SC tissue175. Concentration– 
time diffusion studies carried out with the SCISSOR instrument 
have further shown that 30% of the dose in biotherapeutics do not 
diffuse into the systemic circulation, opening up new possibilities to 
explain clinical observations175. Therefore, it is important to identify 
barriers that drugs and formulations may face at the injection site 
and study the intrinsic mechanisms of interaction with SC tissue 
to overcome such barriers in the early stages of SC formulation 
design176. Moreover, the SCISSOR instrument can be used to mimic 
intra-articular220 and intravitreal221 injections.
Although one study222 describing and evaluating different in vitro 
(osmolality-based and viscosity-based methods, the SCISSOR 
instrument and dissolution methods) and in silico tools to predict 
in vivo bioavailability following SC administration questioned the 
ability of the SCISSOR instrument to predict bioavailability data in 
humans, it remains one of the most relevant in vitro tools to identify 
formulation parameters influencing diffusional behaviours and to 
accurately predict human pharmacokinetics before clinical studies.

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
and limited knowledge concerning the quantitative aspects of SC 
absorption38,182.
Clinical trials and commercial products
Polymer–drug conjugates have reached the market as macromolecular 
prodrugs, specifically PEGylated biotherapeutics49 (Table 1). For exam-
ple, PEGylated interferons (IFNs), Pegasys (PEG-IFNα-2a, Roche) and 
PEGIntron (PEG-IFNα-2b, Merck), were FDA-approved in early 2000 for 
weekly SC administration in the treatment of chronic hepatitis C184,185. 
Similarly, PEGylated Filgrastim (human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor (hG-CSF)) has been marketed since 2002 under the name Neu-
lasta (Amgen)186, which increases the half-life of hG-CSF by a factor of 
10, enabling self-administration only once per chemotherapy cycle187. 
Additionally, monoclonal antibodies are PEGylated for SC delivery, 
such as certolizumab, an anti-TNF antibody modified with a 40-kDa 
branched PEG tethered to the fragment antigen-binding region. It is 
administered under the name Cimzia (UCB) as a monthly SC injection 
to treat rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn’s disease with a reduced risk of 
immunogenicity188,189. The POZ technology (Serina Therapeutics), that 
is, polymer–drug conjugates, has been applied to rigotine, a dopamine 
antagonist used to treat Parkinson disease, and is being evaluated in a 
phase I clinical study190 (NCT02579473, Table 1).
The clinical translation of liposomes and nanoparticles for SC 
delivery remains limited, and no micellar system has yet been clini-
cally tested (Table 1). This may be owing to the complexity of their 
preparation and characterization, and high production costs191. In 
addition, these systems rely on physical encapsulation of the drug, 
which may result in early release into SC tissue, potentially causing 
low bioavailability and local toxicity. Only the bupivacaine Depo-
Foam (Pacira BioSciences) liposomal formulation administered by 
SC infiltration is marketed for pain management192 (Table 1). In addi-
tion, a proliposomal ropivacaine oil formulation (formulation that 
forms liposomes when hydrated) has been tested in a randomized, 
double-blind phase II clinical trial (NCT00883194, Table 1), leading to 
prolonged anaesthesia (1.8-fold and 3-fold longer for pinprick anaes-
thesia and heat pain, respectively)193. Two other liposomal formula-
tions have reached the clinical stage: tecemotide (Merck KGaA), an 
anticancer vaccine73 (phase III, NCT02049151, Table 1), and Xemys (PJSC 
Pharmsynthez)194, which are mannosylated liposomes targeting CD206 
and loaded with immunodominant peptides against multiple sclero-
sis (phase I, Table 1). According to the literature, CHP nanoparticles 
are the only polymer-based DDS that has reached clinical trial for 
SC administration. They have been evaluated in phase I clinical trials 
(NTC00291473, Table 1) for cancer immunotherapy with different 
antigens, such as New York oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma 1 
(NY-ESO-1) and the HER2 gowth factor receptor195,196. They have demon­
strated a humoral immune response against the antigens presented 
after SC immunization.
Although more PEGylated therapeutics than other DDSs have 
been clinically translated, liposomes are highly versatile in terms of 
design, which may enable local drug release, systemic absorption and 
lymph node targeting. This versatility may give liposomes (and other 
types of nanoparticle displaying comparable versatility) an advantage 
over PEGylated therapeutics, suggesting that these systems may see 
considerable future growth in SC drug delivery.
Outlook
Despite preclinical and clinical progress, SC administration does not 
yet seem to have reached its full potential and is still underexplored and 
limited in some cases. In this context, the Subcutaneous Drug Devel-
opment & Delivery Consortium has provided a roadmap outlining the 
challenges and improvements to be considered, in terms of variable 
bioavailability, low administration volumes, risk of immuno­genicity 
and clinical trial implementation strategy16 (Box 1). In addition, SC 
delivery of cancer treatments is restricted to biotherapeutics and 
non-irritant and non-vesicant anticancer drugs to avoid local toxic-
ity, although many anticancer treatments, based on small vesicant and 
irritant drugs, can only be administered intravenously. Furthermore, 
developing prodrug systems can help protect SC tissue from drug 
toxicity and reduce side effects. Moreover, SC administration of fragile 
biomacromolecules can be supported by developing nanoscale DDSs 
using manufacturing processes that do not alter their physicochemical 
properties, conformation or bioactivity. Certain solvents, steriliza-
tion methods or polymers, when they degrade, may cause protein 
denaturation or aggregation197.
Another challenge is the limited injection volume of SC formu-
lations. SC injections are usually performed with fine needles, typi-
cally between 25 and 27 G. However, highly concentrated solutions 
can have high viscosity, making them difficult to inject37. One option 
to address this problem is to co-formulate therapeutic molecules 
with the ENHANZE drug delivery technology developed by Halozyme 
Therapeutics198. The technology uses recombinant human hyaluro-
nidase to degrade the hyaluronic acid network in SC tissue to tempo­
rarily reduce the tissue backpressure, increasing the injection volume, 
reducing the time to reach the maximum drug plasma concentration, 
increasing the bioavailability and improving the pharmacokinetics 
profile of the co-administered compounds. Many biotherapeutics are 
co-administered with the ENHANZE technology, such as rituximab, 
pertuzumab, trastuzumab, daratumumab and immunoglobulins, 
allowing injection volumes of up to 600 ml. The approach can also 
be applied to nanoscale DDSs; for example, hyaluronidase-coated, 
chitosan-derivative nanoparticles can be loaded with CUDC-101, 
a poorly water-soluble multi-target anticancer drug inhibitor199. The 
injection volume of these nanoparticles increases to clinically accepta-
ble volumes of 5–10 ml for treatment in humans, doubling plasma drug 
exposure and tripling long-term survival compared with untreated 
mice in a xenografted A431 mouse model.
Additionally, exploring lymphatic absorption following SC 
administration and its potential effect on immunogenicity compared 
with the IV route is crucial. However, there is a lack of comprehensive 
clinical data comparing these two routes200. Addressing the risk of 
immunogenicity with subcutaneously injected nanoscale DDSs is also 
important, as both the loaded drug and carrier materials may exhibit 
intrinsic immunogenicity. For example, anti-PEG antibodies and, thus, 
rapid clearance (the accelerated blood clearance phenomenon)201 can 
occur after SC administration of PEGylated nanoscale DDSs, such as 
PEGylated liposomes202, recombinant proteins203,204 and antibodies205. 
Accordingly, the development of new polymers as an alternative poly-
mers to PEG could be explored to mitigate this issue206,207. Furthermore, 
systematic investigations on the fate of nanoscale DDSs entering the 
bloodstream are needed to optimize their design.
In parallel, clinical translation can be accelerated by studying 
nano-bio and nano-immuno interactions with relevant model systems, 
to standardize the design of drug delivery systems191,208,209. Reproduc-
ibility of synthesis, complexity and cost of production are also key to 
the successful development of nanoscale DDSs. Comparative studies 
between different nanoscale DDSs should be considered to investi-
gate the influence of key physicochemical parameters on their fate 

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
after SC administration and to identify promising systems for clinical 
translation. Although some trends linking the colloidal properties of 
nanoscale DDSs and their fate after SC injection have been identified, 
there is still a lack of systematic studies enabling solid conclusions 
to be drawn. This could be carried out through design of experiment 
approaches to study the relationship between input variables (for 
example, mean diameter, surface nature, morphology and surface 
charge) and specific responses210. Furthermore, using artificial intel-
ligence (AI) to develop nanoscale DDSs could save time and resources 
and improve the efficiency and safety of DDSs211,212. Additionally, AI can 
help to predict the fate, the pharmacological parameters and the thera-
peutic efficacy of nanoscale DDSs after SC administration and can, 
therefore, accelerate their clinical translation.
The versatility of nanoscale DDS in terms of properties and func-
tionalities is a major asset for developing effective systems for SC 
administration. It is also essential to improve patient experience, for 
example, by developing non-invasive or needle-free administration 
devices, to promote SC self-administration.
Published online: xx xx xxxx
References
1.	
Farokhzad, O. C. & Langer, R. Impact of nanotechnology on drug delivery. ACS Nano 3, 
16–20 (2009).
2.	
Shi, J., Votruba, A. R., Farokhzad, O. C. & Langer, R. Nanotechnology in drug delivery 
and tissue engineering: from discovery to applications. Nano Lett. 10, 3223–3230  
(2010).
3.	
Blanco, E., Shen, H. & Ferrari, M. Principles of nanoparticle design for overcoming 
biological barriers to drug delivery. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 941–951 (2015).
4.	
Choi, H. S. et al. Design considerations for tumour-targeted nanoparticles. Nat. Nano 5, 
42–47 (2010).
5.	
Nicolas, J., Mura, S., Brambilla, D., Mackiewicz, N. & Couvreur, P. Design, functionalization 
strategies and biomedical applications of targeted biodegradable/biocompatible 
polymer-based nanocarriers for drug delivery. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42, 1147–1235 (2013).
6.	
Mura, S., Nicolas, J. & Couvreur, P. Stimuli-responsive nanocarriers for drug delivery. 
Nat. Mater. 12, 991–1003 (2013).
7.	
Wilhelm, S. et al. Analysis of nanoparticle delivery to tumours. Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 16014 
(2016).
8.	
Mitchell, M. J. et al. Engineering precision nanoparticles for drug delivery. Nat. Rev. Drug 
Discov. 20, 101–124 (2021).
9.	
Ekladious, I., Colson, Y. L. & Grinstaff, M. W. Polymer–drug conjugate therapeutics: 
advances, insights and prospects. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 18, 273–294 (2019).
10.	
Rohiwal, S. S., Tiwari, A. P. & Ellederova, Z. in Nanopharmacokinetics: Routes of 
Administration and Predictive Models for Nanopharmacokinetics (eds Thorat, N. D.  
& Kumar, N.) Ch. 2 (Academic, 2021).
11.	
Pond, S. M. & Tozer, T. N. First-pass elimination basic concepts and clinical 
consequences. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 9, 1–25 (1984).
12.	
Hoekstra, M. et al. Bioavailability of higher dose methotrexate comparing oral and 
subcutaneous administration in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J. Rheumatol. 31, 
645–648 (2004).
13.	
Guerrini, G., Magrì, D., Gioria, S., Medaglini, D. & Calzolai, L. Characterization of 
nanoparticles-based vaccines for COVID-19. Nat. Nano 17, 570–576 (2022).
14.	
Jones, G. B., Collins, D. S., Harrison, M. W., Thyagarajapuram, N. R. & Wright, J. M. 
Subcutaneous drug delivery: an evolving enterprise. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf9166  
(2017).
15.	
Jin, J. F. et al. The optimal choice of medication administration route regarding 
intravenous, intramuscular, and subcutaneous injection. Patient Prefer. Adherence 9, 
923–942 (2015).
16.	
Collins, D. S., Sánchez-Félix, M., Badkar, A. V. & Mrsny, R. Accelerating the development 
of novel technologies and tools for the subcutaneous delivery of biotherapeutics. 
J. Control. Rel. 321, 475–482 (2020).  
This review article presents the Subcutaneous Drug Delivery & Development 
Consortium and discusses the eight problem statements that have been identified 
to accelerate the SC delivery of biotherapeutics.
17.	
Leveque, D. Subcutaneous administration of anticancer agents. Anticancer Res. 34, 
1579–1586 (2014).
18.	
Badkar, A. V., Gandhi, R. B., Davis, S. P. & LaBarre, M. J. Subcutaneous delivery of 
high-dose/volume biologics: current status and prospect for future advancements. 
Drug Des. Devel. Ther. 15, 159–170 (2021).
19.	
Aitken, M. & Kleinrock, M. Global oncology trend report: a review of 2015 and outlook to 
2020. IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics https://www.iqvia.com/-/media/iqvia/pdfs/
institute-reports/global-oncology-trend-report-2016.pdf (2016).
20.	 Kiss, L. et al. Kinetic analysis of the toxicity of pharmaceutical excipients Cremophor EL 
and RH40 on endothelial and epithelial cells. J. Pharm. Sci. 102, 1173–1181 (2013).
21.	
Koh, D. B., Gowardman, J. R., Rickard, C. M., Robertson, I. K. & Brown, A. Prospective 
study of peripheral arterial catheter infection and comparison with concurrently sited 
central venous catheters. Crit. Care Med. 36, 397–402 (2008).
22.	 Pujol, M. et al. Clinical epidemiology and outcomes of peripheral venous catheter-related 
bloodstream infections at a university-affiliated hospital. J. Hosp. Infect. 67, 22–29 (2007).
23.	 Anderson, K. C., Landgren, O., Arend, R. C., Chou, J. & Jacobs, I. A. Humanistic and 
economic impact of subcutaneous versus intravenous administration of oncology 
biologics. Future Oncol. 15, 3267–3281 (2019).
24.	 Stoner, K. L., Harder, H., Fallowfield, L. J. & Jenkins, V. A. Intravenous versus 
subcutaneous drug administration. Which do patients prefer? A systematic review. 
Patient 8, 145–153 (2015).
25.	 Pivot, X. et al. Preference for subcutaneous or intravenous administration of trastuzumab 
in patients with HER2-positive early breast cancer (PrefHer): an open-label randomised 
study. Lancet Oncol. 14, 962–970 (2013).  
This article shows that SC injection of trastuzumab is a well-tolerated treatment option 
for HER2-positive breast cancer and is the preferred treatment of patients.
26.	 De Cock, E. et al. Time savings with rituximab subcutaneous injection versus rituximab 
intravenous infusion: a time and motion study in eight countries. PloS ONE 11, e0157957 
(2016).
27.	
Rummel, M. et al. Preference for subcutaneous or intravenous administration of 
rituximab among patients with untreated CD20+ diffuse large B-cell lymphoma or 
follicular lymphoma: results from a prospective, randomized, open-label, crossover 
study (PrefMab). Ann. Oncol. 28, 836–842 (2017).
28.	 Dychter, S. S., Gold, D. A. & Haller, M. F. Subcutaneous drug delivery: a route to 
increased safety, patient satisfaction, and reduced costs. J. Infus. Nurs. 35, 154–160 
(2012).
29.	 Richter, W. F., Bhansali, S. G. & Morris, M. E. Mechanistic determinants of biotherapeutics 
absorption following SC administration. AAPS J. 14, 559–570 (2012).
30.	 Gradel, A. K. J. et al. Factors affecting the absorption of subcutaneously administered 
insulin: effect on variability. J. Diabetes Res. 2018, 1205121 (2018).
31.	
Chambers, E. S. & Vukmanovic-Stejic, M. Skin barrier immunity and ageing. Immunology 
160, 116–125 (2020).
32.	 Agarwal, S. & Krishnamurthy, K. Histology, Skin (StatPearls, 2019).
33.	 Wong, R., Geyer, S., Weninger, W., Guimberteau, J.-C. & Wong, J. K. The dynamic anatomy 
and patterning of skin. Exp. Dermatol. 25, 92–98 (2016).
34.	 Kinnunen, H. M. & Mrsny, R. J. Improving the outcomes of biopharmaceutical delivery 
via the subcutaneous route by understanding the chemical, physical and physiological 
properties of the subcutaneous injection site. J. Control. Rel. 182, 22–32 (2014).
35.	 Mathaes, R., Koulov, A., Joerg, S. & Mahler, H.-C. Subcutaneous injection volume  
of biopharmaceuticals — pushing the boundaries. J. Pharm. Sci. 105, 2255–2259  
(2016).
36.	 Richter, W. F. & Jacobsen, B. Subcutaneous absorption of biotherapeutics: knowns and 
unknowns. Drug Metab. Dispos. 42, 1881–1889 (2014).
37.	
Bittner, B., Richter, W. & Schmidt, J. Subcutaneous administration of biotherapeutics: 
an overview of current challenges and opportunities. BioDrugs 32, 425–440 (2018).
38.	 Sánchez-Félix, M., Burke, M., Chen, H. H., Patterson, C. & Mittal, S. Predicting 
bioavailability of monoclonal antibodies after subcutaneous administration: open 
innovation challenge. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 167, 66–77 (2020).
39.	 Datta-Mannan, A. et al. Influence of physiochemical properties on the subcutaneous 
absorption and bioavailability of monoclonal antibodies. mAbs 12, 1770028 (2020).
40.	 Patel, H. M., Boodle, K. M. & Vaughan-Jones, R. Assessment of the potential uses of 
liposomes for lymphoscintigraphy and lymphatic drug delivery. Failure of 99m-technetium 
marker to represent intact liposomes in lymph nodes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 801, 76–86 
(1984).
41.	
Marupudi, N. I. et al. Paclitaxel: a review of adverse toxicities and novel delivery 
strategies. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 6, 609–621 (2007).
42.	 Supersaxo, A., Hein, W. R. & Steffen, H. Effect of molecular weight on the lymphatic 
absorption of water-soluble compounds following subcutaneous administration. 
Pharm. Res. 7, 167–169 (1990).
43.	 Swartz, M. A. The physiology of the lymphatic system. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 50, 3–20  
(2001).
44.	 Cheng, Z., Que, H., Chen, L., Sun, Q. & Wei, X. Nanomaterial-based drug delivery system 
targeting lymph nodes. Pharmaceutics 14, 1372 (2022).
45.	 McCright, J., Naiknavare, R., Yarmovsky, J. & Maisel, K. Targeting lymphatics for 
nanoparticle drug delivery. Front. Pharmacol. 13, 887402 (2022).
46.	 Singh, I. et al. (eds) Focal Controlled Drug Delivery in Delivery Systems for Lymphatic 
Targeting 429–458 (Springer, 2014).
47.	
Rohner, N. A. & Thomas, S. N. Flexible macromolecule versus rigid particle retention in 
the injected skin and accumulation in draining lymph nodes are differentially influenced 
by hydrodynamic size. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 3, 153–159 (2017).
48.	 Veronese, F. M. & Pasut, G. PEGylation, successful approach to drug delivery. 
Drug Discov. Today 10, 1451–1458 (2005).
49.	 Alconcel, S. N. S., Baas, A. S. & Maynard, H. D. FDA-approved poly(ethylene glycol)–
protein conjugate drugs. Polym. Chem. 2, 1442–1448 (2011).
50.	 Kong, J. H., Oh, E. J., Chae, S. Y., Lee, K. C. & Hahn, S. K. Long acting hyaluronate–
exendin 4 conjugate for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Biomaterials 31, 4121–4128 
(2010).

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
51.	
Cai, S., Xie, Y., Bagby, T. R., Cohen, M. S. & Forrest, M. L. Intralymphatic chemotherapy 
using a hyaluronan-cisplatin conjugate. J. Surg. Res. 147, 247–252 (2008).
52.	 Cai, S. et al. Localized doxorubicin chemotherapy with a biopolymeric nanocarrier 
improves survival and reduces toxicity in xenografts of human breast cancer. 
J. Control. Rel. 146, 212–218 (2010).
53.	 Cohen, S. M. et al. Subcutaneous delivery of nanoconjugated doxorubicin and cisplatin 
for locally advanced breast cancer demonstrates improved efficacy and decreased 
toxicity at lower doses than standard systemic combination therapy in vivo. Am. J. Surg. 
202, 646–652 (2011).
54.	 Vogus, D. R. et al. A hyaluronic acid conjugate engineered to synergistically and 
sequentially deliver gemcitabine and doxorubicin to treat triple negative breast cancer. 
J. Control. Rel. 267, 191–202 (2017).
55.	 Kulkarni, A. et al. Linear cyclodextrin polymer prodrugs as novel therapeutics for 
Niemann-Pick type C1 disorder. Sci. Rep. 8, 9547 (2018).
56.	 Bordat, A. et al. A polymer prodrug strategy to switch from intravenous to subcutaneous 
cancer therapy for irritant/vesicant drugs. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 18844–18860  
(2022).  
This article reports a polymer prodrug strategy for the SC injection of irritant or 
vesicant anticancer drugs.
57.	
Harrisson, S. et al. Nanoparticles with in vivo anticancer activity from polymer prodrug 
amphiphiles prepared by living radical polymerization. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 52, 
1678–1682 (2013).
58.	 Nicolas, J. Drug-initiated synthesis of polymer prodrugs: combining simplicity and 
efficacy in drug delivery. Chem. Mater. 28, 1591–1606 (2016).
59.	 Harris, J. M. et al. Tuning drug release from polyoxazoline-drug conjugates. Eur. Polym. J. 
120, 109241 (2019).
60.	 Denmeade, S. R. et al. Prostate-specific antigen-activated thapsigargin prodrug as 
targeted therapy for prostate cancer. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 95, 990–1000 (2003).
61.	
Janssen, S. et al. Pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, and antitumor efficacy of a human 
glandular kallikrein 2 (hK2)‐activated thapsigargin prodrug. Prostate 66, 358–368  
(2006).
62.	 Peng, M. et al. Self-delivery of a peptide-based prodrug for tumor-targeting therapy. 
Nano Res. 9, 663–673 (2016).
63.	 Allen, T. M. & Cullis, P. R. Liposomal drug delivery systems: from concept to clinical 
applications. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 65, 36–48 (2013).
64.	 Oussoren, C. & Storm, G. Liposomes to target the lymphatics by subcutaneous 
administration. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 50, 143–156 (2001).
65.	 Allen, T. M., Hansen, C. B. & Guo, L. S. Subcutaneous administration of liposomes: 
a comparison with the intravenous and intraperitoneal routes of injection.  
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1150, 9–16 (1993).  
This article reports that small, PEGylated liposomes reach the systemic circulation 
faster than bare liposomes and exhibit reduced retention in lymph nodes.
66.	 Oussoren, C., Zuidema, J., Crommelin, D. J. & Storm, G. Lymphatic uptake and 
biodistribution of liposomes after subcutaneous injection. II. Influence of liposomal size, 
lipid composition and lipid dose. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1328, 261–272 (1997).
67.	
da Costa-Silva, T. A., Galisteo, A. J. Jr, Lindoso, J. A., Barbosa, L. R. & Tempone, A. G. 
Nanoliposomal buparvaquone immunomodulates Leishmania infantum-infected 
macrophages and is highly effective in a murine model. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
61, e02297–e02316 (2017).
68.	 Kaur, C. D., Nahar, M. & Jain, N. K. Lymphatic targeting of zidovudine using 
surface-engineered liposomes. J. Drug Target. 16, 798–805 (2008).
69.	 Tiantian, Y. et al. Study on intralymphatic-targeted hyaluronic acid-modified 
nanoliposome: influence of formulation factors on the lymphatic targeting. Int. J. Pharm. 
471, 245–257 (2014).
70.	 Ye, T. et al. Low molecular weight heparin mediating targeting of lymph node metastasis 
based on nanoliposome and enzyme-substrate interaction. Carbohydr. Polym. 122, 
26–38 (2015).
71.	
Phillips, W. T., Klipper, R. & Goins, B. Novel method of greatly enhanced delivery of 
liposomes to lymph nodes. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 295, 309–313 (2000).
72.	 Wang, N., Chen, M. & Wang, T. Liposomes used as a vaccine adjuvant-delivery system: 
from basics to clinical immunization. J. Control. Rel. 303, 130–150 (2019).
73.	 Wurz, G. T., Kao, C. J., Wolf, M. & DeGregorio, M. W. Tecemotide: an antigen-specific 
cancer immunotherapy. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 10, 3383–3393 (2014).
74.	 Xia, W., Wang, J., Xu, Y., Jiang, F. & Xu, L. L-BLP25 as a peptide vaccine therapy in 
non-small cell lung cancer: a review. J. Thorac. Dis. 6, 1513–1520 (2014).
75.	 Henriksen-Lacey, M. et al. Liposomes based on dimethyldioctadecylammonium promote 
a depot effect and enhance immunogenicity of soluble antigen. J. Control. Rel. 142, 
180–186 (2010).
76.	 Henriksen-Lacey, M. et al. Comparison of the depot effect and immunogenicity 
of liposomes based on dimethyldioctadecylammonium (DDA), 3β-[N-(N′,N′-
dimethylaminoethane)carbomyl] cholesterol (DC-Chol), and 1,2-dioleoyl-3-
trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP): prolonged liposome retention mediates  
stronger Th1 responses. Mol. Pharm. 8, 153–161 (2011).
77.	
Kim, K. S., Kim, H. S., Park, J. S., Kwon, Y. G. & Park, Y. S. Inhibition of B16BL6 tumor 
progression by coadministration of recombinant angiostatin K1-3 and endostatin genes 
with cationic liposomes. Cancer Gene Ther. 11, 441–449 (2004).
78.	 Oussoren, C. & Storm, G. Lymphatic uptake and biodistribution of liposomes after 
subcutaneous injection: III. Influence of surface modification with poly(ethyleneglycol). 
Pharm. Res. 14, 1479–1484 (1997).
79.	 Bestman-Smith, J., Gourde, P., Désormeaux, A., Tremblay, M. J. & Bergeron, M. G. 
Sterically stabilized liposomes bearing anti-HLA-DR antibodies for targeting the primary 
cellular reservoirs of HIV-1. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1468, 161–174 (2000).
80.	 Moghimi, S. M. The effect of methoxy-PEG chain length and molecular architecture 
on lymph node targeting of immuno-PEG liposomes. Biomaterials 27, 136–144 (2006).
81.	
Zhuang, Y. et al. PEGylated cationic liposomes robustly augment vaccine-induced 
immune responses: role of lymphatic trafficking and biodistribution. J. Control. Rel. 159, 
135–142 (2012).
82.	 Moghimi, S. M. & Moghimi, M. Enhanced lymph node retention of subcutaneously 
injected IgG1-PEG2000-liposomes through pentameric IgM antibody-mediated vesicular 
aggregation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1778, 51–55 (2008).  
This article reports the design of surface-functionalized small-sized PEGylated 
liposomes for the targeting of the lymph nodes after SC administration.
83.	 Gagné, J.-F., Désormeaux, A., Perron, S., Tremblay, M. J. & Bergeron, M. G. Targeted 
delivery of indinavir to HIV-1 primary reservoirs with immunoliposomes. Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta 1558, 198–210 (2002).
84.	 Yan, Z. et al. LyP-1-conjugated PEGylated liposomes: a carrier system for targeted therapy 
of lymphatic metastatic tumor. J. Control. Rel. 157, 118–125 (2012).
85.	 Allen, T. M., Hansen, C. B. & Peliowski, A. Subcutaneous administration of 
sterically stabilized (stealth) liposomes is an effective sustained release system 
for 1-β-d-arabinofuranosylcytosine. Drug Deliv. 1, 55–60 (1993).
86.	 Corvo, M. L. et al. Subcutaneous administration of superoxide dismutase entrapped 
in long circulating liposomes: in vivo fate and therapeutic activity in an inflammation 
model. Pharm. Res. 17, 600–606 (2000).
87.	
Ulmansky, R. et al. Glucocorticoids in nano-liposomes administered intravenously and 
subcutaneously to adjuvant arthritis rats are superior to the free drugs in suppressing 
arthritis and inflammatory cytokines. J. Control. Rel. 160, 299–305 (2012).
88.	 Celia, C. et al. Sustained zero‐order release of intact ultra‐stable drug‐loaded liposomes 
from an implantable nanochannel delivery system. Adv. Health. Mater. 3, 230–238 
(2014).
89.	 Angst, M. S. & Drover, D. R. Pharmacology of drugs formulated with DepoFoam™: 
a sustained release drug delivery system for parenteral administration using 
multivesicular liposome technology. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 45, 1153–1176 (2006).
90.	 Bulbake, U., Doppalapudi, S., Kommineni, N. & Khan, W. Liposomal formulations in 
clinical use: an updated review. Pharmaceutics 9, e09394 (2017).
91.	
da Silva, C. M. G. et al. Encapsulation of ropivacaine in a combined (donor-acceptor, 
ionic-gradient) liposomal system promotes extended anesthesia time. PloS ONE 12, 
e0185828 (2017).
92.	 Ramprasad, M. P., Anantharamaiah, G., Garber, D. W. & Katre, N. V. Sustained-delivery 
of an apolipoproteinE–peptidomimetic using multivesicular liposomes lowers serum 
cholesterol levels. J. Control. Rel. 79, 207–218 (2002).
93.	 Langston, M. V., Ramprasad, M. P., Kararli, T. T., Galluppi, G. R. & Katre, N. V. Modulation 
of the sustained delivery of myelopoietin (leridistim) encapsulated in multivesicular 
liposomes (DepoFoam). J. Control. Rel. 89, 87–99 (2003).
94.	 Nakamura, T. et al. The effect of size and charge of lipid nanoparticles prepared by 
microfluidic mixing on their lymph node transitivity and distribution. Mol. Pharm. 17, 
944–953 (2020).
95.	 Rao, D. A., Forrest, M. L., Alani, A. W., Kwon, G. S. & Robinson, J. R. Biodegradable PLGA 
based nanoparticles for sustained regional lymphatic drug delivery. J. Pharm. Sci. 99, 
2018–2031 (2010).
96.	 De Koker, S. et al. Engineering polymer hydrogel nanoparticles for lymph node‐targeted 
delivery. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 128, 1356–1361 (2016).
97.	
Zhan, X., Tran, K. K. & Shen, H. Effect of the poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) density on the 
access and uptake of particles by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) after subcutaneous 
administration. Mol. Pharm. 9, 3442–3451 (2012).
98.	 Kaminskas, L. M. et al. PEGylation of polylysine dendrimers improves absorption and 
lymphatic targeting following SC administration in rats. J. Control. Rel. 140, 108–116 
(2009).
99.	 Freeling, J. P., Koehn, J., Shu, C., Sun, J. & Ho, R. J. Anti-HIV drug-combination 
nanoparticles enhance plasma drug exposure duration as well as triple-drug 
combination levels in cells within lymph nodes and blood in primates. AIDS Res. 
Hum. Retrovir. 31, 107–114 (2015).
100.	 Harivardhan Reddy, L., Sharma, R. K., Chuttani, K., Mishra, A. K. & Murthy, R. S. Influence 
of administration route on tumor uptake and biodistribution of etoposide loaded solid 
lipid nanoparticles in Dalton’s lymphoma tumor bearing mice. J. Control. Rel. 105, 
185–198 (2005).
101.	 Wilson, K. D. et al. Effects of intravenous and subcutaneous administration on the 
pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, cellular uptake and immunostimulatory activity 
of CpG ODN encapsulated in liposomal nanoparticles. Int. Immunopharmacol. 7, 
1064–1075 (2007).
102.	 Mishra, D. et al. Evaluation of solid lipid nanoparticles as carriers for delivery of hepatitis 
B surface antigen for vaccination using subcutaneous route. J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 13, 
495–509 (2010).
103.	 Chen, S. et al. Development of lipid nanoparticle formulations of siRNA for hepatocyte 
gene silencing following subcutaneous administration. J. Control. Rel. 196, 106–112 
(2014).
104.	 Davies, N. et al. Functionalized lipid nanoparticles for subcutaneous administration of 
mRNA to achieve systemic exposures of a therapeutic protein. Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 
24, 369–384 (2021).

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
105.	 Elbrink, K. et al. Application of solid lipid nanoparticles as a long-term drug delivery 
platform for intramuscular and subcutaneous administration: in vitro and in vivo 
evaluation. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 163, 158–170 (2021).
106.	 Miura, R., Tahara, Y., Sawada, S.-I., Sasaki, Y. & Akiyoshi, K. Structural effects and 
lymphocyte activation properties of self-assembled polysaccharide nanogels for 
effective antigen delivery. Sci. Rep. 8, 16464 (2018).
107.	 Zhang, C. et al. Targeted antigen delivery to dendritic cell via functionalized alginate 
nanoparticles for cancer immunotherapy. J. Control. Rel. 256, 170–181 (2017).
108.	 Shi, G.-N. et al. Enhanced antitumor immunity by targeting dendritic cells with 
tumor cell lysate-loaded chitosan nanoparticles vaccine. Biomaterials 113, 191–202 
(2017).
109.	 Singh, Y. et al. Subcutaneously administered ultrafine PLGA nanoparticles containing 
doxycycline hydrochloride target lymphatic filarial parasites. Mol. Pharm. 13, 2084–2094 
(2016).
110.	 Kim, H. et al. Polymeric nanoparticles encapsulating novel TLR7/8 agonists as 
immunostimulatory adjuvants for enhanced cancer immunotherapy. Biomaterials 164, 
38–53 (2018).  
This article reports the use of TLR7/8 agonist-loaded biodegradable polymer 
nanoparticles as vaccine adjuvants for cancer immunotherapy following SC 
administration.
111.	 Saravanan, S. et al. Hydrophilic poly (ethylene glycol) capped poly (lactic-co-glycolic) 
acid nanoparticles for subcutaneous delivery of insulin in diabetic rats. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol. 95, 1190–1198 (2017).
112.	 Rahimian, S. et al. Polymeric nanoparticles for co-delivery of synthetic long peptide 
antigen and poly IC as therapeutic cancer vaccine formulation. J. Control. Rel. 203, 
16–22 (2015).
113.	 Sudha, T. et al. Targeted delivery of cisplatin to tumor xenografts via the nanoparticle 
component of nano-diamino-tetrac. Nanomedicine 12, 195–205 (2017).
114.	 Reddy, L. H., Sharma, R. & Murthy, R. Enhanced tumour uptake of doxorubicin loaded 
poly (butyl cyanoacrylate) nanoparticles in mice bearing Dalton’s lymphoma tumour. 
J. Drug Target. 12, 443–451 (2004).
115.	 Mura, S., Fattal, E. & Nicolas, J. From poly (alkyl cyanoacrylate) to squalene as core 
material for the design of nanomedicines. J. Drug Target. 27, 470–501 (2019).
116.	 Tasset, C. et al. Polyisobutylcyanoacrylate nanoparticles as sustained release system for 
calcitonin. J. Control. Rel. 33, 23–30 (1995).
117.	 Gautier, J. et al. Biodegradable nanoparticles for subcutaneous administration of growth 
hormone releasing factor (hGRF). J. Control. Rel. 20, 67–77 (1992).
118.	 Mesiha, M. S., Sidhom, M. B. & Fasipe, B. Oral and subcutaneous absorption of insulin 
poly (isobutylcyanoacrylate) nanoparticles. Int. J. Pharm. 288, 289–293 (2005).
119.	 Grangier, J. L., Puygrenier, M., Gautier, J. C. & Couvreur, P. Nanoparticles as carriers for 
growth hormone releasing factor. J. Control. Rel. 15, 3–13 (1991).
120.	 Lenaerts, V. et al. Degradation of poly (isobutyl cyanoacrylate) nanoparticles. 
Biomaterials 5, 65–68 (1984).
121.	 Dhandhukia, J. P. et al. Berunda polypeptides: multi-headed fusion proteins promote 
subcutaneous administration of rapamycin to breast cancer in vivo. Theranostics 7, 
3856–3872 (2017).
122.	 Ferrando, R. M., Lay, L. & Polito, L. Gold nanoparticle-based platforms for vaccine 
development. Drug Discov. Today Technol. 38, 57–67 (2020).
123.	 Brinas, R. P. et al. Design and synthesis of multifunctional gold nanoparticles bearing 
tumor-associated glycopeptide antigens as potential cancer vaccines. Bioconj. Chem. 
23, 1513–1523 (2012).
124.	 Sanchez-Villamil, J. I., Tapia, D. & Torres, A. G. Development of a gold nanoparticle 
vaccine against enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157: H7. mBio 10, e01869-19  
(2019).
125.	 Gulla, S. K. et al. In vivo targeting of DNA vaccines to dendritic cells using functionalized 
gold nanoparticles. Biomat. Sci. 7, 773–788 (2019).
126.	 Sábio, R. M., Meneguin, A. B., dos Santos, A. M., Monteiro, A. S. & Chorilli, M. Exploiting 
mesoporous silica nanoparticles as versatile drug carriers for several routes of 
administration. Micropor. Mesopor. Mat. 312, 110774 (2021).
127.	 Elbialy, N. S., Aboushoushah, S. F., Sofi, B. F. & Noorwali, A. Multifunctional curcumin- 
loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticles for cancer chemoprevention and therapy. 
Micropor. Mesopor. Mat. 291, 109540 (2020).
128.	 Wang, L. et al. A two-step precise targeting nanoplatform for tumor therapy via the alkyl 
radicals activated by the microenvironment of organelles. J. Control. Rel. 318, 197–209 
(2020).
129.	 Zhang, Y. et al. A versatile theranostic nanoplatform based on mesoporous silica. 
Mater. Sci. Eng. C 98, 560–571 (2019).
130.	 Nguyen, T. L., Cha, B. G., Choi, Y., Im, J. & Kim, J. Injectable dual-scale mesoporous silica 
cancer vaccine enabling efficient delivery of antigen/adjuvant-loaded nanoparticles  
to dendritic cells recruited in local macroporous scaffold. Biomaterials 239, 119859 
(2020).
131.	 Nguyen, T. L., Choi, Y. & Kim, J. Mesoporous silica as a versatile platform for cancer 
immunotherapy. Adv. Mater. 31, 1803953 (2019).
132.	 Skrastina, D. et al. Silica nanoparticles as the adjuvant for the immunisation of mice using 
hepatitis B core virus-like particles. PloS ONE 9, e114006 (2014).
133.	 Hajizade, A., Salmanian, A. H., Amani, J., Ebrahimi, F. & Arpanaei, A. EspA-loaded 
mesoporous silica nanoparticles can efficiently protect animal model against 
enterohaemorrhagic E. coli O157: H7. Artif. Cell Nanomed. Biotechnol. 46, 1067–1075 
(2018).
134.	 Grootendorst, D. J. et al. Evaluation of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles 
(Endorem®) as a photoacoustic contrast agent for intra‐operative nodal staging. 
Contrast Media Mol. Imaging 8, 83–91 (2013).
135.	 Grootendorst, D. J. et al. Intra‐operative ex vivo photoacoustic nodal staging in a 
rat model using a clinical superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle dispersion. 
J. Biophotonics 6, 493–504 (2013).
136.	 Perumal, S., Atchudan, R. & Lee, W. A review of polymeric micelles and their applications. 
Polymers 14, 2510 (2022).
137.	 Dong, J., Song, X., Lian, X., Fu, Y. & Gong, T. Subcutaneously injected ivermectin-loaded 
mixed micelles: formulation, pharmacokinetics and local irritation study. Drug Deliv. 23, 
2220–2227 (2016).
138.	 Lim, S. B., Rubinstein, I., Sadikot, R. T., Artwohl, J. E. & Önyüksel, H. A novel peptide 
nanomedicine against acute lung injury: GLP-1 in phospholipid micelles. Pharm. Res. 28, 
662–672 (2011).
139.	 Li, X. et al. MPEG-DSPE polymeric micelle for translymphatic chemotherapy of lymph 
node metastasis. Int. J. Pharm. 487, 8–16 (2015).
140.	 Trubetskoy, V. S., Frank-Kamenetsky, M. D., Whiteman, K. R., Wolf, G. L. & Torchilin, V. P. 
Stable polymeric micelles: lymphangiographic contrast media for gamma scintigraphy 
and magnetic resonance imaging. Acad. Radiol. 3, 232–238 (1996).
141.	 Zeng, Q. et al. Cationic micelle delivery of Trp2 peptide for efficient lymphatic 
draining and enhanced cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses. J. Control. Rel. 200, 1–12 
(2015).
142.	 Zeng, Q. et al. Tailoring polymeric hybrid micelles with lymph node targeting ability to 
improve the potency of cancer vaccines. Biomaterials 122, 105–113 (2017).
143.	 Peng, J. et al. Photosensitizer micelles together with IDO inhibitor enhance cancer 
photothermal therapy and immunotherapy. Adv. Sci. 5, 1700891 (2018).
144.	 Li, H. et al. Rational design of polymeric hybrid micelles to overcome lymphatic 
and intracellular delivery barriers in cancer immunotherapy. Theranostics 7, 4383  
(2017).
145.	 Cui, L., Osada, K., Imaizumi, A., Kataoka, K. & Nakano, K. Feasibility of a subcutaneously 
administered block/homo-mixed polyplex micelle as a carrier for DNA vaccination in a 
mouse tumor model. J. Control. Rel. 206, 220–231 (2015).
146.	 Li, C. et al. Synthetic polymeric mixed micelles targeting lymph nodes trigger enhanced 
cellular and humoral immune responses. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 2874–2889 
(2018).
147.	 Jones, M.-C., Gao, H. & Leroux, J.-C. Reverse polymeric micelles for pharmaceutical 
applications. J. Control. Rel. 132, 208–215 (2008).
148.	 Hu, Q., Prakash, J., Rijcken, C. J., Hennink, W. E. & Storm, G. High systemic availability 
of core-crosslinked polymeric micelles after subcutaneous administration. Int. J. Pharm. 
514, 112–120 (2016).
149.	 Liu, X. et al. Glucose and H2O2 dual-responsive polymeric micelles for the self-regulated 
release of insulin. ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 3, 1598–1606 (2020).
150.	 Jeong, B., Kim, S. W. & Bae, Y. H. Thermosensitive sol–gel reversible hydrogels. Adv. Drug 
Del. Rev. 64, 154–162 (2012).
151.	 Jin, K.-M. & Kim, Y.-H. Injectable, thermo-reversible and complex coacervate combination 
gels for protein drug delivery. J. Control. Rel. 127, 249–256 (2008).
152.	 Kim, J. K., Won, Y.-W., Lim, K. S. & Kim, Y.-H. Low-molecular-weight methylcellulose-based 
thermo-reversible gel/pluronic micelle combination system for local and sustained 
docetaxel delivery. Pharm. Res. 29, 525–534 (2012).
153.	 Sharma, G., Italia, J., Sonaje, K., Tikoo, K. & Kumar, M. R. Biodegradable in situ gelling 
system for subcutaneous administration of ellagic acid and ellagic acid loaded 
nanoparticles: evaluation of their antioxidant potential against cyclosporine induced 
nephrotoxicity in rats. J. Control. Rel. 118, 27–37 (2007).
154.	 Peng, Q., Zhang, Z.-R., Gong, T., Chen, G.-Q. & Sun, X. A rapid-acting, long-acting 
insulin formulation based on a phospholipid complex loaded PHBHHx nanoparticles. 
Biomaterials 33, 1583–1588 (2012).
155.	 Peng, Q. et al. Injectable and biodegradable thermosensitive hydrogels loaded with 
PHBHHx nanoparticles for the sustained and controlled release of insulin. Acta Biomater. 
9, 5063–5069 (2013).
156.	 Gou, M. et al. A novel injectable local hydrophobic drug delivery system: 
biodegradable nanoparticles in thermo-sensitive hydrogel. Int. J. Pharm. 359, 228–233 
(2008).
157.	 Matanović, M. R. et al. Development and preclinical pharmacokinetics of a novel 
subcutaneous thermoresponsive system for prolonged delivery of heparin. Int. J. Pharm. 
496, 583–592 (2015).
158.	 Yu, L., Chang, G. T., Zhang, H. & Ding, J. D. Injectable block copolymer hydrogels for 
sustained release of a PEGylated drug. Int. J. Pharm. 348, 95–106 (2008).
159.	 Cai, X. et al. Huperzine A–phospholipid complex-loaded biodegradable thermosensitive 
polymer gel for controlled drug release. Int. J. Pharm. 433, 102–111 (2012).
160.	 Liu, Y. et al. Calcitonin-loaded thermosensitive hydrogel for long-term antiosteopenia 
therapy. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 23428–23440 (2017).
161.	 Cao, D. et al. Liposomal doxorubicin loaded PLGA-PEG-PLGA based thermogel for 
sustained local drug delivery for the treatment of breast cancer. Artif. Cell Nanomed. 
Biotechnol. 47, 181–191 (2019).
162.	 Nagahama, K. et al. Self-assembling polymer micelle/clay nanodisk/doxorubicin hybrid 
injectable gels for safe and efficient focal treatment of cancer. Biomacromolecules 16, 
880–889 (2015).
163.	 Dong, X. et al. Thermosensitive hydrogel loaded with chitosan-carbon nanotubes for 
near infrared light triggered drug delivery. Colloids Surf. B 154, 253–262 (2017).

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
164.	 Park, M.-R. et al. Cationic and thermosensitive protamine conjugated gels for enhancing 
sustained human growth hormone delivery. Biomaterials 31, 1349–1359 (2010).
165.	 Seo, B.-B., Park, M.-R. & Song, S.-C. Sustained release of exendin 4 using injectable and 
ionic-nano-complex forming polymer hydrogel system for long-term treatment of type 2 
diabetes mellitus. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 15201–15211 (2019).
166.	 Seo, B.-B., Park, M.-R., Chun, C., Lee, J.-Y. & Song, S.-C. The biological efficiency 
and bioavailability of human growth hormone delivered using injectable, ionic, 
thermosensitive poly (organophosphazene)-polyethylenimine conjugate hydrogels. 
Biomaterials 32, 8271–8280 (2011).
167.	 Park, M.-R. et al. Sustained delivery of human growth hormone using a polyelectrolyte 
complex-loaded thermosensitive polyphosphazene hydrogel. J. Control. Rel. 147, 
359–367 (2010).
168.	 Park, M.-R., Seo, B.-B. & Song, S.-C. Dual ionic interaction system based on 
polyelectrolyte complex and ionic, injectable, and thermosensitive hydrogel for 
sustained release of human growth hormone. Biomaterials 34, 1327–1336 (2013).
169.	 Kim, Y. M. & Song, S. C. Targetable micelleplex hydrogel for long-term, effective, and 
systemic siRNA delivery. Biomaterials 35, 7970–7977 (2014).
170.	 Zhang, Z.-Q., Kim, Y.-M. & Song, S.-C. Injectable and quadruple-functional hydrogel as 
an alternative to intravenous delivery for enhanced tumor targeting. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 11, 34634–34644 (2019).
171.	 Viola, M. et al. Subcutaneous delivery of monoclonal antibodies: how do we get there? 
J. Control. Rel. 286, 301–314 (2018).
172.	 McDonald, T. A., Zepeda, M. L., Tomlinson, M. J., Bee, W. H. & Ivens, I. A. Subcutaneous 
administration of biotherapeutics: current experience in animal models. Curr. Opin. 
Mol. Ther. 12, 461–470 (2010).
173.	 Li, D. et al. Simulate subQ: the methods and the media. J. Pharm. Sci. 112, 1492–1508 
(2021).
174.	 Kinnunen, H. M. et al. A novel in vitro method to model the fate of subcutaneously 
administered biopharmaceuticals and associated formulation components. 
J. Control. Rel. 214, 94–102 (2015).  
This article describes the SCISSOR instrument and its application to predict the SC 
delivery of therapeutic molecules.
175.	 Song, J. Y. et al. Glatiramer acetate persists at the injection site and draining lymph nodes 
via electrostatically-induced aggregation. J. Control. Rel. 293, 36–47 (2019).
176.	 Thati, S. et al. Novel applications of an in vitro injection model system to study 
bioperformance: case studies with different drug modalities. J. Pharm. Innov. 15, 
268–280 (2020).
177.	 Bown, H. K. et al. In vitro model for predicting bioavailability of subcutaneously injected 
monoclonal antibodies. J. Control. Rel. 273, 13–20 (2018).
178.	 Mathes, S. H., Ruffner, H. & Graf-Hausner, U. The use of skin models in drug development. 
Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 69, 81–102 (2014).
179.	 Choudhury, S. & Das, A. Advances in generation of three-dimensional skin equivalents: 
pre-clinical studies to clinical therapies. Cytotherapy 23, 1–9 (2021).
180.	 Chandran Suja, V. et al. A biomimetic chip to assess subcutaneous bioavailability  
of monoclonal antibodies in humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA Nexus 2, pgad317 (2023).  
This article reports an in vitro coculture subcutaneous tissue model to evaluate 
transport and pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously injected drugs.
181.	 Descargues, P. System for keeping alive and transporting skin biopsies and applications 
of said system. US Patent 14/398,587 (2017).
182.	 Kagan, L. Pharmacokinetic modeling of the subcutaneous absorption of therapeutic 
proteins. Drug Metab. Dispos. 42, 1890–1905 (2014).
183.	 Dubbelboer, I. R. & Sjögren, E. Physiological based pharmacokinetic and biopharmaceutics 
modelling of subcutaneously administered compounds — an overview of in silico models. 
Int. J. Pharm. 621, 121808 (2022).
184.	 Reddy, K. R., Modi, M. W. & Pedder, S. Use of peginterferon alfa-2a (40 KD)(Pegasys®) for 
the treatment of hepatitis C. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 54, 571–586 (2002).
185.	 Wang, Y.-S. et al. Structural and biological characterization of pegylated recombinant 
interferon alpha-2b and its therapeutic implications. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 54, 547–570 
(2002).
186.	 Piedmonte, D. M. & Treuheit, M. J. Formulation of Neulasta®(pegfilgrastim). Adv. Drug 
Del. Rev. 60, 50–58 (2008).
187.	 Molineux, G. The design and development of pegfilgrastim (PEG-rmetHuG-CSF, Neulasta®). 
Curr. Pharm. Des. 10, 1235–1244 (2004).
188.	 Rosa, J., Sabelli, M. & Soriano, E. R. Prefilled certolizumab pegol (Cimzia®) syringes for 
self-use in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Med. Devices Evid. Res. 3, 25–31 (2010).
189.	 Connock, M. et al. Certolizumab pegol (CIMZIA®) for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis. Health Technol. Assess. 14, 1–10 (2010).
190.	 Moreadith, R. W. et al. Clinical development of a poly (2-oxazoline)(POZ) polymer 
therapeutic for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease — proof of concept of POZ as a 
versatile polymer platform for drug development in multiple therapeutic indications. 
Eur. Polym. J. 88, 524–552 (2017).
191.	 Cheng, Z., Al Zaki, A., Hui, J. Z., Muzykantov, V. R. & Tsourkas, A. Multifunctional 
nanoparticles: cost versus benefit of adding targeting and imaging capabilities. Science 
338, 903–910 (2012).
192.	 Vyas, K. S. et al. Systematic review of liposomal bupivacaine (Exparel) for postoperative 
analgesia. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 138, 748e–756e (2016).
193.	 Ginosar, Y. et al. Proliposomal ropivacaine oil: pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
data after subcutaneous administration in volunteers. Anesth. Analg. 122, 1673–1680 
(2016).
194.	 Belogurov, A. et al. CD206-targeted liposomal myelin basic protein peptides in patients 
with multiple sclerosis resistant to first-line disease-modifying therapies: a first-in-human, 
proof-of-concept dose-escalation study. Neurotherapeutics 13, 895–904 (2016).
195.	 Kitano, S. et al. HER2-specific T-cell immune responses in patients vaccinated with 
truncated HER2 protein complexed with nanogels of cholesteryl pullulan. Clin. Cancer 
Res. 12, 7397–7405 (2006).
196.	 Kawabata, R. et al. Antibody response against NY‐ESO‐1 in CHP‐NY‐ESO‐1 vaccinated 
patients. Int. J. Cancer 120, 2178–2184 (2007).
197.	 Gonella, A., Grizot, S., Liu, F., López Noriega, A. & Richard, J. Long-acting injectable 
formulation technologies: challenges and opportunities for the delivery of fragile 
molecules. Expert Opin. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 19, 927–944 (2022).
198.	 Locke, K. W., Maneval, D. C. & LaBarre, M. J. ENHANZE® drug delivery technology: a novel 
approach to subcutaneous administration using recombinant human hyaluronidase 
PH20. Drug Deliv. 26, 98–106 (2019).  
This review article reports the ENHANZE technology and its applications to SC 
administration.
199.	 Soundararajan, R., Wang, G., Petkova, A., Uchegbu, I. F. & Schätzlein, A. G. Hyaluronidase 
coated molecular envelope technology nanoparticles enhance drug absorption via the 
subcutaneous route. Mol. Pharm. 17, 2599–2611 (2020).
200.	Jarvi, N. L. & Balu-Iyer, S. V. Immunogenicity challenges associated with subcutaneous 
delivery of therapeutic proteins. Biodrugs 35, 125–146 (2021).
201.	 Zhang, P., Sun, F., Liu, S. & Jiang, S. Anti-PEG antibodies in the clinic: current issues and 
beyond PEGylation. J. Control. Rel. 244, 184–193 (2016).
202.	Zhao, Y. et al. A frustrating problem: accelerated blood clearance of PEGylated solid 
lipid nanoparticles following subcutaneous injection in rats. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 81, 
506–513 (2012).
203.	Ganson, N. J., Kelly, S. J., Scarlett, E., Sundy, J. S. & Hershfield, M. S. Control of 
hyperuricemia in subjects with refractory gout, and induction of antibody against poly 
(ethylene glycol)(PEG), in a phase I trial of subcutaneous PEGylated urate oxidase. Arthrit. 
Res. Ther. 8, R12 (2005).
204.	Longo, N. et al. Single-dose, subcutaneous recombinant phenylalanine ammonia 
lyase conjugated with polyethylene glycol in adult patients with phenylketonuria: an 
open-label, multicentre, phase 1 dose-escalation trial. Lancet 384, 37–44 (2014).
205.	Chan, L. J. et al. PEGylation does not significantly change the initial intravenous or 
subcutaneous pharmacokinetics or lymphatic exposure of trastuzumab in rats but 
increases plasma clearance after subcutaneous administration. Mol. Pharm. 12, 794–809 
(2015).
206.	Knop, K., Hoogenboom, R., Fischer, D. & Schubert, U. S. Poly (ethylene glycol) in drug 
delivery: pros and cons as well as potential alternatives. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 49, 
6288–6308 (2010).
207.	 Barz, M., Luxenhofer, R., Zentel, R. & Vicent, M. J. Overcoming the PEG-addiction: 
well-defined alternatives to PEG, from structure–property relationships to better defined 
therapeutics. Polym. Chem. 2, 1900–1918 (2011).
208.	Bhatia, S. N., Chen, X., Dobrovolskaia, M. A. & Lammers, T. Cancer nanomedicine. Nat. 
Rev. Cancer 22, 550–556 (2022).
209.	Faria, M. et al. Minimum information reporting in bio–nano experimental literature. Nat. 
Nano 13, 777–785 (2018).
210.	 Luiz, M. T. et al. Design of experiments (DoE) to develop and to optimize nanoparticles as 
drug delivery systems. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 165, 127–148 (2021).
211.	 Hassanzadeh, P., Atyabi, F. & Dinarvand, R. The significance of artificial intelligence in 
drug delivery system design. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 151–152, 169–190 (2019).
212.	 Nuhn, L. Artificial intelligence assists nanoparticles to enter solid tumours. Nat. 
Nanotech. 18, 550–551 (2023).
213.	 Kieseier, B. C. & Calabresi, P. A. PEGylation of interferon-β-1a: a promising strategy in 
multiple sclerosis. CNS Drugs 26, 205–214 (2012).
214.	 Moore, D. J., Adi, Y., Connock, M. J. & Bayliss, S. Clinical effectiveness and cost- 
effectiveness of pegvisomant for the treatment of acromegaly: a systematic review  
and economic evaluation. BMC Endocr. Disord. 9, 20 (2009).
215.	 Thomas, J. et al. Pegvaliase for the treatment of phenylketonuria: results of a long-term 
phase 3 clinical trial program (PRISM). Mol. Genet. Metab. 124, 27–38 (2018).
216.	 Sanchez-Fructuoso, A. et al. Anemia control in kidney transplant patients treated with 
methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta (mircera): the Anemiatrans Group. Transplant. 
Proc. 42, 2931–2934 (2010).
217.	 Valliant, A. & Hofmann, R. M. Managing dialysis patients who develop anemia caused by 
chronic kidney disease: focus on peginesatide. Int. J. Nanomed. 8, 3297–3307 (2013).
218.	 Hukshorn, C. J. et al. Weekly subcutaneous pegylated recombinant native human leptin 
(PEG-OB) administration in obese men. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 85, 4003–4009 
(2000).
219.	 Hukshorn, C. et al. The effect of pegylated recombinant human leptin (PEG-OB) on 
weight loss and inflammatory status in obese subjects. Int. J. Obes. 26, 504–509 (2002).
220.	Mertz, N., Østergaard, J., Yaghmur, A. & Larsen, S. W. Transport characteristics in a 
novel in vitro release model for testing the performance of intra-articular injectables. 
Int. J. Pharm. 566, 445–453 (2019).
221.	 Milak, S., Chemelli, A., Glatter, O. & Zimmer, A. Vancomycin ocular delivery systems 
based on glycerol monooleate reversed hexagonal and reversed cubic liquid crystalline 
phases. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 139, 279–290 (2019).
222.	 Bender, C. et al. Evaluation of in vitro tools to predict the in vivo absorption of 
biopharmaceuticals following subcutaneous administration. J. Pharm. Sci. 111, 2514–2524 
(2022).

Nature Reviews Bioengineering
Review article
Acknowledgements
The PhD fellowships of L.T. and M.F. and some results described in this Review have been 
funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 771829). The National Centre for 
Scientific Research (CNRS) and Université Paris-Saclay are also acknowledged for the financial 
support.
Author contributions
All authors contributed equally to the preparation of this manuscript.
Competing interests
J.N. is a co-founder of the startup company Imescia. The other authors have no competing 
interests.
Additional information
Peer review information Nature Reviews Bioengineering thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for 
their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
Related links
EpiDerm: https://www.mattek.com/products/epiderm
EpiSkin/Human Epidermis: https://www.episkin.com/Episkin
Genoskin. HypoSkin - Skin model for subcutaneous injections: https://genoskin.com/en/
tissue-samples/skin-model-subcutaneous-injections
Subcutaneous Drug Development & Delivery Consortium: https://subcutaneousconsortium.org
© Springer Nature Limited 2024