Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
321
nature reviews immunology
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-024-01104-7
Review article
 Check for updates
Neuroinflammation 
in Alzheimer disease
Abstract
Increasing evidence points to a pivotal role of immune processes in 
the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease, which is the most prevalent 
neurodegenerative and dementia-causing disease of our time. Multiple 
lines of information provided by experimental, epidemiological, 
neuropathological and genetic studies suggest a pathological role 
for innate and adaptive immune activation in this disease. Here, we 
review the cell types and pathological mechanisms involved in disease 
development as well as the influence of genetics and lifestyle factors. 
Given the decade-long preclinical stage of Alzheimer disease, these 
mechanisms and their interactions are driving forces behind the 
spread and progression of the disease. The identification of treatment 
opportunities will require a precise understanding of the cells and 
mechanisms involved as well as a clear definition of their temporal 
and topographical nature. We will also discuss new therapeutic 
strategies for targeting neuroinflammation, which are now entering 
the clinic and showing promise for patients.
Sections
Introduction
Evidence for an inflammatory 
component in AD
The exposome — can 
lifestyle factors modulate 
inflammation?
Microglia and 
pathophysiological processes 
in AD
Which other cells drive 
neuroinflammation in AD?
The blood and lymphatic 
vasculatures
Immune mediators in AD
Mutual interaction between 
immune mechanisms and 
neurodegeneration
Clinical trials and future 
therapeutic targets
Next-generation models 
and open questions
A list of authors and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper
 e-mail: michael.heneka@uni.lu

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
322
Review article
Evidence for an inflammatory component in AD
Brain pathology and microglial changes in AD
The term ‘plaques’ was introduced in 1898 — almost 7 years before Alois 
Alzheimer described AD — for structures that are today known as Aβ 
plaques in the AD brain4,5. Glial cells surrounding these plaques had 
already been described and it was speculated that these plaques were 
of glial origin4,5. It is now clear that microglia are reactive and increased 
in number in the AD brain as well as being associated with Aβ plaques6–9, 
neurofibrillary tangles10 and complement factors6 (Fig. 1). These micro-
glia generate immune mediators, such as cytokines, chemokines, 
inflammasomes and reactive oxygen species (ROS)6,7,11–16, and contrib-
ute to both the asymptomatic and symptomatic disease stages17,18. 
Microglia are also likely to influence the clinical and pathological 
disease phenotype19. In humans, topographical associations have 
been reported for microglia with Aβ and p-tau but not between Aβ 
and p-tau, which is consistent with microglia playing a pivotal role 
in AD pathogenesis20. Diffuse Aβ plaques are present in the brains of 
middle-aged and older individuals who are cognitively normal21, and 
markers of homeostatic microglia (such as ionized calcium-binding 
adaptor molecule 1 (IBA1), puringeric receptor P2Y12R and transmem-
brane protein 119 (TMEM119)) are downregulated following the appear-
ance of Aβ22. While neuritic plaques are defined by the presence of Aβ, 
the presence of p-tau and activated microglia are additional features 
of AD23, with these microglia expressing the phagocytic markers CD68 
and macrophage scavenger receptor A (MSRA)24. Of note, there is wide 
variation in Aβ deposits with different involvement of microglia seen 
in the brains of patients with AD25. Aβ in neuritic plaques tends to be 
more fibrillar, with dense cores, and has a more varied composition with 
the presence of the 40-residue isoform Aβ40, the 42-residue isoform 
Aβ42, the 43-residue isoform Aβ43, N-terminally truncated Aβ and other 
post-translationally modified forms of Aβ26–28. AD cases with an atypi-
cal clinical presentation show a different spreading and morphology 
of pathological hallmarks, associated with different levels and spatial 
localization of microglial activity19,29. This supports the hypothesis that 
the spatial activation of microglia is involved in both the clinical and 
pathological presentation of the disease. In conclusion, microglial acti-
vation is an early event in AD that is instrumental for the morphology of 
Aβ deposits, the spreading of pathology and the clinical presentation 
of patients with AD23.
Biofluid biomarkers of inflammation
Evidence for an ongoing chronic inflammatory disease component 
in AD has been further substantiated by probing inflammatory bio-
markers in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or in blood samples and by the 
development of microglial positron-emission tomography (PET) 
tracers such as translocator protein (TSPO) ligands. Although the first 
studies on biofluid-based biomarkers for inflammation — primarily 
involving CSF or blood-based protein markers — date back nearly 
30 years30, there remains an unmet demand for reliable biomarkers 
that monitor the various aspects of AD neuroinflammation. Studies 
on ‘classical’ inflammation markers, like C-reactive protein (CRP) or 
pro-inflammatory cytokines, are large in number but have shown 
limited consistency in meta-analyses31,32. Quantitation of inflam-
matory mediators, such as cytokines in CSF, can be hampered by 
the sensitivity of detection technologies33, but novel ultra-sensitive 
immunoassays, including single-molecule array, proximity exten-
sion assay and nucleic acid-linked immuno-sandwich assay, or 
measurement of brain-derived exosomes might overcome such 
limitations34–36.
Key points
	
• There is strong evidence for an inflammatory component 
of Alzheimer disease.
	
• Extrinsic factors, such as brain trauma, diet, systemic and local 
infections, and the gut microbiota, have an impact on the inflammatory 
component of Alzheimer disease.
	
• Factors intrinsic to the host, including microglial phagocytosis, 
barrier function in the brain, cellular metabolism and cell senescence, 
also have a central role in neuroinflammation in Alzheimer disease.
	
• Astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, lymphocytes and peripheral 
myeloid cells contribute to neuroinflammation in Alzheimer disease.
	
• Vascular cells become activated in Alzheimer disease and a leakiness 
of the blood–brain barrier is observed. A contributing role of the 
glymphatic system has also been described.
	
• New therapeutic approaches based on targeting the inflammatory 
component of Alzheimer disease are currently being tested in clinical 
trials. Future trials are also being designed to target these pathways.
Introduction
Alzheimer disease (AD) represents the most common cause of dementia, 
accounting for roughly 70% of all cases, and given its high care burden, 
the disease is a major health care challenge. Neuropathologically, AD 
is characterized by extracellular deposition of misfolded and aggre-
gated amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides as well as by the formation of intra-
neuronal neurofibrillary tangles made of hyperphosphorylated tau 
(p-tau). Although Alois Alzheimer described histological abnormalities 
in astroglia and microglia, the changes seen in these cells were long 
regarded as an irrelevant bystander effect. More recent studies have 
challenged and substantially changed this view, and immune-mediated 
disease mechanisms have become a field of intense research and drug 
development in AD. Consequently, one must consider which immuno-
logical process at which time point can be harnessed for therapeutic 
intervention. While, in general, such immune modulation may include 
preventive, disease-modifying or even acute therapeutic strategies, 
it is commonly accepted that clinically silent or even inapparent 
disease stages may hold the greatest potential for such interventions. 
Identification and definition of pre-dementia stages of AD, such as sub-
jective cognitive impairment and mild cognitive impairment, together 
with biomarker discovery may allow delineation of the time, duration 
and sites where immune interventions will successfully interfere with 
disease pathogenesis and progression. In this Review, we summarize 
and weigh the current knowledge on immune processes in AD. Starting 
with a review of human evidence for an inflammatory component in 
AD, we then describe the individual cellular compartments and spe-
cific immune mechanisms that contribute to disease pathogenesis. 
Several of these mechanistic studies have been performed in animal 
models displaying a specific pathology, for instance, deposition of tau. 
While the detailed phenotypes, advantages and limitations of these 
animal models of AD are reviewed elsewhere1–3, we focus here on the 
specific immunological aspects of these models and relate these to 
the human disease.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
323
Review article
For CSF, a few proteins have emerged as robust markers to moni-
tor neuroinflammation in AD due to their reproducible relationship 
to pathological features of the disease. These proteins are soluble 
triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2), which 
is a marker of microglial activation; YKL-40, which is an astroglial 
inflammation marker; and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), which 
serves as a marker of astrocyte reactivity37–39, although its appropri-
ateness as a standalone marker is still under debate. Interestingly, the 
CSF GFAP signal in AD is robustly replicated in serum and plasma, with 
increases in plasma and serum GFAP concentrations closely associ-
ated with the onset of cerebral Aβ pathology40, which likely reflects 
astrocytic reactivity in response to pathology41. Extensive proteomic 
studies that include validation in biofluids have described several 
other inflammatory messengers within sets of proteins affected by 
AD pathology42. Furthermore, novel immunoassays might enable the 
detection of inflammasome components, such as NACHT, LRR and 
PYD domains-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) and apoptosis-associated 
speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC), as biomarkers of inflam-
masome activation in AD43,44, with these being therapeutic targets that 
are soon to be clinically tested in neurodegenerative disease45. There 
is also growing interest in the detailed analysis of CSF leukocyte gene 
expression patterns. By their nature, CSF or blood-based fluid biomark-
ers do not help with ascribing inflammatory processes to specific brain 
areas and cannot be used to assess the spatial and temporal spread of 
inflammation over the entire disease trajectory. Nevertheless, they 
will likely be instrumental in detecting overall changes occurring in 
brain homeostasis and neurodegeneration, thereby helping to identify 
individuals at risk for disease who can then undergo more detailed 
investigations.
Molecular imaging and PET
Changes in regional brain pathology can be partly determined by 
molecular imaging techniques, including PET, that allow for temporal 
and spatial analysis of the living human brain. To visualize microglial 
reactivity by molecular imaging in human brain, radiopharmaceu-
ticals have been developed that target TSPO, which is an 18-kD pro-
tein found within the outer mitochondrial membrane46. Although 
TSPO is expressed by microglia, astrocytes and endothelial cells, its 
upregulation in response to activation is particularly prominent in 
microglia47. Current research aims to develop radiotracers that target 
receptors more specific to microglia (for example, P2X7R, P2Y12R and 
CX3C-chemokine receptor 1 (CX3CR1)) in order to visualize changes in 
these cells48,49. Of the second-generation TSPO tracers, two radiotracers 
(DPA-714 and PBR28) have shown higher binding potential (twofold to 
threefold) and reduced background activity in comparison to PK11195, 
a first-generation TSPO tracer50. In patients with AD, increased PBR28 
binding (to temporal and parietal brain regions) correlates to higher 
levels of cognitive impairment and atrophy51 as well as greater regional 
tau and Aβ deposition52. In a longitudinal study (2.7 years), patients 
positive for Aβ had a greater increase in TSPO binding in several brain 
regions compared to controls, and changes in TSPO binding corre-
lated well with cognitive decline53. These results indicate that TSPO 
could serve as a biomarker of AD progression in patients and be used 
to measure the response to anti-inflammatory therapies53.
By contrast, in prodromal AD, increased TSPO binding (as meas-
ured with DPA-714) in the temporoparietal cortex positively corre-
lated with improved Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores 
and grey matter volume and slowed cognitive decline54. In this study, 
30 patients with AD were stratified into slow or fast decliners after 
2 years of follow-up. Excitingly, slow decliners showed higher TSPO 
binding than fast decliners54. These results demonstrate that reactive 
microgliosis occurs during the prodromal and preclinical stages of 
AD, and that it may even play a protective role at the very early stages 
of disease54,55. Moreover, in patients with clinical AD, an increase of 
DPA-714 binding was observed at follow-up. The correlation between 
increasing DPA-714 binding and poorer clinical outcome measures 
(for example, clinical dementia rating, MMSE, hippocampal atrophy) 
suggests a detrimental effect of increasing levels of neuroinflamma-
tion on clinical AD progression once the disease has developed56. 
In contrast, high initial DPA-714 binding was correlated with a low 
dynamic increase of microglial reactivity and a favourable clinical 
course. Another study has proposed an early and late peak of reactive 
microgliosis in AD trajectory57. Together, PET-based microglial imaging 
can decipher several microglial phenotypes at various disease stages 
and represents a non-invasive biomarker that may be used to assess 
future immune-modulating therapies in AD.
Immune-related genetics
Strong support for the inflammatory hypothesis in AD has come 
from genome-wide association studies (GWAS). GWAS have not 
only unravelled a direct genetic connection of inflammation to dis-
ease pathogenesis but also hold promise for the identification of 
inflammation-related therapeutic targets. In total, the percentage 
of disease risk for AD that can be attributed to inheritable genetic fac-
tors has been estimated to be between 56% and 79% in twin studies58,59. 
The development of high-throughput genomic approaches over the 
Phagocytosis of 
Aβ plaques by 
microglia
Microglial cell
proliferation
Microglial cell 
pyroptosis
ASC speck 
release
• Complement factors
• Chemokines
• Cytokines
• Nitric oxide
• ROS
Aβ plaque
NLRP3
inflammasome
ASC speck
Microglial cell
Fig. 1 | Microglial cell responses at sites of Aβ deposition. Oligomeric or 
fibrillar amyloid-β (Aβ) acts as a danger-associated molecular pattern to activate 
surrounding microglial cells. The microglia release immune mediators, including 
complement factors, chemokines and cytokines, as well as reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) and nitric oxide. Microglia attempt to phagocytose Aβ at the site of 
deposition and can proliferate. Finally, microglia also undergo cell death at sites 
of Aβ deposition. Activation of the NACHT, LRR and PYD domains-containing 
protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome can drive an inflammatory form of cell death, 
namely pyroptosis, which is associated with the release of apoptosis-associated 
speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) specks that can promote further 
tissue inflammation.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
324
Review article
Table 1 | A non-exhaustive list of the most relevant genes with risk variants for AD
AD-related 
risk factor
Description
Suggested role in AD
ABCA7
A member of the superfamily of ABC transporters
Genome-wide association study-identified risk factor for early-onset and late-onset AD. 
Has a role in lipid homeostasis and transport in the brain and plays a role in phagocytosis 
of microglia. Defects repress Aβ clearance
ABI3
Member of an adaptor protein family that regulates actin 
polymerization
Highly expressed in microglia and relevant for Aβ plaque-mediated microglial activation. 
Loss of its activity leads to increased cytokine levels, neuroinflammation and Aβ plaque 
accumulation. Defects lead to a decrease in microglia number and mobility in the brain
ACE2
Enzyme cleaves angiotensin I and angiotensin II and is 
involved in regulating intestinal amino acid homeostasis, 
expression of antimicrobial peptides and the ecology of 
the gut microbiome
Its activity is reduced in AD brains, which correlates with increased neuroinflammation 
and oxidative stress. In the brain, ACE2 converts angiotensin II into angiotensin-(1-7), 
which protects from inflammation and oxidative stress
ADAM10
Transmembrane metalloproteinase that cleaves the 
ectodomain of transmembrane proteins, including 
adhesion proteins, growth factor precursors and 
cytokines
The α-secretase cleaves APP within the Aβ sequence, reducing Aβ production. Defects 
increase extracellular Aβ plaque formation. It is also relevant for keeping normal synapse 
functions. Relevant for hippocampal neurogenesis. It may influence tau pathology
APH1B
Functional component of the γ-secretase complex, 
which enables the intramembrane cleavage of integral 
proteins including APP
Variants are associated with increased AD risk. Component of the γ-secretase complex. 
Involved in intramembrane cleavage of APP, producing Aβ. Dysregulated expression 
increases Aβ plaque formation
APOE
A core component of plasma lipoproteins that is 
involved in their production, conversion and clearance
The ε4 allele of this risk factor is related to sporadic AD, whereas the ε2 allele is 
protective. It has a role in lipid transport and metabolism as well as in membrane 
integrity and repair. Role for metabolism and clearance of Aβ. Accumulation of more Aβ 
plaques in the presence of an ε4 variant. The ε4 variant drives earlier and more abundant 
Aβ deposits and also leads to a stronger tau aggregation and spreading. The neuronal 
ε4 variant promotes tau phosphorylation and leads to increased neuroinflammation 
and cell death
BIN1
Involved in synaptic vesicle endocytosis and may 
interact with dynamin, synaptojanin, endophilin 
and clathrin
Risk factor for late-onset AD, relevant for Aβ production and clearance and involved 
in tau pathology. It is involved in neuronal synapse transmission and also expressed in 
microglia, where it is important for their activation and their role in neuroinflammation. 
Defects lead to an accumulation of enlarged early endosomal vesicles and 
neurodegeneration as well as activation of pro-inflammatory and disease-associated 
responses of microglia
CD2AP
Scaffolding molecule that regulates the actin 
cytoskeleton
Variants of this risk factor affect its protein function and increase susceptibility for AD. 
Defects lead to increased Aβ production and plaque formation as well as to tau fibrillar 
tangle accumulation. CD2AP contributes to maintaining blood–brain barrier integrity. It 
is involved in synaptic plasticity and structure especially in pre-synapses. Also important 
for dendrite branching and spine density
CR1
Member of the receptors of complement activation 
family
This risk factor for late-onset AD plays a role in phagocytosis of Aβ, and complement 
receptor 1 variants lead to the accumulation of Aβ plaques and to increased 
neuroinflammation. It is a receptor for components of the complement system of the 
immune system, which is relevant in regulating clearance of cell debris and pathogens
ECHDC3
Enoyl-CoA hydratase domain-containing 3, 
mitochondrial
Modulates neuroinflammation and has a role in lipid metabolism and endolysosomal 
membrane trafficking
FERMT2
Scaffolding protein that enhances integrin activation 
mediated by TLN1 and/or TLN2 but activates integrins 
only weakly by itself
Relevant for APP metabolism, it modulates APP processing by direct interaction with 
APP and by processing it to Aβ. Defects promote Aβ production; it affects synaptic 
plasticity and connectivity as well as axonal growth and guidance. Low expression of 
FERMT2 has negative effects on neuronal health, axonal growth and synaptic function
HS3ST1
Member of the heparan sulfate biosynthetic enzyme 
family
Relevant for sulfation of heparan sulfate, which affects Aβ aggregation, plaque formation 
and its clearance as well as tau aggregation speed and aggregate internalization. 
3-O-sulfated heparan sulfate can be identified in AD brains. Sulfated heparan sulfate 
interacts with various receptors and proteins involved in inflammation, possibly 
impacting neuroinflammation
IL34
Cytokine that promotes the differentiation and viability 
of monocytes and macrophages through the CSF1R
Involved in monocyte differentiation. Highly relevant for development, survival 
and function of microglia. Binds to CSF1R to promote microglial cell proliferation and 
survival. Relevant for Aβ clearance
MINK1
Serine–threonine kinase that acts as a negative regulator 
of Ras-related Rap2-mediated signal transduction to 
control neuronal structure and AMPA receptor trafficking
Associated with increased AD risk. Involved in various phosphorylation pathways and 
associated with inflammation in the brain. Required for keeping synaptic integrity and 
function, thereby important for cognition and memory
PLCG2
Transmembrane signalling enzyme that catalyses 
the conversion of 1-phosphatidyl-1d-myo-inositol 
4,5-bisphosphate to 1d-myo-inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
and diacylglycerol using calcium as a cofactor
Gene variants modify AD risk. Expressed by microglia regulating their activity, including 
response to Aβ deposition. Its increased activity improves microglia functions such as 
phagocytosis. Associated with the inflammatory response via signalling pathways that 
regulate production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
325
Review article
past 15 years majorly improved our knowledge of AD genetics60, and 
GWAS and next-generation sequencing approaches have now identified 
more than 80 independent genetic loci that modulate the risk of AD61,62 
(Table 1). Pathway analysis using these genetic findings has identified 
both innate and adaptive immune responses as key contributing path-
ways for AD pathogenesis63,64. It has also been shown that many AD risk 
alleles specifically activate enhancers in microglia65. In fact, close to 
25% of the identified potential AD genetic risk factors could be highly 
or exclusively expressed by microglia and/or linked to immune-related 
function66. Several of these genes encode mediators that are involved in 
microglial responses, including factors that activate microglia (such as 
IL-34 and apolipoprotein E (APOE)), immune receptors (TREM2, tran-
scription factor PU.1 (encoded by SPI1), membrane-spanning 4-domains 
subfamily A member 4A (MS4A4A), MS4A6A, HLA-DQA1 and CD33)67, 
signalling intermediates (phospholipase Cγ2 (PLCG2), protein tyros-
ine kinase 2β (PTK2B) and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate 
5-phosphatase 1 (INPP5D)) and molecules linked with the cytoskeletal 
machinery (ABI3 and EPHA1). Other genes encode molecules linked to 
additional immune-related responses such as complement regulation 
(complement receptor 1 (CR1) and clusterin (CLU))66.
Recently, a large meta-GWAS by the European Alzheimer and 
Dementia Biobank reaffirmed most previously detected immuno-
logical loci. Crucially, it also provided genetic evidence linking the 
linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC) to AD64. Compris-
ing SHARPIN, RBCK1 and OTULIN, LUBAC is a high-confidence AD 
risk factor, unique in forming linear ubiquitin chains and pivotal in 
inflammation and immunity research. LUBAC is integral to NLRP3 
inflammasome activation, impacting innate immune responses and 
Aβ pathology in AD. It is also involved in autophagy, specifically in 
modifying TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP43)-positive neuronal 
inclusions, potentially triggering autophagic clearance. Importantly, 
the same GWAS study also supported the significance of the TNF sig-
nalling pathway in AD. Genetic loci, such as ADAM17, which encodes a 
metalloproteinase crucial for the activation of TNF signalling68, and 
TNIP1, which encodes a factor that inhibits the TNF pathway69, were 
identified. Other relevant factors include SPPL2A, which has a role 
AD-related 
risk factor
Description
Suggested role in AD
PLD3
Member of the phospholipase D family of enzymes that 
catalyse the hydrolysis of membrane phospholipids
Linked to increased risk for AD. Negative regulator of Aβ production and reduced 
expression correlates with higher Aβ plaque loads, whereas higher expression levels 
correlate to attenuated cognitive decline and lower Aβ loads in patients with AD. 
Positively linked to the number and size of endolysosomal vesicles in neurons as well  
as to Aβ metabolism
PRKD3
Serine–threonine protein kinase D family member. 
Converts transient diacylglycerol signals into prolonged 
physiological effects, downstream of PKC. Involved in 
resistance to oxidative stress
Associated with increased AD risk. May affect the production and clearance of Aβ; 
potentially involved in vesicle trafficking. Plays a role in different signalling pathways 
regulating neuronal differentiation, survival and apoptosis. Potential role in inflammatory 
responses in the brain
PTK2B
Protein tyrosine kinase that is involved in 
calcium-induced regulation of ion channels and 
activation of the MAP kinase signalling pathway
Associated with late-onset AD, interacting with Aβ as well as with tau pathology. 
Modulates Aβ toxicity and colocalizes with p-tau in AD. Relevant for regulating 
neuroinflammation by affecting microglia activity. Defects lead to increased 
neuroinflammation. Highly expressed in neurons, affecting synaptic plasticity and 
signalling. Involved in tau phosphorylation by regulating several tau-modifying kinases
SCIMP
Scaffold protein, expressed by antigen-presenting cells 
and is localized in the immunological synapse
Variants increase AD risk. Regulates immune responses in microglia upon Aβ exposure. 
Relevant for neuroinflammation as its dysregulation causes cerebral inflammation. 
Involved in pro-inflammatory signalling in Toll-like receptor-activated macrophages. 
Upregulated in microglia in mouse models of AD
SHARPIN
Involved in protein linear polyubiquitination and 
regulation of signal transduction
Related to late-onset AD. Its expression is enhanced by Aβ-induced oxidative stress. 
Relevant for the regulation of Aβ phagocytosis in peripherial macrophages. Enhances 
Aβ clearance and reduces Aβ plaque load. It has a role in regulating inflammatory 
responses in the brain by activation of the NF-κB pathway
SLC2A4
Protein that functions as an insulin-regulated facilitative 
glucose transporter
Insulin-regulated glucose transporter. Defects or dysfunction contribute to insulin 
resistance and metabolic deficits in AD, which can increase oxidative stress and 
neuroinflammation. Upregulated in AD temporal cortex microglia and involved in 
fuelling active synapses in neurons
SORL1
Sortilin-related receptor. Sorting receptor for 
several cellular proteins, including APP
Associated with AD risk and relevant for processing and trafficking of APP away from 
sites producing Aβ. It interacts with APOE and tau and may affect tau aggregation and 
spreading. Involved in Aβ clearance
TREM2
Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2. 
Forms a receptor signalling complex with TYROBP to 
mediate cell activation. Can bind APP cleavage products
Associated with late-onset AD affecting Aβ clearance and tau expression, aggregation, 
spreading, and its phosphorylation. Primarily expressed by microglia and relevant for 
their survival, proliferation and function. Modulates inflammatory responses via galectin 
3 and is involved in regulating the production of cytokines and chemokines
UNC5C
Belongs to the UNC5 family of netrin receptors. Receptor 
for netrin required for axon guidance
Associated with developing AD and late-onset AD. Enhances neuronal susceptibility  
to Aβ toxicity and promotes cell death via apoptosis, in particular in the absence of 
netrin 1. Relevant in DAPK1-mediated tau hyperphosphorylation and neuronal apoptosis 
in relation to Aβ accumulation and tau pathology. Related to changes in brain structure 
and atrophy rates in the hippocampus and precuneus
Aβ, amyloid-β; AD, Alzheimer disease; APOE, apolipoprotein E; APP, Aβ precursor protein; CSF1R, colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor.
Table 1 (continued) | A non-exhaustive list of the most relevant genes with risk variants for AD

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
326
Review article
in non-canonical TNF shedding70, and progranulin (PGRN, encoded 
by GRN), which functions as a TNF receptor ligand and antagonist71.
Genetics studies also suggest a role for adaptive immune 
responses mediated by HLA-DRB1 (and more specifically a protective 
role of the HLA-DRB1*04 subtype), potentially by enabling immune 
targeting of tau, especially the K311-acetylated form of tau72 that 
potentiates aggregation of the tau PHF6 fragment73. Importantly, AD 
research has also shown that tau pathology depends on Aβ42-evoked 
neuroinflammation and may be linked to microglia connecting both 
major pathological hallmarks of AD74–76. Functional genomics will now 
be the focus of ongoing work to enable the translation of genetic risk 
factors to therapeutics.
Epigenetics
Emerging evidence points to an important role of epigenetics in the 
regulation of microglia during AD pathogenesis77–80. Microglia, as well 
as other tissue-resident macrophages, show a high degree of epige-
netic heterogeneity between tissues and disease states81. They also 
display lineage-specific characteristics and epigenetically primed 
responses according to the context and previous events82,83. Chroma-
tin compaction84, DNA methylation85,86, and histone acetylation83,87, 
methylation83,88,89, phosphorylation84,90 or lactylation91 are modified in 
microglia in response to different stimuli. Additionally, microglia are 
also regulated by non-coding RNAs, among which microRNAs (miRNAs) 
seem to play a prominent role in controlling microglia-specific gene 
expression and proteostasis. Changes in microglia-specific miRNAs are 
observed in liquid biopsies from patients with early AD and can predict 
disease progression92,93. While such epigenetic alterations can persist 
and may even transmit across generations, they are also reversible94. 
Interventions targeting epigenetic mechanisms, including treatment 
with DNA methylation95 and histone deacetylase (HDAC)96 inhibitors, 
RNA therapeutics93,97, and depletion of key components of the epige-
netic machinery such as DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1)98, ten-eleven 
translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2)99, HDAC1 and 
HDAC2 (refs. 83,100), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1)101, polycomb protein embryonic 
ectoderm development88,102, and Jumonji domain-containing protein 3 
(JMJD3)89, can modify microglial cell responses. Intriguingly, these 
effects can differ based on contextual factors and the brain’s prior state, 
leading to contrasting outcomes during brain development, homeo-
stasis and disease81,100,103,104. In conclusion, epigenetic processes help to 
shape microglia dynamics and responses to future events83,105–107, mak-
ing the epigenome an attractive drug target. Whether this hypothesis 
will withstand causal validation with epigenetic editing tools remains 
to be determined but, currently, it provides an exciting framework 
for future work.
The exposome — can lifestyle factors 
modulate inflammation?
While genetic and epigenetic influences may still be viewed as ‘given’ 
and ‘unchangeable’, several lifestyle behaviours and environmental 
factors, which are collectively described as the exposome, modify the 
risk of developing AD. Several of these factors are directly or indirectly 
linked to the immune system, as we summarize below.
Brain trauma
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is one of the most important non-genetic, 
non-age-related risk factors for developing dementia, which correlates 
consistently with the number and severity of TBIs108–110. An association 
between a single moderate-to-severe TBI and AD neuropathology is less 
clear, with multiple studies showing no association111,112; however, other 
studies have found an association between TBI with a loss of conscious-
ness and increased Aβ plaque burden, suggesting that the severity of TBI 
relates to Aβ deposition113,114. Notably, exposure to years of repetitive 
mild TBIs (such as those that occur in contact and collision sports as 
well as in military soldiers exposed to multiple mild concussive events) 
is a risk factor for developing chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a neu-
rodegenerative disease characterized by tau pathology in the cortical 
sulci and around blood vessels115,116. Both a single moderate-to-severe 
TBI and repetitive mild TBIs are associated with chronic vascular injury 
and blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption117,118 as well as with persistent 
microgliosis119,120. Additionally, Aβ precursor protein (APP) is accu-
mulated in axons with diffuse injury after TBI, increasing the risk for 
Aβ accumulation121. Due to the elevated levels of neuroinflammation 
common to TBI and AD, it is hypothesized that immune responses 
that occur after TBI accelerate or even trigger AD-prone neuropatho-
logical cascades during normal ageing or in individuals with a specific 
genetic predisposition. Even after a mild TBI, microglia and astrocytes 
remain persistently reactive122, secreting inflammatory mediators, 
such as IL-1β, IL-6, TNF and ASC, that contribute to neurodegenera-
tion post-injury through increased APP transcription123, γ-secretase 
expression124, reduced microglial phagocytosis125, and pathological 
post-translational modifications of tau such as hyperphosphorylation74 
and acetylation126. Furthermore, in a vicious cycle, the accumulation 
of toxic peptides and proteins associated with neurodegenerative dis-
orders may also enhance and perpetuate glial responses to traumatic 
injury, leading to significantly higher secondary damage and acceler-
ated neurodegeneration127. Persistent neuroinflammation following 
TBI may also mediate the increased risk for other neurodegenerative 
diseases such as Lewy body disease111,128 and TDP43 disease129.
Diet and exercise
Several lifestyle factors influence dementia risk via neuroinflamma-
tory processes130,131. Higher physical activity132,133 is associated with 
reduced dementia risk and lower inflammatory markers in human 
blood134,135. The association with cognitive performance is largely 
mediated by the amount of activated microglia136. In animal models, 
increased physical activity as well as an enriched environment attenuate 
the neuroinflammatory response to Aβ pathology, resulting in reduced 
cytokine release134,137–141, altered microglial phagocytic activity141–143 
and improved cognition137,138,140,142,143. By contrast, a sedentary lifestyle 
combined with lack of a balanced diet increases the risk for midlife 
obesity, midlife hypertension and diabetes144,145, which are established 
risk factors for dementia131. These processes can induce wide-ranging 
metabolic changes and systemic chronic inflammation146,147. Systemic 
inflammation and innate immune memory can, in turn, affect neuro-
inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes in the brain83,148,149. 
Accordingly, pro-inflammatory dietary patterns associate with 
cognitive decline-related blood-proteome changes150, high risk for 
dementia151 and reduced brain volume152, while opposite association 
patterns are observed for a balanced, Mediterranean diet153–157. Promot-
ing an active, stimulating lifestyle and a balanced diet (for example, by 
multi-domain behavioural interventions158) therefore holds promise in 
preventing dementia and reducing neuroinflammation in AD.
Systemic infection and inflammation
It is generally accepted that peripheral inflammation impacts demen-
tia. For example, enhanced cognitive decline was consistently found 
in patients with existing AD pathology who additionally experienced 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
327
Review article
peripheral infections (for a review see Bettcher et al.159). Many infec-
tions are linked with a significantly increased risk for developing AD 
and vascular dementia, and increasing numbers of infections increase 
risk in a cumulative fashion160. In mice, it has been shown that sys-
temic inflammation induced by exposure to bacterial lipopolysac-
charide (LPS) exacerbated Aβ and tau pathology, for example, through 
enhanced inflammatory activation and reduced clearance of Aβ and 
tau148,161,162. Interestingly, not only external bacterial challenges but 
also sterile inflammatory, autoimmune and allergic responses affect 
brain inflammation163. In humans, elevated levels of TNF and acute sys-
temic inflammatory events were associated with more rapid cognitive 
decline over a 6-month period160. Exacerbated pathology is often due 
to enhanced inflammatory responses in the brain of patients, and this 
is also seen in animal models.
Mechanistically, inflammation causes ‘priming’ of microglia that 
leads to a severe inflammatory response in the pathologically altered 
brain and, in turn, drives further functional deterioration164,165. Inter-
estingly, epidemiological studies have also provided strong evidence 
that peripheral inflammation increases dementia risk when the inflam-
matory insult occurs up to two decades earlier166. The mechanisms of 
these long-term effects are much less clear but may involve epigenetic 
reprogramming of microglia, leading to long-lasting innate immune 
memory (or ‘trained immunity’) in the brain that is sufficient to alter AD 
pathology in mouse models83. Such epigenetically driven changes have 
been described in peripheral macrophages165,167, but whether microglial 
innate immune memory also exists in the human brain requires further 
investigation. Trained immunity may have beneficial functions in the 
periphery, such as enhanced pathogen clearance, but it may drive 
hyperinflammation in the brain, thereby exacerbating pathology. There 
is some evidence that patients with AD who died with infection show 
higher levels of brain IL-1β than those who died without infection168 and 
LPS-induced systemic inflammation is known to potentiate IL-1β activ-
ity, driving further inflammasome activation and exacerbating both 
Aβ and tau pathology. Conversely, while immune tolerance may lead 
to immune paralysis in the periphery, increasing the risk for secondary 
infections, it may be beneficial in the brain by inhibiting detrimental 
microglial reactivity83,167.
Poor oral health and periodontitis
Periodontal disease represents a subtle and chronic form of peripheral 
inflammation. Support for an influencing role of oral hygiene comes 
from works linking microbiome dysbiosis to the development of 
dementia in later life169,170. LPS from the outer surface membrane 
of Gram-negative bacteria is a strong immune system activator171. The 
Gram-negative anaerobe Porphyromonas gingivalis is considered a 
keystone bacterium172 in generalized periodontitis173. This bacterium 
and its virulence factors are found in autopsied AD brains174–176. The 
infection is responsible for causing extensive oxidative damage in 
a genetically modified ApoE knockout (ApoE-/-) mouse model orally 
infected with P. gingivalis to initiate experimental periodontitis177. 
P. gingivalis infection and P. gingivalis–LPS-induced neuroinflammation 
were studied in mouse models178–181 and it was reported that P. gingivalis 
induced classical complement pathway activation following oral infec-
tions. A subsequent report demonstrated release of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, such as TNF, IL-6 and IL-1β, in the brains of middle-aged mice 
and also highlighted the involvement of the TLR4–NF-κB signalling 
pathway181. Another study found several types of microglial reactiv-
ity states182 similar to those that account for cytokine secretion in the 
human brain183. Taken together, there are multiple hints that oral health 
my influence the risk and course of AD. Further clinical and experimen-
tal data have to identify the precise mechanisms and time at which oral 
health interacts with disease pathogenesis.
Gut microbiome
In addition to the oral microbiome, the gut microbiome may influ-
ence immune processes in the brain. It was shown in mice that the gut 
microbiome essentially educates and shapes microglia responses to 
pathological insults. Strikingly, rats receiving faecal transplantation 
from patients with AD develop AD-like symptoms184. Conversely, faecal 
transplantation from healthy mice to AD model animals reduces disease 
pathology185,186. Disease microbiomes can be modified, for example, 
the traditional Indian medicine Triphala was shown to positively affect 
cognitive parameters in mice with AD and reduce serum Aβ levels by 
shifting the microbiome to Bacteriodetes and Verrucomicrobiota phyla 
with a reduction of Cyanobacteria187.
There are several routes of communication between the gut micro-
biome and the brain, including the vagus nerve, the stress-associated 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, direct or indirect modulation of 
neurotransmitters and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and other metab-
olites (reviewed in refs. 188,189). The BBB controls brain entry of periph-
eral immune cells and immune mediators. Microbiome-originated LPS 
and SCFAs may impair the permeability of the BBB190–192 and affect 
homeostasis, maturation and reactive microgliosis, for example, by 
SCFA binding to free fatty acid receptor 2 or TLR4 (refs. 193,194). In 
germ-free195 mice, the BBB has a higher permeability192. The BBB per-
meability in germ-free mice is rescued by mono-colonization with 
SCFA-producing bacterial strains192.
In germ-free mice, there are global defects in microglia mor-
phology and maturity. Temporal eradication of the microbiome 
subsequently leads to severe changes in microglial properties193. 
Microglia in germ-free animals have enhanced Aβ uptake at early dis-
ease stages196 and protect against tau-related neurodegeneration197. 
Antibiotic-induced microbiome depletion disrupts the BBB in adult 
mice198 and may allow peripheral immune cells to enter the brain199. 
Therapy with Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus species-based pro-
biotics after antibiotic administration improves BBB integrity and 
memory deficits in mouse models of AD187,200. In addition, micro­bially 
derived metabolites from tryptophan and indole that access the brain201 
have an anti-inflammatory effect on microglia and astrocytes. These 
metabolites bind the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, which then inhib-
its NF-κB-mediated pro-inflammatory pathways202–204. Primary and 
secondary bile acids that cross the BBB bind to microglial Takeda 
G protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR5) and induce an anti-inflammatory 
phenotype205 by inhibiting the pro-inflammatory NF-κB pathway via 
protein kinase A206,207, therefore also blocking activation of the NLRP3 
inflammasome208. The conjugated bile acid tauroursodeoxycholic acid 
reduces gliosis in the context of AD, resulting in reduced Aβ plaque 
formation and cognitive decline209. Despite these various lines of evi-
dence for a disease-modulating role, the precise mechanisms through 
which microbiome alterations interfere with disease progression need 
to be better understood.
Additional environmental or personal lifestyle factors may 
contribute to AD pathogenesis by stimulating, aggravating or accel-
erating neuroinflammation but such an influence may depend on the 
genetic background of each individual. Studying gene–exposome 
interactions may therefore be important to pinpoint which genetic 
backgrounds and lifestyle factors combine to mediate detrimental as 
well as protective effects in AD.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
328
Review article
Microglia and pathophysiological processes in AD
Microglial cell transcriptomes and differences between 
murine and human microglia
In the central nervous system (CNS), local macrophages exist in two distinct 
flavours: either as juxta-neuronal macrophages in the parenchyma — 
where they are traditionally called microglia — or as resident macro­
phages at CNS interfaces such as the leptomeninges, the perivascular 
space and choroid plexus210–212. These border macrophages comprise 
the CNS-associated macrophages (CAMs) (Box 1). CAMs are positioned 
at strategically important CNS boundaries but their functions are not 
yet fully understood as was recently discussed96,213–215.
Nevertheless, the identification of microglial phenotypes that are 
associated with neurodegeneration216 in mouse models of AD217 has 
sparked considerable interest in these cells. However, mouse models of 
AD only partially recapitulate the complex brain environment encoun-
tered in patients with AD. Human microglia respond to a plethora of 
environmental signals in the AD brain and genetic variations can also 
affect microglial function. Bulk analysis of microglia isolated from 
the brain tissue of children or adults who were cognitively healthy led 
to the identification of a homeostatic microglial cell gene expression 
signature218,219. Homeostatic microglial marker genes include genes 
encoding microglia-enriched surface receptors such as CX3CR1, P2RY12 
and TMEM119. The generation of single-cell and single-nuclei transcrip-
tomic data from isolated human microglia has revealed multiple, small 
subclusters — microglial states — that differ from homeostatic microglia 
and are characterized by the upregulation of distinct marker genes220,221. 
In neurotypical brains, the upregulation of genes encoding MHC class 
II-associated molecules, such as CD74 and HLA-DRA, by microglia sug-
gests that they can participate in antigen presentation in the brain. Other 
microglial cell activation states include interferon-responsive microglia 
(expressing, for example, interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 
(IFITM3), interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 
(IFIT1), IFIT3 and ubiquitin-like protein ISG15), inflammatory micro-
glia (expressing, for example, CC-chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), CCL3 
and CCL4), proliferative microglia (expressing, for example, MKI67 and 
PCNA), and a small subset reminiscent of mouse disease-associated 
microglia (DAM) that expresses APOE and lipoprotein lipase221.
However, data on gene expression profiles of human microglia 
states in AD is still limited. Compared to microglia from mouse models, 
human AD-associated microglia show a higher degree of variation. 
This is probably due to manifold environmental and genetic dif-
ferences but also may arise due to technical reasons (for example, 
differences in microglia isolation and sequencing technologies). 
Nevertheless, isolation of microglial cells from AD brains and subse-
quent analysis of the transcriptome has provided important insights 
into microglial cell activation states220,222. Reflecting the complex 
environmental changes in AD, signature genes for DAM were found 
across several microglial cell clusters, whereas numbers of MHC class 
II-positive microglia were reduced220. Comparison with mouse micro-
glia isolated from an Aβ mutant mouse model showed only a partial 
overlap between mouse and human DAM signatures, with the com-
mon denominator being genes associated with lipid metabolism and 
lysosomal function223. Regressing microglia gene expression against 
Aβ and p-tau load revealed that these pathologies are characterized 
by distinct gene expression responses in microglia222. As mentioned 
above, the gene expression profile of mouse microglia substantially 
differs from human microglia already under homeostatic conditions. 
One strategy that can measure the impact of different environmental 
stimuli on human microglia is the transplantation of human induced 
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell-derived haematopoietic progenitor cells 
(HPCs) into the brain of immunodeficient mice224 that overexpress 
human colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF1), which supports human 
microglia survival225,226. The presence of Aβ resulted in the transition 
of iPS cell-derived HPCs to DAM that, again, showed only a partial over-
lap in gene expression when compared to the murine DAM signature. 
An advantage of such chimeric mouse models is the possibility to inves-
tigate the response of human microglia to microglial cell-autonomous 
genetic perturbations such as the loss of TREM2. Deletion of TREM2 in 
human microglia resulted in the loss of the DAM response in AD-like 
chimeric mouse models and changed microglia function as evidenced 
by impaired phagocytosis and chemotaxis227. Single-cell RNA sequenc-
ing of xenografted iPS cell-derived HPCs with the TREM2 R47H loss-of-
function variant identified a cluster that resembled foam cells seen in 
atherosclerosis228. Collectively, these transplantation studies may help 
to provide more biological and mechanistic insights into the varying 
microglial cell states in the context of different environmental stimuli. 
However, limitations of the chimeric models include the murine and 
immunocompromised background.
Although we have gained substantial insights into various 
microglial cell states and their underlying gene expression profiles 
Box 1 | CNS-associated macrophages:  
an overview
 
For many years, the ontogeny of central nervous system (CNS)-
associated macrophages was unclear and they were thought to 
originate from bone marrow-derived monocytes589. However, 
elegant fate-mapping experiments have proven their prenatal 
origin from distinct yolk sac progenitors described as c-KIT+ 
non-committed erythromyeloid progenitors590,591. These progenitors 
engraft via the CNS surface to the embryonic mouse brain 
parenchyma at embryonic day 9.5 where they locally migrate, 
expand and finally gain their typical arborized morphology. 
Microglia are relatively long-lived cells with a lifespan of several 
years, and they divide very slowly at estimated rates of about 0.5% 
with considerable differences in various CNS regions in mouse 
and human592–594. Microglial cells in the steady-state CNS undergo 
self-renewal without any input from circulating haematopoietic cells, 
which are excluded by the tight blood–brain barrier595,596. As typical 
tissue macrophages, microglial cells are thought to be extremely 
sensitive to even minute changes in their microenvironment. As 
such, they are considered to be tremendously plastic cells that can 
quickly adopt multiple functional and morphological phenotypes, 
influenced by environmental cues. The recent advent of several 
novel single-cell technologies and innovative fate-mapping 
studies have shed new light on the transcriptional and cellular 
heterogeneity of microglia in mouse and human597. Microglial cells 
are characterized by distinct transcriptional, epigenetic, proteomic 
and functional profiles during development, homeostasis and 
perturbation214,598. During pathology, several microglial states 
have been defined leading to a perplexing nomenclature of 
context-associated microglial signatures214,217,221,281,599–601. Whether 
this endless description of putative novel microglial clusters or 
even subsets is meaningful and whether these reflect real distinct 
biological conditions remains to be determined.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
329
Review article
in recent years, the transcriptional mechanisms by which different 
environmental cues in AD drive these distinct phenotypes are largely 
unknown. Recent advances in sequencing technologies, including 
ATAC-Seq and ChIP-Seq scRNA, may help us to infer key transcrip-
tion factors responsible for context-dependent gene expression in 
microglia. Transfer of human microglia from the brain into a culture 
environment results in rapid chromatin remodelling with altera-
tions in chromatin accessibility and active gene regulatory elements, 
mainly enhancers219. A multi-omics study assessing microglia chro-
matin accessibility and gene expression in AD brains identified SPI1 
(which encodes PU.1) as a key regulator of microglia in AD79. Other 
transcription factors of interest include members of the MAF, AP-1 
and microphthalmia (MIT/TFE) families, which were shown to be 
upregulated in microglia isolated from AD brains222. Clarification of 
the key transcriptional regulators of microglial states may lead to the 
development of novel strategies for selectively targeting microglia 
phenotypes.
Microglial phagocytosis in AD
Phagocytosis may be influenced by many of the genes associated with 
AD that are expressed by microglia, including TREM2, PLCG2, ABI3, 
CD33, PILRA (encoding paired immunoglobulin-like type 2 receptor-α), 
SIGLEC11 (encoding sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectin 11), 
ABCA1 and ABCA7 (encoding phospholipid-transporting ATPase ABCA1 
and ABCA7, respectively), CR1 (encoding CR1), GRN, CLU and APOE229. 
APOE can opsonize Aβ plaques, synapses or neurons, and then con-
secutively activate TREM2, PLCG2 and ABI3 to induce microglial 
phagocytosis; this pathway is potentially inhibited by CD33, PILRα 
and SIGLEC11 (ref. 229). Thus, most of the known genetic AD risk vari-
ants are potentially linked to microglial phagocytosis, but it remains 
unclear whether this concerns the phagocytosis of soluble Aβ, Aβ 
plaques, dead cells and debris, myelin debris, live synapses, or even 
whole neurons. Aβ plaque-associated microglia show increased 
expression of TREM2, which can bind Aβ, inducing phagocytosis 
of Aβ, causing compaction of Aβ plaques, and reducing Aβ seeding of 
new plaques216,217,230,231. Accordingly, antibodies that increased TREM2 
expression and signalling reduced Aβ plaque burden in a mouse model 
of amyloidosis102. Activation of TREM2 can induce a DAM expression 
profile in microglia, including increased expression of the phagocytic 
receptors Axl and Mer217, which also have increased expression in Aβ 
plaque-associated microglia232. Knockout of Axl and Mer in a mouse 
Aβ model lowered Aβ phagocytosis by tenfold and led to a surprising 
and selective reduction in the number of dense-core Aβ plaques. This 
suggests that microglial phagocytosis of Aβ via this class of receptors 
leads to the formation of dense-core plaques by microglia, which is 
arguably a protective confinement mechanism to prevent the release 
of toxic Aβ species232.
Fc receptors have also been shown to mediate microglial phago-
cytosis of Aβ species bound to immune complexes233. This is presumed 
to be one of the mechanisms underlying the Aβ-clearing effects of the 
anti-Aβ antibodies aducanumab and lecanemab, which were recently 
approved by the FDA for AD. Although there are still considerable con-
cerns associated with the use of these anti-Aβ antibodies, they clearly 
highlight and validate the potential of Aβ clearance by microglia as a 
promising therapeutic avenue (Box 2).
Nonetheless, in later stages of AD pathology, microglial phago-
cytosis may contribute to synapse loss (see synapse section below) 
and neuronal loss. TREM2 can mediate microglial phagocytosis of 
synapses in Aβ or tau models of AD234–236. Mer can mediate microglial 
phagocytosis of newborn neurons in Aβ mouse models, limiting neu-
rogenesis and seizures237. Aggregated and oligomeric tau can induce 
microglial phagocytosis of live neurons in vitro or in vivo, and this 
neuronal loss can be prevented by blocking microglial phagocytosis, 
which also prevented memory loss in mice238–240. Thus, microglial 
phagocytosis of Aβ, synapses and neurons may affect AD onset and 
progression, and interventions need to focus on the specific phagocytic 
receptors involved at different stages of disease.
Microglial barrier function
Beyond these clearance functions, microglia also form a barrier around 
sites of degeneration and injury. In AD, microglia cluster around Aβ 
plaques, wrapping their processes tightly around the plaque surface. 
This encapsulation creates a physical barrier that limits Aβ plaque expan-
sion and leads to a more compact conformation of the Aβ deposit241,242. 
Surrounding each Aβ plaque are hundreds of neurites with spheroid 
enlargements243 that disrupt electrical conduction and neural circuit 
function244. Microglia encapsulation of plaques plays a crucial role in 
protecting axons by limiting their exposure to toxic protofibrillar Aβ242. 
Box 2 | Anti-Aβ immunotherapies for AD
 
Although there are multiple mechanisms to explain the efficacy of 
anti-amyloid-β (Aβ) immunotherapies, data from both successful 
and failed human Alzheimer disease (AD) clinical trials support the 
concept that preferential targeting of deposited Aβ and subsequent 
microglial reactivity underlies efficacy. Thus, these interventions 
represent a major translational success for the field, as the proof 
of concept and mechanism of action was first obtained in Aβ-
depositing mouse models. Additional immune therapies are now 
being evaluated both in preclinical studies and in human clinical 
trials. However, there is little consensus regarding how to best 
evaluate these novel therapies in preclinical models and which 
models should be used. As the balance of positive (for example, 
Aβ and/or tau reduction, synaptic integrity) and negative effects 
(for example, excessive synaptic pruning, overt toxicities, impacts 
on peripheral immune status) of any manipulation may limit 
therapeutic benefit, the field would be well-served to utilize a 
rigorous and systematic approach to evaluate these therapies 
in models before human trials.
Indeed, the examples of immune modulation that have 
opposing effects on Aβ and tau pathologies in mice illustrate 
why we should insist on a more rigorous and systematic approach 
to testing these novel therapies before moving them into human 
trials. Few in the field would be comfortable with advancing a 
therapy for AD that had opposing effects on the classic core 
pathologies. Yet, most immune interventions are advanced to 
the clinic without rigorous testing in both models and with only 
limited study of impacts on the peripheral immune system. 
To increase the probability of translational success and reduce 
the potential for doing harm we might consider using systems-
level omics studies both at a cellular and multiorgan level to 
assess potential benefits and liabilities of novel immune therapies. 
Indeed, immune manipulation in a population of older individuals 
with AD or at high risk for developing AD raises many safety 
concerns, and we should try to de-risk these interventions as 
much as possible.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
330
Review article
Microglia Aβ plaque sensing and encapsulation are disrupted in 
ageing242 and with hypomorphic TREM2 human variants245 as well as 
by deletion of Trem2 (refs. 245,246) or disruption of downstream DAP12 
and SYK signalling247,248 in mice. Additional receptors, including the 
receptor tyrosine kinase MERTK232 and PIEZO1 (the pore-forming subu-
nit of the mechanosensitive Piezo channel)249, may also mediate micro-
glial cell plaque sensing and barrier formation. Disruption of these 
signals is associated with more diffuse Aβ plaques and greater axonal 
spheroid formation245,246 and neuritic tau hyperphosphorylation250. In 
contrast, overexpression of Trem2 (ref. 251) or treatment with activating 
TREM2 antibodies252 enhances microglia encapsulation and reduces 
plaque-associated axonal pathology in mouse models of cerebral Aβ 
deposition. Astrocytes intermingle with microglia at the plaque inter-
face, suggesting a coordinated interaction during barrier formation253, 
which may be mediated through TREM2 and APOE signalling254. Overall, 
the evidence suggests that targeting microglia and astroglial cells in 
AD to enhance the formation of neuroprotective barriers could yield 
beneficial therapeutic effects.
Microglial cell proliferation
Microgliosis due to increased microglial cell proliferation represents 
another key feature of AD (Fig. 1) and predicts the onset of cognitive 
decline255. An increase in the proliferation of microglia is observed 
in post-mortem samples from patients with AD in association with 
upregulation of the CSF1 receptor (CSF1R) pathway256–258. CSF1R gene 
variants may associate with the risk of developing AD259, although this 
has not yet been confirmed by meta-GWAS analyses. However, studies 
using mouse models of cerebral Aβ pathology have helped to elucidate 
the timing and consequences of microglial proliferation. An accepted 
mechanistic model suggests that there is an early microglial response 
to nascent Aβ pathology that triggers microglial proliferation, and 
this has been observed using in vivo imaging in mice242. Microglial 
proliferation increases progressively in proximity to Aβ plaques in a 
CSF1R-dependent manner258. Prevention of microglial proliferation via 
inhibition of the tyrosine kinase activity of CSF1R impedes the degen-
eration of synapses, ameliorating cognition deficits without modifying 
the levels of Aβ in the APP/PS1 model258, the 3xTg model260 and 5xFAD 
mouse model261,262 of cerebral Aβ pathology. Microglial proliferation 
can be prevented using alternative agents, such as the antibiotic mino-
cycline, rendering similar beneficial effects over AD-like pathology263. 
The inhibition of CSF1R is also a disease-modifying mechanism in a 
model of tauopathy, leading to reduced neurodegeneration and an 
improvement in behavioural performance. Functionally, prevention of 
microglial proliferation induces a return of microglia to a homeostatic 
phenotype258,264. Interestingly, inhibition of microglial proliferation is 
linked to prevention of the onset of replicative senescence in microglia 
associated with specification of the DAM phenotype265. Collectively, 
these studies point to microglial proliferation as a mechanism under-
pinning the contribution of microglia to disease pathology and identify 
CSF1R as a possible therapeutic target. This body of evidence has led 
to promising drug discovery programmes266 and, in coming years, the 
field will collect valuable clinical information about their potential 
efficacy in AD.
Microglial energy metabolism
Metabolically, the brain is a highly active organ and its energy demand 
is predominantly fuelled by glucose. Glycolytic signalling can power 
inflammatory activity in macrophages and peripheral immune cells, 
yet we are still uncovering the extent to which such signalling impacts 
microglia. In primary microglia, Aβ can increase glycolysis with a cor-
responding reduction in oxidative phosphorylation267. This switch to 
glycolysis activates the mTOR–HIF1α pathway, which in turn directly 
regulates the production of inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1β267. 
Similar effects have been found in murine models of AD, where micro-
glia from APP/PS1 mice show increased glycolytic activity268. This was 
recently shown to be sex-dependent as microglia from aged female 
APP/PS1 mice are more glycolytic and inflammatory than those from 
their male counterparts, with a corresponding reduction in phagocytic 
ability269. Whether this finding relates to sex differences in AD remains 
to be further investigated. Interestingly, microglia are metabolically 
flexible and not solely reliant on glucose. Instead, they can also use 
amino acids, such as glutamine, or fatty acid oxidation to fuel important 
surveillance and migratory activities270. Recent studies indicate that, 
in microglia and macrophages, glycolysis and mitochondrial function 
decline significantly with ageing, leading to an energy-depleted state 
that disrupts homeostatic cell responses such as phagocytosis and 
inflammation resolution. Several mechanisms have been identified 
that contribute to this change. With age and immune stimulation, mye-
loid cells lose their capacity for de novo NAD+ biosynthesis because of a 
distal breakdown in tryptophan metabolism271. Moreover, with ageing, 
glucose is shunted away from glycolysis and towards the production 
of glycogen, an effect driven by increased signalling by the immune 
modulator prostaglandin E2 via its EP2 receptor272. EP2 signalling also 
disrupts glutaminolysis in ageing myeloid cells, an alternative source 
of energy that fuels the tricarboxylic acid cycle and mitochondrial 
respiration via anapleurosis. Inhibition of EP2 signalling genetically and 
pharmacologically restores bioenergetics and homeostatic immune 
responses in microglia and macrophages and reverses age-associated 
cognitive decline. Recent studies also identified TREM1 as a disruptor 
of homeostatic myeloid glucose metabolism that contributes to cog-
nitive decline in ageing and in models of amyloidosis. Thus, myeloid 
metabolism directs immune responses in microglia and macrophages, 
which in turn regulate cognitive function in ageing and models of 
neurodegeneration.
Microglial lipid metabolism
The majority of the brain dry mass comprises lipids (in white matter, 
lipids constitute 49–66% of the dry mass; in grey matter, this figure is 
36–40%)273. In recent years, lipid metabolism and membrane transport 
have been shown to have important roles in AD neuropathogenesis274–276. 
It became clear that, due to ROS production in AD, lipids containing 
polyunsaturated fatty acids are peroxidized, leading to the formation 
of toxic lipid peroxidation byproducts that can crosslink with DNA 
and amino acids in proteins277,278. It seems that ROS induces lipid syn-
thesis in neurons and storage of peroxidized lipids in lipid droplets, 
which are then transferred via APOD or APOE to glial cells as a neuro­
protective measure279. The CMS121 inhibitor of fatty acid synthase 
reduces lipid peroxidation and inflammation in AD280. In ageing and 
neurodegeneration, accumulation of lipid droplets can be observed 
in microglia, which leads to a pro-inflammatory cell phenotype228,281. 
Phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM) 
and homozygosity for the APOEε4 allele are also linked to microglial 
lipid droplet formation in AD282,283 and raised total cholesterol levels284 
that, in turn, cause problems in neurons285. Lipid droplet accumulation 
in microglia in the context of tauopathies is regulated by AMPK286. 
The accumulation of these lipid droplets reduces microglial cell abili-
ties to phagocytose and clear aggregates287,288. In addition, it has been 
shown that a loss-of-function mutation in the innate immune receptor 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
331
Review article
TREM2 leads to lysosomal defects as well as to a downregulation of 
cholesterol synthesis and lipid droplet formation in microglia289. Fur-
thermore, Aβ aggregation takes place at neutral membranes and is 
dependent on membrane composition290. Microglial cell-mediated 
Aβ monomer degradation accelerates upon APOE-mediated efflux of 
cholesterol from the cell291. Long-term exposure to a high-fat diet292 
as well as several regulators of lipid metabolism, such as cholesterol 
25-hydroxylase (CH25H)293, INPP5D294, the transcriptional repressors 
BHLHE40 and BHLHE41 (ref. 295), MS4A4A296, transient receptor poten-
tial cation channel subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1)297 and hexokinase 2 
(HK2)298, have also been linked to inflammation in the setting of tauopa-
thies. Strategies that target microglial function in the context of lipid 
metabolism have emerged as novel therapeutics276.
Microglial senescence
Cellular senescence is a hallmark of ageing and age-associated diseases, 
including AD. Senescent cells are characterized by an irreversible pro-
liferation arrest and profound changes in their metabolism and behav-
iour, preventing them from executing their physiological function. In 
addition, senescent cells frequently display a senescence-associated 
secretory phenotype (SASP) that is characterized by the release of 
various pro-inflammatory factors299. SASP factors were detected in 
the brain, CSF and serum of patients with AD300–303, and these fac-
tors are associated with aged and potentially senescent microglia304. 
Interestingly, microglial cell-mediated inflammation, especially that 
driven by the SASP factor IL-1β, was shown to contribute to tau spread-
ing and tau-mediated neurodegeneration74,161,305,306. In line with this, 
microglia have been identified as a putative senescent population 
in tauopathies, including AD265,302,307,308. Senescent microglia devel-
oped before the onset of neurofibrillary tangle deposition in human 
P301S tau-transgenic mice (PS19 mice); using single-cell RNA sequenc-
ing, these microglia were found to represent a subset of DAM309. 
Remarkably, removal of senescent cells, either genetically or with 
senescence-targeting pharmacological means, alleviated tau pathol-
ogy, tau-mediated neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits in this 
model307, suggesting that senescent microglia contribute to disease 
progression. Cellular senescence can be induced via multiple pathways. 
The sustained proliferation of microglia in Aβ-depositing APP/PS1 mice 
promoted replicative senescence, ultimately fuelling Aβ accumula-
tion and synaptic defects265. Furthermore, microglia internalizing tau 
aggregate-bearing neurons or monomeric tau from the extracellular 
space enter a senescent state and present with a SASP310,311 that might 
modulate AD pathology, neuronal function and neurodegeneration. 
While senescent glial cells seem to be involved in AD pathogenesis as 
outlined above, a unifying set of markers for microglial senescence and 
the SASP has not yet been defined. Further studies will have to detail 
markers of senescence and assess their occurrence over the course of 
AD longitudinally, both in the brains of patients with AD and in related 
mouse models.
Which other cells drive neuroinflammation in AD?
Astrocytes
Astrocytes support the normal development and maintenance of the 
CNS and are vital for neuronal health and function312,313. The response of 
astrocytes during acute infection or brain injury and in chronic disease 
states is referred to as astrocyte reactivity. Any one particular reactive 
response may include several heterogeneous reactive ‘sub-states’ — 
each with distinct transcriptomic profiles and possible functional 
outcomes312,314. The response of astrocytes to neurodegenerative 
diseases like AD has been linked to inflammatory responses of micro-
glia and peripheral immune cells, pathological proteins like Aβ and tau, 
barrier leakage, and many other pathological indications315.
While there are many initiators of astrocyte reactive states in AD, 
the main hallmarks are hypertrophy of astrocytic processes, upregu-
lation of cytoskeletal proteins (like GFAP and vimentin), increased 
expression of innate immune-related genes (such as LCND2 (encod-
ing lipocalin 2) and SERPINA3N (encoding the protease inhibitor 
α1-antichymotrypsin)) and many components of the cholesterol syn-
thesis pathway316. These transcriptomic and morphological changes 
often occur long before cognitive deficits. Reactive astrocytes are 
associated with senile plaques and, while there is restructuring of 
astrocyte gross morphology, their domain architecture is preserved, 
indicative of isomorphic, non-proliferative astrogliosis317. Prolifera-
tion or scar formation is uncommon, although reactive astrocytes 
are accumulated around senile plaques. Other reported altered 
functional changes in reactive astrocytes include decreased phago-
cytosis, decreased glutamate uptake, loss of endfeet polarization 
and expression of AQP4 water channels, and secretion of neurotoxic 
compounds318. In particular, astrocytes in AD upregulate expression of 
monoaminoxidase-B, which translates to increased synthesis of GABA 
(thus increasing tonic inhibition, counteracting neuronal hyperexcit-
ability and causing cognitive impairment) and increased production of 
H2O2. Similarly, H2O2 is produced by increased activity of the urea cycle, 
implemented in detoxification of ammonia and utilization of Aβ319,320. 
Oxidative stress is further augmented by age-dependent decline in 
astrocyte anti-oxidative systems317, thus precipitating direct neuronal 
injury. In addition, astrocytes can secrete cytokines321, thus contribut-
ing to the regulation of inflammation. Single-cell RNA sequencing 
revealed substantial changes in expression of immune response genes, 
genes associated with Aβ clearance and CD74 (which is involved in 
antigen presentation) in post-mortem samples from patients who had 
AD322. A substantial subpopulation of astrocytes in AD demonstrates 
atrophy and loss of homeostatic support, further aggravating neuronal 
damage323.
Given that each astrocyte interacts with up to 2 million synapses in 
the human brain324, changes in synapse-forming functions likely have 
major contributing roles to cognitive decline. Synaptic uncoupling of 
neurons projecting between brain regions, particularly in the hippo­
campus, likely decreases memory function. The neurotoxic reactive 
astrocyte sub-state is also likely to contribute to the degeneration 
of neurons and synapses318, for example, by secretion of toxic satu-
rated lipids contained in lipoparticles325. Other putatively protective 
reactive astrocytes seem more prevalent in the early stages of AD and 
may help maintain CNS integrity by limiting the infiltration of periph-
eral immune cells314. How astrocytes respond directly to Aβ deposits 
remains under investigation, but decreased astrocyte AQP4 levels 
could slow the clearance of pathogenic proteins through the glym-
phatic system, which resides between the blood vessel endothelium 
and astrocyte endfeet.
Loss of cholesterol synthesis machinery is also important for 
understanding modulation of neuroinflammation in the context of 
AD. As almost sole producers of cholesterol in the CNS, astrocytes 
are integral for the biosynthesis of cell membranes in the brain and 
spinal cord. Astrocyte-derived cholesterol has also been reported to 
support the survival of oligodendrocytes and remyelination326, which 
may add to neuroprotection in the context of AD. Cholesterol is also 
an important trophic molecule for microglia, and evidence suggests 
that astrocytes expressing the AD-associated APOE4 allele are less 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
332
Review article
competent at producing and secreting cholesterol. This could initiate a 
feedback loop between decreased cholesterol driving microglial reac-
tive states, which in turn feed back to drive reactivity in astrocytes327. 
Indeed, this astrocyte–microglial cell crosstalk is important for the 
maintenance of many physiological microglial functions, including 
synapse pruning and debris clearance.
Oligodendroglia
In models of AD, oligodendrocytes undergo marked transcriptional 
changes, transforming into what are termed disease-associated oligo-
dendrocytes328–330. Spatial transcriptomics has identified alterations in 
oligodendrocytes located near Aβ plaques316,331,332. Like DAM, this state 
is not confined to a specific brain pathology but is seen in various mod-
els of brain injury and disease. While pathway analyses indicate that the 
primary disease-associated oligodendrocyte state may have immune-
modulatory functions, our understanding of their role in the diseased 
or ageing brain remains limited. Independent lines of evidence suggest 
causal links between oligodendrocytes in the ageing brain, secondary 
neuroinflammation and AD neuropathology. Oligodendrocytes make 
myelin for rapid impulse propagation and provide metabolic sup-
port to myelinated axons333, extending beyond white matter tracts. 
Notably, there is extensive intracortical myelination of projection 
neurons and interneurons334, persisting well into the second and third 
decade of human life. Importantly, with advancing age, cortical mye-
lin decreases in abundance, showing an inverse correlation with the 
onset of pathologies that become the hallmark of AD335. Specifically, 
the late and thinly myelinated regions of the human brain appear to 
be the first to develop AD pathology336. Underlying myelin loss is a 
gradual deterioration of myelin integrity, initially documented by 
electron microscopy in ageing primate brains337. This degeneration 
affects the cytoplasmic channels within myelin338 that are required 
for the delivery of metabolic support to the encapsulated axon339,340. 
Thus, advanced ageing of the cortex is associated with axonal perturba-
tion, myelin degeneration and secondary inflammation341,342, the latter 
triggered by axon loss and the ingestion of myelin debris by microglia 
contributing to their pro-inflammatory activation330,343,344. Combining 
mouse models of AD with oligodendrocyte-specific defects that cause 
a premature white matter ageing phenotype demonstrated that myelin 
dysfunction drives amyloidosis and Aβ plaque formation345. Interest-
ingly, increased brain Aβ load is a consequence of both more Aβ pro-
cessing in affected nerve fibres and a distinct molecular phenotype 
of DAM; the latter become visibly recruited away from Aβ plaques by 
dysfunctional myelin, leading to less efficient clearance of Aβ from 
the brain parenchyma.
Lymphocytes in AD
The adaptive immune system is increasingly recognized as being 
involved in the pathogenesis of AD. Disruption of the BBB in AD346 
creates the possibility for peripheral lymphocytes, including B cells 
and T cells, to enter the brain parenchyma (Fig. 2). Indeed, pathology 
Aβ deposit
Microglia
Neuron
Cerebrospinal
fluid space
CD8+ T cell
Astrocyte
Infiltrated
macrophage
Infiltrated
neutrophil
Blood vessel
Fig. 2 | Contribution of peripheral immune cells to Alzheimer disease. 
Neutrophils and CD8+ T effector memory CD45RA+ cells may infiltrate the brain 
parenchyma in Alzheimer disease by leaving either the cerebral vasculature or 
the cerebrospinal fluid compartment. T cells can proliferate and might promote 
neuronal damage either through the release of inflammatory and cytotoxic 
molecules or by physically interacting with neuronal processes, causing the 
formation of structures called spheroids that indicate restricted or blocked 
axonal transport. Aβ, amyloid-β.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
333
Review article
in transgenic mouse models of AD is associated with infiltration of 
B cells into the brain parenchyma and with immunoglobulin deposi-
tion at Aβ plaques347. Furthermore, in the absence of B cells, Aβ plaque 
burden was reduced, suggesting that B cells might contribute to AD 
pathogenesis. Importantly, the absence of B cells reversed behavioural 
and memory deficits, suggesting these cells as promising targets 
for AD therapy.
One of the most remarkable changes that accompany immune 
system ageing relates to the function and maintenance of T cell 
populations. Whereas the naive T cell population shrinks with age, 
central memory T cell, effector memory T cell and exhausted 
T cell populations accumulate with age and often show dysregulated 
properties348–350. Low-grade chronic systemic inflammation, which 
accompanies and/or is caused by processes such as tissue senescence 
and altered metabolism351, acts as an additional component that 
contributes to T cell dysfunction in ageing. A compelling question 
is whether the emergence of dysregulated T cell subsets prepares 
the ground for the development of AD352. Support for this was evi-
dent in a recent study in humans, which found increased frequencies 
of pro-inflammatory CD8+ T effector memory CD45RA+ cells in the 
peripheral blood of individuals with mild cognitive impairment and 
AD, as well as the clonal expansion of these cells in the CSF, suggest-
ing antigen-specific reactivation353. CD8+ T cells were also observed 
within the meningeal tissues and the brain parenchyma of people 
with AD353 (Fig. 2).
Recent studies using mouse models of tau pathology also suggest 
an instrumental role of T cell infiltration in tau-related neurodegenera-
tion, neuroinflammation and cognitive deficits354,355. Pathology was 
associated with the clonal expansion of selected T cell populations, 
although their antigen specificity remains unknown354. These observa-
tions are reminiscent of earlier reports showing increased frequencies 
of late-stage differentiated CD4+ T effector memory CD45RA+ cells in 
the blood356 and clonal expansion of CD4+ T cells in the CSF357 of patients 
with AD compared to healthy controls, as well as of studies showing 
enhanced circulating Aβ-specific CD4+ T cells in elderly individuals 
and in people with AD358. The precise role of these T cells in AD patho-
genesis remains to be defined, but their identity as tissue-resident 
memory T cells has been confirmed through transcriptome analysis359. 
Moreover, the fact that the CD8+ T cells within the brain parenchyma 
are in direct contact with microglia suggests a regulatory crosstalk 
between both cell types360.
Such T cell–microglial cell crosstalk was illustrated in a recent 
study showing that the CXCL16–CXCR6 axis retains CD8+ T cells in the 
brains of mice with AD-like pathology361. Cxcr6 deficiency reduced 
the accumulation and clonal expansion of CD8+ T cells in the brain, 
while ablation of CD8+ T cells ultimately increased pro-inflammatory 
cytokine production from microglia. These findings suggest ben-
eficial roles for brain CD8+ T cells in protecting against AD patho-
genesis. In contrast, the observed direct contact of the CD8+ T cells 
with neurites argues for the possibility of a neurotoxic activity353; 
however, this requires further experimental evidence. Nevertheless, 
antibody-mediated depletion of CD8+ T cells in a transgenic mouse 
model of AD resulted in changes in the expression of neuronal genes 
in the brain. Moreover, the infiltration of CD8+ T cells into a 3D culture 
system resembling AD pathology led to an increase in neuroinflamma-
tion and neurodegeneration362. In summary, it is still unclear if CD8+ 
T cells are friends or foes in AD pathology. Whether CD8+ T cells play a 
protective or pathological role might ultimately depend, for example, 
on the precise time and stage of disease pathology.
The topic requires further investigation, in particular since 
immune therapeutics targeting CD8+ T cells in other settings, such 
as cancer immunotherapy, could be repurposed for use in neurode-
generative diseases such as AD363. Clinical studies suggest that the 
homeostasis and suppressive functions of regulatory T (Treg) cells are 
also altered in patients with AD364,365. Treg cells were shown to critically 
control anti-Aβ CD4+ T cell responses366, and the selective amplifi-
cation of Treg cells via low-dose IL-2 treatment modulated reactive 
microgliosis and restored cognitive functions in a mouse model of 
AD-like Aβ pathology367. Recent reports showed that Treg cells also 
modulate and finetune the balance of reactive astrocyte subtypes 
in AD-like pathology368. Other CD4+ T cell populations may also have 
protective roles in AD. Aβ-specific T helper 1 cells injected into the 
ventricles of 5xFAD mice migrated into the brain parenchyma and 
stimulated the expansion of MHC class II-positive microglial cells with 
improved capacity for Aβ uptake369. Genetic engineering of these T cells 
to overexpress brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) facilitated 
neuronal repair370.
These studies together support intricate roles of T cells in the 
context of AD neuroinflammation. It is intriguing to speculate that 
the emergence of dysregulated T cells with ageing facilitates neuro-
inflammation and the progression of AD. Further characterization 
of immune senescence processes and defining the antigen specificity of 
disease-associated T cells could pave the way towards novel therapies 
for AD that target lymphocytes.
Peripheral myeloid cells
Circulating myeloid cell populations, such as neutrophils and mono-
cytes, can migrate into the brain during AD and may contribute to dis-
ease pathogenesis (Fig. 2). Neutrophils accumulate in the AD brain and 
the peak of neutrophil infiltration in mice with AD-like disease coincides 
with the onset of memory loss371. Transient neutrophil depletion dur-
ing early disease in AD models reduces cognitive deficits and neuro-
pathology, suggesting that these cells have a detrimental role371,372. 
Neutrophils adhere in brain vessels and migrate into the parenchyma 
but they also obstruct blood flow by plugging brain capillaries371–373. 
Soluble oligomeric Aβ1–42 triggers the rapid activation of LFA1 inte-
grin, leading to neutrophil adhesion, whereas Aβ deposits promote 
neutrophil arrest and spreading in brain venules but also determine 
the intraparenchymal localization of these cells371. In keeping with this, 
LFA1 integrin blockade has therapeutic effects in mouse AD models371.
Neutrophils are highly reactive cells that release multiple cyto-
toxic molecules during AD, including myeloperoxidase, elastase and 
IL-17 (refs. 371,374,375). They also deploy neutrophil extracellular traps 
in the vasculature and inside the parenchyma, thus contributing to 
BBB dysfunction and neuronal damage371. Notably, circulating neutro-
phils have a hyperactivated phenotype in patients with AD compared 
to control individuals, and neutrophil abnormalities correlate with 
faster cognitive decline376–379. Neutrophil indicators could therefore 
be suitable as disease biomarkers and understanding the phenotype 
of neutrophils in AD may help to identify new therapeutic approaches. 
Monocytes have also been implicated in AD pathology. In mouse mod-
els of cerebral amyloidosis, circulating monocytes migrate into the 
brain via the CCR2–CCL2 axis and contribute to Aβ clearance380,381. 
However, a beneficial effect for monocyte infiltration has recently 
been challenged in the context of AD382,383. A dysfunctional monocyte 
compartment has been reported in patients with dementia, further 
highlighting that alterations in peripheral myeloid cells could drive 
pathology in AD377,384.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
334
Review article
The blood and lymphatic vasculatures
Vascular cells
Alzheimer himself described increased endothelial cell proliferation 
and growth in the first case of AD reported4, suggesting that vascu-
lar cells become activated during the progression of the disease. Many 
reports have described vascular anomalies, including but not restricted 
to the existence of a major brain microvascular pathology385,386, insuf-
ficient angiogenesis387–390, deficient clearance of Aβ due to an altered 
BBB391, and the accumulation of hypoxic markers in brains of patients 
with AD and in related animal models392–397. It has also been suggested 
that the vascular network associated with Aβ plaques is altered early 
both in patients with AD398–401 and in mouse models402–404, where vas-
cular voids surrounded by hypervascularized areas were found to be 
associated with Aβ deposits. A recent multifactorial study found that 
vascular dysfunction is an early event in AD pathology405, while small 
nuclear RNA-sequencing analyses identified specific changes in AD 
that are associated with endothelial cells and pericytes406 and reported 
enriched expression of AD risk genes in vascular cells406.
Mechanistically, vascular activation has been associated with 
(1) Aβ accumulation in the wall of brain vessels in the form of cere-
bral Aβ angiopathy407; (2) brain pericyte contraction408; (3) clotting 
of blood vessels by neutrophils371,372; (4) infiltration of peripheral 
immune cells in the brain parenchyma409 in response to chemokines 
released during neuroinflammation410,411; and (5) a reduction in the 
number of vessels through non-productive angiogenesis, which acti-
vates microglia to disassemble blood vessels around Aβ plaques392. 
In addition, perivascular microglia, astrocytes and pericytes may 
also directly affect BBB patency in AD412,413. Importantly, the patho-
logical leakage across the BBB induced by dysfunction of these cells 
may in turn also modulate innate immune cell function in the brain, 
indicating a vicious circle of vascular injury leading to perivascular 
inflammation and vice versa414. In addition to these cellular changes, 
cerebral vasculature functions, including neurovascular coupling, 
are also altered in patients and mouse models of AD415. In animal 
models, these detrimental effects are mediated by Aβ inducing the 
CD36-mediated generation of ROS in perivascular macrophages416 as well 
as by p-tau disrupting the synthesis of the vasodilator nitric oxide (NO) 
evoked by synaptic activity417. These changes are exacerbated by addi-
tional vascular effects at the capillary level such as pericyte-mediated 
vasoconstriction408.
Glymphatic system
The role of the BBB in the removal of Aβ from the brain is well 
established418. However, this is not the sole route of Aβ removal. Typi-
cally, tissue metabolites are cleared through the lymphatic network 
that pervades most tissues. However, CNS parenchyma lacks this 
comprehensive lymphatic vasculature, leading many to presume for 
decades that the brain, due to its ‘immune privileged’ status, has no 
lymphatic connection to the peripheral immune system. This belief 
was disproved in 2015 when functional lymphatic vessels were rede-
scribed just outside the parenchyma of the brain419 and spinal cord420, 
specifically in the outermost layer of their meningeal covering, the 
dura mater. While these vessels are outside the CNS parenchyma, 
they serve as a lymphatic conduit for the CNS, delivering brain and 
spinal cord-derived molecules to the draining lymph nodes419. To 
effectively drain CNS-derived molecules, including Aβ, these menin-
geal lymphatics must interact with the so-called glymphatic system, 
a conceptual model for understanding CSF flow through the brain421. 
Arterial pulsations drive CSF from peri-arterial to intraparenchymal 
spaces, and this CSF is then reabsorbed at the peri-venule spaces with 
the aid of the glial AQP4 molecule422,423. When the ‘dirty’ CSF, contain-
ing brain metabolites, such as Aβ, leaves the brain, it traverses the 
meningeal layers, a process observed in both mice424 and humans425. 
However, the exact path that the CSF takes remains elusive. Upon 
reaching the dura mater, brain-derived molecules are sampled by dural 
antigen-presenting cells, and the remaining molecules are removed 
by the meningeal lymphatics424,426. Impairment of these meningeal 
lymphatics, either through pharmacological or genetic manipulation 
or complete ligation at the entry of the draining lymph node, results 
in increased deposition of Aβ plaques in the brain parenchyma and 
their occurrence in previously plaque-free meninges427–431. Moreover, 
malfunctioning lymphatics hinder the effectiveness of anti-Aβ anti-
bodies in plaque clearance and lead to side effects, such as a compro-
mised BBB and abnormally activated microglia, mirroring the microglia 
phenotype seen in humans with AD432. Given that the functionality of 
meningeal lymphatics declines with age432, it is plausible that these 
lymphatics must be operational for patients to benefit from anti-Aβ 
drugs and possibly other therapies. Future therapies should aim to 
combine plaque removal with strategies that enhance the function of 
the meningeal lymphatics.
Immune mediators in AD
In the sections above, we have highlighted the key cell types that are 
likely to contribute to AD development and progression. Below, we 
summarize the key immune mediators and receptors that have been 
linked to neuroinflammation in the context of AD (Table 2).
Damage-associated molecular patterns
Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) accumulate in the 
brain in AD, contributing to several aspects of the pathology and 
accelerating disease progression433. The most relevant is Aβ, which 
can activate microglia via multiple surface receptors. Microglia can 
phagocytose Aβ through its binding to CD36, subsequently inducing 
the formation of TLR2–TLR6 heterodimers and NF-κB activation434. 
Further uptake mechanisms exist, including but not restricted to CD14 
(which is a co-receptor of TLR4), TLR6, TLR9, α6β1 integrin and the 
scavenger receptor SCARA1 (refs. 433,435–437). Following TLR acti-
vation, Aβ initiates NLRP3 inflammasome activation, promoting the 
release of inflammatory cytokines438. Furthermore, Aβ can also activate 
NLRP1 expressed in neurons and oligodendrocytes through different 
mechanisms, including TLR4 binding439. Other DAMPs, including tau 
monomers and oligomers, HMGB1, chromogranin A, S100 proteins, 
circulating DNA, mitochondrial DNA, ceramides and ATP, also activate 
pattern recognition receptors to drive innate immune activation in the 
context of AD439,440.
TREM2 and APOE
APOE is the primary transporter of lipids and cholesterol in the brain; 
it also has immunomodulatory functions that are entwined with the 
microglial receptor TREM2. APOE is an activating ligand of TREM2 
and, in turn, TREM2 signalling sustains microglial production of APOE 
in the brain. TREM2 directly binds numerous ligands, including lipi-
dated as well as recombinant non-lipidated APOE441–444. Upon binding 
APOE, TREM2 transmits intracellular signals that promote reactive 
microgliosis. However, the TREM2 R47H variant, which is associated 
with increased risk for AD, is unable to bind APOE441–443. Thus, direct 
APOE–TREM2 interactions may sustain microglial cell responses to AD 
pathology. Microglial cell transition from a homeostatic to an activated 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
335
Review article
state in mouse models of Aβ accumulation is partially dependent on 
both TREM2 and APOE231,445. Interaction between TREM2 on micro-
glia and APOE within Aβ plaques may be crucial for compaction: Aβ 
plaques in both APOE-deficient mice and in TREM2-deficient mice 
display filamentous morphology and are associated with axonal 
dystrophy254. Though TREM2 affinity for APOE isoforms may be 
similar441,442, APOE variants are recognized and engulfed by TREM2 at 
varying rates, suggesting that APOE4 may have a more marked impact 
than other isoforms227. During homeostasis, APOE is mainly secreted 
by astrocytes. However, microglia, particularly those wrapped around 
Aβ plaques, secrete large amounts of APOE in AD and related mouse 
models216,217,316,446. This is largely dependent on TREM2: very little APOE 
is produced by microglia that express the TREM2 R47H variant228,447 
or that lack a functional Trem2 gene217,231. Thus, APOE–TREM2 interac-
tions may constitute an autocrine circuit that sustains microglial cell 
responses to Aβ plaques.
Table 2 | Mediators linked to Alzheimer disease
Alzheimer disease-associated 
mediators and factors
Specific examples linked 
to Alzheimer disease
Animal study data on examples?
Clinical study data on examples?
Yes
No
Yesa
No
Cytokines
IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, 
IL-13, IL-17, IL-23, IL-33, IL-34, 
TNF, TGFβ, IFNγ, GM-CSF
IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, 
IL-12, IL-13, IL-17, IL-23, IL-33, 
IL-34, TNF, TGFβ, IFNγ, 
GM-CSF
–
IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2a, IL-6, 
IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, 
IL-17, TNF, TGFβ, 
IFNγ, GM-CSFa
IL-23, IL-33, IL-34
Chemokines
CCL2, CXCL16
CCL2, CXCL16
–
CCL2
CCL16
Transcription factors
NF-κB
NF-κB
–
NF-κB
–
Inflammasomes
NLRP3
NLRP3
–
NLRP3
–
Oxidative mediators
ROS, NO, O2
·
ROS, NO, O2
·
–
ROS, O2
·
NO
Microglial-expressed inducible 
nitric oxide synthase
NOS2
NOS2
–
–
NOS2
Apolipoproteins
APOE
APOE
–
APOE
–
Immune receptors
TREM2, SPI1, MS4A4A, 
MS4A6A, CD33
TREM2, SPI1, MS4A6A, 
CD33
MS4A4A
TREM2, CD33
SPI1, MS4A4A, 
MS4A6A
MHC
HLA-DQA1, HLA-DRB1
HLA-DQA1, HLA-DRB1
–
–
HLA-DQA1, HLA-DRB1
Signalling intermediates
PLCG2, PTK2B, INPP5D
PLCG2, PTK2B, INPP5D
–
–
PLCG2, PTK2B, INPP5D
Complement machinery
CR1, clusterin
CR1, clusterin
–
Clusterina
CR1
Cytoskeletal machinery
ABI3, EPHA1, FERMT2
ABI3, EPHA1
FERMT2
–
ABI3, EPHA1, FERMT2
Prostanoid enzymes
COX1, COX2
COX1, COX2
–
COX1a, COX2a
–
Other immune and neuronal 
proteins
SPP1, NPTX2, SRPX2, CD47, 
SIRPα
SPP1, NPTX2, CD47, SIRPα
SRPX2
NPTX2
SPP1, SRPX2, CD47, 
SIRPα
DAMP receptors
TLRs, NLRs, AIM2-like 
receptors, RLRs, CTDRs
TLRs, NLRs, AIM2-like 
receptors
RLRs, CTDRs
TLRsa, NLRs
AIM2-like receptors, 
RLRs, CTDRs
Regulators of APP processing
BACE1, γ-secretase, IFITM3, 
SMAD, PPARγ, STAT1, GSK3
BACE1, γ-secretase, IFITM3, 
SMAD, PPARγ, STAT1, GSK3
–
BACE1, γ-secretasea, 
PPARγa, GSK3a
IFITM3, SMAD, STAT1
Regulators of ubiquitination 
and other pathways
SHARPIN, RBCK1, OTULIN, 
LUBAC, ADAM17, TNIP1, SPPL2A, 
PGRN
SHARPIN, LUBAC, ADAM17, 
SPPL2A, PGRN
RBCK1, OTULIN, 
TNIP1
–
SHARPIN, RBCK1, 
OTULIN, LUBAC, 
ADAM17, TNIP1, 
SPPL2A, PGRN
Epigenetic regulators
HDAC, DNMT1, TET2, SIRT1, 
JMJD3
HDAC, DNMT1, TET2, SIRT1, 
JMJD3
–
HDACa, SIRT1a
DNMT1, TET2, JMJD3
Exposome factors
Brain trauma, midlife 
hypertension, diabetes, 
systemic inflammation, oral 
and gut microbiome dysbiosis
Brain trauma, midlife 
hypertension, diabetes, 
systemic inflammation, 
oral and gut microbiome 
dysbiosis
–
Diabetesa, systemic 
inflammation, oral 
and gut microbiome 
dysbiosisa
Brain trauma, midlife 
hypertension
Cellular factors
Microglia, astrocytes, 
oligodendroglia, lymphocytes
Microglia, astrocytes, 
oligodendroglia, 
lymphocytes
–
Microgliaa, 
astrocytesa, 
lymphocytes
Oligodendroglia
APP, amyloid-β precursor protein; APOE, apolipoprotein E; BACE1, β-secretase 1; CDTRs, C-type lectin-like receptors; COX, cyclooxygenase; CR1, complement receptor 1; DAMP, damage- 
associated molecular patterns; DNMT1, DNA methyltransferase 1; EPHA1, ephrin type-A receptor 1; FERMT2, fermitin family homolog 2; GM-CSF, granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor; GSK3, glycogen synthase kinase 3; HDAC, histone deacetylase; IFITM3, interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3; INPP5D, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase 1; 
JMJD3, Jumonji domain-containing protein 3; MS4A4A, membrane-spanning 4-domains subfamily A member 4A; NLRs, NOD-like receptors; NLRP3, NACHT, LRR and PYD domains-containing 
protein 3; NO, nitric oxide; NOS2, nitric oxide synthase 2; NPTX2, neuronal pentraxin 2; PGRN, progranulin; PLCG2, phospholipase Cγ2; PTK2B, protein tyrosine kinase 2β; RLRs, RIG-I-like receptors; 
ROS, reactive oxygen species; SIRT1, sirtuin 1; TET2, ten-eleven translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase 2; TLRs, Toll-like receptors; TREM2, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2. 
aClinical study about the specific target; otherwise only measured in a drug testing study.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
336
Review article
Complement factors
It has been known for over four decades that the complement com-
ponents C1q and C3 are associated with pathological hallmarks of 
AD (plaques and tangles)6,448,449. More recent studies demonstrated 
increased expression of complement proteins (reviewed in ref. 450) 
and the generation of activated complement fragments in the brains 
of patients with AD brain and in mouse models of AD451,452. Excessive 
complement activation can lead to detrimental inflammation and 
neurotoxicity via the C5a and C3a fragments, which signal through 
their receptors and synergize with other innate immune signalling 
pathways such as TLRs and RAGE453,454 as well as via the generation of 
the membrane attack complex (C5b-9), all of which are relevant to AD 
progression455–457.
The role of C3 and the receptors for its diverse activation frag-
ments in AD is clearly complex and regulated by time and location458,459 
(and reviewed in ref. 460). C3-deficient mice show protection from neu-
rodegeneration461, spine loss452, and excessive microglial cell-mediated 
synapse loss452 and C3aR is a modulator of microglial function451,462. 
C5ar1 expression is upregulated in AD brain463,464. In mouse models 
of AD, antibody to the pro-inflammatory complement activation 
fragment C5a, genetic ablation of C5aR1 or pharmacological antago-
nism of C5aR1 resulted in less inflammatory microglia and astrocytes, 
preservation of neuronal complexity, reduction of cognitive loss, 
and suppression of synapse engulfment by microglia464–467. In addi-
tion, classical complement activation (through C1, C2, C4 and C3) 
has a substantial role in synapse pruning during neural development 
and adult plasticity, but aberrant or unregulated activation leads to 
excessive synapse elimination in AD mouse models234,468–470. However, 
induction of C1q expression is an early response to injury prior to 
upregulation of other complement components in brain, and protec-
tive roles of C1q have been documented, including an enhancement of 
phagocytosis, suppression of microglial cell-mediated inflammation, 
and neuroprotection471. As a result, unintended immunocompromis-
ing consequences of targeting this component must be considered. 
Novel approaches to modulate neuronal activators of the complement 
cascade may be selective and effective for different subtypes of AD472.
Cytokines
In AD, cytokine production is initiated by DAMPs activating pat-
tern recognition receptors and can be regulated at multiple steps, 
including cellular release. In the brain, cytokines are released by 
microglia, astrocytes, lymphocytes, pericytes, and other cells and 
act on neighbouring cells, including the releasing cells, to drive neuro­
inflammation. In microglia, activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome 
generated IL-1β, which reduced microglial clearance of Aβ and the 
release of Aβ-degrading enzymes (such as insulin-degrading enzyme 
and neprilysin) and stimulated the production of NO and subse-
quent immune cascades438. Neurons exposed to microglia-derived 
IL-1β show enhanced spine loss and reduced hippocampal long-term 
potentiation438,473. Reduced long-term potentiation has also been 
reported in hippocampal slice preparation experiments following 
exposure to IL-2, IL-6, TNF and other cytokines474–477. In animal models, 
IL-1β can cause neurofibrillary tangle formation and tau pathology 
through an IL-1 receptor-mediated calcium–calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinase IIα (CamKIIα)-dependent mechanism74. NLRP3 inflam-
masome activation can also result in microglial pyroptosis, release of 
ASC specks and further seeding of Aβ deposition478 (Fig. 3).
More recently, the generation of type I interferons and other 
cytokines through the cGAS–STING pathway, which is activated by 
cytosolic DNA, has become a focus of intense research479–481. Type I inter-
ferons are elevated in AD, and genetic deficiency for the type I inter-
feron receptor (IFNAR1) can be protective in some mouse models of 
AD482. IL-1α, type I interferon, IFNγ, GM-CSF, IL-10 and IL-13 are elevated 
in AD brains in association with neurofibrillary tangles483. T cell-derived 
IFNγ can increase reactive microgliosis and Aβ deposition in Aβ mouse 
models484. IL-10 is generally anti-inflammatory but knockout of the 
Il10 gene in an Aβ mouse model reduced amyloidosis, synaptic loss 
and cognitive deficits, while increasing reactive microgliosis and 
phagocytosis485. IL-12 and IL-23 are elevated in AD, and depletion of 
their shared subunit (p40) reduced Aβ load and cognitive deficits in 
an AD mouse model486. In contrast, other cytokines may be protective 
in AD. For example, IL-33 is reduced in AD brains, and IL-33 deficiency 
resulted in increased tau pathology and neurodegeneration in mice487. 
Furthermore, IL-33 injection reduced microglial reactivity, Aβ plaques, 
synaptic loss and cognitive deficits in a mouse model of AD488.
Cyclooxygenases and prostanoids
Prostanoids were initially implicated in AD pathogenesis based 
on cross-sectional and longitudinal epidemiological studies 
showing reduced risk for AD in individuals taking non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, which inhibit both cyclooxygenase 1 (COX1) 
and COX2 (refs. 489,490). Although clinical trials of non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs and COX2-selective inhibitors were aban-
doned due to lack of clear benefit and potential cardiovascular risks491, 
continued preclinical work highlights unique roles for these enzymes 
in the context of AD. For example, COX1 is constitutively expressed by 
microglia492, and its activity was associated with memory impairment 
and neuropathology in various models493–495. In addition, cyclooxyge-
nases have been implicated in communication across the BBB190,496, 
and might therefore link peripheral inflammation to dementia and 
AD progression497. Other data demonstrate unique roles for specific 
prostanoids and their G protein-coupled receptors. For instance, pros-
taglandin E2 acting on EP2 receptors reduced Aβ phagocytosis in several 
models498,499 and worsened spatial memory performance in APP/PS1 
and ageing mice272,498, possibly by driving age-associated changes in 
myeloid cell inflammatory and metabolic states272. Moreover, EP1 recep-
tors facilitate excitotoxic injury in ischaemic and AD models500,501. Such 
findings support interventional targets that are more specific than 
general COX inhibitors.
iNOS and NO
One major hallmark of neuroinflammation is aberrant NO production 
by microglial cell-expressed inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS or 
NOS2), a factor held responsible for aggravating pathology. iNOS 
generates high levels of NO, with the stimulation of microglia by 
LPS and IFNγ456 resulting in NO production at a rate of ~140 pmol per 
minute per million cells502. In the presence of ROS following NADPH 
oxidase activation, various reactive nitrogen species are generated, 
including the potent oxidant peroxynitrite, which enhances nitrosative 
stress and causes oxidative damage, nitration, and S-nitrosylation of 
proteins, lipids and DNA. Evidence suggests that iNOS expression is 
the major source for NO-mediated post-translational modifications 
likely rendering many target proteins dysfunctional in AD and other 
neurodegenerative disorders503–506.
In AD, 3-nitration of γ-secretase, triosephosphate isomerase, tau 
or Aβ itself may aggravate pathology507–511. These modifications can 
induce a positive feedback loop by which chronic and uncontrolled 
neuroinflammation causes further excessive microglial reactivity, 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
337
Review article
resulting in release of additional pro-inflammatory cytokines and 
chemokines and damage to the nervous system. In contrast to 
iNOS-derived NO, calcium-dependent neuronal NOS (nNOS) activity 
leads to NMDA-dependent peak NO production of ~2 fmol per second 
(~120 pmol per minute) in the entire hippocampus, which increases 
in aged 3xTg-AD mice due to higher nNOS protein expression512. 
This enhanced NO production was also seen in APP/PS1 mice due 
to increased interaction between C-terminal PDZ-ligand (CAPON) 
and nNOS513, a mechanism that, when disrupted, prevented memory 
defects and dendritic loss in this model. Additional evidence suggests 
that tau nitrotyrosination is caused by the enhanced nNOS–CAPON 
interactions that occur in the AppNL-G-F mouse model of AD514. These 
data confirm an NMDA receptor–nNOS-dependent route contribut-
ing to AD pathology, consistent with earlier studies and clinical tri-
als, where application of the NMDA receptor antagonist memantine 
(an open-channel blocker) reduced excitotoxicity and ameliorated 
AD pathology515.
There are various hypotheses as to where excitotoxicity and the 
associated and well-described neuroinflammation originate. Clas-
sically, accumulation of Aβ aggregates and cell debris are involved 
in a neuroinflammatory response and augmented NO production. 
Indeed, both fibrillary and oligomeric forms of Aβ directly activate 
microglial cells, including iNOS expression and NO production516–518. To 
target NO-mediated cytotoxicity in neurodegenerative conditions, one 
therapeutic approach is to suppress overall NO production, either phar-
macologically or genetically. This method showed promising outcomes 
in a variety of model systems where NOS inhibition or iNOS deletion 
prevented or slowed disease progression519,520. However, clinical trials 
have not yet achieved any beneficial effects, although phase I and II 
trials (NCT02167256, NCT01864655) using Src family kinase inhibitors 
Amyloid-β 
oligomerization
Seeding of 
amyloid-β 
deposition
Direct 
phagocytosis, 
microglial 
uptake of 
neurons
Physiological 
synaptic turnover
Excess uptake 
of C3-decorated 
synapses
NO, ROS, 
complement 
factors
PRR ligation (for 
example, 
amyloid-β, tau)
ASC
release
Neuron
Homeostatic microglia
DAMP-activated microglia
Pro-IL-1β,
Pro-IL-18
Gasdermin D
pore
NO,
ROS
Pyroptotic microglia
P
P
P
P
IL-1β
MYD88
IRAK4
MEK1/2
CamKIIα
NLRP3 
inflammasome 
activation
Reduced trophic 
factor supply
Release of further 
immune 
mediators , for 
example, TNF, IL-6 
and complement 
Fig. 3 | Local neuronal and immune cell interactions in Alzheimer disease. 
Homeostatic microglia are activated through pattern recognition receptor (PRR) 
ligation by neurodegeneration-associated proteins such as tau or amyloid-β. 
This results in NACHT, LRR and PYD domains-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) 
inflammasome activation and subsequent release of IL-1β and IL-18 through 
a gasdermin D-formed pore complex. IL-1β can lead to the phosphorylation 
of tau and to subsequent formation of neurofibrillary tangles within neurons. 
Immune-activated neurons reduce their production of neurotrophic factors. 
Instead, they generate and release further immune factors such as TNF, IL-6, 
complement factors, nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
which lead to neuronal damage and axon damage. Sustained inflammasome 
activation leads to pyroptosis (an inflammatory form of cell death) in microglia 
and subsequent release of the active inflammasome apoptosis-associated 
speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) speck, which contributes to further 
seeding of amyloid-β within the brain parenchyma. Excess decoration of synaptic 
structures with C3 results in an increased uptake of synapses, thus exceeding 
the physiological synaptic turnover by microglia. In addition, neurons that do 
display so-called ‘don’t eat me signals’ can be entirely engulfed by microglial 
cell phagocytosis. CamKIIα, calcium–calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIα; 
DAMP, damage-associated molecular pattern.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
338
Review article
(such as saracatinib) to suppress NF-κB521, the transcription factor nec-
essary for iNOS expression, were performed522,523. It seems obvious that 
there is a need to identify the optimal time window in which inhibition 
of NO production could exert the most clinical efficacy524,525.
Mutual interaction between immune mechanisms 
and neurodegeneration
Inflammation regulates Aβ production
Inflammation can have detrimental effects in AD by exacerbating the 
generation of Aβ. It was proposed that pro-inflammatory cytokines 
could enhance the transcription of APP and affect Aβ aggregation 
and generation526–528. The expression of β-secretase 1 (BACE1) and 
APP increases upon incubation with pro-inflammatory mediators, 
such as cytokines and ROS529–532, or in response to events leading to 
chronic gliosis such as TBI and stroke533–536. Other reports have sug-
gested that inflammatory cytokines can regulate γ-secretase activity 
by inducing the expression of interferon-induced transmembrane 
protein 3 (IFITM3), which binds to γ-secretase, thereby increasing Aβ 
levels537. Interestingly, peripheral infection, including with a periodon-
tal pathogen, can lead to an increase in APP and BACE1 expression179. In 
addition, studies in models of cerebral amyloidosis have revealed that 
low-grade peripheral inflammation induced by LPS injection exacer-
bates Aβ pathology by affecting Aβ clearance mechanisms148,538,539 or 
Aβ generation540,541. However, other reports have shown the opposite 
effects, with a reduction in Aβ when LPS was injected intracranially542,543 
or when mice are primed with low doses of LPS before the onset of 
transgene-driven Aβ deposition149. The effect of inflammation on APP 
and BACE1 expression has been related to the presence of consensus 
binding sites for various transcription factors that are known to be 
regulated by inflammation (such as SMAD, NF-κB, PPARγ and STAT1) in 
the BACE1 and APP promoters529,544–546. In addition, changes in inflam-
matory markers have been associated with alterations in epigenetic 
reprogramming547, including the expression of miRNAs regulating the 
expression of genes (such as BACE1 and GSK3) involved in Aβ generation 
and tau phosphorylation535.
Tau pathology
Tau pathology can spread from cell to cell by unknown mecha-
nisms. Accordingly, tau can be found in the extracellular space and 
potentially enters cells trans-synaptically, a phenomenon thought 
to be involved in disease progression548–550. In tau-transgenic mouse 
models, tau pathology and tau spread were shown to be driven by 
activated microglia, potentially via the release of IL-1β161,305 (Fig. 3). 
In line with this, depletion of microglia led to reduced tau transfer 
between neurons551. Tau was identified as an activator of the NLRP3 
inflammasome, and NLRP3 inflammasome activation was detected 
in the brains and CSF552 of patients with tauopathy. The loss of inflam-
masome function markedly reduced progression of tau pathology as 
well as tau seeding downstream of Aβ74. In another study, p-tau and 
misfolded tau activated NF-κB signalling and NLRP3 inflammasomes 
in microglia552. Notably, myeloid cell-restricted deletion of MYD88 or 
ASC rescued tau pathology and improved cognitive function in a mouse 
model. Importantly, suppression of tau via doxycycline or virus-like 
particle-based neutralization significantly reduced NLRP3 and ASC 
levels in the rTg4510 mouse model of tauopathy552. This suggests that 
neuronally derived tau can serve as a DAMP and trigger microglial cell 
immune responses. Strategies to block tau or tau–microglia cell inter-
actions could be potential therapeutic strategies for tauopathies, 
including AD.
Synapses and axons
It is becoming clear that microglia play crucial roles at the neuronal 
synapse (thus the term quadripartite synapse)216,553. Microglia constantly 
contact synapses and contribute to synaptic homeostasis and function 
throughout lifespan553–555 (Fig. 3). One key microglial function during 
development is the coordination of synaptic pruning via the classical 
complement cascade556,557. Interestingly, this process becomes reac-
tivated in a region-specific manner in various models of neurological 
disease, including in both Aβ-based461,469 and tau-based452,558 AD models. 
These studies have shown that complement components C1q and C3 are 
upregulated and localized to synapses, leading to aberrant elimination 
of the tagged synapses by microglia469 (Fig. 3). This microglial response 
is suggested to mediate synapse loss and dysfunction in models of AD 
and of other neurological diseases559–563 as well as in ageing461,564 and 
across species565.
Several immune and neuronal proteins have emerged as poten-
tial upstream regulators of microglial cell-mediated phagocytosis 
and production of C1q in AD models, including phosphatidylserine 
(PtdSer), SPP1, TREM2 and neuronal pentraxin 2 (NPTX2)566–568. Still, 
further investigations are necessary to determine how specific syn-
apses are being targeted and eliminated while others remain intact569. 
This could include molecules that negatively regulate complement 
proteins, such as the newly identified complement inhibitor SRPX2, 
or molecules that negatively regulate microglial phagocytosis such 
as CD47 and SIRPα. Another important consideration is that micro-
glial cell-mediated synapse elimination may not always be detrimental 
in neurodegeneration570,571. For example, it has recently been shown 
that microglial cell-mediated elimination of synapses can protect 
circuits from hyperexcitability in AD-related neurodegeneration. It is 
possible that synapse elimination early on in neurodegeneration could 
be beneficial as this might protect neurons from excitotoxicity and 
detrimental effects propagating in an uncontrolled manner, leading 
to cognitive decline. Thus, further elucidating the timing and circuit 
specificity of microglial cell-mediated and complement-mediated 
synapse elimination during neurodegeneration will improve our ability 
to therapeutically target these mechanisms in disease.
Clinical trials and future therapeutic targets
The modern era of studying neuroinflammation in AD began in 1982 
with the report from Eikelenboom and Stam of complement compo-
nents decorating Aβ plaques6,9. These results were fortified by addi-
tional studies by McGeer et al.11 and Rogers et al.12 in the late 1980s. 
Given that the implication of inflammation in AD pathogenesis predates 
articulation of the Aβ hypothesis572, and given an assumption that such 
inflammation must harm surrounding tissues, one may wonder why 
no agents have been approved for modification of AD pathogenesis by 
modulation of inflammation as well as why no such agents are presently 
in late-stage clinical trials. Clinical trials to date have resulted in null 
or, in some instances, negative (suggesting harm) findings (reviewed 
up to 2018 in ref. 573). These trials tested anti-inflammatory agents of 
different categories and, in some instances, employed strategies to 
avoid exposure at later stages of the disease process, enroling rela-
tively ‘young–elderly’ cognitively normal individuals with a parental 
history of AD574. The most concerning result emerged from a trial that 
tested the ability of the discontinued COX2-selective agent rofecoxib 
to prevent ‘conversion’ of mild cognitive impairment to AD dementia, 
producing a statistically significant hazard ratio of 1.46 (P = 0.011) in 
favour of incident dementia. Such findings have likely discouraged 
more recent trial efforts, as a search for “neuroinflammation Alzheimer 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
339
Review article
Glossary
3xTg model
Mouse model of Alzheimer disease (AD) 
carrying three mutations associated 
with familial AD (FAD): APP Swedish, 
MAPT P301L and PSEN1 M146V.
5xFAD mouse model
Mouse model of AD that overexpresses 
both mutant human APP (encoding 
amyloid-β precursor protein 695) 
with the Swedish (K670N, M671L), 
Florida (I716V) and London (V717I) 
FAD mutations and a human PSEN1 
harbouring two mutations, M146L and 
L286V. Overexpression of these genes 
results in cerebral amyloidosis and 
behavioural changes in mice.
β-Secretase 1
(BACE1). In the context of AD, BACE1 is 
the major β-secretase that generates 
Aβ in neurons by cleaving APP.
Amyloid-β
(Aβ). An aggregation-prone peptide 
of 36–43 amino acids that originates 
from Aβ precursor protein (APP) after 
being processed by β-secretase and 
γ-secretase. Aβ is the main component 
of AD Aβ plaques.
APP/PS1 model
Mouse model of AD expressing 
a chimeric mouse/human APP 
(Mo/HuAPP695swe) and a mutant 
human presenilin 1 (PSEN1-dE9), both 
directed to central nervous system 
(CNS) neurons. Other combinations of 
FAD-related gene variants exist.
Blood–brain barrier
(BBB). A network of blood vessels 
and tissue that is made up of closely 
spaced cells and helps keep harmful 
substances from reaching the brain.
Central memory T cell
Central memory T cells express 
CD45RO, CCR7 and L-selectin (CD62L). 
They are commonly found in the 
lymph nodes and in peripheral blood 
circulation.
CNS-associated macrophages
(CAMs). Macrophages located at CNS 
interfaces, including the meninges, 
perivascular space and choroid plexus. 
CAMs are also referred to as BAMs or 
‘border-associated macrophages’ in the 
literature.
Damage-associated 
molecular patterns
(DAMPs). Also known as alarmins, 
these are molecules released by 
stressed cells undergoing cell death 
and act as endogenous danger 
signals to promote and exacerbate the 
inflammatory response.
Disease-associated microglia
(DAM). A subset of brain-resident 
macrophages that can be found 
next to sites of neurodegeneration. 
DAM may have protective roles and 
might have a sensory mechanism to 
identify neurodegeneration-associated 
molecular patterns. DAM were first 
described in the 5xFAD mouse AD 
model in 2017 by Keren-Shaul et al.217.
Effector memory T cell
Effector memory T cells express 
CD45RO but lack expression of 
CCR7 and L-selectin. Because these 
memory T cells lack the CCR7 lymph 
node-homing receptor they are found 
in the peripheral circulation and 
tissues. They are important for the rapid 
response to previously experienced 
immune (pathogen) challenges.
Exhausted T cell
A condition in which T cells lose 
their ability to kill certain cells, such 
as cancer cells or cells infected by a 
pathogen, mostly due to sustained 
overactivation in response to chronic 
immune challenges.
Inflammasome
Cytosolic multi-protein complexes that 
enable the cell to initiate inflammatory 
responses following the sensing of 
DAMPs and pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns. They activate caspase 
1-mediated cleavage of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines and can initiate pyroptosis, an 
inflammatory form of cell death.
Innate immune memory
A type of epigenetically driven memory 
shown by myeloid cells and innate-like 
lymphocytes following exposure 
to pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns or DAMPs.
Lewy body disease
A disease associated with abnormal 
deposits of a protein called α-synuclein 
in the brain. These deposits, called Lewy 
bodies, affect chemicals in the brain 
and can lead to problems with thinking, 
movement, behaviour and mood.
Long-term potentiation
A form of activity-dependent plasticity 
that results in a persistent enhancement 
of synaptic transmission.
Microglia
A subset of glial cells of the CNS. They 
are yolk sac-derived macrophages 
that reside in the brain and spinal cord 
parenchyma and are the first and main 
line of immune defence in these tissues. 
Microglia are responsible for CNS 
homeostasis and have a central role 
in removing unnecessary or damaged 
neurons and in pruning synapses as 
well as in recognizing and removing 
plaques and infectious particles.
Mini-Mental State Examination
(MMSE). A screening test that can be 
used to systematically and thoroughly 
assess cognitive functions.
Neurovascular coupling
Alterations in local perfusion that occur 
in response to changes in neuronal 
activity.
Neutrophil extracellular traps
Neutrophil extracellular traps are 
web-like structures that form from 
DNA and other neutrophil intracellular 
proteins. They are released by 
activated neutrophils and bind and kill 
pathogenic microbes.
Prodromal AD
The prodromal stage of AD refers to 
patients with mild cognitive impairment 
and evidence of AD-associated 
pathology.
Quadripartite synapse
A term proposed to describe 
presynaptic and postsynaptic neuronal 
terminals and the neighbouring 
astrocytes and microglia.
Regulatory T (Treg) cells
A specialized subpopulation of T cells 
that act to suppress effector immune 
responses, thereby maintaining tissue 
homeostasis and self-tolerance.
Tau
Tau protein is encoded by the MAPT 
gene and stands for tubulin-associated 
unit. In dementias such as AD but 
also in Parkinson disease and other 
tauopathies, p-tau can form insoluble 
aggregates called neurofibrillary 
tangles.
Tau PHF6 fragment
A hexapeptide fragment of tau that can 
self-assemble and initiate full-length tau 
protein aggregation.
TDP43 disease
Neurodegenerative diseases associated 
with a TDP43 dysfunction. Examples 
include amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration and 
limbic predominant age-related TDP43 
encephalopathy.
T effector memory CD45RA+ 
cells
A terminally differentiated subset of 
memory T cells that re-expresses 
CD45RA, a marker normally associated 
with antigen-inexperienced T cells.
Translocator protein
(TSPO). The protein translocation 
systems found in mitochondria, 
chloroplasts and the general secretory 
pathways (Sec and Tat) responsible 
for the efficient delivery and folding of 
globular and membrane proteins into 
their correct compartment or into the 
membrane.

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
340
Review article
disease” under “controlled clinical trials” retrieved only 26 citations as 
of 6th November 2023. The more recent citations report approaches 
such as treatment with Boswellic acids575, caloric restriction576 and oral 
hygiene intervention577. Investigators described phase I trials of Lome-
cel B, a cell therapy comprising allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells, 
in patients with mild AD578,579; of note, some have proposed rebrand-
ing mesenchymal stem cells as ‘medicinal signalling cells’ to diminish 
the implied stemness of the cell product580. Recipients of Lomecel 
B showed no safety issues but measurements of plasma cytokines, hip-
pocampal volume and MMSE produced variable results with no clear 
dose–response or biomarker–clinical relationship. One high-profile 
initiative (NCT05450549) using DNL919, a brain-penetrant TREM2 
antibody, was discontinued following the observation of moderate, 
reversible haematological toxicity in a single ascending dose safety 
study in healthy volunteers581.
From the present Review, and from examining the clinical trial liter-
ature, it becomes apparent that the community of neuroinflammation 
and neurodegeneration researchers currently lacks a unifying hypoth-
esis that would enable the generation of panels of core-pathology bio-
markers. Our field would be well-advised to consider ways to accelerate 
clinical development given underlying biological uncertainty. For 
example, basket trials performed within a platform trial structure allow 
the establishment of a combined, enlarged placebo group and stand-
ardized protocols against which to evaluate multiple agents simultane-
ously. At the same time, considering how to enhance diversity of trial 
populations promises to augment the potential for real-world success.
Next-generation models and open questions
This Review has highlighted how diverse cell types in the brain paren-
chyma contribute to neuroinflammation in the setting of AD. It is 
clear that the culprit in AD is not any one given cell type but rather 
a community of cells whose mutual interaction accelerates AD 
pathophysiology582. It seems also obvious that any therapy designed to 
target immune processes runs the risk of interfering with mechanisms 
of immune defence and organ homeostasis. The complexity of neu-
roinflammation in AD calls for precise temporal and spatial targeting 
of cell interactions for therapeutic purposes, meaning that, along the 
decade-long course of the disease, the best time for interference has to 
be identified and, ideally, the effects of any therapies confined to the 
brain. Disruption of these interactions that drive neuroinflammation 
is an important therapeutic target, and will require more sophisti-
cated studies at the human level, such as using in vitro iPS cell-derived 
model systems to identify suitable immune targets. Such challenges 
are being addressed by many groups and, while no one model system 
is ideal at present, some in vitro systems show promising results in 
capturing features of AD pathophysiology such as the response to Aβ 
toxicity583. Simpler model systems of cellular monocultures derived 
from iPS cells have also shown that certain in vitro measures correlate 
with complex traits captured during life such as cognitive decline8,584. 
An added challenge is that iPS cell-derived cell types, and even cell lines, 
display heterogeneity in cell states even in monocultures585. Therefore, 
next-generation models will need a higher level of characterization to 
either account for the diversity of cell states or, preferably, differenti-
ate the component cell types to the target cell states needed for an 
experiment.
The recent development of chimeric models where human micro-
glia are transplanted into the mouse brain opens new avenues to tackle 
some of the challenges connected to the complex molecular and cellu-
lar interplay occurring in a whole living organism. They provide a 
complex platform in which human cells are placed into a living brain 
‘bioreactor’, where they can interact with other CNS and systemic com-
ponents and be exposed to relevant disease challenges264,586,587. Initial 
characterization of this model showed that transplanted human micro-
glia recapitulate several baseline transcriptomic, proteomic and func-
tional aspects of human primary cells195,225,586. The analysis of human 
microglia transplanted into the brain of AD mice revealed that they 
display a wide heterogeneity of cell states that mimic time-dependent 
phenotypes and transcriptional features of AD227,587. An additional key 
advantage of chimeric models is the wide range of patient-derived 
iPS cell lines that could shed light on the impact of single or poly-genetic 
risk associated to AD588 as well as relatively straight-forward genetic 
modifications that can be introduced at stem cell level and can help 
in translating from cell state to function. Although transplantation 
studies may provide relevant biological and mechanistic insights into 
different AD genetics, microglia cell states and functions, they also 
come with significant limitations as the human cells are placed in an 
immunodeficient mouse host.
With enhanced multicellular in vitro and in vivo models, we will not 
reproduce the human brain but we will have a manipulable approxima-
tion of cellular communities with which to test mechanistic questions 
and obtain reproducible results that can inform therapeutic pipelines. 
Key questions to pursue include defining how different microglial cell 
states translate into function within the brain. This would enable us 
to target the nodes in the intercellular communication network of 
microglia that drive pathology so that the cell community is instead 
driven towards protective states. One does not necessarily have to 
perturb all cells in a community equally; perhaps perturbing a key 
driver cell subtype can then effect the desired changes in the other cell 
types in the community. In vitro models with a pseudo-vascular com-
ponent or refined chimeric systems with re-introduction of adaptive 
immune cells via T cell transfer are particularly interesting, as leverag-
ing the propagation of immune responses from the periphery to the 
CNS would be ideal for a therapeutic, avoiding the many challenges of 
BBB penetration.
With the advent of anti-Aβ passive vaccination therapies in AD, 
even if limited in efficacy, and the beginning of clinical testing of 
immune-modulatory drugs in AD, future strategies will also have to 
test possible combinations. The success of these therapies either alone 
or in combination may depend on the identification of the optimal 
treatment period and biomarkers to monitor target engagement in 
the decade-long course of this disease.
Published online: 9 December 2024
References
1.	
Gotz, J., Bodea, L. G. & Goedert, M. Rodent models for Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 19, 583–598 (2018).
2.	
Sasaguri, H. et al. Recent advances in the modeling of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Front. Neurosci. 16, 807473 (2022).
3.	
Sierksma, A., Escott-Price, V. & De Strooper, B. Translating genetic risk of Alzheimer’s 
disease into mechanistic insight and drug targets. Science 370, 61–66 (2020).
4.	
Alzheimer, A. Uber eine eigenartige Erkrankung der Hirnrinde. Allg. Z. Psychiatr. 64, 
146–148 (1907).
5.	
Redlich, E. Uber miliare Sklerose der hirnrinde bei seniler Atrophie. Jahrb. Psychiatry 
Neurol. 17, 208–216 (1898).
6.	
Eikelenboom, P. & Stam, F. C. Immunoglobulins and complement factors in senile 
plaques. An immunoperoxidase study. Acta Neuropathol. 57, 239–242 (1982).
7.	
Griffin, W. S., Sheng, J. G., Roberts, G. W. & Mrak, R. E. Interleukin-1 expression in different 
plaque types in Alzheimer’s disease: significance in plaque evolution. J. Neuropathol. 
Exp. Neurol. 54, 276–281 (1995).
8.	
Lagomarsino, V. N. et al. Stem cell-derived neurons reflect features of protein networks, 
neuropathology, and cognitive outcome of their aged human donors. Neuron 109, 
3402–3420.e9 (2021).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
341
Review article
9.	
McGeer, P. L., Itagaki, S., Tago, H. & McGeer, E. G. Reactive microglia in patients with 
senile dementia of the Alzheimer type are positive for the histocompatibility glycoprotein 
HLA-DR. Neurosci. Lett. 79, 195–200 (1987).
10.	
Sheng, J. G., Mrak, R. E. & Griffin, W. S. Glial-neuronal interactions in Alzheimer disease: 
progressive association of IL-1alpha+ microglia and S100beta+ astrocytes with 
neurofibrillary tangle stages. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 56, 285–290 (1997).
11.	
McGeer, P. L., Akiyama, H., Itagaki, S. & McGeer, E. G. Activation of the classical 
complement pathway in brain tissue of Alzheimer patients. Neurosci. Lett. 107, 341–346 
(1989).
12.	
Rogers, J., Luber-Narod, J., Styren, S. D. & Civin, W. H. Expression of immune system- 
associated antigens by cells of the human central nervous system: relationship to the 
pathology of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 9, 339–349 (1988).
13.	
Styren, S. D., Civin, W. H. & Rogers, J. Molecular, cellular, and pathologic characterization 
of HLA-DR immunoreactivity in normal elderly and Alzheimer’s disease brain. Exp. 
Neurol. 110, 93–104 (1990).
14.	
Griffin, W. S. et al. Brain interleukin 1 and S-100 immunoreactivity are elevated in Down 
syndrome and Alzheimer disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 86, 7611–7615 (1989).
15.	
Heneka, M. T., McManus, R. M. & Latz, E. Inflammasome signalling in brain function and 
neurodegenerative disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 610–621 (2018).
16.	
Strauss, S. et al. Detection of interleukin-6 and alpha 2-macroglobulin immunoreactivity 
in cortex and hippocampus of Alzheimer’s disease patients. Lab. Invest. 66, 223–230 
(1992).
17.	
Moonen, S. et al. Pyroptosis in Alzheimer’s disease: cell type-specific activation in 
microglia, astrocytes and neurons. Acta Neuropathol. 145, 175–195 (2023).
18.	
Thal, D. R. et al. Progression of neurofibrillary changes and PHF-tau in end-stage 
Alzheimer’s disease is different from plaque and cortical microglial pathology. 
Neurobiol. Aging 19, 517–525 (1998).
19.	
Boon, B. D. C. et al. Neuroinflammation is increased in the parietal cortex of atypical 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 15, 170 (2018).
20.	 Zotova, E. et al. Inflammatory components in human Alzheimer’s disease and after active 
amyloid-β42 immunization. Brain 136, 2677–2696 (2013).
21.	
Neuropathology Group. Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Aging  
Study. Pathological correlates of late-onset dementia in a multicentre, community- 
based population in England and Wales. Neuropathology Group of the Medical  
Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (MRC CFAS). Lancet 357, 
169–175 (2001).
22.	 Franco-Bocanegra, D. K. et al. Microglial motility in Alzheimer’s disease and after  
Aβ42 immunotherapy: a human post-mortem study. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 7, 174 
(2019).
23.	 Boche, D. & Nicoll, J. A. R. Invited review — understanding cause and effect in Alzheimer’s 
pathophysiology: implications for clinical trials. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 46, 
623–640 (2020).
24.	 Minett, T. et al. Microglial immunophenotype in dementia with Alzheimer’s pathology. 
J. Neuroinflammation 13, 135 (2016).
25.	 Boon, B. D. C. et al. The coarse-grained plaque: a divergent Aβ plaque-type in early-onset 
Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 140, 811–830 (2020).
26.	 Jakel, L., Boche, D., Nicoll, J. A. R. & Verbeek, M. M. Aβ43 in human Alzheimer’s disease: 
effects of active Aβ42 immunization. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 7, 141 (2019).
27.	
Moro, M. L. et al. Pyroglutamate and isoaspartate modified amyloid-beta in ageing and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 6, 3 (2018).
28.	 Nicoll, J. A. et al. Aβ species removal after aβ42 immunization. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 
65, 1040–1048 (2006).
29.	 Tondo, G. et al. The combined effects of microglia activation and brain glucose 
hypometabolism in early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 12, 50 (2020).
30.	 Pirttila, T., Mehta, P. D., Frey, H. & Wisniewski, H. M. α1-Antichymotrypsin and IL-1β are not 
increased in CSF or serum in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 15, 313–317 (1994).
31.	
Lai, K. S. P. et al. Peripheral inflammatory markers in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of 175 studies. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 88, 876–882 
(2017).
32.	 Swardfager, W. et al. A meta-analysis of cytokines in Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Psychiatry 
68, 930–941 (2010).
33.	 Brosseron, F. et al. Characterization and clinical use of inflammatory cerebrospinal fluid 
protein markers in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res. Ther. 10, 25 (2018).
34.	 Chatterjee, M. et al. C1q is increased in cerebrospinal fluid-derived extracellular vesicles 
in Alzheimer’s disease: a multi-cohort proteomics and immuno-assay validation study. 
Alzheimers Dement. 19, 4828–4840 (2023).
35.	 Feng, W. et al. NULISA: a proteomic liquid biopsy platform with attomolar sensitivity and 
high multiplexing. Nat. Commun. 14, 7238 (2023).
36.	 Teunissen, C. E. et al. Methods to discover and validate biofluid-based biomarkers in 
neurodegenerative dementias. Mol. Cell Proteom. 22, 100629 (2023).
37.	
Craig-Schapiro, R. et al. YKL-40: a novel prognostic fluid biomarker for preclinical 
Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Psychiatry 68, 903–912 (2010).
38.	 Heslegrave, A. et al. Increased cerebrospinal fluid soluble TREM2 concentration in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 11, 3 (2016).
39.	 Crols, R., Saerens, J., Noppe, M. & Lowenthal, A. Increased GFAp levels in CSF as a 
marker of organicity in patients with Alzheimer’s disease and other types of irreversible 
chronic organic brain syndrome. J. Neurol. 233, 157–160 (1986).
40.	 Kim, K. Y., Shin, K. Y. & Chang, K. A. GFAP as a potential biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cells 12, 1309 (2023).
41.	
Chiotis, K. et al. Tracking reactive astrogliosis in autosomal dominant and sporadic 
Alzheimer’s disease with multi-modal PET and plasma GFAP. Mol. Neurodegener. 18, 60 
(2023).
42.	 Johnson, E. C. B. et al. Large-scale proteomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease brain 
and cerebrospinal fluid reveals early changes in energy metabolism associated with 
microglia and astrocyte activation. Nat. Med. 26, 769–780 (2020).
43.	 Anderson, F. L. et al. Plasma-borne indicators of inflammasome activity in Parkinson’s 
disease patients. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 7, 2 (2021).
44.	 Scott, X. O. et al. The inflammasome adaptor protein ASC in mild cognitive impairment 
and Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 4674 (2020).
45.	 Ravichandran, K. A. & Heneka, M. T. Inflammasomes in neurological disorders — 
mechanisms and therapeutic potential. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 20, 67–83 (2024).
46.	 Jacobs, A. H. & Tavitian, B.; INMiND Consortium.Noninvasive molecular imaging of 
neuroinflammation. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32, 1393–1415 (2012).
47.	
Corica, F. et al. PET imaging of neuro-inflammation with tracers targeting the translocator 
protein (TSPO), a systematic review: from bench to bedside.Diagnostics 13, 1029 (2023).
48.	 Villa, A. et al. Identification of new molecular targets for PET imaging of the microglial 
anti-inflammatory activation state. Theranostics 8, 5400–5418 (2018).
49.	 Wohleb, E. S. Neuron-microglia interactions in mental health disorders: “For Better, and 
For Worse”. Front. Immunol. 7, 544 (2016).
50.	 Chauveau, F. et al. Comparative evaluation of the translocator protein radioligands 
11C-DPA-713, 18F-DPA-714, and 11C-PK11195 in a rat model of acute neuroinflammation. 
J. Nucl. Med. 50, 468–476 (2009).
51.	
Kreisl, W. C. et al. In vivo radioligand binding to translocator protein correlates with 
severity of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 136, 2228–2238 (2013).
52.	 Dani, M. et al. Microglial activation correlates in vivo with both tau and amyloid in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 141, 2740–2754 (2018).
53.	 Kreisl, W. C. Discerning the relationship between microglial activation and Alzheimer’s 
disease. Brain 140, 1825–1828 (2017).
54.	 Hamelin, L. et al. Early and protective microglial activation in Alzheimer’s disease: 
a prospective study using 18F-DPA-714 PET imaging. Brain 139, 1252–1264 (2016).
55.	 Femminella, G. D. et al. Microglial activation in early Alzheimer trajectory is associated 
with higher gray matter volume. Neurology 92, e1331–e1343 (2019).
56.	 Hamelin, L. et al. Distinct dynamic profiles of microglial activation are associated with 
progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 141, 1855–1870 (2018).
57.	
Fan, Z., Brooks, D. J., Okello, A. & Edison, P. An early and late peak in microglial activation 
in Alzheimer’s disease trajectory. Brain 140, 792–803 (2017).
58.	 Gatz, M. et al. Role of genes and environments for explaining Alzheimer disease. 
Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 63, 168–174 (2006).
59.	 Ridge, P. G. et al. Assessment of the genetic variance of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neurobiol. Aging 41, 200.e13–200.e20 (2016).
60.	 Lambert, J. C., Ramirez, A., Grenier-Boley, B. & Bellenguez, C. Step by step: towards a 
better understanding of the genetic architecture of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Psychiatry 
28, 2716–2727 (2023).
61.	
de Rojas, I. et al. Common variants in Alzheimer’s disease and risk stratification by 
polygenic risk scores. Nat. Commun. 12, 3417 (2021).
62.	 Holstege, H. et al. Exome sequencing identifies rare damaging variants in ATP8B4 and 
ABCA1 as risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 54, 1786–1794 (2022).
63.	 Lambert, J. C. et al. Implication of the immune system in Alzheimer’s disease: evidence 
from genome-wide pathway analysis. J. Alzheimers Dis. 20, 1107–1118 (2010).
64.	 Bellenguez, C. et al. New insights into the genetic etiology of Alzheimer’s disease and 
related dementias. Nat. Genet. 54, 412–436 (2022).
65.	 Novikova, G. et al. Integration of Alzheimer’s disease genetics and myeloid genomics 
identifies disease risk regulatory elements and genes. Nat. Commun. 12, 1610 (2021).
66.	 Hodges, A. K., Piers, T. M., Collier, D., Cousins, O. & Pocock, J. M. Pathways linking 
Alzheimer’s disease risk genes expressed highly in microglia. Neuroimmunol. 
Neuroinflamm. 8, 245 (2021).
67.	
Wang, L. et al. Proteo-genomics of soluble TREM2 in cerebrospinal fluid provides novel 
insights and identifies novel modulators for Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 19, 1 
(2024).
68.	 Black, R. A. et al. A metalloproteinase disintegrin that releases tumour-necrosis factor-α 
from cells. Nature 385, 729–733 (1997).
69.	 Verstrepen, L., Carpentier, I., Verhelst, K. & Beyaert, R. ABINs: A20 binding inhibitors 
of NF-κB and apoptosis signaling. Biochem. Pharmacol. 78, 105–114 (2009).
70.	 Spitz, C. et al. Non-canonical shedding of TNFα by SPPL2a is determined by the 
conformational flexibility of its transmembrane helix. iScience 23, 101775 (2020).
71.	
Tang, W. et al. The growth factor progranulin binds to TNF receptors and is therapeutic 
against inflammatory arthritis in mice. Science 332, 478–484 (2011).
72.	 Le Guen, Y. et al. Multiancestry analysis of the HLA locus in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s 
diseases uncovers a shared adaptive immune response mediated by HLA-DRB1*04 
subtypes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 120, e2302720120 (2023).
73.	 Trzeciakiewicz, H. et al. An HDAC6-dependent surveillance mechanism suppresses 
tau-mediated neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. Nat. Commun. 11, 5522  
(2020).
74.	 Ising, C. et al. NLRP3 inflammasome activation drives tau pathology. Nature 575, 
669–673 (2019).
75.	 Kleineidam, L. et al. PLCG2 protective variant p.P522R modulates tau pathology and 
disease progression in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Acta Neuropathol. 139, 
1025–1044 (2020).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
342
Review article
76.	 Sierksma, A. et al. Novel Alzheimer risk genes determine the microglia response to 
amyloid-β but not to TAU pathology. EMBO Mol. Med. 12, e10606 (2020).
77.	
Gjoneska, E. et al. Conserved epigenomic signals in mice and humans reveal immune 
basis of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 518, 365–369 (2015).
78.	 Hu, B. et al. Neuronal and glial 3D chromatin architecture informs the cellular etiology 
of brain disorders. Nat. Commun. 12, 3968 (2021).
79.	 Kosoy, R. et al. Genetics of the human microglia regulome refines Alzheimer’s disease 
risk loci. Nat. Genet. 54, 1145–1154 (2022).
80.	 Nott, A. et al. Brain cell type-specific enhancer-promoter interactome maps and 
disease-risk association. Science 366, 1134–1139 (2019).
81.	
Troutman, T. D., Kofman, E. & Glass, C. K. Exploiting dynamic enhancer landscapes to 
decode macrophage and microglia phenotypes in health and disease. Mol. Cell 81, 
3888–3903 (2021).
82.	 Shemer, A. et al. Engrafted parenchymal brain macrophages differ from microglia in 
transcriptome, chromatin landscape and response to challenge. Nat. Commun. 9, 5206 
(2018).
83.	 Wendeln, A. C. et al. Innate immune memory in the brain shapes neurological disease 
hallmarks. Nature 556, 332–338 (2018).
84.	 Montalbano, M., Majmundar, L., Sengupta, U., Fung, L. & Kayed, R. Pathological tau 
signatures and nuclear alterations in neurons, astrocytes and microglia in Alzheimer’s 
disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and dementia with Lewy bodies. Brain Pathol. 
33, e13112 (2023).
85.	 Matt, S. M., Lawson, M. A. & Johnson, R. W. Aging and peripheral lipopolysaccharide 
can modulate epigenetic regulators and decrease IL-1β promoter DNA methylation in 
microglia. Neurobiol. Aging 47, 1–9 (2016).
86.	 McGregor, B. A. et al. Alpha-synuclein-induced DNA methylation and gene expression in 
microglia. Neuroscience 468, 186–198 (2021).
87.	
Xavier, A. M. et al. Systematic delineation of signaling and epigenomic mechanisms 
underlying microglia inflammatory activity in acute and chronic brain pathologies. 
Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.04.502805 (2022).
88.	 Ayata, P. et al. Epigenetic regulation of brain region-specific microglia clearance activity. 
Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1049–1060 (2018).
89.	 Tang, Y. et al. Jmjd3 is essential for the epigenetic modulation of microglia phenotypes 
in the immune pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Cell Death Differ. 21, 369–380 (2014).
90.	 Rigillo, G. et al. LPS-induced histone H3 phospho(Ser10)-acetylation(Lys14) regulates 
neuronal and microglial neuroinflammatory response. Brain Behav. Immun. 74, 277–290 
(2018).
91.	
Pan, R. Y. et al. Positive feedback regulation of microglial glucose metabolism by histone 
H4 lysine 12 lactylation in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Metab. 34, 634–648.e6 (2022).
92.	 Ansari, A. et al. miR-146a and miR-181a are involved in the progression of mild cognitive 
impairment to Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 82, 102–109 (2019).
93.	 Islam, M. R. et al. A microRNA signature that correlates with cognition and is a target 
against cognitive decline. EMBO Mol. Med. 13, e13659 (2021).
94.	 Nagy, A. et al. Reassessing domain architecture evolution of metazoan proteins: major 
impact of gene prediction errors. Genes 2, 449–501 (2011).
95.	 Matt, S. M. et al. Inhibition of DNA methylation with zebularine alters 
lipopolysaccharide-induced sickness behavior and neuroinflammation in mice. 
Front. Neurosci. 12, 636 (2018).
96.	 Jiao, F. Z. et al. Histone deacetylase 2 inhibitor CAY10683 alleviates lipopolysaccharide 
induced neuroinflammation through attenuating TLR4/NF-κB signaling pathway. 
Neurochem. Res. 43, 1161–1170 (2018).
97.	
Walgrave, H., Zhou, L., De Strooper, B. & Salta, E. The promise of microRNA-based 
therapies in Alzheimer’s disease: challenges and perspectives. Mol. Neurodegener. 16, 
76 (2021).
98.	 Periyasamy, P. et al. Epigenetic promoter DNA methylation of miR-124 promotes HIV-1 
tat-mediated microglial activation via MECP2-STAT3 axis. J. Neurosci. 38, 5367–5383 
(2018).
99.	 Carrillo-Jimenez, A. et al. TET2 regulates the neuroinflammatory response in microglia. 
Cell Rep. 29, 697–713.e8 (2019).
100.	 Datta, M. et al. Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 regulate microglia function during 
development, homeostasis, and neurodegeneration in a context-dependent manner. 
Immunity 48, 514–529.e6 (2018).
101.	 Cho, S. H. et al. SIRT1 deficiency in microglia contributes to cognitive decline in aging 
and neurodegeneration via epigenetic regulation of IL-1β. J. Neurosci. 35, 807–818 (2015).
102.	 Schlepckow, K. et al. Enhancing protective microglial activities with a dual function 
TREM2 antibody to the stalk region. EMBO Mol. Med. 12, e11227 (2020).
103.	 Cheray, M. & Joseph, B. Epigenetics control microglia plasticity. Front. Cell Neurosci. 12, 
243 (2018).
104.	 Paolicelli, R. C. et al. Microglia states and nomenclature: a field at its crossroads. Neuron 
110, 3458–3483 (2022).
105.	 Denk, F., Crow, M., Didangelos, A., Lopes, D. M. & McMahon, S. B. Persistent alterations 
in microglial enhancers in a model of chronic pain. Cell Rep. 15, 1771–1781 (2016).
106.	 Schaafsma, W. et al. Long-lasting pro-inflammatory suppression of microglia by 
LPS-preconditioning is mediated by RelB-dependent epigenetic silencing. Brain Behav. 
Immun. 48, 205–221 (2015).
107.	 Schwarz, J. M., Hutchinson, M. R. & Bilbo, S. D. Early-life experience decreases 
drug-induced reinstatement of morphine CPP in adulthood via microglial-specific 
epigenetic programming of anti-inflammatory IL-10 expression. J. Neurosci. 31, 
17835–17847 (2011).
108.	 Barnes, D. E. et al. Association of mild traumatic brain injury with and without loss  
of consciousness with dementia in US military veterans. JAMA Neurol. 75, 1055–1061 
(2018).
109.	 Graham, A., Livingston, G., Purnell, L. & Huntley, J. Mild traumatic brain injuries and 
future risk of developing alzheimer’s disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. 
J. Alzheimers Dis. 87, 969–979 (2022).
110.	 Leung, K. K., Carr, F. M., Russell, M. J., Bremault-Phillips, S. & Triscott, J. A. C. Traumatic 
brain injuries among veterans and the risk of incident dementia: a systematic review & 
meta-analysis. Age Ageing 51, afab194 (2022).
111.	 Crane, P. K. et al. Association of traumatic brain injury with late-life neurodegenerative 
conditions and neuropathologic findings. JAMA Neurol. 73, 1062–1069 (2016).
112.	 Sugarman, M. A. et al. Failure to detect an association between self-reported traumatic 
brain injury and Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology and dementia. Alzheimers Dement. 
15, 686–698 (2019).
113.	 Abner, E. L. et al. Self-reported head injury and risk of late-life impairment and AD 
pathology in an AD center cohort. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 37, 294–306 (2014).
114.	 Agrawal, S. et al. Association of traumatic brain injury with and without loss of 
consciousness with neuropathologic outcomes in community-dwelling older persons. 
JAMA Netw. Open 5, e229311 (2022).
115.	 McKee, A. C. et al. The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Brain 
136, 43–64 (2013).
116.	 Mez, J. et al. Duration of American football play and chronic traumatic encephalopathy. 
Ann. Neurol. 87, 116–131 (2020).
117.	 Hay, J. R., Johnson, V. E., Young, A. M., Smith, D. H. & Stewart, W. Blood-brain barrier 
disruption is an early event that may persist for many years after traumatic brain injury 
in humans. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 74, 1147–1157 (2015).
118.	 Kirsch, D. et al. Vascular injury is associated with repetitive head impacts and tau 
pathology in chronic traumatic encephalopathy. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 82, 127–139 
(2023).
119.	 Cherry, J. D. et al. CCL2 is associated with microglia and macrophage recruitment in 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy. J. Neuroinflammation 17, 370 (2020).
120.	 Cherry, J. D. et al. Microglial neuroinflammation contributes to tau accumulation in 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 4, 112 (2016).
121.	 Smith, D. H., Chen, X. H., Iwata, A. & Graham, D. I. Amyloid β accumulation in axons after 
traumatic brain injury in humans. J. Neurosurg. 98, 1072–1077 (2003).
122.	 Drieu, A. et al. Persistent neuroinflammation and behavioural deficits after single mild 
traumatic brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow. Metab. 42, 2216–2229 (2022).
123.	 Kokiko-Cochran, O. et al. Altered neuroinflammation and behavior after traumatic brain 
injury in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurotrauma 33, 625–640 (2016).
124.	 Nadler, Y. et al. Increased expression of the γ-secretase components presenilin-1 and 
nicastrin in activated astrocytes and microglia following traumatic brain injury. Glia 56, 
552–567 (2008).
125.	 Gabande-Rodriguez, E., Keane, L. & Capasso, M. Microglial phagocytosis in aging and 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. Res. 98, 284–298 (2020).
126.	 Shin, M. K. et al. Reducing acetylated tau is neuroprotective in brain injury. Cell 184, 
2715–2732.e23 (2021).
127.	 Kokiko-Cochran, O. N. & Godbout, J. P. The inflammatory continuum of traumatic brain 
injury and Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Immunol. 9, 672 (2018).
128.	 Adams, J. W. et al. Lewy body pathology and chronic traumatic encephalopathy 
associated with contact sports. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 77, 757–768 (2018).
129.	 Nicks, R. et al. Repetitive head impacts and chronic traumatic encephalopathy are 
associated with TDP-43 inclusions and hippocampal sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol. 145, 
395–408 (2023).
130.	 Grande, G., Qiu, C. & Fratiglioni, L. Prevention of dementia in an ageing world: evidence 
and biological rationale. Ageing Res. Rev. 64, 101045 (2020).
131.	 Livingston, G. et al. Dementia prevention, intervention, and care. Lancet 390, 2673–2734 
(2017).
132.	 Santos-Lozano, A. et al. Physical activity and Alzheimer disease: a protective association. 
Mayo Clin. Proc. 91, 999–1020 (2016).
133.	 Yoneda, T. et al. The importance of engaging in physical activity in older adulthood for 
transitions between cognitive status categories and death: a coordinated analysis of 
14 longitudinal studies. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 76, 1661–1667 (2021).
134.	 Ayari, S., Abellard, A., Carayol, M., Guedj, E. & Gavarry, O. A systematic review  
of exercise modalities that reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines in humans and  
animals’ models with mild cognitive impairment or dementia. Exp. Gerontol. 175,  
112141 (2023).
135.	 Fedewa, M. V., Hathaway, E. D. & Ward-Ritacco, C. L. Effect of exercise training 
on C reactive protein: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised and 
non-randomised controlled trials. Br. J. Sports Med. 51, 670–676 (2017).
136.	 Casaletto, K. B. et al. Microglial correlates of late life physical activity: relationship with 
synaptic and cognitive aging in older adults. J. Neurosci. 42, 288–298 (2022).
137.	 Cao, M. et al. Enriched physical environment reverses spatial cognitive impairment 
of socially isolated APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice before amyloidosis onset. CNS 
Neurosci. Ther. 24, 202–211 (2018).
138.	 Grinan-Ferre, C. et al. Environmental enrichment improves cognitive deficits, AD 
hallmarks and epigenetic alterations presented in 5xFAD mouse model. Front. Cell 
Neurosci. 12, 224 (2018).
139.	 Mee-Inta, O., Zhao, Z. W. & Kuo, Y. M. Physical exercise inhibits inflammation and 
microglial activation. Cells 8, 691 (2019).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
343
Review article
140.	 Nakano, M. et al. An enriched environment prevents cognitive impairment in an 
Alzheimer’s disease model by enhancing the secretion of exosomal microRNA-146a 
from the choroid plexus. Brain Behav. Immun. Health 9, 100149 (2020).
141.	 Xu, H. et al. Environmental enrichment potently prevents microglia-mediated 
neuroinflammation by human amyloid β-protein oligomers. J. Neurosci. 36, 9041–9056 
(2016).
142.	 Stuart, K. E. et al. Late-life environmental enrichment preserves short-term memory and 
may attenuate microglia in male APP/PS1 mice. Neuroscience 408, 282–292 (2019).
143.	 Ziegler-Waldkirch, S. et al. Seed-induced Aβ deposition is modulated by microglia under 
environmental enrichment in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. EMBO J. 37, 167–182 
(2018).
144.	 Alhazmi, A., Stojanovski, E., McEvoy, M. & Garg, M. L. The association between dietary 
patterns and type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. 
J. Hum. Nutr. Diet. 27, 251–260 (2014).
145.	 Patnode, C. D., Redmond, N., Iacocca, M. O. & Henninger, M. Behavioral counseling 
interventions to promote a healthy diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease 
prevention in adults without known cardiovascular disease risk factors: updated 
evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 
328, 375–388 (2022).
146.	 Christ, A., Lauterbach, M. & Latz, E. Western diet and the immune system: an inflammatory 
connection. Immunity 51, 794–811 (2019).
147.	 Furman, D. et al. Chronic inflammation in the etiology of disease across the life span. Nat. 
Med. 25, 1822–1832 (2019).
148.	 Tejera, D. et al. Systemic inflammation impairs microglial Aβ clearance through NLRP3 
inflammasome. EMBO J. 38, e101064 (2019).
149.	 Yang, Y. et al. LPS priming before plaque deposition impedes microglial activation and 
restrains Aβ pathology in the 5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Behav. 
Immun. 113, 228–247 (2023).
150.	 Duggan, M. R. et al. Plasma proteins related to inflammatory diet predict future cognitive 
impairment. Mol. Psychiatry 28, 1599–1609 (2023).
151.	 Shi, Y. et al. Association of pro-inflammatory diet with increased risk of all-cause 
dementia and Alzheimer’s dementia: a prospective study of 166,377 UK Biobank 
participants. BMC Med. 21, 266 (2023).
152.	 Melo Van Lent, D. et al. Higher dietary inflammatory index scores are associated with 
brain MRI markers of brain aging: results from the Framingham Heart Study offspring 
cohort. Alzheimers Dement. 19, 621–631 (2023).
153.	 Ballarini, T. et al. Mediterranean diet, Alzheimer disease biomarkers and brain atrophy 
in old age. Neurology 96, e2920–e2932 (2021).
154.	 Garcia-Casares, N. et al. Alzheimer’s disease, mild cognitive impairment and 
Mediterranean diet. A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis. J. Clin. Med. 
10, 4642 (2021).
155.	 Scarmeas, N., Anastasiou, C. A. & Yannakoulia, M. Nutrition and prevention of cognitive 
impairment. Lancet Neurol. 17, 1006–1015 (2018).
156.	 Schwingshackl, L. & Hoffmann, G. Mediterranean dietary pattern, inflammation and 
endothelial function: a systematic review and meta-analysis of intervention trials. 
Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 24, 929–939 (2014).
157.	 Wu, P. Y., Chen, K. M. & Tsai, W. C. The Mediterranean dietary pattern and inflammation in 
older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Adv. Nutr. 12, 363–373 (2021).
158.	 Ngandu, T. et al. A 2 year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive  
training, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive decline in 
at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385, 2255–2263 
(2015).
159.	 Bettcher, B. M., Tansey, M. G., Dorothee, G. & Heneka, M. T. Publisher correction: 
peripheral and central immune system crosstalk in Alzheimer disease — a research 
prospectus. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17, 724 (2021).
160.	 Sipila, P. N. et al. Hospital-treated infectious diseases and the risk of dementia: a large, 
multicohort, observational study with a replication cohort. Lancet Infect. Dis. 21, 
1557–1567 (2021).
161.	 Bhaskar, K. et al. Regulation of tau pathology by the microglial fractalkine receptor. 
Neuron 68, 19–31 (2010).
162.	 Kitazawa, M., Oddo, S., Yamasaki, T. R., Green, K. N. & LaFerla, F. M. 
Lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation exacerbates tau pathology by a 
cyclin-dependent kinase 5-mediated pathway in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Neurosci. 25, 8843–8853 (2005).
163.	 Sarlus, H. et al. Allergy influences the inflammatory status of the brain and enhances 
tau-phosphorylation. J. Cell Mol. Med. 16, 2401–2412 (2012).
164.	 Holmes, C. et al. Systemic inflammation and disease progression in Alzheimer disease. 
Neurology 73, 768–774 (2009).
165.	 Neher, J. J. & Cunningham, C. Priming microglia for innate immune memory in the brain. 
Trends Immunol. 40, 358–374 (2019).
166.	 Walker, K. A. et al. Midlife systemic inflammation, late-life white matter integrity, and 
cerebral small vessel disease: the atherosclerosis risk in communities study. Stroke 48, 
3196–3202 (2017).
167.	 Netea, M. G. et al. Defining trained immunity and its role in health and disease. Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. 20, 375–388 (2020).
168.	 Lopez-Rodriguez, A. B. et al. Acute systemic inflammation exacerbates 
neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: IL-1β drives amplified responses in  
primed astrocytes and neuronal network dysfunction. Alzheimers Dement. 17,  
1735–1755 (2021).
169.	 Beydoun, M. A. et al. Clinical and bacterial markers of periodontitis and their association 
with incident all-cause and Alzheimer’s disease dementia in a large national survey.  
J. Alzheimers Dis. 75, 157–172 (2020).
170.	 Stein, P. S., Desrosiers, M., Donegan, S. J., Yepes, J. F. & Kryscio, R. J. Tooth loss, dementia 
and neuropathology in the Nun study. J. Am. Dent. Assoc. 138, 1314–1322 (2007).
171.	 Beutler, B. Endotoxin, toll-like receptor 4, and the afferent limb of innate immunity.  
Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 3, 23–28 (2000).
172.	 Hajishengallis, G., Darveau, R. P. & Curtis, M. A. The keystone-pathogen hypothesis.  
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 10, 717–725 (2012).
173.	 Caton, J. G. et al. A new classification scheme for periodontal and peri-implant diseases 
and conditions — introduction and key changes from the 1999 classification. J. Clin. 
Periodontol. 45 (Suppl. 20), S1–S8 (2018).
174.	 Dominy, S. S. et al. Porphyromonas gingivalis in Alzheimer’s disease brains: evidence for 
disease causation and treatment with small-molecule inhibitors. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau3333 
(2019).
175.	 Poole, S., Singhrao, S. K., Kesavalu, L., Curtis, M. A. & Crean, S. Determining the presence 
of periodontopathic virulence factors in short-term postmortem Alzheimer’s disease 
brain tissue. J. Alzheimers Dis. 36, 665–677 (2013).
176.	 Singhrao, S. K. & Olsen, I. Are Porphyromonas gingivalis outer membrane vesicles 
microbullets for sporadic Alzheimer’s disease manifestation? J. Alzheimers Dis. Rep. 2, 
219–228 (2018).
177.	 Rokad, F. et al. Cerebral oxidative stress and microvasculature defects in TNF-α 
expressing transgenic and Porphyromonas gingivalis-infected ApoE-/- mice. J. Alzheimers 
Dis. 60, 359–369 (2017).
178.	 Hu, Y. et al. Periodontitis induced by P. gingivalis-LPS is associated with 
neuroinflammation and learning and memory impairment in Sprague-Dawley rats.  
Front. Neurosci. 14, 658 (2020).
179.	 Ilievski, V. et al. Chronic oral application of a periodontal pathogen results in brain 
inflammation, neurodegeneration and amyloid beta production in wild type mice.  
PLoS One 13, e0204941 (2018).
180.	 Poole, S. et al. Active invasion of Porphyromonas gingivalis and infection-induced 
complement activation in ApoE-/- mice brains. J. Alzheimers Dis. 43, 67–80 (2015).
181.	 Zhang, J. et al. Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide induces cognitive 
dysfunction, mediated by neuronal inflammation via activation of the TLR4 signaling 
pathway in C57BL/6 mice. J. Neuroinflammation 15, 37 (2018).
182.	 Memedovski, Z. et al. Classical and alternative activation of rat microglia treated  
with ultrapure Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide in vitro. Toxins 12, 333 
(2020).
183.	 Hanisch, U. K. Microglia as a source and target of cytokines. Glia 40, 140–155 (2002).
184.	 Grabrucker, S. et al. Microbiota from Alzheimer’s patients induce deficits in cognition 
and hippocampal neurogenesis. Brain 69, 4916–4934 (2023).
185.	 Kim, M. S. et al. Transfer of a healthy microbiota reduces amyloid and tau pathology in an 
Alzheimer’s disease animal model. Gut 69, 283–294 (2020).
186.	 Valeri, F. et al. Impact of the age of cecal material transfer donors on Alzheimer’s disease 
pathology in 5xFAD mice. Microorganisms 9, 2548 (2021).
187.	 Upadhyay, P. & Gupta, S. Dual mode of Triphala in the reversal of cognition through  
gut restoration in antibiotic mediated prolonged dysbiosis condition in 5XFAD mice.  
Exp. Neurol. 367, 114473 (2023).
188.	 Kasarello, K., Cudnoch-Jedrzejewska, A. & Czarzasta, K. Communication of gut 
microbiota and brain via immune and neuroendocrine signaling. Front. Microbiol. 14, 
1118529 (2023).
189.	 Strandwitz, P. Neurotransmitter modulation by the gut microbiota. Brain Res. 1693, 
128–133 (2018).
190.	 Banks, W. A. et al. Lipopolysaccharide-induced blood-brain barrier disruption: roles of 
cyclooxygenase, oxidative stress, neuroinflammation, and elements of the neurovascular 
unit. J. Neuroinflammation 12, 223 (2015).
191.	 Banks, W. A. & Robinson, S. M. Minimal penetration of lipopolysaccharide across the 
murine blood-brain barrier. Brain Behav. Immun. 24, 102–109 (2010).
192.	 Braniste, V. et al. The gut microbiota influences blood-brain barrier permeability in mice. 
Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 263ra158 (2014).
193.	 Erny, D. et al. Host microbiota constantly control maturation and function of microglia 
in the CNS. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 965–977 (2015).
194.	 Olson, J. K. & Miller, S. D. Microglia initiate central nervous system innate and adaptive 
immune responses through multiple TLRs. J. Immunol. 173, 3916–3924 (2004).
195.	 Lloyd, A. F. et al. Deep proteomic analysis of microglia reveals fundamental biological 
differences between model systems. Cell Rep. 43, 114908 (2024).
196.	 Mezo, C. et al. Different effects of constitutive and induced microbiota modulation on 
microglia in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 8, 119 
(2020).
197.	 Seo, D. O. et al. ApoE isoform- and microbiota-dependent progression of 
neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Science 379, eadd1236 (2023).
198.	 Sun, N. et al. Antibiotic-induced microbiome depletion in adult mice disrupts 
blood-brain barrier and facilitates brain infiltration of monocytes after bone-marrow 
transplantation. Brain Behav. Immun. 92, 102–114 (2021).
199.	 Frohlich, E. E. et al. Cognitive impairment by antibiotic-induced gut dysbiosis: analysis 
of gut microbiota-brain communication. Brain Behav. Immun. 56, 140–155 (2016).
200.	Yang, X., Yu, D., Xue, L., Li, H. & Du, J. Probiotics modulate the microbiota-gut-brain 
axis and improve memory deficits in aged SAMP8 mice. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 10, 475–487 
(2020).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
344
Review article
201.	 Zelante, T. et al. Tryptophan catabolites from microbiota engage aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor and balance mucosal reactivity via interleukin-22. Immunity 39, 372–385 (2013).
202.	Rothhammer, V. et al. Microglial control of astrocytes in response to microbial 
metabolites. Nature 557, 724–728 (2018).
203.	Rothhammer, V. et al. Type I interferons and microbial metabolites of tryptophan 
modulate astrocyte activity and central nervous system inflammation via the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor. Nat. Med. 22, 586–597 (2016).
204.	Yu, L. W., Agirman, G. & Hsiao, E. Y. The gut microbiome as a regulator of the 
neuroimmune landscape. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 40, 143–167 (2022).
205.	McMillin, M. et al. TGR5 signaling reduces neuroinflammation during hepatic 
encephalopathy. J. Neurochem. 135, 565–576 (2015).
206.	Yanguas-Casas, N., Barreda-Manso, M. A., Nieto-Sampedro, M. & Romero-Ramirez, L. 
Tauroursodeoxycholic acid reduces glial cell activation in an animal model of acute 
neuroinflammation. J. Neuroinflammation 11, 50 (2014).
207.	 Yanguas-Casas, N., Barreda-Manso, M. A., Nieto-Sampedro, M. & Romero-Ramirez, L. 
TUDCA: an agonist of the bile acid receptor GPBAR1/TGR5 with anti-inflammatory effects 
in microglial cells. J. Cell Physiol. 232, 2231–2245 (2017).
208.	Guo, C. et al. Bile acids control inflammation and metabolic disorder through inhibition 
of NLRP3 inflammasome. Immunity 45, 944 (2016).
209.	Nunes, A. F. et al. TUDCA, a bile acid, attenuates amyloid precursor protein processing 
and amyloid-β deposition in APP/PS1 mice. Mol. Neurobiol. 45, 440–454 (2012).
210.	 Goldmann, T. et al. Origin, fate and dynamics of macrophages at central nervous system 
interfaces. Nat. Immunol. 17, 797–805 (2016).
211.	 Mrdjen, D. et al. High-dimensional single-cell mapping of central nervous system 
immune cells reveals distinct myeloid subsets in health, aging, and disease. Immunity 
48, 380–395.e6 (2018).
212.	 Van Hove, H. et al. A single-cell atlas of mouse brain macrophages reveals unique 
transcriptional identities shaped by ontogeny and tissue environment. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 
1021–1035 (2019).
213.	 Kierdorf, K., Masuda, T., Jordao, M. J. C. & Prinz, M. Macrophages at CNS interfaces: 
ontogeny and function in health and disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20, 547–562 (2019).
214.	 Masuda, T. et al. Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of mouse and human microglia 
at single-cell resolution. Nature 566, 388–392 (2019).
215.	 Prinz, M., Masuda, T., Wheeler, M. A. & Quintana, F. J. Microglia and central nervous 
system-associated macrophages-from origin to disease modulation. Annu. Rev. 
Immunol. 39, 251–277 (2021).
216.	 Krasemann, S. et al. The TREM2-APOE pathway drives the transcriptional phenotype of 
dysfunctional microglia in neurodegenerative diseases. Immunity 47, 566–581.e9 (2017).
217.	 Keren-Shaul, H. et al. A unique microglia type associated with restricting development of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169, 1276–1290.e17 (2017).
218.	 Galatro, T. F. et al. Transcriptomic analysis of purified human cortical microglia reveals 
age-associated changes. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1162–1171 (2017).
219.	 Gosselin, D. et al. An environment-dependent transcriptional network specifies human 
microglia identity. Science 356, eaal3222 (2017).
220.	Olah, M. et al. Single cell RNA sequencing of human microglia uncovers a subset 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun. 11, 6129 (2020).
221.	 Sankowski, R. et al. Mapping microglia states in the human brain through the integration 
of high-dimensional techniques. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 2098–2110 (2019).
222.	 Smith, A. M. et al. Diverse human astrocyte and microglial transcriptional responses to 
Alzheimer’s pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 143, 75–91 (2022).
223.	 Srinivasan, K. et al. Alzheimer’s patient microglia exhibit enhanced aging and unique 
transcriptional activation. Cell Rep. 31, 107843 (2020).
224.	 Rongvaux, A. et al. Development and function of human innate immune cells in a 
humanized mouse model. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 364–372 (2014).
225.	 Hasselmann, J. et al. Development of a chimeric model to study and manipulate human 
microglia in vivo. Neuron 103, 1016–1033.e10 (2019).
226.	 Mancuso, R. et al. Stem-cell-derived human microglia transplanted in mouse brain to 
study human disease. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 2111–2116 (2019).
227.	 McQuade, A. et al. Gene expression and functional deficits underlie TREM2-knockout 
microglia responses in human models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun. 11, 5370 
(2020).
228.	 Claes, C. et al. Plaque-associated human microglia accumulate lipid droplets in a 
chimeric model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 16, 50 (2021).
229.	 Andrews, S. J. et al. The complex genetic architecture of Alzheimer’s disease: novel insights 
and future directions. EBioMedicine 90, 104511 (2023).
230.	Grubman, A. et al. Transcriptional signature in microglia associated with Aβ plaque 
phagocytosis. Nat. Commun. 12, 3015 (2021).
231.	 Parhizkar, S. et al. Loss of TREM2 function increases amyloid seeding but reduces 
plaque-associated ApoE. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 191–204 (2019).
232.	 Huang, Y. et al. Microglia use TAM receptors to detect and engulf amyloid β plaques. 
Nat. Immunol. 22, 586–594 (2021).
233.	Bard, F. et al. Peripherally administered antibodies against amyloid β-peptide enter the 
central nervous system and reduce pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. 
Nat. Med. 6, 916–919 (2000).
234.	Dejanovic, B. et al. Complement C1q-dependent excitatory and inhibitory synapse 
elimination by astrocytes and microglia in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Nat. Aging 
2, 837–850 (2022).
235.	 Gratuze, M. et al. Impact of TREM2R47H variant on tau pathology-induced gliosis and 
neurodegeneration. J. Clin. Invest. 130, 4954–4968 (2020).
236.	Popescu, A. S. et al. Alzheimer’s disease-associated R47H TREM2 increases, but wild-type 
TREM2 decreases, microglial phagocytosis of synaptosomes and neuronal loss. Glia 71, 
974–990 (2023).
237.	 Huang, Y. & Lemke, G. Early death in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease exacerbated 
by microglial loss of TAM receptor signaling. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2204306119 
(2022).
238.	Brelstaff, J., Tolkovsky, A. M., Ghetti, B., Goedert, M. & Spillantini, M. G. Living neurons 
with tau filaments aberrantly expose phosphatidylserine and are phagocytosed by 
microglia. Cell Rep. 24, 1939–1948.e4 (2018).
239.	Pampuscenko, K. et al. Extracellular tau induces microglial phagocytosis of living 
neurons in cell cultures. J. Neurochem. 154, 316–329 (2020).
240.	Puigdellivol, M. et al. The microglial P2Y6 receptor mediates neuronal loss and memory 
deficits in neurodegeneration. Cell Rep. 37, 110148 (2021).
241.	 Condello, C., Yuan, P. & Grutzendler, J. Microglia-mediated neuroprotection, TREM2,  
and Alzheimer’s disease: evidence from optical imaging. Biol. Psychiatry 83, 377–387 
(2018).
242.	 Condello, C., Yuan, P., Schain, A. & Grutzendler, J. Microglia constitute a barrier that 
prevents neurotoxic protofibrillar Aβ42 hotspots around plaques. Nat. Commun. 6,  
6176 (2015).
243.	Fischer, O. Miliare Nekrosen mit drusigen Wucherungen der Neuro-fibrillen, eine 
regelmässige Veränderung der Hirnrinde bei. Monatsschr. Psychiatr. Neurol. 22, 361 
(1907).
244.	Yuan, P. et al. PLD3 affects axonal spheroids and network defects in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nature 612, 328–337 (2022).
245.	 Yuan, P. et al. TREM2 haplodeficiency in mice and humans impairs the microglia barrier 
function leading to decreased amyloid compaction and severe axonal dystrophy. Neuron 
90, 724–739 (2016).
246.	Wang, Y. et al. TREM2-mediated early microglial response limits diffusion and toxicity 
of amyloid plaques. J. Exp. Med. 213, 667–675 (2016).
247.	 Ennerfelt, H. et al. SYK coordinates neuroprotective microglial responses in 
neurodegenerative disease. Cell 185, 4135–4152.e22 (2022).
248.	Wang, S. et al. TREM2 drives microglia response to amyloid-β via SYK-dependent 
and -independent pathways. Cell 185, 4153–4169.e19 (2022).
249.	 Hu, J. et al. Microglial Piezo1 senses Aβ fibril stiffness to restrict Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neuron 111, 15–29.e8 (2023).
250.	Lee, S. H. et al. Trem2 restrains the enhancement of tau accumulation and 
neurodegeneration by β-amyloid pathology. Neuron 109, 1283–1301.e6 (2021).
251.	 Zhao, N. et al. Elevating microglia TREM2 reduces amyloid seeding and suppresses 
disease-associated microglia. J. Exp. Med. 219, e20212479 (2022).
252.	 Wang, S. et al. Anti-human TREM2 induces microglia proliferation and reduces pathology 
in an Alzheimer’s disease model. J. Exp. Med. 217, e20200785 (2020).
253.	Damisah, E. C. et al. Astrocytes and microglia play orchestrated roles and respect 
phagocytic territories during neuronal corpse removal in vivo. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba3239 
(2020).
254.	Ulrich, J. D. et al. ApoE facilitates the microglial response to amyloid plaque pathology.  
J. Exp. Med. 215, 1047–1058 (2018).
255.	 Malpetti, M. et al. Microglial activation and tau burden predict cognitive decline in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 143, 1588–1602 (2020).
256.	Akiyama, H. et al. Expression of the receptor for macrophage colony stimulating factor 
by brain microglia and its upregulation in brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain Res. 639, 171–174 (1994).
257.	 Gomez-Nicola, D., Fransen, N. L., Suzzi, S. & Perry, V. H. Regulation of microglial 
proliferation during chronic neurodegeneration. J. Neurosci. 33, 2481–2493 (2013).
258.	Olmos-Alonso, A. et al. Pharmacological targeting of CSF1R inhibits microglial 
proliferation and prevents the progression of Alzheimer’s-like pathology. Brain 139, 
891–907 (2016).
259.	 Sassi, C. et al. Mendelian adult-onset leukodystrophy genes in Alzheimer’s disease: 
critical influence of CSF1R and NOTCH3. Neurobiol. Aging 66, 179.e17–179.e29  
(2018).
260.	Dagher, N. N. et al. Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor inhibition prevents microglial 
plaque association and improves cognition in 3xTg-AD mice. J. Neuroinflammation 
12, 139 (2015).
261.	 Sosna, J. et al. Early long-term administration of the CSF1R inhibitor PLX3397 ablates 
microglia and reduces accumulation of intraneuronal amyloid, neuritic plaque 
deposition and pre-fibrillar oligomers in 5XFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Mol. Neurodegener. 13, 11 (2018).
262.	 Spangenberg, E. E. et al. Eliminating microglia in Alzheimer’s mice prevents neuronal 
loss without modulating amyloid-β pathology. Brain 139, 1265–1281 (2016).
263.	Kater, M. S. J. et al. Prevention of microgliosis halts early memory loss in a mouse model 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Behav. Immun. 107, 225–241 (2023).
264.	Mancuso, R. et al. CSF1R inhibitor JNJ-40346527 attenuates microglial proliferation and 
neurodegeneration in P301S mice. Brain 142, 3243–3264 (2019).
265.	 Hu, Y. et al. Replicative senescence dictates the emergence of disease-associated 
microglia and contributes to Aβ pathology. Cell Rep. 35, 109228 (2021).
266.	Martin-Estebane, M. & Gomez-Nicola, D. Targeting microglial population dynamics in 
Alzheimer’s disease: are we ready for a potential impact on immune function? Front. Cell 
Neurosci. 14, 149 (2020).
267.	 Baik, S. H. et al. A breakdown in metabolic reprogramming causes microglia dysfunction 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Metab. 30, 493–507.e6 (2019).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
345
Review article
268.	McIntosh, A. et al. Iron accumulation in microglia triggers a cascade of events that leads 
to altered metabolism and compromised function in APP/PS1 mice. Brain Pathol. 29, 
606–621 (2019).
269.	Guillot-Sestier, M. V. et al. Microglial metabolism is a pivotal factor in sexual dimorphism 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Commun. Biol. 4, 711 (2021).
270.	 Bernier, L. P. et al. Microglial metabolic flexibility supports immune surveillance of the 
brain parenchyma. Nat. Commun. 11, 1559 (2020).
271.	 Minhas, P. S. et al. Macrophage de novo NAD+ synthesis specifies immune function in 
aging and inflammation. Nat. Immunol. 20, 50–63 (2019).
272.	 Minhas, P. S. et al. Restoring metabolism of myeloid cells reverses cognitive decline in 
ageing. Nature 590, 122–128 (2021).
273.	 O’Brien, J. S. & Sampson, E. L. Lipid composition of the normal human brain: gray matter, 
white matter, and myelin. J. Lipid Res. 6, 537–544 (1965).
274.	 Bjorkhem, I. & Meaney, S. Brain cholesterol: long secret life behind a barrier. Arterioscler. 
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 24, 806–815 (2004).
275.	 Saher, G. Cholesterol metabolism in aging and age-related disorders. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 46, 59–78 (2023).
276.	 Tobeh, N. S. & Bruce, K. D. Emerging Alzheimer’s disease therapeutics: promising insights 
from lipid metabolism and microglia-focused interventions. Front. Aging Neurosci. 15, 
1259012 (2023).
277.	 Lovell, M. A., Ehmann, W. D., Mattson, M. P. & Markesbery, W. R. Elevated 
4-hydroxynonenal in ventricular fluid in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 18, 
457–461 (1997).
278.	 Singh, M., Dang, T. N., Arseneault, M. & Ramassamy, C. Role of by-products of lipid 
oxidation in Alzheimer’s disease brain: a focus on acrolein. J. Alzheimers Dis. 21, 741–756 
(2010).
279.	 Moulton, M. J. et al. Neuronal ROS-induced glial lipid droplet formation is altered by loss 
of Alzheimer’s disease-associated genes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2112095118 
(2021).
280.	Ates, G., Goldberg, J., Currais, A. & Maher, P. CMS121, a fatty acid synthase inhibitor, 
protects against excess lipid peroxidation and inflammation and alleviates cognitive  
loss in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Redox Biol. 36, 101648  
(2020).
281.	 Marschallinger, J. et al. Lipid-droplet-accumulating microglia represent a dysfunctional 
and proinflammatory state in the aging brain. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 194–208 (2020).
282.	 Haney, M. S. et al. APOE4/4 is linked to damaging lipid droplets in Alzheimer’s disease 
microglia. Nature 628, 154–161 (2024).
283.	Kozlova, A. et al. Alzheimer’s disease risk allele of PICALM causes detrimental lipid 
droplets in microglia. Preprint at Res. Sq. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4407146/v1 
(2024).
284.	Sing, C. F. & Davignon, J. Role of the apolipoprotein E polymorphism in determining 
normal plasma lipid and lipoprotein variation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37, 268–285 (1985).
285.	 Young, J. E. & Jayadev, S. Neighborhood matters: altered lipid metabolism in APOE4 
microglia causes problems for neurons. Cell Stem Cell 29, 1159–1160 (2022).
286.	Li, Y. et al. Microglial lipid droplet accumulation in tauopathy brain is regulated by 
neuronal AMPK. Cell Metab. 36, 1351–1370.e8 (2024).
287.	 Bresgen, N., Kovacs, M., Lahnsteiner, A., Felder, T. K. & Rinnerthaler, M. The janus-faced 
role of lipid droplets in aging: insights from the cellular perspective. Biomolecules 13, 912 
(2023).
288.	Hu, X., Ma, Y. N. & Xia, Y. Association between abnormal lipid metabolism and Alzheimer’s 
disease: new research has revealed significant findings on the APOE4 genotype in 
microglia. Biosci. Trends 18, 195–197 (2024).
289.	 Filipello, F. et al. Defects in lysosomal function and lipid metabolism in human  
microglia harboring a TREM2 loss of function mutation. Acta Neuropathol. 145, 749–772 
(2023).
290.	Mirdha, L. Aggregation behavior of amyloid beta peptide depends upon the membrane 
lipid composition. J. Membr. Biol. 257, 151–164 (2024).
291.	 Lee, C. Y., Tse, W., Smith, J. D. & Landreth, G. E. Apolipoprotein E promotes β-amyloid 
trafficking and degradation by modulating microglial cholesterol levels. J. Biol. Chem. 
287, 2032–2044 (2012).
292.	Liang, Z. et al. Long-term high-fat diet consumption aggravates β-amyloid deposition 
and tau pathology accompanied by microglial activation in an Alzheimer’s disease 
model. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 68, e2300669 (2024).
293.	Toral-Rios, D. et al. Cholesterol 25-hydroxylase mediates neuroinflammation and 
neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. J. Exp. Med. 221, e20232000  
(2024).
294.	Lin, P. B. et al. INPP5D deficiency attenuates amyloid pathology in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 19, 2528–2537 (2023).
295.	Podlesny-Drabiniok, A. et al. BHLHE40/41 regulate microglia and peripheral macrophage 
responses associated with Alzheimer’s disease and other disorders of lipid-rich tissues. 
Nat. Commun. 15, 2058 (2024).
296.	You, S.-F. et al. MS4A4A modifies the risk of Alzheimer disease by regulating lipid 
metabolism and immune response in a unique microglia state. Preprint at medRxiv 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.02.06.23285545 (2023).
297.	 Wang, C. et al. TRPV1 regulates ApoE4-disrupted intracellular lipid homeostasis  
and decreases synaptic phagocytosis by microglia. Exp. Mol. Med. 55, 347–363  
(2023).
298.	Leng, L. et al. Microglial hexokinase 2 deficiency increases ATP generation through lipid 
metabolism leading to β-amyloid clearance. Nat. Metab. 4, 1287–1305 (2022).
299.	Hernandez-Segura, A., Nehme, J. & Demaria, M. Hallmarks of cellular senescence. 
Trends Cell Biol. 28, 436–453 (2018).
300.	Blum-Degen, D. et al. Interleukin-1β and interleukin-6 are elevated in the cerebrospinal 
fluid of Alzheimer’s and de novo Parkinson’s disease patients. Neurosci. Lett. 202, 17–20 
(1995).
301.	 Gezen-Ak, D. et al. BDNF, TNFα, HSP90, CFH, and IL-10 serum levels in patients with early 
or late onset Alzheimer’s disease or mild cognitive impairment. J. Alzheimers Dis. 37, 
185–195 (2013).
302.	Streit, W. J. Microglial senescence: does the brain’s immune system have an expiration 
date? Trends Neurosci. 29, 506–510 (2006).
303.	Wood, J. A. et al. Cytokine indices in Alzheimer’s temporal cortex: no changes in 
mature IL-1β or IL-1RA but increases in the associated acute phase proteins IL-6, 
α2-macroglobulin and C-reactive protein. Brain Res. 629, 245–252 (1993).
304.	Sierra, A., Gottfried-Blackmore, A. C., McEwen, B. S. & Bulloch, K. Microglia derived from 
aging mice exhibit an altered inflammatory profile. Glia 55, 412–424 (2007).
305.	Maphis, N. et al. Reactive microglia drive tau pathology and contribute to the spreading 
of pathological tau in the brain. Brain 138, 1738–1755 (2015).
306.	Stancu, I. C. et al. Aggregated Tau activates NLRP3-ASC inflammasome exacerbating 
exogenously seeded and non-exogenously seeded Tau pathology in vivo. Acta 
Neuropathol. 137, 599–617 (2019).
307.	 Bussian, T. J. et al. Clearance of senescent glial cells prevents tau-dependent pathology 
and cognitive decline. Nature 562, 578–582 (2018).
308.	Flanary, B. E., Sammons, N. W., Nguyen, C., Walker, D. & Streit, W. J. Evidence that aging 
and amyloid promote microglial cell senescence. Rejuvenation Res. 10, 61–74 (2007).
309.	Ng, P. Y., Zhang, C., Li, H. & Baker, D. J. Senescent microglia represent a subset of 
disease-associated microglia in P301S mice. J. Alzheimers Dis. 95, 493–507 (2023).
310.	 Brelstaff, J. H. et al. Microglia become hypofunctional and release metalloproteases 
and tau seeds when phagocytosing live neurons with P301S tau aggregates. Sci. Adv. 7, 
eabg4980 (2021).
311.	 Karabag, D. et al. Characterizing microglial senescence: Tau as a key player. J. Neurochem. 
166, 517–533 (2023).
312.	 Han, R. T., Kim, R. D., Molofsky, A. V. & Liddelow, S. A. Astrocyte-immune cell interactions 
in physiology and pathology. Immunity 54, 211–224 (2021).
313.	 Verkhratsky, A. & Nedergaard, M. Physiology of astroglia. Physiol. Rev. 98, 239–389 
(2018).
314.	 Hasel, P., Rose, I. V. L., Sadick, J. S., Kim, R. D. & Liddelow, S. A. Neuroinflammatory 
astrocyte subtypes in the mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci. 24, 1475–1487 (2021).
315.	 Escartin, C. et al. Reactive astrocyte nomenclature, definitions, and future directions. 
Nat. Neurosci. 24, 312–325 (2021).
316.	 Zhou, Y. et al. Human and mouse single-nucleus transcriptomics reveal TREM2-
dependent and TREM2-independent cellular responses in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med. 
26, 131–142 (2020).
317.	 Verkhratsky, A. et al. Astrocytes in human central nervous system diseases: a frontier for 
new therapies. Signal. Transduct. Target. Ther. 8, 396 (2023).
318.	 Liddelow, S. A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated microglia. 
Nature 541, 481–487 (2017).
319.	 Chun, H. et al. Severe reactive astrocytes precipitate pathological hallmarks of 
Alzheimer’s disease via H2O2
- production. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 1555–1566 (2020).
320.	Ju, Y. H. et al. Astrocytic urea cycle detoxifies Aβ-derived ammonia while impairing 
memory in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Metab. 34, 1104–1120.e8 (2022).
321.	 Giovannoni, F. & Quintana, F. J. The role of astrocytes in CNS inflammation. Trends 
Immunol. 41, 805–819 (2020).
322.	 Sekar, S. et al. Alzheimer’s disease is associated with altered expression of genes 
involved in immune response and mitochondrial processes in astrocytes. Neurobiol. 
Aging 36, 583–591 (2015).
323.	Verkhratsky, A., Rodrigues, J. J., Pivoriunas, A., Zorec, R. & Semyanov, A. Astroglial 
atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease. Pflug. Arch. 471, 1247–1261 (2019).
324.	Oberheim, N. A. et al. Uniquely hominid features of adult human astrocytes. J. Neurosci. 
29, 3276–3287 (2009).
325.	 Guttenplan, K. A. et al. Neurotoxic reactive astrocytes induce cell death via saturated 
lipids. Nature 599, 102–107 (2021).
326.	Molina-Gonzalez, I. et al. Astrocyte-oligodendrocyte interaction regulates central 
nervous system regeneration. Nat. Commun. 14, 3372 (2023).
327.	 Tcw, J. et al. Cholesterol and matrisome pathways dysregulated in astrocytes and 
microglia. Cell 185, 2213–2233 (2022).
328.	Mathys, H. et al. Single-cell atlas reveals correlates of high cognitive function, dementia, 
and resilience to Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Cell 186, 4365–4385.e27 (2023).
329.	Kenigsbuch, M. et al. A shared disease-associated oligodendrocyte signature among 
multiple CNS pathologies. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 876–886 (2022).
330.	Kaya, T. et al. CD8+ T cells induce interferon-responsive oligodendrocytes and microglia 
in white matter aging. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 1446–1457 (2022).
331.	 Pandey, S. et al. Disease-associated oligodendrocyte responses across 
neurodegenerative diseases. Cell Rep. 40, 111189 (2022).
332.	Chen, W. T. et al. Spatial transcriptomics and in situ sequencing to study Alzheimer’s 
disease. Cell 182, 976–991.e19 (2020).
333.	Nave, K. A. & Werner, H. B. Myelination of the nervous system: mechanisms and 
functions. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 30, 503–533 (2014).
334.	Dubey, M. et al. Myelination synchronizes cortical oscillations by consolidating 
parvalbumin-mediated phasic inhibition. eLife 11, e73827 (2022).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
346
Review article
335.	Bartzokis, G. Age-related myelin breakdown: a developmental model of cognitive 
decline and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 25, 5–18 (2004).
336.	Braak, H. & Del Tredici, K. Poor and protracted myelination as a contributory factor to 
neurodegenerative disorders. Neurobiol. Aging 25, 19–23 (2004).
337.	 Peters, A. & Sethares, C. Aging and the myelinated fibers in prefrontal cortex and corpus 
callosum of the monkey. J. Comp. Neurol. 442, 277–291 (2002).
338.	Edgar, J. M. et al. Rio-Hortega’s drawings revisited with fluorescent protein defines a 
cytoplasm-filled channel system of CNS myelin. J. Anat. 239, 1241–1255 (2021).
339.	Snaidero, N. et al. Antagonistic functions of MBP and CNP establish cytosolic channels  
in CNS myelin. Cell Rep. 18, 314–323 (2017).
340.	Funfschilling, U. et al. Glycolytic oligodendrocytes maintain myelin and long-term axonal 
integrity. Nature 485, 517–521 (2012).
341.	 Sandell, J. H. & Peters, A. Disrupted myelin and axon loss in the anterior commissure of 
the aged rhesus monkey. J. Comp. Neurol. 466, 14–30 (2003).
342.	Kedia, S. et al. T cell-mediated microglial activation triggers myelin pathology in a mouse 
model of amyloidosis. Nat. Neurosci. 27, 1468–1474 (2024).
343.	Safaiyan, S. et al. White matter aging drives microglial diversity. Neuron 109, 1100–1117.
e10 (2021).
344.	Safaiyan, S. et al. Age-related myelin degradation burdens the clearance function of 
microglia during aging. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 995–998 (2016).
345.	Depp, C. et al. Myelin dysfunction drives amyloid-β deposition in models of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature 618, 349–357 (2023).
346.	Zlokovic, B. V. The blood-brain barrier in health and chronic neurodegenerative 
disorders. Neuron 57, 178–201 (2008).
347.	 Kim, K. et al. Therapeutic B-cell depletion reverses progression of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nat. Commun. 12, 2185 (2021).
348.	Elyahu, Y. et al. Aging promotes reorganization of the CD4 T cell landscape toward 
extreme regulatory and effector phenotypes. Sci. Adv. 5, eaaw8330 (2019).
349.	Goronzy, J. J. & Weyand, C. M. Successful and maladaptive T cell aging. Immunity 46, 
364–378 (2017).
350.	Nikolich-Zugich, J. The twilight of immunity: emerging concepts in aging of the immune 
system. Nat. Immunol. 19, 10–19 (2018).
351.	 Franceschi, C., Garagnani, P., Parini, P., Giuliani, C. & Santoro, A. Inflammaging: a new 
immune-metabolic viewpoint for age-related diseases. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 14, 576–590 
(2018).
352.	Desdin-Mico, G. et al. T cells with dysfunctional mitochondria induce multimorbidity and 
premature senescence. Science 368, 1371–1376 (2020).
353.	Gate, D. et al. Clonally expanded CD8 T cells patrol the cerebrospinal fluid in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature 577, 399–404 (2020).
354.	Chen, X. et al. Microglia-mediated T cell infiltration drives neurodegeneration in 
tauopathy. Nature 615, 668–677 (2023).
355.	Laurent, C. et al. Hippocampal T cell infiltration promotes neuroinflammation and 
cognitive decline in a mouse model of tauopathy. Brain 140, 184–200 (2017).
356.	Pellicano, M. et al. Immune profiling of Alzheimer patients. J. Neuroimmunol. 242, 52–59 
(2012).
357.	 Joshi, C. et al. CSF-derived CD4+ T-cell diversity is reduced in patients with Alzheimer 
clinical syndrome. Neurol. Neuroimmunol. Neuroinflamm. 9, e1106 (2022).
358.	Monsonego, A. et al. Increased T cell reactivity to amyloid β protein in older humans and 
patients with Alzheimer disease. J. Clin. Invest. 112, 415–422 (2003).
359.	Altendorfer, B. et al. Transcriptomic profiling identifies CD8+ T cells in the brain of aged 
and Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mice as tissue-resident memory T cells. J. Immunol. 
209, 1272–1285 (2022).
360.	Unger, M. S. et al. Doublecortin expression in CD8+ T-cells and microglia at sites of 
amyloid-β plaques: a potential role in shaping plaque pathology? Alzheimers Dement. 14, 
1022–1037 (2018).
361.	 Su, W. et al. CXCR6 orchestrates brain CD8+ T cell residency and limits mouse 
Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Nat. Immunol. 24, 1735–1747 (2023).
362.	Jorfi, M. et al. Infiltrating CD8+ T cells exacerbate Alzheimer’s disease pathology in a  
3D human neuroimmune axis model. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 1489–1504 (2023).
363.	Rosenzweig, N. et al. PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint blockade harnesses monocyte-derived 
macrophages to combat cognitive impairment in a tauopathy mouse model. Nat. Commun. 
10, 465 (2019).
364.	Ciccocioppo, F. et al. The characterization of regulatory T-cell profiles in Alzheimer’s 
disease and multiple sclerosis. Sci. Rep. 9, 8788 (2019).
365.	Faridar, A. et al. Restoring regulatory T-cell dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease through  
ex vivo expansion. Brain Commun. 2, fcaa112 (2020).
366.	Toly-Ndour, C. et al. MHC-independent genetic factors control the magnitude of  
CD4+ T cell responses to amyloid-β peptide in mice through regulatory T cell-mediated 
inhibition. J. Immunol. 187, 4492–4500 (2011).
367.	 Dansokho, C. et al. Regulatory T cells delay disease progression in Alzheimer-like 
pathology. Brain 139, 1237–1251 (2016).
368.	Stym-Popper, G. et al. Regulatory T cells decrease C3-positive reactive astrocytes in 
Alzheimer-like pathology. J. Neuroinflammation 20, 64 (2023).
369.	Mittal, K. et al. CD4 T cells induce a subset of MHCII-expressing microglia that attenuates 
Alzheimer pathology. iScience 16, 298–311 (2019).
370.	Eremenko, E. et al. BDNF-producing, amyloid β-specific CD4 T cells as targeted 
drug-delivery vehicles in Alzheimer’s disease. EBioMedicine 43, 424–434 (2019).
371.	 Zenaro, E. et al. Neutrophils promote Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology and cognitive 
decline via LFA-1 integrin. Nat. Med. 21, 880–886 (2015).
372.	 Cruz Hernandez, J. C. et al. Neutrophil adhesion in brain capillaries reduces cortical 
blood flow and impairs memory function in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. 
Nat. Neurosci. 22, 413–420 (2019).
373.	 Baik, S. H. et al. Migration of neutrophils targeting amyloid plaques in Alzheimer’s disease 
mouse model. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 1286–1292 (2014).
374.	 Gellhaar, S., Sunnemark, D., Eriksson, H., Olson, L. & Galter, D. Myeloperoxidase- 
immunoreactive cells are significantly increased in brain areas affected by 
neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Tissue Res. 369, 445–454 
(2017).
375.	 Smyth, L. C. D. et al. Neutrophil-vascular interactions drive myeloperoxidase 
accumulation in the brain in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 10, 38 
(2022).
376.	 Dong, Y. et al. Neutrophil hyperactivation correlates with Alzheimer’s disease 
progression. Ann. Neurol. 83, 387–405 (2018).
377.	 Fiala, M. et al. Ineffective phagocytosis of amyloid-β by macrophages of Alzheimer’s 
disease patients. J. Alzheimers Dis. 7, 221–232 (2005).
378.	 Le Page, A. et al. Polymorphonuclear neutrophil functions are differentially altered in 
amnestic mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s disease patients. J. Alzheimers 
Dis. 60, 23–42 (2017).
379.	 Scali, C. et al. Neutrophils CD11b and fibroblasts PGE(2) are elevated in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurobiol. Aging 23, 523–530 (2002).
380.	El Khoury, J. et al. Ccr2 deficiency impairs microglial accumulation and accelerates 
progression of Alzheimer-like disease. Nat. Med. 13, 432–438 (2007).
381.	 Naert, G. & Rivest, S. CC chemokine receptor 2 deficiency aggravates cognitive 
impairments and amyloid pathology in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Neurosci. 31, 6208–6220 (2011).
382.	Prokop, S. et al. Impact of peripheral myeloid cells on amyloid-β pathology in Alzheimer’s 
disease-like mice. J. Exp. Med. 212, 1811–1818 (2015).
383.	Varvel, N. H. et al. Replacement of brain-resident myeloid cells does not alter cerebral 
amyloid-β deposition in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Exp. Med. 212, 
1803–1809 (2015).
384.	Thome, A. D. et al. Functional alterations of myeloid cells during the course of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 13, 61 (2018).
385.	Farkas, E. & Luiten, P. G. Cerebral microvascular pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s 
disease. Prog. Neurobiol. 64, 575–611 (2001).
386.	Zlokovic, B. V. Neurovascular pathways to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and 
other disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12, 723–738 (2011).
387.	 Carmeliet, P. Angiogenesis in health and disease. Nat. Med. 9, 653–660 (2003).
388.	Grammas, P. Neurovascular dysfunction, inflammation and endothelial activation: 
implications for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 8, 26 
(2011).
389.	Paris, D. et al. Impaired angiogenesis in a transgenic mouse model of cerebral 
amyloidosis. Neurosci. Lett. 366, 80–85 (2004).
390.	Paris, D. et al. Inhibition of angiogenesis by Abeta peptides. Angiogenesis 7, 75–85 
(2004).
391.	 Sweeney, M. D., Sagare, A. P. & Zlokovic, B. V. Blood-brain barrier breakdown in Alzheimer 
disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14, 133–150 (2018).
392.	Alvarez-Vergara, M. I. et al. Non-productive angiogenesis disassembles Ass 
plaque-associated blood vessels. Nat. Commun. 12, 3098 (2021).
393.	Kalaria, R. N. et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor in Alzheimer’s disease and 
experimental cerebral ischemia. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 62, 101–105 (1998).
394.	March-Diaz, R. et al. Hypoxia compromises the mitochondrial metabolism of Alzheimer’s 
disease microglia via HIF1. Nat. Aging 1, 385–399 (2021).
395.	Tang, H., Mao, X., Xie, L., Greenberg, D. A. & Jin, K. Expression level of vascular 
endothelial growth factor in hippocampus is associated with cognitive impairment in 
patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 34, 1412–1415 (2013).
396.	Thomas, T., Miners, S. & Love, S. Post-mortem assessment of hypoperfusion of cerebral 
cortex in Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia. Brain 138, 1059–1069 (2015).
397.	 Yang, S. P. et al. Co-accumulation of vascular endothelial growth factor with β-amyloid 
in the brain of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 25, 283–290 (2004).
398.	Kalaria, R. N. Cerebrovascular degeneration is related to amyloid-β protein deposition 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 826, 263–271 (1997).
399.	Kawai, M., Cras, P. & Perry, G. Serial reconstruction of β-protein amyloid plaques: 
relationship to microvessels and size distribution. Brain Res. 592, 278–282 (1992).
400.	Kawai, M., Kalaria, R. N., Harik, S. I. & Perry, G. The relationship of amyloid plaques to 
cerebral capillaries in Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Pathol. 137, 1435–1446 (1990).
401.	 Sengillo, J. D. et al. Deficiency in mural vascular cells coincides with blood-brain barrier 
disruption in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Pathol. 23, 303–310 (2013).
402.	Kouznetsova, E. et al. Developmental and amyloid plaque-related changes in cerebral 
cortical capillaries in transgenic Tg2576 Alzheimer mice. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 24, 187–193 
(2006).
403.	Lee, G. D. et al. Stereological analysis of microvascular parameters in a double 
transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res. Bull. 65, 317–322 (2005).
404.	Meyer, E. P., Ulmann-Schuler, A., Staufenbiel, M. & Krucker, T. Altered morphology and 
3D architecture of brain vasculature in a mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 3587–3592 (2008).
405.	Sugawara, E. & Nikaido, H. Properties of AdeABC and AdeIJK efflux systems of 
Acinetobacter baumannii compared with those of the AcrAB-TolC system of Escherichia 
coli. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 58, 7250–7257 (2014).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
347
Review article
406.	Yang, A. C. et al. A human brain vascular atlas reveals diverse mediators of Alzheimer’s 
risk. Nature 603, 885–892 (2022).
407.	 Kisler, K., Nelson, A. R., Montagne, A. & Zlokovic, B. V. Cerebral blood flow regulation and 
neurovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 419–434 (2017).
408.	Nortley, R. et al. Amyloid β oligomers constrict human capillaries in Alzheimer’s disease 
via signaling to pericytes. Science 365, eaav9518 (2019).
409.	Cao, W. & Zheng, H. Peripheral immune system in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. 
Mol. Neurodegener. 13, 51 (2018).
410.	 Heneka, M. T., Golenbock, D. T. & Latz, E. Innate immunity in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nat. Immunol. 16, 229–236 (2015).
411.	 Labzin, L. I., Heneka, M. T. & Latz, E. Innate immunity and neurodegeneration. Annu. Rev. 
Med. 69, 437–449 (2018).
412.	 Huang, W. et al. Microglia-mediated neurovascular unit dysfunction in Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 94, S335–S354 (2023).
413.	 Montagne, A. et al. Blood-brain barrier breakdown in the aging human hippocampus. 
Neuron 85, 296–302 (2015).
414.	 Mendiola, A. S. et al. Defining blood-induced microglia functions in neurodegeneration 
through multiomic profiling. Nat. Immunol. 24, 1173–1187 (2023).
415.	 Iadecola, C. Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 347–360 (2004).
416.	 Park, L. et al. Brain perivascular macrophages initiate the neurovascular dysfunction  
of Alzheimer Aβ peptides. Circ. Res. 121, 258–269 (2017).
417.	 Park, L. et al. Tau induces PSD95-neuronal NOS uncoupling and neurovascular 
dysfunction independent of neurodegeneration. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 1079–1089 (2020).
418.	 Montagne, A., Zhao, Z. & Zlokovic, B. V. Alzheimer’s disease: a matter of blood-brain 
barrier dysfunction? J. Exp. Med. 214, 3151–3169 (2017).
419.	 Louveau, A. et al. Structural and functional features of central nervous system lymphatic 
vessels. Nature 523, 337–341 (2015).
420.	Louveau, A. et al. CNS lymphatic drainage and neuroinflammation are regulated by 
meningeal lymphatic vasculature. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1380–1391 (2018).
421.	 Louveau, A. et al. Understanding the functions and relationships of the glymphatic 
system and meningeal lymphatics. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 3210–3219 (2017).
422.	 Hablitz, L. M. & Nedergaard, M. The glymphatic system: a novel component of 
fundamental neurobiology. J. Neurosci. 41, 7698–7711 (2021).
423.	Nedergaard, M. & Goldman, S. A. Glymphatic failure as a final common pathway to 
dementia. Science 370, 50–56 (2020).
424.	Rustenhoven, J. et al. Functional characterization of the dural sinuses as a neuroimmune 
interface. Cell 184, 1000–1016.e27 (2021).
425.	Ringstad, G. & Eide, P. K. Cerebrospinal fluid tracer efflux to parasagittal dura in humans. 
Nat. Commun. 11, 354 (2020).
426.	Rustenhoven, J. & Kipnis, J. Brain borders at the central stage of neuroimmunology. 
Nature 612, 417–429 (2022).
427.	 Da Mesquita, S. et al. Functional aspects of meningeal lymphatics in ageing and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 560, 185–191 (2018).
428.	Kwon, S. et al. Impaired peripheral lymphatic function and cerebrospinal fluid outflow in 
a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 69, 585–593 (2019).
429.	Pappolla, M. et al. Evidence for lymphatic Aβ clearance in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. 
Neurobiol. Dis. 71, 215–219 (2014).
430.	Wang, L. et al. Deep cervical lymph node ligation aggravates AD-like pathology of 
APP/PS1 mice. Brain Pathol. 29, 176–192 (2019).
431.	 Wen, Y. R., Yang, J. H., Wang, X. & Yao, Z. B. Induced dural lymphangiogenesis facilities 
soluble amyloid-beta clearance from brain in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neural Regen. Res. 13, 709–716 (2018).
432.	Da Mesquita, S. et al. Meningeal lymphatics affect microglia responses and anti-Aβ 
immunotherapy. Nature 593, 255–260 (2021).
433.	Heneka, M. T. et al. Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol. 14, 
388–405 (2015).
434.	Stewart, C. R. et al. CD36 ligands promote sterile inflammation through assembly 
of a Toll-like receptor 4 and 6 heterodimer. Nat. Immunol. 11, 155–161 (2010).
435.	Fassbender, K. et al. The LPS receptor (CD14) links innate immunity with Alzheimer’s 
disease. FASEB J. 18, 203–205 (2004).
436.	Liu, S. et al. TLR2 is a primary receptor for Alzheimer’s amyloid β peptide to trigger 
neuroinflammatory activation. J. Immunol. 188, 1098–1107 (2012).
437.	 Walter, S. et al. Role of the Toll-like receptor 4 in neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Cell Physiol. Biochem. 20, 947–956 (2007).
438.	Heneka, M. T. et al. NLRP3 is activated in Alzheimer’s disease and contributes to 
pathology in APP/PS1 mice. Nature 493, 674–678 (2013).
439.	Venegas, C. & Heneka, M. T. Inflammasome-mediated innate immunity in Alzheimer’s 
disease. FASEB J. 33, 13075–13084 (2019).
440.	Hudson, B. I. & Lippman, M. E. Targeting RAGE signaling in inflammatory disease. 
Annu. Rev. Med. 69, 349–364 (2018).
441.	 Atagi, Y. et al. Apolipoprotein E is a ligand for triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cells 2 (TREM2). J. Biol. Chem. 290, 26043–26050 (2015).
442.	Bailey, C. C., DeVaux, L. B. & Farzan, M. The triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cells 2 binds apolipoprotein E. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 26033–26042 (2015).
443.	Song, W. et al. Alzheimer’s disease-associated TREM2 variants exhibit either decreased or 
increased ligand-dependent activation. Alzheimers Dement. 13, 381–387 (2017).
444.	Wang, Y. et al. TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in an Alzheimer’s 
disease model. Cell 160, 1061–1071 (2015).
445.	Sala Frigerio, C. et al. The major risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease: age, sex, and genes 
modulate the microglia response to Aβ plaques. Cell Rep. 27, 1293–1306.e6 (2019).
446.	Mathys, H. et al. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 570, 
332–337 (2019).
447.	 Song, W. M. et al. Humanized TREM2 mice reveal microglia-intrinsic and -extrinsic effects 
of R47H polymorphism. J. Exp. Med. 215, 745–760 (2018).
448.	Afagh, A., Cummings, B. J., Cribbs, D. H., Cotman, C. W. & Tenner, A. J. Localization 
and cell association of C1q in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Exp. Neurol. 138, 22–32 (1996).
449.	Stoltzner, S. E. et al. Temporal accrual of complement proteins in amyloid plaques in 
Down’s syndrome with Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Pathol. 156, 489–499 (2000).
450.	Boche, D. & Gordon, M. N. Diversity of transcriptomic microglial phenotypes in aging and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 18, 360–376 (2022).
451.	 Litvinchuk, A. et al. Complement C3aR inactivation attenuates tau pathology and 
reverses an immune network deregulated in tauopathy models and Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neuron 100, 1337–1353.e5 (2018).
452.	Wu, T. et al. Complement C3 is activated in human AD brain and is required for 
neurodegeneration in mouse models of amyloidosis and tauopathy. Cell Rep. 28, 
2111–2123.e6 (2019).
453.	Yang, J., Wise, L. & Fukuchi, K. I. TLR4 cross-talk with NLRP3 inflammasome and 
complement signaling pathways in Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Immunol. 11, 724 (2020).
454.	Zhang, X. et al. Regulation of Toll-like receptor-mediated inflammatory response by 
complement in vivo. Blood 110, 228–236 (2007).
455.	Alawieh, A. et al. Complement drives synaptic degeneration and progressive cognitive 
decline in the chronic phase after traumatic brain injury. J. Neurosci. 41, 1830–1843 
(2021).
456.	Jack, C. R. Jr. et al. NIA-AA research framework: toward a biological definition of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 14, 535–562 (2018).
457.	 Pavlovski, D. et al. Generation of complement component C5a by ischemic neurons 
promotes neuronal apoptosis. FASEB J. 26, 3680–3690 (2012).
458.	Carrasquillo, M. M. et al. Replication of CLU, CR1, and PICALM associations with 
Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol. 67, 961–964 (2010).
459.	Lambert, J. C. et al. Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 41, 1094–1099 (2009).
460.	Petrisko, T. J., Gomez-Arboledas, A. & Tenner, A. J. Complement as a powerful 
“influencer” in the brain during development, adulthood and neurological disorders. 
Adv. Immunol. 152, 157–222 (2021).
461.	 Shi, Q. et al. Complement C3 deficiency protects against neurodegeneration in aged 
plaque-rich APP/PS1 mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaaf6295 (2017).
462.	El Gaamouch, F. et al. VGF-derived peptide TLQP-21 modulates microglial function 
through C3aR1 signaling pathways and reduces neuropathology in 5xFAD mice. Mol. 
Neurodegener. 15, 4 (2020).
463.	Ager, R. R. et al. Microglial C5aR (CD88) expression correlates with amyloid-β deposition 
in murine models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurochem. 113, 389–401 (2010).
464.	Carvalho, K. et al. Modulation of C5a-C5aR1 signaling alters the dynamics of AD 
progression. J. Neuroinflammation 19, 178 (2022).
465.	Gomez-Arboledas, A. et al. C5aR1 antagonism alters microglial polarization and mitigates 
disease progression in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 
Commun. 10, 116 (2022).
466.	Hernandez, M. X. et al. Prevention of C5aR1 signaling delays microglial inflammatory 
polarization, favors clearance pathways and suppresses cognitive loss. Mol. 
Neurodegener. 12, 66 (2017).
467.	 Landlinger, C. et al. Active immunization against complement factor C5a: a new 
therapeutic approach for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 12, 150 (2015).
468.	Carpanini, S. M. et al. Terminal complement pathway activation drives synaptic loss in 
Alzheimer’s disease models. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 10, 99 (2022).
469.	Hong, S. et al. Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer 
mouse models. Science 352, 712–716 (2016).
470.	Gomez-Arboledas, A., Acharya, M. M. & Tenner, A. J. The role of complement in synaptic 
pruning and neurodegeneration. Immunotargets Ther. 10, 373–386 (2021).
471.	 Thielens, N. M., Tedesco, F., Bohlson, S. S., Gaboriaud, C. & Tenner, A. J. C1q: a fresh look 
upon an old molecule. Mol. Immunol. 89, 73–83 (2017).
472.	 Spurrier, J. et al. Reversal of synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models by targeting 
mGluR5 to prevent synaptic tagging by C1Q. Sci. Transl. Med. 14, eabi8593 (2022).
473.	 Murray, C. A. & Lynch, M. A. Evidence that increased hippocampal expression of the 
cytokine interleukin-1β is a common trigger for age- and stress-induced impairments in 
long-term potentiation. J. Neurosci. 18, 2974–2981 (1998).
474.	 Cunningham, A. J., Murray, C. A., O’Neill, L. A., Lynch, M. A. & O’Connor, J. J. Interleukin-1β 
(IL-1β) and tumour necrosis factor (TNF) inhibit long-term potentiation in the rat dentate 
gyrus in vitro. Neurosci. Lett. 203, 17–20 (1996).
475.	 Tancredi, V. et al. The inhibitory effects of interleukin-6 on synaptic plasticity in the rat 
hippocampus are associated with an inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK. 
J. Neurochem. 75, 634–643 (2000).
476.	 Tancredi, V. et al. Tumor necrosis factor alters synaptic transmission in rat hippocampal 
slices. Neurosci. Lett. 146, 176–178 (1992).
477.	 Tancredi, V., Zona, C., Velotti, F., Eusebi, F. & Santoni, A. Interleukin-2 suppresses 
established long-term potentiation and inhibits its induction in the rat hippocampus. 
Brain Res. 525, 149–151 (1990).
478.	 Venegas, C. et al. Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-β in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature 552, 355–361 (2017).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
348
Review article
479.	 Gulen, M. F. et al. cGAS-STING drives ageing-related inflammation and neurodegeneration. 
Nature 620, 374–380 (2023).
480.	Jin, M. et al. Tau activates microglia via the PQBP1-cGAS-STING pathway to promote brain 
inflammation. Nat. Commun. 12, 6565 (2021).
481.	 Xie, X. et al. Activation of innate immune cGAS-STING pathway contributes to 
Alzheimer’s pathogenesis in 5xFAD mice. Nat. Aging 3, 202–212 (2023).
482.	Sanford, S. A. I. & McEwan, W. A. Type-I interferons in Alzheimer’s disease and other 
tauopathies. Front. Cell Neurosci. 16, 949340 (2022).
483.	Chai, Y. L. et al. Inflammatory panel cytokines are elevated in the neocortex of late-stage 
Alzheimer’s disease but not Lewy body dementias. J. Neuroinflammation 20, 111 (2023).
484.	Kann, O., Almouhanna, F. & Chausse, B. Interferon γ: a master cytokine in microglia- 
mediated neural network dysfunction and neurodegeneration. Trends Neurosci. 45, 
913–927 (2022).
485.	Guillot-Sestier, M. V. et al. Il10 deficiency rebalances innate immunity to mitigate 
Alzheimer-like pathology. Neuron 85, 534–548 (2015).
486.	Vom Berg, J. et al. Inhibition of IL-12/IL-23 signaling reduces Alzheimer’s disease-like 
pathology and cognitive decline. Nat. Med. 18, 1812–1819 (2012).
487.	 Carlock, C. et al. Interleukin33 deficiency causes tau abnormality and 
neurodegeneration with Alzheimer-like symptoms in aged mice. Transl. Psychiatry 7, 
e1164 (2017).
488.	Fu, A. K. et al. IL-33 ameliorates Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology and cognitive decline. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E2705–E2713 (2016).
489.	McGeer, P. L. & McGeer, E. G. NSAIDs and Alzheimer disease: epidemiological, animal 
model and clinical studies. Neurobiol. Aging 28, 639–647 (2007).
490.	Vlad, S. C., Miller, D. R., Kowall, N. W. & Felson, D. T. Protective effects of NSAIDs on the 
development of Alzheimer disease. Neurology 70, 1672–1677 (2008).
491.	 Jordan, F. et al. Aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for the 
prevention of dementia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 4, CD011459 (2020).
492.	Yermakova, A. V., Rollins, J., Callahan, L. M., Rogers, J. & O’Banion, M. K. 
Cyclooxygenase-1 in human Alzheimer and control brain: quantitative analysis of 
expression by microglia and CA3 hippocampal neurons. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 58, 
1135–1146 (1999).
493.	Griffin, E. W., Skelly, D. T., Murray, C. L. & Cunningham, C. Cyclooxygenase-1-dependent 
prostaglandins mediate susceptibility to systemic inflammation-induced acute cognitive 
dysfunction. J. Neurosci. 33, 15248–15258 (2013).
494.	Matousek, S. B. et al. Cyclooxygenase-1 mediates prostaglandin E(2) elevation and 
contextual memory impairment in a model of sustained hippocampal interleukin-1β 
expression. J. Neurochem. 114, 247–258 (2010).
495.	Choi, S. H. et al. Cyclooxygenase-1 inhibition reduces amyloid pathology and improves 
memory deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurochem. 124, 59–68 (2013).
496.	Eskilsson, A. et al. Immune-induced fever is dependent on local but not generalized 
prostaglandin E(2) synthesis in the brain. J. Neurosci. 37, 5035–5044 (2017).
497.	 Walker, K. A. et al. The role of peripheral inflammatory insults in Alzheimer’s disease: 
a review and research roadmap. Mol. Neurodegener. 18, 37 (2023).
498.	Johansson, J. U. et al. Prostaglandin signaling suppresses beneficial microglial function 
in Alzheimer’s disease models. J. Clin. Invest. 125, 350–364 (2015).
499.	Li, X. et al. Prostaglandin E2 receptor subtype 2 regulation of scavenger receptor CD36 
modulates microglial Aβ42 phagocytosis. Am. J. Pathol. 185, 230–239 (2015).
500.	Kawano, T. et al. Prostaglandin E2 EP1 receptors: downstream effectors of COX-2 
neurotoxicity. Nat. Med. 12, 225–229 (2006).
501.	 Zhen, G. et al. PGE2 EP1 receptor exacerbated neurotoxicity in a mouse model of cerebral 
ischemia and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 33, 2215–2219 (2012).
502.	Bal-Price, A., Matthias, A. & Brown, G. C. Stimulation of the NADPH oxidase in activated 
rat microglia removes nitric oxide but induces peroxynitrite production. J. Neurochem. 
80, 73–80 (2002).
503.	Nakamura, T. et al. Noncanonical transnitrosylation network contributes to synapse loss 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Science 371, eaaw0843 (2021).
504.	Nakamura, T., Oh, C. K., Zhang, X. & Lipton, S. A. Protein S-nitrosylation and oxidation 
contribute to protein misfolding in neurodegeneration. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 172, 
562–577 (2021).
505.	Uehara, T. et al. S-nitrosylated protein-disulphide isomerase links protein misfolding to 
neurodegeneration. Nature 441, 513–517 (2006).
506.	Wijasa, T. S. et al. Quantitative proteomics of synaptosome S-nitrosylation in Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Neurochem. 152, 710–726 (2020).
507.	 Guivernau, B. et al. Amyloid-β peptide nitrotyrosination stabilizes oligomers and 
enhances NMDAR-mediated toxicity. J. Neurosci. 36, 11693–11703 (2016).
508.	Guix, F. X. et al. Amyloid-dependent triosephosphate isomerase nitrotyrosination 
induces glycation and tau fibrillation. Brain 132, 1335–1345 (2009).
509.	Guix, F. X. et al. Modification of γ-secretase by nitrosative stress links neuronal ageing 
to sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. EMBO Mol. Med. 4, 660–673 (2012).
510.	 Kummer, M. P. et al. Nitration of tyrosine 10 critically enhances amyloid β aggregation 
and plaque formation. Neuron 71, 833–844 (2011).
511.	 Reynolds, M. R. et al. Tau nitration occurs at tyrosine 29 in the fibrillar lesions of 
Alzheimer’s disease and other tauopathies. J. Neurosci. 26, 10636–10645 (2006).
512.	 Lourenco, C. F., Ledo, A., Barbosa, R. M. & Laranjinha, J. Neurovascular uncoupling in the 
triple transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease: impaired cerebral blood flow response to 
neuronal-derived nitric oxide signaling. Exp. Neurol. 291, 36–43 (2017).
513.	 Zhang, Y. et al. nNOS-CAPON interaction mediates amyloid-β-induced neurotoxicity, 
especially in the early stages. Aging Cell 17, e12754 (2018).
514.	 Hashimoto, S. et al. Tau binding protein CAPON induces tau aggregation and 
neurodegeneration. Nat. Commun. 10, 2394 (2019).
515.	 Lipton, S. A. Paradigm shift in neuroprotection by NMDA receptor blockade: memantine 
and beyond. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 5, 160–170 (2006).
516.	 Brown, G. C. Mechanisms of inflammatory neurodegeneration: iNOS and NADPH 
oxidase. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 35, 1119–1121 (2007).
517.	 Geng, X. et al. Effects of docosahexaenoic acid and its peroxidation product on 
amyloid-β peptide-stimulated microglia. Mol. Neurobiol. 57, 1085–1098 (2020).
518.	 Weldon, D. T., Maggio, J. E. & Mantyh, P. W. New insights into the neuropathology and cell 
biology of Alzheimer’s disease. Geriatrics 52 (Suppl. 2), S13–S16 (1997).
519.	 Bourgognon, J. M. et al. Inhibition of neuroinflammatory nitric oxide signaling suppresses 
glycation and prevents neuronal dysfunction in mouse prion disease. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 118, e2009579118 (2021).
520.	Nathan, C. et al. Protection from Alzheimer’s-like disease in the mouse by genetic 
ablation of inducible nitric oxide synthase. J. Exp. Med. 202, 1163–1169 (2005).
521.	 Mattson, M. P. & Camandola, S. NF-κB in neuronal plasticity and neurodegenerative 
disorders. J. Clin. Invest. 107, 247–254 (2001).
522.	 Nygaard, H. B. et al. A phase Ib multiple ascending dose study of the safety, tolerability, 
and central nervous system availability of AZD0530 (saracatinib) in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Alzheimers Res. Ther. 7, 35 (2015).
523.	van Dyck, C. H. et al. Effect of AZD0530 on cerebral metabolic decline in Alzheimer 
disease: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Neurol. 76, 1219–1229 (2019).
524.	 Gage, M. C. & Thippeswamy, T. Inhibitors of src family kinases, inducible nitric oxide 
synthase, and NADPH oxidase as potential CNS drug targets for neurological diseases. 
CNS Drugs 35, 1–20 (2021).
525.	 Thakur, S., Dhapola, R., Sarma, P., Medhi, B. & Reddy, D. H. Neuroinflammation in 
Alzheimer’s disease: current progress in molecular signaling and therapeutics. 
Inflammation 46, 1–17 (2023).
526.	Brown, M. R., Radford, S. E. & Hewitt, E. W. Modulation of β-amyloid fibril formation in 
Alzheimer’s 33ion. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 13, 609073 (2020).
527.	 Sastre, M., Klockgether, T. & Heneka, M. T. Contribution of inflammatory processes to 
Alzheimer’s disease: molecular mechanisms. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 24, 167–176 (2006).
528.	 Sastre, M., Walter, J. & Gentleman, S. M. Interactions between APP secretases and 
inflammatory mediators. J. Neuroinflammation 5, 25 (2008).
529.	 Burton, T., Liang, B., Dibrov, A. & Amara, F. Transforming growth factor-β-induced 
transcription of the Alzheimer β-amyloid precursor protein gene involves interaction 
between the CTCF-complex and Smads. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 295, 713–723 
(2002).
530.	Sastre, M. et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-γ agonists modulate immunostimulated processing of 
amyloid precursor protein through regulation of β-secretase. J. Neurosci. 23, 9796–9804 
(2003).
531.	 Sommer, G. et al. Amyloid precursor protein expression is induced by tumor necrosis 
factor α in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. J. Cell Biochem. 108, 1418–1422 (2009).
532.	Tamagno, E. et al. Oxidative stress increases expression and activity of BACE in NT2 
neurons. Neurobiol. Dis. 10, 279–288 (2002).
533.	Blasko, I. et al. Experimental traumatic brain injury in rats stimulates the expression, 
production and activity of Alzheimer’s disease β-secretase (BACE-1). J. Neural Transm. 111, 
523–536 (2004).
534.	Hartlage-Rubsamen, M. et al. Astrocytic expression of the Alzheimer’s disease 
β-secretase (BACE1) is stimulus-dependent. Glia 41, 169–179 (2003).
535.	Naseer, S. et al. Traumatic brain injury leads to alterations in contusional cortical miRNAs 
involved in dementia. Biomolecules 12, 1457 (2022).
536.	Pottier, C. et al. Amyloid-β protein precursor gene expression in Alzheimer’s disease and 
other conditions. J. Alzheimers Dis. 28, 561–566 (2012).
537.	 Hur, J. Y. et al. The innate immunity protein IFITM3 modulates γ-secretase in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature 586, 735–740 (2020).
538.	Jaeger, L. B. et al. Lipopolysaccharide alters the blood-brain barrier transport of amyloid 
β protein: a mechanism for inflammation in the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Brain Behav. Immun. 23, 507–517 (2009).
539.	Xie, J. et al. Low-grade peripheral inflammation affects brain pathology in the 
App(NL-G-F)mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 9, 163 
(2021).
540.	Brugg, B. et al. Inflammatory processes induce beta-amyloid precursor protein changes 
in mouse brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 3032–3035 (1995).
541.	 Lee, J. W. et al. Neuro-inflammation induced by lipopolysaccharide causes cognitive 
impairment through enhancement of beta-amyloid generation. J. Neuroinflammation 5, 
37 (2008).
542.	Herber, D. L. et al. Microglial activation is required for Aβ clearance after intracranial 
injection of lipopolysaccharide in APP transgenic mice. J. Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2, 
222–231 (2007).
543.	Herber, D. L. et al. Time-dependent reduction in Aβ levels after intracranial LPS 
administration in APP transgenic mice. Exp. Neurol. 190, 245–253 (2004).
544.	Bourne, K. Z. et al. Differential regulation of BACE1 promoter activity by nuclear factor-κB 
in neurons and glia upon exposure to β-amyloid peptides. J. Neurosci. Res. 85, 1194–1204 
(2007).
545.	Rossner, S., Sastre, M., Bourne, K. & Lichtenthaler, S. F. Transcriptional and translational 
regulation of BACE1 expression — implications for Alzheimer’s disease. Prog. Neurobiol. 
79, 95–111 (2006).

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
349
Review article
546.	Sastre, M. et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs repress β-secretase gene 
promoter activity by the activation of PPARγ. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 443–448 
(2006).
547.	 Placek, K., Schultze, J. L. & Aschenbrenner, A. C. Epigenetic reprogramming of 
immune cells in injury, repair, and resolution. J. Clin. Invest. 129, 2994–3005 (2019).
548.	de Calignon, A. et al. Propagation of tau pathology in a model of early Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neuron 73, 685–697 (2012).
549.	Frost, B., Jacks, R. L. & Diamond, M. I. Propagation of tau misfolding from the outside 
to the inside of a cell. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 12845–12852 (2009).
550.	Yamada, K. et al. Neuronal activity regulates extracellular tau in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 211, 
387–393 (2014).
551.	 Asai, H. et al. Depletion of microglia and inhibition of exosome synthesis halt tau 
propagation. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1584–1593 (2015).
552.	 Jiang, S. et al. Proteopathic tau primes and activates interleukin-1β via myeloid-cell-
specific MyD88- and NLRP3-ASC-inflammasome pathway. Cell Rep. 36, 109720 (2021).
553.	Schafer, D. P., Lehrman, E. K. & Stevens, B. The “quad-partite” synapse: microglia-synapse 
interactions in the developing and mature CNS. Glia 61, 24–36 (2013).
554.	Kettenmann, H., Kirchhoff, F. & Verkhratsky, A. Microglia: new roles for the synaptic 
stripper. Neuron 77, 10–18 (2013).
555.	 De Schepper, S., Crowley, G. & Hong, S. Understanding microglial diversity and implications 
for neuronal function in health and disease. Dev. Neurobiol. 81, 507–523 (2021).
556.	Schafer, D. P. et al. Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and 
complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74, 691–705 (2012).
557.	 Stevens, B. et al. The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimination. 
Cell 131, 1164–1178 (2007).
558.	Dejanovic, B. et al. Changes in the synaptic proteome in tauopathy and rescue of 
tau-induced synapse loss by C1q antibodies. Neuron 100, 1322–1336.e7 (2018).
559.	Lui, H. et al. Progranulin deficiency promotes circuit-specific synaptic pruning by 
microglia via complement activation. Cell 165, 921–935 (2016).
560.	Vasek, M. J. et al. A complement-microglial axis drives synapse loss during virus-induced 
memory impairment. Nature 534, 538–543 (2016).
561.	 Vukojicic, A. et al. The classical complement pathway mediates microglia-dependent 
remodeling of spinal motor circuits during development and in SMA. Cell Rep. 29, 
3087–3100.e7 (2019).
562.	Wilton, D. K. et al. Microglia and complement mediated early corticostriatal synapse loss 
and cognitive dysfunction in Huntington’s disease. Nat. Med. 29, 2866–2884 (2023).
563.	Wilton, D. K. et al. Microglia and complement mediate early corticostriatal synapse loss 
and cognitive dysfunction in Huntington’s disease. Nat. Med. 29, 2866–2884 (2023).
564.	Stephan, A. H. et al. A dramatic increase of C1q protein in the CNS during normal aging. 
J. Neurosci. 33, 13460–13474 (2013).
565.	Datta, D. et al. Classical complement cascade initiating C1q protein within neurons in the 
aged rhesus macaque dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. J. Neuroinflammation 17, 8 (2020).
566.	De Schepper, S. et al. Perivascular cells induce microglial phagocytic states and synaptic 
engulfment via SPP1 in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 406–415 
(2023).
567.	 Fracassi, A. et al. TREM2-induced activation of microglia contributes to synaptic integrity 
in cognitively intact aged individuals with Alzheimer’s neuropathology. Brain Pathol. 33, 
e13108 (2023).
568.	Zhou, J. et al. The neuronal pentraxin Nptx2 regulates complement activity and restrains 
microglia-mediated synapse loss in neurodegeneration. Sci. Transl. Med. 15, eadf0141 
(2023).
569.	Sokolova, D., Childs, T. & Hong, S. Insight into the role of phosphatidylserine in 
complement-mediated synapse loss in Alzheimer’s disease. Fac. Rev. 10, 19 (2021).
570.	 Rueda-Carrasco, J. et al. Microglia-synapse engulfment via PtdSer-TREM2 ameliorates 
neuronal hyperactivity in Alzheimer’s disease models. EMBO J. 42, e113246 (2023).
571.	 Das, M. et al. Alzheimer risk-increasing TREM2 variant causes aberrant cortical synapse 
density and promotes network hyperexcitability in mouse models. Neurobiol. Dis. 186, 
106263 (2023).
572.	 Hardy, J. & Allsop, D. Amyloid deposition as the central event in the aetiology of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 12, 383–388 (1991).
573.	 ADAPT Research Group; Meinert, C. L., McCaffrey, L. D. & Breitner, J. C. Alzheimer’s 
disease anti-inflammatory prevention trial: design, methods, and baseline results. 
Alzheimers Dement. 5, 93–104 (2009).
574.	 Meyer, P. F. et al. INTREPAD: a randomized trial of naproxen to slow progress of 
presymptomatic Alzheimer disease. Neurology 92, e2070–e2080 (2019).
575.	 Karima, S. et al. Boswellic acids improve clinical cognitive scores and reduce systemic 
inflammation in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 
94, 359–370 (2023).
576.	 Rahmani, F. et al. Twelve weeks of intermittent caloric restriction diet mitigates 
neuroinflammation in midlife individuals with multiple sclerosis: a pilot study with 
implications for prevention of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 93, 263–273 (2023).
577.	 Chen, L. et al. Effects of oral health intervention strategies on cognition and microbiota 
alterations in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease: a randomized controlled trial. 
Geriatr. Nurs. 48, 103–110 (2022).
578.	 Brody, M. et al. Results and insights from a phase I clinical trial of Lomecel-B for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 19, 261–273 (2023).
579.	 Goncalves, R. G. J., Vasques, J. F., da Silva-Junior, A. J., Gubert, F. & Mendez-Otero, R. 
Mesenchymal stem cell- and extracellular vesicle-based therapies for Alzheimer’s 
disease: progress, advantages, and challenges. Neural Regen. Res. 18, 1645–1651 (2023).
580.	Caplan, A. I. Mesenchymal stem cells: time to change the name! Stem Cell Transl. Med. 
6, 1445–1451 (2017).
581.	 Hansen, L. Denali Therapeutics Reports Second Quarter 2023 Financial Results and  
Business Highlights https://investors.denalitherapeutics.com/news-releases/ 
news-release-details/denali-therapeutics-reports-second-quarter-2023-financial 
(2023).
582.	Cain, A. et al. Multicellular communities are perturbed in the aging human brain and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 26, 1267–1280 (2023).
583.	Lomoio, S. et al. 3D bioengineered neural tissue generated from patient-derived 
iPSCs mimics time-dependent phenotypes and transcriptional features of Alzheimer’s 
disease.Mol. Psychiatry 28, 5390–5401 (2023).
584.	Yu, L. et al. Association of AK4 protein from stem cell-derived neurons with cognitive 
reserve: an autopsy study. Neurology 99, e2264–e2274 (2022).
585.	Dolan, M. J. et al. Exposure of iPSC-derived human microglia to brain substrates enables 
the generation and manipulation of diverse transcriptional states in vitro. Nat. Immunol. 
24, 1382–1390 (2023).
586.	Fattorelli, N. et al. Stem-cell-derived human microglia transplanted into mouse brain to 
study human disease. Nat. Protoc. 16, 1013–1033 (2021).
587.	 Mancuso, R. et al. A multi-pronged human microglia response to Alzheimer’s disease  
Aβ pathology. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.07.499139 (2022).
588.	Mancuso, R. et al. Xenografted human microglia display diverse transcriptomic states 
in response to Alzheimer’s disease-related amyloid-β pathology. Nat. Neurosci. 27, 
886–900 (2024).
589.	Prinz, M., Erny, D. & Hagemeyer, N. Ontogeny and homeostasis of CNS myeloid cells.  
Nat. Immunol. 18, 385–392 (2017).
590.	Ginhoux, F. et al. Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive 
macrophages. Science 330, 841–845 (2010).
591.	 Kierdorf, K. et al. Microglia emerge from erythromyeloid precursors via Pu.1- and 
Irf8-dependent pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 273–280 (2013).
592.	Fuger, P. et al. Microglia turnover with aging and in an Alzheimer’s model via long-term  
in vivo single-cell imaging. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1371–1376 (2017).
593.	Reu, P. et al. The lifespan and turnover of microglia in the human brain. Cell Rep. 20, 
779–784 (2017).
594.	Tay, T. L. et al. A new fate mapping system reveals context-dependent random or clonal 
expansion of microglia. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 793–803 (2017).
595.	Ajami, B., Bennett, J. L., Krieger, C., Tetzlaff, W. & Rossi, F. M. Local self-renewal can 
sustain CNS microglia maintenance and function throughout adult life. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 
1538–1543 (2007).
596.	Mildner, A. et al. Microglia in the adult brain arise from Ly-6ChiCCR2+ monocytes only 
under defined host conditions. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1544–1553 (2007).
597.	 Masuda, T., Sankowski, R., Staszewski, O. & Prinz, M. Microglia heterogeneity in the 
single-cell era. Cell Rep. 30, 1271–1281 (2020).
598.	Hammond, T. R. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia throughout the mouse 
lifespan and in the injured brain reveals complex cell-state changes. Immunity 50, 
253–271.e6 (2019).
599.	Jordao, M. J. C. et al. Single-cell profiling identifies myeloid cell subsets with distinct 
fates during neuroinflammation. Science 363, eaat7554 (2019).
600.	Li, Q. et al. Developmental heterogeneity of microglia and brain myeloid cells revealed 
by deep single-cell RNA sequencing. Neuron 101, 207–223.e10 (2019).
601.	 Schwabenland, M. et al. Deep spatial profiling of human COVID-19 brains reveals 
neuroinflammation with distinct microanatomical microglia-T-cell interactions. Immunity 
54, 1594–1610.e11 (2021).
Acknowledgements
A.F. received funds from Germany’s Excellence Strategy (EXC 2067/1 390729940). 
A.J.T. is supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant (U54 AG054349). 
D.L.F. is supported by grant IK6BX004852-01 from the Department of Veterans Affairs. 
D.B. acknowledges support from the Medical Research Council UK, Alzheimer’s Research 
UK and the European Union. She thanks the UK Brain Banks and BRAIN UK for providing 
tissue for her studies. D.J.B. is supported by the NIH (R01AG053229, R01AG068076, 
U54AG079779), the Minnesota Partnership for Biotechnology and Medical Genomics (MNP 
#18.04), and the Glenn Foundation for Medical Research. C.Cunningham is funded by the 
Irish Research Council, National Institutes of Health, the Dutch Research Council (ZonMW) 
and Alzheimer’s Research UK. D.G.-N. was supported by grants from the Medical Research 
Council (MR/P024572/1, MR/Y004116/1). C.V. was supported by the RYC2022-036191-I, 
funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and European Social Fund Plus. C.T. is 
supported by the European Commission Marie Curie International Training Network, grant 
agreement No. 860197 (MIRIADE) and TAME, Innovative Medicines Initiatives 3TR (Horizon 
2020, grant No. 831434), EPND (IMI 2 Joint Undertaking (JU), grant No. 101034344) and 
JPND (bPRIDE, CCAD), European Partnership on Metrology, co-financed from the European 
Union’s Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme and by the Participating 
States (22HLT07 NEuroBioStand), CANTATE project funded by the Alzheimer Drug Discovery 
Foundation, Alzheimer Association, Michael J Fox Foundation, Health Holland, ZonMW, 
Alzheimer Drug Discovery Foundation, The Selfridges Group Foundation, and Alzheimer 
Netherlands. C.T. is a recipient of ABOARD, which is a public–private partnership receiving 
funding from ZonMW (#73305095007) and Health Holland, Topsector Life Sciences & Health 
(PPP-allowance; #LSHM20106). C.T. is a recipient of TAP-dementia, a ZonMw-funded project 
(#10510032120003) in the context of the Dutch National Dementia Strategy. D.M. is supported 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
350
Review article
by ZEN24-1070221 from the Alzheimer’s Association and R01 AG055072, R01 AG077651, 
and P30 AG072931 from NIH. D.R.T. received support from Research Foundation – Flanders 
(FWO; G065721N), Stichting Alzheimer Onderzoek (SAO/FRA 2023/0009) and Alzheimer’s 
Association (22-AAIIA-963171). D.S. was supported by NINDS-R01NS117533, NIA-RF1AG068281 
and NIH-R24OD036199. G.C. is supported by the NextGenerationEU and National Recovery and 
Resilience Plan, National Biodiversity Future Center and PE grant MNESYS (PE0000006). 
G.C.P. received funding from the German Science Foundation (PE1193/6-2), ERA-NET 
(MICRO-BLEEDs and TACKLE-CSVD), and the Fondation Leducq (Transatlantic Network of 
Excellence 23CVD03); he is a member of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; 
German Research Foundation) excellence cluster ImmunoSensation2. G.D. thanks the 
Agence Nationale de la Recherche (grants #ANR-21-CE17-0054-01; #ANR-24-CE18-2770-02), 
Fondation Alzheimer, Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale, Fondation Pierre Deniker, 
Association France Alzheimer and Fondation Vaincre Alzheimer for funding his research. 
H.Z. is a Wallenberg Scholar and a Distinguished Professor at the Swedish Research 
Council supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council (#2023-00356; #2022-
01018 and #2019-02397), the European Union’s Horizon Europe Research and Innovation 
Programme under grant agreement No. 101053962, and Swedish State Support for Clinical 
Research (#ALFGBG-71320). J.B. was supported by a research grant from the Canada 
Institute for Health Research. J.G. was funded by the JPB Foundation, the Cure Alzheimers 
Fund and The Alzheimer’s Association. J.C.M.S. is supported by a clinical fellowship from 
the Alzheimer’s Association (AACSF). J.V.S.-M. is supported by grants from the Pasqual 
Maragall Foundation (PMRP/2022/1184) and Spanish (PID2022-143263OB-I00) and Valencian 
(PROMETEO/2021/045) governments. K.-A.N. has been supported by grants from the DFG 
(TRR274), European Research Council (ERC; AdG MyeliNANO) and the Adelson Medical 
Research Foundation (AMRF). K.B. was funded by the NIH grant RF1NS083704. L.A. is 
supppoted by the Austrian Science Fund FWF Project #P35417-B. K.A. is the Edward F. and 
Irene Thiele Pimley Professor of Neurology and Neurological Sciences and is supported by 
NIH grants RF1 AG070839, RF1 AG079131, and RF1 AG080742, the Wu Tsai Neurosciences 
Institute Knight Initiative for Brain Resilience at Stanford University, and she is a Chan 
Zuckerberg Biohub-San Francisco Investigator. M.K.O. is supported by grant 80NSSC21K0542 
from NASA. O.B. is funded by grants from NIH-STTR (R41AG073059), Cure Alzheimer Fund, 
BrightFocus Foundation (2020A016806), NIH/NIA (R01 AG051812), NIH (R01 AG054672), 
NIH (R01 AG075509), NIH (R01 NS088137-10), NIH (R21AG076982), and NIH/NINDS (R01 
NS088137). R.Mancuso has funding from the ERC under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
Research and Innovation Programme (project no. 101041867 - XenoMicrogliaAD), Fonds 
voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (grants No. G0C9219N, G056022N and G0K9422N), the 
Alzheimer’s Association USA (2018-AARF-591110, 2018-AARF-591110-RAPID, E2A-23-1148152, 
ABA-22-968700). He also receives funding from BrightFocus Foundation (A2021034S), 
SAO-FRA (grants No. 2021/0021 and SAO-FRA 20230019) and the University of Antwerp 
(BOF-TOP 2022-2025). R.McManus is supported by grants from the European Union Joint 
Programme Neurodegenerative Disease (JPND) (01ED2409B), the Alzheimer’s Association 
(24AARF-1243474) and from the DFG, under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC2151 –  
390873048, along with Project-ID 432325352 – SFB 1454. S.C.G. is supported by the 
Alzheimer Forschung Initiative e.V (Grant 21060), the Hertie Network of Excellence in 
Clinical Neuroscience (Grant 2021-1A-12), the Bonn Neuroscience Clinician Scientist Program 
(Neuro-aCSis), and the DFG (EXC2151–390873048). S.H. is supported by the UK Dementia 
Research Institute (UKDRI-1011) and the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Neurodegeneration 
Network. J.J.N. is currently supported through Germany’s Excellence Strategy (EXC 2145 
SyNergy– ID 390857198), the Else Kröner-Fresenius Stiftung (2018-A158), the Charitable Hertie 
Foundation (P1200024), the BrightFocus Foundation (A2021035S) and Alzheimer’s Association 
(ADSF-24-1345513-C). W.M.vdF. performs research at the Alzheimer Center Amsterdam as 
part of the neurodegeneration research programme of Amsterdam Neuroscience. Alzheimer 
Center Amsterdam is supported by Stichting Alzheimer Nederland and Stichting Steun 
Alzheimercentrum Amsterdam. The chair held by W.M.vdF. is supported by the Pasman 
Stichting. W.M.vdF. is a recipient of ABOARD, which is a public–private partnership receiving 
funding from ZonMW (#73305095007) and Health Holland, Topsector Life Sciences & Health 
(PPP-allowance; #LSHM20106). W.M.vdF. is a recipient of TAP-dementia (www.tap-dementia.nl), 
receiving funding from ZonMw (#10510032120003).
Author contributions
The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article.
Competing interests
A.J.T. serves/served on scientific advisory boards and/or as a consultant with Alnylam, Apellis, 
and Montis and has a research contract from Visterra. C.Cruchaga has received research 
support from GSK and EISAI. C.Cruchaga is a member of the scientific advisory board of 
Circular Genomics and owns stocks. C.Cruchaga is a member of the scientific advisory board 
of Admit. D.J.B. has a financial interest related to this research. He is a co-inventor on patents 
held by Mayo Clinic, patent applications licensed to or filed by Unity Biotechnology, and a 
Unity Biotechnology shareholder. Research in the Baker Laboratory has been reviewed by 
the Mayo Clinic Conflict of Interest Review Board and is being conducted in compliance with 
Mayo Clinic Conflict of Interest policies. D.M. serves on the advisory board of Mindimmune, 
InMed and SynapsDx. He collaborates with Hesperos Inc. C.Cunningham has acted on the 
advisory board for Exalys Therapeutics and has received a small research grant from IONIS 
Therapeutics. C.T. has research contracts with Acumen, ADx Neurosciences, AC-Immune, 
Alamar, Aribio, Axon Neurosciences, Beckman-Coulter, BioConnect, Bioorchestra, Brainstorm 
Therapeutics, Celgene, Cognition Therapeutics, EIP Pharma, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Fujirebio, Instant 
Nano Biosensors, Novo Nordisk, Olink, PeopleBio, Quanterix, Roche, Toyama and Vivoryon. 
She is editor in chief of Alzheimer Research and Therapy, and serves on editorial boards of 
Molecular Neurodegeneration, Neurology: Neuroimmunology & Neuroinflammation, Medidact 
Neurologie Springer, and serves on committee to define guidelines for cognitive disturbances 
and one for acute neurology in the Netherlands. She had consultancy/speaker contracts 
for Aribio, Biogen, Beckman-Coulter, Cognition Therapeutics, Eli Lilly, Merck, Novo Nordisk, 
Olink, Roche and Veravas. D.B. has served as a consultant for Biogen. D.R.T. collaborated 
with Novartis Pharma AG (Switzerland) and GE-Healthcare (UK). G.D. holds two patents on 
immunomodulatory treatments in Alzheimer disease and tauopathies, has served on the 
scientific advisory board of Coya Therapeutics, and received lecturer fees from Eisai and 
research support from Institut Roche. H.Z. has served at scientific advisory boards and/or 
as a consultant for Abbvie, Acumen, Alector, Alzinova, ALZPath, Amylyx, Annexon, Apellis, 
Artery Therapeutics, AZTherapies, Cognito Therapeutics, CogRx, Denali, Eisai, LabCorp, Merry 
Life, Nervgen, Novo Nordisk, Optoceutics, Passage Bio, Pinteon Therapeutics, Prothena, Red 
Abbey Labs, reMYND, Roche, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Triplet Therapeutics, and 
Wave, has given lectures sponsored by Alzecure, BioArctic, Biogen, Cellectricon, Fujirebio, 
Lilly, Novo Nordisk, Roche, and WebMD, and is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions 
in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program (outside 
submitted work). K.A. is co-founder and member of the SAB for Willow Neuroscience, Inc. 
L.A. has been consultant for Intelgenx. M.C. is a member of the scientific advisory board of 
Vigil, NGMBio, Cell Signalling Technology, Cartesian, and Halyard; receives research support 
from Ono Pharmaceutical; and has patents pending on LILRB4 and TREM2. O.B. co-founded 
and is on the scientific advisory board of Glial Therapeutics and GliaX. O.B. collaborates with 
GSK and Regulus Therapeutics and received research funding from Sanofi, GSK, honoraria 
for lectures, and consultancy for UCB, Camp4, Ono Pharma USA, and General Biophysics. 
R.Mancuso has or had scientific collaborations with Alector, Nodthera, Alchemab and Roche, 
and has been consultant for Sanofi. R.R. is a full time employee at Third Rock Ventures, a firm 
that creates new biotech companies, including those addressing neurodegeneration. He is 
also Co-Founder and holds equity at Abata Therapeutics. S.A.L. maintains a financial interest 
in AstronauTx Ltd. and Synapticure, and sits on the SAB of the Global BioAccess Fund. S.H. 
has received speaking fees from Eisai Ltd, Novo Nordisk, and Alnylam, receives research 
funding from Eisai Ltd., and has a collaborative project with Ionis Ltd. W.M.vdF. receives or has 
received funding by ZonMW, NWO, EU-JPND, EU-IHI, Alzheimer Nederland, Hersenstichting 
CardioVascular Onderzoek Nederland, Health Holland, Topsector Life Sciences & 
Health, stichting Dioraphte, Gieskes-Strijbis fonds, stichting Equilibrio, Edwin Bouw fonds, 
Pasman stichting, stichting Alzheimer & Neuropsychiatrie Foundation, Philips, Biogen MA 
Inc., Novartis-NL, Life-MI, AVID, Roche BV, Eli Lilly-NL, Fujifilm, Eisai, Combinostics. W.M.vdF. 
has been an invited speaker at Biogen MA Inc., Danone, Eisai, WebMD Neurology (Medscape), 
NovoNordisk, Springer Healthcare, and European Brain Council; consultant to Oxford Health 
Policy Forum CIC, Roche, Biogen MA Inc., and Eisai; all funding paid to her institution. W.M.vdF. 
participated in advisory boards of Biogen MA Inc., Roche, and Eli Lilly. W.M.vdF. is a member of 
the steering committee of EVOKE/EVOKE+ (NovoNordisk); all funding paid to her institution. 
W.M.vdF. is a member of the steering committee of PAVE and Think Brain Health. W.M.vdF. 
was an Associate Editor of Alzheimer’s Research & Therapy in 2020/2021 and is an Associate 
Editor at Brain. P.E. was funded by the Medical Research Council and now by Higher Education 
Funding Council for England (HEFCE). He has also received grants from Alzheimer’s Research, 
UK, Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, Alzheimer’s Society, UK, Medical Research 
Council, Alzheimer’s Association US, Van-Geest foundation, and European Union grants. P.E. 
is a consultant to Roche, Pfizer, and Novo Nordisk. He has received educational and research 
grants from GE Healthcare, Novo Nordisk, Piramal Life Science/Life Molecular Imaging, Avid 
Radiopharmaceuticals and Eli Lilly. He was a member of the Scientific Advisory Board at Novo 
Nordisk. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Additional information
Peer review information Nature Reviews Immunology thanks V. Miron, L. Ryan and Y. Huang 
for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2024
Michael T. Heneka 
  1 
, Wiesje M. van der Flier2, Frank Jessen3, Jeroen Hoozemanns4, Dietmar Rudolf Thal 
  5,6,7, 
Delphine Boche 
  8, Frederic Brosseron 
  9, Charlotte Teunissen 
  10, Henrik Zetterberg11, Andreas H. Jacobs12, 
Paul Edison 
  13, Alfredo Ramirez 
  14,15, Carlos Cruchaga16, Jean-Charles Lambert 
  17, Agustin Ruiz Laza 
  18, 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
351
Review article
Jose Vicente Sanchez-Mut 
  19, Andre Fischer 
  20,21, Sergio Castro-Gomez 
  22,23,24, Thor D. Stein25, Luca Kleineidam 
  9,26, 
Michael Wagner 
  26, Jonas J. Neher27,28, Colm Cunningham29,30, Sim K. Singhrao31, Marco Prinz 
  32,33, Christopher K. Glass34,35, 
Johannes C. M. Schlachetzki34,36, Oleg Butovsky37, Kilian Kleemann37, Philip L. De Jaeger 
  38,39, Hannah Scheiblich22, 
Guy C. Brown 
  40, Gary Landreth 
  41, Miguel Moutinho 
  41, Jaime Grutzendler 
  42,43, Diego Gomez-Nicola 
  44, 
Róisín M. McManus 
  9, Katrin Andreasson 
  45, Christina Ising 
  15,46, Deniz Karabag15, Darren J. Baker47,48, 
Shane A. Liddelow 
  49,50,51, Alexei Verkhratsky 
  52, Malu Tansey 
  53, Alon Monsonego 
  54, Ludwig Aigner 
  55, 
Guillaume Dorothée 
  56, Klaus-Armin Nave 
  57, Mikael Simons58, Gabriela Constantin 
  59, Neta Rosenzweig37, 
Alberto Pascual 
  60, Gabor C. Petzold 
  9,61, Jonathan Kipnis 
  62,63, Carmen Venegas1,64,65, Marco Colonna 
  62, 
Jochen Walter 
  66, Andrea J. Tenner 
  67,68,69, M. Kerry O’Banion 
  70,71, Joern R. Steinert72, Douglas L. Feinstein73, 
Magdalena Sastre 
  74, Kiran Bhaskar 
  75, Soyon Hong 
  76, Dorothy P. Schafer77, Todd Golde78,79, Richard M. Ransohoff 
  80, 
David Morgan 
  81, John Breitner82, Renzo Mancuso 
  83,84 & Sean-Patrick Riechers 
  1
1Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette/Belvaux, Luxembourg. 2Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, 
Neurology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC location VUmc, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 3Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 4Department of Pathology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. 5Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 6Laboratory for Neuropathology, Department of Imaging and 
Pathology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 7Laboratory for Neuropathology, Department of Imaging and Pathology, Leuven Brain Institute (LBI), Leuven, 
Belgium. 8Clinical Neurosciences, Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 9German 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany. 10Department of Laboratory Medicine, VUMC Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
11Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. 12European Institute for Molecular Imaging, University of 
Münster, Münster, Germany. 13Division of Neurology, Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK. 14Division of Neurogenetics and 
Molecular Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 15Cluster of Excellence Cellular Stress 
Response in Aging-associated Diseases (CECAD), Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 
16Department of Psychiatry, Washington School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. 17Université de Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 
Lille, France. 18ACE Alzheimer Center Barcelona, Universitat Internacional de Catalunya (UIC), Barcelona, Spain. 19Instituto de Neurociencias, Universidad 
Miguel Hernández-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (UMH-CSIC), Alicante, Spain. 20Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
Medical Center, Georg-August-University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. 21Epigenetics and Systems Medicine in Neurodegenerative Diseases, German 
Centre for Neurodegenerative Disease (DZNE), Göttingen, Germany. 22Center for Neurology, Clinic of Parkinson, Sleep and Movement Disorders, 
University Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 23Institute of Physiology II, University Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 
24Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 25Boston University Alzheimer’s 
Disease Research Center and CTE Center, Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA. 26Department of Neurodegenerative Disease and Geriatric Psychiatry, University Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 
27Biomedical Center Munich, Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. 28Neuroimmunology and Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany. 29School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences 
Institute (TBSI), Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. 30Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience (TCIN), Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. 31Brain and 
Behaviour Centre, Faculty of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences, School of Dentistry, University of Central Lancashire, Preston, UK. 32Institute of 
Neuropathology, Medical Faculty, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 33Signalling Research Centers BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany. 34Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 35Department of Medicine, 
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 36Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 37Department 
of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 38Center for Translational and Computational Neuroimmunology, 
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. 39Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer’s Disease and the 
Aging Brain, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. 40Deparment of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
41School of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 42Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 43Department of 
Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 44School of Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton General 
Hospital, Southampton, UK. 45Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 46Center 
for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 47Department 
of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 48Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, USA. 49Neuroscience Institute, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York City, NY, USA. 50Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, NYU 
Grossman School of Medicine, New York City, NY, USA. 51Department of Ophthalmology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York City, NY, USA. 
52Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 53College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainsville, FL, USA. 
54Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. 55Institute of Molecular Regenerative 
Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria. 56Sorbonne Université, Inserm, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine (CRSA), Hôpital Saint- 
Antoine, Paris, France. 57Department of Neurogenetics, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany. 58Institute of Neuronal Cell 
Biology, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany. 59Section of General Pathology, Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. 
60Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain. 61Department of Vascular 
Neurology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 62Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. 

Nature Reviews Immunology | Volume 25 | May 2025 | 321–352
352
Review article
63Center for Brain Immunology and Glia (BIG), Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. 64Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain. 65Instituto Biosanitario de Granada (ibs.Granada), Granada, Spain. 66Center of Neurology, University 
Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 67Department of Molecular Biology & Biochemistry, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. 
68Department of Neurobiology and Behaviour, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. 69Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School 
of Medicine, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. 70Department of Neuroscience, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA. 
71Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA. 72Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Queen’s Medical 
Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. 73Department of NeuroAnesthesia, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 74Department  
of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK. 75Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology and Neurology, 
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA. 76UK Dementia Research Institute, Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK. 
77Department of Neurobiology, Brudnick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA. 
78Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Emory Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. 79Department of 
Neurology, Emory Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. 80Third Rock Ventures, Boston, MA, USA. 81Department  
of Translational Neuroscience, College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA. 82Department of Psychiatry, McGill 
University Faculty of Medicine, Montreal, Québec, Canada. 83Microglia and Inflammation in Neurological Disorders (MIND) Lab, VIB Center for Molecular 
Neurology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. 84Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.