Nature Reviews Microbiology
nature reviews microbiology
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-025-01183-w
Review article
 Check for updates
Gut microbiota-derived short-chain 
fatty acids and their role in human  
health and disease
Indrani Mukhopadhya 
  1 & Petra Louis 
  2 
Abstract
Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are a group of organic compounds 
produced by the fermentation of dietary fibre by the human gut microbiota. 
They play diverse roles in different physiological processes of the host 
with implications for human health and disease. This Review provides 
an overview of the complex microbial metabolism underlying SCFA 
formation, considering microbial interactions and modulating factors 
of the gut environment. We explore the multifaceted mechanistic 
interactions between SCFAs and the host, with a particular focus on the 
local actions of SCFAs in the gut and their complex interactions with the 
immune system. We also discuss how these actions influence intestinal 
and extraintestinal diseases and emerging therapeutic strategies  
using SCFAs.
Sections
Introduction
Microbial short-chain fatty 
acid metabolism
Molecular host interactions  
of short-chain fatty acids
Short-chain fatty acids and gut 
homeostasis
Short-chain fatty acids, health 
and disease
Conclusions and outlook
1Institute of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, UK. 2Rowett Institute, School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, 
Aberdeen, UK. 
 e-mail: p.louis@abdn.ac.uk

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
fibre, host-derived compounds (in particular mucin)3, amino acids and 
organic acids can also lead to SCFA production (Fig. 1).
Gut microorganisms differ in their substrate utilization capaci-
ties and product formation. A complex web of metabolic interac-
tions between different microorganisms leads to the production of 
mainly acetate, propionate and butyrate in healthy individuals2. Pri-
mary degraders occupy the top level of fibre breakdown and some 
of the liberated polysaccharides, oligosaccharides and monosaccha-
rides become available to secondary fibre degraders. The level of 
cross-feeding depends on the nature of the extracellular enzyme and 
uptake systems present in the respective primary degrader2. Other 
cross-feeding microorganisms make use of some of the fermentation 
products generated by fibre degraders (Table 1). Some microorganisms 
are generalists that show a high level of adaptability to the presence 
of many different substrates, whereas others are more specialized. 
Furthermore, which SCFAs are generated by a specific microorganism 
may differ based on the growth substrate available2.
SCFAs are taken up by the host and elicit numerous effects on host 
physiology, both locally in the intestine and systemically. They are 
implicated in many aspects of host health, including cancer develop-
ment, immune function, metabolic, cardiovascular and neurological 
health. Much progress has been made in recent years in deciphering 
the molecular mechanisms underlying those effects. In this Review, 
we focus on the latest developments in SCFA production by the gut 
microbiota and how this is influenced by gut environmental conditions. 
We then explore the current knowledge on host interactions of SCFAs. 
This is a vast topic area4,5 and not all aspects can be comprehensively 
Introduction
Dietary fibre mainly originates from plant cell wall and storage carbo-
hydrates, also commonly referred to as glycans. It is highly complex 
and consists of carbohydrates that differ in their monosaccharide 
constituents, chemical linkages, chain lengths and non-carbohydrate 
constituents. The main carbohydrate types include cellulose, β-glucan, 
(arabino-)xylan, xyloglucan, glucomannan, galactomannan, pectin, 
fructan and resistant starch1,2. Fibre is indigestible in the human small 
intestine, either because the corresponding digestive enzymes are 
lacking or because their action is not sufficient to achieve complete 
breakdown during ileal passage, as is the case for resistant starch. 
Consequently, fibre reaches the colon, where it is a major substrate 
for the resident microbiota. The colon is a highly anaerobic environ-
ment, and few microorganisms are able to carry out complete sub-
strate oxidation by aerobic respiration (Box 1). Anaerobic respiration, 
in which other compounds replace oxygen as terminal electron trans-
port chain acceptors, is used by some microorganisms (for example, 
sulfate-reducing bacteria). Most gut bacteria, however, perform fer-
mentation, which generates large quantities of reduced fermentation 
products. ­Fermentative bacteria need to compromise between energy 
gain and the requirement for overall redox balance (Box 1) and usually 
produce a range of different fermentation products simultaneously. 
These include the short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) formate, acetate, 
propionate and butyrate (carbon chain length C1–C4; the longer SCFAs 
valerate (C5) and caproate (C6) may also be produced by some gut 
bacteria), other organic acids (mainly lactate and succinate), alcohols 
and the gases carbon dioxide and hydrogen. In addition to dietary 
Box 1 | Principles of anaerobic microbial metabolism
 
During aerobic respiration, bacteria transfer electrons from their 
substrate via electron carriers and an electron transport chain 
to oxygen, which generates an electrochemical proton gradient 
across the membrane that drives ATP production by ATP synthase. 
Fermentative bacteria instead transfer the electrons onto metabolic 
intermediates to regenerate the reduced electron carriers. For 
example, lactate is produced from pyruvate to regenerate NAD+ 
from NADH for continued monosaccharide fermentation by 
glycolysis. Fermentation leads to the generation of large amounts of 
fermentation products, including short-chain fatty acids. Energy is 
conserved via substrate-level phosphorylation in both aerobes and 
anaerobes during glycolysis. Furthermore, anaerobic fermentative 
bacteria may also make use of electrochemical gradients across 
the membrane to gain further energy via ATP synthase, as is shown 
in the figure for butyrate formation (some pathway reactions 
for propionate formation also result in ion gradients across the 
membrane)12). An important recent discovery in fermentative 
bacteria was flavin-based electron bifurcation219, the transfer of 
electrons from a carrier with intermediate redox potential (NADH) 
to one with lower (ferredoxin (Fd)) and higher (electron transfer 
flavoprotein (ETF)) redox potential. In the example shown in the 
figure, this enables the extrusion of sodium ions via the membrane 
protein Rnf. Rnf also has an important role during propionate 
formation in gut microorganisms204. The reverse reaction of electron 
confurcation is also used in gut anaerobes, for example, during 
lactate utilization12. Note that stoichiometries are excluded here;  
for further details, see ref. 12.
Flavin-based electron bifurcation: 
exchange of electrons between 
redox carriers with diﬀerent redox 
potentials: 
• Fd
• NAD
• ETF, part of the butyryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase complex in this 
example
ATP synthesis via substrate-level 
phosphorylation by transfer of a 
phosphate group during 
enzymatic reactions, for example, 
glycolysis enzymes 
phosphoglycerate kinase and 
pyruvate kinase
ATP synthesis by membrane-
bound ATP synthase (sodium-
specific variant in this example), 
driven by the generation of 
electrochemical gradients across 
the membrane (via Rnf in this 
example)
BCD
Na+
Na+
ADP
ATP
NAD+
NADH
ADP
ATP
NAD+
NADH
ETFH2
ETF
NAD+
NADH
Fdox
Fdred
Fdox
Fdred
Fdox
Fdred
NAD+
NADH
Monosaccharide
Pyruvate
Butyrate
Acetyl-CoA
Crotonyl-CoA
Butyryl-CoA
Cytoplasm
Membrane
Rnf
ATP
synthase

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
reviewed here. We provide an overview of the molecular mechanisms 
underlying the action of SCFAs and the role they play in maintaining 
gut homeostasis, before summarizing the implications for disease 
development and therapeutic application.
Microbial short-chain fatty acid metabolism
Many different carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes)6 are required 
for fibre breakdown and assessing their genome carriage helps to 
deduce the roles of different gut microorganisms in fibre fermentation7. 
SCFA production depends on which bacteria are directly promoted by 
the substrates entering the colon and on the prevailing environmental 
conditions, as well as microbial cross-feeding interactions.
Fermentation pathways
Most gut bacteria can produce acetate, formate and lactate, whereas 
propionate and butyrate production is more restricted8,9 (Table 1). 
Propionate is mainly produced by Bacteroidota species from carbo-
hydrates via the succinate pathway, and Veillonella species also utilize 
this pathway for growth on lactate (Fig. 1). The propanediol pathway 
from the deoxy sugars fucose and rhamnose is present in some phylo-
genetically diverse species, whereas the acrylate pathway (operating 
from lactate) is restricted to some Peptostreptococcaceae and not 
believed to play a major role in propionate formation in the gut9,10. 
Butyrate production is present in many species within the Bacillota 
phylum for growth on carbohydrates8,9 (Table 1). It starts with the 
condensation of two acetyl-CoA molecules to acetoacetyl-CoA and its 
reduction to butyryl-CoA, which is converted via a CoA-transferase to 
butyrate with acetate as co-substrate in the majority of gut bacteria8. 
Some microorganisms, mainly belonging to Bacillota, can ferment 
amino acids to butyrate9, including Intestinimonas butyriciprodu-
cens, which ferments the Maillard reaction product fructoselysine11. 
Glutamate, lysine and succinate feed into the pathway intermediate 
crotonyl-CoA (Fig. 1). A small number of butyrate producers can grow 
on lactate, having an important role in preventing the build-up of 
toxic lactate levels12,13. The different SCFA formation pathways are 
principally well understood, but details of the underlying biochem-
istry and alternative enzymatic steps are still being discovered in 
intestinal bacteria14. This should be considered when microbiome 
metagenomic pathway analyses are used to assess SCFA production 
capacities in humans.
Influence of environmental conditions
The collective action of the microbiota shapes the intestinal environ-
ment, which can influence SCFA production. The intestinal pH drops 
during fermentation, providing a competitive advantage to many 
butyrate producers over propionate-producing Bacteroidota15,16, and 
the proportion of butyrate generated relative to other fermentation 
products increases with lower pH in some microorganisms8. This likely 
contributes to a recent observation that the relative proportion of 
faecal butyrate increases with higher total SCFA concentrations17,18. 
Intestinal hydrogen concentration can also influence SCFA production. 
Hydrogen is produced as an alternative electron sink to organic acids in 
some fermentative bacteria and consumed by hydrogenotrophs (meth-
anogenic Archaea, sulfate reducers and acetogens). High intestinal 
Insoluble/complex matter
Monosaccharides
Deoxy sugars
Acetogenesis
Acetate utilization by 
butyryl-CoA:acetate 
CoA-transferase, 
generates acetyl-CoA 
as co-product
Succinate
L-glutamate
L-lysine
Polysaccharides and 
oligosaccharides
Oxaloacetate
1,2-Propanediol
Pyruvate
Acetyl-CoA
Crotonyl-CoA
Dietary fibre and host compounds (mucus)
Cell wall fragments from grains,
vegetables, fruits and mushrooms
Resistant
starch
Solubilized cell wall
components, fructans,
supplements
O
O−
Acetate
O
O−
H
Formate
(or H2 + CO2)
O
O
O−
O−
Succinate
O
O−
Butyrate
OH
O
O−
Lactate
O
O−
Propionate
Acryloyl-CoA
Fig. 1 | Metabolic pathways of short-chain fatty acid 
production. Dietary fibre consists of both complex 
insoluble plant matter and soluble fibre that require 
degradation by primary degraders. Dietary fibre 
and host-derived compounds are ultimately broken 
down to monosaccharides (including deoxy sugars), 
which are fermented to the short-chain fatty acids 
acetate, propionate and butyrate. Other fermentation 
products (blue) and amino acids (red) can also 
contribute to short-chain fatty acid formation. 
Propionate formation from different amino acids may 
occur via several entry points (pyruvate, oxaloacetate, 
fumarate and propionyl-CoA8, not shown). The 
succinate pathway for propionate formation may 
operate via phosphoenolpyruvate instead of pyruvate 
(not shown). The dashed line indicates the usage 
of acetate as a co-substrate for butyrate producers 
that use the butyryl-CoA:acetate CoA-transferase 
for butyrate formation. The thickness of the arrows 
roughly represents the abundance of the different 
pathways (Table 1). Note that stoichiometries 
are excluded here. CoA, coenzyme A; CO2, carbon 
dioxide; H2, hydrogen.

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
Table 1 | Distribution of major metabolic pathways for fermentation acid production in human gut bacteria
Substrate
Product
Pathwaya
Phylogenetic distribution and example genera or speciesb
Refs.
Carbohydrates
Formate
From pyruvate (pyruvate 
formate lyase)
Most taxa;
Bacillota, Lachnospiraceae (Dorea, Coprococcus eutactus, 
Lachnospira, Mediterraneibacter)
9,199–201
Carbohydrates
Acetate
From acetyl-CoA via 
acetyl-phosphatec
All taxa except Actinomycetotad;
Bacillota, Lachnospiraceae (Dorea, Mediterraneibacter), 
Ruminococcaceae (Ruminococcus)
9,199,201
Formate or CO2 + H2
Acetate
Reductive acetogenesis
Phylogenetically heterogeneous;
Bacillota, Eubacteriaceae (Eubacterium limosum,  
Eubacterium maltosivorans), Lachnospiraceae (Blautia)
202,203
Carbohydrates
Lactate
From pyruvate (lactate 
dehydrogenase)
All taxa except Actinomycetotad;
Bacillota, Lachnospiraceae (Coprococcus comes, 
Mediterraneibacter)
9,200,201
Carbohydrates (some 
amino acids also feed 
into the pathway)
Propionate 
and/or 
succinate
Succinate pathway via 
oxaloacetate
Bacteroidota families, including Bacteroidaceae (Bacteroides, 
Parabacteroides, Phocaeicola; propionate usually the main 
product), Prevotellaceae (Prevotella, succinate usually the main 
product), Rikenellaceae (Alistipes);
Bacillota, Negativicutes (Megamonas, Veillonella), 
Ruminococcaceae (Ruminococcus, succinate is the  
end product);
Verrucomicrobiota (Akkermansia)
8–10,204,205
Lactate and/or 
succinate
Propionate
Succinate pathway via 
oxaloacetate
Bacillota, Negativicutes (Dialister, Phascolarctobacterium, 
Veillonella)
10,12
Deoxy sugars from 
carbohydrates
Propionate
Propanediol pathway 
(1,2-propanediol may be either the 
substrate or end product in some 
microorganisms)
Phylogenetically diverse species;
Bacillota, Eubacteriaceae (E. limosum), Lachnospiraceae 
(Blautia gnavus, Blautia obeum, Roseburia inulinivorans), 
Oscillospiraceae (Flavonifractor plautii, Intestinimonas 
butyriciproducens), Peptoniphilaceae (Peptoniphilus indolicus), 
Veillonellaceae (Veillonella dispar);
Fusobacteriota, Fusobacteriaceae (Fusobacterium varium)
8–10
Lactate
Propionate
Acrylate pathway via acryloyl-CoAe
Few species;
Bacillota, Clostridiaceae (Clostridium symbiosum), 
Lachnospiraceae (Coprococcus catus), Veillonellaceae 
(Megasphaera elsdenii)
9,10,12
Carbohydrates
Butyrate
Acetyl-CoA pathway with 
CoA-transferase from butyryl-CoA, 
may consume acetate
Predominantly Bacillota, Lachnospiraceae (Anaerobutyricum, 
Anaerostipes, C. catus, Roseburia), Ruminococcaceae 
(Faecalibacterium)
8,9
Carbohydrates
Butyrate
Acetyl-CoA pathway with 
phosphotransferase and butyrate 
kinase from butyryl-CoAc
Predominantly Bacillota, Clostridiaceae (Clostridium), 
Lachnospiraceae (Butyrivibrio, C. comes, C. eutactus), 
Ruminococcaceae (Anaerotruncus, Subdoligranulum)
8,9
Succinate
Butyrate
Via crotonyl-CoAf
Predominantly Bacillota, Christenellaceae (Christensenella 
minuta), Eubacteriaceae (Anaerofustis stercorihominis), 
Lachnospiraceae (Anaerostipes caccae), Oscillospiraceae 
(F. plautii, I. butyriciproducens), Ruminococcaceae 
(Agathobaculum desmolans), Veillonellaceae (M. elsdenii)
8,9
Glutamate
Butyrate
Via crotonyl-CoAf
Predominantly Bacillota, Acidaminococcaceae 
(Acidaminococcus fermentans), Oscillospiraceae  
(Oscillibacter ruminantium), Peptoniphilaceae (Peptoniphilus)
8,9
Lysine
Butyrate
Via crotonyl-CoAf
Predominantly Bacillota, Oscillospiraceae (F. plautii,  
I. butyriciproducens)
8,9
Lactateg
Butyrate
Via pyruvate and acetyl-CoA 
pathway
Bacillota, Lachnospiraceae (Anaerobutyricum, Anaerostipes), 
Eubacteriaceae (E. limosum)
12
CoA, coenzyme A; CO2, carbon dioxide; H2, hydrogen. aWhere carbohydrates are the growth substrate, key metabolic intermediates from monosaccharide breakdown are indicated as per 
Fig. 1. bPathway carriage within families is often heterogeneous, whereas different species within a genus often, but not always, harbour similar pathways. The relative proportion of different 
fermentation products can differ between species and within species depending on the growth conditions. For fermentation acids that are produced by most bacteria, example genera 
have been selected from those who produce the respective acid as a major end product. cConserves ATP via substrate-level phosphorylation. dActinomycetota, including Bifidobacterium 
and Collinsella spp., utilize the bifid shunt for the formation of acetate, lactate, formate and ethanol206,207. eSome bacteria also utilize this pathway with other substrates; for example, 
Acidaminococcaceae degrade glutamate to propionate via pyruvate and acryloyl-CoA8. fUsually, harbour the whole acetyl-CoA pathway for butyrate formation from carbohydrates as well. 
gMay utilize both l-lactate and d-lactate or only d-lactate, and the presence of alternative substrates (for example, glucose) may suppress lactate utilization12.

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
hydrogen concentrations make further hydrogen production energeti-
cally unfavourable and shift the balance towards butyrate formation 
in some bacteria19. The magnitude of these environmental effects is 
dependent on the individual microbiota composition, which shows 
a large variation between healthy humans20. Consequently, specific 
microbial functional groups (for example, lactate utilizers) can differ 
in abundance, and functional variation also occurs between closely 
related microorganisms down to strain level13,21.
The amount and type of fibre entering the colon are an important 
determinant of SCFA formation. A diverse range of glycans likely pro-
motes a diverse microbiota22, and the level of fermentability, influenced 
by physicochemical determinants such as solubility, can influence 
where in the colon fermentation takes place1,23. Fermentation along the 
intestine cannot easily be assessed in vivo, but the usefulness of telem-
etric capsules was recently assessed during a fully controlled dietary 
trial with patients presenting irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)24. There 
were no clear trends in pH between different diets, possibly reflecting 
confounding factors in vivo. Intestinal hydrogen concentration, how-
ever, showed a clear trend towards more distal colonic fermentation 
with a diet containing fibres with different levels of fermentability, 
which is desirable for delivering health-promoting SCFAs to the distal 
gut epithelium. Our understanding of microbial fibre metabolism is 
mainly based on assessments with individual purified glycans, and 
the breakdown of more complex fibre remains poorly understood1,2,23. 
Whole plant-based diets contain insoluble plant cell wall fragments that 
may require additional microbial functions (for example, attachment) 
and provide a surface for biofilm formation. This may promote com-
munity interactions, such as synergistic fibre breakdown or enhanced 
cross-feeding2,23. Differences in fibre composition between plants and 
food processing (for example, cooking and milling) also affect the 
physicochemical properties of fibres, and studies on their impact on 
microbiota metabolism are emerging25–27.
Microbial community interactions
Factors influencing microbial competitiveness, such as enzyme or 
transporter specificities and efficiencies, require careful biochemical 
analysis, as exemplified for xylan degradation by the butyrate producer 
Roseburia intestinalis28. In addition to direct competition for specific 
substrates and cross-feeding interactions, recent studies provide 
insights into additional community interactions that influence SCFA 
production. Bacteroides species are generalists that carry polysaccha-
ride utilization loci for many different carbohydrates. CRISPR genome 
editing was used to unravel their complex expression control, which 
contributes to strain fitness in the context of the nutrient environment 
and interactions with different butyrate-producing microorganisms29. 
SCFAs may exert inhibitory effects, as demonstrated for butyrate via the 
build-up of a high intracellular butyryl-CoA pool in Bacteroides strains. 
This was dependent both on the growth substrate and strain-specific 
genetic factors, in particular carriage of enzymes involved in acyl-CoA 
metabolism and nucleotide polymorphisms in their promoter and 
coding regions that affect gene regulation and protein function21. Thus, 
similar intestinal butyrate concentrations in different individuals may 
result in different propionate concentrations, depending on which 
Bacteroides strains prevail. It would be desirable to predict SCFA pro-
duction in response to different types of dietary fibre from the micro-
biota composition to develop personalized nutritional strategies that 
aim to maximize health. Mathematical modelling strategies are being 
developed, and machine learning may have an increasingly important 
role in this area in the future30–32.
Molecular host interactions of short-chain  
fatty acids
Total SCFA concentrations in the colon are around 100 mM as deter-
mined in sudden death victims, with an acetate:propionate:butyrate 
ratio of approximately 3:1:1 (ref. 33). More than 90% of the SCFAs are 
absorbed from the intestine34 and they exert numerous local and sys-
temic effects on the host. Here, we briefly outline the major mechanistic 
routes by which SCFAs modulate host physiology.
Short-chain fatty acid transport and energy provision
The colonic epithelium absorbs SCFAs mainly via two transporters: 
solute carrier family 26 member 3 (SLC26A3) (by exchange with bicarbo-
nate) and monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1) (by proton symport). 
Basolateral export of SCFAs from colonocytes is less well understood, 
but likely involves chloride antiporter SLC4A1/2, proton symporter 
MCT4 and an anion channel35 (Fig. 2). All three major SCFAs are detect-
able in portal blood33 and a recent study determined their concentra-
tions in the small veins emanating from the colon in a pig model (acetate 
3.8 mM, propionate 1.1 mM and butyrate 0.29 mM)36. The authors pro-
pose that these concentrations are in the appropriate range to condi-
tion the immune system by signalling to G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs), which are present on immune cells passing through the portal 
venous system. Portal butyrate concentrations are lower than those of 
acetate and propionate when considering their respective concentra-
tions in the lumen of the colon, as butyrate is mainly metabolized in 
colonocytes. Propionate, by contrast, is largely metabolized in the liver. 
Together, this results in low peripheral venous blood concentrations of 
both SCFAs compared with acetate33. All three SCFAs, however, remain 
detectable in different tissues. For example, concentrations in the cer-
ebrospinal fluid were reported to range from 0 to 171 μM for acetate, 
0 to 5 μM for propionate and 0 to 2.8 μM for butyrate37.
SCFAs can be metabolized in host tissues by entering the tricar-
boxylic acid cycle after conversion to acetyl-CoA (acetate; butyrate via 
β-oxidation) or succinyl-CoA (propionate), providing energy. Alterna-
tively, acetyl-CoA can be utilized for lipogenesis and succinyl-CoA for 
gluconeogenesis38. Collectively, the SCFAs contribute an estimated 
5–10% to the host energy requirements37,38. Butyrate has an important 
trophic role in the colon, as it is the preferred energy source of colo-
nocytes and has been estimated to provide ~70% of their total energy 
needs in mice37. Its importance relative to other potential fuels has 
recently been questioned, as butyrate cannot provide building blocks 
for cell proliferation owing to the nature of its metabolism. Therefore, 
the role of other metabolites, such as monosaccharides, also needs to 
be considered34. In addition to providing energy to the host, SCFAs 
have also been shown to increase energy expenditure, and several 
mechanistic routes, including neuronal and metabolic pathways in 
various tissues, are under investigation38.
Interaction with host receptors
Various intestinal and extraintestinal host cells express GPCRs that 
respond to SCFAs and trigger host responses, which has recently 
been reviewed39,40. Two free fatty acid receptors (FFARs) are activated 
by all three major SCFAs: FFAR2 (also known as GPR43; higher affin-
ity for the shorter SCFAs acetate and propionate) and FFAR3 (also 
known as GPR41; higher affinity for the longer SCFAs propionate and 
butyrate). A butyrate-specific (GPR109A) and acetate-specific and 
propionate-specific (OLFR78) receptor has also been identified. In 
view of much of the research in this field being carried out in mouse 
models, it is important to note that SCFA potencies differ between 

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
human and mouse orthologues of FFAR2 and FFAR3 (ref. 39). Activation 
of GPCRs results in disassociation of the associated G protein α-subunit, 
which leads to a cellular response via signalling cascades, such as gene 
expression changes (Fig. 2). Different GPCRs associate with different 
G proteins, which influence downstream signalling. A complex interplay 
of further factors modulates receptor action, including desensitization 
and resensitization processes, post-translational modifications and 
regulatory proteins39,41.
GPCRs are involved in the regulation of many aspects of host physi-
ology, including hormone secretion, glucose and lipid metabolism and 
immune function, some of which are discussed further in the sections 
subsequently. SCFA affinities of FFAR2 and FFAR3 are in the micromolar 
range, broadly in line with the systemic concentrations in the many 
tissues they are expressed in, including adipocytes, immune cells, 
neurons and pancreatic β-cells. Colonic SCFA concentrations are in 
the millimolar range, but apical expression has been confirmed for 
several GPCRs on colonocytes39. FFAR2, however, has also been shown 
to be expressed at the basolateral membrane of enteroendocrine cells 
involved in satiety-enhancing gut hormone secretion40. It appears that 
the complex interplay among overlapping functions, tissue-specific 
expression levels and different signalling cascades of diverse GPCRs 
enables the fine-tuning of body homeostasis39,40,42.
Epigenetic regulation
Epigenetics refers to inheritable changes of gene function that do 
not involve changes in the DNA sequence43. DNA methylation, medi-
ated by DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), involves the addition of 
a methyl group to the c-5 position of cytosine in the promoter CpG 
region, which results in the suppression of gene expression. Butyrate 
has been shown to downregulate DNMT1 by phosphorylation of 
mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 and extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase signalling44.
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
O
O−
Intracellular actions
• Energy provision
• Mineral absorption
• Gut motility and transit time
• Gut barrier (mucus layer, 
tight junctions)
• Immunity and inflammation
• Cell proliferation and 
apoptosis
• Oxidative stress
Systemic actions
• Energy provision and energy expenditure
• Immunity and inflammation
• Cardiovascular, metabolic and brain function
Luminal actions
• Colonization resistance
• Mineral absorption
SCFAs
SLC26A3
MCT1
SLC4A1/2
MCT4
Anion
channel
FFAR2
miRNAs
Ac
Ac
Ac
Ac
DNMT1
CH3
HCO3
−
H+
Cl–
H+
Acetyl-CoA↑
ATP↑
HATs
HDACs
pH↓
↓Pathogens
↑Free Ca2+
Ca2+ transport
Gut lumen
Colonocyte apical
membrane
Colonocyte basolateral
membrane
mRNA
Ribosome
DNA
Histones
Nucleus
Gene expression
Mitochondrial
β-oxidation
Signalling cascades
GPR109A
Fig. 2 | Molecular interactions of SCFAs with the host. Short-chain fatty 
acids (SCFAs) elicit luminal effects, including pathogen resistance and mineral 
absorption. They are transported across the intestinal epithelial barrier via 
transporters in both the apical (soluter carrier family 26 member 3 (SLC26A3) 
and monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1)) and basolateral (SLC4A1/2, MCT4 
and an anion channel) cell membranes of colonocytes35. Butyrate is a major 
fuel for colonocytes, which results in lower extraintestinal concentrations 
than for the other SCFAs. SCFAs are sensed by at least four different G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs) across many different host tissues (free fatty 
acid receptor 2 (FFAR2) and GPR109A are shown here, as they are strongly 
expressed in colonocytes)39. Gene expression of target genes is modulated via 
signalling cascades triggered by GPCRs or by epigenetic regulation via histone 
modification, DNA methylation or RNA interference. Text boxes summarize the 
major physiological effects elicited via these molecular interactions at various 
body locations. Red blunt-headed arrows represent inhibitory actions. Ac, acetyl 
group; Ca2+, calcium ion; CH3, methyl group; Cl−, chloride; CoA, coenzyme A; 
DNMT1, DNA methyltransferase 1; H+, proton; HAT, histone acetyltransferase; 
HCO3
−, bicarbonate; HDAC, histone deacetylase; miRNA, microRNA.

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
Histone post-translational modifications involve the covalent 
attachment of functional groups to the histone tails that affect tran-
scription, the predominant epigenetic mechanism by which SCFAs 
influence several gut–organ axes to modulate gene expression in 
multiple cell types43 (Fig. 2). Acetylation induced by histone acetyl-
transferases relaxes condensed chromatin, making it more accessible 
to gene expression. Conversely, deacetylation mediated by histone 
deacetylases (HDACs) leads to compaction of the chromatin, making 
genes less accessible for transcription. SCFAs have been proven to act 
as class I and II HDAC inhibitors45, acting directly or through GPCRs. 
The resulting increased expression of target genes impacts cellular 
differentiation, apoptosis and tumour suppression46,47. Butyrate is 
the most studied and most potent HDAC inhibitor, whereas acetate is 
the least potent SCFA43. Acetate and butyrate also get metabolized to 
acetyl-CoA and increase histone acetylation directly48,49. Other novel 
post-translational protein modifications, propionylation, butyryla-
tion and lysine crotonylation, are alternate pathways for the action of 
SCFAs50,51. It has also been suggested that butyrate acts as a ligand for 
several transcription factors independent of HDAC inhibition52, but 
this has recently been called into question for the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor pathway53.
The third epigenetic mechanism is RNA interference, a process 
by which a class of non-coding RNA species called microRNAs inhibit 
the translation process of mRNA. There is increasing evidence that 
microRNAs have a vital role in the initiation, progression and spread of 
cancers54. Butyrate reduced the expression of the miR-17-92 oncogenic 
cluster, which has a prominent role in proliferation, angiogenesis, dif-
ferentiation and apoptosis in colorectal cancer (CRC)55. The evidence 
for the epigenetic effect of butyrate through RNA interference has been 
discussed in a recent review56.
Short-chain fatty acids and gut homeostasis
SCFAs have an important role in maintaining gut health through a mul-
titude of different actions. They contribute to colonization resistance 
against pathogens via several mechanistic pathways, which have recently 
been reviewed57. Pathogens, however, may overcome SCFA-mediated 
colonization resistance. For example, Salmonella enterica serovar 
Typhimurium could overcome propionate inhibition in the presence 
of inflammation-derived nitrate by enabling anaerobic respiration and 
propionate catabolism58. SCFAs also influence gut physiology. In addi-
tion to providing energy to host tissues as discussed earlier, they are 
also implicated in aiding mineral absorption via several mechanisms 
of action, including a lowering of gut pH leading to enhanced mineral 
solubility, an increase in the intestinal surface area and regulatory 
effects59. Here, we focus on the role of SCFAs in ­influencing gut ­motility, 
the ­physical gut barrier and the host immune system.
Modulation of gut physiology by short-chain fatty acids
Gut homeostasis is maintained by achieving a delicate equilibrium 
between the resident microorganisms in the gut lumen with the 
host cells that are in close relationship with them. SCFAs have a dis-
tinctive role in this critical crosstalk that determines the overall gut 
health of the host.
Gut motility and transit time. One of the fundamental functions 
of the gut is the ability to mix the intestinal contents and propel 
them forward to facilitate digestion and absorption. Microbial and 
luminal metabolites are sensed by enterochromaffin and L cells in 
the mucosa to initiate downstream signals via enteric neurons to 
the muscular layers and modulate gut motility60. The role of the gut 
microbiota has been highlighted by the reduced enteric neurons and 
impaired motility in germ-free mice61. Butyrate, acetate and propion-
ate have all been shown to activate enterochromaffin cells to pro-
duce 5-hyroxytryptamine (5-HT), which activates 5-HT4 receptors on 
enteric neurons, promoting gut motility62. Conversely, L cells sense 
SCFAs and secrete glucagon-like peptide 1 and peptide YY, both of 
which inhibit gut motility62. The association of SCFAs with gut motil-
ity in humans has been highlighted in a recent meta-analysis, which 
showed that faecal propionate and butyrate were lower in patients with 
constipation-predominant IBS, whereas faecal butyrate was higher in 
patients with diarrhoea-predominant IBS63.
Mucous layer. The intestinal mucous layer is the most proximal layer 
of the gut barrier and is critical for protection from luminal pathogens. 
Butyrate directly influences mucin 2 production, which is the most 
important secretory mucin component in the intestine, either via 
selective acetylation or methylation of histones of the MUC2 gene or indi-
rectly through the mediation of fibroblasts64,65. In a mouse model, admin-
istration of butyrate enemas increased mucin 2 production, although the 
actual mucosal layer decreased in thickness66. However, butyrate enemas 
in a human trial with patients with ulcerative colitis showed no change in 
MUC2 gene expression in rectal biopsies67. The direct effect of SCFAs on 
mucin production in vivo still needs further elucidation.
Epithelial cell barrier. The epithelial cell layer is by far the most impor-
tant component of the gut barrier. The cells are held in proximity by 
junctional proteins, which effectively seal off the paracellular spaces. 
Several in vitro cellular models have confirmed the beneficial effects 
of SCFAs, especially butyrate, by positive regulation of claudin, zonulin 
and occludin expression, resulting in restoration of transepithelial 
electrical resistance. However, these effects are dose-dependent, 
with lower doses of butyrate conferring these beneficial effects, but 
higher doses having the opposite effect on Caco-2 cell monolayers68. 
Butyrate was also found to mitigate epithelial barrier injury in a mouse 
model69. However, this protective effect was not demonstrated in stud-
ies on epithelial cells isolated from healthy individuals or those with 
ulcerative colitis70,71.
Immune regulation
SCFAs have a crucial role in immune system regulation, influencing 
both innate and adaptive immune responses. The players of the innate 
arm are in close proximity to the intestinal lumen, whereas the adaptive 
immune components are affected through smaller concentrations of 
SCFAs that are absorbed into the systemic circulation (Fig. 3).
Innate immunity. The innate immune system has the critical task of 
early recognition of pathogens and activation of mechanisms for their 
rapid clearance, irrespective of prior exposure. Macrophages and 
monocytes are the first line of defence whose functions are altered 
by SCFAs. The evidence is mostly based on observations of cytokine 
responses of different cell types following direct interactions with 
SCFAs. Butyrate, propionate and acetate have been shown to impact the 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis fac-
tor, IL-1β, IL-6 and nitric oxide and inhibit the activity of inducible nitric 
oxide synthase in macrophages to dampen inflammation72. Butyrate 
also directly suppressed the kinase activity of mammalian target of 
rapamycin to enhance phagocytosis and increased antimicrobial pep-
tide synthesis73. SCFAs have been found to attenuate inflammation 

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
by remodelling macrophages from the pro-inflammatory M1 polar-
ized macrophage phenotype to the anti-inflammatory M2 polarized 
macrophage phenotype in dextran sulfate sodium colitis and alco-
holic hepatitis mouse models74,75. Butyrate reduced the expression of 
monocyte attractant protein 1 and vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, 
both of which are critical in leukocyte migration to the intestine76,77. 
Collective evidence suggests that SCFAs have a dampening impact on 
macrophages.
SCFAs modulate the phagocytic function of neutrophils and 
impair the production of reactive oxygen species78. This also results in 
decreased production of inflammatory cytokines79. All SCFAs induced 
apoptosis in neutrophils and accelerated death80. By impairing the 
chemotaxis of neutrophils, SCFAs have an attenuating effect on 
intestinal inflammation81,82. Overall, evidence suggests that SCFAs 
have an inhibitory effect on neutrophil function, highlighting their 
anti-inflammatory role.
As specialized antigen-presenting cells, dendritic cells are the 
bridge between innate and adaptive immunity. In vitro studies showed 
that pretreatment with butyrate resulted in a significant reduction of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-12 and interferon-γ (IFNγ) and a 
significant increase in anti-inflammatory IL-10 secretions83,84. Butyrate 
and propionate have been found to have a critical role in the differen-
tiation, maturation and function of these cells towards a predominant 
tolerogenic phenotype85.
Adaptive immunity. Adaptive immune system CD4+ T cells can differ-
entiate into various subtypes, such as T helper 1 (TH1) cells and TH17 cells  
directed at cell-mediated immunity, TH2 cell subtypes promot-
ing humoral immunity and regulatory T (Treg) cells, which suppress 
adverse immune reactions, maintain immune tolerance and contrib-
ute to gut homeostasis. Through HDAC inhibition, both butyrate and 
propionate increase the expression of transcription factor Foxp3 
to induce the generation and activation of Treg cells, pointing to an 
anti-inflammatory effect86,87. However, butyrate has also been shown 
to generate pro-inflammatory TH17 and TH1 effector cell subtypes88. 
In a dextran sulfate sodium colitis mouse model, butyrate induced a 
regulatory phenotype at physiological concentrations, whereas higher 
doses stimulated the pro-inflammatory subtype with increased levels 
of IFNγ89. Butyrate and, to a lesser extent, propionate have also been 
shown to induce both IFN-γ and granzyme B gene expression in CD8+ 
T cells90. This suggests that SCFAs induce anti-inflammatory Treg cells in 
normal homeostatic conditions, but SCFA-mediated pro-inflammatory 
cytokines may predominate in the presence of inflammation. This is 
by a dual action of the SCFAs activating both the effector and Treg cell 
pathways88.
SCFAs have been shown to amplify antibody production by mod-
ulating gene expression, leading to a differentiation of B cells into 
specific plasma cells91. Butyrate enhanced the intestinal IgA response 
to microbiota by affecting the activity of B cells in the Peyer’s patches 
via GPR43 (ref. 92). Butyrate and propionate were found to affect 
B cells through HDAC inhibition, leading to reduced autoantibody 
production in lupus-prone mice93. Butyrate, propionate and acetate 
stimulated development into regulatory B cells by induction of IL-10 
(refs. 94,95). The pivotal effects of SCFAs on antibody production, B cell 
MCT1
SLC26A3
MCT4
SLC4A1/2
Intestinal
lumen
Mucin
layer
Capillary
Epithelium
Lamina
propria
Innate
immunity
Adaptive
immunity
• ↑Mucin
• ↑Mucin 2
• ↑Occludin
• ↑Claudin
• ↑Energy
• ↑Antimicrobial 
peptide
• ↓ROS
• ↓IL-6
• ↓TNF
• ↓IL-1β
• ↑Apoptosis
• ↓Chemotaxis
• ↓NET
• ↓TNF
• ↓IL-6
• ↓IL-13
• ↓NO
• ↑M2 
phenotype
• ↓MCP1
• ↓VCAM1
• ↓IL-12
• ↓IFNγ
• ↑IL-10
• ↓Maturation
• ↑Tolerogenic 
phenotype
• ↑TReg cell
• ↑FOXP3
• ↑IFNγ
• ↑Granzyme B
• ↑IgA
• ↑Plasma cells
• ↑Breg cell
• ↓Autoantibodies
Neutrophil
Dendritic cell
Macrophage
Plasma cell
B cell
T cell
Acetate
Butyrate
Propionate
Intestinal
microbiota
Treg cell
Occludin
Claudin
Dietary
fibre
Colonocyte
M cell
Goblet cell
Systemic
circulation
FFAR2
FFAR3
GPR109A
Fig. 3 | Immune regulation by SCFAs. Short-
chain fatty acids (SCFAs) influence both the 
innate and adaptive immune arms by their action 
through G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and 
epigenetically by histone modulation. Overall, the 
effects of SCFAs result in the strengthening of the 
epithelial barrier, increase in mucin production 
and dampening of pro-inflammatory cytokines. 
SCFAs act through different GPCRs on neutrophils, 
dendritic cells, macrophages, T cells and B cells to 
foster an anti-inflammatory milieu in the mucosal 
environment. Text boxes summarize the major 
action of SCFAs alongside each immune cell type. 
The affected cells transit through the bloodstream 
to propagate these effects systemically. Additionally, 
SCFAs are absorbed into the bloodstream to exert 
their systemic effects in distal extraintestinal 
sites. Breg cell, regulatory B cell; FFAR, free fatty 
acid receptor; FOXP3, forkhead box P3; IFNγ, 
interferon-γ; M2, M2 polarized macrophage; 
MCP1, monocyte chemotactic protein 1; MCT, 
monocarboxylate transporter; NET, neutrophil 
extracellular trap; NO, nitric oxide; ROS, reactive 
oxygen species; SLC, solute carrier; TNF, tumour 
necrosis factor; Treg cell, regulatory T cell; VCAM1, 
vascular cell adhesion molecule 1.

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
development and differentiation and local IgA responses highlight 
their mediatory role in immune-related inflammatory diseases and 
autoimmune disorders.
Short-chain fatty acids, health and disease
There is a large body of evidence that links the gut microbiota to health 
and disease, mediated by SCFAs in the gut and further afield96. This 
section provides a broad overview of the impact of SCFAs on disease 
conditions and SCFA-targeted therapeutic approaches, mostly based 
on studies in human subjects.
Intestinal diseases
The intestinal lumen, as the site of bacterial fermentation, has the high-
est concentration of SCFAs, so it is not a surprise that they play a critical 
role in several intestinal diseases. The ‘leaky gut’ in these disorders tends 
to allow transit of not only luminal pathogens but also toxic metabo-
lites such as endotoxin from the lumen into the bloodstream. SCFAs 
have a putative anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory function to 
­counteract the inflammatory cascade that is triggered by this disruption.
Inflammatory bowel disease. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) com-
prises two different phenotypes, ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease, 
characterized by an alteration in luminal bacteria, barrier dysfunction, 
immune dysregulation and chronic inflammation97. An alteration in 
SCFA-producing bacteria has been documented in IBD, with Faecali-
bacterium prausnitzii and R. intestinalis being significantly reduced98,99. 
A decreased bacterial capacity for butyrate production, as measured 
by the gene content for one of the bacterial enzymes responsible for 
butyrate synthesis, butyryl-CoA:acetate CoA-transferase, has been 
detected in IBD100. Furthermore, a meta-analysis of 11 studies showed 
that patients with IBD had significantly reduced concentrations of total 
faecal SCFAs, acetate, propionate and valerate compared with healthy 
subjects101. In addition to a reduction in butyrate production, there are 
potential alterations of mucosal butyrate oxidation in patients with 
IBD102. Additionally, the presence of an inflammatory milieu, includ-
ing cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor, renders the epithelium 
less responsive to butyrate103. This is borne out by a reduced expres-
sion of butyrate receptors in the colonocytes of patients with Crohn’s 
disease104. One can consider a ‘double hit hypothesis’, wherein not only 
SCFA production is reduced in IBD but also its metabolism and effective-
ness are further affected in the background of intestinal inflammation. 
There is emerging evidence that faecal SCFAs could be used as a marker 
of disease activity in patients with Crohn’s disease and ­ulcerative colitis, 
with levels improving as the inflammation decreases105,106.
Several studies have utilized SCFAs in the treatment of IBD 
(Table 2). Butyrate enemas improved symptoms, decreased inflam-
mation and showed a reduction in nuclear factor-κB activation in mac-
rophages of the lamina propria from patients with ulcerative colitis in 
some studies107–109. However, a recent systematic review did not support 
the application of butyrate enemas in ulcerative colitis, with no reliable 
data in patients with Crohn’s disease110. Oral tablets and microencap-
sulated preparations of butyrate have shown some benefit in patients 
with ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease111,112. This suggests that oral 
butyrate may help to augment existing treatment options for IBD, but 
further studies are required.
Colorectal cancer. CRC is the third most diagnosed cancer and the 
second commonest cause of cancer-related mortality113. An inverse rela-
tionship between dietary fibre intake and CRC has been documented114 
and a large prospective, observational cohort study (EPIC study, more 
than 500,000 European subjects) found a 25% reduction of CRC in the 
highest quintile of fibre intake when compared with the lowest115. How-
ever, the linkage to SCFAs in protection against CRC is more tenuous, as 
a clear relationship between either faecal SCFA levels and dietary fibre 
intake in healthy individuals, or between patients with CRC and healthy 
subjects, has not been established116–118. This may reflect the fact that 
faecal SCFAs are a poor marker of intestinal SCFA production owing to 
their extensive uptake in the colon. Nevertheless, combined metabo-
lomic signatures have shown SCFAs to have an inverse ­correlation with 
CRC incidence119.
SCFAs, especially butyrate, have been studied extensively in colo-
rectal carcinogenesis in animal models with putative anti-tumorigenic 
actions that include induction of cancer cell apoptosis, arrest 
of the tumour cell cycle and inhibition of oncogenic micro-RNA 
expression55,120–123. Butyrate also acts via changes in the cellular 
metabolism of cancer cells, which mainly utilize glucose instead of 
butyrate for their energy needs (Warburg effect). This leads to the 
accumulation of larger concentrations of butyrate in the nucleus of 
cancer cells compared with normal colonocytes, inhibiting HDACs, 
which leads to the inhibition of cellular proliferation and promotion 
of apoptosis. This is described as the ‘butyrate paradox’, based on 
the opposing role of butyrate in cell proliferation between normal 
and cancerous cells48,124. Recently, expression patterns of butyrate 
metabolism-related genes have been studied in tissue samples of 
CRC, and 18 such genes, including 4 high-risk genes (FN1, SERPINE1, 
THBS2 and COMP), were identified to develop a prognostic model 
that could predict survival rate and the response of these patients to 
chemotherapy and immunotherapy125.
Food allergy. Food allergy encompasses adverse immune responses 
to specific food antigens, which can result in a spectrum of illnesses 
and even death in severe cases126,127. The role of the gut microbiota is 
evidenced by the fact that germ-free mice cannot achieve immune 
tolerance to food antigens128. In murine allergic models, changes in gut 
microbial composition have enhanced food allergen sensitization to 
potential food allergens such as peanuts and ovalbumin128,129, which in 
turn have been prevented by dietary interventions to propagate SCFA 
production130. Several cross-sectional human studies and systematic 
reviews have also suggested a SCFAs-mediated link between food 
allergy and the gut microbiota94,131,132.
Extraintestinal diseases
In the presence of an intact gut barrier, SCFAs have a role in systemic 
health, with physiological absorption of SCFAs into the circulation. The 
underlying mechanistic pathways are relatively poorly understood.
Extraintestinal cancers. The beneficial effects of butyrate, in particu-
lar, have been demonstrated in several extraintestinal cancers in the 
cervix, urinary bladder, breast, liver and lung133. SCFAs are believed to 
influence cancer progression not only by affecting the tumour micro-
environment but also by modulating signalling pathways in immune 
and cancer cells134. Butyrate has been proven to alleviate the side effects 
of conventional chemotherapeutic agents, enhance the bioavailability 
of cancer drugs and augment the efficacy of both chemotherapy and 
immunotherapy. Additionally, faecal butyrate has been found to be 
an independent predictor of the therapeutic response with immuno-
therapy in a wide variety of cancers. These beneficial effects have been 
summarized in a recent review135.

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
Table 2 | Summary of selected human trials with short-chain fatty acid formulationsa
Trial
Disease
Formulation and constituents
Number of participants 
(treatment, control)
Duration
Key findings
Refs.
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Diversion colitis
Enema
Acetate (60 mmol l−1); propionate 
(30 mmol l−1); N-butyrate 
(40 mmol l−1)
n (7, 6)
14 days
No endoscopic or 
histological change
208
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Distal ulcerative colitis
Enema
Sodium butyrate (100 mol l−1)
n (10, 10)
2 weeks
Improvement of 
symptoms and 
histological change
108
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Left-sided ulcerative 
colitis
Enema
Sodium acetate (80 mmol l−1), 
sodium propionate (30 mmol l−1) 
and sodium butyrate (40 mmol l−1)
n (14, 5)
6 weeks
Improvement of 
intestinal bleeding and 
urgency
107
Open label
Distal ulcerative colitis
Enema
Sodium acetate (60 mM), sodium 
propionate (30 mM), sodium 
butyrate (40 mM)
n (10)
6 weeks
Clinical remission 50%, 
no histological change
209
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Distal ulcerative colitis
Enema
Sodium butyrate (80 mM)
n (19, 19)
6 weeks
No difference in clinical 
response
210
Parallel, randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Distal ulcerative colitis
Enema
Sodium butyrate (100 mol l−1) and 
acetate (60 mmol l−1), propionate 
(30 mmol l−1), N-butyrate 
(40 mmol l−1)
n (16, 15, 16)
4 weeks
No improvement of 
symptoms, decrease in 
neutrophils on biopsy
211,212
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Distal ulcerative colitis
Enema
Acetate (80 mmol l−1), propionate 
(30 mmol l−1), N-butyrate 
(40 mmol l−1)
n (45, 46)
6 weeks
No significant clinical 
improvement (33% 
versus 20%, P = 0.14)
213
Randomized 
double-blind 
crossover
Diversion colitis
Enema
Sodium acetate (80 mmol l−1), 
sodium propionate (30 mmol l−1) 
and sodium butyrate (40 mmol l−1)
n (10)
3 weeks
No endoscopic or 
histological change
214
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Ulcerative colitis
Tablet
Sodium butyrate (4 g per day) 
plus oral mesalazine (2.4 g 
per day) versus mesalazine 
plus placebo
n (12, 13)
6 weeks
No difference noted 
between the two groups
112
Randomized 
double-blind 
crossover
Radiation proctitis
Enema
Sodium butyrate (80 mM)
n (20)
3 weeks
Remission of symptoms 
noted on treatment
215
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Distal ulcerative colitis
Enema
Sodium butyrate (100 mol l−1)
n (6, 5)
8 weeks
Decrease in inflammation 
and nuclear factor-κB in 
macrophages
109
Open label
Crohn’s disease
Enteric-coated tablet
Sodium butyrate (4 g per day)
n (13)
8 weeks
Clinical remission in 53% 
of patients
111
Open label
Irritable bowel 
syndrome
Enteric-coated tablet
Sodium butyrate (1 g per day)
n (50)
4 weeks
Improvement in 
diarrhoea-predominant 
irritable bowel syndrome
216
Open label
Crohn’s disease
Enteric-coated tablet
Sodium butyrate (4 g per day)
n (13)
8 weeks
Significant improvement 
of endoscopic and 
clinical scores in 69%  
of subjects
178
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Ulcerative colitis in 
remission
Enema
Sodium butyrate (100 mol l−1)
n (17, 18)
20 days
No change in oxidative 
stress parameters or 
histology
67
Parallel, randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Metabolic syndrome
Enteric-coated tablet
Sodium butyrate (600 mg  
per day), inulin powder, sodium 
butyrate and inulin, placebo
n (15 each)
45 days
Sodium butyrate and 
inulin significantly 
reduced fasting blood 
sugar
140

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
Cardiovascular and metabolic disease, energy metabolism and 
obesity. The relationship among the gut microbiota, dietary fibre and 
SCFAs in metabolic and cardiovascular health has been well reviewed136. 
Systematic reviews have demonstrated an association of dietary fibre 
intake with a lower incidence of coronary artery disease and associated 
mortality114 as well as a reduction in both systolic and diastolic blood 
pressures, although the exact role of SCFAs was not ascertained137. 
Murine studies have also confirmed the beneficial role of a high-fibre 
diet and SCFAs, showing a reduction in systolic and diastolic blood 
pressures, cardiac index and cardiac function138,139. In humans, how-
ever, butyrate supplementation has been reported to both reduce and 
increase blood pressure140,141. A small, randomized placebo-controlled 
trial with oral butyrate also showed a rise in both systolic and diastolic 
blood pressures142. With respect to atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease, SCFA-producing bacteria (including R. intestinalis and F. praus-
nitzii) were less abundant in patients compared with healthy controls 
in a large cohort study143. Propionate has been postulated to have 
parasympathetic effects, and this action has proved beneficial as an 
autonomic rebalancing strategy after myocardial infarction in a mouse 
model144. Butyrate administration has also been found to improve 
cardiac function and prevent ventricular arrythmia in a similar mouse 
model of myocardial infarction145.
Both oral and colonic delivery of SCFAs has been found to impact 
dietary intake, fatty acid oxidation and energy expenditure in 
human subjects and to modulate metabolic health146,147 (Table 2). 
A meta-analysis of SCFAs as anti-inflammatory agents in obesity noted 
a significant decrease in markers of systemic inflammation148. Oral 
butyrate has been tried with little success in metabolic syndrome. 
Butyrate conferred benefits on glucose metabolism in lean individ-
uals but not in subjects with metabolic syndrome, possibly due to 
altered SCFA handling in subjects with insulin resistance149. This was 
confirmed in a randomized placebo-controlled trial of oral butyrate 
in individuals with type 2 diabetes, which showed no improvement in 
metabolic parameters, blood pressure or oxidative stress indices150. 
Another randomized trial with individuals presenting type 1 diabetes 
showed that oral butyrate did not affect innate or adaptive immunity 
in these patients either151. However, butyrate showed a significantly 
higher rate of decrease in body mass index in children with obesity than 
those on placebo, which suggests that this may be an effective treat-
ment of paediatric obesity152. SCFAs have also been postulated to have 
satiety-enhancing properties, which could be the modality of action153.
Respiratory diseases. The ‘hygiene hypothesis’ suggests that exposure 
to microorganisms in early childhood prevents the development of 
allergic disorders in adulthood154, and SCFAs may be involved in the 
underlying mechanisms. The important role of SCFAs in allergic asthma 
has been shown in neonatal mouse models, in which mice fed SCFAs 
had less severe allergic airway disease with attenuated airway hyper-
responsiveness and reduced infiltration of eosinophils155. Treatment 
of mice with vancomycin that depleted butyrate-producing bacteria 
was found to exacerbate allergic airway disease, but subsequent oral 
administration of SCFAs reversed this effect156,157. Despite these murine 
studies, their role in humans is less clear. The PASTURE study group 
analysed faecal SCFA samples from around 300 children in a birth 
cohort and found that children with the highest butyrate levels were 
less likely to have childhood asthma155,158. A recent systematic review 
that included observational and interventional studies showed that 
faecal acetate, propionate and butyrate concentrations in the first 
few years of life had a protective effect against the development of 
childhood asthma132. The role of the gut microbiota and SCFAs in other 
respiratory diseases currently does not have a robust evidence base 
and is reviewed elsewhere159.
Trial
Disease
Formulation and constituents
Number of participants 
(treatment, control)
Duration
Key findings
Refs.
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled 
crossover
Men with obesity
Enema
Short-chain fatty acid mixtures 
(200 mmol l−1)
n (12)
Single 
dose
Increased fat oxidation, 
energy expenditure 
and peptide YY 
concentrations
146,147
Open label
Metabolic syndrome
Enteric-coated tablet
Sodium butyrate (4 g per day)
n (9, 10)
4 weeks
Improved insulin 
sensitivity in lean 
controls but not 
metabolic syndrome
149
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Healthy volunteers
Tablet
Sodium propionate (6,845 mg 
per day)
n (9, 9)
Single 
dose
Improved resting energy 
expenditure and lipid 
oxidation
146
Open label
Ulcerative colitis in 
remission
Microencapsulated tablet
Sodium butyrate (1 g per day)
n (42)
12 months
Maintained remission  
in 64% of patients
217
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Paediatric 
inflammatory bowel 
disease
Enteric-coated tablet
Sodium butyrate (300 mg  
per day)
n (29, 43)
12 weeks
No difference in clinical 
remission
218
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Type 2 diabetes
Tablet
Sodium butyrate (600 mg  
per day)
n (21, 21)
6 weeks
No difference in 
HOMA-IR
150
Randomized 
double-blind 
placebo-controlled
Paediatric obesity
Enteric-coated tablet
Sodium butyrate (800 mg  
per day)
n (27, 27)
6 months
Significant reduction in 
body mass index and 
metabolic parameters
152
HOMA-IR, homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance. aA summary of trials from a search using the string ‘SCFA AND human trials AND rectal enemas OR oral tablet’.
Table 2 (continued) | Summary of selected human trials with short-chain fatty acid formulationsa

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
Neurological diseases. The role of SCFAs in neurological diseases is 
believed to be facilitated via their passage through the blood–brain 
barrier and mediated via GPCRs, HDAC inhibition, neurohumoral and 
immune pathways160. A meta-analysis found alterations in the gut 
microbiota in Alzheimer disease, suggesting an associative role of 
decreased SCFA production in its pathogenesis161. SCFAs have been 
postulated to have a beneficial effect in Alzheimer disease via gene 
expression regulation of Alzheimer disease-related genes, mainte-
nance of blood–brain barrier integrity, reduced neuroinflammation 
and interference with brain amyloid production, as demonstrated in 
several murine studies162,163. The gut microbiota and SCFAs have also 
recently been associated with Parkinson disease164,165. Butyrate and 
propionate supplementation has been shown to exert a protective 
effect against Parkinson disease development in mice166,167. SCFAs may 
also have a role in multiple sclerosis, which is an autoimmune neuro-
inflammatory disease characterized by demyelination and axonal 
damage of the central nervous system. Gut dysbiosis and reduced 
faecal SCFAs have been documented in a cohort of patients with 
multiple sclerosis168. Plasma and faecal propionate levels were low in 
patients with multiple sclerosis and supplementation of oral propion-
ate appeared to be a potent immunomodulatory agent in addition to 
traditional drugs in naive patients with multiple sclerosis169. In a mouse 
model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, oral supple-
mentation with SCFAs also improved outcomes, with both butyrate 
and acetate supplementation reducing demyelination and altering 
neural lipid content170–172.
Therapeutic applications of short-chain fatty acids
The emerging understanding of the role of SCFAs in health and disease 
has paved the way for potential therapeutic interventions, and the 
different approaches are summarized in Fig. 4. The twin challenges of 
drug delivery involve ensuring that SCFAs reach specific regions in the 
gut and have a surrogate measure to confirm their successful convey-
ance. Poor access to the proximal colon, where endogenous SCFAs are 
maximally produced173, and the portal vein, which is the main transport 
blood vessel, makes both assessments very challenging.
SCFAs can be administered directly via rectal enemas or oral 
tablets (Table 2). Rectal infusion of butyrate led to a rapid increase in 
portal and hepatic venous concentrations in a surgical study, confirm-
ing the efficacy of this approach174. Another study showed that distal 
infusion of acetate was more efficacious than proximal delivery175. 
However, oral delivery of tributyrin showed a large degree of interpa-
tient variability in the absorption of the drug176. Microencapsulation 
and enteric-coated versions of butyrate led to a much better delivery 
and may be the preferred option177,178. Other delivery vehicles for SCFAs 
include acylated compounds. High-amylose maize starch acting as an 
SCFA carrier showed significant increases of the respective SCFAs in 
the distal colon in a mouse model179. Both acetylated and butyrylated 
starch was used as vehicles with good effect to prevent type 1 diabetes 
in a mouse model180. Butyrate release was also demonstrated in the 
human colon, and the consumption of butyrylated starch prevented 
the formation of O6-methyl-2-deoxyguanosine DNA adducts on a high 
red meat diet, thus likely reducing the risk of CRC development181,182. 
The potential physiological and microbiological impacts of the reduc-
tion of pH owing to SCFA delivery to the colon have not been fully 
elucidated.
SCFA production can also be stimulated in the gut by consuming 
a fibre-rich diet and/or prebiotics183. A recent meta-analysis, which 
looked at 42 randomized controlled human trials, reported that the 
SCFA profile was not only influenced by type, structure and dose of 
dietary fibre but also by individual characteristics that included gut 
microbiota composition118. Rapid increases in serum levels of SCFAs 
have been noted with ingestion of highly fermentable fibres such as 
inulin and guar gum184,185. The use of probiotics (live organisms) is 
SCFA modulation strategies
Diet and prebiotics
• Fibre-rich diet, non-digestible ingredients
• Stimulate SCFA-producing bacteria
Synbiotics
• Combine prebiotics and probiotics
• Synergistically enhance SCFA 
production
Probiotics
• Live beneficial microorganisms 
including SCFA-producing strains
• Forms: capsules, fermented food
Faecal microbiota transplant
Transfer of stool from a healthy 
donor to restore microbial diversity 
and function
Metabolic engineering of gut microbiota
• Genetically modify probiotics
• Enhance SCFA metabolic pathways
Direct SCFA supplementation
• Oral or enema delivery
• Directly increases SCFA levels
• Target specific gut regions
Fig. 4 | SCFA modulation strategies. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) can be 
delivered directly through oral or rectal formulations, which can target specific 
gastrointestinal sites or act systemically by absorption into the circulation. 
Dietary fibre and prebiotics comprise non-digestible carbohydrates that act 
as substrates for SCFA production by the gut microbiota. Probiotics are live 
microorganisms that have the ability to produce SCFAs and can be delivered 
as isolated strains or in consortia, whereas synbiotics are a combination of 
both prebiotics and probiotics. Faecal microbiota transplantation is a shotgun 
approach that replaces a host’s microbiota with that of a healthy donor. Bacteria 
can be genetically modified to produce SCFAs by insertion of specific genes.
SCFA modulation strategies
Diet and prebiotics
• Fibre-rich diet, non-digestible ingredients
• Stimulate SCFA-producing bacteria
Synbiotics
• Combine prebiotics and probiotics
• Synergistically enhance SCFA 
production
Probiotics
• Live beneficial microorganisms 
including SCFA-producing strains
• Forms: capsules, fermented food
Faecal microbiota transplant
Transfer of stool from a healthy 
donor to restore microbial diversity 
and function
Metabolic engineering of gut microbiota
• Genetically modify probiotics
• Enhance SCFA metabolic pathways
Direct SCFA supplementation
• Oral or enema delivery
• Directly increases SCFA levels
• Target specific gut regions

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
another therapeutic avenue, and a recent review summarized their 
effect on SCFA generation and their impact on intestinal health186. 
Faecal microbiota transplantation is a more shotgun approach to 
change the host microbial composition by transferring a donor’s faecal 
microbiota, with the benefits possibly mediated through the effects of 
enhanced SCFA production187,188.
Understanding the key SCFA synthesis genes has also opened new 
avenues for genetic engineering by providing new targets to create 
‘designer’ symbiotic bacteria189. A cocktail of beneficial SCFA-producing 
bacteria can also be utilized as a multispecies consortium to benefit 
the host190. Taken together, these applications have laid the foundation 
for exploring emerging and potential future approaches that include 
advanced delivery systems for SCFAs, dietary strategies and targeted 
supplements, culminating in personalized medicine strategies that 
will tailor SCFA-based therapies to individual microbiome profiles.
Conclusions and outlook
SCFAs are important mediators of health effects exerted by the gut 
microbiota. We have a good understanding of which microorganisms 
are responsible for the production of different SCFAs, owing in part 
to (meta)genome-based analyses; however, deciphering microbial 
community interactions and the influence of environmental condi-
tions are much more challenging. Many traits that dictate the activ-
ity of individual microorganisms within their ecosystem, such as pH 
tolerance, gene regulation or transporter specificity, cannot easily be 
deducted from genome information and require further research, as 
do microbial interactions during complex whole plant-based insolu-
ble dietary fibre fermentation and the importance of different nutri-
ent niches in the gut191. This is exemplified by a recent study, which 
demonstrated that faecal particle size was counterintuitively not 
dependent on chewing efficiency but on microbiome characteristics, 
with a larger particle size being associated with higher faecal SCFA 
concentrations192. Synthetic consortia are increasingly being used as 
model systems to reveal the microbial metabolic interactions within 
the microbiota193.
There is overwhelming evidence that SCFAs influence many 
aspects of host health, and much progress has been made in recent 
years in deciphering the underlying molecular mechanisms of action, 
which include energy provision, interaction with host receptors and 
epigenetic gene regulation. However, much remains to be explored 
for a fuller understanding of the complex interplay of SCFAs with their 
multiple molecular pathways of action. For example, the overlapping 
actions of different GPCRs are not fully understood and require further 
study in model systems, including the use of knockout or humanized 
animals and synthetic receptor ligands39. SCFAs have been implicated 
in many different aspects of host physiology, including gut motility, 
strengthening of the physical gut barrier, numerous immune interac-
tions and the prevention of diseases including cancer, inflammatory, 
cardiovascular, metabolic and neurological diseases. However, the 
underlying mechanisms often remain obscure, and it is important not 
to confuse association with causation. Owing to the inaccessibility of 
the system and the complexity of host and microbiota, human stud-
ies need to be complemented with in vivo, ex vivo and in vitro model 
systems to further our understanding. We should also be aware that 
much of the work to date is in the context of Westernized diets with 
a much lower fibre content than more traditional diets, which affects 
gut microbiota and SCFA output194–198.
Published online: xx xx xxxx
References
1.	
Gill, S. K., Rossi, M., Bajka, B. & Whelan, K. Dietary fibre in gastrointestinal health and 
disease. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 18, 101–116 (2021).
2.	
Louis, P., Solvang, M., Duncan, S. H., Walker, A. W. & Mukhopadhya, I. Dietary fibre 
complexity and its influence on functional groups of the human gut microbiota.  
Proc. Nutr. Soc. 80, 386–397 (2021).
3.	
Glover, J. S., Ticer, T. D. & Engevik, M. A. Characterizing the mucin-degrading capacity  
of the human gut microbiota. Sci. Rep. 12, 8456 (2022).
4.	
Zhang, D. et al. Short-chain fatty acids in diseases. Cell Commun. Signal. 21, 212  
(2023).
5.	
Hodgkinson, K. et al. Butyrate’s role in human health and the current progress  
towards its clinical application to treat gastrointestinal disease. Clin. Nutr. 42, 61–75 
(2023).
6.	
Drula, E. et al. The carbohydrate-active enzyme database: functions and literature. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 50, D571–D577 (2022).
7.	
Ndeh, D. & Gilbert, H. J. Biochemistry of complex glycan depolymerisation by the human 
gut microbiota. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 42, 146–164 (2018).
8.	
Louis, P. & Flint, H. J. Formation of propionate and butyrate by the human colonic 
microbiota. Environ. Microbiol. 19, 29–41 (2017).
9.	
Frolova, M. S., Suvorova, I. A., Iablokov, S. N., Petrov, S. N. & Rodionov, D. A. Genomic 
reconstruction of short-chain fatty acid production by the human gut microbiota.  
Front. Mol. Biosci. 9, 949563 (2022).  
This study utilizes human faecal metagenomic data sets to perform an in-depth in 
silico analysis of SCFA fermentation pathways in different populations.
10.	
Reichardt, N. et al. Phylogenetic distribution of three pathways for propionate production 
within the human gut microbiota. ISME J. 8, 1323–1335 (2014).
11.	
Bui, T. P. N. et al. Production of butyrate from lysine and the Amadori product 
fructoselysine by a human gut commensal. Nat. Commun. 6, 10062 (2015).
12.	
Louis, P., Duncan, S. H., Sheridan, P. O., Walker, A. W. & Flint, H. J. Microbial lactate 
utilisation and the stability of the gut microbiome. Gut Microbiome 3, e3 (2022).
13.	
Wang, S. P. et al. Pivotal roles for pH, lactate, and lactate-utilizing bacteria in the stability 
of a human colonic microbial ecosystem. mSystems 5, 1–18 (2020).
14.	
Hackmann, T. J. New biochemical pathways for forming short-chain fatty acids during 
fermentation in rumen bacteria. JDS Commun. 5, 230–235 (2024).
15.	
Walker, A. W., Duncan, S. H., McWilliam Leitch, E. C., Child, M. W. & Flint, H. J. pH and 
peptide supply can radically alter bacterial populations and short-chain fatty acid 
ratios within microbial communities from the human colon. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 
3692–3700 (2005).
16.	
Duncan, S. H., Louis, P., Thomson, J. M. & Flint, H. J. The role of pH in determining the 
species composition of the human colonic microbiota. Environ. Microbiol. 11, 2112–2122 
(2009).
17.	
LaBouyer, M. et al. Higher total faecal short-chain fatty acid concentrations correlate with 
increasing proportions of butyrate and decreasing proportions of branched-chain fatty 
acids across multiple human studies. Gut Microbiome 3, e2 (2022).
18.	
Flint, H. J., Louis, P. & Duncan, S. H. Why does increased microbial fermentation in the 
human colon shift toward butyrate? AIMS Microbiol. 10, 311–319 (2024).
19.	
Campbell, A., Gdanetz, K., Schmidt, A. W. & Schmidt, T. M. H2 generated by fermentation 
in the human gut microbiome influences metabolism and competitive fitness of gut 
butyrate producers. Microbiome 11, 133 (2023).
20.	 Joos, R. et al. Examining the healthy human microbiome concept. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 23, 
192–205 (2024).
21.	
Park, S.-Y. et al. Strain-level fitness in the gut microbiome is an emergent property of 
glycans and a single metabolite. Cell 185, 513–529.e21 (2022).  
Using in vitro and in vivo approaches, this study demonstrates the unique fitness 
landscape of different Bacteroides strains based on their response to butyrate in the 
presence of different glycan substrates.
22.	 Chung, W. S. F. et al. Impact of carbohydrate substrate complexity on the diversity of the 
human colonic microbiota. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 95, fiy201 (2019).
23.	 Puhlmann, M.-L. & de Vos, W. M. Intrinsic dietary fibers and the gut microbiome: 
rediscovering the benefits of the plant cell matrix for human health. Front. Immunol. 13, 
954845 (2022).
24.	 So, D. et al. Detection of changes in regional colonic fermentation in response to 
supplementing a low FODMAP diet with dietary fibres by hydrogen concentrations, but 
not by luminal pH. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 58, 417–428 (2023).
25.	 De Paepe, K. et al. Modification of wheat bran particle size and tissue composition affects 
colonisation and metabolism by human faecal microbiota. Food Funct. 10, 379–396 
(2019).
26.	 Solvang, M. et al. Beyond purified dietary fibre supplements: compositional variation 
between cell wall fibre from different plants influences human faecal microbiota activity 
and growth in vitro. Environ. Microbiol. 25, 1484–1504 (2023).
27.	
Puhlmann, M.-L. et al. Analysis of the fermentation kinetics and gut microbiota 
modulatory effect of dried chicory root reveals the impact of the plant–cell matrix 
rationalizing its conversion in the distal colon. Microbiome Res. Rep. 3, 28  
(2024).
28.	 La Rosa, S. L. et al. The human gut Firmicute Roseburia intestinalis is a primary degrader 
of dietary β-mannans. Nat. Commun. 10, 905 (2019).  
This study provides a deep biochemical characterization of Roseburia intestinalis 
β-mannan utilization and reveals its competitive behaviour with other gut bacteria 
both in vitro and in vivo.

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
29.	 Feng, J. et al. Polysaccharide utilization loci in Bacteroides determine population fitness 
and community-level interactions. Cell Host Microbe 30, 200–215.e12 (2022).  
This study reveals the contribution of different polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs) to 
nutrient-dependent fitness of Bacteroides uniformis PUL mutants and demonstrates 
their altered cross-feeding interactions with butyrate-producing bacteria.
30.	 Kettle, H., Louis, P. & Flint, H. J. Process-based modelling of microbial community 
dynamics in the human colon. J. R. Soc. Interface 19, 20220489 (2022).
31.	
Quinn-Bohmann, N. et al. Microbial community-scale metabolic modelling predicts 
personalized short-chain fatty acid production profiles in the human gut. Nat. Microbiol. 
9, 1700–1712 (2024).
32.	 Gibbons, S. M. et al. Perspective: leveraging the gut microbiota to predict personalized 
responses to dietary, prebiotic, and probiotic interventions. Adv. Nutr. 13, 1450–1461 
(2022).
33.	 Cummings, J. H., Pomare, E. W., Branch, W. J., Naylor, C. P. & Macfarlane, G. T. Short chain 
fatty acids in human large intestine, portal, hepatic and venous blood. Gut 28, 1221–1227 
(1987).
34.	 Fagundes, R. R. et al. Beyond butyrate: microbial fiber metabolism supporting colonic 
epithelial homeostasis. Trends Microbiol. 32, 178–189 (2024).
35.	 Stumpff, F. A look at the smelly side of physiology: transport of short chain fatty acids. 
Pflugers Arch. 470, 571–598 (2018).
36.	 Wang, Q. & Mackay, C. R. High metabolite concentrations in portal venous blood as a 
possible mechanism for microbiota effects on the immune system and Western diseases. 
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 153, 980–982 (2024).
37.	
O’Riordan, K. J. et al. Short chain fatty acids: microbial metabolites for gut–brain axis 
signalling. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 546, 111572 (2022).
38.	 Sukkar, A. H., Lett, A. M., Frost, G. & Chambers, E. S. Regulation of energy expenditure 
and substrate oxidation by short-chain fatty acids. J. Endocrinol. 242, R1–R8 (2019).
39.	 Priyadarshini, M., Kotlo, K. U., Dudeja, P. K. & Layden, B. T. Role of short chain fatty acid 
receptors in intestinal physiology and pathophysiology. Compr. Physiol. 8, 1091–1115 
(2018).
40.	 Kimura, I., Ichimura, A., Ohue-Kitano, R. & Igarashi, M. Free fatty acid receptors in health 
and disease. Physiol. Rev. 100, 171–210 (2020).
41.	
Barki, N. et al. Phosphorylation bar-coding of free fatty acid receptor 2 is generated in a 
tissue-specific manner. eLife 12, RP91861 (2023).
42.	 Bolognini, D., Tobin, A. B., Milligan, G. & Moss, C. E. The pharmacology and function of 
receptors for short-chain fatty acids. Mol. Pharmacol. 89, 388–398 (2016).
43.	 Stein, R. A. & Riber, L. Epigenetic effects of short-chain fatty acids from the large intestine 
on host cells. Microlife 4, uqad032 (2023).
44.	 Sarkar, S. et al. Histone deacetylase inhibitors reverse CpG methylation by regulating 
DNMT1 through ERK signaling. Anticancer Res. 31, 2723–2732 (2011).
45.	 Steliou, K., Boosalis, M. S., Perrine, S. P., Sangerman, J. & Faller, D. V. Butyrate histone 
deacetylase inhibitors. Biores. Open Access 1, 192–198 (2012).
46.	 He, J. et al. Short-chain fatty acids and their association with signalling pathways in 
inflammation, glucose and lipid metabolism. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 6356 (2020).
47.	
Rekha, K. et al. Short-chain fatty acid: an updated review on signaling, metabolism, and 
therapeutic effects. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 64, 2461–2489 (2024).
48.	 Donohoe, D. R. et al. The Warburg effect dictates the mechanism of butyrate-mediated 
histone acetylation and cell proliferation. Mol. Cell 48, 612–626 (2012).
49.	 Moffett, J. R., Puthillathu, N., Vengilote, R., Jaworski, D. M. & Namboodiri, A. M. Acetate 
revisited: a key biomolecule at the nexus of metabolism, epigenetics and oncogenesis — 
part 1: acetyl-CoA, acetogenesis and acyl-CoA short-chain synthetases. Front. Physiol. 11, 
580167 (2020).
50.	 Chen, Y. et al. Lysine propionylation and butyrylation are novel post-translational 
modifications in histones. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 6, 812–819 (2007).
51.	
Fellows, R. et al. Microbiota derived short chain fatty acids promote histone crotonylation 
in the colon through histone deacetylases. Nat. Commun. 9, 105 (2018).
52.	 Martin-Gallausiaux, C., Marinelli, L., Blottière, H. M., Larraufie, P. & Lapaque, N. SCFA: 
mechanisms and functional importance in the gut. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 80, 37–49 (2021).
53.	 Modoux, M. et al. Butyrate acts through HDAC inhibition to enhance aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor activation by gut microbiota-derived ligands. Gut Microbes 14, 2105637 (2022).
54.	 Peng, Y. & Croce, C. M. The role of microRNAs in human cancer. Signal Transduct. Target. 
Ther. 1, 1–9 (2016).
55.	 Hu, S. et al. The microbe-derived short chain fatty acid butyrate targets 
miRNA-dependent p21 gene expression in human colon cancer. PLoS ONE 6, e16221 
(2011).
56.	 Bishop, K. S., Xu, H. & Marlow, G. Epigenetic regulation of gene expression induced 
by butyrate in colorectal cancer: involvement of microRNA. Genet. Epigenet. 9, 
1179237X17729900 (2017).
57.	
Shealy, N. G., Yoo, W. & Byndloss, M. X. Colonization resistance: metabolic warfare as a 
strategy against pathogenic Enterobacteriaceae. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 64, 82–90 (2021).
58.	 Shelton, C. D. et al. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium uses anaerobic respiration 
to overcome propionate-mediated colonization resistance. Cell Rep. 38, 110180 (2022).
59.	 Whisner, C. M. & Castillo, L. F. Prebiotics, bone and mineral metabolism. Calcif. Tissue Int. 
102, 443–479 (2018).
60.	 Hyland, N. P. & Cryan, J. F. Microbe–host interactions: influence of the gut microbiota on 
the enteric nervous system. Dev. Biol. 417, 182–187 (2016).
61.	
Anitha, M., Vijay-Kumar, M., Sitaraman, S. V., Gewirtz, A. T. & Srinivasan, S. Gut microbial 
products regulate murine gastrointestinal motility via toll-like receptor 4 signaling. 
Gastroenterology 143, 1006–1016.e4 (2012).
62.	 Zheng, Z., Tang, J., Hu, Y. & Zhang, W. Role of gut microbiota-derived signals in the 
regulation of gastrointestinal motility. Front. Med. 9, 961703 (2022).
63.	 Sun, Q., Jia, Q., Song, L. & Duan, L. Alterations in fecal short-chain fatty acids in patients 
with irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine 98, 
e14513 (2019).
64.	 Burger-van Paassen, N. et al. The regulation of intestinal mucin MUC2 expression by 
short-chain fatty acids: implications for epithelial protection. Biochem. J. 420, 211–219 
(2009).
65.	 Willemsen, L. E., Koetsier, M. A., van Deventer, S. J. & van Tol, E. A. Short chain fatty acids 
stimulate epithelial mucin 2 expression through differential effects on prostaglandin E(1) 
and E(2) production by intestinal myofibroblasts. Gut 52, 1442–1447 (2003).
66.	 Gaudier, E., Rival, M., Buisine, M. P., Robineau, I. & Hoebler, C. Butyrate enemas 
upregulate Muc genes expression but decrease adherent mucus thickness in mice 
colon. Physiol. Res. 58, 111–119 (2009).
67.	
Hamer, H. M. et al. Effect of butyrate enemas on inflammation and antioxidant status in 
the colonic mucosa of patients with ulcerative colitis in remission. Clin. Nutr. 29, 738–744 
(2010).
68.	 Peng, L., He, Z., Chen, W., Holzman, I. R. & Lin, J. Effects of butyrate on intestinal barrier 
function in a Caco-2 cell monolayer model of intestinal barrier. Pediatr. Res. 61, 37–41 
(2007).
69.	 Cresci, G. A. et al. Prophylactic tributyrin treatment mitigates chronic-binge 
ethanol-induced intestinal barrier and liver injury. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 32, 
1587–1597 (2017).
70.	 Tabat, M. W. et al. Acute effects of butyrate on induced hyperpermeability and tight 
junction protein expression in human colonic tissues. Biomolecules 10, 766 (2020).
71.	
Vancamelbeke, M. et al. Butyrate does not protect against inflammation-induced loss 
of epithelial barrier function and cytokine production in primary cell monolayers from 
patients with ulcerative colitis. J. Crohns Colitis 13, 1351–1361 (2019).
72.	 Liu, T. et al. Short-chain fatty acids suppress lipopolysaccharide-induced production 
of nitric oxide and proinflammatory cytokines through inhibition of NF-κB pathway in 
RAW264.7 cells. Inflammation 35, 1676–1684 (2012).
73.	 Schulthess, J. et al. The short chain fatty acid butyrate imprints an antimicrobial program 
in macrophages. Immunity 50, 432–445.e7 (2019).  
This study provides the mechanistic pathway by which butyrate induces the 
differentiation of macrophages to exert their antimicrobial function.
74.	 Ji, J. et al. Microbial metabolite butyrate facilitates M2 macrophage polarization and 
function. Sci. Rep. 6, 24838 (2016).
75.	 Wang, Z. et al. Inulin alleviates inflammation of alcoholic liver disease via 
SCFAs-inducing suppression of M1 and facilitation of M2 macrophages in mice.  
Int. Immunopharmacol. 78, 106062 (2020).
76.	 Aguilar, E. C. et al. Butyrate impairs atherogenesis by reducing plaque inflammation and 
vulnerability and decreasing NFκB activation. Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 24, 606–613 
(2014).
77.	
Zapolska-Downar, D., Siennicka, A., Kaczmarczyk, M., Kolodziej, B. & Naruszewicz, M.  
Butyrate inhibits cytokine-induced VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 expression in cultured 
endothelial cells: the role of NF-kappaB and PPARalpha. J. Nutr. Biochem. 15, 220–228 
(2004).
78.	 Mills, S. W., Montgomery, S. H. & Morck, D. W. Evaluation of the effects of short-chain 
fatty acids and extracellular pH on bovine neutrophil function in vitro. Am. J. Vet. Res. 67, 
1901–1907 (2006).
79.	 Li, G. et al. Microbiota metabolite butyrate constrains neutrophil functions and 
ameliorates mucosal inflammation in inflammatory bowel disease. Gut Microbes 13, 
1968257 (2021).  
This study shows that butyrate inhibited the ability of neutrophils isolated from 
patients with IBD to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines and suppressed neutrophil 
migration and formation of neutrophil extracellular traps.
80.	 Aoyama, M., Kotani, J. & Usami, M. Butyrate and propionate induced activated or 
non-activated neutrophil apoptosis via HDAC inhibitor activity but without activating 
GPR-41/GPR-43 pathways. Nutrition 26, 653–661 (2010).
81.	
Liu, B. et al. Butyrate protects rat liver against total hepatic ischemia reperfusion injury 
with bowel congestion. PLoS ONE 9, e106184 (2014).
82.	 Simeoli, R. et al. An orally administered butyrate-releasing derivative reduces neutrophil 
recruitment and inflammation in dextran sulphate sodium-induced murine colitis.  
Br. J. Pharmacol. 174, 1484–1496 (2017).
83.	 Liu, L. et al. Butyrate interferes with the differentiation and function of human 
monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Cell. Immunol. 277, 66–73 (2012).
84.	 Kaisar, M. M. M., Pelgrom, L. R., van der Ham, A. J., Yazdanbakhsh, M. & Everts, B. Butyrate 
conditions human dendritic cells to prime type 1 regulatory T cells via both histone 
deacetylase inhibition and G protein-coupled receptor 109A signaling. Front. Immunol. 
8, 1429 (2017).
85.	 Nastasi, C. et al. The effect of short-chain fatty acids on human monocyte-derived 
dendritic cells. Sci. Rep. 5, 16148 (2015).
86.	 Tao, R. et al. Deacetylase inhibition promotes the generation and function of regulatory 
T cells. Nat. Med. 13, 1299–1307 (2007).
87.	
Arpaia, N. et al. Metabolites produced by commensal bacteria promote peripheral 
regulatory T-cell generation. Nature 504, 451–455 (2013).
88.	 Park, J. et al. Short-chain fatty acids induce both effector and regulatory T cells by 
suppression of histone deacetylases and regulation of the mTOR–S6K pathway.  
Mucosal Immunol. 8, 80–93 (2015).

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
89.	 Kespohl, M. et al. The microbial metabolite butyrate induces expression of Th1-associated  
factors in CD4(+) T cells. Front. Immunol. 8, 1036 (2017).
90.	 Luu, M. et al. Regulation of the effector function of CD8(+) T cells by gut microbiota- 
derived metabolite butyrate. Sci. Rep. 8, 14430 (2018).
91.	
Kim, M., Qie, Y., Park, J. & Kim, C. H. Gut microbial metabolites fuel host antibody 
responses. Cell Host Microbe 20, 202–214 (2016).
92.	 Wu, W. et al. Microbiota metabolite short-chain fatty acid acetate promotes intestinal IgA 
response to microbiota which is mediated by GPR43. Mucosal Immunol. 10, 946–956 
(2017).
93.	 Sanchez, H. N. et al. B cell-intrinsic epigenetic modulation of antibody responses by 
dietary fiber-derived short-chain fatty acids. Nat. Commun. 11, 60 (2020).
94.	 Luu, M., Monning, H. & Visekruna, A. Exploring the molecular mechanisms underlying 
the protective effects of microbial SCFAs on intestinal tolerance and food allergy.  
Front. Immunol. 11, 1225 (2020).
95.	 Daien, C. I. et al. Gut-derived acetate promotes B10 cells with antiinflammatory effects.  
JCI Insight 6, e144156 (2021).  
This study shows that acetate induces proliferation of IL-10 producing regulatory B cells 
(B10 cells) in both in vivo and in vitro models, outlining its anti-inflammatory role.
96.	 Cong, J., Zhou, P. & Zhang, R. Intestinal microbiota-derived short chain fatty acids in host 
health and disease. Nutrients 14, 1977 (2022).
97.	
Mukhopadhya, I., Hansen, R., El-Omar, E. M. & Hold, G. L. IBD — what role do 
Proteobacteria play? Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9, 219–230 (2012).
98.	 Machiels, K. et al. A decrease of the butyrate-producing species Roseburia hominis and 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii defines dysbiosis in patients with ulcerative colitis. Gut 63, 
1275–1283 (2014).
99.	 Kowalska-Duplaga, K. et al. Differences in the intestinal microbiome of healthy children 
and patients with newly diagnosed Crohn’s disease. Sci. Rep. 9, 18880 (2019).
100.	 Laserna-Mendieta, E. J. et al. Determinants of reduced genetic capacity for butyrate 
synthesis by the gut microbiome in Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. J. Crohns 
Colitis 12, 204–216 (2018).
101.	 Xu, H. M. et al. Characterization of short-chain fatty acids in patients with ulcerative 
colitis: a meta-analysis. BMC Gastroenterol. 22, 117 (2022).  
This meta-analysis of 11 studies shows that patients with ulcerative colitis had 
significantly decreased concentration of acetate and propionate as opposed to 
healthy controls.
102.	 De Preter, V. et al. Kinetics of butyrate metabolism in the normal colon and in ulcerative 
colitis: the effects of substrate concentration and carnitine on the β‐oxidation pathway. 
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 34, 526–532 (2011).
103.	 Ferrer-Picón, E. et al. Intestinal inflammation modulates the epithelial response to 
butyrate in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 26, 43–55 
(2020).
104.	 Starr, A. E. et al. Associations between cellular energy and pediatric inflammatory bowel 
disease patient response to treatment. J. Proteome Res. 20, 4393–4404 (2021).
105.	 Kaczmarczyk, O. et al. Altered fecal short-chain fatty acid profile as a potential marker  
of disease activity in patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease: a pilot study. 
Pol. Arch. Intern. Med. 132, 16254 (2022).
106.	 Zhuang, X. et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis: short-chain fatty acid 
characterization in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 25, 
1751–1763 (2019).
107.	 Vernia, P. et al. Short‐chain fatty acid topical treatment in distal ulcerative colitis.  
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 9, 309–313 (1995).
108.	 Scheppach, W. et al. Effect of butyrate enemas on the colonic mucosa in distal ulcerative 
colitis. Gastroenterology 103, 51–56 (1992).
109.	 Lührs, H. et al. Butyrate inhibits NF-κB activation in lamina propria macrophages of 
patients with ulcerative colitis. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 37, 458–466 (2002).
110.	 Jamka, M. et al. The effect of sodium butyrate enemas compared with placebo on 
disease activity, endoscopic scores, and histological and inflammatory parameters 
in inflammatory bowel diseases: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. 
Complement. Med. Res. 28, 344–356 (2021).
111.	 Sabatino, A. et al. Oral butyrate for mildly to moderately active Crohn’s disease.  
Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 22, 789–794 (2005).
112.	 Vernia, P. et al. Combined oral sodium butyrate and mesalazine treatment compared to 
oral mesalazine alone in ulcerative colitis. Dig. Dis. Sci. 45, 976–981 (2000).
113.	 Bray, F. et al. Global Cancer Statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and 
mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J. Clin. 68, 394–424 
(2018).
114.	 Reynolds, A. et al. Carbohydrate quality and human health: a series of systematic reviews 
and meta-analyses. Lancet 393, 434–445 (2019).
115.	 Bingham, S. A. et al. Dietary fibre in food and protection against colorectal cancer in the 
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC): an observational 
study. Lancet 361, 1496–1501 (2003).
116.	 Yusuf, F., Adewiah, S., Syam, A. F. & Fatchiyah, F. Altered profile of gut microbiota and the 
level short chain fatty acids in colorectal cancer patients. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 1146, 012037 
(2019).
117.	 Shuwen, H. et al. Protective effect of the ‘food–microorganism–SCFAs’ axis on colorectal 
cancer: from basic research to practical application. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 145, 
2169–2197 (2019).
118.	 Vinelli, V. et al. Effects of dietary fibers on short-chain fatty acids and gut microbiota 
composition in healthy adults: a systematic review. Nutrients 14, 2559 (2022).
119.	 Gold, A., Choueiry, F., Jin, N., Mo, X. & Zhu, J. The application of metabolomics in recent 
colorectal cancer studies: a state-of-the-art review. Cancers 14, 725 (2022).
120.	 Louis, P., Hold, G. L. & Flint, H. J. The gut microbiota, bacterial metabolites and colorectal 
cancer. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 661–672 (2014).
121.	 Scharlau, D. et al. Mechanisms of primary cancer prevention by butyrate and other 
products formed during gut flora-mediated fermentation of dietary fibre. Mutat. Res. 
682, 39–53 (2009).
122.	 Kim, Y.-H., Park, J.-W., Lee, J.-Y. & Kwon, T. K. Sodium butyrate sensitizes TRAIL-mediated 
apoptosis by induction of transcription from the DR5 gene promoter through Sp1 sites in 
colon cancer cells. Carcinogenesis 25, 1813–1820 (2004).
123.	 Waby, J. S. et al. Sp1 acetylation is associated with loss of DNA binding at promoters 
associated with cell cycle arrest and cell death in a colon cell line. Mol. Cancer 9, 1–16 
(2010).
124.	 Eslami, M. et al. Importance of the microbiota inhibitory mechanism on the Warburg 
effect in colorectal cancer cells. J. Gastrointest. Cancer 51, 738–747 (2020).
125.	 Luo, Q., Zhou, P., Chang, S., Huang, Z. & Zeng, X. Characterization of butyrate- 
metabolism in colorectal cancer to guide clinical treatment. Sci. Rep. 13, 5106 (2023).  
This study utilizes expression of butyrate metabolism-related genes in CRC samples 
to develop a risk prognostic model that could forecast the response of these patients 
to immunotherapy and chemotherapy.
126.	 Ho, M. H.-K., Wong, W. H.-S. & Chang, C. Clinical spectrum of food allergies:  
a comprehensive review. Clin. Rev. Allergy Immunol. 46, 225–240 (2014).
127.	 Sicherer, S. H. & Sampson, H. A. Food allergy: epidemiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, 
and treatment. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 133, 291–307.e5 (2014).
128.	 Stefka, A. T. et al. Commensal bacteria protect against food allergen sensitization.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 13145–13150 (2014).
129.	 Liu, S., Yang, B., Yang, P. & Liu, Z. Herbal formula-3 ameliorates OVA-induced food  
allergy in mice may via modulating the gut microbiota. Am. J. Transl. Res. 11, 5812–5823 
(2019).
130.	 Takahashi, H. et al. Combined oral intake of short and long fructans alters the gut 
microbiota in food allergy model mice and contributes to food allergy prevention.  
BMC Microbiol. 23, 266 (2023).
131.	 De Paepe, E., Van Gijseghem, L., De Spiegeleer, M., Cox, E. & Vanhaecke, L. A systematic 
review of metabolic alterations underlying IgE‐mediated food allergy in children.  
Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 65, e2100536 (2021).
132.	 Sasaki, M. et al. Systematic review of the association between short‐chain fatty acids and 
allergic diseases. Allergy 79, 1789–1811 (2024).
133.	 Son, M.-Y. & Cho, H.-S. Anticancer effects of gut microbiota-derived short-chain fatty 
acids in cancers. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 33, 849–856 (2023).
134.	 Yang, Q. et al. A review of gut microbiota‐derived metabolites in tumor progression and 
cancer therapy. Adv. Sci. 10, e2207366 (2023).
135.	 Sun, J. et al. Butyrate as a promising therapeutic target in cancer: from pathogenesis to 
clinic (review). Int. J. Oncol. 64, 44 (2024).
136.	 Mayorga-Ramos, A., Barba-Ostria, C., Simancas-Racines, D. & Guamán, L. P. Protective 
role of butyrate in obesity and diabetes: new insights. Front. Nutr. 9, 1067647 (2022).
137.	 Evans, C. E. L. et al. Effects of dietary fibre type on blood pressure. J. Hypertens. 33, 
897–911 (2015).
138.	 Marques, F. Z. et al. High-fiber diet and acetate supplementation change the gut 
microbiota and prevent the development of hypertension and heart failure in 
hypertensive mice. Circulation 135, 964–977 (2017).
139.	 Karbach, S. H. et al. Gut microbiota promote angiotensin II-induced arterial hypertension 
and vascular dysfunction. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 5, e003698 (2016).
140.	 Roshanravan, N. et al. Effect of butyrate and inulin supplementation on glycemic 
status, lipid profile and glucagon-like peptide 1 level in patients with type 2 diabetes: 
a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Horm. Metab. Res. 49, 886–891 
(2017).
141.	 Verhaar, B. et al. Oral sodium butyrate increases daytime systolic blood pressure  
in hypertensive patients: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.  
J. Hypertens. 41, e77 (2023).
142.	 Verhaar, B. J. H. et al. Effects of oral butyrate on blood pressure in patients with 
hypertension: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Hypertension 81, 2124–2136 
(2024).
143.	 Jie, Z. et al. The gut microbiome in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Nat. Commun. 
8, 845 (2017).
144.	 Zhou, M. et al. The short-chain fatty acid propionate improved ventricular electrical 
remodeling in a rat model with myocardial infarction. Food Funct. 12, 12580–12593 
(2021).
145.	 Jiang, X., Huang, X., Tong, Y. & Gao, H. Butyrate improves cardiac function and 
sympathetic neural remodeling following myocardial infarction in rats. Can. J. Physiol. 
Pharmacol. 98, 391–399 (2020).
146.	 Chambers, E. S. et al. Acute oral sodium propionate supplementation raises resting 
energy expenditure and lipid oxidation in fasted humans. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 20, 
1034–1039 (2018).
147.	 Canfora, E. E. et al. Colonic infusions of short-chain fatty acid mixtures promote energy 
metabolism in overweight/obese men: a randomized crossover trial. Sci. Rep. 7, 2360 
(2017).
148.	 Eslick, S., Thompson, C., Berthon, B. & Wood, L. Short-chain fatty acids as 
anti-inflammatory agents in overweight and obesity: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Nutr. Rev. 80, 838–856 (2022).

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
149.	 Bouter, K. E. C. et al. Differential metabolic effects of oral butyrate treatment in lean 
versus metabolic syndrome subjects. Clin. Transl. Gastroenterol. 9, e155 (2018).
150.	 Khosravi, Z. et al. The effects of butyrate supplementation on glycemic control, lipid 
profile, blood pressure, nitric oxide level and glutathione peroxidase activity in type 2 
diabetic patients: a randomized triple-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Clin. Nutr. ESPEN 
49, 79–85 (2022).
151.	 de Groot, P. F. et al. Oral butyrate does not affect innate immunity and islet autoimmunity 
in individuals with longstanding type 1 diabetes: a randomised controlled trial. 
Diabetologia 63, 597–610 (2020).
152.	 Coppola, S. et al. Therapeutic effects of butyrate on pediatric obesity: a randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA Netw. Open 5, e2244912 (2022).
153.	 Byrne, C. S., Chambers, E. S., Morrison, D. J. & Frost, G. The role of short chain fatty acids 
in appetite regulation and energy homeostasis. Int. J. Obes. 39, 1331–1338 (2015).
154.	 Haspeslagh, E., Heyndrickx, I., Hammad, H. & Lambrecht, B. N. The hygiene hypothesis: 
immunological mechanisms of airway tolerance. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 54, 102–108 
(2018).
155.	 Roduit, C. et al. High levels of butyrate and propionate in early life are associated with 
protection against atopy. Allergy 74, 799–809 (2019).
156.	 Russell, S. L. et al. Early life antibiotic‐driven changes in microbiota enhance 
susceptibility to allergic asthma. EMBO Rep. 13, 440–447 (2012).
157.	 Cait, A. et al. Microbiome-driven allergic lung inflammation is ameliorated by short-chain 
fatty acids. Mucosal Immunol. 11, 785–795 (2018).
158.	 Depner, M. et al. Maturation of the gut microbiome during the first year of life contributes 
to the protective farm effect on childhood asthma. Nat. Med. 26, 1766–1775 (2020).
159.	 Verma, A. et al. Short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) as a connecting link between microbiota 
and gut–lung axis — a potential therapeutic intervention to improve lung health.  
ACS Omega 9, 14648–14671 (2024).
160.	 Mirzaei, R. et al. Role of microbiota-derived short-chain fatty acids in nervous system 
disorders. Biomed. Pharmacother. 139, 111661 (2021).
161.	 Li, H. et al. Gut microbiota changes in patients with Alzheimer’s disease spectrum based 
on 16S rRNA sequencing: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front. Aging Neurosci. 
16, 1422350 (2024).
162.	 Matt, S. M. et al. Butyrate and dietary soluble fiber improve neuroinflammation 
associated with aging in mice. Front. Immunol. 9, 1832 (2018).
163.	 Fernando, W. M. A. D. B. et al. Sodium butyrate reduces brain amyloid-β levels and 
improves cognitive memory performance in an Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mouse 
model at an early disease stage. J. Alzheimers Dis. 74, 91–99 (2020).
164.	 Nishiwaki, H. et al. Meta‐analysis of gut dysbiosis in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 35, 
1626–1635 (2020).
165.	 Nishiwaki, H. et al. Meta-analysis of shotgun sequencing of gut microbiota in Parkinson’s 
disease. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 10, 106 (2024).
166.	 Liu, J. et al. Sodium butyrate exerts protective effect against Parkinson’s disease in mice 
via stimulation of glucagon like peptide-1. J. Neurol. Sci. 381, 176–181 (2017).
167.	 Guo, T.-T. et al. Neuroprotective effects of sodium butyrate by restoring gut microbiota 
and inhibiting TLR4 signaling in mice with MPTP-induced Parkinson’s disease. Nutrients 
15, 930 (2023).
168.	 Zeng, Q. et al. Gut dysbiosis and lack of short chain fatty acids in a Chinese cohort  
of patients with multiple sclerosis. Neurochem. Int. 129, 104468 (2019).
169.	 Duscha, A. et al. Propionic acid shapes the multiple sclerosis disease course by an 
immunomodulatory mechanism. Cell 180, 1067–1080.e16 (2020).
170.	 Chen, T., Noto, D., Hoshino, Y., Mizuno, M. & Miyake, S. Butyrate suppresses 
demyelination and enhances remyelination. J. Neuroinflammation 16, 1–13 (2019).
171.	 Chevalier, A. C. & Rosenberger, T. A. Increasing acetyl‐CoA metabolism attenuates injury 
and alters spinal cord lipid content in mice subjected to experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis. J. Neurochem. 141, 721–737 (2017).
172.	 Mizuno, M., Noto, D., Kaga, N., Chiba, A. & Miyake, S. The dual role of short fatty acid 
chains in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease models. PLoS ONE 12, e0173032 
(2017).
173.	 Macfarlane, G. T., Gibson, G. R. & Cummings, J. H. Comparison of fermentation reactions 
in different regions of the human colon. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 72, 57–64 (1992).
174.	 van der Beek, C. M. et al. Hepatic uptake of rectally administered butyrate prevents an 
increase in systemic butyrate concentrations in humans. J. Nutr. 145, 2019–2024 (2015).
175.	 van der Beek, C. M. et al. Distal, not proximal, colonic acetate infusions promote fat 
oxidation and improve metabolic markers in overweight/obese men. Clin. Sci. 130, 
2073–2082 (2016).
176.	 Edelman, M. J. et al. Clinical and pharmacologic study of tributyrin: an oral butyrate 
prodrug. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 51, 439–444 (2003).
177.	 Donovan, J. D., Bauer, L., Fahey, G. C. & Lee, Y. In vitro digestion and fermentation of 
microencapsulated tributyrin for the delivery of butyrate. J. Food Sci. 82, 1491–1499 
(2017).
178.	 Di Sabatino, A. et al. Efficacy of butyrate in the treatment of mild to moderate Crohn’s 
disease. Dig. Liver Dis. Suppl. 1, 31–35 (2007).
179.	 Annison, G., Illman, R. J. & Topping, D. L. Acetylated, propionylated or butyrylated 
starches raise large bowel short-chain fatty acids preferentially when fed to rats. J. Nutr. 
133, 3523–3528 (2003).
180.	 Mariño, E. et al. Gut microbial metabolites limit the frequency of autoimmune T cells and 
protect against type 1 diabetes. Nat. Immunol. 18, 552–562 (2017).
181.	 Clarke, J. M. et al. Butyrate esterified to starch is released in the human gastrointestinal 
tract. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 94, 1276–1283 (2011).
182.	 Le Leu, R. K. et al. Butyrylated starch intake can prevent red meat-induced O6-methyl-2-
deoxyguanosine adducts in human rectal tissue: a randomised clinical trial. Br. J. Nutr. 
114, 220–230 (2015).
183.	 Hutkins, R. et al. Classifying compounds as prebiotics — scientific perspectives and 
recommendations. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 22, 54–70 (2025).
184.	 Wolever, T. M., ter Wal, P., Spadafora, P. & Robb, P. Guar, but not psyllium, increases 
breath methane and serum acetate concentrations in human subjects. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 
55, 719–722 (1992).
185.	 Rahat-Rozenbloom, S., Fernandes, J., Cheng, J., Gloor, G. B. & Wolever, T. M. S. The acute 
effects of inulin and resistant starch on postprandial serum short-chain fatty acids and 
second-meal glycemic response in lean and overweight humans. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 71, 
227–233 (2017).
186.	 Markowiak-Kopeć, P. & Śliżewska, K. The effect of probiotics on the production of 
short-chain fatty acids by human intestinal microbiome. Nutrients 12, 1107 (2020).
187.	 El-Salhy, M., Valeur, J., Hausken, T. & Gunnar Hatlebakk, J. Changes in fecal short-chain 
fatty acids following fecal microbiota transplantation in patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 33, e13983 (2021).
188.	 Smits, L. P., Bouter, K. E. C., de Vos, W. M., Borody, T. J. & Nieuwdorp, M. Therapeutic 
potential of fecal microbiota transplantation. Gastroenterology 145, 946–953 (2013).
189.	 Arnold, J., Glazier, J. & Mimee, M. Genetic engineering of resident bacteria in the gut 
microbiome. J. Bacteriol. 205, e0012723 (2023).  
This mini-review highlights recent progress in genetic engineering to create designer 
bacteria that produce metabolites capable of impacting host health and creating 
novel biotherapeutics.
190.	 Vázquez-Castellanos, J. F., Biclot, A., Vrancken, G., Huys, G. R. & Raes, J. Design of 
synthetic microbial consortia for gut microbiota modulation. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 49, 
52–59 (2019).
191.	 Pereira, F. C. & Berry, D. Microbial nutrient niches in the gut. Environ. Microbiol. 19, 
1366–1378 (2017).
192.	 Letourneau, J. et al. Interplay between particle size and microbial ecology in the gut 
microbiome. ISME J. 18, wrae168 (2024).
193.	 Shetty, S. A. et al. Dynamic metabolic interactions and trophic roles of human gut 
microbes identified using a minimal microbiome exhibiting ecological properties.  
ISME J. 16, 2144–2159 (2022).
194.	 O’Keefe, S. J. D. et al. Fat, fibre and cancer risk in African Americans and rural Africans. 
Nat. Commun. 6, 6342 (2015).
195.	 Tannock, G. W. Understanding the gut microbiota by considering human evolution: 
a story of fire, cereals, cooking, molecular ingenuity, and functional cooperation. 
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 88, e0012722 (2024).
196.	 Sonnenburg, E. D. & Sonnenburg, J. L. The ancestral and industrialized gut microbiota 
and implications for human health. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17, 383–390 (2019).
197.	 O’Keefe, S. J. The association between dietary fibre deficiency and high-income 
lifestyle-associated diseases: Burkitt’s hypothesis revisited. Lancet Gastroenterol. 
Hepatol. 4, 984–996 (2019).
198.	 Ramsteijn, A. S. & Louis, P. Dietary fibre optimisation in support of global health.  
Microb. Biotechnol. 17, e14542 (2024).
199.	 Taras, D., Simmering, R., Collins, M. D., Lawson, P. A. & Blaut, M. Reclassification of 
Eubacterium formicigenerans Holdeman and Moore 1974 as Dorea formicigenerans  
gen. nov., comb. nov., and description of Dorea longicatena sp. nov., isolated from 
human faeces. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 52, 423–428 (2002).
200.	Holdeman, L. V. & Moore, W. E. C. New genus, Coprococcus, twelve new species, and 
emended descriptions of four previously described species of bacteria from human 
feces. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 24, 260–277 (1974).
201.	 Togo, A. H. et al. Description of Mediterraneibacter massiliensis, gen. nov., sp. nov., a 
new genus isolated from the gut microbiota of an obese patient and reclassification of 
Ruminococcus faecis, Ruminococcus lactaris, Ruminococcus torques, Ruminococcus 
gnavus and Clostridium glycyrrhizinilyticum as Mediterraneibacter faecis comb. 
nov., Mediterraneibacter lactaris comb. nov., Mediterraneibacter torques comb. nov., 
Mediterraneibacter gnavus comb. nov. and Mediterraneibacter glycyrrhizinilyticus comb. 
nov. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 111, 2107–2128 (2018).
202.	Flaiz, M. et al. Refining and illuminating acetogenic Eubacterium strains for 
reclassification and metabolic engineering. Microb. Cell Fact. 23, 24 (2024).
203.	Trischler, R., Roth, J., Sorbara, M. T., Schlegel, X. & Müller, V. A functional 
Wood–Ljungdahl pathway devoid of a formate dehydrogenase in the gut acetogens 
Blautia wexlerae, Blautia luti and beyond. Environ. Microbiol. 24, 3111–3123 (2022).
204.	Zhang, B., Lingga, C., De Groot, H. & Hackmann, T. J. The oxidoreductase activity of Rnf 
balances redox cofactors during fermentation of glucose to propionate in Prevotella.  
Sci. Rep. 13, 16429 (2023).
205.	Robert, C. & Bernalier-Donadille, A. The cellulolytic microflora of the human colon: 
evidence of microcrystalline cellulose-degrading bacteria in methane-excreting 
subjects. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 46, 81–89 (2003).
206.	Kettle, H., Louis, P., Holtrop, G., Duncan, S. H. & Flint, H. J. Modelling the emergent 
dynamics and major metabolites of the human colonic microbiota. Environ. Microbiol. 
17, 1615–1630 (2015).
207.	 Gupta, R. S., Nanda, A. & Khadka, B. Novel molecular, structural and evolutionary 
characteristics of the phosphoketolases from bifidobacteria and Coriobacteriales.  
PLoS ONE 12, e0172176 (2017).
208.	Guillemot, F. et al. Treatment of diversion colitis by short-chain fatty acids: prospective 
and double-blind study. Dis. Colon Rectum 34, 861–864 (1991).

Nature Reviews Microbiology
Review article
209.	Patz, J., Jacobsohn, W. Z., Gottschalk-Sabag, S., Zeides, S. & Braverman, D. Z.  
Treatment of refractory distal ulcerative colitis with short chain fatty acid enemas.  
Am. J. Gastroenterol. 91, 731–734 (1996).
210.	 Steinhart, A. H., Hiruki, T., Brzezinski, A. & Baker, J. P. Treatment of left‐sided ulcerative 
colitis with butyrate enemas: a controlled trial. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 10, 729–736 
(1996).
211.	 Scheppach, W. et al. Histological changes in the colonic mucosa following irrigation with 
short-chain fatty acids. Eur. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9, 163–168 (1997).
212.	 Scheppach, W. & Group, G.-A. S. S. Treatment of distal ulcerative colitis with short-chain 
fatty acid enemas a placebo-controlled trial. Dig. Dis. Sci. 41, 2254–2259 (1996).
213.	 Breuer, R. I. et al. Short chain fatty acid rectal irrigation for left-sided ulcerative colitis:  
a randomised, placebo controlled trial. Gut 40, 485–491 (1997).
214.	 Schauber, J. et al. Local short-chain fatty acids supplementation without beneficial effect 
on inflammation in excluded rectum. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 35, 184–189 (2000).
215.	 Vernia, P. et al. Topical butyrate for acute radiation proctitis: randomised, crossover trial. 
Lancet 356, 1232–1235 (2000).
216.	 Scarpellini, E. et al. Efficacy of butyrate in the treatment of diarrhoea-predominant 
irritable bowel syndrome. Dig. Liver Dis. Suppl. 1, 19–22 (2007).
217.	 Vernero, M. et al. The usefulness of microencapsulated sodium butyrate add-on therapy 
in maintaining remission in patients with ulcerative colitis: a prospective observational 
study. J. Clin. Med. 9, 3941 (2020).
218.	 Pietrzak, A. et al. Sodium butyrate effectiveness in children and adolescents with newly 
diagnosed inflammatory bowel diseases — randomized placebo-controlled multicenter 
trial. Nutrients 14, 3283 (2022).
219.	 Buckel, W. & Thauer, R. K. Flavin-based electron bifurcation, a new mechanism of 
biological energy coupling. Chem. Rev. 118, 3862–3886 (2018).
Acknowledgements
P.L. received funding from the Scottish Government Rural and Environment Service and 
Analytical Services Division.
Author contributions
The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Peer review information Nature Reviews Microbiology thanks Ellen Blaak, Hauke Smidt and 
the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2025