Detecting Interactions between Nanomaterials
and Cell Membranes by Synthetic Nanopores
Binquan Luan,*,†
Shuo Zhou,‡ Deqiang Wang,‡ and Ruhong Zhou*,†
†Computational Biology Center, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research, Yorktown Heights, New York 10598, United States
‡Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China
*
S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Engineered nanomaterials have been increasingly
utilized in industry for various consumer products, environmental
treatments, energy storage, and biomedical applications. Meanwhile, it
has been established that certain nanomaterials can be toxic to
biological cells from extensive experimental and theoretical studies.
Despite that the exact molecular mechanisms of this nanomaterial
toxicity are still not well understood, it is ubiquitous that their
interactions with cell membranes, through either endocytosis or
penetration (and thus potential lysis), act as the ﬁrst step toward the
inﬂammation or even the death of a cell. To facilitate the study of
nanomaterial−membrane interactions, here we demonstrate a nanopore-based single-molecule approach that can be
applied to monitor a speciﬁc nanomaterial−membrane interaction in real time. Combined with molecular dynamics and
experimental approaches, we show how an ionic current can be used to detect membrane damage by a graphene nanosheet
and illustrate the underlying molecular mechanism. More generally, we expect that measured transmembrane ionic currents
(both DC and AC) can signify many particle-induced membrane modiﬁcations, such as hole formation, particle adsorption,
and protein insertion.
KEYWORDS: bionano, nanotoxicity, nanopore, biosensor, membrane damage, graphene, nanomaterials
T
he membrane of a biological cell encloses cytoplasm,
such as cytosol and organelles, and protects the cell
from its extracellular environment. Functionally, the
membrane regulates the transport of nutrients into and wastes
out of a cell. The damage of a cell membrane can often lead to
the leakage of intracellular substances (e.g., ions, mRNA, and
proteins), which may trigger necrosis for cellular death. During
bacterial infection that targets a cell membrane, protein toxins
(also known as pore-forming-proteins, such as α-hemolysin
from Staphylococcus aureus1) can self-assemble into a trans-
membrane channel on the host membrane, causing cell lysis or
leakage, which is the major mechanism for cellular damage.2
Associated with Alzheimer’s disease (a deadly neurodegenera-
tion disease), amyloid-β 42 peptides (Aβ42), which are
intrinsically disordered, can surprisingly aggregate on a cell
membrane and form pores with various sizes.3,4 Recently, the
same concept or mechanism has been applied to the design of
synthesized antibacterial drugs. For example, positively charged
peptides or polymers can target the negatively charged bacterial
membrane and eﬀectively kill bacteria by forming holes on their
membrane.5−7
Engineered nanomaterials have been commercially used in
cosmetics, catalysis, microelectronics, food, and drug industries,
due to their attractive physical and chemical properties.
However, this is accompanied by growing concerns on
nanomaterials’ biocompatibility (i.e., potential harmful inter-
actions with biological systems).8,9 Some nanomaterials have
been known to induce cytotoxicity to biological cells by
damaging cell membranes, similar to protein toxins and
amyloid peptides. For example, hydrophobic nanomaterials of
particular sizes can penetrate into a cell membrane directly (a
passive transport in contrast to endocytosis) and leave open
pores in the bilayer.10 A poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA)
coated gold nanoparticle (AuNP) can promote the initial
adsorption on a lipid membrane and later abduct a patch of
membrane lipids leaving a large hole in the bilayer.11
Additionally, graphene nanosheets have been shown to
aggressively extract lipids out of a cell membrane,12,13 causing
damage to the membrane.
The adsorption of a nanoparticle on a supported lipid
bilayer,14 followed by possible damage to the membrane, can be
experimentally monitored using atomic force microscopy
(AFM)15 or a quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation
(QCM-D).11,16 Alternatively, pore formation as a consequence
of interactions between nanomaterials and vesicles (with
molecular dyes inside) can be discovered by applying
ﬂuorescence techniques to optically measure dye leakage.17
Received:
October 2, 2017
Accepted:
November 21, 2017
Published: November 21, 2017
Article
www.acsnano.org
Cite This: ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
© 2017 American Chemical Society
12615
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 24, 2026 at 03:17:43 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

To facilitate and simplify experimental detection of nanoma-
terial−membrane interactions, here, we propose a nanopore-
based single-molecule technique that has been widely used to
detect biomolecules (such as DNA18 and proteins19) electro-
chemically. Similar to a black lipid membrane (BLM)14 at
macroscale, a patch of lipid bilayer is self-assembled inside a
nanometer-sized pore (or generally <1 μm) drilled through a
thin (∼5 nm) solid-state (e.g., SiO2) membrane. For simplicity,
lipids outside the pore due to lipid-spanning are not modeled.
In a typical ﬂuidic device, such a membrane separates the cis
and trans ﬂuidic chambers, with an external electric ﬁeld E
applied normal to the membrane (Figure 1a). After loading the
to-be-tested nanomaterials in the electrolyte on the cis side, it is
expected that the potential nanomaterial−membrane inter-
actions can be conveniently monitored by measuring the ionic
currents through the membrane.
To prove the principle, we carried out molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations on the potential harmful eﬀects resulting
from a graphene nanosheet’s interaction with the lipid bilayer
supported by the solid-state nanopore. The MD method has
been extensively applied in studying both biomolecules20−23
and nanotechnologies.24−27 Previously, MD simulations have
shown that a graphene nanosheet can spontaneously insert into
a lipid bilayer through its sharp edges and corners,12,13
destructively extracting lipids out of the membrane.12,28
Recently, through both experimental and simulation ap-
proaches, it was demonstrated that the extensive loss of lipids
due to the extraction by a graphene nanosheet may eventually
yield a hole in the membrane.17,29 Here, we focus on the
dynamic graphene−membrane interactions after graphene’s
insertion and show how the nanopore sensor can be used to
detect the hole-formation in the membrane. Generally, this
method can be applied to study interactions between a cell
membrane and many other engineered nanomaterials, provid-
ing a means for evaluating their nanotoxicity in vitro.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The simulation system for nanopore-based assessments of
potential nanotoxicity of nanomaterials toward a cell membrane
is illustrated in Figure 1. Brieﬂy, to obtain the SiO2 nanopore in
silico, atoms in the solid membrane were fully mixed at a high
temperature before being quenched to 300 K. During the
quenching process, atoms within 5 nm of the z axis were
harmonically pushed out, forming a cylindrical channel. Finally,
the system was equilibrated at 1 bar and 300 K, with the
periodic boundary condition applied in the x- and y-directions
only. The thickness of the equilibrated membrane is about 5
nm.
A patch of pre-equilibrated 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-
phosphocholine (POPC) lipid bilayer was placed inside a 10
nm diameter nanopore (D = 10 nm). Previous studies30 have
shown that such membrane model can yield insightful
understanding of the interactions between nanomaterials and
a cell membrane. The membrane complex was further solvated
in a 0.15 M KCl electrolyte (Figure 1a), separating the
electrolyte into cis and trans ﬂuidic chambers. After
minimization and equilibration, the lipid density in the POPC
membrane is about one lipid per 67.7 Å2, which is comparable
to that measured in experiment.31 Experimentally, the critical
biasing voltage is 0.3 V, below which electroporation does not
occur, for example, a typical voltage of 0.15 V used for
monitoring the ssDNA translocation through an α-hemolysin
channel in a supported lipid bilayer.18 In simulation, due to the
force ﬁeld32 (describing POPC lipids), a much larger baising
voltage (e.g., 2 V) is required for the poration.33 Here, we
applied a biasing electric voltage of 0.5 V across the entire
system (height ∼16 nm), ensuring that no electroporation can
occur in our simulations.
As shown in previous studies, a graphene nanosheet
spontaneously enters a cell membrane through its sharp
edges;12,13 here we focus on possible subsequent membrane
damages after graphene’s entry into the cell membrane. Two
docking positions of a graphene nanosheet in the membrane
were investigated: (1) a graphene nanosheet (63.8 × 136.3 Å2)
enters only the upper layer of the membrane (Figure 1b),
referred to as Sim-1 hereafter; (2) the same graphene
nanosheet penetrates the bilayer and is “symmetrically docked”
on the membrane with equally exposed segments on both sides
of the membrane (Figure 1c), referred to as Sim-2 hereafter. In
both cases, the graphene nanosheet was perpendicular to the
membrane surface, with its position ﬁxed during all simulations.
Positions of the lipids that are in conﬂict with the graphene
nanosheet were slightly moved or reoriented, and the top view
of an inserted graphene nanosheet after minimization and
equilibration is shown in Figure S1 in the Supporting
Information.
Due to the strong van der Waals interaction, as well as
hydrophobic interaction (due to water), between lipids and the
graphene nanosheet, consistent with previous studies,12,28 we
also observed the vigorous extraction of lipids toward the
graphene surface. In Sim-1, since the graphene nanosheet only
partially penetrated into the membrane, the strong lipid-
graphene interaction drove the entire membrane to bend
toward the graphene after a few nanoseconds (Figure S2a),
allowing the lower layer of the lipid membrane to cover the
graphene nanosheet as well. After that, the process of lipid-
Figure 1. Setup of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. (a) The
nanopore system; Si and O atoms in the solid-state nanopore are
shown in yellow and red; the POPC lipids ﬁlling the nanopore are
shown as van der Waals spheres; K+ and Cl−are represented as tan
and cyan dots; water is shown transparently. (b) A graphene
nanosheet enters halfway through the membrane (Sim-1). (c) A
graphene nanosheet enters the membrane entirely and is “sym-
metrically docked” on the membrane with equally exposed
segments on both sides of the membrane (Sim-2).
ACS Nano
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
12616

extraction toward the graphene nanosheet (exposed in the cis
chamber) started and the number of extracted lipids increased
with time as shown in Figure 2a. In Sim-2, because the
graphene nanosheet was fully inserted, lipids were allowed to be
extracted toward graphene fragments in both cis and trans
chambers (Figure 2b, Figure S2b).
In these proof-of-principle simulations, we modeled a small
graphene nanosheet that can only be covered by 30 to 40 lipids.
For example, at around 100 ns in Sim-1 (the end of the black
line in Figure 2a), the exposed graphene nanosheet was fully
covered by extracted lipids (see inset in Figure 2a). To model
the toxic eﬀect by a larger nanosheet, we divided the entire
simulation into several stages. In order to continue extracting
lipids, at the end of each stage all extracted lipids covering the
exposed nanosheet were removed from the simulation system.
After proper equilibration in the NPT ensemble for 0.5 ns with
all heavy (non-hydrogen) atoms in lipids restrained, the
simulation resumes in the NVT ensemble in the next stage.
We carried out four and ﬁve simulation stages in Sim-1 and
Sim-2, respectively. Due to the removal of extracted lipids, the
dimension (along z axis) of the simulation box were slightly
reduced in latter stages, e.g. 16.35, 16.07, 15.90, and 15.80 nm
in stages 1−4 in Sim-1. Thus, this simulation approach allows
us to investigate the depenency of graphene’s size on the pore
formation (see below).
Overall, the rates of lipid extraction in Sim-1 and Sim-2 are
comparable, as shown from the slopes (dN/dt) of the lines in
Figure 2. Roughly, one lipid was extracted every 4 to 5 ns. This
rate is comparable to the result reported under a similar
condition in the previous study12 without applying the electric
ﬁeld, suggesting that the applied electric ﬁeld barely aﬀected the
lipid-extraction process. However, both systems behaved quite
diﬀerently during the beginning stage. The fast extraction at the
beginning of Sim-1 was facilitated by the initial bending of the
entire membrane toward the graphene nanosheet in the cis
chamber. Energetically, the lower lipid−lipid interaction energy
in the bent membrane (with an increase surface area) yields the
faster lipid-extraction process in Sim-1 in the beginning. In later
stages, the lipid extraction in Sim-2 was slightly faster because
lipids can be extracted from both sides of the membrane.
Destructive and vigorous extraction of lipids from the
membrane would inevitably damage the membrane after
some time. Therefore, the above lipid-extraction process can
be monitored conveniently by measuring the ionic current
through the lipid membrane. From the trajectories of Sim-1 and
Sim-2, we calculated the time-dependent ionic currents I=
∑(qivi)/H, where H is the system height; qi and vi are the
charge and the velocity of an ith ion, respectively. At the
beginning the membrane was not damaged, so the average
trans-membrane current was zero as shown in Figure 3.
Even after the lipid extraction started, in the early stages, the
membrane spanned the entire nanopore despite the loss of
lipids. Thus, the ionic current did not increase immediately
after the lipid-extraction process occurred. Figure 3 shows that
in both Sim-1 and Sim-2, the average current remained at zero
for about 160 ns, during which about 40 lipids were extracted
onto the graphene nanosheet (Figure 2a). After this critical
point (t ∼160 ns), currents in both simulations surged to about
0.5 nA, indicating a signiﬁcant amount of ions permeated
through the lipid membrane. From the trajectory analyses of
both systems, a hole was observed in the damaged membrane,
which increased its size over time(Figure 3c, and see movie S1
in Supporting Information). Consistently, the hole formation in
the damaged membrane in either Sim-1 or Sim-2 occurred after
about the same amount of lipids (∼40) were extracted. In the
current simulation setup, there were a total of 234 lipids in the
membrane. Therefore, our results suggest that a hole can form
after the membrane loses about 17% of its lipids, which also sets
the size limit for a graphene nanosheet in order to produce a
pore in the membrane. In a live cell, due to the diﬀusion of
excess surrounding lipids, losing 17% of local lipids may not
yield a pore. Actually, this result suggests that a pore might
form only if a cell membrane uniformly loses 17% of its entire
lipids. Previously, it was found that in order to yield a hole in
Figure 2. Time-dependent number of POPC lipids extracted onto
the graphene nanosheet in Sim-1 (a) and in Sim-2 (b).
Figure 3. Ionic currents through the nanopore during the Sim-1 (a)
and the Sim-2 (b). Gray lines, currents averaged over 1 ns intervals;
black lines, currents averaged over 10 ns intervals. (c) Snapshots of
the hole-formation in the lipid membrane in Sim-1.
ACS Nano
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
12617

the membrane, a graphene nanosheet should be large enough
or multiple small graphene nanosheets are required.29
After the pore formation, because of the continuous lipid
extraction (Figure 2), ionic currents increased accordingly
(Figure 3). Thus, at this stage, the measured current is
proportional to the rate of lipid-extraction, that is, I ≈dN/dt. In
Sim-1, the current increased to a larger value (∼1 nA) than the
one in Sim-2, because more lipids were extracted and thus a
larger hole was formed in the membrane in Sim-1 at the end of
simulation. It can be expected that, given more simulation time,
all lipids near the graphene nanosheet could be extracted and
the hole in the membrane could grow larger. Eventually, direct
interactions between lipids in the membrane and the graphene
nanosheet become impossible, which yields a saturated ionic
current.
To highlight the pore formation process, we calculated the
number of water molecules that entered the membrane and
were present in a 5-Å-thick layer near the bilayer interface, or
the overlap region of the lipid tails in both upper and lower
layers (e.g., 5 Å < z < 10 Å). Generally, a water molecule can
stay near the headgroup of a lipid but can only temporally enter
the hydrophobic lipid-tail region in the membrane. By selecting
water molecules found deeply inside the membrane, we
calculated the number of water molecules NW that contributed
to the hole formation. In each simulation, NW ﬂuctuates near
zero in the beginning, indicating that water can only temporally
enter the already damaged membrane (due to lipid extraction).
Similar to the onset of ionic currents, NW increased sharply
after the critical point in each simulation. This avalanche-like
process in membrane rupture accompanied by water inﬁltration
is very similar to many phenomena signiﬁed with a ﬁrst-order
phase transition.
Noticeably, the following behaviors of NW(t) as shown in
Figure 4a resemble those for I(t) very well (Figure 3). Due to
the same thickness (for the calculated water slab), the
calculated number of water molecules is proportional to the
cross-sectional area of a hole in the lipid membrane. Given the
water density (∼0.0334 Å−3) for the TIP3P water model,
estimated cross-sectional areas for membrane holes at the end
of Sim-1 and Sim-2 are 14.4 and 10.8 nm2, respectively. The
ionic current is also proportional to the cross-sectional area of
the hole; therefore the time-dependency of NW is similar to that
for the ionic current I.
Figure 4b illustrates a snapshot of the simulation system at
the end of Sim-2, showing a water-ﬁlled hole in the lipid
membrane, connecting both cis and trans ﬂuidic chambers. The
hole resides at one side of the graphene nanosheet, while the
membrane on the other side of the nanosheet was not broken
yet. Due to water inﬁltration, lipids near the hole edge
reoriented their head groups toward water inside the hole,
preventing the exposure of hydrophobic lipid tails to water.
Several ions in the emerging aqueous hole can be discerned,
and in the externally applied electric ﬁeld they moved through
the hole (e.g., Cl−from cis to trans chambers), contributing to
the above-mentioned ionic current.
As stated above, a membrane hole can form only after about
17% of the lipids in a membrane patch were extracted onto the
graphene nanosheet. Thus, it is interesting to know how the
lipid bilayer structure was aﬀected before forming a hole.
Because of the constant membrane area inside the solid-state
nanopore, the lipid density is expected to reduce after the lipid
extraction process started. From the simulation trajectories, we
found that the density of the head groups of the lipids
decreased with time but the density of the tail region remained
nearly constant. The latter actually resulted from the enhanced
overlap of ﬂexible lipid-tails between the upper and the lower
layers (with reduced bilayer thickness). In Figure 5a, we show
the time-dependent thickness of the membrane, which was
deﬁned as the distance (projected on z axis) between the center
of mass (COM) of the phosphorus atoms in the upper layer
and the COM of the phosphorus atoms in the lower layer.
During the simulation time, the membrane thickness continued
to decrease from about 39 Å to about 31 Å on average. Near
the time when the hole started to form in the membrane, its
thickness was only about 33 Å. The side view of the membrane
(see insets in Figure 5a) shows the signiﬁcant interpenetration
of lipid tails between upper and lower layers.
This membrane-thinning eﬀect enables more water mole-
cules to be present at each membrane surface because of the
lower lipid density. Additionally, water molecules can further
diﬀuse more deeply into the hydrophobic tail region. The
overlap region of the lipid tails was the last barrier before water
penetrated the entire membrane. As shown in Figure 4a, water
molecules can only temporarily stay in that region, that is, NW
ﬂuctuates around zero, before the hole formation.
As the lipid density decreased further, water molecules can
ﬁnally penetrate the overlap region. Right after that, the
membrane burst and a hole started to develop on the
membrane. Consistent with calculated current signals (Figure
3) or number of water molecules inside the membrane (Figure
4a), the hole size increased very quickly (within a few
nanoseconds), as shown in Movie S1. Thus, the initial increase
of the hole size must result from the rearrangement of lipids
Figure 4. Interactions between water and the POPC membrane. (a)
Time-dependent numbers of water molecules inside the membrane
during the Sim-1 and the Sim-2. (b) A snapshot of the damaged
membrane with a water-ﬁlled hole. POPC lipids are in stick
representation; atoms in the graphene nanosheet are shown as van
der Waals spheres. Water inside the hole is shown transparently
with green surface; K+ and Cl−are represented as tan and cyan
balls; water and ions outside the hole are not shown for clarity.
ACS Nano
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
12618

after the burst. To conﬁrm this, we calculated the interfacial
interaction energy E between the lipids on both sides of the
graphene nanosheet (see inset of Figure 5b); the graphene
nanosheet was included into one of the two lipid groups. Both
electrostatic (relative dielectric constant = 4) and van der Waals
energies were computed, and the latter was found to be
dominant. To account for the membrane thickness (h)
variation, we deﬁne energy density γ = E/A, where the
interfacial area A = hd, where d is the width of the graphene
nanosheet. As shown in Figure 5b, before the membrane burst,
γ was about −0.28 kcal/(mol/Å2) on average. After the burst, γ
was reduced to about −0.33 kcal/(mol/Å2), indicating that the
interaction per unit area became stronger. After the burst, the
following increase of the hole area was accompanied by more
intimate contacts between the lipids on the hole-forming side
and the graphene nanosheet (see Figure 4b), which accounts
for the stronger van der Waals attraction inside the membrane.
It is noted that the hole was formed at around 160 ns, while the
values of γ were saturated after 240 ns. Here, the delay (tens of
nanoseconds) indicates the rearrangement of lipids in the
remaining membrane after the burst.
We further analyzed the interaction forces exerted on the
graphene nanosheet from the membrane lipids on both sides.
To exclude the extracted lipids and eﬀects of water on the
membrane surface, we only included the inner 30-Å-thick
membrane (−15 Å < z < 15 Å in Sim-2) from which forces on
the graphene nanosheet were exerted. Because of the charge-
neutral atoms in the graphene nanosheet, only van der Waals
forces were calculated. Figure 6a,b shows the forces on the
graphene nanosheet from the hole-forming side and the non-
hole-forming side (see Figure 4b) of the membrane,
respectively. At the beginning, forces on both sides of the
nanosheet were negative, suggesting that the membrane was
initially under the tension. The tensile force F is about 2 kcal/
(mol/Å) initially. The resulting local surface tension estimated
by F/d is about 7 dyn/cm. The surface tension of an entire
membrane should include the lipid−lipid interaction across the
graphene nanosheet as well and is generally about tens of dynes
per centimeter.34 Here, we use the surface tension on the
graphene nanosheet to elucidate the nanomechanics during the
membrane burst.
With more lipids extracted onto the graphene nanosheet, the
tensile force decreased gradually. Note that if this process or
deformation is elastic, the force is expected to increase. As
described above, the bilayers in the membrane rearranged
themselves by allowing the lipid-tails to overlap more to
compensate the loss of lipids, which maintains the tensile force.
Therefore, such deformation is plastic in nature. At the time of
membrane burst (∼160 ns), the tensile force from the
membrane on the hole-forming side decreased to zero. The
remaining membrane on this side of the graphene nanosheet
lost its internal tension. However, on the non-hole-forming
side, there remained small tensile forces.
After the burst of membrane, surprisingly, forces exerted
from the hole-forming side became positive, that is, repulsive
forces, between the graphene nanosheet and nearby membrane
lipids. In fact, this nonintuitive result can be understood by
considering a balancing force: the hydrophobic force that
pushes the lipids against the graphene nanosheet. As shown in
Figure 4b, after water’s entry into the membrane, such
hydrophobic force between the graphene nanosheet and lipids
occurred and was normal to the graphene surface. Water’s
penetration into the lipid membrane was reversible before the
loss of a signiﬁcant amount of lipids (Figure 4a). However,
when more water molecules were temporarily present inside
the membrane, they yielded hydrophobic force to push the
lipids toward the graphene nanosheet, which further allowed
more water molecules to get into the membrane. Therefore,
this positive feedback loop eventually initiated the avalanche-
like process: hole formation. On the non-hole-forming side of
the graphene nanosheet, the tensile force in the membrane
continued decreasing after the membrane burst and was about
zero at around 240 ns. As mentioned above, this time delay is
due to the required time (∼80 ns) for the lipids to rearrange
Figure 5. (a) Time-dependent membrane thicknesses in Sim-2.
Insets show snap-shots of side-views of the POPC membrane at
diﬀerent times. (b) Time-dependent interfacial interaction energies
during the simulation. In the insets the orange line shows where the
interface is (the top view). In panels a and b, the graphene
nanosheet is in gray; POPC lipids are in stick representation;
phosphorus atoms in POPC lipids are shown as tan spheres.
Figure 6. Normal forces on graphene exerted from POPC lipids
from the hole-forming side (a) and the non-hole-forming side (b).
Gray lines, data averaged over 1 ns; black lines, data averaged over
10 ns; dashed lines, guides to the eye.
ACS Nano
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
12619

after the membrane burst on the other side of the graphene
nanosheet.
Once a hole is formed in a live cell membrane, depending on
the competition between lipid extraction and self-repairing
(because of the diﬀusion of surrounding lipids to ﬁll the hole),
the hole size may increase or decrease. However, due to the
presence of transmembrane proteins in a live cell membrane,
driven or diﬀusive motions of lipids toward the hole can be
hindered.35 Thus, lipid extraction may dominate the self-
repairing, which yields a hole enlargement (similar to the case
in our simulation). Alternatively, when the cell membrane is
interacting with multiple nanomaterials,29 it becomes more
challenging for self-repair and easier for hole formation.
Additionally, many nanomaterials (such as cationic quantum
dots) other than graphene nanosheets can passively diﬀuse
through a cell membrane; the cell membrane is only transiently
broken and can be repaired by itself.36 Experimental studies of
vesicle−graphene interactions also revealed a transient leakage
of dyes inside the vesicle.17 The typical time scale for these
transient membrane holes is around a few milliseconds,37 which
can be adequately detected by measuring the transmembrane
current from cis to trans chambers.18
To further validate our simulation results, we carried out a
series of experiments to explore the interaction between
graphene and the lipid bilayer. Figure 7a illustrates the
experimental setup. Brieﬂy, 5 μg/mL graphene oxide (GO)
was added and stirred in the chamber after the formation of a
lipid bilayer in an oriﬁce on a Teﬂon ﬁlm. Here, due to the poor
solubility of graphene nanosheets, we used GO nanosheets in
our experiment, which contain many unoxidized graphene (sp2)
domains. As shown in our previous simulation and experi-
ments,12 these large sp2 domains behave just like pristine
graphene and agree well with the theoretical predictions using
pure graphene. When applying a lower concentration (5 μg/
mL) of GO, the ionic current remained at 0 pA for 20 min
(Figure S3 in Supporting Information), suggesting a stable and
unbroken lipid bilayer. However, after increasing the GO
concentration to 15 μg/mL in the chamber, the ionic current
began to ﬂuctuate signiﬁcantly around 16 min (Figure 7b),
indicating that due to the strong interaction GO nanosheets
started to breach the membrane. During the next 50 min, the
ionic current quickly went up to 350 pA (Figure 7b), suggesting
that the continuous lipid extraction had passed the critical point
(t ≈16.6 min) and the pore formation in the lipid bilayer
became possible. The observed concentration dependency
conﬁrms the simulation result that the membrane has to lose a
signiﬁcant amount of lipids before the pore formation either by
a large graphene nanosheet or by multiple small ones. Because
of this mechanism of pore formation, with limited GO
nanosheets inserted in the membrane, the produced pore size
may not be proportional to the size of entire membrane. The
proportionality occurs only when a signiﬁcantly large amount of
GO nanosheets are in the membrane.
Given that the size (diameter <3 μm) of each GO nanosheet
is much smaller than the pore size, multiple GO nanosheets can
be present in the membrane when increasing the GO
concentration to 15 μg/mL. Figure 7c highlights several
representative current signals showing stepwise increases,
each of which might signal the formation of an additional
pore in the membrane by an inserted GO nanosheet. Similarly,
this phenomenon occurs when recording the ionic current
through a membrane with multiple protein channels (e.g., α-
hemolysin) inserted one-by-one. After that, without any
additional pore formation, the ionic current continuously and
gradually increased to 420 pA (Figure 7b) because the size of
each pore became larger after more lipids were extracted by GO
nanosheets. Finally, the current became stable and saturated,
after the GO nanosheets were fully covered with the exacted
Figure 7. Experimental studies on interactions between GO and the lipid bilayer conﬁned in an oriﬁce. (a) Schematic illustration of the
experimental setup (not drawn to scale). (b, c) Ionic currents in the presence of 15 μg/mL GO: (b) 400 min current recording and (c) typical
magniﬁed trace segments. The experiment was performed at +20 mV with the lipid bilayer formed at a 156-μm-diameter oriﬁce on a Teﬂon
ﬁlm. The electrolyte solution contains 1 M NaCl and 10 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5).
ACS Nano
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
12620

lipids. In an independent experiment (see Figure S4), we
reproduced the phenomenon of the current increase after the
GO-membrane interaction. Overall, these experimental ob-
servations are consistent with the simulation results above.
It is worth emphasizing that the phenomenon of lipid
extraction is independent of the lipid type, because the
extraction is driven by the favorable dispersive interaction
between lipid tails and the graphene nanosheet. For two lipid
types, POPC (used in our simulation) and DPhPC (used in our
experiment), the free energy change for moving a lipid from the
membrane to the graphene surface is, respectively, −7.4 kcal/
mol28 and −7.5 kcal/mol (see Figure S5 in Supporting
Information). The same phenomenon was previously ob-
served12 for other types lipids such as POPE, POPE/POPG
(3:1), and DPPC. Because the headgroup of a lipid is not
involved in the lipid extraction process, even charged lipids (e.g.,
POPG) can be extracted to the graphene surface.12
Generally, the hole formation by nanomaterials can be toxic
(e.g., intracellular substance loss) to a biological cell, which as
shown above can be detected by measuring the transmembrane
ionic current. In many cases, it is possible that some
nanomaterials (e.g., TiO2
38) are only adsorbed on the
membrane surface, and their entry into a cell depends on the
following endocytosis process. Although the method proposed
above (by measuring DC currents) cannot capture the
adsorption of nanomaterials on the membrane, it is possible
to apply alternating biasing voltages V(t) to measure the AC
signals, that is, I = C dV/dt where C is the capacitance of the
lipid membrane. Under alternating biasing voltages, each side of
the membrane is alternatively charged by K+ and Cl−ions and
both sides of the membrane are always oppositely charged,
yielding a well-deﬁned capacitance. Once nanomaterials are
adsorbed on the membrane, the ionic distribution (electric
double layer) near the membrane will be aﬀected by the
presence of nanomaterials, which results in a diﬀerent
capacitance and consequently a diﬀerent AC current. Addi-
tionally, considering that the capacitance C = ϵS/h where ϵ is
the dielectric constant, S is the cross-sectional area of the
membrane, and h is the membrane thickness, the membrane
thinning eﬀect (Figure 5a) before the burst can cause an
increase in the capacitance and the consequent AC current.
Therefore, while not demonstrated in our simulation, we expect
that AC signals might provide more information on particle−
membrane interactions.
CONCLUSION
In summary, we have proposed a low-cost yet eﬃcient in vitro
method to assess the nanotoxicity of nanomaterials toward the
cell membrane. By measuring the ionic currents through a cell
membrane supported in a solid-state nanopore, it is possible to
detect the adverse particle−membrane interactions in real time.
Generally, by measuring both DC and AC currents, phenomena
such as particle adsorption, membrane thinning, and hole
formation can be directly inferred. Here, we demonstrate that
once a graphene nanosheet extracted about 17% of the lipids in
the membrane and allowed water to penetrate into the
membrane, a hole can occur on the membrane, accompanied
by an increase in measured ion currents. We analyzed the
energetics and nanomechanics during the membrane burst and
the hole formation processes and revealed the important role of
water. Other mechanisms of pore formation can be dependent
on surface properties of a nanomaterial, such as the curvature,
polarity, and roughness.15
Besides detecting toxicity of a nanomaterial, it can be used to
screen designed chemical modiﬁcations of an engineered
nanomaterial and determine the most biocompatible one.
Additionally, the eﬃciency of antimicrobial peptides/polymers
can be conveniently tested and optimized toward bacterial
membranes under certain conditions (such as the Ca2+-rich
environment39). Broadly deﬁned, nanomaterials/nanoparticles
are not restricted to the engineered ones but can also include
protein toxins, bacteria, or viruses that bind the cell membrane
as the precursor of their invasion. Therefore, the nanopore
platform described here provides a simple yet powerful means
to study broad particle−membrane interactions in general.
METHODS
Molecular Dynamics Simulations. All MD simulations were
carried out using the software package NAMD2.9.40 The entire
simulation system measures about 140 × 140 × 160 Å3, after
minimization for 10 ps and equilibration for 5 ns in the NPT ensemble
(P ≈1 bar and T ≈300 K). Subsequent production runs were carried
out in the NVT ensemble with the electric ﬁeld turned on. We applied
periodic boundary conditions (PBC) in all three dimensions. Long-
range Coulomb interactions are computed using particle-mesh Ewald
(PME) full electrostatics with the grid size set around 1 Å in each
dimension. The van der Waals (vdW) energies between atoms were
calculated using a smooth (10−12 Å) cutoﬀ. The temperature T was
maintained at 300 K using the Langevin thermostat41 to all atoms in
the SiO2 membrane. The pressure was kept constant at 1 bar using the
Nosé−Hoover method.42 With the SETTLE algorithm43 enabled for
all bonds, the simulation time-step was 2 fs for bonded and
nonbonded (e.g., vdW, angle, and dihedral) interactions, and long-
range electric interactions were calculated every 4 fs. During the
simulation for melting and quenching the SiO2 solid, the BKS force
ﬁeld44 was applied for the amorphous SiO2 nanopore. We used the
TIP3P model45,46 for water and the standard ion force ﬁeld47 and silica
force ﬁeld for the solid membrane interacting with biomolecules.48
The force ﬁeld for the graphene nanosheet was adopted from our
previous study;12 the CHARMM force ﬁeld32 was used for POPC
lipids.
Materials and Reagents. The graphene oxide (GO) was
purchased from Chengdu Organic Chemicals Co. Ltd., Chinese
Academy of Sciences (Chengdu, China). The size (diameter) of each
GO nanosheet varies from 0.5 to 3 μm. The lipid, 1,2-
diphytanoylphosphatidylcholine (DPhPC), was purchased from Avanti
Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL). All the other chemicals were obtained
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO)).
Bilayer Experiment and Electrical Recording. The bilayer
experiments were performed in a planar bilayer chamber, which was
separated into two compartments by a Teﬂon ﬁlm, and the lipid
bilayer was formed at a 156-μm-diameter aperture of the Teﬂon ﬁlm
using DPhPC according to the Montal−Mueller method.49 All the
experiments were carried out in the chamber with 2 mL of buﬀer
solutions added in each compartment containing 1 M NaCl and 10
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). The higher ion concentration than the one
(0.15 M) used in simulation can enhance the ionic current through the
pore50 achieving improved signal-to-noise ratios and meanwhile can
screen charges of membrane/GO at pH 7.5. GO nanosheets were
added to the grounded cis compartment. An Axopatch 200B ampliﬁer
(Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) was used to record the ionic
currents that were low-pass ﬁltered with a built-in four-pole Bessel
ﬁlter at 2 kHz and sampled at 50 kHz by a computer equipped with a
Digidata 1440A converter (Molecular Devices).
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
S
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005.
ACS Nano
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
12621

Top view of graphene in the lipid membrane,
deformation of the lipid membrane around the inserted
graphene (side views), current traces from experiment,
and illustration of an annihilation process of a DPhPC
lipid in the lipid bilayer or on the graphene surface
(PDF)
Hole-forming process in the lipid membrane after
excessive lipid-extraction onto the graphene nanosheet
(Sim-1) (MPG)
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*E-mail: bluan@us.ibm.com.
*E-mail: ruhongz@us.ibm.com.
ORCID
Binquan Luan: 0000-0002-9414-5379
Ruhong Zhou: 0000-0001-8624-5591
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Tien Huynh for his help with proofreading
the manuscript. We also gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial
support from the IBM Bluegene Science Program (Grant
Numbers W125859, W1464125, and W1464164).
REFERENCES
(1) Song, L.; Hobaugh, M. R.; Shustak, C.; Cheley, S.; Bayley, H.;
Gouaux, J. E. Structure of Staphylococcal α-Hemolysin, a Heptameric
Transmembrane Pore. Science 1996, 274, 1859−1865.
(2) Dal Peraro, M.; Van Der Goot, F. G. Pore-Forming Toxins:
Ancient, but never Really out of Fashion. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2016, 14,
77−92.
(3) Bode, D. C.; Baker, M. D.; Viles, J. H. Ion Channel Formation by
Amyloid-β42 Oligomers but not Amyloid-β40 in Cellular Membranes.
J. Biol. Chem. 2017, 292, 1404.
(4) Di Scala, C.; Yahi, N.; Boutemeur, S.; Flores, A.; Rodriguez, L.;
Chahinian, H.; Fantini, J. Common Molecular Mechanism of Amyloid
Pore Formation by Alzheimer’s β-Amyloid Peptide and α-Synuclein.
Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 28781.
(5) Brogden, K. A. Antimicrobial Peptides: Pore Formers or
Metabolic Inhibitors in Bacteria? Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2005, 3, 238−
250.
(6) Yang, L.; Gordon, V. D.; Trinkle, D. R.; Schmidt, N. W.; Davis,
M. A.; DeVries, C.; Som, A.; Cronan, J. E.; Tew, G. N.; Wong, G. C.
Mechanism of a Prototypical Synthetic Membrane-Active Antimicro-
bial: Efficient Hole-Punching via Interaction with Negative Intrinsic
Curvature Lipids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2008, 105, 20595−
20600.
(7) Nederberg, F.; Zhang, Y.; Tan, J. P.; Xu, K.; Wang, H.; Yang, C.;
Gao, S.; Guo, X. D.; Fukushima, K.; Li, L.; Hedrick, J.; Yang, Y.
Biodegradable Nanostructures with Selective Lysis of Microbial
Membranes. Nat. Chem. 2011, 3, 409−414.
(8) Nel, A.; Xia, T.; Mädler, L.; Li, N. Toxic Potential of Materials at
the Nanolevel. Science 2006, 311, 622−627.
(9) Shang, L.; Nienhaus, K.; Nienhaus, G. U. Engineered Nano-
particles Interacting with Cells: Size Matters. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2014,
12, 5.
(10) Guo, Y.; Terazzi, E.; Seemann, R.; Fleury, J. B.; Baulin, V. A.
Direct Proof of Spontaneous Translocation of Lipid-Covered
Hydrophobic Nanoparticles through a Phospholipid Bilayer. Sci. Adv.
2016, 2, e1600261.
(11) Bailey, C. M.; Kamaloo, E.; Waterman, K. L.; Wang, K. F.;
Nagarajan, R.; Camesano, T. A. Size Dependence of Gold Nano-
particle Interactions with a Supported Lipid Bilayer: A QCM-D Study.
Biophys. Chem. 2015, 203, 51−61.
(12) Tu, Y.; Lv, M.; Xiu, P.; Huynh, T.; Zhang, M.; Castelli, M.; Liu,
Z.; Huang, Q.; Fan, C.; Fang, H.; Zhou, R. Destructive Extraction of
Phospholipids from Escherichia Coli Membranes by Graphene
Nanosheets. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2013, 8, 594−601.
(13) Li, Y.; Yuan, H.; von dem Bussche, A.; Creighton, M.; Hurt, R.
H.; Kane, A. B.; Gao, H. Graphene Microsheets Enter Cells through
Spontaneous Membrane Penetration at Edge Asperities and Corner
Sites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2013, 110, 12295−12300.
(14) Castellana, E. T.; Cremer, P. S. Solid Supported Lipid Bilayers:
From Biophysical Studies to Sensor Design. Surf. Sci. Rep. 2006, 61,
429−444.
(15) Roiter, Y.; Ornatska, M.; Rammohan, A. R.; Balakrishnan, J.;
Heine, D. R.; Minko, S. Interaction of Nanoparticles with Lipid
Membrane. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 941−944.
(16) Yi, P.; Chen, K. L. Release Kinetics of Multiwalled Carbon
Nanotubes Deposited on Silica Surfaces: Quartz Crystal Microbalance
with Dissipation (QCM-D) Measurements and Modeling. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 2014, 48, 4406−4413.
(17) Liu, X.; Chen, K. L. Interactions of Graphene Oxide with Model
Cell Membranes: Probing Nanoparticle Attachment and Lipid Bilayer
Disruption. Langmuir 2015, 31, 12076−12086.
(18) Branton, D.; Deamer, D.; Marziali, A.; Bayley, H.; Benner, S.;
Butler, T.; Di Ventra, M.; Garaj, S.; Hibbs, A.; Huang, X.; Jovanovich,
S.; Krstic, P.; Lindsay, S.; Ling, X.; Mastrangelo, C.; Meller, A.; Oliver,
J.; Pershin, Y.; Ramsey, J.; Riehn, R.; et al. The Potential and
Challenges of Nanopore Sequencing. Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1146−
1153.
(19) Yusko, E. C.; Bruhn, B. R.; Eggenberger, O. M.; Houghtaling, J.;
Rollings, R. C.; Walsh, N. C.; Nandivada, S.; Pindrus, M.; Hall, A. R.;
Sept, D.; Li, J.; Kalonia, D.; Mayer, M. Real-Time Shape
Approximation and Fingerprinting of Single Proteins Using a
Nanopore. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 360−367.
(20) Zhou, R.; Huang, X.; Margulis, C.; Berne, B. Hydrophobic
Collapse in Multidomain Protein Folding. Science 2004, 305, 1605.
(21) Luan, B.; Huynh, T.; Zhao, L.; Zhou, R. Potential Toxicity of
Graphene to Cell Functions via Disrupting Protein-Protein
Interactions. ACS Nano 2015, 9, 663−669.
(22) Liu, P.; Huang, X.; Zhou, R.; Berne, B. Observation of a
Dewetting Transition in the Collapse of the Melittin Tetramer. Nature
2005, 437, 159−162.
(23) Stirnemann, G.; Kang, S.-g.; Zhou, R.; Berne, B. J. How Force
Unfolding Differs from Chemical Denaturation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 2014, 111, 3413−3418.
(24) Li, J.; Gong, X.; Lu, H.; Li, D.; Fang, H.; Zhou, R. Electrostatic
Gating of a Nanometer Water Channel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2007, 104, 3687−3692.
(25) Luan, B.; Robbins, M. O. The Breakdown of Continuum
Models for Mechanical Contacts. Nature 2005, 435, 929−932.
(26) Tu, Y.; Xiu, P.; Wan, R.; Hu, J.; Zhou, R.; Fang, H. Water-
Mediated Signal Multiplication with Y-shaped Carbon Nanotubes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2009, 106, 18120−18124.
(27) Luan, B.; Peng, H.; Polonsky, S.; Rossnagel, S.; Stolovitzky, G.;
Martyna, G. Base-by-Base Ratcheting of Single Stranded DNA through
a Solid-State Nanopore. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 104, 238103.
(28) Luan, B.; Huynh, T.; Zhou, R. Complete Wetting of Graphene
by Biological Lipids. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 5750−5754.
(29) Duan, G.; Zhang, Y.; Luan, B.; Weber, J. K.; Zhou, R. W.; Yang,
Z.; Zhao, L.; Xu, J.; Luo, J.; Zhou, R. H. Graphene-Induced Pore
Formation on Cell Membranes. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 42767.
(30) Rascol, E.; Devoisselle, J.-M.; Chopineau, J. The Relevance of
Membrane Models to Understand Nanoparticles-Cell Membrane
Interactions. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 4780−4798.
(31) Kučerka, N.; Tristram-Nagle, S.; Nagle, J. F. Structure of Fully
Hydrated Fluid Phase Lipid Bilayers with Monounsaturated Chains. J.
Membr. Biol. 2006, 208, 193−202.
(32) Klauda, J. B.; Venable, R. M.; Freites, J. A.; O’Connor, J. W.;
Tobias, D. J.; Mondragon-Ramirez, C.; Vorobyov, I.; MacKerell, A. D.,
ACS Nano
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
12622

Jr; Pastor, R. W. Update of the CHARMM All-Atom Additive Force
Field for Lipids: Validation on Six Lipid Types. J. Phys. Chem. B 2010,
114, 7830−7843.
(33) Tarek, M. Membrane Electroporation: a Molecular Dynamics
Simulation. Biophys. J. 2005, 88, 4045−4053.
(34) Gullingsrud, J.; Schulten, K. Lipid Bilayer Pressure Profiles and
Mechanosensitive Channel Gating. Biophys. J. 2004, 86, 3496−3509.
(35) Goose, J. E.; Sansom, M. S. Reduced Lateral Mobility of Lipids
and Proteins in Crowded Membranes. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2013, 9,
e1003033.
(36) Verma, A.; Uzun, O.; Hu, Y.; Hu, Y.; Han, H.-S.; Watson, N.;
Chen, S.; Irvine, D. J.; Stellacci, F. Surface-Structure-Regulated Cell-
membrane Penetration by Monolayer-Protected Nanoparticles. Nat.
Mater. 2008, 7, 588−595.
(37) Dimova, R.; Riske, K. A.; Aranda, S.; Bezlyepkina, N.; Knorr, R.
L.; Lipowsky, R. Giant Vesicles in Electric Fields. Soft Matter 2007, 3,
817−827.
(38) Andersson, P. O.; Lejon, C.; Ekstrand-Hammarström, B.; Akfur,
C.; Ahlinder, L.; Bucht, A.; Österlund, L. Polymorph-and Size-
Dependent Uptake and Toxicity of TiO2 Nanoparticles in Living Lung
Epithelial Cells. Small 2011, 7, 514−523.
(39) Luan, B.; Chen, K. L.; Zhou, R. Mechanism of Divalent-Ion-
Induced Charge Inversion of Bacterial Membranes. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2016, 7, 2434−2438.
(40) Phillips, J. C.; Braun, R.; Wang, W.; Gumbart, J.; Tajkhorshid,
E.; Villa, E.; Chipot, C.; Skeel, R. D.; Kale, L.; Schulten, K. Scalable
Molecular Dynamics with NAMD. J. Comput. Chem. 2005, 26, 1781−
1802.
(41) Allen, M. P.; Tildesley, D. J. Computer Simulation of Liquids;
Oxford University Press: New York, 1987.
(42) Martyna, G. J.; Tobias, D. J.; Klein, M. L. Constant Pressure
Molecular Dynamics Algorithms. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 101, 4177−
4189.
(43) Miyamoto, S.; Kollman, P. A. SETTLE: An Analytical Version of
the SHAKE and RATTLE Algorithm for Rigid Water Molecules. J.
Comput. Chem. 1992, 13, 952−962.
(44) van Beest, B.; Kramer, G.; van Santen, R. Force Fields for Silicas
and Aluminophosphates Based on Ab Initio Calculations. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 1990, 64, 1955−1958.
(45) Jorgensen, W. L.; Chandrasekhar, J.; Madura, J. D.; Impey, R.
W.; Klein, M. L. Comparison of Simple Potential Functions for
Simulating Liquid Water. J. Chem. Phys. 1983, 79, 926−935.
(46) Neria, E.; Fischer, S.; Karplus, M. Simulation of Activation Free
Energies in Molecular Systems. J. Chem. Phys. 1996, 105, 1902.
(47) Beglov, D.; Roux, B. Finite Representation of an Infinite Bulk
System: Solvent Boundary Potential for Computer Simulations. J.
Chem. Phys. 1994, 100, 9050−9063.
(48) Cruz-Chu, E. R.; Aksimentiev, A.; Schulten, K. Water-Silica
Force Field for Simulating Nanodevices. J. Phys. Chem. B 2006, 110,
21497−21508.
(49) Montal, M.; Mueller, P. Formation of Bimolecular Membranes
from Lipid Monolayers and a Study of Their Electrical Properties.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1972, 69, 3561−3566.
(50) Luan, B.; Stolovitzky, G. An Electro-Hydrodynamics-Based
Model for the Ionic Conductivity of Solid-State Nanopores during
DNA Translocation. Nanotechnology 2013, 24, 195702.
ACS Nano
Article
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b07005
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 12615−12623
12623