Advanced Materials
www.advmat.de
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Aminotetrazole–Gold Nanocomplexes Shunt Electrons to
Eradicate Bacteria Without ROS-Induced Resistance
Mingzhi Huang
Qingqing Li
Zhuangzhuang Sun
Jiayi Liu
Zhiming Hou
Rongbing Tang
School of Stomatology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China
Correspondence: Rongbing Tang (tangrb@lzu.edu.cn)
Received: 27 February 2026
Revised: 13 May 2026
Accepted: 23 May 2026
Keywords: antibacterial nanotechnology | antibiotic resistance | bacterial metabolism | gold nanocomplexes | NADH | ROS
ABSTRACT
Most bactericides directly or indirectly disrupt the electron transport chain (ETC)-mediated energy metabolism to exert
antibacterial effects. However, the consequent perturbation of electron transfer states (e.g., flux overload or blockade) leads
to electron accumulation, which enhances reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. High ROS concentrations kill bacteria,
while sublethal levels induce DNA damage, thereby elevating antibiotic resistance risk. In this study, we found that shunting
electrons at critical ETC nodes is able to disrupt bacterial energy metabolism, damaging bacteria without ROS generation. To
leverage the ROS-free mechanism for infection control, we synthesized 5-aminotetrazole-functionalized gold nanocomplexes
(ATZ-Au) that intercept electron transfer from electron donors to downstream carriers. This rapidly depletes reduced nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NADH), disrupts the proton motive force (PMF), impairs ATP synthesis, and blocks bacterial compensatory
metabolic pathways, ultimately leading to lethal intracellular acidosis and metabolic collapse. This effect blocks the capture of
electrons by oxygen, thereby preventing the generation of ROS. The ATZ-Au efficiently eliminates pathogenic bacteria in complex
infections, providing a promising strategy to address antibiotic resistance.
1
Introduction
The antibacterial mechanisms of bactericides are typically char-
acterized by specific target inhibition, exemplified by β-lactams
targeting penicillin-binding proteins (PBP) and quinolones tar-
geting DNA gyrase [1]. Notably, the lethal effects of most
bactericides involve not only primary target inhibition but
also downstream stress responses, which impose substantial
metabolic burdens on bacterial cells [2]. Specifically, target
inhibition triggers compensatory elevations in metabolic demand
and significant fluctuations in metabolic intermediates; whether
directly or indirectly, these changes ultimately entail electron
transport chain (ETC)-mediated energy metabolism [3, 4]. As
prototypical examples, bedaquiline directly binds to the mycobac-
terial ATP synthase c-subunit ring, inducing futile proton cycling
and respiratory uncoupling that dissipate the proton motive
force (PMF), disrupt ETC function, and cause lethal energy
depletion [5, 6]. Similarly, mecillinam inhibits PBP2 transpep-
tidase, initiating a futile peptidoglycan synthesis cycle that
imposes substantial compensatory energy demand, forcing ETC
overactivation and consequent PMF dissipation and metabolic
collapse [7, 8]. Therefore, perturbation of ETC-mediated energy
metabolism acts as a common downstream event underpinning
the lethality of many bactericides [9]. This represents a synergistic
amplification effect extending beyond the primary bactericidal
mechanisms. Critically, such perturbations often cause elec-
tron accumulation at critical respiratory complexes (e.g., flavin
adenine dinucleotide (FAD), ubiquinone pool (CoQ)), concomi-
tantly promoting univalent oxygen reduction to accelerate the
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [10, 11]. As a double-
edged sword, ROS generated by bactericidal antibiotics at high
concentrations facilitates bacterial killing [12], while sublethal
© 2026 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Advanced Materials, 2026; 0:e73611
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.73611
1 of 22

levels mediate genomic instability, activating the SOS response
and error-prone repair mechanisms to drive bacterial resistance
[13, 14]. In brief, the intrinsic bactericidal effect of bactericides
generates evolutionary selection pressure for the emergence of
resistance [15]. This risk is prevalent in clinical settings, where
bacteria encounter sublethal antibiotic concentrations due to
incomplete treatment courses (e.g., patient non-compliance) and
limited drug penetration into target tissues (e.g., cerebrospinal
fluid) [13]. More critically, this paradox is ubiquitous across
diverse bactericidal agents, including conventional antibiotics [11,
12], molecular drugs [16], metal ions [17], nanomaterials [18, 19],
and detergents [20]. Therefore, the targeted disruption of ETC-
mediated energy metabolism while minimizing ROS induction
represents a pivotal unmet challenge in the development of
bactericidal agents.
Herein, we revealed that shunting electrons at critical nodes of
ETC can dampen respiratory chain activity while minimizing
ROS production. To facilitate the translation of the “elec-
tron shunting” strategy into clinical therapeutic applications,
inspired by tetrazolium salts (a class of cell metabolic indica-
tors), we designed an electron-shunting nano-system, namely
5-aminotetrazole-functionalized gold nanocomplexes (ATZ-Au).
ATZ-Au enables the persistent shunting of electrons in the
ETC, specifically during the transfer process from electron
donors, reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)
and reduced form of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2) to
downstream electron carriers. This perturbation rapidly depletes
intracellular NADH, disrupting the PMF, impairing H+ efflux,
and inhibiting oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Conse-
quently, bacteria attempt to enhance glycolysis and fermentation
to survive but quickly fail due to complete depletion of reducing
power, ultimately leading to intracellular acidosis and extensive
metabolic collapse. This antibacterial mechanism intercepts elec-
tron transfer to oxygen, preventing the generation of ROS, a
factor that promotes the development of resistance (Scheme 1). In
murine in vivo models of septic arthritis, acute wound infection,
and acute cystitis, ATZ-Au demonstrated superior antibacterial
efficacy. This finding provides a novel strategy to address the
prevailing challenge posed by widespread multidrug-resistant
bacteria.
2
Results and Discussion
2.1
“Electron-shunting” Strategy Enables
Bacterial Killing Without Elevating ROS Levels
To achieve ROS-free bactericidal effects, we proposed a bacterial
“electron-shunting” strategy and treated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) with methylene blue (MB), a
compound that targets NADH dehydrogenase in the ETC [21].
Flow cytometry results revealed that the percentage of bacteria
with high intracellular ROS levels was significantly lower in
both MB-treated groups (2 mm: 3.13%; 8 mm: 4.61%) than in
the negative control (NC) group (13.1%), and similarly lower
in the norfloxacin (Norflox) + MB co-treatment group (21.10%)
compared to Norflox monotherapy (73.49%) (Figure 1A; Figure
S1). The nitrotetrazolium blue chloride (NBT) reduction assay
further demonstrated intracellular superoxide anion (O2∙−) levels
in MRSA treated with 2 and 8 mm MB were reduced by 28.4%
and 45.8%, respectively, compared with the NC group (Figure 1B).
These findings confirm that MB can reduce bacterial ROS produc-
tion during the bactericidal process. Additionally, the respiratory
chain electron flux was significantly reduced by 14.49%, 37.87%,
and 62.57% in bacteria treated with 2 mm MB, 8 mm MB, and
the bacteriostatic agent tedizolid (which inhibits bacterial protein
synthesis to reduce metabolic activity), respectively (Figure 1D).
Concurrently, 10.25% and 41.52% reductions in the transmem-
brane pH gradient (ΔpH, stained with BCECF-AM; Figure 1E;
Figure S2) were observed in the 2 mm MB- and 8 mm MB-
treated groups, along with impaired membrane potential (ΔΨ,
stained with DiBAC4(3), Figure 1F). These results indicated that
MB sequesters a substantial number of electrons at the NADH
dehydrogenase II (NDH-2) site [22], reducing electron flux to
downstream proton pumps. Consequently, the bacteria fail to
effectively establish the transmembrane PMF (PMF = ΔpH + ΔΨ)
[23], which exacerbates intracellular acidosis, impairs bacterial
ATP synthesis, and reduces bacterial viability (Figure 1E–H).
Notably, when using Iodonitrotetrazolium chloride (INT) to
target the quinone pool, a downstream node of complex I in the
ETC [24], electron flux was similarly reduced, and the proton
gradient was likewise disrupted; however, ROS levels exhibited
no significant decrease (Figure 1A, E–H; Figures S1 and S2).
These results indicated that Complex I is an appropriate site for
the electron-shunting strategy, which can impair bacteria while
suppressing ROS generation. Importantly, this ROS suppression
mitigated the progression of Norflox resistance (Figure 1C; Figure
S1).
2.2
Design, Synthesis, Characterization, and
Electronic Property Regulation of
Tetrazole-Modified Au Nanocomplexes
To advance the clinical application of the “electron-shunting”
strategy, we designed and synthesized tetrazole-functionalized
Au nanocomplexes. In physiological environments, tetrazolium
salts with localized positive charges on their nitrogen rings
possess the capacity to shunt electrons from reductants (e.g.,
NADH) with the assistance of the dehydrogenase system
[25, 26]. Notably, the Au(I) species on the surface of Au
nanocomplexes reduces the electron density of tetrazole ligands,
resulting in localized positive charges that facilitate efficient
interception of electrons in the ETC [27, 28]. To probe how
tetrazole ligand structure modulates surface Au(I) content
and consequent electron-shunting efficacy, we synthesized
formulations featuring different tetrazole charge densities on
Au nanocomplexes, including 1-methyl-5-aminotetrazole Au
nanocomplexes (1-M-ATZ-Au), 2-methyl-5-aminotetrazole Au
nanocomplexes
(2-M-ATZ-Au),
and
5-aminomethyltetrazole
Au nanocomplexes (AMTZ-Au) (Figure 2A,B). After synthesis
and dialysis, we characterized their key physicochemical
properties. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis
(Figure 2B; Figure S3) revealed that all Au nanocomplexes
exhibited a spherical morphology, with lattice fringes (0.23 nm)
corresponding to the interplanar spacing of the Au (111) crystal
plane. The average diameters (Figure 2C) and polydispersity
indices (PDI) of ATZ-Au, 1-M-ATZ-Au, 2-M-ATZ-Au, and
AMTZ-Au were 2.83 ± 0.69 nm (PDI: 0.059), 4.92 ± 3.06 nm
(PDI: 0.387), 6.68 ± 2.09 nm (PDI: 0.099), and 2.85 ± 0.47 nm
(PDI: 0.027), respectively. Their zeta potentials were -25.1 ±
2 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SCHEME 1
Schematic illustration of the synthesis and bactericidal Mechanism of ATZ-Au. (A) Mixed-valence Au(I)/Au(0) ATZ-Au nanomaterial
synthesized via a one-pot method under ice bath conditions. (B) Inspired by the biological vitality indicator tetrazolium salt, the localized positively
charged system formed by Au(I) and the tetrazolyl ligand in ATZ-Au efficiently shunts electrons that would normally be transferred from upstream
electron donors (NADH/FADH2) to downstream acceptors in the ETC. This shunting prevents the effective activation of terminal oxidases, leading
to PMF collapse, subsequent impairment of H+ efflux, and loss of OXPHOS. Meanwhile, sustained NADH depletion blocks bacterial compensatory
glycolysis and fermentation, ultimately inducing severe intracellular acidosis that halts key cellular processes and results in bacterial death. Importantly,
this electron-shunting effect potently suppresses ROS generation at its source, thereby overcoming ROS-associated resistance development.
0.49 mV, -11.36 ± 0.90 mV, -8.43 ± 0.12 mV, and -28.23 ± 0.93 mV,
respectively, indicating enhanced size uniformity and colloidal
stability for ATZ-Au and AMTZ-Au [29]. This observation was
further corroborated by visual changes in solution appearance
after 4 days of storage at 37◦C (Figure S4). X-ray diffraction
(XRD) analysis (Figure 2D) revealed distinct diffraction peaks
for ATZ-Au, 1-M-ATZ-Au, and 2-M-ATZ-Au at 38.18◦, 44.36◦,
64.68◦, and 77.74◦, corresponding to the (111), (200), (220), and
(311) crystallographic planes of metallic Au, respectively. The
exposed planes were predominantly the (111) plane with high
crystallinity, while AMTZ-Au showed no distinct diffraction
peaks, likely stemming from its slightly smaller particle size and
Advanced Materials, 2026
3 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 1
Validation of the “electron-shunting” strategy. (A) Flow cytometry results of intracellular ROS levels in MRSA after different treatments.
(B) O2∙−production in MRSA after different treatments, measured using the NBT reduction assay. (C) Changes in the MIC of Norflox against MRSA
under conditions where MB reduces the amount of ROS generation. (D) Electron flux in the respiratory chain of MRSA after different treatments. (E)
Intracellular ATP levels in MRSA after different treatments. (F) Flow cytometry results of ΔΨ in MRSA after different treatments. (G) Mean fluorescence
intensity of ΔpH in MRSA after different treatments. (H) Bacterial survival rates after different treatments. Data are expressed as means ± SD (n = 3).
P-values were calculated using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; n.s., not significant.
subsequent
structural
disordering
[30].
Fourier
transform
infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Figure 2F) exhibited strong
characteristic peaks at 900–1200 cm−1 for pristine ligands,
corresponding to tetrazole ring skeletal vibrations (e.g., C-N
stretching, ring in-plane bending) [31]. For Au nanocomplexes,
these
peaks
were
markedly
attenuated,
indicating
that
coordination to the Au surface notably altered the electronic and
vibrational properties of the tetrazole ring. X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) exhibited characteristic peaks for Au, N, C
and O (Figure 2E). Quantitative analysis further revealed an
approximate 1:1 ligand/Au atomic ratio. This stoichiometric
ratio matches the theoretical monolayer coverage requirement,
confirming successful, high-density immobilization of tetrazole
ligands
on
Au
nanocomplexes
surfaces
(Figure
S5)
[32,
33].
High-resolution XPS analysis of the Au 4f region (Figure 2G)
revealed that the proportion of Au(I) increased significantly from
7.14% in AMTZ-Au to 60.93% in 2-M-ATZ-Au. This trend indicates
that electron-donating groups (e.g., methyl groups) help mitigate
the reduction of Au(I) to Au(0), suggesting a strong correlation
between the oxidation state of Au and ligand structure [34, 35].
To elucidate the influence of ligand structure on Au(I) stability
from the perspective of electronic structure, we performed density
functional theory (DFT) simulations using the Au25(0) cluster,
based on the bidentate coordination hypothesis (ligands bind via
both ring nitrogen atoms and amino nitrogen atoms). Mulliken
charge analysis (Figure S6) indicated that ATZ transferred higher
electron density (ΔQ = 0.266772 |e|) to the Au25 cluster compared
to AMTZ (ΔQ = 0.2446310 |e|). Charge density difference maps
(Figure 2H) confirmed that coordination predominantly occurred
4 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 2
Synthesis and characterization of Au nanocomplexes. (A) Schematic illustration of Au nanocomplexes synthesis. (B, C) TEM images
(B) and quantitatively calculated sizes (C) of ATZ-Au, 1-M-ATZ-Au, 2-M-ATZ-Au, and AMTZ-Au. Scale bar, 10 nm. (D-F) XRD spectra (D), XPS spectra
(E), and FTIR spectra (F) of ATZ-Au, 1-M-ATZ-Au, 2-M-ATZ-Au, and AMTZ-Au. (G) High-resolution XPS spectra of Au 4f and N 1s for ATZ-Au, 1-M-
ATZ-Au, 2-M-ATZ-Au, and AMTZ-Au. (H, I) Charge density difference (H) and electrostatic potential (I) of ATZ and AMTZ coordinated on the surface of
an Au25(0) nanocluster model. In (H), yellow indicates increased electron density, while cyan indicates decreased electron density. In (I), red represents
positive electrostatic potential and blue represents negative electrostatic potential. (J) CV curves of ATZ-Au, 1-M-ATZ-Au, 2-M-ATZ-Au, and AMTZ-Au
in saturated KCl solution (pH = 7) at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1.
Advanced Materials, 2026
5 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

through ring nitrogen atoms, with more pronounced electron
accumulation (yellow regions) for ATZ than AMTZ. Electrostatic
potential (ESP) analysis (Figure 2I) demonstrated that ATZ’s
conjugated system conferred high delocalized nucleophilicity
(blue regions) to the tetrazolium ring while preserving moderate
nucleophilicity at the amino group. In contrast, AMTZ exhib-
ited attenuated ring electron density due to methylene-induced
conjugation blockade [36], resulting in significantly diminished
nucleophilicity at the critical N1 site. These results theoretically
confirm that ligand structure directly impacts Au(I)-stabilizing
capacity by modulating electronic properties, specifically, the
amino group in ATZ electronically activates the ring nitrogen,
facilitating coordination to stabilize surface Au(I). In contrast,
the broken conjugation of AMTZ abrogates this synergy, favoring
the formation of Au(0). Control experiments further underscored
the dominant role of ligand structure in Au(I) stabilization.
In the absence of NaBH4, methyltetrazole (MTZ) did not yield
any nanoparticles, indicating it lacks the coordination capacity
critical for nucleation initiation. In contrast, ATZ alone mixed
with Au3+ formed large-sized aggregates (65.87% Au(I) content),
surpassing the 49.45% in NaBH4-reduced ATZ-Au. This validates
that ATZ’s amino group enhances the electron density of the
nitrogen ring, enabling Au(III) reduction and Au(I) stabilization
via coordination. By contrast, NaBH4 regulates nucleation and
growth by partially disrupting Au(I)-ligand bonds (Figure S7).
Au(I) stabilization, in turn, triggers ligand electron cloud rear-
rangement. This ligand-to-Au charge transfer and the consequent
electronic perturbation of the ligand are observable via high-
resolution N 1s XPS spectroscopy (Figure 2G). Accordingly, a
higher Au(I) content exerts a stronger electron-withdrawing
effect on the tetrazole ligands, reducing their electron density and
increasing the proportion of polarized nitrogen species (binding
energy: 401.0–402.0 eV) [37], thereby enhancing their electron-
accepting capacity and driving a positive shift in their reduction
potential (E). Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements (Figure 2J)
yielded ligand reduction potentials (E vs. Ag/AgCl, sat. KCl) of
approximately −406, −456, −363, and −515 mV for ATZ-Au, 1-M-
ATZ-Au, 2-M-ATZ-Au, and AMTZ-Au, respectively. Conversion
using the relationship E vs. SHE = E vs. Ag/AgCl (sat. KCl) +
0.197 V provided corresponding E vs. SHE values of −209, −259,
−166, and −318 mV. Therefore, subtle differences in ligand struc-
ture amplify their electronic effects by modulating the content of
Au(I) species, thereby inducing significant changes in reduction
potential. Furthermore, a reduction peak corresponding to the
reduction of Au(I) to Au (0), representing an electron-accepting
center, was also observed. Ligands with reduction potentials
exceeding those of the biological cofactors NADH (-320 mV vs.
SHE) and FADH2 (+31 mV vs. SHE) are thermodynamically
capable of shunting electrons from these reductants [23]. The
UV–visible absorption spectrum (Figure S8) showed that all four
nanoparticles lacked a characteristic surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) peak between 500–600 nm, attributable to Au(I) weakening
free electron density and their small size inducing quantum
effects [38, 39].
2.3
Antibacterial Activity Screening of
Tetrazole-Modified Au Nanocomplexes
Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum bacte-
ricidal concentration (MBC) determinations (Figure S9) showed
that bare Au nanoparticles (NPs) and tetrazole small molecules
exhibited no antibacterial activity, while ligand-conjugated Au
nanocomplexes all exhibited antibacterial activity, with ATZ-Au
showing the most potent bactericidal effect. Growth inhibition
assays against low-concentration bacteria (106 colony-forming
units, CFU mL−1) further confirmed ATZ-Au’s superior bac-
tericidal activity (Figure 3A,B; Figure S10). Notably, at their
respective antibacterial concentrations, all Au nanocomplexes
inhibited ATP synthesis (Figure 3C) and reduced ROS genera-
tion (Figure 3D,E; Figure S11). Figure S12 confirmed successful
bacterial uptake of the Au nanocomplexes. Due to their larger
particle sizes [40], 1-M-ATZ-Au and 2-M-ATZ-Au had insufficient
internalization, limiting their antibacterial efficacy. Strikingly,
despite the highest uptake efficiency, AMTZ-Au exhibited the
weakest antibacterial activity. Protein leakage assays (Figure 3F)
and β-galactosidase hydrolysis assays (Figure 3G) demonstrated
that intracellular Au nanocomplexes did not directly impair cell
membrane integrity within the initial 4 h, providing a sufficient
time window to interfere with membrane-localized ETC.
2.4
Cytocompatibility of ATZ-Au
Among the nanoparticles, ATZ-Au demonstrated the most
favorable safety profile, characterized by the highest safe con-
centration (187.5 µg mL−1, inducing <10% cytotoxicity in L929
cells) (Figure 4A) and the widest therapeutic window (40.4-fold,
defined as the ratio of safe concentration to MIC) [41]. This
confirms potent antibacterial activity at concentrations far below
those toxic to mammalian cells. Hemolysis assays further corrob-
orated biocompatibility trends consistent with cytotoxicity results
(Figure 4B). Owing to its superior physicochemical properties,
antibacterial potency, and biosafety, ATZ-Au was selected for
in-depth investigation.
To comprehensively characterize the biosafety of ATZ-Au at
its maximum safe dose, a series of cytotoxicity evaluations
was conducted. The Live/Dead cell viability assay revealed that
ATZ-Au-treated L929 cells exhibited nearly unaltered viability
(Figure 4C). Cytoskeletal staining showed that ATZ-Au did not
induce significant alterations in cellular morphology or F-actin
architecture (Figure 4D). Apoptosis analysis via Annexin V-
FITC/PI dual staining indicated that ATZ-Au did not trigger
programmed cell death, with the total apoptotic cell percentage
(early + late apoptosis) remaining at approximately 5%, compa-
rable to the 4.21% observed in the control group (Figure 4E).
Furthermore, ATZ-Au did not significantly disrupt the plasma
membrane potential (DiSC3(5) staining), indicating an absence
of direct physical damage to the mammalian cell membrane
or interference with ion channel function (Figure 4F). Given
that the antibacterial mechanism of ATZ-Au involves target-
ing the bacterial ETC, we specifically investigated its potential
impact on mammalian mitochondrial function. JC-1 staining
demonstrated that unlike the proton uncoupler carbonyl cyanide
3-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP), which induces mitochondrial
membrane potential (MMP) depolarization, ATZ-Au did not trig-
ger MMP disruption, as evidenced by an unchanged ratio of red
(aggregates, high MMP) to green (monomers, low MMP) fluores-
cence (Figure 4I,J) [42]. This is associated with ATZ-Au’s minimal
mitochondrial internalization (Figure 4G). Consequently, intra-
cellular ATP levels in L929 cells remained unaffected by ATZ-Au
6 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 3
Antibacterial Activity Screening of Au nanocomplexes. (A) Optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of diluted suspensions of MRSA and
Enterococcus faecalis (E. faecalis) after different treatments at 24 h and 48 h. (B) Bacterial viability of MRSA and E. faecalis after treatment with different
groups. (C) Intracellular ATP levels in MRSA and E. faecalis following 8 h of treatment with ATZ-Au, 1-M-ATZ-Au, 2-M-ATZ-Au, or AMTZ-Au. (D) Flow
cytometry results of intracellular ROS levels in MRSA and E. faecalis treated with various Au nanocomplexes. (E) O2∙−production in MRSA and E.
faecalis treated with various Au nanocomplexes. (F) Protein leakage from MRSA and E. faecalis treated with various Au nanocomplexes. (G) Bacterial
membrane permeability, assessed by the hydrolysis of o-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside (ONPG), in MRSA and E. faecalis treated with various Au
nanocomplexes. Data are expressed as means ± SD (n = 3). P-values were calculated using one-way ANOVA (C, E) and two-way ANOVA (F, G) with
Tukey’s post hoc test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; n.s., not significant.
treatment (Figure 4H). Collectively, ATZ-Au exhibits favorable
selective toxicity, with no significant mammalian cytotoxicity
nor mitochondrial ETC impairment at its effective antibacterial
concentrations.
2.5
Antibacterial Activity and Mechanism of
ATZ-Au
The killing kinetics curves (Figure 5A) demonstrated that ATZ-
Au at 2-fold MIC eliminated ∼3.5 log10 CFU/mL of MRSA and
∼6.5 log10 CFU/mL of E. faecalis within 1 h and achieved complete
eradication within 4 h. Its bactericidal efficiency is superior to
that of vancomycin (Vanco, 128 µg mL−1, 64×MIC). Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) images (Figure 5B) revealed that
the treated bacteria displayed surface blistering and roughness,
as indicated by red arrows. TEM images (Figure 5C) showed
cell wall thickening (indicated by black arrows) and mesosome-
like structures (indicated by red arrows), which are structural
artifacts derived from plasma membrane invaginations, reflecting
perturbations in plasma membrane architecture [43]. To verify
the composition of the intracellular aggregates observed by TEM,
we performed energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) point
analysis. As shown in Figure 5D, a high electron-density region
Advanced Materials, 2026
7 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 4
Cytotoxicity evaluation of ATZ-Au. (A) Viability of L929 murine fibroblast cells following treatment with various Au nanocomplexes,
determined via the CCK-8 assay. (B) Hemolysis rate of mouse red blood cells after 4 h incubation with various Au nanocomplexes. (C) Representative
fluorescence images of L929 cell viability following treatment with ATZ-Au at its safe concentration, assessed via Calcein AM/PI live/dead staining. Scale
bars, 100 µm. (D) Representative images of the cytoskeleton in L929 cells after ATZ-Au treatment, stained with TRITC-phalloidin (F-actin, red) and DAPI
(nuclei, blue). Scale bars, 100 µm. (E) Flow cytometric analysis of apoptosis in L929 cells following ATZ-Au treatment using Annexin V-FITC/PI dual
staining. (F) Assessment of plasma membrane potential in L929 cells under different treatments, measured with the fluorescent potentiometric dye
DiSC3(5). (G) Uptake efficiency of ATZ-Au by cells and mitochondria. (H) Intracellular ATP levels in L929 cells treated with ATZ-Au. (I, J) Quantitative
analysis of MMP expressed as the ratio of red (aggregate, high MMP) to green (monomer, low MMP) JC-1 fluorescence intensity (I) and representative
JC-1 fluorescence images (J) of L929 cells under different treatments. Scale bars, 100 µm. Data are expressed as means ± SD (n = 3). P-values were
calculated using an unpaired t-test (H), one-way ANOVA (I); Tukey’s post hoc test was applied following significant ANOVA results. Significance levels:
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; n.s., not significant.
8 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 5
Antibacterial activity of ATZ-Au. (A) Time-dependent killing of MRSA and E. faecalis treated with ATZ-Au or Vanco. Data are presented
as means ± SD (n = 3 independent experiments). (B) Representative SEM images of MRSA and E. faecalis treated with ATZ-Au. Red arrows indicate
membrane blebbing and rough bacterial surfaces. Scale bars, 1 µm. (C) Representative TEM images of MRSA and E. faecalis treated with ATZ-Au. Black
arrows indicate cell wall thickening, and red arrows indicate mesosome-like structures. Scale bars, 1 µm, 200 nm, 500 nm. (D) (Left) TEM images of
MRSA and E. faecalis obtained by point scanning and (Right) corresponding EDS point spectrum analysis for Au element content. Scale bars, 200 nm.
(E) Flow cytometry analysis of membrane integrity over time in MRSA and E. faecalis treated with ATZ-Au.
within the bacterial cytoplasm (square in the TEM image) was
selected for elemental characterization. The corresponding EDS
spectrum exhibited a distinct characteristic peak at approximately
2.1 keV, corresponding to the Au Mα emission line, an element
that is absent in the background spectrum acquired from a
nearby sample-free area. This comparison confirms that the
observed aggregates are Au-based, corroborating the successful
internalization and accumulation of ATZ-Au nanoparticles in
the bacterial cytoplasm [44, 45]. Notably, propidium iodide (PI)
staining revealed that significant disruption of bacterial mem-
brane integrity (for MRSA at 6 h post-treatment and for E. faecalis
at 4 h post-treatment) occurs subsequent to bacterial death,
indicating that ATZ-Au exerts its antibacterial effect via a non-
lytic mechanism (Figure 5E). Collectively, ATZ-Au accumulate
in the bacterial cytoplasm without directly compromising mem-
brane integrity; instead, they induce metabolic dysregulation,
ultimately leading to extensive disruption of normal bacterial
ultrastructure.
Advanced Materials, 2026
9 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

2.6
The Electron-Shunting Mechanism of
ATZ-Au
Time-dependent ROS analysis showed that ATZ-Au exerts a rapid
and sustained inhibitory effect on total ROS (Figure 6A; Figure
S13), with hydroxyphenyl fluorescein (HPF) staining further
confirming its effective suppression of hydroxyl radical (∙OH)
production (Figure 6B). In contrast, Vanco significantly accumu-
lates ROS during bactericidal action. ATZ-Au lacks the capacity
to scavenge H2O2 and 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) rad-
icals like the reducing agent vitamin C (VC) (Figure 6C; Figure
S14) [46], and exerts a negligible influence on the activity of
antioxidant enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) and
catalase (CAT) (Figure 6D). Therefore, we propose that the ROS-
free bactericidal mechanism of ATZ-Au resides in the inhibition
of bacterial ROS generation rather than the scavenging of ROS.
To validate this hypothesis, we examined the impact of ATZ-
Au on key stages of the ETC-mediated ROS generation process,
encompassing “electron supply”, “electron transport”, and “elec-
tron acceptance”. By exogenously supplying electron donors (e.g.,
NADH or succinate) to ATZ-Au-treated bacteria [47], we observed
that the addition of NADH and succinate exerted negligible
effects on intracellular ROS levels, suggesting that the functional
target of ATZ-Au does not reside in the “electron supply” stage
(Figure 6E; Figure S15). By elevating the concentration of the
electron acceptor (O2 or menadione, a menaquinone analog)
in ATZ-Au-treated bacteria [48], we detected no significant
alteration in intracellular ROS levels, demonstrating that the
mechanism is not associated with the “electron reception” stage
(Figure 5F,G; Figures S16 and S17). Therefore, we next focused
on the “electron transport” stage. Given that AMTZ-Au exhibits
internalization efficiency comparable to ATZ-Au but markedly
lower antibacterial efficacy (Figures S9 and S12), a discrepancy
that may stem from ligand-modulated electronic properties, we
used it alongside bare Au NPs as controls (matching the Au mass
concentration of ATZ-Au at 2×MIC). The INT reduction assay
demonstrated that ATZ-Au rapidly and sustainably suppressed
ETC electron flux (65.2%) within 1 h, with an inhibitory effect
higher than that of 128 µg mL−1 tedizolid (54.8%), while bare Au
NPs and AMTZ-Au showed no such interference (Figure 6H).
ATZ-Au-induced electron flux deficiency prevents downstream
terminal oxidases (e.g., cytochrome bd or aa3) from being driven
[49], reducing bacterial oxygen consumption rate (OCR) to ∼25%
of baseline within 15 min. By contrast, the 20 µm proton uncoupler
CCCP accelerates ETC turnover, triggering a ∼3-fold OCR surge
over the same period; bare Au NPs and AMTZ-Au had negligible
effects on OCR (Figure 6I). Notably, while all formulations were
tested at the same Au concentration, only ATZ-Au targeted the
bacterial ETC, which demonstrates that this effect arises not from
the inherent properties of Au, but from the precise electron-
shunting capability endowed by the 5-aminotetrazole ligand.
Furthermore, AMTZ-Au only exhibits weak, concentration-
dependent ETC interference at Au concentrations far exceeding
ATZ-Au’s effective dose. This indicates that ATZ-Au (ligand: E
≈−209 mV vs. SHE) is more prone to accepting electrons than
AMTZ-Au (ligand: E ≈−318 mV vs. SHE), further validating that
the ligand structure governs the nanoparticle’s electron-shunting
efficiency via regulating reduction potential, thereby determining
antibacterial potency (Figure S18). To investigate whether the
shunted electrons are transferred to Au(I), we isolated ATZ-
Au from bacterial lysates obtained from bacteria subjected to
different treatments. When bacteria with their ETC function
inhibited by tedizolid were treated with ATZ-Au, the Au(I)
content remained virtually unchanged. In contrast, when normal
bacteria were treated with ATZ-Au, the Au(I) content decreased
to 9.53%, accompanied by a negative shift in the binding energy
of the Au 4f XPS peaks, which was ascribed to increased electron
density [50, 51]. This indicates that the electrons derived from the
bacterial ETC are involved in the reduction of Au(I) (Figure 6J).
When ATZ-Au served as the working electrode and was exposed
to the bacterial suspension, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV)
detected a distinct cathodic current, further confirming that
abundant electrons provided by bacteria were transferred to
ATZ-Au (Figure 6K). To determine the consequence of ATZ-
Au-mediated electron shunting, we examined changes in key
electron transport components downstream of the ETC. The
results showed that ATZ-Au-induced electron shunting blocked
electron transfer from NADH to flavin complexes (FAD) [20],
leading to the accumulation of FAD, which reached 136.1% of the
initial baseline (F0) within 5 min. Consequently, the blockade
of FAD reduction to FADH2 disrupted the normal operation
of the ETC without generating ROS (Figure 6L). In addition,
succinate is typically oxidized in the ETC to generate FADH2,
which subsequently transfers electrons to the menaquinone pool
[23, 52]. As shown in Figure 6E,G, the addition of succinate
and menadione still did not increase the intracellular ROS levels
in ATZ-Au-treated MRSA, indicating that ATZ-Au also shunts
the electrons transferred in this process. Thus, since the locally
positively charged tetrazolyl ligand in ATZ-Au has a higher
reduction potential (−209 mV vs. SHE) than NADH (−320 mV
vs. SHE), it temporarily accepts electrons from NADH in NDH-
2 before rapidly transferring them to surface-bound Au(I) via
the conductive pathway of Au. Meanwhile, Au(I) stably retained
within the particles (+242 mV vs. SHE) captures electrons from
the remaining FADH2 (+31 mV vs. SHE). This local positive
charge system formed by the ligand and Au(I) facilitates dual,
efficient electron interception, disrupting ETC function while
inhibiting ROS formation (Figure 6M).
Importantly, acting as a downstream electron sink for NDH-2,
ATZ-Au forces NDH-2 to persistently and futilely oxidize NADH
to compensate for continuous electron shunting [53, 54]. This
leads to rapid NADH depletion (intracellular NADH concentra-
tion decreased from ∼1.53 × 10−3 to ∼9.5 × 10−4 nmol cell−1)
and a consequent significant imbalance in the NAD+/NADH
redox ratio. This pattern of NADH depletion differs distinctly
from the transient NADH depletion induced by oxidative stress-
inducing bactericidal antibiotics (e.g., Vanco, Norflox) [11] and is
completely opposite to the NADH accumulation caused by the
classical NDH-2 inhibitor 2-Heptyl-4-hydroxyquinoline N-oxide
(HQNO) [22], and is significantly attenuated by HQNO co-
administration (Figure 6N,O; Figure S19). Thus, the exhaustion of
cellular reducing power triggered by ATZ-Au maximally blocks
electron supply to the ETC, further exacerbating its functional
collapse.
The electron-shunting capability of ATZ-Au exhibits universality,
remaining effective even in bacteria such as E. faecalis, which
lack heme synthesis capacity and possess specialized ETCs
(Figure 7A). In the absence of heme, E. faecalis fails to synthesize
cytochrome bd (Cyt-bd) oxidase, leading to the accumulation of
electrons transferred by NDH-2 in the quinone pool and excessive
10 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 6
The electron-shunting Mechanism of ATZ-Au. (A, B) Flow cytometry analysis of intracellular total ROS (A) and ∙OH levels (B) in MRSA
treated with ATZ-Au or Vanco over time. (C) Free radical scavenging ability of ATZ-Au and VC against H2O2. (D) SOD activity and CAT activity in MRSA
after ATZ-Au treatment. (E) Intracellular ROS levels measured by flow cytometry in ATZ-Au-treated MRSA supplemented with exogenous electron
donors (NADH, succinate). (F) Intracellular ROS levels in MRSA treated with ATZ-Au under normoxic (21% O2) or hyperoxic (50% O2) conditions. (G)
Intracellular ROS levels in MRSA treated with ATZ-Au after adding the exogenous artificial quinone acceptor menadione. (H) Electron concentration
in the ETC of MRSA after different treatments. (I) OCR curves of MRSA under different treatments. (J) High-resolution XPS spectra of Au 4f peaks from
ATZ-Au-treated MRSA pre-exposed to tedizolid or PBS. (K) LSV curve of ATZ-Au in the presence of MRSA. (L) Intracellular FAD content in MRSA after
ATZ-Au treatment. (M) Schematic diagram illustrating the electron-shunting mechanism of ATZ-Au. (N, O) Time-dependent changes in the absolute
concentrations of NADH (N) and the NAD+/NADH ratio (O) in MRSA. Data are expressed as means ± SD (n = 3). P-values were calculated using
unpaired t-test (D), one-way ANOVA (C), and two-way ANOVA (B); Tukey’s post hoc test was applied following significant ANOVA results. Significance
levels: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; n.s., not significant.
Advanced Materials, 2026
11 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 7
Validating the electron-shunting mechanism of ATZ-Au in E. faecalis. (A) Antibacterial activity of ATZ-Au against E. faecalis without
a functional ETC (without heme) or with a functional ETC (with heme). (B, C) Electron concentration in the ETC of E. faecalis without heme (B) and
with heme (C) under different treatments. (D) OCR curves of E. faecalis (with heme) after different treatments. (E, F) Extracellular H2O2 concentration
(E) and intracellular ∙OH levels (F) in E. faecalis (without heme) treated with ATZ-Au or Vanco. (G) Time-dependent intracellular total ROS levels in E.
faecalis (without heme) treated with ATZ-Au or Vanco, measured by flow cytometry. (H) SOD enzyme activity of E. faecalis treated with ATZ-Au. (I–K)
Time-dependent changes in absolute NAD+ and NADH concentrations (I, J) and the NAD+/NADH ratio (K) in E. faecalis without heme or with heme.
Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3). Statistical analyses were performed using an unpaired t-test (H) and two-way ANOVA (I, J); Tukey’s post hoc
test was applied for multiple comparisons following significant ANOVA results. Significance levels: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001;
n.s., not significant.
12 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ROS production via autoxidation. Conversely, heme enables Cyt-
bd-mediated aerobic respiration, reducing quinone pool electrons
and ROS [55, 56]. INT reduction assay (Figure 7B,C) and OCR
assays (Figure 7D) confirmed that ATZ-Au significantly sup-
pressed electron flux and oxygen consumption in the respiratory
chain of E. faecalis, thereby inhibiting the generation of ROS
(including extracellular H2O2 and intracellular ∙OH) (Figure 7E–
H). Similarly, ATZ-Au’s electron-shunting effect induces intra-
cellular NADH depletion and imbalance in the NAD+/NADH
redox ratio in E. faecalis, thereby abrogating its ETC recovery
capacity and ultimately triggering irreversible functional collapse
(Figure 7I–K).
2.7
ETC-Mediated Energy Metabolism
Alterations Induced by ATZ-Au
ATZ-Au significantly intercepted electron flow in the ETC, lead-
ing to markedly reduced efficiency of downstream proton pumps.
This disruption impaired transmembrane ΔpH (Figure 8A,E;
Figure S20) and ΔΨ (Figure 8B,F), ultimately triggering PMF
collapse. The change not only compromised H+ efflux function
but also blocked OXPHOS [57], causing a sharp drop in ATP
levels at the initial stage of treatment (Figure 8C,G). Confronted
with an energy crisis, both MRSA and E. faecalis (whether
or not they contain heme) initiated metabolic remodeling [58,
59]. They enhanced glycolysis and fermentation pathways to
maintain energy homeostasis and ensure survival (Figure S21).
This adaptation was manifested by a transient recovery in ATP
levels, with peaks at ∼15 min for MRSA and ∼3 min for E. faecalis
(Figure 8C,G). The ATP/ADP ratio increased synchronously,
exceeding that of the NC group at 15 min for MRSA and at
both 3 min and 15 min for E. faecalis (Figure 8D, H). This
compensatory phase was accompanied by a marked elevation
in lactate dehydrogenase activity (LDH) (Figure S22) as well as
substantial accumulation of pyruvate and lactate (Figure 8I,L).
Critically, lactate (pKa≈3.86) dissociates to release H+ under
physiological conditions, further exacerbating intracellular acidi-
fication [60]. However, the irreversible hijacking of electron flow
by ATZ-Au induced persistent rapid NADH depletion (Figure 6N;
Figure 7I,J). Bacteria gradually lost essential reducing power,
which prevented NAD+ regeneration (Figure 7I, J; Figure S19)
and consequently hindered and eventually halted glycolysis. Con-
sequently, the bacteria entered an irreversible state of metabolic
collapse, evidenced by a subsequent decline in ATP levels
(Figure 8C,G), ATP/ADP ratios falling below control values for
both strains at 30 min (Figure 8D,H), and a decrease in pyruvate
levels (Figure 8I,L). At this stage, to counteract progressively
worsening intracellular acidification, bacteria were forced to
reverse ATP synthase function for proton efflux. This process was
inefficient and instead accelerated the depletion of remaining
energy reserves (Figure 8J,M) [61]. Eventually, bacteria suffered
from dual exhaustion of energy and reduced power and failed
to maintain pH homeostasis. Severe intracellular acidosis thus
induced proved fatal to bacterial survival (Figure 8K,N; Figures
S23 and S24). Of note, heme-deficient E. faecalis lacked aerobic
respiration capacity and relied entirely on glycolysis and fermen-
tation for energy production, with ATP synthase only mediating
H+ efflux. Its lethal metabolic process was highly consistent
with that of heme-supplemented counterparts. No significant
differences were observed in ATP dynamics (Figure 8G,H), lactate
accumulation (Figure 8L), or the trajectory of enzyme activity
changes (Figure 8M; Figure S22). This result demonstrates that
the metabolic lethal effect of ATZ-Au does not depend on aerobic
respiration inhibition itself, but rather its core mechanism lies
in NADH depletion. This targeted mechanism fundamentally
blocks bacteria’s ability to shift to alternative energy-producing
pathways such as fermentation, thereby abolishing their pH
homeostasis.
Given that pH homeostasis is critical for sustaining essential
cellular processes (including enzyme activity, protein synthesis,
and membrane stability), its disruption directly triggers extensive
abnormalities in bacterial physiology, particularly in energy
metabolism [62, 63]. For tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle-dependent
bacteria (e.g., MRSA), intracellular acidification suppressed the
activity of TCA cycle enzymes (citrate synthase (CS), α- ketog-
lutarate dehydrogenase (α-KGDH), succinate dehydrogenase
(SDH), malate dehydrogenase (MDH)), pyruvate dehydroge-
nase (PDH), and key glycolytic enzymes (phosphofructokinase-1
(PFK), fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA), glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)) (Figure 8O). This induced
a significant downregulation of critical TCA metabolites (acetyl-
CoA, citrate, and fumarate), a marked decrease in key glycolytic
metabolites (phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), pyruvate), and accu-
mulation of fructose 1,6-diphosphate (FBP) (Figure 8P; Figures
S25 and S26) [64, 65]. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) pathway analysis revealed significant suppression of
major metabolic pathways, including the TCA cycle, glycoly-
sis/gluconeogenesis, and OXPHOS, thereby abrogating energy
production and thus harming the bacteria (Figure 8Q). For
non-TCA cycle-dependent bacteria (e.g., E. faecalis) that lack
key TCA cycle enzymes, intracellular acidification significantly
suppressed glycolysis-related enzymes (PFK, FBA, GAPDH,
phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK), pyruvate kinase (PK)) and PDH
in heme-supplemented E. faecalis (Figure 8R). This resulted in
notable depletion of 2-phosphoglycerate (2-PGA), PEP, pyruvate,
and acetyl-CoA, accompanied by accumulation of fructose-6-
phosphate (F-6-P) and FBP (Figure 8S; Figures S25 and S27) [66].
The marked downregulation of key energy-producing pathways,
including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and OXPHOS (Figure 8T),
combined with the comprehensive inhibition of all critical
energy-generating mechanisms, ultimately led to bacterial death.
The identical acidosis-driven metabolic collapse observed in
bacteria with divergent metabolic profiles strongly confirms that
ATZ-Au exerts broad-spectrum antibacterial activity by disrupt-
ing the central supply of energy and cellular reducing power
(Figure 8U).
2.8
Mechanistic Analysis of the Low Resistance
Risk of ATZ-Au
Typically, bactericides utilize iron from iron-sulfur clusters to
promote Fenton reaction-mediated generation of ∙OH, which
damages bacterial DNA, proteins, and lipids, and this is the
key mechanism underlying ROS-induced bacterial death [11].
To further verify whether the bactericidal activity of ATZ-
Au involves this pathway, ZnO NPs, a typical ROS-dependent
antibacterial material [67], were employed as the PC group.
As shown in Figure 9A,B, the iron chelator 2,2’-bipyridine
(which sequesters free iron to block the Fenton reaction) and
Advanced Materials, 2026
13 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 8
Lethal energy metabolism mediated by the ETC induced by ATZ-Au. (A, E) Fluorescence intensity of ΔpH in ATZ-Au-treated MRSA
(A) and heme-containing E. faecalis (E). (B, F) Flow cytometry analysis of ΔΨ in ATZ-Au-treated MRSA (B) and heme-containing E. faecalis (F). (C,
G) ATP levels in MRSA (C), heme-containing E. faecalis (upper panel, G), and heme-deficient E. faecalis (lower panel, G) treated with ATZ-Au at
different time points. Here, “0+” denotes the instantaneous interaction time point. (D, H) ATP/ADP ratio in MRSA (D), heme-containing E. faecalis
(upper panel, H), and heme-deficient E. faecalis (lower panel, H) treated with ATZ-Au at different time points. (I, L) Contents of pyruvate and lactate
in MRSA (I), heme-containing E. faecalis (upper panel, L), and heme-deficient E. faecalis (lower panel, L) treated with ATZ-Au at different time points.
(J, M) Time-dependent maximum ATP hydrolase activity of ATP synthase in ATZ-Au-treated MRSA (J), heme-containing E. faecalis (upper panel, M),
and heme-deficient E. faecalis (lower panel, M) with NC (enzyme activity of inactivated bacteria) and positive control (PC, enzyme activity of log-phase
bacteria). (K, N) Intracellular pH levels of MRSA (K), heme-containing E. faecalis (upper panel, N), and heme-deficient E. faecalis (lower panel, N) under
14 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

thiourea (which directly scavenges ∙OH) significantly impaired
the bactericidal activity of ZnO NPs but did not affect that of
ATZ-Au, confirming that the bactericidal mechanism of ATZ-
Au is completely independent of the ROS pathway centered on
the Fenton reaction. This mechanistic difference is the key to
the distinct resistance profiles [13–15]. During 30 consecutive
passages, no detectable resistance to ATZ-Au was observed in
MRSA or E. faecalis (defined as MICn ≥4× MIC0). In contrast,
the MIC values of ROS-dependent ZnO NPs and traditional
antibiotics (Norflox and Vanco) increased sharply: for MRSA, the
MICs increased to 128-fold, 256-fold, and 64-fold, respectively,
while for E. faecalis, the MICs increased by 256-fold, 512-fold, and
32-fold, respectively (Figure 9D–I). More importantly, scavenging
ROS significantly delayed the development of resistance to ZnO
NPs and traditional antibiotics. This indicates that sublethal
levels of ROS act as a stressor to accelerate the enrichment
of drug-resistant mutants, whereas ATZ-Au, which avoids ROS
production, inherently exhibits a mechanism less prone to
inducing resistance. Furthermore, the mutation frequency of
ATZ-Au was maintained at 10−8 to 10−9, significantly lower than
that of the control groups, demonstrating an extremely low
intrinsic resistance risk (Figure 9C) [68]. Thus, the “electron
shunting” strategy that circumvents ROS can effectively prevent
ROS-mediated resistance development.
2.9
Evaluation of the Antibacterial Efficiency of
ATZ-Au In Vivo
To determine ATZ-Au’s efficacy against deep-seated infections,
we utilized a murine model of septic arthritis induced by direct
intra-articular injection of MRSA. This model enables precise
control of infection burden at specific anatomical sites, facilitat-
ing direct assessment of therapeutic effects on joint pathology
(Figure 10A) [69, 70]. Briefly, mice were randomly allocated to
four groups: an NC group receiving PBS alone, a PC group
infected with MRSA and treated with PBS; an ATZ-Au-treated
group, and a Vanco-treated group serving as the standard-of-care
control. Infected mice developed typical septic arthritis symptoms
(joint warmth, edema, and stiffness) at 24 h post-infection, con-
firming successful model establishment (Figure 10B). After three
consecutive days of treatment (On day 5), the PC group exhibited
progressive, severe joint swelling and purulent accumulation,
whereas both treatment groups showed symptom mitigation.
Notably, the ATZ-Au group achieved the most pronounced and
rapid edema resolution, with complete pus dissipation by day
7 (Figure 10B). Bacterial colony counting assays demonstrated
near-complete eradication of pathogens in the ATZ-Au group
(Figure 10C). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining indicated
a largely normal articular capsule structure in the ATZ-Au
group, with no evidence of subsequent inflammatory damage
in the tibial and femoral subchondral regions, whereas the PC
and Vanco groups exhibited prominent neutrophil infiltration in
the synovial layer and accompanying articular capsule swelling
(Figure 10D). Safranin O staining was performed to assess
the content and distribution of proteoglycans in the articular
cartilage matrix [69]. The results revealed a continuous articular
cartilage surface with no significant bone erosion in the ATZ-
Au group. In contrast, the PC and Vanco groups exhibited bone
loss, cartilage degeneration, and sparse chondrocyte distribution
(Figure 10E). To objectively quantify these observations, we
performed semi-quantitative scoring of key pathological features
(inflammation, synovial hyperplasia, osteophyte size, cartilage
degradation, bone erosion, bone formation, lameness) across
all groups. The corresponding heatmap (Figure 10F) clearly
confirmed that ATZ-Au treatment resulted in significantly less
synovial joint tissue damage than the PC and Vanco groups. These
results collectively demonstrated that ATZ-Au possesses excellent
local antibacterial and anti-inflammatory activities, which can
effectively block infection-mediated osteochondral destruction.
During the entire ATZ-Au treatment period, the changes in the
body weight of mice remained within 5% (Figure S28). In addition,
the biosafety was evaluated by performing H&E staining on major
organs, including the heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney, on the
seventh day after treatment. All the organs exhibited a normal
histological appearance, suggesting that ATZ-Au had good in vivo
biosafety (Figure 10G).
To further evaluate the broad-spectrum therapeutic potential of
ATZ-Au, we established a standardized murine full-thickness
dermal wound model infected with E. faecalis (Figure 11A).
This model is well-suited for assessing antimicrobial efficacy in
superficial infections, as it features bleeding and air exposure
that facilitate E. faecalis aerobic respiration. Mice were divided
into four groups: NC (uninfected, untreated), PC (infected, PBS-
treated), ATZ-Au-treated, and Vanco-treated. After 1 day of treat-
ment, ATZ-Au-treated wounds showed minimal exudation and
remained clean, contrasting sharply with the PC group (obvious
suppuration) and Vanco group (mild exudation) (Figure 11B). By
postoperative day 5, scab formation without underlying pus was
observed in the ATZ-Au, Vanco, and NC groups, whereas the PC
group remained covered with pseudomembranes and persistent
exudate (Figure 9B). Wound closure rate assessment revealed that
the ATZ-Au group achieved the fastest healing (Figure 11B,C).
Consistent with this, the bacterial load in infected skin tissue from
the ATZ-Au group was significantly lower than that in the other
groups (Figure 11D), a finding further corroborated by Giemsa
staining (red circles indicate bacteria) (Figure 11E). H&E staining
of wound sections revealed extensive inflammatory cell infiltra-
tion and disrupted tissue architecture in the PC group. In contrast,
ATZ-Au treatment. (O, R) Heatmaps displaying the relative activities of key enzymes in central carbon metabolism in MRSA (O) and heme-containing E.
faecalis (R). (P, S) Schematic diagrams summarizing the key alterations in glycolysis and the TCA cycle in MRSA (P) and glycolysis in heme-containing E.
faecalis (S). Solid and dashed arrows denote direct and multi-step reactions, respectively. Inhibited enzymes are highlighted in blue. Red upward and blue
downward arrows indicate metabolite increases and decreases, respectively. (Q, T) KEGG enrichment analysis of differentially abundant metabolites in
MRSA (Q) and heme-containing E. faecalis (T). Bubble color and size represent the -log10 (p-value) and pathway impact, respectively. (U) Schematic
diagram summarizing the ETC-mediated lethal metabolic collapse induced by ATZ-Au. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) (n =
3). Statistical analyses were performed using two-way ANOVA (D, H); Tukey’s post hoc test was applied for multiple comparisons following significant
ANOVA results. Significance levels: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, **** p < 0.0001; n.s., not significant.
Advanced Materials, 2026
15 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 9
Evaluation of ATZ-Au’s resistance profiles. (A, B) Time-dependent bactericidal activity of ATZ-Au and ZnO NPs against MRSA (A)
and E. faecalis (without heme) (B) in the presence of 2,2’-dipyridyl or thiourea. Data are presented as means ± SD (n = 3 independent experiments). (C)
Mutation frequency of resistance to ATZ-Au, ZnO NPs, Norflox, and Vanco in MRSA and E. faecalis after 30 consecutive passages. Data are presented
as means ± SD (n = 3 independent experiments). (D–F) Fold changes in MIC of MRSA to ATZ-Au (D), ZnO NPs (E), and Norflox/Vanco (F) after 30
consecutive passages in 1/2 MIC-containing medium. (G-I) Fold changes in MIC of E. faecalis to ATZ-Au (G), ZnO NPs (H), and Norflox/Vanco (I) after
30 consecutive passages in 1/2 MIC-containing medium.
the ATZ-Au and Vanco groups exhibited markedly reduced
inflammation and enhanced the formation of a continuous, intact
neo-epidermis (indicated by blue rectangles) (Figure 11F). Mas-
son’s trichrome staining, which stains collagen fibers blue, was
employed to assess tissue remodeling [71]. Quantitative analysis
of the stained sections (Figure S29) confirmed that the PC group
exhibited sparse, disorganized collagen, whereas substantial,
well-organized collagen deposition was observed in the newly
formed tissue of the ATZ-Au and Vanco groups, indicative of
advanced healing (Figure 11G). Collectively, efficient pathogen
clearance by ATZ-Au underpins inflammation resolution and
subsequent tissue regeneration. Complete blood count (CBC)
analysis confirmed that ATZ-Au treatment effectively suppressed
the localized wound infection without inducing systemic effects
(Figure S30). Therefore, ATZ-Au effectively promotes wound
healing by alleviating the inflammatory response and promoting
collagen deposition in E. faecalis-infected wounds. During the
treatment period, the body weights of mice in all groups changed
by less than 5% (Figure S31).
To further validate ATZ-Au’s efficacy against E. faecalis under
anaerobic conditions, we established a murine model of acute
urinary tract infection (UTI) [72]. At 24 h post-inoculation, clin-
ical signs including urethral meatal erythema, swelling, reduced
single void volume, and increased urinary frequency were noted
in infected mice, confirming successful model establishment
16 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 10
Evaluation of the in vivo efficacy of ATZ-Au against septic arthritis. (A) Schematic diagram of the establishment and treatment process
of the septic arthritis model. The four groups are: NC, PC, ATZ-Au, and Vanco. (B) Representative images of the knee joints from each group on days 0,
2, 5, and 7. (C) Quantification of MRSA colony counts in periarticular tissues and synovial fluid. (D) H&E-stained images of the knee joints. Scale bars:
left, 1000 µm; right, 100 µm. (E) Saffron O-stained images of the knee joints. Scale bars: top, 1000 µm; bottom, 500 µm. (F) Heatmap of histological scores:
(1) inflammation score; (2) synovial hyperplasia; (3) osteophyte size; (4) cartilage degradation; (5) bone erosion; (6) bone formation; (7) lameness score.
(G) H&E images of the heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys harvested from the mouse models in each treatment group. Scale bar, 100 µm. All data are
expressed as means ± SD (n = 6). P-values were calculated using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p
< 0.0001; n.s., not significant.
(Figure 11H). On day 3 post-infection (after 2 days of treatment),
quantitative culture analyses demonstrated that ATZ-Au treat-
ment significantly reduced bacterial loads in urine, bladder, and
kidney tissues (Figure 11I). H&E staining revealed that mice in
the PC and Vanco groups exhibited exfoliation of transitional
epithelial cells (black arrows), inflammatory cell infiltration
in the bladder mucosa (white arrows), and bladder mucosal
hyperplasia (red arrows) in the bladder (Figure 11J), as well
as renal interstitial hemorrhage (black arrows) and prominent
mesangial hypercellularity with glomerular enlargement (red
arrows) in the kidney (Figure 11K). In contrast, mice treated with
ATZ-Au exhibited near-complete resolution of inflammatory
Advanced Materials, 2026
17 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FIGURE 11
Evaluation of the in vivo efficacy of ATZ-Au against E. faecalis-associated infection. (A) Schematic diagram of the establishment
and treatment process of a full-thickness cutaneous wound infection model with E. faecalis. The four groups are: NC, PC, ATZ-Au, and Vanco. (B)
Representative photographic documentation of wound healing in each group on days 0, 2, 5, 10, and 14 post-infection. (C) Calculated wound areas during
the treatment period. (D) Quantification of E. faecalis colony counts in homogenized tissue dilution from the wound periphery. (E) Representative
Giemsa staining images of skin wound tissues. Scale bars, 100 µm. (F) H&E staining images of skin tissue sections collected from wound areas. The
blue rectangle indicates the gap of the repaired epidermal layer. Scale bars: left, 500 µm; right, 50 µm. (G) Masson’s trichrome staining images of the
healed skin wound. Scale bars: left, 500 µm; right, 50 µm. (H) Schematic of the establishment and treatment protocol for the murine acute urinary tract
infection model. (I) Quantification of bacterial loads in (a, b) urine on days 1 and 3, and in (c) bladder and (d) kidney tissues harvested on day 3. (J) H&E
staining of bladder sections. Black arrows indicate exfoliation of transitional epithelial cells; white arrows indicate infiltration of inflammatory cells in
18 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

changes in both bladder and kidney tissues, underscoring its
excellent tissue-protective capacity in complex luminal infec-
tion microenvironments (Figure 11J,K). CBC analysis further
corroborated the attenuation of systemic inflammation in ATZ-
Au-treated mice (Figure S32). Additionally, in the experiment of
E. faecalis infection, the histopathological assessment of major
organs further confirmed a favorable biosafety profile for ATZ-
Au, with no evidence of drug-induced toxicity (Figures S33 and
S34).
Finally, we confirmed the pharmacokinetic characteristics of
ATZ-Au via elemental analysis. ATZ-Au, administered intraperi-
toneally, entered the bloodstream within 1 h, peaked at ∼6 h, and
declined to near-undetectable levels by 24 h. The nanocomplexes
distributed rapidly to major organs, with notable accumulation
in the kidneys, liver, and spleen at 4 h post-administration,
achieving distribution equilibrium at ∼12 h. Notably, urinary
Au content peaked at 8 h and fell to near-zero by 24 h, a
trend consistent with renal clearance profiles, confirming renal
excretion as its primary clearance pathway [73]. Importantly, Au
accumulation in other major organs (e.g., heart, lung, brain)
was negligible, further verifying ATZ-Au’s favorable biosafety and
rapid clearance properties (Figure S35).
3
Conclusion
In summary, this study constructed an antibacterial strategy cen-
tered on “electron shunting,” which achieves effective bacterial
eradication by disrupting the bacterial ETC without inducing
ROS production. Benefiting from the precise regulation of ligand
structure on Au(I) states and reduction potential, we fabricated
ATZ-Au nanomaterials to advance the clinical translation of
this “electron shunting” strategy. The synergistic effect of the
ATZ ligand and Au(I) endows the material with a locally elec-
tropositive structure, enabling it to continuously and rapidly
intercept electrons from key electron donors such as NADH and
FADH2. This effect triggers irreversible metabolic collapse, since
NADH depletion blocks bacterial compensatory pathways along
with PMF dissipation and lethal intracellular acidosis, ultimately
leading to bacterial death. Critically, this strategy decouples
bacterial killing from oxidative stress, and this ROS-independent
mechanism offers a significant advantage in reducing the risk
of antibiotic resistance development, a limitation of traditional
antibacterial therapies. In vivo validation using multiple infection
models confirmed that ATZ-Au possesses both excellent ther-
apeutic efficacy and favorable biocompatibility. Although this
study successfully integrates the surface electronic properties of
nanomaterials with the precise regulation of bacterial bioener-
getic metabolism, future research should focus on expanding
its therapeutic window and exploring its antibacterial efficacy
against a broader spectrum of multidrug-resistant pathogens.
Ultimately, this electron shunting strategy provides a highly
promising new approach to addressing the escalating crisis of
antibiotic resistance.
4
Experimental Section
4.1
Ethical Statement
Balb/c mice were purchased from the Animal Experimental
Center, Lanzhou University. All animal experimental proto-
cols were performed strictly following the guidelines estab-
lished by the Association of Laboratory Animal Sciences and
the Center for Laboratory Animal Sciences at the School of
Stomatology, Lanzhou University (Ethics approval number:
LZUKQ-2023-065).
4.2
Statistical Analysis
Statistics were performed with GraphPad Prism 7.0 software. All
the results were presented as the mean value plus a standard
deviation (±SD) from at least three independent experiments.
One- or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s
post hoc test was used to compare the means of more than
two groups. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001
were considered statistically significant, and n.s. p>0.05 was
considered non-significant.
4.3
Declaration of AI Assistance
The author team independently developed this manuscript and
employed DeepSeek exclusively for linguistic improvement after
draft completion. Following this assistance, the authors reviewed
and edited all content, accepting full responsibility for the final
publication.
Author Contributions
M.H.: Investigation, Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing
– original draft, Data curation. Q.L.: Investigation, Methodology, Valida-
tion, Data curation. Z.S.: Methodology, Data curation. J.L.: Data curation.
Z.H.: Data curation. R.T.: Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing –
review and editing. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Foundation for Innovative Research
Groups of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82470995,
82101011), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(lzujbky-2022-ey19), the Natural Science Foundation of Gansu Province
of China (24JRRA951, 24JRRA383, 25JRRA1287, 2022-0405-JCC-0442),
the Medical Innovation and Development Project of Lanzhou University
(lzuyxcx-2022-182), the Lanzhou Municipal Science and Technology Plan
Project (2023-4-44), the Education Technology Innovation Project of
Gansu Province (2024B-003), the Gansu Association for Science and
Technology (GXH20220530-16), and the Gansu Provincial Youth Talent
Project (2025QNGR76).
the bladder mucosa; red arrows indicate bladder mucosal hyperplasia. Scale bars, 100 µm. (K) H&E staining of kidney sections. Black arrows indicate
renal interstitial hemorrhage; red arrows indicate prominent mesangial hypercellularity with glomerular enlargement. Data are expressed as means ±
SD (n = 6). P-values were calculated using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001; n.s., not
significant.
Advanced Materials, 2026
19 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
References
1. F. Baquero and B. R. Levin, “Proximate and Ultimate Causes of the
Bactericidal Action of Antibiotics,” Nature Reviews Microbiology 19 (2020):
123–132, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-020-00443-1.
2. P. Belenky, J. D. Ye, C. B. M. Porter, et al., “Bactericidal Antibiotics
Induce Toxic Metabolic Perturbations That Lead to Cellular Damage,”
Cell Reports 13 (2015): 968–980, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2015.09.
059.
3. M. Zampieri, M. Zimmermann, M. Claassen, and U. Sauer, “Non-
targeted Metabolomics Reveals the Multilevel Response to Antibiotic
Perturbations,” Cell Reports 19 (2017): 1214–1228, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.celrep.2017.04.002.
4. J. H. Yang, S. N. Wright, M. Hamblin, et al., “A White-Box Machine
Learning Approach for Revealing Antibiotic Mechanisms of Action,” Cell
177 (2019): 1649–1661, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.016.
5. A. Koul, L. Vranckx, N. Dhar, et al., “Delayed Bactericidal Response
of Mycobacterium Tuberculosis to Bedaquiline Involves Remodelling of
Bacterial Metabolism,” Nature Communications 5 (2014): 3369, https://
doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4369.
6. K. Hards, J. R. Robson, M. Berney, et al., “Bactericidal Mode of Action
of Bedaquiline,” Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 70 (2015): 2028–
2037, https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dkv054.
7. H. Cho, T. Uehara, and T. G. Bernhardt, “Beta-Lactam Antibiotics
Induce a Lethal Malfunctioning of the Bacterial Cell Wall Synthesis
Machinery,” Cell 159 (2014): 1300–1311, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.
11.017.
8. H. Cho, C. N. Wivagg, M. Kapoor, et al., “Bacterial Cell Wall Biogenesis
Is Mediated by SEDS and PBP Polymerase Families Functioning Semi-
autonomously,” Nature Microbiology 1 (2016): 16172, https://doi.org/10.
1038/nmicrobiol.2016.172.
9. P. Murima, J. D. McKinney, and K. Pethe, “Targeting Bacterial Central
Metabolism for Drug Development,” Chemistry & Biology 21 (2014): 1423–
1432, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.08.020.
10. J. A. Imlay, “The Molecular Mechanisms and Physiological Con-
sequences of Oxidative Stress: Lessons from a Model Bacterium,”
Nature Reviews Microbiology 11 (2013): 443–454, https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrmicro3032.
11. M. A. Kohanski, D. J. Dwyer, B. Hayete, C. A. Lawrence, and
J. J. Collins, “A Common Mechanism of Cellular Death Induced by
Bactericidal Antibiotics,” Cell 130 (2007): 797–810, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cell.2007.06.049.
12. Y. Lu, Y. Guo, X. Guo, et al., “Two-Dimensional FeCu-Metal-Organic-
Framework Boosts Peroxidase Activity for Antibacterial Application,”
Dental Research 1 (2026): 100008, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dtrs.2025.
100008.
13. M. A. Kohanski, M. A. DePristo, and J. J. Collins, “Sublethal Antibiotic
Treatment Leads to Multidrug Resistance via Radical-Induced Mutagen-
esis,” Molecular Cell 37 (2010): 311–320, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.
2010.01.003.
14. J. P. Pribis, L. García-Villada, Y. Zhai, et al., “Gamblers: An Antibiotic-
Induced Evolvable Cell Subpopulation Differentiated by Reactive-
Oxygen-Induced General Stress Response,” Molecular Cell 74 (2019):
785–800, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.02.037.
15. R. Roemhild, T. Bollenbach, and D. I. Andersson, “The Physiology
and Genetics of Bacterial Responses to Antibiotic Combinations,” Nature
Reviews Microbiology 20 (2022): 478–490, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-
022-00700-5.
16. X. Ma, X. Zhang, J. Xia, H. Sun, X. Zhang, and L. Ye, “Phenolic
Compounds Promote the Horizontal Transfer of Antibiotic Resistance
Genes in Activated Sludge,” Science of The Total Environment 800 (2021):
149549, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.149549.
17. C. Baker-Austin, M. S. Wright, R. Stepanauskas, and J. V. McArthur,
“Co-selection of Antibiotic and Metal Resistance,” Trends in Microbiology
14 (2006): 176–182, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2006.02.006.
18. Y. Zhang, A. Z. Gu, S. Xie, et al., “Nano-metal Oxides Induce
Antimicrobial Resistance via Radical-mediated Mutagenesis,” Environ-
ment International 121 (2018): 1162–1171, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.
2018.10.030.
19. Q. Fang and X. Pan, “A Systematic Review of Antibiotic Resistance
Driven by Metal-based Nanoparticles: Mechanisms and a Call for Risk
Mitigation,” Science of The Total Environment 916 (2024): 170080, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.170080.
20. M. Seewald, L. Nielinger, K. Alker, J. S. Behnke, V. Wycisk, and L. H.
Urner, “Detergent Chemistry Modulates the Transgression of Planetary
Boundaries Including Antimicrobial Resistance and Drug Discovery,”
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 63 (2024): 202403833, https://
doi.org/10.1002/anie.202403833.
21. L. Tretter, G. Horvath, A. Hölgyesi, F. Essek, and V. Adam-Vizi,
“Enhanced Hydrogen Peroxide Generation Accompanies the Beneficial
Bioenergetic Effects of Methylene Blue in Isolated Brain Mitochondria,”
Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014): 317–330, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.09.024.
22. F. V. Sena, F. M. Sousa, A. S. F. Oliveira, C. M. Soares, T. Catarino, and
M. M. Pereira, “Regulation of the Mechanism of Type-II NADH: Quinone
Oxidoreductase from S. Aureus,” Redox Biology 16 (2018): 209–214, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2018.02.004.
23. V. R. I. Kaila and M. Wikström, “Architecture of Bacterial respiratory
Chains,” Nature Reviews Microbiology 19 (2021): 319–330, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41579-020-00486-4.
24. M. Fukuda, L. Qianjun, N. Kishikawa, K. Ohyama, and N. Kuroda,
“Development of Ultrafast Colorimetric Microplate Assay Method for
Ubiquinone Utilizing the Redox Cycle of the Quinone,” Microchemical
Journal 150 (2019): 104104, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2019.104104.
25. L. Xie, Z. Dai, C. Pang, D. Lin, and M. Zheng, “Cellular Glucose
Metabolism Is Essential for the Reduction of Cell-impermeable Water-
soluble Tetrazolium (WST) Dyes,” International Journal of Biological
Sciences 14 (2018): 1535–1544, https://doi.org/10.7150/ijbs.25629.
26. M. V. Berridge, P. M. Herst, and A. S. Tan, “Tetrazolium Dyes as
Tools in Cell Biology: New Insights into Their Cellular Reduction,”
Biotechnology Annual Review 11 (2005): 127–152.
27. L. Mohammadi, R. Taghavi, M. Hosseinifard, M. R. Vaezi, and S.
Rostamnia, “Gold Nanoparticle Decorated Post-synthesis Modified UiO-
66-NH2 for A3-coupling Preparation of Propargyl Amines,” Scientific
Reports 13 (2023): 9051, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-35848-4.
28. H. E. Toma, V. M. Zamarion, S. H. Toma, and K. Araki, “The
Coordination Chemistry at Gold Nanoparticles,” Journal of the Brazil-
ian Chemical Society 21 (2010): 1158–1176, https://doi.org/10.1590/S0103-
50532010000700003.
29. J. Wang, X. Yang, J. J. Klemeš, K. Tian, T. Ma, and B. Sunden, “A
Review on Nanofluid Stability: Preparation and Application,” Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 188 (2023): 113854, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rser.2023.113854.
30. A. A. Bunaciu, E. G. Udriştioiu, and H. Y. Aboul-Enein, “X-ray
Diffraction: Instrumentation and Applications,” Critical Reviews in Ana-
lytical Chemistry 45 (2015): 289–299, https://doi.org/10.1080/10408347.
2014.949616.
31. S. Thomas, N. Biswas, S. Venkateswaran, S. Kapoor, S. Naumov, and
T. Mukherjee, “Studies on Adsorption of 5-amino Tetrazole on Silver
20 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Nanoparticles by SERS and DFT Calculations,” The Journal of Physical
Chemistry A 109 (2005): 9928–9934, https://doi.org/10.1021/jp0537512.
32. E. Villarreal and H. Wang, “Diazonium-Mediated Chemisorption
and Polymerization of Aryl Ligands on Gold Nanoparticle Surfaces,”
ACS Nano 19, no. 31 (2025): 28755–28767, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.
5c08452.
33. A. Widmer-Cooper and P. L. Geissler, “Ligand-Mediated Interactions
between Nanoscale Surfaces Depend Sensitively and Nonlinearly on
Temperature, Facet Dimensions, and Ligand Coverage,” ACS Nano 10, no.
2 (2016): 1877–1887, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b05569.
34. M. N. Nichick, S. V. Voitekhovich, A. Shavel, A. I. Lesnikovich, and O.
A. Ivashkevich, “1-Substituted 5-thiotetrazoles as Novel Capping Agents
for Stabilization of Gold Nanoparticles,” Polyhedron 28 (2009): 3138–3142,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poly.2009.07.023.
35. M. Caldera-Villalobos, A. M. Herrera-González, J. García-Serrano,
M. A. Martins-Alho, and M. I. Montalvo-Sierra, “Polyelectrolytes with
Tetrazole Pendant Groups Useful in the Stabilization of Au and Ag
Nanoparticles,” Journal of Applied Polymer Science 133 (2016): 43773,
https://doi.org/10.1002/app.43773.
36. S. Ohtani, S. Akine, K. Kato, S. Fa, T. H. Shi, and T. Ogoshi,
“Silapillar[n]Arenes: Their Enhanced Electronic Conjugation and Con-
formational Versatility,” Journal of the American Chemical Society 146, no.
7 (2024): 4695–4703, https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.3c12093.
37. A. Fahmy, T. A. Mohamed, and J. F. Friedrich, “XPS and IR Studies
of Plasma Polymers Layer Deposited from Allylamine with Addition of
Ammonia,” Applied Surface Science 458 (2018): 1006–1017, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.07.160.
38. J. D. S. Newman and G. J. Blanchard, “Formation of Gold Nanopar-
ticles Using Amine Reducing Agents,” Langmuir 22 (2006): 5882–5887,
https://doi.org/10.1021/la060045z.
39. P. Baptista, E. Pereira, P. Eaton, et al., “Gold Nanoparticles for the
Development of Clinical Diagnosis Methods,” Analytical and Bioanalyt-
ical Chemistry 391 (2007): 943–950, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-007-
1768-z.
40. K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, and J. Xie, “Overcoming
Bacterial Physical Defenses with Molecule-Like Ultrasmall Antimicrobial
Gold Nanoclusters,” Bioact Mater 6 (2021): 941–950, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.bioactmat.2020.09.026.
41. W. Zheng, X. Wang, H. Lian, et al., “OBOC Screening of High Activity
and Low-toxic Polymyxin Analogs against MCR-1 Resistant Strains,”
Biomaterials Science 13, no. 10 (2025): 2651–2655, https://doi.org/10.1039/
D5BM00362H.
42. X. Xu, D. Wang, C. Zheng, et al., “Progerin Accumulation in Nucleus
Pulposus Cells Impairs Mitochondrial Function and Induces Interver-
tebral Disc Degeneration and Therapeutic Effects of Sulforaphane,”
Theranostics 9, no. 8 (2019): 2252–2267, https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.
30658.
43. X. Xiao, S. Zhang, S. Chen, et al., “An Alpha/Beta Chimeric Peptide
Molecular Brush for Eradicating MRSA Biofilms and Persister Cells
to Mitigate Antimicrobial Resistance,” Biomaterials Science 8 (2020):
6883–6889, https://doi.org/10.1039/D0BM01211D.
44. S. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Luo, et al., “Intracellular Polymerization Induced
Self-Assembly and Gold Nanocomposite Synthesis in Living Bacteria,”
Angewandte Chemie, International Edition 64, no. 29 (2025): 202504936,
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202504936.
45. Y. Zhao, Y. Tian, Y. Cui, W. Liu, W. Ma, and X. Jiang, “Small Molecule-
capped Gold Nanoparticles as Potent Antibacterial Agents That Target
Gram-negative Bacteria,” Journal of the American Chemical Society 132,
no. 35 (2010): 12349–12356, https://doi.org/10.1021/ja1028843.
46. P. Miéville, P. Ahuja, R. Sarkar, et al., “Scavenging Free Radi-
cals to Preserve Enhancement and Extend Relaxation Times in NMR
Using Dynamic Nuclear Polarization,” Angewandte Chemie Interna-
tional Edition 49, no. 35 (2010): 6182–6185, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.
201000934.
47. A. Moe, J. Di Trani, J. L. Rubinstein, and P. Brzezinski, “Cryo-EM
Structure and Kinetics Reveal Electron Transfer by 2D Diffusion of
Cytochrome c in the Yeast III-IV respiratory Supercomplex,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 11 (2021): 2021157118, https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2021157118.
48. L. B. Negri, Y. Mannaa, S. Korupolu, W. A. Farinelli, R. R. Anderson,
and J. A. Gelfand, “Vitamin K3 (Menadione) Is a Multifunctional
Microbicide Acting as a Photosensitizer and Synergizing with Blue Light
to Kill Drug-resistant Bacteria in Biofilms,” Journal of Photochemistry
and Photobiology B: Biology 244 (2023): 112720, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphotobiol.2023.112720.
49. S. A. Henry, C. M. Webster, L. N. Shaw, et al., “Steroid Drugs
Inhibit Bacterial Respiratory Oxidases and Are Lethal toward Methicillin-
Resistant Staphylococcus aureus,” The Journal of Infectious Diseases 230
(2024): e149–e158, https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiad540.
50. L. Wu, Y. Luo, C. Wang, et al., “Self-driven Electron Transfer
Biomimetic Enzymatic Catalysis of Bismuth-doped PCN-222 MOF for
Rapid Therapy of Bacteria-infected Wounds,” ACS Nano 17 (2023):
1448–1463, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c10203.
51. J. Tan, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, et al., “Interfering with Proton and Electron
Transfer Enables Antibacterial Starvation Therapy,” Science Advances 11
(2025): adt3159, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adt3159.
52. P. Bénit, J. Goncalves, R. El Khoury, et al., “Succinate Dehydrogenase,
Succinate, and Superoxides: A Genetic, Epigenetic, Metabolic, Environ-
mental Explosive Crossroad,” Biomedicines 10, no. 8 (2022): 1788, https://
doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines10081788.
53. A. M. P. Melo, T. M. Bandeiras, and M. Teixeira, “New Insights
into Type II NAD(P)H: Quinone Oxidoreductases,” Microbiology and
Molecular Biology Reviews 68 (2004): 603–616, https://doi.org/10.1128/
MMBR.68.4.603-616.2004.
54. A. K. Sharma, R. Khandelwal, and C. Wolfrum, “Futile Cycles:
Emerging Utility from Apparent Futility,” Cell Metabolism 36 (2024):
1184–1203, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2024.03.008.
55. L. Léger, A. Budin-Verneuil, M. Cacaci, A. Benachour, A. Hartke,
and N. Verneuil, “β-Lactam Exposure Triggers Reactive Oxygen Species
Formation in Enterococcus faecalis via the Respiratory Chain Component
DMK,” Cell reports 29 (2019): 2184–2191, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.
2019.10.080.
56. S. H. Light, L. Su, R. Rivera-Lugo, et al., “A Flavin-based Extracellular
Electron Transfer Mechanism in Diverse Gram-positive Bacteria,” Nature
562 (2018): 140–144, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0498-z.
57. T. Lenn and M. C. Leake, “Single-molecule Studies of the Dynamics
and Interactions of Bacterial OXPHOS Complexes,” Biochimica et Bio-
physica Acta (BBA)—Bioenergetics 1857, no. 3 (2016): 224–231, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bbabio.2015.10.008.
58. K. J. McLaughlin, C. M. Strain-Damerell, K. Xie, et al., “Structural
Basis for NADH/NAD+ Redox Sensing by a Rex family Repressor,”
Molecular Cell 38, no. 4 (2010): 563–575, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.
2010.05.006.
59. G. A. Somerville and R. A. Proctor, “At the Crossroads of Bacterial
Metabolism and Virulence Factor Synthesis in Staphylococci,” Microbiol-
ogy and Molecular Biology Reviews 73, no. 2 (2009): 233–248, https://doi.
org/10.1128/MMBR.00005-09.
60. C. Wu, J. Huang, and R. Zhou, “Progress in Engineering Acid
Stress Resistance of Lactic Acid Bacteria,” Applied Microbiology and
Biotechnology 98, no. 3 (2014): 1055–1063, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-
013-5435-3.
61. R. Narang, R. Kumar, S. Kalra, et al., “Recent Advancements in
Mechanistic Studies and Structure Activity Relationship of FoF1 ATP Syn-
thase Inhibitor as Antimicrobial Agent,” European Journal of Medicinal
Chemistry 182 (2019): 111644, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmech.2019.111644.
62. J. Schwarz, K. Schumacher, S. Brameyer, and K. Jung, “Bacterial Battle
against Acidity,” FEMS Microbiology Reviews 46 (2022): fuac037, https://
doi.org/10.1093/femsre/fuac037.
Advanced Materials, 2026
21 of 22
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

63. M. Liu, M. Feng, K. Yang, et al., “Transcriptomic and Metabolomic
Analyses Reveal Antibacterial Mechanism of Astringent Persimmon
Tannin against Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus Isolated
from Pork,” Food Chemistry 309 (2020): 125692, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.foodchem.2019.125692.
64. D. Zilberstein, A. L. Carvalho, D. L. Turner, et al., “Metabolic and
Transcriptional Analysis of Acid Stress in Lactococcus Lactis, with a
Focus on the Kinetics of Lactic Acid Pools,” PLoS ONE 8 (2013): 68470,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0068470.
65. N. Patil, O. Howe, P. Cahill, and H. J. Byrne, “Monitoring and
Modelling the Dynamics of the Cellular Glycolysis Pathway: A Review
and Future Perspectives,” Molecular Metabolism 66 (2022): 101635, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101635.
66. H. Chen, Y. Zheng, J. Zhan, C. He, and Q. Wang, “Comparative
Metabolic Profiling of the Lipid-producing Green Microalga Chlorella
Reveals That Nitrogen and Carbon Metabolic Pathways Contribute to
Lipid Metabolism,” Biotechnology for Biofuels 10 (2017): 153, https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13068-017-0839-4.
67. J. Ye, B. Li, M. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Wu, and Y. Han, “Formation of
a ZnO Nanorods-patterned Coating with Strong Bactericidal Capability
and Quantitative Evaluation of the Contribution of Nanorods-derived
Puncture and ROS-derived Killing,” Bioactive Material 11 (2021): 181–191,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2021.09.019.
68. H. Wang, Y. Feng, and H. Lu, “Low-Level Cefepime Exposure Induces
High-Level Resistance in Environmental Bacteria: Molecular Mechanism
and Evolutionary Dynamics,” Environmental Science & Technology 56, no.
21 (2022): 15074–15083, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c00793.
69. M. Su, M. Yin, Y. Zhou, S. Xiao, J. Yi, and R. Tang, “Freeze-
Thaw
Microfluidic
System
Produces
“Themis”
Nanocomplex
for
Cleaning
Persisters-Infected
Macrophages
and
Enhancing
Uninfected Macrophages,” Advanced Materials 36 (2024): 2311436,
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202311436.
70. H.-K. Kwon, I. Lee, K. E. Yu, et al., “Dual Therapeutic Targeting of
Intra-articular Inflammation and Intracellular Bacteria Enhances Chon-
droprotection in Septic Arthritis,” Science Advances 7 (2021): abf2665,
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abf2665.
71. J. Asenso, N. Choudhury, R. Ganugula, T. Posey, M. Arora, and M. N. V.
Ravi Kumar, “Dual-Function Oral Nanotherapeutic Mitigates Sepsis-Like
Multi-organ Failure by Targeting Inflammatory and Fibrotic Pathways,”
Bioactive Material 62 (2026): 34–46, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.
2026.02.058.
72. A. G. Elliott, J. X. Huang, S. Neve, et al., “An Amphipathic Peptide with
Antibiotic Activity against Multidrug-resistant Gram-negative Bacteria,”
Nature Communications 11 (2020): 3184, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
020-16950-x.
73. Y. Huang, M. Yu, and J. Zheng, “Proximal Tubules Eliminate Endo-
cytosed Gold Nanoparticles through an Organelle-extrusion-mediated
Self-renewal Mechanism,” Nature Nanotechnology 18 (2023): 637–646,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-023-01366-7.
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting
Information section.
SupportingFile: adma73611-sup-0001-SuppMat.docx.
22 of 22
Advanced Materials, 2026
 15214095, 0, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.73611 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [24/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License