Surface-Engineered Nanoparticles Enhance
the Peroxidase Activity of Heme-Containing
Proteins
Subrata Pandit,∇Atri Bhattacharya,∇Busra Ozguney,∇Seungheon Lee, Jeetain Mittal,
and Devleena Samanta*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Enzymes interfaced with nanomaterials often lose
more than 90% of their activity; yet, some nanomaterials have
been shown to enhance enzyme activity. However, these
findings are largely observational and lack clear and actionable
design principles. Systematic studies are needed to develop
nanomaterials that can control and tune enzyme activity. Given
that enzyme−nanomaterial interactions are mediated by their
surface functional groups, we hypothesized that engineering
nanoparticle surfaces could allow for controlled tuning of the
enzyme activity. In this study, we used peptide-functionalized
gold nanoparticles (PGNPs) as a programmable platform to
investigate how surface functionalization affects enzyme activity.
By varying the peptide sequences, we examined the effects of
charge, hydrophobicity, peptide length, and structure on the peroxidase activity of cytochrome C (Cyt C). Our results showed
that carefully designed ligands can significantly enhance enzyme activity, exceeding 10-fold compared with the free enzyme.
Molecular dynamics simulations provided insights into the molecular basis of these findings, revealing the preferred
orientation of Cyt C upon adsorption and key interaction patterns between the enzyme and peptide ligands, thus bridging
experimental results with a mechanistic understanding. Furthermore, PGNPs proved to be a versatile platform for boosting
peroxidase activity of other heme-containing proteins such as lactoperoxidase, hemoglobin, and catalase by 13.4-, 3.9-, and 4.2-
fold, respectively. This study highlights the potential of nanoparticle surface engineering to activate enzymes at interfaces in a
tunable manner, offering a promising alternative to protein engineering for developing biocatalysts.
KEYWORDS: surface engineering, gold nanoparticles, peptides, peroxidase, enzymes
1. INTRODUCTION
The global market value for enzymes is expected to reach
around $20.4 billion by 2029, highlighting their significant role
in biotechnological advancements.1 Enhancing enzyme activity
could revolutionize various fields, making it a critical area of
research. Typically, protein engineering techniques such as
site-directed mutagenesis and directed evolution are used to
design enzymes with higher specific activities.2−6 Although
effective, these methods require sophisticated technology and a
deep understanding of enzyme structures and functions,
making them technically challenging and resource-intensive.
An alternative approach involves integrating enzymes with
nanomaterials to enhance their structural stability, extend their
activity, and enable reuse.7−12 Despite these benefits,
interfacing enzymes with nanomaterials often results in a
considerable decrease in enzyme activity, sometimes with
losses over 90%.13−15 However, several reports have
demonstrated that pairing enzymes with certain nanomaterials
can instead increase their activity.12,16−19 Various nanomateri-
als, including metallic core nanoparticles (NPs),20,21 quantum
dots,22−25 DNA-based and polymer-based nanostruc-
tures,16,26−28 nanoporous materials,29−31 and carbon-based
materials like nanotubes and graphene oxide,32,33 as well as
nanogels,8 have proven effective in this capacity.
Received:
November 10, 2024
Revised:
January 26, 2025
Accepted:
January 28, 2025
Published: February 11, 2025
Article
www.acsnano.org
© 2025 American Chemical Society
7117
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 27, 2026 at 10:44:30 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

The activity enhancement is often attributed to the unique
local environments that these nanomaterials create, which
differ significantly from bulk environments and can affect
enzyme behavior. For instance, electrostatic interactions
between oppositely charged substrates and nanomaterials can
increase the local substrate concentration at the NP−enzyme
interface, potentially boosting enzyme activity. In an early
study, Rotello et al. demonstrated a 3-fold increase in the
apparent catalytic activity of chymotrypsin when immobilized
on gold nanoparticles coated with positively charged ligands
and paired with positively charged substrates.21 Similarly,
enzymes associated with nanomaterials may experience
different local pH, ionic strength, and hydrophobicity
compared with their free counterparts. For example, Gang et
al. observed that repositioning the glucose oxidase (GOx)
enzyme on a DNA scaffold enhanced its activity, likely due to
changes in the local polyanionic environment.16 A recent study
by Schwartz et al. revealed a 50-fold increase in lipase activity
when the enzyme was associated with random copolymer
brushes on silica NPs, facilitated by π-stacking and π-cation
interactions.17 Some studies have also examined detailed
mechanisms of activity enhancement. For example, Medintz et
al. showed that the increased activity of phosphotriesterase was
due to accelerated enzyme−product dissociation, rather than
changes in activation energy.24 Despite these promising
findings, a comprehensive understanding of how nanomaterial
properties affect enzyme activity remains elusive. Current
research is primarily phenomenological, with a few exceptions,
and specific design guidelines are still lacking. Systematic
studies are needed to explore how variations in the
nanomaterial properties influence enzyme activity. Given that
enzyme-NP interactions are mediated by surface functional
groups, we hypothesized that engineering NP surfaces with
tailored ligands could provide a means of controlling and
modulating enzyme activity.
In this study, we explore how NP surface engineering can
enhance the activity of heme-containing proteins. We chose
heme-containing proteins because they serve as catalysts for a
broad spectrum of biochemical transformations.34 One notable
member of this family is cytochrome c (Cyt C), a
Figure 1. (A) Scheme showing the interaction of enzymes with PGNPs and the consequent effect of this interaction on activity. (B) Cartoon
structures of the representative peptides used to study the effects of charge, length, and branching on enzymatic activity. The sequences are
written from N to C terminus from left to right. (C) Relative sizes of GNPs, enzymes, and the peptide EEGCGEE used in this study. Proteins
shown in this figure correspond to crystal structures of Cyt C (PDB ID: 1HRC), Hb (PDB ID: 6BB5), LP (PDB ID: 3GC1), and Cat (PDB
ID: 1TGU). (D) Relative sizes of representative peptides used in this study.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7118

mitochondrial protein that primarily takes part in the electron
transport chain.35 During programmed cell death, Cyt C binds
to anionic phospholipids called cardiolipins in the inner
mitochondrial membrane, which induces peroxidase-like
activity in this heme-containing protein.36−38 This interaction
highlights how the local environment of the heme group can
significantly influence enzymatic function. As electrostatic
forces are known to be the key to these interactions, we
hypothesized that engineering nanoparticle surfaces to mimic
the charged cardiolipin environment could potentially enhance
the peroxidase activity of Cyt C.
We note that prior research has shown that Cyt C activity
can be enhanced when it is interfaced with nanostructured
materials. However, much of this research has focused on
either encapsulating the enzyme within porous structures or
covalently attaching it to nanomaterials.11,31,39 Encapsulation,
while effective, can create diffusion barriers, and covalent
conjugation often restricts Cyt C’s orientational flexibility,
limiting its interaction with the surrounding materials.
To overcome these challenges, we designed a system based
on three key criteria: (1) it should be simple and highly
modular, allowing for easy modification of surface groups; (2)
it should minimize barriers to substrate diffusion; and (3) it
should rely on noncovalent interactions between the enzyme
and the nanomaterial. Noncovalent interactions were specifi-
cally chosen to allow enzymes to naturally adopt the most
favorable binding orientation based on the properties of the
ligands.
To satisfy these requirements, we selected peptide-function-
alized gold nanoparticles (PGNPs) as a programmable
nanomaterial platform (Figure 1). Gold NPs (GNPs) were
chosen for their ease of synthesis and functionalization with
thiolated ligands. Peptides were selected as ligands because
their amino acid sequences can be systematically varied to
adjust properties, such as charge, length, and hydrophobicity,
allowing us to study their effects on enzyme activity. In this
study, 24 different peptide sequences were modified onto
GNPs (Table S1), and their impact on the peroxidase activity
of Cyt C was investigated.
Our findings show that these PGNPs significantly enhance
the peroxidase activity of Cyt C by 10.4-fold. Remarkably, they
also enhance the activity of other heme-containing proteins,
including lactoperoxidase (LP) by 13.4-fold, hemoglobin (Hb)
by 3.9-fold, and catalase (Cat) by 4.2-fold. Notably, this is the
first report of nanomaterials enhancing the activity of LP, Hb,
and Cat.
2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
2.1. Design Strategy for Engineering the Surfaces of
PGNPs. To achieve our goal of generating nanomaterials that
mimic the key interactions between Cyt C and cardiolipins, we
focused on designing short amino acid sequences that replicate
both electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions. We started
with the sequence FEGC, which includes a hydrophobic amino
acid phenylalanine (F) and a negatively charged amino acid,
glutamic acid (E) to simulate the anionic properties of
cardiolipins. Cysteine (C) was included to facilitate attachment
to gold surfaces, and glycine (G) was added as a spacer. From
this initial sequence, we created additional sequences
consisting of 3 to 15 amino acids by modifying the F and E
groups. These variations were designed to explore differences
in the type, number, and position of charges, as well as
sequence length and branching patterns (Figure S1). In some
cases, we substituted glycine (G) with fluorescent amino acid
tryptophan (W) to assist in characterizing peptide loading.
2.2. Synthesis and Characterization of PGNPs. GNPs
were synthesized via the reduction of chloroauric acid using
sodium borohydride (Figure S2) following previously reported
procedures.40 Peptides were synthesized via solid-phase
chemistry using 9-fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl (Fmoc)-pro-
tected amino acids. A cysteine group was incorporated in all
of the peptides to enable functionalization onto the GNP
surfaces through gold−thiol interactions. Subsequently,
PGNPs were prepared using a freezing-directed approach to
obtain a high density of ligand functionalization on the GNP
Figure 2. (A) UV−vis spectra for GNPs and PGNPs showing a minimal change in the absorbance peak at 510 nm after addition of the
peptides. The insets show photographs of the GNPs and the PGNPs. (B) ζ-Potential values of GNPs and PGNPs. (C) TEM images and
corresponding size distribution histograms for GNPs (top) and PGNPs (bottom).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7119

surfaces (Figure S3).41 For this, thiolated peptides were added
to the as-synthesized GNPs. The resultant solution was
sonicated, frozen under liquid nitrogen for 30 s, and
subsequently thawed.
GNPs and PGNPs were characterized by UV−vis spectros-
copy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and electro-
phoretic light scattering (ELS). GNPs have a characteristic
plasmon resonance peak at 510 nm (Figure 2A). PGNPs
comprising negatively charged peptides show similar optical
properties (Figures 2A and S4), suggesting that the nano-
particles do not aggregate postfunctionalization. The ζ-
potential of the GNPs changes from −25.4 ± 3.2 to −37.2
± 1.5 mV upon conjugation to the negatively charged peptides
(Figure 2B). The fact that the nanoparticles do not aggregate
post peptide functionalization is further corroborated via TEM
images which show individual particles at an average diameter
of 4.8 ± 0.8 and 4.5 ± 0.7 nm for GNPs and PGNPs,
respectively (Figures 2C, S5, and S6).
2.3. Factors Influencing Peroxidase Activity. To
investigate how PGNPs affect Cyt C function, we examined
the peroxidase activity of Cyt C in the presence and absence of
these materials. Cyt C results in the breakdown of H2O2 which
can then oxidize 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) to
form a blue product (Figure 3A). The formation of oxidized
TMB can be monitored spectroscopically at 652 nm.
Figure 3. (A) Scheme for the peroxidase-like activity of Cyt C and its effect on the TMB substrate. The blue compound is monitored
spectroscopically at 652 nm in the activity assays. (B) 3D PDB structure of Cyt C (PDB ID: 1HRC) showing the asymmetric distribution of
charge on its surface. (C) Absorbance generated from the interaction between TMB and Cyt C in the absence (blue) and presence (red) of
PGNPs. (D) Effect of PGNPs with different types of overall charges on Cyt C activity; red: negative; yellow: positive. (E) Effect of the
number of negative charges on Cyt C activity; light to dark transition indicates an increase in the number of negative charges on the
peptides. (F) Effect of charge orientation on Cyt C activity; violet: negative charge oriented inside; red: negative charge oriented outside.
(G) Effect of peptide length on Cyt C activity; dark to light transition indicates increase in the length of the peptide. (H) Effect of branching
peptide structures on Cyt C activity; light: linear; dark: branched. Blue bars represent free Cyt C without PGNPs in (D−H). The
enhancement factor is defined as the ratio of the absorbance observed in a TMB assay (at 652 nm) with Cyt C and a specific PGNP to that
observed with Cyt C alone at the same time point (5 min). * indicates statistical significance at the 95% confidence level, while ** indicates
statistical significance at the 90% confidence level, as determined by a one-tailed Student’s t test.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7120

A mixture of PGNPs (10 nM) and Cyt C (125 nM) was
prepared in acetate buffer (pH 5; Figure S7). Absorbance was
measured over time after the addition of 2 mM H2O2 and 1.5
mM TMB. Cyt C contains an asymmetric distribution of
charged residues on its surface (Figure 3B). At pH 5, the
surface amino groups (e.g., lysines) are expected to be
protonated. Therefore, we hypothesized that PGNPs with
negatively charged peptides will interact with these positively
charged residues. Conversely, PGNPs with positively charged
peptides are expected to preferentially interact with negatively
charged sites on the protein (e.g., glutamic acid, which carries a
net negative charge at pH 5) (Figure 3B).
We observed that PGNPs engineered to have negative
surface charges can enhance the activity of Cyt C by up to
10.4-fold (Figure 3C). This enhancement is due to the overall
PGNP architecture as solutions containing identical concen-
trations of peptides do not show any enhancement, and bare
GNPs aggregate under the solution conditions used for
monitoring enzyme activity (Figure S8). Importantly, PGNPs
did not show any peroxidase activity on their own under the
conditions tested (Figure S9).
To further understand this effect, we next screened several
peptides with different charges, branches, and lengths (Figure
S10). Our results indicate that the type, number, and spatial
distribution of charges on the peptides are crucial factors
influencing the peroxidase activity of Cyt C. While PGNPs
with negatively charged peptides enhance Cyt C activity (e.g.,
FEEGC), those with positively charged peptides (e.g.,
FHHGC) decrease it (Figure 3D). This differential effect is
likely due to the orientation of Cyt C binding to PGNPs,
where asymmetric charge distribution on the Cyt C surface
may lead to binding with PGNP surfaces along different
orientations (Figure 3B). Such binding variations can either
expose or occlude Cyt C’s active site, thereby increasing or
decreasing its enzymatic activity. Changing the identity of the
amino acid residues while keeping the charge constant (e.g.,
FEEGC vs FDDGC) does not significantly alter the magnitude
of the enhancement seen. The number of negative charges also
plays an important role in enhancing the peroxidase activity of
Cyt C, with peptides containing a greater number of negative
charges (e.g., GGGC vs FEGC vs EEGC) leading to higher
enhancement (Figure 3E). Additionally, the position of the
charged residues plays a role; PGNPs containing peptides with
the same overall charge, having negative residues positioned on
the outer surface facilitate slightly higher enhancement of Cyt
C activity compared to those with negative charges oriented
toward the interior of the nanoparticle (e.g., FEGCGEF vs
EFGCGFE; Figure 3F).
It is important to consider that the apparent enzymatic
activity may vary based on the charge of the substrate used.
Previous studies, such as those by Rotello et al., have
demonstrated that α-chymotrypsin immobilized onto GNPs
functionalized with negatively charged ligands exhibits lower
activity in the presence of negatively charged substrates
compared to positively charged substrates.21 These results
are attributed to preferential accumulation or depletion of
charged substrates near the charged nanoparticle-enzyme
interface, owing to attractive or repulsive Coulombic
interactions. To determine whether similar effects occur in
our system, we tested two substrates with different charges:
TMB, which is positively charged, and 2,2′-azinobis (3-
ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS), which is neg-
atively charged. Our results indicate that substrate charge
significantly influences the enhancement of Cyt C enzymatic
activity, with an enhancement factor of 10.4-fold for TMB and
4.1-fold for ABTS (Figure S11). This supports the notion that
negatively charged PGNPs facilitate the local accumulation of
TMB at the nanoparticle-enzyme interface. However, the
observed enhancement with ABTS suggests that the substrate
charge alone does not fully account for the increased activity.
We therefore posited that the unique microenvironment of the
PGNPs may alter the enzyme structure, contributing to
enhanced activity. This hypothesis is supported by circular
dichroism experiments (vide infra).
To further reinforce the fact that electrostatic interactions
play a key role in our system, we conducted an activity assay
using PGNPs with varying ratios of negatively and positively
charged peptides (ranging from 100 to 20% negative charge).
Our results indicate that increasing the proportion of positively
charged ligands on the PGNP surfaces leads to a gradual
decrease in enzymatic activity (Figure S12). This reduction is
attributed to the decreased local concentration of electrostatic
interactions between the protein and the nanoparticles.
Additionally, we performed an activity assay in the presence
of a positively charged small molecule, tetrabutylammonium
bromide (TBA) at a concentration of 2.0 mM. We
hypothesized that TBA would screen the negative charges on
the PGNPs, lowering their ability to bind to the enzyme. As
expected, the activity observed was lower in the presence of
TBA (Figure S13). Control experiments confirmed that TBA
alone does not alter the Cyt C activity. Similar results were
obtained when 50−200 mM NaCl was used to screen the
charges on the PGNPs (Figure S14). These experiments
collectively show that electrostatic interactions play a dominant
role in mediating the interactions between Cyt C and surface-
engineered PGNPs.
Another key parameter in determining the magnitude of the
enhancement is the length of the peptide. Longer peptides with
identical overall charges lead to smaller enhancement
compared with their shorter counterparts (Figure 3G), likely
due to a decrease in charge density.
An interesting observation we made was that the shape of
the ligand (linear vs branched) impacts the enzymatic activity
(Figure 3H). Some branched ligands exhibit more than twice
the activity of their linear counterparts (e.g., PGNPs with
FEWC vs FEWCGEF). Even when the total charge per peptide
is identical, branched ligands still show slightly higher activity
(FEEWC vs FEWCGEF). By examining the peptide loadings
(∼112, ∼81, and ∼68 peptides per GNP for FEWC, FEEWC,
and FEWCGEF, respectively), we note that these differences
are not merely due to overall NP charge; therefore, the
branched structure does contribute to the enhancement. To
understand these effects further, we experimentally investigated
the binding affinity between these PGNPs and Cyt C and also
performed molecular dynamics simulations (vide infra).
Among the 24 different PGNPs tested in this study, PGNPs
functionalized with the peptide EEGCGEE were found to yield
maximum enhancement in the peroxidase activity of Cyt C
(10.4-fold, Video S1). By fitting the Michaelis−Menten model
to the enzyme kinetics data (Figure S15), we found that the
kcat and KM of free Cyt C are 8.4 min−1 and 1.4 mM,
respectively, whereas those of PGNP-bound Cyt C are 99
min−1 and 11 mM, respectively. These results show an ∼12-
fold increase in turnover number and an ∼8-fold decrease in
substrate binding affinity when the enzymes are on nano-
particle surfaces. The decrease in substrate binding affinity is
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7121

consistent with previous reports and is likely due to the
charged nanoparticle surface restricting the access of the
substrate to the active site.19,24
2.4. Investigating Interactions between PGNPs and
Cyt C. We first performed a qualitative assessment of the
binding between Cyt C and PGNPs via electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA). EMSAs show that bare GNPs
aggregate in the well and do not appreciably migrate through a
0.7% agarose gel (Figures S16−S19). In contrast, PGNPs
migrate through the gel to a larger extent due to their greater
negative charge. The addition of Cyt C retards the migration
(Figure 4A). These results are corroborated with ζ-potential
measurements which show that the surface charge of PGNPs
changes from −37.2 ± 1.5 to +0.6 ± 0.3 mV upon the addition
of Cyt C in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 4B).
EMSA experiments indicate that PGNPs with branched
peptides have a higher binding affinity to Cyt C compared
to their linear counterparts (Figure S16), which can potentially
explain the better performance of branched peptides. The
binding strength between Cyt C and PGNPs functionalized
with the best-performing peptide, EEGCGEE, was quantita-
tively determined by using Stern−Volmer analysis (Figure
S20). The dissociation constant (Kd) was found to be 13.6 nM.
Following our binding experiments, we employed circular
dichroism (CD) spectroscopy to investigate the structural
changes in Cyt C upon interaction with the PGNPs (Figure
4C). All of the controls including peptides, bare GNPs, and
PGNPs show flat CD signals, indicating the absence of
secondary structures in these components alone (Figure S21).
The native Cyt C shows two minima with peaks around 208
and 222 nm, indicating its α-helical structure that matches well
with previously established reports.42,43 Upon interaction with
PGNPs, we observed a change in the intensity and a slight shift
in these peaks. This alteration suggests a decrease in the
proportion of α-helices in Cyt C,44 possibly due to its
interaction with the PGNPs. The CD data was further
processed using the BeStSel algorithm to quantify the
distribution of secondary structures in both cases.45 Indeed,
our results (Figure S22) confirm a reduction in α-helices in
Cyt C upon interaction with PGNPs, accompanied by an
increase in the antiparallel β-sheet content. According to
previously reported studies, this elevation in β-sheet structure
is associated with conformational changes that increase the
exposure of the heme region in Cyt C and enhance its
peroxidase activity.37,46
2.5. Computational Characterization of Cyt C
Adsorption on PGNPs. While our experimental findings
demonstrated varying degrees of enzymatic enhancement
across different PGNPs, the molecular basis of these
differences remained uncertain. We hypothesized that this
activation may arise from distinct mechanisms: (1) strong
adsorption of Cyt C on the peptide-functionalized surfaces,
with varying interaction profiles that influence the protein’s
orientation; (2) intermediate interactions at the peptide−
protein interface that lead to distinct orientational preferences;
or (3) subtle, nonadsorptive effects, such as long-range
electrostatic interactions, that modulate Cyt C behavior
without direct binding.
To investigate these hypotheses, we conducted molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations, focusing on the following aspects:
(1) the propensity and nature of Cyt C adsorption on peptide-
functionalized surfaces, (2) the molecular interactions
governing the protein−surface interface when adsorption
occurs, and (3) the resulting conformational preferences of
Cyt C on different coatings. Through these simulations, we
aimed to provide atomic-level insights into how peptide
coatings potentially modulate Cyt C activity through varied
molecular mechanisms.
We selected three peptidesFEEGC, FEGCGEF, and
EEGCGEEfrom the PGNPs designed in this study (Table
S1). These peptides vary in terms of branching (i.e., the
position of cysteine residues), length, polarity, and charge,
representing the diversity of our peptide design strategy.
Specifically, FEEGC is a linear peptide with two negative
charges from its glutamic acid residues; FEGCGEF is longer
and differs in branching; and EEGCGEE has the highest net
negative charge among the selected peptides. As discussed
earlier, these structural variations resulted in differing perform-
ances of Cyt C activity in functionalizing gold nanoparticle
experimental data. EEGCGEE proved most effective, followed
by FEGCGEF and FEEGC, with the latter two showing
comparable performance (Figure S10).
To eliminate curvature effects on peptide orientation and
packing, we simplified the geometry by modeling a flat gold
surface, coating it with a capping density of 1 peptide/nm2 via
harmonic distance restraints between the gold and sulfur atoms
Figure 4. (A) Agarose gel showing the migration of PGNPs functionalized with the peptide EEGCGEE in the presence and absence of Cyt C.
The gold box shows the aggregation of bare GNPs, the red box shows the band for PGNPs, and the blue box shows the point at which
PGNPs are saturated with Cyt C and, therefore, do not migrate through the gel. Lane 1: Bare GNPs (100 nM); Lane 2: PGNPs (100 nM);
Lane 3: PGNPs + 0.02 μM Cyt C; Lane 4: PGNPs + 0.04 μM Cyt C; Lane 5: PGNPs + 0.08 μM Cyt C; Lane 6: PGNPs + 0.16 μM Cyt C;
Lane 7: PGNPs + 0.31 μM Cyt C; Lane 8: PGNPs + 0.63 μM Cyt C; Lane 9: PGNPs + 1.25 μM Cyt C; Lane 10: PGNPs + 2.5 μM Cyt C. (B)
ζ-Potential values of GNPs, PGNPs, and PGNPs with increasing concentrations of Cyt C added to them. (C) CD spectra for Cyt C with and
without PGNPs.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7122

of cysteines. We placed this coated surface at the bottom of the
simulation box while positioning Cyt C in the middle, with
additional padding in the z-direction to allow it to remain in
bulk solution or adsorb onto the peptide-coated Au surface
(Figure S23). We conducted triplicate simulations lasting 400
ns for each construct to increase the robustness and reliability
of the observed trends.
First, we investigated the adsorption behavior of Cyt C on
GNP surfaces coated with EEGCGEE, FEGCGEF, and
FEEGC peptides. To assess adsorption strength and proximity,
we analyzed the center of mass (CoM) distance between Cyt
C and a reference Au atom in the z-direction (Figures 5A and
S24). Our results revealed distinct adsorption profiles across
the peptides. Cyt C demonstrated strong association with
EEGCGEE-coated surfaces, whereas it maintained significantly
greater distances from surfaces coated with FEGCGEF and
FEEGC. Particularly for FEEGC-coated surfaces, Cyt C
predominantly remained in the bulk solution, indicating
minimal surface interaction. This variation suggests that
peptide composition significantly influences Cyt C adsorption
behavior, with EEGCGEE fostering stable binding while
FEGCGEF and FEEGC allow limited surface association.
These results are in agreement with experimental EMSA data
(Figure S16).
To further quantify Cyt C’s interactions with each
functionalized surface, we analyzed the contacts formed
between any heavy atoms of Cyt C and each peptide. As
shown in Figure 5B, EEGCGEE consistently formed contacts
with Cyt C across all simulation trajectories, suggesting that
once adsorbed Cyt C is effectively retained by the EEGCGEE-
functionalized surface. In contrast, interactions with FEGC-
GEF and FEEGC peptides were less frequent and more
transient, consistent with their weaker adsorption profiles,
suggesting that these peptides may not provide sufficient
anchoring for Cyt C, leading to a tendency for the protein to
remain in the bulk solution (Figure S25).
Building on our observation of distinct adsorption
propensities and interaction dynamics, we further investigated
how the amino acid sequence of the peptides influenced the
orientation of Cyt C upon adsorption. To explore this, we
constructed a two-dimensional map of the joint probability
distribution of order parameters defining key tilt angles
(Figures 5C, S25, and S26). Specifically, we analyzed two
vectors: one defined by K9 and D51, capturing the relative
orientation of the N-terminal α helix with respect to the 50′s
helix, and another defined by K23 and K80, capturing the
relative orientation of Ω-loop B with respect to Ω-loop D,
which encapsulate the heme moiety. These tilt angles
effectively represent the relative orientation of the two
principal axes of the Cyt C surface, allowing us to characterize
how the enzyme positions itself in the presence of PGNPs
(Figure S27).
Our analysis showed a distinct orientational preference for
Cyt C on EEGCGEE-coated surfaces. On these surfaces, Cyt C
exhibited a clear adsorption orientation, with the N- and C-
terminal helices positioned toward the surface, while the N-
terminal region of Ω-loop B was anchored, leaving the
remaining portion of Ω-loop B and Ω-loop D exposed to the
bulk solution (Figure 5D). This orientation preferentially
exposes the flexible disordered loops of Cyt C, potentially
contributing to the observed enhanced enzymatic efficiency.
Figure 5. Conformational dynamics and interactions of Cyt C with PGNPs. (A) Adsorption propensity of Cyt C to PGNPs coated with
EEGCGEE, FEGCGEF, or FEEGC peptides, quantified by the z-component of the center of mass (CoM) distance between Cyt C and the
GNP surface. Lower distances indicate the closer proximity of Cyt C to the PGNP, while higher distances represent Cyt C moving away from
the surface. Results show distinct favorable adsorption propensity to the EEGCGEE-PGNPs. (B) Contact frequency between Cyt C and
surface peptides during triplicate 400 ns simulations for EEGCGEE-PGNPs. Contacts are defined between any heavy atoms of Cyt C and
corresponding peptides within 0.6 nm. (C) Two-dimensional probability distribution of Cyt C conformations on EEGCGEE-PGNPs,
represented by two tilt angles. The single highly populated basin indicates a preferred orientation of adsorbed Cyt C. (D) Left:
Representative structures of the favored Cyt C orientation on EEGCGEE-PGNPs. Right: Residue-specific interaction propensities were
averaged across triplicate runs. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Lysine residues show high interaction propensities,
suggesting electrostatic driving forces in the adsorption process. Results elucidate molecular mechanisms of Cyt C adsorption on PGNPs,
highlighting EEGCGEE as the most effective peptide coating and the role of surface chemistry in protein-nanoparticle interactions.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7123

Further contact analysis revealed that interactions between
Cyt C and the EEGCGEE peptides were predominantly
electrostatically driven. Key lysine (K) residues, including K8,
K9, K23, K26, and K101, played crucial roles in these
interactions, regardless of whether they were located in folded
α helices or disordered regions (Figure 5D). This electrostatic-
driven binding mechanism aligns with the higher negative
charge of the EEGCGEE peptide compared with FEEGC and
FEGCGEF.
In contrast, on FEEGC and FEGCGEF-coated surfaces with
lower adsorption propensities, Cyt C displayed a more
dispersed orientation distribution, spending the majority of
time in bulk solution and showing no specific orientational
preference with respect to the z-direction (Figure S27). These
weakly interacting cases thus served as controls, highlighting
that the strong adsorption to EEGCGEE not only anchors Cyt
C to the surface but also directs its orientation.
In conclusion, our computational characterization of Cyt C
adsorption on PGNPs provided valuable atomic-level insights
into the interactions governing the enhanced activation
observed experimentally. Surfaces coated with the EEGCGEE
peptide, which demonstrated superior performance in
enhancing the Cyt C activity, also exhibited the strongest
and most consistent interactions with Cyt C in our simulations.
This peptide facilitated stable adsorption and induced the
specific orientation of Cyt C, establishing a foundation for
future peptide design aimed at optimizing protein-nanoparticle
interactions for enhanced functionality.
2.6. Versatility of the PGNP Platform for Modulating
Enzyme Activity. To assess the versatility of the PGNP
platform, we investigated its effects on various heme-
containing proteins capable of showing peroxidase activities.
Specifically, we examined the peroxidase activities of LP, Hb,
and Cat in the presence of PGNPs. These proteins were
selected as they are commonly available, relatively low cost,
and also have different sizes, biological functions, and
isoelectric points (Figure 1C). All three proteins possess an
overall positive charge at pH 5, the conditions under which the
assays were performed.
Our findings show that the presence of PGNPs function-
alized with the peptide EEGCGEE enhances the catalytic
activity of all three proteins, albeit to different extents (Figure
6). EMSAs confirm that all proteins bind to PGNPs (Figures
S17−S19). This is the first demonstration that surface-
engineered nanoparticles can enhance the peroxidase activity
of these proteins. These results indicate the broad potential of
the PGNP platform in enhancing enzyme activity in a tunable
manner, highlighting its versatility as a tool for modulating
biochemical transformations.
3. CONCLUSIONS
This study demonstrates the potential of peptide-function-
alized gold nanoparticles (PGNPs) as a powerful and versatile
platform for enhancing enzyme activity, particularly for heme-
containing proteins such as Cyt C, LP, Hb, and Cat. Through
systematic surface engineering of PGNPs, we have shown that
the activity of these enzymes can be significantly boosted by
over 10-fold. Our findings reveal that specific peptide
sequences on the nanoparticle surface can control enzyme
activity through electrostatic interactions and alterations in
enzyme conformation. The molecular-level insights provided in
this study offer a deeper understanding of these interactions,
particularly for Cyt C. The preferential exposure of the heme-
encapsulating loops to the bulk solution when Cyt C is bound
to functionalized surfaces could facilitate substrate access and
product release, potentially explaining the observed increase in
the enzymatic efficiency. These molecular-level findings not
only corroborate the experimental results but also provide a
rationale for the design principles of peptide-functionalized
nanoparticles for optimal Cyt C binding and activation.
Importantly, the PGNPs not only enhance activity but also
do so in a tunable manner, depending on peptide charge,
length, and branching. This tunability offers a new dimension
in enzyme modulation, potentially providing a more accessible
and flexible alternative to traditional protein engineering
approaches.
Moreover, this work underscores the crucial role of
nanoparticle surface properties in shaping enzyme behavior
at the nanoscale interface. The ability to modify the local
microenvironment of enzymes with precisely engineered
ligands opens new possibilities for the design of highly efficient
biocatalysts. The versatility of this platform, demonstrated
across multiple enzymes, suggests that PGNPs could be
applied to enhance other important classes of enzymes,
extending the impact of this approach into broader
biotechnological and industrial applications.
Additionally, this study has important implications for the
field of protein coronas, as it shows that nanoparticle
interactions can convert innocuous proteins, such as Hb, into
species capable of causing oxidative damage. This finding
emphasizes the need to carefully consider the potential risks
associated with protein-nanoparticle interactions, particularly
in therapeutic or diagnostic settings, where unintended
activation of proteins could lead to adverse effects. Overall,
this research paves the way for a new strategy in enzyme
enhancement, where surface-engineered nanomaterials offer an
innovative toolset for optimizing enzymatic functions while
also contributing to our understanding of nanoparticle−
protein interactions.
Figure 6. Relative enhancement of (A) LP, (B) Hb, and (C) Cat in the presence (red lines) and absence (blue lines) of PGNPs.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7124

4. MATERIALS AND METHODS
4.1. Synthesis, Purification, and Characterization of
Peptides. 4.1.1. Synthesis and Purification. All of the peptides
were synthesized in house using standard Fmoc-based chemistry.47 All
of the necessary reagents and amino acids were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. The synthesis was conducted on a 0.1 mmol scale
using rink amide AM resin 100−200 mesh (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. No.
8551300005) as the solid support. For the addition of amino acids, at
first, the resin was swollen in dimethylformamide (DMF) for 15 min,
and then the DMF was washed out. Deprotection was performed
using 20% piperidine in DMF for two cycles (5 min for the first cycle,
15 min for the second cycle), followed by thorough washing with
DMF (4−5 times) until the piperidine smell disappeared. Fmoc-
amino acids (2.5 equiv) were then added to the activated resin, along
with standard coupling reagents (2.5 equiv of HOBt (Sigma-Aldrich,
Cat No. 157260-25G), 2.5 equiv of DIC (Sigma-Aldrich Cat No.
D125407-5G)) in 3 mL of DMF. The reaction was run for 2 h at RT.
Subsequently, Fmoc deprotection was performed as described earlier.
The N-terminus was protected by acetylation using a 3 mL DCM
solution containing 40 μL of acetic anhydride and 40 μL N, N,-
diisopropylethylamine. Finally, the desired peptide sequences were
cleaved from the resin surface using a cocktail solution of
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. No. 302031-100
ML), H2O, and triisopropylsilane (TCI, Cat. No. T1533) in a ratio of
95:2.5:2.5 (v/v). The mixture was incubated for 4 h with shaking at
RT. The peptide was precipitated with ice-cold diethyl ether (Sigma-
Aldrich, Cat No. 296082-1L) and collected by centrifugation at
15,000 rpm for 2 min. This process was repeated 5 times to ensure
proper collection of the peptide. The peptide was then lyophilized
(Labconco, Fisher) and stored dry at 4 °C until further use.
4.1.2. MALDI Characterization. MALDI-MS characterization of
peptides was performed using MALDI-TOF MS-Autoflex maX,
Bruker. 2′,6′-Dihydroxyacetophenone (DHAP) (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat.
No. 37468-1G-F > 99.5% purity) was used as the matrix. The DHAP
matrix was prepared as follows: 25 mg of DHAP was dissolved in 333
μL of methanol (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat No. A452-4), and 111 μL of
saturated ammonium citrate (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat No. 247561- 100G)
was added dropwise to the solution (note: do not shake). On a
MALDI plate, the sample and the matrix were added at a 1:1 ratio,
resulting in a total volume of 2 μL. This sample was air-dried before
being placed in the mass spectrometer.
4.2. Synthesis of PGNPs. First, GNPs were synthesized via
reduction of chloroauric acid with NaBH4 using established
procedures.40 30 mL of Milli-Q water was taken in a 50 mL tube
and 42 μL of HAuCl4 (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. No. 520918-1G) from a
100 mM stock in Milli-Q water was added to it. Under constant
stirring, 420 μL of NaBH4 (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. No. 452882-5G) was
added from a 100 mM stock in Milli-Q water as well (10-fold excess
wrt HAuCl4). The mixture started changing color and was allowed to
stir for 5 min. It was then kept in the dark for 30 min and used in
further experiments.
For PGNP synthesis, to 1 mL of the above GNP solution was
added 500-fold excess peptide (1 μL from 10 mM stock in DMSO).
The mixture was sonicated for 30 s and placed in liquid nitrogen for
30 s for freezing. It was then thawed at 37 °C for 2 min. Activity
assays were carried out with this solution without further purification,
unless otherwise mentioned.
For PGNPs containing both negatively and positively charged
peptides at varying ratios (100:0, 80:20, 60:40, 40:60, and 20:80),
appropriate volumes of both peptides were added to the GNPs before
freeze−thaw. The negatively and positively charged peptides chosen
for this study were the peptide sequences FEEGC and FHHGC,
respectively.
PGNPs were characterized by using UV−vis spectroscopy,
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and dynamic light
scattering (DLS) as described below.
4.3. UV−Vis Characterization of PGNPs. GNPs and PGNPs
were characterized by UV−vis spectroscopy. As-synthesized nano-
particles (both GNPs and PGNPs) were placed in a 1 cm path length
cuvette, and the absorbance was monitored between 300 and 800 nm
using a Cary-60 UV−vis (Agilent) instrument. GNPs showed a
characteristic plasmonic peak at 510 nm. PGNPs containing
negatively charged peptides retained the peak at ∼510 nm, but
those with positively charged peptides showed a prominent red shift
in their spectra.
4.4. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) and ζ-Potential
Measurements. DLS experiments were conducted using a Malvern
Zetasizer Nano instrument. Experiments were performed using 20 nM
GNPs and EEGCGEE-PGNPs. ζ-Potential was also measured for
GNP and PGNPs at 20 nM concentrations. To PGNPs, Cyt C was
added at final concentrations ranging from 125 nM to 2 μM. Each
experiment was repeated three times, and the average values are
reported.
4.5. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). The surface
morphology of the nanoparticles was studied using a (FEI Tecnai
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM)) at an accelerating voltage
of 300 kV. The samples for TEM were obtained by plating 5 μL of
GNPs or PGNPs onto UC A on Lacey Carbon 400 mesh Cu TEM
grids (TED PELLA, Inc., Cat No. 080623 01824) and air drying it.
4.6. Calculation of Peptide Loading onto GNPs. Peptide
loading studies were carried out using 4 different tryptophan-labeled
peptides (FEWC, FEEWC, FEGCWEF, EEGCWEE). To calculate
the amount of peptide loaded onto the surface of the GNPs, the as-
synthesized PGNPs were centrifuged (Eppendorf, Centrifuge 5425 R
instrument) at 15,000 rpm using a 100 kDa spin Amicon filter for 5
min. As a control, peptide solutions without GNPs, prepared at the
same concentration in water, were also centrifuged under identical
conditions. Following centrifugation, the filtrate was analyzed by
measuring the UV−vis absorbance at 280 nm on a Cary-60 UV−vis
(Agilent) instrument to detect tryptophan. Tryptophan concentration
in the filtrate was calculated using Beer’s law with an extinction
coefficient of 5600 M−1 cm−1. To account for nonspecific peptide
adsorption to the filter membrane, absorbance from the peptide-only
control was subtracted from the absorbance of the PGNP filtrate.
4.7. Activity Assays. 4.7.1. TMB Assay. The enzymatic activities
of Cyt C (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat No. C2506-50 mg), LP (Sigma-Aldrich,
Cat No. L2005-1G), Hb (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat No. H7379-1G), and
Cat (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat No. C9322-1G) were evaluated in the
presence and absence of PGNPs under the following conditions:
experiments were conducted in an acetate buffer solution (1X; 0.1 M)
with a pH of 5, at 25 °C. In the assay, we individually added 125 nM
Cyt C, 2 nM LP, 50 nM Hb, or 125 nM Cat, along with 10 nM
functionalized PGNPs, to the acetate buffer. The enzyme activity was
monitored by observing the oxidation of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzi-
dine (TMB) (Thermo Scientific, Cat No. 229990010) at a
wavelength of 652 nm in the presence of hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat No. 18304). TMB concentration was
fixed at 1.5 mM for all of the assays. H2O2 was added at final
concentrations of 2 mM for the Cyt C and Cat assays and 50 μM for
the LP and Hb assays. All of the assays were performed using a plate
reader (Agilent, BioTek Cytation 5 Imaging Multimode Reader), with
absorbance measurements taken over a 30 min period.
In charge screening experiments involving TBA, a final
concentration of 2 mM TBA was maintained in the assay. In
experiments involving NaCl, a final concentration of 50, 100, 150, or
200 mM was maintained in the assay. In all cases, control experiments
were performed to ensure that the addition of TBA or NaCl does not
impact the peroxidase activity of Cyt C by itself.
4.7.2. ABTS Assay. The enzymatic activity of Cyt C in the presence
and absence of PGNPs was assessed under the following conditions:
the experiments were conducted in an acetate buffer solution (1X; 0.1
M) with a pH of 5, at a temperature of 25 °C. In the assay, we
combined 125 nM Cyt C with 10 nM functionalized PGNPs in the
acetate buffer. To monitor the enzyme’s activity, we observed the
oxidation of 2,2′-azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)
diammonium salt (ABTS) (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat No. 194430) at a
wavelength of 415 nm in the presence of H2O2. ABTS and H2O2
concentrations were fixed at 1.5 and 2 mM for the assay. The assays
were carried out using a plate reader (Agilent, BioTek Cytation 5
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7125

Imaging Multimode Reader), and absorbance measurements were
taken over a time span of 30 min.
4.8. Michaelis−Menten Kinetics Studies. The Michaelis−
Menten kinetic model was used to monitor how the reaction rate
changes for the peroxidase activity of Cyt C in the presence and
absence of PGNPs. For this study, PGNPs functionalized with the
peptide EEGCGEE were used. The enzyme concentration (Cyt C)
was held constant at 125 nM, and the TMB concentration was fixed at
1.5 mM, while the concentration of H2O2 was varied from 0 to 4 mM.
These experiments were performed in acetate buffer (1X, 0.1 M) at
pH 5 and 25 °C. The rate of TMB oxidation was determined by
continuously monitoring the absorbance at 652 nm, indicative of the
formation of the oxidized product, at 1 min intervals. The readings
were carried out on a plate reader (Agilent, BioTek Cytation 5
Imaging Multimode Reader). Each substrate concentration was tested
three times with Cyt C, and similar assays were conducted with Cyt C
in the presence of PGNPs (10 nM) under the same conditions. The
reaction rates were obtained by analyzing the initial slopes of the
activity curves corresponding to different substrate concentrations.
Thereafter, KM and kcat values were determined from Lineweaver−
Burk plots (see the SI for more details).
4.9. Investigating Binding between PGNPs and Proteins.
The binding of PGNPs to Cyt C, LP, Hb, and Cat was first
investigated qualitatively using EMSAs. The samples were run on a
0.7% agarose gel using 1X TAE buffer (40 mM Tris, 20 mM Acetate,
and 1 mM EDTA). To prepare the 0.7% agarose gel, 0.21 g of agarose
(Thermo Scientific, Cat. No. R049) was weighed and dissolved in 30
mL of 1X TAE buffer. The solution was microwaved for 25−30 s until
agarose was completely dissolved. After cooling, the solution was
poured into a cast chamber (Thermo Scientific, Cat. No. B1A-BP)
equipped with a 10-well comb and allowed to solidify. PGNPs were
mixed with proteins in acetate buffer (1X, 0.1 M) at varying enzyme
concentrations (0.02 μM to 2.5 μM) in PCR tubes. The final
concentrations of both GNPs and PGNPs were 100 nM. After mixing
the nanoparticles and enzymes, 2 μL of glycerol (Sigma, Cat. No.
G5516) was added to each sample, followed by vortexing and
spinning. Next, 10 μL of each prepared sample was loaded into the
wells of the agarose gel. The gel was placed in a gel electrophoresis
chamber (Thermo Scientific, Cat. No. B1A-BP), and a voltage of 120
V was applied for 20 min. Finally, the gel was imaged using the
ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad) in the Fast Blast channel.
We also quantitatively determined the binding affinity between the
EEGCGEE-PGNPs using Stern−Volmer kinetics (details in SI).
4.10. CD Spectroscopy. CD spectroscopy was used to study the
structure of Cyt C in the presence and absence of PGNPs. CD spectra
were monitored using a Jasco J-818 spectrophotometer with a 1 mm
path length cuvette. 1X acetate buffer (0.1 M) at pH 5 was used as the
solvent. The final concentrations of the materials in the cuvette were
20, 10, 1.6, and 1.6 μM for Cyt C, peptides, GNPs, and PGNPs,
respectively. Signal was monitored on the instrument in terms of raw
ellipticity values in millidegrees (mdeg).
4.11. Molecular Dynamics Simulations. The adsorption
behavior and molecular interactions between Cyt C and PGNPs
were investigated by using all-atom explicit solvent molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations. Three distinct peptide coatings were
examined: FEEGC, FEGCGEF, and EEGCGEE. Simulations were
performed using GROMACS under isothermal−isobaric (NPT)
conditions at 1 bar and 300 K.48 Each system was simulated in
triplicate for 400 ns. The simulation setup included explicit water
molecules, and Na+ and Cl−ions were introduced to maintain a salt
concentration of 100 mM, along with additional counterions
necessary for charge neutrality. Complete details of the simulation
protocol, including surface preparation, force field parameters,
equilibration procedures, and analysis methods, are provided in the
Supporting Information. Molecular visualizations were rendered using
Protein Imager.49
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059.
Sequences and structures of peptides used in this study;
schemes and results for synthesis and UV−vis/TEM
characterization of GNPs and PGNPs; additional activity
assays to validate interactions between PGNPs and
enzymes; Michaelis−Menten kinetic studies; EMSA
assays showing binding between PGNPs and enzymes;
Stern−Volmer kinetic studies; CD characterization of
enzymes with and without PGNPs; and detailed
methods and results for molecular dynamics simulations
(PDF)
Activity enhancement showing a video of the activity
enhancement of Cyt C in the presence and absence of
PGNPs (MP4)
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Devleena Samanta −Department of Chemistry, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, United
States; Livestrong Cancer Institutes, Dell Medical School,
Austin, Texas 78712, United States; Texas Materials
Institute, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas
78712, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-0647-7673;
Email: dsamanta@utexas.edu
Authors
Subrata Pandit −Department of Chemistry, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, United States;
orcid.org/0009-0000-3968-716X
Atri Bhattacharya −Department of Chemistry, The University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, United States;
orcid.org/0009-0009-5904-3711
Busra Ozguney −Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
77843, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-2025-0149
Seungheon Lee −Department of Chemistry, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0001-9631-4853
Jeetain Mittal −Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
77843, United States; Department of Chemistry and
Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics and
Genomics, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
77843, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-9725-6402
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
Author Contributions
∇S.B., A.B., and B.O. contributed equally to this work. S.P. and
D.S. conceived of the study. Synthesis, characterization
experiments, and enzymatic assays were performed by S.P.
and A.B. S.L. performed CD and EMSA studies. Computa-
tional work was carried out by B.O. and supervised by J.M.
The manuscript was written through contributions of all
authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of
the manuscript.
Funding
This work was supported by start-up funds from The
University of Texas at Austin, NSF CHE 2404334 from the
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7126

National Science Foundation (NSF CSDM-B grant), and F-
2209-20240404 grant from the Welch Foundation. J.M.
acknowledges
support
from
NIH/NIGMS
grant
R35GM153388.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
MALDI characterization of peptides was performed at the UT
Austin Center for Biomedical Research Support Biological
Mass Spectrometry Facility (RRID:SCR_021728). TEM was
performed at the Center for Biomedical Research Support
Microscopy
and
Imaging
Facility
at
UT
Austin
(RRID:SCR_021756). Images have been created using
BioRender.com. DLS was carried out at the Materials Analysis
and Spectroscopy Facility at Texas Materials Institute. We
thank the TTP (Targeted Therapeutic Drug Discovery
Program) Core facility at the University of Texas at Austin
for providing access to the J-815 CD spectrometer. The TTP
core facility is supported by CPRIT (Cancer Prevention
Research Institute of Texas) RP210088. J.M. acknowledges
support from the Texas A&M High Performance Research
Computing facility for providing advanced computing
resources for atomistic MD simulations.
ABBREVIATIONS
GNPs:gold nanoparticles; PGNPs:peptide-functionalized gold
nanoparticles; Cyt C:cytochrome c; LP:lactoperoxidase;
Hb:hemoglobin; Cat:catalase; EMSA:electrophoretic mobility
shift assay
REFERENCES
(1) Enzymes Market, Global Industry Size Forecast. https://www.
marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/enzyme-market-46202020.
html (accessed Nov 5, 2024).
(2) Otten, R.; Pádua, R. A. P.; Bunzel, H. A.; Nguyen, V.; Pitsawong,
W.; Patterson, M.; Sui, S.; Perry, S. L.; Cohen, A. E.; Hilvert, D.; Kern,
D. How Directed Evolution Reshapes the Energy Landscape in an
Enzyme to Boost Catalysis. Science 2020, 370 (6523), 1442−1446.
(3) Yang, K. K.; Wu, Z.; Arnold, F. H. Machine-Learning-Guided
Directed Evolution for Protein Engineering. Nat. Methods 2019, 16
(8), 687−694.
(4) Zhang, B.; Xu, W.; Peng, L.; Li, Y.; Zhang, W.; Wang, Z. Nature-
Inspired Interfacial Engineering for Energy Harvesting. Nat. Rev.
Electr. Eng. 2024, 1 (4), 218−233.
(5) Brannigan, J. A.; Wilkinson, A. J. Protein Engineering 20 Years
On. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2002, 3 (12), 964−970.
(6) Hutchison, C. A.; Phillips, S.; Edgell, M. H.; Gillam, S.; Jahnke,
P.; Smith, M. Mutagenesis at a Specific Position in a DNA Sequence.
J. Biol. Chem. 1978, 253 (18), 6551−6560.
(7) Jin, L.; Yang, K.; Yao, K.; Zhang, S.; Tao, H.; Lee, S.-T.; Liu, Z.;
Peng, R. Functionalized Graphene Oxide in Enzyme Engineering: A
Selective Modulator for Enzyme Activity and Thermostability. ACS
Nano 2012, 6 (6), 4864−4875.
(8) Knecht, L. D.; Ali, N.; Wei, Y.; Hilt, J. Z.; Daunert, S.
Nanoparticle-Mediated Remote Control of Enzymatic Activity. ACS
Nano 2012, 6 (10), 9079−9086.
(9) Chen, G.; Huang, S.; Ma, X.; He, R.; Ouyang, G. Encapsulating
and Stabilizing Enzymes Using Hydrogen-Bonded Organic Frame-
works. Nat. Protoc. 2023, 18 (7), 2032−2050.
(10) Xu, W.; Fu, Z.; Chen, G.; Wang, Z.; Jian, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Jiang,
G.; Lu, D.; Wu, J.; Liu, Z. Graphene Oxide Enabled Long-Term
Enzymatic Transesterification in an Anhydrous Gas Flux. Nat.
Commun. 2019, 10 (1), No. 2684.
(11) Le Ouay, B.; Minami, R.; Boruah, P. K.; Kunitomo, R.;
Ohtsubo, Y.; Torikai, K.; Ohtani, R.; Sicard, C.; Ohba, M. Water-
Soluble Ionic Metal−Organic Polyhedra as a Versatile Platform for
Enzyme Bio-Immobilization. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145 (22),
11997−12006.
(12) Bhattacharya, A.; Pandit, S.; Lee, S.; Ebrahimi, S.B.; Samanta,
D. Modulating Enzyme Activity Using Engineered Nanomaterials.
ChemBioChem 2024, No. e202400520.
(13) Cha, S.-H.; Hong, J.; McGuffie, M.; Yeom, B.; VanEpps, J. S.;
Kotov, N. A. Shape-Dependent Biomimetic Inhibition of Enzyme by
Nanoparticles and Their Antibacterial Activity. ACS Nano 2015, 9
(9), 9097−9105.
(14) Fischer, N. O.; McIntosh, C. M.; Simard, J. M.; Rotello, V. M.
Inhibition of Chymotrypsin through Surface Binding Using Nano-
particle-Based Receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2002, 99 (8),
5018−5023.
(15) De, M.; Chou, S. S.; Dravid, V. P. Graphene Oxide as an
Enzyme Inhibitor: Modulation of Activity of α-Chymotrypsin. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2011, 133 (44), 17524−17527.
(16) Xiong, Y.; Huang, J.; Wang, S.-T.; Zafar, S.; Gang, O. Local
Environment Affects the Activity of Enzymes on a 3D Molecular
Scaffold. ACS Nano 2020, 14 (11), 14646−14654.
(17) Sánchez-Morán, H.; Kaar, J. L.; Schwartz, D. K. Supra-
Biological Performance of Immobilized Enzymes Enabled by
Chaperone-like Specific Non-Covalent Interactions. Nat. Commun.
2024, 15 (1), No. 2299.
(18) Díaz, S. A.; Sen, S.; Boeneman Gemmill, K.; Brown, C. W.; Oh,
E.; Susumu, K.; Stewart, M. H.; Breger, J. C.; Lasarte Aragonés, G.;
Field, L. D.; Deschamps, J. R.; Král, P.; Medintz, I. L. Elucidating
Surface Ligand-Dependent Kinetic Enhancement of Proteolytic
Activity at Surface-Modified Quantum Dots. ACS Nano 2017, 11
(6), 5884−5896.
(19) Hooe, S. L.; Breger, J. C.; Medintz, I. L. Enhancing Enzymatic
Activity with Nanoparticle Display −an Updated Compendium and
Engineering Outlook. Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 2024, 9 (7), 679−704.
(20) Li, G.; Ma, P.; He, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Luo, Y.; Zhang, C.; Fan, H.
Enzyme−Nanowire Mesocrystal Hybrid Materials with an Extremely
High Biocatalytic Activity. Nano Lett. 2018, 18 (9), 5919−5926.
(21) You, C.-C.; Agasti, S. S.; De, M.; Knapp, M. J.; Rotello, V. M.
Modulation of the Catalytic Behavior of α-Chymotrypsin at
Monolayer-Protected Nanoparticle Surfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006,
128 (45), 14612−14618.
(22) Brown III, C. W.; Oh, E.; Hastman, D. A.; Walper, S. A.;
Susumu, K.; Stewart, M. H.; Deschamps, J. R.; Medintz, I. L. Kinetic
Enhancement of the Diffusion-Limited Enzyme Beta-Galactosidase
When Displayed with Quantum Dots. RSC Adv. 2015, 5 (113),
93089−93094.
(23) Breger, J. C.; Vranish, J. N.; Oh, E.; Stewart, M. H.; Susumu, K.;
Lasarte-Aragonés, G.; Ellis, G. A.; Walper, S. A.; Díaz, S. A.; Hooe, S.
L.; Klein, W. P.; Thakur, M.; Ancona, M. G.; Medintz, I. L. Self
Assembling Nanoparticle Enzyme Clusters Provide Access to
Substrate Channeling in Multienzymatic Cascades. Nat. Commun.
2023, 14 (1), No. 1757.
(24) Breger, J. C.; Ancona, M. G.; Walper, S. A.; Oh, E.; Susumu, K.;
Stewart, M. H.; Deschamps, J. R.; Medintz, I. L. Understanding How
Nanoparticle Attachment Enhances Phosphotriesterase Kinetic
Efficiency. ACS Nano 2015, 9 (8), 8491−8503.
(25) Vranish, J. N.; Ancona, M. G.; Oh, E.; Susumu, K.; Lasarte
Aragonés, G.; Breger, J. C.; Walper, S. A.; Medintz, I. L. Enhancing
Coupled Enzymatic Activity by Colocalization on Nanoparticle
Surfaces: Kinetic Evidence for Directed Channeling of Intermediates.
ACS Nano 2018, 12 (8), 7911−7926.
(26) Wilner, O. I.; Weizmann, Y.; Gill, R.; Lioubashevski, O.;
Freeman, R.; Willner, I. Enzyme Cascades Activated on Topologically
Programmed DNA Scaffolds. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2009, 4 (4), 249−
254.
(27) Chen, T.; Xu, Y.; Peng, Z.; Li, A.; Liu, J. Simultaneous
Enhancement of Bioactivity and Stability of Laccase by Cu 2+ /PAA/
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7127

PPEGA Matrix for Efficient Biosensing and Recyclable Decontami-
nation of Pyrocatechol. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89 (3), 2065−2072.
(28) Song, J.; Kahveci, D.; Chen, M.; Guo, Z.; Xie, E.; Xu, X.;
Besenbacher, F.; Dong, M. Enhanced Catalytic Activity of Lipase
Encapsulated in PCL Nanofibers. Langmuir 2012, 28 (14), 6157−
6162.
(29) Zhao, H.; Zhang, J.; Liu, Y.; Liu, X.; Ma, L.; Zhou, L.; Gao, J.;
Liu, G.; Yue, X.; Jiang, Y. Molecular Engineering and Morphology
Control of Covalent Organic Frameworks for Enhancing Activity of
Metal-Enzyme Cascade Catalysis. Adv. Sci. 2024, 11 (25),
No. 2400730.
(30) Liang, J.; Ruan, J.; Njegic, B.; Rawal, A.; Scott, J.; Xu, J.; Boyer,
C.; Liang, K. Insight into Bioactivity of In-situ Trapped Enzyme-
Covalent-Organic Frameworks. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023, 62 (23),
No. e202303001.
(31) Chen, Y.; Jiménez-Ángeles, F.; Qiao, B.; Krzyaniak, M. D.; Sha,
F.; Kato, S.; Gong, X.; Buru, C. T.; Chen, Z.; Zhang, X.; Gianneschi,
N. C.; Wasielewski, M. R.; Olvera de la Cruz, M.; Farha, O. K.
Insights into the Enhanced Catalytic Activity of Cytochrome c When
Encapsulated in a Metal−Organic Framework. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2020, 142 (43), 18576−18582.
(32) Wang, X.; Deng, K.; Wu, J.; Ma, Y.; Du, X.; Zhang, M.; Huang,
H.; Liu, Y.; Kang, Z. Carbon Dots from d-Cysteine and Citric Acid
Increase the Activity of the Enzyme Laccase. ACS Appl. Nano. Mater.
2022, 5 (11), 16812−16820.
(33) Li, K.; Wang, J.; He, Y.; Abdulrazaq, M. A.; Yan, Y. Carbon
Nanotube-Lipase Hybrid Nanoflowers with Enhanced Enzyme
Activity and Enantioselectivity. J. Biotechnol. 2018, 281, 87−98.
(34) Poulos, T. L. Heme Enzyme Structure and Function. Chem.
Rev. 2014, 114 (7), 3919−3962.
(35) Bertini, I.; Cavallaro, G.; Rosato, A. Cytochrome c: Occurrence
and Functions. Chem. Rev. 2006, 106 (1), 90−115.
(36) Belikova, N. A.; Vladimirov, Y. A.; Osipov, A. N.; Kapralov, A.
A.; Tyurin, V. A.; Potapovich, M. V.; Basova, L. V.; Peterson, J.;
Kurnikov, I. V.; Kagan, V. E. Peroxidase Activity and Structural
Transitions of Cytochrome c Bound to Cardiolipin-Containing
Membranes. Biochemistry 2006, 45 (15), 4998−5009.
(37) Hanske, J.; Toffey, J. R.; Morenz, A. M.; Bonilla, A. J.;
Schiavoni, K. H.; Pletneva, E. V. Conformational Properties of
Cardiolipin-Bound Cytochrome c. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012,
109 (1), 125−130.
(38) Li, M.; Mandal, A.; Tyurin, V. A.; DeLucia, M.; Ahn, J.; Kagan,
V. E.; van der Wel, P. C. A. Surface-Binding to Cardiolipin
Nanodomains Triggers Cytochrome c Pro-Apoptotic Peroxidase
Activity via Localized Dynamics. Structure 2019, 27 (5), 806−815.e4.
(39) Zhu, J.; Zhang, Y.; Lu, D.; Zare, R. N.; Ge, J.; Liu, Z.
Temperature-Responsive Enzyme−Polymer Nanoconjugates with
Enhanced Catalytic Activities in Organic Media. Chem. Commun.
2013, 49 (54), 6090.
(40) Deraedt, C.; Salmon, L.; Gatard, S.; Ciganda, R.; Hernandez,
R.; Ruiz, J.; Astruc, D. Sodium Borohydride Stabilizes Very Active
Gold Nanoparticle Catalysts. Chem. Commun. 2014, 50 (91), 14194−
14196.
(41) Liu, B.; Liu, J. Freezing Directed Construction of Bio/Nano
Interfaces: Reagentless Conjugation, Denser Spherical Nucleic Acids,
and Better Nanoflares. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139 (28), 9471−9474.
(42) da Silva, R. T. P.; de Barros, H. R.; Fernandes, R. F.; Temperini,
M. L. A.; Cordoba de Torresi, S. I. Cytochrome C with Peroxidase-
like Activity Supported on Plasmonic AuNPs: Improved Stability and
Enhanced Nanobioplasmonic Catalytic Conversion. ChemCatChem
2023, 15 (4), No. e202201568.
(43) Jain, A.; Trindade, G. F.; Hicks, J. M.; Potts, J. C.; Rahman, R.;
Hague, R. J. M.; Amabilino, D. B.; Pérez-García, L.; Rawson, F. J.
Modulating the Biological Function of Protein by Tailoring the
Adsorption Orientation on Nanoparticles. J. Colloid Interface Sci.
2021, 587, 150−161.
(44) Tollefson, E. J.; Allen, C. R.; Chong, G.; Zhang, X.; Rozanov,
N. D.; Bautista, A.; Cerda, J. J.; Pedersen, J. A.; Murphy, C. J.;
Carlson, E. E.; Hernandez, R. Preferential Binding of Cytochrome c to
Anionic Ligand-Coated Gold Nanoparticles: A Complementary
Computational and Experimental Approach. ACS Nano 2019, 13
(6), 6856−6866.
(45) Micsonai, A.; Wien, F.; Kernya, L.; Lee, Y.-H.; Goto, Y.;
Réfrégiers, M.; Kardos, J. Accurate Secondary Structure Prediction
and Fold Recognition for Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2015, 112 (24), E3095−E3103.
(46) Balakrishnan, G.; Hu, Y.; Spiro, T. G. His26 Protonation in
Cytochrome c Triggers Microsecond β-Sheet Formation and Heme
Exposure: Implications for Apoptosis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134
(46), 19061−19069.
(47) Pandit, S.; Duchow, M.; Chao, W.; Capasso, A.; Samanta, D.
DNA-Barcoded Plasmonic Nanostructures for Activity-Based Pro-
tease Sensing. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2024, 63 (2), No. e202310964.
(48) Páll, S.; Zhmurov, A.; Bauer, P.; Abraham, M.; Lundborg, M.;
Gray, A.; Hess, B.; Lindahl, E. Heterogeneous Parallelization and
Acceleration of Molecular Dynamics Simulations in GROMACS. J.
Chem. Phys. 2020, 153 (13), No. 134110.
(49) Tomasello, G.; Armenia, I.; Molla, G. The Protein Imager: a
full-featured online molecular viewer interface with server-side HQ-
rendering capabilities. Bioinformatics 2020, 36 (9), 2909−2911.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c16059
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 7117−7128
7128