RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.afm-journal.de
A Triple-Integrated 3D-Printed Composite Scaﬀold of
High-Activity Peptide-Metal Ion-Bone Cement Facilitates
Osteo-Vascular Regenerative Repair of Diabetic Bone
Defects
Junwu Wang, Yuhao Xia, Zhuowen Hao, Guang Shi, Qi Zhang, Chenglong Wang,
Mengyue Zhu, Yilong Huang, Lanhong Guo, Tian Luan, Tonghe Zhu,* Honglian Dai,*
and Jingfeng Li*
Hyperglycemia and its induced oxidative stress microenvironment present
formidable challenges to the repair of diabetic bone defects. Herein, a novel
TZGP (𝜶-TCP/ZnO/GM@P2) composite scaﬀold for diabetic bone defect
repair is developed. Characterization results demonstrate that the 𝜶-TCP
cement scaﬀold, ZnO nanoparticles, and gelatin microspheres loaded with
and protecting P2 (a novel parathyroid hormone-related peptide) achieve
complementary advantages. The TZGP scaﬀold, while meeting the
mechanical strength requirements of cancellous bone, compensates for the
deﬁciency of bioactive peptides in inorganic scaﬀolds. Its biocompatibility is
enhanced, and the scaﬀold is endowed with antibacterial and antioxidant
properties. The in vitro and in vivo results reveal that the TZGP scaﬀold
releases active factors P2 and Zn2+, promotes cell proliferation and
recruitment in a high-glucose microenvironment, reduces cellular reactive
oxygen species accumulation, improves DNA injury and mitochondrial
homeostasis, and induces osteogenic-angiogenic diﬀerentiation. Compared
with the conventional 𝜶-TCP scaﬀold, the TZGP scaﬀold exhibits more
excellent biodegradability, accelerates local tissue ﬁlling, and promotes bone
accumulation and vascular reconstruction in diabetic bone defects.
Consequently, the novel design strategy of the TZGP scaﬀold oﬀers a
promising approach to repairing diabetic bone defects.
J. Wang, Z. Hao, G. Shi, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, L. Guo, T. Luan, J. Li
Department of Orthopedics
Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University
Wuhan 430071, China
E-mail: jingfengli@whu.edu.cn
Y.Xia,H.Dai
StateKey Laboratory of AdvancedTechnology forMaterials Synthesis and
Processing
Biomedical Materials andEngineering Research Centerof Hubei Province
Wuhan University of Technology
Wuhan 430070,China
E-mail: daihonglian@whut.edu.cn
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202422950
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202422950
1. Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is one of the
most prevalent diseases and a signiﬁcant
global health issue. The International Dia-
betes Federation’s released data indicates
that over one-tenth of the world’s adult
population is aﬄicted by the burden of
DM.[1] Characterized by hyperglycemia,
DM is a systemic metabolic endocrine
disorder that often leads to various com-
plications, such as diabetic nephropathy,[2]
retinopathy,[3]
cardiovascular
diseases,[4]
and diabetic foot.[5] A series of unfa-
vorable
pathological
microenvironment
changes, including dysregulated expres-
sion of bone metabolism regulators,[6]
lipid peroxidation,[7] and oxidative stress,[8]
triggered by hyperglycemia disrupt the
stability of bone metabolism, resulting in
an increased occurrence of osteoporosis
and fractures.[9] The microvascular regen-
eration of fractured or bone-deﬁcient sites
is crucial for the bone regeneration and
remodeling processes. The hyperglycemic
microenvironment
induces
metabolic
C. Wang
Key Laboratory of Coal Conversion and New Carbon Materials of Hubei
Province
School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
Wuhan University of Science and Technology
Wuhan 430081, China
T. Zhu
Frontier Institute of Medical & Pharmaceutical Science and Technology
School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
Shanghai University of Engineering Science
Shanghai 201620, China
E-mail: zhutonghe89@sues.edu.cn
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (1 of 18)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
disorders and mitochondrial dysfunction, which are character-
ized by increased oxidative stress.[8] This often leads to im-
paired downstream osteoprogenitor cell function and abnormal
neovascularization.[8,9] Therefore, bone defects and fractures in
patients with DM are considered to be serious challenges for re-
pair and regeneration.
Inorganic materials, including phosphates and silicates, have
been widely used in bone tissue engineering.[10,11] Calcium phos-
phates are commonly used as repair materials for bone de-
fects because they are the main mineral component of bones.
𝛼-tricalcium phosphate (𝛼-TCP) bone cement and 𝛽-tricalcium
phosphate (𝛽-TCP) calcined scaﬀolds are commonly used cal-
cium phosphates with good biocompatibility. However, the lim-
ited biological degradability and mismatch in mechanical perfor-
mance with new tissue formation of single TCP phases lead to
inadequate bone inductivity.[12–14] Moreover, since inorganic scaf-
folds lack microenvironmental regulatory factors and biological
inductive factors to promote the construction of a more eﬃcient
bone-vascular network, relying solely on the implantation of TCP
scaﬀolds may not eﬀectively promote the healing of bone de-
fect sites in diabetic patients.[11] Therefore, inorganic scaﬀolds
must be modiﬁed and empowered to enhance osteogenic eﬃ-
cacy. 𝛽-TCP scaﬀolds are often sintered by calcination, which re-
stricts their drug loading to mainly bionic coatings.[11] This drug-
loading strategy limits the amount and duration of the drug re-
lease. As the biomimetic coating degrades, the drug is rapidly re-
leased, leaving only the inorganic 𝛽-TCP scaﬀold, which aﬀects
long-term bone inductivity and integration eﬀects at the bone de-
fect site. 𝛼-TCP also possesses osteoconductivity and bioactivity.
In particular, it has faster biodegradation and bio-absorption ca-
pabilities compared with 𝛽-TCP.[15,16] Diﬀerent from the prepara-
tion method of calcining 𝛽-TCP scaﬀolds, the 𝛼-TCP powder can
immediately undergo a self-dissolving, precipitating, and solidi-
fying reaction upon contact with a weakly acidic liquid at room
temperature, forming brushite (Ca(HPO4)•2H2O) and provid-
ing a certain mechanical strength.[15] Meanwhile, this creates an
opportunity for adding temperature-sensitive bioactive drugs to
the bone cement.[10] It is noteworthy that brushite, the product
after the solidiﬁcation of 𝛼-TCP, will release weakly acidic sub-
stances during the early degradation process, which is unfavor-
able for bone repair.[15] Hence, we added zinc oxide nanoparticles
(ZnONPs) to regulate the pH during the degradation process of
the scaﬀold. Meanwhile, ZnONPs have the functions of antibac-
terial, antioxidant, and antidiabetic eﬀects.[17,18] In addition, Zn2+
produced by the degradation of ZnONPs is an important basic
element in the osteogenesis process. Numerous studies have in-
dicated that Zn2+ can enhance osteogenic diﬀerentiation by up-
regulating the expression of various genes such as alkaline phos-
phatase (ALP), collagen I (Col-I), osteocalcin (OCN), and osteo-
pontin (OPN), thereby improving collagen synthesis and min-
eral deposition to facilitate bone regeneration.[10,19,20] Therefore,
the innovative strategy of adding ZnONPs to 𝛼-TCP bone cement
might achieve the excellent eﬀect of “killing two birds with one
stone”.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is an important hormone se-
creted by the parathyroid glands that regulates bone conversion
and Ca-P metabolism. It is an FDA-approved synthetic metabolic
drug for treating osteoporosis, exerting eﬀects such as bone for-
mation, vascularization, and promotion of bone resorption. Cur-
rently, the drug is mainly administered systemically via intermit-
tent subcutaneous injection in clinical practice. However, chal-
lenges such as excessive drug dosage, short half-life, diﬃculty
in maintaining local drug concentration, high cost, and limited
local application have been encountered. Previous studies have
conﬁrmed that PTH-related peptide-2 (P2) can be synthesized in
larger quantities at lower costs.[21] Compared with PTH(1-34), P2
demonstrated superior Ca-P tissue anchoring ability, prolonged
drug retention at the local site, and avoided high bone resorption
caused by a burst release of the drug. The surface-functionalized
scaﬀold of P2 exhibits better osteogenic and angiogenic induc-
tion capabilities than PTH(1-34), with a relatively weaker osteo-
clastic diﬀerentiation eﬀect, thereby achieving greater bone mass
accumulation eﬀects.[21,22] However, directly mixing P2 into the
bone cement may damage the structure and activity of P2, mak-
ing it diﬃcult to achieve eﬀective drug loading. If gelatin micro-
gels (GMs) are used as the delivery carriers for P2, GMs may play
a dual role in protecting and controlling the release of P2.[23,24]
Therefore, this study intends to adopt a novel strategy of com-
bining 𝛼-TCP-ZnONP-P2, ingeniously integrating the organic ac-
tive peptide, inorganic scaﬀold, and metal ions to prepare a new
type of 3D multifunctional composite scaﬀold (TZGP scaﬀolds).
From the perspective of material components, the various com-
ponents of TZGP scaﬀolds will complement each other’s advan-
tages, ingeniously and signiﬁcantly improving on the unfavor-
able factors of the simple TCP scaﬀold such as slow degradation,
lack of bioactive peptides, and the presence of acidic degrada-
tion products. From the perspective of material functions, TZGP
scaﬀolds will meet the mechanical strength requirements of
cancellous bone and will have more excellent biocompatibility,
biodegradability, antibacterial, and antioxidant capabilities than
the simple TCP scaﬀold. Moreover, it will promote the repair of
diabetic bone defects by exerting a potent osteogenic-angiogenic
eﬀect. The in vitro and in vivo experiments veriﬁed our conjec-
ture (Figure 1).
2. Results & Discussion
2.1. Characterization of 3D Printed Composite Scaﬀolds
Microgels possess colloidal properties such as small size, large
speciﬁc surface area, swelling, and adsorption as well as loading
and delivery of functional substances, which oﬀer signiﬁcant ad-
vantages in drug delivery.[24,25] Therefore, in this study, GMs were
used as a drug delivery carrier for P2 and made to serve as a pro-
tective shell for P2 during the preparation of 3D-printed compos-
ite scaﬀolds. The GMs were prepared as shown in Figure 2A, and
the gelatin powders before cross-linking manifested as irregular
lumps of larger size (Figure 2B). The successfully prepared GMs
appeared as regular, porous, spherical small particles (Figure 2B).
The particle size distribution ranged from 10–70 μm, concen-
trated at 35–50 μm, with an average diameter of 41.33 ± 9.13 μm
(Figure 2C).
𝛼-TCP is non-toxic, osteoconductive, bioactive, and especially
has faster biodegradation and bio-resorption than 𝛽-TCP and
hydroxyapatite.[15] The preparation process of TCP/ZnONP/GM
(TZG) composite scaﬀolds at room temperature is shown in
Figure 2D. Rheological testing was utilized to assess the print-
able properties of TZG composite ink. Printing inks have high
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (2 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the triple integrated 3D-printed composite scaﬀold of active peptide-metal ion-bone cement facilitates osteo-vascular
regenerative repair of diabetic bone defects. GMs: gelatin microgels; P2: PTH-related peptide-2; GP: GMs of load P2; Alg: alginate; STZ: Streptozotocin;
ROS: reactive oxygen species; MMP: Mitochondrial membrane potential; OB: osteoblast; BMSC: bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell; VEC: vascular
endothelial cell.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (3 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 2. Characterizations of T, TZ, and TZG scaﬀolds. A) Schematic diagram of the preparation of GMs. B) SEM of gelatin and GMs. C) Particle size
distribution of GMs. D) Schematic diagram of the preparation of TZG scaﬀolds. E, F) rheological tests of TZG ink. G) XRD, and H) pH level of T, TZ,
and TZG scaﬀolds (n = 3). I) The release kinetics of Zn2+ from TZ and TZG scaﬀolds (n = 3). J) Degradation curves (n = 5), K) compressive strength
(n = 5), and L) antimicrobial property testing of T, TZ, and TZG scaﬀolds.
viscosity at low shear force. A sudden elevation in shear force
causes its viscosity to decrease rapidly and remain in a steady
state. Restoring the shear force to the initial value, the viscos-
ity of the printing ink can be quickly recovered (Figure 2E). This
indicates that the printing ink has well self-healing ability. The
self-healing ability of the printing ink enables it to quickly return
to the initial state or viscosity during forced stabilization shear to
avoid the ink collapsing after extrusion and failing to form a com-
plete scaﬀold structure.[26] The spontaneous reduction of viscos-
ity under shear indicates that the TZG printing ink has shear-
thinning properties (Figure 2F). This shear-thinning behavior
provides extrudable properties and printability suitability as a 3D
printing ink. X-ray diﬀractometer (XRD) results showed that the
main crystalline phase in the solidiﬁed pure 𝛼-TCP (T) scaﬀolds
was brushite. The characteristic peaks of the TZ and TZG com-
posite scaﬀolds were essentially the same as those of the pure
TCP scaﬀolds, suggesting that the incorporation of ZnONPs and
GMs did not aﬀect the solidiﬁed products of TCP (Figure 2G).
The initial degradation products of T scaﬀolds are weakly
acidic, while ZnONPs are alkaline-biased substances that can re-
act with H+ to release Zn2+. Successive pH assays showed that the
introduction of ZnONPs slightly increased the pH of the TZ and
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (4 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
TZG scaﬀolds. The pH of the TZ and TZG scaﬀolds was closer
to that of the neutral and physiological environments than that of
the T scaﬀolds (Figure 2H), which conﬁrms our hypothesis. The
release kinetics of Zn2+ showed that both TZ and TZG scaﬀolds
could release Zn2+ stably during the ﬁrst 3 weeks (Figure 2I).
The TZG scaﬀold released a slightly higher concentration of Zn2+
than the TZ scaﬀold. Eight-week continuous testing showed that
all three groups of scaﬀolds exhibited positive degradation. The
TZG scaﬀold exhibited better degradation compared to the T and
TZ scaﬀolds (Figure 2J). This might be ascribed to the fact that
the introduction of GMs caused the degradation rate of TZG to be
slightly faster than that of TZ scaﬀolds. The morphology of the
TZG scaﬀold after degradation over time is shown in the SEM
results in Figure S1 (Supporting Information). The GMs inside
the scaﬀold are revealed as the scaﬀold degrades. This may facil-
itate the provision of space for the nascent bone tissue to climb
and cross-link. The solidiﬁcation reaction that occurs when the
printed scaﬀolds are immersed in a weakly acidic solution pro-
vides the scaﬀolds with basic mechanical strength.[15] During the
solidiﬁcation process of 𝛼-TCP, the Ca2+ dissolved will chelate
with sodium alginate in the scaﬀolds, further enhancing the me-
chanical strength of the scaﬀolds.[10,15] The compressive strength
of the TZ scaﬀold (23.34 ± 1.80 MPa) did not change signiﬁcantly
compared with that of the T scaﬀold (24.17 ± 1.55 MPa), while the
compressive strength of the TZG (14.53 ± 1.27 MPa) exhibited
a more obvious decrease (Figure 2K). The introduction of GMs
may reduce the densiﬁcation of the scaﬀolds and might be the
reason for the decrease in the mechanical properties of the com-
posite scaﬀolds. Fortunately, it was still able to meet the require-
ments of cancellous bone (4–12 MPa).[27] Successive observations
by microscope showed that the diameter of GM increased in PBS
due to water absorption, and then gradually degraded, more than
90% degraded by 28 days, with only a small number of remaining
particles (Figure S2, Supporting Information).
ZnONPs are potent antimicrobial agents that can directly in-
ﬂict damage to proteins and lipids on bacterial cell membranes,
leading to leakage of bacterial intracellular contents and death.
ZnONPs and Zn2+ can also cross damaged membranes to dis-
rupt internal cellular functions leading to bacterial death.[17,18]
According to SEM images, the average particle size of ZnONPs
was 30.33 ± 7.30 nm. (Figure S3, Supporting Information) In
this study, we veriﬁed that the introduction of ZnONPs conferred
certain antimicrobial properties to TZ and TZG scaﬀolds by the
spread plate method (Figure 2L), which would be beneﬁcial for
the prevention of localized bacterial infections in diabetic bone
defects.
Studies have demonstrated that ZnONPs exhibited strong an-
tioxidant activity by redistributing the electron density from oxy-
gen to nitrogen with an odd number of electrons in DPPH.[28] In
this study, the results of free radical scavenging of the scaﬀolds in-
dicated that the nitrogen radical scavenging ability of the TZ and
TZG scaﬀolds was signiﬁcantly increased compared to the T scaf-
fold (Figure S4, Supporting Information). This suggests that the
introduction of ZnONPs endowed the composite scaﬀolds with
antioxidant activity.
The schematic illustration of P2 loading is presented in
Figure 3A. Leveraging the solubilization, porosity, and adsorption
characteristics of GMs, P2 was incorporated into GMs (GP). The
average loading eﬃciency for P2 was 95.38% ± 1.37%. The bright
and uniform green ﬂuorescence of GP loaded with ﬂuorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled P2 (P2FITC) could be visualized via
immunoﬂuorescence microscopy (Figure 3A), and the GP main-
tains a relatively regular spherical shape (Figure S5, Supporting
Information). Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) re-
sults indicated that both GM and GP formed two distinct amide I
and amide II bands in the region of 1700–1500 cm−1. Moreover,
the vibrational peaks of GP at 1540 and 1453 cm−1 were more
prominent, and more conspicuous rocking vibrations of NH2 of
the primary amide group appeared ≈1158 and 594 cm−1 (Figure
S6, Supporting Information). The zeta potential measurement
demonstrated that P2 carried a negative charge, GM a positive
charge, and the positive charge of GP was diminished, imply-
ing that the anchoring of P2 onto GM was further reinforced by
the electrostatic attraction between positive and negative charges,
which facilitated the slow release of P2 from GP (Figure 3B). The
release curve of P2 from the GP exhibited an initial rapid release
phase during the ﬁrst 5 days, succeeded by a slow-release period
(Figure 2C).
There is no morphological disparity between GP and GM, GM
per se lacks biologically active. Therefore, the follow-up assay only
evaluated the T, TZ, and TZGP scaﬀolds. From a macroscopic
perspective, the incorporation of ZnONPs rendered the scaﬀolds
a whiter hue, while the addition of GP imparted a slightly yel-
lowish tint to the scaﬀolds (Figure 3D). Scanning electron mi-
croscope (SEM) results showed that, in comparison to the T and
TZ scaﬀolds, the surface of the TZGP scaﬀolds was rougher
and formed more microporous structures (Figures 3E,H), which
were conducive to cell adhesion and proliferation.[29] Embedded
GP could be observed from some of the microporous structures
(Figure 3F), which provided a window for P2 release. Beneﬁting
from the improvement of three consecutive glutamates at the C-
terminus, the calcium-phosphorus matrix anchoring ability of P2
was enhanced (Figure 3N).[21] This will undoubtedly beneﬁt the
duration of P2 action in the scaﬀold and bone tissue locally and
prolong the half-life. The EDS results revealed a uniform distri-
bution of Ca, P, and Zn within the TZGP scaﬀolds (Figure 3G).
2.2. Biocompatibility of Composite Scaﬀolds
The live/dead cell staining results demonstrated that the live cell
ratios of all three scaﬀold groups were above 90% after 3 days of
co-culture (Figures 3I,J), indicating that all had good biocompat-
ibility. Nevertheless, the average spreading area of bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) in the TZ and TZGP groups
was larger than that of the T group (Figures 3K,L), which indi-
cated that the TZ and TZGP scaﬀolds were more conducive for
cell adhesion. The CCK-8 results showed that the overall cell pro-
liferation in the TZGP group was more pronounced than that in
the T and TZ groups (Figure 3M).
2.3. TZGP Scaﬀold Enhances Osteogenic Diﬀerentiation of
BMSCs in High-Glucose Microenvironment
The functional modulatory eﬀects of composite scaﬀolds on BM-
SCs were assessed by proliferation, migration, osteogenic diﬀer-
entiation, and gene and protein expression proﬁles. According to
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (5 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 3. Biocompatibility of scaﬀolds. A) Schematic and immunoﬂuorescence diagram of the GP. B) Zeta potential of P2, GMs, and GP. C) Release
curve of P2 and degradation curve of GM. D) The macro morphology and E) SEM of scaﬀolds. F) TZGP scaﬀold under the light microscope. Arrows
point to GP. G) EDS of TZGP scaﬀold. H) Localized enlarged SEM image of the TZGP scaﬀold. Arrows point to GP. I) Live/dead cell staining and
J) quantitative analysis of the cell viability (living cell ratio = green cells/(green cells + red cells) × 100%). K) Cytoskeleton ﬂuorescence staining and
L) average spreading area of BMSCs. M) The proliferation of BMSCs in the diﬀerent scaﬀold groups after intervention for 1 and 3 days. N) Schematic
illustration of the anchoring of P2 released from GP on localized calcium-phosphorus-based materials and bone tissue. The Data is presented as the
mean ± SD (n = 3). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001 compared with the T group; ###p < 0.001 compared with the TZ group.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (6 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 4. Eﬀect of scaﬀolds on the recruitment and osteogenic diﬀerentiation of BMSCs. A, B) EdU staining and C, D) Transwell assay of BMSCs at
day 3. E, F) ALP staining at day 14. G, H) ARS staining and I, J) Von Kossa staining at day 21. The mRNA expression of K) OCN, L) Col-I, M) ALP, and
N) RUNX2 of BMSCs. The expression levels of O, P) RUNX2 and Q, R) OCN in BMSCs by immunoﬂuorescence staining. The Data is presented as the
mean ± SD (n = 3). ****p < 0.0001 compared with the control group; ##p < 0.01, ###p < 0.001, and ####p < 0.0001 compared with the High-G group.
the EdU results, the high-glucose microenvironment decreased
the proliferative viability of BMSCs, and the T group failed to
noticeably ameliorate this adverse eﬀect, whereas the TZ group
and TZGP group restored the proliferative viability of BMSCs to
a certain extent, especially the TZGP group (Figures 4A,B). The
Transwell assay indicated that the migratory ability of BMSCs in
the high-glucose microenvironment was diminished, and the mi-
gratory ability of cells in the T, TZ, and TZGP scaﬀold groups
exhibited a progressive increase (Figures 4C,D). The Ca and P
ions released after the degradation of the 𝛼-TCP scaﬀolds could
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (7 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
stimulate and positively recruit BMSCs. Zn2+ could promote the
adhesion and proliferation of BMSCs in early osteogenesis.[10,19]
P2, as a highly active PTH-related peptide, possesses a powerful
capacity to recruit BMSCs and promote proliferation.[21,22] This
endows TZGP with a superior protective ability on BMSCs in a
high glucose environment.
The osteogenic diﬀerentiation of BMSCs in high glucose
osteogenic induction medium was assessed by ALP staining
(Figures 4E,F), alizarin red S (ARS) staining (Figures 4G,H), and
Von Kossa staining (Figures 4I,J). RT-qPCR was performed to
assess the expression of osteogenesis-related genes ALP, OCN,
Col-I, and RUNX2 (Figures 4K–N), and the protein expression
of RUNX2 and OCN in cells was presented as immunoﬂuores-
cence results (Figures 4O–R). These results demonstrated that
the TZ group had a more potent osteoinductive capacity than the
T group, but the TZGP group had signiﬁcantly superior ALP ac-
tivity and calcium deposition area, and more signiﬁcantly stim-
ulated the expression of osteogenesis-related genes and proteins
than the TZ group. This enhanced osteogenic activity can be at-
tributed to several aspects. Primarily, degradation of the TCP scaf-
fold provides Ca and P for osteogenic diﬀerentiation of BMSCs.
Subsequently, Zn2+ plays an important role in osteogenic dif-
ferentiation by promoting the expression of osteogenesis-related
genes, enhancing osteogenic diﬀerentiation, collagen synthesis,
and mineral deposition.[10,19,20] Critically, PTH is an important
Ca-P regulator involved in the regulation of the metabolic balance
of bone formation/resorption. The P2 developed by our group,
with the introduction of triple glutamate at the C-terminus, was
able to enhance the degree of anchoring of the carboxyl group
at the tail end of P2 to Ca2+ on the TCP scaﬀold, exposing the
peptide active site; and the introduction of a phosphoric acid
functional group to the serine at the N-terminus of PTH.[21,22]
These improvements signiﬁcantly enhanced the mineralization-
promoting eﬀects of PTH, tilting the bone metabolic balance to-
ward bone accumulation.[21,22,30,31]
Previous studies have indicated that the composite scaﬀolds
capable of controlled release of Zn2+ promote osteogenic repair
through the Wnt/𝛽-catenin and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathways.[32–34] In our prior research, it was demon-
strated that the PTHrP1 functionally modiﬁed scaﬀolds could
activate the Wnt/𝛽-catenin signaling pathway to enhance the os-
teogenic eﬀect.[35] Additionally, the p38 MAPK signaling pathway
serves as a regulatory route for PTH to improve osteogenesis.[36]
In this study, as veriﬁed by immunoﬂuorescence staining and
Elisa experiments, the TZGP scaﬀolds were shown to signif-
icantly upregulate the expression levels of p-p38 MAPK and
𝛽-catenin (Figure S7, Supporting Information). Therefore, the
Wnt/𝛽-catenin and p38 MAPK pathways may be involved in the
potential mechanism by which TZGP promotes osteogenic re-
pair. Thus, the innovative design of superimposing triple positive
eﬀects of Ca-P inorganic materials, Zn2+, and P2 in this study en-
ables the TZGP scaﬀolds to achieve more eﬃcient osteogenesis.
2.4. TZGP Scaﬀold Promotes Angiogenesis of HUVECs in a High
Glucose Microenvironment
The vascular network in bone tissue provides essential nutrients,
oxygen, and growth factors for osteogenesis.[37] Consequently,
angiogenesis is crucial for the regenerative properties of bone
tissue-engineered scaﬀolds. The hyperglycemic microenviron-
ment leads to the accumulation of excess reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and advanced glycation end products (AGEs), which fre-
quently culminates in microangiopathy and severely aﬀects the
revascularization of bone defect sites in DM patients.[6–9,38] EdU
staining (Figures 5A,B) and Transwell assay (Figures 5C,D) re-
vealed that the proliferation and migration capacities of human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were severely im-
paired in the High-G group. The intervention in the T group
failed to ameliorate this state. The TZ group mildly alleviated
the suppressed proliferation and migration of HUVECs. Inter-
estingly, this condition was signiﬁcantly modiﬁed in the TZGP
group.
Scratch healing experiments similarly conﬁrmed the relatively
satisfactory migration healing ability of HUVECs in the TZGP
group (Figures 5G,H). Tube formation experiments showed that
only a few vessel-like structures were formed in the High-G
group, a small number of intermittent vessels were formed in
the HUVECs of the T and TZ groups, and a rich continuous vas-
cular network was formed in the TZGP group (Figures 5E,F).
This indicated that adding P2 endowed the composite scaf-
folds with eﬃcient vessel-forming ability, which was in keep-
ing with our previous study.[39] Immunoﬂuorescence assay in-
dicated that TZGP scaﬀolds signiﬁcantly promoted the expres-
sion of angiogenesis-related factors CD31, HIF-1𝛼, and VEGF
in cells (Figures 5I–N). The expression levels of angiogenesis-
related genes CD31, VEGF, HIF-1𝛼, and bFGF were signiﬁcantly
increased in the TZGP group by qRT-PCR (Figure S8, Supporting
Information). These results demonstrated that the TZGP scaﬀold
could improve the proliferation and migration of HUVECs in a
high-glucose environment and promote the construction of vas-
cular networks by up-regulating the expression of pathway pro-
teins such as HIF-1𝛼/VEGF.
2.5. TZGP Scaﬀolds Protect Mitochondria in High-Glucose
Environments
We evaluated DNA damage in a high-glucose environment by
immunoﬂuorescence assay. The results manifested that DNA
damage marker 𝛾-H2AX was signiﬁcantly expressed within BM-
SCs and HUVECs in the High-G group, whereas the expression
level of dividing and proliferating marker Ki67 was substantially
downregulated in the nucleus (Figures 6A–D, I–L). The expres-
sion of 𝛾-H2AX and Ki67 in the TZ group was ameliorated, and
this salutary eﬀect was more signiﬁcant in BMSCs, but it was
still signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that in the control group. The ex-
pression of 𝛾-H2AX in the nuclei of BMSCs and HUVECs in the
TZGP group was signiﬁcantly diminished, while the expression
of Ki67 was improved compared with the T and TZ groups. Mito-
chondria serve as important drivers for maintaining metabolic
adaptations in response to metabolic perturbations and play a
pivotal role in the osteogenic diﬀerentiation of osteoblasts.[40–42]
Mitochondrial dynamic homeostasis is impaired by a sustained
hyperglycemic microenvironment.[43,44] In addition, mitochon-
dria are the main source of ROS in cells, which conversely
act as potent inducers of mitochondrial division, and excess
ROS can induce mitochondrial division.[45] Diabetes-mediated
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (8 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 5. Eﬀect of scaﬀolds on angiogenic diﬀerentiation of HUVECs. A, B) EdU staining and C, D) Transwell assay of HUVECs at day 3. E, F) Identiﬁcation
of tube formation of HUVECs. G, H) The scratch assay validated the migration healing ability of HUVECs. The expression levels of I, J) CD31, K, L) VEGF,
and M, N) OCN in HUVECs by immunoﬂuorescence staining. The Data is presented as the mean ± SD (n = 3). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and
****p < 0.0001 compared with the control group; #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01, ###p < 0.001, and ####p < 0.0001 compared with the High-G group.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (9 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 6. The expression of 𝛾-H2AX in A) BMSCs and B) HUVECs. The expression of Ki67 in C) BMSCs and D) HUVECs. Mitochondrial membrane
potential of E) BMSCs and F) HUVECs assessed by JC-1 assay. DHE assay to evaluate intracellular ROS expression in G) BMSCs and H) HUVECs.
Quantitative analysis of I, J) 𝛾-H2AX, K, L) Ki67, M, N) JC-1, and O, P) ROS. The Data is presented as the mean ± SD (n = 3). **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001,
and ****p < 0.0001 compared with the control group; #p < 0.05, ###p < 0.001, and ####p < 0.0001 compared with the High-G group.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (10 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
excessive ROS production impairs implant osseointegration.[46]
The JC-1 ﬂuorescent probe assay in this study indicated that the
mitochondrial membrane potential was improved in the TZ and
TZGP groups, particularly in the TZGP group, compared with
that in the High-G group, with the improvement being more sig-
niﬁcant in the BMSCs (Figures 6E, F, M, N). Moreover, a ﬂuores-
cent probe dihydroethidium (DHE) was used to detect intracel-
lular ROS expression (Figures 6G, H, O, P). The production of
ROS was signiﬁcantly decreased in BMSCs in the TZ group in
contrast to the High-G group. However, there was a reduction in
the accumulation of ROS in HUVECs, but the diﬀerence was not
statistically signiﬁcant with the High-G group. The intracellular
ROS production was signiﬁcantly decreased in the TZGP groups
relative to other scaﬀold groups.
Several studies have indicated the potent free radical scaveng-
ing ability of ZnONPs by experimental evaluations such as DPPH
assay, ABTS assay, hydroxyl radical scavenging assay, superoxide
radical scavenging assay, hydrogen peroxide radical scavenging
assay, and ferric reducing antioxidant power assay.[28,47–49] The
present study also corroborated that the addition of ZnONPs en-
hanced the ability of composite scaﬀolds to scavenge DPPH and
ABST free radicals (Figure S4, Supporting Information). There-
fore, we hypothesized that ZnONPs in the TZ scaﬀold scavenged
free radicals in the microenvironment and interrupted the posi-
tive feedback toxicity caused by ROS accumulation, thereby exert-
ing a certain antioxidative stress eﬀect, which partially improved
the mitochondrial membrane potential and downregulated intra-
cellular ROS production in the cells of the TZ group. Zn2+ has
a signiﬁcant protective function in the proliferation and diﬀer-
entiation of BMSCs, which might be one of the potential rea-
sons for the diﬀerences in the treatment of BMSCs and HUVECs
in the TZ group. Furthermore, there was evidence that PTH
inhibits apoptosis by enhancing DNA repair.[50] PTHrP could
reduce ROS production in osteoblasts through its N-terminal
and osteoinhibitory structural domains and also attenuate ROS-
induced apoptosis by regulating MAPK activation.[51,52] Our pre-
vious study demonstrated that P2 signiﬁcantly attenuated H2O2-
induced mitochondrial damage and endogenous ROS accumula-
tion in BMSCs and HUVECs compared with PTH(1-34).[22] Con-
sequently, the dual protective eﬀects of P2 and ZnONPs may be a
potential mechanism by which TZGP scaﬀolds reduce the dam-
aging eﬀects of high glucose-induced oxidative stress on cells.
2.6. TZGP Scaﬀold Promotes Regenerative Repair of Diabetic
Bone Defects In Vivo
To investigate the bone regeneration of TZGP composite scaf-
folds in DM patients, we constructed a diabetic bone defect model
and implanted T, TZ, and TZGP scaﬀolds. After continuous
blood glucose monitoring, the DM model was successfully con-
structed in SD rats after 5–7 days of streptozotocin induction. In-
terestingly, the blood glucose values of rats in the TZ and TZGP
groups were slightly lower than those in the T group, although
they also gradually increased (Figure S9, Supporting Informa-
tion). Previous studies have conﬁrmed the positive antidiabetic
eﬀects of ZnONPs. Supplementation of ZnONPs by oral or in-
traperitoneal injection signiﬁcantly reduced blood glucose levels
in DM rats.[18,53,54] In addition, zinc plays a key role in insulin syn-
thesis, storage, and secretion.[55] Therefore, we speculated that
ZnONPs released during the degradation of TZ and TZGP scaf-
folds exerted a mild hypoglycemic eﬀect. However, the limited
local release of the drug into the blood concentration failed to ex-
ert a signiﬁcant antidiabetic eﬀect.
Bone restoration was assessed at weeks 6 and 12 using micro-
CT and 3D reconstruction analysis. The results demonstrated
that in the diabetic bone defect sites of the DM group, only a
small amount of bone mass was accumulated merely at the edges
of the defects. Due to the absence of scaﬀold support, the tissue
migration into the interior of the defects was slow, thus making
it diﬃcult to form new bone. Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the DM
group, there were more mineralized bone tissue was generated
in the localization of the bone defects in the TZGP group, and
more nascent bone was covered on the surface and interstices of
the scaﬀolds. Meanwhile, scaﬀold degradation seemed more ob-
vious in the TZGP group than in the T group, which promoted
gradual creeping in of nascent bone tissue (Figure 7A). More-
over, more yellow-green bone tissue was observed around the
scaﬀolds in coronal, sagittal, and transverse planes in the TZGP
group, whereas more blue scaﬀold structures were observed in
the T group (Figure 7B). Consistent with these results, bone mi-
crostructural parameters such as bone volume (BV), the bone
volume fraction (BV/TV), the number of trabeculae (Tb.N), and
the thickness of trabeculae (Tb.Th), were signiﬁcantly better in
the TZGP group than in the other groups (Figures 7C–E; Figure
S10, Supporting Information). The trabecular spacing (Tb.Sp)
did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly among the three scaﬀold groups but
was smaller than in the control group (Figure 7F). These re-
sults indicated that the TZGP scaﬀold could signiﬁcantly pro-
mote bone regeneration in diabetic bone defects.
Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining was used to evaluate the in
vivo biocompatibility of the scaﬀold by observing the morphology
of the major organs. No signs of pathological damage or inﬂam-
mation were found in these vital organs (Figure S11, Supporting
Information). By conducting HE staining at two distinct time in-
tervals, we could observe more visually the formation of a con-
tinuous ring of nascent tissue around the scaﬀolds in all three
groups. However, only a relatively thin layer of tissue covered
the defect area in the DM group (Figure 8A). Encouragingly, the
scaﬀolds degraded the most in the TZGP group, the scaﬀold sur-
roundings and interstices were occupied by more nascent tissues
(Figures 8A,B; Figure S12A, Supporting Information), and the
orange-colored nascent bone tissues were more abundant than
those in the other groups (Figure 8A). In contrast, the interior of
the scaﬀolds in the T group was not yet signiﬁcantly ﬁlled with
nascent tissue at 6 weeks (Figure 8A; Figure S12A, Supporting
Information).
Masson staining results were consistent with HE results, with
more red and blue interspersed new bone tissue inside and
around the scaﬀold in the TZGP group (Figures 8C,D; Figure
S12B, Supporting Information). However, there was only little
new bone formation in the DM group, and even in some spec-
imens, we observed obvious bone resorption at the edges of
the bone defects. Interestingly, we observed undegraded GP in
the scaﬀold area due to protection on the inside and GP be-
ing degraded by the encapsulated tissue in the scaﬀold-tissue
interface area (Figures 8A,C). This may suggest that GPs in
the TZGP scaﬀold can achieve a temporally and spatially slow
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (11 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 7. Assessment of micro-CT for repair of diabetic bone defects. A) 3D reconstruction of localized diabetic bone defects. B) Distribution of nascent
bone tissue around the scaﬀold at 6 and 12 weeks of implantation. The new bone was yellowish green and the scaﬀold was bluish purple. The post-
treatment bone microstructural parameters in each group, including C) BV/TV, D) Tb.N, E) Tb.Th, and F) Tb.Sp. The Data is presented as the mean ±
SD (n = 5). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001 compared with the diabetes mellitus (DM) group; ##p < 0.01 and ####p < 0.0001
compared with the T group. &&p < 0.01, &&&p < 0.001, and &&&&p < 0.0001 compared with the TZ group.
release of P2 through positional diﬀerences. Further, IHC stain-
ing for RUNX2, Col-I, CD31, and HIF-1𝛼reﬂected the expression
of osteogenesis- and angiogenesis-related factors (Figures 8E;
Figure S13, Supporting Information). RUNX2 is an important
transcription factor for early osteogenesis, and we observed
that its expression was more signiﬁcant in the TZGP group,
especially at the scaﬀold-new tissue junction. This indicated
that the TZGP scaﬀold maintained good osteogenic activity
(Figures 8E,F; Figure S13, Supporting Information). Col-I is the
major collagen component in bone tissue. Compared with the
DM and T groups, the collagen structures formed in the TZ
and TZGP groups were richer and denser (Figures 8E,G; Figure
S13, Supporting Information). In addition, HIF-1𝛼was more
abundantly expressed in the TZGP group, and it could play a
positive role in both osteogenic and angiogenic diﬀerentiation
(Figures 8E,J; Figure S13, Supporting Information). With the
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (12 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 8. Histologic assessment of diabetic bone defect repair. A) HE staining of diabetic bone defect regeneration. Yellow arrows point to GP.
B) Percentage of scaﬀolds and newborn tissue in T, TZ, and TZGP groups at 12 weeks. ****p < 0.0001 compared with the T group; ###p < 0.001
compared with the TZ group. C) Masson’s trichrome staining of diabetic bone defect regeneration. The yellow arrow points to GP. D) Percentage of
new bone area in Masson staining results at 12 weeks. E) IHC staining for RUNX2, Col-I, CD31, and HIF-1𝛼at 12 weeks of implantation. Arrows point
to neovascularization. Semi-quantitative analysis of relative expression of F) RUNX2, G) Col-I, and J) HIF-1𝛼. Semi-quantitative analysis of H) vascular
area and I) vessel number. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001 compared with the diabetes mellitus (DM) group; #p < 0.05 and ####p < 0.0001
compared with the T group. &&&p < 0.001, and &&&&p < 0.0001 compared with the TZ group. The Data is presented as the mean ± SD (n = 5).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (13 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
labeling of CD31, the neovascular structures around the scaﬀolds
could be visualized in each group (Figures 8E,H,I; Figure S13,
Supporting Information). There seemed to be more vessel for-
mation in the TZ group compared to the T group. Furthermore,
the angiogenic activity of the TZ scaﬀolds in vivo appeared to be
more signiﬁcant compared to the results of the in vitro experi-
ments (Figures 5E, 8E; Figure S13, Supporting Information). We
hypothesized that the reasons for this diﬀerence were multiple.
On the one hand, the free radical scavenging and antidiabetic ef-
fects of TZ scaﬀolds have improved the local microenvironment.
On the other hand, multiple signaling crosstalk between cells ex-
ists locally in bone defects in vivo, such as cellular crosstalk be-
tween osteoblasts and endothelial cells. Zn2+ plays an important
role in the recruitment, proliferation, and diﬀerentiation of BM-
SCs, and BMSCs can crosstalk vascular endothelial cells and re-
cruit them to form new vascular structures through the release
of signaling factors or exosomes. Compared with the TZ group,
the number of neovessels in the TZGP group was more signiﬁ-
cant, which was attributed to the positive angiogenic eﬀect of the
scaﬀold-controlled release of P2. In conclusion, TZGP scaﬀolds
modiﬁed with both ZnONPs and P2 could accelerate the angio-
genic and osteogenic repair of diabetic bone defects.
This study has veriﬁed the eﬀectiveness of the TZGP compos-
ite scaﬀold at the cellular and small animal levels, laying a ro-
bust groundwork for further promotion to clinical trials. How-
ever, there are still some directions that need to be further ex-
plored. First, this study found that TZGP scaﬀolds have better
biodegradability compared with 𝛼-TCP scaﬀolds, and future re-
search could focus on developing scaﬀolds with degradation rates
synchronized to bone tissue regeneration. Second, although we
have initially veriﬁed that TZGP can regulate the p38 MAPK and
Wnt/𝛽-catenin signaling pathways, it must be pointed out that
the inﬂuence of the composite scaﬀolds in the local bone defect
area is multifaceted, and multiple types of cells will be regulated
by the scaﬀolds. Therefore, we will focus on exploring the de-
tailed regulatory mechanisms of the TZGP composite scaﬀold
in our subsequent work to promote the clinical translation of
this research. Finally, although we found that the introduction of
ZnONPs in the scaﬀolds was able to slightly modulate blood glu-
cose, subsequent studies should further explore the possible and
potential mechanisms of localized ZnONPs release on systemic
blood glucose regulation. Although facing numerous challenges,
we are determined and capable of promoting the clinical trials of
the research results.
3. Conclusions
The hyperglycemic microenvironment of diabetic patients
can trigger toxic pathological factors such as oxidative stress,
posing challenges to localized bone regeneration and vascular-
ized repair of bone defects. In this study, a 3D-printed TZGP
composite scaﬀold with degradability, antibacterial, antioxidant,
highly osteoinductive, and vasodilatory activities was constructed
by a triple ingenious combination of P2, ZnONPs, and 𝛼-TCP.
The various components of this novel TZGP scaﬀold comple-
ment each other’s advantages, signiﬁcantly improving the un-
favorable factors of the traditional pure 𝛼-TCP scaﬀold such as
slow degradation, lack of bioactive peptides, and the presence of
acidic degradation products. In vitro, experiments conﬁrmed that
the TZGP scaﬀolds can improve DNA injury and mitochondrial
damage of BMSC and HUVEC in a high-glucose microenviron-
ment and reduce ROS accumulation. Zn2+ and P2, which are
released by the TZGP scaﬀolds, accelerate osteogenic diﬀeren-
tiation and calcium salt deposition by promoting the expression
of osteogenesis-related factors, such as RUNX2, OCN, ALP, and
Col I. Meanwhile, the TZGP scaﬀolds can eﬃciently reconstruct
the vascular network by promoting the expression of biofactors
such as VEGF, CD31, bFGF, and HIF-1𝛼. In vivo, assays con-
ﬁrmed that the TZGP composite scaﬀold promoted tissue ﬁlling
and osteo-vascular regeneration in diabetic bone defects. There-
fore, the strategy of combining active peptides, metal ions, and
inorganic Ca-P materials adopted in this study provides a new
design for the repair of refractory diabetic bone defects.
4. Experimental Section
Materials:
An Alcian blue staining kit and alginate (Alg) were pur-
chased from Sigma (USA). Gelatin, lysozyme, CCK-8, Triton X-100,
QuickBlock blocking buﬀer for immune staining, 4′, 6-diamidino-2′-
phenylindole (DAPI), 4% paraformaldehyde, ALP staining kit, crystal vio-
let solution, ARS staining kit, EdU cell proliferation detection kit, Hoechst
33342, phalloidin-Alexa Fluor 488, phalloidin-Alexa Fluor 594, and the
primary antibody anti-𝛾-H2AX (AF5836) were purchased from Beyotime
(China). An osteogenic induction medium was purchased from Cyagen
(China). Olive oil and GPTMS were purchased from Aladdin (China). The
PTH Elisa kit, p-p38 MAPK Elisa kit, and 𝛽-catenin Elisa kit were pur-
chased from Jingmei Biotechnology (China). Luriae–Bertani (LB) medium
and Von Kossa staining kit were purchased from Solarbio (China). A
calcein-AM/Ethidium homodimer viability/cytotoxicity kit was purchased
from BestBio (China). A streptozotocin was purchased from Biofroxx
(Germany). Annexin V-FITC/PI apoptosis detection kit, ﬂuorescent iodide
probe JC-1 detection kit, and ROS detection ﬂuorescent probe DHE kit
were purchased from KeyGen (China). A total RNA isolation kit was pur-
chased from Foregene (China). ZnONPs (30 ± 10 nm) and glucose an-
hydrase were purchased from Macklin (China). A RevertAid ﬁrst-strand
cDNA synthesis kit was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc (USA).
A SYBR Premix Ex Taq was purchased from Vazyme Biotech (China). Pri-
mary antibodies against Ki67, RUNX2, 𝛽-catenin, OCN, CD31, VEGF, and
HIF-1𝛼, and CoraLitePlus 488- and 594-conjugated secondary antibodies
were purchased from Proteintech (China). Primary antibodies against p-
p38 MAPK were purchased from ABclonal (China). 𝛼-minimum essen-
tial medium (𝛼-MEM), Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (DMEM),
fetal bovine serum (FBS), phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS), ethylenedi-
aminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) solution, and penicillin/streptomycin (P/S)
were obtained from Gibco (USA). P2 was synthesized with the assistance
of BankPeptide Biological Technology Co., Ltd. (China).
Preparation of GMs and GP:
GMs were prepared using a modiﬁed
emulsion-solvent extraction method reported by Nouri–Felekor.[56] Brieﬂy,
gelatin (2.5 g) was dissolved in deionized water to obtain a 10 wt% gelatin
solution. GPTMS (1.25 mL) was added to this solution, and the mixture
was stirred at 500 rpm and 40 °C for 2 h to achieve crosslinking, resulting
in a uniform precursor solution. The precursor solution was slowly dripped
into 125 mL of preheated olive oil with stirring to form a uniform water-in-
oil emulsion. The emulsion was stirred at 40 °C for 2 h and cooled in an ice
bath for 30 min. To extract the residual water, 50 mL of pre-cooled acetone
was added, and the mixture was ﬁltered to collect the GMs. The GMs were
washed multiple times with acetone to remove any remaining olive oil,
then rehydrated and freeze-dried for storage. Finally, ﬁeld-emission SEM
(Tescan MIRA, Czech Republic) was used to examine the morphology and
particle size of the GMs.
Based on the solubilization properties of the GMs, GP was prepared
by adsorbing P2 onto the GMs. Brieﬂy, 1 g of GMs was added to 2.5 mL
of 0.5 mg mL−1 P2 solution with gentle shaking with a vortex shaker to
ensure uniform absorption. The mixture was then freeze-dried to obtain
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (14 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Table 1. Composition of ingredients for the preparation of diﬀerent scaf-
folds.
𝛼-TCP
ZnONPs
GMs
GPs
Alg
T scaﬀold
+
–
–
–
+
TZ scaﬀold
+
+
–
–
+
TZG scaﬀold
+
+
+
–
+
TZGP scaﬀold
+
+
–
+
+
the GP. The loading rate of P2 was obtained by comparing the weights of
GMs before and after P2 loading (n = 3).[21] Since the volume of the solu-
tion was less than the theoretical swelling volume of the GMs, the P2 was
completely absorbed.[23] The eﬀect of P2 loading on the GMs was exam-
ined using zeta potentials and FTIR (NICOLET 5700 FT–IR Spectrometer,
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA). The loading of P2 on GM was also visu-
alized with the assistance of P2FITC. Fluorescence of GM was observed
and recorded using a ﬂuorescence microscope (IX73, Olympus, Japan).
The release of P2 was detected using an ELISA kit according to the man-
ufacturer’s instructions. The optical density (OD) value was measured at
450 nm by a multifunctional enzyme meter (VICTOR Nivo, PerkinElmer,
USA) to determine the P2 concentration.
Fabrication of 3D-Printed TZGP Composite Scaﬀolds:
𝛼-TCP powder (3
g), ZnONPs (2% w/v), and GMs (5% w/v) or GPs (5% w/v) were added
to 10% w/v Alg gel. Mechanical stirring was performed until a paste was
formed to obtain the printing ink. Four diﬀerent composite scaﬀolds, T,
TZ, TZG, and TZGP scaﬀolds, were prepared according to the compo-
sition in Table 1. The composite scaﬀolds were printed on a 3D printer
(SunP BioMaker 2). The 3D printer nozzle had a diameter of 500 μm, with
a screw extrusion speed of 0.5–1 mm3 s−1, and a printing speed of 5—
15 mm−1 s−1. The printed scaﬀold blank was immersed in a 10% phospho-
ric acid solution for a crosslinking reaction for 5 min, followed by rinsing 3
times with deionized water, rapid vacuum drying, and storage at −20 °C.
Characterization of Materials:
Identiﬁcation of the crystalline phases
of materials was carried out by the XRD (Empyrean, PANalytical B.V.) with
Cu-K𝛼radiation (𝜆= 1.5418 Å). Rheological measurements of TZG were
conducted on a Kinexus Pro rheometer (Malvern, UK) with a cone plate
(diameter: 60 mm; conical degree: 1°). The T, TZ, and TZG composite
scaﬀolds were immersed in PBS (pH = 7.4) with a mass-to-volume ra-
tio of 0.2 g mL−1. Meanwhile, the pH of the PBS was measured every 2
days with a pH meter (PHS-25, China) and the PBS was updated every 2
days. The scaﬀolds were removed at various time points, gently rinsed in
deionized water, and dried and weighed. The weight of the scaﬀolds was
recorded every 1 week for 8 weeks. The degradation rate of the scaﬀolds
was calculated by the change in weight before and after incubation with
PBS. The scaﬀolds were preserved after freeze-drying at each time point,
and SEM was used to observe the morphology of the degraded scaﬀolds.
Residual weight (%) = Wt/W0 × 100%. Wt was the weight of the dried scaf-
fold at a speciﬁc time point and W0 was the initial weight of the dry scaf-
fold. An inductively coupled plasma-optical emission (ICP, Prodigy 7, Lee-
man Labs Inc., America) was used to measure Zn2+ concentration every 2
days. Degradation experiments were performed at 37 °C at 100 rpm under
continuous shaking. Compressive strength was tested using an electronic
universal testing machine (MTS Exceed 40, USA) (standard specimen size
was 10 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm). The morphology and element distribution
of the materials were evaluated by SEM. The in vitro DPPH and ABTS rad-
ical scavenging activity of scaﬀolds was assessed by using earlier reported
methods.[57] Brieﬂy, the ABTS working solution and DPPH working solu-
tion were prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then,
the scaﬀold blocks were immersed in the reaction working solutions and
were allowed to react in the dark for the corresponding time. After that, the
supernatants were taken and the OD values at 515 nm and 734 nm were
measued using a multifunctional enzyme meter. The radical scavenging
activity = ((Ac−As)/Ac) × 100%. As was the absorbance of the samples
and Ac was the absorbance of the scaﬀold-free control.
In Vitro Antibacterial Activity:
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus, ATCC
6538) and Escherichia coli (E. coli, ATCC 25922) and the spread plate
method were used to assess the antibacterial activity of T, TZ, and TZG
scaﬀolds. 60 μL of the bacterial suspension (1.0 × 107 CFU mL−1) was
dropped onto the surface of the sterile scaﬀold and incubated for 24 h
at 37 °C. The scaﬀold was then incubated in 2 mL of saline for 2 min to
completely separate the attached bacteria from the implant surface. The
medium was diluted 100-fold with saline to obtain a countable number
of colonies, and 100 μL of the dilution was incubated in an LB medium.
Plates were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h to obtain digital images. Those
without scaﬀold intervention served as the control group.
Cell Acquisition and Culture:
BMSCs were obtained from Sprague–
Dawley rat bone marrow and cultured in 𝛼-MEM. HUVECs were cultured
in a vascular cell basal medium. The culture medium was supplemented
with 10% FBS and 1% P/S. All cells were incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2
incubator.
Biocompatibility of Scaﬀolds:
The cytocompatibility of the diﬀerent
scaﬀolds was assessed by live/dead cell staining, cytoskeletal staining,
and CCK-8 assay. Brieﬂy, the scaﬀolds of each group were immersed in
the culture medium and cultured in a cell incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2
for 72 h. After that, the scaﬀolds were removed, and the scaﬀold extracts
were obtained after ﬁltration. Subsequently, BMSCs were seeded in either
24-well plates (5 × 104 cells/well) or 96-well plates (5 × 103 cells/well)
and co-cultured with the scaﬀold extracts supplemented with FBS and
P/S. The 24-well plates were subjected to live/dead cell staining using a
calcein-AM/Ethidium live/dead kit on the 3rd day after culturing. The 96-
well plates were subjected to CCK-8 assays on the 1st and 3rd days after
culturing. The cytoskeleton was performed using phalloidin-Alexa Fluor
488. Brieﬂy, a scaﬀold sheet with a diameter of 10 mm and a thickness
of 1 mm was placed in a 24-well plate, and BMSCs (5 × 104 cells) were
inoculated on the composite scaﬀold. The 24-well plates were placed on
a rotary culture device (with a rotation speed of 5 rpm for 6 h) and gen-
tly shaken to make the cells distribute more evenly on the surface of the
scaﬀolds. Then, they were incubated statically for 3 days and stained. All
assays were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Assessing Cell Proliferation and Migration:
To verify the eﬀects of T,
TZ, and TZGP scaﬀolds on the functional status of cells in the high-
glucose microenvironment, all scaﬀold groups were cultured with the
high-glucose scaﬀold extracts obtained by immersing the scaﬀolds in high-
glucose medium (glucose concentration of 33.3 mm L−1) except for the
normal control group (glucose concentration of 1000 mg L−1). Cells in-
duced only with high-glucose medium without scaﬀolds were used as the
high-glucose control group (High-G group).
The proportion of newly proliferating cells in BMSCs and HUVECs was
assessed by the EdU kit. The cells were co-cultured with diﬀerent scaf-
fold extracts for 3 days and then the medium was removed. Cells were
co-cultured with EdU for 2 h according to the manufacturer’s instructions
and then ﬁxed, permeabilized, and ﬂuorescently labeled. Cell nuclei were
stained using Hoechst 33342. The newly proliferating cells ﬂuoresced red
due to being labeled with EdU. A ﬂuorescence microscope was used for
observation.
The migration property of the cells was assessed by the Transwell assay.
Brieﬂy, cells (5 × 104 cells, 200 μL) were inoculated in Transwell chambers
(pore size of 8 μm), and diﬀerent scaﬀolds were placed in 24-well plate
medium chambers. After incubating for 12 h, cells were wiped from the up-
per surface of the membrane with a cotton swab. The migrated cells were
ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, and stained with 0.5% crystal
violet solution for 10 min. Then they were observed under a light micro-
scope (Olympus IX73, Japan). Moreover, the migratory ability of HUVECs
was also assessed by cell scratch assay. Brieﬂy, HUVECs were inoculated in
6-well plates incubated until 90%–100% of the plate bottom was spread.
The fused cell layer was scraped with a 0.2 mL pipette tip and washed
three times with PBS. Subsequently, cells were incubated in FBS-free scaf-
fold extracts. Scratch healing was observed at four time points: 0, 12, 24,
and 36h.
Eﬀects of Diﬀerent Scaﬀolds on Osteogenic Diﬀerentiation:
Osteogenic
diﬀerentiation of BMSCs was assessed using ALP staining, ARS stain-
ing, and Von Kossa staining. BMSCs were induced and cultured in an
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (15 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
osteogenic induction medium. The 24-well plate cell co-culture cham-
bers were used for the co-culture of BMSCs and scaﬀolds. The scaﬀolds
were placed inside the chambers and submerged in the culture medium,
while the BMSCs were seeded on the bottom surface of the 24-well plate.
After 7 days of induction, the scaﬀolds and medium were removed, the
cells were ﬁxed, and stained using the ALP staining kit according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Calcium deposition and mineralization were
assessed at 21 days of induction using a 1% ARS working solution and Von
Kossa staining working solution. Staining was visualized using an inverted
light microscope.
The expression of osteogenic diﬀerentiation-related genes (OCN, Col-
I, ALP, and RUNX2) in BMSCs was evaluated by qRT-PCR at 7 days of
induction. A total RNA isolation kit was used for total RNA extraction.
Reverse transcription from RNA to cDNA was performed using a Rever-
tAid ﬁrst-strand cDNA synthesis kit following the manufacturer’s proto-
col. The obtained cDNA was then ampliﬁed using SYBR Premix Ex Taq.
qRT‒PCR analysis was performed using an A 7500 real-time PCR system
(Applied Biosystems, USA). The relative mRNA expression levels of the
samples were determined using the 2−ΔΔCT method, with GAPDH used
as an internal control for normalizing gene expression levels. The primer
sequences (forward and reverse) used are listed in Table S1 (Support-
ing Information). Moreover, intracellular protein expression of OCN and
RUNX2 was examined by immunoﬂuorescent staining. Brieﬂy, each group
of pretreated BMSCs was ﬁxed, permeabilized, and blocked. Subsequently,
cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against
OCN and RUNX2. Then, cells were washed with TBST and incubated with
CoraLiteplus 488- or 594-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h. After
washing with TBST, the cells were co-incubated with phalloidin-Alexa Fluor
488 or 594 for 45 min at room temperature to label the cytoskeleton. Af-
ter staining with DAPI for 10 min, the cells were visualized and captured
images with a ﬂuorescence microscope.
To evaluate the potential regulatory eﬀects of the TZGP composite scaf-
fold on MAPK and Wnt/𝛽-catenin, immunoﬂuorescence staining was used
to detect the expression level of p-p38 MAPK in cells; ELISA kits were used
to detect the expression levels of p-p38 MAPK and 𝛽-catenin. The ELISA
detection method was carried out following the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. The OD values of the samples were measured at 450 nm using a
multifunctional enzyme meter.
Eﬀects of Diﬀerent Scaﬀolds on Angiogenesis:
The ability of endothelial
cells to form capillary-like structures was assessed by tube formation as-
say. First, A DMEM medium containing 0.2% FBS was used for starvation
pretreatment after the cell conﬂuence reached 80%. 50 μL well−1 of cold
ECM gel was added to a precooled 96-well plate using a precooled tip.
The 96-well plate was incubated at 37 °C for 15 min to solidify the gel.
Subsequently, 5 × 104 (100 μL) of the starved pre-treated HUVECs were
inoculated onto the ECM gel. According to the treatment methods of dif-
ferent groups, the cells in the control group were cultured with a normal
medium, the High-G group was cultured with a high-glucose medium, and
the cells in the three scaﬀold groups were cultured with the high-glucose
scaﬀold extracts. After 6–8 h of incubation, the capillary-like structures
were observed by light microscopy. The cytoskeleton was ﬂuorescently la-
beled by phalloidin-Alexa Fluor 594 for further assessment of angiogene-
sis and was observed and photographed using a ﬂuorescence microscope.
ImageJ software and the Angiogenesis Analyzer plug-in were used to cal-
culate the average tube-formation parameters from three randomized re-
gions.
The expression of angiogenesis-related genes (VEGF, CD31, bFGF, and
HIF-1𝛼) was detected by qRT-PCR. The primer sequences (forward and
reverse) used are listed in Table S2 (Supporting Information). After co-
culture of 2 × 104 HUVECs with diﬀerent scaﬀolds for 3 days, the cells
were harvested for RNA extraction. The rest of the qRT-PCR steps were
consistent with “Eﬀects of diﬀerent scaﬀolds on osteogenic diﬀerentia-
tion” in Experimental Section. Moreover, intracellular protein expression
of VEGF, CD31, and HIF-1𝛼was examined by immunoﬂuorescent stain-
ing. All staining steps remained the same as in “Eﬀects of diﬀerent scaf-
folds on osteogenic diﬀerentiation” in Experimental Section, except that
pretreated and blocked cells were incubated overnight with primary anti-
bodies against VEGF, CD31, and HIF-1𝛼.
Resistance of Diﬀerent Scaﬀolds to Oxidative Stress-Induced Cellular Dam-
age:
High blood glucose levels, mitochondrial dysfunction, accumula-
tion of AGEs, and activation of various enzymes in DM induced overpro-
duction of ROS, leading to a state of oxidative stress.[9] The cellular injury
of BMSCs and HUVECs by high glucose-induced oxidative stress was as-
sessed by Ki67 and 𝛾-H2AX in the cells. The immunoﬂuorescence assay
procedure remained the same as in “Eﬀects of diﬀerent scaﬀolds on os-
teogenic diﬀerentiation” in Experimental Section, except that the blocked
cells were co-incubated overnight with primary antibodies against Ki67
and 𝛾-H2AX. Mitochondrial membrane potential damage was assessed
by the JC-1 kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. JC-1 formed
aggregated in normal mitochondria and emitted a red ﬂuorescence. JC-1
existed as a monomer and ﬂuoresced green in damaged mitochondria.
The health of mitochondrial membrane potential was assessed from the
ratio of red to green ﬂuorescence. Intracellular ROS overexpression was
assessed by a DHE kit, the nuclei were ﬂuorescently labeled with Hoechst
33342. The ﬂuorescent microscope was used for observation and visual-
ization.
In Vivo Experiment:
All animal experimental procedures were reviewed
and approved by the Animal Ethical Committee of Wuhan University
Zhongnan Hospital. These procedures adhered to the “Guiding Opinions
on the Treatment of Animals (09/30/2006)” published by the Ministry of
Science and Technology of the People’s Republic of China. Nine-week-old
male Sprague‒Dawley rats were adapted and fed for 1 week at the An-
imal Experimentation Center before receiving one intraperitoneal injec-
tion of streptozotocin (50 mg kg−1) dissolved in citrate buﬀer (pH 4.5).
Non-fasting blood glucose levels (BGL) were recorded 3, 5, and 7 days
after injection using an electronic glucometer (GA-3, Sinocare, China).
The success criterion for diabetes mellitus molding was deﬁned as BGL
> 16.7 mm L−1.[58] BGLs were recorded weekly thereafter.
Surgery:
Forty diabetic rats were randomly divided into four groups:
the DM group (non-scaﬀold), the T group (T scaﬀold), the TZ group (TZ
scaﬀold), and the TZGP group (TZGP scaﬀold). Rats were anesthetized by
intraperitoneal injection of phenobarbital. A 1.0–1.5 cm sagittal incision
was made in the scalp and the cranium was exposed by blunt dissection.
Two critical size defects of diameter 5 mm were made in the cranium and
scaﬀolds were placed in them. The diabetic rats in the control group only
had the bone defect model established without scaﬀold implantation. The
incisions were closed layer by layer. Cranial specimens were taken for eval-
uation at 6 and 12 weeks postoperatively. Five rats were taken from each
group at each time point.
Micro-CT and Histology Assay:
To assess the in vivo biosafety of the
scaﬀolds, major organs (heart, lungs, spleen, liver, and kidneys) were col-
lected from the rats after 12 weeks of treatment, and the tissues were ﬁxed
in 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with HE for histopathological analy-
sis.
The collected cranial specimens were scanned and 3D reconstructed
using a micro-CT imaging system (SkyScan 1276). The BV, BV/TV, Tb.N,
Tb.Th, and Tb.Sp were measured according to the 3D reconstruction. All
cranial specimens were decalciﬁed, dehydrated, paraﬃn-embedded, sec-
tioned, and subjected to HE staining and Masson staining according to
standard procedures. To assess the expression of osteogenic and angio-
genic related proteins after treatment, the slides were co-incubated with
primary antibodies against RUNX2, Col-I, CD31, and HIF-1𝛼for immuno-
histochemical staining. Semi-quantitative analysis of the histological re-
sults was carried out using Image J software.
Statistical Analysis:
The experimental data are presented as the mean
± standard deviation (SD). The statistical analysis and quantitative image
generation were performed using GraphPad Prism 8 software and Origin
2018 software. Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s
post hoc test, were employed to establish signiﬁcance levels. The conﬁ-
dence levels were set as 95% (p < 0.05).
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (16 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Acknowledgements
J.W., Y.X., Z.H., and G.S. contributed equally to this work. The authors
gratefully acknowledged the support of the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (No: 82372405), the Key Research and Development Pro-
gram of Hubei Province (No: 2022BCA052), and the Key Research and De-
velopment Program of Wuhan City (No: 2024020702030105). The authors
thank Miss Yanli Guo for her assistance with SEM/EDS analysis.
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
3D-printed scaﬀold, bone-vascularized reconstruction, diabetic bone
defects, PTH-related peptide
Received: November 24, 2024
Revised: January 2, 2025
Published online: January 10, 2025
[1] International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes Atlas, 10th edn Brus-
sels, Belgium 2021, https://www.diabetesatlas.org.
[2] D. H. van Raalte, P. Bjornstad, D. Z. I. Cherney, I. H. de Boer, P.
Fioretto, D. Gordin, F. Persson, S. E. Rosas, P. Rossing, J. A. Schaub,
K. Tuttle, S. S. Waikar, H. J. L. Heerspink, Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 2024, 20,
433.
[3] A. Serikbaeva, Y. Li, S. Ma, D. Yi, A. Kazlauskas, Prog. Retin Eye Res.
2024, 101, 101271.
[4] D. M. Maahs, J. Svensson, N. Engl. J. Med. 2024, 390, 2226.
[5] W. Jeﬀcoate, E. J. Boyko, F. Game, P. Cowled, E. Senneville, R. Fitridge,
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2024, 12, 472.
[6] M. S. Ardawi, D. H. Akhbar, A. Alshaikh, M. M. Ahmed, M. H. Qari,
A. A. Rouzi, A. Y. Ali, A. A. Abdulrafee, M. Y. Saeda, Bone 2013, 56,
355.
[7] Y. Chen, W. Zhao, A. Hu, S. Lin, P. Chen, B. Yang, Z. Fan, J. Qi, W.
Zhang, H. Gao, X. Yu, H. Chen, L. Chen, H. Wang, J. Transl. Med.
2024, 22, 409.
[8] P. Xiang, M. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Cheng, X. Luo, H. Zhou, Y.
Zheng, Adv. Sci. 2024, 11, 2305856.
[9] L. C. Hofbauer, B. Busse, R. Eastell, S. Ferrari, M. Frost, R. Muller,
A. M. Burden, F. Rivadeneira, N. Napoli, M. Rauner, Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2022, 10, 207.
[10] Y. H. Xia, X. R. Jing, X. P. Wu, P. Z. Zhuang, X. D. Guo, H. L. Dai, Chem.
Eng. J. 2023, 465, 143015.
[11] S. C. Tao, X. R. Li, W. J. Wei, Z. Y. Wei, C. R. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Dawes,
S. C. Guo, Biomaterials 2022, 283, 121465.
[12] B. Viswanath, R. Raghavan, N. P. Gurao, U. Ramamurty, N.
Ravishankar, Acta Biomater. 2008, 4, 1448.
[13] Y. Li, W. Weng, K. C. Tam, Acta Biomater. 2007, 3, 251.
[14] B. R. Spirandeli, R. G. Ribas, S. S. Amaral, E. F. Martins, E. Esposito, L.
M. R. Vasconcellos, T. M. B. Campos, G. P. Thim, E. S. Triches, Mater.
Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl. 2021, 131, 112453.
[15] R. G. Carrodeguas, S. De Aza, Acta Biomater. 2011, 7, 3536.
[16] M. C. Tronco, J. B. Cassel, L. A. Dos Santos, Acta Biomater. 2022, 151,
70.
[17] M. Zare, K. Namratha, K. Byrappa, D. M. Surendra, S. Yallappa, B.
Hungund, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 2018, 34, 1035.
[18] T. A. Singh, A. Sharma, N. Tejwan, N. Ghosh, J. Das, P. C. Sil, Adv.
Colloid Interface Sci. 2021, 295, 102495.
[19] T. Lu, J. Zhang, X. Yuan, C. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, K. Xiong, J. Ye,
Mater. Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl. 2021, 131, 112490.
[20] A. A. Shitole, P. W. Raut, N. Sharma, P. Giram, A. P. Khandwekar, B.
Garnaik, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 2019, 30, 51.
[21] J. Huang, D. Lin, Z. Wei, Q. Li, J. Zheng, Q. Zheng, L. Cai, X. Li, Y.
Yuan, J. Li, Small 2020, 16, 1905876.
[22] J. Wang, R. Chen, B. Ren, Q. Feng, B. Li, Z. Hao, T. Chen, Y. Hu, Y.
Huang, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Huang, J. Li, Adv. Healthcare Mater.
2023, 12, 2301604.
[23] Y. Zeng, C. Huang, D. Duan, A. Lou, Y. Guo, T. Xiao, J. Wei, S. Liu, Z.
Wang, Q. Yang, L. Zhou, Z. Wu, L. Wang, Acta Biomater. 2022, 153,
108.
[24] J. Wang, Y. Huang, T. Luan, P. Shi, L. Guo, Q. Zhang, G. Shi, Z. Hao,
T. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Li, Small 2024, 20, 2404732.
[25] H. Cheng, H. B. Liu, Z. Shi, Y. A. Xu, Q. Lian, Q. Zhong, Q. Liu, Y. H.
Chen, X. Pan, R. Chen, P. K. Wang, J. Gao, C. H. Gao, Y. Y. Zhang, K.
Yue, J. Wang, Z. J. Shi, Chem. Eng. J. 2022, 433, 134451.
[26] J. Gao, X. Ding, X. Yu, X. Chen, X. Zhang, S. Cui, J. Shi, J.
Chen, L. Yu, S. Chen, J. Ding, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2021, 10,
2001404.
[27] M. Li, J. W. Jiang, W. B. Liu, X. L. Huang, X. P. Wu, W. Y. Wei, H. Zhu,
J. Y. Zhang, J. Xiao, H. L. Dai, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 2023, 155, 54.
[28] D. Das, B. C. Nath, P. Phukon, A. Kalita, S. K. Dolui, Colloids Surf B
Biointerfaces 2013, 111, 556.
[29] H. Luo, Y. Wu, X. Diao, W. Shi, F. Feng, F. Qian, J. Umeda, K. Kondoh,
H. Xin, J. Shen, Mater. Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl. 2020, 117,
111306.
[30] D. S. Benoit, M. P. Schwartz, A. R. Durney, K. S. Anseth, Nat. Mater.
2008, 7, 816.
[31] H. Ceylan, S. Kocabey, H. Unal Gulsuner, O. S. Balcik, M. O. Guler,
A. B. Tekinay, Biomacromolecules 2014, 15, 2407.
[32] B. Jia, H. Yang, Z. Zhang, X. Qu, X. Jia, Q. Wu, Y. Han, Y. Zheng, K.
Dai, Bioact Mater. 2021, 6, 1588.
[33] C. Li, F. Sun, J. Tian, J. Li, H. Sun, Y. Zhang, S. Guo, Y. Lin, X. Sun, Y.
Zhao, Bioact Mater. 2023, 24, 361.
[34] X. Niu, S. Xiao, R. Huang, D. Huang, K. E. Aifantis, H. Yu, C. Xue, L.
Yin, N. Dunne, X. Li, J Control Release 2024, 374, 154.
[35] Y. Wang, Y. Hu, S. Lan, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Guo, L. Cai, J. Li, Adv.
Sci. 2023, 10, 2300516.
[36] C. Thouverey, J. Caverzasio, J. Bone Miner. Res. 2016, 31, 985.
[37] J. Filipowska, K. A. Tomaszewski, L. Niedzwiedzki, J. A. Walocha, T.
Niedzwiedzki, Angiogenesis 2017, 20, 291.
[38] C. Romero-Diaz, D. Duarte-Montero, S. A. Gutierrez-Romero, C. O.
Mendivil, Diabetes Ther. 2021, 12, 71.
[39] Y. F. Shen, J. H. Huang, K. Y. Wang, J. Zheng, L. Cai, H. Gao, X. L. Li,
J. F. Li, Cell Commun. Signal. 2020, 18, 40.
[40] M. Giacomello, A. Pyakurel, C. Glytsou, L. Scorrano, Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 2020, 21, 204.
[41] X. Zhong, P. Cui, Y. Cai, L. Wang, X. He, P. Long, K. Lu, R. Yan, Y.
Zhang, X. Pan, X. Zhao, W. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Zhou, P. Gao, Cell Metab.
2019, 29, 979.
[42] Q. Li, Z. Gao, Y. Chen, M. X. Guan, Protein Cell 2017, 8, 439.
[43] E. Haythorne, M. Rohm, M. van de Bunt, M. F. Brereton, A. I. Tarasov,
T. S. Blacker, G. Sachse, M. Silva Dos Santos, R. Terron Exposito, S.
Davis, O. Baba, R. Fischer, M. R. Duchen, P. Rorsman, J. I. MacRae,
F. M. Ashcroft, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 2474.
[44] W. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Long, J. Wang, S. B. Haudek, P. Overbeek, B. H.
Chang, P. T. Schumacker, F. R. Danesh, Cell Metab. 2012, 15, 186.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (17 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
[45] R. Sabouny, T. E. Shutt, Trends Biochem. Sci. 2020, 45, 564.
[46] Y. F. Feng, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Li, Z. S. Ma, J. W. Zou, W. Lei, Z. Y.
Zhang, Biomaterials 2013, 34, 2234.
[47] D. Rehana, D. Mahendiran, R. S. Kumar, A. K. Rahiman, Bioprocess
Biosyst. Eng. 2017, 40, 943.
[48] S. Rajeshkumar, S. V. Kumar, A. Ramaiah, H. Agarwal, T. Lakshmi, S.
M. Roopan, Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2018, 117, 91.
[49] M. F. Sohail, M. Rehman, S. Z. Hussain, Z. E. Huma, G. Shahnaz, O.
S. Qureshi, Q. Khalid, S. Mirza, I. Hussain, T. J. Webster, J. Drug Deliv.
Sci. Technol. 2020, 59, 101911.
[50] M. Schnoke, S. B. Midura, R. J. Midura, Bone 2009, 45, 590.
[51] S. Portal-Nunez, J. A. Ardura, D. Lozano, I. Martinez de Toda, M. De
la Fuente, G. Herrero-Beaumont, R. Largo, P. Esbrit, Bone Joint Res.
2018, 7, 58.
[52] J. A. Ardura, S. Portal-Nunez, I. Castelbon-Calvo, I. Martinez de Toda,
M. De la Fuente, P. Esbrit, J. Cell Physiol. 2017, 232, 785.
[53] A. Bayrami, S. Haghgooie, S. R. Pouran, F. M. Arvanag, A. Habibi-
Yangjeh, Adv. Powder Technol. 2020, 31, 2110.
[54] J. Hussein, M. E. El-Naggar, Y. A. Latif, D. Medhat, M. El Bana, E.
Refaat, S. Morsy, Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 2018, 170, 76.
[55] R. M. Matter, N. S. Elbarbary, E. A. R. Ismail, Y. W. Darwish, A. S.
Nada, V. P. Banoub, Nutrition 2020, 73, 110702.
[56] M. Nouri-Felekori, M. Khakbiz, N. Nezafati, J. Mohammadi, M. B.
Eslaminejad, Int. J. Pharm. 2019, 557, 208.
[57] C. Shu, C. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Shi, J. Yu, J. Huang, C. Zhao, Z.
Huan, C. Wu, M. Zhu, Y. Zhu, Adv. Sci. 2023, 10, 2206875.
[58] H. Wang, X. Fu, J. Shi, L. Li, J. Sun, X. Zhang, Q. Han, Y. Deng, X. Gan,
Adv. Sci. 2021, 8, 2101778.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2422950
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2422950 (18 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 24, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202422950 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License