1768  ｜NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH｜Vol 16｜No. 9｜September 2021
Probiotics, prebiotics and their role 
in Alzheimer’s disease
Accumulation of amyloid and dysfunctional 
tau proteins in the brain, along with the 
development of dementia, characterizes 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Although the 
cause of AD is currently unknown, it 
has been shown that the onset of the 
disease, with amyloid-beta peptide (Aβ) 
accumulation, occurs 10–20 years before 
the development of the clinical signs; to 
date, several factors, including lifestyle 
habits (such as diet and exercise), chronic 
infection and inflammation, have been 
related to AD pathogenesis and progression 
(Sochocka et al., 2019). In addition, the gut 
microbial dysbiosis seems to be a critical 
feature able to characterize AD and regulate 
Aβ production. Indeed, imbalances in gut 
microbiota can induce aberrant immune 
responses which, in turn, can disrupt the 
local and systemic homeostasis of the host 
(Figure 1A). Moreover, it has been proposed 
that the gut microbiota, represented by 
intestinal microflora, may participate in 
the development of the disease through 
a network called “gut-brain axis,” that is a 
bidirectional signaling mechanism between 
the central nervous system and the intestinal 
tract. Gut has the largest nervous system, 
outside the central nervous system, that is 
in close interplay with the microbiome (MB), 
the other human genome. The extraordinary 
complexity of the intestinal ecosystem is 
represented by more than 100 trillion of 
microbial cells and their interaction with 
the intestinal epithelium can influence brain 
functionality and behavior. Likely, human 
MB is a promising target for prevention and 
therapeutic interventions. Indeed, several 
approaches have been employed with the 
aim to reduce age-related dysbiosis in both 
experimental model and in clinical studies. 
These include strategies to regulate MB 
via the administration of probiotics and 
prebiotics, and dietary interventions. The 
progress of research on the role of intestinal 
MB in the development of AD will dictate 
the future for the employment of pro- and 
prebiotics in the prevention/treatment of AD 
(D’Argenio and Sarnataro, 2019).
First, we have to understand “when and how 
intestinal bacteria promote AD?”
Because of the existence of the “gut-brain 
axis” via immune, neuroendocrine and direct 
nerve mechanisms, changes in the intestinal 
microflora have been associated to various 
neurodegenerative diseases (D’Argenio and 
Sarnataro, 2019), with possible involvement 
in AD. Interestingly, studies comparing the 
microbiota of AD cases respect to that 
of healthy, control patients, showed that 
the microbial diversity was reduced in AD 
patients with a decrease in the number of 
Firmicutes and an increase in the percentage 
of Bacteroidetes (Vogt et al., 2017) and 
Proteobacteria (Liu et al., 2019).
Moreover, bacterial infections can also cause 
AD. Chronic Helicobacter pylori infection 
has been shown to increase Aβ levels in the 
plasma of AD patients and to induce, in vitro, 
hyperphosphorylation of tau by activation of 
glycogen-3β synthase kinase (GSK3β; Wang 
et al., 2015).
Finally, bacterial amyloids have been shown 
to activate signaling pathways that underlie 
neuropathology of AD, and study carried 
out using APPPS1 transgenic mice in the 
absence of the gut microbiota (D’Argenio 
and Sarnataro, 2019) reported a reduction in 
amyloid accumulation, indicating a direct link 
between MB and amyloid.
Some bacteria, such as Salmonella enterica, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Bacillus subtilis, and E. coli, are 
able to produce amyloid peptides, which 
behaves like seeds for the aggregation of 
amyloid in the brain and act by increasing 
the nucleation of Aβ aggregates (Zhou 
et al., 2012) triggering an inflammatory 
response. MB participates in the expansion 
of the neuroinflammation associated to 
the production of amyloid (D’Argenio and 
Sarnataro, 2019). It has been shown that 
metabolites released from pro-inflammatory 
bacteria can exacerbate AD, by intensifying 
neuroinflammation in the brain, while 
metabolites from anti-inflammatory 
bacteria in healthy digestive tract maintain 
cognitive functions. Bacterial amyloids can 
enter the systemic circulation aggravating 
inflammation in the brain as a consequence 
of the increased permeability of the 
intestinal barrier induced by the microbial 
dysbiosis at gut level (Zhao et al., 2017). 
Modification of the gut MB composition can 
be induced by high-fat diets, at least in mice, 
and has direct effects on gut permeability. 
Furthermore, a reduction of Lactobacillus, 
Bacteroides and Prevotella species and 
an increase of Bifidobacterium species, 
accompanied by reduced expression of both 
zonulin and occludin proteins (involved in 
epithelia permeability), have been reported 
in mice fed with unsaturated fatty acid 
diet. These features corresponded also to 
a higher circulatory level of the bacterial 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and other pro-
inflammatory markers. Interestingly, high 
serum LPS, accumulation of bacterial LPS in 
the brain, together with monocyte activation, 
were reported in AD patients compared with 
healthy individuals. Thus, an impaired MB 
can modify the levels of bacterial products 
and amyloids in the serum, and may play a 
key role in AD neurodegeneration. 
Perspective
Valeria D’Argenio*, Daniela Sarnataro*
The correlations between the gut microbial 
dysbiosis and AD features are reported in 
Figure 1A.
Bacteria with a beneficial effect on the 
health of host recipient are probiotics, while 
food for these bacteria are substances called 
prebiotics. 
P hy s i c a l  e xe r c i s e  a n d  p ro b i o t i c s 
administration in APPPS1 transgenic mice 
have shown to exert beneficial effects on 
amyloid accumulation in the hippocampal 
area of mice brain (D’Argenio and Sarnataro, 
2019). Furthermore, three strains of 
lactobacilli and Bifidobacterium bifidum, 
were shown to improve cognitive functions 
in AD patients (D’Argenio and Sarnataro, 
2019). Recently, probiotics consisting of 
8 strains mixture of lactic acid-producing 
bacteria were shown to significantly 
ameliorate intestinal dysfunction, and slightly 
Aβ plaque load, in a mouse model of AD (Kaur 
et al., 2020). Bifidobacterium and lactic acid 
bacteria have shown the ability to suppress 
neuroinflammation, which is a key element 
in amyloid accumulation and AD progression. 
Moreover, Bonfili et al. (2020) have assessed 
that oral probiotic administration in 3xTg-
AD mice, through a manipulation of the gut 
MB, is able to decrease phosphorylated tau 
aggregates.
Since some bacteria in the gut are able 
to consume food-derived tryptophan (an 
amino acid with a key role in cellular aging 
and serotonin pathway), and can regulate 
tryptophan availability (D’Argenio and 
Sarnataro, 2019), in addition to probiotic 
administration, intervention with the 
prebiotic tryptophan has been recently 
reviewed. Therefore, manipulation of gut 
microbiota may represent a strategy for 
regulating tryptophan availability and reduce 
the production of neurotoxic derivatives, 
with the aim to reduce the severity of AD. In 
this context, Hoffman et al. (2020) showed 
that also the dietary supplementation with 
the prebiotic inulin in E4FAD mice increases 
short chain fatty acids production and 
reduces neuroinflammation.
Several neurotransmitters, like noradrenalin, 
serotonin, dopamine, and acetylcholine, are 
produced by MB, whose impairment, in turn 
can change neurotransmitters level in the 
brain and the autophagic flux. Furthermore, 
short-chain fatty acids, such as acetate and 
propionate, are able to pass the blood-brain 
barrier and have neuroactive properties. 
Interestingly, acetate, a metabolite of the 
Bifidobacterium breve strain A1, ameliorates 
cognitive disturbance in AD mouse model 
and in humans (Kobayashi et al., 2017, 
2019), and in vitro studies with photo-
induced crosslinking of unmodified proteins 
found that butyric, valeric, propionic and 
isovaleric acids (metabolites from Bacillus 
and Bifidobacterium species) inhibit 
oligomerization of Aβ1–40 (Ho et al., 2018), 
and were found to interfere with astrocyte 
and microglia activation with beneficial 
effect on AD development by reducing 

NEURAL REGENERATION RESEARCH｜Vol 16｜No. 9｜September 2021｜1769
inflammation (Macfarlane et al., 2012). 
Prebiotic effect of fructooligosaccharides 
from Morinda officinalis on AD has been 
evaluated in rodent models by targeting 
the microbiota-gut-brain axis. This study 
reported a significant improvement of 
cognitive functions after prebiotic treatment.
Even if most of the studies published to date 
have been carried out on AD mouse models, 
some translational studies are showing 
promising evidences also in humans. A 
randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical 
trial involving 79 AD patients showed that 
the co-supplementation of probiotic and 
selenium for 12 weeks determines an 
improvement of cognitive and metabolic 
functions (Tamtaji et al., 2019).
Taken together, these studies suggest that 
a personalized diet and/or pro/prebiotic 
or symbiotic (combination of bioactive 
probiotics) administration, by modulating 
the gut microbiota, may represent a new 
treatment for AD. The mechanisms through 
which the gut microbiota manipulation 
may ameliorate some AD specific treats are 
summarized in Figure 1B.
The use of probiotics and prebiotics in 
clinical practice still lacks robust evidence. 
However, since recent data in specific aging-
related disorders are encouraging, we can 
seriously consider to modify the intestinal 
microflora with pro- and/or pre-biotics to 
obtain beneficial effects in the prevention 
and treatment of AD. 
Valeria D’Argenio*, Daniela Sarnataro*
Department of Human Sciences and Quality of Life 
Promotion, San Raffaele Open University, Roma, 
Italy (D’Argenio V)
CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy 
(D’Argenio V)
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical 
Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, 
Naples, Italy (Sarnataro D)
*Correspondence to: Valeria D’Argenio, 
dargenio@ceinge.unina.it; Daniela Sarnataro, 
daniela.sarnataro@unina.it.
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9273-3698 
(Valeria D’Argenio);
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6094-8384 
(Daniela Sarnataro)
Date of submission: September 10, 2020  
Date of decision: November 4, 2020  
Date of acceptance: December 8, 2020  
Date of web publication: January 25, 2021 
https://doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.306072
How to cite this article: D’Argenio V, Sarnataro D  
(2021) Probiotics, prebiotics and their role in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Regen Res 16(9):1768-
1769. 
Copyright license agreement: The Copyright 
License Agreement has been signed by both 
authors before publication.
Plagiarism check: Checked twice by iThenticate.
Peer review: Externally peer reviewed.
Open access statement: This is an open access 
journal, and articles are distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 License, which 
allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the 
work non-commercially, as long as appropriate 
credit is given and the new creations are licensed 
under the identical terms. 
References
Bonfili L, Cecarini V, Gogoi O, Berardi S, Scarpona 
S, Angeletti M, Rossi G, Eleuteri AM (2020) Gut 
microbiota manipulation through probiotics oral 
administration restores glucose homeostasis in a 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 
87:35-43. 
D’Argenio V, Sarnataro D (2019) Microbiome influence in 
the pathogenesis of prion and Alzheimer’s diseases. Int 
J Mol Sci 20:4704.
Ho L, Ono K, Tsuji M, Mazzola P, Singh R, Pasinetti GM 
(2018) Protective roles of intestinal microbiota derived 
short chain fatty acids in Alzheimer’s disease-type 
beta-amyloid neuropathological mechanisms. Expert 
Rev Neurother 18:83-90. 
Hoffman JD, Yanckello LM, Chlipala G, Hammond TC, 
McCulloch SD, Parikh I, Sun S, Morganti JM, Green SJ, 
Lin AL (2019) Dietary inulin alters the gut microbiome, 
enhances systemic metabolism and reduces 
neuroinflammation in an APOE4 mouse model. PLoS 
One 14:e0221828. 
Kaur H, Golovko S, Golovko MY, Singh S, Darland DC, 
Combs CK (2020) Effects of probiotic supplementation 
on short chain fatty acids in the AppNL-G-F mouse 
model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 
76:1083-1102.
Kobayashi Y, Sugahara H, Shimada K, Mitsuyama E, 
Kuhara T, Yasuoka A, Kondo T, Abe K, Xiao JZ (2017) 
Therapeutic potential of Bifidobacterium breve strain 
A1 for preventing cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Sci Rep 7:13510.
Kobayashi Y, Kinoshita T, Matsumoto A, Yoshino K, 
Saito I, Xiao JZ (2019) Bifidobacterium Breve A1 
supplementation improved cognitive decline in older 
adults with mild cognitive impairment: an open-label, 
single-arm study. J Prev Alzheimers Dis 6:70-75. 
Liu P, Wu L, Peng G, Han Y, Tang R, Ge J, Zhang L, Jia L, 
Yue S, Zhou K, Li L, Luo B, Wang B (2019) Altered 
microbiomes distinguish Alzheimer’s disease from 
amnestic mild cognitive impairment and health in a 
Chinese cohort. Brain Behav Immun 80:633-643.
Macfarlane GT, Macfarlane S (2012) Bacteria, colonic 
fermentation, and gastrointestinal health. J AOAC Int 
95:50-60. 
Sochocka M, Donskow-Łysoniewska K, Diniz BS, Kurpas 
D, Brzozowska E, Leszek J (2019) The gut microbiome 
alterations and inflammation-driven pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer’s disease-a critical review. Mol Neurobiol 
56:1841-1851.
Tamtaji OR, Heidari-Soureshjani R, Mirhosseini N, 
Kouchaki E, Bahmani F, Aghadavod E, Tajabadi-
Ebrahimi M, Asemi Z (2019) Probiotic and selenium 
co-supplementation, and the effects on clinical, 
metabolic and genetic status in Alzheimer’s disease: 
A randomized, double-blind, controlled trial. Clin Nutr 
38:2569-2575. 
Vogt NM, Kerby RL, Dill-McFarland KA, Harding SJ, 
Merluzzi AP, Johnson SC, Carlsson CM, Asthana S, 
Zetterberg H, Blennow K, Bendlin BB, Rey FE (2017) 
Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci 
Rep 7:13537. 
Wang XL, Zeng J, Yang Y, Xiong Y, Zhang ZH, Qiu M, 
Yan X, Sun XY, Tuo QZ, Liu R, Wang JZ (2015) 
Helicobacter pylori filtrate induces Alzheimer-like tau 
hyperphosphorylation by activating glycogen synthase 
kinase-3β. J Alzheimers Dis 43:153-165.
Zhao Y, Jaber V, Lukiw WJ (2017) Secretory products of 
the human GI tract microbiome and their potential 
impact on Alzheimer’s disease (AD): detection of 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in AD hippocampus. Front Cell 
Infect Microbiol 7:318.
Zhou Y, Smith D, Leong BJ, Brännström K, Almqvist F, 
Chapman MR (2012) Promiscuous cross-seeding 
between bacterial amyloids promotes interspecies 
biofilms. J Biol Chem 287:35092-35103.
C-Editors: Zhao M, Wang L; T-Editor: Jia Y
Figure 1 ｜Graphical representation of the correlation between the gut microbiota and brain 
functions.
A bacterial dysbiosis at gut level exerts pathogenic effects, i.e., altered gut permeability, systemic 
activation of the immune system, bacterial amyloid-beta (Aβ) fibrils production, increased 
neuroinflammation, and increased Aβ fibrils deposition at the brain level, that contribute to Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) development (A). The use of probiotics/prebiotics, by restoring a “healthy” gut microbiota, 
is able to ameliorate one or more of these aspects showing promising potentialities in AD prevention 
and/or treatment (B).