RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advmat.de
Synchronous Sterilization and Immunoreaction Termination
for Corneal Transparency Protection in Treating
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Induced Bacterial Keratitis
Siyuan Qian, Xuan Wang, Yishun Guo, Wenfang He, Jianhua Yang, Hao Chen,*
Renlong Li, Lili Su, Xinyi Wang, Yi Shao, and Bailiang Wang*
In the treatment of infectious keratitis, therapeutic strategies often prioritize
enhancing bactericidal eﬃcacy. However, endotoxins released from
Gram-negative bacteria cause inﬂammatory reaction, leading to corneal
structural damage and scar formation. Given that polymyxin B (PMB) can
bind and neutralize lipopolysaccharide (LPS), this study employs large-pore
mesoporous silica nanoparticles (lMSNs) grafted with PMB as carriers for
cationic antibacterial carbon quantum dots (CQDs) to prepare
CQD@lMSN-PMB, which enables synchronous sterilization and endotoxin
neutralization. In the acidic infectious microenvironment, the accelerated
release of CQDs eliminates 99.88% bacteria within 2 h, eﬀectively
substituting immune mediated sterilization. Notably, CQD@lMSN-PMB
exhibits exceptional LPS neutralization performance (2.22 µg LPS/mg
CQD@lMSN-PMB) due to its high speciﬁc surface area. In an infectious
keratitis model, inﬂammation subsides signiﬁcantly within the ﬁrst day of
CQD@lMSN-PMB intervention and is completely resolved by day 3. By day 2,
interleukin-1𝜷, interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-𝜶in
CQD@lMSN-PMB group decrease by 86.99%, 91.15%, and 77.56%,
respectively, compared to the CQDs-only sterilization group. Ultimately,
corneal integrity and transparency are preserved, with suppressed expressions
of ﬁbrosis-related factors including matrix metalloproteinase 9, transforming
growth factor-𝜷and 𝜶-smooth muscle actin. Therefore, this synchronous
sterilization and endotoxin neutralization strategy outperforms monotherapy
strategies focused solely on sterilization or endotoxin neutralization.
S. Qian, X. Wang, Y. Guo, H. Chen, X. Wang, B. Wang
National Engineering Research Center of Ophthalmology and Optometry
Eye Hospital
Wenzhou Medical University
Wenzhou 325000, China
E-mail: Chenhao823@mail.eye.ac.cn;blwang@wmu.edu.cn
S.Qian,X.Wang, Y.Guo,W.He,J.Yang,H.Chen,R.Li,L.Su,X.Wang,
B.Wang
StateKey Laboratory of Ophthalmology
Optometry andVisual Science
EyeHospital
Wenzhou Medical University
Wenzhou 325027, China
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202419209
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202419209
1. Introduction
As the outermost tissue of eyeball, cornea
plays a physical defense role against pol-
lutants while maintaining immune privi-
lege to preserve its high transparency. How-
ever, cornea is vulnerable to bacteria, fungi,
viruses and other microorganisms.[1] In the
case of trauma, ophthalmic surgery and de-
creased immunity, infection leads to un-
healed wound and persistent keratitis.[2]
Clinical guidelines require that immuno-
suppressants can only be administered
to suppress immune responses after 1–
2 weeks of frequent high-dose antibiotics
treatment.[3] There are two main prob-
lems in this treatment strategy. First, in
the post-antibiotic era, the increase of
bacterial resistance signiﬁcantly compro-
mises antibiotic eﬃcacy, whereas the de-
velopment of novel antibiotics is consid-
erably slower than the progress of bacte-
rial resistance.[4] Moreover, escalating an-
tibiotic dose inevitably induces toxicity and
other side eﬀects on mammalian cells.[5]
Second, the immune response is con-
sidered as a double-edged sword. While
the immune response plays a critical role
in bacterial clearance, excessive activation
X. Wang, W. He, J. Yang, R. Li, L. Su, X. Wang, B. Wang
NMPA Key Laboratory for Clinical Research and Evaluation of Medical
Devices and Drug for Ophthalmic Diseases
Eye Hospital
Wenzhou Medical University
Wenzhou 325027, China
Y. Shao
Department of Ophthalmology
Shanghai General Hospital
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
National Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases
Shanghai 200080, China
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (1 of 20)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
exacerbates
corneal
inﬂammation,
contributing
to
ulcera-
tion, scarring, neovascularization, corneal perforation, and
potential vision loss.[6] Consequently, the search for alternative
bactericidal agents has become a major focus in antibacterial
research. Furthermore, the two-pronged treatment mode of
synchronous sterilization and immune response elimination is
obviously superior to conventional single sterilization mode.[7]
Recent advancements in bactericidal agents and sterilization
strategies have yielded promising solutions for infectious wound
management.[8] Non-antibiotic bactericides include heavy met-
als and alloys, synthetic polymer antibacterial agents such as
quaternary ammonium salts, natural polymers such as chitosan,
and nano-antibacterial agents.[9] Novel sterilization modes en-
compass photodynamic therapy (PDT), photothermal therapy
(PTT), chemical catalytic therapy, sonodynamic therapy (SDT)
and multi-modal bactericidal strategies.[10] Previous research
demonstrated the high bactericidal eﬃcacy of PDT in infec-
tious keratitis treatment.[11] However, clinical application re-
mains constrained by the phototoxicity associated with laser
exposure.[12] As an emerging carbon-based nanomaterial, car-
bon quantum dots (CQDs) have the characteristics of small
size, low biotoxicity, excellent water dispersibility, and exceptional
chemical stability, making them widely applicable in bioimag-
ing, biosensing, drug delivery and optoelectronic devices.[13]
The antibacterial mechanism of CQDs primarily involves di-
rect reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, ROS genera-
tion assisted by photoactivation and other compounds, and
cell membranes damage through electrostatic and hydrophobic
interactions.[14]
The human immune system is an autonomous and highly
eﬃcient defense mechanism evolved to combat infections.[15]
Upon pathogen invasion, it recognizes bacteria, initiates antigen
presentation, and triggers the inﬂammatory response to facil-
itate bacterial clearance.[16] However, inﬂammation inevitably
induces a series of adverse eﬀects and tissue damage.[17] For
instance, in severe coronavirus infections, the excessive immune
response, characterized by a cytokine storm, leads to respiratory
distress and lung injury, ultimately resulting in respiratory
failure and mortality.[18] In the context of infectious keratitis,
the primary distinction between corneal and skin infections
lies in the necessity of preserving corneal transparency.[19] If
corneal infections are not rapidly resolved, persistent inﬂamma-
tion ensues, causing irreversible structural damage and loss of
transparency.[20] Clinical studies show that Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa (P. aeruginosa), a Gram-negative bacterium, exhibits high
invasiveness and frequently leads to corneal perforation. More
importantly, even after being killed, P. aeruginosa continues to
release substantial amounts of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-based
endotoxins, exacerbating inﬂammation and causing irreversible
corneal damage.[7a] LPS plays a pivotal role in the inﬂammatory
cascade by stimulating immune cells to produce ROS, reactive
nitrogen species (RNS) and proinﬂammatory cytokines such
as interleukin-1𝛽(IL-1𝛽), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis
factor-𝛼(TNF-𝛼) in immune cells, which further induce ma-
trix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) release. This leads to the
degradation of collagen ﬁbers in the corneal stroma, culminat-
ing in corneal perforation.[21] At the same time, the elevated
proinﬂammatory cytokines and transforming growth factor-
𝛽(TGF-𝛽) activate corneal stromal cells to diﬀerentiate into
contractile and opaque myoﬁbroblasts, leading to corneal scar
formation.[22]
To mitigate inﬂammatory damage during infectious wound
healing, researches mainly focus on enhancing sterilization ef-
ﬁciency and incorporating anti-oxidant and anti-inﬂammatory
components to regulate the microenvironment.[23] Rapid bacte-
rial eradication is fundamental to shortening the inﬂammatory
cycle and preserving tissue integrity. Meanwhile, anti-oxidant
and anti-inﬂammatory agents, such as tannic acid, curcumin,
resveratrol, quercetin, polydopamine and nanozymes attenuate
inﬂammatory damage during the later stage of wound repair.[24]
For example, nanozymes such as cerium oxide, manganese ox-
ide and Se-CQDs eﬀectively scavenge ROS to reduce inﬂamma-
tory reaction.[25] However, the immune response exhibits inher-
ent persistence and, once activated, remains sustained for a pro-
longed period (usually ranging from a few days to 2 weeks).[26]
Bacterial toxin secretion is considered the primary driver of
inﬂammation during infection. Therefore, toxin neutralization
through the development of bacterial toxin bait represents a fun-
damental strategy to interrupt inﬂammatory reaction to avoid
tissue damage.[27] Notably, Zhang’s group has carried out a se-
ries of fruitful works in the ﬁeld of toxin neutralization. For ex-
ample, it was found that macrophage biomimetic nanoparticles
could bind and neutralize endotoxins for sepsis treatment.[28] Ad-
ditionally, a detoxiﬁcation platform based on red blood cell mem-
branes eﬀectively removed pore-forming toxins, reducing toxic-
ity of staphylococcal 𝛼-haemolysin and improving survival rate in
toxin-challenged mice.[29]
Polymyxin B (PMB) is a cyclic polypeptide cationic antibiotic
derived from Bacillus polymyxa, which can inhibit a variety of
Gram-negative bacteria, including P. aeruginosa, Escherichia coli
(E. coli), Klebsiella and Haemophilus.[30] PMB binds to LPS in the
bacterial cell wall with high aﬃnity, increasing the permeability
of the bacterial cell membrane and ultimately leading to bacte-
rial cell death. Notably, PMB can neutralize the toxicity of LPS,
thereby inhibiting the inﬂammatory response induced by LPS.[31]
Lipid A, the principal toxic component of LPS, is the primary
target of PMB. The amino groups of PMB electrostatically bind
to phosphate group of lipid A, while the non-polar regions of
PMB hydrophobically interact with acyl chain of lipid A.[32] Here,
mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) were employed as car-
riers due to their excellent biocompatibility, adjustable pore size,
facile modiﬁcation and high speciﬁc surface area.[33] MSNs cova-
lently modiﬁed with PMB (MSN-PMB) act as nanosponges ca-
pable of LPS neutralization, thereby blocking the presentation
of immune antigen and the activation of inﬂammation To ex-
plore the eﬀect of pore size on LPS neutralization, three kinds
of MSNs with diﬀerent pore size were synthesized: small-pore
MSN-PMB (sMSN-PMB, 2.51 nm), medium-pore MSN-PMB
(mMSN-PMB, 7.48 nm), and large-pore MSN-PMB (lMSN-PMB,
11.66 nm). Among these, lMSN-PMB demonstrated the most ef-
fective LPS neutralization and was subsequently selected to load
bactericidal CQDs, yielding the ﬁnal CQD@lMSN-PMB prod-
uct. CQD@lMSN-PMB achieved eﬃcient sterilization by releas-
ing antibacterial CQDs and neutralized endotoxins using PMB
covalently grafted within the lMSNs, thereby alleviating oxida-
tive stress and inﬂammatory responses in macrophages. In an
animal model of P. aeruginosa-infected keratitis, CQD@lMSN-
PMB signiﬁcantly inhibited the immune response through its
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (2 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of CQD@IMSN-PMB preparation and infectious keratitis treatment. a) The process of CQD@IMSN-PMB prepa-
ration. b) Synchronous sterilization and endotoxin neutralization by CQD@IMSN-PMB for immune response suppression and corneal transparency
preservation in P. aeruginosa-infected keratitis.
therapeutic strategy of synchronous sterilization and endotoxin
neutralization, thus preserving the structural integrity and trans-
parency of the cornea (Scheme 1).
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Fabrication and Characterization of CQD@IMSN-PMB
In this work, a one-pot biphase stratiﬁcation approach was used
to prepare MSNs with dendritic center-radial mesopores.[34] The
upper oil phase comprised tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) dis-
solved in a hydrophobic organic solvent, while the lower aqueous
phase contained hexadecyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC)
as a template and triethanolamine (TEOA) as a catalyst. Dendritic
MSNs with small, medium, and large pores (sMSNs, mMSNs,
and lMSNs) were synthesized by modulating the concentration
of the silicon source in diﬀerent hydrophobic solvent. All three
kinds of MSNs showed distinct radial mesoporous channels and
uniform spherical nanostructures (Figure S1, Supporting Infor-
mation). In order to covalently graft PMB into MSNs, sMSNs,
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (3 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
mMSNs and lMSNs were ﬁrst aminated with (3-aminopropyl)
triethoxysilane (APTES), resulting in the surface charges rever-
sal from negative to positive, with Zeta potential changed from
−32.86 ± 0.48, −24.31 ± 0.44, and −19.10 ± 0.25 mV to +21.03
± 1.80, +23.74 ± 0.71, and +24.04 ± 0.55 mV for sMSN-NH2,
mMSN-NH2 and lMSN-NH2, respectively (Figure 1a). Subse-
quent carboxylation using succinic anhydride facilitated further
covalent conjugation of PMB, as evidenced by the reversal of sur-
face charges from positive to negative (−49.32 ± 0.55, −42.01
± 1.08, and −33.70 ± 0.93 mV for sMSN-COOH, mMSN-COOH,
and lMSN-COOH, respectively), conﬁrming successful function-
alization. PMB was then covalently grafted into MSN-COOH
through amide reaction to obtain sMSN-PMB, mMSN-PMB and
lMSN-PMB. The resulting hydrated particle sizes were 161.33
± 2.20, 152.70 ± 1.40, and 148.43 ± 2.75 nm, respectively (Figure
S2, Supporting Information). Transmission electron microscope
(TEM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images further
veriﬁed the uniform spherical morphology of all three types of
MSN-PMB (Figure 1b and Figure S3, Supporting Information).
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) analysis con-
ﬁrmed successful PMB grafting, as evidenced by the disappear-
ance of the 1714 cm−1 absorption peak corresponding to the C═O
stretching vibration of carboxyl groups. Concurrently, the emer-
gence of sharper and more intense peaks at 1652 and 1541 cm−1
attributed to the amide I band (C═O stretching) and amide II
(N─H bending and C─N stretching) bands, respectively, signify-
ing the formation of amide bond (Figure S4, Supporting Infor-
mation). Nitrogen adsorption-desorption analysis was conducted
to evaluate the adsorption-desorption isotherms and pore size
distribution curves of MSNs and MSN-PMB (Figure 1c,d and
Figure S5, Supporting Information). The changes of Brunauer-
Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area, total pore volume and pore
size of MSNs during modiﬁcation were summarized in Table
S1, Supporting Information. PMB grafting and CQDs loading
signiﬁcantly reduced BET surface area and total pore volume.
However, pore sizes only slightly decreased during PMB modi-
ﬁcation, while it obviously decreased after CQDs loading, which
might be due to the high CQDs loading capacity of lMSN-PMB.
Speciﬁcally, the pore sizes of sMSNs, mMSNs, lMSNs initially
measured at 2.72, 7.60, and 12.46 nm, respectively, slightly de-
creased to 2.51, 7.48, and 11.66 nm after covalent PMB grafting.
These results indicate that neither PMB grafting nor CQDs load-
ing blocked the pore channels, which could be owing to the small
size of PMB (1189.45 Da) and CQDs (3.54 ± 0.73 nm).[30]
Pore size plays a critical role in determining the LPS neu-
tralization eﬃciency of MSNs. Three pore sizes of nanomateri-
als, sMSN-PMB, mMSN-PMB and lMSN-PMB were incubated
with LPS-ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and the residual LPS-
FITC in the supernatant was quantiﬁed after centrifugation.
Among the three, lMSN-PMB exhibited signiﬁcantly superior
LPS neutralization capability (Figure 1e). Since too large a pore
size aﬀected the mechanical strength of MSNs, the pore size
was not further increased.[35] LPS is a cell wall fragment disinte-
grated after Gram-negative bacterial death with molecular mass
of 10‑20 kDa.[36] Based on electrostatic forces and hydrophobic
interactions, PMB have strong speciﬁc binding forces to LPS.
In this way, MSN-PMB could adsorb LPS like a nanosponge,
which would signiﬁcantly reduce antigen presentation and mit-
igate the subsequent immune inﬂammatory reaction.[36a] To op-
timize PMB grafting, the feed ratio of PMB to lMSN-COOH was
adjusted from 1:4 to 2:1 (Figure S6, Supporting Information).
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis re-
vealed that with the increase of PMB input, the loading eﬃciency
(LE) increased, while the encapsulation eﬃciency (EE) exhibited
a declining trend. When the ratio of PMB to lMSN-COOH was
1:1 and 2:1, there was no statistical diﬀerence in LE, but EE was
much higher at 1:1 ratio. Therefore, the ﬁnal feed ratio of PMB
to lMSN-COOH was set at 1:1, achieving an LE of 41.86 ± 0.34%.
PMB is primarily used in clinic to eradicate Gram-negative bac-
teria such as E. coli and P. aeruginosa; however, its application is
often limited by nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity.[31] To evaluate
the cytotoxicity of free PMB and lMSN-PMB (containing equiva-
lent PMB concentrations) on mammalian cells, cell viability as-
says were conducted on rat adrenal pheochromocytoma PC-12
cells, human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs), and mouse reti-
nal ganglion cells (RGCs) using the cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8)
and cell live/dead staining. As shown in Figure 1f and Figure S7,
Supporting Information, cell viability dropped below 80% when
the PMB concentration exceeded 100 μg mL−1, indicating sig-
niﬁcant cytotoxic eﬀects of free PMB on mammalian cells. Es-
pecially, PC-12 cells exhibited heightened sensitivity, consistent
with the neurotoxic eﬀects observed in clinical applications.[37]
In contrast, lMSN-PMB maintained cell viabilities above 90%
across all tested cell lines at PMB concentrations ranging from
12.5 to 400 μg mL−1. Live/dead staining further corroborated
these ﬁndings, where green ﬂuorescence indicated viable cells
and red ﬂuorescence marked cell death. When free PMB ex-
ceeded 50 μg mL−1, a pronounced increase in red ﬂuorescence
was observed in PC-12 cells, HCECs, and RGCs, accompanied
by a corresponding decrease in green ﬂuorescence, conﬁrming
its cytotoxicity (Figures S8–S10, Supporting Information). These
results suggest that covalent grafting of PMB into MSNs signiﬁ-
cantly mitigated direct PMB exposure, thereby reducing its toxi-
city to mammalian cells.
To further enhance bactericidal eﬃcacy while maintaining bio-
compatibility, lMSN-PMB was employed as a carrier for cationic
CQDs, which possess inherent advantages such as activation-free
antimicrobial activity, nanoscale size, low cytotoxicity, and excel-
lent water dispersibility.[38] CQDs were synthesized via a dry heat
method as described in previous studies, yielding nanoparticles
with an average diameter of 3.54 ± 0.73 nm and a Zeta potential
of +27.91 ± 1.25 mV (Figure S11, Supporting Information).[39]
CQDs were subsequently loaded into the 11.66 nm pore chan-
nels of lMSN-PMB through magnetic stirring, forming the ﬁnal
CQD@lMSNPMB nanocomposite. TEM and ultraviolet-visible
(UV–vis) spectroscopy conﬁrmed the crystalline lattice struc-
ture and characteristic absorption peak at 264 nm of CQDs in
CQD@lMSN-PMB (Figure 1g and Figure S12, Supporting In-
formation). The Zeta potential reversed from −4.36 ± 0.62 to
+33.40 ± 0.31 mV after CQDs loading (Figure S13a, Support-
ing Information). Nitrogen adsorption-desorption analysis fur-
ther revealed that BET surface area (201.13 m2 g−1), total pore
volume (0.68 cm3 g−1) and pore size (7.55 nm) of CQD@lMSN-
PMB were reduced compared to lMSN-PMB, indicating success-
ful loading of CQDs (Figure 1h, Figure S14 and Table S1, Sup-
porting Information). In addition, the average hydrated particle
size increased from 148.43 ± 2.75 to 160.13 ± 2.25 nm after
CQDs loading, suggesting that a portion of CQDs were adsorbed
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (4 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 1. Characterization and in vitro LPS neutralization performance of MSNs. a) Zeta potentials of MSNs. b) TEM images of sMSN-PMB, mMSN-
PMB and lMSN-PMB. Scale bar: 100 nm. c) Nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms of sMSN-PMB, mMSN-PMB and lMSN-PMB. d) Pore size
distributions of sMSN-PMB, mMSN-PMB and lMSN-PMB. e) The remaining LPS-FITC after incubation with diﬀerent concentrations of lMSNs, sMSN-
PMB, mMSN-PMB and lMSN-PMB. f) Viability of HCECs incubated with diﬀerent concentrations of PMB and lMSN-PMB for 24 h. g) TEM images of
CQD@lMSN-PMB. Scale bar: 100 nm (detailed view: 3 nm). h) Pore size distribution of CQD@lMSN-PMB. i) Loading and encapsulation eﬃciencies
of CQDs in CQD@lMSN-PMB with diﬀerent feed ratios of CQDs to lMSN-PMB. j) Cumulative release proﬁles of CQD@lMSN-PMB at diﬀerent pH
conditions. k) LPS neutralization capacities of lMSNs, lMSN-PMB, CQDs and CQD@lMSN-PMB by LPS ELISA kit. Data are presented as mean ± SD,
n ≥3. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s correction. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns = no signiﬁcance.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (5 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
onto the surface of lMSN-PMB through electrostatic interactions
(Figure S13a,b, Supporting Information). The polymer dispersity
index (PDI) of 0.070 ± 0.018 showed excellent dispersibility of
CQD@lMSN-PMB.
The loading capacity and release behavior of CQDs from
lMSN-PMB were evaluated in buﬀer solutions at diﬀerent pH
levels. Based on the characteristic absorption peak of CQDs
at 264 nm, a standard curve was established to correlate ab-
sorbance with concentration (Figure S15, Supporting Informa-
tion). The LE and EE of CQDs were closely related to the feed
ratio of CQDs to lMSN-PMB. A higher feed ratio increased LE,
whereas EE declined signiﬁcantly when the ratio exceeded 1:1
(Figure 1i). Therefore, feed ratio of CQDs to lMSN-PMB was de-
termined to be 1:1, yielding an LE of 43.48 ± 3.56% and an EE
of 83.91 ± 5.54%. To investigate the release behavior of CQDs,
CQD@lMSN-PMB was dispersed in phosphate buﬀered saline
(PBS) at diﬀerent pH levels. As shown in Figure 1j, cumulative
release of CQDs at 60 min was 49.60 ± 0.39% at pH 7.4, 51.47
± 0.42% at pH 6.5, and 64.90 ± 0.21% at pH 5.5. At pH 5.5, lMSN-
PMB exhibited a positive surface charge of +7.22 ± 0.35 mV
(Figure S16, Supporting Information), generating electrostatic
repulsion with positively charged CQDs and facilitating their re-
lease. This pH-responsive behavior aligned with the acidic mi-
croenvironment of infection sites, promoting the timely release
of CQDs for sterilization.[40]
The release of CQDs exhibited two key characteristics: rapid
release and responsiveness to the acidiﬁed infectious microenvi-
ronment, both of which were conducive to swift bacterial erad-
ication in infectious keratitis treatment. Importantly, rapid re-
lease of CQDs provided additional space for LPS neutraliza-
tion by covalently-grafted PMB following bacterial disintegration.
The eﬀect of CQDs loading on LPS neutralization was quanti-
tatively assessed using Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
(ELISA) kit (Figure 1k), revealing that CQDs incorporation did
not compromise LPS neutralization. This result was attributed
to the high speciﬁc surface area of MSNs and the rapid re-
lease of CQDs. To determine the maximum LPS neutralization
capacity of CQD@lMSN-PMB, 1 mg mL−1 CQD@lMSN-PMB
was incubated with varying LPS concentrations (0.5, 1, 2, 4, and
6 μg mL−1). As shown in Figure S17, Supporting Information,
LPS neutralization reached saturation at 4 μg mL−1, achieving
an LPS adsorption capacity of 2.22 ± 0.09 μg LPS per mg of
CQD@lMSN-PMB. This performance surpassed previously re-
ported toxin-adsorbing materials, including macrophage mim-
icking nanoparticles (MΦ-NPs, 62.5 ng LPS/mg MΦ-NPs) and
PMB-modiﬁed red blood cell-mimetic hybrid liposome (P-RL,
≈121.7 ng LPS/mg P-RL).[28,41] The superior endotoxin neutral-
ization capacity of CQD@lMSN-PMB can be attributed to the
large speciﬁc surface area of MSNs and the high-density covalent
grafting of PMB into lMSNs.
2.2. Bactericidal Ability of CQD@lMSN-PMB
Given the high positive charge of CQD@lMSN-PMB, its bio-
compatibility was assessed prior to evaluating antibacterial eﬃ-
cacy using CCK-8 and live/dead staining assays in PC-12 cells,
HCECs, and RGCs. As shown in Figure S18, Supporting Infor-
mation, cell viabilities remained above 90% across all cell types,
even at a CQD@lMSN-PMB concentration of 800 μg mL−1, indi-
cating negligible cytotoxicity. Fluorescence staining further cor-
roborated these ﬁndings, as minimal red ﬂuorescence was ob-
served in all three cell types at 800 μg mL−1 CQD@lMSN-PMB
(Figure S19, Supporting Information), conﬁrming the mainte-
nance of cell viability.
As a prevalent Gram-negative bacterium, P. aeruginosa is a ma-
jor pathogen responsible for infectious keratitis.[2] P. aeruginosa-
infected keratitis is characterized by rapid progression and ex-
tensive tissue destruction.[42] Without timely intervention, it can
lead to corneal perforation and irreversible blindness. The bac-
tericidal performance of CQD@lMSN-PMB was ﬁrst assessed
using plate counting method. The results demonstrated that
both CQDs and CQD@lMSN-PMB achieved >99.9% bacterial
eradication at the test concentration (106 Colony Forming Units
[CFU] mL−1) within 4 h, conﬁrming their excellent bacterici-
dal eﬀect. In contrast, lMSN-PMB exhibited limited bacterici-
dal capacity, eliminating only 18.46% of bacteria, likely due to
the surface-grafted PMB (Figure 2a). The lMSN carrier itself
showed no signiﬁcant antibacterial eﬀect compared to the con-
trol group. Furthermore, the eﬀects of CQD@lMSN-PMB con-
centration and action time on bactericidal performance were
also assessed in detail (Figure 2b). It revealed a weak bacte-
ricidal eﬀect below 100 μg mL−1. However, at concentrations
exceeding 100 μg mL−1, bacterial elimination demonstrated a
clear concentration- and time-dependent trend. The sterilizing
rates against P. aeruginosa were 93.78% and 99.00% after in-
cubation with 300 μg mL−1 CQD@lMSN-PMB for 2 and 6 h,
respectively. Increasing the CQD@lMSN-PMB concentration to
400 and 500 μg mL−1 further enhanced bacterial clearance,
achieving 99.89% and 99.99% eradication after 4 h incubation,
respectively.
SEM images provided further insight into bacterial morphol-
ogy post-treatment (Figure 2c). In the control and lMSNs groups,
P. aeruginosa retained its characteristic rod-shaped morphol-
ogy with intact, smooth cell walls, indicating viable cells. Bac-
teria treated with lMSN-PMB exhibited slight surface wrinkles
and nanoparticle attachment, suggesting enhanced bacterial tar-
geting by surface-grafted PMB. However, bacteria treated with
CQDs and CQD@lMSN-PMB showed severe cell wall deforma-
tion, extensive wrinkling, and shrinkage. It revealed that de-
struction of bacterial cell wall led to the leakage of contents,
proving characteristics of CQDs sterilization.[39] The survival
status of P. aeruginosa post-treatment was further assessed via
SYTO9 and propidium iodide (PI) staining (Figure 2d). PI se-
lectively penetrates damaged membranes and binds to DNA,
emitting red ﬂuorescence.[43] Bacteria in the control and lM-
SNs groups exhibited bright green ﬂuorescence, indicating the
absence of bactericidal ability. After lMSN-PMB treatment, a
small proportion of bacteria exhibited red ﬂuorescence, while
most remained green, indicating limited bactericidal eﬃcacy.
Conversely, nearly all bacteria in the CQDs and CQD@lMSN-
PMB groups displayed red ﬂuorescence, demonstrating exten-
sive membrane damage and bacterial death. These results sug-
gest that P. aeruginosa exposed to CQDs or CQD@lMSN-PMB
underwent membrane disruption and intracellular leakage, lead-
ing to bacterial lysis. However, this process also facilitated
LPS release, which could subsequently trigger inﬂammatory
responses.[7b]
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (6 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 2. In vitro bactericidal performance assessment of CQD@lMSN-PMB against P. aeruginosa. a) Representative images of bacterial colonies on agar
plates and quantitative analysis of P. aeruginosa treated with PBS, lMSNs, CQDs, lMSN-PMB and CQD@lMSN-PMB. b) Survival rates of P. aeruginosa
treated with varying concentrations of CQD@lMSN-PMB over diﬀerent time intervals determined by the plate counting. c) SEM images of P. aeruginosa
treated with PBS, lMSNs, CQDs, lMSN-PMB and CQD@lMSN-PMB. Scale bar: 1 μm. d) Cell membrane permeability of P. aeruginosa treated with PBS,
lMSNs, CQDs, lMSN-PMB and CQD@lMSN-PMB using SYTO9 and PI staining. All cells were labeled by membrane-permeable SYTO9 (green), while
PI (red) selectively stained cells with compromised membrane integrity. Scale bar: 100 μm. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n ≥3, biological replicate.
Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s correction. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p
< 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns = no signiﬁcance.
2.3. Endotoxin Neutralization and Anti-Inﬂammatory Eﬀect of
CQD@lMSN-PMB
As key immune regulators, macrophages play a pivotal role
in maintaining immune homeostasis through immunomodula-
tion, phagocytosis, and antigen presentation.[44] Upon LPS stim-
ulation, macrophages produce ROS and RNS, resulting in ox-
idative stress and subsequent damage. The interaction between
LPS and macrophages activates Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), which
subsequently triggers nuclear factor 𝜅B (NF-𝜅B) signaling path-
way, promoting the production and release of proinﬂammatory
cytokines such as IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼, thereby amplifying im-
mune responses.[45] As shown in Figure 3h, timely neutraliza-
tion of LPS released from lysed bacteria is essential to mitigating
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (7 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 3. Assessment of anti-oxidative stress and anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects of CQD@lMSN-PMB in LPS-induced RAW264.7 cells. a) Representative
ROS ﬂuorescence images and b) quantitative analysis of DCFH-DA stained RAW264.7 cells after diﬀerent treatments for 6 h. Scale bar: 100 μm.
c) Measurement of NO production in RAW264.7 cells using Griess assay after diﬀerent treatments for 24 h. d) Representative immunoﬂuorescence
images and e) quantitative analysis of TLR4 expression in RAW264.7 cells after diﬀerent treatments for 24 h. Scale bar: 100 μm. f) RT-qPCR analysis of
IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼mRNA expressions in RAW264.7 cells after diﬀerent treatments for 24 h. g) Flow cytometry analysis of CD80 and CD206 expres-
sion in RAW264.7 cells after diﬀerent treatments for 24 h. h) Schematic illustration of the mechanism by which CQD@lMSN-PMB inhibits LPS-induced
oxidative stress and inﬂammatory response. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n ≥3, biological replicate. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by
one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s correction. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns = no signiﬁcance.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (8 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
macrophage-mediated oxidative stress and inﬂammatory dam-
age. To assess the LPS-neutralizing capability of diﬀerent nano-
materials, mouse macrophage RAW264.7 cells were stimulated
with LPS, and intervened with lMSNs, CQDs, lMSN-PMB and
CQD@lMSN-PMB.
To
evaluate
intracellular
ROS
levels,
LPS-stimulated
RAW264.7 cells were stained with 2′,7′-dichloroﬂuorescein
diacetate (DCFH-DA), and ﬂuorescence microscopy was used
to detect green ﬂuorescence intensity. As showed in Figure 3a,
RAW264.7 cells treated with lMSN-PMB and CQD@lMSN-PMB
exhibited ﬂuorescence levels comparable to unstimulated nor-
mal cells, indicating eﬀective LPS neutralization and complete
suppression of oxidative stress activation. In contrast, cells
treated with lMSNs or CQDs exhibited ﬂuorescence intensities
similar to the LPS-stimulated group, conﬁrming their inability
to neutralize LPS. Quantitative analysis further revealed a 10.34-
fold increase in oxidative stress levels upon LPS stimulation
(Figure 3b). However, CQD@lMSN-PMB treatment eﬀectively
neutralized LPS, restoring oxidative stress levels to near-normal
conditions. Nitric oxide (NO) production in RAW264.7 cells
was detected using Griess reagent (Figure 3c). Compared to the
normal group, LPS stimulation led to a 23.82-fold increase in
intracellular NO levels. Neither lMSNs nor CQDs exhibited in-
hibitory eﬀects on NO production, with NO levels at 94.84% and
100.98% of the LPS-stimulated group, respectively. In contrast,
lMSN-PMB and CQD@lMSN-PMB treatments signiﬁcantly
suppressed NO production by 79.41% and 79.36%, respectively,
highlighting their potent LPS-neutralizing ability.
During the inﬂammatory reaction, LPS activates TLR4 and
the NF-𝜅B signaling pathway, thereby promoting the transcrip-
tion and expression of proinﬂammatory cytokines. The expres-
sion of TLR4 in RAW264.7 cells was analyzed via immunoﬂuores-
cence staining and quantitative statistical analysis (Figure 3d,e).
As shown in Figure 3d, LPS stimulation signiﬁcantly upregu-
lated TLR4 protein expression on the cell membrane, as indicated
by the strong red ﬂuorescence signal. However, in lMSN-PMB
and CQD@lMSN-PMB treatment groups, the red ﬂuorescence
levels were comparable to those in normal group, demonstrat-
ing that LPS neutralization eﬀectively inhibited the activation of
TLR4 pathway. Further statistical analysis of TLR4 immunoﬂuo-
rescence conﬁrmed that no statistical diﬀerences were observed
among LPS, lMSNs + LPS, and CQDs + LPS treated groups, in-
dicating that lMSNs and CQDs did not inhibit TLR4 expression
(Figure 3e). Conversely, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in TLR4 ex-
pression were detected among the normal, lMSN-PMB + LPS,
and CQD@lMSN-PMB + LPS groups, further conﬁrming that
LPS neutralization by lMSN-PMB and CQD@lMSN-PMB eﬀec-
tively blocked TLR4 activation.
The expressions of IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼in RAW264.7 cells
were quantiﬁed by reverse transcription quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) to assess the inﬂamma-
tory reaction (Figure 3f). The results showed that the three pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines all exhibited similar intergroup diﬀer-
ences. Under LPS stimulation, the expressions of IL-1𝛽, IL-
6, and TNF-𝛼in RAW264.7 cells increased by 4.10, 4.75, and
2.17 folds, respectively, compared to the normal group. No sig-
niﬁcant reduction in the expressions of proinﬂammatory cy-
tokines was observed in lMSNs and CQDs treatment groups,
compared to LPS stimulation group, indicating the absence of
anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects. In contrast, inﬂammatory cytokine lev-
els in lMSN-PMB and CQD@lMSN-PMB groups decreased to
levels comparable to those in the normal group, conﬁrming ef-
fective suppression of the inﬂammatory response. Macrophage
activation results in distinct phenotypic polarization, primarily
into the proinﬂammatory M1 phenotype (marked by CD80 ex-
pression) or the anti-inﬂammatory M2 phenotype (marked by
CD206 expression). To investigate the impact of CQD@lMSN-
PMB on macrophage polarization, RAW264.7 cells were stimu-
lated with LPS to induce inﬂammation. Flow cytometry analysis
revealed that the proportion of CD80+ cells in the LPS-stimulated
group was 91.93% (Figure 3g and Figure S20, Supporting In-
formation). However, following treatment with lMSN-PMB and
CQD@lMSN-PMB, the percentage of CD80+ macrophages de-
creased to 49.97% and 50.60%, respectively, closely resembling
that of untreated RAW264.7 cells (46.37%). In contrast, the lM-
SNs and CQDs treatment groups retained a high proportion
of CD80+ cells (91.23% and 92.47%, respectively), indicating
that neither material modulated macrophage polarization. No-
tably, none of the treatment groups altered the proportion of
CD206+ M2 macrophages. These results suggested that LPS
stimulation promoted macrophage polarization toward the M1
phenotype, thereby exacerbating the inﬂammation response. Ef-
fective LPS neutralization by CQD@lMSN-PMB reduced the pro-
portion of M1 macrophages, thereby interrupting inﬂammation.
Therefore, it was inferred that in the context of infectious kerati-
tis, CQD@lMSN-PMB could provide a dual-function therapeu-
tic strategy: CQDs rapidly eradicated bacteria, while subsequent
LPS neutralization by lMSN-PMB eﬀectively terminated oxida-
tive stress and inﬂammatory signaling (Figure 3h).
To elucidate the intracellular neutralization mechanism of
CQD@lMSN-PMB, whole-transcriptome RNA sequencing was
performed on RAW264.7 cells, identifying a total of 21 959
genes. Among them, 482 genes were signiﬁcantly downreg-
ulated in CQD@lMSN-PMB + LPS group compared to the
LPS-stimulated group (Figure 4a). Gene Ontology (GO) func-
tional enrichment analysis of diﬀerentially expressed genes
(DEGs) revealed signiﬁcant enrichment in biological processes
related to “response to stress” and “immune system process”
(Figure 4b). Heatmap visualization of key DEGs indicated the
downregulation of inﬂammation-related genes (e.g., IL-1𝛽, TNF,
MMP-9), chemotaxis-related genes (e.g., CXCL2, CCL3, CCL4,
CCL22) and oxidative stress-related genes (e.g., PTGS2) follow-
ing CQD@lMSN-PMB intervention (Figure 4c). Additionally, Ky-
oto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway en-
richment analysis identiﬁed the NF-𝜅B signaling pathway as
the primary pathway aﬀected by CQD@lMSN-PMB treatment
(Figure 4d).
NF-𝜅B refers to a group of transcription factor complexes pri-
marily composed of subunits such as RelA (p65), RelB, c-Rel,
p50/p105 (NF-𝜅B1) and p52/p100 (NF-𝜅B2).[46] As an active DNA
bound dimer, standard NF-𝜅B (comprising p50 and p65) is com-
monly analyzed to assess NF-𝜅B pathway activation.[47] In its
inactive state, NF-𝜅B resides in the cytoplasm of macrophages,
forming a trimeric complex (p50-p65-I𝜅B) with the inhibitory
protein I𝜅B. Upon stimulation by speciﬁc signals such as LPS,
I𝜅B undergoes phosphorylation and subsequent degradation,
leading to NF-𝜅B release. The liberated NF-𝜅B translocate into
the nucleus, where it binds to nuclear DNA, initiating the
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (9 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 4. Intracellular LPS neutralization and anti-inﬂammatory signaling pathway modulation by CQD@lMSN-PMB in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells.
a) Venn diagram demonstrating the intersection of DEGs between the LPS group and CQD@lMSN-PMB + LPS group. By Figdraw. b) GO enrichment
analysis between the LPS group and CQD@lMSN-PMB + LPS group. c) Heat map of DEGs in the normal, LPS and CQD@lMSN-PMB + LPS groups.
d) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis between the LPS group and CQD@lMSN-PMB + LPS group. e) Western Blot and f) quantitative analysis of key
protein expression levels (p-p65/p65, p-p50/p50, p-I𝜅B/I𝜅B) in the NF-𝜅B signaling pathway after diﬀerent treatments in RAW264.7 cells for 24 h. Data
are presented as mean ± SD, n = 3, biological replicate. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s correction. *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns = no signiﬁcance.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (10 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
transcription of target genes and promoting the release of in-
ﬂammatory mediators.[47] To quantitatively assess NF-𝜅B path-
way activation, Western blot analysis was performed to mea-
sure the phosphorylation levels of key regulatory proteins, in-
cluding phospho-NF-𝜅B p65 (p-p65), phospho-NF-𝜅B p50 (p-
p50), phospho-I𝜅B𝛼(p-I𝜅B𝛼) (Figure 4e,f). Compared to the LPS-
stimulated group, phosphorylation of I𝜅B𝛼, NF-𝜅B p65 and NF-
𝜅B p50 was signiﬁcantly reduced in the CQD@lMSN-PMB +
LPS group, indicating eﬀective suppression of macrophage in-
ﬂammatory responses via NF-𝜅B pathway inhibition. Conversely,
treatments with lMSNs + LPS or CQDs + LPS hardly changed
activation level of NF-𝜅B signaling pathway. Hence, it could be
concluded that CQD@lMSN-PMB exerted its anti-inﬂammatory
eﬀects by neutralizing LPS and preventing TLR4-mediated NF-
𝜅B signaling activation, ultimately leading to the termination of
inﬂammatory cascades.
2.4. In Vivo Biocompatibility and Therapeutic Eﬀect of P.
aeruginosa-Infected Keratitis
Prior to establishing an infectious keratitis animal model, the oc-
ular biocompatibility of CQD@lMSN-PMB was assessed by ad-
ministering topical eye drops twice daily for seven consecutive
days in rats. A comprehensive evaluation was conducted using
slit lamp microscopy, corneal thickness measurement, tonome-
ter, retinal electrophysiology, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain-
ing, as well as blood routine and blood biochemical analyses
(Figures S21–28, Supporting Information). Throughout the ad-
ministration period, slit lamp observations conﬁrmed that the
iris vasculature remained clearly visible, and the cornea retained
its transparency without signs of edema in all groups (Figure
S21, Supporting Information). No signiﬁcant changes in corneal
thickness or ﬂuctuations in intraocular pressure (IOP) were de-
tected, indicating the absence of acute ocular inﬂammatory re-
actions (Figures S22,S23, Supporting Information). Following
7 days of administration, ﬂuorescein sodium staining revealed
an intact corneal epithelium without punctate ﬂuorescence, fur-
ther conﬁrming the absence of corneal epithelial damage (Figure
S24, Supporting Information). Retinal function remained unal-
tered, as evidenced by full-ﬁeld electroretinogram (ERG) record-
ings, which showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in a-wave and b-
wave amplitudes before and after treatment (Figure S25a,b, Sup-
porting Information). Histological examination of the cornea
demonstrated a well-preserved structure, with no apparent in-
crease in corneal thickness or inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells
in the CQD@lMSN-PMB group compared to the normal cornea
(Figure S26, Supporting Information). Systemic toxicity assess-
ments revealed no observable pathological changes or inﬂam-
matory cell inﬁltration in major organs, including the heart,
liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys, based on H&E staining (Figure
S27, Supporting Information). Furthermore, liver and kidney
function biomarkers in the CQD@lMSN-PMB-treated group re-
mained within normal ranges, showing no signiﬁcant deviations
from the control group (Figure S28a, Supporting Information)
Hematological parameters, including white blood cell, red blood
cell, and platelet counts, exhibited no abnormalities (Figure S28b,
Supporting Information). These results collectively conﬁrm
the excellent biocompatibility of CQD@lMSN-PMB, demon-
strating its safety proﬁle with no evident ocular or systemic
toxicity.
An in vivo infectious keratitis model was established to eval-
uate the bactericidal eﬃcacy and LPS adsorption capability of
CQD@lMSN-PMB in immune response modulation (Figure 5a).
A P. aeruginosa suspension (108 CFU mL−1) was instilled onto
the cornea with an epithelial defect for 12 h, inducing bacterial
keratitis characterized by corneal turbidity, edema, and conjunc-
tival congestion, closely mimicking clinical inﬂammatory symp-
toms. Before animal experiment intervention, the retention abil-
ity and bactericidal eﬀect of clinically used antibiotics oﬂoxacin
and CQDs were compared to determine the control group. As
shown in Figure S29, Supporting Information, rhodamine B
isothiocyanate (RBITC) representative of free drugs was quickly
washed away by tears and metabolized from the ocular surface.
The retention capacity of positively charged CQDs on the oc-
ular surface was greatly improved by binding with negatively
charged mucin in tear ﬁlm. Furthermore, after the intervention
of oﬂoxacin and CQDs on infected model animals, the number of
bacteria in ocular surface secretions treated by CQDs also showed
much better bactericidal eﬀect than that of oﬂoxacin with time
(Figure S30, Supporting Information). According to the principle
of 3Rs (Replacement, Reduction and Reﬁnement) in animal ex-
periments, in order to reduce the number of animals used, CQDs
with better retention capacity and sterilization eﬀect was selected
as the control group with only sterilization eﬀect.
Following model establishment, CQDs, lMSN-PMB and
CQD@lMSN-PMB were topically administered twice daily for
7 days. The administration was applied at 12 h post-infection
as the rapid corneal clouding formation leading to the diﬃculty
in evaluation of key indexes such as light transmittance in the
later stage. Therapeutic eﬃcacy was assessed using slit lamp mi-
croscopy, central corneal thickness measurement, IOP monitor-
ing, and bacterial plate counting. Post-treatment evaluation in-
cluded ﬂuorescein sodium staining to visualize corneal epithelial
defects, while anterior segment-optical coherence tomography
(AS-OCT) was utilized to assess structural integrity and corneal
swelling. After euthanasia, corneal tissues were ﬁxed and sec-
tioned for H&E and immunoﬂuorescence staining to detect the
expressions of proinﬂammatory cytokines and corneal ﬁbrosis-
related factors.
As shown in Figure 5b–g and Figure S31, Supporting Informa-
tion, P. aeruginosa exhibited high virulence in the control group,
leading to rapidly progressing keratitis characterized by severe
corneal edema, elevated IOP and conjunctival congestion. By day
7, the inﬂammatory response remained severe, with an anterior
segment inﬂammation score of 11.29, resulting in dense white
corneal scarring (Figure 5b,c). At this stage, the cornea had com-
pletely lost transparency, with a high corneal transparency score
of 3.75 and a bacterial load of 6.39 × 103 CFU persisting in oc-
ular surface secretions (Figure 5d,g). In CQDs group, the bac-
terial load decreased by 92.84% compared to the control group
on the ﬁrst day after administration, owing to the excellent bac-
tericidal eﬀect of CQDs. However, during the CQDs treatment,
inﬂammatory responses including corneal edema and thicken-
ing, as well as elevated intraocular pressure, still occurred, with
distinct scar formation observed in the cornea. This may be at-
tributed to the release of large amounts of LPS from P. aeruginosa
cells lysed by CQDs, inducing a severe inﬂammatory response.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (11 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 5. In vivo therapeutic eﬃcacy of CQD@lMSN-PMB in P. aeruginosa-infected keratitis. a) Schematic representation of P. aeruginosa-infected
keratitis model and treatment regimen. Created in BioRender. b) Slit lamp images of P. aeruginosa-infected keratitis in rats before modeling and on
days 0, 1, 3, 5, and 7 during diﬀerent treatments. c) Clinical inﬂammation scores of the anterior segment, d) corneal transparency scores, e) central
corneal thickness measurements, and f) IOP values of P. aeruginosa-infected rats on days 0, 1, 3, 5, and 7 during diﬀerent treatments. g) Quantiﬁcation
of bacterial colonies from ocular surface secretions collected on days 1, 3, 5, 7 post-treatments. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n ≥3, biological
replicate. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s correction. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns
= no signiﬁcance.
Compared to the control group, lMSN-PMB treatment alleviated
corneal edema and inﬂammatory responses, likely due to its LPS
adsorption capacity. However, its therapeutic parameters, includ-
ing clinical inﬂammation score, corneal transparency score, cen-
tral corneal thickness, and IOP, were comparable to those of
the CQDs-treated group (Figure 5e,f). This suggests that while
immune-mediated bacterial clearance was enhanced by the anti-
inﬂammatory eﬀects of lMSN-PMB via LPS adsorption, the over-
all therapeutic eﬃcacy was limited by the lack of intrinsic bacte-
ricidal activity. Consequently, a substantial bacterial load (1.65 ×
103 CFU) remained on the ocular surface by day 7, accompanied
by persistent inﬂammation and reduced corneal transparency.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (12 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
In contrast, the CQD@lMSN-PMB treatment group exhib-
ited a markedly superior therapeutic response. By day 1 post-
administration, P. aeruginosa was reduced by 91.56%, a bacteri-
cidal eﬃcacy comparable to the CQDs-treated group (Figure 5g).
This suggests that CQD@lMSN-PMB eﬀectively adhered to the
ocular surface, enabling the rapid release of CQDs for eﬃcient
bacterial clearance. Notably, unlike other treatment groups, the
CQD@lMSN-PMB group exhibited immediate suppression of
inﬂammation, as reﬂected by stabilized corneal inﬂammation
and transparency scores on day 1, in contrast to the progres-
sive increases observed in other groups (Figure 5c,d). The sta-
tistical analysis of central corneal thickness and IOP on day
1 also indicated a lower level of acute inﬂammation in the
CQD@lMSN-PMB group (Figure 5e,f). Over time, inﬂammation
subsided rapidly in the CQD@lMSN-PMB group, with the an-
terior segment inﬂammation score declining to 2.67 by day 7.
Corneal transparency also recovered at the fastest rate, with a
transparency score of 1.14. Additionally, central corneal thick-
ness (174.00 μm) and IOP (8.40 mmHg) nearly returned to
physiological levels (normal values: 180.80 ± 11.77 μm and 8.64
± 0.57 mmHg). This dual-action therapeutic approach eﬀectively
preserved corneal structure and transparency through synchro-
nized bacterial eradication and LPS neutralization, thereby termi-
nating the inﬂammatory cascade. Notably, existing antibacterial
materials primarily focus on enhancing bactericidal performance
to promote tissue repair.[48] In contrast, CQD@lMSN-PMB intro-
duced a fundamentally novel therapeutic mechanism. CQDs re-
placed immune-mediated bacterial clearance, while LPS neutral-
ization blocked inﬂammatory signaling and prevents ﬁbrotic scar
formation, providing an integrated strategy for infectious kerati-
tis treatment.
To further quantify corneal inﬂammation in the CQD@lMSN-
PMB group, corneas were harvested on days 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5,
and 7, and the expression levels of IL1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼were
measured using ELISA kits. As shown in Figure 6a–c, the con-
trol group exhibited a pronounced peak in proinﬂammatory cy-
tokine levels on day 2, indicative of a strong inﬂammatory re-
sponse. In CQDs group, IL-1𝛽, IL6, and TNF-𝛼levels also peaked
on day 2, but their expression was reduced by 31.68%, 27.59%,
and 34.91%, respectively, compared to the control group. This
reduction could be attributed to the potent bactericidal eﬀect of
CQDs, which eﬀectively suppressed bacterial proliferation and
endotoxin release. In the lMSN-PMB group, IL-1𝛽expression
gradually decreased, whereas IL-6 and TNF-𝛼levels initially in-
creased, peaking on day 2. The overall cytokine expression was
lower than in both the control and CQDs groups, reﬂecting the
combined eﬀect of lMSN-PMB-mediated LPS neutralization and
immune-mediated bacterial clearance. However, from days 3 to 7,
cytokine levels in the lMSN-PMB group closely resembled those
in the CQDs group but remained signiﬁcantly higher than those
in the CQD@lMSN-PMB group. This delayed resolution of in-
ﬂammation likely resulted from the intrinsic lag in immune-
mediated bacterial clearance, which is governed by inﬂammatory
regulation mechanisms.[26] If the intervention started at 24 or
36 h post-infection, based on the diﬀerence of action mechanism
and antibacterial performance, it is speculated that there are still
signiﬁcant diﬀerences among the groups. However, will be dif-
ﬁcult to save the light transmittance of cornea owing to corneal
clouding formation and irreversible structural loss caused by se-
vere inﬂammatory reaction.
During CQD@lMSN-PMB treatment, the expression levels of
all three proinﬂammatory cytokines decreased rapidly from the
onset of treatment, without the characteristic cytokine peaks ob-
served in other groups. By day 2, IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF𝛼lev-
els were reduced by 91.11%, 93.59%, and 85.39%, respectively,
compared to the control group. Similarly, relative to the CQD-
treated group, CQD@lMSN-PMB reduced IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-
𝛼levels by 86.99%, 91.15%, and 77.56%, respectively. This rapid
suppression of inﬂammation was attributed to the dual action
of CQD@lMSN-PMB, wherein immediate bacterial eradication
by CQDs prevented sustained bacterial growth, while simul-
taneous LPS neutralization eliminated inﬂammatory stimula-
tion. Notably, the rapid bactericidal eﬀect of CQDs could com-
pletely replace immune-mediated bacterial clearance, oﬀering a
faster and more direct antimicrobial mechanism than the im-
mune system itself.[49] Although various high-eﬃciency bacteri-
cidal agents and novel sterilization strategies can rapidly elim-
inate bacteria, Gram-negative pathogens such as P. aeruginosa
and E. coli release large amounts of endotoxins upon cell ly-
sis. These endotoxins trigger excessive proinﬂammatory cytokine
production, culminating in a cytokine storm-a major driver of tis-
sue damage.[50] Zhang et al. previously developed macrophage
biomimetic nanoparticles for endotoxin neutralization to im-
prove sepsis treatment.[28] In comparison, CQD@lMSN-PMB,
with its simpler preparation and scalable synthesis, oﬀered a
more practical solution for treating various infectious diseases.
Compared with the intervention 12 h post-infection, the expres-
sion of inﬂammatory factors increased by 0.5–1 times at 24 and
36 h in control group. Based on the eﬃcient LPS adsorption ca-
pacity of CQD@lMSN-PMB, it can be speculated that it can still
remove endotoxin and terminate inﬂammatory reaction in time
even the intervention started at 24 or 36 h post-infection.
To further assess corneal inﬂammation after 7 days of treat-
ment, immunoﬂuorescence staining was performed to visual-
ize IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼expression (Figure 6d). Compared to
the control group, corneas from CQDs and lMSN-PMB groups
exhibited weak red ﬂuorescence, indicating a reduced inﬂam-
matory reaction state. In contrast, the CQD@lMSN-PMB group
showed an almost complete absence of red ﬂuorescence, sig-
nifying near-complete resolution of inﬂammation. Quantitative
analysis conﬁrmed signiﬁcantly lower cytokine expression levels
in the CQD@lMSN-PMB group compared to CQDs and lMSN-
PMB groups (Figure S32, Supporting Information). Additionally,
RT-qPCR was used to quantify IL1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼mRNA
levels in corneal tissues (Figure 6e). Expression levels in the
CQD@lMSN-PMB group were substantially lower than those
in the CQDs and lMSN-PMB groups. Compared to the control
group, IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF𝛼mRNA levels in CQD@lMSN-
PMB-treated corneas were reduced by 75.60%, 69.82%, and
60.98%, respectively. These results underscored the limitations
of single modality treatments: neither high-eﬃciency bacterial
eradication (CQD treatment) nor LPS adsorption alone (lMSN-
PMB treatment) was suﬃcient to fully suppress immune acti-
vation and prevent inﬂammatory damage. Instead, the synchro-
nized dual action of rapid sterilization and immediate endotoxin
neutralization, as achieved by CQD@lMSN-PMB, was essential
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (13 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 6. In vivo anti-inﬂammatory eﬀect of CQD@lMSN-PMB in P. aeruginosa-infected keratitis. a-c) ELISA quantiﬁcation of IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼in
corneal homogenates on days 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7 after diﬀerent treatments. d) Immunoﬂuorescence staining of IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼in corneal
tissues on day 7 across diﬀerent treatment groups. Scale bar: 200 μm. e) RT-qPCR analysis of IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼mRNA expressions in corneal tissues
on day 7 after diﬀerent treatments. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n ≥3, biological replicate. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way
ANOVA with Tukey’s correction. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns = no signiﬁcance.
for modulating proinﬂammatory cytokine expression and pre-
serving corneal structure and transparency.
During infectious keratitis progression, immune cells such as
macrophages and neutrophils are recruited to the infection site,
where they release proinﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines,
inducing the upregulation of MMPs that contribute to extracel-
lular matrix (ECM) degradation. The severity of inﬂammation
and aberrant corneal stromal remodeling is directly correlated
with MMP expression levels.[51] Additionally, proinﬂammatory
cytokines such as IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼promote the transdif-
ferentiation of static keratocytes into ﬁbroblasts, which further
diﬀerentiate into myoﬁbroblasts upon exposure to ﬁbrogenic fac-
tors like TGF-𝛽. Myoﬁbroblasts, characterized by 𝛼-smooth mus-
cle actin (𝛼-SMA) expression, generate disorganized and exces-
sive ECM, leading to corneal ﬁbrosis and scarring, which ulti-
mately compromise corneal transparency and visual function.[22]
To assess corneal prognosis following treatment, key parame-
ters including ulcer size, structural integrity, and ﬁbrosis were
evaluated after 7 days of treatment. Fluorescein staining re-
vealed persistent corneal epithelial defects and ulceration in
the control group, covering ≈32.90% of the total corneal area
(Figure 7a,b). In the CQDs and lMSN-PMB groups, ulcer areas
were signiﬁcantly reduced to 15.61% and 13.63%, respectively.
However, in the CQD@lMSN-PMB-treated group, no detectable
corneal epithelial defects or ulceration were observed, with ob-
servable and clear iris texture. AS-OCT imaging further con-
ﬁrmed severe corneal structural disruption in the control group,
where irregular thickening and complete loss of normal curva-
ture were observed (Figure 7c). In contrast, CQDs- and lMSN-
PMB-treated corneas retained their basic structure but exhibited
pronounced edema, thickening, subepithelial blister formation,
and an irregular stromal architecture. Only the CQD@lMSN-
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (14 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 7. In vivo corneal healing assessment of CQD@lMSN-PMB in P. aeruginosa-infected keratitis model. a) Slit lamp images of corneas stained
with sodium ﬂuorescein after 7 days of treatments. b) Quantiﬁcation of corneal epithelial defect area after 7 days of treatments. c) AS-OCT images and
d) H&E-stained images of cornea sections after 7 days of treatments. Scale bar: 400 μm (detailed view: 100 μm). e) Immunoﬂuorescence staining of
MMP-9, TGF-𝛽1 and 𝛼-SMA in corneal tissues after 7 days of treatments. Scale bar: 200 μm. f) RT-qPCR analysis of MMP-9, TGF-𝛽1 and 𝛼-SMA mRNA
levels in corneal tissues after 7 days of treatments. Data are presented as mean ± SD, n ≥3, biological replicate. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined
by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s correction. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ns = no signiﬁcance.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (15 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
PMB-treated group displayed a clear and intact corneal structure,
without detectable edema or thickening. Histological examina-
tion of H&E-stained corneal sections further corroborated these
ﬁndings (Figure 7d). The control, CQDs, and lMSN-PMB groups
exhibited excessive corneal thickening, signiﬁcant inﬂammatory
cell inﬁltration, and disorganized collagen ﬁber arrangement.
In contrast, the CQD@lMSN-PMB-treated group showed a well-
preserved corneal structure with normal thickness, unobservable
inﬂammatory inﬁltration, and regularly arranged matrix colla-
gen ﬁbers, indicating eﬀective suppression of inﬂammation and
ﬁbrosis.
The expression levels of corneal ﬁbrosis-related factors MMP-
9, TGF-𝛽1 and 𝛼-SMA were assessed via immunoﬂuorescence
and RT-qPCR after 7 days of treatment. As shown in Figure 7e
and Figure S33, Supporting Information, the control group ex-
hibited intense red ﬂuorescence, indicating high expression of
MMP-9, TGF-𝛽1, and 𝛼-SMA. This corresponds to the abun-
dant presence of opaque myoﬁbroblasts and disorganized ECM,
leading to corneal ﬁbrosis and opacity. In contrast, the red ﬂu-
orescence intensity in the CQDs and lMSN-PMB groups was
notably reduced, suggesting attenuated ﬁbrosis and scarring.
The CQD@lMSN-PMB group displayed minimal red ﬂuores-
cence, indicating markedly suppressed expression of ﬁbrosis-
related factors. Additionally, quantitative analysis of ﬂuorescence
intensity using ImageJ conﬁrmed that MMP-9, TGF-𝛽1, and 𝛼-
SMA levels in the CQD@lMSN-PMB group were signiﬁcantly
lower than those in the control, CQDs, and lMSN-PMB groups
(Figure S33, Supporting Information). RT-qPCR results fur-
ther demonstrated a 99.24%, 82.52%, and 82.24% reduction in
MMP-9, TGF-𝛽1, and 𝛼-SMA mRNA expression, respectively,
in the CQD@lMSN-PMB group relative to the control. Con-
versely, ﬁbrosis-related factor expressions remained elevated in
the CQDs and lMSN-PMB groups. Only the CQD@lMSN-PMB
group exhibited substantial downregulation of ﬁbrosis related
factors, leading to a favorable corneal prognosis without ﬁbrosis
or opacity and opacity (Figure 7f).
In summary, in vivo ﬁndings demonstrated that CQD@lMSN-
PMB not only mitigated corneal immune responses but also ef-
fectively reduced ﬁbrosis, preserving corneal transparency. These
results underscored its pleiotropic therapeutic potential, integrat-
ing potent antibacterial activity with synchronous endotoxin neu-
tralization for scar-free infectious keratitis treatment. However,
this treatment system also has some shortcomings, which need
to be paid attention to in the follow-up research. For example,
the release of CQDs is not signiﬁcantly responsive to the infec-
tion microenvironment. The CQDs release quickly in physiolog-
ical environment in a few hours, so it needs to be administered
many times in the treatment. In addition, CQD@lMSN-PMB can
only treat infections caused by Gram-negative bacteria, and has
limited toxin adsorption on Gram-positive bacteria and fungi.
3. Conclusions
Conventional infectious keratitis treatments often fail to simul-
taneously control inﬂammatory damage, resulting in scar for-
mation and reduced corneal transparency. In this study, a novel
nanomaterial, CQD@lMSN-PMB, was designed to achieve po-
tent bacterial eradication while synchronously neutralizing en-
dotoxins released by lysed Gram-negative bacteria. The cationic
bactericide CQDs were rapidly released, eﬀectively replacing
the immune system’s bactericidal function. More importantly,
lMSNs covalently grafted with PMB exhibited a high-aﬃnity
endotoxin-scavenging capability, leveraging their extensive spe-
ciﬁc surface area to eﬀectively halt inﬂammatory responses. In
the P. aeruginosa-infected keratitis model, proinﬂammatory cy-
tokine levels (IL-1𝛽, IL-6, TNF-𝛼) declined sharply from the ﬁrst
day of intervention without a discernible inﬂammatory peak. No-
tably, only in the CQD@lMSN-PMB group did the cornea main-
tain structural integrity and transparency, with no signiﬁcant ep-
ithelial defects, ECM degradation, or scar formation. This thera-
peutic approach demonstrates a signiﬁcant advantage over strate-
gies based solely on either bacterial elimination or endotoxin neu-
tralization, oﬀering a promising reference for managing other
Gram-negative bacterial infection-related inﬂammatory diseases.
4. Experimental Section
Materials:
TEOS (98%), CTAC (97%), 1-octadecene (≥99.5%), cy-
clohexane (99.5%), TEOA (98%), triethylamine (TEA, 99.0%), succinic
anhydride (99%), polymyxin B sulfate (PMB) were purchased from Al-
addin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Spermidine
trihydrochloride (≥99.0%) and APTES (99%) were sourced from Sigma-
Aldrich Trading Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The Reactive Oxygen Species
Assay Kit, Calcein/PI Cell Viability/Cytotoxicity Assay Kit and Nitric Ox-
ide Assay Kit were purchased from Beyotime (Jiangsu, China). The
LIVE/DEAD BacLight Bacterial Viability Kit was acquired from Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc (Shanghai, China). The CCK-8 assay kit was obtained from
DOJINDO (Shanghai, China). ELISA kits for rat IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼were
supplied by Solarbio (Beijing, China), while the LPS ELISA Kit was sourced
from Fine Biotech Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China). P. aeruginosa (ATCC 27 853)
was obtained from Luwei Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).
Characterizations:
TEM imaging was performed using a Talos F200S
electron microscope (Thermo Scientiﬁc, USA). SEM images were acquired
with a Quanta FEG 450 (FEI, USA). Nitrogen adsorption analysis was
conducted using a V-Sorb 2800P speciﬁc surface analyzer (Gold APP
Instrument Corporation, Beijing, China). HPLC analysis was performed
on an LC30AD system (Shimadzu, Japan), using a Shimadzu Shim-pack
Scepter C18-120 column maintained at 30 °C. Hydrodynamic diameter
and zeta potential measurements were obtained via dynamic light scat-
tering (DLS) using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments
Limited, UK). UV–vis absorbance was recorded on a UV-1780 (Shimadzu,
Japan). CCK-8 assay and NO production experiments were measured us-
ing a SpectraMax M5 microplate reader (Molecular Devices, USA). Flu-
orescence imaging of bacteria stained with SYTO9/PI and intracellular
ROS was conducted using a Leica DMi8 ﬂuorescence microscope (Leica,
Germany). Cell viability/cytotoxicity assays and TLR4 immunoﬂuorescence
staining were imaged using an LSM S4 880 NLO laser scanning confo-
cal microscope (LSCM, Zeiss, Germany) with AiryScan. Histological and
immunoﬂuorescence-stained tissue sections were visualized using a Leica
DM4B ﬂuorescence microscope (Leica, Germany). Flow cytometry e anal-
ysis of CD80 and CD206 expression was performed using a C6 Plus ﬂow
cytometer (Becton, Dickinson and Company, USA). Full-ﬁeld ERG record-
ings were obtained with a Reti-port/scan21 system (Roland Consult, Ger-
many). The qPCR analysis was carried out using an ABI QuantStudio6 Q6
system (Applied Biosystems, USA).
Synthesis of MSNs with Diﬀerent Apertures:
MSNs with varying aper-
tures were synthesized following a previously reported protocol.[34] A one-
pot biphase stratiﬁcation method was employed, utilizing CTAC as the
cationic surfactant template, TEOS as the silicon precursor, TEOA as the
catalyst, and either cyclohexane or 1octadecene as the emulsiﬁer. First, a
24 mL CTAC solution (25 wt%) and TEOA (0.18 g) were added to 36 mL
water and stirred at 60 °C for 1 h in a 100 mL round-bottom ﬂask. Sub-
sequently, 20 mL TEOS solution (20 v/v% TEOS in 1-octadecene and
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (16 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
cyclohexane for sMSNs and mMSNs, respectively, and 5 v/v% TEOS in
cyclohexane for lMSNs) was carefully added into the CTAC-TEOA aque-
ous solution and maintained at 60 °C under continuous magnetic stirring
at 150 rpm. The reaction proceeded for 5 h, yielding unmodiﬁed MSNs.
To remove the template structure, CTAC molecules were extracted via acid
treatment. The synthesized materials were suspended in 40 mL methanol
containing 2 mL concentrated HCl and stirred at 50 °C for 6 h. This pro-
cess was repeated three times. The resulting sMSNs, mMSNs and lM-
SNs were collected via centrifugation, washed three times each with water
and methanol, and dried under high vacuum until a constant weight was
achieved.
Synthesis of MSN-NH2:
Amine-functionalized MSNs (MSN-NH2)
were synthesized via silanization reaction.[34] Brieﬂy, 100 mg of MSNs
(sMSNs, mMSNs and lMSNs) were dispersed in a mixture of 20 mL
methanol, 2 mL water and 0.4 mL ammonium hydroxide. Under contin-
uous stirring, 50 μL APTES was added. And the reaction was maintained
at 60 °C for 5 h. The resulting products (sMSN-NH2, mMSN-NH2 and
lMSN-NH2) were collected via centrifugation, washed three times each
with water and methanol, and dried under high vacuum until a constant
weight was reached.
Synthesis of MSN-COOH:
Carboxyl-functionalized MSNs (MSN-
COOH) were obtained through the reaction of MSN-NH2 with succinic
anhydride.[52] Brieﬂy, 100 mg MSN-NH2 (sMSN-NH2, mMSN-NH2 and
lMSN-NH2) were dispersed in 40 mL of DMF via ultrasonication. A solu-
tion of 0.9 g succinic anhydride dissolved in 10 mL DMF was then intro-
duced into the suspension, followed by the addition of 0.9 mL TEA to facil-
itate the reaction. The resulting products (sMSN-COOH, mMSN-COOH
and lMSN-COOH) were collected via centrifugation, washed three times
each with ethanol and water to remove residual TEA and unreacted suc-
cinic anhydride, and dried under high vacuum until a constant weight was
attained.
Synthesis of MSN-PMB:
PMB-functionalized MSNs (MSN-PMB) were
synthesized via amidation. Initially, 36 mg of MSN-COOH (sMSN-COOH,
mMSN-COOH and lMSN-COOH) was dispersed in 10 mL of MES buﬀer
(0.1 mol L−1, pH 5.5). EDC (19.17 mg) and NHS (17.26 mg) were sub-
sequently added to activate carboxyl groups for 30 min. Following activa-
tion, 36 mg of PMB was introduced into the solution, and the mixture was
stirred at 800 rpm overnight at 4 °C. The resulting products (sMSN-PMB,
mMSN-PMB and lMSN-PMB) were collected via centrifugation and puri-
ﬁed by dialysis against ultrapure water at 4 °C to remove unbound PMB.
Synthesis of CQDs:
CQDs were synthesized through direct pyrolysis
of spermidine (50 mg) at 270 °C for 3 h in the solid state.[39] The ob-
tained CQDs were then dispersed in 5 mL ultrapure water and sonicated
for 30 min. Larger aggregates were removed by centrifugation with a rela-
tive centrifugal force (RCF) of 20 000 × g for 60 min, and the supernatant
containing CQDs was collected and further puriﬁed via dialysis against
ultrapure water.
Preparation of CQD@MSN-PMB:
CQDs at varying concentrations
(25, 33, 50, 100, 200, 400 μg mL−1) were mixed with the lMSN-PMB
(100 μg mL−1) in PBS and stirred at 800 rpm for 2 h at 4 °C. The resulting
complexes were collected via centrifugation and washed with PBS. Super-
natants were collected at each step to determine drug loading eﬃciency
using UV–vis spectrophotometry at 264 nm. A standard curve was con-
structed based on the absorbance of CQDs at 264 nm. The total amount
of CQDs encapsulated within lMSN-PMB was determined by subtracting
the unabsorbed CQDs in the supernatant from the initial CQDs input.
LE% =
CQDsadded−CQDssupernatant
lMSN −PMB + CQDsadded−CQDssupernatant
×100%
(1)
EE% =
CQDsadded−CQDssupernatant
CQDsadded
×100%
(2)
LPS-FITC
Adsorption
Study:
LPS-FITC
(from
E.
coli
O111:B4,
2 μg mL−1, Sigma) was incubated with varying concentrations of lMSNs,
sMSN-PMB, mMSN-PMB and lMSN-PMB (1, 2, 4, and 8 mg mL−1) in
PBS at 37 °C for 30 min. Following incubation, nanoparticles were pelleted
by centrifugation (15 000 × g). The ﬂuorescence intensity of unbound
LPS-FITC in the supernatant was measured to assess LPS adsorption.
The ﬂuorescence intensity of a 2 μg mL−1 LPS-FITC solution was set as
100%.
Quantitative Study on LPS Adsorption:
To quantify LPS removal ability,
lMSNs (0.58 mg mL−1), lMSN-PMB (1 mg mL−1), CQDs (0.78 mg mL−1),
and CQD@lMSN-PMB (1.78 mg mL−1) were incubated with 2.8 μg mL−1
LPS in PBS at 37 °C for 30 min. To determine the maximum adsorption per-
formance, 1 mg mL−1 CQD@lMSN-PMB was incubated with LPS concen-
trations of 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 6 μg mL−1 in PBS under the same conditions. In
both experiments, the supernatant was collected by centrifugation (15 000
× g), and unadsorbed LPS in the supernatant was quantiﬁed using an LPS
ELISA kit following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Evaluation of CQDs Release:
To assess CQDs release behavior,
CQD@lMSN-PMB (0.1 mL, 2 mg mL−1) was incubated in 0.9 mL PBS
at pH 5.5, 6.5 and 7.4 at 37 °Cin a shaking incubator (200 rpm). CQDs
release from CQD@lMSN-PMB was quantiﬁed via UV–vis absorbance at
264 nm after centrifugation (15 000 × g, 5 min) at predetermined time
points.
Cell Lines and Culture Conditions:
HCECs and RAW264.7 cells were ob-
tained from Pricella Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China), RGCs from
Fuheng Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), and PC-12 cells from
the National Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (Shanghai, China).
All cell lines were incubated in 25 cm2 cell culture ﬂasks (JET BIOFIL).
HCECs were cultured in DMEM/F-12 (Gibco) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco), penicillin (100 U mL−1), and strepto-
mycin (100 μg mL−1) (Gibco) at 37 °C in a humidiﬁed 5% CO2 atmo-
sphere. RGCs were maintained in Ham’s F-12K medium (FuHeng) supple-
mented with 10% FBS (Gibco), penicillin (100 U mL−1) and streptomycin
(100 μg mL−1) (Gibco). RAW264.7 cells and PC-12 cells were cultured in
DMEM (Gibco) containing 4.5 g L−1 D-Glucose, supplemented with 10%
FBS (Gibco). HCECs, RGCs and PC-12 cells were passaged every 2–3 days
using 0.25% trypsin with 0.02% ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA)
(Gibco), while RAW264.7 macrophages were passaged every 2 days using
cell scrapers.
In Vitro Cytotoxicity Assay:
Cytotoxicity was evaluated using the CCK-
8 assay and the Calcein/PI cell viability/cytotoxicity assay. PC-12 cells,
HCECs and RGCs pre-seeded in 96-well plates were incubated with dif-
ferent concentrations of PMB, lMSN-PMB, and CQD@lMSN-PMB in a
humidiﬁed incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2) for 24 h. Then, cell viability was
assessed using the CCK-8 kit following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Additionally, cells subjected to the same treatments were stained with cal-
cein/PI for 30 min and imaged using LSCM.
Bactericidal
Ability
Evaluation:
The
antibacterial
eﬃcacy
of
CQD@lMSN-PMB was determined using the plate count method.
P. aeruginosa (106 CFU mL−1) in log-phase growth was incubated with
increasing concentrations of CQD@lMSN-PMB (0–500 μg mL−1) in the
shaker (200 rpm) at 37 °C for 2, 4, and 6 h. At each time point, 100 μL
serially diluted bacterial suspension was plated on agar to record colony
counts after incubation at 37 °C for 16 h. To compare the bactericidal
eﬀects of diﬀerent nanoparticles, P. aeruginosa (106 CFU mL−1) was incu-
bated with PBS, lMSNs (164 μg mL−1), CQDs (217 μg mL−1), lMSN-PMB
(283 μg mL−1) and CQD@lMSN-PMB (500 μg mL−1) for 4 h. The number
of surviving bacteria was enumerated using the plate count method. In
addition, bacteria subjected to the same treatments were ﬁxed with 2.5%
glutaraldehyde overnight at 4 °C, dehydrated in a graded ethanol series,
and analyzed by SEM to examine morphological changes. In bacterial
live/dead staining assay, bacteria subjected to the same treatments were
stained with SYTO9/PI for 15 min to capture ﬂuorescence images under
a ﬂuorescent microscope.
In Vitro Anti-Oxidative Stress of CQD@lMSN-PMB:
RAW264.7 cells
pre-seeded in 96-well plates were incubated with LPS derived from P.
aeruginosa 10 (100 ng mL−1, Sigma) in the presence of lMSNs (33
μg mL−1), CQDs (43 μg mL−1), lMSN-PMB (57 μg mL−1), or CQD@lMSN-
PMB (100 μg mL−1) in complete medium. Cells maintained in a complete
medium without LPS stimulation were served as the normal group (neg-
ative control). After 6 h of incubation, cells were rinsed and treated with
DCFH-DA (10 μM) in serum-free DMEM for 30 min at 37 °C in the dark.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (17 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
After three PBS washes, ﬂuorescence images were acquired using a ﬂu-
orescence microscope, and quantitative analysis was performed using
ImageJ software. Additionally, after 48 h of treatment, NO production
of RAW264.7 cells was quantiﬁed using Nitric Oxide Assay Kit (Griess
reagent) and measured with a microplate reader.
In Vitro Anti-Inﬂammatory Eﬀect of CQD@lMSN-PMB:
The anti-
inﬂammatory eﬀect of CQD@lMSN-PMB were assessed using im-
munoﬂuorescence, RT-qPCR and ﬂow cytometry. Preseeded RAW264.7
cells were incubated with 100 ng mL−1 LPS and either lMSNs (33
μg mL−1), CQDs (43 μg mL−1), lMSN-PMB (57 μg mL−1) or CQD@lMSN-
PMB (100 μg mL−1) for 24 h. Cells cultured in a complete medium without
LPS stimulation were served as the normal group (negative control). TLR4
expression was evaluated by immunoﬂuorescence staining, macrophage
polarization was analyzed via ﬂow cytometry, and the mRNA levels of IL-
1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼were quantiﬁed by RT-qPCR.
Immunoﬂuorescence Evaluation:
RAW264.7 cells were washed three
times with PBS, ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 15 min, and
blocked with 5% BSA for 1 h at room temperature. Then, cells were incu-
bated overnight at 4 °C with a primary TLR4 antibody (ab22048, Abcam).
After three PBS washes, cells were incubated with a secondary antibody of
Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (8890S, CST) at 37 °C for
1 h, followed by sealing with antifade mounting medium containing DAPI
(P0131, Beyotime). Immunoﬂuorescence images were captured by LSCM
and quantitative analysis was performed with ImageJ software.
Macrophage Polarization Analysis:
CD80 and CD206 were used as
markers for M1 and M2 macrophage phenotypes, respectively. RAW264.7
cells were washed three times with PBS, resuspended in stain buﬀer, di-
vided into two equal portions. One portion was incubated with a PE-
conjugated CD80 antibody (PE-65076, Proteintech) for 20 min at 4 °C.
The other portion was subjected to ﬁxation and permeabilization before
incubation with an APC-conjugated CD206 antibody (APC-18704, Protein-
tech). Samples were processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol
and analyzed via ﬂow cytometry. Data were exported and analyzed using
FlowJo software.
RNA Isolation, Reverse Transcription and qPCR Analysis:
Total RNA from
cells and corneas was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) follow-
ing the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA concentration was determined us-
ing a NanoDrop One spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc). Comple-
mentary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized from total RNA using the Hiscript
III RT SupetMix for qPCR kit (Vazyme) according to the manufacturer’s in-
structions. The qPCR was performed using Taq Pro Universal SYBR qPCR
Master Mix (Vazyme). The primer sequences for IL-1𝛽, IL-6, TNF-𝛼, MMP-
9, TGF-𝛽1 and 𝛼-SMA were provided in Table S2, Supporting Information.
RNA-Sequencing:
RAW264.7 cells were incubated for 24 h under three
conditions: complete medium (normal group), LPS (100 ng mL−1), and
LPS + CQD@lMSN-PMB (100 μg mL−1). After incubation, total RNA was
extracted using the RNAprep Pure Plant Plus Kit (Tiangen Biotech, Bei-
jing, China) to assess RNA concentration, quality, and integrity with a
NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc). For RNA sequencing,
3 μg total RNA was used for library preparation. mRNA was puriﬁed us-
ing poly-T oligo-attached magnetic beads and fragmented using divalent
cations under elevated temperature in an Illumina proprietary fragmen-
tation buﬀer. First-strand cDNA was synthesized using random oligonu-
cleotides and Super Script II, followed by second-strand synthesis using
DNA Polymerase I and RNase H. The remaining overhangs were con-
verted to blunt ends via exonuclease/polymerase activities followed by en-
zyme removal. After the 3′ends of DNA fragments adenylation, Illumina
PE adapter oligonucleotides were ligated for hybridization. 400–500 bp li-
brary fragments were selected using the AMPure XP system (Beckman
Coulter, Beverly, CA, USA). Adapter-ligated DNA fragments were selec-
tively enriched via 15 cycles of PCR ampliﬁcation using the Illumina PCR
Primer Cocktail. Products were puriﬁed (AMPure XP system) and quan-
tiﬁed through Agilent high sensitivity DNA assay on a Bioanalyzer 2100
system (Agilent). Sequencing was performed on NovaSeq 6000 platform
(Illumina).
Western Blot Analysis:
Western blot analysis was performed to quan-
tify the expression and phosphorylation levels of I𝜅B𝛼, NF-𝜅B p65 and
NF-𝜅B p50, key proteins in the NF-𝜅B signaling pathway. RAW264.7 cells
were incubated with LPS (100 ng mL−1) in combination with lMSNs (33
μg mL−1), CQDs (43 μg mL−1), lMSN-PMB (57 μg mL−1), or CQD@lMSN-
PMB (100 μg mL−1) for 24 h. Cells maintained in a complete medium with-
out LPS stimulation served as the normal group (negative control). After
incubation, RAW264.7 cells were harvested and lysed in RIPA buﬀer (Bey-
otime) supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl ﬂuoride (PMSF).
Lysates were centrifuged to obtain protein supernatants, and total protein
concentrations were determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (23 227,
Thermo Scientiﬁc). Equal amounts of protein samples were separated via
SDS-PAGE using a 10% BeyoGel Plus Precast PAGE Gel, then transferred
onto a polyvinylidene diﬂuoride (PVDF) membrane (Millipore). Mem-
branes were blocked in TBST containing 5% BSA at room temperature for
1 h and incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. After three
times TBST washing, membranes were incubated with secondary antibod-
ies at room temperature for 2 h. Protein bands were visualized using an ul-
trasensitive chemiluminescent substrate (A38554, Thermo Scientiﬁc) and
imaged with the Amersham Imager 680 (GE). Band intensities were quan-
tiﬁed using ImageJ software, with GAPDH as the internal control. A com-
plete list of antibodies is provided in Table S3, Supporting Information.
Animals:
Healthy male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (160–180 g, 6–8
weeks old) were obtained from Charles River (China Inc). Before exper-
imentation, all rats were raised under controlled conditions (20–26 °C,
40–70% humidity, and 12 h light/dark cycle) for 1 week. All animal experi-
ments were approved by Laboratory Animal Resources Center of Wenzhou
Medical University (Ethics Approval No.: wydw2024-0414).
In Vivo Safety Evaluation of CQD@lMSN-PMB:
SD rats (n = 4 per
group) were randomly assigned to four groups and received topical admin-
istration of 10 μL PBS, CQDs (217 μg mL−1), lMSN-PMB (283 μg mL−1)
or CQD@lMSN-PMB (500 μg mL−1) on both eyes twice daily for seven
consecutive days. Slit lamp examination, IOP and central corneal thick-
ness measurements were conducted on days 0, 1, 3, 5, and 7 post-
treatments. Slit lamp imaging of corneas stained with sodium ﬂuorescein
and electroretinography were conducted on day 0 and day 7. On day 7,
rats were euthanized under overdose anesthesia, and blood samples were
collected for blood routine and biochemistry examination. The blood rou-
tine parameters included white blood cells (WBC), red blood cells (RBC),
hemoglobin (HGB), hematocrit (HCT), mean cell volume (MCV), mean
corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concen-
tration (MCHC), mean platelet volume (MPV), red cell distribution width
(RDW), blood platelet (PLT), neutrophil (NEU) and lymphocyte (LYM).
Blood biochemistry parameters included alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
aspartate transferase (AST), creatinine (CREA), albumin (ALB) and total
bilirubin (TBIL). After sacriﬁce, corneal tissues and major organs includ-
ing liver, lung, heart, kidney and spleen were harvested. Corneal tissues
were ﬁxed in 4% PFA, dehydrated in a sucrose gradient, embedded in OCT,
and sectioned for H&E staining. Major organs were ﬁxed in 4% PFA, dehy-
drated in an ethanol gradient, embedded in paraﬃn, sectioned and stained
with H&E for histopathological evaluation.
Therapeutic Eﬃcacy Assessment of CQD@lMSN-PMB in P. aeruginosa-
infected Keratitis:
A 3-mm-diameter region of the central corneal epithe-
lium was scraped oﬀ, followed by the topical administration of 10 μL log-
phase P. aeruginosa suspension (108 CFU mL−1). Corneal infection was
conﬁrmed via slit lamp examination 12 h post-inoculation. Twenty rats ex-
hibiting a uniform degree of keratitis were selected and randomly assigned
to four treatment groups (n = 5 per group), receiving topical adminis-
tration of 10 μL PBS, CQDs (217 μg mL−1), lMSN-PMB (283 μg mL−1),
or CQD@lMSN-PMB (500 μg mL−1) on both eyes twice daily for seven
consecutive days. Any deceased animals during the study were excluded
from further analysis. Slit lamp examination, IOP and central corneal thick-
ness measurements were conducted before modeling and on days 0, 1, 3,
5, and 7 post-treatments. Clinical inﬂammation of anterior segment and
corneal transparency were scored based on previously established criteria
(Tables S4 and S5, Supporting Information). To quantify viable bacteria on
the ocular surface, corneal secretions were collected using sterile cotton
swabs, suspended in 1 mL PBS, and subjected to plate counting on days
1, 3, 5, and 7. To assess corneal prognosis, slit lamp imaging of sodium
ﬂuorescein-stained corneas and AS-OCT were performed after 7 days
of treatment. Following all assessments on day 7, rats were euthanized
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (18 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
under anesthesia. A subset of eyeballs was ﬁxed in 4% PFA for 2 h, af-
ter which corneal tissues were excised, dehydrated in a sucrose gradient,
embedded in OCT, sectioned, and stained with H&E or subjected to im-
munoﬂuorescence staining. Antibodies used for immunoﬂuorescence are
listed in Table S3, Supporting Information. H&E and immunoﬂuorescence
images were acquired using a ﬂuorescence microscope. Corneal tissues
from the remaining fresh eyeballs were homogenized in TRIzol reagent,
and the supernatant was centrifuged to extract RNA. The mRNA expres-
sion levels of IL-1𝛽, IL-6, TNF-𝛼, MMP-9, TGF-𝛽1 and 𝛼-SMA in each treat-
ment group were analyzed via RT-qPCR. Primer sequences for these genes
are provided in Table S2, Supporting Information.
In Vivo Anti-Inﬂammatory Eﬀect Assessment:
To monitor the temporal
dynamics of proinﬂammatory cytokines (IL-1𝛽, IL-6, and TNF-𝛼) during
keratitis treatment, the keratitis model was established as described pre-
viously. Rats exhibiting a uniform infection degree were randomly assigned
to four treatment groups (n = 21 per group) and received the same top-
ical treatments as outlined above. Three rats from each group were eu-
thanized on days 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7 post-treatments. Corneal tissues
were excised from freshly enucleated eyeballs and stored at −80 °C. Subse-
quently, the preserved corneal tissues were homogenized and centrifuged
to obtain supernatants, and cytokine levels were quantiﬁed using ELISA
kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Statistical Analysis:
All statistical analyses were performed using
GraphPad Prism 9 software. Data were presented as the mean ± stan-
dard deviation (SD). Comparisons between two groups were conducted
using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test, while comparisons among mul-
tiple groups were performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with Tukey’s correction. Statistical signiﬁcance was deﬁned as *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, while p > 0.05 indicated no
signiﬁcance (ns).
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
This work was ﬁnancially supported by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural
Science Foundation of China (LR21H180001), National Natural Science
Foundation of China (82072077), Wenzhou key program of scientiﬁc and
technological innovation (ZY2019017), and Zhejiang Provincial Traditional
Chinese Medicine Science and Technology Project (2021ZA091) which are
greatly acknowledged.
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
endotoxin neutralization, infectious keratitis, lipopolysaccharide, proin-
ﬂammatory cytokines, sterilization
Received: December 7, 2024
Revised: March 24, 2025
Published online: April 1, 2025
[1] A. Austin, T. Lietman, J. Rose-Nussbaumer, Ophthalmology 2017,
124, 1678.
[2] R. B. Singh, S. Das, J. Chodosh, N. Sharma, M. E. Zegans, R. P.
Kowalski, V. Jhanji, Prog. Retinal Eye Res. 2022, 88, 101028.
[3] M. K. Rhee, S. Ahmad, G. Amescua, A. Y. Cheung, D. S. Choi, V. Jhanji,
A. Lin, S. I. Mian, E. T. Viriya, F. S. Mah, D. M. Varu, Ophthalmology
2024, 131, P87.
[4] E. D. Brown, G. D. Wright, Nature 2016, 529, 336.
[5] N. Arulkumaran, M. Routledge, S. Schlebusch, J. Lipman, A. C Morris,
Intensive Care Med. 2020, 46, 225.
[6] X. Huang, L. Li, Z. Chen, H. Yu, X. You, N. Kong, W. Tao, X. Zhou, J.
Huang, Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2302431.
[7] a) Y. Meng, L. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Shi, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Wu, X. Jiang,
W. Yang, L. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Meng, Y. Wu, W. Bu, Nat. Commun.
2022, 13, 7353; b) J. Shan, X. Wu, J. Che, J. Gan, Y. Zhao, Adv. Sci.
2024, 11, 2309622.
[8] a) P. P. Kalelkar, M. Riddick, A. J. García, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2021, 7, 39;
b) Y. Qiao, J. He, W. Chen, Y. Yu, W. Li, Z. Du, T. Xie, Y. Ye, S. Y. Hua,
D. Zhong, K. Yao, M. Zhou, ACS Nano 2020, 14, 3299.
[9] a) Y. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Shi, H. Song, C. Yu, Adv. Mater. 2019, 32,
1904106; b) Q. Xin, H. Shah, A. Nawaz, W. Xie, M. Z. Akram, A.
Batool, L. Tian, S. U. Jan, R. Boddula, B. Guo, Q. Liu, J. R. Gong,
Adv. Mater. 2018, 31, 1804838.
[10] a) C. He, P. Feng, M. Hao, Y. Tang, X. Wu, W. Cui, J. Ma, C. Ke, Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2024, 34, 2402588; b) H. Xin, Y. Liu, Y. Xiao, M. Wen, L.
Sheng, Z. Jia, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2024, 34, 2402607.
[11] Z. Zhu, L. Wang, Y. Peng, X. Chu, L. Zhou, Y. Jin, H. Guo, Q. Gao, J.
Yang, X. Wang, Z. Long, Y. Ge, S. Lu, B. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022,
32, 2201875.
[12] S. H. Ibbotson, T. H. Wong, C. A. Morton, N. J. Collier, A. Haylett, K.
E. McKenna, R. Mallipeddi, H. Moseley, L. E. Rhodes, D. C. Seukeran,
K. A. Ward, M. F. Mohd Mustapa, L. S. Exton, Br. J. Dermatol. 2018,
180, 715.
[13] L. Ðor ¯devi´c, F. Arcudi, M. Cacioppo, M. Prato, Nat. Nanotechnol.
2022, 17, 112.
[14] K. J. Lagos, D. García, C. F. Cuadrado, L. M. de Souza, N. F.
Mezzacappo, A. P. da Silva, N. Inada, V. Bagnato, M. P. Romero,
WIREs Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2023, 15, 1887.
[15] J. Shilts, Y. Severin, F. Galaway, N. Müller-Sienerth, Z.-S. Chong, S.
Pritchard, S. Teichmann, R. Vento-Tormo, B. Snijder, G. J. Wright, Na-
ture 2022, 608, 397.
[16] B. S. Ou, O. M. Saouaf, J. Baillet, E. A. Appel, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev.
2022, 187, 114401.
[17] C. Shi, E. G. Pamer, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2011, 11, 762.
[18] G. Li, R. Hilgenfeld, R. Whitley, E. De Clercq, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery
2023, 22, 449.
[19] A. Bukowiecki, D. Hos, C. Cursiefen, S. Eming, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017,
18, 1257.
[20] S. Tuft, T. F. Somerville, J.-P. O. Li, T. Neal, S. De, M. J. Horsburgh,
J. L. Fothergill, D. Foulkes, S. Kaye, Prog. Retinal Eye Res. 2022, 89,
101031.
[21] S. Li, Z. Lu, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, Q. Jin, X. Shentu, J. Ye, J. Ji, K. Yao, H.
Han, Adv. Sci. 2022, 9, 2200435.
[22] R. R. Mohan, D. Kempuraj, S. D’Souza, A. Ghosh, Prog. Retinal Eye
Res. 2022, 91, 101090.
[23] L. Chen, M. Y. Wu, S. L. Chen, R. Hu, Y. Wang, W. Zeng, S. Feng, M.
Ke, L. Wang, S. Chen, M. Gu, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2407268.
[24] H. J. Forman, H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2021, 20, 689.
[25] L. Wang, B. Zhu, Y. Deng, T. Li, Q. Tian, Z. Yuan, L. Ma, C. Cheng, Q.
Guo, L. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2101804.
[26] S. Qin, W. Xiao, C. Zhou, Q. Pu, X. Deng, L. Lan, H. Liang, X. Song,
M. Wu, Signal Transduction Targeted Ther. 2022, 7, 199.
[27] S. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Duan, Z. Zhou, W. Gao, L. Zhang, Adv. Mater.
2022, 34, 2107719.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (19 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[28] S. Thamphiwatana, P. Angsantikul, T. Escajadillo, Q. Zhang, J. Olson,
B. T. Luk, S. Zhang, R. H. Fang, W. Gao, V. Nizet, L. Zhang, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114, 11488.
[29] C.-M. J. Hu, R. H. Fang, J. Copp, B. T. Luk, L. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol.
2013, 8, 336.
[30] R. L. Nation, J. Li, O. Cars, W. Couet, M. N. Dudley, K. S. Kaye, J. W.
Mouton, D. L. Paterson, V. H. Tam, U. Theuretzbacher, B. T. Tsuji, J.
D. Turnidge, Lancet Infect. Dis. 2015, 15, 225.
[31] S. A. Yuk, H. Kim, N. S. Abutaleb, A. M. Dieterly, M. S. Taha, M.
D. Tsifansky, L. T. Lyle, M. N. Seleem, Y. Yeo, Sci. Adv. 2021, 7,
1577.
[32] T. Velkov, P. E. Thompson, R. L. Nation, J. Li, J. Med. Chem. 2009, 53,
1898.
[33] B. Xu, S. Li, R. Shi, H. Liu, Signal Transduction Targeted Ther. 2023, 8,
435.
[34] D. Shen, J. Yang, X. Li, L. Zhou, R. Zhang, W. Li, L. Chen, R. Wang, F.
Zhang, D. Zhao, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 923.
[35] X. Y. Hong, X. F. Zhong, G. S. Du, Y. Y. Hou, Y. T. Zhang, Z. R. Zhang,
T. Gong, L. Zhang, X. Sun, Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, aaz4462.
[36] a) F. Di Lorenzo, K. A. Duda, R. Lanzetta, A. Silipo, C. De Castro, A.
Molinaro, Chem. Rev. 2021, 122, 15767; b) F. B. Anspach, J. Biochem.
Bioph. Methods 2001, 49, 665.
[37] S. C. Nang, M. A. K. Azad, T. Velkov, Q. Zhou, J. Li, E. Barker, Phar-
macol. Rev. 2021, 73, 679.
[38] S. Li, L. Li, H. Tu, H. Zhang, D. S. Silvester, C. E. Banks, G. Zou, H.
Hou, X. Ji, Mater. Today 2021, 51, 188.
[39] H.-J. Jian, R.-S. Wu, T.-Y. Lin, Y.-J. Li, H.-J. Lin, S. G. Harroun, J.-Y. Lai,
C.-C. Huang, ACS Nano 2017, 11, 6703.
[40] a) M. Ye, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, M. Zhao, N. Yodsanit, R. Xie, D. Andes, S.
Gong, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 2006772; b) K. Rajamäki, T. Nordström,
K. Nurmi, K. E. O. Åkerman, P. T. Kovanen, K. Öörni, K. K. Eklund, J.
Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 13410.
[41] L. Jiang, Y. Zhu, P. Luan, J. Xu, G. Ru, J.-G. Fu, N. Sang, Y. Xiong, Y.
He, G.-Q. Lin, J. Wang, J. Zhang, R. Li, ACS Nano 2021, 15, 4173.
[42] J. Vazirani, S. Wurity, M. H. Ali, Ophthalmology 2015, 122, 2110.
[43] W. Song, X. Wang, S. Nong, M. Wang, S. Kang, F. Wang, L. Xu, Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2024, 34, 2402761.
[44] M. D. Park, A. Silvin, F. Ginhoux, M. Merad, Cell 2022, 185, 4259.
[45] D. Brooks, L. C. Barr, S. Wiscombe, D. F. McAuley, A. J. Simpson, A.
J. Rostron, Eur. Respir. J. 2020, 56, 1901298.
[46] S.-C. Sun, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2017, 17, 545.
[47] T. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Joo, S.-C. Sun, Signal Transduction Targeted Ther.
2017, 2, 17023.
[48] a) J. Xie, M. Zhou, Y. Qian, Z. Cong, S. Chen, W. Zhang, W. Jiang, C.
Dai, N. Shao, Z. Ji, J. Zou, X. Xiao, L. Liu, M. Chen, J. Li, R. Liu, Nat.
Commun. 2021, 12, 5898; b) X. He, Y. Qian, C. Wu, J. Feng, X. Sun, Q.
Zheng, X. Li, J. Shen, Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2211432.
[49] D. Zhang, M. Li, S. Chen, H. Du, H. Zhong, J. Wu, F. Liu, Q. Zhang,
F. Peng, X. Liu, K. W. K. Yeung, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2404485
[50] a) R. Medzhitov, Nature 2008, 454, 428; b) R. Karki, T.-D. Kanneganti,
Trends Immunol. 2021, 42, 681.
[51] C. García-López, M. Rodríguez-Calvo-de-Mora, D. Borroni, J.-M.
Sánchez-González, V. Romano, C. Rocha-de-Lossada, Surv. Ophthal-
mol. 2023, 68, 929.
[52] X. Du, B. Shi, J. Liang, J. Bi, S. Dai, S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater. 2013, 25,
5981.
Adv. Mater. 2025, 37, 2419209
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2419209 (20 of 20)
 15214095, 2025, 20, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202419209 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License