Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
1 of 17
CO G N I T I V E  N E U R O S C I E N C E
Gut microbial-­derived indole-­3-­propionate improves 
cognitive function in Alzheimer’s disease
Ling Li1†, Mengzhen Jia1†, Cong Yang1†, Yihang Zhao1, Jun Hu2, Yu Zhao1, Xinyu Hu1,  
Fangjie Ning1, Chen Ding1, Qingyuan Li1, Jun Gong1, Xiaoran Jia1, Kun Xu3, Yuhao Wang1,  
Shuang Zhou1, Lu Deng3, Lin Shi4, Xuhui Chen2*, Xuebo Liu1*, Zhigang Liu1,3,5*
Intermittent fasting (IF) offers a potential strategy to counteract Alzheimer’s disease (AD) progression. In our 
16-­week study on AD transgenic mice, IF positively affected cognitive function and reduced amyloid-­β (Aβ) accumu-
lation, verifying the IF’s role in modulating neuroinflammation. Multiomics integration revealed strong links 
between IF-­induced hippocampal gene expression, gut microbiota, and serum metabolites beneficial for cogni-
tion. Indole-­3-­propionic acid (IPA) emerged as a pivotal microbial metabolite. Blocking its neuronal receptor, 
pregnane X receptor (PXR), abolished IF’s effects. Human data paralleled these findings, showing lower IPA levels 
in patients with mild cognitive impairment and AD than in controls. IPA supplementation and IPA-­producing 
Clostridium sporogenes reproduced IF’s cognitive benefits, whereas PXR blockade in neurons or disruption of IPA 
synthesis abrogated them. IPA crossed the blood-­brain barrier, exhibited potent anti-­inflammatory activity, and 
suppressed Aβ accumulation, essential for neuroprotection. These results underscore microbial metabolites 
regulated by IF, particularly IPA, as therapeutic candidates for AD, highlighting the critical role of the gut-­brain 
axis in neurodegeneration.
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), affecting 43 million people worldwide, is a 
leading neurodegenerative disease causing dementia (1). AD is char-
acterized by cognitive impairment resulting from the accumulation 
of amyloid-­β (Aβ) peptides and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles 
caused by hyperphosphorylated Tau protein in the brain (1, 2). In 
addition, AD leads to synaptic damage and neuroinflammation in 
the brain (3). However, the precise etiological mechanisms underly-
ing AD remain unclear. There is an urgent need for effective medi-
cal treatments and nonpharmacological nutritional interventions to 
prevent the development of AD. The risk of AD is associated with 
nongenetic factors, such as obesity, lack of physical exercise, and an 
unhealthy diet (4).
Over the past few decades, the benefits of dietary restriction for 
brain health and dementia prevention have been widely documented 
(5). Likewise, intermittent fasting (IF) has shown promising effects 
on metabolic syndrome and cognitive impairment (6). Specifically, IF 
has been shown to improve cognitive function in elderly individuals 
through biochemical and metabolic changes over a 36-­month follow-­
up period (7). Animal studies have suggested that IF may alleviate 
memory deficits by increasing the expression of neurotrophic factors, 
enhancing synaptic plasticity, and inhibiting neuroinflammatory re-
sponses (8–11). A recent study showed that a 3-­month IF regimen 
enhanced spatial cognition and hippocampal neurogenesis in female 
mice (12). Notably, IF has been found to reduce Aβ accumulation—a 
key indicator of AD development—and to prevent memory loss in 
ovariectomized rats infused with Aβ (13, 14). The neuroprotective 
mechanism of IF may be linked to its anti-­inflammatory and antioxi-
dant effects, the improvement of hippocampal synaptic plasticity, and 
increased activity of neurotrophic factors, although these remain elu-
sive (10, 15). A recent study indicates that IF could prevent cognitive 
decline in AD model mice by regulating gut microbiota and amino 
acid metabolism (16). It has also been reported that time-­restricted 
feeding improves memory in AD mice by ameliorating the misalign-
ment of circadian rhythmicity (17).
The gut microbiome modulates host brain function, including 
cognitive behavior, via the gut-­brain axis (18). Studies have found 
that gut microbiota composition is altered in patients with AD 
(19, 20) and that transplantation of fecal microbiota from patients 
with AD to rats could lead to loss of hippocampal neurogenesis and 
behavioral impairment (21). Our previous study demonstrated that 
IF prevented synaptic structure damage and cognitive decline in mice 
with type 2 diabetes. This prevention was attributed to enhanced mi-
tochondrial biogenesis and energy metabolism gene expression in the 
hippocampus, reshaping the gut microbiome and elevating the levels 
of beneficial microbial metabolites, such as short-­chain fatty acids 
and the tryptophan microbial metabolite 3-­indolepropionic acid 
(IPA) (9). IPA has been widely reported to have neuroprotective ef-
fects, including preventing toxicity of Aβ, enhancing nerve regenera-
tion after constriction injury, protecting blood-­brain barrier (BBB) 
function, and anti-­neuroinflammation (22–25). However, studies 
aiming to explore whether IF-­induced alterations in the gut microbi-
ome and microbial metabolites, especially IPA, could prevent cogni-
tive deficits in AD are unexpectedly lacking.
In this study, the transgenic AD models, including Aβ precursor 
protein (APP)swe/PSEN1dE9(PS1) and 5×FAD mice, were used to 
investigate the effects of IF on alleviating cognitive deficits in AD. 
Integrative modeling of the hippocampal transcriptome, gut micro-
biome, and metabolome was conducted to uncover the biological 
mechanisms underlying the observed benefits of IF in alleviating 
cognitive impairments. Furthermore, we explored the role played by 
IPA in mediating IF’s neuroprotective effects on AD. Our findings 
1College of Food Science and Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 
712100, China. 2Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518004, 
China. 3College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling 712100, China. 4College of Food Engineering and Nutritional Science, 
Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710119, China. 5Northwest A&F University Shenzhen 
Research Institute, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518000, China.
*Corresponding author. Email: zhigangliu@​nwsuaf.​edu.​cn (Z.L.); xueboliu@​nwsuaf.​
edu.​cn (X.L.); xuhuichen@​pkuszh.​com (X.C.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2025 The 
Authors, some rights 
reserved; exclusive 
licensee American 
Association for the 
Advancement of 
Science. No claim to 
original U.S. 
Government Works. 
Distributed under a 
Creative Commons 
Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-­NC). 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
2 of 17
suggest that IF is a potential dietary restriction strategy for preventing 
AD development by regulating gut microbiota composition and en-
hancing IPA generation, which in turn reduces Aβ accumulation and 
neuroinflammation, consequently preserving cognitive function.
RESULTS
IF alleviates cognitive impairment and Aβ deposition in a 
mouse model of AD
Four-­month-­old male and female APP/PS1 transgenic mice (AD 
model) and their wild-­type (WT) littermates were subjected to either 
ad libitum feeding or an IF regimen (24-­hour cycles) for 16 weeks 
(Fig. 1A). We recorded the weight of mice in each group on the fast-
ing day (fig. S1A). IF reduced body weight gain and food intake 
while increasing water intake in both genotypes of mice (Fig. 1, B 
and C, and fig. S1B).
The effect of IF on cognitive function was assessed using the 
Morris water maze test. Compared with the WT mice, the AD mice 
had a longer escape latency on navigation tests, indicating that they 
were cognitively impaired (Fig. 1D). IF decreased the escape latency 
in the day 6 navigation test, which indicated that IF improved cogni-
tion of the AD mice (Fig. 1D). As shown in fig. S1C, the trajectory of 
mice on the probe day was also recorded. The accumulation of Aβ 
plaques in the brains of AD mice was measured by immunofluores-
cence staining (Fig. 1E). IF might reduce the Aβ plaque deposition 
in the piriform cortex of the AD mouse brain (Fig. 1, E and F), ac-
companied with a notable decrease gene expression of Bace-­1, a key 
enzyme associated with Aβ production. The pathological features of 
AD are related to abnormal synaptic plasticity, which can be affected 
by the accumulation of Aβ plaques (26).
IF improves synapse ultrastructure and alters hippocampal 
gene expression
Postsynaptic density (PSD) is a complex subcellular domain that 
forms an essential protein network and modulates synaptic plastic-
ity (27). In AD mice, both the PSD length and width were reduced 
compared to those in WT mice (Fig. 1G). However, IF increased the 
length and width of the PSD in the AD mouse hippocampus (Fig. 1, 
H and I). Consistently, IF up-­regulated the mRNA expression of 
PSD-­95, a critical gene regulating PSD structure, in the hippocampus 
of AD mice (fig. S1G).
Moreover, IF reduced ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 
1 (IBA-­1) expression, a marker of microglial activation, in the piri-
form cortex and CA1 regions of AD mice (fig. S1, E and F). Similarly, 
IF down-­regulated the expression of APP, Bace-­1, and TNFα while 
up-­regulating the anti-­inflammatory cytokine IL-­10 in the hippo-
campus of AD mice (fig. S1, D and H to J).
Furthermore, we performed RNA sequencing with mouse hippo-
campi to identify key biological processes and pathways that might 
be altered by IF. A total of 56,090 genes was detected, including 
14,100 newly predicted genes lacking annotation. We found that 
1709, 1559, and 1090 genes were differentially expressed in the hip-
pocampus in AD mice, WT mice, and mice in a combined group 
that contained both AD and WT mice without considering geno-
type after IF [analysis of variance (ANOVA), P < 0.05]. Significant 
discrepancies were noted among the gene panels when comparing 
AD + ad libitum to AD + IF, WT + ad libitum to WT + IF, and 
ad libitum to IF, regardless of genotype (fig. S1K). This discrepancy 
suggested a gene type effect on hippocampal response to IF regimen.
We focused on genes that were up-­ (n = 1103) or down-­regulated 
(n = 606) by IF in AD mice (P < 0.05). Compared to ad libitum feed-
ing, IF resulted in differential expression of AD mouse genes that 
were associated with 280 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) pathways (table S1). Genes that were highly expressed after 
IF were enriched in wingless-­related integration site signaling, mam-
malian target of rapamycin signaling, autophagy, hippo signaling, 
Notch signaling, mitogen-­activated protein kinase signaling, and 
sphingolipid signaling (P < 0.05). Genes down-­regulated by IF were 
enriched in pathways related to primary bile acid and unsaturated 
fatty acid biosynthesis (P < 0.05). Particular focus was given to 175 
differentially expressed genes in AD + ad libitum versus AD + IF 
mice that are proposed to be involved in pathways related to AD 
physiology, oxidative phosphorylation, neurotrophin signaling pathway, 
and synapse (Fig. 1J and table S2). We observed a clear discrimina-
tion between AD + ad libitum versus AD + IF (fig. S1L). Expression 
of Gadd45b, Zfyve1, Ap3d1, Cpt1c, Lamp2, and Foxo6 in AD mouse 
hippocampi was greatly enhanced by IF (Fig. 1K; Student’s t test, 
P < 0.05); expression levels were confirmed by quantitative poly-
merase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis (fig. S1M). Therefore, IF could 
alleviate cognitive dysfunction in AD mice by reducing Aβ accumu-
lation, accompanied by improved synaptic structure and down-­
regulated neuroinflammation.
IF reshapes the gut microbiome and metabolome in AD mice
The gut microbiome has vital functions in AD physiology (28). We 
analyzed gut microbiota composition in mouse fecal samples using 
16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) v3-­v4 gene amplicon sequencing. IF 
did not significantly affect α or β diversity of gut microbiota within 
the ad libitum group (fig. S2A). However, α and β diversity differed 
significantly between ad libitum and IF groups in terms of microbial 
genera and operational taxonomic units (OTUs; fig. S2B). Specifi-
cally, we identified optimal bacterial panels at the genus and OTU 
levels to distinguish between ad libitum and IF groups, with or with-
out considering the genotype. The panels were derived by using par-
tial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-­DA) incorporated into 
a repeated double cross-­validation framework with an all-­relevant 
variable selection procedure. Compared with the ad libitum group, 
IF altered the abundance of 181 bacterial species in WT mice, as 
well as the abundance of 250 bacterial species in AD mice (fig. S2B). 
There is a distinct separation between the ad libitum and IF treat-
ment (fig. S2C). Most of the differential bacterial species were in-
cluded in the multivariate models distinguishing WT + ad libitum 
from WT + IF, as well as ad libitum from IF groups across both AD 
and WT mice. This result indicated the robustness of IF-­induced 
changes in the abundance of bacteria. Individually, IF significantly 
altered the relative abundance of 28 OTUs in AD mice (Fig. 2A). Com-
pared with AD mice, IF greatly promoted the growth of Lactobacillus 
and several OTUs belonging to Lactobacillus, whereas it led to a lower 
relative abundance of Turicibacter and Yaniella (Fig. 2B and fig. S2D). 
Phylogenetic investigation of communities by reconstruction of un-
observed states (PICRUSt) analysis revealed that IF up-­regulated 
genes enriched in pathways related to apoptosis, primary and second-
ary bile acid metabolism, and fatty acid biosynthesis compared with 
the ad libitum group of AD mice (table S3).
IF greatly affected the plasma metabolome, and notably, a gene 
type–specific effect on IF-­induced changes in plasma metabolites 
was observed. Specifically, 348 and 182 metabolites were optimally 
selected as key metabolites relevant to IF in the AD and WT groups, 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
3 of 17
Fig. 1. IF alleviates cognitive impairment and Aβ deposition and protects the synapse ultrastructure in AD mice. (A) Schematic of the treatment with IF or ad libi-
tum in each group (WT + ad libitum: n = 20, WT + IF: n = 20, AD + ad libitum: n = 20, AD + IF: n = 20). (B) Body weight change (n = 20). (C) Food intake (n = 20). (D) Escape 
latency (n = 20). Cognitive function was measured by the Morris water maze test (see Materials and Methods). (E) Representative immunofluorescence images of Aβ 
plaques in the piriform cortex (n = 6 slices per group). Scale bars, 200 μm. (F) Aβ plaque density (number of plaques per square micrometer) in the piriform cortex (n = 6). 
(G) Representative images of the ultrastructure of synapse in the hippocampus of female mice (n = 6). (H and I) The length and width of PSD in the hippocampus of mice 
(n = 6). (J) A z-­score scaled heatmap of 175 differentially expressed genes between AD + ad libitum and AD + IF with P < 0.05. The top 25 genes are presented. (K) Gene 
Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway annotations for 175 genes whose expression differed between AD + ad libitum and AD + IF. Wnt, wingless-­related integration site; 
mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; MAPK, mitogen-­activated protein kinase. In (D), * indicates a significant difference between WT + ad libitum and AD + ad libitum, 
while # indicates a significant difference between AD + ad libitum and AD + IF. Data are mean ± SEM. **P < 0.01 and #P < 0.05. Significant differences between means 
were determined by two-­way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. DAPI, 4′,6-­diamidino-­2-­phenylindole; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; MAPK, 
mitogen-­activated protein kinase.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
4 of 17
respectively, with 77 metabolites in common (fig. S3A). Univariate 
statistics revealed 87 differential AD + ad libitum versus AD + IF 
metabolites (Fig. 2C and fig. S3C) showing varying degrees of cor-
relations with each other (fig. S3B). These metabolites were en-
riched in the metabolism of histidine, β-­alanine, arginine, and proline 
(Fig. 2D). Of note, 10 metabolites have been associated with AD 
development and/or cognitive impairment (Fig. 2E and fig. S3D). 
Metabolites involved in the tryptophan metabolic pathway have 
been considered gut microbiota–related metabolites, including 
IPA and indolelactic acid (Fig. 2E and fig. S3D). The fldC gene, 
encoded by gut microbiota and responsible for phenylactyl-­CoA 
dehydratase—an enzyme essential for IPA biosynthesis—was sig-
nificantly up-­regulated in the gut of AD mice following IF inter-
vention. (Fig. 2F). Thus, IF restructured the gut microbiome, modified 
Fig. 2. IF restructured the gut microbiome and metabolome of AD mice. (A) Differences in a selection of six genera and 28 OTUs differed between AD + ad libitum and AD + 
IF groups. The least-­square means ±95% confidence intervals obtained from ANOVA (P < 0.05) are presented. (B) A z-­score scaled heatmap of top 10 bacteria that differed 
between AD + ad libitum and AD + IF with P < 0.05. (C) A z-­score scaled heatmap of differential metabolites between AD + ad libitum and AD + IF with P < 0.05. The top 20 
differential metabolites are presented. (D) Metabolic pathways influenced by IF treatment in AD mice (AICAR, 5-­Aminoimidazole-­4-­carboxamide1-­β-­D-­ribofuranoside). 
(E) Plasma levels of IPA (n = 18). (F) DNA level of fldC in colon content (n = 8). Data are mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01. Statistical significance for (E) and (F) was deter-
mined by two-­way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
5 of 17
metabolic pathways—particularly tryptophan metabolism—and in-
creased the levels of IPA in AD mice.
Multiomics integration for IF on AD mice
We identified 175 hippocampal genes, 34 gut bacterial species, and 
87 plasma metabolites as key signatures associated with IF treatment 
in AD mice. To explore their potential mechanistic connections, we 
analyzed the interplay among these features (Fig. 2). Genes, gut bac-
teria, and metabolites distinguished AD + IF from AD + ad libitum 
with accuracies of 92, 100, and 92%, respectively (Fig. 3A). Predic-
tions were made using partial least squares discriminant analysis 
with a repeated double cross-­validation framework to minimize 
overfitting. The models’ predictive ability surpassed 1000 permuted 
models, demonstrating their robustness and generalizability (Stu-
dent’s t test, P < 0.05). We used DIABLO (Data Integration Analysis 
for Biomarker discovery using a Latent component method for Omics) 
integration analysis with a weighted design (fig. S4A) to identify bio-
logically relevant and highly correlated omic signatures (fig. S4B). 
Figure 3 summarizes the integrative analysis of IF-­modulated gut mi-
crobes, metabolites, and hippocampal genes. A total of 28 genes, 32 
bacteria, and 40 metabolites were identified as key omic signatures dif-
ferentiating AD + ad libitum from AD + IF groups (Fig. 3B). Fig. 3 (C 
to E) illustrates the loading scores of predictors from gut microbes, 
plasma metabolites, and hippocampal genes, highlighting their contri-
butions to differentiating AD + ad libitum and AD + IF groups. Nota-
bly, following IF intervention, the gut microbes Ruminococcus and 
Lactobacillus, the serum metabolite IPA, and the expression of hippo-
campal gene Zfyve1 were not only significantly up-­regulated but also 
exhibited the greatest differences between treatment groups. These 
features emerged as the top-­ranking contributors to the observed 
Fig. 3. Multiomics integration for IF treatment. (A) The performance of predictive models for signatures of IF status. Omic signatures included 175 differential AD + 
ad libitum versus AD + IF genes expressed in the hippocampus, 34 gut bacteria, and 87 plasma metabolites. For each dataset, multivariate predictive modeling was con-
ducted using partial least squares discriminant analysis incorporated into a repeated double cross-­validation framework. Prediction performance is shown in downstream 
figures: Each swim lane represents one mouse. For each sample, class probabilities were computed from 200 double cross-­validations. Class probabilities are color-­coded 
by class, presented per repetition (smaller dots), and averaged over all repetitions (larger dots). Misclassified samples are circled. Predictive accuracy was calculated as the 
number of correctly predicted samples/total number of measured samples. (B) Model performance of DIABLO integrative analysis of omic signatures concerning IF. The 
use of DIABLO maximized the correlated information between genes, bacteria, and metabolites. Scatterplots depicting the clustering of groups, i.e., AD + ad libitum and 
AD + IF, based on the first component of each dataset from the model, showed significant separation between groups. A scatterplot displays the first component in each 
dataset (top diagonal plot) and Pearson correlation between components (bottom diagonal plot). (C to E) Lollipop plot of contributions of key omic signatures identified 
by DIABLO integrative modeling for discriminating AD + IF from AD + ad libitum. Loading of DIABLO integrative modeling for each predictor is presented. Blue bars indi-
cate IF-­induced improvements in predictors. Predictors that were lower in AD + IF compared with AD + ad libitum are in red. TES, N-­Tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl-­2-­
aminoethanesulfonic acid sodium salt hydrate; NAAG, N-­acetylaspartylglutamate. (F) The Circos plot shows the positive (negative) correlation, denoted as brown (gray) 
lines, between selected multiomics features.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
6 of 17
multiomics associations across the microbiome, metabolome, and 
transcriptome. In addition, the selected omic signatures displayed 
strong interrelationships, as shown in Fig. 3F. In addition to strong 
interrelationships among genes, bacteria, and plasma metabolites, 
we observed significant correlations between key predictors and IF-­
induced improvements in escape latency during navigation tests 
(r = 0.51, 0.50, and 0.45 for genes, gut bacteria, and plasma metabo-
lites, respectively).
The neuroprotective effects of IF are mediated by 
gut microbiota
To determine whether gut microbiota contribute to the cognitive 
improvements observed in AD mice with IF, we conducted further 
analyses. Ten-­month-­old AAPswe/PS1dE9 male mice and WT lit-
termates received an antibiotic mixture [ABx; penicillin G sodium 
(1 g/liter), metronidazole (1 g/liter), neomycin sulfate (1 g/liter), 
streptomycin sulfate (1 g/liter), and vancomycin hydrochloride (0.5 g/
liter)] for 2 weeks, followed by IF treatment for 6 weeks (Fig. 4A). 
ABx treatment significantly reduced the 16S rRNA gene copy num-
bers in feces (fig. S5A). IF decreased body weight and food intake in 
AD mice but had no effect on water intake (Fig. 4B and fig. S5, B to 
D). Compared with the AD + IF group, the AD + IF + ABx group 
showed no significant changes in body weight, food intake, or weekly 
water intake (Fig. 4B and fig. S5, C and D). To evaluate the cognitive 
function of ABx-­ and/or IF-­treated AD mice while avoiding micro-
bial contamination from swimming water, we used the Barnes maze 
test instead of the water maze test. During acquisition and probe 
trials, the primary latency of AD mice increased with training days 
compared to WT mice (Fig. 4C and fig. S5E). IF significantly en-
hanced cognitive performance in AD mice. In contrast, the AD + IF + 
ABx group exhibited a significantly longer primary latency com-
pared to the AD + IF group, suggesting that the cognitive benefits of 
IF were partially mitigated by gut microbiota removal (Fig. 4C and 
fig. S5, E and F).
The influence of ABx on the beneficial effects of IF was investi-
gated by comparing the AD + IF + ABx group and the AD + IF 
group. As shown in Fig. 4 (E to G), the beneficial effects of IF on Aβ 
deposition were eliminated by ABx treatment. Similarly, ABx treat-
ment abolished the IF-­induced down-­regulation of TNFα, APP, and 
Bace-­1 mRNA expression, as well as the up-­regulation of PSD-­95 
and IL-­10 mRNA expression (Fig. 4D and fig. S5, G to J).
The omic study revealed that the microbial metabolite IPA was up-­
regulated following IF treatment in AD mice, suggesting that IPA plays 
a key role in mediating IF’s neuroprotective effects. To block the ben-
eficial effects of IPA, 10-­month-­old male APP/PS1 mice were intra-
peritoneally administered ketoconazole (KCZ; 0.05 mg/kg per day), an 
inhibitor of the IPA receptor, pregnane X receptor (PXR) (Fig. 4H). 
The results indicated that KCZ did not influence the body weight, food 
intake, or water intake of IF-­treated AD mice (fig. S5, K to M). How-
ever, KCZ injection partially abolished the protective effects of IF on 
cognitive function in AD mice, as assessed by the Barnes maze test 
(Fig. 4, I and J). Similarly, KCZ injection increased Aβ accumulation in 
the piriform cortex and hippocampus of IF-­treated AD mice (Fig. 4, K 
to M). KCZ injection did not alter the IPA levels in the feces or serum 
of IF-­treated mice (fig. S5, N and O). KCZ injection inhibited the 
mRNA expression of Cyp3a11, a downstream gene of PXR (fig. S5P). 
Consistent with the behavioral and Aβ results, KCZ increased mRNA 
expression of APP and tumor necrosis factor–α (TNFα) while decreas-
ing the expression of PSD-­95 and IL-­10 (Fig. 4N and fig. S5, Q to S).
These findings suggest that gut microbiota, particularly the mi-
crobial metabolite IPA, play a vital role in the neuroprotective effects 
of IF on AD mice.
IPA mimics the neuroprotective effects of IF
To further investigate the potential benefits of IPA in AD, we mea-
sured serum IPA levels in human volunteers, including patients with 
AD, patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and healthy 
individuals (Fig. 5A). Serum IPA levels were significantly lower in 
the MCI and AD groups compared to healthy controls, consistent 
with fecal IPA levels (Fig. 5, B and C). Serum IPA levels were sig-
nificantly correlated with cognitive scores, including the Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA; r = 0.71, P < 0.0001) and the Mini-­
Mental State Examination (MMSE; r = 0.59, P < 0.0001) (Fig. 5, D 
and E). Moreover, the relative abundance of the fldC gene in the gut 
microbiota of individuals with AD was significantly lower than that 
observed in healthy controls and individuals with MCI (fig. S6C). 
Correlation analysis revealed a strong positive association between 
the relative abundance of fldC and serum levels of IPA (r = 0.80, 
P < 0.0001) (fig. S6D).
To validate the neuroprotective effects of IPA, 5-­month-­old male 
APP/PS1 mice were treated with IPA (20 mg/kg per day, gavage) for 
6 weeks (Fig. 5F). The Barnes maze test demonstrated that IPA sig-
nificantly improved cognitive function in AD mice (Fig. 5G). The 
novel object recognition (NOR) test showed that IPA enhanced rec-
ognition memory in AD mice (Fig. 5H). IPA treatment appeared to 
eliminate Aβ accumulation in the piriform cortex and hippocampus 
of AD mice (Fig. 5, J to L). IPA supplementation markedly increased 
serum IPA levels but had no effect on fecal IPA levels in AD mice 
(fig. S6, E and F). IPA down-­regulated the mRNA expression of APP 
and TNFα while up-­regulating Cyp3a11, PSD-­95, and IL-­10 (Fig. 5I 
and fig. S6, G to J).
Clostridium sporogenes, a well-­known gut bacterium, is capable 
of generating IPA in the host (29). We treated 7-­month-­old male 
5×FAD mice with C. sporogenes or a mutant strain to confirm the 
role of gut-­derived IPA in cognitive regulation (Fig.  5M). The 
C. sporogenes △fldC mutant strain lacked the fldC gene. In vitro experi-
ments confirmed that the mutant fldC strain was incapable of gener-
ating IPA in the culture medium (Fig. 5N). The 5×FAD transgenic 
AD mice were treated with WT or mutant C. sporogenes for 28 days 
after a 3-­day vancomycin regimen to eliminate other gut bacteria–
producing tryptophan metabolites (22). At the conclusion of the 
experiments, IPA was undetectable in the feces of mice colonized 
with the C. sporogenes △fldC mutant strain (Fig. 5O). The mRNA ex-
pression levels of Mdr1a and Cyp3a11 were reduced in the brains of 
AD mice treated with the mutant strain (fig. S6, K and L). Behav-
ioral tests, including the NOR and Y-­maze tests, revealed that mice 
colonized with C. sporogenes △fldC exhibited significantly lower 
discrimination indices and spontaneous alternation rates in the Y-­
maze compared to those colonized with the WT strain (Fig. 5, P 
and R). Consistently, treatment with C. sporogenes △fldC resulted in 
greater Aβ accumulation in the piriform cortex and hippocampus 
of AD mice and elevated Bace-­1 mRNA expression in the hippo-
campus compared to mice recolonized with the WT strain (Fig. 5, 
Q, S, and T, and fig. S6P). Similarly, treatment with the mutant 
bacteria led to higher levels of microglial activation (fig. S6, M to 
O). These findings suggest that IPA exerts preventive effects on Aβ 
accumulation, neuroinflammation, and cognitive dysfunction in 
AD mice.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
7 of 17
Fig. 4. The neuroprotective effects of IF are mediated by gut microbiota. For antibiotic administration experiment: (A) Schematic of the treatment with ABx and IF in 
each group (n = 4 to 5). (B) Body weight change (WT + ad libitum, WT + ad libitum + ABx, AD + ad libitum + ABx, and AD + IF: n = 5; AD + ad libitum and AD + IF + ABx: 
n = 4). (C) Primary latency in acquisition trials of Barnes maze [same group sizes as in (B)]. (D) Hippocampal TNFα mRNA levels (n = 3). (E) Representative immunofluores-
cence of Aβ plaques in the hippocampal CA1 region and piriform cortex (n = 3 slices per group). Scale bar, 100 μm. (F and G) Aβ plaque density (number of plaques per 
square micrometer) in the hippocampal CA1 region and piriform cortex (n = 3 mice per group). For ketoconazole (intraperitoneal) injection experiment: (H) Schematic of 
the treatment with KCZ (intraperitoneal) and IF in each group (n = 7). (I) Primary latency in Barnes maze acquisition trials (n = 7). (J) Primary latency in probe trial of Barnes 
maze (n = 6). (K) Aβ plaque density (number of plaques per square micrometer) in the CA1 region of the hippocampus (AD + IF: n = 5, AD + IF + KCZ: n = 4). (L) Represen-
tative immunofluorescence images of Aβ plaques in the piriform cortex and CA1 region of the hippocampus [same group sizes as in (K)]. Scale bar, 100 μm. (M) Aβ plaque 
density (number of plaques per square micrometer) in the piriform cortex [same group sizes as in (K)]. (N) Hippocampal TNFα mRNA levels (n = 4). In (C), * indicates a 
significant difference between WT + ad libitum and AD + ad libitum, # indicates a significant difference between AD + ad libitum and AD + IF, and & indicates a significant 
difference between AD + IF + ABx and AD + IF. Data are mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ##P < 0.01, and &&P < 0.01. For the antibiotic experiment [(B) to (G)], statistical 
significance was determined by one-­way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. For the KCZ experiment [(I) to (N)], comparisons between the two groups 
were performed using a Student’s t test.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
8 of 17
Fig. 5. IPA mimics the neuroprotective effects of IF. Human data: (A) Workflow for collection and processing of samples. (B) Fecal IPA concentrations (n = 9 to 11). 
(C) Serum IPA concentrations (n = 9 to 11). Correlation between serum IPA and (D) MoCA or (E) MMSE scores. For IPA (gavage) experiment: (F) Schematic of the IPA treat-
ment (n = 6). (G) Primary latency in Barnes maze acquisition trials (n = 6). (H) Discrimination index in the novel object recognition (NOR) test (n = 6). (I) Hippocampal TNFα 
mRNA expression (n = 4). (J) Representative immunofluorescence of Aβ plaques in the piriform cortex and CA1 region of the hippocampus (n = 3 slices per group). Scale 
bar, 100 μm. (K and L) Aβ plaque density (number of plaques per square micrometer) in the CA1 region of the hippocampus and piriform cortex. For the C.S. WT or C.S. 
△fldC recolonization experiment: (M) Schematic of the treatment with vancomycin and C.S. WT or C.S. △fldC (n = 10). The content of IPA in the (N) culture medium (n = 3) 
and (O) mouse serum (n = 9 to 10). (P) Discrimination index in the NOR test (n = 9 to 10). (Q) Representative immunofluorescence images of Aβ plaques in the piriform 
cortex and CA1 region of the hippocampus (n = 3 slices per group). Scale bar, 200 μm. (R) The spontaneous alternation of the Y-­maze test (n = 9 to 10). (S and T) Aβ plaque 
density (number of plaques per square micrometer) in the CA1 region of the hippocampus and piriform cortex. Data are mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01. For human 
data [(B) and (C)], significance was determined by one-­way ANOVA with Tukey’s test. For the IPA gavage experiment [(G) to (L)], a two-­way ANOVA with Tukey’s test was 
used. For the C. sporogenes colonization experiment [(N) to (T)], a Student’s t test was used for comparisons between the two groups.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
9 of 17
IPA attenuates neuroinflammation by activating PXR
To confirm that IPA can penetrate the BBB (30), we conducted dynam-
ic experiments and observed detectable IPA levels in the brain within 
1 hour postinjection, peaking at the same time (fig. S7, A and B). Simi-
larly, serum IPA levels also peaked 1 hour postinjection (fig. S7C).
We performed intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injections of KCZ to 
block the IPA’s receptor, PXR, in the hippocampus. Nine-­month-­old 
male 5×FAD mice were then treated with IPA (20 mg/kg per day, in-
traperitoneally) for 14 days, following a 3-­day vancomycin regimen 
to deplete gut bacteria primarily responsible for IPA production 
(fig. S7D). The NOR and Y-­maze tests demonstrated that IPA treat-
ment significantly alleviated cognitive dysfunction in AD mice (fig. S7, 
E and F). However, KCZ (i.c.v.) injections nullified the cognitive ben-
efits of IPA treatment. In addition, KCZ abolished IPA’s protective 
effects against Aβ accumulation in the hippocampus and piriform 
cortex (fig. S7, H to J) and reversed IPA-­mediated down-­regulation of 
TNFα, COX2, and Bace-­1 mRNA expression in the brain (fig. S7, G, K, 
and L). KCZ injection did not affect serum IPA levels (fig. S7M) but 
suppressed the mRNA expression of Mdr1a/b and Cyp3a11, thereby 
inhibiting PXR activation (fig. S7, N to P). Thus, these results further 
confirmed that IPA could penetrate the BBB and suppress neuroin-
flammation by activating PXR in neurons.
IPA suppresses NFκB/Bace-­1 activation by activating PXR 
in neurons
To determine the cell type–specific localization of PXR in the brain, 
we performed double immunofluorescent staining of PXR and neu-
ronal cell markers, including neuron-­specific nuclear protein (NeuN; 
an neuron-­specific marker), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; an 
astrocyte-­specific marker), or IBA-­1 (a microglia-­specific marker) in 
the mouse brain. The staining results indicated that PXR was only 
highly expressed in NeuN+ neurons, but not in GFAP+ astrocytes and 
IBA-­1+ microglia (fig. S8A). On the basis of the above findings and to 
further delineate the cell type specificity of IPA’s function, we con-
structed an adeno-­associated virus (AAV) in which an PXR-­targeting 
short hairpin RNA (shRNA) was expressed under the control of 
the hSyn promoter (PXR-­shRNA) and used it to specifically knock 
down PXR expression in neurons of 9-­month-­old male 5×FAD mice 
(Fig. 6A). As shown in fig. S8 (B and C), the AAV successfully in-
fected the neurons in the hippocampus and decreased the effective 
expression of PXR in neurons. Consistent with the results of KCZ 
i.c.v. injection, hippocampal delivery of PXR-­shRNA abolished the 
protective effects of IPA on cognitive impairment (Fig. 6, B and C) 
and Aβ accumulation in AD mice (Fig. 6, D to F). Moreover, IPA 
markedly reduced both mRNA and protein levels of Bace-­1 in the 
hippocampus of AD mice, which was effectively reversed by PXR-­
shRNA intervention (Fig. 6, G and I). IPA also up-­regulated the ex-
pression of Cyp3a11 and Mdr1, downstream of PXR (Fig. 6, L to M, 
and fig. S8D). However, these effects were similarly abrogated follow-
ing PXR deficiency in neurons. As shown in Fig. 6N, IPA significant-
ly lowered the phosphorylated nuclear factor κB (p-­NFκB)/NFκB 
ratio and reduced the mRNA expression of TNFα and COX2 in the 
hippocampus of AD mice (Fig. 6O and fig. S8E). However, the anti-­
inflammatory effects of IPA were attenuated in PXR-­deficient mice. 
Inhibition of NFκB phosphorylation has been reported to reduce 
Bace-­1 activity and subsequently decrease Aβ deposition in the brains 
of AD mice (31, 32). These findings suggest that IPA may attenuate 
Aβ production by suppressing NFκB activation and Bace-­1 expres-
sion, predominantly within neurons.
We found that serum TNFα levels were significantly elevated in 
individuals with AD, consistent with an enhanced neuroinflamma-
tory state (fig. S9A). On the basis of the above findings, to further 
confirm the concurrent inhibitory effects of IPA on NFκB phosphor-
ylation and Bace-­1 expression, we used a TNFα (20 ng/ml)–induced 
neuroinflammation model in SH-­SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells 
to examine whether IPA could inhibit Bace-­1 expression. We found 
that IPA attenuated TNFα (20 ng/ml)–induced down-­regulation of 
Mdr1, the increased p-­NFκB/NFκB ratio, and up-­regulation of Bace-
­1 expression in SH-­SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells (fig. S9, D to 
G). Furthermore, we performed a model by (i.c.v.) injection of TNFα 
into the hippocampus of C57BL/6J mice, after intraperitoneal ad-
ministration of IPA (Fig. 6P). Y-­maze test results showed that IPA 
injection before surgery significantly increased the spontaneous ex-
ploration rate in TNFα-­treated mice (Fig. 6Q). IPA also up-­regulated 
the mRNA expression of Mdr1b (Fig. 6R) and down-­regulated the 
content of TNFα and the expression of Bace-­1 in the hippocampus 
(Fig. 6S and fig. S9H). Thus, these results further confirmed that IPA 
suppresses NFκB activation and inhibits Bace-­1 expression through 
neuronal PXR activation, thereby reducing Aβ accumulation and 
improving cognitive impairment in mice. This mechanism may pro-
vide insight into how IPA down-­regulates Aβ accumulation and re-
verses cognitive dysfunction.
DISCUSSION
Here, we observed that IF enhanced cognitive function and spatial 
memory, concurrently attenuating Aβ accumulation in the piriform 
cortex and hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice. IF notably modified gene 
expression related to autophagy, synaptic plasticity, and cognitive 
function in the hippocampus of AD mice. In addition, IF enhanced 
gut barrier integrity, altered the gut microbiome, and subsequently 
augmented the production of neuroprotective microbial metabolites. 
Our integrated analysis of gene expression, gut microbiome, and me-
tabolites suggests that 16 weeks of IF ameliorated cognitive deficits in 
AD mice, primarily through the gut-­brain axis, with IPA potentially 
being a crucial microbial metabolite. Pseudo germ-­free mice were 
used to further demonstrate a pivotal function of gut microbiota in 
regulating the neuroprotective effects of IF in AD mice. Blocking the 
IPA receptor PXR also nullified the neuroprotective effects of IF. Hu-
man data revealed reduced IPA levels in patients with MCI and AD 
relative to healthy individuals. Supplementation of IPA and IPA-­
producing bacteria C. sporogenes could mimic IF’s effects, but block-
ing the PXR in the brain or knocking of the IPA-­producing gene fldC 
in the C. sporogenes also eliminated these effects. IPA could penetrate 
the BBB, and IPA may have neuroprotective effects due to its anti-­
inflammatory properties, according to TNFα (i.c.v.) injection experi-
ment. Therefore, these results suggest that IF protects against cognitive 
dysfunction in AD by altering the composition of the gut microbiota, 
in which IPA is a pivotal metabolite.
In addition to the above findings, aside from genetic factors, envi-
ronmental factors, such as diet, can also influence AD development 
(4). Prior research has demonstrated that IF enhances spatial learn-
ing and memory across different transgenic AD mouse models, in-
cluding APP mutant, 3xTgAD, and APP/PS1 mice (10, 13, 16, 33). 
We observed a significant improvement in the cognitive function of 
APP/PS1 mice following IF treatment, as measured by behavioral 
tests (Fig. 1). Despite some resistance and controversy surrounding 
the “amyloid cascade hypothesis,” Aβ’s involvement in the onset and 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
10 of 17
Fig. 6. IPA attenuates neuroinflammation via activating PXR. For PXR-­shRNA (i.c.v.) experiment: (A) Schematic of the treatment with PXR-­shRNA (i.c.v.) and IPA in each 
group (n = 8). (B) Discrimination index in the NOR test and (C) spontaneous alternation in the Y-­maze test (n = 7 to 8), SCM-­shRNA, mice were treated with AAV-­scrambled 
shRNA (negative control). (D and F) Quantification of Aβ plaque density in the CA1 region and piriform cortex (plaques per square micrometer). (E) Representative im-
munofluorescence images of Aβ plaques in CA1 (n = 3 slices per group). Scale bars, 200 μm. (G) Quantification of the Western blot of Bace-­1 protein levels relative to 
glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) in the hippocampus (n = 3). (H) Representative Western blot of Bace-­1, Cyp3a11, Mdr1, p-­NFκB, NFκB, and GAPDH 
protein levels in the hippocampus (n = 3). (I) The mRNA levels of Bace-­1 in the hippocampus (n = 4 to 5). (J and K) Quantification of the Western blot of Cyp3a11 and Mdr1 
protein levels relative to GAPDH in the hippocampus (n = 3). (L and M) The mRNA levels of Cyp3a11 and Mdr1b in the hippocampus (n = 4 to 5). (N) Quantification of the 
Western blot of p-­NFκB protein levels relative to NFκB in the hippocampus (n = 3). (O) The mRNA levels of TNFα in the hippocampus (n = 4 to 5). For TNFα (i.c.v.) experi-
ment: (P) Schematic of the treatment with TNFα (i.c.v.) and IPA in each group (n = 7 to 8). (Q) The spontaneous alternation of the Y-­maze test (n = 7 to 8). (R) The mRNA 
levels of Cyp3a11 in the hippocampus (n = 6). (S) TNFα content in the hippocampus (n = 6). Data are mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01. For the PXR-­shRNA and TNFα 
injection experiments, which involved comparisons across four groups [(B) to (D), (G), (I) to (O), and (Q) to (S)], statistical significance was determined by one-­way ANOVA 
followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
11 of 17
progression of AD is well documented (34). Furthermore, increased 
levels of Aβ and highly phosphorylated tau proteins are recognized 
as significant biomarkers and predictors of early-­stage dementia (35). 
Our findings indicated that IF might attenuate excessive Aβ accumu-
lation in the piriform cortex and hippocampal CA1 regions of AD 
mice while significantly decreasing APP expression in the hippo-
campus (Fig. 1). IF’s reduction of Aβ deposition in AD mouse brains 
suggests its potential benefits in AD prevention. Accumulation of Aβ 
in the brain is caused by an imbalance in the production and clear-
ance of Aβ, and autophagy is an important mechanism of Aβ clearing 
(36). We observed an increase in autophagy-­related gene expression, 
such as ZFYVE1, Lamp2, and Foxo6, in the hippocampus of AD mice 
following IF (Fig. 2). This finding may partly explain the beneficial 
effects of IF on Aβ deposition. Moreover, IF up-­regulated the expres-
sion of Gadd45b, a regulator of neurogenesis, as well as Ap3d1 and 
Cpt1c (Fig. 2) (37). Our study revealed that IF significantly preserved 
the ultrastructure of synapses in hippocampal neurons and increased 
the expression of genes related to synaptic plasticity, such as PSD-­95 
and Ap3d1 (38).
Gut dysbiosis and increased intestinal permeability are implicated 
in neuroinflammatory responses within the central nervous system 
(CNS) and an increased risk of AD (39, 40). Studies suggest that gut 
dysbiosis exacerbates neuroinflammation in neuronal C/EBPβ trans-
genic mouse models (41). Dietary interventions, such as caloric re-
striction (CR) and IF, have been shown to mitigate Aβ accumulation in 
AD mice, an effect partly attributable to alterations in gut microbiota 
composition (16, 42). Our prior studies indicated that IF may prevent 
diabetes-­associated cognitive decline by modulating gut microbiome 
composition and metabolic functions (9). Consistently, our findings 
reveal that IF significantly alters the relative abundance of cognitively 
associated bacteria, including Lactobacillus, Corynebacterium, and 
Allobaculum (Fig. 3 and fig. S2). Lactobacillus has been demonstrated 
to mediate the anti-­inflammatory and metabolic benefits of both long-­
term and short-­term CR (43, 44). Lactobacillus supplementation miti-
gated cognitive dysfunction and corrected abnormal fear memory 
in an animal model of autism (45) and enhanced spatial memory and 
learning in postoperative neurocognitive disorders (46). In addition, 
oral probiotics containing Lactobacillus reuteri enhanced spatial mem-
ory, diminished Aβ plaque burden, and lowered inflammatory mark-
ers IL-­1β and TNFα in AD rats subjected to intrahippocampal Aβ1–40 
injections (47). Conversely, IF was associated with a down-­regulation 
of Butyricimonas and Allobaculum levels (Fig. 3). Recent studies have 
indicated a negative correlation between the relative abundance of 
Butyricimonas and human cognitive ability (48). However, in our pre-
vious research, Allobaculum was reduced in IF-­treated diabetic mice 
(9). Removal of gut microbiota with ABx treatment (Fig. 4) signifi-
cantly abolished the beneficial effects of IF on AD. Of note, a reduction 
in cerebral Aβ accumulation was observed in ad libitum–fed AD mice 
that received ABx treatment, which may be associated with decreased 
hippocampal TNFα expression (Fig. 4). Similarly, previous work has 
shown that long-­term administration of broad-­spectrum combinato-
rial or single antibiotics lessens Aβ plaque deposition, likely through 
diminishing harmful bacteria and neuroinflammation in AD mice 
(49, 50). Thus, these results suggest that IF prevents cognitive dysfunc-
tion in AD by modulating the gut microbiota composition. Future 
research should explore potential probiotics derived from healthy in-
dividuals or engineered to simulate the effects of dietary restrictions 
and use optimized fecal microbiota transplantation methods to inves-
tigate the potential role of microbial interventions in improving AD.
Integrated multiomics analysis reveals that IPA is the key me-
tabolite affected by IF treatment. IPA, a tryptophan-­derived micro-
bial metabolite previously mentioned, is widely reported to have 
neuroprotective effects. The production of IPA is associated with 
the presence of specific gut microbiota, particularly C. sporogenes 
(29, 51). Lactobacillus species, including L. reuteri and Lactobacillus 
johnsonii, can also metabolize intestinal tryptophan into indole-­3-­
lactic acid (ILA), which serves as a key precursor for IPA syn-
thesis by C. sporogenes (51). Therefore, the IF-­induced increase in 
Lactobacillus may promote IPA production by supplying more ILA 
substrate to C. sporogenes. Whether Corynebacterium, Allobaculum, 
or Butyricimonas influence C. sporogenes or other IPA-­producing 
bacteria through cross-­feeding interactions within the gut microbiota 
remains unclear and warrants further investigation to clarify these 
complex relationships. Recent studies suggest that IPA alleviates Aβ 
fibril formation and propose it as a candidate for treating metabolic 
disorders by lowering fasting blood glucose and reducing insulin 
resistance (23, 52). IPA has been found to reduce proinflammatory 
cytokine levels in lipopolysaccharide-­activated astrocytes (53). Our 
earlier study demonstrated that IPA supplementation could replicate 
IF’s beneficial effects in an animal model of diabetes-­associated cog-
nitive dysfunction. A recent human study revealed that probiotic 
treatment can enhance IPA production, elevate brain-­derived neu-
rotrophic factor expression, and reduce neuroinflammation (25). 
Several in vivo and in vitro studies have also shown that IPA can 
down-­regulate the NFκB pathway, subsequently suppressing inflam-
matory cytokines such as TNFα (24, 29, 46, 54). Bace-­1 cleavesAPP 
to generate Aβ, a key component of neuritic plaques in AD brains 
(55). Inhibition of NFκB phosphorylation has been reported to re-
duce Bace-­1 activity and decrease Aβ accumulation in the brains of 
AD mice (30, 31). Notably, in a 5×FAD transgenic mouse model, 
alternate-­day fasting worsened neuroinflammation and increased 
TNFα protein levels (33). Consistently, we found that either IPA 
alone or C. sporogenes, an IPA-­producing bacterium, could replicate 
IF’s beneficial effects in AD mice. These effects were nullified by PXR 
inhibitors and neuron-­specific knockout of PXR, the receptor for 
IPA. The knockout also down-­regulated the NFκB pathway and 
Bace-­1 expression in AD mice. These data suggest that IPA is the 
critical metabolite mediating IF’s beneficial effects on AD. In addi-
tion, we performed a dose-­response study of IPA in a TNFα-­induced 
acute neuroinflammation model, revealing that IPA’s ameliorative 
effects on cognitive impairment and neuroinflammation are dose 
dependent. Notably, the dose of 20 mg/kg effectively activated PXR 
downstream targets and reduced the expression of inflammatory 
markers and Bace-­1 [see fig. S10 (A to J)]. At the same time, KCZ can 
inhibit other enzymes, such as cyclosporine oxidase; therefore, it re-
mains unclear whether IPA can bind to other receptors and exert its 
beneficial effects on AD. Our recent work also established that, com-
pared to time-­restricted feeding and intermittent energy restriction, 
alternate-­day fasting aggravated dextran sulfate sodium–induced 
colitis and inflammation in a chronic colitis mouse model (56). The 
disparity in findings underscores the need for further research to elu-
cidate IF regimen effects across various animal models and human 
trials. Supplementation with probiotics or key metabolites could po-
tentially emulate the benefits of dietary restriction more effectively 
than IF alone. Notably, participants in alternate-­day fasting studies 
reported irritability on fasting days (57), potentially limiting its clini-
cal use. It may be preferable to adopt more moderate and sustainable 
time-­restricted fasting in the future.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
12 of 17
In summary, this study reveals that IF significantly enhances cogni-
tive function in AD mice, concomitant with reduced Aβ accumulation 
and neuroinflammation in the CNS. The cognitive benefits of IF in AD 
may stem from the gut-­brain axis, whereby IF modifies the gut micro-
biome and boosts metabolite production, like IPA, preventing neuro-
inflammation and Aβ buildup in the CNS. These findings strongly 
support the potential for therapeutic and nonpharmacological nutri-
tional interventions in AD and other neurodegenerative disorders.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human study
In collaboration with Peking University Shenzhen School of Medi-
cine’s Neurology Department, participants, upon admission, under-
go the following assessments: (i) MMSE and MoCA to evaluate 
comprehensive cognitive function; (ii) a medical interview to con-
firm medical history and current medication use; (iii) the analysis of 
the four cerebrospinal fluid components (including Aβ1-­40, Aβ1-­42, 
t-­Tau, and p-­Tau, voluntary participation), which serve as the diag-
nostic basis for physicians in diagnosing AD; (iv) positron emission 
tomography–computed tomography (PET-­CT) scans (encompass-
ing Aβ-­PET and Tau-­PET, voluntary participation), as a diagnostic 
reference for physicians in diagnosing AD; (v) the analysis of AD 
blood biomarkers (including Aβ1-­40, Aβ1-­42, p-­Tau, and others, 
voluntary participation), to further assist physicians in diagnosing 
AD. On the basis of the data results and following the diagnostic 
criteria of the National Institute of Neurological and Communica-
tive Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related 
Disorders Association, the patients are classified as follows:
1) Health (n = 10, MoCA ≥ 26 or MMSE ≥ 27);
2) AD (n = 8, individuals with abnormalities in the cerebrospinal 
fluid analysis, PET-­CT scans, or blood biomarkers) or probable AD 
(n = 1, CT scan can provide evidence of brain atrophy);
3) MCI (n = 11; Because of the absence of results from cerebro-
spinal fluid analysis, PET-­CT scans, or AD blood biomarkers, it is 
not possible to make a further diagnosis of AD, MoCA = 19 to 25 or 
MMSE = 21 to 26).
The gender, age, and level of education of the selected participants 
are presented in table S4. Exclusion criteria for patients in this study 
include: (i) a history of inflammatory bowel disease, carbohydrate 
malabsorption, hormonal imbalances, known allergies to food addi-
tives, or any other serious medical conditions; (ii) a history of gastro-
intestinal or cranial surgery; (iii) presence of parasitic infections; (iv) 
suicidal ideation, self-­harm, or aggressive behavior; (v) use of medi-
cations known to affect gastrointestinal function, blood pressure, 
lipid levels, hormone supplements, allergy or asthma medications, 
proton pump inhibitors, or over-­the-­counter drugs; (vi) use of probi-
otics, antibiotics, or prebiotics (dietary fiber and oligosaccharides) in 
the 8 weeks before the study, alcohol, or drug abuse; (vii) cognitive 
impairment following various surgeries or a history of significant 
trauma; (viii) a history of cerebrovascular disease, brain tumors, or 
cognitive impairment caused by other primary brain lesions. This 
study has received approval from the Institutional Review Board at 
Peking University Shenzhen Hospital (research ethics committee of 
Beijing university Shenzhen hospital, no. 2023-­108). All participants 
must provide written consent before engaging in the study. If a par-
ticipant is legally incapacitated, then written consent must be ob-
tained from their designated legal custodian.
Animals
All animals were single-­housed with a constant temperature of 22° ± 
2°C and a relative humidity of 55 ± 5% under a 12/12-­hour light-­
dark cycles (lights on at 8:00 a.m.) in the facility of Northwest A&F 
University. The animal test protocol follows the guidelines for the 
care and use of laboratory animals (eighth edition, ISBN-­10: 0-­309-­
15, 396-­4) and was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of 
Northwest A&F University (ethics no. XN2023-­0610).
APPswe/PSEN1dE9 (APP/PS1) double-­transgenic mice and age-­
matched WT littermates, on a B6C3-­Tg background, were purchased 
from Model Animal Research Center of Nanjing University (Nanjing, 
China) and bred in the Northwest A&F University animal facility. 
APP and Presenilin1 (PSEN1) are regarded as causative genes for 
AD. The male 5×FAD-­transgenic mice (stock no. 006554) on a con-
genic C57BL6 background were provided by the Jackson Laboratory 
(Bar Harbor, ME, USA).
IF treatment
Four-­month-­old WT or APP/PS1 mice (male and female) random-
ly divided into ad libitum or IF diet groups, including WT + ad li-
bitum (WT mice, n = 20), WT + IF (WT mice with IF treatment, 
n = 20), AD + ad libitum (APP/PS1 mice, n = 20), and AD + IF 
(APP/PS1 mice with IF treatment, n = 20) for 16 weeks. The IF 
protocol comprised a day with enough food followed by a day of 
complete fasting. Food (AIN-­93M, TROPHIC Animal Feed High-­
tech Co. Ltd. Nantong, China) was provided or removed every day 
at 9:00 a.m., with water supplied ad libitum. Mice were measured 
for body weight and food intake every 2 days and weekly for wa-
ter intake.
Antibiotic administration
The set of 4-­month-­old animals in the validation test were divided 
into six groups: WT + ad libitum (n = 5), WT + ad libitum + ABx 
(n = 5), AD + ad libitum (n = 4), AD + ad libitum + ABx (n = 5), 
AD + IF (n = 5), and AD + IF + ABx (n = 4). The IF regimen was 
the same as the aforementioned sets. Antibiotic cocktail [penicillin 
G sodium (1 g/liter), metronidazole (1 g/liter), neomycin sulfate 
(1 g/liter), streptomycin sulfate (1 g/liter), and vancomycin hydro-
chloride (0.5 g/liter)] was given in the drinking water starting 14 days 
before the IF regimen and throughout the experiment.
KCZ (intraperitoneal) injection
A cohort of 10-­month-­old male APP/PS1 mice underwent stratifi-
cation into two distinct groups. One of these cohorts underwent 
intraperitoneal administration of KCZ (MedChemExpress) at a 
concentration of 1 mg per 1 ml of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) over 
a 6-­week period, equating to 0.05 mg/kg per day (n = 7). Con-
comitantly, the control group of mice received intraperitoneal in-
jections of DMSO (n = 7). It is noteworthy that throughout this 
period, both cohorts of APP/PS1 mice were concurrently subjected 
to IF treatment.
IPA (gavage) treatment
Five-­month-­old WT and APP/PS1 mice were administered IPA 
(Sigma-­Aldrich) via gavage at a concentration of 2.5 mg per 1 ml of 
phosphate-­buffered saline (PBS; n = 6), corresponding to a dosage 
of 20 mg/kg per day, over a span of 6 weeks. In parallel, the control 
group received PBS (n = 6).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
13 of 17
C. sporogenes and fldC-­mutant C. sporogenes recolonization
The phenylactyl-­CoA dehydratase β-­subunit (fldC) gene is pivotal 
for IPA synthesis in C. sporogenes ATCC15579 (C.s.) (American 
Type Culture Collection, USA). A fldC-­mutant C.s. (C.s. △fldC) was 
obtained from D. Dodd at Stanford University School of Medicine. 
Both C.s. WT and C.s. △fldC were cultivated under strict anaerobic 
conditions and suspended in PBS at a concentration of 1 × 1011 colony-­
forming units (CFU).
For the study, 7-­month-­old 5×FAD mice underwent a 3-­day pre-
treatment of vancomycin in their drinking water. Subsequently, they 
were orally gavaged with either C.s. WT or C.s. △fldC strains at a 
daily dosage of 1 × 1010 CFU for 28 days (n = 10 per group) (22).
KCZ stereotaxic surgery
Using a stereotactic injection apparatus, KCZ was injected into the 
hippocampus of 9-­month-­old 5×FAD mice. The KCZ solution was 
prepared at 10 mg/ml in DMSO. Injection coordinates were set at 
medial/lateral (M/L) = 1.2 mm, anterior/posterior (A/P) = −2.0 mm, 
dorsal/ventral (D/V) = −2.5 mm. Each mouse received a 2-­μl dose 
at a controlled rate of 0.2 μl/min. After the injection, a 10-­min wait 
allowed for KCZ diffusion. The injection site was sealed with sterile 
bone wax, and the scalp incision was sutured. In the sham surgery 
group, a 2-­μl aliquot of DMSO was injected.
After surgery, each mouse received a 100-­μl intraperitoneal injec-
tion of ceftriaxone [saline solution (0.5 mg/ml)]. Three days later, the 
mice were either exposed to a 14-­day regimen of IPA treatment or left 
untreated. IPA was delivered via intraperitoneal injection at a concen-
tration of 2.5 mg/ml in PBS, equivalent to 20 mg/kg per day. In con-
trast, the control group received PBS injections (n = 10 per group).
PXR-­shRNA stereotaxic surgery
To further elucidate the role of PXR in IPA-­mediated cognitive 
function in AD mice, we designed an shRNA interference fragment 
targeting PXR. This PXR-­shRNA fragment was constructed into 
an AAV vector, pAAV-­hSyn-­EGFP-­3xFLAG-­WPRE, enabling PXR 
gene knockdown in neuronal cells, with the target sequence: 5′- 
­CACAACTTTCTCCCACTTCAA-­3′. The AAV-­expressing PXR-­
shRNA was injected into the hippocampus of 9-­month-­old 5×FAD 
mice via i.c.v. injection. The injection coordinates and postoperative 
care were consistent with the KCZ (i.c.v.) protocol. Three days postin-
jection, mice received either IPA or PBS intervention for 14 days 
(20 mg/kg per day, intraperitoneally) (n = 8 per group). Mice were 
euthanized after 3 weeks of IPA or PBS intervention and behavioral 
testing following shRNA-­PXR (i.c.v.) treatment.
TNFα stereotaxic surgery
After a single intraperitoneal injection of either PBS or IPA (5 or 10 or 
20 mg/kg) to 9-­month-­old C57BL/6J mice for 1 hour, we used cerebral 
stereotaxy to deliver a one-­time TNFα (MedChemExpress) or saline in-
jection directly into the hippocampus. Injection coordinates were pre-
cisely set at M/L = 1.2 mm, A/P = −2.0 mm, D/V = −2.5 mm. Each 
mouse received a 2-­μl infusion of TNFα solution (25 mg/ml in saline) at 
a controlled rate of 0.2 μl/min. Following the injection, a 10-­min obser-
vation period was observed before needle withdrawal, and the incisions 
were sutured. After a 4-­hour rest, the mice were assessed in the Y-­maze.
Biodistribution study of IPA
At 2 months of age, C57BL/6J mice were divided into two groups: 
one group received intraperitoneal IPA injections (20 mg/kg per 
day, n = 16), and the other group received PBS injections (n = 16). 
Four mice from each group were anesthetized at 0, 1, 2, and 4 hours 
postinjection. After perfusion with physiological saline, IPA levels 
in both whole brain and serum were measured (n = 4 per group).
Bacterial strains and culture conditions
C.s. WT and C.s. △fldC were cultivated in GAM medium with a 
uniform inoculum of 1 × 106 CFU and then cultured at 37°C for 
72 hours. IPA was detected in the medium supernatant of C.s. fldC 
by high-­performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Cell culture
The SH-­SY5Y human neuroblastoma cell line was purchased from 
the National Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (Shanghai, 
China). Cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/
F12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin-­
streptomycin, and 1% nonessential amino acids (Procell Life Science 
and Technology Co., China) and cultured at 37°C in a humidified 
incubator with 5% CO₂.
SH-­SY5Y cells were seeded in six-­well plates and pretreated with 
either KCZ (10 μM) or an equivalent volume of DMSO for 1 hour. 
Subsequently, cells were exposed to IPA (5 μM) or vehicle control. 
After 6 hours, TNFα (20 ng/ml in PBS) was added to induce an in-
flammatory response, and incubation continued for an additional 
6 hours. Following treatment, cells were harvested for total RNA or 
protein extraction.
HPLC analysis: Fecal sample extraction
A total of 0.1 g of feces was dissolved in 1 ml of methanol and incu-
bated at 40°C for 20 min with gentle agitation every 5 min. Afterward, 
the mixture was chilled at −20°C for 20 min and then centrifuged at 
12,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min, and the resulting supernatant was fil-
tered through a 0.22-­μm microporous membrane (organic phase).
HPLC analysis: Serum sample extraction
Sixty μl of serum was diluted with prechilled methanol (−20°C) to a 
total volume of 300 μl. After diluting with methanol, the serum was 
placed at −20°C for a 20-­min incubation period. The samples were 
then centrifuged and then filtered (as in fecal sample extraction).
HPLC analysis: Brain tissue sample extraction
Within the weighed brain tissue, 500 μl of physiological saline was add-
ed and homogenized, and then 10 min of ultrasound was performed. 
The homogenates were then centrifuged at 4°C and 10,000  rpm for 
10 min. Two hundred microliters of the supernatant was mixed with 
200 μl of prechilled methanol and subjected it to 5 min of ultrasound. 
Finally, the samples were centrifuged and filtered, following the same 
procedure as for fecal sample extraction.
HPLC analysis
The supernatant was filtered and immediately subjected to HPLC 
(LC-­16; Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) after centrifugation (14,000g, 10 min, 
4°C). For IPA analysis, 10 μl of each sample was injected into a chro-
matograph with a C18 column (Agilent, 4.6 mm by 250 mm, 5 μm) 
and a fluorescence detector (excitation wavelength/emission wave-
length: 282/352 nm) at a column temperature of 30°C. A flow rate of 
1.0 ml/min was used with a gradient elution of deionized water 
(mobile phase A) and 15 mM NAH2PO4 (mobile phase B) as fol-
lows: 0 to 12 min, 42% A; 12 to 28 min, 50% A; 28 to 35 min, 85% A.
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
14 of 17
Western blot
Protein expression levels in the hippocampus and SH-­SY5Y cells 
were quantified using the Protein Simple Jess system (Protein Sim-
ple, USA). Total tissue proteins were extracted from samples of three 
mice per group using extraction kits (PL001, ZhongHuiHeCai Bio-
technology, China). Protein concentrations were measured with the 
BCA Protein Assay Kit (A55864, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). 
Protein samples were first prepared by diluting with a sample buffer, 
followed by mixing with a master mix. The resulting mixture was 
heated at 95°C for 5 min to achieve complete denaturation. A total of 
3 μl of denatured protein, chemiluminescent substrate, primary anti-
body, and horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibody 
were then added to the appropriate wells of the assay plate. A biotinyl-
ated protein ladder (12 to 230 kDa) was incorporated into each assay 
as a molecular weight reference. The plates and capillaries were subse-
quently placed in the Jess system for automated protein electropho-
resis, blocking, antibody incubation, and chemiluminescent signal 
detection. Data analysis was performed using Compass software (Pro-
tein Simple, USA). The following primary antibodies were used for the 
Western blot analysis: rabbit anti-­phospho-­NFκB (1:50; Cell Signaling 
Technology, #3033), rabbit anti-­NFκB (1:50; Cell Signaling Technolo-
gy, #8242), rabbit anti-­Mdr1 (1:50; Cell Signaling Technology, #13978), 
mouse anti-­Cyp3a11 (1:50; Abcam, ab22724), rabbit anti–Bace-­1 
(1:50; Abcam, ab183612), and rabbit anti–glyceraldehyde phosphate 
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (1:50; Cell Signaling Technology, #2118).
16S rRNA microbiome sequencing
Fecal samples were collected in a clean environment, and total cellu-
lar DNA was extracted with the E.Z.N.A. Stool DNA Kit (Omega, 
Norcross, GA, USA) according to the company’s instructions. The 
bacterial hypervariable V3-­V4 region of 16S rRNA was chosen for 
MiSeq (Illumina, CA, USA) paired-­end 300-­bp amplicon analysis us-
ing primers 341_F (5′-­ CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-­3′) and 802_R 
(5′-­ TACNVGGGTATCTAATCC-­3′). Library preparation followed 
a published method (9). The raw reads were merged and trimmed, 
chimeras were removed, and zero-­radius zOTUs with UNOISE was 
implemented in Search (v2.6.0). The greengenes (13.8) 16S rRNA 
gene database was used as a reference for annotation.
A Kruskal-­Wallis test assessed IF’s impact on microbial species 
diversity. Community richness and diversity were evaluated using 
Chao1, ACE, Shannon, and Simpson indices. Principal coordinate 
analysis (PCoA) was applied to analyze gut microbiota composition, 
considering weighted and unweighted UniFrac distances and Bray-­
Curtis dissimilarity. Permutational multivariate ANOVA (Adonis) 
with 9999 permutations and analysis of similarities were used to 
gauge the IF’s effect on PCoA β diversity scores. To pinpoint micro-
bial taxa affected by IF, we used PLS-­DA within a variable selection 
(VS) framework, using autoscaled microbiota abundance data. This 
analysis discriminated AD and WT mouse groups from IF-­treated 
groups (AD + IF and WT + IF), the AD mouse group from the AD + 
IF group, and the WT mouse group from the WT + IF group, as de-
scribed in (58). We further assessed IF-­induced changes in the rela-
tive abundance of bacteria selected by VS-­PLS-­DA using ANOVA, 
considering sex (females and males) and genotype (APP/PS1 and 
WT). Significance was determined with a false discovery rate (FDR) 
threshold of P < 0.05. For functional gene predictions, rarified OTU 
data were used with PICRUSt (v1.1.3). Predicted genes were anno-
tated at various KEGG levels, and significantly enriched pathways 
were identified using edgeR with an FDR threshold of P < 0.1.
Untargeted plasma metabolomics
All samples were analyzed in a single batch using a 1290 Infinity se-
ries UHPLC System (Agilent Technologies) with a UPLC BEH Am-
ide column (2.1 mm by 100 mm, 1.7 μm, Waters). The mobile phase 
consisted of 25 mM ammonium acetate and 25 mM ammonia hy-
droxide in water (pH 9.75) (A) and acetonitrile (B). The following 
elution gradient was used: 0 to 0.5 min, 95% B; 0.5 to 7.0 min, 95 to 
65% B; 7.0 to 8.0 min, 65 to 40% B; 8.0 to 9.0 min, 40% B; 9.0 to 9.1 min, 
40 to 95% B; 9.1 to 12.0 min, 95% B. The column temperature was 
25°C, and the autosampler temperature was 4°C, with a 2-­μl injec-
tion volume. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were ac-
quired using the TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) in 
an information-­dependent manner. The acquisition software, Ana-
lyst TF 1.7 (AB Sciex), continuously assessed the full scan survey MS 
data, triggering the acquisition of MS/MS spectra based on specific 
criteria. In each cycle, the 12 most intense precursor ions with inten-
sities above 100 were selected for MS/MS analysis at a collision energy 
of 30 eV, with a cycle time of 0.56 s. Electrospray ionization source 
conditions included gas 1 at 60 psi, gas 2 at 60 psi, curtain gas at 
35 psi, source temperature at 600°C, declustering potential at 60 V, 
and ion spray voltage floating at 5000 V or −4000 V in positive or 
negative modes, respectively.
MS raw data (.wiff) files were converted to mzXML using Prote-
oWizard and processed with XCMS (version 3.2) for peak deconvo-
lution, alignment, and integration. Parameters were set at Minfrac 
0.5 and a cutoff of 0.3. An in-­house MS/MS database was used for 
identification. We quantified 1936 and 1887 metabolite features for 
reverse phase chromatography (RP)+ and RP−, respectively. These 
were analyzed using VS-­PLS-­DA and ANOVA to study the IF’s im-
pact on the plasma metabolome. Relevant pathways were identified 
with MetaboAnalyst (59).
Integrated multiomics analysis
Multivariate predictive modeling on each omic dataset was conducted 
using PLS-­DA incorporated into a repeated double cross-­validations 
framework (rdCV-­PLS-­DA). To gain a robust and reliable estimate of 
model performance, 200 repetitions of the outer cross-­validations 
loop were performed, followed by permutation analysis (n = 1000). 
A multivariate dimension reduction method, DIABLO, was used for 
multiple omic integration (60, 61). Random use of a full design matrix 
was used to identify linear combinations of variables from each omic 
dataset that were maximally correlated. A tuning procedure was used 
to determine the optimal number of key variables in each dataset to be 
selected with a minimum misclassification rate. Model performance 
was then evaluated by 10-­fold cross-­validation.
RNA sequencing analysis
The total RNA of brain tissue from the hippocampus and SH-­SY5Y 
cells was extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, UA, USA) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by being 
qualified and quantified using a NanoDrop and Agilent 2100 bio-
analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). RNA sequencing li-
braries were prepared using BGISEQ-­500 (BGI-­Shenzhen, China). 
Sequencing data were filtered and trimmed using Trimmomatic 
v0.38 (62) to obtain high-­quality clean-­read data. Clean reads were 
mapped to the Mus musculus genome sequence (http://ftp.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/genomes/all/GCF/000/001/635/GCF_000001635.26_
GRCm38.p6) using Hisat2 v2–2.1.0 (63). The reads of each sample 
were then assembled into transcripts and compared with reference 
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
15 of 17
gene models using StringTie v1.3.4d (64). We merged the 55 tran-
scripts to obtain a consensus transcript using a StringTie-­Merge pro-
gram. Transcripts that did not exist in the coding DNA sequence 
database of the M. musculus genome were extracted to predict new 
genes. The gene expression fragments per kilobase of exon model per 
million mapped fragments values were calculated using the StringTie 
Merge program based on the consensus transcript. We then used VS-­
PLS-­DA modeling and ANOVA to identify significant IF-­induced 
changes in gene expression. KEGG and Gene Ontology enrichment 
analyses were performed using the WebGestalt 2019 (WEB-­based 
Gene Set Analysis Toolkit) (65). The most relevant genes associated 
with IF were further filtered according to KEGG about AD, oxidative 
phosphorylation, neurotrophin signaling pathway, and synapse (glu-
tamatergic, cholinergic, serotonergic, GABAergic, and dopaminer-
gic). The expression of these genes was subjected to the multiomics 
analysis integrating with the relative abundance of gut microbiota 
and plasma levels of metabolites that were affected by IF treatment.
fldC gene detection
Genomic DNA was isolated from mouse colonic contents using the 
TIANamp Stool DNA Kit (TIANGEN, China) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription qPCR was per-
formed to detect the presence of the fldC gene. The primers used for 
fldC amplification were 311F: 5′-TGGGGAATATGATATGTTGT­
CTGGCATGATG-­3′ and 311R: 5′-TGTTCAGCTAATCTATCCA­
TTGGTGTATTCGC-­3′ (44). The 16S rRNA gene was used as an 
internal reference for normalization.
Statistical analysis
Data were reported as mean ± SEM of at least three independent ex-
periments and analyzed with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test by 
GraphPad Prism 8.0 software (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, 
CA). Two-­way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test was used to ana-
lyze the main IF treatment and the IPA gavage experiments. One-­way 
ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test was used for the human cohort 
analysis, antibiotic administration, PXR-­shRNA and KCZ (i.c.v.) ste-
reotaxic surgeries, TNFα injection, and all in vitro studies. Unpaired, 
two-­tailed Student’s t tests were used for the KCZ (intraperitoneal) 
injection and C. sporogenes recolonization experiments. Spearman 
correlation analysis was used to evaluate the relationship between se-
rum IPA levels and participants’ cognitive scores. Statistical signifi-
cance was presented as mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01.
Supplementary Materials
The PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S10
Tables S4 and S5
Supplementary Methods
Legends for tables S1 to S3
Legends for data S1 and S2
References
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:
Tables S1 to S3
Data S1 and S2
REFERENCES AND NOTES
	 1.	 B. D. Arbo, M. F. Ribeiro, L. M. Garcia-­Segura, Development of new treatments for 
Alzheimer’s disease based on the modulation of translocator protein (TSPO). Ageing Res. 
Rev. 54, 100943 (2019).
	 2.	 W. A. Eimer, R. Vassar, Neuron loss in the 5XFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease 
correlates with intraneuronal Aβ42 accumulation and Caspase-­3 activation. Mol. 
Neurodegener. 8, 2 (2013).
	 3.	 D. K. Kim, D. Han, J. Park, H. Choi, J. C. Park, M. Y. Cha, J. Woo, M. S. Byun, D. Y. Lee, Y. Kim,  
I. Mook-­Jung, Deep proteome profiling of the hippocampus in the 5XFAD mouse model 
reveals biological process alterations and a novel biomarker of Alzheimer’s disease. Exp. 
Mol. Med. 51, 1–17 (2019).
	 4.	 M. V. F. Silva, C. M. G. Loures, L. C. V. Alves, L. C. de Souza, K. B. G. Borges,  
M. das Graças Carvalho, Alzheimer’s disease: Risk factors and potentially protective 
measures. J. Biomed. Sci. 26, 33 (2019).
	 5.	 D. Wahl, V. C. Cogger, S. M. Solon-­Biet, R. V. Waern, R. Gokarn, T. Pulpitel, R. de Cabo,  
M. P. Mattson, D. Raubenheimer, S. J. Simpson, D. G. Le Couteur, Nutritional strategies to 
optimise cognitive function in the aging brain. Ageing Res. Rev. 31, 80–92 (2016).
	 6.	 A. Cherif, B. Roelands, R. Meeusen, K. Chamari, Effects of intermittent fasting, caloric 
restriction, and ramadan intermittent fasting on cognitive performance at rest and 
during exercise in adults. Sports Med. 46, 35–47 (2016).
	 7.	 T. C. Ooi, A. Meramat, N. F. Rajab, S. Shahar, I. S. Ismail, A. A. Azam, R. Sharif, Intermittent 
fasting enhanced the cognitive function in older adults with mild cognitive impairment 
by inducing biochemical and metabolic changes: A 3-­year progressive study. Nutrients 
12, 2644 (2020).
	 8.	 A. R. Vasconcelos, L. M. Yshii, T. A. Viel, H. S. Buck, M. P. Mattson, C. Scavone,  
E. M. Kawamoto, Intermittent fasting attenuates lipopolysaccharide-­induced 
neuroinflammation and memory impairment. J. Neuroinflammation 11, 85 (2014).
	 9.	 Z. Liu, X. Dai, H. Zhang, R. Shi, Y. Hui, X. Jin, W. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Wang, J. Wang, 
X. Tan, B. Ren, X. Liu, T. Zhao, J. Wang, J. Pan, T. Yuan, C. Chu, L. Lan, F. Yin, E. Cadenas,  
L. Shi, S. Zhao, X. Liu, Gut microbiota mediates intermittent-­fasting alleviation of 
diabetes-­induced cognitive impairment. Nat. Commun. 11, 855 (2020).
	10.	 Y. Liu, A. Cheng, Y. J. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Kishimoto, S. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. Wan, S. M. Raefsky, D. Lu, 
T. Saito, T. Saido, J. Zhu, L. J. Wu, M. P. Mattson, SIRT3 mediates hippocampal synaptic 
adaptations to intermittent fasting and ameliorates deficits in APP mutant mice. Nat. 
Commun. 10, 1886 (2019).
	11.	 Y. Hu, Y. Yang, M. Zhang, M. Deng, J.-­J. Zhang, Intermittent fasting pretreatment prevents 
cognitive impairment in a aat model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. J. Nutr. 147, 
1437–1445 (2017).
	12.	 G. P. Dias, T. Murphy, D. Stangl, S. Ahmet, B. Morisse, A. Nix, L. J. Aimone, J. B. Aimone,  
M. Kuro-­O, F. H. Gage, S. Thuret, Intermittent fasting enhances long-­term memory 
consolidation, adult hippocampal neurogenesis, and expression of longevity gene 
Klotho. Mol. Psychiatry 26, 6365–6379 (2021).
	13.	 J. Zhang, Z. Zhan, X. Li, A. Xing, C. Jiang, Y. Chen, W. Shi, L. An, Intermittent fasting 
protects against Alzheimer’s disease possible through restoring aquaporin-­4 polarity. 
Front. Mol. Neurosci. 10, 395 (2017).
	14.	 B. K. Shin, S. Kang, D. S. Kim, S. Park, Intermittent fasting protects against the 
deterioration of cognitive function, energy metabolism and dyslipidemia in Alzheimer’s 
disease-­induced estrogen deficient rats. Exp. Biol. Med. (Maywood) 243, 334–343 (2018).
	15.	 V. Rajeev, D. Y. Fann, Q. N. Dinh, H. A. Kim, T. M. De Silva, D. G. Jo, G. R. Drummond,  
C. G. Sobey, M. K. P. Lai, C. L. Chen, T. V. Arumugam, Intermittent fasting attenuates 
hallmark vascular and neuronal pathologies in a mouse model of vascular cognitive 
impairment. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 18, 6052–6067 (2022).
	16.	 R. Y. Pan, J. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Liao, Y. Liao, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Song, J. Yu,  
Z. Yuan, Intermittent fasting protects against Alzheimer’s disease in mice by altering 
metabolism through remodeling of the gut microbiota. Nat. Aging 2, 1024–1039 (2022).
	17.	 D. S. Whittaker, L. Akhmetova, D. Carlin, H. Romero, D. K. Welsh, C. S. Colwell, P. Desplats, 
Circadian modulation by time-­restricted feeding rescues brain pathology and improves 
memory in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Metab. 35, 1704–1721.e6 (2023).
	18.	 X. Hu, T. Wang, F. Jin, Alzheimer’s disease and gut microbiota. Sci. China Life Sci. 59, 
1006–1023 (2016).
	19.	 C. C. Hung, C. C. Chang, C. W. Huang, R. Nouchi, C. H. Cheng, Gut microbiota in patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease spectrum: A systematic review and meta-­analysis. Aging 14, 
477–496 (2022).
	20.	 X. Guo, X. Zhang, P. Tang, L. Chong, R. Li, Integration of genome-­wide association studies 
(GWAS) and microbiome data highlights the impact of sulfate-­reducing bacteria on 
Alzheimer’s disease. Age Ageing 52, afad112 (2023).
	21.	 S. Grabrucker, M. Marizzoni, E. Silajdžić, N. Lopizzo, E. Mombelli, S. Nicolas,  
S. Dohm-­Hansen, C. Scassellati, D. V. Moretti, M. Rosa, K. Hoffmann, J. F. Cryan,  
O. F. O'Leary, J. A. English, A. Lavelle, C. O’Neill, S. Thuret, A. Cattaneo, Y. M. Nolan, 
Microbiota from Alzheimer’s patients induce deficits in cognition and hippocampal 
neurogenesis. Brain 146, 4916–4934 (2023).
	22.	 E. Serger, L. Luengo-­Gutierrez, J. S. Chadwick, G. Kong, L. Zhou, G. Crawford, M. C. Danzi, 
A. Myridakis, A. Brandis, A. T. Bello, F. Müller, A. Sanchez-­Vassopoulos, F. De Virgiliis,  
P. Liddell, M. E. Dumas, J. Strid, S. Mani, D. Dodd, S. Di Giovanni, The gut metabolite 
indole-­3 propionate promotes nerve regeneration and repair. Nature 607, 585–592 
(2022).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
16 of 17
	23.	 Y. J. Chyan, B. Poeggeler, R. A. Omar, D. G. Chain, B. Frangione, J. Ghiso, M. A. Pappolla, 
Potent neuroprotective properties against the Alzheimer β-­amyloid by an endogenous 
melatonin-­related indole structure, indole-­3-­propionic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 
21937–21942 (1999).
	24.	 Q. Zhao, T. Chen, C. Ni, Y. Hu, Y. Nan, W. Lin, Y. Liu, F. Zheng, X. Shi, Z. Lin, J. Zhu, Z. Lin, 
Indole-­3-­propionic acid attenuates HI-­related blood-­brain barrier injury in neonatal rats 
by modulating the PXR signaling pathway. ACS Chem. Nerosci. 13, 2897–2912 (2022).
	25.	 M. L. Garcez, V. X. Tan, B. Heng, G. J. Guillemin, Sodium butyrate and indole-­3-­propionic 
acid prevent the increase of cytokines and kynurenine levels in LPS-­induced human 
primary astrocytes. Int. J. Tryptophan Res. 13, 1178646920978404 (2020).
	26.	 J. Sun, J. Xu, Y. Ling, F. Wang, T. Gong, C. Yang, S. Ye, K. Ye, D. Wei, Z. Song, D. Chen, J. Liu, 
Fecal microbiota transplantation alleviated Alzheimer’s disease-­like pathogenesis in APP/
PS1 transgenic mice. Transl. Psychiatry 9, 189 (2019).
	27.	 B. J. Moraes, P. Coelho, L. Fão, I. L. Ferreira, A. C. Rego, Modified glutamatergic 
postsynapse in neurodegenerative disorders. Neuroscience 454, 116–139 (2021).
	28.	 S. M. Dehkordi, M. Arnold, K. Nho, S. Ahmad, W. Jia, G. Xie, G. Louie, A. Kueider-­Paisley,  
M. A. Moseley, J. W. Thompson, L. S. J. Williams, J. D. Tenenbaum, C. Blach, R. Baillie, X. Han, 
S. Bhattacharyya, J. B. Toledo, S. Schafferer, S. Klein, T. Koal, S. L. Risacher, M. A. Kling,  
A. Motsinger-­Reif, D. M. Rotroff, J. Jack, T. Hankemeier, D. A. Bennett, P. L. De Jager,  
J. Q. Trojanowski, L. M. Shaw, M. W. Weiner, P. M. Doraiswamy, C. M. van Duijn, A. J. Saykin, 
G. Kastenmüller, R. Kaddurah-­Daouk, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative and 
the Alzheimer Disease Metabolomics Consortium, Altered bile acid profile associates 
with cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease-­An emerging role for gut microbiome. 
Alzheimers Dement. 15, 76–92 (2019).
	29.	 D. Dodd, M. H. Spitzer, W. Van Treuren, B. D. Merrill, A. J. Hryckowian, S. K. Higginbottom, 
A. Le, T. M. Cowan, G. P. Nolan, M. A. Fischbach, J. L. Sonnenburg, A gut bacterial pathway 
metabolizes aromatic amino acids into nine circulating metabolites. Nature 551, 648–652 
(2017).
	30.	 A. Ungurianu, A. Zanfirescu, D. Margină, Sirtuins, resveratrol and the intertwining cellular 
pathways connecting them. Ageing Res. Rev. 88, 101936 (2023).
	31.	 C. Y. Wang, J. W. Xie, Y. Xu, T. Wang, J. H. Cai, X. Wang, B. L. Zhao, L. An, Z. Y. Wang, Trientine 
reduces BACE1 activity and mitigates amyloidosis via the AGE/RAGE/NF-­κB pathway in a 
transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 19, 2024–2039 
(2013).
	32.	 T. Wang, B. Chen, M. Luo, L. Xie, M. Lu, X. Lu, S. Zhang, L. Wei, X. Zhou, B. Yao, H. Wang,  
D. Xu, Microbiota-­indole 3-­propionic acid-­brain axis mediates abnormal synaptic pruning 
of hippocampal microglia and susceptibility to ASD in IUGR offspring. Microbiome 11, 
245 (2023).
	33.	 D. Lazic, V. Tesic, M. Jovanovic, M. Brkic, D. Milanovic, B. V. Zlokovic, S. Kanazir, M. Perovic, 
Every-­other-­day feeding exacerbates inflammation and neuronal deficits in 5XFAD 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 136, 104745 (2020).
	34.	 Y. Li, J. O. Rinne, L. Mosconi, E. Pirraglia, H. Rusinek, S. DeSanti, N. Kemppainen, K. Någren, 
B. C. Kim, W. Tsui, M. J. de Leon, Regional analysis of FDG and PIB-­PET images in normal 
aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 
35, 2169–2181 (2008).
	35.	 T. C. Hammond, X. Xing, C. Wang, D. Ma, K. Nho, P. K. Crane, F. Elahi, D. A. Ziegler, G. Liang, 
Q. Cheng, L. M. Yanckello, N. Jacobs, A. L. Lin, β-­amyloid and tau drive early Alzheimer’s 
disease decline while glucose hypometabolism drives late decline. Commun. Biol. 3, 352 
(2020).
	36.	 A. Wani, M. Gupta, M. Ahmad, A. M. Shah, A. U. Ahsan, P. H. Qazi, F. Malik, G. Singh,  
P. R. Sharma, A. Kaddoumi, S. B. Bharate, R. A. Vishwakarma, A. Kumar, Alborixin clears 
amyloid-­β by inducing autophagy through PTEN-­mediated inhibition of the AKT 
pathway. Autophagy 15, 1810–1828 (2019).
	37.	 A. Virmani, L. Pinto, O. Bauermann, S. Zerelli, Z. Binienda, S. F. Ali, F. R. Leij, Neuronal 
carnitine palmitoyl transferase1c in the central nervous system: Current visions and 
perspectives. J Alzheimers Dis 4, 132 (2014).
	38.	 M. Lachén-­Montes, A. González-­Morales, M. V. Zelaya, E. Pérez-­Valderrama, K. Ausín,  
I. Ferrer, J. Fernández-­Irigoyen, E. Santamaría, Olfactory bulb neuroproteomics reveals a 
chronological perturbation of survival routes and a disruption of prohibitin complex 
during Alzheimer’s disease progression. Sci. Rep. 7, 9115 (2017).
	39.	 C. A. Köhler, M. Maes, A. Slyepchenko, M. Berk, M. Solmi, K. L. Lanctôt, A. F. Carvalho, The 
gut-­brain axis, including the microbiome, leaky gut and bacterial translocation: 
Mechanisms and pathophysiological role in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Pharm. Des. 22, 
6152–6166 (2016).
	40.	 Y. Xia, Y. Xiao, Z. H. Wang, X. Liu, A. M. Alam, J. P. Haran, B. A. McCormick, X. Shu, X. Wang, 
K. Ye, Bacteroides Fragilis in the gut microbiomes of Alzheimer’s disease activates 
microglia and triggers pathogenesis in neuronal C/EBPβ transgenic mice. Nat. Commun. 
14, 5471 (2023).
	41.	 Y. Qiu, Y. Hou, D. Gohel, Y. Zhou, J. Xu, M. Bykova, Y. Yang, J. B. Leverenz, A. A. Pieper,  
R. Nussinov, J. Z. K. Caldwell, J. M. Brown, F. Cheng, Systematic characterization of 
multi-­omics landscape between gut microbial metabolites and GPCRome in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Cell Rep. 43, 114128 (2024).
	42.	 L. M. Cox, M. J. Schafer, J. Sohn, J. Vincentini, H. L. Weiner, S. D. Ginsberg, M. J. Blaser, 
Calorie restriction slows age-­related microbiota changes in an Alzheimer’s disease model 
in female mice. Sci. Rep. 9, 17904 (2019).
	43.	 F. Pan, L. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Hu, B. Zeng, H. Yuan, L. Zhao, C. Zhang, Predominant gut 
Lactobacillus murinus strain mediates anti-­inflammaging effects in calorie-­restricted 
mice. Microbiome 6, 54 (2018).
	44.	 C. Zhang, S. Li, L. Yang, P. Huang, W. Li, S. Wang, G. Zhao, M. Zhang, X. Pang, Z. Yan, Y. Liu,  
L. Zhao, Structural modulation of gut microbiota in life-­long calorie-­restricted mice. 
Structural modulation of gut microbiota in life-­long calorie-­restricted mice. Nat. 
Commun. 4, 2163 (2013).
	45.	 W. Zhang, J. Huang, F. Gao, Q. You, L. Ding, J. Gong, M. Zhang, R. Ma, S. Zheng, X. Sun,  
Y. Zhang, Lactobacillus reuteri normalizes altered fear memory in male Cntnap4 
knockout mice. EBioMedicine 86, 104323 (2022).
	46.	 C. Pan, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Chen, L. Xu, N. Xu, X. Liu, Q. Meng, X. Wang, Z.-­Y. Zhang, 
Surgery-­induced gut microbial dysbiosis promotes cognitive impairment via regulation 
of intestinal function and the metabolite palmitic amide. Microbiome 11, 248 (2023).
	47.	 S. Mehrabadi, S. S. Sadr, Assessment of probiotics mixture on memory function, 
inflammation markers, and oxidative stress in an Alzheimer’s disease model of rats. Iran. 
Biomed. J. 24, 220–228 (2020).
	48.	 T. Ren, Y. Gao, Y. Qiu, S. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, K. Nie, Gut 
microbiota altered in mild cognitive impairment compared with normal cognition in 
sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Front. Neurol. 11, 137 (2020).
	49.	 M. R. Minter, C. Zhang, V. Leone, D. L. Ringus, X. Zhang, P. Oyler-­Castrillo, M. W. Musch,  
F. Liao, J. F. Ward, D. M. Holtzman, E. B. Chang, R. E. Tanzi, S. S. Sisodia, Antibiotic-­induced 
perturbations in gut microbial diversity influences neuro-­inflammation and amyloidosis 
in a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 6, 30028 (2016).
	50.	 C. Wasén, L. C. Beauchamp, J. Vincentini, S. Li, D. S. LeServe, C. Gauthier, J. R. Lopes,  
T. G. Moreira, M. N. Ekwudo, Z. Yin, P. da Silva, R. K. Krishnan, O. Butovsky, L. M. Cox,  
H. L. Weiner, Bacteroidota inhibit microglia clearance of amyloid-­beta and promote 
plaque deposition in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Nat. Commun. 15, 3872 (2024).
	51.	 H. M. Roager, T. R. Licht, Microbial tryptophan catabolites in health and disease. Nat. 
Commun. 9, 3294 (2018).
	52.	 V. Rothhammer, I. D. Mascanfroni, L. Bunse, M. C. Takenaka, J. E. Kenison, L. Mayo,  
C. C. Chao, B. Patel, R. Yan, M. Blain, J. I. Alvarez, H. Kébir, N. Anandasabapathy,  
G. Izquierdo, S. Jung, N. Obholzer, N. Pochet, C. B. Clish, M. Prinz, A. Prat, J. Antel,  
F. J. Quintana, Type I interferons and microbial metabolites of tryptophan modulate 
astrocyte activity and central nervous system inflammation via the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor. Nat. Med. 22, 586–597 (2016).
	53.	 A. Abildgaard, B. Elfving, M. Hokland, G. Wegener, S. Lund, The microbial metabolite 
indole-­3-­propionic acid improves glucose metabolism in rats, but does not affect 
behaviour. Arch. Physiol. Biochem. 124, 306–312 (2018).
	54.	 C. S. Kim, S. Jung, G. S. Hwang, D. M. Shin, Gut microbiota indole-­3-­propionic acid 
mediates neuroprotective effect of probiotic consumption in healthy elderly: A 
randomized, double-­blind, placebo-­controlled, multicenter trial and in vitro study. Clin. 
Nutr. 42, 1025–1033 (2023).
	55.	 C. H. Chen, W. Zhou, S. Liu, Y. Deng, F. Cai, M. Tone, Y. Tone, Y. Tong, W. Song, Increased 
NF-­κB signalling up-­regulates BACE1 expression and its therapeutic potential in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 15, 77–90 (2012).
	56.	 X. Zhang, Q. Zou, B. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Zhao, Y. Li, R. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Liu, Effects of 
alternate-­day fasting, time-­restricted fasting and intermittent energy restriction 
DSS-­induced on colitis and behavioral disorders. Redox Biol. 32, 101535 (2020).
	57.	 L. K. Heilbronn, S. R. Smith, C. K. Martin, S. D. Anton, E. Ravussin, Alternate-­day fasting in 
nonobese subjects: Effects on body weight, body composition, and energy metabolism. 
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 81, 69–73 (2005).
	58.	 L. Shi, J. A. Westerhuis, J. Rosén, R. Landberg, C. Brunius, Variable selection and validation 
in multivariate modelling. Bioinformatics 35, 972–980 (2019).
	59.	 Z. Pang, J. Chong, S. Li, J. Xia, MetaboAnalystR 3.0: Toward an optimized workflow for 
global metabolomics. Metabolites 10, 186 (2020).
	60.	 A. Singh, C. P. Shannon, B. Gautier, F. Rohart, M. Vacher, S. J. Tebbutt, K. A. Lê Cao, DIABLO: 
An integrative approach for identifying key molecular drivers from multi-­omics assays. 
Bioinformatics 35, 3055–3062 (2019).
	61.	 F. Rohart, B. Gautier, A. Singh, K. A. Lê Cao, mixOmics: An R package for ‘omics feature 
selection and multiple data integration. PLOS Comput. Biol. 13, e1005752 (2017).
	62.	 A. M. Bolger, M. Lohse, B. Usadel, Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence 
data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120 (2014).
	63.	 D. Kim, B. Langmead, S. L. Salzberg, HISAT: A fast spliced aligner with low memory 
requirements. Nat. Methods 12, 357–360 (2015).
	64.	 M. Pertea, G. M. Pertea, C. M. Antonescu, T. C. Chang, J. T. Mendell, S. L. Salzberg, StringTie 
enables improved reconstruction of a transcriptome from RNA-­seq reads. Nat. Biotechnol. 
33, 290–295 (2015).
	65.	 Y. Liao, J. Wang, E. J. Jaehnig, Z. Shi, B. Zhang, WebGestalt 2019: Gene set analysis toolkit 
with revamped UIs and APIs. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, W199–W205 (2019).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025

Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadw8410 (2025)     28 November 2025
S c i e n c e  A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h  A r t i c l e
17 of 17
	66.	 L. M. Lueptow, Novel object recognition test for the investigation of learning and 
memory in mice. J. Vis. Exp. , e55718 (2017).
	67.	 Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, M. Jia, S. Fu, J. Pan, C. Chu, X. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Liu, (+)-­Sesamin 
attenuates chronic unpredictable mild stress-­induced depressive-­like behaviors and 
memory deficits via suppression of neuroinflammation. J. Nutr. Biochem. 64, 61–71 
(2019).
	68.	 Q. Wang, M. Jia, Y. Zhao, Y. Hui, J. Pan, H. Yu, S. Yan, X. Dai, X. Liu, Z. Liu, Supplementation 
of sesamin alleviates stress-­induced behavioral and psychological disorders via 
reshaping the gut microbiota structure. J. Agric. Food Chem. 67, 12441–12451 (2019).
Acknowledgments: We thank D. Dodd and Y. Liu from Stanford University for providing the 
mutant C. sporogenes strain. We appreciate the support from the platform of Northwest A&F 
University Gene Editing Scientific Teaching (NWAFU-­GEST). We also thank Y. Zhou and  
Q. Zhang from the instruments shared platform of the College of Food Science and Engineering 
and Life Science Research Core Services of NWAFU, for the assistance of instruments and 
facility. Funding: This work was financially supported by the National Science and Technology 
Innovation 2030-­Major Program of Brain Science and Brain-­Like Research (no. 2022ZD0208100, 
Z.L.), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 3224100327, Z.L.), and Shenzhen 
Science and Technology Program (no. JCYJ20220818102810022, J.H.). Author contributions: L.L., 
M.J., C.Y., Y.Z., J.H., Y.Z., X.H., F.N., C.D., Q.L., J.G., X.J., K.X., Y.W., L.D., S.Z., and L.S. performed the 
experiments and analyzed the data; Z.L., X.L., and X.C. designed the study; Z.L., L.S., Y.Z., M.J., 
and L.L. wrote the paper. M.J., L.S., and L.L. prepared the figures. All authors discussed the 
results and commented on the paper. Competing interests: The authors declare that they 
have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: The raw and processed data of 
RNA sequencing in the current study were deposited on GEO (https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE164461), and the sequencing data have been deposited in the NCBI 
database under accession number GSE164461.
Submitted 18 February 2025 
Accepted 31 October 2025 
Published 28 November 2025 
10.1126/sciadv.adw8410
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Qingdao University of Science & Technology on November 28, 2025