Iman Zare 1, Daniel M. Chevrier 2,†, Anna Cifuentes-Rius 3,†, Nasrin Moradi 4,
Yunlei Xianyu 5, Subhadip Ghosh 6,7, Laura Trapiella-Alfonso 8, Ye Tian 9,
Alireza Shourangiz-Haghighi 10, Saptarshi Mukherjee 11, Kelong Fan 12,13,⇑,
Michael R. Hamblin 14,⇑
1 Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Semnan University, Semnan 35131-19111, Iran
2 Aix-Marseille Université, CEA, CNRS, BIAM, 13108 Saint Paul lez Durance, France
3 Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Parkville Campus, 381 Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia
4 Department of Chemistry, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran 14115 175, Iran
5 College of Biosystems Engineering and Food Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, Zhejiang, China
6 Program in Biophysics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA
7 Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
8 Chimie ParisTech, PSL University, CNRS 2027, Institute of Chemistry for Life and Health Sciences, SEISAD, 11 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France
9 Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, USA
10 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Shiraz University of Technology, Shiraz, Iran
11 Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Bhopal, India
12 CAS Engineering Laboratory for Nanozyme, Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceutical, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 15
Datun Road, Beijing 100101, China
13 Academy of Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, 40 N Daxue Road, Zhengzhou 450052, China
14 Laser Research Centre, Faculty of Health Science, University of Johannesburg, Doornfontein 2028, South Africa
The use of protein templates for the controlled synthesis of inorganic nanostructures has gained
considerable attention in multidisciplinary ﬁelds, including electronics, optics, energy, sensing, and
biomedicine, owing to their biocompatibility and structural programmability. The possible synergistic
combination of protein scaffolds (and other biomolecules/biopolymers) with metal nanoclusters
(MNCs) has created a new class of highly photoluminescent nanoprobes and nanodevices. For the ﬁrst
time, we will discuss the different types of protein templates used for MNC preparation with an
emphasis on their optoelectronic properties for application. In particular, applications of protein-
coated MNCs for chemosensing or biosensing of cancer biomarkers, neurotransmitters, pathogenic
microorganisms, biomolecules, pharmaceutical compounds, and immunoassays are discussed in detail
herein. Fluorescence-based and multimodal molecular imaging, both in vitro and in vivo based on
functional proteins are also covered. Furthermore, we discuss the burgeoning growth of protein-coated
MNCs (e.g., gold (Au) and silver (Ag) NCs) to develop synergistic nanotherapeutics with potential
Protein-protected metal nanoclusters as
diagnostic and therapeutic platforms for
biomedical applications
⇑Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: Fan, K. (fankelong@ibp.ac.cn), Hamblin, M.R. (hamblin.lab@gmail.com).
† These authors made equal contribution.
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
RESEARCH: Review
1369-7021/ 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2020.10.027
159

biomedical applications in chemotherapy, radiotherapy, photodynamic therapy (PDT), photothermal
therapy (PTT), and antibacterial activity, as well as MNC-containing nanocomposites for enhanced
bioimaging and controlled drug release. Overall, the proposed review highlights the recent progress,
technical challenges and new horizons in this ﬁeld, and summarizes our understanding of how MNC
properties interact with the biological function of protein scaffolds to develop synergistic nanother-
apeutics towards clinical translation.
Introduction
Proteins are complex biomolecules made up of amino acids,
which provide structural integrity and take part in most chemical
reactions in all living organisms. The use of protein templates for
the synthesis of uniform inorganic nanostructures has gained
considerable attention in multidisciplinary ﬁelds, including elec-
tronics, optics, energy, sensing, and biomedicine. The distinctive
features of these nanostructures, particularly metal nanoclusters
(MNCs), are their optical, electronic, magnetic, and chemical
properties, which have been ascribed to the extremely small
dimensions and special nature of the surface structure [1–8].
Quantum conﬁnement of the electrons in MNCs (e.g., AuNCs
and AgNCs) occurs due to the ultrasmall sizes of these nanopar-
ticles (with diameters  2 nm), creating more discrete energy
levels with distinct molecule-like electronic transitions in the
valence states (i.e., HOMO–LUMO transitions) [9]. This endows
MNCs with properties such as photoluminescence (PL) at wave-
lengths ranging from the ultraviolet (UV) to near-infrared (NIR),
wavelength-tunable emission, quantized charges, magnetism,
and optical chirality [1,2,6,10,11]. The tremendous progress in
research on MNCs suggests that they could be employed in many
biomedical applications due to such intrinsic properties [2,12–
14].
Despite the myriad of advantages in several ﬁelds, MNC syn-
thesis procedures often require long reaction times and harsh
conditions, such as organic solvents and hazardous reducing
agents, as well as high reaction temperatures. To address the syn-
thetic preparation issues of MNC, most researchers have turned
to biological systems to direct the synthesis of inorganic nanos-
tructures [15–21]. The use of biological systems that can simulta-
neously act as reducing and protecting agents is a stepping stone
towards developing clean or green procedures for the synthesis of
MNCs using milder reaction conditions [22–24]. Protein-directed
synthesis of MNCs using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a bio-
scaffold was ﬁrstly reported by Xie et al. [25]. It was reported that
aromatic amino acid groups reduced metal ions through donat-
ing electrons to gold ions, whereby AuNCs were formed.
Since the discovery of this clean synthesis procedure for BSA-
AuNCs, there has been a growing number of studies using bio-
molecules, proteins, and biomaterials to produce templated
metal and alloy NCs [26,27]. These proteins have included oval-
bumin (OVA), glucose oxidase (GOD), lysozyme (LYZ), trypsin
(TRY), transferrin (Trf), pepsin (PEP), egg white albumin (EWA),
insulin (INS), and hemoglobin (Hb) [26,28–34]. In addition to
proteins, recently it has been reported that cancerous cells and
normal mammalian cells are able to direct the synthesis of
MNCs, such as Au, Ag, zinc (Zn), and platinum (Pt) [35–38].
Because the protein coating acts as an interface between the
MNC and the biological environment, the protein surrounding
the MNC can determine key parameters, which are of great sig-
niﬁcance in biological settings, including water solubility, excel-
lent stability, low toxicity, and abundance of functional groups.
The intrinsic ﬂuorescence of protein-templated MNCs arising
from their metallic core makes them promising ﬂuorescent
probes in both pre-clinical and clinical applications [39–43].
These properties have emerged as a whole new direction in
biomedical
research.
However,
although
the
synthesis,
properties and biomedical applications of some biomolecule-
protected MNCs have been published in recent years, there
are few comprehensive reviews covering the biomedical applica-
tions of protein-encapsulated MNCs in the open literature
[17,22,44–55].
The integration of many advantageous features including
optical, electronic, and catalytic properties of MNCs [56] with
the abundant active functional groups of proteins within a single
structure make protein-protected MNCs outstanding among
other nanostructures. Protein-MNCs can be used as tracking
and carrier agents in biolabeling, biosensing, bioimaging, tar-
geted cancer therapy and drug delivery applications. In some
respects, protein-protected MNCs are preferable to conventional
ﬂuorescence probes or stains (e.g., 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) and green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP)) and quantum dots
(QDs) (e.g., cadmium selenide (CdSe) and gallium arsenide
(GaAs)) due to their prolonged ﬂuorescence lifetime, biocompat-
ibility and good stability [57,58] This is due to the surrounding
protective protein layer, since the ﬂuorescence of the metal core
is shielded from nonspeciﬁc bio-macromolecular interactions or
unwanted cellular sequestration that could lead to photobleach-
ing and quenching in biological environments [59,60]. More-
over, unlike QDs where the core stability is prominent and the
functional coating determines the QD toxicity leading to restric-
tions in their bio-application, the multifunctionality of the pro-
tein coating on MNCs is useful for post-synthesis modiﬁcation
for a variety of biomedical applications, particularly biomarker
sensing, drug loading, imaging-guided drug delivery as well as
cancer therapy (See Fig. 1). Nevertheless, there are still concerns
about the practical application of MNCs for biomedical purposes.
One concern for using protein-MNCs as staining probes in
bioimaging applications is the weaker luminescence of protein-
MNCs. In terms of quantum yield (QY), protein-MNCs are
slightly inferior compared to conventional ﬂuorescence probes
and semiconductor QDs, thus different approaches for enhanc-
ing the ﬂuorescence intensity of MNCs are of importance.
Another growing concern about the practical in vivo applications
of MNCs is the possible toxicity issue, which will be further dis-
cussed in Section 2. According to a few studies that assessed the
toxicity of protein-protected MNCs, the toxicity of BSA-protected
MNCs towards some cell lines has been reported in [61,62]. Con-
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
160

sidering the progress and the current limitations, we suggest that
prospects for employing MNCs in biology and medicine are
encouraging, but will require judicious consideration for their
future clinical translation.
In this comprehensive overview, we will focus on the advan-
tages and limitations of a broad range of protein-protected MNCs
in biomedical research (Fig. 1). First, we will introduce the emer-
gent properties of protein-protected MNCs in terms of structure,
electronic, and optical properties (Section 2). Next, in Section 3,
we will focus on chemical and biological sensing applications as
ﬂuorescent labels in assays. These include sensing and detection
of cancer biomarkers, biomolecules, pharmaceutical compounds,
neurotransmitters, pathogenic microorganisms, and pH and
temperature monitoring. Fluorescence-based imaging and multi-
modal imaging strategies for biological systems, both in vitro and
in vivo are presented in Section 4. In Section 5, we highlight the
progress
in
emerging
therapeutic
applications
of
protein-
protected MNCs such as chemotherapy, radiotherapy, PDT,
PTT, antibacterial activity and drug/gene delivery. Lastly, the
outlook and future perspectives for protein-protected MNCs are
discussed with consideration of recent progress, key opportuni-
ties and remaining challenges. This is towards the goal of creat-
ing
next-generation
diagnostic
and
therapeutic
agents
in
translational medicine.
Emergent properties of protein-protected MNCs
Only recently has the marriage between MNCs and proteins (and
other biomolecules/biopolymers) created a new class of highly
photoluminescent nanoprobes and nanodevices. In particular,
the protecting protein plays an important role in directing the
formation and stabilization of MNC structures. When combined
together, the stabilizing protein molecule and the MNC compo-
nent give rise to robust emergent properties, such as PL and the
ability for sensitive analyte detection. Before a complete under-
standing
of
these
properties
can
be
ascertained,
protein-
protected MNCs require more in-depth structural characteriza-
tion, especially concerning the MNC component. It should be
mentioned that several other biomolecular scaffolds can be uti-
lized to stabilize an even broader range of MNCs, which include
single amino acids, peptides, DNA and other biopolymers [11].
Similar emergent properties can also be observed with these sys-
tems which arise from synergetic interaction between the MNC
RESEARCH: Review
FIGURE 1
Protein-protected MNCs have been widely used in many fields, such as their synthesis & properties, diagnosis, and therapy.
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
161

and the stabilizing biomolecule [63]. Nevertheless, these systems
may not be directly applicable to the understanding protein-
protected MNCs. Unlike smaller biomolecules, a variety of pro-
teins, with the combination of proximal amino acid residues,
enable the binding and accumulation of metal ions [64]. The spa-
tially conﬁned nature and speciﬁc concentration of these accu-
mulation sites could also give rise to unique MNC structures
and properties. Protein-MNCs, furthermore, possess additional
advantages over other biomolecule-protected systems, including:
(i) protein molecules have an intrinsic capability for highly
speciﬁc molecule-/analyte–protein interaction that leads
to a recognition/sensing property;
(ii) with further improvements to the synthetic protocol, it
may be possible to preserve the protein conformation dur-
ing the MNC formation, thereby retaining some of the pro-
tein’s biological activity;
(iii) the protein scaffold has a wide range of chemical function-
alization possibilities for drug delivery and other biomedi-
cal applications.
The one-pot synthesis protocol
It has been demonstrated that several combinations of protein
molecule and metal ion precursors can lead to MNC formation
under the direction of the protein molecule in a facile, aqueous,
one-pot synthesis procedure, while the same approach cannot as
easily be applied to smaller ligand molecules (e.g., organothio-
lates, amines, carboxylates, single amino acids, etc.). This was
demonstrated in a seminal report on the preparation of red lumi-
nescent BSA-protected AuNCs by Xie et al. [25]. Under ambient
reaction conditions (water-based, incubation and mixing at
37 C) metal ions interact with protein residues, leading to reduc-
tion of the metal ions and protein-metal bond formation. With a
balanced number of metal ions to protein molecules, emergent
MNC properties were created including (most notably) intense
FIGURE 2
On the relationship between luminescence-composition and -structure of protein-MNCs. (a) Representative overview of protein-type and metal-type with
wavelength of optimized emission maxima (LYZ [79,107,111], BSA [25,29,30,71,75,78,106,110], HAS [105], PEP [72], Trf [34], INS [109], ESM (LYZ) [32]) and QY
reported in parentheses rounded to nearest 0.01. *no QY reported, **emission potentially originates from protein (b) Rigidified and non-rigidified conditions
of Au10(SG)10 (SG - glutathione) [72] and BSA-AuNCs, bottom plots show emission spectra and PL lifetime decay [81]. Reproduced with permission from Ref.
[81]. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Crystal structures of mutant-apo-ferritin protein with accumulated Au atoms before and after reduction
[84]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [84]. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
162

luminescence, selective analyte interaction (e.g., mercury ions
(Hg2+) sensing) and good photostability (i.e., limited photo-
bleaching and photoblinking), which taken together are beneﬁ-
cial for a range of imaging, sensing and detection applications.
Following on from this report, similar one-pot mixing and incu-
bation synthesis approaches have yielded several other protein-
MNCs with luminescence properties (Fig. 2). It is thus under-
standable how such a breakthrough in luminescent MNC syn-
thesis has provided a burgeoning area of research for these
nanomaterials. Of course, the protocol has adapted over the last
decade, for example, to reduce synthesis time with higher reac-
tion temperatures, and the addition of microwave-induced
reduction have been reported [65]. Regarding point ii) made
above, the ability to improve the preservation of protein confor-
mation will impact on future applications of protein-MNCs.
High alkalinity and chemical reactions with reactive metal pre-
cursors (e.g., HAuCl4) are still needed in most one-pot approaches
to create the luminescent MNC component, which will change
the native state of the protecting protein [66,67]. Nevertheless,
alternative synthetic strategies that allow the conjugation of a
preformed MNC with protein molecules could provide an alter-
native approach to protein-MNCs materials [68].
Optoelectronic properties
The intriguing optoelectronic properties of protein-MNCs can be
attributed to a combination of a highly conﬁned ultra-small
MNC component (tens of metal atoms per protein molecule)
with discrete molecule-like electronic transitions, protein resi-
dues capable of stabilizing single metal atom coordination sites,
and MNC species with signiﬁcant charge transfer interactions,
governed by the conformation of the protein host. The most
notable property of protein-MNCs is the luminescence, which
spans the visible to near-infrared wavelengths, determined by
the particle size regime and the electronic structure of the metal
atom type itself. The brightest luminescence can occur in small
clusters of late transition metals [69]. In addition to clusters of
metal atoms, strong luminescence can be observed in a variety
d8 to d10 metal–ligand complexes [70]. Research efforts thus far
suggest that the combination of the protein molecule, metal pre-
cursor, and suitable reaction conditions can produce a vast range
of different MNC sizes (measured as number of metal atoms per
protein determined by mass spectrometry) and emission proper-
ties. Fig. 2a provides a representative overview of some protein-
metal combinations and the resultant optimized emission wave-
lengths. The emission energy of protein-MNCs is not fully tun-
able across the whole of the visible range. Maximal optimized
emission peaks are often reported around 400–500 nm and
600–700 nm. Interestingly, green emission (500–550 nm) is less
common, having only been observed for BSA-PtNCs and lysed
PEP-AuNCs [71,72]. However, higher energy emission (400–
450 nm) may originate from the protein itself and not from the
MNC component; for example, it may arise from dityrosine resi-
dues [6]. According to some studies, the maximal emission peak
can shift during optimization of the QY by varying the metal ion
to protein concentration, or by adjusting pH conditions, for
example [73,74]. Signiﬁcant tuning of the emission energy
through modiﬁcation of the synthetic procedure will likely lead
to lower emission efﬁciency, indicating that the optimal emis-
sion wavelength may inherently depend on the particular com-
bination of metal atom and protein. One potential method for
tuning the optical properties of protein-MNCs is to introduce a
combination of different metals. This has been demonstrated
in a few studies using a mixture of Au and Ag precursors with
BSA in a protein-directed synthesis, or by adding ions such as
Ag(I), Cd(II) or Pb(II) to AuNCs post-synthesis [25,65,75,76]. This
approach could enhance the QY, as has been shown for other
Au/AgNC systems [77], providing more tunable control over
the emission energy. QY values are reported for most combina-
tions plotted (Fig. 2a). Lower QY of 0.01 is typically reported
when a strong reducing agent is required to induce MNC forma-
tion with the protein (e.g., BSA-AgNCs) [78], though this is not
the case for some CuNCs and PtNCs, where hydrazine and ultra-
sonication (combined with ascorbic acid reduction) were used,
respectively, to produce MNCs with QY > 0.15 [71,79]. It will
be interesting to see the progress made with other noble metals
such as Cu and Pt and to understand the nature of the MNC pro-
tected by the protein molecule.
Structure-optoelectronic relationship of protein-MNCs
It is clear that a variety of different MNC compositions (metal
types and cluster sizes) can yield strong luminescence, and that
larger metal cluster sizes (above 3 nm in NP diameter) will
not yield strong luminescence emissions. Thus, the discrete
HOMO-LUMO electronic transitions between metal-centered
states and signiﬁcant ligand–metal charge transfer of protein-
MNCs provide a suitable platform for molecule-like optoelec-
tronic properties [9]. Regarding the origin of the strikingly
intense luminescence property in certain MNCs, recent studies
have
suggested
that
the
signiﬁcant
enhancement
can
be
explained by increased rigidity of the ligand shell surrounding
the MNC, or an aggregation-induced-emission (AIE) occurring
between clusters [80]. It is possible that this emission mechanism
could apply to protein-protected MNCs as well. For example, the
intense luminescence would not be achieved for MNCs without
protein molecules to conﬁne the MNC into a rigidiﬁed state, and
to isolate them from solvent interactions. The concept of a rigid-
iﬁed MNC within a protein molecule was suggested in a recent
report on BSA-AuNCs [81]. This was demonstrated (see Fig. 2b)
by the enhanced luminescence of SG-AuNCs (SG = GSH) via a
phase-transfer process, where SG-AuNCs were encapsulated with
bulky counterions, while on the converse, BSA protein was
digested for BSA-AuNCs using the TRY enzyme to signiﬁcantly
decrease the MNC luminescence, thereby removing the condi-
tions enforcing rigidity.
Depending on the metal atom type, certain amino acid resi-
dues can form covalent interactions with metal species or pro-
vide stabilization through weaker interactions with a zero-
valent metal core [64,82]. The speciﬁc inter-metal interactions
involved, and the structural architecture of the MNC itself, are
still uncertain and could vary markedly across different combina-
tions of protein molecules and metal species. Albeit, the compo-
sition of MNCs coated with protein molecules could very well be
polydisperse, although many reports have aimed at preparing a
single MNC composition. If protein-MNCs were truly monodis-
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
163

perse, a well-resolved absorbance spectrum might be expected,
showing distinct optical transitions. Instead, a broader and
weaker absorption spectrum is typically found in the visible
region, with a strong onset of absorption in the visible blue
and UV regions arising from the aromatic protein residues. More-
over, a recent report even suggested that the luminescence of
BSA-AuNCs may originate from Au(III)-BSA complexes without
any reduction of the Au(III) precursors [83]. A step in the right
direction for understanding the interactions between the MNC
and the protein molecule was investigated by Maity et al. [84],
where they were able to crystallize an AuNC within a mutant
apo-ferritin protein cage (Fig. 2c). Although the report of this sys-
tem did not describe any application-based properties such as
luminescence or sensing, it did provide direct structural evidence
for the assembled AuNC structure and identiﬁed metal ion accu-
mulation sites.
Toxicity of protein-MNCs
A growing concern associated with the practical in vivo applica-
tion of protein-protected MNCs is their possible associated
toxicity.
Studies assessing the toxicity of protein-protected MNCs have
shown the non-toxicity of BSA-protected MNCs towards some
model cell lines [61,62]. For instance, Matulionyte et al. investi-
gated the toxicity of BSA-encapsulated and 2-(N-morpholino)
ethanesulfonic acid (MES)-capped AuNCs. BSA-AuNCs exhibited
insigniﬁcant cytotoxicity compared to MES-AuNCs, suggesting
the important contribution of the protein coating to the biocom-
patibility. The main reason deals with the BSA template prevents
exposure of the Au core to biological components, signiﬁcantly
reducing any negative effects on cell viability. On the contrary,
cell viability decreased after incubation of cells with non-
coated MES-AuNCs, due to reactive oxygen species (ROS) gener-
ation, which is a common observation for MNCs [61]. Similarly,
Kundu et al. showed that protein-protected AgNCs impregnated
onto graphene oxide (GO) sheets had no signiﬁcant effects on
cell viability, conﬁrming that protein coating could modulate
the toxicity of AgNCs [85]. Conversely, some papers studying
the toxicity of BSA-MNCs showed there was an adverse effect
on cell viability, depending on the incubation time and dose
[86,87]. According to their results, BSA-AuNCs exhibited cytotox-
icity against both cancer and normal cell lines over a certain
range of concentration and time via intracellular generation of
ROS. Interestingly, this toxicity could be alleviated by the addi-
tion of additional free BSA molecules. The ultra-small size of
SG-protected MNCs, on the other hand, enables them to be
metabolized,
consequently
decreasing
their
toxicity.
These
GSH-MNCs showed higher renal clearance and lower toxicity
after 24 h compared to AuNCs stabilized in BSA [86]. Hence,
these studies suggest that the eventual use of protein-MNCs in
clinical applications requires judicious consideration.
Fluorescence enhancement strategies
There are numerous examples showing that the size, shape and
surface chemistry of protein-protected MNCs can be readily
tuned by adjusting the environmental conditions, including
the structure of the protein, synthesis method used, temperature,
and pH, which will determine their resulting PL properties [88].
Despite the many advantages of using proteins to template
MNCs, their use is limited given their weak luminescence com-
pared to conventional ﬂuorescent dyes or QDs.
There are certain strategies known to increase the lumines-
cence of MNCs including: 1) increasing the electron donation
density of the ligands; 2) increasing the electro-positivity of the
metal core; 3) AIE; and 4) using ligands containing electron-
rich elements [80,89]. In general, for protein-protected MNCs,
it has been shown that biomolecules with a large number of
electron-rich atoms (e.g. N and O) or groups (e.g. –COOH and –
NH2) can increase the number of reduced metal ions in the
MNC leading to luminescence enhancement. For instance,
Shamsipour and coworkers investigated the reason underlying
the QY enhancement of Hb-AgNCs [90]. They found that the
mechanism involved in the MNC redox reactions mediated by
Hb led to AIE, resulting in a signiﬁcant increase in ﬂuorescence.
The Ag(I) precursor was ﬁrst converted into oligomeric Ag(I)-X
complexes (X: thiol, carboxyl and amine groups) in alkaline
media, and was then reduced to Ag(0) metal by ligands with
electron-rich atoms, (e.g. tryptophan, tyrosine and phenylala-
nine) which are abundant in human Hb (Fig. 3). Subsequently,
the Ag(0)NCs-Ag(I)Hb complex core–shell nanostructure led to
a dual emission/single excitation nanoprobe with a high QY.
FIGURE 3
Synthesis mechanism identification of Hb protected AgNCs [90]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [90]. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
164

Other strategies have focused on reducing the size of the
MNCs in order to maximize their photoluminescent properties.
For example, the presence of metal ion binding sites within the
protein template is an effective mechanism to enhance the QY
of protein-protected MNCs [91]. Yarramala et al. used metalla-
tion of the protein template using external ions as a strategy
for improving the ﬂuorescence intensity of AuNCs formed by
a-lactalbumin (a-LA). In this study, the addition of lanthanum
ions (La3+) occupied the metal ion binding sites within the pro-
tein and restricted AuNC growth, so that smaller AuNCs with
higher emission intensity were formed. Another approach to
increase the QY of MNCs has been the use of ionic liquids (ILs)
as the reaction medium. In another work, Wang et al. showed
that the use of imidazolium ILs in the synthesis process of BSA-
AuNCs resulted in an enhancement in ﬂuorescence intensity
and improved stability. Direct donation of delocalized electrons
from the imidazolium ring structure contributed to restricting
the size of the MNCs formed and thus, to the luminescence
enhancement [92]. Metal-enhanced luminescence is another
effective technique to maximize the QY. Muhammed et al.
showed improved quantum efﬁciency of luminescent mercapto-
succinic acid-protected AuNPs by employing BSA as an etching
agent [93]. It is likely that BSA could etch the surface atoms of
the NPs, leading to a reduction in the Au core size resulting in
highly luminescent AuNCs. Also, the metal-ion-induced lumi-
nescence enhancement can be used to synthesize cluster systems
with enhanced optical properties and different ion-cluster inter-
actions can be used to develop metal ion sensors as studied
recently by Mohanty et al. with Au38-BSA [76]. Other approaches
that have been successfully applied to enhance the QY of MNCs
include: i) using sonochemical and microwave synthetic path-
ways, ii) forming “protein-corona”-like assemblies on the surface
of NCs, iii) encapsulating NCs into metal–organic frameworks
(MOFs), and iv) using mixed proteins for coating [71,94–97].
Considering that protein-MNCs are situated between the
realms of metallic semiconductors and molecular systems, or
are hybrids of such systems, it is of interest to understand how
the MNC component contributes to the observed optical proper-
ties. The photoexcitation and emission mechanism of protein-
MNCs is coming into focus from lately published papers on
atomically-precise MNCs. For example, correlating precise struc-
ture, HOMO-LUMO electronic energy levels, and optical proper-
ties of Au25(SR)18 NCs has enabled a detailed understanding on
the origin of the optical properties [98,99]. This information
can somewhat be translated to protein-MNCs to better under-
stand their PL mechanism since similar structures as S-Au(I)-S oli-
gomers are likely to exist [81]. If the MNC structure takes the
form of Au25(SR)18, it has been suggested for BSA-AuNCs that
an efﬁcient intersystem crossover event occurs during the
photo-relaxation process due to a small energy gap between sin-
glet state and S–Au(I)–S triplet states leading to the observed
decay times from ns to ms [100,101].
Parameters such as Stokes shift and PL decay time can provide
some useful information regarding the nature of the MNC and
the interaction between the MNC and the protein molecule.
Large Stokes shifts more than 150 nm have often been reported
for
protein-MNCs,
which
indicate
signiﬁcant
metal-ligand
charge transfer as a result of which, photoexcitation can cause
a large degree of relaxation to the ground state. Moreover, reori-
entation of dipoles can occur via vibrational energy dissipation
from the MNC, leading to the stabilization of the protein resi-
dues with respect to the surrounding solvent molecules. If the
MNC component is only weakly bound to the protein molecule,
a smaller Stokes shift might be expected due to lower protection
from solvent interactions. For instance, dendrimer-stabilized
AuNCs of various sizes (but similar in size to AuNCs protected
by proteins) are only weakly-protected metal clusters and show
emission across the visible range with Stokes shifts <100 nm
[102]. Considering the PL decay time, metallic clusters with fewer
metal–ligand interactions (having a zero valence state) should
exhibit a fast decay on the order of ps to ns due to the increase
rate of excitation/relaxation electronic transitions [103]. If the
MNC can be regarded as molecular in structure, having more
interactions with the protein on average per metal atom (and
likely in an oxidized valence state), or having inter-metal
d10–d10 interactions, the PL decay time may be two to three mag-
nitudes longer than that of a metallic particle [104]. Taking into
account these two photophysical properties, a signiﬁcant differ-
ence in the structural environments of protein-MNCs and thus,
molecular orbital levels, may cause the difference in PL decay
time. For example, protein-MNCs formed from CuNCs (HSA,
BSA, LYZ) [79,105,106], PtNCs (BSA, LYZ) [71,107] and AgNCs
(BSA) [108] have Stokes shifts of <150 nm and average lumines-
cence decay times of 1 ns, whereas protein-MNCs formed from
AuNCs (INS, Trf, BSA, LYZ) [109–111] have Stokes shifts >150 nm
and average PL decay times of 100 – 1000 ns.
The second interesting property of protein-MNCs is the possi-
bility of selective and sensitive physicochemical interactions
with analytes ranging from metal ions to enzymes (as will be dis-
cussed in detail in the following sections). These speciﬁc protein-
MNC–analyte interactions have often been explored as potential
platforms for sensing/diagnostic applications, which can achieve
detection limits of nM or even pM [112]. The method of analyte
detection is typically based on an increase or decrease in lumi-
nescence intensity, which can either occur due to protein-
analyte or metal–analyte binding or recognition, and is some-
times reversible, rendering the protein-MNC sensor reusable
[113]. The decrease in protein-AuNC luminescence when inter-
acting with heavy metal ions such as Hg2+ has been attributed
to closed-shell, metallophilic interactions (d10–d10). Through this
interaction, Hg2+ ions interrupt charge carriers after photoexcita-
tion of protein-AuNCs [114,115]. On the other hand, other
heavy metals such as Pb2+ can cause aggregation of the protein-
MNCs, as was shown for BSA-CuNCs [106]. In this regard, a con-
formational change to the protein molecule around the MNC
will
also
cause
a
change
in
the
luminescence
intensity
[116,117]. For detection of molecular analytes, quenching of
the luminescence can occur through oxidation of protein amino
acid residues that bind to the MNC, for example, the oxidation of
thiols in horseradish-AuNCs can be caused by hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) [118]. There is also the possibility of an etching process of
the MNC itself, as shown by the interaction between BSA-AuNCs
and cyanide ions [119]. For detection of biomolecules and larger
molecules, strong binding afﬁnities between certain metal ions
and these biomolecules can be exploited to develop an appropri-
ate sensing mechanism using protein-MNCs as the platform.
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
165

This was demonstrated using EWP-AuNCs in which Cu2+ ions
had been employed to quench the luminescence. In the presence
of ATP, Cu2+ ions would dissociate from the protein-AuNC con-
jugates by an interaction with the ATP, thereby restoring the
luminescence of the protein-AuNCs as an ATP biosensor [120].
Diagnostic applications in biomedicine
Chemical and biological sensing applications
The sensing of important chemical and biological analytes has
great signiﬁcance in biomedical, forensic and environmental
sciences
[121,122].
The
design
of
highly
sensitive,
cost-
effective, and biocompatible sensors requires advanced technol-
ogy which involves fundamental knowledge of chemistry, biol-
ogy and material science [123,124]. In general, the functional
operation of sensors requires two stages: (i) a recognition element
to provide selective/speciﬁc binding to the target species; (ii) a
transducer component to provide a measurable signal of the
binding event. The efﬁciency of these two stages governs the
overall efﬁciency of the sensor in terms of response time, selec-
tivity, and limit of detection (LOD) [125]. The ideal sensor
should be facile to produce, robust, yet delicate enough for opti-
mum performance. For instance, the detection of toxic chemicals
containing Hg, lead (Pb), Cd, chromium (Cr) and arsenic (As)
ions is of utmost importance owing to their long-term bioaccu-
mulation in vital organs and tissues, resulting in alteration of
physiological
functions
causing
serious
health
hazards
[126,127]. Recently, protein-protected MNCs have shown great
potential as chemical sensors and biosensors with very low LODs
[128]. Besides being non-toxic as compared to many organic
molecules/dyes and QDs, these MNCs are intrinsically lumines-
cent which makes their detection process label free and highly
sensitive [129].
Cancer biomarker detection
Cancer continues to be a major cause of death across the world as
evident from the latest GLOBCAN 2018 report, which estimates
18.1 million new cases of cancer and 9.6 million deaths due to 36
different types of cancer [130]. This number seems to escalate
every year, and hence detection at early stages and precise diag-
nosis of cancer is highly desirable for the successful treatment
of the disease. In this context, a cancer biomarker is a molecular
indicator of the presence of cancer in the body or changes in
cancerous cells in response to different kinds of therapy [131].
Cancer biomarkers are typically DNA, RNA, cell metabolites, or
tumor-speciﬁc membrane receptors, and the mentioned issues
play a crucial role in cancer diagnosis and treatment [132]. The
use of protein-MNCs simpliﬁes the post modiﬁcation process
with various available functional groups, allowing speciﬁc iden-
tiﬁcation, interaction, differentiation and imaging of tumor-
speciﬁc moieties. Out of all the reported methods employed for
cancer detection by MNCs, electrochemistry, colorimetry, and
ﬂuorimetry techniques have been the most frequently used.
Zhou et al. designed a ternary nanostructure based on an elec-
trochemiluminescence (ECL) approach comprising BSA-AuNCs
as the luminophore, tris(3-aminoethyl)amine as a co-reactant,
and Pd–CuO as an accelerator [133]. This ECL assay could efﬁ-
ciently measure carcinoembryonic antigen (a protein derived
from colon cancer and embryonic tissue). The ECL signal of
the luminophore (which was normally weak) was greatly ampli-
ﬁed due to the combination of the luminophore, co-reactant,
and the accelerator resulting in ultrasensitive detection [133].
In another study, BSA-AuNCs were incorporated inside porous
CaCO3 nanospheres, and subsequently, these hybrids were fur-
ther surface decorated with an antibody (Ab) against neuron-
speciﬁc enolase (NSE), conjugated to horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) to form the sensor (CaCO3-BSA-AuNCs-HRP-Ab2) [134].
This hybrid biosensor served as a versatile ﬂuorescence as well
as an electrochemical probe for the detection of the NSE cancer
biomarker. The sensor speciﬁcally bound to NSE attached to
modiﬁed carbon nanotubes. After that, NSE was detected by ﬂu-
orescence upon the release of AuNCs from the substrate in the
presence of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), whereas,
for electrochemical detection a H2O2-mediated HRP catalyzed
reaction was employed [134].
AuNCs have been reported to display intrinsic peroxidase-like
activity which can be used for designing bioassays [135,136]. Tao
et al. synthesized LYZ-AuNCs and attached them to GO via elec-
trostatic interactions. The peroxidase activity of the GO-LYZ-
AuNCs was tested in the presence of 3,30,5,50-tetramethylbenzi
dine (TMB) and H2O2, whereby a strong blue color could be
detected by the naked eye. GO-LYZ-AuNCs were then covalently
modiﬁed with folic acid (FA) to form an ultrasensitive colorimet-
ric cancer detection assay by selectively binding to the folate
receptors (FRs) expressed on cancer cells [137]. In a continuation
of this work, Tao et al. exploited the same peroxidase activity of
AuNCs (stabilized with BSA instead of LYZ) to develop a robust
assay for colorimetric sensing of human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer cells. Based on the
change in the absorbance produced by the catalytic reaction in
the presence of TMB and H2O2, the HER2 Abs (Ab-HER2)
anchored to the surface of AuNCs-loaded liposomes (AuNCs-
LPs) (BSA-AuNCs-LPs-Ab-HER2) that were adsorbed to SKBR3
(HER2
high)
and
Michigan
Cancer
Foundation-7
(MCF-7)
(HER2 low) breast cancer cells could be detected by UV–Vis spec-
trometry [138].
Liu et al. took advantage of NIR ﬂuorescence of TRY-AuNCs to
target HeLa cells. TRY-AuNCs were surface-modiﬁed with FA,
which enabled them to selectively detect FR-positive HeLa tumor
cells with high afﬁnity [31]. Pradeep and co-workers prepared
BSA-AuNCs with a similar FA surface conjugation. This ﬂuores-
cent probe speciﬁcally detected FR-positive oral cancer KB and
breast cancer MCF-7 cells, whereas FR-negative lung cancer
A549 cells remained unstained by the probe [139]. Some
enzymes like telomerase can act as a useful cancer biomarker
because telomerase is activated in almost 85% of cancer cell
types. When telomerase is activated and the telomeres become
elongated in the cancer cells, the deoxy-ribonucleoside triphos-
phates are converted into nucleic acids along with the formation
of pyrophosphate ions (PPi) molecules as byproducts [140]. Addi-
tion of telomerase to the medium containing BSA-AuNCs-Cu2+
provided a simple and sensitive real time analysis of telomerase
activity as a cancer biomarker by measuring changes in the ﬂuo-
rescence intensity of the probe [140]. Thus, protein-MNCs,
because of their emissive properties, could provide sensitive
detection of extracellular cancer biomarkers based on changes
in ﬂuorescence intensity [141] (Fig. 4). Besides the ﬂuorescence
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
166

properties of protein-MNCs, their electrochemical effect could
also be utilized for biomarker assays. Mousavi and coworkers
described
BSA-protected
PbNCs
for
an
electrochemical
immunoassay for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) detec-
tion. The signal of the immunosensor was dual-ampliﬁed by the
electrochemical stripping current of Pb and PbNCs, which
enabled detection of very low quantities of EGFR [142].
Biomolecules and pharmaceutical compounds
By exploiting their stable ﬂuorescence properties and biocompat-
ibility, protein-protected MNCs have played a major role in the
sensing of biological molecules for more than a decade [128].
Small molecules such as GSH have important biological signiﬁ-
cance. The detection and quantiﬁcation of GSH as the most
abundant thiol in cells is important because it takes part in sev-
eral biological reactions such as neutralizing free radicals and per-
oxides, and is associated with HIV expression and cancer therapy
[143]. Bhardiya et al. synthesized amylase-protected AuNCs as a
GSH biosensing assay. The gradual addition of GSH to these
AuNCs resulted in quenching of the NCs ﬂuorescence due to
the formation of a non-ﬂuorescent complex [144]. Similarly,
LYZ type-VI stabilized blue-emitting AuNCs were synthesized
for highly sensitive detection of GSH with a LOD as low as
20 nM
[145].
Lin
et
al.
synthesized
BSA-AuNCs
for
sub-
nanomolar detection of cystatin C, a cysteine protease inhibitor.
Their procedure involved quenching of the ﬂuorescence inten-
sity of the AuNCs in the presence of papain (a cysteine protease
that destroyed the BSA coating), whereas the absence of papain
resulted in the retention of ﬂuorescence [146]. A similar ﬂuores-
cence recovery procedure was also studied using gluten-protected
AuNCs for “turn-on” sensing of creatinine in human blood. The
ﬂuorescence of the AuNCs was initially “turned-off” by addition
of picric acid (PA); however, on subsequent addition of crea-
tinine to these quenched AuNCs, the ﬂuorescence was recovered
due to the formation of a creatinine–PA complex, which had
stronger binding afﬁnity than the initial gluten-PA complex
[147].
Glucose is the major source of energy in living cells, however,
its over-abundance may cause diseases such as diabetes, and
hence its quantitative detection is essential [148,149]. The sens-
ing of glucose can be monitored by the formation of H2O2 as a
reaction by-product during the enzymatic oxidation of glucose
[129,150]. The generated H2O2 may induce degradation of the
MNC core resulting in the quenching of ﬂuorescence, and there-
fore, the levels of glucose can be determined. This technique was
demonstrated by Jin et al., where they synthesized BSA-AuNCs
that exhibited emission in the NIR region. These ﬂuorescent
BSA-AuNCs showed good performance for the detection of
H2O2, which signiﬁcantly quenched the ﬂuorescence intensity
of the MNCs. Glucose detection by BSA-AuNCs was enabled by
the catalytic oxidation of glucose in the presence of GOD with
the generation of H2O2 as a by-product. From quenching results,
the LOD for glucose was estimated to be 5 lM [151]. Apart from
BSA, LYZ-CuNCs have also been used to detect glucose based on
ﬂuorescence quenching. However in this work, glucose was sim-
ply added to the NCs sample without applying any catalytic pro-
cedure [152]. It is worth noting that glycoprotein-functionalized
AuNCs could be an attractive tools for the analysis and under-
standing
of
carbohydrate-protein
interactions
as
recently
demonstrated by Brzezicka et al. [153]. The biological molecule
bilirubin is an important product of the biological breakdown
of heme. An excess of bilirubin in the blood (greater than
50 lM) is found in a serious disease called jaundice, [154]. In
two different studies, BSA-CuNCs [155] and HSA-AuNCs [156]
were successfully employed for the detection of bilirubin in
blood and serum samples with high sensitivity. The mechanism
of bilirubin sensing by BSA-CuNCs involved the ﬂuorescence
recovery of the MNCs, which was initially “turned-off” in the
presence of Fe3+ but subsequently “turned-on” due to an interac-
tion between Fe3+ and bilirubin that removed Fe3+ ions from the
system. On the other hand, quenching of ﬂuorescence was
observed when bilirubin was added to HSA-AuNCs [156].
Other biomolecules like mangiferin have also been detected
by BSA-CuNCs with a low LOD value [157]. In addition to serum
proteins, the chicken egg protein, OVA, has also been used to
RESEARCH: Review
FIGURE 4
Schematic showing the mechanism of cancer biomarker detection and molecular sensing by protein-protected MNCs.
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
167

synthesize MNCs with good biocompatibility and optical proper-
ties, which enabled them to act as efﬁcient sensors for different
biomolecules. OVA-CuNCs successfully detected another essen-
tial biomolecule, FA (LOD  0.18 lM) [158], and also the toxic
compound ricin (LOD  4.6 lM) [159]. Shamsipour and co-
workers developed Hb-protected AuNCs for the analysis of cyto-
chrome c (Cyt c), a biomarker for the apoptotic process in cells.
The ﬂuorescence of AuNCs decreased due to the ﬂuorescence res-
onance energy transfer (FRET) from Hb-AuNCs as a donor, to the
heme group in Cyt c as an acceptor. The decrease in ﬂuorescence
intensity of AuNCs enabled the “turn-off” assay to measure Cyt c
at nanomolar level [160]. Ghosh et al. used HSA as a template to
synthesize blue-emitting HSA-AgNCs. When AgNCs were treated
with the serine protease, TRY, the NC ﬂuorescence was signiﬁ-
cantly quenched due to the proteolysis of HSA into smaller pep-
tide
fragments.
The
quenching
was
accompanied
by
the
generation of an unusual red emission band with an enhanced
QY. These AgNCs provided a new approach to sense TRY as well
as to study protein metabolism involved in the proteolytic pro-
cess [161]. In another recent study, a hybrid platform comprised
of reduced GO and BSA was created for in situ synthesis of AuNCs
that could detect TRY with a sensitivity of 100 ng/ml [162].
Protein-protected MNCs have also shown the ability to sense
pharmaceutical molecules and drugs. BSA-AuNCs detected the
antibacterial drug ciproﬂoaxin [163], and the neurotransmitter
dopamine [164]; while papain-AuNCs were able to sense
D--
penicillamine [165]. The mechanism of drug sensing for both
of these AuNCs involved Cu2+-mediated ﬂuorescence quenching
of the MNCs. With the gradual addition of the drug, a complex
was formed between the protein template and the drug dissociat-
ing the Cu2+, restoring the ﬂuorescence of AuNCs. BSA-protected
MNCs have been successful at sensing rutin [166], clenbuterol
[167], metronidazole [168] and nitroimidazole [168]. The sensing
mechanism for all of the mentioned drugs involved direct
quenching of MNC ﬂuorescence, which was either ascribed to
electron transfer from the MNC to the drug molecule or to a
chemical reaction between the two [166–168]. The detection of
cysteamine (CSH), involved chemical etching of the MNC core
by CSH causing a loss of ﬂuorescence [168]. MNCs have also
shown the ability to selectively detect Escherichia coli bacteria
involving a ﬂuorescence recovery mechanism. The ﬂuorescence
of the Cu2+-BSA-AuNC complex was recovered by copper binding
involving the redox pathways of E. coli. The other three types of
bacteria used as controls were not able to “turn-on” the ﬂuores-
cence of the NCs in the same way [169].
Metal ions and small molecules
The unique ﬂuorescence characteristics of protein-protected
MNCs have been applied for metal ion sensing and quantiﬁca-
tion. Some of these metal ions are essential biological compo-
nents, while others are environmentally toxic causing health
hazards. Either way, it is important to detect these metallic ele-
ments with high precision and sensitivity. Heavy metal ions such
as Hg2+ and Pb2+are highly toxic to human health and the envi-
ronment [170]. During the past decade, there have been numer-
ous reports describing heavy metal detection exploiting the
change in the ﬂuorescence of photostable protein-protected
MNCs (Fig. 4) [171,172]. The complex formation between Hg2+
and the cysteine residues in BSA through Hg-S bond formation
was primarily responsible for the ﬂuorescence quenching of
BSA-AuNCs which enabled sensitive and selective detection of
Hg2+ in different samples [173]. Another plausible mechanism
for the ﬂuorescence “turn-off” behavior of MNCs may be the
presence of a large number of non-reduced M+ ions on the sur-
face of the protein-MNCs, which direct the high-afﬁnity d10
(Hg2+)–d10 (M+) metallophilic interaction. This Hg2+–M+ bond
attenuates the ﬂuorescence of MNCs, allowing the detection
and quantiﬁcation of Hg2+ ions [115]. Recently, a variety of
protein-templated MNCs, such as GOD-templated AuNCs [33],
TRY-AuNCs [174], b–lactoglobulin-AuNCs [175], casein-AuNCs
[176], bimetallic Au-AgNCs protected by keratin [177], bimetallic
Pt-AuNCs protected by BSA [178] and mixed proteins (BSA/LYZ)
stabilized Au/AgNCs [94] have all been shown to function as efﬁ-
cient Hg2+ sensing assays, mostly via “turn-off” of their ﬂuores-
cence, with very low LODs and functionality in real samples.
Lin et al. reported LYZ type-VI protected AuNCs that could selec-
tively detect Hg2+ as well as CH3Hg+ ions with LODs of 0.003 nM
and 4 nM, respectively [112]. The LODs met the limits set for per-
mitted Hg levels in drinking water by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA). In addition, bimetallic Pt-AuNCs pro-
tected by BSA showed ratiometric sensing for cysteine in the
presence of Hg2+ ions involving strong interaction between the
thiol group of cysteine and Hg2+ ions [178].
The detection of another heavy metal, Pb, is also important
due
to
its
toxic
effects
on
the
human
nervous
system
[125,179]. Pal and co-workers developed BSA-protected lumines-
cent CuNCs which acted as highly sensitive and selective “turn-
off” ﬂuorescence sensors for Pb2+ ions [106]. On the other hand,
Kawasaki et al. synthesized PEP-stabilized AuNCs with a dual
metal sensing ability, where in the presence of Hg2+ ions ﬂuores-
cence quenching occurred, and with the addition of Pb2+ ions
enhanced the ﬂuorescence of the MNCs by almost 8-fold [72].
Although the mechanism responsible for this dual sensing was
not discussed in detail, a possible explanation may be due to
metallophilic interactions as described above.
The detection of other metal ions, namely Cu, Zn and Co is
also important because excessive amounts in the human body
might have negative consequences such as cellular damage, caus-
ing heart, lung, liver, kidney and brain disorders [180–182]. In an
interesting work, Yang et al. synthesized lysine-AuNCs, which
cooperatively interacted with BSA-AuNCs to show enhanced ﬂu-
orescence. The nanoconjugate selectively detected Cu2+ ions by
interactions with surface ligands such as COOH and NH2 groups
of BSA and lysine resulting in ﬂuorescence quenching of AuNCs
[183]. Similarly, Hb-AuNCs have been found to be a selective and
sensitive ﬂuorescence “turn-off” probe for the quantiﬁcation of
low concentrations of Cu2+. The interaction between the Hb pro-
tecting shell and the Cu2+ ions induced the aggregation, which
led to ﬂuorescence quenching of Hb-AuNCs [28]. Fan et al.
showed that BSA-AgNCs combined with a zeolite imidazole
framework (ZIF) was capable of ultrasensitive detection of Cu2+
in blood [95]. Ghosh and co-workers synthesized two different
types of AgNCs utilizing HSA as template with interconvertible
ﬂuorescence characteristics. The blue-emitting AgNCs indepen-
dently detected Co2+ (via ﬂuorescence quenching) and Zn2+ ions
(via ﬂuorescence enhancement). The successive addition of Co2+
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
168

followed by Zn2+ ions to the same sample restored the ﬂuores-
cence of the AgNCs to its original value. Interestingly, by chang-
ing the emission from blue to red, these AgNCs were able to
sense Hg2+ at the LOD of environmental standards. The sensing
mechanism for all three ions (Co2+, Zn2+, Hg2+) was ascribed to
an electronic phenomenon involving excited states of MNCs
[184]. In another study, BSA-AuNCs has been shown to detect
heavy metals Co and Cd via differential interaction which
resulted in “turn-off” and “turn-on” luminescent properties,
respectively [185].
In addition, several other protein-MNC-based assays have
been developed for selective and speciﬁc metal ion detection,
which include papain-AuNCs for Cu2+ detection [73], BSA-
AuNCs for Zn2+ detection [186] and protamine-AuNCs for Pb2+
detection [187]. In addition to metal cations, the detection of
anions must, of course, taken into account. Inorganic ions like
CN, S2 and NO2
 are known to have an adverse impact on cel-
lular respiration, or can act as potential carcinogens [128].
Recently, ﬂuorescent BSA-AuNCs were applied as a chemosensor
for CN ions. The mode of action of the sensor involved the for-
mation of a very stable Au(CN)2
2 complex accompanied by ﬂuo-
rescence attenuation of the AuNCs. The CN mediated etching
reaction of the BSA-AuNCs could be detected visually by a color
change from deep brown to colorless, thus facilitating highly
speciﬁc sensing in the simultaneous presence of interfering spe-
cies [119]. A similar CN ion detection method was also demon-
strated for LYZ-AuNCs [188]. Zhang et al. showed that addition
of S2- ions to silk ﬁbroin (SF)-CuNCs resulted in AIE with an
almost 3-fold increase in ﬂuorescence, thus providing a platform
for “turn-on” detection of S2- ions [189]. On the other hand, BSA-
AuNCs showed ﬂuorescence quenching behavior in the presence
of S2- ions due to the formation of insoluble Au2S precipitates
[190]. Yang and coworkers utilized BSA-AuNCs for the fabrica-
tion of a Boolean “NAND” logic gate for the detection of NO2

ions [191]. It was observed that under strongly acidic conditions
that NO2
 in the presence of H2O2 quenched the ﬂuorescence of
BSA-AuNCs via oxidation of the BSA scaffold. This ﬁnding was
used to design a Boolean NAND logic gate using NO2
 and
H2O2 as inputs and the ﬂuorescence intensity ratio (F/F0; where
F and F0 correspond to the ﬂuorescence in the presence and
absence of the inputs) as the output [191]. For ion sensors, the
most crucial parameter is to evaluate the sensitivity and speci-
ﬁcity of the probe. The conventional way to determine the sens-
ing efﬁciency is by constructing Stern-Volmer intensity plots. In
addition, the speciﬁcity of a sensing probe can be tested through
the addition of similar but different ions, or when other interfer-
ing species are added to the analyte in the medium.
Protein-MNCs have also been used for the sensing of small
molecules. AgNCs stabilized by denatured LYZ (dLYZ-AgNCs)
exhibited a ratiometric ﬂuorescent sensing ability for H2O2 and
hydroxyl radicals (OH) by displaying a dual emission. In the
presence of Fenton reagent, dLYZ-AgNCs behaved as a “turn-
off” ﬂuorescence sensor for H2O2 monitored at 640 nm due to
OH-induced quenching. In contrast, it behaved as a “turn-on”
ﬂuorescence sensor when monitored at 450 nm due to OH-
induced oxidation of the tyrosine residues in LYZ. The ratio of
ﬂuorescence changes of the two emission peaks (F450/F640) was
used to quantify H2O2 with adequate LOD. As shown by confocal
imaging, dLYZ-AgNCs possessed sensitivity towards the ﬂuctua-
tion of OH levels in living cells, hence it could be used as a
promising tracker for ROS-induced oxidative damage to proteins
[192]. In another study, polymeric microcapsules were fabricated
co-encapsulating BSA-AuNCs and FluoSpheres (FSs). From the
dual emission peak of the microcapsule, it was observed that
the ﬂuorescence peak due to BSA-AuNCs (red emission) was
highly sensitive to the H2O2 concentration, showing quenching
behavior, whereas, the FSs were found to be insensitive to H2O2
and
the
ﬂuorescence
peak
(green
emission)
remained
unchanged. Based on this ﬁnding, a novel ratiometric ﬂuores-
cence sensor was designed for ultrasensitive detection of H2O2.
When internalized within macrophage cells, the microcapsules
could
detect
intracellular
H2O2
ﬂuctuations
occurring
in
response to external chemical stimuli [193]. HRP-AuNCs were
employed for quantitative detection of H2O2 by exploiting the
catalytic activity of HRP towards H2O2. The oxygen radicals that
were generated from the reaction between H2O2 and HRP oxi-
dized Au-S bonds leading to the formation of S-S bonds and
aggregation of AuNCs accompanied by ﬂuorescence quenching
[118]. HRP-AuNCs were also used in a microﬂuidic droplet con-
ﬁguration for the detection of 200–400 attomoles of H2O2. With
this microﬂuidic technique, which contained an ultrasmall vol-
ume (4.2 nL) of a microdroplet of HRP-AuNCs, H2O2 secreted
from a single cell, which was introduced in the setup, was sufﬁ-
cient to induce pronounced ﬂuorescence quenching of HRP-
AuNCs. The study also provided a method to distinguish
between cancerous and normal cells since the former has a
higher H2O2 content leading to greater quenching of HRP-
AuNC ﬂuorescence when compared to the signal observed in
the presence of normal cells [194]. Apart from H2O2, TRY-
AgNCs were used for the sensing of NADH and ethanol via an
enzyme-catalyzed reaction [195]. BSA-AuNCs were employed
for ratiometric detection of malachite green (MG) involving a
FRET mechanism. When MG was added gradually to BSA-
AuNCs, a signiﬁcant energy transfer took place from the donor
(AuNCs) to the acceptor MG, resulting in ﬂuorescence quench-
ing of AuNCs. Since FRET is primarily a dynamic quenching pro-
cess, ﬂuorescence lifetime measurements conﬁrmed its validity
[196]. BSA-AuNCs were also used as sensors for melamine [197]
and salicylaldehyde [186].
Temperature and pH sensing
The temperature effect is another parameter of interest to moni-
tor in many biological processes since the activity of enzymes
and other cellular processes is temperature-dependent. A small
change in temperature can lead to major alterations in biological
reactions [198–200]. Temperature sensors like thermocouples are
not realistic for in vivo temperature sensing since their mode of
action is in ‘contact’ with the target location [199,200]. In this
context, protein-protected MNCs have shown great potential as
in vivo thermometers. By exploiting their stable ﬂuorescence
properties, water solubility and biocompatibility, the MNCs
can operate as ‘non-contact’ probes for temperature sensing at
sub-micron
scales
[199].
Ghosh
et
al.
synthesized
HSA-
protected blue-emitting CuNCs which could act as reversible
temperature sensor. When the HSA-CuNCs were heated and sub-
sequently cooled within the temperature range of 20–55 C, a
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
169

ﬂuorescence “turn-off” with a 25% drop in ﬂuorescence inten-
sity was observed during heating, which was restored to 100%
during a subsequent cooling process. The sensing procedure was
highly versatile as was evident from hysteresis results, which
showed almost the same ﬂuorescence properties after 5 cycles
of temperature variation. The temperature sensing ability of
these photo-stable HSA-CuNCs was further demonstrated via
reversible FRET experiments using an external organic dye
[105]. In another study, Chen and co-workers synthesized BSA-
AuNCs with similar reversible sensing characteristics. The red
emission of the AuNCs dropped 40% upon increasing the tem-
perature from 10 to 45 C. However, when cooling back to 10 C,
the emission was restored, but with a slightly higher value than
the initial ﬂuorescence intensity due to hysteresis. After several
synthetic modiﬁcations, they were ﬁnally successful in demon-
strating that these BSA-AuNCs could function as efﬁcient
“nano”thermometers [201]. Gelatin-stabilized AgNCs [202] and
EWP-AuAgNCs [203] were also demonstrated to act as reversible
temperature sensors in the temperature range 10–60 C. The
mechanism for this reversible temperature sensing was ascribed
to the thermal unfolding of the protein scaffolds during the heat-
ing process, while subsequent cooling caused refolding. This
phenomenon directly affected the optical properties of the
MNCs, where the loss/gain in ﬂuorescence was proportional to
the rate of non-radiative decay pathway, depending on the pro-
tein structure. Importantly, in all of the above studies, the upper
temperature limit was set 65 C because refolding of the protein
conformation
becomes
impossible
at
higher
temperature
[105,201–203].
Regulation of the intracellular pH also plays an important role
in many cellular functions like ion transport, signaling, and
membrane dynamics [204]. The physiological pH varies within
the range of 7.0–7.4 due to the balance of dissolved ions. In this
context, protein-templated MNCs also exhibit pH-dependent
optical properties, which have been exploited by several research
groups to develop versatile and reversible pH sensors for biolog-
ical applications. TRY-CuNCs were synthesized and tested for pH
sensing over a wide pH range from 2 to 12 using a series of buffer
solutions. The ﬂuorescence intensity of the CuNCs exhibited a
linear decrease with increasing pH, with the highest emission
at acidic pH, but negligible emission under alkaline conditions
due to the formation of precipitates at high pH. It was also
shown that the changes in ﬂuorescence were reversible because
they remained the same after varying the pH over 7 cycles
[205]. SF-protected CuNCs were also found to be highly efﬁcient
and reversible pH sensors. However, in contrast to TRY-MNCs,
the ﬂuorescence intensity of SF-CuNCs exhibited an increased
emission with increasing pH which was attributed to the depro-
tonation of the amide and carboxyl groups in SF at alkaline pH
[206]. Similarly, CuNCs stabilized by EWP [207] and BSA [208]
also displayed pH sensing properties. The ﬂuorescence response
of the CuNCs stabilized by these two proteins showed similar
pH dependence to those found with SF. Interestingly, BSA and
EWP possess isoelectric points (pI) at acidic pH (4.5), whereas
the pI of TRY is at alkaline pH (10). When the pH  pI, proteins
tend to precipitate out of solution and the MNCs lose their ﬂuo-
rescence. Hence, the plot of ﬂuorescence response against pH
showed an opposite trend when the CuNCs were stabilized by
BSA/EWP in contrast to TRY. Xiong, et al. synthesized BSA-
AuNCs which functioned as an “ON/OFF” pH switch based on
the ﬂuorescence signal. The ﬂuorescence of the sensor was highly
sensitive to pH value; at pH > 5 ﬂuorescence was “turned-on”
and at pH < 5 it was “turned-off”. In addition, these BSA-
AuNCs could be immobilized on a highly stable and porous agar-
ose hydrogel to construct a pH indicator that allowed visual
detection
[209].
Ali
and
co-workers
reported
that
BSA-
templated AuNCs could be applied as intracellular pH sensors.
BSA-AuNCs were labeled with a pH indicator bromothymol blue
(BTB) to modulate the pH sensitivity of the ﬂuorescent MNCs.
The emission of the native BSA-AuNCs was found to be pH inde-
pendent within the range 2–11. On the other hand, BTB-labelled
BSA-AuNCs were shown to detect post-mortem changes in blood
pH that occur after the death of the red blood cells (RBCs). Thus,
this nanosensor could be used as a potential forensic tool for esti-
mating the time passed since death [210]. In another study, a
dual temperature/pH-responsive ﬂuorescent probe was con-
structed based on the integration of a pH-sensitive organic dye,
ﬂuorescein-5-isothiocyanate (FITC) and BSA-AuNCs. The ﬂuores-
cence of this hybrid compound was sensitive to both tempera-
ture and pH changes. The resultant FITC-labelled BSA-AuNCs
were applied as an “AND” logic gate with temperature and pH
as inputs and the ratiometric ﬂuorescence signal of FITC-
labelled BSA-AuNCs as the output. The ﬂuorescence signal ratio
of FITC to BSA-AuNCs was used for intracellular temperature
and pH monitoring in HeLa cells [211]. Wei et al. synthesized
BSA-protected AuNCs that showed enhancement in QY by vary-
ing the pH of the reaction medium and also the temperature. The
synergistic effect of these two parameters resulted in core–shell
MNCs comprising of Au(0)–Au(I) aurophilic interactions which
stabilizes the excited state of the NCs and increases its lumines-
cence [212].
Detection of neurotransmitters
Neurotransmitters are chemicals that function as messengers of
neural activity and can be classiﬁed into several groups such as
biogenic amines, amino acids, peptides, and gaseous neurotrans-
mitters. Common neurotransmitters include dopamine, acetyl-
choline, epinephrine, 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT; serotonin),
histidine and hydrogen sulphide (H2S), which have all been
detected by using the protein-MNCs [213–218].
Dopamine is an important neurotransmitter released by neu-
rons that plays a signiﬁcant role in the central nervous, renal,
hormonal, and cardiovascular systems. It is also an important
biomarker for diseases such as schizophrenia and Parkinson’s.
Conventional methods for dopamine detection generally rely
on electrochemistry, but this can be interfered with by other
reducing agents. The ﬂuorescence properties and the charge
transfer property of MNCs offer an excellent platform for devel-
oping dopamine sensors.
By using ﬂuorescent TRY-AuNCs as the probe, a “turn-off”
sensing platform has been developed for dopamine detection
with high sensitivity [219]. The TRY-AuNCs present strong red
ﬂuorescence at 665 nm upon excitation at 520 nm. Dopamine
can greatly quench the red ﬂuorescence of TRY-AuNCs with good
selectivity and sensitivity, showing a detection limit of 0.14 nM.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
170

This facile “turn-off” method has been successfully used to detect
dopamine in pharmaceutical samples, showing good precision
and accuracy. Fluorescent AuNCs can be also used to detect dopa-
mine in cerebrospinal ﬂuid based on an electron transfer mecha-
nism [213]. Dopamine was oxidized to dopamine o-quinone that
acted as the electron acceptor, while the AuNCs acted as the elec-
tron donor, leading to ﬂuorescence quenching depending on the
concentration of dopamine. This approach enabled the detection
of dopamine spiked into cerebrospinal ﬂuid with a linear range
from 0 to 10 nM and a LOD of 0.83 nM.
Apart from their ﬂuorescent properties, MNCs also have cat-
alytic activities that mimic those of natural enzymes. Hb-
stabilized
AuNCs,
for
example,
were
reported
to
exert
a
peroxidase-mimicking activity that can catalyze a chemilumines-
cence reaction between luminol and NaIO4, while dopamine can
inhibit this catalytic reaction [220]. Dopamine is a reducing
agent and can act as a scavenging agent of the ROS generated
in the chemiluminescence reaction, leading to a decrease in
the chemiluminescence signal. With this method, dopamine
concentrations ranging between 0.3 and 9.0 nM can be detected
with a LOD of 0.1 nM. Besides AuNCs, CuNCs can be also used to
develop ﬂuorescent sensors for dopamine detection [221]. BSA-
protected CuNCs emit a blue ﬂuorescence and dopamine can
interact with BSA-CuNCs that leads to a ﬂuorescence quenching.
Another interesting feature of BSA-CuNCs is that they possess an
intrinsic peroxidase-like activity that can be employed for colori-
metric detection of dopamine. A LOD 0.1637 pM was achieved,
and BSA-CuNCs have been successfully applied for dopamine
detection in serum samples with recoveries in the range 90–
98.33%.
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is an enzyme that can catalyze
the breakdown of acetylcholine, an important neurotransmitter
that functions in both the central and peripheral nervous sys-
tems. By using bimetallic BSA-AuAgNCs [222], researchers have
developed a simple, cost effective and ultrasensitive method for
detecting AChE (Fig. 5a). The assay is based on the “ON/OFF”
sensing strategy. Cu2+ can quench the ﬂuorescence of bimetallic
AuAgNCs. In the presence of AChE, it can catalyze the enzymatic
reaction to generate thiocholine that can switch on the ﬂuores-
cence of BSA-AuAgNCs. This method can be used to sensitively
detect AChE as well as its inhibitors such as ethyl parathion.
Apart from dopamine and AChE, many other biomolecules are
associated with neurodegenerative disorders such as epinephrine
and 5-HT [223]. For instance, an elevated epinephrine concentra-
tion in human body ﬂuids such as blood and urine is highly asso-
ciated with Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases. High QY (12%)
BSA-AuNCs
were
prepared
through
a
reﬂux
hydrothermal
method, showing an average diameter of 3.3 ± 1.82 nm [214].
Epinephrine can signiﬁcantly enhance the ﬂuorescence intensity
of BSA-AuNCs that may relate to the electron transfer during the
polymerization
of
epinephrine
(Fig.
5b).
The
ﬂuorescence
enhancement is concentration-dependent that can be used to
detect epinephrine, and a LOD of 0.91 nM was achieved in sam-
ples from Alzheimer's patients. Acting as a monoamine neuro-
transmitter, 5-HT is widely distributed to the central nervous
system and contributes to the feelings of happiness. Highly sen-
sitive and rapid detection of 5-HT is of great importance to help
understand its biological function in neurological diseases. Trf-
AuNCs have been prepared to detect 5-HT based on a “turn-
on” strategy of the ﬂuorescence (Fig. 5c) [216]. The presence of
FIGURE 5
Functionalized MNCs for detection of neurotransmitters. (a) BSA-AuAgNCs for AChE detection [222]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [222]. Copyright
2020 Elsevier. (b) BSA-AuNCs for epinephrine detection [214]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [214]. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (c) Trf-AuNCs for 5-HT
detection [216]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [216]. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
171

5-HT can trigger the aggregation of Trf-AuNCs because of the
speciﬁc interaction between 5-HT and the sialic acid residues of
Trf. The aggregation-enhanced emission feature of Trf-AuNCs
resulted in a signiﬁcant enhancement in the ﬂuorescence inten-
sity, thus a “turn-on” ﬂuorescent assay can be developed with
high selectivity and sensitivity. The linear detection range for
5-HT detection is 0.2–50 lM (R2 = 0.994), and this approach
has a detection limit of 0.049 lM (S/N = 3). 5-HT detection has
been challenged in serum samples with recoveries of 96.20–
108.6%, suggesting the effectiveness of this “turn-on” biosensor.
Detection of pathogenic microorganisms
Microorganisms can be harmful to human health and cause sev-
ere diseases, such as bacterial infections. AuNCs have been used
to detect Staphylococcal enterotoxins B (SEB) that can cause food
contamination and lead to serious diseases (Fig. 6a) [224]. Egg-
shell membrane (ESM)-templated AuNCs showed intense ﬂuores-
cence but weak enzymatic activity. In contrast, GSH templating
allowed the NCs to show a higher peroxidase-like activity but
weak ﬂuorescence. By modulating the catalytic activity of the
MNCs, researchers developed an immunoassay for the rapid
and on-site detection of SEB. A concentration range of 0.4–
20 ng/mL could be detected with a LOD of 0.12 ng/mL, provid-
ing a promising platform for the point-of-care testing of patho-
genic microorganisms for food safety applications. Combined
with aptamers, BSA-AuNCs can be employed for colorimetric
detection of Salmonella typhimurium based on the peroxidase-
like activity of aptamers-BSA-AuNCs [225]. Bacteria of micron
size can bind with aptamers-BSA-AuNCs which further catalyze
the reaction to generate a blue color, enabling a colorimetric
detection of bacteria. This allowed detection of S. typhimurium
in the range of 101–106 colony-forming unit (cfu)/mL with a
detection limit of 1 cfu/mL.
As a Gram-positive food-borne bacterial pathogen that can
lead to listeriosis and meningitis, the rapid detection of Listeria
monocytogenes species from contaminated food samples is impor-
tant to protect human health [226]. Leucocin A, a potent antimi-
crobial peptide against Listeria, was immobilized on a glass slide
and could capture L. monocytogenes in the samples. Fluorescent
AuNCs spontaneously assembled onto the peptide-bound bacte-
ria in situ with an emission wavelength at 612 nm after excitation
at 304 nm. This approach allowed rapid detection of bacteria
with a LOD of 2000 cfu in a 10 lL sample that was promising
for bacterial screening in food safety. Apart from in situ forma-
tion, functionalized MNCs can also be used to develop ﬂuores-
cent sensor arrays that act as a “chemical tongue” to identify
FIGURE 6
MNCs for detection of pathogenic microorganisms. (a) Peroxidase-mimicking AuNCs for detection of SEB [224]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [224].
Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b) Functionalized AuNCs used in fluorescent sensor arrays as “chemical tongue” for bacteria identification [227]. Reproduced with
permission from Ref. [227]. Copyright 2018 Wiley. (c) LYZ-AuNCs for E. coli detection [229]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [229]. Copyright 2015
Elsevier. (d) Zn-MNCs combined with an ATP luminometer for Salmonella detection [230]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [230]. Copyright 2017
Elsevier.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
172

bacteria (Fig. 6b) [227]. Several proteins including HSA, LYZ, and
lactoferrin (Lf) were used as templates to prepare the probes,
which had different binding afﬁnities to bacteria depending on
the protein template. The different physicochemical properties
of bacteria resulted in different responses of the sensor array,
and the ﬁngerprint-like pattern generated enabled the identiﬁca-
tion of different bacteria including Staphylococcus aureus, E. coli
and their drug-resistant strains methicillin-resistant S. aureus
(MRSA) and kanamycin-resistant E. coli. Bacterial infection with
MRSA can be fatal if improperly treated due to the antibiotic-
resistant properties of the bacteria. HSA-AuNCs were found to
have a speciﬁc afﬁnity toward S. aureus and MRSA [228]. The pep-
tide binding motifs identiﬁed in HSA were also used to function-
alize AuNCs to generate peptide-bound AuNCs that showed high
binding afﬁnity with S. aureus and MRSA. It provided a straight-
forward and practical way for the naked-eye identiﬁcation of bac-
teria with a sensitivity of 106 cells/mL.
The choice of the template for the synthesis of the MNCs
plays an impotent role in developing assays. LYZ-AuNCs have
been reported as appropriate sensors for bacterial detection
(Fig. 6c) [229]. LYZ has several advantages in this regard includ-
ing (i) amino acid residues that are beneﬁcial for the nucleation
and growth of MNCs (ii) good biocompatibility and MNC stabil-
ity make the assay dependable and (iii) it belongs to a family of
bacteria-recognizing and bacteria-killing enzymes. Fluorescent
LYZ-AuNCs can attach to the surface of E. coli with red ﬂuores-
cence that was linearly responsive over the range of 2.4  104 –
6.0  106 cfu/mL of E. coli with a LOD of 2.0  104 cfu/mL. In
contrast, BSA-AuNCs could not recognize E. coli and no ﬂuores-
cence enhancement was observed. Magnetic NCs can be also
used for bacterial detection. Zn-doped magnetic NCs (Zn-
MNCs) were hydrothermally synthesized and employed to detect
pathogenic bacteria in milk (Fig. 6d) [230]. The accessible Zn sites
on the MNCs enabled bacterial-targeted Ab immobilization by
Zn-S bonding, as a facile procedure avoiding the tedious steps
for Ab functionalization on other metallic NPs. In addition, the
magnetic properties of the Zn-MNCs allowed the capture and
magnetic separation of Salmonella bacteria in milk. The captured
bacteria could be quantiﬁed with a commercial ATP luminome-
ter. With the help of the ATP luminometer assay, this method
could
achieve
a
detection
limit
of
only
10 cfu/mL
in
Salmonella-spiked milk. Because different Abs can be conjugated
onto the Zn-MNCs, this type of assay could be useful for rapid
and sensitive detection of various pathogenic bacteria.
Protein-protected MNCs as nanoprobes for immunoassays
Protein-protected MNCs have been exploited in the develop-
ment of immunoassays thanks to their electrochemical, catalytic,
and optical properties. When electrochemical detection is used,
MNCs act either as signal probes [142,231–233] or as modiﬁers
of the electrode surface to enhance the transduction of the signal
[234] or even as blocking agents of the signal [235,236]; whereas
when optical properties are used, MNCs are the signal nanop-
robes [237–241]. One of the trends in the ﬁeld is the use of
protein-protected MNCs as a component of a nanocomposite,
which acts as the signal nanoprobe for further enhancement of
the detection signal, thus rendering the immunosensor more
sensitive [242–244]. MNCs can be used as nanocarriers of the
detection molecule due to the surface binding capacity to
decrease the number of molecules that can be detected and for
stabilizing the signal [245]. In the following paragraphs, recent
strategies and formats of immunoassays based on protein-
protected MNCs will be brieﬂy discussed (a recent review was
dedicated to a general overview of MNCs as probes for diagnostic
applications [2]).
Gold is the most commonly used metal for the MNC core
[2,246], however, other metals have been utilized including Ag,
Cu, Cd, and Pb. Another approach is bimetallic MNCs, such as
Au/Pt [242], with a positive synergistic effect compared to the
properties exhibited by individual MNCs. BSA is the preferred
protein template in most studies, but other biomolecules such
as hormones (dopamine), amino-acids [239] (cysteine, tyrosine),
TABLE 1
Application of functionalized MNCs as fluorescent/catalytic probes in the detection of different analytes.
Metal(s)
Protecting layer
Biomarker(s)
LOD
Sensing strategy
Refs
Au
GOD
Hg2+
7.5 lM
Quenching of the ﬂuorescence intensity
[33]
Au-Ag
BSA, LYZ
Hg2+
0.7 nM.
The ﬂuorescence quenching
[94]
Ag
LYZ
H2O2
0.2 lM
Ratiometric ﬂuorescent quenching
[192]
Au
BSA
Dopamine
0.830 nM
Quenching of the ﬂuorescence intensity
[213]
Au
BSA
Epinephrine
0.91 nM
Enhancement in the ﬂuorescence intensity
[214]
Au
dBSA
AChE
0.02 mU mL1
Quenching of the ﬂuorescence intensity
[215]
Au
Trf
5-HT
0.049 lM
Enhancement in the ﬂuorescence intensity
[216]
Au
TRY
Dopamine
0.14 nM
Quenching of the ﬂuorescence intensity
[219]
Au
Hb
Dopamine
0.1 nM
Peroxidase-mimicking activity
[220]
Cu
BSA
Dopamine
0.1637 pM
Quenching of the ﬂuorescence intensity
[221]
Au
ESM
SEB
0.12 ng/mL
Peroxidase-mimicking activity
[224]
Au
BSA
S. Typhimurium
1 cfu/mL
Peroxidase-mimicking activity
[225]
Au
HSA, LYZ, and Lf
S. aureus, E. coli, and drug-resistant bacteria
1.2  107 cells/mL
Fluorescent sensor array
[227]
Au
HSA
S. aureus
106 cells/mL
Enhancement in the ﬂuorescence intensity
[228]
Au
LYZ
E. coli
2.0  104 cfu/mL
Enhancement in the ﬂuorescence intensity
[229]
Zn-Fe
Ab
Salmonella
10 cfu/mL
Magnetic separation and ATP luminometer
[230]
Au
BSA
ALP
Mouse-IgG
0.002 U L1
1.5 pg mL1
Switch-on ﬂuorescent immunoassay
[237]
Au
BSA
INS
0.11 ng mL1
Fluorescent immunoassay
[238]
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
173

enzymes [241] (PEP, GSH) and also DNA [240] have been widely
used to create robust nanoprobes for the development of
immunoassays (see Table 1).
Classical formats of immunoassays (sandwich and competi-
tive) have been performed using different detection strategies
thanks to the versatility of the MNCs. A variety of signal genera-
tion processes have been investigated (Fig. 7) resulting in ultra-
sensitive immunoassays with LODs in the range of lower parts
per trillion (i.e., pg/L), and reliable assays with an interassay error
< 8%. In addition, these strategies have been applied directly to
clinically/environmentally relevant samples including water,
urine, serum, or even cancer cells.
Several studies have employed MNCs as electrochemical sig-
nal enhancers using the classical method of acidic digestion of
MNCs followed by electrochemical detection of the generated
free metal ions [142,231,233]. Because each MNC contains only
tens to hundreds of metal atoms, the electrochemical signal is
enhanced, offering the potential to create sensitive immunoas-
says. In addition, this strategy allows for the detection of several
target molecules at the same time, using a mixture of different
metal cores for each target (Fig. 7a). Another interesting detec-
tion strategy is the use of MNCs as a catalyst in the detection
reaction [242,243]. To increase the catalytic effect, a nanocom-
posite can be developed based on a NP support (PtNP or C60)
allowing
the
decoration
of
its
surface
with
the
protein-
protected MNCs, which will then act as a catalyst for the detec-
tion reaction. In a study by Chen et al.[242], bimetallic MNCs
were shown to increase the catalytic effect compared to single
metal-core MNC, and achieved a LOD two hundred times lower
than a conventional ELISA (Fig. 7b). Another approach is a pho-
toelectrochemical (PEC) immunoassay [235,236] where Cu2+ions
coming from the CuNCs attached to the recognition molecule
(e.g., Ab or aptamer) after an acidic digestion, hinder the pho-
tocurrent transmission (at the electrode surface) by intercalation
into the electron-hole pair structure of the electrode's material
and thus shutting down the electrochemical signal. (Fig. 7c).
FIGURE 7
Different signal transduction processes in immunoassays based on MNCs. (a) Direct electrochemical detection of the metal ions that compose the MNCs
[233]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [233]. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) MNCs acting as a catalyst of the detection reaction [242].
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [242]. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (c) PEC immunoassay using CuNCs as blocking agents of the photocurrent [235].
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [235]. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) Synthesis of green-emitting Arg/ATT/AuNCs and bioconjugation
to streptavidin (top scheme); and schematic representation of the FLFIA process at the bottom [239]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [239]. Copyright
2018 Elsevier. (e) Switch ON/OFF strategy of the MNCs fluorescent signal [237]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [237]. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (f) In situ
generation of fluorescent MNCs [240]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [240]. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
174

MNCs can also be used as modiﬁers of the electrode surface to
improve the electronic conduction of the signal, providing a sig-
nal enhancement of 28% compared to an unmodiﬁed surface
electrode [234].
Fluorescence is the most often used reporter for MNCs in
labels in immunoassays and can be tuned either by changing
the nature of the metal core, or by varying the biomolecule used
as the scaffold for the MNC synthesis. Different immunoassays
have been developed using direct measurement of the ﬂuores-
cence of the MNCs [238,239,244]. Peng et al. reported [239]
the simultaneous determination of clenbuterol and ractopamine
in swine urine using a lateral ﬂow immunoassay (LFIA) format
with
green-emitting
Arg/ATT/AuNCs
as
detection
probes
(Fig. 7d), providing the most sensitive LFIA to date and decreas-
ing the LOD for both targets up to two orders of magnitude com-
pared with previous reports. Several studies have described the
production
of
switchable
(ON/OFF)
immunoassays
using
quenching and/or enhancement of the MNC ﬂuorescence
(Fig. 7e) [237]. This strategy relies on the generation of structural
defects by exposure to oxidants that quench the ﬂuorescence
from MNCs, and the regeneration of the ﬂuorescence emission
when MNCs were exposed to a reconditioning medium contain-
ing reducing agents [237,241]. An innovative strategy for signal
generation consisted of the in situ formation of ﬂuorescent MNCs
as the ﬁnal product of detection (Fig. 7f). This approach was pro-
posed by Li et al.[240] and took advantage of the rapid formation
of DNA-templated CuNCs (within 5 min) in the presence of the
reducing agent produced by the enzymatic reaction of alkaline
phosphatase (one of the enzymes often used in ELISA assays),
expanding its use into highly sensitive ﬂuorimetric immunoas-
says (LOD of human-IgG was 7 pg/mL).
ECL has also been used as signal detection for immunoassays,
and in a recent work, MNCs have demonstrated advantages in
the ﬁeld by offering the possibility to expand the optical window
to the NIR spectrum and increasing the sensitivity of the bioassay
[247]. Thus, a new family of ECL tags is possible. Very recently
has been probed the use of Abs as scaffolds for the synthesis of
MNCs
and
thus
allowing
the
development
of
dot-blot
immunoassays [248]. The bioactivity of modiﬁed IgG has been
evaluated by surface plasmon resonance measurement suggest-
ing that the IgG-AuNCs binds to its antigen with an afﬁnity con-
stant of 6.28  108 M probing that any loss of activity is
observed. This work opens the door to a new application of
MNCs into the classical biological techniques.
TABLE.2
Imaging applications of protein-protected MNCs.
Metal cluster(s)
Protecting ligand(s)
Surface functionalization
Diagnostic modality
Refs
Cu
BSA
N/A
In vitro cell imaging
[29]
Au
TRY
FA
In vivo HeLa tumor cell imaging
[31]
Au
Human Trf
FA
Cellular imaging
[34]
AuNCs-MSNs
BSA
N/A
In vivo tumor imaging
[41]
Au-Zn3(PO4)2
BSA
N/A
In vitro/in vivo imaging
[62]
AgNCs/GO
BSA/HSA
N/A
CT imaging
[85]
Au
BSA
FA
In vitro cell imaging
[93]
Au
INS
N/A
The two-photon red ﬂuorescence imaging/X-ray/CT
[109]
Au
BSA
FA
Targeted cancer imaging
[139]
Au/Ag
Egg white
N/A
Cell imaging
[203]
Au
BSA
FA and HA
Tumor-targeted imaging
[251]
Au
BSA
FA
Turn on ﬂuorescence imaging
[256]
Cu
Trf
N/A
Targeted imaging of cancer cells
[258]
Au
BSA
N/A
Time gated intensity imaging
[265]
Au
BSA
N/A
In vivo and ex vivo ﬂuorescence imaging
[267]
Au
BSA
N/A
Two photon in vitro imaging
[269]
Au
Albumin NPs
N/A
Two-photon imaging of cancer cells
[270]
Au
LYZ
FA
NIRF/CT dual-modal bioimaging
[272]
Gd2O3/Au
BSA
RGD
NIR/MRI/in vivo targeted tumor imaging
[274]
Au
BSA
ICG
In vivo NIRF imaging/PAI
[275]
Gd2O3-Au
BSA
ICG
X-ray CT/NIRF/MRI
[276]
IONPs/AuNCs
BSA
N/A
MRI/in vitro
[277]
Cu
BSA
LHRH
PET imaging
[278]
Au- GO
Trf
N/A
NIR/in vivo imaging
[279]
Au
BSA
Met
NIR tumor imaging
[280]
64Cu-AuNCs
HSA
N/A
PET and NIR imaging
[281]
Au
BSA
FA
Targeted imaging in cancer cells
[282]
Au
OVA
FA
In vitro Imaging
[283]
Au
BSA
N/A
Cellular and bacterial imaging
[284]
Au
BSA
N/A
NIR FL imaging
[285]
Au
BSA
DTPA, GdI
NIRF/CT/MRI
[286]
Au
Ribonuclease-A
Vitamin B12
Cancer targeting and imaging
[287]
Au
BSA
FA
Targeted tumor cellular dual-modality imaging
[288]
Au
Egg white
N/A
Cellular imaging
[289]
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
175

Diagnostic imaging of biological systems in vitro and
in vivo
In vitro imaging
Bioimaging is a common technique used to understand biolog-
ical
processes
and
for
effective
medical
diagnosis
[249].
Bioimaging techniques based on magnetic (e.g., magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI)), radiation-based (e.g., computed tomogra-
phy (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), single photon
emission
computed
tomography
(SPECT))
and
optical
approaches (ﬂuorescence imaging) have different properties in
terms of spatial resolution, sensitivity, and depth of tissue pen-
etration. Optical imaging is a non-invasive technique known
for providing information at a cellular and/or molecular level
with a relatively low cost and high sensitivity even at the single
molecule level [250]. Many studies have reported the use of
protein-templated NCs as ﬂuorescence probes for cancer cell
imaging (See Table 2). Cancer cells often over-express certain
cell receptors that can be targeted by MNCs, and thus cancer
cells can be imaged and distinguished from normal cells
[251,252]. To provide cell receptor-speciﬁc targeting properties,
MNCs can be functionalized with targeting moieties such as FA,
hyaluronic acid (HA), Trf, steroids, aptamers, or Abs (e.g. Her-
ceptin) [253–256]. Retnakumari et al. described Au quantum
cluster (AuQC)-BSA conjugated with FA as a targeting agent
which could recognize KB carcinoma cells that over-express
FR. FA-conjugated BSA-AuNC exhibited bright and stable ﬂores-
cence in the NIR, and showed signiﬁcant internalization by FR-
positive oral carcinoma KB cells through FA-mediated endocyto-
sis [139]. Another study reported functionalization of BSA-
protected
AuNCs
with
Herceptin
to
visualize
cancer
cells
[257]. The bioconjugated AuNCs-Herceptin effectively localized
within the nuclei of breast cancer cells that overexpressed the
receptor tyrosine-protein kinase ErbB2. Chattopadhyay et al.
developed
a
novel
composite
based
on
Zn
phosphate-
decorated AuNCs protected with BSA fragments and used them
as a bioimaging agent to target HeLa cancer cells [62]. Efﬁcient
internalization of AuNCZn3(PO4)2 by cancer cells was tracked
by their bright luminescence (Fig. 8). Additionally, their resis-
tance to proteases could open up their practical application
for clinical purposes. In addition to Au clusters, Cu clusters sta-
bilized by proteins could also be utilized as bioprobes for in vitro
imaging. Trf-directed CuNCs with a high QY were used to stain
HeLa cells [258]. In this study, Wen et al. used Trf not only as a
synthesis template, but also as a molecular recognition agent
for targeting of Trf receptors which are overexpressed on HeLa
cells as well as other cancer cells. Strong red ﬂuorescence was
emitted from HeLa cells treated with the Trf-CuNCs, indicating
the efﬁcient targeting of the Trf-CuNCs. In addition to recogni-
tion and imaging of cancer cells, the afﬁnity of protein-
protected MNCs towards metal ions can be leveraged to visual-
ize the distribution of ions within cells. For instance, a “turn-
on” sensor based on Hb-incorporated iron QCs (Hb-FeQCs)
was designed for the detection and cellular imaging of Zn(II)
[259]. The enhancement of emission intensity was due to the
formation of a complex between Zn ions and Hb-FeQCs, and
this nanoplatform displayed good cellular uptake and viability
conﬁrming
the
excellent
cellular
imaging
capability
of
protein-MNC-based ﬂuorescent probes.
FIGURE 8
Schematic description of the biomimetic pathway towards Zn phosphate crystallization in protein fragment stabilized AuNC assembly and their uptake in
cancer (HeLa) cells for bio-imaging [62]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [62]. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
176

In vivo imaging
The ability of in vivo nanoprobes to accumulate within the tumor
tissue via the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) is piv-
otal. They should possess long circulation times in the blood
and have low toxicity. The ultrasmall size and biocompatibility
of protein-protected MNCs meet all these desired criteria. In
terms of size, NPs with a hydrodynamic diameter >6–8 nm tend
to accumulate in the liver, giving rise to concerns associated with
possible toxicity. The ultrasmall size of MNCs is lower than the
size threshold for renal excretion, which enable them to be
rapidly cleared through the kidneys with minimal accumulation
in other organs [260,261]. Their ultrasmall size also allows them
to accumulate in solid tumors facilitated by the EPR effect due to
abnormalities in vascular architecture and poor lymphatic drai-
nage of tumors [262]. It has been proved that their renal clear-
ance does not interfere with their tumor accumulation [253].
Similar to in vitro imaging, the presence of multiple functional
groups on the MNCs surface enables their functionalization with
targeting moieties, facilitating their accumulation and internal-
ization
into
tumor
cells
by
receptor-mediated
endocytosis
[263]. Their tunable emission ranging from UV to NIR solves
an important problem for in vivo imaging, that is absorption
and scattering of short-wavelength light by biological tissues
[264]. For instance, there was an interesting report demonstrat-
ing, for the ﬁrst time, the use of long-lived BSA AuNCs as time-
gated intensity imaging probes. Since the ﬂuorescence lifetime
of BSA-AuNCs is several hundred fold longer than the tissue
autoﬂuorescence, the contribution of background ﬂuorescence
and light scattering could be suppressed by collecting the
emission of AuNC-BSA 50 ns after the excitation pulse [265].
Protein-MNCs emitting in the biologically transparent NIR win-
dow are advantageous for in vivo imaging, including deep tissue
penetration, reduced light scattering, minimal background inter-
ference, minimized autoﬂuorescence, and less photodamage to
biological samples [168,266].
Wu et al. were the ﬁrst group to employ BSA-AuNCs as ﬂuores-
cent probes for in vivo imaging in HeLa tumor-bearing mice. Flu-
orescence imaging conﬁrmed the accumulation of the NIR-
emitting BSA-protected AuNCs in the tumor via the EPR effect.
More signiﬁcantly, their results showed negligible uptake of
BSA-AuNCs by the reticuloendothelial system with no potential
for toxicity [267]. Following this study, Zhang et al. demon-
strated the application of HA-functionalized BSA-AuNCs as a
tracking agent for tumor-targeted imaging in tumor-bearing
nude mice [251]. Since HA can recognize CD44 receptor, which
is over-expressed on Hep-2 cells, Hep-2 tumors could be visual-
ized by the bright ﬂuorescence of AuNC taken up by cells
through receptor-mediated internalization. Pea protein isolate
(PPI)-stabilized AuNCs were employed as an in vitro staining
probe and for in vivo imaging [268]. In order to enhance the
blood circulation time, they were further coated with RBC mem-
branes. Signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence could be detected at the tumor
site after the injection of AuNCs/PPI-RBC, conﬁrming their efﬁ-
ciency as an in vivo imaging nanoprobe.
Multimodal imaging
Despite many successful applications of ﬂuorescence-based imag-
ing techniques using protein-MNCs, one major limitation con-
cerns the lack of resolution, especially in deep tissue. Given
that three-dimensional resolution using tomographic techniques
provide more information than ﬂuorescence imaging alone,
protein-MNCs
have
been
utilized
in
multimodal
imaging
approaches, including multi-photon imaging, traditional CT,
PET, MRI, ultrasound imaging (US), and photoacoustic imaging
(PAI).
Two-photon excitation ﬂuorescence microscopy provides dee-
per imaging inside tissue. The two-photon luminescence behav-
ior of BSA-AuNCs was investigated by Raut et al. [269]. In their
study, BSA-AuNCs exhibited two-photon excitation lumines-
cence within the 560–1100 nm optical window which allowed
deep tissue imaging. A quadratic relation between excitation
power and emission intensity of BSA-AuNCs investigated their
ability to be used as probes for multiphoton microscopy [269].
Khandelia et al. validated the use of AuNCs embedded in BSA-
NPs for two-photon imaging of cancer cells [270]. The internal-
ization of the AuNCs in cancer cells was conﬁrmed by lumines-
cence emission in the biological window after two-photon
excitation. Liu and coauthors reported a procedure to control
the number of AuNCs (formed by 8 Au atoms) in one BSA mole-
cule [271]. They showed that BSA units with multiple Au8NCs act
as an effective and biocompatible luminescence probe for two-
photon in vivo imaging.
FIGURE 9
Dual-modality CT-fluorescence imaging with INS–AuNCs. (a) CT imaging of INS–AuNCs at sequential concentrations; and (b) differentiated C2C12 myoblasts
with (20 mg/mL, right) and without (left) INS–AuNCs [109]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [109]. Copyright 2011 Wiley.
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
177

The ability of protein-protected AuNCs to function as a con-
trast agent in CT has also been investigated. Among the various
contrast agents used in CT imaging, AuNPs possess X-ray attenu-
ation properties due to their high atomic number. Motivated by
this property of AuNPs, considerable attention has been dedi-
cated to investigate whether protein-protected AuNCs could also
be used in CT imaging in combination with their intrinsic ﬂuo-
rescence. Liu et al. reported a strong dual imaging contrast signal
(CT and ﬂuorescence) for LYZ–AuNCs [272]. In vivo CT imaging
along with ﬂuorescence imaging of HeLa tumor-bearing nude
mice indicated that AuNCs not only exhibited NIR ﬂuorescence
signal – thus avoiding the autoﬂuorescence of biological tissue,
but also displayed promising X-ray attenuation properties. In
another study, the use of INS-AuNCs as a multimodal imaging
probe was assessed by Liu and coworkers [109]. In the proposed
paper, a two-photon z-stacking study conﬁrmed the internaliza-
tion of INS-AuNCs by C2C12 cells through endocytosis. Differ-
entiated
C2C12
myoblasts
showed
strong
CT
signal
enhancement by these ﬂuorescent INS-AuNCs (Fig. 9).
In addition to the aforementioned imaging techniques,
protein-MNCs as a contrast probe for simultaneous MRI and
ﬂuorescence or CT imaging have also been investigated. For
example,
the
efﬁciency
of
iodinated
BSA-GdNPs
(I-BSA-
GdNPs) as a dual MRI/CT imaging probe was evaluated both
in vitro and in vivo by Wang et al. [273]. The high relaxivity
coefﬁcients of the I-BSA-GdNPs supported their MR imaging
ability, resulting in MRI contrast enhancement and enhanced
CT signals clearly observable in orthotopic osteosarcoma tumor
models (Fig. 10). In another study, in vivo multimodal imaging
with a BSA-Gd2O3/Au nanoprobe in the MR blood pool was
explored [274]. As it can be seen in Fig. 11, intense NIR ﬂuo-
rescence and MR signals with excellent contrast, were demon-
strated, illustrating the ability of protein-protected MNCs as
MRI agents.
Therapeutic applications in biomedicine
Chemotherapy
The introduction of nanomedicine is expected to revolutionize
cancer chemotherapy, with the potential to beneﬁt millions of
cancer patients. NPs offer an exciting route to deliver chemother-
apeutic drugs more exclusively to the tumor site, using both pas-
sive (EPR) and active (through speciﬁc over-expressed cell
receptors) targeting strategies. Improved targeting can diminish
side effects and increase the overall efﬁcacy of the drugs.
Researchers in the ﬁeld have concentrated their efforts on design-
ing a wide range of different protein-MNCs as nanotherapeutics
with the capacity to deliver drugs selectively into tumors. For
example, the anti-cancer drug cisplatin was conjugated to BSA-
AuNCs together with FA, used as active targeting moiety, for
4T1 breast cancer cells [290]. The nanoformulation induced cel-
lular apoptosis, exhibited high accumulation in orthotopic
breast tumors and decreased the metastatic burden in the lungs.
Overall, this work conﬁrmed the efﬁciency of the AuNC-based
nanomedicine as a theranostic platform for targeted chemother-
apy and bioimaging of breast cancer. Doxorubicin (DOX) has
also been conjugated to FA-functionalized BSA-AuNCs to induce
cytotoxicity in lung, liver, breast and colon cancer cells [253].
High anti-tumor activity was observed both in vitro and in vivo
when treated with the DOX-loaded, FA-BSA-AuNCs, which also
acted as a ﬂuorescence imaging probe. Similarly, DOX was incor-
porated into BSA-AuNCs to treat HeLa cervical cancer cells
(Fig. 12a) [291]. An RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) peptide was attached to
the nanomedicine to enhance cell recognition and internaliza-
tion. The resulting DOX-conjugated RGD-BSA-AuNCs showed
increased cell uptake and tumor penetration, and successfully
inhibited cell growth both in vitro and in vivo. The long-term
retention of the nanotherapeutic in the tumor after intratumoral
injection was monitored by ﬂuorescence imaging (Fig. 12b) and
its efﬁcacy was compared to tumor-bearing mice treated with
FIGURE 10
In vivo imaging of orthotopic osteosarcoma animal models using I-BSA-GdNPs. (a) Photograph of orthotopic osteosarcoma rat. (b) In vivo T1-weighted MRI
images of orthotopic osteosarcoma rats before and at 30 min, 2 h, and 24 h after I-BSA-GdNPs injection. (c) CT 3D images of orthotopic osteosarcoma rats
after Ioversol and I-BSA-GdNPs injection [273]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [273]. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
178

PBS alone (Fig. 12c). Another strategy that has been used is con-
jugating both DOX and SN28, a camptothecin derivative,
through linkers that allow controlled release of both therapeutics
by the change of pH and reductive state, respectively [292]. Their
cytotoxicity was conﬁrmed in 2D and 3D in vitro breast cancer
models.
Hybrids between silica NPs and AuNCs have also been used
for the delivery of combined therapeutics to combat breast can-
cer chemoresistance [293]. In this work, a combination of two
drugs were loaded onto the nano-hybrid: (a) ZD6474, an inhibi-
tor of tyrosine kinase activity; and (b) epigallocatechin gallate
(EGCG), an Akt signaling pathway inhibitor. EGCG was ﬁrst
encapsulated into the silica NPs which were then functionalized
with thiols to immobilize BSA-AuNCs onto the surface. ZD6474
molecules were then preferentially attached around the BSA-
AuNCs through amine-gold interactions. The resulting nanofor-
FIGURE 11
In vivo blood imaging using BSA-Gd2O3/Au nanoprobe. (a) NIR fluorescent imaging and (b) magnetic resonance imaging [274]. Reproduced with permission
from Ref. [274]. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.
RESEARCH: Review
FIGURE 12
Design and performance of DOX- and RGD-conjugated AuNCs. (a) Schematic of the preparation of the BSA-templated AuNCs conjugated to DOX and RGD
peptide. (b) In vivo fluorescence imaging of the nanoformulation after intratumoral injection to HeLa tumor-bearing mice. (c) Comparison of the mice and
tumors after being treated with the nanoformulation (bottom mouse) and the control treated with PBS (upper mouse) [291]. Reproduced with permission
from Ref. [291]. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
179

mulation only dissolved and released its cargo at acidic pH, and
induced apoptosis in drug-resistant breast cancer cells.
Cationic BSA-AuNCs were cross-linked with HA and then
triple-loaded with paclitaxel, indocyanine green (ICG, a U.S Food
and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved contrast agent), and a
nitric oxide donor [294]. The ability of the nanotherapeutic to
penetrate deep within the tumor microenvironment together
with the combination of drugs resulted in a signiﬁcant inhibition
of tumor growth and reduced metastatic load in the lungs.
Croissant and his team carried out a study, describing the use
of BSA-capped AuNCs as an imaging probe to track the in vitro
and in vivo distribution of the nanocarrier [41]. The BSA-AuNCs
acted as a cap to block the pores of MSNs that had been loaded
with DOX and gemcitabine (GEM). The electrostatic interaction
between the BSA-AuNCs and the MSNs allowed a high loading
capacity, and pH-responsive drug release, avoiding premature
leakage of the cargo by only releasing both drugs at the lysoso-
mal pH. BSA-AuNCs have also been used as an imaging probe
for a drug delivery vehicle formed from BSA [270]. The BSA-
capped MSN-AuNCs loaded with DOX were able to reduce the
viability of HeLa cells down to 20%, and induce apoptosis. The
uptake of the nanocomposite was tracked using the intrinsic ﬂu-
orescence both of the AuNCs and DOX, showing intracellular
release of the drug. In another study by Pan et al. [277], a
DOX-loaded
multifunctional
nanocarriers
(MFNCs)
was
designed by self-assembly of BSA-AuNCs, gold nanorods (AuNRs)
and iron oxide (Fe3O4) NPs (IONPs) into a larger BSA-NP. The ﬂu-
orescent, plasmonic and magnetic protein-based nanocarrier suc-
cessfully
carried
out
in
vitro
photoluminiscent
imaging,
plasmonic PPT, magnetic targeting and the delivery of DOX to
HeLa cells.
Besides Au-based NCs, other metals have been used for the
synthesis of protein MNCs for cancer therapy. For example,
Trf-templated CuNCs were loaded with DOX and showed
promising results as a targeted theranostic nanomedicine [295].
Tumor-bearing mice treated with this nanoformulation showed
an increased lifespan as compared to controls due to its longer
circulation time and tumor-targeted accumulation. Moreover,
FIGURE 13
Nano-radiosensitizer formed by BSA-capped AuNCs and MnO2 NPs. (a) Schematic of the mechanism of action of the synthesized BSA-Au-MnO2 NPs:
circulation and accumulation deep inside the tumor of the NPs until dissociation of MnO2 in the acidic environment of the tumor generating O2 and reducing
hypoxia. (b) Quantification of the hypoxic and blood vessel areas for each treatment group measured by fluorescence intensity after staining tumors with the
hypoxia-probe. (c) Tumor growth with time after radiotherapy treatment. Mice were irradiated with X-ray (6 Gy) at 6 h post intravenous injection of the
nanoformulation or the controls [305]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [305]. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
180

the results showed that healthy tissue like liver and kidneys were
not affected by the treatment. In another study, bimetallic NCs
formed by Au and Ag were synthesized using cationic BSA and
further cross-linked to form a larger nanocomposite [27]. The
resulting nanocarrier was able to deliver a suicide gene into HeLa
cells reducing their viability in combination with ROS generated
by the bimetallic cluster. This work proved that the intrinsic ﬂu-
orescence of this type of protein-MNC could be used for simulta-
neous bioimaging, providing theranostic properties to the
nanocarrier.
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy is one of the most often used cancer therapies,
together with chemotherapy. Typically, radiation therapy uses
ionizing radiation, such as X-rays or gamma rays to treat cancer
[296,297]. This ionizing irradiation damages biomolecules in
tumor cells, in particular DNA, disrupting the cell division and
proliferation. The DNA damage can be caused directly by the
radiation absorbed by the nucleic acids, or indirectly by the cre-
ation of ROS by the radiation absorption of water. ROS play an
important role in radiotherapy by triggering speciﬁc cell signal-
ing pathways that result in apoptosis. Oxygen, in particular,
can act as a radiosensitizer by producing more radicals and boost-
ing the overall ROS effect. This is why hypoxia, a lack of oxygen
inside the tumor microenvironment, is one of the main obstacles
to the success of radiotherapy [298]. Nanomaterials that are able
to overcome hypoxia have the potential to be efﬁcient radiosen-
sitizers and improve the outcomes of radiotherapy treatment
[297].
In 2013, Zhang et al. were the ﬁrst to report the use of BSA-
AuNCs for radiation therapy [13]. In a pilot study, they showed
that intraperitoneal administration of BSA-AuNCs into tumor-
bearing mice that were then irradiated with gamma rays was able
to reduce tumor volume to 38% of untreated ones. Since then,
most of the studies on AuNC-based radiosensitizers have utilized
GSH-AuNCs, because they show better efﬁcacy and penetration
into the tumor [299–301]. However, some groups have demon-
strated increased efﬁcacy of radiotherapy using targeted and/or
multifunctional protein-protected AuNCs. For example, Kefayat
and colleagues, used FA [302] and aptamers [303,304] to target
glioblastoma multiforme and breast cancer, respectively. In both
cases, the targeting moieties were conjugated to BSA-AuNCs.
After intravenous injection of FA-BSA-AuNCs and treatment with
6 Gy radiation, glioma tumor-bearing rats showed a signiﬁcantly
longer survival time (almost double compared to the controls)
[302]. This study conﬁrmed the ability of these AuNCs to cross
the blood brain barrier – one of the most challenging biological
barriers to overcome in drug discovery. The AS1411 aptamer, a
RNA-like structure designed to bind to nucleolin (a protein
over-expressed in cancer cells), was conjugated to the BSA-
AuNCs, and their role as a radiosensitizer was ﬁrst evaluated
in vitro [303]. This preliminary study showed increased internal-
ization of the AS1411-BSA-AuNCs in 4T1 breast cancer cells as
opposed to normal cells, and exhibited enhanced cell killing
when irradiated with different intensity X-rays. In a follow-up
study by the same team of researchers, this system was evaluated
in vivo [304]. AS1411-BSA-AuNCs were intraperitoneally adminis-
tered to mice bearing breast cancer tumors, who were then trea-
ted with radiation. Targeted AuNCs combined with radiotherapy
reduced tumor growth and enhanced survival rate in comparison
to the injection of non-targeted AuNCs or radiotherapy alone.
BSA-templated nanocomposites were prepared from AuNCs
plus manganese dioxide (MnO2) as multifunctional radiosensi-
tizers to overcome radiation resistance [305]. While the Au that
accumulated in the tumor acted as an effective radiosensitizer,
the MnO2 component was able to react with endogenous H2O2
present within the tumor to generate additional O2, and thus
overcoming
the
hypoxia
in
the
tumor
microenvironment
(Fig. 13). The results showed that X-ray irradiation (6 Gy) follow-
ing intravenous injection of BSA-Au-MnO2 nanocomposite, had
higher efﬁcacy at reducing tumor growth than the controls,
including BSA-AuNCs (Fig. 13c). The authors hypothesized that
the hypoxia-driven radiotherapy resistance is overcome with
their system.
Gadolinium polytungstate NCs (GdW10O36 NCs) coated with
BSA have also been synthesized and proven to be efﬁcient radio-
therapy sensitizers [306]. When these protein-MNCs were intra-
venously administered to tumor-bearing mice, there was high
accumulation in the tumor without any toxicity. Subsequent
X-ray irradiation led to signiﬁcantly decreased tumor growth.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT)
PDT is capable of destroying tumor lesions using light-sensitive
photosensitizer (PS) drugs [307,308]. In PDT, light excitation of
the PS produces cytotoxic ROS, such as singlet oxygen (1O2), free
radicals or hydroperoxides under irradiation of the appropriate
wavelength leading to the irreversible destruction of cancer cells
and tissues. MNCs can have long-lived triplet excited states able
to react with triplet ground state oxygen, which forms excited
state
1O2 [309]. Therefore protein-protected MNCs can be
employed as PS in PDT by photogenerating ROS [310].
Most of the work employing AuNCs for PDT has used GSH-
AuNCs
[309,311,312],
probably
because
protein-protected
AuNCs have a lower 1O2 generation QY. However, alkyl thiolated
AuNCs co-modiﬁed with HSA and catalase (CAT) were employed
as theranostic nanoagents to overcome limitations in PDT [313].
In these nanocomposites, in addition to the Au core leading to
the formation of 1O2 upon NIR light excitation, the CAT enzyme
produces additional O2 and relieves tumor hypoxia through
decomposition of endogenous H2O2 inside the tumor microenvi-
ronment. Huang and colleagues designed a photo-theranostic
nanomaterial for ﬂuorescence imaging-guided PDT [314]. The
material consisted of a silica construct encapsulating BSA-
AuNCs plus immobilized chlorin e6 (Ce6), a potent PS molecule.
Their formulation facilitated the internalization of Ce6 into cells
without non-speciﬁc release. Similarly, to enhance PS efﬁcacy
under hypoxic conditions, BSA-protected PtNCs (BSA-PtNCs)
were used to coat MSNs loaded with methylene blue, a model
PS agent [315]. The injected nanoformulation into HeLa xeno-
graft models was able to inhibit tumor growth without apparent
side effects when irradiated with a 635-nm laser. This study
demonstrated that the BSA-PtNC biocoating onto the nano-
spheres generated O2 intracellularly upon laser excitation, which
led to a reduction of hypoxia and enhanced PDT efﬁcacy. In
another work, BSA-AgNCs exhibited PDT properties which could
generate 1O2 with high quantum efﬁciency comparable to com-
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
181

mercial PS (Fig. 14) [316]. The PDT efﬁcacy of this type of
protein-MNC was shown by decreased cell viability of breast can-
cer cells treated with BSA-AgNC plus light irradiation (Fig. 14)
[316]. Yu and coworkers reported protein-protected Au/Ag alloy
NCs showing peculiar 1O2 generation properties inversely corre-
lated to their PL intensities [317].
Photothermal therapy (PTT)
PTT is deﬁned as use of light in order to generate localized heat-
ing by speciﬁc absorption of light by speciﬁc chromophores
whereby diseased cells are damaged [318]. The unique properties
of protein-protected metallic nanostructures enables them to
carry out photoexcited hyperthermia-induced cytotoxicity given
their high conversion rate of energy to heat, resulting in the
destruction of tumor cells and malignant tissue. This process
therefore requires two steps: i) administering the phototherapeu-
tic agent to the tumor; ii) irradiating with an electromagnetic
ﬁeld, typically in the form of NIR light.
Plasmonic
and
magneto-luminescent
MFNCs
containing
AuNRs, IONPs or BSA-AuNCs can all function as sophisticated
probes for cancer theranostics, combining drug delivery, PTT
and bioimaging capabilities (Fig. 15a) [277]. Irradiating MFNCs-
treated HeLa cells with an 808-nm NIR laser led to a noticeable
decrease in cell viability, indicating the high plasmonic PTT efﬁ-
ciency of the MFNCs in vitro (Fig. 15b) [319]. In this study, how-
ever, BSA-AuNCs were used for bioimaging purposes, without
exploring their ability to induce PTT.
Gu et al. on the contrary designed polymeric nanocapsules
loaded with BSA-AuNCs plus ICG, and functionalized with an
RGD peptide to mediate PTT against glioblastoma [319]. The
nanoformulation
showed
remarkable
photothermal
activity
under 808-nm laser irradiation, killing >95% of U87-MG cells
after irradiation at a power density of 2 W/cm2. The intrinsic ﬂu-
orescence of AuNCs together with the co-loaded ICG allowed for
dual-modality ﬂuorescence imaging, using either one-photon or
two-photon excitation.
Using a different heat-triggered approach, Cifuentes-Rius and
colleagues showed that BSA-AuNCs induced cytotoxicity to a
wide range of cells when exposed to a radiofrequency (RF) ﬁeld
in the microwave region (1 GHz) [320]. Despite the fact that
the heating pathways of AuNCs under RF excitation are still
not fully understood, the study showed that cells treated with
RF without the presence of BSA-AuNCs were not killed, and like-
wise, BSA-AuNCs alone were non-toxic to the cells (Fig. 15c). The
same group showed that the heat induced by BSA-AuNCs acted
as a chemosensitizer by increasing the effectiveness of cytotoxic
drugs [321], which could lead to a reduction of dosage and fre-
quency of treatment.
Other types of protein-MNCs have been used as effective ther-
apeutic agents for PTT. For instance, the in vivo hyperthermia
efﬁciency of BSA-CuS-NCs was assessed in tumor-bearing mice
[322]. Infrared thermography showed the temperature elevation
at the tumor under irradiation, indicating the mild hyperthermia
efﬁcacy of BSA-CuS-NCs. Their in vivo PTT efﬁcacy was evaluated
after injection into tumor-bearing mice. Profound damage to
tumor cells without any harm to the healthy tissue was observed
indicating their potency for in vivo hyperthermia.
Wang et al. synthesized BSA-capped smart gadolinium oxide
nanocrystals (Gd2O3) conjugated to Cypate, a NIR dye with
potential as a clinical theranostic agent. These nanocrystals were
suitable for trimodal imaging, magnetic resonance, photoacous-
tic and NIR ﬂuorescence, plus mediating PTT as a therapy
(Fig. 15d) [323]. These BSA-GdNCs showed good tumor ablation
under NIR irradiation (Fig. 15e), as well as increased tumor accu-
mulation and cellular internalization. The advantage of this plat-
form was the pH-responsive photothermal effect, tailored to be
more potent in the lysosomal environment after endocytosis,
together with their trimodal imaging capability, enabling track-
ing in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo.
Gd-based NCs were also employed by Yang and co-workers
[324]. They prepared a BSA-coated Gd:CuS hybrid nanotheranos-
tic for PTT as well as dual imaging, magnetic resonance and pho-
toacoustic.
The
protein-MNCs
showed
a
strong
NIR
photothermal conversion, and potent tumor ablation capacity
when irradiated with a 980-nm laser. Tumor-bearing mice treated
with BSA-(Gd:CuS)NCs showed a remarkable regression in tumor
growth, some of which were completely eliminated 6 days post-
treatment.
FIGURE 14
BSA-templated AgNCs as PSs for PDT. (a) Schematic diagram showing photodynamic treatment of MCF-7 cancer cells using BSA-Ag13 NC. (b) MTT assay
histogram of MCF-7 cancer cells treated with BSA-Ag13 NC ranging from 50 to 500  106 M (Ag basis) without (i) and with light irradiation (ii) [316].
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [316]. Copyright 2016 Wiley.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
182

Ruthenium
sulﬁde
(RuS)-based
NCs
have
also
shown
enhanced photothermal activity under 808-nm laser irradiation
[325]. In this work, Lu et al. used denatured BSA and polyethy-
lene glycol (PEG) to coat RuS NCs. This nanomaterial had the
ability to accumulate in the tumor to unprecedented levels, pre-
sumably due to its long circulation times. While all the control
treatments showed no change in tumor growth, mice treated
with BSA/PEG-(RuS)NCs had tumors that were eradicated within
4 days after treatment (Fig. 15f). This novel protein-MNC repre-
sents a potent photothermal agent for cancer PTT.
RESEARCH: Review
FIGURE 15
Different protein-stabilized MNCs design strategies for PTT. (a) Schematic of the synthesis and implementation of MFNCs [277] (Reproduced with permission
from Ref. [277]. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.) and (b) their performance under NIR laser irradiation with different power densities [319].
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [319]. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Cytotoxicity of BSA-AuNCs to different types of cells – B-
lymphocyte cells (HR1K), glioblastoma (U87), fibroblasts (3T3), neuroblastoma (SHSY5Y) and prostate cancer (PC3 and C4-2B) cells – before (1) and after (2)
exposing them to a 1 GHz RF field [320]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [320]. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) Scheme of the strategy
followed by Wang et al. in the synthesis and application of their GdNCs for dual imaging and PTT, (e) showing successful tumor eradication after 4 days of
treatment [323]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [323]. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (f) Photos of tumor-bearing mice showing tumor reduction after
treatment with RuS NCs following laser irradiation (Group 4) as compared to the other controls (Group 1–3) where the tumors have kept growing [325].
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [325]. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
183

MNC-containing nanocomposites for enhanced bioimaging
and controlled release
Aside from the potential of protein-protected MNCs as effec-
tive tracking probes in imaging applications, they could also
be used as simultaneous delivery and therapy agents (theranos-
tics) for human diseases in biomedical applications [45]. This
capability could be attributed to good water solubility of these
agents owing to the protein moiety which dissolves poorly
water-soluble drugs while maintaining drug activity. More
importantly, the delivery of these drugs can be tracked via
the luminescence of the MNCs. In addition, MNCs allow drugs
and genes to be delivered into speciﬁc target cells to inhibit
their growth and kill them in a more controllable fashion
[23,30,41,270,280,326–330]. This is why a lot of effort has
been made to create nanocomposites composed of polymers
or proteins-coating MNCs in order to provide new features
for controlled release of therapeutics, triggered by external or
endogenous stimuli, and simultaneous imaging.
FIGURE 16
Self-assembly of AuNCs in the presence of the pH-responsive polymer (poly(allyl amine hydrochloride, PAH. (a) Scheme of the process to obtain self-
assembled GSH-capped AuNCs and a cationic polymer (PAH) as cross-linking agent. (b) TEM images of the cross-linked compound at different magnifications.
(c) Excitation and emission spectra of before (dashed lines) and after cross-linking with PAH (solid lines). (d) Fluorescence emission under UV illumination
(kexc = 366 nm) of AuNCs before (left) and after (right) self-assembling with PAH. (e) Enhancement of the fluorescence signal (kexc/kem = 450 nm/600 nm)
of the self-assembled complex with PAH concentration and NP concentration. (f) Fluorescence signal of cells incubated with fluorescently-labelled peptide or
Ab-loaded complexes, unloaded complexes or free biomolecules (peptide and Ab). Detection of fluorescence by flow cytometry from (f-1) labelled
biomolecules and (f-2) the self-assembled complex. (g) Confocal microscopy images of cells incubated with (1) PBS, (2) free peptide, (3) free Ab, (4) unloaded
self-assembled AuNCs-PAH, (5) peptide-loaded self-assembled AuNCs-PAH and (6) Ab-loaded self-assembled AuNCs-PAH. Green: NPs; Red: free biomolecules.
Scale bar: 5 lm [331]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [331]. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
184

The self-assembly of AuNCs in the presence of pH-responsive
polymers was studied by Yahia-Ammar et al. [331]. These nano-
gels were composed of GSH-AuNCs plus a cationic polymer
(polyallyl
amine
hydrochloride
(PAH))
and
exhibited
pH-
dependent swelling ability and 4-fold enhancement of ﬂuores-
cence (Fig. 16). The authors explained this increase in ﬂuores-
cence by the phenomenon of AIE reported by Xie’s group
[332]. The reversible pH-dependent swelling capability of the
nanogels, allowed the study of the cross-linking effect between
AuNCs, proving that the electrostatic interaction between clus-
ters not only enhanced the emission, but also the ﬂuorescence
lifetime. These properties were demonstrated in cell culture
delivered by either Abs or peptides, and ﬂuorescence-based imag-
ing techniques.
Driven by the opportunities to enhance the PL efﬁciency of
thiolated-AuNCs using the AIE phenomena, Qu’s team used
MOFs to achieve controlled release and ﬂuorescence monitoring
of a model compound (Fig. 17a) [333]. These 150-nm nanostruc-
tures (Fig. 17b) were able to encapsulate AuNCs, almost doubling
their QY to 7.74% (Fig. 17c). Due to the pH-dependent dissocia-
tion of their MOF structure, AuNCs were able to disassemble the
framework decreasing their luminescence providing a real-time
tracking platform to monitor the release (Fig. 17c and d). More-
over, AuNCs could be co-loaded with hydrophobic drugs and
dyes achieving a controlled release of both agents at pH values
below 6 (Fig. 17e and f).
Serum albumin-based NPs have been shown to be non-toxic
and biocompatible drug carriers [334]. Thus, the interest in
encapsulating
and
cross-linking
albumin-coated
MNCs
has
increased. One advantage of albumin is that it possesses a variety
of functionalities allowing speciﬁc conjugation and biological
interactions to take place. In order to enhance pDNA loading,
Sarparast et al. used a cationic BSA to embed bimetallic Au-Ag
MNCs into its structure [27]. Using this approach, the delivery
of a therapeutic suicide gene to HeLa cancer cells accompanied
with ROS generation by the clusters inducing apoptosis was pos-
sible. Moreover, they demonstrated simultaneous bioimaging to
prove superior cell uptake compared to free therapeutic DNA,
where the lack of positive charge caused poor cell internalization.
In another work, researchers synthesized BSA-AuNCs at a high
temperature (95 C) forming BSA cross-links into a larger rod-
shaped structure [335]. The binding of these nanostructures to
bacterial cells could be controlled by manipulating their electro-
static charge. They used this nanostructure to not only label
E. coli cells, but also to bind negatively charged antibiotics (ampi-
cillin, chloramphenicol) and deliver them to bacterial cells with
complete growth inhibition.
Other proteins have been used to synthesize MNCs. For exam-
ple, Cyt c, a protein triggering apoptosis once it reaches the cyto-
plasm, was employed to produce ﬂuorescent and cytotoxic
AuNCs [336]. This work showed that once Cyt c-AuNCs were
taken up by the cells, the cellular GSH replaced the capping
agent, releasing free Cyt c inside the cell. Moreover, they demon-
strated that the Cyt c-AuNCs accumulated into the mitochon-
dria, showing that these NPs could be a novel mitochondria-
targeted probe.
INS has also been used as a template to synthesize highly-
ﬂuorescent AuNCs [109]. In this interesting work, the functional-
ity of INS was maintained, and therefore could be used for blood-
glucose regulation as well as for cell imaging.
FIGURE 17
Encapsulation of AuNCs into MOFs for controlled release of therapeutics. (a) Scheme representing how aggregated AuNCs (aAuNCs) together with drugs can
be encapsulated into MOFs enhancing their PL performance. This nanocomplex is a powerful tool for real-time imaging of hydrophobic drug release. (b) TEM
images of (b-1) free aAuNCs and (b-2) encapsulated within the MOF. (c) TEM images of the aAuNC-MOF after 24 h in buffer at different pH values. (d)
Fluorescence spectrum of well dispersed AuNCs and aAuNCs-MOFs at physiological pH. kexc = 365 nm. (e) Release kinetics of fluorescein previously loaded
into aAuNCs-MOFs at different pH for 48 h. (f) Fluorescence microscopy images of HeLa cells incubated with fluorescein-loaded aAuNCs-MOFs. Green:
fluorescein; Red: aAuNCs. Magnification: 40x [333]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [333]. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
185

Protein-MNCs have also been used as a key ingredient in lipid-
based nanocarriers. For example, BSA-AuNCs have been used to
stabilize lipid nanocapsules loaded with curcumin. The NCs were
used not only to stabilize the core–shell structure of the capsules,
but also to follow their cell internalization through ﬂuorescence
microscopy [337]. Wang et al. used lipid vesicles to deliver a com-
plex of AuNCs and Cas9 protein and single guide RNA (sgRNA)
for CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats) [338]. The positive charges of TAT (HIV-1-transactivor
of transcription) peptide-protected AuNCs was bound to Cas9
protein and sgRNA plasmid in order to facilitate the nuclear
delivery of the gene editing tool. The ﬂuorescence of the TAT-
AuNCs allowed the tracking of the nanoconjugates, which accu-
mulated near the nucleus at longer incubation times. An in vivo
study in a subcutaneous melanoma mouse model showed effec-
tive tumor reduction (5-fold) after intratumoral injection com-
pared to the controls.
Small interference RNA (siRNA) has gained a lot of attention
as a potent anti-cancer modality. Taking advantage of the nega-
tive charge on the backbone structure, Lei et al. formed a com-
plex between nerve growth factor (NGF) siRNA and positively-
charged AuNCs coated with GSH and oligoarginine for pancre-
atic cancer treatment (Fig. 18) [339]. The clusters alone had a
diameter <3 nm while the siRNA-NC complex reached a size of
approximately 16 nm. This size provided the nanocomplex with
a prolonged blood circulation time in a subcutaneous pancreatic
cancer mouse model. The intrinsic ﬂuorescence of the AuNCs
enabled tracking of the complex with enhanced permeation
and retention within the tumor. In an orthotopic patient-
derived xenograft model, they showed impressive results con-
cerning anti-tumor activity and gene-knockdown using these
nanocomplexes.
In addition to Au or Ag-based NCs, CdNCs have also been
studied as a theranostic nanovehicle for simultaneous cancer cell
imaging and drug delivery. CdNCs conjugated with HA and BSA
were developed as a theranostic pH-responsive nanocarrier for
MCF-7 breast cancer cells over-expressing CD44 [30].
Antibacterial activity
AuNCs (unlike AgNPs) do not show intrinsic bactericidal activity,
therefore they require functionalization with proteins or other
molecules to be used for antibacterial applications [340]. Some
of the proteins immobilized on MNCs act either as bactericidal
agents against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria [341].
As an example, Chen and colleagues prepared LYZ–AuNCs via
microwave assisted synthesis that could target and effectively
inhibit pathogenic bacteria including, pan-drug-resistant Acineto-
bacter baumannii, and vancomycin (Van)-resistant Enterococcus
faecalis
[342].
The
interaction
between
LYZ–AuNCs
and
antibiotic-resistant
bacteria
showed
enhanced
antimicrobial
activity compared to free LYZ. LYZ–AuNCs not only targeted bac-
teria as labeling agents, but also inhibited the growth of
antibiotic-resistant species. In addition, Khlebtsov and coworkers
synthesized
BSA-AuNCs
conjugated
to
human
anti-
staphylococcal immunoglobulin (antiSA–IgG) plus the photo-
sensitizing dye PhotosensTM (PS) (Au–BSA–antiSAIgG–PS) for
effective photodynamic inactivation of MSSA and MRSA under
660-nm light irradiation [343]. The observed inactivation of bac-
teria was due to the biospeciﬁc targeting of IgG molecules to
FIGURE 18
AuNC-siRNA complexes for pancreatic cancer treatment. (a) Chemical formulas of GSH and oligoarginine (CR9) and (b) the synthetic route to form AuNCs and
(c) subsequent AuNCs-siRNA complexes by electrostatic interaction. (d) Visual yellow appearance and (e) excitation and emission spectra of AuNCs solution.
(f) Positive surface charge of AuNCs (Mean ± s.d.) before forming the complex. (g, i) Cryo-TEM images and (h, j) size (Mean ± s.d.) of AuNCs and AuNC-siRNA,
respectively. Scale bar: 20 nm. (k) Schematic of the delivery mechanism followed by the AuNC-siRNA complex NGF silencing. Importantly, the complex
protects the siRNA from nuclease degradation and renal clearance, favors its accumulation to tumor cells, and allows efficient silencing in pancreatic tumors.
The knockdown of NGF expression inhibits the progression of pancreatic cancer and the neurogenesis of the tumour microenvironment [339] Reproduced
with permission from Ref. [339]. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
186

pathogenic bacteria, as well as the photodynamic activity of the
PS. Miao et al. also employed papain-protected CuNCs as promis-
ing antimicrobial agents towards Gram-positive and Gram-
negative bacteria and actual wound infections. The key feature
of papain-CuNCs was the ability to convert the added H2O2 to
OH to inhibit the growth of the Gram-positive bacteria S. aureus
and Gram-negative bacteria E. coli. Mice with infected wounds
treated by papain-CuNCs plus H2O2 showed no erythema, edema
and lesser scabs indicating the killing of bacteria in the wounds
[344].
On the other hand, Nain and coworkers developed 1,3-propa
nedithiol/BSA–CuNCs that are able to generation of ascorbyl
(Asc) and perhydroxyl (HOO) radicals with superior bactericidal
effects against non-multidrug-resistant bacteria (S. aureus, E. coli,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Salmonella enteritidis) as well as
multidrug-resistant bacteria such as MRSA [341]. They used the
1,3-propanedithiol, an organic compound with two thiol groups,
which acts as carriers for lipophilic to improve the internaliza-
tion of CuNCs into bacteria [345]. They demonstrated that 1,3-
propanedithiol/BSA–CuNCs was >200-fold higher bactericidal
activity than 1,3-propanedithiol, which resulted in i) the destabi-
lization of the bacterial membranes, ii) satisfactory biocompati-
bility,
and
iii)
stronger
photoluminescent
intensity.
Furthermore, they revealed that 1,3-propanedithiol/BSA–CuNCs
decorated carbon ﬁber fabrics (CFFs) possess great potential inhi-
bitory activity against S. aureus and E. coli cells. Their results also
showed
that
1,3-propanedithiol/BSA–CuNCs-functionalized
CFFs acted as an effective antibacterial agent, where less than
5% of the bacteria remained alive, and their antifouling proper-
ties could be exploited for the fabrication of antibacterial
dressings.
Conclusions and future perspectives
In this review we have summarized the burgeoning growth of
interest in protein-protected MNCs for imaging and therapy in
health care applications. Concerning the practical future use of
MNCs in clinical applications, there is still a long way to go to
provide more precise information on their performance and fate
in human tissue including their circulation in blood and clear-
ance from the body. Considering some reports on the toxicity
of protein-protected MNCs, their safety over the long term
should be considered a paramount issue. The accumulation of
some protein-MNCs in the liver and the spleen, could cause
irreparable damage, which illustrates how improved control of
MNC size is necessary to predict clearance and excretion from
the body. Moreover, the future application in clinical practices
requires considerable effort to reproducibly generate highly lumi-
nescent MNCs with high photostability and longer ﬂuorescence
lifetimes. These features are prerequisites for the detection of
malignant cells and infections, which may possess biomarkers
at ultra-trace levels. Recent developments in optical imaging
techniques, such as multi-photon excitation microscopy, which
allows studies of biological interactions at a deep cellular level,
has motivated intensive research in developing multi-photon
absorption ﬂuorophores. The strategies described in this review
can be translated to the nonlinear optical regime (two-photon
excited ﬂuorescence for instance), that is useful for multi-
photon excitation microscopy, even if this ﬁeld is still in its
infancy [346–350]. Despite these identiﬁed limitations, there is
still scope for feasible application of protein-protected MNCs as
theranostic agents.
In the last decade, a wealth of information has accumulated
concerning
structure–property
relationships
of
atomically-
precise MNCs, which are deﬁned as MNCs that can be described
by a precise molecular formula, including the number of metal
atoms and the number of protecting ligands [1]. By the use of
single crystal diffraction or through a combination of mass spec-
trometry, material characterization and theoretical prediction,
the core and surface structure of the MNC can be elucidated or
at least strongly inferred. For these systems, the optoelectronic
properties of the MNCs can then be directly correlated with
the structure and composition. This is not really the case for
protein-MNCs. Thus far, much of MNC structural information
has been deduced solely from the measured mass of metal atoms
per protein molecule. More is understood regarding the combi-
nation of the protein, metal atom type and reaction conditions
that can lead to particular luminescence/sensing/imaging prop-
erties (Fig. 2a). Nevertheless, there may be some commonality
between thiolate-protected AgNCs and AuNCs with known
structures, and those AgNCs and AuNCs stabilized by proteins
which are rich in cysteine residues (e.g., BSA). For example, the
optical properties (absorbance, emission and photophysical
properties) of BSA-AuNCs and Au22(SG)18 NCs are strikingly sim-
ilar [351]. In fact, it was shown that the luminescence appeared
to originate from Au10 catenane structures (interlocked Au-S
rings) rigidiﬁed by BSA protein templates [81], because similar
structural motifs (interlocking Au-S rings) had been elucidated
for Au22(SG)18 NCs. Researchers should be cautioned that assum-
ing
there
are
structural
similarities
between
small
ligand-
protected MNCs and protein-protected MNCs could be mislead-
ing, especially where there is no direct, clear structural evidence,
such as is the case for Au25(SR)18 NCs and BSA-AuNCs. Due to the
challenge of growing single crystals of protein-MNCs, employing
modern structural characterization techniques such as single par-
ticle cryo-electron microscopy, synchrotron-based X-ray spec-
troscopy, or even X-ray free electron laser measurements could
be necessary to understand the stabilizing interactions from the
protein environment and to untangle the protein-MNC struc-
tural components within. Advances in computational chemistry
and hybrid calculations of many atom systems (molecular
dynamics combined with quantum mechanical treatment for
systems containing 1000 s of atoms) should also make an impact
on understanding the most probable binding sites for MNCs
within a protein molecule and the effect of protein residues in
controlling MNC size and structure. By using these advanced
characterization methods, a deeper and more precise under-
standing of protein-MNC structure and associated properties
could be achieved. Toward a better understanding of protein-
MNC interactions in biological media or environments, the
aforementioned electron/X-ray techniques will also be relevant
for observing structural and chemical changes that occur in situ
and in real time. With the advances in, and wider availability
of, fourth-generation synchrotron light sources, in situ spectro-
scopic measurements of very dilute metals (e.g., protein-MNCs
inside cells) will be more achievable, leading to a better under-
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
187

standing of how protein-MNCs perform in biological environ-
ments and conditions and toward an improved design for their
intended applications.
Instead of using protein molecules as a scaffold for synthesiz-
ing MNCs, another option is the use of ligand exchange or click
chemistry to attach a protein molecule onto an atomically-
precise MNC that has well-characterized structural and electronic
properties. For example, using highly luminescent MNCs, a pro-
tecting ligand could be exchanged for a protein molecule using
an extended linker to avoid adverse steric interactions. Such link-
ers could use a facile click-chemistry terminus that could be cou-
pled to a reciprocal counterpart (e.g., azide-alkyne cycloaddition)
on the protein molecule. The MNC would then act as a lumines-
cent marker and could be a useful approach for cellular imaging
applications. Glycoprotein-functionalized AuNCs could become
attractive
tools
enabling
analysis
and
applications
of
carbohydrate-protein interactions as recently demonstrated by
Reichardt and coworkers [153]. This speciﬁc ligand exchange
reaction was studied mechanistically using a computational
approach [352]. Such an approach could also preserve more of
the protein bioactivity without needing amino acid residues to
interact with reactive metal ion reagents. Furthermore, borrow-
ing from progress made in the ﬁeld of atomically-precise MNCs,
the effect of metal atom doping or bimetallic clusters could
demonstrate
marked
increases
in
QY
[77,353].
Bimetallic
protein-MNCs systems have been synthesized, but with a much
less dramatic increase in luminescence. Apart from the case of
atomically-precise MNCs with known crystal structures and
speciﬁc metal atom locations, the arrangement and type of pro-
tein moieties that stabilize metal clusters and the structural com-
position are still relatively unknown. To achieve the same kind of
leap forward in QY or tunable emission properties using protein-
MNCs, better structural determination of the MNCs within the
protein scaffold will be required.
Although
several
protein-templated
MNCs
have
been
designed for selective sensing of analytes, optimization of these
parameters is still a challenge to meet the demands for cost-
effective clinical diagnostic applications involving complex bio-
logical systems. To address these issues, functionalization of
the protein surface with appropriate recognition elements is very
important, along with the use of lower quantities of expensive
proteins for cost reduction. Nanocomposites comprised of
surface-grown or deposited protein-MNCs are promising hybrid
nano-bio platforms leading to synergistic energy/charge transfer
properties that could enhance the emission properties or sensi-
tivity to detect analytes [162,354,355]. In particular, a Trf-
AuNCs/GO nanocomposite was fabricated as a “turn-on” NIR ﬂu-
orescent probe for bioimaging cancer cells and small animals
[279]. Secondly, for better quantitative evaluation of the sensing
ability of the probe, single molecule techniques like ﬂuorescence
correlation spectroscopy (FCS) and single particle tracking could
be employed instead of traditional ﬂuorescence enhancement or
quenching. The application of optical-based single molecule
analysis in sensing studies, would never be a limitation since
MNCs possess very good photostability and high QY.
The extraordinary properties of protein-MNCs such as tunable
ﬂuorescence, enzyme-mimicking activity, and good biocompati-
bility make them excellent probes for applications in the detec-
tion of neurotransmitters or pathogenic microorganisms. The
signal transduction mechanisms include target-induced ﬂuores-
cence quenching or enhancement, enzyme-like activity for catal-
ysis, and ﬂuorescent sensor arrays. Although current studies have
shown great progress in this ﬁeld, several issues must be taken
into
account
for
their
real-world
applications.
First,
most
protein-MNCs are still not market-ready for in vivo imaging or
detection due to their low QY and relatively low sensitivity.
Future studies should be focused on the preparation of protein-
MNCs with improved properties such as higher QY and more
versatile ﬂuorescence properties. MNCs with multiple excitation
wavelengths
and
corresponding
emission
wavelengths
are
expected to broaden the applications for multiplex detection
with enhanced accuracy. To enhance the sensitivity, dual-read-
out
detection
methods
can
be
employed,
because
some
protein-MNCs can act as a “nanozyme” catalyzing reactions for
signal ampliﬁcation. The combination of protein-MNCs with
other technologies such as enzyme-mediated signal ampliﬁca-
tion could be beneﬁcial for in vivo applications with enhanced
sensitivity. Secondly, as mentioned above, the precise structures
of most MNCs are still under investigation. Fine control over the
MNC structure is necessary to design speciﬁc nanovehicles that
can be applied for detecting neurotransmitters or microorgan-
isms. To address both applications, the structure–function rela-
tionships of protein-MNCs should be studied in more detail to
understand their physicochemical properties to make further
progress in biosensing applications. Protein-protected MNCs
could be versatile tools for the development of ultra-sensitive
immunoassays, achieving limits of detection in the range of
ultra-trace amounts (ppt, nM), offering the possibility of multi-
plexed assays, with a wide variety of signal transduction pro-
cesses either electrochemical or optical, and being able to be
applied directly to a complex analytical matrix (e.g., urine,
serum, etc.). They can also act as surface modiﬁers, supports for
the detection molecules, or even as catalysts for the detection
reaction. The trend towards the use of use bimetallic MNCs
and nanocomposites has opened new doors for the sensitivity
of the detection step in immunoassays. Finally, miniaturization
of the assay assembly are becoming a must in the development
of immunoassays, due to the needs for rapid, disposable, sensi-
tive and reliable tests for diagnostic, prognostic and follow up
applications. Thus, the number of published studies using
microﬂuidic chips, paper-based tests, etc. as the ﬁnal platforms
is increasing. Moreover, the miniaturization or simpliﬁcation of
the instruments, for example smartphones, is also increasing
[356,357]. These trends show the need in clinical medicine to
bring this kind of device close to the patients (i.e., at the bedside)
and to make it user-friendly for clinicians in hospitals.
Protein-MNCs beneﬁt from the optical features inherent in
the metal core, and can be functionalized with Abs, aptamers
and DNA sequences, providing tumor-recognition moieties,
bio-compatibility and effective renal clearance stemming from
their ultrasmall size. Nevertheless, remaining concerns are lar-
gely due to their toxicity, weak ﬂuorescence as well as questions
about biodistribution. Although the functionality of protein-
MNCs suggests their superiority to other ﬂuorescent probes,
some necessary steps should be taken to adjust their functional-
ity in order to provide precise numbers of moieties on the sur-
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
188

face. A judicious effort should be put into gaining deeper under-
standing of whether adjusting the functionality affects the toxi-
city or not. What other variables should be controlled to address
the toxicity and biodistribution? How do the functional groups
control the QY of the protein-protected MNCs, which is vital
in bioimaging applications? Although protein-MNCs will most
likely pave a new way towards bioimaging applications, a deeper
understanding of the toxicity of protein-protected MNCs, the
variables determining the QY, and their biodistribution, is neces-
sary before they are translated to clinical applications.
A large number of protein-MNCs have been developed for diag-
nostic purposes, relating to cancer and a wide variety of other dis-
eases. Advances in synthetic techniques have proved to be useful
for broadening their applications both in vitro and in vivo. How-
ever, only a few of these MNCs have been implemented for clinical
studies, which may be partly due to the low penetration depth in
living tissue of their ﬂuorescence emission in the visible region.
Although some Au-based MNCs emit ﬂuorescence at around
800 nm, their ﬂuorescence QY is far from satisfactory. Besides, cur-
rent ﬂuorescence probes based on MNCs need more functionality
to expand their applications in bioimaging, including targeting to
speciﬁc tissues or cells, and responsiveness to stimuli either inter-
nal or external. The joint efforts of chemists, material scientists
and biologists are expected to propel protein-protected MNCs to
ever-greater achievements in bioimaging.
Thus far, protein-protected MNCs have shown promising per-
formance in different therapeutic areas such as chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, PTT and PDT. In general, their small diameter,
good biocompatibility, intrinsic ﬂuorescence, easy surface func-
tionalization, and colloidal stability in biological environments
make them ideal candidates as theranostic agents for cancer
due to: (i) long circulation times; (ii) accumulation deep within
the tumor; and (iii) convenient tracking via ﬂuorescence. Over
recent years, there have therefore been many encouraging stud-
ies in the use of MNCs as nanomedicines in preclinical models;
however, their translation into the clinical realm remains rela-
tively unexplored. A thorough evaluation of the fate of the nano-
materials after treatment, in vivo biodegradability, and potential
long-term side effects in both preclinical and clinical settings will
be required before they are ready for translation.
Conﬂicts of interest
M.R.H. is on the following Scientiﬁc Advisory Boards: Transdermal
Cap, Inc., Cleveland, OH; BeWell Global, Inc., Wan Chai, Hong
Kong; Hologenix, Inc. Santa Monica, CA; LumiThera, Inc.,
Poulsbo, WA; Vielight, Toronto, Canada; Bright Photomedicine,
Sao Paulo, Brazil; Quantum Dynamics LLC, Cambridge, MA; Glo-
bal Photon, Inc., Bee Cave, TX; Medical Coherence, Boston MA;
NeuroThera, Newark DE; JOOVV, Inc., Minneapolis-St. Paul MN;
AIRx Medical, Pleasanton CA; FIR Industries, Inc. Ramsey, NJ;
UVLRx Therapeutics, Oldsmar, FL; UltraluxUV, Inc., Lansing MI;
Illumiheal&Petthera, Shoreline, WA; MB Lasertherapy, Houston,
TX; ARRC LED, San Clemente, CA; Varuna Biomedical Corp.
Incline Village, NV; Niraxx Light Therapeutics, Inc., Boston, MA;
Dr Hamblin has been a consultant for Lexington Int, Boca Raton,
FL; USHIO Corp, Japan; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; Phi-
lips Electronics Nederland B.V.; Johnson & Johnson, Inc.,
Philadelphia, PA; Sanoﬁ-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, Frankfurt
am Main, Germany; Dr Hamblin is a stockholder in Global Pho-
ton, Inc., Bee Cave, TX; Mitonix, Newark, DE. Other authors
report no conﬂicts of interest.
Nomenclature
AChE
Acetylcholinesterase
AIE
Aggregation-induced emission
ALP
Alkaline phosphatase
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
Ab
Antibody
antiSA–IgG
Anti-staphylococcal immunoglobulin
Asc
Ascorbyl
Asp
Aspartic acid
ATT
6-aza-2-thiothymine
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
BTB
Bromothymol blue
CFFs
Carbon ﬁber fabrics
CAT
Catalase
Cfu
Colony-forming unit
CT
Computed tomography
Ce6
Chlorin e6
CSH
Cysteamine
Cyt c
Cytochrome c
dBSA
Denatured bovine serum albumin
DAPI
40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
DTPA
Diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid
DOX
Doxorubicin
ESM
Eggshell membrane
EWA
Egg white albumin
EWP
Egg white protein
ECL
Electrochemiluminescence
EPR
Enhanced permeability and retention
EGFR
Epidermal growth factor receptor
EGCG
Epigallocatechin gallate
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
FITC
Fluorescein-5-isothiocyanate
FRET
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
FLFIA
Fluorescent lateral ﬂow immunoassay
FSs
FluoSpheres
FR
Folate receptor
FA
Folic acid
GEM
Gemcitabine
GOD
Glucose oxidase
GSH
Glutathione
AuNRs
Gold nanorods
GO
Graphene oxide
GFP
Green ﬂuorescent protein
Hb
Hemoglobin
HRP
Horseradish peroxidase
HAS
Human serum albumin
HER2
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
HA
Hyaluronic acid
5-HT
5-hydroxytryptamine
ICG
Indocyanine green
INS
Insulin
Ils
Ionic liquids
IONPs
Iron oxide nanoparticles
pI
Isoelectric point
a-LA
a-lactalbumin
Lf
Lactoferrin
(continued on next page)
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
189

Arg
L-arginine
LFIA
Lateral ﬂow immunoassay
LOD
Limit of detection
LHRH
Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone
LYZ
Lysozyme
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
MG
Malachite green
MSN
Mesoporous silica nanoparticle
Met
Methionine
MNCs
Metal nanoclusters
MNPs
Metal nanoparticles
MOFs
Metal organic frameworks
MRSA
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
MSSA
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus
MCF-7
Michigan Cancer Foundation-7
MES
2-(N-morpholino) ethanesulfonic acid
MFNC
Multifunctional nanocarrier
NIRF
Near infrared ﬂuorescent
NGF
Nerve growth factor
NSE
Neuron-speciﬁc enolase
OVA
Ovalbumin
PPI
Pea protein isolate
PEP
Pepsin
PA
Picric acid
PEG
Polyethylene glycol
PEI
Polyethylenimine
PET
Positron emission tomography
PBS
Phosphate buffered saline
PAI
Photoacoustic imaging
PDT
Photodynamic therapy
PEC
Photoelectrochemical
PL
Photoluminescence
PS
Photosensitizer
PTT
Photothermal therapy
PPi
Pyrophosphate ion
QC
Quantum cluster
QD
Quantum dot
QY
Quantum yield
RF
Radiofrequency
ROS
Reactive oxygen species
RBC
Red blood cell
RuS
Ruthenium sulﬁde
SF
Silk ﬁbroin
sgRNA
Single guide RNA
SPECT
Single photon emission computed tomography
siRNA
Small interference RNA
SEB
Staphylococcal enterotoxins B
TMB
Tetramethylbenzidine
TAT
Transactivor of transcription
Trf
Transferrin
TRY
Trypsin
US
Ultrasound imaging
UV
Ultraviolet
Van
Vancomycin
ZIF
Zeolite imidazole framework
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
D.M.C. acknowledges research funding through a European
Union Marie-Skłodowska Curie Action International Fellowship
(Project: BioNanoMagnets). A.C-R. acknowledges support from
the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC)
of Australia (Grant GNT1112432). K.L-F acknowledges support
from the National Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.
31871005, 31900981), Chinese Academy of Sciences under
Grant No. YJKYYQ20180048 and Youth Innovation Promotion
Association CAS (2019093). M.R.H. was funded by US NIH
Grants R01AI050875 and R21AI121700. Y.X. acknowledges the
“Hundred Talents Program” from Zhejiang University.
References
[1] R. Jin et al., Chem. Rev. 116 (2016) 10346–10413.
[2] Y. Tao et al., Chem. Soc. Rev. 44 (2015) 8636–8663.
[3] Y.-C. Shiang et al., J. Mater. Chem. 22 (2012) 12972–12982.
[4] M. Cui, Y. Zhao, Q. Song, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 57 (2014) 73–82.
[5] J. Li, J.-J. Zhu, K. Xu, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 58 (2014) 90–98.
[6] I. Chakraborty, T. Pradeep, Chem. Rev. (2017).
[7] M.G. Taylor, G. Mpourmpakis, Nat. Commun. 8 (2017) 15988.
[8] C. Deraedt et al., Nano Lett. 17 (2017) 1853–1862.
[9] R. Jin, Nanoscale 2 (2010) 343–362.
[10] B.H. Kim et al., Chem. Mater. 26 (2014) 59–71.
[11] L. Zhang, E. Wang, Nano Today 9 (2014) 132–157.
[12] X.-D. Zhang, et al., Sci. Rep. (2015) 8669.
[13] X.-D. Zhang et al., Adv. Healthcare Mater. 3 (2014) 133–141.
[14] X. Yuan et al., Chemistry 8 (2013) 858–871.
[15] G. Schmid et al., Chem. Soc. Rev. 28 (1999) 179–185.
[16] M.B. Dickerson, K.H. Sandhage, R.R. Naik, Chem. Rev. 108 (2008) 4935–4978.
[17] N. Goswami, K. Zheng, J. Xie, Nanoscale 6 (2014) 13328–13347.
[18] W.J. Crookes-Goodson, J.M. Slocik, R.R. Naik, Chem. Soc. Rev. 37 (2008) 2403–
2412.
[19] H. Bönnemann, Ryan M. Richards, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 2001 (2001) 2455–
2480.
[20] H. Li et al., Sens. Actuators, B 241 (2017) 1057–1062.
[21] E. Thyrhaug et al., Nat. Commun. 8 (2017) 15577.
[22] A. Kumar, V. Kumar, Chem. Rev. 114 (2014) 7044–7078.
[23] Y. Yu et al., Chem. Commun. 50 (2014) 13805–13808.
[24] J. Zhou, Y. Yang, C.-Y. Zhang, Chem. Rev. 115 (2015) 11669–11717.
[25] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, J.Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131 (2009) 888–889.
[26] H. Chen et al., ACS Nano 9 (2015) 2173–2183.
[27] D. Dutta, A. Chattopadhyay, S.S. Ghosh, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2 (2016)
2090–2098.
[28] M. Shamsipur et al., Microchim. Acta 182 (2015) 1131–1141.
[29] C. Wang et al., Nanoscale 6 (2014) 1775–1781.
[30] M. Sarparast et al., Nano Res. (2016) 1–18.
[31] J.-M. Liu, J.-T. Chen, X.-P. Yan, Anal. Chem. 85 (2013) 3238–3245.
[32] C. Shao et al., J. Mater. Chem. 21 (2011) 2863–2866.
[33] J. He et al., Colloids Surf., A 518 (2017) 80–84.
[34] G. Xavier Le, D. Nicole, S. Marc, Nanotechnology 22 (2011) 275103.
[35] A.L. West et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8 (2016) 21221–21227.
[36] S. Gao et al., Sci. Rep. 4 (2014) 4384.
[37] D. Chen et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7 (2015) 18163–18169.
[38] M.-N. Su et al., Chin. Chem. Lett. 26 (2015) 1400–1402.
[39] A.D. Kurdekar et al., Nanoscale Adv. 2 (1) (2020) 304–314.
[40] G.S. Heo et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11 (22) (2019) 19669–19678.
[41] J.G. Croissant et al., J. Control. Release 229 (2016) 183–191.
[42] C. Lv, S. Yin, X. Zhang, J. Hu, T. Zhang, G. Zhao, Anal. Chim. Acta (2020).
[43] C.N. Loynachan et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 14 (9) (2019) 883–890.
[44] P.L. Xavier et al., Nano Rev. 3 (2012) 1–16.
[45] Y. Yu et al., Adv. Healthcare Mater. 5 (2016) 1844–1859.
[46] Y. Hu, W. Guo, H. Wei, Isr. J. Chem. 55 (2015) 682–697.
[47] X. Tan, R. Jin, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 5 (2013)
569–581.
[48] J. Liu, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 58 (2014) 99–111.
[49] T. Zhao et al., J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part C 33 (2015) 168–187.
[50] A.R.D. Voet, J.R.H. Tame, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 46 (2017) 14–19.
[51] Y. Zhao et al., Part. Part. Syst. Char. 36 (11) (2019) 1900298.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
190

[52] Y. Zhao et al., Method. Appl. Fluoresc. 8 (1) (2019) 012001.
[53] E. Porret, X. Le Guével, J.L. Coll, J. Mater. Chem. B 8 (11) (2020) 2216–2232.
[54] X. Meng et al., Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 12 (3)
(2020) e1602.
[55] A.S. Kumar, W.L. Tseng, Anal. Methods 12 (14) (2020) 1809–1826.
[56] L. Liu, A. Corma, Chem. Rev. 118 (2018) 4981–5079.
[57] E.A. Ivleva et al., Mater. Des. (2020) 108771.
[58] de Souza, N., 2007. Nat. Methods, 4(7), 540–540.
[59] L. Shang et al., Nano Res. 5 (2012) 531–542.
[60] M.J. Meziani et al., J. Phys. Chem. B 106 (2002) 11178–11182.
[61] M. Matulionyte et al., Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18 (2017) 378.
[62] A. Dutta et al., Chem. Commun. 53 (2017) 1277–1280.
[63] L. Shang, S. Dong, G.U. Nienhaus, Nano Today 6 (2011) 401–418.
[64] Y.N. Tan, J.Y. Lee, D.I.C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 (2010) 5677–5686.
[65] Y. Yue et al., Nanoscale. 4 (7) (2012) 2251–2254.
[66] D. Ghosh et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 121 (24) (2017) 13335–13344.
[67] D. Ghosh et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 123 (28) (2019) 17598–17605.
[68] D. Ghosh et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 123 (48) (2019) 29408–29417.
[69] J. Zheng, P.R. Nicovich, R.M. Dickson, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 58 (2007) 409–
431.
[70] V.W.-W. Yam, V.K.-M. Au, S.Y.-L. Leung, Chem. Rev. 115 (2015) 7589–7728.
[71] N. Xu et al., Nanotechnology 27 (2016) 425602.
[72] H. Kawasaki et al., Adv. Funct. Mater. 21 (2011) 3508–3515.
[73] Y. Chen et al., J. Colloid Interface Sci. 396 (2013) 63–68.
[74] K. Chaudhari, P.L. Xavier, T. Pradeep, ACS Nano 5 (2011) 8816–8827.
[75] J.S. Mohanty et al., Nanoscale 4 (2012) 4255–4262.
[76] J.S. Mohanty et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 123 (47) (2019) 28969–28976.
[77] S. Wang et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53 (2014) 2376–2380.
[78] C. Guo, J. Irudayaraj, Anal. Chem. 83 (8) (2011) 2883–2889.
[79] R. Ghosh et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 6 (6) (2014) 3822–3828.
[80] N. Goswami et al., J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 7 (2016) 962–975.
[81] D.M. Chevrier et al., Chem. Sci. 9 (2018) 2782–2790.
[82] O. Yamauchi, A. Odani, M. Takani, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans. (2002) 3411–
3421.
[83] J.M. Dixon, S. Egusa, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140 (2018) 2265–2271.
[84] B. Maity, et al., Nat. commun. 8 (2017) 14820.
[85] N. Kundu et al., J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 8 (2017) 2291–2297.
[86] X.-D. Zhang et al., Biomaterials 33 (2012) 4628–4638.
[87] L. Dong et al., Small 11 (2015) 2571–2581.
[88] A. Soleilhac, F. Bertorelle, R. Antoine, Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol.
Spectrosc. 193 (2018) 283–288.
[89] Z. Wu, R. Jin, Nano Lett. 10 (7) (2010) 2568–2573.
[90] M. Shamsipur et al., ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 6 (2018) 11123–11137.
[91] D.S. Yarramala et al., ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 5 (2017) 6064–6069.
[92] W. Wang et al., New J. Chem. 41 (2017) 3766–3772.
[93] M.A. Habeeb Muhammed et al., Eur. J. 16 (2010) 10103–10112.
[94] G. Yang et al., Sens. Actuators, B 251 (2017) 773–780.
[95] C. Fan et al., ACS Sensors 3 (2018) 441–450.
[96] H. Liu et al., Chem. Commun. 47 (2011) 4237–4239.
[97] N. Kumar Das et al., ChemPhysChem 19 (2018) 2218–2223.
[98] M. Zhu et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130 (18) (2008) 5883–5885.
[99] K.D. Weerawardene, C.M. Aikens, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (35) (2016) 11202–
11210.
[100] X. Wen et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 116 (35) (2012) 19032–19038.
[101] X. Wen et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 116 (21) (2012) 11830–11836.
[102] J. Zheng, C. Zhang, R.M. Dickson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004) 077402.
[103] J. Zheng et al., Nanoscale 4 (2012) 4073–4083.
[104] K.G. Stamplecoskie, Y.-S. Chen, P.V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C 118 (2014) 1370–
1376.
[105] S. Ghosh et al., J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6 (2015) 1293–1298.
[106] N. Goswami et al., Anal. Chem. 83 (2011) 9676–9680.
[107] C.-J. Yu et al., Nanoscale 6 (2014) 9618–9624.
[108] A. Mathew, P.R. Sajanlal, T. Pradeep, J. Mater. Chem. 21 (2011) 11205–11212.
[109] C.-L. Liu et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50 (2011) 7056–7060.
[110] X. Le Guével et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 115 (2011) 10955–10963.
[111] H. Wei et al., Analyst 135 (2010) 1406–1410.
[112] Y.-H. Lin, W.-L. Tseng, Anal. Chem. 82 (2010) 9194–9200.
[113] Z. Lin et al., Analyst 137 (2012) 2394–2399.
[114] D. Hu et al., Analyst 135 (2010) 1411–1416.
[115] J. Xie, Y. Zheng, J.Y. Ying, Chem. Commun. 46 (2010) 961–963.
[116] N. Alkudaisi et al., J. Mater. Chem. B 7 (2019) 1167–1175.
[117] M. Zhang et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 117 (2013) 639–647.
[118] F. Wen et al., Anal. Chem. 83 (2011) 1193–1196.
[119] Y. Liu et al., Adv. Funct. Mater. 20 (2010) 951–956.
[120] K. Selvaprakash, Y.-C. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron. 61 (2014) 88–94.
[121] G. Deng, Mater. Manuf. Processes 14 (1999) 623–625.
[122] K.E. Sapsford et al., Mater. Today 11 (2008) 38–49.
[123] M. De, P.S. Ghosh, V.M. Rotello, Adv. Mater. 20 (2008) 4225–4241.
[124] S.W. Thomas, G.D. Joly, T.M. Swager, Chem. Rev. 107 (2007) 1339–1386.
[125] J.N. Anker et al., Nat. Mater. 7 (2008) 442.
[126] Vella, F. Principles of bioinorganic chemistry: By S J Lippard and J M Berg. pp
411. University Science Books, Mill Valley, California. 1994. $30 ISBN 0-
935702-73-3 (paper). Biochemical Education 1995, 23, 115-115.
[127] R.L. Brathwaite, S.D.C. Rabone, J. R. Soc. New Zealand 15 (1985) 363–370.
[128] L.-Y. Chen et al., Anal. Chem. 87 (2015) 216–229.
[129] S. Ghosh, Spectroscopic Investigations and Applications, IISER, Bhopal, 2015.
[130] F. Bray et al., CA Cancer J. Clin. 68 (2018) 394–424.
[131] O. Golubnitschaja, J. Flammer, Surv. Ophthalmol. 52 (2007) S155–S161.
[132] C.L. Sawyers, Nature 452 (2008) 548.
[133] Y. Zhou et al., Anal. Chem. 90 (2018) 10024–10030.
[134] J. Peng et al., Eur. J. 18 (2012) 5261–5268.
[135] X.-X. Wang et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 26 (2011) 3614–3619.
[136] Y. Tao et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 42 (2013) 41–46.
[137] Y. Tao et al., Adv. Mater. 25 (2013) 2594–2599.
[138] Y. Tao et al., Theranostics 7 (2017) 899–911.
[139] A. Retnakumari et al., Nanotechnology 21 (2009) 055103.
[140] Y. Xu et al., Microchim. Acta 185 (2018) 198.
[141] A.B. Chinen et al., Chem. Rev. 115 (2015) 10530–10574.
[142] M.F. Mousavi et al., Electroanalysis 29 (2017) 861–872.
[143] V.I. Lushchak, J. Amino Acids 2012 (2012) 26.
[144] J.R. Bhamore et al., Sens. Actuators, B 281 (2019) 812–820.
[145] T.-H. Chen, W.-L. Tseng, Small 8 (2012) 1912–1919.
[146] H. Lin et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 41 (2013) 256–261.
[147] M.S. Mathew, K. Joseph, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 5 (2017) 4837–4845.
[148] B. Alberts, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts, P. Walter, The molecular
mechanisms of membrane transport and the maintenance of compartmental
diversity, in: Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th Ed. 2002. Garland Science.
[149] M. Mita et al., Anal. Chem. 91 (7) (2019) 4821–4830.
[150] E.-H. Yoo, S.-Y. Lee, Sensors 10 (2010) 4558–4576.
[151] L. Jin et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 26 (2011) 1965–1969.
[152] C. Wang et al., RSC Adv. 5 (2015) 101599–101606.
[153] K.A. Brzezicka, S. Serna, N.C. Reichardt, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13 (1) (2018) 360.
[154] C.E. Ahlfors, R.P. Wennberg, Semin. Perinatol. 28 (2004) 334–339.
[155] M. Jayasree et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 1031 (2018) 152–160.
[156] M. Santhosh et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 59 (2014) 370–376.
[157] C. Muñoz-Bustos et al., Sens. Actuators, B 244 (2017) 922–927.
[158] X. Li et al., Talanta 195 (2019) 372–380.
[159] K. Selvaprakash, Y.-C. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron. 92 (2017) 410–416.
[160] M. Shamsipur et al., Anal. Chem. 88 (2016) 2188–2197.
[161] S. Ghosh, U. Anand, S. Mukherjee, J. Phys. Chem. C 119 (2015) 10776–10784.
[162] M.H. Griep et al., Plasmonics 2 (2020) 1–7.
[163] Z. Chen et al., Talanta 94 (2012) 240–245.
[164] B. Aswathy, G. Sony, Microchem. J. 116 (2014) 151–156.
[165] Y. Chen et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 1026 (2018) 133–139.
[166] B. Wang et al., Talanta 178 (2018) 1006–1010.
[167] X. Cao et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 871 (2015) 43–50.
[168] L. Meng et al., Anal. Methods 9 (2017) 768–773.
[169] R. Yan et al., ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 6 (2018) 4504–4509.
[170] M. Jaishankar et al., Interdiscip. Toxicol. 7 (2014) 60–72.
[171] Y. Zhang et al., Sens. Actuators, B 238 (2017) 683–692.
[172] J. Zhang et al., Nano Today 11 (2016) 309–329.
[173] H. Li et al., Analyst 142 (2017) 567–581.
[174] H. Kawasaki, et al. Anal. Sci., 27 (2011), 591-591.
[175] J. Zang et al., Anal. Chem. 88 (2016) 10275–10283.
[176] S. Xu et al., Microchim. Acta 182 (2015) 2577–2584.
[177] J. Wang et al., Sens. Actuators, B 267 (2018) 342–350.
[178] S.-N. Ding, Y.-X. Guo, Anal. Methods 7 (2015) 5787–5793.
[179] T. Sanders et al., Rev. Environ. Health 24 (2009) 15–45.
[180] L.M. Gaetke, C.K. Chow, Toxicology 189 (2003) 147–163.
[181] T. Mayr et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 462 (2002) 1–10.
[182] M.E. Letelier et al., Chem. Biol. Interact. 151 (2005) 71–82.
[183] X. Yang et al., J. Mater. Chem. C 1 (2013) 6748–6751.
[184] S. Ghosh, U. Anand, S. Mukherjee, Anal. Chem. 86 (2014) 3188–3194.
[185] U.S. Akshath, P. Bhatt, S.A. Singh, J. Fluoresc. 17 (2020) 1–9.
[186] X. Liu et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 74 (2015) 322–328.
[187] Y.-Q. Huang et al., Microchim. Acta 185 (2018) 1–10.
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
191

[188] D. Lu et al., Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 121 (2014) 77–
80.
[189] G. Zhang et al., Sens. Actuators, B 279 (2019) 361–368.
[190] M.-L. Cui et al., Sens. Actuators, B 188 (2013) 53–58.
[191] J. Zhang et al., Chem. Commun. 49 (2013) 2691–2693.
[192] F. Liu et al., Anal. Chem. 88 (2016) 10631–10638.
[193] A. Biswas et al., ACS Omega 2 (2017) 2499–2506.
[194] R. Shen et al., Anal. Chem. 90 (2018) 4478–4484.
[195] S. Liu et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 886 (2015) 151–156.
[196] Y.J. Ju et al., Sens. Actuators, B 275 (2018) 244–250.
[197] C.-Y. Lee et al., RSC Adv. 6 (2016) 79020–79027.
[198] K. Okabe et al., Nat. Commun. 3 (2012) 705.
[199] C. Wang et al., Nano Res. 8 (2015) 1975–1986.
[200] D. Jaque, F. Vetrone, Nanoscale 4 (2012) 4301–4326.
[201] X. Chen, J.B. Essner, G.A. Baker, Nanoscale 6 (2014) 9594–9598.
[202] J. Lan et al., Talanta 143 (2015) 469–473.
[203] L. Tian et al., Talanta 170 (2017) 530–539.
[204] A. Roos, W.F. Boron, Physiol. Rev. 61 (1981) 296–434.
[205] W. Wang et al., Analyst 139 (2014) 2990–2993.
[206] G. Zhang et al., J. Mater. Chem. C 4 (2016) 3540–3545.
[207] Y. Qiao et al., Sens. Actuators, B 220 (2015) 1064–1069.
[208] Z. Miao et al., New J. Chem. 42 (2018) 1446–1456.
[209] H. Xiong et al., Sens. Actuators, B 239 (2017) 988–992.
[210] R. Ali, S. Saleh, S. Aly, Microchim. Acta 184 (2017) 3309–3315.
[211] Y.-T. Wu et al., Nanoscale 8 (2016) 11210–11216.
[212] Y. Wei et al., Part. Part. Syst. Char. 36 (12) (2019) 1900314.
[213] S. Govindaraju, et al. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 40298-40298.
[214] S. Govindaraju et al., Appl. Surf. Sci. 498 (2019) 143837.
[215] H. Li et al., Analyst 139 (1) (2014) 285–289.
[216] Q. Sha et al., Sens. Actuators, B 294 (2019) 177–184.
[217] Y. He et al., Analyst 137 (17) (2012) 4005–4009.
[218] Y. Yang et al., Talanta 154 (2016) 190–196.
[219] S. Ghosh et al., Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 215 (2019)
209–217.
[220] Y. Li, W. Peng, X. You, Microchim. Acta 184 (2017) 3539–3545.
[221] R.S. Aparna et al., J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 379 (2019) 63–71.
[222] D. Sharma, N. Wangoo, R.K. Sharma, Talanta 21 (2020) 121267.
[223] G. Gao et al., Biomaterials 194 (2019) 36–46.
[224] F. Tan et al., Talanta 194 (2019) 634–642.
[225] Q. Chen, R. Gao, L. Jia, Talanta 1 (2020) 121476.
[226] H. Hossein-Nejad-Ariani, T. Kim, K. Kaur, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 1 (2018)
3389–3397.
[227] H. Ji et al., Adv. Healthc. Mater. 7 (2018) 1701370.
[228] P.-H. Chan, Y.-C. Chen, Anal. Chem. 84 (2012) 8952–8956.
[229] J. Liu et al., Talanta 134 (2015) 54–59.
[230] M. Pal et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 952 (2017) 81–87.
[231] B. Liu et al., Microchim. Acta 181 (2013) 257–262.
[232] Q. Guo et al., Microchim. Acta 182 (2015) 1483–1489.
[233] D. Tang, J. Ren, M. Lu, Analyst 142 (2017) 4794–4800.
[234] M. Lin et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 45 (2013) 82–88.
[235] S. Lv et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (2017) 38336–38343.
[236] L.-P. Mei et al., Anal. Chem. 90 (2018) 2749–2755.
[237] X.L. Hu et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 77 (2016) 666–672.
[238] S. Menon, K. Girish Kumar, J. Fluoresc. 27 (2017) 1541–1546.
[239] T. Peng et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 1040 (2018) 143–149.
[240] R. Li et al., Sens. Actuators, B 281 (2019) 28–33.
[241] N. Zhu et al., Talanta 199 (2019) 72–79.
[242] Q. Chen et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 79 (2016) 364–370.
[243] L. Zhao, Z. Ma, Sens. Actuators, B 241 (2017) 849–854.
[244] T. Peng et al., Microchim. Acta 185 (2018) 1–8.
[245] Z. Zhang et al., Anal. Chim. Acta 1035 (2018) 168–174.
[246] N. Kaur et al., Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13 (2018) 302.
[247] Lei YuLei Yu, Qiao Zhang, Qi Kang, Bin Zhang, Dazhong Shen, and Guizheng
Zou. Anal. Chem. 92 (2020) 7581-7587.
[248] Quan-Quan Zhuang et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11 (2019) 31729–
31734.
[249] Bioimaging: principles and techniques. In Introduction to Biophotonics; pp.
203–254.
[250] D.L. Farkas et al., Comput. Med. Imaging Graph. 22 (1998) 89–102.
[251] P. Zhang et al., Nanoscale 6 (2014) 2261–2269.
[252] C.-Y. Tsai et al., J. Fluoresc. 26 (2016) 1239–1248.
[253] H. Chen et al., Nanoscale 4 (2012) 6050–6064.
[254] D. Hu et al., Theranostics 4 (2014) 142–153.
[255] Z. Teng et al., J. Agric. Food. Chem. 61 (2013) 2556–2564.
[256] H. Li et al., Talanta 158 (2016) 118–124.
[257] Y. Wang, J. Chen, J. Irudayaraj, ACS Nano 5 (2011) 9718–9725.
[258] T. Zhao et al., J. Mater. Chem. B 3 (2015) 2388–2394.
[259] N. Hashemi et al., Microchim. Acta 185 (2017) 60.
[260] L. Shang, G.U. Nienhaus, APL Mater. 5 (2017) 053101.
[261] C. Zhou et al., Angew. Chem. 123 (2011) 3226–3230.
[262] U. Prabhakar et al., Cancer Res. 73 (2013) 2412–2417.
[263] D. Rosenblum et al., Nat. Commun. 9 (2018) 1410.
[264] P. Reineck, B.C. Gibson, Opt. Mater. 5 (2017) n/a-n/a.
[265] S.L. Raut et al., Nanoscale 6 (2014) 2594–2597.
[266] P. Zhao et al., Anal. Chem. 87 (2015) 9998–10005.
[267] X. Wu et al., Nanoscale 2 (2010) 2244–2249.
[268] Z. Li et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (2018) 83–90.
[269] S.L. Raut et al., Chem. Phys. Lett. 561–562 (2013) 74–76.
[270] R. Khandelia et al., Small 11 (2015) 4075–4081.
[271] H. Al Kindi et al., J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 357 (2018) 168–174.
[272] Y. Liu et al., J. Mater. Chem. B 4 (2016) 1276–1283.
[273] Q. Wang et al., Anal. Chem. 87 (2015) 4299–4304.
[274] S.-K. Sun et al., Anal. Chem. 85 (2013) 8436–8441.
[275] H. Cui et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces (2017).
[276] L. Han et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (2017) 6941–6949.
[277] U.N. Pan et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (2017) 19495–19501.
[278] F. Gao et al., ACS Nano 9 (2015) 4976–4986.
[279] Y. Wang, J.-T. Chen, X.-P. Yan, Anal. Chem. 85 (2013) 2529–2535.
[280] H. Chen, B. Li, X. Ren, S. Li, Y. Ma, S. Cui, Y. Gu, Biomaterials 33 (2012) 8461–
8476.
[281] H. Hu et al., Biomaterials 35 (2014) 9868–9876.
[282] C. Ding, Y. Tian, Biosens. Bioelectron. 65 (2015) 183–190.
[283] J. Qiao et al., Chem. Commun. 49 (2013) 8030–8032.
[284] L. Kong et al., ChemistrySelect 1 (2016) 1096–1103.
[285] H.-D. Cui et al., Chin. Chem. Lett. 28 (2017) 1391–1398.
[286] D.-H. Hu et al., Nanoscale 5 (2013) 1624–1628.
[287] Y. Kong et al., Nanoscale 5 (2013) 1009–1017.
[288] J. Lin et al., Nanoscale Res. Lett. 8 (2013) 170.
[289] J. Wang et al., Sci. Rep. 3 (2013) 1157.
[290] F. Zhou et al., Theranostics 6 (2016) 679–687.
[291] C. Ding et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (2018) 8947–8954.
[292] A. Latorre et al., Cancers 11 (7) (2019) 969.
[293] B.N.P. Kumar et al., Mol. Pharm. 15 (2018) 2698–2713.
[294] R. Liu et al., J. Control. Release 278 (2018) 127–139.
[295] U. Goswami et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (2018) 3282–3294.
[296] H. Wang et al., Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 39 (2018) 24–48.
[297] J. Xie et al., Adv. Mater. 31 (2019) 1802244.
[298] S. Zhu, Z. Gu, Y. Zhao, Adv. Ther. 1 (2018) 1800050.
[299] X.-D. Zhang et al., J. Mater. Chem. B 3 (2015) 4735–4741.
[300] D. Huo et al., ACS Nano 11 (2017) 10159–10174.
[301] X.-D. Zhang et al., Adv. Mater. 26 (2014) 4565–4568.
[302] A. Kefayat et al., Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 16 (2019) 173–184.
[303] F. Ghahremani et al., RSC Adv. 8 (2018) 4249–4258.
[304] F. Ghahremani et al., Nanomedicine 13 (2018) 2563–2578.
[305] J. Chen et al., Nanoscale 9 (2017) 14826–14835.
[306] Y. Yong et al., NPG Asia Mater. 8 (2016) e273.
[307] P. Agostinis et al., CA Cancer J. Clin. 61 (4) (2011) 250–281.
[308] A.P. Castano, P. Mroz, M.R. Hamblin, Nat. Rev. Cancer 6 (7) (2006) 535–545.
[309] R. Ho-Wu, S.H. Yau, T. Goodson, J. Phys. Chem. B 121 (2017) 10073–10080.
[310] V. Poderys et al., J. Photochem. Photobiol., B 204 (2020) 111802.
[311] C. Zhang et al., Adv. Funct. Mater. 25 (2015) 1314–1325.
[312] F. Xia et al., Biomaterials 170 (2018) 1–11.
[313] Q. Chen et al., Nano Res. 11 (2018) 5657–5669.
[314] P. Huang et al., Biomaterials 34 (2013) 4643–4654.
[315] Y. Li et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces (2019) 17215–17225.
[316] Y. Yu et al., Adv. Healthcare Mater. 5 (2016) 2528–2535.
[317] Y. Yu, W. Di Lee, Y.N. Tan, Mater. Sci. Eng., C 109 (2020) 110525.
[318] M. Abbas et al., Adv. Mater. 29 (2017) 1605021.
[319] W. Gu et al., J. Mater. Chem. B 4 (2016) 910–919.
[320] A. Cifuentes-Rius et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (2017) 41159–41167.
[321] A. Cifuentes-Rius, et al. Small 13 (2017) 1701201-n/a.
[322] T. Yang et al., Adv. Mater. 28 (2016) 5923–5930.
[323] Y. Wang et al., Adv. Mater. 27 (2015) 3874–3882.
[324] W. Yang et al., ACS Nano 10 (2016) 10245–10257.
[325] Z. Lu, et al., Sci. Rep. 7 (2017), 41571-41571.
[326] T. Chen et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 4 (2012) 5766–5774.
RESEARCH: Review
RESEARCH
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
192

[327] H. Ding et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7 (2015) 4713–4719.
[328] C. Wang et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50 (2011) 11644–11648.
[329] B. Khlebtsov et al., J. Innov. Opt. Health Sci. 09 (2016) 1650004.
[330] X. Bai et al., TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 73 (2015) 54–63.
[331] A. Yahia-Ammar et al., ACS Nano 10 (2016) 2591–2599.
[332] Z. Luo, e, et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 (2012) 16662–16670.
[333] F. Cao et al., Nanoscale 9 (2017) 4128–4134.
[334] R.R. Kudarha, K.K. Sawant, Mater. Sci. Eng., C 81 (2017) 607–626.
[335] P. Liu et al., Part. Part. Syst. Char. 32 (2015) 749–755.
[336] S. Chattoraj, M.A. Amin, K. Bhattacharyya, ChemPhysChem 17 (2016) 2088–
2095.
[337] C. Fu et al., Mater. Sci. Eng., C 87 (2018) 149–154.
[338] P. Wang et al., Adv. Sci. 4 (2017) 1700175.
[339] Y. Lei et al., Nat. Commun. 8 (1) (2017) 1–5.
[340] Y. Zhao, X. Jiang, Nanoscale 5 (2013) 8340–8350.
[341] A. Nain et al., J. Hazard. Mater. 389 (2020) 121821.
[342] W.-Y. Chen et al., Nanomedicine 5 (2010) 755–764.
[343] B. Khlebtsov et al., RSC Adv. 5 (2015) 61639–61649.
[344] H. Miao et al., Nanoscale 7 (2015) 19066–19072.
[345] P. Domenico et al., Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 41 (8) (1997) 1697–1703.
[346] K. Brach et al., Langmuir 33 (36) (2017) 8993–8999.
[347] F. Bertorelle et al., ACS Omega 3 (11) (2018) 15635–15642.
[348] F. Bertorelle et al., ChemPhysChem 19 (2) (2018) 165–168.
[349] J. Olesiak-Banska et al., Chem. Soc. Rev. 48 (15) (2019) 4087–4117.
[350] V. Bonacic-Koutecky, R. Antoine, Nanoscale. 11 (26) (2019) 12436–12448.
[351] Y. Yu et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136 (2014) 1246–1249.
[352] V. Rojas-Cervellera et al., Nanoscale 9 (2017) 3121–3127.
[353] G. Soldan et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55 (2016) 5749–5753.
[354] H. Bagheri et al., Biosens. Bioelectron. 89 (2017) 829–836.
[355] C. Guo et al., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 47 (2017) 41188–41199.
[356] J.M. Campbell et al., Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19 (2018) 2731.
[357] S.K. Vashist, J.H.T. Luong, Smartphone-based immunoassays. Handbook of
Immunoassay Technology 2018, chapter 16.
RESEARCH: Review
Materials Today d Volume 66 d June 2023
RESEARCH
193