Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
Available online 5 December 2024
2452-199X/© 2024 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
3D-printed zinc oxide nanoparticles modified barium titanate/ 
hydroxyapatite ultrasound-responsive piezoelectric ceramic composite 
scaffold for treating infected bone defects
Kai Chen a,1, Fang Wang b,1, Xiumei Sun c, Wenwei Ge d, Mingjun Zhang a, Lin Wang a,  
Haoyu Zheng b, Shikang Zheng a, Haoyu Tang d, Zhengjie Zhou b, Guomin Wu a,*
a Department of Oral, Plastic and Aesthetic Surgery, Hospital of Stomatology, Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China
b Department of Pathogeny Biology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China
c Department of Orthodontics, Hospital of Stomatology, Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China
d Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials of Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Piezoelectric ceramics
Zinc oxide nanoparticles
Antibacterial therapy
Bone regeneration
Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound
A B S T R A C T
Clinically, infectious bone defects represent a significant threat, leading to osteonecrosis, severely compromising 
patient prognosis, and prolonging hospital stays. Thus, there is an urgent need to develop a bone graft substitute 
that combines broad-spectrum antibacterial efficacy and bone-inductive properties, providing an effective 
treatment option for infectious bone defects. In this study, the precision of digital light processing (DLP) 3D 
printing technology was utilized to construct a scaffold, incorporating zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs) 
modified barium titanate (BT) with hydroxyapatite (HA), resulting in a piezoelectric ceramic scaffold designed 
for the repair of infected bone defects. The results indicated that the addition of ZnO-NPs significantly improved 
the piezoelectric properties of BT, facilitating a higher HA content within the ceramic scaffold system, which is 
essential for bone regeneration. In vitro antibacterial assessments highlighted the scaffold’s potent antibacterial 
capabilities. Moreover, combining the synergistic effects of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) and piezo­
electricity, results demonstrated that the scaffold promoted notable osteogenic and angiogenic potential, 
enhancing bone growth and repair. Furthermore, transcriptomics analysis results suggested that the early growth 
response-1 (EGR1) gene might be crucial in this process. This study introduces a novel method for constructing 
piezoelectric ceramic scaffolds exhibiting outstanding osteogenic, angiogenic, and antibacterial properties under 
the combined influence of LIPUS, offering a promising treatment strategy for infectious bone defects.
1. Introduction
The incidence of fracture-related infections following internal fixa­
tion is reported to range from 5 % to 20 %, while for open fractures, this 
rate increases to 30 % [1]. Infective bone defects present a severe threat, 
causing osteonecrosis, significantly compromising patient outcomes, 
increasing financial burdens, and prolonging hospital stays [2]. Unlike 
typical bone defects, infectious bone defects require implants that are 
not only robust in osteoinductive capabilities but also endowed with 
exceptional antibacterial properties [3]. Recently, numerous strategies 
have been developed to equip implants with antibacterial surfaces to 
reduce implant-associated infections [4]. Although these innovations 
offer numerous benefits, they suffer from limitations that obstruct their 
widespread clinical adoption. Consequently, there is a pressing need to 
develop an alternative bone graft material that merges broad-spectrum 
antimicrobial activity, unparalleled biocompatibility, and potent 
osteoinductive properties, thus providing an effective therapeutic solu­
tion for infectious bone defects.
Zinc oxide (ZnO), an amphoteric metal oxide, has attracted signifi­
cant attention due to its potent and broad-spectrum antibacterial, anti­
tumor, and low-toxicity characteristics, among which ZnO nanoparticles 
(ZnO-NPs) have received approval from the United States Food and Drug 
Peer review under responsibility of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: wugm@jlu.edu.cn, guominwu2006@sina.com (G. Wu). 
1 Kai Chen and Fang Wang are co-first authors.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Bioactive Materials
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/bioactive-materials
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.11.015
Received 25 July 2024; Received in revised form 22 October 2024; Accepted 10 November 2024  

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
480
Administration’s (USFDA) for clinical use, highlighted by their 
remarkable antibacterial efficacy [5–7]. Beyond their antimicrobial 
prowess, zinc, the second most abundant trace element in the human 
body, plays a crucial role in numerous physiological functions [8]. 
Approximately 30 % of the body’s zinc is found in bone tissue, 
emphasizing its critical role in bone formation, development, minerali­
zation, and maintenance [9]. Research has shown that the careful 
addition of ZnO-NPs to biomaterial surfaces promotes bone cell activity, 
triggering a cascade of favorable in vivo responses including adhesion, 
migration, proliferation, osteogenic differentiation, and mineralization 
[4,7,10]. Moreover, among various piezoelectric materials, ZnO is 
notable for its simple synthesis process and superior semiconductor 
properties, surpassing traditional piezoelectric ceramics and organic 
counterparts [11–13]. ZnO, a representative binary piezoelectric 
ceramic, is distinguished by its superior piezoelectric characteristics. 
These properties enable the development of various applications, 
including devices for power generation, water splitting, biomolecular 
detection, humidity regulation, and monitoring of pressure or strain, as 
well as photonics and gas detection applications [14]. Furthermore, as a 
beneficial additive, ZnO substantially enhances the electrical perfor­
mance of lead-free piezoelectric ceramics [15–18].
Following the identification of piezoelectric characteristics in bone 
tissue, an array of piezoelectric substances has been utilized in the 
construction of scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. BT and poly­
vinylidene fluoride (PVDF) are among the most rigorously examined 
materials in this field [19–21]. Concurrently, novel piezoelectric mate­
rials have been synthesized to improve bone tissue restoration [22]. In 
this context, inorganic materials are recognized for their unique benefits 
and drawbacks in comparison to their organic, more flexible counter­
parts, with an overarching aim of enhancing osteogenic properties [23,
24]. Extensive documentation supports that materials possessing robust 
piezoelectric traits not only expedite osteogenesis but also bolster the 
osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) [25–27]. In 
recent decades, considerable advancements have been made in refining 
the composition of lead-free piezoelectric ceramics through the inclu­
sion of dopants to achieve superior electrical characteristics [15,17,
28–32]. ZnO, a prominent piezoelectric ceramic, has garnered signifi­
cant interest for its capability to augment the electrical attributes of 
piezoelectric ceramics, thereby emerging as a preferred material among 
scholars.
Currently, LIPUS is a prevalent stimulation technique used to prompt 
piezoelectric materials to generate electrical energy. This ultrasound 
modality operates at frequencies of 1–3 MHz and features a significantly 
lower intensity (<1W/cm2) than traditional ultrasound techniques. 
More than inducing electrical energy from piezoelectric materials, 
LIPUS has gained broad therapeutic use due to its biological effects, 
including thermal, mechanical, and cavitation influences. These effects 
initiate intracellular biochemical cascades that promote tissue repair 
and regeneration [33]. Recognized for its effectiveness, LIPUS was 
approved by the FDA in 1994 for treating fresh fractures and in 2000 for 
nonunions [34,35]. A recent extensive review highlights LIPUS’s ability 
to accelerate bone formation in various contexts, such as fresh fractures, 
delayed unions, nonunions, and distraction osteogenesis, via complex 
molecular, biological, and biomechanical changes at the fracture site 
[36]. Beyond its use in fractures and nonunions, several randomized 
controlled trials have demonstrated LIPUS’s efficacy in treating other 
conditions, including osteoarthritis [37] and root resorption [38]. 
Additionally, ongoing research reveals LIPUS’s effects on the biological 
behavior of MSCs, affecting crucial aspects like viability, proliferation, 
migration, differentiation, and inflammatory responses [39–42]. This 
emphasizes LIPUS’s broad therapeutic potential and highlights the need 
for further exploration of its extensive applications.
Our research team has previously demonstrated the commendable 
biosafety and osteogenic efficacy of piezoelectric ceramics composed of 
BT and HA [43]. However, two primary concerns have persisted: the 
relatively low proportion of HA incorporated and the inherent lack of 
antibacterial properties in the HA/BT ceramic system. To overcome 
these challenges, a study was initiated to incorporate ZnO-NPs into the 
BT matrix, aiming to enhance both the piezoelectric properties and the 
HA proportion in the composite while ensuring minimal disruption to 
the piezoelectric coefficient. Moreover, the addition of ZnO-NPs imparts 
a significant advantage by providing antibacterial capabilities to the 
piezoelectric ceramic system. This innovative approach not only ad­
dresses the limitations of the existing system but also opens new avenues 
for potential applications in biomedical and other fields where anti­
bacterial properties are essential.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Optimal ratio screening of ZnO-NPs, BT and HA
The fabrication of nZnO@BT/HA involved incorporating ZnO-NPs at 
various concentrations (ranging from 0 to 2.0 wt%) into the BT/HA 
matrix. The optimal concentration of ZnO-NPs was determined through 
a comprehensive assessment of antibacterial efficacy and cell viability 
across five distinct concentrations, aiming to balance optimal biocom­
patibility with robust antibacterial properties. Antibacterial assays 
indicated a marked antibacterial effect when ZnO-NP concentrations 
equaled or exceeded 1 wt% (Supplementary Fig. 1). Consequently, 
concentrations below 1 wt% were deemed suboptimal and excluded 
from further consideration. A CCK-8 assay was used to evaluate the 
toxicity profile of ZnO-NPs towards DPSCs (Supplementary Fig. 2). A 
significant decline in cell survival rate was observed at concentrations 
exceeding 1 wt%, whereas concentrations at or below 1 wt% showed no 
detrimental effects on DPSC viability. Therefore, the inclusion of 2 wt% 
ZnO-NPs was precluded from subsequent studies. Accordingly, 1 wt% 
ZnO-NPs was selected as the optimal concentration for further explo­
ration, consistent with previous findings that emphasized the dose- 
dependent nature of ZnO-NPs’ impact on cellular proliferation [44]. 
Specifically, low concentrations of ZnO-NPs have been found to stimu­
late cell growth, whereas high concentrations inhibit cell proliferation 
[45]. Our research aligns with these observations, revealing that as 
ZnO-NP concentration increases to 1 wt%, there is a proportional 
enhancement in cell proliferation ability. However, at 2 wt%, pro­
nounced toxicity towards DPSCs becomes evident. Thus, to ensure 
optimal biocompatibility and cell proliferation potential, our study 
incorporated 1 wt% ZnO-NPs into the BT/HA system for further inves­
tigation. This decision is supported by the literature, optimizing the 
beneficial effects of ZnO-NPs while minimizing potential toxicity con­
cerns [44,46].
Furthermore, prior research has highlighted the capability of ZnO- 
NPs to modulate the electrical characteristics of BT piezoelectric ce­
ramics [47]. With this objective, 1 wt% ZnO-NPs was incorporated into 
various BT and HA compositions, ranging from 100:0 to 0:100 (x) 
BT/(100-x)HA (x = 100, 90, 80, 70, 60, 50, 0), to assess their effects on 
the piezoelectric and dielectric properties of the resultant BT/HA sys­
tem. These hybrid systems were designated as ZnO@100BT, 
ZnO@90BT/10HA, ZnO@80BT/20HA, ZnO@70BT/30HA, ZnO@60B­
T/40HA, ZnO@50BT50/HA, and ZnO@100HA, reflecting varying pro­
portions of BT and HA with 1 wt% ZnO-NPs. Analysis at 1 KHz and 37 ◦C 
(as detailed in Supplementary Fig. 3A), revealed that as the BT content 
decreased, the εr (relative permittivity) values also diminished, specif­
ically: ZnO@100BT: 2329.4, ZnO@90BT/10HA: 729.6, ZnO@80B­
T/20HA: 310.4, ZnO@70BT/30HA: 95.0, ZnO@60BT/40HA: 33.8, 
ZnO@50BT50/HA: 28.6, and ZnO@100HA: 11.8. This pattern un­
derscores the significant influence of BT content on the dielectric 
properties of the composite system. Supplementary Fig. 3B illustrates 
the piezoelectric coefficient (d33) of the samples, showing a decline in 
d33 values with reduced BT content: ZnO@100BT: 83.83 pC/N, 
ZnO@90BT/10HA: 41.20 pC/N, ZnO@80BT/20HA: 8.61 pC/N, 
ZnO@70BT/30HA: 1.87 pC/N, ZnO@60BT/40HA: 0.63 pC/N, 
ZnO@50BT50/HA: 0.17 pC/N, and ZnO@100HA: 0 pC/N. Prior studies 
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
481
have noted that the piezoelectric coefficient of bone tissue ranges from 
0.7 to 2.3 pC/N [48]. Interestingly, the ZnO@70BT/30HA composition, 
with a d33 value of 1.87 pC/N, falls within this biological range, sug­
gesting its potential for biocompatibility and functional mimicry with 
bone tissue. Consequently, this specific proportion has been chosen as 
the focal point for further research.
Upon comprehensive evaluation, 1 wt% ZnO-NPs was incorporated 
into a system with a 70/30 ratio of BT to HA, designated as ZnO@BT/HA 
for the experimental group. Additionally, systems composed solely of a 
70/30 BT to HA ratio (BT/HA) and pure HA (HA) were selected as 
control groups for subsequent experimentation, ensuring a rigorous and 
comparative analysis.
2.2. Construction and characterization of ceramic simples
The structural characteristics of HA, BT/HA, and ZnO@BT/HA 
scaffolds were meticulously examined and compared (Fig. 1). The 
panoramic views of these scaffolds revealed distinctive color variations, 
with HA displaying a porcelain-like whiteness, while BT/HA and 
ZnO@BT/HA exhibited a warm tan hue (Fig. 1B). Fig. 1C details the 
post-sintering morphologies of these ceramic scaffolds, indicating that 
the integration of BT significantly alters the morphology of HA. None­
theless, the microstructural integrity of BT/HA is largely maintained 
despite the incorporation of ZnO-NPs. Further elemental analysis 
included elemental mapping of Ca, P, Ti, Ba, and Zn (Fig. 1D) alongside 
the corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra (Fig. 1E), 
highlighting changes in surface elemental compositions among the 
scaffolds and confirming the successful integration of trace ZnO-NPs into 
the BT/HA system. The XRD patterns of HA, BT/HA, and ZnO@BT/HA 
scaffolds provide additional insights. As shown in Fig. 1F(1), the 
appearance of characteristic BT peaks in the BT/HA scaffold, absent in 
the HA scaffold, confirms the incorporation of BT. Notably, the 
ZnO@BT/HA scaffold shows no new characteristic peaks, indicating the 
absence of secondary phases [49]. In the refined XRD analysis [Fig. 1F 
(2)], the absence of secondary phases at all dopant concentrations 
confirms the successful incorporation of ZnO-NPs into BT, forming a 
solid solution without altering the primary phase structure. Results in 
Fig. 1G demonstrate that the average water contact angles of HA, 
Fig. 1. Characterization of different groups of piezoelectric ceramic samples 
A: The preparation processes of the 3D printed piezoelectric ceramic simples. B: Panoramic images of the 3D printed ceramic scaffolds. C: The SEM images of the 3D 
printed ceramic simples. D: The EDS mapping of the 3D printed ceramic simples. E: The EDX mapping of the 3D printed ceramic simples. F: The XRD pattern of the 3D 
printed ceramic simples. G: The water contact angle of the 3D printed piezoelectric ceramic simples at a RT. H: The morphology, amplitude and phase of the 3D 
printed piezoelectric ceramic simples. I: The relative dielectric (εr) of the 3D printed piezoelectric ceramic simples at a frequency of 1 KHz. J: The d33 of the 3D 
printed piezoelectric ceramic simples.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
482
BT/HA, and ZnO@BT/HA ceramic samples were 52.34◦, 44.17◦, and 
32.28◦, respectively, and these results were significant (p < 0.05). The 
lower water contact angle indicates greater hydrophilicity. Conse­
quently, ZnO@BT/HA ceramic samples, being more hydrophilic than 
the other two groups, are more conducive to cell adhesion [50].
In our previous investigation, by fine-tuning the HA to BT ratio, we 
observed that a BT content of 80 % in the system resulted in a piezo­
electric constant d33 of 2.15 pC/N [51]. However, this configuration 
only allowed for 20 % HA. Aiming to enhance the HA content while 
maintaining piezoelectric performance, this study explores the 
improvement of piezoelectric properties in lead-free BT ceramics 
through ZnO-NPs doping. ZnO-NPs, known for their efficacy as a sin­
tering aid, have been shown to enhance the sintering efficiency of ce­
ramics [17]. Our comparative analysis reveals that incorporating 1 wt% 
ZnO-NPs into pure BT ceramics significantly enhances their electrical 
characteristics. Specifically, the εr value at the Curie temperature 
increased from 1879.8 to 3933.0, and the piezoelectric constant d33 
rose from 35.68 pC/N to 83.83 pC/N [51]. This highlights the significant 
impact of 1 wt% ZnO-NPs on the electrical properties of BT ceramics, 
attributable to enhanced spontaneous polarizatio [47]. The electrical 
characteristics of the ceramic scaffolds, namely their relative dielectric 
constants (εr) and piezoelectric coefficient (d33), for HA, BT/HA, and 
ZnO@BT/HA compositions (Fig. 1G and H). Fig. 1G shows the εr values 
at a frequency of 1 KHz. Notably, the εr of pure HA is significantly low at 
37 ◦C, registering at 11.8. The incorporation of BT into the system 
markedly increases the εr to 46.9. Furthermore, the introduction of 1 wt 
% ZnO-NPs into the BT/HA composite more than doubles the εr to 95.0, 
emphasizing the considerable impact of trace ZnO-NPs in enhancing the 
εr of the BT-based system [47]. Fig. 1H examines the piezoelectric 
properties of these scaffolds. Measured with a quasi-static d33 tester, the 
d33 value of pure HA is negligible (0). The addition of BT results in a d33 
value of 0.65 pC/N for the BT/HA composite. Remarkably, the inclusion 
of 1 wt% ZnO-NPs in the ZnO@BT/HA system elevates the d33 to 1.87 
pC/N, aligning with the range of natural bone (0.7–2.3 pC/N) [48]. 
Fig. 2. In vitro antibacterial properties of different groups of piezoelectric ceramic samples 
A: The process of antibacterial experiment of ceramic samples. B: The results of plate counting of the 3D printed ceramic simples. C: The quantitative results of CFU of 
the 3D printed ceramic simples. D: The live/dead bacterial staining of the 3D printed ceramic simples, green represents living bacteria and red represents dead 
bacteria. E: The quantitative proportion of dead bacteria of the 3D printed ceramic simples. F: The bacterial morphology scanning of the 3D printed piezoelectric 
ceramic simples. G: The plot growth curves of S. aureus after co-culture with 3D printed ceramic simples. H: The plot growth curves of E. coli after co-culture with 3D 
printed ceramic simples.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
483
Different ceramics exhibit varied polarization response processes due to 
their microstructural differences [52]. The topography and piezoelectric 
response mode images of a 2 μm × 2 μm scanning area were tested, 
presenting representative topography, amplitude, and phase images in 
Fig. 1H. The morphology in Fig. 1H was omitted as it represented only 
the surface condition without additional electrical data. The amplitude 
and phase of the piezoelectric response signal relate to the magnitude of 
the piezoelectric coefficient and the direction of local polarization, 
respectively [53]. In the piezoelectric response amplitude images, yel­
low indicates greater piezoelectricity, and blue indicates weaker 
piezoelectricity. The irregular light-dark contrast region in the phase 
result diagram indicates anti-parallel polarization domains [54]. The 
amplitude results show that the ZnO@BT/HA ceramic scaffold has a 
higher amplitude than the other two groups, suggesting stronger 
piezoelectric properties. This finding underscores the potential of 
ZnO@BT/HA ceramic scaffolds for applications requiring piezoelectric 
properties similar to those of biological tissues.
2.3. In vitro antibacterial experiment
ZnO-NPs enhance the properties of BT piezoelectric ceramics, 
refining their electrical attributes during sintering and introducing 
essential antibacterial capabilities into bone tissue engineering scaffold 
systems [44]. To explore the antibacterial efficacy of these materials, 
prevalent pathogens such as the Gram-positive bacterium S. aureus and 
the Gram-negative bacterium E. coli were selected for this study.
The results from the plate counting method are depicted in Fig. 2B, 
and the quantitative CFU counts are presented in Fig. 2C. Notably, the 
ZnO@BT/HA composite doped with ZnO-NPs exhibited pronounced 
antibacterial activity against S. aureus, demonstrated by a significant 
reduction in CFU counts (p < 0.01), compared to the HA and BT/HA 
groups. Similarly, for E. coli, the ZnO@BT/HA group showed substantial 
antibacterial properties, evidenced by a comparable reduction in CFU 
counts (p < 0.01). The live/dead bacterial staining results shown in 
Fig. 2D, and the quantitative analysis of dead bacteria proportions in 
Fig. 2E, further confirm the antibacterial efficacy. For both S. aureus and 
E. coli, the ZnO@BT/HA group contained a higher proportion of dead 
bacteria and fewer live bacteria than the HA and BT/HA groups. Spe­
cifically, dead S. aureus constituted 25.2 % of the total area, while dead 
E. coli accounted for 43.1 %, both representing significant differences (p 
< 0.01). These results highlight the bactericidal nature of ZnO@BT/HA 
ceramic samples, capable of eliminating a substantial portion of adhered 
pathogens. SEM imaging analysis of bacterial morphology revealed 
contrasting patterns between the groups. Bacteria on HA and BT/HA 
samples maintained their normal size, shape, and membrane integrity 
(Fig. 2F). Conversely, bacteria cultured on ZnO@BT/HA samples 
exhibited abnormal morphologies and shrunken membranes, indicative 
of stress or damage. Growth curves, constructed from absorbance values 
measured at various time points post-co-culture wit HA, BT/HA, and 
ZnO@BT/HA, are presented in Fig. 2G and H. These curves demonstrate 
that ZnO@BT/HA significantly impeded the growth of both S. aureus 
and E. coli, compared to the HA and BT/HA groups (p < 0.01), under­
scoring the potent antibacterial properties of ZnO@BT/HA and its 
suitability for applications requiring antimicrobial capabilities.
ZnO is highly regarded within the pharmaceutical industry and has 
been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [55]. 
ZnO-NPs epossess a broad antibacterial spectrum, effectively inhibiting 
bacterial growth through membrane disruption, zinc ion release, and 
generation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) [4,5,56,57]. 
Therefore, ZnO-NPs are considered an optimal choice for combating 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria [58]. Given these properties, ZnO-NPs were 
selected as an additive in this study to enhance the antimicrobial qual­
ities of BT/HA piezoelectric ceramic systems. In vitro antibacterial as­
says have conclusively shown the strong inhibitory effect of ZnO-NPs 
against both S. aureus and E. coli. Although BT is known to have some 
antibacterial potential, its efficacy requires nanoscale particles and 
ultrasonic stimulation [59,60]. In this study, BT particles were sized 
between 0.6 and 1 μm, and no ultrasonic stimulation was used during 
antibacterial testing. Thus, the BT/HA ceramic sample displayed anti­
bacterial efficacy similar to that of the HA sample, consistent with 
previous findings [27].
2.4. In vitro biosafety
The CCK-8 assay results, shown in Fig. 3B, reveal trends in cell 
viability across various groups on days 1, 3, and 5. Notably, the HA and 
BT/HA groups displayed similar cell viability, with a significant differ­
ence emerging only on day 5. The addition of 1 wt% ZnO-NPs signifi­
cantly enhanced cell activity and proliferation in the ZnO@BT/HA 
group (p < 0.05). Moreover, the integration of polarization and LIPUS in 
the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group resulted in the highest cell viability, distinct 
from the other groups (p < 0.05), highlighting the synergistic effects of 
these factors. Live/dead cell staining images in Fig. 3C differentiate 
viable (green) and nonviable (red) cells. The quantitative analysis in 
Fig. 3D shows cell death rates. No significant difference was observed in 
the proportion of dead cells between the HA and BT/HA groups, while 
the ZnO@BT/HA group showed a reduction in dead cells, though not 
significant (p > 0.05). The LP-ZnO@BT/HA group had the lowest rate of 
dead cells among all groups, significantly so (p < 0.05), demonstrating 
the effectiveness of this treatment in preserving cell viability. Fluores­
cent staining was used to assess the cytoskeletal architecture and nuclear 
features of DPSCs, highlighting F-actin with rhodamine-phalloidin and 
nuclei with Hoechst, as displayed in Fig. 3E. The LP-ZnO@BT/HA group 
exhibited fuller cell morphology compared to the other groups, indi­
cating enhanced cellular development. The cytoplasm-to-nucleus (C/N) 
ratio of DPSCs was analyzed in Fig. 3F. No significant difference in the 
C/N ratio was found between the HA and BT/HA groups. However, a 
significant increase in the C/N ratio was noted with the addition of 1 wt 
% ZnO-NPs (p < 0.05), indicating cellular growth and maturation. 
Remarkably, the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group, exposed to polarization and 
LIPUS, showed the highest C/N ratio among all groups (p < 0.05). This 
increase in C/N ratio correlates with the natural process of cell devel­
opment, characterized by cytoplasmic expansion, thus serving as an 
indicator of increased cell maturity [61], highlighting the beneficial 
effects of the LP-ZnO@BT/HA treatment on DPSCs maturation.
Optimal concentrations of ZnO-NPs have been demonstrated to 
enhance cell proliferation [46]. Biocompatibility assessments showed 
that DPSCs cultured on ZnO@BT/HA ceramic samples, modified with 
ZnO-NPs, exhibited significantly enhanced proliferation capabilities 
compared to those on HA and BT/HA surfaces. Additionally, a notable 
reduction in the rate of cell death was observed in the ZnO@BT/HA 
group. Moreover, the C/N ratio in the ZnO@BT/HA group, augmented 
by ZnO-NPs, exceeded that of the initial groups, confirming that this 
ZnO-NP-modified ceramic system promotes cellular maturation without 
cytotoxicity.
DPSCs cultured on LP-ZnO@BT/HA surfaces demonstrated sub­
stantial improvements in cellular activity and proliferation capacity, 
surpassing the first three groups. This improvement was accompanied 
by a notable decrease in the rate of dead cells and a significant increase 
in the nuclear proportion, indicating peak cellular maturity. The sig­
nificant changes in the biological behavior of DPSCs on LP-ZnO@BT/HA 
ceramic samples, compared to ZnO@BT/HA, are attributed to the syn­
ergistic effects of LIPUS and piezoelectric properties. LIPUS is believed 
to play a crucial role in modulating the biological responses of DPSCs, 
including proliferation and activity. Research by Gao and colleagues has 
shown that LIPUS (at intensities of 250/750 mW/cm2, 1 MHz, admin­
istered for 5 or 10 min per day) stimulates DPSC proliferation, with 250 
mW/cm2 producing the most pronounced effects [62]. Furthermore, the 
integration of LIPUS causes the polarized piezoceramic surface to 
generate electrical energy, immersing DPSCs in a microelectric envi­
ronment that triggers alterations in their biological behavior [63,64]. 
This highlights the multifaceted benefits of the LP-ZnO@BT/HA system 
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
484
in promoting optimal DPSC development and functionality.
2.5. In vitro osteogenic properties
Osteogenic induction medium was applied to DPSCs on various 
ceramic surfaces for 7 days, with ALP staining outcomes illustrated in 
Fig. 4B. Despite varying background hues among the groups, LP- 
ZnO@BT/HA surfaces showed pronounced purple agglomerations, 
indicating superior osteogenic properties. To reduce the effect of back­
ground color variations on our results, hexadecylpyridinium chloride 
monohydrate was used in an elution process, detailed in Fig. 4C. This 
approach enabled clearer visualization of the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group, 
enriched with ZnO-NPs and enhanced by LIPUS stimulation. The darker 
hue of eluents from this group highlighted its increased osteogenic 
capacity in vitro, outperforming the other groups. Quantitative analysis 
of eluent color, shown in Fig. 4D, supports these findings. While no 
significant differences were observed between the HA and BT/HA 
groups, the addition of ZnO in the ZnO@BT/HA group led to a notable 
increase in osteogenic activity. The LP-ZnO@BT/HA group, enhanced 
synergistically by LIPUS and polarization, displayed the highest OD 
value among all groups. Immunofluorescence (IF) staining results in 
Fig. 4E show OCN in red, OPN in green, and nuclei stained blue. Detailed 
microscopic imagery reveals that the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group exhibits 
the highest expression levels of both OCN and OPN proteins. Further 
quantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity, as shown in Fig. 4F, re­
veals consistent trends in protein expression. No significant differences 
were noted between the HA and BT/HA groups, but ZnO-NPs signifi­
cantly elevated OCN and OPN protein expression in DPSCs. The LP- 
Fig. 3. In vitro biosafety of different groups of piezoelectric ceramic samples 
A: The process of in vitro biosafety test of ceramic samples. B: The results of CCK-8 assay of the 3D printed ceramic simples. C: The live/dead cell staining of the 3D 
printed ceramic simples, green represents living cells and red represents dead cells. D: The quantitative proportion of dead cells of the 3D printed ceramic simples. E: 
F-actin and nucleus results of DPSCs after 3 days of co-culture with different groups of ceramic samples, green represents F-actin and blue represents dead nucleus. F: 
Quantitative results of C/N ratio.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
485
ZnO@BT/HA group demonstrated the highest protein levels among the 
groups tested.
Numerous studies have shown that incorporating ZnO into bone 
tissue engineering scaffolds significantly enhances MSC osteogenic dif­
ferentiation capabilities, marking a notable advancement in the field 
[65–67]. Additionally, many studies have recognized that LIPUS can 
stimulate MSC osteogenic differentiation through various biological 
pathways, highlighting its potential as a powerful therapeutic tool 
[68–70]. Since the discovery of bone tissue’s piezoelectric properties, a 
range of materials with these unique characteristics have been utilized 
to promote osteogenic differentiation, offering innovative therapeutic 
options for bone defects [71–73]. This study highlights the remarkable 
enhancement of osteogenic properties in ceramic samples through the 
incorporation of ZnO-NPs. Furthermore, the combined effect of LIPUS 
and the piezoelectric properties significantly amplifies the osteogenic 
efficacy of the ceramic system, corroborating previous research findings.
2.6. In vitro angiogenic properties
Achieving efficient vascularization is crucial in bone tissue engi­
neering to enhance the regenerative potential of scaffold materials [74]. 
This process ensures an ample nutrient supply and facilitates oxygen 
exchange and metabolic activities of osteoblasts, the primary 
bone-forming cells [75]. Consequently, this study examined DPSCs’ 
migratory abilities and the expression patterns of vasogenesis-associated 
proteins across various ceramic sample groups. Fig. 5B illustrates the 
migratory behavior of DPSCs on different ceramic samples. Addition­
ally, Fig. 5C presents a quantitative assessment of wound healing, of­
fering a detailed understanding of the process. The results showed that 
DPSCs in both the HA and BT/HA groups exhibited comparable migra­
tory capabilities. However, the inclusion of ZnO-NPs enhanced the 
migration potential of DPSCs. Significantly, the integration of LIPUS and 
piezoelectric effects into the experimental setup led to a marked 
improvement (p < 0.05) in the migratory abilities of DPSCs, highlighting 
Fig. 4. In vitro osteogenic properties of different groups of piezoelectric ceramic samples 
A: The process of in vitro osteogenic properties test of ceramic samples. B: ALP staining assays results of DPSCs after 7 days of co-culture with different groups of 
ceramic samples. C: Color comparison of eluents harvested from different groups of ceramic samples after ALP staining assays. D: The quantitative analysis of eluents 
harvested from different groups of ceramic samples after ALP staining assays. E: Immunofluorescence staining assays results of DPSCs after 7 days of co-culture with 
different groups of ceramic samples (red for OPN, green for OCN, blue for nucleus). F: The quantitative analysis results of immunofluorescence staining of different 
groups of ceramic samples.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
486
the synergistic benefits of these factors. IF staining results, shown in 
Fig. 5D, illustrate the distribution of VEGF (red), HIF-1α (green), and 
nuclei (blue). The LP-ZnO@BT/HA group displayed the most pro­
nounced expression levels of the osteogenic markers VEGF and HIF-1α 
proteins. Quantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity, presented in 
Fig. 5E, revealed a consistent pattern of significant upregulation of VEGF 
and HIF-1α proteins in DPSCs following the incorporation of ZnO-NPs, 
emphasizing their critical role in promoting vascularization. The 
LP-ZnO@BT/HA group exhibited the highest concentrations of VEGF 
and HIF-1α proteins among the groups, underscoring its outstanding 
vascularization potential.
Studies have demonstrated that LIPUS can promote angiogenic dif­
ferentiation of MSCs through various signaling pathways [76,77]. 
Additionally, the piezoelectric effect in tissue engineering scaffolds has 
been shown to enhance the angiogenic differentiation of MSCs [78,79]. 
This study highlights the profound impact of combining LIPUS and the 
piezoelectric effect on facilitating MSC migration and enhancing the 
expression of vasogenic proteins. This evidence further validates its 
ability to stimulate vasogenic differentiation of MSCs, emphasizing its 
potential in regenerative medicine.
2.7. Transcriptomics analysis
To explore the molecular mechanisms behind the osteogenic 
enhancement observed in LP-ZnO@BT/HA ceramic samples, a 
comprehensive transcriptomic analysis was conducted comparing the 
control group with the LP-ZnO@BT/HA treatment group (Fig. 6). Initial 
differential gene statistics identified changes in gene expression profiles 
between these groups, as illustrated in Fig. 6B. The differential gene 
volcano plot revealed a significant finding: 531 genes showed differen­
tial expression, with 256 up-regulated and 275 down-regulated due to 
LP-ZnO@BT/HA treatment. Notably, the EGR1 gene was the most 
prominently altered among the upregulated genes. To visually display 
these extensive transcriptional changes, a heat map including all 531 
Fig. 5. In vitro angiogenic properties of different groups of piezoelectric ceramic samples 
A: The process of in vitro angiogenic properties test of ceramic samples. B: The cell scratch assay results of DPSCs in different groups of ceramic samples. C: The 
quantitative analysis of wound healing rate results in different groups of ceramic samples at different time points. D: The quantitative analysis of eluents harvested 
from different groups of ceramic samples after ALP staining assays. D: Immunofluorescence staining assays results of DPSCs after 7 days of co-culture with different 
groups of ceramic samples (red for VEGF, green for HIF-1α, blue for nucleus). E: The quantitative analysis results of immunofluorescence staining of different groups 
of ceramic samples.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
487
differential genes was created, shown in Fig. 6C. A subset of genes 
related to osteogenesis was specifically highlighted in Fig. 6D, empha­
sizing their roles in the noted osteogenic enhancement. Deeper insights 
were sought through Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) 
enrichment analysis, the results of which are depicted in Fig. 6E. This 
analysis segregated the upregulated and downregulated genes into 
distinct KEGG pathways, identifying specific signaling cascades, marked 
by blue and red boxes in Fig. 6F (blue for downregulation, red for 
upregulation), as crucial to the osteogenic differentiation of MSCs. 
Notably, it was hypothesized that the LP-ZnO@BT/HA ceramic scaffold 
promotes osteogenic differentiation in DPSCs via the “Parathyroid hor­
mone synthesis, secretion, and action" signaling pathway. Furthermore, 
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) pathway analysis corroborated 
these findings, reinforcing the proposed molecular mechanisms at play.
Previous research has highlighted the significant role of EGR1 as a 
key transcription factor in growth and differentiation processes [80,81]. 
Research on dental stem cells from apical papilla and dental follicle 
indicated that EGR1 actively promotes osteogenic differentiation, 
potentially through the modulation of distal-less homeobox 3 and bone 
morphogenetic protein 2 expression [82]. Further studies confirmed 
EGR1’s essential role in osteogenic differentiation of MSCs in response 
to mechanical stimuli [83]. Additionally, recent research demonstrated 
EGR1’s role in enhancing chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs, facili­
tated by a complex silk-based hydrogel, showcasing its versatility in 
stem cell fate regulation [84]. In this study, whole-transcriptome 
sequencing was used to analyze gene expression differences between 
Fig. 6. The results of transcriptomics analysis of osteogenesis 
A: The process of transcriptomics analysis of osteogenesis. B: Differential gene volcano plot of LP-ZnO@BT/HA group and control group. C: Differential gene heat 
map of LP-ZnO@BT/HA group and control group. D: Heat maps of some osteogenic differential genes in LP-ZnO@BT/HA group and control group. E: The KEGG 
enrichment of all differential gene. F: The KEGG enrichment of upregulated and downregulated genes (blue indicating downregulation, red indicating upregulation). 
G: Signaling pathways associated with osteogenesis analyzed in part by GSEA enrichment.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
488
the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group and the control group, revealing significant 
upregulation of the EGR1 gene in the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group. Both 
KEGG pathway analysis and GSEA highlighted the critical role of the 
“Parathyroid Hormone Synthesis, Secretion, and Action" pathway in 
promoting 
osteogenic 
differentiation 
of 
DPSCs 
within 
the 
LP-ZnO@BT/HA treatment framework. In conclusion, transcriptome 
profiling indicated that LIPUS and piezoelectric effects work together to 
enhance osteogenic differentiation of DPSCs by specifically upregulating 
the EGR1 gene within this signaling cascade, thus uncovering a novel 
mechanism for improved bone regeneration in ceramic materials.
2.8. In vivo osteogenic and angiogenic properties
Infected scaffolds were first utilized to assess in vivo antimicrobial 
performance. Supplementary Figs. 4B and 4C shows a significant 
reduction in bacterial colonies in the ZnO@BT/HA and LP-ZnO@BT/HA 
groups compared to the HA and BT/HA groups, demonstrating effective 
antibacterial activity of ZnO-doped piezoelectric ceramic scaffolds in 
vivo.
Following the encouraging in vitro results regarding osteogenic and 
angiogenic potential, a deeper investigation into the ability of various 
ceramic scaffolds to stimulate in vivo bone regeneration was conducted 
using a standardized rat skull defect model with a well-defined defect 
diameter (φ = 5 mm) [85]. Additionally, to explore the antibacterial 
efficacy of ZnO-NPs-doped scaffolds, an infected skull defect model was 
employed. Micro-CT analyses, detailed in Fig. 7B–F, provide intricate 
insights. To ensure unbiased imaging and quantitative assessment of 
nascent bone tissue, scaffolds and bone tissue were meticulously 
reconstructed in isolation. Examination of the two-dimensional images 
across groups (Fig. 7B) revealed that HA and BT/HA ceramic scaffolds 
exhibited suboptimal contact with adjacent bone tissue, appearing as 
low-density regions. Conversely, scaffolds doped with ZnO-NPs, specif­
ically ZnO@BT/HA and LP-ZnO@BT/HA, showed seamless integration 
with surrounding bone tissue. Three-dimensional reconstructions of new 
bone tissue (Fig. 7B) indicated that while HA and BT/HA scaffolds dis­
played comparable osteogenic efficacy in vivo, the inclusion of ZnO-NPs 
significantly enhanced the osteogenic capability of the ZnO@BT/HA 
scaffold. Moreover, when combined with polarization and LIPUS stim­
ulation, the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group was the most effective at inducing 
bone regeneration, outperforming other groups at both 4 and 8 weeks’ 
assessment points. Quantitative analysis of 3D reconstructed structures, 
including BV/TV, Tb.Th, Tb.N, and Tb. Sp. Was conducted to evaluate 
new bone formation (Fig. 5C–F). At 4 and 8 weeks post-surgery, there 
were no significant differences in BV/TV, Tb.Th, Tb.N, and Tb. Sp be­
tween the HA and BT/HA groups, except that BT/HA showed higher Tb. 
Th at 8 weeks. Significant statistical differences were observed in 
BV/TV, Tb.Th, Tb.N, and Tb. Sp in the ZnO@BT/HA group compared to 
the first two groups. With LIPUS stimulation and the polarization pro­
cess, BV/TV, Tb.Th, and Tb.N in the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group significantly 
increased, and Tb. Sp significantly decreased compared to the other 
groups.
H&E and Masson’s trichrome staining are commonly used histolog­
ical methods to evaluate potential inflammatory responses associated 
with scaffold implantation and to assess collagen synthesis and bone 
maturation [86]. The H&E staining results revealed no notable severe 
inflammation across all groups, confirming the exceptional biocompat­
ibility of the implanted ceramic scaffolds (Fig. 7G). In vivo biosafety 
findings further support this observation (Supplementary Fig. 5). Mas­
son’s staining showed a lighter hue for the HA and BT/HA groups, while 
the ZnO@BT/HA and LP-ZnO@BT/HA groups exhibited deep dark-blue 
staining, indicative of robust collagen deposition. Additionally, the red 
staining in these groups highlighted the organized structure of the 
calcified extracellular matrix (Fig. 7H). By week 8, the new bone had 
nearly filled the defect and enveloped the LP-ZnO@BT/HA scaffold, 
with trabecular morphology resembling autologous bone. These results 
highlight a significant disparity in osteogenic potential, with 
ZnO-NPs-doped ZnO@BT/HA and LP-ZnO@BT/HA groups exhibiting 
far superior abilities compared to the HA and BT/HA groups. The 
ZnO@BT/HA group, enriched with ZnO-NPs, showed a heightened ca­
pacity for bone formation over the initial two groups. Combined with 
LIPUS stimulation and polarization effects, the LP-ZnO@BT/HA scaf­
folds emerged as the most potent osteogenic enhancers, outperforming 
all other groups.
Eight weeks post-implantation, the rat skulls were subjected to IF 
staining, revealing significant findings (Fig. 8). To assess osteogenesis 
and angiogenesis at the defect sites, antibodies against osteogenic 
markers Runx2, COL1, OCN, and OPN, as well as angiogenic markers 
TGF-β, ANG-1, VEGF, and HIF-1α were used. A meticulous quantitative 
analysis displayed a nuanced trend: although the BT/HA group showed 
slightly higher levels than the HA group, this difference was not sig­
nificant. Notably, the incorporation of ZnO-NPs significantly enhanced 
both angiogenic and osteogenic potential. Furthermore, the integration 
of LIPUS and piezoelectric effects dramatically increased the scaffold’s 
capacity to stimulate angiogenesis and promote bone regeneration, 
making it the most effective among the four experimental groups.
Previous studies have shown that incorporating ZnO-NPs onto 
biomaterial surfaces accelerates bone integration of implants and 
shortens the healing period [7]. Additionally, these studies have high­
lighted the ability of ZnO-NPs to stimulate bone differentiation in MSCs 
[3,46]. ZnO also possesses strong antibacterial properties that facilitate 
the regeneration of infected bone defects [3,87,88], prompting the 
development of an infected skull defect model in this study.
Our results indicate that ZnO-NPs-doped ZnO@BT/HA ceramic 
samples demonstrate enhanced osteogenic potential both in vitro and in 
vivo compared to their ZnO-NPs-free counterparts. Specifically, these 
samples promote osteogenic differentiation of DPSCs in vitro and 
effectively stimulate bone regeneration in vivo within infected skull 
defect models. Notably, the LP-ZnO@BT/HA ceramic sample out­
performed the other three groups in terms of osteogenic efficacy, 
emphasizing the synergistic effect of LIPUS stimulation and polarization 
[89]. LIPUS is known to promote osteogenesis through various signaling 
pathways that augment the expression of osteogenic proteins [90]. Our 
observations align with previous findings showing LIPUS enhancing 
osteogenic differentiation in MSCs [91]. Besides its direct osteogenic 
impact, LIPUS acts as an exogenous inducer, converting mechanical 
energy from piezoelectric materials into electrical energy, thereby 
enhancing its osteogenic effect [50,89,92]. Thus, our study highlights 
the significant osteogenic effects of LP-ZnO@BT/HA ceramic samples, 
achieved through dual stimulation by LIPUS and the piezoelectric effect. 
This innovative approach offers considerable potential for advancing 
bone regeneration strategies in cases of infected bone defects.
3. Materials and methods
3.1. Preparation and characterization ceramic simples
3.1.1. Materials
Highly purified ZnO-NPs (99.8 % purity), with an initial particle size 
of D50 = 50 ± 10 nm, were obtained from Aladdin in Shanghai, China. 
BT (99.9 % purity), with a particle size range of D50 = 0.6–1 μm, was 
sourced from Mackin in Dalian, China. HA (97 % purity), with a particle 
size of D50 < 100 nm, was also procured from Aladdin to ensure 
consistent quality. For 3D printing, a specialized light-curing resin was 
formulated, primarily consisting of polyethylene glycol (600) dimetha­
crylate (PEG600DMA, 80 %), γ-(methylallyl) propyl trimethoxysilane 
(KH-570, 15 %), 2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl-diphenyl oxide phosphine 
(TPO-L, 2 %), and Sudan red, following a previously established recipe 
[45]. This resin blend is optimized for performance in the 3D printing 
process [51].
3.1.2. Preparation of ceramic simples (Fig. 1A)
The fabrication of 3D printed piezoelectric ceramic specimens was 
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
489
Fig. 7. In vivo osteogenic properties of different groups of piezoelectric ceramic samples 
A: The process of in vivo osteogenic properties test of ceramic samples. B: Two-dimensional images of bone defects combined with ceramic scaffolds and 3D 
reconstruction of the new bone tissue with/without ceramic scaffolds. C: The quantitative results of BV/TV of the 3D printed ceramic simples. D: The quantitative 
results of Tb.Th of the 3D printed ceramic simples. E: The quantitative results of Tb.N of the 3D printed ceramic simples. F: The quantitative results of Tb. Sp of the 3D 
printed ceramic simples. G: The H&E staining results of the 3D printed ceramic simples. H: The Masson’s trichrome staining results of the 3D printed ceramic simples.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
490
conducted following methods from previous studies [51]. Initially, 
ZnO-NPs were homogeneously dispersed within a light-curing resin 
matrix using a magnetic stirrer. Subsequently, varying concentrations of 
BT and HA were meticulously blended with the ZnO-NPs-laden resin 
using a precision ceramic three-roll mill. The ceramic scaffolds and discs 
were then constructed using a DLP 3D printer, adhering to optimized 
printing parameters: light intensity of 2.5 mW/cm2, exposure time of 10 
s, and a layer thickness of 20 μm. After printing, the specimens under­
went a thorough degreasing process and were sintered in a muffle 
furnace at 1250 ◦C for 2 h to ensure high-quality consolidation. In the 
next step, the ceramic samples were subjected to high-voltage polari­
zation in a specialized device, applying a field strength of 30 kV/cm for 
20 min at room temperature to enhance their piezoelectric properties. 
Prior to further experimentation, any silver coating applied during the 
fabrication process was meticulously removed. Finally, the prepared 
piezoelectric ceramic scaffolds and discs were ready for subsequent 
experimental evaluations and applications.
3.1.3. Scanning electron microscope (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and 
water contact angle
To examine the detailed morphology and microstructure of the 
ceramic samples, a SEM (Oxford ULTIM Max65 model) was utilized. The 
samples were carefully sputter-coated with gold to improve image 
clarity and enable high-resolution imaging. SEM acquisitions were 
performed at an optimized accelerating voltage of 10 kV. Additionally, 
energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) in mapping mode was employed 
to visualize the spatial distribution of key elements within the samples, 
providing crucial insights into their in-situ elemental composition. For 
phase composition analysis, comprehensive XRD assessments were 
carried out using a Bruker D8 Advance instrument over a 2θ range of 
10◦–90◦, with a scanning rate of 10◦/min and a step size of 0.02◦. The 
surface water contact angle of the ceramic samples was measured using 
a contact angle meter (OCA-20, Germany) through the sessile-drop 
method at room temperature. A 5 μL droplet of deionized water was 
placed on the sample surface, and the droplet’s shape was captured. 
Fig. 8. Results of immunofluorescence staining of osteogenesis and angiogenesis in vivo 
A: TGF-β and ANG-1 protein expression in different ceramic scaffold groups (red for TGF-β, green for ANG-1, blue for nucleus). B: The quantitative analysis of TGF-β 
and ANG-1 protein expression in different ceramic scaffold groups. C: VEGF and HIF-1α protein expression in different ceramic scaffold groups (red for VEGF, green 
for HIF-1α, blue for nucleus). D: The quantitative analysis of VEGF and HIF-1α protein expression in different ceramic scaffold groups. E: Runx2 and COL1 protein 
expression in different ceramic scaffold groups (red for Runx2, green for COL1, blue for nucleus). F: The quantitative analysis of Runx2 and COL1 protein expression 
in different ceramic scaffold groups. G: OPN and OCN protein expression in different ceramic scaffold groups (red for OPN, green for OCN, blue for nucleus). H: The 
quantitative analysis of OPN and OCN protein expression in different ceramic scaffold groups.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
491
Three different points on each sample were tested, and the average value 
was calculated.
3.1.4. Dielectric properties and piezoelectric properties
The dielectric characteristics of the ceramic samples were analyzed 
utilizing a high-precision dielectric temperature spectrometer (DMS- 
500, China), covering a frequency range from 1 kHz to 1 MHz and 
temperature range from 30 ◦C to 300 ◦C. The piezoelectric properties 
were evaluated using a quasi-static d33 tester (ZJ-3AN, China), exam­
ining the samples under pressurization ranging from −10 to 10 V at a 
frequency of 75 Hz. Additionally, piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM, 
Asylum Research + Cypher ES, USA) was used to analyze morphology, 
amplitude, and phase displacement of the piezoelectric response.
3.2. In vitro antibacterial experiment (Fig. 2A)
3.2.1. Bacteria culture
In this study, the antibacterial efficacy of the samples was evaluated 
against two bacterial strains: the Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus 
(S. aureus, ATCC 29213) and the Gram-negative Escherichia coli (E. coli 
ATCC 25922). These bacteria served as model organisms to assess the 
antimicrobial properties of three distinct ceramic categories: HA (pure 
HA), BT/HA (a blend of HA and BT in a 70BT/30HA ratio), and 
ZnO@BT/HA (addition of 1 wt% ZnO-NPs to the previous BT/HA ratio). 
The study systematically investigated the impact of various ceramic 
compositions on antibacterial performance against these strains.
3.2.2. Antibacterial activity
The antibacterial efficacy was rigorously assessed using the plate 
count method. A 500-μL bacterial suspension, adjusted to an optical 
density (OD) of 0.5 at 600 nm, was thoroughly mixed with each sample 
and incubated at 37 ◦C for 24 h. Post-incubation, a 20-μL aliquot from 
the diluted co-cultured bacterial suspension was carefully inoculated 
onto Luria-Bertani (LB) agar plates to promote the growth of bacterial 
colonies. The antibacterial prowess of the samples was quantitatively 
evaluated by meticulously counting the colony-forming units (CFUs) on 
the agar surfaces.
3.2.3. Live/dead bacterial staining
A 500-μL bacterial suspension, standardized to an OD600 of 0.5, was 
intimately mixed with various samples and incubated at 37 ◦C for 24 h. 
Bacterial cells adhering to the samples were differentially stained using 
equal volumes of SYTO 9 and propidium iodide (PI), producing distinct 
green and red fluorescent signatures for 20 min. High-resolution images 
were captured using an advanced fluorescence microscope (OLYMPUS 
IX71, Japan) for analysis. The proportion of non-viable (dead) bacteria 
was quantified using Image-Pro Plus software, enabling precise assess­
ment of the samples’ antibacterial effectiveness.
3.2.4. Bacterial morphology scanning
Following a 24-h incubation at 37 ◦C, 500 μL of bacterial suspension, 
standardized to an OD600 of 0.5, were exposed to various samples, then 
fixed with paraformaldehyde for 60 min. After triple rinsing with 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), the samples were dehydrated using a 
graded ethanol series (25 %, 50 %, 75 %, and 100 %), facilitating 
preservation of bacterial morphology. The dried samples were coated 
with a thin gold layer via spray-gold process, enhancing their SEM im­
aging conductivity. Using an advanced SEM instrument (JEOL JSM- 
3400IV), the morphology of the adhered bacteria was visualized in 
detail, providing insights into their interactions with the sample 
surfaces.
3.2.5. Absorbance test
5 mL of bacterial suspension, adjusted to an OD600 of 0.5, were 
exposed to diverse samples and incubated at 37 ◦C for 8 h. The absor­
bance at 600 nm was meticulously measured at 2-h intervals during this 
period, allowing for the monitoring of bacterial growth dynamics.
3.3. In vitro biosafety (Fig. 3A)
3.3.1. Cell culture
Dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) were extracted and cultured ac­
cording to established methodologies, using Alpha Modified Eagle Me­
dium (α-MEM) (Gibco, China), supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine 
serum 
(FBS) 
(Biological 
Industries, 
Israel) 
and 
1 
% 
pen­
icillin–streptomycin, at 37 ◦C in a 5 % CO2 in a humidified incubator. 
Ceramic samples were grouped as follows: HA (pure HA), BT/HA (70BT/ 
30HA combination), ZnO@BT/HA (addition of 1 wt% ZnO-NPs to BT/ 
HA), and LP-ZnO@BT/HA (polarized ZnO@BT/HA stimulated by 
LIPUS). The LIPUS stimulation protocol is outlined in a prior publication 
[43]. Briefly, the LIPUS exposure was conducted in vitro using a Soni­
cator 740 device (Mettler Electronics, USA), which delivered a 1 MHz 
sine wave, a 50 % duty cycle, and an intensity of 30 mW/cm2. A 
custom-designed water-filled apparatus served as the platform for LIPUS 
application, with a 48-well plate positioned on the water’s surface. This 
setup facilitated the non-invasive stimulation of DPSCs attached to the 
sample surfaces in the wells, using water as the coupling medium. The 
LIPUS treatment was administered daily for 10 min at 37 ◦C.
3.3.2. Cell viability and proliferation assay
Following the arrangement of various ceramic samples in a 48-well 
plate, dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) were seeded onto each and 
cultured over periods of 1, 3, and 5 days. Cell proliferation and viability 
were assessed using the sensitive Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) from 
Dojindo (Japan).
3.3.3. Live/dead cell staining
After placing various ceramic samples in a 48-well plate, DPSCs were 
seeded onto these substrates and cultured for 3 days. The cells were then 
stained using a Live/Dead Cell Staining Kit (LMAI, China), which uses 
Calcein AM and PI to emit green and red fluorescence, respectively, 
distinguishing live from dead cells. The fluorescence-based differentia­
tion was examined under an Olympus IX71 high-resolution fluorescence 
microscope (Japan), and images were captured for detailed analysis. 
Image-Pro Plus software was used to quantify the precise proportion of 
dead cells, providing a quantitative assessment of cellular health and 
vitality in response to the ceramic environments.
3.3.4. Cell morphology
Various ceramic samples were placed in a 48-well plate and DPSCs 
were seeded onto these surfaces, where they were cultured for 3 days. 
The cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min at 4 ◦C to 
preserve structural integrity, followed by permeabilization with 0.1 % 
Triton-X 100 for 10 min at room temperature to facilitate staining. The 
cytoskeleton was stained with rhodamine-phalloidin (Solarbio, China) 
for 20 min at room temperature, producing a vibrant red fluorescence. 
Nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (Solarbio, China) for 1 
min at room temperature, resulting in a distinct blue fluorescence for 
clear delineation of cellular structures. These fluorescently labeled 
samples were examined under the advanced optics of an Olympus IX71 
fluorescence microscope (Japan), and images were captured for subse­
quent analysis. Image-Pro Plus software quantified cellular morphology, 
specifically measuring the ratio of overall cellular area to nuclear area 
(CN rate), across different groups, providing a quantitative assessment 
of cellular growth on the ceramic substrates.
3.4. In vitro osteogenic properties (Fig. 5A)
3.4.1. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining
Osteogenic differentiation was induced in DPSCs cultured on various 
samples using a medium containing 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 10 nM 
dexamethasone, and 50 mg/mL ascorbic acid for 7 days. ALP activity 
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
492
was performed using the BCIP/NBT Alkaline Phosphatase Color Devel­
opment Kit (Beyotime, China). To reduce color interference from HA 
and BT materials, cells were de-stained with 10 % hexadecylpyridinium 
chloride monohydrate (Aladdin, China) at room temperature, and the 
eluates were analyzed in a 96-well plate at 550 nm using an enzyme- 
labeling instrument (Biotech, USA).
3.4.2. IF staining and analysis
The assessment of protein expression levels of osteocalcin (OCN) and 
osteopontin (OPN) in co-cultured DPSCs was conducted using IF Stain­
ing techniques. To induce osteogenic differentiation, DPSCs were co- 
cultured with ceramic samples in 48-well plates immersed in osteo­
genic induction medium for 7 days. Afterward, the DPSCs were fixed 
with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min and washed thoroughly with 
PBS, repeating the wash step three times. IF staining involved antibodies 
from Servicebio, China, including Rabbit Monoclonal Antibody against 
OCN, Rabbit Monoclonal Antibody against OPN, HRP-labeled Goat Anti- 
rabbit IgG, and Alexa Fluor 488-labeled Goat Anti-rabbit IgG, following 
the manufacturer’s protocols. Additionally, nuclei were stained with 
DAPI (Servicebio, China) to enhance the visualization of cellular struc­
tures. IF images were captured and analyzed using Image-Pro Plus 
software, which enabled the quantification of average fluorescence in­
tensity of the proteins, providing a detailed assessment of the expression 
levels of OCN and OPN in the co-cultured DPSCs.
3.5. In vitro angiogenic properties (Fig. 5A)
3.5.1. Cell scratch assay
Dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) were seeded on ceramic samples in 
48-well plates and incubated for 12 h at 37 ◦C in a 5 % CO2 atmosphere 
to facilitate cell adhesion and monolayer formation. A wound model was 
then created on the ceramic surface using a 200 μl pipette tip. Cyto­
skeleton and nucleus staining were performed at 0h, 12h, and 24h to 
monitor in vitro wound closure. The scratch width was measured to 
calculate the wound healing extent, with the closure rate determined by: 
(original width - measured width)/original width * 100 %.
3.5.2. IF staining and analysis
Protein expression levels of vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) and hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α) in co-cultured DPSCs 
were analyzed using IF staining. To induce osteogenic differentiation, 
DPSCs were cultured with ceramic samples in osteogenic induction 
medium for 7 days. The cells were then fixed with 4 % para­
formaldehyde for 15 min and washed three times with PBS. IF staining 
utilized Servicebio antibodies, including Rabbit Monoclonal Antibodies 
against VEGF and HIF-1α, HRP-labeled Goat Anti-rabbit IgG, and Alexa 
Fluor 488-labeled Goat Anti-rabbit IgG, following manufacturer’s in­
structions. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (Servicebio, China), 
enhancing cellular structure visualization. The images were captured 
and analyzed with Image-Pro Plus software to quantify the fluorescence 
intensity, thus assessing VEGF and HIF-1α expression levels in DPSCs.
3.6. Transcriptomics analysis of osteogenesis (Fig. 6A)
To elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind the osteogenic dif­
ferentiation promoted by the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group, gene expression 
profiling was conducted. DPSCs were co-cultured with ceramic samples 
in osteogenic induction medium for 7 days. Transcriptome analysis 
identified differentially expressed genes, highlighting those up- 
regulated or down-regulated during osteogenic differentiation on LP- 
ZnO@BT/HA ceramic surfaces. Pathway analyses, including KEGG 
and GSEA, were performed to identify relevant pathways.
3.7. In vivo osteogenic properties (Fig. 7A)
3.7.1. Infected skull defect model and scaffold implantation
All animal experiments received approval from the Research Ethics 
Committee of the College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin University 
(Ethics number: 2022450). Eight-week-old male Sprague-Dawley (SD) 
rats, sourced from the Laboratory Animal Centre at Jilin University, 
were used to create calvaria critical-size defects. Twenty-four rats were 
divided into four groups (9 rats per group): Group I: HA alone, Group II: 
BT/HA mixture (70BT/30HA), Group III: ZnO@BT/HA (with 1 wt% 
ZnO-NPs), and Group IV: LP-ZnO@BT/HA (LIPUS-stimulated ZnO@BT/ 
HA). Before surgery, the scaffolds (D: 5 mm, H: 1.5 mm) were contam­
inated with 10 μl S. aureus (OD600 = 0.5). Rats were anesthetized 
through intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital (10 mg/100 g 
body weight). Following anaesthesia, a critical-size defect of 5 mm 
diameter was created in the skull using a micro drill at low rotation 
speed with constant irrigation. Post-surgery, the LIPUS exposure device 
was immediately applied to the LP-ZnO@BT/HA group using the pa­
rameters previously described in the cell studies. Specifically, the ul­
trasound transducer was positioned on the skin of the head, secured by a 
thin layer of coupling agent, and maintained for 10 min daily over 1, 4, 
or 8 weeks. At 4 and 8 weeks post-implantation, the rats were eutha­
nized using an overdose of CO2 to obtain the skull specimens containing 
the scaffold.
3.7.2. In vivo antibacterial activity (Supplementary Figure 4A)
After a week of implantation, the infected scaffolds were extracted, 
and bacteria were isolated using ultrasound. Twenty microliters of the 
bacterial suspension were plated on agar and incubated overnight before 
being counted and photographed.
3.7.3. Micro-computed tomography (Micro-CT) scanning and evaluation
Specimens, fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde, underwent scanning 
with a Micro-CT scanner (PerkinElmer Quantum GX2, USA) at 90 kV 
source voltage, 88 μA beam current, and 25 μm resolution. Three- 
dimensional reconstruction was achieved using CTvol software 
(Bruker Micro-CT). The area of the scaffold (D: 5 mm, H: 1.5 mm) was 
identified as the region of interest (ROI). CTan software (Bruker Micro- 
CT) was used to calculate the percentage of bone volume to total volume 
(BV/TV), Trabecular Thickness (Tb.Th), Trabecular Number (Tb.N), and 
Trabecular Space (Tb.Sp).
3.7.4. Histological and histomorphometric analysis
Skull tissues were fixed and decalcified for 28 days, followed by 
dehydration and embedding in paraffin. Bone slices were then stained 
with Hematoxylin-Eosin (H&E) and Masson’s trichrome stains.
3.7.5. IF analysis
Skull tissues from eight-week specimens were fixed and subjected to 
28 days of decalcification, then dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. IF 
staining was conducted on these sections. Osteogenesis-related anti­
bodies (Anti-runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2), collagen type 1 
(COL1), OCN, and OPN) and angiogenesis-related antibodies (Anti- 
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), angiopoietin 1 (ANG-1), VEGF, 
and HIF-1α) were applied to assess osteogenesis and angiogenesis at 
defect sites in rats. Images were captured and analyzed using Image-Pro 
Plus software to quantify the average fluorescence intensity and protein 
expression levels.
3.7.6. In vivo biosafety
At four weeks, rat hearts, livers, spleens, lungs, and kidneys were 
harvested, dehydrated, and embedded for histological examination to 
assess in vivo toxicity via H&E staining.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
493
3.8. Statistics
All data were presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Statis­
tical analyses were performed using SPSS 19.0 and GraphPad Prism 8 
(GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA), with significance thresholds 
set at p = 0.05. Discrepancies between groups were indicated with as­
terisks: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
4. Conclusion
This study utilized DLP 3D printing technology to fabricate a ZnO- 
modified BT/HA piezoelectric ceramic scaffold for repairing infected 
bone defects. Firstly, the piezoelectric properties of the ZnO-modified BT 
were enhanced, facilitating an increased HA content in the scaffold. 
Secondly, the scaffold demonstrated significant antibacterial efficacy in 
vitro. Additionally, with the incorporation of LIPUS and piezoelectric 
effects, the scaffold exhibited superior osteogenic capabilities. Thus, the 
development of multifunctional bone tissue engineering ceramic scaf­
folds holds promising potential for the repair of complex tissue defects 
[93].
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal experiments received approval from the Research Ethics 
Committee of the College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin University 
(Ethics number: 2022450).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kai Chen: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, 
Funding acquisition, Data curation, Conceptualization. Fang Wang: 
Writing – review & editing, Resources, Funding acquisition, Data cura­
tion. Xiumei Sun: Methodology, Investigation. Wenwei Ge: Visualiza­
tion, Software, Resources, Methodology. Mingjun Zhang: Software, 
Resources, Methodology. Lin Wang: Software, Methodology. Haoyu 
Zheng: Resources, Methodology. Shikang Zheng: Validation, Software, 
Methodology. Haoyu Tang: Resources, Methodology. Zhengjie Zhou: 
Software, Methodology. Guomin Wu: Writing – review & editing, 
Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by grants from National Key R&D Project 
of China, Ministry of Science and Technology of the People’s Republic of 
China (grant numbers: 2023YFC2509205), Jilin Provincial Science and 
Technology Development Project (grant numbers: 20230204088YY), 
Jlin Provincial Science and Technology Development Project (grant 
numbers: YDZJ202401300ZYTS), Fund Project of Science and Tech­
nology Project of Jilin Provincial Department of Finance (grant 
numbers: JCSZ2023481-15), Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Preci­
sion Infectious Diseases (grant numbers: 20200601011JC), Jilin Prov­
ince Development and Reform Commission (grant numbers: 2022C036), 
and Graduate Innovation Fund of Jilin University (grant numbers: 
2024CX127).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.11.015.
References
[1] C.T. Johnson, J.A. Wroe, R. Agarwal, K.E. Martin, R.E. Guldberg, R.M. Donlan, L. 
F. Westblade, A.J. García, Hydrogel delivery of lysostaphin eliminates orthopedic 
implant infection by Staphylococcus aureus and supports fracture healing, Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115 (22) (2018) E4960–e4969.
[2] P.P. Kalelkar, M. Riddick, A.J. García, Biomaterial-based delivery of antimicrobial 
therapies for the treatment of bacterial infections, Nat. Rev. Mater. 7 (1) (2022) 
39–54.
[3] Y. Zhang, Z. Li, B. Guo, Q. Wang, L. Chen, L. Zhu, T. Zhang, R. Wang, W. Li, D. Luo, 
et al., A zinc oxide nanowire-modified mineralized collagen scaffold promotes 
infectious bone regeneration, Small (2023) e2309230.
[4] Y. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Qing, R. Li, X. Tang, D. Guo, Y. Qin, Enhancing ZnO-NP 
antibacterial and osteogenesis properties in orthopedic applications: a review, Int. 
J. Nanomed. 15 (2020) 6247–6262.
[5] S. Jha, R. Rani, S. Singh, Biogenic zinc oxide nanoparticles and their biomedical 
applications: a review, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater. (2023) 1–16.
[6] S. Raha, M. Ahmaruzzaman, ZnO nanostructured materials and their potential 
applications: progress, challenges and perspectives, Nanoscale Adv. 4 (8) (2022) 
1868–1925.
[7] Z. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, Q. Zhou, NanoZnO-modified titanium 
implants for enhanced anti-bacterial activity, osteogenesis and corrosion 
resistance, J. Nanobiotechnol. 19 (1) (2021) 353.
[8] D.P. Kiouri, E. Tsoupra, M. Peana, S.P. Perlepes, M.E. Stefanidou, C.T. Chasapis, 
Multifunctional role of zinc in human health: an update, EXCLI journal 22 (2023) 
809–827.
[9] Z. Neˇsˇc´akov´a, K. Zheng, L. Liverani, Q. Nawaz, D. Galuskov´a, H. Kaˇnkov´a, 
M. Mich´alek, D. Galusek, A.R. Boccaccini, Multifunctional zinc ion doped sol - gel 
derived mesoporous bioactive glass nanoparticles for biomedical applications, 
Bioact. Mater. 4 (2019) 312–321.
[10] M. Laurenti, V. Cauda, ZnO nanostructures for tissue engineering applications, 
Nanomaterials 7 (11) (2017).
[11] N. Bhadwal, R. Ben Mrad, K. Behdinan, Review of zinc oxide piezoelectric 
nanogenerators: piezoelectric properties, composite structures and power output, 
Sensors 23 (8) (2023).
[12] A. Shayan, M. Abdellahi, F. Shahmohammadian, S. Jabbarzare, A. Khandan, 
H. Ghayour, Mechanochemically aided sintering process for the synthesis of 
barium ferrite: effect of aluminum substitution on microstructure, magnetic 
properties and microwave absorption (vol 708, pg 538, 2017), J. Alloys Compd. 
713 (2017), 18-18.
[13] U. Naresh, R.J. Kumar, N.V.S. Gupta, D. Kothandan, Ferroelectric properties of 
CuFe2O4, BaFe2O4, Ba0.2La0.8Fe2O4 nanoparticles, Elect. Sci. Eng. 1 (1) (2019) 
6.
[14] R.K. Pandey, J. Dutta, S. Brahma, B. Rao, C.A.P. Liu, Review on ZnO-based 
piezotronics and piezoelectric nanogenerators: aspects of piezopotential and 
screening effect, Journal of Physics-Materials 4 (4) (2021).
[15] M. Promsawat, Z.-G. Ye, A. Watcharapasorn, Enhancement of piezoelectric 
properties of Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3) 0.65Ti0.35O3 ceramics by ZnO modification, Mater. 
Lett. 205 (2017) 126–129.
[16] X. Pang, J. Qiu, K. Zhu, J. Du, Effect of ZnO on the microstructure and electrical 
properties of (K0.5Na0.5)NbO3 lead-free piezoelectric ceramics, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. 
Electron. 23 (5) (2012) 1083–1086.
[17] S.-H. Lee, S.-G. Lee, H.-J. Kim, Y.-H. Lee, Effect of sintering temperature on 
piezoelectric and dielectric properties of 0.98(Na0.5K0.5)NbO3-0.02Li(Sb0.17Ta0.83) 
O3+0.01wt%ZnO ceramics, J. Electroceram. 28 (2–3) (2012) 101–104.
[18] S.-H. Shin, J. Yoo, Effect of ZnO addition on dielectric and piezoelectric properties 
of (Ba0.85Ca0.15)(Ti0.915Zr0.085)O3 ceramics, Ferroelectrics Lett. 42 (1–3) (2015) 
43–50.
[19] D. Khare, B. Basu, A.K. Dubey, Electrical stimulation and piezoelectric biomaterials 
for bone tissue engineering applications, Biomaterials 258 (2020) 120280.
[20] E. Fukada, I. Yasuda, On the piezoelectric effect of bone 12 (10) (2007) 
1158–1162.
[21] G.W. Hastings, Medicine FMJJoMSMi: the electromechanical properties of fluid- 
filled bone: a new dimension 2 (2) (1991) 118–124.
[22] R.V. Chernozem, M.A. Surmeneva, S.N. Shkarina, K. Loza, M. Epple, M. Ulbricht, 
A. Cecilia, B. Krause, T. Baumbach, A.A. Abalymov, et al., Piezoelectric 3-D fibrous 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)-based scaffolds ultrasound-mineralized with calcium 
carbonate for bone tissue engineering: inorganic phase formation, osteoblast cell 
adhesion, and proliferation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11 (21) (2019) 
19522–19533.
[23] S. Luo, C. Zhang, W. Xiong, Y. Song, Q. Wang, H. Zhang, S. Guo, S. Yang, H. Liu, 
Advances in electroactive biomaterials: through the lens of electrical stimulation 
promoting bone regeneration strategy, J Orthop Translat 47 (2024) 191–206.
[24] J. Li, Y. Xie, G. Liu, A. Bahatibieke, J. Zhao, J. Kang, J. Sha, F. Zhao, Y. Zheng, 
Bioelectret materials and their bioelectric effects for tissue repair: a review, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 16 (30) (2024) 38852–38879.
[25] P. Wu, L. Shen, H.F. Liu, X.H. Zou, J. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y.F. Zhu, Z.Y. Li, C. Xu, L. 
H. Luo, et al., The marriage of immunomodulatory, angiogenic, and osteogenic 
capabilities in a piezoelectric hydrogel tissue engineering scaffold for military 
medicine, Military Medical Research 10 (1) (2023) 35.
[26] S. Joo, Y. Gwon, S. Kim, S. Park, J. Kim, S. Hong, Piezoelectrically and 
topographically engineered scaffolds for accelerating bone regeneration, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 16 (2) (2024) 1999–2011.
[27] C. Lei, J. Lei, X. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. He, W. Zhang, B. Tong, C. Yang, X. Feng, 
Heterostructured piezocatalytic nanoparticles with enhanced ultrasound response 
for efficient repair of infectious bone defects, Acta Biomater. 172 (2023) 343–354.
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
494
[28] K.N.D.K. Muhsen, R.A.M. Osman, M.S. Idris, The effects of Ca, Zr and Sn 
substitutions into a ternary system of BaTiO3-BaSnO3-BaZrO3towards its dielectric 
and piezoelectric properties: a review, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 32 (10) 
(2021) 12771–12783.
[29] M. Adamczyk-Habrajska, B. Wodecka-Dus, T. Goryczka, D. Szalbot, M. Bara, 
L. Cieply, Dielectric and electric properties of Ba0.996La0.004Ti0.999O3 ceramics 
doped with europium and hafnium ions, Materials 15 (2) (2022).
[30] B. Deng, J. Jiang, H. Li, C. Zhao, C. Lin, X. Wu, M. Gao, T. Lin, Enhanced 
piezoelectric property in Mn-doped K0.5Na0.5NbO3 ceramics via cold sintering 
process and KMnO4 solution, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 105 (9) (2022) 5774–5782.
[31] Q. Hou, B. Yang, C. Ma, Z. Zhou, R. Liang, H. Li, X. Dong, Tailoring structure and 
piezoelectric properties of CaBi2Nb2O9 ceramics by W6+-Doping, Ceram. Int. 48 
(12) (2022) 16677–16684.
[32] Z. Peng, L. Chen, Y. Xiang, F. Cao, Microstructure and electrical properties of 
lanthanides-doped CaBi2Nb2O9 ceramics, Mater. Res. Bull. 148 (2022).
[33] M. Du, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Ouyang, Z. Chen, The impact of low intensity 
ultrasound on cells: underlying mechanisms and current status. Progress in 
Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 2022.
[34] J.D. Heckman, J.P. Ryaby, J. McCabe, J.J. Frey, R.F. Kilcoyne, Acceleration of 
tibial fracture-healing by non-invasive, low-intensity pulsed ultrasound, J Bone 
Joint Surg Am 76 (1) (1994) 26–34.
[35] P.A. Nolte, A. van der Krans, P. Patka, I.M. Janssen, J.P. Ryaby, G.H. Albers, Low- 
intensity pulsed ultrasound in the treatment of nonunions, J. Trauma 51 (4) (2001) 
693–702. ; discussion 702-693.
[36] X. Guo, M. Lv, J. Lin, J. Guo, J. Lin, S. Li, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, Latest progress of LIPUS 
in fracture healing: a mini-review, J. Ultrasound Med. : official journal of the 
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2024).
[37] S. Samaan, M.G. Sedhom, M.O. Grace, A randomized comparative study between 
high-intensity laser vs low-intensity pulsed ultrasound both combined with 
exercises for the treatment of knee osteoarthritis, Int J Rheum Dis 25 (8) (2022) 
877–886.
[38] H. Raza, P. Major, D. Dederich, T. El-Bialy, Effect of low-intensity pulsed 
ultrasound on orthodontically induced root resorption caused by torque: a 
prospective, double-blind, controlled clinical trial, Angle Orthod. 86 (4) (2016) 
550–557.
[39] X. Yang, Y. Wu, J. Li, W. Yin, Y. An, Y. Wang, M. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Qu, G. Ning, et 
al., A pilot study of parameter-optimized low-intensity pulsed ultrasound 
stimulation for the bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells viability improvement, 
Comput. Math. Methods Med. 2019 (2019) 8386024.
[40] L. Ling, J. Hou, Y. Wang, H. Shu, Y. Huang, Effects of low-intensity pulsed 
ultrasound on the migration and homing of human amnion-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells to ovaries in rats with premature ovarian insufficiency, Cell Transplant. 
31 (2022) 9636897221129171.
[41] Y. Wu, Q. Gao, S. Zhu, Q. Wu, R. Zhu, H. Zhong, C. Xing, H. Qu, D. Wang, B. Li, et 
al., Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound regulates proliferation and differentiation of 
neural stem cells through notch signaling pathway, Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 526 (3) (2020) 793–798.
[42] Q. Liao, B.J. Li, Y. Li, Y. Xiao, H. Zeng, J.M. Liu, L.X. Yuan, G. Liu, Low-intensity 
pulsed ultrasound promotes osteoarthritic cartilage regeneration by BMSC-derived 
exosomes via modulating the NF-κB signaling pathway, Int. Immunopharm. 97 
(2021) 107824.
[43] K. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Du, H. Tang, S. Zheng, Z. Zhou, H. Zheng, G. Wu, Ln 
vitro assessment of immunomodulatory and osteogenic properties in 3D-printed 
hydroxyapatite/barium titanate piezoelectric ceramic scaffolds, Ceram. Int. 50 (6) 
(2024) 8751–8759.
[44] Z. Wen, X. Shi, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Liu, R. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Su, Mesoporous TiO2 
coatings regulate ZnO nanoparticle loading and Zn2+Release on titanium dental 
implants for sustained osteogenic and antibacterial activity, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 15 (12) (2023) 15235–15249.
[45] L. Taccola, V. Raffa, C. Riggio, O. Vittorio, M.C. Iorio, R. Vanacore, A. Pietrabissa, 
A. Cuschieri, Zinc oxide nanoparticles as selective killers of proliferating cells, Int. 
J. Nanomed. 6 (2011) 1129–1140.
[46] X. Wang, F. Shi, D. Zhao, Y. Yan, Effect of ZnO-doped magnesium phosphate 
cements on osteogenic differentiation of mBMSCs in vitro, J. Appl. Biomater. 
Funct. Mater. 20 (2022) 22808000221136369.
[47] A. Li, Y. Wang, Non-uniform micro-nanoarchitectonics of ZnO structure for the 
regulation of electrical properties of barium titanate lead-free piezoceramics, Appl. 
Phys. Mater. Sci. Process 128 (11) (2022).
[48] Y.F. Tang, C. Wu, Z.X. Wu, L. Hu, W. Zhang, K. Zhao, Fabrication and in vitro 
biological properties of piezoelectric bioceramics for bone regeneration, Sci. Rep. 7 
(2017).
[49] E. Ul Haq, M.R.A. Karim, K.I. Khan, W. Akram, S.S. Hassan, F. Kashif, Study of 
structural and electrical properties of Zn-doped barium titanate ceramics 
synthesized by conventional solid-state method, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater. 24 
(1–2) (2022) 69–73.
[50] B. Fan, Z. Guo, X. Li, S. Li, P. Gao, X. Xiao, J. Wu, C. Shen, Y. Jiao, W. Hou, 
Electroactive barium titanate coated titanium scaffold improves osteogenesis and 
osseointegration with low-intensity pulsed ultrasound for large segmental bone 
defects, Bioact. Mater. 5 (4) (2020) 1087–1101.
[51] K. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Du, H. Tang, S. Zheng, Z. Zhou, H. Zheng, G. Wu, Ln 
vitro assessment of immunomodulatory and osteogenic properties in 3D-printed 
hydroxyapatite/barium titanate piezoelectric ceramic scaffolds, Ceram. Int. 
(2023).
[52] C. Wu, X. Qiu, W. Ge, L. Chen, C. Liu, H. Zhao, Z. Liu, L. Li, J.G. Fisher, A co-doping 
strategy to achieve high energy storage performance in BiFeO3-based ceramics, 
Ceram. Int. 49 (17) (2023) 29218–29228.
[53] N. Jaitanong, H.R. Zeng, G.R. Li, Q.R. Yin, W.C. Vittayakorn, R. Yimnirun, 
A. Chaipanich, Interfacial morphology and domain configurations in 0-3 PZT- 
Portland cement composites, Appl. Surf. Sci. 256 (10) (2010) 3245–3248.
[54] S.M. Gheno, R.H.G.A. Kiminami, M.M. Morelli, J.V. Bellini, P.I. Paulin Filho, An 
AFM/EFM study of the grain boundary in ZnO-based varistor materials, J. Am. 
Ceram. Soc. 91 (11) (2008) 3593–3598.
[55] M. Kiarashi, P. Mahamed, N. Ghotbi, A. Tadayonfard, K. Nasiri, P. Kazemi, 
A. Badkoobeh, S. Yasamineh, A. Joudaki, Spotlight on therapeutic efficiency of 
green synthesis metals and their oxide nanoparticles in periodontitis, 
J. Nanobiotechnol. 22 (1) (2024) 21.
[56] Y. Li, J. Li, M. Li, J. Sun, X. Shang, Y. Ma, Biological mechanism of ZnO 
nanomaterials, J. Appl. Toxicol. : J. Anal. Toxicol. 44 (1) (2024) 107–117.
[57] S.M. George, C. Nayak, I. Singh, K. Balani, Multifunctional hydroxyapatite 
composites for orthopedic applications: a review, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 8 (8) 
(2022) 3162–3186.
[58] H. Al-Momani, D. Al Balawi, S. Hamed, B.A. Albiss, M. Almasri, H. AlGhawrie, 
L. Ibrahim, H. Al Balawi, Haj Mahmoud S. Al, J. Pearson, et al., The impact of 
biosynthesized ZnO nanoparticles from Olea europaea (Common Olive) on 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa growth and biofilm formation, Sci. Rep. 13 (1) (2023) 
5096.
[59] D. Liu, L. Li, B.L. Shi, B. Shi, M.D. Li, Y. Qiu, D. Zhao, Q.D. Shen, Z.Z. Zhu, 
Ultrasound-triggered piezocatalytic composite hydrogels for promoting bacterial- 
infected wound healing, Bioact. Mater. 24 (2023) 96–111.
[60] A. Houshyar, M. Ahmadian, Y. Azizian-Kalandaragh, N. Amirpour, H. Salehi, 
Fabrication and properties evaluation of chitosan/BaTiO(3) composite membranes 
for the periodontitis treatment, Sci. Rep. 14 (1) (2024) 1022.
[61] X. Wei, W. Zhou, Z. Tang, H. Wu, Y. Liu, H. Dong, N. Wang, H. Huang, S. Bao, 
L. Shi, et al., Magnesium surface-activated 3D printed porous PEEK scaffolds for in 
vivo osseointegration by promoting angiogenesis and osteogenesis, Bioact. Mater. 
20 (2023) 16–28.
[62] Q. Gao, A.D. Walmsley, P.R. Cooper, B.A. Scheven, Ultrasound stimulation of 
different dental stem cell populations: role of mitogen-activated protein kinase 
signaling, J. Endod. 42 (3) (2016) 425–431.
[63] C. Shuai, G. Liu, Y. Yang, W. Yang, C. He, G. Wang, Z. Liu, F. Qi, S. Peng, 
Functionalized BaTiO(3) enhances piezoelectric effect towards cell response of 
bone scaffold, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 185 (2020) 110587.
[64] K.K. Poon, M.C. Wurm, D.M. Evans, M.A. Einarsrud, R. Lutz, J. Glaum, 
Biocompatibility of (Ba,Ca)(Zr,Ti)O(3) piezoelectric ceramics for bone replacement 
materials, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. B Appl. Biomater. 108 (4) (2020) 1295–1303.
[65] S.V. Harb, E. Kolanthai, L.A. Pinto, C.A.G. Beatrice, E.O.T. Bezerra, E.H. Backes, L. 
C. Costa, S. Seal, L.A. Pessan, Additive manufacturing of bioactive and 
biodegradable poly (lactic acid)-tricalcium phosphate scaffolds modified with zinc 
oxide for guided bone tissue repair, Biomed. Mater. (2024).
[66] Y. Liu, L. Yu, J. Chen, S. Li, Z. Wei, W. Guo, Exploring the osteogenic potential of 
zinc-doped magnesium phosphate cement (zmpc): a novel material for orthopedic 
bone defect repair, Biomedicines 12 (2) (2024).
[67] Y. Zhang, Z. Li, B. Guo, Q. Wang, L. Chen, L. Zhu, T. Zhang, R. Wang, W. Li, D. Luo, 
et al., A zinc oxide nanowire-modified mineralized collagen scaffold promotes 
infectious bone regeneration, Small 20 (19) (2024) e2309230.
[68] T. Wu, F. Zheng, H.Y. Tang, H.Z. Li, X.Y. Cui, S. Ding, D. Liu, C.Y. Li, J.H. Jiang, R. 
L. Yang, Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound reduces alveolar bone resorption during 
orthodontic treatment via Lamin A/C-Yes-associated protein axis in stem cells, 
World J. Stem Cell. 16 (3) (2024) 267–286.
[69] S. Yan, D. Wang, L. Zhang, T. Gan, H. Yao, H. Zhu, Y. He, K. Yang, LIPUS-S/B@NPs 
regulates the release of SDF-1 and BMP-2 to promote stem cell recruitment- 
osteogenesis for periodontal bone regeneration, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 11 
(2023) 1226426.
[70] X. Li, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, Y. Song, W. Li, Q. Jin, T. Gao, L. Zhang, M. Xie, Low- 
intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) enhances the anti-inflammatory effects of bone 
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs)-derived extracellular vesicles, Cell. Mol. 
Biol. Lett. 28 (1) (2023) 9.
[71] Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Z. Xie, Y. Yang, S. Chen, T. Han, M. Li, Z. Guo, N. Sun, C. Wang, 
A biomimetic nanogenerator to enhance bone regeneration by restoring electric 
microenvironments, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 10 (1) (2024) 525–536.
[72] H. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Zhu, P. Wu, Z. Deng, Q. Dong, M. Wu, L. Cai, Bioinspired 
piezoelectric periosteum to augment bone regeneration via synergistic 
immunomodulation and osteogenesis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15 (9) (2023) 
12273–12293.
[73] S. Zhou, C. Xiao, L. Fan, J. Yang, R. Ge, M. Cai, K. Yuan, C. Li, R.W. Crawford, 
Y. Xiao, et al., Injectable ultrasound-powered bone-adhesive nanocomposite 
hydrogel for electrically accelerated irregular bone defect healing, 
J. Nanobiotechnol. 22 (1) (2024) 54.
[74] Z. Wang, Q. Dai, H. Luo, X. Han, Q. Feng, X. Cao, Nano-vibration exciter: hypoxia- 
inducible factor 1 signaling pathway-mediated extracellular vesicles as bioactive 
glass substitutes for bone regeneration, Bioact. Mater. 40 (2024) 460–473.
[75] M. Wu, H. Liu, Y. Zhu, P. Wu, Y. Chen, Z. Deng, X. Zhu, L. Cai, Bioinspired soft-hard 
combined system with mild photothermal therapeutic activity promotes diabetic 
bone defect healing via synergetic effects of immune activation and angiogenesis, 
Theranostics 14 (10) (2024) 4014–4057.
[76] F. Zhong, S. Cao, L. Yang, J. Liu, B. Gui, H. Wang, N. Jiang, Q. Zhou, Q. Deng, Low- 
intensity pulsed ultrasound accelerates diabetic wound healing by ADSC-derived 
exosomes via promoting the uptake of exosomes and enhancing angiogenesis, Int. 
J. Mol. Med. 53 (3) (2024).
[77] S. Liu, C. Jiang, J. Hu, H. Chen, B. Han, S. Xia, Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound 
enhanced adipose-derived stem cell-mediated angiogenesis in the treatment of 
K. Chen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Bioactive Materials 45 (2025) 479–495
495
diabetic erectile dysfunction through the piezo-ERK-VEGF Axis, Stem Cell. Int. 
2022 (2022) 6202842.
[78] W. Liu, X. Li, Y. Jiao, C. Wu, S. Guo, X. Xiao, X. Wei, J. Wu, P. Gao, N. Wang, et al., 
Biological effects of a three-dimensionally printed Ti6Al4V scaffold coated with 
piezoelectric BaTiO(3) nanoparticles on bone formation, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 12 (46) (2020) 51885–51903.
[79] D. D’Alessandro, C. Ricci, M. Milazzo, G. Strangis, F. Forli, G. Buda, M. Petrini, 
S. Berrettini, M.J. Uddin, S. Danti, et al., Piezoelectric signals in vascularized bone 
regeneration, Biomolecules 11 (11) (2021).
[80] K. Tamama, D.J. Barbeau, Early growth response genes signaling supports strong 
paracrine capability of mesenchymal stem cells, Stem Cell. Int. 2012 (2012) 
428403.
[81] E. Havis, D. Duprez, EGR1 transcription factor is a multifaceted regulator of matrix 
production in tendons and other connective tissues, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (5) (2020).
[82] T. Press, S. Viale-Bouroncle, O. Felthaus, M. Gosau, C. Morsczeck, EGR1 supports 
the osteogenic differentiation of dental stem cells, Int. Endod. J. 48 (2) (2015) 
185–192.
[83] W. Wang, N. Li, M. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Wu, J. Shi, M. Musa, X. Chen, Analysis of 
ceRNA networks during mechanical tension-induced osteogenic differentiation of 
periodontal ligament stem cells, Eur. J. Oral Sci. 130 (5) (2022) e12891.
[84] Z. Cao, H. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Mo, P. Zhang, M. Wang, H. Liu, X. Bao, 
Y. Sun, et al., Silk-based hydrogel incorporated with metal-organic framework 
nanozymes for enhanced osteochondral regeneration, Bioact. Mater. 20 (2023) 
221–242.
[85] P.S. Gomes, M.H. Fernandes, Rodent models in bone-related research: the 
relevance of calvarial defects in the assessment of bone regeneration strategies, 
Lab. Anim 45 (1) (2011) 14–24.
[86] L. Wang, Y. Pang, Y. Tang, X. Wang, D. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Yu, X. Yang, Q. Cai, 
A biomimetic piezoelectric scaffold with sustained Mg(2+) release promotes 
neurogenic and angiogenic differentiation for enhanced bone regeneration, Bioact. 
Mater. 25 (2023) 399–414.
[87] X. Wang, L. Pan, A. Zheng, L. Cao, J. Wen, T. Su, X. Zhang, Q. Huang, X. Jiang, 
Multifunctionalized carbon-fiber-reinforced polyetheretherketone implant for 
rapid osseointegration under infected environment, Bioact. Mater. 24 (2023) 
236–250.
[88] Y. Zhao, J. Li, L. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Ju, C. Zeng, Z. Lu, D. Xie, J. Guo, Zinc-based 
tannin-modified composite microparticulate scaffolds with balanced antimicrobial 
activity and osteogenesis for infected bone defect repair, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 12 
(20) (2023) e2300303.
[89] K. Cai, Y. Jiao, Q. Quan, Y. Hao, J. Liu, L. Wu, Improved activity of MC3T3-E1 cells 
by the exciting piezoelectric BaTiO(3)/TC4 using low-intensity pulsed ultrasound, 
Bioact. Mater. 6 (11) (2021) 4073–4082.
[90] C. McCarthy, G. Camci-Unal, Low intensity pulsed ultrasound for bone tissue 
engineering, Micromachines 12 (12) (2021).
[91] Z. Hua, S. Li, Q. Liu, M. Yu, M. Liao, H. Zhang, X. Xiang, Q. Wu, Low-intensity 
pulsed ultrasound promotes osteogenic potential of iPSC-derived MSCs but fails to 
simplify the iPSC-EB-MSC differentiation process, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 10 
(2022) 841778.
[92] H. Wu, H. Dong, Z. Tang, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, M. Wang, X. Wei, N. Wang, S. Bao, D. Yu, 
et al., Electrical stimulation of piezoelectric BaTiO3 coated Ti6Al4V scaffolds 
promotes anti-inflammatory polarization of macrophages and bone repair via 
MAPK/JNK inhibition and OXPHOS activation, Biomaterials 293 (2023) 121990.
[93] Y. Chen, M. Xiao, L. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y. Lin, T. Xie, J. Tian, Q. Wang, Y. Tang, Z. Su, 
Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound counteracts advanced glycation end products- 
induced corpus cavernosal endothelial cell dysfunction via activating mitophagy, 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (23) (2022).
K. Chen et al.