Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
A one-two punch targeting reactive oxygen
species and ﬁbril for rescuing Alzheimer’s
disease
Jiefei Wang1,7, Ping Shangguan1,7, Xiaoyu Chen2, Yong Zhong
3, Ming Lin1,
Mu He1, Yisheng Liu1, Yuan Zhou1, Xiaobin Pang1, Lulu Han1, Mengya Lu1,
Xiao Wang1, Yang Liu
1, Huiqing Yang1, Jingyun Chen1, Chenhui Song1,
Jing Zhang
4
, Xin Wang
1
, Bingyang Shi
1,5
& Ben Zhong Tang
6
Toxic amyloid-beta (Aβ) plaque and harmful inﬂammation are two leading
symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). However, precise AD therapy is
unrealizable due to the lack of dual-targeting therapy function, poor BBB
penetration, and low imaging sensitivity. Here, we design a near-infrared-II
aggregation-induced emission (AIE) nanotheranostic for precise AD therapy.
The anti-quenching emission at 1350 nm accurately monitors the in vivo BBB
penetration and speciﬁcally binding of nanotheranostic with plaques. Trig-
gered by reactive oxygen species (ROS), two encapsulated therapeutic-type
AIE molecules are controllably released to activate a self-enhanced therapy
program. One speciﬁcally inhibits the Aβ ﬁbrils formation, degrades Aβ ﬁbrils,
and prevents the reaggregation via multi-competitive interactions that are
veriﬁed by computational analysis, which further alleviates the inﬂammation.
Another effectively scavenges ROS and inﬂammation to remodel the cerebral
redox balance and enhances the therapy effect, together reversing the neu-
rotoxicity and achieving effective behavioral and cognitive improvements in
the female AD mice model.
As the population ages, the central nervous system (CNS) neurode-
generative disease prevalence gradually grows, posing a signiﬁcant
public health crisis1,2. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is one of the most
common neurodegenerative diseases, impairing brain health and
leading to severe neurological dysfunction and dyskinesia, which has
been considered an incurable disease3–5. Toxic amyloid-beta (Aβ) pla-
que and harmful inﬂammation are the leading hallmarks of AD,
reinforcing each other and aggravating the devastating process, i.e., Aβ
deposits activate inﬂammation6–8. In return, the inﬂammation further
exacerbates the deposition of Aβ plaque9, together inducing the
downstream free radical accumulation to mediate irreversible neuro-
nal demise and synapse elimination10. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to design an Aβ and inﬂammation dual-targeted therapeutic
system against AD. Over the past decades, only several classes of
Received: 28 May 2023
Accepted: 2 January 2024
Check for updates
1Henan-Macquarie Uni Joint Centre for Biomedical Innovation, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Henan Key Laboratory of Brain Targeted Bio-
nanomedicine, School of Life Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan 475004, China. 2School of Medical Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, China. 3Key Laboratory for Special Functional Materials of Ministry of Education, National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center for High-
efﬁciency Display and Lighting Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center of Nano Functional Materials and
Applications, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China. 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China. 5Macquarie Medical School, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia. 6School of Science
and Engineering, Shenzhen Institute of Aggregate Science and Technology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518172, China.
7These authors contributed equally: Jiefei Wang, Ping Shangguan.
e-mail: zhangjingzisefeng@163.com; wx@henu.edu.cn; bingyang.shi@mq.edu.au;
tangbenz@cuhk.edu.cn
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

approved drugs were developed to treat AD although pouring tre-
mendous investments, e.g., acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, N-methyl
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists, anti-inﬂammatory agents,
and monoclonal antibody11–13. However, these drugs are mono-tar-
geted, have low speciﬁcity to both Aβ and inﬂammation symptoms,
and some exist high toxic risks, e.g., up to 40% of clinical AD trials
received a high dose (10 mg kg−1) of aducanumab appeared severe
brain edema and hemorrhage14. What’s worse, the blood-brain barrier
(BBB) blocks most drugs into the brain15,16, thus inducing a poor ther-
apy outcome12,17. The development of precise and efﬁcient drugs is
dependent on visual in vivo research means. Therefore, it has an
urgent demand to develop a visual therapeutic drug with BBB-pene-
trating, high-speciﬁcity, and dual-targeting potential to achieve safe,
effective, and precise therapy for AD via high-sensitivity in vivo visual
monitoring of BBB penetration and binding with Aβ plaque, reversing
the Aβ plaques, and in situ anti-inﬂammatory.
High-sensitivity imaging tracking technology could guide the
directional and precise design of drugs via the feedback of in vivo
monitoring results. Among numerous imaging technologies, ﬂuores-
cence imaging with non-radioactive, noninvasive, safe, and real-time
observation merits18,19, is an ideal candidate to fabricate visual drugs
for AD. Although a growing number of in vitro detected probes of Aβ
plaques have already been developed, e.g., thioﬂavin probes (ThT or
ThS)20,21, unfortunately, these reported probes only function as a
reporter for ex vivo histological staining of amyloid ﬁbrils and are
unable to support in vivo imaging and therapeutic applications for the
following reasons: First, the difﬁculties in penetrating BBB and short
half-life together block the penetration of probes into the brain. Sec-
ondly, all current probes only possess short emission wavelengths
below 715 nm even those so-called NIR probes22–25, far from the high-
sensitivity NIR-II region (1000~1700 nm). In this case, these probes
only acquired low imaging sensitivity that is proportional to wave-
length. Moreover, the aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) effect26,27
and poor Aβ-afﬁnity28 further impaired the imaging sensitivity. Most
importantly, all current probes lack active centers for speciﬁc dual-
targeting therapy. These above requirements are way out of the league
of current probe or drug molecule systems.
Therapeutic-type NIR-II probes with aggregation-induced emis-
sion (AIE) property, i.e., visual drugs, are supposed to hold non-
invasive, large penetration depth29,30, anti-quenching31–33, and high
signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) merits34,35, as well as potential drug activity.
As an advanced conceptual visual drug, it was expected to not only
support the high-ﬁdelity visualization of the BBB-traversing process
and binding process of drugs with Aβ plaques but also offer a chance
to achieve the above dual-targeted therapy for AD. However, there
exist huge challenges to acquiring this ideal probe: (i) the modest
hydrophobic skeleton with strong Aβ-afﬁnity is the basis of Aβ ﬁbril-
targeted therapy-type probe36–38. (ii) large π-conjugated structures
with intermolecular π-π stacking interaction can achieve long-
wavelength absorption (spectral broadening) but the corresponding
quantum yield (ΦPL) of emission was low, whereas twisted structures
including some special aromatic rotors and bridged groups can
acquire relatively high ΦPL but generally result in low molar extinction
coefﬁcient (ε) value27,39,40, thereby a balanced structure is needed for
the highly bright, anti-quenching, and long-wavelength NIR-II emis-
sion. (iii) the multi-interacted sites and strong Aβ-afﬁnity were neces-
sary for the probe, which could pull back the Aβ monomer from the
strong aggregated interaction with another Aβ monomer via the
competition interaction. The site number and strength of competition
determine the efﬁciency of the inhibition to ﬁbril generation and ﬁbril
degradation. (iv) a safe and effective anti-inﬂammatory active center is
another critical factor for therapy activity. (v) suitable delivery, release,
and targeted modiﬁcation forms need to be considered to acquire long
in vivo circulation, superior BBB penetration, and maximize the drug
concentration in AD lesion regions. To date, there is still no successful
paradigm that can address the above challenges to achieve such an
ideal visual drug with superior NIR-II emission due to the lack of proper
design strategies.
In this work, we fabricate a brain-targeting, ﬁbril-degrading, and
ROS-regulating NIR-II nanotheranostic system via ingenious molecule
design and co-assembly strategy to successfully resolve the above
long-standing challenges in AD. Firstly, we synthesize two theranostic-
type AIE luminogens (AIEgens) with NIR-II emission, i.e., compound 3
(green block, cLogP = 7.63) and compound 6 (blue block) through
imaginative multi-optimization and metal complex strategies. Then,
they are further fabricated into reactive oxygen species (ROS)-
responsive nanotheranostic via smart co-assembly engineering strat-
egy and brain-targeted angiopep-2 (Ang-2) modiﬁcation41. As shown in
Fig. 1, the resulting nanocomposites (Ang-AIE NCs, termed Ang-NCs)
generate new advantages neither existing in two AIEgens: (i) two
hydrophobic molecules are changed to hydrophilic NCs with long
in vivo elimination half-life (3.9 h), which is favorable for in vivo long-
term tracking and the improvement of therapy efﬁcacy. (ii) the NCs
possess the longest emission at 1350 nm in the AD ﬁeld to date, which
generates the highest sensitivity for efﬁciently monitoring the across-
skull-signals of invivo Aβ plaque binding with NCs after traversing BBB.
(iii) the inﬂammation-associated reactive oxygen species in the AD
region triggers the controllable release of two AIEgens from NCs,
generating an additively and synergistically self-enhanced therapy
effect. The released compound 3 speciﬁcally inhibits the Aβ ﬁbrils
formation and disassembles the Aβ plaques via Van der Waals forces,
hydrogen bonding, and π-π interactions. The compound 6 scavenges
the harmful inﬂammation-associated ROS by the Ce(III) active center
and alleviates the formation of Aβ ﬁbrils. Moreover, the NCs strongly
inhibit the potent harmful reaggregation process of the degraded Aβ
fragments, remodel the cerebral redox balance, and reverse neuro-
toxicity to acquire remarkable behavioral and cognitive improvements
in the AD mice model. Overall, the achievement of the NIR-II dual-
targeting strategy, as a proof-of-concept, has well settled the dilemma
of the Aβ ﬁbril and inﬂammation in AD, thus might inspire more
advanced visual nanotheranostic for other neurodegenerative dis-
eases to guard our brain health.
Results
Rational design and characterization of compounds 3 and 6
Based on the above guidelines, we synthesized two therapeutic-type
NIR-II AIEgens, i.e., compounds 3 and 6, according to the route as
shown in Supplementary Figs. 1–4. The intermediates have been con-
ﬁrmed by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and high-resolution
mass spectrum (HRMS) (Supplementary Figs. 5–14). Two AIEgens
contain the same central backbone consisting of a benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c′]
bis([1,2,5]thiadiazole (BBTD) acceptor unit, side alkyl chain-substituted
thiophene bridging units and the same aromatic bridge groups
(Fig. 2a). Differently, two symmetrical ends of 3 are 2,2’-azanediylbi-
s(ethan-1-ol) groups that could specially bind with Aβ ﬁbrils42,43. The
ends of 6 are terpyridyl coordinated Ce(III) units, which endow 6 with
effective antioxidation capability44–46. Actually, 6 is a polymer accord-
ing to the dual coordination mode of Ce(III) centers, but not a small
molecule.
According to the frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs), the results
indicated the electron cloud of the lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital (LUMO) of 3 in ground-state (S0) is dominantly localized in the
core, while the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) is delo-
calized across the whole conjugated backbone (Fig. 2b). The corre-
sponding energy gap between HOMO and LUMO was calculated to be
1.40 eV, revealing an apparent donor-acceptor (D-A) interaction and
intramolecular charge transfer effect from D/π-bridge to BBTD core
contributing to NIR-II absorption and emission47. By contrast, the
quenching effect of central Ce(III), 3 has intense NIR-II emission. The
main contribution may be generated by the two dihedral angles (46.3˚
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
2

and 46.6˚) between the BBTD core and adjacent thiophene group of
optimized S0 state (Supplementary Fig. 15), and 48.3˚ and 88.3˚ of the
excited state (S1) accompanied by 0.83 eV gap (Supplementary Fig. 16).
Fabrication and optical performance characterization of NCs
We ﬁrst veriﬁed the emission character of two AIEgens. The results
revealed
typical
aggregation-induced
photoluminescence
(PL)
increase, suggesting both were typical AIE molecules (Fig. 2c, Sup-
plementary Fig. 17). To achieve the long in vivo circulation, hydro-
philicity, and BBB penetration, two AIEgens were co-assembled into
nanocomposites via a ROS-responsive thioketal (TK)-containing tem-
plate (DSPE-TK-PEG)48 combined with angiopep-2 (Ang-2) modiﬁca-
tion. The obtained Ang-NCs revealed amorphous morphology (inset)
with an average size centered at 153.4 nm (Fig. 2d). As expected, the
Fig. 1 | Schematic of NIR-II brain-target theranostic system for dual-target
therapy of AD via a four-step route. (i) The co-assembly of nanodrug (Ang-AIE
NCs, termed Ang-NCs). (ii) the NIR-II imaging monitored the BBB-traversing process
of Ang-NCs. (iii) the inﬂammation-associated reactive oxygen species (ROS)
environment stimulated the controllable release of Ang-NCs. iv) the activation of
the self-enhanced dual-targeting program: compound 3 speciﬁcally inhibits the
formation of amyloid-beta (Aβ) ﬁbrils, degrades toxic ﬁbrils, and inhibits reag-
gregation. Compound 6 relieves harmful inﬂammation-associated ROS and pro-
motes the inhibition of Aβ ﬁbrils generation.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
3

absorption and maximum emission of NCs were respectively loaded at
760 nm and 1070 nm with tail emission exceeding 1550 nm as shown in
Fig. 2e, f. The NCs mainly inherit the photonic performance of 3. Two
AIEgens were homogeneously distributed in the NCs (Fig. 2g). Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectra veriﬁed the Ang-2 modiﬁcation
(Supplementary Fig. 18). Visual NIR-II images of NCs solution indicated
a concentration-/wavelength-dependent brightness (Fig. 2h, Supple-
mentary Fig. 19). The NIR imaging at 1350 nm of Ang-NCs clearly out-
lines the frame of cerebrovascular (Fig. 2i) with higher sensitivity than
that of other channels (Supplementary Fig. 20). Therefore, the window
at 1350 nm was selected than 1150 nm and 1550 nm due to the max-
imization of penetration depth and brightness.
Antioxidation, ﬁbril disassembly, and inhibition of ﬁbril
generation
We further evidenced the dual-target therapy function of NCs. For the
anti-inﬂammation capacity, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) was used to
mimic the high-inﬂammation environment of the AD region char-
acterized by high levels of ROS and toxic free radical (·OH). As shown in
Fig. 3a, the controlled release of NCs was monitored by dynamic light
Fig. 2 | Photophysical property characterization of two AIE luminogens (AIE-
gens) and NCs. a Chemical formula of 3 and 6. b Illustration of the HOMO/LUMO
and the corresponding energy gap of 3 in the ground-state (S0). c Increase ratio
(αAIE) of relative photoluminescence (PL) intensity of 3 at 1110 nm and 6 at 916 nm.
d Representative size distribution and morphology image of NCs. The data was
presented as mean ± SEM. e, f were respectively the absorption and emission
spectra (excitation: 808 nm) of two AIEgens and NCs. g Elements (Ce and O)
mapping of NCs. h NIR imaging at 1350 nm for various concentrations of NCs
aqueous solution (0.1, 0.3, and 0.6 mg/mL). i In vivo NIR imaging at 1350 nm of
cerebral vessels in mice without removing the scalp or skull after i.v. injection of
Ang-NCs. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
4

scattering (DLS) analysis, and the result revealed a gradually increased
size with swelling and broken morphology (Supplementary Fig. 21),
suggesting effective ROS-responsive release. The Ce(III) in the released
6 could catalyze H2O2 to oxygen (Fig. 3b) and signiﬁcantly decreased
the radical generated by iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles with per-
oxidase (POD)-like activity49 (Fig. 3c). The Ce(III) was oxidized into
Ce(IV) product by H2O2, which was evidenced by X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (Fig. 3d, Supplementary Fig. 22), and revealed a potential
antioxidation-mediated anti-inﬂammation capacity of our NCs.
Then we investigated the parallel therapy functions, i.e., inhibition
of ﬁbril generation, Aβ ﬁbril disassembly, and reaggregation inhibition
by NCs (Fig. 3e). We compared the morphology and length of various
Aβ species with different treatments by transmission electron micro-
scope (TEM) observation and DLS determination. The Aβ monomer
underwent an intermediated product, i.e., oligomer (12 h), to Aβ ﬁbril
after 48 h of growth (Fig. 3f). Moreover, we discovered that H2O2 could
promote the elongation of Aβ ﬁbrils according to the TEM image
(Fig. 3g). As expected, our NCs not only inhibited the transform of
monomer into ﬁbril but also degraded Aβ ﬁbril into amorphous frag-
ments (Fig. 3h). In sharp contrast to this, the commercial Thioﬂavin T
(ThT), Thioﬂavin S (ThS), and Pittsburg-B (PiB) probes were unable to
inhibit the ﬁbril generation and degrade Aβ ﬁbril (Supplementary
Fig. 23). The TEM images and corresponding size monitoring indicated
an obvious restructuring from the broken ﬁbril back into longer
Ce(Ϫ) 
Ce(ϫ)
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
5

aggregated ﬁbrils after growing for 48 h and replenishing the Aβ
monomer, while it could be greatly inhibited by the NCs (Fig. 3i, j).
To verify the binding process, we ﬁrst conducted the electrostatic
potential analysis of the density functional theory (DFT)-optimized 3
(Fig. 3k). The result indicated that 3 has an obvious polarization with
central negative conjugated core (repulsive interactions) and positive
charge ends (attractive interactions), which showed huge potential to
bind with negative Aβ species (Supplementary Fig. 24) via weak
interactions. Furthermore, we used NIR ﬂuorescence at 1350 nm to
monitor the concentration-dependent binding either forward (Fig. 3l)
or reverse titration (Supplementary Fig. 25). The dissociation constant
(Kd) of 3 was determined from the reverse titration nonlinear ﬁtting
curve to be 2.6 μM (Fig. 3m), which is close to that of ThT
(Kd = 0.89 μM)50, responding to comparable binding afﬁnity. More-
over, the ThT experiment on the inhibition kinetics of NCs against Aβ
monomers was tested. The results indicated the 50% inhibiting con-
centration (IC50) value of NCs is 9.67 μg/mL, suggesting effective
inhibition of NCs against the aggregation of Aβ monomer (Supple-
mentary Fig. 26). Notably, 3 also has a 7.7-fold binding selectivity with
Aβ ﬁbril than that of DL-Glutamine (DL-Glu, Fig. 3n), indicating a strong
speciﬁcity with Aβ ﬁbril. The bound 3 further disrupted the aggregated
structure of Aβ ﬁbril tested by the circular dichroism (CD) spec-
tra (Fig. 3o).
Aβ-degradation mechanism exploration via computation
To explore the detailed interaction of how 3 interferes with Aβ ﬁbril.
We attempted to use molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to ﬁnd the
detailed interaction force in the above Aβ ﬁbril degradation, blocking
the generation of ﬁbril, and reaggregation inhibition process. We
optimized the crystal structure of Aβ ﬁbrils and performed geometry
optimization on compound 3. We obtained the crystal structure of
Aβ42 amyloid ﬁbrils from the RCSB protein data bank (PDB code:
5KK3)51 and prepared its structure by removing substructures, repair-
ing sidechains, adding hydrogens and charges with AmberTools 2052.
The DFT calculations were performed on 3 with the Gaussian 16 pro-
gram package53. The geometry optimization of 3 was carried out at the
B3LYP-D3 level of theory54 with the 6-31 G(d) basis set. To predicthow 3
interferes with the Aβ protein, we performed MD simulations on the
protein in water for 100 ns, which allowed sufﬁcient time for equili-
bration (Supplementary Fig. 27).
We utilized the protein structure obtained from 100 ns of MD
simulations and docked it with the DFT-optimized structure of 3 using
AutoDock Vina55. Next, we used the complex structure to perform MD
simulations for 100 ns (Fig. 4a). General Amber force ﬁeld (GAFF)56 was
used for 3. The FF14SB57 force ﬁeld was used for the protein. The TIP3P
force ﬁeld was used for water molecules58. Finally, we analyzed the
interactions between the Aβ protein and 3 using the results of MD
simulations (Fig. 4b-d). The complex structure was shown at different
snapshots with a time gap of 2 ns (Supplementary Fig. 28). According
to the results of MD simulations, 3 (sticks) docked at the interface
between two Aβ monomers (surface). We tallied the frequency of
different residues observed in ﬁfty plots to identify the active-site
residues. We identiﬁed 16 active-site residues in the Aβ protein that
interact with 3 at high frequencies (20-50), including H37, H100, G317,
V318, V319, G349, V351, G381, V383, G413, V414, V415, G445, V447, V479
and V511 (Supplementary Table 1). The changes in distance between
the mass center of 3 and 16 active-site residues of Aβ ﬁbril during
100 ns MD simulations are listed in Supplementary Fig. 29. The
detailed analysis revealed that Van der Waals force and hydrogen
bonding (with V318 and V414 residues) between Aβ peptide with 3
were two of the main forces (Fig. 4b). Moreover, the partially nega-
tively charged alkyl thiophene in 3 is stabilized by a T-shaped π-π
stacking interaction with the aromatic rings of residues H100 and
H37 (Fig. 4c).
The binding free energy was calculated by the molecular
mechanics generalized Born surface area (MM/GBSA). We selected
the equilibrium trajectory from the last 1 ns for calculation, which
showed that MM/GBSA is -35.8 kcal/mol. From this calculation, we
can see that 3 can bind to proteins more tightly. To accurately
describe the binding afﬁnity of 3 and protein, we performed high-
precision quantum mechanical calculations. First, we used ONIOM
(B3LYP-D3/6-31 G(d)//Amber) to determine the most stable struc-
ture. After conducting an ONIOM model calculation, we chose the
structure with the lowest energy as the basis for our theozyme
model. Meanwhile, we selected the structure of the ﬁnal frame and
computed the average distances from binding residues in the last
100 snapshots to 3. Then we identiﬁed one with the strongest cor-
relation between its distance and average distances obtained from
MD simulations. We used the same DFT method for selected theo-
zyme structure optimization. We calculated the binding free energy
to be -8.5 kcal/mol, which is consistent with the experimental ﬁnd-
ings of -7.6 kcal/mol and further validates our previous analysis of
the impact of 3 on protein binding forces. The data veriﬁed the
function design of 3 as shown in Fig. 4e, the introduction of the
hydrophobic central backbone, alkyl chain, 2,2’-azanediylbis(ethan-
1-ol), S and O heteroatom for hydrogen bond, and conjugated
thiophene and benzene ring (Supplementary Table 2).
To further verify if the contributed component was generated
from 3 rather than 6 for Aβ ﬁbril degradation, we detected the TEM
images of Aβ ﬁbril treated respectively with 3 and 6. As expected, the
ﬁbril can be degraded by 3 but with negligible change by 6 (Fig. 4f).
Collectively, the results corroborated that 6 and 3 in Ang-NCs
respectively supported the antioxidation and Aβ-related therapy
functions, i.e., inhibition of ﬁbril generation and ﬁbril degradation,
which has incomparable advantages by all current commercial
probes.
Fig. 3 | Anti-oxidation, selective inhibition of the formation for Aβ ﬁbrils, Aβ
ﬁbril degradation, and reaggregation inhibition by NCs. a Size change of NCs
treated with PBS and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) for various times. b Oxygen
generation comparison of H2O2 that respectively was treated with PBS, 3, and
NCs. a, b were representative data of three independent experiments. c Electron
spin resonance (ESR) spectra comparison among the PBS group, iron oxide
nanoparticles (Fe3O4, 100 μg/mL), and the mixture of Fe3O4 with NCs, all contain
H2O2. d Proportion change of various valence states for Ce element in NCs before
and after H2O2 treatment. e Illustration for the experiment design, including the
oxidation promoted the elongation of Aβ ﬁbrils, NCs achieved the ﬁbril degra-
dation, and NCs inhibited the aggregation of monomer and reaggregation of
fragments. f Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of the morphology
change of Aβ species from monomer, oligomer to Aβ ﬁbrils during 48 h of
growth. g TEM image of Aβ ﬁbril treated with H2O2. h TEM images of the ﬁbril
degradation and the inhibition of ﬁbril generation treated by NCs for 48 h. i TEM
images for the reaggregation of fragments and reaggregation inhibition by NCs.
j The corresponding length of ﬁbrils tested by DLS under different conditions.
f–j were representative data of three independent experiments. k Positive (blue)
and negative (red) electrostatic potential analysis of the DFT-optimized 3. l NIR
imaging at 1350 nm of various concentrations of Aβ ﬁbril with 3 (2 μM). m The
monitoring of ﬂuorescence intensity at 1060 nm of Aβ ﬁbrils (10 μM) treated with
various concentrations of 3. n Absorption at 760 nm of various proteins, bovine
serum albumin (BSA), and human serum albumin (HSA) treated with 3. The
absorption test was representative of three independent experiments. o CD
spectra of Aβ monomer, Aβ ﬁbril (5 μM), and Aβ ﬁbril (5 μM) incubating with 3.
Unless otherwise stated, all Aβ peptides in whole assays were Aβ42 (10 μM), and all
concentrations of H2O2 and NCs were 100 μM and 100 μg/mL. All data were
presented as mean ± SEM. NS, no signiﬁcance, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001. All
statistical analyses were compared by analyses of one-way ANOVA except the
two-tailed Student’s t-test in a. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
6

In vitro synergistic therapy
Then, we evaluated the in vitro BBB permeability and synergistic
therapy efﬁciency of Ang-NCs. First, we examined the cytotoxicity of
the NCs and Ang-NCs. As illustrated in Fig. 5a, there have no signiﬁcant
toxicities were observed in both groups on various cell lines including
SH-SY5Y, PC12, BV2, Neuro-2a, and HT-22 cells. The uptake of Ang-NCs
by the PC12 cells was tested by the confocal images and quantiﬁed by
the optical density in the 96-well plates, the results indicated that Ang-
Fig. 4 | MD results for the binding of 3 with Aβ protein. a 3 bound to the surface
structure of Aβ42 protein via 16 residues of 5KK3 that are close to 3. b Van der Waals
force and hydrogen bonds interactions between 3 and Aβ protein. c T-shaped π–π
stacking interactions between 3 and Aβ protein. d Top view of the 16 active-site
residues. e Binding groups analysis of 3. f TEM images of ﬁbril (25 μM) incubated
with 3 and 6 molecules (25 μM). The TEM images were representative data from
three independent experiments.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
7

NCs have almost the same uptake as NCs (Fig. 5b). Furthermore, we
respectively detected the in vitro BBB penetration of NCs and Ang-NCs
in PC12 and HT-22 cells via Transwell model. Compared to the negli-
gible ﬂuorescence signals of NCs in two cells, the Ang-NCs displayed
bright red ﬂuorescence in two cells, implying enhanced BBB penetra-
tion by Ang-2 modiﬁcation (Fig. 5c).
To assess the dual-target therapy ability for neuroprotection of
Ang-NCs, we used confocal imaging observation to monitor the Aβ
ﬁbril degradation capability of Ang-NCs. The decreased green ﬂuor-
escence from ThT strongly approved that Ang-NCs could efﬁciently
degrade the Aβ ﬁbril around the PC12 cells (Fig. 5d).Forthe antioxidant
function assessment of Ang-NCs, we detected the total ROS, mito-
chondria superoxide, and mitochondria damage respectively using 2’-
7’dichloroﬂuorescin
diacetate
(DCFH-DA
probe),
Mitochondrial
Superoxide Indicator (MitoSOX probe), and Mitochondrial Membrane
Potential Kit (JC-1 probe). Compared to the Aβ ﬁbril group, the Ang-
NCs group revealed inhibited ROS level with weak green ﬂuorescence
from DCF (Fig. 5e), decreased red signal from MitoSOX (Fig. 5f), and
suppressive green/red ﬂuorescence ratio of JC-1 (Fig. 5g), which were
the same as that of the PBS group, verify a strong antioxidant cap-
ability. In addition, all mRNA levels of pro-inﬂammatory factors (TNF-
α, IL-1β, and IL-6) of the Ang-NCs group tested by RT-PCR assay showed
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
8

decreased levels, which were close to that of PBS group (Fig. 5h). The
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) result revealed an
obvious content decrease of IL-1β in Ang-NCs with Aβ ﬁbril group than
Aβ ﬁbril group (Fig. 5i). Then we further veriﬁed the recently identiﬁed
AD-associated IL-1β/NLRP3 inﬂammatory pathway and antioxidant
regulator glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) by Western blot test. The
downregulated IL-1β/NLRP3 and upregulated GPX4 in the Ang-NCs
with Aβ ﬁbril group indicated a strong antioxidation and anti-
inﬂammation capability (Fig. 5j). The results suggested Aβ ﬁbril-
induced a severe inﬂammation response and Ang-NCs could reverse it
through strong antioxidant capability, implying a potential neuro-
protective effect.
Subsequently, the neuroprotective effect was explored in detail.
First, the cell viability of various groups was detected and the result
indicated the Ang-NCs could reverse the cell toxicity induced by Aβ
ﬁbril and inﬂammation, indicating a gradually increased cell viability as
a function of concentration (Fig. 5k). To further verify the therapy
contribution, we respectively detected the disassembly function of 3
and 6 against Aβ ﬁbril and ROS-alleviating capability, the confocal
imaging result indicated the efﬁcient degradation of Aβ ﬁbril was
contributed by 3 rather than 6 (Supplementary Fig. 30a). On the other
hand, the intensity quantiﬁcation of DCF tested by a microplate reader
revealed a strong antioxidation effect of NCs, suggesting 6 was the
main contributor to the antioxidation (Supplementary Fig. 30b). As a
result, both two molecules could reverse the toxicity of the Aβ ﬁbril
and ﬁbril-induced oxidative damage (Fig. 5l). Then, we further eval-
uated the toxicity of degraded Aβ fragment to PC12 and HT-22 cells.
The result indicated negligible toxicity of the Aβ fragment to two cells
(Fig. 5m). Lastly, the neuroprotective effect was veriﬁed by crystalline
violet imaging, in which the cell density visually represents the cell
viability. The representative images powerfully verify that the Ang-NCs
group with large cell density has a superior neuroprotective function
(Fig. 5n). The Bio-TEM images visually detected the state of mito-
chondria. The HT-22 cells treated with Aβ ﬁbril appeared to severe
destruction of the mitochondria membrane and disappearance of
cristae. By contrast, the Ang-NCs group could reverse the damaging
effect and displayed intact morphology of mitochondria as that of PBS
treatment (Fig. 5o). Overall, the data demonstrated our Ang-NCs have
strong in vitro neuroprotection through scavenging excess ROS and
inﬂammation, as well as ﬁbril degradation.
In vivo synergistic therapy effects on AD mice
Lastly, we investigated the in vivo BBB penetration and therapeutic
function of Ang-NCs in AD mice according to the workﬂow (Fig. 6a),
which includes the i.v. injection of PBS or Ang-NCs once every three
days and performed six times of injections. First, it was commenced
with a biocompatibility assessment. The hemolysis assay was investi-
gated, and the colorless supernatant indicated a low hemolysis ratio
and high safety of Ang-NCs treatment (Supplementary Fig. 31). The
long
half-life
of
the
nanoparticle
also
was
veriﬁed
by
the
pharmacokinetic test, and the result indicated a longer half-time
(4.8 h) of the targeted group than 3.9 h in the non-targeted group
(Fig. 6b), which was favorable for long-acting in vivo BBB penetration
that was monitored by the NIR-II imaging at 1350 nm. As a result, the
Ang-NCs group indicated much higher ﬂuorescence intensity than that
of the NCs group due to stronger BBB penetration and higher binding
with Aβ ﬁbril in the brain (Fig. 6c). Moreover, the NIR images and
corresponding intensity quantiﬁcation together indicated the major
accumulation were distributed in the liver and spleen (Fig. 6d, e).
To explore the in vivo dual-targeted therapy function of Ang-NCs
in the female AD mice after six times of injections, we ﬁrst analyzed
in situ ROS change in the ex vivo brain after i.v. injection of Ang-NCs
one time, the results revealed an efﬁcient decrease of excess ROS
induced by Aβ ﬁbril and inﬂammation (Fig. 6f). Then, reduced green
ﬂuorescence signals and intensity of ROS level in the brain slices
stained by 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG)59 veriﬁed the Ang-
NCs could efﬁciently decrease the oxidation level in the brain of APP/
PS1 mice (Supplementary Fig. 32). Moreover, the level change of TNF-
α, IL-1β, and Aβ1–42 in the mice indicated high in vivo anti-inﬂammatory
capability and strong Aβ degradation capability of Ang-NCs (Fig. 6g).
Subsequently, the Aβ plaques degradation and whether the existed
activation of astrocytes and microglia cells were explored in detail. The
ThS probe (Supplementary Fig. 33) and a speciﬁc Aβ probe (Rabbit
pAb anti-Aβ) for Aβ plaques were used to detect the Aβ plaque in the
hippocampus and cortex of ex vivo slices. A mass of plaques was
observed in the AD mice. In contrast, the Ang-NCs powerfully degra-
ded the plaque and revealed weak ﬂuorescence as that of the wild-type
(WT) group (Fig. 6h, i). The observation of microglia and astrocytes
assisted by Iba-1 and GFAP staining showed decreased red ﬂuores-
cence levels in the Ang-NCs groups than AD mice (Fig. 6i–k), sug-
gesting no obvious activation of astrocytes and microglia cells60.
Moreover, the cerebral microhemorrhage risk of Ang-NCs treatment
was investigated by the Prussian Blue histochemistry of brain slices.
The microhemorrhage proﬁle images revealed the AD mice with Ang-
NCs treatment have no obvious iron-positive deposits of microbleeds
as to that WT mice, reﬂecting the high safety of Ang-NCs treatment
(Supplementary Fig. 34).
Subsequently, we veriﬁed the improvement of the above dual-
target therapy on memory loss, cognitive impairment, and behavioral
impairment in AD mice post the treatment of Ang-NCs. Firstly, the nest
construction (NC) test was performed to evaluate the improvement of
motor deﬁcits. Compared to the typical unimpaired paper pieces and
the lowest behavior score in the AD group (Fig. 6l, m), the Ang-NCs
group displayed a better performance and higher behavior score than
that of the AD group. Subsequently, the long-term learning and
memory capability in the spatial orientation of various groups were
investigated by the Morris water maze (MWM) test. The time spent
moving from the start site to the target platform (escape latency) was
recorded in the ﬁrst ﬁve days. After removing the platform, the moving
route, crossing number, and staying time in the target quadrant were
Fig. 5 | In vitro neuroprotective effect of Ang-NCs. a Cell viability of various cell
lines treated with NCs and Ang-NCs (n = 3 biologically independent samples). b The
confocal images and quantiﬁcation in the 96-well plates for the uptake of NCs and
Ang-NCs in PC12 cells (n = 3). c Confocal images of in vitro BBB penetration of two
NCs by PC12 and HT-22 cells via Transwell model. d Confocal images of Aβ ﬁbril
degradation in PC12 cells with different treatments and ThT staining (green).
e Cellular ROS in PC12 cells with various treatments for 48 h and stained with DCFH-
DA (green). f, g Confocal images of the superoxide generation and mitochondrial
membrane potential in HT-22 cells with various treatments for 48 h and staining by
MitoSOX (f) and JC-1 probes (g). The confocal images were representative data of
three independent experiments in c–g. h The relative expression of mRNA (TNF-α,
IL-1β, and IL-6) in HT-22 cells tested by RT-PCR (n = 3). The P values (****) were the
comparison of three parameters between the Aβ ﬁbril group and the other two
groups, respectively. i IL-1β level in HT-22 cells tested by ELISA kit (n = 3). j The
expression of IL-1β and NLRP3 in HT-22 cells, and GPX4 in PC12 cells by Western
blot analyses. k Cell viability of PC12 cells treated with various concentrations of
Ang-NCs (n = 3). l Cell viability of PC12 cells treated with Aβ ﬁbril, Aβ ﬁbril with 6
(100 μg/mL), and Aβ ﬁbril with 3 (100 μg/mL) for 48 h (n = 3). m Cell viability (n = 3)
of PC12 and HT-22cells incubated with Aβ oligomer (10 μM),Aβ ﬁbril,and degraded
Aβ fragment (10 μM). n Representative crystal violet staining images of HT-22 cells
after various treatments for 48 h. o The corresponding biological transmission
electron microscopy (Bio-TEM) images of mitochondria in HT-22 cells with various
treatments. Unless otherwise stated, all concentrations of Aβ ﬁbril and Ang-NCs
were respectively 10 μM and 100 μg/mL. All data were presented as mean ± SD. NS,
no signiﬁcance, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001. All assays (n = 3) were bio-
logically independent samples. All statistical analyses were compared by analyses
of one-way ANOVA except the two-tailed Student’s t-test in a and b. Source data are
provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
9

recorded on the sixth day. Both the WT and Ang-NCs groups revealed a
purposeful route to the platform and gradually decreased escape
latency compared to the AD group (Fig. 6n, o). Moreover, the resi-
dence time in the target quadrant (Fig. 6p) and crossing number
through the platform (Fig. 6q) of the Ang-NCs group have signiﬁcant
improvements compared to that of the AD group. At last, the novel
object recognition (NOR) test was further monitored. The Ang-NCs
group demonstrated a higher recognition index (RI) compared to that
of AD mice (Fig. 6r), which was comparable to that of the WT mice,
reﬂecting great interest in exploring novel objects. These results
together demonstrated the Ang-NCs treatment could signiﬁcantly
improve the activity of daily living, spatial learning memory, and
recognition capability of AD mice. We further examined the biosafety
through the hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of major organs
Ang-NCs
PBS
L
H
ROS
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.2
0.3
0.4
OD
m
n
5
6
3
Time (h)
 Ang-NCs
 NCs
tAng-NCs = 4.8 h
tNCs = 3.9 h
b
f
Hippocampus
Cortex
0
1
2
3
4
Aβ area (%)
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
****
**P = 0.0015
NS
WT
****P < 0.0001
P < 0.0001
WT
AD AD/Ang-NCs
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
TNF-α (μg/L)
****
****
NS
P < 0.0001
P < 0.0001
WT
AD AD/Ang-NCs
0
50
100
150
IL-1β (ng/L)
*
**
NS
P = 0.0037
P = 0.0127
g
h
Heart
Liver
Spleen
Lung
Kidney
0
1000
2000
3000
Integrated density (arb. units)
NCs
Ang-NCs
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
e
7-month-old
APP/PS1 mice (0 day)
Slice observation
NOR
MWM
i.v. injection once every 3 days, six times
Nesting
16
18
19
26
28
10
13
4
7
1
20
25
29
a
35 days
WT
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
0
2
4
6
Crossing number
****
****
NS
P < 0.0001
P < 0.0001
WT
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
0
20
40
Time (s)
NS
P = 0.0019
**
** P = 0.0042
WT
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
0
50
100
Recognition index (%)
*
*
P = 0.0315
P = 0.0454
NS
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
WT
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
Time (days)
Escape latency (s)
P = 0.0001
P = 0.0009
NS
***
***
WT
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
0
2
4
Scores
**
NS
P = 0.0044
* P = 0.0426
o
p
q
r
Hippocampus
Cortex
0
1
2
3
4
Iba-1 area (%)
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
****P < 0.0001
NS
NS
****P < 0.0001
WT
Hippocampus
Cortex
0
1
2
GFAP area (%)
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
****P < 0.0001
*
NS
****P < 0.0001
WT
P = 0.0479
j
k
l
m
WT
AD AD/Ang-NCs
0
20
40
60
Aβ1-42 (pg/mL)
**
***
NS
P = 0.0007
P = 0.0050
AD
AD /Ang-NCs
WT
Target quadrant
Platform
n
AD
Motion path
AD/Ang-NCs
WT
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
WT
Cortex
Hippocampus
100 μm
GFAP
i
Cortex
Hippocampus
100 μm
Aβ
Cortex
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
WT
100 μm
Cortex
Hippocampus
AD
AD/Ang-NCs
WT
Iba-1
c
NCs
Ang-NCs
H Li
S L
K
H
Li
S
L
K
L
H
d
0 h
12 h
Ang-NCs
NCs
L
H
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
10

from various groups; all morphologies indicated no obvious damage
(Supplementary Fig. 35). Moreover, the levels of blood parameters of
Ang-NCs treatment revealed no signiﬁcant difference with PBS treat-
ment, demonstrating good biocompatibility for in vivo AD theranostic
(Supplementary Fig. 36).
Discussion
Brain health is the most challenging frontier area in modern medicine.
AD is one of the multifactorial neurodegenerative disorders. The toxic
Aβ aggregation and inﬂammation are two reliable and accompany
parallel representation. Unfortunately, there is no effective drug to
satisfy the in vivo dual-target, brain-target, and visual theranostic
requests despite tremendous investments. In this work, we have vali-
dated an original work, fabricating a brain-targeting, ﬁbril-degrading,
and ROS-regulating NIR-II nanotheranostic system via ingenious
molecule design and co-assembly strategy, that successfully resolves
the long-standing challenge in the AD ﬁeld. To our delight, the high-
sensitivity NIR-II imaging veriﬁed the Ang-2 modiﬁcation assisted the
NCs to efﬁciently cross the BBB. Triggered by the high ROS in the AD
lesion, the NCs degraded and released 3 and 6. 3 selectively inhibited
the ﬁbril generation, degraded the toxic Aβ ﬁbril, and relieved the ROS
as well as inﬂammation. 6 remodeled the cerebral redox balance and
enhanced the above therapy effect of 3, together reversing the neu-
rotoxicity and achieving effective behavioral and cognitive improve-
ments in the AD mice model. Such a powerful cascade of relay
enhanced the therapy output, yielding improved behavior and mem-
ory in AD mice.
Beneﬁted from the previous reports and our experiences, we
summarized an instructive guideline of molecule design and nanos-
tructure modulation of NIR-II AD nanotheranostic: (i) high-speciﬁcity
to the aimed target is the primary consideration of all efﬁcient and safe
drugs, some special groups need to be grafted onto the probe, e.g.,
dimethylamino, diethylamino, or hydroxy groups, that were ideal
groups specially bound with Aβ ﬁbrils42,43. (ii) multi-competitive
interactions were generally introduced for efﬁcient degradation of
Aβ ﬁbrils, e.g., Van der Waals forces, π-π stacking, and hydrogen
bonding. (iii) the coordination compound with reducing metal may be
a high-efﬁciency antioxidation strategy for anti-inﬂammation. (iv) the
high brightness, anti-quenching, and long-wavelength NIR-II emission
are the future direction of drugs with the popularity of clinic NIR
imaging, which need simultaneously balanced multi factors, e.g., large
planar conjugation, large twisted structure, and multi-rotors. (v) the
megamerger of high biocompatibility and superior BBB penetration.
(vi) the smart nanodrugs responsive to the microenvironment of
neurodegenerative diseases are future trends to acquire long in vivo
half-life, maximize the drug availability in lesion regions, and minimize
the toxicity to normal cells. These important guidelines are general-
izable to the fabrication of NIR-II drugs against other neurodegenera-
tive diseases. Our goal is to provide insight into the development of
advanced NIR-II anti-neurodegenerative nanodrugs to guard brain
health.
Methods
Ethical regulations
The animal experiments and protocols follow the guidelines of the
Medical and Scientiﬁc Research Ethics Committee of Henan University
School of Medicine (P. R. China, HUSOM 2018-354).
Materials
Aβ peptide powder was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical
Reagent Co., Ltd. Angiopep-2 peptide (TFFYGGSRGKRNNFK TEEYC)
with thiol group was synthesized by China peptide Co., Ltd. (Suzhou,
China). The amphiphilic polymer with various molecular weight and
thioketal (TK) bond linkage-bridged DSPE-TK-PEG2000, DSPE-TK-
PEG3400, DSPE-TK-PEG3400-Mal, and iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles
with 10 nm of diameter were obtained from Xi’an ruixi Biological
Technology Co., Ltd. (China). The Fe3O4 nanoparticles (1 mg) need to
be modiﬁed by DSPE-PEG (10 mg) under sonication and evaporation
before use. Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) and 2’,7’-dichlorodihydro-
ﬂuorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) were supplied by Beyotime Bio-
technology (China).
Co-assembly of Ang-AIE NCs
The NCs were prepared by co-assembly. Brieﬂy, 1 mg 3 and 1 mg 6 were
dissolved in N, N-dimethylformamide (100 μL). Then the mixture was
dropped into 10 mL of deionized water containing 2 μmol of DSPE-TK-
PEG2000. Then the solution was sent to the probe sonication (80 W, on/
off cycle was 5 s/5 s). Lastly, the resulting solution was centrifuged,
washed, and dispersed in deionized water to acquire the NCs. The Ang-
NCs were prepared using the same procedure with the mixture of
1.6 μmol of DSPE-TK-PEG2000 with 0.4 μmol of DSPE-TK-PEG3400-Ang
instead of the primary DSPE-TK-PEG2000.
Preparation of Aβ monomer and ﬁbril
The Aβ monomer was prepared through the dissolve and centrifuga-
tion procedures. Brieﬂy, 0.1 mg of Aβ peptide powder was dissolved in
11 μL of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) solvent with water bath sonication
for 10 min. Then 432 μL of PBS buffer (10 mM, pH = 7.4) was added into
the above mixture and further sonicated for 10 min. The supernatant
was collected as Aβ monomer after centrifugation at 14,000 × g for
15 min. The monomer solution was further incubated for 12 h and 48 h
at 37 °C to obtain the oligomer and ﬁbril samples, respectively.
Degradation of Aβ ﬁbril and restructuring of fragment
To verify the disassembly ability of the NCs against Aβ ﬁbril, 1 mL of
PBS solution containing ﬁbril (25 μM) was co-incubated with NCs
(200 μg/mL) for 48 h at 37 °C. Then the solution was separated and the
Aβ products were collected after adding 10 μL of dimethylsulfoxide
Fig. 6 | In vivo theranostic of Ang-NCs in the female APP/PS1 (AD) mice. a The
outline of the experiment design and sequences for animal behavior evaluation.
b In vivo pharmacokinetic analyses (n = 3 biologically independent mice). c NIR
imaging at 1350 nm of the brain in APP/PS1 mice at various time points (0 and 12 h)
post i.v. injection of NCs and Ang-NCs (dosage: 10 mg/kg). d, e NIR images and
corresponding ﬂuorescence quantiﬁcation for main organs of AD mice treated with
NCs and Ang-NCs (n = 4 biologically independent mice), heart (H), liver (Li), spleen
(S), lung (L), and kidney (K). f Fluorescence images of ROS in ex vivo brains from AD
mice post the injection of PBS and Ang-NCs. The DCFH-DA was dropped onto the
surface of ex vivo brains before imaging. g The levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and Aβ1–42 in
the various mice (n = 5 biologically independent samples). h Fluorescence quanti-
ﬁcation of Aβ plaques of brain slices (3 biologically independent mice and
respectively sampling two tested sites in the hippocampus in one slice of each
mouse, the same quantiﬁcation for cortex site). i Immunoﬂuorescence images of
Aβ plaques, Iba-1, and GFAP in hippocampus and cortex regions of ex vivo brain
slices, red (Aβ plaque, Iba-1, and GFAP) and cell nucleus (blue), all scale bars:
100 μm. j, k The corresponding ﬂuorescence quantiﬁcation of Iba-1 and GFAP from
the hippocampus and cortex of the brain slices (3 biologically independent mice
and respectively sampling two tested sites in the hippocampus in one slice of each
mouse, the same quantiﬁcation for cortex site). l, m The representative images and
corresponding scoring comparisons of various groups in the nesting test (n = 8
biologically independent mice). n Swimming tracks of various groups. o–q were
respectively the escape latency (o), the staying time in the target quadrant (p), and
the crossing number through the platform (q) in the Morris water maze (MWM) test
(n = 8 biologically independent mice). r Recognition index in the NOR test (n = 8
biologically independent mice). All dosages were 10 mg/kg. All data were presented
as mean ± SEM. NS, no signiﬁcance, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and
****P < 0.0001. All statistical analyses were compared by analyses of one-way ANOVA
except the two-tailed Student’s t-test in e. Source data are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
11

(DMSO). The precipitate (fragment) was divided into two samples, one
was supplemented with fresh Aβ monomer (ﬁnal concentration:
25 μM) for the restructuring growth. Another was added the same
amount of Aβ monomer containing NCs (ﬁnal concentration: 200 μg/
mL). Two samples were allowed to be co-incubated and grown for
various times. Lastly, all samples were sent for TEM observation after
staining with uranium acetate solution (1%).
Detection of intracellular ROS
To test the in vitro antioxidation effect of NCs, DCFH-DA was used for
the detection of intracellular ROS in PC12 cells with various treatments.
In detail, the PC12 cells (1 × 105 cells per well) were seeded in the
microscope plate and grown overnight. Then these cells were incu-
bated with various treatments including PBS, Aβ ﬁbril (10 μM), and Aβ
ﬁbril (10 μM) with Ang-NCs (100 μg/mL) for 48 h at 37 °C. The cells
were successively stained by the Hoechst 33342 and DCFH-DA (10 μM)
according
to
the
speciﬁcation
before
confocal
microscope
observation.
Computational methodologies
Assisted by the Gaussian 16 program package53, the density func-
tional theory (DFT) calculations were performed. The geometry
optimizations of minima states involved were carried out at the
B3LYP-D3 level of theory54 with the 6-31 G(d) basis set. Solvation
energies were computed at the B3LYP-D3 level of theory with the 6-
311 + G (d,p) basis set using the gas-phase optimized structures and
the SMD model61 in water. The S1 state was carried out with Time-
Dependent Density Functional Theory (TD-DFT)62. The structure of
Aβ and complex structures were solvated in a water box using
AmberTools 2052. In predicting how 3 interferes with the Aβ protein,
we started with the structure of Aβ and performed molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations on the protein in water for 100 ns, which
is long enough for equilibration. Then, we took the protein structure
at the end of 100 ns and docked with the DFT-optimized structure of
3 using AutoDock Vina55. The MD simulations of complex structures
were conducted using Amber 20 for 100 ns in water. 3 models
constructed in water were used for MD simulations with RESP63
charges. General Amber force ﬁeld (GAFF)56 was used for 3. The
FF14SB57 force ﬁeld was used for the proteins. The TIP3P force ﬁeld
was used for water molecule58. In water, the system was minimized
for 20000 steps, gradually heated to 298 K and then equilibrated for
10 ps under constant volume and temperature. The production run
was conducted for 100 ns under constant pressure and temperature.
Fifty snapshots were taken in the whole 100 ns with 2 ns interval to
form an ensemble of docking structures. The graphs of structures
were generated using CYLview64 and PyMOL (http://www.pymol.
org/). GaussView 6.0.16 was used to construct the initial structures
used in our computations. Schematic diagrams of the interactions
between protein and 3 were shown by LigPlot65. The HOMO and
LUMO were shown by Multiwfn66 and VMD67.
Cell lines
The PC12, BV2, SH-SY5Y, and Neuro-2a cell lines were bought from
Procell Life Science & Technology Co., Ltd. The bEnd.3 cell line was
provided by the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). The HT-22
cell line was obtained from Sunncell Biotech Inc. The PC12 cell line and
Neuro-2a cell line were respectively cultured in the RPMI 1640 medium
and MEM medium. The BV2, SH-SY5Y, HT-22, and bEnd.3 cell lines were
grown in the DMEM medium.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
HT-22 cells (2 × 105 cells per well) were cultured in the 6-well plates for
12 h. Then, the cells were respectively treated with PBS, Aβ ﬁbril
(10 μM), and Aβ ﬁbril (10 μM) with Ang-NCs (100 μg/mL) for one day.
Subsequently, the total RNA of all cells was extracted with FastPure®
Cell/Tissue Total RNA Isolation Kit V2 (Vazyme Biotech Co., Ltd). The
cDNA was synthesized using the above RNA template (1 µg) and Pri-
meScript RT Master Mix (Takara). The RT-PCR analysis was performed
by LightCycler 480II real-time detection system. The sequence of PCR
primer (Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd.) is shown as follows:
IL-6-F, AGCCAGAGTCCTTCAGAGAG;
IL-6-R, CTTAGCCACTCCTTCTGTGAC;
IL-1β-F, TGTGTAATGAAAGACGGCA;
IL-1β-R, TCCACTTTGCTCTTGACGGCAC;
TNF-α-F, CAAAATTCGAGTGACAAGCCT;
TNF-α-R, CTGGGAGTAGACAAGGTACAAC;
GAPDH-F, TTGATGGCAACAATCTCCA;
GAPDH-R, CGTCCCGTAGACAAAATGGT.
Western blot assay
PC12 cells and HT-22 cells (2 × 105 cells per well) were seeded in the
6-well plate, cultured overnight, and respectively incubated with PBS,
Aβ ﬁbril (10 μM), and Aβ ﬁbril (10 μM) with Ang-NCs (100 μg/mL) for
24 h at 37 °C. The cells were treated with RIPA buffer after washing two
times. Then the protein concentration was determined by a BCA kit.
Then 15 μg of proteins were separated by 12.5% SDS-PAGE and trans-
ferred onto the PVDF membranes. After blocking with 5% defatted milk
for 1 h at room temperature, the membranes were respectively incu-
bated with Anti-GPX4 antibody (Abcam, ab125066, 1: 1000 dilution),
Anti-iL-1β antibody (Proteintech, 26048-1-AP, 1: 1000 dilution), Anti-
NLRP3 antibody (Hangzhou Huaan Biotechnology, ER1706-72, 1: 1000
dilution), and β-actin antibody (ABclonal AC026, 1: 50000 dilution)
overnight at 4 °C. Lastly, the bands of these membranes were visua-
lized with an ECL reagent and recorded by Super Signal ECL (Amer-
sham Imager 680RGB) after 2 h of incubation with goat anti-rabbit IgG
secondary antibody.
In vitro cytotoxicity assessment
The PC12 cells (5 × 103 cells per well) were cultured in 96-well plates.
After 24 h, the cells were incubated with PBS, Aβ ﬁbril (10 μM), and Aβ
ﬁbril (10 μM) with various concentrations of Ang-NCs at 37 °C for 48 h.
Lastly, the CCK-8 detected agent was added to the wells and further
incubated for 40 min. The optical density at 450 nm of the plates was
recorded by a microplate reader (Devivces/13x).
Animals
All AD mice in this work were seven-month-old female APP/PS1 trans-
genic AD mice that were provided by Beijing HFK Bioscience Co. Ltd.
The seven-month-old wild-type C57 mice and healthy 6- to 8-week-old
Balb/c white mice were female and purchased from SiPeiFu (SPF)
Biotechnology Co., Ltd. Mice are fed in Speciﬁc Pathogen Free (SPF)
level laboratory animal center following standard experimental animal
guidelines and ethics. The mice were caged in individually ventilated
cages following a common light/dark cycle (12/12 h) at 22 ± 2 °C. The
humidity is set as 55 ± 10%. The bedding in the cage was cleaned once
weekly.
Hemolysis assay
To evaluate the biocompatibility of Ang-NCs, we used a microplate
reader to test the hemolysis ratio of erythrocytes. Brieﬂy, the whole
blood (300 μL) was harvested from Balb/c white mice and was placed
in the anticoagulation tubes coated with ethylenediamine tetraacetic
acid (EDTA). Then the samples underwent centrifugation at 845 × g for
10 min at 4 °C and were washed ﬁve times with PBS. The resulting
erythrocytes were dispersed in 5 mL of PBS. Subsequently, equivalent
parallel dispersions (0.5 mL) were respectively incubated with 500 μL
of deionized water, PBS, and various concentrations of Ang-NCs
solution in PBS buffer at 37 °C for 2 h. Lastly, the supernatants of each
sample were collected after centrifugation for the test of OD values
at 570 nm.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
12

In vivo pharmacokinetics test
To assess the in vivo pharmacokinetics, the healthy Balb/c white
mice (6–8-week-old, n = 3 biologically independent mice) were
respectively i.v. injected with 200 μL of NCs and Ang-NCs (injection
dosage is 10 mg/kg). We collected the blood at predetermined time
points and subsequently centrifuged at 845 × g for 15 min at 4 °C.
Then 20 μL of supernatant was mixed with 80 μL of PBS in 96-well
plates to measure the OD values at 365 nm. The OriginPro
2021 software was used to analyze the elimination half-life of
two groups.
In vivo NIR-II imaging
The seven-month-old female APP/PS1 mice were selected as AD mouse
model. First, the Ang-NCs were i.v. injected into the AD mice (injection
dosage is 10 mg/kg). The ﬂuorescence imaging of cerebral vessels in
mice without removing the scalp or skull was monitored at different
channels
with
an
NIRvana640
InGaAs
camera
under
808 nm
irradiation.
Behavior assessments on AD mice
All AD mice were randomly divided into different groups (n = 8
biologically independent mice) with one mouse per cage to avoid
ﬁghting. The AD mice were respectively i.v. injected with PBS and
Ang-NCs (dosage: 10 mg/kg) once every three days. The total injec-
tion was six times. The WT mice also were i.v. injected with PBS
six times.
Nest construction (NC): all mice were sent to the cage (one per
cage). A pad of test napkin paper with three pieces was placed in the
cage. The next day, the situation of paper in the cage was photo-
graphed and scored following scoring criteria28.
Morris water maze (MWM): a pool was used as the test equipment
and divided into four quadrants afﬁxed with various symbols. The pool
was ﬁlled with water containing titanium dioxide powder and kept at
22 ± 1 °C and exclude noise and strong light. The mice were trained
daily for ﬁve consecutive days to seek the hidden platform. The time
spent moving from the start site to the target platform (escape latency)
was recorded in the ﬁrst ﬁve days. After removing the platform, the
moving route, crossing number, and staying time in the target quad-
rant were recorded on the sixth day.
Novel object recognition (NOR): the open box was used as the test
apparatus. The tracking route was recorded by software to obtain
manual behavior scoring. Brieﬂy, the mice were ﬁrst habituated to the
empty tested box for 5 min. The next day, mice were trained to explore
the pre-placed two identical objects for 10 min. On the third day, the
same experiments were repeated except using a novel object to
replace one of two original objects. The recognition index (RI) was
calculated to assess the differences in exploration time among various
groups.
Assessment of antioxidant, anti-inﬂammation effect, and quan-
tiﬁcation of Aβ1–42 level
To detect the antioxidant therapy effect of Ang-NCs, the brains of the
APP/PS1 mice were harvested after i.v. injection of Ang-NCs one time.
The DCFH-DA probe was dropped onto the surface of isolated fresh
brains and incubated for 30 min. Then the ﬂuorescence of ex vivo
brains was observed under the equipment (IVIS Lumia III) post-
dropping. To investigate the levels of inﬂammation factors and
quantify Aβ1–42 in the brain of mice after i.v. injection of Ang-NCs six
times, the brain of mice was collected and homogenized for 4 min
(70 Hz) in the 0.2 mL tube with RIPA buffer. Then the solution was
centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 30 min. Lastly, we tested the inﬂam-
matorymediators of the supernatants with the corresponding kits. The
precipitate was treated with formic acid under sonication. The Aβ1–42
in the solution was centrifugated and tested with an ELISA kit. The
concentration of proteins was quantiﬁed by a BCA kit.
Preparation and immunoﬂuorescence staining of brain slices
The mice were anesthetized and perfused transcardially with saline
after treatment. Then the brains of mice were harvested and ﬁxed via
immersion in paraformaldehyde for three days. After the dehydration
treatment by gradient concentrations of alcohol, the brains were
embedded into parafﬁn. The brain slices with 4 μm of thickness are
prepared with a pathology slicer (Leica RM2016) and mounted onto
glass slides. The slices were deparafﬁnized after the successive treat-
ment of xylene, alcohol, and washing with deionized water. Then these
slices were immersed in the EDTA antigen retrieval buffer (pH = 8.0)
and sent to the microwave for 8 min. After being washed with PBS
buffer (pH = 7.4), it was further incubated with bovine serum albumin
(BSA, 5%) for 1 h and further incubated with the diluted primary anti-
body in PBS overnight at 4 °C. Lastly, the slices were washed and
incubated with the secondary antibody for 1 h. Prior to the imaging
observation using CaseViewer (Pannoramic MIDI), the slices were
washed with PBS and then stained with DAPI (Servicebio G1012). The
information of primary and secondary antibodies includes Rabbit pAb
anti-Aβ (Servicebio, GB111197, 1: 400 dilution), GFAP (Servicebio,
GB11096, 1: 500 dilution), Iba-1 (Servicebio, GB113502, 1: 500 dilution),
8-OHdG antibody (Santa Cruz, sc-393871, 1: 50 dilution), Goat anti-
rabbit IgG (Servicebio, GB21303, 1: 300 dilution), and Goat anti-mouse
IgG Alexa Flour 488 (Abcom, ab150117, 1: 500 dilution).
Cerebral microbleeds observation
The microbleeds risk was investigated by the Prussian Blue his-
tochemistry of brain slices. The slices were prepared according to the
above procedure. Then the slices were treated with 2% potassium
ferrocyanide in HCl (2%) in Coplin jars for 1 h at room temperature,
followed by a counterstain in the Nuclear fast Red solution (0.1%) for
5 min. Subsequently, the blue haemosiderin-deposition proﬁles in the
stained brain slices were imaged by Grundium OCUS40X.
Aβ plaque detection of ex vivo brain slices staining by ThS
To investigate the level of in vivo Aβ plaque after the treatment, the
ex vivo brain slices were respectively stained by Rabbit pAb anti-Aβ
probe and ThS dye. First, the slice was immersed in the EDTA antigen
retrieval buffer (pH = 8.0) and sent to the microwave for 8 min. After
washing for three times with PBS buffer (pH = 7.4), it was treated with
5% BSA for 1 h and further incubated with the diluted primary antibody
in PBS overnight at 4 °C. The slices were washed and underwent
another incubation of secondary antibody for 1 h. Secondly, for the
ThS staining, the new slice was stained with ThS dye for confocal
observation. Brieﬂy, the slices were stained with ThS solution (100 μM)
in 50% ethanol for 20 min and washed with 80% ethanol for 10 s and
water for 10 s. After sealing with an anti-ﬂuorescence quenching agent,
these slices were sent to the CLSM observation (Zeiss 880).
Safety assessment
The in vivo toxicity of our NCs was investigated through histological
observation and blood safety examination. Five main organs were
harvested and prepared into H&E staining slices for microscopic
observation after ﬁnishing behavior assessments. The whole blood was
acquired from the healthy Balb/c mice (6–8-week-old, n = 3 biologi-
cally independent mice) on the eighteenth-day post i.v. injection of
Ang-NCs (dosage: 10 mg/kg) and PBS six times. Then, these blood
samples were performed for the routine blood test. The serums were
sent for the biochemical analysis.
Statistical analysis
All results are shown as mean ± standard deviation (SD) and means ±
standard error of the mean (SEM). Statistical analysis among multiple
datasets was compared by analysis of one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA), while that in two groups of dataset experiments was com-
pared using a two-tailed Student’s t-test. The reproducibility for all
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
13

experiments was performed according to at least three technical
replicates.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this
published article its Supplementary Information ﬁle, and the Source
Data ﬁle. The full image dataset is available from the corresponding
author upon request. The accessible link for 5KK3 is https://www.rcsb.
org/structure/5KK3. Source data are provided in this paper.
References
1.
Li, X. et al. Global, regional, and national burden of Alzheimer’s
disease and other dementias, 1990-2019. Front Aging Neurosci. 14,
937486 (2022).
2.
Knopman, D. S. et al. Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 7,
33–53 (2021).
3.
Butterﬁeld, D. A. & Halliwell, B. Oxidative stress, dysfunctional
glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20,
148–160 (2019).
4.
Villemagne, V. L. et al. Amyloid β deposition, neurodegeneration,
and cognitive decline in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: a pro-
spective cohort study. Lancet Neurol. 12, 357–367 (2013).
5.
Keller, J. N. Age-related neuropathology, cognitive decline, and
Alzheimer’s disease. Ageing Res. Rev. 5, 1–13 (2006).
6.
Qiang, W., Yau, W., Lu, J., Collinge, J. & Tycko, R. Structural variation
in amyloid-β ﬁbrils from Alzheimer’s disease clinical subtypes.
Nature 541, 217–221 (2017).
7.
Leng, F. & Edison, P. Neuroinﬂammation and microglial activation in
Alzheimer disease: where do we go from here? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17,
157–172 (2021).
8.
Baik, S. H. et al. A breakdown in metabolic reprogramming causes
microglia dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Metab. 30,
493–507 (2019).
9.
Ising, C. et al. NLRP3 inﬂammasome activation drives tau pathol-
ogy. Nature 575, 669–673 (2019).
10.
Reiman, E. M. Attack on amyloid-β protein. Nature 537, 36–37 (2016).
11.
Bachurin, S. O., Bovina, E. V. & Ustyugov, A. A. Drugs in clinical trials
for Alzheimer’s disease: the major trends. Med. Res. Rev. 37,
1186–1225 (2017).
12.
Madav, Y., Wairkar, S. & Prabhakar, B. Recent therapeutic strategies
targeting beta amyloid and tauopathies in Alzheimer’s disease.
Brain Res. Bull. 146, 171–184 (2019).
13.
Breijyeh, Z. & Karaman, R. Comprehensive review on Alzheimer’s
disease: causes and treatment. Molecules 25, 5789–5816 (2020).
14.
Jung, H. et al. Anti-inﬂammatory clearance of amyloid-β by a chi-
meric Gas6 fusion protein. Nat. Med. 28, 1802–1812 (2022).
15.
Arvanitis, C. D., Ferraro, G. B. & Jain, R. K. The blood-brain barrier
and blood-tumour barrier in brain tumours and metastases. Nat.
Rev. Cancer 20, 26–41 (2020).
16.
Liu, Y. et al. Brain co-delivery of ﬁrst-line chemotherapy drug and
epigenetic bromodomain inhibitor for multidimensional enhanced
synergistic glioblastoma therapy. Exploration 2, 20210274 (2022).
17.
Moutinho, S. The long road to a cure for Alzheimer’s disease is
paved with failures. Nat. Med. 28, 2228–2231 (2022).
18.
Hong, G. et al. Ultrafast ﬂuorescence imaging in vivo with con-
jugated polymer ﬂuorophores in the second near-infrared window.
Nat. Commun. 5, 4206–4214 (2014).
19.
Gooyer, J. M. et al. Multimodal CEA-targeted ﬂuorescence and
radioguided cytoreductive surgery for peritoneal metastases of
colorectal origin. Nat. Commun. 13, 2621–2630 (2022).
20. Amdursky, N., Erez, Y. & Huppert, D. Molecular rotors: what lies
behind the high sensitivity of the Thioﬂavin-T ﬂuorescent marker.
Acc. Chem. Res. 45, 1548–1557 (2012).
21.
Rodríguez-Rodríguez, C. et al. Crystal structure of Thioﬂavin-T and
its binding to amyloid ﬁbrils: insights at the molecular level. Chem.
Commun. 46, 1156–1158 (2010).
22. Shin, J. et al. Harnessing intramolecular rotation to enhance two-
photon imaging of Aβ plaques through minimizing background
ﬂuorescence. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 58, 5648–5652 (2019).
23. Zhou, J. et al. Fluorescent diagnostic probes in neurodegenerative
diseases. Adv. Mater. 32, e2001945 (2020).
24. Fu, W. et al. Rational design of near-infrared aggregation-induced-
emission-active probes: in situ mapping of amyloid-β plaques with
ultrasensitivity and high-ﬁdelity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 3171–3177
(2019).
25. Yan, C. X. et al. Preparation of near-infrared AIEgen-active ﬂuor-
escent probes for mapping amyloid-β plaques in brain tissues and
living mice. Nat. Protoc. 18, 1316–1336 (2023).
26. Wang, J. et al. Central metal-derived co-assembly of biomimetic
GdTPP/ZnTPP porphyrin nanocomposites for enhanced dual-modal
imaging-guided photodynamic therapy. Biomaterials 229, 119576
(2020).
27.
Wang, J. et al. Brain-targeted aggregation-induced-emission nano-
particles with near-infrared imaging at 1550 nm boosts orthotopic
glioblastoma theranostics. Adv. Mater. 34, e2106082 (2022).
28. Zhang, T. et al. Near-infrared aggregation-induced emission lumi-
nogens for in vivo theranostics of Alzheimer’s disease. Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 62, e202211550 (2023).
29. Staderini, M., Martín, M. A., Bolognesi, M. L. & Menéndez, J. C.
Imaging of β-amyloid plaques by near infrared ﬂuorescent tracers:
a new frontier for chemical neuroscience. Chem. Soc. Rev. 44,
1807–1819 (2015).
30. Xin, Q., Ma, H., Wang, H. & Zhang, D. Tracking tumor heterogeneity
and progression with near-infrared II ﬂuorophores. Exploration 3,
20220011 (2023).
31.
Liao, Y., Peng, Z., Liu, X., Hu, Y. & Zhang, J. Theranostic applications
of biomolecule-responsive aggregation-induced emission lumino-
gens. Interdiscip. Med. 1, e20230024 (2023).
32. Wan, H. et al. A bright organic NIR-II nanoﬂuorophore for three-
dimensional imaging into biological tissues. Nat. Commun. 9,
1171–1179 (2018).
33. Wanderi, K. & Cui, Z. Organic ﬂuorescent nanoprobes with NIR-IIb
characteristics for deep learning. Exploration 2, 20210097 (2022).
34. Duo, Y. et al. Noncancerous disease-targeting AIEgens. Chem. Soc.
Rev. 52, 1024–1067 (2023).
35. Kenry, Duan & Liu, Y. B. Recent advances of optical imaging in the
second near-infrared window. Adv. Mater. 30, 1802394 (2018).
36. Zhang, X. et al. Design and synthesis of curcumin analogues for
in vivo ﬂuorescence imaging and inhibiting copper-induced cross-
linking of amyloid beta species in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 135, 16397–16409 (2013).
37. Whitty, A. & Kumaravel, G. Between a rock and a hard place? Nat.
Chem. Biol. 2, 112–118 (2006).
38. Chen, G. F. et al. Amyloid beta: structure, biology and structure-
based therapeutic development. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 38,
1205–1235 (2017).
39. Qi, J. et al. Light-driven transformable optical agent with adaptive
functions for boosting cancer surgery outcomes. Nat. Commun. 9,
1848–1859 (2018).
40. Liu, S., Li, Y., Kwok, R. T. K., Lam, J. W. Y. & Tang, B. Z. Structural and
process controls of AIEgens for NIR-II theranostics. Chem. Sci. 12,
3427–3436 (2021).
41.
Zheng, M. et al. Tuning the elasticity of polymersomes for brain
tumor targeting. Adv. Sci. 8, 2102001 (2021).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
14

42. Heo, C. H. et al. A quadrupolar two-photon ﬂuorescent probe for
in vivo imaging of amyloid-β plaques. Chem. Sci. 7,
4600–4606 (2016).
43. Fu, H. et al. Highly sensitive near-infrared ﬂuorophores for in vivo
detection of amyloid‑β plaques in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Med.
Chem. 58, 6972–6983 (2015).
44. El-Fiqi, A., Allam, R. & Kim, H. W. Antioxidant cerium ions-containing
mesoporous bioactive glass ultrasmall nanoparticles: Structural,
physico-chemical, catalase-mimic and biological properties. Col-
loids Surf. B Biointerfaces 206, 111932 (2021).
45. Xu, C. & Qu, X. Cerium oxide nanoparticle: a remarkably versatile
rare earth nanomaterial for biological applications. NPG Asia Mater.
6, e90 (2014).
46. Danilczuk, M., Schlick, S. & Coms, F. D. Cerium (III) as a stabilizer of
perﬂuorinated membranes used in fuel cells: in situ detection of
early events in the ESR resonator. Macromolecules 42, 8943–8949
(2009).
47. Liu, S. et al. Molecular motion in aggregates: manipulating TICT
for boosting photothermal theranostics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141,
5359–5368 (2019).
48. Li, J. et al. Photoinduced PEG deshielding from ROS-sensitive link-
age-bridged block copolymer-based nanocarriers for on-demand
drug delivery. Biomaterials 170, 147–155 (2018).
49. Fan, K. et al. In vivo guiding nitrogen-doped carbon nanozyme for
tumor catalytic therapy. Nat. Commun. 9, 1440–1450 (2018).
50. Biancalana, M. & Koide, S. Molecular mechanism of Thioﬂavin-T
binding to amyloid ﬁbrils. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1804, 1405–1412
(2010).
51.
Colvin, M. T. et al. Atomic resolution structure of monomorphic
Aβ42 amyloid ﬁbrils. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 9663–9674 (2016).
52. Case, D. A. et al. AMBER 2020, University of California, San Fran-
cisco (2020).
53. Frisch, M. J. et al. Gaussian 16, revision A.03; Gaussian, Inc.: Wall-
ingford CT, (2016).
54. Grimme, S., Antony, J., Ehrlich, S. & Krieg, H. A consistent and
accurate ab initio parametrization of density functional dispersion
correction (DFT-D) for the 94 elements H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 132,
154104–154124 (2010).
55. Trott, O. & Olson, A. J. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and
accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efﬁcient opti-
mization, and multithreading. J. Comput. Chem. 31, 455–461
(2010).
56. Wang, J. M., Wolf, R. M., Caldwell, J. W., Kollman, P. A. & Case, D. A.
Development and testing of a general AMBER force ﬁeld. J. Comput.
Chem. 25, 1157–1174 (2004).
57. Maier, J. A. et al. ff14SB: Improving the accuracy of protein side
chain and backbone parameters from ff99SB. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 11, 3696–3713 (2015).
58. Jorgensen, W. L., Chandrasekhar, J., Madura, J. D., Impey, R. W. &
Klein, M. L. Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating
liquid water. J. Chem. Phys. 79, 926–935 (1983).
59. Liu, P. et al. Biomimetic dendrimer-peptide conjugates for early
multi-target therapy of Alzheimer’s disease by inﬂammatory
microenvironment modulation. Adv. Mater. 33, 2100746 (2021).
60. Carter, S. F. et al. Astrocyte biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease.
Trends Mol. Med. 25, 77–95 (2019).
61.
Marenich, A. V., Cramer, C. J. & Truhlar, D. G. Universal solvation
model based on solute electron density and on a continuum
model of the solvent deﬁned by the bulk dielectric constant
and atomic surface tensions. J. Phys. Chem. 113, 6378–6396
(2009).
62. Adamo, C. & Jacquemin, D. The calculations of excited-state
properties with time-dependent density functional theory. Chem.
Soc. Rev. 42, 845–856 (2013).
63. Bayly, C. I., Cieplak, P., Cornell, W. & Kollman, P. A. A well-behaved
electrostatic potential based method using charge restraints for
deriving atomic charges: the RESP model. J. Phys. Chem. 97,
10269–10280 (1993).
64. CYLview, 1.0b, Legault, C. Y. Université de Sherbrooke, (http://
www.cylview.org) (2009).
65. Wallace, A. C. et al. LIGPLOT: a program to generate schematic
diagrams of protein-ligand interactions. Protein Eng. 8, 127–134
(1995).
66. Lu, T. & Chen, F. W. Multiwfn: a multifunctional wavefunction ana-
lyzer. J. Comput. Chem. 33, 580–592 (2012).
67. Humphrey, W., Dalke, A. & Schulten, K. ‘VMD-visual molecular
dynamics’. J. Mol. Graph. 14, 33–38 (1996).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (NSFC 22275050 from J.W., 32001071 from J.W., and
22205096 from J.Z.), Joint Training Funds for Science & Technology
R&D of Henan Province (222301420059, J.W.), Program for Science &
Technology Innovation Talents in Universities of Henan Province
(22HASTIT004, J.W.), the Outstanding Youths Development Scheme
of Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University (2021J002, J.Z.),
NHMRC Investigator Grant, and GuangDong Basic and Applied Basic
Research Foundation (2021A1515110373, J.Z.), Natural Science
Foundation of Henan Province (222300420113, X.W.). The Transwell
model in Fig. 5c and partial ﬁgure elements were drawn in BioR-
ender.com. The authors acknowledge the Beijing Super Cloud
Computing Center (BSCC) for its high performance and AI comput-
ing resources, which contributed to the research results reported in
this paper. URL: http://www.blsc.cn/.
Author contributions
B.Z.T. and B.S. conceived the concept for this work. J.W. and P.S. con-
tributed to the preparation and measurements of materials. X.C. and Y.Z.
assisted with the characterizations. M.L., M.H., Y.L., L.H. and M.L. (Men-
gya Lu) assisted with the cell and animal assays. X.P. assists with the
behavior test. X.W., Y.L. (Yang Liu), and C.S. helped to analyze the data.
Y.Z. (Yuan Zhou), H.Y., J.C. and X.W. (Xin Wang) carried out the binding
calculations of proteins. J.Z. synthesizes the compounds. B.S., J.W. and
X.W. (Xin Wang) wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Jing Zhang, Xin Wang, Bingyang Shi or Ben Zhong Tang.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Ibrahim Javed,
Jian Luo and Ruiqing Ni for their contribution to the peer review of this
work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
15

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-44737-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:705 
16