Deploying Gold Nanomaterials in Combating
Multi-Drug-Resistant Bacteria
Xiaohui Zhao, Hao Tang, and Xingyu Jiang*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
ABSTRACT: Antibiotic resistance has become a serious threat
to human health due to the overuse of antibiotics. Different
antibiotics are being developed to treat resistant bacteria, but
the development cycle of antibiotics is hard to keep up with the
high incidence of antibiotic resistance. Recent advances in
antimicrobial nanomaterials have made nanotechnology a
powerful solution to this dilemma. Among these nanomaterials,
gold nanomaterials have excellent antibacterial efficacy and
biosafety, making them alternatives to antibiotics. This review
presents strategies that use gold nanomaterials to combat drug-
resistant bacteria. We focus on the influence of physicochemical
factors such as surface chemistry, size, and shape of gold
nanomaterials on their antimicrobial properties and describe the antimicrobial applications of gold nanomaterials in medical
devices. Finally, the existing challenges and future directions are discussed.
KEYWORDS: multi-drug-resistant bacteria, gold nanoantibiotics, surface modification, structure−activity relationship, biosafety,
wound dressing, implantable devices, clinical translation
INTRODUCTION
The urgent bacterial infections threaten human health
worldwide. Antibiotics are powerful weapons to fight against
bacteria and reduce the high mortality caused by bacterial
infections.1 Thousands of antibiotics have been discovered in
the golden age of 1940−1960,2 but the abuse of antibiotics
brings about the problem of antibiotic resistance.3 The easy
access to antibiotics in human communities increases antibiotic
abuse and intensifies drug resistance.4 Moreover, the close
communication of the global population enables pathogens to
enter human society from nature easily.5 A fact is that the
number of annual deaths from drug-resistant bacterial
infections will rise from 700 thousand to 10 million by
2025.6 However, the discovery cycle of antibiotics is rather
long and far behind the pace of superbugs. Thus, discovering
antibacterial agents are urgent and cannot be delayed.
Many nanomaterials have been proved to possess excellent
antibacterial properties to treat drug-resistant bacterial
infections recently. These nanoantibiotics include silver
nanoparticles (NPs), gold NPs, zinc NPs, CuONPs, TiO2NPs,
and so forth.7,8 These antibacterial nanomaterials exert their
antibacterial effects through mechanisms including affecting
the integrity of bacterial cell membrane, releasing antibacterial
metal ions, generating reactive oxygen species (ROS),
inhibiting enzyme activity and DNA synthesis, interrupting
energy transmission, and so forth.7,9 Moreover, these
antibacterial nanomaterials induce the emergence of drug
resistance with low frequencies.10 The research of antibacterial
nanomaterials has witnessed a series of exciting results. In the
era of antibiotic resistance, nanomaterials may become the
mainstream in treating bacterial infections with increasing
research and development.11
Among these nanomaterials, gold nanomaterials have been
extensively used as antibacterial and antiviral agents for their
high antipathogens efficacy and biocompatibility.12−14 The
advantages of gold nanomaterials as antibacterial agents
include the following: (1) Gold nanomaterials can be endowed
with high biosafety because gold itself is chemically inert and
the body elimination/metabolization of gold nanomaterials can
be tuned by material design. (2) By modifying the surface with
different molecules, gold nanomaterials are allowed to
maximize the antibacterial efficacy through chemically
manipulation of properties such as size, shape, surface
Received:
March 6, 2022
Accepted:
June 27, 2022
Published: July 1, 2022
Review
www.acsnano.org
© 2022 American Chemical Society
10066
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 23, 2026 at 06:41:02 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

composition, and so forth. (3) Gold nanomaterials induce
bacterial drug resistance less frequently. Some reviews have
discussed the antibacterial performance, sterilization mecha-
nism, toxicity, and antibacterial applications of nanomaterials,
including a broad range of materials (AgNPs, carbon
nanomaterials).7,15−19 In this review, we focus on recent
achievements of gold nanomaterials in the antibacterial field,
and we mainly introduce the utilization of gold nanomaterials
to fight against drug-resistant bacteria.
GOLD NANOMATERIAL-BASED NANO-ANTIBIOTICS
Antibacterial nanomaterials are nanoscale antibacterial candi-
dates due to their typical physicochemical properties. This
section will introduce the discovery of gold nanomaterials as
potential antibiotics and general strategies to maximize their
antibacterial efficacy by optimizing the intrinsic characteristics.
Surface-Functionalized Antibacterial Gold Nanoma-
terials. Antibiotic-Modified Gold Nanomaterials. Restoring
the antibacterial efficacy of the existing antibiotics is quite
important, particularly in combating antibiotic resistance.
Taking advantage of the multivalent effects and nanoscale
properties of gold nanomaterials, researchers have tried to
combine gold NPs with clinically used antibiotics to promote
the interaction between antibiotics and bacteria, exceeding a
synergistic effect on treating bacteria. This strategy can
enhance the antibacterial properties of antibiotics and help
to fight drug-resistant bacteria effectively. A series of traditional
antibiotics have been used to cap gold NPs, including
vancomycin,20 gentamicin,21 kanamycin,22 amoxicillin,23 pen-
icillin,24 doxycycline,25 daptomycin,26 ampicillin,27 antimicro-
bial peptide,28 and so forth. For example, researchers have
synthesized vancomycin-immobilized gold NPs (Van@Au) to
cope with bacterial resistance. The Van@Au is synthesized in
one pot by attaching bis(vancomycin) cyanamide to AuNPs
via a Au−S bond, and each Van@Au has about 31 vancomycin
molecules on the surface. Vancomycin alone has no antibiotic
activity against Escherichia coli (E. coli), but Van@AuNPs have
antibacterial activities against Gram-negative bacteria and
Gram-positive bacteria, and even against their multi-drug-
resistant (MDR) counterparts, including vancomycin-resistant
Enterococci (VRE) and E. coli. The minimal inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) of Van@Au against all tested VRE
are 2−4 μg/mL, while vancomycin alone is inactive (MIC >
128 μg/mL).29 Researchers have also used cationic antimicro-
bial peptides to modify gold NPs to maintain the antibacterial
activity of peptides and reduce their cytotoxicity, as well.28 In
short, the combination of antibiotics and gold NPs can lower
the working dosage and broaden antibacterial spectrum of
antibiotics, which is an effective strategy to combat antibiotic
resistance.
Non-antibiotic-Modified Gold Nanomaterials. Similar to
the antibiotic-modified AuNPs, some molecules which do not
have antibacterial efficacy (here we term them as non-
antibiotics) are screened to modify AuNPs to treat bacterial
infections. Using this strategy, we have discovered 4,6-diamino-
2-pyrimidinethiol (DAPT)-modified AuNPs (Au_DAPTNPs)
as typical non-antibiotic-modified nanoantibiotics. The Au_-
DAPTNPs, synthesized using DAPT as the protection ligand
and sodium borohydride (NaBH4) as the reducing agent, have
a size of 3.2 ± 0.5 nm and a surface charge of +18.6 ± 7.3 mV.8
DAPT is an analogue of tRNA cytosine in E. coli. Neither
DAPT nor Au alone has antibacterial activities (Figure 1).
However, Au_DAPTNPs show outstanding antibacterial
activities against Gram-negative bacteria and their MDR
counterparts. The MICs of Au_DAPTNPs are 2 μg/mL
against Klebsiella pneumoniae (K. p), 4 μg/mL against E. coli,
MDR E. coli, MDR K. p, and 16 μg/mL against Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (P. a) and MDR P. a. The Au_DAPTNPs can
damage the bacterial membrane by chelating magnesium or
calcium ions, which further cause the leakage of cytoplasmic
contents. The internalized NPs can further interact with DNA
and inhibit the synthesis of proteins. Transcriptomic and
proteomic analysis reveals that Au_DAPTNPs decrease cell
membrane potential and ATP levels and inhibit the binding of
ribosomal subunits to tRNA, which ultimately leads to the
death of bacteria (Figure 2).9 Exogenous energy or ROS-
related reactions are not a prerequisite for Au_DAPTNPs to
be effective antibiotics. Moreover, Au_DAPTNPs develop
drug resistance more slowly than antibiotics. In vitro toxicity
tests indicate that Au_DAPTNPs are nontoxic to human vein
epidermal cells.
We have used the strategy of codecoration of AuNPs to
improve the antibacterial performance of Au_DAPTNPs. We
modify AuNPs with DAPT and a second ligand to fight against
superbugs through a synergistic mechanism of action.
Figure 1. Antibacterial schematic diagram of DAPT, AuNPs alone,
and Au_DAPTNPs.
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of the antibacterial mechanism of
Au_DAPTNPs against E. coli. Reprinted and modified with
permission from ref 9. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10067

Au_DAPTNPs kill Gram-negative bacteria but remain
ineffective to Gram-positive bacteria (MIC > 64 mg/mL).
The entry of Au_DAPTNPs into bacteria is a primary
condition for their antibacterial performance. Studies show
that Au_DAPTNPs enter Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli and
P. a), cause damages to bacterial cell walls, and induce the
bacterial death. However, Au_DAPTNPs only adsorb on the
surface of the cell walls of Gram-positive bacteria (S. aureus)
and do not damage them.30 Thus, Au_DAPTNPs have
antibacterial activities against Gram-negative bacteria but
remain ineffective to Gram-positive bacteria. By adding non-
antibiotic amines (NAA) onto the surface of Au_DAPTNPs,
the obtained gold NPs (Au_DAPT/NAANPs) show anti-
bacterial activities on both Gram-negative and positive
bacteria. For example, 1,1-dimethyl biguanide (DMB) and
DAPT-modified gold NPs are more effective against Gram-
negative bacteria and Gram-positive bacteria than Au_-
DAPTNPs. The synergistic effect of NAA and DAPT on the
gold NPs has reached a broad antibacterial spectrum.30
Moreover, we use bovine serum albumin (BSA) to modify
Au_DAPTNPs. The Au_DAPT_BSANPs also show enhanced
antibacterial activities against Gram-negative and Gram-
positive bacteria.31 Notably, the antibacterial effect of
Au_DAPT_BSANPs against E. coli increased by four times
compared with Au_DAPTNPs. Mechanism studies have
shown that using the strategy of comodifying NPs with
DAPT and a second ligand (DMB or BSA) can increase the
attachment and damage of NPs to the cell walls of Gram-
positive bacteria (S. aureus).30,31 These gold NPs exhibit
broad-spectrum activities by increasing the permeability of
bacterial cell walls and cytoplasmic membranes. These studies
imply that regulating the surface ligands of gold NPs can
broaden the antibacterial spectrum of gold NPs. Recently, we
discovered that the antibacterial efficacy of AuNPs can also be
enhanced by reducing their sizes.32,33 We expand the
antimicrobial spectrum of Au_DAPTNPs by reducing their
size to less than 2 nm. These ultrasmall Au_DAPTNPs can
produce ROS in bacteria, which helps them kill Gram-negative
and Gram-positive drug-resistant bacteria.32
We have developed a series of antibacterial gold NPs
modified with small molecules, including amines, pharmaceut-
ical intermediates, and saccharides (Figure 3). These non-
antibiotic amines include 1,1-dimethyl biguanide (DMB),
guanidine (G), 1-(3-chlorophenyl) biguanide (CPB), chlor-
oquine diphosphate (CQ), acetylcholine chloride (ACh), and
melamine (Mel).30 Most of these non-antibiotic amines are
FDA-approved drugs. For example, DMB is an antihypergly-
cemic drug, CQ is an antimalarial drug, and so forth. These
gold NPs show excellent antibacterial activities against
superbugs. We also developed a series of gold NPs capped
with N-heterocyclic molecules, including 3-amino-1,2,4-
triazole-5-thiol (ATT), 4-amino-3-hydrazino-5-mercapto-
1,2,4-triazole (AHMT), 2-mercaptoimidazloe (MI), methima-
zole (MTM), 2-amino-6-mercaptopurine (AMP), and 6-
amino-2-mercaptobenzothiazole (AMBT). These N-hetero-
cyclic molecule-modified gold NPs show antibacterial activities
against Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria.34 These
gold NPs capped with N-heterocyclic molecules affect the
function of bacterial membranes and cause a massive leakage of
cell contents. We also use amino acids and sugars to
functionalize gold NPs for antibacterial studies. We discovered
that tryptophan (W)-capped gold NPs have bactericidal
Figure 3. Candidates of surface ligands that are used to modify antibacterial gold NPs. These ligands include non-antibiotics, pharmaceutical
intermediate molecules, and biomolecular.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10068

activities against Gram-negative bacteria and MDR strains.35
Likewise, the gold NPs kill bacteria by destroying their cell
membranes and increasing the membrane permeability.
Interestingly, when we modify gold NPs with aminosaccharide,
such as D-glucosamine (GluN), D-galactosamine (GalN), and
D-mannosamine (ManN), the gold NPs become effective
against Gram-positive bacteria.36 Aminosaccharide can affect
the synthesis of cell walls because of its similar composition to
bacterial peptidoglycan. Taking advantage of the multivalent
and synergistic effect of gold NPs, gold NPs modified with
aminosaccharide can interfere with the synthesis of bacterial
cell walls and thus exert antibacterial efficacy.
We have applied gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) for anti-
bacterial studies. AuNCs compose ten to several hundred gold
atoms and are smaller than 2 nm in size.37,38 We show that
positively charged quaternary ammonium (QA)-modified
AuNCs (QA-AuNCs) are as active as vancomycin in treating
bacteremia caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA) infection both in vitro and in vivo.39,40
Gold-Based Alloying Nanomaterials. Gold-based alloys
produced by mixing metallic elements with gold in reductive
reactions have the potential to treat bacterial infections. The
principle of synergistic effects can optimize the antibacterial
properties of alloys. The diversities in compositions and
structures of gold-based alloying NPs have to endow
themselves with different properties for bioapplications.
Particularly, gold-based metal NPs demonstrate excellent
antibacterial properties.41
We have discovered that AuPt bimetallic NPs can kill
bacteria, while none of the single components has antibacterial
activity.42 The AuPt bimetallic NPs are synthesized by
coreducing the chloroauric acid and potassium tetrachlor-
oplatinate (Figure 4A). The antibacterial properties of AuPt
bimetallic NPs vary by metal composition. When the Pt
content is 20%, the bimetallic NPs (Au80Pt20) have the optimal
antibacterial activity against Gram-negative bacteria and MDR
bacteria. The MICs against E. coli, P. a, K. p, and MDR E. coli
are 5 μg/mL, the MIC against Salmonella choleraesius is 9 μg/
mL. The antibacterial mechanism study shows that AuPt
bimetallic NPs kill bacteria by destroying bacterial cell
membranes and increasing intracellular ATP levels. This
process does not involve ROS generation nor the antibacterial
effect by releasing Au or Pt ions. In addition to AuPtNPs, we
also find that AuRh and AuRuNPs are effective bimetallic
nanoantibiotics against MDR Gram-negative bacteria (Figure
4B).43
Using antibacterial components as the building blocks is a
straightforward strategy to prepare gold-based antibacterial
nanocomposites. AgNPs have been well-known as antimicro-
bial nanomaterials, but the high toxicity and instability of
AgNPs limit their applications. Researchers have discovered
that AuAg bimetallic nanomaterials have higher antibacterial
efficacy but lower toxicity than AgNPs alone.44 Au@Ag core−
shell NPs exhibit antibacterial activities against both Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacteria at low Ag concentrations.
Due to the toxicity of silver nanomaterials can be alleviated by
reducing the dosage of silver ions,45 the Au@Ag core−shell
NPs cause ignorable cytotoxicity at the working dosage.
Similarly, we have customized the trimetallic nanostructure
(Au@PtAgNRs) to reduce the toxicity of silver nanomaterials
and improve their antibacterial activity (Figure 4C).46 The
Au@PtAgNRs are synthesized by epitaxial growth of AgPt
alloy nanodots on gold nanorods. When the Ag content is 80%,
the Au@PtAgNRs have the best antibacterial effect against E.
coli and S. aureus, with MICs of 8 and 32 μg/mL, respectively.
Moreover, the bactericidal effect of Au@PtAgNRs can be
dramatically improved under near-infrared (NIR) irradiation.
Successively, various of AuAg bimetallic nanomaterials have
been prepared to fight bacteria, such as AuAg nanorods
(NRs),47 gold-coated silver nanoplates,48 and gold@silver gold
alloy nanoflowers.49 In terms of the AuAg alloy NCs, the
antibacterial properties of these NCs have been reported to
decrease with the increase of the degree of alloying (Figure
4D).50 In this work, the synthesized full-spectrum component
NCs kill bacteria by producing ROS. Because the AuAg alloy
NCs are stable and do not produce ROS, their antibacterial
activity is lower than AuNCs or AgNCs alone. The
antibacterial activities of AuAg alloy NCs behave in a U-
shape trend with the increase of silver components. Alloying
gives the materials different physical and chemical properties
and provides antibacterial gold nanocomposites. In addition to
Ag, many nonmetallic materials are also selected to design
antibacterial gold nanomaterials, for example, SiO2,51,52
polymers,53,54 and chitosan,55 and so forth.
In this section, we have introduced ligand-modified gold
NPs and gold-based nanocomposites as potential antibiotics
(Table 1). These works remind us how to design antibacterial
gold nanomaterials. For small-molecules, we can choose from
the following choices: (1) non-antibiotic small molecules
containing similar functional groups (such as nitrogen
heterocycles and amino-substituted mercaptopyrimidines);
(2) clinically used drugs with non-antibiotic effects (such as
blood sugar-regulating drugs and detoxification drugs); (3)
biomolecular (for example peptidoglycan and amino acids).
Moreover, we can design diverse gold nanocomposites with
antibacterial activity by combining gold and other components.
Figure 4. Gold nanocomposites for nanoantibiotics. (A) AuPtNPs
kill bacteria by rupturing the bacterial membrane and enhancing
the ATP levels. Reprinted with permission from ref 42. Copyright
2014 Wiley-VCH. (B) AuRhNPs heal wounds infected with MDR
bacteria. Reprinted with permission from ref 43. Copyright 2020
Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Synthesis scheme of antibacterial
Au@PtAgNR. Reprinted and modified with permission from ref
46. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (D) Antibacterial activities of
full-spectrum AuAgNCs rely on their composition properties.
Reprinted and modified from ref 50. Copyright 2020 American
Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10069

Table 1. Antibacterial Activities of Gold Nanomaterials Indicated with MIC (Minimum Inhibitory Concentration)a
nanomaterials
size (nm)
bacteria
antibacterial activities (MIC)
ref
Antibiotic-Modified Gold Nanomaterials
Au@VanNPs
4−5
G−and G+
E. coli: 8 μg/mL; vancomycin-resistant Enterococci (VRE): 0.5−2 μg/mL
20
Au-VanNPs
∼8.4
G−and G+
(MIC50) E. coli: 8 μg/mL; P. a: 8 μg/mL; A. b: 8 μg/mL; S. aureus: 8 μg/mL; MRSA: 8 μg/mL; VRE: 16−32 μg/mL
29
Au_AONPs
∼20
G−and G+
E. coli: 11.64 mm; B. subtilis: 12.04 mmb
56
Au-KanNPs
∼20
G−and G+
P. a: 3.3 μg/mL; Y. pestis: 1.7 μg/mL; S. bovis: 9.8 μg/mL S. epidermidis: 6.3 μg/mL, E. aerogenes: 5.6 μg/mL
22
Au@AmoxiNPs
∼79
G+
MRSA: 0.15 μg/mL; MSSA: 1.5 μg/mL
23
Au@PCo-PeniNPs
∼6
G−and G+
E. coli: 4.5 μg/mL; K. p: 5.4 μg/mL; P. vulgaris: 4.9 μg/mL; S. aureus: 2.6 μg/mL
24
Au-AmpNPs
∼50
G−and G+
E. coli: 15.6 μg/mL; S. aureus: 7.8 μg/mL; B. subtilis: 7.8 μg/mL
27
Non-antibiotic-Modified Gold Nanomaterials
Au_DAPTNPs
∼3.2
G−
E. coli: 4 μg/mL; P. a: 16 μg/mL; K. p: 2 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 4 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 16 μg/mL; MDR K. p: 4 μg/mL; MDR A. b: 2 μg/mL
30
Au_DAPT/DMBNPs
∼2.5
G−and G+
E. coli: 1 μg/mL; P. a: 8 μg/mL; K. p: 2 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 2 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 4 μg/mL; MDR K. p: 4 μg/mL; MDR A. b: 1 μg/mL;
S. aureus: 8 μg/mL; S. e: 16 μg/mL; MRSA: 16 μg/mL; MDR E. f: 16 μg/mL
30
Au_DAPT_BSANPs
∼4.1
G−and G+
E. coli: 1 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 1 μg/mL; S. aureus: 16 μg/mL; MRSA: 16 μg/mL
31
Au_MINPs
∼3
G−and G+
P. a: 64 μg/mL; K. p: 64 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 64 μg/mL; S. aureus: 16 μg/mL; MDR S. a: 16 μg/mL
34
Au_ATTNPs
∼2
G−and G+
P. a: 8 μg/mL; K. p: 8 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 8 μg/mL; S. aureus: 32 μg/mL; MDR S. a: 32 μg/mL
34
Au_AMPNPs
∼3
G−and G+
P. a: 16 μg/mL; K. p: 2 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 16 μg/mL; S. aureus: 8 μg/mL; MDR S. a: 8 μg/mL
34
Au_APANPs
∼3
G−
E. coli: 2.5 μg/mL; P. a: 5 μg/mL; K. p: 2.5 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 5 μg/mL; MDR K. p: 5 μg/mL
57
Au_ABA/MBANPs
∼4
G−and G+
E. coli: 3 μg/mL; P. a: 3 μg/mL; K. p: 6 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 6 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 6 μg/mL;
MDR K. p: 2 μg/mL; S. aureus: 6 μg/mL; S. epidermidis: 4 μg/mL; E. faecium: 4 μg/mL; MDR S. a: 6 μg/mL; MDR S. e: 13 μg/mL; MDR E. f: 12 μg/mL
58
Au_APNPs
∼5.3
G−and G+
E. coli: 7.8 μg/mL; P. a: 5.2 μg/mL; A. b: 1.3 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 10.5 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 5.2 μg/mL; MDR A. b: 1.3 μg/mL;
S. aureus: 2.6 μg/mL; S. epidermidis: 10.5 μg/mL; E. faecium: 10.5 μg/mL; MRSA: 10.5 μg/mL; MDR S. e: 13.1 μg/mL; MDR E. f: 5.2 μg/mL
59
Au_GluNNPs
∼4
G+
S. aureus: 4 μg/mL; S. epidermidis: 4 μg/mL; L. monocytogenes: 8 μg/mL; B. subtilis: 4 μg/mL, E. faecium: 8 μg/mL, MRSA: 4 μg/mL;
MDR S. epidermidis: 4 μg/mL
36
Au_GalNNPs
∼4
G+
S. aureus: 4 μg/mL; S. epidermidis: 8 μg/mL; L. monocytogenes: 16 μg/mL; B. subtilis: 8 μg/mL; E. faecium: 8 μg/mL; MRSA: 4 μg/mL; MDR S. e: 8 μg/mL
36
Au_ManNNPs
∼4
G+
S. aureus: 8 μg/mL; S. epidermidis: 8 μg/mL; L. monocytogenes: 16 μg/mL; B. subtilis: 8 μg/mL; E. faecium: 16 μg/mL; MRSA: 8 μg/mL; MDR S. e: 8 μg/
mL
36
Au_W (5-AI)NPs
∼6
G−
E. coli: 4 μg/mL; P. a: 4 μg/mL; K. p: 2 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 2 μg/mL; PR E. coli: 2 μg/mL; MDR K. p: 4 μg/mL; PR K. p: 4 μg/mL; MDR A. b: 4 μg/mL
35
Au_cationicNPs
∼2
G−and G+
MDR E. coli: 16 nM; MDR P. a: 16 nM; MDR S. aureus: 64 nM; MRSA: 32 nM
39
Au_SHNPs (zwitterionic)
∼6
G−and G+
P. a: 50 nM; A. azurea: 100 nM
60
Au25MHA18NCs
<2
G−and G+
(IC50) E. coli: 3.3 μM; P. a: 3.0 μM; S. aureus: 2.5 μM; S. epidermidis: 2.8 μM; B. subtilis: 2.7 μM
61
Au-Prot/MTUNCs
∼1.5
G−and G+
E. coli: 5.6 μM; S. aureus: 11 μM
62
Au_MUTABNCs
<2
G−and G+
E. coli: 4 μg/mL; P. a: 0.5 μg/mL; B. subtilis: 3 μg/mL; S. pneumoniae: 4 μg/mL; E. faecium: 0.5 μg/mL; VRE: 1 μg/mL
63
Au_QANCs
<2
G+
S. aureus: 2.5 μg/mL; MRSA: 5 μg/mL
40
Au_DAPTNCs
∼1.9
G−and G+
E. coli: 5 μg/mL; P. a: 2.5 μg/mL; K. p: 2.5 μg/mL; A. b: 2.5 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 5 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 2.5 μg/mL; MDR K. p: 3 μg/mL;
MDR A. b: 2.5 μg/mL; S. aureus: 2.5 μg/mL; S. epidermidis: 5 μg/mL; S. pneumoniae: 5 μg/mL; E. faecium: 2.5 μg/mL; MDR S. a: 5 μg/mL;
MDR S. e: 5 μg/mL; MDR S. p: 5 μg/mL; MDR S. hemolyticus: 5 μg/mL
32
Au_ABANCs
∼2
G−
E. coli: 8.75 μg/mL; P. a: 8.75 μg/mL; K. p: 8.75 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 8.75 μg/mL; MDR P. a: 4.38 μg/mL; MDR K. p: 8.75 μg/mL
64
Gold-Based Alloying Nanomaterials
Au@AgNPs
∼30
G−and G+
E. coli: 1.56 μg/mL; P. a: 1.88 μg/mL; E. faecalis: 2.50 μg/mL; Pediococcus acidilactici: 2.81 μg/mL
45
Au@AgNPs
5
G−and G+
E. coli: 10 μg/mL; S. aureus: 15 μg/mL
65
Au/AgNRs
L: 12−14
G−and G+
E. coli: 8 μM; MRSA: 32 μM (Ag+)
47
W: 50−55
AuPd nanocomposite
∼8
G−and G+
E. coli: 25 μg/mL; E. coli: 25 mm; Staphylococcus: 22 mm; Streptococcus: 21 mm; Klebsiella: 21 mmb
66
AuPtNPs
∼2.2
G−
E. coli: 5 μg/mL; P. a: 5 μg/mL; K. p: 5 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 5 μg/mL; S. choleraesius: 9 μg/mL
42
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10070

Regulation of Antibacterial Properties of Gold Nano-
materials. Antibacterial nanomaterials can be divided into
broad-spectrum and narrow-spectrum nano-antibiotics. Broad-
spectrum antibiotics are mainly used to treat unknown
pathogenic bacteria, but excessive use of these antibiotics will
pressure bacteria to acquire broad-spectrum resistance. Once
the pathogenic bacteria are identified, narrow-spectrum
antibiotics are the preferable choice for specific sterilization,
avoiding broad-spectrum drug resistance to a large extent.
Researchers attempt to uncover the principles that govern
relationships between nanostructures and antibacterial efficacy
based on the present finding of antibacterial nanomaterials.
The goal is to use these structure−activity relationships (SAR)
to predict and tune the antibacterial spectrum of potential
nano-antibiotics. The antibacterial properties of gold nanoma-
terials are dependent on their surface properties and core
structures (Figure 5). In the following section, we will
introduce the regulation of the antibacterial properties of
gold nanomaterials, particularly from the perspective of
adjusting the antibacterial spectrum.
Ligands. Surface ligands have a significant influence on the
physicochemical properties and biomedical activity of nano-
materials.75,76 The density, type, and combination of surface
ligands of gold nanomaterials determine the antibacterial
efficacy and antibacterial spectrum to a large extent.
The density of surface ligands significantly influences the
antibacterial properties of gold NPs. For instance, the MI-
AuNPs can broadly inhibit Gram-negative bacteria (K. p, P. a,
and MDR P. a) and Gram-positive bacteria (S. aureus and
MDR S. a).34 We also confirm that the antibacterial activities
of gold NPs are related to the molar ratio of surface ligands to
Au. The gold NPs with a higher MI/Au ratio of 10:1 have
better antibacterial activities than 1:1. Recently, we discovered
that the antibacterial spectrum of mixed-ligand gold NPs could
be tunable by adjusting the density of the surface ligands
(Figure 6).58,77 We adjusted the proportion of mercaptophe-
nylboronic acid (MBA)/ aminophenylboronic acid (ABA) on
gold NPs based on the different affinity of Au−S and Au−N
bonds. Through this strategy, we tune the antimicrobial
spectrum of the dual ligand-modified gold NPs. MBA-modified
gold NPs have narrow-spectrum antibacterial activity against
Gram-positive bacteria, and ABA-modified gold NPs are only
antimicrobial against Gram-negative bacteria. When ABA and
MBA are coanchored onto the gold NPs (A/M-AuNPs), the
A/M-AuNPs become antimicrobial against Gram-negative and
Gram-positive bacteria. Mechanism studies show that the
Table 1. continued
nanomaterials
size (nm)
bacteria
antibacterial activities (MIC)
ref
Gold-Based Alloying Nanomaterials
AuRhNPs
∼5
G−
E. coli: 7 μg/mL; K. p: 14 μg/mL; P. a: 14 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 7 μg/mL; MDR K. p: 14 μg/mL;
PR E. coli: 14 μg/mL; PR K. p: 28 μg/mL; PR P. a: 14 μg/mL
43
AuRuNPs
∼5
G−
E. coli: 20 μg/mL; K. p: 40 μg/mL, P. a: 20 μg/mL; MDR E. coli: 20 μg/mL; MDR K. p: 80 μg/mL; PR E. coli: 80 μg/mL; PR K. p: 20 μg/mL; PR P. a: 20
μg/mL
43
Ti−Au nanocomposites
∼200−500
G+
S. aureus: 89.6%c
67
SnO2−AuNPs
33
G−and G+
E. coli: 17.5 mm; B. subtilis: 30 mmb
68
Fe3O4−AuNCs
20
G−
E. coli: 10 mm; P. a: 12 mmb
69
Fe3O4−Au@AgNPs
∼150
G−and G+
E. coli: 20 μg/mL; S. aureus: 50 μg/mL
70
Au/Pt/AgNPs
110
G−and G+
E. coli: 15.625 μg/mL; K. p: 15.625 μg/mL; Salmonella typhi: 15.625 μg/mL; S. aureus: 31.25 μg/mL; E. faecalis: 15.625 μg/mL
71
Ag−Au−PdNPs
∼11.6
G−
E. coli: 0.96 mmb
72
Au@PtAgNRs
L: ∼69.0
G−and G+
E. coli: 8 μg/mL; S. aureus: 32 μg/mL
46
W: ∼30.7
Au1/BiOI nanocomposites
∼40
G−and G+
E. coli, K. p, S. enteritidis, S. aureus, B. subtilis, and MRSA: 0.1−0.2 μg/mL
73
AuAgCu2ONSs
190
G−and G+
ESBL E. coli: 26.4 μg/mL; MRSA: 26.4 μg/mL
74
aNote: G−: Gram-negative bacteria, G+: Gram-positive bacteria. bUnit: Diameter of the zone of inhibition. cUnit: Antibacterial rate.
Figure 5. Factors affecting the antibacterial properties of gold
nanomaterials.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10071

Gram-selective antibacterial ability of A/M-AuNPs is derived
from the distinct binding abilities of ABA-AuNPs or MBA-
AuNPs to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and lipoteichoic acid
(LTA). ABA-AuNPs bind explicitly to LPS on Gram-negative
bacteria, and MBA-AuNPs bind to LTA on Gram-positive
bacteria. What molecular mechanisms dictate such specificity
in molecular binding is currently poorly understood and might
be contribution to tailor gold nanomaterials to treat the
personalized precision treatment of bacteria. Further in vivo
experiments confirm that the A/M-AuNPs are far more
effective than ampicillin in treating acute abdominal infections
caused by Gram-negative (E. coli and MDR E. coli) or Gram-
positive bacteria (S. aureus and MDR S. aureus) at the dose of
7.2 mg/kg, far below the median lethal dose (920 mg/kg).
The discovery of narrow-spectrum antibiotics is of great
significance because using these antibiotics can avoid broad-
spectrum drug resistance to a certain extent. Gram-selective
antibacterial gold nanomaterials are mainly based on the
specificities in recognizing cell wall structures and components
between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. We
anchor the aminosaccharide molecules to gold NPs to enable
the NPs to kill Gram-positive bacteria selectively.36 In vivo
experiments confirm that these gold NPs have excellent effects
on treating abdominal infection in mice without causing any
harm.78
Charge. The surface charge affects the antibacterial
properties of gold nanomaterials. Generally, a positively
charged surface is more conducive to intimate interaction
with the negatively charged bacterial cell wall than neutral- or
negatively charged surfaces, resulting in a higher overall
antibacterial effect.79,80 As a result, positively charged gold
nanomaterials and zwitterionic materials are widely used for
antibacterial applications.39,60 Researchers also report that the
negatively charged gold NCs show highly bactericidal activities
(Figure 7A).75 Gold NCs (Au25SR18NCs) with the same
number of gold atoms are synthesized with different types and
proportions of thiolates. By comparing the antibacterial
properties of these Au25SR18NCs, researchers find that
carboxyl groups coated Au25SR18NCs have a higher negative
charge, can generate more ROS, and endow themselves with
better antibacterial properties. Furthermore, this work shows
that the surface charge of gold NCs affects their ability to
generate ROS. Specifically, the positively charged groups on
the surface of the gold NCs consume the generated ROS by
quenching singlet oxygen, while the surface negatively charged
groups preserve the generated ROS. As a result, the more
negative charges on the surface of the gold NCs, the more
ROS are stored, and a higher level of the total ROS.
Adjusting the surface charge of gold nanomaterials can
prepare customized gold nanomaterials with different anti-
bacterial properties. For example, the Gram-selective anti-
bacterial effects can be realized by regulating the molar ratio of
charged ligands on the surface of gold NPs (Figure 7B).81 By
tuning
the
proportion
of
N,N,N-trimethyl(11-
mercaptoundecyl)ammonium chloride (TMA, positively
charged ligand) and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA,
negatively charged ligand) on the surface of gold NPs, the
mixed-charge gold NPs (TMA/MUA = 80:20) show
antibacterial activities against Gram-negative bacteria. In
contrast, the gold NPs (TMA/MUA = 48:52) become active
on Gram-positive bacteria. Moreover, researchers also use pH-
responsive zwitterionic monolayers to decorate gold nanoma-
terials and modulate the surface charge for targeting bacteria.
After coating a monolayer composed of (10-mercaptodecyl)-
trimethylammonium bromide and 11-mercaptoundecanoic
acid, the surface charge of gold NPs can transform from
negative to positive under acidic conditions. In MRSA biofilms
(pH is about 5.5), the AuNPs exhibit a quick and strong
adhesion to the surface of negatively charged bacteria. The
accumulation of AuNPs in the MRSA biofilm enhances the
photothermal ablation of the MRSA biofilm under NIR
irradiation.82
In short, the antibacterial efficacy of gold nanomaterials can
be enhanced by engineering the surface charge toward their
abilities to interact with or destroy bacterial membrane more
intensely. Such strategies include customizing positively
charged materials and adjusting the charge on the surface of
gold nanomaterials. Moreover, a recent study shows that the
spatial distribution of charged groups on the surface of NPs
affects their antibacterial activities. Diamond NPs covalently
Figure 6. Surface ligands regulate the antibacterial properties of
gold nanomaterials. The density of the ligands on the surface of
the gold NPs (A/M-AuNPs) affects the antibacterial properties.
Reprinted from ref 58. Copyright 2020 American Chemical
Society.
Figure 7. Surface charges affect the antibacterial properties of gold
nanomaterials. (A) Gold NPs with more surface charges can
produce ROS to destroy the bacterial membrane.75 Reprinted and
modified from ref 75. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
(B) Adjustment of positive and negative charges on the surface of
gold NPs can regulate their Gram selectivity. Reprinted and
modified with permission from ref 81. Copyright 2016 Wiley-
VCH.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10072

linked to cationic polymers have greater damage to bacterial
membranes, and higher toxicity to bacteria than that of the
NPs functionalized with short cationic ligands.83 This work
points out that the length and configuration of the surface
ligands of NPs which have similar zeta-potential values can
cause significant differences in their biological activities. Thus,
using the single parameter of zeta-potential to analyze
relationships between the antibacterial activities of nanoma-
terials and the surface charge is not comprehensive, and in-
depth characterization of the physiochemical environments of
ligands is also needed to reveal their links with biological
activities.
Size. The size of gold NPs also affects their antimicrobial
activities. Recently, we show that the antibacterial properties of
DAPT-modified gold NPs can be enhanced by decreasing their
sizes (Figure 8A).32 Specifically, gold NPs with a diameter of
14 nm were not antimicrobial (IDGNPs). Gold NPs with
diameters of 3−4 nm have a narrow-spectrum antibacterial
activity on Gram-negative bacteria (mDGNPs). Gold NPs
smaller than 2 nm in diameter have broad-spectrum
antibacterial activity against Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria (uDGNPs). Mechanism studies show that 3−4 nm
gold NPs can exert the antibacterial effect by changing the
ATP levels, membrane permeability, and membrane potential
of E. coli, while no ROS is generated in bacteria. By contrast, 2
nm gold NPs can induce ROS production in bacteria. The
reason may be that the 2 nm gold NPs have a larger surface-to-
volume ratio and surface activity. The generation of active
ROS in the bacteria leads to the death of bacterial, which
enhances the antibacterial properties.
Similarly, 6-mercaptohexanoic acid-modified AuNCs smaller
than 2 nm in diameter possesses higher antibacterial capability
against Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria than the
gold NPs larger than 2 nm (Figure 8B).61 These studies show
that the ultrasmall AuNCs have outstanding antibacterial
properties to enhance the active ROS levels and disturb the
metabolism and proliferation of bacteria.62,84,85 Moreover,
AuNCs can be cleared from the body through the liver and
kidney.86 Thus, we think AuNCs are candidates as nano-
antibiotics for treating bacterial infections both in vitro and in
vivo.
However, another example shows that the antibacterial
properties of zwitterionic gold NPs can be enhanced with the
increase of particle sizes. In this study, researchers determined
that the MICs of 6 nm zwitterionic gold NPs (MIC is 50 nM
against P. a) are lower than that of 2 nm zwitterionic gold NPs
(MIC is 8000 nM against P. a). Mechanism studies reveal that
6 nm NPs have a larger specific surface area, which helps to
enhance their interaction with the bacterial membrane and
effectively destroys the bacterial membrane (Figure 8C).60
Altogether, these studies enlighten us to consider more
comprehensively the design of antimicrobial gold nanomateri-
als due to the potential synergistic effects of size and surface
charge toward the antibacterial efficacy of the gold NPs.
Shape. The shape is an important factor affecting the
antimicrobial properties of gold nanomaterials. For example,
gold NPs of the same size (∼100 nm) have a stronger
bactericidal effect than gold NSTs because the higher
interaction affinity of the spherical NPs can induce greater
stretch and rupture of the bacterial membrane.87 Gold
nanomaterials are excellent photothermal therapy (PTT)
Figure 8. Adjusting antibacterial properties of gold nanomaterials by regulating their size. (A) Left: Reducing the size of gold NPs can
enhance their antibacterial properties. Right: Antibacterial activities of different size gold NPs indicated with MICs. IDGNPs, mDGNPs, and
uDGNPs represent Au_DAPT NPs with the size of ∼14, ∼3.5, and ∼1.9 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref 32. Copyright
2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. (B) Gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) produce more ROS to kill bacteria. Reprinted from ref 61. Copyright 2017
American Chemical Society. (C) Gold NPs with 6 nm have higher antibacterial efficacy than 2 nm. Reprinted from ref 60. Copyright 2016
American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10073

agents due to their strong surface plasma resonance and high
photothermal conversion performance.88 Generally, gold
nanomaterials with anisotropic plasmonic nanostructure have
higher surface plasma resonance than isotropic counterparts.89
Inspired by this, researchers have produced gold nanomaterials
with different shapes such as gold nanospheres (AuNSs),90
gold nanobipyramids (AuNBPs),88,91 gold nanorods
(AuNRs),92 gold nanostars (AuNSTs),93,94 and gold nano-
flowers (AuNFs),49 to achieve antibacterial activities with the
help of laser irradiation. Recently, chiral glutamic acid-modified
AuNBPs are reported to be nano-antibiotics that can treat
bacterial infection with a combination of chemotherapy,
physical therapy, and PPT. The structure of the wings of this
two-pointed bionic cicada can pierce the bacterial walls to kill
bacteria (Figure 9A).88 In addition, a study shows that
AuNBPs with (111) plane have stronger antibacterial efficacy
than AuNRs with (200) plane due to the higher photothermal
properties of AuNBPs than AuNRs.91 In another work,
researchers use vancomycin-modified gold nanostars (NSs)
to kill MRSA selectively (Figure 9B).93 The gold NSs target
Gram-positive bacteria by binding to the D-Ala-D-Ala of the cell
wall. Subsequently, the gold NSs produce hyperthermia under
near-infrared radiation, which eventually causes the death of
bacteria. In vivo, the gold NSs have shown an ability to heal
MRSA-infected wounds. Gold nanorods (AuNRs) also have
high photothermal properties.95 For example, the gold NRs
modified with the sulfhydryl compound can selectively
recognize E. coli and act as bactericidal agents through
photothermal effects (Figure 9C).96 Researchers have used
glycomimetics-modified AuNRs to eliminate aminoglycoside-
resistant P. a and cure lung infections caused by P. a under
near-infrared (NIR) radiation.97 Moreover, researchers com-
pare the antibacterial activities of AuNSs, AuNSTs, and AuNFs
on S. aureus and human dermal fibroblasts, respectively (Figure
9D).90 AuNFs have significant antibacterial properties because
the large surface area of AuNFs allows them to associate with
bacteria more easily. In short, these studies indicate that
differences in shape endow gold nanomaterials with diverse
photothermal effects to kill bacteria, and gold nanomaterials
with sharp points in shape can puncture bacteria through
physical interaction.
This section introduces the key parameters (ligand, charge,
size, and shape) and their influences on the antibacterial
properties of antibacterial gold nanomaterials. These funda-
mental works provide theoretical supports for gold nanoma-
terials to become clinically useful antibiotics. However, gold
nanomaterials still face many challenges toward clinically used
antibiotics, such as uncleared antibacterial mechanisms of
action, inadequate evaluation of long-term biosafety, in vivo
metabolism, and so forth. Particularly, exploring the structure−
activity relationship of antibacterial gold NPs is of guiding
significance for designing and discovering nano-antibiotics.
However, as we discussed above, the antibacterial activities of
gold NPs are affected by multiple factors. The variability of
parameters such as concentration, size, physical and chemical
properties used in the different studies hardly yield a consistent
conclusion. From the perspective of antibacterial mechanisms,
gold nanomaterials can exert antibacterial effects by increasing
Figure 9. Different shapes of gold nanomaterials affect their antibacterial activities. (A) Diagram of preparation and application of in vivo
sterilization of gold nanobipyramids. Reprinted with permission from ref 88. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (B) Schematic illustration of
fabrication of gold nanostars and evaluation of killing bacteria in vivo. Reprinted and modified from ref 93. Copyright 2019 American
Chemical Society. (C) Detection and antibacterial properties of gold nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref 96. Copyright 2021
Elsevier (D) Comparison of antibacterial activity of AuNSs, AuNSTs, and AuNFs. Reprinted with permission from ref 90. Copyright
International Journal of Nanomedicine 2017, 12, 2457−2468. Originally published by and used with permission from Dove Medical Press
Ltd.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10074

the efficacy of antibiotics, destroying bacterial membranes,
damaging DNA, generating ROS and overloaded heat, and so
forth (Table 2).98,99 However, the fundamental mechanism of
action of these nano-antibiotics at the molecular level remains
unclear. Based on current studies, our choices for small
molecules are still limited to their biological activities, and the
laws at the molecular level need to be further explored.
Recently, researchers have proposed a strategy to design or
modify antibiotics.100 Briefly, by studying the accumulation of
more than 180 drugs in E. coli, the data show that charge,
rigidity, and molecular shape of compounds affect their
accumulative ability in the bacteria, and discover that amines,
amphiphilic and rigid molecules with a less spherical structure
are more likely to remain in E. coli. They use this law to
transform the natural product, deoxynibomycin, which
originally only acts on Gram-positive bacteria, into a new
compound that remains the antibacterial activity of Gram-
positive bacteria and has antibacterial activity against Gram-
negative bacteria and MDR Gram-negative bacteria. Similarly,
a well-defined SAR between physiochemical properties and the
antimicrobial activities of gold NPs would greatly promote the
design of antibacterial gold nanomaterials.
Bacterial Resistance of Gold Nanomaterials. Com-
pared to traditional antibiotics, nano-antibacterial materials do
not cause drug resistance easily. Previous studies have shown
that antibacterial gold NPs induce bacterial resistance much
slower than traditional antibiotics (Table 3).101 For example,
cation-modified gold NPs do not cause E. coli to develop
resistance within 20 generations.39 The MICs of Au_DAPT to
E. coli only increase 1.3 times after 51 generations of passage.8
No resistance of QA-AuNCs against S. aureus is observed when
QA-AuNCs are used to incubate for 30 generations.40
Mercaptopyrimidine-capped AuNCs do not develop bacterial
resistance after 30 days of S. aureus induction.33 These results
demonstrate that the rate of inducing bacterial resistance by
the NPs is much prolonged compared to antibiotics. We
recently found that the MICs of Au_DAPT against E. coli
increase by 16 times after a long-term incubation of 183 days.
However, the antibacterial efficacy of Au_DAPT can be
regained by size modulation.102 Collectively, gold nanomateri-
als are candidates for treating bacterial infections and MDR
bacteria with advantages, including multimodal antimicrobial
mechanisms and decreased rate of occurrence of bacterial
resistance.
Biocompatibility and Biosafety of Gold Nanomateri-
als. The effects of nanomaterials on the environment and
human health have attracted more and more attention. High
biosafety is an essential requirement for drugs and
biomaterials. The biocompatibility of nanomaterials is closely
related to the entry of nanomaterials into the human body, the
crossing of physiological barriers, and the targeting of specific
sites. Table 4 summarizes recent in vivo and in vitro toxicity
assessments of antimicrobial gold nanomaterials. A growing
number of studies have shown that gold NPs can accumulate
in the liver, spleen, and lung post-in vivo administration.81
Particularly, the accumulation of gold NPs in immune cells can
lead to a series of local or systemic immune responses.
Nanomaterials will affect the immune system when entering
the organism as exogenous substances. The size, shape, and
surface modification of gold NPs will affect the functions of
different immune cells, including macrophages, lymphocytes,
and dendritic cells.103,104 As an example, polyethylene glycol-
modified gold nanospheres do not damage the immune
function of human B lymphocytes in vitro, while bare gold
nanospheres or gold NRs do.105 Presently, the immune effects
caused by antibacterial gold nanomaterials and how the
immune system works upon the treatment of gold nanoma-
terials are still unclear.
When NPs enter the biological environment, they will
adsorb proteins and form NP−protein complexes, namely
“protein corona”. Protein corona can significantly change the
physical and chemical properties of nanomaterials, affect their
targeting and endocytosis ability, and somehow determine the
biocompatibility and toxicity of nanomaterials.107,108 For
example, the formation of a protein corona usually impedes
the direct contact between the nanomaterial and the cell
membrane, thus inhibits the internalization of the nanoma-
terials. At present, a consensus is that the physical and
chemical properties of gold nanomaterials, such as size, shape,
and charge, can also affect protein corona formation.109
Nevertheless, how protein corona formation influences
biosafety and efficacy of antibacterial gold nanomaterials still
needs to be fully studied.
The body elimination of gold nanomaterials impacts their
safety in vivo crucially. Researchers have regulated the
physicochemical properties of size, charge, and surface ligands
to tune the body elimination abilities. Studies have shown that
gold NPs with 4−22 nm are degraded by cells by ROS which
Table 2. Physicochemical Properties and Antibacterial Mechanisms for the Typical Gold Nanomaterials
nanomaterials
physicochemical properties (ligands/charge/size/shape)
antibacterial mechanisma
ref
Au@PCo-Peni
cationic cobaltocenium homopolymer and penicillin-G
(G−and G+), enhance the efficacy of penicillin-G
24
AuNSs@Van
vancomycin, 104.4 ± 13.3 nm, stars
(G+), the antibacterial effect of antibiotics, PTT
93
Au25MHA18NCs
6-mercaptohexanoic acid, −37.4 ± 2.5 mV, <2 nm
(G−and G+), increase negative charge and ROS
61, 75
Au_DAPTNPs
4,6-diamino-2-pyrimidinethiol, +18.6 ± 7.3 mV, ∼3 nm
(G−), decrease bacterial membrane potential and ATP levels, inhibit
bacterial proteins synthesis, no ROS
8,9
Au_DAPTNCs
4,6-diamino-2-pyrimidinethiol, +23.4 mV, <2 nm
(G−and G+), ROS
32
AuNBPs
D/L-glutamic acid, −11.7 mV, 110 nm long and 35 nm
wide, bipyramids
(G+), physical actions (destroy the bacterial walls), PTT
88
aG−: Gram-negative bacteria, G+: Gram-positive bacteria.
Table 3. Bacterial Resistance of Gold Nanomaterials
nanomaterials
bacterial resistance
ref
cation-modified gold NPs
E. coli, 20 generations
39
Au_DAPTNPs
E. coli, MIC increase 1.3 times after 51
generations
8,102
E. coli, MIC increase by 16 times after
183 days.
QA-AuNCs
S. aureus, 30 generations
40
mercaptopyrimidine-
capped AuNCs
S. aureus, 30 days
33
MUTAB-AuNCs
P. aeruginosa, 30 days
63
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10075

generated by NADPH oxidase oxidation of gold NPs in
vitro.110 In vivo, gold NPs with the size of 1−3 nm have
comparable renal clearance capabilities. For subnanometer
gold NCs, the renal clearance rate decreases with the reduction
of atom number of gold.111 In terms of the surface charge, gold
NPs with the lower value of the negative surface charge are less
efficiently cleared through the kidneys.112 In terms of the
surface ligands, a study shows that PEG-gold NPs maintain
their dispersive properties in vivo and would be captured by
hepatocytes and eliminated via the hepatobiliary pathway,
Table 4. Toxicity Evaluation of Antibacterial Gold Nanomaterials In Vitro and In Vivo
nanomaterials
in vitro
in vivo
ref
AuNSs@Van
HeLa cells: the cell survival rate was 96% after coculture with 150 μg/mL
NPs for 12 h
mice treated with NPs of 80 mg/mL show no organ
damage or immune response
93
A/M_AuNPs
no data
LD50: 920 mg/kg
58
Au_MBANPs
HUVECs and HAF cells: the cells were treated with 60 μg/mL of NPs
without significant toxicity; at 80 μg/mL, NPs had no hemolysis
injection of 1200 μg/mL did not harm the organs of the
mice, nor did it cause an immune response
106
Au_GluNNPs
the hemolysis ratio is 0.59% when the concentration is 60 μg/mL
41.2 mg/kg dose is not harmful to mice, with no
immune response
78
QA-AuNCs
HUVEC and A735 cells: the NCs were not toxic to cells at 160 μg/mL; no
hemolysis occurred when NCs were 80 μg/mL
100 mg/kg dose is harmless to mice
40
Au25MHA18NCs
NCM460 and HMVEC: the dose of 0.5 mM did not cause cytotoxicity
no data
61
AuPtNPs
HUVEC: NPs with 80 μg/mL are not harmful to cells
no data
42
CS_AuNPs
A549 and HaCaT: when the concentration of NPs increases to 714 μM,
they are toxic to cells
no data
55
Figure 10. Antibacterial gold NPs capped with polymers and bacterial cellulose (BC) for wound dressings. (A) Left figure shows the
schematic illustration of the preparation of Au_APA fibers via co-electrospinning. The right figure shows the histological graphs and the
photographs of wounds at different time points. Reprinted and modified from ref 57. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (B)
Preparation of Au_IDNPs fibers mixed with PLGA and application of wound dressings. Reprinted from ref 35. Copyright 2018 American
Chemical Society. (C) Fabrication of BC/Au-DAPT nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref 119. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH
Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (D) Schematic illustration of intelligent wound dressings that can visually monitor the residual dose
of nanomedicine. Reprinted from ref 64. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10076

while CS-gold NPs and PEI-gold NPs cause intracellular
coalescence/aggregation and lead to their long-term accumu-
lation in vivo.113 Our recent work has found that the biosafety
and pharmacokinetics of cationic gold NCs can be improved
by modulating the chirality of their surface ligands.76 The
employment of D-form ligands onto the surface of cationic gold
NCs significantly enhance their biosafety and in vivo transport.
Moreover, the injection dose also affects the renal clearance
of gold nanomaterials in vivo.114 When injected different with
doses of gold NPs, the renal excretion amount of gold NPs
increases linearly with the increase of the injected dosage
within 2 h post-injection. When NPs are injected at the low
dosage of 15 mg/kg, the NPs rapidly penetrate the vascular
periphery. This causes a low renal clearance since few NPs can
reach the kidneys. However, when the injection dosage
increases to 1059 mg/kg, NPs become confined to the blood
vessels, and the extravasation of NPs from the blood vessels is
lowered. Thus, more NPs are transported directly to the
kidneys and excreted through the urine. These studies provide
ideas to minimize the toxicities of gold nanomaterials while
maintaining antimicrobial efficacy.
GOLD NANO-ANTIBIOTIC-BASED ANTIMICROBIAL
TREATMENTS
Microbial infections frequently occur during and after the
surgery. The raises challenges for operation associated
instruments toward antimicrobial activities to reduce the risk
of bacterial infection during the whole treatment process of
surgery. Plating antibacterial components (such as antibiotics,
silver NPs, and quaternary ammonium compounds) on the
surface of devices is the most straightforward strategy to endow
these biomedical instruments with antibacterial properties,
which has been used clinically to improve the life quality of
patients.115 In the following section, we will introduce the
biomedical applications of antimicrobial gold nanomaterials in
wound dressings and implantable medical devices.
Wound Dressings. Fibers. Loading gold nanomaterials
onto nanofibers is one of the most common and straightfor-
ward strategies to prepare gold nanomaterials based on
antibacterial wound dressings. Researchers usually produce
scaffolds of nanofibers by electrospinning technology, which
directly enables the preparation of continuous nanoscale fibers
from polymer solutions. These polymers include poly(vinyl
alcohol) (PVA), poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), polyacrylonitrile
(PAN), polyurethane (PU), polylactic acid (PLA), polycapro-
lactone (PCL), poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), and so
forth.116,117
We have doped antibacterial APA-modified AuNPs
(Au_APANPs) on PCL/gelatin nanofibers to prepare
Au_APA-based antibacterial wound dressings to treat wounds
infected with MDR bacteria (Figure 10A).57 SEM and TEM
images show that Au_APANPs are loaded on the scaffolds
successfully. In vivo experiments confirm that the Au_APA
electrospinning nanofibers promote the re-epithelialization and
healing rate of the infected wounds. Au_APA electrospinning
nanofibers are more effective in treating MDR bacterial wound
infection than the silver mat. The study shows that the gold
NPs-loaded electrospinning nanofibers could be used as
wound dressings to treat MDR bacterial infections. In another
study, we prepared antibacterial wound dressing by cospinning
antibacterial gold NPs modified with 5-aminoindole and
biodegradable PLGA (Figure 10B).35 The obtained nanofibers
can reduce inflammation of wounds and speed wound healing
rate in treating MDR E. coli infection. In situ synthesis of
antibacterial gold NPs is another strategy to prepare these NP-
containing wound dressings. Researchers synthesize gold NPs
in situ on silk fibers as scaffolds in which antibiotics
(gentamicin sulfate) are loaded to prepare a wound dressing.
The obtained wound dressings significantly reduce the dose of
antibiotics, and the therapeutic efficacy against S. aureus-
infected wounds is far better than that of commercial silver-
based wound dressings.118
Bacterial cellulose (BC) is widely used to prepare wound
dressings due to its high mechanical strength, permeability,
water absorption ability, and good biocompatibility. However,
BC alone has no antibacterial activities, and we try to load
Au_DAPTNPs onto BC to prepare nanocomposite fibers (BC-
Au-DAPT) for the antibacterial properties. The BC-Au-DAPT
fibers show antibacterial activities against superbugs, including
MDR E. coli and MDR P. a, with the advantages of BC
retained.119 In vivo, the fibers promote the proliferation of
wound fibroblasts and accelerate skin tissue repair (Figure
10C). In recent work, we load ABA-modified gold nanoclusters
with antibacterial activities and fluorescence properties onto
BC to prepare smart wound dressings and drug content
monitoring abilities (Figure 10D).64 In the treatment of
wounds with MDR P. a infections, the fluorescence intensity of
the smart dressing under UV light decreases with the release of
the drug, thus achieving the role of real-time monitoring of
drug residues.
Hydrogels. Hydrogels are soft materials with extensive
three-dimensional networks formed by chemically- or physi-
cally cross-link of hydrophilic polymers. Hydrogels have great
potential in biomedical applications, including biosensors, cell
culture, wound healing, tissue engineering, and so forth. We
have fabricated antibacterial Au_DAPTNPs doped agarose gel
to treat the infection of MDR bacteria after burn injury.32 The
prepared wound dressings have excellent antibacterial effects in
treating skin burn infection on the back of rats and speeding up
wound healing. In another study, researchers have prepared
hydrogels that contain PEG-AuNRs and cationic poly-
(allylamine hydrochloride)-AuNRs to exceed remarkable
wound healing properties in animal models (Figure 11A).120
Researchers also mix PVA/CS into an AuNRs graphitic
nanocapsule (AuNR@G) to obtain the hydrogel with high
and stable photothermal antibacterial properties for the PTT
treatment of infection E. coli and S. aureus (Figure 11B).121
Recent studies have attempted to use gold nanomaterial-
modified hydrogels to serve as wound dressings to treat wound
infections of diabetic patients, which are complicated to
heal.122 For example, researchers have prepared light-
activatable nanogels to treat chronic wounds and refractory
keratitis infected by drug-resistant bacteria in diabetic mice.
The nanogels compose AuAgCu2O nanocomposite and
sodium hyaluronate. Under near-infrared light excitation, the
nanogels release silver ions locally to destroy the bacterial cell
wall rapidly, generate ROS to destroy the bacterial intracellular
structure and damage the bacterial DNA. As a result, the
nanogels kill various super bacteria including MRSA and β-
lactamase E. coli effectively in vivo and promote wound healing
of diabetic mice with chronic refractory wounds and drug-
resistant bacteria-infected keratitis.74
In addition to fibers and hydrogels, many other wound
dressings have been reported. For example, gold NPs are
loaded onto biological glass materials to make ointments to
treat skin wounds and regenerate.123 Because none of the
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10077

wound dressings can be adapted to all wounds, wound
dressings adapted for different situations are still needed.
Incorporating antibacterial gold nanomaterials into different
scaffolds can be a straightforward strategy for preparing the on-
demand wound dressings.
Implantable Devices. Nosocomial infections caused by
drug-resistant bacteria remain challenging, particularly for
those medical equipment-related infections. Developing
antibacterial medical devices to decrease the possibility of
hospital infection is of great significance. Coating antibacterial
nanomaterials on the surface of materials is an effective way to
kill adherent bacteria, by inhibiting bacterial reproduction and
biofilm formation.124 In recent years, antibacterial gold
nanomaterials have been widely used to modify biological
materials to give them antibacterial properties.
We bind antibacterial Au_DAPTNPs to various oxygen
plasma-treated substrates by electrostatic adsorption to form
an antibacterial coating.125 These substrates include glasses,
injectors, 96 well plates, and catheters (Figure 12A). These
antibacterial coatings are highly effective in eliminating bacteria
and inhibiting the formation of bacterial biofilms. The coating
can be stored for one month while retaining its antibacterial
activity. Moreover, Au ions will not be released during storage
and sterilization, avoiding secondary pollution to the environ-
ment. These antimicrobial coatings are harmless to normal
cells and compatible with blood safety. In vivo, these materials
do not induce inflammatory reactions in mice, making them
implantable devices. Similarly, we have prepared an ortho-
dontic aligner with an antibacterial surface. The QA-GNCs-
coated orthodontic aligner can effectively inhibit the growth of
Streptococcus mutans in the oral cavity to protect teeth from
bacterial diseases (Figure 12B).126 The aligners inhibit biofilm
formation and can be used more than three times repeatedly
without loss of efficacy. We have also designed and synthesized
DNase-modified gold NCs as cleaning agents for the Invisalign
aligners to eliminate bacterial biofilms and kill bacteria through
enzymolysis, PTT, and photodynamic therapy (PDT).127
Moreover, the deposition of gold NPs and chitosan onto
NiTi orthopedic materials can enhance the antimicrobial
properties and corrosion resistance of the substrate.128 Gold
NPs synthesized in situ on the SF/nanoHA hydrogel can
endow the hydrogel with antibacterial activity and do not affect
the adhesion and growth of osteoblastic cells, which is
Figure 11. Gold nanomaterials hydrogels for the treatment of
bacterial infections. (A) AuNP-hydrogel for the removal of MRSA
biofilms. Reprinted from ref 82. Copyright 2017 American
Chemical Society. (B) Schematic diagram of antibacterial AuNR
hydrogel that kills bacteria under NIR irradiation. Reprinted with
permission from ref 121. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of
Chemistry.
Figure 12. Coating of gold NPs on different medical devices for the
treatments of bacterial infection. (A) Schematic diagram of coating
Au_DAPT on different substrates, and the evaluation of
antibacterial properties of the coated devices. Reprinted from ref
125. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (B) Coating
orthodontic aligners with QA-GNCs for the inhibition of biofilm
formation. Reprinted from ref 126. Copyright 2020 American
Chemical Society. (C) Anti-infection coating of PU-Au-PEG for
the treatment of infected hernia. Reprinted from ref 135.
Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10078

expected to be used in bone repair engineering.129 Attempts
have also been made to modify gold nanomaterials on fabrics
to give them antimicrobial activities. For example, AuNR-
deposited cotton and silk fabrics can not only resist E. coli and
S. aureus but also have UV blocking ability.130 Similarly,
depositing gold NPs onto the fabric-like biomedical textiles,131
silk,132 and cotton133,134 also gives the substrates antibacterial
and UV protection properties. Researchers modify gold NRs
with polyethylene glycol (PEG) and PU to form a coating
(PU-Au-PEG) with inherent antifouling and photothermal
sterilization properties (Figure 12C).135 PU-Au-PEG has
abilities of antibacterial adhesion and inhibition of biofilm
and exhibits high-efficiency photothermal sterilization perform-
ance under NIR irradiation (808 nm). This work has verified
the photothermal antibacterial properties in vivo through the
subcutaneous implantation of PU-Au-PEG and successful
treatment of the infected hernia model.
Animal Models of Diseases of Bacterial Infections.
Despite recent advances in gold nanomaterials, there are still
challenges toward their clinical translation. The development
of preclinical in vivo models to test the efficacy and safety of
gold nanomaterials will provide feasibility for their translations.
Table 5 summarizes the preclinical animal models with a
bacterial infection. The experimental animal models for
evaluating the antimicrobial abilities of gold nanomaterials
are established in mice, rats, rabbits, and pigs. The pig is a
suitable model animal because its skin, lungs, and heart are
anatomically like a human.136 Bacterial infections occur in all
body organs, and different types of bacteria can cause diverse
organ infections. For example, E. coli causes respiratory tract
infections, urinary tract infections, kidney infections, muscle
infections, and S. aureus causes meningitis, skin infections,
musculoskeletal infections, and prostate infections. According
to different infection models (mostly wound infection and
intraperitoneal infection), administration routes of drugs can
vary from each other and include intravenous injection, i.p.
injection, and oral administration.
Currently, the in vivo models used to assess the therapeutic
efficacy of gold nano-antibiotics still face obstacles, including
objectivities and biological diversities between models, high
cost, animal ethics, and so forth. Considering the in-depth
studies of the antibacterial gold nanomaterials in vivo are
extremely valuable to accelerate their translation, we appeal
that appropriate infection models should be selected based on
the clinically real cases to ensure that valuable preclinical data
are obtained.
FORWARD-LOOKING
Synergistic Antibacterial Strategy. Despite the severe
concerns of antibiotic resistance, antibiotics are still the
mainstay to treat bacterial infections. Combining multiple
antibiotics is an effective strategy to broaden the antibacterial
spectrum of antibiotics, enhance antibacterial efficacy, and fight
MDR infections.141 Combining antibiotics and metal nano-
materials can lower the working dosage of antibiotics and
nanomaterials to (MDR) bacteria, further decreasing their
toxicities. Combining silver NPs and antibiotics (rifampin,
vancomycin, levofloxacin, gentamicin, and polymyxin B) can
effectively fight against drug-resistant bacteria, including
MRSA and carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter bauman-
ni.142,143 Polymeric NPs are also used to combine with colistin
to increase the efficacy of colistin for the treatment of infection
by Gram-negative bacteria and the elimination of related
biofilm.144 Gold NPs have a synergistic antibacterial effect with
cefotaxime and ciprofloxacin on Salmonella.145 Gold NPs
disrupt cation homeostasis in cells while antibiotics stimulate
ROS accumulation, and the combination of gold NPs and
antibiotics leads death of bacteria synergistically. Generally, the
studies of combining gold NPs and antibiotics to resist MDR
bacteria are still limited. The combination of gold nanoma-
terials and antibiotics can provide a strategy to treat clinical
MDR bacteria. Meanwhile, we need to pay attention to the
possible adverse effects derived from the combination of drugs.
These concerns are mainly toxicity problems and impacts on
bacterial resistance evolution, which are often critical factors
restricting the combination of drugs.146
Antibacterial Immunity. The immune system is a
powerful weapon to protect human beings from diseases
including cancer, infectious diseases, inflammation, auto-
immune diseases, and so forth.147 Great progress has been
made in studying immunogenicity, immunomodulatory and
immunosuppressive properties, and immunotoxicity of nano-
materials.148 Gold nanomaterials have been used as antigen
carriers and adjuvants to produce antibodies in vivo against
viruses, bacteria, parasites, and tumors.104,149−151 In one study,
researchers coated gold NCs with bacterial outer membrane
vesicles to prepare a nanovaccine that can induce the rapid
activation and maturation of lymph nodes and dendritic cells,
Table 5. Animal Models of Bacterial Infection Treated with Gold Nanomaterials
animal model
bacteria (G−/G+)a
nanomaterials
administration route
ref
skin infections (subcutaneous abscesses)
MRSA (G+), MDR E. coli (G−)
Au_DAPT/BSANPs
subcutaneous injection
31
skin infection (subcutaneous abscesses)
MRSA (G+)
AuAgNRs
subcutaneous injection
47
skin infection (burn wound)
MDR S. a (G+), MDR E. coli (G−)
Au_DAPTNCs
apply
32
skin infection (full-thickness wound)
MDR E. coli and MDR P. a (G−)
Au_APANPs
apply
40
bacteremia
MRSA (G+)
Au_QANCs
intravenous injection
40
intraperitoneal infection
MRSA (G+)
Au_GluNPs
intraperitoneal injection
78
intraperitoneal infection
MDR E. coli (G−)
Au_ABANPs
oral
137
LPS-induced sepsis
E. coli (G−)
SAuNCs
intraperitoneal injection
138
intestinal infection
E. coli (G−)
Au_DAPTNPs
oral
139
intestinal infection
E. coli (G−)
AuAgNFs
oral
49
keratitis (mice)
MRSA (G+)
AuAgCu2ONSs
apply
74
keratitis (rabbit)
S. aureus (G+)
Au1/BiOI
intrastromal injection
73
lung infection
MDR P. a (G−)
AuNRs@pLAMA/pFEMA-50
nasal instillation
97
eyeball infection
S. aureus (G+)
CP@Au@DC_AC50
apply
140
aG−: Gram-negative bacteria, G+: Gram-positive bacteria.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10079

and produce a lasting and robust antibody response.152 The
gold NCs are modified with short-chain alkyl groups that can
inactivate endotoxin by compressing the packing density of
lipid A and inhibiting the recognition of LPS by the immune
system. The gold NCs that block the endotoxin activity of LPS
have provided a potential strategy for preventing LPS induced
sepsis.138 Nanotechnology has been well established to control
and prevent many diseases through immune modulation.
Compared with traditional methods, NPs platforms with
inherent toxin-neutralizing and immune-enhancing capabilities
have higher safety and more efficient toxin- or antigen-specific
elimination. Gold NPs can be used as antigen carriers and
immune adjuvants to prepare antibodies in vivo. On the one
hand, gold nanomaterials can load antigens such as peptides,
polysaccharides or toxoids to improve the loading rate and
effectiveness of vaccines. On the other hand, gold nanoma-
terials can be used as immune adjuvants to activate immune
cells and improve the effectiveness of vaccines by stimulating
antigen-presenting cells and providing controlled release of
antigens. Thus, gold nanomaterials are candidates for
immunotherapy of bacteria-related diseases.
Intestinal Flora. Intestinal flora is a large number of
microbes that populate in the human intestine and maintain
the symbiotic and balanced relationship within the human
body. Disorders of the intestinal flora will cause negative
impacts on human energy metabolism, immune regulation,
digestion, absorption, and so forth. These physiological
processes drive diseases, including diabetes, gastrointestinal
disease, kidney disease, cancer, and cardiovascular disease.153
Thus, regulating the balance of intestinal flora is essential to
human health. Our recent work finds that Au_DAPTNPs can
treat intestinal bacterial infections (Figure 13A).139 In vitro,
Au_DAPTNPs display a significant bactericidal effect on E. coli
under anaerobic conditions. In vivo experiments show that
Au_DAPTNPs are not toxic to the liver or kidney of mice after
oral administration for 28 days. Compared with levofloxacin (a
conventional antibiotic), Au_DAPTNPs are more effective in
curing bacterial infections without damaging the balance of
intestinal flora. Au_DAPTNPs are harmless to intestinal
epithelial cells and can increase the relative abundance of
typical probiotics and protect the diversity of intestinal flora
after a long-term administration. These results show that the
Au_DAPTNPs can kill E. coli while exhibiting no harm to
human cells, thus inhibiting the imbalance of microbial
communities. We also synthesize gold NPs in vivo to treat
bacterial infections (Figure 13B).137 We inject the precursor
chloroauric acid and the ligand (ABA) into mice by oral
perfusion and synthesize gold NPs in the stomach. These gold
NPs can be absorbed into the gastrointestinal tract and treat
abdominal infections caused by MDR E. coli.
Antibiotics do harm to commensal bacteria indiscriminately
when treating bacterial infections by disrupting the composi-
tion of the intestinal microbiota and leading to dysbiosis and
disease. The side effects of antibiotics on the intestinal flora
can be alleviated by using a narrow spectrum of antibiotics,
reducing the use of high doses of antibiotics, and taking oral
probiotic preparations. Recent studies show that using
antidotes that can antagonize antibiotic activity in combination
with antibiotics can selectively protect beneficial bacteria
without compromising antibiotic efficacy against pathogenic
bacteria.154 Thus, ensuring that gold nanomaterials are
antimicrobial while combining friendly properties for intestinal
probiotics is certainly challenging for the design and
application of antimicrobial gold nanomaterials. Some
potential solutions are listed: (1) Select narrow-spectrum
antimicrobial materials which have less impact on intestinal
flora to treat infections; (2) reduce the dose of drugs, possibly
by optimizing the physicochemical properties of antimicrobial
gold nanomaterials to improve their antimicrobial efficacy; (3)
combine antidote or probiotic agents for treatment.
Tumor-Associated Bacteria. Many studies have con-
firmed the existence of bacteria in tumors, and the bacteria
species vary among tumors.155,156 The internal relations
between bacteria and tumors are still unclear. Pieces of
evidence have shown that a significant proportion of bacteria
promote tumorigenesis; for example, E. coli can cause enteritis
with cancer potential, H. pylori is a major pathogen of gastric
cancer, and the imbalance of commensal bacteria in lung
tumors accelerates the growth of tumor cells.157,158 Moreover,
bacteria can inactivate gemcitabine (a clinically used anticancer
drug) and greatly affect its anticancer efficacy.159,160 Thus,
antibiotic treatments are effective strategies to suppress tumor
growth. In a mouse lung tumor model, treatment with
antibiotics (ampicillin, neomycin, metronidazole, and vanco-
mycin) cocktail 2 or 7 weeks after the tumor establishment can
shrink the tumor size by about 50%.158 In the treatment of
Figure 13. (A) Application of Au_DAPTNPs in treating intestinal infections. Reprinted from ref 139. Copyright 2019 American Chemical
Society. (B) Preparation of antimicrobial agents in vivo based on gold and ligand precursors. Reprinted from ref 137. Copyright 2021
American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10080

cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, the combination of antibiotics
(cephalosporin and metronidazole, amoxicillin, and clavula-
nate) can inhibit the growth of the staphylococci and cancer
cells.161 The resistance of anticancer drugs may be overcome
through the synergistic treatment of antibiotics and anticancer
drugs. In a mouse model of colon cancer, researchers
demonstrate the combination of gemcitabine and ciprofloxacin
can overcome the resistance of gemcitabine-induced by γ-
proteus.159 Subsequent research prepares acid-responsive and
tumor-targeting organosilica nanodots to wrap ciprofloxacin
and gemcitabine, which kill bacteria in tumors and reduce the
adverse reactions caused by antibiotic abuse.160 Although
antibiotics offer an approach to cancer treatment, the use of
antibiotics (especially broad-spectrum antibiotics) can cause
bacterial resistance, and the nonselective killing ability of
antibiotics would harm those bacteria that are beneficial for
people’s health. Thus, using antimicrobial agents that target the
bacteria in the tumor and do not produce bacterial resistance
will be an alternative strategy to treat bacteria-associated
tumors.
Inspired by the fact that gold nanomaterials demonstrate
excellent antibacterial properties and are less prone to bacterial
resistance,13 we envision using antibacterial gold NPs to
substitute antibiotics to kill the bacteria in the tumor and help
to inhibit the growth of the tumor with or without the
combination with anticancer drugs. Considering that gold
nanomaterials are alternatives to antibiotics and immune
adjuvants,151 and they have shown efficacy in treating tumors
that are not bacteria-associated, we infer that antimicrobial
gold nanomaterials may activate the local tumor-immune
system and kill intratumor bacteria for tumor therapy.
Meanwhile, challenges such as improving the pharmacokinetics
of gold nanomaterials should be addressed, and we think
potential solutions lie in optimizing the surface properties
(such as chirality) toward requisite biobehaviors.
Push Forward the Clinical Translation of Gold Nano-
antibiotics. There have many challenges to be resolved
toward the clinical translation of antimicrobial gold nanoma-
terials. According to the FDA requirements, pharmaceuticals
must be manufactured in strict compliance with the Good
Manufacturing Practices and potential risks about safety,
identification, strength, quality, and purity characteristics
must be rigorously evaluated.112 As we discussed, physico-
chemical parameters of gold nanomaterials determine their
biological functions, including antibacterial properties, tox-
icities, and metabolism behaviors. However, the heterogeneity
of gold nanomaterials increases their difficulties in quality
control and challenges their clinical translation. Thus, strict
control of the quality requirements in the large-scale
production of gold nanomaterials will provide a solid
foundation to meet the FDA requirements of therapeutics.
Microfluidic technology has the advantages of controlled and
adjustable process parameters and high throughput scale-up
production in the preparation of nanomaterials and has
successfully prepared reproducible NPs that can be used for
the treatment, diagnosis, and prevention of diseases.162,163
Studies have shown that NPs generated using microfluidic
devices have better controllable physical properties and
biomedical applications than bulk techniques (e.g., particle
size, particle size distribution, and loading efficiency). Thus,
the higher quality of nanoparticles synthesized by applying
microfluidic techniques is expected to accelerate the research
of nanoparticles in biomedical applications.
Another challenge lies in the unclear SAR of these gold
nano-antibiotics at a molecular level. The well-established SAR
will benefit the rational design of nano-antibiotics and drive the
translation. However, the multiple dimensions in character-
istics of gold nanomaterials raise difficulties in revealing the
SAR, and technologies that can handle immense amounts of
data collection are needed. Artificial intelligence (AI) has
become a powerful tool to develop pharmaceuticals, including
antibiotics, due to the ability to learn, predict, and screen.164 AI
technology is used to understand the molecular structures and
characteristics of existing antimicrobial drug libraries to predict
and screen effective molecules. We believe that when AI comes
to the development of antimicrobial gold nanomaterials, AI
technology may greatly improve the efficiency of discovering
gold-based nano-antibiotics and, more importantly, help study
the SAR and antimicrobial mechanism of action of gold nano-
antibiotics. The limitation of using AI in the field of
antibacterial nanomaterials is that the database of effective
gold-based nano-antibiotics is not comprehensive enough for
machine learning and prediction. Thus, large-scale and
continuous optimization of antibacterial gold nanomaterials
are still needed.
There is a serious imbalance between the burgeoning field of
nanomedicine and its limited clinical translation rate of
nanomedicines.165 Active clinical trials of nanomaterials will
help alleviate this awkward situation. In clinical trials of
nanomaterials for bacterial infections, most formulations were
for antibiotic nanocarriers or antibacterial AgNPs.18 Currently,
two liposomes for delivery of antibiotics are undergoing phase
III clinical trials (Clinicaltrials.gov, Identifiers: NCT01315691
and NCT02104245). Silver nanoparticle-impregnated central
venous catheters have entered phase IV clinical trials
(NCT00337714). Most clinical trials of gold nanomaterials
focus on tumor and virus-related research (Table 6), and
treatments of bacterial infection are not involved presently.
Table 6. Lists of Clinical Trials of Gold Nanomaterials
name
materials
application
clinical trial number
phase
AuroLase
silica-gold nanoshells coated with PEG
head/neck cancer, lung cancer
NCT00848042,
NCT01679470
not applicable
NU-0129
spherical nucleic acid arranged on gold
NPs
gliosarcoma
NCT03020017
early phase I
CNM-Au8
gold nanocrystal
evaluation of safety, tolerability, and
pharmacokinetics
NCT02755870
phase I
gold NPs
gold NPs
pulmonary arterial hypertension
NCT02782026
not applicable
silica-gold NPs
silica-gold NPs
atherosclerotic lesions
NCT01270139
not applicable
gold NPs
CD24-gold nanocomposite
salivary gland tumors
NCT04907422
no data
gold NPs
PepGNP-Dengue
Dengue
NCT04935801
phase I
gold NPs
PepGNP-SARSCoV2
COVID-19
NCT05113862
phase I
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10081

These studies demonstrate the promise of gold nanomaterials
as clinical medicines and motivate the clinical translation of
antibacterial gold nanomaterials. Although many challenges in
technical, industrial and economic aspects are existed, we
believe that efforts will lead to success in this area ultimately.
SUMMARY
The continuous adaptation of bacteria to antibiotics has
presented many challenges toward utilizing antibiotics to treat
bacterial infections effectively. Nanotechnology provides a
strategy to deal with drug-resistant bacterial infections, and
different kinds of antimicrobial nanomaterials can meet
different antimicrobial requirements to a large extent. This
review focuses on the recent progress of gold nanomaterials in
antibacterial fields, and we have discussed the discovery and
potential clinical applications of gold-based nano-antibiotics.
Gold nano-antibiotics with optimal and customized anti-
bacterial efficacy can be obtained by rationally adjusting the
morphology, surface chemistry, and composition of the
nanomaterials. These gold nano-antibiotics can be finely
integrated into medical devices for antibacterial applications.
We should notice that there are still challenges for gold-
based nano-antibiotics to translate into clinical applications.
The specific antibacterial mechanism of action and safety of
these nanomaterials are needed to study in-depth. This process
is so complex that it requires cross-disciplinary integration of
microbiology, immunology, biomaterials, pathology, toxicol-
ogy, pharmacology, and nanotechnology. Nevertheless, gold
nanomaterials have essential value in the strategy of treating
bacterial infections, and we expect that further research will
broaden the field of antibacterial applications of gold
nanomaterials and accelerate their translation into clinical
applications.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Xingyu Jiang −Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Advanced Biomaterials, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Smart
Healthcare Engineering, Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Guangdong 518055, P.R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-
5008-4703; Email: jiang@sustech.edu.cn
Authors
Xiaohui Zhao −Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Advanced Biomaterials, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Smart
Healthcare Engineering, Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Guangdong 518055, P.R. China
Hao Tang −Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Advanced Biomaterials, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Smart
Healthcare Engineering, Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Guangdong 518055, P.R. China
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We
thank National Key R&D
Program of
China
(2018YFA0902600), Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Advanced Biomaterials (2022B1212010003), Shenzhen
S c i e n c e
a n d
T e c h n o l o g y
P r o g r a m
(KQTD20190929172743294), Shenzhen Key Laboratory of
Smart Healthcare Engineering (ZDSYS20200811144003009),
and Tencent Foundation through the XPLORER PRIZE for
financial support.
VOCABULARY
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), the lowest drug
concentration at which the drug can inhibit the growth of
pathogenic bacteria in the medium after culturing bacteria in
vitro for 18 to 24 h, is the indicator for measuring the
inhibition activity of an antibacterial drug; bacterial resistance,
refers to the phenomenon that bacteria are not sensitive to
antibacterial drugs, is a special form of bacteria in the process
of their survival; antibacterial spectrum, refers to the range of
classes, genera and species of microorganisms that can be
inhibited (or killed) by one or a class of antibacterial drugs;
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the major component of the outer
wall of Gram-negative bacteria; LPS is composed of lipids and
polysaccharides; protein corona, the nanomaterial−protein
complex formed by the adsorbing proteins on the surface of
nanomaterials after the entrance of nanomaterials into
biological environments
REFERENCES
(1) Zhao, Y.; Jiang, X. Multiple Strategies to Activate Gold
Nanoparticles as Antibiotics. Nanoscale 2013, 5, 8340−8350.
(2) Brown, E. D.; Wright, G. D. Antibacterial Drug Discovery in the
Resistance Era. Nature 2016, 529, 336−343.
(3) Huh, A. J.; Kwon, Y. J. ″Nanoantibiotics″: A New Paradigm for
Treating Infectious Diseases Using Nanomaterials in the Antibiotics
Resistant Era. J. Controlled Release 2011, 156, 128−145.
(4) Klein, E. Y.; Van Boeckel, T. P.; Martinez, E. M.; Pant, S.;
Gandra, S.; Levin, S. A.; Goossens, H.; Laxminarayan, R. Global
Increase and Geographic Convergence in Antibiotic Consumption
Between 2000 and 2015. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018, 115, 3463−
3470.
(5) Michael, C. A.; Dominey-Howes, D.; Labbate, M. The
Antimicrobial Resistance Crisis: Causes, Consequences, and Manage-
ment. Front. Public Health 2014, 2, 145.
(6) Willyard, C. Drug-Resistant Bacteria Ranked. Nature 2017, 543,
15−15.
(7) Herman, A.; Herman, A. P. Nanoparticles as Antimicrobial
Agents: Their Toxicity and Mechanisms of Action. J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol. 2014, 14, 946−957.
(8) Zhao, Y.; Tian, Y.; Cui, Y.; Liu, W.; Ma, W.; Jiang, X. Small
Molecule-Capped Gold Nanoparticles as Potent Antibacterial Agents
that Target Gram-Negative Bacteria. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132,
12349−12356.
(9) Cui, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Tian, Y.; Zhang, W.; Lu, X.; Jiang, X. The
Molecular Mechanism of Action of Bactericidal Gold Nanoparticles
on Escherichia coli. Biomaterials 2012, 33, 2327−2333.
(10) Khorsandi, K.; Keyvani-Ghamsari, S.; Khatibi Shahidi, F.;
Hosseinzadeh, R.; Kanwal, S. A Mechanistic Perspective on Targeting
Bacterial Drug Resistance with Nanoparticles. J. Drug Target. 2021,
29, 941−959.
(11) Gao, W.; Zhang, L. Nanomaterials Arising Amid Antibiotic
Resistance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2021, 19, 5−6.
(12) Zhang, J.; Mou, L.; Jiang, X. Surface Chemistry of Gold
Nanoparticles for Health-Related Applications. Chem. Sci. 2020, 11,
923−936.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10082

(13) Tang, H.; Zhao, X.; Jiang, X. Synthetic Multi-Layer Nano-
particles for CRISPR-Cas9 Genome Editing. Adv. Drug Deliver. Rev.
2021, 168, 55−78.
(14) Chen, Y.; Xianyu, Y.; Jiang, X. Surface Modification of Gold
Nanoparticles with Small Molecules for Biochemical Analysis. Acc.
Chem. Res. 2017, 50, 310−319.
(15) Gupta, A.; Mumtaz, S.; Li, C. H.; Hussain, I.; Rotello, V. M.
Combatting Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria Using Nanomaterials. Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2019, 48, 415−427.
(16) Wang, Y.; Yang, Y.; Shi, Y.; Song, H.; Yu, C. Antibiotic-Free
Antibacterial Strategies Enabled by Nanomaterials: Progress and
Perspectives. Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 1904106.
(17) Linklater, D. P.; Baulin, V. A.; Juodkazis, S.; Crawford, R. J.;
Stoodley, P.; Ivanova, E. P. Mechano-Bactericidal Actions of
Nanostructured Surfaces. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2021, 19, 8−22.
(18) Makabenta, J. M. V.; Nabawy, A.; Li, C. H.; Schmidt-Malan, S.;
Patel, R.; Rotello, V. M. Nanomaterial-Based Therapeutics for
Antibiotic-Resistant Bacterial Infections. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2021,
19, 23−36.
(19) Genji Srinivasulu, Y.; Yao, Q.; Goswami, N.; Xie, J. Interfacial
Engineering of Gold Nanoclusters for Biomedical Applications. Mater.
Horiz. 2020, 7, 2596−2618.
(20) Gu, H.; Ho, P. L.; Tong, E.; Wang, L.; Xu, B. Presenting
Vancomycin on Nanoparticles to Enhance Antimicrobial Activities.
Nano Lett. 2003, 3, 1261−1263.
(21) Burygin, G. L.; Khlebtsov, B. N.; Shantrokha, A. N.; Dykman,
L. A.; Bogatyrev, V. A.; Khlebtsov, N. G. On the Enhanced
Antibacterial Activity of Antibiotics Mixed with Gold Nanoparticles.
Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2009, 4, 794−801.
(22) Payne, J. N.; Waghwani, H. K.; Connor, M. G.; Hamilton, W.;
Tockstein, S.; Moolani, H.; Chavda, F.; Badwaik, V.; Lawrenz, M. B.;
Dakshinamurthy, R. Novel Synthesis of Kanamycin Conjugated Gold
Nanoparticles with Potent Antibacterial Activity. Front. Microbiol.
2016, 7, 607.
(23) Silvero C, M. J.; Rocca, D. M.; de la Villarmois, E. A.; Fournier,
K.; Lanterna, A. E.; Pérez, M. F.; Becerra, M. C.; Scaiano, J. C.
Selective Photoinduced Antibacterial Activity of Amoxicillin-Coated
Gold Nanoparticles: From One-Step Synthesis to in vivo
Cytocompatibility. ACS Omega 2018, 3, 1220−1230.
(24) Yang, P.; Pageni, P.; Rahman, M. A.; Bam, M.; Zhu, T.; Chen,
Y. P.; Nagarkatti, M.; Decho, A. W.; Tang, C. Gold Nanoparticles
with Antibiotic-Metallopolymers toward Broad-Spectrum Antibacte-
rial Effects. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2019, 8, 1800854.
(25) Haddada, M. B.; Jeannot, K.; Spadavecchia, J. Novel Synthesis
and Characterization of Doxycycline-Loaded Gold Nanoparticles:
The Golden Doxycycline for Antibacterial Applications. Part. Part.
Syst. Char. 2019, 36, 1800395.
(26) Zheng, Y.; Liu, W.; Chen, Y.; Li, C.; Jiang, H.; Wang, X.
Conjugating Gold Nanoclusters and Antimicrobial Peptides: From
Aggregation-Induced Emission to Antibacterial Synergy. J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 2019, 546, 1−10.
(27) Chavan, C.; Kamble, S.; Murthy, A.; Kale, S. N. Ampicillin-
Mediated Functionalized Gold Nanoparticles against Ampicillin-
Resistant Bacteria: Strategy, Preparation and Interaction Studies.
Nanotechnology 2020, 31, 215604.
(28) Pal, S.; Mitra, K.; Azmi, S.; Ghosh, J. K.; Chakraborty, T. K.
Towards the Synthesis of Sugar Amino Acid Containing Antimicro-
bial Noncytotoxic Cap Conjugates with Gold Nanoparticles and a
Mechanistic Study of Cell Disruption. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2011, 9,
4806−4810.
(29) Lai, H.; Chen, W.; Wu, C.; Chen, Y. Potent Antibacterial
Nanoparticles for Pathogenic Bacteria. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2015, 7, 2046−2054.
(30) Zhao, Y.; Chen, Z.; Chen, Y.; Xu, J.; Li, J.; Jiang, X. Synergy of
Non-Antibiotic Drugs and Pyrimidinethiol on Gold Nanoparticles
against Superbugs. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 12940−12943.
(31) Sun, Z.; Zheng, W.; Zhu, G.; Lian, J.; Wang, J.; Hui, P.; He, S.;
Chen, W.; Jiang, X. Albumin Broadens the Antibacterial Capabilities
of Nonantibiotic Small Molecule-Capped Gold Nanoparticles. ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 45381−45389.
(32) Xie, Y.; Yang, J.; Zhang, J.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X. Activating
Antibacterial Effect of 4,6-diamino-2-pyrimidinethiol-Modified Gold
Nanoparticles by Reducing Their Sizes. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020,
59, 23471−23475.
(33) Zheng, Y.; Liu, W.; Qin, Z.; Chen, Y.; Jiang, H.; Wang, X.
Mercaptopyrimidine-Conjugated Gold Nanoclusters as Nanoanti-
biotics for Combating Multidrug-Resistant Superbugs. Bioconjug
Chem. 2018, 29, 3094−3103.
(34) Feng, Y.; Chen, W.; Jia, Y.; Tian, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Long, F.; Rui, Y.;
Jiang, X. Molecule-Capped Gold Nanoparticles as Effective Anti-
biotics against Multi-Drug Resistant Bacteria. Nanoscale 2016, 8,
13223−13227.
(35) Zhao, X.; Jia, Y.; Li, J.; Dong, R.; Zhang, J.; Ma, C.; Wang, H.;
Rui, Y.; Jiang, X. Indole Derivative-Capped Gold Nanoparticles as an
Effective Bactericide in vivo. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10,
29398−29406.
(36) Yang, X.; Zhang, L.; Jiang, X. Aminosaccharide-Gold
Nanoparticle Assemblies as Narrow-Spectrum Antibiotics against
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Nano Res. 2018, 11,
6237−6243.
(37) Hwang, G. B.; Wu, G.; Shin, J.; Panariello, L.; Sebastian, V.;
Karu, K.; Allan, E.; Gavriilidis, A.; Parkin, I. P. Continuous Single-
Phase Synthesis of [Au25(Cys)18] Nanoclusters and Their Photo-
bactericidal Enhancement. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12,
49021−49029.
(38) Kang, X.; Chong, H.; Zhu, M. Au25(SR)18: the Captain of the
Great Nanocluster Ship. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 10758−10834.
(39) Li, X.; Robinson, S. M.; Gupta, A.; Saha, K.; Jiang, Z.; Moyano,
D. F.; Sahar, A.; Riley, M. A.; Rotello, V. M. Functional Gold
Nanoparticles as Potent Antimicrobial Agents against Multi-Drug-
Resistant Bacteria. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 10682−10686.
(40) Xie, Y.; Liu, Y.; Yang, J.; Liu, Y.; Hu, F.; Zhu, K.; Jiang, X. Gold
Nanoclusters for Targeting Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus
aureus in vivo. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 3958−3962.
(41) Loza, K.; Heggen, M.; Epple, M. Synthesis, Structure,
Properties, and Applications of Bimetallic Nanoparticles of Noble
Metals. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 1909260.
(42) Zhao, Y.; Ye, C.; Liu, W.; Chen, R.; Jiang, X. Tuning the
Composition of AuPt Bimetallic Nanoparticles for Antibacterial
Application. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 8127−8131.
(43) Zhao, X.; Jia, Y.; Dong, R.; Deng, J.; Tang, H.; Hu, F.; Liu, S.;
Jiang, X. Bimetallic Nanoparticles against Multi-Drug Resistant
Bacteria. Chem. Commun. 2020, 56, 10918−10921.
(44) Padmos, J. D.; Langman, M.; Macdonald, K.; Comeau, P.;
Yang, Z.; Filiaggi, M.; Zhang, P. Correlating the Atomic Structure of
Bimetallic Silver-Gold Nanoparticles to Their Antibacterial and
Cytotoxic Activities. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 7472−7482.
(45) Banerjee, M.; Sharma, S.; Chattopadhyay, A.; Ghosh, S. S.
Enhanced Antibacterial Activity of Bimetallic Gold-Silver Core-Shell
Nanoparticles at Low Silver Concentration. Nanoscale 2011, 3, 5120−
5125.
(46) Hu, X.; Zhao, Y.; Hu, Z.; Saran, A.; Hou, S.; Wen, T.; Liu, W.;
Ji, Y.; Jiang, X.; Wu, X. Gold Nanorods Core/Agpt Alloy Nanodots
Shell: A Novel Potent Antibacterial Nanostructure. Nano Res. 2013, 6,
822−835.
(47) Kim, T.; Zhang, Q.; Li, J.; Zhang, L.; Jokerst, J. V. A Gold/
Silver Hybrid Nanoparticle for Treatment and Photoacoustic Imaging
of Bacterial Infection. ACS Nano 2018, 12, 5615−5625.
(48) Kyaw, K.; Ichimaru, H.; Kawagoe, T.; Terakawa, M.; Miyazawa,
Y.; Mizoguchi, D.; Tsushida, M.; Niidome, T. Effects of Pulsed Laser
Irradiation on Gold-Coated Silver Nanoplates and Their Antibacterial
Activity. Nanoscale 2017, 9, 16101−16105.
(49) Yan, W.; Yang, L.; Wang, H.; Zhang, J.; Shen, W. Atomic-
Engineered Gold@Silvergold Alloy Nanoflowers for in vivo Inhibition
of Bacteria. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 15661−15668.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10083

(50) Zheng, K.; Xie, J. Composition-Dependent Antimicrobial
Ability of Full-Spectrum AuxAg25-x Alloy Nanoclusters. ACS Nano
2020, 14, 11533−11541.
(51) Wu, S.; Li, A.; Zhao, X.; Zhang, C.; Yu, B.; Zhao, N.; Xu, F.
Silica-Coated Gold-Silver Nanocages as Photothermal Antibacterial
Agents for Combined Anti-Infective Therapy. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2019, 11, 17177−17183.
(52) Tao, Y.; Ju, E.; Ren, J.; Qu, X. Bifunctionalized Mesoporous
Silica-Supported Gold Nanoparticles: Intrinsic Oxidase and Perox-
idase Catalytic Activities for Antibacterial Applications. Adv. Mater.
2015, 27, 1097−1104.
(53) Wang, C.; Cui, Q.; Wang, X.; Li, L. Preparation of Hybrid
Gold/Polymer Nanocomposites and Their Application in a
Controlled Antibacterial Assay. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8,
29101−29109.
(54) Yuan, Y.; Liu, F.; Xue, L.; Wang, H.; Pan, J.; Cui, Y.; Chen, H.;
Yuan, L. Recyclable Escherichia coli-Specific-Killing AuNP-Polymer
(ESKAP) Nanocomposites. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8,
11309−11317.
(55) Regiel-Futyra, A.; Kus-Liskiewicz, M.; Sebastian, V.; Irusta, S.;
Arruebo, M.; Stochel, G.; Kyziol, A. Development of Noncytotoxic
Chitosan-Gold Nanocomposites as Efficient Antibacterial Materials.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 1087−1099.
(56) Mitra, P.; Chakraborty, P. K.; Saha, P.; Ray, P.; Basu, S.
Antibacterial Efficacy of Acridine Derivatives Conjugated with Gold
Nanoparticles. Int. J. Pharmaceut. 2014, 473, 636−643.
(57) Yang, X.; Yang, J.; Wang, L.; Ran, B.; Jia, Y.; Zhang, L.; Yang,
G.; Shao, H.; Jiang, X. Pharmaceutical Intermediate-Modified Gold
Nanoparticles: against Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria and Wound-
Healing Application via an Electrospun Scaffold. ACS Nano 2017, 11,
5737−5745.
(58) Wang, L.; Li, S.; Yin, J.; Yang, J.; Li, Q.; Zheng, W.; Liu, S.;
Jiang, X. The Density of Surface Coating Can Contribute to Different
Antibacterial Activities of Gold Nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 2020, 20,
5036−5042.
(59) Wang, L.; Zheng, W.; Li, S.; Zhong, L.; Jiang, X. Aminophenol-
Decorated Gold Nanoparticles for Curing Bacterial Infections. Nano
Lett. 2022, 22, 3576−3582.
(60) Huo, S.; Jiang, Y.; Gupta, A.; Jiang, Z.; Landis, R. F.; Hou, S.;
Liang, X. J.; Rotello, V. M. Fully Zwitterionic Nanoparticle
Antimicrobial Agents through Tuning of Core Size and Ligand
Structure. ACS Nano 2016, 10, 8732−8737.
(61) Zheng, K.; Setyawati, M. I.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J. Antimicrobial
Gold Nanoclusters. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 6904−6910.
(62) Zhu, H.; Li, J.; Wang, J.; Wang, E. Lighting Up the Gold
Nanoclusters via Host-Guest Recognition for High-Efficiency
Antibacterial Performance and Imaging. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2019, 11, 36831−36838.
(63) Li, Y.; Zhen, J.; Tian, Q.; Shen, C.; Zhang, L.; Yang, K.; Shang,
L. One Step Synthesis of Positively Charged Gold Nanoclusters as
Effective Antimicrobial Nanoagents against Multidrug-Resistant
Bacteria and Biofilms. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2020, 569, 235−243.
(64) Wang, L.; Hou, Q.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X. Fluorescent and
Antibacterial Aminobenzeneboronic Acid (ABA)-Modified Gold
Nanoclusters for Self-Monitoring Residual Dosage and Smart
Wound Care. ACS Nano 2021, 15, 17885−17894.
(65) Yang, L.; Yan, W.; Wang, H.; Zhuang, H.; Zhang, J. Shell
Thickness-Dependent Antibacterial Activity and Biocompatibility of
Gold@Silver Core-Shell Nanoparticles. RSC Adv. 2017, 7, 11355−
11361.
(66) Boomi, P.; Prabu, H. G. Synthesis, Characterization and
Antibacterial Analysis of Polyaniline/Au-Pd Nanocomposite. Colloids
Surf., A 2013, 429, 51−59.
(67) Fu, S.; Zhao, X.; Yang, L.; Qin, G.; Zhang, E. A Novel Ti-Au
Alloy with Strong Antibacterial Properties and Excellent Biocompat-
ibility for Biomedical Application. Biomaterials Advances 2022, 133,
112653−112653.
(68) Mostafa, A. M.; Mwafy, E. A. Effect of Dual-Beam Laser
Radiation for Synthetic SnO2/Au Nanoalloy for Antibacterial
Activity. J. Mol. Struct. 2020, 1222, 128913.
(69) Arockia Jency, D.; Sathyavathi, K.; Umadevi, M.; Parimaladevi,
R. Enhanced Bioactivity of Fe3O4-Au Nanocomposites - A
Comparative Antibacterial Study. Mater. Lett. 2020, 258, 126795.
(70) Wang, C.; Xu, S.; Zhang, K.; Li, M.; Li, Q.; Xiao, R.; Wang, S.
Streptomycin-Modified Fe3O4-Au@Ag Core-Satellite Magnetic
Nanoparticles as an Effective Antibacterial Agent. J. Mater. Sci.
2017, 52, 1357−1368.
(71) Yadav, N.; Jaiswal, A. K.; Dey, K. K.; Yadav, V. B.; Nath, G.;
Srivastava, A. K.; Yadav, R. R. Trimetallic Au/Pt/Ag Based Nanofluid
for Enhanced Antibacterial Response. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2018, 218,
10−17.
(72) Rao, K. J.; Paria, S. Mixed Phytochemicals Mediated Synthesis
of Multifunctional Ag-Au-Pd Nanoparticles for Glucose Oxidation
and Antimicrobial Applications. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7,
14018−14025.
(73) Hsu, C.; Li, Y.; Jian, H.; Harroun, S. G.; Wei, S.; Ravindranath,
R.; Lai, J.; Huang, C.; Chang, H. Green Synthesis of Catalytic Gold/
Bismuth Oxyiodide Nanocomposites with Oxygen Vacancies for
Treatment of Bacterial Infections. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 11808−11819.
(74) Qiao, Y.; He, J.; Chen, W.; Yu, Y.; Li, W.; Du, Z.; Xie, T.; Ye,
Y.; Hua, S. Y.; Zhong, D.; Yao, K.; Zhou, M. Light-Activatable
Synergistic Therapy of Drug-Resistant Bacteria-Infected Cutaneous
Chronic Wounds and Nonhealing Keratitis by Cupriferous Hollow
Nanoshells. ACS Nano 2020, 14, 3299−3315.
(75) Zheng, K.; Setyawati, M. I.; Leong, D. T.; Xie, J. Surface Ligand
Chemistry of Gold Nanoclusters Determines Their Antimicrobial
Ability. Chem. Mater. 2018, 30, 2800−2808.
(76) Tang, H.; Li, Q.; Yan, W.; Jiang, X. Reversing the Chirality of
Surface Ligands Can Improve the Biosafety and Pharmacokinetics of
Cationic Gold Nanoclusters. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 13829−
13834.
(77) Wang, L.; Li, S.; Zhong, L.; Li, Q.; Liu, S.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X.
Evaluation of the in vivo Behavior of Antibacterial Gold Nanoparticles
for Potential Biomedical Applications. J. Mater. Chem. B 2021, 9,
3025−3031.
(78) Yang, X.; Wei, Q.; Shao, H.; Jiang, X. Multivalent Amino-
saccharide-Based Gold Nanoparticles as Narrow-Spectrum Antibiotics
in vivo. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 7725−7730.
(79) Hayden, S. C.; Zhao, G.; Saha, K.; Phillips, R. L.; Li, X.;
Miranda, O. R.; Rotello, V. M.; El-Sayed, M. A.; Schmidt-Krey, I.;
Bunz, U. H. Aggregation and Interaction of Cationic Nanoparticles on
Bacterial Surfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 6920−6923.
(80) Feng, Z. V.; Gunsolus, I. L.; Qiu, T. A.; Hurley, K. R.; Nyberg,
L. H.; Frew, H.; Johnson, K. P.; Vartanian, A. M.; Jacob, L. M.; Lohse,
S. E.; Torelli, M. D.; Hamers, R. J.; Murphy, C. J.; Haynes, C. L.
Impacts of Gold Nanoparticle Charge and Ligand Type on Surface
Binding and Toxicity to Gram-Negative and Gram-Positive Bacteria.
Chem. Sci. 2015, 6, 5186−5196.
(81) Pillai, P. P.; Kowalczyk, B.; Kandere-Grzybowska, K.;
Borkowska, M.; Grzybowski, B. A. Engineering Gram Selectivity of
Mixed-Charge Gold Nanoparticles by Tuning the Balance of Surface
Charges. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2016, 128, 8752−8756.
(82) Hu, D.; Li, H.; Wang, B.; Ye, Z.; Lei, W.; Jia, F.; Jin, Q.; Ren, K.
F.; Ji, J. Surface-Adaptive Gold Nanoparticles with Effective
Adherence and Enhanced Photothermal Ablation of Methicillin-
Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Biofilm. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 9330−
9339.
(83) Zhang, Y.; Hudson-Smith, N. V.; Frand, S. D.; Cahill, M. S.;
Davis, L. S.; Feng, Z. V.; Haynes, C. L.; Hamers, R. J. Influence of the
Spatial Distribution of Cationic Functional Groups at Nanoparticle
Surfaces on Bacterial Viability and Membrane Interactions. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 10814−10823.
(84) Tay, C. Y.; Yu, Y.; Setyawati, M. I.; Xie, J.; Leong, D. T.
Presentation Matters: Identity of Gold Nanocluster Capping Agent
Governs Intracellular Uptake and Cell Metabolism. Nano Res. 2014, 7,
805−815.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10084

(85) Xie, Y.; Xianyu, Y.; Wang, N.; Yan, Z.; Liu, Y.; Zhu, K.;
Hatzakis, N. S.; Jiang, X. Functionalized Gold Nanoclusters Identify
Highly Reactive Oxygen Species in Living Organisms. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2018, 28, 1702026.
(86) Loynachan, C. N.; Soleimany, A. P.; Dudani, J. S.; Lin, Y.;
Najer, A.; Bekdemir, A.; Chen, Q.; Bhatia, S. N.; Stevens, M. M. Renal
Clearable Catalytic Gold Nanoclusters for in vivo Disease Monitoring.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14, 883−890.
(87) Linklater, D. P.; Baulin, V. A.; Le Guevel, X.; Fleury, J. B.;
Hanssen, E.; Nguyen, T. H. P.; Juodkazis, S.; Bryant, G.; Crawford, R.
J.; Stoodley, P.; Ivanova, E. P. Antibacterial Action of Nanoparticles
by Lethal Stretching of Bacterial Cell Membranes. Adv. Mater. 2020,
32, 2005679.
(88) Zhang, M.; Zhang, H.; Feng, J.; Zhou, Y.; Wang, B. Synergistic
Chemotherapy, Physiotherapy and Photothermal Therapy against
Bacterial and Biofilms Infections through Construction of Chiral
Glutamic Acid Functionalized Gold Nanobipyramids. Chem. Eng. J.
2020, 393, 124778.
(89) Zeng, J.; Zhang, Y.; Zeng, T.; Aleisa, R.; Qiu, Z.; Chen, Y.;
Huang, J.; Wang, D.; Yan, Z.; Yin, Y. Anisotropic Plasmonic
Nanostructures for Colorimetric Sensing. Nano Today 2020, 32,
100855.
(90) Penders, J.; Stolzoff, M.; Hickey, D. J.; Andersson, M.; Webster,
T. J. Shape-Dependent Antibacterial Effects of Non-Cytotoxic Gold
Nanoparticles. Int. J. Nanomed. 2017, 12, 2457−2468.
(91) Yougbare, S.; Chou, H. L.; Yang, C. H.; Krisnawati, D. I.;
Jazidie, A.; Nuh, M.; Kuo, T. R. Facet-Dependent Gold Nanocrystals
for Effective Photothermal Killing of Bacteria. J. Hazard. Mater. 2021,
407, 124617.
(92) Ma, K.; Li, Y.; Wang, Z.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, X.; Chen, C.; Yu, H.;
Huang, J.; Yang, Z.; Wang, X.; Wang, Z. Core-Shell Gold Nanorod@
Layered Double Hydroxide Nanomaterial with Highly Efficient
Photothermal Conversion and Its Application in Antibacterial and
Tumor Therapy. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 29630−29640.
(93) Wang, H.; Song, Z.; Li, S.; Wu, Y.; Han, H. One Stone with
Two Birds: Functional Gold Nanostar for Targeted Combination
Therapy of Drug-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Infection. ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 32659−32669.
(94) Sasidharan, S.; Poojari, R.; Bahadur, D.; Srivastava, R. Embelin-
Mediated Green Synthesis of Quasi-Spherical and Star-Shaped
Plasmonic Nanostructures for Antibacterial Activity, Photothermal
Therapy, and Computed Tomographic Imaging. ACS Sustain. Chem.
Eng. 2018, 6, 10562−10577.
(95) Zhu, Y.; Ramasamy, M.; Yi, D. K. Antibacterial Activity of
Ordered Gold Nanorod Arrays. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6,
15078−15085.
(96) Guo, Y.; Luo, Y.; Tang, M.; Zhang, M.; Yuan, M.; Chen, S.; Tu,
Q.; Wang, J. Gold Nanosensor for the Selective Identification of
Escherichia coli in Foodstuff and Its Antibacterial Ability. Sens.
Actuators, B 2021, 344, 130191.
(97) Zhao, Y.; Guo, Q.; Dai, X.; Wei, X.; Yu, Y.; Chen, X.; Li, C.;
Cao, Z.; Zhang, X. A Biomimetic Non-Antibiotic Approach to
Eradicate Drug-Resistant Infections. Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1806024.
(98) Tang, M.; Zhang, J.; Yang, C.; Zheng, Y.; Jiang, H. Gold
Nanoclusters for Bacterial Detection and Infection Therapy. Front.
Chem. 2020, 8, 181.
(99) Gu, X.; Xu, Z.; Gu, L.; Xu, H.; Han, F.; Chen, B.; Pan, X.
Preparation and Antibacterial Properties of Gold Nanoparticles: A
Review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2021, 19, 167−187.
(100) Richter, M. F.; Drown, B. S.; Riley, A. P.; Garcia, A.; Shirai, T.;
Svec, R. L.; Hergenrother, P. J. Predictive Compound Accumulation
Rules Yield A Broad-Spectrum Antibiotic. Nature 2017, 545, 299−
304.
(101) Bresee, J.; Bond, C. M.; Worthington, R. J.; Smith, C. A.;
Gifford, J. C.; Simpson, C. A.; Carter, C. J.; Wang, G.; Hartman, J.;
Osbaugh, N. A.; Shoemaker, R. K.; Melander, C.; Feldheim, D. L.
Nanoscale Structure-Activity Relationships, Mode of Action, and
Biocompatibility of Gold Nanoparticle Antibiotics. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2014, 136, 5295−5300.
(102) Zheng, W.; Jia, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Zhang, J.; Xie, Y.; Wang, L.;
Zhao, X.; Liu, X.; Tang, R.; Chen, W.; Jiang, X. Reversing Bacterial
Resistance to Gold Nanoparticles by Size Modulation. Nano Lett.
2021, 21, 1992−2000.
(103) Dykman, L. A.; Khlebtsov, N. G. Immunological Properties of
Gold Nanoparticles. Chem. Sci. 2017, 8, 1719−1735.
(104) Chen, W.; Zhang, F.; Ju, Y.; Hong, J.; Ding, Y. Gold
Nanomaterial Engineering for Macrophage-Mediated Inflammation
and Tumor Treatment. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2021, 10, 2000818.
(105) Hocevar, S.; Milosevic, A.; Rodriguez-Lorenzo, L.;
Ackermann-Hirschi, L.; Mottas, I.; Petri-Fink, A.; Rothen-
Rutishauser, B.; Bourquin, C.; Clift, M. J. D. Polymer-Coated Gold
Nanospheres Do Not Impair the Innate Immune Function of Human
B Lymphocytes in vitro. ACS Nano 2019, 13, 6790−6800.
(106) Wang, L.; Yang, J.; Yang, X.; Hou, Q.; Liu, S.; Zheng, W.;
Long, Y.; Jiang, X. Mercaptophenylboronic Acid-Activated Gold
Nanoparticles as Nanoantibiotics against Multidrug-Resistant Bac-
teria. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 51148−51159.
(107) Cai, R.; Chen, C. The Crown and the Scepter: Roles of the
Protein Corona in Nanomedicine. Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1805740.
(108) Monopoli, M. P.; Aberg, C.; Salvati, A.; Dawson, K. A.
Biomolecular Coronas Provide the Biological Identity of Nanosized
Materials. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 779−786.
(109) Ma, Y.; Hong, J.; Ding, Y. Biological Behavior Regulation of
Gold Nanoparticles via the Protein Corona. Adv. Healthc. Mater.
2020, 9, 1901448.
(110) Balfourier, A.; Luciani, N.; Wang, G.; Lelong, G.; Ersen, O.;
Khelfa, A.; Alloyeau, D.; Gazeau, F.; Carn, F. Unexpected Intracellular
Biodegradation and Recrystallization of Gold Nanoparticles. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2020, 117, 103−113.
(111) Du, B.; Jiang, X.; Das, A.; Zhou, Q.; Yu, M.; Jin, R.; Zheng, J.
Glomerular Barrier Behaves as an Atomically Precise Bandpass Filter
in a Sub-Nanometre Regime. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 1096−1102.
(112) Yu, M.; Xu, J.; Zheng, J. Renal Clearable Luminescent Gold
Nanoparticles: From the Bench to the Clinic. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2019, 58, 4112−4128.
(113) Li, X.; Wang, B.; Zhou, S.; Chen, W.; Chen, H.; Liang, S.;
Zheng, L.; Yu, H.; Chu, R.; Wang, M.; Chai, Z.; Feng, W. Surface
Chemistry Governs the Sub-Organ Transfer, Clearance and Toxicity
of Functional Gold Nanoparticles in the Liver and Kidney. J.
Nanobiotechnol. 2020, 18, 45.
(114) Xu, J.; Yu, M.; Peng, C.; Carter, P.; Tian, J.; Ning, X.; Zhou,
Q.; Tu, Q.; Zhang, G.; Dao, A.; Jiang, X.; Kapur, P.; Hsieh, J. T.;
Zhao, X.; Liu, P.; Zheng, J. Dose Dependencies and Biocompatibility
of Renal Clearable Gold Nanoparticles: From Mice to Non-human
Primates. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 266−271.
(115) Yuan, P.; Qiu, X.; Wang, X.; Tian, R.; Wang, L.; Bai, Y. K.;
Liu, S. Y.; Chen, X. Substrate-Independent Coating with Persistent
and Stable Antifouling and Antibacterial Activities to Reduce Bacterial
Infection for Various Implants. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2019, 8, 1801423.
(116) Yu, M.; Dong, R.; Yan, X.; Yu, G.; You, M.; Ning, X.; Long, Y.
Recent Advances in Needleless Electrospinning of Ultrathin Fibers:
From Academia to Industrial Production. Macromol. Mater. Eng.
2017, 302, 1700002.
(117) Greiner, A.; Wendorff, J. H. Electrospinning: A Fascinating
Method for the Preparation of Ultrathin Fibers. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2007, 46, 5670−5703.
(118) Zhou, L.; Yu, K.; Lu, F.; Lan, G.; Dai, F.; Shang, S.; Hu, E.
Minimizing Antibiotic Dosage Through in Situ Formation of Gold
Nanoparticles Across Antibacterial Wound Dressings: A Facile
Approach Using Silk Fabric as the Base Substrate. J. Clean. Prod.
2020, 243, 118604.
(119) Li, Y.; Tian, Y.; Zheng, W.; Feng, Y.; Huang, R.; Shao, J.;
Tang, R.; Wang, P.; Jia, Y.; Zhang, J.; Zheng, W.; Yang, G.; Jiang, X.
Composites of Bacterial Cellulose and Small Molecule-Decorated
Gold Nanoparticles for Treating Gram-Negative Bacteria-Infected
Wounds. Small 2017, 13, 1700130.
(120) Mahmoud, N. N.; Hikmat, S.; Abu Ghith, D.; Hajeer, M.;
Hamadneh, L.; Qattan, D.; Khalil, E. A. Gold Nanoparticles Loaded
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10085

into Polymeric Hydrogel for Wound Healing in Rats: Effect of
Nanoparticles’ Shape and Surface Modification. Int. J. Pharmaceut.
2019, 565, 174−186.
(121) Xu, M.-L.; Guan, L.-Y.; Li, S.-K.; Chen, L.; Chen, Z. Stable
Gold Graphitic Nanocapsule Doped Hydrogels for Efficient Photo-
thermal Antibacterial Applications. Chem. Commun. 2019, 55, 5359−
5362.
(122) Wei, S. C.; Chang, L.; Huang, C. C.; Chang, H. T. Dual-
Functional Gold Nanoparticles with Antimicrobial and Proangiogenic
Activities Improve the Healing of Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria-
Infected Wounds in Diabetic Mice. Biomater. Sci. 2019, 7, 4482−
4490.
(123) Mârza, S. M.; Magyari, K.; Bogdan, S.; Moldovan, M.; Peştean,
C.; Nagy, A.; Tăbăran, F.; Licarete, E.; Suarasan, S.; Dreanca, A.; Baia,
L.; Papuc, I. Skin Wound Regeneration with Bioactive Glass-Gold
Nanoparticles Ointment. Biomed. Mater. 2019, 14, 025011.
(124) Noimark, S.; Dunnill, C. W.; Wilson, M.; Parkin, I. P. The
Role of Surfaces in Catheter-Associated Infections. Chem. Soc. Rev.
2009, 38, 3435−3448.
(125) Zheng, W.; Jia, Y.; Chen, W.; Wang, G.; Guo, X.; Jiang, X.
Universal Coating from Electrostatic Self-Assembly to Prevent
Multidrug-Resistant Bacterial Colonization on Medical Devices and
Solid Surfaces. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 21181−21189.
(126) Xie, Y.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, W.; Liu, X.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X.
Gold Nanoclusters-Coated Orthodontic Devices Can Inhibit the
Formation of Streptococcus mutans Biofilm. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng.
2020, 6, 1239−1246.
(127) Xie, Y.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X. Near-Infrared Light-Activated
Phototherapy by Gold Nanoclusters for Dispersing Biofilms. ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 9041−9049.
(128) Ahmed, R. A.; Fadl-allah, S. A.; El-Bagoury, N.; El-Rab, S. M.
F. G. Improvement of Corrosion Resistance and Antibacterial Effect
of NiTi Orthopedic Materials by Chitosan and Gold Nanoparticles.
Appl. Surf. Sci. 2014, 292, 390−399.
(129) Ribeiro, M.; Ferraz, M. P.; Monteiro, F. J.; Fernandes, M. H.;
Beppu, M. M.; Mantione, D.; Sardon, H. Antibacterial Silk Fibroin/
Nanohydroxyapatite Hydrogels with Silver and Gold Nanoparticles
for Bone Regeneration. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. 2017, 13, 231−239.
(130) Zheng, Y.; Xiao, M.; Jiang, S.; Ding, F.; Wang, J. Coating
Fabrics with Gold Nanorods for Colouring, UV-Protection, and
Antibacterial Functions. Nanoscale 2013, 5, 788−795.
(131) Silva, I. O.; Ladchumananandasivam, R.; Nascimento, J. H. O.;
Silva, K.; Oliveira, F. R.; Souto, A. P.; Felgueiras, H. P.; Zille, A.
Multifunctional Chitosan/Gold Nanoparticles Coatings for Biomed-
ical Textiles. Nanomaterials 2019, 9, 1064.
(132) Ahmed, H. B.; El-Hawary, N. S.; Emam, H. E. Self-Assembled
AuNPs for Ingrain Pigmentation of Silk Fabrics with Antibacterial
Potency. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2017, 105, 720−729.
(133) Ganesan, R. M.; Gurumallesh Prabu, H. Synthesis of Gold
Nanoparticles Using Herbal Acorus Calamus Rhizome Extract and
Coating on Cotton Fabric for Antibacterial and UV Blocking
Applications. Arab. J. Chem. 2019, 12, 2166−2174.
(134) Boomi, P.; Poorani, G. P.; Selvam, S.; Palanisamy, S.;
Jegatheeswaran, S.; Anand, K.; Balakumar, C.; Premkumar, K.; Prabu,
H. G. Green Biosynthesis of Gold Nanoparticles Using Croton
Sparsiflorus Leaves Extract and Evaluation of UV Protection,
Antibacterial and Anticancer Applications. Appl. Organomet. Chem.
2020, 34, No. e5574.
(135) Zhao, Y.; Sun, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Ding, X.; Zhao, N.; Yu, B.; Zhao,
H.; Duan, S.; Xu, F. Well-Defined Gold Nanorod/Polymer Hybrid
Coating with Inherent Antifouling and Photothermal Bactericidal
Properties for Treating an Infected Hernia. ACS Nano 2020, 14,
2265−2275.
(136) Shi, D.; Mi, G.; Wang, M.; Webster, T. J. In vitro and ex vivo
Systems at the Forefront of Infection Modeling and Drug Discovery.
Biomaterials 2019, 198, 228−249.
(137) Wang, L.; Yang, J.; Li, S.; Li, Q.; Liu, S.; Zheng, W.; Jiang, X.
Oral Administration of Starting Materials for in vivo Synthesis of
Antibacterial Gold Nanoparticles for Curing Remote Infections. Nano
Lett. 2021, 21, 1124−1131.
(138) Liao, F.; Wu, T.; Huang, Y.; Lin, W.; Su, C.; Jeng, U.; Kuo, S.;
Lin, S. Subnanometer Gold Clusters Adhere to Lipid A for Protection
against Endotoxin-Induced Sepsis. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 2864−2869.
(139) Li, J.; Cha, R.; Zhao, X.; Guo, H.; Luo, H.; Wang, M.; Zhou,
F.; Jiang, X. Gold Nanoparticles Cure Bacterial Infection with Benefit
to Intestinal Microflora. ACS Nano 2019, 13, 5002−5014.
(140) Wang, S.; Chen, B.; Ouyang, L.; Wang, D.; Tan, J.; Qiao, Y.;
Ge, S.; Ruan, J.; Zhuang, A.; Liu, X.; Jia, R. A Novel Stimuli-
Responsive Injectable Antibacterial Hydrogel to Achieve Synergetic
Photothermal/Gene-Targeted Therapy towards Uveal Melanoma.
Adv. Sci. 2021, 8, No. e2004721.
(141) Yoshida, M.; Reyes, S. G.; Tsuda, S.; Horinouchi, T.;
Furusawa, C.; Cronin, L. Time-Programmable Drug Dosing Allows
the Manipulation, Suppression and Reversal of Antibiotic Drug
Resistance in vitro. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 15589.
(142) Xu, N.; Cheng, H.; Xu, J.; Li, F.; Gao, B.; Li, Z.; Gao, C.; Huo,
K.; Fu, J.; Xiong, W. Silver-Loaded Nanotubular Structures Enhanced
Bactericidal Efficiency of Antibiotics with Synergistic Effect in vitro
and in vivo. Int. J. Nanomed. 2017, 12, 731−743.
(143) Wan, G.; Ruan, L.; Yin, Y.; Yang, T.; Ge, M.; Cheng, X. Effects
of Silver Nanoparticles in Combination with Antibiotics on the
Resistant Bacteria Acinetobacter baumannii. Int. J. Nanomed. 2016,
11, 3789−3800.
(144) Gupta, A.; Makabenta, J. M. V.; Schlüter, F.; Landis, R. F.;
Das, R.; Cuppels, M.; Rotello, V. M. Functionalized Polymers
Enhance Permeability of Antibiotics in Gram-Negative MDR Bacteria
and Biofilms for Synergistic Antimicrobial Therapy. Adv. Therap.
2020, 3, 2000005.
(145) Lee, B.; Lee, D. G. Synergistic Antibacterial Activity of Gold
Nanoparticles Caused by Apoptosis-Like Death. J. Appl. Microbiol.
2019, 127, 701−712.
(146) Tamma, P. D.; Cosgrove, S. E.; Maragakis, L. L. Combination
Therapy for Treatment of Infections with Gram-Negative Bacteria.
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2012, 25, 450−470.
(147) Feng, X.; Xu, W.; Li, Z.; Song, W.; Ding, J.; Chen, X.
Immunomodulatory Nanosystems. Adv. Sci. 2019, 6, 1900101.
(148) Zhou, J.; Kroll, A. V.; Holay, M.; Fang, R. H.; Zhang, L.
Biomimetic Nanotechnology toward Personalized Vaccines. Adv.
Mater. 2020, 32, 1901255.
(149) Zhang, D.; Wu, T.; Qin, X.; Qiao, Q.; Shang, L.; Song, Q.;
Yang, C.; Zhang, Z. Intracellularly Generated Immunological Gold
Nanoparticles for Combinatorial Photothermal Therapy and
Immunotherapy against Tumor. Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 6635−6646.
(150) Dykman, L. A. Gold Nanoparticles for Preparation of
Antibodies and Vaccines against Infectious Diseases. Expert Rev.
Vaccines 2020, 19, 465−477.
(151) Xu, L.; Wang, X.; Wang, W.; Sun, M.; Choi, W. J.; Kim, J. Y.;
Hao, C.; Li, S.; Qu, A.; Lu, M.; Wu, X.; Colombari, F. M.; Gomes, W.
R.; Blanco, A. L.; de Moura, A. F.; Guo, X.; Kuang, H.; Kotov, N. A.;
Xu, C. Enantiomer-Dependent Immunological Response to Chiral
Nanoparticles. Nature 2022, 601, 366−373.
(152) Gao, W.; Fang, R. H.; Thamphiwatana, S.; Luk, B. T.; Li, J.;
Angsantikul, P.; Zhang, Q.; Hu, C. M.; Zhang, L. Modulating
Antibacterial Immunity via Bacterial Membrane-Coated Nano-
particles. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 1403−1409.
(153) Schuijt, T. J; Lankelma, J. M; Scicluna, B. P; de Sousa e Melo,
F.; Roelofs, J. J T H; de Boer, J D.; Hoogendijk, A. J; de Beer, R.; de
Vos, A.; Belzer, C.; de Vos, W. M; van der Poll, T.; Wiersinga, W J.
The Gut Microbiota Plays a Protective Role in the Host Defence
against Pneumococcal Pneumonia. Gut 2016, 65, 575−583.
(154) Maier, L.; Goemans, C. V.; Wirbel, J.; Kuhn, M.; Eberl, C.;
Pruteanu, M.; Muller, P.; Garcia-Santamarina, S.; Cacace, E.; Zhang,
B.; Gekeler, C.; Banerjee, T.; Anderson, E. E.; Milanese, A.; Lober, U.;
Forslund, S. K.; Patil, K. R.; Zimmermann, M.; Stecher, B.; Zeller, G.;
Bork, P.; Typas, A. Unravelling the Collateral Damage of Antibiotics
on Gut Bacteria. Nature 2021, 599, 120−124.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10086

(155) Bullman, S.; Pedamallu, C. S.; Sicinska, E.; Clancy, T. E.;
Zhang, X.; Cai, D.; Neuberg, D.; Huang, K.; Guevara, F.; Nelson, T.;
Chipashvili, O.; Hagan, T.; Walker, M.; Ramachandran, A.; Diosdado,
B.; Serna, G.; Mulet, N.; Landolfi, S.; Ramon y Cajal, S.; Fasani, R.;
Aguirre, A. J.; Ng, K.; Elez, E.; Ogino, S.; Tabernero, J.; Fuchs, C. S.;
Hahn, W. C.; Nuciforo, P.; Meyerson, M. Analysis of Fusobacterium
Persistence and Antibiotic Response in Colorectal Cancer. Science
2017, 358, 1443−1448.
(156) Poore, G. D.; Kopylova, E.; Zhu, Q.; Carpenter, C.; Fraraccio,
S.; Wandro, S.; Kosciolek, T.; Janssen, S.; Metcalf, J.; Song, S. J.;
Kanbar, J.; Miller-Montgomery, S.; Heaton, R.; McKay, R.; Patel, S.
P.; Swafford, A. D.; Knight, R. Microbiome Analyses of Blood and
Tissues Suggest Cancer Diagnostic Approach. Nature 2020, 579,
567−574.
(157) Song, W.; Anselmo, A. C.; Huang, L. Nanotechnology
Intervention of the Microbiome for Cancer Therapy. Nat. Nano-
technol. 2019, 14, 1093−1103.
(158) Jin, C.; Lagoudas, G. K.; Zhao, C.; Bullman, S.; Bhutkar, A.;
Hu, B.; Ameh, S.; Sandel, D.; Liang, X. S.; Mazzilli, S.; Whary, M. T.;
Meyerson, M.; Germain, R.; Blainey, P. C.; Fox, J. G.; Jacks, T.
Commensal Microbiota Promote Lung Cancer Development via
Gammadelta T Cells. Cell 2019, 176, 998−1013.
(159) Geller, L. T.; Barzily-Rokni, M.; Danino, T.; Jonas, O. H.;
Shental, N.; Nejman, D.; Gavert, N.; Zwang, Y.; Cooper, Z. A.; Shee,
K.; Thaiss, C. A.; Reuben, A.; Livny, J.; Avraham, R.; Frederick, D. T.;
Ligorio, M.; Chatman, K.; Johnston, S. E.; Mosher, C. M.; Brandis, A.;
Fuks, G.; Gurbatri, C.; Gopalakrishnan, V.; Kim, M.; Hurd, M. W.;
Katz, M.; Fleming, J.; Maitra, A.; Smith, D. A.; Skalak, M.; Bu, J.;
Michaud, M.; Trauger, S. A.; Barshack, I.; Golan, T.; Sandbank, J.;
Flaherty, K. T.; Mandinova, A.; Garrett, W. S.; Thayer, S. P.; Ferrone,
C. R.; Huttenhower, C.; Bhatia, S. N.; Gevers, D.; Wargo, J. A.;
Golub, T. R.; Straussman, R. Potential Role of Rntratumor Bacteria in
Mediating Tumor Resistance to the Chemotherapeutic Drug
Gemcitabine. Science 2017, 357, 1156−1160.
(160) Zhang, X.; Chen, X.; Guo, Y.; Gao, G.; Wang, D.; Wu, Y.; Liu,
J.; Liang, G.; Zhao, Y.; Wu, F. Dual Gate-Controlled Therapeutics for
Overcoming Bacterium-Induced Drug Resistance and Potentiating
Cancer Immunotherapy. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 14013−
14021.
(161) Lindahl, L. M.; Willerslev-Olsen, A.; Gjerdrum, L. M. R.;
Nielsen, P. R.; Blumel, E.; Rittig, A. H.; Celis, P.; Herpers, B.; Becker,
J. C.; Stausbol-Gron, B.; Wasik, M. A.; Gluud, M.; Fredholm, S.; Buus,
T. B.; Johansen, C.; Nastasi, C.; Peiffer, L.; Kubat, L.; Bzorek, M.;
Eriksen, J. O.; Krejsgaard, T.; Bonefeld, C. M.; Geisler, C.; Mustelin,
T.; Langhoff, E.; Givskov, M.; Woetmann, A.; Kilian, M.; Litman, T.;
Iversen, L.; Odum, N. Antibiotics Inhibit Tumor and Disease Activity
in Cutaneous T-cell Lymphoma. Blood 2019, 134, 1072−1083.
(162) Dong, R.; Liu, Y.; Mou, L.; Deng, J.; Jiang, X. Microfluidics-
Based Biomaterials and Biodevices. Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1805033.
(163) Shepherd, S. J.; Issadore, D.; Mitchell, M. J. Microfluidic
Formulation of Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications. Biomate-
rials 2021, 274, 120826.
(164) Stokes, J. M.; Yang, K.; Swanson, K.; Jin, W.; Cubillos-Ruiz,
A.; Donghia, N. M.; MacNair, C. R.; French, S.; Carfrae, L. A.;
Bloom-Ackermann, Z.; Tran, V. M.; Chiappino-Pepe, A.; Badran, A.
H.; Andrews, I. W.; Chory, E. J.; Church, G. M.; Brown, E. D.;
Jaakkola, T. S.; Barzilay, R.; Collins, J. J. A Deep Learning Approach
to Antibiotic Discovery. Cell 2020, 180, 688−702.
(165) Younis, M. A.; Tawfeek, H. M.; Abdellatif, A. A. H.; Abdel-
Aleem, J. A.; Harashima, H. Clinical Translation of Nanomedicines:
Challenges, Opportunities, and Keys. Adv. Drug Deliver. Rev. 2022,
181, 114083.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c02269
ACS Nano 2022, 16, 10066−10087
10087
 Recommended by ACS
Perspectives on Usage of Functional Nanomaterials in
Antimicrobial Therapy for Antibiotic-Resistant Bacterial
Infections
Arun Karnwal, Mohammed B. Alshammari, et al.
APRIL 06, 2023
ACS OMEGA
READ 
Inhibition of Biofilm and Virulence Properties of Pathogenic
Bacteria by Silver and Gold Nanoparticles Synthesized from
Lactiplantibacillus sp. Strain C1
Min-Gyun Kang, Young-Mog Kim, et al.
MARCH 07, 2023
ACS OMEGA
READ 
Increasing Antibiotic Susceptibility: The Use of Cationic
Gold Nanoparticles in Gram-Negative Bacterial Membrane
Models
Jakob Andersson, Ingo Köper, et al.
AUGUST 04, 2021
LANGMUIR
READ 
Communication Breakdown: Into the Molecular Mechanism
of Biofilm Inhibition by CeO2 Nanocrystal Enzyme Mimics
and How It Can Be Exploited
Eva Pütz, Wolfgang Tremel, et al.
SEPTEMBER 29, 2022
ACS NANO
READ