Historical perspective
Fluorescence enhancement for noble metal nanoclusters
Dan Li ⁎, Zhenhua Chen, Xifan Mei ⁎
Department of Basic Science, Jinzhou Medical University, Jinzhou 121001, PR China
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Available online 7 November 2017
Noble metal nanoclusters have attracted great attentions in the area of ﬂuorescence related applications due to
their special properties such as low toxicity, excellent photostability and bio-compatibility. However, they still
describe disadvantages for low quantum yield compared to quantum dots and organic dyes though the bright-
ness of the ﬂuorescence play an important role for the efﬁciency of the applications. Attentions have been
attracted for exploring strategies to enhance the ﬂuorescence based on the optical fundamentals through various
protocols. Some methods have already been successfully proposed for obtaining relative highly ﬂuorescent
nanoclusters, which will potentially describe advantages for the application. In this review, we summarize the
approach for enhancement of the ﬂuorescence of the nanoclusters based on the modiﬁcation of the properties,
improvement of the synthesis process and optimization of the environment. The limitation and directions for fu-
ture development of the fabrication of highly ﬂuorescent metal nanoclusters are demonstrated.
© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords:
Metal nanoclusters
Fluorescent enhancement
Ligand
Synthesis
Contents
1.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.
Fluorescence enhancement based on the properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.1.
Fabrication of alloy NCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.
Aggregation induced emission. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.1.
Solvent induced aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.2.
Assembly induced enhancement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.3.
Ion induced aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.4.
Other aggregations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.
Conﬁned ﬂuorescence enhancement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.1.
ELDH nanosheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.2.
Nanogel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.3.
Fabrication of Au NCs-MOFs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.4.
Protein interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.4.
Optimization of the ligand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.5.
Changing the valence states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.6.
Rigidifying the ligand or the shell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.7.
Other method for modiﬁcation the properties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.
Modiﬁcation of synthesis process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.
Environment conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.
Concluding remark and outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
1. Introduction
Noble metal nanoclusters (NCs) have attracted great attentions re-
cently due to their speciﬁc physicochemical properties that are different
from conventional nanoparticles [1]. The ﬂuorescent NCs composed of
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39
⁎ Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: danli@jzmu.edu.cn (D. Li), meixifan1971@163.com (X. Mei).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2017.11.001
0001-8686/© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cis

several to tens of atoms and the sizes are so small that the molecular like
behaviors are demonstrated. Normally, they do not exhibit featured sur-
face plasmon resonance absorption in the visible region but describe
ﬂuorescence in the visible to near-infrared region [2]. The NCs can be
designed to possess large stokes shift, [3] long lifetime, [4] good
photostability, [5] living cell compatibility, [6] catalysis properties, [7]
electrocatalysis [8] and photo catalytic activity, [9] etc. Among special
properties for NCs, ﬂuorescent behaviors are most attractive for the ap-
plications because it will provide avenues for designing as sensors, [10]
imaging dyes, [11] photosensitizers, [12] light-emitting devices [13]
with good performance. Compared to traditional ﬂuorescent materials
like organic dyes and quantum dots (QDs), they tend to describe
lower toxicity and satisﬁed renal clearance ability [14]. However, it
should be noted that the ﬂuorescence quantum yield (QY) of most
noble metal NCs are still not competitive as compared to ODs or organic
dyes [15]. If the NCs are modiﬁed with brighter ﬂuorescence, the as ob-
tained product can be expected to be applied as more efﬁcient materials
[16]. As well as this, the enhancement process can be made used of since
the analysis protocol may be fabricated based on the ﬂuorescence
change induced by the analytes [17]. One primary reason for the difﬁ-
culty to obtain NCs with high QY is the limited strategies for optimiza-
tion of the factors that inﬂuences their photophysical properties.
Initially, it was believed the origin of ﬂuorescence was mainly depended
on the ultra-small core size that could cause the quantum effect and in-
ﬂuence the ﬂuorescence behaviors, which was similar to QDs [18]. As
more works are contributed to this area, the roles for the protection li-
gand have attracted great attentions on the inﬂuence of the ﬂuores-
cence [19]. Additionally, the intrinsic structure, metal composition,
hydrophilic property, surface charge, environment, and other condi-
tions may also have different effects for the ﬂuorescence. When the rel-
ative factors that inﬂuence the ﬂuorescence will be at the optimum
state, the QY of the NCs may possibly be greatly modiﬁed. Recently, var-
ious strategies have been tried to obtain noble metal NCs with enhanced
ﬂuorescence, but the advances for the endeavor on the ﬂuorescence en-
hancement hasn't be summarized yet to the best of our knowledge. Pre-
vious reports are normally focused on the broad synthesis, structures,
characterization and applications of noble metal NCs [7,20–28]. In this
review, we will summarize the works that have been employed to ob-
tain brighter ﬂuorescent metal NCs. Meanwhile, the corresponding ap-
plications of these modiﬁed metal NCs are described. Finally, some
concluding remarks and outlook for research into ﬂuorescence en-
hancement for the metal NCs are demonstrated for future prospect.
2. Fluorescence enhancement based on the properties
2.1. Fabrication of alloy NCs
The formation of alloy NCs has been employed as an important pro-
tocol for the improvement of the brightness of the ﬂuorescence through
changing the structures, core position and shapes by various protocols
[22]. Thereafter, these changes could affect the ﬂuorescence properties
of metal NCs signiﬁcantly. The doping of another metal in NCs for the
enhancement of ﬂuorescence has been reported by different papers.
The most common combination for fabrication of alloy NCs are doping
gold NCs (Au NCs) with silver, which have described considerable en-
hancement effect. Additionally, other combination for NCs between
noble metals can also be employed for the enhancement of the ﬂuores-
cence. A summarization for recently work on the employment of alloy
NCs for modiﬁcation of ﬂuorescence behaviors are described in
Table 1. For instance, Jin has fabricated series of the phosphine-
protected AgxAu25 −x NCs [29]. Initially, the as prepared Au NCs de-
scribe quite low QY. After the fabrication of alloy AgxAu25 −x NCs,
they haven't described signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence change when x ≤12.
However, it is further found substituting Ag with Au in the matrix
of the 25 Au atoms can signiﬁcantly enhance the ﬂuorescence of the
NCs. It is proposed the atomic-level structure can only be obtained
when X = 13, which enables the formation of highly ﬂuorescent alloy
NCs. The ﬂuorescence QY of the as modiﬁed Ag13Au12 NCs is as high as
40.1%, which describes 200 fold enhancement compared to the
AgxAu25 −x NCs when x ≤12. After the modiﬁcation, it has been demon-
strated Ag13Au12 NCs describe excellent efﬁciency for human cancer cell
imaging though the original Au NCs are not of practical for bioimaging
or related applications. As well as phosphine-ligand protected Au NCs,
the introduction of Ag for fabrication of alloy NCs that can enhance the
ﬂuorescence are also available by using other template. For instance, Bo-
vine serum albumin (BSA) and glutathione (GSH) protected Au-Ag NCs
describe ﬂuorescence enhancement compared to Au NCs though the
exact number of each atom is not mentioned [30–32]. Furthermore,
Cu can also be used like Ag to enhance the ﬂuorescence of Au NCs. Re-
cently, Kazan reported the ﬂuorescence of Au38 NCs was signiﬁcantly
enhanced after the fabrication of Au38Cu1 due to the change in the elec-
tronic structure as well as the restriction of intramolecular movement
for the SR units in protection ligand by the addition of copper [33].
Besides the ﬂuorescence enhancement for Au NCs, doping Ag NCs
with Au will improve the ﬂuorescence of QY as well. Giada Soldan
found doping discrete number of Au atoms in Ag NCs could not only en-
hance the ﬂuorescence brightness but also the stability [34]. A 26-fold
QY enhancement had been obtained by doping Ag29(BDT)12(TPP)4
NCs with Au atoms, producing Ag29 −xAux(BDT)12-(TPP)4, x = 1–5.
As well as the composition ratio for each metal of the alloy, it
was found the ﬂuorescence of the NCs was drastically inﬂuenced
by shape. Kang has successfully designed a controllable strategy for
synthesis of alloy NCs with different shapes by alloying heteroatom
complexes with different ligands [35]. The shape of the spherical
[Pt1Ag24(SPhMe2)18]
NCs
could
be
transferred
to
rod-like
Pt2Au10Ag13(PPh3)10Br7 NCs while alloying with [AuI(PPh3)Br]. After
that, Alloy NCs with much higher QY (14.7%) was obtained. Compared
to the ﬂuorescent Pt1Ag24 NCs (QY = 0.1%) with spherical shape, the
QY of Pt2Au10Ag13 NCs increases about 150 times. Progress has been
made for the ﬂuorescence enhancement of NCs by the fabrication of
alloy NCs, but most of the NCs are built by doping Nobel metal NCs
with other noble metal element [22]. In the future, after wide investiga-
tions are contributed to this area, the combination with other common
metal or metal oxide such as Zn or ZnO may also contribute to the QY
enhancement for metal NCs due to the charge transfer or structure
change, which may also describe more excellent application efﬁciency.
Table 1
The fabrication of alloy NCs for the ﬂuorescence enhancement.
Nanoclusters
Combination
Enhancement fold
Reference
[Au25(PPh3)10(SC2H4Ph)5Cl2]2+
AgxAu25-x(x = 13)
200
[29]
Au16 NCs@BSA
hybrid Au@Ag NCs adducts
2
[30]
GSH-Au NCs
GS-Au/Ag NCs
3.5
[32]
BSA-Au NCs
BSA-AuAg NCs
6.5
[36]
Au NCs@GSH
AgAu NCs (Ag: (Au + Ag) = 1: 20)
4–5
[37]
Ag29(BDT)12(TPP)4
Ag29-xAux(BDT)12 (x = 1–5)
26
[34]
Pt1Ag24(SPhMe2)18
Pt2Au10Ag13(PPh3)10Br7
150
[35]
Au38(2-PET)24
CuxAu38(2-PET)24 (x = 1)
–
[33]
26
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

2.2. Aggregation induced emission
Aggregation induced emission (AIE) is considered to be fabricated as
the ﬂuorescence of the related molecules is signiﬁcantly enhanced upon
aggregation [38]. It is initially proposed as a phenomenon that has been
produced with certain organic ﬂuorophores [39]. Since the protection li-
gand that related to the non-radiative relaxations for the sublevel excit-
ed states in isolated NCs limit the ﬂuorescence QY, the vibration,
rotation and torsional movements can be signiﬁcantly inhibited after
aggregation. It can be expected the restriction of the non-radiative re-
laxation will enhance the ﬂuorescence. Therefore, the aggregation of
NCs will enable the ﬂuorescence enhancement at appropriate condi-
tions based on this mechanism. Recently, AIE has received great atten-
tions in designing highly ﬂuorescent NCs [40]. The typical approaches
are summarized as follows.
2.2.1. Solvent induced aggregation
Varying the polarity of the corresponding solvent has been proved to
be an effective method to modulate the degree of aggregation for NCs. It
has been found that the aggregation can be obtained much easily and
the ﬂuorescence will be signiﬁcantly enhanced by chose an appropriate
solvent [41]. For instance, we found that little ﬂuorescence was visible
after the mixing of D-penicillamine (DPA) and Cu2+ within short time
[42]. However, bright red emission could be obtained almost immedi-
ately with the assistance of ethanol, which facilitates the formation of
aggregated Cu NCs and the ﬂuorescence can be greatly enhanced than
that in water [43]. Furthermore, the fast formation process facilitates
the design of Cu2+ sensor based on the speciﬁc formation of Cu NCs be-
tween DPA and any copper precursor even with low concentrations of
Cu2+. On the hand, the sensing experiment is not favorable in the pres-
ence of pure water solution due to the relative lower QY of Cu NCs and
much longer reaction time [44]. Similarly, another example for using
ethanol to enable the easier formation of highly ﬂuorescent NCs is de-
scribed by Luo, see Fig. 1 [45] Initially, no ﬂuorescence can be observed
with the excitation by the oligomeric Au (I)-thiolate complexes in water
solvent. On the other hand, the ﬂuorescence of the aggregated Au (I)-SG
complexes can be signiﬁcantly enhanced by adjusting the degree of mo-
lecular aggregates through the addition of ethanol. In the presence of
ethanol, the aggregation of Au (I)-thiolate complexes will attach on
Au (0) cores. Then, the generation of Au (0)@Au (I)-thiolate core-shell
NCs would emit strong ﬂuorescence due to the aggregation of Au (I)-
thiolate complexes on the surface of NCs [45]. By the employment of
AIE, the QY of ﬂuorescent Au-thiolate NCs can reach as high as ca.15%,
which would be bright enough for some further applications.
Besides ethanol, other solvent that can facilitate higher insolubility of
the NCs will also improve the brightness of the ﬂuorescence for AIE [46,
47]. For instance, because the structures of PEI solvent could be changed
in THF, the conformational changes of PEI capped Cu NCs in THF would
cause the AIE phenomena. Therefore the ﬂuorescence intensity of PEI
protected Cu NCs will be greatly enhanced in THF [48]. From these exam-
ples, it can be seen that some NCs will show signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence en-
hancement in organic solvent, but they will describe weak or no
ﬂuorescence in water. Huang employed this phenomenon to develop a
method for detection of water [49]. The bright ﬂuorescence can be
turned on due to AIE of Cu NCs in organic solvents. On the other hand,
it the presence of water, the ﬂuorescence will be quenched. Furthermore,
by adding N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) to remove water, the
ﬂuorescence will be recovered. Based on these phenomena, a reversible
nano-switch sensor based on Cu NCs can be obtained for water sensing.
The scheme and the reversible switch phenomena are described in Fig. 2.
It can be observed from Fig. 2b that the reversibility for the switch is ex-
cellent enough for several cycles and the sensor can be reused.
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic illustration of solvent-induced aggregation of oligomeric Au (I)-thiolate complexes. (b) Photos of Au (I)-thiolate complexes in mixed solvents of ethanol and water
with different ratio under visible and UV light. (c) UV–vis absorption and (d) ﬂuorescence emission spectra of Au (I)-thiolate complexes in mixed solvents with different ratio.
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [45]. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.
27
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

2.2.2. Assembly induced enhancement
Normally, the assembled materials can combine the advantages of
the entire structure and each component and thus show some speciﬁc
performance for the application. For instance, the assembled noble
metal nanomaterials can be used as excellent SERS substrate due to gen-
eration of hot-spots [50]. Recently, like traditional nanoparticles, people
also found methods for assembling NCs as bigger size nanomaterials,
which can suppress intramolecular vibration and rotation of the cap-
ping ligand. As the NCs are assembled as larger size materials, the
ratio between different charged element such as Au (0) and Au (I) is
changed. Then, the ligand to metal charge transfer process will also be
changed and further inﬂuence the ﬂuorescence. As well as this, the radi-
ative relaxation of exactions can be facilitated due to AIE. Moreover, the
properties of individual NCs hasn't been destroyed, which still show dis-
perse behavior that is conﬁrmed by higher magniﬁcation observation.
All these factors will be necessary for the ﬂuorescence enhancement.
Then the emission intensity of the as assembled NCs can be greatly en-
hanced by assembly aggregation [51]. Wang developed Au NCs at the
oil/water interface to assemble well-deﬁned nano-ribbon structures
[52]. The QY of the as prepared Au NCs at room temperature is as high
as 13.3%. By the further development of this ﬁeld, Cu NCs have been
engineered self-assembly using ethanol into some special shapes like
bigger size nanomaterial. It is reported the QY can be enhanced to 13%
as nanoribbons and 15.4% by creating metal defects on the surface of
Cu NCs self-assembly nanosheets. Furthermore, the Transmission elec-
tron microscopy (TEM) shows that the as-assembled Cu NCs appear as
well deﬁned sheets (Fig. 3a) and ribbons (Fig. 3b). The inset TEM images
reveal that both the nanosheets and nanoribbons are composed of indi-
vidual NCs rather than crystalline Cu. Since bright emission has been de-
scribed by the assemblies of NCs, they can be employed as the colour
conversion layer for fabrication of LEDs. Wu has combined the Cu NCs
assemblies with blue, green and red emissions, where the ﬁrst white
colour LED has been obtained by metal NCs [53]. Additionally, they
may combine the ﬂuorescence as well as the simple separation proper-
ties of the relative big size nanoparticles, which will facilitate further ap-
plications especially for immunoassay.
In addition to the self-assembly method, the NCs can also be assem-
bled within the polymer or other conﬁned template to enhance the
ﬂuorescence. Yahia-Ammar successfully achieved ﬂuorescence for Au-
ASH-PAH in the pH range from 6 to 8 and ca. 6.5-fold ﬂuorescence en-
hancement can be obtained compared to the free Au NCs [54]. The ﬂuo-
rescence intensity is decreased for high PAH and high Au-GSH
concentrations. Brighter ﬂuorescence imaging and enhanced drug
delivery application was achieved by the application of the modiﬁed
product.
2.2.3. Ion induced aggregation
Normally, metal ion tend to quench the ﬂuorescence of noble metal
NCs due to the interaction with the metal core [7,55,56] or interconnect-
ed by stabilized ligands [56]. Then, the bigger fused aggregates are
formed though they are not ﬂuorescent. However, several papers re-
ported the enhancement of ﬂuorescence by metal ion induced aggrega-
tion based on different mechanisms. Dou has designed a simple strategy
to synthesize highly ﬂuorescent thiolated Au@Ag NCs where Ag(I) ions
were used to bridge Au(I)-thiolate motifs on thiolated Au NCs [57]. The
weak ﬂuorescence of Au NCs was greatly enhanced due to the formation
of large Au (I)/Ag (I)-thiolate motifs on the surface of NCs, see Fig. 4.
Then, the ﬂuorescence of thiolated AuAg NCs can be greatly enhanced
by Ag (I) induced by AIE. In addition, it is proposed that the protocol
can be further extended to enhance the ﬂuorescence of other parental
Au NCs by the formation of Au@Ag NCs. For example, the QY of the
weakly ﬂuorescent Au15(SG)13 (QY of 0.025%) and Au25(SG)18 (QY of
0.12%) can be enhanced to 2.1% and 3.2%, respectively by the fabrication
of Au15@Ag NCs and Au25@Ag NCs using a similar route like that de-
scribed in Fig. 4. The ﬂuorescence of Au15@Ag NCs and Au25@Ag NCs
could be enhanced 83 times and 25 times compared to Au15 NCs and
Au25 NCs, respectively. Beside gold and silver, the metal ion induced ag-
gregation can also facilitate the ﬂuorescence enhancement of Cu NCs.
Miao found the ﬂuorescent intensity of Eu3+@Cu NCs protected by insu-
lin protein has been signiﬁcantly enhanced compared with that of Cu
NCs by the addition of Eu3+ [58]. They propose the insulin could be
gathered together to form insulin hexamer by permeability regulation
of lanthanide ions. As a result, the ﬂuorescence resonance energy trans-
fer (FRET) will efﬁciently enhance the ﬂuorescence of Cu NCs by sensi-
tizing lanthanide ions. Similarly, since Eu3+ can cause AIE for Cu NCs
while phosphate ion will enable the aggregation of Cu NCs soluble,
Cao has designed on-off-on sensor for determination of phosphate ion
in water samples [59]. Another example for inducing the aggregation
for ﬂuorescence enhancement of Cu NCs is by the addition of Zn2+
[60]. Our group found that the combination of Zn2+ with Cu NCs can
not only increase the stability in water solution, but also N3 fold en-
hancement can be achieved. By using this mechanism, the ﬂuorescence
enhancement process has been developed for Zn2+ sensor by other
work [61]. Most recently, Han developed thymine template ﬂuorescent
Cu NCs, which show great enhancement in the presence of Mn2+ based
on AIE [62]. By the employment of this mechanism, selective Mn2+
Fig. 2. (a) Schematic illustration of the reversible ﬂuorescence switch in response to external stimulus of H2O or DCC based on AIE mechanism of Cu NCs in organic solvents.
(b) Reversibility of Cu NCs in DMSO by introducing an equivalent mole of H2O and DCC.
Reprinted with permission from [49]. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.
28
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

sensor can be designed over other metal ions. Additionally, it is interest-
ing that the ﬂuorescence enhanced alloy NCs can be further enhanced
by some other ions induced aggregation. Zhou found Al3+ could enable
the aggregation of NCs through the interaction of Al3+ with the ligand
shell. Then, the ﬂuorescence enhancement of AuAg alloy could be fur-
ther achieved by the addition of Al3+ [63]. It is reported bout 3-fold ﬂuo-
rescence enhancement has been achieved.
On the other hand, the addition of anions could also increase the
ﬂuorescence intensity of the NCs based on AIE. Li found the addition
of H2S could induce a signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence enhancement because
S2−ions led to the aggregation of the dispersed Cu NCs in diluted
solutions. Furthermore, by employment of the enhancement behavior,
the as-prepared Cu NCs was used as a novel ﬂuorescent probe to selec-
tively detect H2S in a gas sample on the basis of the speciﬁc interactions
of HS−/S2−ions with Cu ions [64]. Finally, since both anions and cations
have been reported for the assistance of AIE, it is worth investigating
whether the addition of some salt where both anions and cations can
contribute to the AIE behavior. As expected, Francos has conﬁrmed
AIE can happen for Au-NCs@GSH by adding KSCN. It was demonstrated
by their experiment that both K+ and SCN−contributed to the ﬂuores-
cence increasing [65]. 1.3 times ﬂuorescence enhancement can be
achieved by this method.
Fig. 3. (a) TEM image of the nanoribbons from self-assembly Cu NCs. Inset: the Fourier transform image. (b) TEM images of Cu NCs self-assembly nanosheets. Inset: magniﬁcation TEM
images of Cu NCs self-assembly nanosheets.
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [51]. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society (for a). Reprinted with permission from Ref. [53]. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society
(for b).
Fig. 4. Schematic illustration for the synthesis of highly ﬂuorescent Au@Ag NCs by using Ag (I) ions as linkers in connecting the small Au(I)–thiolate motifs on the parental Au NCs. (b) UV–
vis absorption and ﬂuorescence spectra: spectra of the parental Au18(SG)14 NCs (black lines) and ﬂuorescent Au@Ag NCs (red lines). (Insets) Photos of the parental Au18(SG)14 NCs (items
1 and 2) and ﬂuorescent Au@Ag NCs (items 3 and 4), under visible (items 1 and 3) and UV (items 2 and 4) light.
Reproduced from Ref. [57] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.
29
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

2.2.4. Other aggregations
As well as the above methods for triggering AIE, many other
methods can caused the aggregation of NCs though their mechanism
are not completely clear. For instance, by choosing and optimized tem-
perature and pH, Lakshmi V. Nair has prepared GSH-Au NCs with red
emission and the QY is as high as 24% [66]. It has been mentioned that
the enhanced ﬂuorescence of the Au NCs are caused by AIE that based
on the core oxidation. AIE can greatly enhance the QY of NCs, but
most methods are included the aggregates that cannot be dissolved in
water. Another interesting ﬂuorescence enhancement phenomenon
for NCs is through taking advantage of the protein aggregates that
were formed by the interaction of lysozyme (Lyz) and bovine serum al-
bumin (BSA) [67]. An inter-protein conjugate was formed after the ag-
gregations would play a role as the new template where FRET might
possibly enable the ﬂuorescence enhancement. The new water soluble
Au36@BSA–Lyz NCs protected by the conjugate of the protein could
show an extremely high QY of 42%, which will be very promising in
the area of sensing and bio-imaging. Recently, Kang has developed a
protocol that doesn't require insoluble solutions or cations [68]. The
ﬂuorescence enhancement is induced by the aggregation of non-
ﬂuorescent CuISR1 (R1 = C10H15) with Au0 atoms. The movement of
the CuISR units was highly inhibited by Au atoms, which induced signif-
icant enhancement of QY to 11.7%.
However, not all aggregation is available for the ﬂuorescence en-
hancement. The increased sizes of the aggregates sometimes just induce
the quenching of the ﬂuorescence [69]. In summary, if the NCs are as-
sembled in the aggregates as individual clusters rather than fused as
bigger particle with other NCs, the ﬂuorescence possibly tend to be en-
hanced. It can be concluded that many other promising protocols are
expected to contribute to AIE for NCs.
2.3. Conﬁned ﬂuorescence enhancement
2.3.1. ELDH nanosheets
2D exfoliated layered double hydroxides (ELDH) nanosheets have
been employed to localize Au NCs and the surface conﬁnement effect
can be achieved. Therefore, they are effective methods for enhancement
of the ﬂuorescence for metal NCs. For instance, the excited electrons of
GSH-Au NCs can be strongly conﬁned by MgAl-ELDH nanosheets,
which results in great enhancement of QY [70]. The host-guest interac-
tion inhibits the non-radiation transition when Au NCs are anchored
onto ELDH nanosheets. Due to the different conﬁnement effect, the
ratio of Au NCs/ELDH play an important role for the ﬂuorescence inten-
sity, see Fig. 5. It can be seen from Fig. 5A that the original Au NCs exhibit
weak ﬂuorescence. With the enhancement of x/y ratio, the QY of Au NCs
x/ELDHy nanohybrids increases at ﬁrst to a maximum from 0.5:1 to 3:1
and then decreases from 3:1 to 4:1. The highest QY (19.05%) is about 7.3
folds compared to the original Au NCs (2.60%). As well as this, there are
other successful attempts along this surface-conﬁned ﬂuorescence
enhancement by fabrications of similar nanosheets. For instance, Tian
fabricated Au NCs-based UTFs with high QY through a layer-by-layer as-
sembly with LDH nanosheets [50]. Due to the host-guest interaction, Au
NCs are conﬁned by LDH nanosheets and the enhanced ﬂuorescence is
obtained caused by the reduced non-radiative transition. The method
can promote QY of the Au NCs from 2.69% to 14.11%. They further report
that the as modiﬁed Au NCs hybrid material exhibit signiﬁcantly en-
hanced image resolution for Hela cell imaging. The as prepared mate-
rials are also promising for further applications such as drug delivery
in the area of targeted diagnosis and therapy.
2.3.2. Nanogel
Nirmal Goswami has employed nano-sized hydrogel to fabricate
highly thiolated Au NCs by “spatially conﬁning” the Au(I)-thiolate com-
plexes in chitosan, see Fig. 6 [71]. As the nanogel was formed, signiﬁcant
ﬂuorescence enhancement has been obtained due to the attraction be-
tween chitosan and thiolate ligands, which restricts the intramolecular
motions of the thio ligands and Au NCs. From Fig. 6a, it can be observed
that nearly 3.7 times enhancement is obtained for the Au NCs in the
presence of chitosan. The TEM characterization (Fig. 6b) demonstrates
the spherical shape of the nanogel, where each nanogel is impregnated
with a group of Au NCs. It reveals that the morphology on the as-
synthesized nanogel is assembled from the Au NCs. Based on this meth-
od, it can be concluded that when other NCs are conﬁned in this kind of
nanogel, the enhancement for ﬂuorescence could be probably achieved
as well. Due to the water stability of the as modiﬁed product are with
low toxicity and good biocompatibility, it can be expected that the
nanogel-impregnated Au NCs will be promising for applications in the
biomedical ﬁeld.
2.3.3. Fabrication of Au NCs-MOFs
It has found that the materials with weak ﬂuorescence are possible
to be turned on by building them within metal-organic frameworks
(MOFs) [72]. In the case of NCs, MOFs can be used to control the confor-
mation and restrict the rotation of their protection ligands, and thus fur-
ther improve their QY like other conﬁnement method. Until now, only
several works have been developed to conﬁne NCs by MOFs, but prom-
ising progress has been achieved by these protocols, which will enlight-
en the further combination of NCs with MOFs for application with more
excellent efﬁciency. For instance, Cao enable the encapsulation of aggre-
gated Au NCs (aAu NCs) in MOFs and maintain their aggregation [73].
The as prepared MOFs have been employed for the relative applications
such as drug release. The QY are enhanced to be as high as 7.74%. Like
other MOFs, this product may be applied for gas storage in the future
[74]. Fig. 7 describes the as-synthesized Au NCs, aAu NCs and the corre-
sponding MOF for aAu NCs. It can be seen the Au NCs were initially
mono-dispersed. After they were aggregated by introducing methanol,
the as prepared aAu NCs were encapsulated in MOF and a rhombic do-
decahedron shape was obtained. It can be observed from Fig. 7d that the
Fig. 5. (A) Fluorescence spectra, (B) relative QY of Au NCsx/ELDHy with various x/y ratios under the condition of equivalent Au content (from Samples 1 to 10): x/y = 0:1, 0.5:1, 0.75:1, 1:1,
1.25:1, 1.5:1, 2:1, 3:1, 4:1 and 1:0, respectively. The inset in B shows sample photographs under UV light radiation (365 nm).
Reproduced from Ref. [70] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.
30
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

aAu NCs-MOFs demonstrates enhancement compared to Au NCs.
Besides Au NCs, Cu NCs has also been conﬁned in MOFs for enhance-
ment of the ﬂuorescence [75]. A N20-fold increase of QY (from 0.5% to
11%) is achieved. Additionally, it has been well known that Cu NCs are
extremely unstable that the ﬂuorescence can decrease very fast
with short time [21,76,77], but the as prepared MOFs for Cu NCs can in-
crease the ﬂuorescence stability and it can last from several hours to
weeks. The MOFs can be employed as selective chemical sensors to
the explosive pollutant 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT). Based on these
work, conﬁnement of NCs by MOFs will be an effective strategy to im-
prove the ﬂuorescence and enable the further application in various
ﬁeld. Still, little water soluble MOFs has been established for NCs yet,
which limit their application. Further efforts for the modiﬁcation of
NCs-MOFs in this area are still required.
2.3.4. Protein interaction
The amine and carboxylic groups from protein may assist their bind-
ing with the NCs. Thus, it is easier for protein to be attached on the
Fig. 6. Comparison of the ﬂuorescence intensity of the Au (0)@Au (I)-SG NCs with (red) and without (black) chitosan (a). TEM image of the nanogel-impregnated Au (0)@Au (I)-SG NCs
(b).
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [71]. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.
Fig. 7. TEM images of (a) the Au NCs, (b) the aAu NCs, and (c) aAu NCs-MOFs. (d) Fluorescence spectra of the Au NCs and aAu NCs-MOFs in PBS buffer (pH 7.4).
Reproduced from Ref. [73] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.
31
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

surface of NCs. It was found the interaction of NCs with protein can be
used for the enhancement of ﬂuorescence. Due to non-radiative relaxa-
tion induced by water, many water soluble NCs describe weaker ﬂuo-
rescence than the NCs that are not water soluble. However, after the
surface of Au NCs is further conﬁned by protein molecules, ﬂuorescence
enhancement was achieved since the surface of Au NCs will be
obstructed from water [78]. Shang found both the ﬂuorescence of Au
NCs and Ag NCs described enhancement after interaction with various
kinds of protein [79,80]. In the presence of Human serum albumin
(HAS), the ﬂuorescence increased ca. 5 times for Au NCs and ca. 1
time for Ag NCs. It is suggested by other work that the enhancement
of ﬂuorescence intensity is due to the binding of the protein to the high-
ly active surface of Au NCs [81]. Fig. 8 shows the respective ﬂuorescence
spectra of Au NCs in the presence of absence and presence of three kinds
of proteins. A signiﬁcant increase in ﬂuorescence intensity is observed
for Au NCs in the presence of proteins especially for MPT63G20C. As
well as this, since BSA shell can also effectively block the direct contact
between the NC core and water. Meanwhile, the hydrophilic behavior
of protein enables the water solubility of the modiﬁed product. For in-
stance, DPA-Cu NCs were prepared based on AIE, but they are initially
not water soluble [82]. By the modiﬁcation, BSA can be attached on
DPA-Cu NCs by their electrostatic attraction and N2-fold enhancement
for the ﬂuorescence was achieved. It was reported the as modiﬁed pro-
duced has described more excellent sensitivity for detection of Ag+ than
most relative sensors.
2.4. Optimization of the ligand
Jin reported the charge transfer from the ligands to the metal core
and direct donation of delocalized electrons of electron-rich atoms or
groups of the ligands to the metal core both contribute to the ﬂuores-
cence behavior [83]. As a result, the surface ligands play an important
role in the ﬂuorescence of NCs. They propose ligands with groups
(e.g.,\\COOH, NH2) or electron-rich atoms (e.g., N, O) will promote
the ﬂuorescence with great efﬁciency. Finding a perfect ligand or mod-
iﬁed the NCs can both optimize the ﬂuorescence of NCs. Various works
have functionalized the surface of NCs with various protected ligand in-
cluding thiols, [84] polymers, [85] and proteins [81]. Since different li-
gands may enable different effects for the ﬂuorescence behavior of
NCs, some work has employed the ligand exchange strategy to obtain
brighter ﬂuorescence. For instance, Crawford found the ligand substitu-
ent group altering the electronic structure of the ﬂuorophore can sig-
niﬁcantly inﬂuence the ﬂuorescence of Au NCs [86]. Initially, they
prepared phosphine-terminated Au NCs where no ﬂuorescence has
been observed. After the introduction of additional sulfur-containing li-
gands, the ﬂuorescence QY is signiﬁcantly enhanced from 0.13% to
3.65% [86]. They propose the substituent group attached to the sulfur
atom will modify the ﬂuorescence properties of NCs. Additionally,
it has been found the ligands with longer chain for mercapto-
carboxylate acid can always enable the higher QY for NCs. For instance,
Au NCs can be fabricated using ligands from 3-mercaptopropionic acid
to 16-mercaptohexadecanoic acid, signiﬁcant fold enhancements
(from 0.37% to 11.43%) for the ﬂuorescence can be obtained by increas-
ing the ligand alkyl chain by a methylene unit [87]. Another work [88]
obtains the Au NCs with 16-mercaptohexadecanoic acid coating and
the QY can be achieved as high as 28%. The as obtained Au NCs with
bright ﬂuorescence can be used as excellent dyes for HeLa cell imaging.
Though high QY has been obtained, but the water solubility of
mercapto-carboxylate acid protected NCs will decrease at the same
time with the longer chain. Actually, 16-mercaptohexadecanoic acid
protected NCs are with low water solubility and stability. Further im-
provement of the as fabricated product is required.
Normally, the addition of GSH can result in ﬂuorescence enhance-
ment for some Au NCs with weak ﬂuorescence because a stronger
Au\\S bond will be formed. Zhang found the ﬂuorescence of histidine
protected AuNCs could be enhanced by GSH through ligand change ef-
fect [89]. They demonstrated the GSH could also be applied for other
NCs such as BSA-Au NCs. By the employment the enhancement process,
selective GSH sensor can be designed over cysteine (Cys) and homocys-
teine (Hcy) in cell medium. The GSH enhancement effect has also be
proved by PVP supported Cu NCs [90], which further conﬁrm the mod-
iﬁcation of GSH can be employed for the ﬂuorescence enhancement of
NCs. Fig. 9 describes the ﬂuorescence and absorption spectra for Cu
NCs and GSH modiﬁed Cu NCs. It can be observed the ﬂuorescence QY
of Cu NCs treated with GSH signiﬁcantly enhance the ﬂuorescence of
Cu NCs. It is reported the most pronounced effect for the ﬂuorescence
QY can reach 27%. The as modiﬁed powders of Cu NCs are bright enough
to fabricate LED. Besides the introduction of another ligand for ligand
exchange, we propose salt aging method for enhancement of the ﬂuo-
rescence with the current ligand. Because higher ligand densities will
be effective in enhancing the ﬂuorescence of thiolated Au NCs [91], we
enable gold core cap with more DHLA ligands by the addition sodium
citrate, which is similar like the DNA maximizing method for gold label-
ing [92–94]. Intense ﬂuorescence signal is found for the highest ligand
coverage. Similar effects have also been reported by other paper [95].
Most recently, it was reported the water-dispersible naked Au
NCs are non-ﬂuorescent without capping any ligand [96]. However,
after they were passivated with different thiols and adenosine
Fig. 8. (A) Fluorescence emission spectra of (a) only Au NCs and in saturating concentration of (b) WT MPT63, (c) MPT63G75C and (d) MPT63G20C. (B) Fluorescence intensity as a function
of proteins; (a) MPT63G20C, (b) MPT63G75C and (c) wild type MPT63.
Reproduced from Ref. [78] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.
32
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

monophosphate, ﬂuorescent NCs could be obtained. They proposed the
interaction between the ligand and the surface of Au NCs played an im-
portant role for the ﬂuorescence of the passivated NCs. All these reports
suggest that modifying the appropriate ligand or make full use of the li-
gand on NCs is very important for obtaining a product with excellent
ﬂuorescent properties.
2.5. Changing the valence states
Another important parameter of Au NCs that needs to be considered
is the valence state of metal atoms, which may drastically inﬂuence the
ﬂuorescence. Shang used NaBH4 for reduction of the as prepared DPA-
Au NCs, which caused a sharp decrease of the ﬂuorescence intensity to
b5% [97]. The signiﬁcant changes suggest that the compositions of Au
atoms in the Au NCs are mixture of Au (0) and Au (I). In their case,
when the ratio of Au (I) is decreased, the ﬂuorescence is also signiﬁcant-
ly quenched. It reveals the ﬂuorescence will be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced
by the ratios between Au (I) and Au (0). On the other hand, it is also re-
ported that the ﬂuorescence of Au25(PET)18 NCs increased by the chem-
ical oxidation of the Au core [83]. They use dialysis method to oxidize Au
(0) to Au (I) for an optimum ratio. Then, obvious ﬂuorescence enhance-
ment has been obtained. Based on this mechanism, a new surface oxida-
tion method was demonstrated to efﬁciently increase the QYs of Au NCs
from 1–2% to 10% [98]. Fig. 10 describes the enhancement diagram by
the oxidation process, which indicates the change of the surface charge.
It can be seen from Fig. 10b that signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence enhancement
can be achieved after the dialysis. Therefore, oxidation of the metal to
an appropriate charge ratio will be a promising method for improve-
ment of the ﬂuorescence for NCs.
2.6. Rigidifying the ligand or the shell
Fluorescence enhancement due to rigidity in organic molecules has
been widely reported [99]. However, still few works are contributed
to enable the rigidity of the metal shell for the fabrication of ultra-
bright emitted NCs. Recently, similar behavior for Au NCs to organic
molecules has been proposed by Pyo [100]. They paired Au22(SG)18
NCs with TOA cations with the carboxylate anions of GSH. Due to the in-
tramolecular interaction between the alkyl chains of TOA cations, the Au
(I)-thiolate shell becomes rigid, see Fig. 11. It can be seen that the ﬂuo-
rescence intensity increases drastically after the gold core is paired with
TOA. The ﬂuorescence intensity is found to be enhanced nearly 9 times
and a QY of 62% is achieved for Au NCs in toluene. By using a similar
strategy, they modify the cluster with small aromatic molecules and
pyrene chromophores, 5-fold ﬂuorescence enhancement can be
achieved for water soluble Au NCs by rigidifying the shell gold and the
QY of 30% can be obtained [101].
Unfortunately, the TOA paired Au22 NCs are only stable in organic
solvents. Therefore, it is necessary to ﬁnd new protocols to efﬁciently
obtain water-soluble, homogeneous, and ultra-bright metal NCs. Wei
Chen's group introduced a new attempt to strikingly improve the QY
of Au NCs based on host-guest recognition [102]. Initially, they synthe-
size 6-aza-2-thiothymine-stabilized Au NCs (ATT-AuNCs) with weak
ﬂuorescence (QY = 1.8%). However, after addition of D-arginine (Arg)
Fig. 9. (a) Absorption spectra, (b, c) ﬂuorescence emission and excitation spectra of Cu NCs and GSH treated Cu NCs.
Reproduced from Ref. [90] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Fig. 10. (a) Scheme for oxidation of the lipoic acid ligands on Au22 NCs. (b) Impacts of puriﬁcation routes on the optical features. The absorption (left) and the ﬂuorescence spectra (right) of
Au22 NCs by different treatments.
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [98]. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.
33
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

in the capping layer, the ﬂuorescence is signiﬁcantly enhanced (QY =
65%). The scheme is describe in Fig. 12. It indicated the interaction be-
tween the guanidine group of Arg and ATT rigidiﬁed the ligand shell
and the ﬂuorescence QY can be signiﬁcantly increased because vibration
and rotation of protection ligand is inhibited after the host-guest recog-
nition between ATT and arginine. This method may possibly enlighten
the further development of water soluble NCs with ultra-bright
ﬂuorescence.
2.7. Other method for modiﬁcation the properties
Great efforts have been achieved for the modiﬁcation of the QY
based on optical fundamental of NCs, but the ﬂuorescent behaviors are
not completely clear. Some other factors may still inﬂuence the bright-
ness of the ﬂuorescence emission. There are also some methods,
which mentioned the enhancement of the ﬂuorescence though the
mechanism is not explained in detail. For instance, Li demonstrate
that the introduction of NaBr can improve the uniform dispersion and
decrease the size of eptiﬁbatide@Au NCs, which may be the reason to
obtain the NCs with more excellent optimal properties [103]. It is ob-
served the associated ﬂuorescence intensities are greatly increased in
the presence of NaBr when compared with the blank case. The experi-
mental results conﬁrm that NaBr is an excellent ﬂuorescence sensitizer
for the improved ﬂuorescence of eptiﬁbatide@Au NCs. The correspond-
ing ﬂuorescent intensity can enhance 3.37 times in comparison with
that in the absence of NaBr, with the ﬂuorescence quantum yield of
1.8%. In addition, other properties that have been reported still poten-
tially inﬂuence the behaviors of NCs and all these ﬂuorescence en-
hanced phenomena are worth investigating to completely understand
the behavior of NCs.
3. Modiﬁcation of synthesis process
Besides the consideration of the properties of NCs, the modiﬁcation
of the synthesis process will also play an important role for improve-
ment of the ﬂuorescence behaviors by various reasons. For instance,
microwave exposure can provide a rapid and high elevation of temper-
ature and homogeneous heating, which may accelerate the reduction of
the metal precursors and the nucleation of Au NCs. During the synthesis
process, some big size gold nanoparticles that are not ﬂuorescent are
always formed together with the NCs, which may not easily be separat-
ed. By the microwave assistance, the yields of NCs are enhanced and
more homogeneous products can be obtained. Lin et al. observed en-
hanced ﬂuorescence QY for dendrimer-entrapped Au NCs that were
generated by microwave irradiation for 30 min [104]. Generally, it
takes more than several hours to obtain these metal NCs, but the micro-
wave assistance will largely reduce the reaction time and enable the
product with enhanced QY. Shang et al. synthesized DHLA-Au NCs by
a microwave strategy. The QY was ﬁve times higher than that of product
produced by conventional heating [105]. Fig. 13 demonstrated the com-
parison of the Au NCs obtained by microwave heating and normal room
temperature synthesis. Due to the signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence enhance-
ment for Au NCs, the as modiﬁed product can be used as excellent can-
didates for applications. These modiﬁed metal NCs have been utilized
for metal ions sensing and bioimaging [32].
Additionally, other modiﬁcation for the fabrication process may also
enable brighter NCs. For instance, boiling water synthesis approach has
been employed to prepare ultrastable thiolated Ag NCs with enhanced
ﬂuorescence [106,107]. Initially, a unique Ag (0)@Ag (I)-thiolate core-
shell structure was formed. At high temperature, Ag+ can be reduced
by a mild reducing agent to Ag0. After that, a compact Ag (I)-thiolate
layer is formed on the surface of the Ag0 core and AIE enable the ﬂuores-
cence enhancement. Moreover, Liu obtain an ultra-bright AMP capped
Au NCs prepared by using the heating and citrate reduction procedure
[108]. The method was fast and cost-effective, which required just
60 min. The as obtained Au NCs show high QY (14.52%) and can be po-
tentially applied for biological and/or environmental sensing. Besides
modiﬁcation of the heating protocol, Nguyen synthesized Au NCs by
modiﬁcation of the synthesis media. Higher concentration of alkali is
employed for the synthesis process [109]. They proposed that increas-
ing the concentration of alkali can inﬂuence the charge transfer via
S\\Au bonds between the surface ligands and gold core. At the optimum
alkali condition, the ﬂuorescence can be enhanced up to 3.9 times.
4. Environment conditions
The ﬂuorescence of the as prepared NCs will further be inﬂuenced
according to the environment conditions such as temperature, pressure
and pH values. For real applications, the brightness of NCs can be tuned
by changing the environment though they have already been fabricated.
Fig. 11. (a) Scheme for binding TOA to Au22(SG)18 NCs (Au, blue; S, green), (b) photograph of Au22(SG)18 in water and Au22 NCs in toluene under UV lamp irradiation (365 nm), and
(c) ﬂuorescence spectra of Au22(SG)18 NCs in water and Au22 NCs in toluene.
Reprinted with permission from Ref. [100]. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.
34
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

Zhang [110] found that the ﬂuorescence of BSA-Au NCs could be en-
hanced from 0.1 to 1050 MPa due to the conformational changes of
the structures of BSA. At high pressure, the α-helical structure of BSA
will change, which can facilitate the enhancement of the ﬂuorescence.
On the other hand, the ﬂuorescence will decrease as the protein adopts
a more ﬂexible conformational structure at the boundary surface of Au
Fig. 13. (A) Absorption spectra of Au NCs prepared under ambient conditions (RT_Au NCs, grey curve) and microwave irradiation (MW_Au NCs, dark curve). (B) Fluorescence excitation
(dotted curves) and emission spectra (solid curves) of RT_Au NCs (grey curves) and MW_Au NCs (dark curves).
Reproduced from Ref. [105] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Fig. 12. Schematic illustration of the origin of Arg-mediated ﬂuorescence enhancement of ATT-Au NCs. S0–S2 and IC represent the ground state, the ﬁrst singlet excited state, the second
singlet excited state, and the internal conversion process, respectively.
Reprinted with permission from [102]. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.
35
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

NCs. As well as the inﬂuence of pressure, several works reported the
ﬂuorescence of metal NCs increased when the temperatures decreased.
With increasing temperature, the ﬂuorescence intensity was found to
decrease monotonously as a result of thermal activation of non-
radiative trapping [111]. The ﬂuorescence was mostly enhanced at the
lowest temperate during the work range. By the employment of the
ﬂuorescence change at different temperature, many papers have using
this mechanism for fabrication of temperature sensors based on NCs.
Table 2 demonstrates the ﬂuorescence probes that has been developed
based on NCs. It can be concluded that the ﬂuorescence change of NCs at
different temperature will not only be applied for other potential study,
but also be used for its own process.
Besides temperature and pressure, the pH values may cause a large
conformational change for the ligand of NCs. For instance, the denatur-
ation of some protection ligand happens at an alkaline pH, which can fa-
cilitate the formation of red emitted protein protected NCs [120]. It is
likely that the intensity for the ﬂuorescence of BSA-Cu NCs can be
changed at different pH values, see Fig. 14. The strongest intensity was
obtained at ca. pH 6 for BSA-Cu NCs. Thus, for real applications such as
sensing, appropriate pH 6 can be chose for the optimization of sensing
signal for the analysis at some conditions.
5. Concluding remark and outlook
Great efforts have been devoted for the improvement of the ﬂuores-
cence quantum yield of noble metal nanoclusters, but more excellent
strategies are still expected in this area for further modiﬁcation of the
disadvantages. For instance, aggregation induced emission has been
made great progress for ﬂuorescence enhancement of nanoclusters,
but the as obtained products are mostly not water soluble, which limit
their applications in bio-environment and living systems. Thus, for as-
sembling of the nanoclusters based on aggregation induced emission
as water soluble species will be very important for future applications.
Encapsulated the aggregates with some additional water soluble coat-
ing and engineering them as the controllable size will be one of the
strategies that can be employed. Additionally, the small molecular li-
gand protected nanoclusters can be easily modiﬁed by additional ligand
such as glutathione and protein, but the quantum yield is still not high
enough for most practical application, even after the improvement of
the synthesis process such as microwave assistance. As the ﬁeld
moves forward, the rigidifying the small molecular ligand by host-
guest recognition will enable further improvement of the ﬂuorescence.
However, the as developed ultra-bright nanoclusters are either not sta-
ble in water or with green emission. It is very important to expect water
soluble nanoclusters with red emission, which will facilitate the bio ap-
plication more efﬁciently. Finding a perfect ligand for rigidifying of the
small molecule protected red emitted nanoclusters will be of great im-
portance. Finally, it can be concluded that the combination of these
methods may enable more dramatic enhancement of the nanoclusters.
For instance, the alloy nanoclusters with enhanced ﬂuorescence can
be encapsulated as metal-organic frameworks and the metal-organic
frameworks may be further modiﬁed with some hydrophilic coating
that can obstruct water. This can not only increase the water solubility
but also increase the ﬂuorescence. With these modiﬁcations, it will be
possible to expect a design route for preparing highly ﬂuorescent
metal nanoclusters that could describe more advantages over other
ﬂuorophores, such as inorganic quantum dots and organic dyes in the
future.
Fig. 14. (a) Fluorescence intensity of BSA–Cu NCs responses to pH ranging systematically from 6 to 12, the inset shows that when the pH changed from 12 to 6, the ﬂuorescence intensity of
BSA–Cu NCs increased nearly 2-fold; (b) the ﬂuorescence intensity upon the cyclic switching of BSA–Cu NCs under alternating conditions of pH 6 and pH 12.
Reproduced from Ref. [121] with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Table 2
Temperature range and resolution of metal NCs-based thermometry.
Nanoclusters
Working Range (°C)
Temperature resolution (°C)
Reference
AuNCs@DHLA
10–45
0.1–0.3
[112]
Au NCs@GSH
AuNCs/Dox-liposome
15–50
~0.2
[113]
[(CO32−)@Ag20(SBut)10(DMF)6(NO3)8]
−196–25
[114]
AuNCs@BSA
10–45
0.2
[115]
AuNCs@histidine
−196–27
[116]
Au25SG18 (SG-glutathione thiolate)
−193–27
[117]
[Cu5-(MeNC(S)PPh2NPPh2C(S)NMe)3](PF6)2
−45–80
0.1
[118]
[Cu6L3(Cu2I2)-Cu6L3](H2L = 3,5-bis((3,5-dimethyl-pyrazol-4-yl)methyl)-2,6-dimethylpyridine)
−153–177
[119]
36
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Science Project of Liaoning Province
(No. 201602288) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
81702105).
References
[1] Gao G, Zhang M, Gong D, Chen R, Hu X, Sun T. The size-effect of gold nanoparticles
and nanoclusters in the inhibition of amyloid-beta ﬁbrillation. Nano 2017;9:
4107–13.
[2] Palmal S, Jana NR. Gold nanoclusters with enhanced tunable ﬂuorescence as
bioimaging probes. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 2014;6:
102–10.
[3] Borghei Y-S, Hosseini M, Ganjali MR. Fluorescence based turn-on strategy for deter-
mination of microRNA-155 using DNA-templated copper nanoclusters. Microchim
Acta 2017;184:2671–7.
[4] Oh E, Huston AL, Shabaev A, Efros A, Currie M, Susumu K, et al. Energy transfer sen-
sitization of luminescent gold nanoclusters: more than just the classical Forster
mechanism. Sci Rep 2016;6:35538.
[5] Govindaraju S, Ankireddy SR, Viswanath B, Kim J, Yun K. Fluorescent gold
nanoclusters for selective detection of dopamine in cerebrospinal ﬂuid. Sci Rep
2017;7:40298.
[6] Tao Y, Li M, Kim B, Auguste DT. Incorporating gold nanoclusters and target-directed
liposomes as a synergistic ampliﬁed colorimetric sensor for HER2-positive breast
cancer cell detection. Theranostics 2017;7:899–911.
[7] Li H, Zhu W, Wan A, Liu L. The mechanism and application of the protein-stabilized
gold nanocluster sensing system. Analyst 2017;142:567–81.
[8] Zhao S, Jin R, Abroshan H, Zeng C, Zhang H, House SD, et al. Gold nanoclusters pro-
mote electrocatalytic water oxidation at the nanocluster/CoSe2 INTERFACE. J Am
Chem Soc 2017;139:1077–80.
[9] Chen H, Liu C, Wang M, Zhang C, Luo N, Wang Y, et al. Visible light gold nanocluster
photocatalyst: selective aerobic oxidation of amines to imines. ACS Catal 2017;7:
3632–8.
[10] Liu H, Li M, Xia Y, Ren X. A turn-on ﬂuorescent sensor for selective and sensitive de-
tection of alkaline phosphatase activity with gold Nanoclusters based on inner ﬁlter
effect. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9:120–6.
[11] Han GM, Jia ZZ, Zhu YJ, Jiao JJ, Kong DM, Feng XZ. Biostable L-DNA-templated
aptamer-silver nanoclusters for cell-type-speciﬁc imaging at physiological temper-
ature. Anal Chem 2016;88:10800–4.
[12] Gao F, Zheng W, Gao L, Cai P, Liu R, Wang Y, et al. Au nanoclusters and photosen-
sitizer dual loaded spatiotemporal controllable liposomal nanocomposites enhance
tumor photodynamic therapy effect by inhibiting thioredoxin reductase. Adv
Healthc Mater 2017;6:1601453.
[13] Wang Z, Chen B, Zhu M, Kershaw SV, Zhi C, Zhong H, et al. Stretchable and thermal-
ly stable dual emission composite ﬁlms of on-purpose aggregated copper
nanoclusters in carboxylated polyurethane for remote white light-emitting de-
vices. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2016;8:33993–8.
[14] Han L, Xia JM, Hai X, Shu Y, Chen XW, Wang JH. Protein-stabilized gadolinium
oxide-gold nanoclusters hybrid for multimodal imaging and drug delivery. ACS
Appl Mater Interfaces 2017;9:6941–9.
[15] Higaki T, Liu C, Zeng C, Jin R, Chen Y, Rosi NL, et al. Controlling the atomic structure
of Au30 nanoclusters by a ligand-based strategy. Angew Chem Int Ed Eng 2016;55:
6694–7.
[16] Li D, Zhao Y, Chen Z, Mei X, Qiu X. Enhancement of ﬂuorescence brightness and sta-
bility of copper nanoclusters using Zn 2+ for ratio-metric sensing of S 2−. Mater
Sci Eng C 2017;78:653–7.
[17] Bain D, Paramanik B, Patra A. Silver(I)-induced conformation change of DNA: gold
Nanocluster as a spectroscopic probe. J Phys Chem C 2017;121:4608–17.
[18] Zheng J, Zhou C, Yu M, Liu J. Different sized luminescent gold nanoparticles. Nano
2012;4:4073–83.
[19] Yao C, Tian S, Liao L, Liu X, Xia N, Yan N, et al. Synthesis of ﬂuorescent
phenylethanethiolated gold nanoclusters via pseudo-AGR method. Nano 2015;7:
16200–3.
[20] Jin R, Zeng C, Zhou M, Chen Y. Atomically precise colloidal metal nanoclusters
and nanoparticles: fundamentals and opportunities. Chem Rev 2016;116:
10346–413.
[21] Hu X, Liu T, Zhuang Y, Wang W, Li Y, Fan W, et al. Recent advances in the analytical
applications of copper nanoclusters. TrAC Trends Anal Chem 2016;77:66–75.
[22] Yuan X, Dou X, Zheng K, Xie J. Recent advances in the synthesis and applica-
tions of Ultrasmall bimetallic Nanoclusters. Part Part Syst Charact 2015;32:
613–29.
[23] Yu P, Wen X, Toh Y-R, Ma X, Tang J. Fluorescent metallic nanoclusters: electron dy-
namics, structure, and applications. Part Part Syst Charact 2015;32:142–63.
[24] Guo Y, Cao F, Lei X, Mang L, Cheng S, Song J. Fluorescent copper nanoparticles: re-
cent advances in synthesis and applications for sensing metal ions. Nano 2016;8:
4852–63.
[25] Nirmal Goswami KZ, Xie Jianping. Bio-NCs-the marriage of ultrasmall metal
nanoclusters with biomolecules. Nano 2014;6:13328–47.
[26] Zheng Y, Lai L, Liu W, Jiang H, Wang X. Recent advances in biomedical applications
of ﬂuorescent gold nanoclusters. Adv Colloid Interf Sci 2017;242:1–16.
[27] Jin R, Zhao S, Xing Y, Jin R. All-thiolate-protected silver and silver-rich alloy
nanoclusters with atomic precision: stable sizes, structural characterization and
optical properties. CrystEngComm 2016;18:3996–4005.
[28] Kurashige W, Niihori Y, Sharma S, Negishi Y. Precise synthesis, functionalization
and application of thiolate-protected gold clusters. Coord Chem Rev 2016(320–
321):238–50.
[29] Wang S, Meng X, Das A, Li T, Song Y, Cao T, et al. A 200-fold quantum yield boost in
the photoluminescence of silver-doped Ag(x)Au(25 −x) nanoclusters: the 13th
silver atom matters. Angew Chem Int Ed Eng 2014;53:2376–80.
[30] Li H-W, Yue Y, Liu T-Y, Li D, Wu Y. Fluorescence-enhanced sensing mechanism
of BSA-protected small gold-nanoclusters to silver(I) ions in aqueous solutions.
J Phys Chem C 2013;117:16159–65.
[31] Zhou Q, Lin Y, Xu M, Gao Z, Yang H, Tang D. Facile synthesis of enhanced ﬂuores-
cent gold-silver bimetallic nanocluster and its application for highly sensitive de-
tection of inorganic pyrophosphatase activity. Anal Chem 2016;88:8886–92.
[32] Zhang J, Yuan Y, Wang Y, Sun F, Liang G, Jiang Z, et al. Microwave-assisted synthesis
of photoluminescent glutathione-capped Au/Ag nanoclusters: a unique sensor-on-
a-nanoparticle for metal ions, anions, and small molecules. Nano Res 2015;8:
2329–39.
[33] Kazan
R,
Zhang
B,
Bürgi
T.
Au38Cu1(2-PET)24
nanocluster:
synthesis,
enantioseparation and luminescence. Dalton Trans 2017;46:7708–13.
[34] Soldan G, Aljuhani MA, Bootharaju MS, AbdulHalim LG, Parida MR, Emwas AH,
et al. Gold doping of silver nanoclusters: a 26-fold enhancement in the lumines-
cence quantum yield. Angew Chem Int Ed Eng 2016;55:5749–53.
[35] Kang X, Xiong L, Wang S, Yu H, Jin S, Song Y, et al. Shape-controlled synthesis
of trimetallic nanoclusters: structure elucidation and properties investigation.
Chemistry 2016;22:17145–50.
[36] Zhang N, Si Y, Sun Z, Chen L, Li R, Qiao Y, et al. Rapid, selective, and ultrasensitive
ﬂuorimetric analysis of mercury and copper levels in blood using bimetallic gold-
silver nanoclusters with "silver effect"-enhanced red ﬂuorescence. Anal Chem
2014;86:11714–21.
[37] Le Guevel X, Trouillet V, Spies C, Li K, Laaksonen T, Auerbach D, et al. High
photostability and enhanced ﬂuorescence of gold nanoclusters by silver doping.
Nano 2012;4:7624–31.
[38] Mei J, Leung NL, Kwok RT, Lam JW, Tang BZ. Aggregation-induced emission:
together we shine, united we soar! Chem Rev 2015;115:11718–940.
[39] Yuning Hong JWYL, Tang Ben Zhong. Aggregation-induced emission. Chem Soc Rev
2011;40:5361–88.
[40] Goswami N, Yao Q, Luo Z, Li J, Chen T, Xie J. Luminescent metal Nanoclusters with
aggregation-induced emission. J Phys Chem Lett 2016;7:962–75.
[41] Yang L, Cao Y, Chen J, Sun Z, Yao T, Jiang Y, et al. Luminescence of Au(I)-thiolate
complex affected by solvent. Radiat Phys Chem 2017;137:68–71.
[42] Jia X, Li J, Wang E. Cu nanoclusters with aggregation induced emission enhance-
ment. Small 2013;9:3873–9.
[43] Li D, Li B, Yang SI. A selective ﬂuorescence turn-on sensing system for evaluation of
Cu2+polluted water based on ultra-fast formation of ﬂuorescent copper
nanoclusters. Anal Methods 2015;7:2278–82.
[44] Jia X, Yang X, Li J, Li D, Wang E. Stable Cu nanoclusters: from an aggregation-
induced emission mechanism to biosensing and catalytic applications. Chem
Commun (Camb) 2014;50:237–9.
[45] Luo Z, Yuan X, Yu Y, Zhang Q, Leong DT, Lee JY, et al. From aggregation-induced
emission of Au(I)-thiolate complexes to ultrabright Au(0)@Au(I)-thiolate core-
shell nanoclusters. J Am Chem Soc 2012;134:16662–70.
[46] Liu J, Zhang QM, Feng Y, Zhou Z, Shih K. Solvent-switching gelation and orange-red
emission of ultrasmall copper nanoclusters. ChemPhysChem 2016;17:225–31.
[47] Chen PC, Ma JY, Chen LY, Lin GL, Shih CC, Lin TY, et al. Photoluminescent AuCu bi-
metallic nanoclusters as pH sensors and catalysts. Nano 2014;6:3503–7.
[48] Ling Y, Wu JJ, Gao ZF, Li NB, Luo HQ. Enhanced emission of polyethyleneimine-
coated copper nanoclusters and their solvent effect. J Phys Chem C 2015;119:
27173–7.
[49] Huang Y, Liu W, Feng H, Ye Y, Tang C, Ao H, et al. Luminescent nanoswitch based on
organic-phase copper nanoclusters for sensitive detection of trace amount of water
in organic solvents. Anal Chem 2016;88:7429–34.
[50] Tian R, Zhang S, Li M, Zhou Y, Lu B, Yan D, et al. Localization of Au nanoclusters on
layered double hydroxides nanosheets: conﬁnement-induced emission enhance-
ment and temperature-responsive luminescence. Adv Funct Mater 2015;25:
5006–15.
[51] Wu Z, Liu J, Gao Y, Liu H, Li T, Zou H, et al. Assembly-induced enhancement of Cu
nanoclusters luminescence with mechanochromic property. J Am Chem Soc
2015;137:12906–13.
[52] Wang F, Zhang X, Zhang Z, He C. In situ formation and ordered assembly of gold
nanoclusters to nano-ribbons at the oil/water interface. J Mater Chem 2011;21:
15167.
[53] Wu Z, Liu H, Li T, Liu J, Yin J, Mohammed OF, et al. Contribution of metal defects in
the assembly induced emission of Cu nanoclusters. J Am Chem Soc 2017;139:
4318–21.
[54] Yahia-Ammar A, Sierra D, Merola F, Hildebrandt N, Le Guevel X. Self-assembled
gold Nanoclusters for bright ﬂuorescence imaging and enhanced drug delivery.
ACS Nano 2016;10:2591–9.
[55] Qing T, He X, He D, Qing Z, Wang K, Lei Y, et al. Oligonucleotide-templated rapid
formation of ﬂuorescent gold nanoclusters and its application for Hg2+ ions sens-
ing. Talanta 2016;161:170–6.
[56] Zhang T, Xu H, Xu S, Dong B, Wu Z, Zhang X, et al. DNA stabilized Ag–Au alloy
nanoclusters and their application as sensing probes for mercury ions. RSC Adv
2016;6:51609–18.
[57] Dou X, Yuan X, Yu Y, Luo Z, Yao Q, Leong DT, et al. Lighting up thiolated Au@Ag
nanoclusters via aggregation-induced emission. Nano 2014;6:157–61.
[58] Miao H, Feng Y, Zhong D, Yang X. Enhanced-ﬂuorescence of europium–copper
nanoclusters for cell imaging. J Mater Sci 2016;51:7229–35.
37
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

[59] Cao H, Chen Z, Huang Y. Copper nanocluster coupling europium as an off-to-on
ﬂuorescence probe for the determination of phosphate ion in water samples.
Talanta 2015;143:450–6.
[60] Li D, Chen Z, Wan Z, Yang T, Wang H, Mei X. One-pot development of water soluble
copper nanoclusters with red emission and aggregation induced ﬂuorescence en-
hancement. RSC Adv 2016;6:34090–5.
[61] Lin L, Hu Y, Zhang L, Huang Y, Zhao S. Photoluminescence light-up detection of zinc
ion and imaging in living cells based on the aggregation induced emission en-
hancement of glutathione-capped copper nanoclusters. Biosens Bioelectron 2017;
94:523–9.
[62] Han B, Xiang R, Hou X, Yu M, Peng T, Li Y, et al. One-step rapid synthesis of single
thymine-templated ﬂuorescent copper nanoclusters for “turn on” detection of
Mn2+. Anal Methods 2017;9:2590–5.
[63] Zhou TY, Lin LP, Rong MC, Jiang YQ, Chen X. Silver-gold alloy Nanoclusters as a
ﬂuorescence-enhanced probe for aluminum ion sensing. Anal Chem 2013;85:
9839–44.
[64] Li Z, Guo S, Lu C. A highly selective ﬂuorescent probe for sulﬁde ions based on ag-
gregation of Cu nanocluster induced emission enhancement. Analyst 2015;140:
2719–25.
[65] Maria Antonia EF, Badía-Laíño Rosana, Díaz-García Marta Elena. Fluorescence sen-
sitization of gold-glutathione nanoclusters by aqueous solutions of sodium and po-
tassium ions. Microchim Acta 2015;18:1591–8.
[66] Nair LV, Nair RV, Jayasree RS. An insight into the optical properties of a
sub nanosize glutathione stabilized gold cluster. Dalton Trans 2016;45:11286–91.
[67] Mohanty JS, Baksi A, Lee H, Pradeep T. Noble metal clusters protected with mixed
proteins exhibit intense photoluminescence. RSC Adv 2015;5:48039–45.
[68] Kang X, Wang S, Song Y, Jin S, Sun G, Yu H, et al. Bimetallic Au2 Cu6 Nanoclusters:
strong luminescence induced by the aggregation of copper(I) complexes with
gold(0) species. Angew Chem Int Ed Eng 2016;55:3611–4.
[69] Zhang Y, Li M, Niu Q, Gao P, Zhang G, Dong C, et al. Gold nanoclusters as ﬂuorescent
sensors for selective and sensitive hydrogen sulﬁde detection. Talanta 2017;171:
143–51.
[70] Tian R, Yan D, Li C, Xu S, Liang R, Guo L, et al. Surface-conﬁned ﬂuorescence en-
hancement of au nanoclusters anchoring to a two-dimensional ultrathin nanosheet
toward bioimaging. Nano 2016;8:9815–21.
[71] Goswami N, Lin F, Liu Y, Leong DT, Xie J. Highly luminescent Thiolated gold
Nanoclusters impregnated in Nanogel. Chem Mater 2016;28:4009–16.
[72] Wei Z, Gu ZY, Arvapally RK, Chen YP, McDougald Jr RN, Ivy JF, et al. Rigidifying ﬂuo-
rescent linkers by metal-organic framework formation for ﬂuorescence blue shift
and quantum yield enhancement. J Am Chem Soc 2014;136:8269–76.
[73] Cao F, Ju E, Liu C, Li W, Zhang Y, Dong K, et al. Encapsulation of aggregated gold
nanoclusters in a metal-organic framework for real-time monitoring of drug re-
lease. Nano 2017;9:4128–34.
[74] Basu S, Paul A, Chattopadhyay A. Zinc mediated crystalline assembly of gold
nanoclusters for expedient hydrogen storage and sensing. J Mater Chem A 2016;
4:1218–23.
[75] Wang Z, Chen R, Xiong Y, Cepe K, Schneider J, Zboril R, et al. Incorporating copper
Nanoclusters into metal-organic frameworks: conﬁnement-assisted emission en-
hancement and application for trinitrotoluene detection. Part Part Syst Charact
2017;1700029.
[76] Lu Y, Wei W, Chen W. Copper nanoclusters: synthesis, characterization and prop-
erties. Chin Sci Bull 2012;57:41–7.
[77] Anindya Ganguly IC, Udayabhaskararao Thumu, Pradeep Thalappil. A copper clus-
ter protected with phenylethanethiol. J Nanopart Res 2013;15:1222.
[78] Paramanik B, Kundu A, Chattopadhyay K, Patra A. Study of binding interactions be-
tween MPT63 protein and Au nanocluster. RSC Adv 2014;4:35059–66.
[79] Shang L, Dorlich RM, Trouillet V, Bruns M, Nienhaus GU. Ultrasmall ﬂuorescent sil-
ver nanoclusters: protein adsorption and its effects on cellular responses. Nano Res
2012;5:531–42.
[80] Shang L, Brandholt S, Stockmar F, Trouillet V, Bruns M, Nienhaus GU. Effect of pro-
tein adsorption on the ﬂuorescence of ultrasmall gold nanoclusters. Small 2012;8:
661–5.
[81] Shang L, Nienhaus GU. Metal nanoclusters: protein corona formation and implica-
tions for biological applications. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2016;75:175–9.
[82] Ruiyi L, Huiying W, Xiaoyan Z, Xiaoqing L, Xiulan S, Zaijun L. d-Penicillamine and
bovine serum albumin co-stabilized copper nanoclusters with remarkably en-
hanced ﬂuorescence intensity and photostability for ultrasensitive detection of
Ag+. New J Chem 2016;40:732–9.
[83] Wu Z, Jin R. On the ligand's role in the ﬂuorescence of gold nanoclusters. Nano Lett
2010;10:2568–73.
[84] Jiang H, Su X, Zhang Y, Zhou J, Fang D, Wang X. Unexpected thiols triggering
photoluminescent enhancement of cytidine stabilized au Nanoclusters for sensi-
tive assays of glutathione reductase and its inhibitors screening. Anal Chem
2016;88:4766–71.
[85] Zhang X, Wu FG, Liu P, Wang HY, Gu N, Chen Z. Synthesis of ultrastable and multi-
functional gold nanoclusters with enhanced ﬂuorescence and potential anticancer
drug delivery application. J Colloid Interface Sci 2015;455:6–15.
[86] Crawford SE, Andolina CM, Smith AM, Marbella LE, Johnston KA, Straney PJ, et al.
Ligand-mediated "turn on," high quantum yield near-infrared emission in small
gold nanoparticles. J Am Chem Soc 2015;137:14423–9.
[87] Chang H-Y, Chang H-T, Hung Y-L, Hsiung T-M, Lin Y-W, Huang C-C. Ligand effect on
the luminescence of gold nanodots and its application for detection of total mercu-
ry ions in biological samples. RSC Adv 2013;3:4588–97.
[88] Lai SF, Tan HR, Tok ES, Chen YH, Ong EB, Li MT, et al. Optimization of gold
nanoparticle photoluminescence by alkanethiolation. Chem Commun 2015;
51:7954–7.
[89] Zhang X, Wu FG, Liu P, Gu N, Chen Z. Enhanced ﬂuorescence of gold nanoclusters
composed of HAuCl4 and histidine by glutathione: glutathione detection and selec-
tive cancer cell imaging. Small 2014;10:5170–7.
[90] Wang Z, Susha AS, Chen B, Reckmeier C, Tomanec O, Zboril R, et al.
Poly(vinylpyrrolidone) supported copper nanoclusters: glutathione enhanced
blue photoluminescence for application in phosphor converted light emitting
devices. Nano 2016;8:7197–202.
[91] Li D, Chen Z, Yang T. Fluorescence enhancement of DHLA protected gold
nanoclusters in the presence of salt. New J Chem 2016;40:3781–5.
[92] Hurst SJ, Lytton-Jean AK, Mirkin CA. Maximizing DNA loading on a range of gold
nanoparticle sizes. Anal Chem 2006;78:8313–8.
[93] Gill R, Goeken K, Subramaniam V. Fast, single-step, and surfactant-free oligonucle-
otide modiﬁcation of gold nanoparticles using DNA with a positively charged tail.
Chem Commun (Camb) 2013;49:11400–2.
[94] Yao G, Pei H, Li J, Zhao Y, Zhu D, Zhang Y, et al. Clicking DNA to gold nanopar-
ticles: poly-adenine-mediated formation of monovalent DNA-gold nanoparti-
cle conjugates with nearly quantitative yield. NPG Asia Materials 2015;
7:e159.
[95] Shen D, Henry M, Trouillet V, Comby-Zerbino C, Bertorelle F, Sancey L, et al. Zwit-
terion functionalized gold nanoclusters for multimodal near infrared ﬂuorescence
and photoacoustic imaging. APL Materials 2017;5:053404.
[96] Pablo Londoño-Larrea JPV, Cuaran Daniel, Zaballos-García Elena, Pérez-Prieto Julia.
Water-soluble naked gold nanoclusters are not luminescent. Chem Eur J 2017;23:
8137–41.
[97] Shang L, Dorlich RM, Brandholt S, Schneider R, Trouillet V, Bruns M, et al. Facile
preparation of water-soluble ﬂuorescent gold nanoclusters for cellular imaging ap-
plications. Nano 2011;3:2009–14.
[98] Jiang J, Conroy CV, Kvetny MM, Lake GJ, Padelford JW, Ahuja T, et al. Oxidation at
the core–ligand Interface of au lipoic acid nanoclusters that enhances the near-IR
luminescence. J Phys Chem C 2014;118:20680–7.
[99] Kokado K, Taniguchi R, Sada K. Rigidity-induced emission enhancement of network
polymers crosslinked by tetraphenylethene derivatives. J Mater Chem C 2015;3:
8504–9.
[100] Pyo K, Thanthirige VD, Kwak K, Pandurangan P, Ramakrishna G, Lee D. Ultrabright
luminescence from gold nanoclusters: rigidifying the au(I)-thiolate shell. J Am
Chem Soc 2015;137:8244–50.
[101] Pyo K, Thanthirige VD, Yoon SY, Ramakrishna G, Lee D. Enhanced luminescence
of Au22(SG)18 nanoclusters via rational surface engineering. Nano 2016;8:
20008–16.
[102] Hao-Hua Deng X-QS, Wang Fei-Fei, Peng Hua-ping, Liu Ai-Lin, Xia Xing-Hua, Chen
Wei. Fabrication of water-soluble, green-emitting gold nanoclusters with a 65%
photoluminescence quantum yield via host-guest recognition. Chem Mater 2017;
29:1362–9.
[103] Li H, Huang H, Wang A-J, Feng H, Feng J-J, Qian Z. Simple fabrication of
eptiﬁbatide stabilized gold nanoclusters with enhanced green ﬂuorescence
as biocompatible probe for in vitro cellular imaging. Sensors Actuators B
Chem 2017;241:1057–62.
[104] Jao Y-C, Chen M-K, Lin S-Y. Enhanced quantum yield of dendrimer-entrapped gold
nanodots by a speciﬁc ion-pair association and microwave irradiation for
bioimaging. Chem Commun 2010;46:2626–8.
[105] Shang L, Yang L, Stockmar F, Popescu R, Trouillet V, Bruns M, et al. Microwave-
assisted rapid synthesis of luminescent gold nanoclusters for sensing Hg2+ in liv-
ing cells using ﬂuorescence imaging. Nano 2012;4:4155–60.
[106] Zheng K, Yuan X, Kuah K, Luo Z, Yao Q, Zhang Q, et al. Boiling water synthesis of
ultrastable thiolated silver nanoclusters with aggregation-induced emission.
Chem Commun 2015;51:15165–8.
[107] Li D, Li B, Lee G, Yang SI. Facile synthesis of ﬂuorescent silver nanoclusters as
simultaneous detection and remediation for Hg2+. Bull Kor Chem Soc 2015;
36:1703–6.
[108] Liu J, Li H-W, Wang W-X, Thermally Wu Y. Prepared ultrabright adenosine
monophosphate capped gold nanoclusters and the intrinsic mechanism. J Mater
Chem B 2017;5:3550–6.
[109] Nguyen TN, Do TH, Nguyen DH, Vu D, Do QH, Tran HN, et al. Enhanced absorption
and ﬂuorescence of gold nanoclusters using initial alkali concentrations. Appl Phys
Express 2016;9:022001.
[110] Zhang M, Dang YQ, Liu TY, Li HW, Wu YQ, Li Q, et al. Pressure-induced ﬂuorescence
enhancement of the BSA-protected gold nanoclusters and the corresponding con-
formational changes of protein. J Phys Chem C 2013;117:639–47.
[111] Yu P, Wen X, Toh Y-R, Tang J. Temperature-dependent ﬂuorescence in au10
nanoclusters. J Phys Chem C 2012;116:6567–71.
[112] Shang L, Stockmar F, Azadfar N, Nienhaus GU. Intracellular thermometry by using
ﬂuorescent gold nanoclusters. Angew Chem 2013;52:11154–7.
[113] Gui R, Wan A, Liu X, Jin H. Intracellular ﬂuorescent thermometry and
photothermal-triggered drug release developed from gold nanoclusters
and doxorubicin dual-loaded liposomes. Chem Commun (Camb) 2014;50:
1546–8.
[114] Yuan S, Deng YK, Wang XP, Sun DA. Temperature-sensitive luminescent Ag-20
nanocluster templated by carbonate in situ generated from atmospheric CO2 ﬁxa-
tion. New J Chem 2013;37:2973–7.
[115] Xi Chen JBE, Baker Gary A. Exploring luminescence-based temperature sensing
using protein-passivated gold nanoclusters. Nanoscale 2014;6:9594–8.
[116] Yu P, Wen XM, Toh YR, Tang J. Temperature-dependent ﬂuorescence in Au-10
nanoclusters. J Phys Chem C 2012;116:6567–71.
[117] Shibu ES, Muhammed MAH, Tsukuda T, Pradeep T. Ligand exchange of
Au(25)SG(18) leading to functionalized gold clusters: spectroscopy, kinetics, and
luminescence. J Phys Chem C 2008;112:12168–76.
38
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39

[118] Cauzzi D, Pattacini R, Delferro M, Dini F, Di Natale C, Paolesse R, et al. Temperature-
dependent ﬂuorescence of Cu5 metal clusters: a molecular thermometer. Angew
Chem Int Ed 2012;51:9662–5.
[119] Wang JH, Li M, Zheng J, Huang XC, Li DA. Dual-emitting Cu-Cu-Cu cluster as a self-
calibrated, wide-range luminescent molecular thermometer. Chem Commun 2014;
50:9115–8.
[120] Kawasaki H, Hamaguchi K, Osaka I, Arakawa R. Ph-dependent synthesis of pepsin-
mediated gold nanoclusters with blue green and red ﬂuorescent emission. Adv
Funct Mater 2011;21:3508–15.
[121] Wang C, Wang C, Xu L, Cheng H, Lin Q, Zhang C. Protein-directed synthesis of pH-
responsive red ﬂuorescent copper nanoclusters and their applications in cellular
imaging and catalysis. Nano 2014;6:1775–81.
39
D. Li et al. / Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 250 (2017) 25–39