Biomimetic Metallic Nanostructures for Biomedical Applications,
Catalysis, and Beyond
Mohammad Tavakkoli Yaraki,⊗Shima Zahed Nasab,⊗Iman Zare, Mohammad Dahri,
Mohammad Moein Sadeghi, Maedeh Koohi, and Yen Nee Tan*
Cite This: Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
ABSTRACT: Nature has inspired scientists to develop green and
sustainable nanomaterials with biomimetic functions. Particularly,
biomimetic metallic nanostructures (biometal NPs) with unique
optical, catalytic, and electrical properties have received tremen-
dous attention in many ﬁelds, ranging from healthcare and
agriculture to energy and environmental sciences. Biometal NPs
synthesized by various natural resources such as plant extracts,
biomolecules, bacteria, and even viruses possess unique biomimetic
functions including but not limited to precise biorecognition, self-
assembly, antibacterial/antiviral, and enzymatic properties. In this
report, we ﬁrst review the bioinspired synthesis of industrially
important metal nanoparticles, followed by the discussion on how
the diﬀerent biological sources aﬀect the biomimetic functions of
the as-synthesized biometal NPs. Next, we review the recent advancement and applications of these biometal NPs in the ﬁelds of
biomedical engineering and catalysis, which include the development of metallic nanobiosensors, biomedical imaging probes,
nanotherapeutics (e.g., antimicrobial and photodynamic/photothermal therapeutic agents), as well as the design of multifunctional
nanozymes and artiﬁcial metalloenzymes for chemical and biopharmaceutical industries. Finally, we highlight some of the latest
advancements in nanobiomimicry and their emerging applications in clean energy, electronic devices, and data storage, which shows
the game-changing role of biomimetic metallic nanostructures for various technological applications in the near future.
1. INTRODUCTION
In nature, diﬀerent inorganic minerals can be synthesized by
microorganisms in the form of teeth, shells, skeletons, etc.
through the biomineralization process. Interestingly, almost all
these biomineralization processes occur at near-neutral pH and
ambient temperature. This biological formation of mineral
compounds has inspired researchers to investigate the potential
of microorganisms and other live species such as plants in the
synthesis of industrially important metallic nanostructures such
as noble metals (e.g., gold (Au), silver (Ag)), metal oxides
(e.g., iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3), titanium dioxide (TiO2)),
semiconductors (e.g., cadmium sulﬁde (CdS)), etc. In addition
to bioinspired synthesis, biological systems also inspired the
self-assembly and biodirected organization of inorganic
nanostructures with their highly precise biorecognition
functions such as DNA hybridization, and eﬃcient biochemical
processes like enzymatic reactions under benign conditions
(e.g., aqueous solution and room temperature). The metal
nanostructures formed by these bioinspired approaches possess
both the biological and physicochemical properties that come
from the natural resources/biological systems (microorgan-
isms, plant extract, etc.), leading to the synergic eﬀects between
the biomolecular component and metal core that exhibit many
competitive advantages for various industrial applications.1
Among the metallic nanostructures, noble metal nano-
particles (e.g., Au, Ag, platinum (Pt), and palladium (Pd))
have received tremendous attention in the last decades due to
their unique optical, catalytic, and electronic properties suitable
for a wide range of applications.2−8 Noble metal nanoparticles
in the size range of 2−100 nm exhibit a localized surface
plasmon resonance (LSPR) property, making them unique as
compared to the other types of metallic nanostructures such as
iron, zinc, etc.9,10 When the light with a wavelength larger than
the size of metal NPs interacts with them, free electrons at the
surface of nanometals oscillate, resulting in the absorption of
light at a unique wavelength which is size and/or shape-
dependent.11−14 Interestingly, the LSPR property disappears
Special Issue: Jim Yang Lee Festschrift
Received:
January 22, 2022
Revised:
April 26, 2022
Accepted:
April 27, 2022
Published: May 16, 2022
Review
pubs.acs.org/IECR
© 2022 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society
7547
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 23, 2026 at 06:43:43 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

when the size of NPs becomes less than 2 nm. These types of
ultrasmall small nanometals with only a few metal atoms that
accumulate in the core structures are called metal nanoclusters
(NCs). Due to the quantum conﬁnement eﬀects, metal NCs
possess bright luminescent and molecular-like properties,
which are suitable for use in biomedical sensing and
bioimaging as their ﬂuorescence intensity is sensitive to the
change in environments even at the molecular scale.15,16
Another distinct feature of metal NCs is their atomically
precise size and structure, which makes them an ideal platform
to understand not only the growth mechanism of biometal
NPs but also the interaction mechanisms of metal NPs with
biological systems at the molecular and/or atomic level.17,18
Besides optical properties, metal nanostructures with special
geometry (e.g., multibranched, rod, cube, star-shape, etc.) and
controlled atomic sizes also possess high conductivity and free
electrons on their surfaces with facet-selectivity, making them
ideal candidates for catalytic, optoelectronic, and energy
applications.19−22
Over the past few decades, both top-down and bottom-up
approaches have been developed for the synthesis of metallic
nanostructures. Among them, the chemical reduction of metal
ions into atomic metal in the presence of stabilizers, such as
small molecules (e.g., citrate ions) and polymers (e.g.,
poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP)) to form the metal nanostruc-
ture with the desired size and shape, has received much
attention.23,24 While this approach has resulted in the
development of many chemical strategies for the synthesis of
metallic nanostructures, they are mostly involving the use of
harsh chemicals and toxic or ﬂammable solvents under high
Figure 1. Schematic illustrations show the (a) diﬀerent routes of synthesizing biomimetic metal nanoparticles (biometal NPs), (b) microbial-
mediated synthesis through extracellular and intracellular pathways, and (c) plant (extracts)-based synthesis of metal NPs.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7548

temperature or pressure conditions, which are not environ-
mentally friendly and safe25 for large scale industrial or
biomedical applications. Therefore, developing “green synthesis
approaches” is still a hot topic in this ﬁeld.
Thanks to the new biotechnological revolution in material
science and chemistry, metal nanostructures with a tunable
size, shape, and composition have been successfully synthe-
sized using a diverse natural biological source which includes
bacteria, fungi, plant extracts, proteins, and DNAs as the
reducing and/or stabilizing cum shape-directing agents.26
Recent advance in genetic engineering also allows non-
pathogenic human viruses (e.g., bacteriophages) to be
modiﬁed and used as customizable biotemplates for the
synthesis of multidimensional metallic nanostructures with
unique shapes and sizes. The enriched nature of these
biological sources adds various (bio)functionalities to the as-
synthesized metallic nanostructures, leading to the formation
of multifunctional biometal NPs that are not found in nature,
with greatly enhanced properties such as high particle stability,
good biocompatibility, and eﬀective antimicrobial and eﬃcient
enzymatic/catalytic activities, etc.
The present review focuses on the use of diﬀerent
microorganisms and biomolecules as bioreactors/templates
for the bioinspired synthesis of various metal nanostructures
(i.e., plasmonic metal NPs, luminescent metal NCs, and metal
oxides), followed by the discussion on how these biological
sources aﬀect the biomimetic functions of the as-synthesized
biometal nanostructures. Then, we review the recent advances
in the applications of these biomimetic metal NPs in diﬀerent
industries such as pharmaceuticals, food, and agriculture, with
a special focus on nanomedicine (i.e., metallic nanobiosensors,
biomimetic antimicrobials and drug carriers, nanotherapeutics
for photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy
(PTT), etc.) and biomimetic catalysis. Overall, the current
review uncovers a brief conceptual idea and new insights into
how biomimetic metal nanostructures can be used to address
the current challenges in the biomedical ﬁeld and highlight
future advancements in nanobiomimicry for the emerging
applications in clean energy (e.g., biomimetic batteries and
artiﬁcial photosynthesis), electronic devices (e.g., biohybrid
metal ink), and data storage (e.g., DNA-iron NP data storage).
2. BIOMIMETIC SYNTHESIS OF METAL
NANOPARTICLES
Diﬀerent approaches have been developed to synthesize a
variety of metal NPs with diﬀerent geometries and
functionalities. In general, there are two approaches to
synthesize metal NPs: (1) top-down method that relies on
milling and grinding of bulk materials to obtain small-sized
NPs and (2) bottom-up approaches such as chemical
reduction of metal ions into the atomic metal to form the
NPs. However, most of these approaches require the use of
harsh chemicals and involve tedious and energy-consuming
processes (e.g., hydrothermal synthesis, high-pressure con-
ditions, etc.), resulting in high prices and hazardous
byproducts that limit their use in various areas, especially in
biomedical applications.27−30 To overcome these shortcom-
ings, researchers have been looking nature for inspiration to
devise new routes for the synthesis of precisely controlled
metal NPs with good biocompatibility and tailored (bio)-
functionalities.28
Biomimetic synthesis is a green approach to produce
biometal NPs in a cost-saving and eco-friendly manner by
using biological agents as the shape-directing, stabilizing, and/
or reducing agents similar to that in the natural biomineraliza-
tion processes.30−32 The biological agents include biomole-
cules (e.g., enzymes, DNA, peptides, amino acids, small
organic molecules, etc.), microorganisms (e.g., bacteria, virus,
algae, fungi, phage, etc.), plants (leaves, roots, fruits, ﬂowers,
seeds, etc.), as well as biomass wastes such as agricultural
wastes, eggshell, fruit peel wastes, etc. Since biomolecules
themselves (e.g., peptide and DNA) possess these intrinsic
functions which can be ﬁne-tuned at the molecular (e.g., amino
acid and nucleotide) level, no exogenous reducing and/or
stabilizing agents are required during the bioinspired synthesis
of metal NPs since biomolecules themselves (e.g., peptides and
DNA) possess these intrinsic functions which can be ﬁne-
tuned at the molecular (e.g., amino acid and nucleotide)
level.33 For example, the cysteine (Cys) molecules present in a
protein are good capping agents for gold NPs (AuNPs) and
silver NPs (AgNPs). Speciﬁcally, bioinspired synthesis of metal
NPs can be achieved through two mechanisms: (1)
bioreduction and (2) biosorption. For the bioreduction
process, metal ions are reduced through biological agents,
resulting in the formation of biometal NPs with high stability,
which can be easily separated from the reaction media. While
the biosorption mechanism requires the metallic ions to be
adsorbed onto the microorganism biomass and transformed
into biometal NPs through an ion-exchange, nucleation,
precipitation, and complexation process.30,34 In the following
sessions, we will review the use of diﬀerent types of
biomolecular templates and biological systems (e.g., micro-
organism and plants) for the synthesis of biometal NPs as
illustrated in Figure 1a.
2.1. Biotemplated Synthesis of Metal Nanoparticles.
Recent advancements in nanobiotechnology suggest that using
a biomolecule as a template and water as an eco-friendly
solvent is a tantalizing approach to the bottom-up synthesis of
metal NPs (also known as biotemplated synthesis). Bio-
molecules such as DNA, proteins, enzymes, peptides,
polysaccharides, etc. are intricate organic molecules with
biological functions encoded in their programmable sequen-
ces.35 The chemical structure and spatial arrangement of
biomolecules determine their interactions with other biological
moieties.36 For instance, proteins can fold into complex tertiary
structures to create active peptide domains or cavities that can
embrace other molecules.36 Biomolecules are composed of
various functional groups which can be used for the synthesis
of metal NPs, including the stabilizing moieties like amines,
carboxyl, hydroxyl, sulfate, nucleotides, etc., and reducing
moieties such as thiol, tyrosine (Tyr), and tryptophan (Trp).37
In addition, some biomolecules exhibit a high binding aﬃnity
with metal ions/atoms. They can entrap metallic ions within
their three-dimensional (3D) structure by creating coordina-
tion bonds with the stabilizing moieties and reduce the metal
precursors to biometal NPs by the reducing moieties within
the biomolecular structures. In the traditional colloidal
synthesis, surfactants (e.g., PVP) are used as capping agents
to control the size and morphology of metal NPs, which are
diﬃcult to remove from the products and constitute environ-
mental pollution. The use of natural or biomolecular templates,
on the other hand, eliminates the need for toxic chemicals in
the synthesis, leading to the formation of biometal NPs with
good biocompatibility and unique biofunctionalities (e.g.,
antiviral) as highlighted below.31,34,38,39
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7549

2.1.1. DNA-Templated Synthesis. Deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) is a sophisticated genetic biomolecule with an
extraordinary structure that has opened up a new perspective
on traditional material science.40 The presence of anionic
phosphate groups in the backbone, the paired electrons of
oxygen and nitrogen in the nucleobases (adenine (A), guanine
(G), cytosine (C), thymine (T)), and deoxyribose as well as
the π-electron clouds of double-ringed bases have enabled
DNA to have a strong binding aﬃnity to metal cati-
ons.36,37,41,42 With the gradual understanding of DNA
functionalities, researchers have been engaged in the develop-
ment of diﬀerent DNA sequences as a stabilizing/reducing
agent to control the growth of metal nanostructures during the
synthesis process, resulting in diﬀerent morphologies such as
rods, cubes, plates, spheres, and prisms with excellent potential
in nanoscience.43−46 There have been many studies on DNA
metallization to date. Following are some examples of utilizing
the designer DNA templates for the customizable synthesis of
various metallic nanostructures ranging from the photo-
luminescent NCs < 2 nm and plasmonic metal NPs > 10
nm to the multidimensional nanostructures (e.g., metal
nanowires (NWs)).
2.1.1.1. Metallization through Interaction with Phosphate
Groups. In this method, metal cations bind strongly to the
negative phosphate groups of double-stranded (ds)DNA
backbones through the electrostatic interaction to form
metallo-DNA complexes. Then, the metal nuclei can form on
the template and growth occurs to produce metallic
nanostructures onto DNA templates.47−49 The stoichiometry
ratio of metal ion to DNA template plays a decisive role in
directing the shape of as-synthesized metal nanostructures. As
this ratio increases, discrete metal NCs gradually grow to larger
clusters and, ﬁnally, become continuous NWs.47 Double-
stranded DNAs possess diameters of 2 nm and lengths ranging
from 2 nm to more than 2 mm, making them ideal as a
deposition site for growing metallic NWs. As a result of metal
cations binding to the anionic phosphate backbone, a scaﬀold
can be generated for the synthesis of NWs. In this process, a
reducing agent or ultraviolet (UV) radiation increases the
ability for NCs to grow on DNA, creating continuous high-
conductivity NWs.36 For instance, Braun et al. utilized a
(ds)DNA as a template for nucleation and longitudinal growth
of silver ions on the DNA strands to produce conductive
AgNWs (100 nm in diameter and 12 mm in length) for
nanoelectronic devices.50
Figure 2. Biotemplated synthesis of metal nanostructures (i.e., plasmonic NPs and luminescent NCs) using diﬀerent types of biomolecules as
reducing, shape-directing, and/or stabilizing agents: (a) DNA-templated AuNCs and AgNCs with predictable emission colors. Reproduced with
permission from ref 57. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Peptide-synthesized AuNPs with controlled morphologies. (i) Top:
Whole-tissue NIR ﬂuorescence imaging of the kidney before (Day 0) and after (Day 1). Bottom: Zoom-in bright ﬁeld (BF) and near-infrared
(NIR) images of the kidney cortex after in situ formation of GSH-AuNP. (ii) NIR luminescence spectra of GSH-AuNPs. (iii) Confocal
ﬂuorescence microscopy image of kidney cortex with localized GSH-AuNPs. (iv) Microscopy imaging for the kidney slides with the in situ formed
ultrasmall GSH-AuNCs. Scale bar is 10 μm. PT: proximal tubule, DT: distal tubule. Reproduced with permission from ref 80. Copyright 2010
American Chemical Society. (c) In situ growth of GSH-protected AuNPs in kidney tissue cells. Reproduced with permission from ref 92. Copyright
2019 American Chemical Society. (d) Polysaccharide-templated synthesis of Au−Ag alloy NPs using pectin. Reproduced with permission from ref
97. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7550

It is also possible to design and assemble DNA templates
into intricate shapes before the metallization, such as a
bundles, 1D parallel or 2D crossed patterns, Y-shape, and even
an origami nanostructures to produce the predetermined metal
nanostructures.51−53 For example, Becerril et al. rationally
designed a Y-shaped DNA scaﬀold to assemble motifs to
produce a three-terminal nanoelectronic device. They designed
a three-branched DNA scaﬀold which was assembled from
three diﬀerent oligonucleotide templates, with each branch
having an average length of 26 nm. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) revealed symmetric three-branched
metallic structures when Ag or copper (Cu) was deposited
on the DNA template, whereas irregular-shaped products were
observed in the absence of DNA.54
2.1.1.2. Metallization through Interaction with Nucleo-
bases. Metal ions could bind by coordination to the
nucleobases of DNA (purine-N7 and pyrimidines-N3), with
an aﬃnity order of C > G > A > T, so it is expected that C and
G-rich DNAs are suitable templates for the synthesis of metal
NCs that exhibit unique luminescent and molecular-like
properties.55 Several studies have been conducted concerning
the use of all types of DNA strands, including single-stranded
(ss), double-stranded (ds), and triple-stranded (ts) DNA as
biotemplates for synthesizing metal NCs.56
First, ssDNA is the most common DNA-based template for
synthesizing metal nanostructures, because of its structural
ﬂexibility that provides an eﬀective interaction with metal ions
in the capping process.57 Studies have revealed that (12−30)-
mer ssDNA is a suitable template for the formation of metal
NCs. For the ﬁrst time, in 2004, Petty et al. synthesized the
ultrasmall silver NCs (AgNCs) < 2 nm with a narrow size
distribution using ssDNA with a 12-base oligonucleotide with a
primary structure as the template and NaHB4 as the reducing
agent. According to mass spectral analysis, the as-synthesized
AgNCs consist of 1−4 Ag atoms. Also, they demonstrated that
these ultrasmall AgNCs possess unique photoluminescent
properties which can be used for bioimaging applications and
act as label-free ﬂuorophores.58
More recently, our group has conducted a systematic
investigation to understand the empirical inﬂuences of the
four basic DNA nucleotides on AgNCs synthesis and their
combinatorial eﬀects on photoluminescence properties57
(Figure 2a). As ssDNA can be arranged into a secondary
structure including i-motifs, G-quadruplexes, and hairpins,
their structural impacts have been investigated. We have
successfully uncovered the “genetic code” of DNA sequences
as programmable biotemplates for the direct synthesis of
multifunctional AgNCs with a tunable ﬂuorescent color and
intrinsic cancer cell targeting function. In addition, the folded
geometry of the ssDNA template can provide a stable scaﬀold
to prevent metal NCs aggregation and precisely control their
shape. For instance, Ritchie et al.59 utilized a dC12-
oligonucleotide (i-motif) as a template and NaBH4 as a
reducing agent for synthesizing AgNCs with high-precision
shape control. Based on NMR spectra, cytosine had
experienced a large shift with AgNCs, which conﬁrms the
interaction of Ag and cytosine. Also, the results of mass spectra
demonstrated that the as-synthesized AgNCs contain 2−7 Ag
atoms. By replacing the canonical nucleobases with their
analogues, it is possible to enhance the metal aﬃnity and
precisely control the nanostructure morphology. For instance,
Shah et al. investigated the eﬀect of the second structure of
DNA hairpins on the ﬂuorescent properties of AgNCs.60 They
demonstrated that the orange-emitting ﬂuorescent AgNCs
were adsorbed through the head-to-head linkage between two
(6C-loop) hairpins. On the other hand, the red and green
emissive ﬂuorescent AgNCs were adsorbed into hairpin loops
and dsDNA.
Second, the full complementary dsDNA (as a result of
Watson and Crick base pairing) cannot act as a template for
metal NC synthesis due to the absence of metal ion binding
sites, unless it is modiﬁed to possess a gap, mismatched base
pair, abasic sites, and interior loop within the dsDNA
templates. These defects prevent the complementary base
pairing, providing accessible space for metal ion bindings onto
the nucleobases of DNA templates and getting reduced to
form the metal NC under certain reaction conditions.61 For
example, Cui et al. designed a dsDNA template with a gap
opposite to the cytosine with no phosphate groups around it.
They demonstrated that Ag+ binds to the accessible cytosines
and reduces immediately with NaBH4, resulting in DNA-
AgNCs with a size <3 nm. Furthermore, the results indicated
that the presence of phosphate groups surrounding the gap
created a repulsion force between phosphates and BH4
−, an
eﬀect that prevents reduction.62
Third, tsDNA (also called H-DNA) is formed when three
DNA strands twist around each other.61 Ihara et al.
demonstrated that metal ions can replace with the proton of
cytosine at the N3 position, producing a stable metallo-DNA.
By considering this feature, Feng et al. presented a novel
approach to product stable ﬂuorescent AgNCs. They
demonstrated that with a sensible design of oligonucleotide
sequences, Ag2 clusters could be synthesized in the C+.GC
base triple of tsDNA.63
Besides the synthesis of ultrasmall metal NCs, DNA
templates have been used to control the shape and size of
plasmonic metal NPs of larger size (>2 nm).64 Lu and
coauthors have reported the use of ssDNA as a powerful tool
to control the morphology of metal NPs, such as Au, Ag, and
Pd−Au bimetallic NPs.65 In a comprehensive study, Wu et al.
examined the role of diﬀerent DNA sequences on the
morphology of the synthesized NPs from Ag nanocube
seeds. TEM images demonstrated that 10-mer oligo dT, dA,
and dC led to the growth of Ag nanocubes into truncated
octahedrons with diﬀerent degrees of edge-directed truncation,
while the nanocubes did not grow in the presence of 10-mer
oligo dG.66 Also, they indicated that nucleobases can bind to
the Ag facet, and both the primary and secondary structure of
each oligomer aﬀects this binding aﬃnity.67
2.1.2. Protein/Peptide-Templated Synthesis. Nature bio-
mineralization of proteins provides an incentive to use them as
templates in the synthesis of biometal NPs under mild
conditions.36,37 Peptides are sequences consisting of 3 to 15
amino acids, and the presence of a variety of functional side
groups from the amino acids makes them attractive templates
for synthesizing metal NPs.68−72 There is evidence that peptide
sequences can coordinate with metallic cations, and hence
metalloproteins account for about half of all proteins in
nature.73,74 The critical metal bonding sites in proteins/
peptides are phenolic ring residues in Tyr, imidazole ring
residues in histidine (His), carboxylic acid residues in
glutamine (Glu) and asparagine (Asp), nitrogen in arginine
(Arg), lysine (Lys),75 and the thiol group in Cys. Furthermore,
Trp and Tyr are reductant amino acids, with the ability to
transform metal cations into metal nanostructure.37 In some
cases, amino acids alone can serve as both the reducing and
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7551

stabilizing agents for the synthesis of metal NPs. For instance,
Tan et al. reported the aspartic acid synthesis of crystalline
gold nanoplates, nanoribbons, and NWs in aqueous solutions
without additional chemical reagents under ambiance con-
ditions.76
Until now, many proteins have served as the templates to
produce biometal NPs.37 According to the studies, natural or
engineered proteins high in Cys and His residues are excellent
biotemplates for the synthesis of metal NPs.77,78 Additionally,
the morphology of biometal NPs is determined by the tertiary
structure of the protein templates. With the help of globular
proteins, such as bovine serum albumin (BSA) and ferritin, the
microspheres and nanosheets of Au, Ag, and Pt can be
generated. At the same time, the nanotubes, NCs, or NWs of
Ag, Pd, and Au are produced using ﬁlament proteins such as
ﬁbroin, collagen, elastin, keratin, and ﬂagellin.36,42,79 Research-
ers have been trying to tailor peptides by changing their
sequences to create an eﬀective template to synthesize metal
NPs.37 For an instance, Tan and co-workers have established
the ﬁrst design rules of using customized peptides with tailored
sequences to control the growth kinetics, and thus the size and
shapes of the resulted gold nanostructures80 (Figure 2b). In
addition, in situ morphosynthesis of gold nanoplates in
polypeptide multilayer ﬁlms (as reactive biotemplates) formed
by layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly of polyaspartic acid (pLAA)
and linear polyethylenimine (LPEI) has been demonstrated.81
Size-controlled synthesis of gold nanoplates was accomplished
by controlling the secondary structure of pLAA in the
multilayer ﬁlm. These two studies presented the new routes
to ﬁne-tune the morphology of metal NPs via the customizable
amino acid sequences and molecular structures of the
biotemplates.
Xie et al.82 have pioneered the synthesis of highly
luminescent gold NCs (AuNCs) using BSA as the protein
template. Thereafter, diﬀerent synthesis approaches to
precisely controlled the numbers of atoms in the metal core
and thus the size of metal NCs (<2 nm) have been
reported.83,84 For instance, a two-step carbon monoxide
(CO) reduction method has been developed to understand
the formation process of Au22(SR)18 (SR denotes thiolate
ligand) containing 22 Au atoms in the metal core, which
exhibit unique aggregation-induced emission (AIE) character-
istics. Recently, our group has employed the BSA protein to
synthesize 13 atoms of AgNCs (BSA-Ag13) and Au/Ag alloy
NCs with eﬀective single oxygen generation properties that can
be used for PDT.85,86 We have also reported other protein/
peptide-templated synthesis approaches to form multicolor
biometal NCs (including bimetallic NCs) with tailored
functionalities for various biomedical applications.87−93 For
example, Li et al. studied the potential of pea proteins to
synthesize spherical AuNCs for tumor imaging.94 In another
work, Chevrier et al. reported the atomic structure and
luminescent and biomolecular assembly of AuNCs stabilized
by the BSA scaﬀolds for theranostic applications. They used a
multistep procedure for the design of these unique BSA-
stabilised AuNCs including screening of Au-thiolate (Au-SR)
model structures, synthesis of analogous free-standing AuNCs,
and rigidifying/unrigidifying experiments.93 Meanwhile, Peng
et al. reported the in situ synthesis of both glutathione (GSH)-
protected plasmonic and near-infrared (NIR) luminescence
AuNPs in kidney cells (i.e., mitochondria of renal tubule cells)
as shown in Figure 2c. They found that the precise control
growth of AuNPs is likely due to the speciﬁc ligands and
unique function of the mitochondrial for GSH storage. The
method of metal-based staining may serve for ex vivo disease
diagnosis and better-guided development of artiﬁcial nanobio
hybrid systems.92
2.1.3. Polysaccharide-Templated Synthesis. In recent
years, polysaccharides, such as chitosan, pectin, carrageenan,
carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), and starch, have been
regarded as potential templates to synthesize metal NPs due
to the variety of their functional groups (hydroxyl, carboxylic
acid, amine, and sulfate) which can be used as a reductant and
stabilizer agent, and their unique biochemical (biocompati-
bility and biodegradability) features.95,96 For example,
Nigoghossian et al. reported a straightforward method to
synthesize Au−Ag alloy NPs (16 nm) using orange-based
pectin (Figure 2d). They claimed that carboxylic acid groups in
pectin caused the nucleation and growth of Au−AgNPs. It was
also found that repulsion between acidic groups led to stable
colloidal formation without aggregation.97 Chitosan is a natural
polysaccharide derived from deacetylated chitin with the
reducing and capping potential for metal NPs synthesis.98
This biomolecule is rich in hydroxyl (pair electrons of oxygen)
and amine (lone pair electrons of nitrogen) groups, possessing
a strong aﬃnity toward metallic cations by chelating and ionic
interaction to support the nucleation and stabilization of metal
NPs.99 According to this, Wongpreecha et al. synthesized
AgNPs using AgNO3 as a precursor and chitosan as a stabilizer
cum reducing agent under mild conditions. They demon-
strated that increasing temperature accelerates the reduction of
Ag+ to Ag0.100
Besides the reducing and capping properties, polysaccharides
also possess gelation mechanisms in the presence of metal ions,
which make them excellent biotemplates for the one-pot
synthesis of stable nanometal/polymer composites, such as
hydrogels, ﬁlms, and sponges.101 For instance, Zhu et al. has
successfully developed a green one-pot approach to synthesize
AgNPs−κ-carrageenan hydrogel. They showed that κ-carra-
geenan can act as a natural capping and reducing agent for
synthesizing AgNPs. Also, adding KI salt during synthesis can
enhance the helical aggregation of κ-carrageenan to form a
stable NP/gel. Results showed that the as-synthesized
AgNP−κ-carrageenan hydrogel is biocompatible with an
acceptable antibacterial eﬀect against Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria.102
2.2. Microorganism-Mediated Synthesis. In the early
1960s, Professor Becking introduced the concept of synthesiz-
ing biometal NPs using living microorganisms.103 Following
that, with the advancements in biotechnology, several methods
of microbial-mediated synthesis of metal NPs have been
developed, which culminated in the early 2000s with the
emergence of genetic engineering and CRISPR (clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) technol-
ogy.104,105 In general, microbial-mediated synthesis of metal
NPs can be carried out in two diﬀerent pathways, i.e.,
intracellular and extracellular.38,106 In the intracellular mech-
anism, metal cations are added to the culture medium. These
cations then pass through the membrane of microorganisms
and accumulate in various parts of cells, including the cell
walls, cytoplasm, and periplasmic space, where reductase
enzymes are active to reduce metallic cations into metal NPs.
Finally, the microorganisms are lysed and puriﬁed to recover
the as-synthesized metal NPs.107 In contrast, in the
extracellular mechanism, metal cations are reduced by the
enzymes expressed in culture media. Studies have shown that
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7552

the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) and reduced
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) play
critical roles in the extracellular synthesis of metal NPs (Figure
1b).38,106−108 In this approach, puriﬁcation of metal NPs
synthesized in the extracellular pathway can be carried out
upstream, resulting in lower production costs as compared to
the intracellular mechanism that requires a few more
downstream procedures for NP recovery.38 In this session,
the biosynthesis of metal NPs using diﬀerent types of
microorganisms (e.g., bacteria, viruses, fungi, etc.) will be
reviewed.
2.2.1. Bacteria-Mediated Synthesis. Today, bacterial
research has gone beyond the laboratory stage into the realm
of industry, wherein bacteria has become an important part of
biotech industries from pharmaceutics, genetically modiﬁed
food, and cosmetics to diagnostics.32,109−111 Bacteria have an
intrinsic defense system against stresses, such as the over-
concentration of metal cations, which allow them to grow and
reproduce under harsh environmental conditions without
disrupting their vital functions.112,113 In addition, their
ubiquitous nature, high proliferation rate, and low-cost
cultivation make them superior to other microorganisms for
the biosynthesis processes.31,114 Through bioreduction, bac-
teria can reduce metal cations into metal NPs using reductase
enzymes, both intracellular and extracellular.29,32 Generally,
bacterial-mediated synthesis of metal NPs is based on the
oxidation of extracellular and intracellular reductase enzymes
that reduce metallic cations to metal oxides NPs.39 Bacterial
species that have been widely employed to synthesize metal
NPs, include Escherichia coli,115 Bacillus cereus,116 Klebsiella
pneumonia,117 and Enterobacter cloacae.118
Hug et al. studied the potential of using the culture
supernatant of Pseudoduganella eburnea MAHUQ-39 for the
facile eco-friendly synthesis of spherical AgNPs with high
production yield. They demonstrated that the synthesized
AgNPs have signiﬁcant antibacterial activity against pathogenic
strains of Staphylococcus aureus, E. coli, and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa by disrupting their cell membrane integrity.119 In
another study, the supernatant of the Bacillus safensis TEN12
strain isolated from the soil has been successfully used for the
biosynthesis of AgNPs (23−46 nm) with spherical morphol-
ogy. The spectroscopy analysis Fourier transform infrared
(FTIR) and UV−vis demonstrated that the hydroxyl group of
bacterial proteins acted as the stabilizer and capping agents in
the production of biogenic AgNPs. Their study showed that
these biosynthesized AgNPs are not only very eﬀective against
S. aureus and E. coli bacteria but also possess good anticancer
eﬀects against cancerous HepG2 cell lines.120
2.2.2. Fungi-Mediated Synthesis. The biosynthesis of metal
NPs using fungi is a practical approach to produce
monodispersed metal NPs with a broad spectrum of chemical
compositions.29 Metal NPs are expected to be formed through
two possible routes in the fungi-mediate synthesis: (1)
enzymatic reduction within fungi vacuoles (intracellular) and
(2) bioreduction at the fungal wall surface or using fungal
extracts (extracellular).38,121 As compared to the other
microorganisms, fungi have some extra advantages for the
synthesis of metal NPs.31,32 For instance, fungi express
reducing biomolecules, such as enzymes and proteins, which
can produce a large volume of metal NPs.32,39 Moreover,
fungal-mediated biosynthesis can be scaled-up for the large-
scale production of metal NPs due to the high resistance of
fungi against agitation forces and turbulence ﬂow in the
bioreactors.122 Fungal species that have been utilized for the
biosynthesis of metal NPs include Fusarium chlamydospo-
rum,123 Penicillium cyclopium,124 Aspergillus fumigates,125 and
Fusarium oxysporum.126
Tidke et al. reported a facile process for the extracellular
synthesis of 17 nm AuNPs through F. acuminatum from the
HAuCl4 precursor. The FTIR analysis of fungal extract
conﬁrmed that proteins act as capping agents for the fungi-
mediated synthesis of AuNPs. Moreover, the results of the zeta
potential indicated that the synthesized AuNPs can be used as
drug delivery nanocarriers due to their high colloidal
stability.127 Recently, Ramos et al. investigated the extracellular
synthesis of AgNPs with sizes 10−25 nm using Trichoderma
spp. (Amazon fungi) extracted from the Bertholletia excelsa
(Brazilian nut). Interestingly, these fungi-synthesized AgNPs
demonstrated high antibacterial potential against E. coli and P.
aeruginosa bacteria.128 In another example, Xiaowen et al.
studied the use of P. cyclopium for the synthesis of AgNPs (size
72 nm) with narrow particle size distribution (DPI 0.143).
They proved that the as-synthesized AgNPs exhibited cytotoxic
activity against the human lung tumor cell line (A549) through
the ROS-mediated cell death mechanism.129
2.2.3. Yeast-Mediated Synthesis. Yeasts are single-celled
eukaryotic microorganisms that can uptake and accumulate
toxic metallic cations in large amounts from their surrounding
environment due to their large cell surface area and cytosolic
volume.29,30,32,39,130 These eukaryotes possess several detox-
iﬁcation mechanisms, such as chelation, bioprecipitation, and
biosorption, that make them an ideal biofactory for generating
metal NPs from metallic precursors.31 A diﬀerence in
detoxiﬁcation mechanisms of various yeasts leads to the
production of biometal NPs with tunable particle size,
morphology, and chemical composition, leading to diﬀerent
physicochemical properties.29,131
In exciting research reported by Shu et al., a novel method
for the biosynthesis of AgNPs with high stability using baker’s
yeast extract has been developed. In this study, the yeast
extract acted as a reducing and capping medium agent to form
AgNPs.132 Saitoh et al.133 studied the formation of PdNPs
(size 10−20 nm) using commercial Baker’s yeast (Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae) under acidic conditions. They demonstrated
that Pd(II) cation solution can be reduced to crystalline
PdNPs through a biosorption mechanism on the yeast cell wall
in the absence of external reducing agents. For the ﬁrst time,
Zhang et al. employed the Magnusiomyces ingens LH-F1 yeast
for the green synthesis of bio-AuNPs with diﬀerent
morphologies (sphere, hexagon, and triangle). The FTIR and
SDS-PAGE analysis demonstrated that some proteins absorbed
on the AuNPs surface could act as the reducing cum capping
agents in the production of bio-AuNPs. Furthermore, they
examined the catalytic behavior of AuNPs during the reduction
of nitrophenol to aminophenol and found that the presence of
reducing agents on the surface of the AuNPs enhanced their
catalytic activity.134
2.2.4. Algae-Mediated Synthesis. Algae is a large group of
photosynthetic aquatic microorganisms known to have a rich
source of secondary metabolites, including proteins, peptides,
pigments, and functional moieties (amine, hydroxyl, carboxyl,
and thiol).135,136 The secondary metabolites of algae can act as
the reducing and stabilizing agents to convert metallic cations
into metal NPs, both intracellularly and extracellularly.29,39,136
Aside from that, algae can grow rapidly and be easily cultivated
as well as scaled up for large production, making them an
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7553

excellent candidate for the biosynthesis of metal NPs.29,136,137
Spirogyra insignis (green),138 Fucus vesiculosus (brown),139 and
Chondrus crispus (red)140 are the common algae used for the
biosynthesis of metal NPs.
Recently, Satapathy et al. have designed a semicontinuous
setup with 15 L of culture medium to generate AgNPs from
Chlorella vulgaris.141 Rajkumar et al. also investigated the green
synthesis of AgNPs (size 55 nm) with a narrow particle size
distribution using C. vulgaris. They showed that aqueous
extract of green algae C. vulgaris can reduce Ag(II) cations into
AgNPs with high colloidal stability. The FTIR and SPR
analysis revealed that some organic compounds extracted from
the algae during the cultivation process were involved in the
production of AgNPs as reducing and capping agents.
Furthermore, catalytic studies indicated that methylene blue
dye could be reduced by AgNPs with high yield activity.142 In
another research, Basiratnia et al. studied the formation of
AuNPs (size 50−60 nm) from gold(III) chloride trihydrate
(HAuCl4·3H2O) using microalga Dunaliella salina. Based on
the FTIR spectroscopy results, some functional groups
(hydroxyl, carbonyl, and amine) were detected on the surface
of AuNPs, which suggested the presence of bioactive ligands as
reducing and capping agents.143
2.2.5. Virus-Mediated Synthesis. Viruses are submicron
pathogens, consisting of nucleic acid molecules protected by a
protein coat (capsid), which interrupt the vital functions of the
host cell by commandeering its DNA replication machi-
nery.29,130 For decades, the pathogenic nature of viruses had
left scientists oblivious to their positive ﬂip-side, but recently,
the crosstalk between the ﬁelds of virus biology and chemistry
has led to a gradual perception of viruses.144 From an
interesting perspective, viruses are considered as sophisticated
nanomaterials with the highly precise spatial symmetric
organization of protein building blocks in a variety of
architectures, such as ﬁlaments, spindles, spheres, rods,
icosahedrons, and phage head−tail structures. Hence, they
can be used as nanoscaﬀolds in a broad spectrum of
applications from pharmaceuticals, vaccines, gene, and drug
delivery to medical diagnosis and bioinspired chemistry.145−147
Recently, viruses have gained attention for their structural
features that make them attractive templates for synthesizing
metal nanostructures, among which nonpathogenic human
viruses are taking center stage, such as plant viruses and
bacteriophages.144 Their capsid is permeable to metallic ions,
so the internal cavity of viruses serves as a constrained reaction
environment to synthesize biometal NPs with a unique shape
and size control.146 Some viruses have a positive internal
surface, which prevents the nucleation of metallic precursors to
the formation of metal NPs. However, genetic engineering can
change the charge of the internal surface into negative by
mutagenesis that upregulates the carboxylic amino acids
(glutamic and aspartic acids).147 Studies have shown that the
change of pH unfolds capsid proteins, leading to swelling of
the virus. This phenomenon increases the permeability of ions
to the internal chamber of viruses.148 In addition, the outer
surface of the capsid serves as a powerful three-dimensional
scaﬀold with several reactive sites for metal deposing, reducing,
and growing, which can be enhanced with genetic and
chemical modiﬁcation to achieve desirable nucleation sites
and conﬁguration for the synthesis of metallic nanostruc-
tures.149,150 Chemical modiﬁcation can be achieved through
two fundamental mechanisms: (1) chemical conjugation of
metal-binding amino acids (e.g., Cys, Lys, Tyr, and His), and
(2) polymer coating for extra stability and functionality of virus
scaﬀolds.147
Dujardin et al. employed tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), a rod-
shaped plant virus, as a biotemplate for controlled deposition
and constrained organization of AuNWs, AgNWs, and PtNWs
from their precursor salts. They applied the genetically
modiﬁed MTV with a reduced negative charge along the
internal surface for the production of metallic NPs and
conﬁrmed that carboxylic amino acids (aspartic and glutamic
acids) were involved in the site-speciﬁc deposition of cationic
metals.151 In another study, Aljabali et al. demonstrated that
the Cowpea mosaic virus (CPMV) can be used as a biotemplate
for synthesizing Pd nanoparticles without any preactivation
(genetic and chemical modiﬁcations) assisted by the electro-
less deposition (ELD) metallization process. In their approach,
Pd cations were embedded into the CPMV by electrostatic
binding and reduced via dimethylaminoborane (DMAB) to
form Pd(0) NCs as a nucleation site for Pd deposition.152 In
an interesting study, Niu et al. produced 1D nanoﬁbers with a
high aspect ratio through the head-to-tail assembly of TMV
near-neutral pH assisted by in situ polycondensation of aniline.
TEM analysis showed that in acidic pH, the nanoﬁbers
assembled by hydrophobic interactions form 3D supra-
molecular virus templates. This bioinspired approach to
synthesize complex virus templates can be employed for the
production of multidimensional metallic nanostructures.153
Ahiwale et al. synthesized AuNPs using a rare bacteriophage
belonging to the Podoviridae family with a head-and-tail shape
as a reducing agent. The results of scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) indicated a polymorphic distribution in
shapes of the phage-inspired AuNPs, including spherical,
triangular, rectangular, hexagonal, and rhomboidal shapes.
They showed that the phage-inspired AuNPs have an
acceptable antibacterial activity against the pathogenic strains
of Salmonella paratyphi and P. aeruginosa.154 In another
research, Lee et al. studied the potential of a genetically
engineered M13 phage virus (i.e., p8#9 variant) with site-
speciﬁc peptides as a template for the facile synthesis of
AuNWs at room temperature. They utilized the cetyltrime-
thylammonium bromide (CTAB) as a surfactant molecule in
the biomineralization process to control the diameter and
uniformness of AuNWs. TEM images also showed that the
interaction of M13 phage and CTAB during the process led to
the synthesis of high aspect-ratio AuNWs (i.e., 5-fold of M13
phage length). Furthermore, they extended the study to
synthesize Au (core)−Pt (shell) NWs with a tunable Pt shell
diameter which can be used as an electrocatalyst in fuel cells
for the reduction of ethanol. The presence of Au in the core
can act as the cocatalyst that resolved the poisoning challenge
of Pt.155
2.3. Plant-Based Metal Nanoparticles Synthesis.
Despite the promising results of the microbial synthesis of
metal NPs, their opportunistic pathogenic nature has limited
their industrial production,30,34 since this approach demands
extra safety considerations. In addition, the microbial synthesis
of metal NPs requires an aseptic processing line, which incurs
additional costs.130 Therefore, a great deal of research has been
conducted on how plants can be used as promising green
biofactories to produce metal NPs.34 Similar to the bacterial
system, plants have diverse cell surveillance mechanisms that
eﬀectively detoxify the overconcentration of metallic cati-
ons.156 Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the as-
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7554

synthesized metal NPs accumulate in some organelles of plant
cells, such as vacuoles.32,34
Plants produce a large array of metabolites compared to
other living organisms.157 They produce several primary and
secondary metabolites, including amino acids, sugars, lipids,
proteins carbohydrates, vitamins, water-soluble polyphenols
(e.g., ﬂavonoids, phenolic acids, tannins, anthocyanins,
stilbenes, and lignans), alkaloids, quinines, terpenoids, and
saponins. These phytochemicals act as natural pesticides in
protecting plants against external biotic and abiotic aggres-
sions, like fungi, bacteria, insects, herbivores, and UV
radiation.157,158 These biomolecules can act as a surfactant,
stabilizer, and/or reducing agents in the synthesis of biometal
NPs (Figure 1c).32,159 In general, three steps are involved in
the plant-mediated synthesis of metal NPs: activation, growth,
and stabilization. In the activation phase, phytomolecules
convert metal cations into metal atoms through the redox
reaction and the metal atoms commence the nucleation.
Afterward, during the growth phase, metal atoms coalesce
spontaneously to form metallic nanoparticles through the
Ostwald ripening phenomenon. The size and shape of the as-
synthesized metal NPs will be determined by this step; if this
phase continues for a long period, the metal NPs can aggregate
and become irregularly shaped. Finally, in the stabilization
phase, the phytomolecules enclose the metallic nanoparticles,
which prevents their overgrowth and results in the energeti-
cally stable forms.159,160 So, scientists have been encouraged to
use plants as a facile, cost-saving, and eﬀective means of
biosynthesizing metal NPs. However, the amounts and types of
phytochemical compounds in plants depend on the seasonal
and climatic conditions, which aﬀect the ﬁnal properties and
reproducibility of the plant-based synthesized metal NPs.
There have been several studies of using diﬀerent parts of
plants (ex vivo) such as barks, fruits, fruits peel, seeds, roots,
stems, leaves, and ﬂowers for the biosynthesis of metal NPs as
discussed below.
2.3.1. Root Extracts. Plant roots are the primary and major
barrier to heavy metals entry from the soil into plants, so it is
not surprising that they possess some mechanisms for
detoxiﬁcation and mobilization of heavy metals.161,162 Singh
et al.163 used the root extract of Nepeta leucophylla as a source
of ﬂavonoid and phenolic compounds to reduce Ag nitrate for
the synthesis of spherical AgNPs (size 20 nm). The FTIR
results demonstrated that phenolic compounds and proteins in
the root extract were responsible for the reducing and capping
function, respectively. Consequently, the as-synthesized AgNPs
were examined by an antioxidant assay based on the
scavenging of 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radicals.
It was found that the plant-based AgNPs have an added
antioxidant activity as compared to the root extract of N.
leucophylla only.
2.3.2. Stem Extracts. Stems of the plant contain signiﬁcant
amounts of polyphenolic compounds, especially phenolic acids,
ﬂavonols, and ﬂavanonols such as astilbin.164,165 Khalir et al.166
showed that the aqueous stem extract from Entada spiralis
could reduce AgNO3 precursor for the synthesis of AgNPs,
which exhibited excellent antibacterial activity against Gram-
positive (e.g., S. aureus and Enterococcus faecalis) and Gram-
negative (e.g., E. coli and Proteus vulgaris). The diameter and
antibacterial activity of AgNPs were correlated to the reaction
time and initial concentration of the stem extracts and metal
precursors.
2.3.3. Leaf Extracts. Plant leaf extracts contain phytochem-
icals that are capable of reducing metal ions in a short time,
making them a perfect source for the fabrication of metal NPs.
Furthermore, plant leaf extracts have dual functional roles in
the process of synthesizing metal NPs by serving as both
reducing and capping agents.167 Nouri et al.168 developed a
straightforward method to synthesize AgNPs using the extract
of Mentha aquatica leaves (MAL) as a source of phytomole-
cules (e.g., ﬂavonoids, phenolic acids, and oils), which could
reduce Ag cations to Ag zerovalent atoms and act as capping
agents to produce stable plant-based AgNPs with multi-
functionality. They demonstrated that using ultrasound during
the biomineralization process could produce ultraﬁne AgNPs
(size 8 nm) with increased antibacterial potential against
Gram-negative species (e.g., P. aeruginosa and E. coli) and
Gram-positive species (e.g., S. aureus and B. cereus).
Furthermore, they indicated that the as-synthesized ultraﬁne
AgNPs showed acceptable catalytic activity to reduce dyes in
the textile wastewater, including methylene blue, Congo red,
methyl orange, and Rhodamine B.
2.3.4. Flower Extracts. Flowers possess diﬀerent secondary
compounds, such as pigments, volatile aromatic substances,
and other phenolic compounds, which can be used as reducing
and capping agents to develop a variety of metal NPs.169 For
example, Hemmati et al.170 found that the extract of Fritillaria
ﬂower could be employed to synthesize spherical AgNPs (size
10 nm) with signiﬁcant stability and antibacterial activity. The
FTIR results revealed that some biomolecules with hydroxyl,
carbonyl, and amide functional groups were responsible for the
reduction of Ag precursors in forming AgNPs.
2.3.5. Fruit Peel Extracts. Fruit peels contain various
phytomolecules (e.g., vitamins, lycopenes, carotenoids, luteins,
and polyphenols) and can act as an antioxidant shield for
protecting fruits against pro-oxidants. Therefore, fruit peels are
promising biowaste for the biosynthesis of metal NPs.171,172
Liu et al. introduced a facile and eco-friendly route, based on
the hydrothermal method to form anisotropic gold nano-
dendrites. They employed banana peel extract as a source of
reducing (glucose and fructose) and capping (starch) agents,
for synthesizing Au nanodendrites (four-leaf clover) from
HAuCl4 precursor. However, in previous studies, using
traditional chemical methods for the synthesis of AuNPs
resulted in spherical and rod morphologies.
2.3.6. Fruit Extracts. Fruits are natural packs of vitamins
with other reducing agents such as ﬂavonoids, polysaccharides,
ascorbic acid, and polyphenols that can be used in synthesizing
metal NPs.173 For example, Sujitha et al. applied the aqueous
extract of Phyllanthus emblica fruit to reduce AgNO3 and
obtained spherical AgNPs with an average diameter of 39 nm
that exhibited remarkable antibacterial activity against Acid-
ovorax oryzae (Gram-negative bacteria). The FTIR results
indicated that the phenolic compounds and proteins were
responsible for the production of these antibacterial AgNPs.174
2.3.7. Seed Extracts. Plant seeds contain have been used
successfully for the synthesis of metal NPs due to the high
levels of polysaccharides, proteins, and lipids.175 In this regard,
Girón-Vázquez et al. found that the Ag precursor (AgNO3)
could be reduced using the extract of Persea americana seed to
obtain spherical AgNPs (50 nm) that exhibited antibacterial
activity against E. coli. The FTIR analysis of the seed extract
synthesized AgNPs conﬁrmed the presence of polyphenols on
the surface of nanoparticles. Also, TEM images showed that
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7555

the diameter of the AgNPs has a positive correlation with the
concentration of the seed extract of P. americana.175
2.3.8. Bark Extracts. In the forestry industry, tree bark is
considered a waste product, but from a chemical perspective,
they contain a wide range of phytochemicals to produce
valuable materials. The bark of plants plays an important role
in plant protection because of its high content of bioactive
compounds with antimicrobial properties. In recent studies, it
was found that diﬀerent tree species’ bark extracts are a rich
source of reducing agents in the plant-based synthesis of
metallic NPs.158,176 For example, Ontong et al.177 employed
the extract of the Senna alata bark as the reducing and capping
agent for the production of AgNPs. The as-synthesized AgNPs
were spherical with particle size in the range of 10−30 nm.
Furthermore, the plant-based AgNPs showed acceptable
antibacterial activity against both Gram-positive (e.g., S.
aureus) and Gram-negative (e.g., Acinetobacter baumannii, E.
coli, P. aeruginosa, and Klebsiella pneumoniae) bacteria. The
FTIR results demonstrated that several phytomolecules,
including alkaloids, ﬂavonoids, polysaccharides, saponins,
terpenes, tannins, and steroids, in the bark extract acted as
the reducing and capping agents in the synthesis.
3. BIOMIMETIC AND BIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS OF
METAL NANOPARTICLES
In addition to green synthesis, the biological systems also
inspired the self-assembly and biodirected organization of
nanoscale metal structures with highly precise biorecognition
(e.g., DNA hybridization) and biochemical processes. This led
to the eﬀorts for the development of biofunctionalization
strategies for metal NPs tailored with functional biomolecules
such as an antibody (Ab), cell targeting ligand, nucleic acids,
etc. Biofunctionalized metal NPs possessed both the biological
functions that inherit from their biomolecular shell and the
unique physiochemical properties originating from the metal
cores, to the formation of multifunctional biometal NPs
suitable for a broad range of technological applications. On the
other hand, some metal NPs also exhibit biomimetic functions
such as enzymatic activities and antimicrobial properties, which
will be highlighted in this section. Furthermore, recent
advances in crystallography suggest that molecule-like metal
NCs exhibit similar structural hierarchy and complexity to
those of proteins and/or DNA.178,179 This may provide the
structural basis for many biomimetic functions of biometal
NPs. These bioinspiration strategies oﬀer new opportunities
not only to control the particle size, morphology, and
crystalline structure but also to customize the bio/chemical
functionalities as well physicochemical properties of the
resulted biomimetic metal nanoparticles (including biosynthe-
sized and biofunctionalized metal NPs) using a plethora of
biological origins available in nature.29,30,38,42,130
3.1. Biorecognition Functions for Precision Assembly.
Precision assembly is the formation of well-organized complex
nanostructures from nanoparticles in the macro-, micro-, and
nanoscale. Biomolecule-capped metal NPs (including those
produced from bioinspired synthesis and biofunctionalization
approaches) are excellent motifs for precision assembly. The
principle of biodirected assembly is based on the use of highly
precise biomolecular recognition between the capping
biomolecules on metal NPs that occurs spontaneously (e.g.,
Ab-antigen binding) through diﬀerent intramolecular inter-
actions, e.g., hydrogen bond, van der Waals, and hydrophobic
interactions, etc. In some cases, external triggers such as pH
and temperature play a pivotal role in the assembly and
disassembly of biometal NPs. For example, temperature plays
an essential role in the regulation of DNA-metal NPs assembly
and disassembly because DNA hybridization is susceptible to
the annealing temperature, oligonucleotides concentration, and
sequences. This paves the ways to form a broad spectrum of
multifunctional and stimuli-responsive biometal nanostructures
with improved plasmonic, optical, magnetic, and electrical
properties over individual nanoparticles, which have promising
uses in several applications, such as sensing, electronic devices,
catalysts, bioimaging, and drug delivery.
Scientists have observed similar patterns of assembly in
nanomaterials based on self-assembling patterns and their
functions in nature and have incorporated them into several
advanced technologies. Recent research has been demon-
strated that DNA can self-assemble to create various hybrid
nanostructures,180 which can be used to direct the organization
or crystallization of metal NPs. Through Watson−Crick base
pairing, complementary ssDNA can hybridize and generate
double-helical dsDNA. In one interesting work, Ma et al. found
that DNA can direct gold crystallization to form rodlike
nanoparticles with bridges based on the structural DNA
design.181 They have demonstrated the feasibility of direction-
speciﬁc crystallization by which one dsDNA anchored between
two Au nanoseeds served as a directional guide for the
crystallization of Au atoms into nanobridges. The single gold-
bridged nanoprobes have been successfully employed for the
identiﬁcation of single nucleotide polymorphism. To function-
alize metal NPs with DNA, thiolated DNA is typically used in
the following four ways: (i) hybridizing ssDNA with metal NPs
through complementary oligonucleotide sequences, (ii)
hybridizing ssDNA with metal NPs through DNA linkers,
(iii) hybridizing dsDNA with metal NPs through comple-
mentary oligonucleotide sequences, and (iv) aggregating
dsDNA with metal NPs through short complementary sticky
ends.64,182 The precise control of the assembly/disassembly of
diﬀerent DNA-functionalized metal NPs has been largely
utilized for the design of colorimetric metallic nanobiosensors,
which will be discussed in detail in the biomedical applications
section.
3.2. Antimicrobial Functions against Antimicrobial
Resistance (AMR). In recent years, the emergence of drug-
resistant pathogens has led to antimicrobial resistance (AMR),
which poses a threat to global public health. AMR refers to the
immunity of microorganisms (such as bacteria, viruses,
protozoa, and fungi) to antibiotic agents during gradual
genetic mutation, which prolongs the infection cycle, increases
the mortality of patients, and imposes an added ﬁnancial
burden on healthcare insurance systems. A variety of
mechanisms have been identiﬁed in microorganisms that
enable them to achieve AMR, such as thickening of the
microbial cell wall, decreasing multidrug uptake, inducing the
up-regulation of multidrug eﬄux pump genes, alteration of
antibiotic target proteins, expression of antibiotic modifying
and degrading enzymes, and generation of a bioﬁlm. This
problem has challenged scientists to develop novel antimicro-
bial agents against AMR. Metal NPs, in particular AgNPs, are
at the forefront of these due to their wide inhibitory spectrum
against microorganisms.183,184 In the past decade, many studies
have been conducted to discover antibacterial mechanisms in
metal NPs. It was found that metal NPs can damage
microorganism cells by disrupting membrane proteins,
damaging electron transport, damaging and denaturing cellular
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7556

Figure 3. Schematic illustration of (a) (i) synthesis of 3D matrix DNA self-nanocatalyzer and (ii) design principle of Au-based DNA self-nano
catalyst for electrochemical detection of DNA 5-methylcytosine. Reproduced with permission from ref 200. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (b)
Preparation of AuNPs-based ﬁlm on the surface of modiﬁed electrochemical biosensor for dopamine detection. Reproduced with permission from
ref 204. Copyright 2013 Elsevier.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7557

macromolecules (DNA, RNA, enzymes, and proteins), and
inducing apoptosis by generating reactive oxygen species
(ROS).184,185
Biomimetic metal NPs show promising potential as new
antimicrobial agents in treating infectious diseases because of
their improved physicochemical properties and biocompati-
bility. It has been observed that metal NPs synthesized by
bioinspired approaches are capped with biomolecules, which
can enhance the antimicrobial activity of metal NPs in several
ways: (i) some capping agents such as alkaloids, phenolic
compounds, proteins, peptides, and polysaccharides have
inherent antimicrobial activity, resulting in the synergistic
inhibition of microbial growth; (ii) capping biomolecules can
enhance the antibacterial activity of metal NPs by inhibiting
them from the agglomeration and produce stable biomimetic
antimicrobial NPs, because agglomeration of metal NPs often
leads to the reduced surface area and consequently ion release
for eﬀective antimicrobial actions; (iii) by incorporating
biomolecules (via biofunctionalization or during biosynthesis),
biometal NPs can be employed as antibiotic carriers to
increases the eﬀectiveness of antibiotics against resistant
microorganisms while reducing the dose intake. Lastly, (iv)
capping biomolecules can improve the antibacterial activity of
metal-NPs by adjusting their surface charge. Studies have
shown that the membrane of microorganisms has a negative
charge, which can eﬀectively bind to the positive biometal NPs
and get disrupted leading to bacterial cell death.186 The
antibacterial and antiviral applications of biomimetic metal
NPs will be reviewed in section 4.2.
3.3. Enzyme Mimetic Functions for Industries.
Enzymes are the most important group of proteins that
accelerate biochemical reactions in living organisms. There are
a total of six kinds of enzymes that exist in nature, i.e.,
hydrolases, oxidoreductases, lyases, transferases, ligases, and
isomerases. Each of them plays an important role to help speed
up the chemical reactions in our human body, which are
essential for respiration, digesting food, muscle, and nerve
function, among thousands of other roles. Like the
biorecognition function, they bind to molecules and alter
them in speciﬁc ways. So, the enzyme also plays a pivotal role
in the industries for pharmaceuticals, food, energy, and
environmental applications. However, natural enzymes possess
some disadvantages which are not suitable for industrial
applications, e.g., low stability, high prices, and limited
resources, which have prompted the researchers to ﬁnd
alternatives.
In 2007, Wei and Wang discovered that iron oxide
nanoparticles could act as mimics of the enzyme peroxidase.
With this discovery, a new ﬁeld called “nanozymes” emerged,
and researchers found that metal nanoparticles/metal oxides
could be a promising alternative to natural enzymes in various
research and industrial ﬁelds due to their low cost, high
stability, and reusability. There is evidence that the catalytic
properties of nanozymes strongly depend on the particle size,
shape, and formulation of the as-synthesized metal NPs.
Studies have shown that the biosynthesis of metal nano-
particles due to the presence of binding molecules with active
functional groups on the surface of nanoparticles can facilitate
the speciﬁc binding of the substrate to the nanozyme. It is
expected that the enzymic mimetic metal NPs can lead to
signiﬁcant progress in selectivity, durability, and enzymatic
activity. The development and applications of diﬀerent types of
enzyme mimetic metal NPs including nanozymes and artiﬁcial
metalloenzymes for various industrial applications will be
discussed in detail in section 5, catalysis applications.
4. BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS OF BIOMETAL
NANOPARTICLES
Biomimetic metallic (biometal) nanostructures, including
those with intrinsic biological (through biofunctionalization)
and biomimetic functions (e.g., enzymatic and antimicrobial
activities) have a broad spectrum of diagnostic and therapeutic
applications. Biofunctionalized metal NPs provide a versatile
surface functional group with speciﬁc biorecognition ability to
interact with other molecules (analyte) depending on the
nature of the biological shell tailored on the metal core. For
example, the existence of DNAs, proteins, and other
biomolecules on the surface of metal NPs enables them to
interact with other biologically important molecules selectively
through highly speciﬁc biomolecular interactions, such as the
DNA hybridization process, Ab-antigen binding interaction,
etc. These speciﬁc interactions have been used as fundamental
concepts to design a wide range of biosensors and bioimaging
nanoprobes for medical diagnosis. Thanks to the unique
electrical, optical and physicochemical properties of metal
nanostructures (i.e., metal NPs and metal NCs), wide ranges of
electrochemical and optical biosensors have been designed to
address the limitations of conventional chemical/biological
sensors in diﬀerent ﬁelds. This section reviews the recent
advances in using biometal NPs for biomedical diagnostic (i.e.,
sensing and imaging) and therapeutic (e.g., PDT and PTT)
applications.
4.1. Metallic Nanobiosensors. Biosensing is an essential
step to diagnose diseases and is used in post-treatment
monitoring of diﬀerent therapeutic procedures.187 Biofunction-
alized metal NP with biorecognition and/or biomimetic
functions (e.g., metal nanozymes) can be used in biosensing
applications to detect a broad spectrum of biomolecules and
disease cells (e.g., DNA, proteins, cancer cells, etc.) as well as
pathogenic species such as multidrug-resistant bacteria,
coronaviruses, etc. for medical diagnosis.188,189 Biometal NPs
have been used in designing electrochemical and optical
biosensors, owing to their unique conductivity and LSPR
properties (i.e., size-dependent color and microenvironment-
dependent ﬂuorescence signal changes).64,182,190−197 This
section focuses on the versatile designs of metallic nano-
biosensors for detecting various biomarkers, including small
molecules, DNA, proteins, bacteria, and viruses.
4.1.1. Electrochemical Nanobiosensors. An electrochem-
ical biosensor is a device that transduces biochemical events to
electrical signals.198 Metal nanostructures are of great
importance in designing electrodes, where the conductivity
of metal NPs results in higher sensitivity of the detection
system.199 For example, Zhu et al.200 fabricated a biomimetic
Au-based DNA self-nano catalyzer called AuNPs/g-C3N4−
rGO for electrochemical sensing of DNA 5-methylcytosine,
which is related to methylation-related diseases. The sensing
principle is illustrated in Figure 3a. This biomimetic sensing
system can be used to capture the speciﬁc immune responses
between DNA 5-methylcytosine and anti-5-methylcytosine
antibodies onto the electrode surface with ampliﬁed electro-
chemical signal through the attachment of the 3D self-
nanocatalyzer including containing AuNPs, hemin, and
methylene blue (Figure 3a(i)), resulting in the reduction of
methylene blue by H2O2 (Figure 3a(ii)). This electrochemical
sensitizer could provide an early diagnosis of methylation-
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7558

related diseases with high sensitivity (i.e., limit of detection
(LOD) is 8.6 aM).
Many voltammetric and amperometry electrochemical
biosensors have been designed to detect small molecules
such as neurotransmitters (i.e., dopamine).201−203 For
example, Xue et al.204 worked on the detection of dopamine
in human serum by fabricating AuNPs-based ﬁlm on the
surface of modiﬁed electrochemical biosensor (Figure 3b) with
an LOD of 7.8 nM. This nanobiosensor had high conductivity
and selectivity by avoiding the interfaces of coexistent
biomolecules. Besides neurotransmitter detection, a sand-
wich-like electrochemical nanobiosensor has been designed
for protein biomarker detection.205 Vural et al. utilized the
AuNPs/peptides with antibodies to detect prostate-speciﬁc
antigen on the surface of the pencil graphite electrode,
achieving an LOD of 0.68 ng/mL. Table 1 shows the latest
advances in designing electrochemical biosensors using
biometal NPs to detect various biomolecules.
4.1.2. Metal Nanoparticle-Based Colorimetric Biosensors.
Noble metal NPs exhibit unique LSPR properties which are
size- and shape-dependent. Therefore, any changes in the
microenvironment resulting in the aggregation of metal NPs
can lead to a color change which is accompanied by a shift in
extinction spectra/LSPR absorption peaks.9 This sensing
principle has been utilized for designing diﬀerent metal NP-
based colorimetric biosensors.2,206−208 The colorimetric nano-
biosensors can be categorized based on their assay designs: (i)
aggregation or antiaggregation-based and (ii) oxidative
etching-based colorimetric assays. Among the plasmonic NPs
(e.g., Ag, Cu, Pt, etc.), Au nanostructures have been largely
used for the colorimetric biosensor designs owing to their
distinctive solution color and LSPR peaks which can be easily
tuned by their size and shape.209 Table 1 summarizes some of
the recent advances in colorimetric biosensors designed to
detect various biological analytes.
Aggregation-based colorimetric biosensors are designed
based on the aggregation induced by (1) non-cross-linking
and/or (2) biodirected assembly of metal NPs in the presence
of analyte molecules. In the non-cross-linking mechanism,
metal NPs can be aggregated by the removal of repulsion
forces (including electrostatic, steric, and electrosteric) in bare
or weakly stabilized metal NPs (e.g., citrate anions capped
AuNPs) with the addition of salt ions or polyelectrolytes.
Normally, non-cross-linking particle aggregation can occur
within 5 min. In this context, Li et al.210 investigated the
electrostatic interaction between AuNPs and DNA bases. It
was found that the single-stranded (ss)DNA can stabilize the
citrate-capped AuNPs against salt-induced aggregation while
double-stranded (ds)DNA cannot due to its inability to attach
onto the AuNPs.210 Besides DNA−AuNPs interactions, our
group has studied the protein−DNA interactions with citrate−
AuNPs. For example, Tan et al. has developed a label-free
AuNPs biosensor to rapidly characterize DNA binding
properties of ssDNA binding (SSB) protein and to detect
single nucleotide polymorphisms.211 This assay is designed
based on the discovery that the SSB−ssDNA complexes can
protect AuNPs against salt-induced aggregation better than
SSB or ssDNA alone, leading to diﬀerential solution color and
LSPR spectrum changes for both qualitative and quantitative
measurement. A similar concept has also been utilized for
colorimetric detection of transcription factor (e.g., estrogen
receptors and SP1 proteins) binding interactions with speciﬁc
dsDNA sequences related to breast cancer.207,212,213 On the
other hand, biofunctionalized metal NPs can be aggregated
through biorecognition driving forces such as Ab-antigen
binding and DNA hybridization. For example, Assah et al. have
utilized the protein tetramerization-induced aggregation of
dsDNA-conjugated AuNPs for detecting tumor suppressor
protein p53, which can be used for cancer diagnosis and high-
throughput drug screening.2 This assay is designed based on
the cross-linking eﬀect induced through tetramerization of
wild-type p53 protein upon binding to the canonical DNA
motifs (containing p53 response element) modiﬁed on AuNPs.
This leads to a visible solution color change from red to blue,
which is quantiﬁable by the UV−visible absorption spectra
with a detection limit of 5 nM.
Due to the need to form chemical bonds between
biomolecules (e.g., hydrogen bonding for DNA hybridization),
the biodirected NP cross-linking mechanism normally requires
longer assay time (e.g., minutes to hours) to observe the
solution color changes/aggregation. As such, Tan et al.206 has
established a combinatorial colorimetric biosensor design
utilizing both the non-cross-linking mechanism (i.e., salt-
induced aggregation) and biodirected assembly (i.e., dsDNA-
modiﬁed AuNPs with sticky ends) to accelerate particle
aggregation, which allows the rapid and highly speciﬁc
detection of protein (i.e., estrogen receptor, ER)-dsDNA
(containing estrogen response element (ERE) sequences)
binding interactions. The assay design is shown in Figure 4a,
where two sets of AuNPs were each functionalized with a half
site segment of the ERE sequence containing a short
complementary sticky end that introduces base-pairing forces
to facilitate particle aggregation and form a transient full
dsDNA sequence. The addition of KCl causes the dsDNA
modiﬁed particle mixture (v1 and v2) to aggregate almost
immediately due to the synergic driving forces by electrolyte
charge screening and sticky ends base-pairing. However,
aggregation of NPs can be retarded in the presence of ER
protein that binds and stabilizes the transient ERE sequence
and therefore introduces steric protection forces between
particles. Diﬀering from many metal NPs colorimetric
biosensors, this antiaggregation (protein binding-stabilization)
sensing strategy reduces the false signals caused by unrelated
particle destabilizing eﬀects. Results in Figure 4a(ii−iv) show
that the rigid dsDNA spacers length is associated with the
hydrodynamic diameter of the DNA-conjugated AuNPs. It is
clearly shown that the length of dsDNA spacers and sticky
ends of the segmented protein binding sequences play a crucial
role in the biosensor design. Further investigation has been
carried out to systematically study the DNA design depend-
ency of the segmented DNA-induced AuNPs aggregation
toward versatile bioassay development.214 In another example,
Kataria et al.215 designed a colorimetric biosensor for detecting
mercury ions based on the antiaggregation approach where
aggregation of metal NPs is prevented in the presence of the
analyte. In this assay, 5-dimethyl-1-thiocarboxamidepyrazole
causes the accumulation of AuNP and changes color from red
to blue. However, the interaction between mercury ions and 5-
dimethyl-1-thiocarboxamidepyrazole prevents AuNPs aggrega-
tion, and the solution remained red in color (Figure 4b).
In the etching-based colorimetry assay, two factors are
essential, that is, the production of etchant molecules (e.g., free
radicals) and the formation of metal NPs/hybrid which is
prone to the changes in LSPR peaks upon oxidative etching.
For example, Khani et al.216 fabricated a colorimetric biosensor
for sensing GSH in biological serums. This is based on the
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7559

Table 1. Examples of Metallic Nanobiosensors for the Detection of Chemical and Biological Analytesa
type of metallic
nanobiosensors/
detection signals
biometal nanoparticles sensing probes
bio-ligand shell
metal core
analytes
linear range
limit of detection
refs
electrochemical detection
GE−MWCNTs
AuNPs
MMP-7 cancer cells
1 × 10−2−1 × 103 ng mL−1
6 pg mL−1
225
DNA-r
AuNPs
BRCA1 cells
1 fM−1 nM
0.1 fM
226
GSH peptide
Cu−PtNPs
Tyr enantiomers
227
BPAA/Zr4+/DNA/MCH/PNA
AgNPs
DNA
10 aM−10 pM
4.725 aM
228
DNA
AuNPs
Pb2+ ions
100 pM−5 μM
95 pM
229
DNA/H37Rv aptamer/MSPQC
AuNPs
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
102−107 cfu mL−1
100 cfu mL−1
230
colorimetric detection
ALP-DNA
AuNPs
ochratoxin A
1−50 U L−1
0.05 U L−1
231
p53 peptide
AuNPs
MDM2 protein
30−50 nM
20 nM
232
p14 peptide
AuNPs
segmented dsDNA ERE with
sticky ends
AuNPs
sequence specific estrogen
receptor-RE DNA binding
0−200 nM
25 nM
206
AgNPs
full dsDNA (p53 response
element)
AuNPs
p53 protein−DNA complex, p53
mutant, and drug screening
5 nM
2
DNA tetrahedron
AgNPs
HIV-related DNA
1−15000 nM
0.84 nM
233
GSH peptide
AuNPs
Pb2+
0.03−2 μM
13 nM
234
DNA origami
Au−Ag core−
shell nanorods
Ab
10−40 mM
235
pathogen RNA
casein protein
AuNPs
Porphyromonas gingivalis
4.3 nM
236
biomolecules (serine/histamine)-
derived biodots
biodot−AgNPs
H2O2
0.5−1000 μM (H2O2) 10−400 μM (Glu)
0.5−40 μM (Cho)
73.5 μM (H2O2) 53 μM (Glu) 8 μM (Cho)
217
Glu
Cho
bacteria matrix B40/PSS-PAH
AuNPs
Hg2+ ions
0.5−2000 ppb
0.5 ppb
237
Cd2+ ions
single-stranded DNAs
citrates-AuNPs
SSB protein, DNA mutations
sensitivity: single-base mutation/SNP
211
fluorescent detection
dsDNA template
CuNCs
Glu
0.05−100 μM
12 nM
238
dsDNA template
CuNCs
dopamine
0.1−10000 nM
20 pM
239
BSA protein
CuNCs
dopamine
0.1−0.6 nM
0.1637 pM
240
BSA protein
AuNCs
epinephrine
10−100 μM
0.91 nM
241
peptide-FITC
manganese-doped
iron oxide NPs
trypsin
2−100 ng mL−1
0.6 ng mL−1
242
HSA protein
CuNCs
HSA
1.8 ± 0.1 × 10−3 g L−1 (in human serum)
2.48 ± 0.07 × 10−3 g L−1 (in H2O);
243
0.62 ± 0.03 × 10−3 g L−1 (in urine)
1.8 ± 0.1 × 10−3 g L−1 (in human serum)
DNA template
AgNCs
ATP
0−240 μM
0.54 μM
244
oligomer-A or oligomer-B/Cy3
AgNPs
HBV DNA
100 fM−10 nM
50 fM
245
aptamer/DNase
AuNPs
Hg2+
10−300 nM
2.11 nM
246
dsDNA
Ag nanoflakes
endogenous H2S in cell division
cycles
1−10 μM
0.53 μM
247
pepsin template
CuNCs
flutamide
0.10−100 μM (flutamide)
61.82 nM (flutamide)
248
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7560

etching of Au nanorods (AuNRs) by the superoxide anion
radicals. This ultrasensitive colorimetric nanobiosensor has an
LOD of 34 nM. As shown in Figure 4c, the LSPR peak shift of
AuNR in the presence of GSH is compared to that with other
interfering molecules/ions through the superoxide etching
process. In 2019, our group has developed a dual optical (i.e.,
ﬂuorescent and plasmonic) nanobiosensor to detect glucose
and cholesterol via hydrogen peroxide sensing,217 using a
uniquely synthesized biometal nanohybrid from the ﬂuorescent
biodots (i.e., bioinspired carbon dots derived from serine-
histamine precursors218,219) and plasmonic AgNPs. The
formation of Bio−AgNPs nanohybrids caused the ﬂuorescent
signal of biodots to turn-oﬀ, exhibiting a yellowish-brown
solution color. In the presence of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2),
AgNP on a biodot was etched out, which turned on the
ﬂuorescent signal and caused the change of solution color from
yellowish to colorless. Based on this sensing principle, the as-
formed biohybrid metal NPs have been successfully utilized for
both ﬂuorescent and colorimetric sensing of cholesterol and
glucose in human plasma and synthetic urine, respectively
(Figure 4d).217
4.1.3. Metal Nanocluster-Based Fluorescence Biosensors.
Metal nanoclusters (NCs) with sizes less than 2 nm possess
bright ﬂuorescence due to the quantum conﬁnement eﬀect.
Many studies have shown that the ﬂuorescence of metal NCs is
sensitive to change in the microenvironment due to the change
in the electron-transferring process between the protected
ligand and metal core.64,220−222 The metal NCs-based
biosensors can be designed by either ﬂuorescence quenching,
appearance/ampliﬁcation, or ﬂuorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) emission color change mechanisms. For
example, our group has developed a facile drug screening
method based on the in situ synthesis of ﬂuorescent AuNCs
inside human serum albumin (HSA) proteins loaded with
small molecular drugs (Figure 4e).90,91 By comparing the
relative ﬂuorescence intensities of the resultant AuNCs loaded
with diﬀerent drug molecules (i.e., ibuprofen, warfarin,
phenytoin, and sulfanilamide), drug−protein binding constants
can be quantitively measured. In another example, Aparna et
al.223 developed BSA-templated CuNCs to detect protamine
(LOD is 0.12 ng mL−1) and heparin (LOD is 0.0406 ng
mL−1). After the addition of protamine, the ﬂuorescent
intensity of the BSA-CuNCs was increased. In contrast,
when the heparin was added, the intensity decreased. In
another study, Tang et al.224 synthesized the red-emissive
AuNCs using a 10-amino acid peptide CCYRGHDHCY and
then used these peptide-templated AuNCs to detect Allura red
dye. The ﬂuorescence of AuNCs was quenched dramatically in
the presence of Allura red molecules, which was due to FRET
from the AuNCs to the Allura red molecules. The as-designed
metal NC-based biosensor showed an LOD of 0.667 μM and a
linear relationship between the ﬂuorescence intensity and
concentration of Allura red dye over the range of 2−90 μM.
4.2. Metallic Nanotherapeutics for Cancers and
Pathogen Infections. The interest in applying metal
nanostructures in nanomedicine stems from their desirable
features such as size and shape-dependent optical and
electromagnetic properties, facile synthesis, and easy surface
functionalization.253 Some metal NPs show antitumor proper-
ties triggered by external electromagnetic radiation. Inherent
antitumor actions are seen with metal NPs alone without any
external stimuli, e.g., ZnONPs and AuNPs are deleterious to
cancerous cells by inducing oxidative stress and mitochondrial
Table 1. continued
type of metallic
nanobiosensors/
detection signals
biometal nanoparticles sensing probes
bio-ligand shell
metal core
analytes
linear range
limit of detection
refs
5.0−100 μM (chloramphenicol)
188.32 nM (chloramphenicol)
chloramphenicol
pDNA
AgNPs
Haemophilus influenza
1 ZM
249
Ab
Zn−Fe oxide NCs
Salmonella
10−105 cfu mL−1
10 cfu mL−1
250
aptamer
CuNCs
S. aureus
102−108 cfu mL−1
80 cfu mL−1
251
hairpin DNA, G-quadruplex
DNAzyme
AgNCs
S. typhimurium
10−5.0 × 105 cfu mL−1
8 cfu mL−1
252
peptide
AuNCs
Allura Red dye
2−90 μM
0.667 μM
224
BSA protein
CuNCs
heparin
0.04 ng mL−1
223
protamine
0.12 ng mL−1
aAbbreviations: ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; Ab, antibody; BSA, bovine serum albumin; BPAA, α-bromophenylacetic acid; Cho, cholesterols; Cu, copper; ERE, estrogen
response element; FITC, ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate; GE−MWCNTs, germanium nanoparticles−multiwalled carbon nanotubes; Glu, glucose; GSH, glutathione; Au, gold; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HIV,
human immunodeﬁciency virus; HSA, human serum albumin; MMP-7, matrix metalloproteinase-7; MCH, 6-mercapto-1-hexanol; MDM2, mouse double minute 2; MSPQC, multichannel series
piezoelectric quartz crystal; NC, nanocluster; NP, nanoparticle; Pd, palladium; Pt, platinum; PAH, poly(allylamine hydrochloride); PSS, poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate); PNA, peptide nucleic acid;
SSB, ssDNA binding; Ag, silver; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism; T-DNA, target DNA; Tyr, tyrosine.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7561

Figure 4. (a) Schematic illustration of the combinatorial sensing principle. Two sets of AuNPs each are modiﬁed with a half ERE segment (v1 and
v2) containing 3-base complementary sticky ends (i). The eﬀect of dsDNA sticky ends (v1 and v2) length on the AuNP aggregations: Color
solution (ii), eﬀective hydrodynamic diameter (iii), and absorption spectra (iv). Reproduced with permission from ref 206. Copyright 2010
American Chemical Society. (b) UV−vis analysis of antiaggregation-based assay. Reproduced with permission from ref 215. Copyright 2019
Elsevier. (c) The LSPR peak shift of AuNRs in the presence of diﬀerent molecules and ions through the superoxide etching process. Reproduced
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7562

damage.254,255 Metal NPs-induced tumor antagonistic eﬀects
include photochemical and hyperthermic reactions in PDT and
PTT, respectively.256 Although metal NPs are widely used in
the bench-side for these nanotherapies, there is still limited
bench-to-bed translation due to some challenges, such as
biocompatibility issues, toxicity concerns, and accumulation
within the body.257 Integration of metal NPs with the materials
derived from biological sources can increase biocompatibility
and reduce toxicity as well as introduce multifunctionalities
including biorecognition, enzymatic and tumor-targeting
function.258 Therefore, the employment of biomimetic metal
NPs in nanotherapeutics has been increasing over time,
particularly for cancer treatment and anti-infections.
Chemotherapy is one of the most conventional approaches
to treating cancer. Despite being the mainstay of cancer
therapy in the clinical setting, it faces many challenges which
make its eﬃcacy suboptimal and its side eﬀects toxicity beyond
the expectation. Some of these obstacles return to the
nonspeciﬁc action of chemotherapy on healthy cells. Also,
some characteristics of chemotherapeutics like water insol-
ubility and undesirable pharmacokinetics, including lack of
bioavailability and poor biodistribution to the tumor environ-
ment, pose many challenges.259 At the same time, other
challenges of chemotherapy originate from the intelligence of
tumor cells themselves to develop chemoresistance mecha-
nisms.260,261 Similarly, excessive antibiotic treatment for
bacterial infections also causes the development of antibiotic
resistance and the appearance of superbugs against the
traditional anti-infectives. Nanomedicine and bioinspiration
have supplied researchers with novel and eﬃcient tools to
overcome these barriers in cancer treatment and pathogen
infections, including screening, diagnosis, and remission
monitoring.262 Among the inorganic nanomaterials used in
nanomedicine, metal nanostructures are investigated well for
their applications in cancer diagnosis and antimicrobial
treatment. Multifunctional metal nanostructures are designed
on the benchtop for theragnostic purposes (combined
diagnostic and therapeutic function in one nanoparticle), a
few of which have found their way to clinical trials.257 The
following sections highlight the unique properties of various
biometal NPs and their therapeutic applications, including
antipathogenic activity, nanocarriers for drug delivery, as well
as nanoagents for PDT and PTT.
4.2.1. Antibacterial and Antiviral Applications. The
growth of bacteria in the human body is one of the challenges
of modern medicine. Due to antibiotic resistance, many
researchers have been seeking inspiration from nature to
develop eﬀective antibacterial materials. Since ancient times,
silver has been playing a prominent role in wound healing and
disinfection. The current advancement in nanotechnology has
led to the development of metal nanoparticles-based
antimicrobial materials for eﬀective treatment and prevention
of overdosing by controlling the release rate of metal ions from
the metal NPs reservoir. Today, as the viral infections go on,
antiviral properties of nanoparticles have been a hot topic for
investigation as an alternative to treat life-threatening
infections (e.g., SARS-Cov-2). This section will discuss the
intrinsic and postfunctionalized antibacterial/antiviral proper-
ties of biometal NPs.
Some metal ions (e.g., Ag or Cu) have antibacterial eﬀects
on the cell cycle pathways of bacteria. Accordingly, the
researchers have developed biometal NPs synthesize from
natural biomolecules to kill or deactivate bacteria. These
AgNPs can penetrate the bacterial cell wall and alter the cell
membrane structure, leading to cell death. In other words, they
can increase the cell membrane permeability, generating ROS
and abolish the DNA by releasing silver ions (Figure
5a).263−265 Biomimetic NPs in some cases can take advantage
of the synergistic eﬀects between the antibacterial properties of
metal core and anti-infective biomolecules on the surface of
metal NPs. Therefore, the bioinspired synthesis of metal NPs
using plant extracts, which are fully enriched by various
phenolic compounds, has received tremendous attention.266
For example, Al-Haddad et al.267 have synthesized bimetallic
AgNPs and CuNPs (Ag−CuNPs) using an extract of Phoenix
dactylifera L. leaves. The as-synthesized bimetallic Ag-CuNPs
showed great antibacterial activities against Bacillus subtilis and
E. coli (Figure 5b). In another study, Halawani and co-
workers268 applied an aqueous extract of Zizyphus spina-christi
(L.) to the synthesis of AgNPs. The leaves extract acts as both
the reducing and capping agent to form the bio-AgNPs. They
determined the antibacterial eﬀect of AgNPs against P.
aeruginosa, E. coli, Acinetobacter sp., and S. aureus with the
maximum inhibition zone of 15 mm, 17 mm, 23 mm, and 24
mm, respectively. Besides AgNPs, it has been reported that
AuNPs can abolish the bacterial cell wall or cell membrane,
leading to the bacterial cell death. For example, Hayden et
al.269 reported that AuNPs can bind to the surface of E. coli and
B. subtilis cell membrane, leading to signiﬁcant lysis of bacterial
cells (Figure 5c).
4.2.2. Nanocarriers for Cancer Therapy. Chemotherapeutic
drugs mainly exhibit their nonspeciﬁc cytotoxicity and extend
their oﬀ-target proﬁle.270 Metal NPs as drug nanocarriers can
solve nonselectivity problems, short half-life, and poor tumor
distribution of the conventional chemotherapeutic drugs.271,272
Thus, targeting seems a pivotal solution to conﬁne the
cytotoxic eﬀects of chemotherapeutics to tumor cells. Tumor
targeting by metal NP-based drug cargoes can be achieved
passively or actively.273 The primary approach for passive
targeting is to beneﬁt from the tumor’s physiological property,
enhanced permeation, and retention (EPR) eﬀect.274 En-
hanced permeation of metal NP nanocarriers results from the
leakiness of tumor vasculatures more than other vasculatures,
and enhanced retention results from minor lymphatic drainage
in the tumor environment as compared with normal tissues.275
One group of the well-studied metal NPs for passive
targeting of antineoplasm drugs is gold NPs. AuNPs loaded
with doxorubicin (DOX) showed more antitumor activity
Figure 4. continued
with permission from ref 216. Copyright 2022 Elsevier. (d)(i) Bio−AgNPs sensing probes for dual optical detection of glucose, (ii) ﬂuorescence
spectra, and (iii) solution color change and absorbance spectra of Bio−AgNPs in the presence of varied concentrations of glucose. Reproduced with
permission from ref 217. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Detection of warfarin using red-emissive HAS-AuNCs: (i) schematic
illustration of the formation of red-emissive HSA-AuNCs in the absence of warfarin and how warfarin aﬀects the ﬂuorescence intensity of these
NCs and (ii) elevation of ﬂuorescence intensity as a function of time in the absence and presence of warfarin. Reproduced with permission from ref
90. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7563

Figure 5. (a) Bactericidal mechanisms of AgNPs due to their direct contact with the bacterial cell wall and the release of silver ions. Reproduced
with permission from ref 497. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) Eﬀects of bimetallic AgCuNPs on (i) B. subtilis and (ii) E. coli. Reproduced with
permission from ref 267. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (c) TEM images of timed stages of the interaction of the bimetallic NP1 with B. subtilis
and E. coli. Images were collected at incubation time points of (A,A1) 20 s, (B,B1) 1.5 min, (C,C1) 3 min, and (D,D1) 10 min. Reproduced with
permission from ref 269. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7564

against ﬁbrosarcoma in mice than free DOX because of passive
targeting.274 The EPR eﬀect is dependent on many factors,
where the size, charge, and shape of NPs are of prominent
contribution.276 One intelligent way to control these factors is
to introduce biomolecules to metal NPs and produce
biomimetic metal NP−drug nanoconjugates. The ﬁrst feature
is the diameter of biometal NPs which is well correlated with
the permeation and retention eﬀects. Reducing the size of
metal NPs leads to better transvacuolar export; however, it
negatively aﬀects the half-life of metal NPs and their
biodistribution to healthy tissues.277 To untangle this contra-
diction, Ruan et al.278 smartly exploited the biodegradability
characteristic of a biomolecule, i.e., gelatin, in a way to produce
size-shrinkable biometal NPs for deep tumor penetration. They
fabricated PEGylated AuNPs conjugated with DOX and
coated the resultant AuNPs−DOX−PEG on gelatin nano-
particles. The ultimate size of this biometal conjugate was
about 186.5 nm, which is large enough to delay its clearance
and prevent out-of-tumor extravasation. More interestingly,
after exposure to the matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and
overexpressed enzyme in tumor interstitium that breaks
gelatin, the biometal NPs were shrieked to about 59.3
nm.278 The second feature: surface charge of metal NPs is
also comprehensively investigated for better passive targeting.
One way to modify the surface of metal-NPs is to PEGylate
them to diminish their uptake by the reticuloendothelial
system (RES), resulting in more circulation time and more
EPR eﬀect. DOX bound to the PEGylated-AuNPs showed
better cellular internalization, which could successfully over-
came the drug resistance and accumulated within the
multidrug resistance (MDR) cells.279 Oxaliplatin (anticancer
drug) attached to PEGylated AuNP showed more cytotoxicity
than free drug targeting.280 Since surface charge modiﬁcation
can improve the EPR eﬀect and aﬀect the uptake of metal NPs
into cancerous cells, biomolecule-modiﬁed metal NPs such as
AuNPs−albumin and AuNPs−gemcitabine has shown to have
increased endocytosis in human lung cancer cells.281
Functionalization of metal NPs with biomolecules leads to
the formation of biomimetic metal NPs with improved
biocompatibility, half-life, and increased cellular targeting.
However, the story of using biomolecules in biometal NPs
does not end with these beneﬁts merely. Active targeting is
another fascinating advantage obtained from creating the
biomimetic metal NP−drug complexes. This moiety binds
speciﬁcally to a receptor or antigen associated with cancerous
cells or a tumor microenvironment and is not found or with
much smaller amounts in healthy tissues. In addition to
reducing the harmful eﬀects of chemotherapeutics on normal
tissues, active targeting also enhances receptor-mediated
endocytosis of nanocarriers282 and outﬁght against multiple
drug resistance.283 For instance, cyclic arginine-glycine-aspartic
acid (cRGD) is a short peptide motif that binds to αvβ3
integrin. This adhesive protein is overexpressed on tumor
vascular and some speciﬁc tumor cells. The attachment of
cRGD to this receptor mimics the binding of RGD-containing
extracellular matrix proteins (e.g., ﬁbronectin and vitronectin)
to αvβ3 integrin. DOX-carrying PEGylated iron oxide NPs
were decorated with a 64Cu chelator and functionalized with
cRGD for theragnostic purposes. Cellular uptake and
accumulation were much more signiﬁcant with cRGD-
containing NPs than the cRGD-depleting ones.284 Chen et
al. also fabricated a DOX-carrying AuNP targeted with RGD
(AuNP−CD−AD−DOX−RGD) that exhibits pH-sensitive
release of drug in tumor cells.285 As shown in Figure 6,
time-dependent red ﬂuorescence of DOX was seen in U87
cancer cells while weak red ﬂuorescence was observed in the
COS7 normal cells.
In another example, Cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody
(mAb) against epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) that
targets gemcitabine-bound AuNPs in pancreatic cancer cells is
Figure 6. Evaluation of the cancer-targeted uptake ability of AuNP−CD−AD−DOX/RGD. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images
of U87 cancer cells incubated with AuNP−CD−AD−DOX/RGD for (A−A2) 3 h, (B−B2) 6 h, and (C−C2) 6 h for U87 cancer cells pretreated
with excess free RGD peptide in advance. CLSM images of COS7 normal cells incubated with AuNP−CD−AD−DOX/RGD for (D−D2) 3 h, (E−
E2) 6 h, and (F−F2) 6 h for COS7 normal cells pretreated with the excess of free RGD peptide in advance. (A−F) Red ﬂuorescence images of
DOX; (A1−F1) blue ﬂuorescence images of nuclei; and (A2−F2) merged images of red and blue ﬂuorescence. Reproduced with permission from
ref 285. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7565

reported. Targeting eﬃciency was correlated directly to the
level of EGFR expression on diﬀerent cell lines.286 In addition
to mAb, AS1411 aptamer with an aﬃnity to the protein
nucleolin, which is excessively translocated to the cell
membrane of malignant cells, is also used to form the cancer
cells-targeting nanocarriers. DOX was conjugated to the
Figure 7. (a) Schematic illustration of a new protocol for BSA−Ag13 NC synthesis (i). Absorption (black line) and emission (red line, λ ex = 480
nm) spectra of BSA−Ag13 NC. (Inset) An aqueous solution of BSA−Ag13 NC under daylight (no. 1) and UV light (no. 2) (ii). Photoemission
spectra of BSA−Ag13 NC in water at diﬀerent times. (Inset) The relative photoluminescence intensity at 625 nm is a function of reaction time,
indicating the completion of the reaction in 1 h (iii). MALDI-TOF mass spectra of BSA (black line) and BSA−Ag13 NC (red line) (iv).
Reproduced with permission from ref 3. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons. (b) Tuning the composition of bimetallic Au−Ag alloy NCs (BSA−
RAuxAg(13−x)NCs) through galvanic replacement reaction (i). UV−Vis (ii) and (c) photoemission spectra (λ ex = 480 nm) of BSA−Ag13NC
(dashed lines) and BSA−RAuxAg(13−x)NCs (solid lines) (iii), where R indicates the molar ratio of Au ions to AgNC. Reproduced with permission
from ref 295. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7566

AuNPs and then functionalized with AS1411, which targeted
breast cancer and uveal melanoma cell lines.287 Folic acid (FA)
is an excellent example of small biological molecules that are
widely used to actively target chemotherapy drug nanovehicles
into cancerous cells because they overexpress folate receptors
(FR). Banu et al. developed PEGylated folate-functionalized
AuNP loaded with DOX, which showed better cytotoxicity in
FR overexpressing breast cancer cell lines than the low FR
expressing breast cancer cell lines.288
4.2.3. Photodynamic Nanotherapy (Nano-PDT). Photo-
dynamic therapy (PDT) is a tumor-eradicating strategy that
acquires the use of a photosensitizer, a light source at a speciﬁc
wavelength, and the presence of oxygen to generate ROS to
destroy the tumor. Brieﬂy, the photosensitizer is ﬁrst
administered, followed by light irradiation at a particular
wavelength to the target tissue. Then the photosensitizer is
excited and will react photochemically with the molecular
oxygen to produce ROS.289 PDT works by many mechanisms
in cancer treatment. To name a few, the as-produced ROS
induces cellular oxidative stress and mediates tumor cells’
apoptosis.290 The ROS can close tumor vessels, leading to
tumor tissue ischemia.291 It also stimulates T cells to have
antitumor immune memory.292 Although PDT is a nontoxic
and minimally invasive method, it has some drawbacks to
traditional therapy. For example, the most widely used lights in
PDT have the limitation for deep tissue penetration. The
hypoxia in the core of tumors also resulted in insuﬃcient
oxygen required for PDT.293 Furthermore, most of the
conventional photosensitizers are hydrophobic, which are not
readily dissolved/dispersed in aqueous media. This causes the
aggregation of photosensitizer molecules which reduce the
accumulation and uptake by tumor cells for eﬀective PDT.294
Metal nanostructures have attracted attention for application
in eﬃcient PDT due to their unique features, such as water
solubility, small size, and simplicity of surface functionalization
for targeted therapy. In 2016, our group has reported the ﬁrst
BSA−Ag13 NCs with the ability of singlet oxygen (1O2)
generation (SOG) (Figure 7a).3 These metal NCs-based
photosensitizers have shown a SOG quantum yield of 1.26
under visible light illumination, which is higher than the SOG
quantum yield of Rose Bengal (0.75), a common organic
photosensitizer. These BSA−Ag13 NCs also exhibited bright
red ﬂuorescence which has been demonstrated for bioimaging
of breast cancer cells. Furthermore, the intrinsic ability of
nanophotosensitizers to generate 1O2 under irradiation can be
adjusted by altering their size or composition. More recently,
Yu et al. from the same group have designed the BSA-
protected Au/Ag alloy NCs (BSA−AuAgNCs) by tuning their
metallic composition through a spontaneous galvanic displace-
ment reaction. The correlation between the eﬃcacy of SOG
and photoluminescence intensity has been investigated and
found to be correlated inversely. Interestingly, it was also found
that plasmonic AuNPs were formed in situ during the
photobleaching process, which directly enhanced the SOG
eﬃciency of bimetallic NCs which is higher than the
monometallic BSA−Ag13 NC (Figure 7b).295 This phenom-
enon is called metal-enhanced SOG (ME-SOG), which is a
physical phenomenon that happens when a photosensitizer
molecule is placed in the vicinity (<10 nm distance) of
plasmonic metal NPs. Tavakkoli Yaraki et al.296 have shown
that tannic-acid capped AgNPs (80 nm) can enhance the SOG
rate in AIE photosensitizers, due to the enhanced electric ﬁeld
around the plasmonic AgNPs. The larger size of AgNPs results
in higher scattering and a stronger enhanced electric ﬁeld at
the excitation wavelength and therefore leading to a higher
SOG rate of the AIE photosensitizers. In another study, the
same group reported that the molar ratio of metal NP-to-
photosensitizer is critical in designing an eﬀective ME-SOG
system. It was found that lower concentration of plasmonic
NPs of larger size is required to maximize the ME-SOG
eﬃciency.5
While one-photon excitation is mainly reported in metal
NCs-based photosensitizers, two-photon excitation PDT is
reported in some of the plasmonic metal NPs, which provides
more advantages for PDT. For example, plasmonic AuNPs can
be excited with two half-energy photons into the same
excitation level obtained with a single high-energy photon.297
This mechanism, called two-photon excitation (TPE), allows
more light penetration with a reduced chance of unwanted
collateral phototoxicity to normal tissues. In addition to TPE,
the exploitation of AuNPs as PDT photosensitizers also
presents some favorable features such as low dark cytotoxicity,
long excitation time, and eﬃcient ROS production in the
presence of light, besides intrinsic antitumor and EPR
eﬀects.298 Furthermore, a AuNPs-based photosensitizer is
shown to be able to overcome hypoxic conditions within the
tumor. In addition, photosensitizer-conjugated metal NPs can
be decorated with a speciﬁc cell targeting ligand to facilitate
higher tumor cell uptake for more eﬀective PDT.299
Stuchinskaya et al. exploited the use of anti-HER2 monoclonal
antibodies to target breast cancer cells which were conjugated
onto PEGylated phthalocyanine modiﬁed AuNP. This
biometal NPs photosensitizer system showed favorable proper-
ties like stability against aggregation and enhanced cellular
uptake in cancer cells.300
4.2.4. Photothermal Nanotherapy (Nano-PTT). Photo-
thermal therapy (PTT)-induced hyperthermia is a minimally
invasive treatment for thermal ablation of cancer tumors. In
PTT, the agent can absorb the energy from irradiation light
(i.e., mostly at NIR region) and convert the absorbed energy to
heat through relaxation of the excited electrons.301 As
compared to PDT, PTT is less harmful as it uses longer-
wavelength radiations and does not require molecular oxygen
in the tumor site to generate ROS. However, there are still
some obstacles in using PTT for cancer treatment, including
unwanted damage to the surrounding tissues, poor penetration
for deep-seated tumors, and the development of thermo-
resistance mechanisms in some tumor cells.302 As such, the
application of metal NPs for PTT (i.e., nano-PTT) has paved
the way to overcome these challenges. First, metal NPs have
both strong photon absorption capacity and good ability to
convert the absorbed energy into heat.303 The mechanism of
enhanced photothermal conversion eﬃcacy arises from the
optical properties of metal NPs. If the oscillation resonance
frequency of metal NP matches the practical frequency of the
light, it will be able to convert light’s energy to heat.304
Typically, the higher the radio-absorbance capacity of metal
NPs, the shorter the irradiation wavelength is required for the
PTT, resulting in more cancer-directed irradiation with less
harmful eﬀect on the nearby healthy cells.
One of the most studied metal NPs for use in PTT is
anisotropic Au nanostructures such as AuNRs, Au nanostars
(AuNSs), Au nanoboxes, etc. In addition to large absorbance
capacity, such anisotropic nanostructures also transfer the
transduced heat to its proximity at a faster rate. Tumor homing
via passive and/or active targeting is still a challenge for using
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7567

gold nanostructures in PTT. Wang et al. developed PEGylated
Au nanohexapods for PTT in mice breast cancer models.305 In
this study, PEGylation acted as an eﬃcient tool for expanding
the circulation time of Au nanohexapods and their
accumulation within the tumor by passive targeting.
Furthermore, Au nanohexapods showed more promise in
cellular uptake and radiation-to-heat transducing as compared
to the AuNRs and nanocages, both in vitro and in vivo.305
PEGylated AuNSs was designed to passively target the tumor
cells.306 While PEGylation can diminish in vitro cellular uptake,
trans-activating transcription (TAT) peptide was introduced to
AuNS to overcome this problem. TAT peptide is a cell-
penetrating peptide derived from the Human Immunodeﬁ-
ciency Virus Type 1 (HIV-1). This bio(peptide)-metal nano-
PTT system showed both the enhanced cellular uptake and
enhanced photothermolysis in comparison with the bare
AuNSs.306
Active targeting of metal nanostructures by using bio-
molecules is another approach for enhancing eﬃcacy and
reducing the adverse eﬀects of PTT. For this purpose, biometal
NPs can exploit the tumor cells’ biological features such as
overexpressing some speciﬁc receptors and mimicking their
aﬃnity. For instance, CD30 protein is overexpressed in
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The anti-CD30 mAb targeted AuNPs
into L-428 Hodgkin’s cell for PTT. Results showed the
eﬀective killing of cancer cells with minor damage to
noncancer cells.307 Biometal NPs are designed to mimic the
thirst of tumor cells for FA in targeted PTT. While tumor cells
upregulate folate receptors, metal NPs can be decorated with
folate to exhibit tumor-homing selectivity. Multifunctional
folate-conjugated AuNPs can be used for targeted nano-
therapies to enhance PTT and radiotherapy.308 Zhang et al.309
produced AuNRs with a targeting FA (GNRs-FA) that
eﬀectively targeted melanoma cells. The increase in temper-
ature induced by GNRs-FA can be adjusted by altering the
NIR current. It showed both time- and current-dependent
patterns in photothermal conversion. When the postirradiation
time and NIR current increased, the heat generated by GNRs-
FA also increased (Figure 8).
4.3. Bioimaging for Diseases Prognosis and Diag-
nosis. Bioimaging is related to the method that noninvasively
visualizes biological processes in real-time with minimum
Figure 8. Temperature increase induced by laser-treatment of GNRs-FA. B16-BL6 cells were treated with PBS or 50 μg/mL GNRs-FA for 24 h. (a)
A ﬁlter paper, with a well-sized hole for a 96-well format plate, was used to cover the treated cells to guarantee the laser irradiating the target well
accurately, and an infrared radiation thermometer was applied to measure the temperature. (b) An 808 nm NIR laser source was used for 15 min
with diﬀerent power densities that could be adjusted by the current (0.55 A (i), 0.60 A (ii), 0.65 A (iii)). The detected temperature (in degrees
Celsius) was plotted. Results represent one of three experiments. Reprinted with permission from ref 309. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7568

interferences with the life processes. Bioimaging allows us to
get valuable information about molecular events, which is
especially helpful for early and precise diagnosis and prognosis
of diseases, biochemistry, and drug discovery. Desirable
bioimaging is characterized by high contrast and resolution,
optimal sensitivity, low cost, and without ionizing radiation.
Common modalities for bioimaging include optical imaging
(e.g., ﬂuorescence imaging), X-ray, and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI).310 Many bioimaging probes including organic
and inorganic nanoparticles have been developed over the last
decades for diﬀerent bioimaging techniques.218,219,311−314 In
particular, biometal NPs have been used in targeted
bioimaging from ﬂuorescence to MRI due to their tunable
physicochemical and optical properties. Some of these metal
NPs are inherently optically active (e.g., ﬂuorescent metal
NCs), while others become active in a multicompartmental
system functionalized with optically active elements. On the
other hand, plasmonic metal NPs with unique LSPR can be
used to amplify the response to optical processes (e.g., metal-
Figure 9. (a) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of L-AuNCs/FA-PDNH is shown. Reprinted and adapted with permission from ref 335.
Copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons. (b) Schematic PDT illustration of MCF-7 cancer cells using BSA−Ag13 NC (i) and MTT assay (ii) histogram
of MCF-7 cancer cells treated with BSA−Ag13 NC ranging from 50 to 500 × 10−6 m (Ag basis) without and with light irradiation. Reproduced with
permission from ref 3. Copyright 2016 John Wiley & Sons.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7569

enhanced ﬂuorescence) and are well studied for their use in
bioimaging.315−319
4.3.1. Fluorescence Imaging. Among bioimaging modal-
ities, ﬂuorescence imaging is one of the most widely used
techniques, owing to its high-resolution image at the cellular
level.313 Recording events at the molecular level by
ﬂuorescence imaging is an exciting way to study physiological
or pathological procedures.320 A crucial part of ﬂuorescence
imaging is the ﬂuorophore (i.e., contrast agent), which can
absorb light with a speciﬁc wavelength and emit light with a
longer wavelength. The probe signiﬁcantly aﬀects contrast,
detection limit, and sensitivity of imaging. An ideal probe for
ﬂuorescence imaging should have bright ﬂuorescence,
preferably red emission, high photostability under excitation,
and desirable pharmacokinetics.321 In general, metal nano-
structures can be used in ﬂuorescence imaging in two ways: (i)
ultrasmall metal NCs with an intrinsic ﬂuorescence properties
and (ii) plasmonic NPs in metal-enhanced ﬂuorescence
systems.
4.3.1.1. Metal NCs in Fluorescence Bioimaging. Metal
NCs (mostly Au, Ag, Pt, and Cu) are ultrasmall inorganic
ﬂuorophores with a maximum of 2 nm diameter in size.
Biotemplated synthesis of metal NCs leads to the formation of
biometal NCs which are composed of a metal core consisting
of a few to hundreds of atoms and a biomolecular shell that
stabilizes the ultrasmall nanostructures in quantum conﬁne-
ment regime.322 Most importantly, the optical properties like
ﬂuorescence brightness, emission color, etc. can be tuned
across diﬀerent wavelengths (from UV−visible to NIR) at the
biomolecular level (i.e., by changing the biotemplate sequence
at nucleotide/amino acid levels) for use in ﬂuorescence
imaging of biological tissues.57,89 NIR imaging represents an
emerging trend in ﬂuorescence bioimaging, showing great
promise for medical diagnosis due to its deep penetration and
high resolution in biological tissue. Recent discoveries
suggested that the atomically precise AuNCs with NIR
emission at 1100−1700 nm could be good candidates for
high-resolution medical diagnosis323,324 In addition to accept-
able photostability and biocompatibility, speciﬁc characteristics
of metal NCs that have made them an ideal ﬂuorescent probe
include interesting optical features such as a high Stokes
shift325 (diﬀerence between absorbed and emitted wave-
length), capability for two-photon absorption,326 and adjust-
ability of the emitted wavelength by altering the metal NCs’
size and composition.327 For example, the emission tunability
of AuNCs was well studied by Yu and co-workers from our
group.87 They have used the GSH biomolecule as a template
for the synthesis of multicolor emissive AuNCs. It was shown
that the surface charge of peptide and peptide-to-metal ratio
were the most determinative factors that aﬀected the emission
wavelength of AuNCs.87 Furthermore, Lim et al. from the
same group have uncovered the rational design rules of nucleic
acid as templates for the synthesis of AgNCs.328 They have
investigated the impacts of four basic DNA nucleotides on
AgNCs synthesis and revealed how they could inﬂuence the
photoluminescence properties of AgNCs, especially the
emission wavelength. It has allowed the successful prediction
of the emission colors of AgNCs templated by diﬀerent cancer
cells targeting aptamer sequences before the synthesis. This
shows the accuracy of the DNA template design rules
developed by the team.
Several metal NCs, especially AuNCs, AgNCs, and PtNCs,
have been developed for ﬂuorescence imaging of living cells,
especially cancer cells.329−332 Some cells speciﬁc ligands, like
aptamers, have been conjugated onto metal NCs toward
targeted ﬂuorescent bioimaging.333,334 For cancer diagnosis
and treatment, designing a targeted theragnostic system that
can simultaneously image and deliver cytotoxic drugs to cancer
cells is highly valued. Chen et al. have designed smart
nanocomposites that served as targeted vehicles for paclitaxel,
which released their payload in a pH-dependent manner.335
The luminescent AuNCs also served as the diagnostic probes
for detecting speciﬁc cancer cells. These multifunctional core−
satellite nanocomposites were prepared by self-assembly of FA-
modiﬁed AuNC as the shell (satellite) and drug-loaded
amphiphilic pH-responsive polymer as the core (Figure 9a).
Recently, our group has designed BSA-templated AgNCs3 and
BSA-templated alloy AgAuNCs295 with red-color ﬂuorescence
emission and SOG ability. The biomolecular protein shell
makes the metal NCs highly biocompatible with normal cells
but shows a high PDT eﬀect on the cancer cells when
irradiating with white light. Viability assays using methyl-
thiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) revealed that
more than 85% of cells treated with BSA−Ag13 NC without
light irradiation remained viable, even with high concentrations
of NCs. While the viability of cancerous cells decreased
signiﬁcantly after light exposure. This decline in viability
increased as the concentration of BSA−Ag13 NCs increased.3
These data prove the biocompatibility of BSA-templated
AgNCs under dark conditions and high phototoxicity toward
cancer cells under light (Figure 9b). In addition, an inverse
correlation between SOG rate and photoluminescence
intensity of BSA-templated AgAuNCs was found. It is due to
the competition of using photons to react with the surrounding
medium and being excited to generate photoluminescence.295
This study provides useful information in designing multi-
functional metal NCs toward eﬀective theragnostic treatment.
Multimodal imaging probes (e.g., MRI and ﬂuorescent) have
been introduced for cellular imaging. For example, Li et al.336
fabricated a multimodal imaging nanoprobe by conjugating
polyethylene glycol onto the ultrasmall gadolinium oxide
(PEG−Gd2O3) for MRI contrast agent, functionalizing AgNCs
with aptamer (aptamer−AgNCs) as ﬂuorescence modality for
targeted bimodal imaging. In addition to in vitro imaging,
ﬂuorescence metal NCs have also been used for in vivo imaging
of tumor sites.337 Li and co-workers94 have synthesized
biomimetic AuNCs for in vivo tumor imaging by using the
pea protein isolate (PPI) as both a reducing and stabilizing
agent to produce red-emissive PPI−AuNCs with desirable
biocompatibility. Then they camouﬂaged the PPI−AuNCs
with red blood cell membranes to improve the circulation time
and tumor-homing after in vivo administration of the biometal
nanostructures.
4.3.1.2. Metal-Enhanced Fluorescence (MEF) and Thera-
nostic Application. Diﬀerent from the intrinsically ﬂuorescent
metal NCs as discussed above, plasmonic metal NPs in the size
range of 10−100 nm can be used to enhance the ﬂuorescence
intensity of a ﬂuorophore in a metal−ﬂuorophore hybrid
system at an appropriate NP−ﬂuorophore distance. When the
ﬂuorophore is placed in direct contact or at a short distance
(<5 nm) from the surface of MNPs, ﬂuorescence quenching is
due to the high energy transfer rate from the excited
ﬂuorophore molecules to metal NPs. However, at an optimum
distance, the ﬂuorescence intensity of ﬂuorophores can be
enhanced by several fold. This phenomenon was ﬁrst observed
by the Geddes’s group,338 which is termed as the metal-
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7570

enhanced ﬂuorescence (MEF). Generally, there are two main
mechanisms to describe the MEF phenomenon: (i) enhanced
excitation rate due to enhanced electric ﬁeld around plasmonic
NPs under excitation wavelength,339 (ii) plasmonic coupling
eﬀect, where the metal NP couples with an excited ﬂuorophore
and emits light with the same wavelength of the emission
wavelength in the ﬂuorophore.340 Figure 10 shows the
simpliﬁed Jablonski diagram for the MEF phenomenon.341
MEF is a size and shape-dependent phenomenon. This
means that the morphology of metal NPs aﬀects the enhanced
electric ﬁeld under excitation wavelength, leading to diﬀerent
enhanced excitation rates in the ﬂuorophore. Therefore,
optimizing the size of metal NPs in a MEF system is crucial
to achieve maximum ﬂuorescent enhancement.222 Generally,
anisotropic metal NPs with sharp edges/corners (e.g., AuNSs,
Ag nanobipyramid, Ag nanocube, etc.) result in a higher MEF
eﬀect, owing to the creation of hot spots with dramatically
enhanced electric ﬁelds at their edges/corners.341,316,319,342,343
For example, Liang et al.342 have reported a 13.8-fold
ﬂuorescence enhancement in an AIE dye using 78 nm Ag
Figure 10. Simpliﬁed Jablonski diagram for a ﬂuorophore/photosensitizer placed in the vicinity of the Ag nanocube. S0 is the ground state of
energy. S1 and Sn refer to the ﬁrst 1st and nth singlet state of energy. Intersystem crossing (ISC) occurs when an electron goes from the S1 level to
the 1st triplet state level of energy (T1). The electrons in T1 can pass their energy to the surrounding oxygen molecules (3O2) and produce 1O2.
Reprinted with permission from ref 341. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry.
Figure 11. Confocal images of HeLa cells with AIE-PS dots and Au585−AIE-PS after 12 h of incubation (ﬁrst column, red ﬂuorescence). The
nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33,342 (5 μg mL−1, 5 min) with blue emission. The diﬀerence in the contrast of bright ﬁeld images (last column)
indicates the internalization of AuNSs in the cells. All the images share the same scale bar of 50 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref 4.
Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7571

nanocube covered by polyelectrolytes with a metal−polymer
distance of about 6 nm.
Besides, MEF is a distance-dependent phenomenon. The
nonradiative rate and radiative rate in a ﬂuorophore in the
vicinity of the metal NP change with diﬀerent trends, resulting
in MEF at an optimum distance from the surface of metal NPs.
We have observed this distance-dependent MEF in AIE dyes
using the tannic acid-capped AgNPs.5,296 In another study
reported by Tavakkoli Yaraki et al. from our group, highly
monodispersed HEPES buﬀer-synthesized AuNS-AIE dots
hybrid systems have been successfully fabricated for enhanced
ﬂuorescence imaging of cancer HeLa cells and SOG toward
image-guided therapy (Figure 11).319 It was shown that AuNS
with the highest enhanced electric ﬁeld at an excitation
wavelength of AIE dots (Au585) could result in a higher
enhancement eﬀect in both ﬂuorescence and SOG.
4.3.2. Computed Tomography (CT) and X-ray Imaging. X-
ray imaging currently accounts for the most widely used
diagnostic imaging in medical practice. Iodinated organic
molecules and barium sulfate were used in the clinic as X-ray
contrast agents. In some cases, their uses as contrast agents
have raised safety concerns and some of them cannot respond
readily to the latest X-ray imaging techniques.344 In X-ray
imaging, contrast is achieved when X-ray attenuation of
substances diﬀers from each other. Advancement in nano-
technology leads to the development of metal NPs as new
contrast agents for X-ray imaging. This is because metal atoms
have high atomic numbers, leading to unique X-ray attenuation
properties. Thus, metal NPs can provide higher contrast/
enhancement than the conventional iodinated organic contrast
agents.345 Some metal NPs are composed of a contrast-
producing core coated by lipids, silica, polymers, or other
compounds.346−348 For example, AuNPs are massively
reported as X-ray contrast agents due to their high K-edge
energy, biocompatibility, and tunable physicochemical proper-
ties.349 Also, other types of metal NPs were introduced for
their X-ray contrast generation, such as bismuth, tantalum, and
Pt. In addition, metal NPs have been reported for use in
computed tomography (CT scans), which is 3D imaging based
on X-ray imaging. Metal NPs are well-suitable for CT imaging
because their K-edges decrease the energy range used by many
CT scanners.350
Biofunctionalization of metal NPs for use as X-ray and CT
contrast agents makes them more biocompatible and more
targeted to the imaging site. For instance, the biofunctionaliza-
tion of AuNPs by the heparin molecules (HEPA−AuNPs)
renders them more speciﬁc to the image of the liver organ. CT
imaging showed much more enhanced liver images by these
heparin-conjugated AuNPs, as compared with the eXIA 160,
an iodine-based CT contrast agent (Figure 12).351 In another
study, Cormode et al.352 reported the use of biofunctionalized
AuNPs for the analysis of atherosclerotic plaque composition
by multicolor CT imaging. They functionalized the AuNPs
with high-density lipoprotein (HDL) to produce the biometal
Figure 12. (a) Cross-sectional microCT images in livers 2 h after injection of saline, eXIA 160 (800 mg I kg−1), and HEPA−AuNPs (250 mg Au
kg−1). (b) 3D micro-CT images of livers were obtained after 2 h postinjection of saline, eXIA 160, and HEPA−AuNPs. Reprinted with permission
from ref 351. Copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7572

Table 2. Diﬀerent Types of Biomimetic Metal Nanocatalystsa
noncatalytic compartment
biometal nanostructures
biomimetic functions and systems
catalytic reactions
refs
supports
porous
structures
carbon
Vulcan (XC-72 or XC-72-R)
Pt, PtRu, core−shell Au−Pt, PtCo, Pseudo-Core−Shell Pd−Pt, PtCoW,
PtNi,, Pt−, PtRhIr, core−shell dM−PdPt/C (M = Pt, Ni, Co, Fe, Cr),
PtFe, PdCo−PdPt and Pt−Sn
• dehydrogenase enzyme mimetic
• methanol oxidation
reaction
387,400,404,428−450
• oxidoreductase enzyme mimetic
• ORR
• mimic active sites of photosystem
(II) in plants dehydrogenase
enzyme
• OER
• ethanol electrooxida-
tion reaction
CNTs (single and double
wall)
Pt, PtRu,
• oxidoreductase enzyme mimetic
• ORR
434,451−454
ordered graphitic mesopo-
rous carbon
Pt, PtRu
• dehydrogenase enzyme mimetic
• methanol oxidation
reaction
396,398,455,456
• oxidoreductase enzyme mimetic
• ORR
ordered microporous carbon
(carbon core and graphitic
carbon shell)
Pt
• mimic methanol oxidation path-
way in C. glutamicum bacteria
• methanol oxidation
reaction
395,397
zeolites
HY, NaY
Ru
• bioinspired synthesis using Cacu-
men Platycladi extract
• hydrogenolysis of hy-
drocarbons (C2, C3)
390,457
• hydrogenation of cy-
clopropane
beta
Au
• glucose oxidase enzyme mimetic
• conversion of glucose
oxidation to gluconic
acid
458
silica
SiO2
Au
• nitric oxide reductase mimetic
(bioinspired synthesis using citric
acid and uric acid)
• nitrogen oxide reduc-
tion reaction
459
Snowtex
Pt
• dehydrogenase enzyme mimetic
• methanol oxidation
reaction
386
EMSN
Pt
• peroxidase enzyme mimetic
• hydrogen peroxidase
decomposition
388
alumina
Al2O3
Ru
• bioinspired synthesis using Cacu-
men Platycladi extract
• hydrogenation of cy-
clopropane
457
MOFs
UiO-66-NH2
core−shell Au−Pd
• carbon monoxide dehydrogenase
enzyme mimetic
• CO2 hydrogenation
reaction to convert into
CO
14
392
metal oxides
TiO2 (anatase)
Pt
• wood channels inspired template
for catalyst synthesis
• electrochemical reac-
tion
460
MgO
Au−Pd
• bioinspired synthesis using Cacu-
men Platycladi extract
• hydrogenation of cy-
clopropane
457
CeO2
Pd
• nitric oxide reductase
• NO reduction reaction
459
artiﬁcial
enzymes
noncovalent
BSA/tumor-targeting peptide
Cu cluster
• tumor-targeting metalloenzymes
• transforming H2O2 to
OH• and O2
461
macrocyclic
βCD
Au
• glucose oxidase enzyme mimetic
• conversion of glucose
to gluconic acid
422
container molecules
nitrogenase scaﬀold
[Fe6S9(SEt)2]4−clusters
• nitrogenase enzyme mimetic
• acetylene reduction in
ATP-dependent meta-
bolic reaction
462
aAbbreviations: ATP, adenosine triphosphate; βCD, beta-cyclodextrin; BSA, bovine serum albumin; CO, carbon monoxide; CNTs, carbon nanotubes; Cr, chromium; Co, cobalt; Cu, copper; EMSN,
expanded mesoporous silica nanoparticle; Au, gold; MOF, metal−organic frameworks; Ni, nickel; Pd, palladium; OER, oxygen evaluation reaction; ORR, oxygen reduction reaction; Pt, platinum; Ru,
ruthenium; Ag, silver
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7573

contrast agent (Au−HDL). Results showed that there is an
enhanced accumulation of Au−HDLs within the macrophages
on the aorta section. Other biological moieties include various
types of monoclonal antibodies that have been added to metal
Figure 13. Schematic illustration of the typical biomimetic nanocatalysts. (a) Silica-supported PtNPs for methanol oxidation. Reproduced with
permission from ref 386. Copyright 2008 Elsevier. (b) Fe, Mo-doped mesoporous MCM-41 zeolite for transforming N2 to NH3. Reproduced with
permission from ref 390. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (c) MOF-based AuPd NPs for the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide.
Reproduced with permission from ref 392. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. (d) Carbon-supported metal NPs for methanol oxidation. Reproduced with
permission from ref 395. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. (e) CeO2 supported PdNPs for methane oxidation. Reproduced with permission from ref 407.
Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Cavity-containing scaﬀold ArM for transforming glucose to gluconic acid. Reproduced with
permission from ref 422. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (g) Container molecule-based ArM for acetylene reduction. Reproduced
with permission from ref 425. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons. (h) Noncovalent binding of ArM for transforming H2O2 to OH and oxygen in
the tumor microenvironment. Reprinted with permission from ref 427. Copyright 2020 Science.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7574

NPs by introducing targeted X-ray contrast agents. For
example, Eck et al. conjugated the anti-CD4 mAb onto the
PEGylated AuNPs to target lymph nodes. This biofunction-
alized AuNP enhanced the contrast in peripheral lymph nodes
in CT imaging because the immune cells with CD4 receptors
help to transport the X-ray contrast agents selectively to the
lymph nodes.353 While optical properties of metal NPs can be
adjusted by their size alteration, in the context of X-ray
imaging, it has been shown that the X-ray attenuation of AuNP
is independent of its size.
5. CATALYSIS APPLICATIONS OF BIOMIMETIC
METAL NANOPARTICLES
Enzymes are the most important group of proteins that
accelerate biochemical reactions in living organisms by
reducing the activation energy and play a pivotal role in
regulating cellular activity.354 Depending on their mechanisms,
enzymatic reactions can be classiﬁed into six general
categories: (i) oxidation−reduction (gaining or losing
electrons by oxidoreductase), (ii) transition (transferring
functional moieties such as acetyl, amines, and phosphate
groups by transferase), (iii) hydrolysis by hydrolase, (iv)
dissociation (removing some atoms from molecular structures
by lyase), (v) isomerization (rearranging atoms in molecules
structures by isomerase), and (vi) synthesis (conjugating of
two molecules by ligase).355
Nowadays, enzymes are widely used in a variety of
industries, including pharmaceuticals, food, energy, and
agriculture.356,357 However, some disadvantages such as high
prices, limited resources, and low stability have prompted
researchers to ﬁnd alternatives. Recently, studies have shown
that metal oxides/metal NPs can be used as enzyme mimics to
catalyze enzymatic reactions.358,359 There is evidence that the
catalytic properties of nanocatalysts depend on several
physicochemical features, including particle size, shape, and
formulation. So, it is not a surprise that nanocatalyst science
has ﬂourished in the past years, leading to signiﬁcant progress
in selectivity, durability, and activity.360−363 Since metal NPs
are stabilized by loose ligands (typically polymers, inorganic
agents, solids, or ionic liquids), this allows the substrates to
reach the nanocatalyst surface by ligand displacement
approach.360,361,364−367 Considering that the catalytic perform-
ances are strongly dependent on the physicochemical proper-
ties of metal NPs, it is imperative to control these parameters
precisely to tune their selectivity, stability, and catalyst activity.
To achieve this, several strategies have been developed for the
synthesis of enzyme mimetic metal nanoparticles (also known
as nanozymes or biomimetic nanocatalysts) with controlled
properties.368−370 Table 2 summarizes some of the recent
advances in biomimetic metal nanocatalysts and their
corresponding biomimetic functions and catalyzed reactions.
5.1. Biometal Nanocatalysts and Their Supports.
Nanocatalysts bridge the gap between homogeneous and
heterogeneous catalysts owing to the combination of the
advantages of both methods by providing more active sites and
accessibility in solution (like homogeneous catalytic solutions)
and the possibility of recycling (like in heterogeneous catalytic
mixtures).371−374 However, it is often diﬃcult to remove
nanocatalysts from reaction media due to their small
dimension. To address this issue, nanocatalysts are often
immobilized on support surfaces.375 Based on the types of
catalyst supports, we can largely diﬀerentiate two categories of
biomimetic nanocatalysts: (1) biosupported metal nano-
catalysts where biological templates, such as microorganisms,
viruses, plants, and DNA, are used instead of the conventional
supports. For example, Jia et al.376 used the biomass of
Gardenia jasminoides Ellis as catalytic support for PdNPs (size
3−5 nm). They demonstrated that this biomass-supported Pd
nanocatalyst can catalyze the hydrogenation of p-nitrotoluene.
Furthermore, it was found that PdNPs were capped with
several antioxidants, such as crocin, chlorogenic acids, and
crocetin, leading to the enhanced antioxidant-stability of
biotemplate Pd nanocatalysts. (2) Enzyme mimetic metal
nanocatalysts (i.e., nanozymes and artiﬁcial metalloenzymes)
are dispersed in traditional supports. In the following section,
we will discuss the applications of these biomimetic metal NPs
for catalysis based on the diﬀerent types of supports.
5.1.1. Mesoporous Supports for Biometal Nanocatalysts.
Loading superﬁne metallic nanocatalysts into porous materials
with large speciﬁc areas presents a promising strategy to
prepare heterogeneous catalysts with excellent performance.
Similarly, the entrapment of nanozymes in porous materials
prevents Ostwald ripening, aggregation, and particle growth.
As a result of this approach, biometal nanocatalysts achieve
enhanced catalytic functionality and are protected from fouling
and leaching during the synthesis and catalytic reac-
tions.377−379 Thus, the pore size of the support is a pivotal
factor to achieve eﬃcient catalysts. While the pores should not
be so large as to cause biometal NPs to leach, they should also
be large enough to allow reactants and products to
diﬀuse.380−384 The main mesoporous supports that have
been used for this purpose are mesoporous silica, zeolite,
and metal−organic frameworks.
5.1.1.1. Mesoporous Silica. Mesoporous silica has a high
speciﬁc surface area, ordered porosity, and pore size
distributions that make them advantageous support for metal
and metal oxide nanocatalysts.375,385 For instance, Zeng et al.
prepared a dehydrogenase enzyme to mimic PtNPs supported
by silica for use as methanol oxidation catalysts. It was found
that the catalytic activity of PtNPs increased with the
supported mesoporous silica (Figure 13a).386,387 In another
example, Li et al. prepared the Pt nanocatalysts in expanded
mesoporous silica that could mimic peroxidase activity with
high stability and catalytic performance over a broad range of
pH.388
5.1.1.2. Zeolites. Zeolites are crystalline aluminosilicate
minerals with a high potential for use as catalyst supports due
to their low cost and structural characteristics, such as high
porosity, speciﬁc area, and adsorption capacity.389 Thangudu et
al. investigated a green and sustainable biomimetic metal (Fe
and molybdenum (Mo)) catalyst supported on mesoporous
zeolite (FM-MCM-41) to accelerate the transformation of
dinitrogen into ammonia, which can produce high ammonia
formation yields under natural conditions. Additionally, the
Michaelis−Menten kinetics of the synthesized catalyst show
that it behaves like the nitrogenase enzymes in the reaction
(Figure 13b).390
5.1.1.3. Metal−Organic Frameworks. Metal−organic
frameworks (MOFs) are a subclass of crystalline porous
materials with distinctive properties, including large speciﬁc
areas, diversity in compositions and structures, and high
porosity with tunable pore size. Therefore, these features make
MOFs potentially interesting for heterogeneous catalysis.
MOFs have been successfully combined with several functional
materials, including metal NPs, biomolecules, inorganic
materials, and metal oxides clusters (polyoxometalates), to
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7575

produce MOF-based composites with improved catalytic
activity, stability, and selectivity.391 The encapsulation of
biometal NPs inside nanoporous MOFs could be a viable
approach to prevent aggregation. As such, the biometal NPs
act as the active sites while MOFs enhance the chemical
stability, active sites, and enzyme mimetic activity of the metal
nanocatalyst. For instance, Zhang et al. have successfully
prepared the antenna-reactor plasmonic Au-core−Pd-shell
catalyst encapsulated within UiO-66-NH2 (Au−Pd−UiO-66-
NH2-0.5) as the CO dehydrogenase enzyme mimetic to
convert carbon dioxide (CO2) into CO. The results
demonstrated that the encapsulation of Au−PdNPs nanozymes
signiﬁcantly improves the catalytic activity, conversion, and
selectivity for the CO2 hydrogenation reaction (Figure 13c).392
5.1.2. Carbon Supports for Biometal Nanocatalysts.
Carbon nanostructures often serve as the catalyst supports,
particularly Pt-based catalysts, due to their remarkable physical
and chemical features, including large speciﬁc area, tunable
porosity, high electrical conductivity, as well as speciﬁc surface
chemistry, which made them an ideal support for the
heterogeneous catalysis, especially for the electrochemical
reactions.393,394 Zeng et al. prepared PtNPs supported on
microporous amorphous carbon as a catalyst for fastening the
methanol electrooxidation in acidic media, which mimics the
methanol oxidation pathway in Corynebacterium glutamicum
(Figure 13d).395 Similarly, Su et al. synthesized the ordered
graphitic carbon with interconnecting pores as a support for
dispersing Pt nanocatalysts to accelerate the methanol
electrooxidation reaction at ambient temperature. The results
demonstrated that the catalyst possesses improved and speciﬁc
activity as compared to the commercial Pt catalysts.396−398 On
the other hand, Zhu et al. developed a composite of Co3O4-
dominated nanocatalyst on the porous carbon nanosheets. The
as-synthesized composites demonstrated an acceptable per-
formance as a nonprecious metal nanocatalyst for the oxygen
evaluation reaction (OER) in acidic media, which mimic the
active sites of photosystem (II).399 Yang et al. also prepared
the carbon-supported metal NPs with the heterogeneous
structure consisting of a PdCo-core surrounded by the PdPt-
shell. This unique core−shell nanocatalyst exhibited eﬀective
performance for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), which
acts as an oxidoreductase enzyme.400 In a comprehensive
study, Yang et al. examined the catalytic activity of Fe, nickel
(Ni), and cobalt (Co) supported on mesoporous carbons,
which mimic the active sites of photosystem (II) for OER in
acidic media. According to the results, these supported
structures eﬀectively enhanced the active sites of nanometals,
which showed stronger acid resistance and better catalytic
performance than the non-noble metals catalysts.401,402
5.1.3. Metal Oxides Supports for Biometal Nanocatalysts.
Diﬀerent metal oxides, including TiO2, magnesium oxide
(MgO), and cerium(IV) oxide (CeO2), are used as support
catalysts in heterogeneous catalysis. These materials have been
investigated for their catalytic performance, inert nature, and
durability.403 TiO2 (called titania) exists in three crystalline
allotropes (anatase, rutile, and brookite), which are widely
used as catalyst supports. Among diﬀerent types of titania
allotropes, anatase is generally used as a catalytic support due
to its high speciﬁc surface area, cost-saving, nontoxicity,
noncorrosive, and excellent interaction with metal NPs.404 In
an interesting study, Hong et al. utilized the anatase TiO2 with
bioinspired wood channels as a template for distributing
PtNPs. The results indicated that this nanocatalyst could
convert formaldehyde (HCHO) to carbon dioxide and water
through an oxidation reaction.405 In another example, Zhan et
al. synthesized Au−Pd−MgO bimetallic catalysts through a
green bioreduction route using the aqueous extract of Cacumen
Platycladi for the aerobic oxidation of phenylmethanol.406 Cai
et al. also presented a facile route for synthesizing spherical
Pd−CeO2 NPs using bioreducing agents (citric acid and uric
acid) for the methane oxidation reaction (Figure 13e).407
5.2. Artiﬁcial Metalloenzymes (ArM). Artiﬁcial metal-
loenzymes (ArM) are macromolecule scaﬀolds coordinated
with the metal cofactors that catalyze speciﬁc chemical
reactions. Therefore, with recent advances in organometallics,
artiﬁcial enzymes have been regarded as a potential substitute
for natural enzymes.408−410 In general, there are three
approaches to bind metal nanostructured to macromolecule
scaﬀolds: (i) cavity-containing scaﬀolds, (ii) noncovalent, and
(iii) container molecules.
5.2.1. Cavity-Containing Scaﬀolds. Molecules containing
cavities are a class of artiﬁcial enzymes that imitate the
pocketlike structure of natural enzymes, so these molecules act
as a “host” to admit substrate that acts as a “guest” into their
cavities to accelerate the transformation of the substrate by
either increasing the local molarity of the reagents or
preorganizing them.411−413
5.2.1.1. Macrocyclic Compounds. Macrocyclic compounds
(e.g., crown ethers, cyclodextrins (CDs) derivatives, resorci-
narene, calixarenes, and cryptands) are bioinspired catalysts
that mimic the cavity of natural enzymes. This provides an
environment where substrates are isolated from the surround-
ing, while the substrate-binding sites of cavities provide a
suitable preorganization to accelerate reactions, even without
any catalytic moieties.414−417 For instance, CDs are cyclic
oligosaccharides, having hydrophobic cavities that can
accommodate small hydrophobic molecules and catalyze
reactions.418−420 In recent years, there has been a great deal
of enthusiasm about the enzymatic potential of CDs, especially
when combined with metal ions, metal clusters, organometallic
metal complexes, and metal nanoparticles. Studies have shown
that CDs can act as the enzyme mimetics in oxidation,
reduction, hydrogenation, hydroforming, ring-opening/forma-
tion, and coupling reactions.421 For example, Zhao et al. used
an in situ colloidal synthesis method to produce the Au0-beta-
cyclodextrin (βCD) NPs (∼20 ± 1.6 nm) that act as glucose
oxidase-mimicking catalysts (GOx) to transform glucose into
gluconic acid and H2O2. The XPS analysis revealed that the
modiﬁcation of AuNPs with βCD reduced the hydroxyl
concentration and increased the carboxylic acid, indicating that
βCD had a reducing and stabilizing eﬀect. Furthermore, the
molar ratio of the AuNPs to βCD indicated high coverage of
the particle’s surfaces by the βCDs at a distance of 1.47 nm as
shown in Figure 13f.422
5.2.1.2. Container Molecules. During the last decades,
various container organomolecules have been designed with a
constricted microenvironment mimicking the cavity of
enzymes. So, it is not surprising that synthetic containers can
conduct some speciﬁc chemical reactions.423,424 For an
example, Tanifuji et al. synthesized ArM that mimics
nitrogenase enzyme by substituting the native M-cluster with
the synthesized [Fe6S9(SEt)2]4−clusters for acetylene reduc-
tion in the ATP-dependent metabolic reaction (Figure 13g).425
5.2.2. Noncovalent Binding Approaches. With the latest
advances in host−guest chemistry, noncovalent binding
methods have been developed to produce supramolecular
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7576

complexes that mimic enzymes functions. In addition to
synthetic host−guest complexes, proteins and oligonucleotides
also act as excellent scaﬀolds to create these complexes through
noncovalent binding such as hydrogen bonds, ionic bonds, van
der Waals interactions, and hydrophobic−hydrophobic inter-
actions. The inherent physicochemical characteristics of
proteins make them attractive candidates as scaﬀolds for
ArM, including their strong stability, pre-existing metal-binding
sites, native aﬃnity to small molecules/ligands, internal void
spaces, secondary structures, and native aﬃnity to binding
cells. Among the metalloprotein scaﬀolds, porphyrins are the
most popular and eﬀective proteins used as metalloen-
zymes.408,426 Gao et al. synthesized an ArM, Cu cluster
anchored in BSA conjugated to a tumor-targeting peptide to
catalyze transforming H2O2 to OH• and O2 in the tumor
microenvironment (Figure 13h).427
6. OTHER EMERGING APPLICATIONS OF BIOMETAL
NANOPARTICLES
The applications of biomimetic metal NPs are not limited to
biomedical applications and biocatalysis. The presence of
biomimetic parts on the surface of metal NPs provides unique
features that have opened new avenues for researchers in
employing the designer biometal NPs in various ﬁelds
including clean energy, electronic devices, and data storage.
In this section, we brieﬂy review the latest advances in these
emerging applications of biometal NPs.
6.1. Clean Energy. With rising greenhouse gas emissions
and dwindling fossil fuel reservoirs, scientiﬁc communities have
Figure 14. Emerging applications of biomimetic metal nanostructures: (a) two-step simplistic routes for the fabrication of mitochondria-like
lithium iron phosphate (MC-LFP) battery. Reproduced with permission from ref 467. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic
diagram (left) and microscopy images (right) of the M. thermoacetica/AuNC hybrid system. Reproduced with permission from ref 471. Copyright
2018 Springer Nature. (c) Schematic diagram of LbL (left) and qPCR quantiﬁcation (right) of DNA loading on Fe/C nanoparticles. Reproduced
with permission from ref 496. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7577

been encouraged to develop eco-friendly energy technologies.
Although the advent of Ni−Cd batteries has sparked hope in
the energy industry, their low performance has prompted
researchers to consider developing a new generation of
batteries.463 In the 1970s, the revolutionary research of
Professor Whittingham opened up a new paradigm in the
energy storage systems for the development of lithium-ion
batteries (LIBs). Over the last decades, nanomaterials have
made a signiﬁcant contribution to the state-of-the-art develop-
ment of batteries due to their high speciﬁc surface area and
surface energy.464−466 Nowadays, as nature is the largest
factory for the generation, distribution, and storage of energy
in various forms, researchers have been looking for inspiration
from the biological systems in the designs of next-generation
LIBs that can overcome the shortcoming of conventional
approaches. For instance, to mimic the mitochondrion
structure, Yasmin et al. developed a mitochondrion-like lithium
iron phosphate (MC-LFP) battery by uniformly coating the
surface of lithium iron phosphate with two carbon layers
(Figure 14a). According to the results, the performance of
MC-LFP with dual carbon layers is superior to that with a
single carbon layer. The as-fabricated biomimetic battery has
been demonstrated to have a decreased resistance of charge
transferring, improved charging eﬃciency, and enhanced
charge−discharge cycling stability.467
Natural photosynthesis stores sunlight in chemical energy
carriers, but it has not evolved for the eﬃcient synthesis of
fuels, such as hydrogen. Artiﬁcial photosynthesis is another hot
topic that has attracted the attention of scientists to explore
bioinspiration and nanotechnology in developing green and
sustainable energy technologies. The photobiological water-
splitting technology using cyanobacteria and algae to produce
clean hydrogen fuel,468 semiartiﬁcial photosynthesis using
hydrogenase enzyme and metal NPs,469 as well as biomimetic
metal oxide catalyst in water splitting catalysis470 are among
the few emerging technologies in artiﬁcial photosynthesis
utilizing renewable solar energy. In a paper reported by Zhang
et al., a photosynthetic biohybrid system in which AuNCs are
incorporated inside the nonphotosynthetic bacteria achieves
faster electron transfer and more durable solar CO2 ﬁxation471
(Figure 14b). This system is more durable as compared to the
previously reported semiartiﬁcial photosynthesis that utilized
CdS, as the intracellular AuNCs are less toxic and can trap
ROS that might damage the cells. As sunlight is an abundant
source of energy and one that will never deplete, research on
artiﬁcial photosynthesis using nanotechnology will continue to
develop in the future, moving forward toward renewable forms
of hydrogen production.
6.2. Electronic Devices. In the past few years, a great deal
of eﬀort has been made toward developing the next generation
of cost-saving, ﬂexible, and eco-friendly electronics devices.
The advances in nanomaterial science have provided new
opportunities for developing electronic devices with reduced
size and dimensions.472,473 Today, the fabrication of small-
scale and ﬂexible electronic devices through the additive
patterning of printable materials is in the spotlight.474
However, the creation of eco-friendly and low-cost conductive
ink has a pivotal role in the advancement of printed electronics.
Inkjet printing has been widely used to produce printed
electronic devices, including ﬂexible displays, transistors, and
sensors.475−477 Recently, using metal NP-based inks has
become increasingly prevalent for fabricating conductive
patterns due to their higher electrical conductivity than
nonmetallic inks.475,478 They can be categorized into elemental
metal NP inks, alloy NP inks, metallic oxides, and core−shell
bimetallic.478 Currently, silver is the most reported material for
superior electrically conductive ink, but its high price
encourages researchers to look for cheaper alternatives such
as Cu. However, Cu is a reactive metal, which means a thin
oxide layer is formed on its surface upon exposure to the
atmosphere at elevated temperatures. Hence, the oxide layer
signiﬁcantly reduces electrical conductivity and makes it
challenging to use as conductive NP inks.478 A method to
protect against oxidation of active metal NP inks is based on
the formation of biohybrid metal NP inks. The functional
metal NPs are coated with a dense layer of capping agents such
as polymers/biomolecules, thereby improving their chemical
and colloidal stability.479,480
By coating metal NPs with (bio)polymers, metal NPs are
prevented from forming “coﬀee ring” patterns during the ink
evaporation-induced self-assembly process.475,478,481 In this
context, Li et al. employed the ascorbic acid and glucose as the
reducing and capping agents, respectively, to synthesize
diﬀerent types of biometal inks containing Cu (50 nm), Au
(10 nm), and Ag (15.5 nm) NPs. They used the fast infrared
sintering method to reduce the resistivity of the biometal NPs
and protect the conductive patterns from damage. By utilizing
the direct brushing method, paper-based electrodes have been
produced with great ﬂexibility and conductivity.482 Another
interesting creation that scientists have discovered is the
glowing bionic mushrooms that produce electricity in the hope
that they can be used to power devices such as electrolyzers for
hydrogen production. In this study, mushroom caps were
coated with cyanobacteria printed in the 3D electronic ink
spiral patterns along with the graphene nanoribbons to collect
electricity because cyanobacteria can undergo photosynthesis
while graphene nanostructure can conduct electricity.483
Experiments were done and showed that small amounts of
current are produced. In addition, cyanobacteria can be kept
alive for a signiﬁcantly long period due to moisture,
biophysiological conditions, and the geometry of the mush-
room cap that gives ample sunlight. However, this system is
not yet ready for practical use and research is still ongoing on
ways to generate higher currents. By integrating biological
species with nanomaterials, this work has shown huge
opportunities for the next-generation biohybrid applications.
6.3. Data Storage. With the ﬁrst digital revolution during
the 1950s and 1960s, new horizons appeared in data storage
technologies. Punch cards were replaced by new types of data
storage media, such as magnetic disks, semiconductor circuit
memories, and optical discs, which have dominated the data
storage market for some decades.484−486 The ever-increasing
volume of generated data has prompted researchers to develop
more advanced paradigms for data storage.487 Today, with the
advent of nanostructured materials with unique characteristics
attributed to the strong lateral conﬁnement of photons,
phonons, and electrons at the nanoscale, cutting-edge
approaches to generate optical, magnetic, and electronic data
storage with higher storage density and faster data processing
are being developed.488
More recently, researchers have demonstrated that bio-
molecules such as peptides, proteins, polysaccharides, DNA,
RNA, virus, and cell membrane have promising prospects to
meet the storage demands of big data centers.487,489−491 Data
storage based on biomolecules is a signiﬁcant step toward
developing green data storage devices, where DNA has taken
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7578

the lion’s share in this regard.487,492 DNA is a stable, writable,
rewritable, readable, and data-dense biomolecule, so it has
recently received the great attention of scientists as a versatile
data storage medium. Despite the striking features of DNA, the
utilization of biomolecule in data storage is still in its infancy
and requires more research and developmental eﬀorts to reach
its maturity for practical applications.493−495 Some literature
has shown that the functionalization of metallic nanomaterials
with biomolecules provides distinguished physicochemical
properties that could enhance data storage eﬃciency.487,489,491
As shown in Figure 14c, Chen et al. employed an LbL
approach to fabricate nanostructures with alternating layers of
polyethylenimine (PEI) as a polycationic polymer and DNA as
a polyanionic biopolymer for the encapsulation of carbon-
coated iron NPs inside the LbL nanostructures. According to
this study, the qPCR results showed that the stability and
storage density of DNA strands in the protected structures is
signiﬁcantly increased as compared to the unprotected DNA.
Additionally, with the encapsulation of iron NPs by DNA, 83
Kbytes of digital information can be stored and read out in
DNA using a 4991 oligonucleotide pool.496
7. CONCLUSIONS
Biomimetic metal NPs (biometal NPs), especially gold and
silver, have witnessed huge progress within the last 20 years.
Diﬀerent biological resources have been used to synthesize
monodispersed biometal NPs with good control of size and
morphology. Plant extracts enriched with phenolic compounds
and various biomolecules such as proteins and DNAs have
been the most appealing biological templates for the synthesis
of metallic nanostructures, ranging from metal NCs that
contain a few atoms (<2 nm) with molecular-like properties to
the formation of large plasmonic NPs (10−100 nm) with
unique LSPR. Additionally, microorganisms such as bacteria,
fungi, and even viruses have also been reported as valuable
sources for the biosynthesis of metal nanostructures. Such
biosynthesized metal NPs not only exhibit intrinsic biological
and physicochemical properties but also possess versatile
functional groups on their surface for functionalization,
enabling them to be used in various technological applications,
including nanomedicine, catalysis, and beyond.
Biometal NPs that include biofunctionalized metal NPs with
highly speciﬁc biorecognition ability (e.g., DNA base-pairing
and Ab-antigen binding) and those with biomimetic functions
such as enzymatic and antimicrobial activities, etc. have a
broad range of biomedical applications. The shape and size-
dependent LSPR peak and unique conducting properties of
biometal NPs have led them for used in various electro-
chemical and optical biosensors designs to detect disease
biomarkers ranging from small molecules to large biomacro-
molecules and even living microorganisms. Additionally, the
application of ﬂuorescent metal NCs has also been extended
from biosensors to bioimaging of cancer cells and tumors in
vivo. In addition to biomedical sensing/imaging, biometal NPs
have been used as biomimetic nanocarrier and/or nano-
therapeutic agents in diﬀerent treatment methods, which
include chemotherapy via targeted drug delivery, PDT, PTT,
and theragnostic treatment that combine diagnostic and
therapeutic components in one multifunctional biometal NPs.
The metal nanostructures also play an important role in the
catalyst industry, where they can accelerate the reaction either
by facilitating the electron transfer process or active sites for
reactants. These unique properties have led to the utilization of
metal nanocatalysts in many ﬁelds. Particularly, enzymes,
which are substances that act as a catalyst in living organisms,
are widely used in pharmaceuticals, food, and the agricultural
industry. Recent studies have reported that metal NPs can be
used as enzyme mimics to catalyze enzymatic reactions in
which strategies have been comprehensively reviewed in this
report, including the synthesis of enzyme mimetic metal NPs
(also known as nanozymes), biosupported metal nanocatalysts,
and ArM. Additionally, the applications of biomimetic metal
nanostructures are not limited to the biomedical and catalyst
industries, they have been reported as good candidates for
clean energy (e.g., biomimetic batteries and artiﬁcial photo-
synthesis), electronic devices (e.g., biohybrid metal ink), and
data storage (e.g., DNA-iron NP data storage) applications.
However, these new directions still need to be extensively
investigated to generalize and facilitate the applications of
biomimetic nanostructures in these new ﬁelds. By integrating
biological systems with nanomaterials, we believe that
biomimetic metal nanostructures as reviewed herein possess
promising potential to be the next-generation biohybrids for
clean technologies, chemical/food, healthcare, and many other
ﬁelds. Their success for practical applications strongly depends
on the accomplishment of developing robust biomimetic
synthesis and eﬀective biofunctionalization strategies to realize
many other amazing designer biometal hybrids, making them
highly reproducible and reliable for plentiful applications
toward a green and sustainable future.
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Yen Nee Tan −Faculty of Science, Agriculture and
Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne
NE1 7RU, U.K.; Newcastle Research and Innovation
Institute, Newcastle University in Singapore, 609607,
Singapore;
orcid.org/0000-0002-4003-063X;
Email: Yennee.tan@newcastle.ac.uk
Authors
Mohammad Tavakkoli Yaraki −School of Natural Sciences,
Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales 2109,
Australia;
orcid.org/0000-0002-6987-7885
Shima Zahed Nasab −Department of Life Science
Engineering, Faculty of New Sciences and Technologies,
University of Tehran, Tehran 143951561, Iran
Iman Zare −Research and Development Department, Sina
Medical Biochemistry Technologies Co. Ltd., Shiraz
7178795844, Iran
Mohammad Dahri −Student Research Committee, School of
Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz
71345, Iran
Mohammad Moein Sadeghi −Student Research Committee,
School of Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences,
Shiraz 71345, Iran
Maedeh Koohi −Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science,
University of Zanjan, Zanjan 45371-38791, Islamic Republic
of Iran
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Author Contributions
⊗M.T.Y. and S.Z.N. contributed equally to this work.
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7579

■REFERENCES
(1) Yang, W.; Guo, W.; Chang, J.; Zhang, B. Protein/peptide-
templated biomimetic synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles for
biomedical applications. J. Mater. Chem. B 2017, 5, 401−417.
(2) Assah, E.; Goh, W.; Zheng, X. T.; Lim, T. X.; Li, J.; Lane, D.;
Ghadessy, F.; Tan, Y. N. Rapid colorimetric detection of p53 protein
function using DNA-gold nanoconjugates with applications for drug
discovery and cancer diagnostics. Colloids Surf., B 2018, 169, 214−
221.
(3) Yu, Y.; Geng, J.; Ong, E. Y. X.; Chellappan, V.; Tan, Y. N. Bovine
Serum Albulmin Protein-Templated Silver Nanocluster (BSA-Ag13):
An Effective Singlet Oxygen Generator for Photodynamic Cancer
Therapy. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2016, 5, 2528−2535.
(4) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Wu, M.; Middha, E.; Wu, W.; Daqiqeh
Rezaei, S.; Liu, B.; Tan, Y. N. Gold nanostars-AIE theranostic
nanodots with enhanced fluorescence and photosensitization towards
effective image-guided photodynamic therapy. Nano-Micro Lett. 2021,
13, 58.
(5) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Pan, Y.; Hu, F.; Yu, Y.; Liu, B.; Tan, Y. N.
Nanosilver-enhanced AIE photosensitizer for simultaneous bioimag-
ing and photodynamic therapy. Mater. Chem. Front. 2020, 4, 3074−
3085.
(6) Regulacio, M. D.; Wang, Y.; Seh, Z. W.; Han, M.-Y. Tailoring
porosity in copper-based multinary sulfide nanostructures for energy,
biomedical, catalytic, and sensing applications. ACS Applied Nano
Materials 2018, 1, 3042−3062.
(7) Azharuddin, M.; Zhu, G. H.; Das, D.; Ozgur, E.; Uzun, L.;
Turner, A. P.; Patra, H. K. A repertoire of biomedical applications of
noble metal nanoparticles. Chem. Commun. 2019, 55, 6964−6996.
(8) Zhang, Q.; Tan, Y. N.; Xie, J.; Lee, J. Y. Colloidal Synthesis of
Plasmonic Metallic Nanoparticles. Plasmonics 2009, 4, 9−22.
(9) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Tan, Y. N. Recent advances in metallic
nanobiosensors development: colorimetric, dynamic light scattering
and fluorescence detection. Sens. Int. 2020, 1, 100049.
(10) Lu, M.; Zhu, H.; Bazuin, C. G.; Peng, W.; Masson, J.-F.
Polymer-templated gold nanoparticles on optical fibers for enhanced-
sensitivity localized surface plasmon resonance biosensors. ACS
sensors 2019, 4, 613−622.
(11) Nouri, A.; Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Lajevardi, A.; Rezaei, Z.;
Ghorbanpour, M.; Tanzifi, M. Ultrasonic-assisted green synthesis of
silver nanoparticles using Mentha aquatica leaf extract for enhanced
antibacterial properties and catalytic activity. Colloid Interface Sci.
Commun. 2020, 35, 100252.
(12) Mosaviniya, M.; Kikhavani, T.; Tanzifi, M.; Tavakkoli Yaraki,
M.; Tajbakhsh, P.; Lajevardi, A. Facile green synthesis of silver
nanoparticles using Crocus Haussknechtii Bois bulb extract: Catalytic
activity and antibacterial properties. Colloid Interface Sci. Commun.
2019, 33, 100211.
(13) Ryu, K. R.; Ha, J. W. Influence of shell thickness on the
refractive index sensitivity of localized surface plasmon resonance
inflection points in silver-coated gold nanorods. RSC Adv. 2020, 10,
16827−16831.
(14) Lajevardi, A.; Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Masjedi, A.; Nouri, A.;
Hossaini Sadr, M. Green synthesis of MOF@ Ag nanocomposites for
catalytic reduction of methylene blue. J. Mol. Liq. 2019, 276, 371−
378.
(15) Yu, H.; Rao, B.; Jiang, W.; Yang, S.; Zhu, M. The
photoluminescent metal nanoclusters with atomic precision. Coord.
Chem. Rev. 2019, 378, 595−617.
(16) Jin, R. Atomically precise metal nanoclusters: stable sizes and
optical properties. Nanoscale 2015, 7, 1549−1565.
(17) Du, B.; Jiang, X.; Das, A.; Zhou, Q.; Yu, M.; Jin, R.; Zheng, J.
Glomerular barrier behaves as an atomically precise bandpass filter in
a sub-nanometre regime. Nature Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 1096−1102.
(18) Yu, Y.; Luo, Z.; Yu, Y.; Lee, J. Y.; Xie, J. Observation of cluster
size growth in CO-directed synthesis of Au25 (SR) 18 nanoclusters.
ACS Nano 2012, 6, 7920−7927.
(19) Aslam, U.; Rao, V. G.; Chavez, S.; Linic, S. Catalytic conversion
of solar to chemical energy on plasmonic metal nanostructures.
Nature Catalysis 2018, 1, 656−665.
(20) Fu, Y.; Zhu, H.; Chen, J.; Hautzinger, M. P.; Zhu, X.-Y.; Jin, S.
Metal halide perovskite nanostructures for optoelectronic applications
and the study of physical properties. Nature Reviews Materials 2019, 4,
169−188.
(21) Zada, A.; Muhammad, P.; Ahmad, W.; Hussain, Z.; Ali, S.;
Khan, M.; Khan, Q.; Maqbool, M. Surface Plasmonic-Assisted
Photocatalysis and Optoelectronic Devices with Noble Metal
Nanocrystals: Design, Synthesis, and Applications. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2020, 30, 1906744.
(22) Li, Y.; Sun, Y.; Qin, Y.; Zhang, W.; Wang, L.; Luo, M.; Yang,
H.; Guo, S. Recent advances on water-splitting electrocatalysis
mediated by noble-metal-based nanostructured materials. Adv. Energy
Mater. 2020, 10, 1903120.
(23) Wang, D.; Li, Y. One-pot protocol for Au-based hybrid
magnetic nanostructures via a noble-metal-induced reduction process.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132 (18), 6280−6281.
(24) Jamkhande, P. G.; Ghule, N. W.; Bamer, A. H.; Kalaskar, M. G.
Metal nanoparticles synthesis: An overview on methods of
preparation, advantages and disadvantages, and applications. Journal
of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 2019, 53, 101174.
(25) Neretina, S.; Hughes, R. A.; Gilroy, K. D.; Hajfathalian, M.
Noble metal nanostructure synthesis at the liquid-substrate interface:
new structures, new insights, and new possibilities. Accounts of
chemical research 2016, 49, 2243−2250.
(26) Xie, J.; Tan, Y. N.; Lee, J. Y. Nanotechnologies for the Life
Sciences; Wiley: New York, 2010; p 4680.
(27) Rauwel, P.; Küünal, S.; Ferdov, S.; Rauwel, E. A review on the
green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their morphologies studied
via TEM. Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2015, 2015, 682749.
(28) Patra, J. K.; Baek, K.-H. Green nanobiotechnology: factors
affecting synthesis and characterization techniques. J. Nanomater.
2014, 2014, 417305.
(29) Koul, B.; Poonia, A. K.; Yadav, D.; Jin, J.-O. Microbe-Mediated
Biosynthesis of Nanoparticles: Applications and Future Prospects.
Biomolecules 2021, 11, 886.
(30) Zhang, D.; Ma, X.-l.; Gu, Y.; Huang, H.; Zhang, G.-w. Green
synthesis of metallic nanoparticles and their potential applications to
treat cancer. Front. Chem. 2020, 8, 799.
(31) Gahlawat, G.; Choudhury, A. R. A review on the biosynthesis of
metal and metal salt nanoparticles by microbes. RSC Adv. 2019, 9,
12944−12967.
(32) Singh, J.; Dutta, T.; Kim, K.-H.; Rawat, M.; Samddar, P.;
Kumar, P. ‘Green’synthesis of metals and their oxide nanoparticles:
applications for environmental remediation. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2018,
16, 84.
(33) Sharma, D.; Kanchi, S.; Bisetty, K. Biogenic synthesis of
nanoparticles: a review. Arabian journal of chemistry 2019, 12, 3576−
3600.
(34) Moodley, J. S.; Krishna, S. B. N.; Pillay, K.; Govender, P., Green
Synthesis of Metal Nanoparticles for Antimicrobial Activity. In Novel
Nanomaterials; IntechOpen: London, 2020; pp 253−278.
(35) Vaseghi, Z.; Nematollahzadeh, A.; Tavakoli, O. Green methods
for the synthesis of metal nanoparticles using biogenic reducing
agents: a review. Reviews in Chemical Engineering 2018, 34, 529−559.
(36) Ma, N.; Sargent, E. H.; Kelley, S. O. Biotemplated
nanostructures: directed assembly of electronic and optical materials
using nanoscale complementarity. J. Mater. Chem. 2008, 18, 954−964.
(37) Wang, B.; Zhao, M.; Mehdi, M.; Wang, G.; Gao, P.; Zhang, K.-
Q. Biomolecule-assisted synthesis and functionality of metal nano-
clusters for biological sensing: a review. Materials Chemistry Frontiers
2019, 3, 1722−1735.
(38) Ovais, M.; Khalil, A. T.; Ayaz, M.; Ahmad, I.; Nethi, S. K.;
Mukherjee, S. Biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles via microbial
enzymes: a mechanistic approach. International journal of molecular
sciences 2018, 19, 4100.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7580

(39) Saravanan, A.; Kumar, P. S.; Karishma, S.; Vo, D.-V. N.;
Jeevanantham, S.; Yaashikaa, P.; George, C. S. A review on
biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles and its environmental applica-
tions. Chemosphere 2021, 264, 128580.
(40) Kwon, Y.-W.; Lee, C. H.; Choi, D.-H.; Jin, J.-I. Materials
science of DNA. J. Mater. Chem. 2009, 19, 1353−1380.
(41) Morris, D. L. DNA-bound metal ions: recent developments.
Biomolecular concepts 2014, 5, 397−407.
(42) Huang, J.; Lin, L.; Sun, D.; Chen, H.; Yang, D.; Li, Q. Bio-
inspired synthesis of metal nanomaterials and applications. Chem. Soc.
Rev. 2015, 44, 6330−6374.
(43) Satyavolu, N. S. R.; Loh, K. Y.; Tan, L. H.; Lu, Y. Discovery of
and Insights into DNA “Codes” for Tunable Morphologies of Metal
Nanoparticles. Small 2019, 15, 1900975.
(44) Wang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Ekman, J. M.; Kenis, P. J. A.; Lu, Y. DNA-
Mediated Control of Metal Nanoparticle Shape: One-Pot Synthesis
and Cellular Uptake of Highly Stable and Functional Gold
Nanoflowers. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 1886−1891.
(45) Wang, Y.; Counihan, M. J.; Lin, J. W.; Rodríguez-López, J.;
Yang, H.; Lu, Y. Quantitative Analysis of DNA-Mediated Formation
of Metal Nanocrystals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 20368−20379.
(46) Song, M.; Lyu, Y.; Guo, F.; Pang, S.-Y.; Wong, M.-C.; Hao, J.
One-Step, DNA-Programmed, and Flash Synthesis of Anisotropic
Noble Metal Nanostructures on MXene. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2021, 13, 52978−52986.
(47) Chen, Z.; Liu, C.; Cao, F.; Ren, J.; Qu, X. DNA metallization:
principles, methods, structures, and applications. Chem. Soc. Rev.
2018, 47, 4017−4072.
(48) Liu, X.; Jing, X.; Liu, P.; Pan, M.; Liu, Z.; Dai, X.; Lin, J.; Li, Q.;
Wang, F.; Yang, S.; Wang, L.; Fan, C. DNA framework-encoded
mineralization of calcium phosphate. Chem 2020, 6, 472−485.
(49) Albarqouni, Y.; Ali, G. A.; Hairul, A. R. M.; Chong, K. F. On
the Way of DNA Metallization: Principle, Methods, and Recent
Applications. Chem. Adv. Mater. 2020, 5, 1−14.
(50) Braun, E.; Eichen, Y.; Sivan, U.; Ben-Yoseph, G. DNA-
templated assembly and electrode attachment of a conducting silver
wire. Nature 1998, 391, 775−778.
(51) Shen, B.; Tapio, K.; Linko, V.; Kostiainen, M. A.; Toppari, J. J.
Metallic Nanostructures Based on DNA Nanoshapes. Nanomaterials
2016, 6, 146.
(52) Pang, C.; Aryal, B. R.; Ranasinghe, D. R.; Westover, T. R.;
Ehlert, A. E. F.; Harb, J. N.; Davis, R. C.; Woolley, A. T. Bottom-Up
Fabrication of DNA-Templated Electronic Nanomaterials and Their
Characterization. Nanomaterials 2021, 11, 1655.
(53) Jia, S.; Wang, J.; Xie, M.; Sun, J.; Liu, H.; Zhang, Y.; Chao, J.;
Li, J.; Wang, L.; Lin, J.; Gothelf, K. V.; Fan, C. Programming DNA
origami patterning with non-canonical DNA-based metallization
reactions. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 5597.
(54) Becerril, H. A.; Stoltenberg, R. M.; Wheeler, D. R.; Davis, R. C.;
Harb, J. N.; Woolley, A. T. DNA-Templated Three-Branched
Nanostructures for Nanoelectronic Devices. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005,
127, 2828−2829.
(55) New, S. Y.; Lee, S. T.; Su, X. D. DNA-templated silver
nanoclusters: structural correlation and fluorescence modulation.
Nanoscale 2016, 8, 17729−17746.
(56) Wilner, O. I.; Willner, I. Functionalized DNA Nanostructures.
Chem. Rev. 2012, 112, 2528−2556.
(57) Lim, J. Y. C.; Yu, Y.; Jin, G.; Li, K.; Lu, Y.; Xie, J.; Tan, Y. N.
Establishing empirical design rules of nucleic acid templates for the
synthesis of silver nanoclusters with tunable photoluminescence and
functionalities towards targeted bioimaging applications. Nanoscale
Advances 2020, 2, 3921−3932.
(58) Petty, J. T.; Zheng, J.; Hud, N. V.; Dickson, R. M. DNA-
templated Ag nanocluster formation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126,
5207−5212.
(59) Ritchie, C. M.; Johnsen, K. R.; Kiser, J. R.; Antoku, Y.; Dickson,
R. M.; Petty, J. T. Ag Nanocluster Formation Using a Cytosine
Oligonucleotide Template. J. Phys. Chem. C 2007, 111, 175−181.
(60) Shah, P.; Nagda, R.; Jung, I. L.; Bhang, Y. J.; Jeon, S.-W.; Lee,
C. S.; Do, C.; Nam, K.; Kim, Y. M.; Park, S.; Roh, Y. H.; Thulstrup, P.
W.; Bjerrum, M. J.; Kim, T.-H.; Yang, S. W. Noncanonical head-to-
head hairpin DNA dimerization is essential for the synthesis of orange
emissive silver nanoclusters. ACS Nano 2020, 14, 8697−8706.
(61) New, S.; Lee, S.; Su, X. DNA-templated silver nanoclusters:
structural correlation and fluorescence modulation. Nanoscale 2016, 8,
17729−17746.
(62) Cui, Q.; Ma, K.; Shao, Y.; Xu, S.; Wu, F.; Liu, G.; Teramae, N.;
Bao, H. Gap site-specific rapid formation of fluorescent silver
nanoclusters for label-free DNA nucleobase recognition. Anal. Chim.
Acta 2012, 724, 86−91.
(63) Ihara, T.; Ishii, T.; Araki, N.; Wilson, A. W.; Jyo, A. Silver Ion
Unusually Stabilizes the Structure of a Parallel-Motif DNA Triplex. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 3826−3827.
(64) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Tan, Y. N. Recent advances in metallic
nanobiosensors development: Colorimetric, dynamic light scattering
and fluorescence detection. Sensors International 2020, 1, 100049.
(65) Satyavolu, N. S. R.; Tan, L. H.; Lu, Y. DNA-Mediated
Morphological Control of Pd-Au Bimetallic Nanoparticles. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 16542−16548.
(66) Wu, J.; Tan, L. H.; Hwang, K.; Xing, H.; Wu, P.; Li, W.; Lu, Y.
DNA Sequence-Dependent Morphological Evolution of Silver
Nanoparticles and Their Optical and Hybridization Properties. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 15195−15202.
(67) Anbia, M.; Bandarchian, F. Optimization of Nanocrystals NaX
Zeolite Synthesis with Different Silica Sources. J. Appl. Chem. Res.
2015, 9, 71−80.
(68) Mishra, N. K.; Kumar, V.; Joshi, K. B. Fabrication of gold
nanoparticles on biotin-di-tryptophan scaffold for plausible biomed-
ical applications. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 64387−64394.
(69) Kracht, S.; Messerer, M.; Lang, M.; Eckhardt, S.; Lauz, M.;
Grobéty, B.; Fromm, K. M.; Giese, B. Electron transfer in peptides: on
the formation of silver nanoparticles. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2015, 54,
2912−2916.
(70) Unal Gulsuner, H.; Ceylan, H.; Guler, M. O.; Tekinay, A. B.
Multi-domain short peptide molecules for in situ synthesis and
biofunctionalization of gold nanoparticles for integrin-targeted cell
uptake. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 10677−10683.
(71) Tomizaki, K.-y.; Kubo, S.; Ahn, S.-A.; Satake, M.; Imai, T.
Biomimetic alignment of zinc oxide nanoparticles along a peptide
nanofiber. Langmuir 2012, 28, 13459−13466.
(72) Palomo, J. M.; Filice, M. Biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles:
novel efficient heterogeneous nanocatalysts. Nanomaterials 2016, 6,
84.
(73) Smith, A. M. Functional Metallosupramolecular Materials; Royal
Society of Chemistry: London, 2015; p 404.
(74) Dokmanić, I.; Šikić, M.; Tomić, S. Metals in proteins:
correlation between the metal-ion type, coordination number and
the amino-acid residues involved in the coordination. Acta
Crystallographica Section D: Biological Crystallography 2008, 64,
257−263.
(75) Rodzik, A.; Pomastowski, P.; Sagandykova, G. N.; Buszewski, B.
Interactions of whey proteins with metal ions. International journal of
molecular sciences 2020, 21, 2156.
(76) Tan, Y. N.; Lee, J. Y.; Wang, D. I. Aspartic acid synthesis of
crystalline gold nanoplates, nanoribbons, and nanowires in aqueous
solutions. J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 5463−5470.
(77) Fan, T.-X.; Chow, S.-K.; Zhang, D. Biomorphic mineralization:
from biology to materials. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2009, 54, 542−659.
(78) Dickerson, M. B.; Sandhage, K. H.; Naik, R. R. Protein-and
peptide-directed syntheses of inorganic materials. Chem. Rev. 2008,
108, 4935−4978.
(79) Zare, I.; Yaraki, M. T.; Speranza, G.; Najafabadi, A. H.;
Shourangiz-Haghighi, A.; Nik, A. B.; Manshian, B. B.; Saraiva, C.;
Soenen, S. J.; Kogan, M. J.; Lee, J. W.; Apollo, N. V.; Bernardino, L.;
Araya, E.; Mayer, D.; Mao, G.; Hamblin, M. R. Gold nanostructures:
synthesis, properties, and neurological applications. Chem. Soc. Rev.
2022, 51, 2601−2680.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7581

(80) Tan, Y. N.; Lee, J. Y.; Wang, D. I. C. Uncovering the Design
Rules for Peptide Synthesis of Metal Nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2010, 132, 5677−5686.
(81) Tan, Y. N.; Lee, J. Y.; Wang, D. I. C. Aspartic Acid Synthesis of
Crystalline Gold Nanoplates, Nanoribbons, and Nanowires in
Aqueous Solutions. J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 5463−5470.
(82) Xie, J.; Zheng, Y.; Ying, J. Y. Protein-Directed Synthesis of
Highly Fluorescent Gold Nanoclusters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131,
888−889.
(83) Yu, Y.; Luo, Z.; Teo, C. S.; Tan, Y. N.; Xie, J. Tailoring the
protein conformation to synthesize different-sized gold nanoclusters.
Chem. Commun. 2013, 49, 9740−9742.
(84) Yu, Y.; Li, J.; Chen, T.; Tan, Y. N.; Xie, J. Decoupling the CO-
Reduction Protocol to Generate Luminescent Au22(SR)18 Nano-
cluster. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 10910−10918.
(85) Yu, Y.; Geng, J.; Ong, E. Y. X.; Chellappan, V.; Tan, Y. N.
Bovine Serum Albulmin Protein-Templated Silver Nanocluster (BSA-
Ag13): An Effective Singlet Oxygen Generator for Photodynamic
Cancer Therapy. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2016, 5, 2528−2535.
(86) Yu, Y.; Lee, W. D.; Tan, Y. N. Protein-protected gold/silver
alloy nanoclusters in metal-enhanced singlet oxygen generation and
their correlation with photoluminescence. Materials Science and
Engineering: C 2020, 109, 110525.
(87) Yu, Y.; Ching, P. Y. J.; Tan, Y. N. Microwave-assisted synthesis
and mechanistic study of multicolor emissive Au nanoclusters using
thiol-containing biomolecules. Adv. Mater. Lett. 2018, 9, 647−651.
(88) Yu, Y.; Zheng, X. T.; Yee, B. W.; Tan, Y. N. Biomimicking
synthesis of photoluminescent molecular lantern catalyzed by in-situ
formation of nanogold catalysts. Materials Science and Engineering: C
2017, 77, 1111−1116.
(89) Yu, Y.; Mok, B. Y. L.; Loh, X. J.; Tan, Y. N. Rational Design of
Biomolecular Templates for Synthesizing Multifunctional Noble
Metal Nanoclusters toward Personalized Theranostic Applications.
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2016, 5, 1844−1859.
(90) Yu, Y.; New, S. Y.; Xie, J.; Su, X.; Tan, Y. N. Protein-based
fluorescent metal nanoclusters for small molecular drug screening.
Chem. Commun. 2014, 50, 13805−13808.
(91) Yu, Y.; New, S. Y.; Lin, J.; Su, X.; Tan, Y. N. A Rapid and
Quantitative Fluorimetric Method for Protein-Targeting Small
Molecule Drug Screening. J. Vis. Exp. 2015, 10, No. e53261.
(92) Peng, C.; Yu, M.; Zheng, J. In situ ligand-directed growth of
gold nanoparticles in biological tissues. Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 1378−
1382.
(93) Chevrier, D. M.; Thanthirige, V. D.; Luo, Z.; Driscoll, S.; Cho,
P.; MacDonald, M. A.; Yao, Q.; Guda, R.; Xie, J.; Johnson, E. R.;
Chatt, A.; Zheng, N.; Zhang, P. Structure and formation of highly
luminescent protein-stabilized gold clusters. Chem. Sci. 2018, 9,
2782−2790.
(94) Li, Z.; Peng, H.; Liu, J.; Tian, Y.; Yang, W.; Yao, J.; Shao, Z.;
Chen, X. Plant protein-directed synthesis of luminescent gold
nanocluster hybrids for tumor imaging. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2018, 10, 83−90.
(95) Wang, C.; Gao, X.; Chen, Z.; Chen, Y.; Chen, H. Preparation,
characterization and application of polysaccharide-based metallic
nanoparticles: a review. Polymers 2017, 9, 689.
(96) Kim, C.; Tonga, G. Y.; Yan, B.; Kim, C. S.; Kim, S. T.; Park, M.-
H.; Zhu, Z.; Duncan, B.; Creran, B.; Rotello, V. M. Regulating
exocytosis of nanoparticles via host-guest chemistry. Organic &
biomolecular chemistry 2015, 13, 2474−2479.
(97) Nigoghossian, K.; dos Santos, M. V.; Barud, H. S.; da Silva, R.
R.; Rocha, L. A.; Caiut, J. M.A.; de Assuncao, R. M.N.; Spanhel, L.;
Poulain, M.; Messaddeq, Y.; Ribeiro, S. J. L. Orange pectin mediated
growth and stability of aqueous gold and silver nanocolloids. Appl.
Surf. Sci. 2015, 341, 28−36.
(98) Cheung, R. C. F.; Ng, T. B.; Wong, J. H.; Chan, W. Y.
Chitosan: an update on potential biomedical and pharmaceutical
applications. Marine drugs 2015, 13, 5156−5186.
(99) da Silva Alves, D. C.; Healy, B.; Pinto, L. A.; Cadaval, T. R.;
Breslin, C. B. Recent developments in chitosan-based adsorbents for
the removal of pollutants from aqueous environments. Molecules
2021, 26, 594.
(100) Wongpreecha, J.; Polpanich, D.; Suteewong, T.; Kaewsaneha,
C.; Tangboriboonrat, P. One-pot, large-scale green synthesis of silver
nanoparticles-chitosan with enhanced antibacterial activity and low
cytotoxicity. Carbohydr. Polym. 2018, 199, 641−648.
(101) Shibaev, A. V.; Muravlev, D. A.; Muravleva, A. K.; Matveev, V.
V.; Chalykh, A. E.; Philippova, O. E. pH-Dependent Gelation of a Stiff
Anionic Polysaccharide in the Presence of Metal Ions. Polymers 2020,
12, 868.
(102) Zhu, M.; Li, X.; Ge, L.; Zi, Y.; Qi, M.; Li, Y.; Li, D.; Mu, C.
Green synthesis of κ-carrageenan@ Ag submicron-particles with high
aqueous stability, robust antibacterial activity and low cytotoxicity.
Materials Science and Engineering: C 2020, 106, 110185.
(103) Becking, L. B.; Kaplan, I. R.; Moore, D. Limits of the natural
environment in terms of pH and oxidation-reduction potentials.
Journal of Geology 1960, 68, 243−284.
(104) Pasula, R. R.; Lim, S. Engineering nanoparticle synthesis using
microbial factories. Engineering Biology 2017, 1, 12−17.
(105) Luo, C.-H.; Shanmugam, V.; Yeh, C.-S. Nanoparticle
biosynthesis using unicellular and subcellular supports. NPG Asia
Mater. 2015, 7, No. e209.
(106) Li, X.; Xu, H.; Chen, Z.-S.; Chen, G. Biosynthesis of
nanoparticles by microorganisms and their applications. J. Nanomater.
2011, 2011, 270974.
(107) Thakkar, K. N.; Mhatre, S. S.; Parikh, R. Y. Biological
synthesis of metallic nanoparticles. Nanomedicine: nanotechnology,
biology and medicine 2010, 6, 257−262.
(108) He, S.; Guo, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, S.; Wang, J.; Gu, N.
Biosynthesis of gold nanoparticles using the bacteria Rhodopseudo-
monas capsulata. Mater. Lett. 2007, 61, 3984−3987.
(109) Bhat, E. A.; Sajjad, N.; Rather, I. Cosmetic and Medical
Applications of Microbial Nanotechnology. In Microbial Nano-
technology: Green Synthesis and Applications; Springer: Berlin,
Germany, 2021; pp 321−342.
(110) Rahmati, F.; Hosseini, S. S.; Mahuti Safai, S.; Asgari Lajayer,
B.; Hatami, M. New insights into the role of nanotechnology in
microbial food safety. 3 Biotech 2020, 10, 425.
(111) Minocha, S.; Khadgawat, P.; Bhattacharjee, A.; Kumar, A.;
Tripathi, T.; Pandey, S.; Tripathi, D. Role of Microbial Nano-
technology in Diagnostics. In Microbial Nanotechnology: Green
Synthesis and Applications; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2021; pp
237−274.
(112) Essa, A. M.; Al Abboud, M. A.; Khatib, S. I. Metal
transformation as a strategy for bacterial detoxification of heavy
metals. Journal of basic microbiology 2018, 58, 17−29.
(113) Gupta, P.; Diwan, B. Bacterial exopolysaccharide mediated
heavy metal removal: a review on biosynthesis, mechanism and
remediation strategies. Biotechnology Reports 2017, 13, 58−71.
(114) Shah, M.; Fawcett, D.; Sharma, S.; Tripathy, S. K.; Poinern, G.
E. J. Green synthesis of metallic nanoparticles via biological entities.
Materials 2015, 8, 7278−7308.
(115) Rad, M.; Taran, M.; Alavi, M. Effect of incubation time,
CuSO4 and glucose concentrations on biosynthesis of copper oxide
(CuO) nanoparticles with rectangular shape and antibacterial activity:
Taguchi method approach. Nano Biomed. Eng. 2018, 10, 25−33.
(116) Fatemi, M.; Mollania, N.; Momeni-Moghaddam, M.;
Sadeghifar, F. Extracellular biosynthesis of magnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles by Bacillus cereus strain HMH1: Characterization and
in vitro cytotoxicity analysis on MCF-7 and 3T3 cell lines. Journal of
biotechnology 2018, 270, 1−11.
(117) Saleh, M. N.; Khoman Alwan, S. Bio-synthesis of silver
nanoparticles from bacteria Klebsiella pneumonia: Their character-
ization and antibacterial studies. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 2020, 1664,
012115.
(118) Muthulakshmi, K.; Uma, C.; Sivagurunathan, P.; Yoganathan,
K.; Satheeshkumar, S. Extracellular, biosynthesis of silver nano-
particles using Enterobacter cloacae (mk163462) and their anti-
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7582

bacterial activity against certain multidrug resistant pathogens. J.
Pharmacogn. Phytochem. 2018, 7, 741−747.
(119) Huq, M. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using
Pseudoduganella eburnea MAHUQ-39 and their antimicrobial
mechanisms investigation against drug resistant human pathogens.
International journal of molecular sciences 2020, 21, 1510.
(120) Ahmed, T.; Shahid, M.; Noman, M.; Bilal Khan Niazi, M.;
Zubair, M.; Almatroudi, A.; Khurshid, M.; Tariq, F.; Mumtaz, R.; Li,
B. Bioprospecting a native silver-resistant Bacillus safensis strain for
green synthesis and subsequent antibacterial and anticancer activities
of silver nanoparticles. Journal of Advanced Research 2020, 24, 475−
483.
(121) Siddiqi, K. S.; Husen, A. Fabrication of metal nanoparticles
from fungi and metal salts: scope and application. Nanoscale Res. Lett.
2016, 11, 400.
(122) Siddiqi, K. S.; Husen, A. Fabrication of Metal Nanoparticles
from Fungi and Metal Salts: Scope and Application. Nanoscale Res.
Lett. 2016, 11, 98.
(123) Khalil, N. M.; Abd El-Ghany, M. N.; Rodríguez-Couto, S.
Antifungal and anti-mycotoxin efficacy of biogenic silver nanoparticles
produced by Fusarium chlamydosporum and Penicillium chrysoge-
num at non-cytotoxic doses. Chemosphere 2019, 218, 477−486.
(124) Wanarska, E.; Maliszewska, I. The possible mechanism of the
formation of silver nanoparticles by Penicillium cyclopium. Bioorganic
chemistry 2019, 93, 102803.
(125) Bhainsa, K. C.; D’souza, S. Extracellular biosynthesis of silver
nanoparticles using the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus. Colloids Surf., B
2006, 47, 160−164.
(126) Durán, N.; Marcato, P. D.; Alves, O. L.; De Souza, G. I.;
Esposito, E. Mechanistic aspects of biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles
by several Fusarium oxysporum strains. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2005, 3, 8.
(127) Tidke, P. R.; Gupta, I.; Gade, A. K.; Rai, M. Fungus-Mediated
Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles and Standardization of Parameters
for its Biosynthesis. IEEE Transactions on NanoBioscience 2014, 13,
397−402.
(128) Ramos, M. M.; dos S. Morais, E.; da S. Sena, I.; Lima, A. L.; de
Oliveira, F. R.; de Freitas, C. M.; Fernandes, C. P.; de Carvalho, J. C.
T.; Ferreira, I. M. Silver nanoparticle from whole cells of the fungi
Trichoderma spp. isolated from Brazilian Amazon. Biotechnology letters
2020, 42, 833−843.
(129) Naveen, K. V.; Sathiyaseelan, A.; Mariadoss, A. V. A.;
Xiaowen, H.; Saravanakumar, K.; Wang, M.-H. Fabrication of
mycogenic silver nanoparticles using endophytic fungal extract and
their characterization, antibacterial and cytotoxic activities. Inorg.
Chem. Commun. 2021, 128, 108575.
(130) Velusamy, P.; Kumar, G. V.; Jeyanthi, V.; Das, J.; Pachaiappan,
R. Bio-inspired green nanoparticles: synthesis, mechanism, and
antibacterial application. Toxicological research 2016, 32, 95−102.
(131) Ghosh, S.; Ahmad, R.; Zeyaullah, M.; Khare, S. K. Microbial
nano-factories: synthesis and biomedical applications. Front. Chem.
2021, 9, 194.
(132) Shu, M.; He, F.; Li, Z.; Zhu, X.; Ma, Y.; Zhou, Z.; Yang, Z.;
Gao, F.; Zeng, M. Biosynthesis and antibacterial activity of silver
nanoparticles using yeast extract as reducing and capping agents.
Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2020, 15, 14.
(133) Saitoh, N.; Fujimori, R.; Yoshimura, T.; Tanaka, H.; Kondoh,
A.; Nomura, T.; Konishi, Y. Microbial recovery of palladium by
baker’s yeast through bioreductive deposition and biosorption.
Hydrometallurgy 2020, 196, 105413.
(134) Zhang, X.; Qu, Y.; Shen, W.; Wang, J.; Li, H.; Zhang, Z.; Li,
S.; Zhou, J. Biogenic synthesis of gold nanoparticles by yeast
Magnusiomyces ingens LH-F1 for catalytic reduction of nitrophenols.
Colloids Surf., A 2016, 497, 280−285.
(135) Patel, V.; Berthold, D.; Puranik, P.; Gantar, M. Screening of
cyanobacteria and microalgae for their ability to synthesize silver
nanoparticles with antibacterial activity. Biotechnology Reports 2015, 5,
112−119.
(136) Chaudhary, R.; Nawaz, K.; Khan, A. K.; Hano, C.; Abbasi, B.
H.; Anjum, S. An overview of the algae-mediated biosynthesis of
nanoparticles and their biomedical applications. Biomolecules 2020,
10, 1498.
(137) Chandran, P. R.; Naseer, M.; Udupa, N.; Sandhyarani, N. Size
controlled synthesis of biocompatible gold nanoparticles and their
activity in the oxidation of NADH. Nanotechnology 2012, 23, 015602.
(138) Pawłowska, A.; Sadowski, Z., Biosynthesis of Nanoparticles by
Green Algae: Mechanism and Applications. In Microbial Nano-
technology; CRC Press: London, 2020; pp 87−99.
(139) Mata, Y.; Torres, E.; Blazquez, M.; Ballester, A.; González, F.;
Munoz, J. Gold (III) biosorption and bioreduction with the brown
alga Fucus vesiculosus. Journal of hazardous materials 2009, 166, 612−
618.
(140) Castro, L.; Blázquez, M. L.; Muñoz, J. A.; González, F.;
Ballester, A. Biological synthesis of metallic nanoparticles using algae.
IET nanobiotechnology 2013, 7, 109−116.
(141) Satapathy, S.; Shukla, S. P.; Sandeep, K.; Singh, A. R.; Sharma,
N. Evaluation of the performance of an algal bioreactor for silver
nanoparticle production. Journal of applied phycology 2015, 27, 285−
291.
(142) Rajkumar, R.; Ezhumalai, G.; Gnanadesigan, M. A green
approach for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles by Chlorella vulgaris
and its application in photocatalytic dye degradation activity.
Environmental Technology & Innovation 2021, 21, 101282.
(143) Basiratnia, E.; Einali, A.; Azizian-Shermeh, O.; Mollashahi, E.;
Ghasemi, A. Biological Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles from
Suspensions of Green Microalga Dunaliella salina and Their
Antibacterial Potential. BioNanoScience 2021, 11, 977−988.
(144) Iravani, S.; Zolfaghari, B. Plant Viruses and Bacteriophages for
Eco-friendly Synthesis of Nanoparticles: Recent Trends and
Important Challenges. Comments on Inorganic Chemistry 2021, 41,
1−23.
(145) Lee, S.-Y.; Royston, E.; Culver, J. N.; Harris, M. T. Improved
metal cluster deposition on a genetically engineered tobacco mosaic
virus template. Nanotechnology 2005, 16, S435.
(146) Aljabali, A. A.; Barclay, J. E.; Lomonossoff, G. P.; Evans, D. J.
Virus templated metallic nanoparticles. Nanoscale 2010, 2, 2596−
2600.
(147) Zhang, Y.; Dong, Y.; Zhou, J.; Li, X.; Wang, F. Application of
plant viruses as a biotemplate for nanomaterial fabrication. Molecules
2018, 23, 2311.
(148) Speir, J. A.; Munshi, S.; Wang, G.; Baker, T. S.; Johnson, J. E.
Structures of the native and swollen forms of cowpea chlorotic mottle
virus determined by X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron
microscopy. Structure 1995, 3, 63−78.
(149) Soto, C. M.; Szuchmacher Blum, A.; Wilson, C. D.; Lazorcik,
J.; Kim, M.; Gnade, B.; Ratna, B. R. Separation and recovery of intact
gold-virus complex by agarose electrophoresis and electroelution:
Application to the purification of cowpea mosaic virus and colloidal
gold complex. Electrophoresis 2004, 25, 2901−2906.
(150) Pokorski, J. K.; Steinmetz, N. F. The art of engineering viral
nanoparticles. Mol. Pharmaceutics 2011, 8, 29−43.
(151) Dujardin, E.; Peet, C.; Stubbs, G.; Culver, J. N.; Mann, S.
Organization of Metallic Nanoparticles Using Tobacco Mosaic Virus
Templates. Nano Lett. 2003, 3, 413−417.
(152) Aljabali, A. A. A.; Barclay, J. E.; Lomonossoff, G. P.; Evans, D.
J. Virus templated metallic nanoparticles. Nanoscale 2010, 2, 2596−
2600.
(153) Niu, Z.; Bruckman, M. A.; Li, S.; Lee, L. A.; Lee, B.; Pingali, S.
V.; Thiyagarajan, P.; Wang, Q. Assembly of Tobacco Mosaic Virus
into Fibrous and Macroscopic Bundled Arrays Mediated by Surface
Aniline Polymerization. Langmuir 2007, 23, 6719−6724.
(154) Ahiwale, S. S.; Bankar, A. V.; Tagunde, S.; Kapadnis, B. P. A
Bacteriophage Mediated Gold Nanoparticles Synthesis and Their
Anti-biofilm Activity. Indian J. Microbiol 2017, 57, 188−194.
(155) Lee, Y.; Kim, J.; Yun, D. S.; Nam, Y. S.; Shao-Horn, Y.;
Belcher, A. M. Virus-templated Au and Au-Pt core-shell nanowires
and their electrocatalytic activities for fuel cell applications. Energy
Environ. Sci. 2012, 5, 8328−8334.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7583

(156) Cobbett, C. S. Phytochelatin biosynthesis and function in
heavy-metal detoxification. Current opinion in plant biology 2000, 3,
211−216.
(157) Basaid, K.; Chebli, B.; Mayad, E. H.; Furze, J. N.; Bouharroud,
R.; Krier, F.; Barakate, M.; Paulitz, T. Biological activities of essential
oils and lipopeptides applied to control plant pests and diseases: A
review. International Journal of Pest Management 2021, 67, 155−177.
(158) Nisca, A.; Ştefănescu, R.; Stegăruş, D. I.; Mare, A. D.;
Farczadi, L.; Tanase, C. Phytochemical Profile and Biological Effects
of Spruce (Picea abies) Bark Subjected to Ultrasound Assisted and
Microwave-Assisted Extractions. Plants 2021, 10, 870.
(159) Bao, Y.; He, J.; Song, K.; Guo, J.; Zhou, X.; Liu, S. Plant-
Extract-Mediated Synthesis of Metal Nanoparticles. J. Chem. 2021,
2021, 6562687.
(160) Makarov, V. V.; Love, A. J.; Sinitsyna, O. V.; Makarova, S. S.;
Yaminsky, I. V.; Taliansky, M. E.; Kalinina, N. O. ″Green″
nanotechnologies: synthesis of metal nanoparticles using plants.
Acta Naturae 2014, 6, 35−44.
(161) Keller, C.; Hammer, D.; Kayser, A.; Richner, W.; Brodbeck,
M.; Sennhauser, M. Root development and heavy metal phytoex-
traction efficiency: comparison of different plant species in the field.
Plant and Soil 2003, 249, 67−81.
(162) Yan, A.; Wang, Y.; Tan, S. N.; Mohd Yusof, M. L.; Ghosh, S.;
Chen, Z. Phytoremediation: A Promising Approach for Revegetation
of Heavy Metal-Polluted Land. Front. Plant Sci. 2020, 11, 359.
(163) Singh, J.; Dhaliwal, A. S. Novel green synthesis and
characterization of the antioxidant activity of silver nanoparticles
prepared from Nepeta leucophylla root extract. Anal. Lett. 2019, 52,
213−230.
(164) Mahiuddin, M.; Saha, P.; Ochiai, B. Green Synthesis and
Catalytic Activity of Silver Nanoparticles Based on Piper chaba Stem
Extracts. Nanomaterials (Basel) 2020, 10, 1777.
(165) Muchanyereyi, N. M.; Muchenje, T.; Nyoni, S.; Shumba, M.;
Mupa, M.; Gwatidzo, L.; Rahman, A. Green Synthesis of Silver
Nanoparticles Using Euphorbia Confinalis Stem Extract, Character-
ization and Evaluation of Antimicrobial Activity. J. Nanomater. Mol.
Nanotechnol. 2017, 6, 3.
(166) Wan Mat Khalir, W. K. A.; Shameli, K.; Jazayeri, S. D.;
Othman, N. A.; Che Jusoh, N. W.; Hassan, N. M. Biosynthesized
Silver Nanoparticles by Aqueous Stem Extract of Entada spiralis and
Screening of Their Biomedical Activity. Front. Chem. 2020, 8, 620.
(167) Singh, J.; Dutta, T.; Kim, K. H.; Rawat, M.; Samddar, P.;
Kumar, P. ’Green’ synthesis of metals and their oxide nanoparticles:
applications for environmental remediation. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2018,
16, 84.
(168) Nouri, A.; Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Lajevardi, A.; Rezaei, Z.;
Ghorbanpour, M.; Tanzifi, M. Ultrasonic-assisted green synthesis of
silver nanoparticles using Mentha aquatica leaf extract for enhanced
antibacterial properties and catalytic activity. Colloid and Interface
Science Communications 2020, 35, 100252.
(169) Kumar, H.; Bhardwaj, K.; Kuča, K.; Kalia, A.; Nepovimova, E.;
Verma, R.; Kumar, D. Flower-Based Green Synthesis of Metallic
Nanoparticles: Applications beyond Fragrance. Nanomaterials 2020,
10, 766.
(170) Hemmati, S.; Rashtiani, A.; Zangeneh, M. M.; Mohammadi,
P.; Zangeneh, A.; Veisi, H. Green synthesis and characterization of
silver nanoparticles using Fritillaria flower extract and their
antibacterial activity against some human pathogens. Polyhedron
2019, 158, 8−14.
(171) Suleria, H. A. R.; Barrow, C. J.; Dunshea, F. R. Screening and
Characterization of Phenolic Compounds and Their Antioxidant
Capacity in Different Fruit Peels. Foods 2020, 9, 1206.
(172) Kubola, J.; Siriamornpun, S. Phytochemicals and antioxidant
activity of different fruit fractions (peel, pulp, aril and seed) of Thai
gac (Momordica cochinchinensis Spreng). Food Chem. 2011, 127,
1138−1145.
(173) Kumar, H.; Bhardwaj, K.; Dhanjal, D. S.; Nepovimova, E.;
Şen, F.; Regassa, H.; Singh, R.; Verma, R.; Kumar, V.; Kumar, D.;
Bhatia, S. K.; Kuča, K. Fruit Extract Mediated Green Synthesis of
Metallic Nanoparticles: A New Avenue in Pomology Applications.
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2020, 21, 8458.
(174) Masum, M. M. I.; Siddiqa, M. M.; Ali, K. A.; Zhang, Y.;
Abdallah, Y.; Ibrahim, E.; Qiu, W.; Yan, C.; Li, B. Biogenic Synthesis
of Silver Nanoparticles Using Phyllanthus emblica Fruit Extract and
Its Inhibitory Action Against the Pathogen Acidovorax oryzae Strain
RS-2 of Rice Bacterial Brown Stripe. Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 820.
(175) Girón-Vázquez, N. G.; Gómez-Gutiérrez, C. M.; Soto-Robles,
C. A.; Nava, O.; Lugo-Medina, E.; Castrejón-Sánchez, V. H.; Vilchis-
Nestor, A. R.; Luque, P. A. Study of the effect of Persea americana
seed in the green synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their
antimicrobial properties. Results in Physics 2019, 13, 102142.
(176) Burlacu, E.; Tanase, C.; Coman, N.-A.; Berta, L. A Review of
Bark-Extract-Mediated Green Synthesis of Metallic Nanoparticles and
Their Applications. Molecules 2019, 24, 4354.
(177) Ontong, J. C.; Paosen, S.; Shankar, S.; Voravuthikunchai, S. P.
Eco-friendly synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Senna alata bark
extract and its antimicrobial mechanism through enhancement of
bacterial membrane degradation. J. Microbiol. Methods 2019, 165,
105692.
(178) Li, Y.; Zhou, M.; Song, Y.; Higaki, T.; Wang, H.; Jin, R.
Double-helical assembly of heterodimeric nanoclusters into super-
crystals. Nature 2021, 594, 380−384.
(179) Zeng, C.; Chen, Y.; Kirschbaum, K.; Lambright, K. J.; Jin, R.
Emergence of hierarchical structural complexities in nanoparticles and
their assembly. Science 2016, 354, 1580−1584.
(180) Zubair Iqbal, M.; Ali, I.; Khan, W. S.; Kong, X.; Dempsey, E.
Reversible self-assembly of gold nanoparticles in response to external
stimuli. Materials & Design 2021, 205, 109694.
(181) Ma, X.; Song, S.; Kim, S.; Kwon, M.-s.; Lee, H.; Park, W.; Sim,
S. J. Single gold-bridged nanoprobes for identification of single point
DNA mutations. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 836.
(182) Yaraki, M. T.; Tan, Y. N. Metal Nanoparticles-Enhanced
Biosensors: Synthesis, Design and Applications in Fluorescence
Enhancement and Surface-enhanced Raman Scattering. Chemistry -
An Asian Journal 2020, 15, 3180−3208.
(183) Singh, P.; Garg, A.; Pandit, S.; Mokkapati, V. R. S. S.;
Mijakovic, I. Antimicrobial Effects of Biogenic Nanoparticles.
Nanomaterials (Basel) 2018, 8, 1009.
(184) Cheeseman, S.; Christofferson, A. J.; Kariuki, R.; Cozzolino,
D.; Daeneke, T.; Crawford, R. J.; Truong, V. K.; Chapman, J.;
Elbourne, A. Antimicrobial Metal Nanomaterials: From Passive to
Stimuli-Activated Applications. Advanced Science 2020, 7, 1902913.
(185) Sharmin, S.; Rahaman, M. M.; Sarkar, C.; Atolani, O.; Islam,
M. T.; Adeyemi, O. S. Nanoparticles as antimicrobial and antiviral
agents: A literature-based perspective study. Heliyon 2021, 7,
No. e06456.
(186) Naikoo, G. A.; Mustaqeem, M.; Hassan, I. U.; Awan, T.;
Arshad, F.; Salim, H.; Qurashi, A. Bioinspired and green synthesis of
nanoparticles from plant extracts with antiviral and antimicrobial
properties: A critical review. Journal of Saudi Chemical Society 2021,
25, 101304.
(187) Anker, J. N.; Hall, W. P.; Lyandres, O.; Shah, N. C.; Zhao, J.;
Van Duyne, R. P. Biosensing with plasmonic nanosensors. In
Nanoscience and Technology: A Collection of Reviews from Nature
Journals; World Scientiﬁc Publishing: Singapore, 2009; pp 308−319.
(188) Mauriz, E. Recent progress in plasmonic biosensing schemes
for virus detection. Sensors 2020, 20, 4745.
(189) Hoyos-Nogués, M.; Gil, F.; Mas-Moruno, C. Antimicrobial
peptides: powerful biorecognition elements to detect bacteria in
biosensing technologies. Molecules 2018, 23, 1683.
(190) Zheng, X. T.; Tan, Y. N. Recent development of nucleic acid
nanosensors to detect sequence-specific binding interactions: From
metal ions, small molecules to proteins and pathogens. Sensors
International 2020, 1, 100034.
(191) Chandra, P.; Tan, Y. N.; Singh, S. P. Next Generation Point-of-
Care Biomedical Sensors Technologies for Cancer Diagnosis; Springer:
Singapore, 2017; p 396.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7584

(192) Zhao, V. X. T.; Wong, T. I.; Zheng, X. T.; Tan, Y. N.; Zhou,
X. Colorimetric biosensors for point-of-care virus detections. Materials
Science for Energy Technologies 2020, 3, 237−249.
(193) Seow, N.; Tan, Y. N.; Yung, L.-Y. L.; Su, X. DNA-Directed
Assembly of Nanogold Dimers: A Unique Dynamic Light Scattering
Sensing Probe for Transcription Factor Detection. Sci. Rep. 2016, 5,
18293.
(194) Suleman, S.; Shukla, S. K.; Malhotra, N.; Bukkitgar, S. D.;
Shetti, N. P.; Pilloton, R.; Narang, J.; Nee Tan, Y.; Aminabhavi, T. M.
Point of care detection of COVID-19: Advancement in biosensing
and diagnostic methods. Chemical Engineering Journal 2021, 414,
128759.
(195) Seow, N.; Tan, Y. N.; Yung, L.-Y. L. Gold Nanoparticle-
Dynamic Light Scattering Tandem for the Rapid and Quantitative
Detection of the let7MicroRNA Family. Particle & Particle Systems
Characterization 2014, 31, 1260−1268.
(196) Zheng, X. T.; Goh, W. L.; Yeow, P.; Lane, D. P.; Ghadessy, F.
J.; Tan, Y. N. Ultrasensitive dynamic light scattering based
nanobiosensor for rapid anticancer drug screening. Sens. Actuators, B
2019, 279, 79−86.
(197) Saraf, M.; Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Prateek; Tan, Y. N.; Gupta, R.
K. Insights and Perspectives Regarding Nanostructured Fluorescent
Materials toward Tackling COVID-19 and Future Pandemics. ACS
Applied Nano Materials 2021, 4, 911−948.
(198) Zhang, S.; Wright, G.; Yang, Y. Materials and techniques for
electrochemical biosensor design and construction. Biosens. Bioelec-
tron. 2000, 15, 273−282.
(199) Luo, X.; Morrin, A.; Killard, A. J.; Smyth, M. R. Application of
nanoparticles in electrochemical sensors and biosensors. Electro-
analysis: An International Journal Devoted to Fundamental and Practical
Aspects of Electroanalysis 2006, 18, 319−326.
(200) Zhu, Q.; Yang, H.; Luo, J.; Huang, H.; Fang, L.; Deng, J.; Li,
C.; Li, Y.; Zeng, T.; Zheng, J. 3D matrixed DNA self-nanocatalyzer as
electrochemical sensitizers for ultrasensitive investigation of DNA 5-
methylcytosine. Anal. Chim. Acta 2021, 1142, 127−134.
(201) Wei, D.; Bailey, M. J.; Andrew, P.; Ryhänen, T. Electro-
chemical biosensors at the nanoscale. Lab Chip 2009, 9, 2123−2131.
(202) Beitollahi, H.; Safaei, M.; Tajik, S. Different electrochemical
sensors for determination of dopamine as neurotransmitter in mixed
and clinical samples: a review. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. Res. 2019, 6, 81−
96.
(203) Ronkainen, N. J.; Halsall, H. B.; Heineman, W. R.
Electrochemical biosensors. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010, 39, 1747−1763.
(204) Xue, C.; Han, Q.; Wang, Y.; Wu, J.; Wen, T.; Wang, R.; Hong,
J.; Zhou, X.; Jiang, H. Amperometric detection of dopamine in human
serumby electrochemical sensor based on gold nanoparticles doped
molecularly imprinted polymers. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2013, 49, 199−
203.
(205) Vural, T.; Yaman, Y. T.; Ozturk, S.; Abaci, S.; Denkbas, E. B.
Electrochemical immunoassay for detection of prostate specific
antigen based on peptide nanotube-gold nanoparticle-polyaniline
immobilized pencil graphite electrode. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2018,
510, 318−326.
(206) Tan, Y. N.; Su, X.; Zhu, Y.; Lee, J. Y. Sensing of transcription
factor through controlled-assembly of metal nanoparticles modified
with segmented DNA elements. ACS Nano 2010, 4, 5101−5110.
(207) Tan, Y. N.; Su, X.; Liu, E. T.; Thomsen, J. S. Gold-
Nanoparticle-Based Assay for Instantaneous Detection of Nuclear
Hormone Receptor-Response Elements Interactions. Anal. Chem.
2010, 82, 2759−2765.
(208) Song, J.; Tan, Y. N.; Jańczewski, D.; Hempenius, M. A.; Xu, J.
W.; Tan, H. R.; Vancso, G. J. Poly(ferrocenylsilane) electrolytes as a
gold nanoparticle foundry: “two-in-one” redox synthesis and
electrosteric stabilization, and sensing applications. Nanoscale 2017,
9, 19255−19262.
(209) Aldewachi, H.; Chalati, T.; Woodroofe, M.; Bricklebank, N.;
Sharrack, B.; Gardiner, P. Gold nanoparticle-based colorimetric
biosensors. Nanoscale 2018, 10 (1), 18−33.
(210) Li, H.; Rothberg, L. Colorimetric detection of DNA sequences
based on electrostatic interactions with unmodified gold nano-
particles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2004, 101, 14036−14039.
(211) Tan, Y. N.; Lee, K. H.; Su, X. Study of Single-Stranded DNA
Binding Protein-Nucleic Acids Interactions using Unmodified Gold
Nanoparticles and Its Application for Detection of Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83, 4251−4257.
(212) Tan, Y. N.; Lai, A.; Su, X. Interrogating cooperative
interactions of transcription factors with composite DNA elements
using gold nanoparticles. Science of Advanced Materials 2014, 6, 1460−
1466.
(213) Aung, K. M. M.; Tan, Y. N.; Desai, K. V.; Su, X. Interrogating
oestrogen receptor-DNA interactions using metallic nanoparticles and
surface plasmon resonance technique. Aust. J. Chem. 2011, 64, 1288−
1294.
(214) Tan, Y. N.; Lee, K. H.; Su, X. A study of DNA design
dependency of segmented DNA-induced gold nanoparticle aggrega-
tion towards versatile bioassay development. RSC Adv. 2013, 3,
21604−21612.
(215) Kataria, R.; Sethuraman, K.; Vashisht, D.; Vashisht, A.; Mehta,
S. K.; Gupta, A. Colorimetric detection of mercury ions based on anti-
aggregation of gold nanoparticles using 3, 5-dimethyl-1-thiocarbox-
amidepyrazole. Microchemical Journal 2019, 148, 299−305.
(216) Khani, H.; Abbasi, S.; Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Gholivand, M. B.
Colorimetric detection and determination of glutathione based on
superoxide radical-assisted etching approach. Microchemical Journal
2022, 173, 107006.
(217) Xu, H. V.; Zhao, Y.; Tan, Y. N. Nanodot-directed formation of
plasmonic-fluorescent nanohybrids toward dual optical detection of
glucose and cholesterol via hydrogen peroxide sensing. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 27233−27242.
(218) Choi, Y.; Zheng, X. T.; Tan, Y. N. Bioinspired carbon dots
(biodots): emerging fluorophores with tailored multiple function-
alities for biomedical, agricultural and environmental applications.
Molecular Systems Design & Engineering 2020, 5, 67−90.
(219) Zheng, X. T.; Choi, Y.; Phua, D. G. G.; Tan, Y. N.
Noncovalent Fluorescent Biodot-Protein Conjugates with Well-
Preserved Native Functions for Improved Sweat Glucose Detection.
Bioconjugate Chem. 2020, 31, 754−763.
(220) Sun, J.; Jin, Y. Fluorescent Au nanoclusters: recent progress
and sensing applications. Journal of Materials Chemistry C 2014, 2,
8000−8011.
(221) Li, D.; Chen, Z.; Mei, X. Fluorescence enhancement for noble
metal nanoclusters. Advances in colloid and interface science 2017, 250,
25−39.
(222) Yaraki, M. T.; Tan, Y. N. Metal Nanoparticles-Enhanced
Biosensors: Synthesis, Design and Applications in Fluorescence
Enhancement and Surface-enhanced Raman Scattering. Chemistry-
An Asian Journal 2020, 15, 3180−3208.
(223) Aparna, R. S.; Anjali Devi, J. S.; Anjana, R. R.; Nebu, J.;
George, S. Reversible fluorescence modulation of BSA stabilised
copper nanoclusters for the selective detection of protamine and
heparin. Analyst 2019, 144, 1799−1808.
(224) Tang, Y.; Sun, Z.; Shen, J.; Yu, J.; Wang, S.; Hao, J.; Wang, B.;
Huang, Y.; Liu, X.; Zhuang, H. Peptide modified gold nanoclusters as
a novel fluorescence detector based on quenching system of detecting
Allura red. Analytical Methods 2018, 10, 5672−5678.
(225) Palomar, Q.; Xu, X.; Selegård, R.; Aili, D.; Zhang, Z. Peptide
decorated gold nanoparticle/carbon nanotube electrochemical sensor
for ultrasensitive detection of matrix metalloproteinase-7. Sens.
Actuators, B 2020, 325, 128789.
(226) Feng, D.; Su, J.; He, G.; Xu, Y.; Wang, C.; Zheng, M.; Qian,
Q.; Mi, X. Electrochemical DNA Sensor for Sensitive BRCA1
Detection Based on DNA Tetrahedral-Structured Probe and Poly-
Adenine Mediated Gold Nanoparticles. Biosensors 2020, 10, 78.
(227) Ye, Q.; Yin, Z.-Z.; Wu, H.; Wu, D.; Tao, Y.; Kong, Y.
Decoration of glutathione with copper-platinum nanoparticles for
chirality sensing of tyrosine enantiomers. Electrochem. Commun. 2020,
110, 106638.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7585

(228) Sun, H.; Kong, J.; Wang, Q.; Liu, Q.; Zhang, X. Dual signal
amplification by eATRP and DNA-templated silver nanoparticles for
ultrasensitive electrochemical detection of nucleic acids. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 27568−27573.
(229) Song, X.; Wang, Y.; Liu, S.; Zhang, X.; Wang, J.; Wang, H.;
Zhang, F.; Yu, J.; Huang, J. A triply amplified electrochemical lead (II)
sensor by using a DNAzyme and via formation of a DNA-gold
nanoparticle network induced by a catalytic hairpin assembly.
Microchimica Acta 2019, 186, 559.
(230) Zhang, X.; Feng, Y.; Duan, S.; Su, L.; Zhang, J.; He, F.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain H37Rv electrochemical sensor
mediated by aptamer and AuNPs-DNA. ACS sensors 2019, 4, 849−
855.
(231) He, Y.; Tian, F.; Zhou, J.; Zhao, Q.; Fu, R.; Jiao, B.
Colorimetric aptasensor for ochratoxin A detection based on enzyme-
induced gold nanoparticle aggregation. Journal of hazardous materials
2020, 388, 121758.
(232) Retout, M.; Valkenier, H.; Triffaux, E. o.; Doneux, T.; Bartik,
K.; Bruylants, G. Rapid and selective detection of proteins by dual
trapping using gold nanoparticles functionalized with peptide
aptamers. ACS sensors 2016, 1, 929−933.
(233) Ma, X.; Miao, P. Silver nanoparticle@ DNA tetrahedron-
based colorimetric detection of HIV-related DNA with cascade strand
displacement amplification. J. Mater. Chem. B 2019, 7, 2608−2612.
(234) Yu, Y.; Hong, Y.; Gao, P.; Nazeeruddin, M. K. Glutathione
modified gold nanoparticles for sensitive colorimetric detection of
Pb2+ ions in rainwater polluted by leaking perovskite solar cells.
Analytical chemistry 2016, 88, 12316−12322.
(235) Nguyen, L.; Dass, M.; Ober, M. F.; Besteiro, L. V.; Wang, Z.
M.; Nickel, B.; Govorov, A. O.; Liedl, T.; Heuer-Jungemann, A. Chiral
Assembly of Gold-Silver Core-Shell Plasmonic Nanorods on DNA
Origami with Strong Optical Activity. ACS Nano 2020, 14, 7454−
7461.
(236) Svárd, A.; Neilands, J.; Palm, E.; Svensáter, G.; Bengtsson, T.
r.; Aili, D. Protein-Functionalized Gold Nanoparticles as Refracto-
metric Nanoplasmonic Sensors for the Detection of Proteolytic
Activity of Porphyromonas gingivalis. ACS Applied Nano Materials
2020, 3, 9822−9830.
(237) Halkare, P.; Punjabi, N.; Wangchuk, J.; Nair, A.; Kondabagil,
K.; Mukherji, S. Bacteria functionalized gold nanoparticle matrix
based fiber-optic sensor for monitoring heavy metal pollution in
water. Sens. Actuators, B 2019, 281, 643−651.
(238) Wang, H.-B.; Zhang, H.-D.; Chen, Y.; Li, Y.; Gan, T. H 2 O 2-
mediated fluorescence quenching of double-stranded DNA templated
copper nanoparticles for label-free and sensitive detection of glucose.
RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 77906−77912.
(239) Wang, H.-B.; Zhang, H.-D.; Chen, Y.; Huang, K.-J.; Liu, Y.-M.
A label-free and ultrasensitive fluorescent sensor for dopamine
detection based on double-stranded DNA templated copper nano-
particles. Sens. Actuators, B 2015, 220, 146−153.
(240) Aparna, R.; Devi, J. A.; Nebu, J.; Syamchand, S.; George, S.
Rapid response of dopamine towards insitu synthesised copper
nanocluster in presence of H2O2. J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 2019,
379, 63−71.
(241) Govindaraju, S.; Reddy, A. S.; Kim, J.; Yun, K. Sensitive
detection of epinephrine in human serum via fluorescence enhance-
ment of gold nanoclusters. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2019, 498, 143837.
(242) Fu, Y.; Liu, L.; Li, X.; Chen, H.; Wang, Z.; Yang, W.; Zhang,
H.; Zhang, H. Peptide modified manganese-doped iron oxide
nanoparticles as a sensitive fluorescence nanosensor for non-invasive
detection of trypsin activity in vitro and in vivo. RSC Adv. 2021, 11,
2213−2220.
(243) Lettieri, M.; Palladino, P.; Scarano, S.; Minunni, M. Protein-
templated copper nanoclusters for fluorimetric determination of
human serum albumin. Microchimica Acta 2021, 188, 116.
(244) Qiu, Q.; Gao, R.-R.; Xie, A.; Jiao, Y.; Dong, W. A ratiometric
fluorescent sensor with different DNA-templated Ag NCs as signals
for ATP detection. J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 2020, 400, 112725.
(245) Jin, F.; Li, H.; Xu, D. Enzyme-free fluorescence microarray for
determination of hepatitis B virus DNA based on silver nanoparticle
aggregates-assisted signal amplification. Analytica chimica acta 2019,
1077, 297−304.
(246) Yao, J.; He, Y.; Li, L.; Li, P.; Yang, M. Magnified Fluorescent
Aptasensors Based on a Gold Nanoparticle- DNA Hybrid and DNase
I for the Cycling Detection of Mercury (II) Ions in Aqueous Solution.
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2019, 58, 21201−21207.
(247) Xie, S.; Fu, T.; He, L.; Qiu, L.; Liu, H.; Tan, W. DNA-capped
silver nanoflakes as fluorescent nanosensor for highly sensitive
imaging of endogenous H2S in cell division cycles. Analytical
chemistry 2019, 91, 15404−15410.
(248) Borse, S.; Murthy, Z.; Park, T.-J.; Kailasa, S. K. Pepsin
mediated synthesis of blue fluorescent copper nanoclusters for sensing
of flutamide and chloramphenicol drugs. Microchemical Journal 2021,
164, 105947.
(249) Hassanpour, S.; Saadati, A.; Hasanzadeh, M. pDNA
conjugated with citrate capped silver nanoparticles towards ultra-
sensitive bio-assay of Haemophilus influenza in human biofluids: A
novel optical biosensor. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 2020, 180, 113050.
(250) Pal, M.; Lee, S.; Kwon, D.; Hwang, J.; Lee, H.; Hwang, S.;
Jeon, S. Direct immobilization of antibodies on Zn-doped Fe3O4
nanoclusters for detection of pathogenic bacteria. Analytica chimica
acta 2017, 952, 81−87.
(251) Bagheri Pebdeni, A.; Mousavizadegan, M.; Hosseini, M.
Sensitive detection of S. Aureus using aptamer-and vancomycin-
copper nanoclusters as dual recognition strategy. Food Chem. 2021,
361, 130137.
(252) Leng, X.; Wang, Y.; Li, R.; Liu, S.; Yao, J.; Pei, Q.; Cui, X.; Tu,
Y.; Tang, D.; Huang, J. Circular exponential amplification of
photoinduced electron transfer using hairpin probes, G-quadruplex
DNAzyme and silver nanocluster-labeled DNA for ultrasensitive
fluorometric determination of pathogenic bacteria. Microchimica Acta
2018, 185, 168.
(253) Sharma, A.; Goyal, A. K.; Rath, G. Recent advances in metal
nanoparticles in cancer therapy. J. Drug Targeting 2018, 26, 617−632.
(254) Fan, P.; Yang, C.; Wang, L.; Wang, Q.; Zhang, Y.; Zhou, J.;
Weng, J.; Feng, B. ZnO nanoparticles stimulate oxidative stress to
induce apoptosis of B16F10 melanoma cells: In vitro and in vivo
studies. Biomedical Physics & Engineering Express 2021, 7, 065014.
(255) Bai, X.; Wang, Y.; Song, Z.; Feng, Y.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, D.;
Feng, L. The basic properties of gold nanoparticles and their
applications in tumor diagnosis and treatment. International journal of
molecular sciences 2020, 21, 2480.
(256) Yang, Z.; Sun, Z.; Ren, Y.; Chen, X.; Zhang, W.; Zhu, X.; Mao,
Z.; Shen, J.; Nie, S. Advances in nanomaterials for use in
photothermal and photodynamic therapeutics. Mol. Med. Rep. 2019,
20, 5−15.
(257) Vlamidis, Y.; Voliani, V. Bringing again noble metal
nanoparticles to the forefront of cancer therapy. Front. Bioeng.
Biotechnol. 2018, 6, 143.
(258) Jin, J.; Bhujwalla, Z. M. Biomimetic nanoparticles camouflaged
in cancer cell membranes and their applications in cancer theranostics.
Front. Oncol. 2020, 9, 1560.
(259) Pucci, C.; Martinelli, C.; Ciofani, G. Innovative approaches for
cancer treatment: Current perspectives and new challenges. ecancer
2019, 13, 961.
(260) Ankathil, R. The mechanisms and challenges of cancer
chemotherapy resistance: A current overview. Eur. J. Mol. Clin. Med.
2019, 6, 26−34.
(261) Olivares-Urbano, M. A.; Griñán-Lisón, C.; Marchal, J. A.;
Núñez, M. I. CSC radioresistance: a therapeutic challenge to improve
radiotherapy effectiveness in cancer. Cells 2020, 9, 1651.
(262) Gonzalez-Valdivieso, J.; Girotti, A.; Schneider, J.; Arias, F. J.
Advanced nanomedicine and cancer: Challenges and opportunities in
clinical translation. Int. J. Pharm. 2021, 599, 120438.
(263) Tan, Y.; Ayob, M.; Osman, M.; Matthews, K. Antibacterial
activity of different degree of hydrolysis of palm kernel expeller
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7586

peptides against spore-forming and non-spore-forming bacteria.
Letters in applied microbiology 2011, 53, 509−517.
(264) Khalandi, B.; Asadi, N.; Milani, M.; Davaran, S.; Abadi, A. J.
N.; Abasi, E.; Akbarzadeh, A. A review on potential role of silver
nanoparticles and possible mechanisms of their actions on bacteria.
Drug Res. (Stuttg.) 2017, 67, 70−76.
(265) Liao, C.; Li, Y.; Tjong, S. C. Bactericidal and cytotoxic
properties of silver nanoparticles. International journal of molecular
sciences 2019, 20, 449.
(266) El-Seedi, H. R.; El-Shabasy, R. M.; Khalifa, S. A. M.; Saeed, A.;
Shah, A.; Shah, R.; Iftikhar, F. J.; Abdel-Daim, M. M.; Omri, A.;
Hajrahand, N. H.; Sabir, J. S. M.; Zou, X.; Halabi, M. F.; Sarhan, W.;
Guo, W. Metal nanoparticles fabricated by green chemistry using
natural extracts: biosynthesis, mechanisms, and applications. RSC Adv.
2019, 9, 24539−24559.
(267) Al-Haddad, J.; Alzaabi, F.; Pal, P.; Rambabu, K.; Banat, F.
Green synthesis of bimetallic copper-silver nanoparticles and their
application in catalytic and antibacterial activities. Clean Technologies
and Environmental Policy 2020, 22, 269−277.
(268) Halawani, E. M. Rapid biosynthesis method and character-
ization of silver nanoparticles using Zizyphus spina christi leaf extract
and their antibacterial efficacy in therapeutic application. J. Biomater.
Nanobiotechnol. 2017, 8, 22−35.
(269) Hayden, S. C.; Zhao, G.; Saha, K.; Phillips, R. L.; Li, X.;
Miranda, O. R.; Rotello, V. M.; El-Sayed, M. A.; Schmidt-Krey, I.;
Bunz, U. H. Aggregation and interaction of cationic nanoparticles on
bacterial surfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 6920−6923.
(270) Hejmady, S.; Pradhan, R.; Alexander, A.; Agrawal, M.; Singhvi,
G.; Gorain, B.; Tiwari, S.; Kesharwani, P.; Dubey, S. K. Recent
advances in targeted nanomedicine as promising antitumor
therapeutics. Drug Discovery Today 2020, 25, 2227−2244.
(271) El-Safoury, D. M.; Ibrahim, A. B.; El-Setouhy, D. A.;
Khowessah, O. M.; Motaleb, M. A.; Sakr, T. M. Amelioration of
Tumor Targeting and In Vivo Biodistribution of 99mTc-Methotrex-
ate-Gold Nanoparticles (99mTc-Mex-AuNPs). J. Pharm. Sci. 2021,
110, 2955−2965.
(272) Yücel, O.; Şengelen, A.; Emik, S.; Önay-Uçar, E.; Arda, N.;
Gürdağ, G. Folic acid-modified methotrexate-conjugated gold nano-
particles as nano-sized trojans for drug delivery to folate receptor-
positive cancer cells. Nanotechnology 2020, 31, 355101.
(273) Arvizo, R. R.; Miranda, O. R.; Moyano, D. F.; Walden, C. A.;
Giri, K.; Bhattacharya, R.; Robertson, J. D.; Rotello, V. M.; Reid, J.
M.; Mukherjee, P. Modulating pharmacokinetics, tumor uptake and
biodistribution by engineered nanoparticles. PLoS One 2011, 6,
No. e24374.
(274) Dhamecha, D.; Jalalpure, S.; Jadhav, K.; Jagwani, S.; Chavan,
R. Doxorubicin loaded gold nanoparticles: Implication of passive
targeting on anticancer efficacy. Pharmacol. Res. 2016, 113, 547−556.
(275) Ghosh, P.; Han, G.; De, M.; Kim, C. K.; Rotello, V. M. Gold
nanoparticles in delivery applications. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2008,
60, 1307−1315.
(276) Subhan, M. A.; Yalamarty, S. S. K.; Filipczak, N.; Parveen, F.;
Torchilin, V. P. Recent Advances in Tumor Targeting via EPR Effect
for Cancer Treatment. Journal of Personalized Medicine 2021, 11, 571.
(277) Kang, H.; Rho, S.; Stiles, W. R.; Hu, S.; Baek, Y.; Hwang, D.
W.; Kashiwagi, S.; Kim, M. S.; Choi, H. S. Size-Dependent EPR Effect
of Polymeric Nanoparticles on Tumor Targeting. Adv. Healthc. Mater.
2020, 9, No. 1901223.
(278) Ruan, S.; Cao, X.; Cun, X.; Hu, G.; Zhou, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Lu,
L.; He, Q.; Gao, H. Matrix metalloproteinase-sensitive size-shrinkable
nanoparticles for deep tumor penetration and pH triggered
doxorubicin release. Biomaterials 2015, 60, 100−110.
(279) Gu, Y.-J.; Cheng, J.; Man, C. W.-Y.; Wong, W.-T.; Cheng, S.
H. Gold-doxorubicin nanoconjugates for overcoming multidrug
resistance. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine
2012, 8, 204−211.
(280) Brown, S. D.; Nativo, P.; Smith, J.-A.; Stirling, D.; Edwards, P.
R.; Venugopal, B.; Flint, D. J.; Plumb, J. A.; Graham, D.; Wheate, N. J.
Gold nanoparticles for the improved anticancer drug delivery of the
active component of oxaliplatin. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 4678−
4684.
(281) Wang, Z.; Chen, L.; Chu, Z.; Huang, C.; Huang, Y.; Jia, N.
Gemcitabine-loaded gold nanospheres mediated by albumin for
enhanced anti-tumor activity combining with CT imaging. Materials
Science and Engineering: C 2018, 89, 106−118.
(282) Navya, P.; Kaphle, A.; Srinivas, S.; Bhargava, S. K.; Rotello, V.
M.; Daima, H. K. Current trends and challenges in cancer
management and therapy using designer nanomaterials. Nano
Convergence 2019, 6, 23.
(283) Khan, S.; Imran, M.; Butt, T. T.; Ali Shah, S. W.; Sohail, M.;
Malik, A.; Das, S.; Thu, H. E.; Adam, A.; Hussain, Z. Curcumin based
nanomedicines as efficient nanoplatform for treatment of cancer: new
developments in reversing cancer drug resistance, rapid internal-
ization, and improved anticancer efficacy. Trends in Food Science &
Technology 2018, 80, 8−22.
(284) Yang, X.; Hong, H.; Grailer, J. J.; Rowland, I. J.; Javadi, A.;
Hurley, S. A.; Xiao, Y.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Nickles, R. J.; Cai, W.;
Steeber, D. A.; Gong, S. cRGD-functionalized, DOX-conjugated, and
64Cu-labeled superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for targeted
anticancer drug delivery and PET/MR imaging. Biomaterials 2011, 32,
4151−4160.
(285) Chen, W.-H.; Lei, Q.; Luo, G.-F.; Jia, H.-Z.; Hong, S.; Liu, Y.-
X.; Cheng, Y.-J.; Zhang, X.-Z. Rational design of multifunctional gold
nanoparticles via host-guest interaction for cancer-targeted therapy.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 17171−17180.
(286) Patra, C. R.; Bhattacharya, R.; Wang, E.; Katarya, A.; Lau, J. S.;
Dutta, S.; Muders, M.; Wang, S.; Buhrow, S. A.; Safgren, S. L.;
Yaszemski, M. J.; Reid, J. M.; Ames, M. M.; Mukherjee, P.;
Mukhopadhyay, D. Targeted delivery of gemcitabine to pancreatic
adenocarcinoma using cetuximab as a targeting agent. Cancer Res.
2008, 68, 1970−1978.
(287) Latorre, A.; Posch, C.; Garcimartin, Y.; Celli, A.; Sanlorenzo,
M.; Vujic, I.; Ma, J.; Zekhtser, M.; Rappersberger, K.; Ortiz-Urda, S.;
Somoza, A. DNA and aptamer stabilized gold nanoparticles for
targeted delivery of anticancer therapeutics. Nanoscale 2014, 6, 7436−
7442.
(288) Banu, H.; Sethi, D. K.; Edgar, A.; Sheriff, A.; Rayees, N.;
Renuka, N.; Faheem, S. M.; Premkumar, K.; Vasanthakumar, G.
Doxorubicin loaded polymeric gold nanoparticles targeted to human
folate receptor upon laser photothermal therapy potentiates chemo-
therapy in breast cancer cell lines. Journal of photochemistry and
photobiology. B, Biology 2015, 149, 116−28.
(289) Ming, L.; Cheng, K.; Chen, Y.; Yang, R.; Chen, D.
Enhancement of tumor lethality of ROS in photodynamic therapy.
Cancer Medicine 2021, 10, 257−268.
(290) Allegra, A.; Pioggia, G.; Tonacci, A.; Musolino, C.; Gangemi,
S. Oxidative stress and photodynamic therapy of skin cancers:
Mechanisms, challenges and promising developments. Antioxidants
2020, 9, 448.
(291) Suzuki, T.; Tanaka, M.; Sasaki, M.; Ichikawa, H.; Nishie, H.;
Kataoka, H. Vascular shutdown by photodynamic therapy using
talaporfin sodium. Cancers 2020, 12, 2369.
(292) Donohoe, C.; Senge, M. O.; Arnaut, L. G.; Gomes-da-Silva, L.
C. Cell death in photodynamic therapy: From oxidative stress to anti-
tumor immunity. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Reviews on
Cancer 2019, 1872, 188308.
(293) Overchuk, M.; Zheng, G. Overcoming obstacles in the tumor
microenvironment: Recent advancements in nanoparticle delivery for
cancer theranostics. Biomaterials 2018, 156, 217−237.
(294) Shang, L.; Zhou, X.; Zhang, J.; Shi, Y.; Zhong, L. Metal
Nanoparticles for Photodynamic Therapy: A Potential Treatment for
Breast Cancer. Molecules 2021, 26, 6532.
(295) Yu, Y.; Lee, W. D.; Tan, Y. N. Protein-protected gold/silver
alloy nanoclusters in metal-enhanced singlet oxygen generation and
their correlation with photoluminescence. Mater. Sci. Eng.: C 2020,
109, 110525.
(296) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Hu, F.; Daqiqeh Rezaei, S.; Liu, B.; Tan,
Y. N. Metal-enhancement study of dual functional photosensitizers
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7587

with aggregation-induced emission and singlet oxygen generation.
Nanoscale Adv. 2020, 2, 2859−2869.
(297) Ho-Wu, R.; Yau, S. H.; Goodson III, T. Efficient singlet
oxygen generation in metal nanoclusters for two-photon photo-
dynamic therapy applications. J. Phys. Chem. B 2017, 121, 10073−
10080.
(298) Cui, H.-D.; Hu, D.-H.; Zhang, J.-N.; Gao, G.-H.; Zheng, C.-F.;
Gong, P.; Xi, X.-H.; Sheng, Z.-H.; Cai, L.-T. Theranostic gold cluster
nanoassembly for simultaneous enhanced cancer imaging and
photodynamic therapy. Chin. Chem. Lett. 2017, 28, 1391−1398.
(299) García Calavia, P.; Bruce, G.; Pérez-García, L.; Russell, D. A.
Photosensitiser-gold nanoparticle conjugates for photodynamic
therapy of cancer. Photochemical & photobiological sciences: Official
journal of the European Photochemistry Association and the European
Society for Photobiology 2018, 17, 1534−1552.
(300) Stuchinskaya, T.; Moreno, M.; Cook, M. J.; Edwards, D. R.;
Russell, D. A. Targeted photodynamic therapy of breast cancer cells
using antibody-phthalocyanine-gold nanoparticle conjugates. Photo-
chemical & photobiological sciences: Official journal of the European
Photochemistry Association and the European Society for Photobiology
2011, 10, 822−31.
(301) Chen, Y.-W.; Su, Y.-L.; Hu, S.-H.; Chen, S.-Y. Functionalized
graphene nanocomposites for enhancing photothermal therapy in
tumor treatment. Advanced drug delivery reviews 2016, 105, 190−204.
(302) Deng, X.; Shao, Z.; Zhao, Y. Solutions to the Drawbacks of
Photothermal and Photodynamic Cancer Therapy. Advanced Science
2021, 8, 2002504.
(303) Wang, C.; Cai, X.; Zhang, J.; Wang, X.; Wang, Y.; Ge, H.; Yan,
W.; Huang, Q.; Xiao, J.; Zhang, Q.; Cheng, Y. Trifolium-like platinum
nanoparticle-mediated photothermal therapy inhibits tumor growth
and osteolysis in a bone metastasis model. Small 2015, 11, 2080−
2086.
(304) Link, S.; El-Sayed, M. A. Spectral properties and relaxation
dynamics of surface plasmon electronic oscillations in gold and silver
nanodots and nanorods. J. Phys. Chem. B 1999, 103, 8410−8426.
(305) Wang, Y.; Black, K. C.; Luehmann, H.; Li, W.; Zhang, Y.; Cai,
X.; Wan, D.; Liu, S. Y.; Li, M.; Kim, P.; Li, Z. Y.; Wang, L. V.; Liu, Y.;
Xia, Y. Comparison study of gold nanohexapods, nanorods, and
nanocages for photothermal cancer treatment. ACS Nano 2013, 7,
2068−77.
(306) Yuan, H.; Fales, A. M.; Vo-Dinh, T. TAT peptide-
functionalized gold nanostars: enhanced intracellular delivery and
efficient NIR photothermal therapy using ultralow irradiance. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 11358−11361.
(307) Qu, X.; Yao, C.; Wang, J.; Li, Z.; Zhang, Z. Anti-CD30-
targeted gold nanoparticles for photothermal therapy of L-428
Hodgkin’s cell. International journal of nanomedicine 2012, 7, 6095−
103.
(308) Neshastehriz, A.; Tabei, M.; Maleki, S.; Eynali, S.; Shakeri-
Zadeh, A. Photothermal therapy using folate conjugated gold
nanoparticles enhances the effects of 6MV X-ray on mouth epidermal
carcinoma cells. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology B: Biology
2017, 172, 52−60.
(309) Zhang, Y.; Zhan, X.; Xiong, J.; Peng, S.; Huang, W.; Joshi, R.;
Cai, Y.; Liu, Y.; Li, R.; Yuan, K.; Zhou, N.; Min, W. Temperature-
dependent cell death patterns induced by functionalized gold
nanoparticle photothermal therapy in melanoma cells. Sci. Rep.
2018, 8, 8720.
(310) Kunjachan, S.; Ehling, J.; Storm, G.; Kiessling, F.; Lammers, T.
Noninvasive imaging of nanomedicines and nanotheranostics:
principles, progress, and prospects. Chem. Rev. 2015, 115, 10907−
10937.
(311) Zheng, X. T.; Lai, Y. C.; Tan, Y. N. Nucleotide-derived
theranostic nanodots with intrinsic fluorescence and singlet oxygen
generation for bioimaging and photodynamic therapy. Nanoscale
Advances 2019, 1, 2250−2257.
(312) Xu, H. V.; Zheng, X. T.; Zhao, Y.; Tan, Y. N. Uncovering the
Design Principle of Amino Acid-Derived Photoluminescent Biodots
with Tailor-Made Structure-Properties and Applications for Cellular
Bioimaging. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 19881−19888.
(313) Geng, J.; Goh, W. L.; Zhang, C.; Lane, D. P.; Liu, B.;
Ghadessy, F.; Tan, Y. N. A highly sensitive fluorescent light-up probe
for real-time detection of the endogenous protein target and its
antagonism in live cells. J. Mater. Chem. B 2015, 3, 5933−5937.
(314) Zheng, X. T.; Tan, Y. N. Development of Blood-Cell-Selective
Fluorescent Biodots for Lysis-Free Leukocyte Imaging and Differ-
ential Counting in Whole Blood. Small 2020, 16, 1903328.
(315) Bai, Y.; Shu, T.; Su, L.; Zhang, X. Fluorescent gold
nanoclusters for biosensor and bioimaging application. Crystals
2020, 10, 357.
(316) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Daqiqeh Rezaei, S.; Tan, Y. N.
Simulation guided design of silver nanostructures for plasmon-
enhanced fluorescence, singlet oxygen generation and SERS
applications. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2020, 22, 5673−5687.
(317) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Pan, Y.; Hu, F.; Yu, Y.; Liu, B.; Tan, Y.
N. Nanosilver-enhanced AIE photosensitizer for simultaneous
bioimaging and photodynamic therapy. Materials Chemistry Frontiers
2020, 4, 3074−3085.
(318) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Hu, F.; Daqiqeh Rezaei, S.; Liu, B.; Tan,
Y. N. Metal-enhancement study of dual functional photosensitizers
with aggregation-induced emission and singlet oxygen generation.
Nanoscale Advances 2020, 2, 2859−2869.
(319) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Wu, M.; Middha, E.; Wu, W.; Daqiqeh
Rezaei, S.; Liu, B.; Tan, Y. N. Gold Nanostars-AIE Theranostic
Nanodots with Enhanced Fluorescence and Photosensitization
Towards Effective Image-Guided Photodynamic Therapy. Nano-
Micro Lett. 2021, 13, 58.
(320) Zhang, X.; Tian, Y.; Yu, J.; Yuan, Z. Fluorescent Probes for
Biological Imaging. BioMed Res. Int. 2016, 2016, 3730486.
(321) Li, D. H.; Schreiber, C. L.; Smith, B. D. Sterically shielded
heptamethine cyanine dyes for bioconjugation and high performance
near-infrared fluorescence imaging. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59,
12154−12161.
(322) Su, Y.; Xue, T.; Liu, Y.; Qi, J.; Jin, R.; Lin, Z. Luminescent
metal nanoclusters for biomedical applications. Nano Research 2019,
12, 1251−1265.
(323) Liu, H.; Hong, G.; Luo, Z.; Chen, J.; Chang, J.; Gong, M.; He,
H.; Yang, J.; Yuan, X.; Li, L.; Mu, X.; Wang, J.; Mi, W.; Luo, J.; Xie, J.;
Zhang, X.-D. Atomic-precision gold clusters for NIR-II imaging. Adv.
Mater. 2019, 31, 1901015.
(324) Wu, Z.; Yao, Q.; Chai, O. J. H.; Ding, N.; Xu, W.; Zang, S.;
Xie, J. Unraveling the impact of gold (I)-thiolate motifs on the
aggregation-induced emission of gold nanoclusters. Angew. Chem.
2020, 132, 10020−10025.
(325) Yang, T.-Q.; Peng, B.; Shan, B.-Q.; Zong, Y.-X.; Jiang, J.-G.;
Wu, P.; Zhang, K. Origin of the photoluminescence of metal
nanoclusters: from metal-centered emission to ligand-centered
emission. Nanomaterials 2020, 10, 261.
(326) Bonačić-Koutecký, V.; Antoine, R. Enhanced two-photon
absorption of ligated silver and gold nanoclusters: theoretical and
experimental assessments. Nanoscale 2019, 11, 12436−12448.
(327) Sun, H.-T.; Sakka, Y. Luminescent metal nanoclusters:
controlled synthesis and functional applications. Sci. Technol. Adv.
Mater. 2014, 15, 014205.
(328) Lim, J. Y.; Yu, Y.; Jin, G.; Li, K.; Lu, Y.; Xie, J.; Tan, Y. N.
Establishing empirical design rules of nucleic acid templates for the
synthesis of silver nanoclusters with tunable photoluminescence and
functionalities towards targeted bioimaging applications. Nanoscale
Advances 2020, 2, 3921−3932.
(329) Yang, L.; Shang, L.; Nienhaus, G. U. Mechanistic aspects of
fluorescent gold nanocluster internalization by live HeLa cells.
Nanoscale 2013, 5, 1537−1543.
(330) Wang, X.; Xia, J.; Wang, C.; Liu, L.; Zhu, S.; Feng, W.; Li, L.
Preparation of novel fluorescent nanocomposites based on Au
nanoclusters and their application in targeted detection of cancer
cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 44856−44863.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7588

(331) Yang, J.; Xia, N.; Wang, X.; Liu, X.; Xu, A.; Wu, Z.; Luo, Z.
One-pot one-cluster synthesis of fluorescent and bio-compatible Ag14
nanoclusters for cancer cell imaging. Nanoscale 2015, 7, 18464−
18470.
(332) Tanaka, S. I.; Miyazaki, J.; Tiwari, D. K.; Jin, T.; Inouye, Y.
Fluorescent platinum nanoclusters: synthesis, purification, character-
ization, and application to bioimaging. Angew. Chem. 2011, 123, 451−
455.
(333) Li, J.; Zhong, X.; Cheng, F.; Zhang, J.-R.; Jiang, L.-P.; Zhu, J.-J.
One-pot synthesis of aptamer-functionalized silver nanoclusters for
cell-type-specific imaging. Analytical chemistry 2012, 84, 4140−4146.
(334) Zhang, X.; Chen, F.; Song, X.; He, P.; Zhang, S. Proximity
ligation detection of lectin Concanavalin A and fluorescence imaging
cancer cells using carbohydrate functionalized DNA-silver nanocluster
probes. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2018, 104, 27−31.
(335) Chen, D.; Luo, Z.; Li, N.; Lee, J. Y.; Xie, J.; Lu, J. Amphiphilic
polymeric nanocarriers with luminescent gold nanoclusters for
concurrent bioimaging and controlled drug release. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2013, 23, 4324−4331.
(336) Li, J.; You, J.; Dai, Y.; Shi, M.; Han, C.; Xu, K. Gadolinium
oxide nanoparticles and aptamer-functionalized silver nanoclusters-
based multimodal molecular imaging nanoprobe for optical/magnetic
resonance cancer cell imaging. Analytical chemistry 2014, 86, 11306−
11311.
(337) Liu, J.-M.; Chen, J.-T.; Yan, X.-P. Near infrared fluorescent
trypsin stabilized gold nanoclusters as surface plasmon enhanced
energy transfer biosensor and in vivo cancer imaging bioprobe.
Analytical chemistry 2013, 85, 3238−3245.
(338) Geddes, C. D.; Lakowicz, J. R. Metal-enhanced fluorescence. J.
Fluoresc. 2002, 12, 121−129.
(339) Guzatov, D. V.; Vaschenko, S. V.; Stankevich, V. V.; Lunevich,
A. Y.; Glukhov, Y. F.; Gaponenko, S. V. Plasmonic enhancement of
molecular fluorescence near silver nanoparticles: theory, modeling,
and experiment. J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 10723−10733.
(340) Hu, F.; Cai, X.; Manghnani, P. N.; Kenry; Wu, W.; Liu, B.
Multicolor monitoring of cellular organelles by single wavelength
excitation to visualize the mitophagy process. Chem. Sci. 2018, 9,
2756−2761.
(341) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Daqiqeh Rezaei, S.; Tan, Y. N.
Simulation guided design of silver nanostructures for plasmon-
enhanced fluorescence, singlet oxygen generation and SERS
applications. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2020, 22, 5673−5687.
(342) Liang, J.; Li, K.; Gurzadyan, G. G.; Lu, X.; Liu, B. Silver
nanocube-enhanced far-red/near-infrared fluorescence of conjugated
polyelectrolyte for cellular imaging. Langmuir 2012, 28, 11302−
11309.
(343) Tavakkoli Yaraki, M.; Daqiqeh Rezaei, S.; Middha, E.; Tan, Y.
N. Synthesis and Simulation Study of Right Silver Bipyramids via
Seed-Mediated Growth cum Selective Oxidative Etching Approach.
Particle & Particle Systems Characterization 2020, 37, 2000027.
(344) De La Vega, J. C.; Häfeli, U. O. Utilization of nanoparticles as
X-ray contrast agents for diagnostic imaging applications. Contrast
Media and Molecular Imaging 2015, 10, 81−95.
(345) Mullan, B. F.; Madsen, M. T.; Messerle, L.; Kolesnichenko, V.;
Kruger, J. X-ray attenuation coefficients of high-atomic-number,
hexanuclear transition metal cluster compounds: a new paradigm for
radiographic contrast agents. Academic radiology 2000, 7, 254−259.
(346) Zeng, Y.; Zhang, D.; Wu, M.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, X.; Li, L.; Li, Z.;
Han, X.; Wei, X.; Liu, X. Lipid-AuNPs@ PDA nanohybrid for MRI/
CT imaging and photothermal therapy of hepatocellular carcinoma.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6, 14266−14277.
(347) Koosha, F.; Farsangi, Z. J.; Samadian, H.; Amini, S. M.
Mesoporous silica coated gold nanorods: a multifunctional
theranostic platform for radiotherapy and X-ray imaging. Journal of
Porous Materials 2021, 28, 1961−1968.
(348) Yang, Z.; Yang, H.; Shang, L.; Zhang, T. Ordered PtFeIr
Intermetallic Nanowires Prepared through a Silica-Protection Strategy
for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction. Angew. Chem. 2022, 134,
No. e202113278.
(349) Cole, L. E.; Ross, R. D.; Tilley, J. M.; Vargo-Gogola, T.;
Roeder, R. K. Gold nanoparticles as contrast agents in x-ray imaging
and computed tomography. Nanomedicine (London, England) 2015,
10, 321−41.
(350) Hsu, J. C.; Nieves, L. M.; Betzer, O.; Sadan, T.; Noël, P. B.;
Popovtzer, R.; Cormode, D. P. Nanoparticle contrast agents for X-ray
imaging applications. WIREs Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2020, 12,
No. e1642.
(351) Sun, I.-C.; Eun, D.-K.; Na, J. H.; Lee, S.; Kim, I.-J.; Youn, I.-
C.; Ko, C.-Y.; Kim, H.-S.; Lim, D.; Choi, K.; Messersmith, P. B.; Park,
T. G.; Kim, S. Y.; Kwon, I. C.; Kim, K.; Ahn, C.-H. Heparin-coated
gold nanoparticles for liver-specific CT imaging. Chem.Eur. J. 2009,
15, 13341−13347.
(352) Cormode, D. P.; Roessl, E.; Thran, A.; Skajaa, T.; Gordon, R.
E.; Schlomka, J.-P.; Fuster, V.; Fisher, E. A.; Mulder, W. J. M.; Proksa,
R.; Fayad, Z. A. Atherosclerotic plaque composition: analysis with
multicolor CT and targeted gold nanoparticles. Radiology 2010, 256,
774−782.
(353) Eck, W.; Nicholson, A. I.; Zentgraf, H.; Semmler, W.; Bartling,
S. n. Anti-CD4-targeted gold nanoparticles induce specific contrast
enhancement of peripheral lymph nodes in X-ray computed
tomography of live mice. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 2318−2322.
(354) Robinson, P. K. Enzymes: principles and biotechnological
applications. Essays in Biochemistry 2015, 59, 1−41.
(355) Komoda, T.; Matsunaga, T., Chapter 3: Constituents of the
Human Body. In Biochemistry for Medical Professionals; Komoda, T.,
Matsunaga, T., Eds.; Academic Press: Boston, MA, 2015; pp 7−24.
(356) Singh, R.; Kumar, M.; Mittal, A.; Mehta, P. K. Microbial
enzymes: industrial progress in 21st century. 3 Biotech 2016, 6, 174.
(357) Jegannathan, K. R.; Nielsen, P. H. Environmental assessment
of enzyme use in industrial production - a literature review. Journal of
Cleaner Production 2013, 42, 228−240.
(358) Chen, Y.; Ma, S. Biomimetic catalysis of metal-organic
frameworks. Dalton Transactions 2016, 45, 9744−9753.
(359) Wang, X.-N.; Zhao, Y.; Li, J.-L.; Pang, J.-D.; Wang, Q.; Li, B.;
Zhou, H.-C. Biomimetic catalysts of iron-based metal-organic
frameworks with high peroxidase-mimicking activity for colorimetric
biosensing. Dalton Transactions 2021, 50, 3854−3861.
(360) Zhu, Y.; Chakrabarti, A.; Hosmane, N. S. Applications of
Nanocatalysis in Boron Chemistry. In Boron; Springer: Berlin,
Germany, 2015; pp 199−217.
(361) Zhou, W.; Lee, J. Y. Particle size effects in Pd-catalyzed
electrooxidation of formic acid. J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 3789−
3793.
(362) Ye, K.; Cao, A.; Shao, J.; Wang, G.; Si, R.; Ta, N.; Xiao, J.;
Wang, G. Synergy effects on Sn-Cu alloy catalyst for efficient CO2
electroreduction to formate with high mass activity. Science Bulletin
2020, 65, 711−719.
(363) Li, M.; Xia, Z.; Luo, M.; He, L.; Tao, L.; Yang, W.; Yu, Y.;
Guo, S. Structural Regulation of Pd-Based Nanoalloys for Advanced
Electrocatalysis. Small Science 2021, 1, 2100061.
(364) Narayanan, R.; El-Sayed, M. A. Effect of nanocatalysis in
colloidal solution on the tetrahedral and cubic nanoparticle shape:
electron-transfer reaction catalyzed by platinum nanoparticles. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2004, 108, 5726−5733.
(365) Mahmoud, M. A.; O’Neil, D.; El-Sayed, M. A. Hollow and
solid metallic nanoparticles in sensing and in nanocatalysis. Chem.
Mater. 2014, 26, 44−58.
(366) Mahmoud, M. A.; Narayanan, R.; El-Sayed, M. A. Enhancing
colloidal metallic nanocatalysis: sharp edges and corners for solid
nanoparticles and cage effect for hollow ones. Accounts of chemical
research 2013, 46, 1795−1805.
(367) Fihri, A.; Bouhrara, M.; Nekoueishahraki, B.; Basset, J.-M.;
Polshettiwar, V. Nanocatalysts for Suzuki cross-coupling reactions.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 5181−5203.
(368) Otera, J.; Nishikido, J. Esteriﬁcation: Methods, Reactions, and
Applications; Wiley: New York, 2010; p 386.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7589

(369) Stark, W. J.; Stoessel, P. R.; Wohlleben, W.; Hafner, A.
Industrial applications of nanoparticles. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44,
5793−5805.
(370) Jia, C.-J.; Schüth, F. Colloidal metal nanoparticles as a
component of designed catalyst. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13,
2457−2487.
(371) Mohamed, R.; McKinney, D.; Sigmund, W. Enhanced
nanocatalysts. Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports 2012,
73, 1−13.
(372) Copéret, C.; Chabanas, M.; Petroff Saint-Arroman, R.; Basset,
J. M. Homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis: bridging the gap
through surface organometallic chemistry. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2003, 42, 156−181.
(373) Yang, J.; Zhou, W.; Cheng, C. H.; Lee, J. Y.; Liu, Z. Pt-
decorated PdFe nanoparticles as methanol-tolerant oxygen reduction
electrocatalyst. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2010, 2, 119−126.
(374) Corma, A. Heterogeneous catalysis: understanding for
designing, and designing for applications. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2016, 55, 6112−6113.
(375) Ndolomingo, M. J.; Bingwa, N.; Meijboom, R. Review of
supported metal nanoparticles: synthesis methodologies, advantages
and application as catalysts. J. Mater. Sci. 2020, 55, 6195−6241.
(376) Jia, L.; Zhang, Q.; Li, Q.; Song, H. The biosynthesis of
palladium nanoparticles by antioxidants in Gardenia jasminoides Ellis:
long lifetime nanocatalysts for p-nitrotoluene hydrogenation. Nano-
technology 2009, 20, 385601.
(377) Campelo, J. M.; Luna, D.; Luque, R.; Marinas, J. M.; Romero,
A. A. Sustainable preparation of supported metal nanoparticles and
their applications in catalysis. ChemSusChem: Chemistry & Sustain-
ability Energy & Materials 2009, 2, 18−45.
(378) Zhu, Q.-L.; Xu, Q. Metal-organic framework composites.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 5468−5512.
(379) Zhu, Q.-L.; Xu, Q. Immobilization of ultrafine metal
nanoparticles to high-surface-area materials and their catalytic
applications. Chem. 2016, 1, 220−245.
(380) Tian, H.; Li, X.; Zeng, L.; Gong, J. Recent advances on the
design of group VIII base-metal catalysts with encapsulated structures.
ACS Catal. 2015, 5, 4959−4977.
(381) Deng, J.; Deng, D.; Bao, X. Robust catalysis on 2D materials
encapsulating metals: concept, application, and perspective. Adv.
Mater. 2017, 29, 1606967.
(382) Kosinov, N.; Liu, C.; Hensen, E. J.; Pidko, E. A. Engineering
of transition metal catalysts confined in zeolites. Chem. Mater. 2018,
30, 3177−3198.
(383) Qin, J.-S.; Yuan, S.; Lollar, C.; Pang, J.; Alsalme, A.; Zhou, H.-
C. Stable metal-organic frameworks as a host platform for catalysis
and biomimetics. Chem. Commun. 2018, 54, 4231−4249.
(384) Li, W.; Liu, J.; Zhao, D. Mesoporous materials for energy
conversion and storage devices. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1, 16023.
(385) Trewyn, B. G.; Nieweg, J. A.; Zhao, Y.; Lin, V. S.-Y.
Biocompatible mesoporous silica nanoparticles with different
morphologies for animal cell membrane penetration. Chemical
Engineering Journal 2008, 137, 23−29.
(386) Zeng, J.; Chen, J.; Lee, J. Y. Enhanced Pt utilization in
electrocatalysts by covering of colloidal silica nanoparticles. J. Power
Sources 2008, 184, 344−347.
(387) Zeng, J.; Lee, J.; Chen, J.; Shen, P.; Song, S. Increased Metal
Utilization in Carbon-Supported Pt Catalysts by Adsorption of
Preformed Pt Nanoparticles on Colloidal Silica. Fuel cells 2007, 7,
285−290.
(388) Li, M.; Lv, J.; Wang, S.; Wang, J.; Lin, Y. Expanded
mesoporous silica-encapsulated ultrasmall Pt nanoclusters as artificial
enzymes for tracking hydrogen peroxide secretion from live cells.
Analytica chimica acta 2020, 1104, 180−187.
(389) Weitkamp, J. Zeolites and catalysis. Solid state ionics 2000,
131, 175−188.
(390) Thangudu, S.; Wu, C.-H.; Lee, C.-H.; Hwang, K. C. Enhanced
Photofixation of Dinitrogen to Ammonia over a Biomimetic Metal
(Fe, Mo)-Doped Mesoporous MCM-41 Zeolite Catalyst under
Ambient Conditions. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2021, 9, 8748−
8758.
(391) Chen, L.; Xu, Q. Metal-organic framework composites for
catalysis. Matter 2019, 1, 57−89.
(392) Zhang, X.; Fan, Y.; You, E.; Li, Z.; Dong, Y.; Chen, L.; Yang,
Y.; Xie, Z.; Kuang, Q.; Zheng, L. MOF encapsulated sub-nm Pd skin/
Au nanoparticles as antenna-reactor plasmonic catalyst for light driven
CO2 hydrogenation. Nano Energy 2021, 84, 105950.
(393) Pérez-Mayoral, E.; Calvino-Casilda, V.; Soriano, E. Metal-
supported carbon-based materials: opportunities and challenges in the
synthesis of valuable products. Catalysis Science & Technology 2016, 6,
1265−1291.
(394) Hone, J.; Dresselhaus, M.; Dresselhaus, G. Carbon Nanotubes,
Synthesis, Structure, Properties and Applications; Springer: Berlin,
Germany, 2001; p 448.
(395) Zeng, J.; Su, F.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhou, W.; Zhao, X. Methanol
oxidation activities of Pt nanoparticles supported on microporous
carbon with and without a graphitic shell. Carbon 2006, 44, 1713−
1717.
(396) Su, F.; Zhao, X.; Wang, Y.; Zeng, J.; Zhou, Z.; Lee, J. Y.
Synthesis of graphitic ordered macroporous carbon with a three-
dimensional interconnected pore structure for electrochemical
applications. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109, 20200−20206.
(397) Su, F.; Zeng, J.; Yu, Y.; Lv, L.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhao, X. Template
synthesis of microporous carbon for direct methanol fuel cell
application. Carbon 2005, 43, 2366−2373.
(398) Su, F.; Zeng, J.; Bao, X.; Yu, Y.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhao, X.
Preparation and characterization of highly ordered graphitic
mesoporous carbon as a Pt catalyst support for direct methanol fuel
cells. Chemistry of materials 2005, 17, 3960−3967.
(399) Zhu, Y.; Zhang, T.; An, T.; Zong, Y.; Lee, J. Y. Unraveling the
electrocatalytically active sites and stability of Co & Co oxides on
nanocarbon for oxygen evolution reaction in acid solution. Journal of
Energy Chemistry 2020, 49, 8−13.
(400) Yang, J.; Cheng, C.; Zhou, W.; Lee, J.; Liu, Z. Methanol-
Tolerant Heterogeneous PdCo@ PdPt/C Electrocatalyst for the
Oxygen Reduction Reaction. Fuel Cells 2010, 10, 907−913.
(401) Yang, S.; Zhang, T.; Li, G.; Yang, L.; Lee, J. Y. Facile synthesis
of N/M/O (M= Fe, Co, Ni) doped carbons for oxygen evolution
catalysis in acid solution. Energy Storage Materials 2017, 6, 140−148.
(402) Yang, S.; Zhan, Y.; Li, J.; Lee, J. Y. N-Co-O Triply Doped
Highly Crystalline Porous Carbon: An Acid-Proof Nonprecious Metal
Oxygen Evolution Catalyst. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8,
3535−3542.
(403) Dawody, J.; Skoglundh, M.; Fridell, E. The effect of metal
oxide additives (WO3, MoO3, V2O5, Ga2O3) on the oxidation of
NO and SO2 over Pt/Al2O3 and Pt/BaO/Al2O3 catalysts. J. Mol.
Catal. A: Chem. 2004, 209, 215−225.
(404) Zeng, J.; Yang, J.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhou, W. Preparation of carbon-
supported core- shell Au- Pt nanoparticles for methanol oxidation
reaction: The promotional effect of the Au Core. J. Phys. Chem. B
2006, 110, 24606−24611.
(405) Hong, Y.; Jing, X.; Huang, J.; Sun, D.; Odoom-Wubah, T.;
Yang, F.; Du, M.; Li, Q. Biosynthesized bimetallic Au-Pd nano-
particles supported on TiO2 for solvent-free oxidation of benzyl
alcohol. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2014, 2, 1752−1759.
(406) Zhan, G.; Hong, Y.; Mbah, V. T.; Huang, J.; Ibrahim, A.-R.;
Du, M.; Li, Q. Bimetallic Au-Pd/MgO as efficient catalysts for aerobic
oxidation of benzyl alcohol: a green bio-reducing preparation method.
Applied Catalysis A: General 2012, 439, 179−186.
(407) Cai, G.; Luo, W.; Xiao, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Zhong, F.; Zhan, Y.;
Jiang, L. Synthesis of a highly stable Pd@ CeO2 catalyst for methane
combustion with the synergistic effect of urea and citric acid. ACS
omega 2018, 3, 16769−16776.
(408) Davis, H. J.; Ward, T. R. Artificial metalloenzymes: challenges
and opportunities. ACS central science 2019, 5, 1120−1136.
(409) Meng, X.; Zare, I.; Yan, X.; Fan, K. Protein-protected metal
nanoclusters: An emerging ultra-small nanozyme. WIREs Nanomed.
Nanobiotechnol. 2020, 12, No. e1602.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7590

(410) Zare, I.; Chevrier, D. M.; Cifuentes-Rius, A.; Moradi, N.;
Xianyu, Y.; Ghosh, S.; Trapiella-Alfonso, L.; Tian, Y.; Shourangiz-
Haghighi, A.; Mukherjee, S.; Fan, K.; Hamblin, M. R. Protein-
protected metal nanoclusters as diagnostic and therapeutic platforms
for biomedical applications. Mater. Today 2021, DOI: 10.1016/
j.mattod.2020.10.027.
(411) Wiester, M. J.; Ulmann, P. A.; Mirkin, C. A. Enzyme mimics
based upon supramolecular coordination chemistry. Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 114−137.
(412) Dong, Z.; Wang, Y.; Yin, Y.; Liu, J. Supramolecular enzyme
mimics by self-assembly. Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 2011, 16,
451−458.
(413) Deuss, P. J.; den Heeten, R.; Laan, W.; Kamer, P. C.
Bioinspired catalyst design and artificial metalloenzymes. Chem.Eur.
J. 2011, 17, 4680−4698.
(414) Hooley, R. J.; Rebek Jr, J. Chemistry and catalysis in
functional cavitands. Chemistry & biology 2009, 16, 255−264.
(415) Schühle, D. T.; Peters, J. A.; Schatz, J. Metal binding
calixarenes with potential biomimetic and biomedical applications.
Coord. Chem. Rev. 2011, 255, 2727−2745.
(416) Nicoli, F.; Baroncini, M.; Silvi, S.; Groppi, J.; Credi, A. Direct
synthetic routes to functionalised crown ethers. Organic Chemistry
Frontiers 2021, 8, 5531−5549.
(417) Payne, D. T.; Labuta, J.; Futera, Z.; Březina, V.; Hanykova, L.;
Chahal, M. K.; Hill, J. P. Molecular Rotor based on an Oxidized
Resorcinarene. Organic Chemistry Frontiers 2021, 9, 39−50.
(418) Xu, W.; Li, X.; Wang, L.; Li, S.; Chu, S.; Wang, J.; Li, Y.; Hou,
J.; Luo, Q.; Liu, J. Design of cyclodextrin-based functional systems for
biomedical applications. Front. Chem. 2021, 9, 22.
(419) Bai, C. C.; Tian, B. R.; Zhao, T.; Huang, Q.; Wang, Z. Z.
Cyclodextrin-catalyzed organic synthesis: Reactions, mechanisms, and
applications. Molecules 2017, 22, 1475.
(420) Del Valle, E. M. Cyclodextrins and their uses: a review. Process
biochemistry 2004, 39 (9), 1033−1046.
(421) Molnár, Á. Synthetic Application of Cyclodextrins in
Combination with Metal ions, Complexes, and Metal Particles.
ChemCatChem. 2021, 13, 1424−1474.
(422) Zhao, Y.; Huang, Y.; Zhu, H.; Zhu, Q.; Xia, Y. Three-in-one:
sensing, self-assembly, and cascade catalysis of cyclodextrin modified
gold nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 16645−16654.
(423) Breiner, B.; Clegg, J. K.; Nitschke, J. R. Reactivity modulation
in container molecules. Chemical Science 2011, 2, 51−56.
(424) Amouri, H.; Desmarets, C.; Moussa, J. Confined nanospaces
in metallocages: guest molecules, weakly encapsulated anions, and
catalyst sequestration. Chem. Rev. 2012, 112, 2015−2041.
(425) Tanifuji, K.; Lee, C. C.; Ohki, Y.; Tatsumi, K.; Hu, Y.; Ribbe,
M. W. Combining a nitrogenase scaffold and a synthetic compound
into an artificial enzyme. Angew. Chem. 2015, 127, 14228−14231.
(426) Schreiber, C. L.; Smith, B. D. Molecular conjugation using
non-covalent click chemistry. Nature Reviews Chemistry 2019, 3, 393−
400.
(427) Gao, L.; Zhang, Y.; Zhao, L.; Niu, W.; Tang, Y.; Gao, F.; Cai,
P.; Yuan, Q.; Wang, X.; Jiang, H.; Gao, X. An artificial metalloenzyme
for catalytic cancer-specific DNA cleavage and operando imaging. Sci.
Adv. 2020, 6, No. eabb1421.
(428) Liu, Z.; Ling, X. Y.; Su, X.; Lee, J. Y. Carbon-supported Pt and
PtRu nanoparticles as catalysts for a direct methanol fuel cell. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2004, 108, 8234−8240.
(429) Liu, Z.; Gan, L. M.; Hong, L.; Chen, W.; Lee, J. Y. Carbon-
supported Pt nanoparticles as catalysts for proton exchange
membrane fuel cells. J. Power Sources 2005, 139, 73−78.
(430) Chen, W. X.; Lee, J. Y.; Liu, Z. Microwave-assisted synthesis
of carbon supported Pt nanoparticles for fuel cell applications. Chem.
Commun. 2002, 34, 2588−2589.
(431) Zeng, J.; Lee, J. Y. Effects of preparation conditions on
performance of carbon-supported nanosize Pt-Co catalysts for
methanol electro-oxidation under acidic conditions. J. Power Sources
2005, 140, 268−273.
(432) Chen, W.-X.; Lee, J. Y.; Liu, Z. Preparation of Pt and PtRu
nanoparticles supported on carbon nanotubes by microwave-assisted
heating polyol process. Mater. Lett. 2004, 58, 3166−3169.
(433) Yang, J.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhang, Q.; Zhou, W.; Liu, Z. Carbon-
supported pseudo-core-shell Pd-Pt nanoparticles for ORR with and
without methanol. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2008, 155, B776.
(434) Liu, Z.; Ling, X. Y.; Guo, B.; Hong, L.; Lee, J. Y. Pt and PtRu
nanoparticles deposited on single-wall carbon nanotubes for methanol
electro-oxidation. J. Power Sources 2007, 167, 272−280.
(435) Zeng, J.; Lee, J. Y. Ruthenium-free, carbon-supported cobalt
and tungsten containing binary & ternary Pt catalysts for the anodes
of direct methanol fuel cells. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2007, 32, 4389−
4396.
(436) Zeng, J.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhou, W. A more active Pt/carbon DMFC
catalyst by simple reversal of the mixing sequence in preparation. J.
Power Sources 2006, 159, 509−513.
(437) Deivaraj, T.; Lee, J. Y. Preparation of carbon-supported PtNi
nanoparticles via the single source molecular precursor approach. J.
Electrochem. Soc. 2004, 151, A1832.
(438) Liu, B.; Chia, Z.-W.; Lee, Z.-Y.; Cheng, C.-H.; Lee, J.-Y.; Liu,
Z.-L. The importance of water in the polyol synthesis of carbon
supported platinum-tin oxide catalysts for ethanol electrooxidation. J.
Power Sources 2012, 206, 97−102.
(439) Liu, B.; Chia, Z.-W.; Cheng, C.-H.; Lee, J.-Y. Promotional
effects of Ir addition in carbon-supported Pt5Rh electrocatalysts for
the electrooxidation of ethanol at room temperature. Energy Fuels
2011, 25, 3135−3141.
(440) Chen, W.-X.; Lee, J.-Y.; Liu, Z.-L. Carbon supported Pt
nanoparticles prepared by microwave heating and their electro-
catalytic activities for methanol oxidation. Acta Chimica Sinica 2004,
62, 42−46.
(441) Chen, W.-X.; Yu, G.-Y.; Zhao, J.; Lee, J.-Y.; Liu, Z.-L. PtRu/
carbon catalyst: Microwave polyol synthesis and electrocatalytic
activity for methanol electrooxidation. Chin. J. Inorg. Chem. 2004, 20,
1467−1470.
(442) Chen, W.-X.; Zhao, J.; Lee, J.-Y.; Liu, Z.-L. Rapid synthesis of
XC-72 and carbon nanotubes supported PtRu nanoparticles by
microwave irradiation for methanol electrooxidation application. Acta
Chimica Sinica 2004, 62, 1590−1594.
(443) Liu, Z.; Lee, J. Y.; Han, M.; Chen, W.; Gan, L. M. Synthesis
and characterization of PtRu/C catalysts from microemulsions and
emulsions. J. Mater. Chem. 2002, 12, 2453−2458.
(444) Liu, Z.; Ling, X. Y.; Su, X.; Lee, J. Y.; Gan, L. M. Preparation
and characterization of Pt/C and PtRu/C electrocatalysts for direct
ethanol fuel cells. J. Power Sources 2005, 149, 1−7.
(445) Trinh, Q. T.; Yang, J.; Lee, J. Y.; Saeys, M. Computational and
experimental study of the Volcano behavior of the oxygen reduction
activity of PdM@ PdPt/C (M= Pt, Ni, Co, Fe, and Cr) core-shell
electrocatalysts. J. Catal. 2012, 291, 26−35.
(446) Zeng, J.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhou, W. Activities of Pt/C catalysts
prepared by low temperature chemical reduction methods. Applied
Catalysis A: General 2006, 308, 99−104.
(447) Zeng, J.; Liao, S.; Lee, J. Y.; Liang, Z. Oxygen reduction
reaction operated on magnetically-modified PtFe/C electrocatalyst.
International journal of hydrogen energy 2010, 35, 942−948.
(448) Lee, J.; Yun, Y.; Park, S.; Kim, S.; Yi, S.; Kim, W. Synthesis of
nano-sized Pt/C via zeolite-templating method and its application to
the cathode catalyst in PEMFC. Microporous and mesoporous materials
2010, 134, 1−7.
(449) Zeng, J.; Zhao, Z.; Lee, J. Y.; Shen, P. K.; Song, S. Do
magnetically modified PtFe/C catalysts perform better in methanol
electrooxidation? Electrochim. Acta 2007, 52, 3673−3679.
(450) Zeng, J.; Lee, J. Y. More active PtRu/C catalyst for methanol
electrooxidation by reversal of mixing sequence in catalyst
preparation. Materials chemistry and physics 2007, 104, 336−341.
(451) Ji, J.; Woo, J.; Chung, Y.; Joo, S. H.; Kwon, Y. Dual catalytic
functions of biomimetic, atomically dispersed iron-nitrogen doped
carbon catalysts for efficient enzymatic biofuel cells. Chemical
Engineering Journal 2020, 381, 122679.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7591

(452) Chen, W.; Zhao, J.; Lee, J. Y.; Liu, Z. Microwave heated polyol
synthesis of carbon nanotubes supported Pt nanoparticles for
methanol electrooxidation. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2005, 91, 124−129.
(453) Liu, Z.; Lee, J. Y.; Chen, W.; Han, M.; Gan, L. M. Physical and
electrochemical characterizations of microwave-assisted polyol prep-
aration of carbon-supported PtRu nanoparticles. Langmuir 2004, 20,
181−187.
(454) Liu, Z.; Lin, X.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhang, W.; Han, M.; Gan, L. M.
Preparation and characterization of platinum-based electrocatalysts on
multiwalled carbon nanotubes for proton exchange membrane fuel
cells. Langmuir 2002, 18, 4054−4060.
(455) Zeng, J.; Su, F.; Han, Y.-F.; Tian, Z.; Poh, C. K.; Liu, Z.; Lin,
J.; Lee, J. Y.; Zhao, X. Pt nanoparticles supported on sandwiched Ru/
carbon nanocomposite as a bimetallic catalyst for methanol
electrooxidation. J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 15908−15914.
(456) Lee, J. Y.; Zhang, R.; Liu, Z. Dispersion of Sn and SnO on
carbon anodes. J. Power Sources 2000, 90, 70−75.
(457) Schwank, J.; Lee, J.; Goodwin Jr, J. Structure sensitivity of
reactions between cyclopropane and hydrogen on supported ruthenium
catalysts 1987, 108, 495−500.
(458) Wolska, J.; Walkowiak, A.; Sobczak, I.; Wolski, L.; Ziolek, M.
Gold-containing Beta zeolite in base-free glucose oxidation-the role of
Au deposition procedure and zeolite dopants. Catal. Today 2021, 382,
48−60.
(459) Lee, J.; Schwank, J. Infrared spectroscopic study of NO
reduction by H2 on supported gold catalysts. J. Catal. 1986, 102,
207−215.
(460) Cao, S.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, T.; Lee, J. Y. Fluoride-assisted
synthesis of plasmonic colloidal Ta-doped TiO2 nanocrystals for near-
infrared and visible-light selective electrochromic modulation. Chem.
Mater. 2018, 30, 4838−4846.
(461) Villarino, L.; Splan, K. E.; Reddem, E.; Alonso-Cotchico, L.;
Gutiérrez de Souza, C.; Lledós, A.; Maréchal, J. D.; Thunnissen, A. M.
W.; Roelfes, G. An artificial heme enzyme for cyclopropanation
reactions. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 7785−7789.
(462) Thordarson, P.; Bijsterveld, E. J.; Rowan, A. E.; Nolte, R. J.
Epoxidation of polybutadiene by a topologically linked catalyst.
Nature 2003, 424, 915−918.
(463) Zhao, Y.; Pohl, O.; Bhatt, A. I.; Collis, G. E.; Mahon, P. J.;
Rüther, T.; Hollenkamp, A. F. A Review on Battery Market Trends,
Second-Life Reuse, and Recycling. Sustainable Chemistry 2021, 2,
167−205.
(464) Tripathi, S. K.; Kumar, R.; Shukla, S. K.; Qidwai, A.; Dikshit,
A., Exploring application of nanoparticles in production of biodiesel.
In Green Nanotechnology for Biofuel Production; Springer: Berlin, 2018;
pp 141−153.
(465) Kumar, Y.; Yogeshwar, P.; Bajpai, S.; Jaiswal, P.; Yadav, S.;
Pathak, D. P.; Sonker, M.; Tiwary, S. K. Nanomaterials: stimulants for
biofuels and renewables, yield and energy optimization. Materials
Advances 2021, 2, 5318−5343.
(466) Xie, X.; Shang, L.; Shi, R.; Waterhouse, G. I.; Zhao, J.; Zhang,
T. Tubular assemblies of N-doped carbon nanotubes loaded with
NiFe alloy nanoparticles as efficient bifunctional catalysts for
rechargeable zinc-air batteries. Nanoscale 2020, 12, 13129−13136.
(467) Yasmin, A.; Shehzad, M. A.; Ding, X.; Deng, M.; Liao, J.; Hu,
Q.; He, X.; Wang, S.; Chen, C. Biomimetic mitochondrial
nanostructures boost the battery performance. Sustainable Energy &
Fuels 2019, 3, 2015−2023.
(468) Poudyal, R. S.; Tiwari, I.; Koirala, A. R.; Masukawa, H.; Inoue,
K.; Tomo, T.; Najafpour, M. M.; Allakhverdiev, S. I.; Veziroğlu, T. N.
10 - Hydrogen production using photobiological methods. In
Compendium of Hydrogen Energy; Subramani, V., Basile, A.,
Veziroğlu, T. N., Eds.; Woodhead Publishing: Oxford, U.K., 2015;
pp 289−317.
(469) Sokol, K. P.; Robinson, W. E.; Warnan, J.; Kornienko, N.;
Nowaczyk, M. M.; Ruff, A.; Zhang, J. Z.; Reisner, E. Bias-free
photoelectrochemical water splitting with photosystem II on a dye-
sensitized photoanode wired to hydrogenase. Nature Energy 2018, 3,
944−951.
(470) Lucht, K. P.; Mendoza-Cortes, J. L. Birnessite: A Layered
Manganese Oxide To Capture Sunlight for Water-Splitting Catalysis.
J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 22838−22846.
(471) Zhang, H.; Liu, H.; Tian, Z.; Lu, D.; Yu, Y.; Cestellos-Blanco,
S.; Sakimoto, K. K.; Yang, P. Bacteria photosensitized by intracellular
gold nanoclusters for solar fuel production. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018,
13, 900−905.
(472) Lah, N. A.; Zubir, M. N.; Mahendran, A.; Samykano, L.,
Engineered nanomaterial in electronics and electrical industries. In
Handbook of Nanomaterials for Industrial Applications; Elsevier:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2018; pp 324−364.
(473) Subramanian, V.; Lee, T. Nanotechnology-based flexible
electronics. Nanotechnology 2012, 23, 340201.
(474) Cui, Z. Printing practice for the fabrication of flexible and
stretchable electronics. Science China Technological Sciences 2019, 62,
224−232.
(475) Kamyshny, A.; Magdassi, S. Conductive nanomaterials for
printed electronics. Small 2014, 10, 3515−3535.
(476) Yin, Z.; Huang, Y.; Bu, N.; Wang, X.; Xiong, Y. Inkjet printing
for flexible electronics: Materials, processes and equipments. Chin. Sci.
Bull. 2010, 55, 3383−3407.
(477) Beedasy, V.; Smith, P. J. Printed electronics as prepared by
inkjet printing. Materials 2020, 13, 704.
(478) Tan, H. W.; An, J.; Chua, C. K.; Tran, T. Metallic nanoparticle
inks for 3D printing of electronics. Advanced Electronic Materials 2019,
5, 1800831.
(479) Curtis, C.; Schulz, D.; Miedaner, A.; Alleman, J.; Rivkin, T.;
Perkin, J.; Ginley, D. Spray and inkjet printing of hybrid nanoparticle-
metal-organic inks for Ag and Cu metallizations. MRS Online Proc.
Lib. 2001, 676, 86.
(480) Reiser, B.; González-García, L.; Kanelidis, I.; Maurer, J.; Kraus,
T. Gold nanorods with conjugated polymer ligands: sintering-free
conductive inks for printed electronics. Chemical science 2016, 7,
4190−4196.
(481) Magdassi, S.; Grouchko, M.; Toker, D.; Kamyshny, A.;
Balberg, I.; Millo, O. Ring stain effect at room temperature in silver
nanoparticles yields high electrical conductivity. Langmuir 2005, 21,
10264−10267.
(482) Li, W.; Cen, Q.; Li, W.; Zhao, Z.; Yang, W.; Li, Y.; Chen, M.;
Yang, G.; Yang, J. A green method for synthesizing novel
nanoparticles and their application in flexible conductive patterns.
Journal of Materiomics 2020, 6, 300−307.
(483) Joshi, S.; Cook, E.; Mannoor, M. S. Bacterial Nanobionics via
3D Printing. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 7448−7456.
(484) Lammi, M.; Pantzar, M. The data economy: How
technological change has altered the role of the citizen-consumer.
Technology in Society 2019, 59, 101157.
(485) Koh, H.; Magee, C. L. A functional approach for studying
technological progress: Application to information technology.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 2006, 73, 1061−1083.
(486) Blanchette, J. F. A material history of bits. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology 2011, 62,
1042−1057.
(487) Lim, C. K.; Nirantar, S.; Yew, W. S.; Poh, C. L. Novel
modalities in DNA data storage. Trends Biotechnol. 2021, 39, 990−
1003.
(488) Gu, M.; Zhang, Q.; Lamon, S. Nanomaterials for optical data
storage. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1, 16070.
(489) Lv, Z.; Zhou, Y.; Han, S.-T.; Roy, V. From biomaterial-based
data storage to bio-inspired artificial synapse. Mater. Today 2018, 21,
537−552.
(490) Tseng, R. J.; Tsai, C.; Ma, L.; Ouyang, J.; Ozkan, C. S.; Yang,
Y. Digital memory device based on tobacco mosaic virus conjugated
with nanoparticles. Nature Nanotechnol. 2006, 1, 72−77.
(491) Ng, C. C. A.; Tam, W. M.; Yin, H.; Wu, Q.; So, P.-K.; Wong,
M. Y.-M.; Lau, F. C.; Yao, Z.-P. Data storage using peptide sequences.
Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 4242.
(492) De Silva, P. Y.; Ganegoda, G. U. New trends of digital data
storage in DNA. BioMed Res. Int. 2016, 2016, 8072463.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7592

(493) Lin, K. N.; Volkel, K.; Tuck, J. M.; Keung, A. J. Dynamic and
scalable DNA-based information storage. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11,
2981.
(494) Kannadasan, R.; Saleembasha, M.; ArnoldEmerson, I. Survey
on molecular cryptographic network DNA (MCND) using big data.
Procedia Computer Science 2015, 50, 3−9.
(495) Church, G. M.; Gao, Y.; Kosuri, S. Next-generation digital
information storage in DNA. Science 2012, 337, 1628−1628.
(496) Chen, W. D.; Kohll, A. X.; Nguyen, B. H.; Koch, J.; Heckel,
R.; Stark, W. J.; Ceze, L.; Strauss, K.; Grass, R. N. Combining Data
Longevity with High Storage CapacityLayer-by-Layer DNA
Encapsulated in Magnetic Nanoparticles. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019,
29, 1901672.
(497) Pareek, V.; Gupta, R.; Panwar, J. Do physico-chemical
properties of silver nanoparticles decide their interaction with
biological media and bactericidal action? A review. Materials Science
and Engineering: C 2018, 90, 739−749.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
pubs.acs.org/IECR
Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c00285
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61, 7547−7593
7593
 Recommended by ACS
Synthesis and Design of a Synthetic-Living Material
Composed of Chitosan, Calendula officinalis Hydroalcoholic
Extract, and Yeast with Applications as a Biocatalyst
Isabel O. Caamal-Herrera, José R. Morones-Ramírez, et al.
APRIL 01, 2023
ACS OMEGA
READ 
Collision Electrochemical Synthesis of Metal Nanoparticles
Using Electrons as Green Reducing Agent
Xuguang Sun, Jiawen Hu, et al.
DECEMBER 14, 2022
ACS APPLIED MATERIALS & INTERFACES
READ 
Metal Nanoparticles Incorporated within Graphene-Enzyme
Preparations for Synergistic Multiactive Catalysts
Noelia Losada-Garcia, Jose M. Palomo, et al.
DECEMBER 28, 2022
ACS APPLIED NANO MATERIALS
READ 
Nanozymes Inspired by Natural Enzymes
Ruofei Zhang, Kelong Fan, et al.
JUNE 24, 2021
ACCOUNTS OF MATERIALS RESEARCH
READ 
Get More Suggestions >