Living Cell-Metal Cyborg Microalgae for Treating MRSA Infection
Tao Liu,∇Guangyu Chu,*,∇Xiao Yang, Tairan Deng, Zhilong Pi, Zhichao Tan, Yao Lu,*
and Xiangling Ye*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Metal-ion-based antibacterial agents are promising against antibiotic-
resistant bacteria like MRSA, but their reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent
bactericidal activity is greatly hampered by the infection-related hypoxic micro-
environments. Here, we green-synthesized silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) on the
surface of biocompatible microalgae Chlorella vulgaris (CV) to develop a live cell-
metal hybrid system. These living cyborg AgNP@CV microalgae not only provide
sustained oxygen generation to alleviate hypoxia under illumination due to their
photosynthetic capability, but also synergistically enhance Ag ion-mediated ROS
production to kill MRSA. Moreover, AgNP@CV promotes angiogenesis of
endothelial cells via the VEGF−VEGFR2-PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, facilitating
tissue regeneration. In a clinically relevant MRSA-infected wound model, a single
dose of AgNP@CV achieves efficient bacterial elimination and wound healing,
significantly surpassing Ag-containing hydrogel dressing. In addition, this approach is
universal and cost-effective for producing many other metal-NP@CV systems with strong antibacterial ability, such as CuNP@CV
and ZnNP@CV. These cyborg microalgae provide a sustainable and translatable strategy for treating resistant bacterial infections
through self-oxygenation and synergistic metal ion therapy.
KEYWORDS: Chlorella vulgaris, self-oxygenation, green synthesis, metal ion therapy, bacterial infection
■INTRODUCTION
Bacterial infections cause 13.6% of global morbidity and
mortality worldwide every year, posing a persistent and serious
threat to global public health.1 Antibiotic abuse further
exacerbates this situation and accelerates the emergence of
antibiotic-resistant superbugs.2 Metal-ion-based antimicrobial
strategies have attracted growing attention for their broad-
spectrum antibacterial activity and their potential to bypass
conventional mechanisms of antibiotic resistance.3,4 For
instance, silver (Ag)-based formulations (e.g., Ag-containing
dressings) have been clinically applied in the management of
infected wounds.5 However, their therapeutic efficacy stands at
77.6−86.4%, falling short of initial expectations.6 A critical
challenge is the complex microenvironment of bacterial
infections characterized by localized hypoxia.7
Hypoxia, fostering bacterial persistence and biofilm for-
mation, plays a pivotal role in treatment failure.8 Oxygen
deprivation dampens immune cell function, such as the oxidative
burst activity of neutrophils, thereby promoting bacterial
adaptive responses and enhancing their virulence and
resistance.9 Moreover, hypoxia can hinder the antibacterial
mechanisms of metal-based antibacterial materials, particularly
those relying on reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation that
require adequate oxygen as both a substrate and an amplifier to
achieve maximal bactericidal effects.10 Thus, oxygen supple-
mentation (e.g., Hyperbaric oxygen therapy) combined with
antibacterial agents has been explored in combating persistent
infections.11 However, the clinical outcome is still below
expectations due to the lack of a constant oxygen supply.12
The existing oxygen-generating materials often exhibit burst
oxygen emission followed by rapid exhaustion.13 Safety
concerns regarding the toxicity of oxygen-producing com-
pounds (e.g., peroxides) also limit their clinical application.14 In
addition, integrating antibacterial components into oxygen-
supplying systems makes construction complicated, hindering
large-scale preparation and clinical translation.15 Recent
advances have indeed explored the use of photosynthetic
biomaterials, such as algae-loaded microneedles for hypoxia
modulation and algae-based gels for diabetic wound repair.16,17
These pioneering systems effectively harness photosynthesis to
generate oxygen and ameliorate the hypoxic wound micro-
environment. However, their reliance on the immune system of
the host for bacterial clearance may be insufficient for managing
infected wounds. Thus, a facile strategy that synergistically
combines prolonged oxygen generation and potent antibacterial
Received:
September 21, 2025
Revised:
March 28, 2026
Accepted:
March 30, 2026
Published: April 8, 2026
Article
www.acsnano.org
© 2026 American Chemical Society
11585
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 25, 2026 at 02:27:35 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

activity within a simple and biocompatible platform is highly
demanded.
Green synthesis offers such an opportunity. Microalgae, the
most ubiquitous photosynthetic microorganisms in ecosystems,
represent a promising yet underexplored resource for bio-
medical applications owing to their rapid growth, low-cost
cultivation, and capacity to release bioactive metabolites with
antioxidant and immunomodulatory properties.18,19 Among
them, Chlorella vulgaris (CV) stands out due to its robust
photosynthetic efficiency, enabling continuous oxygen produc-
tion under illumination.20 As a bioreactor, CV can also reduce
and stabilize metal ions directly into nanoparticles (NPs) to
heavy metal ion contamination from the environment.21,22 This
biosynthesis route offers an eco-friendly, diverse, and low-cost
alternative to traditional chemical synthesis of NPs.23 Green-
synthesized NPs typically exhibit superior biocompatibility and
reduced surface chemical contamination compared with their
chemically synthesized counterparts.24 This approach enables
the construction of a versatile microalgae-based platform, which
integrates photosynthetic oxygen production and customizable
delivery of metal-based NPs. Oxygen serves as both a substrate
and an amplifier for ROS generation. Therefore, the oxygen
produced by CV photosynthesis can theoretically enhance metal
ion-induced ROS production, thereby leading to a more potent
antibacterial effect.10 However, the use of such living cell-
material hybrid systems for biomedical applications remains
largely unexplored.10
Herein, we developed a series of CV-metal NP hybrid cyborg
microalgae that exhibit strong antibacterial activity. Through a
straightforward coincubation process with metal salts, metal
particles were green-synthesized in situ on the surface of CV
(term NP@CV). Specifically, AgNP@CV was selected for
further investigation because Ag-based antibacterial materials
have already been approved and used in clinical practice. Under
hypoxic conditions and upon light exposure, AgNP@CV
continuously produced oxygen to support the generation of
intracellular ROS within bacterial cells, resulting in efficient
antibacterial performance toward Gram-positive and Gram-
negative bacteria, as well as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA). Beyond its excellent biosafety profiles, AgNP@
CV promotes pro-angiogenic activity in vascular endothelial
cells by activating the VEGF/VEGFR2/PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway, thereby facilitating cell proliferation, migration, and
tube formation. Remarkably, in vivo experiments confirmed that
AgNP@CV outperformed the conventionally synthesized
AgNP in eradicating infection and accelerating the healing of
MRSA-infected wounds (Scheme 1). Hence, this work
addresses a highly desired but unmet goal in current infection
therapyameliorating the hypoxic microenvironment and
enhancing metal-ion-mediated antibacterial activity. Our work
is also a universal, facile, cost-effective, and environmentally
friendly approach for producing antibacterial metal-based NPs,
offering a translatable strategy for infection management.
■RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Preparation and Characterization of Cyborg NP@CV
The green synthesis of silver (Ag), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn),
magnesium (Mg), gold (Au), and iron (Fe) NPs was achieved
by reacting metal salt solutions with CV under sterile conditions.
Scheme 1. Schematic Illustration of the Preparation and Application of Cyborg AgNP@CV for Treating Bacterial Infectiona
aAgNPs are biosynthesized on the surface of photosynthetic microalgae Chlorella vulgaris to develop AgNP@CV. Under illumination, AgNP@CV
continuously produces oxygen to ameliorate hypoxia and synergistically enhances Ag-ion-induced ROS generation for efficient MRSA elimination.
Furthermore, AgNP@CV promotes endothelial angiogenesis via the VEGF−VEGFR2-PI3K-Akt pathway, significantly accelerating infected wound
healing.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11586

A representative synthesis protocol for AgNPs is depicted in
Figure 1A. The same procedure was applied to all other above-
mentioned metal NPs. Bright-field microscopy and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) revealed spherical CV cells with an
average diameter of ∼1 μm. Under appropriate light excitation,
CV exhibits red autofluorescence due to its high concentration
of photosynthetic pigments (Figure 1B,C).25 To enable green
synthesis of AgNPs by CV while maintaining high viability, we
coincubated CV with varying concentrations of silver nitrate
(AgNO3). The results demonstrated that CV retained over 80%
viability at a 0.0625 mM AgNO3, establishing this threshold as
optimal for subsequent experiments (Figure S1). After mixing
algae with AgNO3, brown deposits appeared on the algal surface
(Figure 1D).
Figure 1. Preparation and characterization of AgNP@CV. (A) Schematic of AgNP@CV synthesis. (B) Bright-field (left) and fluorescence (right)
micrographs of CV. Scale bars = 10 μm. (C) SEM and high magnification images of CV. Scale bars = 1 μm and 500 nm, respectively. (D) Bright-field
microscope image of AgNP@CV. Scale bars = 10 μm. (E) Schematic of the mechanism of CV-mediated AgNPs biosynthesis. (F) UV−vis spectra of
CV and AgNP@CV. Insets: UV−vis spectra of AgNP@CV exhibited characteristic absorbance peaks of AgNPs. (G) ζ-Potential of CV and AgNP@
CV. Insets: ζ-potential showing the successful synthesis of AgNPs from CV cells. (H) SEM and elemental mapping images of AgNP@CV. Insets:
AgNPs attached to the CV surface. Scale bars = 500 nm. (I) Oxygen release under illumination within a short duration (30 min). (J) Oxygen release
under intermittent light/dark cycles. (K) Long-term oxygen release under continuous illumination for 15 days. n = 3; Data are mean ± SD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11587

Theoretically, the algal-mediated biosynthesis of AgNPs
initiates through electrostatic attraction and culminates in
biochemical reduction: Negatively charged functional groups
(e.g., carboxyl, hydroxyl, and phosphate moieties) on microalgal
cell surfaces electrostatically bind and concentrate dissolved
silver ions (Ag+). Subsequent electron transfer from redox-active
biomoleculesparticularly proteins, polysaccharides, and phe-
nolic compoundsfacilitates the reduction of Ag+ to elemental
silver (Ag0).23 This bioreduction process generates nucleation
sites that grow in a controlled manner, ultimately yielding stable
AgNPs through the inherent biofabrication capability of CV
(Figure 1E). To validate CV-mediated AgNP synthesis, we
conducted comprehensive characterization. The ultraviolet−
visible (UV−vis) spectrum of AgNO3 exhibited a characteristic
Ag+ absorption peak at 302 nm. In contrast, the cyborg AgNP@
CV composite displayed a distinct surface plasmon resonance
peak at 687 nmdiagnostic of AgNP formation (Figure 1F).24
ζ-Potential measurements revealed a decreased surface-charge
magnitude in AgNP@CV relative to pristine CV due to electron
transfer (Figure 1G). Furthermore, XPS analysis confirmed the
presence of elemental silver signatures in AgNP@CV absent in
control CV samples (Figure S2A,B). SEM, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS)
demonstrated the formation of AgNPs on the surface of CV
(Figures 1H and S3).
The green-synthesized AgNPs have a diameter of approx-
imately 65 nm (Figure S4A,F). To assess batch-to-batch
consistency, three independent batches of AgNP@CV were
synthesized (B1, B2, and B3) and subsequently characterized.
The results demonstrated that the particle size, ζ-potential, and
loading efficiency of AgNP showed no statistically significant
differences across the three batches (Figure S4A−C). This
indicates that the synthesis method employed yields AgNP@CV
with high reproducibility between batches. After 50th
generation of subculturing, the AgNP distribution produced
by CV remained consistent with that of the primary generation
(Figure S4D,E). Furthermore, no significant difference in the
size of the AgNPs was observed (Figure S4F). The Ag loading
was 0.1879 mg/mL with a loading rate of 18.79% for the first
generation, and 0.1842 mg/mL with a loading rate of 18.42% for
the 50th generation. No statistically significant difference was
found (Figure S4G). Ag exhibited an initial rapid release, with
rates of 20.37% on day 1 and 53.55% by day 3. This initial burst
ensures a sufficiently high antibacterial concentration of Ag at
the early stage. Subsequently, the release rate slowed down,
reaching 76.14% by day 12 (Figure S4H). This sustained release
profile guarantees long-term antibacterial efficacy. Collectively,
these spectroscopic and physicochemical results demonstrate
CV’s capacity to mediate green reduction of Ag+ to stable
AgNPs.
The sustained viability of CV and AgNP@CV is fundamental
to continuous oxygen generation. Physiologically active micro-
algae exhibit distinct red autofluorescence under laser excitation.
As demonstrated in Figure S5, CV and AgNP@CV maintain
metabolic activity and undergo proliferation over time,
confirming sustained functionality.26 During the initial 30 min
Figure 2. SEM images and EDS elemental maps of various metal NP@CV composites. (A) CuNP@CV, (B) MgNP@CV, (C) ZnNP@CV, (D)
AuNP@CV, and (E) FeNP@CV. Scale bar = 200 nm.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11588

of high-intensity illumination, both CV and AgNP@CV
exhibited a rapid increase in oxygen release, reaching a plateau
of approximately 2 mg/mL (Figure 1I). Cessation of
illumination triggered a gradual decline in oxygen production,
while subsequent light exposure restored oxygen-generation
capacity (Figure 1J). These findings indicate that CV remains
fully active and capable of photosynthesis and respiration. As
demonstrated in Figure 1K, CV and AgNP@CV maintained
sustained oxygen release throughout the observation period,
peaking on day 9 before gradually declining. Notably, the oxygen
release concentration remained above 3 mg/mL even on day 12.
Despite a reduction compared to high-intensity light, oxygen
production under continuous low-intensity light continued to
rise in both groups, progressing to 1.62 and 1.43 mg/mL by day
15 without reaching a plateau (Figure S6A). Under the 30 min
low-intensity illumination, the oxygen production of both CV
and AgNP@CV increased. It decreased in the absence of light
and resumed when illumination was restored (Figure S6B). Both
CV and AgNP@CV showed no detectable oxygen production
under continuous dark conditions. This prolonged, active
oxygen-generation capabilitymediated by the photosynthetic
CVrepresents a key advantage of our dressing over conven-
tional wound care materials, as it continuously addresses tissue
hypoxia throughout the critical healing phases. All bioprocessing
steps for synthesizing CV-metal nanoparticles were conducted
in a laminar flow biosafety cabinet using sterile materials.
Consequently, the resulting CV and AgNP@CV was confirmed
to be sterile (Figure S7).
We also applied this approach to develop other metal NP@
CV systems. SEM and EDS analysis verified the successful green
synthesis of antibacterial Cu, Mg, and Zn NPs using CV (Figure
2A−C). Notably, Au and Fe nanoparticles with photothermal
antibacterial capabilities were also synthesized. These results
Figure 3. Intracellular ROS in bacteria under hypoxia after indicated treatments. (A) Representative confocal micrographs of bacteria stained with
DHE (red; O2
•−). Scale bar = 20 μm. (B) Representative confocal micrographs of bacteria stained with DCFH-DA (green; general ROS). Scale bar =
20 μm. (C, E) Quantification of DHE fluorescence in MRSA and E. coli. (D, F) Quantification of DCFH-DA fluorescence in MRSA and E. coli. n = 3;
Data are mean ± SD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11589

underscore the promise of this method as a versatile and broad-
spectrum antimicrobial platform (Figure 2D,E).
In Vitro Biocompatibility of AgNP@CV
Biocompatibility assessment is crucial for evaluating the
potential of AgNP@CV for biomedical applications, as it
ensures minimal adverse effects on cell viability and prolifer-
ation.27 In this study, human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) were incubated with AgNP@CV at varying
concentrations, and cell proliferation was assessed using the
CCK-8 assay. The results showed that even at 72.5 μg/mL, cells
maintained >90% viability relative to controls (Figure S8A). In
prolonged cultures, AgNP@CV significantly enhanced cell
Figure 4. In vitro antibacterial activities of AgNP@CV. (A) Live/dead staining of bacteria after the indicated treatments. Live and dead cells were
stained with SYTO 9/PI (green/red). Scale bars = 100 μm. (B) SEM images and EDS elemental maps of bacteria after the indicated treatments. Inset:
bacteria coincubated with AgNP@CV show membrane distortion and shrinkage; EDS mapping shows Ag (red) on the bacterial surface. Scale bars =
500 and 700 nm. (C) Adherent bacteria were harvested after imaging and cultured on sheep blood agar. (D, F) Growth curves of MRSA and E. coli
treated with CV or AgNP@CV. (E, G) Antibacterial efficacy of different nanoformulations. n = 3; Data are mean ± SD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11590

proliferation compared to its chemical counterpart, which
exhibited inhibitory effects, thereby indicating the superior
biocompatibility of the green synthesis approach. (Figure S8B).
Biocompatibility was also assessed using live/dead staining
(Figure S8C). Viable cells exhibited green fluorescence (stained
with calcein-AM), while dead cells displayed red fluorescence
(stained with propidium iodide, PI). No dead cells were
observed in either the control or treatment groups, and the cell
numbers increased over time, confirming the low cytotoxicity of
AgNP@CV toward HUVECs. Additionally, cytoskeleton
staining revealed well-spread, spindle-shaped HUVECs with
strong adhesion and proliferation in the CV- and AgNP@CV-
treated groups (Figure S8D), further supporting the favorable
biocompatibility of the materials. Assessment with RAW264.7
macrophages and NIH-3T3 fibroblasts revealed that the
biocompatibility of AgNP@CV was superior to that of
chemically synthesized AgNPs (Figure S9). The measured
endotoxin levels for both CV and AgNP@CV were 0.41 EU/mL
and 0.43 EU/mL (Figure S10), respectively, which are below the
limit of 0.5 EU/mL.
Photosynthetic Oxygenation of AgNP@CV Synergistically
Enhances Bacterial Intracellular ROS Generation under
Hypoxia
AgNPs exert antibacterial effects in part by inducing the
production of intracellular ROS.28 Their surfaces act as a
catalytic platform, facilitating the transfer of electrons to
environmental oxygen to generate superoxide anions (O2
•−),
which initiates the ROS cascade.29 These reactive intermediates
subsequently give rise to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and
hydroxyl radicals (•OH).30 Accordingly, oxygen serves as both
a substrate and an amplifier for ROS generation.31 Under
hypoxic conditions, however, intracellular ROS production is
limited.32 Thus, oxygen production can act synergistically with
AgNPs to enhance ROS formation under oxygen-depleted
conditions.
MRSA and Escherichia coli (E. coli)prevalent pathogenic
microorganismswere selected to investigate whether CV
photosynthetic oxygenation promotes ROS generation by
AgNP@CV under hypoxic conditions. Bacteria were cocultured
with CV and AgNP@CV under dark and illumination, assigned
to CV(D), CV(L), AgNP@CV(D), and AgNP@CV(L).
Subsequently, the bacterial cells were incubated with fluorescent
probes, fluorescent probes DHE and DCFH-DA, which
specifically detect O2
−• and general ROS, respectively.33 As
shown in Figure 3A, the untreated control and CV(D) showed
only negligible background red fluorescence over 0, 2, and 4 h.
An increase in ROS levels was observed in CV(L) and AgNP@
CV(D). Notably, bacterial cells treated with AgNP@CV(L)
displayed a distinct increase in red fluorescence, indicating
numerous O2
•−generation. Quantitative fluorescence analysis
corroborated these observations, revealing a statistically
significant increase in the AgNP@CV(L) group compared to
other treatment (Figure 3C,E). Similarly, stronger green
fluorescence in the AgNP@CV(L) group indicated higher
levels of general ROS compared to the CV(D), CV(L), and
AgNP@CV(D) group (Figure 3B,D,F).
ROS generation was assessed in Cutibacterium acnes, a
common anaerobic pathogen. The results showed that
AgNP@CV significantly enhanced ROS levels in C. acnes
compared to other groups (Figure S11), thereby validating its
broad applicability in elevating ROS in both facultative
anaerobes and obligate anaerobesa cornerstone of its
antibacterial mechanism. These results demonstrate that under
hypoxic conditions, photosynthetic oxygen production by CV
promotes AgNP@CV-mediated ROS generation in a time-
dependent manner.
AgNP@CV-Mediated Antibacterial via Surface-Immobilized
Silver on Microalgae under Hypoxia
Bacterial infections severely impede wound healing by establish-
ing resilient biofilms, secreting tissue-destructive proteases, and
triggering chronic inflammation that together drive progression
toward nonhealing ulcers or life-threatening sepsis.34 These
complications necessitate high-performance antimicrobial bio-
materials capable of overcoming antibiotic resistance while
preserving tissue-regenerative capacity.35 Because AgNP@CV
produces significantly more ROS under light illumination than
in the dark, we therefore used light-irradiated AgNP@CV.
To evaluate the antibacterial activity under hypoxia, we
coincubated bacteria with AgNP@CV under illumination and
observed outstanding antibacterial efficacy at 1 mg/mL (Figure
S12A). Live/dead staining revealed significantly more PI-
positive bacteria in the AgNP@CV group than in controls or
CV for both species (Figure 4A), indicating potent bactericidal
activity under hypoxia. SEM imaging showed intact, spherical
MRSA and E. coli in control and CV groups, whereas bacteria
exposed to AgNP@CV exhibited severe membrane distortion,
deflation, and collapse (Figure 4B). EDS analysis confirmed the
attachment of AgNPs to the surfaces of inactivated bacteria.
Bacterial growth curves showed that AgNP@CV significantly
suppressed proliferation, while CV showed minimal inhibitory
effects (Figure 4D,F). For direct quantification, agar plating after
12 h coculture demonstrated near-total pathogen eradication in
AgNP@CV groups, with negligible colony formation (Figure
4C,E,G).
To assess the light-independent antibacterial efficacy of
AgNP@CV, MRSA was cocultured with the composite under
dark conditions. The antibacterial activity was diminished in the
absence of light. However, a significant bactericidal effect was
still observed, with efficacy matching that of an equivalent dose
of pure AgNPs (Figure S12B,C). This result is likely due to the
sustained release of Ag+ ions from the nanoparticles. AgNP@CV
exhibited strong antibiofilm performance against Green
Fluorescent Protein-labeled Staphylococci and E. coli (GFP-S
and GFP-E) biofilm, as evidenced by significantly reduced GFP
fluorescence and crystal violet staining (Figure S13). Addition-
ally, AgNP@CV from three independently prepared batches
showed potent antibacterial efficacy. No statistically differences
were found among these batches (Figure S14A,B). The
antibacterial performance of AgNP@CV fabricated from CV
after 50 subcultures showed no significant difference from the
initial preparation (Figure S14C,D).
To elucidate the bactericidal mechanism, we investigated the
effect of AgNP@CV on bacterial membrane integrity. As shown
in Figure S15A,B, AgNP@CV induced a significant depolariza-
tion of the membrane in both MRSA and E. coli, as indicated by a
sharp increase in fluorescence intensity ratio. Concurrently, the
protein leakage assay confirmed an increase in extracellular
protein concentration upon AgNP@CV treatment (Figure
S15C,D), directly indicating the compromise of cytoplasmic
membrane integrity and the leakage of intracellular contents.
Collectively, these results confirm that AgNP@CV exerts its
bactericidal effect by disrupting the bacterial membrane.
Remarkably, CuNP@CV, ZnNP@CV, and AuNP@CV ex-
hibited robust antibacterial activity under light, contrasting with
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11591

their limited efficacy in the dark. Notably, both CuNP@CV and
ZnNP@CV achieved over 90% inhibition against MRSA and E.
coli. Although MgNP@CV and FeNP@CV were weakly
antimicrobial alone, their performance was markedly enhanced
by light, confirming the role of photocatalytic oxygen production
in boosting the efficacy of Metal-NP@CV (Figure S16).
Furthermore, AgNP@CV shows no capacity to promote the
horizontal transfer of antibiotic resistance genes, thereby
mitigating a key concern regarding its application (Figure
S17). Collectively, the microalgae-mediated green synthesis of
NP@CV provides a versatile platform with promising
antibacterial performance.
Figure 5. AgNP@CV alleviates hypoxia and promotes HUVEC migration and tube formation in vitro. (A) Representative fluorescence micrographs of
HUVEC migration (visualized by live/dead staining) after 24 h. Scale bar = 100 μm. (B) Migration rate of HUVECs. (C) Transwell migration of
HUVECs under the indicated conditions (crystal violet staining). Scale bar = 50 μm. (D) Quantification of HUVEC migration (crystal violet-stained
cells). (E) Representative images of HUVEC tube formation (calcein-AM staining). Scale bar = 200 μm. (F, G) Quantification of tube formation
(mesh and junction counts). (H−L) Relative expression of angiogenesis- and wound-healing-related genes (EGF, FGF, VEGF, α-SMA, and CD31) in
HUVECs under the indicated treatments. (M) O2 released from AgNP@CV under illumination promotes HUVEC migration and tube formation. n =
3; Data are mean ± SD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11592

Figure 6. Regulatory mechanism of AgNP@CV in HUVECs. (A) Volcano plot of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between CD and CL. (B)
Heatmap of DEGs for CD vs CL. (C) PCA score plot showing separation of CL-treated HUVECs from CD. (D) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis
of DEGs. (E) GO enrichment analysis of up- and downregulated DEGs. (F) Representative Western blots of VEGF, VEGFR2, PI3K, Akt, and β-actin
in HUVECs from CD and CL. (G−J) Densitometric quantification of VEGF, VEGFR2, PI3K, and Akt normalized to β-actin. (K) Schematic: CL
promotes HUVEC proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis via the VEGF/VEGFR2/PI3K/Akt signaling axis. n = 3; Data are mean ± SD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11593

Figure 7. AgNP@CV promotes healing of MRSA infected wounds. (A) Schematic timeline of the in vivo study evaluating therapeutic efficacy. Full-
thickness skin wounds were created and inoculated with MRSA; treatments were administered 2 days postinfection. (B) Photographs of representative
wounds from each group at days 0, 3, 6, 9, and 12. Insets: Schematic diagram presentation of the wound healing process for different groups. Scale bar =
2 cm. (C, D) Wound-closure kinetics across groups at days 3, 6, 9, and 12. (E, F) H&E and Masson’s trichrome staining of wound sections on
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11594

AgNP@CV Alleviates Hypoxia and Promotes Cell Migration
and Tubule Formation
Wound healing is frequently compromised by localized hypoxia
due to vascular damage, making hypoxia alleviation critical for
infected wound repair.13,15 To investigate whether AgNP@CV
could mitigate hypoxia under illumination, HUVECs were
exposed to four conditions: normoxia, hypoxia, hypoxia +
AgNP@CV (dark; H+AgNP@CV(D)), hypoxia + AgNP@CV
(light; H+AgNP@CV(L)). Compared with normoxia, hypoxia
and H+AgNP@CV(D) significantly inhibited HUVEC pro-
liferation after 2 days of incubation, whereas H+AgNP@CV(L)
produced a marked proliferative increase relative to H+AgNP@
CV(D) (Figure S18).
In the scratch assay, Hypoxia significantly suppressed
HUVEC cell migration compared to normoxia. Strikingly,
when cells were cocultured with AgNP@CV under hypoxia and
exposed to light, their migration increased markedly (Figure
5A,B). This suggests that the soluble oxygen released by
AgNP@CV enhances epithelialization. Transwell assay showed
a similar trend, as AgNP@CV(L) significantly alleviated the
simulated hypoxic microenvironment, markedly promoting
HUVEC cell migration (Figures 5C,D and S19A).
Blood vessels deliver oxygen and nutrients and are essential in
wound healing.36 The tube-formation assay demonstrated that
AgNP@CV alleviated hypoxia under illumination in the local
microenvironment and promoted HUVEC tubulogenesis, with
a significantly higher number of meshes and junctions compared
to other groups (Figure 5E−G). Furthermore, compared to the
other groups, H + AgNP@CV(L) significantly upregulated the
expression of Differentiation 31 (CD31), α-smooth muscle actin
(αSMA), Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), Epi-
dermal growth factor (EGF), Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF)
in HUVECs, which are closely associated with angiogenesis, cell
migration, and collagen formation (Figure 5H−L). A significant
downregulation of HIF-1α was detected, demonstrating the
efficacy of AgNP@CV in alleviating hypoxia in vitro (Figure
S19B). Collectively, our data show that light-activated CV/Ag
oxygen generation relieves local hypoxia, effectively stimulating
cellular migration, proliferation, and vascularization, which
establishes a foundation for in vivo therapeutic use (Figure 5M).
Regulatory Mechanism of AgNP@CV in HUVECs
Our previous results revealed that AgNP@CV(L) (CL)
treatment significantly promoted HUVEC cell proliferation,
migration and tube formation compared with AgNP@CV(D)
(CD) under hypoxia, although the underlying mechanisms
remain unclear. To probe these mechanisms, we performed
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to profile transcriptomic changes
in CL- versus CD-treated cells. Volcano plots and a heatmap
showed that CL-treated HUVECs had 1,244 significantly DEGs
relative to CD, including 648 upregulated and 596 down-
regulated genes (Figure 6A,B). These results indicate that CL
substantially alters gene expression in HUVECs. Unsupervised
principal component analysis (PCA) of the whole transcriptome
showed that CL treatment induced a marked divergence in
HUVEC gene expression, with PC1 clearly separating CL from
CD samples (Figure 6C). The clear segregation of clusters in the
PCA score plot indicates that CL substantially alters the
HUVEC gene-expression profile.
KEGG pathway analysis showed upregulation of pro-
angiogenic pathways, including “PI3K−Akt signaling pathway,”
“Focal adhesion,” “ECM−receptor interaction,” and “Cell
adhesion molecules (CAMs),” along with unexpected enrich-
ment of “cornified envelope.” Concurrently, the pro-inflamma-
tory “IL-17 signaling pathway” was significantly downregulated
(Figure 6D). GO enrichment analysis corroborated these
findings, highlighting angiogenesis-related biological processes
such as “cell adhesion via plasma membrane adhesion
molecules,” “epithelial tube morphogenesis,” and “positive
regulation of cell adhesion” (Figure 6E).
Furthermore, Western blotting confirmed marked increases in
VEGF, VEGFR2, PI3K, and Akt protein levels following CL
treatment (Figure 6F−J). Subsequent RT-qPCR further
corroborated these results, showing significant increases in the
mRNA levels of the corresponding genes (Figure S20).
Collectively, these data indicate that CL promotes HUVEC
proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis via the VEGF/
VEGFR2/PI3K/Akt signaling axis (Figure 6K).
AgNP@CV Effectively Eliminates Bacteria and Promotes
Infected-Wound Healing
To evaluate the in vivo antibacterial efficacy and pro-healing
effects of the cyborg AgNP@CV, an MRSA-infected full-
thickness skin defect model was established in C57BL/6 mice
(Figure 7A).12,37 After infection was established, CV(L),
AgNP@CV(D), AgNP@CV(L), and chemically synthesized
AgNPs were applied to treat the infected wound. A sterile, highly
transparent polyurethane film (characterized by a transmittance
>90%) was used to cover the wound site, thereby securing the
material and establishing an occlusive environment (Figure
S21). Wound progression was photographed at 0, 3-, 6-, 9-, and
12-days post-treatment (Figure 7B). All groups showed
progressive reductions in wound area throughout the observa-
tion period, but the AgNP@CV(L) exhibited significantly
accelerated healing kinetics. By day 6, AgNP@CV(L) achieved a
wound closure rate of 76.7%substantially higher than the
control, AgNPs, CV(L), and AgNP@CV(D) groups. Remark-
ably, AgNP@CV(L)-treated wounds approached near-com-
plete epithelialization (≈99.8%) by day 12, while other groups
exhibited markedly delayed healing with residual wound areas
(Figure 7C,D). As shown in Figure S22, the silver content in the
wound tissue continuously increased due to the sustained
release of Ag+ from AgNP, peaking on day 6. This initial
accumulation helps maintain a sufficient antibacterial concen-
tration in the early stages. Subsequently, the Ag+ level gradually
decreased, indicating its systemic clearance over time without
long-term persistence at the wound site. To visualize
antibacterial activity, the wound-tissue extracts were plated on
agar. AgNP@CV(L) exhibited remarkable antibacterial efficacy
in wound treatment, with virtually no bacterial colonies
observed (Figure S23).
Persistent inflammation is a major barrier to infected wound
healing, where bacterial components perpetuate a destructive
cycle of neutrophil infiltration, proteolytic enzyme release, and
tissue necrosis.35,38 H&E staining was performed to investigate
Figure 7. continued
postoperative day 12. Black dashed lines indicate the interface between normal tissue (N) interface and the wound (W). Scale bar = 50 and 100 μm,
respectively. n = 10; Data are mean ± SD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11595

inflammatory cell infiltration in each group. As shown in Figure
7E, a severe inflammatory response was triggered in the wound
tissues in the control and CV(L) groups, as indicated by the
penetration of numerous inflammatory cells. AgNP and AgNP@
Figure 8. AgNP@CV promotes angiogenesis and resolves inflammation in vivo. (A) Immunofluorescence staining of Pimonidazole (green) in
infected-wound tissues. Scale bars = 0.6 mm. (B) Representative immunofluorescence micrographs of wound tissue stained for CD31/α-SMA/DAPI
(green/red/blue). Scale bars = 0.2 mm. (C) Representative immunofluorescence micrographs of wound tissue stained for CD206/CD86/DAPI
(green/red/blue). Scale bars = 0.2 mm. (D, E) Quantification of CD31 and α-SMA fluorescence intensity. (F, G) Quantification of CD206 and CD86
fluorescence intensity. n = 10. Data are mean ± SD.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11596

CV(D) attenuated the inflammation of wound tissues, and
AgNP@CV(L) further reduced the inflammatory response,
compared with other groups. Because bacterial components are
highly immunogenic in infected wounds, which can trigger host
immune responses.39 Hence, AgNP@CV(L) effectively reduced
local inflammatory responses. These findings indicate that
AgNP@CV has excellent anti-infective activity and thereby
facilitates wound healing. Crucially, collagen deposition
provides both a structural foundation and a biochemical
regulator in infected wound repair, where bacterial proteases
typically degrade extracellular matrix and impair healing.40,41
Masson’s trichrome staining (Figure 7F) demonstrated that
AgNP@CV treatment generated significantly denser collagen
fibers organized in mature basket-weave patterns alongside
substantially reduced wound gaps compared to other groups.
This enhanced collagen architecture signifies successful
pathogen containment and resolution of proteolytic damage.
ROS production in wound tissues across treatment groups
was evaluated with the DHE probe. AgNP@CV-treated tissue
displayed pronounced red DHE fluorescence, markedly
surpassing that of other groups. Furthermore, the AgNP@CV
group demonstrated the most intense fluorescence signal,
collectively demonstrating robust ROS generation specifically
at the wound site (Figure S24A). To investigate whether the
antibacterial mechanism of AgNP(L) is related to ROS
generation, the ROS scavenger N-acetylcysteine (NAC) was
introduced. Co-administration of NAC with AgNP@CV (light)
in MRSA-infected mice abrogated most of the antibacterial
benefit, resulting in significantly higher bacterial loads. This
rescue experiment confirms that ROS generation is a primary
mechanism for the enhanced bacterial clearance observed with
our system (Figure S24B,C).
To investigate whether AgNP@CV(L) alleviates hypoxia in
infected wound tissue, we assessed hypoxic status on post-
operative day 2 using a Hypoxyprobe (antipimonidazole). As
shown in Figures 8A and S24D, the Pimonidazole-specific signal
was markedly lower in the AgNP@CV(L) group compared to all
other groups. This indicates that the continuous oxygen release
from AgNP@CV(L) effectively mitigates hypoxia in the wound
microenvironment. Angiogenesis plays a pivotal role in infected
wound repair by restoring microcirculation to overcome
pathogen-induced hypoxia, delivering immune mediators, and
supporting tissue regeneration.42 The vascular markers CD31
(endothelial cell junction protein) and α-SMA (pericyte/
smooth muscle marker) collectively indicate functional neo-
vascularization.43 Our analysis revealed attenuated CD31 and α-
SMA expression in control, AgNPs, and AgNP@CV(D) groups,
reflecting impaired angiogenic responses that perpetuate
hypoxic microenvironments favorable for bacterial persistence.
Conversely, CV(L) significantly upregulated both markers,
demonstrating moderate revascularization capacity. Most
notably, AgNP@CV(L) induced the greatest CD31+ endothelial
networks and α-SMA+ perivascular coverage, demonstrating
robust, mature neovascularization in wound beds (Figure
8B,D,E). This enhanced vascularization correlates with
accelerated infection resolution by facilitating immune cell
infiltration, oxygen and nutrient delivery, and metabolic-waste
clearanceultimately converting stagnant, hypoxic wounds into
regenerative microenvironments.
In infected wounds, sustained inflammation driven by
macrophage polarization critically impacts healing outcomes.44
Pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages (CD86+) exacerbate tissue
damage via production of reactive oxygen species and pro-
inflammatory cytokines, while anti-inflammatory M2 macro-
phages (CD206+) orchestrate inflammatory resolution, angio-
genesis, and tissue remodeling.45,46 Immunofluorescence (IF)
staining revealed pronounced CD86+/CD206−M1 predom-
inance in control and CV(L), indicating persistent pro-
inflammatory states that impair healing. Conversely, AgNPs
and AgNP@CV(D) attenuated inflammation, evidenced by
reduced CD86 and elevated CD206 expression. Strikingly,
AgNP@CV(L) induced the most substantial immunomodula-
tory shift, with minimal CD86 and maximal CD206
expressiondemonstrating superior promotion of pro-regen-
erative M2 polarization (Figure 8C,F,G). This reprogramming
of macrophage phenotypes from destructive M1 to reparative
M2 substantiates the capacity of AgNP@CV(L) to resolve
pathological inflammation and create a regenerative micro-
environment in infected wounds.
The biocompatibility of AgNP@CV, a living cell-based
material, is fundamental for its clinical translation. We employed
in vivo imaging to monitor the distribution of both CV and
AgNP@CV at the wound site over time. On day 0, intense
fluorescence was observed in the CV(L), AgNP@CV(D), and
AgNP@CV(L) groups, indicating substantial algal accumula-
tion. By day 5, the signal had markedly decreased. Only minimal
fluorescence remained on the wound surface by day 10,
demonstrating the clearance of most algae. Finally, all
fluorescence had dissipated by day 20, confirming complete
elimination (Figure S25A). Concurrently, no fluorescence was
detected in major organs at any time point, indicating that the
algae were confined to the wound site without systemic
dissemination (Figure S25B). In addition, hematological profiles
remained within normal ranges (Figure S25C−H). H&E
staining of major organs revealed no apparent histological
abnormalities (Figure S26). To evaluate the long-term biosafety
of AgNP@CV, skin tissue, major organs, and blood samples
were collected from mice 2 months after treatment. H&E
staining of the wound sites showed no significant inflammatory
cell infiltration in the AgNP@CV-treated group compared with
the control group (Figure S27A). Similarly, H&E analysis of
major organs revealed no notable histopathological differences
(Figure S27B). Hematological and biochemical parameters also
showed no significant variations (Figure S27C). Taken together,
these results demonstrate that AgNP@CV exhibits favorable
biosafety profiles.
■DISCUSSION
The growing global burden of bacterial infections, compounded
by the relentless rise of antibiotic resistance, underscores the
critical need for innovative antimicrobial strategies that operate
beyond conventional mechanisms.47 Our study addresses this
challenge by developing AgNP@CV, a living biohybrid that
combines the continuous photosynthetic oxygen production of
CV with the potent antibacterial activity of green-synthesized
AgNP. This design specifically targets and overcomes the
hypoxic microenvironmenta fundamental barrier that se-
verely curtails the efficacy of existing metal-ion-based therapies,
including widely used silver-containing hydrogel dressings.
The limitations of existing modalities are multilayered. Metal
ions, while possessing broad-spectrum antibacterial capabilities,
see their ROS-dependent bactericidal mechanisms profoundly
undermined in the oxygen-deprived conditions typical of
chronic wounds and bacterial biofilms.48,49 Contemporary
strategies to supplement oxygen, often reliant on chemical
peroxides, are plagued by unsustainable burst-release kinetics,
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11597

potential cytotoxic side effects, and a lack of intrinsic
antibacterial activity.50,51 Furthermore, the engineering com-
plexity of integrating separate oxygen-generating and anti-
bacterial components into a single, cohesive system presents a
significant hurdle to scalability and clinical translation.52 Our
AgNP@CV platform bypasses these limitations by harnessing a
biological system that inherently provides both sustained,
physiological oxygen production and a benign green-synthesis
pathway for functional metal nanoparticles.
A major strength of this approach is its simplicity and
sustainability. The one-step coincubation method utilizes C.
vulgaris as a self-contained bioreactor, eliminating the need for
harsh chemicals, high-energy processing, and complex purifica-
tion, thereby yielding a biocompatible “living material”. The
oxygenic photosynthesis of microalgae is not merely an auxiliary
function but is central to this platform. The continuous oxygen
flux directly alleviates the hypoxic milieu that suppresses
immune function and promotes bacterial tolerance, thereby
potentiating the silver-ion-induced antibacterial activity. By
providing ample molecular oxygen as a substrate, it dramatically
enhances the metal-ion-induced ROS generation, creating a
powerful synergistic effect that is unattainable by either
component alone.
Notably, the therapeutic prowess of AgNP@CV extends
beyond direct bactericidal activity to encompass significant pro-
regenerative effects. The robust promotion of angiogenesis,
evidenced by the activation of the VEGF/VEGFR2/PI3K/Akt
signaling axis and the consequent enhancement of endothelial
migration, proliferation, and tube formation, is a crucial
advantage for wound healing. This pro-angiogenic effect likely
stems from a combination of the oxygenated microenvironment
and the potential release of bioactive, immunomodulatory
metabolites from the living microalgae. This dual function-
alitysimultaneously eradicating pathogens and actively
promoting tissue regenerationrepresents a paradigm shift
from conventional single-target antimicrobials such as AgNP
and addresses the multifaceted nature of infection.
While our findings strongly suggest that enhanced wound
healing is driven by photosynthetic oxygenation, Ag-antibacte-
rial, and the subsequent activation of the VEGF/PI3K−Akt
signaling axis, we acknowledge that the therapeutic effects are
likely multifaceted, arising from the synergistic combination of
the Chlorella-AgNP construct. It is well-documented that both
Ag+ and certain microalgal components can modulate immune
responses, such as macrophage polarization, which may play a
significant role in resolving inflammation and promoting tissue
repair.53 Additionally, the photocatalytic properties of AgNP
under illumination can generate ROS. While high levels of ROS
are cytotoxic, a sublethal, transient increase may act as a
signaling molecule that further promotes cellular proliferation
and migrationa phenomenon known as hormesis.54 There-
fore, the observed healing outcome is likely not attributable to a
single mechanism, but rather to a concerted action where
oxygenation creates a conducive pro-healing microenvironment,
while Ag+-mediated antibacterial activity, immunomodulation,
and redox signaling work in parallel to facilitate the regeneration
process.
Despite the promising therapeutic outcomes demonstrated in
this study, several limitations should be acknowledged. AgNP@
CV demonstrates potent efficacy against MRSA and E. coli; the
effects on other pathogens deserve further evaluation. A valid
consideration for the clinical translation of this photodynamic
approach is the limited penetration depth of external light into
deep or covered wound tissues.55 While our study effectively
demonstrated the proof-of-concept in a superficial wound
model, we acknowledge that this represents a limitation for
treating such complex wounds. However, several strategies can
be envisioned to overcome this challenge. The development of
wearable, flexible light-emitting diode (LED) devices offers a
practical solution for consistent superficial illumination of
ambulatory care wounds.56 For deeper tissues, the integration
of biocompatible optical fibers or the utilization of self-
illuminating systems, such as those employing chemilumines-
cence, could be explored in the future.57 Furthermore, it is
plausible that the oxygen continuously generated by AgNP@CV
at the wound surface may diffuse into the surrounding hypoxic
tissue, exerting a beneficial bystander effect beyond the direct
reach of light. Addressing these limitations in future studies will
be essential to broaden the therapeutic applicability of our
platform.
Although CV remains metabolically active during the early
phase of treatmentenabling oxygen evolutionit gradually
loses viability after exerting its therapeutic effect. Thus, the
system functions as a transient bioactive modulator of the
infected microenvironment rather than a permanently coloniz-
ing living therapeutic. This distinction is important for
understanding both the mechanism of action and the safety
profile of the platform. Conversely, the diminishing viability of
CV serves to alleviate any biosafety concerns.
Beyond the therapeutic outcomes demonstrated in a wound
infection model, this study establishes several fundamental
principles for nanobio interactions and living material design.
First, photosynthetic microorganisms like CV act as micro-
environment modulators, reversing local hypoxia via light-driven
oxygen evolutiona mechanism applicable to oxygen-deficient
conditions including chronic wounds, ischemic tissues, and solid
tumors. Second, the reductive capacity of living algae enables in
situ green synthesis of metal nanoparticles, providing a
sustainable, spatially controlled alternative to conventional
methods that minimize systemic exposure and enables on-
demand localized therapy. Third, the system achieves light-gated
synergy where biological oxygen production and nanomaterial-
derived ROS generation are coupled, demonstrating external
control over living-synthetic component coordination. Fourth,
gradual clearance of the algal component introduces the concept
of transient bioactive materialssystems designed for func-
tional activity during the therapeutic window followed by
elimination, potentially mitigating long-term safety concerns.
Finally, successful synthesis of multiple metal nanoparticles
using the same platform confirms the universality of this
biohybrid strategy, allowing incorporation of diverse therapeutic
metals with tailored properties. These principles extend beyond
our specific wound model to provide a conceptual framework for
designing next-generation living materials for infection,
inflammation, and cancer therapy.
■CONCLUSION
In summary, we present an integrated, sustainable, and
translatable strategy for combating resistant bacterial infections
by capitalizing on the unique biological virtues of microalgae.
The AgNP@CV biohybrid platform represents a significant
conceptual advance by effectively solving the critical issue of
hypoxia that undermines current metal-ion therapies. It achieves
this through a self-sustaining, photosynthetic oxygen supply that
acts in synergy with silver ions to boost ROS-mediated
bactericidal activity. Furthermore, its innate capacity to
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11598

stimulate angiogenesis ensures it not only clears infection but
also actively facilitates the healing process. This study pioneers a
new pathway in the design of multifunctional, biologically
inspired therapeutic platforms. Using a living microorganism as
a combined factory, sustaining system, and active therapeutic
component opens exciting possibilities for future biomaterial
design. The AgNP@CV platform heralds a revolutionary and
highly translatable strategy for managing difficult-to-treat
infections, offering a potent, unified solution that merges robust
antibacterial efficacy with innate pro-healing functionality.
■MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation and Characterization of Cyborg Metal NP@CV
AgNP@CV was fabricated by in situ biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles
(AgNPs) on CV over 24 h of bioreduction. One mg/mL microalgal
suspension was mixed with AgNO3 solution (0.0625 mM) under
constant stirring (400 rpm) at 25 °C. The resulting Chlorella-AgNPs
(AgNP@CV) composite was collected by centrifugation (5000 rpm, 5
min), washed three times with deionized water to remove residual ions,
and resuspended. Synthesis of copper (Cu), magnesium (Mg), zinc
(Zn), gold (Au), and iron (Fe) nanoparticles followed the same
protocol. CV was coincubated with copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate
(CuSO4·5H2O), magnesium sulfate heptahydrate (MgSO4·7H2O),
zinc acetate (Zn(OAc)2), chloroauric acid (HAuCl4), and iron(II)
chloride tetrahydrate (FeCl2·4H2O). After centrifugation and washing,
the resulting biohybrids, denoted as metal-nanoparticles@CV
(CuNP@CV, MgNP@CV, ZnNP@CV, AuNP@CV, and FeNP@
CV), were harvested. All bioprocessing steps for the synthesis of CV-
metal NPs are strictly performed under a laminar flow biosafety cabinet
using sterile materials. The prepared Metal-NP@CV can be stored
under sterile conditions at 25 °C.13,15 To evaluate the genetic stability
of CV, AgNP@CV was fabricated using CV that had been subcultured
to the 50th generation. The final product was inoculated onto blood
agar plates to assess microbial contamination.
Bright-field and fluorescence images were acquired on an inverted
microscope (Olympus IX73, Japan). Morphology of CV and the
AgNP@CV composite was examined by scanning electron microscopy
(SEM; ZEISS GeminiSEM 300, Germany) and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM, JEM-F200, Japan). Elemental composition and
mapping analysis were conducted via energy-dispersive spectroscopy
(EDS). UV−vis absorption spectra was recorded with a Shimadzu UV-
2600 spectrophotometer (Japan). ζ-Potentials and particle size
distribution of AgNP were measured using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano
ZS90 (UK). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were
referenced to the C 1s peak at 284.8 eV. ICP-MS was used to determine
the AgNP loading capacity of AgNP@CV and its subsequent release
kinetics. Dissolved oxygen released from CV and AgNP@CV under
dark, high-intensity, low-intensity, and intermittent light conditions was
measured using an oxygen microsensor at 25 °C.
In Vitro Biocompatibility of AgNP@CV
HUVECs were used to evaluate AgNP@CV cytotoxicity by a CCK-8
assay. Cells were seeded in the lower chamber of 24-well transwell
plates at 1 × 104 cells/well and allowed to adhere for 12 h.
Subsequently, AgNP@CV suspensions were then added to the upper
chambers and incubated for 1, 3, or 5 days. The AgNPs synthesized by
the conventional chemical method served as the control group. After
incubation, CCK-8 solution was added to each well followed by 2 h
incubation. Absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate
reader. Viability was further assessed by calcein-AM/PI live/dead
staining, and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was used to
assess apoptosis. Cytoskeletal morphology of HUVECs exposed to CV
and AgNP@CV was evaluated via F-actin staining. The endotoxin
content in the sterile CV and AgNP@CV suspension (the same batch
used for animal studies) was determined using the standard Limulus
Amebocyte Lysate assay.
Intracellular ROS Production in Bacterial Cells Following
Coincubation with AgNP@CV under Hypoxia
Briefly, MRSA, E. coli, and C. acnes cells in the logarithmic growth phase
were collected, washed, and resuspended in PBS (pH 7.4) to a density
of approximately 107 CFU/mL. The bacterial suspension was then
coincubated with CV and AgNP@CV under dark and illuminated
conditions (CV(D), CV(L), AgNP@CV(D), and AgNP@CV(L)) for
2 and 4 h under hypoxia. Bacteria coincubated with PBS served as
controls. After incubation, the bacterial cells were washed with PBS to
remove excess compounds and then labeled with 10 μM DCFH-DA
and DHE at 37 °C for 30 min in the dark. The bacteria were
subsequently observed using confocal microscopy.
In Vitro Antibacterial Activity under Hypoxia
S. aureus and E. coli were inoculated into 24-well plates at 1 × 106 CFU/
mL and coincubated with CV or AgNP@CV at 37 °C under
illumination and hypoxic conditions. The illumination conditions
were set at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2, a wavelength of 450 nm, and a
distance of 10 cm. After 12 h of incubation, bacterial viability was
assessed using Live/Dead BacLight staining followed by CLSM. SEM
was performed to evaluate the antibacterial properties of CV and
AgNP@CV after incubation for 12 h. Growth kinetics were monitored
by measuring optical density (OD600) at 2 h intervals using a microplate
reader. For quantitative analysis, supernatants were diluted to 1 × 107
CFU/mL, plated (100 μL) on Columbia blood agar, and bacterial
colonies were enumerated after 12 h at 37 °C. The antibacterial efficacy
of AgNP@CV under constant dark conditions was assessed by
coculturing it with MRSA, followed by plating on agar plates and
colony enumeration. The antibiofilm efficacy of the AgNP@CV was
evaluated using confocal microscopy and crystal violet staining
following coculture with GFP-labeled bacterial biofilms.
The membrane disruption activity of AgNP@CV was further
investigated by evaluating bacterial membrane potential and protein
leakage. Membrane potential was assessed using the fluorescent dye
DiSC3(5) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, mid log
phase bacteria were harvested, washed, and incubated with the dye
followed by treatment with AgNP@CV or controls. Fluorescence was
measured using a microplate reader. For the protein leakage assay,
bacterial suspensions treated with AgNP@CV were centrifuged. The
supernatant was then collected, and the amount of leaked protein was
quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit. The conjugative plasmid
transfer assay utilized E. coli K-12 LE392 as the donor strain, harboring
the conjugative plasmid RP4 (60099 bp). This plasmid carries genes
encoding resistance to ampicillin (AMP), tetracycline (TET), and
kanamycin (KAN).
Hypoxia Relief Test
HUVECs were seeded in 24-well plates at a concentration of 1 × 104
cells per well for 24 h to allow cell attachment. Oxygen concentration
was reduced to 1% to induce hypoxia. The AgNP@CV was coincubated
with the cells through a transwell system. The control group was
cultured in normal. The hypoxia group was cultured at 1% O2 for 2 days.
The H+AgNP@CV(D) group was coincubated with AgNP@CV at 1%
O2 without illumination, and the H+AgNP@CV(L) group was
coincubated with AgNP@CV at 1% O2 with illumination. Cells were
stained with calcein-AM to assess viability and imaged by microscopy.
Cell Migration Assay
HUVECs were seeded in 24-well plates and cultured to confluence for
24 h. Uniform scratch wounds were then created in the monolayer
center using a sterile 200 μL pipet tip. The cells were then placed in
different environments and divided into four groups: the hypoxic
environment group (Hypoxia), the O2 supply environment group
(Normoxia), the hypoxic environment with coincubation with AgNP@
CV group in dark (H + AgNP@CV (D)), and the hypoxic environment
with coincubation with AgNP@CV and exposure to light group (H +
AgNP@CV (L)). Scratch healing of the HUVECs was observed after
live/dead staining, and the wound healing rate was calculated using (eq
1)
A
A
wound healing rate (%)
(
A )/
100
i
i
24
=
×
(1)
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11599

Here, Ai is the initial wound area, and A24 is the wound area after 24 h
of coculture, respectively.
Transwell Assay
Transwell assays were used to assess HUVEC migration. Matrigel (80
μL; Corning, USA) was added to 8-μm-pore Transwell inserts (24-
well) and allowed to solidify at 37 °C for 2 h. Lower chambers were
filled with 600 μL of medium from the respective treatment groups.
HUVECs (1 × 105 cells per well) in serum-free medium were seeded
into the upper chambers. After 24 h at 37 °C, nonmigrated cells and
Matrigel were removed with a cotton swab. Cells that migrated to the
underside of the membrane were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (30
min), stained with 0.5% crystal violet (Macklin, China; 1 h), and
imaged by light microscopy (five random fields). For quantification,
stained cells were solubilized in 95% ethanol, and absorbance was
measured at 570 nm.
Tube Formation Assay
To assess tube formation, 80 μL of cold Matrigel (Corning, USA) was
added to each well of a 48-well plate and polymerized at 37 °C for 1 h.
HUVECs (5 × 104 cells/well) were seeded onto the Matrigel-coated
surface and exposed to respective treatments. After incubation, tubes
were imaged using fluorescence microscopy following Calcein-AM
staining, and network parameters (total tube length/branch points)
were quantified using ImageJ software.
RT-qPCR
HUVECs were seeded in 6-well plates at 2 × 105 cells/well. Following a
3-day incubation with different treatments, total RNA was extracted
using the RNA isolation kit. cDNA synthesis was performed with
PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit (Takara, Japan) at 37 °C for 15 min. Gene
expression of differentiation 31 (CD31), α-smooth muscle actin
(αSMA), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), epidermal
growth factor (EGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), and Hypoxia-
Inducible Factor 1-α (HIF-1α) was quantified by real-time quantitative
reverse transcription (RT-qPCR) using TB Green Premix Ex TaqII
(Takara, Japan) on an ABI Prism 7000 system (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, USA).
RNA Sequencing
Total RNA was extracted from HUVECs treated with AgNP@
CV(Light) (CL) using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) per manufacturer’s
protocol, with AgNP@CV(Dark) (CD)-treated HUVECs as controls.
Eukaryotic transcriptomes were sequenced in PE150 mode on Illumina
NovaSeq 6000 (CHI BIOTECH, China). Raw reads were quality-
trimmed using Cutadapt (v4.3), then aligned to the appropriate
reference genome (e.g., GRCh38) using HISAT2 (v2.2.1). Gene
quantification was conducted with featureCounts (v2.0.4), followed by
differential expression analysis via DESeq2 (v1.38.3) applying thresh-
olds of |log2 (fold change)| > 1 and adjusted p-value <0.05. Functional
enrichment of DEGs was analyzed through KEGG and GO databases.
Western Blot Analysis
Following treatment with CD and CL, HUVECs were lysed using RIPA
buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein
concentrations were determined via BCA assay. Equal amounts of
protein (20−30 μg) were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to
PVDF membranes. After blocking with 5% nonfat milk, membranes
were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against
VEGF, VEGFR2, PI3K, Akt, and β-actin (loading control), followed by
incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. Protein bands
were visualized using an ECL detection system and quantified by
densitometry.
Establishment of An Infected Wound Model and Treatment
To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of AgNP@CV, an infected wound
model was established in mice. We performed all animal studies in
accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines (Reporting of In Vivo
Experiments). The experiment protocol was approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of The First
Affiliated Hospital Zhejiang University School of Medicine (approval
No. 2025−107). All animals were housed in a specific pathogen-free
(SPF) animal facility for 2 weeks for environmental adaptation and
allowed free access to food and water. Animals were randomly assigned
to each experimental group using a random number table or computer-
generated sequence to minimize bias. Following anesthesia with
isoflurane, the dorsal fur was shaved and full-thickness wounds (10 mm
diameter) were created using biopsy punches. Wounds were inoculated
with 10 μL MRSA suspension (1 × 107 CFU/mL). CV and AgNP@CV
were applied to the wound bed and covered with a transparent medical
film under illumination. Wound treated with chemically synthesized
AgNPs served as a comparison. Wound areas were documented
photographically and measured using ImageJ software on days 0, 3, 6, 9,
and 12. The dynamics of silver ion concentration in wounds treated
with AgNP@CV(D) and AgNP@CV(L) were evaluated by ICP-MS
over different treatment periods. On day 12, hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) and Masson’s trichrome, and immunofluorescence staining
were performed for the histological analysis. ROS levels in the wound
tissue were evaluated using DHE staining. To assess the contribution of
ROS to the antibacterial effect, we supplemented the AgNP@CV(L)
treatment with the ROS scavenger N-acetylcysteine (NAC). Processed
wound tissue was then harvested and plated for colony counting.
Determine whether AgNP@CV mitigates local hypoxia, wound
tissue hypoxia was evaluated using the Hypoxyprobe Green Kit
(Hypoxyprobe, Inc., HP6−100). Briefly, Pimonidazole (60 mg kg−1)
was administered intraperitoneally 1 h prior to euthanasia. The
harvested wound tissues were cryosectioned and subjected to
immunofluorescence staining. Intracellular Pimonidazole adducts
were labeled with the FITC-conjugated primary antibody provided in
the kit. The fluorescence intensity of Pimonidazole was quantified using
ImageJ software. In addition, to analyze the antibacterial effect visually,
the skin was collected and homogenized. Serially diluted homogenates
were plated on LB agar to quantify the bacterial colonies.
To evaluate the biocompatibility in vivo of the AgNP@CV, its
biodistribution in wound tissue and major organs was assessed at
different time points (days 0, 5, 10, and 20) using in vivo fluorescence
imaging. Furthermore, blood samples were collected from mice and
analyzed for complete blood count (CBC) as well as hepatic and renal
functions. The major organs of the mice, including the heart, liver,
spleen, lung, and kidney, were collected for H&E staining analysis after
AgNP@CV treatment.
Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as means ± standard deviations. To test the
significance of observed differences between the study groups, One-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed when more than two
groups were compared, and multiple comparisons were performed
using Tukey’s posthoc test. All statistical analyses were performed with
GraphPad Prism 9.0.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304.
Methods (cell proliferation, oxygen production under
different illumination); characterization (XPS, TEM,
EDS, particle size, ζ-potential, loading efficiency, release
kinetics, subculture stability); in vitro biocompatibility
(cytotoxicity, CCK-8 assay, live/dead staining, cytoske-
leton staining, endotoxin detection); antibacterial and
antibiofilm efficacy; mechanistic studies (intracellular
ROS detection, membrane potential, protein leakage,
antibiotic resistance gene transfer); in vivo evaluation
(wound modeling, silver accumulation, bacterial colony
counting, ROS staining, biodistribution, hematological
analysis, serum biochemistry, H&E staining of major
organs) (PDF)
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11600

■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Guangyu Chu −Spine lab, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, China; Email: 12118297@
zju.edu.cn
Yao Lu −Department of Joint and Orthopedics, Orthopedic
Center, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510260, China; State Key Laboratory of Multi-
organ Injury Prevention and Treatment, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China;
orcid.org/0000-0001-7650-4828; Email: oayul@
smu.edu.cn
Xiangling Ye −Department of Orthopedics, Dongguan Hospital
of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Dongguan
523000, China; Email: yxl20160228@163.com
Authors
Tao Liu −Department of Orthopedics, Dongguan Hospital of
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Dongguan
523000, China; The First School of Clinical Medicine,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China
Xiao Yang −Department of Joint and Orthopedics, Orthopedic
Center, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510260, China
Tairan Deng −Department of Joint and Orthopedics,
Orthopedic Center, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510260, China
Zhilong Pi −Southern University of Science and Technology,
Shenzhen 518055, China
Zhichao Tan −Department of Orthopedics, Dongguan Hospital
of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Dongguan
523000, China
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
Author Contributions
∇T.L. and G.C. contributed equally to this work. T.L. and G.C.
conceived the idea performed the experiments. X.Y. and T.D.
analyzed the data. Z.P. reviewed the manuscript. X.Y. and Y.L.
initiated and supervised the project. All authors contributed to
the discussions and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Basic and Applied Basic
Research Foundation of Guangdong Province (Nos.
2023A1515110833, 2024B1515020015), the China Postdoc-
toral Science Foundation (Nos. 2023M740862, 2024T170198).
The authors also thank Xiaohuan Zhao and Jianwen Jiao of the
Analysis Center of Agrobiology and Environmental Sciences,
Zhejiang University, for their technical assistance in TEM and
SEM measurements. The authors are also grateful to Lijun Song
for her assistance.
■REFERENCES
(1) Ciofu, O.; Moser, C.; Jensen, P.; Høiby, N. Tolerance and
resistance of microbial biofilms. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2022, 20 (10),
621−635.
(2) Arciola, C. R.; Campoccia, D.; Montanaro, L. Implant infections:
adhesion, biofilm formation and immune evasion. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
2018, 16 (7), 397−409.
(3) Goudouri, O. M.; Kontonasaki, E.; Lohbauer, U.; Boccaccini, A. R.
Antibacterial properties of metal and metalloid ions in chronic
periodontitis and peri-implantitis therapy. Acta Biomater. 2014, 10
(8), 3795−3810.
(4) Han, D.; Liu, X.; Wu, S. Metal organic framework-based
antibacterial agents and their underlying mechanisms. Chem. Soc. Rev.
2022, 51 (16), 7138−7169.
(5) Chernousova, S.; Epple, M. Silver as antibacterial agent: ion,
nanoparticle, and metal. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2013, 52 (6), 1636−
1653.
(6) Kalantari, K.; Mostafavi, E.; Afifi, A. M.; Izadiyan, Z.; Jahangirian,
H.; Rafiee-Moghaddam, R.; Webster, T. J. Wound dressings function-
alized with silver nanoparticles: promises and pitfalls. Nanoscale 2020,
12 (4), 2268−2291.
(7) Yang, Z.; Chen, H.; Yang, P.; Shen, X.; Hu, Y.; Cheng, Y.; Yao, H.;
Zhang, Z. Nano-oxygenated hydrogels for locally and permeably
hypoxia relieving to heal chronic wounds. Biomaterials 2022, 282,
No. 121401.
(8) Thangarajah, H.; Yao, D.; Chang, E. I.; Shi, Y.; Jazayeri, L.; Vial, I.
N.; Galiano, R. D.; Du, X. L.; Grogan, R.; Galvez, M. G.; Januszyk, M.;
Brownlee, M.; Gurtner, G. C. The molecular basis for impaired hypoxia-
induced VEGF expression in diabetic tissues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 2009, 106 (32), 13505−13510.
(9) Lee, P.; Chandel, N. S.; Simon, M. C. Cellular adaptation to
hypoxia through hypoxia inducible factors and beyond. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 2020, 21 (5), 268−283.
(10) Xie, N. Synthesis and antibacterial effects of silver nanoparticles
(AgNPs) against multi-drug resistant bacteria. Bio-Med. Mater. Eng.
2024, 35 (5), 451−463.
(11) Zhang, X.; Chen, G.; Liu, Y.; Sun, L.; Sun, L.; Zhao, Y. Black
Phosphorus-Loaded Separable Microneedles as Responsive Oxygen
Delivery Carriers for Wound Healing. ACS Nano 2020, 14 (5), 5901−
5908.
(12) Gao, S.; Rao, Y.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Q.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, Y.; Guo,
J.; Yan, F. Chlorella-Loaded Antibacterial Microneedles for Micro-
acupuncture Oxygen Therapy of Diabetic Bacterial Infected Wounds.
Adv. Mater. 2024, 36 (15), No. e2307585.
(13) Kang, Y.; Xu, L.; Dong, J.; Yuan, X.; Ye, J.; Fan, Y.; Liu, B.; Xie, J.;
Ji, X. Programmed microalgae-gel promotes chronic wound healing in
diabetes. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15 (1), No. 1042.
(14) Chu, G.; Guan, M.; Jin, J.; Luo, Y.; Luo, Z.; Shi, T.; Liu, T.;
Zhang, C.; Wang, Y. Mechanochemically Reprogrammed Interface
Orchestrates Neutrophil Bactericidal Activity and Apoptosis for
Preventing Implant-Associated Infection. Adv. Mater. 2024, 36 (16),
No. e2311855.
(15) Guan, Y.; Niu, H.; Liu, Z.; Dang, Y.; Shen, J.; Zayed, M.; Ma, L.;
Guan, J. Sustained oxygenation accelerates diabetic wound healing by
promoting epithelialization and angiogenesis and decreasing inflam-
mation. Sci. Adv. 2021, 7 (35), No. eabj0153, DOI: 10.1126/
sciadv.abj0153.
(16) Jia, J.; Guo, X.; Wang, Y.; Wu, M.; Wang, X.; Zhao, M.; Zhao, Y.
Living photosynthetic microneedle patches for in situ oxygenation and
postsurgical melanoma therapy. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2024, 22 (1),
No. 698.
(17) Wang, Z.; Kwong, C. H. T.; Zhao, H.; Ding, Y. F.; Gao, C.;
Zhang, D.; Cheng, Q.; Wei, J.; Zhang, Q. W.; Wang, R. Microalgae
Microneedle Supplies Oxygen for Antiphotoaging Treatment. ACS
Appl. Bio Mater. 2023, 6 (9), 3463−3471.
(18) Severo, I. A.; Dias, R. R.; do Nascimento, T. C.; Deprá, M. C.;
Maroneze, M. M.; Zepka, L. Q.; Jacob-Lopes, E. Microalgae-derived
polysaccharides: Potential building blocks for biomedical applications.
World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2022, 38 (9), No. 150.
(19) Wangpraseurt, D.; You, S.; Sun, Y.; Chen, S. Biomimetic 3D
living materials powered by microorganisms. Trends Biotechnol. 2022,
40 (7), 843−857.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11601

(20) Panahi, Y.; Darvishi, B.; Jowzi, N.; Beiraghdar, F.; Sahebkar, A.
Chlorella vulgaris: A Multifunctional Dietary Supplement with Diverse
Medicinal Properties. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2015, 22 (2), 164−173.
(21) AlNadhari, S.; Al-Enazi, N. M.; Alshehrei, F.; Ameen, F. A review
on biogenic synthesis of metal nanoparticles using marine algae and its
applications. Environ. Res. 2021, 194, No. 110672.
(22) Khanna, P.; Kaur, A.; Goyal, D. Algae-based metallic nano-
particles: Synthesis, characterization and applications. J. Microbiol.
Methods 2019, 163, No. 105656.
(23) Chan, S. S.; Low, S. S.; Chew, K. W.; Ling, T. C.; Rinklebe, J.;
Juan, J. C.; Ng, E. P.; Show, P. L. Prospects and environmental
sustainability of phyconanotechnology: A review on algae-mediated
metal nanoparticles synthesis and mechanism. Environ. Res. 2022, 212,
No. 113140.
(24) Patel, V.; Berthold, D.; Puranik, P.; Gantar, M. Screening of
cyanobacteria and microalgae for their ability to synthesize silver
nanoparticles with antibacterial activity. Biotechnol. Rep. 2015, 5, 112−
119.
(25) Ren, C.; Zhong, D.; Qi, Y.; Liu, C.; Liu, X.; Chen, S.; Yan, S.;
Zhou, M. Bioinspired pH-Responsive Microalgal Hydrogels for Oral
Insulin Delivery with Both Hypoglycemic and Insulin Sensitizing
Effects. ACS Nano 2023, 17 (14), 14161−14175.
(26) Zhao, X.; Wu, H.; Guo, B.; Dong, R.; Qiu, Y.; Ma, P. X.
Antibacterial anti-oxidant electroactive injectable hydrogel as self-
healing wound dressing with hemostasis and adhesiveness for
cutaneous wound healing. Biomaterials 2017, 122, 34−47.
(27) Liu, T.; Feng, Z.; Li, Z.; Lin, Z.; Chen, L.; Li, B.; Chen, Z.; Wu, Z.;
Zeng, J.; Zhang, J.; Hong, J.; Xia, H.; Li, L.; Ye, X.; Zhang, Y.
Carboxymethyl chitosan/sodium alginate hydrogels with polydop-
amine coatings as promising dressings for eliminating biofilm and
multidrug-resistant bacteria induced wound healing. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 2023, 225, 923−937.
(28) Choi, O.; Hu, Z. Size dependent and reactive oxygen species
related nanosilver toxicity to nitrifying bacteria. Environ. Sci. Technol.
2008, 42 (12), 4583−4588.
(29) Siddiqi, K. S.; Husen, A.; Rao, R. A. K. A review on biosynthesis of
silver nanoparticles and their biocidal properties. J. Nanobiotechnol.
2018, 16 (1), No. 14.
(30) Flores-López, L. Z.; Espinoza-Gómez, H.; Somanathan, R. Silver
nanoparticles: Electron transfer, reactive oxygen species, oxidative
stress, beneficial and toxicological effects. J. Appl. Toxicol. 2019, 39 (1),
16−26.
(31) He, D.; Dorantes-Aranda, J. J.; Waite, T. D. Silver nanoparticle-
algae interactions: oxidative dissolution, reactive oxygen species
generation and synergistic toxic effects. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012,
46 (16), 8731−8738.
(32) Jiang, H. S.; Yin, L. Y.; Ren, N. N.; Zhao, S. T.; Li, Z.; Zhi, Y.;
Shao, H.; Li, W.; Gontero, B. Silver nanoparticles induced reactive
oxygen species via photosynthetic energy transport imbalance in an
aquatic plant. Nanotoxicology 2017, 11 (2), 157−167.
(33) Xu, Y.; Yang, W.; Zhang, B. ROS-responsive probes for low-
background optical imaging: a review. Biomed. Mater. 2021, 16 (2),
No. 022002.
(34) Pranantyo, D.; Yeo, C. K.; Wu, Y.; Fan, C.; Xu, X.; Yip, Y. S.; Vos,
M. I. G.; Mahadevegowda, S. H.; Lim, P. L. K.; Yang, L.; Hammond, P.
T.; Leavesley, D. I.; Tan, N. S.; Chan-Park, M. B. Hydrogel dressings
with intrinsic antibiofilm and antioxidative dual functionalities
accelerate infected diabetic wound healing. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15
(1), No. 954.
(35) Puthia, M.; Butrym, M.; Petrlova, J.; Strömdahl, A. C.;
Andersson, M.; Kjellström, S.; Schmidtchen, A. A dual-action
peptide-containing hydrogel targets wound infection and inflammation.
Sci. Transl. Med. 2020, 12 (524), No. eaax6601, DOI: 10.1126/
scitranslmed.aax6601.
(36) Li, C.; Xiong, Y.; Fu, Z.; Ji, Y.; Yan, J.; Kong, Y.; Peng, Y.; Ru, Z.;
Huang, Y.; Li, Y.; Yang, Y.; He, L.; Tang, J.; Wang, Y.; Yang, X. The
direct binding of bioactive peptide Andersonin-W1 to TLR4 expedites
the healing of diabetic skin wounds. Cell. Mol. Biol. Lett. 2024, 29 (1),
No. 24.
(37) Maitz, J.; Merlino, J.; Rizzo, S.; McKew, G.; Maitz, P. Burn
wound infections microbiome and novel approaches using therapeutic
microorganisms in burn wound infection control. Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 2023, 196, No. 114769.
(38) Ashcroft, G. S.; Yang, X.; Glick, A. B.; Weinstein, M.; Letterio, J.
L.; Mizel, D. E.; Anzano, M.; Greenwell-Wild, T.; Wahl, S. M.; Deng,
C.; Roberts, A. B. Mice lacking Smad3 show accelerated wound healing
and an impaired local inflammatory response. Nat. Cell Biol. 1999, 1
(5), 260−266.
(39) Deng, L.; Huang, Y.; Chen, S.; Han, Z.; Han, Z.; Jin, M.; Qu, X.;
Wang, B.; Wang, H.; Gu, S. Bacterial cellulose-based hydrogel with
antibacterial activity and vascularization for wound healing. Carbohydr.
Polym. 2023, 308, No. 120647.
(40) Fu, Y. J.; Shi, Y. F.; Wang, L. Y.; Zhao, Y. F.; Wang, R. K.; Li, K.;
Zhang, S. T.; Zha, X. J.; Wang, W.; Zhao, X.; Yang, W. All-Natural
Immunomodulatory Bioadhesive Hydrogel Promotes Angiogenesis
and Diabetic Wound Healing by Regulating Macrophage Hetero-
geneity. Adv. Sci. 2023, 10 (13), No. e2206771.
(41) Ming, Z.; Han, L.; Bao, M.; Zhu, H.; Qiang, S.; Xue, S.; Liu, W.
Living Bacterial Hydrogels for Accelerated Infected Wound Healing.
Adv. Sci. 2021, 8 (24), No. e2102545.
(42) Xiang, P.; Jiang, M.; Chen, X.; Chen, L.; Cheng, Y.; Luo, X.;
Zhou, H.; Zheng, Y. Targeting Grancalcin Accelerates Wound Healing
by Improving Angiogenesis in Diabetes. Adv. Sci. 2024, 11 (14),
No. e2305856.
(43) Dai, F.; Zhang, J.; Chen, F.; Chen, X.; Lee, C. J.; Liang, H.; Zhao,
L.; Tan, H. A Multi-Responsive Hydrogel Combined With Mild Heat
Stimulation Promotes Diabetic Wound Healing by Regulating
Inflammatory and Enhancing Angiogenesis. Adv. Sci. 2024, 11 (46),
No. e2408783.
(44) Wang, Z.; Lu, J.; Yuan, Z.; Pi, W.; Huang, X.; Lin, X.; Zhang, Y.;
Lei, H.; Wang, P. Natural Carrier-Free Binary Small Molecule Self-
Assembled Hydrogel Synergize Antibacterial Effects and Promote
Wound Healing by Inhibiting Virulence Factors and Alleviating the
Inflammatory Response. Small 2023, 19 (5), No. e2205528.
(45) Lv, D.; Cao, X.; Zhong, L.; Dong, Y.; Xu, Z.; Rong, Y.; Xu, H.;
Wang, Z.; Yang, H.; Yin, R.; Chen, M.; Ke, C.; Hu, Z.; Deng, W.; Tang,
B. Targeting phenylpyruvate restrains excessive NLRP3 inflammasome
activation and pathological inflammation in diabetic wound healing.
Cell Rep. Med. 2023, 4 (8), No. 101129.
(46) Peña, O. A.; Martin, P. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of
skin wound healing. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2024, 25 (8), 599−616.
(47) Larsson, D. G. J.; Flach, C. F. Antibiotic resistance in the
environment. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2022, 20 (5), 257−269.
(48) Guo, Z.; Jiang, H.; Song, A.; Liu, X.; Wang, X. Progress and
challenges in bacterial infection theranostics based on functional metal
nanoparticles. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2024, 332, No. 103265.
(49) Wang, Y. L.; Lee, Y. H.; Chou, C. L.; Chang, Y. S.; Liu, W. C.;
Chiu, H. W. Oxidative stress and potential effects of metal
nanoparticles: A review of biocompatibility and toxicity concerns.
Environ. Pollut. 2024, 346, No. 123617.
(50) Lee, I.; Surendran, A.; Fleury, S.; Gimino, I.; Curtiss, A.; Fell, C.;
Shiwarski, D. J.; Refy, O.; Rothrock, B.; Jo, S.; Schwartzkopff, T.; Mehta,
A. S.; Wang, Y.; Sipe, A.; John, S.; Ji, X.; Nikiforidis, G.; Feinberg, A. W.;
Hester, J.; Weber, D. J.; Veiseh, O.; Rivnay, J.; Cohen-Karni, T.
Electrocatalytic on-site oxygenation for transplanted cell-based-
therapies. Nat. Commun. 2023, 14 (1), No. 7019.
(51) Wang, Z.; Chen, T.; Li, X.; Guo, B.; Liu, P.; Zhu, Z.; Xu, R. X.
Oxygen-releasing biomaterials for regenerative medicine. J. Mater.
Chem. B 2023, 11 (31), 7300−7320.
(52) Wei, Y. J.; Chen, H.; Zhou, Z. W.; Liu, C. X.; Cai, C. X.; Li, J.; Yu,
X. Q.; Zhang, J.; Liu, Y. H.; Wang, N. Kill Two Birds with One Stone:
Dual-Metal MOF-Nanozyme-Decorated Hydrogels with ROS-Scav-
enging, Oxygen-Generating, and Antibacterial Abilities for Accelerating
Infected Diabetic Wound Healing. Small 2024, 20 (48), No. e2403679.
(53) Yang, Y.; Guo, L.; Wang, Z.; Liu, P.; Liu, X.; Ding, J.; Zhou, W.
Targeted silver nanoparticles for rheumatoid arthritis therapy via
macrophage apoptosis and Re-polarization. Biomaterials 2021, 264,
No. 120390.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11602

(54) Zhao, M.; Kang, M.; Wang, J.; Yang, R.; Zhong, X.; Xie, Q.; Zhou,
S.; Zhang, Z.; Zheng, J.; Zhang, Y.; Guo, S.; Lin, W.; Huang, J.; Guo, G.;
Fu, Y.; Li, B.; Fan, Z.; Li, X.; Wang, D.; Chen, X.; Tang, B. Z.; Liao, Y.
Stem Cell-Derived Nanovesicles Embedded in Dual-Layered Hydrogel
for Programmed ROS Regulation and Comprehensive Tissue
Regeneration in Burn Wound Healing. Adv. Mater. 2024, 36 (32),
No. e2401369.
(55) Yang, L.; Zhang, D.; Li, W.; Lin, H.; Ding, C.; Liu, Q.; Wang, L.;
Li, Z.; Mei, L.; Chen, H.; Zhao, Y.; Zeng, X. Biofilm microenvironment
triggered self-enhancing photodynamic immunomodulatory micro-
needle for diabetic wound therapy. Nat. Commun. 2023, 14 (1),
No. 7658.
(56) Li, M.; Zhou, S.; Yu, Q.; Wang, C.; Chen, H.; Ma, Y.; Fan, H.; Ni,
T.; Lu, M.; Yao, M. A sprayable TQ/Ce6@SAB/F-gel for accelerating
wound healing via hypoxia-tolerant photodynamic therapy and
immune-metabolic pathway. Biomaterials 2026, 325, No. 123602.
(57) Cheng, K.; Wang, H.; Sun, S.; Wu, M.; Shen, H.; Chen, K.;
Zhang, Z.; Li, S.; Lin, H. Specific Chemiluminescence Imaging and
Enhanced Photodynamic Therapy of Bacterial Infections by Hemin-
Modified Carbon Dots. Small 2023, 19 (31), No. e2207868.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5c16304
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 11585−11603
11603