Gold nanoparticle-loaded multifunctional Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets 
fabricated by in situ reduction to effectively enhance their catalase-like 
activity for tumor therapy
Yuhao Guo a,b, Jinyu Wang a, Xiaomei Wu b, Qianqian Qiao b, Tao Liao a, Linwei Li b,  
Ziqiang Xu b, Di-Wei Zheng c,d,**, Ying Kuang a,*, Wenqian Yu b,*, Cao Li a,b,***
a Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Cooperative Innovation Center of Industrial Fermentation (Ministry of Education & Hubei 
Province), National “111” Center for Cellular Regulation and Molecular Pharmaceutics, Glyn O. Phillips Hydrocolloid Research Centre at HBUT, School of Life and 
Health Sciences, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan 430068, PR China
b Ministry-of-Education Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Hubei Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials, College of Health 
Science and Engineering, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, PR China
c State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China
d Key Laboratory of Biopharmaceutical Preparation and Delivery, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
MXene
In situ reduction
Nanozyme
Cascade enzyme system
Combination therapy
A B S T R A C T
Designing novel, high-performance nanozymes is essential for developing biocatalytic therapeutics, a promising 
therapeutic approach. In this work, gold nanoparticles (Au NPs)-loaded Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets (Ti3C2Tx-Au) 
are prepared by in situ reduction and then modified with polyethylene glycol (PEG) to obtain a multifunctional 
anticancer cascade enzyme system, Ti3C2Tx-Au-PEG (TANP). The photothermal properties of Ti3C2Tx in the near- 
infrared (NIR) region allow for its use in photothermal therapy (PTT). The complexation of Au NPs with Ti3C2Tx 
significantly enhances the catalase-like (CAT) activity of TANP, while incubating the glucose oxidase (GOx)- and 
peroxidase (POD)-like properties of TANP. The strong CAT-like property of TANP allows it to decompose the 
H2O2 overexpressed in cancer cells into O2, which alleviates hypoxia. It can also be used for glucose catabolism in 
cancer cells, i.e., GOx-like induced starvation therapy. H2O2, one of the glucose degradation products, can be 
supplied to TANP to generate O2 and POD-like induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation to kill cancer 
cells. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations provide possible reasons for the enhanced CAT-like activity of 
Ti3C2Tx-Au. Photothermal can enhance enzyme activity and can also be combined with biocatalytic therapy to 
achieve good therapeutic effects.
Introduction
Enzymes are a class of biocatalysts that control many catalytic pro­
cesses such as metabolism, nutrition, and energy conversion in organ­
isms, and most reactions closely related to life processes are enzyme- 
catalyzed reactions [1]. In cancer therapy, enzymes can be used as 
therapeutic targets, tools, and biocatalytic drugs [2–4]. For example, 
proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC) protein degraders, which have 
become very popular in recent years, use their special molecular struc­
ture to bind target proteins to E3 ligase to degrade them [5,6]. Glucose 
oxidase (GOx) effectively depleted glucose in cancer cells, providing an 
approach to starvation therapy [7,8]. However, biocatalytic drugs based 
on natural enzymes have been limited in their further research and 
application by inherent defects such as poor stability, susceptibility to 
degradation, immunogenicity, and lack of targeting [4,9]. As a result, 
since the first report of horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-like activity of 
* Corresponding authors.
** Corresponding author at: State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR 
China.
*** Corresponding author at: Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Cooperative Innovation Center of Industrial Fermentation 
(Ministry of Education & Hubei Province), National “111” Center for Cellular Regulation and Molecular Pharmaceutics, Glyn O. Phillips Hydrocolloid Research 
Centre at HBUT, School of Life and Health Sciences, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan 430068, PR China.
E-mail addresses: dwzheng@ipe.ac.cn (D.-W. Zheng), lazywawa@163.com (Y. Kuang), wenqianyu@hubu.edu.cn (W. Yu), licao0415@163.com (C. Li). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Nano Today
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nanotoday
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2025.102848
Received 28 January 2025; Received in revised form 22 May 2025; Accepted 26 June 2025  
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
Available online 28 June 2025 
1748-0132/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

Fe3O4 nanoparticles (NPs) by Yan et al. [10], researchers have focused 
on discovering and developing novel enzyme mimics or nanozymes, and 
several anticancer nanomedicines have been developed based on them 
[11–13]. For example, nanozymes with peroxidase (POD)-like activity 
can convert H2O2 that is overexpressed in the tumor microenvironment 
(TME) into reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as hydroxyl radicals 
(•OH), which have a strong oxidative capacity and can kill cancer cells 
[14,15]. Catalase (CAT) mimetics, on the other hand, can reduce H2O2 
to O2 to alleviate tumor hypoxia, thereby enhancing the efficacy of many 
oxygen-dependent therapies [16,17]. In most cases, nanozymes are 
multi-enzyme in nature and can also be combined with other natural 
enzymes or enzyme mimics to form cascade enzyme systems, or in 
combination with other therapies to more effectively counteract the 
adverse effects of a particular TME on the treatment and enhance 
therapeutic efficacy [18,19].
Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal carbides, nitrides, and car­
bonitrides (MXenes) are among today’s hottest materials and were 
selected by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry 
(IUPAC) as one of the IUPAC’s 2024 Top Ten Emerging Technologies in 
Chemistry [20]. MXenes have unique physicochemical properties 
including a large specific surface area, flexibility, attractive ceramic 
properties, and electrical conductivity [21,22], which make them 
extensively researched in the fields of energy storage [23,24], environ­
mental protection [25,26], catalysis [27,28], sensing [29,30], and 
electromagnetic shielding and absorption [31,32]. In addition, recent 
years have seen an increase in research efforts exploring the potential of 
MXene in the field of biomedical applications [33–35]. Like many other 
2D materials, such as graphene, black phosphorus, and 2D transition 
metal sulfides, MXene has photothermal properties [36,37]. Therefore, 
to our knowledge, the first time MXene was used in cancer therapy was 
in 2017 when Shi’s group used Ti3C2Tx nanosheets for photothermal 
therapy (PTT) [38,39]. This is one of the most important applications of 
MXene in disease treatment [38–41]. Interestingly, transition metal el­
ements such as Ti, V, and Nb are often found in lower valence states in 
MXenes. For example, in the first MXene prepared, Ti3C2Tx, Ti is present 
in + 2 and + 3 valences instead of + 4 [42,43]. Thus, MXenes tend to be 
reductive. Combined with their 2D structures, the common MXenes 
represented by Ti3C2Tx have good free-radical and ROS scavenging 
abilities [44–46]. Ti3C2Tx, in particular, can decompose H2O2 into H2O 
and O2, exhibiting CAT-like behavior [42,43]. Therefore, we proposed 
the hypothesis that Ti3C2Tx MXene is a CAT mimetic and constructed 
Ti3C2Tx nanosheets as the basis for a cascade enzyme system Ti3C2Tx-­
GOx/DOX-PEG, which is loaded with both GOx and the anticancer drug 
doxorubicin (DOX) [42,43]. The CAT-like properties of Ti3C2Tx enable it 
to decompose the overexpressed H2O2 in TME to produce O2 and alle­
viate hypoxia, thereby sensitizing DOX for chemotherapy. In addition, 
O2 can also be supplied to GOx for use in starvation therapy. One of the 
degradation products of glucose, H2O2, can in turn be supplied to 
Ti3C2Tx. Combination therapy introduces a mild PTT of Ti3C2Tx at low 
doses. Yang’s group also reported a thermoelectric heterojunction 
named Pt-TiO2-x/Ti3C2Tx-PEG based on Ti3C2Tx, which utilizes its 
CAT-like property to supply O2 to cancer cells, for the generation of 1O2 
and •O2
- by ultrasound and photo-thermoelectric catalysis, which 
combine with PTT to kill cancer cells [47]. Zhang et al. precisely 
anchored self-assembled S-Cu(I)-S sites to Ti3C2Tx to construct a nano­
modulator that can trigger multiple tumor combination therapies via a 
photothermal-enhanced cascade modulation pathway [48].
However, although Ti3C2Tx MXene has CAT-like properties that can 
alleviate hypoxia in the TME to a certain extent, its enzymatic activity is 
weak, and its ability to remodel hypoxic TME is limited [42,43]. 
Conversely, GOx, as a natural enzyme, has inherent defects such as poor 
stability and susceptibility to inactivation, which make it subject to 
many limitations when participating in the construction of anticancer 
cascade enzyme systems [4,9]. As one of the first nanomaterials to be 
systematically investigated, gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) or colloidal 
gold have also been shown to possess multi-enzymatic activities, 
including GOx- and POD-like activities [49,50]. As one of the precious 
metals, gold is widely used in biodetection and anticancer fields due to 
its excellent electrochemical properties and low biotoxicity [51,52]. 
Therefore, replacing GOx with Au NPs to construct CAT/GOx-like 
anticancer cascade enzyme systems in combination with Ti3C2Tx is a 
possible approach that can overcome the inherent defects of GOx. And 
compounding different conductors or semiconductors with very 
different structures and catalytic activities is one of the ways to change 
the catalytic ability of a material [53–55]. Therefore, we also expect that 
compounding Au NPs with Ti3C2Tx will lead to more interesting 
nanozymes.
Due to the reducing nature of Ti3C2Tx, Zhang et al. recently reported 
an in situ reduction method for depositing various metals such as Au, Pd, 
Ag, and Pt on Ti3C2Tx [56]. We have independently discovered this 
method and used it to prepare Au NPs-loaded Ti3C2Tx (Ti3C2Tx-Au) in 
this work. The complexation of Au NPs with Ti3C2Tx imparts GOx- and 
POD-like properties to Ti3C2Tx-Au. This enables the construction of a 
CAT/GOx/POD-like cascade enzyme system. Introducing Au NPs 
dramatically enhances the CAT-like activity of Ti3C2Tx. This could 
effectively alleviate the adverse effects of hypoxia on the treatment. We 
present a possible process of Ti3C2Tx-Au-catalyzed H2O2 decomposition 
for oxygen production and a possible mechanism for its enhanced 
CAT-like activity by Density functional theory (DFT) calculations, i.e., 
Au NPs act as a bridge for electron transfer during the reaction. As 
shown in Scheme 1, we further modified Ti3C2Tx-Au with polyethylene 
glycol (PEG) to obtain Ti3C2Tx-Au-PEG (TANP), which is more suitable 
for in vivo applications. Once TANP accumulates in the tumor and enters 
the cancer cell through the Enhanced Permeability and Retention effect, 
it can catalyze enhanced enzymatic cascade reactions inside the cell. The 
reactions sustain glucose consumption and oxygen production to alle­
viate hypoxia, and ROS production, which can also be enhanced by the 
photothermal effect. As a result, TANP enables highly effective com­
bined photothermal/biocatalytic therapy. This work is expected to 
provide new ideas for developing novel multifunctional nanozymes with 
anticancer activity.
Results and discussion
Preparation and characterization of TANP
The nanoscale cascade enzyme system, TANP, was prepared from 
bulk Ti3AlC2 ceramics (Scheme 1). First, monolayer Ti3C2Tx MXene with 
surface terminal groups Tx (–OH, –F, and –O) was obtained by etching 
the Al layer from the Ti3AlC2 with LiF and HCl, and then the obtained 
Ti3C2Tx MXene dispersion was placed in an ice bath under N2 atmo­
sphere, and the small-sized Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets were prepared 
after sufficient ultrasonic treatment. The Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets 
loaded with gold NPs (Ti3C2Tx-Au) were prepared by adding HAuCl4 to 
the Ti3C2Tx dispersion under strong stirring, which utilized the reducing 
property of Ti3C2Tx to reduce Au(III) and immobilize it on the surface in 
the form of gold monomers. Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-Au were further ami­
nated to give Ti3C2Tx-NH2 and Ti3C2Tx-Au-NH2, which were then 
modified with PEG to produce TNP and TANP, respectively. Trans­
mission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) 
images shown in Fig. 1a-d indicate that the transverse sizes of Ti3C2Tx 
and TNP nanosheets are hundreds of nanometers in size. To further 
determine the 2D structure of Ti3C2Tx, we also obtained its atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) image and measured its thickness to be a~1.3 nm 
(Fig. 1e). The HRTEM and TEM images of Ti3C2Tx-Au and TANP are 
shown in Fig. 1f and g, and Fig. 1i and j, respectively. The magnified 
image (Fig. 1h) shows that the interplanar crystal spacing of the NPs is 
consistent with the Au (100) crystal plane. Therefore, it can be assumed 
that they are Au NPs. The presence and absence of the corresponding 
elements in Ti3AlC2 and Ti3C2Tx were also confirmed by EDS (Fig. 1k 
and l and Fig. S1).
The hydrodynamic sizes of Ti3C2Tx MXene and TANP, as measured 
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
2 

by dynamic light scattering (DLS) were ~208.1 and 296.2 nm, respec­
tively, with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 0.261 and 0.187 (Fig. 1m). 
The zeta-potentials of the products at each stage are shown in Fig. 1n. 
Due to the negative charge of the Au NP, the potential of Ti3C2Tx-Au 
(~−29.9 mV) is slightly decreased compared to Ti3C2Tx (~−26.4 mV). 
However, after amino modification, the potential of Ti3C2Tx-Au-NH2 
increased to ~+ 11.6 mV. After protecting the nanosheets with PEG, the 
potential of the obtained TANP decreased to ~−10.0 mV. Fig. 1o shows 
the XRD patterns of Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-Au. Compared with the XRD 
pattern of Ti3AlC2 (Fig. S2a), the (104) peak at 2θ ≈38◦attributed to the 
Al layer disappeared from the pattern of Ti3C2Tx. The spectrum of 
Ti3C2Tx-Au also showed the peak of Au (PDF#04–0784). These results 
indicate the successful preparation of Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-Au.
The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of Ti3AlC2 and the 
nanosheets are shown in Fig. 1p. The spectra reveal the vibrational 
peaks of the hydroxyl groups that were introduced during the prepara­
tion of Ti3C2Tx (~3442 and 1597 cm−1). The Ti3C2Tx-Au-NH2, TNP, and 
TANP spectra also show C–H asymmetric stretching peaks at 
~2987–2884 cm−1 and N–H and C–N stretching vibrational peaks at 
~3410 and 1180–1120 cm−1, which were introduced by APTES modi­
fication. Following further PEG modification, peaks of –O– appeared 
in the spectra of TNP and TANP at ~1398–1332 cm−1. The presence of 
other peaks in the FT-IR spectra, including those from –NH and 
Si–O–Si bonds, confirms that the Ti3C2Tx surface modification was 
successful. Fig. 1q shows the TGA curves of Ti3C2Tx, Ti3C2Tx-Au, 
Ti3C2Tx-Au-NH2, and TANP. The modification leads to an increase in the 
organic content, which also leads to an increase in the thermal weight 
loss of the nanosheets at elevated temperatures. The weight loss value of 
Ti3C2Tx-Au increased from ~7.1 % to ~10.1 % for Ti3C2Tx at 600 ◦C, 
which was due to the thermal decomposition of residual ascorbic acid 
during the synthesis process [57]. Based on the calculations, the content 
of –NH2 for Ti3C2Tx-Au-NH2 was ~6.2 wt%. At 600 ◦C, the weight loss 
of TANP further increased to ~22.6 %. From the thermal weight loss 
data, the PEG content can be calculated to be ~1.83 wt%. Fig. 1r and 
Fig. S3 show the XPS spectra of the nanosheets before and after modi­
fication. As the modification proceeds, the signal of Ti–C decreases, 
while the signal of Ti–O increases, indicating an oxidation reaction. In 
addition, Au and N signals appear in the spectra of TANP that were not 
present in the spectra of Ti3C2Tx, and the binding energies of Ti and C 
shift slightly. Compared to Ti3C2Tx, the intensity of Ti–C 2p3/2 in 
Ti3C2Tx-Au decreased, indicating the decrease of Ti3C2Tx, which was 
related to the oxidation of Ti3C2Tx (Fig. S3a and b). The presence of Au 
4 f and N 1 s signals indicated successful gold loading and amino 
modification, respectively (Fig. S3c and d). Compared to Ti3C2T­
x-Au-NH2, the peak intensity of C–C in TANP was significantly 
enhanced, indicating successful PEG coating (Fig. S3e and f).
In addition, the stability of TANP in deionized (DI) water and an 
RPMI 1640 medium containing 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) was 
evaluated. After five days of immersion and shaking in the medium, the 
particle size of TANP, as determined by DLS, was still ~200–300 nm 
(Fig. S2b). The decrease in particle size may be related to nanoparticle 
oxidation and structural disruption. This study confirmed that TANP 
remains non-agglomerated in different media, making it suitable for 
biological studies.
Photothermal properties
As shown in Fig. S4a, the Ti3C2Tx dispersions exhibit broad absorp­
tion with the maximum absorption at ~772 nm. Following modifica­
tion, the maximum absorption peaks of TNP (Fig. S4b) and TANP 
(Fig. S4c) shift slightly toward the red. There is an obvious peak at 
~600 nm for TANP compared to TNP, which should be the absorption of 
the Au NPs. Absorbance at 808 nm increases linearly with increasing 
Ti3C2Tx concentration (Fig. S4b and c). Using the Lambert-Beer law, the 
extinction coefficients (ε) of TNP and TANP at 808 nm were calculated 
to be ~23.7 (Fig. S4d) and 18.1 L•g−1•cm−1 (Fig. 2a), respectively 
(calculated as Ti3C2Tx concentration). The partial oxidation of Ti3C2Tx 
during Au NP modification may have affected its NIR light absorption. 
Nevertheless, the results still indicate that TNP and TANP have photo­
thermal potential in the NIR region.
Next, the photothermal properties of TNP and TANP dispersions 
were investigated under 808 nm laser irradiation. The photothermal 
Scheme 1. Schematic diagram of the preparation of TANP and its mechanism of catalyzing cascade enzyme reaction and synergizing with PTT for cancer therapy in 
cancer cells.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
3 

Fig. 1. HRTEM images of (a) Ti3C2Tx, (c and d) TNP, (f) Ti3C2Tx-Au, and (i and j) TANP. TEM images of (b) Ti3C2Tx and (g) Ti3C2Tx-Au. h) Magnified HRTEM image 
of a single Au NP. (e) AFM image of Ti3C2Tx. EDS mapping of (k) Ti3C2Tx and (l) Ti3C2Tx-Au. (m) Size distribution diagrams, (n) zeta-potentials, (o) XRD patterns, and 
(q) TGA curves of Ti3C2Tx, Ti3C2Tx-Au, Ti3C2Tx-Au-NH2, and TANP. (p) FT-IR spectra of Ti3AlC2, Ti3C2Tx, Ti3C2Tx-Au, Ti3C2Tx-Au-NH2, TNP, and TANP. (r) XPS 
patterns of Ti3C2Tx, Ti3C2Tx-Au, Ti3C2Tx-Au-NH2, and TANP.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
4 

curves showed a concentration-dependent increase in temperature for 
both dispersions, indicating that they can efficiently convert laser en­
ergy into heat (Fig. S4e and Fig. 2b). After 15 min of irradiation, the 
temperature of the TNP dispersion (50 μg•mL−1, calculated as Ti3C2Tx 
concentration) increased by ~40.2 ◦C at a power density of 1.0 W•cm−2, 
which was ~39.2 ◦C for TANP. We also investigated the photothermal 
effect of both dispersions (50 μg•mL−1, calculated as Ti3C2Tx concen­
tration) at different laser power densities. The results showed significant 
power-dependent photothermal properties, with temperature increases 
of ~48.7 and 44.8 ◦C for TNP and TANP, respectively, within 15 min 
(Fig. S4f and Fig. 2c). Both dispersions were also exposed to the laser for 
900 s, followed by 900 s without the laser to test their photothermal 
cycling properties (Fig. S4g and Fig. 2d). There was no degradation in 
performance over five on/off cycles, demonstrating their high photo­
thermal stability.
As shown in Fig. S4h and i and Fig. 2e and f, the systematic heat 
transfer time constants (τs) at 808 nm were calculated to be ~318.3 and 
349.3 s, respectively, for TNP and TANP, based on the linear time data of 
the negative natural logarithm of the cooling cycle versus the driving 
force temperature obtained from the cooling phase of the nanosheets. 
The photothermal conversion efficiencies (η) at 808 nm were ~42.2 % 
and 30.9 %, respectively. The photothermal efficiency decreased 
slightly due to the oxidation of Ti3C2Tx caused by the growth of Au NPs 
on its surface. These results also suggest that TANP has potential as a 
PTT reagent.
In vitro CAT-like activity
First, the ability of TANP to decompose H2O2 was investigated using 
a catalase assay kit. TNP without Au NPs was also used as a reference. 
The kit provided H2O2 to oxidize the substrate under the catalytic action 
of peroxidase, and the maximum absorbance of the product was 520 nm 
[58]. As shown in Fig. 3a and Fig. S5a, the higher concentrations of 
Ti3C2Tx result in lower absorbance at 520 nm. The corresponding ab­
sorption spectra are shown in Fig. S6a and b. This indicates that Ti3C2Tx 
can decompose H2O2, which is in line with previous reports [59], and 
also shows that TANP can decompose more H2O2 than TNP at the same 
Ti3C2Tx concentration.
We further investigated the CAT-like activities of TNP and TANP. For 
this purpose, we co-incubated different concentrations of TNP and TANP 
(calculated as Ti3C2Tx concentration) with different concentrations of 
H2O2 in PBS at pH 7.4 and measured the change in oxygen concentration 
using a dissolved oxygen meter. As shown in Fig. S5b and Fig. 3b, both 
TNP and TANP increased the O2 concentration in the dispersion. There 
was a positive correlation between Ti3C2Tx concentration and the O2 
concentration at a fixed H2O2 concentration (200 mM). This suggests 
that both nanosheets are effective in converting H2O2 to O2, but TANP is 
more effective. At a Ti3C2Tx concentration of 200 μg•mL−1, the change 
in O2 concentration in the TNP dispersion was also ~2.4 μg•mL−1 
within 450 s, which was ~10.4 μg•mL−1 in the TANP dispersion. 
Fig. S5c and Fig. 3c also show that the change in O2 concentration in the 
dispersion was positively correlated with the concentration of H2O2. 
Similarly, TANP produced more oxygen than TNP at the same H2O2 
concentration. The Michaelis-Menten curves (Fig. S5d and Fig. 3d) and 
Lineweaver-Burk plots (Fig. S5e and Fig. 3e) show that both TNP and 
TANP exhibit CAT-like behavior with optimized steady-state kinetics 
using H2O2 as a substrate at pH 7.4 and 37 ◦C. The Michaelis-Menten 
constants (Km) are ~2580 and 578 mM for TNP and TANP, respec­
tively. And the maximum H2O2 degradation rate (Vmax) was ~6.17 and 
4.28 mg•L−1•min−1 for TNP and TANP, respectively. The decrease in 
the maximum reaction rate was due to the occupation of some active 
sites by Au NPs. Upon binding to Au NPs, the CAT-like activity of TANP 
was significantly enhanced compared to that of TNP.
We also investigated the ability of TNP and TANP to decompose 
H2O2 into oxygen at 42 ◦C, pH 7.4/5.5, and 37 ◦C, pH 5.5. At the same 
concentration, both TNP and TANP exhibited stronger catalytic activity 
at higher temperatures (Fig. S7a). Both TNP and TANP exhibited CAT- 
like activity in a slightly acidic environment at pH 5.5; however, this 
activity was weaker than that observed at pH 7.4 (Fig. S7b), which is 
consistent with those reported for most CAT mimetics [16].
We also investigated the oxygen-generating capacity of TNP and 
TANP using H2O2 as a substrate with the oxygen probe [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2. 
As shown in Fig. S8 and Fig. 3g, the fluorescence intensity of [Ru(dpp)3] 
Cl2 (Ex ≈625 nm) decreased with the increasing TNP or TANP co-in­
cubation time from 0 to 20 min at pH 7.4 in the presence of H2O2, 
whereas there was no significant decrease in the fluorescence intensity 
in the pure H2O2 and pure TANP groups. In the presence of H2O2, the 
fluorescence intensity of TANP decreased more significantly than that of 
Fig. 2. (a) Normalized absorbance intensity of aqueous TANP suspensions at λ = 808 nm at different concentrations. (b) Photothermal heating curves of aqueous 
TANP suspensions at different concentrations (calculated as Ti3C2Tx concentration) under laser irradiation (1.0 W•cm−2) and (c) aqueous TANP suspensions (Ti3C2Tx 
concentration of 50 μg•mL−1) under laser irradiation at different power densities. (d) Heating and cooling curve of an aqueous dispersion of TANP (Ti3C2Tx con­
centration of 50 μg•mL−1) for five laser on-off cycles under laser irradiation (1.0 W•cm−2). (e and f) Calculation of the photothermal conversion efficiency of TANP at 
808 nm. Laser wavelength: 808 nm. Units of concentration and power are μg•mL−1 and W•cm−2, respectively. T0 = 20 ◦C.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
5 

(caption on next page)
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
6 

TNP during the same incubation period, again confirming that TANP has 
a greater ability to scavenge H2O2 and produce O2 than TNP. Similar to 
the results obtained with the dissolved oxygen meter, as shown in 
Fig. S8e and f and Fig. 3h and i, the nanosheets produced O2 slightly 
more efficiently at high temperatures (42 ◦C) than at low temperatures 
(37 ◦C), and more efficiently at pH 7.4 than at pH 5.5. These results 
suggest that TANP is superior to TNP in terms of oxygen production 
regardless of changes in temperature or pH.
To demonstrate that it is the special structure of TANP rather than 
the simple addition of TNP to Au NPs that leads to their enhanced CAT- 
like activity, we synthesized Au NPs of the same size as those grown on 
TANP by conventional methods. Fig. S9a, b, and S9c show their TEM and 
EDS images, respectively. Fig. S9d shows their UV-Vis spectra. The re­
sults of the catalase kit (Fig. S9e), the UV-Vis spectra of the kit (Fig. S6c), 
and the dissolved oxygen meter tests (Fig. S9f) show that the Au NPs 
alone do not have a strong CAT-like activity, and the introduction of the 
AuNPs alone will not significantly enhance the ability to decompose 
H2O2 to produce oxygen.
To elucidate the mechanism by which TANP exhibits stronger CAT- 
like activity than TNP, we performed DFT calculations. To simplify the 
process, we omitted PEG and used only Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-Au for the 
calculations. The Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-Au models are shown in Fig. 3k 
and l, respectively. First, we analyzed their energy distribution in the Z 
coordinate direction (Fig. 3m and n). For Ti3C2Tx, the Fermi level is 
0.86 eV, the work function is 4.21 eV, and the vacuum level is 5.07 eV. 
In contrast, Ti3C2Tx-Au has a slightly higher Fermi level of 0.99 eV, a 
work function of 3.95 eV, and a vacuum level of 4.94 eV. Comparing the 
two, the Fermi level of Ti3C2Tx-Au increases after the introduction of Au 
NPs, indicating a change in the electron-filling state. Meanwhile, the 
lower work function of Ti3C2Tx-Au indicates improved electron escape 
ability, which may be beneficial for electron transport.
Furthermore, we compared the adsorption energies (Eabs) (Fig. 3o) 
and charge differences (Fig. 3p-r) of different systems. The Eabs of 
Ti3C2Tx (Ti) (−9.04 eV) and Ti3C2Tx-Au (Ti) (−8.50 eV) are high, while 
the adsorption energy of Ti3C2Tx-Au (Au) (−2.86 eV) is significantly 
lower. Since too strong adsorption is not conducive to the reaction and 
leads to a higher energy barrier, the Ti3C2Tx-Au (Au) lowers the reaction 
energy barrier by reducing the Eabs. Meanwhile, the charge difference 
results showed that the charge of Ti3C2Tx-Au (Au) was redistributed, 
affecting the adsorption and reaction behavior.
Finally, we present the most probable reaction path of the CAT re­
action (Fig. S10) and analyze the energy changes at three different re­
action sites, Ti3C2Tx (Ti), Ti3C2Tx-Au (Ti), and Ti3C2Tx-Au (Au), in a 
series of reaction steps by free energy changes. As shown in Fig. 3s, the 
formation of O2 is the key step in determining the reaction rate in the 
CAT-like reaction. The activation energies of Ti3C2Tx (Ti), Ti3C2Tx-Au 
(Ti), and Ti3C2Tx-Au (Au) in this step are 12.71, 11.7, and 0.66 eV, 
respectively. The significant difference in energy values indicates that 
the free energy barrier in Ti3C2Tx-Au (Au) is much lower than that in 
Ti3C2Tx-Au (Ti) and Ti3C2Tx (Ti), greatly improving the reaction kinetics 
of the CAT-like reaction. Calculations show that the strong binding with 
H2O2 affects the subsequent dissociation of the oxygen intermediate. 
When the reaction site transfers from the Ti3C2Tx surface to the Au NPs, 
the charge redistribution occurs, electron migration becomes easier, and 
the energy required for the reaction greatly decreases, promoting the 
rapid progress of the CAT-like reaction and improving its kinetics and 
catalytic efficiency.
In vitro GOx-like activity and enzymatic cascade reactions
Au NPs exhibit GOx-like activity, catalyzing the formation of glu­
conic acid and H2O2 from glucose in the presence of O2 [60]. We 
investigated the ability of TANP to degrade glucose using a glucose 
content kit at various temperatures and pH values, with TNP serving as 
the control. As shown in Fig. 4a and S11, TNP does not affect the kit’s 
absorbance at 510 nm. In contrast, the absorbance of the kit decreased 
with increasing TANP concentration after TANP treatment. Increasing 
temperature and decreasing pH enhance the GOx-like ability of TANP. 
These results demonstrate that the introduction of Au NPs endows TNP 
with GOx-like activity, enabling it to degrade glucose. This suggests that 
TANP shows promise for starvation therapy.
One of the products of GOx-catalyzed glucose degradation is glu­
conic acid. Therefore, to further investigate the GOx-like behavior of 
TANP, we measured the pH change of the TANP dispersion solution 
(Ti3C2Tx concentration of 100 μg•mL−1) after co-incubation with 
glucose. As shown in Fig. 4b, the pH of the TANP dispersion decreased 
from 8.0 to 4.1 after 8 h at 37 ◦C, which also indicates that TANP has 
good long-term stability and GOx-like activity.
Since TANP has both CAT-like and GOx-like activities, we believe 
that TANP should be able to form a GOx/CAT-like enzymatic cascade 
system: 
GOx-like: 2C6H12O2 + O2 → 2C6H12O7 + 2H2O2                             
(1)
CAT-like: 2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2                                                       
(2)
To verify this conjecture, a dissolved oxygen meter was used to 
measure the change in O2 concentration in the TANP dispersion in the 
presence of glucose only. As shown in Fig. 3f, the concentration of dis­
solved oxygen in the dispersion slowly increased over time, indicating 
that the enzymatic cascade reaction was successfully performed. Similar 
results were obtained using the [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2 probe (Fig. S5f and 
Fig. 3j).
In most cases, the same nanozymes that catalyze the decomposition 
of H2O2 will tend to exhibit CAT-like behavior in neutral and alkaline 
environments and, due to H+, will tend to exhibit peroxidase (POD)-like 
behavior in acidic conditions, catalyzing the decomposition of H2O2 to 
ROS [16,61]. Fig. 4c, d, and Fig. S12 show the ability of TNP and TANP 
to oxidize methylene blue (MB) at different pH values and temperatures 
in the presence of H2O2. As shown in Fig. 4c, TNP did not significantly 
degrade MB at pH 7.4 or 5.5. This suggests that TNP does not readily 
decompose H2O2 to produce ROS. TANP, on the other hand, signifi­
cantly degraded MB in the presence of H2O2 (Fig. 4d). Introducing Au 
NPs conferred TANP POD-like activity. As temperature increased or pH 
decreased, MB degradation increased. These results suggest that the 
photothermal and weakly acidic environments within tumors and can­
cer cells favor the TANP decomposition of H2O2 to produce ROS. 
Therefore, TANP is more suitable for combined PTT for tumor treat­
ment. The oxidation of o-phenylenediamine (OPD) also confirms the 
formation of free radicals. As shown in Fig. 4e, the absorbance of 
oxidized OPD (OPDox) at ~410 nm was gradually enhanced with 
Fig. 3. Studies on the CAT-like activity of TANP and its mechanism: (a) Relative residue of H2O2, tested by a catalase kit. (b) Changes in oxygen concentration of 
H2O2 solution (200 mM) co-incubated with different concentrations of TANP (calculated as Ti3C2Tx concentration) at 37 ◦C and pH 7.4. Unit: μg•mL−1. (c) Changes in 
oxygen concentration of TANP suspensions (concentration of Ti3C2Tx of 50 μg•mL−1) co-incubated with different concentrations of H2O2 at 37 ◦C and pH 7.4. Unit: 
mM. (d) Michaelis-Menten kinetic analysis and (e) Lineweaver-Burk plot of CAT-like activity of TANP with H2O2 as substrate. (f) Changes in oxygen concentration of 
TANP suspension with glucose as substrate. Normalized fluorescence intensity of [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2 incubated with (g) different substances, with (h) TNP and (i) TANP 
(concentration of Ti3C2Tx of 50 μg•mL−1) + H2O2 (20 mM) for 20 min at different temperatures and pH values, and (j) TANP (concentration of Ti3C2Tx of 
100 μg•mL−1) + glucose (10 mM) for different times. The structural models of (k) Ti3C2Tx and (l) Ti3C2Tx-Au. Calculated work function of (m) Ti3C2Tx and (n) 
Ti3C2Tx-Au. (o) Calculated adsorption energy of nanosheets on different sites. (p-r) Differential charge density maps. (s) The energy profile diagram of the most 
favorable pathways for the reduction of H2O2 (CAT-like reaction) on Ti3C2Tx and different sites of Ti3C2Tx-Au, with the product marked in blue. (t) The atoms 
involved in the calculation process.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
7 

increasing TANP concentration in the presence of H2O2. As shown in 
Fig. 4f, the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra indicated 
that TANP decomposed H2O2 to produce hydroxyl radicals (•OH). The 
above experiments demonstrated that TANP possesses triple enzymatic 
activities, especially the significantly enhanced CAT-like activity 
compared with Ti3C2Tx, which solves the problem of the weak 
oxygen-producing capacity of Ti3C2Tx and has good potential for anti­
cancer applications.
Intracellular enzymatic reaction studies
Using a mouse breast cancer cell line (4T1) as a model, we further 
investigated the ability of TNP and TANP to catalyze the decomposition 
of H2O2 for oxygen production in cells using the [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2 kit. To 
this end, we employed confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) to 
observe the cells after co-culturing 4T1 cells with TNP and TANP in the 
presence of external H2O2 (100 μM). As shown in Fig. 5a, the red fluo­
rescence intensity was lower in both the TNP and TANP groups than in 
the Control group, though it was lower still in the TANP group. These 
results suggest that both nanosheets exhibit CAT-like activity in cells to 
catalyze oxygen production; however, TANP exhibits stronger enzyme 
activity. After irradiation with an 808 nm laser, there was no significant 
change in the intracellular fluorescence intensity in the Control + L 
group. However, the intracellular red fluorescence intensity decreased 
in all groups co-incubated with nanosheets. Previous experiments have 
verified that warming enhances the CAT-like activity of nanosheets. 
Therefore, we believe that the photothermal heat caused by laser irra­
diation enhances the enzyme activity of the two nanosheets, enabling 
them to better alleviate hypoxia. The TANP + L group was certainly the 
most effective in alleviating hypoxia compared with the other groups.
We also determined the changes in the relative concentration of 
intracellular H2O2 after different treatments using an H2O2 kit. As shown 
in Fig. 5b, the intracellular concentration of H2O2 in 4T1 cells co- 
cultured with TNP and TANP (Ti3C2Tx concentration of 20 μg•mL−1) for 
4 h decreased by ~11.8 % and 43.1 %, respectively, compared to the 
Control group in the absence of irradiation. After laser irradiation, the 
decreases were ~17.5 % and 52.2 %, respectively. In addition, the 
concentration of H2O2 in the extracellular medium was also examined 
using the same method, and the results followed the same trend as the 
intracellular test results (Fig. 5c).
Flow cytometry was further used to investigate the changes in 
intracellular O2 concentration after 8 h of co-incubation of nanosheets 
with 4T1 cells in the presence of additional H2O2 (100 μM). As shown in 
Fig. 5d, the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of the cells in the TNP and 
TANP groups decreased by ~40.1 and 65.5 %, respectively, similar to 
the results of the kit test. The decrease in MFI was even greater under 
808 nm laser irradiation. Flow cytometry images are shown in Fig. S13.
Since hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (Hif-1α) expression in cells is 
related to the degree of hypoxia [62] and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) 
expression is related to the concentration of H2O2 [63], Western blotting 
was used to evaluate Hif-1α and HO-1 expression in 4T1 cells under 
different conditions. As shown in Fig. 5e and f, TNP had little effect on 
the expression of Hif-1α and HO-1 after co-culture, possibly due to the 
TNP’s weak CAT-like activity and the slow oxygen production rate at 37 
◦C. In contrast, TANP significantly accelerated the decomposition of 
H2O2 and alleviated the hypoxic environment. This reduced the 
expression of Hif-1α by ~25.4 % and HO-1 by ~25.9 % compared to the 
Control group. After laser irradiation, the CAT-like activity was further 
enhanced. Compared with the Control group, Hif-1α and HO-1 expres­
sion decreased by ~52.5 % and 47.5 %, respectively. The results of the 
Western blot assay were consistent with those of the kit assay, indicating 
that TANP is more effective than TNP at degrading H2O2 in cells and 
alleviating the hypoxic environment.
Changes in intracellular and extracellular glucose concentrations in 
4T1 cells after different treatments were analyzed using a glucose assay 
kit in the presence of additional H2O2 (100 μM). After 10 h of co-culture, 
TANP significantly depleted intracellular and extracellular glucose 
concentrations, with reductions of ~43.7 % and 29.2 %, respectively, 
compared to the control (Fig. S14a and b). However, after 10 h of co- 
culture with TNP, intracellular glucose levels did not decrease. These 
results provide further evidence that the introduction of Au NPs 
imparted GOx-like activity to TANP.
We further investigated the effect of nanosheets on intracellular ROS 
in 4T1 cells using DCFH-DA. As shown in Fig. S15, CLSM images 
revealed that the green fluorescence intensity in the TNP group was 
lower than in the Control group. However, the TANP group exhibited 
significantly higher fluorescence intensity. The MFI in the TNP group 
decreased by ~13.1 % compared with the Control group, whereas the 
MFI in the TANP group increased by ~83.9 % (Fig. 5g). These results 
suggest that Ti3C2Tx can scavenge some intracellular ROS, but its ability 
Fig. 4. Studies of GOx- and POD-like activities: (a) The relative residue of glucose co-incubated with TNP or TANP, tested by a glucose test kit. (b) The pH changes in 
TANP aqueous suspensions co-incubated with glucose (10 mM) at 37 ◦C. Relative residual of MB co-incubated with (c) TNP and (d) TANP in the presence of H2O2. (e) 
Absorption changes of an OPD solution co-incubated with TANP at pH 5.5. Unit: μg•mL−1. (f) EPR spectra of •OH generated by H2O2, TNP + H2O2, and 
TANP + H2O2.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
8 

is not strong enough to counteract its generation by the PDO-like 
property of TANP. The green fluorescence of the TNP + L group 
increased slightly after laser irradiation, possibly due to hyperthermia- 
induced membrane disruption, releasing ROS from the necrotic cells 
[46,63,64]. The fluorescence intensity of the TANP + L group increased 
significantly, with an MFI ~3-fold higher than that of the Control group. 
This may be due to an increase in intracellular ROS caused by photo­
thermia or because photothermia enhances the GOx- and POD-like ac­
tivities of TANP.
In vitro cytotoxicity studies
The cytotoxicity of TNP and TANP in different environments was 
evaluated using the standard MTT assay with 4T1 cells as a model. As 
shown in Fig. 6a, TNP was not significantly toxic to 4T1 cells in a nor­
moxic environment without 808 nm laser irradiation, while TANP 
exhibited some cytotoxicity. Introducing PTT further enhanced the cell- 
killing ability of both TNP and TANP. Similarly, cell viability in the 
TANP + L group was lower than that in the TNP + L group. As shown in 
Fig. 6b, TANP exhibited similar inhibitory effects on 4T1 cells in hypoxic 
and normoxic environments, suggesting that hypoxia does not 
Fig. 5. Studies on intracellular H2O2 and O2. (a) CLSM images of 4T1 cells after different treatments, red fluorescence is excited by [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2 labeling of 
hypoxia. Scale bar: 50 μm. (b) Relative intracellular and (c) extracellular H2O2 concentration of 4T1 cells after treatments (Ti3C2Tx concentration of 20 μg•mL−1) 
without or with laser irradiation for 5 min, determined by a microplate reader. (d) Relative MFI of [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2 of 4T1 cells after different treatments, determined 
by flow cytometry. (e) Western blots of Hif-1α and HO-1 expression in 4T1 cells co-incubated with TNP or TANP with or without laser irradiation. (f) Relative 
expression values of Hif-1α and HO-1 with β-actin as an internal reference. (g) Relative MFI of DCFH-DA of 4T1 cells after different treatments, determined by flow 
cytometry. Laser wavelength: 808 nm, laser power: 1.0 W•cm−2.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
9 

Fig. 6. The cytotoxicity of TANP. Cell viability of 4T1 cells co-incubated with TNP and TANP without or with laser irradiation for 5 min (+ L) in (a) normoxic or (b) 
hypoxic environment. (c) Cell viability of L929 cells co-incubated with TNP and TANP without or with laser irradiation for 5 min in a normoxic environment. (d) 
CLSM images of calcein-AM/PI double staining of 4T1 cells after different treatments. Scale bar: 100 μm. (e) Apoptosis rates of 4T1 cells co-incubated with culture 
medium, TNP, and TANP in a hypoxic environment without or with laser irradiation for 5 min. Laser wavelength: 808 nm; laser power: 1.0 W•cm−2.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
10 

significantly impact its cytotoxicity. We also examined the toxicity of Au 
NPs as a control on 4T1 cells in both normoxic and hypoxic environ­
ments (Fig. S16a). The results indicated that the cytotoxicity of Au NPs is 
oxygen-dependent. These results suggest that it should be the multi- 
enzymatic activities brought about by the introduction of Au NPs that 
led to the killing of cancer cells by TANP. This includes alleviating 
hypoxia and enhancing starvation treatment by the GOx/CAT-like 
cascade enzyme system and the cytotoxicity brought about by the 
Fig. 7. Transcriptional analysis of 4T1 cells treated with TANP + L by RNA sequencing. (a) Volcano plot of DEGs, the red dots represent the upregulated genes, and 
the blue dots represent the down-regulated genes. (b) Heatmap visualization of the expression patterns of 1892 DEGs. (c) KEGG gene set enrichment analysis plot. (d) 
GO gene set enrichment analysis plot. (e) Circos plot visualization of the subordination between five enriched pathways and 55 representative DEGs. (f) A KEGG 
network diagram based on DEGs.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
11 

POD-like property. In contrast, better 4T1 cell killing was obtained in 
combination with PTT. In addition, the effect of incubation time on cell 
activity was discussed. As shown in Fig. S16b and c, TNP was not toxic to 
4T1 cells at any of the co-culture times from 24 to 72 h. However, at high 
concentrations, cell viability decreased over time in co-cultured with 
TANP.
The toxicity of both TNP and TANP on normal cells was investigated 
using mouse fibroblast (L929) cell lines as a model. As shown in Fig. 6c, 
the TANP and TANP + L groups exhibited weaker inhibitory effects on 
L929 cells than on 4T1 cells in a normoxic environment. Previous studies 
have reported that normal cells have better heat resistance than cancer 
cells [65] and that the H2O2 content in normal cells is lower than that in 
tumor cells [66]. These factors may explain why TANP is less toxic to 
normal cells. In addition, one advantage of PTT is its ability to precisely 
irradiate the target area. Therefore, we believe that TANP enables more 
precise treatment, resulting in less damage to normal tissues and cells.
The above results demonstrate that TANP effectively alleviates 
hypoxia. Under hypoxic conditions, CLSM images of 4T1 cells treated 
with calcein-AM/propidium iodide (PI) exhibited a similar trend. The 
red fluorescence representing dead cells was nearly absent in the images 
of the TNP group, whereas it was most prominent in the images of the 
TANP + L group (Fig. 6d). Similarly, flow cytometry detected the 
mechanism of cell death in 4T1 cells using Annexin V-FITC/PI staining. 
As shown in Fig. 6e, apoptosis, particularly late apoptosis (Q2), was the 
primary cause of cell death. This trend of apoptotic cell death was 
consistent with the results of the MTT assay. In a hypoxic environment, 
the lowest apoptosis rate was observed in the TNP group, and the highest 
apoptosis rate was observed in the TANP + L group. In short, the total 
apoptosis rate of the TANP + L group in a hypoxic environment was Q2 
+ Q3 (early apoptosis) = 98.9 %, reflecting its good therapeutic effect.
Since apoptosis is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction [67], 
we used JC-1 staining to analyze changes in mitochondrial membrane 
potential and determine if mitochondrial integrity was damaged in the 
treated 4T1 cells. As shown in Fig. S17, little green fluorescence 
appeared in the CLSM images of 4T1 cells after simultaneous incubation 
with TNP in a hypoxic environment without irradiation, indicating that 
TNP did not significantly damage mitochondria. Compared with the 
Control and TNP groups, the other groups, especially those irradiated 
with an 808 nm laser, showed stronger green fluorescence. This in­
dicates a slight change in mitochondrial membrane potential. The 
strongest green fluorescence was observed in the TANP + L group. This 
indicates the most severe damage to mitochondria. These results are 
consistent with those of the MTT assay.
Gene expression analysis with RNA-seq
RNA sequencing is an essential technique for uncovering the genetic 
and molecular processes that control cellular functions. To gain further 
insight into the biological effects of TANP on 4T1 cells under laser 
irradiation, RNA-seq analysis was performed on both untreated (Con­
trol) and TANP + L-treated cells. The results revealed 1892 differen­
tially expressed genes (DEGs) in the TANP + L group compared to the 
Control group. Of these DEGs, 379 were up-regulated (red dots), and 
1513 were down-regulated (blue dots) (Fig. 7a). In addition, a heat map 
was generated to illustrate the DEGs visually between the experimental 
and Control groups (Fig. 7b). As shown in Fig. 7c, Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis revealed significant 
alterations in ribosomal function, heat-related gene expression, and 
metabolic pathways in the TANP + L group compared to the Control 
group. Together with Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis (Fig. 7d), 
the TANP + L group exhibited significant alterations in biological pro­
cesses, cellular components, and molecular functions. This indicates that 
the cells were stimulated by photothermal heating and underwent the 
process of cell necrosis and apoptosis. In addition, a Circos plot was used 
to depict the hierarchical relationship between 55 selected DEGs and 
their enriched pathways (Fig. 7e). This visualization method depicts the 
association between DEGs and their corresponding pathways, illus­
trating their hierarchical relationship. The KEGG network diagram more 
directly represents the relationship between genes and pathways. 
(Fig. 7f).
In vivo therapy studies
Whether or not hemolysis occurs is the first consideration when 
nanoparticles are subjected to in vivo experiments. As shown in Fig. S18, 
TNP and TANP induced little hemolysis at the concentration close to the 
actual amount injected, suggesting that TNP and TANP are suitable for 
subsequent in vivo experiments.
We used 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice as a model for in vivo 
studies and first investigated the photothermal effects of TNP and TANP 
in vivo. Photothermal images of tumor-bearing mice were obtained by 
irradiating the tumor site with an 808 nm laser (1.0 W•cm−2) 8 h after 
injection of physiological saline (PS, Control), TNP, and TANP 
(5 mg•kg−1 body weight of Ti3C2Tx) (Fig. 8a and b). The temperature 
rise of tumors in the control group within 10 min was only 2.2 ± 1.1 ◦C, 
while the temperature rise induced by TNP and TANP was 13.5 ± 2.8 
and 14.2 ± 2.3 ◦C, respectively. This indicates that TNP and TANP can 
achieve photothermia in mouse tumors.
As shown in Fig. 8c, in the in vivo treatment experiments, the tumor- 
bearing mice were randomly grouped and first injected intravenously. 
The tumors in the laser irradiation group (+ L) were irradiated 8 h after 
injection with 808 nm light at 1.0 W•cm−2 for 10 min. Injections and 
light irradiation were performed on the first and third days. TNP and 
TANP were injected at a dose of 5 mg•kg−1 body weight of Ti3C2Tx. 
Changes in body weight (Fig. 8d) and tumor volume (Fig. 8e and f) were 
recorded every two days during treatment, and the mice were sacrificed 
after 14 days. As shown in Fig. 8e, tumor volume growth trends differed 
among the groups of mice. On day 14, the tumor volumes of the Control 
+ L, TNP, TNP + L, TANP, and TANP + L groups were ~91.1 %, 
111.5 %, 58.9 %, 79.1 %, and 23.1 % of the Control group’s volume, 
respectively. After sacrificing the mice, we removed and photographed 
the tumors (Fig. 8g) and weighed them (Fig. 8h). As shown in Fig. 8g, 
only TANP inhibited tumor growth in the non-laser irradiated groups. 
The average tumor weight in this group was reduced to ~74.6 % of the 
Control group’s weight. These results suggest that the enzyme cascade 
reaction has a therapeutic effect on tumors. Following laser irradiation, 
TNP and TANP exhibited enhanced tumor inhibition. The average tumor 
weight in these two groups decreased to ~57.1 % and 30.7 % of the 
Control group, respectively. Although complete tumor elimination was 
not achieved, inhibiting tumors by ~70 % after only two treatments 
demonstrates the superior therapeutic efficacy of the TANP cascade of 
nanozymes (CAT-, GOx-, and POD-like) combined with photothermal 
therapy (PTT). Additionally, as shown in Fig. 8d, the TNP and TNP + L 
groups exhibited a slight decrease in body weight during treatment, 
potentially due to incomplete –NH2 reactions on the surface affecting 
the mice. The mice in the other groups experienced a steady increase in 
body weight, which reflects the biosafety of TANP to some extent.
The extent of cell damage and necrosis was further determined using 
hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining on tumor sections (Fig. 8i). The cells 
in sections from the Control, Control + L, and TNP groups retained 
normal morphology, while typical histological damage was observed in 
the other groups. Hif-1α immunohistochemical labeling was used to 
indicate the hypoxic status of the tumor tissue. The TANP + L group 
exhibited the weakest green fluorescence, confirming its effectiveness in 
alleviating the tumor’s hypoxic environment. As shown in the Ki67 
immunohistochemical labeling images, the TANP + L group exhibited 
the weakest green fluorescence, indicating a significant inhibitory effect 
on tumor aggressiveness. A terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase- 
mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay showed that the 
TANP + L group induced the highest level of apoptosis compared to the 
other groups.
To further investigate the biosafety of TANP, H&E staining of major 
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
12 

Fig. 8. In vivo therapy studies. (a) Photothermal images of 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice after intravenous injection of physiological saline (Control), TNP, or 
TANP and laser irradiation for 10 min, and (b) the temperature rise curves of the tumors. (c) Duration of intravenous injection and laser irradiation for 10 min in 4T1 
tumor-bearing BALB/c mice. (d) Weight change curves and (e) tumor growth curves of mice after different treatments. (f) The relative volume of tumors in different 
groups. (g) Photograph and (h) weight of tumors after excision from each group. (i) H&E, Hif-1α, Ki67, and TUNEL staining images of tumor sections collected from 
4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice in different treatment groups. Scale bar: 100 μm. Laser wavelength: 808 nm, laser power: 1.0 W•cm−2.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
13 

organs was performed. As shown in Fig. S19, no inflammatory lesions or 
pathological changes were observed in any of the major organs in any 
group. In addition, as shown in Fig. S20a-c, several clinically relevant 
biochemical analyses (AST/CK/CKMB/LDH1 in the heart; BUN/CREA in 
the kidney; and ALT/AST in the liver) were within normal ranges, 
suggesting that TANP is not harmful to mice.
We also examined the distribution of TNP and TANP in the major 
organs of mice after 14 days of treatment. As shown in Fig. S20d and e, 
we analyzed the major elements Ti and Au by ICP-OES. The results 
showed that TNP and TANP were accumulated primarily in the livers 
and spleens of the mice after 14 days, and a small amount was distrib­
uted in other organs. Interestingly, the Au element was concentrated 
primarily in the heart and spleen. This may be because the TANP is 
enriched in other organs through blood circulation after degradation. 
Compared to the total dose (200 μg), only a small amount of TANP 
remained in the body.
The spleen is an important immune organ that is closely related to 
tumor growth and inhibition [68]. Therefore, we also weighed and 
photographed the spleens of the mice (Fig. S20f and Fig. S21). Inter­
estingly, the smaller the spleen and the lighter the weight, the better the 
tumor suppression effect. Compared to the Control group, the spleens of 
the TNP + L, TANP, and TANP + L groups were reduced by ~46.2 %, 
32.3 %, and 66.2 %, respectively. This may be related to the altered 
immune response in mice caused by tumor injury and necrosis.
Conclusion
In conclusion, we prepared the Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets loaded 
with Au NPs, called Ti3C2Tx-Au, through in situ reduction. We then 
further modified PEG to produce a multifunctional cascade enzyme 
system called TANP. The Au NPs were prepared from chloroauric acid by 
exploiting the reducing properties of Ti3C2Tx. The introduction of Au 
NPs significantly enhanced the CAT-like activity of Ti3C2Tx and 
endowed TANP with GOx- and POD-like properties. Thus, TANP can 
form a CAT/GOx/POD-like cascade enzyme system. The CAT-like ac­
tivity enables TANP to decompose the excess H2O2 found in cancer cells, 
generating oxygen to alleviate hypoxia. O2 can also be supplied to 
glucose catabolism, a GOx-like catalytic reaction, enhancing starvation 
therapy and H2O2 generation. The POD-like property of TANP also al­
lows it to decompose H2O2 to generate ROS, which can kill cancer cells. 
The introduction of PTT of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets enables more 
precise light-controlled therapy, while the photothermal effect also en­
hances the enzymatic activity of TANP. Thus, such a multifunctional 
cascade enzyme system can enable efficient, precise cancer therapy.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ziqiang Xu: Funding acquisition. Di-Wei Zheng: Writing – review & 
editing, Methodology. Tao Liao: Investigation. Linwei Li: Investigation. 
Xiaomei Wu: Investigation. Qianqian Qiao: Investigation. Yuhao Guo: 
Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation. Jinyu Wang: 
Writing – original draft, Investigation. Cao Li: Writing – review & 
editing, Methodology, Funding acquisition. Ying Kuang: Writing – re­
view & editing, Methodology. Wenqian Yu: Funding acquisition.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This study was financially supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (51973053, 51773055, and 22073025) and the 
Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2024AFB540). We 
appreciate the help of CESHIGO RESEARCH SERVICE (Chengdu, China) 
on DFT computation.
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.nantod.2025.102848.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] R.A. Sheldon, S. van Pelt, Enzyme immobilisation in biocatalysis: why, what and 
how, Chem. Soc. Rev. 42 (2013) 6223–6235.
[2] B.D. Wallace, H. Wang, K.T. Lane, J.E. Scott, J. Orans, J.S. Koo, M. Venkatesh, 
C. Jobin, L.A. Yeh, S. Mani, Alleviating cancer drug toxicity by inhibiting a 
bacterial enzyme, Science 330 (2010) 831–835.
[3] T. Kodadek, Catalytic protein inhibitors, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 63 (2024) 
e202316726.
[4] R. Zhang, B. Jiang, K. Fan, L. Gao, X. Yan, Designing nanozymes for in vivo 
applications, Nat. Rev. Bioeng. 2 (2024) 849–868.
[5] M. B´ek´es, D.R. Langley, C.M. Crews, PROTAC targeted protein degraders: the past 
is prologue, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 21 (2022) 181–200.
[6] J.M. Tsai, R.P. Nowak, B.L. Ebert, E.S. Fischer, Targeted protein degradation: from 
mechanisms to clinic, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 (2024) 740–757.
[7] L.-H. Fu, C. Qi, J. Lin, P. Huang, Catalytic chemistry of glucose oxidase in cancer 
diagnosis and treatment, Chem. Soc. Rev. 47 (2018) 6454–6472.
[8] S. Agrawal, G.K. Singh, S. Tiwari, Focused starvation of tumor cells using glucose 
oxidase: a comprehensive review, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 281 (2024) 136444.
[9] S.N. Dean, K.B. Turner, I.L. Medintz, S.A. Walper, Targeting and delivery of 
therapeutic enzymes, Ther. Deliv. 8 (2017) 577–595.
[10] L. Gao, J. Zhuang, L. Nie, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, N. Gu, T. Wang, J. Feng, D. Yang, 
S. Perrett, X. Yan, Intrinsic peroxidase-like activity of ferromagnetic nanoparticles, 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2 (2007) 577–583.
[11] J. Ju, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, C. Huang, Y. Li, D. Kong, W. Shen, S. Tang, Modification and 
application of Fe3O4 nanozymes in analytical chemistry: a review, Chin. Chem. 
Lett. 34 (2023) 107820.
[12] J. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Wang, Z. Lou, S. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Qin, H. Wei, Nanomaterials with 
enzyme-like characteristics (nanozymes): next-generation artificial enzymes (II), 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 48 (2019) 1004–1076.
[13] J. He, Y. Hou, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Yan, K. Fan, M. Liang, Carbon-based 
nanozymes: how structure affects performance, Nano Biomed. Eng. 16 (2024) 
28–47.
[14] S. He, Q. Zheng, L. Ma, H. Shen, B. Zheng, Y. Zhang, H.-H. Deng, W. Chen, K. Fan, 
Mucin-triggered osmium nanoclusters as protein-corona-like nanozymes with 
photothermal-enhanced peroxidase-like activity for tumor-specific therapy, Nano 
Lett. 24 (2024) 14337–14345.
[15] Q. Yang, J. Liu, W. Cai, X. Liang, Z. Zhuang, T. Liao, F. Zhang, W. Hu, P. Liu, S. Fan, 
W. Yu, B. Jiang, C. Li, D. Wang, Z. Xu, Non-heme iron single-atom nanozymes as 
peroxidase mimics for tumor catalytic therapy, Nano Lett. 23 (2023) 8585–8592.
[16] Z. Xing, L. Li, T. Liao, J. Wang, Y. Guo, Z. Xu, W. Yu, Y. Kuang, C. Li, 
A multifunctional cascade enzyme system for enhanced starvation/chemodynamic 
combination therapy against hypoxic tumors, J. Colloid Interf. Sci. 666 (2024) 
244–258.
[17] R. Zhang, Y. Shen, X. Zhou, J. Li, H. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Zhao, H. Jin, S. Guo, 
H. Ding, G. Nie, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Yan, K. Fan, Hypoxia-tropic delivery of 
nanozymes targeting transferrin receptor 1 for nasopharyngeal carcinoma 
radiotherapy sensitization, Nat. Commun. 16 (2025) 890.
[18] Y. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Guo, C. Yin, C. Xie, Q. Fan, Self-Amplified Competitive 
Coordination of MnO2-Doped CeO2 Nanozyme for Synchronously Activated 
Combination Therapy, Adv. Funct. Mater. 33 (2023) 2209927.
[19] Z. Jiang, J. Li, G. Liu, Q. Qiu, J. Zhang, M. Hao, H. Ren, Y. Zhang, pH-sensitive 
glucose oxidase and hemin coordination micelle for multi-enzyme cascade and 
amplified cancer chemodynamic therapy, Small 40 (2024) 2407674.
[20] F. Gomoll´on-Bel, IUPAC’s 2024 top ten emerging technologies in chemistry, Chem. 
Int. 46 (2024) 8–16.
[21] A. VahidMohammadi, J. Rosen, Y. Gogotsi, The world of two-dimensional carbides 
and nitrides (MXenes), Science 372 (2021) eabf1581.
[22] N. Gao, J. Zhao, X. Zhu, J. Xu, G. Ling, P. Zhang, Functional two-dimensional 
MXenes as cancer theranostic agents, Acta Biomater. 154 (2022) 1–22.
[23] M.R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C.E. Ren, Y. Dall’Agnese, P. Rozier, P.L. Taberna, 
M. Naguib, P. Simon, M.W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, Cation intercalation and high 
volumetric capacitance of two-dimensional titanium carbide, Science 341 (2013) 
1502–1505.
[24] X. Wang, T.S. Mathis, K. Li, Z. Lin, L. Vlcek, T. Torita, N.C. Osti, C. Hatter, 
P. Urbankowski, A. Sarycheva, M. Tyagi, E. Mamontov, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, 
Influences from solvents on charge storage in titanium carbide MXenes, Nat. 
Energy 4 (2019) 241–248.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
14 

[25] M. Ozkan, K.A.M. Quiros, J.M. Watkins, T.M. Nelson, N.D. Singh, M. Chowdhury, 
T. Namboodiri, K.R. Talluri, E. Yuan, Curbing pollutant CO2 by using two- 
dimensional MXenes and MBenes, Chem 10 (2024) 443–483.
[26] K. Yang, Q. Dong, H. Liu, L. Wu, S. Zong, Z. Wang, A MXene hydrogel-based 
versatile microrobot for controllable water pollution management, Adv. Sci. 10 
(2024) 2309257.
[27] W. Zeng, X. Ye, Y. Dong, Y. Zhang, C. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Guan, L. Guo, MXene for 
photocatalysis and photothermal conversion: synthesis, physicochemical 
properties, and applications, Coord. Chem. Rev. 508 (2024) 215753.
[28] X. Pan, X. Yang, M. Yu, X. Lu, H. Kang, M.-Q. Yang, Q. Qian, X. Zhao, S. Liang, 
Z. Bian, 2D MXenes polar catalysts for multi-renewable energy harvesting 
applications, Nat. Commun. 14 (2023) 4183.
[29] R. Qin, J. Nong, K. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Zhou, M. Hu, H. Zhao, G. Shan, Recent 
advances in flexible pressure sensors based on MXene materials, Adv. Mater. 36 
(2024) 2312761.
[30] S. Lee, D.H. Ho, J. Jekal, S.Y. Cho, Y.J. Choi, S. Oh, Y.Y. Choi, T. Lee, K.-I. Jang, J. 
H. Cho, Fabric-based lamina emergent MXene-based electrode for 
electrophysiological monitoring, Nat. Commun. 15 (2024) 5974.
[31] M. Han, D. Zhang, C.E. Shuck, B. McBride, T. Zhang, R.J. Wang, K. Shevchuk, 
Y. Gogotsi, Electrochemically modulated interaction of MXenes with microwaves, 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 18 (2023) 373–379.
[32] Y. Sun, Y. Su, Z. Chai, L. Jiang, L. Heng, Flexible solid-liquid bi-continuous 
electrically and thermally conductive nanocomposite for electromagnetic 
interference shielding and heat dissipation, Nat. Commun. 15 (2024) 7290.
[33] F. Gao, C. Xue, T. Zhang, L. Zhang, G.-Y. Zhu, C. Ou, Y.-Z. Zhang, X. Dong, MXene- 
based functional platforms for tumor therapy, Adv. Mater. 35 (2023) 2302559.
[34] J. Guo, X. Zhu, B. Liang, X. Gu, C. Wu, A. Li, W. Li, Application and recent progress 
of MXene-based bioactive materials in wound management, Nano TransMed 4 
(2025) 100079.
[35] H. Guo, X. Chu, Y. Guo, J. Yang, Y. Jin, L. Zhou, Y. Peng, Q. Wang, F. Lu, B. Wang, 
A water transfer printing method for contact lenses surface 2D MXene modification 
to resist bacterial infection and inflammation, Sci. Adv. 10 (2024) eadl3262.
[36] S. Liu, X. Pan, H. Liu, Two-dimensional nanomaterials for photothermal therapy, 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 59 (2020) 5890–5900.
[37] J. Wu, Y. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Yang, D. Jin, W. Liu, D. Huang, B. Jia, D.J. Moss, 2D 
graphene oxide films expand functionality of photonic chips, Adv. Mater. 36 
(2024) 2403659.
[38] H. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Chen, J. Shi, Two-dimensional ultrathin MXene ceramic 
nanosheets for photothermal conversion, Nano Lett. 17 (2017) 384–391.
[39] H. Lin, S. Gao, C. Dai, Y. Chen, J. Shi, A two-dimensional biodegradable niobium 
carbide (MXene) for photothermal tumor eradication in NIR-I and NIR-II 
biowindows, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139 (2017) 16235–16247.
[40] R. Zhao, Y. Zhu, L. Feng, B. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Zhu, Z. Zhao, H. Ding, S. Gai, P. Yang, 
Architecture of vanadium-based mxene dysregulating tumor redox homeostasis for 
amplified nanozyme catalytic/photothermal therapy, Adv. Mater. 36 (2024) 
2307115.
[41] X. He, Y. Lv, Y. Lin, H. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Tong, C. Zhang, Platinum nanoparticles 
regulated V2C MXene nanoplatforms with NIR-II enhanced nanozyme effect for 
photothermal and chemodynamic anti-infective therapy, Adv. Mater. 36 (2024) 
2400366.
[42] Q. Qiao, J. Wang, K. Long, L. Li, J. Chen, Y. Guo, Z. Xu, Y. Kuang, T. Ji, C. Li, 
A cascaded enzyme system based on the catalase-like activity of Ti3C2Tx MXene 
nanosheets for the efficient combination cancer therapy, Nano Today 54 (2024) 
102059.
[43] Q. Qiao, J. Wang, B. Li, Y. Guo, T. Liao, Z. Xu, Y. Kuang, C. Li, Ti3C2Tx MXene 
nanosheet-based drug delivery/cascaded enzyme system for combination cancer 
therapy and anti-inflammation, Appl, Mater. Today 38 (2024) 102215.
[44] W. Feng, X. Han, H. Hu, M. Chang, L. Ding, H. Xiang, Y. Chen, Y. Li, 2D vanadium 
carbide MXenzyme to alleviate ROS-mediated inflammatory and 
neurodegenerative diseases, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021) 2203.
[45] T. Liao, Z. Chen, Y. Kuang, Z. Ren, W. Yu, W. Rao, L. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Xu, B. Jiang, 
C. Li, Small-size Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets coated with metal-polyphenol 
nanodots for enhanced cancer photothermal therapy and anti-inflammation, Acta 
Biomater. 159 (2023) 312–323.
[46] J. Liu, W. Lu, X. Lu, L. Zhang, H. Dong, Y. Li, Versatile Ti3C2Tx MXene for free- 
radical scavenging, Nano Res. 15 (2022) 2558–2566.
[47] Y. Zhu, Q. Hao, H. Zhu, R. Zhao, L. Feng, S. He, W. Wang, G. He, B. Liu, P. Yang, 
Thermoelectric nanoheterojunction-mediated multiple energy conversion for 
enhanced cancer therapy, ACS Nano 18 (2024) 34257–34271.
[48] Y. Zhang, S. Ya, J. Huang, Y. Ju, X. Fang, X. Ouyang, Q. Zeng, X. Zhou, X. Yan, 
G. Nie, K. Fan, B. Zhang, Spatial Isolation of Single Copper(I) Sites for Cascade 
Enzyme-Like Catalysis and Simultaneous Ferroptosis/Cuproptosis Boosted 
Immunotherapy, Exploration 5 (2025) 20240275.
[49] J. Chen, Q. Ma, M. Li, D. Chao, L. Huang, W. Wu, Y. Fang, S. Dong, Glucose-oxidase 
like catalytic mechanism of noble metal nanozymes, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021) 
3375.
[50] Q. Yao, L. Liu, Z. Cai, M. Meng, S. Luo, J. Gong, Visual and photoelectrochemical 
analysis of antibiotic resistance genes enabled by surface-engineered ZIF-8@Au 
cascade nanozymes, Biosens. Bioelectron. 261 (2024) 116470.
[51] J.J. Li, D. Hartono, C.-N. Ong, B.-H. Bay, L.-Y.L. Yung, Autophagy and oxidative 
stress associated with gold nanoparticles, Biomaterials 31 (2010) 5996–6003.
[52] Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Lu, S. Gong, H. Haick, W. Cheng, Y. Wang, Tailor-made gold 
nanomaterials for applications in soft bioelectronics and optoelectronics, Adv. 
Mater. 36 (2024) 2405046.
[53] Q. Qiao, Z. Liu, F. Hu, Z. Xu, Y. Kuang, C. Li, A Novel Ce─Mn heterojunction-based 
multi-enzymatic nanozyme with cancer-specific enzymatic activity and 
photothermal capacity for efficient tumor combination therapy, Adv. Funct. Mater. 
35 (2025) 2414837.
[54] X.-L. Song, L. Chen, J.-T. Ren, L.-J. Gao, Z.-Y. Yuan, Engineering of g-C3N4-based 
composites for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting: recent progress, 
challenges and perspective, Coord. Chem. Rev. 507 (2024) 215752.
[55] Y. Absalan, M. Gholizadeh, E.-B. Kim, S. Ameen, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, H. He, Recent 
progress on organic metal compound/MOF hybrids: from controllable synthesis to 
potential catalytic applications, Coordin, Chem. Rev. 515 (2024) 215972.
[56] Q. Zhang, J.-a Wang, Q. Yu, Q. Li, R. Fan, C. Li, Y. Fan, C. Zhao, W. Cheng, P. Ji, 
J. Sheng, C. Zhang, S. Xie, G. Henkelman, H. Li, Metal/MXene composites via in 
situ reduction, Nat. Synth. 4 (2025) 252–261.
[57] J. Shi, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, C. Wang, Investigation of thermal decomposition of 
ascorbic acid by TG-FTIR and thermal kinetics analysis, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 77 
(2013) 116–119.
[58] X. Ye, L. Xia, H. Yang, J. Xu, T. Liu, L. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Chen, D. Du, W. Feng, 
Reactive oxygen/nitrogen species scavenging multi-enzyme mimetic ultrasmall 
calcium hexacyanoferrate (III) nanozyme for hypertension remedy, Mater. Today 
68 (2023) 148–163.
[59] X. Zhao, L.-Y. Wang, J.-M. Li, L.-M. Peng, C.-Y. Tang, X.-J. Zha, K. Ke, M.-B. Yang, 
B.-H. Su, W. Yang, Redox-mediated artificial non-enzymatic antioxidant mxene 
nanoplatforms for acute kidney injury alleviation, Adv. Sci. 8 (2021) 2101498.
[60] J. Chen, Q. Ma, M. Li, D. Chao, L. Huang, W. Wu, Y. Fang, S. Dong, Glucose-oxidase 
like catalytic mechanism of noble metal nanozymes, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021) 
3375.
[61] D. Jana, D. Wang, A.K. Bindra, Y. Guo, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, Ultrasmall alloy nanozyme 
for ultrasound- and near-infrared light-promoted tumor ablation, ACS Nano 15 
(2021) 7774–7782.
[62] Q. Wu, L. You, E. Nepovimova, Z. Heger, W. Wu, K. Kuca, V. Adam, Hypoxia- 
inducible factors: master regulators of hypoxic tumor immune escape, J. Hematol. 
Oncol. 15 (2022) 77.
[63] S. Meiners, A. Ludwig, M. Lorenz, H. Dreger, G. Baumann, V. Stangl, K. Stangl, 
Nontoxic proteasome inhibition activates a protective antioxidant defense response 
in endothelial cells, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 40 (2006) 2232–2241.
[64] C. Zhang, D.-W. Zheng, C.-X. Li, M.-Z. Zou, W.-Y. Yu, M.-D. Liu, S.-Y. Peng, Z.- 
L. Zhong, X.-Z. Zhang, Hydrogen gas improves photothermal therapy of tumor and 
restrains the relapse of distant dormant tumor, Biomaterials 223 (2019) 119472.
[65] M. Watanabe, K. Suzuki, S. Kodama, T. Sugahara, Normal human cells at 
confluence get heat resistance by efficient accumulation of HSP72 in nucleus, 
Carcinogenesis 16 (1995) 2373–2380.
[66] Z. Chu, J. Yang, W. Zheng, J. Sun, W. Wang, H. Qian, Recent advances on 
modulation of H2O2 in tumor microenvironment for enhanced cancer therapeutic 
efficacy, Coord. Chem. Rev. 481 (2023) 215049.
[67] S. Dong, Y. Dong, T. Jia, S. Liu, J. Liu, D. Yang, F. He, S. Gai, P. Yang, J. Lin, GSH- 
depleted nanozymes with hyperthermia-enhanced dual enzyme-mimic activities 
for tumor nanocatalytic therapy, Adv. Mater. 32 (2020) 2002439.
[68] Y.O. Alexandre, S.N. Mueller, Splenic stromal niches in homeostasis and immunity, 
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 23 (2023) 705–719.
Y. Guo et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Nano Today 65 (2025) 102848 
15