Drug in Drug: Quorum Sensing Inhibitor in
Star-Shaped Antibacterial Polypeptides for
Inhibiting and Eradicating Corneal Bacterial
Biofilms
Zhouyu Lu,§ Wenjie Fan,§ Yang Ye,§ Yue Huang, Xianchi Zhou, Yin Zhang, Wenyu Cui, Jian Ji,*
Ke Yao,* and Haijie Han*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Biofilm-related bacterial keratitis is a severe ocular
infection that can result in drastic vision impairment and even
blindness. However, the therapeutic efficiency of clinical antibiotic
eyedrops is often compromised because the bacteria in the biofilms
resist bactericide via the community genetic regulation, namely,
bacterial quorum sensing. Herein, quercetin (QCT)-loaded star-shaped
antibacterial peptide polymer (SAPP), QCT@SAPP, is developed
based on a “drug” in a “drug” strategy for inhibiting and eradicating
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms on the cornea. The natural
antibacterial peptide-mimic SAPP with the positively charged
amphipathic structure not only enables QCT@SAPP to penetrate the
biofilms readily but also selectively adheres to the highly negatively
charged P. aeruginosa, releasing the loaded QCT into the bacteria to
regulate quorum sensing by inhibiting lasI, lasR, rhlR, and rhlI. Thanks to its robust bactericidal ability from SAPP, QCT@
SAPP can eliminate more than 99.99% of biofilms. Additionally, QCT@SAPP displayed outstanding performance in relieving
ocular inflammation by significantly downregulating pro-inflammatory cytokines and profiting from scavenging reactive
oxygen species by releasing QCT, which finally helps to restore visual function. In conclusion, QCT@SAPP, with good
compatibility, exerts excellent therapeutic effects in a bacterial keratitis mice model, making it a promising candidate for
controlling bacterial biofilm-induced infections, including bacterial keratitis.
KEYWORDS: quercetin, antibacterial polypeptides, quorum sensing, biofilms, keratitis
1. INTRODUCTION
Bacterial keratitis, which is a rapidly progressing localized
corneal infection with bacterial invasion, inflammatory
response, and ocular surface destruction, poses a significant
threat to public vision health and remains a costly ocular
infectious disease.1−3 Thereinto, keratitis caused by Pseudomo-
nas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) has strong invasiveness and
usually causes devastating damage to the entire cornea in a
very short period, thus attracting more attention. If not treated
properly and timely, a series of complications such as severe
corneal ulcers, subsequent neovascularization, and final
scarring may arise and eventually lead to corneal blindness,4−6
whereas the current keratitis treatments like antibiotics-based
eyedrops have encountered huge obstacles, since the
therapeutic efficiency is often compromised by the protection
of biofilm on the ocular surface and the inherent resistance of
bacteria.7−9 Bacteria initially adhere to the ocular surface,
forming an early adhesion biofilm. Subsequently, they undergo
massive proliferation and actively produce a series of
macromolecules, such as proteins, polysaccharides, and
extracellular DNA (eDNA), which form the biofilm. On the
one hand, the activity of antibacterial agents can be extremely
reduced in the biofilm since the highly structured extracellular
polymeric substance (EPS)-rich matrix and the specific
microenvironment created by pathogens can act as a shield
Received:
September 1, 2024
Revised:
December 16, 2024
Accepted:
December 23, 2024
Published: January 7, 2025
Article
www.acsnano.org
© 2025 American Chemical Society
2268
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 23, 2026 at 02:57:12 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

Figure 1. Schematic illustrations and characterization of QCT@SAPP. (a) Scheme of preparation and therapeutic mechanism of QCT@
SAPP nanocomplex against biofilm of bacterial keratitis. QCT@SAPP could efficiently permeate into the biofilm, selectively adhere to the
bacteria, sustainably release QCT, and inhibit the quorum sensing by downregulate the Las and Rhl system, ultimately strongly destructing
the bacteria and biofilms. (b) UV−vis absorption spectra of QCT in methanol, and SAPP, QCT@SAPP in Milli-Q water. (c) Photographs of
QCT, SAPP, and QCT@SAPP in methanol (upper) and Milli-Q water (down). (d) Size distribution of SAPP and QCT@SAPP. TEM images
of SAPP (e) and QCT@SAPP (f). (g) Zeta potential of SAPP and QCT@SAPP. (h) Zeta potential of P. aeruginosa, HCECs, and RAW 264.7
in PBS. (i) QCT cumulative release curve at pH 7.4 and pH 6.0 over 24 h. n = 3.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2269

to protect the resident microorganisms that enmeshed within
the biofilm.10,11 On the other hand, the affinity of traditional
bactericides to the bacteria can be easily reduced whenever the
molecular structures and configurations of bacterial receptors
are altered by bacterial mutations in evolution.12 Therefore,
there is an urgent need to develop more effective antibiofilm
treatments with excellent biocompatibility and low drug
resistance for biofilm-associated bacterial keratitis.
Recently, quorum sensing as the bacterial cell-to-cell
biochemical communication mechanism has been identified
as an indispensable physiological process in the formation of
biofilms.13,14 Autoinducers secreted by bacteria during the
quorum sensing reflect the changes in the surrounding
environment and then activate a corresponding series of
gene expressions.15,16 A series of coordinated behaviors of
bacteria was regulated including virulence secretion, secondary
metabolite production, and biofilm formation.17−19 What is
more, quorum sensing not only facilitates the spread of
bacteria but also improves the resistance of bacteria and
biofilms to antibacterial drugs. Quorum sensing inhibitors
discovered in recent years have been demonstrated to pose
potent and specific antiquorum sensing and antibiofilm effects
by blocking quorum sensing without killing any target bacteria,
which can significantly reduce bacterial toxicity and minimize
the risk of inducing bacterial resistance. Accordingly, these
properties of quorum sensing inhibitors can be utilized,
enabling them to have the potential to turn into new
antibacterial therapies.20,21 Among the quorum sensing
inhibitors, quercetin (QCT), an FDA-approved natural
flavonoid, is distinguished for effective and selective inhibition
of quorum sensing in P. aeruginosa throughout the entire
biofilm formation process by inhibiting LasR-LasI and RhlR-
RhlI quorum sensing system.22,23 QCT plays a critical role in
multiple processes, including preventing bacterial adhesion,
inhibiting efflux pumps and cell envelope synthesis, disrupting
or altering the plasma membrane, and degrading the biofilm-
extracellular matrix.24,25 However, most quorum-sensing
inhibitors, including QCT, are water-insoluble, which limits
their bioavailability and bioactivity. When they are directly
chemically modified, their activity can be greatly reduced or
even inactivated. Therefore, QCT should be ingeniously
loaded to exert the antiquorum sensing and antibiofilm
effects.26−28
The positively charged antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) with
amphiphilic structures can attach to the negative cell
membrane of bacteria and exert a bacterial membrane
rupturing effect to kill bacteria.29−31 However, both natural
AMPs and synthetic AMPs, especially linear AMPs, usually
have high bactericidal thresholds, which limits their clinical
applications.32 Star-shaped antibacterial peptide polymer
(SAPP) with high spherical curvature possesses a low
sterilization threshold and is easier to permeate into dense
bacterial biofilms.33−35 The high spherical curvature of the star
topology enhances the surface charge density and strengthens
the interaction between SAPP and bacterial membranes, which
enables SAPP to have a strong membrane destruction
capability and increases its sterilization efficiency. More
importantly, SAPP itself can serve as an excellent drug carrier
for loading hydrophobic QCT in its hydrophobic cavity and
realizing slow and sustained drug release at infection
tissue.36−38
In this study, based on the “drug” in the “drug” strategy, we
designed and fabricated quorum sensing inhibitor QCT-loaded
SAPP (QCT@SAPP) for combating corneal bacterial biofilms
(Figure 1a). The SAPP serves as not only the antibacterial
agent but also the QCT carrier to efficiently permeate into the
biofilm, selectively adhere to the bacteria, sustainably release
QCT, highly suppress the quorum sensing, and strongly
destroy the bacterial membrane. QCT@SAPP synergistically
inhibits and destroys bacterial biofilms for treating P.
aeruginosa-infected murine bacterial keratitis with negligible
toxicity. Together, the QCT@SAPP displayed robust biofilm
elimination ability and effectively controlled severe ocular
biofilm infection, which distinguished itself as a prospective
candidate for managing refractory bacterial keratitis and
promoting the recovery of visual quality.
2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
2.1. Preparation and Characterization of QCT@SAPP.
To prepare QCT@SAPP, natural AMPs-inspired antibacterial
polypeptides, SAPP with the positively charged amphipathic
structure was first synthesized by N-carboxyanhydride ring-
opening polymerization of Lys(CBz)-NCA and Val-NCA
monomers using poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) as the
initiator, followed by deprotection of carbobenzyloxy (CBz)
groups (Figure S1). The Lys and Val were randomly
polymerized from the PAMAM dendritic core to form the
star arms and acted as the hydrophilic cationic segment and
the hydrophobic segment, respectively. The 1H NMR results
showed that the Lys-to-Val ratio was 2.2:1 in SAPP by
comparing their well-defined peak integrals (Figures S2 and
S3), which could well promote water solubility. The successful
incorporation of QCT in SAPP was also confirmed by UV−vis
spectra (Figure 1b) and DOSY results (Figure S4), with the
loading capacity (LC) and loading efficiency of QCT of
QCT@SAPP being around 11.3% and 25.6%, respectively,
which was calculated based on the standard curve of QCT
(Figure S5). Since hydrophobic QCT could not be directly
dissolved in water, it was physically encapsulated into the
hydrophobic interior of PAMAM of SAPP to obtain QCT@
SAPP to improve the water solubility and bioavailability
(Figure 1c). The size and zeta potential of SAPP before and
after QCT incorporation were investigated by dynamic light
scattering and transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
analysis. The number-average hydrodynamic diameter (Dh)
of QCT@SAPP shows almost no significant change after the
incorporation of QCT into SAPP (Figure 1d), both of which
had uniformly dispersed spherical morphologies (Figure 1e,f).
In addition, QCT@SAPP possessed a strong positive surface
charge with a zeta potential of +31.7 mV that was close to that
of SAPP of +35.6 mV (Figure 1g). The positively charged
properties of the QCT@SAPP enable it to penetrate into the
biofilm and adhere to the negatively charged bacteria.39,40
Besides, it also facilitates bacterial membrane destruction and
sterilization. It is worth noting that the P. aeruginosa (∼−24.9
mV) had stronger surface electronegativity than human corneal
epithelial cells (HCECs) (∼−10.2 mV) and RAW264.7
(∼−11.0 mV) (Figure 1h), making it more liable to bond
with QCT@SAPP, thus reducing the damage to normal cells.
The cumulative release curves of QCT showed that QCT@
SAPP was relatively stable in a neutral environment (pH 7.4),
and QCT was released spontaneously with only 17.67% of the
total loaded QCT after 24 h (Figure 1i). QCT is released
rapidly with 80.99% within 24 h in an acidic environment (pH
6.0), demonstrating that QCT@SAPP was more likely to
release QCT in a more acidic environment where eye
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2270

infections happen. This might be because QCT has a higher
solubility in an acidic environment than in a neutral
environment.41,42
2.2. Biofilm Permeation and Bacterial Adhesion.
Biofilms are complex communities of bacteria that form a
highly structured EPS-rich matrix, and the microenvironment
created by pathogens can act as a shield to protect the resident
microorganisms and help bacteria survive in harsh environ-
ments, including exposure to antibiotics, which is a primary
driver of drug resistance and recurrent infections. Therefore,
we evaluated the antibacterial efficacy of QCT@SAPP against
a model biofilm consisting of P. aeruginosa (Figure 2a).
Bacterial biofilm was equipped with a dense structure and
complex microenvironment, which accounts for the difficulty
for most drugs to penetrate and function. However, the
cationic SAPP can penetrate the biofilm and attach to the
bacteria to launch the antibiofilm process because of its strong
electrostatic attraction with negatively charged bacterial cell
surfaces.43 The selectivity of QCT@SAPP to P. aeruginosa and
Raw264.7 and HCEC cells was investigated by using
rhodamine (Rho)-loaded SAPP (Figure S6). Strong red
fluorescence was found in P. aeruginosa, but few were detected
in Raw264.7 and HCEC with unchanged cell morphology,
verifying the selectivity of SAPP. To track and investigate its
penetration and distribution behavior further, fluorescent dye
BODIPY-loaded SAPP and was coincubated with P. aeruginosa
biofilms and observed via confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM).44 As shown in Figure 2b, the fluorescence of DAPI-
marked P. aeruginosa and BODIPY-loaded SAPP is well
codistributed in the biofilm, demonstrating efficient pene-
tration and distribution capacity of SAPP within the P.
aeruginosa biofilms owing to its cationic nature. Additionally,
by sectional view, the overlap of the different fluorescence was
clearly observed, indicating that BODIPY-loaded SAPP
successfully penetrated into the biofilm.
We further employed high-intelligence and sensitive
structure-induced illumination microscopy (HIS−SIM) to
investigate the distribution of QCT@SAPP in the biofilm
(Figure 2c). HIS−SIM images showed that P. aeruginosa was a
hollow rod-shaped bacteria with the membrane labeled with
red fluorescence. The green fluorescence of BODIPY could be
found in the bacteria after incubating with BODIPY-loaded
SAPP for a mere 15 min, demonstrating that SAPP could
rapidly penetrate the biofilm and selectively enter into P.
aeruginosa. Hence, we can speculate that QCT-loaded SAPP
possessed rapid adsorption and may exert antiquorum sensing
effects with high availability. With the increase of action
concentration and time, the antiquorum sensing and
antibiofilm effects of QCT@SAPP may also be amplified
sharply and rapidly.
2.3. Quorum Sensing Inhibition. During biofilm
formation, bacteria are highly interactive and possess an
extraordinary repertoire of intercellular communication and
social behaviors, which form the quorum sensing network. P.
aeruginosa regulates quorum sensing mainly through the LasR-
LasI and RhlR-RhlI signaling system, which is based on N-acyl
homoserine lactone (AHL).45,46 The content of AHL in P.
aeruginosa biofilms after coincubation of QCT@SAPP was
measured. As shown in Figure 2d, compared to the CTRL
group, the content of multiple quorum sensing signaling
molecules including C4-HSL, C6-HSL, C8-HSL, and 3-OXO-
C12-HSL after coincubation with QCT@SAPP decreased by
Figure 2. QCT@SAPP permeated the biofilm and attached to the bacteria, exerting the inhibition of the quorum sensing. (a) Schematic of
the antibiofilm progress of QCT@SAPP. (b) CLSM images of P. aeruginosa biofilms (DAPI) after incubation with BODIPY-SAPP (green
fluorescence) for 15 min. Scale bar = 40 μm. (c) HIS-SIM images of P. aeruginosa biofilms (red fluorescence) before and after incubation
with BODIPY−SAPP (green fluorescence). Scale bar = 5 μm (left) and 1 μm (right). (d) Quantification of HSL in P. aeruginosa biofilm
measured by high-performance liquid chromatography−mass spectrometry after coculture with various groups. The biomass (e), pyocyanin
(f), violacein (g), and EPS (h) of P. aeruginosa biofilm after coculturing with different groups for 24 h (n = 3).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2271

more than 93.2%, 95.2%, 70.0%, and 77.1%, respectively. The
SAPP group had a slight decrease, suggesting that it may be on
account of the antibacterial action reducing the total number
of bacteria and thus reducing the HSL production. Similarly,
QCT also showed a degree of inhibition of quorum sensing,
but its efficacy was surpassed by QCT@SAPP as the
formidable resistance of the biofilm might hinder the
bioavailability of free QCT. QCT@SAPP can effectively
inhibit the production of bacterial quorum sensing signaling
molecules, thereby inhibiting bacterial quorum sensing.
The LasR-LasI and RhlR-RhlI quorum sensing system also
regulates the expression of a variety of virulence factors, which
help bacteria invade the host and evade host defenses in
infections.47 The bacterial virulence after different treatments
was studied by measuring the levels of 4 typical index, i.e.,
biomass, pyocyanin, violacein, and EPS (Figure 2e−h).48 It can
induce bacterial lysis and release cellular DNA to form eDNA,
which is one of the components of the biofilm. eDNA can bind
to pyocyanin to increase the viscosity of the solution, thereby
increasing the interaction between the biofilm matrix and the
surrounding environment and promoting bacterial aggrega-
tion.49 Compared to the phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), free
QCT, and SAPP groups, the QCT@SAPP group showed an
obvious decrease in the virulence factors, which indicated that
the decline of pathogenic virulence factors may contribute to
the enormous suppression of the invasive ability of P.
aeruginosa to normal cells and tissues especially in the early
stages of infection. Since the QCT@SAPP facilitates the
internalization of QCT inside bacterial cells, they could
promote the attenuation of bacterial virulence. Therefore, the
clustered QCT@SAPP might be helpful to retard the
progression of bacterial keratitis by attenuating the production
of bacterial virulence.
In short, QCT@SAPP could efficiently penetrate the
biofilm, and the acidic microenvironment accelerates the
release of QCT, leading to powerful antiquorum sensing effects
on the biofilm with less-secretory quorum-sensing signaling
molecules and bacterial virulence factors. Therefore, QCT@
SAPP not only exhibits a moderate inhibitory effect on
bacterial growth and reproduction but also significantly
reduces bacterial virulence factor production. This dual action
assists the body in eliminating pathogenic bacteria, inhibits the
P. aeruginosa biofilm formation, and enhances the antibacterial
effects, thus strongly inhibiting and eradicating bacterial
biofilms.
2.4. Bacterial Membrane Rupture. After penetrating the
biofilm, QCT@SAPP accumulated on the surface of the
negatively charged bacterial membrane and induced the
membranolysis to exert antibacterial activity. Cryo-TEM was
used to vividly visualize the P. aeruginosa cell morphology after
treatment with SAPP and QCT@SAPP (Figure 3a). Initially,
all bacterial cells showed intact outer and cytoplasmic
membranes. Once QCT@SAPP with a concentration of 1/2
minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) (64 μg mL−1)
was added, it can be observed to aggregate around the bacteria
via electrostatic interactions in a short time. As time went by,
Figure 3. Bacterial membrane rupture and biofilm destruction by QCT@SAPP in vitro. (a) Morphological studies of P. aeruginosa by Cryo-
TEM before and 15 min after QCT@SAPP treatment in PBS. Scale bar = 500 nm (left) and 100 nm (right). (b) In vitro antibacterial
capability of various groups against P. aeruginosa biofilms (n = 3). (c) Live/Dead (SYTO 9/PI) staining images of P. aeruginosa biofilm
under various treatments for 6 h. Scale bar = 30 μm. The CLSM images of P. aeruginosa biofilms (green fluorescence) (d) and the mean
thickness (e) after coculture with different groups in TSB for 24 h (n = 3). (f) SEM images of P. aeruginosa biofilm under various treatments
for 6 h. Scale bar = 1 μm (up) and 5 μm (down).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2272

Figure 4. Potential antibiofilm mechanism of QCT@SAPP. (a) Schematic of the gene expression of QCT@SAPP. (b) Volcano plot of gene
expression differences in P. aeruginosa biofilm after QCT@SAPP treatment. (c) KEGG analysis of downregulated DEGs. (d) GO analyses of
downregulated DEGs for biological process (blue), cellular component (green), and molecular function (orange) (e) Heat cluster plot of
gene expression differences among P. aeruginosa biofilms after QCT@SAPP treatment. (f) PPI network of DEGs involved in the biofilm
formation. qPCR analysis of the mRNA expression levels of quorum sensing genes including lasI (g), lasR (h), rhlI (i), and rhlR (j).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2273

the bacterial membrane of bacteria incubated with QCT@
SAPP appeared to be disrupted and cracked, and an obvious
small leakage can be observed in the image. Finally, some
bacterial cells were broken into isolated fragments, with
contents leaking out. Since the potassium ions (K+) are an
important part of the intracellular fluid, they can be used to
characterize bacterial content leakage and bacterial death. The
potassium leakage test showed a significant rise in the
concentration of K+ after treatment with QCT@SAPP (Figure
S7), confirming the membrane-disrupting mechanism of
QCT@SAPP against bacteria.
2.5. Antibiofilm Assessment in Vitro. The biofilm
formed by the mass aggregation of planktonic bacteria
exhibited a more complex microenvironment and demon-
strated an enhanced resistance in practical applications. The
exact antibiofilm efficiency of QCT@SAPP was subsequently
investigated by a typical dilution-plate method using P.
aeruginosa. As shown in Figures 3b and S8 and S9, the
antibiofilm efficacy of SAPP and QCT@SAPP displayed
considerable differences. Unlike its brilliant performance in
the planktonic antibacterial tests, SAPP was significantly less
effective at inhibiting biofilm formation, as the bactericidal
efficacy of SAPP at 88.5 μg mL−1 barely satisfactory with a
remaining count of almost 1.5 × 107 CFU mL−1, which still
exists a strong resistance to antibacterial agents.50,51 Surpris-
ingly, QCT@SAPP exhibits outstanding antibacterial ability,
resulting in a decrease of 99.996% of bacterial colonies at 88.5
μg mL−1, while QCT itself can slightly reduce the number of
bacteria in the biofilm. The Live/Dead staining assay provides
a clear visualization of the distinct bactericidal effects of the
various antibacterial agents in biofilm, revealing a significantly
higher number of dead bacterial cells in the QCT@SAPP-
treated group compared to the free QCT-treated group and
SAPP-treated group (Figure 3c), which verified the enhanced
antibiofilm effect of the QCT@SAPP. Therefore, we can
speculate that the release of QCT may amplify the antibacterial
efficiency in the biofilm.
Under the combination of the QCT and SAPP, the
synergistic effect of inhibiting and destroying the biofilm is
amplified. The growing states of P. aeruginosa biofilms after
different treatments were observed by CLSM visually. The
entire biofilm was stained by using Syto9, which highlighted
the entire structure of the biofilm. As shown in Figure 3d, the
image of the CTRL group and its slice showed the mature
biofilm with a dense structure, which increased its drug
resistance. The QCT@SAPP-treated group exhibited a thinner
and looser biofilm compared to the other groups; to be more
precise, the mean thickness of the biofilm in the QCT@SAPP
group showed a significant decrease of 80.3% compared to the
CTRL group, as depicted in Figure 3e. Combining the
functions of quorum sensing inhibitor and AMPs, the QCT@
SAPP can induce the destruction and elimination of biofilm
and result in the death of bacteria in the biofilm. Therefore, we
predict that this highly effective sterilization method is likely to
play a decisive role in the persistence of bacterial infection.
Apart from biofilm-induced drug resistance, the inherent
resistance of the drug also needs to be taken into
consideration. Given the possibility of the development of
resistance to QCT@SAPP, we therefore tested the increase in
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) after continuous
cultivation for 10 generations (Figure S10). We found that the
QCT@SAPP group did not exhibit any noticeable change in
MIC in 10 generations due to its physical membrane-breaking
mechanism, while the MIC of the three classical antibiotics of
ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, and tobramycin increased by 8-, 14-,
and 15-fold after six generations of cultivation, respectively.
Hence, we may conclude that QCT@SAPP can serve as a
potent antibiofilm agent that does not tend to induce bacterial
resistance compared with traditional antibiotics.
2.6. Biofilm Destruction of QCT@SAPP in Vitro. By
bacterial quorum sensing inhibition and bacterial sterilization,
the biofilm can be effectively disintegrated, which is observed
via scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Figure 3f). The P.
aeruginosa biofilm in the control group appeared dense, and
each bacterium was rod-shaped with an integral membrane.
However, the biofilm treated by QCT@SAPP appeared loose
and most bacteria became morphologically incomplete
compared with other groups. The dead biofilm debris and
QCT@SAPP attached were visible in the zoomed image.
Based on the results, we can hypothesize that the QCT@
SAPP induces the elimination of the biofilm through the
following processes. First, the QCT@SAPP penetrates the
biofilm and selectively accumulates on the surface of bacteria
by electrostatic interaction. Then, QCT is released from
QCT@SAPP and enters the bacteria cell to regulate quorum-
sensing genes. By inhibiting bacterial quorum sensing, QCT@
SAPP can help to alter the construction of the biofilm and
further facilitate subsequent biofilm entry of QCT@SAPP,
thus promoting the gradual disintegration of biofilm through
positive feedback. Meanwhile, QCT@SAPP adsorbed on the
bacterial membrane induces membranolysis and bacterial
death. Finally, the biofilm is effectively eliminated. The
above results have verified that QCT@SAPP possessed high
efficiency of antibiofilm ability and developed little drug
resistance during the process. The difference between SAPP
and QCT@SAPP in antibiofilm might be attributed to the
release of QCT, which possessed enormous inhibition of the
formation of biofilm in P. aeruginosa.
2.7. Potential Antibiofilm Mechanism of QCT@SAPP.
The bacterial biofilm gene transcriptome sequencing was
employed to investigate the potential mechanism of QCT@
SAPP in antibiofilms. The whole change of gene expression
after treatment was analyzed, and the results showed that
QCT@SAPP could weaken bacterial resistance and biofilm
formation ability in multiple ways (Figure 4a).52,53
The volcano plots displayed 3514 significantly differentially
expressed genes (DEGs), with 1497 upregulated genes and
2017 downregulated genes, respectively (Figure 4b). Further
analysis through the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment demonstrated that
the microbial metabolism in diverse environments, flagellar
assembly, bacterial chemotaxis, and quorum sensing pathways
were closely associated with the therapeutic mechanisms of
QCT@SAPP (Figure 4c).54 The gene ontology (GO) analysis
revealed that the DEGs were enriched in biological processes,
cellular components, and molecular function (Figurse 4d and
S11−S13). The DEGs were mainly in the peptide biosynthesis
process, translation, and intracellular and transporter activity,
indicating the disruption in bacterial metabolism. Among the
DEGs, partially dramatically changed genes were displayed in
the heatmap, and the genes related to quorum sensing and
virulence were generally downregulated (Figure 4e). The
drastic downregulation of the Las and Rhl systems indicates
inhibition of quorum sensing.
Therefore, the antibiofilm mechanism of QCT@SAPP
might include three aspects. On the one hand, QCT@SAPP
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2274

could influence the process of flagellar assembly, which is
essential for the motility of bacteria. Bacteria with reduced
motility have more difficulty attaching to the ocular surface,
affecting the formation of the initial stage of the biofilm. On
the other hand, QCT@SAPP could inhibit the quorum sensing
in biofilm, thus resulting in the downregulation of lasI, lasR,
rhlI, and rhlR, which are related to biofilm formation and
virulence factor. The results were consistent with the protein−
protein interaction (PPI) analyses of quorum sensing (Figure
4f). lasI and lasR as the main components of the LAS system
play a leading role in maintaining the growth and maturation of
biofilms. The qRT-PCR results verified the downregulation of
lasI and lasR, indicating that QCT@SAPP could effectively
reduce the formation of the biofilm (Figure 4g,h). rhlI and rhlR
as the main components of the RHL system play a role in
keeping biofilm channels open and fixed structures by
regulating the production of rhamnolipids. The qRT-PCR
results also verified the downregulation of rhlI and rhlR,
indicating that QCT@SAPP could effectively reduce the
formation of biofilms so that the pathogenicity and drug
resistance of bacteria is reduced (Figure 4i,j). Besides, QCT@
SAPP influences the expression of bacterial chemotaxis,
biological metabolism, and multidrug efflux, indicating that
QCT@SAPP could affect the cell metabolism of bacteria by
inducing the bacteria’s membrane lysis and biofilm destruction.
Under the dual function of membrane breaking and quorum
sensing inhibiting, thus greatly reducing the pathogenicity of P.
Figure 5. In vitro ROS-scavenging and anti-inflammatory activities of QCT@SAPP. (a) Illustration of the procedures to evaluate oxidative
stress, inflammation, and polarization in RAW264.7 cells. (b) Flow cytometer diagram of BODIPY 581/591 after different treatments. (c)
Representative ROS images of RAW264.7 cells after different treatments using DCFH-DA staining. Scale bar = 10 μm. The qRT-PCR gene
detection of relative expression amount of TNF-α (d), IL-1β (e), TGF-β (f), and ARG-1 (g) in macrophages with different groups in vitro.
The expression difference (h) and quantitative analysis of the average fluorescent intensity of CD86 (i) and CD206 (j) in macrophages were
determined by flow cytometry (n = 3).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2275

aeruginosa. Overall, the study provided a comprehensive
understanding of the antibiofilm mechanism of QCT@SAPP.
2.8. In Vitro ROS-Scavenging and Anti-Inflammatory
Activities of QCT@SAPP. The corneal inflammation caused
by bacterial biofilm may lead to a series of sequelae such as
corneal nephelopia, anterior synechia, and even blindness that
permanently affect visual quality. Therefore, apart from
reducing the bacterial burden and eliminating the biofilm,
efficiently relieving the inflammation is also a vital part of
improving the prognosis of biofilm-related bacterial kerati-
tis.55,56 Here, RAW 264.7 triggered by P. aeruginosa
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was utilized to mimic the process
of bacterial infection and the ROS elimination and
inflammation inhibition effects of QCT@SAPP in RAW
264.7 cells were investigated (Figure 5a).
Excessive ROS production during the cornea infection
damages the ocular surface and aggravates clinical symp-
toms.57,58 The reduction production of lipid ROS was
determined by BODIPY 581/591 (Figure 5b). The QCT
treatment achieved moderate lipid peroxidation inhibition
effects with a 25.8% reduction, while QCT@SAPP exhibited
the most effective suppression of lipid ROS generation with a
40.7% reduction. The intracellular ROS reduction after the
QCT@SAPP treatment was confirmed by DCFH-DA staining
(Figure 5c). As expected, the intracellular ROS levels of RAW
264.7 exhibited an apparent increase in fluorescein intensity.
QCT slightly reduced ROS levels, while QCT@SAPP
exhibited the most effective suppression of ROS generation.
In this way, we speculated that QCT@SAPP reduces the ROS,
both extracellular and intracellular, which may contribute to
the release of QCT.
During the immune process against bacterial infections, a
large number of macrophages accumulate and infiltrate the
infected cornea, causing an inflammatory response to eliminate
Figure 6. Assessment of biofilm eradication ability of QCT@SAPP in vivo. (a) Scheme of antibacterial evaluation of QCT@SAPP in a well-
established model of P. aeruginosa-infected keratitis. (b) Representative slit-lamp micrographs and sodium fluorescence staining images of P.
aeruginosa-infected keratitis on C57/BL6 mice with different formulations over a series of observation time points. (c) Corresponding
clinical score of day 10 was evaluated based on three criteria (opacity area, surface regularity, and opacity density). (d) Quantified wound
area from the fluorescence sodium staining images in (b). (e) OCT images of the cornea. Scale bar = 200 μm. (f) Murine cornea images were
taken after sacrificing and dissecting on day 3. (g) Path tracings during the visual water test. The distance traveled (h) and escape latency (i)
in the visual water test. All data are expressed as mean ± SD (indicated by error bars) based on values obtained from five biological
replicates (n = 5).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2276

bacteria. The expression of four major genes related to the
inflammatory response was analyzed by qRT-PCR to elucidate
the anti-inflammatory effects of QCT@SAPP on RAW 264.7
(Figure 5d−g). QCT@SAPP greatly reduced M1 macrophage-
produced proinflammatory cytokines, TNF-α and IL-1β by
50.0% and 70.4%, respectively, and showed a notable increase
in M2 macrophage-produced anti-inflammatory cytokines,
TGF-β and ARG-1 by 2.94-fold and 1.68-fold, respectively,
compared with CTRL groups. An increase in TNF-α and IL-
1β was observed in the SAPP group, which may be caused by
its stimulation effects with potential membrane interaction.
Appropriate but not overexpression of TNF-α and IL-1β is in
favor of the production of antibacterial molecules and with
little impact on the tissue, while a high expression of TGF-β
and ARG-1 facilitates the corneal repairment. Therefore, it was
supposed that QCT would inhibit macrophage polarization
inclining to the M1 phenotype and yield an efficient effect on
modulating M2 macrophage activation.
To confirm the impact of QCT@SAPP on macrophage
polarization, the flow cytometry assay was conducted with
CD86 labeled as M1 macrophages and CD206 labeled as M2
macrophages. Flow cytometry results revealed that QCT@
SAPP could down-regulate the M1 macrophages with 59.7%
reduction while up-regulating the M2 macrophages with 4.48-
fold increase, indicating the anti-inflammatory transformation
of M1 macrophages to M2 macrophages (Figure 5h−j). Based
on these results, we proposed that QCT@SAPP exhibited
superior anti-inflammatory efficacy, including a release-
sustainable of QCT in drug delivery and down-regulated the
M1/M2 polarization of macrophages.59,60
2.9. Toxicity Assessments. It is well-known the
biocompatibility of the agents should be adequately inves-
tigated before their future clinical translation. In this study, a
series of toxicity assessments including CCK8 assay in vitro and
ocular surface and systematic evaluation in vivo were adopted
to assess the potential toxicity of QCT@SAPP. QCT@SAPP
showed little toxicity toward HCECs even at high concen-
trations of 400 μg mL−1, which is 2-fold higher than the MBC
of QCT@SAPP (Figure S14). Since both the epithelial cells
and endothelial cells remained important components in
maintaining the normal morphology and function of the
cornea, the safety assessments were adopted in healthy mice.
Saline, QCT, SAPP, and QCT@SAPP were applied to the
ocular surface of healthy mice for 10 days to find out the
preliminary toxicity and influence. No significant damage on
the ocular surface with the epithelial cell integrity in the cornea
and no significant changes in the morphology and quantity of
endothelial cells were observed in all groups after therapy
(Figure S15). The hematoxylin−eosin (H&E) staining and
cornea confocal microscope images of the cornea after
treatment with no difference in structure and thickness in all
groups also verified the safety of QCT@SAPP. Besides, blood
biochemistry (ALT, ALB, and ALP) and blood routine
examination analysis (RBC, MCV, HCT, HGB, and WBC)
remained normal (Figure S16), with the mice’s body weight
remaining stable (Figure S17) during the whole administration
period. The histological analysis of major organs (heart, liver,
spleen, lung, and kidney) showed no significant changes in
morphology and structure after treatments, which means that
the effect of QCT@SAPP on the whole body is negligible
(Figure S18). All of these toxicity assays demonstrated the
excellent biocompatibility of QCT@SAPP eye drops in
multiple aspects. Therefore, the tremendous potential of
QCT@SAPP eye drops for future clinical applications
encouraged us to conduct further animal experiments on
bacterial keratitis.
2.10. Assessment of Biofilm Eradication Ability of
QCT@SAPP in Vivo. The therapeutic efficacy of QCT@SAPP
against corneal biofilms was evaluated by using a well-
established P. aeruginosa keratitis model (Figure 6a). In vivo
fluorescence imaging was first utilized to explore the retention
time of SAPP on the cornea using fluorescent molecular Rho
as the model drug (Figure S19). A large amount of
fluorescence remained on the ocular surface even after 40
min of exposure, indicating that a large number of Rho@SAPP
can remain on the surface of the eyeball. In contrast, the free
Rho group showed a significant decrease in about 10 min,
which can be quickly cleared. The opacity and surface
regularity of the cornea after various treatments were
monitored by slit-lamp microscopy and their corresponding
clinical scores were assessed according to opacity area, surface
regularity, and opacity density.61 As shown in Figure 6b, P.
aeruginosa infection caused severe clinical symptoms, including
corneal ulcers, opacification, edema, neovascularization, and
exudation after 16 h postinfection (Day 0) with an inferior
clinical score (11.25 ± 0.22) (Figure 6c). For the CTRL and
QCT groups, the infected corneas continued to exhibit severe
ulcers and corneal opacification over the 10 days following
infection. After topical administration of SAPP, the infected
corneas slightly improved with the clinical score decreased to
7.50 ± 1.05. In contrast, corneal edema was alleviated, the
corneal transparency was well restored to a great extent after
the application of QCT@SAPP, and its total clinical score
decreased dramatically to 2.17 ± 0.75 at day 10, showing a
statistically significant difference compared to the other groups.
Additionally, its corneal epithelial impairments recovered
immediately, since only faint fluorescence can be observed
on the cornea (Figure 6b).62,63 Actually, due to the robust
synergistic antibiofilm ability of QCT@SAPP, a noticeable
therapeutic effect was detected on the third day. The wound
area in the QCT@SAPP treatment group exhibited a
statistically significant reduction compared to the correspond-
ing areas in the other groups (Figure 6d). The OCT images
revealed the rapid decline in edema and opacity of the cornea
(Figure 6e). The cornea of the QCT@SAPP group appeared
regular semiarched and uniform tissue distribution, whereas
the other groups had awful edema and irregular appearance.
The cornea was then taken down for further observation, and
the cornea images proved the potent therapeutic efficiency of
QCT@SAPP (Figure 6f) as the background can be clearly
observed through the translucent cornea. These notable
improvements in therapeutic efficacy can be attributed to the
excellent antibiofilm activity and anti-inflammatory ability of
QCT@SAPP.
To assess the therapeutic effect in restoring the visual
function of mice, we further conducted a vision-based
behavioral water task that takes advantage of rodents’ visual-
spatial learning ability to swim to a submerged hidden platform
(Figure 6g−i and Movies S1).64 The vision-based task was
utilized to intuitively trace and quantitatively measure the
visual-spatial ability of mice after treatment.65,66 Compared to
the infected groups, the groups treated with QCT@SAPP were
able to find the target platform more easily with only 19.11 s
(escape latency) and traveled a shorter distance with 2.49 m
(distance traveled), closely resembling the distances traversed
by the normal mice. In detail, the mice in the QCT@SAPP-
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2277

treated groups exhibited purposeful and smooth swimming
behavior, with their paths consistently directed toward the
target during the test. This behavior suggests that QCT@SAPP
treatment successfully restored visual sensitivity and sight in
the corneal-infected mice model, while the QCT group (over
60.00 s for escape latency and 8.15 m for distance traveled)
and SAPP group (58.01 s for escape latency and 7.45 m for
distance traveled) possessed a noticeable difficulty. In
conclusion, the topical administration of QCT@SAPP potently
healed biofilm-related bacterial keratitis, as the ocular
examination results returned to normal and visual quality
was successfully restored, indicating that it not only restores
the morphology and structure of the cornea but also
normalizes the visual function of mice.
2.11. In Vivo Biofilm Tracking and Corneal Structure
Evaluation. Reduction of the ocular biofilm burden is one of
the key factors in the therapeutic process of bacterial keratitis,
thus we conducted three-dimensional (3D) confocal imaging
of biofilm tracking to visualize and quantitively analyze the
biofilm elimination effect of QCT@SAPP. After 3 days of
treatment, the corneal biofilms that contained GFP (green
fluorescent protein) expressing P. aeruginosa were traced and
Figure 7. In vivo biofilm tracking and corneal structure evaluation after QCT@SAPP treatment. (a) Scheme of in vivo 3D confocal imaging of
biofilm tracking. (b) Fluorescence images and heatmap of GFP expressing P. aeruginosa biofilm after different treatments. The results of
biomass (c), mean thickness (d), and biovolume (e) of the biofilm in vivo, calculated by Imaris 9.3.1 software. (f) Corresponding CFU of
surviving P. aeruginosa in infected corneas. (g) SEM images of the cornea. Scale bar = 1 μm (above), 2 μm (below). (h) Photographs of
bacterial colonies formed on LB-agar plates from the corneal tissues. (i) Micrographs of histopathologic and immunohistochemical staining
(TNF-α, IL-1β, and MMP9) of mice cornea on day 10. Scale bar = 100 μm. The quantification of TNF-α (j), IL-1β (k), and MMP9 (l) based
on the immunohistochemical staining.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2278

recorded by intravital microscopy, followed by 3D reconstruc-
tion (Figure 7a).67 The 3D fluorescence images intuitively
showed that compared to other groups the thickness and the
density of corneal bacterial biofilms were distinctly reduced
Figure 8. RNA-seq of mice corneal function change after QCT@SAPP therapy. (a) Venn diagram of the transcriptomic profiles between
CTRL, SAPP, and QCT@SAPP groups. (b) Volcano plots showing the identified upregulated and downregulated genes by QCT@SAPP.
Heat maps of significantly downregulated genes involved in the angiogenesis (c) and inflammatory response (d) after QCT@SAPP
treatment (fold change ≥2 and P < 0.05). (e) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of the identified DEGs. The 20 most significantly enriched
pathways are shown. GSEA enrichment analysis between the CTRL and QCT@SAPP group with indicated inflammatory response gene sets
(f) and cornea healing gene sets (g). (h) PPI network of DEGs involved in the treatment of bacterial keratitis.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2279

after the administration of QCT@SAPP, demonstrating an
effective disintegration of the biofilm (Figure 7b). To further
quantitatively demonstrate its outstanding ability to eliminate
biofilm in vivo, a series of information on the biofilm was
calculated by Imaris 9.3.1 software. As shown in Figure 7c−e,
limited elimination efficiency was observed in QCT with a
28.9% decline in biomass, 28.0% decline in mean thickness,
and 28.9% decline in biovolume and SAPP with a 40.6%
decline in biomass, 40.5% decline in mean thickness, and
40.6% decline in biovolume. However, there was a reduction of
78.7% decline in biomass, 77.1% decline in mean thickness,
and 78.7% decline in biovolume after QCT@SAPP therapy,
indicating the unparalleled antibiofilm capacity of the QCT@
SAPP. Therefore, based on the in vivo imaging and its
statistical data, it is believed that QCT@SAPP exerted
therapeutic effects by reducing the biofilm on the infected
corneas.
To further examine the antibiofilm activity, SEM character-
ization was employed to observe the changes of ocular surface
bacterial biofilms (Figure 7g). The SEM images clearly
revealed the damage of biofilm morphology on the corneal
surface, where QCT@SAPP effectively eliminated the biofilm
on the cornea, with almost no bacteria observed on the smooth
corneal surface. In contrast, dense biofilms and a large number
of bacteria were observed in the control group and QCT
group. For the SAPP group, only a small number of bacteria
remained in the gaps in the uneven surface of the cornea.
These results demonstrated that QCT@SAPP exhibited the
optimal antibiofilm efficacy among all the tested formulations.
Moreover, colony-forming unit (CFU) counting results were
consistent with the SEM characterization, which means that
QCT@SAPP could significantly reduce the bacterial burden
with over 99.99% removal efficiency and possess a commend-
able therapeutic effect (Figure 7f, h).
In addition, histological and immunohistochemical analyses
of the infected corneas were conducted after therapy since the
regularity of corneal structure is closely related to the corneal
transparency after keratitis (Figure 7i). In the control group,
H&E staining images showed an infected thickened corneal
structure with heavy infiltration of inflammatory cells and an
irregular stromal matrix. The QCT and SAPP treatments
slightly improved the corneal inflammation and wound
recovery, but there was still infiltration of inflammatory cells,
indicating that the treatment effect was unsatisfactory and the
inflammation was not well controlled. However, the corneas
merely exhibited little inflammatory infiltration, and the
regularity of the cornea matrix was well preserved in the
QCT@SAPP group, which was well consistent with the visual
quality assessment results. The inflammatory factors TNF-α
and IL-1β were highly expressed in the corneas in the other
three groups, but the QCT@SAPP group had very few
infiltrated inflammatory cells and limited expression of TNF-α
and IL-1β (Figure 7j,k). MMP9 remained a significant
biomarker in the degradation and remodeling of extracellular
matrix dynamic balance during the keratitis recovery process-
(Figure 7l). The expression of MMP9 remained extremely low
in the QCT@SAPP group compared to the other groups,
indicating that it may be due to the dual action of antibacterial
and anti-inflammatory of QCT@SAPP. The rapid recovery of
bacterial keratitis promoted the low secretion of MMP9,
resulting in minimal tissue damage to the corneal tissue. In
summary, QCT@SAPP displayed brilliant therapeutic poten-
tial in bacterial keratitis, by efficiently eradicating corneal
bacterial biofilm, reducing corneal inflammation, and promot-
ing corneal recovery.
2.12. Therapeutic Mechanism Analysis of QCT@SAPP
for Bacteria Keratitis. In order to comprehensively elucidate
the in vivo therapeutic mechanism of QCT@SAPP, whole
transcriptome RNA sequencing of the cornea was performed
after the treatment. The Venn diagram in Figure 8a revealed
that 11,515 genes were coexpressed in all three groups, while
467 genes were exclusively expressed in the QCT@SAPP-
treated group. The volcano plots in Figure 8b displayed 1619
significantly DEGs, with 524 upregulated genes and 1095
downregulated genes. Therefore, we also investigated the
impact of QCT@SAPP on the expression of genes related to
angiogenesis and inflammatory response. As shown in Figure
8c,d, several significant genes, such as Plxnd1, Mmp19, Eng,
Mmp9, Mmp14, and Syk were downregulated after QCT@
SAPP treatment. Further analysis through the KEGG pathway
enrichment of downregulated genes (Figures 8e and S20−S22)
demonstrated that the cytokine−cytokine receptor interaction,
bacterial infection pathway, and chemokine signaling pathways
were closely associated with the therapeutic mechanisms of
QCT@SAPP. The severe bacterial infection of bacterial
keratitis can activate an inflammatory response, leading to
corneal epithelial cell apoptosis and the release of local or
systemic inflammatory mediators, which exacerbate cornea
injury. Interestingly, QCT@SAPP significantly inhibited
cytokine−cytokine receptor interaction and chemokine signal-
ing pathways, which are close to inflammatory pathways,
indicating that it could alleviate cornea injury. Gene enrich-
ment analysis (GSEA) showed that QCT@SAPP treatment
would induce a series of inflammatory response as well as
corneal healing programs, such as neutrophil degranulation,
inflammasomes, cholesterol biosynthesis, and DNA replication
(Figure 8f,g). Furthermore, bacterial infection can promote the
production of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, IL-1β,
and IL-6).68 For example, IL-1β can trigger a strong cascade
inflammatory response throughout the IL-1β/MAPK and IL-
1β/NF-κB signaling pathways, leading to excessive inflamma-
tion and more severe cornea damage.69 Remarkably, IL-1β
signaling pathway inhibition was observed after QCT@SAPP
treatment, suggesting that other therapeutic mechanisms for
protection occur by inhibiting the TNF signaling pathway.
The excess of inflammatory cytokines caused by an
overactivated inflammatory response would aggravate the
clinical symptoms and promote keratolysis.70 The PPI network
further confirmed the importance of these genes in tissue
repair and regeneration (Figure 8h). The inhibition of the
inflammatory response and angiogenesis in the QCT@SAPP
group can greatly shorten the treatment course and restore
corneal clarity. Overall, the results indicate that QCT@SAPP
may also promote the expression of genes related to ocular
regeneration.
3. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, star-shaped antibacterial polypeptides carrying
quorum sensing inhibitor, designated as QCT@SAPP, were
prepared to combat bacterial biofilms based on the “drug” in
the “drug” strategy. The highly positively charged QCT@
SAPP selectively adheres to the negatively charged bacterial
membrane and penetrates the biofilms. Particularly, its specific
membrane adhesion and destruction characteristics lead to
minimal drug resistance to exert potent bactericidal effects to
eliminate biofilms. Once the QCT@SAPP aggregate on the
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2280

bacterial membrane, QCT is sustainably released inside the
bacteria to efficiently regulate the expression of lasI, lasR, rhlR,
and rhlI and inhibit the quorum sensing of biofilm. The
breakdown of bacteria communication significantly diminishes
bacteria toxicity, promotes the gradual disintegration of
biofilms, and further facilitates subsequent biofilm entry of
the QCT@SAPP. Meanwhile, increased QCT@SAPP ad-
sorbed on the bacterial membrane induces membrane lysis and
bacterial death. More attractively, QCT@SAPP also displayed
great therapeutic potential for reducing ocular inflammation by
downregulating inflammatory cytokines, which is crucial for
preventing the formation of leukoplakia and other potential
vision-impairing sequelae. In elaborately established P.
aeruginosa-infected biofilm-related keratitis models, we further
confirmed the robust efficiency of topical QCT@SAPP eye
drops in combating bacterial corneal infections in vivo.
Additionally, the corneal inflammatory response is substantially
reduced, avoiding further damage to the corneal tissue. In
conclusion, we have demonstrated that QCT@SAPP possesses
robust antibiofilm and anti-inflammation properties, thereby
establishing its efficacy as a potent therapeutic agent for
effectively managing bacterial biofilms in cornea and other
infections. By loading diverse quorum sensing inhibitors, the
SAPP-based nanocomplex might be used to combat various
bacterial biofilms and corresponding infections.
4. MATERIALS AND METHODS
4.1. Permeation Ability of QCT@SAPP in P. aeruginosa
Biofilms. P. aeruginosa biofilms were cultured in a glass bottom cell
culture dish at 37 °C for 48 h. The biofilm was then washed with PBS
and treated with BODIPY-labeled SAPP (1/4 MBC) at 37 °C for 15
min. After treatment, the biofilm was washed with PBS three times to
remove the excess nanoparticles, and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI, Invitrogen, D1306) was then added. After incubation for 20
min, the biofilms were washed with Milli-Q water three times and
were observed by a CLSM (Zeiss LSM 880).
4.2. HIS−SIM Observation of the Absorption Behavior of
QCT@SAPP. P. aeruginosa biofilms were treated by the procedures
described above procedures. After treatment with BODIPY-SAPP for
15 min, the nanocomplex was removed, and FM 4−64FX dye with a
final concentration of 5 μg mL−1 in PBS was added and further
incubated on ice for 10 min. The biofilms were subsequently washed
with Milli-Q water three times and were observed by HIS-SIM
(Guangzhou Computational Super-resolution Biotech HIS-SIM).71,72
4.3. Quorum Sensing Inhibition of QCT@SAPP in P.
aeruginosa Biofilms. 4.3.1. Quantification of HSL in the P.
aeruginosa Biofilm. P. aeruginosa biofilms were cultured in 6-well
plates with 2 mL per well with CTRL (PBS), free QCT (10 μg
mL−1), SAPP (78.5 μg mL−1), or QCT@SAPP (QCT: 10 μg mL−1,
SAPP: 78.5 μg mL−1 in culture medium) for 2 days. The bacterial
suspension was extracted 3 times with 2 mL of ethyl acetate, and the
solvent was removed by rotary evaporation. The sample was dissolved
in 1 mL of chromatographic grade methanol and then measured by
high-performance liquid chromatography−mass spectrometry
(HPLC−MS) (Agilent 6460) after filtering through a 0.45 μm
membrane. Standard samples are N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactone
(C4-HSL, Sigma-Aldrich, SML3427), N-hexanoyl-L-homoserine
lactone (C6-HSL, Sigma-Aldrich, 56395), N-octanoyl-L-homoserine
lactone (C8-HSL, Sigma-Aldrich, 44558), and N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-
L-homoserine
lactone
(3-OXO-C12-HSL,
Sigma-Aldrich,
O9139).49,73
4.3.2. Evaluation of the Virulence Factors of QCT@SAPP. P.
aeruginosa biofilms were cultured in 96-well plates (200 μL per well)
with free QCT, SAPP, or QCT@SAPP (QCT: 10 μg mL−1, SAPP:
78.5 μg mL−1 in culture medium) for 2 days. For pyocyanin
quantification, it was extracted with 1 mL of chloroform and re-
extracted into 0.2 mol L−1 HCl to obtain a pink to deep red solution.
The pyocyanin concentration in this solution was measured at OD520.
For EPS content determination, the suspension was treated with 200
μL of 5% phenol solution and 200 μL of concentrated sulfuric acid in
a culture bottle at room temperature for 1 h, followed by its
absorption at 490 nm. For violacein quantification, the Chromobacte-
rium violaceum (GDMCC 1.824) was incubated with the nano-
complex in the same way, and 400 μL of dimethyl sulfoxide was added
to the bacterial suspension and then vortex for 1 min. Bacterial
residues are subsequently removed by centrifugation at 1000 rpm, and
the uptake value of the supernatant at 585 nm is determined. For
biomass, the biofilm was washed with PBS three times and stained for
15 min with a 1% crystal violet solution (Beyotime, C0121). The
wells were washed with PBS to remove excess stains and left to air-
dried. Later, the crystal violet bound to the biofilm was extracted with
80% ethanol. The absorbance of the crystal violet solution at 590 nm
was measured.74
4.3.3. Evaluation of the Gene Expression of Quorum Sensing.
The P. aeruginosa was inoculated into LB medium at initial turbidity
of 0.05 at OD600 and then cultured with CTRL (PBS), QCT (10 μg
mL−1), SAPP (78.5 μg mL−1), or QCT@SAPP (QCT: 10 μg mL−1,
SAPP: 78.5 μg mL−1) in TSB at 37 °C. The bacteria were collected
after a 2 day incubation. Gene transcriptome and fluorescence real-
time quantitative polymerase chain reaction were used to investigate
the expression of the quorum sensing genes of P. aeruginosa. The
sequencing of transcriptome of the obtained bacteria was performed
and analyzed by Novogene Co.,Ltd. The experiments were repeated
independently three times using different RNA samples. The primers
used to amplify the lasI, lasR, rhlI, and rhlR genes, as well as those for
the reference gene encoding 16S rRNA, are shown in Table S1. Q-
PCR analysis was then used to investigate the antiquorum sensing
effects of QCT@SAPP.
4.4. Cryo-TEM Observation of Bacterial Membrane Rupture.
P. aeruginosa (2 × 107 CFU mL−1) was dispersed in PBS and treated
with QCT@SAPP (1/2 MBC) at 37 °C for 30 min. Following the
incubation period, the bacterial suspension was washed and
resuspended in 20 μL of Milli-Q water to prevent any negative
impact caused by the crystal of PBS solution during microscopic
observation. The samples were then observed by Cryo-TEM (Thermo
Scientific Talos F200C).
4.5. Establishment of Ocular Biofilm Mouse Model and
Topical Ocular Administration. Thirty-two healthy female
C57BL/6 mice (6 weeks old) were obtained from the animal center
of Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences and used for bacterial
inoculation on the right corneas. After the application of topical
anesthesia, three 1 mm abrasions were made on the corneas using a
29-gauge needle. GFP expressing P. aeruginosa suspension (approx-
imately 1 × 106 CFU mL−1) was then inoculated onto the damaged
corneas. After 16 h of inoculation, the mice with P. aeruginosa biofilms
on the cornea were randomly divided into four groups (8 mice per
group), namely, CTRL, QCT, SAPP, and QCT@SAPP. The CTRL
group received 5 μL of normal saline only, while the other three
groups were treated with 5 μL of QCT, SAPP, or QCT@SAPP
(QCT: 226 μg mL−1, SAPP: 1774 μg mL−1 in PBS), respectively. All
treatments were administered immediately after the 16 h postinfection
period (Day 0) and were repeated four times a day for 10 days.
4.6. Therapeutic Efficacy Evaluation. To investigate the
therapeutic efficacy of various treatments for P. aeruginosa keratitis,
ophthalmic evaluations were performed on the infected eyes of mice
using slit-lamp microscopy (66 Vision-Tech YZ5T) on Day 1, Day 3,
Day 5, and Day 10 after treatment. The clinical features of the
infection were scored and graded by three masked ophthalmologists
according to the opacity area, surface regularity, and opacity density.7
Meanwhile, the weight of the mice was recorded every 2 days during
the treatment. After 3 days of treatment, the solution of 1% sodium
fluorescein (w/v) was applied to the mice, and then the eyelids were
manually blinked three times. The fluorescein staining images were
captured using a digital slit lamp under cobalt blue light; the mice
were detected with a cornea-specific in vivo OCT (Phoenix Micron
IV); the cornea was removed and observed with Stereo Microscope
(Leica S9i); the sequencing of the transcriptome of the obtained
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2281

cornea was performed and analyzed by Novogene Co., Ltd. To
determine the bacterial load of the infected corneal tissues, the excised
corneas were homogenized in 10 mL of sterile PBS, and 0.1 mL
aliquots of 10-fold diluted samples were plated onto Soybean Casein
Digest Agar (TSA) plates. After incubation at 37 °C for 16 h, the
colonies were counted and analyzed.
4.7. CLSM Observation of Ocular Biofilms in Vivo. The GFP-
expressing P. aeruginosa was used for inducing corneal biofilms. After
3 days of treatment, the mice were anesthetized and examined. In
detail, the mice were fixed onto a plate with tape to reduce the impact
of breathing on imaging. The vertex of the mouse’s eyeball was
orthogonal to the plane of the microscope objective. The biofilms on
the cornea were observed using CLSM (Olympus BX61), and the
images were analyzed using Imaris (9.3.1) and the biofilm analysis
plugin to quantify and display the biofilm in vivo.67
4.8. SEM Observation of the Cornea. After 3 days of treatment,
the mice were euthanized and their corneas were removed for SEM
observation. The cornea was initially fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in
phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 7.0) for a duration of 1 day.
Subsequently, double fixation and dehydration were carried out
prior to observation, as previously mentioned. The prepared corneal
sample was coated with gold−palladium using an ion sputter (Hitachi
E-1010) for 4−5 min. Finally, the sample was observed using SEM
(Hitachi SU-8010).
4.9. Morris Water Task. After 10 days’ treatment, the mice
underwent Morris maze training using the platform of Morris water
maze (Coulbourn ACT-200A) for 5 consecutive days.75 The
experimental procedure of the water maze was carried out according
to the standard experiment. The mice were placed on the platform for
20 s. During the training period, the mice were gently placed into the
water from four marked entry points toward the pool wall randomly
to find the platform, for a total of four times a day. If the mice cannot
reach the platform, a plastic rod was used to guide the mice to find the
platform (stay for 10 s). On the final day, the water task was
conducted for the mice: the mice were gently placed into the water
from four marked entry points as before, and the time it took for the
mice to find and climb onto the platform was recorded by VisuTrack.
The escape latency, distance traveled, path, and video were recorded
to determine the curative effect of each treatment.
4.10. Statistical Analysis. We conducted a minimum of three
independent experiments for each experiment mentioned above, and
the results were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. We
carried out statistical analysis using GraphPad Prism 9 software. The
difference between groups was compared with unpaired t tests and a
one-way classification of ANOVA. The results were considered
statistically significant as follows: n.s. for no significant difference, *
for p < 0.05, ** for p < 0.01, and *** for p < 0.001. The confocal
images were analyzed with Imaris (9.3.1) and Biofilm Analysis
XTension.
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195.
Vision-based behavioral water task performed on mice
after different treatments (MP4)
Experimental section, synthetic routes of SAPP,
1H
NMR spectra of SAPP precursor and SAPP, the DOSY
image of QCT@SAPP, the standard curve of QCT, the
in vitro selectivity of QCT@SAPP, the leakage of K+, the
in vitro antibacterial capability of P. aeruginosa, the
antibacterial results of P. aeruginosa biofilm, the MIC of
resistant P. aeruginosa cells, GO and KEGG enrichment
analysis of the downregulation genes in biofilm, cell
viability assay in HCECs, sodium fluorescent staining
changes, corneal confocal microscope, and H&E staining
of the cornea in C57BL/6 mice after different treat-
ments, blood routine test and biochemistry examination
in healthy mice after different treatments, body weight
changes of C57BL/6 mice after different treatments,
H&E staining of histological sections of heart, liver,
spleen, lung, and kidney samples, the retention time of
QCT@SAPP on the ocular surface in vivo, and GO and
KEGG enrichment analysis of the identified DEGs in the
cornea (PDF)
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Jian Ji −Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Provincial Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial Clinical
Research Center for Eye Diseases, Zhejiang Provincial
Engineering Institute on Eye Diseases, Hangzhou 310009, P.
R. China; MOE Key Laboratory of Macromolecule Synthesis
and Functionalization of Ministry of Education, Department
of Polymer Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou 310058, P. R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0001-
9870-4038; Email: jijian@zju.edu.cn
Ke Yao −Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Provincial Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial Clinical
Research Center for Eye Diseases, Zhejiang Provincial
Engineering Institute on Eye Diseases, Hangzhou 310009, P.
R. China; Email: xlren@zju.edu.cn
Haijie Han −Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Provincial
Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial
Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Zhejiang
Provincial Engineering Institute on Eye Diseases, Hangzhou
310009, P. R. China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-0936-2791;
Email: hanhj90@zju.edu.cn
Authors
Zhouyu Lu −Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Provincial
Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial
Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Zhejiang
Provincial Engineering Institute on Eye Diseases, Hangzhou
310009, P. R. China
Wenjie Fan −Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Provincial
Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial
Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Zhejiang
Provincial Engineering Institute on Eye Diseases, Hangzhou
310009, P. R. China
Yang Ye −Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Provincial Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial Clinical
Research Center for Eye Diseases, Zhejiang Provincial
Engineering Institute on Eye Diseases, Hangzhou 310009, P.
R. China
Yue Huang −MOE Key Laboratory of Macromolecule
Synthesis and Functionalization of Ministry of Education,
Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, P. R. China
Xianchi Zhou −MOE Key Laboratory of Macromolecule
Synthesis and Functionalization of Ministry of Education,
Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, P. R. China
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2282

Yin Zhang −Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital, School
of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Provincial Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial Clinical
Research Center for Eye Diseases, Zhejiang Provincial
Engineering Institute on Eye Diseases, Hangzhou 310009, P.
R. China
Wenyu Cui −Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Provincial
Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhejiang Provincial
Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Zhejiang
Provincial Engineering Institute on Eye Diseases, Hangzhou
310009, P. R. China
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
Author Contributions
§Z.Y.L., W.J.F., and Y.Y. contributed equally to this work.
Conceptualization: H.J.H., K.Y., and J.J. Methodology: H.J.H.,
K.Y., J.J., and Z.Y.L. Performed all the experiments: Z.Y.L.,
W.J.F., Y.Y, Y.H, X.C.Z., Y.Z., W.Y.C, and H.J.H. Analyzed all
data: Z.Y.L., W.J.F., and Y.Y. Writing (review and editing): all
authors.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation
of Zhejiang Province (grant number LR23H120001) and the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant numbers
82271063, 82271064, 52293381, and 82070939). All animal
experiments were conducted following the Association for
Research in Vision and Ophthalmology (ARVO) Statement for
the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research and
the Guidelines for Principles of Laboratory Animal Care. All
animal procedures were approved by the Animal Ethics
Committee, the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University (approval no. 2022-128). The
authors thank Shuangshuang Liu and Guifeng Xiao from the
core facilities, Zhejiang University School of Medicine for their
technical support and Lingyun Wu from the Center of Cryo-
Electron Microscopy (CCEM), Zhejiang University, for her
technical assistance on Cryo-TEM. The authors also thank
Guangzhou C.S.R. Biotech Co. Ltd for live-cell imaging using
their commercial HIS−SIM.
REFERENCES
(1) Austin, A.; Lietman, T.; Rose-Nussbaumer, J. Update on the
Management of Infectious Keratitis. Ophthalmology 2017, 124 (11),
1678−1689.
(2) Ting, D. S. J.; Ho, C. S.; Deshmukh, R.; Said, D. G.; Dua, H. S.
Infectious keratitis: an update on epidemiology, causative micro-
organisms, risk factors, and antimicrobial resistance. Eye 2021, 35 (4),
1084−1101.
(3) Josyula, A.; Omiadze, R.; Parikh, K.; Kanvinde, P.; Appell, M. B.;
Patel, P.; Saeed, H.; Sutar, Y.; Anders, N.; He, P.; et al. An ion-paired
moxifloxacin nanosuspension eye drop provides improved prevention
and treatment of ocular infection. Bioeng. Transl. Med. 2021, 6 (3),
No. e10238.
(4) Zhu, Y.; Wu, S.; Sun, Y.; Zou, X.; Zheng, L.; Duan, S.; Wang, J.;
Yu, B.; Sui, R.; Xu, F. J. Bacteria-Targeting Photodynamic
Nanoassemblies for Efficient Treatment of Multidrug-Resistant
Biofilm Infected Keratitis. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022, 32 (14), 2111066.
(5) Fan, W.; Han, H.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, X.; Gao, Y.; Li, S.; Jin, Q.; Ji,
J.; Yao, K. Antimicrobial nanomedicine for ocular bacterial and fungal
infection. Drug Delivery Transl. Res. 2021, 11 (4), 1352−1375.
(6) Fan, W.; Han, H.; Lu, Z.; Huang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Chen, Y.; Zhang,
X.; Ji, J.; Yao, K. ε-poly-L-lysine-modified polydopamine nanoparticles
for targeted photothermal therapy of drug-resistant bacterial keratitis.
Bioeng. Transl. Med. 2023, 8 (1), No. e10380.
(7) Han, H.; Gao, Y.; Chai, M.; Zhang, X.; Liu, S.; Huang, Y.; Jin,
Q.; Grzybowski, A.; Ji, J.; Yao, K. Biofilm microenvironment activated
supramolecular nanoparticles for enhanced photodynamic therapy of
bacterial keratitis. J. Controlled Release 2020, 327, 676−687.
(8) Saraswathi, P.; Beuerman, R. W. Corneal Biofilms: From
Planktonic to Microcolony Formation in an Experimental Keratitis
Infection with Pseudomonas Aeruginosa. Ocul. Surf. 2015, 13 (4),
331−345.
(9) Tuft, S.; Somerville, T. F.; Li, J.-P. O.; Neal, T.; De, S.;
Horsburgh, M. J.; Fothergill, J. L.; Foulkes, D.; Kaye, S. Bacterial
keratitis: identifying the areas of clinical uncertainty. Prog. Retin. Eye
Res. 2022, 89, 101031.
(10) Naha, P. C.; Liu, Y.; Hwang, G.; Huang, Y.; Gubara, S.;
Jonnakuti, V.; Simon-Soro, A.; Kim, D.; Gao, L.; Koo, H.; Cormode,
D. P. Dextran-Coated Iron Oxide Nanoparticles as Biomimetic
Catalysts for Localized and pH-Activated Biofilm Disruption. ACS
Nano 2019, 13 (5), 4960−4971.
(11) Darby, E. M.; Trampari, E.; Siasat, P.; Gaya, M. S.; Alav, I.;
Webber, M. A.; Blair, J. M. A. Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic
resistance revisited. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2023, 21 (5), 280−295.
(12) Mc Carlie, S.; Boucher, C. E.; Bragg, R. R. Molecular basis of
bacterial disinfectant resistance. Drug Resistance Updates 2020, 48,
100672.
(13) Mukherjee, S.; Bassler, B. L. Bacterial quorum sensing in
complex and dynamically changing environments. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
2019, 17 (6), 371−382.
(14) Reynolds, D.; Kollef, M. The Epidemiology and Pathogenesis
and Treatment of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Infections: An Update.
Drugs 2021, 81 (18), 2117−2131.
(15) Whiteley, M.; Diggle, S. P.; Greenberg, E. P. Progress in and
promise of bacterial quorum sensing research. Nature 2017, 551
(7680), 313−320.
(16) Striednig, B.; Hilbi, H. Bacterial quorum sensing and
phenotypic heterogeneity: how the collective shapes the individual.
Trends Microbiol. 2022, 30 (4), 379−389.
(17) Mukherjee, S.; Bassler, B. L. Bacterial quorum sensing in
complex and dynamically changing environments. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
2019, 17 (6), 371−382.
(18) Bronesky, D.; Wu, Z.; Marzi, S.; Walter, P.; Geissmann, T.;
Moreau, K.; Vandenesch, F.; Caldelari, I.; Romby, P. Staphylococcus
aureus RNAIII and Its Regulon Link Quorum Sensing, Stress
Responses, Metabolic Adaptation, and Regulation of Virulence
Gene Expression. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2016, 70, 299−316.
(19) Barnard, A. M. L.; Bowden, S. D.; Burr, T.; Coulthurst, S. J.;
Monson, R. E.; Salmond, G. P. C. Quorum sensing, virulence and
secondary metabolite production in plant soft-rotting bacteria. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 2007, 362 (1483), 1165−1183.
(20) Schütz, C.; Ho, D.-K.; Hamed, M. M.; Abdelsamie, A. S.;
Röhrig, T.; Herr, C.; Kany, A. M.; Rox, K.; Schmelz, S.; Siebenbürger,
L.; et al. A New PqsR Inverse Agonist Potentiates Tobramycin
Efficacy to Eradicate Pseudomonas aeruginosa Biofilms. Adv. Sci.
2021, 8 (12), No. e2004369.
(21) Soukarieh, F.; Gurnani, P.; Romero, M.; Halliday, N.; Stocks,
M.; Alexander, C.; Cámara, M. Design of Quorum Sensing Inhibitor-
Polymer Conjugates to Penetrate Pseudomonas aeruginosa Biofilms.
ACS Macro Lett. 2023, 12 (3), 314−319.
(22) Li, Y.; Dai, J.; Ma, Y.; Yao, Y.; Yu, D.; Shen, J.; Wu, L. The
mitigation potential of synergistic quorum quenching and anti-
bacterial properties for biofilm proliferation and membrane
biofouling. Water Res. 2024, 255, 121462.
(23) Cheng, J.; Zhang, H.; Lu, K.; Zou, Y.; Jia, D.; Yang, H.; Chen,
H.; Zhang, Y.; Yu, Q. Bi-functional quercetin/copper nanoparticles
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2283

integrating bactericidal and anti-quorum sensing properties for
preventing the formation of biofilms. Biomater. Sci. 2024, 12 (7),
1788−1800.
(24) Kalia, V. C.; Patel, S. K. S.; Kang, Y. C.; Lee, J.-K. Quorum
sensing inhibitors as antipathogens: biotechnological applications.
Biotechnol. Adv. 2019, 37 (1), 68−90.
(25) Memariani, H.; Memariani, M.; Ghasemian, A. An overview on
anti-biofilm properties of quercetin against bacterial pathogens. World
J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019, 35 (9), 143.
(26) Ho, D.-K.; Murgia, X.; De Rossi, C.; Christmann, R.; de Mello
Martins, A. G. H.; Koch, M.; Andreas, A.; Herrmann, J.; Müller, R.;
Empting, M.; et al. Squalenyl Hydrogen Sulfate Nanoparticles for
Simultaneous Delivery of Tobramycin and an Alkylquinolone
Quorum Sensing Inhibitor Enable the Eradication of P. aeruginosa
Biofilm Infections. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 2020, 59 (26), 10292−
10296.
(27) Kang, M.; Kim, S.; Kim, H.; Song, Y.; Jung, D.; Kang, S.; Seo,
J.-H.; Nam, S.; Lee, Y. Calcium-Binding Polymer-Coated Poly-
(lactide- co-glycolide) Microparticles for Sustained Release of
Quorum Sensing Inhibitors to Prevent Biofilm Formation on
Hydroxyapatite Surfaces. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11 (8),
7686−7694.
(28) Aiello, P.; Consalvi, S.; Poce, G.; Raguzzini, A.; Toti, E.;
Palmery, M.; Biava, M.; Bernardi, M.; Kamal, M. A.; Perry, G.; Peluso,
I. Dietary flavonoids: Nano delivery and nanoparticles for cancer
therapy. Semin. Cancer Biol. 2021, 69, 150−165.
(29) Xuan, J.; Feng, W.; Wang, J.; Wang, R.; Zhang, B.; Bo, L.;
Chen, Z.-S.; Yang, H.; Sun, L. Antimicrobial peptides for combating
drug-resistant bacterial infections. Drug Resistance Updates 2023, 68,
100954.
(30) Ganesan, N.; Mishra, B.; Felix, L.; Mylonakis, E. Antimicrobial
Peptides and Small Molecules Targeting the Cell Membrane of
Staphylococcus aureus. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2023, 87 (2),
No. e0003722.
(31) Han, H.; Li, S.; Xu, M.; Zhong, Y.; Fan, W.; Xu, J.; Zhou, T.; Ji,
J.; Ye, J.; Yao, K. Polymer- and lipid-based nanocarriers for ocular
drug delivery: Current status and future perspectives. Adv. Drug
Delivery Rev. 2023, 196, 114770.
(32) Chen, N.; Jiang, C. Antimicrobial peptides: Structure,
mechanism, and modification. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2023, 255, 115377.
(33) Lam, S. J.; O’Brien-Simpson, N. M.; Pantarat, N.; Sulistio, A.;
Wong, E. H. H.; Chen, Y.-Y.; Lenzo, J. C.; Holden, J. A.; Blencowe,
A.; Reynolds, E. C.; Qiao, G. G. Combating multidrug-resistant
Gram-negative bacteria with structurally nanoengineered antimicro-
bial peptide polymers. Nat. Microbiol. 2016, 1 (11), 16162.
(34) Zhao, J.; Dong, Z.; Cui, H.; Jin, H.; Wang, C. Nanoengineered
Peptide-Grafted Hyperbranched Polymers for Killing of Bacteria
Monitored in Real Time via Intrinsic Aggregation-Induced Emission.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10 (49), 42058−42067.
(35) Liu, Y.; Shi, L.; Su, L.; van der Mei, H. C.; Jutte, P. C.; Ren, Y.;
Busscher, H. J. Nanotechnology-based antimicrobials and delivery
systems for biofilm-infection control. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019, 48 (2),
428−446.
(36) Wang, C.; Hong, T.; Cui, P.; Wang, J.; Xia, J. Antimicrobial
peptides towards clinical application: Delivery and formulation. Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev. 2021, 175, 113818.
(37) Li, G.; Lai, Z.; Shan, A. Advances of Antimicrobial Peptide-
Based Biomaterials for the Treatment of Bacterial Infections. Adv. Sci.
2023, 10 (11), No. e2206602.
(38) Lv, Z.; Li, S.; Zeng, G.; Yao, K.; Han, H. Recent progress of
nanomedicine in managing dry eye disease. Adv. Ophthalmol. Pract.
Res. 2024, 4 (1), 23−31.
(39) Nordström, R.; Malmsten, M. Delivery systems for antimicro-
bial peptides. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2017, 242, 17−34.
(40) Bechinger, B.; Gorr, S. U. Antimicrobial Peptides: Mechanisms
of Action and Resistance. J. Dent. Res. 2017, 96 (3), 254−260.
(41) Hu, K.; Miao, L.; Goodwin, T. J.; Li, J.; Liu, Q.; Huang, L.
Quercetin Remodels the Tumor Microenvironment To Improve the
Permeation, Retention, and Antitumor Effects of Nanoparticles. ACS
Nano 2017, 11 (5), 4916−4925.
(42) Mu, Y.; Wu, G.; Su, C.; Dong, Y.; Zhang, K.; Li, J.; Sun, X.; Li,
Y.; Chen, X.; Feng, C. pH-sensitive amphiphilic chitosan-quercetin
conjugate for intracellular delivery of doxorubicin enhancement.
Carbohydr. Polym. 2019, 223, 115072.
(43) Li, X.; Yeh, Y.-C.; Giri, K.; Mout, R.; Landis, R. F.; Prakash, Y.
S.; Rotello, V. M. Control of nanoparticle penetration into biofilms
through surface design. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51 (2), 282−285.
(44) Tan, P.; Wu, C.; Tang, Q.; Wang, T.; Zhou, C.; Ding, Y.; Fu,
H.; Xu, S.; Feng, Y.; Zhang, Y.; et al. pH-Triggered Size-
Transformable and Bioactivity-Switchable Self-Assembling Chimeric
Peptide Nanoassemblies for Combating Drug-Resistant Bacteria and
Biofilms. Adv. Mater. 2023, 35 (29), No. e2210766.
(45) Qin, S.; Xiao, W.; Zhou, C.; Pu, Q.; Deng, X.; Lan, L.; Liang,
H.; Song, X.; Wu, M. Pseudomonas aeruginosa: pathogenesis,
virulence factors, antibiotic resistance, interaction with host,
technology advances and emerging therapeutics. Signal Transduction
Targeted Ther. 2022, 7 (1), 199.
(46) Mukherjee, S.; Bassler, B. L. Bacterial quorum sensing in
complex and dynamically changing environments. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
2019, 17 (6), 371−382.
(47) Azimi, S.; Klementiev, A. D.; Whiteley, M.; Diggle, S. P.
Bacterial Quorum Sensing During Infection. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.
2020, 74, 201−219.
(48) Azam, M. W.; Khan, A. U. Updates on the pathogenicity status
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Drug Discovery Today 2019, 24 (1),
350−359.
(49) Moura-Alves, P.; Puyskens, A.; Stinn, A.; Klemm, M.; Guhlich-
Bornhof, U.; Dorhoi, A.; Furkert, J.; Kreuchwig, A.; Protze, J.; Lozza,
L.; et al. Host monitoring of quorum sensing during Pseudomonas
aeruginosa infection. Science 2019, 366 (6472), No. eaaw1629.
(50) Mah, T. F.; O’Toole, G. A. Mechanisms of biofilm resistance to
antimicrobial agents. Trends Microbiol. 2001, 9 (1), 34−39.
(51) Pang, Z.; Raudonis, R.; Glick, B. R.; Lin, T.-J.; Cheng, Z.
Antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: mechanisms and
alternative therapeutic strategies. Biotechnol. Adv. 2019, 37 (1), 177−
192.
(52) Huang, Y.; Wan, X.; Su, Q.; Zhao, C.; Cao, J.; Yue, Y.; Li, S.;
Chen, X.; Yin, J.; Deng, Y.; et al. Ultrasound-activated piezo-hot
carriers trigger tandem catalysis coordinating cuproptosis-like
bacterial death against implant infections. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15
(1), 1643.
(53) Xie, W.; Chen, J.; Cheng, X.; Feng, H.; Zhang, X.; Zhu, Z.;
Dong, S.; Wan, Q.; Pei, X.; Wang, J. Multi-Mechanism Antibacterial
Strategies Enabled by Synergistic Activity of Metal-Organic Frame-
work-Based Nanosystem for Infected Tissue Regeneration. Small
2023, 19 (14), No. e2205941.
(54) Rumbaugh, K. P.; Sauer, K. Biofilm dispersion. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 2020, 18 (10), 571−586.
(55) Fleiszig, S. M. J.; Kroken, A. R.; Nieto, V.; Grosser, M. R.; Wan,
S. J.; Metruccio, M. M. E.; Evans, D. J. Contact lens-related corneal
infection: Intrinsic resistance and its compromise. Prog. Retin. Eye Res.
2020, 76, 100804.
(56) Sun, Y.; Chan, J.; Bose, K.; Tam, C. Simultaneous control of
infection and inflammation with keratin-derived antibacterial peptides
targeting TLRs and co-receptors. Sci. Transl. Med. 2023, 15 (686),
No. eade2909.
(57) Jiao, Z.; Huo, Q.; Lin, X.; Chu, X.; Deng, Z.; Guo, H.; Peng, Y.;
Lu, S.; Zhou, X.; Wang, X.; Wang, B. Drug-free contact lens based on
quaternized chitosan and tannic acid for bacterial keratitis therapy and
corneal repair. Carbohydr. Polym. 2022, 286, 119314.
(58) Chen, Q.; Han, X.; Liu, L.; Duan, Y.; Chen, Y.; Shi, L.; Lin, Q.;
Shen, L. Multifunctional Polymer Vesicles for Synergistic Antibiotic-
Antioxidant Treatment of Bacterial Keratitis. Biomacromolecules 2023,
24 (11), 5230−5244.
(59) Wang, Y.; Li, C.; Wan, Y.; Qi, M.; Chen, Q.; Sun, Y.; Sun, X.;
Fang, J.; Fu, L.; Xu, L.; et al. Quercetin-Loaded Ceria Nanocomposite
Potentiate Dual-Directional Immunoregulation via Macrophage
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2284

Polarization against Periodontal Inflammation. Small 2021, 17 (41),
2101505.
(60) Maleki, S. J.; Crespo, J. F.; Cabanillas, B. Anti-inflammatory
effects of flavonoids. Food Chem. 2019, 299, 125124.
(61) Shi, D.; Qi, X.; Ma, L.; Zhao, L.; Dou, S.; Wang, Y.; Zhou, Q.;
Zhang, Y.; Yang, C.; Wang, H.; Xie, L. Fabrication of nanozyme-
thixotropic anionic hydrogel coating with multi-enzyme-mimicking
activity for the treatment of fungal keratitis. Chem. Eng. J. 2024, 486,
150264.
(62) Pang, Z.; Ren, N.; Wu, Y.; Qi, J.; Hu, F.; Guo, Y.; Xie, Y.; Zhou,
D.; Jiang, X. Tuning Ligands Ratio Allows for Controlling Gold
Nanocluster Conformation and Activating a Nonantimicrobial Thiol
Fragrance for Effective Treatment of MRSA-Induced Keratitis. Adv.
Mater. 2023, 35 (40), No. e2303562.
(63) He, J.; Ye, Y.; Zhang, D.; Yao, K.; Zhou, M. Visualized
Gallium/Lyticase-Integrated Antifungal Strategy for Fungal Keratitis
Treatment. Adv. Mater. 2022, 34 (49), No. e2206437.
(64) Shi, T.; Hou, X.; Guo, S.; Zhang, L.; Wei, C.; Peng, T.; Hu, X.
Nanohole-boosted electron transport between nanomaterials and
bacteria as a concept for nano-bio interactions. Nat. Commun. 2021,
12 (1), 493.
(65) Morriss, N. J.; Conley, G. M.; Hodgson, N.; Boucher, M.;
Ospina-Mora, S.; Fagiolini, M.; Puder, M.; Mejia, L.; Qiu, J.; Meehan,
W.; Mannix, R. Visual Dysfunction after Repetitive Mild Traumatic
Brain Injury in a Mouse Model and Ramifications on Behavioral
Metrics. J. Neurotrauma 2021, 38 (20), 2881−2895.
(66) Hodgson, T. L.; Hermens, F.; Pennington, K.; Pickering, J. S.;
Ezard, G.; Clarke, R.; Sharma, J.; Owen, A. M. Eye Movements in the
″Morris Maze″ Spatial Working Memory Task Reveal Deficits in
Strategic Planning. J. Cognit. Neurosci. 2019, 31 (4), 497−509.
(67) Thanabalasuriar, A.; Scott, B. N. V.; Peiseler, M.; Willson, M.
E.; Zeng, Z.; Warrener, P.; Keller, A. E.; Surewaard, B. G. J.; Dozier, E.
A.; Korhonen, J. T.; et al. Neutrophil Extracellular Traps Confine
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Ocular Biofilms and Restrict Brain Invasion.
Cell Host Microbe 2019, 25 (4), 526−536.
(68) Santacruz, C.; Linares, M.; Garfias, Y.; Loustaunau, L. M.;
Pavon, L.; Perez-Tapia, S. M.; Jimenez-Martinez, M. C. Expression of
IL-8, IL-6 and IL-1β in tears as a main characteristic of the immune
response in human microbial keratitis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015, 16 (3),
4850−4864.
(69) Wang, W.; Guan, W.-J.; Huang, R.-Q.; Xie, Y.-Q.; Zheng, J.-P.;
Zhu, S.-X.; Chen, M.; Zhong, N.-S. Carbocisteine attenuates TNF-α-
induced inflammation in human alveolar epithelial cells in vitro
through suppressing NF-κB and ERK1/2 MAPK signaling pathways.
Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 2016, 37 (5), 629−636.
(70) Stepp, M. A.; Menko, A. S. Immune responses to injury and
their links to eye disease. Transl. Res. 2021, 236, 52−71.
(71) Chen, L.; Dong, J.; Liao, S.; Wang, S.; Wu, Z.; Zuo, M.; Liu, B.;
Yan, C.; Chen, Y.; He, H.; et al. Loss of Sam50 in hepatocytes induces
cardiolipin-dependent mitochondrial membrane remodeling to trigger
mtDNA release and liver injury. Hepatology 2022, 76 (5), 1389−
1408.
(72) Li, G.; Zhao, Y.; Wang, H.; Zhang, Y.; Cai, D.; Zhang, Y.; Song,
W. The M2Macrophages Derived Migrasomes From the Surface of
Titania Nanotubes Array as a New Concept for Enhancing
Osteogenesis. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2024, 13 (20), No. e2400257.
(73) Song, D.; Meng, J.; Cheng, J.; Fan, Z.; Chen, P.; Ruan, H.; Tu,
Z.; Kang, N.; Li, N.; Xu, Y.; et al. Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum-
sensing metabolite induces host immune cell death through cell
surface lipid domain dissolution. Nat. Microbiol. 2019, 4 (1), 97−111.
(74) Chen, Y. C.; Gao, Y. F.; Huang, Y.; Jin, Q.; Ji, J. Inhibiting
Quorum Sensing by Active Targeted pH-Sensitive Nanoparticles for
Enhanced Antibiotic Therapy of Biofilm-Associated Bacterial
Infections. ACS Nano 2023, 17 (11), 10019−10032.
(75) Guo, X.; Zhou, J.; Starr, C.; Mohns, E. J.; Li, Y.; Chen, E. P.;
Yoon, Y.; Kellner, C. P.; Tanaka, K.; Wang, H.; et al. Preservation of
vision after CaMKII-mediated protection of retinal ganglion cells. Cell
2021, 184 (16), 4299−4314.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c12195
ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2268−2285
2285