DOI: 10.1002/alz.053172
D E M E N T I A C A R E P R A C T I C E ( D E S C R I P T I V E )
POSTER PRESENTATION
Nutritional treatments for Alzheimer’s disease: A narrative
review
Liza A Aschettino
Corinne A Labyak
Claudia Sealey-Potts
University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL,
USA
Correspondence
LizaAAschettino,UniversityofNorthFlorida,
Jacksonville,FL,USA
Email:lizaaschettino@gmail.com
Abstract
Background: Knowledge is limited about ways to treat, manage and slow the progres-
sion of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). It is suspected that there are potential nutrition-
related components that may contribute to the pathology of AD. This includes nutri-
ent deficiencies and/or dietary factors that may lead to comorbidities, increasing the
risk for development. Thus, many nutrient-specific, dietary and medical food treat-
ments are continually being researched. Some studies even combine both nutrient and
dietary interventions to treat AD. The purpose of this review is to explore and discuss
the efficacy of several macro- and micronutrients, antioxidants, dietary therapies and
combined components to treat or slow the progression of AD while providing valuable
insight into the role that nutrition may play in the treatment of this disease.
Methods: Using PubMed, Google Scholar, EBSCOhost and Science Direct, databases
were searched using pertinent keywords. A total of 33 research articles were
included, primarily consisting randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
human research trials with the addition of few animal studies. Full-text studies in detail
were obtained, assessed with data extracted and summarized.
Results: Overall, it was determined that folate in conjunction with Donepezil, may
improve cognitive function and inflammatory markers. Omega-3 fatty acids (FA) with
ɑ-lipoic acid may reduce cognitive and functional decline rates. Adequate B-vitamin
status is needed to obtain the benefits of omega-3 FAs. Vitamin D supplementation and
medical food Souvenaid may be considered for cognitive benefits in patients with AD.
Medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) supplementation is not yet supported. Antioxidant
treatment is not recommended as it may accelerate cognitive decline. DASH, Mediter-
ranean Diet, MIND and ketogenic diet therapy may be considered as dietary treat-
ments in AD patients. Nutrient supplementation requires more research to determine
appropriate dosages.
Conclusion: Alzheimer’s disease remains a major health concern to the aging public.
The anti-inflammatory properties, antioxidative and neuroprotective effects of several
nutrition-related treatments have been shown to be beneficial in combating the pro-
gression of this disease. Patient individualization must be considered prior to treating.
It is recommended that future studies determine appropriate dosage amounts to mini-
mize adverse effects.
Alzheimer’s Dement. 2021;17(Suppl. 8):e053172.
© 2021 the Alzheimer’s Association
1 of 1
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/alz
https://doi.org/10.1002/alz.053172