Copper–luteolin nanocomplexes for Mediating multifaceted regulation of
oxidative stress, intestinal barrier, and gut microbiota in inflammatory
bowel disease
Wanyue Fu a,1, Zhongshi Huang b,1, Weiqi Li a,1, Lingling Xu a, Miaomiao Yang c, Yan Ma a,
Hanghang Liu b,***, Haisheng Qian a,**, Wanni Wang a,*
a School of Biomedical Engineering, Anhui Provincial Institute of Translational Medicine, Anhui Engineering Research Center for Medical Micro-Nano Devices, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, 230011, PR China
b Hubei Key Laboratory of Natural Products Research and Development, College of Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, China Three Gorges University, Yichang,
443002, PR China
c The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Anhui Public Health Clinical Center, Hefei, 230012, PR China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Inflammatory bowel disease
Regulating inflammatory microenvironment
Oxidative stress
Reactive oxygen species
Flora regulation
Nrf2/NF-κB
A B S T R A C T
Oxidative stress, dysbiosis, and immune dysregulation have been confirmed to play pivotal roles in the complex
pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Herein, we design copper ion–luteolin nanocomplexes (CuL
NCs) through a metal–polyphenol coordination strategy, which plays a multifaceted role in the amelioration of
IBD. The fabricated CuL NCs function as therapeutic agents with exceptional antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
capabilities because of their great stability and capacity to scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS). It can
effectively modulate the inflammatory microenvironment including facilitating the efficient reduction of pro-
inflammatory cytokine levels, protecting intestinal epithelial cells, promoting mucosal barrier repair and regu-
lating intestinal microbiota. In addition, CuL NCs have been found to enhance cellular antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory capacities by regulating the nuclear factor erythroid 2–related factor 2/heme oxygenase-1
(Nrf2/HO-1) oxidative stress pathway and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) signaling pathway, respectively.
Notably, CuL NCs demonstrate significant prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy in mouse models with typical
IBD, including ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD). This study provides a new approach for building
multifaceted therapeutic platforms for natural products to treat IBD.
1. Introduction
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory disor-
der with a rapidly increasing incidence worldwide, particularly in newly
industrialized countries [1,2]. The pathogenesis of IBD is associated
with oxidative stress, inflammatory response, disruption of intestinal
barrier function, imbalance of the gut microbiota, and dysregulation of
the mucosal immune system [3]. Traditional treatment for IBD usually
includes medications, nutritional interventions, and surgical proced-
ures.
Commonly
used
medications
include
5-aminosalicylic
acid
(5-ASA) [4], corticosteroids, immunosuppressants (such as azathioprine
and methotrexate), and biologics (such as antitumor necrosis factor-α
antibodies) [5]. Although these treatments can relieve symptoms and
control inflammation, they often fail to fundamentally solve IBD, and
long-term use may lead to side effects and drug resistance [6].
Furthermore, the longer the duration of inflammation, the higher the
risk of intestinal and systemic complications. Therefore, developing a
rapid and effective strategy is key to treating IBD.
During the development of IBD, complex molecular interactions and
cellular communications occur between different proinflammatory cy-
tokines, chemokines, inflammatory cells, and immune cells [7]. (1)
Oxidative Stress and Cellular Damage: excess reactive oxygen species
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.
*** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: liuhanghang@ctgu.edu.cn (H. Liu), shqian@ahmu.edu.cn (H. Qian), wnwang@ahmu.edu.cn (W. Wang).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Bioactive Materials
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/bioactive-materials
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.12.004
Received 14 September 2024; Received in revised form 2 December 2024; Accepted 2 December 2024
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
2452-199X/© 2024 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC 
BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

(ROS) present in the inflammatory microenvironment are higher than
normal levels [8]. Intestinal epithelial cell damage is caused by the
imbalance in oxidative stress due to a large concentration of ROS and a
diminished antioxidant capacity. This imbalance leads to oxidation of
proteins and lipids and damage of DNA molecules. (2) Intestinal Barrier
Disruption and Inflammation: the intestinal mechanical barrier is
damaged by the loss of intestinal epithelial cells, and colonic tissue
damage is worsened by the entry of neutrophils and other pathogens [9,
10]. Alternatively, excessive ROS affect macrophage differentiation and
activate inflammatory factors, causing inflammation [11]. M2 macro-
phages, which play a role in immunosuppression and tissue repair,
typically produce minimal anti-inflammatory cytokines. This leads to
chronic inflammation, and a sequence of inflammatory cascade re-
actions are triggered [12]. (3) Microbial Imbalance: growing evidence
shows that intestinal inflammation and permeability issues caused by
microbial imbalance play important roles in the progression of IBD [13].
Restoring intestinal homeostasis is a complex challenge that cannot be
addressed through a single therapeutic approach. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to develop a range of multidimensional regulatory strate-
gies that not only alleviate the symptoms of the inflammatory micro-
environment in the gut but also facilitate better long-term management
outcomes, thereby ensuring safe and effective treatment of IBD [14,15].
Natural active small molecules (NASMs) demonstrate promise for
treating IBD, offering benefits such as minimal side effects, affordability,
and easy accessibility [16–18]. For example, epigallocatechin gallate
(EGCG) primarily found in green tea exhibits anti-inflammatory, anti-
oxidant, and antibacterial effects [19]. Tea polyphenols can inhibit in-
testinal inflammation and improve the gut microbiota [20]. Luteolin
(Lut) is a flavonoid with unique antioxidant properties and has garnered
considerable attention owing to its diverse biological activities,
including anti-inflammatory, anticancer, and cardiovascular protective
effects [21,22]. Lut has demonstrated remarkable efficacy in modulating
the nuclear factor erythroid 2–related factor 2 (Nrf2) signaling pathway
[23,24]. It exerts its effects by upregulating antioxidant enzyme genes
such as heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreduc-
tase 1 (NQO1), thereby mitigating oxidative stress, and by targeting
proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and
interleukin-6 (IL-6) to suppress inflammation [25–27]. Consequently,
the modulation of Nrf2 by Lut is considered an effective strategy for
management of colitis. However, the application of NASMs is frequently
constrained by challenges such as instability, insufficient targeting, and
low bioavailability[28,29]. Additionally, Lut is susceptible to oxidative
degradation because of its highly unsaturated structure, which restricts
its solubility and bioavailability in water [30].
Herein, we develop copper ion–Lut nanocomplexes (CuL NCs) using
a metal–polyphenol coordination strategy through a simple hybrid
approach. This strategy of nanometrization of NASMs using metal ions
can effectively address their low bioavailability [31–33]. Copper (Cu) is
an essential trace element for the human body. Cu exists in its oxidized
(Cu2⁺) and reduced (Cu⁺) forms, and both forms have inherent redox
properties that are vital for maintaining redox homeostasis [34,35].
Therefore, it can be hypothesized that the complexation of the copper
ion with Lut may enhance the enzymatic catalytic performance and
antioxidant activity of Lut, thereby improving overall ROS scavenging
efficiency and bioavailability of Lut. As illustrated in Scheme 1, the
highly stable CuL NCs can effectively reduce the excess ROS in the in-
flammatory lesions in the intestine, and protecting intestinal epithelial
cells. While promoting the polarization of macrophages toward the M2
phenotype, CuL NCs also facilitate the nuclear translocation of Nrf2,
which activates the expression of downstream antioxidant enzymes
HO-1 to combat oxidative stress damage. Furthermore, CuL NCs inhibit
the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) signaling pathway by down-
regulating phosphorylated IκB kinase β (p-IκKβ) and phosphorylated
NF-κB p65 (p-p65), thereby reducing proinflammatory factors and
effectively modulating the imbalance of oxidative stress and excessive
inflammation. Additionally, CuL NCs restore the levels of tight junc-
tion–related proteins, improving intestinal barrier function while
enhancing the abundance and diversity of the gut microbiota. This study
aims to clarify that metal–polyphenol coordination with multifaceted
regulation of the inflammatory microenvironment could be a novel
approach for management of IBD.
Scheme 1. Schematic of CuL NCs in the treatment of IBD. CuL NCs reduces intestinal oxidative stress and inflammation through Nrf2 activation and NF-κB
inhibition, protects intestinal epithelial cells while inhibiting further intestinal damage, improves intestinal barrier function, and enhances the abundance and di-
versity of intestinal flora.
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
119 

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Synthesis of CuL NCs
First, polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP; 1200 mg) was dissolved in 40 mL
of deionized water. Then, 210 mg of anhydrous copper (II) sulfate
(CuSO4) powder was added to the solution and stirred until clear. Lut
(40 mg) was added, and the solution was stirred at 25oC for 72 h and
then centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min to remove excess Lut. The
supernatant containing CuL NCs was filtered using a 100-KD ultrafil-
tration tube to eliminate excess PVP and Cu ions. Finally, the resulting
CuL NCs were stored at 4 ◦C for future use.
2.2. Cell viability assay
RAW264.7, HT-29 [36–38], NCM460 [39], L929, and HUVEC cells
were cultured until they reached the logarithmic growth phase. They
were then digested and plated into 96-well plates at a density of 1 × 104
cells per well. After overnight incubation for cell adherence, the old
medium was discarded. Next, the medium with varying concentrations
of CuL NCs was added, and the solution was incubated for 24 h. 3-(4,
5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) was
added, and the solution was incubated for 4 h. Dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) was added, and absorbance was read at 490 nm. The cell sur-
vival rate was calculated based on the absorbance results. OD1: indicates
the OD value of the experimental group; OD2: indicates the OD value of
the blank group; OD3: indicates the OD value of the control group.
Cell Viability (%) = OD1 −OD2
OD3 −OD2
× 100%
2.3. Cell uptake
RAW264.7 cells were inoculated in confocal dishes with approxi-
mately 1 × 106 cells per well and cultured for 1 day to ensure cell
attachment. The groups are as follows: control group = no Cy5.5-CuL
NCs are added; low-concentration group = 100 μg/mL of Cy5.5-CuL
NCs are added; high-concentration group = 200 μg/mL Cy5.5-CuL
NCs are added. Culture of cells was continued for 6 h to allow endocy-
tosis of CuL NCs. After treatment, the culture was gently rinsed with
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to eliminate any CuL NCs that were not
endocytosed. The cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15–30
min and then washed with PBS.
2.4. Nrf2 immunofluorescence
RAW264.7 cells were inoculated at 1 × 106 cells per well in confocal
dishes and incubated for 12 h. The supernatant was absorbed, lipo-
polysaccharide (LPS) (1 μg/mL) was added with Dulbecco’s modifica-
tion of Eagle’s medium (DMEM), 1 mL of the configured solution was
added, and the solution was incubated for 12 h. Bovine serum albumin
(BSA) was sealed for 2 h and added to cell permeable solution, and the
Nrf2 antibody was applied and incubated at 37 ◦C for 4 h. The cells were
rinsed with PBS, and then the secondary antibody was incubated for 30
min. After the addition of 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), images
of the sealed sheet were taken using a fluorescence microscope.
2.5. Anti-inflammatory experiment
RAW264.7 cells were plated in 24-well plates. After incubating for
24 h, cells were induced by 1 μg/mL LPS and different concentrations of
CuL NCs for additional 12 h of incubation. The supernatant was
analyzed via the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit. The
mRNA expression of antioxidant antioxidative genes was also measured
through quantitative Realreal-time polymerase chain reaction PCR
(qRT-PCR) assay (Table S1).
2.6. In vivo imaging system (IVIS)
Healthy mice were intraperitoneally injected with 20 mg/kg of
Cy5.5-CuL NCs and imaged at 0, 2, 4, 8, 12, 24, and 48 h after injection
via IVIS imaging. Major organs of sacrificed mice (heart, liver, spleen,
lungs, kidneys, and colon) were taken for IVIS imaging at 0, 2, 4, 8, 12,
24, and 48 h.
2.7. DSS-induced colitis model
Preventive experimental groups were established as follows: (1) PBS
+ water, (2) CuL NCs (5, 10, and 20 mg/kg) + water, (3) PBS + 4 % DSS,
and (4) 4 % DSS + CuL NCs (5, 10, and 20 mg/kg). After one week of
adaptation, (1) and (2) were given drinking water for 7 days, while (3)
and (4) were given 4%w/v DSS water for 7 days. Fresh DSS drinking
water was prepared and old ones were replaced every 2 days. (1) and (3)
were intraperitoneally injected with PBS on days 1, 3, and 5, while (2)
and (4) were intraperitoneally injected with CuL NCs on days 1, 3, and 5.
Daily assessment includes recording weights and calculating the disease
activity index (DAI) scores (Table S2). All mice were euthanized, and the
entire colon and other internal organs were extracted. The colon length
of each group was then measured and photographed (n = 4).
Preventive experimental groups were established as follows: (1) PBS
+ water, (2) PBS + 4 % DSS, (3) 4 % DSS + PVP, (4) 4 % DSS + Cu2+, (5)
4 % DSS + Lut, (6) 4 % DSS + Lut + Cu2+, (7) 4 % DSS + Mesalazine (5-
ASA), (8) 4 % DSS + CuL NCs (20 mg/kg). After one week of adaptation,
(1) was given normal drinking water for 7 days, while (2) ~ (8) were
given 4%w/v DSS water for 7 days. Fresh DSS drinking water was pre-
pared and old ones were replaced every 2 days. (1) and (2) were
intraperitoneally injected with PBS on days 1, 3, and 5, while (3) ~ (8)
were intraperitoneally injected with PVP, Cu2+, Lut, Lut + Cu2+, 5-ASA
and CuL NCs, respectively, on days 1, 3, and 5. The concentrations of
both Cu2+ and Lut were at the same level as that of CuL NCs (n = 5).
Colitis treatment groups were established as follows: (1) PBS +
water, (2) PBS + 4 % DSS, (3) 4 % DSS + CuL NCs (10 mg/kg), and (4) 4
% DSS + CuL NCs (20 mg/kg). After one week of adaptation, (1) was
given drinking water for 7 days, while (2) ~ (4) were given 4%w/v DSS
water for 7 days. Fresh DSS drinking water was prepared and old ones
were replaced every 2 days. (1) and (2) were intraperitoneally injected
with PBS on day 8, 10, 12, and 14, while (3) and (4) were intraperito-
neally injected with CuL NCs on days 8, 10, 12, and 14. Body weight,
mouse status (Table S3), and DAI score were recorded. On day 16, the
mice were killed and the whole colon and organs were taken. The colons
of each group were recorded (n = 5).
2.8. TNBS-induced Crohn’s disease (CD) model
Crohn’s disease (CD) mice treatment groups were established as
follows: (1) control group, (2) 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid
(TNBS) group, (3) TNBS + 10 mg/kg CuL NCs group, and (4) TNBS + 20
mg/kg CuL NCs group. There were eight mice in each group. All the mice
acclimated for a week, and then before the TNBS-induced colitis model
was constructed, the mice were fasted overnight. The (1), (2), and (3)
group were given 2 % TNBS/ethanol enema. Subsequently, mice in the
(3) and (4) groups were intraperitoneally injected with 10 and 20 mg/kg
of CuL NCs from the first day to the fifth day, respectively. Simulta-
neously, the control and TNBS groups received intraperitoneal injections
of PBS solution. Observations were made regarding body weight, fecal
consistency, the presence of blood in the stool, DAI scores, and the
overall physical condition and activity levels of the mice.
2.9. Histological evaluation
Samples were preserved in 4 % paraformaldehyde solution to
maintain tissue structure. The fixed tissue samples were dehydrated and
then treated with xylene to remove water. The sample was then
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
120 

immersed in paraffin until fully embedded. The paraffin-embedded tis-
sue was cut into sections that were 5–10 μm thick using a microtome and
placed on a slide. For frozen slices, PBS washing was performed. For
paraffin sections, dewaxing and hydration were performed. Hematoxy-
lin and eosin (H&E) or Alcian Blue–periodic acid–Schiff staining (AB-
PAS) was performed. After the sheet was sealed, the slices were observed
to record the tissue structure, cell morphology, and other characteristics.
The stained tissues were scored according to Table S4.
2.10. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and immunofluorescence (IF)
IHC staining: Sections are dewaxed in xylene and passed through a
series of ethanol solutions (100 %, 95 %, and 70 %). The sections were
boiled in sodium citrate solution for antigen repair. The slices were
incubated with blocking solution and incubated at 4 ◦C overnight for the
primary antibody. The secondary antibodies were incubated for 30–60
min. 3,3′-Diaminobenzidine (DBA) solution was added, and hematoxylin
was mixed for staining. Finally, the sections were observed under an
optical microscope. IF staining: Fresh colon tissue of mice was frozen
and incubated using a tyramide signal amplification (TSA) kit. Then, the
tissue was observed under a fluorescence microscope.
Fig. 1. Synthesis and characterization of CuL NCs. (A) Synthesis of CuL NCs. (B) Comparison of Lut and CuL NCs (at the same amount of Lut). (C) TEM images; scale
bar = 50 nm. (D) Size distribution by DLS and Zeta potential. (E) UV–vis spectra of Lut and CuL NCs. (F, G) XPS patterns of CuL NCs and Cu2p. (H) FT-IR spectra of
Lut, CuL NCs and PVP. (I) Hydrodynamic size of CuL NCs in different solutions. (J) Different concentrations of CuL NCs ABTS⋅+ scavenging activity. (K) ABTS⋅+
scavenging activity (the concentrations of both copper ions and Lut at the same level as that of CuL NCs. CuL NCs = 100 μg/mL). (L) Different concentrations of CuL
NCs DPPH⋅scavenging activity. (M) DPPH⋅scavenging activity (the concentrations of both copper ions and Lut at the same level as that of CuL NCs. CuL NCs = 100
μg/mL). (N–P) H2O2, ⋅OH, and ⋅O2
−scavenging activities. (Q) H2O2, H2O2, and ⋅O2
−scavenging activity was observed when the concentrations of copper ions and Lut
were maintained at the same level in the CuL NCs (CuL NCs = 100 μg/mL). (R, S) SOD-like and CAT-like antioxidative activity of CuL NCs. The data are presented as
the mean ± standard deviation (SD) with (n = 3).
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
121 

2.11. Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). The experi-
mental data and differences were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 9.5
software (GraphPad, San Diego, CA) through one-way analysis of vari-
ance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. Signifi-
cant differences among groups were indicated as *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
and ***P < 0.001. A P-value of less than 0.05 was considered statisti-
cally significant, corresponding to a 95 % confidence level.
2.12. Animals
Male C57BL/6 mice and male BALB/c nude mice (6 weeks old) were
obtained from Henan Skobes Biotechnology Co., Ltd. All the animal
studies were approved by the Association of Laboratory Animal Sciences
and the Center for Laboratory Animal Sciences at Anhui Medical
University.
2.13. Ethics approval statement
All animal experiments received approval from the Ethics Committee
of Anhui Medical University (approval number: LLSC20241722). These
experiments were conducted in compliance with the guidelines set forth
by the Association of Laboratory Animal Sciences and the Center for
Laboratory Animal Sciences at Anhui Medical University.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Synthesis and characterization of CuL NCs
Herein, anhydrous CuSO4 was mixed with Lut solution in the pres-
ence of PVP at room temperature to obtain CuL NCs (Fig. 1A). In Fig. 1B,
Lut exhibits relatively low water solubility, leading to noticeable pre-
cipitation after 12 h. However, upon complexation with copper ions, the
solution changes to a clear and transparent yellow color, demonstrating
a stable form. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images show
that the CuL NCs have a uniform particle size distribution (Fig. 1C), with
an average size of 7.58 ± 0.90 nm (Fig. 1D). Additionally, the Zeta
potential is measured at −35.7 ± 3.83 mV. Compared with Lut solution,
the characteristic absorption peaks of Lut appear at 254 and 350 nm, and
similar characteristic peaks of CuL NCs also appear at these two places,
indicating the successful complexation of Lut [40] (Fig. 1E). The X-ray
diffraction (XRD) pattern in Fig. S1 indicates that CuL NCs are amor-
phous, with no crystalline copper-containing phase detected. In Fig. 1F,
the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectrum displays peaks
associated with the Cu, O, N, and C elements at binding energies of 974,
529, 397, and 282 eV, respectively. After deconvolution, the Cu 2p
spectrum of CuL NCs reveals six peaks (Fig. 1G). The high-resolution Cu
2p spectrum shows a main peak for Cu 2p3/2 at 933.3 eV and a main
peak for Cu 2p1/2 at 953.3 eV. The peak at 933.3 eV is deconvoluted into
two peaks that correspond to Cu2+ (933.5 eV) and Cu+ (932.5 eV),
confirming the presence of two oxidation states in CuL NCs. Moreover,
the composition and structure of CuL NCs were characterized by Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) (Fig. 1H). The absorption peak
at 1264 cm−1, which is attributed to the stretching vibration of the C–O
bond of the phenolic hydroxyl group coupled with the in-plane bending
vibration of the O–H bond in Lut, shows a shift after the formation of the
nanocomplexes. The tensile vibration peak of the carbonyl group (C=O)
shifts from 1655 to 1640 cm−1, which further demonstrates the suc-
cessful complexation of copper ions with Lut [41]. Thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA) was used to estimate Lut content in CuL NCs (Fig. S2)
[42]. The weight loss of CuL NCs occurred in three distinct stages. The
first stage, observed around 100 ◦C, was attributed to the evaporation of
water. The second stage occurred at 240–349 ◦C was associated with the
thermal decomposition of a mixed species of Lut and PVP [43,44]. The
third stage of weight loss, occurring between 450 and 800 ◦C, was
associated with the thermal decomposition of the remaining Lut [45]. In
summary, the weight percentage of Lut in the CuL NCs is approximately
14.25 wt%. While inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
(ICP-OES) analysis determined that Cu ions constituted 4.14 wt %.
Additionally, dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Fig. 1I) and ζ potential
(Fig. S3) measurements demonstrate that CuL NCs maintain remarkable
stability in various physiological solutions, such as fetal bovine serum
(FBS) and DMEM. These results demonstrate the successful synthesis of
CuL NCs nanocomplexes through the coordination of Cu ions with Lut
and their good stability.
3.2. ROS scavenging activity of CuL NCs
Considering that the broad-spectrum antioxidant activity of newly
developed nanomedicines is one of the key factors in the treatment of
IBD, the antioxidant activity of CuL NCs need to be investigated. Redox
potential measures the ability of a compound to gain or lose electrons.
The reduction potential of CuL NCs was found to be lower than that of
Lut, suggesting that CuL NCs had stronger antioxidant capacity than Lut
(Fig. S4) [46–48]. Various Cu valence states in CuL NCs, along with the
inherent antioxidant properties of Lut, indicate potential SOD-like and
CAT-like catalytic mechanisms. As illustrated in Fig. S5, Cu+ is oxidized
by ⋅O2
−to Cu2+, producing H2O2, while the hydroxyl group of Lut do-
nates electrons to ⋅O2
−, forming additional H2O2. Cu2+ can be reduced
back to Cu + by oxidizing ⋅O2
−to O2. The valence transition of Cu in CuL
NCs is crucial for the ⋅O2
−
disproportionation reaction. The unique
CAT-mimicking activity of CuL NCs likely stems from the Cu+ coordi-
nation structure, which catalyzes the decomposition of H2O2 into O2 and
H2O2 [49]. ABTS⋅+, a typical ROS-related derivative, was completely
eliminated by 100 μg/mL of CuL NCs (Fig. 1J and S6). For a comparison,
the ABTS⋅+ scavenging abilities of Lut, Cu ions, mixtures of Lut and Cu
ions and CuL NCs were examined. It was demonstrated that CuL NCs
exhibited strong ABTS⋅+ scavenging ability (Fig. 1K). CuL NCs at a
concentration of 400 μg/mL eliminated about 70 % of nitrogen radicals
with numerous unpaired electrons (Fig. 1L and S7). CuL NCs also
exhibited greater antioxidant activity than Lut, Cu ions, and mixtures of
Lut and Cu ions (Fig. 1M).
We conducted further investigations into the ROS scavenging capa-
bility of CuL NCs by assessing their effectiveness against three repre-
sentative ROS: H2O2, ⋅O2
−, and ⋅OH. First, the levels of oxygen produced
by different concentrations of CuL NCs after a 15-min reaction were
recorded using a dissolved oxygen meter. Fig. 1N shows that the con-
centration of dissolved oxygen in CuL NCs levels off when it reaches a
certain level, eventually producing ~30 mg/L of O2 when the CuL NCs
concentration is 400 μg/mL ⋅OH, which is a highly toxic and destructive
ROS, exhibited a stronger scavenging effect with increasing CuL NCs
concentration (Fig. 1O and Fig. S8). Subsequently, the scavenging
ability of CuL NCs for ⋅O2
−was investigated separately using a superoxide
anion detection kit, and the scavenging ability of CuL NCs for ⋅O2
−was
found to steadily improve at each concentration gradient (Fig. 1P).
Analysis of the results indicates that CuL NCs exhibit a stronger capacity
to scavenge H2O2, ⋅OH, and ⋅O2
−than Lut, Cu ions, and a mixture of Lut
and Cu ions at the same concentration (Fig. 1Q). In addition, CuL NCs
have been shown to exhibit SOD-like and CAT-like activities using the
total SOD activity assay kit and the CAT activity assay kit, respectively.
The concentration of CuL NCs was positively correlated with SOD- and
CAT-like activities, and 400 μg/mL of CuL NCs exhibited SOD-like and
CAT-like activities of 72 ± 6.9 % and 80 ± 3.7 %, respectively, showing
satisfactory activity effects (Fig. 1R and S).
3.3. Cytoprotective capacity and anti-inflammatory effects of CuL NCs In
vitro
After demonstrating the excellent ROS scavenging ability of CuL NCs,
RAW264.7 and HT-29 cells were chosen to evaluate the effect of
different concentrations of CuL NCs on cell viability. After incubating
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
122 

the cells with different concentrations of CuL NCs for up to 24 h, CuL
NCs exhibited good biocompatibility and low toxicity, with the relative
viability of the cells maintained at >80 % even at CuL NCs concentration
as high as 200 μg/mL (Fig. 2A and B). Additionally, CuL NCs showed
similar results for NCM460, L929, and HUVEC cells (Fig. S9). These
experimental results demonstrate that CuL NCs do not cause significant
toxicity to the cells, prompting us to continue to investigate their cellular
uptake behavior. The cell uptake characteristics of Cy5.5-CuL NCs were
evaluated after coincubation with RAW264.7 cells. In the control group,
only blue fluorescence was produced by DAPI staining and no red
fluorescence could be observed. In the experimental group, in addition
to blue fluorescence, red fluorescence of CuL NCs was observed around
the nucleus and the red fluorescence intensity showed a marked increase
with increasing concentration of CuL NCs (Fig. 2C).
Using the endocytosis property combined with the ROS scavenging
effect of CuL NCs, the antioxidant properties of CuL NCs were further
evaluated at the cellular level. RAW264.7 cells were stimulated with
H2O2 to generate intracellular ROS and were then treated with CuL NCs
[50,51]. A notable enhancement in cell viability was observed in
RAW264.7 cells treated with CuL NCs compared to those subjected to
H2O2-induced damage without treatment with CuL NCs (Fig. 2D).
Similarly, CuL NCs enhanced the viability of HT-29 cells after
H2O2-induced oxidative stress injury (Fig. 2E). Furthermore, CuL NCs
exhibited enhanced cytoprotective effects compared to Cu ions, Lut, and
the mixture of Lut and copper ions (Fig. S10). To observe the protective
effect of CuL NCs on cells more directly, live/dead cell staining was
performed on RAW264.7 cells. Almost no cell death was observed in the
cells incubated with CuL NCs alone, while the RAW264.7 cells subjected
to continuous stimulation with H2O2 on a large area died, showing a
large amount of red fluorescence (Fig. 2F). However, in the experi-
mental group pretreated with different concentrations of CuL NCs, the
fluorescence images showed that cell viability recovered to varying
degrees, and after treatment with 200 μg/mL of CuL NCs, cells almost
returned to their normal state. Notably, CuL NCs also played a protective
role in HT-29 cells against oxidative stress (Fig. S11). Compared with the
same-concentration a mixture of Lut and Cu ions treatment group, the
CuL NCs treatment group showed better resistance to H2O2-induced cell
death (Fig. S12).
Afterward, the ability of CuL NCs to scavenge intracellular ROS was
assessed. During cell growth in a logarithmic period, high concentration
of H2O2 was used as an exogenous stimulus to incubate RAW264.7 cells
to induce oxidative stress, at which time a large amount of ROS was
generated inside the cells. As demonstrated in Fig. 2G, the control group
without H2O2 exhibited no significant green fluorescence. This suggests
that the levels of ROS generated were insufficient to impact the obser-
vations when the cells were undergoing normal physiological meta-
bolism. By contrast, there was a large amount of green fluorescence in
the experimental group that added only H2O2, indicating that exogenous
H2O2 successfully induced oxidative stress in the cells. In the 100-μg/mL
CuL NCs group, the green fluorescence was reduced in some cells, while
at a dose of 200 μg/mL, it was almost invisible, clearly suggesting that
CuL NCs eliminated the intracellular ROS. Similar results were
confirmed in HT-29 cells (Fig. S13). In comparison with Lut and Cu ions
separately, excess ROS and free radical production led to oxidative stress
in RAW264.7 cells, resulting in constitutive damage to the nuclear
junctions. By contrast, a natural oval shape was observed in the nuclei of
all the cells treated with CuL NCs (Fig. S14). Effects of CuL NCs on the
ROS levels of RAW264.7 and HT-29 cells were further quantified across
a broad concentration range using flow cytometry. After exogenous
H2O2 stimulation, the relative fluorescence intensity of cells increased.
Notably, the relative fluorescence intensity decreased more significantly
at higher concentrations of CuL NCs, indicating that CuL NCs have a
concentration-dependent ability to scavenge ROS (Fig. S15). In addition,
excess ROS production led to a decrease in mitochondrial membrane
potential (MMP), which triggered the release of proapoptotic factors
such as cytochrome c from the mitochondria. This process activates
downstream apoptotic signaling pathways, ultimately causing cell death
[52]. To evaluate the impact of CuL NCs on MMP, cells were exposed to
H2O2, which resulted in a decrease in red fluorescence and an increase in
green fluorescence, indicating that the generation of free radicals caused
mitochondrial damage, causing a reduction in MMP. Nonetheless, the
introduction of CuL NCs led to a significant reduction in the increase in
green fluorescence, suggesting that the decrease in MMP was prevented
and apoptosis was inhibited. This was confirmed in both RAW264.7 and
HT-29 cells (Fig. S16, Fig. S17, and Fig. S18).
Dysfunction of the intestinal epithelial barrier is an important feature
in the onset and maintenance of IBD, but the dysregulation of oxidative
stress and the inflammatory microenvironment hinder the repair of
damaged mucosal wounds, which in turn exacerbates the disease [53].
Therefore, maintaining an intact epithelial barrier is crucial for pre-
venting disease progression. We explored the growth capacity of
damaged colonic epithelial cells under oxidative stress conditions, and
as shown in Fig. S19A, NCM460 cells demonstrated low tendency to
grow in H2O2 environment, whereas the recovery of NCM460 cells was
significantly improved after treatment with 200 μg/mL of CuL NCs. CuL
NCs exhibited a tendency to promote the growth of NCM460 cells
compared to the control group (Fig. S19B); therefore, we also confirmed
that CuL NCs could promote the expression of tight junction proteins
Zonula Occludens protein 1 (ZO-1) and occludin in quantitative reverse
transcription
polymerase
chain
reaction
(qRT-PCR)
experiments
(Figs. S19C and D). Moreover, lipid peroxidation damaged the mem-
brane integrity of intestinal epithelial cells. The malondialdehyde
(MDA) content is an important parameter that reflects the antioxidant
capacity of organisms and indirectly reflects the degree of peroxidation
injury in tissues and cells [54]. MDA levels in NCM460 cells were
assessed. MDA production was markedly elevated in NCM460 cells after
H2O2 treatment, suggesting the onset of severe oxidative stress. How-
ever, there was a decrease in MDA levels after the addition of CuL NCs
(Fig. S19E). The abovementioned results demonstrate that CuL NCs are
beneficial in counteracting the cellular damage caused by oxidative
stress and protecting the intestinal epithelial cells while enhancing the
epithelial barrier function by modifying the structure and functionality
of tight junctions.
3.4. Anti-inflammatory experiment In vitro
Given the influence of oxidative stress in macrophage polarization on
inflammation-related diseases and considering that previous studies
have shown that proinflammatory M1 and anti-inflammatory M2 mac-
rophages play a key role in the development of IBD [55]; in vitro studies
were conducted to stimulate macrophage polarization with LPS to
evaluate whether macrophage polarization during inflammatory pe-
riods can be modulated by CuL NCs. In Fig. 2H, compared with the
LPS-stimulated group, the percentage of M2 cells after incubation with
100 and 200 μg/mL CuL NCs increased from 1.39 % to 11.1 % and 16.6
%, respectively. Mechanistically, Nrf2, an endogenous antioxidant
pathway, is a spontaneously produced system against free radicals, and
Nrf2 transcription factors have been reported to promote M2 polariza-
tion by activating potential signals through translocation from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus. To explore this possibility, experiments
revealed that the proportion of nuclear Nrf2 was notably elevated in
macrophages treated with LPS after the administration of CuL NCs
(Fig. 2I and Fig. S20). Although Nrf2 does not directly react with ROS, it
can induce the expression of several antioxidant enzymes and protective
proteins. The SOD content in RAW264.7 cells induced by LPS was tested
using the SOD enzyme activity detection kit. The SOD activity in the
LPS-induced
inflammation
model
decreased
by
20
±
10.1
%.
Conversely, the SOD level in the 200 μg/mL CuL NCs group returned to
control group levels (Fig. 2J). Meanwhile, CuL NCs could also reverse
the intracellular CAT activity levels after LPS treatment (Fig. 2K).
After confirming that CuL NCs promoted M2 polarization. The key
inflammatory factors TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-17A were detected, with
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
123 

Fig. 2. Protective and anti-inflammatory effects of CuL NCs on cells in vitro. (A, B) Viability of RAW264.7 and HT-29 cells (n = 3). (C) CLSM images of RAW264.7 cell
intracellular endocytosis; scale bars = 50 μm. (D, E) Viability of RAW264.7 and HT-29 cells followed by H2O2 incubation (n = 3). (F) Images of calcein AM/PI–-
stained RAW264.7 cells; scale bars = 50 μm. (G) CLSM images of ROS in RAW264.7 cells stained by DCFH-DA; scale bars = 50 μm. (H) The effect of CuL NCs on M2
was detected by flow cytometry. (I) Macrophages collected after different treatments for immunofluorescence staining of Nrf2 (CuL NCs: 200 μg/mL); scale bars = 50
μm. (J, K) SOD and CAT levels in RAW264.7 cells. Levels of (L) TNF-α, (M) IL-1β, (N) IL-6 and (O) IL-17A in RAW264.7 cells stimulated by LPS and treated with
different concentrations of CuL NCs (n = 3).
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
124 

levels reaching 65.3 ± 2.7, 74.9 ± 2.1, 121.9 ± 10.8, and 91.4 ± 7.8 pg/
mL, respectively (Fig. 2L–O). CuL NCs significantly reduced the
expression levels to 34.6 ± 8.5, 4.9 ± 1.5, 14.6 ± 3.1, and 39.5 ± 1.4
pg/mL, respectively. Beyond the effect of a reduced expression of
proinflammatory
cytokines,
CuL
NCs
significantly
increased
the
expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokines. The anti-inflammatory
factors IL-10 and IL-4, which are markers of M2, were detected. In
macrophages treated with LPS, IL-10 and IL-4 levels were relatively low
at 7.5 ± 2.9 and 6.1 ± 4.4 pg/mL, respectively (Fig. S21). Conversely,
these levels spiked significantly after treatment with CuL NCs. As
anticipated, qRT-PCR results proved that CuL NCs could regulate the
verification of the microenvironment (Fig. S22).
3.5. Biodistribution and biosafety In vivo
Before evaluating the prophylactic and protective effects of CuL NCs
in acute enteritis, the biodistribution and metabolic pathways of CuL
NCs were explored, as these are prerequisites for determining the dosage
and frequency of administration. After intraperitoneal injection of
Cy5.5-CuL NCs in healthy mice, in vivo imaging was evaluated using a
small-animal imager at different time points. As shown in Fig. S23,
fluorescence in the lower abdomen started to accumulate at around 2 h,
reached a maximum intensity at the 12th hour, and then weakened after
24 h. Next, we explored the distribution of CuL NCs in specific organs by
ICP-OES. The heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys, and colon were
collected at different time points for in vitro imaging studies. A large
amount of CuL NCs reached the major organs through blood circulation,
among which the accumulation in the liver and kidney was the highest.
After 12 h, the content of CuL NCs in the major organs showed a
downward trend, which may be related to the biodegradation of CuL
NCs in vivo. After 48 h, CuL NCs were metabolized by the liver and
kidneys and expelled from the body (Fig. S24).
To assess the biosafety of the formulation in vivo, we first performed a
hemolysis test, which showed that all concentrations of CuL NCs dis-
persions had a hemolysis rate of <2 %, indicating excellent hemo-
compatibility (Fig. S25). Subsequently, in vivo toxicity was assessed
through intraperitoneal injection of a 20 mg/kg of CuL NCs into healthy
C57BL/6 mice every other day. After euthanizing the mice on day 7 and
14, major organs were collected for H&E staining. H&E results show that
CuL NCs did not induce significant pathological changes or inflamma-
tory lesions compared with those in control mice (Fig. S26). The he-
matological index parameters, such as mean corpuscular hematocrit
(HCT), hemoglobin (HGB), mean corpuscular hemoglobin, red blood
cells (RBCs), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, white blood
cells, and mean corpuscular volume, remained within the normal range
for the CuL NCs–treated group and the control group, with no significant
outliers (Fig. S27A). More importantly, typical hepatic and renal func-
tion parameters, namely, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), urea (UREA), uric acid, and total protein, did
not exhibit significant abnormal values, suggesting that CuL NCs are
virtually devoid of hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity (Fig. S27B).
3.6. Colitis Preventative effects of CuL NCs
Motivated by the powerful protective effect of CuL NCs on intestinal
epithelial cells and good biological safety, the preventive potential of
CuL NCs was investigated before the onset of colitis. Initially, healthy
mice were allowed to acclimate. Subsequently, the mice were adminis-
tered a 4 % DSS solution. At the same time, the mice were treated with
different concentrations of CuL NCs, and the mice were sacrificed on day
9, with specific methods detailed in the experimental section (Fig. 3A).
Mice treated with different concentrations of CuL NCs showed no sig-
nificant differences in physiological parameters compared to the control
group, indicating good biocompatibility of CuL NCs. Colon length, a key
indicator of colitis progression, decreased to 6.0 ± 0.29 cm in the colitis
group, but CuL NCs (5, 10, 20 mg/kg) restored the colon lengths to 7.9
± 0.13, 8.7 ± 0.15, and 9.0 ± 0.13 cm, respectively (Fig. 3B and C). DSS-
fed mice experienced marked weight loss, while the CuL NCs (20 mg/kg)
group showed the least weight loss and a trend of increase in weight by
day 7 (Fig. 3D). DAI was significantly increased in the DSS and low-dose
CuL NCs groups, indicating severe diarrhea and blood in the stool
(Fig. 3E). The high-dose CuL NCs group (20 mg/kg) showed a gradual
increase in DAI, effectively suppressing IBD. H&E staining revealed in-
flammatory symptoms in DSS-induced mice, including mucosal erosion
and cell damage (Fig. 3F). CuL NCs treatment restored colon length and
alleviated microstructural damage, exhibiting protective effects on
colonic tissue.
ROS were identified as a primary target for IBD treatment [11]. As
shown in Fig. 3G, fluorescence staining with dihydroethidium (DHE)
revealed no red fluorescence in the colons of healthy mice or those
treated with CuL NCs, while colitis mice exhibited significant red fluo-
rescence, indicating excessive ROS accumulation. In the CuL NCs
treatment group, red fluorescence decreased with increasing drug con-
centration, demonstrating the efficacy of CuL NCs in reducing excess
ROS in the colon and preventing colitis development. DSS-induced mice
showed significantly reduced levels of CAT and SOD, suggesting a dis-
rupted antioxidant system. CuL NCs treatment effectively restored these
levels to 18.3 ± 0.5 and 15.1 ± 0.65 U/mL, respectively (Fig. 3H and I).
MDA levels were elevated in DSS-treated mice but significantly
decreased after CuL NCs treatment. Myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity, an
indicator of neutrophil infiltration, was increased in the inflamed area
(124.7 ± 9.32 ng/mL) but was restored to 58.9 ± 5.94 ng/mL after CuL
NCs treatment (Figs. S28A and B). The levels of proinflammatory cyto-
kines IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-17A were elevated in the DSS group
compared to those on healthy mice but decreased in the CuL
NCs–treated
group
(Fig.
3J–M).
Conversely,
the
levels
of
anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-10 and IL-4 increased after CuL NCs
treatment, enhancing the inflammatory microenvironment, suppressing
local immune responses, and promoting colonic epithelial barrier
restoration (Figs. S28C and D).
To further compare the therapeutic effects, we compared the results
of 20-mg/kg CuL NCs–treated group with those of the Lut-treated group,
PVP-treated group, Cu2+-treated group as well as the clinically used IBD
treatment drug 5-ASA (Fig. 3N). Results showed that the CuL NCs group
most effectively inhibited colonic shortening in colitis mice and was the
only treatment in these groups that directly reduced severe symptoms to
mild symptoms in colitis mice (Fig. 3O and P). DSS induced IBD mice
sustained weight loss within 8 days. Compared with other treatment
groups, CuL NCs treated colitis mice showed significantly slower weight
loss (Fig. 3Q). In addition, the reduction of DAI further illustrated the
preventive efficacy of CuL NPs for IBD, with the same dose of 5-asa
having a lower effect on DAI (Fig. 3R). Changes in tissue damage were
direct evidence to evaluate the effectiveness of colitis treatment. The
DSS group shown in Fig. 3T and S showed signs of lamina propria
vasodilation, congestion, epithelial degeneration and necrosis, mucosal
erosion, and diffuse mixed inflammatory cell infiltration of the mucous
lamina propria. The CuL NCs treatment group showed better improve-
ment compared to the other treatment groups. The above evidence
showed that CuL NCs greatly improved the signs and symptoms of IBD,
and the effect was significantly better than the positive control drug 5-
ASA, Lut and Cu2+.
3.7. Mechanism of CuL NCs treatment of colitis
Given the promising preventive effects of CuL NCs in the early stages
of disease, we investigated their potential therapeutic effects after the
disease onset by regulating biological pathways and promoting cellular
repair. After 1 week of acclimatization, C57BL/6 mice were given a 4 %
DSS solution. On day 9, 11, and 13, the mice received intraperitoneal
injections of either PBS or CuL NCs (Fig. 4A). The colon length in the
DSS-induced colitis group was significantly shorter than that in the
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
125 

Fig. 3. Preventive effect of CuL NCs on IBD. (A) Experimental protocol. (B) Digital photos of the colons of each group of mice on day 9. (C) Colon length (n = 4). (D)
Daily body weight (n = 4). (E) DAI scores in each group over 8 days (n = 4). (F) H&E staining images of the mouse colon; scale bars = 200 μm. (G) DHE fluorescence
images of the colon in different groups of mice; scale bars = 100 μm. (H, I) SOD and CAT activity levels. (J–M) TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-17A levels in colon tissue.
Data are shown as mean ± SD (n = 3). (N) Experimental protocol. (O) Digital photos of the colons of each group of mice on day 9. (P) Colon length (n = 5). (Q) Daily
body weight (n = 5). (R) Daily body weight (n = 5). (S) H&E score (n = 5). (T) H&E staining of colon sections of mice in different treatment groups; scale bars =
200 μm.
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
126 

control group (Fig. 4B and D). Colitis mice showed signs of hemorrhagic
diarrhea and weight loss, consistent with clinical symptoms (Fig. 4E).
The DAI score significantly increased in the DSS group after 7 days but
decreased in the CuL NCs group following treatment starting on day 9
(Fig. 4F). CuL NCs also significantly reduced colon shortening and
weight loss, enhancing the quality of life of mice (Fig. 4C). H&E staining
revealed pathological changes in the colonic tissue, including epithelial
barrier defects, crypt damage, goblet cell depletion, and inflammatory
cell infiltration, in the colitis group (Fig. G).
To better understand the therapeutic mechanism of CuL NCs against
IBD, we conducted comprehensive RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on colon
tissues of healthy mice, CuL NCs-treated mice, and DSS-induced colitis
mice. Venn diagrams illustrated the distinct transcriptome profiles of the
control, DSS-induced colitis, and CuL NCs-treated groups (Fig. 4H).
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) showed clear clustering (Fig. 4I),
with volcano plots indicating significant differences between the DSS-
induced colitis and CuL NCs-treated groups, where 700 genes were
downregulated and 1199 genes were upregulated (Fig. 4J). We
performed KEGG enrichment analysis on the DEGs to identify the
pathways through which CuL NCs exerted their immunomodulatory
effects. The analysis revealed that the T-cell pathway, Th17 cell differ-
entiation, Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation, and NF-κB signaling pathway
were closely associated with the therapeutic mechanisms of CuL NCs
(Fig. 4K and L). Additionally, genomic enrichment analysis (GSEA)
showed that DEGs were clustered in pathways related to oxidative stress
and inflammatory response compared to the DSS-induced colitis model.
CuL NCs treatment reduced the expression of the inflammation-
associated NF-κB pathway and inhibited Th17 cell differentiation
(Fig. 4M and N).
Based on the findings regarding the role of NF-κB in oxidative stress
and inflammation, as well as the effects of Lut on Nrf2, we hypothesized
that CuL NCs may have inhibited inflammation by modulating the NF-
κB/Nrf2 signaling pathway, thereby reducing the levels of proin-
flammatory factors and enhancing the expression of antioxidant genes
(Fig. 5A). IHC was utilized to assess the expression levels and distribu-
tion of NF-κB in colon tissues. The increase in inhibitor of kappa B α
Fig. 4. CuL NCs treatment of mice with DSS-induced colitis. (A) Experimental protocol. (B) Digital photos of anus and colons of mice on day 16. (C) Status of mice
scores. (D) Colon length (n = 5). (E) Daily body weight changes (n = 5). (F) DAI scores for each group over a period of 17 days (n = 5). (G) H&E images; scale bars =
200 μm. (H) Venn diagram of DEGs. (I) Heatmap analysis of DEGs. (J) Volcano plot of DEGs. (K, L) Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment of
DEGs. (M, N) NF-κB and Th17 signaling pathway were selected for GSEA.
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
127 

(IκBα) and p65 in the DSS-induced colitis model group was significantly
attenuated by treatment groups (Fig. 5B). The levels of p-IκBα and p-
p65, associated with the activation of the NF-κB signaling pathway, also
returned to near normal levels following CuL NCs treatment. In previous
cellular experiments, we verified that Nrf2 could be activated by CuL
NCs. This primary regulator of oxidative stress activated the expression
of the antioxidant enzyme HO-1 to further clear ROS, which plays a
central role in triggering inflammation and activating the NF-κB
signaling pathway in the inflammatory process [56–58]. To further
confirm the CuL NCs effect on Nrf2 and its downstream signaling
molecule HO-1 at the animal level, immunofluorescence staining was
performed, showing that the fluorescence intensity of Nrf2/HO-1 was
weaker after DSS-induced colitis (Fig. 5C–E). This indicated a lower
expression level of Nrf2/HO-1. Conversely, the treatment group showed
a stronger fluorescence signal, indicating that the effects of CuL NCs led
to a slight upregulation of Nrf2/HO-1 expression in the inflammatory
microenvironment, thereby activating the antioxidant system. Western
blot (WB) analysis further confirmed that CuL NCs upregulated the
expression of Nrf2/HO-1 (Fig. 5F). Some biomarkers of oxidative stress
and inflammation also returned to normal (Fig. S29). Furthermore, the
activation of Nrf2 may influence the activation of Th2 cells and the
production of IL-4. Experimental evidence demonstrated that CuL NCs
not only regulate IL-4 but also IL-10 (Fig. S30). Combined with the
above results, CuL NCs had antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects
both in vivo and in vitro, promoting the expression of SOD, CAT, and
HO-1 by up-regulating the Nrf2 antioxidant gene, and clearing intra-
cellular reactive oxygen species, thus exhibiting antioxidant capacity. By
promoting the nuclear translocation of Nrf2, the activation of the NF-κB
Fig. 5. Mechanism of CuL NCs treatment of colitis. (A) Therapeutic mechanism diagram of CuL NCs. (B) Immunohistochemical staining of IκKβ, p65, p-IκKβ, and p-
p65; scale bars = 50 μm. (C) Immunofluorescence staining of HO-1 and Nrf2; scale bars = 100 μm. (D, E) Nrf2 and HO-1 quantification. (F) WB of HO-1 and Nrf2. (G)
AB-PAS staining of the mouse colon; scale bars = 200 μm. Immunofluorescence images of ZO-1 and occludin; scale bars = 100 μm. (H, I) Levels of mucin and goblet
cells in the colon. (J, K) ZO-1 and occludin quantification. Data are shown as mean ± SD (n = 3).
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
128 

signaling pathway was inhibited, and the expression of IL-1β, TNF-α, and
other pro-inflammatory factors was reduced. In addition, CuL NCs
transformed macrophages from M1 type to M2 type and promoted the
expression of anti-inflammatory factors.
Intestinal mucus serves as a protective barrier that maintains gut
homeostasis. However, in patients with IBD, the secretion of intestinal
mucus is impaired, leading to the thinning of the mucus layer, which
renders the gut more susceptible to inflammation, bacteria, and other
harmful substances [59]. The effect of CuL NCs on mucus secretion was
investigated using AB-PAS staining. In Fig. 5G–a significant quantity of
goblet cells were present in each crypt and mucins in healthy mice, and a
continuous thick mucus layer covered the colon epithelium. Alterna-
tively, a notable reduction in the quantity of goblet cells per crypt was
noted, along with the disruption of the mucus layer in the IBD model
mice. Administration of CuL NCs significantly ameliorated the massive
depletion of goblet cells and mucins caused by DSS. The protective effect
of the high dose of CuL NCs on the mucus barrier was more obvious
(Fig. 5H and I). The expression levels of ZO-1 and occludin increased,
indicating that the compromised intestinal barrier was restored (Fig. 5J
and K).
Fig. 6. Role of CuL NCs in regulating the intestinal flora. (A) Relative abundance of the top 20 gut microorganisms classified by family and (B) phylun level tax-
onomy. (C–G) α-Diversity of intestinal flora in mouse gut by Chao 1, Simpson, Faith-pd, Shannon and Observed-secies’s index. (H) Venn diagram for the strains of
identified bacteria in Control, DSS, and CuL NCs treated colitis mice. (I, J) β-diversity of faecal microbiome demonstrated by PCoA plot and NMDS plot. (K)
Cladogram based on LEfSe analysis showing the communitycomposition of the gut microbiota in mice with different treatments. (L–O) The relative abundance of
Enterobacteriaceae family, Lachnospiraceae family, Lactobacillaceae families and Bifidobacteriaceae family were selected in the family classification (n = 3).
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
129 

3.8. Regulatory effect of CuL NCs on the intestinal flora
Increasing evidence indicates that the balance of gut microbiota not
only influences the immune response of the intestine but also plays a
crucial role in regulating inflammation, promoting digestion and
nutrient absorption [60]. Therefore, maintaining gut homeostasis is
essential for IBD treatment. The regulatory effects of CuL NCs on gut
flora were investigated via 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene
sequencing analysis to determine whether CuL NCs treatment could
modulate the composition of intestinal flora in mice with IBD. In Fig. 6A
and B, the microbiota composition of each group at the family and
phylum levels is characterized by a significant decrease in harmful mi-
croorganisms such as Proteobacteria and a significant increase in
beneficial bacteria such as Bacteroides [59]. These beneficial microbes
support gut health by suppressing harmful microorganisms and regu-
lating
mucosal
immune
balance.
In
line
with
earlier
studies,
Fig. 7. CuL NCs treatment in TNBS-induced CD mice. (A) Overview of the experimental protocol. (B) Digital photos of the colons of each group of mice on day 6. (C)
Body weight (n = 5). (D) Survival curve of mice (n = 8). (E) Colon length (n = 5). (F) DAI scores (n = 5). (G–J) MDA, MPO, CAT, and SOD levels in colon ho-
mogenates. (K) Flow cytometry analysis of macrophage inhibition in different subgroups after macrophage polarization. (L) Immunohistochemical staining of TNF-α,
IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-17A; scale bars = 100 μm. (M) AB-PAS staining of colon; scale bars = 100 μm. (N) Mucin quantification (n = 3).
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
130 

DSS-induced colitis was associated with a reduction in microbiota di-
versity and community richness, as evidenced by the α-diversity metrics
(Chao 1, observed species, Shannon, Simpson, and Faith). However,
treatment with CuL NCs resulted in a marked enhancement in both
abundance and diversity of the gut microbiota of mice (Fig. 6C–G). This
finding was also confirmed by bacterial abundance in terms of opera-
tional taxonomic units, and the bacterial abundance detected in both
CuL NCs groups was much higher than that in the DSS-induced group
(Fig. 6H). Subsequently, variations in microbiota composition among
the samples were evaluated by β-diversity analysis. The principal co-
ordinates analysis (PCoA) and nonmetric multidimensional scaling
(NMDS) results showed that unique gut microbiota profiles were
exhibited by the group receiving CuL NCs compared to the other treat-
ment groups (Fig. 6I and J). Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect
sizes were analyzed to identify taxa that were richly differentiated
among these groups, and the LDA scores showed the dominant taxa and
their effects at different taxonomic levels from phylum to genus
(Fig. 6K).
In addition, the relative abundance of microbiota that changed at the
family level was counted. Potentially harmful Proteobacteria, especially
the Enterobacteriaceae family, was reduced by CuL NCs (Fig. 6L). The
Enterobacteriaceae family consisted of bacteria that can thrive in an
inflamed intestine, leading to over proliferation and further exacer-
bating the inflammatory response associated with IBD [59]. While the
treatment with CuL NCs notably enhanced the relative abundance of
Firmicutes, particularly within the Lachnospiraceae and Lactobacillaceae
families (Fig. 6M and N). Lachnospiraceae is associated with butyric acid
production, which promotes the growth of microorganisms and host
epithelial cells [61,62]. Bifidobacteriaceae is a probiotic that benefits the
health of the intestinal microenvironment by competitively inhibiting
harmful
microorganisms
and
modulating
the
intestinal
immune
response [63]. They have been found to be in higher abundance in the
CuL NCs treatment group (Fig. 6O).
To sum up, CuL NCs are proposed as a potential prebiotic that pro-
motes beneficial bacteria by altering the composition of the gut micro-
biota in mice and improving the intestinal ecological balance, thereby
indirectly facilitating the amelioration of the intestinal inflammatory
microenvironment. As a result, CuL NCs could serve as a promising
option for treating active colitis by minimizing the side effects associ-
ated with antibiotics and helping prevent severe infections caused by
drug-resistant bacteria.
3.9. CuL NCs for TNBS-induced CD
To explore the therapeutic uses of CuL NCs, their therapeutic efficacy
against CD was further evaluated. As another type of IBD, CD was
induced by rectal administration of TNBS in mice following typical
procedures. Fig. 7A illustrated the overall experimental design of CuL
NCs for the treatment of CD. First, the mice were fasted for 1 day before
the establishment of CD. Then, the mice were treated with TNBS and
ethanol enemas, and intraperitoneal injections of PBS or CuL NCs were
performed daily for the next 5 days. The treatment effects were recorded
and analyzed for all experimental groups. Differences in body weight
changes, mortality, and colon length indicated the superior therapeutic
effects of CuL NCs (Fig. 7C and D). Mice treated with CuL NCs lost less
weight and exhibited decreased mortality compared to TNBS-induced
mice, implying that CuL NCs significantly ameliorated the progression
of TNBS-induced CD. The colon lengths of mice in the control, TNBS,
TNBS +10-mg/kg CuL NCs, and TNBS +20-mg/kg CuL NCs groups were
measured to be 8.2 ± 0.29, 6.6 ± 0.13, 7.5 ± 0.16, and 8.0 ± 0.30 cm,
respectively. These findings suggest that CuL NCs significantly reduced
colon length shortening in TNBS-treated mice (Fig. 7B and E). The
scoring system further evaluated the therapeutic effects of CuL NCs
(Fig. 7F). As illustrated in Fig. S31, CuL NCs provided significant pro-
tection against TNBS-induced colon damage in mice. This was supported
by histological analyses. Specifically, the TNBS-treated mice exhibited
severe mucosal damage, characterized by prominent infiltration of in-
flammatory cells and significant injury to the colonic epithelium. In
stark contrast, treatment with CuL NCs effectively repaired the colonic
epithelium
and
reconstructed
the
crypt
structure.
These
results
demonstrate the potential of CuL NCs in alleviating colonic damage.
Furthermore, it was suspected that ROS clearance activity and effective
therapeutic effects similar to those observed in DSS-induced colitis may
be exhibited by CuL NCs in the context of TNBS-induced CD. In line with
the expected results, the levels of SOD, CAT, MDA, and MPO detected in
colon tissues of each group were decreased by CuL NCs treatment
(Fig. 7G–J).
Subsequently, to demonstrate the effect of CuL NCs on macrophage
polarization, the percentages of M1 and M2 cells in the colonic tissue
were quantified. In Fig. S32, M1 cells during inflammation increased
from 4.63 % in the normal group to 12.4 % in the TNBS group. After
treatment with different concentrations of 10 mg/kg CuL NCs and 20
mg/kg CuL NCs, M1 cells decreased to 8.18 % and 3.54 %, respectively.
Compared with TNBS-induced CD mice, the percentage of M2 cells
increased from 2.86 % to 22.5 % after 20-mg/kg CuL NCs treatment
(Fig. 7K). These findings indicate that CuL NCs can modify the balance
between M1 and M2 macrophages, particularly promoting M2 polari-
zation. Furthermore, we evaluated the levels of colonic proinflammatory
cytokines through IHC to determine the impact of blocking the macro-
phage chemotaxis. Following TNBS-induced colitis, there was a signifi-
cant increase in the production of IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-17A.
However, CuL NCs treatment resulted in a reduction of these cytokines
(Fig. 7I). Expression of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), which is
activated in colitis-associated intestinal fibrosis, was also reduced after
treatment (Figs. S33A and B) [64–66]. Treatment with CuL NCs pro-
moted IL-4 and IL-10 production to a certain extent (Figs. S33C and D).
The
ELISA
results
similarly
demonstrated
modulation
of
anti-inflammatory and proinflammatory factors by CuL NCs treatment,
all of which were restored from abnormal to normal levels after treat-
ment (Fig. S34). In addition, intestinal barrier damage was inevitable
during the pathogenesis of CD, and the repair of the intestinal barrier
was significantly increased after CuL NCs treatment, which is manifested
by the obvious increase in goblet cells and mucus secretion (Fig. 7M and
N). These results demonstrated that CuL NCs potentially provide a novel
approach to modulating the inflammatory processes associated with CD.
4. Conclusion
Herein, CuL NCs with good biosafety and biocompatibility have been
successfully prepared through a simple hybrid approach, serving as ROS
scavengers to modulate the intestinal inflammatory microenvironment.
We have experimentally demonstrated that CuL NCs can effectively
eliminate ROS, thereby protecting intestinal cells from damage.
Furthermore, CuL NCs facilitate Nrf2 nuclear translocation, facilitating
the transformation of macrophages into the anti-inflammatory M2
phenotype, thus increasing the anti-inflammatory factors in the in-
flammatory microenvironment. RNA-seq analysis reveals that CuL NCs
suppress the NF-κB signaling pathway, clarifying the mechanism by
which they protect the intestinal barrier from damage. Additionally, 16S
rRNA analysis highlights their critical role in gut microbiota remodeling,
demonstrating their ability to effectively reduce pathogenic bacteria
while increasing beneficial probiotics. Therefore, CuL NCs can be
considered a multifunctional and comprehensive nanomedicine that
uniquely possesses the ability to simultaneously tackle oxidative stress,
inflammation, mucosal barrier damage, and gut microbiota dysbiosis,
representing a novel therapeutic approach for IBD. In summary, this
work presents a novel nanoplatform composed of metal-natural product
nanocomplexes that exhibit multifunctional properties and clinical
translation potential. This innovative approach not only contributes to
the development of new therapeutic strategies for IBD but also lays the
groundwork for advanced antioxidant nanocomplexes applicable to a
broader spectrum of inflammatory conditions.
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
131 

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Wanyue Fu: Writing – original draft, Software, Resources, Meth-
odology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualiza-
tion. Zhongshi Huang: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Weiqi Li: Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis. Lingling Xu: Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Miaomiao Yang: Soft-
ware, Investigation, Formal analysis. Yan Ma: Supervision, Software,
Investigation, Formal analysis. Hanghang Liu: Supervision, Project
administration,
Investigation,
Conceptualization.
Haisheng
Qian:
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration. Wanni
Wang: Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Formal
analysis, Conceptualization.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal experiments received approval from the Ethics Committee
of Anhui Medical University (approval number: LLSC20241722).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grants 82200610), the Natural Science Founda-
tion of Hubei Province (2024AFB109) and the Basic and Clinical
Cooperative Research and Promotion Program of Anhui Medical Uni-
versity (2021xkjT027).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.12.004.
References
[1] G.G. Kaplan, J.W. Windsor, The four epidemiological stages in the global evolution
of inflammatory bowel disease, Nat. Rev. Gastro. Hepat. 18 (2021) 56–66, https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41575-020-00360-x.
[2] L. Xu, B.J. He, Y.X. Sun, J. Li, P. Shen, L.M. Hu, G.Z. Liu, J.X. Wang, L.P. Duan, S.
Y. Zhan, S.F. Wang, Incidence of inflammatory bowel disease in urban China: a
nationwide population-based study, Clin. Gastro. Hepat. 21 (2023) 13, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cgh.2023.08.013.
[3] D.B. Graham, R.J. Xavier, Pathway paradigms revealed from the genetics of
inflammatory bowel disease, Nature 578 (2020) 527–539, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41586-020-2025-2.
[4] R.S. Mehta, J.R. Mayers, Y.C. Zhang, A. Bhosle, N.R. Glasser, L.H. Nguyen, W.
J. Ma, S. Bae, T. Branck, K.J. Song, L. Sebastian, J.A. Pacheco, H.S. Seo, C. Clish,
S. Dhe-Paganon, A.N. Ananthakrishnan, E.A. Franzosa, E.P. Balskus, A.T. Chan,
C. Huttenhower, Gut microbial metabolism of 5-ASA diminishes its clinical efficacy
in inflammatory bowel disease, Nat. Med. 29 (2023) 700–709, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41591-023-02217-7.
[5] P. Eder, A. Zielinska, J. Karczewski, A. Dobrowolska, R. Slomski, E.B. Souto, How
could nanobiotechnology improve treatment outcomes of anti-TNF-α therapy in
inflammatory bowel disease? Current knowledge, future directions,
J. Nanobiotechnol. 19 (2021) 346, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-021-01090-1.
[6] P.S. Haque, N. Kapur, T.A. Barrett, A.L. Theiss, Mitochondrial function and
gastrointestinal diseases, Nat. Rev. Gastro. Hepat. 21 (2024) 537–555, https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41575-024-00931-2.
[7] V. Marotti, Y.N. Xu, C.B. Michalowski, W.A. Zhang, I. Domingues, H. Ameraoui, T.
G. Moreels, P. Baatsen, M. Van Hul, G.G. Muccioli, P.D. Cani, M. Alhouayek,
A. Malfanti, A. Beloqui, A nanoparticle platform for combined mucosal healing and
immunomodulation in inflammatory bowel disease treatment, Bioact. Mater. 32
(2024) 206–221, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2023.09.014.
[8] T. Tian, Z.L. Wang, J.H. Zhang, Pathomechanisms of oxidative stress in
inflammatory bowel disease and potential antioxidant therapies, Oxid. Med. Cell.
Longev. 2017 (2017) 4535194, https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/4535194.
[9] J.R. Turner, Intestinal mucosal barrier function in health and disease, Nat. Rev.
Immunol. 9 (2009) 799–809, https://doi.org/10.1038/nri2653.
[10] S. Citi, Intestinal barriers protect against disease, Science 359 (2018) 1097–1098,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat0835.
[11] H. Blaser, C. Dostert, T.W. Mak, D. Brenner, TNF and ROS crosstal in inflammation,
Trends Cell Biol. 26 (2016) 249–261, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2015.12.002.
[12] G. Rogler, Chronic ulcerative colitis and colorectal cancer, Cancer Lett. 345 (2014)
235–241, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2013.07.032.
[13] J. Lloyd-Price, C. Arze, A.N. Ananthakrishnan, M. Schirmer, J. Avila-Pacheco, T.
W. Poon, E. Andrews, N.J. Ajami, K.S. Bonham, C.J. Brislawn, D. Casero,
H. Courtney, A. Gonzalez, T.G. Graeber, A.B. Hall, K. Lake, C.J. Landers,
H. Mallick, D.R. Plichta, M. Prasad, G. Rahnavard, J. Sauk, D. Shungin, Y. V´azquez-
Baeza, R.A. White, J. Braun, L.A. Denson, J.K. Jansson, R. Knight, S. Kugathasan, D.
P.B. McGovern, J.F. Petrosino, T.S. Stappenbeck, H.S. Winter, C.B. Clish, E.
A. Franzosa, H. Vlamakis, R.J. Xavier, C. Huttenhower, J. Bishai, K. Bullock,
A. Deik, C. Dennis, J.L. Kaplan, H. Khalili, L.J. McIver, C.J. Moran, L. Nguyen, K.
A. Pierce, R. Schwager, A. Sirota-Madi, B.W. Stevens, W. Tan, J.J. ten Hoeve,
G. Weingart, R.G. Wilson, V. Yajnik, I. Investigators, Multi-omics of the gut
microbial ecosystem in inflammatory bowel diseases, Nature 569 (2019) 655–662,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1237-9.
[14] C. Le Berre, S. Honap, L. Peyrin-Biroulet, Ulcerative colitis, Lancet 402 (2023)
571–584, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(23)00966-2.
[15] W.Y. Fu, L.L. Xu, Z.T. Chen, L.L. Kan, Y. Ma, H.S. Qian, W.N. Wang, Recent
advances eon emerging nanomaterials for diagnosis and treatment of inflammatory
bowel disease, J. Control. Release 363 (2023) 149–179, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jconrel.2023.09.033.
[16] L. Li, P.L. Peng, N. Ding, W.H. Jia, C.H. Huang, Y. Tang, Oxidative stress,
inflammation, gut dysbiosis: what can polyphenols do in inflammatory bowel
disease? Antioxidants 12 (2023) 967, https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox12040967.
[17] Q.W. Chen, J.Y. Qiao, M.W. Cao, Z.Y. Han, X. Zeng, X.Z. Zhang, Spore germinator-
loaded polysaccharide microspheres ameliorate colonic inflammation and
tumorigenesis through remodeling gut microenvironment, Mater. Today 63 (2023)
32–49, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2023.02.002.
[18] J.T. Li, J. Song, Z.C. Deng, J. Yang, X.Q. Wang, B.W. Gao, Y.Y. Zhu, M. Yang, D.
P. Long, X.Q. Luo, M.X. Zhang, M.Z. Zhang, R.Q. Li, Robust reactive oxygen species
modulator hitchhiking yeast microcapsules for colitis alleviation by trilogically
intestinal microenvironment renovation, Bioact. Mater. 36 (2024) 203–220,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.02.033.
[19] Z.H. Wu, S.M. Huang, T.T. Li, N. Li, D.D. Han, B. Zhang, Z.J.Z. Xu, S.Y. Zhang, J.
M. Pang, S.L. Wang, G.L. Zhang, J.C. Zhao, J.J. Wang, Gut microbiota from green
tea polyphenol-dosed mice improves intestinal epithelial homeostasis and
ameliorates experimental colitis, Microbiome 9 (2021) 184, https://doi.org/
10.1186/s40168-021-01115-9.
[20] M.H. Zu, D.C. Xie, B.S.B. Canup, N.X. Chen, Y.J. Wang, R.X. Sun, Z. Zhang, Y.M. Fu,
F.Y. Dai, B. Xiao, ’Green’ nanotherapeutics from tea leaves for orally targeted
prevention and alleviation of colon diseases, Biomaterials 279 (2021) 121178,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121178.
[21] J.L. Fei, B. Liang, C.Z. Jiang, H.F. Ni, L.M. Wang, Luteolin inhibits IL-1β-induced
inflammation in rat chondrocytes and attenuates osteoarthritis progression in a rat
model, Biomed. Pharmacother. 109 (2019) 1586–1592, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biopha.2018.09.161.
[22] H. Slika, H. Mansour, N. Wehbe, S.A. Nasser, R. Iratni, G. Nasrallah, A. Shaito,
T. Ghaddar, F. Kobeissy, A.H. Eid, Therapeutic potential of flavonoids in cancer:
ROS-mediated mechanisms, Biomed. Pharmacother. 146 (2022) 112442, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112442.
[23] L. Li, W. Luo, Y.Y. Qian, W.W. Zhu, J.C. Qian, J.L. Li, Y.Y. Jin, X.Z. Xu, G. Liang,
Luteolin protects against diabetic cardiomyopathy by inhibiting NF-κB-mediated
inflammation and activating the Nrf2-mediated antioxidant responses,
Phytomedicine 59 (2019) 152774, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
phymed.2018.11.034.
[24] Y. Li, L. Shen, H.S. Luo, Luteolin ameliorates dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis
in mice possibly through activation of the Nrf2 signaling pathway, Int.
Immunopharmacol. 40 (2016) 24–31, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
intimp.2016.08.020.
[25] A.R. Bourgonje, D. Kloska, A. Grochot-Przeczek, M. Feelisch, A. Cuadrado, H. van
Goor, Personalized redox medicine in inflammatory bowel diseases: an emerging
role for HIF-1α and NRF2 as therapeutic targets, Redox Biol. 60 (2023) 102603,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2023.102603.
[26] D. Ross, D. Siegel, The diverse functionality of NQO1 and its roles in redox control,
Redox Biol. 41 (2021) 101950, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2021.101950.
[27] L. Torrente, G.M. DeNicola, Targeting NRF2 and its downstream processes:
opportunities and challenges, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. 62 (2022) 279–300, https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-052220-104025.
[28] M.H. Zu, Y. Ma, B. Cannup, D.C. Xie, Y.J. Jung, J.M. Zhang, C.H. Yang, F. Gao,
D. Merlin, B. Xiao, Oral delivery of natural active small molecules by polymeric
nanoparticles for the treatment of inflammatory bowel diseases, Adv. Drug Deliver.
Rev. 176 (2021) 113887, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2021.113887.
[29]a C. Tan, H. Fan, J.H. Ding, C.Q. Han, Y. Guan, F. Zhu, H. Wu, Y.J. Liu, W. Zhang, X.
H. Hou, S.W. Tan, Q. Tang, ROS-responsive nanoparticles for oral delivery of
luteolin and targeted therapy of ulcerative colitis by regulating pathological
microenvironment, Mater, Today Bio 14 (2022) 100246, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100246.
[29]b Z.Y. Chu, W.N. Wang, W. Zheng, W.Y. Fu, Y.J. Wang, H. Wang, H.S. Qian,
Biomaterials with cancer cell-specific cytotoxicity: challenges and perspectives,
Chem. Soc. Rev. 53 (2024) 8847–8877, https://doi.org/10.1039/d4cs00636d.
[30] C. Tan, H. Fan, J.H. Ding, C.Q. Han, Y. Guan, F. Zhu, H. Wu, Y.J. Liu, W. Zhang, X.
H. Hou, S.W. Tan, Q. Tang, ROS-responsive nanoparticles for oral delivery of
luteolin and targeted therapy of ulcerative colitis by regulating pathological
microenvironment, Mater, Today Bio 14 (2022) 100246, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.mtbio.2022.100246.
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
132 

[31] J.K. Gu, P.Y. Zhang, H.J. Li, Y.S. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Fan, X. Ma, X.D. Qian, J.Q. Xi,
Cerium-luteolin nanocomplexes in managing inflammation-related diseases by
antioxidant and immunoregulation, ACS Nano 18 (2024) 6229–6242, https://doi.
org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09528.
[32] Y.X. Guo, Q. Sun, F.G. Wu, Y.L. Dai, X.Y. Chen, Polyphenol-containing
nanoparticles: synthesis, properties, and therapeutic delivery, Adv. Mater. 33
(2021) 2007356, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202007356.
[33] Z.Y. Han, Q.W. Chen, D.W. Zheng, K.W. Chen, Q.X. Huang, Z.N. Zhuang, X.
Z. Zhang, Inhalable capsular polysaccharide-camouflaged gallium-polyphenol
nanoparticles enhance lung cancer chemotherapy by depleting local lung
microbiota, Adv. Mater. 35 (2023) 2302551, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.202302551.
[34] T.F. Liu, B.W. Xiao, F. Xiang, J.L. Tan, Z. Chen, X.R. Zhang, C.Z. Wu, Z.W. Mao, G.
X. Luo, X.Y. Chen, J. Deng, Ultrasmall copper-based nanoparticles for reactive
oxygen species scavenging and alleviation of inflammation related diseases, Nat.
Commun. 11 (2020) 2788, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16544-7.
[35] Z.Z. Zhang, Y. Pan, Z.Y. Guo, X. Fan, Q.Q. Pan, W.X. Gao, K. Luo, Y.J. Pu, B. He, An
olsalazine nanoneedle-embedded inulin hydrogel reshapes intestinal homeostasis
in inflammatory bowel disease, Bioact. Mater. 33 (2024) 71–84, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bioactmat.2023.10.028.
[36] R. Thibault, P. De Coppet, K. Daly, A. Bourreille, M. Cuff, C. Bonnet, J.F. Mosnier,
J.P. Galmiche, S. Shirazi-Beechey, J.P. Segain, Down-regulation of the
monocarboxylate transporter 1 is involved in butyrate deficiency during intestinal
inflammation, Gastroenterology 133 (2007) 1916–1927, https://doi.org/10.1053/
j.gastro.2007.08.041.
[37] Q. Huang, Y.Q. Yang, Y. Zhu, Q.H. Chen, T.J. Zhao, Z.X. Xiao, M.Y. Wang, X.
P. Song, Y.T. Jiang, Y.R. Yang, J.P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y.Y. Nan, W. Wu, K.L. Ai, Oral
metal-free melanin nanozymes for natural and durable targeted treatment of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), Small 19 (2023) 2207350, https://doi.org/
10.1002/smll.202207350.
[38] S. Zhao, Y.X. Li, Q.Y. Liu, S.R. Li, Y. Cheng, C.Q. Cheng, Z.Y. Sun, Y. Du, C.J. Butch,
H. Wei, An orally administered CeO2@Montmorillonite nanozyme targets
inflammation for inflammatory bowel disease therapy, Adv. Funct. Mater. 30
(2020) 2004692, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202004692.
[39] A.H.C. Bai, W.K.K. Wu, L.L. Xu, S.H. Wong, M.Y. Go, A.W.H. Chan, M. Harbord, S.
H. Zhang, M.H. Chen, J.C.Y. Wu, M.W.Y. Chan, M.T.V. Chan, F.K.L. Chan, J.J.
Y. Sung, J. Yu, A.S.L. Cheng, S.C. Ng, Dysregulated lysine acetyltransferase 2B
promotes inflammatory bowel disease pathogenesis through transcriptional
repression of interleukin-10, J. Crohns Colitis 10 (2016) 726–734, https://doi.org/
10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjw020.
[40] L. Malacaria, C. La Torre, E. Furia, A. Fazio, M.C. Caroleo, E. Cione, L. Gallelli,
T. Marino, P. Plastina, Aluminum(III), iron(III) and copper(II) complexes of
luteolin: stability, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory properties, J. Mol. Liq. 345
(2022) 117895, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.117895.
[41] H. Zhang, G.H. Li, Z.P. Su, Y.J. Bao, J.C. Wang, R. Yan, C.H. Guo, Y.X. Jin, Copper-
doped luteolin carbon dots with antitumor properties based on the induction of
immunogenic cell death, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 7 (2024) 7942–7957, https://doi.
org/10.1021/acsanm.4c00546.
[42] W.W. Feng, X.Y. Guo, G. Yang, Y. Yao, L.X. Zhao, S. Gao, F. Ye, Y. Fu, Direct
electrospinning for producing multiple activity nanofibers consisting of aggregated
luteolin/hydroxypropyl-gamma-cyclodextrin inclusion complex, Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 270 (2024) 132344, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.132344.
[43] R. Bul´anek, R. Hrdina, A.F. Hassan, Preparation of polyvinylpyrrolidone modified
nanomagnetite for degradation of nicotine by heterogeneous Fenton process,
J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 7 (2019) 102988, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jece.2019.102988.
[44] C.M. Yang, K. Chathuranga, J.S. Lee, W.H. Park, Effects of polyphenols on the
thermal decomposition, antioxidative, and antimicrobial properties of poly(vinyl
alcohol) and poly(vinyl pyrrolidone), Polym. Test. 116 (2022) 107786, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2022.107786.
[45] H. Dong, X.C. Yang, J.P. He, S. Cai, K.J. Xiao, L. Zhu, Enhanced antioxidant
activity, antibacterial activity and hypoglycemic effect of luteolin by complexation
with manganese(II) and its inhibition kinetics on xanthine oxidase, RSC Adv. 7
(2017) 53385–53395, https://doi.org/10.1039/c7ra11036g.
[46] H. Huang, S.Q. Xie, L. Deng, J. Yuan, R.R. Yue, J.K. Xu, Fabrication of rGO/MXene-
Pd/rGO hierarchical framework as high-performance electrochemical sensing
platform for luteolin detection, Microchim. Acta 189 (2022) 59, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00604-021-05132-1.
[47] B. Dinesh, R. Saraswathi, Electrochemical synthesis of nanostructured copper-
curcumin complex and its electrocatalytic application towards reduction of 4-
nitrophenol, Sens. Actuator B-Chem. 253 (2017) 502–512, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.snb.2017.06.149.
[48] Y. Xu, J. Yang, Y. Lu, L.L. Qian, Z.Y. Yang, R.M. Han, J.P. Zhang, L.H. Skibsted,
Copper(II) coordination and translocation in luteolin and effect on radical
scavenging, J. Phys. Chem. B 124 (2020) 380–388, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpcb.9b10531.
[49] M.Y. Wen, T.Y. Wang, N. Li, Y.F. Wu, L.B. Zhang, Y.M. Xue, L. Shang, Polyphenol-
copper derived self-cascade nanozyme hydrogel in boosting oxygenation and
robust revascularization for tissue regeneration, Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 (2024)
2403634, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202403634.
[50] X.J. Cao, S. Tao, W.T. Wang, S.L. Wu, Y. Hong, X.Y. Wang, Y. Ma, H.S. Qian, Z.
B. Zha, Ternary inulin hydrogel with long-term intestinal retention for
simultaneously reversing IBD and its fibrotic complication, Nat. Commun. 15
(2024) 8428, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-52722-7.
[51] D.D. Zhu, H.T. Wu, K. Jiang, Y.F. Xu, Z.H. Miao, H. Wang, Y. Ma, Zero-valence
selenium-enriched prussian blue nanozymes reconstruct intestinal barrier against
inflammatory bowel disease via inhibiting ferroptosis and T cells differentiation,
Adv. Healthc. Mater. 12 (2023) 2203160, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adhm.202203160.
[52] H. Lee, J.H. Jeon, E.S. Kim, Mitochondrial dysfunctions in T cells: focus on
inflammatory bowel disease, Front. Immunol. 14 (2023) 1219422, https://doi.org/
10.3389/fimmu.2023.1219422.
[53] A. Larabi, N. Barnich, H.T.T. Nguyen, New insights into the interplay between
autophagy, gut microbiota and inflammatory responses in IBD, Autophagy 16
(2020) 38–51, https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2019.1635384.
[54] M.X. Zhou, W.M. Xu, J.Z. Wang, J.K. Yan, Y.Y. Shi, C. Zhang, W.S. Ge, J. Wu, P. Du,
Y.W. Chen, Boosting mTOR-dependent autophagy via upstream TLR4-MyD88-
MAPK signalling and downstream NF-κB pathway quenches intestinal
inflammation and oxidative stress injury, EBioMedicine 35 (2018) 345–360,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.08.035.
[55] M. Arabpour, A. Saghazadeh, N. Rezaei, Anti-inflammatory and M2 macrophage
polarization-promoting effect of mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes, Int.
Immunopharmacol. 97 (2021) 107823, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
intimp.2021.107823.
[56] A. Loboda, M. Damulewicz, E. Pyza, A. Jozkowicz, J. Dulak, Role of Nrf2/HO-1
system in development, oxidative stress response and diseases: an evolutionarily
conserved mechanism, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73 (2016) 3221–3247, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00018-016-2223-0.
[57] L.P. Bao, J.S. Li, D.Q. Zha, L. Zhang, P. Gao, T. Yao, X.Y. Wu, Chlorogenic acid
prevents diabetic nephropathy by inhibiting oxidative stress and inflammation
through modulation of the Nrf2/HO-1 and NF-κB pathways, Int.
Immunopharmacol. 54 (2018) 245–253, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
intimp.2017.11.021.
[58] Z.P. Shi, X.H. Li, J.F. Chen, Z.D. Dai, Y.F. Zhu, T. Wu, Q. Liu, H.L. Qin, Y. Zhang, H.
R. Chen, Enzyme-like biomimetic oral-agent enabling modulating gut microbiota
and restoring redox homeostasis to treat inflammatory bowel disease, Bioact.
Mater. 35 (2024) 167–180, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.01.016.
[59] J.K. Gustafsson, M.E.V. Johansson, The role of goblet cells and mucus in intestinal
homeostasis, Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 19 (2022) 785–803, https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41575-022-00675-x.
[60] D.W. Zheng, J.Y. Qiao, J.C. Ma, J.X. An, C.H. Yang, Y. Zhang, Q. Cheng, Z.Y. Rao,
S.M. Zeng, L. Wang, X.Z. Zhang, A microbial community cultured in gradient
hydrogel for investigating gut microbiome-drug interaction and guiding
therapeutic decisions, Adv. Mater. 35 (2023) 2300977, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.202300977.
[61] P. Gonçalves, J.R. Araújo, J.P. Di Santo, A cross-talk between microbiota-derived
short-chain fatty acids and the host mucosal immune system regulates intestinal
homeostasis and inflammatory bowel disease, Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 24 (2018)
558–572, https://doi.org/10.1093/ibd/izx029.
[62] D.W. Zheng, R.Q. Li, J.X. An, T.Q. Xie, Z.Y. Han, R. Xu, Y. Fang, X.Z. Zhang,
Prebiotics-encapsulated probiotic spores regulate gut microbiota and suppress
colon cancer, Adv. Mater. 32 (2020) 2004529, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.202004529.
[63] A.S. Neish, Microbes in gastrointestinal health and disease, Gastroenterology 136
(2009) 65–80, https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2008.10.080.
[64] Y. Wang, Z. Wang, H.P. Yang, S.Z. Chen, D.K. Zheng, X.Y. Liu, Q.R. Jiang, Y. Chen,
Metformin ameliorates chronic colitis-related intestinal fibrosis via inhibiting TGF-
β1/smad3 signaling, Front. Pharmacol. 13 (2022) 887497, https://doi.org/
10.3389/fphar.2022.887497.
[65] J.Y. Liu, Y.N. Bai, Y.G. Li, X.L. Li, K. Luo, Reprogramming the immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment through nanomedicine: an immunometabolism
perspective, EBioMedicine 107 (2024) 105301, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ebiom.2024.105301.
[66] H.N. Li, Q.Y. Gong, K. Luo, Biomarker-driven molecular imaging probes in
radiotherapy, Theranostics 14 (2024) 4127–4146, https://doi.org/10.7150/
thno.97768.
W. Fu et al.
Bioactive Materials 46 (2025) 118–133 
133