Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Non-invasive in vivo sensing of bacterial
implant infection using catalytically-
optimised gold nanocluster-loaded
liposomes for urinary readout
Kaili Chen1, Adrian Najer
1,2
, Patrick Charchar
3, Catherine Saunders1,
Chalaisorn Thanapongpibul1, Anna Klöckner1,4,5, Mohamed Chami6,
David J. Peeler1,5,7, Inês Silva7, Luca Panariello1,8, Kersti Karu
9,
Colleen N. Loynachan
1, Leah C. Frenette1, Michael Potter1,
John S. Tregoning
5, Ivan P. Parkin
9, Andrew M. Edwards
4,5,
Thomas B. Clarke
4,5, Irene Yarovsky
3
& Molly M. Stevens
1,7,8
Staphylococcus aureus is a leading cause of nosocomial implant-associated
infections, causing signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality, underscoring the need
for rapid, non-invasive, and cost-effective diagnostics. Here, we optimise the
synthesis of renal-clearable gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) for enhanced catalytic
activity with the aim of developing a sensitive colourimetric diagnostic for
bacterial infection. All-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations conﬁrm the
stability of glutathione-coated AuNCs and surface access for peroxidase-like
activity in complex physiological environments. We subsequently develop a
biosensor by encapsulating these optimised AuNCs in bacterial toxin-
responsive liposomes, which is extensively studied by various single-particle
techniques. Upon exposure to S. aureus toxins, the liposomes rupture,
releasing AuNCs that generate a colourimetric signal after kidney-mimetic
ﬁltration. The biosensor is further validated in vitro and in vivo using a hya-
luronic acid (HA) hydrogel implant infection model. Urine samples collected
from mice with bacteria-infected HA hydrogel implants turn blue upon sub-
strate addition, conﬁrming the suitability of the sensor for non-invasive
detection of implant-associated infections. This platform has signiﬁcant
potential as a versatile, cost-effective diagnostic tool.
Staphylococcus
aureus,
including
methicillin-resistant
S.
aureus
(MRSA), are responsible for a raft of minor and serious infections in
humans and is the leading cause of surgical implant-associated
infection1. Surgical site infections (SSI) are a major complication
associated with procedures involving indwelling medical devices2,3.
The infection of implanted devices typically results in hard-to-treat
bioﬁlm
formation
and
necessitates
removal
and
replacement,
signiﬁcantly increasing morbidity, mortality and cost4,5. A major chal-
lenge in combatting this problem is that many infections become
established by the time they are detected. Therefore, developing new
approaches to achieve earlier diagnosis of bacterial infection is key to
addressing this problem. To identify infection at the site of an implant,
it is necessary to collect samples from patients using swabs, aspira-
tions, and even tissue biopsy or removal of the implant6,7, which is
Received: 13 April 2024
Accepted: 11 October 2024
Check for updates
A full list of afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper.
e-mail: adrian.najer@kcl.ac.uk; irene.yarovsky@rmit.edu.au; molly.stevens@dpag.ox.ac.uk
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

invasive, challenging and carries the potential risk of causing addi-
tional infections. Traditional bacterial culture is the gold standard
detection method but requires a relatively long incubation time with
limited speciﬁcity7. Advanced methods have been developed to com-
plement bacterial culture for a comprehensive diagnosis with higher
sensitivity and speciﬁcity, including polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and mass spectrometry
(MS)8–10. However, the sampling is invasive and can introduce the risk
of contamination on the implants or the specimens, leading to false-
positive results. Additionally, these methods require highly specialised
equipment and extensive lab-based technical support, resulting in high
costs and limiting their applications in resource-limited laboratories
and medical institutions. Hence, there is a high demand for a non-
invasive, in-situ approach for detecting implant-associated infection.
Leveraging the enzymatic or membrane-damaging activities of
bacteria-derived virulence factors, including pore-forming toxins,
enzymes (lipase activity), surface proteins (surfactant-like mechan-
isms) and adhesion proteins, is an emerging and promising alternative
method to detect bacterial infection11,12. This provides a foundation for
the design of various non-invasive diagnostic tools for the detection of
S. aureus13–15. The toxin action has been harnessed for creating lipo-
somal
systems
responsive
to
bacterial
growth
for
detecting
infections16,17. Liposomes with a cell membrane-like composition,
especially formulated by utilising bacterial lipase-sensitive sphingo-
myelin lipids in the composition, are commonly used in speciﬁc drug
delivery and sensing applications for bacterial infection18–23.
Ultra-small (1–5 nm in size) gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) have
recently become prominent in the ﬁelds of drug delivery24,25, photo-
thermal therapy26, bioimaging27,28 and biosensing29,30, due to the
advantage of their biocompatibility and rapid clearance through the
urinary system compared to larger gold nanoparticles (>10 nm)31–33.
Urinary readout after administration of various types of nanosensors is
particularly attractive for diagnostic purposes due to its simplicity and
non-invasiveness and it has previously been employed to detect
implant rejection, bacterial infection, and cancer32,34–37. In our previous
work, the catalytic activity of AuNCs was used in an in vivo sensing
application for cancer, employing urinaryreadout32. Intumour-bearing
mice, AuNCs covalently linked to a protein carrier via enzyme-
responsive peptides were liberated and excreted into urine upon
enzyme cleavage in vivo. The AuNCs catalyse the hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2)-mediated oxidation of a chromogenic substrate resulting in a
colour change visible to the naked eye. This approach facilitates the
development of non-invasive, real-time monitoring systems for early
diagnosis and personalised treatment strategies. Improvement in the
catalytic activity of the underlying AuNCs could enhance sensitivity of
the diagnostic to allow more accurate and earlier detection of patho-
logical conditions. However, the AuNC size must remain below the
glomerular ﬁltration cut-off (ca. 5.5 nm)38 to ensure rapid clearance of
catalytically optimised AuNCs through the kidneys. Mechanistic
understanding of stabilising ligand distribution and behaviour around
the AuNCs is another key aspect required to move forward the
development of diagnostic tests using renal-clearable, catalytically
active AuNCs.
Here, we signiﬁcantly improved the sensitivity of the AuNC sen-
sing platform by optimising both the catalyst and carrier design, and
expanded its utility to new disease areas. We designed an AuNC-based
sensing system for detecting bacterial implant infection that assem-
bles a large number of AuNCs (>100) per liposomal sensor unit and
responds to pathogenic bacterial growth in the vicinity. First, we
optimised the catalytic activity of AuNCs (renally clearable with a size
of 1–2 nm) to improve our previously reported materials32 by varying
the synthesis conditions. The optimised AuNCs achieved enhanced
signal ampliﬁcation and they were characterised using a variety of
experimental and computational techniques. This improvement in
AuNC catalytic performance can enhance the sensitivity of the sensing
platform, allowing for detection even with minimal liberation of
AuNCs, which is particularly relevant when aiming to detect disease
early. Compared to our previous work32, we improved the catalytic
activity of AuNCs, changed the sensor design away from a covalent
peptide-AuNC conjugate to a non-covalent liposomal system, expan-
ded the application from cancer to bacterial infection, and provided
extensive mechanistic understanding by leveraging various single-
particle techniques and computational analysis. Here, the AuNCs were
subsequently encapsulated in 100 nm liposomal nanocarriers, which
could be disassembled by exposure to toxins secreted by pathogenic
bacteria as characterised by single particle-sensitive methods. Hya-
luronic acid (HA) hydrogels, clinically used as dermal ﬁllers, were
loaded with the optimised sensor and in this context served as a model
for implant-associated bacterial infections. We demonstrated a suc-
cessful response of our biosensor to S. aureus growth in contaminated
HA hydrogel implants in vitro. A mouse model conﬁrmed the usability
of our sensor for the non-invasive detection of S. aureus implant
infection in vivo with a simple urinary readout, serving as a proof of
concept for Point-of-Care early detection methods. Our sensing plat-
form takes advantage of the toxin activity to trigger the disassembly of
liposomes in combination with the catalytic activity and renal clear-
ance ability of inorganic AuNCs. This versatile biosensing platform,
featuring a colourimetric readout in urine, achieved rapid and non-
invasive detection of implant-related bacterial infection. The system
highlights its signiﬁcant potential for revolutionising healthcare prac-
tices, paving the way for impactful advancements in infection detec-
tion and broader healthcare improvements.
Results
Catalytic activity optimisation of AuNCs
Catalytic AuNCs were synthesised through reduction of gold (III)
chloride trihydrate by glutathione (GSH), which were subsequently
encapsulated within liposomes to create a sensing system (Fig. 1a). The
action of bacterial toxins on the lipid membrane released AuNCs
in situ. The catalytic activity of the AuNCs directly serves as an indi-
cator of bacterial infection state. This detection leverages the use of
sphingomyelin lipids in the liposome formulation, which can be
hydrolysed by the toxins secreted by S. aureus. AuNCs capped with
GSH were selected as probes due to their low cytotoxicity, high sta-
bility against harsh environments, high signal ampliﬁcation with a high
surface-to-volume ratio, stable catalytic activity in complex physiolo-
gical environments, and small size that allows rapid and efﬁcient renal
clearance. S. aureus-contaminated or bacteria-free HA hydrogels with
AuNC-loaded liposomes were intraperitoneally (i.p.) implanted into
mice to serve as an in vivo model of implant infection detection
(Fig. 1b). AuNCs were liberated from the liposomal sensor unit by
exposure to toxins produced by nearby pathogenic bacteria (Fig. 1c).
The AuNCs rapidly reached the kidneys and were ﬁltered into the urine
since they are smaller than the renal ﬁltration threshold of 5.5 nm32,38. A
colourimetric assay utilising 3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) oxi-
dation through AuNC catalysis was performed in the collected urine,
producing a blue colour change to verify the presence of AuNCs as an
indicator of bacterial infection (Fig. 1d).
First, we optimised the synthesis of nanoclusters to enhance their
catalytic property. We explored various conditions including differ-
ence in core metals (gold and platinum), core metal-to-thiol ratios,
reducing
agents
and
solvents
(Supplementary
Table
1).
The
peroxidase-like catalytic activity of AuNCs was assessed by measuring
the absorbance at 652 nm, which resulted from TMB oxidation via
H2O2 catalysed by AuNCs39, represented throughout as kinetics, end-
point absorbance, or onset velocity. Through comparative analysis,
clusters based on gold (Au) were found to exhibit superior catalytic
activity compared to platinum (Pt) under various conditions. The
nanoclusters synthesised in a weak reducing condition led to faster
increaseinabsorbance over time, revealing enhanced catalytic activity,
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
2

whilst a change in solvent from aqueous to organic (ethanol) for
synthesis diminished catalytic activity (Supplementary Fig. 1). The
variation in synthesis temperature and metal-to-GSH ratio affected the
size and catalytic activity of nanoclusters, with 70 °C and Au:GSH ratio
of 1:1 and 1:1.5 representing optimal conditions for catalytic enhance-
ment, whilst maintaining the size below the renal clearance cut-off of
5.5 nm (Supplementary Fig. 2). The effect of the ratio of metal-to-GSH
on size is in agreement with previous literature, with nanocluster dia-
meter decreasing with the increased ratio40. For these optimised 1:1
and 1:1.5 samples, we compared their sizes using transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) images and analysed their catalytic functionality in
different physiological environments such as in foetal bovine serum
(FBS) and urine, both at 50 v/v % (Supplementary Fig. 3). Their small
size was conﬁrmed by TEM ( < 5.5 nm). Compared to measurements in
PBS, >80% of catalytic activity was retained, even after 12-h incubation
in physiologically relevant environments highlighting the exceptional
stability of this AuNC composition.
We also optimised the synthesis pH for AuNC synthesis before
encapsulating AuNCs into liposomes. Notably, AuNCs with metal-to-
GSH ratio of 1:1.5 synthesised at pH 10 exhibited the highest activity,
which was approximately 33.5-fold greater than the 1:1.5 AuNCs syn-
thesised at pH 2 reported in our previous paper32 (Fig. 2a–c). TEM
images and the histogram derived from measurements indicate that
the average size of the ﬁnal optimised AuNCs synthesised in basic
conditions (pH 10) (1.7 ± 0.4 nm) falls below the renal clearable
threshold (5.5 nm), thereby enabling their efﬁcient ﬁltration through
the urinary system32,38,41 (Fig. 2a, b). The limit of detection (LoD) when
studying a dilution series of puriﬁed AuNCs in synthetic urine for both
the optimised and previously studied AuNCs32 was 0.028 pmol and
2.33 pmol, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 4). This indicates an 83-
fold increase in sensitivity for the herein optimised clusters (Au-to-GSH
1:1.5). The broad impact of AuNCs with higher catalytic activity was
demonstrated by formulating a thrombin sensor using peptide-linked
AuNC-protein conjugates analogous to our previous study with non-
optimised AuNCs32. The sensors developed with the optimised AuNCs
synthesised at pH 10 showed 6x higher signal and 10x higher signal-to-
noise (S/N) compared to our previous study, conﬁrming the impor-
tance of catalytic optimisation on diagnostic sensitivity (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 4g–i). UV-Vis spectral analysis revealed a calibration curve for
the concentrations of the optimised AuNCs, which was used for the
quantiﬁcation
of
different
batches
of
AuNCs
(Supplementary
Fig. 5a, b). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) showcased that the
percentage of weight loss (%) attributable to the organic ligands (GSH)
in our previously studied (pH 2) and the optimised (pH 10) AuNCs was
nearly identical. This observation suggests that the ligand density
remained consistent when synthesised at an equivalent metal-to-GSH
ratio and varying pH of synthesis conditions (Supplementary Fig. 5c).
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-ﬂight (MALDI-TOF)
Fig. 1 | Design of AuNC-loaded liposome biosensors and mechanism for
detecting bacterial implant infection. a AuNC synthesis. Au (III) was reduced to
Au (0) to self-assemble as GSH-stabilised AuNCs, which were further encapsulated
in liposomes to create the sensing system. HA hydrogels were used as model
implants, embedded with AuNC-loaded liposomes with or without bacterial con-
tamination. b Size threshold of particle clearance from different organs32,41. The
ultra-small AuNCs were below the kidney ﬁltration threshold (5.5 nm)32,38 and were
able to be rapidly cleared into the urine. c Response mechanism of AuNC-loaded
liposomes sensing system in presence of pathogenic bacteria growth concomitant
with the secretion of lipid membrane-damaging toxins. d Colourimetric TMB oxi-
dation assay in collected urine. The colour change of TMB substrate from colour-
less to blue demonstrated the presence of AuNCs which is the indicator of bacterial
infection state of the implant.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
3

mass spectrometry analysis, which is often performed on such
AuNCs42,43, revealed that both our previously developed (pH 2) and the
optimised (pH 10) AuNCs exhibited a similar molecular weight, ranging
from 2000 to 12,000 Da, along with an identical Au-to-GSH ratio. This
similarity suggests that the pH variation during synthesis may be
associated with other surface properties, such as the ligand-to-Au
bond or the Au oxidation state rather than a change in the ligand
composition and/or size of the clusters (Supplementary Fig. 5d, e). To
evaluate the catalytic activity of AuNCs in environments mimicking the
usual assay conditions (acidic pH) and the in vivo situation (neutral
pH), the catalytic activity of AuNCs was tested through TMB oxidation
assays, varying pH levels and concentrations of sodium chloride (NaCl)
(Supplementary Fig. 5f, g). Both cluster types showed the same
decrease in catalytic activity at neutral vs acidic assay pH, whilst only
the pH 2 not the pH 10 AuNCs revealed slightly elevated catalytic
activity at higher salt concentration at low pH, although the signal still
remained much lower than for pH 10 synthesised AuNCs. Overall, these
results suggest that AuNCs, particularly those with a speciﬁc metal-to-
GSH ratio, alkaline pH synthesis, and acidic assay conditions, exhibit
signiﬁcantly improved catalytic performance compared to previous
ﬁndings32, which will allow the creation of more sensitive diagnostic
tests for a variety of settings.
Molecular dynamics insights into ligand mobility and active site
accessibility of AuNCs
Using all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, we investigated
how the mobility and arrangement of GSH ligands in different solution
conditions affect the accessibility of active sites on Au25(SG)18
(Fig. 2d–h), a prototypical model for the synthesised ultrasmall AuNCs.
Atomic level monitoring and understanding of the coverage/exposure
pH 2
pH 6
pH 10
pH 2
pH 6
pH 10
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
Onset velocity (A652nmmin-1)
AuNC-GSH 1:1
AuNC-GSH 1:1.5
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Nanocluster diameter (nm)
Percentage (%)
c
b
a
d
e
f
g
h
20 nm
33.5X
Fig. 2 | Optimisation, characterisation, and simulation of AuNCs. a TEM image
of AuNCs (optimised synthesis at 1:1.5 Au-to-GSH ratio, pH 10) used in the liposome
encapsulation. Scale bar 20 nm. b The size distribution histogram from TEM images
of AuNCs in (a) (mean diameter = 1.7 ± 0.4 nm (s.d.), n = 170 particles). c Catalytic
activity of AuNCs after synthesis in different pH reaction conditions. The catalytic
activity was calculated from the onset velocity (A652nm min–1) when the TMB reac-
tion kinetics had a linear trend (mean values ± standard error, N = 3 independent
biological replicates, n = 3 technical replicates, One-Way ANOVA with Tukey post
hoc test, p < 0.0001). d–h Mechanistic properties of glutathione-capped gold
nanoclusters in varying salt and pH conditions, derived from all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations. Probability distributions for the: (d) NC radius of gyration,
Rg, and (e) the accessibility of the inner Au25S18 framework to small molecules, such
as H2O, H2O2, and TMB, calculated as solvent accessible surface area (SASA) with
the corresponding molecular probe radius. A SASA of 0 nm2 signiﬁes none of the
inorganic NC core surface area is accessible. f Transparent rendering showing the
location of the eight triangular active sites (i.e., pockets) on the internal
gold–sulphur nanocluster surface. A graphic animation illustrating the dynamic
opening and closing of an accessible active site can be found in Supplementary
Movie 1. g Euler plots showing the probability to ﬁnd one or more active sites on
Au25(SG)18 accessible (binary open/closed, i.e., SASA > 0 nm2) and with water in
close proximity to the exposed metal atoms. Overlapping regions indicate that
within a single Au25(SG)18 snapshot, multiple binding pockets have different con-
ﬁgurations. Colours for each circle/oval match the atomic renderings shown in (h)
to illustrate the four possible scenarios an individual catalytic pocket may be in:
open with water present (lightest blue), closed with trapped water (medium blue),
open without water present (dark blue), or closed without trapped water (black).
Atoms are shown in a space-ﬁlling representation and coloured according to the
inset key. Only solvent proximal to the relevant binding pocket is shown for clarity.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
4

of Au cluster surface sites is highly valuable due to its direct relevance
to catalytic activity. We explored the exposure of Au cluster surface
active sites under three NaCl salt concentrations (0 M, 0.2 M, and 1 M)
and two GSH ligand protonation microstates, Au25(SG0)18 and
Au25(SG–)18, to gain insights into the behaviour of the AuNCs in acidic
(pH ~2.5) and neutral (pH ~7.5) environments, respectively. This
information is extrapolated to the in vitro TMB assay (0 or 0.2 M salt,
acidic pH) and in vivo physiological (0.2 M salt, neutral pH) conditions,
where the AuNCs’ polyprotic dissociation equilibria result in proto-
nation microstates with a variable number of COOH/COO– moieties.
AuNCs with a combination of protonated and deprotonated ligands
have been experimentally reported for aqueous44 and gas-phase45,46
GSH-capped AuNCs, as well as, computationally predicted for other
aqueous peptide-coated Au25 systems47.
Here, our nanocluster models were constructed with non-
equilibrium GSH ligand conﬁgurations (Supplementary Fig. 6) that
were then relaxed in ambient conditions with respect to the initial
arrangements and equilibration was veriﬁed by monitoring the ligand
atomic root-mean-square deviations (RMSD) and radii of gyration (Rg)
(Supplementary Fig. 7–8). The observed RMSD plateaus and relatively
small Rg ﬂuctuations suggested that the systems were exploring
properties within the equilibrium phase space of the ambient condi-
tions after 200 ns. The Rg analysis also highlighted that the AuNC
global shape is well preserved over the ﬁnal 300 nanoseconds of MD
for each trajectory (Supplementary Fig. 7–8), and that neutral pH
conditions cause the ligand layer to slightly expand (see right-skewed
Rg for Au25(SG–)18 in Fig. 2d). This expansion leads to a higher solvent
accessibility of the internal Au25S18 framework for deprotonated
Au25(SG–)18 compared to protonated Au25(SG0)18 (Fig. 2e). For
Au25(SG–)18, we ﬁnd that 83–90% of NCs have an internal Au25S18 fra-
mework with a solvent accessible surface area (SASA) greater than
0 nm2, of which approximately 8–18% of the structures are signiﬁcantly
Fig. 3 | The assembly and characterisation of AuNC-loaded liposomal sensor.
a Schematic of the encapsulation of AuNCs in liposomes. The lipid components of
liposomes include brain sphingomyelin (BSM), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-
phosphocholine (16:0–18:1 PC), cholesterol (CH), 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phos-
phoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(polyethylene glycol)-2000] (DSPE-PEG2k), and 1,2-
dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP) in various ratios. b TMB oxida-
tion kinetics measurement on each eluted fraction from size exclusion chromato-
graphy (SEC) for separation of unloaded AuNCs from liposomes (n = 1
measurement). The larger liposomes were eluted ﬁrst, followed by smaller unloa-
ded AuNCs. Liposomes loaded with AuNCs pH 10 exhibited signiﬁcantly higher
catalytic activity in both fractions than those loaded with AuNCs pH 2. c Catalytic
activity of all concentrated liposome fractions after SEC loading with different
concentrations of AuNCs. Numbers refer to the times of concentration compared
to AuNCs pH 10 1X (20 µM). Liposomes loaded with 100X of AuNCs pH 10 (2 mM)
performed best, with the optimal catalytic activity according to the endpoint at 60 s
(n = 2 technical repeats). d DLS measurement results of AuNCs (number distribu-
tion) and AuNC-loaded liposomes (intensity distribution) of different formulations
using BSM, PC, CH and DSPE-PEG2k (average of N = 1 sample, n = 3 measurements).
e Zeta potential distribution measurements of AuNCs pH 10 100X and the lipo-
somes loaded with AuNCs 100X (curves are mean of n = 3 technical measurements).
f, g Cryo-TEM image of empty liposomes (a total of 32 images were taken with
similar results) (f) and AuNC-loaded liposomes (a total of 28 images were taken with
similar results) (g) (BSM:PC:CH 1:1:1 with 1 mol % DSPE-PEG2k). Scale bar 100 nm.
The white arrow indicates one loaded AuNC. Additional images and comparison to
empty liposomes is shown in Supplementary Fig. 14.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
5

accessible (i.e., with a SASA greater than 0.1 nm2). In contrast, the
Au25(SG0)18 simulations showed only 51–57% with a non-zero Au25S18
SASA (a decrease of 30%) and a negligible 0.4% of structures had a
notably accessible core (>0.1 nm2). In the neutral pH setting, a higher
number of open structures correlate with an increased salt con-
centration due to improved intermolecular electrostatic screening
between the anionic glutathione ligands of Au25(SG–)18. These ﬁndings
indicate that the deprotonation of GSH, especially within a high ionic
strength environment, provides small molecules (e.g. H2O, H2O2, and
TMB) better access to the inorganic core of the NC.
Considering the mobility of the GSH ligands under the various pH
and salt conditions, we assessed the impact of ligand movement on the
entropic penalty for small molecules to access catalytic sites and/or
the release of trapped water. It is well established thatdynamics of GSH
ligands and water solvation shells are vital for an accurate description
of glutathione-protected AuNCs48,49. Here, we observed through
atomic root-mean-square-ﬂuctuations (RMSF) that most ligand rear-
rangement is brought about by ﬂexibility in the GSH peptides’ C- and
N-terminal regions as opposed to movement in the gold–sulphur
interface (Supplementary Fig. 9). While we noted that sulphur atoms
infrequently “ﬂip” over the [Au–S–Au–S–Au] “staples” that protect the
NC core50, the overall ligand structure and active site accessibility was
largely unaltered by these events.
On the icosahedral core of the Au25(SR)18 nanoclusters, there are
eight equivalent Au3 pockets (Fig. 2f) that have been previously iden-
tiﬁed as active sites for catalysis51. Using SASA, we monitored the
dynamic opening and closing of the catalytic pockets (Supplementary
Fig. 10). Irrespective of solution conditions (120 independent
Fig. 4 | In vitro bacterial toxin response of AuNC-loaded liposomes composed
ofdifferent lipid formulations. a Schematic of toxin incubation with AuNC-loaded
liposome and separation of released AuNCs for TMB assay. b TMB catalytic activity
assay on the ﬁltrates of liposomes with different formulations for sensitivity com-
parison (1 mol % DSPE-PEG2k was used in all formulations as a stabiliser) with and
without toxin incubation (mean values, n = 2 technical repeats). c DLS measure-
ments of BPC (BSM:PC:CH) liposomes incubated with a dilution series of toxin,
including hydrodynamic diameter (intensity and number distribution) and the
derived count rates as an approximate guide of concentration (mean values ±
standard error, n = 3 measurements). d The release efﬁciency determined via the
ﬁltrates after the incubation of the different liposomal sensors with various dilu-
tions of S. aureus SH1000 overnight culture supernatant containing secreted toxins
and centrifugal ﬁltration to separate intact sensors from released AuNCs (mean
values ± standard error, N = 2 biological replicates, n = 1 technical measurement).
e Normalised average autocorrelation curves from FCS measurements of free dye
(OG488), dye-labelled AuNCs (AuNCs-OG488), liposomes loaded with AuNCs-
OG488, and the toxin-treated liposomes (average curve of n = 25 individual mea-
surements per sample). f Hydrodynamic diameters of AuNCs-OG488 and AuNC-
OG488-loaded liposomes and the number of AuNCs per liposomes calculated from
FCS molecular brightness analysis of data from (e). Box-plots: The centre line, the
median; the box limits, the upper and lower quartiles; the whiskers, minimum and
maximum values. g, h Mean single particle Raman spectra of AuNC-liposome
before (black line) and after (red line) toxin treatment measured with single particle
automated Raman trapping analysis (SPARTA®). Spectra were normalised to the
area under the curve. The red arrow indicates choline headgroup peak at 717 cm–1
(n > 234, the shading refers to S.D.). g refers to a full spectrum and (h) is a spectrum
from 600 cm–1 to 900 cm–1. i Scatter plots of peak signal intensity from (h) of both
samples at 700 cm–1 (cholesterol peak area) and 717 cm–1 (choline group peak area).
These indicate the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin into ceramide and
phosphorylcholine.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
6

simulations representing 3 μs of equilibrated data per system), at least
one out of eight active sites51 had a non-zero SASA and remained
sterically accessible to small molecules such as water or hydrogen
peroxide for 25–63% of the simulation time (Fig. 2g, h). We further
reﬁned our analysis by also monitoring the MD trajectories for the
presence of water molecules in the vicinity of the catalytic sites
(<0.5 nm to gold icosahedral core, Fig. 2g, h), where H2O (radius
~0.14 nm) acts as a proxy for H2O2 (radius ~0.18 nm) or TMB (length
along the short semi-axis ~0.22 nm). The water population analysis
revealed that the abovementioned conﬁgurations with accessible
binding pockets (SASA > 0 nm2) had water near the catalytic metal core
for 4–25% of the simulation time (Fig. 2g–h). Interestingly, even when
all active sites were covered by ligands and inaccessible to small
molecules (SASA = 0 nm2), an appreciable amount of trapped water
(30–50%) remained on the cluster surface (Fig. 2g, h). In several cases,
multiple catalytic pockets (out of eight) were open and/or had prox-
imal water in a single Au25(SG)18 conﬁguration. It is important to note
that these statistics are based on instantaneous conﬁgurations recor-
ded every 5 ps, while a water molecule may have moved into or out of a
binding pocket in the time between the data points, or the ligands may
have opened or closed the pocket. We therefore consider all observed
scenarios where a binding pocket on Au25(SG)18 has a non-zero SASA
and/or nearby water molecules to be a statistically signiﬁcant oppor-
tunity for an active site to participate in peroxidase-like catalytic
activity. These results emphasise that although pH and salt inﬂuence
active site accessibility (Fig. 2g, h), the AuNC ligand layer undergoes
molecular rearrangement irrespective of solution conditions to enable
a small molecule access to the catalytic metal sites on the nano-to-
microsecond timescale. In summary, the MD simulations highlight that
while the GSH ligands protect the clusters to ensure stability in solu-
tion, they also continuously allow small molecule access to the active
site(s), providing a plausible explanation for the consistent peroxidase
activity of AuNCs in complex physiological environments.
Preparation and characterisation of the liposomal sensor
encapsulating AuNCs
To create the sensing unit, liposomes were self-assembled in the pre-
sence of aqueous solutions of AuNCs. The ratios of lipid components
were varied and included brain sphingomyelin (BSM), 1-palmitoyl-2-
oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine (16:0–18:1 PC), cholesterol (CH), 1,2-
distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[meth-oxy(polyethy-
lene glycol)-2000] (DSPE-PEG2k), and 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammo-
nium-propane (DOTAP) (Fig. 3a). BSM was speciﬁcally chosen as a
crucial component in liposomes due to the secretion of beta-toxin by
S. aureus, which is a sphingomyelinase C52,53. This toxin turns sphin-
gomyelin into ceramide, which induces negative membrane curvature,
eventually causing liposome rupture14,54. To validate the effect of
enhanced catalytic activity of AuNCs on the performance of this sen-
sing platform, both optimised (1:1.5, pH 10) and previously developed
AuNCs (1:1.5, pH 2 32) were encapsulated in liposomes and puriﬁed by
size exclusion chromatography (SEC). To estimate the maximal signal
that can be achieved after full release of AuNCs from the liposomes,
Triton X−100 was added before running the TMB assay on the SEC
fractions.
The liposome sensing system based on the optimised AuNCs
exhibited a signiﬁcantly higher catalytic activity after the lysis of the
relevant liposome fractions (Fig. 3b; Supplementary Fig.11, 12). We
further investigated the optimal concentration of AuNCs for loading
by using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) to
precisely measure the gold contents in liposomes after SEC puriﬁca-
tion. This helped to quantitatively determine the encapsulation efﬁ-
ciency of AuNCs within the liposomes. We discovered the liposome
sensing platform loaded with an initial concentration of 2 mM AuNCs
exhibited the best catalytic activity and with an encapsulation efﬁ-
ciency of 2.5% (Fig. 3c; Supplementary Fig. 13; Supplementary Table 2).
This was expected for passive loading of hydrophilic components
(GSH-AuNCs), which ended up in the liposome core, generally reach-
ing similar encapsulation efﬁciencies of a few percent limited only by
the internal volume available. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) mea-
surements
of
liposomes
prepared
with
different
formulations
demonstrated consistency, with a hydrodynamic size of approxi-
mately 120 nm after extrusion using a 100 nm-pore membrane
(Fig. 3d). Liposomes loaded with AuNCs revealed neutral to slightly
negative zeta potentials as expected when incorporating 1 mol % DSPE-
PEG2k (Fig. 3e; Supplementary Fig. 13b). The size and membrane
structure of empty liposome controls and AuNC-loaded liposomes was
conﬁrmed by cryo-TEM (Fig. 3f, g; Supplementary Fig. 14).
AuNC-loaded liposomes respond to toxins secreted by S. aureus
in vitro
To assess the sensitivity of different liposome formulations to bacterial
toxins, the liposomes were incubated with freshly prepared bacterial
supernatant from S. aureus SH1000 strain overnight cultures con-
taining the secreted toxins. S. aureus SH1000 is a laboratory strain,
which is commonly used in research, and has the ability to secrete a
variety of toxins. The incubation solution was subsequently ﬁltered
(100 kDa centrifugal ﬁlter to mimic kidney ﬁltration) to collect the
released AuNCs, and the ﬁltrate was measured through the oxidation
of TMB (Fig. 4a). This indicated the presence of released AuNCs and
the sensitivity of the liposome sensing system. Among the tested for-
mulations, liposomes composed of a 1:1:1 mass ratio of BSM, PC, CH
and incorporating 1 mol % DSPE-PEG2k as stabiliser exhibited the
highest release of AuNCs (Fig. 4b). The 1:1:1 lipid ratio mimics the base
composition ratio found in red blood cell (RBC) membranes55,56, which
we selected since RBCs are a common tool for assessing toxin action,
responding efﬁciently to toxins57. Importantly, S. aureus produces
several toxins capable of lysing RBCs, making this lipid ratio an
effective strategy for mimicry. Also, other ratios of these lipid com-
ponents were used for comparison, demonstrating 1:1:1 was optimal in
terms of its responsiveness to toxins (Supplementary Table 3, Sup-
plementary Figs. 15, 16).
We hypothesised that additional cationic lipids in the formulation
could improve the loading efﬁciency of anionic gold nanoclusters. A
further attempt to optimise the liposome composition was conducted
by incorporating cationic DOTAP lipid (positively charged) and per-
forming comprehensive comparative characterisation and release
quantiﬁcation. This included assessment of zeta potential, nano-
particle tracking analysis (NTA) to compare concentrations, limit of
detection (LoD), and release efﬁciency. To evaluate the release efﬁ-
ciency, Triton X-100 was used to fully lyse the liposomes, and all for-
mulations were measured accordingly58. Considering both the surface
charge of the liposomes and the toxin-triggered release signal ampli-
ﬁcation, we discovered that the inclusion of DOTAP did not contribute
to a better performance of sensing. Liposomes composed of the
above-described 1:1:1 mixture and incorporating 1 mol % DSPE-PEG2k
exhibited high stability in bacteria medium (tryptic soy broth, TSB),
high release efﬁciency of AuNCs in response to S. aureus toxin mixture,
and the highest ﬁnal signal after performing the catalytic reaction
(Supplementary Figs. 16–18, Supplementary Table 4). The release
efﬁciency reached 74% with the highest absorbance intensity on the
released ﬁltrate analysis when compared to other formulations. Hence,
this formulation, termed BPC, was taken forward for subsequent
experiments.
DLS measurements of BPC liposomes after incubating with dif-
ferent dilutions of toxin-containing bacterial culture supernatants
revealed the impact on size and relative concentration (derived count
rate as a rough estimate) of liposomes, which dropped when increas-
ing the amount of toxin added (Fig. 4c). We used ﬂuorescence corre-
lation spectroscopy (FCS) to investigate the toxin-mediated release
from the liposomes. FCS allows the characterisation of the diffusion
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
7

properties (hence the hydrodynamic size) of a ﬂuorescent sample and
the amount of ﬂuorescent cargo per liposome can be calculated using
the molecular brightness information (counts per particle, cpp, in
kHz). After incubation with toxin, the diffusivity of the liposomes
completely shifted to that of freely diffusing OG488-labelled AuNCs
and analysis indicated 99% release of AuNCs-OG488 upon 2-h toxin
incubation, after correction for bright and slow diffusing species59
(Fig. 4e). AuNC release as measured by FCS is higher than when mea-
sured via catalytic activity assessment (Supplementary Fig. 16), which
can be attributed to the fact that FCS was performed without pur-
iﬁcation after toxin-incubation. The centrifugal ﬁlters used for pur-
iﬁcation prior to catalytic activity measurements have likely adsorbed
a fraction of the released AuNCs. The hydrodynamic diameters of both
the AuNCs-OG488 and AuNC-OG488-loaded liposomes calculated
from the FCS autocorrelation analysis (Fig. 4f) were consistent with the
sizes obtained from DLS. Brightness analysis (cpp) also revealed that in
average >100 AuNCs were loaded per liposome, in agreement with the
cryo-TEM images (Fig. 3g; Supplementary Fig.14).
To investigate the lipid transformations in liposomes exposed to
toxin at a single-particle level, we employed the single particle auto-
mated Raman trapping analysis (SPARTA®) technique60. SPARTA® was
recently reported as a label-free method to provide high-throughput
information about the precise chemistry compositions among a
population of the nanocarriers and their cargo61 and to measure time-
resolved enzymatic conversion of lipid headgroups62. Here, SPARTA®
measurements were performed on toxin-treated and untreated lipo-
somalsensors.The mean Raman spectra acrossall liposomes exhibited
similarities between the samples, with characteristic lipid peaks at
1298 cm–1 and 1438 cm–1 (CH2 deformation), and 1670 cm–1 (over-
lapping cholesterol, ceramide backbone, C = C). However, the signal
intensity of toxin-treated liposomes was slightly lower than of the non-
treated ones, likely due to less integrity after exposure to toxin
(Fig. 4g, h). Notably, there was a reduction relative to the rest of the
spectrum in intensity of the 717 cm–1 peak after incubation with toxin,
which can be attributed to the C-N symmetric stretching of the choline
group63. This data conﬁrms that the sphingomyelin lipids were
hydrolysed
into
ceramide
and
soluble
phosphorylcholine
by
sphingomyelinase-like toxin secreted from S. aureus64. The production
of ceramide is known to cause membrane destabilisation and vesicle
collapse resulting in cargo release65,66, as observed here with AuNCs.
After cleavage, the phosphorylcholine was likely released into solution,
so it was no longer spatially associated with the liposomes, leading to
the loss of the choline headgroup signal in the SPARTA® data after
toxin incubation. This observation is consistent with previous
Fig. 5 | In vitro incubation of bacteria with AuNC-loaded liposomes and char-
acterisation of bacterial growth. a Schematic of in vitro incubation of AuNC-
loaded liposomes with bacteria and subsequent separation of released AuNCs from
intact liposomes. b Bacterial growth curve of S. aureus SH1000 by CFU counting
method (mean values ± standard error, N = 3 biological replicates, n = 1 technical
repeat). c–e TMB oxidation assay on the ﬁltrates after incubation of AuNC-loaded
liposome with TSB ± S. aureus from 0 to 24 h. c Photographs of ﬁnal TMB assay
results. d, e Absorbance (at 652 nm at140 s endpoint) and onset velocity for assayin
c: TSB (black bars with circular dots) and TSB + bacteria (grey bars with square dots)
(mean values ± standard error, N = 3 biological replicates, n = 1 technical replicate,
additional repeats with detailed reaction curve in Supplementary Fig. 19a–e). f, g In
vitro MTS cell viability assay after incubation of AuNC-loaded liposomes (f) and
AuNC (g) with RAW 264.7 cells (mean values ± standard error, N = 3 biological
replicates, n = 3 technical replicates).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
8

literature on the transformation of sphingomyelin to ceramide by
sphingomyelinase67. Additionally, the peak signal at 700 cm–1 is asso-
ciated with cholesterol63, which is a component present in the lipo-
some formulation. The consistent presence of the stable signal at
700 cm-1 was attributed to the cholesterol lipids in the liposome for-
mulation, contributing to enhanced stability68. Scatter plots compar-
ing the peak signal at 700 cm-1 against the choline headgroup peak at
717 cm–1 can be used to show the single particle-level variation of
choline signal with cholesterol signal for both samples (Fig. 4i).
Untreated liposomes formed a homogenous population with choles-
terol and choline peak areas centred around 0.011 and 0.016, respec-
tively. After toxin treatment, choline signal in the whole population
notably decreased relative to the cholesterol signal which demon-
strates relatively homogenous cleavage of the choline headgroup.
Overall, the optimised liposome composition, BPC, was demonstrated
to be responsive to toxin secreted from S. aureus in vitro and achieve
an almost complete release of AuNCs, whilst the sensor remained
intact when incubated without the toxins.
AuNC-loaded liposomes respond to S. aureus in vitro
To assess the responsiveness of AuNC-loaded liposomes to bacteria in
their vicinity – a more clinically relevant scenario – we conducted
incubation experiments with S. aureus cultures instead of toxin
supernatant as above. This approach aimed to mimic the sensing
process during bacterial infection. Following incubation of the lipo-
somal sensor with S. aureus cultures or with TSB only, the supernatant
was obtained by centrifugation after different time points. The
supernatant of each incubation was then ﬁltered through a centrifugal
ﬁlter (100 kDa) to collect the ﬁltrate containing AuNCs released from
the liposomes. The collected ﬁltrates were subjected to TMB assays,
where a colour change to blue indicated the release of AuNCs from the
liposomes in the presence of bacterial growth (Fig. 5a).
To ensure consistent S. aureus SH1000 growth behaviour, an
overnight bacterial culture was diluted at ratios of 1:100 and 1:1000,
followed by subsequent serial dilutions. The diluted bacteria were
streaked on tryptic soy agar (TSA) plates and allowed to grow over-
night to obtain colony-forming units (CFU) for determining the bac-
terial concentration. The 1:100 diluted bacteria exhibited rapid growth
in the initial 5 h and reached a maximum concentration of 109 CFU/mL
(Fig. 5b). The 1:100 dilution was taken forward for testing with the
liposome sensor. The ﬁltrates obtained from liposomes incubated with
bacteria or TSB were mixed with the TMB substrate, and the absor-
bance at 652 nm was monitored to assess the kinetics of the reaction.
The peak absorbance endpoint in the TMB assay indicated the catalytic
activity of the released AuNCs, which directly correlates with the
extent of their release. After a 3-h incubation, a blue colour change was
observed in wells where liposomes were incubated with bacteria. This
indicated the onset of liposome lysis by the bacterial toxins, which
correlated with the endpoint measurements of the TMB assay. The
catalytic activity reached its highest value after 5 h incubation with
bacteria, as indicated from their absorbance and the onset velocity
(Supplementary 19c, d). In contrast, the ﬁltrates from liposomes
incubated with TSB culture medium showed no colour change even
after 48-h incubation, indicating the high stability of liposomes in
media in the absence of bacteria (Fig. 5c-e; Supplementary Fig. 19d–f).
The reaction curve kinetics also demonstrated a similar trend, with the
fastest reaction observed at 5 h of incubation. The onset velocity of the
reaction was consistent with the endpoint measurements, and repro-
ducibility of the assay was conﬁrmed (Fig. 5d, e; Supplementary
Fig. 19a–e). The reason for reaching a plateau after 5 h was attributed
the blockage of Amicon ﬁlter units caused by bacterial growth and the
accumulation of liposome debris following disassembly. To further
verify the stability of the liposomes, DLS characterisation was per-
formed in different media. The results showed that the size of the
liposomes
remained
around
120 nm
without
disassembly
or
aggregation after incubation in various media at body temperature
over at least 48 h (PBS, PBS:TSB 1:1, and 10 v/v% human serum) (Sup-
plementary Fig. 19g–i). To estimate the minimum amount of sensor
that needs to be disassembled to achieve a detectable signal, the
calibration curve for AuNC-loaded liposomes (BSM:PC:CH) was con-
ducted and calculated to be 19 µg/mL of lipid in the presence of 86
pmol of AuNC (Supplementary Fig. 20).
An important consideration for the use of any biosensor is their
biocompatibility. To assess the cytocompatibility of AuNC-loaded
liposomes, RAW 264.7 cells were exposed to serial dilutions of the
liposomal sensor (Fig. 5f) or AuNCs alone (Fig. 5g), and cell viability was
evaluated using MTS assays. The results indicated that the sensor and
the AuNCs exhibited excellent biocompatibility and the cells remained
viable. This is in agreement with previous literature, liposomes of this
composition are known for their biocompatibility69 and GSH-AuNCs
have also previously been tested and shown to be biocompatible in
vitro and in vivo32,70. In conclusion, we synthesised a biocompatible
sensor that responds to S. aureus growth in vitro.
HA hydrogels as an implant model for the liposomal
bacteria sensor
Various hyaluronic acid (HA) hydrogels have been approved for human
use as injectable dermal ﬁllers, with the advantage of high content of
water, tissue-like properties and ease of implantability71,72. Here, we
used a commercial HA hydrogel (Belotero Intense) as an implant
model, which allows for simple physical loading of our liposomal
sensor. These commercial HA hydrogels offer enhanced stability due
to cross-linking technologies, which extend their duration and provide
resistance to enzymatic degradation, ensuring a longer-lasting effect in
tissue augmentation applications73,74. The commercial product we
used (Belotero Intense) is widely used and has a reported longevity of
up to 12 months after injection75. Infection of hydrogel dermal ﬁllers
through implantation of inadvertently contaminated implants is also a
concern, similar to other implants76. To test the suitability of this
implant system, free AuNCs or AuNC-liposomes were mixed with HA
hydrogels and injected into PBS or TSB culture medium, incubated
over time, followed by supernatant collection and TMB assay. These
tests were performed to investigate the timescales of retention, dif-
fusion, and release of free AuNCs and AuNC-liposomes out of the HA
hydrogels. AuNCs readily diffuse out of the HA hydrogel within the ﬁrst
hour, demonstrating that liberated AuNCs from our sensor will be able
to pass through the gel efﬁciently. In contrast, AuNC-liposomes were
mostly retained within the hydrogel for up to 6 h of incubation at 37 ˚C
and the centrifugal ﬁlter test conﬁrmed that liposomes largely
remained intact and the AuNCs remained encapsulated (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 21, 22). Overall, the HA hydrogel system was deemed suitable
for our subsequent proof-of-concept tests in a mouse model of acute
implant infection, as the liposomes largely remained within the
hydrogel for the required timescale and the mixture remained readily
injectable. Incorporating a covalent coupling strategy to anchor the
sensor to the implant could extend the duration of liposome retention
within/on the implant, but this will require extensive optimisation and
we envisage this as future work.
Using the experimental setup described above, we then incor-
porated bacterial contamination into the system. AuNC-liposomes
mixed with HA hydrogel were either bacteria-free or intentionally
contaminated with S. aureus. The mixture was again injected into TSB
for incubation, supernatant collection, and centrifugal ﬁltration. The
ﬁltrates were collected for TMB assay to detect AuNCs released from
the liposomal sensor (Fig. 6a). The sensor remained intact when
incubated in bacteria-free HA hydrogels, whilst AuNCs were released
from the sensor and detected by TMB assay for the bacteria-
contaminated gels, as early as 1 h after the start of the incubation
(Fig. 6b–d; repeat in Supplementary Fig. 22). Before in vivo adminis-
tration, we conﬁrmed efﬁcient bacteria growth also in the presence of
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
9

HA hydrogels. Bacteria incubated in TSB with or without HA hydrogel
had the same growth curve (Supplementary Fig. 23a–c). CFU counts
and the absorbance at 600 nm (OD600) were identical over time
(Supplementary Fig. 23b, c). When considering the bacteria numbers,
we can estimate that about 108 CFU/mL produced enough toxin within
1–2 h to cause sufﬁcient sensor rupture and AuNC release to be avail-
able for TMB signal generation. To evaluate the speciﬁcity of the
liposomal sensor, we incubated sensors with supernatants from cul-
tures of S. aureus and the non-pathogenic, non-toxin producing bac-
terium Lactococcus lactis. The TMB assay results indicated that the
liposomal sensor speciﬁcally responded to the S. aureus toxin, as evi-
denced by the blue colour change observed in the ﬁltrate containing
released AuNCs. In contrast, no blue colour was visible in the ﬁltrate
from the incubation with L. lactis, demonstrating that the liposomal
sensor selectively responded to S. aureus (Supplementary Fig. 23d–h).
This is in agreement with a previous study that revealed speciﬁcity of
liposomal rupture in presence of pathogenic S. aureus vs non-
pathogenic L. lactis22. We have further selected thrombosis as an
unrelated disease to investigate diagnostic speciﬁcity. After incubation
of the liposomal sensor with thrombin, no colour change was detected
when performing the TMB assay in the ﬁltrate (Supplementary
Fig. 23d–h), conﬁrming the inability of the sensor to respond to this
enzyme. If future research reveals the need to improve sensor speci-
ﬁcity further, we envision that a dual-response system with an enzyme-
cleavable PEG shell could be explored. This strategy has previously
been successful in improving speciﬁcity in the anti-cancer drug
Fig. 6 | AuNC-liposome sensing system enabling a colourimetric readout of
bacterial infection state. a Schematic of the HA hydrogel implant infection model
and detection of in vitro released AuNCs. b, c Photographs of TMB colourimetric
readout results for ﬁltrates as shown in (d). d TMB assay on ﬁltrates after incubation
of the liposomal sensor mixed with HA gel ± bacteria, showing onset velocity. The
incubation time varied from 0 to 48 h (mean values ± standard error, N = 3 biolo-
gical replicates, n = 1 technical replicate, the corresponding absorbance measure-
ments are shown in Supplementary Fig. 22b and the cleavage efﬁciency calculated
from onset velocity and absorbance are shown in Supplementary Fig. 22c, d).
e Schematic of mouse model of acute implant infection using i.p. administration of
HA-hydrogels loaded with AuNC-liposomes with or without S. aureus contamina-
tion. f TMB reaction kinetics measurements on the urine collected from mice 4 h
after administration of sensor-loaded HA hydrogels with (bacterial infection, BI) or
without (healthy control, HC) bacterial contamination with S. aureus SH1000 (n = 6
mice per group). g Onset velocity calculated from TMB catalytic activity assay in (f)
(n = 6 mice per group, two-tailed Mann–Whitney test, p = 0.0022). Box-plots: The
centre line, the median; the box limits, the upper and lower quartiles; the whiskers,
minimum and maximum values (N = 6 biological replicates, n = 1 technical
replicate).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
10

delivery ﬁeld77. Hence, the HA hydrogel implant model was found to be
a suitable system to verify our bacteria sensor in vivo, as the implant is
prone to bacterial infection and growth.
AuNC-liposome biosensor responds to bacteria growth in vivo
and provides simple urinary readout
GSH-AuNCs at a size of around 2 nm have been extensively studied
with regard to biocompatibility, biodistribution, clearance through the
kidneys into the urine, and catalytic activity retention in urine32. This
previous work demonstrated rapid elimination of similar nanocluster
compositions into the urine after i.v. administration using the TMB
assay to verify their presence. To conﬁrm renal clearance of our bare
AuNCs also after i.p. administration, urine samples were collected from
mice injected i.p. with AuNCs. The catalytic activity of cleared AuNCs
was monitored by TMB oxidation reaction. PBS control injections gave
no signal, whilst the urine samples after AuNCs i.p. injection and TMB
reaction turned blue indicating successful clearance of AuNCs into the
urine (Supplementary Fig. 24). The urine sample from 3 h post injec-
tion exhibited higher catalytic activity than that from 1 h, after nor-
malisation for different dilution factors (less urine was available for 3-h
sample, hence it was tested at a higher dilution than the 1-h sample). A
calibration curve of onset velocity of AuNCs in urine was measured for
the clearance efﬁciency of the AuNC clearance at 1 h and 3 h as 6.3%
and 2.5% (not corrected for differences in urine volume). This data
provides further insights into the renal clearance dynamics of bare
AuNCs in mice via different routes of administration78,79. In previous
work, the cleared AuNCs in urine were measured with up to 73%
clearance efﬁciency compared to the injected dose after 1 h post
injection by intravenous (i.v.) administration32. This suggests that
AuNCs could be cleared through kidneys after i.p. administration but
the clearance after i.p. administration was much slower than i.v.
administration, as expected.
After conﬁrming the in vitro response of our biosensor to bac-
terial infection in HA hydrogels and the successful clearance of AuNC
through the kidneys in vivo, we employed an acute infection model in
mice. S. aureus SH1000 strain has previously been used for the study of
surgical bacterial implant infection80–82. We administered the implant
with biosensor (AuNC-liposome-loaded HA hydrogels) to the model,
either
with
or
without
bacterial
contamination
(S.
aureus
SH1000 strain), via i.p. route using two groups of six mice each: the
healthy control group (HC) and the bacterial infection (BI) group.
Urine collection was performed 4 h after the injection (Fig. 6e). The
TMB catalytic activity kinetics assay was measured using 20 µL of the
collected urine. The raw absorbance curves for the TMB reaction
increased over time in the bacterial infection (BI) group (pink lines),
whereas the healthy control (HC) group did not increase (grey, Fig. 6f).
This conﬁrmed the in vitro data, showing that only in the presence of
bacterial contamination signiﬁcant amounts of AuNCs were released
from our sensor and cleared into the urine. Comparing the calculated
onset velocities showed signiﬁcantly higher signals from BI versus HC
group (Fig. 6g). Additionally, we administered AuNC-loaded liposomes
with HA gel to three healthy mice, along with two PBS injection con-
trols, followed by TMB assays on urine samples collected over a 48-h
period. The absence of blue colour change in both groups demon-
strates that the sensing platform remained stable in vivo during that
timeframe (Supplementary Fig. 25).
Further optimisation of AuNC catalytic activity, loading amount of
AuNCs per liposome, and liposome composition are future means to
further optimise the detection sensitivity. Future studies on the effect
of variations in urine volume (dependent on liquid uptake) and time
window of urine collection on signal intensity is required to deﬁne the
necessary minimal sensor concentration needed at the implant site to
achieve the envisioned binary yes/no readout of bacterial infection
status. These results demonstrate that our biosensor, combining cat-
alytic AuNCs and toxin-responsive liposomes, can realise rapid
detection of implant infection with a colourimetric readout using a
non-invasive method.
Discussion
In this study, we have developed a biosensor platform as a rapid and
sensitive colourimetric method for detecting bacterial infections
within a short 4-h timeframe. Our research focused on the synthesis
and optimisation of ultra-small AuNCs with signiﬁcantly enhanced
catalytic activity (33.5-fold higher than AuNCs in previous work32, with
83-fold lower LoD), whilst accessibility of reactant molecules to the Au
core was conﬁrmed by MD simulations. The composition of the lipo-
somes that encapsulated these AuNCs was varied to develop a bio-
sensing platform with high sensitivity and responsiveness. We
demonstrated that the biosensors could respond to toxins secreted by
S. aureus in vitro. This particularly leverages the advantage that the
secreted beta-toxin can hydrolyse the sphingomyelin lipid in the
liposome formulation, thereby releasing encapsulated AuNCs, as ver-
iﬁed by single-particle measurements. Finally, we validated the bio-
sensor platform in solution, culture, and in hydrogels and successfully
showed detection of released AuNCs in the urine from mice with a
model of implant-associated bacterial infection. Overall, our work
emphasised the signiﬁcance of enhancing the catalytic activity of
AuNCs due to the low encapsulation efﬁciency within liposomes and
tailoring the liposome compositions to engineer a sensitive biosensor
platform for the detection of bacterial infection in vivo, in which the
catalytic activity of AuNCs can be used as a readout for disease mon-
itoring. This development holds great promise for early detection of
implant infection allowing for timely treatment to limit the chance of
developing severe complications and other scenarios of bacterial
infection. We envision the application of the current system for
detecting acute implant infection. The clinical scenario could follow
the same procedure as demonstrated in our animal experiments,
involving mixing the sensor with the hydrogel before injection and
collecting a urine sample from the patient a few hours after the pro-
cedure. If the urine turns blue upon addition of the TMB substrate
solution, an antibiotic could be prescribed. Alternatively, the liposo-
mal sensor could be injected locally in any area of suspected bacterial
infection and urine could be collected at a deﬁned later time point for
sensing via the catalytic reaction. Further research and reﬁnement of
this biosensor platform could lead to its practical clinical application
with particular relevance for at-home or resource limited settings due
to its simple and sensitive colourimetric readout.
Methods
All experimental data was plotted using Origin 10.0.0.154 and Prism 10,
with schematics created using Autodesk 3ds Max and Power Point.
Computational data was plotted using gnuplot (version 5) and mole-
cular visualisations were rendered with Visual Molecular Dynamics
(VMD, version 1.9.3)83.
Materials
Gold chloride trihydrate (HAuCl4), chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate
(H2PtCl6), L-glutathione reduced (GSH), sodium borohydride (NaBH4),
sodium hydroxide (NaOH), Ethanol (EtOH), NeutrAvidin Protein (NAv),
3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine (1-Step™Ultra TMB-ELISA Substrate
Solution), 30% (w:w) hydrogen peroxide solution (H2O2), Triton X-100,
Sepharose CL-2B, Gold Standard for ICP, TraceCERT(R), 1000 mg/L Au
in hydrochloric acid, M-17 broth and thrombin from human plasma
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Brain sphingomyelin (BSM), 1-
palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine (16:0–18:1 PC), choles-
terol
(CH),
1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane
(DOTAP)
and
1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methox-
y(polyethylene glycol)−2000] (DSPE-PEG2K) were purchased from
Avanti Polar Lipids. Methanol (MeOH) and chloroform (CHCl3) were
used as purchased. Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline (DPBS),
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
11

DMEM without phenol red (1X, high glucose, GlutaMAX, Gibco, 31966-
021) and Oregon Green 488 Carboxylic Acid, Succinimidyl Ester,
6-isomer (OG488) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. RAW
264.7 cells were obtained from ATCC. MTS (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-
yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium)
assay (Promega) was purchased from Abcam. Tryptic soy agar (TSA)
and tryptic soy broth (TSB) were purchased from BD biosciences. HA
hydrogel (Belotero Intense) was purchased from Fillerworld. Milli-Q
water (18.2 MΩ.cm) was used in all experiments.
Nanocluster synthesis and optimisation
The protocol of nanocluster synthesis and puriﬁcation was adapted
from published literature32. Many parameters for the reaction condi-
tions were adjusted for the nanocluster synthesis to optimise the
catalytic activity and retain the ultra-small size. We chose various ratios
of metal to ligand with different reducing agents to get ligand-capped
nanoclusters (1:0.5, 1:0.8, 1:1,1:1.5 and 1:2) with different solvents in the
reaction mixture (Supplementary Table 1). Typically, freshly prepared
HAuCl4 or H2PtCl6 (20 mM, 50 µL) was added into DI water, which was
followed by quick addition of the reducing agent GSH (5 mM, 200 to
400 µL depending on the metal-to-GSH ratios) as weak reducing con-
ditions, and NaBH4 (143 mM, 20 µL) on top of GSH added for cap-
ping as the strong reducing condition. The whole reaction volume was
topped up to 1 mL with H2O. Subsequently, the weak reducing condi-
tion mixture was heated up to 70 °C and reacted for 24 h, while the
mixture under strong reducing conditions was kept at room tem-
perature in thermomixer at a gentle shaking speed of 500 r.p.m. and
reacted for 2–3 h. Different reaction temperatures under weak redu-
cing conditions were evaluated for the synthesis, varying from 37 °C,
50 °C, 70 °C to 90 °C. The pH of the reaction under weak reducing
condition was varied from 2 to 10. After the 24-h reduction reaction,
nanoclusters were puriﬁed and buffer exchanged with DPBS (pH 7.4)
using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units (MWCO 10 kDa) at
5000 × g and 15 min for three times. Finally, the AuNCs in the con-
centrate were suspended in DPBS to yield 20 µM (concentration given
based on a previous study32) and subsequently transferred and ﬁltered
into a new Eppendorf tube after passing through a sterile syringe ﬁlter
(0.22 µm Millex-GV Filter) to remove any aggregates and sterilise the
sample.
Thrombin sensor assembly and thrombin cleavage assay
Here, thrombin-cleavable biotinylated peptide ligands (sequence of
biotin-SGGfPRSGGSGGC from a previous study32) were used in AuNC
synthesis for the subsequent conjugation to NAv forming a covalent
sensor. For thrombin sensor pH 2, thrombin peptide templated AuNCs
pH 2 were synthesised by mixing HAuCl4 (20 mM, 100 µL), DI
water (750 µL) and GSH (20 mM, 125 µL) with addition of thrombin
cleavable peptide (20 mM, 25 µL), reacting at 70 °C, 500 r.p.m. for 24 h.
After puriﬁcation of the AuNC-thrombin peptide (1 mL), it was mixed
with NAv (8 mg/mL, 125 µL) and reacted at 37 °C, at 500 r.p.m. for 3 h.
The AuNC-NAv thrombin sensor was then puriﬁed using Amicon Ultra-
15 Centrifugal Filter Units (MWCO 30 kDa) at 5000 × g and 15 min for at
least ﬁve times. Finally, the thrombin sensor AuNCs pH 2 were sus-
pended in DPBS to 1 mL (ﬁnal 1 mg/mL in terms of NAv). For thrombin
sensor pH 10, crude AuNC-GSH pH 10 was synthesised by mixing
HAuCl4 (20 mM, 100 µL), DI water (736 µL) and GSH (20 mM, 150 µL)
with addition of NaOH (1 M, 14 µL), reacting at 70 °C, 500 r.p.m. for
24 h. Thrombin cleavable peptide (20 mM, 25 µL) was added into crude
AuNC-GSH pH 10 for another 12-h reaction at 70 °C and 500 r.p.m. The
conjugation of AuNC-peptide on NAv, puriﬁcation, and ﬁnal stock
preparation in DPBS (1 mg/mL in terms of NAv) was the same as for the
thrombin sensor pH 2. For the cleavage assay, the puriﬁed thrombin
sensors pH 2 and 10 (80 µL, 1 mg/mL) were incubated with thrombin
enzyme (80 µL, 100 nM) for 3 and 16 h at 37 °C under shaking condition
(300 r.p.m.). The incubated solutions were then centrifuged through
Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Units (MWCO 30 kDa) at 14,000 × g
for 15 min to collect the ﬁltrates containing liberated AuNCs for TMB
assay. TMB asasy was conducted by mixing 10 µL of ﬁltrates with 90 µL
TMB:H2O2 (2 M) at 1:1 ratio, follow by absorbance measurement at
652 nm using a SpectraMax M5 multimodal microplate reader.
Liposome preparation and optimisation
To optimise the responsiveness of the liposome system, different lipid
compositions were used, including BSM, PC, CH and DOTAP. 1 mol %
DSPE-PEG2K was added in all the formulations for prevention of lipo-
some aggregation. The optimised liposome composition was 33.3%
BSM, 33.3% PC and 33.3% CH (mass percentage) with 1 mol % of DSPE-
PEG2K (all the other compositions tested are summarised in Supple-
mentary Table 3). The lipid ﬁlms (typically 5 mg total) were prepared in
1.5-mL glass vials through evaporation of CHCl3:MeOH (9:1 used to
prepare the lipid stocks) by drying with N2 gas, then storing in a
desiccant overnight. The lipid ﬁlms were hydrated with AuNCs cargo
solutions in PBS (500 µL, 2 mM, 100X concentrated compared to
above mentioned AuNCs 20 µM as 1X) for at least 1 h. Subsequently,
liposomes were formed by vortexing and ﬁve freeze-thaw cycles by
heating up to 50 °C and freezing at -80 °C. The lipid suspensions were
then extruded by using 200 nm polycarbonate membranes (6 cycles)
and 100 nm membranes (21 cycles). Finally, the extruded liposome
suspension was puriﬁed by using size exclusion chromatography
(SEC), through a 30-cm column packed with Sepharose CL-2B equili-
brated in PBS. Eluted fractions (30 mL) were collected for analysis of
the liposome fractions and free AuNC fractions, respectively. Amicon
Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units (MWCO 100 kDa) were used to con-
centrate the eluted liposome fractions. The samples were ﬁnally ster-
ilised by ﬁltration through a sterile syringe ﬁlter (0.45 µm Millex-GV
Filter) to remove any aggregates and sterilise the sample.
Bacterial culture and toxin supernatant collection
TSB and M-17 broth (3 w/v %) was prepared and autoclaved for growing
S. aureus SH1000 and L. lactis NZ9800 strains, respectively. Both
S. aureus and L. lactis bacterial stocks were initially incubated in TSB or
M-17 broth (5 mL each) overnight (12–16 h). The overnight S. aureus
culture was diluted 100 and 1000 times, then incubated overnight for
different time points (ranging from 0 to 24 h). Samples from speciﬁc
time points were taken for plate streaking and CFU counting to
determine the growth curve. For toxin collection, both ﬁrst overnight
stock cultures were centrifuge at 3,500 g for 10 min at 4 °C, followed
by sterile ﬁltration of the toxin supernatants through a 0.45 µm Millex-
GV syringe ﬁlter to remove any remaining bacteria for later incubation
of the supernatants with the sensor.
In vitro incubation of liposomal sensor with toxin, media and
thrombin for speciﬁcity assay
The prepared AuNC-loaded liposomes (90 µL, 12.5 mg/mL) were incu-
bated with S. aureus and L. lactis culture supernatants from overnight
cultures (90 µL each), TSB (90 µL, 3 w/v %), M-17 broth (90 µL, 3 w/v %),
and thrombin (90 µL, 100 nM), respectively, for 3 h at 37 °C under
shaking condition (180 r.p.m.). Subsequently, all the samples were ﬁl-
tered through a syringe ﬁlter (0.45 µm Millex-GV Filter) and then cen-
trifuged through Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Units (MWCO
100 kDa). The ﬁltrates were collected for TMB assays (20 µL of ﬁltrates
were added with 180 µL of TMB and H2O2 (2 M) in a 1:1 ratio), and the
absorbance was measured at 652 nm using a SpectraMax M5 multi-
modal microplate reader.
Stability test of liposomal sensor in TSB
AuNC-loaded liposomes (0.5 mL, 20 mg/mL) were incubated in TSB
(4.5 mL, 3 w/v %) ranging from 0 to 48 h. At each time point, 500 µL
incubation solution was taken for syringe ﬁltration (0.45 µm Millex-GV
Filter) and then passed through Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
12

Units (MWCO 100 kDa). Filtrates were collected for the subsequent
TMB assay to determine the stability of the liposomal sensors. TMB
assays were conducted mixing 100 µL of ﬁltrate and 100 µL of TMB/
H2O2 (2 M) at a ratio of 1:1 and ﬁnally measuring the absorbance
at 652 nm.
Characterisation of NCs and liposomes
The hydrodynamic diameter of nanoclusters and liposomes was
measured by using dynamic light scattering (DLS, Zeta Sizer Nano-
series, Malvern Instruments, Ltd). SpectraMax M5 multimodal micro-
plate reader was used to measure the kinetics reaction of TMB
oxidation by AuNC catalysts as well as AuNC-loaded liposomes in the
presence of H2O2. The TMB assay was employed to compare the cata-
lytic activity, using a typical condition of a commercial TMB substrate
adjusted to 1 M H2O2 and pH 3, unless speciﬁed otherwise. The cata-
lytic activity was quantiﬁed by calculating the onset velocity, analysing
the kinetics of the absorbance over time, derived from the linear
portion of the curve at the onset of the reaction. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) images of AuNCs were obtained on a JEOL 2100 F.
To prepare AuNC samples for TEM, AuNCs solution needed to be
desalted ﬁrst with Zeba Spin Desalting Columns (7 K MWCO) and 5 µL
of the sample was dropped on a carbon-coated copper grid and let to
dry overnight for imaging. The calibration curve of liposomal sensor
was done using TMB oxidation assay. 25 µL of diluted liposomal sensor
was mixed with 100 µL of 1-step TMB substrate and 100 µL H2O2 (2 M).
Absorbance at 652 nm of the mixture was measured on the plate
reader. The onset velocity was calculated by the increased absorbance
signal over time, representing the catalytic activity determined. The
minimum detectable sensor threshold was determined as the mean
value of the blank measurements plus three times the standard
deviation. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-ﬂight
(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry analyses were carried out using a
Shimadzu MALDI-8030 mass spectrometer (Shimadzu, UK). MALDI-
8030 was operated in linear negative mode. The TOF was calibrated
with PEG300 prior experiments. The laser was 200 Hz solid-state,
355 nm. Laser power was 100 and ion gate blanking 500. Mass range
was m/z 500 to 15,000. Data were acquired atvarious ion gate blanking
values of 500, 2000, 5000 and 10,000. This allows to ﬁlter out ions
below a certain mass range. The pulse extraction was set at 5,000 or
10,000
to
acquire
data.
Approximately
10 ng
of
freeze-dried
AuNCs were loaded on the MALDI plate. Nanoparticle Tracking Ana-
lysis (NTA) was used to obtain the hydrodynamic diameters, size dis-
tribution and count-based concentration of liposomes. For Cryo-
Transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM), 5 µL of 5 mg/mL lipo-
some solution was dropped on a holey carbon-coated copper grid and
subsequently blotted with Whatman 1 ﬁlter paper, followed by vitriﬁ-
cation into liquid ethane at -180 °C. Frozen grids were placed on a
Gatan Multi-Specimen cryo-holder Model 910 and transferred into a
Talos L120C Electron microscope. Micrographs were recorded using
4 K x 4 K Ceta CMOS camera, at an accelerating voltage of 120 kV at
-175 °C using a low-dose system (40 e-/Å2).
Molecular dynamics characterisation of NCs
All-atom MD simulations in explicit aqueous solvent were performed
using the GROMACS 2022 software package84. Glutathione peptide
interatomic interactions were modelled via the Amber99sb-ildn FF85,
with additional parameters optimised for N-terminal γ-glutamyl and
protonated C-terminal glycine moieties. The TIP3P model was used for
water86, with optimised monovalent Na+ and Cl– nonbonded para-
meters from Joung et al.87. The PyRED server88,89 was employed for
atom type assignment and restrained electrostatic potential (RESP)
partial atomic charge ﬁtting90 (Supplementary Fig. 6a). Quantum
mechanical geometry optimisations and Merz–Singh–Kollman ESP
grid ﬁtting91,92 were performed using Gaussian 1693 at the HF/6-31 G*
level of theory, ensuring compatibility with the Amber FF. The Au25
nanoclusters were described using the thiolate-protected gold
nanocluster parameters of Pohjolainen et al.50. To address the sam-
pling of unphysical tilting and folding of [–Au–S–Au–S–Au–] “staple”
geometries in the Au25 FF51, we introduced additional parameters for
the 24 angles deﬁned by the harmonic potentials (equilibrium angle of
125° and force constant of 500 kJ/mol) to effectively limit the distor-
tion of the staple motifs (Supplementary Fig. 6b).
Models for Au25(SG)18 were constructed using a series of pre-
liminary MD simulations and the NanoModeler webserver94. First, 50
nanoseconds of MD (at 298.15 K) was conducted on single molecules
of protonated glutathione (GSH0) and deprotonated glutathione
(GSH–) in aqueous solution. The most compacted peptide conforma-
tions for each protonation were extracted and inputted as templates to
NanoModeler for the 18 ligands on Au25. This was necessary to avoid
steric clashes when generating the passivated NC models. Next, 100
nanoseconds of MD was performed at elevated temperature (600 K)
for Au25(SG0)18 and Au25(SG–)18 in aqueous solvent, with the cartesian
coordinates for sulphur and gold atoms frozen during the simulations
(Supplementary Fig. 6c). The high temperature allowed for an
ensemble of ligand conﬁgurations to be quickly sampled while
retaining the underlying Au25S18 crystal structure framework95. Cluster
analysis and 2D pairwise RMSD similarity matrices (Supplementary
Fig. 6d–f) were used to identify ten unique Au25(SG)18 structures with
dissimilar ligand arrangements (Supplementary Fig. 6g). Each of the
ten Au25(SG0)18 and ten Au25(SG–)18 unique structures were used as the
inputs for MD to explore the effect of glutathione protonation and
NaCl salt concentration on the conformation of aqueous Au25(SG)18.
Nanoclusters were solvated in periodic cubic boxes (side length ~6 nm)
with approximately 5300–7400 water molecules (density ~1 g/cm3).
Sodium and chloride ions were included to neutralise each system with
additional ions added for the systems with 0.2 M and 1 M NaCl
concentrations.
MD simulation parameters were as follows. Electrostatics were
evaluated using the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method95 with a real
space cutoff of 1.2 nm and a 0.12 nm fast Fourier transform (FFT) grid
spacing. Van der Waals interactions were smoothly force-switched to
zero from 1.0–1.2 nm. Energy minimization was carried out using
the
steepest
descent
algorithm.
MD
was
performed
in
the
isothermal–isobaric NPT ensemble (298.15 K and 1 atm) using the
Nosé-Hoover thermostat96,97 and Parrinello-Rahman barostat98. The
LINCS algorithm99 was applied to constrain all bonds to their equili-
brium lengths and improve performance, enabling an integration time-
step of 2 fs to be used throughout. Simulations were conducted for
500 nanoseconds eachwith frames outputted to trajectory ﬁles every5
picoseconds. Each unique structure was simulated twice, with different
randomised initial atomic velocities. In total, each of the 6 systems
(ligand protonation and salt concentration) was simulated with 20
independent, 500 nanoseconds trajectories. Unless otherwise stated,
statistical analysis was performed on the ﬁnal 300 nanoseconds of
each simulation.
ICP-MS on AuNC-loaded liposomes
Aqua regia was freshly prepared with a molar ratio of 3:1 of HCl (35%,
8 mL) to HNO3 (65%, 2 mL). Liposomes loaded with varying con-
centrations of AuNCs, ranging from 12.5X (0.25 mM) to 200X (4 mM),
or initial AuNC batches for loading (200 µL), were digested in 500 µL of
aqua regia overnight and then diluted with H2O up to 5 mL. A gold
standard for ICP was prepared to calibrate the instrument. The gold
content in the digested and diluted samples was measured using ICP-
MS (8900 Triple Quadrupole ICP-MS), and the data were recorded on
iTEVA iCAP Software (Version 2.2.0.51).
Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS)
FCS using ﬂuorescently labelled AuNCs was performed similarly to our
previous report32. Brieﬂy, AuNCs (1 mM, 50 µL) were labelled through
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
13

reactive amine (GSH on AuNCs) coupling by adding a 20-molar excess
of NHS-activated Oregon Green 488 (OG488). This labelling process
lasted for 3-h incubation at room temperature. Subsequent PD Mini-
Trap and PD MidiTrap columns equilibrated in PBS were then utilised
to remove any unreacted OG488 dye to obtain puriﬁed AuNCs-OG488.
Subsequently, 5 mol % labelled AuNCs-OG488 were mixed with
95 mol % unlabelled AuNCs (overall ﬁnal conc. 2 mM) and encapsu-
lated in BPC liposomes, which were again puriﬁed by SEC using a
Sepharose CL-2B column. The puriﬁed AuNC-liposomes were then
incubated 1:1 with either TSB or S. aureus SH1000 overnight culture
supernatant containing the secreted toxins in TSB and incubated for
2 h, at 37 °C. FCS was then performed on a commercial LSM 880 (Carl
Zeiss, Jena, Germany) using 5 µL droplets on glass-bottom ibidi 8-well
plates (80827, ibidi, Germany), equilibrated at 37 °C. The setup inclu-
ded an Ar+ laser (488 nm excitation), 40X C-Apochromat water
immersion objective (NA 1.2), and a LP 505 ﬁlter. All measurements
were performed 200 µm above the ibidi bottom plate. A serial dilution
of OG488 diluted in
PBS or TSB
were
used
for calibration
(D = 5.49 × 10–6 cm2/s at 37 °C)100 and obtaining the x-y dimension of
the confocal volume (ω2
xy) to enable calculation of diffusion coefﬁ-
cients (D) and use Stokes-Einstein equation to convert to hydro-
dynamic diameter (Dh). Intensity traces (25 × 5 s) were recorded and
analysed for each sample. The autocorrelation curves shown in the
ﬁgures represent the average curve for the whole 125 s measurement.
All curves were ﬁtted and analysed using PyCorrﬁt programme 1.1.6101.
Free AuNCs-OG 488 were ﬁrst ﬁtted with a one component ﬁt to obtain
their characteristic diffusion time and the liposome samples were then
analysed with a two-component ﬁt, ﬁxing one component to free
cluster diffusion. The ratio of height to width of the confocal volume
was ﬁxed to 5 and a triplet fraction with triplet time of 1-10 µs was
included in all ﬁts. The number of clusters loaded per liposome were
obtained by using the counts per particle (cpp in kHz) signal of free
AuNCs-OG488 and loaded liposomes, using a correction due to the
disproportional effect of bright slow diffusing species on average
autocorrelation curves59, and multiplying by 20 because we only used
5 mol % of loaded AuNCs in the encapsulation procedure.
Single particle automated Raman trapping analysis (SPARTA®)
SPARTA®, as previously reported60, is a label-free method that enables
high-throughput analysis of single nanoparticles with Raman spec-
troscopy to provide population level information with single particle
detail about nanoparticle size and chemical composition. For sample
preparation, the optimal BPC liposomes were prepared and loaded
with catalytically optimised AuNCs through lipid ﬁlm hydration and
extrusion. To collect fresh toxin supernatant, S. aureus SH1000 strain
was cultured in TSB overnight for bacterial growth and toxin secretion.
For sample incubation, BPC liposomes (10 mg/mL, 200 µL) were
incubated with DPBS (200 µL) as control or 4-fold diluted fresh toxin
supernatant in DPBS (200 µL) for 2 h. SPARTA® measurements were
conducted using the SPARTA® Alpha prototype. A 22 mm diameter
coverglass with thickness 0 (VWR) was afﬁxed to a microscope slide.
Onto the coverglass was placed 200 μL of either particle suspension or
DPBS for background measurement. During measurements, liposomes
in DPBS or with toxin were trapped and analysed with a 10 s acquisition
time. The laser was disabled for 1 s to release the trapped particle and
allow a new particle to diffuse into the confocal volume. 20 spectra of
blank DPBS at 10 s acquisition time was measured for background
subtraction. Raman spectra were analysed using custom MATLAB
scripts for cosmic spike removal and spectral response correction
(785 nm reference standard National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology, US). Aggregates or empty traps were then manually removed
by minimum and maximum thresholding, before a background sub-
traction of 95% blank DPBS was performed. A Whittaker baseline cor-
rection was then applied, before each spectrum was then smoothed
using a Savitzky-Golay smoothing ﬁlter with order 1 and frame size 7.
Each particle spectrum was normalised to the area under the whole
spectrum to remove effects such as laser power ﬂuctuation between
samples. Mean spectra and standard deviation were calculated across
each sample in Matlab R2020a.
In vitro toxin-triggered release of AuNC from liposome
Toxin was collected from an overnight culture supernatant of S. aureus
SH1000 cultured in TSB, centrifuged away the bacteria, and sterile
ﬁltered the supernatant before use. Different formulations of lipo-
somes (5 mg/mL, 250 µL) were mixed with the toxin supernatant
(250 µL) and incubated at 37 °C for 2 h at a shaking speed of 500 r.p.m.
As a control group without toxin, and a positive full release control,
liposomes were separately incubated with the same volume of TSB and
Triton-X100 in PBS (10 v/v %), respectively. After incubation, the
reaction solutions were centrifuged and ﬁltered through Amicon Ultra-
0.5 Centrifugal Filter Units (MWCO 100 kDa) to separate the released
AuNCs from the intact liposomes. The collected ﬁltrates were col-
lected for TMB assay for detection of released AuNCs. To perform the
TMB assay, all the collected ﬁltrates (100 µL) were added into a 96-well
plate, followed by the addition of 1-Step™Ultra TMB-ELISA Substrate
Solution (50 µL) and H2O2 (2 M, 50 µL). The kinetics of the reactions
were measured by monitoring the absorbance at a wavelength of
652 nm using a SpectraMax M5 plate reader.
In vitro AuNC release from bacterial incubation with liposome
S. aureus SH1000 was cultured overnight to obtain 1X stock which was
subsequently diluted at a 1:100 ratio. BPC liposomes were prepared at
a concentration of 20 mg/mL in a total volume of 2 mL. The prepared
liposomes (1 mL) were incubated with 5 mL of the diluted S. aureus
SH1000 in TSB (1:100) or 5 mL TSB only was used as the control. The
incubation period lasted for 8 h. At various time points (0–8 h) with 1-h
intervals, 500 µL of the reaction mixture solution (3.33 mg/mL of
lipids) was sampled. Each sample was then centrifuged and ﬁltered
using Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Units (MWCO 100 k Da). All
the collected ﬁltrates (100 µL), which contained the released AuNCs,
were used for the TMB assay (60 µL 1-Step TMB and 40 µL H2O2). This
assay allows for the quantiﬁcation of the released AuNCs by measuring
oxidised TMB absorbance.
In vitro tests with HA hydrogels
BPC liposomes loaded with AuNCs were prepared at a concentration of
20 mg/mL. S. aureus SH1000 was cultured in TSB overnight and sub-
sequently puriﬁed by pelleting and resuspension in DPBS. The puriﬁed
SH1000 was then diluted to a concentration of 108 colony-forming
units per millilitre (CFU/mL) in DPBS. 200 µL of BPC liposomal sensors
were added to 200 µL of HA hydrogel (Belotero Intense). Subse-
quently, either TSB (200 µL, 3 w/v %) or the diluted SH1000
(200 µL, 108 CFU/mL) was added to the above mixture (BPC liposomal
sensors with HA hydrogel). After thorough mixing, the resulting mix-
tures were pipetted and injected into 1400 µL of TSB for incubation
over a period of 0–48 h. To analyse the release of AuNCs, 200 µL of
supernatant was collected from each incubation solution at different
incubation time points and ﬁltered using a 0.45 µm syringe ﬁlter into
an Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL Filter Unit (100 kDa). This ﬁltration step
allowed for the separation of the released AuNCs into the ﬁltrate,
which was then used for the subsequent TMB assay. For the TMB assay,
20 µL of the ﬁltrate was mixed with 180 µL of TMB:H2O2 solution (ﬁnal
concentration 1 M H2O2) for the generation of a colourimetric signal.
The absorbance of the reaction mixture was measured over time on
the plate reader.
In vitro cytotoxicity studies
RAW 264.7 cells were cultured in culture media consisting of DMEM 1X
medium with 10% of FBS and 0.5% of penicillin-streptomycin. To seed
the cells, the desired concentration of RAW 264.7 cells were prepared
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
14

in culture media and then transferred into sterile 96-well plates
(20,000 cells/well), which is followed by incubation for 24 h for
adhesion. The culture media from the wells with the adherent RAW
264.7 cells was removed and different concentration of AuNC-loaded
liposomes and AuNCs (20 µL both in PBS) were added in the wells with
a ﬁnal mixture of 180 µL of medium:PBS (9:1). The plates were incu-
bated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for another 24 h. The cell viability assay was
evaluated by using reagents MTS assay (MTS) by removing the cell
supernatants and replacing with 120 µL of MTS stock solution con-
taining DMEM medium without phenol red (31.5 mL), MTS (2 mg/mL,
6 mL), PMS (0.92 mg/mL, 0.3 mL), incubation for 1 h and measurement
of absorbance at 490 nm.
In vivo injection and urine analysis
All animal experiments were conducted according to the Animals
(Scientiﬁc Procedures) Act 1986, following ethical review by Imperial
College London Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body and with an
internal
ethics
board
and
UK
government
approved
project
(PF93C158E and PP5168779) and personal license (I87985646; Peeler),
and with approval from the UK Home Ofﬁce authority; studies fol-
lowed ARRIVE guidelines. For AuNC clearance study, the catalytically
optimised AuNCs (10 µM, 200 µL) or DPBS (200 µL) were injected i.p.
into each mouse. Urine samples were collected in Eppendorf tubes
after 1-h and 3-h period post injection for TMB assay and then diluted
to get enough volume for the assay. The diluted urine sample (10 µL)
was mixed with 40 µL of TMB:H2O2 solution (ﬁnal H2O2 concentration
of 2.5 M) in 384-well plate for the absorbance measurement at 652 nm.
The results were normalised by dilution factors for comparison. This
dilution was necessary due to the limited volume of urine collected. A
mixture of liposomes (60 mg/mL, 100 µL), hyaluronic acid (HA)
(100 µL), and either DPBS or S. aureus SH1000 (3 × 108 CFU/mL, 100 µL)
was prepared at room temperature. Subsequently, 200 µL of the above
prepared mixture with PBS (healthy control, HC) or SH1000 (bacterial
infection, BI) was injected i.p. into each mouse (wild-type C57BL/6
mice purchased from Charles River, female, 6–14 weeks old). Adult
mice were housed no more than ﬁve per cage with Aspen chip 2
bedding with a 12-h light and 12-h dark cycle at 20–22 °C. Mice were
randomly assigned to experimental groups. Water was provided freely,
and the mice were fed RM1 (Special Diet Services). Groups consisted of
6 animals each. After a 4-h period after injection, urine samples were
collected in Eppendorf tubes for further analysis. The collected urine
(20 µL) was subjected to the TMB assay in a 384-well plate, where it was
mixed with 60 µL of TMB:H2O2 solution (ﬁnal concentration of 5 M).
Mice were humanely sacriﬁced via cervical dislocation and death was
conﬁrmed by severing the femoral artery.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are available within the
article and its supplementary ﬁles. Any additional requests for infor-
mation can be directed to, and will be fulﬁlled by, the corresponding
authors. Source data are provided with this paper.
References
1.
Pietrocola, G. et al. Colonization and infection of indwelling
medical devices by staphylococcus aureus with an emphasis on
orthopedic implants. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 5958 (2022).
2.
Weiner-Lastinger, L. M. et al. The impact of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) on healthcare-associated infections in 2020: A
summary of data reported to the National Healthcare Safety Net-
work. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 43, 12–25 (2022).
3.
Adeiza, S. S., Shuaibu Bello, A. & Shuaibu, M. G. Random effects
meta-analysis of COVID-19/S. aureus partnership in co-infection.
GMS Hyg. Infect. Control 15, Doc29 (2020).
4.
Li, Y. et al. Near-infrared light triggered phototherapy and immu-
notherapy for elimination of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus
aureus bioﬁlm infection on bone implant. ACS Nano 14, 8157–8170
(2020).
5.
Yang, C. et al. Inorganic nanosheets facilitate humoral immunity
against medical implant infections by modulating immune co-
stimulatory pathways. Nat. Commun. 2022 13, 1–16 (2022).
6.
Holm, T. et al. Sampling challenges in diagnosis of chronic bac-
terial infections. J. Med. Microbiol 70, 001302 (2021).
7.
Zhang, J. et al. High-throughput cultivation and identiﬁcation of
bacteria from the plant root microbiota. Nat. Protoc. 2021 16,
988–1012 (2021).
8.
Poli, M. A., Rivera, V. R. & Neal, D. Sensitive and speciﬁc colori-
metric ELISAs for Staphylococcus aureus enterotoxins A and B in
urine and buffer. Toxicon 40, 1723–1726 (2022).
9.
Punjabi, C. D. et al. Prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus (MRSA) in respiratory cultures and diagnostic
performance of the MRSA nasal polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
in patients hospitalized with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pneumonia. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 42, 1156–1158
(2021).
10.
Abril, A. G. et al. Staphylococcus aureus exotoxins and their
detection in the dairy industry and mastitis. Toxins 2020 12,
537 (2020).
11.
Marie, V. et al. Nanomaterial-based therapeutics for antibiotic-
resistant bacterial infections. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 23–36 (2021).
12.
Valiūnienė, A. & Valinčius, G. Tethered bilayer membranes as
impedimetric biosensors for detection of pore-forming biological
agents. Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 40, 101344 (2023).
13.
Kong, C., Neoh, H. M. & Nathan, S. Targeting staphylococcus
aureus toxins: A potential form of anti-virulence therapy. Toxins
(Basel) 8, 72 (2016).
14.
Tam, K. & Torres, V. J. Staphylococcus aureus secreted toxins and
extracellular enzymes. Microbiol Spectr. 7, 10–1128 (2019).
15.
Kwon, E. J. et al. Porous silicon nanoparticle delivery of tandem
peptide anti-infectives for the treatment of pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa lung infections silicon nanoparticles. Adv. Mater.
29, 1701527 (2017).
16.
Thet, N. T. et al. SPaCE Swab: Point-of-care sensor for simple and
rapid detection of acute wound infection. ACS Sens 5, 2652–2657
(2020).
17.
Li, Y., Liu, G., Wang, X., Hu, J. & Liu, S. Enzyme-responsive poly-
meric vesicles for bacterial-strain-selective delivery of anti-
microbial agents. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 55, 1760–1764 (2016).
18.
Thet, N. T. et al. Visible, colorimetric dissemination between
pathogenic strains of Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa using ﬂuorescent dye containing lipid vesicles. Bio-
sens. Bioelectron. 41, 538–543 (2013).
19.
Camussone, C. M. et al. Efﬁcacy of immunization with a recom-
binant S. aureus vaccine formulated with liposomes and ODN-
CpG against natural S. aureus intramammary infections in heifers
and cows. Res Vet. Sci. 145, 177–187 (2022).
20.
Pattni, B. S., Chupin, V. V. & Torchilin, V. P. New developments in
liposomal drug delivery. Chem. Rev. 115, 10938–10966 (2015).
21.
Mazur, F., Bally, M., Städler, B. & Chandrawati, R. Liposomes and
lipid bilayers in biosensors. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 249, 88–99
(2017).
22.
Tonkin, R. L. et al. Bacterial toxin-triggered release of antibiotics
from capsosomes protects a ﬂy model from lethal methicillin-
resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) Infection. Adv Healthc
Mater 11, 2200036 (2022).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
15

23.
Potter, M. et al. Controlled dendrimersome nanoreactor system
for localized hypochlorite-induced killing of bacteria. ACS Nano
14, 17333–17353 (2020).
24.
Han, L. et al. Protein-stabilized gadolinium oxide-gold nanoclus-
ters hybrid for multimodal imaging and drug delivery. ACS Appl
Mater. Interfaces 9, 6941–6949 (2017).
25.
Fu, C., Ding, C., Sun, X. & Fu, A. Curcumin nanocapsules stabilized
by bovine serum albumin-capped gold nanoclusters (BSA-AuNCs)
for drug delivery and theranosis. Mater. Sci. Eng. C. 87, 149–154
(2018).
26.
Hong, E. J., Kim, Y. S., Choi, D. G. & Shim, M. S. Cancer-targeted
photothermal therapy using aptamer-conjugated gold nano-
particles. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 67, 429–436 (2018).
27.
Wang, Y., Chen, J. T. & Yan, X. P. Fabrication of transferrin func-
tionalized gold nanoclusters/graphene oxide nanocomposite for
turn-on near-infrared ﬂuorescent bioimaging of cancer cells and
small animals. Anal. Chem. 85, 2529–2535 (2013).
28.
Bai, Y., Shu, T., Su, L. & Zhang, X. Fluorescent gold nanoclusters
for biosensor and bioimaging application. Cryst. (Basel)
10, 357 (2020).
29.
Zheng, Y., Lai, L., Liu, W., Jiang, H. & Wang, X. Recent advances in
biomedical applications of ﬂuorescent gold nanoclusters. Adv.
Colloid Interface Sci. 242, 1–16 (2017).
30.
Liu, J. M., Chen, J. T. & Yan, X. P. Near infrared ﬂuorescent trypsin
stabilized gold nanoclusters as surface plasmon enhanced energy
transfer biosensor and in vivo cancer imaging bioprobe. Anal.
Chem. 85, 3238–3245 (2013).
31.
Shamsabadi, A., Haghighi, T., Carvalho, S., Frenette, L. C. & Ste-
vens, M. M. The nanozyme revolution: Enhancing the performance
of medical biosensing platforms. Adv. Mater. 36, 2300184
(2023).
32.
Loynachan, C. N. et al. Renal clearable catalytic gold nanoclusters
for in vivo disease monitoring. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 883–890
(2019).
33.
Li, D. et al. Gold nanoclusters for NIR-II ﬂuorescence imaging of
bones. Small 16, 2003851 (2020).
34.
Mac, Q. D. et al. Non-invasive early detection of acute transplant
rejection via nanosensors of granzyme-B activity HHS Public
Access Author manuscript. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 281–291 (2019).
35.
Hao, L. et al. nature nanotechnology CRISPR-Cas-ampliﬁed urin-
ary biomarkers for multiplexed and portable cancer diagnostics.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 18, 798–807 (2023).
36.
Chan, K. M., Gleadle, J. M., O’callaghan, M., Vasilev, K. & Mac-
gregor, M. Prostate cancer detection: a systematic review of
urinary biosensors. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 25, 39–46 (2021).
37.
Buss, C. G., Dudani, J. S., Akana, R. T. K., Fleming, H. E. & Bhatia, S.
N. Protease activity sensors noninvasively classify bacterial
infections and antibiotic responses. EBioMedicine 38, 248–256
(2018).
38.
Soo Choi, H. et al. Renal clearance of quantum dots. Nat. Bio-
technol. 25, 1165–1170 (2007).
39.
Abarghoei, S., Fakhri, N.,Borghei, Y. S., Hosseini, M. & Ganjali, M. R.
A colorimetric paper sensor for citrate as biomarker for early stage
detection of prostate cancer based on peroxidase-like activity of
cysteine-capped gold nanoclusters. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol.
Biomol. Spectrosc. 210, 251–259 (2019).
40.
Zhao, R.-X. et al. Glutathione stabilized green-emission gold
nanoclusters for selective detection of cobalt ion. Spectrochim.
Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 154, 119628 (2021).
41.
Yang, G. et al. Degradability and clearance of inorganic nano-
particles for biomedical applications. Adv. Mater.
31, 1805730 (2019).
42.
Zhang, Q. et al. Glutathione disulﬁde as a reducing, capping, and
mass-separating agent for the synthesis and enrichment of gold
nanoclusters. Nanomaterials 11, 2258 (2021).
43.
Katla, S. K., Zhang, J., Castro, E., Bernal, R. A. & Li, X. Atomically
precise Au25(SG)18 nanoclusters: Rapid single-step synthesis and
application in photothermal therapy. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
10, 75–82 (2018).
44.
Kumar, S. S., Kwak, K. & Lee, D. Amperometric sensing based on
glutathione protected Au25 nanoparticles and their pH depen-
dent electrocatalytic activity. Electroanalysis 23, 2116–2124 (2011).
45.
Negishi, Y., Nobusada, K. & Tsukuda, T. Glutathione-protected
gold clusters revisited: Bridging the gap between gold(I)-thiolate
complexes and thiolate-protected gold nanocrystals. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 127, 5261–5270 (2005).
46.
Hamouda, R. et al. Electron emission of gas-phase [Au25(SG)18-
6H] 7- gold cluster and its action spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 1, 3189–3194 (2010).
47.
Zanetti-Polzi, L., Charchar, P., Yarovsky, I. & Corni, S. Origins of the
pH-responsive photoluminescence of peptide-functionalized Au
nanoclusters. ACS Nano 16, 20129–20140 (2022).
48.
Rojas-Cervellera, V., Rovira, C. & Akola, J. How do water solvent
and glutathione ligands affect the structure and electronic prop-
erties of Au25(SR)18. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 3859–3865 (2015).
49.
Monti, M. et al. What contributes to the measured chiral optical
response of the glutathione-protected Au25 nanocluster? ACS
Nano 17, 11481–11491 (2023).
50.
Pohjolainen, E., Chen, X., Malola, S., Groenhof, G. & Häkkinen, H. A
uniﬁed AMBER-compatible molecular mechanics force ﬁeld for
thiolate-protected gold nanoclusters. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
12, 1342–1350 (2016).
51.
Jin, R., Li, G., Sharma, S., Li, Y. & Du, X. Toward active-site
tailoring in heterogeneous catalysis by atomically precise
metal nanoclusters with crystallographic structures. Chem.
Rev. 121, 567–648 (2021).
52.
Gaskin, D. K., Bohach, G. A., Schlievert, P. M. & Hovde, C. J. Pur-
iﬁcation ofStaphylococcus aureusβ-Toxin: Comparison of three
isoelectric focusing methods. Protein Expr. Purif. 9, 76–82 (1997).
53.
Walev, I., Weller, U., Strauch, S., Foster, T. & Bhakdi, S. Selective
killing of human monocytes and cytokine release provoked by
sphingomyelinase (beta-toxin) of staphylococcus aureus. Infect.
Immun. 64, 2974–2979 (1996).
54.
Divyakolu, S. et al. Hemolysins of staphylococcus aureus—an
update on their biology, role in pathogenesis and as targets for
anti-virulence therapy. Adv. Infect. Dis. 9, 80–104 (2019).
55.
Vahedi, A., Bigdelou, P. & Farnoud, A. M. Quantitative analysis of
red blood cell membrane phospholipids and modulation of cell-
macrophage interactions using cyclodextrins. Sci. Rep.
10, 15111 (2020).
56.
He, Y. et al. Erythroliposomes: Integrated hybrid nanovesicles
composed of erythrocyte membranes and artiﬁcial lipid mem-
branes for pore-forming toxin clearance. ACS Nano 13, 4148–4159
(2019).
57.
Olchowik-Grabarek, E. et al. Inhibition of interaction between
Staphylococcus aureus α-hemolysin and erythrocytes membrane
by hydrolysable tannins: Structure-related activity study. Sci. Rep.
10, 11168 (2020).
58.
Karmakar, M. et al. N-GSDMD trafﬁcking to neutrophil organelles
facilitates IL-1β release independently of plasma membrane pores
and pyroptosis. Nat. Commun. 2020 11, 1–14 (2020).
59.
Massi, L. et al. Tuneable peptide cross-linked nanogels forenzyme-
triggered protein delivery. J. Mater. Chem. B 8, 8894–8907 (2020).
60.
Penders, J. et al. Single particle automated raman trapping ana-
lysis. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–11 (2018).
61.
Saunders, C. et al. Revealing population heterogeneity in vesicle-
based nanomedicines using automated, single particle Raman
analysis. ACS Nano. 12, 11713–11728 (2023).
62.
Barriga, H. M. G. et al. Coupling lipid nanoparticle structure and
automated single-particle composition analysis to design
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
16

phospholipase-responsive nanocarriers. Adv. Mater. 34,
2200839 (2022).
63.
Czamara, K. et al. Raman spectroscopy of lipids: A review. J.
Raman Spectrosc. 46, 4–20 (2015).
64.
Astley, R., Miller, F. C., Mursalin, H., Coburn, P. S. & Callegan, M. C.
An Eye on Staphylococcus aureus toxins: roles in ocular damage
and inﬂammation. Toxins (Basel) 11, 356 (2019).
65.
Artetxe, I. et al. Does ceramide form channels? the ceramide-
induced membrane permeabilization mechanism. Biophys. J. 113,
860–868 (2017).
66.
López-Montero, I., Vélez, M. & Devaux, P. F. Surface tension
induced by sphingomyelin to ceramide conversion in lipid mem-
branes. Biochimica et. Biophysica Acta (BBA) 1768, 553–561
(2007).
67.
Mir, I. H. & Thirunavukkarasu, C. The relevance of acid sphingo-
myelinase as a potential target for therapeutic intervention in
hepatic disorders: current scenario and anticipated trends. Arch.
Toxicol. 97, 2069–2087 (2023).
68.
Nakhaei, P. et al. Liposomes: Structure, biomedical applications,
and stability parameters with emphasis on cholesterol. Front
Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9, 705886 (2021).
69.
Dymek, M. & Sikora, Z. Liposomes as biocompatible and smart
delivery systems-the current state. Adv. Colloid Interface
Sci. 309, 102757 (2022).
70.
Zheng, Y., Wu, J., Jiang, H. & Wang, X. Gold nanoclusters for
theranostic applications. Coord. Chem. Rev. 431, 213689 (2021).
71.
Kaya, G. & Oytun, F. Rheological properties of i̇njectable hya-
luronic acid hydrogels for soft tissue engineering applications.
Biointerface Res. Appl. Chem. 11, 8424–8430 (2021).
72.
Zerbinati, N. et al. Toward physicochemical and rheological
characterization of different injectable hyaluronic acid dermal
ﬁllers cross-linked with polyethylene glycol diglycidyl ether.
Polym. (Basel) 13, 948 (2021).
73.
Fundarò, S. P., Salti, G., Malgapo, D. M. H. & Innocenti, S. The
rheology and physicochemical characteristics of hyaluronic acid
ﬁllers: Their clinical implications. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 10518 (2022).
74.
Pinsky, M. A., Thomas, J. A., Murphy, D. K. & Walker, P. S. Juvéderm
injectable gel: A multicenter, double-blind, randomized study of
safety and effectiveness. Aesthet. Surg. J. 28, 17–23 (2008).
75.
Prasetyo, A. D., Prager, W., Rubin, M. G., Moretti, E. A. & Nikolis, A.
Hyaluronic acid ﬁllers with cohesive polydensiﬁed matrix for soft-
tissue augmentation and rejuvenation: A literature review. Clin.
Cosmet. Investig. Dermatol 9, 257–280 (2016).
76.
Wang, Y. et al. In vitro and in vivo methods to study bacterial
colonization of hydrogel dermal ﬁllers. J. Biomed. Mater. Res B
Appl Biomater. 110, 1932–1941 (2022).
77.
Fang, Y. et al. Cleavable PEGylation: a strategy for overcoming the
“PEG dilemma” in efﬁcient drug delivery. Drug Deliv. 24, 22–32
(2017).
78.
Ning, X. et al. Physiological stability and renal clearance of ultra-
small zwitterionic gold nanoparticles: Ligand length matters. APL
Mater 5, (2017).
79.
Yu, M. et al. Noninvasive staging of kidney dysfunction enabled by
renal-clearable luminescent gold nanoparticles. Angew. Chem. -
Int. Ed. 55, 2787–2791 (2016).
80.
Bispo, M. et al. Fighting Staphylococcus aureus infections with
light and photoimmunoconjugates. JCI Insight 5, (2020).
81.
El-Mahdy, T. S. et al. Interaction of implant infection-related
commensal bacteria with mesenchymal stem cells: a comparison
between Cutibacterium acnes and Staphylococcus aureus. FEMS
Microbiol Lett. 368, fnab014 (2021).
82.
Pader, V. et al. Staphylococcus aureus inactivates daptomycin by
releasing membrane phospholipids. Nat. Microbiol 2, 1–8 (2016).
83.
Humphrey, W., Dalke, A. & Schulten, K. VMD: Visual molecular
dynamics. J. Mol. Graph 14, 33–38 (1996).
84.
Abraham, M. J. et al. Gromacs: High performance molecular
simulations through multi-level parallelism from laptops to
supercomputers. SoftwareX 1–2, 19–25 (2015).
85.
Lindorff-Larsen, K. et al. Improved side-chain torsion potentials for
the Amber ff99SB protein force ﬁeld. Proteins: Struct., Funct.
Bioinforma. 78, 1950–1958 (2010).
86.
Jorgensen, W. L., Chandrasekhar, J., Madura, J. D., Impey, R. W. &
Klein, M. L. Comparison of simple potential functions for simu-
lating liquid water. J. Chem. Phys. 79, 926–935 (1983).
87.
Suk, J. et al. Determination of alkali and halide monovalent ion
parameters for use in explicitly solvated biomolecular simulations.
J. Phys. Chem. B 112, 9020–9041 (2008).
88.
Vanquelef, E. et al. R.E.D. Server: A web service for deriving RESP
and ESP charges and building force ﬁeld libraries for new mole-
cules and molecular fragments. Nucleic Acids Res. 39,
W511–W517 (2011).
89.
Dupradeau, F. Y. et al. The R.E.D. tools: Advances in RESP and ESP
charge derivation and force ﬁeld library building. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 12, 7821–7839 (2010).
90.
Bayly, C. I., Cieplak, P., Cornell, W. D. & Kollman, P. A. A well-
behaved electrostatic potential based method using charge
restraints for deriving atomic charges: The RESP model. J. Phys.
Chem. 97, 10269–10280 (1993).
91.
Singh, U. C. & Kollman, P. A. An approach to computing electro-
static charges for molecules. J. Comput Chem. 5, 129–145 (1984).
92.
Besler, B. H., Merz, K. M. & Kollman, P. A. Atomic charges derived
from semiempirical methods. J. Comput. Chem. 11, 431–439
(1990).
93.
Frish, M. J. et al. Gaussian 16, Revision C.01; Gaussian, Inc.: Wall-
ingford, CT, USA. (2019).
94.
Franco-Ulloa, S., Riccardi, L., Rimembrana, F., Pini, M. & De Vivo, M.
NanoModeler: A webserver for molecular simulations and engi-
neering of nanoparticles. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15, 2022–2032
(2019).
95.
Zhu, M., Aikens, C. M., Hollander, F. J., Schatz, G. C. & Jin, R.
Correlating the crystal structure of A thiol-protected Au25 cluster
and optical properties. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 5883–5885 (2008).
96.
Nosé, S. A molecular dynamics method for simulations in the
canonical ensemble. Mol. Phys. 52, 255–268 (1984).
97.
Hoover, W. G. Canonical dynamics: Equilibrium phase-space dis-
tributions. Phys. Rev. A (Coll. Park) 31, 1695–1697 (1985).
98.
Parrinello, M. & Rahman, A. Polymorphic transitions in single
crystals: A new molecular dynamics method. J. Appl. Phys. 52,
7182–7190 (1981).
99.
Hess, B., Bekker, H., Berendsen, H. J. C. & Fraaije, J. G. E. M. LINCS:
A linear constraint solver for molecular simulations. J. Comput.
Chem. 18, 1463–1472 (1997).
100. Müller, C. B. et al. Precise measurement of diffusion by multi-color
dual-focus ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy. EPL 83,
46001 (2008).
101.
Müller, P., Schwille, P. & Weidemann, T. PyCorrFit-generic data
evaluation for ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy. Bioinfor-
matics 30, 2532–2533 (2014).
Acknowledgements
We kindly acknowledge Dr Akemi Nogiwa Valdez for editing of the
manuscript and data management support. A.N. acknowledges support
from a Sir Henry Wellcome Postdoctoral Fellowship (209121_Z_17_Z)
from the Wellcome Trust. A.K. acknowledges from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie Actions grant agreement “BacDrug” [838183]. C.S.
acknowledges funding from the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in
the Advanced Characterisation of Materials (EP/S023259/1). L.P. and
M.M.S. acknowledge support from Cancer Research UK (EDDPMA-
May23/100017). C.T. acknowledges support via the Ofﬁce of the Civil
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
17

Service Commission (OCSC) - Royal Thai Government Scholarship
scheme. P.C. and I.Y. acknowledge the high-performance computing
resources provided by the Australian Government through the National
Computational Merit Allocation Scheme (NCMAS project e87). I.Y. and
M.M.S. acknowledge funding from the Australian Research Council
under the Discovery Project scheme (Grants No. DP170100511 and
DP230100709). I.S. acknowledges funding from the Fundação para a
Ciência e Tecnologia (2022.13654.BD). We thank the Light Microscopy
Facilities at the Francis Crick Institute (London, UK) for access to FCS,
and characterisation facilities within the Harvey Flower Electron Micro-
scopy Suite, Department of Materials, Imperial College London. This
research was funded in part by the Wellcome Trust (209121_Z_17_Z). M.P.
and M.M.S. acknowledge funding from the Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council for M.P.’s studentship (EP/L015498/1)
through the Institute of Chemical Biology at Imperial College London.
M.M.S. acknowledges the EPSRC IRC Agile Early Warning Sensing Sys-
tems for Infectious Diseases and Antimicrobial Resistance (EP/R00529X/
1), the Rosetrees Trust and the Department of Science, Innovation and
Technology (DSIT) and the Royal Academy of Engineering under the
Chair in Emerging Technologies programme (CiET2021\94). For the
purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copy-
right license to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from
this submission.
Author contributions
K.C., A.N., and M.M.S. conceived the project and wrote the paper. K.C.
and A.N. primarily designed the experiments. K.C. executed the majority
of experimental procedures and data processing. P.C. and I.Y. carried
out molecular dynamics simulations. C.S. conducted SPARTA® mea-
surements. A.N. performed FCS measurements. C.T. conducted TEM
imaging of AuNCs and M.C. performed cryo-TEM imaging of liposomes.
A.K. and A.M.E. assisted with bacterial culture. I. S. helped with AuNC
synthesis. L.P., K.K. and I.P.P helped MALDI-TOF measurements. M.P.
contributed to the help for liposome assembly. T.B.C. D.J.P. and J. S. T.
conducted AuNC and liposomal sensor administration into mice. C.N.L.
and L.C.F helped experimental design and manuscript proofreading. All
authors engaged in result discussions and manuscript preparation.
M.M.S. supervised the project and assisted in the study design.
Competing interests
The authors declare the following competing ﬁnancial interest(s):
M.M.S. has ﬁled a patent application (1810010.7) and has a registered
trademark (US Reg. No. 6088213) covering the name SPARTA® and the
techniques, described in the manuscript by Penders et al. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-018-06397-6. M.M.S. is a founder of Sparta Bio-
discovery Ltd. C.N.L. and M.M.S. have ﬁled a patent application
(US20200116725 A1) on renal clearable nanocatalysts for disease mon-
itoring. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Adrian Najer, Irene Yarovsky or Molly M. Stevens.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
1Department of Materials, Department of Bioengineering, and Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. 2School of
Cancer & Pharmaceutical Sciences, Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King’s College London, London SE1 9NH, UK. 3School of Engineering, RMIT
University, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia. 4Centre for Bacterial Resistance Biology (CBRB), Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College London,
London SW7 2AZ, UK. 5Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. 6BioEM lab, Biozentrum, University of Basel,
Mattenstrasse 26, Basel 4058, Switzerland. 7Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, Department of Engineering Science, Kavli Institute for
Nanoscience Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK. 8Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 171
77, Sweden. 9Department of Chemistry, University College London, London WC1H 0AJ, UK.
e-mail: adrian.najer@kcl.ac.uk; irene.yarovsky@rmit.edu.au;
molly.stevens@dpag.ox.ac.uk
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53537-2
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:10321 
18