Review article
Microglia and gut microbiota: A double-edged sword in Alzheimer’s disease
Nargis Bano a,1, Sameera Khan a,1, Shakir Ahamad b,2, Jitendra Singh Kanshana c,  
Nawab John Dar d, Sumbul Khan a, Aamir Nazir e,f,*, Shahnawaz Ali Bhat a,3,**
a Department of Zoology, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202002, India
b Department of Chemistry, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202002, India
c Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburg, PA, USA
d CNB, SALK Institute of Biological Sciences, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
e Division of Neuroscience and Ageing Biology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, UP, India
f Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, New Delhi, India
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Gut-microbiota
Gut-microbiota-brain axis
Microglia
Neuroinflammation
Alzheimer’s disease
Neurotherapeutics
A B S T R A C T
The strong association between gut microbiota (GM) and brain functions such as mood, behaviour, and cognition 
has been well documented. Gut-brain axis is a unique bidirectional communication system between the gut and 
brain, in which gut microbes play essential role in maintaining various molecular and cellular processes. GM 
interacts with the brain through various pathways and processes including, metabolites, vagus nerve, HPA axis, 
endocrine system, and immune system to maintain brain homeostasis. GM dysbiosis, or an imbalance in GM, is 
associated with several neurological disorders, including anxiety, depression, and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). 
Conversely, AD is sustained by microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Further, GM and 
their products also affect microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Despite the evidence 
connecting GM dysbiosis and AD progression, the involvement of GM in modulating microglia-mediated neu­
roinflammation in AD remains elusive. Importantly, deciphering the mechanism/s by which GM regulates 
microglia-dependent neuroinflammation may be helpful in devising potential therapeutic strategies to mitigate 
AD. Herein, we review the current evidence regarding the involvement of GM dysbiosis in microglia activation 
and neuroinflammation in AD. We also discuss the possible mechanisms through which GM influences the 
functioning of microglia and its implications for therapeutic intervention. Further, we explore the potential of 
microbiota-targeted interventions, such as prebiotics, probiotics, faecal microbiota transplantation, etc., as a 
novel therapeutic strategy to mitigate neuroinflammation and AD progression. By understanding and exploring 
the gut-brain axis, we aspire to revolutionize the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders, many of which share 
a common theme of microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration.
Abbreviations: ABX, Broad-spectrum antibiotics; AD, Alzheimer’s Disease; ApoE, Apolipoprotein E; Aβ, Amyloid Beta; BA, Bile Acids; BBB, Blood-brain barrier; 
BDNF, Brain-derived neurotrophic factor; CD14, Cluster of differentiation 14; CNS, Central nervous system; COX2, Cyclooxygenase 2; DAMP, Damage Associated 
Molecular Patterns; DASH, Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension; DCA, Deoxycholic acid; D-gal, D-galactose; FMT, Fecal microbiota transplantation; GABA, 
γ-aminobutyric acid; GM, Gut Microbiota; HPA, Hypothalamus pituitary adrenal axis; LPS, Lipopolysaccharide; MCI, Mild Cognitive Impairment; NF-KB, Nuclear 
factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer; NLRP3, NOD-LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3; PD, Parkinson’s disease; ROS, Reactive oxygen species; SCFA, Short 
chain fatty acids; SPF, Specific pathogen free; TLR, Toll like receptors; TUDCA, Tauroursodeoxycholic acid; UDCA, Ursodeoxycholic acid.
* Correspondence to: Division of Neuroscience and Ageing Biology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Sector 10, Jankipuram Extension, Sitapur Road, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 226031, India.
** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: shakirzaheer111@gmail.com (S. Ahamad), jitendrakanshana@gmail.com, kanshana@pitt.edu (J.S. Kanshana), nawabdar@gmail.com
(N.J. Dar), anazir@cdri.res.in, aamir1109@gmail.com (A. Nazir), shahnawazalibhat@gmail.com, sabhat1@myamu.ac.in (S.A. Bhat). 
1 These authors contributed equally
2 orcid.org/0000–0002-9873- 7806
3 orcid.org/0000–0003-4098–8810
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Ageing Research Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/arr
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2024.102515
Received 23 April 2024; Received in revised form 6 September 2024; Accepted 19 September 2024  
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
Available online 24 September 2024 
1568-1637/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a highly prevalent neurodegenerative 
disorder, accounting for 60–80 % of dementia cases and ranking as the 
sixth highest cause of death globally (Yasuno et al., 2020). It has a sig­
nificant negative influence on the socioeconomic status of a society or 
country (Yasuno et al., 2020). The estimated total number of dementia 
sufferers globally has climbed to close to 50 million, with a cost of more 
than US$1 trillion yearly (Gustavsson et al., 2023). The incidence is 
expected to have tripled by 2050, with low- and middle-income coun­
tries anticipating the largest growth (Jurc˘au et al., 2022). AD is char­
acterized by the deposition of extracellular amyloid-β plaques and 
intracellular deposition of neurofibrillary tangles, consisting of phos­
phorylated tau protein (Horie et al., 2023; Tsatsanis et al., 2020). It is 
more important for researchers to examine the underlying mechanisms 
of pathogenesis of AD and to look for disease-modifying therapeutics 
due to the persistently rising prevalence and significant burden of AD.
GM plays a crucial role in maintaining a healthy gut-brain axis, and 
dysbiosis in this microbial community has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases such as AD (Furness and 
Stebbing, 2018). There is mounting evidence suggesting a bidirectional 
relationship between gut dysbiosis and the manifestation of neuro­
inflammation and cognitive decline in AD (Furness and Stebbing, 2018). 
Studies have shown alterations in the GM composition and function in 
AD patients, characterized by a decrease in beneficial microbial com­
munities and an increase in potentially harmful ones (Chen et al., 2020; 
Wu et al., 2021). These changes in the gut microbial ecosystem can 
disrupt the intestinal barrier function, leading to the translocation of 
bacterial products such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS) into the blood­
stream (Kincaid et al., 2021; Othman et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2016). 
Once in circulation, LPS can activate immune cells and trigger a systemic 
inflammatory response, ultimately contributing to neuroinflammation, 
which plays a significant role in the progression of AD (Kincaid et al., 
2021; Othman et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2016). Neuroinflammation 
worsens neuronal loss and the formation of amyloid plaques and tau 
tangles in AD (Kincaid et al., 2021; Othman et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 
2016). Furthermore, the inflammatory response can also contribute to 
blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction, allowing immune cells to infil­
trate 
the 
brain 
and 
exacerbating 
neuroinflammation, 
neuro­
degeneration, and cognitive deterioration in AD (Cheng et al., 2023; 
Huang et al., 2021). Additionally, the altered GM may also affect the 
production of neurotransmitters, such as serotonin and dopamine, 
which are crucial for brain function and mood regulation (Aaldijk and 
Vermeiren, 2022; Sugama et al., 2016). This dysregulation in neuro­
transmitter levels can further exacerbate cognitive decline and behav­
ioral symptoms in individuals with AD (Teleanu et al., 2022). 
Furthermore, moderate cognitive impairment (MCI) patients, who are at 
a higher risk of developing AD, have also been found to have alterations 
in their GM (Pan et al., 2021). This suggests that targeting the GM could 
potentially delay or prevent the progression of MCI to AD. Therefore, 
understanding the interplay between the GM, neuroinflammation, and 
AD pathology is essential for developing novel therapeutic approaches 
to combat AD.
Remarkably, the activation of microglia, the brain-resident immune 
cells, primarily sustain neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative dis­
eases like AD (Muzio et al., 2021). Microglia play a crucial role in 
maintaining brain homeostasis and defending against pathogens, injury, 
or various insults, including the accumulation of amyloid beta (Aβ) and 
tau proteins (Muzio et al., 2021). However, microglia become dysre­
gulated and can contribute to the progression of neuroinflammation 
through the release of chemokines, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can further damage neurons and 
exacerbate AD pathology (Muzio et al., 2021). Importantly, recent 
studies have examined how alterations in the GM can lead to microglia 
activation and subsequent neuroinflammation (Alsegiani and Shah, 
2022; Huang et al., 2023; Solanki et al., 2023). This connection suggests 
that targeting the GM could be a potential therapeutic strategy for 
mitigating microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and reducing the risk 
of AD. Further research is needed to fully understand the complex 
relationship between GM, microglia activation, and the development of 
AD, but these findings provide promising avenues for future treatment 
approaches.
Herein, we discuss the current evidence linking GM dysbiosis with 
microglia activation and neuroinflammation in AD. We also explore the 
potential mechanisms through which the GM influences microglia 
function and the implications for therapeutic interventions. Further, we 
explore the potential of microbiota-targeted interventions, such as pre­
biotics, probiotics, faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), etc., as 
novel therapeutic approaches to alleviate neuroinflammation and halt 
the progression of AD. By understanding and harnessing the power of 
the gut-brain axis, we may be able to revolutionize the treatment of this 
devastating neurological disorder.
2. Overview of the central role of microglia in AD
The hallmarks of AD include cognitive deterioration, neuro­
inflammation, robust microgliosis, and neuronal death (Leng and Edi­
son, 2021). Large-scale genome-wide association studies have revealed 
that a number of genetic loci related to the risk of late-onset AD are 
associated with inflammatory pathways, suggesting that microglia 
strongly influence the pathophysiology of AD (J¨antti et al., 2022; Leng 
and Edison, 2021). In both human and animal models of AD, microglia 
buildup near amyloid plaques, which may or may not be beneficial in 
halting the progression of disease (Chen and Colonna, 2022; Leng and 
Edison, 2021). Consequently, microglia activation has a dual role in the 
pathophysiology of AD (Schoch et al., 2021; Sheng et al., 2019). On one 
hand, acute microglial activation in various experimental paradigms 
reduces Aβ buildup by enhancing its phagocytosis or clearance (Feng 
et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2024). On the other hand, persistent activation of 
microglia triggers various proinflammatory cascades that lead to 
neurotoxicity and synapse loss contributing to AD progression (Kaur 
et al., 2019). During the course of AD, the activation status of microglia 
changes from an early protective phenotype to a late detrimental 
phenotype (Bivona et al., 2023). Studies have demonstrated that tau 
hyperphosphorylation and Aβ aggregation cause microglia to activate 
the NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) 
inflammasome, which in turn causes microgliosis and the release of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines that ultimately leads to neurotoxicity and 
neuronal death in AD (Dong et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024). 
NLRP3/caspase-1 inflammasome activation has also found to reduce the 
phagocytic ability of microglia for Aβ (Gold and El Khoury, 2015).
Many abnormalities related to mitochondria have been found in AD. 
These include changes in the structure of the mitochondria, changes in 
the age-dependent accumulation of mitochondrial DNA, alterations to 
mitochondrial membrane potential, increased production of ROS in the 
mitochondria, decreased levels of ATP in the mitochondria, and dis­
rupted electron transport chain (Bobba et al., 2013; Pradeepkiran and 
Reddy, 2020; Terni et al., 2010). Disease-associated microglia are acti­
vated in AD as a result of protein aggregation and neuronal injury which 
in turn facilitate persistent inflammation, and ROS generation leading to 
oxidative stress (Simpson and Oliver, 2020). Microglia is also known to 
exacerbate and propagate tau pathology. Microglia phagocytose 
tau-containing neurons or synapses and secrete tau protein in exosomes, 
which effectively transmit tau to neurons. Furthermore, depletion of 
microglia significantly reduces tau propagation, emphasizing the sig­
nificance of microglia in tau propagation (Asai et al., 2015). A study 
involving PS19 mice expressing the human tau P301S mutant transgene 
and lacking murine ApoE has shown that when compared to PS19 mice 
expressing ApoE2, ApoE3, or no ApoE, human ApoE4 expression 
increased the microglial response and worsened tau pathology sug­
gesting that apart from its well-known effects on amyloid buildup, 
ApoE4 may also exacerbate tau pathology and neuroinflammation, 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
2 

which both contribute to the pathogenesis of AD (Nagpal et al., 2018).
3. Overview of the GM imbalance (gut dysbiosis) in AD
The GM plays a crucial role in maintaining a healthy gut-brain axis, 
and dysbiosis in this microbial community has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases such as AD (Conway and A 
Duggal, 2021). There is mounting evidence suggesting a bidirectional 
relationship between gut dysbiosis and the manifestation of neuro­
inflammation and cognitive decline in AD (Cattaneo et al., 2017; Chen 
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021). Studies have shown alterations in the GM 
composition and function in AD patients, characterized by a decrease in 
beneficial microbial communities and an increase in potentially harmful 
ones (Chen et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021). For example, it has been 
observed that as people age, commensal species like Bifidobacteria, 
Bacteroides, and Lactobacilli decline while opportunistic/potentially 
pathogenic species like Clostridium perfringens, Enterobacteria, and Clos­
tridioides difficile appear to increase (Nagpal et al., 2018). Additionally, 
ageing, food, and lifestyle, all have a significant effect on the diversity of 
GM and AD susceptibility (Askarova et al., 2020; Bostanciklio˘glu, 2019; 
M. Zhang et al., 2020). Recent research has provided persuasive evi­
dence that the gut dysbiosis, cognitive impairment, systemic inflam­
mation, and neuroinflammation, are associated with the development 
and progression of AD (Borsom et al., 2020; Giridharan et al., 2022).
In contrast to Bacteroidaceae, Rikenellaceae, and Gemellaceae fam­
ilies, Clostridiaceae, Peptostreptococcaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, Mogi­
bacteriaceae, Turicibacteraceae, and Ruminococaceae families were 
shown to be less prevalent in AD individuals (Lu et al., 2022; Park et al., 
2020). Dysbiosis promotes the growth of pro-inflammatory bacteria, 
including Proteobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, Escerchia/Shigella, and 
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, 
while 
reducing 
the 
abundance 
of 
anti-inflammatory bacteria, including Bacillus fragilis, Eubacterium hallii, 
Bifidobacterium, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and Eubacterium rectale, 
promoting neuroinflammation and aggravating build-up of Aβ plaques 
(Lu et al., 2022; Park et al., 2020). In AD, the abundance of detrimental 
bacteria belonging to genus Odoribacter, Butyricimonas and Helicobacter 
and family members of Desulfovibrionaceae and Helicobacteraceae 
(linked to cognitive impairment), while a reduction in beneficial bac­
teria such as Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Barmesiella and Longicatena 
(linked to cognitive improvement), have been reported (Park et al., 
2022; Wang et al., 2024). Further, the lower level of short chain fatty 
acids (SCFAs), which effect several metabolic pathways, significantly 
contribute to amyloid burden, and exacerbate the symptoms of AD 
(Zhang et al., 2017). Additionally, the emerging data from the clinical 
research, point to the imbalance in the composition of faecal microbiota 
of AD patients from that of healthy individuals (Asano et al., 2012; 
Borsom et al., 2020). For example, compared to control participants, the 
faeces of AD patients showed an increase in Escherichia/Shigella and a 
reduction in Bacteroides fragilis and Eubacterium rectale (Cattaneo et al., 
2017). Notably, Escherichia/Shigella and Bacteroides fragilis were found 
to be significantly higher in Aβ-positive patients than in Aβ-negative 
individuals (Cattaneo et al., 2017). Additionally, participants with AD 
showed higher levels of Bacteroides and lower levels of Bifidobacterium 
and Firmicutes (Mitrea et al., 2022).
4. Gut-brain axis and its impact on microglia activation and AD
Recent research has shed light on the intricate connection between 
the gut and the brain, known as the gut-brain axis (Ashley et al., 2020; 
Mosaferi et al., 2021a; Uribe-Herranz et al., 2019). This bidirectional 
communication system involves a complex network of neural, endo­
crine, and immune pathways that play a crucial role in maintaining 
homeostasis within the body (Ashley et al., 2020; Mosaferi et al., 2021a; 
Uribe-Herranz et al., 2019). It plays a crucial role in maintaining overall 
health and has been implicated in various neurological disorders, 
including AD (Ashley et al., 2020; Mosaferi et al., 2021a; Uribe-Herranz 
et al., 2019). Microglia, the resident immune cells of the brain, play a 
pivotal role in the pathogenesis of AD and current intriguing area of 
investigation is the impact of the gut-brain axis on microglia activation 
and its potential implications for neurodegenerative diseases such as AD. 
With the advancement in technological and scientific understanding, 
researchers are now exploring the complex interactions between the GM 
and the central nervous system (CNS) to decipher the potential role of 
gut dysbiosis in neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration to uncover 
new avenues for effective therapeutic interventions (Chen et al., 2020; 
Doifode et al., 2021). Notably, there are five major ways in which GM 
can influence AD, which includes neuroactive metabolites, modulation 
of the vagus nerve, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, regula­
tion of neurotransmitter levels, and manipulation of the immune 
response and inflammation (Fig. 1). A brief description of these mech­
anisms is presented in this section.
4.1. Neuroactive metabolites
Metabolites are basically of 3 types (I) metabolites that the GM 
produces directly from dietary substances, such as SCFAs, tryptophan, 
and indole derivatives of tryptophan (Araújo et al., 2024; Liu et al., 
2020; Tomasova et al., 2021); (II) metabolites that the hosts initially 
synthesize and that the GM chemically transforms, such as secondary 
bile acids (Feng et al., 2022; Lucas et al., 2021); and (III) metabolites 
that the GM produces on its own (Feng et al., 2022). The development of 
AD is accelerated by alteration in metabolites like SCFAs, Trimethyl­
amine N-oxides, LPS, bile acid secreted by GM (Jung et al., 2024). The 
majority of bile acids (BAs) in the colon are produced by bacteria 
(Collins et al., 2023; Mohanty et al., 2024; Ru et al., 2019). Bile salt 
hydrolases are found in three major phyla namely Firmicutes, Bacter­
oidetes, and Actinobacteria and are responsible to deconjugate primary 
BAs into secondary BAs such as lithocholic acid, deoxycholic acid (DCA) 
and cholic ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) (Spichak et al., 2021). The 
primary BAs are responsible for lipid absorption and maintenance of 
cholesterol homeostasis since they can effectively cross BBB and regu­
late physiological functions (Collins et al., 2023) (Table 1 Entry-1). Al­
terations in BAs metabolism caused by GM are known to contribute in 
AD progression. A multicenter metabolomic study that involved 1464 
AD patients have found that DCA and its conjugated forms with glycine 
and taurine was increased in serum metabolome of these patients and 
were 
associated 
with 
decreased 
cognitive 
abilities 
(MahmoudianDehkordi et al., 2019). The development of amyloid pla­
ques is a well-known hallmark of AD (Ashton et al., 2021). Amyloids 
produced by bacteria, such as TasA (Bacillus subtilis), curli (Escherichia 
coli), FapC (Pseudomonas fluorescens), CsgA (Salmonella typhimurium), 
phenol soluble modulins (Staphylococcus aureus), and others, have been 
shown to contribute to the pathology of AD, by assisting in the formation 
of Aβ oligomers and fibrils (Kesika et al., 2021; Mitra et al., 2023) 
(Table 1 Entry-2). Some neuroactive metabolites produced by the GM, 
such as neurotransmitters or their precursors, can impact the concen­
trations of related neurotransmitters, their precursors, or both in the 
brain and they modulate the neuroinflammatory conditions (Wu et al., 
2020) (Table 1 Entry-3). SCFAs are by-products of bacterial fermenta­
tion of prebiotics and fibers that are difficult to digest (Araújo et al., 
2024; Mann et al., 2024). The most common SCFAs in the human body 
and the most frequent anions in the colon that bacteria produce as 
metabolites are acetate, propionate, and butyrate (Laffin et al., 2019; 
Portincasa et al., 2022). SCFAs plays multiple roles in AD pathogenesis 
including epigenetic regulation, modulation of neuroinflammation, 
maintenance of BBB, synaptic plasticity and interference in amyloid 
protein formation (Chen et al., 2022; Silva et al., 2020a; Yadav et al., 
2022). Several bacterial spp. such as Bacteriodetes, Firmicutes and 
Akkermansia municiphila abundantly release SCFAs in gut which ulti­
mately decreases AD (Portincasa et al., 2022) (Table 1 Entry-4). LPS is a 
component of gram-negative bacteria outer cell walls that has the po­
tential to cause severe inflammation, increase Aβ buildup in the brain, 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
3 

and impair cognitive function (Brown and Heneka, 2024).Family 
Enterobacteriaceae of the gut are known to contain highly 
immune-stimulatory LPS (Moreira de Gouveia et al., 2024) (Table 1
Entry-5). Tri methyl amine is a gastrointestinal metabolite produced by 
bacteria from substrates like choline and L-carnitine (Zhen et al., 2023). 
Examples of tri methyl amine-producing bacteria include those 
belonging to the genera Clostridium, Escherichia and Proteus; however, 
these may vary in terms of the substrates they use to make tri methyl 
amine (Al Bander et al., 2020; Fennema et al., 2016) (Table 1 Entry-6). It 
has been shown that Trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) contributes to the 
pathophysiology of AD by inducing amyloid-beta peptide and tau pro­
tein to aggregate (Caradonna et al., 2024).
4.2. Modulation of vagus nerve
Vagus, the 10th cranial nerve, consist of 80 % afferent and 20 % 
efferent fibers and plays a major role in parasympathetic nervous system 
(Jung et al., 2024). It is the fastest and most direct path between the 
brain and the gut (Jung et al., 2024). It also has a broad distribution 
throughout the abdominal organs, travelling from the proximal duo­
denum caudally to the transverse colon, thus significantly influences the 
interactions between the CNS and gut bacteria (Giridharan et al., 2022). 
Further, microbiota indirectly activates the afferent fibers of vagus 
nerves via metabolites or other harmful products such as amyloids and 
LPS (D´ecarie-Spain et al., 2024). This intimate connection between the 
gut bacteria and the brain via the vagus nerve is known to modulate 
various neurobehaviors and processes, such as anxiety, depression, 
reward motivation and learning and memory (D´ecarie-Spain et al., 
2024). Further, intracerebroventricular injection of Aβ1–42 in mice by 
suppressing vagus nerve-mediated cholinergic anti-inflammatory 
pathway, altered intestinal structure, induced GM dysbiosis, and pro­
moted the amyloidogenic pathways, (Qian et al., 2022). Moreover, 
inoculation of α-synuclein into the gastrointestinal tract resulted in the 
spread of α-synuclein from gastrointestinal tract to the brain through the 
vagus nerve (Uemura et al., 2018). Furthermore, sub-diaphragmatic 
vagus nerve acts as a major modulatory pathway between the brain 
and GM. This observation is corroborated from the studies on adult male 
BALB/c mice wherein the ingestion of beneficial bacteria or selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors mitigated depression-like behavior and 
stress-induced anxiety through the activation of sub-diaphragmatic 
vagus nerve, and these antidepressant-like effects were reversed after 
subdiaphragmatic vagotomy (SDV) (Bravo et al., 2011; McVey Neufeld 
et al., 2019). Similarly, SDV reversed depression-like phenotype after 
intraperitoneal injection of LPS in adult male wistar rats (Zhang et al., 
2020).
4.3. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
HPA is the main neuroendocrine system that produces glucocorti­
coids such as cortisol and corticosterone in humans and rodents in 
response to stress (Mbiydzenyuy and Qulu, 2024). Increased gut 
permeability and changes in GM composition have been linked to 
elevated cortisol levels, which can cause inflammation and exacerbate a 
number of CNS disorders as well as brain dysfunction (Rusch et al., 
2023). Several studies have reported dysfunction of HPA axis in AD 
(Harris et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2021b; Pietrzak et al., 2017). It is also 
interesting to note that Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus have been 
shown to enhance HPA axis function and regulate the behavioral stress 
Fig. 1. Schematic illustrating the Microbiota–gut–brain axis. Direct and indirect pathways through which GM interacts with the CNS. (1) Metabolites that are 
produced and transformed by the GM. (2) Vagus nerve may be indirectly activated by the GM metabolites. (3) corticosteroids, released in response to HPA axis 
activation, modulates GM composition. (4) They can produce a vast array of neuroactive compounds that participate in neurotransmitter signaling, as well as some 
hormones through the neuroendocrine cells. (5) Metabolites that found their way into the blood as a result of gut barrier disruption activates peripheral immune cells, 
they release cytokines that in turn activates the microglial cells towards the proinflammatory phenotype therefore promoting neuroinflammation. Figure created 
with Biorender.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
4 

response (Liu et al., 2021b). The interrelations between HPA 
axis-related hormones and depression-like behaviors have stated that 
the HPA system play an important role in the development of depressive 
behavior following GM manipulations. For instance, the dysregulation 
of the HPA axis system in germ-free (GF) mice was confirmed by an 
elevation in plasma corticosterone and adrenocorticotropic hormone 
levels (Liu et al., 2021b). Further, dysfunctional HPA axis-mediated 
higher cortisol levels were associated with lower glucose metabolism 
in frontal cortex, lower total brain volume, higher Aβ load, and 
increased phosphocreatine to ATP ratio in AD patient (Mosconi et al., 
2024). Conversely, treatment with mannan oligosaccharide, a prebiotics 
derived from Konjac, and outer cell-wall membrane of plants, yeast, and 
bacteria was found to restructure GM, augment SCFAs production, 
improve cognitive function, spatial memory and HPA dysfunction in AD 
(Liu et al., 2021b).
4.4. Regulation of neurotransmitter levels
GM produce a significant proportions of neuroactive compounds 
involved in neurotransmitter signaling, which interact with components 
of the host neuroendocrine system, to modify the host behaviour 
(Jayaraman and Paul, 2024). For instance, Bifidobacterium and Lacto­
bacillus can directly produce γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), while Serratia 
and Escherichia are involved in dopamine production (Alizadeh et al., 
2022; Jain et al., 2023). Additionally, by altering the neurotransmitter 
precursors of neuroactive compounds, GM might indirectly take over the 
production of neurotransmitters (Zhong et al., 2021). Two important 
neurotransmitters that control numerous physiological processes in the 
brain and body are noradrenaline and dopamine (Tan et al., 2024). Since 
both neurotransmitter levels in the caecum of GF mice were shown to be 
lower than those of specific-pathogen-free mice (SPF), this finding raises 
the possibility that catecholamines may be produced by the GM (Asano 
Table 1 
Overview of the influence of GM and their products on microglia activation, neuroinflammation and AD.
S. 
No.
Bacterial 
metabolites
Bacterial family/genus/species
Mechanism
Impact 
on AD
References
1
Bile
Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Actinobacteria.
Through S1PR2 increases microglial 
activation.
↑ AD
(Karunakaran et al., 2019)
​
​
Through receptor TGR5 and FXR reduces 
microglia induced neuroinflammation.
↓ AD
(Zheng et al., 2023)
2
Bacterial amyloid
Bacillus subtilis (TasA), Escherichia coli (curli), 
Pseudomonas fluorescens (FapC), Salmonella 
typhimurium (CsgA), Staphylococcus aureus (phenol 
soluble modulins).
Activates TLR2, CD14, NF-KB and inducible 
nitric oxide. Also activates NLRP3 
inflammasomes in microglia.
↑ AD
(Erridge et al., 2010; 
Friedland and Chapman, 
2017; Zhou et al., 2012)
3
Bacterial 
Neurotransmitters
​
​
​
​
I) GABA
Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium and Streptococcus.
GABA binds with the metabotropic and 
ionotropic GABA receptors on microglia and 
inhibits the response of microglia to the 
proinflammatory stimuli, leading to 
inhibition of inflammatory pathways 
mediated by p38 MAP kinase and NF-κB
↓ AD
(Otaru et al., 2021)
II) Serotonin
Escherichia coli, Bifidobacterium, Hafnia, Bacteroides, 
Streptococcus, Morganella, Klebsiella, Lactococcus, 
Lactobacillus, Propionibacterium, Eubacterium, 
Roseburia, and Prevotella.
Serotonin binds with the 5-HT2B of microglia 
and direct the microglial phenotype towards 
neuroprotection, and also decreases the 
anxiety like behavior.
↓ AD
(Sugama et al., 2016)
III) Glutamate
Lactobacillus plantarum, 
Corynebacteriumglutamicum, Lactobacillus 
paracasei, Lactococcuslactis, Mycobacterium 
smegmatis, Brevibacterium avium, Bacillus subtilis 
and Brevibacteriumlacto fermentum.
Binds with ionotropic and metabotropic 
glutamate receptors on microglia therefore 
regulates its activation, migration, NO 
production, cytokine release and 
inflammatory responses.
↑ AD
(A. García-Contreras et al., 
2023; Cao et al., 2017)
IV) Dopamine
Serratia spp., Bacillus spp., and Staphylococcus.
Dopamine decreases microglial AT1/AT2 
ratio by binding to type 2 D2 receptors 
leading to inhibition of proinflammatory 
AT1/NADPH oxidase/superoxide axis.
↓ AD
(Miri et al., 2023)
V) Acetylcholine
Bacillus subtilis, Lactobacillus plantarum, Escherichia 
coli, and Staphylococcus aureus.
Acetylcholine binds with the nAChR of 
microglia and mediate the cholinergic anti- 
inflammatory pathway which mitigates the 
proinflammatory microglia activation.
↓ AD
(Islas Weinstein et al., 2015; 
Luqman et al., 2018)
4
SCFAs
​
​
​
​
I) Acetate
Blautiahydrogeno trophica.
↓ production of IL−6, IL−1β and TNF-α and 
the subsequent phosphorylation of p38 
MAPK, JNK and NF-κB thereby inactivating 
these pathways.
↓ AD
(Soliman et al., 2012)
II) Propionate
Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes
↓ TNF- α, monocyte chemoattractant protein 
−1, IL−1β and cytotoxins
↓ AD
(Louis et al., 2014; Wenzel 
et al., 2020)
III) Butyarte
Akkermansia municiphill, Firmicutes such as 
Ruminococcus bromii, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, 
Eubacterium hallii, and Eubacterium rectale.
↓ pro-inflammatory alterations and promotes 
microglia towards a homeostatic profile
↓ AD
(Silva et al., 2020; Wei et al., 
2023; Yamawaki et al., 
2018)
5
Bacterial LPS
Bacteriodes fragilis and Escherichia coli.
Activates TLR4 along with TLR2 in microglia.
↑ AD
(Gonz´alez-Sanmiguel et al., 
2020)
6
TMAO
Clostridium, Proteus, and Escherichia.
↑ Aβ and tau aggregation. damaged 
mitochondria, ROS. 
↓ decreased expression of synaptic plasticity 
related protein and downregulation of mTOR 
pathway.
↑ AD
(Arrona Cardoza et al., 2022; 
Buawangpong et al., 2022)
7
Indoles
Parasutterella, Agathobacter, and Lactobacillus spp. 
and family members of Muribaculaceae, 
Atopobiaceae, Prevotellaceae.
Binds with aryl hydrocarbon receptors of 
microglia which inhibits the NF-κB pathway.
↓ AD
(Sun et al., 2022)
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
5 

et al., 2012). These findings imply that intestine bacteria and dopamine 
levels may be related in disorders like Parkinson’s disease (PD), which is 
characterized by insufficient dopamine synthesis in the brain (Wang 
et al., 2021). Additionally, it has been demonstrated that Helicobacter 
pylori affects L-DOPA levels and neurologic improvement has also been 
reported in patient with PD after faecal transplantation for chronic 
constipation (Ananthaswamy, 2011; Cussotto et al., 2018).
4.5. Regulation of the immune system
Both GM and immune system have an impact on one another; GM 
controls immune system function and maturation, whereas immune 
system regulates the structure and abundance of the GM (Cheng et al., 
2023; Riazi-Rad et al., 2021). Both peripheral and central immune ho­
meostasis depend on the composition and enrichment of GM (Chen 
et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2024). Species of microbiota (Bacteroides fragilis) 
and their metabolites (altered levels of succinic acid, acetic acid, lactic 
acid and propionic acid) result in peripheral immune activation and 
sustain a systemic immune response that is characterized by the release 
of inflammatory cytokines (Aghamajidi and Maleki Vareki, 2022; Round 
et al., 2011). Moreover, these metabolites alter the BBB integrity, 
resulting in the immune cell infiltration into the brain and the activation 
of microglia, both of which result in neuroinflammation and neuro­
degeneration (Lukiw, 2020; Zhao et al., 2017). Additionally, GM me­
tabolites intricately regulate microglia behavior and functions, for 
instance, SCFA supplementation to SPF mice promoted Aβ deposition by 
modulating microglial phenotypic plasticity (Colombo et al., 2021).
5. Microbiota-derived SCFA and AD
GM shows tremendous diversity in terms of the number or density of 
bacteria belonging to a bacterial species as well as the composition of 
specific bacterial species (Ho et al., 2018). A growing number of health 
ailments, such as metabolic syndrome, obesity, cardiovascular diseases, 
immunological diseases, and neurodegenerative disorders like AD and 
PD, have been linked to such interpersonal variations in the composition 
of intestinal bacteria (Ho et al., 2018). Much research has been done on 
how the gut bacterial community influences host physiology, and 
accumulating evidence indicates that SCFAs are the primary metabolites 
facilitating this mutual relationship (Tsukuda et al., 2021). GM enzy­
matically breaks down plant polysaccharides and carbohydrates to 
produce SCFAs, mainly propionic acid, acetate and butyrate, which 
together account for approximately 95 % of all SCFAs in the human 
body (Mirzaei et al., 2021; Tsukuda et al., 2021). Propionate is prefer­
entially produced by Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, while butyrate is 
mostly produced by Firmicutes (Anaerostipes, Eubacterium, Faecali­
bacterium prausnitzii and Roseburia) (Luo et al., 2024). These SCFAs can 
cross the gut-brain axis and the BBB, regulating gene expression, lipid 
metabolism, mitochondrial activity, and neurotransmitter production. It 
has been proposed that SCFAs may reduce AD by acting as substrates for 
energy metabolism and providing an alternative energy source to alle­
viate brain hypometabolism, which leads to neuronal dysfunctions in 
AD and other neurodegenerative diseases (Ho et al., 2018; Zilberter and 
Zilberter, 2017). The involvement of SCFAs in AD is further supported 
by their reduced abundance in the guts of patients with MCI and AD 
(Razazan et al., 2021). Numerous studies have demonstrated the influ­
ence of SCFAs on AD-associated pathologies like dementia, Aβ aggre­
gation and clearance, and synaptic plasticity (Cuervo-Zanatta et al., 
2023; Ho et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2021; Razazan et al., 2021). Con­
sumption of the high fiber diet boosts the survival of butyrate-producing 
bacteria, which enhanced learning and memory functions by producing 
butyrate, this increase in butyrate restored the propionate: butyrate 
ratio which gets altered in AD (Cuervo-Zanatta et al., 2023). In 
APPPS1–21 mice model sodium butyrate administration improved 
cognitive functions which was linked with the increase in the expression 
of genes associated with the memory-consolidation like, Marcksl1, 
MYST4, GluR1, SHANK3 and SNAP25 (Govindarajan et al., 2011). 
Additionally, sodium butyrate by enhancing synapse associated proteins 
(SYP, PSD-95, NR2B) and promoting depotentiation and long term 
potentiation was found to improve synaptic plasticity in 8-week-old AD 
mice (Jiang et al., 2021). Using multiple complementary assays re­
searchers have showed the effect of individual SCFAs on AD. For 
instance, valeric acid, butyric acid and propionic acid was found to 
interfere with Aβ species and prevent their assemblies to form soluble, 
neurotoxic Aβ aggregates in a dose dependent manner. While isovaleric 
acid, isobutyric acid, and acetic acid) do not have an impact on Aβ ag­
gregates (Ho et al., 2018). SCFAs also decreases Aβ accumulation by 
inducing its clearance after binding with FFAR2, a type of inhibitory G 
(Gi/o) protein-coupled receptor, activates downstream signaling 
cascade that leads to phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and lysosomal degra­
dation of Aβ in neuronal cells (Razazan et al., 2021). Neuroinflammation 
and marked increase in microgliosis as well as astrogliosis is associated 
with AD progression (Jackson et al., 2023). SCFAs were reported to have 
an indispensable role in neuroinflammation by modulating microglia 
and astrocyte functions in AD (Cuervo-Zanatta et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 
2021). Sodium butyrate a well-known histone deacetylase inhibitor in­
fluences the transcription of anti-inflammatory genes and therefore 
promotes neuroprotection (Jiang et al., 2021). Sodium butyrate after 
binding with histone deacetylase, released the transcription inhibition 
and promoted the transcription of IL-10, an anti-inflammatory molecule 
in the microglia. IL-10 then activated IL-10/STAT3 anti-inflammatory 
signaling associated with neuroprotection and neurogenesis (Jiang 
et al., 2021). Similarly, supplementation of acetate in APP/PS1 mice 
inhibited the phosphorylation of ERK, JNK, NF-κB p65, reduced the 
levels of COX-2 and IL-β, through upregulating the levels of G-pro­
tein-coupled receptor 41 (Liu et al., 2020). Furthermore, treatment with 
SCFA can promote recruitment of microglia to Aβ plaques without 
affecting microglial phagocytic capacity (Colombo et al., 2021). SCFAs 
was reported to provide metabolic support to the astrocytes by pro­
moting astrocyte-neurons metabolic coupling to lower the oxidative 
damage particularly by contributing to glutamate-glutamine shuttle by 
acting on glutamine synthetase thereby combating AD (Sun et al., 2023). 
SCFAs also regulate BBB permeability and integrity via interaction with 
the cellular components of BBB which gets severely altered in AD. It was 
found that oral gavage of sodium butyrate to GF mice improved BBB 
integrity via increase in tight junction protein expression and reduction 
in permeability (Braniste et al., 2014). Also, mono-colonization of GF 
mice with butyrate producer Clostridium tyrobutyricum and acetate and 
propionate producers Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, significantly reduced 
BBB permeability (Braniste et al., 2014).
6. Role of ageing in AD associated GM changes and microglia 
activation
Aging is described as a genetically determined and environmentally 
influenced process that results in a widespread reduction in physiolog­
ical functions (Colloca et al., 2020). The gastrointestinal tract is engaged 
in this process, with degeneration of the enteric nervous system, changes 
in mucosal barrier and intestinal motility, and a decline in defensive 
function, all of which favor the development of gastrointestinal diseases 
(Mangiola et al., 2018; Spencer and Hu, 2020). Changes in these func­
tions are linked to changes in GM, which has an impact on the gut-brain 
axis (Mangiola et al., 2018). According to studies, GM of older persons 
differs significantly from that of younger at both phylum and genus level 
due to lifestyle and physical changes (Vaiserman et al., 2017; Wu et al., 
2021). At the phylum level, a significant raise in the population of Fir­
micutes and reduction in the numbers of Bacteriodetes were found in 
aged mice (Wu et al., 2021). An upsurge in the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes 
ratio may exacerbate low-grade inflammation, which has been linked to 
the incidence of cognitive decline and AD (Atienza et al., 2018; Machiels 
et al., 2014). At the genus level, the relative abundance of beneficial 
bacteria with anti-inflammatory properties (such as Roseburia and 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
6 

Faecalibacterium) was lower in aged mice, whilst the relative abundance 
of pathogenic bacteria (such as Parasutterella and Helicobacter) was 
higher (Fani et al., 2018; Koistinen et al., 2019). An increase in the 
number of proinflammatory GM taxa and a reduction in the number of 
anti-inflammatory taxa are possibly related with a state of inflammation 
in patients with cognitive impairments (Cattaneo et al., 2017). Cognitive 
impairment a characteristic of AD that is often accompanied by altered 
microbiota in the elderly when compared to a healthy elderly individual. 
Clinical evidence has linked dysbiosis of the GM to cognitive deficit in 
the elderly, because subjects with brain amyloidosis and cognitive 
decline had higher abundance of proinflammatory Escherichia/Shigella 
and lower prevalence of anti-inflammatory Eubacterium rectale in their 
stools when compared to control subjects (Cattaneo et al., 2017). It was 
discovered that the abundance of Lactobacillales members was posi­
tively associated with cognition in the elderly, but Enterobacteriaceae 
and Porphyromonadaceae were negatively associated (Bajaj et al., 
2016). This study has revealed a direct relationship between microor­
ganisms and cognitive problems in the elderly. Integrity of the epithelial 
gut barrier and BBB gets reduced during ageing that helps in the release 
of microbial products into the blood as well as their migration to the 
brain through impaired BBB, which induces glial cells activation and 
subsequent neuroinflammation (B¨auerl et al., 2018). As suggested by a 
study that changes in the GM composition, gut leakiness, release of LPS 
and proinflammatory cytokines into the blood, promotes microglial 
activation and prime them towards proinflammatory phenotype 
through TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB signaling pathway, therefore resulting in 
neuroinflammation mediated neuronal loss and synaptic damage in the 
cortex and hippocampal CA1 region ultimately leading to cognitive 
dysfunction in aged mice (Wu et al., 2021). One study had suggested it is 
not the decrease in the diversity of GM but the prevalence and reduced 
number of certain bacterial strains in the aged mice that promotes the 
progression of AD in mice model (B¨auerl et al., 2018). For example, 
using transgenic APP/PS1 mice model, they reported that AD pathology 
switched GM composition towards an inflammation-related bacterial 
profile related to Proteobacteria and Erysipelotrichaceae and suggested 
that these changes could contribute to disease progression and severity 
(B¨auerl et al., 2018). Furthermore, the chemicals generated by GM, 
either as metabolic byproducts or as components of bacterial structures, 
might increase protein aggregation in brain regions. Many GM species, 
such as Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, are linked with the devel­
opment of amyloid fibers (Alsegiani and Shah, 2022). These amyloid 
fibers have the ability to traverse the intestinal and BBB layers, stimulate 
amyloid-protein synthesis and accumulation in the brain, thus acceler­
ated AD pathogenesis in the elderly (Alsegiani and Shah, 2022). Where 
amyloid protein plays a crucial role in microglia activation and subse­
quent neuroinflammation (Sun et al., 2020). A recent study has reported 
aging associated alterations in brain bile acids profile in both male and 
female 8-week-old C57 mice. It was found that tauro-β-muricholic acid 
(a type of bile acid) was found to be increased in the brain of aged mice 
of both sexes, particularly in the hippocampus and hypothalamus (Ma 
et al., 2024). Further, tauro-β-muricholic acid stimulation induced 
microglia inflammation and cognitive impairment in mice (Ma et al., 
2024). Importantly, aggregation of brain tauro-β-muricholic acid during 
aging was linked with gut dysbiosis and metagenomic data revealed 
reduced abundance of bile salt hydrolases carrying bacteria such as, 
Ligilactobacillus, Enterorhabdus, Ligilactobacillus murinus, Firmicutes, 
Christensenella hongkongensis and Bacteroides acidifaciens (Ma et al., 
2024). It was also found that rejuvenation of GM of aged mice with the 
bile salt hydrolases carrying bacteria, such as Christensenellaceae R-7 
group and Oscillibacter, by co-housing with young mice reduced taur­
o-β-muricholic acid levels and improved neurological function in aged 
mice (Ma et al., 2024).
7. Animal studies investigating the role of GM and microglial 
activation in AD
The bidirectional communication between the brain and the GM, as 
well as its stake in the development of AD and the activation of micro­
glia, are being studied using a variety of animal models (Clarke et al., 
2013; Heijtz et al., 2011; Miranda-Ribera et al., 2022; Nishino et al., 
2013; Sittipo et al., 2022). Some strains of mice used are GF mice and 
SPF mice (Clarke et al., 2013; Heijtz et al., 2011; Miranda-Ribera et al., 
2022; Nishino et al., 2013; Sittipo et al., 2022). GF mice are more 
appropriately referred to as “axenic,” which means they are devoid of all 
microbes, including those that are normally present in the gut (Clarke 
et al., 2013; Heijtz et al., 2011; Miranda-Ribera et al., 2022; Nishino 
et al., 2013; Sittipo et al., 2022). Studies on GF animals or animals given 
broad-spectrum antibiotics are frequently used to explore the 
microbiota-gut-brain axis, specifically the effects of the GM complete 
absence on development and behavior (Clarke et al., 2013; Heijtz et al., 
2011; Miranda-Ribera et al., 2022; Nishino et al., 2013; Sittipo et al., 
2022). To investigate the two-way communication between the GM and 
brain, researchers used GF mice, either colonizing with a single species 
(mono-associated) or with an intricate mixture by FMT from an animal 
that was conventionally reared (Lyte et al., 2019). It was discovered that 
GF and broad spectrum antibiotics (ABX; vancomycin, cefoxitin, 
gentamicin, 
metronidazol) 
treatment 
delayed 
the 
onset 
of 
disease-related memory deficits in 5x familial AD (5xFAD) mice by 
attenuating hippocampal Aβ pathology and associated neuronal death 
(Mez¨o et al., 2020). When compared SPF and ABX treated, GF 5XFAD 
mice showed enhanced microglial accumulation close to Aβ plaques, 
containing more Aβ debris intracellularly, indicated increased phago­
cytic removal of Aβ (Mez¨o et al., 2020). Consistent with these obser­
vations, many molecules regulating phagocytosis, such as Trem2, its 
adapter TYRO protein tyrosine kinase binding protein, complement re­
ceptors (e.g. complement C1q subcomponent subunit B, C1qb) and ApoE 
were elevated in microglia from GF 5xFAD mice (Mez¨o et al., 2020). 
Microglial fraction in the hippocampal region of GF mice was much 
lower than in SPF and microbial colonization was unable to rescue this 
change (Huang et al., 2023). In the prefrontal cortex, there was a ten­
dency towards increase in the percentage of microglia in the GF group 
compared to the SPF group, which was found to be reversed by micro­
bial colonization (Huang et al., 2023). This colonization in turn also 
rescued microglial gene alterations and genes were associated with the 
chemical synaptic transmission and cell-cell adhesion (Huang et al., 
2023). According to a study on FMT microbiota-targeted intervention, it 
was reported that transferring fresh fecal matter orally from healthy 
wild-type mice in ADLPAPT mice for 16 weeks and FMT in ADLPAPT mice 
that were pre-treated with antibiotics for a period of 4 weeks reduced Aβ 
deposition, reactive gliosis, tau pathology and memory impairment in 
such transgenic AD mice (Kim et al., 2020). Intriguingly, in ADLPAPT 
recipient rats, FMT effectively restored the abnormal intestinal macro­
phage activity and circulating inflammatory monocyte levels (Kim et al., 
2020).
Depending on the brain region, the GM has also affected the 
communication between the microglia and astrocytes (Loh et al., 2024). 
Microglia was found to interact mostly with astrocytes in the hippo­
campus in the SPF group, but the lack of GM in GF group led to a 
reduction in the intensity of these interactions (Huang et al., 2023). GM 
also modulated mutual transformation of microglial subtypes (Huang 
et al., 2023). According to microglia re-clustering studies, in hippo­
campus, two subpopulations of microglia (M1, M4) were shown to be 
considerably enriched in the GF and M2 subtype was found to be 
significantly enriched in GF when compared to the SPF, and in the 
colonized GF group, and these alterations were successfully reversed by 
microbial colonization (Huang et al., 2023). Cross-species analysis using 
human, mice and monkey single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-sequenc­
ing have shown that the transcriptomic alterations of these microglial 
subtypes are closely associated with AD across different species and 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
7 

surprisingly the disease associated microglia is strongly correlated with 
the hippocampal M1 subpopulation (Huang et al., 2023). These results 
provide insight into the single-cell molecular mechanisms by which the 
GM control brain functions through gut-brain axis.
Numerous studies have also shown how dietary modifications con­
taining a particular nutrient or a combination of nutrients may operate 
on intestinal microbes and their metabolites to improve AD neuropa­
thology. In one study, it was discovered that probiotic treatment with 
Lactobacillus plantarum DP189 (DP189) for 10 weeks prevented cogni­
tive dysfunction, increased dopamine, serotonin and GABA levels, and 
effectively improved neuronal damage, ameliorated Aβ deposition, and 
tau pathology in D-galactose (D-gal) and AlCl3-induced AD mice (Song 
et al., 2022). Lactobacillus plantarum DP189 intervention simultaneously 
altered the microbial populations in the gut and therefore treated gut 
dysbiosis (Song et al., 2022). Furthermore, by regulating the 
PI3K/Akt/GSK-3 pathway, Lactobacillus plantarum DP189 also pre­
vented tau hyperphosphorylation (Song et al., 2022). Additionally, 
12-week course of memantine combined with Lactobacillus plantarum 
treatment reduced levels of hippocampal Aβ while preserving neuronal 
integrity and plasticity and mitigated cognitive decline (Wang et al., 
2020). Lactobacillus plantarum has been shown to improve the thera­
peutic effectiveness of memantine in APP/PS1 mice by altering the in­
testinal microbiota, preventing the synthesis of TMAO, and lowering 
clusterin levels (Wang et al., 2020). A study on ABX-treated APP/PS1 
mice found that secoisolariciresinol diglucoside, a plant-derived estro­
gen, significantly improved spatial and working memory in female mice 
(Jia et al., 2024). Secoisolariciresinol diglucoside was metabolized into 
enterodiol and enterolactone by GM, enhancing levels of postsynaptic 
density protein-95 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and 
attenuating inflammatory responses via the GPER/CREB/BDNF 
pathway (Jia et al., 2024).
Another study examined the effects of bacterial-derived SCFA on the 
pathophysiology of AD using the GF amyloidosis mouse model (APP/ 
PS1), which was generated via embryo transfer into axenic mice 
(Colombo et al., 2021). GF APP/PS1 mice have distinctly reduced 
plasma SCFA concentrations and Aβ plaque, however, SCFA supple­
mentation (to mimic the microbiome effect) markedly increased Aβ 
plaque burden (Colombo et al., 2021). An additional investigation using 
APP/PS1 double transgenic mice found that FMT from AD patients 
resulted in elevated NLRP3 expression, severe cognitive decline, 
elevated expression of neuroinflammatory markers, and activated 
microglia in the hippocampus (Shen et al., 2020). Similarly, recoloni­
zation of GF 3×Tg mice with faecal microbiota from AD patients, 
resulted in a significant cognitive decline and exacerbated AD pathology 
compared to those of mice receiving faecal microbiota from healthy 
subjects (Chen et al., 2022). This severity in AD pathology was attrib­
uted to the activation of C/EBPβ pathway in microglia resulting in the 
activation of pro-inflammatory mediators in GF 3xTg mice (Chen et al., 
2022).
SLAB51, a combination of lactic acid bacteria and Bifidobacteria, has 
shown to have positive effects on the microbiota of 3xTg-AD mice by 
reducing the relative abundance of Campylobacterales and increasing 
the relative abundance of Bifidobacterium spp. (Bonfili et al., 2018). 
These bacterial species are known to play different roles in the regula­
tion of inflammatory pathways. In the 3xTg-AD mouse brain, 
SLAB51-mediated microbiota modification significantly improved 
glucose homeostasis and also reduced oxidative stress via activating 
Sirtuin1 -dependent pathways (Bonfili et al., 2018). Additionally, 
probiotic-4, a distinct preparation containing Bifidobacterium lactis, 
Lacticaseibacillus casei, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and Lactobacillus aci­
dophilus, significantly enhanced cognitive abilities and reduced BBB 
injury as well as intestinal injury in aged SAMP8 mice by inhibiting both 
retinoic acid-inducible gene-I as well as TLR4-mediated NF-κB signaling 
pathways as well as inflammatory responses (Li et al., 2023). Another 
study showed that altering the GM with a mixture of Bifidobacterium 
longum R0175 and Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 significantly mitigated 
hippocampal apoptosis, reduced serum and hippocampal levels of 
proinflammatory cytokines and lowered the adverse effects of LPS on 
memory impairment through BDNF protein expression in LPS-treated 
rats (Mohammadi et al., 2019).
Additionally, mice with altered schaedler flora (ASF) mice, which 
harbors a specific narrow set of bacterial strains, also show a defective 
microglial phenotype (Mossad and Erny, 2020). altered schaedler flora 
mice are used as an alternative to Conventionally reared (CR) and GF 
animals (Lyte et al., 2019). Altered schaedler flora is an organized 
community of 8 bacterial species that supports host development while 
avoiding the considerable difficulties brought on by the diversity and 
richness of conventional bacterial communities (Lyte et al., 2019). By 
mimicking the gut ecology of CR mouse, altered schaedler flora mice 
provide helpful insights into the BMG axis (Lyte et al., 2019). After being 
exposed to oral Salmonella typhimurium infection, LCM mice generated 
by colonizing GF mice with the altered schaedler flora (only 3 bacterial 
strains) showed significant microglial defects, including altered cell 
proportions and an immature phenotype comprising more segments, 
longer processes with extensive branching and terminal points (Stecher 
et al., 2010).
Drosophila melanogaster, which is currently being used to study the 
mechanisms underlying AD, is also used in a number of studies that 
involves the interactions between the microbiota and probiotics. It is 
regarded as a gold standard model for microbiota research due to its 
easily manipulable microbiome, high-throughput screening capabilities, 
low cost, and rapid reproduction (Wu et al., 2017). Wu and colleagues 
demonstrated that the gut-brain axis is a crucial factor in neuro­
degeneration in AD transgenic flies expressing human Aβ42 (Wu et al., 
2017). The lifetime of transgenic fly was seen to be decreased by 
Enterobacteria (Ecc15) infection, along with motor function impairment 
and an increase in brain cell death. In these flies, enhanced migratory 
behavior of the phagocytes to the brain, produced ROS more frequently 
along with the elevated JNK pathway (Wu et al., 2017). Another study 
found that administering Lactobacillus plantarum DR7 to Drosophila 
melanogaster model of AD was able to rescue the rough eye phenotype, 
restored the diversity of the GM, and significantly lowered Wolbachia 
relative abundance, which is positively correlated with neurodegener­
ative diseases (Tan et al., 2020; Westfall et al., 2019). In a transgenic 
humanized Drosophila melanogaster model of AD, a symbiotic prepara­
tion of a polyphenol-rich prebiotic with three metabolically active 
probiotics, increased both survivability as well as motility, rescuing 
acetylcholinesterase activity and Aβ deposition through the effect on 
gut-brain axis components and on peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptors γ activity (Westfall et al., 2019). The presence of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptors γ in microglia results in the synthesis of 
anti-inflammatory gene-related expression and downregulates the pro­
duction of proinflammatory mediators by inhibiting the expression of 
NF-kB, AP-1, and STAT-1 in active microglia (Westfall et al., 2019). 
Despite the abundance of considerable number of studies, the precise 
mechanisms through which gut microbial metabolites interact with 
microglia and host genetics to either promote or prevent AD still remain 
largely unclear.
8. Human studies exploring the link between GM and microglial 
activation in AD
Given that AD, insulin resistance, diabetes, obesity, and cardiovas­
cular disease are all closely related, as obesity is a major risk factor for 
Type II diabetes and insulin resistance which in turn increases the risk of 
cardiovascular disease, ultimately leads to increased risk of AD 
(Sędzikowska and Szablewski, 2021; Wang et al., 2022). Thus, an 
increasing number of dietary interventions designed to change GM have 
been recorded in humans, primarily including older individuals with 
memory complaints and healthy volunteers (Tu et al., 2020). According 
to a study, prolonged supplementation with Bifidobacterium breve A1 
improved subjective memory complaints and restored cognitive 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
8 

functions in older adults aged between 50 and 80 (Zhu et al., 2021). 
According to these findings, altering the composition of GM or diet may 
be able to improve cognition and memory, which may be due to mod­
ifications in the microglia. Further, significant differences between the 
gut microbiomes of cognitively normal subjects and patients with 
cognitive impairment has been reported (Nagpal et al., 2019). Impor­
tantly the gut microbiome signatures associated with cognitive impair­
ment correlated with levels of Aβ, total and phosphorylated tau in 
cerebrospinal fluid (Nagpal et al., 2019). In the same study, a modified 
Mediterranean ketogenic diet improved cognitive functions in AD pa­
tients by increasing the abundance of the bacterial taxa, such as, 
Enterobacteriaceae, Akkermansia, Slackia, Christensenellaceae, and 
Erysipelotriaceae and decreasing Bifidobacterium and Lachnobacterium 
(Nagpal et al., 2019). Further an increase in the level of SCFAs such as 
propionate and butyrate was observed in these patients (Nagpal et al., 
2019).
Another study involving randomized, double-blind, controlled 
experiment has shown that prebiotic interventions that includes chronic 
supplementation with milk enriched with Lactobacillus acidophilus, 
Lacticaseibacillus casei, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and Lactobacillus fer­
mentum enhanced learning and memory patterns in AD patients (Akbari 
et al., 2016). In comparison to controls, probiotics improved insulin 
resistance, pancreatic beta cell secretion, reduced malondialdehyde and 
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein levels in AD patients (Akbari et al., 
2016). According to another study, supplementing AD patients with a 
multispecies probiotic formulation has found to alter the composition 
gut bacteria by increasing the anti-inflammatory bacteria Faecalibacte­
rium prausnitzii and decreasing the concentrations of faecal zonulin, a 
biomarker for intestinal permeability associated with leaky gut 
(Leblhuber et al., 2018). Increased kynurenine serum concentrations in 
these patients have also found to affect tryptophan metabolism and 
stimulated the immune system, which corroborated with increased 
macrophage activation (Leblhuber et al., 2018). Despite the fact that 
animal models offer tremendous opportunities to shed new light on 
microbiota-host interactions, they cannot completely or accurately 
reproduce the human phenotype. Thus, additional human studies with 
well-defined objectives, standardized procedures, and outcome mea­
surements are needed on an urgent basis.
In 2017, a preliminary studies demonstrated that the GM composi­
tion is altered in amyloid-positive individuals/AD patients as compared 
to those without amyloid/AD (Cattaneo et al., 2017). When RNAs 
encoding specific cytokines as well as stool abundances of particular gut 
microbiota taxa were measured using qPCR, it was discovered that 
amyloid-positive patients had higher levels of mRNA of the 
pro-inflammatory cytokines IL6, IL1β and CXCL2 and lower levels of 
mRNA of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 when compared to 
amyloid-negative patients (Cattaneo et al., 2017). Additionally, an un­
biased 16 s ribosomal RNA amplicon sequencing on DNA extracted from 
both the faeces of AD patients and age and sex-matched healthy controls 
revealed a decline in Firmicutes and Bifidobacterium and an increase in 
Bacteroidetes levels compared to controls (Vogt et al., 2017). Further, a 
reduction in overall gut bacterial diversity was also noted in AD patients 
(Vogt et al., 2017). Moreover, it was discovered that AD patients had 
lower levels of Bacteroidetes and higher levels of Actinobacteria when 
compared to healthy individuals (Zhuang et al., 2018). Similarly a 
decline in Firmicutes and an elevation in Proteobacteria in AD patients 
compared with healthy individuals has been reported (Liu et al., 2019). 
The findings of these studies collectively imply that GM composition is 
different in AD patients and that GM differences have an impact on how 
AD progresses. These investigations, however, are only correlative. To 
determine whether the changes in the GM have a direct impact on AD 
pathogenesis, the results of human AD microbiome-mediated thera­
peutic clinical trials will be required in near future. Future work will 
involve a substantial, global study that compares the GM composition of 
healthy controls with age and sex-matched AD patients preferably 
divided on the basis of various stages of MCI or AD. Furthermore, since 
stool consistency might affect the results of the gut microbiota compo­
sition, it is advisable to standardize the stool collecting procedures and 
take it into account for further studies (Chandra et al., 2023; Vandeputte 
et al., 2016).
9. Mechanistic insights into the role of GM in microglia 
activation in AD
The GM has been increasingly recognized for its role in various as­
pects of brain health and function, including the activation of microglia, 
the immune cells of the CNS (Chen et al., 2021). Emerging evidence 
suggests that the GM can modulate microglial activation through several 
mechanisms (Chen et al., 2021). One such mechanism is the production 
of metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids, which have been shown 
to have anti-inflammatory effects and can influence microglial behavior 
(Wenzel et al., 2020). Additionally, the GM can directly interact with the 
immune system, triggering an immune response that can impact 
microglial activation (Zhuang et al., 2018). These findings highlight the 
potential role of the GM in regulating neuroinflammation and microglial 
functions (Zhuang et al., 2018). By influencing microglial activation, the 
GM may play a crucial role in the development and progression of 
neurodegenerative diseases such as AD (Zhuang et al., 2018). In this 
section, we will discuss in detail key signalling pathways and mecha­
nisms by which the GM can modulate microglial activation. Under­
standing these signalling pathways and mechanisms will not only 
deepen our understanding of the gut-brain axis but also pave the way for 
potential therapeutic interventions targeting the GM to modulate neu­
roinflammation and combat neurodegenerative diseases.
9.1. Microglia activation by GM-regulated immune signaling pathways
The immune system is vital for maintaining the balance and facili­
tating communication between the host and the GM through a variety of 
signal pathways (Qian et al., 2021). Microglia might recognize specific 
gut microbial components, such as LPS, bacterial amyloid, and pepti­
doglycans, through TLRs which belongs to the class of PRR (Kumari 
et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2021). The binding of microbial components to 
TLRs then triggers the well-known NF-κB signaling pathway, which is a 
classical signaling regulating a vast array of genes involved in different 
processes of the inflammatory responses (Qian et al., 2021; Wicher­
ska-Pawłowska et al., 2021). Shedding of the inflammagens such as LPS 
from the GM involves complicated immune mechanisms and subsequent 
activation of cluster of differentiation 14 (CD14), LPS-binding protein 
and myeloid differentiation-2 (MD2) (Jagtap et al., 2020). LPS-binding 
protein removes LPS present in the bacterial membrane and then 
transports it to CD14, which then helps to transport LPS to the 
TLR4-MD2 complex (Athapaththu et al., 2022; Mazgaeen and Gurung, 
2020) (Fig. 2). The downstream signaling cascade is initiated upon LPS 
recognition by the TLR4-MD2 homo-heterodimer (Ain et al., 2020). It is 
termed as MyD88-dependent pathway because the cytoplasmic adaptor 
protein myeloid differentiation primary-response protein 88 (MyD88) 
mediates the downstream pathway of pro-inflammatory cytokine pro­
duction (Cucos et al., 2022). However, there is a MyD88-independent 
pathway also in which IFNβ production and activity is regulated 
(Saikh et al., 2020). This recognition signaling takes place both locally 
(gut epithelium) and centrally (brain) (Welcome, 2019). It has been 
discovered that bacterial amyloids directly activate TLRs. Bacterial 
amyloids, which bind with the TLR1/TLR2 receptor complex when 
bacteria infiltrate the intestinal mucosa, can cause a significant release 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-17 and IL-22 (Nishimori 
et al., 2012). Peptidoglycans, which are major components of the bac­
terial cell-wall also serves as PAMPs that activate the TLR2 signaling in 
microglia (Lin et al., 2019). Pioneering research supports the existence 
of dynamic interactions between the GM and NLRP3 inflammasome, 
also known as the microbiota-gut-inflammasome-brain axis, in which 
enteric bacteria regulate peripheral inflammatory pathways through 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
9 

inflammasome signalling, which in turn affects brain homeostasis 
(Pellegrini et al., 2020) (Fig. 2). According to a study, the minimal motif, 
found in all bacterial peptidoglycans, is a ligand for the protein 
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-2 (NOD2) which belongs to 
the family of the novel nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat 
region containing proteins that is functionally expressed by both 
microglia and astrocytes (Chauhan et al., 2009). Further, minimal 
bioactive peptidoglycan motif muramyl dipeptide signals through the 
NOD2 receptor, causing rapid changes in microglial gene expression and 
cytokine and chemokine secretion (Spielbauer et al., 2024). Muramyl 
dipeptide also induces the translocation of NF-κB subunit p65 into the 
nucleus, which is blocked by MAPK p38 inhibitor SB202190, suggesting 
a crosstalk of NF-κB and MAPK pathways for the activation of muramyl 
dipeptide-specific proinflammatory microglial phenotype (Spielbauer 
et al., 2024). Another study showed NLRP3 knockdown in mice changed 
the makeup constituency of the GM and affected behavior and motility, 
emphasizing the significance of the NLRP3 inflammasome in controlling 
activities associated with mood regulation. The overall composition of 
the GM and the behavioral patterns of caspase-1-/- mice were also found 
to be different from those of WT mice, confirming the involvement of the 
NLRP3 inflammasome in the connections between the gut and the brain 
(Wong et al., 2016). In one study involving 5XFAD mice, it was shown 
that these animals had substantial differences in the composition of their 
intestinal microbiota when compared to WT mice, as well as reduced 
intestinal barrier integrity and increased levels of NLRP3 and IL-1β in 
the gut. NLRP3 inflammasome and IL-1β were also expressed more often 
in the brains of 5xFAD animals accompanied with astrocyte proliferation 
and microglial activation (Shukla et al., 2021).
According to a study, FMT from AD patients further activated the 
NLRP3 inflammasome in APP/PS1 mice, substantially upregulating the 
expression of inflammatory factors (Shen et al., 2020). Additionally, it 
was shown that following FMT from AD patients in AD mice, the 
cognitive and behavioral abilities were further diminished, the hippo­
campus microglia were further activated, and the levels of inflammatory 
factors were up-regulated (Shen et al., 2020). On the other hand, the 
activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome was dramatically suppressed 
along with the suppression of inflammatory factors when FMT from 
healthy population were taken and the oral administration was per­
formed along with minocycline into APP/PS1 mice (Shen et al., 2020). 
Additionally, FMT from AD patients triggered the NLRP3 inflammasome 
in normal mice along with microglial activation in the central hippo­
campus and the release of inflammatory mediators (Shen et al., 2020). 
As a result of the activation of these signaling pathways, the transcrip­
tion of proinflammatory genes is accompanied along with the cascade of 
inflammatory responses that eliminate the microbial insult at the site of 
inflammation (Mortellaro et al., 2015). In addition, inflammagens from 
bacteria especially LPS has found to activate the NLRP3 inflammasome 
activation both via classical as well as non-classical pathways i.e. 
without TLR4 which underlies pyroptosis and the release of inflamma­
tory cytokines (Barker and Weiss, 2019; Yi, 2017). By escaping from the 
GI tract and accumulating inside of the brain via the gut-brain upstream 
route, amyloid peptides produced by the GM of AD patients may 
Fig. 2. Diagram illustrating various signalling pathways through which GM produced metabolites activates immune cells. Bacterial inflammagens such as LPS and 
bacterial amyloids can trigger the TLR4 receptor abundantly present on the microglial membrane. In the MyD88-dependent pathway, TLRs works by activating the 
downstream signaling through the phosphorylation of IkB at two serine sites i.e., Ser 32 and 36, proteasomal degradation of IkB takes place. Free NF-kB translocate to 
the nucleus and produces inflammatory cytokines along with the increased production of NLRP3 whose assembly activates caspase-1 which in turn is responsible for 
the maturation of pro-inflammatory cytokines. NLRP3 inflammasome is also responsible for the cleavage of full-length GSDMD into N terminal GSDMD which forms 
oligomeric pores in the plasma membrane and helps in extruding cytokines in the extracellular milieu which in turn exacerbates inflammation, this process is termed 
as pyroptosis. Bacteria-derived peptidoglycans has been found to trigger TLR2 receptors in microglia as well as function as DAMPs which are sensed by NLRP3 
inflammasome. Bacterial amyloids lead to mitochondrial dysfunction as well as lysosomal damage which in turn also activates NLRP3 inflammasomes. Figure created 
with Biorender.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
10 

contribute to the generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, most likely 
by activation of NLRP3 (Pistollato et al., 2016). In addition to these, 
microbial metabolites play a significant role in the regulation of the 
NLRP3 inflammasome. Probiotics, such as Lactobacillus plantarum MA2, 
have been demonstrated to reduce anxiety-like behaviors and cognitive 
deficits in AD rats by altering the composition and structure of the GM, 
reducing intestinal mucosal damage, and preventing the activation of 
microglia as well as neuroinflammation via the TLR4/MYD88/NLRP3 
signaling pathway (Wang et al., 2022). Further, through tryptophan 
metabolism, indole produced from the microbiota inhibits the activation 
of the NF-κB signaling pathway and increases the production of aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor, along with NLRP3 inflammasome, which subse­
quently lowers the inflammatory response preventing Aβ accumulation 
and tau hyperphosphorylation (Praveenraj et al., 2022). Contrarily, the 
metabolite TMAO, which is generated from the GM, has been discovered 
to promote NLRP3 inflammasome activation in both the periphery and 
the CNS, and its level escalates with age-related cognitive impairment 
(Praveenraj et al., 2022). Mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, 
neuronal ageing, and synaptic damage in the brain have also been 
associated with TMAO (Praveenraj et al., 2022). Therefore, a deeper 
comprehension of the interactions between NLRP3 and the GM as well as 
the identification of foods or probiotics that might help maintain its 
homeostasis could lead to novel treatment approaches for neurological 
disorders (Yang et al., 2023). Research into the involvement of specific 
bacteria in aging and AD particularly in the context of altered phago­
cytic phenomena of microglia is also gaining wide popularity. A study 
has reported that Bacteroides fragilis when orally administered to 
APP/PS1 mice at the stage of early plaque formation resulted in 
increased number of plaques and decreased microglial gene expression 
associated with phagocytosis such as Trem2, Cathepsin L and 
colony-stimulating factor 2 receptor beta leading to impaired Aβ clear­
ance (Was´en et al., 2024).
Oxidative stress, a significant factor in AD, is closely related to 
chronic inflammation. Microglial oxidative stress and inflammation are 
greatly regulated by the GM (Li et al., 2021). Previous research suggests 
that the microbiome affects oxidative stress and antioxidative meta­
bolism in the healthy brain, both of which are essential for the CNS 
accurate functioning (Li et al., 2021). Both pathogenic and commensal 
bacteria in the gut have the ability to modify cellular ROS via modifying 
mitochondrial activity (Swanson et al., 2011; Zorov et al., 2014). 
Commensal bacteria tend to produce formylated peptides that binds to 
neutrophil and macrophage G protein-coupled receptors, inducing 
inflammation in epithelial cells resulting in superoxide production by 
NADPH oxidase 1 thereby causing an increase in cellular ROS 
(Shandilya et al., 2022). The gut epithelia is a rich source of nitric oxide 
because gut Lactobacilli and Bifidobacterium have the capacity to convert 
nitrate and nitrites into nitric oxide (Tiso and Schechter, 2015). Simi­
larly, Streptococcus and Bacilli produce nitric oxide from L-arginine in the 
presence of nitric oxide synthase (Tiso and Schechter, 2015). Higher 
nitric oxide concentrations have negative effects due to the development 
of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species such as superoxide and H2O2, 
which then produce highly reactive hydroxyl radicals which is corre­
lated to axonal degeneration, neuroinflammation and progression of 
neurodegenerative disorders (Swanson et al., 2011). Hydrogen sulphide 
is produced in the gut when pathogenic bacteria like Salmonella and 
Escherichia coli breakdown amino acids that contain sulphur (Cirino 
et al., 2023). Moreover, the generation of ATP as well as lactate both 
decrease when hydrogen sulphide levels are elevated, and cyclo­
oxygenase 2 (COX-2) activity is inhibited accompanied with low con­
sumption of oxygen by mitochondria and an elevated expression of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines contributing to stimulate hypertension 
and neuroinflammation (Ayaz and Zubcevic, 2020; Lee and Wang, 2016; 
Wang, 2014). There are a variety of pathways that are reported for 
neurotoxic substances such as lipopolysaccharides and amyloid proteins 
produced by microbiota to enter the CNS (Cobley et al., 2018). These 
substances 
encourage 
the 
activation 
of 
microglia 
and 
neuroinflammation, which increases the production of ROS and makes 
the neurons more vulnerable to oxidative stress (Cobley et al., 2018). It 
has been demonstrated that the GM secreted Aβ tends to localize and 
further accumulates in the mitochondria, resulting in an increased 
mitochondrial toxicity, particularly by the dysfunction of mitochondrial 
respiration and the resultant ROS overproduction (Jung et al., 2024). 
According to a recent hypothesis, mitochondrial components including 
mitochondrial DNA and cardiolipin may serve as DAMPs that might 
activate innate immune responses throughout the pathological pro­
gression of AD (Deus et al., 2022; Picca et al., 2020). Thus, it may be 
suggested that bacterial amyloids induce mitochondria to release 
DAMPs, which then DAMPs activate TLRs present on microglia, result­
ing in the excessive production and release of proinflammatory cyto­
kines, and oxidative stress, resulting in sustained and exaggerated 
neuroinflammatory environment in AD (Jurc˘au et al., 2022).
9.2. Microglia activation by GM-derived metabolites and related signaling 
cascades
Microglia have been considered as primary cell group that responds 
to the metabolites originating from the gut (Zhou et al., 2023). Studies 
have corroborated that eradicating the microbiota through the devel­
opment of GF mice or hindering the microbiome metabolic activity by 
treatment with antibiotic tends to decrease microglial activation and Aβ 
plaque burden (Mez¨o et al., 2020). When the supplementation of SCFA 
was performed in microbiota-eradicated GF mice, it has been shown to 
enhance microglial maturation, indicating a more active microglial 
phenotype (Mez¨o et al., 2020). Microglial recruitment to Aβ plaques was 
found to be higher in SCFA-treated APPPS1 GF mice than in 
control-treated mice (Harach et al., 2017). Also, the ApoE gene was 
upregulated and the ApoE-Trem2 pathway was subsequently activated 
by SCFA supplementation (Colombo et al., 2021) (Fig. 3). It has been 
discovered that elevated microglial ApoE mediates faster Aβ deposition 
during early stage of amyloidogenesis (Colombo et al., 2021). In 
co-aggregation with Aβ fibrils, ApoE helps in plaque seeding and sta­
bilize plaque cores (Colombo et al., 2021). It has been discovered that 
SCFAs produced by gut microorganisms interact with microglia by 
crossing the BBB (O’Riordan et al., 2022). In one study, it was proposed 
that either SCFAs alone or SCFA in combination could reduce the in­
flammatory response of microglia (Wenzel et al., 2020). In a study it was 
found that when cultured human THP-1 monocytic cells and differen­
tiated human HL-60 myelomonocytic cells mainly taken to mimic the 
immune functions of human microglia were taken and mixture of SCFAs 
such as butyrate, acetate, formate, valerate and propionate were added 
to the cells alone or in combination, resulted in decreased secretion of 
TNF- α, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, IL-1β and cytotoxins by 
THP-1 cells when incubated with either a mixture of SCFAs or SCFA 
alone (Wenzel et al., 2020). Additionally, the phagocytic activity of 
immune stimulated THP-1 cells was reduced by formate and valerate 
alone (Wenzel et al., 2020). These findings suggests that microglia 
functions could be regulated by microbial SCFAs (Wenzel et al., 2020). 
Studies have shown that sodium butyrate has the ability to reduce 
microglial activation and pro-inflammatory cytokines secretion (Wei 
et al., 2023). Moreover, butyrate administration suppresses LPS-induced 
pro-inflammatory alterations and produces morphological and func­
tional changes in the microglia towards a homeostatic profile as seen in 
both in vitro as well as in vivo conditions (Silva et al., 2020; Wei et al., 
2023; Yamawaki et al., 2018). It has also been demonstrated that acetate 
treatment of microglia primary culture reduces inflammatory signaling 
by decreasing the production of IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α and the subse­
quent phosphorylation of p38 MAPK, NF-κB and JNK (Soliman et al., 
2012).
The microbiota-gut-brain axis, which may be mediated by indoles, 
plays a significant role in regulating neuroinflammation (Yin et al., 
2023). In AD and tryptophan-deficient diets, the composition of 
indoles-producing bacteria in the gut was drastically altered. The 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
11 

relative abundance of Parasutterella, Agathobacter at the genus level and 
Muribaculaceae, Atopobiaceae, Prevotellaceae at the family level were 
drastically reduced in AD conditions with tryptophan deficiency (Sun 
et al., 2022) (Table 1 Entry-7). Lactobacillus a key indole-producing 
bacteria was found to be reduced in 5xFAD mice (Sun et al., 2022). 
The enzymes aromatic amino acid aminotransferase and indole-3-lactic 
acid dehydrogenase in Lactobacillus spp. converts tryptophan into 
indole-3-acetaldehyde, indole-3-acetic acid and indole-3-lactic acid. 
According to a study, metabolites such as I3C and 2, 2′-aminophenyl 
indole, which are produced by bacteria, reduced the inflammatory 
processes in microglia (Sun et al., 2022). Indoles produced by the GM 
tends to act on aryl hydrocarbon receptors, which is one of the major 
transcription factors of microglia (Sun et al., 2022). When aryl hydro­
carbon receptor are activated by indoles, it inhibits the NF-κB signaling 
pathway, decrease the transcription of proinflammatory factors, 
including IL-6 and TNF-α, promoting the release of anti-inflammatory 
factor IL-10 hence, preventing the inflammatory process of microglia 
in APP/PS1 mice (Sun et al., 2022).
9.2.1. Bile acids
BAs have emerged as a star molecule in microbiota-gut-brain axis 
and researchers in recent years are interested in them due to their 
incredible therapeutic potential in models of neurological disorders, 
neurodegenerative diseases, and neuropsychiatric disorders (Rosa et al., 
2018). BAs signaling via neural pathways may either occur directly i.e. 
via its receptors present in the central and enteric nervous system or 
indirectly i.e. via the FXR-FGF15/19 axis (Liu et al., 2020). In microglia, 
it has been reported that activation of primary BA receptors, such as 
sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 2, can result in an elevation of che­
mokine ligand 2 release from neurons as well as microglial activation 
(Weng et al., 2022) (Fig. 3). It is through the FXR and Takeda G 
protein-coupled receptor 5 pathways (TGR5), secondary BA which 
mainly includes tauroursodeoxycholic acid and hyodeoxycholic acid 
reduces both CNS and microglial inflammation (Weng et al., 2022). The 
most extensively researched BAs, TUDCA and UDCA, play significant 
roles in regulating the functions of neuronal cells, microglial and 
astrocytic cells (Hou et al., 2021; Weng et al., 2022). Both TUDCA and 
UDCA are neuroprotective, and studies have shown that TUDCA pre­
vents both microglia proinflammatory polarization and astrocytic 
neurotoxic type A1 polarization in a dose-dependent manner (Cuevas 
et al., 2022; Romero-Ramírez et al., 2017). Additionally, TUDCA can 
lessen the release of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 from blood monocytes into the CNS, along 
with inhibiting microglial migration (Wang et al., 2023; Yanguas-Cas´as 
et al., 2014). TUDCA affinity to Takeda G protein-coupled receptor 5 in 
microglia elevated the intracellular cAMP levels, boost the expression of 
anti-inflammatory proteins such as IRAK-M, IL-10, PD-L1, IL-4Rα, PD-L1 
and Sphk1 and decrease the expression of pro-inflammatory proteins i.e. 
IL-12, inducible Nitric oxide synthase, which ultimately have an 
anti-neuroinflammatory effect in APP/PS1 mice (Kumar et al., 2022; 
Yanguas-Cas´as et al., 2017). This process involved the activation of 
cAMP-activated protein kinase A along with the inhibition of NF-κB. By 
suppressing NLRP3, BAs can indirectly regulate the NF-κB pathway 
(Calmus and Poupon, 2014). Also, by modifying the TGR5/AKT/NF-κB 
pathway, another secondary BA, Hyodeoxycholic acid, has been found 
to lessen the LPS-triggered inflammatory microglia both in vitro and in 
vivo (Zhu et al., 2022). UDCA also has anti-inflammatory effects as seen 
by its potential to inhibit microglial NF-κB pathway and lowering the 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines like NO and IL-1β (Huang, 
2021).
Fig. 3. Schematic demonstrating the effect of metabolites on microglia. The altered microfauna of the gut produces increased amounts of LPS, SCFAs, Amyloid 
plaques, neurotransmitters as well as bile. These molecules first of all increase the inflammatory responses of the gut increasing the peripheral immune system which 
in turn release an avalanche of inflammatory cytokines responsible for the breaching of BBB. Moreover, these molecules are also transported via circulation through 
peripheral blood vessels and reach to the brain. In the brain these molecules activate the primary immune cells of the brain i.e., microglia which further results in the 
exacerbation of neuroinflammatory responses contributing to neuronal loss, neurodegeneration and finally AD. Figure created with Biorender.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
12 

9.2.2. Bacterial amyloids
The gut exposure to amyloids produced by bacteria primes and ac­
tivates the immune system, boosting immune response to the brain 
endogenous production of neuronal amyloid (Taglialegna et al., 2016). 
Fried-land and Chapman came up with the name mapranosis to describe 
the process of microbiota-associated proteinopathy and neuro­
inflammation (Friedland and Chapman, 2017). Bacterial amyloids 
mimics the prion proteins, causing cross-seeding, the process by which 
one amyloidogenic protein, such as tau, curli, α-syn, Aβ and prion in­
duces another host protein with an entirely different basic structure, to 
adopt pathogenic β-sheet form (Kowalski and Mulak, 2019; Zhou et al., 
2012). Remarkable evidence suggests that bacterial amyloids impact 
microglial activity. As previously mentioned, bacterial amyloid is 
recognized by the innate immune system as a PAMP including TLR2, 
CD14, NFkB, and inducible- nitric oxide synthase. Bacterial amyloid 
triggers the NLRP3 inflammasome, which then releases proin­
flammatory interleukin-1β in microglia, ultimately leading to aggrega­
tion of Aβ and tau (Friedland et al., 2020; Ising et al., 2019; Tejera et al., 
2019; Venegas et al., 2017) (Fig. 3). Both in vitro and in vivo in­
vestigations have revealed that when intestinal barrier is permeable 
enough, the bacterial amyloids which are immunogenic in nature enter 
the bloodstream and exacerbate neuroinflammation in the brain 
(Friedland and Chapman, 2017). Bacterial amyloids tend to remove 
β-amyloid peptide aggregates by activating microglia as a result of the 
interaction between microbial amyloids and microglia (Pluta et al., 
2020). In a pioneer study, it was found that when rats were administered 
with curli-producing Escherichia coli, they displayed an elevated 
neuronal α-syn deposition in both the gut and brain, as well as increased 
microgliosis and astrogliosis in comparison to rats exposed to bacteria 
that were incapable of producing curli (Chen et al., 2016; Kowalski and 
Mulak, 2019). GM of the order Lactobacillales, Enterobacterales and 
Bacillales secrete biofilm-associated proteins, these proteins possess 
amyloidogenic properties and assemble as amyloid like fibrils in insol­
uble fractions and have also found to induce α-syn aggregation 
(Fern´andez-Calvet et al., 2024). Biofilm-associated proteins amyloids 
also hinder chaperone-mediated autophagy ultimately leading to the 
aggregation of fibrils (Fern´andez-Calvet et al., 2024).
9.2.3. Microbial neurotransmitters
After being absorbed into the bloodstream, it has been discovered 
that gut-derived neurometabolites communicate with the CNS through 
stimulating nearby vagal afferents and also by their distant endocrine 
action (Kowalski and Mulak, 2019; Westfall et al., 2017). The presence 
of numerous Gram-positive facultative anaerobic or microaerobic bac­
teria in the gut, including Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, Bifidobacterium and 
Streptococcus, can affect the synthesis and transformation of neuro­
transmitters such as serotonin, dopamine and γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) in the nervous system (Konstanti et al., 2024; Wang et al., 
2023). Numerous receptors for neurotransmitters including glutamate, 
GABA, norepinephrine, cannabinoid and acetylcholine are expressed by 
microglia, and these receptors play a crucial role in regulating the 
activation of microglia (Liu et al., 2016; McMullan et al., 2012; Siva­
kumar et al., 2010) (Fig. 3). Microglia may increase or decrease their 
production of neuroactive molecules in response to neurotransmitter 
binding as a result of a positive or negative feedback loop, respectively 
(Liu et al., 2016). The molecules that gets secreted by microglia after 
stimulation by neurotransmitters, include free radicals such as NO and 
superoxide as well as cytokines and chemokines like TNFα and ILs, all of 
which are well known to exhibit neurodegenerative effects on neurons 
(Liu et al., 2016). For instance, it is known that microglial neurotrans­
mitter receptors cause nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(NADPH) oxidase to produce superoxide, which can either be neuro­
protective or neurotoxic depending on the neurotransmitter that 
initially triggered the microglial receptor (Harrigan et al., 2008; Mead 
et al., 2012).
9.2.4. LPS
The gram-negative bacilli, Bacteroides fragilis and Escherichia coli, two 
of the most prominent bacterial species of the GI tract, generate a wide 
range of pro-inflammatory neurotoxins that are not only pathogenic but 
are also damaging to the homeostatic functioning of neurons (Zhao 
et al., 2017). Dysbiosis associated with the GM leads to the shedding of 
inflammagens like LPS, which enhances gut permeability and causes 
systemic and neuro-inflammation (Kell and Pretorius, 2018). Shedding 
can happen in response to a variety of physiological and environmental 
signals, with the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction being the most extreme 
example of microbial shedding (Kell and Pretorius, 2018). This is simply 
an uncontrollable cytokine storm brought on by the fast release of in­
flammatory substances. As a result, there may be an impairment in 
synaptic plasticity, neural malfunction, apoptosis and induced vulner­
ability to cognitive decline (Daulatzai, 2014; Xin et al., 2019). Bacterial 
LPS has also been discovered in hippocampal brain lysates from AD 
patients, where the mean LPS levels were three times greater than in 
age-matched controls. This was shown to surge to 26-fold in patients 
with severe AD hippocampal degeneration (Pretorius et al., 2018; Zhao 
et al., 2017). TLR 4 which is abundantly present on microglia is 
considered as a prime receptor for LPS binding along with TLR2 and 
CD14 which are thereby involved in phagocytosis and removal of Aβ 
plaque (Rehman et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2014) (Fig. 3). TLR4-mediated 
activation of microglia reflects an important player in AD (Rehman 
et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2014). Increased microgliosis and astrogliosis in 
addition with higher levels of TLR2, IL-6, and TNF-α expression were 
discovered in the brains of animals exposed to curli-producing bacteria 
(Gonz´alez-Sanmiguel et al., 2020; Tursi and Tükel, 2018). Additionally, 
microglia activation worsens phagocytosis, which results in the buildup 
of Aβ42 (Pretorius et al., 2018; Xin et al., 2019). Further, the 
anti-inflammatory activities of Bifidobacterium spp. including Bifido­
bacterium bifidum, Bifidobacterium cantenulatum, Bifidobacterium breve, 
and Bifidobacterium adolescent known to inhibit LPS-induced IL-8 pro­
duction and TNFα expression (Khokhlova et al., 2012). Moreover, Bifi­
dobacteria are known to reduce the intestinal permeability (Abdulqadir 
et al., 2023). Further, Bifidobacterium supplementation has also been 
demonstrated to reduce intestinal LPS levels and repair the GI-mucosal 
barrier in mice (Ling et al., 2016; Saha and Dey, 2021). Thus, supple­
mentation with Bifidobacterium have resulted in decreased LPS-mediated 
neuroinflammation.
10. Overview of ongoing clinical studies evaluating the 
therapeutic impact of GM on AD
An exploration of the ongoing clinical investigations underscores the 
significance of the GM as a crucial susceptibility factor in AD. As of 
November 28, 2023, ClinicalTrials.gov has registered 17 observational 
and 20 interventional clinical trials. Table 2 provides a comprehensive 
overview, encompassing NCT number, study title, status, results, con­
dition, intervention, phase, type, and the year of initiation for studies 
assessing the impact of GM on AD. Notably, the majority of these clinical 
studies have commenced within the last five years, signifying recent 
advancements in recognizing the role of GM as a susceptibility factor in 
AD. However, it is noteworthy that most studies are still pending results, 
with only one clinical trial having reached completion.
11. GM modulation as a potential treatment strategy for shaping 
microglia activation and AD
As was previously mentioned, patients with AD have altered gut 
microbial composition (Zhuang et al., 2018); hence, altering the GM 
may be an effective treatment strategy to treat AD (Cheng et al., 2023; 
Zhu et al., 2020). Intestinal microbial makeup can be altered to lessen 
AD symptoms in mice (Brandscheid et al., 2017; Mancuso and Santan­
gelo, 2018). Despite early evidence of an inflammatory pathway 
participation, the precise role of GM in the genesis and progression of AD 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
13 

Table 2 
Clinical Studies Evaluating the Impact of GM on AD.
S. 
No.
NCT No.
Study Title
Study Status
Result
Conditions
Interventions
Phase
Type
Year
1
NCT03593941
Ageing Gut Brain Interactions
Completed
No
Dementia, AD
Other: standard diet
-
O
2018
2
NCT03827733
Gut Microbiota and Alzheimer’s 
Diseases
Unknown
No
AD
-
-
O
2018
3
NCT04100889
A Non-Interventional Pilot 
Study to Explore the Role of Gut 
Flora in Alzheimer’s Disease
Unknown
No
AD
Other: no intervention
-
O
2020
4
NCT03487380
Taxonomic and Functional 
Composition of the Intestinal 
Microbiome: A Predictor of 
Rapid Cognitive Decline in 
Patients with Alzheimer’s 
Disease
Unknown
No
AD, Intestinal 
Microbiota
Procedure: Fecal sample 
collection
NA
I
2017
5
NCT03998423
Oral Fecal Microbiota 
Transplant Feasibility Study in 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Terminated
No
AD
Biological: fecal microbiota 
transplant
1
I
2019
6
NCT06039267
Brain Health & the Microbiome
Recruiting
No
Mild Cognitive 
Impairment, Mild 
Dementia, AD
Other: gut microbiome testing
-
O
2023
7
NCT04094129
Evaluation of the Effect of 
Wismemo on Alzheimer’s 
Dementia Patients
Withdrawn
No
AD
Dietary supplement: wismemo
NA
I
2020
8
NCT05934188
Exploring the Gut-Brain Axis in 
Ageing and Neurodegeneration
Recruiting
No
Healthy, Prodromal AD, 
PD, Multiple Sclerosis
Diagnostic test: Inflammatory 
markers, AD biomarkers
-
O
2023
9
NCT05078944
Progress of Mild Alzheimer’s 
Disease in Participants on 
Acupuncture Versus Sham 
Acupuncture
Recruiting
No
AD
Device: Active acupuncture 
and Sham acupuncture, Drug: 
Donepezil Hydrochloride
NA
I
2022
10
NCT05943925
Dementias and Microbiota 
Composition: Is Possible to 
Revert the Dementia Symptoms 
Reverting the Microbiota 
Composition?
Recruiting
No
Dementia Alzheimers, 
Dementia with Lewy 
Bodies, PD Dementia,
Other: No intervention, 
dietary supplement: Probiotic 
supplement
-
O
2021
11
NCT05145881
Effect of Probiotics in 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Active not 
recruiting
No
AD
Dietary supplement: Probiotics
NA
I
2020
12
NCT05601856
Gut Microbiome and Blood 
Indices in Patients with AD and 
Their Spousal Caregivers
Recruiting
No
AD, Gut Biome
-
-
O
2022
13
NCT06094452
Effects of 24-week 
Computerized Cognitive 
Training in Patients with MCI 
and AD
Completed
No
Mild Cognitive 
Impairment, AD
Other: computerized cognitive 
training other: treatment as 
usual
NA
I
2020
14
NCT05181475
Long-term Efficacy and Safety 
Study of GV−971
Active not 
recruiting
No
AD
Drug: sodium oligomannate 
capsules (gv−971)
4
I
2021
15
NCT05256251
Westlake Longevity Cohort
Recruiting
No
Aging, AD, 
Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, 
Cardiometabolic 
Diseases
-
-
O
2021
16
NCT05532644
Correlation of P-glycoprotein 
Polymorphisms with Microbial 
Metabolites in Patients with 
Alzheimer’s Disease on 
Medication
Not yet 
recruiting
No
AD
Other: AD drugs
-
O
2022
17
NCT03991195
Intervention of Intestinal 
Microorganism in Mild 
Cognitive Impairment
Completed
No
Mild Cognitive 
Impairment, Dementia, 
Alzheimer Type, 
Neuroimaging
Dietary supplement: probiotic
NA
I
2019
18
NCT06083350
Effects of Yeast Beta-glucan on 
Cognitive Function in Patients 
with Mild Cognitive Impairment
Active not 
recruiting
No
Mild Cognitive 
Impairment, AD
Dietary supplement: Yeast 
beta glucan and Starch
NA
I
2023
19
NCT05905822
Dietary Plant Extracts, Colonic 
Microbes, and Apoe genetics 
Interactions study
Not yet 
recruiting
No
AD
-
-
O
2023
20
NCT05114499
Efficacy and Safety of Donepezil 
and Sodium Oligomannate in 
Patients with Mild to Moderate 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Not yet 
recruiting
No
AD
Drug: Donepezil and GV−971
-
O
2021
21
NCT05801380
Monitoring Drug Efficacy in 
Patients with Alzheimer’s 
Disease
Recruiting
No
AD
Drug: AChE inhibitor 
monotherapy, AChE inhibitor 
and N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor antagonist 
combination therapy
-
O
2022
(continued on next page)
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
14 

has not been determined. Replacing or replenishing the phyla may have 
therapeutic effects in light of the documented alterations in the GM of 
AD patients (Huynh et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2020).
Through an intricate web of neuronal, hormonal, and immunological 
pathways, the gut-brain axis enables communication between bacteria, 
metabolites, and neuroactive substances (Benakis et al., 2020; Huynh 
et al., 2022). Dietary changes thus gives health advantages that may be 
beneficial in controlling AD by reversing elevated neuroinflammation 
and oxidative stress, altered neuroactive pathways, and HPA axis dam­
age (Serra et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2020). Resolving diet-induced dysbiosis 
is a particularly exciting first step in combating the AD epidemic because 
FDA-approved drugs currently on the market have been shown to be 
ineffective, therefore, underscoring the need for alternative methods 
(Kumar et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2019a). In fact, a number 
of researchers discuss the intriguing potential of treatments that alter the 
GM, such as fermented foods, probiotics, and plant-based eating habits 
(Sayed et al., 2021;Kumar et al., 2022; Rose et al., 2021; Tiihonen et al., 
2010). Naturally, giving up unhealthy routines and Western foods may 
also stop the advancement of neurodegenerative disorders (Lee et al., 
2022; Wie¸ckowska-Gacek et al., 2021). In this section, we will discuss in 
detail key GM modulatory strategies and their influence on microglial 
activation and AD as a viable and potential therapeutic avenue to pre­
vent this debilitating disease.
11.1. Diet
Although the GM composition in adults is fairly resilient, it can be 
altered in individuals by both internal (disease status) as well as external 
(diet) stimulus (Park et al., 2020). According to epidemiological 
research unhealthy diets and lifestyle choices may raise the likelihood of 
developing AD. The Lancet Commission found that modifying risk fac­
tors, such as diet, might prevent 40 % of dementia and AD cases (Shi 
et al., 2021; van den Brink et al., 2019). The composition of the gut 
microbiome is altered by the nutrients available to the gut flora. People 
who consume more microbiota accessible carbohydrate have increased 
microbial richness and diversity than those who consume less 
Table 2 (continued)
S. 
No.
NCT No.
Study Title
Study Status
Result
Conditions
Interventions
Phase
Type
Year
22
NCT03856359
Trial of Rifaximin in Probable 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Completed
Yes
AD
Drug: Rifaximin 550 mg
2
I
2019
23
NCT04804618
Proteomics Study of Mild 
Cognitive Impairment and 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Recruiting
No
AD, Early Onset, Protein; 
Disease
-
-
O
2021
24
NCT04629547
Sleep Trial to Prevent 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Recruiting
No
Sleep, AD
Drug: Suvorexant 20 mg
2
I
2022
25
NCT04213391
Effects of Sulforaphane in 
Patients with Prodromal to Mild 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Unknown
No
AD
Dietary supplement: 
sulforaphane|
NA
I
2020
26
NCT05430867
Efficacy and Safety of 
Memantine and Sodium 
Oligomannate in Patients with 
Moderate to Severe Alzheimer’s 
Disease
Not yet 
recruiting
No
AD
Drug: Memantine and 
GV−971
PHASE4
I
2022
27
NCT04044131
Metabolic Cofactor 
Supplementation in Alzheimer’s 
Disease (AD) and Parkinson’s 
Disease (PD) Patients
Completed
No
AD, PD
Drug: Metabolic Cofactor and 
Sorbitol
2
I
2019
28
NCT04606420
Can Lifestyle Changes Reverse 
Early-Stage Alzheimer’s Disease
Active not 
recruiting
No
AD
Behavioral: Lifestyle medicine
NA
I
2018
29
NCT03847714
Probiotics in Dementia
Recruiting
No
Dementia, Alzheimer, 
Mixed Type (Etiology)
Dietary supplement: omni- 
biotic stress repair
NA
I
2019
30
NCT03370744
Prediction of Cognitive Decline 
by Neuroimaging Techniques 
and the Application in Diagnosis 
and Treatment of Preclinical AD
Completed
No
Subjective Cognitive 
Decline, Preclinical AD
Diagnostic test: 
Neuropsychological scale
-
O
2017
31
NCT05468905
China Longitudinal Aging and 
Cognitive Impairment Study
Recruiting
No
Aging, Mild Cognitive 
Impairment, AD
Other: None of intervention
-
O
2021
32
NCT05617508
N-DOSE AD: A Dose 
Optimization Trial of 
Nicotinamide Riboside in 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Recruiting
No
AD, Dementia
Other: Dietary supplement: 
nicotinamide riboside
NA
I
2022
33
NCT05887674
Shanghai Non-pharmacological 
Intervention for Mild Cognitive 
Impairment and Mild 
Alzheimer’s Disease
Recruiting
No
Mild Cognitive 
Impairment, Mild 
Dementia
Behavioral: Diet intervention, 
behavioral: Exercise and 
Cognitive training
NA
I
2023
34
NCT04265482
Community-based Cohort of 
Functional Decline in Subjective 
Cognitive Complaint Elderly
Unknown
No
Subjective Cognitive 
Complaint, Activities 
Daily Living, Dementia, 
AD
-
-
O
2017
35
NCT05322343
Biobank and Brain Health in 
Bordeaux.
Recruiting
No
Aging, Neurocognitive 
Disorders, AD, Anxiety
Other: Fasting blood sampling 
and Saliva collection and nasal 
or nasopharyngeal swab
-
O
2022
36
NCT03117829
Study: Diet and Exercise Study 
to Improve Brain Blood Flow: 
Blood Flow Improvement Trial
Completed
No
Prediabetes
Behavioral: Diet and Exercise
NA
I
2017
37
NCT05186090
Active Gains in Brain Using 
Exercise During Aging
Completed
No
Healthy, Cognitive 
Function
Behavioral: 24-week 
resistance exercise program
NA
I
2021
Note: Data is taken from https://ClinicalTrials.gov, accessed on November 28, 2023, with search strategy “Condition/disease: Alzheimer’s disease, other terms: Gut 
Microbiota.” O, Observational; I, Interventional; NA, not Applicable.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
15 

microbiota accessible carbohydrate and SCFA production is decreased 
by microbiota accessible carbohydrate limitation (Park et al., 2020; 
Yanguas-Cas´as et al., 2021). Diet plays a crucial role in GM dysbiosis, 
neuroinflammation and AD progression (Yanguas-Cas´as et al., 2021) 
(Fig. 4). As TgAPP mice fed with high fat diet induced anxiety, GM 
dysbiosis, increased expression of proinflammatory and phagocytosis 
related genes in the microglial cells (Yanguas-Cas´as et al., 2021). High 
fat diet enriched in saturated fatty-acids led to an increase in tau 
phosphorylation at serine residues associated with neurofibrillary pa­
thology in the hippocampus of wild-type (Xu et al., 2017). In a similar 
manner GM composition also relies upon the consumption of vegetarian 
and non-vegetarian diet, as sequence-based studies of GM diversity have 
showed that Prevotella (anti-inflammatory) is more common in a 
plant-based diet and has been linked with vegetarianism while the 
Bacteroides genus are present in diets high in animal protein and satu­
rated fats (Claesson et al., 2012; De Filippo et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2022). 
In comparison to controls, the keto diet, which is high in fat and low in 
carbohydrates, impairs memory performance and increases the pro­
portion of Proteobacteria, particularly Enterobacteriales, which are 
considerably harmful bacteria in AD rats (Al-kuraishy et al., 2024; Park 
et al., 2020). The dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH) diet, 
Mediterranean diet and the Mediterranean-DASH intervention for 
neurodegenerative delay diet are three dietary patterns that have been 
extensively investigated in the context of dementia, cognitive decline, or 
AD (Barnes et al., 2023; Grewal et al., 2020; van den Brink et al., 2019). 
These diets were shown to be associated with neuroprotection and 
mitigation of dementia and displayed a slower rate of cognitive decline 
and a reduced risk of AD (Barnes et al., 2023; Grewal et al., 2020; van 
den Brink et al., 2019). However, Mediterranean-DASH intervention for 
neurodegenerative delay impact was superior to those of the DASH diet 
and the Mediterranean diet (Barnes et al., 2023; Grewal et al., 2020; van 
den Brink et al., 2019).
Conversely, eating a western diet accelerates the development of AD 
due to genetic changes, compromised barrier function, and persistent 
inflammation (Więckowska-Gacek et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2021). 
According to a study, a lack of dietary fiber commonly known as fiber 
deficient causes neuroinflammation, cognitive impairment, gut dysho­
meostasis, and microbiota dysbiosis (a change in the makeup of Pro­
teobacteria and Bacteroidetes) (Shi et al., 2021). Additionally, fiber 
deficient animals had activated microglia with elevated phagocytic 
markers, which accelerated the engulfment of synapses in the hippo­
campus that eventually led to synaptic loss (Shi et al., 2021). Supple­
menting fiber deficient mice with SCFA reversed the leaky gut and 
cognitive deterioration (Shi et al., 2021). Similarly supplementing diets 
with high butyrate and acetate slowed down cognitive impairment in 
5xFAD mice (Zhou et al., 2023). SCFAs promoted microglial activation, 
improved microglial clustering around Aβ and their removal by 
phagocytosis thus, improved cognitive functions (Zhou et al., 2023).
11.2. Probiotics
Probiotics, which include Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and other 
beneficial microbes, serve a crucial role in managing the balance of in­
testinal microecology in humans (Wang et al., 2022). Recent research 
has demonstrated that treatment with probiotic can: 1) enhance intes­
tinal flora adhesion 2) significantly enhance intestinal microecology, 3) 
control the immune system, and 4) encourage the production of neu­
rotransmitters and other profitable metabolites to treat AD and other 
Fig. 4. Schematic illustrating GM modulation through various approaches. Antibiotics promote gut dysbiosis and ultimately leads to AD development, Aβ plaque 
accumulation and neurofibrillary tangle formation in the brain. Diet, FMT, and prebiotics decreases Aβ plaque accumulation and neurofibrillary tangle formation in 
the brain. Prebiotics and probiotics, they both have the tendency to improve barrier integrity, mucus formation, alter enteroendocrine function, decrease inflam­
mation and oxidative stress. They improve autophagy, ubiquitin proteolysis system, and homeostatic microglia function in the brain. Probiotics also secrete bacterio- 
toxins like bacteriocins, which prevents bacterial invasion and their adhesion with the intestinal epithelial cells. All of these therapeutic strategies ultimately improve 
cognitive function and synaptic dysfunction and therefor inhibits the AD pathologies and progression. Figure created with Biorender.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
16 

neurodegenerative diseases (Wang et al., 2022). Probiotic supplemen­
tation, dietary fiber intake probiotic and prebiotic enhanced foods are 
all examples of diet-modulated therapies. Probiotics can secrete and 
generate bacterio-toxins (such as, bacteriocins), which can prevent 
bacterial invasion and pathogen adhesion to epithelial cells (Cryan et al., 
2020) (Fig. 4). By having a trophic influence on the intestinal mucosa as 
well as impacts on cytokine release by epithelial cells, they also enhance 
barrier integrity and mucus formation. Treatment of APPNL−G−F with 
probiotic VSL#3 (consisting of eight live bacterial strains) has increased 
the levels of acetate, propionate lactate, isobutyrate, and butyrate in the 
serum along with the changes in GM composition (Kaur et al., 2020). 
According to a meta-analysis published in 2020, probiotics may improve 
cognitive 
function 
in 
AD 
and 
MCI 
patients 
due 
to 
their 
anti-inflammatory and antioxidative effects (Den et al., 2020). In com­
parison with untreated AD mice, probiotic-treated transgenic AD mice 
display improved cognitive function and a decline in the number of Aβ 
plaques in the hippocampus (Abraham et al., 2019). In APPPS1 trans­
genic mice, supplementation of probiotics and exercise has been found 
to have positive effects on amyloid buildup in the hippocampus region of 
the mouse brain. Additionally, oral probiotic therapy in 3xTg-AD mice 
reduced phosphorylated tau aggregates via altering the GM (Bonfili 
et al., 2020; D’Argenio and Sarnataro, 2021). Furthermore, Lactobacillus 
plantarum C29 was found to control NF-κB activation, reduce Aβ depo­
sition, and modulate microglia activation in the brains of 5xFAD 
transgenic mice (Lee et al., 2018). A study reported that administration 
of SLAB51 mixture in AD mice might reduce the Aβ burden, restores the 
autophagy and defective ubiquitin proteolysis system, and improves the 
cortical atrophy (Bonfili et al., 2017).
Regarding clinical studies, it was found that probiotics modify the 
gut microbiome while also lowers stress and promotes mental flexibility 
in healthy older adults, suggesting its therapeutic role (Kim et al., 2021). 
Likewise, a study compared the effects of administering probiotic milk 
(including Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus fer­
mentum and Bifidobacterium bifidum) to AD patients over the course of 12 
weeks to control milk (200 ml/day) (Akbari et al., 2016). It was 
discovered that those who received probiotics reported a decreased level 
of oxidative stress (malondialdehyde) and inflammation (C-reactive 
protein), as well as a noticeable increase in their cognitive score on the 
Mini Mental State Examination (Solanki et al., 2023). Further, probiotic 
interventions such as SLAB 51 cocktail treatment in the transgenic 
mouse model of AD caused changes in the microflora and also altered 
the content of metabolites of intestine such as SCFAs that tends to 
improve cognitive functions (Bonfili et al., 2018). A recent study has 
reported that oral administration of probiotics Bifidobacterium lactis, 
Levilactobacillus brevis, and Limosilactobacillus fermentum to 5XFAD mice 
improved spatial and recognition memory and also reduced Aβ accu­
mulation in hippocampus and cerebral cortex along with attenuation of 
microglial activation (Kim et al., 2024). Additionally, administration of 
probiotics to 5XFAD mice also ameliorated the elevated tau phosphor­
ylation in these transgenic mice (Kim et al., 2024).
11.3. Prebiotics
Prebiotics are fermented nutrients that alter the composition and/or 
activity of the GM, improving host health. The microbiota in the gut 
ferment undigested/unabsorbed carbohydrates to produce their main 
byproducts, such as lactic acid and SCFAs, which have a variety of ef­
fects, including the control of enteroendocrine serotonin secretion, a 
reduction in anxiety-like behavior, neuroinflammation, and an 
improvement in cognition (Burokas et al., 2017). The usage of prebiotics 
has been linked to multiple benefits for the immune system and 
gastrointestinal tract (Burokas et al., 2017). Prebiotic sialyllactose has 
been demonstrated to reduce stress-related changes in the colonic 
mucosa-associated microbiota community structure, anxiety-like 
behavior, and immature neuron cell counts in mice, regardless of 
immunological or endocrine function (Burokas et al., 2017). 
Additionally, oligosaccharides boosted N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 
signalling and BDNF expression in rats (Burokas et al., 2017). These 
prebiotics also attenuated microglia activation as seen in obese-insulin 
resistant rats (Chunchai et al., 2018).
Fructooligosaccharides was reported to significantly change the 
behavior, improve inflammation, oxidative stress, cognitive impairment 
and GM, regulated the synthesis and secretion of neurotransmitter, as 
well as decreased the expression of Aβ and tau in AD-like animals (Chen 
et al., 2017). Similar outcomes were shown in mice under chronic stress, 
where prebiotic (fructooligosaccharides and galactooligosaccharides) 
supplementation resulted in behavioral, neurochemical, genetic, and 
neuroendocrine changes that may have been partially induced by SCFAs 
(Burokas et al., 2017). Additionally galactooligosaccharides and fruc­
tooligosaccharides alone or in combination increased the levels of GABA 
and 5-HT, improved cognitive impairment, ameliorated proin­
flammatory cytokine levels and Aβ burden and in AAP/PS1 mice and 
human patients (Baldi et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023). Furthermore, 
prebiotic 
xylooligosaccharides 
treatment 
significantly 
mitigated 
surgery-induced cognitive impairment and alteration of intestinal 
microbiota, decreased inflammatory responses and enhanced the tight 
junction integrity in the hippocampus and intestine of APP/PS1 mice 
(Han et al., 2020). In the 5xFAD mice, mannan oligosaccharide greatly 
reduces the cognitive and mental shortcomings, which may be partially 
attributed to the altered microbiome and increased SCFA synthesis in 
the gut (Liu et al., 2021a). Hoffman and colleagues demonstrated that 
supplementing the diet of E4FAD mice with the prebiotic inulin similarly 
increased the synthesis of SCFAs and decreased neuroinflammation 
(Hoffman et al., 2019). Bifidobacterium breve, Streptococcus thermophilus, 
short-chain galactooligosaccharides, long-chain fructooligosaccharides, 
and acidic oligosaccharides derived from pectin are all present in human 
milk, and they all play protective roles against gastrointestinal infections 
by reducing the symptoms of AD, regulating the immune response, 
capturing viral particles, and preventing rotavirus infection (Chen et al., 
2017). Further, research is being conducted on the use of synbiotics, a 
specialized combination of probiotics and prebiotics, which work syn­
ergistically to promote gut health (Pandey et al., 2015). It was found that 
β-nicotinamide mononucleotide (a precursor for NAD+ synthesis), in 
combination with Lactobacillus plantarum and lactulose, classified as 
nicotinamide mononucleotide synbiotics restructured the GM in 
APP/PS1 mice, with a decrease in Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes, thereby 
ameliorating gut dysbiosis and significantly reducing Aβ plaques in AD 
(Zhang et al., 2024).
11.4. Antibiotics
Antibiotics are often used to get rid of or stop bacterial colonization 
in the human body, without specifically targeting any particular bac­
teria. Therefore, broad-spectrum antibiotics can significantly alter the 
GM makeup, diminish its diversity, and postpone colonization for a 
considerable amount of time following administration (Gough, 2022; 
Rea et al., 2011). Studies have revealed that different antibiotic thera­
pies lead to long- and/or short-term changes that alter the GM in both 
animals and humans (Dethlefsen and Relman, 2011; Nel Van Zyl et al., 
2022; Ye et al., 2024). Additionally, it has been shown in both animal 
and human research that the use of antibiotics and the ensuing dysbiosis 
is linked to alterations in behavior and brain chemistry (Angelucci et al., 
2019; Nel Van Zyl et al., 2022; Neuman et al., 2018) (Fig. 4). Antibiotic 
use in humans has been linked to neurological problems such anxiety 
and panic attacks to significant depression, psychosis, and delirium 
when given as a cocktail therapy (Mosaferi et al., 2021b). Despite this, 
neuropsychiatric side effects are not frequently linked to routine anti­
biotic usage in the general population. It has been demonstrated that 
administration of cocktail of antibiotics in APP/PS1 transgenic mice can 
worsen the cytokine levels and neuroinflammatory condition and 
therefore the disease itself (Mosaferi et al., 2021b). A further investi­
gation found that using a cocktail of antibiotics from early adolescence 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
17 

until adulthood reduced brain IL-6 and recognition memory in male 
C57BL/6 mice, but had no effect on the spatial memory, BDNF, Aβ42, or 
TNF-α levels (Mosaferi et al., 2021b). The usage of antibiotics and their 
impact on the microbiota and human health are still debatable, as some 
argue for their beneficial function and others for their detrimental 
impact on AD. Treatment with ABX (consisting of ampicillin, vanco­
mycin, metronidazole, and neomycin) antibiotics reduced the number of 
Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes bacteria and increased the abundance of 
the Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Sutterella, and Mycoplasma (linked to the 
maintenance of gut homeostasis), as well as improved cognitive 
impairment, motor activity alteration, and reversed Aβ accumulation in 
3xTg mice (Bello-Medina et al., 2022). Additionally, vertical trans­
ference of comparable bacterial species through coprophagy, lactation, 
and vagina has been documented in the F1 generation (Bello-Medina 
et al., 2022). Similarly treatment with Antibiotic cocktail in APPPS1–21 
decreased the Aβ accumulation (Dodiya et al., 2020).
Streptozotocin and ampicillin are among the potential harmful an­
tibiotics that disrupt the balance of gut microorganisms (Zarrinpar et al., 
2018). As per the hypothesis on GM and AD, the use of these antibiotics 
either benefits the condition or accelerates its progression. Ampicillin 
was given to rats, which resulted in an increase in serum corticosterone, 
an impairment in spatial memory, and an increase in anxiety-like 
behavior (Zarrinpar et al., 2018). Elevated glucocorticoids are linked 
to memory impairment and a decrease in hippocampus BDNF, two 
characteristics of AD pathology (Wang et al., 2015). It is interesting to 
note that administration of probiotics (Lactobacillus fermentum strain 
NS9) can undo the anomalies in their psychology and physiology which 
was elicited by ampicillin in rats (Wang et al., 2015). Similarly, GF mice 
are also characterized by similar molecular alterations, such changes in 
anxiety-like behavior, the expression of tight junction proteins, BDNF, 
neuropeptide Y, the serotonin transporter, Glutamate ionotropic recep­
tor N-methyl-D-aspartate type subunit 2B (GRIN2B) and HPA axis ac­
tivity (Angelucci et al., 2019; Bercik et al., 2011; Fr¨ohlich et al., 2016; 
Neufeld et al., 2011). Quinolone accelerated the course of AD and Aβ 
buildup in a time-dependent manner (Tern´ak et al., 2022). A number of 
studies have also demonstrated that certain antibiotics can have bene­
ficial impact in AD by lowering the neuroinflammation brought on by 
dysbiosis. These benefits include neuroprotection as well as cholinergic, 
anti-inflammatory, anti-tau, and anti-amyloid properties (Zhu et al., 
2021). Depletion of murine Bacteroides fragilis with metronidazole 
resulted in decreased amyloid load in aged 5XFAD mice and activated 
microglial pathways that were related to phagocytosis and lysosomal 
degradation (Was´en et al., 2024). Rifampicin treatment in AD animal 
models lowers the levels of inflammatory cytokines and Aβ in the brain 
(Zhu et al., 2021). Similar effects on Aβ are also produced by minocy­
cline, which effectively lessens microglia activation in rodent AD models 
(Bassett et al., 2021). Similar to this, rapamycin has been demonstrated 
to lessen tau phosphorylation in addition to Aβ and microglia activation 
(Ding et al., 2021). D-Cycloserine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 
partial agonist, helps AD patients and old rats with cognitive problems 
(Angelucci et al., 2019; Portero-Tresserra et al., 2018).
11.5. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT)
FMT which is the process of introduction of GM into the host, rep­
resents a potentially attractive therapeutic option against AD (Sun et al., 
2019b). FMT from a healthy donor to a patient or diseased animal is a 
conventional and gold-standard therapeutic approach for the 
re-establishment of a healthy gut microbial community and has been 
shown to have potent beneficial effects (Elangovan et al., 2022). 
Depression-like behaviors and pain were markedly improved by FMT 
from resilient rats to antibiotic-treated pseudo-GF mice (Settanni et al., 
2021). In PD mice model FMT decreased GM dysbiosis and alleviated 
physical impairment and for this reason FMT have been extensively 
studied using animal models of PD (Sun et al., 2019b). In APPs­
we/PS1dE9 transgenic mice, FMT treatment dramatically reduced 
cognitive impairments, Aβ buildup, synaptic dysfunction, and neuro­
inflammation caused by altered GM and SCFA levels (Sun et al., 2019b). 
Transfer of FMT from transgenic mice to antibiotic-treated APPPS1 mice 
reversed antibiotic-perturbed GM and brain amyloidosis partially 
(Dodiya et al., 2020). Improvement in cognitive function and Aβ uptake 
on FMT treatment in 5XFAD was found to be dependent on the age of 
donor, as transfer of microbiota from young mice to AD mice signifi­
cantly reversed the pathology compared to transfer from the old mice 
(Elangovan et al., 2022). Frequent transfers and transplants of faecal 
microbiota from WT mice to ADLPAPT mice decreased the development 
of amyloid plaque and NFT, cognitive impairment, glial responses 
particularly microglia activation; FMT also reversed the abnormal 
expression of genes related to intestinal macrophage activity and the rise 
in circulating blood inflammatory monocytes in ADLPAPT recipient mice 
(Kim et al., 2020). Similar to this, FMT therapy improved the microglia 
homeostasis, Aβ deposition profile, and GM composition in the APP/PS1 
animals (Dodiya et al., 2019; Varesi et al., 2022). Additionally, GM 
transferred from 5XFAD into wild type mice found that these mice had 
altered microglial-mediated neuroinflammation, altered microbiota 
composition, reduced neurogenesis, and produced less BDNF, which 
resulted in memory impairment (Kim et al., 2021). Furthermore, in a 
study using humanized gnotobiotic mice, faecal transplant from AD 
patients into GF AD mice reduced beneficial neuromodulators, such as 
valine and taurine, in these mice compared to faecal transplant from 
healthy controls (Fujii et al., 2019). FMT has been found to be a 
promising area of research for refractory diseases, as it has been shown 
to alleviate cognitive impairments in type 1 diabetic mice (Ye et al., 
2024). It was discovered that cognitive deficits in late-stage type 1 
diabetes (T1D) mice were significantly improved by transplanting faecal 
microbiota from 8-week-old healthy mice to T1D mice (Ye et al., 2024). 
Additionally, FMT regulated the intestinal microbiome by reducing the 
abundance of gram negative bacteria and improved the integrity of the 
intestinal barrier, which prevented LPS from entering the bloodstream 
and NLRP3 activation in the hippocampus, and improved cognitive 
functions in T1D mice (Ye et al., 2024). Similar to animal models, FMT 
from a healthy person to an AD patient improved cognitive imbalance, 
microbiome dysbiosis, and altered the diversity of microbiota influ­
encing the microbiome-gut-brain axis and these beneficial outcomes 
may be related to the transformed gut flora and increased levels of 
SCFAs (Park et al., 2021) (Fig. 4). Repeated FMT improves cognitive 
function in cognitive domains of attention and short-term memory in 
addition to daily living ability (Park et al., 2022). As many studies have 
suggested the advantage of healthy GM transplantation in alleviating 
neurological conditions/pathology, therefore poop pills containing 
microbiota from healthy gut was developed. The poop pill has been 
shown to be successful in treating autism symptoms and Clostridium 
difficile infections in clinical trials. The criterion for choosing healthy gut 
bacteria and donors who supply them, however, must be made clear 
(Kim et al., 2021).
12. Conclusion and future perspective
In conclusion, the emerging understanding of the GM and microglia 
bi-directional axis in the modulation of AD presents a promising avenue 
for further research and potential therapeutic interventions. The intri­
cate communication between the GM and microglia, the resident im­
mune cells of the brain, highlights the importance of considering the gut- 
brain axis in the context of neurodegenerative diseases. With the 
increasing prevalence of AD and the limited success of current treatment 
strategies, exploring this novel axis holds great potential for improving 
our understanding of the disease and developing targeted therapies in 
the future. Additionally, targeting the gut-brain axis offers a more ho­
listic approach to AD treatment, addressing not just the brain but also 
the gut and potentially influencing the disease progression in a more 
comprehensive manner.
Gut dysbiosis has been found to play a significant role in microglia 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
18 

activation and neuroinflammation, as well as oxidative stress, in AD 
(Shandilya et al., 2022). Understanding the connection between gut 
dysbiosis and these pathological mechanisms could open up new ave­
nues for intervention in AD. By modulating the GM, it may be possible to 
mitigate microglia activation, reduce neuroinflammation, and alleviate 
oxidative stress, ultimately leading to improved outcomes for patients 
with AD (Sun et al., 2019a). For example, a study conducted on mice 
with AD showed that when their GM was manipulated through the use of 
probiotics, there was a significant decrease in microglia activation and 
neuroinflammation (Lee et al., 2018). This suggests that targeting the 
GM could potentially be a valuable therapeutic approach to mitigate the 
progression of AD. Additionally, another study found that an imbalance 
in the gut bacteria can lead to increased oxidative stress in the brains of 
individuals with AD (Shandilya et al., 2022). By restoring a healthy 
balance of gut bacteria, it may be possible to reduce oxidative stress and 
potentially slow down the decline in cognitive function associated with 
AD. This highlights the intricate connection between the gut and the 
brain, and the potential for interventions targeting the GM to have 
profound effects on neurodegenerative diseases. However, not all in­
dividuals with AD may experience oxidative stress due to imbalances in 
gut bacteria (Shandilya et al., 2022). Contrarily, some individuals with 
AD may have healthy levels of gut bacteria but still exhibit oxidative 
stress and cognitive decline, suggesting that there may be other factors 
at play in the development of neurodegenerative diseases besides the 
gut-brain axis (Shandilya et al., 2022). Furthermore, interventions tar­
geting the GM may not always lead to significant improvements in 
cognitive function and disease progression, emphasizing the complexity 
and multifactorial nature of neurodegenerative diseases. It is possible 
that gut bacteria alone cannot fully account for the progression of these 
diseases, and other mechanisms such as inflammation, genetics, and 
lifestyle factors may also contribute. Additionally, the diversity and 
composition of the GM may vary greatly among individuals, making it 
challenging to identify a universal solution for all cases. Further research 
is needed to unravel the intricate interplay between the gut and the 
brain and to develop more effective and personalized therapeutic stra­
tegies for neurodegenerative diseases like AD.
Importantly, the use of GM composition and metabolites as diag­
nostic biomarkers could significantly improve and simplify the assess­
ment of AD progression and the cost-effective evaluation of preclinical 
and clinical investigations (Veziant et al., 2021). By identifying specific 
microbial signatures and metabolites associated with AD, it might be 
possible to develop a non-invasive and reliable test for AD. This would 
eliminate the need for costly and invasive procedures, such as brain 
imaging or lumbar punctures, and provide a more accessible method for 
diagnosing and monitoring the disease. Furthermore, these diagnostic 
biomarkers could also aid in identifying at-risk individuals before 
symptoms appear, allowing for earlier intervention and potentially more 
effective treatments. However, further research is necessary to establish 
the reliability and validity of these biomarkers before they can be 
implemented in a clinical setting.
The failure of GM-targeting interventions to prevent microglia acti­
vation and AD in clinical trials highlights the need for a deeper under­
standing of the complex relationship between the GM, the immune 
system, and neurodegenerative diseases. While pre-clinical studies have 
shown promising results in modulating the GM to reduce inflammation 
and improve cognitive function, the failure of these interventions in 
clinical trials raises questions about the intricacies of this intricate 
interplay. One possible explanation for the discrepancy between pre­
clinical studies and clinical trials could be the lack of standardization in 
intervention protocols as well as the heterogeneity of patient pop­
ulations. Additionally, the bidirectional communication between the gut 
and the brain, known as the gut-brain axis, adds another layer of 
complexity to this relationship. Understanding how alterations in the 
GM can affect immune responses in the brain may provide new thera­
peutic avenues for the prevention and treatment of neurodegenerative 
diseases. Furthermore, advances in human microbiome research have 
highlighted the crucial role of the GM in modulating various aspects of 
brain function, including cognition, behaviour, and mood. Therefore, by 
elucidating the intricate interplay between the GM and the immune 
system, researchers hope to develop innovative approaches that target 
the gut-brain axis to improve neurodegenerative outcomes. However, 
further investigations, including large-scale clinical trials, are needed to 
fully comprehend the potential of microbiota-based interventions in 
neurodegenerative diseases like AD.
Ethics approval
Not applicable.
Funding
The study was supported by a Start-Up Grant from University Grants 
Commission (UGC) Grant No. 30–564/2021(BSR) and the Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) Adhoc Grant (No. 5/4–5/3/13/ 
Neuro/2022-NCD-I) to SAB.
Consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Nargis Bano, Sameera Khan, and Shakir Ahamad, literature search, 
preparation of figures, and writing original draft, review and editing. 
Sumbul Khan, literature search, and writing first draft. Jitendra Kan­
sana, and Nawab John Dar, review and editing. Aamir Nazir, review and 
editing, supervision. Shahnawaz Ali Bhat, conceptualization, prepara­
tion of figures, and writing original draft, review and editing and su­
pervision. All authors have read and approved the final version of the 
manuscript.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The infrastructural facilities provided by department of Zoology, 
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, and funding agencies UGC, CSIR 
and ICMR, New Delhi, India are highly acknowledged. Further research 
fellowships to Nargis Bano from CSIR, New Delhi, Sameera Khan from 
UGC, New Delhi and Sumbul Khan from ICMR, New Delhi (Adhoc Grant: 
No.5/4–5/3/13/Neuro/2022-NCD-I) are highly acknowledged.The 
CSIR-CDRI communication number of this manuscript is 10859.
During the preparation of this work the author(s) used QuillBot in 
order to improve the readability and language of the manuscript. After 
using this tool, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed 
and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the published article.
References
García-Contreras, A., A, V´asquez-Garibay, M., E., A, Godínez-M´endez, L., 2023. 
Probiotics, Prebiotics, and Synbiotics on Constipation in Children with Cerebral 
Palsy. in: Neuropediatrics - Recent Advances and Novel Therapeutic Approaches 
[Working Title]. IntechOpen. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.1002952.
Aaldijk, E., Vermeiren, Y., 2022. The role of serotonin within the microbiota-gut-brain 
axis in the development of Alzheimer’s disease: A narrative review. Ageing Res. Rev. 
75, 101556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2021.101556.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
19 

Abdulqadir, R., Engers, J., Al-Sadi, R., 2023. Role of Bifidobacterium in Modulating the 
Intestinal Epithelial Tight Junction Barrier: Current Knowledge and Perspectives. 
Curr. Dev. Nutr. 7, 102026. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cdnut.2023.102026.
Abraham, D., Feher, J., Scuderi, G.L., Szabo, D., Dobolyi, A., Cservenak, M., Juhasz, J., 
Ligeti, B., Pongor, S., Gomez-Cabrera, M.C., Vina, J., Higuchi, M., Suzuki, K., 
Boldogh, I., Radak, Z., 2019. Exercise and probiotics attenuate the development of 
Alzheimer’s disease in transgenic mice: Role of microbiome. Exp. Gerontol. 115, 
122–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2018.12.005.
Aghamajidi, A., Maleki Vareki, S., 2022. The Effect of the Gut Microbiota on Systemic 
and Anti-Tumor Immunity and Response to Systemic Therapy against Cancer. 
Cancers (Basel) 14, 3563. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14153563.
Ain, Q. ul, Batool, M., Choi, S., 2020. TLR4-Targeting Therapeutics: Structural Basis and 
Computer-Aided Drug Discovery Approaches. Molecules 25, 627. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/molecules25030627.
Akbari, E., Asemi, Z., Daneshvar Kakhaki, R., Bahmani, F., Kouchaki, E., Tamtaji, O.R., 
Hamidi, G.A., Salami, M., 2016. Effect of Probiotic Supplementation on Cognitive 
Function and Metabolic Status in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Randomized, Double-Blind 
and Controlled Trial. Front. Aging Neurosci. 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnagi.2016.00256.
Al-kuraishy, H.M., Jabir, M.S., Albuhadily, A.K., Al-Gareeb, A.I., Jawad, S.F., Swelum, A. 
A., Hadi, N.R., 2024. Role of ketogenic diet in neurodegenerative diseases focusing 
on Alzheimer diseases: The guardian angle. Ageing Res. Rev. 95, 102233. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2024.102233.
Al Bander, Z., Nitert, M.D., Mousa, A., Naderpoor, N., 2020. The Gut Microbiota and 
Inflammation: An Overview. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17, 7618. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17207618.
Alizadeh, K., Moghimi, H., Golbabaei, A., Alijanpour, S., Rezayof, A., 2022. Post- 
Weaning Treatment with Probiotic Inhibited Stress-Induced Amnesia in Adulthood 
Rats: The Mediation of GABAergic System and BDNF/c-Fos Signaling Pathways. 
Neurochem. Res. 47, 2357–2372. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-022-03625-w.
Alsegiani, A., Shah, Z., 2022. The influence of gut microbiota alteration on age-related 
neuroinflammation and cognitive decline. Neural Regen. Res. 17, 2407. https://doi. 
org/10.4103/1673-5374.335837.
Ananthaswamy, A., 2011. Faecal transplant eases symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. 
N. Sci. 209, 8–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0262-4079(11)60124-3.
Angelucci, F., Cechova, K., Amlerova, J., Hort, J., 2019. Antibiotics, gut microbiota, and 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflamm. 16, 108. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974- 
019-1494-4.
Araújo, J.R., Marques, C., Rodrigues, C., Calhau, C., Faria, A., 2024. The metabolic and 
endocrine impact of diet-derived gut microbiota metabolites on ageing and 
longevity. Ageing Res. Rev. 100, 102451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
arr.2024.102451.
Arrona Cardoza, P., Spillane, M.B., Morales Marroquin, E., 2022. Alzheimer’s disease and 
gut microbiota: does trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) play a role? Nutr. Rev. 80, 
271–281. https://doi.org/10.1093/nutrit/nuab022.
Asai, H., Ikezu, S., Tsunoda, S., Medalla, M., Luebke, J., Haydar, T., Wolozin, B., 
Butovsky, O., Kügler, S., Ikezu, T., 2015. Depletion of microglia and inhibition of 
exosome synthesis halt tau propagation. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1584–1593. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/nn.4132.
Asano, Y., Hiramoto, T., Nishino, R., Aiba, Y., Kimura, T., Yoshihara, K., Koga, Y., 
Sudo, N., 2012. Critical role of gut microbiota in the production of biologically 
active, free catecholamines in the gut lumen of mice. Am. J. Physiol. Liver Physiol. 
303, G1288–G1295. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.00341.2012.
Ashley, S.L., Sjoding, M.W., Popova, A.P., Cui, T.X., Hoostal, M.J., Schmidt, T.M., 
Branton, W.R., Dieterle, M.G., Falkowski, N.R., Baker, J.M., Hinkle, K.J., Konopka, K. 
E., Erb-Downward, J.R., Huffnagle, G.B., Dickson, R.P., 2020. Lung and gut 
microbiota are altered by hyperoxia and contribute to oxygen-induced lung injury in 
mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 12. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aau9959.
Ashton, N.J., Leuzy, A., Karikari, T.K., Mattsson-Carlgren, N., Dodich, A., Boccardi, M., 
Corre, J., Drzezga, A., Nordberg, A., Ossenkoppele, R., Zetterberg, H., Blennow, K., 
Frisoni, G.B., Garibotto, V., Hansson, O., 2021. The validation status of blood 
biomarkers of amyloid and phospho-tau assessed with the 5-phase development 
framework for AD biomarkers. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 48, 2140–2156. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00259-021-05253-y.
Askarova, S., Umbayev, B., Masoud, A.-R., Kaiyrlykyzy, A., Safarova, Y., Tsoy, A., 
Olzhayev, F., Kushugulova, A., 2020. The Links Between the Gut Microbiome, Aging, 
Modern Lifestyle and Alzheimer’s Disease. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 10. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2020.00104.
Athapaththu, A.M.G.K., Lee, K.T., Kavinda, M.H.D., Lee, S., Kang, S., Lee, M.-H., 
Kang, C.-H., Choi, Y.H., Kim, G.-Y., 2022. Pinostrobin ameliorates 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation and endotoxemia by inhibiting LPS 
binding to the TLR4/MD2 complex. Biomed. Pharmacother. 156, 113874. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2022.113874.
Atienza, M., Ziontz, J., Cantero, J.L., 2018. Low-grade inflammation in the relationship 
between sleep disruption, dysfunctional adiposity, and cognitive decline in aging. 
Sleep. Med. Rev. 42, 171–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2018.08.002.
Bajaj, J.S., Ahluwalia, V., Steinberg, J.L., Hobgood, S., Boling, P.A., Godschalk, M., 
Habib, S., White, M.B., Fagan, A., Gavis, E.A., Ganapathy, D., Hylemon, P.B., 
Stewart, K.E., Keradman, R., Liu, E.J., Wang, J., Gillevet, P.M., Sikaroodi, M., 
Moeller, F.G., Wade, J.B., 2016. Elderly patients have an altered gut-brain axis 
regardless of the presence of cirrhosis. Sci. Rep. 6, 38481. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
srep38481.
Baldi, S., Mundula, T., Nannini, G., Amedei, A., 2021. Microbiota shaping — the effects 
of probiotics, prebiotics, and fecal microbiota transplant on cognitive functions: A 
systematic review. World J. Gastroenterol. 27, 6715–6732. https://doi.org/ 
10.3748/wjg.v27.i39.6715.
Barker, J.H., Weiss, J.P., 2019. Detecting lipopolysaccharide in the cytosol of 
mammalian cells: Lessons from MD-2/TLR4. J. Leukoc. Biol. 106, 127–132. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/JLB.3MIR1118-434R.
Barnes, L.L., Dhana, K., Liu, X., Carey, V.J., Ventrelle, J., Johnson, K., Hollings, C.S., 
Bishop, L., Laranjo, N., Stubbs, B.J., Reilly, X., Agarwal, P., Zhang, S., Grodstein, F., 
Tangney, C.C., Holland, T.M., Aggarwal, N.T., Arfanakis, K., Morris, M.C., Sacks, F. 
M., 2023. Trial of the MIND Diet for Prevention of Cognitive Decline in Older 
Persons. N. Engl. J. Med. 389, 602–611. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2302368.
Bassett, B., Subramaniyam, S., Fan, Y., Varney, S., Pan, H., Carneiro, A.M.D., Chung, C. 
Y., 2021. Minocycline alleviates depression-like symptoms by rescuing decrease in 
neurogenesis in dorsal hippocampus via blocking microglia activation/phagocytosis. 
Brain. Behav. Immun. 91, 519–530. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2020.11.009.
B¨auerl, C., Collado, M.C., Diaz Cuevas, A., Vi˜na, J., P´erez Martínez, G., 2018. Shifts in gut 
microbiota composition in an APP/PSS1 transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease during lifespan. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 66, 464–471. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/lam.12882.
Bello-Medina, P.C., Corona-Cervantes, K., Zavala Torres, N.G., Gonz´alez, A., P´erez- 
Morales, M., Gonz´alez-Franco, D.A., G´omez, A., García-Mena, J., Díaz-Cintra, S., 
Pacheco-L´opez, G., 2022. Chronic-Antibiotics Induced Gut Microbiota Dysbiosis 
Rescues Memory Impairment and Reduces β-Amyloid Aggregation in a Preclinical 
Alzheimer’s Disease Model. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 8209. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms23158209.
Benakis, C., Martin-Gallausiaux, C., Trezzi, J.-P., Melton, P., Liesz, A., Wilmes, P., 2020. 
The microbiome-gut-brain axis in acute and chronic brain diseases. Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol. 61, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2019.11.009.
Bercik, P., Denou, E., Collins, J., Jackson, W., Lu, J., Jury, J., Deng, Y., Blennerhassett, P., 
Macri, J., McCoy, K.D., Verdu, E.F., Collins, S.M., 2011. The Intestinal Microbiota 
Affect Central Levels of Brain-Derived Neurotropic Factor and Behavior in Mice. 
Gastroenterology 141, 599–609.e3. https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2011.04.052.
Bivona, G., Iemmolo, M., Agnello, L., Lo Sasso, B., Gambino, C.M., Giglio, R.V., 
Scazzone, C., Ghersi, G., Ciaccio, M., 2023. Microglial Activation and Priming in 
Alzheimer’s Disease: State of the Art and Future Perspectives. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24, 
884. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24010884.
Bobba, A., Amadoro, G., Valenti, D., Corsetti, V., Lassandro, R., Atlante, A., 2013. 
Mitochondrial respiratory chain Complexes I and IV are impaired by β-amyloid via 
direct interaction and through Complex I-dependent ROS production, respectively. 
Mitochondrion 13, 298–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mito.2013.03.008.
Bonfili, L., Cecarini, V., Berardi, S., Scarpona, S., Suchodolski, J.S., Nasuti, C., Fiorini, D., 
Boarelli, M.C., Rossi, G., Eleuteri, A.M., 2017. Microbiota modulation counteracts 
Alzheimer’s disease progression influencing neuronal proteolysis and gut hormones 
plasma levels. Sci. Rep. 7, 2426. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-02587-2.
Bonfili, L., Cecarini, V., Cuccioloni, M., Angeletti, M., Berardi, S., Scarpona, S., Rossi, G., 
Eleuteri, A.M., 2018. SLAB51 Probiotic Formulation Activates SIRT1 Pathway 
Promoting Antioxidant and Neuroprotective Effects in an AD Mouse Model. Mol. 
Neurobiol. 55, 7987–8000. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-018-0973-4.
Bonfili, L., Cecarini, V., Gogoi, O., Berardi, S., Scarpona, S., Angeletti, M., Rossi, G., 
Eleuteri, A.M., 2020. Gut microbiota manipulation through probiotics oral 
administration restores glucose homeostasis in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurobiol. Aging 87, 35–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neurobiolaging.2019.11.004.
Borsom, E.M., Lee, K., Cope, E.K., 2020. Do the Bugs in Your Gut Eat Your Memories? 
Relationship between Gut Microbiota and Alzheimer’s Disease. Brain Sci. 10, 814. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci10110814.
Bostanciklio˘glu, M., 2019. The role of gut microbiota in pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Appl. Microbiol. 127, 954–967. https://doi.org/10.1111/jam.14264.
Brandscheid, C., Schuck, F., Reinhardt, S., Sch¨afer, K.-H., Pietrzik, C.U., Grimm, M., 
Hartmann, T., Schwiertz, A., Endres, K., 2017. Altered Gut Microbiome Composition 
and Tryptic Activity of the 5xFAD Alzheimer’s Mouse Model. J. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 56, 
775–788. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-160926.
Braniste, V., Al-Asmakh, M., Kowal, C., Anuar, F., Abbaspour, A., T´oth, M., Korecka, A., 
Bakocevic, N., Ng, L.G., Kundu, P., Guly´as, B., Halldin, C., Hultenby, K., Nilsson, H., 
Hebert, H., Volpe, B.T., Diamond, B., Pettersson, S., 2014. The gut microbiota 
influences blood-brain barrier permeability in mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 6. https://doi. 
org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3009759.
Bravo, J.A., Forsythe, P., Chew, M.V., Escaravage, E., Savignac, H.M., Dinan, T.G., 
Bienenstock, J., Cryan, J.F., 2011. Ingestion of Lactobacillus strain regulates 
emotional behavior and central GABA receptor expression in a mouse via the vagus 
nerve. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 16050–16055. https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.1102999108.
Brown, G.C., Heneka, M.T., 2024. The endotoxin hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. 
Neurodegener. 19, 30. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-024-00722-y.
Buawangpong, N., Pinyopornpanish, K., Siri-Angkul, N., Chattipakorn, N., 
Chattipakorn, S.C., 2022. The role of trimethylamine-N-Oxide in the development of 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Cell. Physiol. 237, 1661–1685. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
jcp.30646.
Burokas, A., Arboleya, S., Moloney, R.D., Peterson, V.L., Murphy, K., Clarke, G., 
Stanton, C., Dinan, T.G., Cryan, J.F., 2017. Targeting the Microbiota-Gut-Brain Axis: 
Prebiotics Have Anxiolytic and Antidepressant-like Effects and Reverse the Impact of 
Chronic Stress in Mice. Biol. Psychiatry 82, 472–487. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biopsych.2016.12.031.
Calmus, Y., Poupon, R., 2014. Shaping macrophages function and innate immunity by 
bile acids: Mechanisms and implication in cholestatic liver diseases. Clin. Res. 
Hepatol. Gastroenterol. 38, 550–556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinre.2014.07.007.
Cao, H., Liu, X., An, Y., Zhou, G., Liu, Y., Xu, M., Dong, W., Wang, S., Yan, F., Jiang, K., 
Wang, B., 2017. Dysbiosis contributes to chronic constipation development via 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
20 

regulation of serotonin transporter in the intestine. Sci. Rep. 7, 10322. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41598-017-10835-8.
Caradonna, E., Nemni, R., Bifone, A., Gandolfo, P., Costantino, L., Giordano, L., 
Mormone, E., Macula, A., Cuomo, M., Difruscolo, R., Vanoli, C., Vanoli, E., 
Ferrara, F., 2024. The Brain–Gut Axis, an Important Player in Alzheimer and 
Parkinson Disease: A Narrative Review. J. Clin. Med. 13, 4130. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/jcm13144130.
Cattaneo, A., Cattane, N., Galluzzi, S., Provasi, S., Lopizzo, N., Festari, C., Ferrari, C., 
Guerra, U.P., Paghera, B., Muscio, C., Bianchetti, A., Volta, G.D., Turla, M., 
Cotelli, M.S., Gennuso, M., Prelle, A., Zanetti, O., Lussignoli, G., Mirabile, D., 
Bellandi, D., Gentile, S., Belotti, G., Villani, D., Harach, T., Bolmont, T., Padovani, A., 
Boccardi, M., Frisoni, G.B., 2017. Association of brain amyloidosis with pro- 
inflammatory gut bacterial taxa and peripheral inflammation markers in cognitively 
impaired elderly. Neurobiol. Aging 49, 60–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
neurobiolaging.2016.08.019.
Chandra, S., Sisodia, S.S., Vassar, R.J., 2023. The gut microbiome in Alzheimer’s disease: 
what we know and what remains to be explored. Mol. Neurodegener. 18, 9. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s13024-023-00595-7.
Chauhan, V.S., Sterka, D.G., Furr, S.R., Young, A.B., Marriott, I., 2009. NOD2 plays an 
important role in the inflammatory responses of microglia and astrocytes to bacterial 
CNS pathogens. Glia 57, 414–423. https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.20770.
Chen, C., Liao, J., Xia, Y., Liu, X., Jones, R., Haran, J., McCormick, B., Sampson, T.R., 
Alam, A., Ye, K., 2022. Gut microbiota regulate Alzheimer’s disease pathologies and 
cognitive disorders via PUFA-associated neuroinflammation. Gut 71, 2233–2252. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326269.
Chen, D., Yang, X., Yang, J., Lai, G., Yong, T., Tang, X., Shuai, O., Zhou, G., Xie, Y., 
Wu, Q., 2017. Prebiotic Effect of Fructooligosaccharides from Morinda officinalis on 
Alzheimer’s Disease in Rodent Models by Targeting the Microbiota-Gut-Brain Axis. 
Front. Aging Neurosci. 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2017.00403.
Chen, S.G., Stribinskis, V., Rane, M.J., Demuth, D.R., Gozal, E., Roberts, A.M., 
Jagadapillai, R., Liu, R., Choe, K., Shivakumar, B., Son, F., Jin, S., Kerber, R., 
Adame, A., Masliah, E., Friedland, R.P., 2016. Exposure to the Functional Bacterial 
Amyloid Protein Curli Enhances Alpha-Synuclein Aggregation in Aged Fischer 344 
Rats and Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci. Rep. 6, 34477. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
srep34477.
Chen, Y., Colonna, M., 2022. Two-faced behavior of microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nat. Neurosci. 25, 3–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-021-00963-w.
Chen, Y., Xiao, L., Zhou, M., Zhang, H., 2024. The microbiota: a crucial mediator in gut 
homeostasis and colonization resistance. Front. Microbiol. 15. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fmicb.2024.1417864.
Chen, Y., Zhou, J., Wang, L., 2021. Role and Mechanism of Gut Microbiota in Human 
Disease. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fcimb.2021.625913.
Chen, Y., Fang, L., Chen, S., Zhou, H., Fan, Y., Lin, L., Li, J., Xu, J., Chen, Yuewen, Ma, Y., 
Chen, Yu, 2020. Gut Microbiome Alterations Precede Cerebral Amyloidosis and 
Microglial Pathology in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. Biomed. Res. Int. 
2020, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8456596.
Cheng, Y., Chen, C., Zhang, F., 2023. Immunity orchestrates a bridge in gut-brain axis of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Ageing Res. Rev. 85, 101857. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.arr.2023.101857.
Chunchai, T., Thunapong, W., Yasom, S., Wanchai, K., Eaimworawuthikul, S., 
Metzler, G., Lungkaphin, A., Pongchaidecha, A., Sirilun, S., Chaiyasut, C., 
Pratchayasakul, W., Thiennimitr, P., Chattipakorn, N., Chattipakorn, S.C., 2018. 
Decreased microglial activation through gut-brain axis by prebiotics, probiotics, or 
synbiotics effectively restored cognitive function in obese-insulin resistant rats. 
J. Neuroinflamm. 15, 11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-018-1055-2.
Cirino, G., Szabo, C., Papapetropoulos, A., 2023. Physiological roles of hydrogen sulfide 
in mammalian cells, tissues, and organs. Physiol. Rev. 103, 31–276. https://doi.org/ 
10.1152/physrev.00028.2021.
Claesson, M.J., Jeffery, I.B., Conde, S., Power, S.E., O’Connor, E.M., Cusack, S., Harris, H. 
M.B., Coakley, M., Lakshminarayanan, B., O’Sullivan, O., Fitzgerald, G.F., Deane, J., 
O’Connor, M., Harnedy, N., O’Connor, K., O’Mahony, D., van Sinderen, D., 
Wallace, M., Brennan, L., Stanton, C., Marchesi, J.R., Fitzgerald, A.P., Shanahan, F., 
Hill, C., Ross, R.P., O’Toole, P.W., 2012. Gut microbiota composition correlates with 
diet and health in the elderly. Nature 488, 178–184. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nature11319.
Clarke, G., Grenham, S., Scully, P., Fitzgerald, P., Moloney, R.D., Shanahan, F., Dinan, T. 
G., Cryan, J.F., 2013. The microbiome-gut-brain axis during early life regulates the 
hippocampal serotonergic system in a sex-dependent manner. Mol. Psychiatry 18, 
666–673. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2012.77.
Cobley, J.N., Fiorello, M.L., Bailey, D.M., 2018. 13 reasons why the brain is susceptible to 
oxidative stress. Redox Biol. 15, 490–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
redox.2018.01.008.
Collins, S.L., Stine, J.G., Bisanz, J.E., Okafor, C.D., Patterson, A.D., 2023. Bile acids and 
the gut microbiota: metabolic interactions and impacts on disease. Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. 21, 236–247. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00805-x.
Colloca, G., Di Capua, B., Bellieni, A., Fusco, D., Ciciarello, F., Tagliaferri, L., 
Valentini, V., Balducci, L., 2020. Biological and Functional Biomarkers of Aging: 
Definition, Characteristics, and How They Can Impact Everyday Cancer Treatment. 
Curr. Oncol. Rep. 22, 115. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11912-020-00977-w.
Colombo, A.V., Sadler, R.K., Llovera, G., Singh, V., Roth, S., Heindl, S., Sebastian 
Monasor, L., Verhoeven, A., Peters, F., Parhizkar, S., Kamp, F., Gomez de Aguero, M., 
MacPherson, A.J., Winkler, E., Herms, J., Benakis, C., Dichgans, M., Steiner, H., 
Giera, M., Haass, C., Tahirovic, S., Liesz, A., 2021. Microbiota-derived short chain 
fatty acids modulate microglia and promote Aβ plaque deposition. Elife 10. https:// 
doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59826.
Conway, J., A Duggal, N., 2021. Ageing of the gut microbiome: Potential influences on 
immune senescence and inflammageing. Ageing Res. Rev. 68, 101323. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.arr.2021.101323.
Cryan, J.F., O’Riordan, K.J., Sandhu, K., Peterson, V., Dinan, T.G., 2020. The gut 
microbiome in neurological disorders. Lancet Neurol. 19, 179–194. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30356-4.
Cucos, C.A., Dobre, M., Dragnea, E.M., Manda, G., Milanesi, E., 2022. Increased MYD88 
blood transcript in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. BMC Neurosci. 23, 13. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12868-022-00699-8.
Cuervo-Zanatta, D., Syeda, T., S´anchez-Valle, V., Irene-Fierro, M., Torres-Aguilar, P., 
Torres-Ramos, M.A., Shibayama-Salas, M., Silva-Olivares, A., Noriega, L.G., 
Torres, N., Tovar, A.R., Ruminot, I., Barros, L.F., García-Mena, J., Perez-Cruz, C., 
2023. Dietary Fiber Modulates the Release of Gut Bacterial Products Preventing 
Cognitive Decline in an Alzheimer’s Mouse Model. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 43, 
1595–1618. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10571-022-01268-7.
Cuevas, E., Burks, S., Raymick, J., Robinson, B., G´omez-Cris´ostomo, N.P., Escudero- 
Lourdes, C., Lopez, A.G.G., Chigurupati, S., Hanig, J., Ferguson, S.A., Sarkar, S., 
2022. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) is neuroprotective in a chronic mouse 
model of Parkinson’s disease. Nutr. Neurosci. 25, 1374–1391. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/1028415X.2020.1859729.
Cussotto, S., Sandhu, K.V., Dinan, T.G., Cryan, J.F., 2018. The Neuroendocrinology of the 
Microbiota-Gut-Brain Axis: A Behavioural Perspective. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 51, 
80–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yfrne.2018.04.002.
D’Argenio, V., Sarnataro, D., 2021. Probiotics, prebiotics and their role in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neural Regen. Res. 16, 1768. https://doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.306072.
Daulatzai, M.A., 2014. Role Stress, Depress, Aging Cogn. Decline Alzheimer’S. Dis. 
265–296. https://doi.org/10.1007/7854_2014_350.
De Filippo, C., Cavalieri, D., Di Paola, M., Ramazzotti, M., Poullet, J.B., Massart, S., 
Collini, S., Pieraccini, G., Lionetti, P., 2010. Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota 
revealed by a comparative study in children from Europe and rural Africa. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 107, 14691–14696. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005963107.
D´ecarie-Spain, L., Hayes, A.M.R., Lauer, L.T., Kanoski, S.E., 2024. The gut-brain axis and 
cognitive control: A role for the vagus nerve. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 156, 201–209. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2023.02.004.
Den, H., Dong, X., Chen, M., Zou, Z., 2020. Efficacy of probiotics on cognition, and 
biomarkers of inflammation and oxidative stress in adults with Alzheimer’s disease 
or mild cognitive impairment — a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Aging (Albany NY). 12, 4010–4039. https://doi.org/10.18632/aging.102810.
Dethlefsen, L., Relman, D.A., 2011. Incomplete recovery and individualized responses of 
the human distal gut microbiota to repeated antibiotic perturbation. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 108, 4554–4561. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1000087107.
Deus, C.M., Tavares, H., Beatriz, M., Mota, S., Lopes, C., 2022. Mitochondrial Damage- 
Associated Molecular Patterns Content in Extracellular Vesicles Promotes Early 
Inflammation in Neurodegenerative Disorders. Cells 11, 2364. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/cells11152364.
Ding, G., Yang, X., Li, Y., Wang, Y., Du, Y., Wang, M., Ye, R., Wang, J., Zhang, Yongkang, 
Chen, Y., Zhang, Yan, 2024. Gut microbiota regulates gut homeostasis, mucosal 
immunity and influences immune-related diseases. Mol. Cell. Biochem. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11010-024-05077-y.
Ding, Y., Liu, H., Cen, M., Tao, Y., Lai, C., Tang, Z., 2021. Rapamycin Ameliorates 
Cognitive Impairments and Alzheimer’s Disease-Like Pathology with Restoring 
Mitochondrial Abnormality in the Hippocampus of Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic 
Mice. Neurochem. Res. 46, 265–275. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-020-03160-6.
Dodiya, H.B., Frith, M., Sidebottom, A., Cao, Y., Koval, J., Chang, E., Sisodia, S.S., 2020. 
Synergistic depletion of gut microbial consortia, but not individual antibiotics, 
reduces amyloidosis in APPPS1-21 Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Sci. Rep. 10, 8183. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-64797-5.
Dodiya, H.B., Kuntz, T., Shaik, S.M., Baufeld, C., Leibowitz, J., Zhang, Xulun, Gottel, N., 
Zhang, Xiaoqiong, Butovsky, O., Gilbert, J.A., Sisodia, S.S., 2019. Sex-specific effects 
of microbiome perturbations on cerebral Aβ amyloidosis and microglia phenotypes. 
J. Exp. Med. 216, 1542–1560. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20182386.
Doifode, T., Giridharan, V.V., Generoso, J.S., Bhatti, G., Collodel, A., Schulz, P.E., 
Forlenza, O.V., Barichello, T., 2021. The impact of the microbiota-gut-brain axis on 
Alzheimer’s disease pathophysiology. Pharmacol. Res. 164, 105314. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.phrs.2020.105314.
Dong, Y., Yu, H., Li, X., Bian, K., Zheng, Y., Dai, M., Feng, X., Sun, Y., He, Y., Yu, B., 
Zhang, H., Wu, J., Yu, X., Wu, H., Kong, W., 2022. Hyperphosphorylated tau 
mediates neuronal death by inducing necroptosis and inflammation in Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Neuroinflamm. 19, 205. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-022-02567-y.
Elangovan, S., Borody, T.J., Holsinger, R.M.D., 2022. Fecal Microbiota Transplantation 
Reduces Pathology and Improves Cognition in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s 
Disease. Cells 12, 119. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12010119.
Erridge, C., Duncan, S.H., Bereswill, S., Heimesaat, M.M., 2010. The Induction of Colitis 
and Ileitis in Mice Is Associated with Marked Increases in Intestinal Concentrations 
of Stimulants of TLRs 2, 4, and 5. PLoS One 5, e9125. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0009125.
Fani, L., Wolters, F.J., Ikram, M.K., Bruno, M.J., Hofman, A., Koudstaal, P.J., Darwish 
Murad, S., Ikram, M.A., 2018. Helicobacter pylori and the risk of dementia: A 
population-based study. Alzheimer’S. Dement 14, 1377–1382. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jalz.2018.05.005.
Feng, W., Liu, J., Cheng, H., Zhang, D., Tan, Y., Peng, C., 2022. Dietary compounds in 
modulation of gut microbiota-derived metabolites. Front. Nutr. 9. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fnut.2022.939571.
Feng, W., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., Xu, H., Wu, T., Marshall, C., Gao, J., Xiao, M., 2020. 
Microglia prevent beta-amyloid plaque formation in the early stage of an 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
21 

Alzheimer’s disease mouse model with suppression of glymphatic clearance. 
Alzheimers Res. Ther. 12, 125. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13195-020-00688-1.
Fennema, D., Phillips, I.R., Shephard, E.A., 2016. Trimethylamine and Trimethylamine 
N-Oxide, a Flavin-Containing Monooxygenase 3 (FMO3)-Mediated Host-Microbiome 
Metabolic Axis Implicated in Health and Disease. Drug Metab. Dispos. 44, 
1839–1850. https://doi.org/10.1124/dmd.116.070615.
Fern´andez-Calvet, A., Matilla-Cuenca, L., Izco, M., Navarro, S., Serrano, M., Ventura, S., 
Blesa, J., Herr´aiz, M., Alkorta-Aranburu, G., Galera, S., Ruiz de los Mozos, I., 
Mansego, M.L., Toledo-Arana, A., Alvarez-Erviti, L., Valle, J., 2024. Gut microbiota 
produces biofilm-associated amyloids with potential for neurodegeneration. Nat. 
Commun. 15, 4150. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48309-x.
Friedland, R.P., Chapman, M.R., 2017. The role of microbial amyloid in 
neurodegeneration. PLOS Pathog. 13, e1006654. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
ppat.1006654.
Friedland, R.P., McMillan, J.D., Kurlawala, Z., 2020. What Are the Molecular 
Mechanisms by Which Functional Bacterial Amyloids Influence Amyloid Beta 
Deposition and Neuroinflammation in Neurodegenerative Disorders? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
21, 1652. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21051652.
Fr¨ohlich, E.E., Farzi, A., Mayerhofer, R., Reichmann, F., Jaˇcan, A., Wagner, B., Zinser, E., 
Bordag, N., Magnes, C., Fr¨ohlich, E., Kashofer, K., Gorkiewicz, G., Holzer, P., 2016. 
Cognitive impairment by antibiotic-induced gut dysbiosis: Analysis of gut 
microbiota-brain communication. Brain. Behav. Immun. 56, 140–155. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bbi.2016.02.020.
Fujii, Y., Nguyen, T.T.T., Fujimura, Y., Kameya, N., Nakamura, S., Arakawa, K., 
Morita, H., 2019. Fecal metabolite of a gnotobiotic mouse transplanted with gut 
microbiota from a patient with Alzheimer’s disease. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 83, 
2144–2152. https://doi.org/10.1080/09168451.2019.1644149.
Furness, J.B., Stebbing, M.J., 2018. The first brain: Species comparisons and evolutionary 
implications for the enteric and central nervous systems. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 
30. https://doi.org/10.1111/nmo.13234.
Giridharan, V.V., Barichello De Quevedo, C.E., Petronilho, F., 2022. Microbiota-gut-brain 
axis in the Alzheimer’s disease pathology - an overview. Neurosci. Res. 181, 17–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neures.2022.05.003.
Gold, M., El Khoury, J., 2015. β-amyloid, microglia, and the inflammasome in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Semin. Immunopathol. 37, 607–611. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00281-015-0518-0.
Gonz´alez-Sanmiguel, J., Schuh, C.M.A.P., Mu˜noz-Montesino, C., Contreras-Kallens, P., 
Aguayo, L.G., Aguayo, S., 2020. Complex Interaction between Resident Microbiota 
and Misfolded Proteins: Role in Neuroinflammation and Neurodegeneration. Cells 9, 
2476. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9112476.
Gough, E.K., 2022. The impact of mass drug administration of antibiotics on the gut 
microbiota of target populations. Infect. Dis. Poverty 11, 76. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s40249-022-00999-5.
Govindarajan, N., Agis-Balboa, R.C., Walter, J., Sananbenesi, F., Fischer, A., 2011. 
Sodium Butyrate Improves Memory Function in an Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse 
Model When Administered at an Advanced Stage of Disease Progression. 
J. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 26, 187–197. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2011-110080.
Grewal, R., Reutzel, M., Dilberger, B., Hein, H., Zotzel, J., Marx, S., Tretzel, J., 
Sarafeddinov, A., Fuchs, C., Eckert, G.P., 2020. Purified oleocanthal and ligstroside 
protect against mitochondrial dysfunction in models of early Alzheimer’s disease 
and brain ageing. Exp. Neurol. 328, 113248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
expneurol.2020.113248.
Gustavsson, A., Norton, N., Fast, T., Fr¨olich, L., Georges, J., Holzapfel, D., Kirabali, T., 
Krolak-Salmon, P., Rossini, P.M., Ferretti, M.T., Lanman, L., Chadha, A.S., van der 
Flier, W.M., 2023. Global estimates on the number of persons across the Alzheimer’s 
disease continuum. Alzheimer’S. Dement 19, 658–670. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
alz.12694.
Han, D., Li, Z., Liu, T., Yang, N., Li, Y., He, J., Qian, M., Kuang, Z., Zhang, W., Ni, C., 
Guo, X., 2020. Prebiotics Regulation of Intestinal Microbiota Attenuates Cognitive 
Dysfunction Induced by Surgery Stimulation in APP/PS1 Mice. Aging Dis. 11, 1029. 
https://doi.org/10.14336/AD.2020.0106.
Harach, T., Marungruang, N., Duthilleul, N., Cheatham, V., Mc Coy, K.D., Frisoni, G., 
Neher, J.J., Fåk, F., Jucker, M., Lasser, T., Bolmont, T., 2017. Reduction of Abeta 
amyloid pathology in APPPS1 transgenic mice in the absence of gut microbiota. Sci. 
Rep. 7, 41802. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep41802.
Harrigan, T.J., Abdullaev, I.F., Jourd’heuil, D., Mongin, A.A., 2008. Activation of 
microglia with zymosan promotes excitatory amino acid release via volume- 
regulated anion channels: the role of NADPH oxidases. J. Neurochem. 106, 
2449–2462. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05553.x.
Harris, B.N., Roberts, B.R., DiMarco, G.M., Maldonado, K.A., Okwunwanne, Z., 
Savonenko, A.V., Soto, P.L., 2023. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis 
activity and anxiety-like behavior during aging: A test of the glucocorticoid cascade 
hypothesis in amyloidogenic APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 330, 
114126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygcen.2022.114126.
Heijtz, R.D., Wang, S., Anuar, F., Qian, Y., Bj¨orkholm, B., Samuelsson, A., Hibberd, M.L., 
Forssberg, H., Pettersson, S., 2011. Normal gut microbiota modulates brain 
development and behavior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 3047–3052. https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.1010529108.
Ho, L., Ono, K., Tsuji, M., Mazzola, P., Singh, R., Pasinetti, G.M., 2018. Protective roles of 
intestinal microbiota derived short chain fatty acids in Alzheimer’s disease-type 
beta-amyloid neuropathological mechanisms. Expert Rev. Neurother. 18, 83–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14737175.2018.1400909.
Hoffman, J.D., Yanckello, L.M., Chlipala, G., Hammond, T.C., McCulloch, S.D., Parikh, I., 
Sun, S., Morganti, J.M., Green, S.J., Lin, A.-L., 2019. Dietary inulin alters the gut 
microbiome, enhances systemic metabolism and reduces neuroinflammation in an 
APOE4 mouse model. PLoS One 14, e0221828. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0221828.
Horie, K., Salvad´o, G., Barth´elemy, N.R., Janelidze, S., Li, Y., He, Y., Saef, B., Chen, C.D., 
Jiang, H., Strandberg, O., Pichet Binette, A., Palmqvist, S., Sato, C., Sachdev, P., 
Koyama, A., Gordon, B.A., Benzinger, T.L.S., Holtzman, D.M., Morris, J.C., Mattsson- 
Carlgren, N., Stomrud, E., Ossenkoppele, R., Schindler, S.E., Hansson, O., 
Bateman, R.J., 2023. CSF MTBR-tau243 is a specific biomarker of tau tangle 
pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med. 29, 1954–1963. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41591-023-02443-z.
Hou, Yonghui, Luan, J., Huang, T., Deng, T., Li, X., Xiao, Z., Zhan, J., Luo, D., Hou, Yu, 
Xu, L., Lin, D., 2021. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid alleviates secondary injury in spinal 
cord injury mice by reducing oxidative stress, apoptosis, and inflammatory response. 
J. Neuroinflamm. 18, 216. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-021-02248-2.
Huang, F., 2021. Ursodeoxycholic acid as a potential alternative therapeutic approach 
for neurodegenerative disorders: Effects on cell apoptosis, oxidative stress and 
inflammation in the brain. Brain, Behav. Immun. - Heal. 18, 100348. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bbih.2021.100348.
Huang, X., Hussain, B., Chang, J., 2021. Peripheral inflammation and blood–brain 
barrier disruption: effects and mechanisms. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 27, 36–47. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/cns.13569.
Huang, Y., Wu, J., Zhang, H., Li, Y., Wen, L., Tan, X., Cheng, K., Liu, Y., Pu, J., Liu, L., 
Wang, H., Li, W., Perry, S.W., Wong, M.-L., Licinio, J., Zheng, P., Xie, P., 2023. The 
gut microbiome modulates the transformation of microglial subtypes. Mol. 
Psychiatry 28, 1611–1621. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02017-y.
Huynh, Q.-S., Elangovan, S., Holsinger, R.M.D., 2022. Non-Pharmacological Therapeutic 
Options for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 11037. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms231911037.
Ising, C., Venegas, C., Zhang, S., Scheiblich, H., Schmidt, S.V., Vieira-Saecker, A., 
Schwartz, S., Albasset, S., McManus, R.M., Tejera, D., Griep, A., Santarelli, F., 
Brosseron, F., Opitz, S., Stunden, J., Merten, M., Kayed, R., Golenbock, D.T., 
Blum, D., Latz, E., Bu´ee, L., Heneka, M.T., 2019. NLRP3 inflammasome activation 
drives tau pathology. Nature 575, 669–673. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019- 
1769-z.
Islas Weinstein, L., Revuelta, A., Pando, R.H., 2015. Catecholamines and acetylcholine 
are key regulators of the interaction between microbes and the immune system. Ann. 
N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1351, 39–51. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12792.
Jackson, R.J., Keiser, M.S., Meltzer, J.C., Fykstra, D.P., Dierksmeier, S.E., Melloni, A., 
Nakajima, T., Tecedor, L., Ranum, P.T., Carrell, E., Chen, Y., Holtzman, D.M., 
Davidson, B.L., Hyman, B.T., 2023. APOE2 gene therapy reduces amyloid 
deposition, and improves markers of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in a 
mouse model of Alzheimer disease. bioRxiv Prepr. Serv. Biol. https://doi.org/ 
10.1101/2023.08.14.552850.
Jagtap, P., Prasad, P., Pateria, A., Deshmukh, S.D., Gupta, S., 2020. A Single Step in vitro 
Bioassay Mimicking TLR4-LPS Pathway and the Role of MD2 and CD14 Coreceptors. 
Front. Immunol. 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.00005.
Jain, P., Pundir, R.K., Pandey, R.P., 2023. Exploring the Impact of Microbial Invasion on 
the Diseases Involving Gut-Brain Axis in Animals. pp. 203–213. https://doi.org 
/10.1007/978-981-99-2209-3_11.
J¨antti, H., Sitnikova, V., Ishchenko, Y., Shakirzyanova, A., Giudice, L., Ugidos, I.F., 
G´omez-Budia, M., Korvenlaita, N., Ohtonen, S., Belaya, I., Fazaludeen, F., 
Mikhailov, N., Gotkiewicz, M., Ketola, K., Lehtonen, ˇS., Koistinaho, J., Kanninen, K. 
M., Hern´andez, D., P´ebay, A., Giugno, R., Korhonen, P., Giniatullin, R., Malm, T., 
2022. Microglial amyloid beta clearance is driven by PIEZO1 channels. 
J. Neuroinflamm. 19, 147. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-022-02486-y.
Jayaraman, S., Paul, S., 2024. Gut Microbiota and Altered Behaviour: Target on 
Neuroimmune Interplays. in: Gut Microbiome and Brain Ageing. Springer Nature 
Singapore, Singapore, pp. 185–208. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-8803-7_9.
Jia, M., Ning, F., Wen, J., Wang, X., Chen, J., Hu, J., Chen, X., Liu, Z., 2024. 
Secoisolariciresinol diglucoside attenuates neuroinflammation and cognitive 
impairment in female Alzheimer’s disease mice via modulating gut microbiota 
metabolism and GPER/CREB/BDNF pathway. J. Neuroinflamm. 21, 201. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s12974-024-03195-4.
Jiang, Y., Li, K., Li, X., Xu, L., Yang, Z., 2021. Sodium butyrate ameliorates the 
impairment of synaptic plasticity by inhibiting the neuroinflammation in 5XFAD 
mice. Chem. Biol. Interact. 341, 109452. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cbi.2021.109452.
Jung, B., Yang, C., Lee, S.-H., 2024. Vagus Nerves Stimulation: Clinical Implication and 
Practical Issue as a Neuropsychiatric Treatment. Clin. Psychopharmacol. Neurosci. 
22, 13–22. https://doi.org/10.9758/cpn.23.1101.
Jurc˘au, M.C., Andronie-Cioara, F.L., Jurc˘au, A., Marcu, F., T¸ iț, D.M., Pașcal˘au, N., Nistor- 
Cseppent¨o, D.C., 2022. The Link between Oxidative Stress, Mitochondrial 
Dysfunction and Neuroinflammation in the Pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s Disease: 
Therapeutic Implications and Future Perspectives. Antioxidants 11, 2167. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/antiox11112167.
Karunakaran, I., Alam, S., Jayagopi, S., Frohberger, S.J., Hansen, J.N., Kuehlwein, J., 
H¨olbling, B.V., Schumak, B., Hübner, M.P., Gr¨aler, M.H., Halle, A., van Echten- 
Deckert, G., 2019. Neural sphingosine 1-phosphate accumulation activates microglia 
and links impaired autophagy and inflammation. Glia 67, 1859–1872. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/glia.23663.
Kaur, D., Sharma, V., Deshmukh, R., 2019. Activation of microglia and astrocytes: a 
roadway to neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Inflammopharmacology 27, 
663–677. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10787-019-00580-x.
Kaur, H., Golovko, S., Golovko, M.Y., Singh, S., Darland, D.C., Combs, C.K., 2020. Effects 
of Probiotic Supplementation on Short Chain Fatty Acids in the AppNL-G-F Mouse 
Model of Alzheimer’s Disease1. J. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 76, 1083–1102. https://doi.org/ 
10.3233/JAD-200436.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
22 

Kell, D.B., Pretorius, E., 2018. No effects without causes: the Iron Dysregulation and 
Dormant Microbes hypothesis for chronic, inflammatory diseases. Biol. Rev. 93, 
1518–1557. https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12407.
Kesika, P., Suganthy, N., Sivamaruthi, B.S., Chaiyasut, C., 2021. Role of gut-brain axis, 
gut microbial composition, and probiotic intervention in Alzheimer’s disease. Life 
Sci. 264, 118627. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118627.
Khokhlova, E.V., Smeianov, V.V., Efimov, B.A., Kafarskaia, L.I., Pavlova, S.I., 
Shkoporov, A.N., 2012. Anti-inflammatory properties of intestinal Bifidobacterium 
strains isolated from healthy infants. Microbiol. Immunol. 56, 27–39. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/j.1348-0421.2011.00398.x.
Kim, M.-S., Kim, Y., Choi, Hyunjung, Kim, W., Park, S., Lee, D., Kim, D.K., Kim, H.J., 
Choi, Hayoung, Hyun, D.-W., Lee, J.-Y., Choi, E.Y., Lee, D.-S., Bae, J.-W., Mook- 
Jung, I., 2020. Transfer of a healthy microbiota reduces amyloid and tau pathology 
in an Alzheimer’s disease animal model. Gut 69, 283–294. https://doi.org/10.1136/ 
gutjnl-2018-317431.
Kim, N., Jeon, S.H., Ju, I.G., Gee, M.S., Do, J., Oh, M.S., Lee, J.K., 2021. Transplantation 
of gut microbiota derived from Alzheimer’s disease mouse model impairs memory 
function and neurogenesis in C57BL/6 mice. Brain. Behav. Immun. 98, 357–365. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2021.09.002.
Kim, Y.J., Mun, B.-R., Choi, K.Y., Choi, W.-S., 2024. Oral Administration of Probiotic 
Bacteria Alleviates Tau Phosphorylation, Aβ Accumulation, Microglia Activation, 
and Memory Loss in 5xFAD Mice. Brain Sci. 14, 208. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
brainsci14030208.
Kincaid, H.J., Nagpal, R., Yadav, H., 2021. Diet-Microbiota-Brain Axis in Alzheimer’s 
Disease. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 77, 21–27. https://doi.org/10.1159/000515700.
Koistinen, V.M., K¨arkk¨ainen, O., Borewicz, K., Zarei, I., Jokkala, J., Micard, V., Rosa- 
Sibakov, N., Auriola, S., Aura, A.-M., Smidt, H., Hanhineva, K., 2019. Contribution of 
gut microbiota to metabolism of dietary glycine betaine in mice and in vitro colonic 
fermentation. Microbiome 7, 103. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-019-0718-2.
Konstanti, P., Ligthart, K., Fryganas, C., Constantinos, P., Smidt, H., de Vos, W.M., 
Belzer, C., 2024. Physiology of γ-aminobutyric acid production by Akkermansia 
muciniphila. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 90. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.01121-23.
Kowalski, K., Mulak, A., 2019. Brain-Gut-Microbiota Axis in Alzheimer’s Disease. 
J. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 25, 48–60. https://doi.org/10.5056/jnm18087.
Kumar, A., Ali, R., Kumar, R., Chawla, P.A., 2022. Exploring the potential of 
neuronutraceuticals as alternatives in the prevention of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Pharmaspire 14, 47–58. https://doi.org/10.56933/Pharmaspire.2022.14106.
Kumari, S., Dhapola, R., Sharma, P., Singh, S.K., Reddy, D.H., 2023. Implicative role of 
cytokines in neuroinflammation mediated AD and associated signaling pathways: 
Current progress in molecular signaling and therapeutics. Ageing Res. Rev. 92, 
102098. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2023.102098.
Laffin, M., Fedorak, R., Zalasky, A., Park, H., Gill, A., Agrawal, A., Keshteli, A., Hotte, N., 
Madsen, K.L., 2019. A high-sugar diet rapidly enhances susceptibility to colitis via 
depletion of luminal short-chain fatty acids in mice. Sci. Rep. 9, 12294. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41598-019-48749-2.
Leblhuber, F., Steiner, K., Schuetz, B., Fuchs, D., Gostner, J.M., 2018. Probiotic 
Supplementation in Patients with Alzheimer’s Dementia - An Explorative 
Intervention Study. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 15, 1106–1113. https://doi.org/10.2174/ 
1389200219666180813144834.
Lee, D., Lee, V.M.-Y., Hur, S.K., 2022. Manipulation of the diet–microbiota–brain axis in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Neurosci. 16. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnins.2022.1042865.
Lee, H., Hwang, Y., Kim, D., 2018. Lactobacillus plantarum C29-Fermented Soybean 
(DW2009) Alleviates Memory Impairment in 5XFAD Transgenic Mice by Regulating 
Microglia Activation and Gut Microbiota Composition. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 62. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201800359.
Lee, J.-W., Mizuno, K., Watanabe, H., Lee, I.-H., Tsumita, T., Hida, K., Yawaka, Y., 
Kitagawa, Y., Hasebe, A., Iimura, T., Kong, S.W., 2024. Enhanced phagocytosis 
associated with multinucleated microglia via Pyk2 inhibition in an acute β-amyloid 
infusion model. J. Neuroinflamm. 21, 196. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-024- 
03192-7.
Lee, M.-T., Wang, C.-Y., 2016. Case Experience of Radiofrequency Ablation for Benign 
Thyroid Nodules: From an Ex Vivo Animal Study to an Initial Ablation in Taiwan. 
J. Med. Ultrasound 24, 32–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmu.2016.03.003.
Leng, F., Edison, P., 2021. Neuroinflammation and microglial activation in Alzheimer 
disease: where do we go from here? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 17, 157–172. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41582-020-00435-y.
Li, C., Peng, K., Xiao, S., Long, Y., Yu, Q., 2023. The role of Lactobacillus in inflammatory 
bowel disease: from actualities to prospects. Cell Death Discov. 9, 361. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41420-023-01666-w.
Li, S., Liang, T., Zhang, Y., Huang, K., Yang, S., Lv, H., Chen, Y., Zhang, C., Guan, X., 
2021. Vitexin alleviates high-fat diet induced brain oxidative stress and 
inflammation via anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and gut microbiota modulating 
properties. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 171, 332–344. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
freeradbiomed.2021.05.028.
Lin, C., Zhao, S., Zhu, Y., Fan, Z., Wang, J., Zhang, B., Chen, Y., 2019. Microbiota-gut- 
brain axis and toll-like receptors in Alzheimer’s disease. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. 
J. 17, 1309–1317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2019.09.008.
Ling, X., Linglong, P., Weixia, D., Hong, W., 2016. Protective Effects of Bifidobacterium 
on Intestinal Barrier Function in LPS-Induced Enterocyte Barrier Injury of Caco-2 
Monolayers and in a Rat NEC Model. PLoS One 11, e0161635. https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0161635.
Liu, H., Leak, R.K., Hu, X., 2016. Neurotransmitter receptors on microglia. Stroke Vasc. 
Neurol. 1, 52–58. https://doi.org/10.1136/svn-2016-000012.
Liu, J., Li, H., Gong, T., Chen, W., Mao, S., Kong, Y., Yu, J., Sun, J., 2020. Anti- 
neuroinflammatory Effect of Short-Chain Fatty Acid Acetate against Alzheimer’s 
Disease via Upregulating GPR41 and Inhibiting ERK/JNK/NF-κB. J. Agric. Food 
Chem. 68, 7152–7161. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.0c02807.
Liu, P., Wu, L., Peng, G., Han, Y., Tang, R., Ge, J., Zhang, L., Jia, L., Yue, S., Zhou, K., 
Li, L., Luo, B., Wang, B., 2019. Altered microbiomes distinguish Alzheimer’s disease 
from amnestic mild cognitive impairment and health in a Chinese cohort. Brain. 
Behav. Immun. 80, 633–643. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2019.05.008.
Liu, Q., Xi, Y., Wang, Q., Liu, J., Li, P., Meng, X., Liu, K., Chen, W., Liu, X., Liu, Z., 2021a. 
Mannan oligosaccharide attenuates cognitive and behavioral disorders in the 5xFAD 
Alzheimer’s disease mouse model via regulating the gut microbiota-brain axis. Brain. 
Behav. Immun. 95, 330–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2021.04.005.
Liu, Q., Xie, T., Xi, Y., Li, L., Mo, F., Liu, X., Liu, Z., Gao, J.-M., Yuan, T., 2021b. Sesamol 
Attenuates Amyloid Peptide Accumulation and Cognitive Deficits in APP/PS1 Mice: 
The Mediating Role of the Gut–Brain Axis. J. Agric. Food Chem. 69, 12717–12729. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.1c04687.
Loh, J.S., Mak, W.Q., Tan, L.K.S., Ng, C.X., Chan, H.H., Yeow, S.H., Foo, J.B., Ong, Y.S., 
How, C.W., Khaw, K.Y., 2024. Microbiota–gut–brain axis and its therapeutic 
applications in neurodegenerative diseases. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 9, 37. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-024-01743-1.
Louis, P., Hold, G.L., Flint, H.J., 2014. The gut microbiota, bacterial metabolites and 
colorectal cancer. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 661–672. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nrmicro3344.
Lu, J., Zhang, S., Huang, Y., Qian, J., Tan, B., Qian, X., Zhuang, J., Zou, X., Li, Y., Yan, F., 
2022. Periodontitis-related salivary microbiota aggravates Alzheimer’s disease via 
gut-brain axis crosstalk. Gut Microbes 14. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
19490976.2022.2126272.
Lucas, L.N., Barrett, K., Kerby, R.L., Zhang, Q., Cattaneo, L.E., Stevenson, D., Rey, F.E., 
Amador-Noguez, D., 2021. Dominant Bacterial Phyla from the Human Gut Show 
Widespread Ability To Transform and Conjugate Bile Acids. mSystems 6. https://doi. 
org/10.1128/mSystems.00805-21.
Lukiw, W.J., 2020. Human gastrointestinal (GI) tract microbiome-derived pro- 
inflammatory neurotoxins from Bacteroides fragilis: Effects of low fiber diets and 
environmental and lifestyle factors. Integr. Food, Nutr. Metab. 7.
Luo, Y.-X., Yang, L.-L., Yao, X.-Q., 2024. Gut microbiota-host lipid crosstalk in 
Alzheimer’s disease: implications for disease progression and therapeutics. Mol. 
Neurodegener. 19, 35. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-024-00720-0.
Luqman, A., Nega, M., Nguyen, M.-T., Ebner, P., G¨otz, F., 2018. SadA-Expressing 
Staphylococci in the Human Gut Show Increased Cell Adherence and Internalization. 
Cell Rep. 22, 535–545. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.058.
Lyte, J.M., Proctor, A., Phillips, G.J., Lyte, M., Wannemuehler, M., 2019. Altered 
Schaedler flora mice: A defined microbiota animal model to study the microbiota- 
gut-brain axis. Behav. Brain Res. 356, 221–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbr.2018.08.022.
Ma, J., Li, M., Bao, Y., Huang, W., He, X., Hong, Y., Wei, W., Liu, Z., Gao, X., Yang, Y., 
Cui, Z., Wang, W., Wang, J., Zhu, W., Zheng, N., Pan, L., Wang, D., Ke, Z., Zhou, B., 
Sheng, L., Li, H., 2024. Gut microbiota-brain bile acid axis orchestrates aging-related 
neuroinflammation and behavior impairment in mice. Pharmacol. Res., 107361 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107361.
Machiels, K., Joossens, M., Sabino, J., De Preter, V., Arijs, I., Eeckhaut, V., Ballet, V., 
Claes, K., Van Immerseel, F., Verbeke, K., Ferrante, M., Verhaegen, J., Rutgeerts, P., 
Vermeire, S., 2014. A decrease of the butyrate-producing species Roseburia hominis 
and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii defines dysbiosis in patients with ulcerative colitis. 
Gut 63, 1275–1283. https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2013-304833.
MahmoudianDehkordi, S., Arnold, M., Nho, K., Ahmad, S., Jia, W., Xie, G., Louie, G., 
Kueider-Paisley, A., Moseley, M.A., Thompson, J.W., St John Williams, L., 
Tenenbaum, J.D., Blach, C., Baillie, R., Han, X., Bhattacharyya, S., Toledo, J.B., 
Schafferer, S., Klein, S., Koal, T., Risacher, S.L., Allan Kling, M., Motsinger-Reif, A., 
Rotroff, D.M., Jack, J., Hankemeier, T., Bennett, D.A., De Jager, P.L., Trojanowski, J. 
Q., Shaw, L.M., Weiner, M.W., Doraiswamy, P.M., van Duijn, C.M., Saykin, A.J., 
Kastenmüller, G., Kaddurah-Daouk, R., 2019. Altered bile acid profile associates 
with cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease—An emerging role for gut 
microbiome. Alzheimer’S. Dement 15, 76–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jalz.2018.07.217.
Mancuso, C., Santangelo, R., 2018. Alzheimer’s disease and gut microbiota 
modifications: The long way between preclinical studies and clinical evidence. 
Pharmacol. Res. 129, 329–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2017.12.009.
Mangiola, F., Nicoletti, A., Gasbarrini, A., Ponziani, F.R., 2018. Gut microbiota and 
aging. Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 22, 7404–7413. https://doi.org/10.26355/ 
eurrev_201811_16280.
Mann, E.R., Lam, Y.K., Uhlig, H.H., 2024. Short-chain fatty acids: linking diet, the 
microbiome and immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577- 
024-01014-8.
Mazgaeen, L., Gurung, P., 2020. Recent Advances in Lipopolysaccharide Recognition 
Systems. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 379. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21020379.
Mbiydzenyuy, N.E., Qulu, L.-A., 2024. Stress, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, 
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, and aggression. Metab. Brain Dis. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11011-024-01393-w.
McMullan, S.M., Phanavanh, B., Li, G.G., Barger, S.W., 2012. Metabotropic Glutamate 
Receptors Inhibit Microglial Glutamate Release. ASN Neuro 4, AN20120044. 
https://doi.org/10.1042/AN20120044.
McVey Neufeld, K.-A., Bienenstock, J., Bharwani, A., Champagne-Jorgensen, K., Mao, Y., 
West, C., Liu, Y., Surette, M.G., Kunze, W., Forsythe, P., 2019. Oral selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors activate vagus nerve dependent gut-brain signalling. 
Sci. Rep. 9, 14290. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-50807-8.
Mead, E.L., Mosley, A., Eaton, S., Dobson, L., Heales, S.J., Pocock, J.M., 2012. Microglial 
neurotransmitter receptors trigger superoxide production in microglia; consequences 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
23 

for microglial–neuronal interactions. J. Neurochem. 121, 287–301. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07659.x.
Mez¨o, C., Dokalis, N., Mossad, O., Staszewski, O., Neuber, J., Yilmaz, B., Schnepf, D., de 
Agüero, M.G., Ganal-Vonarburg, S.C., Macpherson, A.J., Meyer-Luehmann, M., 
Staeheli, P., Blank, T., Prinz, M., Erny, D., 2020. Different effects of constitutive and 
induced microbiota modulation on microglia in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 8, 119. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-020- 
00988-5.
Miranda-Ribera, A., Serena, G., Liu, J., Fasano, A., Kingsbury, M.A., Fiorentino, M.R., 
2022. The Zonulin-transgenic mouse displays behavioral alterations ameliorated via 
depletion of the gut microbiota. Tissue Barriers 10. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
21688370.2021.2000299.
Miri, S., Yeo, J., Abubaker, S., Hammami, R., 2023. Neuromicrobiology, an emerging 
neurometabolic facet of the gut microbiome? Front. Microbiol. 14. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fmicb.2023.1098412.
Mirzaei, R., Bouzari, B., Hosseini-Fard, S.R., Mazaheri, M., Ahmadyousefi, Y., Abdi, M., 
Jalalifar, S., Karimitabar, Z., Teimoori, A., Keyvani, H., Zamani, F., 
Yousefimashouf, R., Karampoor, S., 2021. Role of microbiota-derived short-chain 
fatty acids in nervous system disorders. Biomed. Pharmacother. 139, 111661. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2021.111661.
Mitra, S., Dash, R., Nishan, A.Al, Habiba, S.U., Moon, I.S., 2023. Brain modulation by the 
gut microbiota: From disease to therapy. J. Adv. Res. 53, 153–173. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jare.2022.12.001.
Mitrea, L., Nemes¸, S.-A., Szabo, K., Teleky, B.-E., Vodnar, D.-C., 2022. Guts Imbalance 
Imbalances the Brain: A Review of Gut Microbiota Association With Neurological 
and Psychiatric Disorders. Front. Med. 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fmed.2022.813204.
Mohammadi, G., Dargahi, L., Peymani, A., Mirzanejad, Y., Alizadeh, S.A., Naserpour, T., 
Nassiri-Asl, M., 2019. The Effects of Probiotic Formulation Pretreatment ( 
Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 and Bifidobacterium longum R0175) on a 
Lipopolysaccharide Rat Model. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 38, 209–217. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/07315724.2018.1487346.
Mohanty, I., Allaband, C., Mannochio-Russo, H., El Abiead, Y., Hagey, L.R., Knight, R., 
Dorrestein, P.C., 2024. The changing metabolic landscape of bile acids – keys to 
metabolism and immune regulation. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41575-024-00914-3.
Mortellaro, A., Diamond, C., Khameneh, H.J., Brough, D., 2015. Novel perspectives on 
non-canonical inflammasome activation. ImmunoTargets Ther. 131. https://doi.org/ 
10.2147/ITT.S57976.
Mosaferi, B., Jand, Y., Salari, A.-A., 2021a. Gut microbiota depletion from early 
adolescence alters anxiety and depression-related behaviours in male mice with 
Alzheimer-like disease. Sci. Rep. 11, 22941. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021- 
02231-0.
Mosaferi, B., Jand, Y., Salari, A.-A., 2021b. Antibiotic-induced gut microbiota depletion 
from early adolescence exacerbates spatial but not recognition memory impairment 
in adult male C57BL/6 mice with Alzheimer-like disease. Brain Res. Bull. 176, 8–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2021.08.004.
Mosconi, L., Williams, S., Carlton, C., Zarate, C., Boneu, C., Fauci, F., Ajila, T., 
Nerattini, M., Jett, S., Andy, C., Battista, M., Pahlajani, S., Osborne, J., Brinton, R.D., 
Dyke, J.P., 2024. Sex-specific associations of serum cortisol with brain biomarkers of 
Alzheimer’s risk. Sci. Rep. 14, 5519. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-56071-9.
Mossad, O., Erny, D., 2020. The microbiota–microglia axis in central nervous system 
disorders. Brain Pathol. 30, 1159–1177. https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.12908.
Muzio, L., Viotti, A., Martino, G., 2021. Microglia in Neuroinflammation and 
Neurodegeneration: From Understanding to Therapy. Front. Neurosci. 15. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2021.742065.
Nagpal, R., Mainali, R., Ahmadi, S., Wang, S., Singh, R., Kavanagh, K., Kitzman, D.W., 
Kushugulova, A., Marotta, F., Yadav, H., 2018. Gut microbiome and aging: 
Physiological and mechanistic insights. Nutr. Heal. Aging 4, 267–285. https://doi. 
org/10.3233/NHA-170030.
Nagpal, R., Neth, B.J., Wang, S., Craft, S., Yadav, H., 2019. Modified Mediterranean- 
ketogenic diet modulates gut microbiome and short-chain fatty acids in association 
with Alzheimer’s disease markers in subjects with mild cognitive impairment. 
EBioMedicine 47, 529–542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.08.032.
Nel Van Zyl, K., Matukane, S.R., Hamman, B.L., Whitelaw, A.C., Newton-Foot, M., 2022. 
Effect of antibiotics on the human microbiome: a systematic review. Int. J. 
Antimicrob. Agents 59, 106502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijantimicag.2021.106502.
Neufeld, K.M., Kang, N., Bienenstock, J., Foster, J.A., 2011. Reduced anxiety-like 
behavior and central neurochemical change in germ-free mice. Neurogastroenterol. 
Motil. 23, 255–e119. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2982.2010.01620.x.
Neuman, H., Forsythe, P., Uzan, A., Avni, O., Koren, O., 2018. Antibiotics in early life: 
dysbiosis and the damage done. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. https://doi.org/10.1093/ 
femsre/fuy018.
Nishimori, J.H., Newman, T.N., Oppong, G.O., Rapsinski, G.J., Yen, J.-H., Biesecker, S.G., 
Wilson, R.P., Butler, B.P., Winter, M.G., Tsolis, R.M., Ganea, D., Tükel, Ç., 2012. 
Microbial Amyloids Induce Interleukin 17A (IL-17A) and IL-22 Responses via Toll- 
Like Receptor 2 Activation in the Intestinal Mucosa. Infect. Immun. 80, 4398–4408. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.00911-12.
Nishino, R., Mikami, K., Takahashi, H., Tomonaga, S., Furuse, M., Hiramoto, T., Aiba, Y., 
Koga, Y., Sudo, N., 2013. Commensal microbiota modulate murine behaviors in a 
strictly contamination-free environment confirmed by culture-based methods. 
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 25, 521. https://doi.org/10.1111/nmo.12110.
O’Riordan, K.J., Collins, M.K., Moloney, G.M., Knox, E.G., Aburto, M.R., Fülling, C., 
Morley, S.J., Clarke, G., Schellekens, H., Cryan, J.F., 2022. Short chain fatty acids: 
Microbial metabolites for gut-brain axis signalling. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 546, 
111572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2022.111572.
Otaru, N., Ye, K., Mujezinovic, D., Berchtold, L., Constancias, F., Cornejo, F.A., 
Krzystek, A., de Wouters, T., Braegger, C., Lacroix, C., Pugin, B., 2021. GABA 
Production by Human Intestinal Bacteroides spp.: Prevalence, Regulation, and Role 
in Acid Stress Tolerance. Front. Microbiol. 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fmicb.2021.656895.
Othman, O., Marshall, H., Masterson, M., Winlow, P., Gibson, G., Ding, Y., Pardon, M.-C., 
2023. Thymosin beta 4 prevents systemic lipopolysaccharide-induced plaque load in 
middle-age APP/PS1 mice. Int. Immunopharmacol. 117, 109951. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.intimp.2023.109951.
Pan, Q., Li, Y.-Q., Guo, K., Xue, M., Gan, Y., Wang, K., Xu, D.-B., Tu, Q.-Y., 2021. Elderly 
Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment Exhibit Altered Gut Microbiota Profiles. 
J. Immunol. Res. 2021, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/5578958.
Pandey, K.R., Naik, S.R., Vakil, B.V., 2015. Probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics- a 
review. J. Food Sci. Technol. 52, 7577–7587. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-015- 
1921-1.
Park, S.-H., Lee, J.-H., Kim, J.-S., Kim, T.J., Shin, J., Im, J.H., Cha, B., Lee, S., Kwon, K.S., 
Shin, Y.W., Ko, S.-B., Choi, S.H., 2022. Fecal microbiota transplantation can improve 
cognition in patients with cognitive decline and Clostridioides difficile infection. 
Aging (Albany NY). 14, 6449–6466. https://doi.org/10.18632/aging.204230.
Park, S.-H., Lee, J.H., Shin, J., Kim, J.-S., Cha, B., Lee, S., Kwon, K.S., Shin, Y.W., Choi, S. 
H., 2021. Cognitive function improvement after fecal microbiota transplantation in 
Alzheimer’s dementia patient: a case report. Curr. Med. Res. Opin. 37, 1739–1744. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03007995.2021.1957807.
Park, S., Zhang, T., Wu, X., Yi Qiu, J., 2020. Ketone production by ketogenic diet and by 
intermittent fasting has different effects on the gut microbiota and disease 
progression in an Alzheimer’s disease rat model. J. Clin. Biochem. Nutr. 67, 
188–198. https://doi.org/10.3164/jcbn.19-87.
Pellegrini, C., Antonioli, L., Calderone, V., Colucci, R., Fornai, M., Blandizzi, C., 2020. 
Microbiota-gut-brain axis in health and disease: Is NLRP3 inflammasome at the 
crossroads of microbiota-gut-brain communications? Prog. Neurobiol. 191, 101806. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2020.101806.
Picca, A., Calvani, R., Coelho-Junior, H.J., Landi, F., Bernabei, R., Marzetti, E., 2020. 
Mitochondrial Dysfunction, Oxidative Stress, and Neuroinflammation: Intertwined 
Roads to Neurodegeneration. Antioxidants 9, 647. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
antiox9080647.
Pietrzak, R.H., Laws, S.M., Lim, Y.Y., Bender, S.J., Porter, T., Doecke, J., Ames, D., 
Fowler, C., Masters, C.L., Milicic, L., Rainey-Smith, S., Villemagne, V.L., Rowe, C.C., 
Martins, R.N., Maruff, P., 2017. Plasma Cortisol, Brain Amyloid-β, and Cognitive 
Decline in Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease: A 6-Year Prospective Cohort Study. Biol. 
Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 2, 45–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bpsc.2016.08.006.
Pistollato, F., Sumalla Cano, S., Elio, I., Masias Vergara, M., Giampieri, F., Battino, M., 
2016. Role of gut microbiota and nutrients in amyloid formation and pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer disease. Nutr. Rev. 74, 624–634. https://doi.org/10.1093/nutrit/ 
nuw023.
Pluta, R., Ułamek-Kozioł, M., Januszewski, S., Czuczwar, S.J., 2020. Gut microbiota and 
pro/prebiotics in Alzheimer’s disease. Aging (Albany NY). 12, 5539–5550. https:// 
doi.org/10.18632/aging.102930.
Portero-Tresserra, M., Martí-Nicolovius, M., Tarr´es-Gatius, M., Candalija, A., Guillazo- 
Blanch, G., Vale-Martínez, A., 2018. Intra-hippocampal d-cycloserine rescues 
decreased social memory, spatial learning reversal, and synaptophysin levels in aged 
rats. Psychopharmacol. (Berl. ) 235, 1463–1477. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213- 
018-4858-z.
Portincasa, P., Bonfrate, L., Vacca, M., De Angelis, M., Farella, I., Lanza, E., Khalil, M., 
Wang, D.Q.-H., Sperandio, M., Di Ciaula, A., 2022. Gut Microbiota and Short Chain 
Fatty Acids: Implications in Glucose Homeostasis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 1105. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/ijms23031105.
Pradeepkiran, J.A., Reddy, P.H., 2020. Defective mitophagy in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Ageing Res. Rev. 64, 101191. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2020.101191.
Praveenraj, S.S., Sonali, S., Anand, N., Tousif, H.A., Vichitra, C., Kalyan, M., Kanna, P.V., 
Chandana, K.A., Shasthara, P., Mahalakshmi, A.M., Yang, J., Pandi-Perumal, S.R., 
Sakharkar, M.K., Chidambaram, S.B., 2022. The Role of a Gut Microbial-Derived 
Metabolite, Trimethylamine N-Oxide (TMAO), in Neurological Disorders. Mol. 
Neurobiol. 59, 6684–6700. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-022-02990-5.
Pretorius, L., Kell, D.B., Pretorius, E., 2018. Iron Dysregulation and Dormant Microbes as 
Causative Agents for Impaired Blood Rheology and Pathological Clotting in 
Alzheimer’s Type Dementia. Front. Neurosci. 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnins.2018.00851.
Qian, X., Liu, X., Chen, G., Chen, S., Tang, H., 2022. Injection of amyloid-β to lateral 
ventricle induces gut microbiota dysbiosis in association with inhibition of 
cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathways in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinflamm. 
19, 236. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-022-02599-4.
Qian, X., Song, X., Liu, X., Chen, S., Tang, H., 2021. Inflammatory pathways in 
Alzheimer’s disease mediated by gut microbiota. Ageing Res. Rev. 68, 101317. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2021.101317.
Razazan, A., Karunakar, P., Mishra, S.P., Sharma, S., Miller, B., Jain, S., Yadav, H., 2021. 
Activation of Microbiota Sensing – Free Fatty Acid Receptor 2 Signaling Ameliorates 
Amyloid-β Induced Neurotoxicity by Modulating Proteolysis-Senescence Axis. Front. 
Aging Neurosci. 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.735933.
Rea, M.C., Dobson, A., O’Sullivan, O., Crispie, F., Fouhy, F., Cotter, P.D., Shanahan, F., 
Kiely, B., Hill, C., Ross, R.P., 2011. Effect of broad- and narrow-spectrum 
antimicrobials on Clostridium difficile and microbial diversity in a model of the 
distal colon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 4639–4644. https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.1001224107.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
24 

Rehman, S.U., Ali, T., Alam, S.I., Ullah, R., Zeb, A., Lee, K.W., Rutten, B.P.F., Kim, M.O., 
2019. Ferulic Acid Rescues LPS-Induced Neurotoxicity via Modulation of the TLR4 
Receptor in the Mouse Hippocampus. Mol. Neurobiol. 56, 2774–2790. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s12035-018-1280-9.
Riazi-Rad, F., Behrouzi, A., Mazaheri, H., Katebi, A., Ajdary, S., 2021. Impact of gut 
microbiota on immune system. Acta Microbiol. Immunol. Hung. https://doi.org/ 
10.1556/030.2021.01532.
Romero-Ramírez, L., Nieto-Sampedro, M., Yanguas-Cas´as, N., 2017. 
Tauroursodeoxycholic acid: more than just a neuroprotective bile conjugate. Neural 
Regen. Res. 12, 62. https://doi.org/10.4103/1673-5374.198979.
Rosa, A.I., Duarte-Silva, S., Silva-Fernandes, A., Nunes, M.J., Carvalho, A.N., 
Rodrigues, E., Gama, M.J., Rodrigues, C.M.P., Maciel, P., Castro-Caldas, M., 2018. 
Tauroursodeoxycholic Acid Improves Motor Symptoms in a Mouse Model of 
Parkinson’s Disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 55, 9139–9155. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s12035-018-1062-4.
Rose, K.N., Barlock, B.J., DaSilva, N.A., Johnson, S.L., Liu, C., Ma, H., Nelson, R., 
Akhlaghi, F., Seeram, N.P., 2021. Anti-neuroinflammatory effects of a food-grade 
phenolic-enriched maple syrup extract in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nutr. Neurosci. 24, 710–719. https://doi.org/10.1080/1028415X.2019.1672009.
Round, J.L., Lee, S.M., Li, J., Tran, G., Jabri, B., Chatila, T.A., Mazmanian, S.K., 2011. 
The Toll-Like Receptor 2 Pathway Establishes Colonization by a Commensal of the 
Human Microbiota. Sci. (80-. ) 332, 974–977. https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.1206095.
Ru, X., Zhang, C.-C., Yuan, Y.-H., Yue, T.-L., Guo, C.-F., 2019. Bile salt hydrolase activity 
is present in nonintestinal lactic acid bacteria at an intermediate level. Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 103, 893–902. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-018-9492-5.
Rusch, J.A., Layden, B.T., Dugas, L.R., 2023. Signalling cognition: the gut microbiota and 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne). 14. https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1130689.
Saha, M.R., Dey, P., 2021. Pharmacological benefits of Acacia against metabolic diseases: 
intestinal-level bioactivities and favorable modulation of gut microbiota. Arch. 
Physiol. Biochem. 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/13813455.2021.1966475.
Saikh, K.U., Morazzani, E.M., Piper, A.E., Bakken, R.R., Glass, P.J., 2020. A small 
molecule inhibitor of MyD88 exhibits broad spectrum antiviral activity by up 
regulation of type I interferon. Antivir. Res 181, 104854. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
antiviral.2020.104854.
Schoch, K.M., Ezerskiy, L.A., Morhaus, M.M., Bannon, R.N., Sauerbeck, A.D., 
Shabsovich, M., Jafar-nejad, P., Rigo, F., Miller, T.M., 2021. Acute Trem2 reduction 
triggers increased microglial phagocytosis, slowing amyloid deposition in mice. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2100356118.
Sędzikowska, A., Szablewski, L., 2021. Insulin and Insulin Resistance in Alzheimer’s 
Disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 9987. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22189987.
Serra, D., Almeida, L.M., Dinis, T.C.P., 2018. Dietary polyphenols: A novel strategy to 
modulate microbiota-gut-brain axis. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 78, 224–233. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2018.06.007.
Settanni, C.R., Ianiro, G., Bibb`o, S., Cammarota, G., Gasbarrini, A., 2021. Gut microbiota 
alteration and modulation in psychiatric disorders: Current evidence on fecal 
microbiota transplantation. Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 109, 
110258. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2021.110258.
Shandilya, S., Kumar, S., Kumar Jha, N., Kumar Kesari, K., Ruokolainen, J., 2022. 
Interplay of gut microbiota and oxidative stress: Perspective on neurodegeneration 
and neuroprotection. J. Adv. Res. 38, 223–244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jare.2021.09.005.
Shen, H., Guan, Q., Zhang, X., Yuan, C., Tan, Z., Zhai, L., Hao, Y., Gu, Y., Han, C., 2020. 
New mechanism of neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: The activation of 
NLRP3 inflammasome mediated by gut microbiota. Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacol. 
Biol. Psychiatry 100, 109884. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.109884.
Sheng, L., Chen, M., Cai, K., Song, Y., Yu, D., Zhang, H., Xu, G., 2019. Microglial Trem2 
induces synaptic impairment at early stage and prevents amyloidosis at late stage in 
APP/PS1 mice. FASEB J. 33, 10425–10442. https://doi.org/10.1096/ 
fj.201900527R.
Shi, H., Ge, X., Ma, X., Zheng, M., Cui, X., Pan, W., Zheng, P., Yang, X., Zhang, P., Hu, M., 
Hu, T., Tang, R., Zheng, K., Huang, X.-F., Yu, Y., 2021. A fiber-deprived diet causes 
cognitive impairment and hippocampal microglia-mediated synaptic loss through 
the gut microbiota and metabolites. Microbiome 9, 223. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s40168-021-01172-0.
Shi, H., Wang, Q., Zheng, M., Hao, S., Lum, J.S., Chen, X., Huang, X.-F., Yu, Y., Zheng, K., 
2020. Supplement of microbiota-accessible carbohydrates prevents 
neuroinflammation and cognitive decline by improving the gut microbiota-brain axis 
in diet-induced obese mice. J. Neuroinflamm. 17, 77. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12974-020-01760-1.
Shukla, P.K., Delotterie, D.F., Xiao, J., Pierre, J.F., Rao, R., McDonald, M.P., Khan, M.M., 
2021. Alterations in the Gut-Microbial-Inflammasome-Brain Axis in a Mouse Model 
of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cells 10, 779. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10040779.
Silva, Y.P., Bernardi, A., Frozza, R.L., 2020. The Role of Short-Chain Fatty Acids From 
Gut Microbiota in Gut-Brain Communication. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne). 11. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2020.00025.
Simpson, D.S.A., Oliver, P.L., 2020. ROS Generation in Microglia: Understanding 
Oxidative Stress and Inflammation in Neurodegenerative Disease. Antioxidants 9, 
743. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox9080743.
Sittipo, P., Choi, J., Lee, S., Lee, Y.K., 2022. The function of gut microbiota in immune- 
related neurological disorders: a review. J. Neuroinflamm. 19, 154. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12974-022-02510-1.
Sivakumar, V., Ling, E., Lu, J., Kaur, C., 2010. Role of glutamate and its receptors and 
insulin-like growth factors in hypoxia induced periventricular white matter injury. 
Glia 58, 507–523. https://doi.org/10.1002/glia.20940.
Solanki, R., Karande, A., Ranganathan, P., 2023. Emerging role of gut microbiota 
dysbiosis in neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Front. Neurol. 14. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1149618.
Soliman, M.L., Puig, K.L., Combs, C.K., Rosenberger, T.A., 2012. Acetate reduces 
microglia inflammatory signaling in vitro. J. Neurochem. 123, 555–567. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07955.x.
Song, X., Zhao, Z., Zhao, Y., Wang, Z., Wang, C., Yang, G., Li, S., 2022. Lactobacillus 
plantarum DP189 prevents cognitive dysfunction in D-galactose/AlCl 3 induced 
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease via modulating gut microbiota and PI3K/Akt/ 
GSK-3β signaling pathway. Nutr. Neurosci. 25, 2588–2600. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/1028415X.2021.1991556.
Spencer, N.J., Hu, H., 2020. Enteric nervous system: sensory transduction, neural circuits 
and gastrointestinal motility. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 17, 338–351. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-020-0271-2.
Spichak, S., Bastiaanssen, T.F.S., Berding, K., Vlckova, K., Clarke, G., Dinan, T.G., 
Cryan, J.F., 2021. Mining microbes for mental health: Determining the role of 
microbial metabolic pathways in human brain health and disease. Neurosci. 
Biobehav. Rev. 125, 698–761. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.02.044.
Spielbauer, J., Glotfelty, E.J., Sarlus, H., Harris, R.A., Diaz Heijtz, R., Karlsson, T.E., 
2024. Bacterial peptidoglycan signalling in microglia: Activation by MDP via the NF- 
κB/MAPK pathway. Brain. Behav. Immun. 121, 43–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbi.2024.06.027.
Stecher, B., Chaffron, S., K¨appeli, R., Hapfelmeier, S., Freedrich, S., Weber, T.C., 
Kirundi, J., Suar, M., McCoy, K.D., von Mering, C., Macpherson, A.J., Hardt, W.-D., 
2010. Like Will to Like: Abundances of Closely Related Species Can Predict 
Susceptibility to Intestinal Colonization by Pathogenic and Commensal Bacteria. 
PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000711. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1000711.
Sugama, S., Sekiyama, K., Kodama, T., Takamatsu, Y., Takenouchi, T., Hashimoto, M., 
Bruno, C., Kakinuma, Y., 2016. Chronic restraint stress triggers dopaminergic and 
noradrenergic neurodegeneration: Possible role of chronic stress in the onset of 
Parkinson’s disease. Brain. Behav. Immun. 51, 39–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbi.2015.08.015.
Sun, J., Liu, S., Ling, Z., Wang, F., Ling, Y., Gong, T., Fang, N., Ye, S., Si, J., Liu, J., 2019a. 
Fructooligosaccharides Ameliorating Cognitive Deficits and Neurodegeneration in 
APP/PS1 Transgenic Mice through Modulating Gut Microbiota. J. Agric. Food Chem. 
67, 3006–3017. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.8b07313.
Sun, J., Xu, J., Ling, Y., Wang, F., Gong, T., Yang, C., Ye, S., Ye, K., Wei, D., Song, Z., 
Chen, D., Liu, J., 2019b. Fecal microbiota transplantation alleviated Alzheimer’s 
disease-like pathogenesis in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Transl. Psychiatry 9, 189. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-019-0525-3.
Sun, J., Xu, J., Yang, B., Chen, K., Kong, Y., Fang, N., Gong, T., Wang, F., Ling, Z., Liu, J., 
2020. Effect of Clostridium butyricum against Microglia-Mediated 
Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s Disease via Regulating Gut Microbiota and 
Metabolites Butyrate. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 64. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
mnfr.201900636.
Sun, J., Zhang, Y., Kong, Y., Ye, T., Yu, Q., Kumaran Satyanarayanan, S., Su, K.-P., Liu, J., 
2022. Microbiota-derived metabolite Indoles induced aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
activation and inhibited neuroinflammation in APP/PS1 mice. Brain. Behav. Immun. 
106, 76–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2022.08.003.
Sun, Y., Zhang, H., Zhang, X., Wang, W., Chen, Y., Cai, Z., Wang, Q., Wang, J., Shi, Y., 
2023. Promotion of astrocyte-neuron glutamate-glutamine shuttle by SCFA 
contributes to the alleviation of Alzheimer’s disease. Redox Biol. 62, 102690. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2023.102690.
Swanson, P.A., Kumar, A., Samarin, S., Vijay-Kumar, M., Kundu, K., Murthy, N., 
Hansen, J., Nusrat, A., Neish, A.S., 2011. Enteric commensal bacteria potentiate 
epithelial restitution via reactive oxygen species-mediated inactivation of focal 
adhesion kinase phosphatases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 8803–8808. https://doi. 
org/10.1073/pnas.1010042108.
Taglialegna, A., Lasa, I., Valle, J., 2016. Amyloid Structures as Biofilm Matrix Scaffolds. 
J. Bacteriol. 198, 2579–2588. https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00122-16.
Tan, F.H.P., Liu, G., Lau, S.-Y.A., Jaafar, M.H., Park, Y.-H., Azzam, G., Li, Y., Liong, M.-T., 
2020. Lactobacillus probiotics improved the gut microbiota profile of a Drosophila 
melanogaster Alzheimer’s disease model and alleviated neurodegeneration in the 
eye. Benef. Microbes 11, 79–89. https://doi.org/10.3920/BM2019.0086.
Tan, J., Xiao, Y., Kong, F., Zhang, X., Xu, H., Zhu, A., Liu, Y., Lei, J., Tian, B., Yuan, Y., 
Yan, C., 2024. Molecular basis of human noradrenaline transporter reuptake and 
inhibition. Nature 632, 921–929. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07719-z.
Tejera, D., Mercan, D., Sanchez-Caro, J.M., Hanan, M., Greenberg, D., Soreq, H., Latz, E., 
Golenbock, D., Heneka, M.T., 2019. Systemic inflammation impairs microglial Aβ 
clearance through NLRP 3 inflammasome. EMBO J. 38. https://doi.org/10.15252/ 
embj.2018101064.
Teleanu, R.I., Niculescu, A.-G., Roza, E., Vladˆacenco, O., Grumezescu, A.M., Teleanu, D. 
M., 2022. Neurotransmitters—Key Factors in Neurological and Neurodegenerative 
Disorders of the Central Nervous System. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, 5954. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ijms23115954.
Tern´ak, G., N´emeth, M., Rozanovic, M., Bog´ar, L., 2022. Alzheimer’s Disease-Related 
Dysbiosis Might Be Triggered by Certain Classes of Antibiotics with Time-Lapse: New 
Insights into the Pathogenesis? J. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 87, 443–451. https://doi.org/ 
10.3233/JAD-220018.
Terni, B., Boada, J., Portero-Otin, M., Pamplona, R., Ferrer, I., 2010. Mitochondrial ATP- 
Synthase in the Entorhinal Cortex Is a Target of Oxidative Stress at Stages I/II of 
Alzheimer’s Disease Pathology. Brain Pathol. 20, 222–233. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00266.x.
Tiihonen, K., Ouwehand, A.C., Rautonen, N., 2010. Human intestinal microbiota and 
healthy ageing. Ageing Res. Rev. 9, 107–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
arr.2009.10.004.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
25 

Tiso, M., Schechter, A.N., 2015. Nitrate Reduction to Nitrite, Nitric Oxide and Ammonia 
by Gut Bacteria under Physiological Conditions. PLoS One 10, e0119712. https:// 
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0119712.
Tomasova, L., Grman, M., Ondrias, K., Ufnal, M., 2021. The impact of gut microbiota 
metabolites on cellular bioenergetics and cardiometabolic health. Nutr. Metab. 
(Lond. ). 18, 72. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12986-021-00598-5.
Tsatsanis, A., Wong, B.X., Gunn, A.P., Ayton, S., Bush, A.I., Devos, D., Duce, J.A., 2020. 
Amyloidogenic processing of Alzheimer’s disease β-amyloid precursor protein 
induces cellular iron retention. Mol. Psychiatry 25, 1958–1966. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41380-020-0762-0.
Tsukuda, N., Yahagi, K., Hara, T., Watanabe, Y., Matsumoto, H., Mori, H., Higashi, K., 
Tsuji, H., Matsumoto, S., Kurokawa, K., Matsuki, T., 2021. Key bacterial taxa and 
metabolic pathways affecting gut short-chain fatty acid profiles in early life. ISME J. 
15, 2574–2590. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-021-00937-7.
Tu, P., Chi, L., Bodnar, W., Zhang, Z., Gao, B., Bian, X., Stewart, J., Fry, R., Lu, K., 2020. 
Gut Microbiome Toxicity: Connecting the Environment and Gut Microbiome- 
Associated Diseases. Toxics 8, 19. https://doi.org/10.3390/toxics8010019.
Tursi, S.A., Tükel, Ç., 2018. Curli-Containing Enteric Biofilms Inside and Out: Matrix 
Composition, Immune Recognition, and Disease Implications. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. 
Rev. 82. https://doi.org/10.1128/MMBR.00028-18.
Uemura, N., Yagi, H., Uemura, M.T., Hatanaka, Y., Yamakado, H., Takahashi, R., 2018. 
Inoculation of α-synuclein preformed fibrils into the mouse gastrointestinal tract 
induces Lewy body-like aggregates in the brainstem via the vagus nerve. Mol. 
Neurodegener. 13, 21. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13024-018-0257-5.
Uribe-Herranz, M., Rafail, S., Beghi, S., Gil-de-G´omez, L., Verginadis, I., Bittinger, K., 
Pustylnikov, S., Pierini, S., Perales-Linares, R., Blair, I.A., Mesaros, C.A., Snyder, N. 
W., Bushman, F., Koumenis, C., Facciabene, A., 2019. Gut microbiota modulate 
dendritic cell antigen presentation and radiotherapy-induced antitumor immune 
response. J. Clin. Invest. 130, 466–479. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI124332.
Vaiserman, A.M., Koliada, A.K., Marotta, F., 2017. Gut microbiota: A player in aging and 
a target for anti-aging intervention. Ageing Res. Rev. 35, 36–45. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.arr.2017.01.001.
Vandeputte, D., Falony, G., Vieira-Silva, S., Tito, R.Y., Joossens, M., Raes, J., 2016. Stool 
consistency is strongly associated with gut microbiota richness and composition, 
enterotypes and bacterial growth rates. Gut 65, 57–62. https://doi.org/10.1136/ 
gutjnl-2015-309618.
Varesi, A., Pierella, E., Romeo, M., Piccini, G.B., Alfano, C., Bjørklund, G., Oppong, A., 
Ricevuti, G., Esposito, C., Chirumbolo, S., Pascale, A., 2022. The Potential Role of 
Gut Microbiota in Alzheimer’s Disease: From Diagnosis to Treatment. Nutrients 14, 
668. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu14030668.
Venegas, C., Kumar, S., Franklin, B.S., Dierkes, T., Brinkschulte, R., Tejera, D., Vieira- 
Saecker, A., Schwartz, S., Santarelli, F., Kummer, M.P., Griep, A., Gelpi, E., 
Beilharz, M., Riedel, D., Golenbock, D.T., Geyer, M., Walter, J., Latz, E., Heneka, M. 
T., 2017. Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-β in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nature 552, 355–361. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25158.
Veziant, J., Vill´eger, R., Barnich, N., Bonnet, M., 2021. Gut Microbiota as Potential 
Biomarker and/or Therapeutic Target to Improve the Management of Cancer: Focus 
on Colibactin-Producing Escherichia coli in Colorectal Cancer. Cancers (Basel) 13, 
2215. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13092215.
Vogt, N.M., Kerby, R.L., Dill-McFarland, K.A., Harding, S.J., Merluzzi, A.P., Johnson, S. 
C., Carlsson, C.M., Asthana, S., Zetterberg, H., Blennow, K., Bendlin, B.B., Rey, F.E., 
2017. Gut microbiome alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep. 7, 13537. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-13601-y.
Wang, C., 2014. Role of hydrogen sulfide in portal hypertension and esophagogastric 
junction vascular disease. World J. Gastroenterol. 20, 1079. https://doi.org/ 
10.3748/wjg.v20.i4.1079.
Wang, F., Yao, Z., Jin, T., Mao, B., Shao, S., Shao, C., 2024. Research progress on 
Helicobacter pylori infection related neurological diseases. Ageing Res. Rev. 99, 
102399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2024.102399.
Wang, Q.-J., Shen, Y.-E., Wang, X., Fu, S., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y.-N., Wang, R.-T., 2020. 
Concomitant memantine and Lactobacillus plantarum treatment attenuates 
cognitive impairments in APP/PS1 mice. Aging (Albany NY). 12, 628–649. https:// 
doi.org/10.18632/aging.102645.
Wang, T., Hu, X., Liang, S., Li, W., Wu, X., Wang, L., Jin, F., 2015. Lactobacillus 
fermentum NS9 restores the antibiotic induced physiological and psychological 
abnormalities in rats. Benef. Microbes 6, 707–717. https://doi.org/10.3920/ 
BM2014.0177.
Wang, Y., Chen, Y., Zhang, A., Chen, K., Ouyang, P., 2023. Advances in the microbial 
synthesis of the neurotransmitter serotonin. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 107, 
4717–4725. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-023-12584-3.
Wang, Y., Tong, Q., Ma, S.-R., Zhao, Z.-X., Pan, L.-B., Cong, L., Han, P., Peng, R., Yu, H., 
Lin, Y., Gao, T.-L., Shou, J.-W., Li, X.-Y., Zhang, X.-F., Zhang, Z.-W., Fu, J., Wen, B.- 
Y., Yu, J.-B., Cao, X., Jiang, J.-D., 2021. Oral berberine improves brain dopa/ 
dopamine levels to ameliorate Parkinson’s disease by regulating gut microbiota. 
Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 6, 77. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-020-00456- 
5.
Wang, Y., Wang, D., Lv, H., Dong, Q., Li, J., Geng, W., Wang, J., Liu, F., Jia, L., 
Wang, Yanping, 2022. Modulation of the Gut Microbiota and Glycometabolism by a 
Probiotic to Alleviate Amyloid Accumulation and Cognitive Impairments in AD Rats. 
Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 66. https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.202200265.
Was´en, C., Beauchamp, L.C., Vincentini, J., Li, S., LeServe, D.S., Gauthier, C., Lopes, J.R., 
Moreira, T.G., Ekwudo, M.N., Yin, Z., da Silva, P., Krishnan, R.K., Butovsky, O., 
Cox, L.M., Weiner, H.L., 2024. Bacteroidota inhibit microglia clearance of amyloid- 
beta and promote plaque deposition in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Nat. 
Commun. 15, 3872. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47683-w.
Wei, H., Yu, C., Zhang, C., Ren, Y., Guo, L., Wang, T., Chen, F., Li, Y., Zhang, X., 
Wang, H., Liu, J., 2023. Butyrate ameliorates chronic alcoholic central nervous 
damage by suppressing microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and modulating the 
microbiome-gut-brain axis. Biomed. Pharmacother. 160, 114308. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.biopha.2023.114308.
Welcome, M.O., 2019. Gut Microbiota Disorder, Gut Epithelial and Blood–Brain Barrier 
Dysfunctions in Etiopathogenesis of Dementia: Molecular Mechanisms and Signaling 
Pathways. NeuroMolecular Med 21, 205–226. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12017-019- 
08547-5.
Weng, Z.-B., Chen, Y.-R., Lv, J.-T., Wang, M.-X., Chen, Z.-Y., Zhou, W., Shen, X.-C., 
Zhan, L.-B., Wang, F., 2022. A Review of Bile Acid Metabolism and Signaling in 
Cognitive Dysfunction-Related Diseases. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2022, 1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/4289383.
Wenzel, T.J., Gates, E.J., Ranger, A.L., Klegeris, A., 2020. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) 
alone or in combination regulate select immune functions of microglia-like cells. 
Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 105, 103493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2020.103493.
Westfall, S., Lomis, N., Kahouli, I., Dia, S.Y., Singh, S.P., Prakash, S., 2017. Microbiome, 
probiotics and neurodegenerative diseases: deciphering the gut brain axis. Cell. Mol. 
Life Sci. 74, 3769–3787. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-017-2550-9.
Westfall, S., Lomis, N., Prakash, S., 2019. A novel synbiotic delays Alzheimer’s disease 
onset via combinatorial gut-brain-axis signaling in Drosophila melanogaster. PLoS 
One 14, e0214985. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0214985.
Wicherska-Pawłowska, K., Wr´obel, T., Rybka, J., 2021. Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs), NOD- 
Like Receptors (NLRs), and RIG-I-Like Receptors (RLRs) in Innate Immunity. TLRs, 
NLRs, and RLRs Ligands as Immunotherapeutic Agents for Hematopoietic Diseases. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 13397. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222413397.
Wie¸ckowska-Gacek, A., Mietelska-Porowska, A., Chutora´nski, D., Wydrych, M., 
Długosz, J., Wojda, U., 2021. Western Diet Induces Impairment of Liver-Brain Axis 
Accelerating Neuroinflammation and Amyloid Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease. 
Front. Aging Neurosci. 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.654509.
Więckowska-Gacek, A., Mietelska-Porowska, A., Wydrych, M., Wojda, U., 2021. Western 
diet as a trigger of Alzheimer’s disease: From metabolic syndrome and systemic 
inflammation to neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Ageing Res. Rev. 70, 
101397. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2021.101397.
Wong, M.-L., Inserra, A., Lewis, M.D., Mastronardi, C.A., Leong, L., Choo, J., Kentish, S., 
Xie, P., Morrison, M., Wesselingh, S.L., Rogers, G.B., Licinio, J., 2016. Inflammasome 
signaling affects anxiety- and depressive-like behavior and gut microbiome 
composition. Mol. Psychiatry 21, 797–805. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2016.46.
Wu, M.-L., Yang, X.-Q., Xue, L., Duan, W., Du, J.-R., 2021. Age-related cognitive decline 
is associated with microbiota-gut-brain axis disorders and neuroinflammation in 
mice. Behav. Brain Res. 402, 113125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113125.
Wu, M., Tian, T., Mao, Q., Zou, T., Zhou, C., Xie, J., Chen, J., 2020. Associations between 
disordered gut microbiota and changes of neurotransmitters and short-chain fatty 
acids in depressed mice. Transl. Psychiatry 10, 350. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41398-020-01038-3.
Wu, S.-C., Cao, Z.-S., Chang, K.-M., Juang, J.-L., 2017. Intestinal microbial dysbiosis 
aggravates the progression of Alzheimer’s disease in Drosophila. Nat. Commun. 8, 
24. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00040-6.
Xin, Y.-R., Jiang, J.-X., Hu, Y., Pan, J.-P., Mi, X.-N., Gao, Q., Xiao, F., Zhang, W., Luo, H.- 
M., 2019. The Immune System Drives Synapse Loss During Lipopolysaccharide- 
Induced Learning and Memory Impairment in Mice. Front. Aging Neurosci. 11. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2019.00279.
Xu, W., Liu, J., Ma, D., Yuan, G., Lu, Y., Yang, Y., 2017. Capsaicin reduces Alzheimer- 
associated tau changes in the hippocampus of type 2 diabetes rats. PLoS One 12, 
e0172477. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0172477.
Yadav, S., Dwivedi, A., Tripathi, A., Tripathi, A.K., 2022. Therapeutic potential of short- 
chain fatty acid production by gut microbiota in neurodegenerative disorders. Nutr. 
Res. 106, 72–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nutres.2022.07.007.
Yamawaki, Y., Yoshioka, N., Nozaki, K., Ito, H., Oda, K., Harada, K., Shirawachi, S., 
Asano, S., Aizawa, H., Yamawaki, S., Kanematsu, T., Akagi, H., 2018. Sodium 
butyrate abolishes lipopolysaccharide-induced depression-like behaviors and 
hippocampal microglial activation in mice. Brain Res 1680, 13–38. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.brainres.2017.12.004.
Yang, D., Wang, Z., Chen, Y., Guo, Q., Dong, Y., 2023. Interactions between gut microbes 
and NLRP3 inflammasome in the gut-brain axis. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 21, 
2215–2227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2023.03.017.
Yanguas-Cas´as, N., Barreda-Manso, M.A., Nieto-Sampedro, M., Romero-Ramírez, L., 
2014. Tauroursodeoxycholic acid reduces glial cell activation in an animal model of 
acute neuroinflammation. J. Neuroinflamm. 11, 50. https://doi.org/10.1186/1742- 
2094-11-50.
Yanguas-Cas´as, N., Torres-Fuentes, C., Crespo-Castrillo, A., Diaz-Pacheco, S., Healy, K., 
Stanton, C., Chowen, J.A., Garcia-Segura, L.M., Arevalo, M.A., Cryan, J.F., de 
Ceballos, M.L., 2021. High-fat diet alters stress behavior, inflammatory parameters 
and gut microbiota in Tg APP mice in a sex-specific manner. Neurobiol. Dis. 159, 
105495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2021.105495.
Yanguas-Cas´as, N., Barreda-Manso, M.A., Nieto-Sampedro, M., Romero-Ramírez, L., 
2017. TUDCA: An Agonist of the Bile Acid Receptor GPBAR1/TGR5 With Anti- 
Inflammatory Effects in Microglial Cells. J. Cell. Physiol. 232, 2231–2245. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/jcp.25742.
Yasuno, F., Minami, H., Hattori, H., 2020. Interaction effect of Alzheimer’s disease 
pathology and education, occupation, and socioeconomic status as a proxy for 
cognitive reserve on cognitive performance: in vivo positron emission tomography 
study. Psychogeriatrics 20, 585–593. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyg.12552.
Ye, X., Jiang, Q., Wu, M., Ye, Q., Zheng, H., 2024. Transplant of fecal microbiota from 
healthy young mice relieves cognitive defects in late-stage diabetic mice by reducing 
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
26 

metabolic disorders and neuroinflammation. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41401-024-01340-6.
Yi, Y., 2017. Caspase-11 non-canonical inflammasome: a critical sensor of intracellular 
lipopolysaccharide in macrophage-mediated inflammatory responses. Immunology 
152, 207–217. https://doi.org/10.1111/imm.12787.
Yin, J., Zhang, Y., Liu, X., Li, W., Hu, Y., Zhang, B., Wang, S., 2023. Gut Microbiota- 
Derived Indole Derivatives Alleviate Neurodegeneration in Aging through Activating 
GPR30/AMPK/SIRT1 Pathway. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 67. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
mnfr.202200739.
Zarrinpar, A., Chaix, A., Xu, Z.Z., Chang, M.W., Marotz, C.A., Saghatelian, A., Knight, R., 
Panda, S., 2018. Antibiotic-induced microbiome depletion alters metabolic 
homeostasis by affecting gut signaling and colonic metabolism. Nat. Commun. 9, 
2872. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-05336-9.
Zhan, X., Stamova, B., Jin, L.-W., DeCarli, C., Phinney, B., Sharp, F.R., 2016. Gram- 
negative bacterial molecules associate with Alzheimer disease pathology. Neurology 
87, 2324–2332. https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000003391.
Zhang, L., Gai, Y., Liu, Yushuang, Meng, D., Zeng, Y., Luo, Y., Zhang, H., Wang, Z., 
Yang, M., Li, Y., Liu, Yi, Lai, Y., Yang, J., Wu, G., Chen, Y., Zhu, J., Liu, S., Yu, T., 
Zeng, J., Wang, J., Zhu, D., Wang, X., Lan, X., Liu, R., 2024. Tau induces 
inflammasome activation and microgliosis through acetylating NLRP3. Clin. Transl. 
Med. 14. https://doi.org/10.1002/ctm2.1623.
Zhang, L., Wang, Y., Xiayu, X., Shi, C., Chen, W., Song, N., Fu, X., Zhou, R., Xu, Y.-F., 
Huang, L., Zhu, H., Han, Y., Qin, C., 2017. Altered Gut Microbiota in a Mouse Model 
of Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 60, 1241–1257. https://doi.org/ 
10.3233/JAD-170020.
Zhang, M., Zhao, D., Zhou, G., Li, C., 2020. Dietary Pattern, Gut Microbiota, and 
Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Agric. Food Chem. 68, 12800–12809. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.jafc.9b08309.
Zhang, S., Lv, S., Li, Y., Wei, D., Zhou, X., Niu, X., Yang, Z., Song, W., Zhang, Z., Peng, D., 
2023. Prebiotics modulate the microbiota–gut–brain axis and ameliorate cognitive 
impairment in APP/PS1 mice. Eur. J. Nutr. 62, 2991–3007. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00394-023-03208-7.
Zhao, Y., Jaber, V., Lukiw, W.J., 2017. Secretory Products of the Human GI Tract 
Microbiome and Their Potential Impact on Alzheimer’s Disease (AD): Detection of 
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in AD Hippocampus. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 7. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2017.00318.
Zhen, J., Zhou, Z., He, M., Han, H.-X., Lv, E.-H., Wen, P.-B., Liu, X., Wang, Y.-T., Cai, X.- 
C., Tian, J.-Q., Zhang, M.-Y., Xiao, L., Kang, X.-X., 2023. The gut microbial 
metabolite trimethylamine N-oxide and cardiovascular diseases. Front. Endocrinol. 
(Lausanne). 14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1085041.
Zheng, H., Zhang, C., Zhang, J., Duan, L., 2023. Sentinel or accomplice”: gut microbiota 
and microglia crosstalk in disorders of gut–brain interaction. Protein Cell. https:// 
doi.org/10.1093/procel/pwad020.
Zhong, S.-R., Kuang, Q., Zhang, F., Chen, B., Zhong, Z.-G., 2021. Functional roles of the 
microbiota-gut-brain axis in Alzheimer’s disease: Implications of gut microbiota- 
targeted therapy. Transl. Neurosci. 12, 581–600. https://doi.org/10.1515/tnsci- 
2020-0206.
Zhou, Y., Smith, D., Leong, B.J., Br¨annstr¨om, K., Almqvist, F., Chapman, M.R., 2012. 
Promiscuous Cross-seeding between Bacterial Amyloids Promotes Interspecies 
Biofilms. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 35092–35103. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc. 
M112.383737.
Zhou, Y., Xie, L., Schr¨oder, J., Schuster, I.S., Nakai, M., Sun, G., Sun, Y.B.Y., Mari˜no, E., 
Degli-Esposti, M.A., Marques, F.Z., Grubman, A., Polo, J.M., Mackay, C.R., 2023. 
Dietary Fiber and Microbiota Metabolite Receptors Enhance Cognition and Alleviate 
Disease in the 5xFAD Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Neurosci. 43, 
6460–6475. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0724-23.2023.
Zhu, F., Li, C., Chu, F., Tian, X., Zhu, J., 2020. Target Dysbiosis of Gut Microbes as a 
Future Therapeutic Manipulation in Alzheimer’s Disease. Front. Aging Neurosci. 12. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2020.544235.
Zhu, H., Bai, Y., Wang, G., Su, Y., Tao, Y., Wang, L., Yang, L., Wu, H., Huang, F., Shi, H., 
Wu, X., 2022. Hyodeoxycholic acid inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced microglia 
inflammatory responses through regulating TGR5/AKT/NF-κB signaling pathway. 
J. Psychopharmacol. 36, 849–859. https://doi.org/10.1177/02698811221089041.
Zhu, L., Yuan, Q., Zeng, Z., Zhou, R., Luo, R., Zhang, J., Tsang, C.K., Bi, W., 2021. 
Rifampicin Suppresses Amyloid-β Accumulation Through Enhancing Autophagy in 
the Hippocampus of a Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Mouse Model of Cognitive 
Decline. J. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 79, 1171–1184. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-200690.
Zhu, M., Wang, X., Schultzberg, M., Hjorth, E., 2014. Differential Regulation of 
Resolution in Inflammation induced by Amyloid-β42 and Lipopolysaccharides in 
Human Microglia. J. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 43, 1237–1250. https://doi.org/10.3233/ 
JAD-141233.
Zhuang, Z.-Q., Shen, L.-L., Li, W.-W., Fu, X., Zeng, F., Gui, L., Lü, Y., Cai, M., Zhu, C., 
Tan, Y.-L., Zheng, P., Li, H.-Y., Zhu, J., Zhou, H.-D., Bu, X.-L., Wang, Y.-J., 2018. Gut 
Microbiota is Altered in Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 63, 
1337–1346. https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-180176.
Zilberter, Y., Zilberter, M., 2017. The vicious circle of hypometabolism in 
neurodegenerative diseases: Ways and mechanisms of metabolic correction. 
J. Neurosci. Res. 95, 2217–2235. https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.24064.
Zorov, D.B., Plotnikov, E.Y., Silachev, D.N., Zorova, L.D., Pevzner, I.B., Zorov, S.D., 
Babenko, V.A., Jankauskas, S.S., Popkov, V.A., Savina, P.S., 2014. Microbiota and 
mitobiota. Putting an equal sign between mitochondria and bacteria. Biochem 79, 
1017–1031. https://doi.org/10.1134/S0006297914100046.
N. Bano et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Ageing Research Reviews 101 (2024) 102515 
27