RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.advmat.de
Doping Engineering to Modulate Lattice and Electronic
Structure for Enhanced Piezocatalytic Therapy and
Ferroptosis
Boshi Tian, Ruixue Tian, Shaohua Liu, Yan Wang, Shili Gai,* Ying Xie, Dan Yang, Fei He,
Piaoping Yang,* and Jun Lin*
Piezocatalytic therapy, which generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) under
mechanical force, has garnered extensive attention for its use in cancer
therapy owing to its deep tissue penetration depth and less O2-dependence.
However, the piezocatalytic therapeutic eﬃciency is limited owing to the poor
piezoresponse, low separation of electron–hole pairs, and complicated tumor
microenvironment (TME). Herein, a biodegradable, porous Mn-doped ZnO
(Mn–ZnO) nanocluster with enhanced piezoelectric eﬀect is constructed via
doping engineering. Mn-doping not only induces lattice distortion to increase
polarization but also creates rich oxygen vacancies (OV) for suppressing the
recombination of electron–hole pairs, leading to high-eﬃciency generation of
ROS under ultrasound irradiation. Moreover, Mn-doped ZnO shows
TME-responsive multienzyme-mimicking activity and glutathione (GSH)
depletion ability owing to the mixed valence of Mn (II/III), further aggravating
oxidative stress. Density functional theory calculations show that Mn-doping
can improve the piezocatalytic performance and enzyme activity of Mn–ZnO
due to the presence of OV. Beneﬁting from the boosting of ROS generation
and GSH depletion ability, Mn–ZnO can signiﬁcantly accelerate the
accumulation of lipid peroxide and inactivate glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4)
to induce ferroptosis. The work may provide new guidance for exploring novel
piezoelectric sonosensitizers for tumor therapy.
1. Introduction
Recently, novel cancer treatment modalities, such as photother-
mal/photodynamic therapy (PTT/PDT), chemodynamic therapy
B. Tian, Y. Wang, S. Gai, D. Yang, F. He, P. Yang
Key Laboratory of Superlight Materials and Surface Technology
Ministry of Education
College of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering
Harbin Engineering University
Harbin 150001, P. R. China
E-mail: gaishili@hrbeu.edu.cn;yangpiaoping@hrbeu.edu.cn
J.Lin
StateKey Laboratory of RareResourceUtilization
Changchun Instituteof AppliedChemistry
ChineseAcademy of Sciences
Changchun 130022,P.R.China
E-mail: jlin@ciac.ac.cn
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202304262
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202304262
(CDT), sonodynamic therapy (SDT), and
other new strategies, have shown promis-
ing prospects for eﬀective ablation of tu-
mors compared to traditional treatments.[1]
However, the low tissue penetration capac-
ity of light signiﬁcantly limits the light-
involved therapeutic outcomes. CDT is
highly dependent on the H2O2 level and
generally encounters the exhaustion of
H2O2
in the tumor microenvironment
(TME), leading to a decrease or even in-
terruption of the catalytic reaction. Alterna-
tively, SDT, which generates reactive oxy-
gen species (ROS) using sonosensitizers to
kill cancer cells under ultrasound (US) ir-
radiation, has gained signiﬁcant attention
owing to its large tissue penetration depth
and noninvasion.[2] Undoubtedly, sonosen-
sitizers play a critical role in SDT. In-
organic nanoparticles have great potential
for cancer diagnosis and therapy owing
to their low cost, intrinsic imaging ability,
good stability, and special biological reactiv-
ity compared with organic sonosensitizers.
Moreover, some inorganic compounds ex-
hibit unique Fenton or enzyme-mimicking
catalytic activity within the TME, catalyzing endogenous H2O2
into ROS to kill tumor cells, thereby achieving imaging-guided
synergetic cancer therapy.[3] However, their inherent toxicity
and long-term biotoxicity risk are the major obstacles to the
R. Tian
Inner Mongolia Key Laboratory of Advanced Materials and Devices
Inner Mongolia University of Science and Technology
Baotou 014010, P. R. China
Y. Xie
Key Laboratory of Functional Inorganic Material Chemistry
Ministry of Education
School of Chemistry and Materials Science
Heilongjiang University
Harbin 150080, P. R. China
B. Tian, S. Liu
Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Functional Materials and Applications
Zhoukou Normal University
Zhoukou 466001, P. R. China
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (1 of 18)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
clinical application of inorganic materials. Biodegradation is an
eﬀective way to eliminate nanoparticles from the body.[4] Never-
theless, the majority of current inorganic sonosensitizers used
in SDT such as TiO2, BaTiO3, and Bi-based nanomaterials,
are nonbiodegradable,[2a,5] which prevents their further clinical
application. Therefore, the development of biocompatible and
biodegradable inorganic sonosensitizers to minimize the risks
of toxicity is extremely important but it remains a challenge.
Another urgent issue that should be addressed is the limited
therapeutic eﬃcacy of SDT in tumor tissues. In general, SDT
treatment outcomes are mainly enslaved to two aspects: the com-
plicated TME and low ROS generation capacity of the sonosen-
sitizer. Although the detailed mechanism of SDT remains con-
troversial and unclear, it is widely believed that SDT eﬃcacy is
highly dependent on the O2 level of tumor tissues.[2c,6] In general,
the sonosensitizer can transform O2 into singlet oxygen (1O2) un-
der US irradiation through an energy-transfer pathway. As an O2-
consuming therapeutic modality, SDT eﬃcacy is impaired by the
hypoxic nature of the TME and may aggravate tumor hypoxia. Be-
sides, the generated ROS can be consumed by overpressed glu-
tathione (GSH) (≈10 × 10−3 m) in the TME,[7] which dramatically
decreases the ROS level in tumor cells.
Piezoelectric materials, as a kind of noncentrosymmetric crys-
tals, are emerging as novel high-eﬃciency sonosensitizers in
SDT. They can generate built-in electric ﬁelds owing to the sepa-
ration of negative and positive charge centers on two opposing
surfaces under external mechanical strain while showing zero
electric dipoles without external strain.[8] Consequently, the built-
in electric ﬁelds promote the separation of carriers and suppress
carrier recombination. Thus, the generated activated electrons
and holes subsequently react with H2O or O2 to yield ROS (e.g.,
·OH, and ·O2
‒).[8,9] Unlike traditional sonosensitizers that con-
sume O2 to generate ROS, piezoelectric materials exhibit no or
less O2-dependency for the generation of ROS by reaction with
H2O or O2 through the electron transfer pathway. In general,
the suitable energy band structure is the prerequisite for ROS
generation in traditional SDT, i.e., a more negative conduction
band than the redox potential of O2/·O2
−to generate ·O2
−, or a
more positive valence band than H2O/·OH potential to produce
·OH.[10] In contrast, the energy band of piezoelectric materials
can be tilted due to the formation of piezoelectric ﬁeld under
external stress, satisfying the requirement band level to gener-
ate ROS.[11] In recent years, several piezoelectric sonosensitizers
such as BaTiO3, MoWOx, ZnO, and 2D Bi-based materials have
been reported for use in cancer therapy.[2e,5a,11b,12] However, most
current piezoelectric materials show unsatisfactory ROS yields
because of the limited piezoelectric eﬀect and rapid recombina-
tion of excited electron–hole pairs.[2a,13] Ionic doping in the crys-
tal lattice is considered an eﬀective strategy to enhance piezo-
electric performance by regulating the crystal lattice and increas-
ing the polarity of the single units.[14] Creating oxygen vacancies
(OV) is a promising approach for enhancing the catalytic perfor-
mance by regulating the electronic structure of the catalyst.[15]
OV not only provide charge traps to capture excited electrons and
holes for promoting charge separation but also act as the electron
donors to increase the density of majority carriers.[15b,16] Cationic
doping is a common and easy method for creating OV in inor-
ganic nanomaterials. What is more, some doped transition met-
als (such as Fe, Mn, Cu, etc.) exhibit enzyme-mimicking catalytic
activity triggered by TME to generate ROS.[17] For example, per-
oxidase (POD) and oxidase (OXD)-like nanozymes can catalyze
H2O2 and O2 transformation into ·OH and ·O2
−, respectively. In
addition, studies have shown that the presence of OV could ac-
celerate the enzyme catalytic performance by optimizing the cat-
alytic process.[17c,18] Therefore, it is anticipated to achieve a piezo-
electric sonosensitizer with high piezocatalytic performance and
superior enzyme-mimicking activity for boosted ROS generation
via doping engineering strategy.
Recently, ferroptosis, a nonapoptotic cell death pathway, has
attracted research attention owing to its inherent ability to elim-
inate resistant tumor cells.[19] Ferroptosis is featured with redox-
active iron (Fe2+), ROS-induced accumulation of lipid peroxides
(LPO), and inhibition of lipid peroxidation repair enzyme glu-
tathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4).[20] However, the low eﬀectiveness
of iron-catalyzed ROS generation in TME usually causes unsatis-
factory ferroptosis because the Fe(II)-dominated Fenton reaction
usually requires low pH conditions (pH = 3–4).[21] Therefore, it
is critical to improve ROS generation eﬃciency in cancer cells to
achieve eﬀective ferroptosis. Inhibition of GPX4 can lead to the
eﬀective accumulation of LPO, resulting in tumor cell death. Be-
cause the action of GPX4 requires the assistance of GSH, GSH
depletion can indirectly lead to the inactivity of GPX4, eventually
causing ferroptosis. Thus, GSH consumption is another way to
induce ferroptosis by inactivating GPX4. Fortunately, upon US ir-
radiation, sono-induced activated holes in the valence band (VB)
of piezoelectric materials decrease GSH levels in tumor cells be-
cause GSH can be oxidized by highly activated holes.[13] It is
reasonable to hypothesize that inorganic piezoelectric sonosen-
sitizers with synergistic burst ROS generation and GSH deple-
tion ability may induce prominent ferroptosis., The hexagonal
wurtzite structure of ZnO is a well-known piezoelectric semicon-
ductor material and has been widely used in many ﬁelds owing to
its unique chemical and physical features.[22] However, the inher-
ent surface/bulk defects reduce its piezoelectric eﬀect,[23] thus,
there is room for further improvement in the piezocatalytic eﬃ-
ciency. In addition, ZnO is considered a promising candidate for
biological applications owing to its good biocompatibility, degrad-
ability, and permitted use by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA).[24] To date, there have been no reports on the application
of metal-doped ZnO with multienzyme-mimicking activity for
combined piezocatalytic cancer therapy and ferroptosis.
To address these challenges, we reported a degradable
Mn-doped ZnO nanocluster with multienzyme-like activity
for enhanced piezocatalytic cancer therapy and ferroptosis
(Scheme 1). In contrast with the widely reported wire/rod-like
ZnO micro/nanostructures, we developed a novel mesoporous
Mn-doped ZnO nanocluster with suﬃcient OV using a facile dop-
ing strategy. It is expected that the unique porous structure and
large surface area of Mn–ZnO could enlarge the catalytic active
sites and promote charge separation,[25] facilitating its piezocat-
alytic performance and enzyme-mimicking activity. First, after
Mn doping, the lattice of Mn–ZnO was distorted and caused
the formation of the built-in electric ﬁeld, resulting in the im-
provement of the piezoresponse. In addition, OV were created
because Mn-doping promoted the separation of electron–hole
pairs generated by US.[26] Thus, Mn-doped ZnO can eﬀectively
generate ROS under US irradiation. Second, the doping Mn
ions exhibited outstanding TME-responsive POD and OXD-like
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (2 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of mesoporous Mn–ZnO nanocluster and its anticancer mechanism of enhanced piezocatalytic therapy and ferropto-
sis.
activity, which further generated ROS within the TME. Third,
Mn-doped ZnO showed remarkable GSH depletion ability ow-
ing to the presence of mixed a valence of Mn2+/Mn3+. Upon US
irradiation, the GSH level was dramatically decreased, which is
a result of the strong oxidization of US-generated holes. This el-
evated the accumulation of LPO and inhibited the expression of
GPX4 in tumor cells, thus achieving eﬃcient ferroptosis. More-
over, Mn–ZnO nanoclusters have remarkable antitumor eﬃcacy
owing to the combination of piezocatalytic therapy and ferropto-
sis features. To the best of our knowledge, this study provides the
ﬁrst example of a biodegradable, metal-ion doped piezoelectric
sonosensitizer with superior ROS generation and GSH-depletion
ability for MRI-imaging guided combined piezocatalytic therapy
and ferroptosis for eﬃcient tumor therapy with good biosafety.
2. Results and Discussion
In this study, mesoporous Mn–ZnO nanocrystal clusters were
prepared by high-temperature decomposition of the metal salts at
220 °C (Figure 1a). Diethylene glycol (DEG, boiling point: 240 °C)
was used as the polar solvent, and Zn(NO3)2 and Mn(NO3)2
were used as the precursor and dopant, respectively. The for-
mation of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters followed a two-stage growth
mechanism. First, ZnO seeds were formed by the decomposition
of Zn(NO3)2 at high temperatures and subsequently grew into
primary nanocrystals. Then, these primary nanocrystals spon-
taneously aggregated into mesoporous spherical nanoclusters.
Figure S1 (Supporting Information) shows transmission elec-
tron microscopy (TEM) images of ZnO and Mn–ZnO varying
Mn doping content. The morphology and particle size of the
nanoclusters were tuned by varying the Mn doping molar ratio
from 0% to 8%. As shown in Figure S1 (Supporting Informa-
tion), the undoped ZnO exhibited irregular aggregation by rod-
like crystals. Interestingly, the 2%-Mn–ZnO showed a uniform
spherical shape with a porous structure. Higher Mn-doping con-
tent caused smaller nanoclusters, indicating that the Mn dopant
inhibited the aggregation of nanocrystals. These observations
demonstrate that Mn-doping is the key factor in the formation
of porous structures of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters. Because the 2%-
Mn–ZnO nanocluster showed an optimized piezocatalytic per-
formance, it was usually selected as the sample to study in the
following sections. All mentions of Mn–ZnO refer to 2%-Mn–
ZnO, unless otherwise indicated. As shown in Figure 1b–d, the
TEM images of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters displayed a uniform par-
ticle distribution (≈140 nm) and a spherical shape with a meso-
porous structure. The nanoclusters were composed of smaller
nanocrystals (7–9 nm) (Figure 1d,f). The porous structure of nan-
ocluster can be understood due to the interval arrangement of
primary nanocrystals with adjacent ones. The selected area elec-
tron diﬀraction (SAED) pattern in Figure 1b corresponded to
diﬀraction rings in the order of (100), (002), (101), (102), and
(110), which could be attributed to hexagonal wurtzite Mn–ZnO
with a polycrystalline structure. High-angle annular dark-ﬁeld
scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) im-
ages displayed that Mn, O, and Zn were uniformly distributed
in Mn–ZnO (Figure 1e). High-resolution TEM (HRTEM)
images displayed a distinct lattice fringe with a crystal spac-
ing of 0.26 nm, corresponding to the (002) diﬀraction plane of
hexagonal Mn–ZnO (Figure 1g). Notably, the HRTEM images of
Mn–ZnO displayed disordered lattice defects (Figure 1g, yellow
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (3 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 1. Morphology and structure of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters. a) Synthetic process of porous Mn–ZnO nanoclusters. b) Representative TEM image
of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters. Inset shows the SAED pattern of Mn–ZnO. c) The hydrodynamic diameter of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters. d) TEM image and e)
the elemental mapping of Zn, O, Mn of Mn–ZnO. f) High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image and g) ampliﬁed HRTEM image of Mn–ZnO. h) Powder
X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) patterns of ZnO and Mn-doped ZnO, and i) partial enlargement for the XRD diﬀraction at (100) and (002) peaks. j) Ferroelectric
hysteresis loop of Mn–ZnO at room temperature. k) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of Mn 2p, and l) O 1s for ZnO and Mn–ZnO
nanoclusters. m) Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra of ZnO and Mn–ZnO nanoclusters.
ellipse) unlike ZnO (Figure S2, Supporting Information), ow-
ing to the surface vacancies caused by the unsaturated coordi-
nation of metal atoms.[17c] Figure S3 (Supporting Information)
shows the N2 absorption–desorption isotherms of Mn–ZnO nan-
oclusters. A type-IV absorption isotherm with a narrow H1 type
hysteresis loop was observed, conﬁrming the mesoporous struc-
ture of Mn–ZnO.[26] The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) sur-
face area of Mn–ZnO was ≈70.6 m2 g−1. In addition, the pore
diameter was estimated to be ≈3.3 nm by the Barrett–Joyner–
Halenda (BJH) method. The unique porous structure and large
surface area are likely to endow Mn–ZnO with high separation
of charge ability and plenty of exposed active sites for catalytic
reactions.
Then, we investigated the crystal structures of ZnO before
and after Mn doping using X-ray diﬀraction (XRD) analysis. As
shown in Figure 1h and Figure S4 (Supporting Information),
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (4 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Table 1. Lattice parameters of ZnO and Mn-doped ZnO based on XRD
patterns..
a = b [Å]
c [Å]
c/a
V [Å3]
d(100) [nm]
Crystal size (nm)
ZnO
3.249
5.173
1.592
47.62
2.8137
1.887
1%-Mn–ZnO
3.253
5.214
1.602
47.79
2.8174
4.506
2%-Mn–ZnO
3.254
5.218
1.604
48.94
2.8177
7.086
4%-Mn–ZnO
3.2598
5.2192
1.601
49.13
2.823
5.222
8%-Mn–ZnO
3.2536
5.2107
1.602
48.87
2.8177
6.579
Note: a, b, and c (lattice parameters) are calculated from the formula for a hexago-
nal unit cell: 1/d2
(hkl) = 4/3(h2 + k2/a2+ hk) + I2/c2. Unit cell volume is calculated
according to the formula over a cubic unit cell: V = 0.866 × a × b × c, wherein V is
the unit cell volume. Crystal size of (002) lattice plane are calculated by the Debye–
Scherrer formula.
all the samples had a typical hexagonal wurtzite structure with
P63mc space group (JCPDS card no. 36-1451). No metallic Mn or
oxide phases were detected, suggesting that Mn was doped into
the ZnO lattice without changing the ZnO phase structure.[27]
However, the diﬀraction peaks of Mn-doped ZnO nanoclusters
shifted to lower angles, revealing that the ZnO lattice space was
enlarged after Mn doping, probably owing to the larger radius
Mn2+ (0.80 Å) replacing Zn2+ (0.74 Å), thereby inducing lat-
tice distortion and increasing the polarity.[23,28] Undoubtedly, the
occupation of oﬀ-centered positions of the ZnO lattice by Mn
dopants would lead to variations in the chemical bond strengths
and polarities.[23] Consequently, the polarity enhancement causes
more noncentrosymmetricity and a higher piezoresponse.[14]
For hexagonal wurtzite ZnO, the noncentrosymmetric structure
arises from the tetrahedrally coordinated Zn2+ and O2−stacked
along the c­-axis.[8,29] They can generate a piezoelectric poten-
tial due to the separation of positive and negative charge centers
when subjected to an external force along the asymmetric c-axis
direction.[30] It has been demonstrated that crystal growth along a
particular direction can increase polarization and lead to the gen-
eration of a greater piezopotential.[14] After Mn ion doping, we
found that the intensity of the (002) peak enhanced (Figure 1i),
which corresponds to the [0001] direction (the c-axis of the hexag-
onal system), indicating that Mn doping favored the c-axis orien-
tation growth of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters.[31] Notably, the relative
intensity ratio of d(002)/d(100) peaks increased after the introduc-
tion of Mn, as shown in Figure 1i. This indicates that Mn-doping
is beneﬁcial for c-axis preferred orientation growth of ZnO nan-
oclusters, resulting in the enhancement of their polarization. It
should be noted that the lattice parameters of Mn–ZnO nan-
ocluster s (a = b = 0.3254 nm, c = 0.5218 nm) changed slightly
compared to those of ZnO (a = b = 0.3249 nm, c = 0.5173 nm)
(Table 1), revealing the distortion of the lattice space of ZnO and
further conﬁrming the increase in its the noncentrosymmetricity.
More importantly, the distortion will cause uneven charge distri-
bution and, in turn, increase the polarization, thus enhancing the
piezoresponse.[32] Figure 1j shows the polarization-electric ﬁeld
(P–E) hysteresis loop of Mn–ZnO at room temperature. The P–
E hysteresis loop displayed a typical ferroelectricity proﬁle with a
remnant polarization (Pr) of 0.04 μC cm−2 and a coercive ﬁeld (Ec)
of 1.74 kV cm−1, conﬁrming the existence of permanent dipole
moments in Mn-doped ZnO crystal.[33] In contrast, no typical P–
E hysteresis loop was observed in the polarization curves, indi-
cating the nonferroelectric feature of undoped ZnO (Figure S5,
Supporting Information). The ferroelectric feature of Mn–ZnO
probably originates from the uneven electronic distribution ow-
ing to the oﬀ-centered and interstitial occupation of the dopant
(Mn2+) in the crystal lattice.[33] Similar ferroelectricity has also
been observed in Li+-doped ZnO nanostructures.[34] Therefore,
the spontaneously generated polarization electric ﬁeld in ferro-
electric Mn–ZnO would strengthen the piezoinduced polariza-
tion under US irradiation and further drive the migration and
separation of carriers, leading to an improvement in the piezo-
catalytic eﬃciency.[9b,35] The surface chemical environments were
characterized using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). As
shown in Figure S6 (Supporting Information), the XPS spec-
tra of Mn–ZnO displayed O, Zn, and Mn, indicating the suc-
cessful doping of Mn. In terms of ZnO (Figure S6b, Support-
ing Information), the peaks located at 1021.4 and 1044.6 eV
were assigned to 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 of Zn2+,[36] respectively. After
doping with Mn, the peak intensities decreased and shifted to
higher binding energy (Figure S6b, Supporting Information),
suggesting that the electron density of Zn decreased owing to
Mn doping.[37] The high-resolution XPS spectrum of Mn 2p3/2
exhibited two separated peaks at 640.5 and 642.0 eV (Figure 1k),
corresponding to Mn2+ and Mn3+, respectively. The mixed va-
lence state of Mn theoretically endows Mn–ZnO with Fenton-
like catalytic activity. More importantly, the existence of Mn3+
in the lattice of Mn–ZnO suggested the nonequivalent substitu-
tion of Zn by Mn, thereby causing the formation of defects in
the ZnO lattice.[36] For the ZnO (Figure 1i), the XPS spectrum
of O1s exhibited two main peaks located at 530.1 and 531.7 eV,
belonging to the lattice oxygen (OL) and surface oxygen (OC),
respectively. Notably, an obvious binding intensity could be ob-
served at 532.1 eV after the doping of Mn, corresponding to the
O atom near the O-vacancies(OV).[38] In addition, the intensity
of lattice O was signiﬁcantly decreased and shifted to higher
binding energy, revealing that charge transfer occurred for the
O atom after doping with Mn, thus leading to spontaneous po-
larization owing to the uneven charge distribution.[32] The con-
centration of oxygen vacancy was estimated to be ≈33.3% of the
XPS peak area, indicating the presence of plentiful oxygen va-
cancies on the surface of Mn–ZnO. Moreover, with increasing
Mn-doping content, higher concentrations of oxygen vacancies
were observed (Figure S6c,d, Supporting Information). The oxy-
gen vacancies were further veriﬁed by electron paramagnetic res-
onance (EPR) analysis. As shown in Figure 1m, Mn–ZnO dis-
played an intense signal at g = 2.002, corresponding to the elec-
trons trapped on the oxygen vacancy, whereas a weak EPR signal
was detected for ZnO.[17c] As expected, these oxygen vacancies
can regulate the electronic structure and promote charge carriers,
which can enhance the catalytic performance. In addition, the
zeta potentials of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters in water and PBS con-
taining 2% fetal bovine serum (PBS/FBS) were determined to be
about −14.5 and −10.4 mV (Figure S7, Supporting Information),
respectively, indicating the moderate colloidal stability of Mn–
ZnO nanoparticles in the physiological environment. The neg-
atively charged surface of Mn–ZnO is possibly owing to the pres-
ence of hydrophilic hydroxyl groups on the surface of Mn–ZnO
(Figure S7a, Supporting Information). Moreover, the diameter
of Mn–ZnO exhibited no obvious change after incubation with
PBS and Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (DMEM) medium
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (5 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
for two days, further conﬁrming the good stability of Mn–ZnO
nanoparticles (Figure S8, Supporting Information).
Next, we investigated the energy levels and electronic struc-
tures of ZnO and Mn–ZnO. The band gap of ZnO was de-
termined to be 3.15 eV based on Kubelka–Munk (K–M) curve
(Figure S9, Supporting Information). For Mn–ZnO, the band
gap was reduced to 2.95 eV possibly because of the formation
of impurity states. A narrow band gap is favorable for the car-
rier migration. Moreover, the conduction band (CB) of Mn–
ZnO was determined to be −0.59 V (vs normal hydrogen elec-
trode (NHE)) from the Mott–Schottky plot (Figure 2f), which
was more negative than the redox potential of O2/·O2
−(−0.33 V
vs NHE), suggesting that O2 molecules can be reduced to su-
peroxide (·O2
−) radicals.[11a] The VB of Mn–ZnO was calcu-
lated to be 2.36 eV (vs NHE) from the equation Eg = EVB –
ECB, which was more positive than the H2O/·OH redox poten-
tial in water (+2.01 V vs NHE),[11a] indicating that the holes in
the VB can oxidize H2O molecules to ·OH radical under US
irradiation. It has been reported that ion substitution can pro-
mote piezoelectric performance by increasing the local dipole
moments and macroscopic polarization.[37] The piezoelectricity
of ZnO and Mn–ZnO was directly detected by piezoresponse
force microscopy (PFM) and the results are shown in Figure 2.
A Typical butterﬂy amplitude loop (Figure 2a) and ≈180° phase
switching (Figure 2b) were observed when a bias voltage from
−10 to 10 V was applied, which is a typical characteristic of piezo-
electric materials, indicating the remarkable piezoelectricity of
Mn–ZnO.[5a] Notably, the amplitude variation was signiﬁcantly
higher than that for ZnO, suggesting a stronger piezoelectric re-
sponse of Mn–ZnO compared to ZnO. The piezoelectric coef-
ﬁcient (d33) is a key characteristic of the piezoelectric material,
which reﬂects the conversion eﬃciency from mechanical energy
to electricity,[12,39] thus a larger d33 is necessary for practical ap-
plications.
In this study, the d33 of Mn–ZnO was calculated to be ≈44.1 pm
V‒1 based on amplitude-voltage loops, which was four times that
of ZnO (11.1 pm V‒1), further conﬁrming the superior piezoelec-
tric performance of Mn–ZnO. Based on the energy band theory,
piezoelectrics can generate a polarizing potential with positive
and negative charges on both sides under external stress, and the
generated polarized charge then creates a built-in electric ﬁeld to
separate the excited electron–hole pairs.[12,40] Under mechanical
stress, the electrons generated in the CB can reduce O2 molecules
to ·O2
–, whereas the holes in the VB can oxidize H2O to ·OH
(Figure 2c). In contrast, O vacancies in metal oxides not only act
as trapping centers to inhibit the recombination of hole-electron
pairs but can also promote the most carrier density,[41] thereby
enhancing the piezocatalytic performance of piezoelectrics. To
evaluate the separation capacity of sono-induced carriers after
Mn doping, ultrasonic transient current and electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were performed. As displayed in
Figure 2d, Mn–ZnO showed a stable and higher current den-
sity under US irradiation than ZnO. Notably, with the increasing
Mn-doping concentration, the current density trend increased
initially and subsequently decreased, and the highest current
density was observed when the Mn-doping concentration was
up to 2%. Similarly, the Nyquist plot showed that 2%-Mn–ZnO
exhibited a much smaller semicircular arc compared to other
samples (Figure 2e), indicating more free charge transfer at the
interface.[42] To gain more insight into the electronic properties,
Mott–Schottky curves of ZnO and Mn–ZnO with diﬀerent Mn-
doping concentrations were measured. As displayed in Figure 2f
and Figure S10 (Supporting Information), the positive slope of
the Mott–Schottky curves revealed the n-type semiconductor of
ZnO and Mn-doped ZnO. As shown, the various doping level
from 1% to 4% samples exhibited diﬀerent slopes, and the 2%
dopant showed a signiﬁcantly smaller slope than that of ZnO and
1%-Mn–ZnO, revealing a higher charge carrier density.[15b,42] It
should be noted that the slope of 4%-Mn–ZnO was nearly close
to that of 2%-Mn–ZnO, indicating the excessive dopant was not
seemly facilitating the enhancement of the carrier density. The
PL spectra in Figure 2g show that 2% dopant displayed the weak-
est ﬂuorescent intensity around 510 nm compared with other
samples, indicating the superior carrier separation eﬃciency of
2%-Mn–ZnO, which is well consistent with the electrochemical
results. These results demonstrate that the charge separation ca-
pacity and carrier concentration strongly depend on the Mn dop-
ing level.[23] All these observations suggested that a moderate
OV concentration (2% Mn-doping) facilitates carrier transport,
whereas excessive OV would cause the electron–hole recombina-
tion to decrease carrier density.[43] Overall, the optimal doping
concentration was 2% in Mn–ZnO, which exhibited outstanding
piezoresponse and high-eﬃciency charge separation. Therefore,
we selected 2%-Mn–ZnO as the typical model in the following
experiments. Electron spin resonance (ESR) measurements were
ﬁrst performed to directly prove the production of ROS (e.g., ·O2
‒,
·OH, and 1O2). As shown in Figure 2i, characteristic ESR peaks
with an intensity ratio of 1:1:1:1 were observed when ZnO was
triggered by US, suggesting the generation of ·O2
‒ species. No-
tably, the ESR signal intensity of Mn–ZnO was signiﬁcantly en-
hanced compared to ZnO, indicating that more ·O2
‒ species were
produced. Dihydrorhodamine 123 (DHR123) was selected as a
speciﬁc indicator to further conﬁrm the generation of ·O2
−. An
intense ﬂuorescent signal was observed when Mn–ZnO was irra-
diated with US (Figure S11a, Supporting Information), and the
intensity gradually increased over time, conﬁrming the genera-
tion of ·O2
‒ species. We next studied the generation ·OH capac-
ity of Mn–ZnO under US irradiation using ESR measurements.
As shown in Figure 2j, quartet intense characteristic ESR signals
(1:2:2:1 in intensity) appeared using DMPO as the ·OH-trapped
agent, ﬁrmly revealing the generation of ·OH, whereas a weaker
ESR signal was observed for ZnO under ﬁxed conditions. Tereph-
thalic acid (TA), a speciﬁc ·OH indicator, was used as a ﬂuores-
cent probe to detect ·OH because TA can be oxidized to TAOH
by ·OH radicals. As shown in Figure S11b (Supporting Informa-
tion), a strong ﬂuorescent emission peak at ≈420 nm appeared
after Mn–ZnO was irradiated with US, suggesting the remark-
able ·OH generation capacity of Mn–ZnO. In addition, ESR mea-
surements were performed to verify whether the Mn–ZnO can
generate single oxygen (1O2) upon US irradiation using 2,2,6,6-
tetramethylpiperidine (TEMP) as a 1O2 trapping agent. As dis-
played in Figure S12 (Supporting Information), Mn–ZnO + US
group exhibited a typical 1:1:1 triplet signal, suggesting that Mn–
ZnO can generate 1O2 under US irradiation possibly since the
·O2
‒ were oxidized by holes in the valence band.[44] Moreover,
we further verify the generation of 1O2 from Mn–ZnO under US
irradiation using singlet oxygen sensor green (SOSG) as a spe-
ciﬁc ﬂuorescence probe. As displayed in Figure S13 (Supporting
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (6 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 2. Structure and piezoelectric performance of Mn–ZnO. a) Amplitude–voltage curves and b) phase hysteresis loops of ZnO and Mn–ZnO.
c) Schematic illustrations on the generation of ROS from Zn–MnO under US irradiation. d) Transient piezoelectric current of ZnO and Mn-doped
ZnO under US irradiation (1.0 MHz, 1.0 W cm–2). e) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra, and f) Mott–Schottky plots of ZnO and
Mn-doped ZnO with diﬀerent Mn-doping concentrations. g) Fluorescence intensity changes with the addition of diﬀerent Mn-doping content under
the excitation of 465 nm. h) Normalized ﬂuorescence intensity and corresponding slope of Mott–Schottky curves from Figure 2g,f, respectively. i)
DMPO spin-trapping ·O2‒ electron spin resonance (ESR) signals of ZnO and Mn–ZnO under US irradiation at diﬀerent pH (5.5, 7.4). j) ESR spectra
of DMPO/·OH for the Mn–ZnO nanoclusters with diﬀerent treatments. k) US-triggered (1.0 MHz, 1.0 W cm−2) ROS generation catalyzed by Mn–ZnO
using 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (DPBF) as a ROS probe. l) Normalized UV–vis absorbance of DPBF after incubation with Mn–ZnO with diﬀerent
Mn-doping concentrations under US irradiation (1.0 MHz, 1.0 W cm−2). Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.) (n = 3).
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (7 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Information), the ﬂuorescence intensity of SOSG probe gradually
increased during the US irradiation, conﬁrming the generation
of 1O2. Furthermore, we evaluated the general ROS generation
capacity of Mn–ZnO using 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (DPBF)
as a ﬂuorescent probe. The decrease in ﬂuorescence intensity of
DPBF revealed the massive ROS generated from Mn–ZnO upon
US irradiation (Figure S14, Supporting Information), indicating
the eﬀective generation of ROS. Moreover, Mn–ZnO exhibited
much weaker ﬂuorescence than ZnO under the same experimen-
tal conditions, further demonstrating that the ROS generation
capacity of Mn–ZnO was superior to that of ZnO (Figure 2k).
Of note, the 2% doping concentration of Mn–ZnO displayed
the strongest ROS generation ability among the Mn-doped ZnO,
which was well consistent with the above electrochemical and PL
results. Collectively, we can conclude that the ROS generation ca-
pacity of Mn–ZnO is remarkably enhanced under US irradiation
because of Mn doping in the ZnO lattice.
Owing to the inherent multivalence of Mn, Mn–ZnO is likely
to exhibit enzyme-mimicking activity. We ﬁrst investigated the
OXD-like activity of Mn–ZnO in PBS solutions with diﬀerent
pH values using 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) as a sub-
strate, in which the colorless TMB can be oxidized to the blue
oxidation of TMB (oxTMB) with a UV-vis absorption peak at
≈652 nm. Interestingly, TMB turned blue oxTMB after incuba-
tion with Mn–ZnO at pH = 5.5, whereas no color change was
observed at pH = 7.4, indicating that O2 was catalyzed into ·O2
‒
by the acid-responsive OXD-like activity of Mn–ZnO (Inset of
Figure 3a). Moreover, the UV-vis absorption of oxTMB showed
that lower pH values induced a stronger absorption intensity of
oxTMB at 652 nm (Figure 3a), suggesting that the acidic environ-
ment was favorable for the OXD-like activity of Mn–ZnO. The
ESR results (Figure 3b) further revealed the pH-triggered gen-
eration of ·O2
‒ from Mn–ZnO nanoclusters. These observations
suggested that the OXD-like activity of Mn–ZnO was unlocked
at weakly acidic conditions, suggesting that it can intelligently
generate ·O2
‒ in acidic TME but not in normal physiological con-
ditions (pH 7.4). The Michaelis–Menten constant (Km) and maxi-
mal initial velocity (Vmax) were estimated to be 37.9 × 10−3 m and
5.2 × 10−7 m s−1, respectively (Figure 3c). Thus, we believe that
our Mn–ZnO with acid-triggered OXD activity can be used for
targeted tumor therapy and to avoid damage to normal tissues.
O2 is the essential substrate of OXD, thus, suﬃcient O2 levels are
favorable for OXD-like activity. It is well known that the overpro-
duced H2O2 in TME could be decomposed into O2 by catalase
(CAT)-like nanozymes. We then veriﬁed whether Mn–ZnO pos-
sesses CAT activity in the presence of H2O2. As expected, many
O2 bubbles appeared after Mn–ZnO incubation with H2O2 solu-
tion (Figure 3d), whereas no bubbles appeared for the ZnO sam-
ple, indicating that H2O2 was decomposed to O2 by Mn–ZnO.
Furthermore, ﬂuorescent [Ru(dpp)3)]Cl2 was used as a speciﬁc
indicator to verify the generation of oxygen because its ﬂuores-
cent emission can be quenched by oxygen. After Mn–ZnO was
incubated with H2O2, the ﬂuorescence of [Ru(dpp)3)]Cl2 gradu-
ally decreased over time (Figure S15, Supporting Information),
verifying the generation of O2. Figure 3d showed that the O2 con-
centration gradually increased over the incubation time, further
conﬁrming the CAT-like activity of Mn–ZnO. The generated O2
was subsequently transformed O2 into ·O2
‒ by OXD-like activ-
ity. Accordingly, the cascade catalytic reaction will facilitate ROS
generation within the TME. Furthermore, the POD-like activity
was evaluated using TMB as an indicator in a PBS solution con-
taining H2O2 (20 × 10−3 m). To eliminate interference from the
OXD activity, the PBS solution was saturated with N2 bubbles
to remove O2. As shown in Figure 3e, time-dependent oxTMB
was observed after Mn–ZnO was incubated with H2O2, reveal-
ing the outstanding POD-like catalytic capacity of Mn–ZnO. The
ESR results displayed in Figure 3f further conﬁrmed the genera-
tion of ·OH from Mn–ZnO. The Km and Vmax were determined
to be 25.9 × 10−3 m and 8.35 × 10−7 m s−1 at pH 4.5 (Figure 3g),
respectively. To summarize, Mn–ZnO can TME-special generate
massive ·O2
‒ through CAT and OXD-like cascade reaction and
catalyze H2O2 into ·OH by POD-like activity, thus exhibiting high
ROS generation eﬃciency.
Excess endogenous GSH is recognized as an antioxidant
that mitigates high oxidative stress in tumor cells, resulting
in limited ROS-mediated tumor therapy outcomes.[7,45] Thus,
we next investigated the GSH depletion ability of Mn–ZnO us-
ing 5,5′-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) as a probe, be-
cause DTNB can recognize the sulfhydryl group with a UV–
vis absorption peak at ≈412 nm. The GSH depletion proﬁles
showed that the absorption intensity dramatically decreased over
time (Figure 3h), suggesting that GSH was consumed by Mn–
ZnO because reductive GSH was oxidized by Mn3+. Moreover,
upon US irradiation, Mn–ZnO + US showed superior GSH-
depletion capacity compared with Mn–ZnO alone, suggesting the
US-enhanced GSH-consuming ability of Mn–ZnO (Figure 3i).
This ﬁnding probably arises from the fact that the US-induced
holes with high oxidation capacity can reduce GSH to GSSG
(GSH/GSSG = −0.24 V),[46] which is consistent with previous
reports.[47]
To gain insight into the enhanced piezocatalytic eﬀect of Mn–
ZnO under US stimulation, theoretical calculations were per-
formed. It is well known that the piezoelectricity of hexagonal
wurtzite ZnO arises from its noncentrally symmetric structure
(Figure 4a).[8] It can generate a piezoelectric potential owing to
the separation of positive and negative charge centers under an
external force stimulus. The structural optimization diagrams
displayed in Figure 4b show an obvious structural deformation
in defective Mn–ZnO with O vacancies (Mn–ZnOV) after dop-
ing with Mn. Figure 4c and d show the changes in the atomic
bond length and bond angle in ZnO before and after the doping
of Mn2+. For Mn–ZnO, the length of the Zn–O bond increased,
and the bond angle of O–Zn–O decreased after the replacement
of Zn2+ by Mn compared to the ideal ZnO. Moreover, the bond
length and bond angle further decreased after the introduction
of O vacancies into the Mn–ZnO. These calculations revealed
that both Mn doping and the creation of O vacancies induced
the lattice distortion of Mn–ZnO, which was consistent with the
HRTEM (Figure 1g) and XRD (Figure 1h and Table 1) results.
Considering that Mn substitution and structural reconstruction
would create oxygen vacancies on the surface of Mn–ZnO, the
oxygen vacancy formation energy (EOv) was calculated. It was
found that the EOv of Mn–ZnOV was calculated to be −0.36 eV.
This negative vacancy formation energy indicates that it is ther-
modynamically permissible for the spontaneous generation of
OV, which was vividly conﬁrmed by the XPS and EPR results
(Figure 1l,m). Figure 4e–g displays the density of states (DOS)
of ideal ZnO, defect-free Mn–ZnO, and Mn–ZnOV. As shown
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (8 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 3. Enzyme-mimicking activity and GSH-depletion ability of Mn–ZnO. a) UV–vis absorption spectra of oxidation of TMB by Mn–ZnO at diﬀerent
pH (7.4, 6.5, 5.5, and 4.5). b) ESR spectra of ·O2‒ trapped by DMPO incubated with Mn–ZnO for diﬀerent times. c) Michaelis–Menten curves of Mn–ZnO
with TMB as a substrate. Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 3). d) The quantiﬁed O2 generation from ZnO and Mn–ZnO. e) Time-dependent
oxidation of TMB by Mn–ZnO. f) Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra of ·OH trapped by DMPO incubated with Mn–ZnO for diﬀerent times. g)
Michaelis–Menten curves of Mn–ZnO with H2O2 as a substrate. Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 3). h) GSH depletion by Mn–ZnO using
5,5′-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) as a probe. i) Time-dependent GSH depletion of Mn–ZnO with and without US irradiation (1.0 MHz, 1.0 W
cm−2). Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 3).
in Figure 4g, Mn–ZnOV showed some new obvious defect states
between the CB and VB compared to ideal ZnO and defect-free
Mn–ZnO (Figure 4e,f). In this case, the sono-induced electrons
are more easily excited to the conduction band and subsequently
transferred to the piezocatalyst surface to participate in the re-
dox reaction. In addition, the introduction of defects would trap
sono-induced electrons under US irradiation, resulting in the
promotion of the separation of electron–hole pairs. These calcu-
lation results suggested that Mn-doping could not only induce
lattice distortion but also form defect bands in Mn–ZnO with
oxygen vacancies, thus enhancing the piezoresponse and sepa-
ration of electron–hole pairs. To illustrate the enzymatic activ-
ity mechanism, the key intermediate structures and free energy
diagrams are shown in Figure 4h,i, respectively. As shown, the
ideal ZnO, defect-free Mn–ZnO, and Mn–ZnOV showed com-
parable energy changes for the ﬁrst two steps involving the ad-
sorption of H2O2 and subsequent O–O bond cleavage. Notably,
the subsequent deprotonation step on the Mn-doped ZnOV sur-
face with O vacancies had a much lower required energy bar-
rier than that of the ideal ZnO, defect-free Mn-doped ZnO sur-
face. Mn–ZnOV exhibited the lowest energy for the generation
of 2O* compared to the other conﬁgurations. These results in-
dicate that the CAT-like activity of Mn–ZnOV was signiﬁcantly
enhanced due to the formation of O vacancies, thereby supply-
ing O2 to augment the OXD-like activity to eﬀectively generate
ROS.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (9 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 4. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations and enhanced piezocatalysis mechanism. a) Hexagonal wurtzite structure of ZnO. b) Geomet-
rically optimized structures of ideal ZnO, Mn–ZnO, and Mn–ZnOV, as well as c,d) bond lengths (c) and bond angles (d) in the samples. e,f) Density
of states (DOS) proﬁles of ideal ZnO (e), defect-free Mn–ZnO (f), and Mn–ZnOV (g). h) Energy diagrams of the catalytic pathways of H2O2 in three
samples, and i) corresponding modeling surface structures of defect-free Mn–ZnO and Mn–ZnOV. j) Proposed enhanced piezocatalysis mechanism
under US irradiation.
Based on these theoretical calculations and experimental re-
sults, a possible mechanism for the enhanced peizocatalytic per-
formance of Mn-doped ZnO with oxygen vacancies was proposed
from two aspects (Figure 4j). The piezoelectric eﬀect was en-
hanced by the doping engineering strategy. In this study, Mn-
doping facilitated ZnO crystal growth along c-axis orientation, re-
markably improving the piezopotential of Mn–ZnO. Moreover,
after Mn doping, the polarity increased owing to lattice distor-
tion and uneven charge distribution, resulting in the generation
of a built-in electric ﬁeld to enhance the piezoresponse. In addi-
tion, the generated built-in electric ﬁelds can promote the sep-
aration of sonogenerated charge carriers.[35] In contrast, O va-
cancies can improve the free charge carrier density of piezoelec-
tric semiconductors.[14,15b] Promoting the charge carrier density
plays a vital role in high-eﬃciency piezocatalysis. It has been
demonstrated that positively charged oxygen vacancies (O2+
V
)
can
function as electron donors to donate free electrons to the
conduction band, inducing an increase in the majority carrier
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (10 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
density.[15b,48] In addition, O vacancies can induce impurity states
near the CB or VB edge, resulting in a reduced bandgap that
makes the electrons in the VB easier to excite to the CB. More
importantly, O vacancies can provide charge traps to capture elec-
trons or holes to suppress the radiative recombination of US-
induced electron–hole pairs, leading to enhanced charge separa-
tion eﬃciency. As a result, more charge carriers reach the surface
of the catalysts to take part in the catalytic reaction. However, ex-
cess O vacancies can form unlocalized levels and subsequently
serve as quenching traps to reduce the separation ratio.[48] In ad-
dition, it is known that the construction of a porous structure
on the surface of the catalyst can promote catalytic reaction ef-
ﬁciency by shortening the migration distance of activated holes
and providing more active reaction sites.[49] The unique porous
structure of Mn–ZnO can shorten the migration distance and
accelerate the migration speed of sound-induced holes, signiﬁ-
cantly increasing the separation eﬃciency of the electron–hole
pairs. In addition, the large surface area and porous structure fa-
cilitated the eﬀective adsorption of O2 and H2O on the surface of
Mn–ZnO, which was beneﬁcial for the following catalytic reac-
tions.
Considering the boosting of ROS generation triggered by US,
we next studied the in vitro therapeutic eﬃcacy of Mn–ZnO nan-
oclusters. First, we evaluated the cytotoxicity of Mn–ZnO on nor-
mal L929 ﬁbroblast cells using the standard MTT assay. The ob-
tained Mn–ZnO nanocluster showed no obvious cytotoxicity even
at concentrations as high as 300 μg mL−1 (Figure S16, Supporting
Information), indicating its good biocompatibility. We then eval-
uated the anticancer eﬀect of Mn–ZnO in vitro using the MTT as-
say. The viability of 4T1 cells in Figure 5a showed concentration-
dependent behavior, and more cells were killed further irradi-
ated with US, indicating the excellent piezocatalytic eﬀect of Mn–
ZnO. The intracellular ROS generation capacity of Mn–ZnO was
determined in 4T1 cells. Dihydroethidium (DHE) was selected
as an indicator to distinguish the intracellular ·O2
−species.[25c]
A red ﬂuorescence signal was observed after 4T1 cells were in-
cubated with Mn–ZnO (Figure 5b), whereas no ﬂuorescence ap-
peared for the control or US group, indicating the generation of
·O2
−arising from the OXD activity of Mn–ZnO. Notably, the in-
tensity signiﬁcantly increased upon US irradiation, suggesting
massive ·O2
‒ generation because of the piezocatalysis eﬀect of
Mn–ZnO. Hydroxyphenyl ﬂuorescein (HPF) was used as a ﬂu-
orescence probe to verify the production of ·OH. As shown in
Figure 5b, the Mn–ZnO + US group showed the strongest green
ﬂuorescence compared to the other groups, while Mn–ZnO dis-
played moderate ﬂuorescence due to POD-like activity, suggest-
ing that the US stimulus aggravated the generation of ·OH. To
verify the intracellular POD-like activity of Mn–ZnO, we evalu-
ated the intracellular H2O2 level in 4T1 cells using Amplex Red
as a speciﬁc probe. As shown in Figure S17 (Supporting Informa-
tion), strong red ﬂuorescence could be observed for the control
and US irradiation groups. In contrast, after 4T1 cells incuba-
tion with Mn–ZnO, the ﬂuorescence drastically decreased, indi-
cating that the H2O2 level decreased because of the consumption
by Mn–ZnO. In addition, SOSG was used as a speciﬁc indicator
to verify the generation of 1O2. As shown in Figure S18 (Support-
ing Information), the cells treated with Mn–ZnO + US exhibited
obvious green ﬂuorescence signals, whereas the other groups
showed negligible green ﬂuorescence, suggesting the generation
of 1O2 in 4T1 cells when Mn–ZnO was irradiated with US. These
results indicate the boosting of the ROS (i.e., ·O2
−, ·OH, and 1O2)
generation capacity of Mn–ZnO under US irradiation. In addi-
tion, both AM/PI double-staining (Figure 5c,d) and ﬂow cytomet-
ric analysis (Figure 5e,f) showed similar results. Furthermore,
multicellular tumor spheroids more closely mimic the tumor mi-
croenvironment within the tumor tissue.[50] Thus, we evaluated
the antitumor eﬀect of Mn–ZnO on 3D 4T1 tumor spheroids. As
displayed in Figure 5c, moderate red ﬂuorescence was detected
after Mn–ZnO incubation with 4T1 tumor spheroids for 4 h. For
the Mn–ZnO + US group, however, strong red ﬂuorescence ap-
peared in the area of the whole cells, suggesting that the majority
of 4T1 cells were killed. In summary, the resulting Mn–ZnO nan-
ocluster can eﬀectively generate ·O2
−and ·OH responses to the
TME to kill tumor cells due to its unique OXD-like and POD-like
activity, respectively. Moreover, the ROS generation capacity was
remarkably enhanced by US irradiation owing to its outstanding
piezocatalytic eﬀect. Figure 5g shows the TME images of Mn–
ZnO at diﬀerent pH values of PBS (pH 5.5, 7.4) for various peri-
ods. As shown, Mn–ZnO can degrade at pH 5.5, while it was rel-
atively stable in the neutral environment, suggesting that acidic
tumor microenvironments have contributed to the degradation
of Mn–ZnO.
Previous studies have reported that GSH depletion and ROS
generation can downregulate the expression of glutathione
peroxidase 4 (GPX4), which is a distinct characteristic of
ferroptosis.[51] Inspired by the combined GSH depletion and
boosted ROS generation capacity of Mn–ZnO, we expect that
Mn–ZnO can trigger ferroptosis in tumor cells. In general, the
overproduced endogenous GSH (≈10 × 10−3 m) in TME can dra-
matically consume ROS and activate the expression of GPX4,[7,52]
which is a major obstacle to tumor treatment. Figure 6a quanti-
tatively shows intracellular GSH depletion after 4T1 cells were
treated with Mn–ZnO. As shown, the GSH content remarkably
decreased in a concentration-dependent manner, suggesting that
Mn–ZnO could eﬀectively consume intracellular GSH. More-
over, western blot results also showed that the expression of GSH-
related GPX4 in tumor cells was signiﬁcantly down-regulated af-
ter treatment with Mn–ZnO + US (Figure 6b,c). In addition, vita-
min C was used GSH antidepletion agent to investigate the GPX4
level in 4T1 cells after incubation with Mn–ZnO using a west-
ern blot assay. Because vitamin C can protect the GSH to main-
tain their reduced form, thus compensating for GSH depletion by
Mn–ZnO.[53] As shown in Figure S19 (Supporting Information),
in the presence of vitamin C (50 × 10−6 m), the GPX4 level in 4T1
cells was much higher than that of Mn–ZnO group, indicating
that GSH level was crucial for the inactivation of GPX4.
Owing to the robust ROS generation and GSH depletion that
can lead to lipid peroxidation (LPO), we next evaluated the LPO
level in 4T1 cells using C11-BODIPY581/591 as the speciﬁc ﬂuo-
rescence probe. When C11-BODIPY581/591 was oxidized by LPO,
the ﬂuorescence emission shifted from 590 nm (red) to 510 nm
(green). As shown in Figure 6d, Mn–ZnO + US group exhib-
ited the strongest green ﬂuorescence signal than that of the other
groups, demonstrating the desired ultrasound-enhanced LPO ac-
cumulation and occurrence of ferroptosis. In addition, the in-
tracellular LPO level was veriﬁed using Liperﬂuo as a probe
(Figure 6d, middle). As shown, the LPO level in the Mn–ZnO
+ US group was much higher than that in the Mn–ZnO group,
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (11 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 5. In vitro piezocatalytic performance of Mn–ZnO. a) 4T1 cells viability with diﬀerent treatments. b) Intracellular level of ·O2‒ and ·OH using
dihydroethidium (DHE) and hydroxyphenyl ﬂuorescein (HPF) as probes, respectively. c) Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images of 3D 4T1
tumor spheres co-stained with AM/PI after diﬀerent treatments. d) Live/dead staining of 4T1 cells after coincubation with Mn–ZnO (100 μg mL−1) for
4 h followed by various treatments. e,f) Flow cytometry analysis of apoptosis in 4T1 cells with diﬀerent treatments. Data are presented as mean ± S. D.
(n = 5). g) TEM images of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters degraded after treatment at diﬀerent pH values.
conﬁrming the high-eﬃciency accumulation of LPO by ultra-
sound irradiation. The eﬀective accumulation of LPO in tumor
cells was probably due to the remarkable GSH depletion and ROS
generation ability (Figure 6d, bottom) of Mn–ZnO under US irra-
diation. Because ROS can damage the endosomal membrane,[54]
an acridine orange (AO) staining assay was performed CLSM
images in Figure 6e showed that the red ﬂuorescence signal
in 4T1 cells treated with Mn–ZnO decreased dramatically, re-
vealing the incompleteness of the endosomal membrane. More-
over, a weaker red ﬂuorescence was observed after further US
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (12 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 6. In vitro ferroptosis. a) GSH levels in 4T1 cells at various concentrations of Mn–ZnO. Data are presented as mean ± S. D. (n = 5). b,c) Western
blot analysis of GPX4 protein expression with diﬀerent treatments. Data are presented as mean ± S. D. (n = 3). d) Confocal laser scanning microscopy
images of 4T1 cells stained with C11-BODIPY581/591, lipid peroxidation (LPO), and 2,7-dichloroﬂuorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA), e) acridine orange
(AO), and f) JC-1 after diﬀerent treatments. g) Bio-TEM images of 4T1 cells after diﬀerent treatments. h) Cell viabilities of 4T1 cells treated by Mn–ZnO
under US stimulation and diﬀerent concentrations of ferrostatin-1. Data are presented as mean ± S. D. (n = 5).
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (13 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
irradiation, indicating that the integrity of the endosomal mem-
brane was further damaged. It is well known that ferroptosis can
cause oxidative injury to mitochondria and lead to the loss of
membrane potential. A JC-1 staining method was used to moni-
tor mitochondrial dysfunction.[55] As shown in Figure 6f, a weak-
ened red ﬂuorescence signal associated with a strengthen green
ﬂuorescence appeared in the Mn–ZnO groups, suggesting mito-
chondrial damage. In the Mn–ZnO + US group, negligible red
ﬂuorescence, and the strongest green ﬂuorescence were observed
under US irradiation in comparison to the other groups, indicat-
ing maximum mitochondrial injury. It has been reported that fer-
roptosis can lead to the shrinking of mitochondrial membranes
and even the disappearance of mitochondrial cristae.[56] Thus, we
directly visualized the changes in mitochondrial morphology us-
ing Bio-TEM. An obvious morphological change appeared after
4T1 cells were treated with Mn–ZnO + US (Figure 6g). Perfect
linear mitochondria and the cristate were observed in the con-
trol group, indicating that the integrity of mitochondrial function
was not disturbed. In contrast, for the Mn–ZnO + US group, the
typical ferroptosis-induced characteristic of mitochondrial mor-
phology, including the mitochondria, was shrunk or ruptured,
the cristate reduced or disappeared, and the membrane density
increased, indicating remarkable damage to the mitochondria.
To gain deeper insight into the cell death pathway, the ferropto-
sis inhibitor ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) was preincubated with 4T1 cells
before diﬀerent treatments. MTT assay results showed that Fer-1
eﬀectively increase cell viability, indicating that ferroptosis was
indeed induced by Mn–ZnO + US treatment (Figure 6h). Ac-
DEVE-CHO, a typical apoptosis inhibitor, was used to evaluate
the contribution of apoptosis. As shown, 4T1 cell death was some-
what inhibited after the addition of Ac-DEVE-CHO (Figure S20,
Supporting Information), suggesting that Mn–ZnO + US could
also induce apoptosis due to the generation of ROS.[52]
Mn(II)-based nanoparticles are generally regarded as eﬀec-
tive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents owing
to their unpaired electrons and long relaxation times.[57] As ex-
pected, Mn–ZnO has potential as an MRI agent for imaging-
guided cancer therapy. The magnetization (M) vs magnetic ﬁeld
(H) curve in Figure 7a reveals the ferromagnetic feature of Mn–
ZnO at room temperature. As displayed in Figure 7b, Mn–
ZnO showed bright MR images and concentration-dependent
T1-weighted MR signals, and the longitudinal relaxation (r1) was
calculated to be 5.07 mm‒1 s‒1 in PBS solution (pH 7.4). It was
reported that evolved Mn2+ from manganese particles could en-
hance the MR signal (or molar relaxivities) due to the enhance-
ment of water contact with manganese.[58] Based on acid-induced
biodegradation in an acidic TME, Mn–ZnO is expected to possess
pH-responsive T1-weighted MR imaging capacity with high lon-
gitudinal relaxivity because of the release of Mn2+ (Figure S21,
Supporting Information). To verify our hypothesis, we next in-
vestigated the pH-responsive MRI contrast performance of Mn–
ZnO in PBS solutions with various pH values. As shown in
Figure 7c, at pH 5.5, the r1 value of Mn–ZnO (18.28 mm‒1 s‒1)
was much higher than that at pH 7.4 (r1 = 5.07 mm‒1 s‒1) due to
Mn2+ release, indicating that Mn–ZnO has potential as a TME-
responsive T1-weighted MR imaging contrast agent. To evalu-
ate the MRI contrast ability in vivo, Mn–ZnO was intravenously
injected into tumor-bearing BALB/c mice, and the changes in
MRI signals were monitored using an MRI system. As shown in
Figure 7e, the tumor area (white cycle) gradually became bright
over time, and the brightest signal appeared at 12 h postinjec-
tion (Figure 7d,e), suggesting the eﬃcient tumor accumulation
capacity of Mn–ZnO. Therefore, the TME-responsive MRI con-
trast eﬀect of Mn–ZnO makes it a potentially highly eﬀective T1-
weighted MRI agent for monitoring the therapeutic process in
vivo. To assess the tumor accumulation and biodistribution of
Mn–ZnO, Mn–ZnO nanoclusters were labeled with Cy5 and in-
travenously injected into tumor-bearing mice via a vein. As dis-
played in Figure 7f,g, the ﬂuorescence intensity of the tumor site
gradually increased over time and reached a peak at 12 h post-
injection, indicating that Mn–ZnO could eﬀectively accumulate
in the tumor. Moreover, ex vivo ﬂuorescence imaging of the tu-
mor and main organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) at
12 h post-injection showed that the tumor displayed a strong ﬂu-
orescence signal (Figure 7h), suggesting good tumor retention
of Mn–ZnO. In addition, the bio-distribution results (Figure 7i)
further revealed the good tumor uptake ability of Mn–ZnO pos-
sibly due to the permeability and retention (EPR) eﬀect and pro-
longed blood circulation (Figure 7j). Moreover, a high content of
Zn was found in the urine after intravenous injection of Mn–
ZnO (Figure 7k), indicating that Mn–ZnO was mainly excreted
through kidney metabolism possibly because it can degrade into
smaller nanoparticles.
Given the outstanding therapeutic outcome in vitro, we further
investigated the antitumor eﬀect in tumor-bearing BALB/c mice.
First, we evaluated the hemolysis of Mn–ZnO in vitro (Figure
S22, Supporting Information), and the result revealed that no ob-
vious hemolysis occurred, suggesting the good blood safety of
Mn–ZnO administered by intravenous injection. For the in vivo
antitumor studies, 4T1-tumor-bearing BALB/c mice with diﬀer-
ent treatments were randomly divided into four groups (n = 5):
1) saline, 2) US, (3) Mn–ZnO (dosage, 15 mg kg−1), and 4) Mn–
ZnO + US (dosage, 15 mg kg−1) (Figure 8a). For the US and Mn–
ZnO + US groups, the tumor location was irradiated with US
(1.0 W cm‒2, 1.0 MHz) for 3 min at 12 h post-injection. The body
weights and tumor volumes of the mice were recorded every two
days throughout the 14 days treatment period. As displayed in
Figure 8b–d, the tumors in the saline and US treatment groups
showed rapid growth, suggesting that US irradiation had a neg-
ligible inﬂuence on tumor inhibition. According to the Mn–ZnO
group (Figure 8e), a moderate tumor inhibition rate (50.1%) was
observed. More importantly, the tumor growth was drastically
suppressed in the Mn–ZnO + US group, and the inhibition rate
(94.5%)was much higher than those of other groups (Figure 8e).
The superior therapeutic outcome of Mn–ZnO is possibly due to
the GSH-depleted SDT and US-enhanced ferroptosis in tumors
by Mn–ZnO. In addition, no obvious weight loss was observed
for the control or treatment groups, suggesting no obvious ad-
verse eﬀect of Mn–ZnO nanoclusters (Figure 8f). Hematological
and blood biochemical analysis results revealed no signiﬁcant bi-
ological toxicity of Mn–ZnO (Figure 8g). To verify the antitumor
eﬀect of Mn–ZnO at the histological level, a tumor specimen was
randomly selected from each group for H&E and TUNEL stain-
ing. As shown in Figure 8h, the tumors treated with Mn–ZnO
+ US showed the most severe damage compared to the other
groups. Moreover, the expression level of GPX4 was detected by
immunostaining. The Mn–ZnO + US group showed the low-
est GPX4 expression (Figure 8i), indicating the occurrence of
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (14 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 7. In vitro and in vivo imaging. a) Magnetic hysteresis loop of Mn–ZnO at room temperature. b) Magnetic resonance (MR) images and c) T1
relaxation rate (r1) of the Mn–ZnO under diﬀerent pH conditions (pH = 7.4, 6.5, and 5.5) at diﬀerent Mn concentrations employed (0.1 × 10−3, 0.2 ×
10−3, 0.4 × 10−3, 0.6 × 10−3, and 0.8 × 10−3 m). d) Quantitative T1-weighted MR signal variations of the tumor area from (e). Data are presented as mean
± S.D. (n = 3). e) T1-weighted MR images of mice at diﬀerent times post-injection of Mn–ZnO (3, 6, 12, and 24 h) intravenously. f) In vivo ﬂuorescence
images of 4T1-tumor-bearing mice at diﬀerent time points (3, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h) after intravenous injection of Mn–ZnO. g) Quantitative analysis of
ﬂuorescence intensity per unit tumor area from (f). Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 3). h) Ex vivo ﬂuorescence imaging of the tumor and the
major organs. i) Biodistribution of Mn–ZnO in major organs and tumor tissues at diﬀerent times of post-injection. Data are presented as mean ± S.D.
(n = 3). j) Blood circulation after the injection of Mn–ZnO intravenously. Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 3). k) Zn content in collected urine
and feces. Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 3).
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (15 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
Figure 8. Antitumor performance of Mn–ZnO in vivo. a) Therapeutic procedure for 4T1-tumor-bearing mice. b) Tumor volumes of the mice and c) the
corresponding excised tumors of each group on the 14th day in various treatment groups. Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 5). d) Average
tumor weight and e) the tumor inhibition rate at the end of diﬀerent treatments of control, US, Mn–ZnO, and Mn–ZnO + US. Data are presented as
mean ± S.D. (n = 5). f) Body weights of the mice in various treatment groups. Data are presented as mean ± S.D. (n = 5). g) Blood biochemistry and
hematological parameters of the healthy mice after diﬀerent treatment days (control, 1 day, 7th day, and 21th day). h) H&E and TUNEL staining images
of tumor after diﬀerent containing control, US, Mn–ZnO, and Mn–ZnO + US. i) Immunohistochemical assessment of the expression levels of GPX4
from the representative tumor tissues in various treatment groups. Student’s t-test, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (16 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
ferroptosis in tumors. To study the biosafety of Mn–ZnO in
healthy mice, the major organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kid-
ney) were stained with H&E. As shown in Figure S23 (Support-
ing Information), no obvious pathological abnormalities were ob-
served, demonstrating the good biocompatibility of Mn–ZnO.
3. Conclusions
We have presented for the ﬁrst time a biodegradable, mesoporous
Mn-doped ZnO nanocluster with enhanced piezoresponse via a
facile doping engineering strategy for high-eﬃciency piezocat-
alytic cancer therapy and ferroptosis. Experimental and DFT cal-
culation results showed that the generated built-in electric ﬁeld
was caused by lattice distortion and oxygen vacancy owing to the
Mn-doping. The built-in electric ﬁeld not only promoted the sep-
aration of sono-induced electron–hole pairs but also increased
the carrier density, thus synergistically enhancing the generation
of massive ROS under US irradiation. The Mn–ZnO nanoclus-
ter also exhibited TEM-responsive multienzyme (CAT, OXD, and
POD)-like activity, which can further generate ·O2
−and ·OH
within the TME. Furthermore, Mn–ZnO showed sono-enhanced
GSH depletion ability, which signiﬁcantly suppressed the expres-
sion of GPX4 in tumor cells. Owing to the boost in ROS gener-
ation and GSH depletion ability under US irradiation, Mn–ZnO
can signiﬁcantly accelerate the accumulation of LPO and inac-
tivate GPX4 to induce ferroptosis. Moreover, Mn–ZnO showed
excellent biocompatibility because it can degrade and be excreted
from the body to avoid long-term biotoxicity. Our ﬁndings pro-
vide the ﬁrst stone for the development of piezoelectric sonosen-
sitizer with good biosafety for a combined enhanced piezocat-
alytic cancer therapy and ferroptosis.
4. Experimental Section
Synthesis of Mn–ZnO and ZnO:
Mn–ZnO nanoclusters were synthe-
sized via a facile one-step high-temperature decomposition of metal salts
at 220 °C. Zn(NO3)2·6H2O (1.8 g) was dispersed in diethylene glycol
(DEG, 150 mL). Subsequently, 30 μL of Mn(NO3)2 solution (50 wt% in
H2O) was added to the above solution and stirred for 15 min at 60 °C to ob-
tain a homogeneously mixed solution. The solution was heated at 220 °C
(2 °C min−1) under stirring for 12 h. After centrifugation (10 000 rpm
min−1, 10 min), the collected solid was sequentially washed with dis-
tilled water and ethanol. After drying at 60 °C for 6 h in a vacuum oven,
brown powdered Mn–ZnO was obtained. Diﬀerent Mn-doping content
ZnOs were obtained using the same procedure by varying the Mn/Zn mo-
lar ratio. The samples are denoted as x%-Mn–ZnO (x = 0, 1, 2, 4, and
8) according to the Mn doping ratio (the Mn content was determined by
ICP) For comparison, bare ZnO was also synthesized under the same con-
ditions without the addition of Mn.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
This work was ﬁnancial supported by the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (51972076, U22A20347, and 51929201), Heilongjiang
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (JQ2022E001), Natural
Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2020ZD42), and the Fun-
damental Research Funds for the Central Universities are greatly acknowl-
edged.
Note: The order of the aﬃliations in the pdf version was revised on
September 21, 2023, after initial publication online.
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Author Contributions
B.T. and R.T. contributed equally to this work. The manuscript was written
through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to
the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the cor-
responding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
doping engineering, enzymatic activity, ferroptosis, oxygen vacancy, piezo-
catalysis
Received: May 7, 2023
Revised: July 2, 2023
Published online: August 15, 2023
[1] a) X. Wang, X. Zhong, Z. Liu, L. Cheng, Nano Today 2020, 35, 100946;
b) M. Li, Y. Shao, J. H. Kim, Z. Pu, X. Zhao, H. Huang, T. Xiong, Y.
Kang, G. Li, K. Shao, J. Fan, J. W. Foley, J. S. Kim, X. Peng, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 5380; c) H. Lin, S. S. Gao, C. Dai, Y. Chen, J.
L. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 16235; d) L. S. Lin, T. Huang, J.
Song, X. Y. Ou, Z. Wang, H. Deng, R. Tian, Y. Liu, J. F. Wang, Y. Liu,
G. Yu, Z. Zhou, S. Wang, G. Niu, H. H. Yang, X. Chen, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2019, 141, 9937.
[2] a) X. Wang, X. Zhong, L. Bai, J. Xu, F. Gong, Z. Dong, Z. Yang, Z.
Zeng, Z. Liu, L. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 6527; b) S. Son,
J. H. Kim, X. Wang, C. Zhang, S. A. Yoon, J. Shin, A. Sharma, M. H.
Lee, L. Cheng, J. Wu, J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2020, 49, 3244; c) F.
Gong, L. Cheng, N. Yang, Y. Gong, Y. Ni, S. Bai, X. Wang, M. Chen,
Q. Chen, Z. Liu, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 3712; d) F. Gong, L. Cheng,
N. Yang, O. Betzer, L. Feng, Q. Zhou, Y. Li, R. Chen, R. Popovtzer, Z.
Liu, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1900730; e) X. Pan, W. Wang, Z. Huang, S.
Liu, J. Guo, F. Zhang, H. Yuan, X. Li, F. Liu, H. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 2020, 59, 13557.
[3] a) B. Yang, J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 21775; b) C. H. Liu,
D. D. Wang, S. Y. Zhang, Y. R. Cheng, F. Yang, Y. Xing, T. L. Xu, H. F.
Dong, X. J. Zhang, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 4267.
[4] a) H. Zhou, J. X. Ge, Q. Q. Miao, R. Zhu, L. Wen, J. F. Zeng, M. Y. Gao,
Bioconjugate Chem. 2020, 31, 315; b) M. Yu, J. Zheng, ACS Nano 2015,
9, 6655.
[5] a) P. Zhu, Y. Chen, J. Shi, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2001976; b) P. Wang,
Q. Tang, L. Zhang, M. Xu, L. Sun, S. Sun, J. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Liang,
ACS Nano 2021, 15, 11326; c) Z. Yang, M. Yuan, B. Liu, W. Zhang, A.
Maleki, B. Guo, P. Ma, Z. Cheng, J. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022,
61, e202209484.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (17 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.advmat.de
[6] S. Liang, X. Deng, P. a. Ma, Z. Cheng, J. Lin, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32,
2003214.
[7] S. Dong, Y. Dong, T. Jia, S. Liu, J. Liu, D. Yang, F. He, S. Gai, P. Yang,
J. Lin, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2002439.
[8] Q. Xu, X. Gao, S. Zhao, Y. N. Liu, D. Zhang, K. Zhou, H. Khanbareh,
W. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Bowen, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 2008452.
[9] a) Y. Dong, S. Dong, B. Liu, C. Yu, J. Liu, D. Yang, P. Yang, J. Lin, Adv.
Mater. 2021, 33, 2106838; b) Z. Liu, X. Yu, L. Li, Chin. J. Catal. 2020,
41, 534.
[10] J. Ma, X. Xiong, D. Wu, Y. Wang, C. Ban, Y. Feng, J. Meng, X. Gao, J.
Dai, G. Han, L. Gan, X. Zhou, Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2300027.
[11] a) Z. Li, T. Zhang, F. Fan, F. Gao, H. Ji, L. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2020, 11, 12281238; b) L. Yang, B. Tian, Y. Xie, S. Dong, M. Yang, S.
Gai, J. Lin, Adv. Mater. 2023.
[12] Q. Truong Hoang, V. Ravichandran, T. G. Nguyen Cao, J. H. Kang, Y.
T. Ko, T. I. Lee, M. S. Shim, Chem. Eng. J. 2022, 435, 135039.
[13] S. Liang, B. Liu, X. Xiao, M. Yuan, L. Yang, P. a. Ma, Z. Cheng, J. Lin,
Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 2101467.
[14] S. Tu, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. Hu, T. Zhang, T. Ma, H. Huang, Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2020, 30, 2005158.
[15] a) B. Zhang, J. Shan, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Li, Small 2022, 18, 2200173;
b) S. Wang, T. He, P. Chen, A. Du, K. Ostrikov, W. Huang, L. Wang,
Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2001385.
[16] S. Selim, E. Pastor, M. García-Tecedor, M. R. Morris, L. Francàs, M.
Sachs, B. Moss, S. Corby, C. A. Mesa, S. Gimenez, A. Kaﬁzas, A. A.
Bakulin, J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 18791.
[17] a) S. Dong, Y. Dong, B. Liu, J. Liu, S. Liu, Z. Zhao, W. Li, B. Tian, R.
Zhao, F. He, S. Gai, Y. Xie, P. Yang, Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater. 2021, 34,
2107054; b) B. Yu, W. Wang, W. Sun, C. Jiang, L. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2021, 143, 8855; c) D. D. Wang, H. H. Wu, C. L. Wang, L. Gu, H. Z.
Chen, D. Jana, L. L. Feng, J. W. Liu, X. Y. Wang, P. P. Xu, Z. Guo, Q. W.
Chen, Y. L. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 3001.
[18] S. Dong, Y. Dong, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, S. Liu, L. Feng, F. He, S. Gai, Y. Xie,
P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 9488.
[19] a) X. Meng, J. Deng, F. Liu, T. Guo, M. Liu, P. Dai, A. Fan, Z. Wang, Y.
Zhao, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 7866; b) C. You, X. Li, D. Wang, H. Chen,
L. Liang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, H. Xiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022, 61,
e202210174.
[20] Z. Xiao, L. Zhang, V. L. Colvin, Q. Zhang, G. Bao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.
2022, 61, 7613.
[21] a) Y. Liu, J. Wu, Y. Jin, W. Zhen, Y. Wang, J. Liu, L. Jin, S. Zhang, Y. Zhao,
S. Song, Y. Yang, H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1904678;
b) G. Guan, C. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Dong, C. Lu, B. Nan, R.
Yue, X. Yin, X.-B. Zhang, G. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022, 61,
e202117229.
[22] a) J. Ma, J. Ren, Y. Jia, Z. Wu, L. Chen, N. O. Haugen, H. Huang, Y.
Liu, Nano Energy 2019, 62, 376; b) D. Xiang, Z. Liu, M. Wu, H. Liu,
X. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. L. Wang, L. Li, Small 2020, 16, 1907603; c) M.
Laurenti, N. Garino, G. Canavese, S. Hernandéz, V. Cauda, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 25798.
[23] M. Laurenti, G. Canavese, A. Sacco, M. Fontana, K. Bejtka, M.
Castellino, C. F. Pirri, V. Cauda, Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 4218.
[24] a) D. X. Ye, Y. Y. Ma, W. Zhao, H. M. Cao, J. L. Kong, H. M. Xiong,
H. Möhwald, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 4294; b) S. Afroz, H. Medhi, S.
Maity, G. Minhas, S. Battu, J. Giddaluru, K. Kumar, P. Paik, N. Khan,
Nanoscale 2017, 9, 14641; c) H. J. Kwon, K. Shin, M. Soh, H. Chang,
J. Kim, J. Lee, G. Ko, B. H. Kim, D. Kim, T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater. 2018,
30, 24.
[25] a) R. Guo, X. Hu, X. Chen, Z. Bi, J. Wang, W. Pan, Small 2023, 19,
2207767; b) J. X. Jian, V. Jokubavicius, M. Syväjärvi, R. Yakimova, J.
Sun, ACS Nano 2021, 15, 5502; c) B. Tian, S. Liu, C. Yu, S. Liu, S.
Dong, L. Feng, N. Hu, P. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2023, 2300818.
[26] B. Tian, S. Liu, S. Wu, W. Lu, D. Wang, L. Jin, B. Hu, K. Li, Z. Wang, Z.
Quan, Colloids Surf., B 2017, 154, 287.
[27] N. Ali, B. Singh, V. A R, S. Lal, C. S. Yadav, K. Tarafder, S. Ghosh, J.
Phys. Chem. C 2021, 125, 7734.
[28] C. Yu, J. He, M. Tan, Y. Hou, H. Zeng, C. Liu, H. Meng, Y. Su, L. Qiao,
T. Lookman, Y. Bai, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022, 32, 2209365.
[29] F. Ali, W. Raza, X. Li, H. Gul, K. H. Kim, Nano Energy 2019, 57, 879.
[30] a) K. Ma, G. Qi, B. Wang, T. Yu, Y. Zhang, H. Li, S. A. Kitte, Y. Jin,
Nano Energy 2021, 87, 106208; b) X. Xue, W. Zang, P. Deng, Q. Wang,
L. Xing, Y. Zhang, Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy 2015, 13, 414.
[31] C. Cao, X. Xie, Y. Zeng, S. Shi, G. Wang, L. Yang, C. Z. Wang, S. Lin,
Nano Energy 2019, 61, 550.
[32] W. Tian, J. Han, L. Wan, N. Li, D. Chen, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. Lu, Nano Energy
2023, 107, 108165.
[33] S. Goel, N. Sinha, B. Kumar, Physica E 2019, 105, 29.
[34] S. Goel, B. Kumar, J. Alloys Compd. 2020, 816, 152491.
[35] M. Wang, B. Wang, F. Huang, Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58,
7526.
[36] S. Zhan, H. Zhang, X. Mi, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, L. Lyu, Environ. Sci. Technol.
2020, 54, 8333.
[37] Y. Wen, J. Chen, X. Gao, W. Liu, H. Che, B. Liu, Y. Ao, Nano Energy
2023, 107, 108173.
[38] L. Kong, G. Fang, Z. Fang, Y. Zou, F. Zhu, D. Zhou, J. Zhan, Chem.
Eng. J. 2021, 416, 128996.
[39] a) X. B. Wang, C. Song, D. M. Li, K. W. Geng, F. Zeng, F. Pan, Appl.
Surf. Sci. 2006, 253, 1639; b) M. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Ling, W. Qiu, F. Wang, T.
Liu, Y. Song, X. Liu, P. Fang, Y. Tong, Y. Li, Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 2490.
[40] S. Chen, P. Zhu, L. Mao, W. Wu, H. Lin, D. Xu, X. Lu, J. Shi, Adv. Mater.
2023, 35, 2208256.
[41] W. Shen, T. Hu, X. Liu, J. Zha, F. Meng, Z. Wu, Z. Cui, Y. Yang, H. Li,
Q. Zhang, L. Gu, R. Liang, C. Tan, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 3384.
[42] G. Wang, Y. Ling, X. Lu, F. Qian, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, V. Lordi, C. Rocha
Leao, Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 10957.
[43] S. Feng, T. Wang, B. Liu, C. Hu, L. Li, Z. J. Zhao, J. Gong, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 2044.
[44] a) Y. Nosaka, T. Daimon, A. Y. Nosaka, Y. Murakami, Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 2004, 6, 2917; b) Y. Nosaka, A. Y. Nosaka, Chem. Rev.
2017, 117, 11302.
[45] L. Teng, X. Han, Y. Liu, C. Lu, B. Yin, S. Huan, X. Yin, X. B. Zhang, G.
Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 26142.
[46] K. Bian, W. Yang, Y. Xu, W. Zeng, H. Wang, H. Liang, T. Cui, Z. Wang,
B. Zhang, Small 2022, 18, 2202921.
[47] M. Yuan, S. Liang, L. Yang, F. Li, B. Liu, C. Yang, Z. Yang, Y. Bian, P.
Ma, Z. Cheng, J. Lin, Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2209589.
[48] Y. C. Wang, J. M. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 1907619.
[49] a) Y. Liu, L. Liang, C. Xiao, X. Hua, Z. Li, B. Pan, Y. Xie, Adv. Energy
Mater. 2016, 6, 1600437; b) Z. Shen, Z. Luo, J. Chen, Y. Li, Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2023, 33, 2213935.
[50] H. Ma, Q. Jiang, S. Han, Y. Wu, J. C. Tomshine, D. Wang, Y. Gan, G.
Zou, X. J. Liang, Mol. Imaging 2012, 11, 487.
[51] L. Ke, F. Wei, L. Xie, J. Karges, Y. Chen, L. Ji, H. Chao, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 2022, 61, e202205429.
[52] C. Wu, Z. Liu, Z. Chen, D. Xu, L. Chen, H. Lin, J. Shi, Sci. Adv. 2021,
7, eabj8833.
[53] F. Shang, M. Lu, E. Dudek, J. Reddan, A. Taylor, Free Radical Biol. Med.
2003, 34, 521.
[54] Z. Dong, P. Liang, G. Guan, B. Yin, Y. Wang, R. Yue, X. Zhang, G. Song,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022, 61, e202206074.
[55] Z. Liu, S. Liu, B. Liu, Y. Bian, M. Yuan, C. Yang, Q. Meng, C. Chen, P.
Ma, J. Lin, Small 2023, 2207825.
[56] D. Huang, H. Huang, M. Li, J. Fan, W. Sun, J. Du, S. Long, X. Peng,
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022, 32, 2208105.
[57] X. Qian, X. Han, L. Yu, T. Xu, Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 20,
1907066.
[58] M. F. Bennewitz, T. L. Lobo, M. K. Nkansah, G. Ulas, G. W. Brudvig,
E. M. Shapiro, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 3438.
Adv. Mater. 2023, 35, 2304262
© 2023 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2304262 (18 of 18)
 15214095, 2023, 38, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adma.202304262 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License